NASA  SP-4019 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 9 7 4  
A  Chronology 

b y  
Nancy  L. B run  

The NASA  H i s t o r y  Series 

Scientific and  Technical  Information Ofice 
1977  
NATIONAL  AERONAUTICS  AND  SPACE  ADMINISTRATION 
Wmhington, D.C. 

For  sale  bjr  the  Superintendent  of  Documents, 
U S .   Government  Printing  Office, Washington,  D.C.  20402 
Price  (paper  cover)  $4.90 
Stock Number 033-000-00661-6 
Library  of  Congress Catalog  Card  Number  65-60308 

Foreword 

New technology in a rapidly  advancing space age remains  a  challenge, but 
this chronological collection of  aeronautical and space events of  1974 shows 
tha t   the  emphasis  in   technology  has  shifted  from  the  problems  of  how  to  
operate  in  a i r  and  space to  the  practical  use  of  those  environments to   meet 
human needs. 
Of  NASA’s 16  payloads  launched  during  the  year,  7  were  operational 
satellites, expected  to   produce  profits  for  their  owners.  Three  of  the  nine 
experimental  spacecraft  were  launched  to  develop  technology  for  applica- 
tions.  Although  the  immediate  use  of  technology  was  emphasized  in  1974,’ 
NASA  also  looked  to  the  future.  A  little  more  than  a  t h i r d - s i x   spacecraft- 
were launched for scientific investigations, an  investment in tomorrow. 
Other  nations  and  commercial interests  increasingly  joined  us in  efforts 
to  explore  and  use  space.  I n  NASA’s 1974 total,  11 spacecraft  were  paid  for 
by  non-NASA  users;  10 were  international.  In   addition,  two  Italian  launches 
used  NASA  launch vehicles. 
Operational satellites-all  of  whose costs, including launch costs, were paid 
six for com un i c a t ion s ,   two  of  them  the  first  US. 
for  by  others-included 
domestic communications satellites and four fo r  other nations o r  international 
groups.  And  a  new  operational  weather  satellite  joined  the  network  that 
reports  data  from  pole  to  pole.  Meanwhile,  new  technology  for  improved 
services  was  pursued : NASA  launched  the  first  Synchronous Meteorological 
Satellite, for  continuous  day-and-night weather monitoring,  and  orbited  a n  
experimental communications satellite for  France  and West Germany. 
NASA’s A ts   6 Applications Technology  Satellite  demonstrated  a  new  use 
for  powerful  communications  satellites,  transmitting  educational  courses 
and health  services  to  small  low-cost receivers in  remote  areas.  And  remote 
sensing by  satellite and  aircraft,  though  still experimental, found  increasing 
use  around  the globe for monitoring  the  earth‘s  geology, ecology, resources, 
and pollution. 
NASA  continued  the  systematic  exdoration  of  the  solar  system  and  the 
observation of  the  universe in  1974. Studies of  the  sun, the  planets,  and  the 
stars  added  to  knowledge  of  atmospheric  processes,  geological formations, 
energy sources, azd  physical laws that affect the earth. The German-American 
H e lw s   I  probed  interplanetary  space to  within  45  million  kilometers  of  the 
sun,  closer than  any  previous spacecraft  had  flown.  Three  planetary  probes 
launched  in previous years  gave us  the  first close look  a t  Mercury, new  clues 
to  the  origin  and  evolution of  Venus,  and  new  information  on  the  weather, 
atmosphere,  and  radiation  belts  of  Jupiter.  Juoiter  was  found  to   be  a  ball 
of  liquid  hydrogen,  its  great  red  spot  a  gigantic  cluster  of  storms  a t   least 
400 years  old.  These Mariner  and Pioneer  probes were  sweeping on  toward 
further  planetary  investigations  even  a s   preparations  continued  for  future 
probes to  softland on Mars and to fly past  Jupiter,  Saturn, and Venus. Scien- 
tific satellites of  the earth, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft were used 
to  study spectra of  the stars,  celestial x-ray and  gammh ray  sources, and  the 

iii 

iv 

FOREWORD 

earth’s  own  atmosphere and  magnetic  field  and   interaction  with  the  solar 
wind. 
Manned space flight continued to  demonstrate man’s  capability to  live and  
work  in   space. Skylab 4, man’s  longest mission  to  date,  extended into  1974, 
gathering data  fox 84  days  on  his  ability to   work  in  space,  his  physiology, 
the sun, and the earth. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared readiness fo r  i ts  
mid-1975 US.-U.S.S.R. 
flight to test compatible docking systems and conduct 
jo in t  experiments in  space. Development of  the  first true  space transportation 
system moved  nearer  i ts  goal of  a  reusable space shuttle  and  reusable  space 
laboratory,  as the shuttle reached test and fabrication  stages and the European 
Space Research Organization awarded  the  prime  contract  for   i t s   contribu- 
tion,  Spacelab, to  be  carried  into  orbit  and  back  in   the  shuttle. 
Aeronautical research  was  reoriented,  with more  emphasis placed  on  re- 
ducing both the amount of  energy required for  transportation  and the pollu- 
tion  produced by  transportation.  NASA  sought new  solutions for  the p rob lem  
of  noise,  pollution,  and safety, while  experimenting with  alternate  fuels and 
composite materials.  Flight  tests began  on  a  new  general-aviation wing,  the 
GAW-1, and the X-24B  lifting body  tested maneuverability and landing abili- 
ties of  a vehicle designed for reentry from space. 
NASA  made  advances  toward  low-cost production  of  solar  cells  to  convert 
sunlight into electricity and demonstrated the use  of  solar energy to  cool and  
heat  houses.  Wind-driven electric  generators  and  ways  to  reduce  fuel  con- 
sumption and pollution by cars were other targets of  research during the year. 
Thus this nation,  in  cooperation with  others,  turned  capabilities that man 
has  never before possessed  toward solution of  today’s problems, while  invest- 
ing  significant resources to  increase our  knowledge and technology so that i n  
fu ture  decades we will be in  a better position to help meet humanity’s cultural 
and  economic needs. 

August  1976 

John  E.  Naugle 
Assoc ia te  Administrator 

Contents 

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
John   E  . Naugle.  Associate Adm in is tra tor  
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
January  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Feb rua ry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Ma rch  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
April . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
M a y  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
June  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Ju ly  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Augus t  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Sep tember  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Oc tober  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
November  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
December  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1974 in Summa ry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix A:  Satellites, Space Probes ,  an d  Manned  Space  F l igh ts ,  
1974 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix B:  M a jo r  NASA  Launches,  1974 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1974 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix C: Manned   Space F l igh ts ,  
Appendix D:  NASA  Sounding Rocke t   Launches, 1974 . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix E: X-24B  Lifting-Body  F l igh ts ,   1974 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix F: Abbrev ia t ions  of  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Index  and  L i s t  of  Abbrev ia t ions  an d  Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
E r r a t a  in Ear l ier  Volumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

PAGE 
111 

V i i  
1 
19 
51 
75 
97 
111 
129 
143 
163 
181 
197 
207 
221 

227 
257 
261 
263 
273 
275 
279 
317 

V 

Preface 

The  14th volume  in   the NASA  series of  day-by-day records of  aeronautical 
and  space events has somewhat narrowed its scope and selectivity in  i ts  brief 
accounts from immediately  available, open  sources. This  year  the  emphasis 
i s   even  more  directly  focused  on  concrete  a ir   and  space  activities.  More 
coverage has,  perforce,  always  been  given  the  national  space agency’s  own 
activities, plans,  and  achievements,  and  tha t   is  true  of  this  volume,  but  the 
text continues to reflect some events in  other agencies and countries. 
The  1974 Chronology includes  fewer  examples  of  public  comment  and  
reaction  and  less technical  detail  in   more  condensed  summaries. New  tech- 
nological  advances  in   other  f ie ld s - such   as   medicine  and   ground  and  sea 
transportation,  except when  related  to NASA’s programs-have   been  dropped, 
as have most death notices. Air and space highlights of  the  President’s budget 
a re  given  in  tables  in  the text. The more routine  notices  of  satellite launches, 
when  little information is  available beyond the fact  of  launch,  are  now  given 
in   Appendix  A  only,  not  in   the  text.  Most  sounding  rocket  launches and 
lifting-body  test  flights  also  have  been  dropped  from  the  text;  two  new 
appendixes, Appendixes D  and E, present the  data  in  table  format.  Routine 
missile  and  nuclear  tests,  defense  contracts,  and  disarmament items  a re  no 
longer covered. 
Corrections for errors found in  previous volumes of  this series are  carried 
on  Erra ta   pages  following  the  index.  This innovation w i l l   be   continued in 
later volumes. 
The sources,  identified by abbreviations that are  explained in  Appendix F, 
were those immediately available in  NASA  and other Government agencies, the 
Congress,  and  the  professional societies, a s  well  as  the  press.  Contradictory 
accounts have been  resolved and doubtful ones verified whenever possible by 
querying participants.  Cross-references a re  given in the text, and the detailed 
index  will  aid  in   tracing  related  events  through  the  year.  The  index  also 
serves a s  a glossary of  acronyms and abbreviations. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics, 1974 was  written  by  Nancy  L.  Brun  of  the 
NASA  History  Office,  with  contributions  from  other  staff members  and  the 
History Office Summer Seminar. General editor  of  the volume was Frank W. 
Anderson,  Jr., Prtblications Manager  of  the  Office,  and   technical  editor  was 
Carrie  E.  Karegeannes.  Archivist  Lee  D.  Saegesser  collected  and  verified 
documentation and provided research assistance. 
The assistance of  many persons throughout NASA and other Federal agencies 
has   contributed  to  reliability  and  comprehensiveness  of  the  volume.  Com- 
ments,  additions,  and  corrections  a re  always welcomed  by  the NASA  History 
Office. 
Monte D .  Wright 
Director, N A S A  Hzktory O f i e  

vii 

January  1974 

1 January: Appointment of Gerald J. Mossinghoff as Assistant General Coun- 
sel  of  NASA  became  effective. Mossinghoff  had  been  Deputy  Assistant 
Administrator  for  Legislative  Affairs  since  1971,  after  earlier  serving 
a s  Director  of  Legislative Liaison. He would continue t o  serve a s  Acting 
Deputy Assistant until  a  successor was appointed.  (NASA  Ann,  3  Jan 74; 
NASA Release 74-1) 
Josef  Boehm,  rocket  pioneer  from  Peenemuende, Germany,  and  Chief  of 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center’s  Electromechanical  Engineering  Div., 
died  at  the age  of  65. An  associate professor  of  kinematics before  join- 
ing  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  in  1939 at  the  Rocket Research Center  in 
Peenemuende, Boehm came to the United States in November 1945 with 
Dr.  von  Braun  under  U S .   contract.  He  was  instrumental  in  designing 
and  engineering  the  first U S .   spacecraft for  the Army  Ballistic Missile 
Agency, beginning with Explorer  1  (launched 3 1  Jan.  1958) , and con- 
tinued  with  MSFC  after  it  was  formed  in  1960. He  had  a major  role  in 
developing the  Skylab Workshop’s Apollo  Telescope Mount.  (Marshall 
Star, 9 Jan 74 ,4 ;  Huntsville T imes ,  1 Jan  74) 
2 January: Sky lab  4 Astronauts Gerald P.  Carr, Dr. Edward G.  Gibson, and 
William  R.  Pogue,  launched  16  Nov.  1973,  discussed  their  changed 
attitudes  during  an  inflight  press  conference  held  on  their  48th  day 
aboard the Orbital Workshop. Science Pilot Gibson said that from space 
“you see the Earth as one unit, you see the Sun as a star, and you can see 
all  the  other  stars  out  there  . . . and  just  the  number  of  possible  com- 
binations  . . . which  could  create  life,  . . . makes  [life  elsewhere  in 
the universe]  seem very much more likely.” Pogue  said that  the mission 
sion, I tried  to  operate like a machine.  . . .  Now  I’m  trying to  operate 
had  had  a  great  spiritual impact  on  him.  “At  the beginning  of  the mis- 
as a human  being within the limitations  I possess.”  Now  he would  “feel 
much  more  inclined  toward  humanistic  feeling  toward  other  people.” 
(Transcript) 
*  The  Air  Force  announced  award  of  a  $75 318 000  fixed-price-incentive, 
firm  contract  to  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  for  Titan  I11  launch  services 
a t  Waterton,  Colo.;  Vandenberg, Calif.;  and Cape Canaveral, Fla.  (DOD  
Release 2-74) 
3  January:   Johnson  Space Center announced extension of  two  contracts for 
program  support  to  the  US.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. 
A  $695 077  cost-plus-fixed-fee contract  extension  covering  1 Jan. 
1974 through 30 Sept. 1975 had been given General Electric Co.  to con- 
tinue  support  of  all Apollo  hardware-related  programs  including  auto- 
matic checkout equipment. 
A  $2 424 250  cost-plus-fixed-fee extension  for  1 Jan.  1974 through 
September  1975 had  been  made  in  a  Boeing  C o .   contract  to  provide 
systems and project engineering support to the ASTP  and Skylab program 
offices.  ( JSC  Release 74-001) 

1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
4  January 
4 January:  Twenty-seven spacecraft  on  twenty-six vehicles-eleven  for  NASA 
and  fifteen  cost-reimbursable  launches  for  other  organizations-were 
scheduled  for  launch  by  NASA  during  1974.  For  the  first  time,  NASA 
would  launch  more  spacecraft  for  other  organizations  than  for  itself. 
Included  in  the  NASA  launches were  two  Synchronous Meteorological 
Satellites (SMS)  to  be launched in cooperation with the National Oceanic 
and  Atmospheric Administration;  a  proof  flight  of  the  Titamcentaur 
booster carrying a mass model of  Viking spacecraft and a Space Plasma 
High  Voltage Interaction  Experiment  (SPHINX)  ; Helios-A, a  NASA  and 
West  German  cooperative  satellite  to  study  the  solar  environment; 
GEOS-C  Geodetic  Explorer ; Nimbus-F  experimental  weather  satellite; 
San  Marco C2,  a  NASA-Italian  cooperative satellite;  UK-5,  a  NASA  and 
United  Kingdom  cooperative  satellite;  ATS-F  Applications Technology 
Satellite;  a  Hawkeye Explorer  scientific satellite;  and  ANS-A,  a  NASA- 
NetherIands astronomical satellite. 
The 15 NASA  launches tha t  would be paid  for by domestic and foreign 
corporations  and  governments included 2  Skynet communications satel- 
lites,  the  UK-X4  scientific satellite for  the  United  Kingdom, 3  InteIsat 
and  2  Marisat  comsats  for  Communications Satellite Corp.,  the  first  3 
Westar  domestic  comsats  for  Western  Union  Telegraph  C o . ,   Aeros-B 
scientific satellite for  West  Germany, ITOS-G  operational  weather  satel- 
lite  and  GOES-A  (SMS-C)  meteorological satellite  for  NOAA ;   and  Sym- 
phonie A experimental communications satellite for  a West German  and 
French  consortium.  (NASA   Release  74-2;  NASA  Gen  Mgt  Rev  Rpts,  1 4  
Jan  74, A66 ; 11 Feb 74, AM )  
*  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  launched  an  Aerobee  200  sounding  rocket 
from White Sands Missile Range to  study  Comet Kohoutek’s  ultraviolet 
rays.  The  rocket carried  cameras, spectrometers, and  other  instruments 
to  232.6-km  altitude  to  determine  amounts  of  oxygen,  hydrogen,  and 
carbon  dioxide  in  the  comet.  The  flight  was  “highly  successful,”  Dr. 
Stephen P. Maran, GSFC  Manager of  Operation Kohoutek, said. 
The  comet, discovered 5 May  1973 by  Czechoslovak astronomer  Dr. 
Lubos  Kohoutek,  was  once predicted  to   be  the  “comet  of  the  century” 
a s  i t  passed  near  the  earth  on  its  75 000-yr journey  around  the  sun.  It 
was  only  twice  as bright  a s  nearby  stars  but  reflected  enough  light  to  
permit  instruments  to   be  aimed  at  i t  precisely.  (Maran, interview, July 
74; Watson, W Pos t ,  5 Jan  74; Dilts, B Sun, 5 Jan 74, A l )  
*-Pioneer  10,  launched  2  March  1972, was  26 070 000  km  beyond  Jupiter‘ 
after  passing  within  130 000 km  of  the  giant  planet  3 Dec.  1973 on  a 
course tha t  would carry i t  past Pluto and out of  the solar system in 1987. 
Pioneer 11 ,  launched 5 April 1973, had been  in flight across the Asteroid 
Belt since August 1973, on its way  toward a Jupiter encounter in Decem- 
ber 1974. (KSC  ReIease 2-74) 
e The  Shuttle Avionic Integration  Laboratory  (SAIL)  was  being  established 
a t   Johnson  Space  Center  to  provide  a  central  facility  for  testing  and 
evaluating avionics, flight software, flight procedures, and ground equip- 
ment  for  the  space  shuttle. Testing  in  SAIL  would  provide  information 
on  system  operation  before  each  major  step  in  the  shuttle  flight  tests. 
( JSC  Roundup, 4 Jan 74) 
?e  North  American  Air  Defense  Command’s  count  of  objects  in  orbit 
around  the  earth  totaled  624  payloads  and  2349  pieces  of  debris,  left 
from  7038  objects  placed  in  space  by  man  since  the  beginning  of  the 
space age i n  1957. Space debris was falling back into the atmosphere a t  a 

2 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
4  January 
rate of  one piece a day, but NORAD’S  tracking and impact prediction pro- 
gram  analyzed  the  decay  trajectory  of  each satellite that might  survive 
reentry  and predicted  the  time  and  area  of  impact, issuing warnings if  
any were  deemed hazardous. Most  returning  objects were burned up  by 
friction heat on reentry  and  most of  the rest fell into oceans and seas. To 
date,  the   only  fatality  caused by  space debris was  a  cow  killed  nearly 
13 yrs ago when an  88-kg chunk of  metal from a U S .  space probe struck 
the ear th  near a Cuban village. 
Eventually,  however,  increasing  space  debris  and  reentries  might 
require traffic  control  assistance fo r  supersonic aircraft and  spacecraft. 
Short of  sending up some sort of  a celestial vacuum cleaner . . . the best 
approach  . . . appears  to  be  tracking  and  impact  prediction,”  NORAD 
<< 
spokesmen said.  (Miles, LA  T imes ,  7 Jan 74)  
had  passed  within 
8  Marquis  Childs  commented  on  Pioneer  10-which 
130 000 km of  the planet Jupiter  on 3 Dec.  1973-in 
the Baltimore Sun: 
The scientific brains that have gone into the Pioneer project  are  one of 
66 
America’s  greatest  resources.  They  underwrite  the  technological- 
scientific  lead  that  is perhaps this country’s  greatest  asset.  The momen- 
tum  must  be maintained  i f   our  rivals-the  Russians, the  Germans,  the 
Japanese-are  not to pass us.’’  (B  Sun, 4 Jan 74) 
6  January:  The  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  of  America,  Inc.,  predicted  “a 
slight decline”  in  sales in  1974 after  a  jump of  more than  10%  in  1973, 
the New  Y o r k  Times reported. Industry sales were expected to total $24.7 
billion  in  1974,  1% lower  than  the   1973 boom  that  had  pulled  the 
industry  out  of  a  five-year slump.  AIA  President Karl  G.  Harr,  Jr., had  
said, however,  that  the energy crisis  could bring  a  greater  decline. Fuel 
shortages  already  had  softened  markets  for  commercial aircraft,  and 
jet transport orders could taper off, although the Department of  Defense 
was  beginning a new  generation of  tactical and strategic weapons. 
Aerospace  industry business with the  space program was  expected to  
continue  its five-year decline, dropping by  about  2.7%  to  sales of  $2.3 
billion  in  1974. 
Profits  of  the  industry had   risen  in   1973, to   an   average of  2.7%  of 
sales  after  taxes, but  employment  dropped  1% to  935000  persons  in  
1973, and was  expected to  fall to 915 000 in  1974.  (Finney, N Y T ,  6 Jan  
74) 
7 January:  A  5-million-km hydrogen  cloud  surrounding  Comet  Kohoutek 
was  photographed by  a  Naval  Research  Laboratory  camera  aboard  a 
NASA  Aerobee  200  sounding  rocket.  The  rocket,  launched  from  White 
Sands Missile Range,  reached an  altitude  of  193.1 km.  The image of  the  
cloud,  invisible from the earth because  it glowed  a t  an  ultraviolet wave- 
length  that. did  not  penetrate  the  atmosphere,  was  obtained by  photo- 
graphing the comet in  the light of  the Lyman-alpha line of  atomic hydro- 
gen  using  a  special electronic w camera.  Scientists believed  the  comet 
consisted  largely  of  water  ice  which  evaporated as   it  neared  the  sun, 
breaking  up   into  component  hydrogen  and  oxygen  atoms.  The  lighter 
hydrogen atoms escaped rapidly,  producing the cloud.  (Naval Research 
Reviews, Jan 74 ,29)  
0  ,Communications Satellite Corp.,  on behalf  of  itself  and other joint owners- 
including American Telephone  &  Telegraph Co.,  ITT  World  Communi- 
cations,  Inc.,  RCA  Global  Communications,  Inc.,  and  Western  Union 
International  Gorp.-announced 
intention  to  award  a  $3.16-million 
contract  to  GSy s tem s   Inc.  fo r   construction  of  two  32-m-dia antennas 
3 

7  January 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 

for  international  satellite communications on  the  existing  earth  station 
sites  of  Andover, Me.,  and  Etam, W.  Va.  (ComSatCorp Release 74-2) 
8 January:  The  first  domestic  communications  satellite  service,  connect- 
ing East  and West Coasts, was  officially inaugurated by RCA Corp.  from 
New  York  City  a t   2:40  pm  EDT.  Within  minutes,  conversations  were 
relayed by Canada’s An ik  2  satellite  (launched by  NASA 20 April  1973) 
on a  circuit leased from Telesat Canada. Sen. Jacob K.  Javits  (R-N.Y.) 
in New York, Federal Communications Chairman Dean Burch  in Wash- 
ington, D.C.,  Alaska Gov. William A.  Egan  in Juneau,  Sen. Mike Gravel 
(%Alaska)  in  Anchorage, and  Sen. Ted  Stevens  (R-Alaska)  in  Nome 
exchanged congratulations. 
Operated by RCA Global Communications, Inc.,  and RCA Alaska Com- 
munications, Inc.,  for the parent RCA  Corp.,  the system used  earth relay 
stations  near  New  York,  San Francisco,  Juneau,  and  Anchorage.  These 
were to be joined by  others in  1976, when  RCA  hoped t o  have three  satel- 
lites  of  its  own.  Transmission  charges  for  coast-to-coast messages were 
less via  satellite than by earthbound systems;  a  telephone circuit  rented 
for  $1700  a  month  rather  than  the  $2298  charged  by  American  Tele- 
phone & Telegraph Co.  for  a  similar  land-based private  circuit.  Quality 
also was better because a connection could be completed with fewer relay 
points,  one  relay  to  the  satellite  and  another  from  the  satellite  to  the 
ground.  (RCA   Release,  8  Jan  74 ;   W Star-News,  9  Jan  74 ;   WSJ,  9 
Jan  74 ,34 )  
The Library of  Congress Congressional Research Service published United 
States  and  Soviet  Progress  in Space: Summa ry  Data  through  1972  and 
a  Forward  Look  (74--35SP), prepared  by  DT. Charles  S.  Sheldon  11, 
Chief  of  the  Science Policy  Research  Div.  In   its  manned  program  the 
U.S.S.R.  had  launched  a  Salyut  2  space  station  3  April  1973  but  a 
failure-possibly 
a  wildly  firing  thruster-had 
damaged  the  station, 
which  reentered  the  earth’s  atmosphere May  28.  Other  later  attempts 
to  launch  and  man  a  space  station  also  appeared  to  have  failed.  Two 
manned  launches, Soyu z   12  and  Soyuz   13, had  been  successful in  Sep- 
tember  and  December,  the  second  spacecraft  remaining  in   space eight 
days  to  conduct  astrophysical,  biological,  and  earth  resources  experi- 
ments. 
By  30 June 1974 the United  States expected to have spent $75 biIlion 
on  combined military  and  civilian  space programs  since the beginning 
of  the  space  program,  spending  about  $4.7  billion  in  FY  1974.  The 
Soviet  Union  did  not  publish  space  budget  data,  but  its  program  was 
thought to be “at  least of  the same magnitude as that of  the United States 
a t  its former peak”  of  $7.7 billion a year. 
The  U.S.  had  several major  space research  and  development centers 
operated by  the military  and private  industry as well  as NASA.  There was 
no  reason  to believe the Soviet aerospace industry was as fully equipped 
but  missiles  of  similar  capabilities  and  different  design  philosophies 
which  had  appeared  in  Moscow  parades  “suggest the existence of  more 
than one design and development team for space work.” 
The  U S .   had  launch  vehicles  scaled  to   lift  payloads weighing  from 
9 kg   t o   136000  kg.  The  Soviet Union  had  started  to   use  in   1957 its 
original  intercontinental  ballistic  missile  and  still  used  the  same basic 
vehicle with stages added to  improve performance. The very large Soviet 
vehicle predicted  by  NASA  officials had  not  been  seen. 
4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
8  January 
A  Soviet lunar landing  did not  seem imminent but  was still expected, 
as pa r t  of  Soviet long-range plans, as soon as the problems of  unreliable 
hardware  were  solved. US.-U.S.S.R.  cooperation  in   space  efforts was 
“the  hope  of  well-intentioned  people  everywhere.”  Two  motives  f o r  
cooperation  were  to  lessen  tension  and  to  save money.  Although there 
was  already  exchange  of  information  between  scientists and  engineers, 
no assessment of  the overall prospects can be made successfully without 
66 
forecasting the future political climate.”  (Text) 
8-31  January:  NASA’s Mariner  10 probe,  launched 3 Nov.  1973, met  a  num- 
ber  of  problems but  continued its flight miIIions of  kilometers from the 
earth toward  a 5 Feb. flyby of  Venus and 29 March flyby of  Mercury. 
Despite the loss of  the prime power chain, causing automatic transfer 
to   the  backup  system,  Mariner  10’s  instruments  continued  scientific 
studies.  Comet  Kohoutek’s  taiI  was  observed  in  the  extreme ultraviolet 
range. On  13 Jan.  hydrogen Lyman-alpha intensity, beginning 20” from 
the comet’s  nucleus, climbed rapidly a s  the nucleus region drifted toward 
the  uv  airglow  spectrometer’s  field  of  view.  The  nucleus  was  scanned 
16 Jan. 
On  17  Jan.,  while  the  spacecraft  was  powered  down  for  its  second 
trajectory  correction  maneuver,  shutting  off  several instrument  heaters 
allowed  the  TV  optics heaters,  which  had  failed  to  function  earlier,  to 
turn on. Scientists had  feared that below-freezing temperature might pre- 
vent  camera  operation  during  the Venus encounter. On 21  Jan.,  instru- 
ments for  Comet Kohoutek and solar wind experiments were turned on. 
On 22  Jan.  the  uv  spectrometer measured hydrogen Lyman-alpha in- 
tensities out to  17” to map the comet’s hydrogen cloud. Comet Kohoutek 
was scanned seven hours 24 Jan. by  the UY spectrometer-the  only instru- 
ment  of  its  kind  to  observe  the  comet  from  outside  the  earth’s  o w n  
hydrogen  cloud. 
During  the seventh and final roll calibration maneuver 28 Jan.,  telem- 
etry  indicated  a  rapid  increase  in  the  use  of  attitude  control  gas,  the 
nitrogen  gas supply dropping from 2.7 to 2.1 kg.  The gyros were turned 
off  and the  spacecraft put  into celestial control, with the SUR  and the star 
Canopus  as  references.  Nitrogen-gas-use rate  returned  to  normal  and 
estimates  of  the  supply  indicated  a  comfortable  margin  for  reaching 
Mercury  and  executing experiments. The backup  electric power  system 
was still in use, a s  studies of  that problem continued. 
On 31 Jan. Mariner  10 was 3 200 000 km from Venus and 38 800 000 
km from the  earth, traveling a t  30 238  km per hr.  ( JPL Mariner Venus/ 
Mercury  1973 Bull Nos   14,  15 ; NASA  PAO  press  briefing  transcript,  31 
Jan 74; IT Post, 10 Jan 74, A5) 
9 January:  Lockheed Propulsion  Go.  asked the General Accounting Office to 
set  aside NASA’s 20  Nov.  1973 selection of  Thiokol Chemical  Corp.  fo r  
negotiation  of  a  $lO€i-rnillion contract  to  design  and  develop the  space 
shuttle’s solid-fueled rocket motor. Lockheed charged that it had  an  edge 
in  technical evaluation of the engine and that i t  had  been the low bidder 
before NASA  had made “improper  adjustments” in  its bid. Lockheed also 
maintained  Thiokol’s  trans  ortation  costs  from  Utah  to  Florida  would 
be higher  and  that  Thiokofs proposed  design would not  meet  program 
objectives  without  major  revision.  (LATNS,  Today ,   10  Jan  74;  NASA 
Release 7 6 1 3 0 )  
A  photograph  of  the  U.S.S.R.’s  space  launching  complex  a t   Baykonur 
Cosmodrome taken by NASA’s Er ts  1 Earth  Resources Technology Satel- 
5 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

9  January 
lite  (launched 23 July  1972)  from 900 km  altitude was published in  the 
Washington newsletter Defense/Space  Business  Da i ly .  The photo, taken 
16 March  1973, showed that the complex stretched 60 km east and west, 
24 km north of  Tyuratam. The newsletter published a closer, 5 Oct.  1972 
photo on 17 Jan.  ( S B D ,  9 , 1 0 , 1 7  Jan 74, 4 14 2 ,4 9 - 50 , 89 ;   NASA  photos 
74-H-6,7&H-l1, 
74-H-12,7&H-13) 
10  January:  All  spacecraft  and  experiment checks on  Explorer  51  (Amo s -  
phere Explorer-C) , launched  1 5  Dec.  1973, were  completed. Spacecraft 
systems and all 1 4  experiments were operational. Spacecraft performance 
was  nominal  except  fo r   Programmer  2,  which  had  experienced  some 
degraded  load  capability.  The  orbital-adjust  propulsion  Bystem  had 
lowered the perigee to  152 km  in two stages. The first  “excursion”  to  a 
planned  for February.  (NASA  MOR,  10 Jan 
lower altitude-125  km-was 
74) 
*  Ames Research Center’s (2-141  AIRO  (Airborne Infrared Observatory)  air- 
craft was officially transferred to operational status for research develop- 
ment.  A  total  of  26  research  programs  had  been  approved  for  C-141 
from universities, 5 from 
participation,  using  its 91-cm IR  telescope-18 
NASA  or  other  Government  agencies,  and  3  from  foreign  countries. 
AIRO  also  was  to  participate  in  studies of  Comet Kohoutek.  (ARC   As tro-  
gram, 18 Jan  74,1,4) 
\ 
11  January:  Solar  energy  would  be  used  by  Marshall  Space Flight  Center 
engineers to heat and cool three house trailers parked together to simulate 
a  residence. The  system would  take  from  the  sun  three  fourths  of  the 
thermal  energy  needed  f o r   the  simulated  living  quarters  and  furnish 
2.7  metric  tons  of  air  conditioning  in  the  summer  and 20.5  kw  of  heat 
during  winter,  with  surplus  energy  in  storage  for  operation  a t   night 
and  through  three  cloudy  days.  A  conventional  system  would  still  be 
necessary to make  up  for  undercapacity  and  provide  energy during  ex- 
tended cloudy periods. 
The  system,  a  project  sponsored  by  the  NASA  Office  of  Applications 
to develop solar energy technology, would use a  120-sq-m solar-collector 
roof, a storage tank,  pumps, coils, a modified a i r  conditioner, plumbing, 
an  auxiliary heater,  and  automatic  controls.  (MSFC   Release 74-6) 
The  National  Science Foundation  was  spending  more  than  $1 million  in 
FY  1974 on wind  research  programs  and to  build  a large windmill,  the 
Wa l l   Street  Journal  reported.  Wmdmills,  for  thousands  of  years  one 
of  man’s  basic  machines,  were  again  being  taken  very  seriously  in  
the  worldwide  energy  crisis.  Researchers believed  windmills  could  be 
grouped  to  form  power  stations  and  provide  a  significant  portion  of 
U.S.  energy needs, becoming com  etitive with other energy sources. The 
$200000   NSF  windmill  would  8,  built  by  NASA  at  Lewis  Research 
Center’s  Plum  Brook  Station  to  capture  the  maximum  possible  power 
from  the  wind  with  the  minimum  construction  costs.  In   addition,  the 
NASA  team  would  look  into  methods  of  storing  electricity  for  periods 
when the wind was not  blowing and of  generating current  at  a  constant 
60  cps,  the  rate  all  large  appliances  were  designed  to  use.  Other  re- 
searchers  were  working  on  windmill  complexes  based  a t   sea,  where 
powerful  ocean  winds  could  provide  a  regular  flow  of  power.  (Brand, 
WSJ ,  11 J an  7 4 , l ;  NASA Release 74-33) 
NASA’s shrinking  work  force  and  the  relatively  few  available women  and 
minority  engineers  and  scientists  were  responsible  for  the  agency’s 
admittedly poor record on equal employment, Dr.  Dudley G.  McConnell, 
6 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

11  January 
NASA Assistant Administrator fo r  Equal Opportunity Programs,  told  the 
Senate Committee  on  Appropriations’ Subcommittee  on  Housing  and 
Urban  Development, Space, Science, and Veterans.  The hearing was  in- 
vestigating the October 1973 dismissal of  a NASA official, Mrs.  Ruth Bates 
Harris,  after she and two coauthors asserted in  a  report that  the agency 
was  not moving  fast enough to  h ire  women  and   minority workers and  
that  NASA’s proportion  of  minority  employees  was  the  lowest  in   the 
Government.  Despite  the  difficulties,  NASA  in   the  past  had   hired  well 
above the  agency’s  current  percentage of  minorities:  10.3% in   1971; 
13.2% in  1972; and  16.3% in  1973. 
Associate  Deputy Administrator Willis H.  Shapley denied  the  report 
was  the  reason  for  the  Harr is   termination  but  conceded  NASA’s poor 
record  on minority  hiring.  Subcommittee Chairman William  Proxmire 
(D-Wis.)  ordered  the  agency  to   report  to   him  quarterly  on  progress 
toward its own  equal opportunity goals.  (Transcript) 
The Air Force’s  first flight-test B-1  strategic bomber had been  successfully 
mated  with  its  wings  irrpalmdale,  Calif.,  the Air  Force Systems Com- 
mand  announced. The  B-1  was  being  developed  by  prime  contractor 
Rockwell  International  Corp.  to  provide  a  modern  supersonic strategic 
manned  bomber  to  replace the  aging B-52.  The B-1,  designed to  carry  
twice  the  payload  of  the  B-52  a t   three  times  the   speed,  was  equipped 
with movable fore and  aft wings to carry out a variety  of  missions from 
both  normal  and   short  runways,  in   addition  to   low-level operation  a t  
high  subsonic speeds and  high-altitude supersonic flight.  (AFSC  Release 
OIP  001.74) 
The U S .   would  sell  fighter  aircraft  to  Iran   and  Saudi Arabia,  the  Wash- 
ington Post  reported.  Iran   would  buy  30  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp. 
F-14  Tomcat  swing-wing  fighters  equipped  with  the  advanced,  long- 
range  Phoenix  missile  system,  with  deliveries  to  begin  January  1976. 
Saudi Arabia would  buy 30  new  Northrop  Corp.  F-5E  Tiger  I1  light- 
weight  fighters  and  20  of  the  earlier  two-place F-5B  trainers.  (Miles, 
W Post, 11 Jan  74, A12) 
14  January:  Sky lab   4  Astronauts Gerald  P.  Carr,  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson, 
and William  R.  Pogue  (launched 16 Nov.  1973  in   the  final mission  to 
crew  the Orbital  Workshop)  set  a  new  record  for   the  longest  manned 
flight  time  in  space, completing  59  days 11 hrs   9 min  a t   1O:lO pm  EDT 
and  surpassing the  time  set  by  Sky lab   3 on  its  28  July-25  Sept.  1973 
mission.  Sky lab   4  had  been  given  a  go-ahead 10 Jan.  for  a  seven-day 
extension,  with  weekly  reviews  through  the  end  of  a  planned  %-day 
mission.  ( A& A  73) 
Three  US.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  working  groups  began 
technical  meetings  a t   Johnson  Space  Center  on  mission  plans  and 
experiments, communications  and   tracking,  and   life  support  and  crew 
transfer.  Thirty-five Soviet  scientists  and  engineers would  work  at  JSC 
for   periods  from  16  to  90  days  in   preparation  fo r   the  joint,  manned, 
earth-orbital  mission  in   July  1975  to   test  compatible rendezvous  and 
docking systems and techniques.  (NASA Release 7 4 - 9 ;  NASA  OMSF,  inter- 
view, 9 July 74) 
14-18  Januury: Final reports on six space tug  system studies were presented 
to   NASA  a t  Marshall Space Flight  Center  by  contractors  Grumman  Air- 
craft  Corp.,  Martin Marietta Co.,  McDonnell Douglas Astronautics CO., 
General Dynamics Corp.,  and  Lockheed  Corp.  The repo r t s -cove r ing  a 
storable propellant version, a cryogenics propellant version, and a growth 

7 

14-18  January 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
stage  version-would 
become  the  basis  for  the  completion of  Phase A 
studies  of  the  space  tug  program  and  recommendations  for  Phase  B 
definition studies.  (Marshall S tar ,  16 Jan 74) 
15 January: A new,  portable, battery-powered spotlight, with a peak capabil- 
ity of 1-million candlepower and 50 times brighter  than high-beam auto- 
mobile  headlights,  had  been  developed  from  NASA  a rc   light  research, 
NASA  announced.  The  3-kg  spotlight,  called  the  Stream  Lite-1 Million 
and  marketed  by  Streamlight,  Inc.,  used  a  unique  xenon  lamp  with  an  
operating lifetime of  200 b r s  a t  maximum intensity.  (NASA Release 74-6) 
16  January:  Plans  for  an  A rab  communications satellite network  were pre- 
sented  by  Arab  League  engineer  Salah  ’Amir  during  a  meeting with 
League Secretary General Mahmud Riyad in Cairo. The plans-prepared 
with  the  assistance  of  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific, and 
Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO)   and the International Communications 
Union-had 
been completed in 1972. The network would establish radio, 
TV,  and news  agency links among the A rab  states to  transmit  standard 
educational,  cultural,  and  development programs.  Fifty  ground  stations 
$500000  and 
would  be  established  with  the  costs  of  each-between 
$1 000 000-defrayed  by  the  country  of  its  location.  The  costs  of  the 
satellites and  launch  facilities  would be  paid  by  member  states.  (Cairo 
MENA,  FBIs-Inter-Arab, 1 7  Jan 74, A6) 
*  The  Air  Force  announced  the  award  of  a  $ 1  553 500  cost-plus-incentive- 
fee  contract  to  Avco  Corp.  for  design,  development,  and  testing  of  a 
space reentry  vehicle for  the  reentry vehicle nosetip test  program.  (DOD  
Release 18-74) 
*  A  12-s tory   addition  to  the  RCA  Corp.  building  in  Rockefeller  Center  in 
New  York  City  would  be  constructed  t o   use  solar  energy  heat,  RCA 
announced.  The  $6-million addition,  a  management  conference center, 
would  use  panels  on  its  solid  exterior  surfaces to  capture  solar  energy 
in  the  fo rm  of  radiant heat, which would be  stored  and  substituted for 
other forms of  energy.  (RCA  Release, 1 6  Jan 7 4 )  
0  A  Huntsville  Times  editorial  commented  on  the  “lengthening  space-flight 
endurance  record”  that  Sky lab   4  (launched  16 Nov.  1973 to  man  the 
Orbital Workshop)  “sets with each successive tu rn  i t  now makes around 
the  old  planet,”  with  a  February  target  splashdown  date.  “America’s 
heart  doubtlessly  goes  out  to  them,  for  that’s  an  awfully long  time  fo r  
anyone to  have  to  be  away from  earth’s  fuel  shortages,  inflation, rainy 
weather,  dishwater-dull Super Bowls, Washington politics, air pollution, 
and  traffic bottlenecks.”  (Hun tsv i l le  Times, 16 Jan  74) 
17  January:  A NASA  plan  for energy conservation and management, effective 
immediately, was  outlined  in  a  memo  from  Dr.  George M.  Low,  NASA 
Deputy  Administrator,  to  heads  of  all  program  and  staff  offices  and 
Center Directors. NASA  expected to  exceed by a  wide margin  the nation- 
wide goal  of  a  5%   reduction  in  energy  cor.aumption  for  the  following 
12-mo  period  as  established  in  a  29  June  1973  Presidential  Memo- 
randum. Management actions  included scheduling all energy  resources, 
using  fewer  cars  and  aircraft,  encouraging  employee  carpools,  and 
exaniining alternative power  sources in  large energy  consumers such as 
wind tunnels. NASA  would  also play  a  key  role  in  the  research,  develop- 
ment,  and  technological  application  for  the  longer  term  solution  of 
energy  requirements  and  efficiencies.  A  Special Task  Force  on  Energy 
Conservation,  activated  10 Dec.  1973,  would  review  and  recommend 
.  policies and guidelines on energy conservation, consider NASA’s response 

8 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

17 January 

to  external energy directives, develop suggestions fo r  conserving energy, 
and review NASA’s progress in  conservation.  (Text) 
*  Johnson  Space Center had  issued requests to  11 interested  aerospace com- 
panies  to  submit  contract  proposals  f o r  computing and  data  processing 
fo r  space program  software systems, JSC  announced. Primary  objective 
of  the  contract  would be  to  define, design, .develop, and maintain  soft- 
ware systems  (for  space shuttle, earth resources, and  other  science pro- 
grams)  that  had maximum  flexibility for  supporting  a  wide variety  of 
missions  and  future  requirements.  The  cost-plus-award-fee contract 
would run  from 1 July  1974 through 31 Dec.  1979.  ( JSC  Release 7 6 3 0 )  
*  A $70-million to $lOO-million cutback in development of  the complex $4.4- 
billion  surface-to-air  ( SAM-D)  a i r   defense  missile  system  had  been 
ordered by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of  Defense, the Washing- 
ton   Post  reported.  The  cutback  had   been  ordered  to  speed  efforts  to 
develop a lower  cost, highly mobile SAM  missile  in  addition to  the  pro- 
duction of  an  already developed foreign-designed missile effective against 
low-flying aircraft  over  a  battlefield.  (Getler,  W  Pos t ,   17  Jan   74, A3) 
*  President  Nixon  issued Executive Order  11760 designating  the  European 
Space  Research  Organization  ( ESRO )  a  public  international  organiza- 
tion  entitled to  privileges, exemptions, and  immunities provided  for  by 
the  International  Organizations  Immunities  Act.  ( P D ,  21  Jan   74,  40) 
18-27  January:   NASA  launched  Skyne t   IZA , first  of  two  second-generation 
United  Kingdom  communications satellites on  the  100th Thor-Delta- 
a  three-stage,  thrust-augmented  booster-from  Kennedy  Space  Center 
Launch  Complex  17  at  9:38  pm  EDT.  The  satellite  was  placed  in  an 
extremely eccentric orbit when the attitude control system of  the rocket’s 
‘2nd  stage failed. The apogee was 3406 km,  perigee 95 km,  period  121.6 
min.,  and  inclination  37.6’.  Tracking  stations were  unable  to  pick  up. 
signals from the spacecraft. 
On  23  Jan.  the  satellite was found by  the A i r  Force  Satellite Control 
Facility  and attempts were made 24 Jan.  to  raise the  orbit by  firing the 
spacecraft’s  onboard  thrusters.  Although  the  firing  was  succcessful, the 
orbital  attitude was not  raised  enough  to  extend the  life  of  the satellite. 
S k y m t  I I A  reentered the earth’s  atmosphere and burned up 25 Jan.  over 
the southwestern Pacific Ocean. 
The Skynet I1 communications satellite program was being carried out 
under  a  U.K.-US.  agreement  signed  1  April  1970  and  a  USAF-NASA 
agreement  1  May  1972  to  provide  the  U.K.  in-orbit,  X-band  military 
communications between designated earth stations and replace Skyne t  A 
and B ,  launched by NASA  21 Nov.  1969 and 18 Aug. 1970. NASA responsi- 
bilities  included integration  of  the U.K.-built spacecraft with  the  launch 
vehicle and  provision  of  the  vehicle  and  related  services including  net- 
work tracking communications and telemetry during ascent and transfer 
orbit phase.  Another  Skynet  I1  satellite was  to  be  launched  in  the  fall. 
(NASA  MORS,  8 Jan   74, 4 Sept  74;  AP,  N Y T ,   30  Jan   74; AP,  W  Star- 
News, 19 Jan  74, A4) 
18 January:  First evidence of  water molecules in a comet had  been  identified 
in the t a i l  of  Comet Kohoutek by Canadian  scientists Dr.  Gerhard Herz- 
berg  and  Dr.  Hin  Lew,  both  of  Canada’s  National  Research  Council, 
NASA  announced. Dr. Herzberg  and Dr. Lew  identified the molecules by 
analyzing emissions of  light a t  five wavelengths in the  red  region  of  the 
comet’s  spectrum,  where  the  positively  charged  molecules,  ionized  by 

9 

18 January 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
solar  radiation,  were pushed by  the solar wind.  Data had been  collected 
by  telescopes  a t   Asiago  Astrophysical Observatory in   Italy  and   Univ. 
of California’s Lick Observatory in October and November 1973. 
The discovery of  hydrogen  in  the  comet  supported the  “dirty  snow- 
ball”  theory  that comets might be  composed  of  an   icy  nucleus,  various 
other  frozen gases,  and  tiny  dust particles  as  proposed  by  Dr. Fred  L. 
Whipple, retired  Director of  the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory 
and principal  consultant to NASA  on comets.  (NASA  Release 73  [74]-13) 
*  Hazard  analyses and  quality  control  techniques developed  by  NASA  in   the 
Apollo  program  would  improve the  reliability  of  safety  and  antipollu- 
tion equipment used in the offshore drilling of  oil wells, NASA  announced. 
At  the  request  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey, NASA teams  a t   Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center,  the  Mississippi  Test  Facility,  and  the  Michoud 
Assembly  Facility  had  recommended  development  of  subsurface safety 
valves,  activated either  automatically after  sensing increased  velocity  in  
the oil line  or  by  remote  control  from  a  surface  location,  to  protect  the 
marine and coastal environment. (NASA Release 7 6 1 0 )  
*  Development  of  a  two-man version of  the  F-5E  International  Fighter  had 
been  initiated  by  the  Air  Force,  the Air  Force  Systems Command  an- 
nounced.  Designated  the  F-5F  and  to  be  built  by  Northrop  Corp.,  the 
two-seater would  have  the  same performance and weapon  capability  as 
the single-seat F-5E  but was to provide the capability of  training fighter 
pilots in   all  aspects of  fighter  aircraft operations.  The first  test  aircraft 
was expected to fly in  September 1974. (AFSC  Release OIP  002.74) 
21 January:  An  all-time record  number  of  helicopters-413-had 
been  ex- 
ported by U S .  manufacturers in  1973, Aerospace Industries Association 
of  America,  Inc.,  announced. The  exports totaled  $84 775 500, up   from 
$73 797 500  in  1972, when  260 helicopters had been  exported.  (AIA  Re- 
lease 74-1) 
Lockheed  Aircraft Corp.  would  need  a  maximum  of  $75 million  to   over- 
come the threat that it would  run out of  cash, the  New York Times News 
Service  quoted Lockheed’s  Chairman of  the  Board  Daniel  J.  Haughton 
as   saying in   a  London news  conference.  Haughton had  expressed  con- 
fidence that  Lockheed’s  bankers would  provide the necessary  funds.  In  
addition he had  expected that a long-term solution-possibly  a merger- 
would  be found by  June.  Lockheed’s financial problems had begun with 
severe  technical  setbacks  during  development  of  the  L - l o l l   TriStar 
airliner  in   1971.  Disaster  had  been  averted by  congressiopal approval 
of  a Government guarantee of up to $250 million in  loans.  ( W  Star-News, 
2 1  Jan  74, A13) 
22 January:  The U.S.S.R.  proposed that the United Nations establish a center 
for collection and distribution  of  data from earth-orbiting  satellites. The 
proposal was made  in  response to  a U.S.  offer to  supply the U.N.  with  a 
master  copy  of  all  information  obtained from  E r t s   I  Ear th  Resources 
Technology Satellite, launched 23  July  1972, if  a facility would be avail- 
able to  process the data. The Soviet proposal suggested a single interna- 
tional  center, under  the  U.N.  or  another  international  organization and 
financed  by  voluntary contributions.  The U.S.S.R.  previously had   been 
unwilling  to   br ing   i n   any  international  authority.  U.S.  space  experts 
later  suggested the new proposal was  a significant development  in  closer 
Soviet-US. cooperation, reached by the scientific exchanges between the  
two countries. Another view was that the  U.S.S.R.  was trying to head off 
10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
22  January 
a  possibility that  the U S .  might turn  over  its expertise to  private  enter- 
prise. 
Brazil had earlier  proposed a treaty that would obligate space powers 
to  obtain consent  of governments for remote-sensing activities over their 
countries and for  release of  the data obtained.  (UN Doc A/AC.lO5/C.I/ 
WG.4/L.G/Add  3; NYT ,  10  Feb 7 4 2 0 )  
23  Jan zmy :   President  Nixon  transmitted  a  message  to  Congress  outlining 
legislative proposals and executive actions to deal with the energy crisis. 
Proposals to  meet the short-term emergency included a special act to per- 
mit  restrictions  on public consumption of  energy and temporarily relax 
pollution  control  requirements fo r   power  plants  and  automotive emis- 
sions,  a  windfall  profits  tax  to   prevent  private  profiteering  a t   public 
expense,  unemployment  insurance  to   help  those  who  lost  their  jobs 
because of  the energy crisis,  and establishment of  a Federal Energy Ad- 
ministration. To meet the long-range goal of  energy self-sufficiency, pro- 
posals  would  allow market  pricing  of  new  natural  gas,  permit  surface 
mining  of  coal  in   an  environmentally safe manner, permit development 
of  deepwater port  facilities off shore, eliminate depletion  allowances for 
foreign  oil  and gas  production, and  accelerate licensing  of  construction 
of  nuclear facilities. 
The  President  concluded  that,  although  shortages  had  been  long  in  
on  the U S .   by  the Arab  oil pro- 
appearing, the   oil  embargo-imposed 
ducing countries because of  American support of  Israel during the Octo- 
ber  1973 war-“opened 
our  eyes  to  the  short-sighted  policy  we  had 
been  pursuing.”  The  U S .   must  never  again  allow  itself  to  be  overly 
dependent on  foreign supplies of  a vital good.  “By  1 98 0 .  . . I believe we  
can  . . . be  essentially  independent of  foreign  energy producers.”  (PD, 
28  Jan 74,72437) 
The Air  Force  announced the  award  of  a  $1  348 414 contract  to  General 
Electric Co.  fo r  the  design,  development, and testing  of  a  space  reentry 
vehicle for the reentry vehicle nosetip test program.  (DOD Release 31-74) 
24 Janm ry :  Ames  Research Center  scientists had  found more evidence that 
life on primitive  earth might have been  triggered  by  chemical evolution 
of  nonliving matter,  NASA  announced.  Seventeen varieties of  fatty acids, 
similar  to  those  used  by  plants  and  animals to  produce more complex 
biological molecules,  had been  discovered in  two meteorites. The family 
of  simple carbon-hydrogen acid  molecules found  in   the  meteorites  had 
counterparts  in   biologically  formed  earth  materials,  but  had  not  been 
found in  nonorganic sources before.  (NASA  Release 74-16) 
9  NASA’s equal  employment  opportunity  program  was   reviewed  during  a 
hearing  before  the  Senate Committee  on  Aeronautical and  Space Sci- 
ences. Dr.  George M.  Low, NASA  Deputy Administrator, said that during 
the  1970s NASA  faced  the challenge of  catching u p  in   a  most  important 
area   of  human  need.  The  challenge would  be  diflicult because  the NASA 
work  force had  decreased by  nearly one third.  In   addition,  47%  of  the 
NASA  work  force  were  scientists  and  engineers.  Of  these,  3.4%  were 
minorities,  while  the  nationwide percentage of  minorities  in   this  cate- 
gory  was  3.596,  and  these  persons  were  in   high  demand  in   private 
industry,  where  starting salaries  were  $1200  to  $1700  per  year higher. 
Dr.  Dudley  G.  McConnell,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for   Equal 
Opportunity Programs, said NASA  would during 1974 achieve a minority 
complement  of  6.1%  of  the  total  permanent  work  force,  h ir ing   80 
11 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
24  January 
minority  members  and  80 women  into  professional  positions.  In   addi- 
tion  NASA  would  help  increase  the  availability  of  technically  trained 
women  and minority members by NASA’s cooperative education program 
and by  initiating  an  aerospace fellowship program. 
Mrs.  Ruth Bates Harris,  former  NASA  Deputy Assistant Administrator 
for  Equal  Opportunity  Programs,  testified  that  NASA  had  turned  away 
qualified women  and minority  applicants. She  said  NASA  ranked  22  out 
of  26  agencies in  percentage  of  female  attorneys.  Also,  although  NASA 
had  a  47%  scientific  and  engineering  work  force,  in  the  53% non- 
scientific  and  technical  category  NASA  had  a  3.7%  minority  participa- 
tion,  not  significantly better  than  the  3.6%  in  the  scientific  and  engi- 
neering category.  (Transcript) 
*  A  space  shuttle  launch  processing  system  (LPS) was  being  developed  a t  
Kennedy Space Center t o  provide  a  flexible, reliable,  and  cost-effective 
method  of  testing systems,  controlling launch  operations,  and monitor- 
ing  status  of  vehicle,  ground  support  equipment  and  facilities  during 
ground  operations. A single automatic system, replacing the multiplicity 
of  systems used  in  previous  programs,  would  support  every  technical 
and management activity  required  to  process the  launch  vehicles,  their 
payloads,  and  all  ground  support  equipment.  (KSC  Spaceport  News,  24  
Jan 7 4 , 4 5 )  
*  Jet  aircraft  pollution  would  be  measured  under  a  $1.1-million NASA  con- 
tract  awarded  to  United  Air  Lines,  Inc.,  NASA  announced.  Under  the 
cost-plus-fixed-fee contract,  United  would  design,  develop, test,  and  fly 
a Boeing 747-equipped 
to measure dust particles  and  gases-to 
deter- 
mine the effects of  jet  exhaust on the natural  environment, weather, and 
human health and to measure changes in the level of  the ozone shielding 
people  on  the  earth  from  solar  ultraviolet  radiation.  Flights  would  be 
made over the  continental U.S.  and Hawaii  in  addition  to   internationaI 
flights by  another  747  under  a  subcontract  with  Pan   American World 
Airways, Inc.  The instruments  were  expected to be  installed by  the  end 
of  1975. NASA  would  work  closely  with  the  National  Oceanic  and  At- 
mospheric  Administration  to  correlate  study  results.  ( NASA  Release 
7 6 2 0  ) 
*  The Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport  would not  go  into trans- 
atlantic  service until  1975 and  would  not  fly  commercially until  1976, 
French  Minister  of  the Armed Forces Robert  Galley said  in  Paris.  The 
press  reported  sources  in  the  French  aviation  industry  as  saying  tha t  
increased  fuel  prices  and  possible  shortages  were  responsible  for  the 
delay.  (UPI, NYT ,  25 Jan 74, 5 3 )  
*  A new  Air  Force  air-traffic-control radar  system  that  could  track  aircraft 
approaching a  runway  in  heavy  rain  would be  put  into  full production, 
the  Air  Force  Systems  Command  announced.  The  A N / T P N - ~ ~ ,  
to  be 
produced  by  Raytheon Co.,  consisted of  an  operational  shelter,  an  air- 
port  surveillance rada r   to   detect aircraft within  9 7  km and  direct  them 
to final approach entry positions, and a precision-approach rada r  to guide 
aircraft  along  the  32-km  final  approach.  The  all-weather, $2 617 000 
syst‘em  could be  transported  anywhere in  the  world  and  be  opefitional 
within two hours.  (AFSC Release OIP  181.73) 
25 January: Results from NASA’s Pioneer 10 mission  (launched 2 March 1972 
toward a 3 Dec.  1973 encounter with Jupiter)  were published in  a series 
of  articles in  Science.  Plasma  analyzer  data  had  indicated  that  Jupiter 
had  a detached bow  shock and magnetopause similar to  the  earth’s  but 

12 

25 January 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
with a much larger  spatial extent and with  the  size highly  responsive to 
changes in solar wind dynamic pressure. The thermal structure of  Jupiter 
was found to be closely related to the visual appearance of  the planet, with 
illuminated  and  nonilluminated  sides  having  the  same  brightness  tem- 
peratures.  The  net  thermal  energy  of  the  planet  was  twice  the  solar 
energy input. 
Magnetic field measurements showed a very strong magnetic field and 
implied the dipole was inclined a t  about 15” to Jupiter’s  axis of  rotation. 
The  satellite Io  was  found  to  have  an  ionosphere extending  from  near 
the surface to about 1000 km. A new  density of  3.5 g per cc--close  to  the 
established for  Io.  Densities of  the 
density of  the moon and Mars-was 
other satellites of  Jupiter were progressively lower in proportion  to their 
distance from the planet. 
More  comprehensive  reports  of  Pioneer  10  experiments  were  pub- 
lished  in  the  Journal  of  Geophysical  Research  of  1  Sept.  (Opp, Wolfe, 
et  al.,  Smith  et  al.,  Kliore  e t   al.,  Science,  25  Jan  74,  302-324;  Journ 
Geophysical Research, Pioneer 10 issue, 1 Sept 74) 
0  A  Science  editorial  commented  on  Pioneer  10’s  3  Dec.  1973  flyby  of 
Jupiter:  “One of  the  impressive features of  the  Pioneer  10 mission was 
the  performance  of  the  spacecraft  and  its  scientific  equipment.  . . . 
.The  craft, with  its  transmitter  of  only eight watts,  has been  storing and 
sending tremendous  quantities  of  data  to  Earth.  Even  after  their  radia- 
tion  exposure during flyby, the electronics components continue to func- 
tion  well  as Pioneer  10 proceeds  on  its way  out  of  the  solar  system.” 
(Abelson, Science, 25 Jan 74 ,261)  
0  A  new  medical device,  the  mobile  automatic metabolic  analyzer  (MAMA )  
developed  from  Apollo  and  Skylab  technology  to   measure  energy  ex- 
pended  by  ambulatory  patients, was  presented to  the  Univ.  of  Alabama 
Medical  School by  Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  Director  of  Marshall  Space 
might  Center.  The  instrument-primarily  a  mass  spectrometer-would 
accurately measure metabolic activity, recording  oxygen consumed, car- 
bon  dioxide  produced,  and  nitrogen  and moisture  exchanged to  gauge 
the  progress  of  severely disabled  persons through  phases  of  rehabilita- 
tion. MAMA was developed and manufactured  at MSFC  under NASA’s 
tech- 
nology utilization program.  ( NASA  Release 74-18) 
Fraudulent  transmissions  to  Johnson  Space Center purporting  to   be  from 
Skylab  4  astronauts,  working  in  the  Orbital  Workshop  since  their 
16 Nov.  1973 launch,  were heard  during  a  telephone call  to  New  York 
City  from Unifi,  Inc.,  in  North  Carolina.  The  supposed  astronauts  de- 
scribed  “an  approximat,ely 10-megaton explosion”  on  the  spacecraft  as 
they  took military  photos  of  silos over Moscow.  After  the  “astronauts” 
said  they  were  sending  scrambled  messages  “on  channeI  5  and  chan- 
nel Byyy  they  were heard  supposedly speaking to  President  Nixon  at  the 
White House. They acknowledged that their wives had been notified and 
were being flown to Houston. The voices then reported  that their  “seeret 
documents and equipment” had been jettisoned. The transmissions then 
abruptly ended. The press later reported that  12  other persons had heard 
similar  “space messages.”  A  Houston area telephone company employee 
was latertaken  into custody.  (Anderson et  al., W Po s t ,  19 Feb 74, B17; 
JSC  Hist Off, interview, 9 Dec 75) 
Julian  Nott  and  Felix  Pole  broke  the  world  altitude  record  for  a  hot-air 
balloon larger than 4000 cu m, ascending to 13 961 m in  the 10 620-cu-m 
Daffodil  I I .  The  crew-which 
pro- 
lifted  off  from  Bhopal,  India-was 

13 

27 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

25 January 
tected by a pressurized cabin and special suits from the United Kingdom 
Royal Air Force.  (NAA  News ,  Aug 74; NAA Record Book) 
*  A.  Ernest  Fitzgerald,  a  financial  analyst who  had  been  fired  from the  Air 
Force after  he  exposed  a  $2-billion cost overrun  in  the  development of 
the  C-5A  jet  transport,  filed  a  $3.5-million damage  suit  against  Dept. 
of  Defense  and  Air  Force  officials. The  Civil  Service Commission had 
ordered the Air Force to rehire Fitzgerald 19 Sept.  1973.  ( W Star-News, 
26  Jan 74, A3) 
*  A  Soviet civil  aviation  magazine,  apparently  alarmed  a t   an  estimated  10 
crashes of  Soviet-built aircraft in 1 6  mos, with a  death toll of  about 600 
persons,  had  implored  aviation  workers  to  be  more  attentive  to  their 
work,  United  Press  International reported.  ( N Y T ,  25 Jan  74, 47 )  
25-26  January:  The U.S.S.R.  conducted the  first  long-range tests  of  its new 
SS-19 
intercontinental  missile  with  multiple  irdepeidently  targetable 
reentry  vehicle  (M IRV )   warheads. Two  missiles were test-fired 7200 km 
from the Soviet missile research center a t  Tyuratam to a target area in the 
Pacific  Ocean  1370  km  northwest  of  Midway  Island.  Chief  Pentagon 
spokesman Jerry W.  Friedheim later  described the tests to the press a s  a 
“significant milestone”  in the  Soviet program  to  develop MIRVS  but  said 
that  the U.S.S.R.  would not have  a missile force with MIRV warheads in 
operation before 1976.  (Finney, NYT ,  29 Jan 7 4 , l )  
January:  Hills 1000 m high  on the planet Mercury,  a s  well  as valleys 700 
m  deep and craterlike surface features 50 km  across, had  been  found by 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  radar  astronomers  during  high-resolution 
scans,  NASA  announced.  The  features  were  charted  by  directing  high- 
powered beams a t  Mercury in 14  probes between 1 5  July and 8 Dec.  1972 
from  Goldstone  Deep  Space  Station’s  64-m  dish  antenna.  Months  of 
computer  work  had  analyzed  the  data  and  formulated  a  map  of  radar 
findings, wliich might be verified 29 March when Mariner  10 (launched 
3 Nov.  1973) was scheduled to fly  past and take the  first closeup photos 
of  Mercury.  (NASA  Release 74-12) 
January:  Three  Intelsat  IV   communications  satellites  transmitted  the 
Muhammad  Ali-Joe.  Frazier  boxing  match  in  New  York  City  to  1 7  
countries. The  three-hour  match, won  by  Ali  by  a  decision, was  trans- 
mitted  to  Argentina,  Australia,  Barbados,  Brazil,  Chile,  Colombia, 
Jamaica,  Japan,  Korea,  Mexico,  Nicaragua,  Philippines,  Puerto 
Rico,  Thailand,  United  Kingdom, Venezuela, and  Zaire.  (ComSatCorp 
Release 7 4 6 ;  W Star-News Library) 
January-1  February:  The American  Institute  of  Aeronautics and  Astro- 
nautics  held  its  10th  Annual  Meeting  and  Technical  Display  28-30 
Jan.  2nd  12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting  30  Jan.-1  Feb.  in Washing- 
ton,  D.C.  “Spaceship Earth-A  New  Perspective” was  the  theme of  the 
meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von  Braun, Vice President of  Fairchild 
Industries,  Inc.,  and  former Marshall Space Flight  Center Director  and 
NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for Planning. 
At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of  Kennedy 
Space Center,  received  the  Louis W.  Hill  Space Transportation  Award 
fo r  1973 for  scientific, engineering, and  organizational contributions to 
manned  and  unmanned  space  missions,  beginning  with  the  first  U.S. 
satellite, Explorer 1, in  1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief  of  Ames Research 
Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the AIAA  Space Science Award 
fo r  1973 for  his  leading  role  in  the  Pioneer  missions and his  contribu- 
tion  to man’s  understanding  of  interplanetary space. 
14 

28 

28 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
28  January-1  February 
The  Goddard  Award  was  shared  by  Paul  D.  Castenholtz,  Rockwell 
International Corp. ; Richard  C.  Mulready, United  Aircraft  Corp. ; and 
John  L.  Sloop, former  NASA  Assistant  Associate Administrator  for  Ad- 
vanced  Research  and Technology-for 
significant  contributions  to  the 
development of  the practical  liquid oxygen and hydrogen  rocket engine. 
Winner of  the A IAA  History Manuscript Award for  1973 was Dr. Wil- 
liam  M.  Leary,  Jr.,  Univ.  of  Georgia  historian,  for  “The  Dragon’s 
Wings : The  China  National  Aviation  Corporation  and  the  Develop- 
ment  of  Commercial Aviation in  China.”  Carroll H. Woodling, Chief  of 
Johnson Space Center Crew Training  and Simulation Div.,  received  the 
de  Florez  Training  Award  for  advancing  development  of  space  flight 
simulators and for flight training programs. 
The  G.  Edward  Pendray  Award  was  awarded  to  Frederick  I.  Ord- 
way 111, Univ. of  Alabama, for his contributions  to the literature record- 
ing  the  history  and  benefits  of  the  space  program.  Willis H.  Hawkins, 
Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded  the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award 
for contributions  to the design and development of  aerospace vehicles- 
including  vertical  take-off,  transport,  interceptor,  and  supersonic 
fighter  aircraft-and 
to  missile  and  space  programs  including  ramjet 
and  reentry  test  vehicles.  The  Lawrence  Sperry  Award  went  to  Din0 
A.  Lorenzini,  Air  Force  Academy,  for  developing  a  modern  inertial 
guidance  test  facility  incorporating  computer-control, data-acquisition, 
sensor-excitation, and  seismic-isolation technology. 
Dr.  Harold  A.  Rosen,  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  received  the  Spacecraft 
Design  Award  for  contributions  to  the  development  of  satellite  com- 
munication  systems,  including  the  spin-stabilized  synchronous-orbit 
spacecraft concept and commercial systems. 
Dr.  Alan  M.  Lovelace of  the  Air  Force  Systems Command  delivered 
the  von  KBrm6n  Lecture,  “Advanced  Composites,”  pointing  to  a  need 
for  competitive  cost  and  innovative  design  to  realize  the  advantages 
of  composites  in   material,  fabrication,  and  configuration.  The  Dryden 
Research  Lecture  was  delivered  by  Herbert  F.  Hardrath,  Langley  Re- 
search  Center,  who  reviewed  the  use  of  fracture  mechanics  to  choose 
materials,  configure  safe  and  efficient  structures,  specify  inspection 
procedures, predict lives of  flawed structures, and  develop the reliability 
ofvcurrent and future airframes. 
Daniel  J.  Fink,  Vice  President  of  General  Electric  Co.  and  General 
Manager of  the GE Space Div.,  was  installed as 12th president  of  A IAA .  
The  19 new  Fellows  elected  included  Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  MSFC  Di- 
rector;  John  P.  Campbell  and  John  P.  Reeder,  LaRc;  and  Astronaut 
Charles Comad, Jr.  Inducted  as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank  E. 
Moss  (D-Utah)  and  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.)  . (A&A ,   Mar  74 ;  
A IAA  Bull,  Jan  74;  AIAA  Releases, 21 Dec 7 3 ;  AIAA  History  Newsletter, 
24 May  74; KSC Release  14-74;  ARC   Astrogram,  18 Jan  7 4 , l ;  Marshall 
Star, 30 Jan 7 4 , l )  
29  lanuury:  Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Chief  of  the Astronaut Office  a t  John- 
son Space Center  and  Apollo  17  astronaut,  began  a  90-day assignment 
a s  special assistant to the NASA Administrator  to coordinate NASA’s  effort 
in   energy  research  and  development  and  facilitate  NASA  aid  to  other 
agencies working on energy research.  (NASA  Release 7 6 3 7 ;  Off  Energy 
Prog, interview, Aug 74) 
30  lunuary:  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  had  signed  a  protocol  agreement  in  
Moscow  with  the  U.S.S.R.  on  possible  future  cooperation,  including 

15 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

30  January 
development  of  civilian  transports  and  helicopters,  a i r   traffic  control, 
and navigation  and communications systems, Lockheed announced. The 
protocol  was  one  of  20  agreements the  U.S.S.R.  signed with U.S.  com- 
panies.  (Lockheed Release, 30 Jan 74) 
30  J a n u a r y 4   February:  Two  representatives  of  the  10-nation  European 
Space  Research  Organization  that  would  develop  and  build  Spacelab 
for  use  with  NASA’s space  shuttle  accompanied  U.S.  scientists  on  the 
Ames Research Center’s Gd i l eo  ZZ Convair 990  aircraft  on  flights eval- 
uating  electronic  instruments  designed  to  measure  sea  conditions. 
Dr.  D.  J.  Shapland  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  J.  De  Waard  of  The 
Netherlands  observed  the  flying  laboratory,  which  would  serve  as  a 
pattern  for  shuttle  sortie missions  carrying  Spacelab.  Spacelab was  to 
have  two  elements : a  manned  laboratory  module  permitting  scientists 
and  engineers to work  in  a  shirt-sleeve environment  and  an   instrument 
platform,  or pallet,  for  telescopes, antenna,  and  other  equipment requir- 
ing space exposure.  (NASA   Release 74-31  ; ARC  Aerospace Sci Div,  inter- 
view, 17  July 74) 
31  January:  A background  science press briefing  on Mariner  1 0 ’ s   approach- 
ing  5  Feb.  encounter  with  the  planet  Venus  was  held  a t   NASA  Hq. 
Launched by NASA  3 Nov.  1973 toward Venus and Mercury, Mariner 10  
would be the  first two-planet mission, the  first  spacecraft to  use  gravity- 
assist  from  one  planet  to  reach  another,  and  the  first  to  take  closeup 
photos of  Venus. 
Dr.  S.  Ichtiaque  Rasool,  NASA  Deputy  Director  for  Planetary  P ro -  
grams,  said  Venus  was  the  planet  most  similar  to  the  earth  in  size, 
density,  and  distance  from  the  sun .   If  its  atmosphere  were  like  the 
earth’s, Venus should also have similar temperature, but the temperature 
had  been  found  to  be  very  high,  755 K  (900OF). And  the  atmosphere 
was 100 times denser than  the earth’s, in  one theory acting as a blanket, 
absorbing  the  radiation  that  tried  to  leave  the  surface  and  giving  a 
greenhouse  effect.”  Further,  the  Venus  atmosphere  had  been  deter- 
< <  
mined  by  measurements from  the  earth  and  by  U.S.S.R.  spacecraft  to 
be mostly carbon dioxide. 
Chief  questions  we re :   Why  such  a  high  temperature?  Why  such  a 
heavy  atmosphere?  Why  did  the  earth  get  all  the  liquid  water  and  on 
Venus everything stayed  in  the  atmosphere?  The earth had  life because 
it  had  oceans. Why  did  i t  happen  on  earth  and  why  did  i t  not  happen 
on  Venus?  And  what  could  happen  to  the  earth  i f   pollution  or  other 
causes  should  increase  its  temperature?  “How  much  increase  in  tem- 
perature  do  you  need  to  have  the  whole  thing  go  this  way,  and  you 
become  like  Venus,  not  next  week,  but  [in]  millions  of  years.  Is  a 
process like that feasible a t  all on the ea r th?”   (Transcript) 
*  Chairman  Don  Fuqua  (D-ma.)  and  members  of  the  Subcommittee  on 
Manned  Space  Flight  of  the  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics  received  an  annual  program  review  a t   Kennedy  Space  Center, 
preliminary  to IT 1975 congressional space budget  hearings.  The  Sub- 
committee was briefed on  preparations  fo r  the  space shuttle, manpower, 
and plans  for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.  Center personnel would be‘ 
further  reduced  in  the next  five months, with  the  closeout of  the  Skylab 
program.  Runway  construction  was  to  begin  in  the  spring  for  the 
shuttle.  (KSC  Release 18-74) 
9  Kennedy Space Center had  extended its contract with Chrysler COT.  Space 
Division  for  the  period  1 Jan.  1974  through  31  July  1975,  KSC 
16 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
31 January 
announced. The  $7 092 547 extension, which  brought  total  value of  the 
contract to $36 467 389, provided for prelaunch, launch, and postlaunch 
support of  the Saturn IB 1st stage for a Skylab rescue vehicle, if  required, 
and  for  the  launch  of  an   Apollo  spacecraft  in  the  1975 US.-U.S.S.R. 
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.  ( KSC  Release 17-74) 
During  January:  A  65%  noise  reduction  during  l p d i n g  had  been  demon- 
strated by 38 United Air Lines, Inc.,  flight crews in a n  in-service evalua- 
tion  of  a NASA-developed landing technique under  visual and instrument 
flight conditions,  NASA  announced. Using  the  NASA  technique,  a  Boeing 
727 aircraft approaching on a two-segment path exposed only a 50-sq-km 
area to greater than 90 effective perceived decibels of  noise. The program 
was  closely  coordinated  with  the  Department  of  Transportation,  the 
Federal  Aviation  Administration,  and  the  Environmental  Protection 
Agency.  Program  guidance  was  provided  by  a  Panel  on  Noise  Abate- 
ment  Flight  Procedures  with  members from  FAA,  DOT,  aircraft  and  avi- 
onics manufacturers, airlines, and pilots’ associations.  (NASA Aeronautics 
Update, Jan  74) 
Dr.  James C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said in his article  “Are  Skylab 
and the Space Shuttle Worth  the Investment?”  in  Government Executive 
that  everything  done  in  the  Skylab  program-with 
total  runout  costs 
of  $2.6 billion through FY 1 9 7 4 c h a d  been necessary for future progress 
in  space.  He  believed  the  Skylab  team  had  “taken  another  giant  leap 
for  mankind  comparable  to  the  first  step  upon  the  Moon  or  the  first 
satellite in Earth orbit.” 
And  even  if  the  shuttle were not  expected to  save $ 1  billion  a  year  in 
launch  and  payload  costs,  a s   i t   was-after 
an  $S-billion  1972-1991 
investment-the  U S .   “should  still  build  it.  We  cannot  run  Spaceship 
Earth without it.” We could not “begin to think of  obtaining solar power 
from  collectors in  space without the  Shuttle;  we  cannot  hope  to  unlock 
the  still  hidden  energy  secrets  of  the  Sun  and  stars  without  improved 
space observatories launched by  the Shuttle;  we   cannot hope to develop 
the  tools  for  management  of  natural  resources  and  protection  of  our 
environment  on  a  global  scale  without  manned  and  unmanned  Earth 
observatories  launched  and  serviced by  the  advantages  of  a  ‘hydrogen 
economy’ in  the  future  unless we  are willing to  support  such  important 
steps toward  that  future  a s  a hydrogen-fueled Shuttle.  In  short,  there  is 
no new  frontier in space for America and mankind without the Shuttle.” 
(Gout Exec, Jan  74,38-42) 

17 

February  1974 

1 February:  Selection of  Hughes Aircraft  c o .   for negotiation  of  a  cost-plus- 
award-fee contract for continuing design of  the Pioneer Venus spacecraft 
system  was  announced  by  NASA.  Proposed  cost  of  design work  was $3 
million,  with  a n   option  for  final  design,  development, fabrication,  and 
testing  of  two  flight spacecraft  and  launch  support  a t  $55 million. Two 
Pioneer Venus missions, planned  for  1978, would  launch one spacecraft 
t o   orbit Venus,  transmitting  data  fo r   nearly  eight  months,  and  another 
to  explore  the  planet’s  atmosphere down  to  the  surface by  ejecting  four 
probes  transmitting  data  during their  hour-long descent.  (NASA   Release 
74-34) 
*  A  $24 475 000  cost-plus-award-fee contract  extension  awarded  to  Boeing 
Co.  for  support services a t  Kennedy Space Center became effective. Serv- 
ices  included  test  support  management,  plant  engineering  and  mainte- 
nance,  supply  and  transportation  operations, security  services,  and  fire 
protection  and  rescue through  31  Jan.  1975, bringing  the  total  contract 
amount to  an estimated $98 952 758.  ( KSC  Release 21-74) 
1-2  February: Congressmen and staff  of  the House Committee on Science and 
Astronautics were briefed  a t  Marshall Space FIight Center and Michoud 
Assembly Facility in  preparation fo;  hearings on NASA’s FY 1975 budget. 
Committee members were briefed on Skylab, space shuttle, tug, Spacelab, 
concept verification test, and use of  space transportation systems at MSFC. 
On 2 Feb. they were briefed on the space shuttle external tank at Michoud. 
(Murshall Star, 6 Feb 7 4 , 2 )  
2  February:  The  U S .   exported  a  record  $5.125  billion  worth  of  aerospace 
equipment  during  1973  according  to  Dept.  of  Commerce  figures,  the 
Aerospace Industries  Associati9n of  America announced. Aerospace ex- 
ports  were  6.4%  of  total  U S .   exports  and  had  increased  34.1%  over 
1972. Much of  the increase was from exports of  complete aircraft, which 
totaled  $3.096  billion  in  1973,  up  from  $2.028  billion  in  1972.  (MA  
Release 74-3) 
*  Four  U S .   schools would  be heated  by  solar  power  in  a  National  Science 
Foundation  project,  the  Washington Pos t   reported.  The  project  would 
evaluate solar  energy  systems in practical  situations. All  four  systems- 
in Osseo, Minn.;  Boston, Mass.;  Baltimore, Md.;  and Warrenton, Va.- 
would  augment  rather  than  replace  the  existing  heating  systems.  The 
system in  the Warrenton  school was  expected to cut heating costs in  the 
five  affected classrooms from  $1600  to  $10  a  year.  Built by  InterTech- 
nology Corp. under  a $173 000 NSF  contract, the Warrenton  system con- 
sisted of a 230-sq-m glass, plastic, and coated metal solar collector through 
which  ran  1-cm pipes.  Water  heated  in  the  pipes was  pumped  from  the 
collector  into  underground  storage  tanks  and  from  there  into  conven- 
tional  hot  water  radiators.  The  tanks  would  provide  heat  through  five 
straight  sunless days.  The  only  outside  energy  required  would  be  elec- 
tricity  to  run  the pumps, less than  1% of  that  re-wired to  power a base- 
board system.  (Ringle, W‘ Po s t ,  2 Feb 74, D5) 
19 

4 February 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
4 February:  President  Nixon,  in   his  message  transmitting  the  U.S.  budget 
for FY  1975 to Congress, said the budget emphasized fiscal balance and 
continued “moderate restraint” on the economy to curb inflation, a strong 
defense force, a comprehensive energy program to “reestablish our ability 
to  be  self-su5cient  in  energy,”  the  “New  Federalism  philosophy  of 
strengthening  the  role of  State and local governments,”  and a “more  in- 
tensive focus on the tangible  results that programs  achieve.” 
The $304.4-billion budget proposed an  increase for defense from $79.5 
billion in  N 1974 to $853 billion, “so  that we  can increase our  defense 
preparedness and preserve present force levels in the face of  rising costs.” 
Despite dollar  increases caused by  rising costs and by pay  raises  accom- 
panying  transition  to  an   all-volunteer armed  force,  the  President  said, 
the proportion of defense costs to the total budget  had  fallen from  44% 
in  1969 to  an  estimated 29%  in  1975, after  the  end  of  US. combat  in 
Vietnam. 
Project  Independence, to   reestablish  US. self-sufficiency in  energy, 
would  require  about  $10  billion  for  accelerated  energy  research  and 
development over the next f ive  years and would encourage an  even larger 
private  R&D  investment. Higher  prices would  be  necessary  to  stimulate 
development  of  fuel  supplies,  but  the  emergency  windfall  profits  tax 
had  been  proposed to  curb excessive profits. The national  energy policy 
included  reorganization  of  Federal  administrative  machinery,  stringent 
energy conservation measures, mandatory  allocation of  petroleum prod- 
ucts, mandatory  reporting on oil production and inventories, moderniza- 
tion  of  railroad  regulations,  accelerated  development  of  domestic  oil 
and  gas  reserves,  increased use  of  coal  reserves, deveIopment of  a  fast- 
breeder  nuclear  reactor,  faster  approval  of  energy  facility  sites,  faster 
construction  of  nuclear  power  plants,  and  increased  research  into  ad- 
vanced energy sources, including fusion power and geothermal and solar 
energy. 
Shortages of  clean fuels would mean “some  temporary variances from 
air quality plans” would be necessary to meet high-priority energy needs. 
The progress  we  have made  in  pollution  control  in  recent years,  how- 
c c  
ever,  along with  reductions  in  energy  consumption,  should  insure  that 
overall air quality will continue to   improve.”  (CR ,  4 Feb  74, H407-14; 
PD, 11 Feb 74,161-70) 
*  President  Nixon  sent  a  $304A-billion FY  1975  U S .   budget  request  to 
Congress,  an  increase of  $29.8  billion  over N 1974. With  90%  of  the 
increase  mandatory  under  existing  law,  the  budget  included  few  new 
programs  and  few  cuts.  Federal  funds  for  research  and  development 
would increase by  9%   from N 1974, to $19.8 billion  total  obligations, 
< C  reflecting  recognition  of  the  larger  potential  contribution  of  science 
and technology to the solution of critical national  problem.”  A substan- 
tial  increase was  requested  fo r   energy  R ~ D ,  $2.05  billion  in  N 1975 
from $942 million in FY 1974. 
The N 1975 R ~ D  
request  proposed  investment  in  priority  national 
needs, but  included basic research  a s  well  a s  efforts  to  speed the  use  of 
federally  sponsored  R ~ D .  The  non-Federal  investment  in  R ~ D  was  ex- 
pected to  be $16 billion, 45%  of  a national total  of  $36 billion. 
NASA’s total  budget request  of  $3.247 billion  was  $245 million  above 
the  FY  1974 appropriation  and  $96.2  million  above  the  1974 budget 
plan.  If  approved, the  increase would  be NASA’s first  since 1965, except 

20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
4  February 
for  a  $100-million FY  1973  increase  that  the  agency  had   not  been 
permitted to  spend.  Significant budget items  are  shown  in  the  table. 
The Dept. of  Defense FY 1975 budget request of  $85.8 billion included 
$9.3  billion  for  research,  development, test,  and evaluation, an   increase 

NASA  FY 1975 Budge t  H igh l igh t s  
( in  thousands;  items do not add to program totals because only selected 
items  a re   listed) 

Budget  I tem  

Total budget  authority 

Research and deoelopmnt 

Manned  space flight 
Snace shu t t le  
d a c e  flight operations 
Skylab 
A S T P  
Development, tes t  & operations 
Space life scienees 
Space sciences 
Physics & astronomy 
os0 
O A O  
HEAO (suspended  1974) 
Orhiting Explorers 
Large  Space Telescope 
Lunar & planetary 
Viking 
Mariner  Jupiter-Saturn 1977 
Pioneer Venus (new s t a r t  1975) 
Helios 
Lunar sample analysis 
Lunar  science  operations 
Launch vehicle procurement 
Space applications 
Weathm and climate 
Nimbus 5 & F 
Tiros-N 
SMS-A & -B 
GARP 
Pollution monitoring 
E a r th   resourcS survey 
ERTS-B 
Aircraft  survey 
E a r th  and ocean pbysics 
SEASAT-A 
Space processing 
Energy applications 
Communications sateIlit~s 
Hea t  Capacity Mapping Mission 
Aeronautics & space technology 
Aerouau tical 
Space & nuclear 
Tracking & da ta   acquisition 
Technology utilization 
ConsmrefMn of  facilities 

Infrared  telescope facility, Hawaii 
X-ray telescope facility. MSFC 
Space shuttle facilities 
Resemdt  &program  management 

FY 1974 
Authorization 

FY 1975 
Request 

FY 1975 
Difference 

$3 054 500 
(3 002 100 
appropriation) 
2 245 500 
(2 194 000 
apprupriatiou) 
1 082  000 
475 000 
555 500 
233 800 
sn  nnn 
250  200 
21 000 
552 000 
63 600 
(un- 
dis- 
trib- 
- 
u tea)  
311 000 
(un- 
dis- 
trib- 
uted) 

177 400 
$161 000 
51 100 
(un- 
dis- 
trib- 
utea) 
13 900 
49 600 
(nndis- 
trihnted) 
- 
10 700 
3 100 
2 000 
- 
22 100 
252 000 
180 000 
72 000 
244 M)o 
4 500 
112 000 
(101 100 
appropriation) - - 
67 200 
707 000 
(707 .OOO 
appropnatlon) 

(3  247 129 

2 346 015 

1 124 800 
800 000 
323 300 - 
114 600 
175 200 
18 000 
547 015 
140 515 
7 630 
2 380 
40 400 
33 000 
6 200 
266 000 
89 016 
69 761 
27 100 
1 400 
5 798 
4 333 
140 500 
$177 500 
35 000 
7 000 
9 000 
1 400 
7 400 
29 800 
58 600 
11 100 
17 300 
18 500 
R  nnn 
3  500 
2 000 
8 300 
2 600 
241 200 
166 400 
74 800 
250 000 
5 500 
151 490 

6 040 
4060 
86 020 
749 624 

$$I92  629 
($245  029) 
$100  515 
($152  015) 
$92  800 
$325  000 
-232  200 
-233  800 
$24  600 
-45  800 
-3  000 
-4  985 
$76  915 

$6  200 
-45  000 

-36  900 
+$ I6   500 
-16  100 

+15  900 
$9  000 

+7  800 
+8 000 
$400 - 
-13  800 
$2  600 
-10  800 
-13  600 
$2  800 
$6  000 
$1  000 
$39  490 
($50  390) 
$6  040 
+4  060 
$18  820 
$42  624 
( $42  624 ) 

21 

4  February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
DOT)  FY 1975 RDT&E Budg e t  H i gh l i gh t s  
(in  thousands;  items do not  add to program totals because only selected 
items  a r e   listed) 

Budget  I tem  

N 1974 
FY 1975 
Fy   1975 
Budget P lan   Budget P lan   Df lerence  

Researoh, devebpment, test,  & evaluation 
Military ostronauics 
Aircraft 
B-1 advanced strategic bomber 
A-10  close-air-aupport aircraft 
A F  air combat  igbter 
USN vvx fighter prototype 
Tanker/missile-carrier aircraft 
Advanced medium STOL  transport  ( A M S T )  
F-14 interceptor  aircraft 
F-15 air superiority fighter 
Missiles 
Trident missile 
Air-launched cruise missile 
Submarine-launched cruiae missile 
Advanced  l r P i  technology 
Minuteman-site-defense prototype development 
Terminally guided maneuvering reentry vehicle 
b u v )  

$8 333 009 
593 926 
1 682 381 
449 000 
107 000 
- 
- 
- 
25 000 
737 000 
1 129 000 
2 124 762 
528 000 
11 000 
3 000 
4 000 
110 000 
- 

$9 322 469 
527 248 
1 829 318 
499 000 
268 000 
36 000 
34 000 
20 000 
56 000 
756 000 
1 076 000 
2,352 993 
649 000 
80 000 
45 000 
37 000 
160 000 
20  000 

460 
+$!)Si, 
-66  678 
+146  937 
+50  000 
+161  000 
+36  000 
t-34 O M )  
$20  000 
+31  000 
+19  000 
-53 000 
$228  231 
+121  000 
4-69 000 
$42  000 
+33  000 
+50  000 
$20  000 

of  $989.5 million  from  the  FY  1974 budget  plan.  Increases  in  military 
astronautics  would  improve  the  satellite  warning  system  and  the  Air 
Force  Satellite  Communications  System  ( AFSATCOM)  . NAVSTAR  Global 
Positioning  System  development would  continue.  The  planning  effort 
toward  use  of  the  NASA  shuttle  for  military  payloads  would  increase. 
The  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration’s  FY  1975 
budget  request  of  $467.1  million,  a  $77.8-million  increase,  included 
space and environmental programs. 
The Federal Aviation Administration  requested $845.4 million within 
a  Department  of  Transportation  total  of  $2.2  billion. Although the  DOT 
total was  a decrease from FY  1974, it included an increase for R&D. 
The  Atomic  Energy  Commission’s  $3.06-billion  request  included  a 
30% increase in energy activities and more funds for civilian efforts than 
for defense for the first time. 

N O M  N 1975 Budge t  Highlights 
(in  thousands) 

Budget  I t em  

BOAA  total budget authority 
Environmental  satellite  services  (including  polar  orbiting  & 
g e o s y n b n o u s   systems;  next  generation  polar-orbiting 
model) 
Public forecast & warning services 
Global monitoring of climate 
International projects  (indnding Global Atmoapberic Researcb 
Program’s  GATE) 

PY. 1974  FY 1975  N 1975 
E m a t e   Reqnest  Difference 

~ 

$389 308  6467 096  +$77  788 

62 356 
45 620 
594 
9 723 

61 475 
47 875 
1 112 
9 148 

-881 
$2  255 
S518 
-575 

22 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
DOT  FY 1975   R&D  Budget  Highlights 
( in   thousands) 

4  Februaw 

Budget  I t em  

DOT  to ta l  budget  authority 
Research & development 
F M  budget authority 
Engineering & development  (aircraft  safety,  envirou- 
ment,  aviation  medicine,  noise  reduction,  STOL, 
VTOL) 

FY-1974  F Y  1975 
F Y  1975 
Estimate  Difference 
E s tm a t e  

477 
$5 520 
390 
000 
1 311 820 

-53  324 821 
656 
$2 195 
417 
000 
4-27 000 
-446  437 
845 383 

11 500 

11 241 

-259 

AEC F Y  1975  Energy  and  Space  Budget  Highlights 
( in   thousands) 

Budget I t em  

AEC to ta l  budget  authority 
Space nuclear systems 
(radioisotope thermoelectric  generators  for  N A S A  & 
DOD  missions,  especially Viking,  Mariner,  Jnpiter- 
Saturn,  XES;  also  technology  improvements & ex- 
tension to energy applications) 
Enriched  uranium  production 
Civilian reactor  R&D  (including fast-breeder reactor) 
Fusion research 

FY.1974  FY 1975 
F Y  1975 
Es t ima te   Difference 
Estimate 

$2 388 914  $3 057 648  $1668  734 
26 100 
27 000 
$900 

331 615 
290 390 
53 000 

426 970 
349 750 
82 000 

4-95 355 
4-59 360 
$29  000 

The National Science Foundation’s $672.1-million request included in- 
creases  in  every  energy-related category ; national  and  special research 
program  funding  decreased slightly. And  the  Environmental Protection 
Agency’s  $695.2 million  would  increase  funding  for  R&D  and  pollution 
control. 
NSF  FY 1975  R&D  Budget  Highlights 
( i n   thousands) 

Budget  I tem  

NSF  total budget  anthority 
National & special research programs  (including tropo- 
sphere  &  atmoBpbece research  i n   GARP’ also seience 
& energy  R&D  policy  support t o  P r e s id eh a1  Adviser) 
Research App!i:.Pd t o  National Needs  (RANN) 
National  research  centers  (including  very-large-array 
radio astronomy facility) 

1974 
Estimate 

1975 
1975 
Estimate  Difference 

$579 260  $672 100 

$892  840 

91 600 
75 100 
42 500 

82 300 
84 000 
52 500 

-9  300 
$8  900 
4-10  000 

EPA  Fy 1975  Budget  Highlights 
(in thousands) 

Budget  I t em  

EPA to ta l  budget au thor i ty  
Research & development 
Pollution abatement & control 

1974 
Estimate 

1975 
1975 
E s tm a t e   Differenee 

$4 628 864  $695 200  4 3  933 664 
$2  152 
168 916 
171 068 
356 094  407 976 
$51  882 

23 

4  February 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
(NASA  Release, FY 75 Budget Briefing, Background Material;  NASA,  FY 
75  Budget  Chronological History;  OMB,  Budget  of  US   Gov t ,   FY  75; 
OMB   Special  Analyses, FY 75;  NASA,  Extracts  Budget US  Govt, FY 75; 
DOD  Release 43-74;  Annua l   DOD  Rp t ,  FY  75; W Post,  5  Feb  74, A l ,  
A10-12) 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  released  the  budget  statement 
he had  given a t  a 2 Feb. press briefing.  The FY  1975 NASA  budget plan 
for new authorization  of  $3.247 billion  and  spending  of  $3.273  billion, 
although  a  “constrained  budget,”  would  carry  forward  the  programs 
planned  in  N 1974. Goals  and  major  programs  were  the  same,  with 
three new projects in space science and applications, but  the space shuttle 
had been slipped four to six months. 
NASA’s FY 1974 budget  had  “reflected  a  sharp  temporary  reduction, 
because  of  Government-wide fiscal problems  . . . , below  the  $3.4 bil- 
lion  level  previously  planned  a s   the  long-term  level.”  Increases  in  FY 
1975  and  later  years  were  therefore  “in  order  to   approach  again  the 
level  required  to  maintain  . . . advances  in  space  and  aeronautics 
for  the  rest  of  the  decade.”  The FY 1975  increase  of  LLabout $100 mil- 
lion,”  however, was  less than  required  to  return  to NASA’s complete pro- 
gram  a s  planned,  and  adjustments had  been  necessary.  Principally,  the 
first manned  orbital  flight  of  the  shuttle was  rescheduled  to  the  second 
quarter  of  1979, instead  of  the end  of  1978, but  NASA  had  a  “firm com- 
mitment now”  that  there would  be no more slips for budgetary  reasons, 
and  none  was  expected  for  technical  reasons.  NASA  Comptroller Wil- 
liam E.  Lilly said at the briefing the  stretchout was expected to  increase 
shuttle  costs  about  $50 million  “in  1971 dollars.”  The $800 million  re- 
quested  for  the  shuttle w a s   $89 million  less than  NASA  had  submitted to  
the Office of  Management and Budget. 
I n   the  three  new  space  flight  projects,  Pioneer  Venus had  top  scien- 
tific  priority  as  the  next  step  in  planetary  exploration.  Two  missions 
launched  in  1978 would  study the Venus atmosphere for a better  under- 
standing  o f   that  planet  and o f  the earth’s  atmosphere, meteorology, and 
climatology. 
I n   the  second  new  start,  SEASAT,  an  experimental  applications  satel- 
lite, would  measure ocean characteristics to   aid  scientific understanding 
of  ocean  dynamics  and  determine  if  a  forecasting  system  could  be 
developed.  SEASAT-A  was  to  be  launched  in  1978.  The  third  start,  the 
Heat  Capacity  Mapping  Mission  (HCMM )  , would  launch  an  Explorer 
satellite  in  1977  to  make  thermal  measurements of  the  earth’s  surface 
to help  find mineral  resources and  potential  geothermal energy  sources 
and  to  discriminate  rock  structures  for  planning  civil  works  such  as 
highways. 
NASA  was  asking  $6 million  to  build  the  world’s  first  large  in f ra red  
telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary  research  to complement 
planetary  space  flights, especially to   provide  data  for  the  1977  launch 
of  the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. 
Another new  thrust,  still  in  the planning  stage, was the Tracking  and 
Data Relay Satellite System  (TDRSS)  , to return the large amounts of  data 
expected  from  the  shuttle  in  the  1980s  and  permit  phase-out  of  some 
tracking  stations.  NASA  would  not  develop  the  spacecraft  for  the  TDRSS 
but would lease satellite services from a  private  organization, beginning 
in CY 1979. 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

4  February 

Analysis of  data  from the  Skylab missions that  were ending with  the 
8 Feb.  splashdown of  Skylab  4  would continue  for many  years. Apollo- 
Soyuz  Test  Project  joint  engineering  and  training  activities  with  the 
U.S.S.R.  were  on  schedule. All  shuttle hardware prime  contractors  and 
most  subcontractors  had  been  selected,  and  the  Dept.  of  Defense  ten- 
tatively planned to modify an existing upper  stage for use a s  an  interim 
space tug with the shuttle. Er ts   1 ,  launched 23 July  1972, was  still work- 
ing  well,  exceeding  its  design  life  by  more  than  six  months.  ERTS-B, 
previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to  1975. Amumber 
of  NASA  and  11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during 
the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be 
continued.  I n   space astronomy,  OSO-I  was  scheduled  for  1975  and  the 
HEAO   series would  be  resumed,  with  launches planned  for  1977,  1978, 
and 1979. Astronautics programs  would continue to  develop technology 
to  improve  fuel  economy,  reduce  noise,  and  improve  performance  of 
U.S.-built civil transport  aircraft. 
NASA’s Civil  Service  employment  was  to  be  stabilized  a t   the  end  o f .  
FY  1974 levels  except  for  a  further  reduction  of  354  persons  at  Mar- 
shall  Space  Flight  Center  following  completion  of  Skylab.  NASA’s FY 
1975 total  would be  24616,  about  2200  less  than  in  FY  1973  and  354 
less  than  in  N 1974.  Support  service  contractors  a t   the  Centers  had 
reductions  planned  a t   about  the  same  level,  the  25000   FY  1973  total 
dropping  to  24 000  in  FY  1974  and  to  22 000  in  FY  1975.  (Text; 
NASA,  FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material) 
4-6 February: The U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Joint Committee on Cooperation in Atomic 
Energy  reached  accord  in Washington,  D.C.,  on   implementation of  the 
Agreement  on  Scientific  and  Technical  Cooperation  fo r   the  Peaceful 
Uses  of  Atomic Energy,  signed  21  June  1973  by  President  Nixon  and 
Soviet Communist Pa r ty  General Secretary Leonid  I. Brezhnev. A Pro- 
tocol  on  Cooperation  in  Controlled Thermonuclear  Fusion  and  Plasma 
Physics  Research  was  signed  by  Atomic Energy  Commission Commis- 
sioner  Clarence  E.  Larson  and  U.S.S.R.  State  Committee  Chairman 
Andronik  M.  Petrosyants.  Joint  coordinating  committees  were  estab- 
lished  for  fusion  and  fast-breeder  reactor  cooperation.  A  program  of 
cooperation  in   research  on  fundamental  properties  of  matter  also  was 
agreed on.  (AEC  Release, 15 Feb  74) 
*  Research into  automotive propulsion systems was  reviewed by  NASA,  Dept. 
of  Transportation,  and  Environmental  Protection  Agency  officials  in 
hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Sub- 
committee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications.  H.R.  10392  had  been 
introduced  19  Sept.  1973  to  authorize  NASA  research  toward  develop- 
ment of  economical, energy-conserving systems with clean emissions and 
improved  performance.  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Adminis- 
trator,  testified  4  Feb.  that  Lewis  Research  Center  was  testing  EPA’S 
experimental  engine,  under  a  June  1973  agreement with  EPA  on  work 
toward  a  low-pollution gas-turbine-powered vehicle.  Upgraded  engine 
work  would  be  completed  by  mid-1975 and  vehicle  performance  eval- 
uation  before the end of  CY  1975. First  results of  Jet Propulsion  Labo- 
ratory  investigations  of  hydrogen  injection  into  fuel  to  improve  effici- 
ency and reduce pollution  in conventional automobile engines promised 
achievement  of  1977  Federal  emission  standards  with  25%  improve- 
ment in fuel economy. 

25 

46 February 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
L ~ R C  Director  Bruce T.  Lundin  testified  that,  in  addition  t o  the  gas 
turbine engine,  a  broader,  longer  range,  advanced  technology program 
was  under  way,  w i th   13  industry  contracts  fo r   such  improvements  as 
a  low-emission combustor,  higher-temperature  heat  exchangers,  lower- 
cost  turbine  discs,  turbine  wheel  cooling,  and  low-cost  fuel  controls. 
Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL  Director, reported  a test automobile using 
bottled  gas to   inject hydrogen  into  the  fuel had  already met the carbon 
monoxide  emission  standard  and  had  almost  met  the  nitrogen  oxide 
standard,  although  the  hydrocarbon  emissions  remained  a  problem. 
With  engine modifications to  produce  hydrogen  from  gasoline,  instead 
of  using  bottled  gas,  performance  per  gallon  of  fuel  was  expected  to 
improve 25% over the conventional engine.  (Transcript) 
4-8  February:  The  first  meeting  of  the  International  Telecommunications 
Satellite  Organization’s Assembly  of  Parties  was  held  in  Washington, 
D.C.  Seventy-two  of  the  eighty-four  member  governments  were  rep- 
resented.  Raymond  J.  Waldmann  (U S . )   was  elected  Chairman  and 
Dr.  Osama Anani  (Jordan)  was  elected  Deputy  Chairman.  Elected  as 
Vice-chairmen were  Ambassador  Alejandro  Orfila  (Argentina) , Am- 
bassador  Adolfo Alessandrini  ( Italy) , Ambassador Leonard 0. Kibinge 
(Kenya ) ,  and Ambassador Motoo Ogiso  ( J ap an ) .  
The Assembly of  Parties  found  that  the proposed US. Geostationary 
Operational  Environmental  Satellite  (GO E S )   and  maritime  satellite sys- 
tem  would  not  interfere with  the INTELSAT  system. GOES was  technically 
compatible  with  the  use  of  the  radio-frequency  spectrum  and  orbital 
space by  the existing o r  planned satellites. The maritime  satellite system 
would  not  prejudice  direct  satellite  telecommunication links.  The  As- 
sembly  refused  a  United  Nations  request  for  free  use  of  INTELSAT 
satellites,  although  a  priority  access  arrangement,  for  periods  not  ex- 
ceeding 90 days during  an  emergency, would be worked  out.  (INTELSAT 
Release 74-12). 
5-22  February:  Mariner  10, launched 3 Nov.  1973, passed within 5800 km of 
15 km of  the planned aim point-at  1:Ol pm EDT  5 Feb. 
Venus-within 
The  encounter  sequence was  accomplished  according  to  plan  and  data 
were  transmitted  over  the  45 million  km between  the  earth  and  Venus 
a t   a  rate  of  117.6 kilobits per  sec.  Excellent ultraviolet  cloud-structure 
pictures  and  new  data  on  particle  environment  and mass,  density,  and 
shape of  the planet were returned. 
Because  Mariner  10  approached  Venus  on  the  dark  side,  the  TV 
sequence was not  begun  until  shortly before the encounter, a t  12:21 pm 
EDT.  The  spacecraft flew  behind Venus a t  1:07 pm  EDT  for  20 min;  TV 
signals were stored on tape and recovered without difficulty after Mariner 
10 emerged  from  the  occultation  zone.  During  occultation,  the  space- 
craft’s  radio antenna was aimed toward the edge of  the planet so that the 
radio signals were bent around Venus by the extremely dense atmosphere 
and sent on to the earth. 
All  science instruments functioned normally except the scanning elec- 
trostatic  analyzer.  The TV  sequence was  completed  13  Feb.  after  some 
4165  pictures  were  returned  to   the  earth.  During  the  flyby,  the  503-kg 
spacecraft used the gravitational field of  Venus to  slow its speed and direct 
the  flight path  toward  a  29 March encounter with Mercury. By  22 Feb. 
Mariner  IO-its 
speed increasing a s  i t  came nearer  the  sun-was 
travel- 
ing 3 million km per day toward the planet. 
26 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
5-22  February 
Preliminary  science  results were  presented  a t  a  press  briefing  7 Feb. 
a t  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory. Dr.  Herbert S.  Bridge, Massachusetts  In- 
stitute  of  Technology  scientist,  said the  solar wind was  interacting with 
the ionosphere of  Venus, producing a magnetic tail that could be detected 
as a modified plasma flow  as far  out from the planet as 500 Venus radii. 
Dr.  James A.  Dunne,  Mariner  project  scientist,  said the  magnetic field 
doubled just before radio  occultation but that no evidence of  an  intrinsic 
planetary  magnetic  field  was  found.  Preliminary  radio  science  results 
indicated  tha t   Venus  was  very  round,  100  times  less  obIate  than  the 
earth,  and confirmed  that  Venus  had a  dayside ionosphere.  The mass of 
the  planet  w a s   slightly  less  than   that  derived  from  previous data.  Hy- 
drogen was a major element of  the Venus cloud deck, ppssibIy present in  
droplets  of  sulfuric  acid  as  well  as  water  vapor.  Marzner  10 found no 
evidence  of  deuterium  on  the  planet,  indicating that  the hydrogen had 
originated from the solar wind. Helium, carbon, and atomic oxygen were 
found in   the atmosphere, with  possible traces  of  argon  and neon.  Outer 
atmosphere temperature of  590 K  (600’F)  was  suggested. 
TV data indicated a uniform main cloud deck with three or four layers 
and  a  stratified  haze  layer.  TV  pictures  in   uv showed  a  classical  “Y” 
feature  that  originated  in  the equatorial  region and spiraled  toward the  
pole. Clear circulation patterns could be seen at the poles, caused by rising 
gas transporting excess solar heat from the equatorial zone by convection. 
The  atmosphere was  smooth, with  no  swirling  storms.  (NASA  MOR, 11 
March 74;  Briefing transcript;  Sullivan, NYT ,  5 Feb.  74, 18; 6 Feb.  74, 
1 ; Miles, LA  Times, 6 Feb 74) 
5  February: Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  NASA’s 
$3.247-biIlion  FY  1975 budget  request’ and  program  [see  4  Feb.]  to 
the  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  to  open 
hearings on the NASA  authorization  bill.  I n  a  review  of  FY  1974 accom- 
plishments,  Dr.  Fletcher  pointed  out  that  as  the  Skylab  program  came 
to an  end the three  crews had  traveled some 113 million km  and orbited 
the  earth  2475  times  in   a  working  scientific  laboratory-chalking  up 
“about  100 miles per  gallon  of  fuel.’’  Skylab had  focused  on  the  sun, 
the earth, and man.  “Apollo  extended man’s  reach to  the moon;  Skylab 
added near-Earth to man’s domain.” 
In   answer  to  questions  Dr.  Fletcher  said  the  principal  difference 
between  NASA’s minimum  request  to  the  Office  of  Management  and 
Budget  and   the  final  figures sent to  Congress by  the  President was  the 
$89 million subtracted  from the shuttle program, causing a  four- to  six- 
month delay. Other differences brought  a  total  decrease of  $124 million 
below “what we  could have gotten by with without any major  changes” 
in   NASA’s program.  The  proposed  minimum  budget  would  not  have 
restored any of  the programs NASA  had had to drop because  of  F”Y 1974 
budget  cuts  and  therefore  had   been  “well  below  the   constant  level” 
envisaged  for   NASA  in   FY 1973. Of  $7.9  million  cut  from  aeronautics 
programs, the  chief  reduction was in  the quiet propulsion lift technology 
program,  deleting  the  system  integration  model  effort.  Deletion  of  $1 
million  from  the   requested  technology  utilization  increase  canceled 
proposed  increases  in  numbers  of  dissemination centers  and  reduced 
buildup  of  support  to  state  and  local  governments.  A  $5.7-million  cut. 
in  the amount requested fo r  ear th  observations instruments had deferred 
their development. 

27 

5 February 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Dr. George M.  Low, Deputy Administrator, said there had been ‘%ome 
discussions during the past  several months’’  of  an OMB   proposal to  con- 
solidate  weather  satellite  programs  under  the  Department  of  Defense. 
NASA,  DOD,  OMB,  and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra- 
tion  had  decided ‘%o keep  separate systems for  the  DOD  and  NASA  [with 
NOAA],  but  we  will  make  maximum  use”  of  hardware  commonality in  
building satellites for them.  (Transcript) 
Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger, Secretary  of  Defense,  said  in  l?Y 1975 budget 
hearings  before  the  Senate Armed  Services Committee that,  although  it 
was the first time in more than a decade the budget did not reflect support 
of  U S .  forces in combat, it had to support a minimum peacetime defense 
and deterrence posture. The $85.5-billion budget appeared large because 
of  inflation,  increased  military  and  civilian  pay,  and  increased  retire- 
ment benefits. 
An  FY 1974  supplemental  request  of  $6.2  billion  included  $480 
million in increased fuel prices and $231 million for extra costs of  arms 
for rsrael during the October 1973 Mid-East war. 
The  FY  1975 budget  included  programs  to  maintain  and  improve 
ballistic  missile  systems;  continue  strategic  systems  research;  increase 
the active a i r  defense of the US . ;   and increase the total airlift and sealift 
capability.  (Testimony) 
6 February:  Skyylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Jack R. Lousma, launched 
28  July  1973  to  spend  59  days  aboard  the  Orbital  Workshop,  were 
honored  by  Secretary  of  the  Navy  John  W.  Warner  in  a  Pentagon 
ceremony. Bean  received his  second Navy Distinguished Service Medal. 
Lousma received the Navy Distinguished Service Medal and Navy astro- 
naut wings.  (DOD  Release 54-74] 
0  The A  ollo  16 command module  (launched 16 April  1972) went on public 
dispfay  at  the  Alabama  Space  and  Rocket  Center  in  Huntsville.  The 
CM,  called  Casper,  had  carried  Astronauts  Thomas  K.  Mattingly  11, 
Charles M.  Duke, Jr.,  and John W. Young to  the moon  and back  during 
the  fifth  successful lunar  Tanding mission.  (Marshall S tar ,  6 Feb  74, 1) 
0  Dr.  Karl  G.  Henize, scientist-astronaut, suffered  a  “‘landing mishap”  while 
on  instrument  flight  plan  after  flying  his  T-38  trainer  aircraft  from 
Ellington Air Force Base to  Bergstcorn AFB,  Tex. Dr. Henize was not  in- 
jured.  A  wheel  on  the  T-38  collapsed  and  the  aircraft  was  damaged. 
( JSC  Release 74-50  ; JSC  Hist Off, interview) 
7 February:  Rep. Olin E. Teague  (D-Tex.)  praised  the  Sky lab   4  astronauts 
(launched  16  Nov.  1973)  on the eve of  their  splashdown after  a record 
84-day  mission,  concluding  the  Sylab  program.  On  the  floor  of  the 
precedented.”  After  damage  to  the  Orbital Worshop  during  its  1 4  May 
House  of  Representatives Rep.  Teague  called  the  Skylab  record  “un- 
1973 launch,  the  three  crews  had  repaired  and  altered  the  systems, ex- 
ceeded  their  expected workloads, and  returned  vast  amounts  of  useful 
information on  earth  rseources, solar  phenomena, physical science, life 
sciences, and  technoIogy. The crews had  spent 41 hrs  in  extravehicular 
activity and 171% days in  earth orbit, demonstrating that man could live 
indefinitely and work productively in space. 
To date the US. manned  space program  had  amassed 30  flights with 
some  21 850  h r s   of  active  operation  in  space. “These  programs- 
Mercury, Gemini, Apollo,  and  Skylab-have  made  direct contributions 
to  our  daily  lives  a s  well  a s   new  scientific knowledge.  . . . Skylab has 
28 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
7  February 
amply demonstrated that space can be used for practical purposes.”  (CR ,  
7 Feb 74, E533) 
*  Prof.  Nikolay  A.  Kozyrev,  Soviet  astronomer,  had  obtained  convincing 
proof  that  Mercury  had  an   atmosphere, Tass  reported.  A  glowing halo 
around  the  planet,  indicating  the  existence of  an   atmosphere, was  seen 
in a spectrogram made while Prof. Kozyrev tracked the planet’s path as it 
crossed the sun’s  disc. He calculated the  refraction  of  light in the atmos- 
phere  to  be  0.002  of  the earth’s  refraction  and the  pressure 0.02 of  the 
earth’s  atmospheric  pressure.  The  thickness  of  the  atmosphere,  estab- 
lished from the brightness of  the halo, was 600 km. Kozyrev had said the 
thickness  indicated  the  presence of  a  light  gas, probably  hydrogen. He 
believed that Mercury’s atmosphere was  continuously replenished by the 
Aow  of  protons  from  the sun.  (Tass, FBIS-SOV, 11 Feb  74,  U1) 
*  Francis C.  Schwenk, Director of  the Research Div. in NASA’s  Office of  Aero- 
nautics and Space Technology, testified on four NASA projects in hearings 
on  space nuclear  propulsion  and power before the House Committee on 
Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Technology. Early research had  shown that high-temperature thermionic 
converters  combined with  a  compact  nuclear  reactor  could  provide  an 
efficient power  plant  for  advanced planetary  missions.  NASA  technology 
would  now  focus on  thermionic  energy conversion fo r  achieving highly 
efficient operation  at lower temperatures. During the ApolIo  and Pioneer 
programs,  NASA  had  proved  the  advantages  of  a  small  (40- to  70-w) 
radioisotope-thermoelectric-generator power system, which had  operated 
a t  6% efficiency  a t  a cost of  $20 million per kilowatt. NASA  w a s  develop- 
ing technology for  a  0.5- to 2.0-kw gas-turbine conversion system  (Bray- 
ton energy conversion system)  to achieve efficiencies of  25% and reduce 
costs to  one fourth. 
Gaseous-core nuclear  rocket  research had  led  to  plasma-core reactors 
as  advanced  energy  sources  for  terrestrial  as well  as  space propulsion 
uses;  use of  uranium hexafluoride a s  plasma fuel was expected to achieve 
efficiencies of  more  than  50%. Lewis  Research  Center  research  into 
superconducting  magnets  and  plasma  confinement  and  heating  in  ad- 
vanced  steady-state schemes was expected to  show within a year whether 
a  superconductive magnetic  apparatus  (SUMMA)   could produce  fusion- 
like plasmas as predicted.  (Text) 
*  NASA’s  report  on  emergency preparedness and  defense mobilization  activi- 
ties for FY  1973 was   issued by  the  Senate in  the  23rd  annual  report  of 
activities  of  the  Joint  Committee  on  Defense  Production.  NASA  had 
revised  emergency  plans  a t   field  installations  for  increased  readiness 
for  a broader  range  of  emergencies. The  agency’s contract  policies had 
contributed to maintenance of a broad  industrial base of  small businesses 
to meet  conditions  of  a  national  emergency. ,Research and  development 
programs  contributing  to  energy  solutions  included  studies  of  new 
aeronautical  technology,  solar  and wind  energy, clean  fuel  production, 
improved  use  of  coal,  and  more  efficient fuels.  Technology  utilization 
teams were  applying  aerospace  technology to  public  problems in  medi- 
cine,  urban  construction,  law  enforcement, mine  safety,  a i r   and  water 
pollution, and transportation.  (Sen Rpt 93-683) 
*  The New  Mexico House of  Representatives approved  a  bill  to  appropriate 
$1.8 million for a proposed International Space Hall of  Fame in  Alamo- 
gordo.  (UPI, NYT ,  8 Feb 74) 

29 

8  February 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
8  February:  President  Nixon  wired  salutations  to  Skylab  4 Astronauts 
Gerald P.  Carr,  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson,  and William R.  Pogue  aboard 
the  recovery ship U.S.S.  New   Orleans  after  their  successful splashdown 
a t  11:17 am EDT.  The astronauts,  launched 16 Nov.  1973, had  set an  a- 
day space flight record in the Orbital Workshop. 
The  President  said:  “On  behalf  of  the  American  people,  I  salute 
Skylab’s third crew of  astronauts on their safe return to earth. They have 
successfully completed man’s  longest space journey  and  brought  to  an  
end  one  of  the  most  scientifically p roduc the  endeavors  in  the  history 
of  human  exploration.  From  the  Skylab program,  we  have  learned tha t  
we  can  live  and work  in  space  for  long  periods  of  time.  And  we  haw. 
found  that  the  results  of  these  efforts  can  be  of  enormous  practical 
value to  life on earth. 
“Skylab  now  joins  the  ranks  of  the  Santa Maria,  the H.M.S.  Beagle, 
the  Spirit  o f  St. Louis,  and  the Eagle.  Each  of  these great  vehicles has 
carried  us   beyond  the  contemporary  limits  of  human  knowledge  into 
a  new  comprehension of  our  own  possibilities and  a  new  definition  of 
ou r  own  destiny. We  welcome the  men  of  Skylab home,  and  we  salute 
them  and  all  their  predecessors  who  have  launched  us  on  this  great 
adventure.’’  (PD, 11 Feb 74 ,193;  A&A   1973) 
“Skylab  . . . has  demonstrated  that  this  nation  is  capable  of  conducting 
. 
broader  and more useful beneficial activities in space that  directly relate 
to  our  own  planet  Earth,”  Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator, 
said  at  a  postrecovery press  briefing  at  Johnson  Space Center.  It  had 
moved the space program  from the realm of  the spectacular  into a new 
< <  
phase  that  can  be  characterized  . . . as  almost  businesslike  if  not  yet 
quite  routine.”  The  Skylab  experience was  necessary  for  the  future  in  
space and had confirmed that  NASA was proceeding in the right direction 
with development of the space shuttle. 
Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said 30 earth resources 
lanned  and  39  accomplished  during  the  Sky lab   4 
passes  had  been 
been 350 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount observations 
mission. There ha I!
 
planned  and  338  h r s   completed.  Observations  of  Comet  Kohoutek 
included  13  by  the  Apollo  Telescope Mount  and  111  by  other  instru- 
ments.  All  28 planned  corollary  experiments and all major medical and 
student  experiments had  been  completed. Original  planning  had  called 
for  140 days  in  orbit  fo r  the  three  manned  missions;  172 were  accom- 
dished.  Skylab‘s  greatest  achievement  “was  to  prove  . . . there  is  no 
limit  in  our  space  research”;  the  limit  “is  on ly   our  resolve,  not  our 
ability  to do work, not  the  ability  of  men  to work  and not  our  technical 
knowledge.”  (Transcript) 
Sky lab  4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G.  Gibson, and William R. 
Pogue had  experienced a  harrowing last hour  in  space when they could 
not  get  commands to   the  secondary  control  system, which  pointed  the 
spacecraft heat shield a t  the correct angle during reentry. After discover- 
ing a  Ieak in  the prime reaction control system, the astronauts tried  and 
failed to activate the secondary system. “Our hearts fell and our eyeballs 
popped,”  Carr said a t  a 22 Feb.  Johnson Space Center press conference. 
Carr, commander of  the mission, instead had used a manual procedure to  
bypass the computer controlling the engine’s firing and guided the space- 
craft to a safe on-target splashdown. The press later quoted a NASA spokes- 
man  a s  saying that  the failure to activate the backup control system was 
just  a matter  of  a  switch not being thrown.”  (O’Toole, W Post, 15 Feb 
CC  
30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 
8  February 
74,  A l ;   UPI,  Richmond  Times-Dispatch, 16 Feb  74; Maloney,  H Post, 
23 Feb 74) 
*  The Army was  issuing  a  $ 1  988 000 firm-fixed-price contract  to  Algernon 
Blair Industrial Contractors, Inc.,  for modifications to  orbiter propulsion 
system test facilities fo r  space shuttle engine testing a t  NASA’s Mississippi 
Test Facility, the Dept.  of  Defense announced.  (DOD Release 59-74) 
The  Dept.  of  Defense  announced the Air  Force was  issuing  a  $ 1  400 000 
fixed-price-incentive contract to General Electric C o .  f o r  engine refurbish- 
ment and increase in  test hours f o r  eight YJ-101  test engines planned for 
use in  theYF-17  aircraft.  (DOD Release 59-74) 
*  Dr.  Fritz  Zwicky,  California  Institute  of  Technology  astronomer  and   a 
leading  expert  on  jet  propulsion,  died  of  a  heart  attack  in   Pasadena, 
Calif.,  a t  the  age  of  76.  Dr.  Zwicky’s  inventions included the  aeropulse, 
hydropulse, hydroturbojet,  monopropellants,  and eoruscatives. An  early 
member  of  Aerojet  Engineering Corp.  (forerunner  of  Aerojet-General 
Corp.), Dr.  Zwicky  was  Director  of  Research  a t  Aerojet  from  1943 to 
1949. Under h is  leadership the corporation developed JATO  ( jet-assisted 
takeoff)  for getting heavy-laden bombers into the a i r  and in  1949 he was 
awarded the Medal of  Freedom  for his work  in  jet propulsion.  I n  1934, 
in   a  report  coauthored with  Dr.  Walter Baade, Dr.  Zwicky  had  drawn 
the  first  clear-cut  professional  distinction  between  common  novas  and 
supernovas. The report  said a  Supernova blew off  considerable mass and 
could  leave  a  pure  neutron  core,  a  theory which  had   gained increasing 
support.  He  discovered  his  100th  supernova in   1973.  Only  378  super- 
novas had  been  discovered  throughout  history.  ( N Y T ,  11 Feb  74,  36 ;  
Who’s W h o )  
9 F e b rm r y :   Medical  tests  of  SlcyZub  4  Astronauts  Gerald  P.  Carr,  Dr. 
Edward  6. Gibson,  and  William R.  Pogue-begun 
after  their  8 Feb. 
splashdown-continued  on  board  the  U.S.S.  New   Orleans.  All  three 
astronauts  reached  their  maximum  preflight  work  rates  on  the  bicycle 
ergometer. Each  astronaut  completed  the  full  run   on  a  whirling chair, 
reaching  a  ra te  of  30  rpm  while making 150  head  movements  with no 
problems.  A  test  of  muscle  function showed no  significant decrease. As 
soon  as   the  men  had  landed,  the  pull  of  gravity  had  compressed  the 
vertebrae  of  their  spinal  columns,  removing  the  inch  or  more  of  height 
gained in  weightlessness. Carr had gained slightly in  weight;  Pogue had 
lost  one  kilogram  and  Dr.  Gibson  a  little  more  than  two.  (McElheny, 
N Y T ,  11 Feb 74,  7)  
A  Baltimore Sun  editorial  commented  on  NASA’s space  program  and  the 
8 Feb.  splashdown of  Skylab 4 :  “The Apollo moon missions and Skylab 
have  moved  NASA  to  a  point  where  few  if   any  scientists  any  longer 
condemn  the  space program  as  ‘more  circus than  science,’  and  Skylab, 
especially, has given manned spaceflight an  unassailable new  reputation 
as  a  superb  scientific instrument.  . . . It  is  unfortunate  that  the  space 
program  entered  its most  useful  and  significant period  in   conjunction 
with  the  loss of  interest  in   space on  the part  of  a  public  obsessed with 
Watergate  and  the  energy  crisis’’  but  “there  a re   no  indications  the  
American  people  wish  to  junk  the  space program.‘’  NASA’s FY  1975 
budget included promising projects.  “The  evolution  of  man  into  space- 
man  has  just  begun  and  there  a re   wondrous  things  ahead.‘’  (B   Sun, 
9 Feb 74)  
10 February:  Sky lab   4 Astronauts Gerald  P.  Cam,  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson, 
and William  R.  Pogue, who  splashed down  8 Feb. after  84 days aboard 
31 

10 February 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 
the  Orbital Workshop,  completed  a  third  day  of  post-splashdown tests 
before  a  brief  welcoming  ceremony  a t   dockside  in   San  Diego,  Calif. 
The astronauts then flew to  Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., for a reunion 
with  their  families. Medical tests would  continue  throughout  the  week 
and  the  three  men  would  continue  to  eat  the  precisely  controlled  diet 
begun  three weeks  before their  16 Nov.  1973 launch.  (McElheny, N Y T ,  
11 Feb 74 ,7 )  
e  A New  York T imes  editorial noted that the 8 Feb. safe return of  the Sky lab  4 
astronauts  “was  considered  so   certain  that  the  television  networks had 
decided well in advance not to broadcast the splashdown.” It “really was 
a  public  tribute  to  the  high  technical  achievements  of  the  Skylab  pro- 
gram and of  previous manned American space projects.” With  Skylab’s 
record  and  dividends,  “the  case  for  a  permanent  manned  station  in 
space can now be regarded as proved.”  ( N Y T ,  10 Feb 74) 
e  The success of  the Skylab program had made  the  idea  of  continuous occu- 
pation  of  an  orbital base more concrete to the  directors  of  the American 
space efforts, a New  York: Times  article  reported.  Such a  base  could be 
assembled by  flights of  the  space  shuttle being  developed by  NASA  and 
could be used  to  observe the  sun  and  the  earth  and  for  manufacturing 
special materials  under  weightless  conditions.  Skylab  Program  Direc- 
tor  William  C.  Schneider  had  said  in  an  interview,  ‘‘We  have  shown 
that  there  is  no  man  or  machine  limitation  on  whatever  we  want  to 
do  in  space.”  The confidence of  space scientists had  been  strengthened 
by  the  apparent  adaptation  of  the  astronauts  to  space,  although  the 
Times  reported  Sky lab   2  Astronaut  Joseph  P.  Kerwin  and  Johnson 
Space  Center  Director  Christopher  C.  Kraft  as  cautioning  that  nine 
men  “is  a  very  small  statistical  sample.”  More  long  test  flights would 
have  to  be  made.  However,  i f   the  medical  data  held  true,  the  design 
of  future  space  stations  could  be  made  much  simpler  and  the  number 
of  space  shuttle  flights  to  establish  it  would  be  fewer.  Schneider  had 
noted  that  the  conflict between  the Workshop’s  need  for  power  and  its 
program for observation was still to be solved. The current design called 
for  Workshop  solar  panels  to  point  toward  the  sun  rather  than  the 
earth.  In   a  future  space station,  observatories might b e  placed  on  long 
booms which could turn  on  their  own, minimking  the  station’s need  to 
maneuver.  (McElheny, N Y T ,  10  Feb 74 ,40 )  
0  Computer enhancement of  multispectral photographs  from  Er ts   I  satellite 
(circling  the  earth  since  23  July  1972)  had  been  proved  useful  for 
finding  mineral  and  water  deposits  on  the  earth.  Computer  image 
enhancement, first  used  a t  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  to  improve early 
spacecraft pictures  of  the  moon  and Mars, had  identified  surface  signs 
of  known  mineral  deposits for  JPL   and U.S.  Geological Survey investi- 
gators.  Twenty  ERTS-identified points  had  been  verified  in  a  test  area, 
exploratory  drilling had  uncovered  water-bearing  rock  12 m  below  an  
ERTS-indicated water  hole,  and  fractures  indicating  other  drilling  sites 
had Keen  revealed.  (NASA 7 4 2 7 )  
0  Noting the space program’s emphasis had shifted earthward  now that space 
flight was  an  accepted and  almost routine  part  of  life,  John  N. Wilford 
commented  in  the  New  York  Times  that  “it  is  only  natural  that  after 
surveying  the  canyons  of Mars,  the  clouds  and haze  of  Venus  and  the 
radiation  belts  of  JuDiter.  men  turn  back  and  take  a  new  look  a t   the 
earth and, in the words of T. S. Eliot, ‘know the place for the first time.’ ” 
( N Y T ,  10 Feb 74 ,7 )  

32 

10-12  February 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
10-12 February:  Soviet space probes Mars  4  and 5 ,  launched 22 and 25 July 
1973, neared Mars after a journey of  460 million km. Mars 4 approached 
the planet 10 Feb. Because of  faulty functioning of  one onboard  system, 
the braking  engine was  not  fired  and  the  spacecraft  flew  by  Mars  a t  a 
distance of  2200 km.  TV pictures were taken during the flyby and trans- 
mittal  of  information on  outer  space characteristics was  to  continue. 
Mars  5 was  put  into  orbit  around  Mars  at  6:45  pm  Moscow  time 
(11:45  am  EDT) 12  Feb.,  with  a  32 500-km apogee,  1760-km perigee, 
25-hr period, and 35" inclination. 
Mars  6 and 7,  launched 5 and 9 Aug.  1973, would  approach  Mars  in  
March.  During  a  22  Sept.  1973  interview  with  Tass,  Director  Roald 
Sagdeyev  of  the  Space  Research  Institute  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences had  said  one of  the  four Mars  probes would  softland  near  the 
Martian  south  polar  cap  to  test  the  physicaI  properties  of  the  soil  and 
surface  rocks  and check the  possibilities of  transmitting TV pictures  of 
the  surrounding  terrain  to  earth.  (Tass,  FBIS-SOV,  14  Feb.  74,  u1; 
A&A   1973)  
I I   February: The Titan  IIIE-Centaur proof-fiight vehicle  (TC-11,  launched 
by  NASA  from Eastern Test Range Complex 41 a t  9:48 am EDT carrying a 
Viking  spacecraft  model  and  the  SPHINX  satellite, was  destroyed  after 
the Centaur engine failed to  start. At  8.1 min  from launch,  after normal 
separation  from  the Titan  booster, the  Centaur main-engine start  failed 
and  the  vehicle  automatically went  into  the  restart  sequence. A  second 
attempt to start the engine failed a t  9.2 min after liftoff. Since the vehicle 
had not achieved orbital velocity the Range Safety Officer a t  the Antigua, 
West  Indies,  tracking  station  transmitted  destruction  commands  and  
the  Centaur was  destroyed at  12.5 min  after  the  liftoff.  The  vehicle  fell 
into the Atlantic Ocean 3530 km downrange. Inflight data indicated that 
the  liquid-oxygen  boost  pump  had  failed  to  operate  during  both  at- 
tempted engine starts. A committee was formed to investigate the failure 
and recommend corrective action. 
Although  the  primary  objective  of  demonstrating  the  capability  of 
the Titan-Centaur  launch vehicle was  not  accomplished, some objectives 
were  fulfilled:  demonstration  of  the  capability  of  the  launch  facility  to 
support  a  Titan-Centaur  launch,  structural  irntegrity  of  the  vehicle, 
Centaur  guidance  and  control  of  the  Titan,  Titan-Centaur  separation, 
and Centaur standard shroud capability. 
The Viking Dynamic Simulator had been  instrumented to verify flight 
loads  for  the  two  planned  1975 missions  to  Mars.  Remaining  attached 
t o  the  Centaur  stage, the VDS was to have  flown  a  typical Viking  launch 
trajectory  with  a  shortened  burn  to  limit  the  spacecraft  to  a  low  earth 
orbit,  to  test  the  guidance system, and  estimate injection  accuracy. 
The SPHINX  Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment space- 
craft  had  been  intended  for  launch into  an elliptical orbit to  investigate 
the effect of  charged particles in  space on high-voltage solar cells, insula- 
tors, and conductors. 
The  launch  vehicle  combined  NASA's versatile  high-energy  liquid- 
hydrogen  and  liquid-oxygen Centaur  upper  stage with  the  Air  Force- 
developed  Titan  I11  booster,  a  two-stage  liquid-propellant  core  rocket 
augmented by two strap-on solid-fueled rocket motors. It was designed to 
fill the  performance  and  cost  gap  between  the  Atlas-Centaur  and  the 
Saturn vehicles and boost NASA's heaviest unmanned payloads into orbit 
o r  interplanetary trajectories.  The first of  six scheduled operational mis- 

33 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
11  February 
sions-the  U.S.  and West German Helios solar probe  scheduled for  the 
fall-would 
be  configured to  a  two-burn mission to  obtain  data  lost  on 
the proof  flight. 
The  Titan-Centaur  program  was  managed  by  NASA’s O 5 c e  of  Space 
Science.  Lewis  Research  Center  was  responsible  for  the  Titan-Centaur 
system. The Air  Force  Space and Missile Systems Organization was  re- 
sponsible fo r  the Titan  I I I E  booster, including aerospace ground equip- 
ment  and Launch Complex 4 1  site activation. Kennedy Space Center di- 
rected  launch  operations a t  ETR. (NASA  MORS, 25  Jan,  24 June 74 ;  NASA 
Release 74-25;  U P I ,  W P o s t ,   1 2  Feb 74, A2; Robinson, Today ,  13 Feb 
74 )  
*  A  standardized  solar-electric propulsion  stage  ( SEPS) that  could  become 
part of a space transportation system fo r  payloads in planetary and earth- 
orbital missions was under  study  at Marshall Space Flight  Center. SEPS, 
one  of  several concepts under  study,  would  be  able  to  accept modules 
such a s  a  docking subsystem for earth-orbital missions o r  a science pack- 
age  fo r   planetary  missions.  Another  concept,  for  an  attachable  SEP  
module,  would  provide  propulsion  only  and  depend  on  spacecraft  sub- 
systems f o r  all other functions. SEPS would  carry a cluster of  six to nine 
thrusters,  fueled by  ionized  mercury,  and  two  lightweight 27-m  solar- 
a r ray  wings to  supply 25 kw  of  power  to  the  thrusters and payloads.  I t  
was  being  designed  for  use  with  the  space  shuttle  and  space tug,  and 
application  of  an   attachable  SEP  module  to  a  Mariner  spacecraft  was 
being  studied. The  tug,  supplemented by  SEPS,  would  be  able  to  deploy 
and  retrieve  a  2500-kg geosynchronous equatorial payload  in  100 days, 
tripling the amount the unaided tug could deliver. After one delivery, the 
SEPS  could continue to operate between the shuttle orbit and intermediate 
orbits,  delivering  and  retrieving  20  more  payloads  before  the  thruster 
life was used  up.  (NASA  Release 74-38;  NASA  OMSF,  interview) 
A  vertical-axis windmill  was  under  study  a t   Langley  Research  Center  as 
a  potential  source  of  nonpolluting  energy.  The  windmill,  based  on  a 
1927  principle,  had  two  four-meter  curved  blades  attached  a t   the  top 
and  bottom  to  a  five-meter vertical  shaft,  set  on  a  simple gear  system, 
and  a  generator  that  converted  wind  power  to  electricity. The  airfoil- 
shaped blades rotated  in  almost any wind  and were expected to   achieve 
enough  revolutions per  minute  to  provide  the  energy  requirements of  a 
single-family house  a t   an  estimated  construction  and  installation  cost 
of  $500  to  $1000.  A  much  larger  windmill project  a t   Lewis  Research 
Center,  for  the  National  Science  Foundation,  was  studying  large  con- 
centrations of  windmills for  industrial use  [see  11 Jan.].  ( NASA  Release 
74-33) 
*  Dr.  Harriet G.  Jenkins assumed her  duties as Deputy Assistant Administra- 
tor  for  Equal  Opportunity  Programs  a t   NASA  Hq.  Dr.  Jenkins  would 
assist Dr.  Dudley G.  McConnell, Assistant Administrator  for Equal Op- 
portunity  Programs,  i n   agency-wide  direction  of  both  employee  and 
contractor  aspects of NASA  equal opportunity programs. She had been an  
educational consultant for  the Response to Educational Needs project  of 
the Anacostia District of Washington, D.C.,  public schools and had served 
in the Berkeley, Calif.,  school system 20 yrs.  (NASA  Release 74-40) 
*  Dr.  Charles A.  Berry, NASA Director  of  Life Sciences, was quoted a s  saying 
in  an interview:  “From  what we  know today, there is no medical reason 
to ba r   a  two-year mission  to Mars.  . . .  We  still need more  data, but  I 
don’t think the medical findings from a six-month o r  a year-long mission 

34 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

11 February 

would differ appreciably from the experience with our three Skylab mis- 
sions.,, On a two-year mission to Mars  (not likely to be considered before 
the early 1990s) , “we’re  going to have a hard  time keeping people com- 
leaving astronauts more  time  to  think  of their  isolation. 
pIetely  b u ~ y , ~ ’  
“That’s  another  problem  we’ll  have  to   deal  with.”  Meanwhile,  all  the 
data indicate “that man is really adapting to the zero-gravity environment 
of  space. He does that  in a way  that causes some very  large fluctuations 
initially  in various body  systems” but,  “with  time,  i t  appears that  these 
fluctuations settle down.”  ( U S  News,  11 Feb 74,62-64+) 
An  Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology editorial  said  the  FY  1975 aero- 
space  budget  request  offered  the  aerospace industry  “its  best  prospect 
in  a  decade.”  The  dollar  increases were  “significant because they  were 
aimed  a t   alleviating  problems  caused  by  a  decade  of  neglect  in   basic 
weapon  system  development and  diplomatic euphoria”  and  recognized 
that aerospace was an  “important  sinew of  national power and economic 
strength.”  I t   was  the  first  budget  in  many  years  tha t   had  no  major 
program  cancellations  or  cuts.  The  worst  cut,  $89  million,  meant  a 
six-month  delay  in  the  first  shuttle  Bight  but  was  accompanied  by  a 
written  guarantee  of  future  support-€or  full  funding  of  the  program. 
The military  budget  was well  balanced between  research,  development, 
and procurement. While  the  NASA  program  would  not  satisfy  the  space 
buffs,  it  was  a  strong  continuing  effort  supplemented by  $500 million 
in military  space activities and  the  growing communications and  appli- 
cations  space  activity  in  other  agencies. The  aerospace  industry  must 
now  spend  extra  effort  in  delivering  the  hardware  and  performance 
to  meet  the  chalIenge required  by  this  budget.  (Holz, Av  Wk, 11 Feb 
74 ,7 )  
0  The  TV  film  “Houston,  We  Have  a  Problem”  w a s   criticized  by  former 
astronaut James A.  Lovell, commander of  the  aborted ApoZZo  13  moon- 
landing mission  (launched  11 April  1970) , in  a  letter  to  the  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator,  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher.  The  fictitious  film  focused  on  the 
personal  livBs  of  the  Mission  Control  team  that  brought  the  crippled 
ApoZZo  13  spacecraft  back  to  earth.  Love11  said  the  film  was  “in  poor 
taste”;  the safe return  of  ApoZlo  13  was  one  of  NASA’s finest hours  and 
i t  is not necessary t o  resort to soap opera plots to  enliven the . . . story.” 
(Carmody, W Post, 1 March 74, C7) 
6 6  
0  Economy moves left Kennedy Space Center dangerously short on  fire pro- 
tection,  according  to  Jack  N.  Anderson  and  Les WhitteQ in  a  Wash- 
ington  Post  article.  The  Center  was  being  protected  between  3:OO  pm 
and  7 : O O   am   by  eight  on-duty  fire  fighters,  not  enough  to  man  the 
$750000  worth  of  fire  equipment  or  fight  a  conflagration,  they  said. 
The  3 237 500-sq-km facility  contained  3747  cu  m  of  liquid  oxygen, 
3028 cu  m  of  liquid  hydrogen,  and  rocket  fuel  “to  stoke  a  flash  fire.” 
Boeing Co.,  which  held  the  ~ t s c  fire protection  contract,  planned  to  lay 
off  21  firemen and shift others to lower paying jobs. A Boeing spokesman 
had  said  no  manned  missions  were  planned  until  1975  and  the  bpse 
was  adequately protected. The Post  quoted a  NASA  spokesman as sayxng 
that  the  cuts were necessary  and  that  additional  fire  fighting  help  was 
only five minutes away.  (W  Post, 11 Feb 74, B13) 
12 February:  With  the  8 Feb.  splashdown of  the  Skylab 4  astronauts,  1816 
employees  a t   Kennedy  Space  Center  saw  their  jobs  come  to  an   end, 
the  Baltimore Sun reported.  The Sun quoted a  NASA  spokesman a s  say- 
ing  that  by  30  June  the  contractor  and  Civil  Service  work  force  a t  

35  

ASTONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

12 February 
IGC  would  be  9450.  The  latest  group  to  be  laid  off  included  mostly 
contract  employees for  Boeing Go.,  General Electric  Co.,  and  Interna- 
tional Business Machines, Inc.  (AP, B Sun, 1 2  Feb 74, A9) 
0  Tass  commentator  Georgy  Sergeyev  commented  on  the  US.-U.S.S.R. 
Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project:  The  success  of  Skylab  and  the  first  flight 
of  Yu r i   A.  Gagarin,  the  space  walk  of  Aleksey  A.  Leonov,  and  the 
exploration of  the moon by American astronauts,  were  only “milestones 
along  the  road  of  exploration  of  outer  space.”  ASTP  would  be  another 
step. The  joint  Soviet-American mission had  become possible,  not  only 
because of  the  efforts  of  scientists, but  also  because  of  the  “conditions 
of  a  favorable political  climate established in  Soviet-American relations 
a s   a  result  of  the  fruitful  . . . summit  meetings.”  The  main  task  was 
to  see tha t   “these  changes become  irreversible.”  ASTP  would  go  a  long 
way  toward  “making  space exploration  really  internationalist.”  (Tass, 
FBIS-SOV, 1 4  Feb 74, B6 )  
13 February:  The Air  Force launched  an unidentified  satellite from Vanden- 
berg Air Force Base on a Titan  IIIB-Agena vehicle. The satellite entered 
orbit  with  a  404-km  apogee,  128-km  perigee,  89.8-rnin  period,  and 
110.4’  inclination.  The  press  later  reported  the  satellite would  support 
the  Navy’s  surface  surveillance program.  It  reentered  1 7  March.  (Pres 
Rpt 74 ;  A v  W k ,  4 March 7 4 , 24 )  
*  The  House  of  Representatives by  a  25340-2 vote  passed  H.R.  11864, the 
Solar Heating  and  Cooling Demonstration Act  of  1974. The  bill  would 
authorize  $50 million  over  five years  for  the  early  commercial demon- 
stration  of  solar  heating  technology by  NASA  and  the  Dept.  of  Housing 
and  Urban  Development,  in  cooperation  with  the  National  Bureau  of 
Standards, the  National  Science Foundation,  the  General Services  Ad- 
ministration,  and  other  Federal  agencies,  and  early  development  and 
commercial  demonstration  of  technology  for  combined  solar  heating 
and cooling. H.R.  11864 was  the clean bill that resulted from the 1 9  Dec. 
1973 recommendation  of  the  House  Committee  on  Science and  Astro- 
nautics,  Subcommittee on  Energy  to  revise, amend,  a d  combine H.R. 
10952, introduced  16 Oct. 1973, and 18 similar bills. The bill was sent to 
the  Senate.  ( C R ,  13  Feb  74,  H774;  Background  I& Legis  H is t ,   Com 
Print, Feb 74 )  
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a 90-day $950 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee 
contract to  Thiokol Chemical Corp. for  studies,  analysis, planning,  and 
design  required  to  define  the  interface  and  performance  relationships 
of  the  solid-fueled  rocket  motor  to  the  solid-fueled  rocket  boosters, 
external  tank,  and  orbiter  of  the  mace  shuttle.  Award  of  the  90-day 
contract was necessary t o   continue  the  overall development schedule of 
the  to ta l   space  shuttle  system.  A  contract  award  to  Thiokol  in  Novem- 
ber  1973 to develop the motors for the shuttle had  been delayed pending 
the  resolution  of  a  protest  filed  by  Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.  (NASA  
Release 74-130;  Huntsville  T imes ,  1 7  Feb  74) 
NASA  and  European  Space  Research  Organization  officials met  in  Pa r i s  
to  discuss  future  cooperative  missions  to  the  planets.  Joint  mission 
possibilities  included  a n   out-of-the-ecliptic flight  to  study  the  sun,  mis- 
sions to Jupiter and Mercury, and experiments on missions to Venus and 
Mars.  NASA  would  receive  suggestions  for  the  1980s  from  European 
nations  during  the  next  few  months.  NASA  Director  of  Planetary  Pro- 
grams Robert S. Kraemer had  said that  international cooperation would 

36 

13 February 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
be  necessary  for  one  third  to  one  fourth  of  the  payloads  the  agency 
envisioned f o r  the next 15 yrs.  (NASA,  Spec Asst to Deputy Assoc Admin, 
interviews, 20-21  Jan  75; Couvault, A v   W k ,  1 April 74,3&9) 
Concorde 202,  the  second production  Anglo-French supersonic  transport, 
made  its  maiden  flight  f rom  British  Aircraft  Corp.’s  airfield  at  Filton, 
England. The aircraft, developed jointly by BAC  and ABrospatiale France, 
was airborne 1 h r  16 min,  including 30 min of  supersonic flight,  reach- 
ing  a  speed  of  mach  1.4  and  an  altitude  of  12800  m.  On  arrival  a t  
Fairford,  the  Concorde made  two  low-level passes  over  the  runway  for 
instrument  calibration tests before making a  perfect  touchdown, piloted 
by  BAC’S  Director  of  Flight  Testing  M.  Brian  Trubshaw.  (BAC-ABro- 
spatiale Release 2c/74) 
0  A New   Y o r k  T imes  editorial commented on Mariner 10’s  5 Feb.  encounter 
with  Venus:  I n   less than  15  yrs  since a  Soviet spacecraft  had  radioed 
back to earth the first pictures of  the fa r  side of  the moon, American and 
Soviet  spacecraft  had  provided  picture  coverage  of  the  moon,  Mars, 
and  Jupiter.  “Now  Venus  . . . and,  if  all  goes  well,  Mercury,”  too, 
would  be  photographed.  “Man’s  understanding  of  the  solar  system,  its 
nature,  origin,  and  history  has  been  profoundly  transformed  by  these 
remarkable  feats,  all  carried  out  in  so  brief  a  period  . . . a t   a  rather 
small cost.  . . .  What  are in effect telescopes in space rockets have now 
realized achievements that can surpass the possjbilities of  even the largest 
earth-space  telescopes  in   giving  us  information  about  our  neighbors 
in  the  solar  system.”  ( N Y T ,  13 Feb  74,  36) 
14 February:   Tentative  NASA  plans  for  launching  810  payloads  into  space 
in  the  next  two  decades were  outlined  by  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, NASA 
Administrator,  in  an   address  before  the  National  Space Club  in Wash- 
ington,  D.C.  The  total,  for  late  1973  to  1991,  included  non-NASA  pay- 
loads  for  Government agencies  (other  than  the  Dept.  of  Defense), for- 
eign  agencies, and private  industry.  The  tentative  payload model-pre- 
sented to Congress in October 1973 to  show “what could  be done in the 
1980s”  when  the  space  shuttle  was  in  use-included 
a s   many  as  10 
missions  to  the  outer  planets  Uranus,  Neptune,  Jupiter,  and  Saturn. 
In   1990 and  1991 two  very  heavy  payloads might  be  sent  to  orbit  one 
of  Jupiter’s moons and  land  an  instrument  package.  Tentative missions 
to  the  inner  planets  included  five missions to  Venus,  one  of  them  with 
a  lander, and  two  spacecraft to  orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions 
included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return 
samples from  the  two moons  of  Mars. Lunar  missions under  considera- 
tion  included  a  lunar  polar  orbiter  in  1979,  two  other  orbiters  in   the 
1980s,  two  lunar  rovers  in  the  1980s,  a  lunar  halo  satellite  to  ensure 
communications with  the hidden  side of  the moon, and two lunar  rovers 
in  1990 and 1991 that could return samples to  the earth  from  any  point 
on  the  moon.  Other  plans  under  consideration  were  a  flyby  and  ren- 
dezvous with  Comet  Encke  and  a  landing  on  the  nucleus,  a  flyby  of 
Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. 
Of  the  810 total  payloads, 57  were  designated for  planetary  explora- 
tion  and  753  for  earth  orbit.  Scientific satellites  for  earth  orbit  were 
Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large 
Solar  Observatories, Large  Radio  Astronomy  Observatories,  and  x-ray 
telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly 
by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing.  I n  the 
37 

14 February 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
applications  field  were  large  Earth  Observatory  Satellites.  And  NASA 
expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation  satellites for other 
agencies or  private  industry through  1991, not  including those for  DOD. 
Of  some  300  payloads  to  be  flown  in  the  Spacelab, most  would  be 
NASA  payloads  in  the  fields  of  astronomy,  physics,  earth  observations, 
earth  and  ocean  physics,  communication  and  navigation,  life  science, 
and  space  technology.  Of  non-NASA  payloads,  10 would  be  for  private 
industry space processing, beginning in  1985. Some 10%  were expected 
to be flown for foreign users. 
The large number of  contemplated missions, even with  the  increasing 
number  of  U.S.S.R.  launches,  was  expected  to  have  very  little  impact 
on the environment. Effects of  the major  constituents of  the  solid-fueled 
rocket booster exhaust-water  vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, 
and aluminum oxide-would  be negligible.  (Text) 
France  reluctantly  decided  to  cut  back  construction  of  the  Anglo-French 
Concorde  supersonic  airliner  and  to  scrap  production  of  the  Mercure 
short-range  twin-jet  airliner,  a t   a  special  meeting  of  Premier  Pierre 
Messmer and  five ministers. France had  been  demanding production  of 
eight  Concorde  aircraft  but  would  now  accept  as  few  a s   six  in  the 
knowledge  that,  with  a  Labor  Party  victory  in  the  28  Feb.  British 
elections,  the  U.K.  might  be  willing  to  scrap  the  entire  project.  The 
press  said the French  decision came after  a  report  from  France’s  rocket 
testing  center  suggesting  a  $9O-million fuel-tank modification  to  boost 
range  at  the  expense  of  reduced  transatlantic  loads.  A  suggested  10% 
increase  in  engine  thrust,  requiring  8%   more  wing  area  a t   a  cost  of 
as much as $400 million, was believed rejected at the meeting. 
The decision to  scrap the  120-seat, 1200-km range Mercure was  taken 
after an initial production  run  of  10 aircraft and writeoff  costs reported 
by  the  press  at  $120 million.  Competition  from  the  already  established 
DC-9s  and Boeing 727s and 737s was  too  great for  the Mercure, whose 
one  buyer  was  Air  Inter,  the  internal French  airline.  (Randal,  W Pos t ,  
17 Feb  74, A I )  
*  NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications Leonard Jaffe--US. 
Representative to the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of 
Outer  Space  Working  Group  and  Task  Forre  on  Remote  Sensing- 
reviewed  U.S.  environmental  and  earth  resources  programs  before  the 
Working  Group  and Task Force. The U.S.  had  designed tape  recorders 
and  studies  on  E r t s   1  Earth  Resources Technology Satellite  (launched 
23  July  1972)  f o r  foreign  use of  the  data, but  the  “extent  and vigor  of 
foreign interest was perhaps greater than we expected.” Brazil and Canada 
had built ground  stations to receive data directly and, by agreement with 
the U.S.,  were  disseminating data.  Italy  also would  establish  a  ground 
station, and nine other countries had expressed interest. 
E r t s   1  performance had  shown that  data collection with  a spatial res- 
olution of  100 m was economical and adequate for a wide range of  signif- 
icant  applications.  Although  total  discontinuance  of  photographic  im- 
agery  was  not  planned,  the  speed,  reliability,  and  flexibility  found  in 
computer  analysis  indicated  that  future  systems would  increasingly use 
automated methods. 
The mapping  accuracy of  the  satellite’s  instruments was  adequate  for 
1 : IO00  000 and even 1 :250 000 scale when  system errors were removed 
by  computer  processing.  Processing  and  disseminating data  was  a  key 
factor in  the cost of  an  earth observation program. No one data-processing 

38 

14  February 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
and  dissemination  facility would  ever  be  able  to  meet  the  needs  of  the 
world  efficiently. Estimates put  the  cost  of  an  additional system similar 
to the E r t s  1 data-collection system-aside 
from spacecraft c o s t s a t  $11 
million for the facility and $9.9 million for five years of  data processing. 
A minimal system with only multispectral scanner and real-time observa- 
tions  would  cost  $2.5  million  for  the  facility  and  $3.6  million  for  five 
years of  data processing.  (Text; NASA  OA,  interview) 
French,  Canadian,  and U.S.  scientists were participating  in projects  to  ex- 
pand  Univ.  of  Hawaii  facilities  on  top  of  5000-m Mauna Kea  into  one 
of  the world’s  greatest centers  for  celestial observations. I n  addition  to 
NASA’s planned  3-m  infrared  telescope  announced  4  Feb.,  Hawaii  had 
recently  concluded an  agreement with  the National Research Council of 
France  and the National  Research Council of  Canada  for  a  $2O-million 
enterprise  to  operate a new  3.8-m telescope for general astronomical ob- 
servations. The  university  already  had  three  telescopes on Mauna Kea. 
(Durdin, NYT ,   14 Feb 74, 33; NASA  Release 74-23) 
*  A  Washington Star-News editorial commented on the triumph of  the Skylab 
program:  Although  a  “fellow wondering where  his  next  tank  of  gas  is 
the country 
coming from ha s  difficulty getting excited about the C O S ~ O S , ~ ~  
“could  take much  encouragement from the  successful completion of  the 
$2.6-billion  Skylab program.”  We  could expect that  this  had  been  well 
worth the effort and that  a  similar crash program  on energy could meet 
with  the  same  success. Americans  would  not  venture  into  space  again 
until  the  space  shuttle  project  a t  the  end  of  the  decade,  except  fo r  the 
1975 linkup  of  U.S.  and  Soviet spacecraft.  If  all went well,  that  “could 
be the most fascinating and heartening adventure since that  first landing 
on the moon.”  ( W Star-News, 1 4  Feb 74, A18) 
15 February:  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Space Flight  DaIe 
D.  Myers had  resigned effective 15 March to  return to  private  industry, 
NASA  announced. Myers would  rejoin  Rockwell  International  Gorp.  as 
president  of  a  new  aircraft  group  with  headquarters  in  Los  Angeles. 
Myers,  who  had  headed  all  NASA  manned  space  flight  programs  since 
January  1970, had  received the NASA  Certificate of  Appreciation in  1969 
for  his  contributions  to  the  Apo l lo   8 moon-orbiting mission,  the  NASA 
Public  Service  Award  in  1969  for  h i s   contributions  to  the  Ap o l lo   11 
landing  mission, and  the  NASA  Distinguished Service Medal in  1971 for 
his  contributions  to  the  continued  success of  the Apollo  program. 
Skylab Program  Director William C.  Schneider had  been named Act- 
ing  Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight.  (NASA  Release 
74-42) 
0  A  one-Uth scale model of  a large portion  of  the Air  Force B-1  swing-wing 
strategic  bomber  had  been  tested  in  transonic  and  supersonic  wind 
tunnels  a t   the  Air  Force  Systems Command’s  Arnold  Engineering  De- 
velopment Center, AFSC announced. The  tests verified  inputs to the com- 
puter  control  system  that  adjusted  the  B-1’s  double  inlets  for  an   ade- 
quate air supply  to the engines during  flight maneuvers.  Test  data  also 
would be  used  t o  optimize the  inlets’ boundary-layer control.  (AFSC  Re- 
lease OIP  196.73) 
16  February:  Japan  successfully  launched  Tansei  2  experimental  MS-T2 
satellite  from  Kagoshima  Space  Center,  Uchinoura,  on  a  three-stage 
MU-3C  booster  a t  2:OO  pm  local time  (1:OO  am  EDT)   after  a  two-day 
postponement  because  of  bad  weather.  A  thrust-vector-control system 
had  been  installed on  the  2nd  stage of  the booster  to  stabilize its  flight. 

39 

16 February 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
The  improved  version  of  the  four-stage  M U 4 S   was  the  first  guided 
booster  Japan  had   used.  The  satellite  entered  orbit  with  a  3229-km 
apogee, 283-km perigee,  121.7-min period, and 31.2” inclination. KYODO 
news service reported  the objective was  “to  test  the  control  devices and 
not for scientific observation.” 
Tanse i  2,  named  “Light  Blue”  for  the  Univ.  of  Tokyo  colors,  was 
Japan’s  fifth satellite and  third  test  satellite. Ohsurni  (launched  11 Feb. 
1970) and Tansei 1 (launched 16 Feb.  1971) were test  satellites return- 
ing  performance  data.  Shinsei  (launched  28  Sept.  1971)  had  carried 
instruments to study cosmic rays and electric waves,  and Denpa  (Radio 
Explorer  Satellite  launched  19  Aug.  1972)  had  carried  instruments  to 
probe  the  ionosphere.  (CSFG  S SR ,  28  Feb  74;  FBIs-Japan,  22  Feb  74, 
13-14;  A&A   1971) 
18-26  February: The cooperative Italian-NASA Sun Marco  4  (San Marco c2:1  
Explorer  satellite was  successfully launched by  an  Italian crew from the 
San  Marco  launch  pIatform  off  the  coast  of  Kenya  on  a  NASA  Scout 
booster. Liftoff was  a t  1:05 pm  local time  (6:05 am  EDT)  , 2 h r s  50 min 
late because of  low cloud cover. The satellite entered orbit with  a  930.5- 
km  apogee,  234.5-km perigee,  96-min  period,  and  2.9’  inclination  to  
measure  diurnal variations  of  the  equatorial neutral  atmosphere’s  den- 
sity,  composition, and  temperature.  The  data  would  be  correlated  with 
data from Explorer 51  (launched 15 Dec.  1973) fo r  studies of  the physics 
and dynamics of  the  thermosphere. The  launch  had  been  delayed  from 
6  Feb.  to  allow NASA’s Spaceflight Tracking  and  Data  Network  (STDN )  
to give better support for the 8 Feb. Shylab 4 splashdown. 
The  Italian-built  170-kg Sun   Marco  4  carried  three  experiments:  an  
Ttalian density-drag accelerometer to measure  atmospheric drag,  a  U S .  
omegatqon  to  measure  the  temperature  and  density  of  thermosphere 
molecular  nitrogen,  and  a  U S .   neutral  mass  spectrometer  to  measure 
primary  constituents of  the  neutral  atmosphere.  Data  gathered  by  S u n  
Marco 4 in the equatorial zone and Explorer 51 in the auroral zone would 
provide  a  good picture  of  the effects of  magnetic  storms on  the  thermo- 
sphere and differences in  the thermosphere’s  response to  energy coming 
from the sun to the poles and the equator. 
The omegatron experiment was  activated 19 Teb. and the neutral mass 
spectrometer 22 Feb. By 26 Feb. both instruments were acquiring worth- 
while  scientific data.  The  Italian  density-drag  accelerometer,  activated 
shortly  after  launch  but  not  performing  properly,  was  being  investi- 
gated. All  spacecraft systems were functioning as planned. 
Sun   Marco  4  was  the  fourth  satellite  launched  under  cooperative 
agreements  between  NASA  and  the  Italian  Space  Commission.  Sun  
Ma rco   1 was launched  15  Dec.  1964; Sun  Marco  2 , 2 6  April 1967; and 
Sun Marco  3, 24 April  1971. Under  the  latest  agreement, signed 6 Aug. 
1973, Italy  had  designed and  built  the  spacecraft, provided  one experi- 
ment,  and  conducted  launch  operations.  The  U S .   provided  the  Scout 
booster,  two  experiments, technical  consultation,  launch  crew  training, 
and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition.  (NASA   MORS, 15 ,26  Feb 74; 
NASA  Releases 74 -30 ,76 39 )  
18  F e b r u a r y 4  March:  Thomas  L.  Gatch ‘was  lost  a t   sea  while  attempting 
the first transatlantic balloon flight. Gatch lifted off  from Harrisburg, Pa., 
18 Feb.  in  a  two-meter sealed gondola, the Light  Heart,  suspended from 
10 helium-filled balloons. He  hoped to  reach  12 000-m altitude  and ride 
4.43 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

18 February4  March 

the  jet-stream  winds  across  the  Atlantic  to  Europe,  but  changes  in   a i r  
currents  pushed  him  south  of  his  planned  course.  Radio  contact  was 
made  with  Gatch  19  Feb.  by  an  airliner  1600  km east  northeast  of 
Puerto Rico. He was spotted a t  305-m altitude 21 Feb. by a Liberian ship 
1670 km  off  the  coast  of  Africa.  Further  inconsistent  and  unconfirmed 
radio contacts and sightings made  tracking  Gatch‘s  balloon  difEcult. 
After reports of a sighting on the Spanish Sahara, the Spanish Foreign 
Legion  searched  the  480-km Moroccan-Spanish Sahara  border  for  two 
days, while  U S .   military  Aircraft  and  ships were  put  on  lookout.  The 
Dept.  of  Defense ordered  an   intensive  visual  rada r   and  radio  search 
1 March  of  the  Atlantic Ocean  1530 km  west  of  Africa,  but  the  search 
was  given  up  6  March  after  exploration  of  578000  sq  km  of  ocean. 
( W   S tar-News ,  18,  22,  26  Feb.  74;   W Po s t ,   25  Feb,  2,  7  March  74; 
B Sun, 21 ,25  Feb 74)  
19 February:  NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight Dale D. 
Myers testified on the manned space program before the House Committee 
on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  Manned  Space  Flight 
during  FY  1975  authorization  hearings.  Myers  said  NASA’s ability  to_ 
hold  close  to   the  original  cost  target  fo r   the  space  shuttle  in  spite  of 
schedule adjustments  in  the  last  two  years was  “due  to  bringing on  our 
contractors below our  cost estimates” and the ability bf  the management 
structure  to  remain  dynamic  and  react  to  changes  and  “surprise  prob- 
lems.’,  He  wa s   confident that  the  average-cost-per-flight commitment of 
$10.5 million in  1971 dollars would  be maintained. However, resolution 
of  the  protested  selection  of  Thiokol  Corp.  for  the  solid-fueled rocket 
motor contract was  necessary before work  on  the motor could begin;  “a 
timely start of  this  . . . activity is very  important to  orderly  progress  in 
the shuttle development schedule.” 
In  the  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project,  the  ASTP  spacecraft was  to  be  de- 
livered to Kennedy Space Center  in the fall,  joint  docking system quali- 
fication  testing  and  preflight docking  system compatibility tests were to 
be completed during the winter, experiment hardware was  to  be qualified 
by  early  spring,  and flight readiness  activities were  to  be  comdeted  by 
spring,  leading  to  the  July  launch.  NASA  had  allocated  $13  million  for 
experiments fo r  ASTP.  More than  140 proposals from  the  scientific com- 
munity  had  been  evaluated by  eminent  scientists and  medica1 doctors. 
The final,  “first-rate”  experiment package had  been  given final approval 
by the Administrator. 
Following ASTP,  two Saturn Vs,  two Saturn IBs, one complete and one 
partially  complete  command  and  service  module,  the  unused  Skylab 
backup  Workshop  cluster,  and  one  ASTP  docking  module  and  system 
would remain unused. Acquisition cost of  the hardware was $870 million. 
With the conclusion of  the programs, the hardware would be stored. Total 
storage costs per  year  would be $100 000. After FY  1975, disposition of 
the hardware wouId have to be considered.  (Transcript) 
A  nine-month, $321 394  study  contract  to  provide  NASA  with  engineering 
concepts, requirements,  and  design trade-offs for  a  zero-gravity atmos- 
pheric-cloud-physics-experiment laboratory to fly on the space shuttle had 
been  awarded  to  McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co . ,  Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center  announced. The proposed  laboratory  would  permit  study 
of  “trigger”  actions  in  clouds,  such  a s  the  formation  of  ice  crystals  o r  
water  droplets,  electrical  charges  on  droplets,  and  water-droplet-ice- 
41 

19 February 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

% 

20 

19  

crystal  interactions  to  aid  in  the  ultimate  control  and  modification of 
hazardous weather conditions. The laboratory could be reused on a t  least 
20 Spacelab missions.  ( MSFC Release 74-27; MSFC PAO) 
Jean-Pierre  Causse, Head  of  the  European  Space Research Organization’s 
Spacelab  Program,  announced  his  resignation  effective in  early  April. 
He  would  join  the  French  company  Saint-Gobain-Pont-i-Mousson  as 
Director  of  Research.  (Space lab  Newsletter, 74-2; NASA  prog  off, inter- 
view) 
*  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  reported  1973 earnings  of  $36 299 000, 
equal  to   $3.63 per  share,  an   increase  from  $24 967 000, or  $2.50 per 
share,  for  1972. Net  operating income for  1973 totaled $29 424 000 and 
revenues $119 291 006, up  frGm  income of  $21 428 000 and revenues of 
$105 965 000  for  1972. Leased  full-time half  circuits  had  totaled  3583 
on  31 Dec.  1973, 21%  more  than  the  2971 at  the  end of  1972. (Com- 
SatCorp Release 74-ll) 
February-1  March:  The U.S.S.R.  launched  a  series  of  test  missiles  into 
the  north  Pacific  Ocean,  the  tests  coinciding  with  resumption  of  the 
Strategic Arms Limitation  Talks  in  Geneva. Pentagon  spokesman Jerry 
W.  Friedheim  said  an  SSX-18 carrying  several multiple independently 
targetable  reentry  vehicles  ( MIRVS)  was  launched  from  Tyuratam  19 
Feb.,  and  the  press  reported  5550-km flight  tests  of  the  SSX-19 and 
SSX-16 missiles  were  made  before  the  conclusion  of  the  tests.  (Tass, 
FBIS-SOV, 19 Feb 74, V1; 1 March 74, V7; Hoffman, W Po s t ,  21 Feb 74 
A3 1 
February:  Pioneer  1 0 ,  launched  by  NASA  2 March  1972 toward  a  3 Dec. 
1973 encounter with  Jupiter, was 60 million km beyond  Jupiter  and 913 
million  km  from  the  earth,  traveling  a t   80000 km  per  h r   on  its  flight 
path  out of  the  solar  system. Communications with the spacecraft, which 
took  1 h r   42 min,  indicated  Pioneer  lo’s  operational  systems  were 
functioning well.  Minor  changes in  operational  systems during passage 
through  Jupiter’s  intense  radiation  belts  had  disappeared  or  had  no 
effect  on  spacecraft  performance,  but  the  cosmic  ray  experiment  had 
suffered some loss of  function. Experimenters were assessing the problem. 
Pioneer  11 ,   launched  5 April  1973, was  660 million  km  from  the 
earth and traveling through the Asteroid Belt a i  58 000 km per h r  toward 
a  December  1974 encounter  with  Jupiter.  Its  meteoroid  detector  had 
recorded  eight hits in the belt, about the same rate of  penetrations as for 
Pioneer  IO when  taking  into account design differences in the meteoroid 
” 
detectors.  (NASA  Releaie 74-43) 
Skylab Program Director William  C.  Schneider testified before  the House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Manned 
Space Flight  in NASA’s FY 1975 authorization hearings  on  early  results 
from  Skylab’s  earth  resources  data.  Perhaps  the  most  interesting  so  
fa r  was  the  unconfirmed indication  of  mineral  deposits near  Ely,  Nev. 
The  Skylab  earth  resources  experiment  package  had  also  identified 
several  areas  of  citrus  f ru i t   fly  infestation  on  the  Mexican  side  of  the 
Rio Grande, demonstrated the  use  of  remote sensing for  snow mapping, 
identified new  urbanization patterns  in  Phoenix,  Ariz.,  and  inventoried 
vegetetion patterns  in California test sites. A Baltimore-Washington area 
photo  and  similar  imagery  for  12 other  cities  were  being  used  by  the 
Dept. of  Interior to test their use for updating the 1970 census. 
Dr.  Joseph  P.  Kenvin,  astronaut  on  the  25 May-22  June  1973 mis- 
sion to m e  the Orbital Workshop, testified that  Skylab astronauts were 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

20  February 

healthy, happy, and not under significant stress during their  long flights. 
After initial decreased appetite, an  astronaut had  a  feeling of  welI-being 
with  normal  thirst  and  appetite,  although  he  had  a  continued  feeling 
of  fullness  in   the  head  and  tended  to  assume  a  peculiar  posture  with 
neck  extended  and  moving  backwards  and  elbows,  hips,  and  knees 
flexed a t  20°  to  30”. He tended to become sleepy and  required  frequent 
exercise to  restore  vigor  and  alertness. His  voice  had  a  peculiar  nasal 
quality. After  the third day he was  virtually immune to motion sickness.. 
Without  gravity,  there  was  no  automatic  sensation  of  up   and  down 
and without vision he could quickly get lost. 
Dr.  Harry  C.  Gatos,  Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology  scientist 
and  Skylab  materials  processing  investigator,  testified  Skylab  experi- 
ments  had  shown  that  segments of  crystals  partially  regrown  in  space 
exhibited  none  of  the  inhomogeneities  from  dopants  (electronically 
active  chemical  elements)  that  characterized  earth-grown  crystals  and 
inhibited  their  efficiency.  In  addition  to preparation  of  special materials 
for  electronic  and  medical  uses,  materials  processing  studies  in  space 
would provide  an  understanding  of  the  structures  of  materials  and per- 
mit preparation of  materials to perform closer to  their  theoretical limits. 
Crystal-growing technology  was  developing new  means  to  create  and 
store  power  and  could, within  five years,  provide  a  practical  economic 
basis for using solar power.  (Transcript) 
The  first  two  Lockheed  S-3A  Viking  carrier-based  jet  aircraft  were deliv- 
ered  to  the  Pacific  fleet  in  San Diego. The $10-million swept-wing sub- 
marine-hunters  carried  60  acoustic  listening  devices  that  could  be 
dropped  to  the  sea within  10 sec  to  transmit  underwater  sounds  to  the 
Viking.  The Viking,  which  could  fly  800 km  per  h r   and  drop  from  a 
cruising altitude  of  12  000 m to  sea level in  two minutes, would  replace 
the  S-2,  the mainstay  of  the Navy’s  antisubmarine  defenses for  20  yrs. 
The Navy wanted delivery of  187 Vikings through  1975.  (Holles, NYT ,  
21  Feb 74 ,13 )  
*  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, NASA  Administrator,  said  in  a  speech at Utah  State 
Univ.  that  he  was  “certain  there  is  intelligent  life  somewhere  in  this 
universe,  but  probably  not  in  this  solar  system.”  Primary  life  would 
probably  be  found  in  our  solar  system, with  Mars  as  the  most  likely 
candidate.  The  U.S.S.R.  was  expected  to  land  a  spacecraft  on  Mars 
within  the  next  few  weeks,  but  in  an  area  not  likely  to  have  any  life 
form. A  NASA  spacecraft would  land  on Mars  in  1976 in  the  area  most 
likely  to  have  water.  NASA  intended  to  continue  systematic exploration 
of  the  solar  system and  to  search for  extraterrestrial life.  (Bean, Logan 
[Utah]  Herald  Journal, 20  Feb 74) 
21  February:  Dr.  Goetz  K .   Oertel,  NASA  Chief  of  Solar  Physics,  testified 
during  NASA  FY  1975  authorization  hearings  before  the  House  Com- 
mittee  on  Science and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  Manned  Space 
Flight  that  Skylab  data  had  changed  the  understanding  of  the  solar 
wind.  Scientists had  thought  the  solar  wind  reached  the  earth  because 
of  a n  expansion of  the sun’s  corona, but Skylab data indicated  the  sun’s 
magnetic fields confined the corona  material  and pulled  i t   inward.  The 
corona  expanded  and  escaped  in  a  significant  amount  only  through 
coronal holes in the magnetic field. 
Dr.  Charles  A.  Berry,  Director  of  Life  Sciences,  testified  that  the 
Skylab  2  and  Skylab  3  crews  (launched  25  May  and  28  July  1973) 
had  experienced similar  reductions  in  their  blood  cell  mass, with  a  red 
43 

21 February 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
blood  cell  reduction.  However,  after  the  59-day  S k y tab   3  mission  the 
compensating  response  of  the  blood-forming  elements  was  faster,  re- 
turning  the  mass  almost  to   the   preflight  level  within  two  weeks  after 
than  the  six weeks  required  after  the  28-day  S k y -  
splashdown-rather 
lab  2  mission. The  Sky lab   4  crew  (which  splashed  down  Feb.  8 after 
16 Nov.  1973 launch)  showed much less red  blood  cell  loss and a  much 
faster  return  to  preflight  levels  after  the  84-day  mission,  indicating 
adaptive changes to  the  space environment. The space life  sciences pro- 
gram  sought  to  understand  the  mechanisms  of  adaptive  changes  and 
would  “undoubtedly  assist our  understanding  of  basic body  physiology 
of  man here on earth.” 
Capt.  Chester M.  Lee,  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  Program  Director, 
said  that  during  Skylab  missions  the  orbital  altitude  and  the  limited 
number  of  ground  stations  had  permitted  communications  coverage 
only 38%  of  the time. The lower orbital  altitude  for ASTP  would reduce 
communications coverage to  17% .  To  alleviate the problem, the  Apollo 
command module was being modified for communications via  the ATS-F 
Applications  Technology  Satellite,  scheduled  for  1974  launch.  Com- 
munications  would  move  from  a  manned  spacecraft  through  an   un- 
manned  communications  satellite  to  the  ground  for  the  first  time. 
Coverage would  be  increased  to  50%.  The present  configuration of  the 
communications network would furnish  minimum real-time data to meet 
experimental requirements.  (Transcript) 
Preliminary  results  of  the  18-26  Dec.  1973 Soyuz  13  mission  were  pub- 
lished in Izwestiya. The two crew members of  the “orbiting astrophysical 
observatory’’ had made 10 000 spectrograms with  the Orion 2  telescope, 
recording  emissions  of  stars  in  ultraviolet.  Remote  luminaries  up  to 
12th stellar  magnitude had  been  recorded. The biomass  of  the microbe 
culture  in  the  Oasis  2  experimental closed-cycle biological  system  had 
increased more than 35 times during the mission.  (Zzwestiya, FBIS-SOV, 5 
March 74, U I )  
0  Sen. Sam J.  Ervin,  Jr.  (D-N.C.)  , introduced S. 3034, a  bill to prohibit the 
reservation  of  appropriated  funds  except  t o  provide  for  contingencies 
or to effect savings. ( C R ,  21  Feb 7 4 , 9 9 5 5 )  
22 February: NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for Programs George W. 
Cherry  testified  in  hearings  on  technology  for  subsonic  aircraft  before 
the  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology.  NASA  aeronautical  programs  were 
structured  to  provide  the  airframe  industry  and  its  airline  customers 
an   efficient  and  environmentally  benign  technology  base  for  a  new- 
generation  subsonic  aircraft.  The  supercritical  aerodynamics  program 
included  studies  to   improve  structural  efficiency  without  increasing 
drag,  thrust,  or  fuel  consumption.  F-8  and  F-111  aircraft  flight  tests 
with  the  supercritical  wing  had  shown  that  using  supercritical  aero- 
dynamics  on  passenger  transports  would  increase  profits  2.5%  over 
those  of  conventional aircraft,  o r   $78 million  a  year,  on  a  fleet  of  280 
two-hundred-passenger aircraft. 
Advanced  transport  technology  studies  showed  that  aircraft  exten- 
sively  employing  composite  materials  would  show  a  yearly  profit  of 
2.70/0,  o r  $100 million, on  a  fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. 
NASA  propulsion  technology  had  initiated  an  advanced  multistage 
axial-flow  experimental  compressor  weighing  60%  less  than  conven- 
tional  coppressors.  This,  with  technology  advances  in  other  compo- 
44 

22  February 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
nents,  could  reduce  gross  aircraft  weights  and  fuel  consumption  10%. 
(Transcript) 
*  Large underwater oscillations, called “internal  waves’’  and usually invisible 
a t  the  surface, had  been  detected by  National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  scientists Dr.  John  R.  Ape1 and  Robert  Charnell,  using 
images  from  NASA’s E r t s   1  Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite 
(launched 23 July  1972), NOAA  announced. The scientists speculated that 
internal-wave formation  by  lunar  and  solar  tides  and  their  subsequent 
‘breaking  and  dissipation  of  energy  were  important  processes  in  the 
gradual  lengthening  of  the day  over millions  of  years.  The waves  also 
affected  the  propagation  of  sound  in  the  ocean  and  contributed  to  the 
mixing  processes  in  its  upper  layers.  Internal  waves  changed  the  way 
sunlight  was  reflected  from  the  ocean  surface  overlying  them,  and  the 
change was  detected  in  the  satellite images.  (NOM   Release 74-32) 
25  February:  The  U S .   Postal  Service  announced  the  design  of  a  10-cent 
stamp to commemorate the Skylab program. To  be  issued 14 May  on the 
first  anniversary  of  the  launch  of  the  Skylab  1  Orbital Workshop,  the 
stamp would  depict  the  7  June  1973  two-man spacewalk that  freed  the 
jammed  solar  panel  during  the  Sky lab   2 mission  (25  May  to   22  June 
1973 ) .  The  horizontal  stamp  was  designed  by  Robert  T.  McCall  of 
Arizona.  (USPS  Release 11)  
A Washington Post editorial commented on solar heating legislation:  There 
was  “enough  sunshine  in  this  country  . . . to  supply  twice  the  energy 
needed  to  heat  and  cool  all  our  buildings.”  Technically,  solar  heating 
was  simple.  Solar  cooling was  more  complicated, but  within  the  grasp 
of  a  determined  engineering  effort.  The  probem  was  psycho-economic 
rather than technical. Industry did not want to produce hardware because 
they  were  not  sure people would buy  it.  A bill  [H.R.  118641  passed  in 
the  House  by  a  25340-2 vote  [see  13  Feb.]  would  make  $50  million 
available  for  a  national  demonstration  of  solar  heating  in  4000 homes 
in  various parts  of  the  country.  The  Senate would begin  hearings  on  a 
similar  measure  [ S.  26581,  and  companion measures  would  encourage 
solar heating and cooling with tax incentives and mortgage rule changes. 
We need “a  wide-open, long-range determined public energy policy  . . . 
and we  need it in all areas that promise to help free UD, of  our dependence 
on shrinking oil resources. The new solar-heating legislation is a welcome 
step in this direction.”  ( W Pos t ,  23 Feb 74, A16) 
*  Dr.  George A.  Van  Biesbroeck, Univ.  of  Arizona astronomer noted for his 
work with twin  stars,  asteroids,  and comets, died  in  Arizona a t  the  age 
of  94.  Dr.  Van  Biesbroeck had   charted  the  orbit  of  Neptune’s  second 
satellite, published catalogs of  double stars, and  discovered 11  asteroids 
and  2  comets.  In   the  1930s  h e   had  been  instrumental  in  establishing 
the  McDonald  Observatory  in  Fo r t   Davis,  Tex.  Dr.  Van  Biesbroeck 
had  won  the  Franklin  L.  Burr  Award  from  the  National  Geographic 
Society in 1952 for finding new proof  of  the bending of  light  from  stars 
in  support of  the Einstein theory of  relativity.  ( AP, N Y T ,  26 Feb 74 ,3 6 )  
24 February-1  March:  This would be the age we  could contact other civiliza- 
tions,  Dr.  Frank  D.  Drake,  Cornell  Univ.  astronomer,  told  the  annual 
meeting of  the American Assn.  for  the  Advancement  of  Science in  San 
Francisco.  The  problem  was  finding  ways  to  detect  them.  Analysis  of 
data  from  a  1973  search  of  500 stars  by  Univ.  of  Maryland  and  Univ. 
of Chicago scientists had  failed  to  reveal  radio  emissions suggestive of 
other  technological civilizations.  Possibly  “no  one  is  seeking  to  make 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

24  February-1  March 
radio  transmissions”  and  eavesdropping  would  be  the  only  method  of 
detection. Project cyclops, a NASA-supported study proposing construction 
of a  16-km-wide field of  1400,91-m antennas, would have a high proba- 
bility  of  success  if  civilization  existed  within  200  light  years.  The 
ultimate  $5-billion  cost  would  be  less  than  the  Apollo  moon  landings 
and  would  give  man  a  chance  to  contact  the  “galactic  community.” 
( N Y T ,  14 March  74,  1 5 ;  Salisbury, C SM ,  7 March  74) 
25 February: NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator  for Applications Leonard 
Jaffe-U.S.  Representative to the United States Committee on the Peace- 
ful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  Working  Group  and  Task  Force  on  Remote 
Sensing-told  a  session of  the Working Group and Task Force  the U.S. 
believed its policy of openness and benefit-sharing in earth resources and 
environmental  remote-sensing programs  was  consistent  with  the  Outer 
Space Act  of  1967, which called for use  of  outer  space for  the benefit  of 
all  countries.  The  U.S.  could  see no  justification  in  the  suggestion that 
sovereignty over natural resources included control  over all  information 
about these resources. The U.S.  would regret  any setback to the principle 
of  open  and  unimpeded  international  exchange  of  information  and 
would  continue  its  open  distribution  policy.  A  restrictive  policy  would 
slow  the  development of  remote-sensing systems and  cut  off  developing 
countries  from  beneficial  data.  Limiting  data  to  conform  to  national 
boundaries  would  require  costly techniques and would  destroy the most 
useful  functions  of  remote  sensing;  most  ecological systems  had  to   be 
studied globally.  (Text) 
0  Hearings  on S. 2658 and H.R.  11864, to  enact the  Solar Heating  and Cool- 
ing  Demonstration Act  of  1974, were  held  by  the  Senate Committee on 
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences.  Rep.  Mike  McCormack  (D-Wash.) 
said  the  legislation--which  called  for  NASA, with  other  agencies,  to 
develop and demonstrate solar technology-would  set up  a program  that 
the National Science Foundation was  not  authorized to  do and therefore 
would  create  no  conflict with  NSF’S  ongoing  research  and  development 
program in solar energy. 
Dr.  H.  Guyford  Stever,  NSF  Director,  said  that  the  bill  should  be 
considered  in  the  context of  the  “intensive and  coordinated  R&D  effort” 
already under way  in  the Executive Branch. The NSF  Act  had  authorized 
NSF   as  lead  agency  in  basic  and  applied  solar  research  and,  with  inter- 
agency cooperation, NSF   could bring “practical solar energy systems into 
widespread  use.”  Dr.  Stever  expressed  the  Nixon  Administration  view 
that  the  Energy  Research  and  Development  Administration  ( ERDA )  , 
proposed in other legislation, would be the preferred  agency to accelerate 
applied solar technology when  programs  reached the  stage of  large dem- 
onstration  and  development. However,  if  that  legislation  were  not  ap- 
proved,  the  Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development would  be  pref- 
erable  over  NASA  as  lead  agency,  because of  HUD’s  experience with  the 
local groups that would carry out the projects. 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  also  expressed  the  Ad- 
ministration’s support of  ERDA  and of  continuing NSF  as the  lead  agency 
until ERDA was established. Dr. Fletcher suggested a s  an alternative plan, 
if ERD.4  were not established, that NASA  serve a s  lead agency in phase one, 
the  development  of  the  technology  and  construction  of  solar  units. 
Phase  two,  building  the  houses  and  installing  the  units,  could  be  best 
handled  by  HUD.  There would  be  “no  big  problem”  in  transferring  the 
responsibility to  ERDA  should  i t  be  established.  (Transcript) 

46 

25  February 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
0  John  H.  Disher,  Skylab Program  Deputy Director since August  1965,  had 
been named Director  of  Advanced Programs in NASA’s Office of  Manned 
Space  Flight,  NASA  announced.  Skylab had   concluded  operations  with 
the  8 Feb.  splashdown of  its  th i rd  manned mission to  visit  the Nation’s 
first experimental space station. I n  the Advanced Program  Office, Disher 
would head  evaluations  of  concepts for  manned  space activities  within 
changing national needs and priorities,  to  guide transition  from present 
to  future  programs.  From  1959 to  1961 Disher  had  headed  advanced 
manned missions. He had  also served as Apollo Test Director and Assist- 
ant  Director  fo r  Apollo Spacecraft Development.  ( NASA  Release 7 M 8 )  
Marshall Space Flight  Center had  requested quotations  from  industry on  a 
contract to  study  a  two-way data  link  using  laser  beams  and  operating 
between  ground  and payloads  in  low earth orbit,  MSFC  announced. The 
study,  which  could  lead  to  a  flight  systetn  on  the  space  shuttle,  would 
indicate  the most  effective lasers  and  frequencies and  analyze effects of 
orbital  dynamics on  acquisition,  tracking,  and pointing systems.  ( MSFC 
Release 74-28) 
26 February:   NASA Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight Dale D. 
Myers testified during the  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and  Space 
Sciences hearings  on  the  FY  1975 NASA  authorization  that  space shuttle 
subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers had been  selected in 32 states. Of 
the  major  subcontractors,  30  had  already  begun  work.  By  June  1974 
the  total  major  subcontractor  team  would  be  at  almost  100%  of  the 
required  level.  Shuttle employment was  16 000  and would  reach  27 000 
by  June  1974 and  37 000  by  June  1975. The  first major  subsystem test 
of  the  shuttle main  engine would be made before  the  end  of  June  1974. 
Fabrication  of  Orbiter  1 would  begin  by  the end  of  1974,  with  the  first 
horizontal  flight  test  scheduled for  the  second quarter  of  1977,  the  first 
manned  orbital flight for  the  second quarter  of  1979,  and  initial  opera- 
tional shuttle capability for 1980.  (Transcript) 
Dr.  Philip  E.  Culbertson, Director  of  Mission  and  Payload  Integration  in  
NASA’s Office  of  Manned  Space  Flight,  testified  on  manned  space  sys- 
tems  in  development,  before  the  House  Committee  on  Science  and 
Astronautics’ Subcommittee on  Manned  Space  Flight  during  FY  1975 
authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 paylozds were projected 
fo r  the  12-yr period  beginning  in  1980, with  one third  each for  applica- 
tions,  science, and  the  Dept.  of  Defense. Duplication of  the  accomplish- 
ments expected from the  space shuttle sortie  (Spacelab)  program would 
require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned  space station, 
and  a  system  for  manned  transport.  The  shuttle, with  effective i n t e g a -  
tion  of  payloads  and  the  ability  to  service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a 
potential  savings  of  $14 billion  over  expendable systems from  1980 to 
1991.  Studies  had  shown  that  725  flights were  required  to  fly  the  pro- 
jected 986 payloads,  an  average  of  60  flights a  year.  A t   a  10%  rate  of 
discount  and  a  10%  rate  of  return,  the  space  transportation  system 
would  break  even  if  the  shuttle  were  flown  only  25  times  a  year. 
(Transcript) 
26-28  F ebw a r y  : NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Applications  Charles 
W.  Math?ws-testifying  during  the  House  Committee  on  Science and 
Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications  hear- 
ings on NASA’s Ey  1975 authorization-said 
the  1974 decision to  phase 
out  NASA  communications  activity  had  been  reconsidered  because  of 

47 

26-28 February 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 

industry  unwiIlingness to  risk  capital  on  advanced communications re- 
search  and  development.  Private  industry  could  meet  short-term  eom- 
mercial  needs  but  LLcontinued NASA  activity  is  essential to   identify  and 
meet  long term  national needs.”  The  investment level in  advanced com- 
munications  R&D  would  increase  from  $1.0 million  in  FY 1974  to  $1.4. 
million  in  FY 1975. R&D  included  investigations into  advanced antenna 
techniques  to  define  radiation  pattern  contours  to  fit  geographical 
boundaries  and eliminate unwanted spillover ; technology to  open near- 
and  far-infrared  wavelengths  for  communications;  new  techniques  in 
solid-state, high-power devices to  replace traveling wave  tubes;  and use 
of  millimeter-wave  regions  to  expand  the  spectrum  for  satellite 
communications. 
The  ATS-F  Applications  Technology  Satellite  scheduled  for  1974 
launch  would  conduct  health  and  education  telecommunications  and 
radio  beacon  experiments and measure  charged  partides  and magnetic 
fields  over  the  U S .   f o r   one  year.  The  satellite  would  then  be  moved 
over  India  to  beam  educational  TV  to  4000  villages.  ATS-F 
(to  be 
A t s   6  after  launch)  also  would  be  used  to  extend coverage during  the 
1975  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  docking  mission.  Following  comple- 
tion  of  the  Indian  experiments,  ATS-F  would  be  moved  back  over  to 
the U S .  to continue experiments there.  (Transcript) 
27  February:  The  House  of  Representatives  approved  the  conference  re- 
port  on  the  Energy  Emergency Act,  S.  2589,  clearing  it  for  the White 
House.  The  act  would  declare  a  nationwide  emergency  and  authorize 
special  Presidential  actions  to  conserve  fuels  and  increase  supply. 
(NASA  LAR ,  XII1/20;  C R ,  22 Jan 74, H63) 
28  February:  NASA’s Acting  Associate  Administrator  for  Aeronautics  and 
Space Technology Edwin C. Kilgore-testifying  during the Senate Com- 
mittee  on  Aeronautics  and  Space Sciences hearings  on  NASA’s N 1975 
au tho r iza t ion - sa id   that  NASA  aeronautics  and  space technology  activi- 
ties,  budgeted  a t  $241.2 million, were  designed to  be  highly  responsive 
to  national  needs.  To   provide  organizational  focus,  a  Research  Divi- 
sion had  been  reestablished, to which  the  OAST  Research  Council would 
report  its evaluation of  NASA’s basic research. New  research  included an 
acoustic  composite  nacelle  program  to  reduce  noise  and  fuel  con- 
sumption  and  a  program  to  develop new  higher  performance materials 
fo r   advanced  turbine  engines.  New  starts  in  long-haul  technology, in- 
cluding  the  active  control  aircraft  program  and  a  remotely  piloted 
research  vehicle, would  help  increase  productivity  and  efficiency, envi- 
ronmental  acceptability, and  reduced  fuel  consumption. 
A  new  Office of  General Aviation Technology had  been  organized in 
FY 1974  to  improve  aircraft  and  increase  safety.  Research  using  a 
new  low-speed  airfoil,  a  derivative  of  NASA’s supercritical  wing  re- 
search,  showed  a  30%  increase  in  maximum  lift  and  a  50%  in- 
crease in  the lift-to-drag ratio  over conventional airfoils. New  programs 
in  advanced avionics technology, including microelectronics and  digital 
circuitry,  would  provide  practical  low-cost  systems  for  genera1  avia- 
tion.  (Transcript) 
The number  of  Federal  scientists and  engineers had  increased  to  166 700 
by  October 1972, an increase of  6%  from  1967 and  1% from  1971, the 
National  Science Foundation  reported. The Depts. of  Defense and Agri- 
culture had continued to employ the largest number, although both agen- 
cies had. decreased since October 1971, by  less than  0.05% and by  2% .  

48 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
28  February 
NASA’s scientists and engineers decreased 3% from 1971. Nonprofessional 
scientific and technical personnel grew 1% Government-wide from  1967 
to  1972. The  yearly  rate  of  salary  increase  for  Federal  scientists  and 
engineers  decreased  from  9%   for  1967-1970  to  5%   fo r   1970-1972. 
( N S F  Highlights, 28  Feb 74) 
During February: The European Space Research Organization awarded study 
and  advance procurement  contracts  totaling  $2.8  million  for  its  mari- 
time  satellite MAROTS.  GEc/Marconi  of  the  United  Kingdom  received a 
six-month $1.16-million contract for  Phase B detailed design and defini- 
tion  work  on  the  communications  payload.  Thomson-csF  of  France 
was  awarded  $100 000  to  continue  critical  development  of  an   L-band 
transistor  amplifier. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd.,  aIso of  U.K.,  was 
awarded  a  six-month  $1.13-million  contract  for  a  Phase  B  detailed 
design study  to   adapt  the Orbital  Test  Satellite platform  to  a  maritime 
mission  and  for  associated  advance  procurement.  MAROTS  would  be 
launched into geostationary orbit in August 1977 to acquire experimental 
data  and preoperational  experience.  ( ESRO  Newsletter,  June  74,  4 )  

49 

March  1974 

I  March:  The  refanned  JTSD  jet  engine  successfully  completed  its  first 
test  a t  full  power,  a t  Lewis  Research Center. The engine, pa r t  of  NASA’s 
program  to  reduce  jet  engine  noise,  was  run  through  its  complete 
operating speed  range and achieved a  thrust  value  above takeoff  thrust. 
Built  by  United  Aircraft  Corp.  P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  the  JTSD  was 
used  in  a  major  portion  of  the  US. narrow-body commercial a i r   fleet. 
Modified by  replacing  the  two-stage fan with  a  larger,  single-stage fan, 
the  engine  could  reduce  the  noise  footprint  areas  of  these  aircraft  by 
75%.  (NASA   Release  7 4 5 7 ;   LeRc   PIO,  interview, Oct  75) 
9  The  YCH-53E  helicopter,  Iargest  and  most  powerful  helicopter  in  the 
Western world, made its first flight, lifting  off  from the Stratford, Conn., 
plant  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  Sikorsky Aircraft  Div.  The  three-engine 
helicopter  had  a  rotor  blade  assembly  24  m  in  dia  and  fuselage 23 m 
long  and could carry a  1 4  500-kg external  payload.  ( W Po s t ,   1 2  March 
74, D7) 
2 March:  American Broadcasting Co.  Science Editor Jules Bergman recalled 
tales of  astronauts in a TV  Guide article and noted that, with the  splash- 
down of  S k y lab  4, an  incred2ble era of  space flight had  come to  an  end. 
In   30  manned  flights  the  U S .   had  moved  from  the  first  15-min sub- 
odbital flight to  12 Americans walking on  the moon  and  then  finally  to 
the  near-routine Skylab  endurance  missions.  It  would  be  a  long while 
before  someone set  out  for  the  planets,  a  t r ip  which would  require  f a r  
more advanced propulsion  systems than  now  available. But  “we will  go 
to  the  planets.  . . .  We  wili  go  beyond  Jupiter.  We  will  go  beyond 
this  solar  system  and  eventually build  starcraft  to  go  so  f a r   that  man’s 
only limit will be h i s  imagination  and ingenuity. But the mission clearly 
fo r   the  next  decade  is  this  Earth:  it  is the  only  home man  has  a t   the 
moment.”  ( T V  Guide, 2 March 74) 
3  March:  A Turkish  Airlines,  Inc.,  DC-10  jumbo  jet  airliner  carrying  335 
passengers and  11 crew members crashed in  the Forest  of  Ermenonville 
42  km  northeast  of Paris,  France,  killing  all  aboard  in   the  worst  a i r  
second  by  a  jumbo  jet-occurred 
disaster  in  history.  The  crash-the 
shortIy after  takeoff  for  London  from  the  Paris  Orly  Airport.  Aviation 
experts from the Federal Aviation Administration, National T  ansporta- 
tion Safety Board, manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp.,  an  ’;r Turkish 
government were sent to the scene to  help French  officials determine the 
cause.  Eyewitness  reports  were  conflicting but  initial  evidence  pointed 
to  a  mid-air explosion;  six bodies  and  one section  of  seats were found 
10 km  from the main  point  of  impact.  Later  findings indicated  that  the 
rear cargo door had  flown  off.  The sudden loss of  pressure  in  the  cargo 
hold  had  collapsed the  cabin  floor,  severing the  aircraft control  cables, 
and  sucked  out  the  six  passengers  before  the  plane  plunged  steeply 
earthward.  (Rohertson, NYT ,  4 March 7 4 1  ; 6 March 7 4 , 5 ;  AI’,  B Sun, 
7 March 74, A2; Randal,  W Po s t ,  4 March 74, A l )  
51 

4  March 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
4 March:  Dr.  James B.  SchIesinger, Secretary  of  Defense,  said  in his  annual 
Defense  Posture  Statement  submitted  to  Congress that  the  U.S.  would 
not  insist  on  strict  numerical  missile  equality  with  the  U.S.S.R. 
in  a 
fu tu re  arms  agreement.  Rather,  he  wanted  a n   “essential  equivalence” 
in   a  diversified  strategic  force  “to  make  avaiIable  to  the  President  a 
reasonable  range  of  strategic  options  a s   USSR  and  PRC   capabilities 
evolve.”  The U S .   might  be  willing t o   agree  to   a  reduction  of  its  land- 
based  missile force  within  an  overall  balance. 
Dr.  Schlesinger also said he had  directed the Navy  to  concentrate  on 
smaller aircraft carriers rather than the large, $1-billion, nuclear-powered 
ships.  He  argued  that  four  nuclear-powered carriers-one  already  i n  
operation  and  three  under  construction-would  meet  “high-threat” 
needs  but  were  not  needed  for  the  usual  “low-threat  situations.”  The 
carrier  fleet was to  remain  a t 1 5  ships through  FY  1975 and be reduced 
by  1980  to   12  large  carriers  including  the  4  nuclear  vessels.  (Text; 
Finney, NYT ,  4 March 7 4 , 14 ;  5 March 7 4 , 7 )  
8  Selection  of  the  official emblem  of  the  joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz 
Test  Project  mission,  scheduled for  July  1975, was  announced by  NASA 
and the Soviet Academy of  Sciences. The circular emblem displayed the 
English  word  “Apollo”  and  the  Russian  “Soyuz”  around  a  center  disc 
depicting the two spacecraft docked in earth orbit.  (NASA Release 74-49) 
8  Widespread  material  and  component shortages-increased  by  the  oil  em- 
bargo  imposed  by  oil  producing  countries  during  the  October  19’72 
Middle East  war-were 
causing  severe probIems  for  the  aerospace  in- 
dustry, Av ia t ion   Week  & Space Technology  reported.  Suppliers found  i t  
easier  and more profitable  to  supply material  such as aluminum  to   non- 
aerospace industry,  which placed  quantity  orders without  specific dead- 
lines and rigid specifications. Government price controls had encouraged 
some suppliers  to  halt  production  or  divert  supplies to  export  markets, 
where profits could be two to three times above the domestic. 
A  Hughes  Aircraft  C o .   survey  showed  that  reasons  for  shortages 
incIuded  a  diminished  supply  of  petrochemicals, which  were  the  basis 
of  most  pIastics  and  synthetic  rubbers,  and  the  curtailed  production  of 
materials  requiring  Iarge  amounts  of  energy  for  fabrication.  ( A v  Wk, 
4 March 74,12-13) 
8  P ro f .  Mikhail Tikhonravov,  Soviet rocket pioneer,  died  in  Moscow  a t   the 
age  of  73.  Prof.  Tikhonravov  had  worked  on  the  development  of  the 
first man-made satellites, pilot-operated spacecraft, and  automatic  space 
stations.  With  Sergey  P.  Korolev,  he  had  worked  on  development  of 
early  liquidrfuel  rockets  in  the  1930s. He  had  been  an  early  expert  in 
glider  and  aircraft  engineering.  Tikhonravov  had  been  awarded  the 
O rd f r s   of  Lenin  and  the  Red  Banner  of  Labor,  the  title  of  Hero  of 
Socialist Labor,  and  the  Lenin  Prize.  ( N Y T ,  7 March  74,  4 0 ;   AV  W k ,  
11 March 74) 
5 March:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched  Meteor  16  meteorological  satellite  from 
Plesetsk to  collect information  for weather forecasts. Orbital parameters 
were  892-km  apogee,  830-km  perigee,  102.2-min  period,  and  81.2” 
indination.  The  satellite  carried  instruments  to  photograph  the  clouds 
and snow cover  on  day  and night  sides of  the  globe and  to  collect data 
on  the heat reflected by  the earth  and  its  atmosphere.  (GSFC W k l y  SSR ,  
28 Feb -6  March 74;  Tass.  FBIS-SOV, 6 March 74, U l ;   SF ,  Sept 74, 355) 
The X-24B  lifting  body  successfully completed  its  first  supersonic  flight 
near  Flight  Research  Center,  in  the  joint  NASA-& 
Force  program  to 

52 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

5 March 

develop a  hypersonic vehicle fo r  reentry  from space and  technology  for 
future aircraft capable of  sustained cruise a t  hypersonic  speeds. Piloted 
by  John  A.  Manke and launched from a  B-52  aircraft a t  13 700 m,  the 
research  vehicle  reached  an  altitude  of  18400  m  and  speed  of  mach 
1.09.  The  powered  flight  satisfied  the  primary  objectives of  obtaining 
stability and control data a t  mach  1.1 for power-off and power-on condi- 
tions, performance  and longitudinal  trim  data  a t  mach  0.8 and  0.9, and 
pressure  data  on both  fins for  identification of  asymmetric flow.  (NASA, 
X-24B  Flash  Rpt,  5  March  74;  NASA  Release  73-130;  Dryden  FRC 
Release, “NASA  Facts,” March 1976) 
9  Major  reorganizations  were  announced  a t   NASA  Hq.  and  Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center  by  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  and  Dr. 
Rocco A.  Petrone, MSFC Director. 
Dr.  Fletcher  said  the Headquarters reorganization  and key  personnel 
appointments would consolidate planning  and direction  of  research  and 
development  programs  under  the  Associate  Administrator  and  overall 
planning  and  direction  of  the  field  center  operations  under  the  newly 
created position  of  Associate Administrator  for  Center Operations.  Dr. 
Petrone was named Associate Administrator.  He would  remain  as MSFC 
Director until early  summer when  he would be  replaced by  Dr. William 
R.  Lncas,  MSFC  Deputy  Director.  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate  Ad- 
ministrator for Space Science, was  appointed Deputy Associate Adminis- 
trator.  He  would  also  continue  as  Acting  Associate  Administrator  for 
Space  Science  until  a  successor  was  named.  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  in 
addition  to  his  duties  as  Deputy  Administrator,  would  serve  as  Acting 
Associate  Administrator  for  Center  Operations  until  the  new  position 
was  filled. He would  be  assisted by  Edwin C.  Kilgore, Deputy Associate 
Administrator  for Management in  the  Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Technology.  Gen.  Bruce  K.  Holloway  (USAF ,   Ret.) , who  would  also 
continue a s  the Assistant Administrator  for  Dept.  of  Defense and  Inter- 
agency  Affairs, was  named  Acting  Associate  Administrator  for  Aero- 
nautics  and Space Technology. Bernard Moritz was  appointed Associate 
Administrator for Organization and Management. 
The  reorganization,  effective 15  March,  followed  completion  of  the 
Apollo  and  Skylab  programs  and  would  provide  mychanisms  for  the 
phaseover  from  conventional  launch  vehicles  to  the  space  shuttle  and 
new programs, Dr. Fletcher said. 
At  MSFC,  Dr.  Petrone  said  that  the  reorganization,  effective 30 May, 
would  enable  the  Center  to  fulfill  requirements  of  its  varied  assigned 
programs  and  improve  its  competitive  position  to  obtain  new  assign- 
ments.  The major  changes were  in  the  Science and  Engineering  Direc- 
torate.  A  Deputy  for  Operations  and  a  Deputy  for  Bystems  had  been 
established. Business  operations  and  control  of  all  resources  had  been 
consolidated  into  a  centralized  office  a t   the  directorate  level.  Elements 
under  the S&E Directorate  included two associate directors,  an  Associate 
Director of  Engineering and an  Associate Director of  Management;  two 
offices, Reliability and Quality Assurance and Research and Technology; 
and  eight  laboratories.  The  laboratories  were  being  restructured  to  
emphasize  system  engineering  and  integration,  analysis,  design,  and 
testing. The  in-house capability  to  manufacture,  inspect,  and  check  out 
major  hardware  projects  had  been  eliminated, with  the  associated sup- 
ply, warehousing, and procurement capability. 
53 

5 March 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Reorganization in  MSFC’S  Administration  and  Program  Support  Di- 
rectorate  included consolidation of  Center-wide automatic data-process- 
ing  functions within  ASS. 
Offices under AA&PS would include Technology 
Utilization, Manpower,  Financial Management, Facilities, Procurement, 
Management, Services,  Logistics,  and  Computer  Services.  (NASA  Ann, 
5 March 74;  NASA  Release 74-76;  MSFC Release 74-31) 
*  Edward  Z.  Gray,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Industry  Affairs  and 
Technology Utilization, and  a number of  users  of  NASA  technology testi- 
fied  in  FY  1975 NASA  authorization  hearings before the House  Commit- 
tee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on  Aeronautics  and 
Space Technology:  I n  the past  year NASA  had  developed programs with 
the  Environmental Protection  Agency  in  instrument  development  and 
testing, with the  Dept.  of  Interior’s Bureau of  Mines in mine safety, w i th  
the  Dept.  of  Housing  and   Urban  Development  in  fire  and  lead-paint 
detection,  and  with  the  Dept.  of  Transportation  in   highway  and  ra i l  
safety. 
Medical applications of  NASA-developed technology included a  stetho- 
scope  for   diagnosing  respiratory  diseases,  developed  from  technology 
used to  analyze aircraft and  rocket engine sounds; a low-friction replace- 
ment  fo r   arthritic  human  ball-and-socket  joints;  magnetometers  to 
analyze  orthopedic diseases,  a method  to  measure heart  action with the 
computer technology used  to  enhance Mariner spacecraft TV  pictures  of 
Mars: - 
and   an   isolation  garment  to  protect  patients  from  infection. 
(’l’ranscript ) 
5-6  March:  NASA  Spacelab  Program  Director  Douglas  R.  Lord  testified 
5 March during-FY 1975 NASA authorization  heaFings before the House 
Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Manned 
Space Flight  that, with  the  European commitment  to  develop Spacelab, 
the program had become  international. Two parallel  structures, the NASA 
Spacelab Program Office headed by Lord and a European Space Research 
Organization  Spacelab  Program  Office  under  Jean-Pierre  Causse,  di- 
rected  the program  on  either  side  of  the  Atlantic.  Activities were  coor- 
dinated  by   the  Joint  Spacelab  Working  Group,  which  met  monthly, 
cochaired by Lord and Causse. 
Causse testified  that  the  ESRO  Spacelab employment  level  was  at  60 
and would  reach 100 by December 1974. ESRO member  countries, except 
Sweden,  had  committed $369.6  million  to  the  Spacelab effort,  in  the 
following  proportions:  West  Germany,  54.1% ; Italy,  18% ; France, 
10%;  United  Kingdom,  6 .3%;   Belgium,  4 .2% ;   Spain,  2.8%;  The 
Netherlands, 2.1% ; Denmark,  1.5% ; and Switzerland, 1%. ESRO would 
attempt to  spend in  each country  an  amount proportional to  that  coun- 
try’s  contribution.  Phase B studies-to  provide a data base  for program 
commitment  and  the  f i n d   go-ahead-had  been  completed  and  one  of 
the   two  competing  firms,  Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm and  ERNO 
Raumfahrttechnik GmbH, would be seIected as  prime contractor  in  June. 
M /G   Robert H. Curtin  (USAF,  Ret.), Director of  the Office of  Facilities, 
testified 6 March  that  shuttle  construction  projects  totaled  $86 020 000 
and   included $71 950 000  for  launch  and  landing  facilities,  $7 480 000 
fo r  ground-test facilities, and  $6 590 000  for  solid-fueled rocket booster 
production and test facilities.  (Transcript) 
The  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on 
Space  Science  and  Applications held  hearings  on  the  FY  1975  NASA 
authorization.  Dr.  William Nordberg,  Chief  of  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center’s  labo ra to ry  for Meteorology and  Earth Sciences, said data from 

54 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
5-6  March 
Er tf   1 Earth  Resources Technology Satellite  (launched  23  July  1972) 
had  demonstrated  savings in  land use planning  and regulation  of  10 to 
100  times  conventional  costs  in  both  dollars  and  personnel.  Every 
cloud-free photo taken by the satellite had been sold to  the general public 
at least  once. One photo  of  a n  Alaskan  naval  petroleum  reserve showed 
a  striking  alignment of  lakes  indicating  that  the  deposits might  extend 
the known petroleum area. 
Dr.  Warren A.  Hovis,  GSFC  scientist,  testified  that  the  Heat  Capacity 
Mapping Mission  (HCMM)   satellite to be  launched in   1977 would use  a 
thermal mapper, with a  resolution of  0.5  km  in optimum  orbit,  to deter- 
mine  maximum  daily  temperature  variations  and  thermal  inertia  of 
surface material,  identify mineral resources, map natural and man-made 
thermal  effluent, and  investigate  geothermal  source  location  by  remote 
sensing. 
Data from the SEASAT-A  satellite t i  be launched in  1978L-or from one 
of  its  follow-on systems-would 
provide  optimum,  minimum-time ship 
routing  around  storms  and  away  from  adverse  wind,  waves,  currents, 
and ice conditions, Dr. John R.  Apel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration meteorologist, testified 6 March. The savings from a one- 
day  decrease  in  transatlantic  crossing  time  could  amount  to  millions 
of  dollars  each  year  for  shipping  interests.  (Transcript) 
6  March:  Exp lo re r   51  Atmosphere  Explorer,  launched  into  orbit  1 5  Dec. 
1973, was moved  in  a  series of  maneuvers down  to  139.8 km  above the 
earth,  its  lowest  perigee  to  date  and  its  first  successful  excursion  into 
the  lower  thermosphere.  Thirteen  of  the  fourteen  experiments  aboard 
the spacecraft performed as expected and worthwhile data were acquired, 
but  both  filaments of  the  closed-source neutral  mass  spectrometer  had 
failed  and that  instrument  could no  longer provide  data.  Evidence indi- 
cated  that  oxidation,  compounded by  thermal  stress, had  weakened the 
filaments in  the  oxygen-rich environment.  A  failure  review  committee 
would study the anomaly and also evidence of  further  filament degrada- 
tion  in  two  other  spectrometers.  (NASA  MOR, 1 9  March  74) 
*  The  Federal  Aviation  Administration  issued  an  airworthiness  directive 
ordering  all  DC-10  jumbo  jet  aircraft  operators  to  make  certain  that 
cargo  holds  were  locked  and  pressurized  before  the  aircraft  left  the 
ground.  Evidence  had  increased  speculation  that  the  3 March  crash 
of  a  DC-10  Turkish  airliner  had  been  caused  by  a  faulty  rear  cargo 
door. I n  addition, operators were required  to observe normal pressuriza- 
tion of  aircraft during the initial flight period. If  pressurization problems 
did occur, the aircraft was  to  be depressurized and brought  down a t  the 
nearest  suitable airport.  (AP, B Sun, 7 March 74, A2) 
Wind-tunnel tests of  almost all supersonic portions  of  a typical  NASA  space 
shuttle flight were completed a t  Arnold Engineering Development Center. 
The  simulated  flight  profile  included  separation  of  the  orbiter  and  its 
fuel  tank  f rom  the  two  large  solid-fueled rocket  motors,  orbiter  flight 
with  and without  fuel  tank,  and  orbiter  reentry  into  the  earth’s  atmos- 
phere.  The  tests,  begun  September  1973,  showed  orbiter  flight  char- 
acteristics and the  heat levels segments of  the  system could be  expected 
to  experience while traveling 41h  to  20 times the  speed  of  sound.  (AFSC 
Newsrev iew ,  June 74,8-9;  AEDC  p ro j  off,  interview, 27 March 75) 
6-7,  12-13  March:  NASA  Acting  Associate  Administrator  for  Aeronautics 
and Space Technology Edwin C. Kilgore and other NASA  officials testified 
on  the  FY 1975 .NASA  OAST  budget  in  hearings  before  the  House Corn- 
55 

6-7,  12-13  March 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
mittee  on  Science and Astroaautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics  and 
Space Technology. Kilgore testified 6 March that in FY  1975 OAST would 
modify its “program  again  to meet  the changing  needs  of  the Nation.” 
Energy  conservation  “is a n  inherent  p a r t  of  ou r   aeronautics  and  space 
research  and I  believe we  have the capability  also to provide  significant 
support  to civil needs fo r  energy technology. At the same time, we must 
continue  our  effective response to  the  Nation’s  need  fo r   a  quiet,  clean, 
economical a i r  transportation  system, for support to military aviation, and 
f o r  a  viable  program  to  exploit and  explore space.”  Much  of  the  aero- 
nautics  program  [see  26  Feb.]  already  was  “contributing  to  aircraft 
fuel conservation.”  Advanced avionics systems  to  relieve  terminal  con- 
gestion, more highly maneuverable aircraft  and operational procedures, 
more  efficient  engines,  composite  materials  for  weight  reduction,  and 
aerodynamic  drag  reduction 
techniques-“all 
contribute  to  fuel 
economy.”  And  the  program  was  being  examined to  increase  emphasis 
in areas related to  the national energy problem, both in conservation and 
in long-term technology. 
For  space  exploration,  propellants  with  more  powerful  liquified-gas 
in cold space conditions-offered  up to 30% increase 
oxidizers-storable 
in  payloads  over  those permitted  by  earth-storable  propellants. Nuclear 
energy studies included investigation of  low-temperature thermionic oon- 
verters,  gaseous uranium  reactor  concepts,  and  use  of  heat  from  high- 
temperature  reactor  sources for  industry use.  I n  stationary power,  NASA 
was  working with  the  Dept.  of  Interior’s Office  of  Coal Research  to   in- 
crease power  produced  from coal 40%.  [See  also During  March.] 
George  W.  Cherry,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Programs, 
OAST,  said  12 March  that  research  and  development on  shuttle  systems 
had  contributed  to  substantial  improvements  in   both  high-  and  low- 
temperature reusable insulations, coatings, bearings, seals, and hydraulic 
fluids, all applicable on  the earth. The requirement that  a reusable space 
tug  return  to   the  shuttle  for  return  to  the  earth  had   doubled  the 
velocity requirement  of  the vehicle,  speeding the  development of  a  high- 
performance propulsion system. (Transcript) 
7 March:  A  proposal  to  tap  energy  from  tiny  black  holes,  superdense 
dbjects in space, was presented by Dr. Lowell Wood, member of  a three- 
man team from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratories,  at a conference of 
international physicists organized by the New York Academy of  Sciences. 
Some black  holes  within  the  orbit  of  the  moon  might  be  so  tiny  that 
their  effects would not  be  evident beyond  a  few  hundred meters. A  tiny 
power plant could be placed in  orbit to  accompany the moving hole but 
remain  at  a  discreet  distance.  Fusion  fuel  would  then  be  fired  from 
the power  plant  to  the  hole,  and  the  hole’s  extremely powerful  gravity 
would squeeze the fuel toward the vanishing point. The fuel would  fuse, 
releasing  vast  amounts of  energy, which could be collected and beamed 
to  the earth by microwave frequencies. (Sullivan, NYT ,  9 March 74 ,12 )  
The  House  of  Representatives passed  the  Federal  Energy  Administration 
bill,  H.R.  11793, which  would  reorganize  and  consolidate certain  func- 
tions  of  the  Federal  Government  in  a  new  Federal  Energy  Adminis- 
tration  to  promote  more  efficient management  of  energy.  (NASA  LAR, 
XIII/26) 
The first  system to  use  solar energy to heat  a  US. school began  operation 
in   Timonium,  Md.  The  $568000  project,  jointly  sponsored  by  the 
National  Science Foundation  and  AAI  Corp.  [see  2  Feb.],  was  rushed 

56 

ASTRONAIJTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

7 March 

into  operation  in   s ix  weeks  to  use  the  remainder  of  the  winter’s  chilly 
days  to   gather  experimental  data  fo r   future  solar  heating  systems. 
(Richards, V Pos t ,  8 March 74, c 2 )  
7 ,  12-14  March:   Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  Associate  Administrator  for   Space 
Science,  testified  on  NASA’s space  science  program  before  the  House 
Committee  on  Science  and   Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on  Space  Sci- 
ence  and Applications during  FY  1975 authorization  hearings:  A Solar 
Maximum  Mission  (SMM)   satellite  was  proposed  for   FY  1975 design 
study  and  launch  in  the  next  period  of  maximum  solar  activity,  1978- 
1979.  SMM  would  investigate  solar  flares  and  related  phenomena  and  
their  effects  on  the   solar-terrestrial  system,  making,  for   the  first  time, 
simultaneous  measurements  of 
flares  across 
the  electromagnetic 
spectrum-within 
a  national program  of  satellite, sounding rocket,  and 
ground-based observations  of  the  sun  during  maximum  activity.  The 
spacecraft  would  be  shuttle-retrievable  fo r   refurbishment  and  reflight 
with advanced solar physics experiments in  the 1980s. 
Requested  funding for  the Large Space Telescope  (LsY)  for FY   1975 
was  $6.2  million,  to  proceed  with  design  of  telescope optics,  detectors, 
and  support  systems.  NASA  had   originally  planned  to  spend  about  $10 
million  in   FY  1975 on  the  LST-to 
be  launched  on  the  space  shuttle 
in   1980-but 
reduced the request to  reflect  the four- to  six-month delay 
in  shuttle development. 
N A S A - ~ ~   cooperation  with  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory,  Sandia 
Laboratories,  and   West  Germany-was 
developing  an  Aries  sounding 
rocket  to   support  the  physics  and   astronomy  program.  Aries,  which 
used  the  2nd  stage  of  surplus  Minuteman  intercontinental  ballistic 
missiles,  would  provide  a  greater  lift  and  longer  flight  time  than  pos- 
sible at the price of  rockets now in use. 
Cost  overruns  on  the  1975  two-spacecraft Viking  mission  to  Mars 
could  total  10%   of  the  original $838-million estimate fo r   the  program 
because  of  hardware  development  problems.  Major  problems with  the  
biology  instrument  included packing the  sophisticated instruments into 
a  small  volume,  development  of  very  small  valves  to  inject  SUfFiciently 
small amounts of  nutrients  into  Martian  samples,  and  thermal  control. 
The  instrument was  running $21.2  million  over  the budgeted  cost.  Dif- 
ficulties  also  had   been  encountered  in   producing  enough  0.005-cm 
plated  magnetic wire  of  uniform  characteristics  for   the  onboard  com- 
puter.  Dr.  Naugle  said  that,  although  the  overall  corripexity  of  the 
spacecraft  had   been  underestimated,  “we  expect  these  problems  to 
be  solved  and   to  launch  both  Viking  spacecraft  on  schedule  in   1975.” 
(Transcript) 
8-19  March:  NASA  launched the  United Kingdom’s  Mirunda  (UK-X4)  ex- 
perimental satellite from Western Test Range a t  7:22  pm  PDT  on a four- 
stage Scout D booster, af ter  the launch had been twice delayed by  a mal- 
functioning  pitch  rate  gyro.  The  spacecraft  carried  five  experiments 
into  orbit with  a  926.8-km apogee,  727.7-km perigee,  l01.1-min period, 
and 97.8’  inclination. 
Experiments were  designed  to   demonstrate  an   attitude  control  ac- 
curacy  of  better  than  three  a r c  minutes using  a  gas  jet  system,  meas- 
.ure  the  performance  in   orb i t   of  operational  infrared  sensor  compo- 
n p t s ,   demonstrate an   inexpensive  Canopus  sensor  of  high  reliability, 
measure  the  density  of  sun-reflecting  particles  near  the  spacecraft, 
determine  interference  generated  by  the  propane  gas  control  system, 

57 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

8-19 March 
demonstrate  a  basic  sensing  element  with  application  in  digital  sun 
and   ear th   albedo  sensors,  and   measure  degradation  of  silicone  solar 
cells in  orbit. 
NASA’s objective  of  placing the  satellite  in  a n  earth  orbit  that would 
permit achievement of  the  scientific objectives was met,  and  the  mission 
was  adjudged  a  success  19  March.  Under  a  December  1972  Memo- 
randum  of  Understanding between  NASA  and  the  U.K.’s  Dept.  of  Trade  
and  Industry,  NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. 
Developed for  the U.K.  b y  Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd.,  the 83.5- 
by   66.5-cmY 92-kg spacecraft  was   powered  by  a  four-panel  250-cm-long 
solar  a r ray  of  1800 solar  cells. Mirundu was  deployed  in   a  fully  sunlit 
polar  orb i t  with  a yo-yo  despin  system  and   its  attitude  control  system 
acquired the sun through three sun sensors. 
The eighth NASA  launch of  a  U.K.  satellite and the  fourth  on  a  Scout 
vehicle-Nirunda  carried  the  names  of  8 0 0 0 0  Boy  Scouts from  nine 
U.S.  states  on  a  microdot.  (NASA  MOR,  2 1  March  74;  NASA  Releases 
74-36,  74-53;  UN  Reg;  Newport  News,  Va,  Daily  Press,  22  Feb  74; 
SBD, 12  March 74 ,59 )  
8 Murch:  Preliminary  reports  for  Skylab  principal  investigators  indicated 
that  large-scale zero-g production  facilities  in  space could manufacture 
alloys,  composites,  and  crystals  of  a  homogeneity  and   perfection  fa r  
greater  than  that  obtainable  on  the earth,  Marshall Space Flight Center 
announced. A  sample  from   a  Skylab brazing  experiment demonstrated 
an   almost  perfect  brazed  joint,  suggesting  that  it  would  be  possible 
to  assemble  large  facilities  in   space  using  welding  and  brazing  tech- 
niques.  Two  ends of  2.5-cm  tubes of  nickel  or  steel joined with  a  sleeve 
by  brazing  with  a  silver-copper  alloy  showed  a  metallic  structure that 
could not form under gravity conditions. 
Crystals  of  germanium  selenide,  typically  2  to  3 mm  on  the  earth, 
were  grown in   zero  g  to   a length of  25 mm with  straight  edges and  no 
surface  structure  defects.  A  mixture  of  metals  that  would  not  form 
alloys  under  gravity  conditions  showed  a t   least  some  alloying  under 
zero  g.  A  strengthening  fiber  of  silicon  carbide  whiskers  introduced 
into  composite materials  was  uniformly distributed,  suggesting a  poten- 
tial  fo r   space  production  of  materials  of  greater  strength  and  lighter 
weight.  ( MSFC Release 74-33) 
0  The 1974 Dr. Robert H.  Goddard Memorial Trophy was  presented  to Rep. 
Qlin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex)  a t   the  National  Space Club’s  17th Annual 
Goddard  Memorial  Dinner  in   Washington,  D.C.  Rep.  Teague  was 
honored  for  his  leadership  as  charter  member  of  the House Committee 
on   Science  and   Astronautics  and  Chairman  of  the  Subcommittee on 
Manned  Space  Flight  since  its  1963  formation,  leading  to  a  “much 
higher  level of  congressional understanding in   support  of  the National 
Space Program.” 
The Astronautics Engineer Award  was  presented to  Skylab Program 
Director  William  C.  Schneider,  NASA  Acting  Associates Administrator 
fo r   Manned  Space  Flight,  for   “his  exceptional  personal  leadership 
of  the  Skylab  Space Station  Program.”  The  Nelson  P.  Jackson Aero- 
space  Award  was  presented  to  the  NASA  Ames-mw  Systems  Group 
Pioneer  10  team  for   its  “historic  achievement  in   obtaining  close-up 
photographs and measurements of  the  Planet Jupiter,  after  a 600 million 
mile  [970 million km] journey from Earth,  in  the process of  becoming 

58 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

8  March 

the  first  spacecraft  to   fly  beyond  the  orbit  of  Mars,  the  first  to   pene- 
tra te   the  asteriod  belt,  and,  eventually,  the  first  man-made object  to  
escape the solar  system.” 
Winners of  the Dr.  Robert H.  Goddard Historical Essay Award  were 
Dr.  Norriss  S.  Hetherington  of  Kansas  Univ.  for  “Winning  the   Initi- 
ative:  NASA and   the  U S .   Space  Science  Program,  1958-60”  and   Dr. 
James  A.  Malloy,  Jr.,  of  American Univ.  for  “The Dryden-Blagonrarov 
E ra   of  Space Cooperation, 1962-65.’’  The  National  Space Club  Press 
Award went  to  John N.  Wilford of  the  New  York  T imes  for  “his super- 
lative  chronicle  of  the  Space Age  from Houston  to   Zvezdny Gorodok; 
from the first Gemini rendezvous to  the last Skylab Space Station.” 
The Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden Memorial Fellowship was awarded to  John 
W.  Edwards  of  Flight  Research  Center  for  his  ability  to  apply  new 
techniques to  practical  flight  research,  and  the Dr.  Robert H.  Goddard 
Scholarship went  to  Miss  Rosemarie Szostak  of  Georgetown  Univ.  for  
her research in inorganic chemistry.  (Program) 
*  Analyses of light flashes seen by  crew members of  the last Apollo missions, 
tentatively attributed  to cosmic ray nuclei penetrating the  head and eyes, 
were  reported by  Univ.  of  Houston and  Johnson Space Center  scientists 
in  Science  magazine.  Three kinds of  flashes-the 
spot  or   star-like flash, 
the  streak,  and   the  cloud-had 
occurred  randomly,  with  no  apparent 
preference for one eye over the other. Astronauts saw many more  flashes 
during  translunar  coast  experiment  sessions  than  in   transearth  coast, 
although the  cosmic ray  flux  appeared to   be  the same inside  the  space- 
craft during both coasts. No physiological explanation was found for  this 
difference in  frequency of  flashes.  (Pinsky,  et  d., Science,  8 March 74, 
957-958) 
*  NASA was presented the Principality of  Monaco’s gold and diamond-studded 
Silver Jubilee plaque at  the Annual Awards  Luncheon  of  the American 
Astronautical Society in  Washington, D.C.,  for its contribution  to world- 
wide television. The award was presented to Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, NASA 
Administrator, by  U.S.  Information Agency Deputy Director  Eugene P. 
Kopp on behalf  of  Prince Ranier I11 of  Monaco, who had said that NASA’s 
live  telecasts  from  the moon  deserved  recognition  as  “one  of  the  most 
dramatic television  events  of  the  past  quarter century.”  (JSC   Roundup, 
29 March 74, 1 )  
9-12  March: Soviet space probes Mars  6 and  7 launched 5  and 9 Aug.  1973, 
flew past  the planet  Mars  but  failed  to  achieve  their  objectives.  Mars  7 
approached the planet  9  March.  A  descent module  was  separated from 
the  spacecraft  but,  because  of  a  malfunction in   an   onboard  system,  it 
passed  by  the  planet  a  distance  of  1300  km. Mars  6 neared  Mars  on 
12 March.  I ts   descent module was  separated a t   48 000 km and Mars  6 
continued past Mars within 16 000 km of  the surface and into heliocentric 
orbit.  The  descent module  transmitted data  to  Mars  6 for   148 sec  as  it 
descended, but  radio  contact was  lost  just  before landing.  The Western 
press later  reported that high winds might have destroyed the spacecraft. 
Data received reportedly indicated several times more water vapor in  the 
Martian  atmosphere over some  areas than  had   been  thought,  traces  of 
ozone, broad oscillations in  atmospheric pressure, identification of  a  hy- 
drogen corona  reaching to   19 300-km altitude,  confirmation of  erosion 
and formation of  what  appeared to  be river beds,  and   a  magnetic field 
7 to  10  times  greater  in  the   planet’s  immediate environment than  in 
planetary space. 

59 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 

9-12 March 
Mars 6 and  7 - co n t inu ing   to  transmit  data  on  solar  wind  and  radia- 
tion  from  heliocentric  orbit-were 
pa r t   of  a  series  of  four  automatic 
stations  launched  to  explore  the Martian  atmosphere and  surface. Mars 
4  and 5 ,  launched  22  and  25  July  1973, had  approached  the  planet  10 
and  12 Feb. Mars  4  flew by Mars when  its braking  engine failed  to  fire. 
Mars  5 went  into  a  successful orbit  and  continued  to  transmit  data  to 
the earth. Earlier, Mars 3 had  softlanded a  capsule on Mars 2 Dec.  1971 
during  a  windstorm;  the  capsule had  transmitted  20  sec before  falling 
silent.  (Tass, FBISSOV, 15  March  74, U1;   21  March  74,  U1;  Pravda, 
FBIS-Sov,  27  March  74,  U1;  W  Post,  15 March  74,  A29;  GSFC SSR, 31 
March 74; Av Wk, 25 March 74 ,17;  1 April, 11)  
9 March:  The  small  tactical  aerial mobility  platform  (STAMP )  -a  wheelless 
“flying jeep”-was 
undergoing  tests a t  the Marine Corps Air  Station  in 
El Toro, Calif. The two-man 300-kg vehicle, produced under  a  $500 000 
Marine contract  to the Garrett C o p ,  could hover  as well  a s  fly 120 km 
per  h r  at any  altitude between 2 .5  cm and 1500 m for 30 min  a t  a time. 
The marines were  testing the vehicle f o r  possible reconnaissance, target 
spotting, courier work, mine detection, and rescue.  (AP ,  B Sun, 9 March 
74, A3) 
11  March:  Explorer  46  Meteoroid Technology  Satellite,  launched  13  Aug. 
1972, was officially adjudged a success. The primary objective of  measur- 
ing  meteoroid  penetration  rates  on  a  bumper-protected  target  in  the 
near-earth environment was  achieved  despite  the  failure  of  half  of  the 
bumper  panels  to  deploy  fully.  Because  of  the  anomaly,  the  spacecraft 
batteries  had   overheated  and  data  collection from  the  main  telemetry 
system had been discontinued;  since 22 Aug.  1972, data from the primary 
experiment had been  transmitted  through  the  backup  system, which  op- 
erated  on  solar  cells only.  Flight  data  showed  that  the  bumper  concept 
was six times more effective than a single-wall structure,  twice the antici- 
pated effectiveness. 
Because  the  secondary  experiments  had  been  powered  only  by  the 
spacecraft batteries, no  data were  received from these experiments after 
22  Aug.  1972. One  secondary  experiment-to  measure  impact  flux  of 
recorded  1850  penetrations,  however, 
small  mass  meteoroids-had 
enough  to  show  conclusively  that  the  micrbphone  meteoroid  sensors 
flown  on  early  Explorer  and  Discoverer  satellites  had  greatly  over- 
estimated the population of  small meteoroids.  ( NASA  MOR,  11 March 74) 
A  General Accounting Office  report  disclosed by  Sen. Thomas F.  Eagleton 
(D-Mo.)  had  questioned  Pentagon  plans  to  begin  production  of  34 
radar-carrying aircraft,  part  of  the Airborne Warning  and Control Sys- 
tem,  the Washington Post reported. The GAO  report said the radar planes’ 
mission,  defense  against  bomber  attack,  had  changed  and  the  project 
should be delayed until  i t  was certain the  system would  work  in  its new 
role.  There  had  been  no  demonstration  that  the  aircraft  could  work 
effectively in  a  massive  a i r  battle.  In   addition,  GAO  questioned whether 
the  aircraft’s  large  radar  would  be  susceptible to  enemy jamming  from 
distances as great a s  320 km  and whether the planes would become high- 
priority targets. Sen. Eagleton therefore had requested the Senate Armed 
Services Committee to deny AWACS production  in  1974.  (Getler, W Pos t ,  
11 March 74, A2) 
11, 21  March:  Joint  hearings  on  the  Technology  Resources  Survey  and 
Applications Act,  S. 2495, were  held  by  the Senate Committee on Aero- 
nautical a n d  Space Sciences and the Committee on Commerce. Dr. James 
60 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

11, 21 March 

C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  said  NASA  supported  the  broad  ob- 
jectives  of  the  bill,  which  would  amend  the  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Act  of  1958  to  establish  within  NASA  an   Office  of  Technology 
Applications to  support the proposed National Resources Council. How- 
ever,  NASA  already  had  an  effective technology  utilization  program  and 
did not require additional authority to ensure that its technological capa- 
bilities were effectively used. Dr.  Fletcher said he could give more support 
to  the  bill  if  the  responsibility  for  a  proposed  survey  of  technological 
resources were given to the existing Domestic Council. 
Dr.  H.  Guyford  Stever,  National  Science  Foundation  Director,  said 
technology coordination  and planning  analysis could be more effectively 
done by a n  augmented Federal Council for Science and Technology than 
by  the  proposed  Council.  In   addition,  although  NASA  had  great  techno- 
logical  resources,  it  was  essential  that  mission  agencies should be  held 
to their originally defined responsibility. 
Dr.  Philip  Handler,  President  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences, 
said  the- bill  unduly  emphasized  technological  resources  of  NASA  and 
the  aerospace  industry,  when  the  real  issue was  how  to  use  the  entire 
Federal science and technology effort in combination with private  indus- 
try  resources within  coherent  national  programs  and  plans.  Instead  of 
direct authorization  to NASA,  a similar  amount should be made available 
to the  President  o r  a council, such as the Council of  Economic Advisors 
or the  Council on Environmental Quality, to  allocate and coordinate. 
Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  President  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Engineering and  former NASA  Deputy Administrator,  favored a  compact 
organizational  structure with  leadership appointed by  the President  and 
a research staff  independent of  all agencies and industry. NASA-developed 
technology could be  used  with  that  in other  agencies and private  indus- 
try.  NASA  laboratories should be  used  whenever  appropriate.  Employees 
and  facilities  of  Lewis  Research  Center,  which  was  preeminent  in   the 
fields of  air-breathing  and  space-propulsion systems,  could  be  applied 
effectively to energy research and development. (Transcript) 
13 March:  The  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  re- 
ported  out H.R.  11864, Solar  Heating  and  Cooling  Demonstration Act 
of  1974. The Committee amended the bill, which had Seen passed by  the 
House 13 Feb.,  to delineate agency responsibility more  specifically. NASA 
would  have  responsibility  for  the  necessary  system  research,  develop- 
ment,  hardware  procurement,  and  delivery. The  Dept.  of  Housing  and 
Urban  Development would  develop  dwelling  and  system  performance 
criteria, construct the dwellings, and install the solar heating  and cooling 
systems. Transfer  of  responsibility to  the Energy Research and Develop- 
ment  Administration,  should  it  be  established, was  authorized  but  not 
mandatory.  (S Rpt 93-734) 
The  Senate  passed  H.R.  11793,  a  bill  to   establish  the  Federal  Energy 
Administration, after amendment to substitute the language of  the Senate- 
passed s. 2776. The Senate appointed conferees to  settle differences from 
the version passed’by the House 7 March.  ( C R Y  13 March 74, S3706) 
NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Applications  Charles W. Mathews testi- 
fied  on  applications  programs  before  the  Senate  Committee  o n   Aero- 
nautics and Space Sciences during NASA  N 1975 authorization hearings. 
In   NASA’s weather  and  climate  program,  satellites  were  providing  in- 
creasingly  valuable  information  fo r   short-range  forecasting : day  and 
night  cloud-cover  images  around  the  globe,  temperature  profiles  (al- 
61 

13 March 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

though still cloud-limited) and surface temperature maps, gross  moisture 
profiles,  and  sea  ice  mapping.  NASA  had   begun  microwave  sounding 
experiments to overcome the cloud problem. Still needed were improved 
sounding accuracy  and coverage, refined moisture profies,  and  simpler 
and less expensive random-access data-collection systems. 
For  one- to  two-week prediction,  space capabilities were contributing 
to progress but lacked complete coverage of critical wind and temperature 
areas  around  the  globe.  New  measurement  approaches  and  improved 
cloud tracking were planned.  For  severe storm and disaster warnings- 
which contained “the  greatest potential  payof€’’-a 
long-term effort was 
studying advances in computer technology and display devices to  assimi- 
late  and convey the mass of  data  produced.  NASA  had  begun  to  develop 
primitive climate models f o r  farmers that would have “high  utility value 
to  the  agriculture section of  our  economy.”  Remote sensing from  space 
and research in a laboratory carried on the space shuttle could give data 
on weather modification possibilities and results.  (Transcript) 
0  Johnson  Space  Center  and  the  Mexican  National  Commission  for  Outer 
Space had begun a remote-sensing test project to assist i n  eradicating the 
screwworm from Mexico, NASA  announced. The experimental phase v a s  
under way and was expected to continue for a year. Sensor data provided 
by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite  (launched 23  July  1972) 
and orbiting meteorological satellites including N o m  2 and 3 (launched 
15 Oct.  1972 and  6 Nov.  1973)  would  be  combined with  data  from  a 
Mexican  remote-sensing  aircraft  on  soil  temperature,  moisture,  and  
vegetation-all 
of  which  affected  breeding  patterns  of  the  screwworm 
fly.  Sterile flies could then  be  distributed to  potential  breeding  grounds 
of  the  fly, which  frequently  caused $200 million  annual losses to  cattle, 
poultry,  and wildlife.  (NASA  Release 7 4 4 ) )  
Sen.  Frank  E.  Moss  (D-Utah)  and  Sen.  Barry  M.  Goldwater  (R-Ariz.) 
introduced S. 3175 to  amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 
1958 to  authorize  NASA  to  contract  fo r  tracking  and  data  reply  satellite 
services.  ( C R ,  13 March  74,  S3548;  NASA  LAR ,  V I I I [ x I I I ] /3 0 )  
14  March:  Gerald M.  Truszynski,  NASA  Associate Administrator  for  Track- 
ing and  Data Acquisition,  testified on the  proposed Tracking  and Data 
Relay Satellite System  (TDRSS) in FY  1975 authorization hearings before 
the  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee on 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology:  TDRSS essentially  would  be  two 
tracking  network  stations  in  synchronous orbit to  support  all low-earth- 
orbit  satellites, giving  real-time control  and  data  with  a  significant  in- 
crease  in  reliability.  The  system  would  provide  close  to  six  times  the 
coverage given by ground networks because supported satellites would be 
visible  to  the  orbital  stations during 85%  of  the  orbits  rather  than  the 
15% from ground stations. Close to continuous visibility would also pro- 
vide greater flexibility in programming  satellite use  and would  simplify 
operations. Number  of  ground  tracking stations  could %e reduced from 
the  1974  total  of  18,  plus  one  ship  and  two  aircraft,  to   8 by   1981. 
(Transcript) 
The  U.S.S.R.  was  developing  two  new  supersonic  bomber  aircraft  and 
another  missile-firing  submarine,  the  Baltimore  Sun reported.  A  new 
heavy  bomber,  the  Backfire,  was  already  in  production.  The  Backfire 
was  believed  to  have  a  top  speed  of  2100 km  per  h r  and,  with  inflight 
refueling,  a  range  of  9700 km. The second bomber,  a  Sukhoi prototype, 
could take off a t  a weight of  136 OOO kg and reach  altitudes of  21  OOO  to 

62 

14 March 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1!374 
24  000 m traveling  a t  3400 km per hr. The new  submarine was to  carry  
16 missiles with ranges of  64100 km and  was comparable to  a development 
planned by  the US. Navy  for  1979.- (Corddry, B Sun, 14 March 74, Al) 
15  March:  NASA  and  the National Science Foundation announced an   agree- 
ment  to  desigii, construct, and test a n  experimental 100-kw wind turbine 
generator a t  Lew is  Research Center. The large windmilI would be tested 
to  determine performahce and  characteristics of  systems for  future com- 
mercial production of  electric power  [see 11 Jan].  (NASA Release 74-63) 
*  The revised estimated cost of  the Rockwell  International  Corp. B-1  bomber 
program-up  $1.3 billion, to $15 billion-was 
sent to  Congress in  a Dept. 
of  Defense  letter.  New  estimates of  the  cost  of  the program to  produce 
244 aircraft resulted from a decision to  build more prototypes and allow 
for  an   annual  inflation  rate  of  3.3%  instead  of  the  previous  2.57%. 
(Reuters, NYT, 1 9  March 74 ,17 )  
*  Aviation pioneer Henri Pequet had   died a t  his home in  Vichy,  France,  a t  
age 86, friends reported.  Pequet had  flown  in  a  free-floating balloon  in  
1905 and was licensed as France’s 88th pilot  in  1910 after  teaching him- 
self  to  fly.  On  18  Feb.  1911 he  piloted  the  world’s  first  official  mail 
flight, between Allahbad and Nani  in  India.  (UPI,  W Post,  17  March 74, 
B7) 
16 March: The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg 
Air Force Base by a Thor-Burner I1 booster  into an orbit with an 878-km 
apogee,  781-km perigee,  101.4 min  period,  and  98.9’  inclination.  The 
press  later  identified the  satellite  as  par t   of  the Defense  Meteorological 
(Pres  Rpt  74; SBD, 26 March  74,  138; AV 
Satellite Program  (DM S P )  
W k ,  25 March 74 ,22)  
~ 
*  The  velocity  of  NASA’s Mariner  10 interplanetary  space  probe,  launched 
toward Venus  and  Mercury  3 Nov.  1973, was  successfully changed by 
17.8 m per  see along the sunline of  the  spacecraft by  the third trajectory 
correction  maneuver.  A  51.1-sec  burn   of  the  onboard  engine  a t   7:54 
am  EDT  changed the trajectory  from  a  sun-side flyby  of  12 359 km  to  a 
dark-side flyby of  860 km  on 29 March. Mariner 10 had continued to per- 
form satisfactorily since its 5 Feb. encounter w i t h  Venus despite anoma- 
lies  [see 8-31  Jan.].  A down-link transmitted power problem apparently 
corrected  itself  and  the  received  power  levels  at  DeeD  Space Network 
sites were  back  to  normal. The  return  of  power  would  permit  real-time 
TV  pictures  from Mercury a t  the  117-kilobit data  rate.  Spacecraft atti- 
tude-control  gas,  used  a t   an  increased  rate  during a  2 8  Jan.  maneuver, 
was  being  conserved  by  rotating the  solar  panels  to  maintain  roll con- 
trol.  (NASA MOR,  21  March 74) 
*  U.S.  officials  were  increasingly  concerned  by  strong  pressure  from  de- 
veloping  countries,  backed  by  the  U.S.S.R.,  to  restrict  the  use  of 
satellites  to   broadcast  TV programs  from  one  country  directly  to   the 
home sets of  another,  the  Washington Post  reported.  Old  cultures were 
afraid  of  being  “irremediably  debased  by  the  ‘hard  sell’  techniques so 
commercially  lucrative  in   the  ‘advanced’  societies.”  As  the  world’s 
f f  
technolo  ‘ea1 giant,  the U S .  wa s   the most  suspect and the  trend  among 
countries  was  “to  tie  up   . . . the   use  of  satellites  by 
the  deveoping 
the   ‘space-faring’ nations  . . . before they gain  too  great  a head start.” 
(Welles, W Post, 16 March 74, A181 
18  March:  The F-14  Tomcat,  the Navy’s  newest  and  most  versatile  fighter. 
made  its  first  operational  flights  from  the  deck  of  the  nuclear-powered 
aircraft  carrier  Enterprise.  The  flights  of  the   $14.8-millionY variable- 

63 

18 March 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 

sweepwing F-14  began  integration  of  the  two  Tomcat squadrons into 
the Enterprise’s  a ir  wing.  Two more  squadrons would  be  assigned to  a 
carrier  in   the Mediterranean or  Atlantic.  (Middleton,  NYT,  2 1  March 
74 , 29 )  
*  NASA  announced  two  Kennedy  Space  Center  contract  awards  fo r   space 
shuttle  facilities.  Morrison-Knudsen  Co.,  Inc.,  had   been  given  a 
$21 812 737 contract  to  construct  a  space shuttle runway with  overruns, 
apron, taxiway,  and access roads.  The runway-to  be  completed  within 
850 days after  the  notice  to  proceed-was 
to  be  built  northwest of  the 
Vehicle Assembly Building. 
Reynolds, Smith, and  Hills  received a $1 463 000 fixed-price contract 
to   design  modifications  to  Launch Complex 39  and Mobile Launcher 3 
for shuttle operations. Complex 39, Apollo and  Skylab launch site, would 
next  be used  for  a  manned flight  in  1975, f o r  the U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo- 
Soyuz Test Project.  (NASA  Releases 74-66,7&67) 
The  British  government  announced  that  it  was  seeking new  talks  with 
France on the Concorde supersonic airliner after heavy losses were pre- 
dicted  for   each  airliner  built.  Official  estimates  had  indicated  that 
Britain  would  Iose  $450 million  to  $517 million  in   producing  16 air- 
craft  and, even with  a  selling price  of  $40.25  million  to  $47.5 million, 
losses would  rise  until  sales  reached 70  or   more.  (Reuters, B  Sun,  19 
March 74,  C9) 
18-22  March:  The  Fifth  Annual  Lunar  Science  Conference,  a t   Johnson 
Space Center,  was  attended by  more than  550 lunar  scientists from  the  
U.S.  and  several  foreign  countries.  Some  200  papers  were  presented 
on  the  lunar  regolith,  interior,  crust,  impact  effects, mare  basins,  and  
the interchange of  material and energy between the  moon and  its environ- 
ment. 
Dr.  A.  Albee,  California  Institute  of  Technology  scientist,  said  that 
analysis  of  an  Apollo  17 lunar  rock  sample  indicated  that  the  sample 
was  4.6  billion  yrs  old  and  an   example  of  a  very  early  differentiate. 
The  study  suggested  that  the  lunar  crust  formed  very  early  in   the 
evolution  of  the moon  by  extensive melting associated with  differential, 
gravitational  separation  of  various  other  rock  types. 
The  donference  showed  the  trend  among  lunar  scientists  had   been 
shifting  away  from  the  initial  dating  and  chemical analysis of  rock  to  
cross-discipline  studies  of  possible  implications  of  the  lunar  samples 
to   understanding  of  solar  system  chronology.  (JSC  Release,  7 March 
74 ;  JSC  Roundrcip, 29 March 7 4 , l )  
I 9  March:  Deputy  Associate Administrator  f o r   Space  Science  Vincent  L. 
Johnson  testified  during N 1975 NASA  authorization  hearings  before 
the  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on 
Space Science  and Applications that  the Thor-Delta launch  vehicle  im- 
provement  program  begun  in   1971 was  nearing  completion.  The most 
modern  Thor-Delta  configuration,  the  2914,  was  expected  to  fly  fo r  
the   first  time  during  the  April  launch  of  Westar-A.  Final  decision  for  
the  launch  was  pending  recommendation of  the  Failure Review  Board 
set  up   a t   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  to  investigate  the  2nd-stage 
failure of  a Thor-Delta dur ing  the 18 Jan. Skynet  ZZA  launch. 
NASA  believed  that,  with  the  2914  Delta,  the  present  family of  vehi- 
cles  could  launch  any   mission,  but  RCA  Corp.  had  determined that  a 
30%  to   35%  increase  in   the  2914 Thor-Delta capability  would  permit 
a 24-channel,  rather  than  the  usual  12-channel, satellite  to  be  launched 

64 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

19  March 

into  synchronous  orbit.  RCA  and McDonnell Douglas Corp.  had  agreed 
to  share  the  cost  of  the  uprating  and  McDonnell Douglas would  reim- 
burse  NASA  fo r   technical  direction.  NASA  had  not  agreed  to   make  the 
new  3914 Thor-Delta a part  of  its launch family but  probably would  do 
so  following  successful proof  flight.  The  first  flight  was  scheduled  for 
1975.  (Transcript) 
Instrumented  aircraft  overflights  of  Volusia  County,  Fla.,  to  determine 
if  soils could be  classified by  remote-sensing techniques were  begun  by 
Kennedy  Space  Center  in   cooperation  with  the  Dept.  of  Agriculture. 
USDA  was  developing soil  classification maps  of  Florida  by  traditional 
field  sampling  and  laboratory  analysis. The  overflights,  by  ICSC’S  twin 
Beechcraft and  a  C 4 6  under  contract  to  Johnson  Space Center, would 
use  multispectral  scanning  to  attempt  to  speed  the  procedure,  which 
would  otherwise take 40  yrs.  (AP, LA  Her-Exam, 1 9  March ‘74) 
*  Soviet  scientists  had  offered  a  theory  explaining  why  Comet  Kohoutek 
had not been a s  bright a s  expected, an  East Berlin newspaper was quoted 
as  saying.  Leningrad  physicists  had  found  in  a  laboratory  test  that 
Kohoutek was  surrounded  by   a  high-density fluid  of  cosmic particles; 
this  “armor”  had  not  burst  and  released  light,  a s   expected,  when  the 
sun  had  heated  and  expanded the  comet’s  nucleus.  (AP, LA Her-Exam, 
19 March 74) 
19-20  March:  NASA  launched  a  record  series  of  79  sounding  rockets  from 
eight  sites  a s   part  of  a  program  to  determine  daily  temperature  and 
wind  variations  in  the  upper  atmosphere  during  the  vernal  equinox. 
The  launches  were  made  over  a  24-hr  period  from  North,  Central, 
and  South America, the  Caribbean  Sea, and  the Atlantic Ocean.  Single- 
stage  Loki  and  Super  Loki  rockets  carried  meteorological instruments 
to  about  70  km,  where  the  payloads  were  ejected  and  returned  to  the 
earth  on  parachutes,  telemetering  data  to  g ro u nd  receiving  stations. 
(NASA  Release 7 6 7 1  ) 
20  March:  Pioneer  1 1 ,   launched  5 April  1973  toward  Jupiter,  completed 
the  second  passage  of  a  spacecraft  through  the  Asteroid  Belt.  The 
spacecraft  had  completed  70%,  or  700  million  km,  of  its  1-billion-km 
flight path  to   Jupiter  and  was  traveling  a t   50 000 km  per  h r   toward  a 
December encounter. Pioneer  11 and  its predecessor Pioneer  10, which 
had  successfully completed its crossing of  the Asteroid Belt  1 5  Feb.  1973 
and had  gone on to a 3 Dec.  1973 encounter with Jupiter, found no dan- 
ger  from  small high-speed particles  in  the  belt.  Particles  in  the  center 
of  the  belt  were  found  to  orbit  the  sun  a t   6 12 0 0   km  per  hr-fast 
enough  for  a  meteoroid  with  a  mass  of  0.001  g  to  penetrate  1 cm  of 
aluminum.  However,  most  particles  detected  by  the  two  spacecraft 
were  smaller  and  f a r   fewer  than  predicted.  Traveling  out  from  the 
to  decline 
earth‘s  orbit  the  smallest  particles-0.001  mm-appeared 
in  number  while  larger  pa r t ic le s -O .01  to  0.1  mm-were 
evenly  dis- 
tributed  throughout  the belt. The number  of  particles 0.1 to  1.0 mm was 
three  times  greater  in  the  center  of  the  belt  than  near  the  earth. 
Particles  larger  than  1.0 mm  appeared  to  be  very  thinly  spread.  (ARC  
Release 769 :  
President  Nixon  was  briefed  on  the  space  shuttle  and  the  Apollo-Soyuz 
Test  Project  a t   Johnson  Space Center.  Following a  tour,  the  President 
and  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  the  Sk y l ab  
4  astronauts  with  NASA’s Distinguished  Service Medal.  Nixon  praised 
the  efforts  of  the  “great  American  scientific,  mechanical,  and  clerical 

65 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 
20  March 
communities” for   their  contributions  to   the   space program.  “You  have 
contributed  to  . . . the   spirit  of  a  great  country, which  means  always 
look out  toward  the  unknown,  go  there,  take  any  risk,  make  any  sacri- 
fice,  and   never  be  discouraged  because  sometimes  you  may  fail.”  Of 
the   ASTP,  President  Nixon  said  that  although  systems  of  government 
were  different,  the  U.S.  wanted  “to  cooperate with  the Russian people 
and  with  all the  people  on  the  earth  in   anything that will  advance the 
cause of  science, the  cause  of  health,  the  cause  of  a  better  life  for  all 
o u r  children,  as well,  of  course,  a s  the cause of  peace.”  (JSC Roundup, 
29 March 7 4 , l ;  PD, 25 March 74,345-347) 
0  NASA  officials testified on the  proposal to  lease a  Tracking  and Data Relay 
Satellite System  and  on  the  closing of  P lum  Brook  Station,  dur ing  FY 
1975  authorization  hearings  before  the  House  Committee  on  Science 
and Astronautics’  Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. 
Associate  Deputy  Administrator  Willis  H.  Shapley  said  NASA  rec- 
ommended  lease  instead  of  Government  ownership an d   operation  for  
four   reasons.  First,  contracting  for  services would  be  as   cost-effective 
as   a  conventional network  of  ground  stations.  Second,  expenditures 
would  be  deferred  to   years  when  resulting  savings could  be  realized. 
Funding  required  to  procure  a  NASA-owned  TDRSS would  reduce  the 
resources that  could be  applied to   important mainline programs. Third, 
industrial technology was  ready  to  provide the needed services. Fourth, 
the   proposed  arrangement  was  consistent  with  long-standing  policies 
and  practice  of  the Government to  rely  on  industry for communications 
services. 
Acting  Associate  Administrator  Edwin  C.  Kilgore  of  NASA’s Office 
of  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  testified  that  Lewis  Research 
Center’s  Plum Brook  Station, which was  to  b e d o s e d  by  June  1974 be- 
cause  of  N 1974  Civil  Service work  force  cuts,  would  keep  its  Space 
Power Facility  on standby. The Air  Force, Navy,  National Oceanic  and 
Atmospheric Administration,  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and   other 
agencies were  considering using  the  facility-the  world’s  largest  space 
environment  facility,  which  included  a  unique  solar  simulation  sys- 
tem.  Also,  NASA’s cooperative  program  with  the   National  Science 
Foundation  to  study  wind-driven energy  devices  was  based  a t   Plum 
Brook.  LeRC  Director Bruce T.  Lundin  reported  that  reduction-in-force 
notices  had  been  sent  to  177 Civil Service employees  11 March,  follow- 
ing  180 in  the past  year,  out of  IRRC’S  400 separations. Dr.  Kilgore said 
50  engineers  and  technicians  would  be  retained  for   the  Space Power 
Facility a t  Plum Brook, which once employed 600 workers.  (Transcript) 
0  Dr. Malcolm R.  Currie, Dept. of  Defense Director of  Defense Research and 
Engineering, testified on DOD space programs before the Senate Committee 
on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1975 NASA  authorization 
hearings:  DOD would  provide  an  interim,  upper,  orbit-to-orbit  stage 
(00s)  fo r  initial use with NASA’s space shuttle until  NASA  could develop 
a  permanent  space tug.  The  OO S ,   which  would  provide the  high  orbits 
necessary  for  about  60%  of  military  payloads,  would  be  a  low-cost 
modification of an  existing upper stage and  would be phased to  coincide 
with  the  first  operation of  the  shuttle  orbiter  in   1980. About  $3.0 mil- 
lion would be spent in  FY 1975 to  select stage configuration and initiate 
detailed  specifications.  The oos would  have no  payload retrieval  capa- 
bility and  might not be reusable but could be used by NASA  o r  any other 
shuttle  user  during early shuttle  operations. DOD would  install  facilities 
66 

20 March 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
to   provide  initial  shuttle  capability  at  Vandenberg Air  Force  Base  in 
December  1982. Shuttle hardware,  software,  operating procedures, and 
ground equipment would  be  common and  interchangeable to  the maxi- 
mum extent possible between KSC  and Vandenberg. 
During N 1974 DOD had  initiated  the  development  and  validation 
plan  fo r  the  NAVSTAR Global Positioning System,  using satellites to  pro- 
vide  worldwide  precise  positioning  and  navigation,  accurate  to   tens  of 
meters.  The   system,  usable  for   civilian  purposes  a s  well  as   military, 
would halt the proliferation of  specialized systems. 
The Navy’s  Fleet  Satellite Communications  System  (FLTSATCOM) , to  
provide  reliable  beyond-the-horizon communications fo r  command  and 
control  of  mobile  DOD forces,  was  “well  into  development.”  Terminal 
equipment for the fleet would be  installed in  FY  1975 and FY 1976 and 
would  be operated through minimal leased transponders in  Communica- 
tion  Satellite Corp.’s  Maritime Communications  Satellite  System  pend- 
ing  full operation of  FLTSATCOM in  1976. 
Three operational early warning satellites were in  geostationary orbit. 
DOD would  seek to  improve coverage  and mission  duration and continue 
development  of  a  simplified  processing  station.  Two  Lincoln  Experi- 
mental Satellites, comsats LES 8 and 9 scheduled for  1975 launch, would 
use  radioisotope  thermoelectric  generators  instead  of  solar  cell  arrays. 
The   Space Detection  and  Tracking  System  (SPADATS),  which  could 
cover up to  5600 km, would be expanded. DOD was working on detectors, 
target  discrimination,  data  processing,  and  other  critical  optical  and 
radar  components, to  reach a  near-real-time ground-based capability by 
FY  1978 to   detect,  track,  and  identify  all  objects up   to  36000-km alti- 
tude.  (Transcript; Aw Wk, 1 April 74 ,20 )  
0  The European  Space Research  Organization marked  the  10th anniversary 
of  the  convention which  established ESRO.  The  organization-which 
in-  
cluded  member  countries  Belgium,  Denmark, West  Germany,  France, 
Italy,  The  Netherlands,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  and   the  United 
successfully  launched  7  satellites  and  180  sounding 
Kingdom-had 
rockets.  In  the 10  yrs  of  ESRO’s‘eXistenCe, the budget had increased from 
$101.4 million fo r  1964-1966  to $405.6 million  for 1972-1974.  Employ- 
ment  had  risen  from  450  in   1964 to  1200 in   1974. The  anniversary 
would be  the  last for ESRO, which was to  be incorporated within  the  new 
European Space Organization. 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  wrote  Dr.  Alexander 
Hocker,  ESRO Director General: “We  on the ‘working level’ of  NASA who 
a re  now working very closely with this  organization add our congratula- 
tions  to   those  officially transmitted  and  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  
the continued association in  bringing Spacelab into being.”  ( ESRO news- 
letter, 74-3  ; ESRO Release). 
21 March:  The  success  of  Skylab’s  Apollo  Telescope Mount  solar  experi- 
ment  was  more  than  a  milestone  in  space exploration,  Dr.  John  Eddy, 
solar physicist of  the Boulder, Colo.,  High Altitude Observatory, said in  
a New  Scientist article.  This battery  of  the world’s  most  advanced tele- 
scopes lofted  to  the ideal observation site had clarified previous theoret- 
ical sketches of  the vertical extent of  the sun’s  chromospheric structures. 
Spicules, which  outlined the giant  circulation  cells of  the chromosphere 
and  extended through the transition region,  disappeared a t  temperatures 
of  1 million K in  the low corona, suggesting that the magnetic field lines 
diverged in  the  corona. 

\ 

67 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

21 March 
First  results  from  the ATM  x-ray observations destroyed  the  common 
concept  of  a  homogeneous  background corona, which  had   served a s  a 
basis  of  modern coronal physics, and  revealed  that d e  corona was  com- 
posed almost entirely of  closed loop structures fitting magnetic field lines 
calculated from observed photospheric fields. 
Reasons for   the ATM  success  included the large-scale  and  highly  so- 
phisticated instruments, large data-storage capa’bility, efficiency of  instru- 
ment  operation,  operation  of  the  six  instruments in   concert,  extensive 
ground  support,  and  astronaut  interest  and  training.  Program  results 
would  be  shared  by  scientists  in  many  countries  and  the   program  ap- 
peared  a  good  investment,  in   scientific  yield  per  dollar  spent.  (N ew  
Scientist,  21  March 74,738-741) 
0  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator, testified  in FY 1975 NASA  au- 
thorization  hearings before the House Committee on  Science and Astro- 
nautics  that NASA supercritical wing technology was “ready now for both 
military  and  commercial people  to  pick  up  and use.” 
Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  Associate  Administrator,  said  demonstration 
tests  fo r   solar  heating  and  cooling under  way  a t  Marshall Space Flight 
Center  [see 11  Jan.]  would  provide enough  baseline  data  within  one 
year  to  18 mos  to  install the  system  in   a  significant number of  homes. 
(Transcript) 
*  George Cunningham, paralyzed from the  neck  down in  a high  school foot- 
ball  game, was  the  first quadriplegic to use  a device developed for  astro- 
nauts  disabIed  in   space,  the  Baltimore  Sun  reported.  He could  place  a 
telephone call,  control  a  radio  or  TV,  open  the  curtains  in  his hospital 
room, o r  call the nurses’  station by blowing  into a tube. The device, Nu- 
Life, made up  of  two  tiny  video display screens and a miniature compu- 
ter,  was  operated by  inhaling  and  exhaling into  a  plastic  tube  or  con- 
trolled by eye rotation,  a turn of  the head, or a touch of  the  tongue.  (AP, 
B Sun, 21  March 74, A3) 
23 March-5  Ap r i l :  NASA’s  Mariner  10, launched 3 Nov.  1973, became the first 
spacecraft  to  explore Mercury,  during  a  12-day flyby  of  the  planet- 
returning  some  1700 TV photos and  much  new  information on  its  at- 
mosphere, surface, mass, and shape. 
The  incoming encounter sequence began  23 March  a t   5 600 000 km 
from   Mercury,  transmitting  d e  clearest  photos  yet  taken  of  the  tiny 
planet.  Although most of  the  photos were recorded on tape before trans- 
mission,  real-time photos with  reduced  resolution  were  sent  to  analyze 
the   reflective  properties  of  Mercury a t   different lighting  angles.  By  28  
March  photos were  showing the,planet  to  be  heavily  cratered  like  the 
moon. 
During  the  incoming near-encounter, from  17  to   31/2  h r s  before  en- 
counter,  18 frames  were  transmitted.  Mosaics  were  made  for   locating 
smaller  areas  photographed  later  a t   higher  resolutions.  Spacecraft in- 
struments  identified  an   extremely  thin  atmosphere  surrounding  the 
planet,  containing helium a t  concentrations above lunar levels and  small 
amounts of neon, argon, and possibly zenon. 
Mariner  10 passed  within  704  km of  Mercury  a t  4:47  pm  EDT  29 
March, within  56 km of the  aim  point.  Data  were transmitted  without 
interruption  over  the  150  000 000-km  distance  until  earth  occultation 
began  a t  4:50  pm  EDT.  Radio  signals were  recovered  following the 12- 
min occultation. Photos of  the planet-described  by scientists a t  Jet P ro -  
pulsion Laboratory as “superb‘-showed  details less than 1.6 km in  size 

68 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1974 

23  March-5 April 

and   covered  almost  half  the   planet’s  surface,  which  was  pocked  with 
craters as  deep as  32 km and between  8 and  160 km wide.  Giant cracks 
in  the surface suggested high heat beneath.  Some ancient volcanic activ- 
ity was seen  in  a few rille-like ravines that crossed the craters and dome- 
like hills.  Absence of  halo craters indicated young craters probably had  
been  covered  by  the  dust  storms tha t   constantly swept  the  planet.  At  a 
JPL   press  briefing  following the   encounter, Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  said 
onboard  instruments showed that Mercury had  an  unexpected magnetic 
field, estimated to be 1%  that of  the earth. The magnetic field was meas- 
ured  a t  90  to  100 gammas  a t   the ~ p a c e c r a f t ~ s  closest approach, with  an  
extrapolated value a t  the surface of  100  to 200 gammas. 
As Mariner  10 raced by Mercury on 30 March, photos of  the morning 
side of  the planet  showed a much  smoother region  than the  rugged  area  
seen under the afternoon sun. The north pole region appeared much less 
pitted  and   flatter  than  the  south pole.  Instruments found  that Mercury 
was  two-thirds iron, making its density greater  than previously believed 
and  probably  responsible for  the unexpected magnetic field. Concentra- 
tions  of  uranium  and  thorium  were  comparable to  those  on  the  earth. 
Preliminary results,  presented a t  a  31 March press  conference a t  JPL, 
included a  Mercury mass  measurement  100 times better  than  previous 
ones,  a  detached well-defined  bow  shock  wave,  a  temperature varying 
from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side  ( - 300°F  to SOOOF) 
with  no   thermal  anomalies detected,  opaque  surface  soil  with  the  top 
few  centimeters  1.0  to  1.5 times as  dense as  water  and  50%  a s  porous, 
and high-energy electrons  in  the mev  range  observed  from  700 to  5000 
km above the surface. An ultraviolet scanner had detected what appeared 
to be an egg-shaped moon moving in  orbit around Mercury, but the Mari- 
ner  navigational  team  later  identified the  object  as  a  dim but  very hot 
star, known as  31 Crater in  the constellation Corvus. 
Despite  a  power  anomaly, Mariner  10 continued to  transmit TV pic- 
tures  in   real-time  a t   117.6 kilobits  per  sec and  tape-recorded frames a t  
‘ 22.05  kbps.  TV imagery was  discontinued 5  April when  tlie  resolution 
became equal to that of  earth-based telescopes. 
All mission  events were  accomplished as  planned and the mission was 
adjudged successful 22 April. The spacecraft was expected to  swing back 
by   Mercury  in   September.  (NASA  MOR,  24  April  74;  JPL   Press   Kit, 
19 March  74 ;   N Y T ,   24   March  74,  30  March-1  April.74;  W  Pos t ,  
29 March-1  April 74 ;  W S tar-News ,  28 March 74; L A  T imes ,  20 March- 
1 April 74) 
23 March:  Key  appointments in  the  space shuttle program a t  Marshall Space 
Flight  Center  became  effective. Robert  E.  Lindstrom became Manager 
of  the Space Shuttle Office, replacing Roy E.  Godfrey, who became Spe- 
cial Assistant to   the MSFC  Director. Within the  Shuttle Office, James R. 
Thompson  became  Project Manager for  the  space  shuttle main  engine. 
John  A.  Chambers became Deputy Manager of  the Shuttle Engine Office 
and Frank M.  Stewart became technical assistant to  the Manager of  the 
Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC   Release 74-41) 
24 March:  Manned mace  spectaculars were gone,  a t  least until  the 21st cen- 
tury,  Thomas O’Toole  said in  the Wmh ing ton  Pos t .  The  similarfties be- 
tween  the  a i r   age when  men  had   begun  flying and  the  space age were 
striking.  Aviators  had   been  considered  stuntmen  until  they  began  to 
carry  the mail.  The Apollo  flights, with  their  “vaguely  circus air,”  had  
struck many peQple  the same way.  The space shuttle promised  to  change 
69 

24 March 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
all that. The US. planned to  operate five shuttles, each one carrying more 
than  27 000  kg  of  satellites and  space machinery into  orbit  12 times a 
year,  to  “improve the quality of  life on ear th  and  to  find out if  life exists 
elsewhere in  the solar  system.”  By  the end of  the  1980s the U.S. would 
have visited eight of  the solar  system’s  nine planets;  the only  exception 
was Pluto. 
While one par t  of  the space agency looked a t  the other planets, another 
would  be  looking  down to  learn more about the earth’s health.  The next 
20  yrs  would  see  an   unprecedented use  of  earth  orbit  to  observe and  
communicate with the  earth. O’Toole quoted Dr.  James C. Fletcher, NASA 
Administrator, as saying that the earth orbit might become overcrowded. 
Not  that  things  would  bump  into  each  other  but  “there  will  not  be 
enough  radio  frequencies  to  communicate  back  to  earth.”  ( W   Post, 
24 March 74, C1)  
New  U S .   proposals might help lead to  a new  agreement  a t  the  stalemated 
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, Leslie H. Gelb said in  the  Washington 
Post.  Dr.  Henry  A.  Kissinger,  Secretary  of  State,  arriving in  MOSCOW, 
would  submit to  the  U.S.S.R.  two  formulas to   establish  equivalence be- 
tween  nuclear forces.  Formula one would bring overall equality in  total 
numbers  of  land-based missiles,  sea-launched missiles,  and   long-range 
bombers.  Within  the  total,  each  side  would  determine its  own  mix  of 
forces.  Formula two would deveIop equality in  land-based missile throw 
weight, a better way to guard against a Soviet first strike on U S .  missiles 
than  to   seek  control  of  multiple  independently targetable  vehicles.  No 
MIRY controls were proposed. Working principles contained no numbers, 
leaving open the  question of  whether U S .  missiles were to be increased, 
Soviet  missiles  decreased,  or   both  lowered.  ( W Post,  24 March  74,  3 ;  
FOnF,  30 March 74)  
25 March:  Data  from  U.S.S.R.  space  probes  Ma r s   4,  6 ,  and  7  [see  9-12 
March]  had   indicated  that several 3 e n s  percent” of  the Martian atmos- 
phere was  made up  of  an  inert gas, probably  argon, Tass quoted Prof. 
Vasily  I. Moroz  as   reporting  in  Zzvestiya. The  data would  substantiate 
Soviet  scientists’  belief  tha t   several  million  or   even  several  hundred 
thousand years ago Mars had  an  atmosphere with  a density close to  that 
of  the earth.  In  addition,  data from Mariner 9  (launched 30 May  1971) 
and Mars  5 had  shown  that  the planet had had  surface water  and might 
L L  acquire  it  again,  for   such changes take  place  during  the  planet’s  geo- 
logical history  . . . with  a  definite periodicity.”  New  data was  increas- 
ing  hope  of  finding the  simplest  biosphere.  “In  any case,  in  the  not  so 
distant  geological past  Mars apparently had   . . . the  conditions neces- 
sary for  the  emergence of  life. The reappearance of  such periods in  the  
future is not ruled out.” 
The Western press  later  quoted U S .  scientists as saying that the pres- 
ence  of  large  amounts  of  argon  would  have  LLdramatic implications” 
and would  tend to  support the theory that the Martian climate had been 
going through  a  series  of  cycles during which  ice  ages  alternated  with 
warmer  and  wetter  conditions.  But  Dr.  Carl E.  Sagan of  Cornel1 Univ. 
said during a telephone interview that the 90% content of  carbon dioxide 
in   the  Martian  atmosphere had   been  well  established,  so that  “at most 
10%  of  argon  was  barely  possible.”  (FBISSOV ,  26  March  74,  U1; 
Shabad, NYT ,  7 April 74 ,34)  
*  Dr. Edward U.  Condon, a  leading U S .  atomic scientist, died a t  the age of 
72  in  Boulder, Colo.,  of  complications from heart  disease.  I n   1941) Dr. 

70 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

25  March 

Condon had  become a  member of  the National Defense Research Coun- 
cil and, in  1941, a member  of  the Roosevelt Committee on Uranium Re- 
search.  During  the  World War  I1 he  played  an   important  role  in   the  
development  of  the   atomic  bomb.  I n   1945 Dr.  Condon  had   been  ap- 
pointed  Director  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards but  resigned in 
1951 because of  House Un-American Activities Committee investigations 
as il  “weak”  security  link.  I n   1952 he  appeared before  the  Committee 
and  denied charges under oath. 
From  1945 to  1951 Dr.  Condon  had  been  a  member  of  the National 
Advisory  Committee on Aeronautics. I n  the  1950s he  developed  a  mis- 
used  by  US. astronauts-that 
sile nosecone-later 
could withstand the  
h igh  temperatures of  reentry  into the  earth’s atmosphere.  I n  1954 he re- 
turned to teaching and, while on the Univ. of  Colorado faculty, he under- 
took  an   Air  Force  study  to  investigate  sightings  of  unidentified  flying 
objects.  (Weil,  W  Pos t ,   27 March  74,  C4;  Slusser,  W  Star-News,  27 
March  74,  B5;  Who’s  W h o ;   House  Un-Am  Activities  Com  Special 
Subcom Rpt) 
26 March:  The U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos 637  from Baykonur Cosmodrome 
near  Tyuratam,  into  orbit  with  35  604-km apogee,  35 595-km  perigee, 
23-hr 46.6-min  period,  and 0.2”  inclination-the 
first  Soviet satellite in 
geosynchronous orbit. The press later  quoted American analysts as  sug- 
gesting  tha t  Cosmos 637, which was  stationed  above the  Indian Ocean, 
might  be  an   engineering test  for  a  full-fledged stationary communica- 
tions  satellite  long  planned by  the   Soviets  to  improve communications 
with  the  southern par t   of  the U.S.S.R.  and  the Warsaw Pact  countries. 
(GSFC  W k l y  SSR,  21-27  March  7 4 ;   Shabad, N Y T ,   2 8  March  74,  20 ;  
SBD, 28  March 74,153 ; A v  Wk, 1 April 74) 
0  The Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee 
on  Aviation held  hearings  to  determine whether  the  Federal  Aviation 
Administration and McDonnell Douglas Corp. had  dealt adequately with 
cargo  door  problems on  the  DC-IO  aircraft.  Experts  believed  that  the 
door had caused  a  12  June  1972 near  crash in  Canada and the  3 March 
1974 crash outside Par is  that killed all 346 persons aboard. 
Documents  had   revealed  that,  following  the  Canadian  incident,  the 
FAA had  drafted an  airworthiness directive requiring three improvements 
in   the  suspect  rear  cargo door. McDonnell Douglas appealed t o  the FAA, 
which  then  agreed to   let  the company  issue voluntary  service bulletins. 
An  inspection  of  all  134  in-service DC-10s  after  the  Pa r i s   crash had  
showed  that  two  aircraft, including the   Turkish  airliner, had  not  been 
modified  despite McDonnell  Douglas  records to   the  contrary. 
Seven months after  the  Canadian incident  the FAA, a t  the suggestion 
of  the  National  Transportation  Safety  Board,  had  asked  the  company 
to consider a redesign of  the vital systems, reinforcement of  thepassenger 
cabin floor, and more pressure vents.  In  a 25 Feb.  1974 letter to the FAA, 
McDonnell  Douglas  said  that  they  d id   not  “have  the  manpower  avail- 
able a t  this  time  to  undertake the study, nor  a re  we  in   a  position to  ac- 
cept this burden alone.”  (Egan, W Pos t ,  23 March 74, A4;  27 March 74, 
A2; W i tk i i ,  N Y T ,  21  March 74 , l ;  26 March 7 4 , l )  
0  The  Federal  Energy  Office  directed  oil  refiners  to  provide  airlines  with 
sufficient  fuel  to  meet  allocations calling for  95% of  1972 supplies  fo r  
trunk  carriers  and  100% fo r  local  service carriers, FEO  also  proposed 
tha t  international airlines be authorized to draw on domestic fuel supplies 
71 

26 March 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

if  bonded fuel was  not available a t  prices comparable to  domestic costs. 
(FEO  Release 74-116) 
29  March:  President Nixon wired  congratulations to  Dr.  James C.  Fletcher, 
NASA Administrator, on Mariner 10’s successful 5 Feb. flyby of  the  planet 
Mercury:  “The  successful  flight  . . . marks  another historic  milestone 
in  America’s  continuing exploration of  the solar  system. With this mis- 
sion  we  will  begin  to  end  centuries  of  speculation aboat  our  planetary 
neighbor closest to  the Sun. On behalf  of  all Americans, I extend warm- 
est congratulations to NASA and the Mariner 10 team on their  outstanding 
performance.  The  hard   work,  skill,  and  ingenuity  that  contributed  to 
the   success  of  Mariner  10  is  in  keeping  with  that  historical  tradition 
which  began  when  men  landed  a t   Plymouth Rock  and  has   continued 
through the landing of  men  on  the moon.”  ( P D ,  1 April 74 ,374 )  
President Nixon  issued Executive Order 11775 abolishing the Energy Pol- 
icy Office, which had  been  established 29 June 1973. The responsibilities 
of  the  Office would  be  taken  over  by  the  Federal Energy Office, estab- 
lished 4 Dee.  1973. ( P D ,  1 April 74,356) 
A Black Brant sounding rocket launched from Peru by  a  team  of  U S .  and 
Peruvian  scientists  found  evidence  that  auroral  activity  occurred  not 
only  in  the  polar  regions  but  in   the  ionosphere near  the  earth’s  geo- 
magnetic equator. The scientists-from  Aerospa-e Gorp., Univ. of  Texas, 
U.S.  Air  Force,  Peru’s Geophysical  Institute,  and the  Peruvian  govern- 
studying  recurring  ionospheric  disturbances,  known  as  
ment-were 
spread  F,  that  had  been  discovered  by  Peruvian  radar   studies.  (Miles, 
L A  T imes ,  28 April 74) 
0  Immigration of  scientists and enpin’eers into the U S .  had dropped sharply, 
from the record 10 300-13  30’5 yearly between 1967 and 19’92 to 660‘0 in  
1973,  the National Science Foundation reported. The  decrease reflected 
the  impact of  the  4  Feb.  1971 restrictions  in   immigration regulations. 
(NSF   Highlights, 29 Mar 74) 
March:  Sen.  James  G.  Abourezk  (D-S.D.)  asked  the  Government Ac- 
counting Office  to  investigate the  “evidence of  solar  energy feasibility” 
contained in  a report by Atomic Energy Commission scientists. He said 
evidence that solar energy could be developed more quickly and  cheaply 
than  previously  believed had  been  ignored when  the AEC   recommended, 
in   a  repod  to  the President,  tha t  only $200 million out of  a  total of  $10 
billion  for   energy research  should be  spent  on  solar  energy fo r   a  five- 
year  period beginning in  1975. Sen. Abourezk wanted to  know “why  the  
A.E.C.  has  been  sitting  on  scientific data  Dointing  the wav  toward  solar 
energy  while major  i i1  companies are   q k e t ly   kov ing   to   take  control 
of  the means to  produce solar power.”  (UPI ,   N Y T ,  1 April 74,  34) 
During March: Apollo 17: Preliminary Science Report  (NASA SP-330),  dated 
1973,  was  issued.  The  Taurus-Littrow landing  site  for   the  7-19  Dec. 
1972 final mission of  the  lunar  landing program had  been  the  most  di- 
verse in  both geologic features  and samples brought back.  Seismic trav- 
erse experiments had  indicated basaltic flows extended to  a depth of  1.2 
km.  The traverse  gravimeter experiment had provided limits to  the den- 
sity  of  underlying material and  permitted development of  models to  help 
interpret  mascons.  Analysis  of  mare basalts  from the ApoEo 11 ,12 ,15 ,  
and  17 missions  and from  the U.S.S.R.’s  Luna 16  indicated that the fill- 
ing of  the  mare  basins  took  place  mostly  between  3.2  billion  and   3.8 
billion  yrs   ago.  Formation  of  more  than  90% of  the  cratering was  be- 
lieved to  be 4 billion  yrs earlier.  Highland material collected  on ApoUo 

31 

72 

During  March 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
14,16, and 17  missions showed a widespread occurrence of  breccias with 
an   apparent  age  of  3.8  billion  to  4 .1  billion  yrs,  with  strong  evidence 
that  rocks  a s  old  a s  4.5  billion  to   4.6  billion  yrs  existed on  the moon. 
Dark mare regions were thought to  be underlain by lava, but craters had 
been mostly caused by impacting projectiles. The moon was once active 
volcanically but was now quiet, with any  activity since 3 billion  yrs ago 
highly  restricted  o r  nonexistent.  It had   a  crust  more  than  60 km  thick 
and a negligibIe overall magnetic field. 
Two  theories  of  lunar  evolution had   come  from  mission  data.  The 
first  was  that  the  planet  was  chemically layered  during  its  formation, 
with  a  low  interior  temperature  gradualIy  increasing, perhaps  reaching 
the  melting point  in  the last  billion  years,  while  the  initial  heat  of  the 
exterior gradually decreased. The second theory  assumed that the moon, 
chemically  homogeneous  and  molten  during  formation,  underwent 
extensive chemical differentiation  resulting  in  surface  concentration  of 
radioactivity  very  shortly  after  formation.  None  of  the  three  theories 
of  origin  of  the moon-separation 
from the  earth, capture from a  solar 
orbit,  o r   formation  from  a  dust  cloud--could  be  absolutely eliminated 
by  data collected to  date, but  chemical differences made it unlikely that 
the moon was torn from the earth.  (Text) 
*  Experiments carried out  during the U.S.S.R.'s  eight-day Soyuz  13  mission 
launched  18 Dec.  1973 were further  evidence that  the U.S.S.R.  was  con- 
tinuing  manned  space  station  efforts,  a  Spaceflight  article  said.  The 
flight had  included the Oasis 2 experiment, part of  a plan  to demonstrate 
that  biological closed-cycle life support  systems could be used  for  large 
space  stations  and  other  long-duration  manned  missions.  Observation 
of  stars  in  the  ultraviolet  range  with  the  Orion  2  telescope was  also  a 
continuing  program  related  to  space  station  activity.  Cosmonaut Kon- 
stantin  P.  Feoktistov had  said  in  a  statement to   the British  Interplane- 
ta ry   Society  that,  in  the  years  between  the  Soyuz   11  tragedy  in  June 
1971  and  the  Soyuz  12 mission  in  September  1973,  design  engineers 
had  been  analyzing the  performance  of  all  spacecraft systems and mak- 
ing  modification  and  improvements.  He  stressed that  work  on  manned 
space stations was continuing because of  the importance of  these stations 
in  the exploration of  natural resources. Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13 crews had 
made  multispectral  photos  of  the  earth's  surface.  ( S F ,  March  74,  110) 
NASA  submitted  its  report  N A S A   Energy-Related  Research  and  Develop- 
ment  to  the  Senate  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences, a t  
the  request  of  i t s  chairman,  Sen. Frank  E.  Moss  (D-Utah)  . NASA's  F"Y 
1974  budget  had   included  a  $2-million  authorization  for  energy  R&D 
for projects  in solar energy utilization ; energy conversion, transmission, 
and  storage;  transportation  and  propulsion  systems;  and  energy  and 
environmental  conservation.  Long-range  research  included  studies  of 
satellite  systems  to   collect  solar  energy,  convert  it  to  electricity,  and 
transmit  it  to  the  earth  by  microwave beams.  I n   one  study  the  use  of 
solar  cells  would  be  considered,  while  in  another  the  possibility  of  a 
turbogenerator in space would be explored. 
Near-term projects included demonstration of  residential solar heating 
and  cooIing  a t   Marshall  Space  FIight  Center,  office  building  f a t s   a t  
Langley  Research  Center,  and  component  studies  at  Lewis  Research 
Center.  LeRC  was  also  sponsoring  a  study  of  crops  that  could  be  con- 
verted  into  clean fuels,  and  a  NAsA-National  Science Foundation  study 

73 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

During  March 
was  testing  wind-electric generating devices.  Projects  a t  Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory  and  LeRC  sought  to  design  low-polluting  but  higher  ef- 
ficiency  automobile engines,  and   Flight  Research  Center  was  testing 
configuration  changes to  reduce aerodynamic drag  for  trucks. 
Energy conversion research  included an   LeRC  study,  in   cooperation 
with  the  Dept.  of  Interior,  of  technical  and   economic  advantages of  a 
potassium topping  cycle  to   permit  higher  peak  cycle  temperatures and  
produce  40%  more  electrical  power  for   a  given  quantity  of  fuel  than 
could conventional steam systems.  (Com P r in t )  
*  US .   trunkline  air  traffic  rose  to   unexpected  heights,  but  industry officials 
were  hesitant  to   interpret  gains  dur ing   the  first  quarter  of  1974 a s  a 
positive  trend  fo r   the  year.  United Air  Lines,  Inc.,  revenuspassenger- 
miles  rose  13.6%  in   March  over  March  1973;  Delta  Air  Lines,  Inc., 
10 .1% ;   and  Eastern  Airlines,  Inc.,  7.4%.  Local  service  carriers  also 
reported  near-record traffic  improvements  for  March,  with  many  show- 
ing   load  factors  above  the  55%  level,  rather  than  the  normal  monthly 
4%. High  fuel  costs,  however,  were  forcing  the  load-factor  level  re- 
quired for airlines to  break even to all-time highs. 
International  operations  were  an   exception  to  the  general  rise:  Pan 
American  World  Airways,  Inc.,  reported  a  revenue-passenger-mile 
decline of  6.1%  in  system-wide scheduled  operations for  March;  Trans 
World Airlines,  Inc.,  a  10.9% dip.  (Av   Wk, 1 4  April 74,  29-30) 

74 

April  1974 

1 April:  Construction of  the  $22-million  runway  for   the  space shuttle was 
begun  a t  Kennedy Space Center after  a brief  ground-breaking ceremoqy 
a t   the   construction  site  northwest  of  the  Vehicle  Assembly  Building. 
Dr.  Debus,  KSC  Director,  said  the  shuttle would  lead  to   a  “new  era   of 
international  transportation  to  and  from   space”  and   the  “boom  and 
bust  of  the   1960s of  this  community and  the  activities  of  the  govern- 
ment  will  be  changed  to  a  more  steady-more 
reliable-situation.” 
The 90-m wide, 4600-m long, 40-cm thick runway would accommodate 
a  75 000-kg spacecraft  returning  from  space a t  a  15”  to  20°  angle and  
a t  a  speed  of  nearly  295 km per  hr.  More than  8000 km  of  grooves  in  
the  surface  would  permit  drainage  and   prevent  hydroplaning  while 
landing in   the rain.  To  reduce the speed of  the  returning  shuttle, astro- 
nauts  would  have  the  help  of  brakes,  parachutes,  and   a net  a t  the  end 
of  the   runway.  The  runway  was  scheduled  for  July  1976 completion. 
(Spaceport  News,  4  April  74,  1, 5;  McElheny, N Y T ,   2  April  74,  22) 
0  Marshall  Space Flight  Center  began  a  six-month study  of  the  feasibility 
of  adapting  the  backup  Skylab Apollo  Telescope Mount  to  fly  on  the 
space shuttle fo r  solar  observations. NASA  anticipated tha t  modified ATM 
instruments positioned in  the shuttle payload bay could provide low-cost 
scientific returns  on  early  shuttle  flights.  (MSFC   Skylab Off, interview, 
Jan 7 5 ;  Covault, A v  Wk, 15 April 74,24-5) 
*  A New  Yorlc Times  editorial  noted  that,  within  a  matter  of  hours,  instru- 
ment  readings  from  Mariner  10’s 29   March  close  flyby  of  Mercury 
had   “made all previous scientific writing and theorizing  about Mercury 
is  now  a  large,  diverse  and  important body  of  hard  information.  . . . 
obsolete.  Where  nearly  complete  ignorance  had  existed  earlier,  there 
Even  if  the  crippled  spacecraft  is unable to  continue LO  transmit data it 
will  have  earned  an  indelible place  in  the history  of  space exploration.” 
( N Y T ,  1 April 74,30) 
The  U.S.S.R.’s 
three-week  Cosmos  605  mission-launched  31  Oct.  1973 
with  several  dozen  mammal,  reptile,  insect,  fungal,  and  bacterial  life 
forms  aboard-had 
yielded  major  data  on  organism  reaction  to   pro- 
longed  weightlessness,  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  member  Oleg  G. 
Gazenko was quoted as reporting. Although the ra ts  had  remained active 
in  space, their  food  intake  had  been  lower  than  that  of  an   earth-based 
control  group.  After  the  flight  the  space rats’  oxygen  requirements had 
declined  10%   to  20%.  Evidence also  indicated  that, although the level 
of  salts  in  the  organisms  had   remained  unchanged,  they  had   redis- 
tributed.  The space animals were sluggish immediately following space- 
craft recovery but their memory and coordination remained unimpaired. 
Capillary  blood  showed  major  changes in   content,  and  bone  marrow 
cells  were  markedly reduced  in  number. Organs taken  from a  group of 
rats  that  had  undergone  autepsy within  24  hrs   of  spacecraft’ recovery 
showed no major pathological changes except for  a marked weight reduc- 

75 

1 April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
tion  in  the Iymphoid glands  and a  small increase in  the adrenal glands. 
The changes were viewed as stress reaction to flight conditions. A degree 
of  atrophy  had  been  noted  in  the  hind  muscles. Most  of  the  disorders 
disappeared  in   a  second  group  of  rats  during  a  25-day  observation 
period  before  autopsy.  Mushrooms  grown  aboard  Cosmos  605  were 
greatly  deformed, with  long  twisted  stems and  large  root  systems.  (Aw 
W k ,  1 April 74,40) 
Available geosynchronous orbit “parking  space” for communications satel- 
lites to  serve the  continental US. was  fast  approaching  saturation  with 
authorized  and  applied-for  comsat  systems  operating  in  the  4-  to   6- 
gigacycle  band,  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology  reported.  This 
saturation  was  expected  to  provide  added  incentive  for  second-genera- 
tion  domestic comsats to  shift  to  the  new  11- to  14-gc band,  permitting 
spacecraft to orbit closer to the existing comsats. ( A v  W k ,  1 April 74 ,59 )  
0  Transformation  of  the  European  Space  Research  Organization  into  the 
European  Space  Agency,  originally  scheduled  for  1 April,  had  been 
postponed,  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology  reported.  The  delay 
would  allow representatives of  member  governments additional  time  to 
resolve  the  remaining  areas  of  disagreement and  decide on  a  Director- 
General.  The  postponement was  not  expected  to  affect  ESRO’S  Spacelab 
program.  Legal  actions  taken  by  ESRO  would  be  equally binding  under 
the new agency’s charter.  ( A v  Wk, 1 April 7 4 , 21 ;  22 April 74,191 
0  Analysis by Hale Observatories astronomers of  light from  the  diffuse halo 
around  the nearest quasar,  known  as BL  Lacertae, indicated  that  it was 
an   ancient  galaxy whose  core  was  undergoing  a  series  of  catastrophic 
explosions,  the N ew   York T imes   reported.  The  implication was  that  all 
quasars,  the  brightest  and most  distant  visible  objects  in  the  universe, 
represented some explosive phase in  the later history  of  a  galaxy. Before 
the  study,  BL  Lacertae  had  been  thought  to  be  a  variable  s ta r   in  the 
constellation  Lacerta,  pa r t   of  the  Milky  Way.  Instead  the  study  had 
showed  i t  to  be  a  massive  object  1 billion  light  years  from  the  earth 
with  visible  light  whose  brilliance  ffuctuated  radically.  ( N Y T ,  1 April 
74 ,21 )  
0  The Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory had awarded contracts to three 
companies to  make  configuration  studies  for  an   advanced  fighter  tech- 
nology  integration  (AFTI)   aircraft, Av ia t ion   Week & Space  Technology 
reported:  $750 000  to  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  $608 000  to  Rock- 
well  International  Corp.,  and  $597000  to  Fairchild  Republic  Co .   The 
studies were the first step in designing a small, low-cost, high-technology 
demonstration  aircraft in  the  initial phase  of  the  USAF’S  AFTI  program. 
(Aw W k ,  1 April 74 ,2 2 )  
1-5 Ap r i l :  Data from Pioneer 10 taken during its 3 Dec.  1973 encounter with 
Jupiter had indicated that the upper atmosphere of  the planet was MO  K 
(260°F) , about 480 K  ( 520°  F )   hotter  than  previously calculated. Dr. 
Arvydas J. Kliore, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist, said at a meeting 
of  the  American  Astronomical  Society.  Temperatures  deeper  down  in  
the atmosphere rose to  a s  much as 700 K  (800°F) , the highest  tempera- 
tu re  found  so  fa r   on  any  planet  in  the  solar  system. The  findings  sug- 
gested that  the  surface temperature  could reach 5800 K  ( i o  000°F) , the 
surface temperature of  the sun. The surprising heat might be  explained 
by heavy dust layers in  the upper  levels of  the atmosphere that  absorbed 
solar radiation  o r  absorbed heat radiating  away from  the  surface of  the 
planet. 

76 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
1-5  April 
Dr.  Fred  L.  Whipple,  retired  Director  of  the  Smithsonian  Astro- 
physical Observatory, said  that  methyl  cyanide  and  hydrogen  cyanide, 
two  compounds always identified with  interstellar  dust, had  been  found 
i n  abundance in  Comet Kohoutek. The discovery marked  the  first time 
the chemicals had been identified with a comet and the first time they had 
been  seen  in  space inside  the  solar  system.  “It  . . . increases  the  sus- 
picion  tha t   comets  were  formed  . . . out  a t   about  30  trillion  km  o r  
halfway to the nearest star.”  ( W Pos t ,  5 April  74,  A29;  7 April 74, A3) 
0  The  second Meeting  of  Signatories  of  the  International  Telecommunica- 
tions  Satellite Organization  (INTELSAT)  was held  in  Acapulco, Mexico. 
The  delegates  determined  that  a  1.106226%  investment  share  would 
entitle a signatory or group of  signatories to representation  on the Board 
of  Governors.  ( INTELSAT Release 74-17; 
INTELSAT PAO,  interview) 
2 Ap r i l :  Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator  for Space Science, 
testified  in  FY  1975 authorization  hearings  before  the  Senate Commit- 
tee  on  Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences  that  Orbiting  Solar  Observa- 
tory OSO-I,  scheduled for 1975 launch into orbit, was expected to acquire 
ultraviolet  solar spectra  of  the  most  detailed  resolution  ever  obtained. 
Spacecraft  and  experiment  assembly was  to   be  complete by  mid-1974. 
A cooperative program with the European Space Research Organization, 
called  International  Sun-Earth  Explorers  ( ISEE)  , planned  three  satel- 
lites  to   make  simultaneous  measurements.  Two  spacecraft,  “Mother” 
built  by  the  US. and  “Daughter”  built  by  ESRO,  would  travel  close to- 
gether  in the  same highly elliptical  orbit, measuring  magnetic and  elec- 
tric  fields,  energetic particles,  and  plasma  properties.  The  third  space- 
craft, called “Heliocentric”  and built  by  the US.,  would  be  placed  near 
one  of  the  unique  points  in  space where  the  earth’s  and  sun’s  gravity 
balance  each  other.  The  spacecraft  would  travel  around  the  sun  and 
close to  the  earth  to  learn what  radiation  was  impinging  on  the  earth’s 
magnetosphere.  Data  from  the  three  satellites would  help  to  untangle 
spatial  from  temporal  changes  in  radiation  fields  around  the  earth.  A 
cooperative  effort  with  ESRO  and  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  the 
h te rna t iona l   Ultraviolet  Explorer  ( IUE)   scheduled  for  launch  into 
geosynchronous orbit  in  1976 to  observe high-resolution spectra  in  the 
w with a telescope controllable from the ground in real time. Techniques 
gained would be applied later t o  NASA’s  Large Space Telescope. 
Associate Administrator  for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. 
Truszynski  reported  deactivation  of  NASA’s transportable  tracking  sta- 
tion  in  Newfoundland  and  closing  of  Spaceflight  Tracking  and  Data 
Network stations a t  Corpus Christi, Tex.,  and Carnarvon, Australia. The 
Newfoundland station,  placed  in  caretaker  status  after  the  Skylab mis- 
sions, would be reactivated fo r  the  1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mis- 
sion  and then permanently  closed. The Deep Space Network portion  of 
the  Johannesburg  station  was  being  phased  out  beginning  June  1974; 
the STDN  facility would be  phased  out following the  near-earth phase  of 
the Viking  mission.  The  closings would  leave  1 5  stations,  adequate  to 
handle the projected workload for the next five years and consistent with 
long-range planning.  (Transcript) 
The House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Transportation 
approved  a  Federal Aviation Administration  budget  request  of  4 3  mil- 
lion  to   begin  the  Aeronautical  Satellite  (Aerosat)  system.  The  two- 
satellite  system,  to  be  built  in   cooperation  with  the  European  Space 
Research Organization  and Canada, would provide  over-the-ocean com- 
77 

2  April 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
munications for   aircraft.  I n   Subcommittee hearings  FAA Administrator 
Alexander P. Butterfield  said recent  changes in  the  program  had  elimi- 
nated  airline opposition. The changes would  limit the  size  and  cost  of 
the program, preclude the  imposition of  user  charges on aircraft  opera- 
tors for  recovery cif  R&D costs, eliminate any commitment for a  follow-on 
operational  system,  include a  very-high-frequency capability  for  evalu- 
ation  against  L-band, and   limit  the  number  of  earth  terminals.  Signing 
of  a. Memorandum  of  Understanding by  the  participants  was  pending 
Senate  approval  of  the  FAA  budget  request.  (Subcom Staff  Off,  inter- 
view; Av  W k ,  8 April 74 ,21 ;  SBD, 3 April 74,190) 
0  NASA  announced  selection  of  General Electric  Co.,  Grumman  Aerospace 
Corp.,  and  TRW Systems Group to  negotiate three  six-month, $600 000, 
fixed-price contracts  to  make  parallel  system definition  studies  for   the 
Ear th  Observatory Satellite  (EOS)  mission.  The  studies  were  to  design 
a  low-cost  modularized  spacecraft  with  a  space  platform  for   testing 
sensors and collecting remotely sensed data fo r  a variety  of  applications 
missions.  EOS  would  be   designed  for   launch  by  both  conventional 
boosters and the space shuttle.  (NASA Release 74-80) 
0  Federal  Aviation  Administrator  Alexander  P.  Butterfield  said  in   a 
written  statement  to  the  Senate  Committee  on  Commerce's  Subcom- 
mittee on Aviation that he had directed FAA offices to issue airworthiness 
directives  to   correct  all  safety-related  aircraft  design  changes.  Such 
directives carried the  force  of  law and required FAA inspection.  In  addi- 
tion, all safety-related  functions of  the FAA  were being centralized under 
one  official.  The  FAA was  also  studying ways  to  prevent  rapid  decom- 
pressurization  on  jumbo  jets  after  accidents.  The  actions  followed  in- 
vestigations of  the 3 March Turkish Airlines,  Inc.,  DG-10  crash outside 
Par is  that had  killed all 346 persons aboard. By  14  May, 43 airworthiness 
directives and 7  telegrams had been  issued, nearly double the usual rate. 
(Egan, W  Post, 3 April 74, A3 ; A v  W k ,  20 May 7 4 , l S )  
*  The  U.S.S.R.  had  requested  permission,  during  the  February  visit  of  a 
Soviet  science  delegation  to   Australia,  to   establish  a  jointly  controlled 
satellite tracking station in  Australia, the New  Y o r k  Times reported.  The 
US. bad  expressed concern that the Soviet Union might use the scientific 
station  to   monitor  U S .   messages  to  bases  ii Australia  and  reportedly 
believed  the proposal would be rejected.  (NYT, 2 April 7 4 , 4 )  
3 April:  The  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Cosmos  638  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome 
into  orbit  with  a  30-km apogee,  189-km perigee,  89.5-min  period,  and  
51.8"  inclination. The  spacecraft was  identified by  Maj.  Gen.  Vladimir 
A.  Shatalov,  chief  of  cosmonaut  training  for   the  U S S R ,  a t   a 9 Sept. 
ceremony a t  Johnson Space Center as an  unmanned test  of  docking sys- 
tems  and  rendezvous  for  the  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  mission.  The 
spacecraft  reentered  13 April.  (GSFC SSR, 30  June  74;  Transcript; SF ,  
Sept 74,394) 
introduced  H.R.  13961  to  amend  the 
Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.) 
National Aeronautics and  Space Act  of  1958 t o   authorize NASA  to  con- 
trac t   for   Tracking  and   Data  Relay  Satellite  services.  (CR,  3 April 74, 
H2584; NASA  LAR ,  XIII/4+3) 
0  Indonesia  would  build  a  domestic  communications satehite  system  in- 
cluding  two  satellites  and   50  earth  stations,  the   Indonesian Post  and 
Telecommunications  Directorate  General announced to   the  press.  Each 
satellite could  serve  as   backup  for   the  other and  would  have  12 trans- 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

3  April 
ponders.  Each transponder would be  able to  serve 12  telephone  lines or  
1 color TV channel. 
The press  later reported that Malaysia and  the Philippines were plan- 
ning  to   jo in   the   Indonesian  system.  The  satellites would  be  put  into 
orbits that would  allow point-to-point telephoke connections within each 
country  and  among the three  countries.  Construction of  the system was 
expected  to   cost  $90  million  and   take  two  years.  (Jakarta  Domestic 
Service and  Hong Kong UP,  FBIsIndonesia,  18 April  74, N1-2) 
*  Pan   American  World Airways,  Inc.,  and  Trans World Airlines,  Inc.,  each 
petitioned  the  Civil  Aeronautics Board  for   subsidies.  Pan   Am  sought 
a  $195-million-a-year mail subsidy because  of  a  pending  financial crisis 
following  six  years  of  losses,  including  an  expected  net  loss  of  $65 
million  in   1974.  In   addition  to  a  huge  debt,  Pan  Am  had  been  h i t   by 
foreign  competition,  sharp  drops  in   traffic,  overcapacity  (half-empty 
Boeing  747  transpor ts) ,   and  soaring  costs,  including  a  $200-million 
annual  increase  in   fuel  costs.  TWA  asked  a  temporary  subsidy to  offset 
fuel  costs,  estimating  1974 international  losses would  be $47 miIIion- 
in  contrast to  a 1973 profit of  $19.5  million. 
On  2 April  the Dept.  of  Justice and  Dept.  of  Transportation had  dis- 
couraged Pan   Am  and  TWA  discussions of  pooling transatlantic  opera- 
tions  as   an  economy measure,  telling  CAB  that  discussions were  prema- 
ture.  (O’Hanlon, Fortune,  Oct 74,  123-7,212-6;  CAB  Doc Section, Docs 
26560 & 26563; W Sear-News, 3 April 74, B9) 
Johnson  Space Center  had  awarded  a  $6 598 000  cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract  to  Charles Stark  Draper  Laboratory,  Inc.,  for  Apollo-Soyuz Test 
Project and space  shuttle  orbiter  software development, JSC  announced. 
( JSC  Release 74-62) 
4  A p r i l :   The  YF-17  prototype  lightweight  fighter  a ircraf t   was  rolled  out 
a t   the  Northrop  Corp.  plant  in   Hawthorne, Calif.  The  YF-17  and  the 
YF-16  being  built  by  General  Dynamics  Corp.  marked  the  first  Air 
Force effort to  place more emphasis on  hardware performance and less 
on  paper  studies  by  using  an   advance prototyping  concept.  The  USAF 
would  evaluate  the  YF-16  and   YF-17  in   a  12-mo flight-test program 
before making a  commitment to  production.  (DOD Release 131-74) 
Dr.  Harrison H.  Schmitt,  ApoZZo  27  astronaut  and  now  Special Assistant 
to  the  NASA  Administrator  for   Energy  Research  and  Development, 
testified  in  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hear- 
ings  on  FY   1975 authorizations:  One  of  the  most  important  contribu- 
tions NASA  could make  to  energy research  and development was  the  ap- 
plication  of  managerial  techniques  developed  in  the  space  program, 
permitting  programs,  schedules,  and  budgets  to  be  defined  and  then 
adhered  to  without  major  degradation  of  the  original  goals.  “This 
mission-oriented approach  to   research  and  development  and  i ts   broad 
the  great  capabilities  and  imagination  of 
industry 
integration  of 
will  . . . be applied just  as successfully to  the critical problems that  face 
the Nation and the  world in  energy.”  (Transcript) 
The  Federal  Aviation Administration  announced a  proposed new  regula- 
tion  requiring  fuel  tanks  and  fuel  venting  spaces on  turbine-powered 
transports  over  5670  kg  to  be  equipped  with  explosion-prevention 
systems. Under the proposal, a ircraf t  operators and  manufacturers could 
use  a  system  tha t   maintained  a  continuous nonflammable  atmosphere, 
such  as nitrogen,  o r   a  system  tha t   arrested  a fire  o r   explosion  once 
79 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

4  April 
initiated.  All  turbine  aircraft manufactured  two years  after  the effective 
date  of  the  final rule would be  required  to  be  fitted with this equipment 
within three years.  (FAA Release 7 4 4 7 )  
5 Ap r i l :   Experiments had  been  approved  for  the  first  High  Energy  Astron- 
omy  Observatory  (H EAO )   mission,  to  make  an  x-ray  survey  of  the  sky 
from  low  earth  orbit  in  1977,  NASA  announced.  Contracts  totaling 
$23 349 266  had  been  let  for  a  large-area  x-ray  survey  experiment  to  
map  the  celestial sphere  for  x-ray  sources;  a  cosmic x-ray  experiment 
to  measure  emissions  and  absorptions  of  diffuse  x-rays  and  correlate 
results  with  radio  and  visible-light-ray emission ; a  scanning  modula- 
tion  collimator experiment  to  determine  precisely  the  celestial position, 
size,  and  structure  of  selected cosmic  x-ray  sources;  and  a  ha rd   x-ray 
and  low-energy gamma  ray   experiment  to  determine  the  intensity  and 
other  properties  of  certain  x-rays  and  gamma  rays.  (NASA  Release 74- 
79)  
*  The  U.S.S.R.’s  Aeroflot  Soviet  Air  Lines  made  its  inaugural  flight  from 
Washington’s  Dulles  International  Airport  to  MOSCOW~S  Sheremetyevo 
Airport,  with  a  stopover  in  Paris,  initiating  regular  weekly  Washing- 
ton-Moscow service.  Under  a  US.--U.S.S.R.  protocol  signed  23  June 
1973, Aeroflot  also  served the  Soviet capital  from  New  York  with two 
flights weekly  during peak periods and one flight per week  at other times. 
(DOT   Release 29-74) 
Large  numbers  of  scientists  and  engineers  trained  in  a  variety  of  tradi- 
tional  and  interdisciplinary  fields would  be  required  over  the  next  sev- 
eral  years  by  increased  energy  research  and  development  efforts,  a 
Science  editorial  said.  Numbers  of  graduating  scientists and  engineers 
were  dropping  each  year  and  some signs  of  a  shortage were  appearing 
already.  Top-level representatives  from  R P ~ D  agencies-including  NASA, 
the  Federal  Energy  Office,  Office  of  Management and  Budget,  National 
Science Foundation,  and the Atomic Energy Commission-should  exam- 
ine manpower needs and set up  or fund a program for continuing assess- 
ment  over the  coming decade. “Dollar  budgets  can be  changed quickly. 
Manpower  budgets  require  longer  planning  time  if  both  dollars  and 
manpower  a re  to  be used  wisely.”  (Vetter, Science,  5 April  74, 11) 
6 Ap r i l :  The backup  Skylab  Orbital Workshop  was  Ioaded  for  shipment  by 
sea to Marshall Space Flight Center for long-term storage.  (MSFG  Release 
74-56) 
8 Ap r i l :  President Nixon transmitted  to Congress the Aeronautics  and  Space 
Repor t   of  the  Pres iden t:   1973  Ac t iv i t ies .   In   his  transmission  message 
the  President  said:  “This  year  has  been  particularly  significant  in  tha t  
many  past  efforts  to   apply  the  benefits  of  space  technology  . . . to  
proiblems  on Earth  a re  now coming to  fruition.”  Data  from  Skylab and 
Earth Resources Technology Satellite Er ts  1  were  being  used  for  appli- 
cations  including  resource  discovery  and  management,  environmental 
information,  and  land  use planning.  Communications satellites had  be- 
come a principal method of  international communication and important 
in  meeting national  defense needs.  Skylab  had  provided  new  informa- 
tion  on  the energy characteristics of  the  sun  that  could aid  understand- 
ing  of  thermonuclear  processes  and  contrzbute to  devdopment  of  new 
energy  sources.  Skylab had  proved  that  man  could  effectively live  and 
work in space for extended periods of  time. Advances in aeronautics had 
contributed  to  defense  of  the  Nation  and  helped  reduce  aircraft  con- 
gestion and provide quieter, safer, more economical and efficient aircraft. 

80 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1W4 

8  April 
The  report  said that  in previous  years  NASA’s  emphasis  in  space had 
been  to  expand  human  knowledge  of  phenomena,  develop  and  operate 
space  vehicles,  and  preserve U S .   leadership  in  aeronautics  and  space 
technology.  But  1973 had  been  the  year  of  “cashing  in” on  the  tech- 
nology development and knowledge obtained from lunar and space explo- 
ration programs.  ( C R ,  8 April 74, H2677; Text) 
NASA  announced selection of  McDonnell Douglas COT.  to  negotiate a two- 
year,  $13.2-millionY cost-plus-award fee  contract  to  support  the  space 
shuttle program  in  system analysis;  avionics system engineering;  mis- 
sion planning, analysis, and software formulation ; computer systems and 
software;  and  crew  procedures  and  flight  planning. 
(NASA  Release 
74-83) 
e  The U.S.S.R.  was continuing plans to build  an earth station in the Ukraine 
to operate with the International Telecommunications Satellite Organiza- 
ion’s  comsat  system.  The  project-the 
second planned  Soviet  INTELSAT 
link-had 
been  unofficially  reported  by  Russians  in  discussions  with 
U S .  Government and  private  representatives over  the  past  few months. 
(The first  station, near MOSCOW, had been  initiated  to provide a bilateral 
communications  capability  for  the  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Hot  Line,  via  a 
Molniya and an Intelsat satellite). U.S.S.R.  participation  in the INTELSAT 
system as  a coinmercial user  would  fill  in  a  major  link  in  the U.S.  goal 
of  a  single global  comsat system, as stated  in  the  1962 Communications 
Satellite  Act,  Av ia t ion   Week  &  Space  Technology  commented.  (Off  
US  Rep  to  INTELSAT,  ComSatCorp,  interview,  23  Jan   75;  Jobnsen, 
A v  W k ,  8 April 74 ,24 )  
*  An  omnidirectional wheel that  could  change a vehicle’s  direction  of  move- 
ment without  changing  the  direction  i t  was  facing had  been  developed 
by Marshall  Space Flight  Center  engineer  Josef  F.  Blumrich,  MSFC  an -  
nounced.  The  rim  of  the  wheel  consisted  of  several  barrel-shaped  seg- 
ments tha t  rotated  independently when  in  contact with  the  ground.  The 
wheel, which would be  strong enough to  negotiate  rough  terrain,  could 
be used on a planetary explorer vehicle o r  on wheelchairs. (MSFC  Release 
7 4 5 3 )  
*  The  French  aerospace  industry  was  reported  as  recording  $1.07  billion 
worth of  exports delivered in  1973. About  1 5% - - $1 7 0  million-was 
in 
cooperative European  aircraft  programs.  Missiles  and  space  deliveries 
amounted  to  $79  million.  New  missile  and  space  orders  totaled  $169 
million. 
British aerospace exports were later reported a t  almost $1.3 billion for 
1973,  a  25%  increase  over  1972  and  nearly  twice  1970 exports.  The 
Ieading  British  market  was  the  US.,  with  $360  million  worth  of 
deliveries.  ( A v  W k ,  8 April 74, 2 3 ;  Interavia, April  74, 275) 
The Navy  had  selected  International  Business Machines Corp.  Electronic 
Systems Center a s  prime  contractor  for  the  light  airborne multipurpose 
system  (LAMPS) helicopter,  Av ia t ion   Week   &  Space  Technology  re- 
ported.  Under  a  $13.8-million  contract,  IBM  would  develop  and  test  a 
prototype  antisubmarine warfare  and  avionics and weapon  control  sys- 
tem for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. 
(Aw  W k ,  8 April 74, 24) 
8  Ap r i l -3   May:   Some  75  Soviet  aerospace  specialists-including  U.S.S.R. 
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project  Technical Director Konstantin  D.  Bushuyev, 
prime crewmen Aleksey A.  Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Direc- 
tor  Aleksey S.  Yeliseyev, and  training  officer  for  ASTP  crews Valery  F. 
81 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

8  A p r i l 4   May 
Bykovsky-joined  U.S.  ASTP  astronauts and specialists a t  Johnson Space 
Center to continue technical discussions and planning  for  the  July  1975 
joint  ASTP  mission.  Agreement was  reached  that  specialists  and  flight 
crews would visit the U S .  launch site in February  1975 and the U.S.S.R. 
launch  site in May  1975,  f o r  familiarization  with  the  spacecraft  and  to  
test  compatible equipment. NASA  had. defined no  technical need  for U S .  
representatives  a t   the  Soviet  launch  site  during  actual  liftoff;  U.S. 
specialists would be in the control center. 
Apollo  docking  module  and  Soyuz  life-support-system  tests  were 
reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and 
spacecraft manufacturing  test  and  checkout.  Schedules  for  each  of  the 
five  joint  experiments-ultraviolet 
absorption,  biological  interaction, 
microbial exchange, multipurpose  furnace,  and  artificial  solar  eclipse- 
were approved. Agreement was  also reached  on  the basic  approach  and 
content of  the joint flight readiness review, to  be held  in  May  1975. The 
U.S.S.R.  crew  and U.S.  ASTP  Astronauts Thomas  P.  Stafford, Vance  D. 
Brand,  and Donald K .   Slayton walked  through  hundreds  of  procedures 
for  the  first time  as crews, to verify  the  integrity  of  the  docking module 
that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. 
At  a  26 April  press  conference Stafford demonstrated his  proficiency 
in  the Russian language  by  answering newsmen’s  questions in  Russian. 
Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “weYve no problem in language.” 
One cosmonaut said, “Our  work  is considerably better  when  the Ameri- 
can crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” 
Glynn  S.  Lunney,  ASTP  Technical Director  for  the  US.,  said  during 
a  3  May  press  briefing  that  the  work  in  the  U.S.  and  jointly  was  on 
schedule.  The  progress  “has  been  good  and  . . . gratifying.”  Prof. 
Bushuyev said  that  “there  can  be  no  longer  any  doubt  that  we  will  be 
successful in preparing for  and achieving our joint  flight in  July  1975.” 
(JSC   Roundup,  12  April  74,  1 ;   ASTP  Communiquh;  Press  briefing 
transcripts, 26 April 7 4 , 3  May 74) 
8-12  Ap r i l :   Mariner  10  closeup photos of  Mercury  taken  23 March-5  April 
showed that many  large basinlike features  on  the  planet  appeared  to  be 
flooded by lava, Dr. Bruce C. Murray-California 
rnstitute of  Technology 
scientist and head of  the Mariner 10 photo inierpretation  team-reported 
to  the  American  Geophysical Union’s  annual  meeting  in  Washington, 
D.C.  The  apparent  volcanic  outpourings  indicated  that  Mercury  like 
the earth had a massive iron-rich core, hidden beneath a battered, heavily 
cratered, moonlike crust, making Mercury  “a  unique planet  in  the  solar 
system” and serving as important evidence in deciphering the primordial 
history of  the solar system. The latest results from Mariner  10 ’s   encoun- 
ter with  the planet  showed the  outer portions  of  Mercury to  be made of 
silicate-rich  rocks,  suggesting  the  planet  had  undergone  considerable 
melting in  its history,  with heavier materials sinking to the center of  the 
planet and lighter silicates rising to the surface. Analysis also showed that 
craters  might  have  existed  from  the  time  the  planet  was  formed  by  a 
great  influx of  cosmic debris 4 billion  to  4.5 billion  years  ago, with  no 
great  internal surface-shaping processes since then.  (UPI,  NYT ,  13 April 
74, 9;  AP,  W S tar-News ,  12 April 74, A5;  NASA MOR,  24+ April  74) 
9  Ap r i l :   Analysis  of  Pioneer  10  photographs  taken  during  the  spacecraft’s 
3 Dec.  1973 encounter with  Jupiter  indicated  that  the planet’s great red 
spot was probably a towering mass of  clouds rising from discrete thermal 
sourceg,  Dr.  Tom  Gehrels,  Univ.  of  Arizopa  scientist,  said  a t   a  NASA 
82 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
9  April 
Jupiter  science  press  briefing  in  Washington,  D.C.  The  heat  sources 
caused  the  atmospheric gases  to  rise  locally  to  lower  pressures.  As the 
altitude increased the gases condensed, forming the aerosols that colored 
the   clouds.  The  aerosols  then  sank  and  were  again  evaporated by  the 
higher  pressures  and  temperatures,  creating  an   up-and-down  circular 
motion within the red spot. Dr. Gehrels said tha t  the spot “is not a unique 
feature.”  Pioneer  10 photos showed other areas of  rising clouds. “We see 
quite a few of  these that occur in  equatorial regions.” 
Dr. James A.  Van Allen, Univ.  of  Iowa scientist, said that Jupiter  had 
been  identified for   the  first  time as  a source of  energetic particle emis- 
sions. The earth had  been  known  to be a feeble emitter but Jupiter  emit- 
ted  particles  a t   a  strength  detectable from  fractions  of  an   astronomical 
unit  up  to  four  or  five AU  from Jupiter.  The discovery had dramatically 
changed  interplanetary  science  from  its  traditional  hypothesis  that 
energetic particles observed in  spztce had  come only from the sun or  from 
local acceleration.  (Transcript) 
*  NASA  announced the  Delta  100  Failure  Review  Committee had  concluded 
that  the  failure of  the mo r -De l ta  launch vehicle 2nd stage during the 18 
Jan. Skynet  I I A  launch had  been caused by  an electronics package  short 
circuit induced by a piece of  conductive contaminant shaken loose during 
launch.  Also,  the   insulation  coating  on  the  printed  circuit  boards  had  
been  ineffective  a t   all  sharp  edges;  tests  had  determined that  the  con- 
taminant  had   probably  welded  across  the  exposed  ends  of  component 
leads.  The  committee  recommended  proper  insulation  of  exposed 
electrical points  and  an   electronics package  subjected  to  higher  accept- 
ance test  vibration  levels.  (NASA  Release 74-88) 
Award  of  a  $6462OOooO,  fixed-price-incentive  contract  to   McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  for  Thor-Delta launch vehicle mission  checkout,  launch- 
ings,  engineering support, and modifications through 30 Sept.  1975 was 
announced by NASA. Additional contract options totaled about $2 500 000. 
(NASA Release 74-84; Off  Delta Mgr, interview) 
*  The  Senate  Committee  on  Government  Operations’  Subcommittee  on 
Reorganization, Research, and International  Organizations favorably re- 
ported  S.  2744  to  the  full  Committee.  The  bill  would  split  the Atomic 
Energy  Commission  into  two  agencies,  the  Energy  Research  and  De- 
velopment Adniinistration  ( ERDA)  and  the Nuclear  Energy Commission 
(NEC)   . (House, Bill Status Off, interview, 24 Jan 75) 
9-10  Ap r i l :   Passengers aboard two  Delta Air Lines,  Inc.,  flights on  5 and 6 
April might have been exposed to  radiation from an  improperly shielded 
shipment of  32 curies of  solid radioactive  iridium 192 transported  in  the 
a ircraf t  cargo  compartments from Washington, D.C.,  to  Baton  Rouge, 
La.,  the   Atomic  Energy Commission announced. The highest  exposure 
for  any one passenger  would have been  about 8 roentgens on one flight 
and  51h  roentgens  on  the  other,  and  these  exposures  would  have 
occurred a t  only one seat location. The AEC  also announced 10 April that 
it  had   ordered  Value  Engineering Co.,  the  AEC  licensee that had   origi- 
nated  the  shipment,  to  suspend further  shipments of  radioactive  mate- 
rials  pending investigation.  (AEC  Releases T-161;  T-162) 
10 Ap r i l :   NASA  FY 1975  authorization  bill  H.R.  13998,  a  clean  bill- intro- 
duced  4 April  to  replace  H.R.  12689,  was  reported  out  of  the  House 
Committee on  Science and Astronautics. The revised bill  would  author- 
ize  $3.253  billion  in   FY  1975  funding,  an   increase  of  $6  million  over 
the  original  request.  Authorizations fo r   research  and   development  in- 
a3 

. 

10 April 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
creased $11 million to   $2.357  billion,  and  construction of  facilities  de- 
creased $5 million, to  $146.5 million. Funding for research and program 
management remained the same. 
Iscluded  in  the  R&D  increases was  a  $20-million  addition,  to  a  total 
$112.3 million, for the space shuttle main engine, which had encountered 
technical problems during early development. The increase was proposed 
to  add confidence in meeting schedules and hold  total  program  costs a t  
the  current  projection.  A  $4.3-million  increase,  to   $170.7  million,  was 
added for aeronautical  research  and  technology. A  $1.8-million increase 
brought  the total for space and nuclear research and technology to $76.6 
million. Manned space flight operations funding was  decreased $15 mil- 
lion,  to  $308.3 million,  including  a  $5-miIIion decrease  (to $109.6  rnil- 
lion)  for  the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project  and  a  $10-million decrease  ( to  
$165.2 million)  in development, test, and mission operations. 
Changes in  facility  construction  authorizations  included  an   increase 
of  $4  million, to $10.04 million for construction of  the infrared telescope 
facility in Mauna Kea, Hawaii. 
The  Committee also  requested  that  NASA  make  a  scientific  and  tech- 
nological  inventory  of  its  capability  to  contribute  to   such  critical  na- 
tional needs as energy,  transportation,  and  environmental control. NASA 
was to  report to the Committee by 1 Aug.  (H  Rpt 93-983) 
I I  ApriE:  Communications Satellite Corp.  Laboratories and  Telesat Canada 
had recently completed ioint field tests of  the transmission of  digital data 
through  Canada’;  An ih   I  communications  satellite  (launchedu  9  Nov. 
1972) , ComSatCorp announced. Data were  transmitted  at 67.2  megabits 
per  sec, believed t o  be the highest rate ever transmitted  by satellite. The 
high  rate  allowed two digital TV communications system color channels 
t o  be carried through  a single transponder.  The tests confirmed previous 
system analyses and proved the ability of satellites to transmit the equiva- 
lent  of  100  newspaper  pages  in  one  minute.  (ComSatCorp  Release 
7 6 2 2 )  
Communications Satellite Corp. filed proposed rates with the Federal Com- 
munications  Commission  for  a  new  medium-speed digital-data  satellite 
service called DIGISAT,  to provide  digital  data channels between  the U.S. 
mainland  and Hawaii. The proposed monthly  rate to  international  com- 
mon carriers would be $2700 for 2.4 kilobits per  sec, $3000 for 4.8 kbps, 
and  $3900  for  9.6  kbps.  Expansion  to  European  points  was  expected 
later  in  the year.  (ComSatCorp Release 74-21 ; ComSatCorp PAO,  inter- 
view) 
I2 Ap r i l :   Two  A-9  twin  turbofan  aircraft,  Northrop  Corp.’s  unsuccessful 
contenders for the Air  Force close air  support  aircraft, had  been  trans- 
ferred  to  Flight  Research Center, the  FRC  X-Press  reported.  One of  the 
aircraft wouId be used in three research programs:  as a support  aircraft 
in the trailing vortices research program;  as a mother ship to air-launch 
supersonic Firebee  drones  in the  remotely  piloted  research  vehicle pro- 
gram;  and  as  a  test-bed aircraft  in  the  Center’s  nonpropulsive aircraft 
noise  program.  The  second A-9  would  be  used  f o r   spare  parts.  (FRC 
X-Press,  1 2  April 74,Z;  FRC p ro j  off, interview, 21 Feb 75) 
0  T he economic return  from  the  U S .   space program  amoubted to   33% per 
year,  exceeding the  typical yield  from  investments in stocks, bonds, and 
real  estate,  Dr.  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  Johnson  Space Center  Direc- 
tor,  said  in   a  speech  a t   Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute  and  State Univ. 
a t  Blacksburg, Va.  Among returns not  immediately visible to the public 

84l 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
12  April 
were  some  30000  inventions  available  by  the  end  of  the  Apollo pro- 
gram.  The  price  of  Erts  1 Earth  Resources Technology Sa te l l i te - su r -  
less than  50  cents 
veying the  earth  since  its launch  23  July  1972-was 
per  American.  “Given  its  potential  fo r   aiding  us  in  the  coming years, 
who  would not  support  a  program  that  costs less than  a  . . . half-pound 
[one  fourth  kilogram]  of  ground  beef?”  Dr.  Kraft  estimated  that  the 
space  shuttle,  a t   an  annual  cost  of  $5  for  each  American,  was  an   in- 
vestment that would  “pay,  perhaps,  the greatest return to  future genera- 
tions.”  With  such a  vehicle we  could not  only perform  a  variety  of  sci- 
entific  studies  with  immediate  application  to  life  on  earth  but  build 
permanent  space  stations  and  launch  planetary  vehicles and eventually 
starships. The space shuttle program,  with  its  international cooperation, 
would  unite  “many  nations  for  the  benefit of  all.’,  (Text) 
*  The U.S.S.R.’s  Cosmonautics Day and 13th anniversary of  the first manned 
space flight, made by  Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin  in  1961, was marked 
by articles in  the Soviet press. 
Cosmonautics is one of  the most  important  testing  ranges  of  science 
GC  
in  which  many  directions  of  science  and  technology  are  being  syn- 
thesized into a  single constantly perfecting system,” Soviet Academician 
VaIentin Glushko wrote in Pravda. The successes of  cosmonautics in the 
preceding  15  to   20  yrs  had  given  a  powerful  impetus  to  various 
branches  of  knowledge. The  initial  accumulation of  facts by  spacecraft 
had  been  completed.  On  the  agenda  now  was  the  detailed  study  of 
dynamic processes,  the  interconnection of  phenomena,  and  the verifica- 
tion of  hypotheses and models. 
Maj. Gen. Vladimir A.  Shatalov, chief of  cosmonaut training, acknowl- 
edged  in  an   interview  with  Sovietskaya  Rossiya  the  importance  of 
orbital  stations  for  future  space  experiments.  He  also  acknowledged 
that  Soviet  designers  had  not  yet  been  able  to  develop  a  satisfactory 
space shuttle. He  said  the U.S.S.R.  had  no  plans  for  a  manned landing 
on  the  moon.  His  impassioned  defense  of  the  Soviet  space  program 
suggested  that  i t ,   like  the  U.3.  program,  was  under  fire  by  domestic 
critics;  “many millions of  rubles”  had been  saved because of  the use of 
meteorological satellites. 
I n   T rud ,  Academician Boris N.  Petrov, head  of  the Council of  Inter- 
national  Cooperation  in   Space  Exploration  and  Use  under  the  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences,  said  that  manned  flights  “must  become  more 
frequent  and  more  extended”  to  produce  “really  creative  work  for 
specialists  of  many  branches  of  science.”  (Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 16  April 
74, U1-2;  Wren, N Y T ,  1 3  April 74) 
23-23  Apr i l:   NASA  launched Westar 1 (Westar-A) , the  first US. commercial 
domestic  communications  satellite,  for  Western  Union  Telegraph  Co. 
from  Eastern  Test Range at  7:33  pm  EDT  on  a  Thor-Delta launch vehi- 
cle,  the  first  with  the  TR-201  2nd-stage  propulsion  unit.  One  of  the 
nine  Castor  motors  strapped  onto  the  booster  failed  to  jettison  until 
main  engine  cutoff,  decreasing  vehicle  velocity.  Propellant  reserves  in 
the 2nd stage provided sdlicient additional velocity, however, to put the 
satellite in   the planned  transfer  orbit with  a  36 238-km apogee, 230-km 
perigee, and  24.7”  inclination.  Nonmission-related 2nd-stage mv e uv e r -  
ing  experiments,  which  were  to   use  the  propellant  reserves,  were  not 
performed.  NASA’s mission  o b j e c t i v e t o  place  the  satellite  in  a  trans- 
fe r  orbit that would allow onboard propulsion to pIace it in  a stationary 
synchronous  orbit  while  retaining  sufficient  stationkeeping  propulsion 

85 

13-23  April 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
to  meet  mission  lifetime  requirements-was  met  and  the  mission  was 
adjudged successful 23  April. 
Wes tar  1  was  acquired  by  a  mobile  ground  station  a t  9:38  pm  EDT 
and  control  was  turned  over  to   Western  Union.  The  satellite  apogee 
motor was successfully fired a t  5:21  pm  EDT 16 April and Westar 1  was 
placed  in  geosynchronous  orbit  with  a  35 592-km  apogee,  35 166-km 
perigee,  23-hr  35-min period,  and  0.6' 
inclination.  An  onboard  hydra- 
zine  reaction  control  system was  moving  the  satellite  toward  its  final 
position above the equator a t  99'  W longitude. 
Each  of  12  pawponde r s   aboard  Westar  1 could  relay  1200  voice 
circuits, 1 color TV channel with program  audio, or data a t  50  megabits 
per  sec.  The Westar  system-including  one  satellite  to  be  launched  in 
June,  one satellite to  be held  in  reserve,  and  five earth  stations-would 
greatly  increase Western Union's  capacity fo r  commercial and personal 
communications. Expected to be operational in August, the system would 
be the  first  to  interconnect, under  one company, satellites and  an   exist- 
ing continent-wide, computer-switched, multipurpose terrestrial network. 
(NASA  MORS, 19 March 74 ,24  April 74;  GSFC  Wk l y  SSR ,  11-17  April 74; 
NASA  Release  74-77;  McElheny,  NYT,  15 April  74,  1 ;  AP, CSM,  18 
April  74;  SBD,  26 April  74,  322;  GSFC  proj  off,  interview, 7 Nov  75) 
14 April:  Stratospheric contamination  from supersonic aircraft  engines such 
a s   those  fitted  to  the  Anglo-French  Concorde  and  the  Soviet  Tu-144 
might  lower  the  earth's  mean  temperatures,  with  a  catastrophic  effect 
on  agriculture,  and  increase  the  incidence  of  skin  cancer  from  over- 
exposure to ultraviolet radiation, according to a Dept.  of  Transportation 
study  cited  by  the  Washington  Po s t .   I n   a  telephone  interview with  the 
Post  Dr.  Alan Grobecker, manager  of  DOT'S  climatic  impact  assessment 
program,  confirmed the existence of  the study, which was based  on  data 
collected  by  satellites, balloons,  and  instrumented  aircraft.  He  empha- 
sized  tha t   the  pollution  by  the  emission  of  nitrogen  oxide  and  sulfur 
dioxide would have  a  worldwide  impact because  of  the  capacity  of  the 
stratosphere  to  retain  the  pollutants for  nearly  a  year. A  separate Agri- 
cultural Research Service study showed tha t  stratospheric  contamination 
could  cut  temperate  climate  crops  by  60%.  The  DOT paper  would  be 
considered by  committees of  the National Academy of  Sciences and the 
National Academy of  Engineering a t  a special meeting in July.  (Wilson, 
W Post, 1 4  April 74, AS) 
Appointment of  Stephen E. Doyle as NASA$  Deputy Assistant Administrator 
for  International  Affairs  became  effective.  Before  joining  NASA  Doyle 
had been Manager for International Organization Affairs, Office of  Tele- 
communications Policy  in  the  Executive Office  of  the  President.  (NASA 
Release 74-101) 
15 Aprd:  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  had  begun  a  20-mo  investigation 
of  the  vibration  characteristics  of  railroad  freight  cars  as  part  of  an  
extensive study  of  t ra in  dynamics, with the  Federal  Railroad Adminis- 
tration  and  the  American  Association  of  Railroads,  NASA  announced. 
a  $329 000 contract from MsFc-would 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.-under 
make  a mathematical model of  truck-car  dynamics for comparison with 
da ta   from  laboratory  and  operational  tests of  a  freight  ca r   and  com- 
ponents.  (NASA Release 7486) 
*  The  European  Space  Research  Organization  was  investigating  systems 
fo r   all-weather earth  resources  obServations, Aviation  We&   & Space 
Technology  reported. Thomson-csF and British Aircraft Corp. had com- 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

15  April 
pleted  a  nine-month study  of  a  synthetic-aperture radar   satellite with  a 
50-m-resolution imaging sensor.  (A v  W k ,  15 April  74,  11 )  
“Skylab was  an   achievement  that  will  ultimately  benefit  every  inhabitant 
of  this planet,”  Robert Hotz wrote in   an  Av ia t ion   Week  & Space  Tech- 
nology  editorial.  Further,  “in  addition  to  their  constant work  as  space 
mechanics,  the Skylab crews demonstrated that man  is a valuable addi- 
tion  to   the  loop of  scientific experiments and  activities that can be per- 
formed uniquely from space.  . . .  There is no  doubt tha t  man must be 
an  integral  par t  of  any future space reconnaissance system.  . . . 
“But  perhaps the real  essence of  Skylab‘s  performance and its signifi- 
cance  fo r   fu ture   space  operations  we re   in  its  tremendous flexibility.” 
Besides design, planning, and extra equipment, “it was a spirit developed 
between the ground crews with their  considerable a r ray  of  resources and  
the  flight crews who were able  to  focus these resources on  solving their 
problems  aloft.”  One  astronaut had said,  “Skylab worked better  broken 
than anybody had hoped for i f   it was perfect.”  ( A v  W k ,  15  April 7 4 , 9 )  
*  Radioactive  material  like  that  which  had  leaked  from  an   improperly 
shielded container on two 5 and  6 April Delta Air Lines, Inc.,  flights, and 
germs,  bacteria,  and  nerve  gas  were  shipped routinely  on  commercial 
aircraft,  the  Washington  Post  reported.  The  Post  quoted  an  Atomic 
Energy Commission investigation as   saying that  1 million  shipments of 
radioactive material  had  been  made  dur ing  1973. Medical  isotopes had 
accounted  for   95% of  the  total.  On 20 March  the Air Line Pilots Asso- 
ciation  had  asked  the  Federal Aviation Administration to  ban  the s h i p  
ment  of  radioactive  material  by  a ir   temporarily.  (Conlan, W  Po s t ,   1 5  
April 74, A6) 
16  Ap r i l :   “I am sure  life will move  out from the Earth,  probably first to the 
Moon  and  then  to  Mars,”  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator,  said  in  a  speech  reviewing NASA’s planetary  program 
before  the National Space Club.  Just  what  form of  life would  be trans- 
planted, whether man or   some simple organism, would be the subject of 
debate.  Four planets-  Jupiter,  Venus, Mars,  and Mercury-had  already 
been  visited.  The  next  major  event  would  be  the  Viking  landings  on 
Mars in  1976. Historically, two  significant events in  1965 had determined 
the  direction  of  the  planetary program. The first was  c  study a t  Woods 
Hole, Mass.,  which had  recommended that the space program, following 
Apollo,  should  search  for   life  on  the  planets  and  give  first  priority  to  
the   study  of  Mars-while 
also  maintaining a  wide-ranging program  of 
general planetary exploration-because  Mars most closely resembled the 
earth  and   wa s   the  most  likely  to  support  life.  The  second  event,  the  
14  July  1965 flight  of  Mariner  4 past Mars, supported the recommenda- 
tions when  it found evidence of  water in  the  Martian atmosphere. 
“In   retrospect, I think the decision  . . . has been  sound.”  But a major 
decision  that  faced  NASA  this  summer,  one  year  before  the  launch  of 
Mars  continue  to   have  first  priority  in   planetary  exploration?  . . . 
Viking, was whether there should be follow-on Viking missions. “Should 
Clearly,  if   we   find  evidence of  life  on Mars,  . . . Mars  w i l l   have  first 
priority.”  (Text) 
17  Ap r i l :   Soviet scientists had  determined that weightlessness might d iange  
heredity,  Tass reported.  Mustard  seeds  flown  in   space  had   reproduced 
brown instead of  green  seeds. Nikolay Dubinin, Director of  the General 
Genetics Institute  a t  the U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences, was  quoted  as  
87 

17  April 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

saying  that  the  more  complex  the  organism,  the  greater  the  change. 
( UPI,  W Pos t ,  18 April 74 )  
Marshall Space Flight Center had  awarded a $3 850 000 contract modifica- 
tion  to  Rockwell  International  Corp.  for  architectural  and  engineering 
services and  construction  of  test  and  industrial  facilities  for  the  space 
shuttle main  engine, NASA  announced.  (NASA  Release 7 4 9 7 )  
President Nixon announced he would appoint John C.  Sawhill Administra- 
tor  of  the  Federal  Energy  Office.  He  would  succeed William  E.  Simon, 
who  would  be  nominated  Secretary  of  the  Treasury.  Sawhill had  been 
Deputy Administrator  of  EEO  since 4 Dec.  1973.  ( P D ,  22 April 74 ,413 )  
18 Ap r i l :   American Telephone & Telegraph Co.  and  GTE Satellite Corp.  filed 
a  proposal with  the  Federal  Communications Commission to  operate  a 
joint domestic satellite system. The system would serve the contiguous 48  
states and Hawaii and could serve Alaska and Pue r to  Rico through earth 
stations  owned  by  other  companies. A  joint  system would  improve  net- 
work  efficiency and  reduce  the  number  of  earth  stations  to  7,  from  the 
10 required for two separate systems. Three satellites operated by COMSAT 
General Corp.  and  provided  to   AT&T  would  serve the  joint  system  and 
could handle 28 800 simultaneous telephone conversations. The FCC   had 
approved  separate  domestic satellite  systems  for  the  two  companies  1 2  
Sept. 1973, directing them to work together to  integrate the systems and 
negotiate  agreements fo r  handling  communications traffic and equitable 
division  of  revenues  from  jointly  rendered  services.  (Smith,  NYT ,   19 
April 7 4 4 9 )  
18-19  Ap r i l :  Dr.  James C.  Fletcher, NASA  Administrator,  qresented the  NASA 
Distinguished  Service Medal  to  Dale  D.  Myers,  President  of  Rockwell 
International  Corp.  North  American  Aircraft  Operations  Group  and 
former  NASA  Associate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight,  for  his 
contributions  to  the  Skylab program  in  a  Skylab Honor  Awards  Cere- 
mony in Washington, D.C. Nine Headquarters employees and three  from 
Goddard Space Flight  Center  received the Exceptional Service Medal. 
Twenty-six  individuals  and  four  groups  received  awards  in   cere- 
monies at Johnson Space Center. Twenty-six individuals and five groups 
a t  Kennedy Space Center  and  thirty-four individuals  and  six groups  a t  
Marshall  Space Flight  Center  received  awaids  in  ceremonies 19 April. 
(NASA  Ann ; NASA  Release 7 4 9 0  ; Program) 
19 Ap r i l :   Piom&  11, launched  5  April  1973 toward  a  December  1974 en- 
counter with Jupiter,  was retargeted  to pass within 42 000 km of  Jupiter 
and then, with a  gravity assist from the planet, fly  on to Saturn in 1979. 
Ground controllers a t  Ames Research Center commanded the spacecraft's 
onboard thrusters to  fire for 42 min  36 sec, increasing  velocity 230 km 
per  hr.  On  its  new  course,  Pioneer  11  would  pass  Jupiter  nearer  the 
south polar  region,  intersecting the planet's  equatorial plane a t  55", and 
come  three  times  closer  than  Pioneer  10 had  during  its  3  Dec.  1973 
encounter.  (NASA  MOR,  5 Nov  74;  NASA  Release  7 4 9 4 ;   ARC  Release 
7 4 1 0 )  
* The  Saturn  IB  1st stage  for  the  U.S.S.R.-US.  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project 
launch in 1975 left Michoud Assembly Facility for Kennedy Space Center 
on the ocean-going barge Or ion .  The stage would be storsd in the Vehicle 
Assembly Building  until  December,  when  the  launch  vehicle  would  b e  
assembled on its mobile launcher.  (KSC  Release 70-74) 
20  Ap r i l :   The  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Molniya  1-27  communications  satellite 
f rom  Plesetsk into orbit with a 40 705-km apogee, 623-km perigee, 12-hr 
88 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
20  A p d  
17.6-min period,  and 62.9” inclination.  The satellite would help provide 
a  system of: long-range  telephone  and  telegraph  radio  communications 
in  the U.S.S.R.  and would  transmit  Soviet central TV  programs  to   the 
Orbita  network.  (GSFC Whdy  SSR ,   18-24  April  74;  Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 
22 April 74, U1; SF, Sept 74, 394) 
Japan  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  signed  a  civil  aviation  agree- 
ment in Peking  setting up  commercial flights between the two countries. 
Japan  Air Lines Co.,  Ltd.,  would be &le  to fly  to  Peking  and Shanghai. 
Civil Aviation  Administration  of  China  flights  to  Tokyo  would  be  the 
P.R.C.’s  first service to  a  non-Communist country. The P.R.C.  had  pur- 
chased  10  Boeing 707s for  its expanded international service, including 
possible future service to Canada, the U.S.,  and Latin America.  In  addi- 
tion  to  ratification  by   Japan’s  Diet,  technical  details would  have  to  be 
worked  ou t  before  regular  service could  begin.  Within  hours  after  the 
agreement was announced the Foreign Minister of  the Republic of  China 
(Nationalist)  announced  termination  of  service  by  JAL  and  Taiwan’s 
China Air Lines between Taiwan and Japan and a ban on JAL   flights over 
Taiwan.  (Mackenzie,  W Po s t ,   21  April  74,  A l ;   Butterfield, NYT ,   2 1  
April 74, 1 )  
21  A p r i l :   Design  work  on  the  primary  rescue system for  space shuttle pas- 
sengers proceeded  a t   Johnson  Space Center.  A  prototype  “beach  ball” 
large enough for a person to crawl into, zip up,  and pressurize had  been 
demonstrated and given a  go-ahead at NASA  Hq.  in December 1973. As- 
sistant  Chief  for  Shuttle Larry  E.  Bell  in   JSC’S  Crew  Systems Div.  had 
told  a  news  interviewer  the  balls  could  be  packaged  into  cylinders  to  
accompany each passenger aboard the  shuttle in the 1 9 8 0 ~ ~  
“almost  like 
a  parachute.”  Simplicity,  size,  light  weight,  structural  strength  of  the 
ball  shape,  and low cost had  won  approval over expensive and compli- 
cated spacesuits fo r  nonastronauts  on flights and eliminated the require- 
ment fo r  a rescue docking module. 
I n  an emergency, passengers could enter  the b a l l s - e a c h  with  its  own 
hour  o r   two  before  rescue  by  a  second  shuttle.  Oxygen 
window-an 
containers  connected  to  the  shuttle  supply  system would  be  used  until 
just  before  rescue;  a  device would  remove  carbon  dioxide.  Once  dis- 
connected,  each  container  would  last  an   hour ; transfer  through  space 
t o   the  rescue  shuttle  was  expected  to   take  30  min.  (Bell  interview, 
4 March  75 ;  Hill, H Chron, 2 1  Ap r i l7 4 )  
Aerospace companies that had  succeeded in  using  the  system  approach  to  
develop advanced technology  fo r   use  in  space were  encountering  diffi- 
culties  in  the  field  of  urban  mass  transportation,  a  New  Yo rk   T ime s  
article said. Boeing Co.  Aerospace Div.  faced losses of  up  to  $6 million 
on an  automated “people mover”  shuttle system in Morgantown, W.  Va. 
Cost of  the project,  chosen four years  ago as a pilot  application of  aero- 
space management  techniques, had  jumped  from  the  original  estimate 
of  $13.4  million  to  $115 million.  Rohr  Industries,  Inc.,  had  lost  more 
than  $10 million  on  a  project  to  build  450  commuter  cars  for  the  San  
Francisco  Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  System,  which  had  threatened  to  
sue  Rohr  over  late  deliveries  and  alleged  unreliability  of  same  cars. 
Observers had  noted  that  aerospace technologists tended  to  “overengi- 
neer”  transit  systems,  increasing  costs,  aggravating  maintenar.ce, and 
marring  reliability.  I n  addition  there  were  problems  in  converting pro- 
totypes to hardware that  could withstand  the  rigors  of  carrying  throngs 
of  people.  But,  despite the  frustrations,  more  companies  were  entering 

89 

21 April 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
the competition. A significant test  of  how the  aerospace industry  would 
fa re  in   the  next  e ra   of  transit  development  would  be  the  performance 
of  Boeing’s  Vert01 Div.  in   two  projects  to   produce  230  streetcars  for 
Boston  and  San  Francisco  and  100  cars  for  Chicago’s  rapid  transit 
system.  (Lindsey, N Y T ,  21 April 74 ,3:1)  
21-25  Ap r i l :  Observations of Comet Kohoutek in December and January  and 
sudden changes in brightness of  the more recent Comet Bradfield had led 
to  the  theory  that  comets were layered  like onions, Dr.  Edward  P.  Ney, 
Univ. of Minnesota scientist, reported a t  a joint meeting of  the American 
Physical Society and the Optical Society of  America. When some layers 
were exposed,  they  shone brilliantly;  when  a  layer  wore  off,  the  comet 
might abruptly become dim. The onion model would explain why predic- 
tions of Kohoutek’s brilliance were so  inaccurate  and why Bradfield had 
suddenly dimmed to 100th its previous brilliance. 
Dr.  Alastair  G .  W.  Cameron, Harvard  College Observatory  scientist, 
said that  an  enormous spherical  cloud of  comets with  a  combined mass 
20 times that of  Jupiter might lie beyond the planets and form a f a r  more 
massive part of  the universe than the planets. This cloud, the Oort cloud, 
might be a repository fo r  heavy elements formed since the infancy of  the 
Milky Way. 
Dr.  R.  W.  Klebesadel  of  the  Los  Alamos  Scientific Laboratory  said 
that  satellites,  placed  in   a  100000-km orbit  as part  of  the  Air  Force 
Vela series developed to monitor  the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty,  has 
monitored  27  high-intensity  explosions in   space  over  four  years.  The  
explosions,  which  had  produced  unusually  large  amounts  of  gamma 
and x-ray  energy, might  be  in  the  Orion  arm  of  the  galaxy,  where  the 
earth was.  Dr.  Philip  Morrison  of  the Massachusetts Institute  of  Tech- 
nology said nine current theories of  the origin of  the explosions included 
exploding  stars, or  supernovae;  objects  falling into  neutron  stars;  and 
unusually  large  solar  flares  o r   sunstorms  on  distant  stars.  (Sullivan, 
N Y T ,  24 April  74,  13; Shurkin, P  Inq ,  26 April  74,  12) 
22 A p r i l :  An E r t s  1 photo map of  the contiguous 48 states of  the U.S.,  the first 
ever assembled from satellite images, had been completed for NASA  by the 
Dept.  of  Agriculture’s Soil Cartographic Division, NASA  announced. The 
three- by  five-meter map  was  composed froni  595  cloud-free black  and 
white images taken 25 July-31  Oct 1972 from a n  altitude of  912 km  by 
the  multispectral scanner  on  E r t s   I  (launched  by  NASA  23  July  1972). 
The mosaic would provide  a  base for  regional  compilation of  investiga- 
tion  results,  provide  the  first  synoptic  look  a t   the  U.S.  for  scientists 
examining  subcontinental lineaments and  faults,  permit  construction  of 
a national surface water inventory, provide a base  for  a national-vegeta- 
tion-cover  and  continuous-land-classification  inventory,  provide  an 
accurate assessment of  the  national  water  drainage  network,  and  docu- 
ment 1972 national land use. 
The mosaic would be displayed publicly for the first time in  ceremonies 
a t  NASA Hq. 26 April.  (NASA Release 74431) 
0  Reduction-in-force notices  were  delivered  to  397  employees  a t   Marshall 
Space Flight  Center. Another  250  employees received  notices that  they 
would  be  reduced  in  grade.  Earlier,  MSFC  officials had  projectd  a  per- 
sonnel reduction  of  about  500  employees, but  retirements  and  attrition 
since then had  reduced the number  required.  (MSFC Release 7 6 6 8 )  
NASA  had  applied fo r  a patent  on a  special absorptive coating developed by 
a Marshall Space Flight Center engineer. It would be applied to aluminum 
90 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

22  April 

panels used  in  the  construction of  the solar heating  and  cooling system 
being demonstrated a t  MSFC.  The coating absorbed 93% of  the total solar 
heat, which was transferred  to water circulated through  flow passages to  
a storage tank fo r  use in  heating or cooling;  it reradiated  only 6% of the 
infrared heat.  (NASA Release 74-96) 
*  The Air  Force was  making additional efforts  in   the  application  of  boron 
and graphite composites in  1974-40  take  advantage of  weight  savings, 
higher performance, and lower costs-the  Air  Force Systems Command 
announced.  Tests  would  include  a  full-sized  composite  wing  for   the 
YF-16  prototype  lightweight  fighter,  a  composite  speedbrake for   the  
F-15  air  superiority  fighter,  and  a  composite  outer  wing  for   the  A-7 
attack  fighter aircraft. The composite maneuver  augmentation program 
called  f o r  the design, manufacture, and evaluation of  an  advanced com- 
posite wing on a remotely piloted test vehicle.  (AFSC  Release OIP  029.74) 
23 April:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched eight  Cosmos satellites on  a  single booster 
from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters were: 
Cosmos  641--1483-km  apogee,  1387-km perigee,  114.6-min  period, 
and  74.0"  inclination. 
Cosmos  642-1481-km 
apogee,  1319-km perigee,  113.8-min  period, 
and 74.0"  inclination., 
Cosmos  643-1482-km 
apogee,  1353-km perigee,  114.2-min  period, 
and 74.0"  inclination. 
Cosmos  644-1483-km 
apogee,  1335-km perigee,  114.0-min  period, 
and 74.0"  inclination. 
Cosmos  645-1483-km 
apogee,  1369-km perigee,  114.4-min  period, 
and 74.0"  inclination. 
apogee,  1403-km perigee,  114.8-mins period, 
Cosmos  646-1486-km 
and  74.0"  inclination. 
Cosmos  647-1484-km 
apogee,  1423-km perigee,  115.0-min  period, 
and 74.0"  inclination. 
Cosmos  648-1480-km 
apogee,  1439-km perigee,  115.2-min  period, 
and  74.0"  inclination. 
The press  reported  observers believed  the  satellites would  operate  in  
support of  Soviet naval communications.  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR, 18-24  April 
74 ;  SBD, 25 April 74, 313) 
*  Sky lab  4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. 
Pogue  briefed  members  of  the  House  Committee  on  Science  and  As- 
tronautics  on  the   Skylab program:  Carr   said  that,  in   space,  material 
samples  such a s  paper,  teflon,  nylon,  and  neoprene-covered nylon  were 
urethane,  however,  burned  "like  something soaked  in   gasoline.  . . .  I 
self-extinguishing when  ignited,  because  of  a  lack  of  convection.  Poly- 
am very  certain  that  we  will  never  ever  see  polyurethane foam  in   a 
spacecraft."  Dr. Gibson said that a leg muscle problem that had  hindered 
previous Skylab crews  in   their  ability  to   walk  and  run   upon  return  to  
earth had  been  solved by a very crude treadmill  device used to  simulate 
walking  and  running. "We  worked  a t  it every day, and the condition we 
came back  in  was  good  testimony  to   the  utility  of  tha t   device." 
Pogue narrated a  dramatic presentation  of  slides taken from tb Sky- 
l ab  Wo rk shop -o f   mountainsides eroded by stripmining, forests denuded 
by   the   clearcutting  of  timber,  cities  obscured by  smog,  and  rivers  and 
lakes  muddied  by   pollution  and  silt.  He  said  tha t   the  astronauts  had  
been  constantly  amazed  how  clearly  such  effects  could  be   seen  from 
91 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1974 
23  April 
their  perch  in  space.  “It has  an   emotional feedback.”  Carr  said  that  i t  
had  become  “very,  very  clear  . . . that  we   don’t  have  a  whole  lot  of 
places  to   live  comfortably on  this  Ear th   and we  must  take care  of  it.” 
Dr.  Gibson  said that  the  crew would  like to  see future missions make 
more use  of  man’s capability to  use his own  judgment in  data collection. 
“We would  like to  see instruments with high-data capability which could 
be  pointed  and  selectively operated.”  Carr  said  that,  “if  you  a re  going 
to  use man  in  space, he is going to be happy i f   he can  use his own  judg- 
ment and . . . is productive. If  he is nothing but a switch twiddler work- 
ing  against  the clock, he is going to become very bored, and he is going 
to  have psychological problems.”  (Transcript) 
Dr.  Robert R.  Gilruth,  former  Johnson Space Center  Director  and  retired 
NASA  Director  of  Key  Personnel  Devdopment, was  elected  to  the   Na- 
tional  Academy  of  Sciences during  its  111th Annual Meeting.  I n   addi- 
tion  to  Dr.  Gilruth,  95 other  scientists and engineers, one posthumously, 
were  elected  in   recognition  of  their  achievements  in   original  research. 
(NAS Release, 23 April 74)  
Ap r i l :   The  U.S.S.R.  launched  Meteor  17 meteorological  satellite  from 
Plesetsk  into  orbit  w i th   a  892-km  apogee,  863-km perigee,  102.5-min 
period,  and  81.2’  inclination.  The  satellite carried equipment to  obtain 
cloud- and  snow-cover images on  the sunward  and  shadow sides of  the 
globe  as well  as  data  on  thermal  energy  reflected  and  emitted by  the 
ear th  and the atmosphere.  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,  18-24  April 74; Tass, FBIS- 
SOV, 25 April 74, U1: SF, Sept 74,395) 
NASA’s‘Plum- Brook  Station  had  tested  an  experimental hypersonic ramjet 
engine in  a  hypersonic wind  tunnel with  simulated flight conditions  of 
mach  5, 6,  and  7,  Lewis  Research  Center  announced.  The water-cooled 
r a a j e t  engine, a  cooperative effort  of  LeRC  and  Garrett  Corp.,  was  de- 
signed to  operate eEciently from mach  4 to mach  8 by  using hydrogen 
fuel, a  translating  spike inlet, and both subsonic and supersonic combus- 
tion  modes.  The  tests  had  yielded valuable basic  information  for possi- 
ble future aircraft development.  (LeRC Release 74-14) 
25  Ap r i l :   The  House  passed  the  NASA  authorization  bill,  H.R.  13998, by  a 
vote  of  341 to 37. The total authorization was $3.259  billion,  $6 million 
over  the  $3.253  billion  suggested  by  the  House  Committee  on  Science 
and  Astronautics  1 0  April  and  $12  million  above  the  Administration 
request of  $3.247 billion.  On  the floor, the House had  approved an  addi- 
tional  $3.9  million  for  research  in  coal  extraction,  coal  energy conver- 
sion,  and mine  safety.  An  additional  $2  million  was  authorized for  re- 
search  in  hydrogen production  and  use.  (CR,  25 April  74,  H3201-31) 
Quasars-ce les t ia l   objects  thought  to  be  among  the  oldest,  most  distant, 
and most  radiant bodies observable from the earth-ould 
also be mani- 
festations  of  black  holes,  Dr.  Elden  c. Whipple,  Jr.,  National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration scientist,  and Dr.  Thomas E.  Holzer  of 
the National Center  for Atmospheric Research reported in a paper a t  the  
jo in t   meeting  of  the  American  Physical  Society-Optical  Society  of 
America.  Material  falling  into  a  massive  black  hole  could  produce the 
visible  effects of  a  quasar without requiring  the magnitudes of  distance, 
velocity,  age,  and   radiating  power  usually  attributed  fo  these  objects. 
(NOAA  Release 74-63) 
*  The Federal Aviation Administration proposed a new safety regulation that 
would  require  all  shipments of  radioactive  material  on  passenger  and  
cargo  aircraft  to  be  inspected  for   leakage and   scanned  with  radiation 
92 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

25  April 
monitoring  instruments  before  flight.  On  passenger  flights,  radiation 
monitors would  check  the  cabin  floor  above  the  cargo  hold  before  de- 
parture  and  the  cargo  compartment after  the  aircraft  had  landed.  The 
FAA proposal had  been  prompted  by  incidents  of  improper  packaging 
that  had   exposed  passengers and   crew members  to   higher-than-normal 
radiation  levels [see 9-10  April].  (FAA Release 74-59) 
26  Ap r i l :   The  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Molniyu  11-9  communications  satellite 
from Plesetsk into orbit with  a do 700-km apogee, 599-km perigee,  12-hr  
17.0-min period,  and  62.9"  inclination. The satellite would  help provide 
a  system of  long-range telephone and telegraph radio communications in 
the  U.S.S.R.  and  would  transmit  Soviet  central  TV programs  to  the 
Orbita network.  (GSFC  WMy  SSR ,  25 April-1  May  74;  Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 
30 April 74 ;  U1 ;  SF ,  Sept. 74 ,395)  
*  Data  from Pioneer  10, launched 2 March  1972 toward  a  3 Dec.  1973 en- 
counter  with  Jupiter,  had  indicated  that  sulfur  was  one  possible  ele- 
ment  in   the  surface  composition of  Jupiter's  moon  Io,  Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center  announced.  Scientists  a t   MSFC  had  studied  the  reflective 
properties  of  Io  and  concluded that  sulfur was  one of  the  few materials 
that  could have  the  high  reflectivity  and  strong  absorption features  ob- 
served. The  theory would  be tested by  measuring the  changes in  reflec- 
tivity  of  sulfur  a t  different wavelengths and temperatures and observing 
the  reflectivity  change  of  Io  in   the  fall  when  Jupiter  would  be  in   the 
evening sky.  ( MSFC  Release 74-72) 
*  Wallops  Station, Wallops Island,  Va.,  was  renamed Wallops Flight  Center 
to   describe  its mission  and  operations more accurately. The Center had  
responsibility  for  development and  launch of  scientific payloads,  using 
boosters ranging from the small Arcas t o  the four-stage, solid-propellant 
Scout. The installation  had been established in  1945 as the Pilotless Air- 
craft Research Station of  the National Advisory Committee for Aeronau- 
tics  and  had   served  as   a  base  for   launching small  rockets.  After  NASA 
had  been  established  in  1958, it became known  as  Wallops Station  and 
assumed  an  expanded  mission  in   support  of  space  flight  programs. 
(NASA  Ann, 25 April 74) 
0  NASA  had  awarded the  Planning  Research  Corp.,  Huntsville,  Ala.;  a  one- 
year  $6-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract,  with  an   3dditional  one-year 
$10-million  option,  to   provide  design engineering support  services for  
development,  test,  and   mission  operations  primarily  in   support  of  the 
space shuttle  at  Kennedy  Space Center,  KSC  announced.  (KSC   Release 
75-74) 
*  NASA  had   selected International  Business Machines  Corp.  Federal Systems 
Div.  for  a  $636 000  one-year contract,  with  options for  renewal, to  pro- 
vide system engineering and software development support to the Design 
Engineering  Directorate  a t   Kennedy  Space  Center  for   space  shuttle 
launch processing systems.  IBM  would  help  provide  a  flexible,  reliable, 
and  cost-effective means  of  system-testing,  launch  operations  control, 
and  status  monitoring of  the  space  shuttle,  ground  support  equipment, 
and facilities during ground operations.  (NASA  Release 74-104) 
0  The U.S.S.R. was believed to have orbited between 8 and 10 radar-carrying 
satellites  in   the   last  four  years  that  could  monitor  surface  ship  traffic 
around  the  globe,  Thomas O'Toole  said  in   a  Washington Pos t   article. 
Intelligence  sources believed  the  satellites were  still  experimental and 
par t   of  an   effort  to  monitor  submerged  Polaris  submarines. One  radar  
satellite, Cosmos 626, launched 27 Dec.  1973 into  an  orbit 264-km high, 
93  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
26  April 
separated into two parts 11 Feb. One part moved to a higher 382-km orbit 
and  was  thought  to  be  the  power  supply  for  the  orbital  radar,  using 
polonium 210, a  “hot”  source of  radioactive heat that  could generate a s  
much  a s  2000 kw  of  electricity by  thermoelectricity.  ( W Po s t ,   26 April 
74, A l )  
27  ApriZ-5  Ma y :  Two  full-scale models of  the  Spacelab manned  orbital  lab- 
oratory, to be  developed by  the European  Space Research Organization 
for use with the shuttle, were shown to the international press and public 
fo r  the first time a t  the  1974 German Aerospace Show in Hanover, West 
Germany. Visitors were able to  see interior  a s  well as the exterior equi  - 
ment of  the pallet and pressurized laboratory.  A 1 :50 scale model of  t l!  e- 
space shuttle was  also on  display.  (ESRO  Release, 22 April  74) 
29  A p r i l :  Bacteria found frozen in Antarctic ice and soil for  a possible 1 mil- 
lion  years  had  grown  and  reproduced  in  the  laboratory  when  put  into 
nutrient  fluids,  the  National  Science Foundation  announced.  If  the  es- 
timate  of  the  age  proved  correct,  the  bacteria  would  be  the  oldest  ex- 
amples of  life ever found on the earth.  Results of  the  project,  spdnsored 
by  NSF  and  NASA’s  extraterrestrial  life  detection  program,  would  add 
weight  to  the  theory  that  some  forms  of  life might  b e   frozen  into  the 
permafrost  of  planets  such  a s  Mars.  The  bacteria  had  been  found  a t   a 
depth of  about 130 m near the main US. base on Ross Island. Later sam- 
ples also had been found  in Taylor Valley 95 km away. A senior scientist 
in  the project,  Dr.  Roy  E.  Cameron of  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  said 
in   a  telephone  interview  with  the  New  Yo rk   T imes   that  rod-shaped, 
club-shaped,  and  spherical  specimens  grew  and  reproduced,  but  one 
type, particularly  interesting because it had been capable of  spontaneous 
movement,  could  not  be  made  to  reproduce.  (NSF  Release  74-155; 
Schmeck, NYT ,  30 April 74) 
*  Dr.  James R.  Schlesinger, Secretary  of  Defense,  announced  plans  to   con- 
sider full-scale development of  an air combat fighter  (ACF )   as an alterna- 
tive to  costly tactical  aircraft.  The best  option,  he  said, would  be  to  fol- 
low  the  Air  Force  lightweight  fighter  prototype  program-including 
the YF-16  and YF-17-with 
an  ACF  decelopment  program.  Advocates 
later  said  the  ACF  could  defend  bases  from  fighter  attack  while  larger 
aircraft such as the F-4 and F-15  carried the battle to an enemy hundreds 
of  kilometers away.  (DOD  Release 171-74;  AP,  W Po s t ,  30 April 74, A6) 
*  Total  employment  in  the  aerospace  industry  was  expected  to  drop  back 
to  948 000 positions in June  1974 after  a temporary increase during the 
last  quarter  of  1973, according  to  the  semiannual  forecast  released by 
the  Aerospace  Industries  Assobiation.  September  1973  payrolls  had 
been  up  4000 positions  over the  June  1973 level of  949 000; December 
employment had  added  another 9000 positions;  end of the year employ- 
ment  totaled  962 000  workers,  the  highest  level  since  1970.  (M U   Re- 
lease, 29  April  74) 
*  The  airline  industry  could  not  count  on  “quantum  jumps”  in  technology 
to   ease  inflation  woes,  Aviation  Week   &  Space  Technology  quoted 
former  astronaut  Frank  Borman,  Senior  Vice  President  of  Operations 
f o r  Eastern  Airlines,  Inc.,  a s  saying  in Washington, D.C.  Eastern’s  fur- 
lough  of  more  than  4000  employees over  the  past  several months was 
a  “sign  of  the  austerity  the  industry must  accept to  offset inflation.”  He 
said  service might have  to  be  more  spartan  and less frequent.  (Aw   W k ,  
29 April 74 ,  15) 

94 

30 April 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
30  Ap r i l :   Johnson  Space  Center  announced  two  personnel  changes:  Astro- 
naut John W.  Young, veteran of  four space flights, had been named Act- 
ing Chief of  the Astronaut Office in the Flight Operations Directorate. He 
was replacing  former  Astronaut  Office  Chief  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  who 
would serve as senior adviser to Young. 
Astronaut  Russell  L.  Schweickart had  been  named  Director  of  User 
Affairs  a t   NASA  Hq.,  effective  1  May,  replacing  Albert  T.  Christensen, 
who would return to private industry. The User Affairs Office maintained 
close ties with users of  NASA’s applications program and ensured a flow of 
information  and  that  the  programs were responsive to  user needs.  (JSC 
Releases 74-71 ; 74-72) 
The House of  Representatives passed  the  special  energy  research  and  de- 
velopment  appropriations  bill,  H.R.  14434, by  a  vote  of  392  to  4. The 
bill  appropriated  funds  to  various  agencies,  including  $8.9 million  to  
NASA,  fo r  energy R&D  in N 1975. Of  the NASA  total,  $4.5 million would 
be  to  implement the  Solar  Heating  and  Cooling Demonstration Act  if 
enacted. An amendment to  appropriate an  additional  $1 million to NASA 
was defeated by voice vote.  ( C R ,  30 April 74, H3350-84) 
*  A  portable, remote, patient-monitoring device called the Vitasign Attendant 
Monitor  had  ben  developed by  a NASA  Biomedical Application Team  a t  
Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, Tex., using monitoring tech- 
niques developed for manned space flight, NASA  announced. The monitor, 
commercially available a t   a  moderate cost, operated by  three electrodes 
placed  on the  patient’s  chest. A sudden change in  the electrocardiogram 
signal  or  the  respiration  rate  automatically  alerted  medical attendants. 
(NASA  Release 74-64) 
NASA  had  selected  Computer  Sciences Corp.,  Falls  Church, Va.,  to  negoti- 
ate  a  three-year  $6.2-million  cost-plus-award-fee contract  fo r   central 
computing  support  at  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  NASA  announced. 
csc would provide software support for manned and unmanned missions 
in  real-time mission programs,  network scheduling, and acquisition-data 
generation  and  transmission  and  would  monitor  and  control  display 
programs.  (NASA  Release 74-113) 
During  Apri2:  Skylab Program  Director William C. Schneider and the  three 
Skylab crews had been selected as recipients of  the 1973 Robert J.  Collier 
Trophy  for  “proving  beyond  question  the  value  of  man  in   future  ex- 
plorations  of  space  and  the  production  of  data  of  benefit  to  all  the 
people  on  earth,”  the  National  Aeronautic Association announced. The 
Collier  Committee-while 
recognizing contributions  to  the  Skylab pro- 
gram  by  the  more  than  2 60 0 0   engineers,  scientists,  flight  controllers, 
and  technicians-also  had  unanimously  agreed  that  the  trophy  should 
be presented to Schneider on behalf of  the crews for his leadership in this 
L C  exceedingly  complex  enterprise.’’  The  trophy  was  presented  by  Vice 
President  Gerald  R.  Ford  in   Washington,  D.C.,  ceremonies  4 June. 
(NAA  News ,  April  74)  
0  The  report  For  the  Benefit  of  A l l   Mankind:  The   Practical  Returns  from 
Space  was  released  by   the  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astro- 
nautics:  America’s  space  program  could  stand  on  its  own  feet  a s   a 
heroic  manifestation  of  the  evolutionary progress  of  humanity- toward 
L6 
a  higher  and  better  life.”  During  1973 more  than  2000  new  examples 
of space-developed innovations and techniques had been  reported  under 
technology utilization program.  Since the proqram’s  inception 11 
NASA’s 
yrs  ago,  more  than  30000   items  had  been  reported.  Hundreds  of  new 

95 

During  April 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

products and applications had  become a par t  of  daily life. Under liberal- 
ized licensing procedures, NASA had  granted five exclusive patent licenses 
during  the  year,  the   largest  since  the   inception  of  the  program.  I n  
addition to  publications announcing innovations, NASA’s seven Regional 
Dissemination Centers worked  directly  with  2000 companies each year. 
In   1973  more  than  57000   industrial  inquiries  had  been  handled. 
(Com P r in t )  
*  Aircraft stalls and  spins, greatest cause of  fatal general-aviation accidents, 
had   been  intensively studied  for  the past  18 mos,  NASA  said  in  a  report 
on  its general-aviation technology  program.  More than  1000 spin  tests 
had   been  made  i n  Langley  Research  Center’s  spin  tunnel;  designs for  
test  a ircraf t   were  nearly  complete.  Airport  traffic  flow  and  pilot  ap- 
proach-and-landing performance also were under  study, and a  program 
offering more  precise  flight  path  control  and  reduced  pilot  workload 
had   significantly  improved  pilot  landing  ability.  A  five-year program 
was  developing  better  training  methodology  to  reduce  pilot  errors. 
(NASA  Fact Sheet) 

96 

May  1974 

1 May:  Kennedy Space Center had  awarded  a  $1 228 000 contract  to  Seelye 
Stevenson Value and Knecht, Inc.,  for the design of  an orbiter processing 
facility  and  modifications to  the  Vehicle Assembly Building to  support 
assembly  and  integrated  checkout  of  the  space  shuttle, KSC   announced. 
VAB modifications would  include  redesigning  high  bays  3  and  4  to  ac- 
commodate  complete  shuttles  and  widening  the  north  door  to  permit 
orbiter  entry.  The  design  work  was  to  be  completed within  30  days  of 
notice of  the award.  (KSC   Release 77-74) 
2 M a y :   A full-scale simulated crash of  an aircraft with a crew of  four lifelike 
dummies was successfully completed at Langley Research Center as pa r t  
of  f ive  years of tests in a program to  study the crash-worthiness of  light, 
general-aviation  aircraft.  The  aircraft,  a  surplus  twin-engine  Piper 
Navajo,  was  suspended from  the  top  of  the  test  facility  and  swung by 
cables into  the  ground  at 97  km per  hr.  An  umbilical cable fed data  on 
structural response back to   a  computer. The program was a cooperative 
e f fo r t  with  the  Federal Aviation Administration  and private  industry to  
develop structural  design  techniques  to  improve  the  capability  of  light 
aircraft  to  withstand  crash  conditions  and  to  increase the  likelihood of 
passenger  survival.  (NASA   Release  74-107  ; Newport  News,  Va.,  T ime s  
Herald, 9 May 74) 
*  NASA  announced  the  appointment  of  Dr.  David  L.  Winter  a s  Director  of 
Life  Sciences succeeding Dr.  Charles A.  Berry, who had  announced his 
retirement 21 Dec.  1973 but  remained with  NASA until April. Dr. Winter 
would manage programs  in biomedical and bioscience research, medical 
aspects of  manned space flight operations, man-machine integration,  life 
science  applications,  aeronautical  life  sciences,  extraterrestrial  life  re- 
search, and occupational medicine. He had  been Deputy Director of  Life 
Sciences a t  Ames Research Center.  (NASA  Release 74-118) 
0  Controversy over  the  parking  position  of  Western  Union  Telegraph  CO.'S 
second  satellite-Westar-B, 
growing, 
scheduled  for  June  launch-was 
the  Wall Street  Journal reported. Western Union had requested that the 
Federal  Communications Commission  assign  the  satellite  a  119" west 
longitude  position,  but  American  Telephone 81  Telegraph  Co.  had  peti- 
tioned  the  FCC   to deny the request. AT&T  would  like to use that position 
fo r  one  of  three  comsats it planned  to  have in  operation by  early  1976. 
Positions  were  limited ; communications  satellites  occupied  orbits 
35 500-35  900  km  above the  equator,  and  positions  between  119" and 
138" west  longitude  served  the  continental  US . ,   Hawaii,  and  Alaska 
best.  I n  addition, comsats had to be spaced about 5" apart to avoid inter- 
ference with each other.  (Jacobs, W S J ,  2 May 74)  
Dr. Robert  C.  Seamans, Jr.,  former NASA Deputy Administrator  a d  Secre- 
ta ry  of  the Air Force, had been reelected to a four-year term a s  President 
of  the  National  Academy of  Engineering,  NAE  announced. He was  first 
elected  to  the  office  in  May  1973  for  a  one-year term.  (NAE   Release,  2 
May  74) 

97 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
3  May 
3 May :   Kennedy Space Center had  awarded a $382 000  contract to  General 
Electric Co.  for  a  multispectral-image-analysis system for  data from the 
E r t s   I  Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite  ( in   orbit  since  23  July 
1972) , from  Skylab’s earth  resources  experiment  package  (carried  on 
the Orbital Workshop in  1973), and from remote-sensing aircraft.  (KSC 
Release 80-74) 
4-5  M a y :   The  Lower  Atmosphere  Composition  and  Temperature  Experi- 
ment  (LACATE)  balloon was launched a t  12:00 midnight  EDT  by  a  joint 
Government-industry team from White Sands Missile Range in a Langley 
Research  Center  project.  An  onboard  10-band  infrared  radiometer, 
being  tested  for  use  on  the  planned  Nimbus-G  satellite, measured  ver- 
tical  profiles  of  radiance  emitted  by  the  earth’s  atmospheric  limb.  The 
profiles  would  provide  basic  data  on  temperature,  ozone,  nitrogen  di- 
oxide, water  vapor,  nitric  acid, nitrous oxide, methane,  and  particles  in 
the upper  atmosphere and lower stratosphere, where high-flying je t   air- 
craft  operated.  The  183-m-long, 137-m-wideY helium-filled balloon-the 
largest ever  launched from wSMR-reached 
its maximum stable altitude 
of  50  km  three  hours  after  launch.  Measurements were  made  before, 
during, and after  sunrise so  that  both  day  and night  atmospheric effects 
could  be  studied.  At  flight  termination  the  gondola  and  its  parachute 
were released from the balloon  and returned  to  the  earth.  (Lang l e y  Re -  
searcher, 26 April 7 4 , l ;  LaRC  PIO,  interview, 20 Jan 75) 
6 May:   NASA  FY  1975 authorization  bill H.R.  13998 was reported  to the Sen- 
ate by  the  Senate Committee on  Aeronautical  and  Space Sciences. The 
Committee  authorization  of  $3.267  billion  was  $8.145  million  higher 
than  that  passed  by the House 25 April.  It was  equal t o  1% of  the total 
FY  1975 Federal  budget  and  was  $0.5  billion  below  the  constant-level 
NASA  budget  endorsed  by  Congress two  years  earlier.  The  Committee 
had  added $16 million to NASA’s 4 Feb. budget  request, to  fund procure- 
ment  and  launch  of  a  third  Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite 
(ERTS-C) for  continuity  of  remote-sensing data.  The  Committee  also 
had  added $6 million tQ support  activities under  way  and  the  initiation 
and application  of  new  ideas  in  energy and  environmental  areas.  I t   re- 
fused to  concur  in  $20 million  added by  the  House to  the  space shuttle 
program.  (S Rpt 93-818) 
6-10  May :  The possibility of  self-sufficient colonies of  men  in space was  dis- 
cussed  a t   a  conference of  physicists,  astronauts,  and  space  flight  tech- 
nologists a t  Princeton  Univ.  Dr.  Gerald K .  O’Neill,  Princeton  professor 
of  physics,  suggested  that  a  colony  for.2000  persons  could  be  con- 
structed  on  a  space  station  a t   the  point  in  the  moon’s  orbit  where  the 
gravitational  fields of  the earth and the moon balanced. The cylindrical 
station  could  be  built  within  15 to  20  yrs  using  the  space  shuttle  to 
transport  the 9000 metric  tons  of  necessary building  materials  from the 
earth.  The  abundant  materials  available  on  the  moon  could  be  trans- 
ferred  by  a  cargo-launching system.  Dr.  O’Neill  pointed  out  that  “vir- 
tually  unlimited”  resources  existed  in  space,  including  a  continuous 
source of  energy  from  the  sun  and  great  chunks  of  almost  pure  uickel- 
iron  from  the  Asteroid  Belt.  Increasingly  large  and  cor,:plex  stations 
could ensure that most “dirty”  industry could be  operating  off  the earth 
by  the  middle of  the  21st century.  Space colonies could  also  ensure the 
continuity  of  the  human  race.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,   13 May  74,  1 ; OMSF, 
interview,.Feb 75) 

98 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
6-21  M a y  
6-21  May:  Fifteen  nations,  including  the U.S.,  signed  an  international con- 
vention for the protection of  copyrighted signals transmitted  by  satellite, 
following  a  week-long  international  conference  in  Brussels,  Belgium. 
Each  contracting  country  undertook  to  prevent  any  earth  station  in  its 
territory  from picking up  and redistributing satellite signals without au- 
thority. Representatives of  60 nations had established the text of  the con- 
vention a t  the conference sponsored by the United Nations  Educational, 
Scientific,  and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO )   and  the  World  Intel- 
lectual Property  Organization.  The  convention would  remain  open  fo r  
signatures until March 1975. I t  would come into force three months after 
ratification  by  five signatory  states.  (Rpt to House Com on  Sci & Astro, 
Com Print, July 74) 
7 Ma y :   President  Nixon  signed  H.R.  11793, the  Federal  Energy  Adminis- 
tration  Act  of  1974,  into  Public  Law  19-275,  creating  the  Federal 
Energy Administration  to  replace  the Federal  Energy Office.  I n  signing 
the  bill  President  Nixon  said  that  the  FEA  would  provide  a more  firmly 
based  organization  to  carry  out  the  responsibilities of  the  F E O  through 
30 June  1976, including  fuel allocation  and  pricing  regulation,  energy 
data  collection  and  analysis,  and  broad  energy planning,  with  particu- 
lar  emphasis  on  conservation  and  expansion  of  energy  supplies.  (PD, 
13 May 7 4 , 4 9 8 4 9 9 1  
*  New  synthetic materials developed from advanced aircraft research a t  Ames 
Research Center could be  applied  to  civil aircraft  tires  and  automobile 
brakes  to  improve  wear  and  performance,  NASA  announced.  A  new 
polymer, resistant  to heat buildup  and the consequent frictional deterio- 
ration,  promised  up  to  10  times  the  normal  wear  for  braking  systems. 
And  another  new  polymer,  with  unique  molecular  properties,  might 
provide  aircraft tires  that  could make  as many  as 200  landings,  instead 
of  the  customary  100, before  retreading  was  necessary.  The  new  ma- 
terials  would  be  tested  in   fleets of  hard-use  Government trucks  and  in 
commercial  airline  service  using  Boeing  ‘727  aircraft.  (NASA  Release 
74-117;  ARC  Chem  Research Proi  Off, interview, 1 2  March  74) 
*  Former  astronaut  John  H.  Glenn,  Jr.,  defeated  Sen.  Howard  M.  Metzen- 
baum  in  the  Ohio  Democratic primary  in  his  third  try  for  nomination 
to  the U.S.  Senate. Glenn’s  first t ry  f o r  a  Senate seat in  1 9M  had ended 
when  injuries  from  a  fall  forced  him  out  of  the  primary.  In   1970 
Metzenbaum defeated Glenn in  the primary. Glenn became the first U.S. 
a s t q n a u t   to  orbit  the  earth  20  Feb.  1962.  (Farrell,  NYT,  9 May  74, 
2:  A&A   1964; Hope,  W Star, 6 May  70,  A l )  
8 May:  Siegbert B.  Poritzky, Special Assistant for Systems and Research for 
the  Air  Transport Association, presented U.S.  scheduled airlines’ views 
on NASA’s role and responsibility to the aircraft industry, before a House 
Committee  on  Appropriations’  Subcommittee on  HUD-Space-Science- 
Veterans hearing on FY 1975 appropriations.  Poritzky said i t  was NASA’s 
responsibility  to  build  a  technology base  for  aeronautics  through  inno- 
vative independent research in addition to undertaking directed research 
in  response  to  specific  problems.  Also  vitally  important  was NASA’s re- 
sponsiveness to  the  needs  of  other  agencies.  Airlines  recommended  a 
$24.5-million  increase  in  funding  for  NASA’s aeronautical  programs- 
for  propulsion  environment-impact  minimization,  aircraft  operzltions, 
alternative fuels, wake-vortex minimization, and noise research. 
James  J.  Hartford,  Executive Secretary  of  the American  Institute  of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, testified that some cuts in the NASA budget 
99 

8  May 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

were “penny wise and pound foolish.” Additional but “relatively modest” 
funding  would  prevent  the  High  Energy  Astronomical  Observatory 
( HEAO)   program-which  was  to  investigate  the  scientifically  exciting 
black holes in  space-from 
“limping along.”  Scientists had  been  skepti- 
cal  of  the  usefulness  of  the  space  shuttle  to  science,  but  the  SkyIab 
Apollo  Telescope Mount  discoveries had  so  f a r   exceeded  expectations 
that  astronomers  ‘‘could  hardly  wait”  for  the  Large  Space Telescope, 
planned for launch on the shuttle. “That project  unified the space science 
community” a s  “nothing ever did in the past.” 
Other  “logical  follow-ons”  to  the  approved  program  were  urged: 
Mariner  Jupiter-Uranus  1979  mission,  Jupiter  orbiter,  Venus  atmos- 
pheric  probe,  and  a  follow-on  to  the  Viking  Mars  1975 with  a  rover 
capability. 
Hartford  also  suggested  that  NASA  and  other  Government  agencies 
were not  doing  enough work  in  space applications. Cuts in  NASA’s com- 
munications satellite research  and development program had  been based 
on  the  incorrect  assumption  that  private  industry  could  take  on  full 
comsat  R&D  with  no  further  Government  stimulus.  Early  commercial 
expIoitation of  communications RC?D  had  been  rapid  only because Gov- 
ernment  research  had  reduced risks  to  an  acceptable level.  Competition 
was now  coming from Canadian, Japanese, and European organizations 
with  “a  lot  of  government  backing”  who  had  developed  a  technical 
capability  approaching  that  of  the  U S .   and  were  willing  to  take  high 
risks.  (Transcript) 
Skyrocketing fuel  prices had  added  almost  $1.5 billion  to  the  cost  of  pro- 
ducing  aluminum,  titanium,  and  magnesium,  threatening  serious  inff a- 
tion  for  military  aircraft programs  and NASA’s space shuttle, the  Vm h -  
ing ton   Post  reported.  The  price  of  aluminum  had  jumped  from  6.5 
cents  fo r   a  half  kilogram  to  31.5  cents  in  the  preceding  six  months. 
One  aerospace  company was  quoted  a s  telling  the  Pentagon  and  NASA 
that  the  rising  aluminum  prices would  increase  its program  costs 16%. 
Grumman Aircraft  Corp. had  said i t  was paying 25%  more for titanium 
and  aluminum  than  one  year  ago.  Grumman manufactured  six models 
of  aircraft,  including  the  Navy’s  F-14,  which  used  more  titanium  than 
any  other  aircraft.  Rockwell  International  Corp.  had  raised  the  esti- 
mated  delivery  cost  of  each  of  its  B-1  bombers  from  $45  million  to 
$61.5 million,  a t  least partly  because of  soaring aluminum and titanium 
prices.  Each  B-1  required  12 000  kg  of  titanium  and  24 000  kg  of 
aluminum.  (O’Toole, W Pos t ,  8 May 74 )  
0  Methods  developed  to  analyze  images  of  the  earth  taken  by  the  Erts  1 
Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite  (launched  23  July  1972)  had 
been  adapted  to  enhance  x-rays  for  medical  use,  NASA  announced. The 
new  technique,  developed  by  a  NASA  cooperative  student  a t   Kennedy 
Space Center,  included  a  microdensitometer that  scanned the  film  and 
separated  the  grey  shades  into  various  densities.  The  untrained  eye 
could detect 8 to  10 shades  and the  trained  eye 32, but  the microdensi- 
tometer  could pick  out  256 shades. Breaking down  the image into more 
grey  ievels showed detail not  perceived by  the human eye.  (KSC  Release 
81-?4) 
0  Pan  American World  Airways,  Inc.,  ordered  a  cockpit ground-proximity 
warning  system installed  on  its entire  140-aircraft fleet.  The device, de- 
signed by  Sundstrand Data Control, Inc.,  would sound a  loud “Whoop! 
Whoop!  Pull up!”  and flash a  red  light reading “terrain”  i f   an  aircraft 

100 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

8  May 
was heading  for  a mountain  slope o r  was too low on takeoff  or  landing. 
The  decision  to  install  the  equipment  had  been hastened  by  recent  air. 
craft  accidents, including the  22 April crash  of  a  P an  Am  aircraft  into 
a  Bali,  Indonesia, mountaintop, which  had  killed  107 persons.  (Witkin, 
N Y T ,  9 May 74) 
0  9 May:   NASA  announced the  appointment of  John F. Yardley  as Associate 
Administrator  for Manned  Space Flight. Yardley-who 
had  been  Vice 
President  and General Manager of  McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. 
replace  Dale  D.  Myers,  who  had  re- 
Eastern  Div.  since  1972-would 
turned  to  private  industry.  At  McDonnell Douglas, Yardley had  served 
a s   project  engineer  for  Mercury  spacecraft  design  1958-1960,  Launch 
Operations  Manager  for  Mercury  and  Gemini  Spacecraft  1960-1964, 
Gemini  Technical  Director  1964-1967,  and  a s   Corporate-wide  Gem 
era1 Manager for the Skylab project.  (NASA Ann, 9 May 74 )  
0  Federal Aviation Administrator  Alexander P.  Butterfield signed in  London 
a Memorandum of  Understanding  for  a  joint program  to test, evaluate, 
and  demonstrate  the  Aeronautical  Satellite  (Aerosat)  system,  f o r   im- 
proved  communications and  a i r  traffic services over  the North Atlantic. 
Other participants  included Canada and European Space Research Orga- 
nization  members  Belgium,  Denmark,  France,  West  Germany,  Great 
Britain,  Italy,  The  Netherlands,  Spain,  Sweden,  and  Switzerland. The 
space  segment  would  include  two  synchronous-orbit  satellites  to  be 
launched  in   late  1977  or  early  1978  and  would  be  jointly  owned  by 
ESRO, Canada,  and a U S .  private  sector coowner to be named later.  FAA 
would  lease  use  of  the  satellites from  the  U S .   coowner.  (FAA  Release 
74-70) 
The Senate passed by voice vote the 9g3.267-billion FY  1975 NASA authoriza- 
tion  bill H.R.  13998, as reported  out by  the Senate Committee on Aero- 
nautical  and Space Sciences 6 May.  The  Senate agreed  on  22 May  to  a 
conference with the House on  their  differences.  ( C R ,  9 May 74, 57461; 
NASA L A R ,  X I I I /66 )  
9-10  May :   Two  Mariner  10 trajectory  correction maneuvers were made by 
an   onboard  propulsion  system  to  take  the epacecraft within  48 000 km 
of  Mercury, for  a  second encounter in September. The correction would 
d l ow  Mariner  10’s TV  cameras  to  photograph  the  full planet  from  the 
sun side a t  a  resolution of  about  1 km.  (NASA  MOR,  3 Oct  74;  NASA  Re- 
lease 7 6 1 2 1 )  
10 May:   NASA’s newest  space  communications  facility  was  dedicated  in  a 
ceremony a t  the  station  site a t  Robledo de Chavela, Spain. The facility, 
equipped with a 64-m antenna-one  of  the world’s largest  and most sen- 
sitive-joined 
two  other  Deep  Space  Network  facilities  of  the  Madrid 
Space  Communications Complex.  Construction  of  the  installation  had 
begun  in  1969 and  became  operational  in  the  fall  of  1973. The Madrid 
stations  were  operated  for  NASA  and  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory by  the 
Instituto Nacional de Thcnica Aerospacial under  continuing  agreements 
between SDain and the U S .   (NASA  Release 74-119:  NASA  OTDA.  interview. 
17 March’75) 
11-12  M a r :  More than  500 weather balloons were launched from 55 stations 
in  Marshall  Space Flight  Center’s  Atmospheric Variability  Experiment 
to  provide data for comparison with data collected by NASA and 
(AVE-2)  
Air  Force  weather  satellites. The  balloons-released  by  NASA,  National 
Weather  Service, National Severe Storms Laboratory  in Oklahoma, and 
Eglin  Air  Force  Base-flew 
a s  high  a s  30  km  while  measuring  atmos- 

101 

11-12 May 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

pheric  pressure,  temperature,  humidity,  and wind  speed  and  direction. 
(MSFC  Release 74-76;  MSFC proj mgr, interview, March 75 )  
12-17  M a y :   Scientists from the U S .   and U.S.S.R.,  participating in  a Lenin- 
grad  symposium  on  final  results  of  the  17  F e b . 4   March  1973  joint 
Bering  Sea  experiment, concluded that  satellite data  could  be  used  for 
accurate  assessment of  sea  surface  and  related  atmospheric conditions. 
Two research  groups had  independently surveyed the  sea surface  under 
identical  atmospheric  conditions,  using  microwave  radiometry  equip- 
ment  aboard U S .   and U.S.S.R.  research  aircraft. Results had been com- 
pared  with  data  obtained  by  ships  sailing below.  Findings offered con- 
vincing  proof  that  scientists  could  use  microwave measurements f rom  
satellites to assess sea ice distribution, motion, and stress and that multi- 
spectral  observations  could  determine  the  content  of  liquid  water  and 
water  vapor  in  the  atmosphere  above  the  sea  surface.  (NASA  Release 
7 6 1 3 9 )  
13  Ma y :   Dr.  Harrison  H.  Schmitt became NASA  Assistant Administrator  for 
Energy  Programs.  He  headed  NASA’s new  Office  of  Energy  Programs, 
supporting Federal  agencies responsible for energy  research  and  devel- 
opment. The office consolidated functions previously performed by other 
Headquarters  offices.  Dr.  Schmitt,  science pilot  on  the  ApoZZo  17  lunar 
landing mission,  had  been  Chief  of  the  Science and Applications Direc- 
torate in  the Astronaut  Office a t  Johnson Space Center. He had  been  on 
temporary  assignment a t  Headquarters  a s  Special Assistant to  the  Ad- 
ministrator  for  Energy  Research and Development since 29 Jan.  (NASA  
Ann, 16  May  74) 
e An  experimental  scanning  laser  doppler  system,  originally  developed  at 
Marshall  Space Flight  Center  to  measure  atmospheric  winds  and  tur- 
bulence,  was  being  tested  a t   MSFC  to  determine  the  system’s  reliability 
in detecting and monitoring aircraft wake vortices. Flyby tests had been 
conducted  by  MSFC  and  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  a t   Red- 
stone  Arsenal  using  a  Boeing  Co .   720  aircraft  and  two  laser  doppler 
units.  Early  results  indicated  that,  in  addition  to   detecting the  vortices, 
the  laser  doppler  system provided  data  on  the  a i r   speeds within  them. 
Two experimental systems would be used  in  field tests a t  Kennedy Inter- 
national Airport in New York after checkout of  the units was completed. 
(NASA  Release 74-127) 
e  Johnson  Space  Center had  awarded  a  $2 104 900  cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract  to Westinghouse Electric  Corp.  to  refurbish  and  modify  10 color 
TV cameras from the Skylab program,  for use  in  the Apollo-Soyuz Test 
Project. Westinghouse would  also provide two  new  cameras  and equip- 
ment.  ( JSC  Release 74-101) 
9  NASA announced the appointment of  Judith A.  Cole as Deputy Assistant Ad- 
ministrator  for Legislative Affairs effective 19 May.  She succeeded Ger- 
ald  J. Mossinghoff, who  had  been  appointed Assistant  General Counsel 
1 Jan.  Miss  Cole  had  been  Staff  Assistant in   the  Office  of  the  Director 
a t  the U S .  Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.  (NASA  Ann, 13 May 
7 4 )  
NASA  had  begun  a  national  aerospace  fellowship  program  to  encourage 
women  and members  of  minority groups  to  seek careers  ir,  engineering 
and certain scientific fields. NASA had completed arrangements with seven 
colleges and  universities  to  award  20,  $2500 fellowships to  students  in 
the top  third  of  the  junior or senior  class who  had  demonstrated  a  po- 
tential  and  interest  in   these  fields  of  study.  Recipients would  also  be 

102 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
13 May 
invited to work a t  NASA following graduation if  appropriate job vacancies 
existed.  (NASA Release 74-112) 
8  A New  Orleans Times-Picayune editorial  advocated international coopera- 
tion  in  space:  The  US. was  committed to  a  reusable  space  shuttle  for 
possible use  in   the  future with  a  permanent manned  space  station.  The 
U.S.S.R.  would probably embark  on its own  space shuttle and  space sta- 
tion program.  “The cost of  establishing a space station . . . is such that  it 
would be foolish for  each nation  to  assume the  full burden when  a com- 
mon  station  could  provide  everything  a  separate  one  could-even 
a 
‘secure  section’  for  each  side  fo r  passive  military  uses.”  (T-Picayune, 
13 May 74 ,23 )  
14 M a y :  The U S .   Postal  Service issued a  stamp commemorating the  Skylab 
program on the first anniversary of  the launching of  the Skylab 1 Orbital 
Workshop.  The  yellow,  red,  blue,  and  black  stamp depicted  the  Work- 
shop  and Astronauts  Charles Conrad,  Jr.,  and Dr.  Joseph P.  Kerwin  as 
they worked  in  space to  repair  the  spacecraft, which had  been  damaged 
during launch.  (Tower, NYT ,  28 April  1974, 30) 
8  President  Nixon  announced  his  intention  to  nominate  Gen.  George  S. 
Brown,  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff,  as  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Chiefs  of 
Staff  succeeding Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, who  was  retiring.  The Presi- 
dent  would  nominate  Gen.  David  C.  Jones  to  replace  Gen.  Brown  as 
Air  Force Chief  of  Staff. The nominations were  submitted to  the  Senate 
15 May.  ( P D ,  20 May  74 ,527 ,529)  
15 Ma y :  Marshall Space Flight Center had requested proposals for  two space 
tug  studies, MSFC  announced. The  first  study was  to  develop schedules, 
controls, and planning data for the  space tug program from initial flight 
readiness to  long-term mission operations. The  second study was  to  rec- 
ommend a  space tug avionics system, with  emphasis on  rendezvous and 
docking avionics and data-management-subsystem requirements and con- 
figuration.  (MSFC  Release 74-79) 
9  The papers  of  Dr.  Hugh L.  Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator  from 1958 
until  his  death  in  1965,  were  opened  to  the  public  in   ceremonies  a t  
Johns Hopkins Univ.,  Baltimore, Md. The papers would be housed in the 
university’s Milton S.  Eisenhower Library.  (NASA  Release 7 6 1 2 0 ;  NASA  
Hist Off) 
*  Dr. William 0. Davis,  Chief  of  the Upper  Atmosphere and  Space Services 
Office  of  the  National  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  and  a 
leading  rocket  and  space  expert,  died  in  Washington,  D.C.,  a t  the  age 
of  54.  Dr.  Davis was  a  member  of  the  interagency  team  that  planned 
and coordinated  NASA’s  Earth  Resources satellite program.  As  Assistant 
Director of  Laboratories  a t  Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 1957-1958, 
he had  directed Project Fa r  Side, the earliest attempt to obtain radiation 
and  magnetic  data  from  outer  space  by  launching  a  multistage  rocket 
from  a high-altitude balloon.  ( W Po s t ,  15 May  74) 
16  Ma y :   A  new  method  using  tiny  electronic body  sensors,  developed  by 
Arnes Research Center for remotely recording physical responses during 
space flight training and research programs, was being used  to measure 
the  precise  walking  patterns  of  children  with  cerebral  palsy,  NASA  an- 
nounced.  Patients  could  be  free  of  cumbersome equipment  that  had 
hindered  obtaining accurate gait measurements.  (NASA  Release 74-131) 
17-24  Ma y :   Sms  1  ( SMS-A  Synchronous  Meteorological  Satellite) -first 
meteorological  satellite  in  synchronous  orbit-was 
launched  by  NASA 
fo r  the  National  Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration  from  East- 

103 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
17-24  May 
e rn  Test Range  a t  5:31  am  EDT.  The  1st-stage propulsion  of  the  three- 
stage  Thor-Delta'launch  vehicle  was  less  than  normal.  The  2nd  stage 
burned  to  near  propellant  completion, compensating for  the  deficiency 
but  leaving insufficient propellant to  complete the planned  second burn. 
The spacecraft entered a lower-than-pjanned transfer orbit with a 32  895- 
km apogee,  180-km perigee, 9-hr 37-min period,  and  24.5' 
inclination. 
The apogee boost motor boosted the spacecraft into a near-geostationary 
orbit with a 32 828.3-km apogee, 30 747-km perigee, 20-hr 39-min period, 
and  2.0"  inclination,  with  an  eastward  drift  of  approximately  56" 
per  day. 
The  auxiliary propulsion  system was  fired a t  3:OO  am EDT  19 May to  
place  the  spacecraft  in  operationaI  attitude.  A  planned  series  of  APS 
firings  between  19 and  24 May  increased  the  orbit  to  geosynchronous 
altitude,  eliminated  orbital  drift,  and  stopped  the  satellite a t   45"  west 
longitude. An  early post-launch review of  flight data revealed no  space- 
craft  anomalies, and the  first photos were transmitted  24  May. 
NASA  objectives-to 
launch  the  spacecraft  into  a  geosynchronous 
orbit  of  sufficient  accuracy  to  accomplish  operational  mission  r eq u i r e  
ments and evaluate and check out the spacecraft-were  met and the mis- 
sion  was  adjudged  successful 1 7  Dec.  Operational  control  was  turned 
over to N OA A 10 Dec. after checkout. 
The 272-kg saiellite  (628 kg a t  launch)  would, for  the first time, pro- 
vide  continuous  day  and  night  images of  cloud cover over the U.S.  and 
Atlantic  Ocean.  Its  data-collection  systems  would  be  key  elements  in 
the  Global Atmospheric Research Program's  Atlantic  Tropical  Experi- 
ment  to  be  conducted  during  the  summer,  collecting  meteorological, 
hydrological,  oceanographic,  seismic,  and  tsunami  data.  In  addition, 
Sms  1 would  monitor  solar  flare  activity for  future  manned  spacecraft 
and supersonic aircraft flights. 
Sms  1 was  the  first  in  a  series which would  include two  operational 
prototypes  and one operational  spacecraft  (SMS-C, to become Goes I on 
launch) , developed and funded by  NASA  to meet the requirements of  the 
Dept.  of  Commerce  for  its  Geostationary  Operational  Environmental 
Satellite  (GO E S )   system.  The  SMS  project  was  managed  by  Goddard 
Space  Flight  Center  under  the  direction  of  the  Office  of  Applications. 
GSFC  also  had  responsibility  fo r   the  Thor-Delta  launch  vehicle.  (NASA  
MORS,  10 May, 20 May,  18 Dec.  74 ;  NASA,  Mgr Small Launch Vehicles & 
Intl  Prog,  interview,  31  Jan.  75 ;   GSFC, SMS  Proj  Mgr,  interview,  4 
Feb  75) 
17 M a y :  The U.S.S.R., with  the cooperation of  East Germany and Czechoslo- 
vakia,  launched  Intercosmos  11  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome near  Ty- 
uratam, U.S.S.R.,  into orbit with a 511-km apogee, 483-km perigee, 94.6- 
min period,  and 50.6"  inclination. The spacecraft, launched on the 250th 
anniversary of  the U.S.S.R.  Academy of  Sciences, would study shortwave 
ultraviolet  and  x-ray  radiation  of  the  sun  and  the  upper  atmosphere. 
(GSFC Wh l y  SSR ,   16-22  May  74;  Tass, FBIS-SOV, 21 May  74, U2) 
*  A  prototype  direct-readout  ground  station,  designed  by  Goddard  Space 
Flight  Center  to  receive  high-resolution weather  photos  from  satellites, 
left GSFC  for Dakar, Senegal. It was to  play a key role in &e  Global At- 
mospheric  Research  Program's  Atlantic  Tropical  Experiment  ( GATE) 
to  study  tropical  weather  patterns.  Using  the  ground  station,  planners 
could  quickly advise scientists aboard participating ships to focus atten- 
tion  on  specific weather conditions and could route aircraft into regions 

106 

17 May 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
where  cloud  development was  detected. The prototype  unit,  which  pro- 
duced real-time images a s  large negative or positive transparencies with 
a  resolution  four  to  eight  times  greater  than  units  already  in  use,  con- 
sisted of  four  vans weighing a  total  of  12 000  kg. Future models would 
weigh 270 kg and could be built a t  modest cost by  other countries.  (NASA 
Kelease 74-129) 
NASA  announced selection of  International Business Machines Corp. fo r  an  
$11-million, two-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to design, develop, and 
implement  a  ground-based  computing  and  data-processing  system  for 
the space shuttle and other programs.  (NASA Release 7 6 1 3 2 )  
Science and  technology might  be  stepping  into  a  more  important  role  in  
the  conduct  of  foreign  policy,  a  Science  article  said.  During  an  April 
speech before  the  United  Nations Dr.  Henry A.  Kissinger, Secretary  of 
State, had urged that we “now apply science to the problems which science 
has  helped  to  create.”  He  proposed  international action  in  four  areas: 
agricultural technology, birth  control, energy, and weather. The Science 
article  noted  that  access  to  U S .   technology  had  been  a  major  induce- 
ment toward d6tente for the U.S.S.R.  and the People’s Republic of  China. 
Although  the  speech had  made  no  specific commitments, the proposals, 
announced  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  became  U S .   Government policy. 
By  calling  on  science  to  help  solve  the  world’s  problems,  “Kissinger 
clearly has the monster in his sights . . . but  whether  a coherent science 
policy will  emerge is not yet evident.”  (Wade, Science, 1 7  May  74,780- 
781) 
18 Ma y :  A new low-cost method of making solar cells could make solar energy 
available  to  individual  homes  and  businesses within  a  few  years,  the 
Wash ing ton  Post  reported. The Post  quoted Dr. A.  I.  Mlavsky, Director 
of  Research  a t   Tyco  Laboratories,  Inc.,  and  R.  Bruce  Chalmers,  pro- 
fessor  of  metallurgy  a t   IIarvard  Univ.,  a s   saying  the  new  process- 
developed  by  a  university-industry  team  funded  by  NASA  and  the  Na- 
tional  Science  Foundation--could  cut  solar  cell  production  costs  by 
95%. With the new  cells, a  system that could produce  1 kw of  electricity 
would  cost  $350;  a  system  using  conventional silicon-crystal cells cost 
between  $20 000  and  $100 000.  In   the  new  process, molten  silicon ma- 
terial  was  pulled  into  long  thin  ribbons  and  cut  into  various  lengths. 
(Leary, W Post, 18 May 74) 
India  set off  its first nuclear blast,  an  underground explosion equivalent to 
10 000-15  000  tons  of  TNT,  to  become  the world’s  sixth nuclear  power. 
At a press briefing, the Chairman of  India’s Atomic Energy Commission, 
H. N.  Sethna, said the blast was an  experiment to determine the cratering 
effect of  the earth  and the  cracking effect of rocks  under  the  soil.  (AP, 
W Star-News, 19 May 74, A l )  
*  The Soviet Union’s  first  1-million-kw nuclear  reactor  had  begun  operation 
near Leningrad and had generated its first billion kilowatts of  electricity, 
Pravda  reported.  (Shabad, N Y T ,  30 May 7 4 , S l )  
20  Ma y :   Dr.  James  C.  Ffetcher,  NASA  Administrator,  and  Dr.  Alexander 
Hocker, European  Space Research Organization Director  General, held 
a Spacelab program  review in  Pa r i s  to  assess the  proposed  ESRO  design, 
appraise an ESRO presentation of  contractor evaluation and findings, and 
discuss  follow-on production.  The  review  indicated  that  size, *volume, 
su’bsystems,  transportability,  and  operational  turnaround  met  o r   ex- 
ceeded  design  requirements.  The  design  payload  weight  had  been  re- 
duced  from  phase  B  results.  An  ESRO team  with  NASA  support  would 
105 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

20  May 
further  assess the weight,  and  the common payload  support  equipment 
and instrument pointing system would be studied for nine months.  NASA 
would give a letter  of  commitment to buy  one flight unit with  follow-on 
production  commitment scheduled  after  critical  design  review.  (NASA 
Gen  Mgmt  Rev  Rpt,  17  June  74;  NASA  Spacelab  Newsletter  74-5;  3 
July 74) 
*  Edwin C.  Kilgore had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator  for 
Center Operations, NASA  announced. He had assisted Dr. George M.  Low, 
Deputy  Administrator  and  Acting  Associate Administrator  for  Center 
Operations,  in  organizing  and managing  the  new  office  since  its  estab- 
lishment 15 March. Before March, Kilgore  had served a s  Acting Associ- 
ate Administrator  fo r  Aeronautics  and  Space Technology.  (NASA  Ann, 
20 May 74 )  
*  NASA  announced a 45-day $500 000 continuation  of  a  13 Feb. contract with 
Thiokol  Chemical Corp.  fo r   the  space  shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor 
design study. In  addition to original contract requirements, the continua- 
tion  contract  required  that  Thiokol  assist  NASA  in  idenifying  materials, 
independent  of  the  specific final  motor  design,  that  had  long-lead-time 
supply times.  (NASA Release 74-130) 
21  May :  The Senate by  voice vote passed H.R.  11864, the  Solar Heating and 
Cooling Demonstration Act  of  1974, as  amended by  the  Committee  on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban  Affairs and the  Committee on Labor  and 
Public Welfare  14 May.  The  Senate bill  would  authorize  $5  million  to 
NASA  and $5 million to the Department of  Housing and Urban Develop- 
ment  in  FY  1975  for  development  of  new  or  existing  solar  technology 
and $40 million to HUD   over the next four years  to carry out the  demon- 
stration.  The  development  and  demonstration  were  to  be  carried  out 
within  five years.  NASA  functions  and  funds could  be  transferred  to  the 
Energy  Research  and  Development Administration  i f   ERDA  was  estab- 
lished.  ( C R ,  21 May 74,58761-77) 
21-23  May:   Some  120  scientists and  engineers  from  industry,  Government, 
and universities attended the Outer Planet  Probe Technology Workshop 
at  Ames  Research Center  to  study  effective and economical methods of 
probing  the  outer  planets  and  their  moons.  Participants  considered 
spacecraft  to   fly  past  a  planet  while  sending  a  probe  vehicle  into  its 
atmosphere  to  report  on  composition,  clouds,  pressure  variation,  and 
other characteristics;  the  possibility  of  visiting  such planet-sized moons 
a s  Saturn’s Titan;  and the  cost of  combined outer planet missions,  such 
as  the  addition  of  an  atmosphere probe  to  a  Uranus  flyby, the  use  of  a 
similar  design  for  a  Saturn  atmosphere probe,  and  the  combination  of 
a  Jupiter  orbiter  and  probe  mission.  (ARC   Release  72-21;  ARC  Astro- 
g ram ,   23 May  74;  ARC,  Proceedings, Aug.  74) 
22  May :   ATS-F  Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled  fo r   a  30 May 
launch,  was  “a  very  unusual  NASA  satellite,”  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, 
NASA Administrator,  said a t  an ATS-F  press briefing in Washington, D.C. 
It was  a n  advanced satellite with  a huge  transmitting antenna  and  “the 
first  step  towards  . . . a  satellite  that  can  broadcast  TV  directly  to 
your homes.” 
Secretary  of  Health,  Education,  and Welfare  Caspar W.  Weinberger 
said that  HEW   would  be using  the satellite for  career counseling, teacher 
training,  education  of  medical students, health  eduaation, and transmis- 
sion  of  medical records  to  remote areas  of  Alaska, Appalachia, and the 
Rocky  Mountains.  The  practical  civilian  application  “justifies  fully  a 

106 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 19’74 
22 May 
continuance  of  . . . both  the  space program  in  its  inner-space aspects 
a s  well  as  . . . bringing it down to earth and using it  in our own daily 
lives.”  President  Henry  Loomis  of  the  Corp.  for  Public  Broadcasting 
said  that,  for  the  “first  time,  we  will  have  current  TV  programming 
available  in  Alaska.”  TV videotapes now  were  sent  to  Alaska  by  mail 
and reaching  the most remote  10% of  the people cost a s  much a s  reach- 
ing  the  remaining  90%. ATS-F  would  greatly  reduce  that  cost.  NASA 
Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Applications  Leonard  Jaffe  said 
that  the  ATS-F  was  “a   major  step  forward”  in   the  amount  of  radio 
frequency  power  that  a  satellite muld  generate to  earth  and  focus very 
precisely on  a  small area.  Because of  this capability, very  small, simple 
receiving stations would be adequate.  (Transcript) 
23 May :   The first phase of  the Pioneer  direct-mode command system, which 
would  permit  Ames  Research  Center  to  control  its  spacecraft  directly, 
became  operational.  The  Pioneer  command  (PCOM) system would  per- 
mit  direct  control  without  depending  on  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory 
computer  systems. Committed operational  use  of  PCOM  would  begin  on 
Pioneer  10 (launched 2 March 1972) on 1 Sept., followed by Pioneer  11 
(launched 5 April  1973) on 15 Jan.  1975.  (ARC Astrogram, 6 June 7 4 , l )  
*  The  European-built  A-300B  wide-body transport  began  commercial serv- 
ice  on  Air  France  routes  between  Paris  and  London.  The  airbus  was 
the world’s  fourth wide-bodied aircraft-the 
first  for use exclusively on 
the  internal  European  route  network and the  first powered by  only two 
engines  and  built  outside  the  U S .   The  current  configuration  of  the 
A-300B  carried 251 passengers but an alternate one would accommodate 
331. The  aircraft was  built  by  Airbus  Industries,  a Paris-based  consor- 
tium  formed  to  build  the A-300B  with participation  by West Germany, 
Great Britain, The Netherlands, Spain, and France. Noteworthy achieve- 
ments  included  aircraft  delivery within  days  of  the  schedule originally 
set in May  1969 and development costs that had  remained within expec- 
tations.  ( A v  Wk., 20  May  74,  30;  W S I ,  29  April  74,  6 ;   Air  France, 
NYC PIO, interview, 7 March 75) 
A  New  Yo r k   Times  editorial  commented on  the  Atomic  Energy  Commis- 
sion  report  The  Nation’s  Energy  Future,  submitted  December  1973  to 
President  Nixon:  The  report,  which  was  the  basis  €or Administration 
policy, would  allocate more than  half  the proposed  energy  research  and 
development  budget  to  nuclear  projects.  More  than  25%  of  nuclear 
funds would be spent on the fast-breeder reactor. Three critical questions 
were in need of  answers:  risk  of  accident, security  against  theft,  and the 
relative merit  of  alternative forms of  energy. An AEC environmental im- 
pact  statement issued  in  response to  a  court  order  in  a  1971  suit  by  a 
group  of  scientists  failed,  the  Times  said,  to  weigh  objectively  the 
possible  alternatives that  might  be  environmentally less  damaging,  par- 
ticularly solar energy. “But in making the choice between nuclear fission 
and solar energy, Congress and the public have to weigh the alternatives 
carefully. The A.E.C. can contribute to that decision by offering the nation 
a more careful and  disinterested  impact statement.”  ( N Y T ,  23 May  74, 
38) 
24  May :   Johnson  Space  Center  had  requested  proposals  from  21  h rm s   to 
design,  develop,  fabricate, install,  and  check  out  one  orbiter  aeroflight 
simulator to  support crew training during Orbiter  1 development flights 
in the space shuttle program,  JSC announced.  (JSC Release 84[74]-150) 

107 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
24  M a y  
*  President Nixon  announced his  intention  to   nominate John  C.  Sawhill to  
be Administrator of  the Federal Energy Administration. He had  served 
a s  Deputy Administrator of  the Federal Energy Office from 4 Dec.  1973 
to  8 May  1974, when  he became Acting Administrator. The nomination 
was sent to the Senate 28  May  and confirmed 18 June.  (PD ,  27 May  74, 
541-542;  3  June  74,  570;  NASA  LAR ,   X I I I /82 )  
The  Navy  announced  tha t   Texas  Instruments  Inc.  had  been  awarded  a 
$1 400 000,  incrementally  funded cost-reimbursement contract  for  pre- 
liminary  design  of  the  high-speed  antiradiation mbsile  ( H A RM ) .   The 
contract  contained  an   option  for  engineering  development  including 
weapon  system  integration,  prototype,  and  pilot  production  a t   a  total 
estimated  cost  of  $ a oOOOOOO .  
(DOD   Release  221-74) 
25 May :   Dr.  Pau l  E.  Hemke,  a  pioneer  in   aeronautical  engineering,  died  a t  
the  age of  84.  In  1910 he  had   assisted  in   designing one of  the Nation's 
first aircraft, which  flew to  a height of  0.6  m.  Dr. Hemke,  an  analyst  a t  
the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory  1924-1927,  was  respon- 
sible  fo r   establishing  aeronautical  engineering  departments  a t   Case 
Institute  of  Applied  Science  in   1931  and   a t   Rensselaer  Polytechnic 
Institute  in   1936, where  he  headed  the  department until  1949.  During 
World  War  I1 Dr.  Hemke  served  on  a  Government  team  of  scientists 
sent  to   Europe  to  persuade  European  scientists,  especially  rocket  ex- 
perts,  to  emigrate to the U S .   ( W Star-News, 29  May 74) 
27  May :   The  U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos  656  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome 
into  orbit with  a  322-km apogee,  185-km perigee,  89.6-min period,  and 
51.8"  inclination.  The press  reported  that  Cosmos  656  was  probably  a 
test Aight  of  a  Soyuz spacecraft. The spacecraft reentered 29 May.  (GSFC 
SSR ,   30   June   74;  Tass,  FBIS-Sov, 29 May  74,  U1 ;   O'Toole,  W  Post, 
30 May  74,  A181 
29  May-19  June :   The  U.S.S.R.  launched Luna   22  unmanned  lunar  probe 
from   Baykonur  Cosmodrome  near  Tyuratam  a t   1 5 7  pm  local  time 
(4:57  am  EDT)  . The  automatic station  was  separated from   a  platform 
rocket system in earth orbit and put  into a close-to-planned trajectory  fo r  
the moon.  A  flight-path correction maneuver  30 May  aimed the  space- 
craft toward a selected area of  near-moon space. 
Luna  22 went  into  circular  orbit of  the moon  2 June,  with  a  220-km 
apogee,  220-km  perigee,  130.0-min period,  and  19.6"  inclination.  The 
Soviet press  reported  3 June  that  all  instruments aboard  the  spacecraft 
were  functioning normally and  scientific investigation of  the moon  had  
begun.  Luna   22  was  transferred  into  an  elliptical  orbit with  a  244-km 
apogee  and  25-km  perigee  9  June  to   take  detaiIed  TV  photos  of  the  
lunar   surface  and   to  study  surface  relief  using  an   onboard  altimeter. 
Chemical composition of  rocks was  obtained by determining the  gamma 
radiation.  After  completion  of  the  photography program  the  spacecraft 
was moved to an orb i t  with  a 299-km apogee and 181-km perigee.  By  19 
June  Luna   22  had   completed  187  orbits  of  the  moon;  all  equipment 
continued to  function normally.  ( GSFC  SSR ,  30  June 74 ;  Tass, FBIS-SOV, 
30  May  74,  U1 ;   4  June   74,  U1 ;   20  June  74,  U1;  S F ,   Nov  74,  434) 
30  May-28  June:   NASA  launched  A t s   6  Applications Technology  Satellite 
from   Eastern  Test  Range  a t   9:00  am   EDT  on  a  Titan 2IIC  launch ve- 
hicle.  The booster ejected the transtage  and spacecraft into  an  elliptical 
parking orbit with  a  626-km apogee and  152-km perigee. At  the second 
equatorial  crossing the  first  burn  of  the transtage  placed  the  spacecraft 
in  a  trahsfer  orbit.  Launch, parking orbit,  and transfer  orbit were close 
108 

30 May-28  June 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
to  the  program  plan.  At  3:29  pm  EDT,  Ats  6 was  injected  into  geosyn- 
chronous  orbit  with  a  35 %5.6-km  apogee,  35 774.1-km  perigee,  23-hr 
57-min period,  and  1.8"  inclination.  The  near-perfect  orbit  eliminated 
need for corrections,  leaving nine kilograms of  fuel for operational con- 
tingencies. The spacecraft separated  from the transtage a t  3 3 3  pm EDT. 
An  orbital  correction  7  June  changed  the  0.27"-per-day  westward 
drift  to  a 0.05"  eastward  drift.  Checkout of  spacecraft  systems and on- 
board experiments was completed 28 June with no significant anomalies. 
The mission was adjudged a success 2 6  Sept. 
Primary  objectives  of  the  mission  were  to  inject  the  spacecraft  into 
near-geostationary  orbit,  erect  and  evaluate  a  nine-meter  antenna  to 
provide  a  good-quality  signal  to  small  inexpensive  ground  receivers, 
stabilize  the  spacecraft  using  a  three-axis  control  system, and  support 
user-oriented  applications  experiments.  Secondary  objectives  were  to 
demonstrate new  technology in  aircraft and maritime  traffic control and 
infrared  earth  observations;  acquire  system  data  fo r   communications 
applications in space, including spacecraft-to-spacecraft relay ; test space- 
craft  control;  and measure particles  and radiation.  The 20 experiments 
included  a  health-education  telecommunications experiment  to  broad- 
cast programs  in  several languages simultaneously to  citizens in  remote 
areas  of  the  country.  The  satellite  also  would  aid  in  remote  medical 
telediagnosis  and  teleconsultation,  transmitting  patients'  medical  rec- 
ords to faraway hospital centers for emergency assistance. 
One  year  after  launch  A t s   6 would  be moved  over  Lake Victoria  in 
Central Africa.  Ind i a  would then  use  the satellite to broadcast programs 
teaching  agricultural  techniques,  family  planning  and  hygiene,  school 
courses  and  teacher  education,  and  occupational skills to  5000 villages. 
The  $600  ground  receiving terminals each consisted of  a  receiver, con- 
verter, and three-meter chicken-wire antenna. 
Ats  6 was  the  sixth  in  a  series  of  ATS  satellites developed to  advance 
technology i n  design, propulsion,  and stabilization systems; meteorolog- 
ical  concepts;  applications ; space  environmental  studies  and  measure- 
ment systems; and communications. A t s  I  (launched 6 Dec. 19661, A t s  3 
(5  Nov.  19671, and A t s  5 (12 Aug.  1969) were  still transmitting useful 
data.  The  ATS  program  was  managed  by  Goddard  Space Flight  Center 
under  the  direction  of  the  Office  of  Applications.  (NASA   MORS,  24  May, 
3 June,  8 July,  2 Oct. 74;  NASA  prog  off,  interview, 5 Feb. 74;  NASA  Re- 
lease 74-111) 
30  M a y :   The  Senate  approved  the  House-Senate Conference report  on H.R. 
13998 recommending a $3.267-billion FY  1975 NASA  authorization. The 
compromise between  the 9 May  Senate bill and the 25 April House bill 
would  authorize $805 million for the space shuttle, a $5-million increase 
over  the  President's  requested  funding  instead  of  the  $20-million in- 
crease voted  by  the  House.  An  4g18.8-million  increase  in  space applica- 
tions,  instead  of  the  Senate's  $23-million  increase,  dropped  specific 
designation of  $13 million for the ERTS-c  spacecraft, but the Conference 
report  recommended  that  the  project  be  promptly  initiated  and  it  re- 
tained the Senate's $3-miIlion addition for a Thor-Delta to launch ERTS-C. 
The Conference bill would decrease manned space flight operations fund- 
ing by  $10 million, instead  of  the Senate's  $5-million cut and the House 
bill's  $15-million cut.  It would  retain  the  Senate's  $5.1-miUion  addition 
for  aeronautical  research  and  add  4.9  million  for  energy  research,  a s  
well  a s   the  House-and-Senate-voted $2  million  for  research  in  short- 
109 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
30  May 
term  weather  phenomena  and  the  House-added $1  million  for  ground 
propulsion research.  (CR, 30 May 74, S9349-52) 
31 May: Dr.  John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, announced 
appointment of  a committee to review all aspects of  the Thor-Delta launch 
vehicle program,  including  all anomalies i n  recent Thor-Delta launches. 
Pending completion of  the review, the  10 June launch of  Westar-B-the 
second  of  Western  Union’s  domestic  communications  satellites-had 
been postponed.  (NASA  Release 7 4 1 4 7 )  
0  The U S .  Army Electronics Command was awarding a $1 689 116 cost-plus- 
fixed-fee contract  to   Cincinnati  Electronics,  Inc.,  to  develop, fabricate, 
and  test  ultrahigh-frequency  satellite-line-of-sight manpack  transceiver 
models.  (DOD  Release 231-74) 
During M a y :   Preliminary discussions aimed a t  a n  eventual global system of 
second-generation meteorological satellites were  held  in  Geneva,  spon- 
sored by  the  139-member World Meteorological Organization. Delegates 
considered establishment of  a worldwide forum fo r  presentation of  data 
requirements by  users,  creation  of  a  mechanism for  filing launch  plans 
and  distributing  advance  information  on  capabilities  to  potential  users 
of  planned  satellites, and  prospects  for  training  users  to  interpret  and 
apply  data  from  advanced  satellites.  Talks  were  held  concurrently  on 
technical  standardization  of  systems,  including  preliminary  standards 
for ground stations, coordination  of  transmission times and frequencies, 
and  standardization  of  automatic-picture-transmission  installations. 
Agreements  made  a t  the  informal  sessions would  be  taken  back  to  the 
technical  agencies  of  the  various  countries  and  implemented, without 
the  necessity of  official review.  One result was agreement on L-band fre- 
quencies, with U S .  satellites to transmit on 1690 mc. 
Soviet  sources  revealed  that  the  U.S.S.R.’s  first  synchronous  me- 
teorological satellite would be launched in  1977 o r  1978 and placed over 
the  Indian  Ocean  a t   70’  E.  The  press  reported  that  i t  was  expected to  
be  technically  compatible  with  US . ,   European  Space  Research  Orga- 
nization,  and  Japanese  satellites in  its  class.  (Av Wk, 20  May  74, 21)  

110 

June  1974 

, 

3-20  May:   NASA  launched Hawkeye  1  (Exp lorer  52 )  scientific satellite from 
Western Test Range  a t  4:09  pm  PDT  on  a  five-stage Scout E launch  ve- 
hicle. The 4th and 5th stages separated in parking orbit and the 5th-stage 
burn  placed Hawkeye  1  in polar  orbit  with a  124477-km apogee,  469. 
lun perigee, 49-hr 59-min period,  and 89.8” inclination.  The launch was 
the  first  on  the  five-stage  Scout  E  configuration,  incorporating  a n  
Alcyone 1A motor with a 5th-stage transition section. 
Primary mission  objective was  to  investigate the interaction  between 
the  solar wind  and  the  earth’s magnetic  field.  Secondary  objectives  in- 
cluded  locating magnetic neutral  points  o r  lines  during both  quiet  and 
disturbed  solar  wind  conditions  and  studying  magnetic  field  topology 
a t  large radial distances over the polar caps. 
By  20  June  all  booms  and  electric  antennas  had  been  extended  and 
the spacecraft had despun to the planned five to  six revolutions per min- 
ute.  The  transmitters  and  all  experiments were  operating  satisfactorily. 
Hawkeye  1  was  the  sixth  of  the Univ.  of  Iowa’s  I n ju n  series,  which 
had begun with the 29 June 1961 launch of  In jun  1  and provided a com- 
prehensive  study  of  charged  particles  trapped  in   the  earth’s  magneto- 
sphere. The Hawkeye program was managed by Langley Research Center 
under  the  direction  of  the  NASA  Office  of  Space Science.  LaRC  also  had 
responsibility  for  the  Scout launch  vehicle.  (MORS,  13 May  74,  20  June 
74; NASA Release 74-138K) 
3 June: Italy would build a ground station  to  receive data from NASA’s Earth 
Resources Technology  Satellites, NASA  announced.  Under  a  Memoran- 
dum of  Understanding between NASA  and Italy’s communications satellite 
organization  Societa  per  Azioni  per  le  Comunicazioni Spaziali  (Tele- 
spazio) , the  station,  at  Fucino,  would  complement  existing  stations  in 
Fairbanks,  Alaska;  Goldstone,  Calif. ; Greenbelt,  Md. ; Prince  Albert, 
Canada;  and  Cuiaba,  Brazil.  NASA’s Erts  1  had  been  transmitting  data 
since 23 July 1972 launch; ERTS-B  was scheduled for spring 1975 launch. 
(NASA Release 74-142) 
9  Operation of  a  demonstration solar heating  and  cooling unit was  begun  a t  
Marshall  Space Flight  Center,  using  three  house  trailers  to  simulate  a 
residence.  Continuing  studies  would  combine NASA  and  industry  capa- 
bilities  to  improve  efficiency and minimize cost.  Efforts  included  devel- 
opment of  a  computer-simulation procedure  for  technical and economic 
evaluation  of  the  systems,  studies  to  explore  mass-production  effects 
on  solar-collector costs,  definition  of  a  commercially practical  absorp- 
tion-cycle a i r  conditioner  that  could  be  operated  with  water  a t   353  K 
(176OF)  to  357  K  (183°F) , verification  of  the  absorptive  coating 
stability and application of  coatings to lower-cost materials,  and evalua- 
tion  of  other  thermal  storage techniques,  such  as  melting  and  freezing 
waxes,  a s  used in  spacecraft.  (MSFC   Release 74-77) 
Directors  of  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  and  Textron  Inc.  announced  tenta- 
tive  agreement  on  a management  reorganization  to  aid  the  financially 
111 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
3  June 
troubled Lockheed. Textron would invest $85 million in Lockheed shares 
and  stock. Textron’s  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive Officer  G.  William 
Miller  would  also  become  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  for 
Lockheed;  Lockheed’s  Chairman  Daniel  J.  Haughton  would  become 
Vice  Chairman.  Lockheed  was  to  remain  a  separate  corporation.  The 
arrangement provided f o r  the release of  the Federal Government from its 
1971  guarantee  of  up  to  $250 million  in  bank  loans to  Lockheed. The 
agreement was  subject  to  several conditions,  including requirements  for 
Lockheed  to  bring  firm production  commitments of  its L-loll  TriStar 
aircraft to  a total of  180 and to  change accounting procedures.  (Textron 
Release, 3 June 74; Witkin, NYT ,  4 June 74, 1 )  
4  June:  Dr.  James C.  Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Dr. Richard T. 
Whitcomb,  Head  of  the  Transonic  Aerodynamics  Branch  at  Langley 
Research Center,  a  $25 000  cash  award  for  his  invention  of  the  super- 
critical wing.  The  cash  award,  made  in  a  NASA  Hq.  ceremony,  was  the 
largest  ever made by  NASA  to  an individual. An  improved airfoil  design, 
the  supercritical  wing  would  permit  significant  increases  in  the  speed 
and  range  of  supersonic  aircraft  without  increased  fuel  consumption. 
(NASA  Release 74,148;  NASA photo 7 4 H 4 2 2 )  
0  Boeing  Co.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  State Committee on  Science and Technology 
signed  a n   agreement  on  aviation  cooperation,  including  exchange  of 
information  and  technology  and eventual commercial exchange.  ( FBIS- 
Sov, 11 June 74, B8) 
Dr.  H.  Guyford  Stever, Director  of  the  National  Science Foundation  and 
Chairman  of  the  President’s Advisory Committee  on  Energy  Research 
and Development, predicted that solar heating and cooling systems would 
be commercially available in five years. Following a speech at the Edison 
Electric  Institute’s  annual  convention in  New  York,  Dr.  Stever said  the 
technology would be ready before “society i s  ready to solve the economic 
issues surrounding it.” A choice would have to be made between “build- 
ing a  lower priced house with added cost f o r  a solar heating-cooling sys- 
tem,  o r   spending more  on  higher  fuel prices  in  a  conventional house.” 
(Smith, WS J ,  5 June 74 ,6 5 )  
4-78  June: A  team  of  15  scientists led  by  Dr.  Thomas A.  Mutch  of  Brown 
Univ.  tested  the Viking lander camera  in  an  area of  Colorado with  geo- 
logic  conditions  similar  to  those  expected  on  Mars. With  photo-diodes 
in  the  focal plane  instead  of  film, the  camera used  a  nodding mirror  to 
reflect  the  image  through  the  lenses onto  the  diode  one  line  at  a  time. 
The entire  camera  was  then  rotated  to  scan  the  next  line.  Because  the 
image was sequentially acquired, a t  five lines per second, several minutes 
were needed  to  obtain  a  complete photograph.  The lander’s two-camera 
system would  provide  color, black-and-white, infrared,  and stereoscopic 
views of  the Martian  surface and photometric information to help deter- 
mine sizes and composition of  Martian  soil samples, monitor the opacity 
of  the  Martian  atmosphere,  and  record  the  position  of  the  sun  and 
brighter  planets  fo r   precise  location  of  the  lander  on Mars.  (NASA  Re- 
lease 74,257;  LaRc proj off,  interview, 9 June 75) 
5‘June:  The space shuttle would  introduce  a  new  mode  of, space research  in 
the  1980s, Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator, 
said a t  a space transportation  system press briefing  in Washington, D.C. 
Sounding rockets gave the scientist an immediate return of  data but only 
for  a  very short-duration flight. Satellites provided longer mission times 
but it’might be five to seven years from the initiation of the project  until 

112 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

5 June 

data  were  received.  Experiments  flown  on  the  shuttle  could  remain  in 
orbit from 7 to 30 days and then be returned immediately for evaluation. 
This  capability  would  be  a  powerful  tool  in  the  development  of  new 
technology. 
Dr.  Myron  S.  Malkin,  Space  Shuttle  Program  Director,  said  NASA’s 
commitment to  Congress called  for  a  total  development  cost  of  $5.15 
billion  in   1971 dollars  for  two  operational  shuttle  vehicles plus  $10.5 
million for  each of  725 missions projected  for  1980-1990.  Mission costs 
would be shared by participating  experimenters, and estimates were now 
running  at  $9.05 million  per  flight because of  reduced estimates for  ex- 
ternal  tank  development.  Cost  fo r   a  shuttle  flight,  which  could  take 
29 500 kg  into  orbit,  contrasted with $18 million for  a  4500-kg payload 
launched on  an  expendable Atlas booster  and up to  $58 million  to orbit 
14  000-18  000 kg on a Saturn IB. 
Shuttle development was  on  schedule;  the  first  approach  and landing 
tests were to be  in  the second quarter  of  1977 and the first manned orbi- 
tal  flight in 1979. Orbiter manufacture was under way. The main engine 
oxygen  burner  had  been  tested  14  April  and  the  first  big  engine  firing 
was scheduled for the end of  1975. NASA would need a fleet of  seven orbi- 
ters a t  $250 million each if  the projected missions were flown. Elwood W. 
Land,  Jr.,  of  the  Space Shuttle Systems Office said a  25-astronaut flight 
corps  probably  would  be  maintained  to  fly  missions  averaging  more 
than one a  week. 
LeRoy E.  Day,  Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, reported  the 
main  engine  was  being  designed  to  make  55  starts  before  refurbish- 
ment  was  necessary.  Engine  lifetime would  be  much  longer.  The  solid 
boosters were  being  designed for  20  flights. Phillip  E.  Culbertson, Di- 
rector  of  Mission  and  Payload  Integration,  said  that  all  but  the  small- 
est  expendable launch  vehicles  would  be  phased  out  about  three  years 
after the  shuttle became operational.  (Transcript) 
*  The European  Space Research Organization  decided  to  award  a  8226-mil- 
lion,  six-year  contract  to  VFw-Fokker/ERNo  Raumfahrttechnik  GmbH 
a s   prime  contractor  heading  a  European  team  to  design  and  develop 
Spacelab, the  reusable,  manned  laboratory  to  be  carried  into  orbit  on 
NASA’s space  shuttle  in  the  1980s. The  unanimous  decision, made  at  a 
Paris  meeting  of  ESRO’S  Administrttive  and  Finance  Committee,  fol- 
lowed  six  weeks’  evaluation  of  two  industrial  proposals.  The  second 
proposal  had  been  submitted  by  Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm.  The 
contract  provided  fo r  delivery  of  one  Spacelab flight  unit,  fully  quali- 
fied and ready for installation of  experiments, by April  1979. Two  engi- 
neering  models and  three  sets of  ground  support  equipment  and  initial 
spares would also be delivered. 
Spacelab, to  be reusable fo r  50 missions of  7 to  30 days each, would 
permit scientists and engineers to work in earth orbit in shirtsleeve com- 
fort  and  without  extensive  astronaut  training.  The  first  launch  was 
scheduled for 1980.  (ESRO Release, 5 June 74) 
The Federal Communications Commission authorized Western Union Tele- 
graph  Co.  to  launch  its  second  domestic  communications  satellite. 
Western  Union  had  requested  that  Westar-B be  assigned  a  119:  west 
longitude position  [see  2 May],  a position  the  FCC  reserved for  systems 
authorized to  serve Alaska  and Hawaii. However, the  FCC  took  into  ac- 
count  petitions  filed  by  Western  Union’s  competitors,  also  requesting 
the  location,  and  assigned  the  satellite  a  temporary  station  at  90” west 
113 

5 June 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
longitude.  The  satellite was  to  be  moved  to  91"  within  30  days  after 
NASA%  A t s   6  was  moved  from  94".  If  Western  Union  was  later  au- 
thorized to  serve Alaska and Hawaii, the  FCC  could authorize a  move to 
a  more  appropriate  location.  (FCC  Memorandum  Opinionj Order  and 
Authorization, FCC  74-584) 
Satellite observations had been used  by National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  scientists  to  map  the  fading-or 
"recovery  phase"-of 
the  mammoth,  layered  r ing  of  hot  charged  particles  that  encircled  the 
earth during magnetic storms and temporarily  canceled the earth's  mag- 
netic field, NOAA announced. Exp lo re r  45, launched 1 5  Nov.  1971 into a n  
elliptical orbit  with a  good  view  of  the  ring  current,  had  measured  the 
distribution of  protons before, during, and after a major magnetic storm 
1 7  Dec.  1971. The NOM   study  found  that  interactions  of  hot  and  cold 
plasmas in the ring changed the pitch  angle of  the protons  in relation  to 
the magnetic lines of  force, permitting  some to  escape. By  mapping dis- 
tributions  of  proton  pitch  angles, researchers  could predict  what would 
happen  during  the  recovery phase  of  a  magnetic  storm.  (NOAA  Release 
74-436) 
*  Air  traffic  activity  during  1973 had  increased  6%   over  1972  activity  a t  
Federal Aviation Administration  airport control  towers,  a i r  route traffic 
control  centers,  and  flight  service  stations,  the  FAA  reported.  The  in- 
crease was  the largest  recorded by  towers since 1968 and  followed three 
years of  declining activity. Takeoffs and landings a t  the 386 FAA-operated 
control  towers  during  1973 totaled  56 533 953,  up  from  53 255 919  in 
1972. (FAA Release 74-86) 
5 4  June: Results of  five years of  aerodynamic loads research were presented 
a t  a  YF-12  Flight  Loads  Symposium a t   Flight  Research Center. Wind- 
tunnel  tests  and  flight  measurements  of  loads  and  deflections  for  the 
3200-km-per-hr research  aircraft  were  shown  to  be  in  excellent  agree- 
ment,  and deflection due to loads  and thermal  effects could be predicted 
by ground calibrations. Recommendations included development of  more 
accurate aerodynamic theories  in the transonic range  and thermal  stress 
analysis and prediction methods for supersonic cruise aircraft with much 
larger  transient  temperature  gradients  from  the  skin  to  the  primary 
structure than those experienced on the YF-12. 
(NASA   Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 
17  June 74 ,52 )  
6 June: A solar energy recorder  to  evaluate the  solar  energy available in  any 
area  of  the world with  an  ambient  temperature range  of  233 K  ( -40" 
F)   to  325 K  (125O  F)  was  being  developed by  International  Business 
Machines Corp. Federal  Systems Div.  under  contract  to Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center, MSFC  announced. The  recorder  would measure and  store 
sunfall  data  while  simultaneously  measuring  direct  and  total  (direct 
plus  diffuse)  solar  radiation.  MSFC  engineers  said  the  measurements 
were vital to  efficient development of  solar energy converters before  any 
large-scale construction.  ( MSFC  Release  74-98) 
*  COMSAT  General  Corp.  announced  the  award  of  a  cohtract  to   Scientific- 
Atlanta, Inc., for  100 shipboard antennas and associated terminal equip- 
ment a s  part of the maritime  communications satellite  (Marisat)  system 
to  provide  improved  communications to  commercial "ships a t   sea.  The 
contract was  expected to exceed $2 million and included options  to pur- 
chase up to 300 additional terminals.  ( COMSAT Gen Corp Release 7 4 3 1 )  
6 ,  11 June:  Hearings  on  converting  solar  energy  into  electricity  by  photo- 
voltaic devices were held by the House Committee on Science and Astro- 
114 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

6 ,   11 June 

nautics’  Subcommittee  on  Energy  a s   pa r t   of  a  continuing  series  of 
hearings  on  solar  energy.  John  V.  Goldsmith,  Jet  Propulsion  Labora- 
tory scientist, said the total annual U.S.  production  of  photovoltaic solar 
cells was  50  to   75  kw,  mostly  for  spacecraft  systems.  In   space,  solar- 
cell  systems  were  without  parallel  but  large-scale  applications  on  the 
earth could not be achieved until systems could be produced  in  adequate 
volume  a t  commercially competitive prices.  Goldsmith  recommended  a 
large-scale photovoltaic technology  development program  and  said  that 
a  terrestrial  photovoltaic  system,  with  advantages  of  a n   inexhaustible 
energy  source  and  minimal  environmenal  impact, could be  reduced  in 
cost from its  current $30 per watt  to  an economically feasible $0.50 per 
watt  by  1985  but  would  require  Federal  funding  of  more  than  $250 
million. 
Dr.  Harrison  H.  Schmitt,  NASA  Assistant  Administrator  for  Energy 
Programs,  said  NASA  was  continuing  investigations of  orbiting  satellite 
power  stations.  A microwave  energy  project  was  studying  problems  of 
processing large amounts of  power. However, an  orbiting power  station 
would  weigh  11 million  kg  and  require  a  second-generation shuttle  in 
addition 
to  a  nuclear-powered shuttle  to  put  i t   into  synchronous  orbit. 
,- 
( ‘lranscript ) 
7 June:  Images sensed 1 Jan.  1973 bv  NASA’s Erts  1 Earth  Resources Tech- 
nology  Satellite,  launched  23  J d y   1972,  had  dramatically  recorded  a 
Santa Ana  wind  condition  in  Southern  California,  Univ.  of  California 
scientists reported  in  Science. The Santa Ana,  rarely  recorded by  satel- 
lite, increased the danger of  brush fires, crop and structural damage, and 
wind  erosion  in  the  open  desert. The Er ts   1  images provided  scientists 
their first view of  the entire dynamics in progress a t  one time. Monitoring 
such  environmental  conditions  might  aid  resource  management  deci- 
sions.  (Bowder  et  al.,  Science,  7  June  74,  1077-8) 
planning  for  the  joint  1975 
*  Evidence  revealed  during  US.-U.S.S.R. 
Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  had  indicated  the  Soviet  Union  was  never 
in the race to the moon, the Associated Press reported.  U S .  officials had 
learned  the  Soyuz  capsule  was  designed  for  relatively  brief  earth 
orbital flights and for  ferrying cosmonauts to  and  from  a  space  station, 
but  i t   could  not  make  a  journey  to  the  moon.  AP   quoted  Astronaut 
Eugene  A.  Cernan,  a  member  of  the  ASTP  planning  team,  as  saying, 
Our  Apollo  spacecraft  is  far,  f a r   more  sophisticated  and  has  got 
< C  
a  greater  capability  than  their  Soyuz. That  doesn’t  say  the  Soyuz  is  no 
good.  I t   was  just  built  for  a  different  job.”  I n   addition,  Soyuz  was 
designed to be  controlled from  the  ground  o r  by  preautomated  devices. 
“Their  spacecraft  . . . is  designed around  a  philosophy  that  it  doesn’t 
need a man to fly.” Cernan said that the U.S.S.R.  “had  no major  over-all 
goal like landing  on  the moon.  Their  goals were  all  to  be  first.  Get  the 
first iron ball in orbit. Get the first man there  . . . the first woman  . . . 
the  first  multiman  spacecraft.”  By  proceeding  in   this  way,  politically 
they  “gained  some significant  firsts.”  (Benedict, H Chron,  7  June  74) 
0  The Nation’s  scheduled airlines,  despite  the  energy  crisis,  had  set  service 
records in 1973 by carrying more than 200 million passengers and taking 
in more  than  $1 billion  in  freight  revenues, the Air  Transport Associa- 
tion  announced. The  airlines,  with  more  than  12 000  daily  flights, had 
accounted  for  almost  80% of  the  intercity  public  passenger-kilometers 
and 95% of  all passenger travel between the US. and foreign countries. 
The  industry  had  earned  $223  million  in  1973  on  revenues  of  $12.4 
billion,  up   from‘ the  $215 million  earned  in  1972 on  revenues  of  $11.2 
115 

7  June 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

billion.  Revenue  passenger-kilometers were  up   6.3% from  1972, while 
freight-ton-kilometers had  risen  12.3%. (ATA   Release, 7  June  74) 
*  U S .  District Court Judge Joseph C. Waddy denied a request by the Ameri- 
can  Federation  of  Government Employees for  a  preliminary  injunction 
that  would  have  blocked  NASA  plans  to  lay  off  o r   reduce  in  grade  657 
employees  a t   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center.  The  denial  followed  a  30 
May temporary restraining order  issued by Judge Waddy in response to 
an amendment to a  1967 suit filed by the AFGE  against NASA  and the Civil 
Service Commission. The  suit  challenged  NASA’s alleged  hiring  of  pri- 
vate  contractors  fo r  vacated civil service jobs.  I n  a  November  1973 de- 
cision, the  Federal  District  Court judge had  ordered  csc  to  review con- 
tract  jobs  a t   MSFC  to   determine  whether  they  met  standards  set  forth 
in  the  Pellerzi  rule,  which  guided  csc  in  evaluating  contracts  for  per- 
sonal  services.  (NASA  Off Gen  Counsel,  interview, 23  Jan  76;  Casebolt, 
HuntsviLle T imes ,  31 May 74; Cramer, W Star-News, 1 June  74) 
. 
S June:  An Economist  article, “No Voice in  Space,”  commented on Europe’s 
role  in  the  future  of  educational  satellites:  The  US . ,   with  its  30  May 
launch  of  the  Ats  6 Applications Technology Satellite? was  fast  gaining 
the technology to transmit uncensored TV broadcasts directly into homes 
in   foreign  countries,  “commanding  the  eyes  of  the  uncommitted? un- 
developed world.”  Europe could develop comparable satellite equipment 
but  had  given  up  attempts to  develop a launch vehicle.  “The Americans 
can  hardly  be  asked  to  launch  Europe’s  propaganda  for  i t” ;   perhaps 
European  launch  vehicle  development  should  he  continued.  “The  ATS 
satellite may not  look  like much  of  a menace now,  but  before  a  decade 
i s  out  the  earth  is  liable  to  be  girdled  with  its  offspring.  . . .  To  say 
that Britain should not be up there claiming  . . . attention is equivalent 
to   saying  , . . Europe  has  nothing  to  contribute.  It  would  be  a  more 
rewarding  venture  than  some  of  the  follies  European  countries  waste 
their resources on now.”  (Economist, 8 June  1974) 
9  June: Northrop  Corp.’s  YF-17  lightweight  tactical  fighter  prototype  a i r -  
craft  made  its  first  flight, from  Edwards  Air  Force  Base.  The mach  2 
twin-engine jet  remained  aloft  f o r   1 h r   5 min,  reaching  an  altitude  of 
5500 m  and  a  maximum  speed  of  740  km per  hr.  All  flight  objectives 
were met. The YF-17  joined  the General Dynamics Corp. YF-16,  which 
had  made  its  first  flight  2  Feb.,  in  the  lightweight  fighter  flight-test 
program.  The  two  designs were  being  evaluated by  the  Air  Force  f o r  
possible  full-scale development  as  the  new  a i r   combat  fighter.  (AFSC 
Newsreview, July 74? 4 )  
*  Development  of  a  new  generation  of  communications satellites-such 
as 
Westar I  (launched 13 Ap r i l ) ,  A t s   6  (Applications Technology Satellite 
launched  30  May),  and  three  others  scheduled  fo r  launch  in  1974 and 
1975-would  bring  the  fifth  revolution  in  human  communications, Dr. 
Robert  Jastrow, Director  of  NASA’s  Goddard  Institute  for Space Studies, 
said  in  a New  Yurk  Times  article. The satellites would provide a “quan- 
tum  jump in  the capacity  of  Americans to talk to  and see one another.” 
The  most immediate effect would be to reduce cost of  long-distance com- 
munications and increase number of words and pictures sxchanged. Over- 
seas calls originating  in  the  U S .   had  jumped  from  about  10  million  a 
year  in   1965 to   60 million in  1973. Dr.  Jastrow  predicted that  by  1982 
the  U S .   would  originate  1  billion  overseas  calls  and  a  call  halfway 
around the world would cost the same a s  a call next door. 
116 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

9  June 
Other  consequences  might  be  a  world  language  and  the  ability  of 
people  to   live  where  they  pleased.  With  a n   inexpensive satellite-trans- 
mitted  dial-up conversation by  color TV, people would not  have to  live 
in cities;  “every house can be  transformed  into  an  office,  a  theater,  or a 
classroom by pressing a few buttons.” Long-term effects might knit man- 
kind  into  a  global  society,  enriched  by  freer exchange of  ideas  and re- 
duced fear between nations. A unified global society, however, would be 
an  organism  of  great collective power  in  which the  individual would  be 
restricted  to one role.  “The prospect is not pleasant.  But the transforma- 
tion  . . . will  take place slowly  . . . and most  of  our  descendants will be 
conditioned  to  accept their  more  restricted  options.”  ( N Y T ,  9 June  74, 
4:6) 
11 June: A giant nylon parachute was demonstrated at Kennedy Space Center 
as  a  possible  design  for  the  recovery  of  the  space  shuttle  solid-fueled 
rocket  booster  casings.  The  parachute-built 
by  Goodyear  Aerospace 
Corp.  to  provide  knowledge of  handling heavy  parachutes-had  a  base 
diameter of  40 m ,  base canopy circumference of  120 m,  and total weight 
of  940 kg.  Plans  called for  the  use  of  three  o r   four  chutes  of  this  kind 
in  addition to  a  drogue chute to  land the shuttle’s two 73 000-kg booster 
casings in the Atlantic, where boosters and parachutes could be retrieved 
by ships.  (Spaceport News ,  27 June 7 4 , 5 )  
0  Kennedy  Space Center  awarded  two  contract  extensions. A  one-year $13- 
257 787  cost-plus-award fee  extension was  awarded  to  Federal  Electric 
Corp.  for  support  services,  including  launch  instrumentation  and  com- 
munications support,  for  the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.  The new  award 
brought  the total contract amount to $144 962 628. Bendix Corp. Launch 
Support  Div.  was  awarded  a  $20 640 874,  16-1110  extension to  continue 
launch  support services a t  KSC,  including operation  and maintenance of 
Launch  Complex 39. The extension brought  the total  contract amount to 
$261 498 038.  (KSC  Releases 93-74;  94-74) 
11, 1 2 , 1 3 , 1 8   June:  Hearings  on H.R.  10392, a bill authorizing NASA  to con- 
duct  research  on  ground  propulsion  systems, were  held  by  the  House 
Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science 
and  Applications.  Rep.  Charles  A.  Vanik  (D-Ohio)  said  that  he  was 
becoming impatient  waiting  “for  an  energy  efficient” American automo- 
bile which  can meet  our  pollution  standards.”  It was “time we  truly in- 
volved NASA-On 
a massive scale-in 
solving our earth-bound problems.” 
Carl E.  Nash  of  the  Public  Interest  Research Group suggested that  seri- 
ous  consideration  be  given the  Dept.  of  Transportation  or  the Environ- 
mental  Protection  Agency,  rather  than  NASA,  when  giving authority  for 
ground propulsion research and development, because these agencies had 
had more experience in the field. 
Sydney L.  Terry,  Vice  President  for  PuTlic Responsibility  and  Con- 
sumer Affairs a t  Chrysler Corp.,  said many had  questioned whether  the 
Federal Government had  a legitimate role in automotive propulsion tech- 
noloky,  but  Chrysler would  “welcome NASA’s interest  in  the  automobile 
w i t h  enthusiasm  and  hope.”  NASA’s skill  and  experience  in  long-range 
basic  research  and  in  the  fields of  thermodynamics, heat  transfer,  fluid 
mechanics, and aerodynamics could contribute substantially to tlie devel- 
opment of  efficient transportation. The way to proceed was by a “thought- 
ful division of  research and development work between Government and 
industry.”  (Transcript) 

117 

12  June 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
12 June: Effects of  the shapes of  trucks on a i r  d rag  and fuel consumption were 
being  studied  by  NASA  and  the  Department of  Transportation,  NASA  an- 
nounced.  Trucks traveling 80 km per h r  used more than half  their engine 
horsepower to   overcome drag.  Preliminary  tests had  shown  that  a  rec- 
tangular  vehicle with  rounded  corners had  30%  less  a i r   d rag   a t   90  to  
95 km  per  h r   and  used  15% less  fuel.  Other  configurations  would  be 
tested a t  Flight Research Center and DOT’S  Transportation Systems Cen- 
ter using technology and  instrumentation  developed in FRC’S  aeronautics 
flight-test program.  (NASA Release 74-152) 
The House approved by  voice vote  the House-Senate conference report  on 
H.R.  13998, recommending  a  $3.267-billion  FY  1975  NASA  authoriza- 
tion.  The  action  cleared the  bill  for  the  President’s signature.  ( C R Y  1 2  
June 74, H5057) 
*  Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of  a $5  986 930 contract 
modification  to  Chrysler  Corp.’~ Space  Div.  fo r   stage  and  system  en- 
gineering  for  the  1st stage  of  the Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  Saturn  IB  
launch vehicle.  The modification, effective 1 May  1974 through  31 July 
1975,  brought 
the  existing  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  total  to  
$64 455 696.  ( MSFC Release 74-104) 
*  No  one was  arguing  against  using  the  sun  as  an  unlimited  energy  source 
but few saw it as an energy panacea, a Christian Science Monitor article 
said. With  a  firm commitment from the  Government the  sun  could pro- 
vide a s  much as one fifth of  U.S.  energy needs before the end of  the cen- 
tury.  But  solar  energy  faced  high  capital  costs  for  development;  inef- 
ficient  solar-collecting devices;  unsolved  corrosion  and  freezing  prob- 
lems  for  collectors;  interfering  building  codes;  lack  of  trained  main- 
tenance personnel;  scarcity of  solar technology designers, architects, and 
engineers;  and insufficient mortgage money available. Solar  energy also 
competed for funding with  a Government “bias”  toward nuclear  energy. 
Government research  dollars  ran  “25  to   1 in  favor  of  nuclear  energy.” 
(H o p ,  CSM ,  12 June 74) 
13  June:  The  Anglo-French Concorde supersonic  transport  set  a  new  speed 
record  for  a  transatlantic  flight  of  a  commercial  aircraft,  flying  from 
Pa r i s  to  Boston in 3 hrs  9 min. The  press quoted pilot Andre  Turcat  as 
saying  the  Concorde, which  had  been  invited  for  the  dedication  of  a 
new terminal at Boston’s  Logan International Airport, had  cruised  from 
Pa r i s  a t  an altitude between 1 5  000 and 1 7  000 m.  (AP, B  Sun, 14 June 
74, A l l )  
*  Glynn  S.  Lunney,  Apollo  Spacecraft  Program  Manager,  received  the 
Arthur  S.  Flemming Award-given 
each  year  to   10 outstanding  young 
Federal  employees by  the  Washington,  D.C.,  Jaycees-during 
a  cere- 
mony in Washington. Lunney’s  selection was based  on his work  as U S .  
Technical  Director  of  tbe  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project.  The  award  cited 
h i s  leadership  and  technical  ability  as  important  elements  in  the  coop- 
eration  and  progress  achieved  in  the  project  by  the  two  participating 
countries.  (JSC   Release  7 6 1 1 0 ;  JSC  Roundup,  2 1  June  74,  1 )  
13-14  June: A complex molecule called methyl cyanide had  been  discovered 
in  Comet Kohoutek in December 1973 by scientists at the National Radio 
Astronomical Observatory,  supporting  the  theory  tha t   eomets  and  pos- 
sibly planets were born  out in  space between the stars, a NASA  spokesman 
said  a t  a  Comet Kohoutek Workshop  at  Marshall  Space Flight  Center. 
Twenty-two papers  were. presented  by  U.S.  and  European  scientists on 
early  results  from  observational  programs  including  Skylab,  ground 
118 

13-14 June 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
observatories,  rockets,  and   aircraft.  Dr.  Charles  R .   @Dell,  project 
scientist fo r  NASA’s Large Space Telescope program,  said Kohoutek  had  
been a landmark in  the study of  the solar system.  “We  found large num- 
bers of  heavy molecules tha t  we  had  never seen before. We always thought 
they  were  there  but  now  we  have  proof  of  it.”  (NASA  Release  7&109; 
Michelini,  Birmingham Post-Herald,  14  June  74) 
14 June:  Dr.  James C.  Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced that  NASA’s 
Mississippi  Test  Facility  had   been  renamed  the  National  Space Tech- 
nology Laboratories  ( NSTL)  , effective immediately, and  would become a 
permanent field  installation  reporting  directly  to  NASA  Hq.  MTF,  whose 
activities now  included developmental testing of  the main engine f o r  the  
space shuttle  and   an   earth  resources  laboratory,  had  been  established 
in   1961 as  par t  of  Marshall Space Flight  Center,  to  perform  static tests 
of  Saturn V  launch  vehicle  stages  used  in   the  Apollo  program.  (NASA  
Release  7 6 1 5 9 )  
*  Kennedy  Space Center’s  Earth  Resources  Office  was  studying  the  use  of 
radar   imagery for land  use  planning, water  resources management,  and 
detection  of  pools  of  water under  canopies of  dense vegetation, KSC  an- 
nounced.  Three  Brevard  County,  Fla.,  sites  had  been  surveyed  by   a 
C 4 6  Curtis Commando aircraft equipped with a two-wavelength, multi- 
plex,  synthetic aperture,  sidelooking radar.  Results indicated  that  radar  
was  promising  for  rura l   and  urban  land  use  applications  and  water 
resources management, but water detection experimepts were less encour- 
aging.  The  study  was  being  conducted  because  photographic  and   TV 
sensors on  spacecraft were  limited  to  the  visual  or  near-infrared wave- 
lengths. They were unable  to photograph in  darkness or  through clouds. 
(KSC   Release  97-74) 
0  Overall  U S .   aerospace exports  during the  first  three  months of  1974 had 
totaled  $1713 million,  up  from  $1245  for  the  same period  in  1973, the 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  of  America  announced.  (A IA   Release 
74-6) 
President  Nixon  established  the  Committee on  Energy. The   Cabinet-level 
advisory  body  would  coordinate  development  of  energy policy  within 
the Executive Branch. ( P D ,  17  June 74,607-8) 
15  June-23  Sep tember:   The  Global  Atmospheric  Research  Program’s  At- 
lantic Tropical Experiment  ( GATE)   was  conducted over a 51-million-sq- 
km  area  of  tropical  land  and  sea  to  collect data  on  the  behavior of  the 
tropical  atmosphere and  its  ultimate  effects  on  global  weather.  Spon- 
sored by  the United Nations’ World Meteorological Organization, more 
than  4000  scientists,  technicians,  and  support personnel from  72  coun- 
the   US., Brazil,  France,  East  and  West  Germany, 
tries-including 
38 ships, 
Mexico, The Netherlands, United Kingdom, and USSR.-used 
65 instrumented buoys,  13 aircraft, 6 kinds of satellites, and nearly 1000 
land  stations  to  observe  and  record  phenomena  from  the  top  of  the 
atmosphere to  1500 m below the sea surface. Objectives of  GATE were to  
extend  the  time range and  scope of  weather predictions,  develop means 
to  assess pollution, determine feasibility of  large-scale weather modifica- 
tion, and  establish new bonds of  international cooperation. 
The  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration coordka ted  
U S .   participation,  which  included  NASA,  Dept.  of  Defense,  Dept.  of 
State, Dept.  of  Transportation,  National Academy  of  Sciences, National 
Science Foundation, and National Center  for Atmospheric Research,  as 
well a s  the private sector of  the scientific community. 

119 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
15  June-23  September 
Instrumented  aircraft,  including  NASA’s Convair 990, flew  a t  altitudes 
between 90 and 9150 m to probe the cores of  tropical cloud clusters and 
investigate the  intertropical convergence zone,  ocean waves  and  surface 
temperatures, radiation, tropical disturbances and dust layers moving off 
the African continent, and day-night weather changes in the coastal areas. 
Ships from  10  countries,  including  NASA’s  vanguard   tracking  ship  ‘and 
eight  other  U S .   vessels,  investigated  tropical  cumulus  cloud  clusters, 
uppermost layers of  ocean affected by  local  atmospheric conditions, and 
the broad  systems of  ocean currents near the equator. Satellites-includ- 
ing Sms  1, A t s  3, Noaa  2  and 3, Nimbus  5, and DMSP  Defense Meteoro- 
logical Satellites from the U S .  and polar  orbiting Meteor-class satellites 
from  the  U.S.S.R.-furnished 
day  and  night  information  on  cloudtop 
heights  and  temperatures,  cloud  liquid-water  content,  wind  speed  and 
direction, temperature  and moisture in  the  atmosphere, and  sea surface 
temperatures. Land stations provided surface and upper-air da ta ;  instru- 
mented buoys collected data from  the sea surface to 10-m altitude. 
Each nation  contributing vehicles would  process and validate the  col- 
lected  data.  By  March  1976  all  data  would  be  sent  to  two  World  Data 
Centers, operated  by  the  U S .   and  U.S.S.R.,  where  they  would  become 
available  to  scientists.  (NOAA,  GATE  News  Press  Kit,  9  May  74;  GATE 
Release NI  74A5 ;  FBIs-Poland,  25  June 74, G6 ;  NOAA Release 761541  
16  June:  The  Air  Force  Air  Weather  Service began  operational  testing  of 
the Airborne  Weather Reconnaissance System  ( AWRS )   aircraft  over the 
Gulf  and  East  Coasts.  The  modified -WC-130  aircraft-using 
the most 
advanced meteorological and atmospheric sensors to  provide continuous 
accurate measurements of  wind  speed  and  direction,  temperature, pres- 
sure,  and  dewpoint-humidity at  flight levels-would 
study  the  structure 
and  internal  forces  of  hurricanes,  storms,  and  other  atmospheric  phe- 
nomena. The  aircraft  also  carried  the  first  airborne,  integrated  Omega- 
inertial navigation  system for positional  accuracies of  about 2  km  on  a 
6000-km overwater mission. ( AFSC  Release OIP  116.74) 
17  June:  A  Boeing  747  aircraft  had  been  chosen  to  transport  the  space 
shuttle  orbiter  and  related  hardware  from  the  West  Coast  to  Kennedy 
Space Center, NASA  announced. The 747 would  also be used  in approach 
and  landing  tests  of  the  reusable  orbiter.  Bought  from  American  Air- 
lines, a used 747 would be modified and equipped with  fittings to permit 
quick  installation  of  the  orbiter  or  hardware  on  top  of  the  aircraft. 
Flight  profile tests would begin  immediately;  modifications were  to  be- 
gin  after  November.  Ground  and  flight  tests would  begin  in  late  1976. 
Takeoff  weight  with  the  orbiter  was  estimated as  35  000  kg.  (NASA  Re- 
lease 74-160) 
9  Dr. William R.  Lucas assumed duties a s  Director of  Marshall Space Flight 
Center  succeeding Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone, who  had  been  transferred  to 
NASA  Hq.  a s   Associate Administrator  [see  5  March].  Dr.  Lucas,  who 
had been with MSFC  and predecessor organizations for 22 yrs in scientific 
and management positions, had  been  part  of  the group transferred  from 
the Army in  1960 to form the nucleus of  MSFC.  He had  served as Deputy 
Director since 1971.  (MSFC Release 7 6 1 0 9 ;  MurshaZZStar, 17 Feb 7 1 , l )  
17-18  June:  The international Mission Definition Group, sponsored by NASA 
and the European  Space Research Organization  a t  Ames  Research Cen- 
ter,  concluded that  backup  hardware  from  the  Pioneer  10 and  11  mis- 
sions  (launched 2 March  1972 and 5 April  1973) could be used  for  an 
orbital mission to Jupiter  in  the 1980s. The US. and European scientists 
120 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

17-18 June 
brought together  to  discuss the  possible mission  found the Pioneer-class 
spacecraft  best  suited  for  a  study  of  Jupiter’s  unusual  magnetic  field. 
The  group  recommended  that  70%  of  a  40-kg payload be  designed  to 
study  energetic  particles  and   magnetic  fields,  with  the  remainder  for 
visual,  ultraviolet,  and infrared images. The spacecraft might also carry  
a probe to explore Jupiter’s atmosphere. 
The  possible  mission  to   Jupiter  was  one  of  eight  potential  areas  of 
space cooperation identified by  NASA  and  ESRO dur ing  a  joint review of 
space science program planning in  February. After studying the Group’s 
report, NASA and  ESRO would decide whether further consideration should 
be given a future international mission to Jupiter.  (NASA Release 74-168; 
NASA  proj mgr, interview, 5 May 75) 
17-28  June:   A nine-man NASA  delegation participated  in  joint tests with  So- 
viet  representatives in  Star City,  near MOSCOW, to  evaluate lighting  and 
facilities  for   TV  and  photography  in   the  Soyuz  spacecraft.  Tests  were 
made  in  a  mockup  of  the  Soyuz  spacecraft. The  US.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo- 
Soyuz Test Project mission,  scheduled fo r  July  1975, would  include TV 
coverage  from  both  spacecraft  transmitted  to   the  U.S.  and  U.S.S.R. 
simultaneously.  (JSC  Release  7 6 1 1 4 ;   NASA  prog  off,  interview,  30 
April 75) 
18  June:   Marshall Space Flight  Center  announced  the  award  of  a  $69316  
six-month contract  to   International  Telephone  &  Telegraph Corp.  ITT 
Gilfillan  Div.  to  analyze  a  two-way optical  data  link,  using laser  beams 
and  operating between  the  ground  and payloads  in  low earth orbit. The 
study, which  could  lead  to  a  laser  communications system for the space 
shuttle, was  expected to  provide information on the most  effective lasers 
and   frequencies  and  the  effects  of  orbital  dynamics.  (MSFC Release 
74-105) 
21  June:  The Air  Force  awarded a  $42.8-million  fixed-price-incentive firm- 
award-fee contract  to  Rockwell  International  Corp.  to  design,  develop, 
fabricate,  launch,  and  operate  three  prototype satellites in   the  NAVSTAR 
Global  Positioning  System.  Included  in   the  contract  were  associated 
hardware, qualification model, and  computer programming and services. 
In   addition,  two   navigation  subsystems  would  be  delivered  for  use 
aboard  a  NAVSTAR  satellite to  be developed by  the Nw a l  Research Lab- 
oratory. When  completed, the 24 satellites in   the NAVSTAR  system would 
provide  worldwide  precise  positioning  and  navigation,  day  or  night, 
and under  all weather  conditions.  (DOD  Release 268-74) 
22  June:  President Nixon  signed  NASA’s authorization  bill,  H.R.  13998, into 
Public Law  93-316.  The $3.267-billion act  authorized $2.37  billion  for 
research  and  development,  $144  million  for  construction  of  facilities, 
and $750 million for research and  program management.  (PD, 1 July 74, 
726) 
23  June:   NASA  announced selection  of  39  scientists to  provide experiments 
fo r  the  1978 Pioneer twin  missions to Venus. The selection, made from  
162  scientists who  had   submitted proposals to  NASA,  included  one  sci- 
entist  each from Germany  and  France. The scientists would  participate 
in   a  detailed  study of  the  planet,  including composition, structure,  and 
radiation field of  its atmosphere; nature of  the clouds;  and  magnetic and 
radiation environment of  the planet.  (NASA Release 74-155) 
24 Jum-12 J u l y :  Eight U.S.  astronauts-Thomas  P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, 
Donald K.  Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R.  Lousma, RO- 
bert F. Overmyer, and Karol J .  Bobko-took  par t  in  training in  S tar  City, 
121 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
24  J u n e 1 2   July 
near  Moscow,  for  the  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project.  A  ninth,  Eugene A. 
Cernan,  took  pa r t   in   the  first  two  weeks  of  training,  representing  the 
Johnson  Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program O5ce.  I n  addition to  
studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet 
flight  crews  in  simulators  and mockups.  They  also  continued  planning 
procedures  and  checklists for  the  joint  mission.  (JSC Release  74,121; 
JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 
25  June-19  Ju l y :   The  Sa lyu t   3  research  station  and-nine 
days  later-the 
Soyu z   14  spacecraft  carrying  a  two-man crew were launched  into near- 
earth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R.  manned orbital workshop. 
Salyut  3  was  launched  a t  4:55  am local  time 25 June  (7:55  pm  EDT 
24  June)  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome near  Tyuratam  into  orbit  with 
252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period,  and 51.6”  inclination. 
Tass announced the purpose  of  the mission was to  improve the station’s 
design,  onboard  systems, and  equipment  and  to   perform  scientific re- 
search during  space flight. By  30  June Salyut  3, which consisted of  two 
cylinders more  than  2 1  m in  length and weighing some 18 500 kg,  had 
been  raised  to   a  near-circular orbit  with  a  268-km apogee  and  265-km 
perigee. 
Soyuz I4 was  launched 3 July  a t  11:51 pm local time  (2:51  pm EDT) 
from  Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying  Cosmonauts Pave1 R .   Popovich, 
commander and veteran of  the  1 2  Aug.  1962 Vos tok  4 mission, and Yuri 
P. Artyukhin,  flight engineer,  to  rendezvous with  Sa lyu t   3 .  The  launch 
was  seen by  Soviet  citizens by  delayed broadcast  on  Moscow TV.  The 
spacecraft  entered  orbit  with  a  338-km  apogee,  201-km  perigee,  89.9- 
min period, and 51.5” inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A.  Shatalov, chief 
of  cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July  Tass interview that the main 
objectives of  the mission were “testing methods and  systems of  control- 
ling  the  craft,  improvement  in  the  life-sustaining  complex,  [and] 
exploration of  new possibilities of  using both  separate  craft  and  groups 
of  space  objects  to  zccompIish scientific  and  applied  tasks  in  a  near- 
earth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July  trajectory  correction placed 
the spacecraft  in  an  orbit with  a  277-km apogee, 255-km perigee,  89.7- 
min  period,  and  51.6” inclination. All  spacecraft  systems were  success- 
fully checked out and the crew was reported  to be in  good health. 
The Soyuz   14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and  docked with S d y u t  3 on 
5 July  during their  17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the 
Soviets  would  use  during  the  July  1975  U.S.4.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz 
Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked 
the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m 
three-room  laboratory. 
During  their  15-day  mission  the  cosmonauts  studied  geological- 
morphological  objects  on  the  earth‘s  surface,  atmospheric  formations 
and phenomena, physical characteristics of  outer space, and manufactur- 
ing  techniques, as well  a s  testing the Salyut  space station’s  improved de- 
sign and solar-panel energy system. The crew aIso studied the  influences 
. 
of space on the human  organism and exercised to prevent loss of  muscle 
tone,  using  an  onboard  comprehensive  trainer  to  siwulate  running, 
jumping, and weight lifting. 
Tass  reported  15  July  that  some  Soviet  scientists  considered  ter- 
minating  the  mission  because  unexpected,  intense  solar  flares 4-8  Jdy 
dramatically  increased  the  radiation  exposure.  However,  because  the 
122 

25 June-19 July 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
flares  subsided  and  the  space  station’s  orbit  prevented  excessive  ex- 
posure,  the  crew’s  work  was  not  disrupted. 
While  the  cosmonauts worked  in  space,  two  Soviet  researchers  lived 
in  a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same 
work. All commands relayed to  the  orbiting Sulyut 3 were  first checked 
on the  ground  and  alternate  versions of  decisions for  unforeseen  situa- 
tions were calculated. On 8 July the U.S.  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, 
in  training  a t   Star  City  for  the  joint  US.-U.S.S.R.  mission  in  1975, 
telegraphed  congratulations  to  the  Salyut  3 cosmonauts on  their  “great 
success.”  They  said they  looked  forward  to  meeting the  two  after  their 
happy  return.” 
< I  
By  18 July  the  crew  completed  most  experiments  and  began  trans- 
ferring ec&ipment  to  Soyu z   14. After  checking out  spacecraft  systems, 
the  cosmonauts undocked  19 July.  Retrorockets were  fired,  parachutes 
deployed,  and  Soyu z   14 softlanded  at  5:21  pm  Baykonur  time  (8:21 
am  EDT) 140 km  southeast  of  Dzhezkazgan 2000 m  from  the  planned 
target  after  15 days  1 7  hours  30 min  in  space. The  crew  left  the  space- 
craft  unaided,  and  on-the-spot medical  checks showed  the  cosmonauts’ 
health  was 
All  mission  tests were  reported  completed.  For  the 
first  time,  a  U.S.S.R.  orbital  mission  had  been  in   touch  with  mission 
control continuously because of  maritime  tracking. 
Sulyut  3 was  the third  space station orbited  by  the U.S.S.R.  Sulyut  1 
had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz   10 docked 
with the  station 24 April  but  returned  to  earth  without entering. A  sec- 
ond  crew, launched  6 June  1971 aboard Soyu z   11, entered  the  orbiting 
station and conducted scientific experiments for 24  days. The three  died 
during  reentry  when  an   open  valve  evacuated a i r   from  the  spacecraft. 
Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion 
or  wildly firing thrusters  sent  the  station out  of  control,  tearing  off  the 
solar  panels  and  making  the   station  uninhabitable.  (GSFC W k l y  S SR ,  
20-26  June,  3-10  July  74 ;   GSFC SSR ,  30 June,  31 Aug  74;  Tass, FBI+ 
Sov, 25 J u n e 2 3  July  74;  UPI,  JF  Star-News, 1 4  July 74 ;  Browne, N Y T ,  
9 , 2 0  July 74;  SBD, 9 , 2 7  July  74;  AM  1973) 
25  June:  A  new  flight  research  program,  the  NASA  terminal-configured ve- 
hicle  (TCV) program  studying problems in  aircraft opeyations near  air- 
ports,  was  under  way  at  Langley Research Center.  A  modified  Boeing 
737  flying  laboratory  with  i t s   advanced  digital  electronics  equipment 
would  be  used  to  study  present  and  future  terminal-area operating  en- 
vironments,  precision  four-dimensional  [longitude,  latitude,  altitude, 
time]  flight  paths,  aircraft  performance  requirements,  automatic  sys- 
tems,  displays, and pilot workload. Particular  emphasis would be  given 
to  the  human  factors  and  the  interaction  of  crew  members.  Research 
tasks  would  include  close-in,  minimum  noise,  curved  approaches  to 
touchdown on a runway with zero visibility. Rollout after touchdown and 
&&-speed  turnoffs  would  also  be  investigated.  (NASA Release 74-163) 
25 June-3  Ju l y :  President  Nixon  traveled to Brussels  (25-26  June)  to meet 
with  the  government  heads  of  most  of  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Or- 
ganization countries and then to  Moscow  (27 June-3  July)  for a summit 
meeting with General Secretary Leonid L.  Brezhnev of  the  Soviet Com- 
munist Party’s  Central Committee. During the Moscow summit meeting, 
agreements were  signed  28-29  June  outlining  US.-U.S.S.R. 
coopera- 
tion-including  exchange of  information  and scientists-in 
the fields of 
123 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

25 J u n e 3   Ju ly  
energy,  huusing  and  other  construction,  heart  research,  economics,  in- 
dustry,  and  technology.  I n   addition,  two  treaties  were  signed  3  July 
limiting  antiballistic  missile  systems  and  underground  nuclear  weapon 
testing. Under the treaties, both countries agreed to one antiballistic mis- 
sile site each rather than the two originally agreed on in the US-U.S.S.R. 
treaty  signed  26 May  1972,  to  prohibition  of  underground  nuclear  ex- 
plosions above 150 kt,  and to  discussions on the dangers of  environmen- 
tal warfare. The treaties were sent to the Senate for  ratification  19 Sept. 
During a 2 July televised address to the Soviet people President  Nixon 
said  the  joint  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  mission,  scheduled  for  July 
1975, was “symbolic of  the new relationship we  are building between our 
two  nations”  for  several reasons.  First,  the  rocket  technology built  for 
war  was  being  used  fo r   peace.  Second,  during  the  mission  the  astro- 
nauts  and  cosmonauts would  “join  with  one  another-just 
as  we  are 
doing and must  continue to  do.”  Third,  the newly  standardized  docking 
technology,  making  international  space  rescues  possible,  would  make 
space travel  safer  “just  as  our  new  relationship  can make  life  on  earth 
safer  for  the  people  of  both  our  countries.”  And,  finally,  because  the 
process of  “working and building  together  . . . is the way that  together 
we  can  build  a  . . . peace  that  will  last.”  ( P D ,  8 July  74,  727-763; 
23  Sept  74,  1170) 
26 June: The House passed,  by  a  roll  call vote  of  407  to  7, H.R.  15572, the 
Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 
1975 appropriations bill.  The bill--passed  a s  recommended to the House 
by  its  Committee  on  Appropriations  21  June-appropriated 
$3.203 
billion  to  NASA,  $U.l million  below  the  FY 1975  budget  request  and 
$63.9 million below the FY 1975 authorization. 
Research  and  development funds  totaled  $2.327  billion,  construction 
of  facilities  $135.67  million,  and  research  and  program  management 
$740 million.  An  additional  $4.435 million  had  been  provided  in  the 
Special  Energy  Bill. 
The House cut $6.2 million authorized a s  planning funds for the Large 
Space Telescope, noting that the LST was not among the top four priority 
telescope projects  selected  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences. Also 
the  House  deferred  the  $8.0  million  requested  to  initiate  SEASAT  and 
recommended that  the  satellite be  configured to  fly on  an  early mission 
of  the  space shuttle. The  Committee urged  NASA  to   reprogram  funds  to  
begin  work  on  ERTS-c  as  soon  as  possible  but  directed  the  agency not 
to reprogram any funds for  cost overruns  on the Viking project without 
requesting additional funds from  Congress. C?ther cuts  from  the author- 
ization included $15.8 million for  the construction  of  facilities  and  $9.6 
million for research and program management.  (CR, 26 June 74, H5746- 
73; Com Rpt 93-1139) 
9  Dr.  Noel  W.  Hinners’  appointment  a s  NASA  Associate Administrator  for 
Space Science became  effective. He  succeeded Dr.  John  E. Naugle, who 
had  become  Deputy Associate Administrator.  Dr.  Hinners,  Director  of 
Lunar  Programs  in  the  Office  of  Space Science before his  appointment, 
had joined NASA  in 1972 as Deputy Director and Chief  Scientist of  Apollo 
Lunar  Exploration  in  the  O5 c e   of  Manned  Space Right.  (NASA  Ann, 
26  June  74)  
9  A National  Academy  of  Sciences panel  report  to  President  Nixon  recom- 
mended  that  the White House  create  a  Council for  Science and  Tech- 
nology. The Council would recommend how science and technology could 
1% 

26  June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
be  most  effectively  incorporated  into  the  policy-making process.  Three 
full-time members-drawn 
from  the  sciences,  engineering,  and  related 
fields-would 
be  appointed by  the  President  with  the  advice and  con- 
sent of  the Senate. A  Chairman, who  would‘also serve  as  a  member  of 
the Domestic Council, would report to the President, and a staff  of  25-30 
experts would  attack  special problems.  NAS  also  recommended  that  the 
Council actively participate  in  the work of  the National Security Council 
and  play a  role  in   areas  of  foreign  policy  affected  by  science and  tech- 
nology.  (Dr. H. Guyford Stever, National Science Foundation Director, 
had been  assigned the role of  Science Adviser  to  the President following 
the  abolishment of  the  Office  of  Science and  Technology  by  President 
Nixon  in  mid-1973.)  (Sullivan, N Y T ,   27  June  74)  
27  June:  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator, announced his decision 
to   award  Thiokol Corp.  immediately  a  5.5-million7 180-day letter  con- 
tract to develop the  space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors. The definitive 
contract  would  be  awarded  later.  Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.  had  pro- 
tested  to  the  General Accounting  Office  the  original,  20 Nov.  1973 con- 
tract  award  to  Thiokol.  GAO  validated  NASA’s  selection  procedures 24  
June 1974. GAO  stated, however, that the NASA cost analysis had  contained 
an   overstatement  of  the  cost  differential  favoring  Thiokol’s  proposal 
over  Lockheed’s  and  recommended  the  NASA  Administrator  determine 
whether  the  award  should  be  reconsidered.  Dr.  Fletcher  advised  the 
Comptroller General that the decision to proceed with Thiokol was based 
on the conclusion that the rationale used for the initial selection remained 
valid.  (NASA Release 74-178;  74-180;  A&A   1973) 
*  NASA announced plans for  a joint mission with Great Britain in June 1975 to 
launch an  x-ray telescope  on  a British  Skylark sounding rocket to  study 
the  Puppis A supernova remnant. NASA  would  design,  fabricate,  and as- 
semble the flight telescope; the British would  integrate  the payload  into 
the  sounding  rocket  and  provide  the  high-resolution  position-sensitive 
detector,  launch  facilities,  and  operations.  The  combination  of  the 
Wolter  Type I  glancing incidence telescope  and the  detector would per- 
mit  the  structural details  of  the  regions responsible for  the  supernova’s 
soft  x-ray emission  to  be  studied with  unprecedented  resolution.  (NASA  
Release 7P-179) 
Dr.  Vannevar Bush, who  directed the development of  the atomic bomb and 
mobilized  U S .   scientific and  technical resources during World War  11, 
died in  Belmont, Mass.,  a t  the  age of  84 following a cerebral hemorrhage. 
Dr.  Bush was  Dean  of  Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology during the 
1930s, when  he  developed  the  Bush  differential analyzer, which  led  to 
development of  the modern computer. He had been President of Carnegie 
Institution  in   Washington  1938-1955  and  while  there  had   served  as 
Science  Adviser  to  President  Roosevelt.  In   1938 he  was  elected  Vice 
Chairman of  the National Advisory  Committee for Aeronautics and was 
NACA  Chairman  1939-1941.  President  Roosevelt  appointed him  Chair- 
man  of  the National Defense Research Committee in   1940 and Director 
of  the  Office  of  Scientific  Research  and  Development  in   1941. I n  that 
capacity, Dr.  Bush  organized an  unprecedented  team  of  engineers,  sci- 
entists,  industrialists,  and   military  men  and  oversaw  the  develdpment 
of  the  atomic bomb,  radar,  proximity  fuse,  rocketry,  and  problems of 
technical warfare.  (Washington, W Po s t ,   30 June  74, B8;  NAE  Release, 
19 April 6 6 ;  24 th ,  25 th ,  27 th  Ann  Rpt  of  the N A C A ,  1938 ,1939 ,1941)  

1 25  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
28  June-1  July 
28  J u n e 4  July:  NASA  and the Air  Force Cambridge Research Laboratory,  in  
participation  with  more  than  100  U.S.  and  foreign  experimenters, 
launched  54 sounding rockets from Wallops Flight Center a s  part of  the 
Atmospheric  Layering  and  Density  Distribution  of  Ions  and  Neutrals 
(Project ALADDIN,  ’74)  program.  In  addition to  the 54 rockets launched 
during a  24-hr period beginning a t  1:oo pm EDT 29 June,  a pie-ALADDIN 
chemical experiment was launched aboard  a  Nike-Iroquois 28 June and 
four  post-ALADDIN meteorological rockets were  launched  1 July.  Chemi- 
cal releases made yellow to yellowish green fluorescent aurora-like vapor 
trails visible over the  East Coast. 
The program  was  studying dynamic  and  structural  conditions  of  the 
atmosphere  48-137  km  above  the  earth.  Using  small  meteorological 
probes,  chemical releases,  falling  spheres,  and more  sophisticated spec- 
trometer  payloads, the rockets tracked and measured winds, wind shears, 
temperature  and  diffusion  parameters,  upper-atmosphere patterns  and 
dynamics, and structure and composition. Data received from the rockets 
would be compared with data obtained by Explorer 51  (launched 15 Dec. 
1973). The data would be used for predicting  communications problems 
and  satellite  orbits  a s   well  a s   for  weather  forecasting  and  pollution 
studies.  (WFC   Releases  7 4 4 ,   74-5;  AFSC  Release  OIP  065.74;  AP,  W 
Post, 30 June 74, B3) 
30 June:  Permanent NASA  employment had decreased 4.2% during FY  1974, 
dropping  from  25 955  to   24 854 employees, NASA’S  Office  of  Personnel 
reported.  Despite  a  numerical  decrease  of  470,  employment in  profes- 
sional  occupations had  risen  to  61.4% of  the  NASA  total.  The minority 
component increased to   676. The  increase  in  average age  slowed to  0.2 
year,  reaching  42.7  years,  while  the  average  GS  grade  remained  the 
same a t  11.0. The 2358 separations were almost twice as many as the 1246 
accessions, with most  of  the  reduction-in-force separations  occurring  in 
technical  support,  wage  grade,  and  clerical  occupations.  (NASA,  “The 
In-house Work Force,’’ FY 1974) 
During  June:  NASA  began  “‘Outlook  for  Space,”  a  comprehensive planning 
study  to  identify  potential  roles  for  space exploration  and  expIoitation 
1980-2000.  The year-long  study, headed  by  Deputy Director  Donald P. 
Hearth  of  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center, would  seek  to  relate  goals  of 
potential  civilian  space  activities to   national  interests,  to  develop a  list 
of  desirable  and  practical  U S .   civilian space activities, to  group  activi- 
ties with specific sets of  goals, to  define research  and development tasks 
required  for potential  commercial and operational uses of  space, and to 
identify  social  and economic challenges that  could benefit from the  use 
of  space.  NASA  would  consult  representatives  from  universities,  other 
Government agencies, and industry.  The study would  supplement “The 
1973 NASA  Payload Model”  planning  effort, which had  evaluated poten- 
tial  uses  of  the  space  shuttle,  space  tug,  and  Spacelab  and  which  had 
been completed in ‘October 1973. The new  study would continue through 
June  1975.  (NASA  Activities,  15 Sept 74, 2-6;  GSFC  proj off, interview, 
17 July  74) 
*  T he National  Academy  of  Sciences  issued  Scientific  Uses  of  the  Space 
Shuttle,  report  of  a  July  1973  conference in  Woods  Hole, Mass., spon- 
sored  by  the  NAS  Space Science Board. The  conference, attended by  61 
US. and European  scientists from  seven scientific disciplines, concluded 
the  shuttle could be  an  important  asset  to  scientific research.  Increased 
size, weight, and simplicity permitted for payloads would be of  chief  im- 

126 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

During  June 

portance.  But  many  potential  advantages d e p h d e d  on  innovative man- 
agement and  clear-cut, efficient, and  flexible procedures for flying multi- 
purpose missions.  Small experiments could  be  flown  cost-effectively on 
small standardized pallets with  integrated  experiments,  put  on  standby 
and flown when  space was available. The projected 28-day sortie mission 
would be  valuable for  most  disciplines but  major  programs  requiring 
longer observation times  should be carried ou!  on free-flying automated 
spacecraft  launched from  a  pallet  in  the  shuttle’s  payload bay. 
Cost-effectiveness  of  recovering  and  refurbishing  payloads  in   orbit 
required  additional  study. A  sophisticated Large Space Telescope-pro- 
posed  for   launch  on  the  shuttle-might  be worth the cost to  revisit  and 
service or   return  to  earth.  But  visits  to  less  expensive spacecraft  in  in- 
convenient  orbits might prove too costly. Limits on recoverable payload 
weight might also restrict recovery. 
Scientists  expressed  concern  that  weight  requirements  for   men  in  
addition  to  a  crew  might  limit  scientific payloads.  A  manned Spacelab 
module was  considered essential for  biomedical research but other disci- 
plines  could  often  use  a  smaller  module housing  a  payload  specialist 
and  his  console.  Because  of  weight  penalties,  real-time  control  and 
evaluation  might  be  best  supplied  by  a  ground-based control  using  a 
shuttle-to-ground communications system,  such as  the   proposed Track- 
ing  and Data Relay  Satellite  System  (TDRSS) , giving continuous global 
coverage with a high ra te  of  data interchange. (Text) 

127 

July  1974 

I Ju ly:  The Assembly of  Engineering was established as part  of  the National 
Research Council, to advance efforts of  the National Academy of  Sciences 
and  the  National  Academy  of  Engineering  in  applying  engineering  re- 
sources toward  solving national  problems.  Initially  Dr.  Robert  C.  Sea- 
mans, Jr.,  NAE  President, would  serve a s  Chairman  of  the Assembly and 
Dr. J. H.  Mulligan, Jr.,  NAE  Secretary  and  Executive  Officer,  would  be 
Executive Director.  First  study  areas would  include  alternative  aircraft 
fuels,  uses  and  limits  of  technology  assessment,  operational  safety  in 
marine  mining,  and  outer  continental  shelf  oil  and  gas  safety.  (NAE, 
B r idge ,   July  74) 
A  Washington Po s t   editorial  urged  the  importance  of  scientific advice  to 
the White House:  Although  drought,  famine,  continuing  energy  crisis, 
overpopulation, and meteorological change had  been  byproducts  of  the 
sudden  advancement of  science  and  technology  in  the  past  century,  i t  
had become increasingly clear that  only more progress could provide the 
knowledge  needed  to  keep  this  planet  reasonably  habitable.  “We  also 
need  a  great  deal more  political wisdom  to  apply  this  knowledge effec- 
tively and  cooperatively.  . . . The President  needs  to  be  informed  and 
forewarned  to  help  avert  . . . potential  disasters  by  the  wise  and  hu- 
mane  use  of  technology.”  To  this  end,  a  committee  sponsored  by  the 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  had  recommended  establishment  of  a 
Council for Science and Technology as a staff agency in the White House 
[see  26  June].  Although  President  Nixon  might  remain  hostile  to  the 
idea  and  a  given  President  might  choose  some  other  method,  “some 
orderly way  of  assuring  science’s service to  government cannot  be  long 
delayed. We cannot arrest rapidly  advancing scientific and technological 
developments. The  question  is  whether  these  developments  carry  with 
them side effects  . . . that  are  destructive o r  benign.  No  President  can 
know  this  without  the  best  continuing  analysis  and  advice,  close  at 
hand.”  ( W Po s t ,  1 July 74) 
2  Ju ly:   A t s   6 Applications  Technology  Satellite,  launched  30  May,  trans- 
mitted  the  first  instructional  TV  course  broadcast  directly  by  satellite. 
The  course,  on  career  education  f o r   elementary  school  children,  orig- 
inated  at  the  Univ.  of  Kentucky  and  traveled  by  land  wires  to  NASA’s 
Rosman, N.C.,  antenna  fo r  transmittal to  the satellite. The spacecraft re- 
broadcast  the  program  to  more  than  300  graduate  education  students 
throughout  eight Appalachian  states.  Signals  came  through  strongly  in 
all  the  receiving  areas.  Students  would  receive  university  credit  for 
successful completion  of  the  course, which  included  taped  lessons, pro- 
grammed  instruction,  laboratory  sessions, and  live  seminars.  Seminars 
would use A t s  3, launched 5 Nov.  1967. The course was part  of  the Dept. 
of  Health,  Education,  and Welfare’s  Health  Education  Teleconimunica- 
tions  ( HET)   experiment  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of  satellite- 
transmitted  educational  TV.  ( NASA  Release  7 6 1 7 2  ; McElheny,  NYT ,  
3  July  74,  37) 

129 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
2  July 
*  A Mariner 10  trajectory  correction maneuver was made  to  ensure that  the 
spacecraft would  pass  within  48  300 km of  Mercury  for  its  second en- 
counter 21  Sept. The spacecraft would pass a t  a greater distance from the 
planet  than  it  had  during  the  2 9  March  encounter,  to  photo-map  the 
entire  sunlit  side  of  the  planet  a s  well  a s  the  south  polar  area.  (NASA 
MOR,  3  Oct  74;  Pasadena  Star-News, 3  July  74) 
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite, launched 23 July 1972, stopped 
transmitting  useful stored  global data,  following continued  degradation 
of  its tape  recorder.  After  two years  of  operation,  Er ts   1  was  providing 
only real-time imagery, making world-wide coverage no  longer possible. 
Good  continuous  U.S.  coverage was  being  maintained  by  ground  sta- 
tions in  Canada, Alaska, California, Maryland, and Brazil.  The satellite 
had  been  designed  for  one-year  operational  lifetime.  (GSFC  proj  off, 
interview,  30  July  75 ;   A u   Wk, 1 9  Aug  74,  1 7 ;   NASA  Release  73-62; 
NASA,  ERTS-A  Fact  Sheet,  1 2  July  72 )  
During the  third  quarter  of  the  Federal  energy  conservation program,  en- 
ergy  savings  in  the  nondefense agencies had  been  19% of  anticipated 
energy  use,  and  savings by  the  Dept.  of  Defense had  been  31%, Presi- 
dent Nixon  said  in  a  statement  following receipt  of  a  report  from  Fed- 
eral  Energy  Administrator  John  C.  Sawhill. Total  savings  for  the  first 
nine months of  the  Federal program  had  equaled  75 million  barrels  of 
oil,  or  $600 million in  reduced costs.  Secretary  of  Commerce Frederick 
B.  Dent  had  reported  that  industrial  energy  consumption had  been  re- 
duced by  5%   per  unit  of  output  October 1973-January  19'74. This  rate, 
which was expected to be maintained  or exceeded in 1974 by all of  com- 
merce  and  industry,  would  bring  annual  savings  equal  to  425  million 
barrels of  oil.  ( P D ,  8 July 74, 788) 
3  July:  The U.S.S.R.  launched  Soyuz   14 from  Baykonur Cosmodrome near 
Tyuratam,  carrying  Cosmonauts  Pave1  R.  Popovich  and  Yuri  P. 
Artyukhin  to   work  in  the  orbiting  Salyut  3  research  station  launched 
25 June  [see  25  June-19  July].  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,  3-10  July  74 ;   Tass, 
FBIS-SOV, 5 July 74, U l )  
*  International Business Machines Corp. and Communications Satellite Corp. 
announced  plans  to  enter  the  domestic  satellite  communications  field. 
Subject  to  Federal  Communicatitons  Commission  approval,  IBM  and 
ComSatCorp subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. would acquire two-thirds 
interest  in  CML   Satellite  Corp.  from  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  and  MCI 
Communications Corp.  fo r   $5  million.  COMSAT  General  already  owned 
the  remaining  one third.  IBM  would  own  55%  of  the  joint  organization 
and COMSAT General 45% ; shares would be offered to the public. CML- 
developing  plans  fo r   a  domestic  satellite  system  to   relay  specialized 
voice,  image,  and  data  communications-was 
expected  to   operate  its 
first  satellite  system  in   the  late  1970s.  (IBM   &  ComSatCorp Release,  3 
July 74) 
*  NASA announced the appointment of  J. Lloyd Jones as Deputy Associate Ad- 
ministrator for Aeronautics Technology in the Office of  Aeronautics and 
Space Technology.  Jones had   been  Director  of  the  Aerodynamics and 
Vehicle Systems Div.  in OAST  since 1972, when he had come to NASA  Hq. 
from Ames Research Center. He had  been  a t  ARC  since 1954. 
I n  a n  OAST  reorganization  providing  for  two  deputies instead  of  one, 
Deputy Associate Administrator  for  Technology Robert  E.  Smylie be- 
came Deputy Associate Administrator  for  Space Technology.  ( NASA  Re- 
lease 7 6 1 8 7 )  

130 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
5  July 
5 July: Photographs from the Skylab missions, Er ts  I  Earth Resources Tech- 
nology  Satellite,  and  a  NASA  U-2  aircraft  had  helped  end  a  legal  con- 
frontation  between  land  developers and  the  State  of  Florida,  Kennedy 
Space Center reported.  Proposed heavy  development of  a  section of  the 
Green Swamp had  threatened  to  endanger  a  subsurface  rock  formation, 
the  Florida  Acquifer,  which  provided  90%  of  the  state’s  water.  I n  
conflict were the rights of  owners to  develop their property and the pub- 
lic’s  right to protect vital water resources. The NASA photos demonstrated 
the effects of  land development and led to  a settlement beneficial to both 
parties,  permitting  development  in   large  tracts  with  carefully  planned 
drainage  and  without  chemical control  of  aquatic weeds.  (KSC   Release 
90-74) 
Three  Johnson  Space Center  nutrition  scientists-Dr.  Malcolm  C.  Smith, 
Jr.,  Chief  of  the  Food  and  Nutrition  Branch;  Dr.  Norman  D.  Heidel- 
baugh, Chief  of  Food Science; and Dr. Paul C.  Rambaut, Chief  of  Nutri- 
tion-would 
receive the  1974 Underwood-Prescott Memorial Award for 
“their  contributions  to   the  field  of  food  science through  their  research 
in  space feeding  and  nutrition  . . . for  space missions to  the  Moon  and 
in Skylab.”  The scientists were also  responsible for  food systems on the 
space shuttle and  the Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project.  The  award,  presented 
annually by the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, would be made a t  
an  MIT  luncheon 1 Oct.  (JSC  Roundup, 5 July  74,  1) 
7 July: Aleksander Y. Bereznyak, Soviet pioneer in  jet  aircraft development, 
died  in  Moscow  a t  the  age  of  61.  Bereznyak, one  of  a  group  of  design 
engineers who worked  on  rocket  and  jet  engines during World War  11, 
had  helped  design  a  rocket-powered aircraft  flight-tested in  May  1942. 
(NYT ,  1 4  Aug 74,26) 
8 July: An  optical  memory  system  that  would  increase  computer  memory 
storage  capability by  30% had  been  developed by  scientists under  NASA 
contract,  NASA  announced. The new  technique used  organic compounds 
whose  chemical reactions  could be  manipulated by  low-power lasers  to  
produce  phase holograms  (optical  image-storing units)  that  could hold 
100 million pieces of  information per  square centimeter. The new system 
also  would  be  more  economical, more  compact,  and more  reliable  and 
would  require  less energy and  fewer moving parts.  Advanced computer 
memory  capability,  required  for  future  NASA  missions,  also  could  be 
useful for amlications in business. industrv.  government. and education. 
,,” 
(NASA  Rele&e  74-185) 
*  Dr.  Kurt H. Debus, Kennedv Space Center Director,  and Univ.  of  Florida 
officials signed an  agreement Zo  permit the University to operate a coastal 
and  oceanographic  engineering  laboratory  at  KSC.  Telemetric monitor- 
ing  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean  environment would  be  augmented by  visual 
observation  of  ocean  climate and beach  erosion.  (KSC   Release 113-74) 
The  space  shuttle  had  no  imaginable  use  which  could  not  be  met  more 
cheaply  and  expeditiously  by  rockets  already  in   existence,  columnist 
Nicholas von Hoffman charged in the  Washington Po s t .  Of  the justifica- 
tions  for  the  space  shuttle program,  one  of  “the  most  persuasive is the 
large  amounts  of  money  that  will  be  pumped”  into  an  ailing economy. 
However, “it would  be  difficult to   think  up  a more  inflationaryway  to 
’ 
provide jobs fo r  people.”  ( W Po s t ,  8 July 74) 
9 July: The   U.S.S.R. 
launched  Meteor  18  meteorological  satellite  from 
Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  an  891-km apogee,  863-km perigee,  102.5-min 
period,  and 81.2” Inclination. The  satellite would photograph  clouds and 
131 

9 July 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

their  underlying  surface and  study the  distribution  of  precipitation  and 
ice  zones  and  the  influence of  corpuscular  flows  on  upper  layers  of  the 
atmosphere for  rapid  weather data  supply.  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR, 3-10  July 
74; Tass, FBIS-SOV, 11 July 74, U1; S F ,  1 Jan 75 ,35)  
10 July:  Australian  and  Japanese  astronomers  had  identified  the  chemical 
signature  of  methylamine  in  the  dense  interstellar  cloud  Sagittarius B, 
which was 30 000 light years from the earth near the center of  the Milky 
Way, the Washington Post reported. Methylamine was an organic chemi- 
cal  tha t  mixed  freely with  formic  acid  to  create  glycine, the  simplest of 
the  amino  acid  building  blocks  of  life.  Identification  of  methylamine 
brought to 29 the number of  chemical footprints identified in interstellar 
space  and  brought  scientists one  step closer to  understanding  the proc- 
esses creating life.  (O’Toole, W  Post, 10 July 74, A3)  
11  July:  NASA  announced  the  award  of  a  $483 000 000, cost-plus-fixed-and- 
award-fee supplemental contract  and  11-mo contract  extension to  Rock- 
well  International Corp. Space Div.  fo r  development of  the  space shuttle 
orbiter  and  integration  of  all elements of  the shuttle system. The supple- 
ment  brought  the  total  value  of  the  contract,  which  would  continue 
through  30  June  1975,  to  $943 248 000.  Rockwell  was  to  subcontract 
more than 50% of  the dollar value of  the contract.  (NASA Release 74-195) 
12 Ju l y :   Ninety-three research  teams  in  the  U S .   and  foreign  countries had 
been  selected for  Earth  Resources Technology Satellite follow-on inves- 
tigations,  NASA  announced.  The  studies,  selected  from  669  proposals, 
included  work  in  agriculture,  forestry,  environment,  interpretive  tech- 
niques,  land use,  marine resources, meteorology, mineral  resources, oil, 
civil works,  hazards,  and  water  resources. The  investigators would  use 
data from Erts 1 ,  launched 23 July 1972, and Erts-B,  scheduled for early 
1975  launch.  NASA  would  fund  the  domestic studies  a t   a  cost  of  nearly 
$5.9 million.  (NASA  Release 74-193) 
*  President  Nixon  signed  into  Public Law  93-344  the Congressional Budget 
and  Impoundment Control Act  of  1974, H.R.  7130, which  strengthened 
congressional  control  over  the  budgetary  process. Major  provisions  of 
the legislation would establish House and Senate Budget Committees and 
a  Congressional Budget  Office,  establish  a  tight  timetable  for  congres- 
sional action on authorization  and appropriations  bills, change the fiscal 
year  from  1  July  to  1 Oct.  beginning  in  FY  1976  (with a  transitional 
three-month period  from  1 July  1976  through  30  Sept.  1976) ,  provide 
for  a  congressional process  to  bring  appropriation  bills  into  conform- 
ance with  overall budget  totals,  increase the  flow  of  budgetary  informa- 
tion  from  the  Executive Branch  to  the  Congress,  and  require  congres- 
sional  agreement  on  deferred  use  of  funds  and  reductions  in  funding 
levels.  ( C R ,  16 July, 512585; PD, 15 July 7 4 , 7 9 9 4 0 1 )  
13 Ju ly:   President  Nixon  signed  Proclamation  4303  declaring  the week  of 
16-24  July  United  States  Space  Week.  I n   signing,  President  Nixon 
said:  “Just  five  years  ago,  two Americans thrilled  the world  when  they 
took  man’s  first  steps  on  the  moon.  . . .  In  that  single  journey  five 
years ago, man’s  knowledge of  our universe, diligently gathered over the 
centuries,  resulted  in  a  spectacular  leap  from  the  ear?.  . . .  In   time 
man  may  take  for  granted  such  wonders  as  we  cannot  imagine.  . . . 
But we know that a beginning has heen made that will affect the course of 
human life forever.”  (PD, 22 July 74, 805) 
14 Ju ly :   The Air  Force  launched N t s  1 Navigation Technology Satellite on 
an  Atlas F booster  from Vandenberg Air  Force Base  into  orbit w i th  a 
132 

14 July 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
13 762-km apogee,  13 440-km perigee,  7-hr 48-min period,  and  125.1’ 
inclination.  The  spacecraft,  designed  and  built  by  the  Naval  Research 
Laboratory  and  originally  called  Timation  3A,  would  test  techniques 
under  consideration  for  the Dept. of  Defense’s  NAVSTAR  Global Position- 
ing System  (GPS)   . Nts  1  carried  receivers and  transmitters  to broadcast 
its  exact  position  continuously  and  an  atomic  clock  to  transmit  ultra- 
precise time  signals. NAVSTAR,  when  completed in  the mid-1980s, would 
be a  system of  24  satellites providing  worldwide, accurate, and instanta- 
neous  three-dimensional  positions  of  air,  sea,  and  surface  vehicles 
equipped with a GPS receiver.  (P re s  Rpt 74; Av W h ,  22 July 7 4 , 14 ;  AFSC 
Release OIP   274.74) 
Gen.  Carl  A.  Spaatz,  first  Air  Force  Chief  of  Staff,  died  in  Washington, 
D.C.,  of  congestive heart  failure  at  the  age of  83. Gen.  Spaatz had  been 
one of  the  first  25 Americans to  earn  “wings”  a s  the Army’s  First Aero 
Squadron  in   1916. I n   1929 Gen.  Spaatz, with  Gen.  I r a   S.  Eaker,  set  a 
refueling  endurance  flight  record  by  staying  aloft  151 hrs  over  Los 
Angeles. For  this  feat he  received  the  Distinguished Flying  Cross. Dur- 
ing World  War  I1  Gen.  Spaatz  commanded the  largest  armada  of  air- 
craft  and  airmen  ever  assembled  under  the  control  of  a  single  com- 
mander.  President  Truman  appointed  him  Chief  of  Staff  when  the  A i r  
Force  became  a  separate  branch  of  the  military  service in  1947. After 
his  retirement  in  1948 he  served  a s   chairman  of  the  Civil Air  Patrol. 
(Johnston, N Y T ,  1 5  July 74, 1 )  
15 July:  Evidence of  a possible second black hole, from observations by x-ray 
astronomy  satellite  Uhuru  (Exp lorer   42 ,   launched  1 2  Dec.  1970)  be- 
tween  January  1971  and  February  1973, was  reported  by  Center  for 
Astrophysics astronomers in the Astrophysical  Journal. Black holes were 
believed to  be  superdense collapsed stars with  gravity so great that  even 
light  could  not  escape.  Uhuru  had  detected  radiation  from  the  x-ray 
source  Circinus  X-1  with  characteristics  similar  to  those  detected  in 
1972  by  Uhuru  and  in  1973 by  Oao  3  for  the  suspected  black  hole 
Cygnus  X-1.  Varying  periods  of  x-ray  intensity  had  indicated  that 
Circinus  X-1  was  possibly  binary;  the  x-ray  energy  spectrum  had 
showed changes from 2  to  20  kev.  No  optical counterpart  for  the  x-ray 
source had  been found. 
Black holes might be  an  answer to  two basic  problems in  cosmology, 
Walter S. Sullivan had written in the New  York: Times Magazine 1 4  July. 
All  visible  material  accounted  for  only  2%   of  the  matter  necessary  to 
prevent  the  universe from flying apart  in  a  continuing expansion;  some 
scientists thought black holes might well make up the deficit. Also, black 
holes  might  provide  the  “glue,”  the  necessary  gravity,  to  keep  clusters 
of  galaxies  from  flying apart.  Not  all  scientists were  convinced  of  the 
existence of  black holes, but the holes’ strange effects-such  as the slow- 
ing of  time, the  tight  curvature of  space, and the influence of  gravity on 
light-had  been  anticipated  by   Einstein7s theory  of  relativity. 
One  major  dilemma was  what  happened  within  a  black  hole.  Some 
scientists had  proposed that  a s ta r  drawn into a black hole by its gravity 
might emerge in some other time and place as a quasar and that quasars- 
exceptionally bright  objects  of  relatively  small  volume  and  high  den- 
sity-might  be “white holes”  into which energy was pouring  from some- 
where  else,  perhaps  even  another  universe.  (Jones  et  al.,  Astro  Journ, 
15 July 74, L 7 1 4 ;  N Y T  Magazine, 1 4  July 7 4 , l l -3 5 ;   A&A   1971 ,1972 ,  
1973 )  

133 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
15  July 
0  The Air  Force was  developing a  new  series of  global meteorological satel- 
lites for  the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program  (DMSP) , Aviation 
Week  & Space  Technology reported. The new Block 5D spacecraft would 
be   twice  the weight  of  its predecessors,  have a  payload  capacity  about 
four times greater,  and carry  a broader mix of  meteorological sensors to  
provide  uniformly  high-resolution  photos.  Block  5D  satellites  would 
employ  “selective  redundancy”-redundancy 
in  certain critical,  rather 
than  all,  spacecraft  systems.  This  redundancy would  increase  probable 
mission lifetime to   two  years, more than  twice the 9- or   10-mo lifetime 
of  most  earlier  USAF  weather  satellites.  Rather  than  choosing a  single 
contractor,  the  USAF  had   awarded  a  series  of  fked-price contracts:  to  
RCA Corp. fo r  the spacecraft, Westinghouse Electric Corp. for the  primary 
sensor,  Barnes  Engineering  Co.  for   the  supplementary sensors,  and 
Radiation,  Inc.,  for   ground  terminals.  ( A v   W k ,   15  July  74,  4 1 4 7 )  
*  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  had   been  awarded  a  $13-milEon  contract  by 
Alyeska  Pipeline  Service  Co.  to  produce  100000  heat  pipes  for   the 
trans-Alaska pipeline,  the  Seattle  Journal  of  Commerce  and  Northwest 
Construction  Record  reported.  The  heat  pipes,  called  cryo-anchor soil 
stabilizers, were developed by McDonnell Douglas fo r  thermal control of 
Skylab  Orbital  Workshop  (launched  15  May  1973)  and  unmanned 
satellites.  They  would  prevent  thawing  of  permafrost  around  the  pipe 
supports of  elevated portions of  the 1285-km pipeline  by  removing heat 
from  the ground and transmitting  it to  an above-ground radiator, where 
i t  would  be dispersed  into  the atmosphere.  (Seattle Journ Commerce & 
NW  Constr Record, 15 July 74)  
*  Federal  support  to  universities  and   colleges  had   declined  7% ,   to  $3823 
million,  during  FY  1973 in   the  first  decline  since  1970, the  National 
Science Foundation reported.  The drop had  been  largely the result of  a 
g267-million decrease in  funds from the Dept.  of  Health, Education, and 
Welfare but  other  significant decreases were  posted  by  NSF,  down  $40 
million;  Dept. of Defense, down $11 million;  and NASA,  down $8 million. 
Federal  funds for academic science activities totaled $2463 million,  5%  
below  1972. Two  science  fields had  shown  an increase  in   Federal  R&D 
support between  1972 and  1973. Life  sciences’ $934 million  was  a  4% 
increase;  engineering’s  $204  million  was  up  6%.  (NSF  Highlights,  1 5  
July  74) 
15-16   July: Western  Union  Telegraph  Co.’s  Westar  I-first  US .   domestic 
communications satellite, launched by  NASA  13 April-began  operations 
during inaugural ceremonies  in  New York and Los Angeles. Russell W. 
McFall,  Chairman of  the  Board and President  of  Western  Union COT. 
transmitted the  first message, from New York to  Los Angeles, using the 
original Morse  key  to   tap  “What hath God wrought!”  It was  the same 
message sent by  inventor Samuel F. B. Morse 24  May  1 8 4  over the first 
experimental telegraph,  a  65-km line  between  the  Capitol  in   Washing- 
ton, D.C.,  and  Baltimore, Md. 
Regular commercial operations began  16 July,  providing services for  
Wes tar  1’s  first two  commercial customers, American Can Co.  and Bank 
of  America.  (Westar  Inaugural  Transmission  press  kit,  15 Ju ly   74) 
16-29  July:  NASA  launched Aeros   2  (Aeros-B) aeronomy sctellite f o r  West 
Germany  from  Western  Test  Range  a t   4:51  am   PDT on  a  four-stage 
Scout launch  vehicle  into  polar  orbit with  an   879.0-km  apogee,  221.3- 
km perigee, 95.65-min  period, and 97.44’  inclination. The NASA mission 
place  the  Aeros   2  satellite  in   an   earth  orbit  permitting 
objectiv-to 

134  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

16-29 July 

successful achievement of  the scientific objectives-was  met and the mis- 
sion  was  adjudged  successful  26  July.  The  scientific objective was  to 
measure the main aeronomic parameters of  the upper atmosphere and the 
solar  ultraviolet  radiation  in  the  wavelength band  of  the  main  absorp- 
tion. The long-range objective of  the satellite, which carried one Goddard 
Space Flight  Center and  four West German experiments, was  to provide 
a  model  of  the  ionosphere  from  which  upper  atmospheric  conditions 
could  be  predicted.  By  29  July  the  vehicle  and  experiments were  per- 
forming satisfactorily  and  the West Germans were  initiating  spacecraft 
operations. 
A  July  1965 agreement between the U S .  and West Germany had pro- 
vided  for  a  series  of  cooperative satellite projects.  The Aeros program, 
the  second  in  the  series, was  authorized  by  a  10 June  1969 agreement 
and  Ae ro s   1 was  launched  16 Dec.  1972.  The  1974 contract  between 
NASA  and  the West  Germany Federal Ministry  for  Research and Tech- 
nology  (BMFT )   for  the  Aeros   2  launch  provided  for  reimbursement  of 
NASA  for  launch  vehicle  and  services.  NASA  would  also  provide  one  ex- 
periment,  tracking,  and  backup  for  data  acquisition.  BMFT  was  re- 
sponsible for  development of  spacecraft  and  instrumentation  operation 
and control of  the  satellite after  launch,  and data reduction  and analysis 
except for  the  GSFC  experiment. The spacecraft reentered 25 Sept. 1975. 
(NASA  MORS, 30 Nov  72, 8 & 2 9  July  74 ;   NASA  Releases 69-91,  74-183; 
GSFC S S R ,  31 Oct 75) 
16-24  July:  U.S.  Space Week marked the fifth anniversary of  the first manned 
landing  on  the  moon. 
The  1969 launch  of  ApoZZo  11 was  commemorated  1 6  July  by  cere- 
monies a t  Kennedy Space Center Launch  Complex 39,  Pad  A.  At  9:32 
am EDT,  the moment of  launch, ApoZZo  11 Astronauts Neil A.  Armstrong, 
Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.,  unveiled a plaque designating 
the  site  a  National  Historical  Landmark.  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA 
Deputy  Administrator,  told  the  thousands  of  guests:  “No  matter  our 
achievements,  . . . we  cannot  relax  our  pursuit  of  knowledge,  for  we 
must  face the  coming crises  of  our  time.  Every  effort must  be  made  to 
see  that  the  opportunity  which  our  technology presents  is  not  lost.  We 
may  be  sure  that  the  opportunity  will  not  occur  saan  again,  if  ever. 
To fail now would mean a ravaged environment and depleted resources- 
a plunge into a new and terrible Dark Age from which there would be no 
return.”  Unless  “we  continuously  restore  the  fund  of  basic  knowledge, 
we  shall  ultimately  exhaust  it.  . . . 
Some  day  we  will  establish  scientific  outposts  on  the  Moon,  and 
< <  
even  tap  its mineral  resources. And  in  the  not-too-distant future  astro- 
nauts may  tread  the  surface  of  Mars  and  the  glaciers  of  the  moons  of 
Jupiter  in  search  of  extraterrestrial  life.  . . . The  future  began  here 
a t  9:32  a m .  on  July  16, 1969. At  that  moment  on  July  16 in  the  year 
2069,  launch  windows to  Mars,  Neptune,  and  Pluto  will  be  open.  Will 
we  fly  through  those windows?  I think  we  will.” 
In  19 July  ceremonies  at  the  San  Clemente, Calif.,  Western  White 
House, Armstrong presented President Nixon a plaque bearing the names 
of  each  astronaut  who  had  represented  “this  country  in  a  flight  above 
the surface o i  the  Earth.”  President  Nixon  told  Armstrong  the  greatest 
contribution  to  the  space  program  was  not  the  exploration  or  tech- 
nology  but  the  “spirit  you  and  your  colleagues  . . . have  had  the  op- 
portunity  to  demonstrate.” 

135 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

16-24 July 
The Smithsonian Ihstitution hosted 20 July  activities marking the day 
of  the landing.  Speaking on  the Mall in Washington, D.C.,  Smithsonian 
Under Secretary Robert A.  Brooks said Apollo  11  had been  a  “dramatic 
demonstration  . . . that  progress  in human  affairs does not  spring  full 
blown  from  the efforts of  one man  o r   group  of  men.  What  we  saw was 
the  culmination  of  the  efforts of  hundreds  of  scientists  and  engineers 
from Leonard0  da  Vinci  . . . to  the  Apollo  11 astronauts.  Each  built 
on  what  his  predecessors had  accomplished  until  the  accumulation  of 
knowledge made possible the kind of  quantum leap forward represented 
by  the  Apollo  Program.” 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  called  the  day  of  the 
landing “the day man ended an era  of  one-planet civilization and  began 
a new age as traveler  and colonizer of the  universe.”  Despite difficulties, 
men would “make more  of these steps into the vast but  exciting reaches 
of  the  solar  system.” 
A  21  July  service a t  the Washington Cathedral  in Washington,  D.C., 
dedicated  the  Space Window  donated  by  Dr.  Thomas  0. Paine,  NASA 
Administrator  a t  the time of  the landing. The window, designed by Rod- 
ney Winfield, depicted whirling orange, red, and white stars and orbiting 
planets on a deep blue and green field. A thin white trajectory,  represent- 
ing a manned spacecraft, emphasized man’s minuteness in God’s universe. 
During  the  ceremony, Armstrong  presented  a  7.18-g,  3.6-billion-yr-old 
lunar  rock,  brought  from  the  moon  by  ApoZZo  1 1 ,   to  the  Cathedral. 
The  rock  would  be  inserted  into  a  hydrogen-filled plexiglass  container 
embedded as the centerpiece of  the window.  (PD, 22 July 74 ,815 ;  N A S A  
Ac t iv i t ies ,   15  Aug  74,  5-14;  transcript;  program) 
17  July:  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  Deputy  Director  of  the  National 
Science Foundation  since  1970, announced his  resignation  effective 30 
Sept.  Dr.  Bisplinghoff  had  served  a s   Director  of  NASA’s  Office  of  Ad- 
vanced  Research  and  Technology  1962-1963  and  a s   NASA  Associate 
Administrator  for  Advanced  Research  and Technology  1963-1965  and 
held  NASA’S  Distinguished  Service Medal.  He  would become  Chancellor 
of  the Univ.  of  Missouri  a t  Rolla  1 Oct.  (NSF   Release 74r188) 
19  JuZy:  Astronaut Alan  B.  Shepard, Jr., the  first U S .  man  in  space and the 
fifth man to walk  on the moon, announced h k  retirement from NASA and 
the  Navy  effective 1 Aug.  During  his  5 May  1961,  14.8-min Mercury- 
Redstone 2 mission, Shepard flew his Freedom 7 spacecraft to a 186.2-km 
altitude  and  initiated  the  US. manned  space program.  He  commanded 
the Apo l lo  14 lunar landing mission 3 1  Jan.-9  Feb. 1971. Shepard would 
join  the Marathon  Construction Co.  of  Houston, Tex.,  as  a partner  and 
Chairman.  (NASA Release 74-203;  A&A   1961 )  
NASA  announced the  appointment of  William C.  Schneider as NASA  Deputy 
Associate  Administrator  fo r   Manned  Space  Flight,  effective  2 1   July. 
Schneider had served a s  both Acting Associate and Acting Deputy Asso- 
ciate Administrator  for Manned Space Flight  from 18 March to  17 May 
and had  been  Skylab Program  Director  from  December  1968 until  the 
end  of  the  Skylab program.  (NASA  Ann,  19 July  74;  NASA  Release 7 6  
207) 
British  Prime  Minister  Harold  S.  Wilson  and  French  President  Valery 
Giscard  d’Estaing  decided  a t  a  Paris  summit meeting to  limit  construc- 
tion  of  the Concorde supersonic jet  airliner to  16 aircraft. The  decision, 
which  would  end the  joint project by  1977, was a  compromise between 
the  British  Labor  Party’s  desire  to  cut  off  state  funds  entirely  and  the 

136 

19 July 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
French  demand that the program be expanded to 19 aircraft. Since many 
parts  h ad   already  been  manufactured,  the  decision  meant  that  many 
of  the  30 000  employees  of  manufacturers  Agrospatiale  France  and 
British Aircraft Corp. Ltd. might lose their  jobs. There were firm orders 
for only nine of  the $400-million aircraft, with options on several others. 
U S .  airlines had  refrained from ordering any of  the aircraft because of 
doubts about its operating economy.  ( @‘SI7 22 July  7 4 ’ 6 ;   UK  Embassy 
PIO, Wash, D.C.) 
*  Dr.  Floyd  L.  Thompson,  former  Langley  Research Center  Director,  had 
been  selected  to  receive  the  Society  of  Automotive  Engineers’  1974 
Daniel Guggenheim Medal, the  Langley  Researcher  reported.  He would 
receive the  award for his  “farsighted  development of  men  and facilities, 
and  for  decisive  leadership  of  research  tha t   provided  technological 
foundations  for  manned  flight beyond  the  speed  of  sound,  safe reentry 
of  spacecraft, and successful exploration of  space.”  (Lang ley  Researcher, 
19 July 7 4 , l ;  A&A ,  Dec 74 ,72 )  
*  President Nixon  announced his  intention to nominate James E.  Dow  t o  be 
Deputy Administrator  of  the  Federal Aviation Administration,  succeed- 
ing Kenneth M.  Smith, who had  resigned. Dow had  been Associate Ad- 
ministrator  of  FAA  since August 1972. The nomination was submitted to 
the Senate 22 July and confirmed 8 Aug.  ( P D ,  22 July  74 ,517 ;   29 July 
74,995 ; FonF, 7 Sept 74) 
*  Communications Satellite Corp.  reported  a  net  income of  $21 013 000,  or 
$2.10  a  share,  for  the  first  six months  of  1 9 7 6 u p  from  $15 223 000, 
o r  $1.52  a  share,  for  the  same period  in  1973. Operating  revenues  for 
the  period  were  $63322000 ,   up  from  $ 55 9 02 00 0   in   1973.  The  in- 
creased revenues had resulted from a gain  in the number  of  half-circuits 
leased by ComSatCorp to its carrier customers for overseas satellite com- 
munications.  (ComSatCorp Release 74-41) 
Columbia Broadcasting System newsman Walter Cronkite recalled the  two 
most  exalting  moments  in  his  years  of  TV  space  coverage, during  an  
interview  with  the  Christian  Science  Monitor.  The  first  was  “Alan 
Shepard’s  little  15-minute plop-down into  the  Atlantic.  Rocketry  itself 
was  so  uncertain  . . . I  just  didn’t  know  whether  or  not  I  was  going 
to be.  able to  watch.”  The second was  the  first lunar  :anding.  “That  was 
a  highly emotional moment for me.  The actual  touchdown, not  so much 
Neil  Armstrong’s  walk.”  Cronkite,  preparing  for  the  TV documentary 
“Space:  A Report  to  the  Stockholders,”  said he  still believed the major 
achievement of  the moon  landing was  that  “it proves that we  truly have 
the capability  a t  this stage of  man’s  civilization to do any darn thing we 
want-the  most outlandish o r  the most practical things.” 
Of  course there  were  important  spinoff values.  “Probably  one  of  the 
most  important  industrial  spinoffs  . . . is  the  command  that  US. in- 
dustry had  gotten in  the computer business.  . . .  I  attribute that  almost 
solely to  the  space program.”  Cronkite  said  that  recent  cutbacks in  the 
manned program were proper.  “It is ju s t  about where  it  ought  to  b e -  
most  of  the  concentration  now  is  in  unmanned  satellites”  and  a  delib- 
erate, but not crash, program toward  the reusable space shuttle. If  news- 
men were  allowed to  travel  on  the  space  shuttle, he’d  go  “on  any  flight 
they  offered me.”  When  asked  if  he  wouldn’t  be  missed  by  American 
TV viewers at blastoff, he  said,  “What  do  you  mean.  . . ?  I hope  to   be 
broadcasting  all  the  time  from inside!”  ( C SM ,  19 July  74) 
137 

20  July 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
20 July:  A New  York Times editorial commented on the  fifth anniversary of 
the  Apollo  11 lunar  landing:  “On  20  July  1969, millions of  people  a l l  
over the globe watched . , . as  [Apo l lo  11 Astronaut]  Neil Armstrong’s 
great left boot groped  for  the  lunar  surface  and he made his  ‘one  small 
step  f o r  a  man,  one  giant  leap  f o r  mankind.’”  Today,  just  five  years 
later, many Americans would be ha rd  put to  name all three  participants 
of  the  original mission.  “The  attention  of  the  world  . . . has  turned  to  
problems closer to home.  Yet  when  those  future  centuries  look  back  on 
this  one,  the  first  time  that  men  landed  on  another  celestial body  will 
loom  large  and  they  will  be  rememhered  long  after  those  in   today’s 
headlines have passed beyond recall.”  ( N Y T ,  20 July  74,  30) 
21 July:  The leadership of  “NASA’s other hero,”  former Administrator  James 
E.  Webb,  was  recalled  by  Julian  Scheer,  former  NASA  Assistant  Ad- 
ministrator  for  Public  Affairs,  in  the  Washington  Po s t :   The  fifth  an- 
niversary of  the 20  July  1969 A p d o  11 lunar landing would bring toasts 
to  former  astronauts  Neil  A.  Armstrong,  Edwin  E.  Aldrin,  Jr.,  and 
Michael Collins and  others. But  it had  been Webb’s  “incredible  leader- 
ship” which had m a G h e  event posdble. Webb had  “fought the Bureau 
of  the  Budget  for  every nickel”  and  usuaIIy  got  his  way.  In   Congress, 
few ‘believed he  was  not  a  scientist  o r   engineer.  He  dazzled  them  with 
his  knowledge  of  the  technical  as  well  as  his  management  of  the  vast 
NASA  program  structure.  “But  i t  was  in  the  internal  workings  of  NASA 
where his  strength  lay.”  He  had  a n  uncanny  knack  for  “standing  back 
and  looking  a t   the  big  picture.”  He  never  took  o n   a  problem  without 
coming  up  with  a s  many  as  four  options  and,  for  Webb,  every  option 
was an  opportunity. Abruptly in 1968, Webb resigned. Most of  the major 
Apollo  decisions had  been  made.  “Almost  shockingly,  i t   was  less  than 
a  year  away  from  the  first  manned  luna r  landing.  Had  he  . . . waited 
ju s t   a while longer, he  could have basked in  the moment of  tremendous 
glory.”  ( W Po s t ,  21  July 74, C6) 
*  A  multibillion  dollar  competition between the  U.S.  and  France was  being 
waged over which country would  produce the  new  generation  of  fighter 
aircraft for the Western European allies, the New  Yo& T imes  reported. 
To the victor would go one of  the largest  aircraft export  sales in history, 
the  possibility  of  producing  2000  or  more  aircraft  worth  between  $10 
billion and $15 billion. To replace their  10-yr-old, U.S.-built  F-104  Star- 
fighter,  the  Europeans  would  like  a  low-cost, high-performance  fighter 
that  could meet military  requirements through  the  1990s. The U.S.  was 
offering versions of the lightweight fighter-the  General Dynamics Corp. 
YF-16  and  the  Northrop  Corp. YF-17,  now  in  competition fo r   an  Air 
Force production contract  [see 9 June]-while 
the French were offering 
an improved version of  the F-1  Mirage. Pentagon  officials claimed both 
the YF-16  and YF-17  were  superior  to  the Mirage  in  acceleration and 
maneuverability despite the more powerful engine in the French  aircraft. 
The competition would probably be decided as much on economic and 
political grounds a s  by  military  considerations. The French  argued  that 
the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  allies  shouId  “buy  European” 
and maintain  European  solidarity. The U S .  emphasized standardization 
of  weapons within  NATO  and the  future willingness of  the U.S.  to main- 
tain  forces  in  Western  Europe.  Although  the  immediate  potential  CUS- 
tomers-Belgium,  The  Netherlands,  Norway,  and  Denmark-would 
need  about 300 aircraft,  American officials were envisaging even larger 
138 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
21 July 
markets  in   other  West  European  countries  and  the  world  market. 
(Finney,  NYT ,   21   July  74,  3 )  
23 July: The U.S.S.R.  launched Molniya 11-10  communications satellite from 
Plesetsk  into  orbit with  a  40 724-km apogee, 603-km perigee,  12-hr 18- 
min period,  and  62.9”  inclination. The comsat would help provide long- 
distance  telephone  and  telegraph  radio  communications and   transmit 
U.S.S.R.  TV  programs  to  stations  of  the  Orbita  network.  (GSFC  W k l y  
SSR, 18-24  July 74 ;  Tass, FBIS-SOV, 23  July  74,  U1 ;  SF,  1 Jan  7 5 , 35 )  
0  The  Senate Committee on Aeronautical and  Space Sciences held  hearings 
on  s. 3542, a bill  introduced 29 May  to  authorize $41 700 000 for NASA 
t o   launch  a  seventh  Applications Technology  Satellite.  Sen.  Frank  E. 
Moss  (D-Utah)  said experimenters using A t s   6, launched 30 May,  had 
urged another  launch because more than  the planned one year of  opera- 
tion over  the U S .  was needed to  complete experiments. Two  satellites in  
orb i t  a t  the same time would “greatly improve the experimental informa- 
tion necessary for  further decisions on  the use  of  advanced communica- 
tions satellites.” Sen. Barry Goldwater  (R-Ariz.)  said that ATS  satellites 
held  “the promise of  improved health  care  a t  reduced costsyy for  people 
in   remote  regions  of  the  U S .  
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator, testified  that  A t s   6 was 
in excellent condition and  had a life expectancy of  three additional years 
over  the  U S .   following  its  return  from  the  planned  year  of  operation 
over  India.  In   addition,  use of  the U.S.-Canada  Communications Tech- 
nology  Satellite  scheduled  for  a  mid-December  launch  could  provide 
experimenters additional  experiment time  and   continuity.  Dr.  Fletcher 
expressed  NASA  opposition to  the  bill,  saying  i t   would  cost  $4 million 
more than  the  bill  provided, to  cover  the cost  of  the  Titan  I I IC  launch 
vehicle.  To  avoid further  costs,  a  decision  to  launch  another spacecraft 
would  have  to  be made  by  September, when  the  NASA  and  industry  ATS 
team were to be disbanded. A seventh ATS  satellite could be considered a 
potential  operational  vehicle  and  the  user  community  might  consider 
bearing  the  costs.  (Transcript) 
*  Marshall Space  Flight  Center  announced  the  award  of  two  contracts  for 
studies  of  Skylab results.  American Science and  Engineering, Inc.,  re- 
ceived  $2 044 860  and  the  Smithsonian Institution’s Astrophysical Ob- 
servatory  received  $264684   to  study  jointly  results  from  the  Apollo 
Telescope  Mount  x-ray  spectrographic telescope  experiment. The  tele- 
scope had been used during the three Skylab missions  (25  May-22  June 
1973 , 28  July-25  Sept.  1973, and  1 6  Nov.  1973-8  Feb.  1974)  to  photo- 
graph x-ray producing solar events.  ( MSFC  74-132) 
25 July: The 3-19  July Soyuz 14  mission had prompted concern among U S .  
specialists  that  the  U.S.S.R.  might  be  developing  a  manned  spacecraft 
fo r  military  reconnaissance,  the  Washington  Post  reported.  Soyu z   14 
cosmonauts, who  had linked  up with  the Salyut 3 orbiting space labora- 
tory,  had  used  a  special  coded  channel .of  communications with  Soviet 
ground  stations,  surprising  US .   stations  that  usually  monitored  Soviet 
flights. In  addition,  the Soyuz  14 flight carried  the first  all-military crew 
since the U.S.S.R.  began  flying multiple-man crews in  1969. All previous 
flights had   a t   least  one  civilian  aboard.  Also,  sources reported  that  a t  
the time of  the  flight a  series of  optical sighting targets was la% out on 
the ground not far  from the launch site. The targets  were believed to  be 
much larger  than the targets usually laid out to check  spaceborne optics, 
prompting speculation that  the U.S.S.R.  might by   trying  to  learn  what 
139 

25 July 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
man,  rather  than  cameras,  could  see  from  space.  (Getler,  W  Pos t ,   2 5  
July  74,  A l )  
The  Navy  Sea  Systems  Div.  awarded  a  contract  with  a  target  value  of 
$285 400 000  to  General  Dynamics  Corp.  Electric  Boat  Div.  fo r   con- 
struction  of  the  lead  submarine  in   the  planned  10-submarine Trident 
(undersea  long-range missile  system)  program.  The  submarine,  which 
would  ca r ry  16 Trident  I  missiles with  multiple independently targeted 
vehicle  (MIRV) warheads, would  be  faster,  quieter, and better  equipped 
than  the  Poseidon-class submarine.  And  the  Trident  I  would  have  f a r  
greater range than the Poseidon missile.  (DOD   Releases 33574,336-74; 
AP, W Post, A4) 
*  Preliminary  studies  of  the  use  of  laser  beams  to  monitor  water  tem- 
perature,  turbidity,  salinity,  and  other  factors  affecting  quality  were 
under way a t  the University of  Miami under Kennedy Space Center con- 
tract.  No  method  had  been  known  for  remote  sensing  of  vertical  tem- 
perature profiles  in bodies of  water, but now high-energy, coherent laser 
beams could penetrate  deep into the water. Measuring the  return  radia- 
tion was expected to  yieId  data on a number of  factors, offering a poten- 
tial ecology tool.  (K SC  Release 121-74) 
*  John  W.  Crowley, Jr.,  NASA  Director  of  Aeronautical and  Space Research 
from the agency’s  establishment in 1958 until his retirement in 1959, died 
in  Denver, Colo.,  a t  the age of  75. Crowley had joined NASA’s predecessor, 
the  National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics,  a t   Langley  Aero- 
nautical Laboratory  in  1921, becoming Chief  of  the Aeronautics Div.  in 
1940 and Head  of  the Research Dept.  in  1943. He came to NACA Hq.  in 
1945 a s  Acting  Director  of  Aeronautical  Research  and  was  appointed 
Associate Director  for  Research  in  1947. Crowley  received  NASA’s first 
Distinguished Service Medal in  1959.  (W  Post,  1 Aug 74, c 7 )  
26 Ju ly :  Marshall  Space Flight Center announced the award of  six contracts, 
totaling $1.8 million, for  development studies of  the interim upper stage 
(IUS) and space tug. The Ius-a  predecessor to  the space tug, to be used 
with  the  space shuttle  by  both  the  Dept.  of  Defense and  NASA  until  the 
more sophisticated and capable tug was ready for use in 1983-was  being 
developed as the orbit-to-orbit stage  ( 0 0 s )  by the A i r  Force. 
General Dynamics Corp.  Convair Div. was  awarded  a  $290 000 con- 
tract  to  study  space  shuttle  and  tug  compatibility  and  develop detailed 
interface requirements. A second contract  to General Dynamics, totaling 
$268 000, was awarded  for  a  definition study of  space tug avionics sys- 
tems  with  emphasis  on  areas  where  transition  from  the  IUS  to  the  tug 
would  require  significant hardware or  operational  changes. United Air- 
craft Corp. P ra t t  & Whitney Div. received a $375 371 contract to evaluate 
and  verify  the  RL-10  high-area-ratio nozzle  engine  performance  for 
space tug  application. Under a $246 000 contract, Martin Marietta Corp. 
would  develop concepts, techniques,  and  tools  for  tug  fleet  and  ground 
operations,  mission  assignments,  payload  and  orbiter  integration,  tug 
scheduling, and physical status. MSFC awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. 
a $293 277 contract to  study Ius-tug payload requirements compatibility 
and  International Business Machines Corp.  a $337 250 contract to study 
Ius-tug orbital operations.  (MSFC  Release 74-135) 
* 
David  J .  
*  NASA  announced  the  selection  of  four  U.S.  scientists-Dr. 
Anderson, Kresge Hearing Research Institute  a t  the Univ.  of  Michigan; 
Dr.  Joseph  Bragin,  California  State  Univ.;  Dr.  John  Oro,  Univ.  of 
Houston;  and  Dr.  Alfred  R.  Potvin,  Univ.  of  Texas-for  its  1974 life 
1 40  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
26 July 
Center  studying li F e  sciences related  to  space exploration. The program 
sciences research  rogram. Each  scientist would  spend a year a t  a  NASA 
had  been  recommended  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  to  in- 
crease  participation  in   space-  and   aeronautics-related  research  by   the 
scientific community.  (NASA Release 74-197) 
28  Ju ly:  The economy of  Florida’s  Brevard County was recovering from the 
impact  of  Kennedy  Space Center  layoffs  that  had  followed  the  end  of 
NASA’s  Apollo  and  Skylab  programs,  the  Washington  Pos t   reported. 
Employment  a t   the  launch  facilities bad  formed  the  basis  for   Brevard 
County’s  economy  and  when  manpower  a t   KSC  wa s   cut  in   half  “the 
bottom dropped out.”  Construction came to a near halt, small businesses 
closed,  and  personal  bankruptcies soared.  By  March  1971 the  Federal 
Housing Administration held  title  to  986  repossessed  Brevard County 
homes  and  the  total  tripled  in   the  next  three  years.  However,  a n   ad- 
vertising  campaign, begun  in   1971 to  attract retired  persons to  the area  
and  i ts  vacant  bargain  real  estate,  started  an   upswing  in  the  economy. 
Also  contributing  to  the upswing were  a pledge that NASA  would  not let 
its  KSC  manpower  fall  below  the  current  9500-employee  (Civil  Service 
and  contractor)  level,  assurances tha t  the Air  Force would maintain its 
13300-man  work  force  a t   Eastern  Test  Range fo r   the  next  five  years, 
construction of  a new regional shopping center, and the advent of Disney 
World 95  km away.  (Myers, W Po s t ,  28  July 74, E101 
29  Ju ly:   The  U.S.S.R.  launched Molniya  I-S-the 
first  Molniya  communi- 
cations satellite in  synchronous orbit-from  Baykonur Cosmodrome near 
Tyuratam  into  transfer  orbit  and  then  into  synchronous orbit  with  a 
35 790-km  apogee,  35 787-km  perigee,  23-hr  56-min period,  and  0.0’ 
inclination.  Molniya  I-S  was  the  second  Soviet satellite in   synchronous 
orbit.  The  first,  Cosmos  637, was  launched 29 March.  Tass announced 
the  purpose  of  the  satellite  a s   “further  perfection  of  communication 
systems with the use of  artificial earth satellites.”  (GSFC  SSR ,  31  Aug 74; 
Tass, FBIS-SOV, 31 July 74, U1;  S F ,  1 Jan  7 5 , 35 ;   SBD ,  5 Aug  74 ,100 )  
30  J d y :  Ames Research Center  awarded a $400 000 contract to  Hughes Air- 
craft Co.  for a  design  study of  an infrared telescope to  be carried on the 
space  shuttle  above  the  impeding  effects  of  the  atmosphere.  The  tele- 
scope,  to   operate in   orbit  attached  to  the  shuttle orbiter,  was  to  have  a 
one-arc-sec pointing  accuracy, a  1- to   1.5-m aperture,  and  cooled optics 
and sensors. The study would include the telescope facility concept, inter- 
faces with  the   shuttle  orbiter  and  Spacelab,  operating requirements for  
shuttle  and   telescope,  and  ground  station  requirements including data 
transfer  from  the  telescope  to  the  ground  and  control  of  the  telescope 
from  the  ground  i f   necessary.  (ARC   proj  off,  interview,  29  July  75 ;  
Av Wk, 19 Aug 74, 18 )  
NASA  announced the   award  of  a  $1.7-million  contract  to   John A.  Blume &i 
Associates  to  study  design  modifications  for  the   40-  by  804% wind 
tunnel a t  Ames Research Center. The modifications, which would permit 
full-scale  testing  for  future  aircraft,  included  repowering  the  facility 
from  26.9  mw  to  100.7 mw.  The  new  test  section under  consideration 
would  measure 24.4  by  36.6  m  (80 by  120 f t )  and  increase the   speed 
capability from the present 370 to 555 km per hr.  (NASA  Release. 74-212) 
31  Ju l y :  Deputy Secretary of  Defense William P. Clements, Jr.,  approved Air 
Force plans fo r  initial production of the A-10  close a ir  support aircraft, 
The Dept.  of  Defense  would  release  $39 million  in   FY  1975 funds  fo r  
Iong-lead-time items.  Approval was  granted to  buy  52 aircraft from the 
141 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
31  July 
manufacturer  with  the  provision  tha t   contract  options  to   procure  a 
smaller  quantity  be  kept  open.  Selection of  the  A-10  fo r   full  develop- 
ment followed a competitive prototype flyoff in 1972. Since that time two 
A-10  prototypes had   flown  almost  500 h r s  in   test  flights.  (DOD   Release 
346-74) 
During Jdy: Dramatic changes in a star, altering its chemistry and foretelling 
its  death,  had  been  observed  for  the  first  time,  Dr.  Robert  F.  Kraft, 
California Lick Observatory astronomer, reported in Sky and  Telescope. 
FG  Sagittae,  a  superstar  8000  light  years  away  in   the  constellation 
Sagitta, was  undergoing a  sudden cooling, abrupt changes in  color  and 
brightness,  and increases in  the number and  amounts of  heavy elements 
in   its  atmosphere.  The changes,  which  occurred in   every  star  that  was 
exhausting its nuclear fuel, might also take place in  our own sun, possibly 
in  10 billion yrs.  ( S k y  and  Telescope, July 74,  18-22;  O'Toole,  W Post, 
10 July 74, A3) 
0  Industrial  research  and  development  spending had   totaled  $19.4 billion 
in   1972, an  increase of  6%  over  1971, National Science Foundation re- 
port Research and Development  in Industry 1972  (NSF 7&312)  revealed. 
Company  R&D  funds  had  increased 7%  and  Federal R&D  support regis- 
tered  a 6% gain after  three  years of  decreases. The full-time-equivalent 
number  of  R&D  scientists  in   industry  had  increased  to  nearly  360000 
between January  1971 and January  1972, the  first increase since January 
1969, when  the  total was  386 000.  Dept.  of  Defense  and NASA  had  pro- 
vided  87% of  the.Federa1 R&D funds to  industry i n  1972 and supported 
88% of  the  industrial R&D scientists and engineers working on  Federal 
programs.  (Text) 

142  

August  1974 

1  August:  President  Nixon  transmitted  World  Weather Program, Plan  for 
Fiscal  Yea r  1975 to  Congress. The plan outlined 1975 U.S.  participation 
in  the  program  seeking to  give man  “the understanding, tools  and teoh- 
niques necessary to  cope with his  atmosphere.”  Goals were to  extend the 
time,  range,  and  scope  of  weather  predictions;  assess  the  impact  of 
atmospheric pollution  on  environment;  study  the   feasibility  and  con- 
sequences of  weather modification;  and encourage international coopera- 
tion  in  meeting meteorological needs. He  said the U.S.  would soon begin 
continuous viewing of  storms over much  of  the earth’s surface with two 
geostationary  satellites and that  five more such satellites would be made 
operational  in  cooperation with other  nations.  (PD, 5 Aug 74, 1001) 
A  6 .4cm   underwater  borehole TV  camera to  provide  geologists views  of 
the   earth’s  interior layers  had  been  developed from  Skylab technology, 
Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The camera, designed for MSFC 
by  Sperry  Support  Services  of  Alabama,  would  permit  geologists  to  
study  geological  formations  from   the   interior  of  a  7.6-cm-dia survey 
borehole drilled  to  a  depth of  490 m.  Images received  by  the  remotely 
controlled  camera  would  be  transmitted  along  an  armored  cable  to   a 
standard vidicon receiving tube  on  the surface.  (MSFC   Release 74-138) 
A  digital  computing cardiotachometer developed  for   monitoring  beat-to- 
beat heart rates of  astronauts training underwater was being used in  two 
Birmingham, Ala.,  hospitals, Marshall Space Flight  Center  announced. 
The  device,  designed  to  operate  with  a  standard  electrocardiographic 
unit,  employed an  electronic digital  system to  use  the time between  two 
consecutive hear t  beats  to  calculate the  patient’s  pulse  rate.  A numerical 
display showed the  subject’s  pulse ra te  0.3 sec after detecting his second 
heart beat.  ( MSFC Release 74-140) 
0  “Magnetic  domain  bubbles”  being  tested  as  computer  memory  devices 
could  do mass memory jobs faster, cheaper, and more reliably than con- 
ventional  devices  and could  store  information  for  many years  for  long 
space  journeys,  the  Air  Force  Systems Command  reported.  Dr.  Millar 
Mier of  AFSC  believed the minute bubbles-densely  packed  in  very thin, 
magnetic  garnet  material-would 
replace  tape  recorders  and  computer 
disc  and   drum memories  in   aircraft  and spacecraft within a  few years. 
The  solid-state  bubble  bits  of  information  were  resistant  to  radiation 
and would  remain  stable dur ing  vehicle reentry  into the  atmosphere or  
operation  in   the  Van  Allen  belts.  A  10 000-bit test  module delivered  to 
the Air  Force Avionics Laboratory  in  May was  undergoing tests.  (AFSC 
Release OIP 138.74) 
2 August:  Dr.  Dudley G .  McConnell was  appointed Assistant  Associate Ad- 
ministrator  for   Applications by   Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Adminis- 
trator.  Dr.  Fletcher  also  announced the  promotion  of  Dr.  Harriett  G. 
Jenkins to  succeed Dr.  McConnell  a s  Assistant Administrator for  Equal 

2  August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Opportunity. Dr.  Jenkins had  been Dr. McConnell’s  deputy since Febru- 
ary. The appointments would be effective 1 2  Aug. 
Dr.  McConnell  had  spent  12  yrs  in  laboratory  research  at  Lewis 
Research Center before coming t o  NASA Hq.  in 1969. In  his new position, 
he would be responsible fo r  deveIoping a coordinated planning capability 
and  a  system  analysis  function  for  the  agency’s  space  applications 
program. 
Before  joining  NASA  in  Feb.,  Dr.  Jenkins  had  been  educational con- 
sultant  for  the Response to  Educational Needs Project  of  the Anacostia 
District of  Columbia schools.  (NASA Release 74-217) 
0  The  Aeronautical  Satellite  ( Aerosat )  Memorandum  of  Understanding 
was  signed  in   Pa r i s   by  Acting  Director  General  Roy  Gibson  of  the 
European  Space Research Organization  and Canadian Ambassador Leo 
Cadieux. U S .   Federal  Aviation Administrator  Alexander  P.  Butterfield 
had  signed  the Memorandum 9 May.  The joint Aerosat program would 
test,  evaluate,  and  demonstrate  the  system  in  preparation  for  a  world- 
wide operational  system of  a i r  traffic control in  the mid-1980s. The first 
of  two geostationary satellites over the Atlantic Ocean was to be launched 
in   1977.  (ESRO   ReIease,  1 Aug  74;  FAA  Satellite Div,  interview, 2 1  July 
75) 
*  The  last  of  130  new  solid-state  instrument  landing  systems  were  being 
delivered  to  Air  Force  and  Federal  Aviation  Administration  facilities 
worldwide. The Air  Force  Systems Command said the  new  ILS,  “one of 
the  most  significant  improvements t o   aircraft landing  equipment in  20 
years,”  would become the primary landing approach system a t  Air Force 
bases in  two years, permitting  instrument  landings under weather condi- 
tions of  30-m vertical and 365-m horizontal visibility.  (AFSC  Release OIP  
136.74) 
4  August:  The E x p b r e r  51  Atmosphere Explorer, launched by NASA  1 5  Dec. 
1973, had  achieved  its  prelaunch  objective  of  investigating  the  photo- 
chemical processes  accompanying the  absorption  of  solar  radiation  in 
the  earth’s  atmosphere  and  was  adjudged  successful. All  1 4  onboard 
scientific instruments  were  acquiring  worthwhile  data  and,  except  fo r  
minor  problems, all  spacecraft  systems were  performing  normally. The 
onboard  propulsion  system  had  been  used  on  numerous  occasions  f o r  
perigee  altitude adjustment  and  apogee altitude restoration.  The lowest 
perigee  excursion  into  the  lower  thermosphere  to  date had  been  to  an  
altitude of  130 km.  (NASA MOR ,  6 Aug 74) 
-5  August:  NASA  and  the  Office of  Naval  Research  launched  the  world’s 
largest unmanned balloon from Fort Churchill, Canada, carrying a 363-kg 
payload  to  47 000-m  altitude.  The  experiment,  designed  by  Goddard 
Space Flight  Center scientist Dr. Robert C.  Hartman,  measured position 
and  electron  spectra between  20  and  800 mev  a t  the  1.2-millibar level. 
The helium-filled balloon, constructed of  half-mil polyethylene, weighed 
1360 kg and had  a volume of  1.4 cu m and a 0.25-km dia. Launched and 
tracked  with  facilities of  the Navy’s  Skyhook program,  the balloon  rose 
over  Hudson  Bay  and  moved  westward  805  km.  After  18  hrs,  it 
descended  to  30  km,  where  the  payload  was  separated  by  radio  com- 
mand  and parachuted  to  the ground.  (Nava l  Research l?eviews,  Nov 74, 
13 )  
6 Augus t:  An  automated blood pressure monitoring system developed for the 
NASA  integrated  medical  and  behavioral  laboratory  measurement  sys- 
tem  (IMBLMS)  program  was  being  evaluated for  use  in  studies on  con- 

144 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

6  August 

trol  of  high  blood  pressure,  Johnson  Space  Center  announced.  Using 
Skylab  technology,  the  system  combined  a  blood  pressure  cuff  with  a 
pressure  ramp  p r o g r a m e r   for  continuous  monitoring  and  a  numeri- 
cal display.  Dr.  Ted Andrechuk of  Texas Tech Univ.  was evaluating the 
system, which was providing hypertensive subjects with biosensory data 
fo r  a  biofeedback conditioning  program.  The conditioning would  allow 
the  patient  to  lower  his  blood  pressure  permanently.  ( JSC   Release 74- 
184) 
6 , 8 ,  9 Augus t:  The  Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee con- 
ducted hearings  on  s. 2350  and  S.  3484, bills  to  establish  an  Office  of 
Earth  Resources Survey  Systems within  NASA  and  an   Earth  Resources 
Observation Administration  within  the  Dept.  of  the  Interior.  Both  pro- 
posals  were  designed  to  move  the  Earth  Resources  Technology  Satel- 
lite  system from  an  experimental to  an  operational  phase.  Dr. James C. 
Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  opposed  the  organizational  changes pro- 
posed by  the  bills.  He  argued  that  s. 2350 would  erect barriers in NASA 
between  the  ERTS  system  and  related  programs  in  NASA’s Office  of 
Applications;  keeping  these  programs  together  would  facilitate  hard- 
ware development and data reduction  and handling.  S.  3484 would  limit 
NASA’s research  and  development  in  earth  resources  to  activities  sup- 
ported and funded by the Dept. of  the Interior. 
Citing  the  need  for  more  spectral  channels, more  rapid  handling  of 
data,  and  more  frequent  repetitive  coverage  with  ERTS-class satellites, 
Dr.  Fletcher  stated  that  there  was  no  clear-cut distinction  between  ex- 
perimental and  operational phases in the earth resources program. What 
was  needed  was  “a  continuous  evolutionary  approach,  in  which  opera- 
tionally  useful  data  from  space a re  provided  to  users  for  research,  for 
experimental  demonstrations, and  for  routine  operations when  they  a re  
ready,  while a t  the  same time  and with the  same satellites necessary  im- 
provements  to  the  system  can  be  developed and  used.”  Proponents  of 
the  bills  argued  that  ERTS  data  would  be  exploited  fully  only  when 
users could be  guaranteed  the continuously available data offered by  an 
operational  system. Hearings would  be  continued  18 Sept.  (Transcript) 
7 Augu s t :  The Air  Force Systems Command announced that  it would launch 
an  S3-1  satellite late in  1974 a s  part  of  a three-launch series to measure 
atmospheric  effects  on  satellites. The  first  satellite would  be  placed  in 
polar  orbit  with  a  4000-km apogee and  a  140-km perigee.  I t  would  be 
equipped  with  ionization  gauges  and  accelerometers  to  measure  a i r  
density and  to   provide  data  on  space vehicle trajectory,  slowdown, and 
decay, Other  devices would  measure  atmospheric heating  sources, solar 
radiation, and atmospheric parameters. With a mass spectrometer in addi- 
tion,  to  gather  neutral and ion  composition data, the experiments would 
help  researchers  understand  physical and chemical processes in  interac- 
tions of the  sun’s radiation with the upper atmosphere, a s  well  as neutral 
atmospheric  effects  on  the  ionosphere.  The  low-altitude measurements 
would be used to predict the occurrence and duration of  radio blackouts 
and of  atmospheric effects on orbits.  (AFSC  Release OIP  137.74) 
8 Augus t:  Lewis Research Center awarded a n  $800 000 cost-sharing contract, 
of  which  the  Government would  supply  $500 000,  to  P ra t t   &  Whitney 
Aircraft  Div.  of  United  Aircraft  Corp.  in  NASA’s experimental  clean 
combustor  program.  P ra t t   & Whitney  was  io  maintain  the  already  low 
smoke  emissions  of  its  JT8D  (Class T4 )   aircraft  engine, while  reduc- 
145 

8  August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

ing other pollutants, and was to demonstrate the combustor in  an  engine 
in  1976. 
LeRC  was  also  negotiating  a  contract  with  Garrett  Corp.  AiResearch 
Aviation  Co.  for  refining  Class T1 engines, gas  turbine  engines with  a 
thrust of less than 35 000 newtons (8000 lb s )  . A third contract was being 
negotiated  with  Detroit  Diesel  Allison  Div.  of  General  Motors  Corp. 
to  reduce  pollutants  from Class P2   turboprop  engines.  Both companies 
would  be  awarded  cost-sharing  contracts  for  about  $500 000.  ( WRC  
proj  off,  interview,  30  July  75;  Yaffee,  A v   Why  26  Aug  74,  56-59) 
*  The Air  Force  announced  the  Aeronautical  Systems Div.  was  awarding a 
$4 000 000  firm  fixed-price contract  to  Northrop  Corp.  Aircraft  Div. 
fo r  the  YF-17  lightweight  fighter  aircraft  transition  program.  ASD  was 
also awarding $4 000 000 to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace 
Div. for the YF-16  transition program.  ( DOD Release 368-74) 
9 August:  President  Nixon  resigned  as  37th President  of  the  United  States. 
Vice President  Gerald R.  Ford was  sworn in  a s  the Nation’s  38th Presi- 
dent.  President  Nixon had  been  facing possible impeachment after  tw o  
years of  bitter  public debate over his conduct following the 1 7  June 1972 
break-in  of  the  Democratic  National  Committee  headquarters  a t   the 
Watergate  compound in  Washington, D.C.,  by  agents of  the  Committee 
fo r  the  Reelection  of  the  President.  (Kilpatrick,  W  Pos t ,   9 Aug  74,  1; 
Montgomery,  NYT,  9 Aug  74,  1 3 ;   PD ,   1 2  Aug  74,  1014-1017) 
*  NASA  announced  it  had  awarded  RCA   Astro  Electronics Div.  a  fixed-price 
$15 282 143  NASA  contract,  with  an   additional  incentive  amount  of 
$692 638 for performance  in  orbit, to provide  two  operational meteoro- 
logical spacecraft-Improved  Tiros Operational  Satellite H  and  I-and 
parts  for  ITOS-J. The woik, to  be performed  in Hightstown, N.J.,  would 
extend through  15 Feb.  1977. The satellites would  support  the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s National  Operational Mete- 
orological  Satellite System through  1978. The  noncompetitive procure- 
ment  was  a  follow-on to  an   existing  contract.  (NASA  Release  74-218) 
The Federal  Plan  fo r  Meteorological  Services  and  Supporting  Research- 
Fiscal  Year  1975, published for presentation to Congress, called for  pro- 
grams  totaling  $576.7  million,  an   increase  of  $5.7  million  over  1974. 
Published  by  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration 
and  including proposed  activities of  all  Federal  agencies with  meteoro- 
logical  programs,  the  1975  plan  proposed  an  improved  NOAA  severe 
weather  warning  system;  use  of  new  technology  for  more  efficient ob- 
servation,  recording,  analysis, and warning in the Dept. of  Defense and 
other  agencies;  and  expanded Federal Aviation Administration weather 
services to  aviation. NASA  proposed increases for  research with the Nim- 
bus satellite series.  (NOAA  Release 7 6 1 2 8 )  
Thiokol  Corp.  had  been  awarded  an   $ 8 9 0 0 0 0 0   contract  for  strap-on 
motors  fo r   the  Thor-Delta  launch  vehicle,  NASA  announced.  Delivery 
would  run  from May  1975 through  May  1976. The  contract called  for 
124, TX -3545   (Castro 11) rocket motors, 41 upper-burn nozzle closure 
plugs,  and  documentation  f o r   the  Thor-Delta,  which  was  managed  by 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  The  Castro  I1  strap-ons had  a  thrust  of 
about 270 000 newtons  (60  000 lbs) . (NASA Release 74-219) 
*  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  submitted  its  11th  annual  report  to   the 
President and Congress. N 1974 had included the launch of  Intelsat-ZV 
F-7 
(23   Aug.  1973)  and  the  COMSAT  General  Corp.  award  of  a 
$65 900 000  contract  to  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.  for  four  high-capacity 
146 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
9 August 
satellites to be used by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. fo r  domestic 
communications early  in  1976. By  30  June,  the  number  of  communica- 
tions  satellite pathways had  increased by about 60 to  a total of  325, with 
earth  stations  in  55  countries. With  the  addition  of  10 more  users,  the 
number of  countries, territories,  and possessions leasing satellite services 
had  exceeded  100.  Half  circuits  leased  full  time  in  the  global  satellite 
system b ad   increased  from  8434  in  1973 to   9627 by  30  June  1974, a 
gain  of  about  14%.  This voice  and  record  traffic had  accounted for  the 
majority  of  all  intercontinental  long-distance communications. Net  in- 
come  had  risen  to  $36.3  million,  a  45%  increase  over  FY  1973. 
(ComSatCorp, 1974 Report  to   the President  and the Congress)  
11 August:  “No  other person who h a s  flown in space has captured the experi- 
ence  so vividly,”  Henry  S.  F.  Cooper said  in   a  review  of  Carrying  the 
Fire:  A n  Astronaut’s  Journeys by Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins. 
Although  the  book  was  “long  and  rambling,”  touching  a  great  many 
bases in Collins’ career  from Air Force test pilot through Gemini 10 and 
Apollo,  “it  is  something new  under  the  sun  to   find  an  astronaut  who 
isn’t afraid to express his feelings.” Collins was best a t  single impressions, . 
“little snapshots,”  still sharp and clear five years  after the lunar landing. 
Two days out on the mission, “ ‘The moon I have known all my life, that 
two-dimensional, small yellow disk in the sky, ha s  gone somewhere to be 
replaced by  the most  awesome sphere I have ever  seen.  . . . This  cool, 
magnificent sphere  hangs  there  ominously,  a  formidable presence with- 
out  sound  o r   motion,  issuing  us  no  invitation  to  invade  its  domain.”’ 
Collins  had  cast  off  the  “diffidence  astronauts  normally  wear  like 
spacesuits  to  protect  themselves  from  prying  earthlings.  . . . ‘I have 
been places and done things you simply would not believe. I have dangled 
from  a  cord  a  hundred  miles up ;   I  have seen  the  earth  eclipsed by  the 
moon, and enjoyed  it.  I have  seen the sun’s  t rue  light, unfiltered by any 
planet’s  atmosphere. I have  seen  the  ultimate black of  infinity  in  a still- 
ness  undisturbed  by  any  living  thing.  . . .  I do  have  this  secret, this 
precious thing  that  I will  always carry with me.’  ” ( N Y T  Book  Rev iew ,  
11 Aug 7 4 , l )  
12 August:  The U.S.S.R.  launched Cosmos 672-an  unmanned Soyuz space- 
craft testing docking systems fo r  the July 1975 Apollc-Soyuz Test Project 
mission-from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome  near  Tyuratam.  The  satellite 
entered  an  orbit with  277-km apogee,  142-km perigee, 88.7-min period, 
and  51.8O  inclination.  Maj.  Gen.  Vladimir  A.  Shatalov, Soviet chief  of 
cosmonaut  training,  identified  the  mission  and  that  of  Cosmos  638 
(launched 3 April)  at a 9 Sept. Johnson Space Center ASTP press briefing, 
saying  that  both  had  successfully tested  the  systems.  Cosmos  672  re- 
entered  18 Aug.  (GSFC  SSR, 31 Aug  74;  JSC  briefing  transcript, 9 Sept 
74; SF, Feb 75 , 76 )  
*  Operational  utility  of  satellite  communications  for  maritime  service had 
been demonstrated with Ats  I  and 3 (Applications Technology Satellites 
launched 6 Dec.  1966 and 5 Nov.  1967), Av ia t ion   Week  & Space Tech- 
nology  reported.  Tests  had  been  made  by  Exxon  Corp.  in  cooperation 
with  NASA  f rom  mid-1973 to  early  1974 from an  Exxon  tanker,  using  a 
small  General  Electric  Co.  ship  terminal  and  GE  earth  statios.  Exxon 
had  reported  a t   a  Minneapolis  communications  conference  that  the 
satellites had  transmitted  voice,  teletypewriter, facsimile, and  slow-scan 
TV rapidly,  without the  delay often  caused  on high-frequency radio  by 
spectrum congestion.  (Klass, A v  W k ,  1 2  Aug 7 4 , 5 6 4 )  

, 

147  

12  August 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
*  Raymond  A.  Kline  was  appointed  Assistant  Associate  Administrator  for 
Center  Operations.  Formerly  Assistant  Associate  Administrator  for 
Organization  and Management, Kline would  continue  to  perform  man- 
agement studies  and would  also  oversee  the  activities of  the  Automatic 
Data Processing Management Office.  (NASA  Ann,  12 Aug 74 )  
12-13  August:  Dr.  Richard  T.  Whitcomb,  Chief  of  the  Transonic  Aero- 
dynamics  Branch  of  the  High  Speed Aircraft  Division  a t  Langley Re- 
search  Center,  received  the  Aircraft  Design  Award  of  the  American 
Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics  12 Aug.  a t   its  6th  Aircraft 
Design,  Flight  Test,  and Operations  Meeting,  held  in  Los  Angeles.  Dr. 
Whitcomb  received  the  award  for  “innovative  experimental  research 
resulting  in the development of  the supercritical wing which permits sig- 
nificant  increases  in  speed  and  range  a s  well  as  improved  maneuver- 
ability  of  subsonic  aircraft  without  increases  in  power  or  fuel 
consumption.” 
The Air  Transport Assn.’s  Octave Chanute Award went to Charles A. 
Sewell,  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  chief  test  pilot,  for  promoting  and 
flight-testing the concept of  spin prevention in a tactical aircraft. A. M. 0. 
Smith, Chief of  Aerodynamics Engineering Research at Douglas Aircraft 
Co.,  was selected to present the 37th annual Wright Brothers Lecture, on 
high-lift aerodynamics.  (A IM   News,  1 7  July  74 ;   A IM   PIO, interview, 16 
July  75) 
13  August:  NASA  began  “Outlook  for  Aeronautics,”  a  comprehensive 10-mo 
planning  study  to  assess  aeronautical  challenges and  opportunities  fo r  
1980-2000.  Under  the  leadership  of  Dr.  Leonard  Roberts,  Director  of 
Aeronautics and Flight Systems at Ames Research Center, representatives 
of  NASA,  Federal  Aviation  Administration,  and Dept.  of  Defense would 
survey NASA,  industry, and Government to determine probable directions 
of  civil  and  military  aviation,  technological advances needed,  and  the 
role of  NASA. 
I n   a  4  Oct.  letter  to  NASA  employees Dr.  James C.  Fletcher, NASA  Ad- 
ministrator,  said,  “We  want  to  produce  a  study  that  will  assist NASA  in 
presenting  the  best  possible  aeronautics  program  relevant  to  national 
needs,  for  the  remainder  of  this  century,  to  the  Administration,  the 
Congress,  and  the  people.”  In   the  aeronaukical world  market,  the  U S .  
had sold more than $235 billion worth of  products-not 
including space 
products-over 
the past  25 yrs, maintaining  a favorable balance of  trade 
fo r   a  nation  that  might  otherwise have  been  in   the  red.  I n   preparing 
this  long-range  study,  “we  have  the  great  responsibility  of  indicating 
how  America’s  pre-eminent position  in   areonautics  can  be  maintained 
and enhanced. The stakes are too  high fo r  any other approach.”  (NA SA  
Ac t iv i t ies ,   15  Oct  74,  2-3,  11-13;  NASA  OAST,  Civil Aircraft  Progs  Off ,  
interview, 13  Nov 75 )  
14 August:  The NASA Delta Project Review Committee, established31 May  to 
review Thor-Delta launch vehicle project management and launch vehicle 
performance  abnormalities,  had  completed  its  investigation,  NASA 
announced. The  committee recommended  several design  and  hardware 
changes, more  stringent  quality  control,  strengthening  of  project  man- 
agement by additional staffing, and more rigorous mancgement and con- 
tractual procedures. 
The  committee endorsed  the  ongoing redesign of  the  1st-stage liquid- 
oxygen  pressurization  system  and  2nd-stage  fuel  and  oxidizer  shutoff 
valves,, revision  of  the  redundant  attitude-control-system manufacturing 
148 

14  August 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
sequence and inspection processes, revision of  installation and inspection 
procedures  for  the  solid-fueled-rocket strap-om, and a  complete investi- 
gation of  the start-induced forces on the the 1st-stage engine. The sched- 
ule  fo r   the  next  Delta  launching would  be  established  upon  NASA  Hq. 
acceptance  of  the  plan  fo r   corrective  actions  in  response  to  the  com- 
mittee’s  recommendations. (NASA Release 74-220) 
*  NASA objectives fo r  Exp lo re r  50  (IMP-J, 
launched 25 Oct.  1973)-to  make 
detailed  and  nearly  continuous  studies  of  the  interplanetary  environ- 
ment  for  orbital periods  comparable  to  several rotations  of  active solar 
regions  and  to  study particle  and  field  interactions  in  the  distant  mag- 
netotail-had 
been  met  and  the  mission  was  adjudged  successful.  All 
1 2  instruments were performing  well with the exception of  a n  electronic 
field antenna.  Loss  of  this  antenna  reduced  scientific data  10%  fo r  two 
investigators.  All  spacecraft  housekeeping  systems  were  functioning 
properly.  (NASA MOR,  1 5  Aug 74) 
15 Augus t:   Elmer  S.  “Todd”  Groo had  been  appointed  Associate Adminis- 
trator  for  Center  Operations  a t   NASA  Hq.,  effective 4  Sept.,  NASA  an- 
nounced. Groo, the first to hold the position created in  the reorganization 
announced 5 March, would be responsible for agency-wide planning  and 
direction  of  institutional  resources  and  operational  activities  a t   NASA 
field installations. Groo had retired in  1973 from IBM World Trade Corp., 
where he had served as vice president since 1959.  (NASA  Release 72-221  ; 
MSFC Release 74-146) 
Dr.  Robert A.  R.  Parker,  scientist-astronaut and  program  scientist for  the 
Skylab mission, had  been  named  Chief  of  the  Astronaut Office,  Science 
and  Applications  Directorate,  Johnson  Space  Center  announced.  Dr. 
Parker  succeeded  Dr.  Harrison  H.  Schmitt, who  had  been  named  As- 
sistant  Administrator  for  Energy  Programs  a t   NASA  Hq.  in  May.  The 
S&AD would serve as an interface between eventual space shuttle payload 
users  and  NASA  and  participate  in  the  shuttle  flight  research  program. 
Dr.  Parker  had  been  named  a  NASA  scientist-astronaut in  1967 and  had 
been  a member  of  the  support crews for the  Apo l lo   15 and 1 7  missions. 
( JSC  Release 74-186) 
*  Air  Force  Systems Command  announced  plans  for  a  global  Radio  Solar 
Telescope  .Network  ( RSTN)  , a  four-site  space-surveillance linkup  for 
24-hr operation.  Solar  and space environmental data would  be  gathered 
by  RSTN  parabolic  antennas  monitoring  frequencies  between  245  and 
1 5 4 0 0  mhz.  Data  would  be  used  to  forecast  atmospheric  responses to 
solar  activity,  to  compensate for  communications blackouts  of  satellite 
and warning  systems,  and  to   provide  real-time solar-alert  and  analysis 
data.  Operational  testing  would  begin  early  in  1976, with  the  network 
to  become fully  operational  over a  three-year period.  (AFSC  Release OIP 
132.74) 
16 August:  The Senate passed, by  a  unanimous vote  of  60, H.R.  15572, the 
Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development-Space-Science-Veterans FY 
1975 appropriations  bill.  The  bill  was  passed  as  reported  out  by  the 
Senate  Committee  on  Appropriations  1 5  Aug.  plus  an   amendment  to 
permit  NASA  to  transfer  up  to  O S %   of  its  funds  between  research  and 
development and research  and program management programs.  The bill 
appropriated  $3.207  billion  to  NASA,  $36  million  below  the  P Y   197 s  
budget request and $60.2  million below the FY 1975 authorization signed 
22  June.  An  additional  $4.435  million  was  appropriated  in  a  Special 
Energy Bill. 

149 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
16  August 
NASA  R&D funds totaled $2.327 billion, construction of  facilities $140.2 
million, and R&PM  $74$0 million. The  Senate approved all budgeted R&D 
items,  including  $6.2  million  for  the  Large  Space  Telescope  and  $8.0 
million for  SEASAT,  both  of  which  had  been  cut  from  the  House  appro- 
priation  26  June.  A  reduction  of  $15  million  from  R&D  funds  was  not 
directed t o   any  specific program  because the  Committee suggested that 
NASA was better able to  apply this reduction with  a minimum disruption 
in  its  priorities.  Agreeing  with  the  House,  the  Committee  had  urged 
NASA  to reprogram  funds to begin work  on  ERTS-c  and said that  further 
reprogramming  of  funds fo r  Viking would be  considered only with the 
greatest reluctance. 
Funds  for  construction  of  facilities  were  up  $4.5  million  from  the 
House appropriation and down $4.3 million from the authorization. The 
$9740 million for  R&PM  equaled the  House appropriation  and was  down 
$9.6 million from the authorization. 
H.R.  15572 had been reported out of  the Senate Committee on Appro- 
priations  for  a  first  time  1  Aug.  with  a  total  NASA  appropriation  of 
$3.243  billion.  I t   was  returned  to  the  Committee  5  Aug.  by   the  full 
Senate for additional cuts. 
The Senate requested a conference with the House to resolve differences 
in  the  passed  versions.  (Sen Com Rpts  93-1056,  93-1091;  CR ,  5  Aug 
7 4 , 5 1 4 3 1 3 4 ;  16 A u ~ .  74, S15161-5) 
Static  test  firings  of  a  6.4%-scale  model  of  the  space  shuttle  to  gather 
acoustical data  fo r  design and development activities began  a t  Marshall 
Space Flight  Center. A  series of  24  acoustic test  firings would continue, 
through November, with 7 additional tests later to  study possible sound- 
suppression methods. 
The  test  model’s  two  solid-propellant engines,  representing  the  shut- 
tle  vehicle’s  solid-fueled-rocket boosters,  were  being  tested  first,  to   be 
followed  by  full  system  firings,  including  the  three  model  liquid-pro- 
pellant  engines  representing  the  main  engines, which  would  use  liquid 
hydrogen  and liquid  oxygen. On  each  firing,  60  acoustic measurements 
were taken by specialized microphones to monitor areas potentially sensi- 
tive to high sound-pressure levels: vehicle skin panels, thermal protection 
devices, electronic guidance components, and ground support and related 
structures.  (MSFC   Release  74-154;  MSFC  PIO, interview,  15  July  75) 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  announced  that  Mrs.  Ruth 
Bates  Harris,  who  had  been  dismissed  as  NASA  Deputy  Assistant  Ad- 
ministrator  for  Equal  Opportunity  26  Oct.  1973, had  accepted  an  ap- 
pointment  a s   Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  for  Public  Affairs  for 
Community and Human  Relations effective 19 Aug.  In  a  memorandum 
to   NASA  employees,  Dr.  Fletcher  stated  tha t   he  was  firmly  convinced 
of  Mrs.  Harris’s  “pride  in  NASA7s  program  accomplishments in   aero- 
nautics and space, her belief  that they a re  relevant to a l l  Americans, and 
her  enthusiasm in   conveying this  pride  and  conviction to  others.”  Mrs. 
Harris  would  serve  a s   the  point  of  contact  between  NASA  and  com- 
munity groups and between NASA and state and local governments. (NASA 
Release 74-223  ; Fletcher memo, 16 Aug 74) 
0  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  awards at  an  Ames 
Research  Center  ceremony to   50  members  of  the  Pioneer  10 team  fo r  
their  contributions  to  the  3 Dec.  1973 flyby of  Jupiter.  Charles F.  Hall, 
Manager  of  the  Pioneer  Project  a t   ARC,  received  NASA’s Distinguished 
150 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

16 August 

for   his  “outstanding  leadership  and   dedicated 

Service  Medal 
performance.” 
At  another  awards ceremony, Dr.  Fletcher  presented  28  NASA  awards 
to  personnel of  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  and  other organizations  for  
contributions  to   the Mariner  10  flyby of  Venus  (5  Feb.  1974)  and  Mer- 
cury  (29  March 1974) .  Project Manager Walker E. Giberson received the 
Distinguished Service Medal  fo r   “diitinguished  leadership  in   the  con- 
ception,  organization,  and  management”  of  the  mission.  ( ARC  Release 
74-35;  ARC  PIO,  interview, 18 July 75 ;  JPL  Release 711) 
*  The  Navy  awarded  $1.3-billion  contract  to  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  for  
the  initial  production  of  the  submarine-launched Trident  I missile  and  
the  development  of  a  maneuverable nuclear  warhead.  The  warhead, 
called  the  Mark  500, would not  be  limited  to  targets  on  a  missile’s  or- 
bital  trajectory and  i t  would be  able to  evade enemy  defensive missiles. 
(Reuters, W Pos t ,  17  Aug 74, A5;  WSJ ,  19 Aug. 7 4 , 5 )  
17  August:  The  first test  flight of  an  Air  Force remotely  piloted vehicle was 
successfully completed, operated from a  ground console a t  Edwards Air 
Force Base.  The Rpv-built  by  Teledyne,  Inc.,  Ryan Aeronautical Div. 
and incorporating a 25-m wingspan  and a  single jet engine mounted  on 
in  the  a ir   1 h r   50 min  and  reached an  altitude 
an   11-rn fuselage-was 
of  7770 m.  One of  two kinds of  high-altitude, long-range reconnaissance 
aircraft  produced  under  the  Compass Cope program,  the  aircraft could 
carry  a  3200-kg payload a t  a  cruising  altitude  of  20 000 m  for  30 hrs. 
(Miles, LA   T imes ,  22 Aug  74,  31 ;  AP,  W Pos t ,  23 Aug 7 4 , l l )  
19   August:  The  prototype Mini-Sniffer, a  small 55-kg radio-controlled  air- 
craft equipped to test pollution in  the upper atmosphere, made the first of 
a series of  eight flights from Flight Research Center. The vehicle, powered 
by  a  9-kw gasoline engine, maintained an altitude  of  15-30  m  and per- 
formed well  a t  55-87  km  per  hr.  The  purpose of  the  flight was  to  test 
airworthiness  a t   lower  altitudes  and  speeds.  Another  series  of  flights 
would  check  out the   auto-pilot  system  a t  low  altitude  and  then  the  air- 
craft  would  be  taken  to  6100 m,  using  radar  and  a  long-range radio- 
control  system. The Mini-Sniffer would  eventually be  fitted with  an  11- 
kw engine which would carry it up  to 2 1  000 m.  (FRC   X-Press,  2 Aug 74, 
30 Aug  74 ;  FRC  proj off,  interview, 24 July  75) 
*  Naval Weapons  Center scientists had   discovered that  nitrogen lasers could 
be  used  to  locate  downed  flyers,  Av ia t ion   Week  & Space  Technology 
reported. The  sea  dye marker  routinely  included in  Navy  life vests  and  
rafts was  found to  fluoresce when  illuminated by  a  nitrogen  laser  from 
an  aircraft.  ( A v  W k ,  19 Aug  74, 47 ;   Sullivan, N Y T ,  14 Sept 74, 26 )  
19-29  August:  The  backup  command  and   service  module,  launch  escape 
system,  and   Saturn  IB  1s t  stage in   the Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project were 
subjected  to  simulated  lightning  strikes  a t   Kennedy  Space  Center  to 
determine effects  of  lightning  during  launch  preparations.  Test  results 
would  be used  in shuttle p lann ing ;   the  shuttle would not be surrounded 
by  a  protective mobile service  structure  on  the  launch  pad.  (K SC   PIO, 
interview, 17 June 75; Spaceport N ew s ,  6 Sept 74) 
20  August:  President  Ford nominated Nelson A.  Rockefeller, former Gover- 
nor  of  New York, as 41st Vice President of  the United States.  ( P D ,  2 6  
Aug 74,1050-1 ; 1063,1064) 
The  International  Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization marked  its 
10th anniversary.  Membership, originally  a t  14, had  grown  to  86 c o n -  
tries, which  jointly  owned the four  Intelsat IV satellites and three  spare 

151 

20  August 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Intelsat  I11  satellites in  the  global  communications system, The system 
provided more than  5000 international telephone circuits plus telegraph, 
telex,  data,  and  TV  services;  charges  had  progressively dropped  from 
the  initial  $32 000 per  year  for  a  half  circuit to  $9000. The permanent 
INTELSAT  Organization  had  come into being  12 Feb  1973, replacing  the 
interim  Consortium  that  had  operated  since  20  Aug.  1964.  (INTELSAT 
Release 74-2) 
0  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson,  science pilot  on  the  8 4 d a y  Sky lab   4  mission  (16 
Nov.  1973-8  Feb.  1974) , announced he would  leave the NASA astronaut 
corps 30 Nov.  1974. Dr.  Gibson, a  scientist-astronaut since 1965, would 
join Aerospace Corp. of  Los Angeles as a senior  staff scientist, specializ- 
ing  in  the  interpretation  of  solar  data  gathered  during  the  171  days  of 
manned  operation  in  the Skylab program.  He had held primary  respon- 
sibility for the 338 hrs of  Apollo Telescope Mount operation on Sky lab  4 ,  
making  extensive observations of  solar processes.  ( JSC  Release 74-246) 
20-22  Augus t:  More than  70 papers  on  the  Skylab program were presented 
a t  the  20th  annual meeting of  the American Astronautical Society, held 
a t   the  University  of  Southern  California.  Billed  as the  definitive report 
on Skylab, the conference addressed Skylab evolution, accomplishments, 
and  applications  to  future  NASA  missions.  Eight  NASA  representatives 
were presented at the 22 Aug.  session of  the conference a s  newly elected 
Fellows of  the AAS.  (MSFC   PIO, interview, 11 July  75;  MSFC  Release 74- 
136; WFC  Release 74-8;  JSC   Releases 74-163,74-246) 
21  Augus t:  A House-Senate Conference Committee favorably reported a com- 
promise  version  of  H.R.  15572,  the  FY  1975  Dept.  of  Housing  and 
Urban  Development-Space-Science-Veterans appropriations bill  that  in- 
cluded  a  $3.207-billion  NASA  appropriation.  NASA  funds  were  $40.394 
million  below  the  budget  request  and  $60.194 million less than  the  FY 
1975  authorization.  An  additional  $4.435 million  for  energy  research 
and  development was  appropriated  separately. The  compromise appro- 
priation  was  close to  the  one  passed  by  the  Senate 16 Aug.  and  $3.685 
million  above the $3.203 billion  approved by  the House 26  June.  (NASA 
Off  Budget  Ops,  Chron  History;  C R ,   21  Aug  74,  H8787-90;  H  Rpt 
93-1310) 
0  The  U.S.S.R.  cosmonaut  corps  was  being  built  up  a t   same  time  the 
U S .   astronaut  force  was  dwindling,  a  M iam i   Herald  article  said.  The 
Herald  quoted  Astronaut  Thomas  P.  Stafford,  who  had  visited  the 
U.S.S.R.  during  training  fo r   the  1975  ApolloSoyuz  Test  Project  mis- 
sion,  a s   saying  : “Star  City  (where most  of  the  cosmonauts live  and 
t ra in )   looks  like  a  boom  town.  There’s  no  doubt  the  Soviets  have  a 
vigorous  ongoing  manned  space  effort planned  for  the  next  five o r   six 
years.”  He  said  that  the  number  of  buildings  in  Star  City  had  tripled 
in  the  previous  two  years,  with  more  under  construction. The  total  of 
75  to  80 cosmonauts was  a  sharp increase over the estimated 55  of  five 
years  ago.  I n  contrast  the U S .   astronaut corps had  fallen  to  34  from a 
peak  of  60  during  the  Apollo  program,  with  only  three  trainidg  for  a 
flight.  Stafford  said  he  did not  believe the  U.S.S.R.  had  any new  space- 
c ra f t  under  development but  rather  planned for  the continued use of  the 
Soyuz  as a workhorse.  ( M  Her ,  21 Aug 74)  
22  Augus t:   NASA  reactivated  the  main  telemetry  system  on  Explorer  46 
Meteoroid Technology Satellite  (launched  13 Aug.  1972) , to  gain  addi- 
tional data  on the  impact flux of  small meteoroids. The telemetry system 
had  been  shut down 22 Aug.  1972 after the  spacecraft battery had  over- 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS,  1974 

22  August 

heated,  and a  solar-powered backup had  since transmitted  only primary 
experiment  data.  Data  received  before  shutdown  had  indicated  that 
sensors  flown  on  previous  missions  had  overestimated  the  micro- 
meteoroid population, but variation  in the impact flux necessitated addi- 
tional  data.  Data  transmission  would  continue through  February  1975. 
(NASA  Release 74-321;  NASA  OAST  PIO,  interview, 3 Sept 75) 
0  The  House  and  Senate,  in  separate  floor  actions,  agreed  to  the  2 1  Aug. 
conference  report  on  H.R.  15572,  the  Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development-Space-Science-Veterans Appropriations  Bill  for  FY  1975, 
clearing  the  measure  for  the  White  House.  The  bill  included  a  NASA 
appropriation  of  $3.207 billion.  ( C R ,  22 Aug  74, H8892-9,  S15776-8) 
23  Augus t:   Ames  Research  Center  controllers  of  Pioneer  11-launched  5 
April  1973 and  now  85  000 000 km  from  Jupiter-increased 
the  space- 
craft’s  spin  rate  t o   improve  measurements of  Jupiter’s  radiation  belts 
during the  flyby, scheduled for  December.  (ARC   Release 7 4 4 1 )  
0  Photographs  and  visual  observations made by  astronauts aboard  the  Sky- 
lab Orbital Workshop had  revealed eddies embedded in warm-water cur- 
rents  flowing poleward  from  equatorial  oceans, Robert  E.  Stevenson of 
the  Office  of  Naval Research  reported  in  a  Nature  article. Observations 
from  Sky lab   4  (1 6  Nov.  1973-8  Feb.  1974)  over four  ocean  areas had 
confirmed  initial  evidence  from  Caribbean  photographs  taken  on  S k y -  
lab 2 and 3  (25  May-22  June,  28  July-25  Sept.  1973)  that  eddies with 
vortices of  5500- to 37 000-m dia were present wherever other conditions 
were  suitable,  regardless  of  water  temperature.  Findings were also con- 
firmed  by  the  Navy’s  Weather  Reconnaissance  Squadron  Four  with 
bathythermographs. 
Formerly, turbulence had been difficult to document because of  limited 
oceanographic  techniques,  insufficient information  about  such  features, 
and the  lack of  photos from orbital platforms which enhanced the ocean 
and  atmosphere  manifestations  of  the  eddies.  (Na ture ,   23  Aug  74, 
638-40) 
A  Science  editorial  commented On  the Nixon  Administration  and  science: 
During  his  terms  in  office President  Nixon,  who  had  resigned  9 Aug., 
had been preoccupied by foreign policy and Watergate reaction. Science 
was  “at  most  an  afterthought.”  Because he  thought  that  science should 
advance the  cause of  national  security  and  prestige,  “grand  technology 
seemed  to  have  had  a  special  fascination  for  Nixon,”  most  evident  in 
his  enthusiasm  for  the  Apollo  program  and  the  supersonic  transport. 
He had made a dramatic declaration of  war on cancer and set the Nation 
toward  Project  Independence,  under  which  the  U.S.  was  t o   “achieve 
energy  self-sufficiency by  1980.” There  was  “little  evidence that  Nixon 
was  hostile  to  science  but  rather  that,  except  for  the  technological 
extravaganzas,  he  was  simply  not  interested.”  He  lacked  rapport  with 
scientists,  allying himself  instead  with  proponents  and  practitioners  of 
the quasi-science of  modern management. 
The Presidential tapes  (tape recordings made secretly of  conversations 
in  the  Oval  Office)  showed  a  President  “badly  informed,  even  indif- 
ferent,,,  helping  to  explain  why  the  White  House  science  advisory 
machinery was  deemed expendable. “But  in the present situation  it takes 
no  special wisdom  to  see how  RL+D  decisions will  affect how the  govern- 
ment  deals with  serious  energy  and  food  problems  and  how  important 
these actions will be  in  future economic developments. The Nixon  tapes 
illustrate why good presidential  advisers and good mechanisms to trans- 
153 

23  August 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

mit  their  advice a re  necessary in every sphere of  policy;  this should not 
be overlooked amm g  the  lessons of  Watergate for  the new  Administra- 
tion.”  (Sc ience ,  23 Aug 74,  675-8) 
24 Augus t:   A probe into the next 50 yrs was the subject of  a series of  articles 
in  Saturday  R e v i ew /Wo r ld .  Soviet atomic scientist Andrei  D.  Sakharov 
envisioned flying cities---artificial  earth  satellites with  important  indus- 
trial  functions.  The  satellites  would  hold  nuclear  and  thermonuclear 
installations  with  radiant  cooling of  heat  exchangers, to  avoid  heating 
the earth, and would  also serve as cosmic research laboratories and way 
stations for long-distance flights. Sakharov also foresaw greater  attempts 
to establish communication with other civilizations by searching for  and 
transmitting interplanetary signals on all known wavelengths and search- 
ing outer space for space stations of  extraterrestrial civilizations. Power- 
ful telescopes set up  on the  moon would  permit  scientists to  see planets 
orbiting the nearest stars. 
Apollo  11 Astronaut  Neil  A.  Armstrong  said  tha t   in   50  yrs  every 
interesting  crater  and cranny of  the moon  would  have  been  visited  and 
revisited and lunar  exploration would be  replaced by  lunar  exploitation. 
Underground  lunar  colonies,  protected  from  extreme  temperatures, 
would  consist of  pressurized  compartments  connected  by  tunnels.  One 
day man might  want  to  build  an  atmosphere on  the  moon  to  avoid  the 
inconveniences of  living  in  a  near  vacuum,  but  in  the  nearer  future  the 
use  of  the  moon’s  vacuum  for  activities  such  a s   materials  processing 
was a major reason for being there. Craters on the dark side of  the moon, 
always facing away from the earth, could hold  radio and x-ray telescopes 
fo r  transmissions, unadulterated by earth noise, to and from outer space. 
Deep  craters, which  received no  sunlight  and had  temperatures  nearing 
absolute  zero,  would  be  ideal  for  low-temperature  laboratories  where 
scientists  could  investigate  the  point  where  moleoular  motion  nearly 
stops.  Lunar  agriculture  would  be  underground  under  lights  in  modi- 
fied  lunar  soil  fed  with  a  nutrient  solution. Although by  2024  the  only 
extraterrestrial  colonies would  be  on  the  moon,  men  probably  would 
have visited Mars and a few selected celestial bodies. Men exploring space 
might  well  use  a  miniaturized  heart-lung  machine,  circumventing  the 
need for breathing and spacesuits. 
Dr. Wernher von  Braun,  former Marshall  Space Flight  Center Direc- 
tor,  predicted  a  worldwide  satellite  search  would  be  started  for  addi- 
tional  deposits  of  metal  ore,  coal,  oil,  shale,  and  natural  gas.  Satellite 
data  would  also  provide  key  data  fo r   a  badly  needed  worldwide  food 
supply management system. Von  Braun  predicted  nuclear lasers  in  geo- 
synchronous orbit would handle millions of  TIr channels simultaneously 
and  billions  of  telephone  conversations  and  would  lead  to  worldwide 
video-telephone service. Advanced  meteorological satellites would  pro- 
vide accurate  two-week weather forecasts  and  disaster  warnings,  saving 
million’s  of  dollars  in   property  damage.  (Sa tu rday  Rev iew /Wo r ld ,   24 
Aug 7 4 )  
Maj.  Alexander P. de Seversky  (U.S.  Army Air  Corps),  aviation  pioneer, 
died  of  a  respiratory  ailment  in  New York  a t   the  age  of  80. Maj.  de 
Seversky had begun his career as a pilot in the Czarist air force in Russia 
during World War  I .   After  coming  to  the  U.S.  in   191% he  contributed 
to  military  and  commercial aviation,  helping  to  develop the  first  fully 
automatic  synchronous  bombsight,  gyroscopically  stabilized  flight  in- 
struments, inflight fueling techniques,  and  a variety  of  landing  gear  for 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

24  August 
seaplanes and  aircraft.  He  also  led  the  effort  to  design, build,  and  test 
an  all-metal fighter aircraft, the P-35,  the first aircraft to  fly faster than 
480 km per hr.  I n  1931 he founded the Seversky Aircraft Corp.,  the fore- 
runner of  Republic Aircraft Corp. 
During World War  I1  de Seversky became one  of  the country’s lead- 
ing  advocates of  strategic  air power,  saying that  the U.S.  could not  win 
a  “limited  war  fought  with  traditional  forces.”  He  argued  that  “the 
whole military  philosophy must be changed o r  we  shall forever trail  the 
rest of the world not only in conventional aircraft, but in intercontinental 
ballistic  missiles  and  even  in  man-made  earth  satellite  development.” 
(Fraser,  N Y T ,  26 Aug  74,  32;  AP,  Orlando,  Florida, Sentinal Star,  26 
Aug 74, B4) 
26-29  Augu s t :   The  U.S.S.R.  launched  Soyu z   15,  carrying  crew  members 
Lt. Col.  Gennady V.  Sarafanov and Col.  Lev S.  Demin,  from Baykonur 
Cosmodrome  near  Tyuratam  a t   12:58  pm  local  time  (3:58  pm  EDT) 
26 Aug.  in an  attempt to dock with the orbiting Salyut  3  research station 
(launched  25  June ) .   Soyuz   15  entered  orbit  with  a  239-km  apogee, 
175-km perigee,  88.5-min period,  and  51.7”  inclination.  Tass  reported 
the  purpose  of  the  mission  was  “to  continue  scientific  research  and 
experiments  in  space started  July  3 . . . during the  flight  of  the  trans- 
port ship ‘Soyuz 14’ and the station ‘Salyut 3.’  ” 
Tass  reported  28  Aug.  that  on  the  second  working  day  the  cosmo- 
nauts  felt  well  and  had  made  “experiments to  perfect  the  technique  of 
piloting  the  ship  in  different  flight  regimes.”  During  maneuvering 
SOYUZ  15 approached the Salyut  3 space station many times,  the cosmo- 
nauts  controlling  spaceship  functions,  observing the  approach,  and  in- 
specting  the  station.  Tass  then  reported  the  crew  was  “concluding  the 
flight  and  . . . preparing  the  spacecraft  for  the  return  to  the  earth.” 
After  a  4 8 h r  12-min mission,  Soyuz   15  softlanded safely a t  1 :10 am 
29 Aug.  Baykonur time  (4:lO  pm  EDT 28 Aug.)-the 
first  Soviet night 
l a n d i n g 4 8   km  southwest  of  Tselinograd  in  Kazakhstan  despite  a 
“difficult  meteorological  situation.”  On-the-spot medical  examinations 
showed the cosmonauts to  be in  “good health.” 
Early  press  reports quoted Western experts a s  saying  the  flight prob- 
ably ended  early  because  of  a  failure  in  the  docking mechanism  of  the 
spacecraft,  damage to  or  failure  of  the  spacecraft durlng  the  attempted 
linkup, o r  a serious deterioration of  the Salyut orbital station. In  response 
to  questions about  the  impact  of  the  Soyuz   15 mission  on  the  planned 
July  1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz mission,  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, 
NASA  Administrator,  said  in  a  29  Aug.  statement,  “NASA  personnel  en- 
gaged in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . were informed in advance by 
Soviet personnel of the ‘Soyuz  15’ flight and its approximate timing.”  Dr. 
Fletcher  said  that  neither  Soyuz   14   (launched  3  July)  nor  SOYUZ  1.5 
“carried  the ASTP docking mechanism. We have no  reason to  doubt this 
information.” 
At  a  9  Sept.  press  briefing  at  Johnson  Space  Center,  Maj.  Gen. 
Vladimir  A.  Shatalov,  Soviet  chief  of  cosmonaut  training,  confirmed 
through  his  translator  that  a  ha rd   dock  had  been  one  objective  of  the 
Soyu z  15 mission and that there were problems with the docking system. 
“In  our previous  flights  . . . we  had worked  out the  aqtomatic rendez- 
vous and docking, but it worked only u p  to  150 meters.  . . . From that 
point, it was purely manual.”  At an  11 Sept. JSC  press briefing, Shatalov 
said that during the  S o y v x  15 flight the automatic system “worked well” 

155 

26-29  August 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
up to 30 to 50 m.  “But when going beyond 50-40, the range rate exceeded 
the necessary or  the  intended parameters.”  He  also  said  the  approaches 
had been  repeated  “a  number  of  times and each time the  automatic  sys- 
tem worked  up  to  30-41)  meters.  . . .  At  no  time  in  these approaches 
was  it  intended to  use  manual  docking.”  He  emphasized that  they  were 
satisfied with  the  automatic  system to  the  point  it had  worked.  He  also 
said the second major objective of  the mission was  “to  perfect this night 
landing.” 
Soyu z  15 was the second spacecraft to visit Salyut 3 ,  the Soviet’s third 
orbiting  station.  A  two-man  crew,  launched  3 July  aboard  Soyuz  14, 
had spent nearly  16 days dboard the station performing  scientific experi- 
ments.  (Tass, FBIS-SOV, 27-29  Aug 74, u1; NASA Release 74-242;  Wren, 
N Y T ,  29 Aug  74,  1 ;  W Po s t ,  30 Aug  74, A32;  SF ,  Dec  74, 470;  Tran- 
scripts, 9,11 sep t  74) 
26  Augus t:   Charles  A.  Lindbergh-the 
first  man  to  fly  solo  nonstop  from 
New York to Paris,  in  1927-died  of  cancer on Maui, Hawaii, at the age 
of  72.  He  was  buried  three  hours  later  in  a  simple  funeral  near  the 
Kipahulu church on Maui. In  Washington, President Ford said: “Nearly 
half  a  century  has  passed  since his  courageous  solo  flight  . . . but  the 
courage  and  daring  of  h i s   feat  will  never  be  forgotten.  For  years  to 
come, we will also remember the selfless, sincere man himself.  . . , one of 
America’s alltime heroes and a  great pioneer of  the air  age that changed 
the world.” 
For  the  transatlantic  flight, airmail pilot  and  barnstormer  Lindbergh 
had  helped  design  a  Ryan  monoplane,  calculating  every  ounce. When 
the Sp i r i t   of  St.  Lou is   landed  at Le  Bourget airfield, Paris,  at  10:22  pm 
21   May  1927  after  a  33-hr  29-min  flight,  Lindbergh  was  greeted  by 
25 000  wildly  cheering  persons.  British,  French,  and  Belgian  govern- 
ments awarded the  flyer their  highest decorations for valor. He received 
the  first  U S .  Distinguished Flying  Cross and  the  Medal  of  Honor  and 
was promoted from lieutenant to colonel in the Army Air Corps Reserve. 
Following  goodwill  flights  throughout  the  US. and  Latin  America, 
sponsored  by  the  Guggenheim Fund  for  the  Promotion  of  Aeronautics, 
Lindbergh  served as adviser to Pan American World Airways and to the 
predecessor  of  Trans  World  Airlines,  helping  to  lay  out  transatlantic, 
transcontinental,  and Caribbean  air  routes  for  commercial aviation. He 
served as a member of  the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 
1931-1939,  heading  the  special  committee  that  recommended  to  Con- 
gress expansion of  U.S.  aircraft  research  facilities and establishment of 
what became the Ames and Lewis Research Centers. 
After  the  kidnaping  and  murder  of  his  first  son  and  the  subsequent 
publicity,  Lindbergh  moved  to  Europe  in  1935, where  he  studied  the 
military  forces  of  the  European  countries.  His conclusion  that  the  Ger- 
man  Luftwaffe would  be  superior  to  the  combined forces  of  the Allies, 
his acceptance of the Service Cross of  the German Eagle from the German 
government, and  his  opposition  to  U.S.  participation  in World War  I1 
provoked  the  U.S.  public  to  question  his  patriotism  and  he  resigned 
his  commission  in   the  Army Air  Corps.  During  the  y a r  he was a  con- 
sultant  to   bomber  aircraft  manufacturers  Ford  Motor  Co.  and  United 
Aircraft  Corp.  He traveled  to  the  Pacific war  area  in  1944 to  study the 
Navy’s  Corsair F 4 U  under flying conditions and there, as a civilian, flew 
50 missions against the Japanese. 

156  

26  August 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Following the  war, his commission restored and promoted to the rank 
of  brigadier  general, Lindbergh was  a technical  consultant  for  Govern- 
ment and private  industry in  missile and  space flight programs. As a con- 
sultant  fo r   Pan   Am  he worked  on  design  specifications for   the Boeing 
747.  Lindbergh devoted the later years of  his life to writing and speaking 
on world conservation policies.  ( N Y T ,  27 Aug  74,  1; 18;  Crawford, W 
Post,  27  Aug  74,  C3 ;  PD, 2  Sept 74,  1068-9;  James,  N Y T ,  22 May  27, 
1; Affidavit Exec Apptmt, 6 Nov 31; letter, NACA Chm Bush to Lindbergh, 
7 Feb 40) 
Dr.  Alan M.  Lovelace, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of  the Air  Force 
for  Research  and  Development, had  been  appointed NASA  Associate Ad- 
ministrator  fo r  Aeronautics and Space Technology effective 1 Sept., NASA 
announced. Dr.  Lovelace would  replace Gen.  Bruce K .  Holloway  (WAF, 
Ret.) , who would  retire  from NASA  30 Aug.  after  serving as  Acting Asso- 
ciate Administrator fo r  Aeronautics and  Space Technology and Assistant 
Administrator for  DOD  and  Interagency Affairs.  Dr.  Lovelace had  been 
Director of  the Air Force Materials Laboratory in  1967 and had become 
Director  of  Science  and  Technology,  Air  Force  Systems Command,  in 
1972. He had  received numerous awards, including the AFML  Charles 3. 
Cleary  and  Arthur  S.  Flemming  awards  for   his  work  in  fluorine  and 
polymer  chemistry,  the  National  Civil  Service  League  Career  Service 
Award,  and   the  Air  Force  Decoration for  Exceptional Service.  (NASA 
Release 74.-236) 
John  M.  Thole had   been  appointed  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for 
Space  Science  effective  1 Sept.,  NASA  announced.  Thole would  succeed 
Vincent  L.  Johnson, who  had   retired.  Former  project  manager  for  the 
Applications Technology Satellite a t  Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole 
had  joined  GSFC  in   1960 and had  held a variety  of  project management 
positions since that time.  (NASA  Ann, 26 Aug 74) 
2 6   August-20  September:  Thirty  NASA  engineers and   technicians  met  with 
U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences counterparts  in  Moscow  as  joint  prepa- 
rations  fo r   the  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s  July  1975 flight  continued. 
On  8 Sept.  another  group of  47  specialists and engineers headed by 
U.S.  ASTP  Technical Director  Glynn  S.  Lunney  arrived  in  Moscow  for 
2  weeks  of  meetings  with  the  Soviet  group  headed  by  U.S.S.R.  Tech- 
nical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project  directors announced 
plans  fo r  joint prelaunch tests a t  the U S .  launch site 1-8  Feb.  1975 and 
a t  the  U.S.S.R.  launch area  5-13  May  1975. Flight  crews  and  technical 
specialists from both  countries would participate.  Soviet specialists also 
announced plans to  fly  a manned Soyuz mission to  test ASTP-related sys- 
tems.  NASA  would  be  informed of  further details before the flight to per- 
mit tracking. 
Thirteen U.S.  flight controllers were also spending two weeks  in Mos- 
COW  beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for  familiariza- 
tion  and training,  including briefings  on  Soviet Mission Control Center 
operations,  Soyuz  spacecraft systems,  and   the mission  flight  plan.  (JSC 
ASTP  Press  Communiquh,  20  Sept  74;  JSC   Roundup,  13 Sept  74 ;   JSC 
Release 7 6 2 5 0 )  
27-29  August:  A  Skylab Life  Sciences Symposium a t   Johnson Space Cqnter 
reported medical results  of  the three  Skylab missions. Conference Chair- 
man  Richard  s. Johnston,  Director  of  Life  Sciences  a t   JSC,  said  that 
nothing in-the medical results would preclude man from spending up  to a 
157 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
27-29  August 
year  in   space.  Dr. G .  D.  Whedon  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health 
stated  that  weightlessness could  threaten  capable musculo-skeletal func- 
tions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could 
be  developed to  prevent  significant losses  of  calcium,  phosphorus,  and 
nitrogen. Continued loss of  calcium could cause astronauts to  break their 
backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. 
Dr.  William  E.  Thornton,  life  scientist  in  the  JSC  Astronaut  Office, 
reported that  by Mission Day 3 all  Skylab crewmen had  lost more  than 
2000 cc  ( 2  qts)  of  extravascular  fluid from calf  and thigh;  a t  recovery, 
a  sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason 
for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which 
forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators 
reported  that  such cardiovascular  changes as the  heart’s  decreased ven- 
tricular  size  and  the  suppression  of  red  blood  cell  production  was  the 
body’s  accommodation  to  weightlessness. These  physiological changes 
had been  the expected response to a lack of  exertion;  they reversed after 
the astronauts’ return to  earth.  ( JSC   Roundup, 30 Aug 74, 1-2;  JSC  proj 
off, interview, 12  Aug 75 ;  Altman, NYT ,  1 Sept 74,14) 
28 Augus t:  Marshall Space Flight  Center had  negotiated  a  restructured  con- 
tract  with  TRW  Inc.  for  the  first  of  three  High  Energy  Astronomy Ob- 
servatory  spacecraft  to  be  launched  between  1977  and  1979, NASA  an- 
nounced.  Modifications  had  increased  the  original  contract  value  by 
$9  451 139, to  a  new  total  of  $86 397 579. The contract  covered design, 
development, manufacture, test, checkout, and delivery of  the spacecraft. 
Period  of  performance was from 1 July  1974 through  1 5  April  1980. 
The  original  HEAO  program,  approved  in  1971  and  suspended  in 
1973 because  of  budget  cuts,  had  called  for  two  large  unmanned  ob- 
servatories. The new contract called for a series of  smaller scale missions 
using  three  satellites in circular orbits a t  an altitude of  416 km to  obtain 
data on high-energy radiation  from space-celestial  x-rays, gamma-rays, 
and cosmic rays. 
Contracts  totaling  $23 332 700 had  also  been  signed  for  five  experi- 
ments  to  be  carried  by  the  second spacecraft,  HEAO-B.  The  awards  in- 
cluded $ 1  350 000  to American Science and Engineering, Inc.,  to  design 
and  build  the x-ray telescope.  (NASA   Release 7 4 2 4 0 ;  MSFC  Release 7 4  
179 )  
*  NASA adjudged the mission of  Skyne t  ZZA  communications satellite, launched 
18 Jan.  for  the United Kingdom, unsuccessful. NASA’s primary  objective 
of  launching the comsat into orbit  for transfer  into a  synchronous equa- 
torial  orbit  permitting  the spacecraft to  accomplish i t s  operational mis- 
sion had  not been  achieved. Skyne t   I I A  had been placed in an extremely 
eccentric  orbit  when  the  Thor-Delta launch  vehicle’s  2nd-stage attitude 
control  system failed;  preliminary  analysis had  isolated the  problem  to 
a  failure  in  the  regulator  board  of  the  DC-to-DC converter  in  the  2nd- 
stage electronics package.  (NASA MOR, 4 Sept 74) 
Martin  Marietta  Corp. had  been  awarded  a  $26 453 600 NASA  contract  for 
support  of  the  external  tank  effort  of  the  space  shuttle  program,  NASA 
announced. The consolidated facilities contract, which would run through 
31 -4ug.  1978, provided  for  acquisition  of  plant  equipment a t  Michoud 
Assembly Facility,  rehabilitation  of  existing facilities, and construction, 
modification,  maintenance,  and  repair  of  facilities.  (NASA  Release  74- 
239) 

158 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
29  August 
29  August:  The NASA  Aircraft  Office wa s  established under  the Associate Ad- 
ministrator  for   Center  Operations to   provide a focal  point  for  a ircraf t  
operations and management activities. The Flight Activities Office, Flight 
Research  Center,  was  abolished,  and  the  Administrative  Standardiza- 
tion  Office  a t  Langley Research Center would  report  directly to the NASA 
Aircraft Office.  Robert W.  Sommer, former Director of  the Flight Activi- 
ties Office, was  appointed Acting Director of  the new  office.  (NASA  Ann, 
29 Aug  74)  
0  Communications Satellite Corp.  announced it had  signed a contract to pro- 
vide  technical  and  operational  management  for   the  global  commercial 
satellite  system  owned  by  the  International  Telecommunications Satel- 
lite  Organization.  Under  the   contract,  to  run   through  11  Feb.  1979, 
ComSatCorp would recommend and implement research and development 
programs;  advise on procuring space segment facilities;  negotiate, place, 
and  administer  all  contracts  for   space  segments;  arrange  for   satellite 
launch  services and  support;  prepare  and coordinate system operations 
plans;  and  prepare  and  coordinate  frequency plans  for  earth  stations. 
(ComSatCorp Release 7 M 4 )  
30  August-14  September:  NASA  launched Ans  1 Netherlands Astronomical 
Satellite from Western  Test  Range on  a  four-stage Scout launch vehicle 
a t  7:08 a m  PDT  (10:OS am EDT)  . The satellite entered an elliptical polar 
orbit  with  a  1167-km  apogee,  254-km  perigee,  99.0-min  period,  and 
98.1"  inclination-significantly 
different  from  the  planned  circular 
orbit-because  of  a malfunction in  the 1st stage of  the Scout. Changes in  
the  spacecraft  program  and  scientific  instrument  operations  program 
were  made  to   accommodate  to  the  actual  orbit.  Although  the  orbit 
hindered  the  observation program,  the  primary  objective-to 
increase 
the   scientific knowledge  of  stellar  ultraviolet  and  x-ray  sources-could 
be achieved. 
The spacecraft was pointed a t  the sun, the solar panels were deployed, 
and fine pointing in  a three-axis stabilized condition was  established. All 
three  experiments-a  hard  x-ray  experiment provided by  the U S .   and 
a uv  telescope and soft x-ray experiment provided by The Netherlands- 
were  turned  on  by  8 Sept.  In-orbit checkout  of  experiments and  space- 
craft  was  completed  13  Sept.  and   the  operational  phase of  the  mission 
began 14  Sept. 
Principal effect  of  the  orbit on the  scientific program was  the  loss of 
observing time. The higher apogee placed the spacecraft in  the Van Allen 
radiation  belts  longer  than  planned, creating  a  more  intense  radiation 
backdround than  anticipated. The uv telescope  could  operate effectively 
for   70% of  each  orbit and observe 10th-magnitude stars  only when  the 
spacecraft was below 500 km.  Only 5th-magnitude or brighter  stars were 
observable most of  the time. 
The  U S .   x-ray  experiment could  make  effective  observations about 
25% of  the total possible observing time;  the experiment could operate 
below 700 km but not over the poles o r  the South Atlantic Anomaly.  The 
soft  x-ray  experiment  consisted  of  a  large-area  detector,  which  was 
operating similarly  to  the U S .  experiment, and a  grazing-incidence tele- 
scope,  which  was  seriously  affected  by  the' radiation  background.  AI- 
though  much  of  the   acquired  data  was  not  usable,  most  future  data 
might be recovered through improved analysis techniques. 
159 

30  August-14  September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Despite the problems, the orbit would provide nine months of  full sun- 
light,  rather  than  the  six months expected, permitting  reobservations of 
objects observed during the first three months. In  addition, aerodynamic 
d rag  would lower the apogee over a period of  time, decreasing the passage 
time through the Van Allen belts. 
Am  1  was  launched  under  a  Memorandum of  Understanding  signed 
5 June 1970 by NASA and the Astronomical Netherlands Satellite Program 
Authority  (ANSPA ) .   NASA provided the x-ray experiment, spacecraft tech- 
nical  support, the Scout launch vehicle and services, and limited tracking 
and data acquisition. The Netherlands was responsible for the spacecraft 
design,  fabrication,  and  testing;  two  experiments ; and  primary  space- 
craft command, control, and tracking and data acquisition. Ans  1 was the 
first  satellite to  be  controlled  completely from  the  European  Space Re- 
search organization’s  operations center a t  Darmstadt, Germany. The ANS 
program was managed for  NASA  by  Goddard  Space Flight Center under 
the direction of  the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center had 
responsibility  fo r  the  Scout launch vehicle.  (NASA  MORS,  21 Aug,  6 NOV 
74;  GSFC  SSR ,  31 Aug  74;  GSFC  proj  mgr,  interview, 1 5  July  75 ;   ESRO 
Release, 23 Aug 74) 
31  August:  A  galaxy  six  times  larger  than  any  previously  known  in  the 
universe  had  been  discovered by  an  international team  of  astronomers 
using The Netherlands’ Westerbork radio telescope, the Washington Pos t  
reported. Named  3C  268, the galaxy was  18 million light years in length 
and  1.8 billion  light years  from the earth.  It was composed of  an optical 
galaxy-a  group of stars emitting visible light-at 
the center, with enor- 
mous  gaseous  radio  components  spreading  like  giant  propeller  blades 
on either side.  (AP, W Post, 31 Aug 74, A13) 
During  August:  Flight  Research  Center  began  wake  vortex  studies  with  a 
Boeing  747  to  test  different configurations  and  mechanical devices  f o r  
suppressing  the  formation  or  reducing  the  strength  of  vortices. Wind- 
tunnel  and water-channel tests had  indicated  that  engine-induced turbu- 
lence and  span-load tailoring  by  flap modification would  permit  reduc- 
tion  of  standard  separation  distances  between  aircraft.  Removing  the 
outboard  flap  on  a model  of  a  Boeing  747  and  adding  a  trailing  spline 
reduced the wing-tip vortex so that  the separation between  a Boeing 747 
and  a  following Learjet  or  DC-9  could be  reduced  from  8 to  less  than 
3 km.  During  inflight  tests,  lowering  the  inboard  flap  30’  dissipated 
the  normal  wing-tip  vortex  as  a  second  vortex  flowing  in  a  counter 
direction  formed.  Flight  testing  would  continue  into  September.  (FRC  
X-Press,  13 , 27  Sept 74 ;   NASA Release 7 4 2 3 0 )  
*  The Air  Force  Space and Missile Systems Organization  (SAMSO )   awarded 
a  $42 847 797  contract  to  Rockwell  International  Corp.  Space  Div.  to 
design, develop, fabricate, launch, and operate three prototype  satellites 
in  the  Navigation  System Using  Time  and  Ranging  (NAVSTAR)  Global 
Positioning System  (GPS )   . With  a  Naval  Research Laboratory  NAVSTAR 
technology satellite, the prototypes would provide  positioning  signals to 
support development and test of  user equipment for all military  services. 
Plans called for  refurbished  Atlas F space boosters to  launch the  space- 
craft  into 20 200-km orbits in  1977.  (ASFC   Newsreview, Aug  74, 1 6 )  
*  Federal research and development support  of  space programs had  declined 
steadily in proportion  to  civil projects  from  1969 to  1975, the National 
Science Foundation  reported  in  its  Analysis  of  Federal  R&D  Funding 
160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
During  August 
b y  Function, Fiscal  Years  1969-1975 .  Energy and environment programs 
had  outpaced  other  major  civil  programs,  while  space  programs  had 
been  reduced  more  than  any  other  R&D  function  in  the  period.  In 
FY  1975, the  space budget  was  13% of  the  planned  $19.6-billion Fed- 
eral  R&D  funding,  a  decline from  23.9%  in  1969. Manned  space flight, 
including the  space shuttle, would  account for more  than  half  the  1975 
total.  (NSF Report 74-313) 
The  combined  calculated  weight  a t   launch  of  the  U.S.S.R.’s  Soyuz  4 
(launched  14 Jan.  1969)  and  Soyuz  5  (launched  1 5  Jan.  1969)  had 
indicated that the spacecraft had carried propulsion systems f a r  in excess 
of  requirements  for  an  earth  orbital mission,  David Woods  reported  in 
Spaceflight.  The  1.97-km-per-sec velocity  requirement  of  such  active 
docking vehicles as Soyuz 4 had  matched  the  total  velocity  requirement 
of  1.94 km  per  sec o f  Apo l lo  11  (launched  to  the  moon  1 6  July  1969 ) ,  
indicating that these early Soyuz spacecraft had been capable of  manned 
lunar missions, Woods deduced. ( S F ,  Aug 74,300-302) 

161 

September  1974 

I September:  I n  an   effort toward  accurate  earthquake prediction,  antennas 
a t  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  and  Goldstone Tracking Station-200  km 
apar t  and on either side of  the San Andreas Fault-were 
receiving radio 
signals from  quasars outside the galaxy. As  part  of  JPL’S  Astronomical 
Radio  Interferometric Earth  Surveying  (ARIES)  project,  techniques de- 
veloped  for   spacecraft  navigation  could  measure  the  precise  distance 
between  the antennas by  monitoring the arrival times of  identical radio 
signals, accurate to   one tenth  of  a  billionth  of  a  second.  Changes in  the 
times could indicate three-dimensional shifts in  the earth’s  crust up to an 
initial  accuracy  of  10   cm,  with  an  eventual  accuracy  goal  of  2  cm. 
Scientists hoped tha t  ARIES  techniques would help prove the  theory that 
earthquakes  were  preceded  by  a  swelling  of  the  earth’s  surface  up  to 
one meter over hundreds of  square kilometers and provide a major new 
tool  in  earthquake research  and prediction.  ( J P L  Release 710;  JPL  pro j  
off, interview, 3 Dec 75)  
1-13  September:  The  Air  Force  SR-71  Blackbird  aircraft  sped  from  New 
York  to   London  in   a  record  1 h r   56 min  on  1 Sept.,  piloted  by  Capt. 
Harold  B.  A d am .   Flown  to  England  for  display  a t   the  Farnborough 
International  74  a ir   show through 8 Sept., the strategic  reconnaissance 
aircraft built by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. could survey more than 260 000 
sq km of  the earth’s  surface an  hour from above 24 400 m. On  13 Sept., 
the SR-71  set another record, flying from London to  Los Angeles in  3 h r s  
47  min.  (DOD  Release 410-74;  AP,  W Po s t ,  1 4  Sept 74, A l l )  
3  September:  First wind-tunnel tests of  a third-generation X-24  lifting body 
had been  completed by  Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air 
Force  Systems Command  announced.  A  model  of  the proposed X-24C 
equipped  with  phase-change paint was  expbsed to  a mach 6 airflow in  a 
wind  tunnel.  By  photographing the progression of  the melt  line  formed 
by the paint,  engineers determined where heat built up and how  quickly, 
around  a  new  canopy  designed  fo r   flights up  to  six times  the  speed  of 
sound. 
The  X-24A  lifting  body had  flown test  flights from 1969 t o  1971  and 
the  X-24B  was  continuing  flights  from  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  in   a 
NASA-USAF  research program into concepts for  future hypersonic aircraft 
and  returning  spacecraft.  The X-24C  was  similar  to  the B  model with 
the  exception  of  the new  canopy and omission of  one vertical stabilizer. 
(AFSC Release OIP  158.74) 
President Ford  signed H.R.  11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demon- 
stration Act  of  1974, into P.L. 9 3 4 0 9  and signed H.R.  14920, the Geo- 
thermal Energy Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of  1974, 
into P.L.  93410. 
P.L.  93- 
provided  for   demonstration within  three  years  of  the 
practical  uses  of  solar  heating  technology  and  for   development  and 
demonstration within five years of  the practical use of  combined heating 

163 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
3  September 
and cooling technology.  It amended the National Aeronautics and Space 
Act of  1958 to direct NASA to  carry out solar heating and cooling research 
but provided  that, within 60 days of  a  law creating the Energy Research 
and Development Administration  or  other energy R&D agency, functions 
given to  NASA  and the National Science Foundation  could be transferred 
to  the new agency. 
P.L.  93410  authorized  guaranteed  loans  to  finance  commercial 
ventures in  geothermal energy and provided for coordination  of  Federal 
activities  in   the  development  of  geothermal  energy.  ( P D ,  9  Sept  74, 
1099; texts) 
4 - 5  September:  Plans  for  the  Laser  Geodynamic  Satellite  (LAGEOS)  were 
completed a t  a  two-day Preliminary  Design Review by  officials of  NASA 
and the Smithsonian Institution, at Marsha11 Space Flight Center. LAGEOS, 
to   be  launched  in  1976,  would  provide  information  on  earthquake- 
producing motions and strain  in the surface of  the earth.  (MSFC  Release 
7 4 1 6 5  ; NASA Release 73-261  ; MSFC  PIO, interview, 6 June 75) 
5 September:  The European  Space Research Organization  announced  selec- 
tion  of  Communications Satellite Corp.  as  its U S .  partner  in  the  Aero- 
nautical Satellite (Aerosat)  program  [see 9 May]. Aerosat was to deploy 
two  satellites over  the Atlantic  Ocean  for  communications between  air- 
craft  in  transatlantic  flight  and  the  ground.  (ESRO  Release,  5  Sept  74) 
Maj.  Gen.  Vladimir  A.  Shatalov,  U.S.S.R.  chief  of  cosmonaut  training, 
stated  that  experiments  conducted  during  the  Salyut  3  (launched  25 
June) , Soyuz 14 (3  July) , and Soyuz 15  (26 Aug.)  flights had  no  bear- 
ing  on  the  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project’s  scheduled  July  1975  flight.  I n  
a  Tass  interview before  leaving Moscow for  Johnson  Space  Center  for 
joint training of  ASTP crews, Shatalov announced that the U.S.S.R.  would 
launch  a  manned  spacecraft  a  few  months  before  the  Apollo-Soyuz 
launch, to test hardware in Aight.  (P ravda ,  FBIS-SOV, 11 Sept 74, U1-2) 
6 September:  Western Union Telegraph Co.’s  Westar 1  (launched 13 April) 
made America’s  first mail  delivery via  satellite, sending  a  “mailgram,” 
combination  telegram  and  letter,  from  New  York  to  Los  Angeles.  A 
60-word mailgram  to  the West  Coast  cost  $1.35,  rather  than  the  $6.00 
for a  telegram. Regular,  one-business-day transmission  of  mailgrams by 
satellite from New  York  to Los Angeles wwild  begin  in  late September, 
with  mailgram  traffic  from  the  East  Coast  to  Texas  and  parts  of  the 
West  Coast  beginning  late  in  the  year.  (NASA   Hq  W B ,  7  Oct  74;  AP, 
B Sun, 6 Sept 74, A3) 
0  President  Ford signed H.R.  15572 into Public Law  9 3 4 1 4 ,  making appro- 
priations  for Dept.  of  Housing and Urban  Development, space, science, 
and  veterans  activities for  FY  1975. The  bill  included  a  $3.206-billion 
NASA appropriation and $666.3 million for the National Science Founda- 
tion.  [See 21  and 22 Aug.]  (P.L. 93-414) 
7-27  September:  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project  cosmonauts arrived  in the  U S .  
7  Sept.  fo r   training  with  American  crews  at  Johnson  Space  Center 
8-27  Sept. President  Ford  received  the  U S .   and U.S.S.R.  crews  a t   the 
White  House  before  taking  them  to  visit  an  Alexandria,  Va.,  picnic. 
At the picnic the President said the planned  July 1975 joint mission was 
not  only  a  “technological  achievement”  but  was  “far  broader  in  its 
implications and ramifications  as f a r  a s  the world is concerned.” 
The joint  session a t  JSC  included flight  simulations, training  in  com- 
munications  and  docking procedures,  and  study  of  spacecraft  systems. 
i 
164 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
7-27  September 
( P D ,  16 Sept 74,1101-02,1146;  NASA  OMSF  PAO,  interview, 21  Aug 75; 
JSC  Roundup, 13 Sept 7 4 , l )  
8 September:  The Apollo command and service module for the Apollo-Soyuz 
Test  Project,  which  had  been  delivered  to  Cape  Canaveral  Air  Force 
Station  by  a  C 5 A  transport,  arrived  a t   Kennedy  Space  Center.  The 
spacecraft  completed  the  ASTP  flight  hardware  with  exception  of  the 
docking module, which would arrive a t  KSC in late October after thermal 
and vacuum tests at Johnson Space Center.  ( KSC Release 132-74) 
0  President  Ford  a s  a  Congressman had  been  a  “staunch  defender  of  space 
spending”  whenever  critics  suggested  cuts  in  NASA’s  budget,  the  San 
Diego  Un ion  reported.  As  minority  leader,  Ford  had  declared  that  the 
space  program  could  be  justified  by  its  spinoffs.  I n  April  1972,  Ford 
had defended a $200-million space shuttle appropriation because he had 
believed  that  its  loss  would  end  the  space  program.  (Macomber,  SD 
Union, 8 Sept 74,19) 
8-12  September:  Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  visited  the 
U.S.S.R.  a t  the invitation  of  the Soviet Academy of  Sciences. Interviewed 
by   a  Tass  correspondent,  Dr.  Fletcher  compared  implementing  the 
Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  with  scaling  a  high  mountain  from  which 
new vistas of  Soviet-American scientific and technical cooperation would 
open. 
With President of  the Soviet Academy of  Sciences Mstislav V. Keldysh, 
Dr.  Fletcher  visited  the  space  flight  control  center  near  Moscow,  from 
which  the  ASTP  mission would  be  controlled in  July  1975. Dr.  Fletcher 
also visited the  cosmonaut training center and the Apollo-Soyuz labora- 
tory center with the head of  the  Intercosmos Council, Academician Boris 
N.  Petrov, and discussed Soviet-American cooperation in exploration and 
peaceful  uses  of  outer  space  with  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  U.S.S.R. 
Council  of  Ministers Vladimir  A.  Kirillin.  (NASA  Off  of  Admin,  Daily 
Appointments Calendar; Tass, FBIS-SOV, 12 Sept 74, U1 ;  13 Sept 74, U1 )  
9  September:  NASA  and  the  Maritime  Administration  demonstrated  that 
satellites could be used  for high-quality ship-to-shore communications in 
L-band frequencies. Test  transmissions  from the National Maritime Re- 
search  Center  in  New  York  were  relayed by  NASA’s A ts   6 Applications 
Technology Satellite  (launched 30 May)  to  a commercial container ship 
en route from Virginia to France. A t s  6 could provide two-way communi- 
cations  between  ground  stations  and mobile  units  operating  in   a  1080- 
km-wide  area  and  would  permit  transmittal  of  cargo  manifests  and 
documentation  before  ship  arrival  in  port,  transmittal  of  payroll  data 
for  shore  processing,  and  remote  monitoring  of  ship  machinery  per- 
formance.  (NASA  Release 74-255;  GSFC  PIO,  interview, 24 June 75) 
Johnson  Space Center  announced  award  of  a  12-mo, $300 000 contract  to 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.  Denver  Div.  to   study  technical  and  operational 
concepts for manned and  automated assembly of  space systems from the 
space shuttle  orbiter.  Martin  was  asked to  consider use  of  manipulative 
devices,  an   astronaut  maneuvering  unit,  and  simple  docking  systems. 
( JSC  Release 74-251) 
e  NHK   Technical Research Laboratory of  Japan had developed a TV receiving 
system that  could bring satellite-to-home transmission within five years, 
Broadcasting  journal  reported.  With  General  Electric  co.,  NHK   was 
constructing  an  experimental  12-ghz  broadcast  satellite  d e s i q e d   to 
transmit  signals within the  FM  band.  An  AM-FM  converter attached to  a 
standard  receiver would transform the image into a standard TV signal. 
165 

9 September 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
The  experimental  satellite  was  scheduled  for  launch  in  early  1977. 
(Broadcm t ing ,  9 Sept 7 4 , 68 )  
9-13  September: A Lighter-than-Air Workshop sponsored by NASA,  the Dept. 
of  Transportation,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration,  and  the  US. 
Navy  attracted  200  persons  from  nine  nations  to  Monterey, Calif.,  to 
explore the technical and economic feasibility of  LTA vehicles. The work- 
shop was conducted by  the  Flight Transportation Laboratory  of  Massa- 
chusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  Among  the  speakers, Ames  Research 
Center  representatives argued  that  LTA  vehicles would  be  economically 
competitive with  aircraft  on  established  freight  routes  and  would  be 
suitable  for  heavy-load  low-level transportation.  Nuclear  power  units, 
agricultural products,  and  ore could be  transported  to  and  from under- 
developed  countries.  (MIT,  FTL  Report  R75-2  ; NASA  Release  7 6 2 2 9  ; 
ARC  PIO,  interview, 24  June 75;  O z on e ,  A v  Wk, 30 Sept 7 4 , 4 2 4 6 )  
9-14  September:  A review of  “Technology  in  the  Service of  Man”  a t  Lewis 
Research  Center  featured  a  ferrofluid  separator  for  recycling  scrap 
metals. Based on the magnetized fluid concept devised for taking showers 
in  space,  the  recycling  process  could  separate  nonmagnetic  solids  of 
different  densities-like 
copper,  brass,  and  zinc-by  magnetically con- 
trolling  the  apparent  density  of  the  ferrofluid.  The  method  could  also 
detect metals  in  waste  materials  a t   incinerators  and  retrieve  titanium 
used in aircraft construction and weaponry. 
The  review,  attended  by  11 000  persons,  included  presentations  on 
technology for safer aircraft, supersonic and hypersonic aircraft, energy- 
efficient flight,  low-speed aircraft,  quieter  airport  communities, protec- 
tion  of  the marine  environment, preservation  of  the  earth’s atmosphere, 
exploration  of  the  planetary  environment, and  energy  sources and  use. 
(NASA  Tech Brief B73-10463  ; LeRC  PIO,  interviews, 24 June, 24 July 75 ; 
Biggins, Newport News, Va, Times-Herald, 11 Sept 74 ;  N A S A  Activities, 
Oct 74 , l l -12 )  
10  September:  Pioneer  10  data  returned  from  the  3  Dec.  1973  encounter 
with the  planet  Jupiter  appeared  to  support  the  theory  that  Jupiter  was 
a  spinning  ball  of  liquid  hydrogen  without  a  detectable  solid  surface, 
NASA reported. At most, the planet probably  had only a small rocky core 
deep  below  the  heavily  clouded  atmosphere.  Jupiter’s  great  red  spot 
probably  was  the  vortex  of  a  gigantic  storm  that  had  raged  along  a 
40 000-km front for 700 yrs. 
Analyses  by  NASA  experimenters  and  other  scientists had  shown  that 
the  Pioneer  10 information,  the  first  measurements  made  from  closer 
than  the  earth,  contradicted  some previous theories  and verified  others. 
As early Pioneer 10 reports had  indicated  [see  25 Jan., 2  and 9 April], 
Jupiter’s  turbulent  interior  was much hotter  than  expected, its magnetic 
field much larger than some predictions, and its radiation belts fa r  more 
intense. The planet  was  a  source  of  high-energy particle  radiation,  the 
only  one  in  the  solar  system  besides  the  sun.  I n   its  atmospheric  circu- 
lation  patterns,  cyclones  and  anticyclones  (ascending  and  descending) 
were  stretched  around  the  planet,  rather  than  being  circular  as  on  the 
earth.  This  “weather-stretching,”  probably  caused  by  heat  radiation 
from  the  planet’s  interior  and  its  35 200-km-per-hr rotation  speed,  ac- 
counted  for  Jupiter’s  planet-girdling,  alternating  brown-red  and  gray- 
white cloud bands. 
Density of  the  four largest moons decreased from the density  of  rock 
for  the  innermost I o  and Europa  to  the  density of  a  water-ice and  rock 
166 

10 September 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
mixture  for  the  outer  Ganymede and Callisto.  I o  had  a  tenuous  atmos- 
phere.  Ganymede was known  to  have  an  atmosphere and  the  other  two 
large moons probably had also. 
Meanwhile Pioneer  11, the  sister  spacecraft  launched  5  April  1973, 
was  drawing toward  Jupiter  for  its December flyby, before  going on to  
Saturn.  (NASA Release 74-238) 
Safety was of  prime importance to NASA  management and NASA-Soviet joint 
working  groups  planning  the  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  mission,  Dr. 
James  C.  Fletcher, NASA  Administrator,  said  in  a  letter  to  Sen. William 
Proxmire  (D-Wis.)  . The response to   a  Sen. Proxmire  letter  expressing 
concern for  ASTP  crew  safety in   light  of  past  failures of  the  Soyuz and 
Salyut  spacecraft  explained that  NASA  had  requested  and  received  from 
the Soviets a detailed explanation of  the Soyuz  11 (6-30  June  1971) fail- 
ure,  in  which three  cosmonauts were killed,  and  of  the  test  program  to 
correct  the  problem.  NASA  officials  had  also  asked  for  information  on 
the  26-29  Aug.  Soyu z  15 mission,  which ASTP  technical personnel were 
expected to discuss during joint meetings 9-23  Sept.  (Letter, Proxmire to 
Fletcher,  3  Sept  74;  letter,  Fletcher  to  Proxmire,  10 Sept 74) 
The Air  Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Cen- 
ter  (AEDC) announced that  it had refined computerized wind-tunnel tech- 
niques  for  predicting  aircraft  loss-of-control characteristics.  AEDC  cor- 
related wind-tunnel data from a model F-15  aircraft mounted on a  com- 
puter-controlled  support  with  NASA  drop-test  data  of  a  remotely  con- 
trolled model. The computer predicted model response, such as stalls, to 
forces acting on it; activated the high-pitch rig to place the model in the 
appropriate  position;  and  checked  the  prediction.  This use  of  the com- 
puterized mounting system was the first without a human  in  the control 
cycle.  (ASFC Release OIP  174.74) 
10-12  S q t em b e r :   California  Institute  of  Technology  scientist  Charles  T. 
Kowal discovered a possible 13th moon of  Jupiter.  I n  photos taken with 
the  Hale  Observatories’  122-cm Schmidt  telescope  a t   Mount  Palomar, 
Calif.,  Kowal  detected  a  10- to  16-km moon  as a  pinpoint  of  reflected 
light  11 million km  from the planet. 
Photos  taken  22  Sept.  from the Univ.  of  Arizona’s Steward Observa- 
tory  and again  15 and  16 Oct.  from Mount Palomar  supported Kowal’s 
findings.  Dr.  Kaare  Aksnes  of  the  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa- 
tory  determined the object belonged to the intermediate group of  moons 
orbiting  Jupiter  a t  a  distance  of  about  11 million km.  (Alexander, LA  
T imes ,  20 Sept 74 ;  Sullivan, N Y T ,  23  Oct 74 ,19 )  
11 September:  A  declassified feasibility  study by  Goodyear Aerospace Corp. 
had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illumi- 
nate ground  areas  continuously a t  night,  the Huntsville  T ime s  reported. 
Pointing  out  commercial  uses,  an  official  from  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center, which had managed the  Project  Able  study, told  the  Times that 
potential  applications  included  reflecting  microwaves  from  space  for 
conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves 
should  frost  threaten  the  f ru i t  crop,  and  lighting Alaska  during  its  ex- 
tended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, 
a  640 -md iaY  20000-kg  reflector  satellite  could  provide  twice  the  light 
of  the full moon and raise the temperature of  the area covered by several 
degrees.  (Casebolt, Huntsville T imes ,  11 Sept 74) 
*  A  new  artificial  limb  had  been  developed by  Kennedy  Space  Center  and 
Rancho Los Amigos Hospital  in  California,  ICSC  announced. The  strap- 
167 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

11 September 
less device was attached  directly to  the amputee’s bone through a carbon 
collar tha t  remained a t  skin level. Originally developed for rocket motors, 
the  high-purity  carbon  material  would  not  cause  infection  in  patients. 
Previously,  the  body’s  rejection  of  foreign materials  and  the  failure  of 
the  skin  to  form  a  hygienic  seal had  prevented direct  attachment to  the 
bone. A  quick-release ball  connector for the limb was based on  a device 
that held rocket umbilical attachments in place until liftoff.  (KSC  Release 
13  4-74,) 
0  Pages of  the  Wa l l  Street  Journal were  being printed via  satellite in  a  joint 
test program, Dow Jones & Co.,  Inc.,  and Communications Satellite Corp. 
announced.  A  Dow  Jones  composition  plant  in  Massachusats  trans- 
mitted  high-resolution  facsimile  pages  to  Zntelsat-IV  F-7  communica- 
tions satellite in  synchronous orbit 35 900 km above the Atlantic Ocean. 
The  satellite  relayed  the  data  to  the  Dow  Jones  production  facility  in 
New  Jersey  for  production  of  press  plates.  The  test  program  was  the 
first  time  the  entire  process  from  composition  to   printing  had  been 
conducted  via  satellite  transmission.  (Dow  Jones-ComSatCorp  Joint 
Release 7 4 4 5  ; ComSatCorp PIO,  interview, 1 Aug 75 )  
Trace materials in Cleveland’s  airborne particulate matter were not present 
in dangerous levels, but  lead might approach these levels, scientists from 
Lewis Research Center reported  a t  the Earth Environment and Resources 
Conference in  Philadelphia. With  the  City  of  Cleveland’s Air  Pollution 
Control  Division, LeRc  had  conducted  a  two-year study  using  neutron 
activation  and  gas  chromatography  to  determine  levels of  60  trace ma- 
terials.  Processed by  computer, levels of  trace materials were related  to 
wind  direction  in  the  form of  maps.  Sources of  pollution  could then  be 
established  by  knowing  which  industry  produced  which  elements  and 
compounds and in  what ratios.  (LeRC Release 74-54) 
0  Lockheed-California Co.  had  received  a  $25-million letter  contract  from 
Rockwell  International  Corp.  for  structural  testing  of  the  space  shuttle 
orbiter, the Huntsville  T imes  reported.  (Hun tsv i l le  T imes ,  12 Sept 74 )  
13  September:  Albert  P.  Loening,  developer  and  manufacturer  of  the  first 
successful  amphibian  plane-the  Loening  amphibian-in 
1923, died  at 
the age of  88. He had been a founding stockholder and director of  Grum- 
man Aircraft  Engineering Corp., now Grumman Corp.  (NYT,  1 5  Sept 74, 
5 9 )  
14 September:  A Federal  grand  ju ry  had  charged Charles R.  Riser of  Mary- 
land with mail fraud in setting up Andromeda Space Covers, a mail-order 
firm  selling fake  space  exploration  items,  the  Baltimore  S u n   reported. 
Fifteen persons had  paid  for golf  balls driven across the moon by Astro- 
naut  Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  during  the  January  1971 Apollo  14  mission, 
but he had  used  only two balls and these were still  on the moon. The as- 
sistant  U S .   attorney  on  the  case  said  that  astronauts might be  called  to 
state whether  signatures  on  other  souvenirs were authentic.  (Erlandson, 
B Sun, 1 4  Sept 74, B20) 
15  September:  Five  embryonic  stars  in  the  nebula  of  Orion  had  been 
discovered by  astronomers using  infrared  detectors attached to  the Hale 
Observatories’ 254-cm telescope on Mount Wilson, the Chicago Sun-T imes  
announced.  California  Institute  of  Technology and  Hale  scientists had 
reported  that  the  stars,  probably  less  than  10000 yi-s  old,  were  about 
1600 light years  from earth.  (UPI,  Chicago Sun-T imes ,  15 Sept 741 
Space  engineers  in  India  were  testing  subsystems for  their  first  satellite 
launch vehicle, in preparation for eventual launch of  a 40-kg satellite into 

168 

15 September 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
near-earth  orbit.  All  instruments  and  payload  had  been  developed  a t  
Vikram  Sarabhai  space  center.  (Delhi  Overseas  Service,  FBIs-India, 
17  Sept 74, U4) 
15-22  September:  Arab  League  telecommunications  representatives  voted 
to  establish  a  satellite  communications system,  at  a  meeting in  Beirut, 
Lebanon.  Three  proposals were  under  consideration : Hawker  Siddeley 
Group  Ltd.  had  proposed  a  spacecraft  similar  to  the  Orbiting  Test 
Satellite  ( OTS) being developed by the European Space Research Organi- 
zation.  Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm had  recommended  a  three-axis 
stabilized  spacecraft.  A  consortium  of  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  Nippon 
Electric Co.  of  Japan,  and Thomson-csF of  France had proposed a space- 
craft  similar  to  Telesat  Canada’s  spin-stabilized  12-transponder  Anik 
satellites. 
Meanwhile  a  number  of  nations  also  were moving  toward  domestic 
satellite systems.  Algeria  had  begun  installation  of  the  first  of  1 4  earth 
terminals  for  its  domestic  satellite  system  following  award  of  a  $9.6- 
million contract to GTE International,  a subsidiary of  General Telephone 
& Electronics Corp. The system would begin operations soon after 1 Jan. 
1975, when Algeria would  lease one transponder  from  the  International 
Telecommunications Satellite Organization. Brazil  would  begin  leasing 
an  Intelsat  transponder  for  its  domestic service 1 June  1975. Indonesia 
had  begun development of  two satellites of  its own;  initial terminals in a 
25-station  system  would  be  easily  convertible from  operation  with  an 
Intelsat  satellite to  later  operation with  an  Indonesian  comsat. Malaysia 
was  purchasing  three  ground  terminals  to  use  Intelsat  comsats.  The 
Phillippine  government  was  considering  a  similar  plan  and,  with 
Malaysia, possibility of  switching from an  Intelsat to Indonesia’s planned 
satellite. 
Saudi Arabia  had  installed two  terminals with  11-m-dia antennas  for 
domestic  service,  which,  with  the  completion  of  two  larger  stations  in 
mid-1975, would  be  moved  to  remote  locations for  use  with  an  Intelsat 
or  the planned Arab League satellite. (Av Wk, 23 Sept 74, 2 3 ;  Johnsen, 
Av Wk, 30  Sept 74, 22 ;  Hughes contract  officer,  interview, 27 June  75 )  
16  September:  Two  scientists had  predicted that  in  1982 a  rare  alignment of 
all nine planets on  the  same side of  the sun would produce major  earth- 
quakes,  Newsweek  reported.  I n   their  book  The  Jupiter  Eflect,  John 
Gribbin  of  the  British  magazine  Nature  and  Stephen  Plagemann  of 
Goddard Space Flight Center warned that increased solar activity caused 
by  the  alignment, which occurred every 179 yrs, would alter wind direc- 
tions  in  the  upper  atmosphere. The frictional  effect exerted on  the solid 
earth by  atmospheric circulation would change with the winds. The con- 
sequent braking  of the earth’s rotation  rate would trigger earthquakes in 
areas,  like  California,  under  geological  stress.  (Newsweek ,   16  Sept 
7 4 , 5 7 )  
Dr.  John  E.  Naugle, NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator,  would  receive 
the National Civil Service League’s Career Service Award  for Sustained 
Excellence, NASA  announced. Dr. Naugle had  ioined NASA in 1959 as head 
of  the Nuclear Emulsion Section a t  Goddard Space Flight Center and, in 
1967, had become Associate Administrator for the Office of  Space Science 
a t  Headquarters.  Under  his leadership,  scientists had  mapped the entire 
surface of Mars, collected the first detailed information about Jupiter and 
its moons, and advanced the use of  unmanned spacecraft as astronomical 
observatories.  Dr.  Naugle  would  receive  the  award,  given  to  Federal 
officials with  a t  least  10 yrs  outstanding public  service, on 9 Oct. 

169 

16 September 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Dr.  Carolyn  Huntoon,  Johnson  Space  Center,  would  receive  the 
League’s  Special Achievement Award for her  design of  a Skylab experi- 
ment  that  had  measured biochemical reactions  to weightlessness.  (NASA 
Release 741252) 
*  L/G  Duward  L.  Crow  (USAF,  Ret.)  became  NASA  Assistant Administrator 
for  DOD  and  Interagency  Affairs  and  Special Assistant to  Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher, NASA  Administrator.  Succeding Gen.  Bruce K. Hollc way  ( USAF, 
Ret.),  who had  retired  from the  agency, Gen.  Crow had  been Assistant 
Vice  Chief  of  Staff for  the  Air  Force  before  coming  to   NASA.  (NASA 
Release 741258) 
17  September:  The  channeled  scabland  of  eastern  Washington  had  been 
formed  20000   yrs  ago  by  the  greatest  flood  known  to  have  occurred, 
the New  Y o r k  Times  quoted U.S.  Geological Survey a s  reporting.  From 
ground scars and photographs  from E r t s   I  Earth Resources Technology 
Satellite  (launched  23  July  1972),  scientists  had  traced  the  flood  for 
885 krn.  An  ice dam blocking drainage  of  western Montana  into  Idaho 
had  collapsed, pouring  2000  cubic km  of  water  down  the  valley  of  the 
Spokane River.  Scars  visible  in  satellite  photographs  were  formed  by 
erosion  of  surface  soil and underlying  basalt.  As  water  drained,  gravel 
ridges 6 to 9 m high and 3 km long had been formed. The largest channel 
was  the  Grand  Coulee, 80  km  long  and  270  m  deep.  (Sullivan,  N Y T ,  
17 Sept. 74; USGS PIO,  interview, 12 June 75)  
NASA  authorized  two  flight  kits  for  Apollo-Soyuz  astronauts:  an   official 
flight kit,  containing  selective items for  memorabilia,  and  an  astronaut 
preference kit, containing 20 personal items selected individually. Special 
flight  items  having  particular  significance  for  the  mission  would  be 
suggested by  the  Director,  Johnson  Space Center, and  approved  by  the 
Administrator.  (NASA  NMI  8020.19B) 
The  congressional  Joint  Committee  on  Atomic  Energy  issued  the  panel 
report  Transportation  of  Radioactive  Material  b y   Passenger  A i rc ra f t .  
The panel recommended that  the transport  index  (the level of  radiation 
in millirem per  hour  one meter  from  the  surface  of  packages of  radio- 
active material)  be  reduced from  10 to  1 and that the maximum permis- 
sible  radiation  a t  the  package surface  be  lowered by  one  fourth  to  one 
half.  Total  maximum  permissible  quantities  of  curies  of  radionuclides 
per  package  should  be  a t   least  10  times  lower.  Improved  packaging, 
installation  of  high-level radiation  monitors  in  baggage compartments, 
and Federal monitoring  of  packages  in transit  from  supplier  to  loading 
were also recommended. (Joint Com P r in t )  
17-18  September:  The second irJ a series of  balloon flights carrying develop- 
ment instruments fo r  NASA’s planned High  Energy Astronomy Observa- 
tory  satellites reached a n  altitude  of  38  000 m,  descending 56 hrs  after 
launch  from  Sioux  City,  Iowa.  The  balloon  carried  a  French-Danish 
experiment to  study  isotopic  composition of  primary  cosmic  rays.  The 
first flight, carrying the same instrument  from  Sioux City 27 Aug.,  had 
reached  31 OOO  m  and  descended  160 km  west  of  the  launch  site  after 
12 h r s  aloft. A  third  would  be  launched  from  Palestine, Tex.,  17 Dec., 
carrying a Univ.  of San Diego x-ray experiment;  a fourth was scheduled 
fo r  spring  1975. The flights were being  coordinated  by  Marshall  Space 
Flight Center. 
Three  HEAO  satellites  were  scheduled  for  Iaunch  into  earth  orbit 
1977-1979  t o   study  celestial  x-rays,  gamma  rays,  and  cosmic  rays. 
(NASA Release 74-271;  MSFC proj off,  interview, 12 Nov 75)  
170 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
17-20  September 
17-20  September:  Telephone  communications via  satellite  to   remote  areas 
of  Mexico  were  demonstrated  during  the  International  Congress  of 
Electrical and Electronic Communications. Westus 1  (launched 13 April) 
and a  portable  antenna-earth station  developed by  Hughes Aircraft  Co. 
relayed signals from Isla  de Cedros through  Westur 1  to  Western Union 
Telegraph  Co.’s  earth  station  in  Texas;  signals  were  then  transmitted 
by terrestrial  facilities to Mexico City. The experiment showed satellites 
could span terrain  where conventional communications were  difficult to 
construct  and  uneconomical  to  operate.  (Western  Union  Release,  17 
Sept 74; Western Union PIO,  interview, 6 June 75)  
18 September:  Dr.  Kurt H.  Debus, Director  of  Kennedy Space Center since 
its  establishment in  1962,  annwnced  his  retirement.  Born  in  Germany, 
Dr. Debus had  begun his career in U S .  military and NASA space programs 
in   1945, when with  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun  he  had  joined  the  Army’s 
ballistic missile program.  He had  supervised the launch  of  the first Red- 
stone  ballistic  missile  in  1953  and  the  flight-testing  of  Jupiter  and 
Pershing missiles and Jupiter C and Juno launch vehicles until the Army 
team was transferred to NASA  in  1960. He had  directed the launch of  the 
first  U S .   satellite, Explorer  1 ,   on  31  Jan.  1958,  and  NASA  launch  pro- 
grams from the flight of  Alan B.  Shepard, Jr.,  in 1961 to preparations  for 
space shuttle operations. Dr. Debus had received the Louis W. Hill Space 
Transportation Award  from  the  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics as well as the Army’s  highest civilian decoration, the Excep- 
tional  Civilian Service Medal,  and NASA’s Distinguished  Service Medal. 
( KSC  Release 135-74;  Debus letter to KSC employees) 
The Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee continued hearings 
on S.  2350  and S. 3484, bills to  develop an  operational Earth  Resources 
Technology Satellite  (ERTS)   system and  to  establish  an  Office  of  Earth 
Resources Survey Systems within NASA  and an Earth Resources Observa- 
tion  Administration  within  the  Dept.  of  the  Interior  [see 6 ,  8, 9 Aug.]. 
Frank G.  Zarb, Office  of  Management and Budget Associate Director for 
Material Resources, Energy  and  Science, warned  against  immediate de- 
velopment of  an  operational ERTS  system, citing budgeting restraints and 
marginal value of  current ERTS  data. Since an advanced satellite offering 
higher  spatial resolution would increase the usefulness of  ERTS  data, Zarb 
contended that  the  third  satellite,  ERTS-C,  should  be  experimental. His 
view  was  supported  by  S.  Benedict Levin, Executive Vice  President  of 
Earth  Satellite Corp.,  and  by  John  V.  Granger,  Acting  Director  of  the 
Bureau of  International Scientific and Technological Affairs for the State 
Dept.  (Transcript) 
0  Soviet astronomers  had  detected  a  black  hole  several light  years  away  in 
the  center  of  the  globular cluster Omega in the  constellation Centaurus, 
Tass  reported.  Using the  interaction  effect between  gravitation  fields of 
globular  clusters  and  stars,  Soviet astronomer  Kiriol  Ogorodnikov and 
his assistant Yelena Naumova of  the Univ. of  Leningrad had  determined 
the  value  of  the  mass  of  the  cluster  Omega  Centauri  to  be  one  trillion 
times that of  the sun. Since this value fa r  exceeded the admissible density 
of all luminaries in the cluster, the scientists concluded that  a black hole 
existed within the cluster. (Tass, FBIS-SOV, 19 Sept. 74, U l )  
*  West  German  scientist  Gisbert Winnewisser  announced  discovery  of  the 
organic  molecule vinyl  cyanide  in  outer  space,  a  possible  link  t o   the 
chemistry of  living  organisms. The discovery had  been made with  Aus- 
tralian  Frank Gardner, using the Australian  Commonwealth Science and 
171 

18 September 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Industrial  Research  Organization  ( CSIRO) telescope. A  member  of  the 
Max Planck  Institute  of  Radioastronomy, Winnewisser  announced  the 
find a t  a meeting of  astronomers in  Wurzburg,  West Germany.  (Agence 
France  Presse,  W Post,  20  Sept.  74;  Turner,  Nat’l  Radio Astron  Obs, 
W Va, interview, 6 Aug 75)  
*  Grigory Khozin of  the Soviet Academy of  Sciences’ Institute of  U S .  Studies 
expressed resentment of  criticism by some U S .  press members and others 
of  Soviet  motives  and technical  ability  in  the cooperative Apollo-Soyuz 
Test  Project.  Writing  in  the weekly  Literaturnuya Gazeta,  Khozin  par- 
ticularly censured suggestions  of  early Soviet  reluctance to  cooperate  in 
space  and  of  Soviet  spacecraft  docking  difficulties, made  in   the  recent 
book  i7.S.-Soviet  Cooperation in Space by former U S .  Ambassador to  the 
U.S.S.R.,  Foy D. Kohler. He  accused “certain U S .  circles” of being “glad 
to  cast  a  shadow”  on  ASTP  and  to  “smear  the  forthcoming  joint  experi- 
ment  precisely  because  i t   is  a  joint  one  [and]  promotes  the  establish- 
ment  of  normal  relations  between  countries.”  Khozin  declared  that  the 
U.S.S.R.,  as  well  as  U S .  space  program leaders  and   “ordinary  Ameri- 
cans,”  favored  further  close  cooperation  in   space.  (FBIS-SOV, Sept  74, 
B2-3;  Smith, NYT, 19 Sept 74) 
18 September-21  October, 24  November-14  December:  Two  sets of  critical 
surface-simulation tests were successfully conducted on the Viking lander 
proof-fl ight vehicle in  a Martin Marietta Corp. thermal vacuum  chamber 
under  Martian  temperature  and  pressure  conditions. The tests  verified 
the  ability  of  Viking  systems  to  withstand  Martian  temperatures  and 
verified lander  operations  and   ground  support  systems  from  the  acqui- 
sition of  a simulated Martian soil sample to analysis,  interpretation, and 
reporting  of  data  by   Viking  science  teams.  The  spacecraft  performed 
tasks-usjng 
the  surface  sampler,  imaging  system,  meteorological  sen- 
sors,  x-ray spectrometer, seismometer,  and  thermal control systems-in 
temperatures  ranging from 178 to 308 K  (-135”  to 9 5 °F ) .   (NASA  prog 
off, interview, 2 1  Oct 75 ; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74,44-45) 
September:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched  eight  Cosmos  satellites  on  a  single 
booster  from  Plesetsk,  in   its  second  eight-satellite launch  of  the  year 
[see 2 3  April].  Orbital parameters were: 
Cosmos  677-1466-km 
apogee,  1398-km perigee,  114.5-min  period, 
and 74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos  678-1533-km 
apogee,  1466-km perigee,  116.0-min  period, 
74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos 679-1511-km 
74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos  680-1492-km 
74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos  681-1472-km 
74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos  682-1466-km 
74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos  683-1467-km 
74.0” inclination. 
Cosmos  6 8 6 1 4 6 7 - k m  apogee,  1416-km perigee,  114.7-mjn  period, 
74.0” inclination. 
The  U.S.  press  speculated that  the  satellites  were  part  of  a n   opera- 
tional  system  for  worldwide  naval  communications.  ( GSFC  Wkly  S SR ,  
172 

apogee,  1434-km  perigee,  114.9-min  period, 

apogee,  1466-km perigee.  115.5-min  period, 

19 

apogee,  1466-km  perigee,  115.8-min period, 

apogee,  1466-km perigee,  115.3-min period, 

apogee,  1453-km  perigee,  115.1-min  period, 

19 September 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
19-25  Sept  74;  Tass, FBIS-SOV, 20  Sept 74, U1;  SBD ,  23 Sept 74 ,101 ;  
21 Oct 74.52 
*  Dr.  Richard T. 'Whitcomb,  Head  of  Langley Research  Center's  Transonic 
Aerodynamics  Branch,  had  been  selected  to  receive  the  1974 Wright 
Brothers Memorial Trophy  for  development of  the  area-rule concept  of 
aircraft  design  and  invention  of  the  supercritical  wing,  the  National 
Aeronautic  Assn.  announced.  Dr.  Whitcomb  would  receive  the  award 
13 Dec.  (NAA  Release, 19 Sept 74 )  
A  high-temperature  metal  alloy  and  a  self-lubricating. bearing  material, 
both developed at Lewis Research Center, had been  chosen by Industrial 
Research magazine as 2  of  the 100 most significant products of  the year, 
NASA  announced.  Composed principally  of  tungsten,  nickel,  and  alumi- 
num,  the  alloy  was  three  times  stronger  a t   1480 K  (2200°F)  than  any 
existing  commercial  cast-nickel-base  alloy.  The  bearing  material-a 
product  of  glass,  metal,  and  calcium  fluoride-functioned 
at  tempera- 
tures  up  to  1170 K  (1650 °F ) .  Both  products  would  be  used  for  more 
efficient and  cleaner  turbine  engines, electric-power generating systems, 
and  other  high-temperature  devices.  (LeRC  Release  7 4 5 1  ; Industrial 
Research,  Oct  74) 
20-23  Sep tember:   Mariner  10  (launched  3  Nov.  1973)  encountered  the 
planet Mercury  a  second time, with  its  closest approach  on  2 1  Sept.  a t  
48  069 km. The objective of  the second flyby was to extend photographic 
coverage of  the  sun side  of  Mercury. The spacecraft obtained some 500 
TV science photos of  Mercury, with 350 additional TV pictures to support 
an  optical  navigation  experiment.  Encounter  TV  pictures  were  trans- 
mitted  in  real time  at the  rate  of  117.6 kilobits  per  second. New  photo 
mosaics  would  correlate  incoming  and  outgoing  portions  of  Mercury 
photographed  during  the  first  encounter  (25 March-5  April)  and  pro- 
vide  additional  views  of  the  south  polar  area.  In   the  two  encounters, 
Mariner  I0   had  photographed  45%  of  Mercury's  surface.  Ultraviolet 
airglow  scans  were  also  made  to  obtain  more  information  about  Mer- 
cury's  atmosphere. 
The  spacecraft  did  not  pass  through  either  sun  o r   earth  occultation, 
and  communications with  the  Deep  Space Network  stations  were  unin- 
terrupted. The second flyby was adjudged successful 3 Oct. A  third  flyby 
was planned for March 1975. 
Preliminary  results, presented at  a  23  Sept. press briefing  at Jet  Pro- 
pulsion Laboratory,  indicated that  scarps and evidence of  volcanism ob- 
served  on  the  first  flyby were  pervasive and  not  localized.  The scabby 
hills detected on the first encounter in an  area opposite the Caloris Basin 
did  not  reappear,  suggesting that  such  terrain  was  peculiar  to  that  site. 
(NASA MOR, 3 Oct  74;  NASA  Release  7 4 2 4 8 ;  NASA  proj  off,  interview, 
30 June 75 ;  Sullivan, N Y T ,  24 Sept 74) 
21  September:  The  prototype  West  German,  British,  and  Italian  multirole 
combat  aircraft  (MRCA )  made  its  first  public  flight,  lifting  off  from 
Manching, West Germany. The  aircraft-product  of  three nations'  com- 
bining  technological  and  avionic  resources  to  develop  one  model  to 
fulfill six combat roles,  from low-level attack to high-altitude a i r  superi- 
ority-demonstrated 
its variable-geometry wing in the short flight. Fully 
extended, the wing made short takeoff and landing possible. Moved back 
a t  a 25"  angle to the fuselage, it provided top speed of more than mach 2. 
Final  decision  on  whether  to  produce  the  MRCA   would  follow  1 2  mos 
of  testing.  (Morris, L A  T ime s ,  22 Sept 7 4 , lA )  
173 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
22  September 
22  September:  The  North  American  Air  Defense Command had  predicted 
more than 10 000 pieces of  space clutter would be circling the earth by the 
year  2000,  the  Los  Angeles  T imes  reported. More than  3200 man-made 
objects were already  orbiting  the  earth, with  one object  falling back  to 
earth daily. More than 77%  of  the total had  resulted from  explosions of 
satellites  already  in  orbit,  NORAD  said.  Space  exploration  by  countries 
other  than  the  US. contributed  to  increasing  space  clutter.  (UPI,  LA 
Times, 22 Sept 74) 
23  September:  A  four-engine  DC-8  transport  using  a  NASA-developed two- 
segment  approach  had  reduced  the  area  impacted  by  noise  above  de- 
sirable  tolerances  by  53%  in  a  normal  landing  approach,  NASA  an- 
nounced.  Being  evaluated  in  service by  United  Air  Lines,  the  aircraft 
was  the  second  in  regular  airline  service  to  use  a  steeper  glide  path, 
inclined  5.5"  to  the  ground  instead  of  3". When  the aircraft  intersected 
the  normal  flight  path,  the  glide  path  angle  was  decreased,  with  the 
landing  made  a s   usual.  Both  higher  altitudes  of  the  glide  path  and 
reduced  engine  power  setting  contributed  to  noise  reduction.  (NASA 
Release 74-226) 
Japan  Rocket  Development  Assn.,  an  industry  group,  had  proposed  a 
three-phase, t9-billion Japanese program  to launch 6 5  satellites between 
1978 and  1987, Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology  reported.  Nineteen 
satellites.  each  weighing under  300  kg,  would  be  launched  in   the  $3.3- 
billion  Phase  1 for  engineering,  meteorological, geographical  survey, 
communications, navigation,  and  ionospheric  research  missions.  Of  25 
spacecraft in the  $2.8-billion Phase 2, some would  have  earth  resources 
survey  missions.  Weighing  up  to  600  kg,  they  would  be  launched  by 
rockets  incorporating  McDonnell  Douglas  Delta  1st  stages  and 
N-2 
two  4500-kg,  Japanese-built upper  stages. The  first  prototype  N-2  was 
scheduled for  summer  1975. The  21  Phase  3  satellites, some weighing 
1000 kg,  would  be  orbited  a t   a  cost  of  $2.6  billion,  and  many  would 
be  launched  by  a  Japanese  0-model launch  vehicle still being  designed. 
The  program  also  called  for  launch  trials  for  Japanese M-X  boosters. 
(Aw W k ,  23 Sept 74 ,2 1 )  
Personnel  from  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration, 
operator  of  the  solar  observatory  at  Johnson  Space Center  since  1970, 
would move to Marshall Space Flight Center, JSC  announced. NOAA would 
continue  at  MSFC  as  co-investigator  in  an   experiment  conducted with 
the  Apollo  Telescope Mount  on  the  Skylab Workshop  during  its  1973- 
1974 mission.  The experiment had  gathered  solar  radiation  data  in  the 
solar  observatory  . 
x-ray  region  of  the  solar  spectrum.  The  JSC-NOAA 
would reopen fo r  space shuttle operations.  (JSC Release 74-253) 
A  mainshaft  seal  for  turbine  engines  was  being  developed  a t   Lewis Re- 
search  Center  to  reduce  wear,  maintenance,  and  fuel  consumption. By 
creating  a  thin  gas  film,  the  self-acting lift-pad seal eliminated  contact 
between the  seal bore  and  the  rotating  shaft  shoulder  except  a t  startup 
and  shutdown.  The  seal  functioned  a t   higher  pressures,  speeds,  and 
temperatures  than  conventional  contact  seals  and,  with  its  low  wear 
and  leak  rate,  would  be  used  in  the  NASA  space  shuttle  liquid-oxygen 
pump.  ( L ~ R C  Release 74-55) 
*  Westinghouse  Gorp.  subsidiary  TCom  Tnc.  ( fo r   Tethered  Communica- 
tions)  was  testing  the  aerostat,  an   inexpensive  alternative  to  earth- 
orbiting  satellites, T ime  reported.  Developed from signal-relay balloons 
174 

23 September 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
used  fo r  reaching isolated U S .   outposts in  Vietnam,  the aerostat  was  a 
helium-filled balloon  anchored at altitudes of  3000-5000  m.  In  the Baha- 
mas,  an   aerostat  a t   a  3500-m  altitude  picked  up  signals  from  Miami 
180 km  away,  trebling  the  range  of  Florida  stations. With  i ts   1800 kg 
of  electronic equipment, the   aerostat  could receive and broadcast up  to 
4 TV channels, 2 command radio stations, and data from 5000 to  10 000 
microwave circuits.  ( T im e ,  23 Sept 74)  
President  Ford  outlined  “Project  Interdependence,” a  global  approach  to  
the  energy problem,  in  h is   address  to  the  ninth  annual World  Energy 
Conference in  Detroit.  The President proposed that  all  nations increase 
production,  reduce  consumption, and  eliminate  waste  of  energy;  that 
a  cooperative spirit  exist;  that  poor  nations  receive  special  attention; 
and   that  fuel  prices  reach  a  level  providing  strong  incentives  to  pro- 
ducers without disrupting consumer economics. 
Describing U S .  mobilization to achieve long-term goals, the President 
said  the  energy program would  require “a  commitment  in  excess of  the 
successful one made  by  John  F.  Kennedy  to  put  a  man  on  the Moon  in  
the last decade.”  ( P D ,  30 Sept 74 ,1181-6)  
*  The Global Atmospheric Research Program Atlantic  Tropical Experiment 
(GATE)   ended  its  operations  off  the   coast  of  Senegal  [see  15  June- 
23 Sept.].  ( NOAA  Release 74-154) 
24 September:  Flight  Research  Center’s highly instrumented F-111  aircraft, 
to be used  to  test  the  integrated propulsion control  system  (IPCS)  , made 
its  first  baseline  flight to  gather  data  on  the  engine’s inlets  and  exhaust 
controls.  Data would be used  by  NASA  in  support of  the program  and by 
Boeing  Co.,  which  would  build  the  system.  (FRC   X-Press ,   27  Sept  74, 
2 ;  FRC  PIO,  interview, 17 June 75) 
*  NASA had  designated Marshall Space Flight  Center  as  lead Center  fo r  NASA 
activities under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act signed 
into  law  3  Sept.,  MSFC  announced.  The  Center  would  work  under  the 
direction  of  the  NASA  Hq.  Office  of  Energy  Programs.  (MSFC   Release 
74-175) 
25  September:  A  helical  rotary-screw  expander  that  could  be  used  to  tap  
geothermal energy of  hot aquifers  under  deserts for  low-cost energy was 
described  a t   a  National  Science  Foundation  conference a t   California 
Institute  of  Technology.  The  invention  of  Pasadena  engineer Roger  S. 
Sprankle  was  the  first  electrical  power-generating system  to  use  the 
entire  amount  of  energy  available  in   geothermally heated  water  and 
might reduce production costs 50%. Tested by  Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
and  Hydrothermal  Power  Co.,  the  Sprankle  system’s  rotary  screws 
filtered impurities  to  make maximum  use  of  the  steady flow  of  pumped 
water.  Once  the  geothermally heated  water  flowed  through  the  screw 
expanders,  the  liquid  dropped  in   pressure  and   temperature  as   water 
vaporized.  The  increasing  mass  flow  of  vapor  turned  rotors  with  an 
output  shaft  linked  to  an   electric  generator.  (Caltech-JPL Release,  25 
Sept  74) 
26 September: The U.S.S.R.  announced the mission of  the Salyut 3 space sta- 
tion  (launched  25  June)  had   been  “completely  fulfilled.”  The  ‘‘main 
program  of  work”  had   ended  23  Sept.  and the recoverable module  con- 
taining research materials and  experiments had separated from Salyut  3. 
Engines  were  discarded  before  entry  into  the  atmosphere,  and  the 
parachute  system  was  activated  a t   an   altitude  of  8.4  km  to  land  the 
module  in   a  preset  area   of  the U.S.S.R.  Salyut  3  plans  had  been  for   a 
175 

26  September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

90-day  mission  but  the  station  would  continue  in  orbit  €or  more 
experimentation. 
Equipment  tested  during  the  90-day  flight  included  power  supply 
systems  with  revolving  panels  of  solar  batteries,  an  electromechanical 
stabilizing  system,  a  high-precision  control  system,  an  autonomous 
navigation  system, thermoregulating  life-support and  radio  communica- 
tion systems, and engine systems. 
A  two-man crew aboard Soyuz 14  (launched 3 July)  had  successfully 
docked with  the  orbiting  station 5  July  for  1 5  days  of  scientific experi- 
mentation. However, the press  reported Western  observers doubted  that 
Salyut  3 had  accomplished its entire mission, since the Soyuz 15 cosmo- 
nauts  (launched  26  Aug.)  had  failed  to  dock  with  the  station.  (Tass 
FBIS-SOV, 27  Sept  74,  U1-2;  W  Po s t ,   27  Sept  74, A22;  SBD ,   21   Sept 
74 ,132 )  
The  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Subcommittee  on 
Aeronautics and Space Technology, reporting on almost a year’s  investi- 
gation of NASA’s tracking and data acquisition program, said the program 
was effective and efficient and that planned consolidation was progressing 
well.  The  consolidation,  to  be  completed  by  1976 with  a  reduction  of 
stations from 25 to 15, would combine the Manned Space Flight Network 
and the  Space Tracking  and Data  Acquisition Network  into  one  Space- 
flight Tracking  and  Data  Network  ( STDN)  . The  Subcommittee recom- 
mended that  the FY  1976 NASA  Authorization  request  include a  detailed 
analysis of  the need for  a n  additional  subnet  of  three  64-m antennas f o r  
the  Deep  Space  Network  and  report  on  the  status  of  relations  and 
agreements with the U.S.S.R.  The Subcommittee warned that NASA’S  T&DA 
capabilities were  not  designed for  the workload that  future  operational 
systems would  require;  solutions  should  be  studied  by  the  President’s 
Science Adviser.  NASA  was  asked  to  furnish  an   analysis  of  lease  versus 
purchase  of  satellites for  the  Tracking and  Data  Relay  Satellite System 
( TDRSS) in its FY 1975 authorization request.  (Com P r in t )  
27  Sep tember:  A t s  6 Applications Technology Satellite  (launched  30  May) 
and  Sms   1  Synchronous  Meteorological Satellite  (launched  1 7  May) 
had  caused  substantial  interference  fo r   radio  telescopes  in  the  US . ,  
Canada,  and Great  Britain,  the  Va sh ing ton  Post  reported.  Stars  in  the 
southwest sky with  radio  frequencies near  those  of  the  satellites could 
not be studied. Dr. Frank Kerr, spokesman for the National Academy of 
Sciences Committee on Radio Frequencies, described failed communica- 
tions between NASA  and radio  astronomers. The astronomers had  learned 
that  A ts   6 would  interfere with  study  of  the  sun,  pulsars,  and  quasars 
only  when  i t  was  too  late  to  change  the  satellite’s  transmitter  and  that 
Sms   1  would  overlap radio  telescope signals  only  after  the  satellite had 
begun  sending  back  weather  pictures  1 7  May.  (O’Toole,  W  Post,  27 
Sept 74) 
0  DeElroy E. Beeler, Flight Research Center Director for Center Development, 
left  NASA  to  join  private  industry  after  28  y r s   of  service.  Beeler  had 
joined  the  National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics  in   1941, 
specializing in  high-speed aeronautics.  He  was  appointed  project  engi- 
neer  for  the  X-1, 
the  world’s  first  aircraft  to   reach  supersonic  speeds, 
and  transferred  in  1946  to  what  was  to  become  FRC.  There  he  was 
instrumental  in  research  planning,  design,  and  flight  investigations  of 
advanced research  aircraft  projects  through X-15  and XB-70.  I n   1954 
176 

27 September 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Beeler was named FRC’s  first Director of  Research and in 1958 he became 
Deputy Director, a position h e  held until 1973.  ( FRC X-Press,  27 Sept 74, 
2;  NASA biog, 25 July 63) 
Facilities  a t   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  were  being  modified  to  con- 
solidate Concept Verification Test  ( CTV)  simulation in a central location. 
The  CTV  project would  determine by  testing in  simulators whether  con- 
cepts generated  during definition studies  for  space  activities, especially 
Spacelab  experiments,  were  valid,  before’  commitments  to  proceed 
with  final design  and hardware  fabrication.  ( MSFC  Release 7 6 1 7 8 )  
29 September: A robot with an  artificial intelligence for making  independent 
decisions  in   environments  hostile  to   man  was  being  developed  a t   Jet 
Propulsion  Laboratory  and California  Institute of  Technology to prove 
the  feasibility  of  using  robots  for  planetary  exploration.  The  planned 
rover  would  be  equipped  with  metal  arms  and  hands,  a  visual  system 
of  two  TV  cameras  and  a  laser,  wheels  for  legs,  and  thousands  of  in- 
structions  programmed  into  its  computer  brain.  I t   would  b e   able  to  
analyze  a  scene,  extract  information  from  it,  make  some  choices,  and 
move around obstacles.  (NASA Release 74-260) 
30  September:  NASA’s Explorer  45   ( SSS-A  Small Scientific Satellite launched 
15 Nov.  1971) was turned  off. The spacecraft had  been investigating the 
causes  of  worldwide magnetic  disturbances  associated with  large  solar 
flares. Major accomplishments of  Explorer 45  included the first measure- 
ment  by  satellite  of  man-made stimulated electromagnetic emissions in 
the  magnetosphere;  first  measurements of  alpha  particles  in  the  equa- 
torial  region  of  the  magnetosphere, where  they  were  100  times  more 
numerous  than  expected;  first  detailed  analysis  of  the  interaction  of 
electromagnetic  waves  with  charged  particles ; measurement  of  the 
earth’s ring current, which produced the magnetic storm main phase;  and 
measurement of  the closest approach to  the earth of  the boundary  of  the 
magnetosphere  a t   about  25 000-km altitude.  (Goddard  News, Nov  74) 
30  S e p t em b e r 4   Oc tober:  The fourth  simulated Spacelab mission of  the  air- 
borne  science-shuttle  experiment  system  simulation  ( ASSESS)  program 
was  conducted a t  Marshall Ssace Flight  Center wine: a n  Ames Research 
Center Learjet.  The Lear  4 mission was  the  first  in Ghich  substitute ex- 
periment  operators were  trained  as crewmen.  Their  performance would 
be compared with  that of  the principal  investigator and his team  during 
previous  missions.  During  10  nighttime  flights  into  the  base  of  the 
stratosphere,  the  crew  measured  infrared  radiation  at  selected  wave- 
lengths  from  targets  believed to   be  forming  new  stars.  (MSFC   Release 
7 6 1 8 5 )  
September-5  Oc tober:   A  seminar  to  predict  the  probable  state  of  the 
world in  the year 2000 was held by the Smithsonian Institution  for NASA 
as part of  NASA’s “Outlook for Space” study begun  during June. Experts 
from various fields discussed a new  age-oriented global culture, the prob- 
ability  of  widespread famine, the prolonged disruption of  technological 
economies by  high  oil prices,  and  the  spread  of  nuclear  power  beyond 
control  of  the  great  powers.  Seminar  participants  concluded  tha t   the 
intensification  of  nationalism  would  continue, particularly  in  response 
to  economic  stresses.  Speakers  from  the  high-technology  sector,  how- 
ever,  stressed  that  the  U S .   would  not  have  to  suffer  from  scarcity  of 
resources,  although  resource  extraction  would  be  more  expensive  and 
would require new technology. 

30 

177 

30  September-5  October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

SateIIite  reconnaissance  to  find  mineral  resources  and  to  monitor 
threats  to   the  global  environment  would  still  be  necessary.  The  group 
also  proposed  surveillance  to   track  all  asteroids  crossing  the  earth’s 
orbit  so  that  the  impact  of  an   asteroid  might  not  be  mistaken  for  a 
nuclear  attack.  Communications satellites  were  considered  both  useful 
fo r  uniting countries and dangerous in their potential to increase threats 
of  demagoguery. Many participants agreed that the time for uncontrolled 
free enterprise was passing and that we would require independent agen- 
cies  for  bo th   planning  and  technology  assessment,  exempt  from  the 
special  interests  of  particular  government departments.  Specialists also 
proposed  that  NASA’s planning  and  analytical  abilities  be  applied  to 
nationaI  concerns  in  their  full  complexity,  taking  into  account  world 
economic,  political,  and  social  problems.  (Sullivan,  NYT ,   8  o c t   74, 
16; GSFC proj off, interview, 13 Aug 7 5 )  
The  International  Aeronautical  Federation  held  its  25th  Congress  in 
Amsterdam with the theme “Space Stations, Present and Future.”  Among 
speakers,  Astronaut  Thomas  P.  Stafford  and  Cosmonaut  Aleksey  A. 
Leonov, U S .   and Soviet commanders in  the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 
stressed how well  joint work and understanding had  advanced. A paper 
by  Daniel J. Shramo of  Lewis Research Center, with B.  R.  Foushee and 
P.  J.  O’Leary  of  General  Dynamics Corp.  Convair  Div.,  described  the 
Centaur  primary  upper  stage for  solar  system exploration and its poten- 
tial  adaptation  as an upper stage for the space shuttle. 
A  Ukranian  Academy  of  Sciences research  team  reported  on  experi- 
ments  in  the  formation  of  melts  in  weightlessness with  radiant  heating 
and  on prospects of  using  solar  energy fo r  space engineering. Compara- 
tive  studies  of  metal  solidification had  suggested that  a  more  uniform 
distribution  of  short-grained  structures under  weightlessness might  be- 
come  the  basis  of  space  technology, with  the  added  attraction of  using 
the  sun  as an  energy  source. The team had  built  a  prototype solar  plant 
tha t  could be mounted  on  a  spacecraft o r  used  in  a vacuum chamber  on 
the  earth. 
Soviet medical investigations during the flights of  Soyuz 12 (launched 
27  Sept.  1973), Soyuz 13  (18 Dee.  1973), and Soyuz 14  (3 July)  were 
reported  by  Dr.  Oleg  G.  Gazenko  and  others.  Findings  indicated  that 
prolonged  exercises,  full  and  partial  spacesuits,  and  gravity-simulating 
fittings had  reduced effects of  weightlessness during the space flight and 
after the  crew’s  return. Although reports of  initial  adaptation  symptoms 
were similar to  American findings, the Soviet paper  also noted that cos- 
monauts had reduced vestibular symptoms by deliberately slowing down 
movements, especially head movements. 
Prof.  Hilding  A.  Bjurstedt,  Head  of  the  Dept.  of  Aviation Medicine 
a t  the  Karolinska  Institute  in  Stockholm, received  the  1974 Daniel  and 
Florence  Guggenheim  International  Astronautics  Award  of  the  Inter- 
national Academy of  Astronautics €or studies of  physiological responses 
to  environmental stress. 
Leonard Jaffe, NASA  Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, 
was elected IAF President  (IAA Ann Rpt, 28 Aug 74;  Parks, SF ,  Feb 75, 
4 S O ;  Program,  25th IAF Congress; N A S A   Ac t iv i t ies ,   15 Dec  74,  21) 
During September:  Large-scale verification tests  of  the  “rectenna”  receiving 
system  for  microwave energy  transmission  were  run  a t   Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory  fo r   NASA. A  microwave  energy  transmission  system  was 
178 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

During  September 
being  developed  to  determine  the  possibility  of  transmitting  energy 
through  space. The  tests established a  new  record  for microwave power 
transmission,  delivering  one  kilowatt  over  a  1.6-km  range.  The  10-yr 
program had  increased DC-to-DC efficiency of  transmissions from 17% to 
50%  and  efficiency  of  the  rectenna  in  converting  radio  frequency  to 
DC  from 25%  to  78%. (NASA Gen Mgt Rev  Rpt,  1 5  Oct 74,  57-60) 
*  Interstellar  space  flight  appeared  possible,  British  Interplanetary  Society 
engineers and  scientists concluded after the first 1 5  mos of  a study to es- 
tablish  the  feasibility  of  flight outside the  solar  system. Costs would be 
high,  but  so  f a r   none  of  the  engineering  difficulties seemed  insoluble. 
The chief  limitation  that might delay such a project was  the low natural 
abundance of  helium 3 for the nuclear microbombs proposed for propul- 
sion. 
The  Project  Daedalus  study  had  taken  the  star  Barnard,  six  light 
years away, a s  a theoretical target.  The journey was to be limited to 30- 
40  yrs,  a  working  lifetime. To  achieve the  necessary  5 1  000-km-per-sec 
velocity,  BIS scientists  proposed  a  starship  driven  by  a  series  of  con- 
trolled nuclear explosions-each  equivalent to 90 tons of  TNT-occurring 
a t   the  rate  of  250  per  sec.  Microbombs,  small  pellets  of  nuclear  fuel, 
would be  compressed and heated  to detonation point  by  electron beams. 
The  rocket-powered boost  phase  would  last  5  yrs,  followed  by  a  35-yr 
coast.  During  flyby  of  Barnard,  10-20  probes  would  be  released  to 
search  fo r   inner  planets  and  moons,  sending  back  information  to  the 
mother ship for transmission to the earth. 
NASA  had  studied the nuclear-pulse propulsion  concept for  interplane- 
tary  exploration  through  a  General  Dynamics Corp.  contract  in  1963, 
but  had  suspended the  study because of  costs and the Nuclear Test Ban 
Treaty.  (Gatland,  SF ,   Sept 74,  356-358;  A&A   1963,1964,1965) 

179 

October  1974 

I  Oc tober:  U.S.S.R.  Supreme Soviet Presidium  Chairman  Nikolay V.  Pod- 
gorny presented the highest Soviet award, the Order of  Lenin, to Cosmo- 
nauts  Pave1 R.  Popovich, Yury  P.  Artyukhin,  Gennady  V.  Sarafanov, 
and Lev S.  Demin. Popovich  and Artyukhin were honored  f o r  their  15- 
day mission in the Salyut  3 orbital scientific station and Soyuz 14  trans- 
port  craft  (launched  3  July  to   join  the  Salyut  3 ,   launched  25  June ) .  
Sarafanov and Demin were recognized fo r  their Soyuz 15 flight (launched 
26 Aug.) , during which they experimented in maneuvering and  docking 
with Salyut 3 before landing on land at night. Popovich, already a Hero of 
the Soviet Union, was also awarded the Second Gold Star Medal. Artyuk- 
hin,  Sarafanov,  and  Demin  were  awarded  the  title  Hero  of  the  Soviet 
Union, Gold Star Medals, and Badges of  Pilot-Cosmonaut of  the U.S.S.R. 
(FBIS-SOV, 2 Oct 74, U l )  
1-7  Oc tober:  Astronaut-physician Dr.  F.  Story Musgrave and Dr.  Dennis R. 
Morrison of  Johnson Space Center’s Bioscience Payloads Office spent one 
week  in  a  mockup Spacelab a t   JSC  in  a  shakedown’test of  operational 
procedures and experiments. Spacelab, a scientific space laboratory, was 
being  developed  and  built  by  the  European  Space Research  Organiza- 
tion for  orbital missions aboard NASA’s space shuttle. A rehearsal  fo r  fu- 
ture  tests  and  a  means  of  perfecting  operational  procedures,  this  first 
test  also evaluated proposed space shuttle ground support and flight crew 
operational procedures, data-handling techniques, man-machine integra- 
tion,  and biomedical demonstrations representative of  Spacelab medical 
experiments.  (JSC   Release 74-255;  JSC  Roundup, 11 Oct  74,  1 )  
2 Oc tober:  Roy E. Anderson, General Electric Co.  Research and Development 
Center  engineer,  demonstrated  the  potential  of  geostationary  satellites 
for search-and-rescue missions. Standing on the NASA  Hq. steps in Wash- 
ington,  D.C.,  and  using  an   ordinary  walkie-talkie aided  by  an   antenna 
built on the frame of  a golfer’s umbrella, Anderson beamed a message to 
GE’s  Radio-Optical Observatory in   Schenectady, N.Y.,  via  NASA’s A t s  3 
Applications Technology Satellite. The  inexpensive,  1.4-kg antenna  in- 
creased the normal eight-kilometer range  of  the walkie-talkie more  than 
10 000  times.  Anderson  suggested that  a  global  search-and-rescue sys- 
tem, covering all but the polar regions, would require only six geostation- 
ary  satellites. The necessary  transponder  could be  attached  to   any com- 
munications satellite and would draw only a small portion of  the satellite’s 
power.  (GE Release, 2 Oct 74; AP, B Sun, 3 Oct 74, A3) 
Rockwell  International  Corp.  Space  Division,  prime  contractor  for  the 
space shuttle orbiter, signed a $16.5-million supplemental agreement with 
NASA.  This 27th  supplemental agreement since the contract was  awarded 
9 Aug.  1972 brought  the  estimated  contract  value  to  ~$995 million.  I t  
incorporated authorization  for  sneak  circuit  analysis, vertical  flight-test 
support,  midfuselage mockups,  integration  of  all  shuttle  elements,  and 
other changes.  ( JSC Release 74-258) 
181 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 

2  October 
Skynet IIB, United Kingdom military  communications satellite, arrived  a t  
Kennedy Space Center to be prepared for November launch by NASA on a 
Thor-Delta launch vehicle. NASA  had  launched Shynet  A  and B  in  1970. 
Skynet  I IA ,  launched  18 Jan.  1974 into too  low  an orbit,  had  reentered 
the atmosphere. (Spacepor t  News, 18 Oct 74)  
3  Oc tober:   A  spherical  object  from  Cosmos  654  satellite  was  reported  re- 
covered in Ohio. Cosmos 654, launched 17 May 1974, had  been  reported 
by  the  press  a s   a  Soviet  ocean  surveillance  satellite.  The  debris  was 
believed to  have been  a  portion  of  the  staging system  used  to move  the 
craft  from  its  initial  low,  near-circular  orbit  into  a  higher,  longer  life 
orbit  with  a  1022-km apogee  and  915-km  perigee.  There  the  nuclear 
systems  required  for  ocean  surveillance  radar  equipment  and  sensors 
could  decay  naturally  before  the  orbit  decayed  years  in  the  future. 
( S BD ,  3 o c t  74, 164-5; GSFC SSR ,  31 o c t  74) 
3,  4,  9  Oc tober:   The  House  Committee  on  Science  and  Astronautics’  Sub- 
committee  on  Space  Science  and  Applications  held  hearings  on  H.R. 
14978 and H.R.  15781, bills to  establish offices in the Dept. of  the Interior 
and NASA to operate an Earth Resources Survey System. Hugh T. Loweth, 
Deputy Associate Director  for  Energy and Science of  the Office of Man- 
agement  and  Budget,  testified  that  more  experimentation  was  needed 
before  the  Earth  Resources  Technology  Satellite  program  entered  the 
operational  phase,  but  witnesses  from  industry  and  other  agencies  of 
Government  recommended  accelerating  the  program  immediately.  Dr. 
Rocco  A.  Petrone,  NASA  Associate  Administrator,  and  Charles  A. 
Mathews,  Associate Administrator  for  Applications,  opposed  adoption 
of  the bills, stressing NASA’s desire for  “an  evolutionary  approach”  tha t  
minimized an  artifical  distinction between  experimental and  operational 
satellites  and  concentrated  instead  on  immediate  dissemination of  data 
and  simultaneous  improvement  of  the  system  [see  6,  8,  9  Aug.  and 
18 Sept.] . (Testimony) 
4  Oc tober:   Dr.  Lowell  J.  Paige  was  named  Acting  Deputy  Director  of  the 
National  Science  Foundation  by  NSF  Director  H.  Guyford  Stever.  He 
would  succeed  Dr.  Raymond  L.  Bisplinghoff,  who  had  announced  his 
resignation 17 July.  ( NSF  Release 74-206) 
5  Oc tober:   Scientists using  the  305-m dish  antenna  a t   the Arecibo  Observ- 
atory  in  Puerto  Rico  had  discovered  a  pulsar-a 
pulsating  radio 
source-orbiting  a companion celestial object in the constellation Aquila, 
the  New  Yorh  Times  reported.  Both  pulsar  and  the  object  weighed  as 
much as the  sun but  were only a  few kilometers in  diameter.  It was  the 
first pulsar discovered circling another object, a phenomenon which made 
it  possible  for  scientists  to  estimate  its  mass.  Its  orbit  had  been  cal- 
culated from the slight variations  in its pulse rate. While  i t  was  possible 
that  the  companion was  a  black  hole,  scientists  thought  it  more  likely 
that  both  were  neutron  stars  and  a  search  was  continuing  to  find  out 
if  the companion was a very weak pulsar.  (Sullivan, NYT, 5 Oct 74, 50) 
5-13  Oc tober:   Dr.  James  C .  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  visited  Japan  to 
discuss  U.S. and  Japanese  space  programs  and  evaluate  opportunities 
fo r   cooperation.  He  met  with  representatives  of  government  agencies, 
the scientific community, and Japan’s Federation  of  Economic Organiza- 
tions  and  visited  Tanegashima  Space Center  and  the  Uchinoura  Space 
Center  a t   Kagoshima.  (NASA  Release  74c276;  N A S A   Ac t iv i t ies ,   15 
Nov 74, 23-4) 

182 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
7  October 
7 Oc tober:   NASA  adjudged  the mission of  Nom  3  (ITOS-F,  launched  6 Nov. 
1973)  successful.  NASA  mission  ob jec t ive s - to   launch  the  spacecraft 
into  sun-synchronous  orbit  of  sufEcient  accuracy  for  the  operational 
mission,  to   evaluate  and  check  out  the  spacecraft  in  orbit,  and to  tu rn  
operational  control  over  to  the  National  Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad- 
ministration-had 
been  accomplished.  (NASA  MOR,  8  Oct  74 )  
*  Robert  Hotz,  in  an   Aviation Week  editorial,  praised  the  “stabilizing  and 
peace-keeping  functions”  of  the  large  U S .   military  space  program. 
Scoring the “official government hypocrisy about our non-military space 
program,”  Hotz  argued  the  Eisenhower  Administration’s  attempt  to  
separate  civilian  and military  roles  in  space had  “persisted  to  this day 
and  badly  impaired  and  obscured  the  truly  peaceful  role  played  by 
military  space vehicles.”  Air  Force  boosters and military-trained  astro- 
nauts  and  managers  had  played  key  roles  in  NASA  programs.  Military 
reconnaissance satellites and  early  warning  satellites added  up  to  “one 
of  the  biggest  forces  in  deterring  major  aggression  and  keeping  a s  
much peace as there  is left in  the world.”  In  contrast,  claimed Hotz, the 
Soviet Union  “never  made  any  pretense  of  separating  its military  and 
scientific  space  activities”  and  had  gone  beyond  reconnaissance  satel- 
lites into “offensive space weapons.”  ( A v  Wk, 7 Oct 7 4 , l l )  
8  Oc tober:   Astronaut  Henry  W.  Hartsfield was  presented  the  Gen. Thomas 
D.  White Space Trophy  for  1973 by  Secretary of  the A i r  Force John  L. 
Mc tuca s  in  a  ceremony a t  National  Geographic Society Headquarters. 
annually  to  the  A i r   Force 
Hartsfield  received  the  trophy-presented 
employee who made  the  most  significant  contribution  to  U S .   progress 
in  s p a c s f o r  his part  in  saving the  $2.5-billion Skylab program.  Harts- 
field,  serving  a s   capsule  communicator  during  the  Skylab  2  mission 
(25 May-22  June  19 73 ) ,  played  a key  role  in  preparing and evaluating 
crew procedures and equipment f o r  transporting,  installing, and deploy- 
ing the  parasol  sunshade  to  protect  the  Skylab Orbital Workshop  after 
it  had  been  damaged  during  its  1 4  May  1973 launch.  Hartsfield  also 
had  been  instrumental  in  developing procedures  for  installation  by  the 
Sky lab  3 crew  (launched 28 July 1973) of  a compact, lightweight replace- 
ment  package  for  the  failing  gyroscopes in  the  Skylab  attitude  control 
system.  (NGS Release, 8 Oct 74) 
The House agreed  to H.  Res.  988, the  Committee Reform  Amendments of 
1974,  by  a  35940-7  vote,  reorganizing  House  committee jurisdictions 
and procedures. The name of  the Committee on Science and Astronautics 
was  changed  to  Committee on  Science and  Technology effective 3  Jan. 
1975,  and  the  Committee’s  jurisdiction  was  broadened  to   include  all 
research  and development in non-nuclear energy, environment, weather, 
and  aviation,  with  special  oversight  over  all  nonmilitary  Federal  R&D. 
Legislative  responsibility  fgr  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration  would  be  shared  with  the  Committee  on  Merchant 
Marine  and  Fisheries.  Responsibility  for  Federal  Aviation  Admin- 
istration  civil aviation  =D  programs  would be added  to  that  for NASA% 
aeronautical  R&D.  Major  emphasis  on  the  civilian  national  space  pro- 
gram  would  continue.  (CR ,  8 Oct  74,  D1210-11,  H10146-69;  17 Feb 
75,  534-53  House  Corn  Staff  interview,  24  March  7 6 )  
an  $82.1-billion FY  1975 Dept.  of  Defense appro- 
*  President  Ford  @ped 
priation  bill,  almost  $5  billion  below  the  Administration  request.  The 
183 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

8  October 
conference committee bill had been  approved by the House 23  Sept. and 
the  Senate  24  Sept.  Research,  development,  test,  and  evaluation  funds 
included $445 million  for  the  €3-1  advanced strategic  bomber,  clearing 
the  way  for  construction  of  a  fourth  developmental  prototype  during 
FY  1975. The Navy VFAX  fighter program was allocated $20 million for 
adaptation  of  the  a i r   combat  fighter  to  be  selected by  the  Air  Force- 
either the General Dynamics Corp. YF-16  or the Northrop Corp. YF-17. 
Other  funds  included  $81.4  million  for  six A-10  close-air-support R&D 
aircraft  ( in   addition  to  $138  million  for  purchase  uf   25  production 
aircraft) ; $175  million  for  F-15  air  superiority  fighter  R&D,  and  $8.6 
million  for  Navy  V/STOL  development.  ( P D ,  1 4  Oct  74,  1250;  C R ,  23 
Sept 74, D1125; 24  Sept 74, D1130; A v  W k ,  23 Sept 7 4 , 1 7 4 )  
8-9  Oc tober:   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  hosted  its  Second  Annual  Re- 
search  and  Technology  Review.  Dr.  William  J .   Patterson  of  MSFC’S 
Materials  and  Processes Laboratory  reported  the  development of  poly- 
imide  laminates to  replace  epoxy  printed  wiring  boards  for  high-relia- 
bility  electronic circuits.  The polyimides could  overcome cracking  that 
had  caused Saturn and Skylab electronic problems. A contract has been 
negotiated  to  demonstrate  the  practicability  of  commercial production. 
Lewis L;  Lacey and  Iva  C.  Yates, Jr.,  of  MSFC’S  Space Sciences Labora- 
tory  reported  Skylab  experiments had  demonstrated that  dispersed  im- 
miscible  liquid  emulsions  were  much  more  stable  in  the  low-gravity 
environment  of  space than  on  the  earth  and  that  processing immiscible 
metals  in  low  g could  lead  to  new  alloys  with  unique  electrical prop- 
erties.  Apollo-Soyuz Test  P ro jec t  experiments were  planned  to  develop 
techniques  for  future  alloy-processing experiments on  Spacelab. 
Donald Stone of  MSFC’S  Electronics and Control Laboratory reported 
a scanning laser  radar  for  automatic  rendezvous and  docking had  been 
tested for  possible use on  the  space shuttle, space tug,  and  solar electric 
propulsion  stage. Plans  called  for  delivery  of  the  radar  to  a  simulator 
of  the  space  tug  flight  system  for  evaluation  under  conditions  similar 
to actual use.  (Proceedings ; MSFC Release 74-182) 
8-10  Oc tober:   The  Spacelab Operations Working  Group held  its  first meet- 
ing,  at Marshall  Space Flight  Center. Representatives of  four  NASA  Cen- 
ters,  NASA  Hq.,  and  the  European  Space Research Organization  began 
planning  technical documentation, requirements  review, operations, and 
safety  for  the  European  pressurized  laboratory  that  would  be  carried 
on the space shuttle.  (NASA,  space lab  Newsletter  74-7) 
9  Oc tober:  The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommit- 
tee  on  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  reported  on  prospects  for 
Advanced  Nuclear  Research  in  the wake  of  the February  1972 termina- 
tion  of  the  NERVA  nuclear  rocket program  and  the  FY  1974 reductions 
in nuclear  power  and  propulsion  research  brought  by  NASA  budget cuts. 
Concerned  lest  the  $1.5  billion  invested  in  these  programs  since NASA 
took charge of them in  1958 be entirely  lost, the Subcommittee had  held 
hearings 7 Feb. 1974 to determine how to  maintain a research capability 
and to  ensure that results of the previous R&D would be used  toward solv- 
ing  critical  energy  problems.  The  Subcommittee was  “disappointed” 
that the AEC-NASA  Space Nuclear Systems Office had been abolished. 
Witnesses from industry, NASA,  and AEC  described work being done in 
thermionic  technology,  plasma-core reactor  research,  high-temperature 
gas-cooled reactors,  and  medium-power reactor  systems.  The  Subcom  
mittee  concluded that,  though  funding  in  these  fields was  modest,  “the 
184 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
9  October 
potential benefits  [were]  enormous in  scope and magnitude."  While the  
traditional  R&D areas  were  becoming  less well  defined  for  the  various 
agencies, the Subcommittee found the  greater portion of  the funds for  the 
programs should go  to AEC  rather than to NASA. 
The  Subcommittee recommended:  ( 1 )   NASA  should  continue,  and 
expand  as  i t s   budget  permitted,  i t s   advanced  nuclear  research  in  
potential  energy applications.  (2 )  NASA  should continue complementary 
arrangements  with  other  Federal  agencies,  especially  AEC.  ( 3 )   The 
Joint  Committee  on Atomic  Energy  should evaluate  the  Subcommittee 
findings.  (4 )   NASA  and  AEC  should  jointly  investigate  and  report  how 
nuclear  power  and   propulsion  R&D  had  been  used  and  how  data  was 
stored.  And  ( 5 )   NASA  and  AEC  should expand industrial participation. 
(Com P r in t )  
*  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  held  a  final  review  of  the   Zero-Gravity 
Atmospheric Cloud Physics Project Phase A Definition Study. The study 
established  the  feasibility  of  atmospheric cloud  physics  research  on 
Spacelab  and  recommended  preparation  of  a  Phase  B  study.  (MSFC 
Orbital  &  Space Environmental Br,  interview, 6 Aug  75;  MSFC  Release 
7&181) 
9-10  October:  The fourth flight of  the  balloon-borne ultraviolet  stellar spec- 
trometer  (BUSS)  provided the  best  test  results  yet  of  the  candidate tele- 
scope  experiment for   the  space shuttle.  The National Scientific Balloon 
Facility  of  the  National  Center  for  Atmospheric Research  (NCAR )   a t  
Palestine,  Tex.,  launched  the  91-m  tall,  440 000-cum ,   heliumfilled 
balloon,  which  carried  a  telescope,  Ebert-Fastie  spectrometer, detector, 
star-pointing-and-control system,  and telemetry  and command system to  
40 000-m altitude. During five hours a t  that  altitude  the instruments ob- 
served  seven  stars  in   uv  wavelengths.  The  stars  included  one  giant 
star and  three  super giants. Dr.  Yoji Kondo of  Johnson Space Center's 
Astrophysics Section,  principal  investigator  for   the  experiment,  said 
the  flight  was  free  of  environment  and  hardware  problems  and  its 
success marked  a  new  stage  i n  balloon-borne astronomical observation 
after  past  high  failure  rates.  Data  would  be  combined  with  other  ob- 
servations  fo r   better  information  on  the  structure,  atmosphere,  and 
evolution  of  a  variety  of  stars.  The  mission  also  evaluated  state-of- 
the-art detector  and  tracking  performance,  flexibility  of  attaching  in- 
strumentation to  a  general-purpose telescope  platform,  and  developing 
real-time,  man-in-the-loop data  acquisition,  evaluation,  and  ground 
operations.  (Kondo  interview,  1 Oct  75;  JSC   Release  74-254;  Bulban, 
Av Wk, 2 Dec 7 4 , 4 3 5 )  
9-25  October:  Johnson  Space Center Flight  Operations Aircraft  Div.  com- 
pleted  the  first  mission  of  Project  Airstream,  gathering  high-altitude 
gaseous and particulate  samples from the upper  atmosphere in  the West- 
ern Hemisphere with  the NASA high-altitude WB-57F  aircraft. Sampling 
@ssions,  flown  for  the  Atomic  Energy  Commission  and  the  Dept.  of 
Transportation,  allowed  AEC  to  determine  the  global  distribution  of 
atmospheric nuclear weapon  test  debris,  both  gaseous  and  particulate. 
Nine NASA  crewmen  alternated  in  the 1 4  flights of  the first mission, l o g -  
ging 51 500 km in  all.  ( JSC  Release 74c269) 
10-30  October:  NASA  launched Westar 2  (Westar-B) , the  second  U.S.  com- 
mercial  domestic  communications satellite,  f o r   Western  Union  Tele- 
graph  Co.  from  Eastern  Test  Range  a t   6:53  pm  EDT  on  a  Thor-Delta 
launch  vehicle.  me  satellite  was  placed  in   a  close-to-planned transfer 
185 

10-30 October 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
orb i t  with a 36 107-km apogee,  231-Ign perigee,  and 24.76”  inclination. 
The apogee kick motor, fired 13 Oct.,  circularized the  orb i t  with  35 766- 
km apogee,  35 24d&m  perigee,  23-hr  42-min period,  and  0.5”  inclina- 
tion. By 25  Nov. the  comsat was operating normally a t  its station a t  about 
90” W longitude above the equator. 
The  launch  had   been  twice  delayed,  once  for   investigation  of  the 
entire Delta  program  and  once  for   a  last  minute  check  of  a  connector 
pin.  When  launched, the  vehicle performed as  planned with  two  minor 
exceptions  (both  due  to   human  e r ro r )  : the  2nds tage   cold-gas  re- 
dundant altitude-control system switched from primary to backup nozzles 
because  the   guidance  system  had   been  programmed  with  too  low  a 
moment  threshold  and  the  umbilical  end  fitting  was  damaged  becanse 
a tether had been improperly installed. Neither problem compromised the 
NASA  mission  objective:  to   place  the   satellite  in   an   orbit  of  su5c ien t  
accuracy for  transfer  into  a  stationary  synchronous orbit while  retain- 
ing   sufficient  stationkeeping  propulsion  to   meet  the  mission  lifetime 
requirements.  The  objective  was  met,  and  the  mission  was  adjudged 
successful 30 Oct. 
Wes tar  2 joined  Wes tar  1 ,  launched 13 April 1974 and later  placed  in  
geosynchronous orbit  a t   99” W  longitude.  The Westar  Satellite  Com- 
munications Sys tem-cons is t ing  of  Wes tar  1 and 2, a  th ird   satellite for  
later  launch,  and  five  ground  stations-had 
the  potential  for  general- 
purpose  telecommunications  throughout  the  continental  US.,  Alaska, 
Hawaii,  and  Puerto  Rico.  Western  Union  planned  to  make  the  system 
available  to  all  users,  largely  through  leasing  the  voice,  TV, and  data 
transmitting  services.  NASA  would  be  reimbursed for   the  launch.  (NASA 
MORS,  1, 25 Nov 74 ;   NASA Releases 7 4 1 4 7 , 7 4 2 6 5 ;   Westar Release, 1 2  
Sept 74 ;  S BD ,  11 Oct 74, 214) 
10  October:  An  electric  rocket  engine  that  short-circuited  aboard  Sert  ZZ 
Space Electric Rocket Test satellite in  1970 had  been  restarted  in   space 
and  successfully  operated  for   six  weeks,  scientists  a t   Lewis  Research 
Center  reported.  Launched  3  Feb.  1970 to   demonstrate  that  electric 
propulsion could be used  for  future space missions, Sert  ZZ was  to  have 
operated  an   ion  engine  fo r   six  months  in   space.  Engine  thruster  2 
shut down after less than three months of  operation; thruster 1 performed 
fo r  five months.  Both  failures were attributed  to  a  small chip apparently 
eroded  from  a  molybdenum grid  and  lodged between  two   grids  a t   the 
back  of  the  engine.  William R.  Kerslake,  Sert  U  experiment manager, 
believed  the chip was  jarred  loose  in  summer  1974 when  the  spacecraft 
was spun up  by  i ts  cold-gas thruster  system  to  obtain  a better  sun  angle 
for  solar  arrays.  Since then,  the thruster  had  been  operated successfully 
on 17 occasions for  shor t  periods, obtaining up  to  80%  of  its maximum 
thrust. Electrical Propulsion Branch Chief Robert C. Finke said operation 
after 41/2 years proved “the long term storability  of  this thruster  design” 
and  indicated  that  the   system  could  be  “confidently  incorporated  into 
future  missions  requiring  several  years  of  thruster  operation.”  (LeRC 
Release 74-60) 
NASA  had  deleted a  backup Viking lander  spacecraft  and  would  substitute 
the proof  test  orbiter for one of  two  flight  orbiters  to help offset  signifi- 
cant  cost  increases  and meet  target  dates  for   the two 1975 missions  to 
explore the  planet Mars, NASA  reported to Speaker of  the House Carl AI- 
bert.  Technical problems in  the guidance-and-control computer, biology 
instruinent,  and lander proof-test capsule qualification had  delayed com- 

186 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

10 October 
pletion of the landers, made the schedule “extremely tight,”  and increased 
costs  a n   estimated  $48.8  million  over  the  $89 million  in  the  FY  1975 
budget.  NASA  notified  the  House  that  it  planned  to  use  for  Viking 
$48.8 million  available  from  the  Skylab  program  after  its  succe~ s fu l  
completion.  (Text  in   Viking P ro j   Hearings,  House  Subcom  on  Space 
Science, 21-2  Nov 74) 
NASA  was  negotiating  two  11-mo study contracts  for  assessing methods  of 
producing  electric  power  from  coal.  Funded  by  the  National  Science 
the  program  would  compare 
Foundation,  Dept.  of  Interior,  and  NASA, 
costs  and  impact  on  the  environment  of  such  energy  systems  a s   a 
potassium  Rankine  topping  cycle,  advanced  steam  plants,  open  and 
closed  cycle  gas  turbine  systems, supercritical  carbon  dioxide  systems, 
magnetohydrodynamic  systems,  and  fuel  cells.  Westinghouse  Corp. 
and  General  Electric  Co.  had  been  selected  to   make  the  studies,  to 
provide  data  for  a  Lewis  Research  Center  energy  systems  model  for 
evaluating variables.  (NASA Release 74-273) 
11  Oc tober:  A modified Piper  Seneca  aircraft  completed  the  first  test  flight 
of  a  new  general-aviation  wing,  the  GAW-1 developed  a t   Langley  Re- 
search  Center.  A  derivative  of  the  supercritical  airfoil,  also  developed 
a t   L ~ R C ,  the  new  wing  showed  potential  for  lift  increases  up  to  30%. 
The lift-to-drag ratio  was  increased  about 50%. In   addition to   the  low- 
speed airfoil,  the new wing design had a 25%  reduction  in area, tapered 
planform,  full-span  Fowler  flaps,  and  spoilers  for  roll  control  instead 
of  conventional ailerons.  (Mgr, NASA  Gen Aviation Tech Off, interview, 
25 July 74 ;  NASA Release 74-227) 
A  NASA  design  study  for  the  Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development’s 
modular  integrated  utility  system  ( MIUS)   program  had  revealed  the 
MIUS  design  could  save 3376  over  conventional practices  in   providing 
utility  services to   a  648-living-unit garden  apartment  complex  in  Hous- 
ton,’Johnson  Space  Center  reported.  JSC  had  reported  this  result  and 
similar  savings  f rom   other  studies  a t   a  recent  two-day  conference  on 
technology  transfer  in  Houston.  (JSC  Roundup,  11 Oct  74) 
0  President  Ford  signed  into  law  the  Energy  Reorganization  Act  of  1974 
(P.L. 93-438) , abolishing the Atomic Energy Commission and establish- 
ing  in  its  place  three  new  Federal  entities:  the  Energy  Research  and 
Development  Administration,  the  Energy  Resources  Council,  and  the 
*Nuclear Regulatory  Commission. The  President  also  signed  Executive 
Order  11841, activating  the  Energy  Resources  Council  and  appointing 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  its Chairman.  P.L.  93438  was  to  become 
effective not later than 120 days after signature.  (PD, 14 Oct 74,1271-3; 
CRY 8 Oct 74, H10134) 
15-30  Oc tober:  The United Kingdom’s Ariel 5 (UK-5)  satellite was launched 
on  a  NASA  Scout  vehicle  at  10:47  am  local  time  (3:47  am  EDT) by  a 
team of  Italian  engineers a t  the  San Marco  launch  facility  off  the  coast 
of  Kenya. Orbital parameters were  569.5-km apogee,  502.0-km perigee, 
95.4-min  period,  and  2.86”  inclination.  After  completion  of  checkout, 
routine  experiment  and  spacecraft  operations  began  30  Oct. 
132-kg, solar-powered, 16-sided polygon  designed by  the 
Ariel  5-a 
U.K.-was 
the  fifth satellite launched in  a  cooperative program  between 
NASA  and  the  U.K.  Science Research  Council. The  mission  of  its  one- 
year  operating life was  to  study x-ray sources both  within  and beyond 
our  galaxy,  using  five  experiments  from  U.K.  and  one  from  Goddard 
Space Flight  Center. Instruments  were designed to  follow up  findings of 
187 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
15-30  October 
Uhuru   (Explorer  4 2 ) ,  launched  12  Dec.  1970,  and  Oao  3,  launched 
21 Aug.  1971. Uhuru had  extended the number  of  known  celestial x-ray 
sources from  about 30  to  200 and  found  evidence of  a  black  hole  com- 
panion  to  Cygnus X-1,  later  supported by  Oao  3, sounding  rocket, and 
ground-based  observations.  Four  Ariel  5 pointing  experiments  focused 
on specific x-ray sources, and two scanning experiments swept the entire 
galaxy  with  every  revolution.  The  GSFC scanning  experiment-first  of 
its kind  to  fly  on  an  orbiting  scientific satellite-consisted  of  two  x-ray 
pinhole  cameras,  each  with  a  90’  field  of  view,  providing  together  a 
sweep of  the entire sky. After evaluation, Ariel  5 results  would be avail- 
able to the world scientific community. 
Though  all  experiments  obtained  data  during  initial  tests,  two  were 
drawing excessive current.  The  problem was  resolved  by  outgassing. A 
slight delay  in  shutter closing on  Experiment A,  a  star  sensor, had  little 
o r  no effect on the mission. 
The  U.K.-U.S.  cooperative  satellite  series  had  begun  with  Ariel  I 
in  1962 and continued through  Ariel  4,  launched 11 Dec.  1971. Ariel  5 
was  launched  under  a  2 Nov.  1970  SRC-NASA  Memorandum  of  Under- 
standing,  with  a  27  Dec.  1973  Ietter  modification  shifting  the  launch 
site from Wallops Flight  Center to  San Marco to  enhance scientific data 
return.  The Memorandum tasked SRC  with spacecraft design, fabrication, 
and  testing,  f ive  experiments, primary  command  and  control,  and  data 
reduction  and analysis. NASA  was responsible for one experiment, space- 
craft  technical  support,  the  Scout  launch  vehicle,  and  tracking,  com- 
mand,  and  data  acquisition.  SRC  financed  all  aspects  of  the  Ariel  pro- 
gram.  The  launch  by  members  of  the  Univ.  of  Rome’s  Aerospace 
Research Center wa s   the seventh from  San Marco, but  the  first  payload 
for   a  country  other  than  the  U S .   o r   Italy  (NASA  MORS,  11  Oct  6, 
Nov 74; NASA Release 7 6 2 7 4 )  
15  Oc tober:   Capt.  Jaques-Yves Cousteau’s  research  vessel  Ca lypso   left  Gal- 
veston,  Tex.,  on  a  nine-month voyage  to   carry  out  oceanographic  and 
weather  experiments  for  KASA  in  cooperation  with  Texas  A ~ M  Univ. 
Researchers would measure  chemical content of  seawater, temperature, 
depth  factors,  water  colors,  and  p a u t a n t s   in  different  regions  for 
correlation  with  weather  and  water  appraisals  collected  by  A t s   3  and 
N imbus   5 satellites  (launched  5  Nov.  1967  and  10  Dec.  1972),  by 
Nimbus-F after launch in 1975, and by high-flying U-2  aircraft equipped 
with a coastal zone color sensor being developed for launch on Nimbus-G 
in 1978. 
One  of  NASA’s Lockheed  U-2  earth  resources  survey  aircraft  was 
based  at  Hickam  Air  Force  Base,  Hawaii,  during  October  for  strato- 
spheric  sampling  in  a  semiglobal Ames  Research  Center  study  of  the 
effect of  ozone, nitric oxide, and pollutants on the climate.  (NASA  Release 
74-283  ; ARC  Release 7 U 7 )  
The  Nobel  Prize  in  physics  would  be  shared  by  two  radio  astronomers, 
the  Swedish Academy  of  Sciences  announced  in  Stockholm,  marking 
the  first recognition by  the Nobel committee of  achievements in  astron- 
omy.  Sir Martin  J.  Ryle, Astronomer Royal of  Britain  and professor  a t  
Cambridge Univ.  Cavendish Laboratory, was cited for development of  a 
way  to  use  several  small  radio  telescopes  to  achieve  resuIts  which 
would  otherwise  require  an  antenna  several  kilometers  in  diameter. 
Dr. Ryles’s system accumulated data over a period of  days and correlated 
it  through  computers  to  piece  together  larger  pictures.  Dr.  Antony 
188 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

15 October 

Hewish,  professor  of  radioastronomy  a t  the  Cavendish Laboratory  and 
leader  of  the  research  group  tha t   discovered  pulsars  in  1967,  would 
share the prize.  (Rensberger, NYT ,  16 Oct 7 4 , l )  
16 Oc tobe r :   General Av ia t ion  Programs ,  forwarded to the House Committee 
on  Science and  Astronautics  by  the  Suhomm i t tee  on Aeronautics  and 
Space Technology, reported  on  a n   oversight review  based  on  hearings 
14  and  15  May  and a  visit to  general-aviation manufacturers  in Kansas 
31 May  and  1 June.  Noting  that  general  aviation made  up  about  97%  
of  the  civil aircraft fleet, flew  79%   of  the hours  and  71%   of  the miles, 
and carried up to one third of  all intercity passengers-the  Subcommittee 
recommended : continued  close  NASA-industry cooperation,  NASA  assist- 
ance  to  Federal  agencies  to  ensure  realistic  regulations,  individual 
attention  to  special  general-aviation  needs,  NASA  noise  and  emission 
research,  concerted  industry  effort  to  use  new  technology, NASA  effort 
to  increase  public  visibility  of  its  program,  NASA-industry  measures 
toward better understanding  of  respective roles in research  and develop- 
ment,  and  an  annual  General Aviation Manufacturers  Assn.  evaluation 
of the NASA  program.  (Com P r in t )  
*  Aerospace  industry  employment  would  reach  968 000  by  December-the 
then drop by  8000 by June  1975, the 
highest level since May  1971-but 
Aerospace  Industries Assn.  of  America  predicted  in  its  semiannual sur- 
vey.  The  increase  over  previous  estimates was  attributed  to  an  unex- 
pected  rise  in  production  and  delivery  of  aircraft,  while  the  missile 
and  space  sectors  of  the  industry  remained  essentially constant.  Com- 
mercial transport  deliveries were expected to  slow down  in  the  first half 
of  1975.  (AIA Release 74-16) 
17  Oc tober:  Marshall Space Flight  Center requested bids on  constructing an 
x-ray telescope test facility for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observa- 
tory  (HEAO )   program.  Bid opening wa s  scheduled f o r  27 Nov.  and con- 
tract  award  by  9 Dec.  The facility was  to be  used  f o r  x-ray verification 
testing  and  calibration  of  x-ray  mirrors,  telescope systems, and  instru- 
ments.  (MSFC  Release 74-211) 
18  Oc tober:  The  first  few  space shuttle flights would  land  at Flight Research 
Center, Or.  James C.  Fletcher, NASA  Administrator,  announced in  a  talk 
before the Antelope Valley Board  of  Trade, Lancaster, Calif. First hori- 
zontal test  flights would be  made  from  FRC  and  first  orbital  test  flights 
would  return  there  because  of  added  safety margins  and  good weather 
conditions.  FRC  would  also be  a  secondary landing  site  for  operational 
shuttle  flights  when  weather  or  other  conditions  made  i t   desirable. 
(NASA  Release 74-279) 
Plans  almost  to  double  spending  for  the  European  Space Research  Orga- 
nization’s Axiane launch vehicle program in 1975 were made a t  an  Ariane 
Program  Board meeting in  Paris.  Spending authority would exceed $71 
million,  up  from  1974’s  $37-million budget,  and  obligational  authority 
was  proposed  a t   about  $110  million  instead  of  $71 million  proposed 
earlier,  in  authorizations  expected to be approved a t  the  26 Nov.  Board 
meeting. 
up  of  officials from  ESRO  and  10 European  coun- 
The  Board-made 
tries  financing Ariane development-met 
to  review budget  and develop- 
ment  following  France’s  confirmation  that  she would  continue  to  con- 
tribute 62.5%  of  the financing. The development schedule would still call 
fo r  flight trials of  the launcher in 1979 and 1980. 
189 

18 October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

The Board also was informed that the Soci6th Europhene de Propulsion 
(SEP )   had   sold  a  production  license  for  the  Ariane’s  Viking  rocket 
motors  to  the  Indian  Space  Research  Organization fo r   ISRO’s  SLV-3 
vehicle,  under  development  for  launching  future educational broadcast 
satellites. ( A v  W k ,  28  Oct 74 ,19)  
9  Federal scientists and  engineers decreased by  three percent in   1973, reduc- 
ing  employment in  that  category to  the  10-west level  since  1968, the Na- 
tional Science Foundation reported. Nonprofessional scientific and  tech- 
nical personnel declined by  six percent,  reducing the number below even 
the 1968 level. The 1973 drop was the second decrease in  Federal civilian 
scientists and engineers since comparable figures were first kept in  1954. 
Within  NASA,  total  scientific  and  technical  personnel  decreased  by 
almost five  per  cent.  While  the  number  of  scientists increased  margin- 
ally,  the  number  of  engineers decreased  by  more  than  five percent and 
the  nonprofessionals decreased  by more than  seven percent.  (NSF H igh-  
l igh t s ,  18 Oct 74) 
The Dept. of Defense announced award of  a $29 509 671  cost-plus-award-fee 
contract to  General Dynamics Corp. Electronics Div. to develop, produce, 
and  operate the Phase I  control and user system segments of  the NAVSTAR 
Global Positioning System  [see During August].  (DOD   Release 793-74) 
launched  Cosmos  690  biological 
22   October-12  November:   The  U.S.S.R. 
satellite from Plesetsk into an orbit with 366-km apogee, 216-km perigee, 
90.3-min period,  and  68.8O  inclination. The satellite carried white labo- 
ratory rats,  steppe tortoises,  insects, and fungi in  a test  of  the  combined 
effects  of  weightlessness  and  radiation.  A  cesium-137 g a m m a  radiation 
source within the  spacecraft  provided  an  average radiation dose of  32 
rads  per  h r   on  command  from  the earth.  Beginning  on  the  10th day of 
the  flight,  the  ra ts  were  exposed  to  doses  of  gamma-quantums ranging 
between  200  and  1000 rads  over  24  hrs.  After  return  to  the   earth  12  
Nov.,  the  rats were  found  to  be more pathological and  less  active than 
after  corresponding control experiments. The change in  the hemopoietic 
and lymphoid  organs was  more sharply pronounced  than in  the Cosmos 
605 experiments (31 0ct.-22  Nov.  1973) .  While experiment results were 
processed,  research  was  continuing  on  methods  of  antiradiation  pro- 
tection  by  deflecting  particles  with  an   electric  fieId.  CzechosIovak and 
Romanian specialists cooperated with  the  U.S.S.R.  on  the  Cosmos 690 
project  as  par t   of  the  Intercosmos program.  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,   17-23, 
Oct 7 4 ;  Pruvdu, FBISSOV, 
3 Jan 75, U l 4 )  
22 Oc tober:  Dr.  George M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy Administrator, signed a NASA 
and   Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  agreement  on  news  coverage  of  the 
Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  flight,  scheduled  for   July  1975. The  agree- 
ment  brought  a  protest  from  Associated  Press  President  and  General 
Manager J. Wes Gallagher because i t  excluded American newsmen  from 
the  Soviet  launching.  In   a  23   Oct.  letter  to  Gallagher,  Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  stated  that,  while  the  Soviets  were 
adamant  on  this  question,  they  had  otherwise  agreed  to  provide  “the 
most  complete,  dmprehens ive  release  ever  to   the U.S.  news  media  of 
real-time information related  to  a Soviet space mission.”  The agreement, 
Dr.  Fletcher  noted,  covered  joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
activities while  recog- 
nizing  the  right  of  each nation  to  establish policies for   their  respective 
independent activities. The U.S.  would not exclude Soviet newsmen from 
the  U.S.  liftoff. 

190 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  19’74 

22  October 

The  Public  Affairs  Agreement  provided  that,  beginning  with  the 
S o y  launch  and  ending  with  the A pU o   recovery,  onboard  informa- 
tion from both spacecraft, voice communications between the  spacecraft, 
and  ground  communications with  both  spacecraft,  a s  well  as  ground- 
based  and  onboard  TV,  would  be  exchanged  immediately.  The  first 
real-time TV coverage of a Soviet launch would be  released to the West. 
Factual  information  on  joint  activities would  be  released  immediately. 
Lines from the U.S.  public affairs center in  Moscow would  communicate 
with  technical  specialists in  the  Soviet mission  control  center.  For  the 
first  time,  Soviet  commentators would  be  a t   the  Soviet  control  center 
and launch site during mission operations to describe countdown, launch, 
and  mission events as  they  occurred,  for  immediate  release.  (NASA In t  
Aff,  interview, 30 Sept 75;  AP, NYT,  12 Oct 74,  2;  24 oct 74, 9; NASA 
press conf  transcript, 12 Nov 74)  
23  Oc tober:  An  eight-week series  of  joint  tests  on  the  actual  flight  docking 
system to   be  used  in the  Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project  began  in  Moscow. 
Specialists from  the  U.S.  and  the  U.S.S.R.  confirmed that  the  docking 
units  sealed  hermetically.  ( ASTP  Press  Communiqu6,  JSC  Release,  20 
Dec  74;  Moscow  Domestic  News  Service, FBIS-SOV, 22  NOV 74,  U2; 
31 Dec 74, U4) 
0  The  satellite  relay  system  planned  for  the  July  1975  Apollo-Soyuz space 
mission was tested by  Johnson  Space Center and Goddard  Space Flight 
Center communications engineers. A t s  6 Applications Technology Satel- 
lite  (launched  30  May)  and  the  Apollo  S-band,  steerable,  high-gain 
antenna  were  tested  together  for  the  transmission  of  voice,  television, 
and  simulated telemettry data  in  preparation  for  the  first  spacecraft-to- 
satellite-to-ground routing  employed  in   the  manned  space  flight  pro- 
gram.  Signals were  transmitted  between  JSC  and  the  ground  station  in  
Rosman, N.C.,  via  the A t s  6 in a  simulation of  mission conditions.  (JSC  
Release 7 4 2 6 4 ;  JSC   Roundup, 8 Nov 74) 
0  Detection of  a “plasma mantle” by the European Space Research Organiza- 
tion’s  Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite  (launched by NASA  31  Jan 
1972) was announced by West German space scientists a t  the Max Flanck 
Institutt  fo r  Extraterrestrial  Physics  in  Munich.  Scientists had  become 
aware of  the  new  belt  of  electrically charged particles  circling the earth 
while  assessing  data  collected  by  a  specially  developed  “plasma  ana- 
lysator”  in  the  satellite. The  belt  of  particles  emitted from  the  sun  and 
trapped  in the earth’s magnetic field wa s  said to  be between 10 060 and 
20 100 km thick.  ( B  SUR ,  24 Oct 74, A3 ; A & A  1972) 
“The fact that fewer and fewer young people are entering the  field of  aero- 
nautics”  was  endangering  the U S .   aeronautical  position,  Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher, NASA  Administrator,  said in a speech before the NASA-University 
Conference on Aeronautics a t  the  Univ.  of  Kansas.  The number  of  col- 
lege students in junior classes in  aerospace engineering had dropped 75% 
during  1968-1973,  although  civil  aeronautics  export  business  had  in- 
creased  fivefold  in   the  past  10  yrs.  Total  civil  and  military  aerospace 
exports were expected to  reach  $7 billion  in  1974, with  a  “self-evident” 
importance  to  the  U S .   balance  of  payments.  US.-designed  and  -pro- 
duced  transport  aircraft  formed  80%  of  the  non-Communist world’s 
transport fleets. 
Because of  the increasing system complexity, costs, foreign competition, 
and complex environmental and economic problems, it was “clear that the 
support  of  the  research  and  technology critical to   the  future health  of 

191 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 1974 
23  October 
civil aeronautics will depend on heavier government involvement.” NASA 
was “prepared to support a stronger aeronautics research and technology 
effort” and had organized a long-range study group t o  evaluate the “Out- 
look for Aeronautics” in the  1980-2000  period. A report was due in the 
summer of  1975. 
Among  possible  technology  goals,  Dr.  Fletcher  was  convinced  that 
aircraft  fuel  savings  of  50% within  the  next  20  yrs  could  be  reached, 
through  weight reductions  by  composite structures and  fly-by-wire and 
active  controls  and  through  supercritical  aerodynamics,  advanced  en- 
gine  techniques, and  operational methods.  NASA  would  also  give  special 
attention to technology for alternative fuels, such as hydrogen.  (Text) 
The  first  of  two  C-130  transport  aircraft  with  experimental boron-epoxy 
composite reinforced wing midsections was delivered to the Air Force to  
flight evaluation program 
begin three years of  tests. The joint  NASA-USAF 
was  to demonstrate the fatigue resistance and weight reductions possible 
when the metal wing structures were reinforced with a composite of  boron 
filaments embedded  in   an  epoxy  resin.  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp. would 
make periodic  inspections and report  to  NASA  and the Air  Force.  (NASA  
Release 7 k 2 9 0 )  
24  Ocnober:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched  Molniya  I-28  communications satellite 
f rom  Plesetsk  into orbit with  39 707-km apogee, 645-km perigee, 717.7- 
min period, and 62.8’  inclination. Tass reported  that the satellite carried 
equipment  to  relay  TV  programs  and  to  establish  remote multichannel 
radio  communications.  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,  2 4 3 0  Oct  74;  A v   W k ,  4 Nov 
74 , 13 ;  Tass, FBIS-SOV,  25 Oct 74, U1) 
ff ight  controllers  for  the  ApolIo-Soyuz Test  Project  began  two 
U.S.S.R. 
weeks  training  a t   Johnson  Space  Center  in  preparation  for  the  July 
1975 mission.  Some 20  Soviet controllers  attended  sessions on  Apollo 
trajectory,  spacecraft  systems  and  communications,  docking  module, 
Mission  Control  Center  operations,  and  contingency  flight  planning. 
(JSC  Release  7 k 2 a ;  NASA  Release 7 4 2 % ;   JSC  Roundup, 8 Nov  74) 
The Air  Force successfully test-fired an  intercontinental  Minuteman I  mis- 
sile  dropped  from  a  C-5A  transport  aircraft  flying  6100  m  above  the 
Pacific  Ocean.  The  first  successful  air-drop  firing  followed  drops  of 
two inert missiles in a step toward  development of  an ICBM  with mobility 
in  the  air  and  on  land.  (Finney, NYT ,  26  Oct  74;  Aerospace  Daily,  29 
Oct  74) 
25  Oc tober:   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  announced  i t   had  awarded  a 
$169 000 contract for the  study of  hydrogen  as a possible energy source, 
to  the  Institute  of  Gas  Technology, Chicago,  Ill.  The  10-mo study  was 
to  evaluate  methods  of  producing  large  quantities  of  hydrogen  and 
select  a  few  of  the  most  promising  for  follow-on  studies.  It  was  also 
to  identify  industrial and  residential uses  and estimate costs of  develop- 
ing technology.  ( MSFC  Release 7 4 2 0 7 )  
26 Oc tober:  President  Ford  signed the Solar Energy Research, Development, 
and  Demonstration  Act  of  1974  (P.L. 9 3 4 7 3 )   establishing  the  Solar 
Energy  Coordination  and  Management  Project.  A  NASA  Associate Ad- 
ministrator  would  be  one  of  six  members  of  the  project,  which  was 
tasked with determining  and  evaluating the  resource base  and  conduct- 
ing  research,  development,  and  demonstration  of  solar  energies  and 
technologies.  NASA  would  cooperate  with  other  Federal  agencies in  the 
project  by  providing  management  capability  and  development  of  tech- 
192 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1979 
26  October 
nologies.  NASA  was  further  authorized  to  carry  out  programs  assigned 
it by the project.  (P.L. 9 3 4 7 3 )  
*  The  first  prototype  B-1  intercontinental  strategic  bomber  was  unveiled  a t  
Palmdale,  Calif.,  by  the  Air  Force  and  Rockwell  International  Corp. 
Secretary  of  Defense James R.  Schlesinger told  on-lookers that  the  new 
aircraft  was  needed  to  complement  the  U S .   arsenal  of  land-based 
and  submarine-based  missiles.  Although  smaller  and  lighter  than  the 
B-52  it was meant to  replace,  the B-1  could fly  farther and faster,  carry 
almost  twice  the  payload,  and  use  a  shorter  runway.  Powered  by  fou r  
133.4-kilonewton-thrust  (30  000-lb)  turbofan  engines  and  lifted  by 
variable geometry, o r  “swing”  wings,  the bomber  could fly efficiently a t  
speeds in  excess of  mach  2.  The projected  cost  of  production  models- 
$76.4  million  each-made 
the  future  of  the  aircraft  controversial  and 
uncertain.  (DOD Release 505-74;  Getler, W Pos t ,  27 Oct 74, A6; Wright, 
N Y T ,  27 Oct 74,43) 
26   O c t o b e r 4  November:   An  agreement  for  NASA  to  submit  life  sciences 
experiments  for  flight  aboard  the  next  available Soviet biological satel- 
lite was negotiated  during  the  fifth  joint  US.-U.S.S.R.  Working Group 
on  Space  Biology  and  Medicine  in  Tashkent,  U.S.S.R.  The  first  U S .  
experiments would be passive specimen modules, completely autonomous 
from  spacecraft  power,  life  support,  and  data-recording  systems,  and 
would require no  operational  commands from  the  ground  during  flight. 
NASA  would prepare descriptions of  the proposed experiments in Decem- 
ber and deliver flight hardware by 1 5  Aug.  1975. U S .  investigators would 
also participate in pre- and postflight studies of  blood and tissue samples 
from animals flown  aboard the  next  Soviet biological  satellite. 
The  protocol  was  confirmed  by  NASA  and  the  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences 4 Dec. 
Representatives  also  discussed preparations  for  the  joint  July  1975 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  mission ; exchanged  results  from  Apolln, 
Skylab, Cosmos, Salyut,  and  Soyuz  programs;  and  discussed  pre-  and 
postflight examinations, vestibular  training,  and crew reaction  to  flight. 
(NASA  Gen  Mgt  Rev  Rpt,  1 6  Dec  74, 42-3;  NASA  Release 7 4 2 3 7 ;  NASA 
Int Aff, interview, 1 7  Oct 75 ; Moscow Domestic News  Service, FBIS-SOV, 
29 Oct 74, B10; 8 Nov 74, U1) 
27  October-2  November:   The  67th  Annual  General  Conference  of  the 
Mderation  Aeronautique  Internationale  ( FAI)  convened  in  Sidney, 
Australia.  Astronaut  Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  was  presented  the  1973  FAI 
Gold  Space Medal  for  his  role  a s  Skylab  2 commander,  and  Astronaut 
Alan  L.  Bean  was  presented  the  Yuri  Gagarin  Gold  Medal  for  his 
role  as  Skylab  3  mission  commander.  Both  men  also  received  the 
De  la  Vaulx  Medal  for  their  successive  space  duration  records. 
(NAA  News .  Oct 74, Dec 7 4 , l )  
28 October-9  November:  Luna 23 ,  second Soviet lunar mission of  1974, was 
launched  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome near  Tvuratam  into  a  parking 
orbit  with  246-km apogee,  183-km perigee, 88.7-min period,  and  51.5” 
inclination,  where  the  “automatic  station”  was  separated  and  launched 
on  a  near-to-planned  trajectory  to  the  moon.  After  a  31  Oct.  flight 
path  correction,  the  spacecraft  on  2  Nov.  entered  a,  lunar  orbit  with 
104-km apogee,  94-km perigee,  117-min period,  and  138O  inclination. 
On  4  and  5 Nov.  the  orbit  was  changed  to  105-km apogee  and  17-km 
perigee. 

193 

28 October-9  November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

The  spacecraft  landed  in  the  southern  part  of  the  moon’s  Sea  of 
Crisis  6  Nov.,  but  rugged  terrain  damaged  a  device  designed  to  take 
rock  samples from  a  2.5-m  depth.  The  planned  drilling  and  collection 
of  lunar  soil had  to  be  abandoned  for  a  reduced equipment-testing pro- 
gram. Work with the  station was  discontinued 9 Nov.  (GSFC  W k l y  S SR ,  
24-30  Oct  74;  Domestic  News  Service,  FBIS-SOV, 29  Oct  74,  U1-2; 
10 Nov  74, U1 ;   Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 4  Nov  74,  U1 ;   Av W k ,  4 Nov  74,  1 3 ;  
SF ,  April 75 ,152 )  
28  Oc tober:   The  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Meteor  19  weather  satellite  from 
Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  904-km  apogee,  842-km  perigee,  102.4-min 
period,  and 81.2’  inclination.  Tass reported  that  the  spacecraft carried 
meteorological  equipment  to  photograph  cloud  formations  and  snow 
cover  and  to  obtain  data  on  the  thermal  energy  reflected  and  radiated 
by the earth and the atmosphere.  (GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,  24-30  Oct 74;  Tass, 
FBIS-SOV, 29 Oct 74, U1 ;  Av W k ,  4 Nov 7 4 , 13 )  
29  Oc tober:   The Air  Force  launched  three  satellites on  a  single Titan  IIID 
booster  from  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base-including  S3-1  , launched 
to measure  a i r  density, obtain  upper-atmosphere composition data,  and 
provide  information  on  atmospheric  effects  on  spacecraft  orbits  [see 
7 Aug.].  The  first  satellite  entered  orbit with  a  279-km apogee, 152-km 
perigee, 88.8-min period,  and  96.7’  inclination  and reentered  1 9  March 
1975. The  second entered  orbit  with  a  542-km apogee, 540-km perigee, 
95.3-min period,  and  96.1’  inclination.  The  third  entered  orbit with  a 
3711-km apogee,  147-km perigee,  125.4-min period,  and  97.0’  inclina- 
t ion ;   i t  reentered  26 May  1975.  (P re s  Rpt  74 ;   AFSC  PAO,  interview, 23  
March 76 ;  AFSC  Release OIP  137.74) 
0  The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project  docking module arrived  at Kennedy Space 
Center  aboard  a  C-141 
transport  aircraft,  from  the  Space  Division 
of  Rockwell  International  Corp.,  Downey,  Calif. The  module  virtually 
completed  the  array  of  hardware  being  processed  a t   KSC  for  the  July 
1975 launch.  (ICSC Release 154-74) 
0  lntention  to  nominate  Dr.  Robert  C .   Seamans,  Jr.,  as  Administrator  of 
the  new  Energy  Research  and  Development  Administration  was  an- 
nounced by  President  Ford  as part  of  a major  reshuffling of  key energy 
posts.  Dr.  Seamans-former  NASA  Deputy  Administrator.  Secretary  of 
the Air Force, and President of  the National Academy of  Engineering- 
was  reported  by  the  press  a s   selected  over  former  NASA  Administrator 
Thomas  0. Paine  and  two  other  candidates  to  head  the  new  agency 
replacing the Atomic Energy Commission. Former astronaut and Atomic 
Energy  Commissioner William  A .   Anders  was  to  be  nominated  Chair- 
man  of  the  new  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  and  the  former  AEC 
Chairman, Dr.  Dixy Lee Ray, to the new position  of  Assistant Secretary 
of  State  fo r   Oceans  and  International  Environmental  and  Scientific 
Affairs.  Dr.  Seaman’s  nomination  was  sent  to  the  Senate  2  Dec.  and 
cmfirmed 12  Dec. Anders’ and Dr. Ray’s were sent to the Senate 4 Dec.; 
Anders’ was  confirmed 1 2  Dec.  and  Dr.  Ray’s  13 Dec.  (PD ,   4  Nov  74, 
1382-3;  9 Dec  74,  1546;  C R ,  4 Dec  74,  520620;  1 2  Dec  74,  S21317; 
13 Dec 74,  S21497;  O’Toole,  W  Post,  16 Oct 74, A10;  30 Oct  74,  A l )  
I ran   signed  an   agreement  to  build  a  ground  station  to  receive  data 
directly  from  NASA’s experimental  earth  resources  satellites.  Under 
the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  signed  with  NASA  in  Tehran,  the 
in  the 
new  site  would  join  six  others  already  in   the  system-three 

1 94  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

29  October 

U S .   a n d o n e  each  in  Canada,  Brazil,  and  Italy.  I ran   would  bear  the 
full  cost  of  building  the  facility  and  would  make  its  data  and  tapes 
available  to  NASA  in  return  for  free  access  to  the  first  two  Earth 
Resources  Technology  Satellites.  Thereafter,  NASA  had  the  option  to 
establish a cost-sharing arrangement.  (NASA  Release 7 4 2 8 9 )  
0  NASA’s 16th  Annual  Awards  Ceremony  was  held  in  Washington,  D.C. 
Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  presented  NASA’s highest 
award,  the Distinguished Service Medal, to Robert L. Krieger,  Director, 
Wallops  Flight  Center ; Norman  Pozinsky,  Hq.  Director,  Network 
Development and Engineering;  Martin L. Raines, Johnson  Space Center 
Director  of  Safety, Reliability,  and  Quality Assurance;  Lee  R.  Sherer, 
Director, Flight Research Center;  and John M.  Thole, Deputy Associate 
Administrator for Space Science. 
The  NASA  Distinguished  Public  Service Medal,  the  agency’s  highest 
award  to  non-Government  personnel,  was  presented  to   Jack  M. 
Campbell,  President  of  the  Federation  of  Rocky  Mountain  States  and 
former  Governor  of  New  Mexico;  Harry  Dornbrand,  Executive  Vice 
President, Fairchild Space and Electronics Co. ; and Jesse L.  Greenstein, 
California Institute of  Technology astrophysicist. 
The  Group  Achievement  Award  went  to  1 2   teams  a t   Centers 
and  Headquarters,  the  Exceptional  Service Medal  to  5 1  persons,  and 
the  Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal  to  16.  (Program;  N A S A  
Activities, 15 Nov 74 , 20 )  
30  October:  The  first  Skylab  crew-Charles  Conrad,  Jr.,  Dr.  Joseph  P. 
Kerwin,  and  Paul  J.  Weitz-who 
flew on  Sky lab   2,  25  May-22  June 
awarded  the  Haley  Astronautics  Award  at  the  Conference 
1973-was 
on  Scientific Experiments of  Skylab, Huntsville, Ala. The annual award 
was  given  by  the  America11  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
for  outstanding  contributions  by  test  personnel who  undergo  personal 
c c  
risk  in  the  advancement of  space flight.”  The  three-day  conference, 30 
0ct.-1  Nov.,  was  sponsored jointly  by  the  AIAA  and  the  American Geo- 
physical Union.  ( MSFC  Release  74-205 ; MSFC  PAO,  interview) 
31  Oc tober:   The  U.S.S.R.  launched  Zntercosmos  12  from  Plesetsk  into  an 
orbit  with  697-km apogee, 241-km perigee, 94.0-min period,  and  74.0° 
inclination.  Tass reported  that  the  satellite, intended to  study the earth’s 
atmosphere  and  ionosphere  and  the  flow  of  micrometeorites,  carried 
equipment made  by  specialists from  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  East Germany, 
Romania,  and  Czechoslovakia, as  well  as  the  U.S.S.R.  The  spacecraft 
reentered  11 July  1975.  (LC Science Policv Research Div.,  interview, 6 
Aug  75 ;   GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,  31 Oct-6 Nov  74,  10-16  July  75 ;  Tass, FBIS- 
SOV, 1 Nov 74, U l )  
During  Oc tober:   The  Space  Shuttle  Operational  Management  Assessment 
Team was  formed  to  make “an  appraisal of  the  technical aspects of  the 
program  and  an  assessment of  the  ability  of  management  to  complete 
the development of  the  shuttle within the cost and performance targets.” 
Composed primarily of  industry representatives and named for its chair- 
man, Willis M.  Hawkins of  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp., the Hawkins Com- 
mittee was  to  prepare  a  formal  briefing  no  later  than  1 Nov.  Inflation 
levels of  %9%, well over the 5%  on which FY 1975 funding was based, 
had increased costs throughout the shuttle program and compromised the 
ability  of  NASA  and  the  prime  contractors  to  reach  their  program  mile- 
stones.  (Team charter;  Covault, Aw  W‘k,  23 Sept 74, 20-2) 
195 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

During  October 
The  European  Space  Research  Organization  qejected  a  plan  to  install  a 
launch pad  for  the McDonnell Douglas Thor-Delta launch vehicle a t  the 
Kourou  Space Center  in   French  Guiana. The  ESRO  decision,  which  fol- 
lowed a  four-month feasibility  study, cited the high cost of  installing the 
a t  approximately $50 million-as 
the  reason  for  the rejection. 
pad-set 
The  press  speculated  that,  although  p-oponents  of  the  proposal  con- 
tended the Thor-Delta launch capability would complement the European 
Ariane  launcher  under  development, the  plan  might  have  run  into  op- 
position from Ariane supporters who feared competition. 
NASA,  when  queried  by  ESRO  officials, had voiced no  objections to  the 
plan  even though the equatorial launch site would have increased the ve- 
hicle’s  orbital  weight  capacity  by  about  20%  over  launches  from  the 
U.S.,  making the  site  an  economical alternative for  commercial custom- 
ers.  (Av Wk, 4 Nov  74,  21;  CSFC  Delta  P ro j   Off, interview, 5 Dec 75) 
David  Baker’s  annual  review  of  the  NASA  budget  in  Spacef l igh t   concluded 
that  the  FY  1975 NASA  budget marked  “a  significant turning  point,”  be- 
cause the cuts were not  as drastic  as they had  been  in  recent years, and, 
most  important,  there  was  a  major  increase  fo r   new  programs-from 
$10.5 million  in  1974 to  $37.7 million.  This  led  Baker  to  label “a  trifle 
premature”  his prediction  of  a year  earlier that  NASA might be  relegated 
indefinitely to  the  role  of  serving “as  a  launch vehicle for  satellites and 
space  probes  of  other  agencies, organizations,  and  nations.”  ( S F ,  Oct 
74, 362-5) 

196 

November  1974 
1  November:   Project  d a   Vinci-oft-delayed  manned-atmospheric-research 
balloon  Right-was 
terminated  after  one  third  of  its  projected  36-hr 
duration, because of  threatening weather. The joint project of  the Atomic 
Energy  Commission, National  Geographic Society,  and  the  Army’s  At- 
mospheric  Sciences  Laboratory  was  intended  primarily  to   investigate 
atmospheric behavior a t  12004300  rn, where less scientific research had 
been  done than  at  very  high  and  very  low  altitudes. Floating  free  and 
staying with  a  single parcel  of  a i r   a s   long  as  possible,  the  four  crew- 
men  studied  atmospheric behavior  over mountains,  plains,  forests,  and 
cities.  They had  hoped  to  travel  in  their  21-m helium balloon  from  the 
launch site a t  Las Cruces, N. M a . ,  to  a landing near Lubbock, Tex.  The 
project  safety officer terminated  the flight over Wagon Mound, N.  Mex., 
but  not  before  enough  data  had  been  gathered  to  plan  future  flights. 
(EF~DA PIO,  interview, 4 Aug  75; AEC   Release T 4 2 5 ;  AP,  NYT,  3  Nov 
74,87) 
2  November-3  January  1975:  NASA’s Pioneer  I 1   interplanetary  probe, 
launched 5 April  1973, flew past  Jupiter  three times closer than P ioneer  
10 had  a year  earlier and sent back  the  first polar  images of  the planet. 
The spacecraft then headed on toward  a September 1979 encounter with 
Saturn. 
Pioneer  10,  launched  2  March  1972, had  been  the  first  spacecraft  to  
reach  Jupiter-3  Nov.  1973-9  Jan.  1974. The  success  of  that  mission 
permitted  NASA  scientists to  attempt  a  somewhat  riskier  approach  with 
the backup Pioneer  11 ,  a  clockwise trajectory  by  the south  polar  region 
and  then  straight  up  through  the  intense  inner  radiation  belt  by  the 
equator and back  out  over the north pole.  Although  the spacecraft went 
within 42 000 km  of  the  planet  a t  12:22 am  EST  3 Dec.,  its  peak  speed 
of 171 000 km per h r  and the trajectory’s high latitude prevented serious 
radiation damage. 
The Jupiter mission of Pioneer 11  was to map the magnetic field; meas- 
ure  distributions of  high-energy electrons  and  protons  in  the  radiation 
belts and look for  auroras;  find a  basis for  interpreting radio  emissions 
from  Jupiter;  detect  and  measure  the  bow  shock  and  magnetospheric 
boundary and  their  interactions with the  solar wind;  verify the  thermal 
balance  and  determine  temperature  distribution  of  the  outer  atmos- 
phere;  measure  the hydrogen-helium ratio  in  the  atmosphere;  measure 
the structure of  the ionosphere and atmosphere; measure the brightness, 
color,  and  polarization  of  Jupiter’s  reflected  light;  perform  two-color 
visible-light imaging ; and increase the accuracy of  orbit predictions and 
masses of  Jupiter and its moons. 
The  interplanetary  mission  was  to  map  the  interplanetary  magnetic 
field; study the  radial gradient of  the  solar wind and its fluctuations and 
structure;  study  the  radial  and  transverse  gradients  and  arrival  direc- 
tions  of  high-energy charged  particles  (solar and galactic cosmic rays)  : 
investigate  relationships  between  the  solar  wind,  magnetic  field,  and 
197 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

2  November-3  January 
cosmic rays;  search for the boundary and extent of  the heliosphere  (solar 
atmosphere) ; determine the density of  neutral hydrogen;  and determine 
the  properties of  interplanetary dust. 
Hurtling toward and then away from Jupiter, Pioneer 11 sent data back 
to  the  earth  a t   2048 bits  per  sec  throughout  most  of  the  month  before 
and  after  encounter.  Picture-taking  of  Jupiter  began  18  Nov.,  a t  
14 800 000 km  out from the planet.  From 25 Nov.  through 8 Dec.,  imag- 
ing  and polarimetry observations were made 23 hrs a day. 
On  26  Nov.  Pioneer  11  crossed  the  detached  bow  shock  wave 
( 7  772 OOO  km out)  a t  the juncture of  the solar wind and Jupiter’s mag- 
netic  field and  entered  the magnetosphere  (6  923 000  km  o u t ) .   I n  five 
hours the spacecraft passed undamaged through this first field of  intense 
radiation.  On  1 Dec.  i t   crossed  the  orbit  of  Callisto-outermost  of  the 
five inner moons-and 
began  returning  its best  pictures  of  Jupiter.  On 
2 Dec.  Pioneer  11 crossed the  orbits of  Jupiter’s  four closest moons and 
entered  the  inner  radiation  belt.  During this  last  leg of  the  approach to 
the south polar  region, the spacecraft continued the imaging and sensing 
of  the  planet  and  moons  and  made  a  closeup,  two-hour  scan  that  in- 
cluded the red spot portion of  the surface. 
Less  than  1 2  h r s   before  the  spacecraft  passed  behind  Jupiter,  an  in- 
tense peak of  electron radiation built  u p  a  4000-v electric charge within 
the  spacecraft.  The  charge  created  an  electric  arc  that  signaled heater 
spacecraft power  and weakening the signal to 
lines to turn  on-drawing 
earth.  I n  about three hours the problem was identified and override com- 
mands from earth switched the heaters back off. 
At midnight  on 3 Dec. Pioneer I1 entered Jupiter radio  occultation- 
a  blackout  that  lasted  42  min  while  the  spacecraft  swung  behind  the 
142 744-km-dia planet-moving 
from the south pole straight up  over the 
north  pole.  Since Pioneer  11 radio  signals required 46 min  to  cross the 
737 million km separating the earth  and Jupiter at the time of  encounter, 
the spacecraft had  already circumscribed the planet before the earth  lost 
contact with its signal. During occultation the spacecraft passed through 
the most intense radiation  (up  to 40 000 times as much in the earth’s radi- 
ation  belts) , reached  its  greatest speed  (171 000 km  per  h r )   and  came 
closest  to  the  planet  (within  42 O00  km  of  the  cloudtops). At  1:24  am 
EST--62  min after periapsis-the 
signal reached earth, indicating that the 
spacecraft had  emerged from behind  the planet  and  that  all systems had 
survived the most critical phase  of  the mission. Temporary  failures had 
lost some data, but no permanent damage was sustained. 
Following the Jupiter  encounter, Dr.  James C. Fletcher, NASA Admin- 
istrator,  renamed the  spacecraft Pioneer-Saturn as  it headed  toward  the 
planet Saturn. The exact target point had  not been  selected but  scientists 
considered an  interesting possibility was to  target the spacecraft  to pass 
between  Saturn  and  its  rings  and  then  close  by  Titan,  one  of  Saturn’s 
moons and  a  possible location  of  life.  The  five-year, 2.4-billion-km t r ip  
to  Saturn would  carry P ioneerSa turn   about  160 000 000 km  above the 
orbit planes of  most planets. 
Pioneer  11 was the first spacecraft to use the gravity of  an  outer planet 
to  throw i t  to another planet farther out, came the closest to Jupiter,  was 
the fastest spacecraft yet launched, and was the first spacecraft to photo- 
graph  Jupiter’s  polar  regions.  P ioneerSa turn   was  expected  to  become 
the  first  spacecraft  to   pass  f a r   from  the  ecliptic plane  and  the  first  to 
reach  Saturn. 

198 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1W4 
2  November3  January 
P ioneer   11 confirmed, but somewhat modified, the findings of  Pioneer 
10. The model of  a relatively flat, disclike magnetosphere was challenged 
by new evidence suggesting a large, blunt magnetosphere of  irregular and 
fluctuating shape. Temperature  measurements of  about  125 K  a t  cloud- 
tops  supported  Pioneer  10  readings,  which  were  lower  than  those  indi- 
cated  by  earth-based  observations.  Imaging  revealed  a  decrease  in  the 
banding  structure  of  the  planet  with  increased  latitude  and  a  more 
mottled structure across the poles.  (NASA  Releases 76292 ,74-300;   Hall, 
Opp,  et  d., Science,  2 May  7 5 ,  445-77;  NASA  Pioneer  Mgr,  interview, 
12 Nov  75; NASA  press conference transcript,  19 Nov  74;  Perlman,  SF 
C h o n ,  3 Dec  74; O’Toole,  W Pos t ,  3 Dec 74, A l ;  Sullivan, N Y T ,  4 Dee 
74, 27; Mead, San Jose Mercury,  5  Dec  74; N Y T ,  9 Dec  74)  
4  November:   President  Ford  accepted  a  segment  of  crystal  grown  in  the 
orbiting Skylab Workshop during January,  from Dr. James C.  Fletcher, 
NASA  Administrator,  and  Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology Chair- 
man  Howard W.  Johnson.  Johnson  said  the  indium-antimonide crystal, 
produced  in  an MIT  experiment, was  the purest  crystal  with the  longest 
life yet  produced  by  man.  Using  it  to  carry  power  current,  a  computer 
could be  the  size of  a postage stamp.  (N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies ,   15 Nov  74,  17; 
PD ,  11 Nov 74,1428; UPI, W Po s t ,  5 Nov 7 4 , l )  
4-15  Ivovember: The formal phase of  the Spacelab Preliminary Requirements 
Review-first  major milestone in the Spacelab program-was  completed 
in  Noordwijk,  The  Netherlands,  and  Bremen,  West  Germany.  Repre- 
sentatives of  NASA  and  the  European  Space Research  Organization  ap- 
proved  1077 review items, withdrew 56, and marked 100 for more study. 
Avionics  and mechanical interfaces with  the  space shuttle were  selected 
fo r  particular  attention  before  the  next  major  milestone-the 
Systems 
Requirements  Review.  (Spacelab  Newsletter  7 6 8 ;  Spacelab/cvT  Pro- 
gram Approval Document, Attach A, 1 )  
5 November:   Former Mercury  astronaut  John  H.  Glenn, Jr.,  the  first Amer- 
ican  to  orbit  the  earth,  was  elected U.S.  Senator  from  Ohio by  a  wide 
margin  over  his  Republican opponent,  Ralph  J.  Perk.  Glenn  had  with- 
drawn  from  a  1964 senatorial  bid  after  a  fall  affected his  inner  ear.  In  
1970 Le  lost  the  Democratic primary  to  Howard M.  Metzenbaum, who 
in  turn  lost  the  general  election  to  Robert  Taft,  Jr.  Metzenbaum,  ap- 
pointed  to  fill the vacated seat of  William B.  Saxbe in  September 1973, 
lost to  Glenn in  the 1974 Democratic primary.  (Farrell, NYT ,  6 Nov 74, 
37) 
7 November:   The  appointment  of  Richard  G .  Smith  as Deputy Director  of 
Marshall Space Flight Center, effective 18 Nov., was announced by Center 
Director William R. Lucas. Smith would  also continue as acting director 
of  MSFC’S  Science and Engineering  Directorate.  Since  1960,  Smith had 
held positions  of  increasing  responsibility  in  the  Science and Engineer- 
ing Directorate, including Saturn Program Manager from 1970 to  1973. 
( MSFC  Release 74-218) 
Aircraft  designer Clarence L.  (Kelly)  Johnson  announced  his  retirement 
a s  Senior Vice  President  of  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.,  effective in  mid- 
January 1975. During his 43  yrs with Lockheed, Johnson had contributed 
to   the  design  of  some  40 aircraft-about  half  of  them  his  original  de- 
the P-38  “Lightning” fighter of  World War 11, the P-80 
signs-including 
jet fighter, the Constellation series of  airliners, the F-104  mach 2 fichter, 
the  u-2  reconnaissance plane  and  its  successor  SR-71,  and  the  C-130 
transport.  I n   1964  President  Johnson  awarded  Johnson  the  National 

199 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

7  November 
Medal  of  Science,  citing  his  achievements and  products  “as  both  in- 
comparable and virtually  incredible.”  (Getler, W Post,  8 Nov  74, A12) 
11  November:  A  shortage  of  unsymmetrical  dimethylhydrazine  (UDMH )  
rocket fuel was being strictly managed to prevent delays in  military  and 
NASA  launches. The fuel was produced from raw materials  found  to have 
an  agent that could cause cancer  in humans. Methods had  been  devised 
to   produce  the  fuel  by  removing  humans  from  the  step  endangering 
health,  but  adequate supplies could  not  b e  produced  before  the  end  of 
the  year.  Stopgap  measures  taken  by  the  Air  Force,  including  strict 
control and allocation of  existing  supplies, was  preventing  the  shortage 
from  interfering  with  any  critical  launches.  (NASA  D i r  Launch  Vehicle 
& Propulsion Prog, interview, 2 Oct 75; A v  Wh ,  11 Nov 74 ,14 )  
1 2  November:  The  U.N.  Committee  on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space 
adopted  a  draft  convention  that  would  make  compulsory  the  registra- 
tion  of  all  spacecraft. The treaty  required  approval  by  the  General AS- 
sembly  and  signing by  member  nations  before  taking  effect.  (Dept  of 
State, Off  Treaty Affairs, interview, 11 Aug 75; S BD ,  1 6  Oct 74,20) 
NASA  contract  awards  to   small  business  during  FY  1974  totaled 
$181 247  000--8.60/, 
of  all  contracts---NASA announced. This  percent- 
age was the highest since 1962. (NASA  Release 74-293) 
13  November:  “The  only way  to  face the  crisis  of  our  times  is  through  the 
advancement  of  science  and  technology,”  Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA 
Deputy Administrator,  said  in  an   address to  the Cal Tech Management 
Club.  “The  space program  is  at  the  forefront  of  the  search  for  knowl- 
edge,  . . . of  producing  knowledge, . . . of  developing the  technological 
capability  which  comes  from  this  knowledge.”  Yet,  “among  even  the 
higher  echelons  of  the  American  business  community,  lack  of  under- 
standing  rather  than  comprehension of  space ventures is  the  prevailing 
frame  of  mind.”  Dr.  Low  called  for  communication  to  the  American 
people  of  how  the  space  program  increased  understanding  of  the  uni- 
verse and man’s  place  in  it,  improved life  on  earth,  and kept  the  coun- 
t ry   secure  through  scientific, technological, and  economic  strength,  as 
well a s  international cooperation.  (Text) 
15  November:  NASA  launched three satellites-Noaa  4  (ITOS-G)  meteorologi- 
cal  satellite for  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric Administration, 
Intasat  ionospheric  satellite  for  Spain,  and  Amsat  Oscar  7  amateur 
radio  communications satellite-from  Western  Test  Range  a t  9 :11  am 
PST  on  one  Thor-Delta  launch  vehicle.  The  three  spacecraft  entered 
dmo s t   identical,  near-to-planned,  polar  orbits.  I t   was  the  first  triple 
launch for a Thor-Delta. 
Noaa  4  entered  orbit with  a  1458-km apogee,  1444-km perigee,  115- 
min  period,  and  101.7’  inclination,  as  the  fourth  operational  Improved 
Tiros  Operational  Satellite  in  the  joint  NASA  and  Dept.  of  Commerce 
program  to  provide  global  cloud-cover  observations.  Delayed  29  Oct. 
by  faulty  electrical  connectors  on  the  Thor-Delta  and  again  13 Nov. 
when  a  2nd-stage  hydraulic  pump  posed  a  problem,  the  launch  went 
smoothly on  15  Nov.  N o m  4  joined Noaa 2,  launched 15 Oct.  1972, and 
Noaa  3 ,   launched  6  Nov.  1973. 
The  345-kg, three-axis-stabilized, earth-oriented  satellite moved  in  a 
circular,  near-polar,  sun-synchronous orbit.  Day  and night  coverage of 
the earth’s cloud cover was provided by two very-high-resolution radiom- 
eter  instruments  and by  two  scanning radiometer  sensors. Two vertical- 
temperature-profile radiometers made continuous radiance measurements 

200 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

15  November 

for  determination  of  the  atmospheric vertical  temperature  profile  over 
every  part  of  the  earth’s  surface  a t   least  twice  daily.  One  secondary 
sensor,  the  solar  proton  monitor,  studied  solar  activity  and  its  effects 
on the earth’s environment. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible 
for  design,  development,  launch,  and  in-orbit  checkout  of  the  space- 
craft.  NOAA’S  National  Environmental  Satellite  Service  ( NESS)  would 
take  over  operation  of  the  satellite a f te r  checkout.  NASA  mission objec- 
tives-to 
launch  the  spacecraft  into  sun-synchronous orbit  of  sufficient 
accuracy for operational mission requirements and to conduct an in-orbit 
evaluation  and  checkout  of  the  spacecraft-were 
accomplished and  the 
mission was adjudged successful % Jan.  1976. 
Zntasat,  the  first  Spanish  satellite,  separated  from  the  Delta  2nd 
stage 24 min  after launch and entered orbit with  a  1468-km apogee and 
perigee,  115-min period,  and  101.7O  inclination.  The  20-kg,  12-sided, 
magnetically  oriented,  spin-stabilized  spacecraft  would  measure  iono- 
spheric  electron  content,  irregularities,  and  scintillations  in  a  joint 
space  research  program  of  NASA  and  the  Instituto  Nacional  de T6cnica 
Aeroespacial.  INTA  provided  the  spacecraft  and  would  acquire  experi- 
ment  data. NASA  provided pickaback launch  and tracking. 
Amsat Oscar 7-the  Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.’s  Orbiting Satellite 
Carrying  Amateur  Radio-separated 
from  the  Delta  2nd  stage  77 min 
after  liftoff  and  entered orbit with  a  1458-km apogee, 1454-km perigee, 
115-min period,  and  101.7’  inclination.  The  seventh  in  a  series  begun 
with  Oscar  1  in  1961, the  solar-powered, octahedral,  29.5-kg Oscar  7 
joined  Oscar  6 ,  launched  1 5  Oct.  1972, to  serve a s  a  space communica- 
tions relay station for  radio  amateurs and as a teaching aid, giving first- 
hand experience in  space science for U S .  schools. Oscar 7 was built  and 
prepared  for  launch by  the  Radio  Amateur  Satellite Corp.  (NASA  MORS, 
18  Oct  74 ;   19,  20,  29  Nov  74;  2 6   Jan  76;  NASA  Release  7 4 3 2 2 ;  
Goddard  News ,  Dec  74;  SBD, 30 Oct 74, 301;  1 4  Nov  74 ,79 )  
NASA  announced  selection  of  Boeing  Aerospace  Co . ,   Lockheed  Missiles 
& Space Co.,  and Martin Marietta  Corp.  for  negotiation  of  parallel con- 
tracts of  about $300 000 each for preliminary design and program defini- 
tion  studies f o r   the  support  systems module  ( S SM ) ,   a major  element of 
the Large Space Telescope  (LST) . The LST was  scheduled fo r  launch into 
orbit on the space shuttle in  the 1980s. The SSM,  attached to the structure 
housing  the  telescope, would provide  electric power,  data  storage, com- 
munications, and  automated attitude sensing, pointing,  and control. The 
unit  would  also  contain  some  of  the  elements for  orbital  servicing  and 
retrieval of  the telescope by the space shuttle.  (NASA Release 7 4 3 0 8 )  
16  November:   In  an  attempt to communicate with another civilization in  the 
universe,  a  powerful  three-minute  radio  signal  was  beamed  from  the 
Arecibo  Observatory  in  Puerto  Rico  toward  Messier  13,  a  globular 
cluster  of  stars  a t  the  edge of  the  Milky Way,  2 5  000  light  years  from 
the  earth.  The  transmission-devised 
by  the  staff  of  the  National 
Astronomy  and  Atmosphere  Center,  which  included  the  Observatory 
and  was  operated  by  Cornel1 Univ.  for  the  National  Science Founda- 
tion-was  a coded message representing  life on  the earth. The Observa- 
tory’s  new  450-kw radar  transmitter,  sponsored by  NASA  and completed 
in   October, had  increased  the  planetary  ranging  and  surface  mapping 
capabilities  a  thousandfold. When  focused by  the  Observatory’s  newly 
resurfaced  305-m  dish  the  energy  was  multiplied,  sending  a  beam  to 
Messier 13 brighter  than  any other  source in  the Milky Way.  (Sullivan, 
201 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
16  November 
N Y T ,  20  Nov ?4,77;  O’Toole, V Post,  1 7  Nov 74, A l ;  Pres Rpt 74 ,86 ;  
NASA  Release 74-309;  NASA,  Chief  P l an   Astron,  interview,  15 Dec  75) 
19  November:   Wind-tunnel tests  of  4%   scale  models  of  the  space  shuttle 
orbiter had begun  a t  Air Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering 
Development Center, the Air Force announced. The tests of  heat buildup 
on  the   forward half  of  the  orbiter  during the  critical  period  of  reentry 
and  a t   other  points  in   the  flight  trajectory  were  scheduled  to  continue 
through the  remainder of  the year.  The 4%  model, the fourth size to be 
tested  in   the  AEDC  tunnels,  reflected  the  latest  design  details  on  the 
forward half of  the orbiter.  (AFSC  Release OIP  207.74) 
20  November:   NASA  and  the  Federal GovernEent  as   a  whole  were  charged 
with  race  and  sex discrimination in   a  class  action  suit  filed by  the Na- 
tional  Association  for   the  Advancement  of  Colored  People  (NAACP) 
Legal  Defense  Fund  in   US. District  Court  in   Washington, D.C.  The 
suit was  initiated  by  two  employees at Johnson Space Center. The NAACP 
Legal Defense  Fund  labeled  as  “lame excuses”  NASA’s claims that  work 
forces were  dropping throughout  the  agency  and  that  it was  difficult to 
find  qualified blacks  and  women  in  its specialized  areas  of  work.  (AP, 
N Y T ,  21  Nov 74; Robinson, W Post, 2 1  Nov 74) 
21 November-20  December:  NASA  launched Intelsat-IV F-8  fo r  the  Commu- 
nications  Satellite  Corp.  on  behalf  of  the  International  Telecommuni- 
cations  Satellite Organization. The  1387-kg satellite was  launched from 
Eastern Test  Range  a t  6:U pm  EST  on  an   Atlas-Centaur  vehicle  into  a 
transfer  orbit  with  a  35 899.2-km  apogee,  536.5-km  perigee,  10-hr 
39.8-min period, and 26.0’  inclination. 
NASA’s  primary  objectives were  to  conduct design,  performance, and 
flight  readiness  reviews  for   the  Federal  Communications  Commission, 
to   ensure  compittibility  of  Intelsat  spacecraft  with  NASA  launch  ve- 
hicles  and  launch  environmental conditions,  and  to  launch  Intelsat-IV 
F-8  into a  transfer  orbit that would permit the spacecraft apogee motor 
to  inject  the  spacecraft  into  a  synchronous orbit  for  communications 
service. 
The  apogee kick  motor  was  fired  by  ComSatCorp  a t   6:48  pm  EST 
on  23   Nov.,  placing  IntelsatdV  F-8  in   a  near-circular  prb i t   with  a 
35 780-km  apogee, 35 630-km perigee,  23-hr 51.9-min  period,  and  1.8” 
inclination. The spacecraft then drifted to i ts  station  at 174’  E longitude 
over  the  Pacific Ocean,  arriving  12  Dec.  NASA  adjudged  the  mission  a 
success 20 Dec. 
Intelsat-IV  F-8  joined  five  operational  Intelsat  IV  commercial  com- 
launched 25 Jan  1971, F-3  launched 
sats : three  over  the Atlantic-F-2 
19 Dec.  1971, and F-7  launched 23  Aug.  1973 ;  one over  the  Pacific- 
FA  launched  22  Jan.  1972;  and  one  over  the  Indian  Ocean-F-5 
launched 13 June  1972. F-8  replaced FA, which became a spare, orbit- 
ing   over  178” E  longitude.  F-8  was  designed  to  operate  seven  years 
and   could  provide  multiple  access  and  simultaneous transmission.  It 
had   a  capacity  for   3000  circuits  with  transponders  in   earth mode  and  
9000  circuits  with  transponders  in   spot-beam-coverage  mode,  or   1 2  
TV channels, or certain  combinations. (NASA   MORS,  22 Nov, 24 Dec 74; 
GSYC W k l y  SSR,  21-26  Nov  74;  NASA  Release  7 6 3 0 5 ;   INTELSAT  R e  
leases 7 4 6 2 , 7 6 7 0 ;  NASA Atlas-Centaur Mgr, interview, 30 July 75) 
21  November:   The U.S.S.R.  launched Molniya  I I I -1   communications satel- 
lite from  Plesetsk  into orbit with  a  40 683-km apogee,  628-km perigee, 
12-hr 17.3-min  period,  and  62.8’  inclination.  The  spacecraft  was  in-  

202 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

21  November 

tended  for  long-distance telephone  and  cable  radio  communications in 
the  Soviet  Union,  fo r   transmission  of  color  TV  programs  within  the 
Orbita network, and  for  international cooperation.  (Tass,  FLUS-Sov, 22 
Nov 74, U1;  GSFC  W k l y  SSR ,  21-26  Nov 74; LC Science Policy Research 
Div, interview, 9 Sept 75 )  
I n  a  Skylab awards ceremony a t  Marshall  Space Flight  Center, Dr.  James 
C.  Fletcher, NASA  Administrator, presented Group Achievement Awards 
to   the  Skylab  Program  Offices  a t  MSFC,  Kennedy  Space  Center,  John- 
son Space Center, and NASA Hq. and to special Skylab teams. Dr. Robert 
A.  Parker,  NASA  astronaut  and  Skylab  program  scientist  a t   JSC, re- 
ceived  an   Outstanding  Leadership  Medal.  Dr.  Fletcher  also  presented 
28  individual  Exceptional  Scientific Achievement Medals  to  principal 
investigators  fo r  Skylab experiments and  to  Comet Kohoutek scientific 
investigators.  (MSFC   Release 74-227;  Marshall  Star, 27 Nov  74 )  
21-22  November:   New  cost  increases in  the Viking program  had  raised  the 
total  cost  of  the mission to-more  than  $ 1  billion,  NASA  officials told  the 
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on  Space 
and  Science  and  Applications.  Dr.  Rocco  A.  Petrone,  NASA  Associate 
Administrator,  testified  that  the  preliminary  cost  estimate of  $364 mil- 
lion,  presented  to  the  Committee in   1969,  had  been  nearly  trebled  by 
delay  in  the  mission  from  1973 to  1 9 5 ,  inflation,  and  technical  prob- 
lems in  “developing the most  advanced automated space equipment this 
country  has  ever  attempted.”  The  new  total  included  a  $930-million 
cost target,  a  $20-million contingency fund,  and  the  cost  of  the  Titan- 
Centaur  launch  vehicles.  One  orbiter  and  one  lander  spacecraft  had 
been  deleted  from  the  program  [see  10 Oct.],  manpower  had  been  re- 
duced, and a number of  tests had been eliminated. Dr. Petrone expressed 
confidence in our present technical approach and our ability to meet cost 
L6 
goals.”  Dr.  Edgar  M.  Coriright, Langley Research Center Director,  at- 
tributed  the  “$120  million  in  unanticipated  problems”  experienced by 
mid-1973 to  an  underestimation  of  the  complexity of  the project  a t  the 
outset:  “We have  been  p1ayir.g  catch  up  ever  since  because  of  the  low 
estimate to start with.” 
Questioned about a newspaper  article saying  the Viking lander  might 
sink  deep  into  Martian  surface  dust,  Dr.  Petrone  said  that  tests  men- 
tioned  in  the  article had  been  made  some years  earlier,  not  “two weeks 
ago”  as  reported.  Dr.  Noel  W.  Hinners,  Associate  Administrator  for 
Space Science, testified that the lander’s footpad area had been  increased 
since  the  earlier  tests  and  that  radar  observations  had  indicated  the 
proposed  landing  sites  for  the  first  mission  appeared  “well  within  the 
capability”  of  the  lander.  Sites  for  the  second mission were  still  being 
studied.  (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 20 Nov 74, A3) 
22  N o v e m b e r 4   January  1975: NASA  launched  Skynet  I I B ,   a  U.K.  military 
communications  satellite,  for  the  U S .   Air  Force  Space  and  Missile 
Systems Office  a s  agents for  the U.K. Ministry  of  Defense.  The  satellite 
was  launched  on  a  three-stage Thor-Delta  launch  vehicle  from  Eastern 
Test Range a t  7:28  pm  EST  into  an  orbit with  a  36 965-km apogee, 185- 
km perigee, and  24.6’  inclination. The apogee kick motor,  fired  a t  8 : l O  
pm  EST  on 24 Nov.,  circularized the  orbit with an  apogee of  36 595 km, 
perigee  of  35  896  km, period  of  24  h r s   19.4  min,  and  inclination  of 
2.2’.  The spacecraft then  drifted to  its geosynchronous station  a t  50’  E 
longitude  over  the  Indian  Ocean.  NASA  adjudged  the  launch  a  success 
6 Jan.  1975. 

203 

25 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
22  November4  January 
The first-generation Skyne t   A  and B  had been  developed for  the U.K. 
in  the WAF’S   Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program  (IDCSP)  
and launched by NASA 2 1  Nov.  1969 and 18 Aug.  1970. S k yn e t  I I A  failed 
to achieve a satisfactory orbit when  launched 18 Jan.  1974 and reentered 
25 Jan.  The launch  of  S k yn e t  I I B  had  been  delayed  from  19 Nov.  by  a 
defective  component  in  the  Delta  2nd-stage  attitude  control  system. 
(NASA  MORS,  7 Nov,  5 Dec 74;  6 Jan 75;  GSFC  W k l y  S SR ,  21-26  Nov 74; 
NASA  Release 74-303;  AP, W  Pos t ,  1 2  Nov 74, c5) 
22 November:   NASA  and  the  National  Science Foundation  (NSF)   had  signed 
a  Memorandum of  Understanding  for  collaboration  in  research  on  ter- 
restial  uses  of  solar  energy,  NASA  announced.  NSF,  the  lead  Federal 
agency  in  solar  energy  research,  chaired  the  20-member  Interagency 
Panel  fo r   Terrestrial  Applications  of  Solar  Energy.  NASA’s role  in   the 
National  Solar Energy  Program  would  be  directed to  projects  in which 
NAS.4  had  special capabilities,  although  this  participation  was  expected 
to touch  the full range of  solar energy research.  (NASA  Release 74-302) 
23-24  November:  President  Ford  and General Secretarv Leonid  I. Brezhnev 
of 
the  Soviet  Communist  Party’s  Central  Committee,  meeting  in 
Vladivostok,  drew  up  the  framework  of  a  new,  10-yr  strategic  arms 
agreement,  with  a  goal  of  completing the  accord  in  1975.  The  agree- 
ment would put  a ceiling of  2400 for each country  on  the total  of  inter- 
continental  ballistic  missiles,  submarine-launched  missiles,  and  heavy 
bombers. Wthin  that  total,  the  number  of  missiles  armed  with  multiple 
warheads would be limited  to  1320.  ( P D ,  2 Dec  74,  1489-97;  9 Dec  74, 
1514-7) 
November:  Sen.  Frank  E.  Moss  (D-Utah)  introduced  an   amendment to 
S.  2350  that  would  continue  experimentation  with  earth  resources  re- 
mote-sensing satellite  systems  through  1 Jan.  1980 unless  a  permanent 
system  was  established  before  that  date.  The  amendment  was  a  sub- 
stitute  for  S.  2350,  the  earth  resources survey bill  to  develop an  opera- 
tional ERTS  system and  to  establish an Office  of  Earth  Resources Survey 
Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration 
within  the  Dept.  of  the  Interior  [see  18 Sept.].  Other  provisions  of  the 
amendment would require the President, through NASA  and DOI,  to ensure 
continuity  of  satellite data  during  the  experimental period  and  furnish 
Congress  with  any  necessary  budget  amendments.  ( C R ,   25  Nov  74, 
S19948) 
November:   Deferral  of  $72  million  in  NASA  FY  1975 R ~ D  funding  was 
proposed  by  President  Ford  in  a message to  Congress. Aeronautical  re- 
search  and  space  support  activities wouId  be  deferred  by  $36  million, 
affecting  advanced  systems  for  space  exploration  and  aeronautics, 
analysis  of  data  in  the  space  science  program,  and  maintenance  and 
upgrading  of  equipment for  the  tracking  and data-acquisition program. 
I n  manned  space flight,  $20 million  in  ASTP  funds  would  be  deferred. 
And in space science and applications, deferral of  $16 million in no-year 
(not designated f o r  a specific year)  funds would delay the  rate  of  build- 
up of  Pioneer-Venus, SEASAT-A,  Nimbus-G, Tiros-N, and the Heat Capac- 
ity Mapping Mission. These deferrals were parts of  a $4.6-billion budget 
outlay reduction asked by the President.  ( P D ,  2 Dec 74,1500-1;  C R ,  26 
Nov 74,520096-7:  Federal R e h t e r .  5 Dec 74.42519-667’) 
9  NASA  and  the  National  Science Foundation  announced  the‘ award  of  two 
contracts of  about $500 000 each to General Electric Co.  Space Div.  and 
Kaman  Aerospace Corp.  for preliminary  design  of  very  large wind  sys- 

26 

204 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
26  November 
tems  for  generating  electricity. Windmills  from  100 to  3000  kw  would 
be examined by each company in  a  project  managed by Lewis Research 
Center for NSF  as pa r t  of  the program  for Research Applied to National 
Needs  (RANN ) .   A  100-kw system with  vanes  more  than  37  m  in  dia, 
already under  design and construction, would be erected a t  IRRC’S  Plum 
Brook test area.  (IRRC  Release 74-73) 
Dur ing  November: Marshall Space Flight Center awarded McDonnell Douglas 
Corp. a $299 454 contract for the Spacelab Payload Utilization and Plan- 
ning Study for the space transportation  system.  (MSFC Release 74-243) 

205 

December  1974 

2-8  December:  The  U.S.S.R. 
launched  Soyuz  16,  carrying  cosmonauts 
Col.  Anatoly  V.  Filipchenko and Nikolay N.  Rukavishnikov,  from  Bay- 
konur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam a t  2:40 pm local time  (4:40  am  EST )  
i n  preparation for  the July 1975 US.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project 
mission.  The  spacecraft,  identical  to   the  one  that  would  fly  during  the 
ASTP mission, entered orbit with  a 280-km apogee, 194-km perigee, 89.3- 
min  period,  and  51.8”  inclination.  Tass  reported  the   purpose  of  the 
mission was  to  test  the  spacecraft’s  onboard  systems,  which  had  been 
“modernized  to  meet  the  demands of  the  joint  flight”;  make  scientific 
and  technical  investigations;  and   observe  and  photograph  sections  of 
the earth’s surface for  the solution of  economic problems. 
I n  a  prelaunch Tass interview,  Filipchenko  said  that  the mission was 
to  last several days. “This would be enough fo r  us  to  test carefully all the 
ship’s  systems,  above  all  its  docking gear.”  Using  a  passive  simulator 
docking ring,  Soyuz 16 would  make  docking and  separation  maneuvers 
in  almost all the ASTP modes. I n  addition, U.S.S.R.  ASTP Technical Direc- 
tor  Konstanin D.  Bushuyev said in a launch-day Tass interview, the crew 
would  check  out  the  Soyuz  life  support  system,  which  had  been  re- 
designed  for   better  compatibility  with  Apollo.  Soyuz  normally  had  a 
cabin  pressure of  10 newtons per  sq cm  (14.7 psi)  and  an   atmosphere 
similar  in   oxygen  content to  terrestrial atmosphere.  Apollo maintained 
its pure oxygen atmosphere a t  3.5 newtons per  sq cm  (5 p s i ) .  To reduce 
the acclimation period  for the crews’ transition  between  the  two  atmos- 
pheres,  the U.S.S.R.  had  agreed to   reduce  the  pressure and  increase the 
percentage of  oxygen  in   the  Soyuz  atmosphere.  The  system’s  capacity 
also had been increased to accommodate four persons. 
On  3  Dec.  NASA,  which  had   been  tracking  Soyuz  16  since  shortly 
after  launch,  began  a  15-day joint  tracking  rehearsal  with  the  U.S.S.R. 
After the mission,  information gathered by  nine  U S .   tracking  stations 
would  be compared with  data  from Soviet tracking  stations. Meanwhile 
the  crew  reduced  the  spacecraft’s  cabin  pressure  to  7.2  newtons  per 
sq cm  (10.4 ps i)   and   doubled the  oxygen  content,  from  20%  to  LEO%, 
with  no  adverse effect. Color TV broadcasts from the spacecraft showed 
all wa s  well. A trajectory correction 4 Dec. placed Soyuz 16 in  a circular 
orbit  with  a  225-km  altitude,  88.9-min  period,  and   51.8”  inclination, 
an  orbit  similar  to  ASTP  requirements. Simulated docking and  separa- 
tion  maneuvers “passed  off  without  a  hitch”  5-7  Dec.,  Tass  reported. 
Medical,  biological,  earth  resources,  and  astronomy  experiments 
also were carried out during the six-day mission. At  1 :a pm  Baykonur 
time  (3:04 am ZST)  8 Dec.,  Soyuz 16 softlanded in  the U.S.S.R.  300 km 
north  of  Dzhezkazgan  in   Kazakstan.  Tass  reported  the  cosmonauts 
were in  good health. 
Following the successful landing,  US. ASTP  Technical Director Glynn 
S.  Lunney  conveyed  his  congratulations  “for  the  brilliant  rehearsal 
before  the  Soviet-US.  flight.”  In   a  Tass  interview  Bushuyev  said, 
207 

2-8  December 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

“We  have  succeeded  in  checking  in  real  space  flight  the  whole 
package  of  the  new  system and units  responsible  for  the  success of  the 
future  linkup  of  the  Soviet  and  U.S.  spaceships.”  Soyuz  16 was  the 
third  manned  U.S.S.R. launch  in  1974,  following Soyuz  14  (launched 
3 July)  and Soyuz 15 (26  Aug.) . (GSFC SSR ,  31 Dec.  74; Tass, FBIS-SOV, 
2-11  Dec  74;  Wren,  N Y T ,   3  Dec  74,  16;  4 Dec  7 4  26;  JSC  Release 
74-272) 
2,  12  December : American  astronauts  and  technicians,  although  denied 
access  to  Soviet  spacecraft  factories,  would  be  permitted  to  inspect 
the  Soyuz spacecraft for  the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project  a t  the Bay- 
konur  Cosmodrome  launch  site  in  May  1975,  NASA  officials  said  a t   a 
Johnson  Space  Center  news  conference.  U S .   ASTP  Technical  Director 
Glynn  S.  Lunney  said  the  arrangement  would  satisfy  U.S.  technical 
needs. 
I n   a  12  Dec.  press  conference a t   Star  City,  Maj.  Gen.  Vladimir  A. 
Shatalov,  U.S.S.R. chief  of  cosmonaut  training,  said  American  crews 
would  be  permitted  to  view  only  facilities  directly  connected  with 
the  flight  itself.  “Everything  that  American  astronauts  need  to  be 
acquainted  with  on  the  Soyuz  that  will  fly  will  be  shown them  before- 
hand.”  In   the  meantime  astronauts  would  train  with  mockups  and 
interview, 15  Sept  75; Keefer, Toda y ,  5  Dec  74; 
simulators.  ( JSC   PIO, 
Chriss, LA   T imes ,  3  Dec 74; Toth,  LA  T imes ,  13 Dec  74; FBIS-SOV, 13 
Dec 74, U l )  
2 December:  The surface of  Jupiter’s moon  Io might be composed of  evapo- 
rite  salt  deposits, rich  in  sodium and sulfur, NASA  reported. A year-long 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory study had  indicated that deposits had resulted 
from migration  of  salt-saturated  aqueous solutions t o   Io’s  surface  from 
a warm  or hot  interior  followed by  loss  of  the water  to  space. Salt-rich 
materials  could  have  been  produced  by  the  leaching  of  carbonaceous 
meteorites. According  to  Dr.  Fraser  P.  Fanale,  JPL   team leader,  the  de- 
posits  could  account  fo r   Io’s  high  reflective power,  the  absence  of  ice 
bands, and the dark reddish poles. 
Sodium vapor  emissions from  Io had  been  first reported  in  February 
1973  by  Dr.  Robert  Brown  of  Harvard  Univ.  Subsequently, the  cloud 
of  sodium was  observed to  extend more  than  320 000 km  from  Io. 
In   August  Dr.  Fanale  with  two  other  astronomers  had  proposed 
explanations  for  the  sodium  emissions.  Proton  bombardment  experi- 
ments had  indicated that sodium and other atoms had been blasted from 
Io’s  surface by the impact of  Jupiter’s magnetospheric protons, electrons, 
and  ions  and  had  formed  a  cloud  around  Io.  Io’s  glow,  according  to  
intensive  spectral  studies,  resulted  from  scattering  of  sunlight  by  the 
sodium cloud.  (NASA   Release 74-315;  Fanale  e t   al.,  Science,  6  Dec  74, 
922-5;  Matson e t  ab., As tro  Journ ,  15 Aug 74, L43-6;  JPL  proj  off, inter- 
view, 24 Sept 75, N S F  Release 74-199) 
The  first  Apollo  lunar  surface  experiment  package  (ALSEP)   , placed  on 
the moon  by Apo l lo  12 astronauts  in November  1969, had  f a r  exceeded 
its  one-year life expectancy and was  still functioning, along with  instru- 
ments in  ALSEP  packages from Apollo  14  through  17,  NASA  announced. 
From  ALSEP  magnetometers, Dr.  Palmer  Dyal,  Ames  Research  Center 
luna r   investigator,  had  calculated  that  the  moon  had  a  magnetic  field 
1000 times weaker  than  the  earth’s,  with  an   iron  content about  9%  by 
weight, in contrast to the earth’s 30%. The heat flow measured by ALSEP 
instruments  was  half  the  earth‘s,  indicating  differentiation and  upward 

208 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

2  December 

concentrations  of  radioactivity  early  in   the  moon’s  history,  Seismom- 
eters  had  uncovered  a  new  class  of  moonquakes  originating  a t   depths 
of  100 km or less below the lunar  surface. Dr. M.  Nafi Toksoz of  Massa- 
chusetts  Institute  of  Technology earlier  had  reported  that  preliminary 
information  indicated  the  moon  had   a  small  core  less  than  800  km 
across, lying inside a molten  shell 600-1000 km  down from  the  surface, 
where deep moonquakes had been detected. Seismic, magnetic, and heat- 
flow data  had  also  suggested that  the moon was  further  along  than  the 
earth in  its evolutionary  history.  (NASA  Release 74c313; NASA  prog  off, 
interview, 17 Nov 75; McElheny, N Y T ,  18 Nov 74) 
An  agreement to  establish  an  Aerosat  (Aeronautical  Satellite)  Space Seg- 
ment  Program  was  signed  in  Washington  by  the  European  Space  Re- 
search  organization,  COMSAT  General  Corp.,  and  the  Government  of 
Canada.  Under  the  agreement-provided 
for  in  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding signed 2 Aug.-ESRo, 
COMSAT General, and Canada would 
furnish the space segment capability  for the intergovernmental program. 
COMSAT  General  would  lease  its  share  of  the  space  segment capability 
to  the Federal Aviation Administration.  (ESRO  Release, 3 Dec 74)  
*  The Dept.  of  Defense had  officially approved  development of  the  NAVSTAR 
Glohal  Positioning  System  (GPS )   , the  Air  Force  announced. The  first 
phase  of  the  three-phase  joint  armed  services program  called  for  five 
Rockwell  International  Corp.  spacecraft  to  join  a  Navy  Navigational 
Technology Satellite  ( NTS)  in  two-plane orbital  constallations  in  1977 
to  test  the  system. The  five-meter, 635-kg spacecraft would  be  launched 
on Atlas F boosters by  the Air Force Systems Command’s Space Missile 
Test Center. Phase  two  would  bring  the  number  of  satellites to  nine  in 
24  satellites 
three  orbital  planes.  The  operational  third  phase-with 
orbiting  at  an  18 520-km altitude,  providing  three-dimensional location 
to  air,  sea,  and  surface vehicles in  all kinds of  weather-would 
be com- 
plete in the mid-1980s. (AFSC   Release OIP 274.74) 
Inflation would  force even more extensive cuts in NASA  operations  if  fund- 
ing did not  increase in the next few fiscal years, Av ia t ion  Week  & Space 
Techno logy  reported  in  a  survey of  NASA  belt-tightening. The magazine 
quoted  ,VASA  Comptroller William E.  Lilly  as  saying  cost  contracts  for 
major  spacecraft  programs  had  a  %12%  inflation  rate.  The  overall 
effective  impact  of  inflation  was  7-7.576  a t   NASA,  but  these  averages 
were  much  lower  than  for  many  specific  areas.  Although  materials 
increases  were  averaging  15-20%,  particular  increases  ranged  from 
&loo%. The  7% inflation rate  in  Center  supplies was  being  absorbed 
by   using  inventories  and by  decreasing the  use  of  supplies. Utility  cost 
increases of  20-30%  a t  NASA Centers had been countered by lower use- 
a  30% cut-but  Centers were still paying  l0-15%  more.  Overall wage 
rates  could  increase  20-30%  over  the  next  three  years,  Lilly  had  said, 
because  of  a  trend-setting  agreement  between  the  Boeing  Co.  and  the 
International Assn. of  Machinists and Aerospace Workers. Support serv- 
ice contracts were  showing a  7-976  yearly  inflationary  increase. 
NASA  Centers were  seeking new  solutions. At  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center,  more  fixed-price  contracts  were  being  issued,  but  predicting 
economic  changes  was  problematic,  according  to  William  R.  Mecca, 
GSFC  Deputy  Director  for  Administration  and  Management.  GSFC  had 
begun  limiting  data  acquisition  f rom   spacecraft  and  drawing  up  con- 
the  International 
tingency  plans  fo r   many  unmanned  programs-like 

209 

2  December 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Sun-Earth  Explorer  Spacecraft  program  and  the  International  Ultra- 
save costs i f   primary plans began to exceed 
violet Explorer program-to 
spending limits. 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  had  reduced  its  work  force  by  8 5 0 -  
June  1973  and had  closed  47  structures.  Lewis Re- 
about  15%-since 
search Center had cut its power needs 776, using a  transient  data-record- 
ing system to reduce operating hours.  Johnson Space Center, along with 
others, had  been hiring young persons  rather  than  high-salaried  experi- 
enced  persons.  JSC  electric  costs  were  still  increasing  even  though  the 
Center had  reduced i t s  exterior lighting by 75% and its interior lighting 
by  33%. Kennedy  Space  Center  was  phasing  construction  for  shuttle 
and other programs,  outfitting facilities to meet minimum initial  opera- 
tional  requirements  rather  than  for  long-range  mission  models.  Con- 
sideration  was being  given  to  advance procurement  for lower costs and 
for  preventing  slowdowns from  shortages.  (Covault, Aw  Wk, 2  Dec  74, 
3 W 2  ; Lilly, interview, 19  Sept 75) 
3 December:  NASA’s Pioneer  1 1 ,  traveling  toward  Jupiter  since 5 April  1973 
launch, flew within 42 000 km of  the planet’s cloud tops and sent back the 
first  polar  images-as  well  as  magnetospheric, temperature,  and  other 
swinging  on  toward  Saturn  [see   2  N o v . 3   Jan. 
measurement-before 
19751.  (NASA  Pioneer  Mgr,  interview,  12  Nov  75;  Hall,  Opp,  et  al., 
Science, 2 May 75,445-8) 
The European  Space Research Organization announced the  award  of  three 
contracts  totaling nearly  $66 million  for design and development of  two 
spacecraft  and  one  satellite  communications payload : $25.2 million  to 
GEC-Marconi  (United Kingdom)  a s  the prime contractor for the MAROTS 
maritime  communications  satellite  payload  to  be  launched  in  1977 ; 
$20.76 million plus  launch  and postlaunch  support  to  Hawker  Siddeley 
Dynamics  Ltd.  (U.K.)  as  prime  contractor  fo r   the  MESH  consortium, 
for the MAROTS  spacecraft platform  and satellite integration m d  support; 
and  $19.56 million  to  Dornier-System GMBh  (Germany)  a s  prime  con- 
tractor  fo r  the  STAR consortium, for  the  ISEE-B  International Sun-Earth 
Explorer, to be launched with ISEE-A  in  1977 in a cboperative NASA-ESRO 
program. 
Norway,  the  first  nonmember country  to  participate  in  an  ESRO  proj- 
ect, had agreed to contribute 1.5% to the MAROTS development budget of 
about  $97 million  and  to   share  in  fixed  common  costs.  (ESRO Release, 
3 Dec 74; A v  W k ,  2 Dec 74 ,3 8 )  
4  December:   The  NASA  Space  Shuttle  Cost  and  aeview  Committee  recom- 
mended  program  changes  to  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, Administrator,  to 
reduce  rising  costs.  It  also  reported  design  changes made  necessary by 
thermal  weight  constraints.  The  committee, headed  by  NASA  Associate 
Administrator  fo r  Manned Space Flight  John  F. Yardley,  recommended 
delaying  the  second  shuttle  orbiter  flight,  refurbishing  the  first  test 
orbiter  earlier  than  planned  instead.  Deferrals  of  three  months  to  two 
years  were  recommended for  components of  the  second  shuttle  launch 
complex a t  Kennedy Space Center, which had  originally been scheduled 
fo r   completion  about  the  time  of  the  first  shuttle  flights.  Also  recom- 
mended was  a  delay in the development of  improved spacesuits and port- 
able  life  support  systems  for  extravehicular  activities  from  the  space 
shuttle.  Instead,  EVAS  would  use Apollo-style hardware.  Emergency bar- 
riers  on  shuttle  runways  and  a  building  a t  KSC  fo r   installing  fairings 
210 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

4  December 

and  parachutes on  solid-fueled rocket motors were  judged  unnecessary. 
Some tests were recommended for  cancellation. 
Design  changes  to  accommodate  thermal  and  weight  constraints  in- 
cluded payload doors of  a  graphite epoxy  composite that  expanded less 
when  heated  and  weighed  400  kg  less  than  the  aluminum  composite 
originally  planned  for  use.  Solid-fueled-rocket separation  motors  that 
would  provide a higher  thrust  level  for  a  shorter  time when  separating 
the  large  solid-propellant boosters  from  the   orbiter  after  launch  were 
found  to  cause no  orbiter  darnage-solving 
a  possible  problem  antici- 
pated  with  the  original  separation  motors.  The  committee  also  recom- 
mended  switching to  a  new  thermal  coating material  for   the  external 
liquid-hydrogen  and   liquid-oxygen tank  to  prevent  tank  overheating 
dur ing  launch.  (NASA  prog off,  interview, 22 Sept 75; A v   Wk, 9 Sept 74, 
9-10;  NASA Off  of  Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar) 
Dr.  George M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy  Administrator, was  presented  the  1974 
Rockefeller Public Service Award fo r  Administration by President Ford 
a t   the  Mayflower  Hotel  in   Washington,  D.C.  As  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator fo r  Manned Space Flight a t  NASA Hq.,  Deputy Director of 
Manned  Space  Flight  Center,  and  then  MSC  Manager  of  the  Apollo 
Spacecraft  Program  before  becoming  NASA  Deputy  Administrator  in  
1969, Dr.  Low  had  been  responsible  for  development  of  the  Mercury 
and Gemini programs, an   original  planner  of  the  Apollo  program,  and 
negotiator  for   the  US.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project.  He  had  
joined  the  National Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics in   1949 and 
moved to NASA when i t  was established in  1958. 
Dr.  Robert  M.  White,  Administrator  of  the  National  Oceanic  and 
Atmospheric  Administration,  also  received  one  of  the  five  $10 000 
awards,  for  physical  resource development  and  protection.  Established 
by  John  D.  Rockefeller  I1  in   1952  to  honor  excellence  in  the  career 
Civil  Service,  the  awards  were  administered  by  the  Princeton  Univ. 
Woodrow Wilson School of  Public and International  Affairs.  ( P D ,  9 Dec 
74,  1528-9;  Marshall S tar ,  11 Dec  74; N A S A  Ac t iv i t ies ,   15 Dec  74, 8; 
NASA Biog) 
5 December: Dr.  James  6. Fletcher, NASA  Administrator, signed a Memoran- 
dum  of  Understanding on  cooperation in  energy research  and  develop- 
ment  with  the Electric Power Research  Institute  (EPRI)   . Dr.  Chauncey 
Starr, President of  EPRI,  had signed the  agreement 24 Nov.  The agencies 
would  cooperate  in   applying  safety,  reliability,  and  quality  assurance 
techniques developed for the space program to  electric power generating 
plants and in  research and technology development for  advanced energy 
systems.  (NASA  OAST  pro,  interview,  3 Sept 75 ;  NASA  Release 74-325) 
6  December:  The  International  Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization 
announced it had  contracted with Hughes Aircraft  C o .  for  three  Intelsat 
IVA  satellites in   addition  to  three  ordered  in   1973. The  amendment to  
the  1973  contract  totaled  more  than  $40  million,  including  launch 
support  services but  not  possible performance incentive payments.  The  - 
first of  the additional  satellites, with twice the communications capability 
of  the Intelsat  IV  series, was to be delivered in  1977.  (INTELSAT  Release 
74-67) 
9 December: Wind-tunnel tests a t  Ames  Research  Center  had  indicated  that 
NASA’s swing-wing aircraft configuration could provide a practical design 
for   an   advanced  commercial  jet  transport,  NASA  announced. The  a ir-  
craft’s straight wing, mounted above the  body, could be turned to various 
211 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

9  December 
oblique  angles  for  different  flight  speeds  and  was  proposed  for  slow 
and fast  design versions. Operating a t  speeds of  800 to  1400 km  per  h r ,  
the  needle-nosed fast  version would  maintain  relatively economical fuel 
consumption-13  000 to  1 7  000 km per cu m per passenger-about 
twice 
the  fuel  economy  of  supersonic  transports  like  the  Concorde  o r   the 
Russian Tu-144. For slower flight, the wing would be fixed a t  right angles 
to the fuselage, f o r  landings and takeoffs with minimum power and noise. 
The  design's  flexibility  would  permit  shorter  flight  times  with  little 
increase in  overall fuel consumption. (NASA Release 7 6 3 1 8 )  
*  A  breathing  system developed by  Johnson  Space Center  using  technology 
for  solid-propellant rocket-motor cases was  being  evaluated in  the  field 
by Houston firemen. New a i r  tanks were built of  spiral-wound glass fiber 
over  an   aluminum liner  to  provide  a  lighter  and  more  durable  system. 
(NASA  Release 7 6 3 2 0 )  
10  December-I6  January  1975: NASA  launched West German-built Helios  I 
solar  probe  at  2:11  am  EST  from  Eastern  Test  Range  on  a Titan  I I I E  
Centaur vehicle, putting  it on a  path  that would  take it closer to  the  sun 
than  any  spacecraft  had  yet  traveled.  The  spacecraft  first  entered  a 
parking  orbit  and  then  an   elliptical  orbit  of  the  sun  with  a  0 . 9 8 5 - ~ ~  
aphelion,  0.3095-~u  perihelion,  190.15-day period,  and  0.02"  inclina- 
tion  to   the  ecliptic.  All  vehicle  systems  performed  normally  during 
launch. 
The  Titan-Centaur  carried  a  Delta  solid-fueled  rocket-motor  kick 
stage a s  a 4th  stage and required seven interdependent  ignition  systems. 
Following separation  from  the  1st stage,  the  Centaur,  with  2300  kg 
of  propellants  remaining,  began  maneuvers  to   provide  data  fo r   the 
1977 Mariner Jupiter-Saturn mission, future synchronous orbit missions, 
and  continued  development  of  the  launch  vehicle.  Maneuvers included 
a  one-hour coast  and  restart,  three-hour coast with  thermal maneuvers, 
boost-pump  operation  experiment  with  igniter  on,  and  zero-g  boost- 
pump dead-head operation. 
Helios 1  was to  investigate the fundamental solar processes and  solar- 
terredrial  relations  by  studying  the  solar  wind,  magnetic  and  electric 
fields, cosmic  rays,  and  cosmic dust  from launch  to  the  first  perihelion, 
0.31  AU   from  the  sun .   The  370-kg spool-shaped spacecraft  carried  10 
instruments-7  West  German  and  3  U.S.-to  measure  the  solar  wind, 
magnetic  field, and related  shock waves;  study  radio waves and oscilla- 
tions  in   the  electron plasma;  measure  the  spatial  gradient  of  solar  and 
galactic  cosmic  rays;  observe  composition  and  dynamics  of  inter- 
planetary  du s t ;   and  monitor  x-ray  activity  of  the  solar  disc. 
By  16  Jan.  orientation  and  spin-rate maneuvers had  been  conducted 
and the high-gain antenna despun and pointed toward the earth. Control 
of  the  spacecraft  had  been  passed  to  Germany.  Fnstruments had  been 
turned  on  and  were  operating  normally  with  two  exceptions:  One  of 
two  antennas  in  the  U.S.  plasma-wave experiment  had  jammed  during 
extension and unrolled inside the drive enclosure, producing an  electrical 
ground  and  degrading  all  low-frequency data.  Rewinding the  antenna 
had  not  eliminated the  ground.  In  addition,  operation  of  the high-gain 
antenna  for  the  West  German  plasma  experiment  produced  a  space 
charge near the spacecraft, preventing detection of  electrons with energies 
less than 100 ev. The medium-gain antenna would be used during selected 
periods. 

ID 

212 

10 December-16  January 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
To prepare for its demanding mission, Helios  1 ,  designed to withstand 
the  highest  temperatures  ever  demanded  of  a  spacecraft,  had  been 
successfully subjected  to  six  days  a t   644 K  (700"F), the  highest  heat 
load  expected  a t   0.3  AU,  during  spring  1974  tests  a t   Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory.  The  spacecraft  had  also  withstood  radiation  11  times  the 
solar intensity  a t  the  outer edge  of  the  earth's  atmosphere. Independent 
payload  components,  louver  systems,  optical  surface  reflectors  and 
mirrors,  and  several  layers  of  insulation  dissipated  spacecraft  heat.  I n  
addition  the  spacecraft  spun  a t   one  revolution  per  second  to  distribute 
evenly the heat coming from the sun. Temperatures within the experiment 
area  were kept  between 263  and 303 K  (14" and 86'F). 
A  second Helios spacecraft  would  be  launched  in  12  to  18 mos  w d  
information  from  the  two  spacecraft  would  be  received  simultaneously 
from  widely  differing  locations,  for  comparison  with  each  other  and  
with data  from Pioneer- and  IMP-class spacecraft. 
Helios,  the  third  cooperative  U S .   and  West  German  project,  was 
agreed  on  during  1966 talks.  Following technical  discussions and  mis- 
sion  d f in i t ion ,  a  Memorandum  of  understanding  was  signed  10  June 
1969.  NASA  provided  three  scientific  instruments,  spacecraft  technical 
support,  launch  vehicle  and  operations,  and  initial  tracking  and  data 
acquisition  and  flight  operations. The German Federal Ministry  for  Re- 
search  and  Technology  (BMFT) designed,  built,  and  tested  the  space- 
c ra f t   and  provided  seven  scientific  instruments,  data  acquisition  and 
analysis, and spacecraft control. 
Goddard  Space Flight  Center was  responsible for  NAS-4  project  man- 
agement;  Lewis  Research Center  had  responsibility  for  the  launch  ve- 
hicle.  (NASA MORS, 6 Dec 74, 16 Jan 75; NASA  PAO,  interview, 10 Dec 74; 
NASA Releases 74-314,75-68;  UPI,  N Y T ,  9 Dec 74, 45)  
10  December:  A Memorandum of  Understanding  on  space cooperation was 
signed  at  NASA  Hq.  by  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher, NASA  Administrator;  Dr. 
Robert  M.  White,  Administrator  of  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmos- 
pheric  Administration ; and  Prof. Maurice Levy, President  of  France's 
Centre National  d'Etudes  Spatiales.  France  agreed  to  design  and  build 
a  data-collection system  for  Tiros-N meteorological satellite  scheduled 
for  launch  in   late  1977 and  for  the  seven NOAA  operational  satellites to 
follow.  (NASA  Photo No.  74-H-1170) 
9  A  United  Air  Lines,  Inc.,  747  airliner  carrying  instruments  to  monitor 
pollution  in the  upper  atmosphere  for  NASA's Global Air  Sampling P ro -  
gram  completed  flight testing  and was  certified a s  airworthy. Managed 
by  Lewis  Research  Center,  GASP  would  eventually  use  four  747  jets 
measuring  dust particles  and  gases  a t   altitudes  of  6000  to  12 000 m  to 
study  the effects  of  emissions  from  jet  aircraft  and   other  pollution 
sources  on  the  earth's  atmosphere  and  weather.  (LeRC  Release  74-80; 
Lewis News ,  27 Dec 74) 
11 December:   Edwin  C.  Kilgore,  NASA  Deputy  Associate Administrator  for 
Center  Operations,  had  been  named  Director  fo r  Management  Opera- 
tions, Langley Research Center, effective 1 March 1975, NASA  announced. 
Kilgore would assume the functions of  LaRC  Director for Administration 
Raymond  G .  Romatowski  and  most  of  the  functions  of  Director  for 
Center  Development  and  External  Affairs  T.  Melvin  Butler.  While  a t  
NASA  Hq.,  Kilgore  had  served  as  Acting  Associate  Administrator  for 
Aeronautics and Space Technology and also a s  Deputy Associate Admin- 
213 

11 December 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
istrator  (Management)  in  the  same  office.  I n   1973 Kilgore  had  been 
awarded  NASA’s Outstanding  Leadership Medal  for  developing  an  im- 
proved system for  managing advanced technology programs. 
Romatowski  had   accepted  the  position  a t   NASA  Hq.  of  Assistant Ad- 
ministrator  for   Personnel Programs.  Butler  would  retire  in   December. 
(NASA  Release 74-324A) 
*  The universe was  16 billion  yrs   old,  6 billion  y r s   older  than  earlier  esti- 
mates,  according to  California  Institute  of  Technology  astronomer Dr. 
Allen  R Sandage,  the   Washington  Post  reported  after  an   interview. 
After  10  yrs  of  observing  50  galaxies,  Dr.  Sandage  had   dated  the 
galaxies from 14  billion yrs  ago, meaning that 2 billion yrs were required 
for the primordial gas cloud to  cool enough for  stars to  begin forming. 
Working with  Swiss  astronomer Gustav Tamman, Dr.  Sandage had   ar-  
rived  at  his  new  date when  his  observations had   led  him  to   recalculate 
the   Hubble  Constant,  the  rate  of  speed  for   the  expansion  of  the  uni- 
verse.  He  had   checked  his  figures by  dating  stars  in  globular  clusters 
in  the  Milky Way  and  by measuring the amounts of  metal  still burning 
in  their atmospheres.  (O’Toole, W Post, 11 Dec 74, A l )  
13  December:   A  golden  age   of  planetary  exploration  was  a  realistic  pos- 
sibility,  Science  quoted  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  as 
saying  in   an   interview.  Dr.  Fletcher  believed  space  science was  likely 
to  be a major  thrust of  the  space program  in  the  198Os, although NASA’s 
budget was  vulnerable to  cuts in  the  present  political  climate.  He  ruled 
out  manned  programs  otlier  than  the  space  shuttle,  but  NASA  would 
not  become  an   all-purpose technology  development  agency  for  energy, 
ground  transportation,  and  similar nonspace  systems.  Applications and  
materials  processing would  be  important.  Dr.  Fletcher  believed  NASA’s 
program was acceptable to Congress and to the White House and  that  its 
future problem would not be wholesale cancellation of  the space program 
but surviving annual budget cuts. 
Increased competition for  money  and  staff  attention  in   congressional 
space-related  committees  could  aggravate  NASA’s budgetary  problems, 
according to  Science.  Observers had  predicted  that  Congress would  be 
faced  with  a  choice  between  the  shuttle  and   continuation  of  the  space 
science and applications program. The decision could rest  on the support 
of  the  shuttle  program  by   organized labor,  as   it  had  in   a  1972 Senate 
attempt to kill the  shuttle. Some scientists had suggested that a  $1-billion 
NASA  budget  cut  would  be  better  for   science  than  a  $lOO-million  cut 
because  the  former would  entail  canceling the  shuttle, in   theory  freeing 
money  for  space  science.  Dr.  Fletcher  had  maintained, however,  that  a 
balance between  programs would  be kept.  (Hammond, Science,  13 Dec 
74, 1011-3) 
Three  Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory astronomers  announced they  had 
photographed  large-scale  structures,  hot  and  cold  regions,  that  were 
probably  convection  currents  in  the  atmosphere of  Alpha  Orionis  (the 
star Betelguese  in   the  Constellation  Or ion) ,   500  light  years  from  the  
earth. The announcement, made in Florida a t  the American Astronomical 
Society’s  annual meeting,  was  based  on  photos  made  28 March  using 
the   four-meter Mayall  Telescope.  A  new  technique  of  interferometry 
analysis  had   permitted reconstruction  of  the  star’s  image.  In   resolving 
the   disc  of  Betelguese,  the Kitt  Peak  astronomers became  the  first  ob- 
servers  to   distinguish  actual  forms  on  a  star  other  than  the  sun.  (NSF 
Release  7 6 2 2 9 )  

214 

15  December 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
15  December:  NASA%  Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology S a t e l l i t e r ou t in e ly  
surveying  crops,  forests, watersheds, and mineral  deposits on the  earth 
since  its  23  July  1972 launch-had 
transmitted  photos  of  seven major 
Soviet  antiballistic  missile  launch  and  radar  installations  a t   the  Sary 
Shagan  development site  in   southern  Russia,  the  Sun  D iego   Union  re- 
ported.  The newspaper  pointed  out the ERTS  satellites might  be  used  to 
discover whether the Soviets were violating arms limitation  agreements. 
(Macomber, Sun D iego  Union, 1 5  Dec 75 )  
16 December:  The first map of  gravity forces on the moon’s  f a r  side indicated 
that  the  strong  gravitational tug  of  mascons  (mass  concentrations)  on 
the lunar  face was caused by lava flooding rather  than by buried meteor- 
ites a s  previously thought,  California  Institute  of  Technology planetary 
scientist  Dr.  Alfred  J.  Fe r ra r i   reported  in  a  press  release  based  on  a 
paper to be published  in Science. The map was  developed from measure- 
ments of  the  orbits  of  two  small  subsatellites left  orbiting  the moon  by 
Apo l lo   15 and 16 in  July  1971 and April  1972 and  of  Lunar  Orbiter  5 
(launched  1 Aug.  1967 ) .  Basins on  the moon’s  f a r  side,  not  lava-filled, 
exerted only weak gravitational  forces on orbiting spacecraft, while lava- 
flooded basins on the front side exerted a strong pull.  (Miles, LA   T ime s ,  
1 7  Dec  74;  Fe r ra r i  interview, 20 Nov  75;  Ferrari,  Science,  27 June  75, 
1927-1 300) 
17  December:  The U.S.S.R.  launched Meteor  20 meteorological satellite from 
Plesetsk  into  orbit  with  an   896-km apogee,  841-km perigee,  102.3-min 
period, and 81.2’  inclination. The satellite carried  instruments to  photo- 
graph clouds and snow cover on the day and night sides of  the earth and 
collect data  on thermal  energy reflected and emitted by the earth and  its 
atmosphere, for day-to-day weather service. (GSFC  Wk2y S S R ,  12-18  Dec 
74; Tass, FBIS-SOV, 19  Dec 74, U1; SBD ,  19 Dec 74,270) 
17-19  December:  A major  review of  the  first Viking  lander  spacecraft  was 
held a t  Langley Research Center. The lander was  approved for  shipment 
to Kennedy Space Center in January 1975. The review followed success- 
ful completion of  critical surface simulation testing  [see 18 Sept.-21  Oct., 
24 Nov.-14  Dec.] . (Langley Researcher, 20 Dec 74) 
18 Decembe i-6   January 1975: NASA launched Symphonie  I, French and West 
German  experimental  communications  satellite,  a t   9 :39  pm  EST  from 
Eastern Test Range on a three-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch 
vehicle.  The  402-kg  satellite entered  a  transfer  orbit  with  a  38 071-km 
apogee, 402-km perigee,  688.2-min  period,  and  13.2’  inclination. 
Nine  seconds after  the Thor-Delta’s 3rd  stage separated  from the  2nd 
stage, the  inertial measurement unit  (the altitude-sensing portion  in  the 
2nd-stage guidance system)  stopped functioning, but  the failure did  not 
affect the path  of  the already  separated  3rd  stage.  I n  addition, the main 
engine cutoff was achieved by  fuel depletion with  430 kg  liquid oxygen 
remaining  instead  of  with  the  planned  depletion.  The  anomalies, which 
did not affect the mission, were under investigation. 
Ground controllers in West Germany activated the apogee kick motor, 
the  first  using  liquid  propellant,  a t   6:OO  pm  EST  21  Dec.,  putting  the 
spacecraft  in  circular  geosynchronous  orbit  with  35 810-km  apogee, 
35 767-km perigee, 23-hr 56-min period, and 0 . 3 O   inclination. The space- 
craft was despun and three-axis-stabilized and its large solar panels were 
successfully deployed 24 Dec.  Symphonie  1 drifted eastward to  its  final 
station  a t   1 1 5 O  W  longitude  over  the  west  coast  of  Africa  and  began 
operations 2 Jan. 1975. 

215 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

18 December4  January 
The  NASA  mission  o b j e c t i v e t o  launch the  spacecraft into  a  transfer 
orbit  that  would  permit  the  onboard  propulsion  system  to   place  i t   in  
an   accurate synchronous  orbit-was 
satisfied  and  the  mission  was  ad- 
judged  successful 6  Jan.  Symphonie  I  would  provide  1200  telephone 
circuits, 8 voice channels, and 2 color TV channels for  experimental com- 
munications between Europe, Africa, and South America. 
The first  of  two  Symphonie  satellites, provided  for by  a  French-West 
Germany  agreement  signed  June  1967,  the  satellite  was  developed  by 
a French-German industrial consortium under the direction of  the French 
Centre National  d’gtudes  Spatiales  ( CNES) and the West German Gesell- 
schaft  fur  Weltraumforschung  ( G f w ) .   I n  October  1973 NASA  agreed  to 
provide  the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis and 
in  June  1974 signed  a launch services contract with  CNES-GfW.  Goddard 
Space Flight Center in  cooperation with French and West German ground 
stations was  responsible  for   tracking  the  spacecraft during  launch  and 
transfer orbit operations. GSFC  was also responsible for the launch vehicle. 
(NASA   MORS,  13 Dec  74, 6  Jan  75; NASA  prog off,  interview, 29 Aug 75; 
NASA Release 74-316) 
1 8   December : Post-storage  checkout  was  proceeding  a t   Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center  on  the  first  propulsive  stage  and  instrument  unit  of  the 
Saturn  I B   launch  vehicle  (SA-210)  for  the  July  1975  Apollo-Soyuz 
Test  Project  mission.  Fin-mounting brackets  on  the  stage,  taken  out  of 
storage 27 Nov.,  had  been  rod-peened  (pounded with  a  small bundle  of 
rods  to  place  compressive  stresses  in  the  surface  of  the  material)  to 
avoid  the  stress-corrosion  problems  that  had  delayed  the  Sky lab   4 
launch  in  November  1973.  Bolt  holes  for  the  fins  had  been  rounded 
to eliminate stress points. The complete Saturn vehicle was to be  stacked 
in   January  1975.  (MSFC  Release  74-241;  Spaceport  News ,   12 Dec  74) 
e  Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Theodore Wydeven,  Jr.,  had developed 
a  new  technique  for   coating salt  lenses, NASA  announced.  Lenses  made 
from  large  salt  crystals  had  long  been  used  in  scientific  applications 
because  they  were  transparent  to  infrared  light,  bu t   they  were  suscep- 
tible  to  fogging  from  even  slight  moisture.  Using  a  method  from  his 
water  purification  experiments, Dr. Wydeven had prepared  a Teflon-like 
membrane  in  an  electric  discharge  to  coat  a  salt  lens,  a t   a  few  cents 
a  coating.  The coating  increased  resistance  to  moisture  and  enhanced 
optical quality of  the lens because of  the film’s  antireflection properties. 
(NASA  Release 74-319) 
18-20  December : An  experimental  communications  linkup between  Mission 
Control  Center  a t  Johnson  Space Center  and  the Soviet mission  control 
near Moscow was made  by U.S.  and  Soviet flight  controllers rehearsing 
for   the  July  1975  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  mission.  Procedures  fo r  
interfacing  voice,  video,  teletype,  and  telex  facsimile  between  the  two 
control  centers  through  the  tracking  networks  were  checked  out.  A 
10-hr procedural  simulation of  the  launches  of  the  Apollo  and  SOYUZ 
spacecraft, with  exchange  of  status reports  and data  on  spacecraft posi- 
tion,  was  held  at  JSC  the  third  day.  The  first  JSC  Mission  Control 
Center simulation with Apollo crewmen was scheduled for mid-February 
1975, with  the  first all-up simulation  with  both  control  centers and both 
Apollo  and  Soyuz   crews  in  late  March  1975.  ( JSC   Release  74-275; 
Chriss, LA  T imes ,  24 Dec 7 4 , 8 ;  JSC  PIO, interview, 15 Sept 75)  
216 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1W4 
19  December 
19  December:  Nelson  A.  Rockefeller  was  sworn  in  as  Vice  President  of 
the  United  States  after  the  House  confirmed  his  nomination.  The 
Senate had  confirmed the nomination  10 Dec.  (CRY 10 Dec  74, D1343; 
19 Dec 74, D1413, D1416) 
2Q  December:  Johnson  Space  Center  announced  selection  of  Singer  Co. 
Simulated Products  Div.  for  an  $8-million cost-plus-award fee contract 
to   develop  a  space  shuttle  orbiter  aeroflight  simulator  fo r   crew  train- 
ing.  Singer would  design, manufacture,  and  test  a  simulator  that would 
include  a  high-fidelity  crew  station,  out-of-the-window color  visual 
scene,  motion  base,  and  flight  computer  and  simulator  interface  to 
simulate  vehicle  flight  dynamics  and  motion  during  the  atmospheric 
phase of  missions.  ( JSC  Release 7&276) 
21 December;  The U.S.S.R.  launched Mohi ya ZZ-11  from Plesetsk  into orbit 
with  a  40 630-km apogee,  656-km perigee,  12-hr 16.8-min period,  and 
62.9”  inclination.  The  comsat  would  help  provide  long-distance  tele- 
phone  and  telegraph  radio  communications and  transmit  U.S.S.R.  TV 
programs  to  stations  of  the  Orbita  network.  (GSFC  W k l y   S SR ,   19-25 
Dec  74; Tass, FBIS-SOV, 24 Dec  74, U1;  SBD, 27 Dec  74 ,290 )  
23  December:  Capt.  Lee  R.  Scherer  (USN ,   Ret.),  Flight  Research  Center 
Director,  had  been  named  Director  of  Kennedy Space  Center effective 
in  mid-January  1975, NASA  announced.  He  would  succeed  Dr.  Kurt  H. 
Debus,  who  retired  9 Oct.  Before  going  to  FRC  in  1971, Capt.  Scherer 
had  been  Lunar  Exploration  Director  in   the  NASA  Hq. Apollo  Program 
Office,  directing  the  scientific exploration  of  the  first  five manned  land- 
ings on the moon. He had  been Manager of  the Lunar Orbiter Program 
1963-1967.  (NASA  Ann, 23 Dec 74 )  
0  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  announced  the  award  of  a  two-phase plan- 
ning  study  contract  for  the  space  transportation  system  (STS)  to  Mc- 
Donne11 Douglas Astronautics Co.  Phase  1 ,  funded  at  $116 214 for  six 
months,  would  define  a  master  scheduling  concept  for  effective use  of 
the  space shuttle, interim  upper  stage, space tug,  and Spacelab. Phase 2, 
funded  at  $183 240  for  an  additional  nine  months,  would  validate  a 
master  planning  technique  and  establish  specifications for  scheduling. 
(MSFC Release 7 4 2 4 2 )  
25  December:  Tass  announced  that  the  flight  of  the  U.S.S.R.’s  Salyut 3 
orbiting  space  station,  launched  25  June,  would  soon  end,  after  com- 
pletion  of  a  six-month program  that  doubled  the  flight  duration  origi- 
nally  planned.  During  its  six months  operation  the  spacecraft had  per- 
formed  more  than  400  scientific  and  technical  experiments,  received 
more  than  8000  control  commands  from  the  earth,  conducted  more 
than 200 “dynamic operaiions,” conducted 70 TV transmission and 2500 
telemetric  sessions,  fired  its  thrusters  more  than  500 000  times,  and 
generated  5000 kw  of  electricity with  its  solar panels.  A  two-man crew, 
launched  3 July  on  Soyuz 14, boarded  the  space  station  and  spent  1 5  
days living  and working  in  space. A  second crew, launched 2 6  Aug.  on 
SOYUZ 15, failed in  several attempts to dock with the station and returned 
to  the earth  after 48  h r s  in  space. Since that  time Salyut 3 had  operated 
in  an  unmanned  automatic  mode.  The  Western  press  later  speculated 
that  the  mission  was  being  ended  to  prevent  any  interference with  the 
mission  of  Salyut  4% [see 2 6  Dec.-9  Feb.  19751. The  retrorockets  were 
fired  24  Jan.  1975  and  the  station  reentered  the  atmosphere  over  the 

217 

25 December 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
Pacific Ocean after 213 days in space.  (TASS, FBIS-SOV, 26 Dec 74, U1-2; 
24 Jan  75, U1 ;   GSFC  SSR ,  28 Feb  75; Soviet Aero, 6 Jan  7 5 , l )  
26 December-9  February 1975: The U.S.S.R.  launched Salyut 4 space station 
into  earth  orbit  and  16 days  later  launched  S o y w  1 7  with  a  two-man 
crew to join the Salyut and establish a manned orbital laboratory. 
Salyut  4  was  launched  26  Dec.  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome  near 
Tyuratam  into  orbit  with  a  252-km  apogee,  2 14 km   perigee,  89.2-min 
period, and 51.6” inclination. Tass announced the purpose of  the mission 
was  to  test  the design, onboard  systems, and  equipment and  to  conduct 
scientific  studies  and  experiments  in  space.  The  news  agency  also  re- 
ported  that  onboard  systems and  equipment were  operating  normally. 
The  Western  press  reported  that  major  maneuvers  2 9   and  30  Dee. 
put  the  station  a t   a  record  high  altitude  for  a  Salyut  space  station, 
reaching  an orbit with a  350-km apogee and 337-km perigee by  31 Dec. 
Soyu z   17, launched at 2:43  am  11 Jan.  1975 local time  (4:4$3 pm EST 
10  Jan.)  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome,  carried  cosmonauts  Lt.  Col. 
Aleksey  A.  Gubarev  and  Georgy M.  Grechko  into  orbit  with  a  249-km 
apogee,  186-km perigee,  88.9-min  period,  and  51.6”  inclination.  Tass 
announced the mission would carry  out joint experiments with Salyut 4 ,  
including  a  comprehensive checkup of  the  spacecraft’s onboard  systems 
in  various  flight  conditions.  In  a  launch-day  interview with  Tass, Maj. 
Gen.  Georgy T.  Beregovoy, head  of  the  Soviet cosmonaut training cen- 
ter,  said  that  Soyu z   17.wa.s  in  “no  way  connected  with  additional 
checkups of  ‘Soyuz’ systems before its  rendezvous with  ‘Apollo.’ ” 
An  orbital  correction  raised  the  spacecraft  to  an  orbit  with  a  354- 
km  apogee,  293-km  perigee,  90.7-min  period,  and  51.6”  inclination, 
permitting  Soyuz   17 to   dock  with  Salyut  4  on  1 2  Jan.  The  spacecraft 
w a s   moved  automatically  to  a  distance  of  10 m  from  the  station  and 
then  the  cosmonauts completed  docking  by  manual  control.  The  crew 
entered  the space stztion, switched on the power  and  radio  transmitters, 
and inspected the scientific equipment. 
I n   a  14 Jan.  interview with  Tass, Dr.  Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov, cos- 
monaut  who  had  helped  design  the  space  station,  said  that  Salyut  4 
improvements included  three  panels  of  solar  batteries  that  were  posi- 
tioned  like  the  tail  of  an  aircraft  and  could  be  individually  oriented 
toward  the  sun. The panels permitted the energy supply in  the  station  to 
be  replenished without  using  fuel  for  spacecraft  orientation.  Other  im- 
provements had  been  introduced  in  the  flight control  systems. 
During  a  broadcast  from  the  spacecraft over Moscow  Radio  15 Jan., 
Gubarev  and  Grechko  said  they  had  set  up  the  first  Soviet space-based 
teletype  communications  station.  The  teletype  could  receive  and  copy 
communications  from  the  earth  while  the  cosmonauts  were  busy  a t  
other tasks. Tass reported  1 7  Jan.  that the cosmonauts, neither  of  whom 
had  been  in  space  before,  had  become  accustomed  to   weightlessness 
about the fifth or sixth day of  flight. 
During nearly 30 days aboard Salyut 4 ,  Gubarev and Grechko used  a 
newly  developed high-resolution solar  telescope to  study  solar  phenom- 
ena,  x-ray telescopes and  sensors to  study  the  flux  of  x-radiation from 
celestial  bodies,  and  a n   infrared  spectrometer  to   examine  the  earth’s 
radiation.  The  cosmonauts also  studied  effects  of  weightlessness on  the 
human  vestibular  function,  cardiovascular  system,  and  blood ; made 
earth resources observations;  and studied the earth’s upp$r atmosphere. 
They  resprayed  two  telescope  mirrors  dulled  by  exposure  to  space; 
218 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

26  December-9  February 

carried  out  biological  “Oasisy’  experiments  using  insects,  micro- 
organisms,  tissue  cultures,  and  plants;  and  tried  recycling water,  con- 
densed from  the  cabin  atmosphere, for  drinking  and  food  preparation. 
The  crew began  preparations  for  their  return  to  earth 9 Feb.,  trans- 
ferring equipment to Soyuz 17. The cosmonauts boarded Soyuz 17 and 
undocked  from the  space station a t  11 :08  am Baykonur  time  (1  :08 am 
EST ) .   Soyuz 17 softlanded in  the U.S.S.R.  110 km  northeast  of  Tselino- 
grad, Kazakhstan, “in  complex meteorological conditions”  after 29 days 
13 hrs 20 min in space. The Soyuz 17 cosmonauts had broken the previous 
23-day 18-hr 22-min Soviet record  for time in  space set by the Soyuz 11 
crew  on  Salyut  1 (6-30  June  1971)  before  they  were killed  during  re- 
entry.  On-the-spot and  later  medical  checks  showed  that  the  Soyuz 17 
cosmonauts had “withstood well the long space flight.” 
Salyut  4 was the fourth  space station orbited by  the U.S.S.R.  Salyut  1 
had  been  launched  19  April  1971.  A  three-man  crew,  launched  on 
Soyuz  10, docked with  the  station  24 April  but  returned  to  earth with- 
out  entering.  The  Soyuz  11 crew,  launched  6  June  1971,  boarded  the 
station  and  conducted  scientific  experiments  for  24  days  before  their 
reentry tragedy. 
Salyut  2 was  launched  into  orbit  3  April  1973,  but  an   explosion  o r  
wildly  firing  thrusters  sent  the  statlon  out  of  control,  tearing  off  the 
solar panels and making the  station  uninhabitable.  Salyut  3 was  orbited 
25  June  1974  [see  25  Dec.] . (GSFC   W k l y  SSR, 19-25  Dec  74;  GSFC  SSR, 
31  Dec  74;  28 Feb  75;  Tass, FBISSOV, 31  Dec 74-13 Feb 75;  SF ,  June 
75,  235;  April  75,  144-5;  O’Toole,  W Pos t ,  31  Dee  74,  A7;  UPI,  N Y T ,  
16 Jan  75,14;  SBD, 14  Jan 75,62;  LC, S&T News Alert 2645) 
30  December:  Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher, NASA  Administrator,  and Housing and 
Urban  Development  Secretary  James  T.  Lynn  signed  and  sent  to  the 
President  and  Congress their  agencies’ joint  plan  for  implementing the 
Solar  Heating  and  CooIing Demonstration Act  of  1974.  Under  the Act, 
signed 3 Sept., NASA  was  responsible for  development and  procurement 
of  solar  equipment. HUD  would coordinate the  demonstration, including 
installation  of  solar  equipment  in   residential  structures,  and  collecting 
and  disseminating  information  about  solar  energy.  ( MSFC  Release 74 -  
2 w  
0  Dr.  John  F. Victory,  former  Executive Secretary of  the National Advisory 
Committee  for  Aeronautics,  died  in   Tucson,  Ariz.,  a t   the  age  of  82. 
Dr.  Victory,  NACA’S  first  employee  when  it  was  established  in  1915, 
had  been  appointed  Secretary  of  NACA  in  1921 and  in   1948 had  been 
named  its  Executive Secretary,  responsible for NACA’S  functioning  as an 
independent  research  agency.  When  NASA  succeeded  NACA  in   1958,  h e  
served as special assistant to  Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA  Administrator, 
and he  remained  with  NASA  until  retirement  in  1960.  Dr.  Victory, who 
had been known  as “Mr.  Aviation”  in  the industry, had  received numer- 
ous awards, including a Presidential Medal for Merit, the  first Air Foun- 
dation Certificate of Recognition, the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy, 
and NACA’S  Distinguished Service Medal.  (NASA Activities, Feb 75,  18) 
31 December:  A Soviet earth station to provide US.-U.S.S.R.  Hot Line com- 
munications via  Intelsat  and Molniya satellites went  into operation. The 
comsat  station,  near  Moscow,  was  constructed  under  a  bilateral  agree- 
ment  signed  in  Washington  30 Sept.  1971 to  improve  the Washington- 
MOSCOW direct  communications link  in   an  effort to  reduce  risk  of  war. 
219 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
31 December 
(ComSatCorp Off Internat’l  Affairs,  interview, 23  Jan  75;  A&A   1971, 
1972) 
0  President  Ford  signed  S. 1283  into  P.L.  93-577,  the  Federal  Nonnuclear 
Energy  Research  and   Development Act  of  1974,  to  establish  and  con- 
duct a national program  of  basic and applied research and development, 
including but not  limited  to  demonstrations of  practical  applications, of 
all  potentially  beneficial  energy  sources  and  utilization  technologies, 
within  the  Energy  Research  and  Development Administration.  (Text; 
PD, 6 Jan 75 ,14 )  
During  December:  A  total  of  34$9 NASA  Civil  Service employees, including 
Associate  Deputy  Administrator  Willis  H.  Shapley,  retired  under  an  
“early  outy7 retirement plan  authorized by  the Civil Service Commission. 
Under  the plan employees could retire  if  they were at least 50 yrs of  age 
and had  20 yrs  of  service or  i f   they had  25 yrs  of  service, regardless of 
age.  NASA  had  requested  the  retirement  authority,  which  would  extend 
through 28 Feb.  1975, to minimize effects of  a  reduction  in  force sched- 
uled  for  February  at  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  and  of  end  of  FY 
1975  ceilings  a t   Headquarters  and  elsewhere.  NASA  also  announced  a 
plan to reassign some Headquarters employees to Centers. 
Retirees  included  50  at  Headquarters,  50  at  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center, 78 at Langley Research Center, 68 a t  MSFC, 28 a t  Lewis Research 
Center, 26 a t  Ames Research Center, 16 a t  Kennedy Space Flight Center, 
14 a t  Johnson  Space Flight  Center,  10 at  Flight  Research Center, and 8 
a t   Wallops  Flight  Center.  By  31  Dec.  NASA’s permanent  C iv i l   Service 
strength  totaled  24  619-303  over  its  end  of  FY 1975  ceiling.  (NASA 
Gen Mgt  Rev Rpt, 20 J an  7 5 , l l - 1 2 ;   NASA Ann, 12 Dec 74; NASA  Deputy 
Admin memo to Hq employees, 23 Dec 74) 
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than  $28.2 million in contracts 
of  $25000  or  more.  Among  awards  were  $2253300   to  Inscho’s  Me- 
chanical Contractors,  Inc.,  for  construction of  the X-Ray  Telescope Fa- 
cility  a t   MSFC;   also  $695 000 to  Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.  and  $687 201 
to  Martin  Marietta  Corp.,  fo r   Large  Space  Telescope  support  system 
module studies.  (MSFC  Release 75-18) 

220 

1974  in  Summary 

Launches 
The U S .  orbited 28  payloads in  22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. 
orbited 95  payloads  in   81 launches;  Italy  launched  2  payloads,  using  NASA 
launch vehicles;  and  Japan  launched  1. US .   launches  included  1 6  payloads 
in  1 4  NASA  launches and 12  spacecraft in  8 Dept.  of  Defense launches. 
For the first year since 1967 the U S .  launched no  men  into space, although 
Skylab  4  Astronauts  Gerald  P.  Carr,  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson,  and  William 
R.  Pogue  completed  the  longest  mission  yet  accomplished  by  man  when 
they  splashed down  in  the  Pacific Ocean 8 Feb.  after  84  days  in  space.  The 
U.S.S.R.  orbited  three  two-man crews  during  the  year,  including  two  crews 
to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 1 4  crew docked and worked 
aboard the  laboratory for  nearly  1 6  days, but  Soyuz 15 failed  to   dock and  it 
returned to earth after 48 hrs in  space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test 
Project  configuration  in  December. The U.S.S.R.  also launched  the  Salyut 4 
orbiting  space  station,  t o   be  joined  by  a  two-man crew  in  January  1975. 
The 1 6  NASA-launched payloads-11  paid  for by  domestic and foreign cor- 
porations  o r   foreign  governments-included  7  communications,  1 applica- 
tions  technology, 2  meteorological, and  6  scientific satellites.  These were  in 
addition  to  2  Italian-launched  cooperative  scientific  satellites.  Comsats  in- 
cluded two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications 
-Skynet  ZZA  into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet ZZB, 
Westar  1 and  2,  launched  for  Western  Union  Telegraph  Co.,  were  the  firljt 
US. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most  complex and 
versatile of  the  Applications Technology Satellites, A t s   6 ,  went  into  orbit  in 
May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunica- 
tions  to   small  inexpensive ground  stations  in  remote  areas  of  the  U S .   and 
would,  in  1975,  be  positioned  to  broadcast  educational  programs  to  5000 
villages  in  India.  Symphonie 1 was  launched  for  France  and West  Germany 
as  the  first  of  two  experimental  communications  satellites.  In‘ntelsat-ZV F-8 
was  launched  for  Communications Satellite Corp.  on  behalf  of  the  Interna- 
tional  Telecommunications Satellite  Organization,  and  Amsat  Oscar  7  for 
Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.  as a  secondary payload on the Noua 4 launch. 
The  two  meteorological  satellites  included  Synchronous  Meteorological 
Satellite  Sms I, launched  for  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Ad- 
ministration  to provide continuous day  and night images of  cloud cover over 
the U.S.  and Atlantic Ocean  for  the  first  time.  Sms 1 was  the  first meteoro- 
logical satellite in  synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was  launched a s  part  of  NOM’S 
global weather watch program. 
All  but  one  of  NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative  efforts with 
foreign  countries. Miranda  (UK-X4)  was  launched for U.K. to  measure the 
density  of  sun-reflecting particles  near  the  spacecraft  as  well  as  test  space- 
craft systems. Spain’s  first satellite-Intasat,  put  into polar  orbit as a second- 
ary payload  with N o m  &began 
studies  of  the  ionosphere. Two  spacecraft 
were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to  measure aero- 
221 

During 1974 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

nomic  parameters  of  the   upper  atmosphere and  solar  ultraviolet  radiation, 
Helios I into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to  the sun than 
any  previous  spacecraft  had   and  to   gather  extensive  new  data  on  the  sun. 
NASA  and   The  Netherlands  joined  to  orbit  The  Netherlands Astronomical 
Satellite  Am  1 to  study  stellar  w and   x-ray  sources.  NASA’s only  all-U.S. 
scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Exp lorer  5 2 ) ,  was launched into polar orbit to  
study plasma  properties  of  the  magnetosphere over  the  north  polar cap. 
A  Titan-Centaw proof-flight vehicle  carrying  a  Viking  spacecraft  model 
and  a SPHINX  satellite failed to  achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch 
operations.  The new  NASA  launch vehicle later  successfully launched Helios  1. 
Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into 
earth orbit from the  San Marco launch platform in  the  Indian Ocean  off  the  
East African coast. Sun Marc0  4 in  February carried two U.S.  and one Italian 
experiment into  orbit to  measure diurnal variations  in  the equatorial  neutral 
atmosphere. Ar ie l   5 was launched in  October for  U.K.,  to  study galactic and 
extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian  launch for  a country other than 
the U S .  or  Italy. 
Japan  launched  its  f if th   satellite,  Tansei  2-Japan’s 
first  on  a  guided 
booster. 
In  addition  to  the three  manned Soyuz  missions,  the U.S.S.R.  launched 2 
Salyut space stations;  3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 
656, and  672;  7 Molniya  comsats;  5 Meteor meteorological  satellites;  2  co- 
operative  Intercosmos;  2  Luna  lunar  probes;  and  71 spacecraft  under  the 
Cosmos designation. 

Space Science and Exploration 
Besides the new  scientific satellites, NASA  continued systematic exploration 
of  the  solar  system  as  Pioneer  11 ,  launched in   April  1973, sped  to  within 
42 000 km of  Jupiter  3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and 
its  moons,  transmitting  new  information  on  the  planet’s  weather  patterns, 
atmosphere, and  radiation  belts.  Data  from  Pioneer  11 and  its  predecessor 
Piorzeer  10, which  had   encountered Jupiter  in  December  1973 revealed  that 
Jupiter  was  hotter  than  previously estimated  and composed  largely  of  liquid 
hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around  the planet 
with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s  distinctive 
orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of  a great 
storm that  had-raged along a  400 000-km front  for   centuries. At  year’s  end 
Pioneer  11 was  speeding toward  rendezvous  with  Saturn  to  give  man  his 
closest look at that planet while Pioneer  10 raced  to CTOSS  the orbits of  Saturn, 
Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the  first spacecraft to leave the  solar 
system. 
Meanwhile Mariner  10-after  passing within  5800 km of  Venus  and send- 
ing  back new  information on particle  environment, mass,  and density of  that 
planet-made 
two  successful  flybys  of  Mercury  in   March  and  September. 
The spacecraft transmitted  data  tha t   gave  scientists mass  measurements  100 
times  better  than  previous  ones,  described  a  detached,  well-defined  bow 
shock wave,  and  showed  temperatures varying  from  90 K  on  the  night  side 
to  700 K on  the  day  side  (-300OF to  800OF). During  the  two  encounters 
the  spacecraft photographed 4576 of  the  planet’s  surface. By t h e  end  of  the 
year Mariner  10 was  headed for   a  th ird  Mercury encounter in  March  1975. 
Preparations  for   the  two  1975 Viking missions  to  Mars  continued with 
the  qualification-testing of  Viking  science  instruments,  engineering  subsys- 
222 

During  1974 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
tems,  and   entire  orbiter  and  lander  spacecraft.  During  the  last  quarter  of 
the  year  the  lander  successfully completed critical  surface  simulation  tests 
that  included subjecting  the  spacecraft  to  temperatures approx ima tkg  Mar- 
t ian  conditions and  dropping it from 0.6 m to  determine the effects of  landing 
shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. 
A  detailed spacecraft  design  fo r  the   1977 Mariner mission to  Jupiter  and  
Saturn was completed while a major effort to  find a satisfactory way to protect 
the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. 
A major new space science start,  approved in  NASA’s FY 1975 budget, was 
the  1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission  to  obtain  detailed measurements of  the 
Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and  four  atmospheric entry probes. Hughes 
Aircraft Co.  was  chosen  in   February  for   spacecraft  design,  with  an  option 
for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation 
were selected in  June. 
NASA  continued preparations to  place  the  Large Space Telescope in   earth 
orb i t  to  make  detailed  astronomical observations 10  times deeper  into  space 
than   possible  before.  During  1974,  preliminary  system  definitions  and  
advanced technological  development  were  carried  out  on  selected  elements 
of  the LST. 
Besides  preparing  for   future  missions,  scientists  continued  analysis  of 
data  accumulated from previous missions.  A Lunar  Data  Analysis  and  Syn- 
thesis program began to  correlate  existing data and  data still being collected 
by  the  five  Apollo  lunar  surface-experiment packages  (ALSEP)  left  on  the 
moon  dur ing  the  lunar  landing program. With  the conclusion  of  the  Skylab 
flight program, large volumes  of  new  data  on  the sun  and   the  earth  and  the 
most  comprehensive  inflight data yet  on man’s  adaptation  to  space flight be- 
came  available. 
During  the year  sounding rockets,  balloons,  telescopes,  and  instrumented 
aircraft  continued  to  increase  knowledge  of  the  universe.  NASA  launched 
nearly  80  sounding  rockets  from  sites  around  the  world.  A  significant  ac- 
complishment was  the launch of  54  sounding rockets within 24 hrs  to  support 
the Joint  NASA-& 
Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution  of 
Ions and Neutrals (ALADDIN)  program. 
During  1974 scientists in  programs outside NASA  as  well  a s  in,  using  data 
from  both  orbital  and  suborbital  programs,  discovered  a  13th  moon  of 
Jupiter,  observed a pulsar that was a member of  a double star system, obtained 
new  data  on  the size and  shape of  the Crab Nebula,  discovered  a  galaxy six 
times  larger  than  any  previously  known  in  the  universe,  and  made  the 
greatest  advance  yet  in  cometary  research  with  the  study  of  the  Comet 
Kohoutek,  including first-time identification  of  water molecules  in   a  comet. 
The U.S.S.R.  continued a  program  of  space exploration  with  the  launch 
of  lunar probes Luna  22  in  May  and  Luna  23  in   October.  Luna  22  studied 
the  lunar  surface and  atmosphere from  lunar  orbit.  Luna  23  was  damaged 
while landing on the  moon’s  surface and its work was discontinued after three 
days of equipment testing. 

Space Transportation and Technology 
The  space  shuttle  program  accelerated,  with  funding  increasing  from  
$475  million  in   FY  1974  to  $800  million  in   M 1975.  But  this  total 
reflected  an   $89-million  cut  by  the  Office  of  Management  and   Budget  from 
planned  space  shuttle  funding,  delaying  the  program  four  to  six  months. 
The  final major  contract  was  awarded  and design work  neared  completion; 
223 

During  1974 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

by year’s  end  the program moved  into  hardware  test  and  fabrication  stages. 
Construction of  the  shuttle  runway  a t  Kennedy Space Center began  in  April 
and throughout  the year  contracts were awarded for  additional space shuttle 
facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ 
ERNO  Raumfahrttechnik  GmbH  as  prime  contractor  to  design  and  build 
Spacelab for  missions on  the  shuttle.  Primary  efforts were  directed  toward 
planning  early  shuttle  missions  and  making  analyses  for  a  NASA  mission 
model. 
I n   solid  propulsion  technology,  the  final  motor-the 
first  with  a  restart 
capability-in 
a series of  high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was  successfully 
static-fired.  The  October  firing  marked  the  first  time  a  spacecraft  solid- 
fueled motor  had  been  fired,  quenched, reignited,  and  requenched. Another 
significant  step  was  the  static-firing  of  a  thermally  sterilized  solid-fueled 
as  auxiliary  propulsion  for  long-life 
motor.  Electric  propulsion-attractive 
station-keeping and  attitude  control-took 
a  stride forward with the  tests  of 
a  4.5-millinewton  (0.001-lb-thrust)  ion  engine  aboard  A t s   6.  In   spacecraft 
energy  system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon  grown 
directly  from  the  liquid  state,  a  critical  first step  in  low-cost manufacture  of 
solar  cells.  Other  advances  were  made  in  laser,  nuclear,  atmosphere-entry, 
material-and-structures,  guidance,  and  control-and-information  technology. 

Aeronautics 
The X-24B  lifting  body  completed  1 5  flights  in  the  NASA  and  Air  Force 
program  to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to 
develop  hypersonic  technology.  Following  the  first  supersonic  flight  in 
March,  the  vehicle’s  performance  and  handling  qualities  were  evaluated  in  
the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. 
NASA’s aeronautics  research  and  development  program  to   reduce  fuel 
consumption, reduce undesirable  environmental effects, improve safety, and 
advance  technology  continued  during  the  year.  Flight  tests  of  an   F-111 
equipped  with  the  NASA-developed  supercritical  wing  demonstrated  a  15% 
reduction  in  fuel  consumption. Other  tests  using  flexible  aircraft  skin  con- 
cepts,  composite  materials,  active-control technology,  and  alternative  fuels 
also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. 
effort  to  reduce  noise  of  the  JT8D engine 
I n   NASA’s refan  program-an 
that  powered  most  of  the  Nation’s  narrow-body  commercial  fleet-three 
refanned  engines demonstrated  in ground  tests that  the  ground  area  affected 
by  objectionable  noise  from  commercial aircraft  could be  reduced  by  75%. 
I n   another  technique,  a  DC-8  using  a  NASA-developed  two-segment landing 
approach  reduced  the  ground  area  affected by  excessive noise  53%. 
Efforts  to  measure  and  reduce  aircraft  engine  exhaust  in  the  atmosphere 
continued with  the Global Air  Sampling Program.  A United Air  Lines, Inc., 
Boeing 747 equipped with an  atmospheric sampling instrument began measur- 
ing  aircraft  pollution  on  commercial  air  routes,  while  the  clean  combuster 
technology  program  was  expanded  to  reduce  engine  emissions. 
Programs  t o   improve  aircraft  safety  continued  to  make  progress.  Tech- 
niques  to  reduce  hazardous  trailing  vortices  were  flight-tested.  A  NASA- 
developed prototype  system  to  track  aircraft  wakes  near  airports,  allowing 
traffic  controllers  to  adjust  aircraft  spacing more  closely, was  being  opera- 
tionally evaluated at John  F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. 
The Dept. .of  Defense A-10  close-air-support program moved  into produc- 
2% 

During 1974 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
tion  stage, with  the  first  of  six aircraft  in   final assembly  and checkout. P ro -  
duction  of  an  initial  increment  of  22  aircraft  was  approved  in  December, 
with a full production decision expected late in 1975. 
DOD’S  B-1  advanced  strategic  bomber moved  through  engine preliminary 
flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. 
Following flight  testing,  a  production  decision would  be made  in  1976. The 
first  operational  F-15  advanced tactical  fighter was  delivered in  November. 
At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. 

International  Cooperation 
Aerospace  activities  continued  to  become  more  international.  Of  the  16 
NASA-launched  payloads,  10 were  cooperative efforts with  foreign  organiza- 
tions.  In  addition, the 2  Italian-launched payloads carried U S .   experiments. 
During  the  year  negotiations  were  completed  on  an  agreement  for  NASA  to 
furnish  reimbursable  launches  for  three  future  synchronous-orbit  Japanese 
satellites.  NASA-ESRO  Spacelab working  groups met  throughout  the  year  on 
experimental objectives and  user  requirements.  Investigators  from  42  coun- 
tries  and  5  international  organizations  were  selected  for  Earth  Resources 
Technology  Satellite  follow-on  investigations,  and  Italy  and  I ran   signed 
agreements with  NASA  to  build  earth  stations  to   receive  ERTS  data  directly. 
The 1975 US-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared  flight readiness. 
Joint  compatibility  tests  of  communications and  docking  systems were  car- 
ried  out  and  intensive  joint  flight-crew and  flight-controller  training  was 
begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U S S R  launched two unmanned 
and  one manned  Soyuz  spacecraft  (Co smo s  638  and  672  and  Soyuz  16) to 
check  out  new  systems  and  equipment  for  the  joint  mission.  NASA  and  the 
Soviet Academy  of  Sciences  approved  public  information  plans  and  plans 
fo r  prelaunch testing at the U S .  and U.S.S.R.  launch sites. 
U S .  and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, 
environmental  problems,  and  biomedical  results  from  U S .   and  U.S.S.R. 
space  flights.  U S .   and  Soviet scientists preparing  a  joint  experiment  using 
Ats  6 data met  in  the US. in  October for  technical coordination.  And  plans 
were  formulated  in  October  for  a  U S .   life  science experiment  to  fly  on  the 
next available Soviet biological satellite. 
For  101  days, June-September,  the U S .  and 69 other  countries participat- 
ing in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experi- 
ment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million- 
sq-km tropical  area  of  land  and  sea  from  the  eastern  Pacific  Ocean  across 
Latin  America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to  the western Indian  Ocean. 
More than  4000 persons using 4 1  ships, 40  instrumented  buoys,  1 2  aircraft, 
and  6 satellites probed  from  1.6 km  below  the  sea surface  to  the  top  of  the 
atmosphere  to  improve weather  predictions,  assess  pollution,  determine  the 
feasibility  of  large-scale weather  modification,  and  establish  new  bonds  of 
international cooperation. 

Applications and Energy 
During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions 
to  the  quality  of  life.  In   addition  to  1974-launched A t s  6, Sms  1 ,  Westar 1 
and 2,  Intelstat-IV F-8 ,   and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and com- 
munications on  the  earth-Erts  1, launched  in  July  1972, completed 29 mos 
in   operation.  E r t s   1 had  transmitted  more  than  1 00 0 00   photos  covering 
225 

During  1974 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
three  fourths of  the world’s  land masses and coastal  areas.  ERTS  data-used 
to  monitor  urban  and  agricultural  development, locate  a i r   and  water  pollu- 
tion, update maps, and find new water  and mineral resources-had  been  pro- 
vided  to  more  than  300  U.S.  and  foreign  investigators  in  government, 
development continued on  schedule. 
universities, and  industry.  ERTS-E 
NASA’s pollution  monitoring  program-to 
develop  and  demonstrate  tech- 
nology  t o   monitor  atmospheric  and  water  pollution-completed  its  second 
year.  Procurement  for  design  and  construction  of  the  Nimbus-G  Oceano- 
graphic  and  Air  Pollution  Observing  Satellite,  planned  for  1978  launch, 
was  under  way.  The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature  Ex- 
periment  (LACATE)  was demonstrated in May and a test in  the advanced appli- 
cations  flight  experiment  program-using  balloons,  sounding  rockets,  and 
aircraft  as  well  a s   ground-based  experiments-successfully  gathered  atmos- 
pheric data over a five-hour period. 
DOD  expanded and  improved its Defense Satellite Communications System 
and  let  contracts  for  Phase  1 NAVSTAR  global  positioning  satellites.  The 
Defense  Meteorological  Satellite  program  continued  to  furnish  weather 
data for military and civilian use. 
Space technology continued to be applied to  medicine. A  digital computing 
cardiotachometer to monitor heart  rates,  an  automated blood  pressure moni- 
toring  system, and a new method of  attaching artificial limbs were among the 
NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. 
An  Office of  Energy Programs was  established in  NASA  to  focus  the  appli- 
cation of  its aerospace technology to energy needs. I n  addition to programs to 
reduce aircraft  a i r  pollution and energy consumption and develop new  fuels, 
NASA,  under  the  Solar  Heating  and  Cooling  Demonstration  Act  of  1974 
and  in cooperation  with  the  Dept.  of  Housing  and Urban  Development and 
other  Federal  agencies, was  investigating the use  of  solar energy for heating 
and cooling buildings. An  experimental solar house a t  Marshall Space Flight 
Center would  ultimately  derive up  to  85% of  its heating  and cooling energy 
f r om  the  sun. Solar heating  and  cooling were being  demonstrated in  school. 
NASA  continued  research  on  wind  energy  systems,  with  the  construction 
of  a 100-kw wind-powered generator a t  Lewis Research Center ; low-pollution, 
low-fuel-consumption automotive engines ; aerodynamically designed vehicles 
to  increase fuel economy ; energy conversion systems. 
NASA  distributed  some  300  new  Tech  Briefs  and  30  special  compilations 
o i  new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in  business and industry. Use of 
Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to  other uses 
increased 3476, to 4000 clients. 
Tracking and Data Acquisition 
The  Spaceflight Tracking  and  Data  Network  (STDN)  supported  some  40 
flight  projects  during  1974,  including  all  NASA’s  earth-orbital  missions  a s  
well as space projects  of foreign  governments and private  industry.  Congress 
authorized  funds  for  procurement  activities for  a  Tracking  and  Data  Relay 
satellite  System  (TDRSS) -two 
earth-orbiting  satellites  leased  by  NASA  to 
relay  data  between  low-altitude spacecraft and  a  single ground  station.  The 
authority  to  proceed further  was  subject  to  additional  congressional review 
of  a NASA-owned versus a  leased. system.  (Pres Rpt 74; NASA  Release 74-330: 
NASA  Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A  74) 
226 

Appendix  A 

SATELLITES,  SPACE  PROBES,  AND  MANNED 
SPACE  FLIGHTS,  1974 

The  following table  includes  all  payloads  that  have  ( a )   orbited;  ( b )   as 
probes,  ascended to  a t  least the  6500-kilometer altitude that  traditionally  has 
distinguished  probes  from  sounding  rockets;  or  ( c )   conveyed one  or  more 
human  beings into space whether orbit was attained or not. Date of  launch is 
referenced  to  local time  a t  the  launch  site. An  asterisk follows dates that  are 
one  day  later  by  Greenwich  Mean  Time.  A  double  asterisk  follows  dates 
one day earlier by GMT. 
The  data were  compiled  from  open  sources  including the  United Nations 
Public  Registry;  the  Satellite Situation Report,  compiled by  the  Operations 
Control  Center  a t   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center;  and  public  information 
releases  of  NASA, Department of  Defense, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration,  and  other  agencies,  as  well  as  Communications  Satellite 
Corporation.  Soviet  data  a re   from  the  U.N.  Public  Registry,  the  Satellite 
Situation R q o r t ,   translations  from the Tass News Agency,  statements in  the 
Soviet press, and international news service reports. New  sources of  informa- 
tion  for  1974 were  speeches and  press  briefings  given  by  Soviet officials in 
the United States to  prepare for the US.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s 
1975 mission.  Data  on  satellites of  other  foreign  nations  a re  from  the  U.N. 
Public Registry, the Satellite Situation Report, governmental announcements, 
and international news  service reports. 
World  space activity  in  1974 decreased slightly. Total  launches,  106, were 
down from the  109 launches in  1973, a s  were total payloads  orbited-126 
in 
1974, down  from  133 in  1973. The 5 multiple-payload launches-2, 
8-satel- 
lite  launches  for  the  U.S.S.R.;  2,  3-satellite launches for  DOD, and  a  3-satel- 
lite  launch  for  NASA-account 
for  the  difference between  launches  and  pay- 
loads. 
Of  the  1974 world  total,  the  United  States launched  22  boosters  carrying 
28  payloads,  a  slight  decline  from  1973, when  2 3  U S .   boosters  carried  26 
payloads into space. Of  these 1974 totals, DOD  was responsible for 8 launches 
and  12  payloads.  Of  the  1 6  NASA-launched payloads,  11 were  launched  for 
domestic and  foreign  corporations  o r   foreign  governments:  Skynet ZZA  and 
ZZI? and  M i r a d u   (UK-X4)  for  the  United  Kingdom,  Zntasat  for  Spain, 
Symphonie  1 for  France  and  West  Germany, Aeros  2  for  West  Germany, 
Zntelsat-ZV  F-8  fo r   ComSatCorp  on  behalf  of  the  Tnternational Telecom- 
munications Satellite Organization,  Westar 1 and 2 for Western Union Tele- 
graph Company, Noaa 4 for NOAA,  and Amsut Oscar  7 for the Radio Amateur 
Satellite Corporation. Two satellites were cooperative programs with foreign 
governments: Ans  1 with The Netherlands and Helios I with West Germany. 
6 ,  Sms  1, and  Hawkeye  1 (Exp lo re r  
Three IvA.S-4-sponsored payloads-Ats 
52) -were 
launched  for  applications and  scientific missions. 

227 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
The Soviet Union  once again  f a r  exceeded U.S.  space totals,  launching 95 
payloads  in   81  launches,  with  activity  decreasing  slightly  from  1973’s  107 
payloads in  86 launches. 
For  the  United  States  the  year  was  the  first  since  1967  marked  by  a n  
absence of  manned launches. The last of  three  Skylab crews, already orbiting 
as the  year  began, reentered 8 Feb.  on Skylab 4 after  84 days in space. NASA 
launches included 8 communications, 2 meteorological, and 6  scientific satel- 
lites. Highlights of  the year came with the launches of  A ts  6 ,  the most complex 
and  powerful of  the Applications Technology Satellites, to  transmit medical 
and  educational  telecommunications  to  small  inexpensive  ground  stations 
in remote areas of  the United States and of  Helios 1   to   investigate interstellar 
space closer  to  the  sun  than  any  previous  spacecraft. The  12  DOD  payloads 
included N t s  1 Navigation Technology Satellite to perfect technology fo r  use 
in  the  NAVSTAR  program  and  S3-1  to measure  a i r   density  and  upper  atmos- 
pheric  composition and to  provide  data  on atmospheric efforts on spacecraft 
orbits. 
The  Soviet Union  launched  2  space  stations  and  3  two-man crews  during 
1974,  besides  unmanned  scientific,  lunar,  and  applications  spacecraft.  Fol- 
lowing the  launch  of  the  Salyut  3   space  station,  a  crew  in  Soyuz  14  docked 
with  the  station  and  worked  on  board  for  16  days  before  returning  to  the 
earth.  A second crew,  in Soyuz  15 ,  failed  to  dock  after  several attempts and 
returned  to  earth  after  two  days  in   space.  A  second  station,  Sa lyu t   4,  was 
launched  in  December  to  be  joined  in  January  1975  by  a  crew  aboard 
Soyuz  17 .   Soyuz  16,  carrying  two   cosmonauts, was  launched  to  check  out 
docking and  life support  systems in  preparation  for  the  1975  ASTP  mission. 
In  addition, the U.S.S.R.  launched 3  unmanned Soyuz spacecraft, 7 Molniya 
comsats,  5  Meteor  meteorological  satellites,  2  cooperative  Intercosmos,  2 
Luna lunar probes, and 71 Cosmos spacecraft. 
Italian  crews  launched 2  satellites on  NASA  launch  vehicles:  Sun  Marco  4 
carried one Italian and two  U S .  experiments into orbit to  collect atmospheric 
data.  The  U.K.-built  Ariel  5 carried  one  NASA  and  f ive  U.K  experiments to 
study x-ray sources. 
Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2, to test spacecraft control devices. 
As  we  have  cautioned  in  previous  years,  the  “Remarks”  column  of  these 
appendixes is  never  complete, because  of  printing  time  and  the  inescapable 
lag  between  each  flight  and  the  analysis  and  interpretation  of  results.  Also, 
some missions are still continuing. The information  in this table was compiled 
in  February  1976. 

228 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

E 

v) m 

3 
m 

: 
W 

m 
d 
01 

a 
W 

v) cv m 

d 
h 
-3 N 

h d 
z 

d 
c 
= 

229 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

$ 1 

0 
d 
W 

m m 
m 

a 
0 m 

m 2 
N 

v) d 
m 0, 

i 
N Fl 

m 
m 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

w e 
I d 
L 
9 
I-I El 

e? P 

e? 
d 0) 

N 

w 
2 

w 
d 

co 
a 
h 

d 
i 
3 

p' c 
E. 
N 

2 s 
v) 

5 
i 

2 

231 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

m 
3 00 

.$ N N 

i  i 
I. 
i 
E 
2 

i 
L 
0 
N 

232 

s 
i 
W N 

i 
3 
n 

3 
Id 
d 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

9 
-3 QI 

3 

0 
a; h 

t- 
cd co 

t- 
\o 
i  0 
N 

N 
In 3 

m 
m 
r- 

5i 
E.l 

m m 
e 

w 
N 

ro 0 * 
v: m 

m 
N 0 

Lo 0 t- 
8 

a 
b. 
e I 

a 
4 
m 
w 

233 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

f. P 
I 

2 

234 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

C .- 

C .- 

0. 
ni 
W 

0 
6 
t- 

m L 

0 0 
p. 
0 
cp 

m 
4 W 

N i 

F 
3 

d 
o\ N 

v) d - 
3 

e 0 m 
3 
- 
0 d 
3 

m 
d N 

N 10 N 

0 
4 
t- 

N 

L i  
3 3 

N 
3 
m 

v) 
4 2 

0 
m 
e 
3 

N 
% 

235 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

236 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

3 
$; 

B 
3 El 

3 
E 

B 
% 

237 

h 
W hi 

3 f 

m m N 

e B 
a 

B 
P 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

W I- 
2 

m 
G N 
m f 
c( * 
c- 
v) n 

2 
N 

m 6 

9 m 
N 

B 
P 

238 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

: 
W 

Q 

m 
t- N 

I )  239 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

N 

In v) N 

m 
\o N 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

in 
3 10 

m 
0; 
m 

r( 0 N 

- 
x 
a 
m 
m 

in N f i  
d e 

10 
i m 

10 
m 
N 

3 
2 

3 
m 
3 

10 
‘9 
L A  m 

m 
A 
0.1 
N 

N 
m i 

v) 
ni El 

m 
m 10 

3 % 

24J 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

E ln 
t- 
m 

h 0 
N 

8 
r( 

p 

f 
N 

m 
N 
r( 

8 

243 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

10 
a5 
0 

z 
N 

Y 
m m 

z 
e 

3 m 
3 

c s 
3 

d 4 
8 

d 
4 
a 
N 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

c) B a 
C 
1 
.I 
5; 

0 
3 s 

I 

m 
2 
3 

8 
-3 

m 
m 
3 3 

\o e 
\o 

m 
1 
r( 

m 
m 
m 
?I 

9 
s 
4 

8 
+ 

m 
m m 
c 

'0 
2 
3 

s 

+ 
3 m 
+ 

m 1 - 

z 
-3 
3 

t- \o 
e 
3 

2 
3 
3 

m m -3 
3 

\o s 
r( 

J e 
m 
4 3 

J e 
m 
-. 
4 

245 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

0 f 

!n 
4 a 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

: 
m 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

I 

N - 
m 

N d 

- e  
-
a
m
3 

 

N m d 

9 e  2-g 
'0" 
El 

L B 
r N 

L 8 
a 
N 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

250 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1974 

3 

m 
m r( 

El 
r- N 

10 
\o -? 

m 
r: m 
t- 

s 
3 

m 
m 
10 
3 

5 
z 
0 N 

i d 
,- El 

; 2 
* 
N 

251 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

m 
fi 

8 
N 

i 
P 

i z 
E- N 

N 

252 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

m g

H
N 

 

s 
2  1 
I- 
0 

;E: s 

z 
v) N 
-s P 
d 

a 
0 ni 

" I 
a C 
.- 
a 
2 

N 
I 
a 

253 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1974 

4 B a 
C .- 
5 
3; 

m 
B 
h 

B 
W 

w 
s W 

.E! 

0 
I6 
‘9 

m 
r.4 
01 

0 s 

3 

p 
I m 

- 
N 
r.4 
A 
0.1 
m m 
W 

N 
0 e 

m 
0 

N 
2 

t- 

v) m 

m 
ui 
01 

2 
v) 

m 
I d 
P 
s 
2 
a 

254 

 
 
 
 
b
 
-
 
 
 
 
 
m
 
 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c
 
 
l
.
 
r
d
 
f
a
t
e
n
e
s
y
.
-
t
h
k
e
n
t
v
h
f
d
s
.
.
a
d
e
o
s
k
h
e
n
c
c
o
y
c
r
~
n
a
e
f
a
l
o
m
t
u
e
g
p
c
x
e
y
e
e
i
 
e
t
n
i
-
e
k
a
w
o
k
.
a
a
i
n
a
r
i
m
v
i
n
w
f
 
w
a
n
w
D
r
c
o
n
 
u
g
p
s
a
h
 J
a
0
d
g
r
a
a
g
o
d
e
r
d
r
t
o
 
a
o
b
t
s
 
i
1
V
S
s
z
u
S
n
5
 
 
b
u
i
e
n
 
 
l
I
 
 
o
0
d
m
 
w
l
Y
s
u
6
1
 
a
d
1
,
t
K
a
h
h
d
i
3
t
o
3
o
 
v
e
 
 
3
e
e
S
e
7
G
m
t
3
r
d
 
,
 
g
S
c
e
K
s
r
i
6
i
d
8
k
 
r
w
o
 
d
o
r
 
9
b
 
 
e
s
e
r
 
n
k
e
n
 
p
.
d
n
 
 
t
 
c
 
 
w
r
e
o
c
s
1
l
 
I
p
n
e
y
r
g
y
 
 
 
e
t
u
.
u
c
i
a
A
a
e
f
o
d
i
h
d
e
t
i
f
t
o
r
n
 
o
g
 
e
l
o
n
m
a
b
a
k
r
 
i
 
n
r
r
d
r
c
e
e
c
r
 
g
a
 
d
b
f
r
o
a
a
n
l
d
t
i
o
a
.
y
t
r
i
f
 
n
 
C
 
 
 
 
 
h
b
n
n
m
n
 m
r
t
d
s
o
 
 
d
p
e
u
o
a
,
y
M
f
o
a
e
e
u
v
5
o
e
t
c
c
 
 
e
i
 
a
e
n
a
r
y
t
m
s
p
r
t
,
y
t
.
d
u
n
F
a
o
7
a
a
r
 
e
5
c
o
g
k
a
o
s
o
 
P
d
u
 
g
 
n
 
 &
l
c
u
e
 
b
r
9
n
 
7
m
s
e
c
i
e
d
 
c
e
t
s
4
.
d
 
r
o
 
G
s
r
 
r
a
6
o
n
r
 
a
1
 
a
 
9
e
l
 
e
t
o
d
3
e
,
5
e
0
e
5
d
A
e
l
 
l
1
u
r
w
y
C
r
i
1
S
,
k
p
o
 
r
n
w
7
 
2
 
 
t
 
u
o
 
7
 
 
y
 
t
e
7
.
g
 
5
e
i
e
.
r
s
h
,
n
e
 
9
a
t
z
t
 
s
 
v
9
 
y
b
t
e
 1
c
.
m
y
v
e
h
f
 
n
i
7
v
z
.
 
r
5
a
e
y
h
u
1
s
o
b
1
 
y
y
i
a
t
n
b
l
c
s
u
g
9
a
d
7
l
v
e
p
l
s
=
t
c
O
y
~
i
N
r
l
a
a
e
 
 
n
 
 
e
t
a
i
-
9
 
o
r
1
 
e
e
a
e
o
d
d
l
1
.
o
M
M
l
s
!
l
n
G
S
n
 
a
 
 
v
a
1
p
t
o
S
 
t
f
p
 
i
 
-
r
e
r
 
t
r
h
g
a
7
7
d
n
r
 
n
S
S
o
a
 
y
u
a
e
o
b
n
i
x
t
 
3
p
 
k
r
n
 
 
1
o
1. 
n
m
o
i
N
o
.
 
l
h
6
e
m
a
s
.
a
i
3
 
 
M
c
S
 
,
A
u
b
a
i
 
4
o
n
m
a
e
c
d
n
b
t
2
h
p
 
~
.
t
 
 
 
z
e
3
 
e
d
2
n
 
j
r
e
i
a
 
 
t
s
e
o
9
n
c
 
c
e
 
 
d
 
 
s
 
d
F
b
a
s
o
 
v
 
e
s
h
n
m
p
o
y
 
k
5
o
n
i
m
1
o
s
.
 
n
a
o
r
6
K
n
 
a
r
 
f
f
h
e
s
y
w
o
g
s
i
c
u
a
w
9
 
t
 
o
i
i
8
C
e
t
 w
2
n
 
r
a
 
0
s
c
s
l
 
r
o
t
 
 
o
a
n
d
a
a
t
 
a
4
n
o
4
'
h
 
I
 
i
o
 
n
2
 
 
 
s
h
t
4
d
O
l
b
d
n
e
e
a
 
e
n
 
d
e
 
g
t
 
s
e
c
e
t
u
y
n
 
 
.
d
 
 
=
t
h
d
a
t
u
e
i
a
e
c
r
 
d
e
z
o
n
t
e
 
i
G
r
n
a
 
s
e
o
 
r
r
r
n
c
a
L
u
c
u
g
u
t
 
 
5
o
e
a
y
i
,
i
a
l
 
u
 
 
r
e
c
d
r
 
i
s
n
d
n
e
n
w
t
o
t
y
d
n
b
z
m
t
e
7
d
y
 
l
 
o
o
t
t
a
o
a
i
n
,
s
a
 
n
u
a
a
.
a
o
l
p
f
n
o
u
9
 
a
 
n
t
0
b
b
e
p
a
o
m
t
 
G
a
e
f
o
A
t
m
l
a
a
t
S
S
a
3
i
a
1
n
*
S
2
a
S
S
a
a
o
s
s
a
s
t
l
t
t
l
l
t

 
2
.
9
8

 
4
1
2

 
2
5
2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d
 
 
 
 
s
 
 
 
c
 
8
e
r
-
e
,
d
y
w
-
d
f
e
e
t
n
i
e
v
t
m
e
o
e
l
a
f
r
v
o
m
e
t
e
l
r
r
i
a
h
e
u
a
p
a
l
t
n
i
e
h
 
 
o
g
e
c
n
c
c
s
o
t
n
s
s
T
b
s
s
n
n
r
 
e
i
t
b
-
 
 
d
t
m
n
a
n
u
i
o
m
 
n
a
o
e
c
t
n
p
e
o
a
r
 
m
c
i
d
e
s
.
a
 
 
m
t
 
l
e
u
 
n
h
o
o
e
0
 
 
d
o
 
 
p
r
3
d
o
o
t
,
t
,
u
t
e
a
o
t
 
e
o
n
n
-
z
u
s
r
 
i
e
 
g
r
c
r
e
f
c
t
o
 
a
e
i
a
e
r
e
d
i
i
r
s
s
m
u
w
r
c
d
s
h
o
e
t
n
e
 
y
 
e
e
e
o
 
p
e
l
h
i
 
n
t
I
.
i
d
e
m
;
r
t
 
n
m
a
e
s
s
t
i
y
e
 
t
e
 
n
e
S
o
i
m
 
o
p
s
t
?
t
 
m
i
n
e
n
i
h
'
 
e
 
t
x
r
g
c
o
v
r
m
h
o
o
o
o
o
t
t
a
e
k
t
t
i
i
t
t
h
i
i
 
 t
w
l
~
t
a
p
r
d
t
 
t
 
o
c
 
p
l
a
0
a
h
 
i
y
e
 
r
e
n
a
s
a
y
u
e
0
t
t
 
t
c
a
c
i
s
d
n
 
u
l
q
 5
a
 
r
 
i
p
l
 
 
 
n
e
u
n
n
e
n
b
a
a
n
d
8
 
s
p
o
a
i
 
o
t
u
l
o
h
e
n
,
 
1
o
s
o
c
m
4
 
d
r
g
i
d
c
f
S
a
e
t
s
s
 
l
t
7
o
 
n
y
e
i
.
u
e
-
c
:
T
 
n
v
6
 
 
 
"
t
t
t
x
a
v
1
e
-
t
o
f 
h
u
n
n
i
1
 
e
n
o
e
l
o
o
d
 
d
 
g
t
s
o
e
e
,
d
:
s
o
 
e
n
s
 
n
 
i
m
e
e
i
 
 
 
e
n
c
m
e
i
e
 
d
i
 
s
d
 
v
n
a
e
t
y
r
.
s
w
i
o
p
r
l
p
e
e
i
u
-
m
r
e
i
e
l
a
t
i
m
h
i
c
c
i
d
 
w
 
t
J
c
n
d
u
t
w
r
 
l
s
a
o
b
g
c
u
 
a
c
e
a
E
n
a
q
5
e
y
p
&
i
t
G
o
l
t
s
j
p
t
h
n
a
a
2
e
e
c
s
"
s
b
e
o
t
O
D
T

 
 
m
e
 
 
l
A
-
a
b
r
t
 
W
u
a
.
a
R
d
n
r
.
a
o
u
.
1
S
v
k
y
4
 
.
a
y
T
S
4
7
n
a
9
.
U
U
U
B
1
7
l
a
S

 
.
m
D
6 
2

 
.
5
7
9
1
 
.
n
a
J
 
9
 
d
e
r
e
t
n
e
e
R

 
4
.
1
7

 
6
.
9
8

 
0
7
1

 
5
3
3

 
.
t
i
b
r
o
 
n
i
 
l
l
i
t
S

 
9
.
2
8

 
7
.
4
0
1

 
5
6
9

 
8
9
9

 
-
n
o
n
r
t
a
 
r
e
p
p
u
 
f
o
 
.
e
 
 
.
n
l
 
e
"
b
o
l
.
e
a
b
i
c
l
a
t
i
a
a
l
a
p
i
g
v
a
s
i
a
v
 
t
r
s
n
a
e
e
U
n
t
v
U
u
n
 
o
:
I
 
t
 
"
:
h
d
n
g
 
n
o
:
i
e
a
i
e
t
v
 
w
p
e
i
i
t
r
 
r
c
e
l
c
e
a
h
s
j
t
p
e
b
o
D
O
T

 
-
s
o
m
t
a
 
r
e
p
p
u

f 
o
 
.
c
 
 
 
"
n
.
l
.
b
e
e
o
c
a
i
l
a
t
i
h
a
i
a
 
g
a
s
v
i
 
v
a
t
r
s
n
e
a
e
t
U
n
v
u
n
u
 
o
:
I
t
 
 
"
:
h
d
n
 
g
n
:
o
i
e
a
i
e
 
v
t
w
c
p
i
t
i
a
 
c
r
l
h
c
e
a
s
j
t
p
b
o
e
O
D
T

 
e
l
 
b
A
a
 
 
5
k
.
l
R
 
0
i
s
0
a
1
t
.
0
v
S
e
-
4
7
s
a
.
S
7
 
e
n
s
9
.
l
o
U
U
P
1
m
s
o
C

 
e
 
l
8
b
6
 
a
 
.
k
0
l
R
 
i
1
s
1
a
.
t
0
-
S
v
e
4
7
s
.
a
7
S
e
 
n
s
9
.
l
o
U
U
P
1
m
s
o
C

 
.
c
e
D
 
6
2

 
.
e
e
D
 
7
2

 
.
e
 
.
m
e
m
i
T
i
T
 
n
 
a
n
e
a
M
e
M
 
h
 
c
h
i
c
w
i
w
n
e
n
e
e
r
e
G
r
G
 
y
 
b
y
 
b
r
e
 
r
i
e
l
r
t
a
a
e
l
 
 
y
y
a
a
d
d
 
 
1
1
 
 
;
;
e
e
t
t
i
i
s
s
 
 
h
h
c
c
n
n
u
u
a
a
 l
 l
t
t
a
a
 
 
e
e
m
m
i
i
T
T
 
*
.* 

Appendix B 

MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHES,  1974 

The  chronological  table  of  major  NASA  launches  in   1974  is  intended  to 
provide  an  accurate historical  record,  compiling information  gathered  from 
open sources and scattered elsewhere in this  volume. Itincludes payloads car- 
ried  by  all  rocket  vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets  launched  by  NASA 
or under NASA  direction. 
I n   1974  NASA  successfully  launched  3  payloads  for  NASA  programs  out 
of  a total of  16 payloads launched:  Sms 1  operational prototype meteorologi- 
cal  satellite,  A ts   6  experimental  communications  satellite,  and  Hawkeye  1 
(Explorer 5 2 )  scientific sateIIite. Of  the  rest,  11-Shynet  ZZA  and I I B ,  M i-  
randa  (UK-X4),  Intasat, Symphonie  l, Aeros  2 ,  Intelsat-IV  F-8 ,   Westar l 
and 2 ,  Noaa 4 ,  and Amsat Oscar 7-were 
launched for other organizations o r  
governments. Ans 1  and Helios  1  were launched as cooperative scientific pro- 
grams  with  foreign  governments.  A  Titan  IIIE-Centaur  proof  flight  was 
aborted  by  NASA  range  safety  officers when  the  second-stage engine  failed 
to  ignite. 
I n   addition  to  the  16   NASA-launched  payloads,  Italian  crews  launched 
two  payloads  on  NASA  launch  vehicles:  San  Marco  4,  carrying  U S .   and 
Italian  experiments,  and  Ariel  5,  a  cooperative United  States-United  King- 
dom scientific satellite. 
An  attempt  has  been  made  to  classify  vehicle  and  payload  performance, 
using  three  categories  for  evaluation:  successful  (S )  , partially  successful 
(P) , and  unsuccessful  ( U )  . A  fourth  category,  unknown  (Unk )  , has  been 
added  fo r  payloads when  vehicle  failures did  not  give the  payload  a  chance 
to operate. These classifications a re  unofficial and necessarily arbitrary;  many 
of  the  results  cannot  be  neatly  categorized. Some ignore the  fact  that  much 
may  be  learned  from  missions  that  have  been  classified  a s   unsuccessful. 
Others  do not  account  for  payloads with  a  design  lifetime of  long duration 
which might  later  fail to  meet  that  design  requirement  end  be  officially ad- 
judged unsuccessful after this publication goes to press. 
Launch  dates a re  referenced to  local time  a t  the  launch  site. Open sources 
were used,  verified when  in  doubt  with  program  offices  in  NASA  Headquar- 
ters  and  with  NASA  Centers. For  further  information  on  each  item,  see Ap- 
pendix A of  this volume and the entries in the main chronology as referenced 
in the index. Information in  the table is as of  February 1976. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

P 
P 
R d 

258 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

m 

PI 

m 

m 

v, 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

m 

J 8 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

d 
.r( c .e 
5 
2 
P ; 
2 a 
d 
5 
r( 
L .* 
0 
f 
e 
L 
t 

260 

Appendix  C 

MANNED  SPACE  FLIGHTS,  1974 

This  chronology  contains  basic  information  on  all  manned  space  flights 
begun  during  1974 and-taken  with  Appendix C to  the  1965-1973  volumes 
a  summary  record  of  manned  exploration  of 
of  this  publication-provides 
the space environment through 1974. 
-s 
For the first year  since 1967 the United States launched no men into space, 
although  the  three-man Sky lab   4 crew  ended  its  84-day mission  during  the 
year,  splashing  down  in  the  Pacific  Ocean 8 Feb.  The United  States has  no 
manned flights scheduled until  the July  1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project with 
the U S S R :  ~. 
The  Soviet  Union  launched  three  two-man missions  into  space  in  1974. 
Soyuz 14  was launched in  July  to rendezvous with the Salyut  3 space station, 
orbiting  since  25  June.  The  crew  rendezvoused  and  docked  and  then  per- 
formed  scientific experiments aboard  the  station  for  nearly  16 days  before 
softlanding  in  the  U.S.S.R.  19 July.  The August  Soyuz  15 mission failed  to 
dock  with  Salyut  3  after  several attempts. I t   landed  a t   night  after  48  hours 
in  space. The S o p z  16 mission,  in  December, orbited  for  five days, success- 
fully  testing  spacecraft  and  life  support  systems redesigned fo r  ASTP. 
By  the  end  of  1974 the United  States had  conducted a total  of  30 manned 
space flights-2 
suborbital,  19  in  earth  orbit,  3  in  lunar  orbit,  and  6  lunai 
landing-with  a total of  41  different crewmen. Of  the 4 1  American astronauts, 
10 had  participated  in  tw o   flights each, 4  had  flown  three  times,  and  3 had 
flown  four  times. The Soviet Union had made 23 manned  flights, all in earth 
orbit,  with  32  cosmonauts. Six had  participated  in  two  flights each  and  two 
had flown  three times. Cumulative totals for manned spacecraft hours in flight 
were 7643 hours 42  minutes for  the United States and 2901 hours 33 minutes 
f o r  the Soviet Union. Cumulative total man-hours in space were 21  851 hours 
1 5  minutes for  the United States and 6011 hours 46 minutes for the U.S.S.R. 
This  chronology  was  compiled  in  February  1976  using  the  latest  data 
available within NASA  a t  that  date. The  information may  be  subject  to  modi- 
fication as data are refined. 

261 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

0 
c- Ln W 

Q 
n 

$ 
Es 

bir 4 
8 

262 

Appendix  D 

NASA  SOUNDING  ROCKET  LAUNCHES,  1974 

Following is a chronological table  of  the  77 sounding rockets of  the Arcas 
class  and  above  launched  by  NASA  in  1974.  Rockets  were  launched  from 
sites in six foreign countries a s  well  as the United States and carried payloads 
for  3 government agencies  including NASA,  18 U S .  universities, 3  U S .   com- 
panies,  and  4  European  organizations.  Onboard  experiments  probed  near 
space, providing  scientists with  new  data  in   aeronomy;  galactic, radio,  and 
x-ray  astronomy ; and  solar,  magnetospheric, and  ionospheric  physics.  Five 
flight tests  continued  development of  new  sounding  rocket  capability. 
Principal sources of  information for the table were the “Quick Look Sound- 
ing  Rocket  Data”  reports  issued  after  launches  and  the  twice  yearly  “NASA 
Sounding Rocket Compendium,” both compiled by the Sounding Rocket Divi- 
sion’s  Office  of  Operations  at  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  and  the  NASA 
“Report of  Sounding Rocket Launching” series. 
Missions  listed  were  successful  unless  otherwise  noted  in  the  Remarks. 
The date of  the  launch  is  referenced to local  time  at  the  launch  site, with  an 
asterisk following dates that  a re  one day later by Greenwich Mean Time. 

. 

263 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

B 
k 
In 3 

d 
k 
2 

2a 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

t- 
c 
* B 
In 

V 4 

3 

m e 

.e s" 

t- 
t-: 
a 
N 

m 
d 
N 

r- 
4 m N 

E. 
4 
v) 

10 
& 2 

-3 
t-: 
N 
N 

d 
3 
N 

d 
3 
N 

t- 

3 

a 
t-: a 

265 

m E 

d 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

4 
ti 
0 
H 5 

m 
c) 
2 
-J 

f 
C .- 
a 
‘5 
m 
m 

C 
.I 

5 5 

266 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

a 5 

m c .- 
3 

n 
E 
.I E .g 
.I 
P 
0 
8 
E 
5 
.^ 
8 
3 
c) 1 .- il 
a: 
J 
.I B 
r rx 
- 
m .^ : 
m 
I 
PI 

J .- 
6 

s 
l- 
d 

0 
d m 

0 
w 
m N 

9 
! 
i? 
N 

w 
v j  
2 

0 0 
Ln 

N 
w m 
4 

m 
r( m N 

9 
0 
-3 

m 
w 2 

N 
0 
0 
N 

267 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

N 

n 
co 0; 

0 
n & 
H 

d 
5 

d * 

d * 

4 

8 
k 
t- N 

268 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

u 
f 

A B 

a 
9 

s 

s 

. 

s 

--a 9 

F 

269 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

270 

Appendix E 

X-24B  LIFTINGBODY  FLIGHTS,  1974 

Lifting  bodies--wingless 
vehicles that  receive aerodynamic lift from  their 
body  shape alone-were  being flown  to  develop concepts for a maneuverable 
manned  vehicle  that  could  reenter  the  atmosphere from  space,  as well  as  to 
provide  technology  for  possible  future  hypersonic  cmise  aircraft.  The  pro- 
gram  began  in  the  early  1950s when  NASA  scientists  and  engineers  a t   the 
Ames  and Langley Research Centers studied  the concept of  the lifting  body. 
Since  1963,  Flight  Research  Center  has  flight-tested three  versions  of  the 
ARC-designed M2  configuration,  LaRC’s  HL-10,  and,  in  joint  programs  with 
the Air Force, the X-24A  and X-24B  lifting bodies. 
Following  a  joint  program  flight-testing the  Air  Force  X-24A,  NASA  and 
the Air Force in 1971 signed a memorandum of  understanding to incorporate 
test  programs  of  the  new  double-delta-shaped X-24B,  with  its  improved lift- 
to-drag  ratio,  and  NASA’s  H G l O  and  M2-F3.  The  HL-10,  which  had  com- 
pleted  its  first  flight  series  in  1970, was  held  in  storage. The  M2-F3  made 
its final flight in December 1972. Beginning with a captive flight 1 9  July 1973, 
NASA  and  Air  Force  pilots  tested  X-24B  performance  at  low  supersonic, 
transonic,  and  subsonic  speeds,  with  emphasis  on  landing.  NASA  was  re- 
sponsible for vehicle maintemnce, instrumentation, and ground support. The 
Air  Force  supplied the  X-24B  vehicle, base  services, fuel, B-52  operations, 
and XLR-11  engine and maintenance. NASA  and  the Air  Force  shared  pilot, 
mission planning, and data analysis responsibilities. 
The  X-24B  was  launched from  a  B-52  aircraft,  usually  a t   13 700-m alti- 
tude. I n  captive flights, the vehicle remained attached to  the B-52.  Unpowered 
free flights glided through maneuvers to landings on a dry lake bed.  Powered 
flights ignited  the  rocket engine, to  reach  higher  altitudes and  speeds before 
landing. 
The  following table  includes  all  X-24B  missions  leaving  the  ground  in 
1974, even those eventually aborted  because of  weather o r  mechanical prob- 
lems.  The  flight  numbering  system  included  vehicle  designation  (“B” for 
X-24B  vehicles) -free-flight  number-B-52 
carry  number.  For  example, 
“B-9-16”  was  the 9th free flight of  the X-24B  and the  16th time the vehicle 
was carried  by  the B-52.  A  “C”  o r   an  “A”  replacing  the free-flight number 
indicated a captive or an  aborted flight. 
Information  for  the  tables  was  compiled  from  “Post  Launch  Flight  Re- 
ports”  issued  a t   FRC,  “Flash  Reports”  issued  by  the  NASA  Headquarters 
Office .Of  Aeronautics and Spacr: Technology, and  the “Manned Lifting  Body 
Flight Log,”  a N A S A  Facts issuance released in March 1976 by Dryden Flight 
Research Center  (named  Flight  Research Center  until  January  1976 ) .  

273 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
X-24B  LIFTING-BODY  FLIGHTS,  1974 

Flight  Da te  
a n d  
Number 

Pilot 
Maximum h t i t u d e ,  
Maximum Speed 

15 Feb.  74  Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
(B-8-15) 
1 3  700 m 
Mach 0.68 
John A.  Manke 
18 400 m 
Mach  1.09 

5 Mar.  74 
(B-9-16) 

Maj.  Michael V.  Love 

Maj.  Michael V.  Love 

19 Mar.  74  Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
(B-A-17) 
22 Apr.  74 
(B-A-18) 
23 Apr.  74 
(B-A-19) 
25 Apr.  74 
(B-C-20) 

Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
No t  applicable 
No t  applicable 
30 Apr.  74  Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
(B-10-21) 
15 900 m 
Mach 0.88 
John A. Manke 
17  100 m 
Mach 1.14 

24 May  74 
(B-11-22) 

14 June 74  Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
(B-12-23) 
20 000 m 
Mach 1.23 

28 June  74 
(B-13-24) 

John  A. Manke 
20 800 m 
Mach 1.39 

8 Aug. 74  Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
(B-14-25) 
22 400 m 
Mach 1.54 

29  Aug.  74 
(B-15-26) 

John A.  Manke 
22 100 m 
Mach 1.10 

25 Oct.  74 
(B-16-27) 

Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
22 000 m 
Mach 1.76 

15 Nor.  74  
John A.  Manke 
(B-17-  28)  22 000 m 
Mach 1.62 

17 Dee.  74   Maj.  Michael V.  Love 
21  000 m 
(B-18-29) 
Mach 1.59 

Remarks 

Glide  flight  to   investigate  longitudinel  stability,  make  tu f t  
studies, investigate fin pressure,  and  train pilot. 

First supersonic flight. Objectives were to  fly a t  mach  1.1, obtain 
stability  end control da ta  a t  mach  1.1 for power-on and power-off 
conditions,  obtain  performance  and  longitudinal  trim  data a t  
mach 0.8  and  0.9  and  investigate  fin  pressure to  identify  asym- 
metric flow. 
Flight aborted because of  poor  weather conditions. 

Flight  aborted  when  fire erupted  in  B-52's  TV  monitor  system. 
-z 
Flight  aborted  when  liquid-oxygen feed  lines in B-52  failed. 

Captive  flight  to  determine  if  left-aileron  dead-band  problem 
encountered  in   previous  powered  flights  had  been  eliminated. 
Problem solved. 
First powered flight for pilot;  training mission. 

Fifth  powered  flight.  Primary  objectives  were  to  fly  a t   mach 
1.25, evaluate stability  and control a t  speed greater  than mach 1, 
investigate  buffet  a t  mach  0.65  with  20'  upper  flap,  check  ou t  
engine a t  207  newtons  per  sq cm  chamber  pressure,  investigate 
fin  and  rudder  pressure,  and  study  boundary-layer  noise  and 
vibration.  Because  only  3  of  4  engines  ignited,  vehicle  reached 
only mach 1.14. A l l  otber  objectives were achieved. 
fly  a t  mach  1.25; evaluate  stability  and  control 
Objectives-to 
a t  speed over mach 1; perform boundary layer noise and  vibration 
experiment;  and  survey  fin,  rudder,  and  tlap  p r e s s u r ew e r e  
successfully completed. 
fly  a t  maeh  1.4;  evaluate  stability  and  control a t  
Objective-to 
speed  over mach  1: perform boundary-layer  noise  and vibration 
experiment;  and  survey  fin,  rudder,  and  flap  p r e s s u r ew e r e  
successfully completed. 
fly  a t  mach  1.55;  evaluate  stability  and  eonuol 
Objective-to 
a t   speed  over  mach  1 with 5 O  and 8'  angles of a t tack ;  survey fin, 
rudder,  and  flap  pressure;  and  performed  boundary-layer  noise 
and  vibration experiment-were  successfully completed. 
Objectives-to 
evaluate  stability  and  control  a t   speed  over 
maeh  1  and  to  make  body  pressure  su rv ey -w e r e   completed. 
Objective  of  flying  a t  mach  1.68  was  no t   achieved because  of 
premature  engine  shutdown a t  108 sec into flight. 
Fastest  X-24B  flight  tu  date.  Objectives-to  fly a tmach   1.72: 
evaluate  stability  and  coutrol  a t   mach  1 with  5',  So,  and  12' 
angles  of a t tack ;   evaluate  supersonic  performance  and  longi- 
tudinal  trim; make body pressure survey; and perform boundary- 
layer  noise  and  vibration  experiment-were 
successfully 
completed. 
fly  a t  mach  1.66,  evaluate  stability  and  control 
Objective-to 
a t  ma&  1 with  8O  and 12" angles of  attack, make approach  and 
landing tests  with  upper  flaps  a t   -24O,  make  body  pressure 
survey,  and perform boundary-layer noise  and  vibration  exper- 
im e n vw e r e  successfully completed. 
Objectives-to 
evaluate  longitudinal  stability  and  control; 
approach  and  land  with  upper  flap  a t   -24'; 
and  survey  fin, 
rudder,  and  flap p r e s s u r ew e r e  successfully completed8 

274 

Appendix F 

ABBREVIATIONS  OF  REFERENCES 

ABC 
AEC   Release 
Ae ro   Daily 
Ae ro   Med 
A F   Mag 
AFHF   New s le t te r  
AF J  
AFSC  Newsreview 
AFSC  Release 
AIA  Release 
AIAA  Facts 
AIAA  Release 
AIP Newsletter 
A P  
ARC  Astrogram 
A s t ro   Journ 
A t lan ta   J C  
A v   W k  
B  N ew s  
B  S u n  
Bu l l  A t o m  S c i  

Listed  here  are   the  abbreviations  used  for  citing  sources in  the  text.  Not 
all the sources a re  listed, only those that a re  abbreviated. 
American  Association  f o r   the   Advancement  of  Sei- 
A A A S   Bu l l  
ence’s  A A A S   Bu l le t in   + 
American  Institute  o f   Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
A & A  
magazine, Astronautics  & Aeronautics 
NASA’s Astronautics  and  Ae ronau t ic s ,   1974:  A  Chro-. 
A & A   1974 
nology  ( th is   publication) 
American  Broadcasting  Company 
Atomic Energy  Commission  News  Release 
Aerospace  Daily  newsletter 
Aerospace  Med ic ine  magazine 
Air  Force Association’s A i r   Force  Magazine 
A i r   Force  Historical  Founda t ion   Newsletter 
A rm ed   Forces  Journal magazine 
Air  Force  Systems Command’s Newsreview 
Air  Force  Systems Command News Release 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  of  America  News 
Release 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
Facts 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
News  Release 
American  Institute of  Physics New s le t te r  
Associated Press news service 
NASA  Ames Research Center’s A s t rog ram  
American  Astronomical  Society’s  Astrophysical  Jour-  
nal 
A t lan ta   Journal  Con s t i tu t ion  newspaper 
Av ia t ion   W e e k  & Space  Techno logy  magazine 
B i rm ingham  New s  newspaper 
Baltimore Sun newspaper 
Education  Foundation  for  Nuclear  Science’s  Bu l le t in  
of  t h e  A tom i c  Sc ien t i s t s  
Business  W e e k  magazine 
Chicago Daily N ew s  newspaper 
Chicago  T r ibune  newspaper 
Canadian Press news service 
Columbia Broadcasting  System 
Chemical  &  Engineering  N ew s   magazine 
Cleveland P la in  Dealer  newspaper 
Cleveland Press newspaper 
Columbia  Journalism  Rev iew  magazine 
Communications  Satellite  Corporation  News  Release 
Congressional  Quarterly 
Congressional  Record 
Christian Sc ience  Monitor  newspaper 
Chicago Tribune News Service 
Detroit  N ew s  newspaper 
Denver  Po s t  newspaper 
275 

B u s   W k  
C Daily N ew s  
C T r i b  
Can Press 
CBS 
C&E  N ew s  
C1 PD  
Cl Press 
Columbia J  R e v  
ComSatCorp Release 
CQ 
CR 
CSM 
CTNS 
D N e w s  
D  Post 

DASA  Release 
DFRC 
DJ 
DOC  P I 0  
DOD Release 
DOT Release 
EOP  Release 
FAA  Release 
FBIS-SOV 
FonF 
FRC  Release 

FRC  X-Press 
G E  Fo rum  
Goddard N ew s  
GSFC Release 
GSFC  S S R  
GT&E Release 
H  Ch ron  
H  Pos t  
J A  
JPL  Lab-Ora tory  
J P L  Release 
JPRS  
J s c  Release 

J S C  R o u n d u p  
I S R  
KC  S ta r  
K C  T im e s  
KSC Release 
LA  H e r -E xam  
L A  T im e s  
Lang l e y  Researcher  
LARC Release 
LATNS  
LERC  Release 
L ew i s  N ew s  
M  H e r  
M  N ew s  
M  T r i b  
Marshall  S ta r  
MJ 
MSFC Release 

N  Ha v  R e g  
N  N ew s  
N  V u  S u n  
NAA N ew s  
NAA Record Book 

NAC Release 
NAE Release 
NANA  
NAS Release 
NAS-NRC Release 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Defense Atomic Suppor t  Agency News Release 
SFXI FRC. 
Dow Jones news service 
Department  of  Commerce  Pub l ic   Information  Office 
Department of  Defense News Release 
Department  of  Transportation  News  Release 
Exeoutive Office  of  th e  President News Release 
Federal  Aviation  Administration  News  Release 
Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet number 
Facts-on  F i le  
Flight  Research  Center  News  Release  (af ter   8 Jan. 
1976, became Dryden F l igh t   Research Center News 
Release) 
NASA  Flight Research Center’s X-Press 
General E lec tr ic  Forum  magazine 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Goddard  N e w s  
NASA  Goddard Space F l igh t  Center News  Release 
NASA  Goddard  Spaoe  Flight  Center’s  Sa te l l i te   S i tua -  
tion Report% 
General Telephone  &  Electronics News  Release 
Hous ton  Chron ic le  newspaper 
Hous ton   Pos t  newspaper 
Journa l  of  A i r c r a f t  magazine 
Je t  Propulsion Laboratory’s  Lab-Oratory 
Je t  Propulsion Laboratory News Release 
Department of  Commerce Joint  Publications Research 
Service 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space  Center  (Manned 
Spacecraft  Center  un t i l   17  Feb.  1973) News  Re- 
Iease 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space Center’s  Space   N ew s  
R o u n d u p  
American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics’ 
Journal  of  Sp a c e c r a f t  and  R o c k e t s   magazine 
Kansas  C i t y  S ta r   newspaper 
Kansas C i t y  T im e s  newspaper 
NASA  John  F.  Kennedy Space Center News  Release 
Los  Angeles  Hera ld-Exam iner   newspaper 
Lo s  A ng e l e s  T im e s  newspaper 
NASA  Langley  Researah  Center’s  Lang ley   Researcher  
NASA  Langley  Research  Center News  Release 
Los Angeles Times News  Service 
NASA  Lewis Research Center News Release 
NASA  Lewis Research Center’s L ew i s  N ew s  
M iam i   Herald  newspaper 
M iam i   N ew s  newspaper 
M inneapo l is   T r i bun e  newspaper 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space Flight  Center’s  Mar-  
shall  S ta r  
M i lwaukee   Journa l   newspaper 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  F l igh t   Center  News 
Release 
N e w  Ha v en  R eg i s t e r  newspaper 
Newark   N ew s  newspaper 
Nor thern   V i rg in ia  S u n  newspaper 
National Aeronautic Association N ew s  
National  Aeronautic  Association’s  Wor ld   and  U.S.A. 
Na t iona l   Wo r ld  Au ia t ion-Space   Records  
National Aviation Club News Release 
National  Academy  of  Engineering News  Release 
North American Newspaper Alliance 
National  Aoademy  of  Sciences News  Release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National  Research 
Council  News  Release 
276 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

NAS-NRC-NAE  N ew s   R p t  

NASA  Ann 
NASA  Gen  Mgmt Rev Rp t  
NASA  HHR-39 
NASA  Hist  Off 
NASA  Hq   W B  
NASA   h t  Aff 
NASA  L A R ,  XIII/8 
NASA  Leg  Off 
NASA   MOR 

NASA  prog  off 
NASA  p ro j   off 
NASA   Release 
NASA   Rp t   SRL 
NASA   s p a 1 9  
Na t l   Ob s  
Na tu r e  
NBC 
NGS  Release 
NM I  NN  
NOAA   Release 
NRL  Release 
NSC  Release 
NSC   N ew s  
NSC  L e t t e r  
N SF  H igh l igh ts  
NSF  Release 
NSTL  Release 
N Y  N ew s  
N Y T ,  5:4 
NYTNS  
0 S e n  S tar  
Oakland  T r i b  
Om aha  W-H 
ONR   R e v  
P Bull 
P  Znq 
P A 0  
P D  

P I 0  
PMR   M iss i le  
PMR   Release 
P re s  Rp t   74 

SAO   Release 
SBD 
S c i   Am e r  
S c i  & Gout  Rpt 

SciServ 
S D  
SD   Un ion  
S E T   Manpower  Comm en t s  

‘ 

National  Academy  of  Sc ience sNa t iona l   Research 
Council-National  Academy  of  Engineering  N ew s  
R epo r t  
NASA  Announcement 
NASA  Headquarters  “General  Management  Review 
Report” 
NASA  Historical  Report  No.  39 
NASA  History Office 
NASA  Headquarters  W e e k l y  B u l l e t in  
NASA  Office  of  International  Affairs 
NASA  Leg is la t ive  Ac t iv i t ies  R epo r t ,  Vol.  XIII, No.  8 
NASA  Office  of  Legislative  Affairs 
NASA  Headquarters  Mission  Operations  Report,  pre- 
l i i n a r y   prelaunch  and  postlaunch  report  series; 
information  may  be  revised  and  refined  before  pub. 
lication 
NASA  program  office  ( f o r   the   program  reported) 
NASA  project  office  ( fo r   the  project  reported) 
NASA  Headquarters  News  Release 
NASA  report  of  sounding r&ket  launching 
NASA  Special Publication  No.  4019 
National  Observer  magazine 
Na ture   Phys ica l   Sc ience  magazine 
National  Broadcasting  Company 
National  Geographic Society  News  Release 
NASA  Management  Instruction 
NASA  Notice 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration 
News  Release 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  Release 
National  Space Club News Release 
National  Space  Club N ew s  
National  Space Club L e t t e r  
National  Science  Foundation’s  Sc ience   Resources 
S tud i e s   H igh l igh ts  
Nations1 Science Foundation News Release 
NASA  National  Space  Technology  Laboratories  News 
Re  1 e a s  e 
N ew   Y o r k  Daily  News   newspaper 
N ew   Y o r k   T im e s  newspaper,  section  5, page  4 
New York  Times  News Service 
Orlando Sen t ine l   S tar   newspaper 
Oak land   T r i bun e   newspaper 
Omaha   World-Herald newspaper 
Navy’s  Office  of  Naval  Research  Rev iews  
Philadelphia  Even ing   and S u n d a y  Bu l le t in   newspaper 
Ph i lade lph ia   Inqu irer   newspaper 
Public  Affairs  Office 
National  Archives  and  Records  Service’s  W e e k l y  
Comp i la t ion   o j   Presidential  Documen ts  
Public  Information  Office 
USN   Pacific Missile  Range’s  M iss i le  
USN  Pacific  Missile  Range News Release 
Aeronau t ics   and  Space   R epo r t   of  th e  Pres iden t:   1974 
A c t i v i t i e s  
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  News  Release 
D e f en s e /Spa c e   Bus iness   Daily  newspaper 
Scientific  Amer ican   magazine 
Sc ience   &  Governmen t   R epo r t ,   independent  bulletin 
of  science policy 
Science Service  News  service 
Space   Digest  magazine 
S a n  D iego  Un ion  newspaper 
Scientific  Manpower  Commission’s  Sc ien t i f ic ,   Eng i-  
neer ing ,  Techn ica l  Manpower  Commen ts  
277 

SF 
SF  Ch ron  
SF  E x am  
Sou  Ae ro  
Sou  R p t  
S P  
Spaceport  N ew s  
Spacewarn 
SR  l is t  
S S N  
S t  Lou i s   G D  
S t   Lou i s   P-D 
T-Picayune 
T e c h  R e v  

Testimony 
Tex t  
Transcript 

UN Reg 
UP1 
USGS Release 
USPS Release 
w Post 
W  S ta r -New s  
W F C  Release 

WH Release 
W I T  
WS Release 
WSJ  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

British  Interplanetary  Society’s  Space f l igh t  magazine 
S u n   Francisco Chronicle  newspaper 
Exam ine r   newspaper 
Sal2 
Sov i  
ce   newsletter 
Center  for  Foreign  Technology’s  Sov ie t   Repo r t  
(translations) 
Space   Propulsion  newsletter 
NASA John F.  Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport  N ew s  
IUWDS World  Data  Center  A  for  Rockets  and   Satel- 
lites’  Spacewarn  Bu l le t in  
NASA  compendium of  sounding  rocket  launches 
Sov ie t   Sciences  in  th e   New s ,   publication  of  Electro- 
Optical  Systems, Inc. 
S t .  Louis  Globe-Democrat newspaper 
S t .  Louis  Post-Dispatch newspaper 
New  Orleans  T ime s -P icayune  newspaper 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology’s  Techno logy  
Review 
Congressional h t i m o n y ,  prepared  statement 
Prepared report or speech text 
Official transcript  of  news conference o r   congressional 
hearing 
United  Nations  Pub l ic  Registry  of  Space F l igh t  
United  Press  International  news service 
U.S.  Geological Survey News Release 
U.S.  Postal  Service News  Release 
Wa sh ing ton  Po s t   newspaper 
Wa sh ing ton  S ta r -New s   newspaper 
NASA  Wallops  Flight  Center  News  Release  (af ter   26 
April  1974;  formerly  Wallops  Station  News  Re- 
lease) 
White House News  Release 
World  Journal  T r ibune   newspaper 
NASA  Wallops  Station  News  Release  (see  also  WFC )  
Wa l l  S t ree t   Journal  newspaper 

278 

INDEX  AND  LIST OF  ABBREVIATIONS 
AND  ACRONYMS 

A 

A-7  (attack  fighter  aircraft),  91  
A-9  (research  aircraft),  84 
A-10  (close-air-support  aircraft),  22,  141- 
142,  183-184,  225 
A-300B  (European  airbus),  107 
AAI  COT.,  56-57 
AAAS   (American  Assn.  for  the  Advance- 
ment  of  Science), 45-46 
AAS .   See American  Astronautical  Society 
and  American  Astronomical  Society. 
ABM  (Antiballistic missile system),  123-124, 
215 
ABMA   (Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency),  1 
Abourezk,  Sen.  James G.,  72 
Academy of  Sciences, New York.  See New 
York  Academy  of  Science. 
Academy  of  Sciences,  Sweden.  See  Swed- 
ish  Academy  of  Sciences. 
Academy  of  Sciences, U.S.S.R.  See  Soviet 
Academy  of  Sciences. 
Acapulco,  Mexico,  77 
Accelerometer,  40,  145 
Accident,  aircraft,  14,  28,  51 ,   5 5 ,   71,  78, 
96,  97,  100-101,  123 
ACF.  %e  Air  combat  fighter. 
Acoustic  composite  nacelle  program,  48 
.%e  Attitude  control  system. 
ACS. 
Active  control  aircraft  program,  48 
Adams,  Capt.  Harold  B.  (USAF ) ,   163 
“Advanced  Composites”  ( A I A A   presenta- 
tion),  15 
Advanced  fighter  technology  integration 
(AFTI)  aircraft,  76 
Advanced  medium  STOL  transport  (AMST), 
22 
Advanced  Nude&  Research  (congressional 
report),  184 
AE  (Atmosphere  Explorer).  See  Explorer 
51. 
AEC.  %e  Atomic  Energy  Commission. 
AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Systems  Office, 
184 
AEDC.  See  Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
ment  Center. 
Aerobee  (sounding  rocket) 
170.  269.  270 
17oA:  2%27  1 
I70A-HE,  270 
200,  2,  3,  264,  265,  267,  269,  270,  271 
200A,  264-265,  266,*267, 268,  270-271 
350,  2 6 6 2 6 7  
Aeroflight  simulator,  107 

Aeroflot  (U.S.S.R.  airline),  80 
Ae ronau t ica l   Satellite  (Aerosat)  system, 
77-78,  101,  144,  164, 209 
Aeronautics  (see  also  individual  aircraft), 
140-141,  150 
aerodynamics,  44-45,  73-74,  114,  117, 
160,204, 
budget,  21-25,  27,  48,  84,  109 
energy  conservation,  25,  29,  44-45,  48, 
55-56,  192, 211-212,  224 
research  and  technology,  44-45,  48,  84, 
97,  99-100,  123,  148-149,  1 5 4 1 5 5 ,  
156,  183,  224-225 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Report  of  the  Pres- 
ident:  1973  Ac t iv i t ies ,   80 
Aeronomy satellite.  See Aeros, I and  Aeros  
2 .  
Aeros  program  (West  German-U.S.  satel- 
lite  project),  135 
Aeros I (West German aeronomy  satellite), 
135 
Aeros   2  (Aeros-B),  2,  134-135,  221-222, 
227,  242,  257,  259 
Aerosat.  See  Aeronautical  Satellite  sys- 
tem. 
A e r o s a t   Sp a c e   S egm en t   Program.  See 
Aeronautical  Satellite  system. 
Aerosols,  82-83 
Aerospace Gorp.,  72,  152, 264-265 
Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  of  America, 
Inc.  (AIA),  3,  10,  19, 94,  119,  189 
Aerospace  industry,  4-5,  9,  35,  61 
employment,  94,  189 
energy  crisis  impact,  3,  52,  100 
research,  89-90 
sales,  3,  19,  81,  119,  191 
Aerospace  Research  Center,  Italy,  188 
Ad ro sp a t i a l e   ( S o c i i t i   N a t i o n a l e  
Industrielle  Abrospatiale),  37,  136-137 
Aerostat  (tethered  balloon),  174-175 
AFCRL  (Air  Force  Cambridge  R e s e a r ch  
Laboratories),  126 
AFGE  (American  Federation  of  Govern- 
ment  Employees),  115-1  16 
AFML  (Air  Force  Materials  Laboratory), 
157 
Africa,  4 0 4 1 ,   119,  215-216,  254 
AFSATCOM (Air Force satellite Communica- 
tions  System),  21-22 
AFSC.  !See  Air  Force.  Systems  Command. 
AFTI.  See  Advanced  fighter  technology 
integration  aircraft. 

279 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Agreement.  See International cooperation; 
International  cooperation,  space;  Mem- 
orandum   of  Understanding;  and   Trea- 
ty. 
Agreement  on   Scientific  a n d   T e c h n i c a l  
Cooperation  for   the  Peaceful  Uses  of 
Atomic  Energy  (US-U.S.S.R.),  25 
Agricultural  Research  Service,  86 
Agriculture,  62,  86,  105,  109,  132 
Agriculture,  Dept.  of  (USDA),  4 8 4 9 ,   65, 
90 
See  Aerospace  Industries  Assn.  of 
A IA .  
America,  Inc. 
A IAA .   See American  Institute of  Aeronau- 
tics  and   Astronautics. 
Air  combat  fighter  (ACF;  see  also  YF-16 
and  YF-17),  22,  94,  116,  183-184 
Air  Force.  See  U.S. Air  Force. 
Air  Force  Air  Weather  Service,  120 
Air  Force  Avionics  Laboratory,  143 
Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Labora- 
tories  (AFCRL),  126 
A i r   F o r c e   D e c o r a t i o n   for  Exceptional 
Service,  157 
Air  Force  Flight  Dynamics  Laboratory, 
76 
Air  Force  Materials  Laboratory  (AFML), 
157 
Air  Force  Satellite  Communications 
(AFSATCOM)  System,  21-22 
Air  Force  Systems  Command   (AFSC;  see 
also  Arnold  Engineering  Development 
Center  and  Space  Missile  Test  Center), 
7,  10,  12,  91,  143,  144,  145,  149 
Air  Foundation  Certificate of  Recognition, 
219 
Air  France,  107 
Air  Inter  (French  domestic  airline),  38 
Air-launched  cruise  missile,  22 
Air  Line  Pilots  Assn.  (ALPA),  87 
Air pollution  (see also Global Air Sampling 
Program),  12,  29,  38,  86,  91-92,  98 ,  
143,  145-146,  151,  168,  188,  225-226 
A i r   Po l lu t ion   Con tro l   Div.,  Cleveland, 
Ohio.  168 
Air  traffic  control  (ATC),  12,  15-16,  96, 
101,  109,  114,  123,  144,  238 
Air  Transpor t   Assn.  of  America  ( A T A ) ,  
99-100,  115-116,  148 
A i r b o r n e   I n f r a r e d   Ob s e rv a to ry   (AIRO; 
C-141  aircraft),  6,  194 
Airborne  science-shuttle  experiment  Sys-, 
- tern  simulation 
( A S S E S S )   program, 
177 
A i r b o r n e   w a r n i n g   a n d   con t ro l   system 
(AWACS),  60 
Airborne  weather  reconnaissance  system 
(AWRS ) ,   I20 
Airbus.  See A-300B. 
Airbus  Industries,  107 
Aircraft  (see  also  individual  aircraft  and  
kinds  of  aircraft;  Accident,  aircraft; 
Noise,  aircraft;  and   Safety),  9,  19,  60, 
98,  108,  151,  158-159,  166 
a ir   pollution  effects,  12,  213 
budget,  21-22 

energy  crisis  impact,  100 
scientific  applications,  62,  65,  98,  104- 
105,  118-119 
technology.  See Aeronautics. 
testing,  141 
Aircraft  Design  Award,  148 
Aircraft  industry,  12,44, 119, 138-139,  148, 
189 
Aircraft  survey  program,  21 
Airlines  (see  also  individual  airlines),  44, 
5 1,  68,  7 1-72,  74,  77-78,  87,  89,  94, 
99-100,  115-116,  118,  119,  154155 ,  156, 
157 
(A i rbo rn e   I n f r a r e d   O b s e r v a t o r y ;  
AIRO 
C-141  aircraft),  6,  194 
Airport  (see  also  individual  airports),  96 
Aksnes,  Dr.  Kaare,  167 
Al&ama  Space and  Rocket  Center, Hunts- 
ville,  Ala.,  28 
Alabama,  Univ.  of,  13 
A L A D D I N .   See Atmospheric  Layering  and  
Density  Distribution  of  Ions  and  Neu- 
trals  program. 
Alaska, 88 ,97 ,   106-107,  113-1  14,  130,  167, 
186 
Albee,  Dr .   A.,  64 
Albert,  Rep.  Carl  B.,  1 8 6 1 8 7  
Alcyone  1A  (rocke t  motor),  11 1 
Aldrin,  Col.  Edwin  E.,  Jr .   (USAF,  Ret.), 
135,  138 
Alexandria,  Va.,  164-165 
Algeria,  169 
A k e r n o n   B l a i r   Indus tr ia l   Contractors, 
Inc.,  31 
Ali,  Muhammad,  14 
Allahbad,  India,  63 
Alloys,  58,  173,  184 
ALPA   (Air  Line  Pilots  Assn.),  87  
Alpha  Orionis.  See  Betelgeuse. 
ALSEP   (Apollo  lunar  surface  experiment 
package),  208-209,  223 
Aluminum,  52,  90-91,  100,  173,  210-211, 
212 
Aluminum  oxide,  38 
Alyeska  Pipeline  Service Co.,  134 
American  Airlines,  Inc.,  74,  120 
American  Assn.  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science  (AAAS ) ,   4 5 4 6  
A m e r i c a  Assn.  of  Railroads,  86 
American  Astronautical  Society  (AAS),  59, 
152 
American  Astronomical  Society  (AAS),  76, 
214 
American  Can   Co.,  134 
Am e r i c a n   F e d e r a t i o n   of  Gove rnmen t  
Employees  (AFGE),  115-1  16 
American  Geophysical  Union,  82,  195 
American  Institute  of  A e r o n a u t i c s   a n d  
1 4 1 5 ,  99-100,  148, 
Astronautics (AIAA), 
171,  195 
American  Physical  Society,  90,  92  
American  Science  and  Engineering,  Inc., 
139,  158,  264,  268 
Am e r i c a n   Telephone  &  Telegraph  Co. 
(AT  &T),  3 4 ,  88,  97,  1 4 6 1 4 7  

280 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Ames  Research  Center  (ARC,  NASA )  
aeronautics,  6,  99,  148,  166,  211-212, 
27 3 
applications research,  103 
awards ceremony,  150-15 1 
biological  research,  11  
employment,  220 
establishment,  156 
planetary  exploration project,  58-59,  88, 
106,  107,  120-121,  153 
space  shuttle  support,  16,  141,  177 
Amino  acid,  132 
Amir,  Salah,  8 
Amphibian  aircraft,  168 
Amsat  Oscar 7 (Orbiting Satellite Carrying 
Amateur Radio),  200, 201,  221,  227,  250, 
257.  259 
AMST  iAdvanced medium  STOL  transport), 
?? 
LL Amsterdam, The  Netherlands,  178 
Analysis  of  Fede ra l   R & D   Funding  b y  
Function.  Fiscal  Years  1969-1975  ( N S F  
report  72-313).  160-161 
Anani,  Dr.  Osama,  26 
Anchorage,  Alaska,  4 
Anders,  L / C   William  A.  (USAF,  Pet.),  194 
Anderson,  Dr.  David  J.,  140-141 
Anderson,  Roy  E.,  181 
Andoeya,  Norway,  265,  271 
Andover,  Me.,  3 4  
Andrechuk,  Dr.  Ted,  144-145 
Andromeda  Space  Covers,  168 
Anik  (Canadian  comsat),  169 
An ik   I  (Telesat  A),  84 
Anik  2  (Telesat  B),  4 
Anniversary 
Ap0110  I I ,   135-136,  138 
European Space  Research Organization, 
67 
first  manned  space  flight,  85 
International Telecommunications  Satel- 
lite Organization,  151-152 
'  Skylab  1 ,  45,  103 
Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences,  104 
(ANS-A;  Netherlands  Astronomical 
Ans  I 
Satellite),  2,  159-160,  221-222,  227, 244, 
7 5 9  
A N ~ P A  (Astronomical Netherlands Satellite 
Program  Authority),  160 
Antarctica,  94 
Antelope  Valley  Board  of  Trade,  Calif., 
189 
Antenna,  181 
astronomical  research,  14, 45-46,  182 
communications systems,  3 4 ,  106,  109, 
114,  169,  171 
manned  spacecraft,  16,  191 
seismology,  163 
solar  research,  111,  149,  212 
technology,  47-48 
tracking,  101,  106,  109,  176 
Antiballistic  missile  (ABM),  123-124,  215 
Anticyclones,  166-167,  222 
Antigua,  West  Indies,  33,  265 
AN/TPN-19 
(air  traffic  control  radar  sys- 
tem),  12 

Apel,  Dr.  John   R.,  45,  55 
Apollo  (program),  4 5 4 6 ,   87,  152,  21 1 
achievements,  27,  28-29,  136 
completion,  21,  53,  141 
information  exchange,  193 
press  comment,  31,  69-70,  138,  153 
technology  utilization,  10,  13,  191 
Apollo  (spacecraft),  16-17,  115,  191, 207, 
216.  218 
Apollo  11 ,  72-73,  135-136,  138,  147,  161 
APOIIO IZ, 72-73,  208-209 
Apollo  13,  35 
Ap o f fo  14,  72-73,  168,  208-209 
APOIIO 15,  72-73,  149, 215 
Ap0110  16,  28,  72-73,  215 
Ap0110  17,  15,  59,  64,  72-73,  102,  149, 
208-209 
Apollo  17:  Preliminary  Science  R ep o r t  
(NASA  SP-SO),  72-73 
Apollo  lunar  surface  experiment  package 
(ALSEP),  208-209,  223 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  (ASTP),  16,  25, 
115,  118,  131,  152,  155,  170,  178, 211, 
227,  261 
budget.  21.  41.  84.  204 
comkun ica t ions ,  7,  44,  48,  77,  123,  191, 
238,  258 
contract,  1,  16,  64,  118,  192 
docking,  147,  164,  172,  1.31,  232,  243, 
252.  262 
emblem  selection,  52 
media  coverage,  121,  190 
mission preparations, 7,  81-82,  122,  123, 
164165 ,   192,  193,  207-208,  216 
presidential  briefing,  65-66 
press  comment,  36,  39,  172 
press  conference,  82,  147, 208 
safety,  167 
significance,  124 
space  manufacturing,  184 
sy s t em s   development,  1,  79,  88,  102, 
1 94 
testing,  41,  78,  151,  157,  164,  191,  221, 
228,  232,  243 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  Working 
Group ,   US-U.S.S.R.,  7 
Apollo  Telescope  Moun t   (ATM ) ,   1,  30,  68, 
75,  99-100,  139,  152,  174,  264 
Appalachia,  106-107,  129 
Applications  Technology Satellite (ATS;  see 
also  A t s   I  through  6), 109,  116,  139 
Aquifer,  175-176 
Aquila  (constellation),  182 
Arab-Israeli  war,  11,  28,  52 
A rab   League,  8,  169 
ARC .   See Ames  Research  Center. 
Arcas  (sounding  rocket),  93,  265 
Super Arcas,  264,  266267 ,   268,  269 
Arecibo  Observatory,  Puerto  Rico,  182, 
20 1-202 
Argentina,  14 
Argon,  26,  68,  70 
Ariane  (launch  vehicle),  189,  196 
Ariane  Program  Board,  189-190 
Ariel  I  (U.K.  satellite),  188 
Ariel  4 ,   188 

28 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Ariel  5  (UK-5),  2,  187-188,  228,  247, 
257,  259 
ARIES (Astronomical Radio Interferometric 
Earth  Surveying  project),  163 
Aries  (sounding  rocket),  57 
Arizona,  45 
Arizona,  Univ.  of,  167 
Armstrong,  Neil  A.,  135-136,  137,  138, 
154 
Army.  See  U.S.  Army. 
Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency  (ABMA),  1 
Army  Electronics  Command,  110 
Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center 
(AEDC),  39,  55,  163,  167,  202 
Artyukhin,  Lt.  Col.  Yuri  P.  (cosmonaut), 
122,  130, 239-240,  241,  262 
Asiago  Astrophysical  Observatory,  Italy, 
9-10 
Assembly  of  Engineering,  129 
Assembly  of  Parties  ( INTELSAT ) ,   26 
ASSESS  (Airborne  science-shuttle  experi- 
ment  system simulation  program),  177 
Asteroid,  37,  45,  177-178 
Asteroid  Belt,  2,  42,  58-59,  65,  98 
ASTP.  see  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project. 
Astrobee  (sounding  rocket) 
Astrobee  D ,   270 
Astrobee  F,  261 
Astronaut,  7Ch71,  98,  99,  127,  143,  183 
accident,  28 
accomplishments, 7,  99 
awards,  6 5 4 6  
APoIIo,  15,  59,  135-136,  138,  208-209 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project,  82,  115,  123, 
124,  164-165,  170,  178,  208 
force  reduction,  152 
press  comment,  51 
press  conference,  1,  82  
Skylab,  1,  7,  30,  32,  42-44,  51,  65-66, 
67,  153,  157-158,  193,  195 
space  flight  response,  1,  32,  42-44 
space  shuttle,  113 
Astronautics  Engineer  Award  (NSC),  58- 
59 
Astronomical  Netherlands  Satellite  Pro- 
gram  Authority  (ANSPA ) ,   160 
Astronomical  Radio  Interferometric  Earth 
Surveying  (AR I E S )   project,  163 
Astronomy 
(see  also  individual  celestial 
bod i e s ,   ob se rva to r ie s ,   and  probes; 
Telescope;  and  X-ray  telescope),  21, 
25,  38,  39,  73,  83,  160,  168,  185,  207, 
252,  266 
galactic,  264,  265,  267,  268,  269,  270- 
27 1 
interstellar  clouds,  132 
radio,  23,  176,  188-189 
solar,  2,  28-29,  32,  57,  67 
x-ray,  125,  133,  159,  160 
Astrophysics,  4 
AT&T .   See American  Telephone  &  Tele- 
graph  Co. 
ATA.  See  Air  Transport  Assn.  of  Amer- 
ica. 
ATC.  See  Air  traffic  control. 

Atlantic Ocean, 33, 4 M 1 ,  63-64,  65,  101, 
Atlantic Ocean.  33.  4 M 1 .   63-64.  65.  101. 
- ,  - - -  
104,  117,  131,  i37,  144,  164,  '168,  202: 
104,  117,  131,  137,  144,  164,  168,  202, 
236,  258 
236,  258 
Atlas  (launch  vehicle),  113 
Atlas  (launch  vehicle),  113 
Atlas  F.  132-133.  160,  209.  241-242 
Atlas  F.  132-133.  160,  209.  241-242 
Atlas-Centaur,  33-34,  202,  251,  259 
A m .   See  Apollo  Telescope  Mount. 
Atmosphere  (see  also  individual  planets), 
16, 23,  24,  102,  149,  153,  166 
balloon  observation,  98,  101-102,  185, 
197 
chromosphere,  67 
magnetosphere,  77,  11 1,  177 
pollution,  12,  143,  224 
satellite  research,  40,  102,  144,  145, 
228,  229-231,  242,  248,  249,  253,  258 
sounding  rocket  research,  126,  263-271 
sm to sphe re ,   86,  98,  188 
thermosphere,  40,  5 5 ,   144 
troposphere,  23 
upper  atmosphere, 65,  98,  104,  134-135, 
145,  151,  169,  185,  194,  213,  218-219 
U.S.S.R.  study  (see  also  Appendix  A), 
52,  122,  131-132,  194,  195,  215 
Atmosphere  Explorer  (A E ) .   See  Explorer 
5 1 .  
Atmospheric  Layering  and  Density  Dis- 
tribution 
of 
Ions 
and  Neutrals 
(ALADD IN )   project,  126,  223,  268 
Atmospheric  Sciences  Laboratory  (USA ) ,  
197 _ _ ,  
Atmospheric  Variability 
Experiment 
(AVE-2),  101-102. 
Atomic  bomb,  70-71,  125 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC),  22,  23, 
66,  72,  80,  83,  87,  107,  184-185,  187, 
197 
Atrophy,  75-76 
ATs  (Applications  Technology  Satellite), 
109,  116,  139 
A t s   I ,   109,  147 
A t s   3,  109,  120,  129,  147,  181,  188 
A t s  5 ,   109 
A i s   6  (ATS-F),  2,  44,  113-114,  139,  176, 
225 
ASTP  support,  44,  191 
communications,  116,  165,  221,  225- 
226 
l aun ch ,   .108-109,  227,  228,  238,  257, 
258 
mission  profile,  48,  258 . 
propulsion  technology,  224 
television  broadcasting,  48,  106-  107, 
116,  129 
A t t i tude   control  system  (ACS),  148-149, 
158.  183 
AU:  astronomical  unit. 
Aurora,  72,  197 
Australia,  14, 78,  132,  250 
Automotive  research,  25-26,  73,  86,  99, 
117.  118 
Auto-pilot  system,  151 
Avco  Corp.,  8 
AVE-2 
(Atmospheric  Variability  Experi- 
ment),  101-102 

282 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 

1974 

Aviation.  See   A e r o n a u t i c s ,   A i r c r a f t ,  
A i r l in e s ,   Civil  aviation,  and  General 
aviation. 
Avionics,  48,  56,  81,  103,  199 
AWAC S   (Airborne  Warning  and  Con t ro l  
System),  60 
Awards 
aeronautics,  1 4 1 5 ,  59,  148 
foreign,  52,  59,  181,  188-189 
government,  157, 219 
NASA ,   39,65-66,88,112,  I5&151,171, 
195,  203,  213-214 
military,  28,  133,  156,  157,  171 
society,  14-15,  45,  58-59,  95,  118,  137, 
148,  157,  169-170,  171,  178,  193,  195, 
219 
university,  131, 211 
AW R S   (Airborne  Weather  Reconnaissance 
System),  60 

B 

B-1  (advanced  strategic  bomber),  7,  22, 
39,  63,  100,  183-184,  193, 225 
B-52  (stratofortress),  7,  52-53,  193,  273- 
274 
Baade,  Dr.  Walter,  31 
BAC .   See  British  Aircraft  Corp. 
Backfire  (U.S.S.R.  bomber  aircraft),  62- 
63  
Bacteria,  87,  94 
Badge of  Pilot-Cosmonaut  of  the U.S.S.R., 
181 
Bahamas,  1 7 4 1 7 5  
Bali,  Indonesia,  1W 1 0 1  
Ballistic  missile  system,  28 
B a l loon   ( see   a l so   L ow e r   A tmo sphe re  
Composition  and  Temperature  Experi- 
ment,  and  Project  d a   V inc i ) ,   13-14, 
4 W 1 ,   63,  86,  101-102,  103,  144,  170, 
174175 ,   185, 226 
Balloon-borne  ultraviolet 
stellar  spec- 
trometer  (BUSS ) ,   185 
Baltimore,  Md.,  19, 42,  134 
Bank  of  America,  134 
Barbados,  14 
Barking  Sands,  Hawaii,  270 
Barnard  (star),  179,  270 
Barnes  Engineering  Co.,  134 
BART  (Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  System), 
89-90 
Basalt,  170 
Bathythermographs,  153 
Baton  Rouge,  Ca.,  83 
Bay  Area  Rapid  Transit  System  (BART), 
89-90 
Baykonur 
Cosmodrome, 
Tyuratam, 
U.S.S.R., launch  (see  also  Appendix 
A  and  Appendix  C),  5-6 
Cosmos  satellites,  71,  78,  108,  147 
Intercosmos 11 ,   104, 237 
Luna  22,  108 
Luna  23,  193 
Molniya  I-S, 141 
Salyut  3,  122 

Salyut  4 ,  218 
Soyuz   14, 122,  130 
Soyuz   IS, 155 
SOYUZ  16,  207-208 
Soyuz   17,  218 
Bean,  Capt.  Alan  L.  (USN ) ,   28,  121-122, 
193 
Beechcraft  (aircraft),  65 
Beeler,  DeElroy  E.,  1 7 6 1 7 7  
Beirut,  Lebanon,  169 
Belgium,  54,  67,  101,  138-139,  156 
Bell,  Larry  E.,  89 
Bendix  Corp.,  117 
Beregovoy,  Maj.  Gen.  Georgy  T.  (cosmo- 
naut),  218 
Bereznyak,  Aleksander  Y., 131 
Bergman,  Jules,  51 
Bergstrom  AFB,  Tex.,  28 
Bering  Sea,  109- 
Berry,  Dr.  Charles  A.,  3 4 3 5 ,   43-44,  97 
Betelgeuse  (Alpha  Orionis;  star),  214 
bev:  billion  electron  volts. 
Bhopal,  India,  13-14 
Bicycle  ergometer,  3 1 
Biofeedback,  144-145 
Biomedical  Application  Team  (NASA ) ,   95 
Birmingham,  Ala.,  143 
Birth  control,  105,  109 
B I S   (B r i t i sh   Interplanetary  Society),  73, 
179 
Bisplinghoff,  Dr.  Raymond  L.,  136,  182 
Bjurstedt,  Hilding  A.,  178 
BL  Lacertae  (quasar),  76 
Black  Brant  (sounding  rocket),  72 
Black  Brant  VC,  264,  265-267,  268 ,  
270-27  1 
Black  hole  (space  phenomenon),  56,  92, 
99-100,  133,  171,  182,  187 
Blackbird  (SR-7  1;  reconnaisance  aircraft), 
163,  199-200 
Blood  pressure  monitoring  system,  144- 
145, 226 
Blume,  John  A.  & Associates,  141 
Blumrick,  Josef  F.,  81 
B M F ~  (German  Federal  Ministry  for  Re- 
search and  Technology),  135, 213 
Bobko,  L /C   Karol  J.  (USAF ) ,   121-122 
Boehm,  Josef,  1 
Boeing  707  (iet  passenger  transport),  89 
Boeing  720,  102 
Boeing  727,  17,  38,  99 , 
Boeing  737,  38,  123 
Boeing  747,  12,  79,  120,  157,  160,  213, 
224 
Boeing  Co.,  1,  19,  35-36,  89-90,  112,  175, 
201,  209-210 
B om b e r   a i r c r a f t   ( see   a l so   B-1,  &52, 
Backfire,  and  Sukhoi),  70,  156, 204 
Bombsight,  1 5 4 1 5 5  
Bonn,  Univ.  of,  268 
Booster.  See  Launch  vehicle. 
Borman,  Col.  F rank   (USAF ,   Ret.),  94 
Boron,  91 
Boron-epoxy  composite,  192 
Boston,  Mass.,  19,  89-90,  118 
BOW shock,  12-13,  197,  198 

283 

Boy  Scouts of  America,  58 
bps:  bits  per  second. 
Bradfield  (comet),  90 
Bragin,  Dr.  Joseph,  140-141 
Brakes,  99 
Brand,  Vance  D.,  82,  121-122 
Brayton  energy  conversion  system,  29 
Brazil,  11,  14,  38,  119,  130,  169,  195, 
236-237 
Breccia,  72-73 
Bremen,  West  Germany,  199 
Brevard  County,  Fla.,  119,  141 
Brezhnev, Leonid  I.,  Gen.  Sec.  Communist 
Party Central Committee (U.S.S.R.),  25, 
123-124,  204 
Bridge,  Dr.  Herbert  S.,  27 
British  Aircraft  Corp.  (BAC ) ,   37,  8 6 8 7 ,  
136-137 
British  Interplanetary  Society  (BIS), 73, 
179 
British  Labor  Party,  1 3 6 1 3 7  
Brooks,  Robert  A.,  136 
Brown,  Gen.  George  S.  (U SA F ) ,   103 
Brown,  Dr.  Robert,  208 
Brown  Univ.,  112 
Brussels,  Belgium,  99,  123-124 
Budget,  NASA ,   16,  31,  152 
bills  introduced,  83-84,  139 
bills  passed,  92,  101,  109-110,  118,  124, 
149-150,  153 
bills  signed.  121.  164 
cong r ekon a l   hearings,  19,  27,  41,  42- 
44, 46,  47,  48,  54,  55-57,  61-62,  64, 
6 6 6 7 ,  68 
press  comment,  31,  35,  165,  196 
mess  conference.  24-25 
reduction,  27,  109-110,  124,  134,  204, 
214 
request,  2&25,  27,  73,  176 
Bulgaria,  249 
Buoys,  119,  120 
Burch,  Dean,  4 
Bureau  of  Mines,  U .S . ,   54 
Burr,  Franklin  L.,  Award,  45 
Bush,  Dr.  Vannevar,  125 
Bush  differential  analyzer,  125 
Bu shuy ev ,   Kon s t an t in   D.,  81-82,  157, 
207-208 
BUSS  (ba l loon -bo rne   u l t r av io l e t   s t e l l a r  
spectrometer),  185 
Butler,  T.  Melvin,  213-214 
Butterfield,  Alexander  P.,  77-78,  101,  144 
Bykovsky,  Col.  Valery  F.  (cosmonaut), 
81-82 

C 

C-5A  (Galaxy; military  cargo aircraft),  14, 
165,  192 
C-46  (Commando  aircraft),  65,  119 
C-130  (Hercules;  military  transport),  192, 
199-200 
C-141  (research  aircraft),  6,  194 
CAB   (Civil  Aeronautics  Board),  79 
Cadieux, Ambassador  Leo  (Canada),  144 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1974 

Cairo,  U.A.R.,  8 
Cal  Tech  Management  Club,  200 
Calcium,  157-158 
Calcium  fluoride,  173 
California,  9,  42,  130,  163,  167-168,  169 
California  Institute  of  Technology  ( C a l  
Tech),  168,  175-176,  177 
California,  Univ.  of  (see  also  Lick  Ob- 
servatory),  115, 267,  270-271 
Callisto  (Jovian  moon),  166167 ,   198 
Caloris  Basin  (Mercury),  173 
Ca lyp so   (oceanographic  research  vessel), 
188 
Camera 
(see  also  Television;  Video- 
telephone;  and  Vidicon  receiving  tube), 
2,  3,  102,  112,  143,  187 
Cameron,  Dr.  Alastair  G .   W.,  90 
Cameron,  D r .   Roy  E.,  94 
Campbell,  Jack  M.,  194-195 
Campbell,  John  P.,  15 
Canada  (see  also Anik  2  and  Communica- 
tions  Technology  Satellite),  4,  38,  39, 
71,  77-78,  89,  99-100,  101,  130,  176, 
195, 209,  250 
Cancer,  86,  153, 200 
Canopus  (star),  5 
Canopus  sensor,  231 
Cape  Canaveral,  Fla.,  1 
Cape  Canaveral Air  Force  Station,  165 
Carbon,  27,  167-168 
Carbon  dioxide,  2,  13,  16,  38,  70,  89,  187 
Carbon  monoxide,  26 
Cardiology,  54,  123-124,  143,  154,  158 
Cardiotachometer,  143, 226 
Caribbean  Sea,  65,  153,  156 
Carnarvon  Tracking  Station,  Au s t r a l i a ,  
77 
C a r r ,   Col.  Gerald  P.  (usMC), 
31-32,  91,  92,  221 
Carryinz the Fire: A n  Astronaut’s Journeys 
(book),  147 
Case  Institute  of  Applied  Sciences,  108 
Casper  (Apollo  16  command  module),  28 
Castenholtz,  Paul  D.,  15 
Castor  (rocket  engine),  85 
Castor  I1   (TX-354-5  rocket  motor),  146 
Causse,  Jean-Pierre,  42,  54 
Census,  42 
Centaur  (launch  vehicle  upper  stage),  178 
Centaurus  (constellation),  17 1 
C en t e r   f o r   A s t rophy s i c s ,   C am b r i d g e ,  
Mass.,  133 
Central  America,  65 
Centre  National d’btudes Spatiales  (CNES ) ,  
France,  216 
Cerebral  palsy,  103 
e 
Cerna;,  C a p t .   Eug en e   A.  (USN ) ,   115, 
12 1-1 22 
Cesium-137,  190, 247 
Chalmers,  R. Bruce,  105 
Chambers,  John   A.,  69 
Chanute* Octave, 
148 
Charles  Stark  Draper  Laboratory,  Inc . ,  
79 
Charnell,  Robert,  45 
Chemistry,  59,  157 
284 

1,  7,  30, 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Cherry,  George  W.,  44,  56 
Chicago,  Ill.,  89-90,  192 
Chicago,  Univ.  of,  4 5 4 6  
Childs,  Marquis,  3 
Chile,  14 
China  Airlines-Taiwan,  89 
C h i n a ,   Peop le ’ s   Repub l ic   of  (P.R.C.), 
51-52,  89,  105 
China,  Republic of  (Nationalist),  89 
Christensen, Albert  F.,  95 
Chromatography,  168 
Chromosphere  (earth),  67 
Chrysler Corp.,  16-17,  117,  118 
C I A P  (climatic impact assessment  program), 
86,  265 
Cincinnati  Electronics,  Inc.,  110 
’ 
Circinus X - l   (x-ray  source),  133 
Civil  Aeronautics  Board  (CAB),  79 
Civil  aviation,  146,  148,  154155 ,   183 
Civil  Aviation  Administration  (P.R .C . ) ,  
89 
Civil  Service,  211,  220 
Civil  Service  Commission  (csc),  14,  66, 
115-116,  220 
Clark,  Dr.  John  C.,  110 
Clean  combustor  program,  145-146,  224 
Cleary,  Charles  J.,  Award  (USAF ) ,   157 
C lemen t s ,   William  P.,  Jr . ,   Secretary  of 
Defense,  141-142 
Cleveland,  Ohio,  168 
Climatic 
impact  assessment  program 
(CIAP),  86,  265 
Climatology.  See  Meteorology. 
Cloud  study  (see  also  Interstellar  clouds 
and  Oo r t  cloud),  185, 2 W 2 0 1  
meteorology,  42,  52,  61-62,  104,  119, 
249,  253,  258 
planetary,  26, 2 7 , 4 1 4 2 ,   82-83,  168,208, 
-.*-. 
LLL 
U.S.S.R.,  92,  131-132,  194,  215,  241 
C M   (command  module;  see also Command 
and  service  module),  28,  44 
CM L   Satellite  Corp.,  130 , 
CN E S  (Centre National  d’Etudes  Spatiales), 
France,  216 
Coal,  11,  20,  29,  92,  154,  187 
Cockpit ground-proximity warning  system, 
10&101 
Cole,  Judith  A.,  102 
Collier,  Robert  J.,  Trophy,  95 
Collins,  B / G   Michael  (U SA F ,   R.),  135,  138, 
147 
Colombia,  14 
Colorado,  70-71,  112 
Colorado,  Univ.  of,  264,  265-266,  270- 
I -  * 
L I 1  
Columbia  Univ.,  265,  270,  271 
Comet (see also Bradfield;  Encke;  Halley’s; 
and  Kohoutek),  9-10,  45,  118-119 
Comet  Kohoutek  WorkshoD.  118-1  19 
Command  and  service  module  (CSM),  41, 
82,  151,  165 
Command  module  (cM),  28,  44  
Commerce, Dept.  of  (DOC) ,   19,  104,  200 
Commercial  aviation.  See Airlines. 

C o m m i t t e e   f o r   t h e   Ree lec t ion   of  the 
President,  146 
Committee  on   Energy,  119 
Committee on   the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer 
Space  (U.N.),  46,  200 
Commonwealth  Science  a n d   I n d u s t r i a l  
Research  Organization  (csr~o), 17 1- 
I ?? 1 I L  
Communications,  7,  15-16,  70,  101,  109, 
238 _. . 
Communications satellite (see  also individ- 
ual  programs,  satellites,  and  systems, 
such  a s   Aeronautical  Satellite  pro- 
g r a m ,   A e ro s a t ,   Air  Force  Satellite 
Communications  System,  Arnsar  Os- 
car 7 ,  A n i k   I ,  A t s   I ,  Communications 
Technology  Satellite,  Fleet  Sa te l l i te  
C o m m u n i c a t i o n s   System,  Intelsat, 
Maritime -Communications  S a t e l l i t e  
System, Molniya  I-S, Oscar I ,  Skynet, 
Syrnphon ie   I,  and  Wesrar  I) ,   181, 
710  
L L O  
benefits,  80,  116-1 17 
budget,  21,  25 
domestic,  4,  37-38,  4 7 4 8 ,   76,  99-100, 
130,  146-147 
foreign,  8.78-79,  165-166,  169, 174,232, 
234.  247 
international  agreement,  99 
Communications  Satellite  Act  of  1962, 81 
Communications  Satellite  Corp.  (Com- 
SatCorp;  see  also  individual  Intelsat 
satellites  and  Marisat),  3 4 ,   4 1 4 2 ,  
84,  137,  159,  164,  227 
COMSAT  General  Corp.,  88,  114,  130, 
146-147,  209 
C omm u n i c a t i o n s   T e chno logy   Satellite 
(CTS),  139 
Compass  Cope  program,  151 
Composite,  58 
Compressor,  44-45 
Comptroller  General,  126 
Computer,  199 
aeronautic  applications,  39,  97,  167 
energy  research,  1 1  1 
medical  applications,  54,  68 
pollution  research,  168 
spacecraft  utilization,  30,  32,  38-39,  57, 
81,  105,  186-187 
technology,  62,  131,  143,  177 
Computer  industry,  137 
Computer  Sciences Corp.  (csc), 95 
ComSatCorp.  See Communications Satel- 
lite  Corp. 
Concept  verification  test  (CVT),  19,  177 
Concorde (Anglo-French supersonic  trans- 
port),  12,  38,  64,  86,  118,  136-137, 
211-212 
Concorde  202,  37 
Condon,  Dr.  Edward  U.,  7&71 
Conference  on   Scientific  Experiments  of 
Skylab ( A I A A  and American  Geophysical 
Union),  195 
Congress,  10,  37,  63,  107,  113,  148,  156, 
214,  219 
bills  passed,  132,  183-184 

285 

I 

A ST  ' R O N A U T I C S  A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1974 

Joint Committee on  Atomic Energy,  170, 
185 
Jo in t  Committee on  Defense Production, 
29 
joint  conference,  101,  109,  152 
Presidential  messages,  11, 20-22,  27,  80, 
204 
report  submitted,  51-52,  146-147 
Zongress,  House  of  Representatives,  28- 
29,  150 
bills  introduced,  78,  83-84 
bills  passed,  36,  45,  48,  56,  92,  95,  98, 
118,  124,  153 
Budget  Committee,  132 
Committee  on   Appropriations,  124 
Subcommittee  on  HUD-Space- 
Science-Veterans,  99-100 
Sub com  m i t t e e   o n   T r an spo r t a t ion ,  
77-78 
Committee  on   Merchant  Ma r ine   and  
Fisheries,  183 
Committee on  Science and Astronautics, 
19,  68,  83-84,  91,  92,  95-96,  183 
Sub comm i t t e e   on   Aeronautics  and 
Space Technology,  29,44,54,55-56, 
62,  66,  176,  184,  189 
Subcommittee  on   Energy,  36,  1 1 4  
115 
Subcommittee  on   Manned  Space 
Flight,  16, 41,  4 2 4 4 ,   47,  54,  58 
Subcommittee  on   Space  Science  and 
Applications,  25,  47-48,  5 4 5 5 ,   57, 
64-65,  117,  182, 203 
Committee  on  Science  and  Technology, 
183 
comm i t tee   R e fo rm   A m e n d m e n t s   of 
1974,  183 
Committee  on  Un-American  Activities, 
70-7 1 
nominations  approved  and  confirmed, 
217 
report  approved,  48,  118,  153 
resolutions  passed,  183 
Zongress, Senate,  36,  77-78,  99,  124-125, 
204,  214 
bills  introduced,  44,  62,  139 
bills  passed,  61,  101,  106,  149-150,  152, 
153 
Budget  Committee,  132 
Committee  on  Aeronautical  and  Soace 
Sciences,  11,  27-28,  46,  48,  6d-61, 
6 M 7 ,  73-74,  77,  79,  98,  101,  139, 
145.  171 
. . . , . . - 
Subcommittee on  Aviation,  71 
Committee on Appropriations,  6 7 ,  149, 
150 
Committee  on  Armed  Services,  28,  60 
Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and 
Urban  Affairs,  106 
Committee  on  Commerce 
Subcommittee on  Aviation,  78 
Committee  on  Government  Operations 
S u b c omm i t t e e   o n   Reorganization, 
Research  and  International  Organ- 
izations,  83 

Committee  on  Labor  and  Public  Wel- 
fare,  106 
nominations  submitted,  108,  137 
nominations  approved  and  confirmed, 
194,  217 
report,  29,  109,  152,  153 
treaty  ratification,  123-124 
Conrad,  Capt.  Charles,  Jr.  (USN, Ret.),  15, 
103,  193,  195 
Constellation  (aircraft  series),  199-200 
Constellation.  See Corvus  and  Lacerta. 
Construction  of  facilities,  NASA 
budget,  21,  83-84,  121,  144,  150 
earth  station,  101 
inflation  effects,  209 
simulation  facility,  177 
space  shuttle,  64, 88,  97,  158,  210-211 
~ i n d m i l l ,  6 
x-ray  telescope  facility,  189,  220 
Contract,  NA SA ,   12, 29,  35-36,  80,  200 
aeronautics,  141,  145-146 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project,  1,  1 6 1 7 ,  79, 
102,  117,  118 
automotive  research,  26,  86 
computer  system,  86 
construction  of  facilities,  64, 97,  189, 
220 
energy  research,.  187,  192,  204-205 
fire  protection,  35 
inflation  impact,  209-210 
Large  Space  Telescope,  201,  220 
launch  vehicles,  1 6 1 7 ,  83,  146 
materials  research,  184 
satellite,  78,  80,  98,  135,  146,  158 
Skylab,  121 
mace   orobe.  19 
space  'shuttle,  5,  9,  25,  36,  41-42,  47, 
79,  81,  88,  105,  106,  126,  140,  141, 
158,  181,  217 
space  tug,  140 
studv.  12.  121.  165.  205.  217 
support  services,  1;  19,'  35-36,  62,  78, 
93,  95,  115-116,  117,  216 
Convair  990  (Ga l i leu;  N A S A   research  air- 
craft),  16,  119 
Cooper,  Henry  S.  F.,  147 
Cupernicus  (Oau 3),  133,  187 
Copper,  58,  166 
Cornell  Univ.,  201-202 
Corpcs  Christi  Tracking  Station,  Tex.,  77 
Corsair  (F-4U;  fighter  aircraft),  156 
Cortright,  Dr.  Edgar  M.,  203 
Corvus  (constellation),  69 
Cosmic dust,  212,  253 
Cosmic  ray,  39-40,  42,  59,  65,  80,  158, 
197-198,  212,  253 
Cosmic  research  laboratory,  154 
Cosmonaut,  73,  115,  165,  261 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project,  82,  164-165, 
179,  207-208 
awards,  181 
corps  increase,  152 
Soyuz  missions,  44, 73,  122-124,  139- 
140,  155,  176,  207,  218,  219,  252 
Cosmonautics  Day  (U.S.S.R.), 85 
Cosmos (U.S.S.R.  satellite),  193,  222,  228 
286 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Cosmos 6 0 5 ,  75-76,  190 
Cosmos  6 2 6 ,  93-94 
Cosmos  6 2 8 ,  229 
Cosmos  6 2 9 4 3 2 ,  229-230 
Cosmos 6 3 3 ,  23 1 
Cosmos 6 3 4 ,  231 
Cosmos  6 3 5 ,  232 
Cosmos  6 3 6 ,  232 
Cosmos  6 3 7 ,  71,  141, 232 
Cosmos 6 3 8 ,  78,  147, 222,  225,  232 
Cosmos 6 3 9 ,  232 
Cosmos 6 4 0 ,  233 
Cosmos 6 4 1 6 4 8 ,  91,  234-235 
Cosmos 649-651 ,   235 
Cosmos  652 ,  236 
Cosmos 6 5 3 ,  236 
Cosmos  6 5 4 ,   182, 236 
Cosmos 6 5 5 ,  237 
Cosmos  6 5 6 ,   108, 237 
Cosmos  6 5 7 ,  237 
Cosmos 6 5 8 6 6 1 ,  239 
Cosmos 6 6 2 4 6 5 ,  240-241 
Cosmos  6 6 6 ,  241 
Cosmos 6 6 7 ,  242 
Cosmos 6 6 8 ,  242 
Cosmos 6 6 9 ,  242 
Cosmos 6 7 0 ,  243 
Cosmos 6 7 1 ,  243 
Cosmos 6 7 2 ,   147, 222,  225,  243 
Cosmos  6 7 3 ,  243 
Cosmos  6 7 4 ,  244 
Cosmor  675  244 
Cosmo;  6%:  245 
Cosmos  6 7 7 4 8 4 ,   172-173.  245-246 
Cosmos  6 8 5 ,  246 
Cosmos 6 8 6 ,  246 
Cosmos 6 8 7 ,  246 
Cosmos  688 ,   247 
Cosmos 6 8 9 ,  247 
Cosmos 6 9 0 ,   190,  247 
Cosmos  6 9 1 ,  248 
Cosmos 6 9 2 ,  249 
Cosmos  6 9 3 ,  249 
Cosmos 694 ,  251 
Cosmos  6 9 5 ,  25 1 
Cosmos 6 9 6 ,  252 
Cosmos  6 9 7 ,  253 
Cosmos  6 9 8 ,  254 
Cosmos 699 ,  254 
Cosmos 700 ,  255 
Cosmos  701, 255 
Council  for  Science  and  Technology (pro- 
posed),  124-125,  129 
Council  of  Economic  Advisors, 61 
Council  of  International  Cooperation  in 
Space  Exploration  and  Use  (U.S.S.R.), 
85 
Council on   Environmental  Quality,  61 
Cousteau,  Jacques-Yves,  188 
C rab   Nebula,  223,  270,  271 
Crater.  See Moon. 
Cronkite,  Walter,  137 
C rop  damage,  115 
Crow,  L / G   Duward  L.  (USAF,  Ret.),  170 
Crowley, John   W.,  140 
Cryo-anchor  soil  stabilizer,  134 

Crystals  (see  also  Silicon),  43,  58,  199, 
216 
CSC.  See  Civil  Service  Commission. 
CSIRO (Commonwealth  Science and  Indus- 
trial  Research Organization),  171-172 
C S M .   See Command  and   service module. 
CTS  (Communications  Technology  Sat- 
ellite),  139 
Cuba,  2-3 
Cuiba  Tracking  Station,  Brazil,  11 1 
Culbertson,  Dr.  Phillip  E., 47,  113 
Cunningham,  George,  68 
Currie,  Dr.  Malcolm  R.,  66-67 
Curtin,  M/G Robert  H.  (WAF ,   Ret.),  54 
CVT  (Concept  verification test),  19,  177 
Cyclones,  166167 ,  222 
Cygnus X-1  (x-ray  source),  133,  187, 244, 
259 
Cyprus,  243  -t 
Czechoslovakia,  104,  190,  195, 237,  249 
D 

da   Vinci,  Leonardo,  136 
Daffodii  I 1   (balloon),  13-14 
Dakar,  Senegal,  104-105 
Danish  Meteorological  Institute,  268-269 
Darmstadt,  West  Germany,  160 
Da ta   processing,  9,  38-39,  95,  105,  111, 
120.  131 
D a i s :   Dr.  William  O.,  103 
Day,  LeRoy  E.,  113 
DC-8  (jet  transport),  174, 224 
DC-9,  38,  160 
DC-10,  51,  55,  71,  78 
de  Florez  Training  Award,  15 
De  la  Vaulx  Medal,  193 
de Seversky, Maj. Alexander P. (U.S. Army 
Air  Corps,  Ret.),  154-155 
De  Waard,  J.,  16 
Debus,  Dr.  Ku r t   H.,  14,  75,  131,  171, 
217 
Deep  Space  Network  (DSN),  63,  77,  101, 
163,  173,  176 
Defense,  Dept.  of  (DOD;  see  also  Launch, 
DOD),  3,  14,  28,  37-38,  41,  100,  130, 
132-133,  146, 209 
aeronautics,  148 
budget,  20,  21-22,  183-184 
contract,  31,  19G 
employment, 4 8 4 9  
environmental  research,  119,  264 
funding,  134,  141-142,  143 
space  programs,  22,  25,  31,  47,  66-67, 
140,  241-242 
Defense  Meteorological  Satellite Program 
(DMSP),  63,  120,  134, 226,  232,  243 
Defense Posture  Statement,  51-52 
Defense Satellite Communications  System 
(DSCS) ,   226 
Delta  (launch vehicle upper  stage; see also 
Thor-Delta),  186,  212 
Delta  100 Failure  Review  Committee,  83 
Delta  Air  Lines,  Inc.,  74,  83,  87 
Delta  Project  Review  Committee,  148 

287 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1974 

Demin, Col.  Lev  S. (cosmonaut),  155,  181, 
239-240,  244,  262 
Democratic  National  Committee,  146 
Denmark,  54,  67,  101,  138-139 
Denpa  (Japanese  Radio  Explorer  satellite), 
3 9 4  
Dent,  Frederick  B.,  Secretary  of  Com- 
merce,  130 
Desert,  175-176 
Detroit,  Mich.,  175 
Deuterium,  27 
DIGISAT,  84  
Digital  albedo  horizon  sensor,  23 1 
Digital  circuitry, 48 
Digital  da ta   satellite  service  (D IG I SAT ) ,   84 
Dirty  snowball  theory,  9 
Disarmament  (see  also  S t r a t eg i c   A r m s  
Limitation  Talks),  123-124,  215 
Discoverer  (satellite),  60 
Disher,  John   H.,  47 
Disney  World,  Fla.,  141 
Distinguished  Flying  Cross  (U SA F ) ,   133, 
156 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  (NACA ) ,   219 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  (NA SA ) ,   39, 
65-66,  88,  150-151,  171,  194-195 
Distinguished  Service  Medal  (U SN ) ,   28 
DMSP.  See Defense Meteorological  Satellite 
Program. 
Doc.  See  Commerce, Dept.  of. 
Docking  ( see   a l so   Apo l lo -Soyu z   T e s t  
Project,  Soyuz  14 ,   and  Soyuz  151 ,   85, 
123,  139-140,  161,  184 
DOD .   See  Defense,  Dept.  of. 
DOL   See  Interior,  Dept.  of 
D om e s t i c   communications  satellite  (see 
also  Anik  and  Westar),  4 
Domestic  Council,  124-125 
Dopant  (electronically  a c t iv e   ch em i c a l  
element),  43  
Dornbrand,  Harry,  194-195 
Dornier  System  GmbH,  210 
DOT .   See  Transportation,  Dept.  of. 
Dow,  James  E.,  137 
Dow  Jones  & Co.,  Inc.,  168 
Doyle,  Stephen  E.,  86 
“The Dragon’s Wings: The  China National 
Aviation  Corporation  and  the  Develop- 
ment  of  Commercial Aviation  in  China” 
(history  manuscript),  15 
Drake,  Dr.  F rank   D.,  4 5 4 6  
Drogue  chute,  117 
Drone  aircraft.  See  Firebee. 
Dryden,  Dr.  Hugh  L.,  103 
Dryden,  Dr.  Hugh  L.,  Memorial  Fel- 
lowship,  59 
“The  Dryden-Blagonrarov  Era  of  Space 
Cooperation,  196245”   (essay),  59 
Dryden  Research  Lecture,  15 
DSCS   (Defense  Satellite  Communications 
System),  226 
D SN .   See  Deep  Space  Network. 
Dubinin,  Nikolay,  87-88 
Dudley  Observatory,  269 
Duke,  Col.  Charles  M.,  J r .   (USAF ) ,   28 
Dulles  International  Airport,  Va.,  80 

Dunne,  D r .   James,  A.,  27 
Dyal,  D r .   Palmer,  208-209 
Dzhezkazgan, U.S.S.R.,  123,207,241,252, 
262 

E 

E-Systems,  Inc.,  3 4  
Eagle  (ApoNo  1 1   lunar  module),  30 
Eagleton,  Sen.  ’Thomas F.,  60 
Eaker,  Gen.  Ira  S.,  133 
Early  warning  satellite  system,  67,  183 
Earth 
gravitational  field, 98 
radiation,  83,  194,  248 
solar  effects,  43-14,  191 
s  acecraft  observations,  32,  38,  70,  77, 
991-92, 
100,  109,  114,  122,  126 
Earth  and   o c e an   phy s ic s   a p p l i c a t i o n s  
program  (EOPAP ) ,   21,  25,  38 
Earth  Environment and Resources  Confer- 
ence,  168 
Earth  Observatory  Satellite  (EOS ) ,   37-38, 
78 
Earth  resources,  4,  9,  28,  32,  42,  46,  55, 
80,  86-87,  145,  154,  174,  177-178,  207, 
215,  218-219,  225-226,  252 
Earth 
experiment  package 
resources 
( ER E P ) ,   42,  98 
Earth  Resources  Observation  Administra- 
tion  ( D o l ;   proposed),  145,  171 
E a r t h   re sou rce s   satellite  program,  103, 
204 
Earth  resources  survey  program,  21,  204 
Earth  Resources  Survey  System  (pro- 
posed),  182 
Earth  Re sou rce s   T e chno logy   S a t e l l i t e  
(ERT S ;   see  also  individual  satellites  such 
as  E f t s   I ) ,   38-39,  111,  132,  145,  171, 
182,  194,  215,  225 
Earth  station  (see  also individual stations), 
9,  44,  45,  62,  66,  130,  207 
c omm u n i c a t i o n s   app l i c a t ion s ,   4 ,   8, 
77-79,  81,  86,  88,  99,  106-107,  146- 
147,  159,  171,  186 
construction,  8,  38,  194 
foreign,  8,  78-79,  81,  111,  139-140,  141 
meteorological  applications,  65,  1 0 4  
105,  110 
reduction,  24 
Earthquake,  163,  164,  169 
East  Germany.  See  Germany,  East. 
Eastern  Airlines,  Inc.,  74,  94 
Eastern Test Range (ETR ) ,   Patrick AFB,  Fla. 
(see  also A t s  6 .  Helios  I .  In te lsa t-IV  F 8 ,  
Skynet  I IA .  Skynet  I I B ,   SMS, Symphonie 
I ,  Titan-Centaur,  We s ta r  I ,  and  Westar 
2 ) .   164 
Ebert-Fastie  spectrometer,  185 
Eddy,  Dr.  John,  67 
Edison  Electric  Institute,  112 
Education,  8,  48,  102-103,  106107 ,   109, 
129,  131,  228,  238,  258 
Edwards,  John  W.,  59 
Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  116,  151,  163 
288 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

EEO.  See  Equal  Employment  Opportu- 
nity. 
Egan,  Gov.  William  A.,  4 
Eglin  A F B ,   Fla.,  101-102 
Einstein,  Albert,  133 
Eisenhower,  President  Dwight  D.,  183 
Eisenhower,  Milton  S.,  Library,  103 
El  Toro,  Calif.,  60 
Electric  field,  77,  190 
Electric  generator,  173,  175-176 
Electric  Power  Research  Institute  (EPRI), 
21 1 
Electric  waves,  3 9 4 0  
Electricity  (see  also Thermoelectricity),  34, 
63,73-74,93-94,  105,  114-1 15, 186,  187, 
204-205,  211 
Electrocardiograph,  143 
Electrodes,  103 
Electromagnetic spectrum,  57 
Electronic  Systems  Center. 
See  Inter- 
national  Business  Machines  Corp. 
Electronics,  43,  184 
Electrons,  217,  208 
Eliot,  T.  S.,  32 
Ellington  A F B ,   Tex.,  28,  31-32 
EM E   (environmental  measurements  experi- 
ment).  238 
Emploiment,  NASA ,   6-7,  11,  16, 25,  35-36, 
47,  4 8 4 9 ,   66,  102-103,  115-116,  126, 
141,  190,  202,  210,  220 
Employment,  U.S.,  131,  141 
Encke  (comet),  37 
Energy.  See  E l e c t r i c i ty ,   G e o t h e r m a l  
en e rgy ,   M i c r ow a v e   en e rgy ,   Nuclear 
energy,  Solar  energy,  Thermal  energy, 
and  Wind  energy. 
Energy  conservation 
aeronautics,  25,  29,  4 4 4 5 ,   48,  55-56, 
192,  211-212,  224 
automotive,  25-26,  73-74,  118 
NA SA   plan,  8-9,  73 
national  Dolicv.  20.  99.  119 
Energy  conv e r s ion , ’  73-74,  90-91,  92 ,  
114-115,  130,  167,  187,  192 
Energy  crisis,  3,  6,  11,  31,  39,  48,  52,  79, 
100,  153-154,  175.  177 
Energy  Emergency  Act,  48 
Energy  Policy  Office,  72 
Energy  Reorganization  Act  of  1974,  187 
Energy  research  and  development  ( E R   &D; 
see also Solar energy  research),  6, 8-9, 
29,  34,  61,  99,  105,  160-161,  163-164, 
166.  184-185.  211.  220.  226 
budget,  20-21,  23,  13-74,  95,  98,  107, 
109.  152 
congressional  hearings,  25,  46,  79,  84 
personnel,  15,  194 
press  comment,  39,  45,  80,  107 
Energy  Research 
and   Development 
Administration  (ERDA ) ,   46,  61,  83,  106, 
163-164,  187,  194,  220 
Energy  Resources  Council,  187 
Engine (see  also JTBD,  Space shuttle main 
engine) 
aircraft,  31,  48,  51,  92,  145-146,  193 
rocket,  15,  111,  140,  146 

Engineering,  23,  4 1 4 2 ,   45,  102-103,  108, 
134 
Engineers,  72,  95,  106,  113,  114,  125,  131, 
136,  143,  157,  168-169,  179,  187,  191, 
212 
awards,  92 
employment, 6-7,  11, 4 8 4 9 ,   66,  190 
energy  research,  6,  80 
international  cooperation,  7,  16 
England.  See  United  Kingdom. 
Environment,  17,  23,  38,  48,  73,  84,  98, 
160-161,  183,  187 
Environmental  measurements  experiment 
(EME), 238 
Environmental  monitoring.  115.  131 
Environmental  Protection’ Agency  ( E PA ) ,  
17,  23,  25-26,  54,  117 
Environmental  warfare,  123-1 24 
EOPAP.  See  E a r th   a n d   o c e an   phy s i c s  
applications  program. 
EOS   (Earth  Observatory  Satellite),  37-38, 
78 
See  Environmental  Protection 
EPA. 
Agency. 
epndb:  effective  perceived  noise  in  deci- 
bels. 
Epoxy,  184,  192 
EPRI  (Electric  Power  Research  Institute), 
211 
Equal  employment opportunity (EEO ) ,   6-7, 
11-12,  34 
Equator,  40,  72,  97,  119,  185-186 
Equinox,  vernal,  65 
ER  &D .   See  Energy  research  and  develop- 
ment. 
ERDA.  See  Energy  Research  and  Develop- 
ment  Administration. 
EREP (earth  resources  experiment package), 
42.  98 
Ermenonville  Forest,  France,  5 1 
ERNO   Raumfahrttechnik,  GmbH,  54 
ERTS .   See  Earth  Resources  Technology 
Satellite. 
E r t s   1  (ERTS-A),  25,  98,  111,  115,  132, 
225-226 
agricultural  applications,  62 
benefits,  32,  80 
international  cooperation,  10-1 1, 38-39, 
62,  111,  132, 225-226 
land  management,  54,  80,  90,  131 
oceanography,  45 
photographs,  5-6,  32,  90,  100,  130-131, 
170,  215 
ERTS-B,  21,  25,  111,  132,  225-226 
ERTSSC,  98,  109,  124,  150,  171 
Ervin,  Sen.  Sam  J.,  Jr.,  44 
ESRO.  See  E u r o p e a n   Sp a c e   R e s e a r ch  
Organization. 
Etam,  W.  Va.,  3 4  
ETR.  See  Eastern  Test  Range. 
Europa  (Jovian  moon),  166-167 
E u r o p e ,   40-41,  84 ,   99-100,  108,  116, 
118-119,  138-139,  156,  216,  254 
European  Space  Agency,  76 

289 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

E u r o p e a n   Space  Research  Organization 
(ESRO ;  s  e  also  Maritime Orbital Test 
Satellitef,  9,  160,  169,  210 
anniversary,  67 
comsat  program,  77-78,  101,  144,  164, 
209 
earth  studies,  77,  86-87,  191 
employment,  67 
launch  vehicle  program,  189-190,  196 
meteorology,  110 
personnel,  42 
planetary  exploration,  36-37,  120-121 
reorganization,  76 
Spacelab,  16,  54,  67,  94,  105-106,  113, 
181,  199,  223-224,  225 
E U V   (extreme  ultraviolet).  See  Ultraviolet 
headings. 
E U V   spectrometer,  242 
ev:  electron  volt. 
EVA .   &e  Extravehicular activity. 
Evans,  Capt.  Ronald  E.  (USN), 121-122 
Exceptional  Civilian  Service  Medal  (USA), 
171 
Exceptional  Scientific  Achievement  Medal 
(NASA ) ,  194-195,  203 
Exceptional  Service  M e d a l   ( N A S A ) ,  88 ,  
194-195 
Exhibit,  163 
Explorer  (scientific  satellite),  21,  24 
Explorer  I ,   I ,   14,  171 
E x p l o r e r   4 2   (Uhu ru ;   Small  Astronomy 
Satellite),  133,  187 
Explorer  45  (SSS-A), 114,  177 
Explorer  46  (Meteoroid  Technology  Satel- 
lite),  60,  152-153 
Interplanetary  Moni- 
Explorer  50  (IMP-J; 
toring  Platform),  149 
Explorer  51   (AE-C; Atmosphere  Explorer), 
5-6,  40,  55,  126,  144,  230-231,  266, 
27 1 
Explorer  5 2 .   See  Hawkeye  1 .  
External  tank  (ET ) ,   19,  36,  158,  210-211 
Extraterrestrial  colonies,  98,  154 
Extraterrestial  life,  1,  44,  69-70,  94,  97, 
135,  201-202 
Extravehicular  activity  (EVA ) ,  28-29,  45, 
210-211 
Exxon  Corp.,  147 

F 

F-1  (Mirage  3;  French  fighter  aircraft), 
138-  139 
F-4 
( P h a n t om   fighter-bomber  aircraft), 
94 
F -4U   (Corsair  fighter  aircraft),  156 
F-5B  (fighter-trainer  aircraft),  7 
F-5E  (Tiger  I1   fighter  aircraft),  7,  10 
F-5F  (fighter-trainer  aircraft),  10 
F-8  (carrier  fighter  aircraft),  44 
F-14  (Tomcat  f igh t e r   a i r c r a f t ) ,   7 ,   22, 
63-64,  100 
F-15  (E ag l e   adv an c ed   tac t ica l   fighter 
aircraft),  22,  91,  94,  167,  183-184,  225 

F-104  (m a c h   2  f igh t e r   a i r c r a f t ) ,   138, 
199-200 
F-11  1 (fighter  aircraft),  44,  175,  224 
See  Federal  Aviation  Administra- 
FAA. 
tion. 
FA I   (Fkdbration  Aironautique  Inter- 
nationale),  193 
FA I   Go ld   Space  Medal,  193 
Fairbanks  Tracking  Station.  Alaska.  11 1 
Fairchild  RepublicCo.,  76 
Fairford,  U .K . ,   37 
Falls  Church,  Va.,  95 
Fanale,  Dr.  Fraser  P.,  208 
Farnborough  International  '74,  163 
FCC.  See  Federal  Communications  Com- 
mission. 
FEA .   See  Federal  Energy  Administration. 
FedeJal Aviation Administration  (FAA), 87, 
101,  114,  137,  146,  183,  209 
accident  research,  51,  55,  71,  97 
aircraft  research,  17,  97,  102,  144,  148, 
166 
budget,  22-23,  77-78 
regulations,  78,  79-80,  92-93,  97 
Federal  Commun i c a t ion s   C omm i s s i o n  
(FCC),  84,  88,  113-114,  130,  202,  251 
Federal  Council  for  Science  and  Technol- 
ogy,  60-61 
Federal  Electric  Corp.,  117 
Federal  Energy  Administration  (FEA), 1 I ,  
56,  61,  99,  108 
F e d e r a l   Ene rgy   Administration  Act  of 
1974, 99 
Fede ra l   En e rgy   O f f ice   ( F E O ;  see  a l so  
Federal  Energy  Administration),  71-72, 
80,  88 
F e d e r a l   Hou s ing   Administration  (FHA), 
14 1 
Federal  Nonnuclear  Energy  Research  and 
Development Act  of  1974, 220 
Federal  Plan  f o r   Meteorological  Services 
and  Supporting  Research  FY  1975, 
(NOAA   proposal),  146 
Federal  Railroad  Administration,  86 
F id i r a t ion   Aironautique  Inter- 
nationale  (FAI), 193 
FEO .   See  Federal  Enerev  Office. 
Feoktistov,  Dr.  KonsTintin  P.  (cosmo- 
naut),  73,  218 
Ferrari,  Dr.  Alfred  J.,  215 
Ferrofluid  separator,  166 
F G   Sagittae  (superstar),  143 
FHA   (Federal  Housing  Adm in i s t r a t ion ) ,  
141 
Fifth  Annual  Lunar  Science  Conference, 
64 
Fighter  aircraft.  See  individual  aircraft 
and  programs,  such  a s  A-7,  Air  combat 
fighter,  F-4,  Mirage  3,  P-35,  Sukhoi, 
VFAX,  VFX ,   and  YF-16. 
Filipchenko,  Col. Anatoly V.  (cosmonaut), 
207,  252,  262 
Filton,  U.K.,  37 
Fink,  Daniel  J.,  15 
Finke,  Robert  C.,  186 
Fire  protection,  19, 35,  54,  79-80 

290 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Firebee  (drone  aircraft),  84 
Fitzgerald,  A.  Ernest,  14 
Fleet  Satellite  Communications 
(FLTSATCOM) System,  67 
Fleming,  Arthur  S.,  Award,  118,  157 
Fletcher,  Dr.  James  C.,  17,  35,  53-54,  67, 
70,  72,  119,  148,  155,  167,  170,  191, 
198,  210,  214 
agreements,  211,  213,  219 
awards,  59 
ceremonies,  65-66,88,  112,  136,  15&151, 
195,  199,  203 
congressional  testimony,  27,  46,  60-61, 
68,  139,  145 
contract  award,  126 
foreign  visit,  165,  182 
meeting,  105, 
personnel  appointment,  143-144,  150 
press  conference,  24-25,  30,  68,  106 
speech,  37,  43,  189,  191-192 
Flight  Research  Center  (FRC, NASA) 
aeronautics,  52-53,  84,  151,  160,  175, 
273-274 
automotive  research,  73,  118 
Flight  Activities  Office,  158-159 
“M a n n e d   Lifting  Body  Flight  Log,” 
273 
name  change  (January  1976), 273 
personnel,  176-177,  217,  220 
space  shuttle,  189 
symposium,  114 
Flight  Transportation  Laboratory  (M IT ) ,  
166 
Flood,  170 
Florida,  5,  131,  167,  214 
Florida  Acquifer,  131 
Florida,  Univ.  of,  131 
(Fleet  Satellite  Communi- 
FLTSATCOM 
cations  System),  67 
Fluorine,  157 
Food   supply management,  153-154 
Fo r   the  Bene f i t   of  A l l   Mank ind :   The 
Practical  Returns f rom   Space  (congres- 
sional  report),  95-96 
Ford,  President  Gerald  R.,  146,  156,  199 
agreement,  204 
appointments  and  nom in a t ion s ,   151, 
194 
award,  211 
b i l l s   s ign ed ,   163-164,  183-184,  187, 
192-193,  220 
ceremony,  95 
message  to  Congress,  204 
press  comment,  165 
speech,  175 
Fo rd   Mo to r   Co.,  156 
Forestry,  132 
Fo r t   Churchill,  Canada,  144,  265-269 
Foushee,  B.  R.,  178 
France (see  also  National  Research  Coun- 
cil  and  Symphonie  I ) ,   156,  165 
aeronautics,  12, 38,64,81,  107,  136137. 
138- 139 
agreements,  101,  213 
space  activities,  54,  67,  101,  119,  121, 
189-190,  242 

Frazier,  Joe,  14 
FRC.  See  Flight  Research  Center. 
Friedheim,  Jerry  W.,  14,  42 
Fruit  fly,  42 
Fucino,  Italy,  11 1 
Fuel.  See individual kinds  of  fuel,  Energy 
crisis,  and  Energy  conservation. 
Fuel  cells,  187 
Fuel  conservation.  See  Energy  conserva- 
tion. 
Fuqua,  Rep.  Don,  16 
G 

Gagarin,  Col.  Yuri  A.  (cosmonaut),  36, 
85 
Gagarin,  Yuri,  Go ld   Medal,  193 
Galapagos  Islands,  238 
Galaxy.  See  C ~ A .  
Galaxy (see also Milky Way),  76,  133,  160, 
214,  223 
Galileo.  See  Convair  990. 
Gallagher,  J .   Wes,  190 
Galley,  Robert,  12 
Galveston,  Tex.,  188 
Gamma   ray,  68,  80,  90,  108,  158,  190 
Ganymede  (Jovian  moon),  166-167 
GAO.  See General Accounting  Office. 
Gardner,  Frank,  171-172 
Ga rne t  (silicate  mineral),  143 
GARP .   See  Global  Atmospheric  Research 
Proeram. 
G A R P  x t lan t ic  Tropical Experiment  (GATE), 
22,  104-105,  119,  175,  225,  236-237 
Ga r re t t   Corp..  60,  92 
AiResearih  Aviation  Co.,  145-146 
Gas.  See  Natural  gas. 
G a s   turbine,  25-26,  145-146,  187 
Gaseous-core  nuclear  rocket,  29 
Gasoline,  26 
GASP  (Global  Air  Sampling  P r o g r am ) ,  
213 
Ca tch ,   Thomas  L., W 1  
!%e  GAR P  Atlantic  Tropical Experi- 
GATE. 
ment. 
Gatos,  Dr.  Harry  C.,  42 
CAW-1  (general  aviation  wing),  187 
Gazenko,  Dr.  Oleg G.,  75-76,  178 
GE .   See  General  Electric  Co. 
GEc-Marconi  (U.K.),  49,  210 
Gehrels,  Dr.  Tom,  82-83 
Gemini  (program),  28-29,  59,  211 
Gemini  I O ,   147 
General  Accounting  Office  (GAO),  5,  60, 
72,  126 
General  aviation,  23,  48,  63,  69-70,  96, 
97,  99,  183,  189 
G e n e r a l   Aviation  Manufacturers  Assn., 
189 
General  A viation  Programs  (congressional 
report),  189 
General  aviation  wing.  See  CAW-1. 
General  Dynamics  Corp.,  7-8,  116,  138, 
140,  179,  18S184 ,   190 
Convair  Div.,  140,  146 

29 1 

ASTRONAUTlCS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

General  Electric  Co.  (GE;  see  also  Radio 
Optical  Observatory),  1,  11,  31,  35-36, 
78,  141,  165-166,  187,  204-205 
General  Genetics  i n s t i t u t e   (U .S .S .R . ) ,  
87-88 
General  Mo to r s  Corp.,  145-146 
G e n e r a l   Services  Administration  (GSA), 
36 
General  Telephone  &  Electronics  Corp. 
(GTE),  88,  169 
Genetics,  87-88 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  110 
Geodetic  Explorer.  See  GEos-c. 
Geology,  122,  143,  170,  241 
Geophysical  institute,  Peru,  72 
GEOS-c   (Geodetic  Explorer  satellite),  2 
Geostationary  Operational  Environmental 
Satellite  (see  also  Goes  I ) ,   26,  236 
Geothermal  energy,  13,  24,  175-176 
Geothermal  Energy  Research,  Develop- 
ment  and  Demonstration  Act  of  1974, 
163-164 
German  Aerospace  Show  (1974),  94 
German Federal Ministry  for Research  and 
Technology  (BMFT),  135,  213 
Germanium  selenide,  58 
Germany,  East,  104,  119,  120,  195,  237, 
249 
Germany,  West  (see  also  Aeros  2,  Helios 
I ,   Rocket  Research  Center,  and  Sym-  
phonie  I ) ,   3,  54,  57,  67,  101,  107,  119, 
120,  121,  191,  249-250 
Gesellschaft  fur Weltraumforschung (cfw), 
216 
GET:  ground  elapsed  time. 
ghz:  gigahertz  (1   billion  cycles  per  sec- 
ond). 
Giberson.  Walker  E..  151 
Gibson,  D r .   Edw a rd~  G.,  1,  7,  30,  31-32, 
91-92,  152 
Gibson,  Roy,  144 
Gilruth,  Dr.  Robert  R..  92 
Giscard 
d’Estaing, 
President  Valery 
(France),  136137  
Glass,  173,  212 
Glenn,  Col.  John  H . ,   Jr.  (USMC ,   Ret.),  99, 
199 
Gldnnan,  Dr.  T.  Keith,  219 
Global Air  Sampling Program  (GASP),  213, 
224 
G l o b a l   A trnospheric  Research  Program 
(CARP ;   see  also  C A R P   Atlantic  Tropical 
Experiment),  21,  23,  224 
Glushko,  Valentin  P.,  85 
Godda rd  Award,  15 
Godda rd ,   Robert  H.,  H i s to r i c a l   E s s ay  
Award,  59 
Godda rd ,   Robert  H.,  Memorial  Dinner, 
58 
Godda rd ,   Robert  H.,  Memorial  Trophy, 
5 8  
Godda rd ,   Robert  H.,  Scholarship,  59 
G o d d a r d   Sp a c e   F l i g h t   C e n t e r   ( G S F C ,  
NASA),  64,  88,  126,  169-170,  227 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  support,  19 1 
ea r th   s ta t ion  design,  104-105 

also 

employment,  220 
inflation  impact,  209-210 
project  m an ag em en t ,   104,  146,  160, 
200-201,  213 
sounding 
rocket 
research,  2, 
263, 
264-267,  268,  269,  270 
space   experimentation,  134-135,  144, 
187,  242 
support  services,  95 
tracking,  216 
Godfrey,  Roy  E.,  69 
(Geostationary 
Operational 
GOE S  
Environmental  Satellite),  26,  236 
Goes  I  (GOES-A;  SMS-c), 
2,  104,  236237, 
258 
Gold  Star  Medal  (U.S.S.R.  award),  181 
Goldsmith,  John  V.,  114115  
Goldstone  Tracking  Station,  Ca l i f . ,   14, 
111,  163 
Goldwater,  Sen.  Barry  M.,  62,  139 
Goodyear Aerospace  Corp.,  117,  167 
G P S .   See  NAVSTAR   G loba l   Positioning 
System. 
G rand   Coulee  Canyon,  170 
Granger.  John  V.,  171 
G r apk t e ,   91  
Graphite  epoxy  composite,  210-21 1 
Gravel,  Sen.  Mike,  4 
see 
(earth; 
Gravitational 
field 
individual  planets),  98 
Gravity  (see  also  Weightlessness),  133 
Gray,  Edward  Z.,  54 
Grazing-incidence  telescope,  159 
G rea t   Britain.  See  United  Kingdom. 
G rea t   red  spot  (Eye  of  Jupiter),  82-83, 
166,  222 
Grechko,  Georgy  M. 
(cosmonaut), 
218-219,  255 
Green  Swamp,  Fla.,  131 
Greenbelt  Tracking  Station,  Md.,  11  1 
Greenstein, Jesse  L.,  194-195 
Gribbin,  John,  169 
Grobecker,  Dr.  Alan  J.,  86 
Groo,  Elmer  S.,  149 
G round   station.  See Earth  station. 
G roup   Achievement  Award 
(NASA ) ,  
194-195,  203 
Grumman  Corp. 
Grumman  Aerospace Corp.,  7 
G rumman   Aircraft  C o r p . ,   7-8,  100, 
168 
G S A   (G e n e r a l   Services  Administration), 
36 
GSFC.  See  Godda rd   Space  Flight  Center. 
GTE  (General  Telephone  &  E l e c t r on i c s  
Corp.),  88,  169 
Gubarev,  Lt.  Col. Aleskey A. (cosmonaut), 
218-219,  255 
Guggenheim,  Daniel,  Medal,  137 
Guggenheim,  Daniel 
and 
Florence, 
international  Astronautics  Award 
(1973),  178 
Guggenheim  Fund  for  the  Promotion  of 
Aeronautics,  156 
Guidance 
and 
Navigation),  201 

control 

(see 

also 

292 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Gyroscope,  5,  183 

H 

Hale  Observatories,  76,  167,  168 
Haley  Astronautics  Award  (AIAA),  195 
Hall,  Charles  F.,  15C151  
Halley’s  Comet,  37 
Handler,  Dr.  Philip,  61 
Hanover,  West  Germany,  94 
Hardrath,  Herbert  F.,  15 
H A R M   (High-speed  antiradiation  missile), 
108 
Harr,  Dr.  Karl  G.,  Jr . ,   3 
Harris,  Mrs.  Ruth  Bates,  6-7,  11,  150 
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  4 W 1  
Hartford,  James J . ,   99-100 
Hartman,  D r .   Robert  C.,  144 
Hartsfield,  Henry  W.,  183 
Harvard  College  Observatory,  267,  269 
Haughton,  Daniel  J . ,   10,  111-112 
H aw a i i ,   12,  21-22,  24,  39,  84,  88,  97, 
113-114,  186 
Hawaii,  Univ.  of,  39,  267 
Hawk  (sounding  rocket),  267,  270 
Hawker  Siddeley  Dynamics,  Ltd.,  49,  58, 
210 
Hawker  Siddeley G roup ,   Ltd.,  169 
Hawkeye  I  (Exp lo re r  5 2 ;  scientific satellite), 
2,  11 1,  221-222,  227,  238-239,  257,  259 
Hawkins,  Willis M.,  15,  195 
Hawthorne,  Calif.,  79 
H C M M .   See  H e a t - C a p a c i t y   M a p p i n g  
Mission. 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  Dept.  of 
( H E W ) ,   106-107,  134 
H e a l t h   E d u c a t i o n   Telecommunications 
(H E T )   experiment,  129 
H E A O .   See  H igh   En e rgy   A s t r o n om y  
Observatory. 
HEAO -B ,   158 
Heart-lung  machine,  154 
Hearth,  Donald  P.,  126 
Heat-Capacity  Mapping  Mission  (HCMM ) ,  
21,  24,  55,  204 
Heat  exchangers,  26,  154 
Heidelbaugh,  D r .   Norman  D.,  131 
Helicopter,  10,  15-16,  51,  81 
Helios  (solar  probe),  21,  33-34,  213,  253, 
257,  260 
Helios  I  (Helios-A),  2,  212-213,  221-222, 
227,  228,  253 
Heliosphere  (earth),  197-198 
Helium,  27,  68,  144 
Helium  3,  179,  185,  197 
Hematology,  43-44 
Hemke,  Dr.  Paul  E.,  108 
Henize,  Dr.  Karl  G .  (astronaut),  28 
1 9 1  ., - 
Heos  2  (Highly  Eccentric  Orbit  Satellite), 
Hercules.  See  C-130. 
Hero  of  Socialist  Labor,  52 
Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union,  181 
Herzberg,  Dr.  Gerhard, .9 

H E T   (Health  Education  Telecommunica- 
tions  experiment),  129 
Hetherington,  Dr.  Norris  S., 59 
H E W .   See Health, Education,  and Welfare, 
Dept.  of. 
Hewish,  Dr.  Antony,  188-189 
Hickam  AFB,  Hawaii,  188 
H igh   En e r gy   A s t r o n o m y   Observatory 
( H E A O ) ,   21,  25,  37-38,  80,  99-100,  158, 
170,  189 
High-speed  antiradiation  missile  (HARM ) ,  
108 
Highly  Eccentric  Orbit  Satellite  ( H E O S ) ,  
191 
Hightstown,  N.J.,  146 
H i l l ,   L o u i s   W . ,   Sp a c e   Transportation 
Award,  14,  171 
Hinners,  Dr.  Noel  W . ,   124,  203 
History  Manuscript  Award  (AIAA),  15 
HL-10  (lifting  body),  273 
H.M.S.  Beagle,  30 
Hocker,  D r .   Alexander,  67,  105, 
Holloway,  Gen.  Bruce  K.  (U SA F ,   Ret.),  53, 
157  170 
Hoiz&,-Dr.  Thomas  E.,  92 
Hospitals,  109 
Hot  Line  (U.S.-U.S.S.R.),  81 
Hotz,  Robert,  183 
Housing  and  Urban  Development,  Dept. 
of  ( H U D ) ,   36,  46,  54,  61,  106,  187,  219, 
226 
Housing  and  Urban  Development-Space- 
Science-Veterans  App r op r i a t ion s   bill, 
149,  152,  153,  164 
Houston,  Tex.,  13,  187, 212 
Houston,  Univ.  of,  59,  269 
“Houston, We Have a Problem”  (TV  film), 
35 
Hovis,  D r .   Warren  A.,  55 
Hubble  Constant,  214 
See  Housing  and  Urban  Develop- 
H U D .  
ment,  Dept.  of. 
Hudson  Bay,  144 
Hugh  L.  Dryden  Flight  Research  Center. 
See  Flight  Research  Center. 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  19, 52,  146-147,  169, 
171,  211,  223 
Hungary,  195,  249 
Huntoon,  Dr.  Carolyn,  169-170 
Huntsville,  Ala.,  93,  195 
Hurricane,  120 
Hydraulic pump,  200 
Hydrazine,  86 
Hydrocarbon,  26 
Hydrogen, 2,  3,  5,  9-10,  17, 27,  29,  33-34, 
35,  92,  150,  166,  192,  197-198 
Hydrogen  chloride,  38 
Hydrogen  cyanide,  77 
Hydrogen  injection  technology,  25-26 
Hydrology,  104 
Hydroplaning,  75 
Hydrothermal  Power  Co.,  175-176 
Hypersonic aircraft,  163,  166 
Hypersonic  technology,  224 

293 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

I 

(International  Academy  of  Astro- 
I A A  
nautics),  170 
I A F .   See  I n t e r n a t i o n a l   A s t ron au t i c a l  
Federation. 
IBM.  See  International  Business  Machines 
Corp. 
ICBM.  See  Intercontinental  ballistic  mis- 
sile. 
Ice  distribution  studies,  61-62,  102,  131- 
132,  170 
Idaho,  170 
IDCSP   (Initial  Defense  Commun i c a t ion s  
Satellite Program),  204 
Illinois,  Univ.  of,  264,  267,  268-269 
ILS  (instrument  landing system),  144 
IMBLMS   (integrated medical  and  behavioral 
laboratory  measurement  system),  1 4  
145 
IMP-J  (Explorer  50,  Interplanetary  Moni- 
toring  Platform),  149 
Impeachment,  146 
Im p r o v e d   T i r o s   O p e r a t i o n a l   Sa te l l i te  
(ITOS).  See  individual  satellites, such  as 
ITOs-H  and  Noaa  2 .  
India,  48,  109,  139,  168-169,  221,  238, 
258 
Indian  Ocean, 71-72,  110,  202,  252 
Indian  Space  Research  Organization 
(ISRO),  189-190,  238 
Indium-antimonide,  199 
Indonesia, 78-79,  169 
Inflation,  209 
Infrared  detectors,  168,  231 
Infrared  photography,  120-121 
Infrared  radiation,  91,  109,  177,  216 
Infrared  radiometer, 98  
Infrared  spectrometer, 2 18-2  19 
Infrared  telescope,  6,  21,  24,  39,  84,  141 
Infrared  wavelength,  47-48 
Initial  Defense  Communications  Satellite 
Program  (IDCSP),  204 
In jun   (scientific  satellite  series;  see  also 
Hawkeye   I),  111 
Injun  1 .   111 
Inscho’s  Mechanical  C o n t r a c t o r s ,   Inc . ,  
I ? n  
LLU 
Institute  of  G a s  Technology,  192 
Instituto Nacional de T h i c a  A h e s p a c i a l  
(INTA),  Spain,  101, 201 
Instrument  landing  system  (ILS),  144 
INTA  (Instituto  Nacional  de  T6cnica 
Aeroespacial,  Spain),  101,  201 
Intasat  (Spanish  satellite),  200,  201,  221- 
222,  250-251,  257,  259 
Integrated medical  and  behavioral labora- 
t o r y   m e a s u r em e n t   sys tem   (IMBLMS), 
144-145 
Integrated  propulsion  control 
system 
(IPCS),  175 
See  International  Telecom- 
INTELSAT .  
munications Satellite Organization. 
Intelsat  (comsat  series),  2,  3-4,  81,  169. 
219-220 
, 

I 

Intelsat  111,  151-152 
Intelsat  IV,  14,  151-152 
Intelsat  IVA,  211 
Intelsat-IV  F-2,  202 
Intelsat-IV F-3,  202 
Intelsat-IV F - 4 ,   202 
Intelsat-IV F-5,  202 
Intelsat-IV F-7,  146-147,  168,  202 
Intelsat-IV  F-8 ,   202,  221,  225-226,  227, 
251,  257,  259 
Interagency cooperation,  38,  126 
AEC 
-DOD ,   23 
- 
NASA  
-AEC,  23,  185 
-AEC-DOT ,   185 
-AEC-National Geographic  Society- 
USA,  197 
-American Assn.  of  Ra i lroadsFedera l  
Railroad  Admin.,  86 
-DOC ,   200 
-DOD ,   9,  21-22,  6 6 4 7  
-DOD -DOT -NAS -NCAR -NOAA -NSF -~ t t l te  
Dept.,  119 
-DOD-FAA ,   148 
-DO I ,   54,  7>74 
-DOI-NSF,  187 
-DOT,  54,  118 
-DOT-EPA-FAA,  17, 25 
-DOT-FAA-USN ,   166 
-EPA,  25,  54 
-FCC,  202 
-GSA-HUD-NBS-NSF,  36 
-HEW ,   129 
-HUE’,  54,  187,  219,  226 
-Maritime Admin.,  165 
-NOAA ,   2,  12,  174,  200,  227,  236 
-NOAA-NESS ,   236-231 
-NSF ,   6,  73,  94,  105, 204-205 
-Office  of  Naval  Research,  144 
-Smithsonian  Institution.  164.  177 
-W A F ,   52-53,  126,  163,  i67,  i92, 223, 
224,  252,  273-274 
-USDA ,   65 
Interagency Panel  for  Terrestrial Applica- 
tions  of  Solar Energy,  204 
Intercontinental ballis&  missile  (ICBM;  see 
also  Minuteman  and  SS-19),  4 5 ,  14, 
22,  155,  192, 204 
Intercosmos (U.S.S.R.  satellite series),  190, 
222,  228 
Intercosmos  1 1 ,   104,  237 
Intercosmos  12,  195,  249 
Intercosmos Council.  See Soviet Academy 
of  Sciences. 
Interferometry, 214 
Interim  upper  stage  (IUS), 25,  6 U 7 ,   140, 
178,  217 
Interior,  Dept.  of  (DOI;  see  a lso   E a r t h  
Resources  Observation  Administra- 
tion),  42-43,  54,  73-74,  145,  182,  187 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   Academy  of  Astronautics 
( IAA ) ,   178 
In terna t iona l   A e r o n a u t i c a l   F e d e r a t i o n  
( IAF ) ,   178 

294 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

International  Assn.  of  M a c h i n i s t s   a n d  
Aerospace  Workers,  209 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   Business  Machines  Corp. 
(IBM),  35-36,  81,  93,  105,  114,  140 
International  Communications Union,  8 
International  Congress  of  Electrical  and  
Electronic Communications,  171 
International  cooperation  (see  also  Dis- 
armament,  GARP  A t l an t i c   T r o p i c a l  
Experiment,  Strategic  Arms  Limita- 
t i o n   T a l k s ,   S u m m i t   Meeting,  and  
Treaty), 6,  71-72,  105,  126,  132,  143, 
200,  202-203,  227-228 
France 
-Denmark,  170 
-Netherlands  -  Spain  -  U.K.  -  West 
Germany,  107 
-U.K.,  64,  1 3 6 1 3 7  
Japan 
-P.R.C.,  89 
U.S. 
-Brazil  -  East  Germany  -  France   - 
M ex i co   -  N e th e r l and s   -  U.K.  - 
U.S.S.R.  -  West  G e r m a n y ,   119, 
120 
-Canada,  101 
-Mexico,  62 
-U.S.S.R.,  25,  80,  102,  123-124 
International  cooperation,  space  (see  also 
Apo l lo -Soyu z   T e s t   P ro j e c t ,   ESRO ,  
GAR P   Atlantic  Tropical  Experiment, 
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  and 
Strategic Arms  Limitation  Talks),  8, 
38,  46,  64,  99,  103,  110,  118-119,  225, 
227,  228 
Canada 
-ESRO,  209 
NASA  
-Canada,  4 
-Canada-France,  39 
-ESRO,  1 6 , 3 6 3 7 ,  54 ,77 ,   120-121,  184, 
199,  210,  223-224,  225 
-ESRO-U.K., 77 
-France,  2,  213 
-France-West Germany,  121,215-216, 
117 
LL I 
-India, 48,  139,  238 
-Iran,  194-195,  225 
-Italy,  2,  40, 111,  187-188,  225,  228, 
230-231,  247,  258,  259 
J a p a n ,   225 
-Netherlands,  2,  159-160,  227,  244, 
259 
-Norway,  265,  271 
-Spain,  101,  200,  201, 
257,  259 
-Sweden,  265 
-U.K.,  2,  57-58,  125, 
187, 
227,  228,  231-232, 
247, 
259 
-U.S.S.R.,  4-5,  193,  225 
-West Germany, 2,33-34,57,134-135, 
212-213,  227,  242,  253,  259,  260 
U.S. 
-Brazil,  38 
-Canada,  38,  139 

250 
-251, 

227, 

188, 
257, 

203, 
258, 

-Canada-EsRo,  77-78,  144 
-Denmark,  268-269 
-Europe,  1 2 6 1 2 7  
-Italy,  247 
-Peru,  72 
-Suain.  101 
-d.K.,’9,  229,  257 
-U.S.S.R.,  4-5,  10-11,  118,  121-122, 
157,  191,  207-208,  216,  219-220, 
LLJ 
-West  Germany,  134-135 
U.S.S.R. 
-Bu lg a r i a   -  Czechoslovakia  -  East 
Germany  -  Hung a ry   -  P o l a n d   - 
-Bu lg a r i a   -  Czechoslovakia  -  East 
Romania,  249 
Germany  -  Hungary  -  Rom an i a ,  
195 
-Czechoslovakia  - East Germany,  104, 
237 
-Czechoslovakia  -  Romania,  190 
-INTITELSAT,  81 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   Organizations  Immunities 
Act,  9 
International  Space  Hall  of  Fame,  Ala- 
mogordo,  N.  Mex.  (proposed), 29 
International  Sun-Earth  Explorers  pro- 
gram  (ISEE;  see  also  ISEE-A  and  ISEE-B), 
77.  210 
International Telecommunications Satellite 
Organization (INTELSAT ;  see also Intelsat 
satellites),  26,  77,  81,  151-152,  159, 
169, 202 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   T e l epho r i e   -&  Telegraph 
Corp.  (ITT), M ,  121 
International  Ultraviolet  Explorer  ( I U  E), 
77,  209-210 
Interplanetary dust,  198,  212 
Interstellar clouds,  132 
InterTechnology Corp.,  19 
Io  (Jovian moon),  13, 93,  166-167,  208 
Ion,  208,  264,  267 
Ionization gauge,  145 
Ionosphere   (earth),  39-40,  72,  134-135, 
145,  174,  195,  201,  242,  255,  259,  264, 
267,  268-269 
Iowa,  Univ.  of,  111,  238-239,  259 
IPCS  (integrated  propulsion  control  sys- 
tem),  175 
IR .   See  Infrared  headings. 
Iran,  7,  194-195,  225 
Iridium, 83 
Irop,  68,  82,  208-209 
ISEE  (International  Sun-Earth  Exp lo r e r s  
program),  77,  210 
ISEEyA,  210 
ISEE-B,  210 
Isla  de  Cedros,  Mexico,  171 
Isolation garment,  54 
Isotope, 87 
Israel,  11,  28 
l S R 0   (Indian  Space  Research  Organiza- 
tion),  189-190,  238 
Italian  Space Commission, 40 

295 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Italy  (see  also  San  Marco),  2,  26,  38,  54, 
67,  101,  111,  173,  187,  194-195,  225, 
258 
( Im p r o v e d   T i r o s   O p e r a t i o n a l  
ITos-G  
Satellite).  See Noaa  4 .  
ITOS-H,  146 
ITOS-I,  146 
ITOS-J,  146 
~ T T  (International  Telephone & Telegraph 
Corp.),  3-4,  121 
I U E   (International  Ultraviolet  Exp lorer) ,  
77,  209-210 
IUS.  See Interim  upper  stage. 

J 

J a c k s o n ,   Nelson  P.,  Aerospace  Award, 
58-59 
Jaffe,  Leonard,  38,  46,  106-107,  178 
J A L   (Japan  Airlines  Co.,  Ltd.),  89 
Jamaica,  14 
Japan,  (see  also Denpa,  M U 3 C ,   M U 4 C ,  
Ohsumi, Shinsei. and  Tanse i) ,  3,  14,  26, 
89,  9 S 1 0 0 ,   110,  132,  156,  174,  182 ,  
225 
Japan   Airlines  Co.,  Ltd.  (JAL),  89 
Japan   Rocket Development  Assn.,  174 
Jastrow,  Dr.  Robert,  116 
JATO   (Jet-assisted  takeoff), 3 1 
Javits,  Sen. Jacob  K.,  4 
Jaycees  (Washington, D.C.),  118 
Jenkins, Dr.  Harriet G.,  34,  143-144 
Jet-assisted  takeoff  (JATO),  3 1 
Jet  Propulsion Laboratory (JPL,  Cal Tech), 
68,  101,  151 
applications  research,  25,  32,  73,  175- 
176.  177 
space 'projects,  5 ,   14,  27,  107,  163,  173, 
178-179,  208,  213 
J o h a n n e s b u r g   T r a ck in g   Station,  South 
Africa, 77 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.,  2,  264 
Johnson,  Clarence  L., 199-200 
Johnson,  Howard  W.,  199 
Johnson,  President Lyndon  B.,  199-200 
Johnson,  Vincent  L., 64, 157 
Johnson  Space Center (JSC,  NASA;  see  also 
Shuttle  Avionic  Integration  Labora- 
tory),  13,  15,  59,  65-66,  144-145, 
I74 
A p o l l o   Sp a c e c r a f t   P r o g r a m   Off ice ,  
121-122 
applications research,  62,  65,  187,  212 
ASTP   support,  1,  7,  78,  79,  81-82,  102, 
164,  165-170,  191,  192, 216 
awards,  88,  131 
Bioscience  Payloads Office,  181 
conference,  64, 157-158 
employment,  210 
Flight Operations Aircraft Div.,  185 
personnel,  95,  202,  220 
press  conference,  30,  147,  155-156,  208 
Skylab Program  Office,  203 
space  shuttle  support,  2,  9,  79,  89,  107, 
165-166,  217 

Johnston,  Richard  S.,  157-158 
Jo in t  Committee on Cooperation in Atom- 
ic  Energy  (US.-U.S.S.R.),  25 
G roup  
Joint 
Spacelab  Working 
(NASA-ESRO),  54 
Jones, Gen.  David  C.  (USAF ) ,   103 
Jones, J.  Lloyd,  130 
Jordan ,   26 
JPL.  See Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory. 
JSC.  See  Johnson  Space Center. 
JT8D  (turbofan  engine),  51,  145-146,  224 
Juneau,  Alaska,  4 
Juno   (launch vehicle),  171 
Jupiter  (missile),  171 
Jupiter (planet; see also Callisto,  Grea t   red 
spot, Io, Mariner Jupiter-Saturn, Pioneer 
10,  and  Pioneer  l l ) ,  13,  14,  32,  36-37, 
51,  83,  87,  106,  12&121,  135,  150-151, 
153,  169-170,  197-199,  208,  222,  223 
Jupiter  C   (launch  vehicle),  171 
7'he  Jupiter  Effect  (book),  169 
Jupiter  orbiter,  99-100 
Justice, Dept.  of,  169 
K 

Kagoshima  Space  C e n t e r ,   U c h i n o u r a ,  
Japan ,   3 9 4 0 ,   182, 230 
Kaman   Aerospace Corp.,  204-205 
Kansas.  189 
Kansas:  Univ.  of,  59,  191 
Kazakstan,  U.S.S.R.,  207,  255 
Keldysh,  Prof.  Mstislav  V., 165 
Kennedy, President  John   F.,  175 
Kennedy International Airport,  N.Y., 102, 
224 
Kennedy  Space  Center  (KSC, NASA),  16, 
35,  98,  120,  182 
agriculture research,  65 
A S T P   suppor t ,   41,  88,  117,  151,  165, 
194 
ceremonies,  88,  135 
construction of  facilities, 64,97,21&211, 
223-224 
Design Engineering  Directorate, 93 
Earth  Resources  Office,  119 
employment, 35-36,  141,  220 
environmental research,  86,  140 
launch  operations, 9,  33-34 
personnei,  171,  217 
Skylab Program  Office,  203 
space  shuttle support,  12, 64, 66-67,  75, 
93  
support  services,  16-17,  19,  117 
technology  utilization,  100,  167-168 
Kentucky, Univ.  of,  129 
Kenya,  26 ,40 ,   187,  258 
Kerr,  Dr.  Frank,  176 
Kerslake, William  R., 186 
Kerwin, Cdr.  Joseph P.  (USN),  32,42,  103, 
195 
Khozin,  Grigory,  172 
KIAS:  knots  indicated  a ir   speed. 
Kibinge,  Ambassador  Leonard  O., 
(Kenya), 26 

296 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Kidney disease,  157-158 
Kilgore,  Edwin  C.,  48,  53,  55-56,  66,  106, 
2 13-2  14 
Kirillin,  Vladimir  A.,  165 
Kiruna,  Sweden,  265 
Kissinger,  Dr. Henry A.,  Secretary of  State, 
70,  105 
Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory,  214 
Klebesadel,  Dr.  R.  W.,  90 
Klimuk,  Lt.  Col.  Pyotr  I.  (cosmonaut), 
255 
Kline,  Raymond  A.,  148 
Kliore,  Dr.  Arvydas J.,  76 
Kohler,  Foy  D.,  172 
Kohoutek,  Dr.  Lubos,  2 
Kohoutek  (comet),  2,  3,  5,  6,  9-10,  30, 
65,  77,  90,  119,  203,  223,  264 
Kondo,  Dr.  Yoji,  185 
Kopp,  Eugene  P.,  59 
Korea,  14 
Korolev,  Sergey  P.,  52 
Kourou Space Center, French Guiana,  196, 
267 
Kowal,  Charles T.,  167 
Kozyrev,  Nikolay  A.,  28, 
Kraemer,  Robert  S., 3 6 3 7  
Kraft,  Dr.  Christopher  C.,  Jr.,  32,  84-85 
Kraft,  Dr.  Robert  F.,  143 
Krieger,  Robert  L.,  195 
KSC.  See  Kennedy  Space  Center. 
Kubasov,  Valery  N.  (cosmonaut),  81-82 
L 

L-1011  (TriStar,  j e t   transport),  10,  111- 
112 
L-band  frequency,  77-78,  110,  165 
L-band  t r a n i s t o r   amplifier,  49 
LACATE .   See  Lower  Atmospheric  Com- 
position  and  Temperature  Experiment. 
Lacerta  (constellation),  76 
Lacey,  Lewis  L.,  184 
LAGEOS  (Laser  Geodynamic  Satellite),  164 
Lake  Victoria,  109,  238 
Laminates,  184 
LAM P S  (Light airborne multipurpose system 
helicopter),  8 1 
Lancaster,  Calif.,  189 
Land,  Elwood  W.,  Jr.,  113 
Land  management,  119,  131,  132 
Langley  Research  Center  (LBRC,  NASA) 
Administrative  Standardization  Office, 
158-159 
aeronautics,  96,  97,  123,  187,  273 
atmospheric  research,  98 
employment,  220 
energy  research,  34,  73 
launch  vehicle  management,  11 1,  160 
personnel,  213-214 
satellite,  11 1 
LPRC.  See  Langley  Research  Center. 
Large  Radio  A s t ronomy   O b s e r v a t o r y ,  
37-38 
Large  Solar Observatory,  37-38 

Large  Space  Telescope  (LST), 21,  37-38, 
77,99-100,  118-119,  124,  127,  150,  201, 
220,  223 
Larson,  Clarence  E.,  25 
Las Cruces,  N.  Mex.,  197 
Laser,  47,  102,  121,  131,  140,  151,  154, 
177,  184 
Laser  Geodynamic  Sateltitew(LAcEos), 164  
Launch,  DOD (see  also  Appendix  A),  221, 
227,  228 
N ~ s  1 ,   132-133,  241-242 
Redstone  missile,  171 
S3-1  satellite,  145,  194,  228,  248 
unidentified  satellite,  36,  63,  194 
Launch,  NASA ,   2,  221-222,  227,  228 
Aeros  2 ,  134-135,  242,  257,  259 
Amsat  Oscar 7,  200,  250,  257,  259 
Ans  1 ,   159,  244,  257,  259 
A t s  6,  108-109,  238,  257,  258 
failure,  33-34,  222,  229,  257,  258 
Helios.1,  2i2,’ 213,.  253,  257:  260’--. 
Hawkeve  I .   2.  11 1.  238-239.  251.  259 
Intasat,  200-201,  250-251,  257,  259 
Intelsat-IV  F - 8 ,   202.  251.  251.  259 
Miranda,  57-58,  231-232,  257,  258 
Noaa  4,  200-201,  249-250,  257,  259 
Sun  Marc0  4,  40,  230-231,  257,  258 
Skynet  I I A ,   9,  229,  257,  258 
Skynet  IIB ,   203,  252,  257,  260 
Sms  I ,   103-104,  236-237,  257,  258 
s o u n d i n g   rockets  (see  also  names  of 
individual  sounding  rockets),  263- 
27 1 
Symphonie  I ,  215-216,  254,  257,  260 
Wes tar   I ,  85-86,  233,  257,  258 
Westar 2,  185-186,  246,  257,  259 
Launch  processing  system  (LPS), 12 
Launch  vehicle (see  also  individual  launch 
vehicles), 4-5,  12, 21,  53, W 5 ,  78,  113, 
116,  135,  168-169 
Lava,  82,  215 
Law  enforcement,  29 
Lawrence  Livermore  Laboratory,  56 
Lazarev,  Lt.  Col.  Vasiliy  G .   (cosmonaut), 
255 
Lead,  168 
Lear  4  mission,  177 
Learjet  (executive  transport  aircraft),  160, 
177 
Leary,  Dr.  William  M.,  15 
Le  Bourget  Airfield,  156 
Lee,  Chester M.,  44 
Lenin  Prize  (U.S.S.R.),  52 
Leningrad,  U.S.S.R.,  65,  102,  105-106 
Leonov,  Lt.  Col.  Aleksey  A.  (cosmonaut), 
36,  81-82,  178 
LeRC.  See  Lewis  Research  Center. 
LES  (Lincoln  Experimental  Satellite),  23 
LES  8,  67 
LES  9 ,  67 
Levin,  S.  Benedict,  171 
Levy,  Maurice  M.,  213 
Lew,  Dr.  Hin,  9 
Lewis  Research  Center  ( L ~ R C ,  NASA;  see 
also  Plum  Brook  Station),  210 
aeronautics,  51,  92,  145-146 

297 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

system 

automotive  research,  25 
conference,  166 
employment,  66,  220 
energy  research,  29,  34,  61,  73-74,  187, 
204-205,  226 
environmental  research,  168,  213 
establishment,  156 
launch  vehicle  management,  33-34,  213 
materials  research,  173,  174 
propulsion  technology,  186 
Library  of  Congress,  4 
Lick  Observatory,  % lo  
Life,  origin  of,  11,  132 
Life  raft,  151 
Life  sciences  (see  also  Space  biology  and 
medicine),  2 1, 28-29,  37,  43-44,  97,  13 1, 
134,  140-141 
Life  support  system,  176,  210 
Life  vest,  151 
Lifting  body.  See HL-10,  M2-F3,  X-24A, 
and  X-24B. 
Light 
airborne  multipurpose 
(LAMPS )   helicopter,  81  
“Light  Blue.”  See  Tansei  2 .  
Light  Heart  (balloon), W 1  
Lighter-than-air  vehicles,  166 
Lighter-than-Air  Workshop,  166 
Lightning.  See P-38. 
Lightning,  15 1 
Lightweight  fighter  prototype program,  31, 
79,  91,  94,  116 
Lilly,  William  E.,  24,  209 
Lincoln  Experimental  Satellite  (LES),  23, 
67 
Lindbergh,B/cCharles  A.  (U.S.  Army Air 
Corps,  Ret.),  156-157 
Lindstrom,  Robert  E.,  69 
Liquid-fueled  rocket,  52 
Liquid-oxygen  pressurization  system,  148- 
149 
Liquid  oxygen and hydrogen  rocket engine, 
15 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.,  7-8,  10,  15-16, 
111-112,  130,  151,  163,  192,  220 
Lockheed-California  Co.,  168 
Lockheed  Missiles  &  Space  Co.,  201, 
266-267 
Lockheed  Propulsion  Co.,  5,  36,  126 
Loening,  Albert  P.,  168 
Loening  amphibian  aircraft,  168 
Logan  I n t e r n a t i o n a l   A i r p o r t ,   Bos ton ,  
Mass.,  118 
Loki  (sounding  rocket),  65 
London,  England,  10,  51,  101,  107,  163 
Long-haul  technology,  48 
Long-range  radio-control  system,  15 1 
Loomis,  Henry,  1 0 6 1 0 7  
Lord,  Douglas  R.,  54 
Lorenzini,  Dino  A.,  15 
Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory,  270 
Los  Angeles,  Calif.,  134,  148,  163,  164, 
259 
Lousma,  L/C  Jack  R.  (USMC),  28,  121- 
122 
Love,  Maj.  Michael  V., 274 
Lovelace,  DL  Alan  M.,  15,  157 

Lovell,  Capt.  James  A.,  J r .   (USN ,   Ret.), 
35 
Low,  D r .   George M., 8-9,  11, 25,  28,  53, 
135,  190,  200,  211 
Low-emission  combustor,  26 
L ow e r   A tm o s p h e r i c   Composition  and 
Temperature  Experiment  (LACATE),  98, 
226 
Lower  mesosphere  (earth),  266 
Loweth,  Hugh  T.,  182 
Lox  (liquid  oxygen).  See  Oxygen. 
LPS  (launch  processing  system),  12 
LRV   (lunar  roving  vehicle),  37 
LST.  See  Large  space  Telescope.. 
Lubbock,  Tex.,  197 
Lucas,  Dr.  William  R.,  53,  120,  199 
Luftwaffe,  156 
Luna  (U.S.S.R.  lunar  probe),  222,  228 
Luna  16, 72-73 
Luna  22,  108,  223,  237 
Luna  23,  193-194,  223,  248 
Lunar  agriculture,  154 
Lunar  da ta  analysis and  synthesis program, 
223 
Lunar  exploration  ( see   a l so   ind iv idu a l  
m a n n e d   missions.  such  a s   ADOIIO  11 
and  Luna  16) ,   21,’  32,  36,  37,‘  81,  85, 
132,  135-136,  154,  161 
Lunar  Orbiter 5 ,  215 
Lunar  orbiter  program,  217 
Lunar  roving  vehicle  (LRV),  37 
Lunar  sample  analysis,  21 
Lunar  Science  Conference,  Fifth  Annual, 
64 
Lunar  tide,  45 
Lundin,  Bruce  T.,  26,  66 
Lunney,  Glynn  S.,  82,  118,  157,  207-208 
L‘vov,  Ukraine,  81 
Lyman-alpha  radiation,  3,  5 
Lynn,  James T.,  Secretary  of  Housing and 
Urban  Development,  219 
M 

M2-F3  (lifting  body),  273 
M-X (Japanese  launch  vehicle),  174 
McCall,  Robert  T.,  45 
McConnell,  Dr.  Dudley  G.,  6-7,  11-12, 
34,  143-144 
McCormack,  Rep.  Mike,  46 
MacDonald  Ob s e rv a to ry ,   F o r t   D a v i s ,  
Tex.,  45 
McDonnell  Douglas Corp.,  51,  64, 71,  76, 
81,  83,  134,  140,  196,  205 
McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co., 
7-8,  4 1 4 2 ,   217 
McFall,  Russell  W.,  134 
McLucas,  John   L.,  Secretary  of  the  Air 
Force,  183 
Madrid  Space  Communications  Complex, 
Spain,  101 
MAF.  See  Michoud  Assembly  Facility. 
Magnesium,  100 
Magnet,  29 
“Magnetic  domain  bubbles,”  143 

298 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Magnetic  field  (earth),  48,  77,  103,  111, 
114 
Magnetic  storm,  40,  114 
Magnetohydrodynamics, 187 
Magnetometer, 54,  208-209,  253 
Magnetopause,  12-13 
Magnetosphere (earth).  See  Atmosphere. 
Magnetotail,  149 
Makarov,  Oleg  G.  (cosmonaut), 255 
Malaysia, 78-79,  169 
Malkin,  Dr.  Myron  S.,  113 
Malloy,  Dr.  James  A.,  Jr.,  59 
MAMA  (Mobile automatic  metabolic analy- 
zer),  13 
Manching,  West  Germany,  173 
Manke,  John   A.,  52-53,  274 
M a n n e d   sp a c e   flight  (see  also  Apollo, 
Apollo-SoyuR  Test  Project, Appendix 
A,  Appendix  C,  Astronaut,  Cosmo- 
naut,  Gemini,  Mercury,  Salyut,  Sky- 
lab,  Soyuz,  Space  biology 
and 
medicine,  Space  shuttle,  and  Space- 
lab),  137,  221,  228 
anniversary, 85,  137-138 
award,  137 
budget,  21,  24,  27,  84,  109,  160-161 
congressional  c o n s i d e r a t i o n ,   28,  41, 
4 2 4 4 ,   47 
man-hours  in  space, 261 
medical  aspects, 34-35,  42,  43-44,  97 
press  comment,  31,  32,  51,  69-70,  85 
technology  utilization, 95 
U.S.S.R., 152,  161 
M a n n e d   Space  Flight  Network  (MSFN), 
176 
Mapping,  38-39,  42,  55,  61-62,  65,  114, 
130,  168,  169-170,  215 
Maran,  Dr.  Stephen  P.,  2 
Marathon  Construction  Co.,  136 
Marine  Corps  Air  Station,  Calif.,  60 
Marine  resources,  131-132 
Mariner  (spacecraft), 23,  34,  54 
M a r i n e r   4,  87 
M a r i n e r   9 ,  70 
M a r i n e r  10 (Venus-Mercury probe),  14,72, 
130.  151 
da ta   &ansmission, 5,  68,  71-72,  82,  173 
mission  profile, 5,  2 6 2 7 ,   63,  222-223 
press  comment,  37,  75 
press  conference,  16,  27,  69 
Mariner  Jup i ter-Sa turn   1977  ( M J S  
'77) 
mission,  21,  23,  25,  212,  223 
M a r i n e r   J u p i t e r -U r a n u s   1979  mission, 
99-100 
Marisat  (maritime comsat),  2,  67,  114 
Maritime Administration,  165 
Maritime  communications  satellite  (Mar- 
isat)  system, 2,  67,  114 
Maritime industry,  147,  238 
Maritime  Orbital  Test  Satellite  (MAROTS), 
49,  210 
Mark  500 (nuclear warhead),  151 
MAROT S .   See  M a r i t i m e   O r b i t a l   T e s t  
Satellite. 

Mars  (planet;  see  also  individual probes, 
such  as   M a r s  3,  and   Viking  program), 
13,  32,  33,  34-35,  36-37,  43,  70, 87, 
94,  112,  135,  154,  169-170 
.  ,. 
M a r s  3 .   (U.S.S.R.  Mars  probe).  k0 
M a r s  4 :  33.  60. 70  
M a r s  5 ;  33;  60: 70  
M a r s  6 ,  33,  59,  60,  70 
M a r s   7.  33.  59-60,  70  
M a r s h a l l   Sp a c e   F l i g h t   C e n t e r   (MSFC ,  
NASA),  19,  41-42,  88,  119,  174 
aeronautics,  102 
716 - _ -  
Apollo-Soyuz Test  Project support,  118, 
astronomy, 93,  158,  170 
conference.  118-119.  164.  184 
construction  of  facilities,  21,  176177, 
189,  220 
employment,  25,  90-91. 
115-116,  210, 
220 
energy  research, 6,  73,  9 I,  11 1, 1 14,  175, 
192,  226 
meteorology,  101-102 
personnel,  1,  53-54,  69,  120,  199 
Skylab,  58,  80,  139,  203 
space shuttle support,  36,  121,  140,  150, 
184 
space transportation  system, 7-8,  34,47, 
75,  88,  103,  217 
Spacelab support,  177,  184,  185,  205 
technoloev  utilization.  10.  13.  143.  167 
,
,
 
transpo&ion 
research,  86 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.,  1,  7-8,  86,  140, 
158,  165,  172,  201,  220 
Maryland,  130 
Maryland,  Univ.  of, 45-46 
Mascon,  72-73,  215 
Mass  spectrometer,  13,  145,  231,  242 
Massachusetts, 168 
Massachusetts  I n s t i t u t e   of  T e chno logy  
( M I T ;   see  a l so   F l i g h t   Transportation 
Laboratory),  126,  199,  270-271 
Materials research,  58,  91,  214 
adhesives,  184 
aircraft,  48,  91,  99,  192 
alloys,  173,  184 
coatings,  111,  216 
crystals,  43,  115,  199 
solar  energy  research,  90-91,  105,  178 
Mathews,  Charles W.,  47-48,  61-62,  182 
Mattingly,  Cdr.  Thomas  K. 11,  (USN),  28 
M a m a   Kea, Hawaii,  24,  39,  84  
Max  Planck  Institute  for  Extraterrestrial 
Physics,  West  Germany,  191 
Mayall  Telescope,  214 
Mayflower Hotel, Washington, D.C.,  21 1 
MC I   Communications Corp.,  130 
Mecca,  William  R., 209-210 
Medal  of  Freedom,  31  
Medal of  Honor,  156 
Medicine  (see a l s o   Sp a c e   b io logy   a n d  
medicine) 
aviation, 22 
space  manufacturing, 43 
technology  utilization,  29,  54,  68,  95, 
100,  143,  144-145,  226 

299 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

telecommunications,  48,  106107 ,   109, 
139, 228,  238,  258 
Mediterranean  Sea,  63-64 
Memorandum  of  Understanding,  58,  77- 
78,  101,  111,  144,  160,  188,  194195 ,  
204,  209,  211,  213 
Mercure (European short-range transport), 
38 
Mercury  (metal),  34 
Mercury  (planet;  see also  Mar iner   I O ) ,   14, 
26,  29,  3 6 3 7 ,  87,  222 
Mercury  (program),  28,  21 1 
Mercury  Redstone  2,  136 
MESH  consortium,  210 
Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm  GmbH,  54, 
113,  169 
Messier  13  (star  cluster),  201-202 
Messmer,  Premier  Pierre  (France),  38 
Meteor,  237 
Meteor (U.S.S.R.  meteorological satellite), 
120,  222,  228 
Meteor  16, 52,  231 
Meteor   17, 92,  235 
Meteor  18,  131-132,  241 
Meteor  19,  194,  248 
Meteor  20,  215,  253 
Meteorite,  11, 208,  215 
Meteoroid,  60,  65,  152-153 
Meteoroid  detector,  42,  60 
Meteoroid  Technology  Satellite  (MTS).  See 
Explorer  46 .  
Meteorological satellite  (see also individual 
satellites,  systems, and programs,  such 
a s   De fen se   Meteorological  Satellite 
Program,  Goes  I ,  ITOS-H,  Meteor   Ib, 
National  Operational  Meteorological 
Satellite  System,  N imbu s ,   N o a a   2 ,  
SEASAT,  Sms I ,  and  Tiros-N),  28,  85, 
101-102,  110,  154,  174, 228 
Meteorology (see  also Atmospheric  Layer- 
ing  and  Density  Distribution  of  Ions 
and Neutrals project,  Climatic  Impact 
Assessment  Program,  Global  Atmo- 
sph e r i c   R e s e a r ch   P r o g r a m ,   G A R P  
Atlantic  Tropical  Exp e r im en t ,   a n d  
Weather  and  Climate  program),  24, 
109,  132,  183,  2 6 6 2 6 7  
budget.  21.  109 
inteFnationa1 cooperation,  105 
observation  studies,  65,  101-102,  188, 
213,  236237 ,   253 
program  proposal,  146 
weather  forecasting,  22,  154,  215,  231, 
235.  248 
weather  modification,  4 1 4 2 ,   143 
Methane,  98 
Methyl  cyanide,  77,  118-1 19 
Methvlamine.  132 
Metzinbaum,  Sen.  Howard  M.,  99,  199 
mev:  million  electron  volts. 
Mexican  National  Commission  for  Outer 
Space,  62 
Mexico,  14,  42,  62,  119 
Mexico  City,  171 
mhz :   m e g a h e r t z   (1   m i l l ion   cycles  per 
. 
second). 

Miami,  Fla.,  174-175 
Miami,  Univ.  of,  140 
Michiean.  Univ.  of.  266.  268-269 
Michgud 'Assembly  Fa&lity  (MAF,  NASA), 
10,  19,  88,  158 
Microdensitometer,  100 
Microdot,  58 
Microelectronics,  48 
Micrometeorite,  195, 249 
Microphone,  150 
Microphone  meteoroid  sensors,  60 
Microwave  energy,  115,  178-179 
Microwave  frequency,  56,  61-62,  73 
Microwave  radiometry,  102 
Middle  East  War.  See  Arab-Israeli  War. 
Midway  Island,  14 
Milky  Way  (galaxy),  76,  90,  132, 201-202, 
214 
Miller,  G .   William,  11 1-1  12 
Mini-Sniffer  (radio-controlled  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
151 
Mining,  129 
Ministry  of  Defence,  U.K.,  203 
Minneapolis,  Minn.,  147 
Minnesota,  Univ.  of,  2 6 6 2 6 7  
Minorities,  6 7 ,  11,  102,  126, 202 
M i n u t e m a n   ( i n t e r c o n t i n e n t a l   ba l l i s t ic  
missile),  22,  57 
Minuteman  1,  192 
Mirage  3,  (F-1;  French  supersonic fighter 
aircraft),  138-139 
M iranda  (UK-X4;  U.K.  satellite), 2, 57-58, 
221-222,  227,  231-232,  251,  259 
Mirror,  189 
M IRV .   See  Multiple  independently  target- 
able  reentry  vehicles. 
Missile  (see  also  individual missiles,  kinds 
of  missiles,  and  missile  systems),  4-5, 
22,  28,  51-52,  6 2 6 3 ,   70,  81,  151,  155, 
157,  163,  193 
Missile  Definition  G roup ,   12&121 
Mississippi  Test  Facility  (MTF,  NASA;  see 
also  National  Space  Technology  Labo- 
ratories),  10, 31 
Missouri,  Univ.  a t   Rolla,  136 
M IT .   See Massachusetts  Institute  of  Tech- 
nology. 
M IUS   (modular  integrated  utility  system), 
187 
MJS'77.  See  Mariner Jupiter- Saturn  1977 
mission. 
Mlavsky,  Dr.  A.  I . ,   105 
Mobile  a u t o m a t i c   m e t a b o l i c   an a ly z e r  
(MAMA),  13 
Modular  integrated  utility  system  (M IUS ) ,  
187 
Molecular  science,  118-1  19,  154 
M o l n i y a   (U .S .S .R .   comsat  series),  81, 
219-220,  222,  228 
Mo ln iya   1-27,  88-89,  233-234 
Mo ln iya   1-28,  192, 247 
Mo ln iya   I-S,  141,  243 
Mo!niya  11-9,  93,  235 
Mo ln iya   11-10,  139,  242 
Mo ln iya  11-11,  217,  254 
Mo ln iya   111-1  , 202-203,  25 1 

300  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Monaco,  59 
Monopropellant,  31 
Montana,  170 
Monterey,  Calif.,  166 
Moon  (see  also  lunar  headings,  individual. 
lunar  missions,  Sea  of  Crisis,  and  Tau- 
rus-Littrow),  13,  32,  36,  87,  98,  208-209, 
212,  215 
Moonquakes,  208-209 
Moorer,  Adm.  Thomas  H.  (USN),  103 
Morgantown,  W.Va.,  89-90 
Moritz,  Bernard,  53 
Morocco,  41 
Moroz,  Vasily  I.,  70 
Morrison,  Dr.  Dennis  R.,  181 
Morrison,  Dr.  Phillip,  90 
Morse,  Samuel F.  B.,  134 
Mosaic,  90 
Moscow,  U.S.S.R.,  4 5 ,   14,  70,  80,  81, 
122,  123-124,  157, 
164,  165,  191,  219- 
220 
Moss,  Sen.  Frank  E.,  15,  62,  73,  139,  204 
Mossinghoff,  Gerald  J.,  1,  102 
Motion  sickness,  42, 
Moun t   Palomar,  Calif.,  167 
Mount  Wilson,  Calif.,  168 
M R C A  (multirole  combat  aircraft),  173 
MSFC.  See  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center. 
M S F N   (Manned  Space   F l i g h t   N e tw o r k ) ,  
176 
MS-TI  (Tanse i  I),  3 9 4 0  
M S T 2 .   See  Tansei 2. 
MTF   (Mississippi  Test  Facility),  IO,  31, 
1 1 9  
MTs-(Meteoroid  Technology  Satellite).  See 
Exolorer  46 .  
MUL3C  (Japanese  launch  vehicle),  3 9 4 0  
MU-IS,  3 9 4 0  
Mulligan,  Dr.  J .   H.,  Jr.,  129 
Mulreadv.  Richard  C..  15 
Multipl;  independently  targetable  reentry 
vehicle  (MIRV),  14,  22,  42,  70,  140 
Multirole  combat  aircraft  (MRCA),  173 
Multispectral-image-analysis  system,  98 
Multispectral  scanner,  38-39,  65,  90 
Munich,  West  Germany,  191 
Murray,  Dr.  Bruce  C.,  82 
Musgrave,  Dr.  Franklin  Story,  181 
Mutch,  Dr.  Thomas  A.,  112 
Myers,  Dale  D.,  39,  41,  47,  88,  101 
N 

N-2  (Japanese  launch  vehicle),  174 
N A A  (National  Aeronautic  Assn.),  95,  173 
N A A C P   (National  Assn. 
for 
the  Ad- 
vancement  of  Colored  People),  202 
NACA .   See  National  Advisory  Committee 
for  Aeronautics. 
N A E .   See  National  Academy  of  Engineer- 
ing. 
Nani,  India,  63 
NAS .   See  National  Academy  of  Sciences. 
NASA .   See National Aeronautics and  Space 
Administration. 

NA SA   Aircraft  Office,  158-159 
NASA   Astronaut  Office,  149 
NASA  Energy-Related Research and Devel- 
opment  (report),  73-74 
N A S A   H e adqu a r t e r s ,   89,  90,  119,  120, 
148-149,  181,  184,  211,  213,  220 
Apollo  Program  Office,  217 
personnel,  95,  149,  213-214 
Skylab  Program  Office,  203 
NA SA   Office for Center Operations, 53,  106, 
148,  158-159 
N A S A   Office  of  Aeronautics  and   Space 
Technology  (OAST),  48,  53,  56,  66,  106, 
130,  157,  213-214 
N A S A   Office  of  Applications  (OA),  6,  104, 
143-144,  145 
NASA   Office of  Automatic Da ta  Processing 
Management,  148 
N A S A   O f f ice   of  D O D   a n d   In t e r ag en cy  
Affairs,  157,  170 
NASA  Office  of  Earth  Resources  Survey 
Systems  (proposed),  145,  171 
NA SA   Office of  Energy  Programs,  102,  175, 
226 
NASA   Office  of  Equal  Opportunity  Pro- 
grams,  6-7,  11-12,  34,  143-144,  150 
NASA   Office  of  General  Council,  1 
NA SA   Office  of  Legislative  Affairs,  1,  102 
N A S A   Office  of  M a n n e d   Sp a c e   F l i g h t  
(OMSF),  39,  47,  101,  136,  211 
NASA  Office  of  Personnel,  126 
NA SA   Office  of  Planetary  Programs,  36- 
37 
NASA   o f f ice   of  Public  Affairs  for  Com- 
munity  and  Human  Relations,  150 
NA SA   Office of  Space  Science (oss), 33-34, 
57,  111,  124,  157,  160,  169-170 
N A S A   Office  of  Technology  Applications 
(proposed),  6 0 6 1  
NASA   Office of  Tracking and Da ta  Acquisi- 
tion  (OTDA),  62 
NA SA   Office of  User  Affairs,  95 
NASA   Spacelab  Program  Office,  54 
NASA-University  Conference  on   Aeronau- 
tics,  191 
Nash,  Carl  E.,  117 
N A T E   (n eu t r a l - a tmo sph e r e   temperature 
experiment),  242 
Natibnal  Academy  of  Engineering  (NAE), 
86,  97,  129 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  (NAS),  86, 
92,  119,  124-125,  126-127,  129,  140-141, 
176 
National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aero- 
nautics (NACA),  70-71,  93,  156,  176177, 
211,  219 
National  Aeronautic  Assn.  (NAA),  95,  173 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Act  of 
1958,  6061 ,   62,  78,  163-164 

30 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Space 
and 
Aeronautics 
National 
also 
see 
Administration 
(NASA; 
and  
individual  Centers, 
offices, 
programs;  Awards;  Budget, 
NASA; 
of 
facilities, 
Construction 
NASA; 
C o n t r a c t ,   N A S A ;   Employment,  NASA ;  
Interagency  cooperation;  In te rna t iona l  
cooperation;  International  cooperation, 
space ;   Launch,  NASA ;   and   Personnel, 
NASA),  8-9,  177-178,  227 
National  aerospace  fellowship  p rog r am ,  
102-103 
National  Assn.  for  the  Advancement  of  
Colored  People  (NAACP),  202 
N a t i o n a l   A s t r o n o m y   a n d   Iono sph e r e  
Center,  201-202 
National  Bureau  of  Standards  (NBS),  36, 
70-7 1 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
(NCAR),  119,  185 
National  Civil  Se rv ice   L e a g u e   C a r e e r  
Service Award,  157,  169-170 
N a t i o n a l   C iv i l   Service  League  Special 
Achievement  Asward, 169-170 
National  Commission  for  Ou te r   Space ,  
Mexico,  62 
National  Defense  Research  Council,  7 s  
71 
National  Environmental  Satellite  Service 
(NESS,  NOAA),  2W 2 0 1 ,   249,  259 
N a t i o n a l   G eog r aph i c   Society,  45,  183, 
197 
National  Maritime  Research  Center,  165 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Ad- 
ministration  (NOAA;  see  also  National 
Environmental  Satellite  Service,  Na- 
tional  Ope ra t iona l   M e t eo r o log i c a l  
Satellite  System,  and  Noua  series) 
budget,  22 
coope ra t ion ,   2,  12,  28,  66,  119,  146, 
200,  213,  249 
Meteorological  Se rv ice s   R e s e a r c h   f o r  
1975,  146 
research,  45,  114,  213 
satellites,  103-104,  114,  146,  183,  200, 
249,  258 
solar observatory,  174 
N a t i o n a l   O p e r a t i o n a l   M e t eo r o log i c a l  
Satellite  System  (NOMSS),  146,  236-237, 
249 
National  Radio  Astronomical  Observa- 
tory,  118-119 
National  Research  Council, Canada, 9-10, 
39 
Research 
39 
National  Research  Council,  U.S.,  129 
National  Resources  Council  (proposed), 
60-61 
National  Science  Foundation  (NSF),  119, 
134,  201-202 
budget,  6,  23,  164 
conference,  175-176 
interagency  cooperation,  6,  94,  204 
personnel,  136,  182 
report,  48-49,  72,  143,  160-161,  190 

solar  energy  research,  19,  36,  46,  56-57, 
105,  163-164,  187,  204-205 
wind  energy  research,  6,  34,  63,  66,  73 
National  Scientific  Balloon  Facility,  185 
National  Security  Council,  124-125 
National  Severe  Storms  Laboratory,  101- 
102 
National  Solar  Energy  Program,  204 
National  Space Club  (NSC),  37,  58,  87 
National  Space  Week,  132,  135-136 
National  Space  Technology  Laboratories 
(NSTL,  NASA),  119 
National Transportation  Safety  Board,  51, 
71 
Weather  Service,  101-102 
Nationalist  China.  See  China,  Republic 
of. 
‘&Th e  N a t i o n , s   E n e r g y   F u t u r e , ,   ( A E C  
report),  107 
T~~~~~ o rg an i -  
~~~~h ~
~
l
~
NATO. 
zation. 
Natural  gas,  11,  20,  129,  154 
Naugle,  D r .   J o h n   E . ,   53,  57,  77,  87, 
112-1  13,  124,  169-170 
Naumova,  Yelena,  171 
Navajo  (Piper  aircraft),  97 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  (NRL),  3,  57, 
121,  132-133,  160,  241-242,  264,  269, 
270 
Naval  Weapons  Center,  15 1 
Navigation,  38,  55,  63,  67,  109,  121,  176, 
249-251,  253 
N a v i g a t i o n   sa te l l i te   (see  also  NAVSTAR 
Global  Positioning  System),  21-22,  37, 
209 
Navigation  system  Using  Time and Rang- 
ing  (NAVSTAR ) .  
See  N A V S T A R   G l o b a l  
Positioning System. 
Navigational  Technology  Satellite  (NTS), 
209 
Positioning  System  (GPS), 
NAVSTAR 
21-22,  67,  121,  132-133,  160,  190,  209, 
226,  228,  241-242 
Navy.  See  u.s. Navy. 
Navy  Astronaut  Wings,  28 
Navy  Distinguished  Service Medal,  28 
NBS   (National  Bureau  of  Standards),  36, 
70-7 1 
N C A R   (National  Center  fo r   Atmospheric 
Research),  119,  185 
Nebula.  See  Orion. 
NEC  (Nuclear  Energy  Commission),  83 
Neon,  27,  68 
N
~
~
~
9 1 
Neptune  (planet),  37,  45,  135,  222 
N E R V A   (nuclear  engine  f o r   rocket  vehicle 
program)*  184 
NESS .   !%e  National Environmental Satellite 
Service. 
Netherlands  (see  also  A n s   I ) ,   16,  54,  67, 
101,  107,  119,  138-139,  159-160,  244 
Netherlands  Astronomical  Satellite  (ANS). 
See A n s   1 .  
Neutral-atmosphere 
ment  (NATE),  242 

temperature  experi- 

~

302 

~

~

i

~

 

~

~

~

,

 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

N e u t r a l   m a s s   spectrometer  experiment, 
23 1 
Neutron,  168 
Neutron  star,  182 
New  Jersey,  168 
New  Mexico,  29 
New  York  Academy  of  Sciences,  56 
New  York,  N.Y.,  4,  8,  13,  80,  134,  156, 
163,  164,  165 
Newfoundland  Tracking  Station,  Canada, 
77 
Ney,  Dr.  Edward  P.,  90  
N H K   T e chn i c a l   R e s e a r ch   L a b o r a t o r y ,  
165-166 
Nicaragua,  14 
Nickel,  58,  173 
Nickel-cadmium  battery,  250-251 
Nickel-iron,  98 
Nike-Apache  (sounding  rocket),  264,  265, 
266,  267,  268-269 
Nike-Cajun,  266 
Nike-Iroquois,  126 
Nike-Malemute,  267,  270 
Nike-Tomahawk,  264-265,  267,  268-269, 
270-27 1 
Nimbus  (meteorological  satellite),  146 
Nimbus  5 ,  21,  120,  188 
Nimbus-F,  2,  21,  188 
Nimbus-G,  98,  188,  204,  226 
“The  1973 NA SA   Payload  Model”  (study), 
126 
Nippon  Electric  Co.,  169 
Nitric  acid,  98 
Nitric  oxide,  188,  265,  271 
Nitrogen,  5,  13, 40, 79-80,  151,  157-158 
Nitrogen  dioxide,  98,  266 
Nitrogen  oxide,  26,  86 
Nitrous  oxide,  98 
Nixon,  President  Richard  M.,  9,  65-66, 
72,  130  136,  143 
agreements,  25 
appointments  and  nominations  by,  88, 
103,  108,  137 
bills  signed,  99,  121,  132 
budget  request,  20 
committee  establishment,  119 
messages  and  statements,  11,  20,  30,  72, 
80 
press  comment,  129,  153-154 
reports,  72,  107,  124-125,  146-147 
resignation,  146 
resolutions,  132 
speeches,  65-66 
summit  meeting,  123-124,  241 
NOA:  new  obligational  authority. 
NOAA .   See  National  Oceanic  and  Atmos- 
pheric  Administration. 
Noaa  2  (ITOS-D;  rnetebrological  satellite), 
62,  120,  200 
Noaa  3 (ITOS-F),  62,  120,  183,  200 
Noaa  4  (170s-e), 2,200,221-222.225-226, 
227,  249-251,  257,  259 
Nobel  Prize,  188-189 
No i s e ,   aircraft,  17,  23,  25,  48,  51,  84, 
99-100,  123,  174,  189,  224 
Noise  reduction,  150 

Nome,  Alaska,  4 
NOMSS .   See National  Operational  Mete- 
orological  Satellite  System. 
Noordwijk,  The Netherlands,  199 
NORAD .   See North  American  Air  Defense 
Command. 
Nordberg,  Dr.  William,  54 
North  America.  65 
North  American  Air  Defense  Command 
(NORAD),  2-3,  174 
No r th   Atlantic  Treaty  Organization 
(NATO),  123-124,  138-139 
North  Carolina,  13 
Northrop  Corp.,  7,  10,  79,  84,  116,  138, 
146,  183-184 
Norway,  138-139,  210,  265,  271 
Nott,  Julian,  13-14 
Nova,  31 
NR L .   See  Naval  Research  Laboratory. 
NSC.  See  National  Space  Club. 
NSF .   See  National  Science Foundation. 
NSTL  (National  Space Technology  Labora- 
tories),  119 
NTS  (Navigational  Technology  Satellite), 
209 
( T i m a t i o n   3A ) ,   132-133,  228, 
N t s   I 
~ 
241-242 
Nu-life  (medical  device),  68 
Nuclear energy,  11,  14,  20,  21,  23,  25,  29, 
56,  84,  107,  118,  143,  154,  182,  184- 
185 
Nuclear  Energy  Commission  (NEC ) ,   83 
Nuclear  engine  for  rocket  vehicle  applica- 
tion  (N ERVA   program),  184 
Nuclear  microbomb,  179 
Nuclear-Dowered  shuttle.  115 
Nuclear ieactor, 20,23,25,29,56,  105-106, 
107,  184-185 
Nuclear  Regulatory  C omm i s s i o n ,   187, 
194 
N&ar  Test  Ban  Treatv  (1963).  90.  179 
N u c l e a r   w e apon s ,   103,- 1231124,  151, 
177-178,  185 
Nutrition,  131 
Nylon,  91 

0 

@model  (Japanese  launch  vehicle),  174 
OA .   See NASA  Office  of  Applications. 
OAO  (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory), 
21 
Oao 3 (Copernicus),  133,  187 
Oasis experiments,  44,  218-219 
OAST.  See  NASA  Office  of  Aeronautics and 
Space  Technology. 
individual  ob- 
(see  also 
Observatory 
servatories),  169-170,  174 
Oceanography,  38,  188 
ocean  dynamics,  24,  45,  119,  131,  153 
satellite applications,  102,  104,  182 
Oceans  and  International  Environmental 
and  Scientific Affairs  (State  Dept.),  194 
O’Dell,  Dr.  Charles  R.,  118-1 19 
Oertel,  Dr.  Goetz  K., 43-44 
303 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB), 
24,  27,  28,  80 
Office  of  Naval  Research  (ONR ) ,   144 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  (OST, 
President’s),  125 
Office  of  T e l e c omm u n i c a t i o n s   Po l icy  
(White  House),  86 
Ogiso,  Ambassador  Mo too   (Japan),  26 
Ogorodnikov,  Kiriol,  171 
Ohio,  182,  199 
Ohsumi  (Japanese  satellite),  3 9 4 0  
Oil,  10,  54,  129,  130,  132,  154 
Oil  shortage,  20,  45 
OL e a ry ,   P.  J.,  178 
See   Office  of  Management  and 
O M B .  
Budget. 
Omega  Centauri  (star  cluster),  171 
Omega-inertial  navigation  system,  120 
Omegatron,  40  
Omnidirectional  wheel,  81 
OMSF.  See  NA SA   Office of  Manned  Space 
Flight. 
- 
O’Neill,  Dr.  Gerald  K.,  98 
ONR   (Office  of  Naval  Research),  144 
Oo r t   cloud,  90 
0 0 s   (o rb i t - too rb i t   stage).  See  Interim 
upper  stage. 
Operation  Kohoutek.  See  Kohoutek. 
Optical  Society  of  America,  90,  92 
Orbit-to-orbit  stage  ( 0 0 s ) .   See  Interim 
upper  stage. 
Orbita  network  (U.S.S.R.  comsat  system), 
88-89,  93,  139,  202-203,  217,  233-234, 
235,  242,  247,  254 
Orbital  Workshop  (OWS ) .   See  Skylab  I. 
Orbiter,  shuttle,  47,  79,  107 
Orbiting  Astronomical  Observatory  (OAO; 
see  also  Oao 31,  21 
Orbiting  Explorers,  21 
Orbiting Satellite  Carrying Amateur Radio 
(OSCAR).  See  Amsat  Oscar  7 ,   Oscar  I ,  
and  Oscar 6. 
Orbiting  Solar Observatory  ( O S O ;  see  also 
OSQ-I),  21 
Orbiting  Test  Satellite  (OTS),  49,  169 
Order  of  Lenin  (U.S.S.R.),  52,  181 
Order  of  the  Red  Banner  of  Labor 
(U.S.  S.R.),  52 
Ordway,  Frederick,  I.,  111,  15 
Orfila, Ambassador Alejandro (Argentina), 
26 
O r i o n   (constellation),  90,  168-169,  214, 
247,  270 
Orion  (NASA   barge),  88 
Orion  2  (space  station  telescope),  44,  73, 
239-240 
Orly  Airport,  France,  51 
Oro,  Dr.  John ,   140-141 
Oscar  I  (Orbiting  Satellite  Carrying  Ama- 
teur  Radio),  201 
Oscar 6 ,  201 
Oscar 7.  See Amsat  Oscar  7. 
os0  (Orbiting  Solar Observatory),  21 
oso-I, 25,  77 
oss.  See  NA SA   Office  of  Space  Science. 
Osseo,  Minn.,  19 

OST  (Office  of  Science  and  Technology, 
President’s),  125 
OTDA.  See  NASA   Office  of  Tracking  and 
D a t a   Acquisition. 
OTS  (Orbiting  Test  Satellite),  49,  169 
Outer Planet Probe Technology Workshop, 
106 
Outer  Space Act  of  1967, 46 
“Outlook  for  Aeronautics”  (study),  148, 
191-192 
“Outlook  for  Space”  (study),  126,  177- 
178 
Outstanding  Leadership  M e d a l   ( N A S A ) ,  
203,  213-214 
Overmyer,  L / c   Robert  F.  (USMC) ,   121- 
t 33 
I L L  
ow s  (Orbital  Workshop).  See  Sk y la b   1 .  
Oxygen,  2,  3,  13,  15,  27,  33-34,  35,  75-76, 
89,  148-149,  150 
Ozone,  12,  59,  98,  188, 265,  266 
P 

P-35  (fighter  aircraft),  154-155 
P-38  (Lightning; fighter  aircraft),  199-200 
P-80  (jet  fighter),  199-200 
Pacific  Ocean,  9,  14,  42,  202,  217-218, 
236-237,  251,  258 
Paige,  Dr.  Lowell  J.,  182 
Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,  136,  194 
Palestine,  Tex.,  185 
Palmdale,  Calif.,  7,  193 
Pan  American  World  Airways,  Inc.,  12. 
74.  79.  100-101.  157 
Parachuie,  65,  l l j ,   176, 210 
Paris,  France,  12,  36-37,  51,  71,  78,  80, 
105-106,  107.  113,  118,  136-137.  144. 
156,  189 
Parker,  Dr.  Robert  A,,  149,  203 
Patent,  91,  95-96 
Patterson,  Dr.  William  J.,  184 
PCOM   (Pioneer  command  system),  107 
Peenemuende,  West  Germany,  1 
Peking,  P.R.C.,  89 
Pendray,  G.  Edward,  Award,  15 
Pennsylvania  State  Univ.,  264,  267,  268, 
270 
Pentagon,  28 
People’s  R epub l i c   of  C h i n a   (P .R .C . ) ,  
51-52,  89,  105 
Pequet,  Henri,  63 
Permafrost,  94,  134 
Pershing  (missile),  171 
Personnel,  NASA 
appointment,  1,  15,  34,  47,  53-54,  69, 
95,  97,  101,  102,  106,  120,  124,  130, 
136,  143-144,  148,  150,  157,  158-159, 
170,  199,  213-214,  217 
awards  and  honors,  14,  15,  28,  39,  59, 
6 5 4 6 ,  88 ,95 ,   112,  148,  169-170,  171, 
193,  195, 203,  211,  213-214 
dismissal,  6-7 
resignation,  39,  176-177 
r e t i r em en t ,   136,  157,  228,  170,  171, 
213-214,  217,  220 

3 0 4  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Peru,  72 
Petrone,  Dr.  Rocco  A.,  13,  15,  53-54,  68, 
120,  182,  203 
Petrosyants,  Andronik  M.,  25 
Petrov,  Dr.  Boris  N.,  85,  165 
PKantom  fighter  bomber  a i r c r a f t .   See  
F-4. 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  168 
Philippines,  14,  78-79,  169 
Phoenix  (air-to-air  missile),  7 
Phoenix,  Ariz.,  42 
Phosphorus,  157-158 
Photography  (see also  Infrared  photogra- 
phy  and  Ultraviolet  photography),  5-6, 
32,  38,  68,  69,  100,  101,  104105,  119, 
121,  173 
Photospheric  field,  67 
Photovoltaic  technology,  1 1 4 1  15 
Physical  therapy,  103 
Physics,  21,  38 
Physiology,  43-44,  178 
Pickering,  Dr.  William  H.,  26 
Pilot,  52-53,  63,  96,  118,  148,  151,  152, 
154-155,  156-157 
Pilotless  Aircraft  Research  Center.  See 
Wallops  Flight  Center. 
Pioneer  (program),  14,  21,  24,  29,  121 
Pioneer  (spacecraft),  13,  19,  120-121 
P i o n e e r   10  ( P i o n e e r - F ;   in te rp lane ta ry  
probe),  58-59,  88,  107,  120-121,  150- 
151 
mission  status,  2,  42,  65,  197 
DhotoaraDhs.  82-83 
press  Eomment,  3,  13 
results,  12-13,  76,  82-83,  93,  166167, 
199,  222 
Pioneer  1 1   (Pioneer-Saturn;  Pioneer-G),  2, 
42,  65,  88,  107,  153,  166167,  197-199, 
210,  222 
Pioneer  command  (PCOM)  system,  107 
Pioneer-Saturn.  See  Pioneer  1 1 .  
Pioneer-Venus  mission,  19,  21,  24,  204, 
223 
Piper  Seneca  (research  aircraft),  187 
Pittsburgh,  Univ.  of,  265-266,  268 
Plagemann,  Stephen,  169 
Planetary  evolution,  118-1 19 
Planetary  exploration  (see  also  individual 
planets  and  probes),  21,  24,  32,  34, 
36-38,  44,  87,  106,  154,  179,  214,  222- 
223 
Planning  Research  Corp.,  93 
Plasma  study,  27,  29,  77,  114,  191,  238- 
239 
Plesetsk,  U.S.S.R.,  launch  (see  also  Ap- 
pendix  A) 
C o s m o s   sa te l l i te s ,   91,  147,  172-173, 
190 
Intercosmos  12,  195,  249 
Meteor  16,  7,  231 
Meteor  1 7 ,  92,  235 
Meteor  18,  241 
Meteor  19,  194,  248 
Meteor  20 ,  215,  253 
Molniya  1-27, 88-89,  233,  234 
Molniya  1-28,  192,  247 

Molniya  11-9, 93,  235 
Molniya  11-10,  139 
Molniya  11-11, 217,  254 
Molniya  111-1, 202-203,  251 
Plum  Brook  Station,  Oh io   (QRc),  6,  66, 
92,  204-205 
Pluto (planet;  see also Pioneer l o ) ,  2,69-70, 
135,  222 
pndb:  perceived  noise  in  decibels. 
Podgorny, Presidium  Chairman Nikolay V. 
KJ.S.S.R.L  181 

iaska,  264-265,  266-267 

Polarim&. 
198 
Polaris  (sibmarine),  93-94 
Pole,  Felix,  93-94 
Pollution  (see  also  Air  Dollution:  At- 
mosphere,  pollution;  N o i s e ,   a i r c r a f t ;  
and  Water  pollution),  91-92,  117,  119, 
126 
Pollution  control  (see  also  Air  pollution; 
Climatic  impact  a s s s sm en t   program; 
and  Water  pollution),  10,  11,  20,  21, 
23,  25-26,  226 
Polonium  210,  93-94 
Polyethylene,  144 
Polymer,  99 
Polyurethane,  91  
Popovich,  Col. Pave1  R.  (cosmonaut),  122, 
130,  181,  239-240,  241,  262 
Poritzky,  Siegbert  B.,  99-100 
Poseidon  (missile),  140 
Postal  Service.  See U.S.  Postal  Service. 
Potassium,  73-74,  187 
Pozinsky,  Norman,  195 
P ra t t  & Whitney  Div.  See United Aircraft 
Corp. 
P.R.C.  See  China,  People’s  Republic of. 
Presidential  Medal  for  Merit,  219 
Press  comment 
Apollo  program,  31,  69-70,  138,  153 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project,  36,  39,  172 
A t s  6  (ATS-F),  116 
energy research  and development,  39,45, 
80,  107 
international  cooperation,  space,  103, 
105 
manned  space  flight,  31,  32,  51,  69-70, 
85,  115 
Mariner  10,  37,  75 
NASA   budget,  31,  35,  165,  196 
Pioneer  10,  3,  13 
science  and  technology,  85,  105,  129, 
153-154 
Skylab  program,  8,  31,  32,  34-36,  39, 
87 
space  program,  n a t ion a l ,   31-32,  51, 
69-70,  165,  183 
Press  conference 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project,  147,  208 
AIS 6,  106107  
DOD,  14 
Lockheed  Aircraft  Co.,  10 

305 

t 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Mariner  10,  16,  27,  69 
NASA  budget,  24-25 
Skylab  program,  1,  30 
space  shuttle,  24,  112-1  13 
SOYUZ IS, 155-156 
Prince  Albert  Tracking  Station,  Canada, 
111 
Prince  Ranier  III  (Monaco),  59 
Princeton Univ. (see also Woodrow Wilson 
S choo l   of  P u b l i c   a n d   In t e rn a t ion a l  
Affairs),  98 
Probe  (see  also  individual  probes  such  a s  
Helios  I ,   Luna  16,  Mariner  I O ,   Mars 
3 ,   and  Pioneer  IO),  14,  126 
Project  Able,  167 
Project  Airstream,  185 
Project  A L A D D I N .   See Atmospheric  Layer- 
ing and Density Distribution  of  Ions and 
Neutrals. 
Project  Cyclops,  45-46 
Project  da  Vinci  (atmospheric  re sea rch  
balloon  flight),  197 
Project  Daedalus,  179 
Project  F a r   Side,  103 
Project  Independence,  20,  153 
Project  Interdependence  (proposed),  175 
Propane,  58 
Propulsion  technology  (see  also  Nuclear 
energy),  25,  34,  4 4 4 5 ,   51,  56,  61,  73, 
99-100,  109,  117,  161,  179,  184,  185, 
186,  224 
Prosthetics,  226 
P ro to co l   on   Cooperation  in  Controlled 
Th e rmonu c l e a r   F u s i o n   a n d   P l a sm a  
Physics  Research,  25 
Protons,  197,  208 
Proximity  fuse,  125 
Proxmire,  Sen.  William,  6-7,  167 
Public  Affairs  Agreement,  US.-U.S.S.R., 
191 
Public  Service Award  (NASA ) ,   39 
Puerto  Rico,  11-12,  14,  4&41,  88,  186, 
20 1-202 
Pulsar,  176,  182,  188-189,  223 
Puppis  A  (supernova  remnant),  125 
Q 

Quasars  (see  also  individual quasars,  such 
a s  BL lacertae),  76,  93,  133,  163,  176 
QYizt  propulsive  lift  technology  program, 
LI 

R 

Rada r   (see  also  Scanning  laser  radar),  12, 
14,41,  60,  67,  72,  93-94,  119,  125,  151, 
182,  215 
Rada r   satellite,  86-87,  93-94 

Radiation  (see  also  Cosmic  ray,  Gamma  
ray,  In f r a r ed   radiation,  Lyman-alpha 
radiation,  Solar  radiation,  Ultraviolet 
- 
radiation  and  X-ray),  16, 42,  60, 77,  83, 
98,  103,  109,  119,  121,  122-123,  140, 
143,  153,  159,  166-167,  213 
Radiation,  Inc.,  134 
Radio,  27,  41,  70,  77,  147,  178-179 
astronomical  probe,  80,  201-202 
balloon  transmission,  174-175 
interference,  145,  198 
planetary  emission,  45-46,  197 
satellite  transmission,  48,  59,  68,  106- 
107,  139,  192, 202-203,  217,  243,  247, 
254 
stellar emission,  163,  182 
Radio  Amateur  Satellite  Corp.  (see  also 
Arnsat  Oscar  7),  201,  250 
Radio-Optical  Observatory,  181 
Radio  Solar  Telescope  Network  (RSTN), 
149 
Radio  waves,  160,  212 
Radioactive  material,  170 
Radioactivity,  87,  92-93,  208-209 
Radioastronomy,  23,  176,  188-189 
Radioisotope  th e rmo e l e c t r i c   g e n e r a t o r  
(RTG),  23,  29,  67 
Radiometer,  98,  200-201,  249-250 
Radionuclides,  170 
Radiotelescope,  154,  160,  176,  188-189 
Railroad  (see  also  Federal  Railroad  Ad- 
ministration),  20 
Raines,  Martin  L.,  195 
Rambaut,  Dr.  Paul  G.,  131 
Ramjet  engine,  92 
Rancho  Los  Amigos  Hospital,  Downey, 
Calif.,  167-168 
R& D .   See  Research  and  development. 
R  &PM. See Research and program manage- 
ment. 
Rankine  topping  cycle,  187 
RANN .   See  Research  Applied  to   National 
Needs. 
Rasool,  Dr.  S. Ichtiaque,  16 
Ray,  Dr.  Dixy  Lee,  194 
Raytheon  Corp.,  12 
RCA  COrp.,  8,  64, 134 
RCA  Alaska  Communications,  Inc.,  4 
RCA  Astro  Electronics  Div.,  146 
RCA  G loba l  Communications,  Inc.,  3-4 
RDT &E.  See  Research,  development,  test, 
and  evaluation. 
Reconnaissance  aircraft  (see  also  SR-7  1 
and  U-2),  151 
Reconnaissance satellite,  183,  243 
Rectenna  receiving  system,  178-179 
Redstone  (missile),  171 
Redstone  Arsenal,  Ala.,  102 
Reed,  Sylvanus  Albert,  Award,  15 
Reeder,  John  P.,  15 
R e e n t r y   veh ic le   no s e t ip   t e s t   p rog ram  
(USAF),  8,  11 
Refanned  engine  program,  224 
Reflector  satellites,  167 
Regional  Dissemination  Centers  ( N A S A ) ,  
95-96,  226 

306 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Relativity,  theory  of, 45,  133 
Remote  sensing  (see  also  Sensor),  11,  42, 
46,  55,  62,  65,  98,  111,  115,  140 
Remotely  piloted  research  vehicle  (RPRV), 
48,  91 
Remotely  piloted  vehicle  (RPV),  151 
Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  108 
Republic Aircraft  Corp.,  156155  
Research  aircraft.  See  individual  aircraft, 
such  a s   A-9,  C-141,  Convair  990,  Pi- 
per  Seneca,  WB-57F,  and  x-1. 
Research  and  development  (RLD ;  see  also 
En e rgy   research  and  development), 
6 5 ,  23,  47-48,  126,  153-154,  183 
budget,  F Y   1975, 20-21,  23,83-84,  121, 
124,  134,  143,  149-150,  160-161 
Research  and  D e v e lopm en t   i n   In du s t r y  
1972 (NSF  76312 ) ,   143 
Research 
and  program  management 
(RLPM ) ,  21,  83-84,  121,  124,  149-150 
R e s e a r ch   App l i ed   t o   N a t i o n a l   Needs 
(RANN ) ,  23,  204-205 
Research,  development,  test,  and  evalua- 
tion  (RDT &E),  21-22 
Reynolds,  Smith  and  Hills,  64 
Rice  Univ.,  266 
Rio  G rande   River,  42 
Riser,  Charles  R.,  168 
Riyad,  Mahud,  8 
RL-10  (engine),  140 
Roberts,  Dr.  Leonard,  148 
Robledo  de  Chavela  T rack ing   S t a t i o n ,  
Spain,  101 
Robotics,  177 
Rockefeller,  John   D.,  11,  211 
Rockefeller,  Vice President  Nelson  A.,  151, 
217 
Rockefeller  Center,  N.Y.,  8 
Ro ck e f e l l e r   Pub l ic   Services  Award  for 
Administration,  21 1 
Rocket  Research  Center,  West  Germany, 
1 
Rocket  technology,  52,  103,  124,  125 
Rockwell  International  Corp.,  7,  39,  63, 
76,  88,  100,  121,  160,  168,  181,  193,  194, 
209 
Rocky  Mountains,  106107  
Rohr  Industries  Inc.,  89-90 
Romania,  190,  195,  249 
Romatowski,  Raymond  G.,  213-214 
Rome,  Univ.  of.  See  Aerospace  Research 
Center. 
Roosevelt  Committee  on   Uranium  Re- 
search, 7W7  1 
Rosen,  Dr.  Harold  A.,  15 
Rosman,  N.C.,  129,  191 
Ross  Island,  Antarctica,  94 
Royal  Air  Force  (U.K.),  1 S 1 4  
Royal  Norwegian  Council  for  Scientific 
and  Industrial  Research,  265,  271 
R PRV   (remotely  piloted  research  vehicle), 
151 
RPV   (remotely piloted  vehicle),  151 
RSTN  (Rad io   Solar  Telescope  Network), 
149 

RTG .   See  R ad io i so top e   thermoelectric 
generator. 
Rukavishnikov,  Nikolay  N.  (cosmonaut), 
207,  252,  262 
Russia.  See  U.S.S.R. 
Ryan  Aeronautical  Div.  See  Teledyne, 
Inc. 
Ryan  monoplane,  156 
Ryle,  Sir  Martin  J.,  188-189 
S 

S.2  (antisubmarine  aircraft),  43  
S.3A  (Viking  antisubmarine  aircraft),  43 
53-1  (USAF atmospheric  research  satellite), 
145,  194,  228,  248 
Safetv 
a ik r a f t ,   23,  48,  78,  79-80,  92-93,  1 W  
101,  160,  166,  224 
mine,  29,  54,  92 
Safety  valves,  10 
Sagan, Dr.  Carl  E.,  70 
Sagdeyev,  Roald,  33 
Sagitta  (constellation),  143 
Sagittarius  B  (interstellar  cloud),  132 
Sahara  Desert,  41 
SA IL   (Shuttle  Avionic  Integration  Labora- 
tory),  2 
Saint-Gobain-Pont&Moussan,  42 
Sakharov,  Andrei  D.,  154 
SALT  (Strategic  Arms  Limitation  Talks), 
42,  70,  204 
Salt,  208 
Salt  lenses,  216 
Salyut  (U.S.S.R.  scientific  space  station), 
193,  222 
Salyut  I ,   123,  219 
Salyut  2 ,  4,  123,  219 
Saryut  3 ,   122-123,  130,  139-140,  155,  156, 
164,  176,  181,  217-218,  219,  221,  228, 
239-240,  241,  244,  255,  261,  262 
Salyut  4 ,  217-218,  219,  221,  228,  255 
SAM-D  (surface-to-air  missile),  9 
SAMSO  (Space and Missile Systems Organiz- 
ation),  34,  160,  203 
San  Andreas  Fault,  163 
San Antonio,  Tex.,  95  
San  Clemente,  Calif.,  136 
San  Diego,  Calif.,  31-32 
San  Francisco,  Calif.,  4,  45-46,  89-90 
San  Marco  (Italian  launch  facility),  187, 
188,  222,  230-231,  247,  259 
Sun   M a r c o   1  (NASA-Italy  cooperative 
satellite), 40  
San  Marco 2,  40 
Sun  Marco   3 ,  40 
Sun  Marco  4  (San  Marco  C2),  2,  40,  222, 
228,  230-231,  257,  258 
S &AD  (Science  and  Applications Director- 
ate).  See  NASA  Astronaut  Office. 
Sandage,  Dr.  Allen  R.,  214 
Sandia  Laboratories,  57 
Santa  Ana,  Calif.,  115 
Santa Maria  (ship),  30 

307 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

S A 0   (Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Ob- 
servatory),  139 
Sarafanov,  Lt.  Col.  Gennady  V.  (cosmo- 
naut),  155,  181,  239-240,  244,  262 
Sary  Shagan,  U.S.S.R.,  215 
S A S  (Small  As tronomy   S a t e l l i t e ) .   See 
Explorer  42 .  
Satellite  power  stations,  115 
Satellite  Tracking  and   D a t a   Acqu 
Network.  See  Space  Tracking  and  
D a t a  Acquisition  Network. 
Satellite  warning  system,  21-22 
Saturn  (launch  vehicle),  33-34,  184 
Saturn  IB,  1 6 1 7 ,  41,  88,  113,  118,  151, 
216 
Saturn  V,  41,  119,  167 
Saturn  (planet;  see  also  Mariner  Jupiter- 
Saturn  77  Mission,  Pioneer  10, Pioneer 
1 1 ,   and   Titan),  37,  88,  106,  166167 ,  
198,  222 
Saudia  Arabia,  7,  169 
Sawhill,  John   C.,  88,  108,  130 
Saxbe,  William  B . ,   199 
Scanning  electrostatic  analyzer,  26 
Scanning  laser  doppler  system,  102 
Scanning  laser  radar,  184 
Scanning  radiometer,  249-250 
Scheer,  Julian,  138 
Schenectady,  N.Y.,  181 
Scherer,  Capt.  Lee  R.  ( u SN ,   Ret.),  195, 
217 
Schlesinger,  Dr.  James  R.,  Secretary  of 
Defense,  9,  28,  51-52,  94,  193 
Schmidt  telescope,  167 
Schmitt,  D r .   Harrison  H.,  15,  79,  102, 
115 
S chn e id e r ,   William  C.,  30,  32,  39,  42, 
58-59,  95 
Schweickart.  Russell  L..  95 
Schwenk.  Francis C..  29 
Science, 20,  23,  47,  85,  105,  124-125,  129, 
153-154,  200 
Science  Adviser  (Pres iden t’s) ,   23,  125, 
176 
Sc ience   R e s e a r ch   Council  (U.K.),  187, 
188 
Scientific-Atlanta,  Inc.,  114 
Scientists,  119,  122-124,  126127 ,  140-141, 
151,  153,  169,  214.  225 
astronomy,  3,  59,  65,  76,  118-119,  132, 
133,  143,  160,  169-170,  171-172,  176, 
182,  208,  214,  223 
awards,  92,  95,  188-189,  203 
conference,  64, 98,  102 
death,  125 
ear th   study,  11,  104-105,  114-115,  119, 
168,  170,  191 
employment,  6 7 ,  11,  4 8 4 9 ,   80,  190 
energy  research,  114-1  15 
foreign,  4-5,  72,  87-88,  108,  225 
manned  space  flight,  7,  16,  31,  32,  41, 
113 
planetary  exploration,  14,  68,  106,  112, 
120-121,  154,  166,  179 
propulsion  technology,  186 
Scientist-astronaut,  121-122,  149,  152 

Scout  (launch  vehicle),  40,  93,  134-135, 
159,  160,  188, 213,  23&231,  244,  247, 
258.  259 
Scout  D,  57-58,  231,  242,  258,  259 
Scout  E,  111, 238-239,  259 
Screwworm,  62 
Sea  of  Crisis  (Mare  Crisium),  194,  248 
Seamans,  Dr .   Robert  C.,  Jr.,  61,  97,  129, 
194 
Seaplane,  154-155 
S E A S A T  (Specialized  Experimental Applica- 
tions  Satellite),  24,  124,  150 
SEASAT-A,  21,  24,  55,  204 
Seelye  Stevenson  Value  and  Knecht  Co., 
97 
Seismography,  104 
Seismometer,  208-209 
Senegal,  175 
Sensor,  57-58,  60,  103,  119,  120,  134,  141, 
152-153,  182,  188,  231 
S E P  (SociCtL  EuropCenne  de  Propulsion), 
189-  190 
SEPS (Solar-electric  propulsion  stage),  34, 
184 
Sergeyev,  Georgy,  36 
Se r f  2 (Space Electric Rocket Test satellite), 
186 
Service Cross  of  the  German  Eagle,  156 
Sethna,  H.  N.,  105 
Sevastyanov,  Vitaly  I.  (cosmonaut),  255 
Seversky  Aircraft  Corp.  See  R e p u b l i c  
Aircraft  Corp. 
Sewell, Charles A.,  155 
Shale,  154 
Shanehai.  P.R.C..  89 
Shaprand:  D r .   D.’J.,  16 
Shapley,  Willis  H.,  6 7 ,  220 
Shatalov,  Mai.  Gen.  Vladimir  A.  (cosmo- 
naut),  78,  g5,  122,  147,  155-156;  208 
Sheldon,  Dr.  Charles  S.,  11,  4-5 
Shepard,  R I A  Alan  B.,  Jr.  (C‘SN,  Ret.),  95, 
136,  137,  168,  171 
Sheremetyevo  Airport,  Moscow,  80 
Shinsei  (Japanese  satellite),  3 9 4 0  
Ships,  30,  4 W 1 ,   52,  102,  104-105,  114, 
119,  147,  165 
Shor t  takeoff  and  landing  aircraft  (STOL), 
23 
Shramo,  Daniel, J.,  178 
S h u t t l e   Av ion ic   Integration  Laboratory 
(SAIL), 2 
Sidney,  Australia,  193 
Silicates,  82 
Silicon,  28 
Silicon  carbide whiskers,  58 
Silver,  58 
Simon,  William  E.,  88 
Singer  Co.,  217 
S inus   (star),  244,  259 
6 th   Aircraft  D e s ign ,   F l i g h t   T e s t ,   a n d  
Operations Meeting,  99-100,  148 
Skyhook  program,  144 
Skylab  (program),  13,  1 6 1 7 ,   21,  34-35, 
41,  47,  53,  64, 98,  118-119,  149,  152, 
184,  223 

308 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

achievements,  13,  17,  27,  42-44,  58,  67, 
80,  87, 221 
awards,  59,  88,  95,  131,  169-170,  183, 
203 
budget,  21,  186-187 
commemoration,  45,  103 
conference,  152,  157-158 
congressional  consideration,  19, 91-92 
contract,  1,  139 
employment,  25,  141 
information  exchange,  193 
photographs,  131 
press  comment,  31,  32,  36,  39,  87 
significance,  17, 28-29,  30,  32 
technology  utilization,  134,  143,  1 4 4  
145 
tracking  and  da ta   acquisition,  24,  44, 
77,  102 
S k y l a b   I  (O r b i t a l   Workshop;  see  also 
Apollo  Telescope  Mount),  I ,   8,  28-29, 
32,  4 2 4 3 ,   45,  80,  91-92,  98,  103,  153, 
183.  199 
- 7   - - -  
Sky lab  2  (first manned  mission),  3 2 , 4 3 4 4 ,  
45,  153,  183,  193,  195 
,~ . 
Skv lab   3  (second  manned  m i s s ion ) .   7. 
43-44,  153,  183,  193 
Sky lab   4  (third  manned  mission;  see  also 
A p o l l o   Te le scope   Mount),  14,  25, 
35-36,  152, 216,  228,  264 
achievements,  7,  8,  28-29,  30,  153, 221 
awards,  65-66 
medical  aspects,  31,  32,  43-44 
press  comment,  8,  31,  32,  5 1  
press  conference,  1,  30 
tracking  and  da ta   acquisition,  40 
Skylab  Life  Sciences  Symposium,  157- 
158 
Skylark  (U .K .   sounding  rocket),  125 
Skynet  (U .K .   comsat),  2 
Skynet  A ,   9.  182, 204 
Skvnet  B .  9.  182.  204 
Skynet  I1  comsat  program.  9 
Skynet  I I A ,   9,  64  8 3   1 5 8  
227,  229,  252,  2 
Skynet  I I B ,   182, 
260 
SL-I.  See  Sky lab   1 .  
SL-2.  See  Sky lab   2. 
SL-3.  See  Sky lab   3. 
SL-4.  See  Sky lab   4 .  
Slayton, Maj.  Donald  K.  (U SAF ,   Ret.),  82, 
12 1-122 
Sloop, John  L.,  15 
SLV-3  (launch  vehicle),  189-190 
SM   (service  module).  See  Command  and 
service  module. 
Small  Astronomy  S a t e l l i t e   ( S A S ) .  
See  
Explorer  4 2 .  
Sm a l l   t a c t i c a l   aerial  mobility  platform 
(STAMP),  60 
Smith,  A.  M.  O.,  148 
Smith,  Dr.  Malcolm  C.,  Jr.,  131 
Smith.  Richard  G..  199 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  O b s e r v a t o r y  
(SAO),  139 
Smithsonian  Institution,  136,  164,  177 

SMM  (Solar  Maximum  Mission),  57 
(Synchronous  Meteorological  Sat- 
SMS 
ellite),  2 
Sms  I  (SMS-A;  Synchronous  Meterorologi- 
cal Satellite),  21,  103-104,  119, 176, 221, 
225-226,  227,  236-237,  257,  258 
SMS-B,  21 
SM S -C .   See  Goes  I .  
Smylie,  Robert  E.,  130 
Snow,  92,  194,  215,  253 
Soc i i t i  Nationale Industrielle Airospatiale 
(Airospatiale),  37,  1 3 6 1 3 7  
Sociita per  Azioni  per  16  Communicazioni 
Spaziali  (Telespazio),  11 1 
Soci6t6  Europienne  de  Propulsion  (SEP), 
1 89-  1 90 
Society  of  Automotive  Engineers,  137 
Sodium, 208 
Soendre Stroemfjord,  Greenland,  268-269 
Soil  Cartographic  Division  (Agriculture, 
Dept.  o f) ,   90 
Soil  studies,  62,  65 
Solar astronomy (see also Helios), 2,28-29, 
32,  57,  67 
Solar  conversion  devices 
array,  34,  58,  67,  186,  249-250,  253 
battery,  176, 218 
cell, 33-34,57-58,73,  105, 114-115,224, 
23 1,  25%25  1 
panel,  8,  32,  45,  63,  122, 217-218 
Solar  electric  propulsion  stage  (SEPS),  34, 
184 
Solar  energy  (see  also  Solar  heating  and 
cooling),  8,  12-13,  72,  83,  105,  118 
applications, 43 ,5&57 ,98 ,   11 1,  114-1  15, 
152-153,  201 
environmental  effects,  40,  107 
research  and  development, 6,  17, 20,  29, 
36,  45,  46,  73,  106,  114,  149,  152, 
192-193,  204,  219 
Solar  Energy  Coordination  and  Manage- 
ment  Project,  192-193 
Solar  Energy  Research,  Development,  and 
Demonstration  Act  of  1974.  192-193 
Solar  heating  and  cooling,  6,  8,  19,  45, 
56-57,  68,  73,  91,  111,  112,  114-115, 
118,  226 
Solar Heating  and  Cooling Demonstration 
Act  of  1974,  36,  45,  46,  61,  95,  106, 
163-164,  175, 219,  226 
Solar  Maximum  Mission  (SMM  satellite), 
57 
Solar  phenomena,  28 
corona,  43-44,  67 
flares,  57,  90,  104,  115,  177 
tide,  45 
wind,  5,  9-10,  13,  27,  43-44,  60,  111, 
197-198,  212,  253 
Solar  physics,  57,  212,  253,  260,  264-265, 
267,  269,  270,  271 
Solar  proton  monitor,  200-201,  249-250 
Solar  radiation,  9-10,  12,  60,  76,  77,  104, 
114,  134-135,  139,  144,  145,  174,  212, 
237,  242 
Solar  simulation  system,  66 

309 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS.  1974 

San 

Institute, 

Solar  system,  2,  13,  37,  42,  43,  51,  58-59, 
64,  70,  72,  82,  118-119,  136,  166-167, 
169.  179.  222 
Solar ielescope;  218-219,  255 
Solid-fueled  rocket  booster  (SRB),  36,  38, 
150,  210-211,  212 
Solid-fueled  rocket  motor  (SRM),  5,  33-34, 
36,  41,  55,  106,  210-211,  212 
Solid-state  technology,  47-48,  143,  144 
Sommer,  Robert  W.,  158-159 
Sounding  rocket  (see  also Aerobee,  Aries, 
Black  Brant,  Loki,  Nike-Iroquois, 
Skylark,  and  Super  Loki),  47,  57,  67, 
103,  112-113,  118-119,  126,  223,  226, 
263-27  1 
S o u t h   Ame r ica ,   65,  89,  156,  216,  238, 
254 
South  Atlantic  Anomaly,  159 
Southern  California,  Univ.  of  (USC),  152, 
27 1 
Southwest  Research 
Antonio,  Tex.,  95 
Soviet  Academy   of  Sc ience s   (see  a l so  
Council of  International  Cooperation  in 
Space Exploration  and  Use, and General 
Genetics  Institute),  52,  104,  157,  165, 
190,  193,  225 
Soviet  Mission  Control  Center,  157,  191 
Soviet  Union.  See  U.S.S.R. 
Soyuz  (U.S.S.R. 
spacecraft;  see  also 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project),  108,  115, 
121,  157,  167,  191,  193,  208,  216,  218, 
222,  228 
S o y u z 4 ,  161 
Soyuz 5, 161 
Soyuz 10,  123,  219 
Soyuz I ] ,   73,  123,  167,  219 
Soyuz 12, 4,  73,  178 
Soyuz 13, 4,  44,  73,  178 
SOYUZ 14,  122-123,  130,  139-140,  155,  156, 
164,  176,  178,  181,  207-208,  217-218, 
221,  228,  241,  261,  262 
SOYUZ 15 ,   155-156,  164,  167,  176,  181, 
207-208,  217-218,  221,  228,  239-240, 
244,  261,  262 
SOYUZ 16,  207-208,221,225,228,252,261, 
262 
SOYUZ 17, 218-219,  228,  255 
Sovuz  18. 255 
S h u z  20; 255 
Spaatz,  Gen.  Carl  A..  133 
“Space:  A  Report  to   the  Stockholders” 
(TV  documentary),  137 
Space  and  Missiles  Systems  Organization 
(SAMSO,  USAF),  34,  160,  203 
Space and  Rocket Center,  Huntsville,  Ala., 
28 
Space  biology  and  medicine,  4,  28-29,  30, 
41,  73,  97,  154,  207,  239-240,  252 
animal experiments,  44,  75-76,  190,  193, 
247 
flight  simulation.  181 
human  research,  31-32,  34-35,  42-44, 
103,  122,  123,  155,  157-158,  178, 
218-219,  241,  252 
Space  debris,  2-3,  82,  174 

Space  Detection  a n d   T r a c k i n g   Sy s tem  
(SPADATS),  67 
Space  Electric  Rocket  Test  Satellite  (S e r f  
2),  186 
Space  manufacturing,  21,  32,  38,  43,  58, 
122,  154,  178,  184,  199,  241 
Space  Missile  Test  Center,  209 
Sp a c e   Plasma  H i ih   Voltage  Interaction 
Exp e r im en t   ( S P H I N X )   sp a c e c r a f t ,   2, 
33-34,  222,  258 
space  Power  Facility  (SPF),  66 
Space program,  national  (see  also  Budget, 
NASA),  37-38,  87,  126,  165,  227,  228 
a p p l i c a t i o n s   t e chno logy ,   81,  95-96, 
106107 ,   137,  200 
benefits.  84-85 
press  comment,  31,  32,  35,  51,  69-70, 
103,  165,  183 
Space  science,  21,  24,  57,  214,  222-223, 
24 1 
Space  Science Award  (A IAA ) ,   14 
Space  shuttle  (see  a l so   E x t e r n a l   t a n k ,  
I n t e r im   upp e r   s t ag e ,   So l id - fue led  
rocket  boo s t e r   a n d   m o t o r ,   Sp a c e  
s h u t t l e   m a i n   engine,  Space  shuttle 
orbiter,  Space  tug,  and  Spacelab),  16, 
19,  30,  53,  57,  65-67,  99-100,  115, 
131,  149,  171,  173 
aircraft  use,  120 
budget,  17,  21,  24,  27,  35,  41,  47,  98, 
109,  113,  160-161,  165,  195,  214 
capabilities,  21-22,  32,  37-38,  57,  62, 
78,  98,  112-113,  124,  126127 ,   167 
construction  of  facilities,  21,  31,  64,  97, 
210 
development  status,  47,  223-224 
fuel  crisis  impact,  100 
international  cooperation,  37,  38,  181, 
184 
landing  site,  189 
press  comment,  39,  69-70,  103,  131 
study,  121,  126,  140,  217 
system  development,  9,  12,  41-42,  56, 
81,  89,  93,  105,  113,  117,  141,  174, 
184,  185,  199,  201,  210 
testing,  55,  119,  120,  150,  151 
tracking  and  da ta   acquisition,  24,  47 
use,  21-22,  37-38,  47,  48,  66-67 
Space Shuttle Cost and Review Committee, 
210 
Space  shuttle  main  engine  (SSME),  31,  47, 
84,  88,  150 
Space  Shuttle  Operational  Managemen t  
Assessement  Team,  195 
Space  shuttle  orbiter,  36,  47,  55,  79,  107, 
120,  141,  165,  168,  181,  210,  217 
Space station (see also Salyut,  and Skylab), 
32,  47,  73,  85,  98,  103 
“Space   S t a t i o n s ,   P re sen t   and   Future” 
( IA F   conference),  178 
Space  Tracking  a n d   D a t a   A c q u i s i t i o n  
Network  (STADAN),  176 
Space  transportation  system  (STS),  19,  34, 
47,  205,  217 
Space  tug,  7-8,  19,  25,  34,  56,  66-67,  103, 
126,  140,  178,  184,  217 

3 10 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Space  weapons,  183 
Space  Week  (National  Space  Week),  132, 
135-136 
Spacecraft Design  Award  (A IAA ) ,   15 
Spaceflight  Tracking  and  Da ta   Network 
(STDN),  40,  77,  176, 226 
Spacelab,  42,  47,  126,  185 
budget,  19,  54 
capabilities,  38,  127,  184 
contract,  113,  141, 217 
development status,  223-224 
international  cooperation.  See European 
Space 
Research 
Organization, 
Spacelab. 
laboratory,  16, 41-42,  94 
testing,  176177 ,   181 
Sp a c e l ab   O p e r a t i o n s   Wo rk ing   G roup ,  
184 
Spacelab Payload Utilization and  Planning 
Study,  205 
Spacelab  Preliminary  Requirements  Re- 
view,  199 
“Spaceship  Earth-A  New  P e r sp e c t iv e ”  
~ A I A A  conference).  14 
Spacesuit,  154 
, I  
S P A D A T S   (Space  Detection  and  Tracking 
System),  67 
Spain  (see  also  Intasut), 41,  54,  67,  101, 
107.  200.  201 
Span-load  tailoring,  160 
Spanish  Foreign  Legion,  41  
Special  Energy  Bill,  149 
Special  Task  Force  on   Energy  Conserva- 
tion,  8-9 
Spec ia l ized   E x p e r im e n t a l   Applications 
Satellite  (SEASAT),  24,  124,  150 
Spectrogram,  29,  44 
Spec t rome te r   ( see   a l so   B a l loon - bo rn e  
ultraviolet  stellar  spectrometer,  Ebert- 
Fastie  Spectrometer, EUV spectrometer, 
Infrared  spectrometer,  Mass  spectrome- 
ter, Ultraviolet spectrometer,  and X - ray  
spectrometer),  2,  40,  126,  145,  172,  255 
Sperry,  Lawrence,  Award,  15 
Sperry  Support  Services,  143 
SPF   (Space  Power  Facility),  66 
SPH INX .   See  Space  Plasma  High  Voltage 
Interaction  Experiment  spacecraft. 
Spicules,  67 
Spin  tunnel,  96 
Spirit  of  S t .   Louis (aircraft),  30 
Spokane  River,  170 
Sprankle,  Roger  S.,  175-176 
Spread  F (ionospheric  disturbance),  72 
SR-7  1 (Blackbird; reconnaissance  aircraft), 
163,  199-200 
SR B .   See  Solid-fueled  rocket  booster. 
SRC  (Science Research  Council, U.K.),  187, 
188 
SRM .   See  Solid-fueled  rocket  motor. 
S S 1 9  (U.S.S.R.  ICBM),  14 
SSM  (Support  systems  module),  201 
SSME.  See  Space  shuttle main  engine. 
sss  (Small  Scientific  Satellite). 
See  Ex-  
plorer  45 .  
SST  (supersonic transport),  153 

SSX-16  (U.S.S.R.  missile),  42 
SSX-18,42 
SSX-19,  42 
STADAN  (Space Tracking and Da ta  Acquisi- 
tion  Network),  176 
S t a f f o r d ,   B / G   T h o m a s   P .   (USAF ) ,   82, 
121-122,  152,  178 
STAMP   (Sm a l l   t a c t i c a l   a e r i a l   m o b i l i t y  
platform),  60 
Star  (see  also  Barnard,  Betelgeuse,  Cano- 
pu s ,   N e u t r o n   s t a r ,   Omega  Centauri, 
Pulsar,  Q u a s a r ,   Sup e r nov a ,   a n d   31  
Crater),  44, 45,  73,  90,  118-119,  133, 
143,  159,  160,  168,  176,  177,  185, 214 
Star  City. 
See  Zvezdny  Go rodok ,  
U.S.S.R. 
STAR  COnSOrtiUm,  210 
Star-pointing-and-control  system,  185 
Starr,  Dr.  Chauncey,  211 
State,  Dept.  of,  119,  194 
STDN. See  Spaceflight  Tracking and  D a t a  
Network. 
Steam,  73-74,  187 
Steel,  58 
Stethoscope,  54 
Stevens,  Sen.  Ted,  4 
Stevenson,  Robert  E.,  153 
Stever,  Dr.  H.  Guyford,  46,  6 M 1 ,   112, 
125,  182 
Steward  Observatory,  167 
Stewart,  Frank  M.,  69 
Stockholm,  Sweden,  188-189 
STOL  (short  takeoff  and  landing)  aircraft, 
22,  23 
Stone.  Donald.  184 
Storms,  62,  120 
Strategic  Arms  Limitation  Talks  (SALT), 
42,  70,  204 
Stratford,  Conn.,  51 
Stratofortress.  See  E 5 2 .  
Stratosphere  (earth),  86, 98,  188, 266 
Stream  Lite-1  Million  (spotlight),  8 
Streamlight,  Inc.,  8 
Strip  mining,  91-92 
STS.  See  Space  transportation  system. 
Submarine.  43.  62-63.  140 
Submarinellaunched cruise missile,  22 
Subsonic  aircraft,  148 
Sukhoi (U.S.S.R.  fighter-bomber  aircraft), 
62-63 
Sulfur,  93,  208 
Sulfur  dioxide,  86 
Sulfuric  acid,  27 
(superconductive  magnetic  ap- 
SUMMA  
paratus),  29 
Summit meeting,  123-124,  136137 ,  241 
Sun  (see also solar headings),  28-29 ,3637 ,  
4 3 4 4 ,   67,  118,  143,  166-167,  169,  176 
Sundstrand  D a t a  Control,  Inc.,  100-101 
Super Arcas  (sounding  rocket),  264,  266- 
267,  268,  269 
Super  Loki  (sounding  rocket),  65 
Superconductive  magnetic 
appa ra tu s  
(SUMMA),  29 
Supercritical  wing,  44, 48,  68,  112,  148, 
173,  187, 224 

3 1  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Supernova,  31,  90,  125 
Sup e r son i c   a i rc ra f t   (see  also  names  of 
individual  aircraft),  2-3,  104,  112,  114, 
166,  167,  175,  176-177 
Supersonic  transport  (SST;  see  also  Con- 
corde  and   T u - l a ) ,  153 
Support  systems  module  (SSM),  201 
Surface surveillance  program,  36,  230 
Sweden,  54,  67,  101 
Swedish  Academy  of  Sciences,  188-189 
Swedish  Space  Corp.,  265 
Swing  wing,  7,  39,  193, 211-212 
Switzerland,  54,  67,  101 
Symphonie I  (Symph onie-A;  French- West 
Ge rman   comsat),  2,  215-216,  221,  227, 
254,  257,  260 
Syn ch ronou s   M e t eo ro log i c a l   S a t e l l i t e  
( S M S ;   see   a l so   G o e s   1 ,   S m s   I ,   and 
SMS-B),  2 
Systems  Requirements  Review,  203 
Szostak,  Rosemarie,  59 
T 

T-38  (trainer  aircraft),  28 
Tactical  fighter  aircraft.  See  F-5E,  F-15, 
etc. 
Taft,  Robert,  Jr . ,   199 
Taiwan.  See China, Republic of  (National- 
ist). 
Tamman,  Gustav,  214 
Tanegashima  Space  Center,  Japan ,   182 
Tanker/missile  carrier  aircraft,  22 
Tunsei  I  (MS-T1,  J a p a n e s e   sa te l l i te ) ,  
3 9 4 0  
Tunsei  2  (“Light  Blue”;  MS-TZ),  39-40, 
222,  228,  230 
Tape  recorder.  38.  143.  259 
Taihkent,  U.S.S.R.,  193 
Task  Force  on   Remote  Sensing  (U.N.), 
46 
Taurus-Littrow  region  (lunar  landing site), 
72-73 
Taylor  Valley,  Antarctica,  94 
TC-1.  See  Titan-Centaur. 
TCV  (Terminal-configured  vehicle),  123 
See  Tracking  and  D a t a   Relay 
T D R S S .  
Satellite  System. 
Teague.  Reo.  Olin  E..  15.  28-29.  58.  78 
T e c h o l o g <   20-21,  23 ,  ’25 ,  28 -29 ,   38, 
47-48,  105,  112-113,  123-125,  129,  135, 
146,  153,  177-178,  200 
“T e chno logy   in  th e   Se rv ice   of  Man” 
( ~ R C  review),  166 
Technology  Resources  Survey  and  Appli- 
cations  Act,  60-61 
Technology  utilization,  space,  IO,  24,  56, 
95-96,  99-100,  134,  143,  166,  187 
budget.  FY   1975.  21.  27 
medycine,  13,  54,‘ 68,’ 95,  143,  144-145, 
167-168,  212,  226 
Teflon,  91  
Tehran,  Iran,  1 9 4 1 9 5  
Teledyne,  Inc.,  151 
Telegraph,  88-89,  93,  139,  151-152,  254 

(TCV )   pro- 

Telemetrv.  131.  152-153.  185 
TelemetG  transmitter,  103 
Telephone, 78-79,88-89,93,  116-1  17, 139, 
151-152,  171, 216,  251,  254 
Telesat  Canada,  4.  84.  169 
Telescope  ( see   a l so   A p o l l o   T e l e s cop e  
M o u n t ,   G raz ing - inc idence   telescope, 
Infrared  telescope,  Large  Space  Tele- 
scope,  Mayall  telescope,  Orion 2 ,  Radio 
te le scope ,   S c hm i d t   te le scope ,   S o l a r  
telescope,  Ultraviolet  telescope,  Wolter 
Type  1 Telescope,  and  X-ray  telescope), 
9-10,  16,  37 ,   39 ,   69 ,   77,  154,  168, 
171-172,  185 
Telespazio  (Sociita  per  Azioni  per 
16  Communicazioni  Spaziali),  1 1  I 
Teletype,  216,  218 
Teletypewriter,  147 
Television,  32,  48,  59,  102,  116,  117,  119, 
122,  137,  143,  174175 ,   191 
satellite  transmission,  54,  63 ,   68 ,   69 ,  
78-79,  84,  86,  10&107,  129,  139,  147, 
151-152,  154,  165-166,  186 ,   192, 
202-203,  215,  217 
space  exploration,  5,  27,  59,  101,  108, 
121,  173,  201,  237 
Telex,  151-152 
Terminal-configured  vehicle 
gram,  123 
Terry,  Sydney  L.,  117 
Tethered  Communications  (TCom.  Inc.). 
See  Westinghouse  Corp. 
Texas,  164,  171 
Texas,  Univ.  of,  268-269 
Texas  A&M  Univ.,  188 
Texas  Instruments,  Inc.,  108 
Textron,  Inc.,  11  1-1  12 
Thailand,  14 
Thermal  energy,  92,  194, 215,  231,  235 
Thermal  mapper,  55 
Thermal  stress  analysis,  114 
Thermionic  converter,  29,  56 
Thermionic  technology,  1 8 6 1 8 5  
Thermodynamics,  117 
Thermoelectricity,  93-94 
Thermonuclear  energy,  154 
Thermosphere  (earth),  40,  55,  144,  230- 
23 1 
Thiokol  Corp.,  5,  36,  41,  106,  126,  146, 
229 
31  Crater  (star),  69 
Thole,  John  M.,  157,  195 
Thompson,  D r .   Floyd  L.,  137 
Thompson,  James  R.,  69 
Thomson-CSF,  49,  86-87,  169 
Thor-Burner  I1 (launch  vehicle),  63,  232, 
243 
Thor-Delta  (launch  vehicle),  9,  64 ,   83 ,  
85-86,  103-104,  109,  146,  148-149,  158, 
174,  182,  185-186,  196,  200,  201,  203, 
204,  229,  233,  236,  246,  249,  252,  254, 
258,  259,  260 
Thorium,  68 
Thornton,  Dr.  W.  E.,  158 
3C  268  (galaxy),  160 
Thrust-vector-control  system  (i-vc), 3 9 4 0  
3 12 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Tiger  I1 (F-5E).  7,  10 
Tikhonravov,  Prof.  Mikhail,  52 
Timation  3A.  See  N t s   1 .  
Timonium,  Md.,  56-57 
Tires,  99 
T i r o s N  (meteorological satellite), 21,  204, 
213 
Titan  I11  (launch  vehicle),  1 
Titan  IIIB,  239 
Titan  I I I EA g e n a ,   36,  230,  243 
Titan  IIIC,  108-109,  139,  238,  258 
Titan  I I ID ,   233,  248 
Titan  IIIE,  33-34 
Titan  IIIE-Centaur,  212,  253,  257,  258, 
260 
Titan  (Saturn  moon),  106,  198 
Titan-Centaur  (launch  vehicle), 2,  33,  203, 
222 
Titanium,  99,  166 
Toksoz,  Dr.  M.  Nafi,  208-209 
Tokyo,  Japan,  89 
Tokyo,  Univ.  of,  39-40 
Tomcat.  See  F-14  aircraft. 
Tracking  and  da ta   acquisition  (see  also 
Earth  station,  Spaceflight  T r a c k i n g  
and Da ta  Network,  and  Tracking  and 
Da ta  Relay  Satellite System),  144, 157, 
160,  173,  176,  185,  188,  204,  213,  223, 
226,  242 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project,  7,  207,  216 
budget,  21 
international  cooperation,  135 
space  shuttle,  21,  40,  47 
Tracking and  Da ta   Relay  Satellite  System 
(TDRSS),  24,  62,  66,  78,  127,  176,  226 
Tracking  station.  See  Earth  station  and  
individual  tracking  stations. 
Trainer  aircraft.  See  F-5B,  F-5F,  and  
T-38. 
Trans  World  Airlines,  Inc.  (TWA ) ,   74,  79, 
156 
Transceiver,  110 
Transponder,  7&79,  84,  86,  169,  181, 202, 
-IC  1 
L-J 1 
T r a n s p o r t   aircraft  (see  also  Supersonic 
transport  aircraft),  25 
Transportation,  29,  73,  84 
Transportation,  Dept.  of  (DOT;  see  also 
Transportation  Sy s t em s   C e n t e r ) ,   17, 
22-23,  25,  54,  79,  86,  117,  118,  119,  166, 
185 
Transportation  of  Radioactive  Material  by  
Passenger  Aircraft  (report),  170 
T r a n s p o r t a t i o n   Sy s t em s   Center  (DOT), 
118 
Traveling  wave  tube,  4 7 4 8  
Treaty,  11,  123-124,  200 
Trident 
(undersea 
long-range  missile 
system;  ULMS),  22,  140 
Trident  I  (missile),  140,  151 
TriStar  (jet  transport).  See  L-1011. 
Troposphere  (earth),  23 
Trubshaw,  Brian,  37 
Trucks,  99 
Truman,  President  Harry  S.,  133 
Truszynski,  Gerald  M.,  62,  77 

TRW   h e . ,   58-59,  78,  158 
Tselinograd,  Kazakhstan,  U.S.S.R.,  219, 
262 
Tsunamic  da ta ,   104 
Tu-144  (U.S.S.R.  supersonic  transport), 
86,  211-212 
Tucson,  Ariz.,  219 
Tungsten,  173 
Turbine discs,  26 
Turbine engine,  26,  48 
Turbine  wheel  cooling,  26 
Turbofan  engine  (see  also  JTSD),  193 
Turbogenerator,  63,  73 
Turboprop  engines,  145-146 
Turcat,  And&  118 
Turkey,  243 
Turkish  Airlines,  Inc.,  51,  55,  71,  78 
TVC  (thrust-vector-control  system),  3 9 4 0  
TWA .   See  Trans  World  Airlines,  Inc. 
T x - 3 5 4 5   (Castor  I1  rocket  motor),  146 
Tyuratam,  U.S.S.R.  See  Baykonur  Cos- 
modrome. 

U 

U-2  (reconnaissance  aircraft),  131,  188, 
199-200 
UA L .   See  United  Air  Lines. 
Uchinoura  Space  Center,  Japan,  182 
UDMH   (unsymmetrical  dimethylhydrazine 
rocket  fuel),  200 
UFO   (unidentified  flying  object),  70-71 
Uhuru  (Small  Astronomy  Satellite;  Ex- 
plorer  4 2 ) ,   133,  187 
U.K.  See  United  Kingdom. 
UK-5.  See Ariel  5 .  
UK-XI.  See  Miranda. 
Ukrainian  Academy  of  Sciences,  178 
ULMS  (undersea  long-range  missile  system; 
Trident),  22,  140 
U l t rav io le t   photography,  3,  26,  27,  44, 
120-121,  2 6 6 2 6 7  
Ultraviolet  radiation,  2,  12,  77,  86,  104, 
134135 ,   159,  173,  242,  265-266,  270 
Ultraviolet  scanner,  69 
Ultraviolet  spectrometer,  5 
Ultraviolet  telescope,  159 
Ultraviolet  wavelength,  185 
U.N.  See  United  Nations. 
Undersea 
long-range  missile 
(ULMS;  Trident),  22,  140 
Underwood-Prescott  M em o r i a l   A w a r d ,  
131 
U N E S C O  (U n i t e d   N a t i o n s   Educational, 
Scientific,  and  Cultural  Organization), 
8, 99 
Unidentified  flying  object  (UFO),  70-71 
Unidentified  satellite, GOD ,   36,63,  194,230, 
232,  233,  239,  243,  248-249 
Unifi,  Inc.,  13 
Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.  See 
U.S.S.R. 
United  Air  Lines,  Inc.  (UAL ) ,   12,  17,  74, 
174,  213,  224 
United  Aircraft  Corp.,  156 

system 

313  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

P ra t t   &  Whitney  Div.,  51,  140,  145- 
146 
Sikorsky  Aircraft  Div.,  51 
United  Kingdom  (U.K.;  see  also  Ariel  5 ,  
Concorde,  Miranda,  Royal  Air  Force, 
Skylark,  and  Skynet),  14,  16,  38,  54, 
58,  67,  77,  81,  101,  107,  119,  136137 ,  
156,  173,  176 
United  Nations  (U.N.;  see also Committee 
o n   the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Ou te r   Space, 
Task  Force  on  Remote  Sensing,  a n d  
W o r l d   Me teo ro log ica l   Organization), 
10-11,  26,  105 
United  Nations  Educational,  Sc ien t i f ic ,  
and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO ) ,   8, 
99 
United  States  (U.S.;  see  also  Aerospace 
industry; Ho t  line; International coop- 
e r a t ion ;   In t e rn a t ion a l   cooperation, 
space;  Space  program,  national;  and 
Strategic  Arms  L im i t a t i o n   T a l k s ) ,  
12,  97,  104,  116,  118,  139,  156,  176, 
177,  186,  195,  236 
defense,  28,  51-52,  138-139,  155,  204 
foreign  policy,  63,  105 
trade,  7,  11,  28,  81 
United States and  Soviet  Progress in  Space: 
S u m m a r y   D a t a   th rough   1972  and  a  
Forward  Look  (74-35SP),  4 
Universe,  132,  136,  141,  160,  214 
Universities  (see  also  individual  universi- 
ties),  6,  102-103,  105,  126,  134 
Unsymmetrical  dimethylhydrazine (UDMH )  
rocket  fuel,  200 
Upper  atmosphere  (earth),  65,  98,  104, 
136135 ,   145,  151,  169,  185,  194,  213, 
218-219,  264,  265-267,  268-269,  270- 
27 1 
Uranium,  23,  56,  68 
Uranium  hexafluoride,  29 
Uranus  (planet;  see  also  Pioneer  I O ) ,   37, 
106,  222 
U.S.  Air  Force  (USAF;  see  also  individual 
ba se s ,   centers,  and  commands;  Air 
Force Air Weather  Service; Air  Force 
Avionics  Laboratory;  Air  Force 
Cambridge  Research  L a  b o r a  to r i e s ;  
A i r   F o r c e   M a t e r i a l s   L a b o r a t o r y ;  
Atmospheric  Layering  and   D e n s i t y  
D i s t r i b u t i o n   of  Ions  and  Neutrals 
program;  Initial Defense  Communica- 
tions  Satellite  Program;  Launch, 
DOD.;  and Space and  Missiles  Systems 
Office), 9,66,70-71,72,  101-102,  138, 
163,  192, 200,  209,  224 
Aeronautical  Systems  Div.,  146 
aeronautics  (see  also  X-24  and  individ- 
ual  aircraft,  such  as YF-12  and   E l ) ,  
31,  52-53,  144,  151,  273 
budget,  21-22 
employment,  131,  141 
personnel,  13,  170 
space  program  participation,  1,  8,  11, 
33-34,  90,  121,  134,  140,  183,  229, 
252,  273. 

Squadron 

U.S.  Army  (USA;   see  also  Army  Ballistic 
Missile Agency, Army  Electronics  Com- 
mand, and Atmospheric Sciences Labor- 
atory),  31 
U.S.  Army  Air  Corps,  156 
U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines,  54 
U.S.  Geological  Survey  (U SG S ) ,   10,  32, 
170 
U S .   Information  Agency,  59 
U.S.  Marine Corps (USMC;  see also Marine 
Corps  Air  Station),  60 
U.S.  Navy  (uSN;  see  also  individual  air- 
craft;  LAMPS   helicopter;  and   Launch, 
DOD),  22,  28,  36,  43,  52,  62-63,  66, 
108,  136,  151,  166 
ocean  surveillance  program,  36,  230 
Sea  Systems  Div.,  140 
Weather  Reconnaissance 
Fou r ,   153 
U.S.  Postal  Service, 45,  103,  233 
U.S.-Soviet  Cooperation  in  Space  (book), 
172 
USA .   See  U.S.  Army. 
USAF .   See  U.S.  Air  Force. 
USC.  See  Southern  California,  Univ.  of. 
USDA   See  Agriculture,  Dept.  of. 
USGS .   See  U.S.  Geological  Survey. 
USMC.  See  U.S.  Marine  Corps. 
USN .   See  U.S.  Navy. 
USNS   Vanguard, 119 
U.S.S.  Enterprise, 63-64 
U.S.S.  New  Orleans, 30,  31 
U.S.S.R. 
(Union  of  Soviet  Socialist 
Republics;  see also Aeroflot Soviet Air 
L ine s ;   Apo l lo -Soyu z   Test  Project; 
International  cooperation; 
Interna- 
tional  c o o p e r a t i o n ,   sp a c e ;   O r b i t a  
network; 
Soviet 
headings; 
and 
S t r a t eg i c   A r m s   Limitation  Talks), 
10-11,  14,  15-16,  63,  105-106,  165 
communications,  172-173 
disarmament,  204,  215,  241 
missile (see also individual missiles,  such 
a s   SS-19  and  SSX-16),  6 5 ,  51 
satellites  and  spacecraft 
(see  also 
individual  satellites  and  sp a c e c r a f t ,  
such  a s   Cosmos,  Intercosmos,  Luna, 
Mars,  Meteor,  Molniya,  Salyut,  and 
SOYUZ), 110,  227-228 
space  program,  6 5 ,   16,  36,  38,  43,  78, 
85,93-94,  103,  115,  139-140,  152,  183, 
221,  227 
U.S.S.R.  State  Committee  on   Science and 
Technology,  112 
Utah,  5 
U tah   State  Univ.,  43  
UV.  See  Ultraviolet  headings. 
V 

V A B   (Vehicle  Assembly  Building).  See 
Kennedy  Space  Center. 
Valve  Engineering  Co.,  83  
Van  Allen,  D r .   James A.,  83 
Van  Allen  radiation  belts,  143,  159-160 

3 14 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

Van  Biesbroeck,  D r .   George  A.,  45 
Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.  (see  also  Western 
Test  Range),  1,  36,  63,  66-67,  127, 
132-133,  194 
Vanik,  Rep.  Charles  A.,  117 
Variable-geometry  wing,  173 
VDS  (Viking  Dynamic  Simulator),  33 
Vehicle  Assembly  Building  (VA B ) .   See 
Kennedy  Space  Center. 
Vela  (nuclear  detection  satellite),  90 
Venezuela,  14 
Venus  (planet;  see  also  Mariner  I O ,   and 
Pioneer-Venus),  5,  16,  32,  36-37,  87, 
99-100 
Vertical  o r   s h o r t   takeo f f   a n d   l and ing  
aircraft.  See  V/STOL. 
Vertical  takeoff  and  landing  aircraft.  See 
VTOL. 
Ve r t ica l - tempe ra tu re -p ro f i le   radiometer 
(VTPR), 200-201,  249-250 
Very-high-resolution  radiometer  ( V H  R R ) ,  
2 W 2 0  1,  249-250 
V FAX   fighter  program,  183-184 
VFW-Fokker/ERNO  Raum fah r t techn ik ,  
GmbH ,I  113,  223-224 
V FX   (fighter  aircraft),  22 
V H R R   (Very-high-resolution  rad iome te r ) ,  
200-20 1 
Victory,  Dr.  John  F.  219 
Video-telephone,  154 
Videotape,  106-107 
Vidicon  receiving  tube,  143 
Vietnam,  20,  1 7 4 1 7 5  
Viking  (program),  21,  57,  77,  87,  99-100, 
124,  150,  203,  222-223 
Viking  (spacecraft),  23,  33,  57,  172,  222 
lander,  112,  186187 ,   203,  222-223 
orbiter,  186187 ,   203,  222-223 
Viking  (S3-A  antisubmarine  aircraft),  43 
Viking  Dynamic  Simulator  (VDS), 33 
Viking  rocket,  189-190 
Vikram  Sarabhi,  India,  168-169 
Vinyl  cyanide,  171-172 
Virginia,  165 
Vitasign  Attendant  Monitor,  95 
Vladivostok,  U.S.S.R.,  204 
Volcano.  68.  82 
Volusia  County,  Fla.,  65 
von  Braun,  Dr.  Wernher,  1,  14,  154,  171 
von  K i r m i n ,  Theodore,  Memorial 
Lecture,  15 
Vostok  4  (U.S.S.R.  manned  spacecraft), 
122 
V /STOL   (ve r t ica l   o r   s h o r t   takeo f f   a n d  
landing)  aircraft,  183-184 
(vertical 
takeoff 
and 
landing) 
VTOL 
aircraft,  23 
VTPR  (vertical-temperature-profile 
meter),  200-201,  249-250 
W 

radio- 

Waddy,  Joseph  C.,  115-116 
Wagon  Mound,  N.  Mex.,  197 
Wake  vortex,  99-100,  102,  160 

Waldmann,  Raymond  J.,  26 
Wallops  Flight  Center  (wFC,  NASA),  93, 
126,  188,  220,  264,  267,  268-269,  270, 
27 1 
Warner,  John  W.,  Secretary  of  the  Navy, 
28 
Warning  system,  149 
Warrenton,  Va.,  19 
Warsaw  Pact  countries,  71 
Washington,  170 
Washington  Cathedral,  Washington, D.C., 
136 
Washington,  D.C.,  4,  14,  25,  26,  37,  42, 
58,  59,  82,  83,  88,  94,  95,  106,  112-1  13, 
118,  136,  146,  156,  181,  195, 202 
Water  pollution,  IO,  29,  91-92,  188,  225- 
226 
Water  quality  monitoring,  140 
Water resources management, 32,  119, 131, 
132 
Water  vapor,  38,  98,  102 
Watergate  controversy,  3 1,  146,  153-154 
Waterton,  Colo.,  1 
W E 5 7 F  (research  aircraft),  185 
WC-130  (research  aircraft),  120 
Weather.  See  Meteorology. 
Weather  and  climate  program,  21,  61-62 
Webb,  James  E.,  138 
Weightlessness,  169-170 
an ima l   and  plant  experiments,  75-76, 
87-88.  190.  247 
human  response,  31,  32,  34-35,  42-44, 
91,  157-158,  178, 218-219 
space  manufacturing,  43,  178,  184 
Weinberger,  C a s p e r   W.,  S e c r e t a ry   of 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  106- 
107 
Weitz,  Capt.  Paul  J .   (USN),  195 
West  Germany.  See Germany,  West. 
Westar  (Western  Union  comsat),  2 
Westar  I  (Westar-A),  64,  85-86,  116,  164, 
171,  186,  221,  225-226,  227-228,  233, 
257.  258 
W e s t i r - 2   (Westar-B),  97,  110,  113-1  14, 
W e s t i r - 2   (Westar-B),  97,  110,  113-1  14, 
185-186,  221,  225-226,  227,  246,  257, 
185-186,  221,  225-226,  227,  246,  257, 
259 
259 
Westar  Satellite  Communications  System, 
Westar  Satellite  Communications  System, 
186 
186 
Westerbork,  The  Netherlands,  160 
Western  Test  Range  (WTR;  see  also  Van- 
denberg  AFB,  Calif.),  launch 
Aeros  2 ,   135, 242,  260 
Ans  I ,   159,  244 
Hawkeye  I ,   111, 238-239,  259 
Miranda,  57-58,  231,  258 
N ts   I ,  24 1-242 
Noaa  4 ,  200,  249,  259 
unidentified  satellite,  DOD, 230, 232,233, 
239,  243,  248-249 
Western  Union  International  Corp.,  3-4 
Western  Union  T e l e g r a p h   C o .   See 
Westar  satellites. 
We s t inghou se   Electric  Corp.,  102,  134, 
174-175,  187 
WFC.  See Wallops  Flight  Center. 
Whedon.  Dr.  G .  D.,  157-158 

315  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 
X 

X-1  (rocket  research  aircraft),  176177  
X-15,  176177  
X-24A  (lifting  body),  163,  273 
X-24B,  52-53,  163, 224,  273-274 
X-24C,  163 
X-ray,  67,  80, 90,  100,  104,  133,  139,  158, 
174,  187, 212,  228,  237,  244,  269,  271 
X-ray  astronomy,  125,  133,  159-160,  259, 
266-267,  270 
X-ray  spectrometer,  172 
X-ray  telescope,  21,  37-38,  125,  154,  158, 
189, 218-219 
XB-70 
(experimental  m a ch   3  a i r c r a f t ) ,  
176177  
Xenon,  8,  68 

Y 

Yardley,  John  F.,  101, 210 
Yates,  Iva  C.,  184 
YCH-53E  (helicopter),  5 1 
Yeliseyev,  Dr.  Aleksey  S.,  81-82 
YF-12  (research  aircraft),  114 
YF-12  Flight  Loads  Symposium,  114 
YF-16  (lightweight  fighter  aircraft), 79,91, 
94,  116,  138,  146,  183-184 
YF-17,  31,  79,  94,  116,  138,  146,  183- 
184 
YJ-101  (aircraft  engine),  31 
Young,  Capt.  John  W.  (USN),  28,  95 
Z 

Zaire,  14 
Zarb,  Frank  G . ,   171 
Z e ro -g r av i  t y  a t  m o s p  heric-cloud-physics 
experiment  laboratory,  41-42,  185 
Zinc.  166 
Zveidny  Gorodok  (Star  City),  U.S.S.R., 
121-122,  123,.  152,  208 
Zwicky,  Dr.  Fritz,  31 

Wheelchair,  81 
Whipple,  Dr.  Eldon  C.,  Jr.,  92  
Whipple,  D r .   Fred  L.,  9-10,  77 
Whirling  chair,  31 
Whitcomb,  Dr.  Richard  T.,  112,  148,  173 
White,  Dr.  Robert  M.,  211,  213 
White,  Gen.  Thomas  D.,  Space  Trophy, 
183 
White  hole,  133 
White  House  (see  also  Office  of  Science 
and  Technology,  and Office of  Telecom- 
munications  Policy),  48,  153-154,  164- 
165,  214 
White  Sands  Missile  Range  (WSMR), N. 
Mex.,  2,  3,  98,  264-265,  266267 ,   268, 
269.  270.  271-257 
Wilford,  John  N.,  59 
Wilson,  Prime  Minister  Harold  S. (U.K.), 
1 3 6 1 3 7  
Wind  energy,  6,  29,  34,  66,  73,  115,  120, 
126,  168,  169, 226 
Wind  tunnel,  8-9,  39,  55,  92,  114,  141, 
160,  163,  167, 202,  211-212 
Windmills,  6,  34,  63,  204-205 
Winfield,  Rodney,  136 
Wing, aircraft  (see  also. GAW - I ,   Supercriti- 
cal  wing,  Swing  wing,  and  Variable- 
geometry  wing),  7,  48,  91,  112,  160,  192, 
211-212 
Winnewisser,  Gisbert,  171-172 
“Winning  the Initiative:  N A S A   and  the U.S. 
Space  Science  Program,  1958-60”  (es- 
say),  59 
Winter,  Dr.  David  L.,  97 
Wisconsin,  Univ.  of,  269,  27Ck271 
Wolfe,  Dr.  John  H.,  14 
Wolter  Type  I  telescope,  125 
Women,  6 7 ,   11-12,  102-103,  169-170, 
171,  202 
Wood,  Dr.  Lowell,  56 
Woodling,  Carroll,  H.,  15 
Woods,  David,  161 
Woods  Hole,  Mass.,  87,  126-127 
Working  group.  See  Apollo-Soyuz  Test 
Project  and  Committee  on   the  Peaceful 
Uses  of  Outer  Space. 
Wo rk ing   G roup   on  Space  Biology  and 
Medicine,  US.-U.S.S.R.,  193 
World  Da ta   Center,  120 
World  Energy  Conference,  174 
World  Intellectual  Property  Organization, 
99 
World  language,  117 
World Meteorological Organization, U.N., 
110,  119 
World  War  11,  70-71,  125,  133,  154-155, 
156 
World  Weather  Progrom,  Plan f o r   Fisc01 
Year  1975,  143 
Wright  Brothers  Lecture,  148 
Wright  Brothers  Memorial  Trophy,  173, 
219 
WSMR.  See  White  Sands Missile  Range. 
WTR.  See  Western  Test  Range. 
Wurzburg,  Germany,  171-172 
Wydeven,  D!. 
Theodore,  Jr.,  216 

3 16 

ERRATA 

In  Earlier  Volumes  of  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1963 
p.  189:  Delete  second  item  from  bottom  (U SAF   unidentified  satellite  launch ) .   Insert 
“from Po in t  Arguello, Calif.,”  af ter   “back”  in  third  l ine   from  bottom of  page. 
p.  389:  I n   second  item  from  the   top,  O c t o b e r   I 6   (twin  Vela  l aun ch ) ,  substitute  iden- 
tification  “Tetrahedral  Research  Satellite  (TRS 11) ” and   weight  of  “3  Ibs.” 
for  “Pygmy”  and   “2%  Ibs.”  Add  “Pres.  Rpt.  on  Space,  1963,  1/27/64”  to 
sources a t  the  end of  the item.  (See correction for p.  391.) 
p.  391:  Delete  th ird   item  from  top,  DOD   launch.  (See  information  added  to  p.  389, 
above.  The  launch  from  Cape  Canaveral  was  l a t e   on  Oct.  16  by  Eastern 
S tanda rd  Time  and  was  on  Oct.  17  by  Greenwich Mean  Time.) 
p.  509,  Appendix  A,  launch  table:  I n  Launch  Date  column, change  “Oct.  17” t o   “Oct. 
16.”  For  tha t   date,  also  change  first  “DOD  Spacecraft”  to  “Vela  I”  and  second 
“DOD  Spacecraft”  to  “Vela II.” 
p.  560,  Index, left column: After “M-2,”  change “291”  to “292.” 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1964 
p.  457:  Appendix  A,  launch  tab le :   In   Launch  Date  column,  change  last  entry  from 
“Oct.  10” to “Oct.  9*”  (w i th  an as ter isk) .  
p.  487,  Index,  right  column:  After  “F i re   1,” change  “483”  to  “466.” 
p.  500,  Index,  left  column:  After  “Mars,  unmanned,”  delete  “470-471,  474-475”  and 
substitute  “443,  444.” 
p.  502,  Index,  left  column:  After  “Moon,  photographs,”  change  “460”  to  “360.” 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1965 
p.  591,  Appendix  A,  launch  table:  I n   Aug.  13  entry,  insert  new  name:  Spasurad  I ,  
1965-65G,  with  736-mi  apogee,  680-mi  perigee,  90.0”  inclination,  and   108.1- 
min  period;  s t i l l  in  orbit. 
For  last  SURCAL, substitute  international  designation  “1965K”  for  “1965L”  and 
substitute  orbital  parameters  736-mi apogee, 680-mi perigee,  90.0”  inclination, 
and  108.1-min period. Still in orbit. 
P.  654,  Index,  lef t   column:  After  “Moon,  mapping,”  change  “495”  t o   “496.” 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1966 
p.  257:  I n   11th  l ine   from  top  of  page  ( th ird   i t em ) ,   change  “Space  Tracking  and 
Data  . . .” to  “Satellite Tracking and  Data.  . . .’’ 
p.  354:  I n   13th  line  from  top  of  page,  correct  the  last  name  of  M/G  Vincent  G. 
“Houston”  to  “Huston.” 

317 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

p.  455,  Index,  lef t   column:  Correct  “Maxwell,  B/G  Jewell  6.  (USAF,  Re t .)”   to  read: 
“Maxwell,  M/G  Jewell  C. 
(U SAF ) . ”   Gen.  Maxwell  was  promoted  in   August 
1966. He  was not retired. 
p.  468,  Index,  right  column:  Change  “Space  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  Net- 
work”  to  “Satellite  Tracking  and,”  etc.,  and   move  to  p.  465,  bottom  of  left 
column. 
, p.  470,  Index, left  column: After “SURVEYOR I, launch,”  change “197-198”  to “196-197.” 
p.  469,  Index,  lef t   column:  After  “STADAN”  change  “Space”  to  “Satellite.” 
After  “SYNCOM  11”  change  “133-134” 
to  “134-135.” 
p.  474,  Index,  left  column:  I n   top  line,  after  “Venus  (p lane t) ,”   change  “142”  to 
“141.” 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1967 
p.  154:  I n   third  paragraph,  correct  “B/G  J.  C.  Maxwell” to  read,  “M/G  J.  C.  Maxwell 
(W A F )  .” 
p.  169:  In  M a y  31  USAF launch, third  item from bottom, change first sentence to  begin: 
“USAF  launched  9  satellites.  . . .” 
p.  196:  I n   first  June  29  item,  change  first  sentence t o   read :   “USAF  launched  two  satel- 
lites,  EGRS-9  and  Aurora  I, on  one Thor-Burner I1 booster  from WTR.” 
p.  203:  In  las t   item,  change  “B/G  J.  C.  Maxwell  (USAF,  Re t .)”   t o   read :   “M/G  J.  C. 
Maxwell  (U SAF )  .” 
p.  293:  I n   next  to  last  item,  make  second  sentence  read:  “. . . Williams was  eighth 
astronaut  to  be  killed  i n   an  accident and   fourth  [instead  of  third1  to  die  in   a 
T 3 8  crash.  . . .” Delete “one  other  has  died  i n   an   a i r   mash.”  (Th is  was  the  
third T-38  crash, but the  fourth death.) 
p.  299:  In   top  item,  substitute  the   following  orbital  parameters:  308-km  (214-mi) 
apogee,  1%-km  ( 1 2 4m i )   perigee, 89.7-min  period,  and   65.6”  inclination. 
p.  332:  In  sixth line from top,  delete “first.”  (See July 25 item.) 
p.  404,  Appendix  A,  launch  table:  For  Surveyor  I I I ,   change  international  designa- 
tion  to  “1967-35A.” 
p.  410,  Appendix  A,  launch   table:  For  May  31  DOD spacecraft,  change  first  word  in  
Remarks column to  “Nine.” 
p.  419,  Appendix  A,  launch  table:  For  Surveyor  V, change  international  designation 
I n   las t   l ine   of  Remarks  column,  change  date  to  “12/16/67.” 
to   “1967-84A.” 
p.  422,  Appendix A,  launch   tab le :   In   first  entry, Oct.  11, substitute the  214-mi apogee, 
214-mi perigee, 89.7-min  period,  and 65.6”  inclination. 
p.  425,  Appendix A:  Change Surveyor  V I  launch  vehicle  to  “Atlas-Centaur.’’ 
p.  434,  Appendix B:  Change Surveyor V I  launch vehicle  to  “Atlas-Centaur.” 
p.  446,  Index, right column: Change Cernan’s middle in i t ia l  to “A.” 
p.  448, Index,  right  column:  After  “Conrad,  LCdr.  Charles”  delete  th e   “E.” 
p.  449, Index,  lef t   column:  After  “Cooper, Maj.”  transpose  name  and   in i t ia l   to  read 
“L. Gordon.” 
p.  453,  Index, r igh t  column:  In  top line, insert a “t”  to  make the  surname “Feoktistov.” 
p.  458,  Index,  lef t   column:  After  “Jaffe,  Dr.  Leonard D.,”  ohange  “307”  to  “377.” 
318 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

P.  460, 
Index,  lef t  column:  Substitute  the  following for th e  two  entries below “Launch 
Complex 34”: 
Launch Complex 37 ,81  
Launch Complex 39 ,338 ,339  
Index, lef t  column: After “Maxwell, M/G,”  delete “Ret.” 
Index,  left  column:  After  “President’s  Science Advisory  Committee,”  change 
to  ‘‘434&,, 
<‘&jm 

p.  463, 
p.  471, 

P.  484, 

P.  435, 

space program,”  change “301” 
Index,  right  column:  After  “Webb-Continued, 
to “300.” 
Index,  right  column:  After  “X-15  . . . , record,”  change “344”  to  “345.” 

p.  317: 
p.  381, 
p.  391, 
p.  392, 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1968 
p.  15:  I n   second  item  (AIAA’S  Goddard  Awa rd ) ,   second  line,  change  “Warsham”  to 
“Worsham.” 
I n  last  item  (X-15  f l igh t) ,   third  line,  change  date  to  “1959.” 
Index, lef t  column:  Change Aldrin’s rank  to “Col.” 
Index,  lef t   column:  After  “Disarmament,”  change  “160” to  “159,  161.” 
Index,  left  column:  After  “Electronics  Research  Center,”  change  “164”  to 
“165.” 
Index,  left  column:  Delete  “Naval  Research  Laboratory  ( N R L )  , 184.” 
In  r igh t  column:  Insert “184” in  page numbers for top item. 
Index,  left  column:  After  “Paine,  Dr.  Thomas  O.,”  change  “366”  to  “336.” 
Also  insert “245.” 
Index,  left  column:  Change,  “Warsham”  to  “Worsham”  and   move  to  alpha- 
betical position on p.  426, right column. 

p.  425, 

P.  a 9 ,  

p.  412, 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1969 
p.  21:  I n   third  paragraph  of  Jan .   21  item,  delete  the  second  “n”  from  “Sonnett”- 
to read  “Dr.  Charles P. Sonett.” 
p.  93:  In   photo  caption,  next  to  last  line,  change  “Mariner  IV” to  “Mariner  VI” 
(transposition). 
p.  106:  I n  las t  item, second line,  delete “near  polar.” 
p.  230:  I n   second  paragraph,  second  line,  change  “(20-30  m ) ”   to  “(2-3  m )  .” 
p.  247:  I n   th ird   paragraph,  fourth  line,  change “5 million”  to  “50 million.” 
p.  261:  I n   fourth  item  (Lick  Observatory), make  note  tha t   fourth  lige  from  th is   item 
should be  inserted after second l ine  of  third  item. 
p.  318:  I n   th ird   paragraph,  th ird   line,  insert  omitted  words  after  “our  little  8,000- 
mile-diameter” : 
ea r th   throughout  our  vast  8-billion-mile-diameter 
and  pick up  again with “Solar System.” 
p.  349:  I n   second  item  (Silverstein),  second  paragraph,  fourth  line,,,change  “NASA” 
to  “NACA.”  And  in fifth paragraph,  first line,  insert  “NACA  and  
after  “served.” 
p.  421:  I n   During  1969,  third  paragraph  of  item,  third  line,  change  date  to  “1965.” 
(Mar iner  IY   was  launched  in  1964 but  reached  Mars  i n  1965.) 
p.  466,  Appendix  C:  I n  March  3  entry,  Crew column, change  spelling of  “Schweikart” 
to  “Schweickart.” 

319 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1974 

p.  469,  Index,  r igh t   column:  I n   Oct.  12  entry,  Crew  column,  change  spelling  of 
“Garbatko”  to   “Gorbatko.” 
p.  494,  Index, r igh t  column:  Delete  “FOBS”  entry, top two lines. 
p.  522,  Index,  left  column:  Change “Sonnett”  to “Sonett.’’ 
p.  524,  Index,  left  column:  After  “Space  Shuttle,  reusable,”  change  “23”  to  “25-26.” 
p.  533,  Index,  right  column:  After  “Zahringer,”  change  “Joseph”  to  “Josef.” 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1970 
95:  I n   top   line,  change  “12 200-km”  to  “12 200-m.” 
p. 
p.  199:  I n  Jun e   11  item  (HL-10  flight),  fifth line,  change  “mach  0.07”  to  “mach  0.7.” 
p.  262:  I n  top item, n in th  line, change “7.6-cm” t o  “76-cm.” 
p-  348:  I n   top   item,  n in th   line,  insert  “Space”  before  “Nuclear  Systems  Office.” 
p.  351:  In th i rd   item,  change dateline  from  “October  29”  to  “October  28”  (item should 
be  combined  with  October 28  item  on  p.  349 ) .  P u t  October 28  date  on  fourth 
item on p.  251  (F ru tk in  briefing). 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1971 
p.  202:  I n   second  paragraph  from  bottom,  f i f th , l ine   of  paragraph,  change  “British 
Astronautical  ” to  “British  Interplanetary. 
p.  250:  In   fifth  paragraph  from  the  top,  first  line,  change  “Space  Nuclear  Propulsion 
Office”  to  “Space  Nuclear  Systems  Office.”  (Office name  had  been  changed.) 
p.  419,  Index,  left  column:  Change  “AEC-NASA  Space  Nuclear  Propulsion  Office”  to 
“AEC-NASA  Space Nuclear  Systems Office.” 
p.  427,  Index,  le f t   column:  Delete  “British  Astronomical  Society”  and   add  “202”  to 
page numbers for “British  Interplanetary Society”  below. 
p.  467,  Index,  r igh t   column : Change  “Technology  unitization”  to  “Technology  utili- 
zation.” 

Astronaatics  and  Aeronautics,  1972 
p.  207:  I n  M a y  29  item,  first  line,  change “Secretary  General”  t o   “General  Secretary.” 
p.  555,  Index, left column: After  “Powell,  Cecil,”  change “379”  to “380.” 

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1973 
35 : I n  second item, end of  third  line, change “350”  to “3.5.” 
p. 
p.  285:  In  last  item  (X-24B  flight),  first  line,  change  “fifth  captive”  to  “fifth  glide.” 
In   second  line,  change  “attached  to”   to  “launched  from”  a  B-52  aircraft. 
p.  416,  Index, right  column:  Change Bobko’s rank  to  “L/c.” 
delete  9e.e  N o m  3”  and  add  page  num- 
p.  437,  Index,  right  column:  After  “ITOS-E,” 
bers  “1,  209,  212.”  Insert  new  entry:  “ITOS-F.  See  Noaa  3.”  (ITOS-E  was  in- 
tended  to  become N o a a  3,  but  failed  to reach  o rb i t ;   it was  replaced  by  ITOS-F.) 
p.  453,  Index,  right  column:  Change  the  Noaa  3  item  t o   read:  “Noaa 3  (ITOS-F;  see 
also ITOS-E)  , 312,  352,358.” 

320 

NASA  HISTORICAL  PUBLICATIONS 

HISTORIES 
Frank   W.  Anderson,  Jr.,  Orders   of  Magn i tud e :   A   H is tory   of  N A C A   and  N A S A ,  
1915-1976,  NASA  SP-4403,1976,  GPO.* 
William  R.  Corliss,  N A S A   Sound in g   Ro c k e t s ,   1958-1968:  A   Historical  Summa r y ,  
NASA  SP-4401,  1971,  NTIS.** 
Constance  McL.  Green  and   Milton  Lomask,  Vanguard-A  H is tory ,   NASA  SP- 
4202,  1970, GPO ;   also  Washington:  Smitbsonian  Institution  Press,  1971. 
Barton  C.  Hacker  and  James  M.  Grimwood, O n  th e  Shou lders   of T i tan s :  A   H is tory  
of Pro jec t  G em in i ,  NASA S P 4 3 0 3 ,  in  press. 
0  Edwin  P.  Hartman,  Adven tures   in  Research:   A   H is tory   of  th e   Am e s   Research  
Cen ter ,  1940-1965,  NASA  SP-4302,1970,  NTIS. 
0  Mae Mills  Link,  Space   Med ic ine   in Pro jec t   Mercury ,   NASA  SP-4003,  1965, NTIS. 
0  Alfred  Rosenthal,  V e n tu r e  in to   Sp a c e :   Ear ly   Y e a r s  of Goddard  Space   F l igh t   Cen-  
ter ,  NASA  SP-4301,1968,  NTIS. 
0  Robert  L.  Rosholt,  A n  Adm in is tra t ive   H is tory   of  N A S A ,   1958-1963,  NASA  SP- 
4101,1966,  NTIS. 
0  Loyd  S.  Swenson,  James  M.  Grimwood,  and   Charles  C.  Alexander,  T h i s   N ew  
Ocean:   A   H is tory   of  Pro jec t   Mercury ,   NASA  SP-4201,  1966,  NTIS. 
REFERENCE WORKS 
T h e   Apo l lo   Spacecra f t:   A   Chronology,  NASA  S P 4 0 9 :   Volume  I,  1969,  NTIS. 
Volume  11,  1973, GPO.  Volume  111,  1976, GPO.  Volume  IV,  in  press. 
*  As tronau t ics   and  Aeronau t ics:   A   Chronology  of Sc ience ,   Techno logy ,   and  Po l icy ,  
annua l   volumes  from  1961, with  a n   earfier  summary  volume,  A&onautics  and 
As tronau t ics ,   1915-1960.  Early  volumes  available  from  NTIS  ; recent  volumes 
from  GPO.  As tronau t ics   and  Aeronau t ics ,   1973, NASA  SP-401,  1975. 
0  Katherine  M.  Diukson  (L ibrary   of  Congress),  H is tory   of  Aeronau t ics   and  As tro-  
nau t ics:  A   Pre l im inary   B ib l iography ,  NASA  HHR-29,  NTIS. 
*  Documen ts   in  t h e  H is tory   o f  N A S A :  A n  An th o log y ,  NASA  HHR-43,  August  1975, 
NASA  History  Office. 
0  Pro jec t   G em in i   Techno logy   and  Opera t ions:   A   Chronology, NASA  SP-4002,  1969, 
NTIS. 
0  Pro jec t  M e r c u r y :  A   Chronology, NASA  SP-4001,1963,  NTIS. 
0  Pro jec t  Rang e r :  A   Chronology, JPL/HR-2,1971,  NTIS. 
*  S k y l a b :   Pre l im inary   Chronology,  NASA  HHN-130,  May  1973,  NTIS. 
Jane  Van  Nimmen  and  Leonard  C.  Bruno, N A S A  Historical  Data Book,  1958-1968, 
Vol.  I, N A S A  Resources, NASA SP-41)12,1976, NTIS. 
*  Helen T. Wells,  Susan  H. Whiteley,  a n d  Carrie  E.  Karegeannes,  Or ig ins  of  N A S A  
Names ,  NASA SP-4402,1976,  GPO. 

*GPO : Available  from  Superintendent  of  Documents,  Government  Pr in t ing   Office, 
Washington,  D.C.  20402. 
* *NT IS  : Available  from  National  Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield,  Virginia 
22161. 

U.  S.  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  : 1977  0 -  221-444 

National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration 
Washington, 0 C 
20546 

Postage and  Fees Paid 
National Aeronautics and  
SDace Administration 
NASA -451  

Official  Business 
Penalty for Private Use   5300 

SPECIAL  FOURTH-CLASS  R A T E  
BOOK 

POL(TMASTBR : 

If  Undellverable (8ecUon 
Pontnl  Mnniinl)  Do No t  B 

‘The  aeronautical  and  space  activities  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
conducted  so  as  t o   contribute  . .  to  the  expansion of  human  knowl- 
edge  of  phenomena  in the  atmosphere  and  space. The Administration 
shall  provide  for  the  widest  practicable and  appropriate dissemination 
of  information concerning i t s   activities and  the  results  thereof.” 
-NATIONAL AERONAUTICS A N D  SPACE A m  OF  1958 

TECHNICAL REPORTS: Scientific and 
technical information considered  important, 
complete, and a  lasting contribution eo  existing 
knowledge. 
TECHNICAL NOTES:  Information less broad 
in scope but nevertheless of  importance as a 
contribution  to  existing knowledge. 
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS: 
Information  receiving limited  distribution 
because of  preliminary data,  security  classifica- 
tion, or other reasons. Also includes conference 
proceedings with  either  limited or  unlimited 
distribution. 
CONTRACTOR  REPORTS:  Scientific and  - 
technical  information generated under a NASA 
contract or  grant  and  considered  an  important 
contribution  to existing knowledge. 

TECHNICAL TRANSLATIONS:  Information 
-published in  a  foreign language considered 
to merit NASA  disrribueion  in  English. 

SPECIAL  PUBLICATIONS:  Information 
derived from or  of  value  to NASA activities. 
Publications include  final  reports of  major 
projects, monographs, data  compilations, 
handbooks,  sourcebooks, and  special 
bibliographies. 

TECHNOLOGY  UTILIZATION 
PUBLICATIONS: Information  on  technology 
used by  NASA  that  may  be of  particular 
interest  in commercial and other- non-aerospace 
applications. Publications include Tech  Briefs, 
Technology Utilization Reports and 
Technology  Surveys. 

Details  on  the  ava i lab i l i ly   of  these  publice#ions  m a y   be   o

~

~

from: 
~

i

n

~

~

 

