NASA  SP-4020 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  
A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1 

A  Chronology 

by 
Nancy  L. Brun 
and 
Eleanor H.  Ritehie 

The NASA  H i s tory   Series 

1979 
Sc ien t if ic   and  Technical  In fo rma t ion   Branch 
NAT IONAL   AERONAUTICS  AND  SPACE  ADMINISTRATION  
Washington, D .C .  

For  sale  by  th e   Superintendent of Documents ,   U.S.  Government Printing Office 
Washington,  D .C .   20402  (paper cover)  

Library  of Congress Ca ta log  Number 6540308  

Preface 

Users of this series will notice tha t  t h e  curren t  volume,  the 15th, is more 
condensed than  earlier volumes  in the  series, a trend  s tar ted  with the  1974 
volume.  This is attributable more to staff limitations than  to any reduction 
in the  historical significance of  t h e  sub jec t  matter. Fewer non-NASA  activ- 
ities have been  included this year.  The  annual summary has  been   elimi- 
nated,  riot  without  regret.  More  material  has  been  presefited  in tabu lar  
form  for economy  in  both  preparation  and   use.  The   staff  of  the   History 
Office  expects to produce one volume  per  year of As tronau t ics  and  Aero-  
nautics with approximately the  coverage and detail of  the  present volume- 
and with  greater  regularity  than   in  the  pas t   few  years. 
Note  tha t   the  erra ta   section,  introduced  in  the   1974 volume,  ha s  been 
continued. We  want  this  ser ies  to  be   a  reliable  reference  work,  and   the  
reader  can  help u s  in this.  Let  the  History Office  staff know of  any errors  
tha t   you  de tec t   in  this  or  previous  volumes,  s o   that  corrections  can   be 
published. 
Text  for  the   first  ten   months  of  the   presbht  volume’s  coverage  was 
written  by  Nancy  L.  Brun,  who  has   since  transferred  to  the  NatioQal 
Ins t i tu tes  of Health. Th e  volume was completed by he r  successor, Eleanor 
H.  Ritchie,  formerly of  the   Goddard  Space  Flight Cen ter .  
Arnold  W.  Frutkin 
Assoc ia te  AdrriiniStrrttor for Ex terna l  Re la t ion s  

May  1979: 

... 
111 

Contents 

Preface  .................................................. 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  Arnold W . Frutkin 
January  .................................................. 
February  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
March  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
April  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
May  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
June  .................................................... 
July  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
August  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
September  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
October  ................................................. 
November  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
December  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix A:  Satellites,  Space  Probes ,   and Manned  Space 
Flights,  1975  ......................................... 
Appendix B:  Major NASA  Launches,  1975  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  C:  Manned  Space Flights,  1975  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix D:  NASA  Sounding Rocket  Launches,  1975  . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix E:  X-24B  Lifting-Body Flights,  1975  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix F:  Abbreviations of  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Index  and  List  of  Abbreviations  and  Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Erra ta   in  Earlier Volumes  .................................. 

... 
PAGE 
111 

1 
17 
41 
57 
73 
99 
125 
157 
181 
201 
217 
235 

251 
277 
281 
283 
293 
297 
301 
327 

V 

January 1975 

4 J a n u a r y :   Funding in  t h e  FY 1976 budget  for  a  third  Ear th  Resources  
Technology  Satellite (ERTS)  was  in  doubt,  Walter  Sullivan  said  in  a 
New York Times article. Despite worldwide  en thus iasm  for continuing 
the   program,  which  was  developing  remote-sensing  techniques  for 
monitoring  and  managing  earth‘s  resources,  doubts  about  funding 
approval  were  appearing  within  the   Office  of  Management  and 
Budget.  Fac tors   tha t   would  influence  OMB’S  decision  included  the  
reported  existence  of  far  more  detailed  information  from  secretly 
launched   intelligence  satellites.  Although  scientists would  probably 
prefer  a  system  free   from  intelligence  links,  some  argued  tha t   the  
information needed  by  agencies  such   a s   the   Bureau  of  Census   and  
Dept.  of  Agriculture  could  b e   ex trac ted   from  imagery  from  these  
satellites. Another reason to delay immediate funding was that a more 
effective system would eventually become feasible. Sc ien t is ts  argued 
against  this  reasoning,  saying  tha t   the   lack  of  fine  de ta i l   in   ERTS 
images was not a serious impediment but tha t  lack  of continuity would 
be.  (Sullivan, NYT ,  4 J an  75,  17) 
8 J a n u a r y :   Twenty-five  spacecraf t  on   twenty-four  vehicles were  sched- 
uled for launch  by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The  25 space-  
craft included 14 for NASA programs,  10 for o ther  organizations, and  1 
a s  a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting  the  
year  would  b e   the   15 Ju ly   launch   of  an  Apollo  spacecraf t   carrying 
Thomas P.  Stafford, Vance D.  Brand,  and  Donald  K.  Slayton a s  t h e  
U .S .   contribution to t h e  joint U .S . -U .S .S .R .   Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project. 
7  h r  
Apollo  would  rendezvous  and   dock  with  Soyuz  19-launched 
earlier  than   Apollo  and   carrying Aleksey  A.  Leonov  and  Valery N. 
Kubasov-allowing  both  crews  to  exchange visits  and  perform joint 
scientific  experiments. 
Th e   two  sets  of  Viking  spacecraft,  schedu led   for  11  and   21 
August  launches,  would  journey  through  space   for  a  year  before 
arriving in the  vicinity  of  Mars.  The re   each   se t  of  spacecraf t  would 
separa te   into  an   orbiter  and   a  lander   to  make  orbital  and   surface  
investigations of  t h e  Martian  environment. 
O the r   ‘NASA  spacecraf t   would  include  ERTS-B  Ea r th   Resources 
Technology  Satellite  and   SMS-B  Synchronous  Meteorological 
Satellite,  in  January;  GOES-C  Geodynamic  Experimental  Ocean  
Satellite,  in   March;  OSO-1  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory,  Nimbus-F 
experimental meteorological satellite, and  Explorer 53  (SAS-C  Small 
Astronomy  Satellite),  in   May;  GOES-A  Geostationary  Operational 
Environmental  Satellite,  in  June;  Explorers  56  and   57  Dual  Air 
Density Explorers, on a single booster in July  o r  August; Explorer 5 4  
(m-D Atmospheric Explorer),  in Sep tember ;  and  Explorer 55 (A&-E), 
in December. 
Th e  10 spacecraf t  to b e  launched  by NASA  for o ther  organizations 
included  5  comsats  for  Communications  Satellite  Gorp. : Intelsat- 

1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
January 
IV  F-1  in  February,  Intelsat-IVA F-1  and  F-2  in  July  and  October, 
and  Marisat A  and  B in  April  and  July.  O ther  reimbursable launches  
(An&  3)  for  Canada   in  March,  COS-B 
would  include  Telesat-C 
Celestial  Observation  Satellite  in   July  for  the   European  Space  
Agency,  Symphonie-B  experimental comsat in Sep tember  for F rance  
and   West  Germany,  RCA-A  (RCA-satcom  1 ,   in   orbit)  comsat  in 
December for RCA  Corp.,  and  ITOS E-2  Improved TIROS Operational 
Satellite  in  la te   1975  for  t h e   National  Ocean ic   and   Atmospheric 
Administration. 
Helios-B  would  be   launched   la te   in  1975 a s  a  cooperative  effort 
with West Germany. The  schedu le  called for 18 of  the  24 launches  to 
b e  made  from Kennedy  Space  Cen ter ,   5 from Wes tern  Te s t  Range, 
and  1 from San  Marco.  For the  launches  NASA  would use a Sa turn  IB, 3 
Titan-Centaurs,  5 Atlas-Centaurs,  and  15 Thor-Delta  launch   vehi- 
cles.  (NASA  Release  75-5;  KSC  Release  180-74) 
0  Th e  Department of  Defense announced the  award of  a $1  500 000 cost- 
plus-incentive-fee  contract  to  General  Dynamics  Corp.  for  launch  
services for the  Atlas E and  F vehicles at Vandenberg Air Force Base. 
(DOD  Release 8-  75) 
9  January:  Sea   Satellite  (SEASAT)-a 
new  program,  approved  in  the  
FY  1975  NASA  authorization,  to  monitor  the   oceans  and   provide 
continuous weather  and  sea   condition  reports-was 
announced  by 
NASA.  SEASAT-A,  a  proof-of-concept  mission  schedu led   for  1978 
launch ,   would  carry   sensors   to  measure   wave  heights,  curren t  
directions,  surface   wind  directions,  and   surface   tempera tures .  
Objectives of  the   initial  mission  were  to  disseminate  the se   da ta   to 
users  concerned about weather predictions; to route shipping to avoid 
s torms ,   adverse  curren ts ,   and   ice   fields;  and   to  provide  coastal 
d isas ter  warnings. 
SEASAT-A  would  also accumulate  scientific  da ta  on  the  curva ture  
of  the  oceans;  ocean   circulation;  transport  of  mass,  hea t ,   and  
nu tr ien ts   by  surface  cu r ren t s ;   and   the   interaction  between  air  and  
sea .  
SEASAT  would  be   managed  by  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  with 
Langley  Research  Cen ter ,   Goddard  Space   Flight  Cen ter ,   Wallops 
Flight Cen ter ,   and JPL  each  having responsibility for one  of  the  four 
sensors-off-the-shelf  NASA  or A ir  Force  spacecraf t  to which a  sensor 
module  would  b e   a t tached .   Existing  tracking  facilities  and   support 
hardware would also be  used.  Cos t  of  the  SEASAT-A  mission, a s  cur- 
rently  planned,  was  $58.2  million.  (NASA Release  75-1) 
0  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  working  under   con trac t   to  NASA,  began 
flight  and   static  t e s t s  of  the   refanned   engine  to  demonstrate  NASA- 
developed  noise-reduction  techniques.  More  than   2  yr  of  work  at 
Lewis  Research   Cen ter ;   P ra t t   & Whitney  Aircraft  Div.  of  United 
Aircraft  Corp.;  Boeing  Co.;  United  Air  Lines,  Inc . ;   and   American 
Airlines,  Inc.,  had been  spen t  in modifying  a JT8D engine to reduce  
irritating  high-frequency  noise.  When   installed  on  the   McDonnell 
DC -9,  the  new engine was expected to reduce by 60% the  ground area  
exposed to excessive noise levels. Similar results were expec ted  with 
t h e  engine installed on Boeing’s 727 and  737 aircraft. During the  initial 
test phase,  McDonnell  Douglas  would  fly f m  90 h r  a DC -9  outfitted 
with the  modified  engine,  to evaluate noise charac ter is t ics  and flight 
performance. The  second phase of testing would begin in mid-January 
when Boeing would  flight-test  it  in  a 727.  (NASA  Re lease  75-4;  LeRC 
Release  75-2) 
2 

ASTRONAUTICS AND mRONAU T IC S ,   1975 
January 
11   Janua r y :  The  38  000-kg second  stage  from  the   Sa turn  V  booster  tha t  
placed  the Sky lab  1  orbital workshop  in orbit  14 May  1973 reen tered  
the  atmosphere over the  Atlantic Ocean ju s t  before 3 am EST. NASA re- 
ported  that  radar   tracked  one  large  chunk   tha t   survived  the  fiery 
plunge  through  the  atmosphere  and  fell into  the   ocean  at  34’  north 
latitude, 19” west longitude, about 1600 km west of Gibraltar. Smaller 
pieces  might  have  sca t tered   over  a n   area   several  kilometers  to  the  
. northwest  and southeast of  tha t  point and some charred  debr is  might 
have fallen on the  Sahara  Desert, but NASA received no report tha t  any 
fragments  had  caused  damage  or   injury.  (NASA  PAO ,   interview,  30 
June   1976; Reu ter ,  W Po s t ,   12 J a n  75,  A14; AP ,   W Star-News,  12 J an  
75,  A l ;  UPI,  NYT ,   12 J a n   75,  55) 
11 J a n u a r y - 9   February:  The   U.S.S.R.  launched  Soyuz  17 ,  carrying  cos- 
monauts  Lt.  Col.  Aleksey  A .   Gubarev  and  Georgy  M.  Grechko, 
from  Baykonur  cosmodrome  at  2:43  am  local  time  (4:43  pm  EST  10 
Jan.) to rendezvous and dock with the  Sa lyu t  4 space  station launched 
26  Dec.  1974. Soyuz  17  en tered   orbit with a 249-km  apogee,  186-km 
perigee,  88.9-min period,  and 51.6” inclination. Tass  announced  that 
the  mission would carry joint  experiments with Sa lyu t   4 ,  including a 
comprehensive  checkout  of  the   spacecraft’s  onboard  systems  in 
various flight conditions. 
After an orbital correction tha t  raised the  spacecraft’s orbit to 354- 
km  apogee,  90.7-min  period,  and  51.6”  inclination, Soyuz  17  docked 
with Sa lyu t   4  on  12 Jan.  Gubarev  and   Grechko  en tered   the  station, 
switched  on  the   power  and  radio  transmitters,  and  inspected  the 
scientific  equipment. 
During  their  nearly  30  days  aboard  Sa lyu t   4 ,   the   cosmonauts 
studied  solar  phenomena,  x-radiation  from  celestial  bodies,  and 
earth‘s  radiation.  They  also  studied  the   effects of  weightlessness  on 
the  human body, made earth-resources  observations,  and studied the  
earth‘s  upper  atmosphere.  They  resprayed  two  telescope  mirrors 
dulled  by  exposure  to  space ;   carried  out  biological  “Oasis”  experi- 
ments using insects, microorganisms, tissue cu l tures ,  and plants; and 
recycled water, condensed from the cabin’s atmosphere,  for drinking 
and   food  preparation. 
Th e   crew  began  preparations  to  re turn   to  ea r th   on  9  Feb.,  re- 
boardingsoyuz  17  and undocking  from the  space  station a t  11:08 am 
Baykonur time  (1:08 am EST). Soyuz 17  softlanded in- the  U.S.S.R.  110 
km  northeast  of  Tselinograd,  Kazakhstan,  “in  complex meteorologi- 
ca l  conditions”  af ter  29  da   13  h r  20 min  in  space. 
On-the-spot  and  subsequen t   medical  checks   showed  the   cosmo- 
nau ts   to  be   in  good  health.  Th e   Soyuz  17  cosmonauts  broke  the 
previous  23-day  18-hr 22-min  Soviet record for time  in  space ,   se t  by 
the  Soyuz  11 crew  (6-30  J un e   1971) before  they  were  killed dur ing  
reentry.  (GSFC SSR, 28 F e b  75; Tass ,  FBIS-  SOV, 13 Jan-  13 Feb  7 5 ; S F ,  
April75,144-5,  June 75,235; UPI,NYT, 16 Jan  75,14;SBD,  14 Jan  75, 
62; LC  S&T News A le r t   2645) 
12 Janua ry :  The  communications  satellite business was becoming one of 
the   fastest  growing businesses  on  ear th ,   Thomas  O’Toole  said  in  a 
Wash ing ton  Post  article.  The   huge  dish-shaped  an tennas   used  a s  
telephone  and   television  links  between  ea r th   and   the  dozen  or   so  
orbiting  comsats  had  sprouted  up  in  the   suburbs   of  Moscow  and 
Peking,  in  Brazilian jungles,  in  the   mountains  of  Iran,  and  in  the  
deser ts   of  Algeria.  I n   addition,  Algeria  w a s   building  14 an tennas ;  

3 

January 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Indonesia,  60;  and   Brazil,  2000.  More  than   90  countries  were  cur- 
rently communicating by satellite, most using the  seven In te lsa t  satel- 
lites  orbited  by  the   89-country  consortium,  the   International Tele- 
communications  Satellite  Organization.  Worldwide  In te lsa t   traffic 
was growing by  20%  a year.  In  addition  to  the   Intelsat  comsats,  t h e  
Soviet  Union,  Canada ,   France ,   and  West  Germany,  and  Western 
Union  already  owned  the ir   own  comsats.  Japan   would  have  one  by 
1977, and  Iran,  Saud i  Arabia,  and  Indonesia  were  each  planning  to 
orbit  their  own. 
Besides  making  it  eas ier   to  communicate  around  the   world, 
satellites were responsible  for cutting the  cost of  overseas conversa- 
tions.  In  1947, a 3-min phone call from New York to London cost $12. 
The   same  call  in  1975 cost $5.40.  (O’Toole, W Post,  12 Jan  75,  1) 
13 January: Dr. John L. McLucas,  Secretary of the  Air Force,  announced 
the  selection of  t h e  General Dynamics Corp. YF-16  prototype for full- 
scale  engineering  development  a s   the   Air  Force’s F-  16 air  combat 
fighter.  A‘  $417 904 758 fixed-price-incentive contract  to fabricate  15 
engineering  development  F-  16  aircraft  was  awarded  to  General 
Dynamics, which had been in competition with Northrop Corp. and its 
YF-17  lightweight fighter prototype  during flight-test  evaluations  a t  
the  Air Force  Flight T e s t  Center.  Dr.  McLucas  said  the   decision  in 
favor  of  General  Dynamics  had  been  based  on  cost  and  technical 
engineering  proposals  submitted  by  the   companies.  Th e  Air  Force 
planned  to introduce  a minimum of  650 F-  16 aircraft  into the  active 
inventory  by  the   early  1980s. 
The   Air  Force  also  awarded  a  $55 500 000  fixed-price-incentive 
con trac t   to United Aircraft  Corp’s Pra t t   8.1  Whitney Div.  to produce 
the  FlOO  engine used  in  the  F-  16.  (DOD  Release  16-75) 
0  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   plans  for  the   FY   1975  reduction-in- 
force had been revised, MSFC announced. Th e  target da te  for issuance 
of  RIF notices to MSFC  employees had been delayed from mid-January 
to 29 Jan.  with  an effective da te  of  14 Mar.  The 2-wk  delay resulted 
from  the  need  for  a n   additional  decrease   in  the   end-of-FY  1975 
personnel  ceiling,  from  4145  to  4113.  This  fur ther   reduction  was 
MSFC’S  share  of  the  government-wide reduction of  40  000 employees 
called  for  by  Pres iden t  Ford  in  1974.  (MSFC  Release  75-6) 
0  Marshall  Space  Flight  C e n t e r   announced  the   award  of  a  $59950  
con trac t   to Abbott  Laboratories  for living human  kidney  cells to  be  
used  by  u.S.  as tronau ts   in  the  German  electrophoresis  experiment 
during  the   July  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t   Project.  Abbott 
Laboratories would provide the  cells a s  part of an experiment to find a 
way  to  isolate effectively the  one kidney cell in 20  tha t  produced  the  
enzyme  urokinase,  an  enzyme  capable  of  dissolving  blood  clots. 
Because gravity made  such  separations  difficult on ear th ,   scientists 
hoped to develop new technology in the  zero-g environment of  space. 
The   experiment  was  being  developed,  built,  and  tested  by  West 
Germany’s  Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm  Gmbtt.  (MSFC  Releases 
75-7,  75-13] 
13 -21  January:  Preparations  for  U.S.  participation  in  the   joint  u.s.- 
U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t   Project  mission  in  July  continued  a t  
Kennedy  Space  Center.  After  removal  from  environmentally  pro- 
tec ted   shrouds,  poststorage  inspection,  and  installation  of  eight 
stabilizing fins,  the  S a t u rn  IB booster,  SA-210,  was  s tacked   on  the  

4 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
January 
mobile  launcher  inside  the   Vehicle  Assembly  Building  on  13 Jan. 
Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tes ts  on the  first 
stage and  installed flame cur ta ins  and panels to shroud the outboard 
engines.  T h e  Sa turn   IVB  second  stage was  mated  to  the  booster  14  
Jan.  and the  instrument  unit  added  to the  s tack  16 Jan.  A boilerplate 
unit  simulating  the Apollo  command  module w a s  added  17 Jan.  Th e  
boilerplate  would  be   removed  and   replaced  with  the   actual  space- 
craft,  and  the   rollout  of  the   entire  vehicle  to  t h e   launch  pad  was 
scheduled  for March. 
The docking system and docking module we re  mated  17 Jan .   af ter  
combined systems tes ts .  Th e  complete unit would be placed  into the  
spacecraft  adap ter   in  February.  Swing-arm  launch-control  cen ter  
integration  was  completed  21  Jan.  (KSC  Release  165-74;  MSFC 
Release 75-  19; Spacepor t  News ,   23 Jan  75,  3; 6 Feb  75,  3; Marsha l l  
S ta r ,   2 Jan  75,  2) 
14 Janua ry :  NASA's Ear th  Resources Technology Satellite, ERTS,  had been 
renamed  Landsat,  NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Applications 
Charles  W.  Mathews  announced  a t   a  Landsat-B  prelaunch  press  
briefing in Washington,  D.C. Erts 1, launched  23  July  1972, would be 
called  Landsa t   1 ;   ERTS-B,  scheduled  for  launch  19 Jan.,  would  be 
designated Land sa t  2  once  in  orbit.  Mathews  said  that,  since  NASA 
planned  a SEASAT to study the oceans (see 9 Jan.), Landsat  seemed  a 
more  appropriate  name  for  a  satellite that  studied  the   land. 
Landsat  Program  Manager  Harry  Mannheimer  said  tha t   Land- 
sat-  B would be  launched into the  same orbital plane a s  Land sa t  1  but 
180" out of  phase.  Between them  the  two satellites would re trace   the 
identical ground track  eve ry  9 days  ra ther  than t h e  18-day interval of 
one satellite. The  additional coverage would enable scientists to study 
dynamic  phenomena  more  effectively.  Mannheimer  said  tha t   a 
significant improvement over Land sa t  1 was Landsat-  B's  increase in 
command  storage,  adding  flexibility  in  commanding  the   various 
instruments while the  spacecraft was out of view of  a ground station. 
James R.  Morrison, Landsa t  Resources  Survey Program Manager, 
said  tha t ,   whereas  the  emphasis  of  the  Land sa t   1  mission  was  on 
experimentation,  the  emphasis for Landsat-B  would be on fewer but 
larger  scale  applications  of  remote-sensing  information  to  real 
resource  problems.  Of  the   120  investigators-compared  with  320 
investigators  during the  Land sa t   1  mission-57  were  US.-sponsored 
and  52  we re   from  foreign  countries.  During  the   rigorous  selection, 
preference  had  been  given  to  investigations  tha t   included  d irec t  
participation  and  cost-sharing  by  bona  fide  users  in  both  the   public 
and  private  sectors. 
New with Landsat-  B were  the  Applications Systems Verification 
Tests  (ASVT),  based  on  results  of  Land sa t   1 ,   t o   fur ther   develop, 
demonstrate,  and document Landsa t  results.  Th e  ASVT s   were larger 
in design and scope than  earlier investigations, essentially beyond the  
capability  of  any  one  investigator  to  manage.  ASVT s   for  Landsat-B 
included  a  large-area  crop  inventory  experiment  (LACE ) ,   ice-warn 
program,  snow-cover  a nd   snow-melt  prediction  program,  natural 
resources  information  system,  and  environmental  information  sys- 
tem.  (Text) 
@  Apollo-Soyuz T e s t  Project crew members Thomas P.  Stafford,  Donald 
K.  Slayton,  and  Vance  D.  Brand  participated  in  a  9-hr  exercise  a t  

5 

January 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   to  tes t   the   Apollo  spacecraft 's  internal  sys- 
tems ,   earth-landing  systems,  and  ins trumen t   packages.  The   astro- 
nau t s   climbed  into  the   Apollo,  which  was  inside  a  huge  altitude 
chamber ,  to tes t  the  sys tems  at simulated altitudes of  up to 61  000 m 
while  cabin  pressure   was  maintained  a t  34 474 newtons  per   sq  m. 
P re s su re  inside the  cab in  was also lowered to zero to te s t  t h e  integrity 
of  the  astronauts ' space  suits. On  16 Jan.  the  U.S.  backup  crew for the  
mission,  Alan  L.  Bean,  Ronald  E.  Evans,  and   Jack   R.  Lousma, 
participated  in  a  similar exercise.  (NASA A c t i v i t i e s ,  Feb  75,  11; KSC 
Re lease  5-  75) 
0  Flight Research  Cen te r  was investigating the  use of TV to provide visual 
information  to  pilots  of  fu ture   aircraft  and   spacecraf t ,   NASA  an- 
nounced.  TV might  enhance   target  visibility  for  pilots  of  high-per- 
formance aircraft tha t  might have to approach and  land a t  high angles 
of  a t tack   with  reduced   window  area ,   and   for  unmanned  remotely 
piloted  research   vehicles  that  would  augment flight instrumentation 
with  visual.  For  testing,  FRC  had  installed  a TV  camera   on  top  of  a 
P iper  PA-30  aircraft with a 12.5- by 17.5-m TV screen  installed on the  
ins trumen t   panel.  A  cur ta in   would  restrict  the   tes t   pilot's  view 
through cockpit windows with  a safety pilot riding in the  right seat of 
the   aircraft.  Besides  demonstrating  use  of  TV  for  approach  and  
landings,  the  first  phase   of  the   program  would  evaluate  the   pilot's 
ability  to  judge  altitude  using  TV .   The   second  phase  would  aim  a t  
optimizing  the   TV   system  for  landing  maneuvers.  (NASA  Release 
75-  11) 
14-1  7  Janua ry :   NASA  and   Air  Force   Cambridge  Research   Laboratory 
launched  10 rocket-borne  experiments to study the  upper atmosphere 
a s   a  follow-on  to  the   June   1974 Atmospheric  Layering  and   Density 
Distribution of  Ions and  Neutrals program (Project ALADDIN "74). Two 
experiments on t h e  Ute-Tomahawk rocke ts  released  chemical clouds 
into the  atmosphere to measure  winds and  tempera ture  and  diffusion 
coefficients. The  first, launched  15 Jan.,  released  aluminum vapor at 
160-km  altitude,  crea t ing   a  blue-green  glowing  cloud  visible  along 
much of  the  eastern seaboard. A second, launched 17 Jan. after a 1-day 
postponement, released trimethylaluminum in puffs 10 s e c  apar t  from 
180  km  down  to  90 km.  Five  single-stage  Super-Lokis  carried 
ins trumen ts  to  measure  density,  tempera ture ,   and  wind,  and instru- 
mentation  aboard  two  Paiute-Tomahawks  measured  the   atomic 
oxygen  density  profile.  A  prelaunch  performance  tes t   of  a  Ute- 
Tomahawk was  made  14 Ja'n.  (WFC  Releases  75-1,  75-2;  NYT ,   16 
June   75,  29) 
15 Janua ry :  Pres iden t  Ford signed Executive Order  11834 establishing the  
Energy  Research  and  Development Administration-under  Admini- 
s tra tor   Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans ,   Jr.-and 
the   Nuclear  Regulatory 
Commission-under  Chairman William A. Anders-effective 
19 Jan. 
Establishment of  the  two new agencies was provided  for in the  Energy 
Reorganization  Act  of  1974,  signed  into  law  on  11  Qct.  1974  by 
Pres iden t  Ford, which abolished the  Atomic Energy Commission and  
reassigned  i ts  responsibilities.  ERDA  would  take  over AEC's  research  
and   development  programs  including  the   development  of  fossil, 
nuclear,  solar,  and   geothermal  energy  to  meet  present  and   future 
needs.  ERDA  would  also  take   t h e   lead   in  energy  R&D   programs 
transferred  from  the   Dept.  of 
the   Interior,  National  Science 

6 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

January 

Foundation,  and  Environmental  Protection  Agency.  NRC  was 
assigned me's licensing and  regulatory  responsibilities.  (PD ,  20 J an  
75,  54; ERDA  Release  75-  1; ERDA Fact  Sheet) 
16 J a n u a r y 4  February: U .S .  and  u .S .S .R .   Apollo-Soyuz Test Project work- 
ing  groups  held  the ir   las t   major  meeting  in   t h e   US.  before  the  
scheduled July  launches. The  five working groups included 80 Soviet 
aerospace  specialists led  by Academician Boris N. Pe trov  and  ASTP 
Technical Director  for  t h e  U .S .S .R .   Konstantin  D.  Bushuyev.  Work- 
ing Group 3, Soviet specialists in dockingsystems,  arrived 16 Jan .  and  
went  directly to  Rockwell  International  Corp.  in  California for joint 
tes ts   of  t h e  docking system alignment  pin  and  socket. Following t h e  
tes ts ,  the  group re turned  to JSC to review  the  results of those te s t s  and  
o thers  made  earlier  in Moscow. 
NASTRAN  to  analyze  Space   Shu t t le   structures.  Recipients  of  the  
awards included 12 NASA and 12 contractor employees. (NASA Release 
75-  13) 
16  January-8  February:   U.S.  and U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project work- 
ing  groups  held  their  last  major  meeting  in  the  U.S.  before  the 
scheduled  July  launches.  The  five  working  groups  included  80  Soviet 
aerospace  specialists  led  by  Academician  Boris  N .   Petrov  and  ASTP 
Technical  Director  for  the  U.S.S.R.  Konstantin  D.  Bushuyev.  Work- 
ing Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan.  and  
went  directly  to  Rockwell  International  Corp.  in California for joint 
tes ts   of  the  docking system alignment pin  and  socket.  Following the  
tes ts ,  the  group re turned  to JSC to review the  resu l ts  of  those te s t s  and 
o thers  made  earlier  in  Moscow. 
On   20  Jan.  a  portion  of  Working  Group  l-for 
experiments, 
trajectories,  and   contingencies  plans-arrived 
a t   JSC  to  prepare  
for joint  simulations schedu led  for March.  Group 4,  for communica- 
tions  systems,  also  arrived  to  review  the   results  of  independen t  
U . S .   and   Soviet  tes ts   of  the   flight  communications  system.  The  
by  Dr.  Glynn  S.  Lunney,  U.S.  ASTP 
la t te r   group-accompanied 
Technical Director,  and  Prof.  Bushuyev-then 
traveled  to Kennedy 
Space   Cen ter   3  Feb.  to  make   electromagnetic  radio  and   TV com- 
patibility  tes ts .  
The  remaining  Soviet  specialists  arrived  in  t h e   U .S .   on  27  Jan. 
Working Group 2,  for control sys tems  and docking targe ts ,  prepared 
contingency-control  modes  for  the   mission,  and   Working  Group  5 
prepared   the   final  repor t   on  the   compatibility  of  ASTP  life-support 
systems.  Group 5 also  certified  t h e  equipment  to  be  transferred  be- 
tween  the   two  spacecraft. 
Although a portion of Group 1 would remain in t h e  U .S .  through crew 
training scheduled for  11 Feb., most of the  Soviet contingent re turned  
to  the   Soviet  Union  8 Feb .   Th e  next  major  meeting for  the  working 
groups was scheduled for mid-May  in  Moscow.  (JSC  Release 75-02; 
Spaceport  News ,   6 Feb   75,  3) 
17  Janua ry :  A reques t  for proposals for integrated electronic assemblies 
( E A )  for the  Space  Shuttle’s solid-rocket boosters had been issued by 
be   for  design,  development,  te s t   and   evaluation,  P abrication,  and  
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter ,  MSFC announced. Th e   roposals would 
assembly of 33 E A s .  The  Space  Shu t t le  would carry  two refurbishable 
E A s ,  one  forward and  one aft, to route commands from the  Orb i ter  to 
the thrust-vector control sys tem  to release  the  nosecap and  frus tum ,  

7 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

January 
jettison the  solid-rocket motor nozzle, de tach  parachu tes ,  and tu rn  on 
the   recovery aids.  (MSFC  Release  75-  11) 
18January: New members of  the  House of  Represen ta t ives  Committee on 
Sc ience  and Technology, led  by Committee Chairman Olin E. Teague 
@-Tex.),  made  an  orientation  tour  of  Kennedy  Space   Center.  In 
addition to visits to Launch  Complexes 36 and  39,  the  KSC  indus tr ia l  
area ,   and   the  Visitors  Information Cen te t ,   the   committee members 
viewed the  Apollo spacecraf t  being readied  for the  July  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t  Pro jec t  and  the  Viking lande r  being prepared  for 
the  August twin mission to Mars. The  members also received spec ia l  
briefings  on  Cen te r  activities:  (KSC  Release  11-75) 
20  January: The   appo in tmen ts  of  four  senior European  Space  Research  
Organization d irec tors   became ,  effective.  The   appointments  were 
Professor of  Engineering Massimo Trella  (Italy) a s  Technical Opera- 
tor,  Bernard Deloffre (France)  as Director of  the   Space lab  program, 
Wa l ter  Luksch  (West Germany) a s  Director  of  the   Communications 
Satellite Programme, and John Hawkes (United Kingdom) as  Head of 
Development  and   Technology  a t   ESRO’S  Space   Research   and 
Technology Cen ter  (ESTEC)  in the  Netherlands.  (ESRO  Release,  20 Jan  
75) 
0  An  interagency agreement between NASA and Department of  Interior  to 
use   NASA  technology  for  mineral  extraction  was  announced  by 
Secre tary  of  the   Interior  Rogers C.  B.  Morton.  Funded  and d irec ted  
by DO1  and  combining efforts  of  NASA  and  con trac tor  scientists,  the  
project  would  apply NASA   exper ience   in  developing of  sys tems   for 
manned  and  automated  operations  in  hostile  environments  to 
demons tra te   new  coal-mining  technology.  NASA  has  designated 
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  as the  lead  NASA  Cen ter .  (NASA Release 
75-  17) 
21  January: The  curren t  fleet of  supersonic transports-including 
the   16 
Anglo-French  Concordes and  14 Soviet Tu-144s  flying or  schedu led  
for service-would  cau se  minimal damage to the  ozone layer, Dr. Alan 
J.  Grobecker,  Director  of  the   Dept.  of  Transportation’s  Climatic 
Impac t  Assessment Program, announced a t  a  press  briefing.  Citing a  
3-yr DOT  study,  “The  Effects of  S tra tospher ic  Pollution by Aircraft,” 
Dr.  Grobecker sa id  it would requ ire  125 Concordes flying 4.5  h r  daily 
to cau se  a  minimally de tec tab le  change in  the  ozone layer.  However, 
the   study concluded tha t  fu ture  expansion of  s tra tospher ic  jet  fleets 
should be  carefully monitored. 
Recommendations  made  by  the   study  included  development  of 
engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission s tandards ,  develop- 
ment of  low-sulfur aviation fuels,  and  es tab l ishmen t  of  s tra tospher ic  
air-quiility s tandards   and   engine-emission regulations.  (AP ,   NYT,  22 
J an  75,  33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27  J an   75,  16-17) 
22 -25   January: NASA  launched  Landsat 2   (Landsat-  B),  formerly called 
Ea r th  Resources Technology  Satellite  (ERTS-B),  from Wes tern  Te s t  
Range ,at  9:56  am  P S T   on  a   two-stage  Thor-Delta  booster  supple- 
men ted   by  nine  strap-on  rockets.  The  satellite  en te red  a near-polar 
orbit  with  a   918.23-km  apogee,  912.89-km  perigee,  103.32-min 
period, and 99.09“ inclination. Primary objective of  the  mission was to 
acquire  multispectral  imagery over the  U.S. and   foreign coun tr ies  in 
quan t i ty   sufficient  to  improve  remote-sensing  in terpre ta t ive   tech- 
n iques  and to fur ther  demons tra te  the  prac t ica l  application of Landsa t  
a 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

January 

data.  Secondary objectives  were  to  acqu ire   sufficient  multispectral 
coverage  over  the   U.S. 
to  supply  da ta   requ iremen ts   for  the  
Applications  System Verification  Tes ts   for  at  least  1 yr,  to  acqu ire  
multispectral  coverage for  a t   least  2  yr  over  the  major  agricultural 
a rea s  of  the  world to illustrate  fu r the r  applications of Landsa t  imagery 
for  crop  inventory,  and   to  demons tra te   successfu l  operation  of  the  
Data  Collection System. 
A  3-day  delay in  the  launch  changed  the   initial orbital  phasing of 
Land sa t  2  relative  to Land sa t   1  (launched  a s  Er ts   1  on 23 July  1972) 
into  a   12-  to  6-day  repea t   cycle  instead  of  the  planned  9-day  cycle. 
However, an orbital correction  maneuver beginning 27 Jan .   and  end- 
ing  6   Feb .   a l tered   phasing  to  a   9-day  repea t   cycle.  The   payload 
separa ted  from the  launch  vehicle 50 min 3 sec  after launch,  followed 
by  solar-panel  deployment and   ea r th   acquisition  using the   attitude- 
control  system. The   command  system was  turned   on  automatically, 
permitting  activation of  the   payload  by  ground  stations.  During  the  
night  of  22-23  Jan .   the  mechanical  integrity of  the  wideband video 
tape   recorder  was  verified,  Data-Collection  System (DCS)  activated, 
and  data-collection  platform  experiment  da ta  transm i t ted .   By  12:OO 
pm  EST 23  Jan .   a l l  spacecraf t  sys tems  were operating  and by  25 Jan .  
the   wideband  transm i t ter ,   wideband  video  tape   recorder ,   multi- 
spec t ra l  scanne r  (MSS),  and  return-beam  vidicon  ( B V )  were  turned 
on,  and  operating  normally. 
Teaming up  with Land sa t   1 ,   the   953-kg Land sa t  2  would  provide 
repetitive  coverage  of  almost  the   en t ire   ea r th   to  demons tra te   the  
practical  benefits  of  resources   management  from  space  for NASA  in 
cooperation  with  the   Dept.  of  Agriculture,  National  Oceanic  and  
Atmospheric  Administration,  Dept.  of  the   Interior,  Environmental 
Protection Agency, U.S.  Army Corps of Engineers, and various s ta te ,  
local,  and  foreign organizations.  Experiments  included the  coopera- 
tive  NASA-DOA-NOAA  Large  Area  c r o p   Inventory  (LACIE),  which 
combined  crop-acreage  measuremen ts   derived  from  Landsa t   da ta  
with  meteorological  information  from  ground  s ta t ions   and  NOAA 
satellites to a s se s s  crop yields and make production forecasts.  During 
the   first  yr  of  operation,  L A C E   would  concen tra te   on  US.-grown 
wheat, but the  experiment would la te r  be expanded to o ther  crops  and 
o ther  regions. 
O ther  experiments included land-use survey and  mapping; mineral 
resources,  geological,  structural,  and  land-form  surveys;  wa ter  
resources   s tud ies ;   marine  and   ocean   surveys;  meteorological  and 
environmental s tud ies ;   and  in terpre ta t ive  techn iques  development. 
Data  were  being  transm i t ted   to  three   NASA  track ing   and   da ta-  
acquisition  facilities  at  Fa irbanks ,   Al.;  Goldstone,  Calif.;  and 
Greenbelt,  Md.  In   addition,  Canada   and  Brazil  opera ted   Landsa t  
ground data-acquisition  s ta t ions  and Italy and Iran  were constructing 
similar  facilities.  Data  received  from  the   satellite  were  sen t   to  the  
NASA  Data Processing Facility a t  Goddard Space  Flight Cen te r  where 
1300  images,  covering 45  million  sq  km,  could  be  processed  each  
week.  The da ta  would  then  b e  forwarded to the Federa l  Data Cen te r  
and made  available  to  the   public. 
The  Landsa t  mission was par t  of a  U.S.  program to develop remote- 
sens ing  methods for improved management  of  earth's  resources.  In  
addition  to  Land sa t   1  and   2 ,   the   program  included  remote-sensor 

9 

January 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

ins trumen t   development;  data-analysis  research   using  da ta   from 
spacecraf t ,  aircraft,  and  ground-truth s i tes ;  low-,  intermediate-,  and  
high-altitude  aircraft  flights;  and   Ea r th   Resources  Experiment 
Package   @REP)  experiments  completed  during  the   1973  manned 
Skylab missions.  (NASA  MORS,  9,  23 Jan   75;  NASA  Re leases  74-329, 
75-31) 
22 Janua ry :  NASA's Os0  5 Orbiting Solar Observatory began its 7th yr  in 
ea r th  orbit. Launched  22 Jan .   1969 to s tudy  the  s un  and  its influence 
on  earth's  atmosphere, Os0 5 had completed more than  34  000 orbits. 
I t  was  the   fifth of  eight  spacecraf t  launched   in  the  O S 0   program  to 
observe the  sun  during most of  i ts   11-yr solar cycle. Os0 5 had  been 
shu t   down  3 yr  af ter   launch   but  was  reactivated  in  July  1974 after 
decay  of the  orbit ofOso 7 (launched  29  Sept. 1971). Os0 5, which had a 
planned  lifetime of  6  mo,  was  obtaining  da ta  on   t h e  frequency  a nd  
ex ten t  of  eruptions on  the   sun 's  surface.  (NASA  Release  75-46) 
23 Janua r y :  Th e  Air Force's  prototype B-  1 strategic bomber successfully 
completed  i ts   second  flight  test  a t   Air  Force  Flight  Test  Center. 
Primary objectives of t h e  3-hr 21-min flight included evaluation of the  
aircraft's  wing  sweep   control  sys tem ,   flying  qualities  in  t h e   initial 
climb,  and  power  approach  configuration.  The   auxiliary power  unit 
was  also evaluated  and   air-start  tests were  made. 
Following takeoff,  the   B-1  climbed to   3050 m,  where  i t s  landing 
gear,  flaps, and  s la ts  were re trac ted .   After  flying at low  speeds  with 
the  wings  in the  full forward  15" position,  t h e  wings were  swept 25", 
and   the   aircraft climbed  to  4900  m  and  conduc ted   air-start  tes ts   a t  
mach  0.7.  Th e  prototype  then   slowed  to 463 km  per h r  and  i ts  speed  
b rake  was  checked  in  a descen t   to traffic-pattern  altitude.  The  B-  1 
then   landed  safely at AFFTC.  (AFSC Newsreview,  March  75) 
Th e   Federa l   Communications  Commission  approved  a  plan  for 
International Business Machines  Corp.  and  Communications Satel- 
lite  Corp.'s  Comsat General  subsidiary to  form  a  domestic  satellite 
company with a third company as long a s  no pa r tne r  owned less than  
10% or more  than   49% of  t h e  stock.  However,  a  plan  in which  IBM 
would  replace  Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  and   MCI  Communications 
Corp.  as Cornsat's  par tner  and  own 55% was rejected. The  FCC s ta ted  
tha t   this  plan  would  g ive   IBM  too  much   power  over  t h e   specialized 
communications business. 
O the r  alternatives  suggested by  the  FCC  included  a plan whereby 
IBM  and  Comsat  could  independently  e n t e r   the   communications 
satellite business  or Comsat  could  join  ano ther  consortium  without 
IBM.  Another alternative was tha t  Comsat, which was not permitted to 
dea l   directly  with  t h e   public,  could  lease   space   communications 
c ircu i ts  to  IBM  under   an  arrangement  similar to the  one Comsat had 
with American Te lephone  & Telegraph  Co. 
Whatever  t h e   arrangement,  FCC  ruled,  IBM  must  establish  a 
separa te   corporation  for i t s   satellite operations.  (FCC  Memorandum 
Opinion and  O rde r  75-  156; FCC Release 46281; DJ, W 'Po s t ,  24 J an  75, 
D7;  W S tar-News ,   24 J a n  75,  F21) 
0  Ground was broken  for Marshall Space  Flight Center 's  x-ray  telescope 
test  facility  for  the   High  Energy  Astronomy  Observatory  (HEAO) 
program.  The   facility,  which  would  cost  $4  million  including 
equipment, would  b e  used  to test ins trumen ts  for the  HEAO  program 
a s  well  a s ' t o  ca l ibra te   rocket  payloads  for  x-ray  stellar  s tud ies  and  

10 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

January 

make  advance  telescope  calibrations.  Th e  HEAO  program  included 
three   unmanned  scientific  satellites  to  be  launched  into  low  ea r th  
orbit  between  1977  and   1979  to  study  the  invisible  light  of  x-rays, 
gamma  rays,  and  cosmic  rays.  (Marshall S t a r ,   29  Jan  75,  4) 
24 Janua r y :  S tud ies  of the  heavy particle cosmic-ray exposure received by 
the  astronauts during the  nine Apollo lunar  orbital missions revealed a 
significant  variation  in  exposure  a s   a  function  of  the   amount  of 
shielding and the  phase of  the  solar cycle, Science magazine reported. 
T h e  command module pilot, who remained in the  spacecraft while the  
two other crew members landed on  the  moon,  had  received  the  leas t  
exposure.  T h e  ankle,  the   leas t   shielded  part  of  the  body,  received a 
higher exposure than the  ches t ,  which had greater shielding. A sharp  
rise  in  exposure  had  been  evident  beginning with Apo l lo   14  when 
mission times increased.  Observed variations in flux from mission to 
flux during Apo l lo  16 and  17  w a s  2 . 4  times higher than  
mission-the 
Apo l lo   8  through  1 2 w a s  attributed  to  solar  modulation  of  the  
primary  cosmic  ray  beam. 
Data  obtained  during  the  Apollo  missions  would  be  used  for 
planning long-range missions  and  for estimating  expected  biological 
damage.  (Benton e t   a l . ,  Sc ience ,   Vol.  187, 263-5) 
Th e  U.S.S.R.  commanded  the   retrorockets  aboard  Sa l yu t   3  (launched 
25  June  1974)  to  fire,  putting  the   orbital  workshop  on  a  descen t  
trajectory.  After  7  mo  in  space ,   i t  reen tered   and burned  up  over the 
western  part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean.  After a 16-day visit to Sa l yu t  3 in 
July 1974 by a two-man crew aboardsoyuz 1 4 ,  a second crew launched 
26 Aug.  1974 aboard Soyuz  15 had failed, in several a t temp ts ,  to dock 
with  the  station  and  re turned   to  ear th   after  48  hr  in  space.  (Tass, 
FBIS-SOV, 24 Jan   75,  U1) 
27 Janua r y :  NASA Black Brant VC  sounding rockets would be used to carry  
materials-processing  experiments  a s   a  low-cost  way  of  expanding 
observations  made  during  the   1973-  1974  Skylab  missions,  NASA 
announced.  Three  flights  a  year  aboard  the   sounding  rockets  were 
planned  from  1975 through 1980 to provide a be t ter  understanding of 
material behavior  during  melting,  solidification, and  hea t   trea tmen t  
without  the   effects of  gravity.  Although the   sounding rockets would 
provide only 6 min of low g r a v i t y - o n e  ten-thousandth  of  the gravity 
on  earth-rocket  missions  were  the   only  way  to  get  low-gravity 
materials-processing  d a t a   between  the   July  1975  manned  Apollo- 
Soyuz T e s t  Project  and  the  Sp a c e  Shuttle flights in the   1980s. (NASA 
Release  75-  12) 
0  Dr.  James  6 .  Fletcher,  NASA Administrator,  and  New York City mayor 
Abraham  D.  Beame  met  in  New  York  to  review  NASA-developed 
safety s tandards  for handling liquefied natural  gas.  Following a 1973 
gas  storage tank   fire  tha t   killed 40 persons,  New   York  officials had 
asked   NASA  to  use  its  experience  in  handling  highly  volatile  rocket 
fuels  to  help  the   city  establish  a comprehensive  risk-management 
plan to design, construct,  and operate natural gas facilities. The  plan, 
developed a t  Kennedy Space  Cen ter  and incorporated into New York 
City  Fire  Department  operating  procedures,  identified  liquid  gas 
risks, controlled the  risks through redundan t  fail-safe techniques, and 
se t   up  criteria  for discussions to  eliminate  or   accep t  certain  risks. 
Also  discussed  was  the   new  fiberglass  and  aluminum  breathing 
system  developed  a t   Johnson  Space  Cen ter   a nd   being  tes ted   by 

11 

January 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

firefighters in New York, Houston,  and  Los Angeles. Results to  da te  
indicated that the  new unit-which  was 30% lighter than conventional 
systems and featured  a high-pressure,  longer duration air tank  and a 
face mask allowing be t ter  vision-was 
superior to old-style units. The  
new  system was expected  to be  introduced commercially la ter  in the  
year.  (NASA  Release  75-25) 
0  Sen. Edward M.  Kennedy (D-  Mass.) introduced S. 397 to authorize the  
Secretary  of  the   Interior  to  acquire  and  maintain  for  fu ture  
generations  the   s i te   in  Auburn,  Mass.,  on  which  Dr.  Robert  H. 
Goddard launched the  first liquid-propelled rocket on 16 March 1926. 
(CR,  27  J an  75,  S884) 
27 Janua ry -13   February:  A joint conference of  technical directors for the  
U.S.-u.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Tes t   Project  met  a t   Johnson  Space 
Center.  Participants  in  the   conference,  held  while  U.S.  and  Soviet 
working groups  also met  a t  JSC  (see  16  Jan.-8  Feb.),  reviewed  the  
progress of  ASTP preparations and  published the  necessary documen- 
tation. 
A  joint  communique  issued  13  Feb.  s ta ted   tha t   discussions  and 
agreements  were  completed  on  technical  questions  relating  to  the  
development of  new  spacecraft  equipment and design improvement, 
mission  ground-support  equipment,  and  publication  of  technical 
documentation. 
The   communique  also  s ta ted   that  communication  lines  between 
U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  cen ters   fully  guaranteed  the   flow  of  information 
necessary  to  conduct  the  joint  mission.  Both  docking  systems were 
carefully  checked  and  were  ready  for  flight,  with  final  checkouts 
scheduled  a t   the   respective  launch  sites.  C rew   training  was 
proceeding  satisfactorily (see 7-26  Feb.) with the   final joint  training 
session  scheduled  for April  in  the  U.S.S.R. 
Soviet  ASTP  Technical  Director,  Professor  Konstantin  D.  Bush- 
uyev, had informed U.S.  officials tha t  Soyuz 16  (launched 2 Dec.  1974) 
had  successfully completed  a full tes t  of  basic  flight phases  planned 
for ASTP a s  well as performance of  spacecraft systems and  interaction 
with  U.S.S.R.  ground  kontrol  systems.  Joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
tracking 
activity  during  the   flight  had  shown  tha t   the  precision  of  tracking 
information was  satisfactory. 
During a 13 Feb. press  conference a t  JSC,  Professor Bushuyev said 
tha t ,  in addition to changes  in the  Soyuz life-support  systems and the  
addition of  the  docking appara tus ,  o ther  design changes on the  Soyuz 
spacecraft included the  installation of  a transporter  for the  Apollo and 
related  an tennas ,   a new  interspacecraft  communications  system,  a n  
optical target to permit Apollo to target the  approach and rendezvous, 
and some flashing beacons and  orientation lights. (Joint communique 
tex t ;  JSC  press  briefing  transcript,  13 Feb   75) 
28 J a n u a r y :  Lee R.  Scherer   assumed  the   du t ies  of  Director  of  Kennedy 
Space  Center,  succeeding Dr. Kurt H.  Debus, who re t ired  in October 
1974.  Scherer  had  been   Flight Research  Cen ter  Director  since  1971 
and, before tha t ,  Assistant Director for Lunar  Programs and manager 
of  the   Lunar Orbiter  program  at NASA   Hq.  (KSC  Release  17-75) 
0  Marshall Space Flight C e n t e r  announced the  award of  three  contracts, 
par t   of  a program  to  design,  fabricate,  tes t ,   and demonstrate  a  low- 
cost aesthetically appealing solar collector for residential heating and 
cooling. Chamberlain Manufacturing Corp. was awarded $72 621 and 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
January 
Honeywell, Inc.,  was awarded $104 255 to deliver a low-cost collector 
based on existing technology and the  requirements of the  solar heating 
and  cooling  demonstration.  A   third  contract  was  awarded  to  PPG 
Indus tr ies   which  would  furnish  collector  panels  from  off-the-shelf 
hardware  at  essentially  no  cost.  (MSFC  Release  75-22) 
29 January:  NASA’s basic goal in t h e  U.S.  stratospheric  research  program 
wa s   to determine  the   normal makeup  of  the   upper  atmosphere  with 
emphasis on understanding the  dynamic processes occurring and  the  
perturbations caused  by na tura l  and man-made events, Dr. J am e s  C .  
Fletcher,  NASA   Administrator,  said  a t   a  hearing  before  the   Sena te  
Committee on Aeronautical and  Space  Sciences. NASA’s  curren t  high- 
altitude  program was  being  carried  out  by  conventional  and   special 
purpose  aircraft such a s  the  U-2,  instrumented  packages placed on 
commercial  aircraft,  instrumented  balloons,  sounding  rockets,  and 
computer  modeling  techniques.  Satellites  still  provided  the   best 
potential  for  continuing  repetitive  global observations  of  the   upper 
atmosphere.  Th e   Nimbus  satellites  had  measured  properties 
affecting  the  ozone  and  had  made  vertical  profiles  of  the   upper 
atmosphere.  Atmospheric  Explorer  (m) satellites had  made  coordi- 
nated  investigations  of  photochemical  processes  in  the   upper 
atmosphere  caused   by  solar  ultraviolet  radiation. 
Dr.  Fletcher  said  tha t   NASA  would  continue  these   efforts  and  had 
plans for new atmospheric studies. In  addition to payloads planned for 
launch  on the   Space Shu t t le ,  NASA  would use  instrumented  aircraft, 
balloons, and sounding rockets to study the effects of chlorofluorometh- 
anes ,   or  Freon,  on  atmospheric  ozone.  (Transcript) 
Reduction-in-force and reduction-in-grade notices were sen t  to 213 Civil 
Service employees at Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  as a result of  the  
reduction in the  end-of-N  1975 personnel ceiling. In addition to the  93 
persons  separated  and  the   120 persons  reduced  in  grade,  191 MSFC 
employees received reassignments as part of  a reclassification survey 
conducted  during  the   summe r  of  1974.  (MSFC  Release  75-24) 
30  January :   NASA’s Office  of  Space   Science  announced  assignment  to 
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  of overall responsibility for a definition 
study  of  the   Airnospheric,  Magnetospheric  and  Plasmas-in-Space 
(AMPS) Spacelab payload, to fly on the  Space  Shuttle. AMPs would be  a 
manned  laboratory  equipped  to  study  the  dynamic  process  of  ;he 
atmosphere  and  magnetosphere,  using  active  and  passive  probmg 
techniques.  (NASA  Release  75-28) 
31  January :   An  unexpected  and  sudden  drop  in  the   total  number  of 
ionospheric electrons within 1000 km of  the  burning Sa turn  V second- 
stage engines had been noted during the  15 May 19731auhch o f s ky l a b  
1 ,  Science magazine reported.The  probable cause  of  the  electron loss 
was  the   large  number  of  hydrogen  (HA  and   water  vapor  molecules 
added  by the  engines to the  ionospheric F-region of  the  atmosphere. 
This initiated  a  recombination  process between  ionospheric  positive 
ions and ambient electrons, causing the  removal of ion-electron pairs. 
Th e  Saturn’s first-stage engines, which burned kerosene in a n  oxygen 
environment,  cu t  off  a t  88 km  and,  therefore,  had  little  effect on the  
ionosphere  F-region. 
Similar  changes  in  ionospheric  chemistry  had  not  been  noted  in 
association with Sa turn  V vehicles launched before Skylab 1 because 
a l I  their  final parking  orbits (and therefore the ir  second-stage  burns) 

13 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
January 
had been  below  190 km, where the  ionospheric chemistry i s  different. 
(Mendillo et  a l . ,  Sc ience ,  31  Jan  75,  343-5) 
*  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  announced the  award of  two con trac ts  to 
Martin  Marietta  Corp.  for  fur ther   s tud ies   on  the   Ear th   Orbiting 
Teleoperator System (EOTS).  Under a $246 570 con trac t  Martin would 
design EOTS,  an  unmanned remotely controlled spacecraf t ,  to opera te  
in ea r th  orbit near   t h e  Space  Shu t t le  Orbiter.  The   spacecraf t  would 
carry  a TV  camera   for close-up  inspection,  have  docking capability, 
and   be   propelled  by  cold-gas  expulsion.  Under  a  $64 000  contract 
Martin would  develop a complete se t  of  requ iremen ts  for the  control 
and  display  station,  a  unit  in  the  Orb i ter   that  would  contain control 
equipment  common  to  all  experiments  requiring  a  teleoperator 
system.  (MSFC  Release  75-29) 
*  NASA  had  awarded  a  $152 565  000  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  to 
Martin  Marietta Corp.  for  the   design,  development,  and  tes t   of  the  
Space   Shu t t le   ex terna l   tank,  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   an-  
nounced.  The   con trac t ,   which  covered  the   first  increment  of  the  
external  tank  project  for  1  Sep t .   1973  to  30 June   1980,  called  for  a 
maximum production  ra te  of  24 tank s  per  year and  delivery of major 
ground-test articles and  6 flight-model tanks. The  work would be  done 
at  Michoud  Assembly  Facility  under   the   direction  of  MSFC.  (MSFC 
Release  75-  28) 
During  January:   Oppor tun i t ies   a n d   Choices  i n   Space   Science,  1974,  a 
repor t   published  by  the   Space   Sc ience   Board  of  the   National 
Research  Council,  recommended  tha t   NASA  undertake  the   Large 
Space  Telescope a s  the  only new space  research  s tar t  in FY  1976. Th e  
telescope  should  b e  followed  by  a  ser ies  of  permanen t   national  and 
international  observatories  in  orbit.  The   report  also  recommended 
tha t ,   budget  permitting,  NASA  under take   in  1977  a  lunar-  polar 
mission,  a  Pioneer-  Jupiter  orbiter,  a  Mariner-  Jupiter-  Uranus 
mission,  and   a  solar  maximum  mission.  However,  NASA  should 
compare  the   importance  of  the   Pioneer-  Jup i ter   orb i ter   with  the  
Mariner-  Jupiter-  Uranus  mission  if  curren t   FY 1977  budget  esti- 
ma te s   would  not  suppor t   both  missions.  O the r   recommendations 
included an  immediate reevaluation of strategy for missions to explore 
t h e   ou ter   solar  system  during  the   next  decade   and   for  returning  a 
Martian  surface  sample  to  ea r th   ins tead   of  landing  a n   unmanned 
laboratory to  perform  analyses a s  curren t   plans  propose. 
The   report  strongly  endorsed  the   High  Energy  Astronomical 
Observatories  (HEAO),  Pioneer-Venus  mission,  and   Mariner- 
Jupiter-  Sa turn  mission  a s  vital to the  nation's  space  science efforts. 
(Text) 
*  Con trac ts  involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space  Flight 
Cen te r   during  the   month  totaled  nearly  $200 million.  Among  them 
were awards to Lockheed Missiles and  Space  Co.,  Inc.,  for $67  500 to 
develop the  capability of predicting radiant heating a t  the  base  region 
of the  Space  Shuttle, and  for $49 971 to continue a two-phase s tudy  of 
flow  effects on  Space  Shu t t le  plume  simulation.  Lockheed  also  had 
received $59  740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount da ta  
obtained during the  Skylab mission.  A $29 945  con trac t  had  gone  to 
Northrop Services, Inc.,  to continue s tud ies  on  Space  Tug  recovery of 
a  spinning  satellite. 
Th e  u.S.  Army Engineer Div.,  Ala.,  had  received two con trac ts .  A 
$2-million con trac t  had  been  awarded for construction a t  MSFC of  the 
14 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

January 

s truc tura l  tes t  facility for t h e  Solid Rocket Booster and  a $2.93-miUion 
con trac t  has  been  awarded for construction and  modifications to the  
Dynamic Te s t  Facility for vibration testing of the  Space  Shu t t le  in the  
vertical positions.  The  con trac ts  also included a $152.6-mdlion  award 
to  Martin  Marietta  Corp.  for  t h e   design,  development,  test,  and  
evaluation of the  Space  Shu t t le  ex terna l  tank, including six flight units 
and  te s t   hardware. 
MSFC  had  awarded  t h e   Dept.  of  Commerce  $60 000  for  an 
atmospheric measuring program.  Bendix Corp.  had received $99  736 
for  a  Skylab  control-moment  gyro  anomaly  investigation,  and   t h e  
University  of  New  York  had   received  $36 253  to  continue  da ta  
analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75-  39) 

15 

February  1975 

2  February:  High-speed  compu ter  techn iques  were producing profiles of 
giant  red  s ta r s ,   in  a  NASA-sponsored  research   project  conduc ted  by 
California  Institute  of  Technology  scientist  Dr.  Juliana  Christy- 
Sackmann  a t  the  Je t   Propulsion Laboratory. 
Analyzing  high-resolution 
infrared  da ta   on  success ive   s ta r  
f lashes  represen t ing  from a  fraction of  a  year  to a  million years  in the  
evolution of  a  red giant, Dr.  Christy-Sackmann found tha t  the  violent 
combustion of helium in the  hear t  of the  s ta r s ,  releasing heat up to 260 
million'c,  produced  a   predominance  of  carbon.  She   s tressed   the  
convective role of  helium  and hydrogen in fueling the  stellar fires: A 
convective  tongue of  helium  was  driven  through  layers   of  burning 
shells  toward  the   ou ter  envelope of  hydrogen.  Hydrogen might  also 
drop down to overlap, giving ex tra  energy to an old star. The  re lease  of 
energy  from  the   interior  of  the   s ta r s   varied,  apparen t ly  because   of 
convective zones  tha t   seemed   to  come  and  go.  Although  each  flash 
produced extreme interior disruption,  surface changes  in most ca se s  
were  minor. 
The   length  of  time  required  for  computation  had  prevented 
previous investigators from following and analyzing more than  a  few of 
the  hundreds  of  success ive  f lashes  occurring in a  s ta r ;  using the  new 
computer  technique,  Dr.  Christy-Sackmann  planned  to  analyze 
hundreds .   (JPL  Release,  2  Feb   75) 
3 February:  Pres iden t  Ford sen t  a  $349.4 billion FY  1976 budget reques t  to 
Congress, an  increase  of  $45.0 billion over the  FY  1975 reques t .  The  
recommended  deficit  of  $51.9  billion was  a   peacetime  record  high 
designed to help  revive  the  Nation's  sagging economy.  In his budget 
message  to  Congress,  the   Pres iden t   said  tha t   his  recommendations 
provided  for  fiscal  policy  actions  to  increase   purchasing  power  and 
stimulate economic revival; a  major new energy program to hold down 
energy  use ,   acce lera te   development of  domestic  energy  resources ,  
and promote energy research  and  development; an  increase  in outlays 
for defense to maintain preparedness  and preserve  force levels in the  
face   of  rising  costs;  a   1-yr  moratorium  on  new  Federa l   spending 
programs o ther  than energy; and  a  temporary 5%  ceiling on increases  
in  pay  for  Federa l   employees  and   on  individual  benefits  t ied   to 
changes  in consumer prices.  Proposals included a  one-time 816-billion 
tax  cut-  $12  billion  for  individual  taxpayers  and  $4  billion  for 
business-to 
stimulate  economic recovery. 
Energy: The  Pres iden t   specifically reques ted   tha t   no  new Federa l  
spending programs be initiated in FY 1976 excep t  in the  field of energy, 
which had a  total recommended budget authority s e t  at $2.491 billion. 
Federa l   energy  functions  were  divided  into  th ree   broad  categories: 
general  operating  programs  (analysis  and   development  of  energy 
policy),  regulatory  programs,  and  research   and  development  pro- 
grams.  General  operating  programs,  with  a   recommended  budget 
authority  of  $548  million,  would  be  administered  by  the   Federa l  
17 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Energy  Administration  (FEA),  Dept.  of  t h e   Interior,  and   t h e   new 
Energy  Research  and   Development Administration  (ERDA).  Federa l  
energy  regulation,  with  a  recommended  budget  authority  of  $178 
million, was managed by EEA,  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 
and  Federa l  Power Commission. Although  the  new  budget called for 
suppor t   from  NASA  and   the   National  Sc ience  Foundation  (NSF)  for 
energy R&D,  ERDA  would  have  the  major  responsibility. 
The   proposed  energy  program  called  for  an   increased  fee   on 
imported  oil  and  an  excise  tax on  domestically  produced  petroleum 
and   na tura l   gas.  T h e   proposal  also  called  for  decontrol  of  oil 
deregulation  of 
p r i c e s - coup l ed   with  a  windfall  profits  tax-and 
prices  on  new  na tura l  gas. 

Energy 
(in millions of  dollars) 

Ou t lay s  

P r o g r am  or a g e n c y  

Energy: 
General operating programs 
Regulation 
Research and development 
Total energy 

1 9 7 4  
1 9 7 6  
1 9 7 5  
a e t u a l   e s t im a t e   e s t im a t e  

R e c omm e n d e d  b u d g e t  
a u t h o r i t y  for 1 9 7 6  

223. 
498. 
152. 
164. 
171. 
90. 
- - -  
1577. 
1131. 
739. 
606. 
1454. 
2240. 

548. 
178. 
1764. - 
2491. 

The   Federa l   government  had  fur ther   expanded   i ts   research   and 
development  program  to  provide  new  and   improved  technologies 
necessary to increase  domestic energy resources.  Outlays for energy 
R&D would be  $1.7 billion in FY  1976, an  increase  of 36% over FY  1975 
and  102% over 1974. Budget recommendations continued a  vigorous 
nuc lear   R&D  program  and   accelerated  non-nuclear  energy  R&D, 
particularly  in  coal  and   solar  energy. 
General Science, Space, and Technology 
(in millions of  dollars) 

P r o g r am  or a g e n c y  

1 9 7 6  
1 9 7 5  
1 9 7 4  
a c t u a l   e s t im a t e   e s t im a t e  

R e c omm e n d e d  b u d g e t  
a u t h o r i t y  for 1 9 7 6 '  

O u t l a y s  

Space  research and technology: 
Manned space  flight 
Space science,  applications, and 
technology 
Supporting space activities 
Subtotal 
General science and basic research: 
National Science Foundation 
Energy Research and  Development 
Administration 
Eaah  Sciences: 
Geological Survey 
Dednctions for offsetting receipts 

Total 

1705 
1782 
1538 
1473 
324 - 
351 - -   1119 
1127 
1168 
1040 
322 - 
327 
2905 
3183 
2963 
3225 
757 
720 
647 
649 
438 
393 
414 
369 
m  2% 
- 
178 
1 8  
- -  
- 
-3 
-3 
-3 
-3 
4154 
4183 
4581 
4686 

'Compares  with  budget authority of $3874 million  in  1974 and 54299 million  in  1975. 
18 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
February 
Reques ted   funding  totaling 
ral  Science  and   Techno 
billion  for  gene 
space ,   and   technology-not 
including energy o r  Dept.  of  Defense programs-was 
highlighted by 
the  buildup in the  development and  production of  t h e  Space  Shuttle; 
continued development of  spacecraf t  to explore the sun ,  planets,  and  
universe;  continued research ,   development, and  experimentation in  
the   application  of  space   technology for  surveying na tura l   resources 
and   improving  weather  forecasting;  and  increased   suppor t  for basic 
science. 
Agencies  receiving  t h e   major  portions  of  the   general  science, 
space ,  and  technology  funds  were NASA,  NSF ,  ERDA,  National Ocean ic  
and  Atmospheric  Administration,  and  Geological  Survey. 
A i r  Transpor ta t ion  and  Nonm i l i ta ry  Aeronautical  Research: In the  
field  of  transportation,  for which  the   recommended  FY 1976 budget 
authority was  $5.568  billion,  air transportation  accounted for $2.660 
billion.  The  Administration would  propose  major  legislation in  avia- 
tion  development,  and  revenues   providing  for  continued  long-term 
Federa l  development of  t h e  airway system,  subs tan t ia l  res truc tur ing  
of  the   airport  grant  program,  and more equitable  structuring  of  air- 
transportation  user  fees .  
NASA would  spend  $316 million in FY  1976 on i ts  broad  program of 
research  and  technology to  suppor t  civilian and  military aeronautical 
objectives.  Major  aims  of  the   program:  to  reduce   aircraft  noise  and  
exhaus t   pollution,  reduce   fue l  Lconsumption, and   improve  aircraft , 
performance,  reliability,  and   safety. 

Air Transportation 
(in millions  of  dollars) 

P r o g r am  or a g e n c y  

Air transportation: 

Airways  and  airports 
Air carrier subsidies 
Aeronautical research  and 
technology 
Total, air transportation 

Ou t lav s  
1976  R e c omm e n d e d  b n d g e t  
1974  1975 
a u t h o r i t y  for 1976 
a c t u a l   e s t im a t e   e s t im a t e  

2092 
2285 
2288 
1870 
66 
73 
67 
61 
- - -   - 
304 
292 
314 
316 
2660 
2670 
2236 
2464 

Defense  Research ,   Deve lopmen t ,   Te s t ,   and   Eva lua t ion:   Total 
obligational authority  of  $103 billion  for military defense   included  a 
$10.236-billion  es t ima te   for RDT&E  to  permit  continued  engineering 
development of  the  B-  1 strategic bomber, of  t h e  Tr iden t  submar ine  
missile  system,  of  long-range  and  intercontinental  ballistic missiles, 
and  of the  command, control, and  communications of strategic forces. 
Also  funded   under  the   RDT&E  function  were  military  astronautics 
programs to improve space  technology  for military applications and  to 
develop space  vehicles for specific military missions.  Efforts would be  
increased   on   development  of  a  missile  early  warning  system, 
communications satellite system, NAVSTAR global positioning system, 
and   uses   of  NASA’s Space   Shu t t le   for  launching  military  space  
payloads. 
’ 

19 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
February 
Military  Research, Development, Test and Evaluation 
Programs 
(in millions of  dollars) 

B u d g e t  plan 
1975 
e s t im a t e  

1974 
a e t n d  

1976 
e s t im a t e  

O b l i g a t i o n s  
1975 
e s t im a t e  

1974 
a c t u a l  

1976 
e s t im a t e  

Summary of programs by 
activities: 
1.  Military sciences 
2.  Aircraft and  related 
equipment 
3. Missiles  and  related 
equipment 
4. Military astronautics and 
related equipment 
5.  Ships,  small craft, and 
related equipment 
6.  Ordnance, combat ve- 
hicles,  and  related 
equipment 
7. Other equipment 
8. Promamwide manage- 
ment and  support 
Total direct 

427 346 
1 667 463 
2 123 007 
5w 028 
633 990 

432 586 
1 615 499 
2 107 534 
523 757 
665 301 

4a.s  8% 
2 123 267 
2 488 503 
625 451 
664 3% 

ua  092 
1 660 347 
2 471 245 
585 187 
647 832 

432700  484393 
1 620 520  2 113 520 
2 126 370  2 477 253 
524 130  622 214 
664146 

668026 

426 630 
1 594 571 
731 938 
8 194 973 

464 607 
1 844 160 
962 068 
8 615 513 

569 941 
2 195 680 
1083 513 
10 236 600 

469429  564245 
1850 172  2 186 443 
%0709  1081407 -- 
a 652 056 io 193 ai 

Defense Procurement:  Out of a total FY 1976 recommended defense 
procurement budget  authority of  $24.420 billion, $8.015  billion was 
designated for aircraft and $3.306 billion was designated €or missiles. 
Defense Procurement 
(in millions of  dollars) 

1974 a c t u a l  

1975 e s t im a t e  

1976 e s t im a t e  

. 

Aircraft 
Missiles 
Ships 
Combat vehicles,  weapons, and  torpedoes 
Other 

8 014.8 
6 081.9 
5 938.2 
3 305.6 
2 544.8 
2 681.8 
5 446.0 
3 508.4 
3 174.6 
1314.6 
708.4 
575.5 
-  -  - 
6 338.5 
4 846.0 
4 763.5 
17 467.4 
17 355.7 
24 419.5 
Total 
( PD ,  10 Feb.  75 ,128-136;   OMB,  Budget of the U .S .  Govt., FY 1976 
and  appendixes) 
Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  released  the  budget 
statement he had given at a 1 Feb.  press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA 
budget called for the authorization of $3.539 billion and net outlays of 
$3.498 billion for  the  12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional 
NASA Budget Plan, F T  76 
(in millions of  dollars) 

Research and Development 
Construction of Facilities 
Research and  Program 
Management 
Total 

FY 1974 

N 1975 

N 1976 

2678.4 
2323.3 
2310.9 
142.7 
101.1 
84.6 
-  -  - 
776.0 
765.2 
744.0 
3156.0 
3231.2 
3539.0 

20 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
February 
amounts of  $958.9 million in authorizations  and $905.6 in net outlays 
for the   3-mo  transition  period  beginning  1 July  1976. 
Dr.  Fletcher  said the  new budget was “lean  but manageable.”  For 
the  first  time since  1961 the  budget  provided no new program  s tar ts .  
I n  accordance with Pres iden t  Ford’s  request t o  hold FY 1975 and  FY 
1976  expenditures  to  a  minimum,  NASA,  in  FY 19’75, had  deferred 
obligations of  $72  million  and  optlays  of  $70  million,  reduced  c iv i l  
service  employment by 300,  and  made  program  adjustments  to  stay 
within the  total m 1 9 7 5  and  1976 budgets.  Fur ther  adjustments might 
be  necessary  if  the   inflation ra te   continued  to  grow, 
Although  NASA’s  FY 1976  budget  was  up   $300  million  from  the  
previous  year,  $200  million  of  this  increase  was  specifically 
anticipated in las t  year’s budget to carry forward commitments built 
into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA  had  received  an 
effective increase of  only $100 million, or about 3%.  This,  along with 
the   nation’s  curren t   9%  inflation  ra te ,   was  a “good  indicator of  the  
leanness  of  NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” 
The   budget  would  permit  NASA   to  proceed  with  curren t   major 
programs  a s   planned:  Th e   Space   Shuttle,  scheduled  €or  a  first 
manned  orbital flight  in  mid-1979,  and Landsat-  C ,   scheduled  for a 
fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in 
aircraft  remained  a  principal  focus  in  NASA’s  aeronautics  research  
and  technology.  NASA  was  also  continuing  stratospheric  s tud ies ,  
including the  effects of pollutants on the  environment, with significant 
contributions  coming  from  NASA   meteorological  and  atmospheric 
satellites,  sounding rockets,  and  balloons and  high-flying aircraft. 
Although  there  would  be   no  new  s tar ts ,   NASA  would  continue  its 
study and advanced technical development for science,  applications, 
and   aeronautics  projects  to  be  s tar ted   in  future  years,  including 
preliminary  work  for  payloads  to  f ly   on  the   Space   Shuttle  and 
Spacelab. 
The   1975  calendar  year  launch   schedule  w a s   one  of  t h e   most 
ambitious in U.S.  history with 28 launches  scheduled,  including the  
joint  U .S . -U .S .S .R .   Apollo-Soyuz  Tes t   Project  in  July  and  the   two 
Viking missions to Mars  scheduled  for August. 
Although  NASA’s  legal  responsibilities  for  energy  research   and 
d ev e lopm en t -d e s ign a t e d  under  the  Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 
1974-had  been transferred to the  Energy Research  and Development 
Administration,  NASA  would  work  closely  with  ERDA  in  various 
aspec ts  of  solar  research   and   development. 
Dr.  George M.  Low, NASA  Deputy Administrator,  said a t  the  press  
briefing tha t  the  largest budget  increase was for manned  spaceflight, 
where  the   increase  for  the   Shu t t le  was  partially  offset  by  reduced 
spending for the  rest  of  manned  spaceflight.  T h e  small  increase  for 
space   science  did  not  tell  the   whole  story:  If  funds   for  the   Viking 
program  were  subtracted,  the   budget  for  the   res t   of  science  had 
increased  $170  million  from  FY  1974  to  FY  1976.  Although 
applications,  aeronautics,  and   space   technology  programs  each  
showed  small  increases,  funds   for  tracking  and  da ta   acquisition 
decreased  slightly despite  increased  maintenance  costs  for  tracking 
stations, because NASA wa s  beginning to close down tracking stations, 
preparing for the  time when tracking and da ta  relay satellites would be 
available. 

21 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 
NASA  Budget Plan 
(in  millions of  dollars) 

Manned  space flight 
Space  science 
Applications 
Aeronautics and  space  technology 
Tracking and da ta  acquisition 
Energy  programs 
Technology  utdization 
Total Research  and  Development 
Constructron  of  Facihties 
Research  and  Program  Management 
Total  budget  plan 

N 1 9 7 4  

N 1 9 7 5  

N 1 9 7 6  

1414.6 
582.6 
175.0 
250.3 
2 6 . 0  
5.9 
7.0 

1110.3 
999.9 
542.8 
664.5 
174.5 
159.0 
234.3 
237.8 
244.0 
248.0 
- 
4.7 
4.4 
- 
5.5 
4.5 
2310.9 
2323.3 
-  -  - 
84.6 
142.7 
101.1 
776.0 
765.2 
744.0 
3156.0 
3231.2 
3539.0 

William E.  L d y ,  NASA  Comptroller,  said that,  of  the  $84.6 million 
budgeted  for construction  of  facilities,  $47.2  million was  to continue 
the  buildup of  Space  Shu t t le  facilities, mostly  for launch  and landing 
facilities  at  Kennedy  Space   Center.  The   remaining  funds  were  for 
normal  rehabilitation  and   modification  of  existing  facilities,  with 
smaller amounts for minor construction and  for faciIities planning and 
design. 
Civil service manpower was expec ted  to continue at t h e  same  level 
for FY  1976 with 24 316 employees.  However, the  number  of  support 
service con t rac to r s -exc lud ing   mission  or  stage contractors-would 
decrease   from  18 637 in N 1975 to  17 811 in f l 1 9 7 6 .   The  estimated 
125 000  persons  working  on  NASA  programs  during  N  1975  was 
expected  to  increase  by  6000  to  7000 by  the   end  of  FY  1976. 
Distribution of  funds  to  the  Cen ters  would  change: An  increase  of 
$224.3  million  would  go  to  Johnson  Space   Cen ter   for  the   Shu t t le  
program.  A decrease  of  $37.3 million for KSC  reflected  a decrease  in 
funding for the  construction  program.  Goddard  Space  Flight Cen ter  

Estimated Distribution  of Total NASA  Budget 
(in  millions  of  dollars) 

N 1 9 7 5  

N 1 9 7 6  

In c r ea s e  
or 
D e c r e a s e  

224.3 
1146.9 
922.6 
-37.3 
238.6 
275.9 
112.5 
541.2 
428.7 
0.9 
10.9 
10.0 
-32.6 
461.1 
493.1 
31.3 
-0.6 
31.9 
188.1 
7.2 
180.9 
32.0 
193.0 
168.2 
40.3 
5.7 
34.6 
249.4 
-36.1 
285.5 
- -  - 
35.2 
253.3 
218.1 
7.3 
166.4 
159.1 
-3 .5  
18.5 
22.0 
307.8 
3539.0 
3231.2 

Johnson  Space Center 
John  F.  Kennedy  Space Center,  NASA 
Marshall  Space  Flight Center 
National  Space  Technology Laboratories 
Goddard  Space  Flight Center 
Wallops  Flight  Center 
Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory 
Ames  Research Center 
Flight Research  Center 
Langley  Research Center 
Lewis Research Cen te r  
NASA  Headquarters 
Undetermined 
Total 

22 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

February 

was  down  $32.6  million,  largely  because  of  a  decrease  in  funding  for 
Delta  vehicles.  (OMB, Budget  of  U S .  Gout.,  FY  76  and  Appendix; 
NASA  FY  76   budget  briefing,  1 Feb  76,  transcript;  NASA  Release,  FY 
76  budget  briefing  background  material;  Fletcher  budget  statement, 
3 Feb  76,  text) 
0  The  Federal  Council  for  Science  and  Technology,  a  committee  of 
officials  representing  major  research  and  development  agencies, 
released  “Report  on  the  Federal  R&D  Program-FY 
1976,”  a  summary 
of  17   R&D  agencies’  efforts  in  applying  science  and  technology  to 
national  issues.  Th e  report  s ta ted   tha t   the  FY 1976 budget  included 
$21 billion for  R&D  programs,  a  15% increase  over  the  FY  1975 R&D 
budget  of  $18.8  billion.  Of  this,  approximately  $7.4  billion  was 
planned  for  civilian  programs  including  energy,  health,  education, 
agriculture,  environment,  urban   problems,  and   transportation.  Ap- 
proximately  one-fourth  the   civilian  R&D  budget  was  planned  for 
energy,  with  the   largest  sha re   of  that-$1.55  million-going 
to  the  
Energy  Research   and   Development  Administration.  Nine  other 
government  agencies would  receive  increases   in R&D  budgets,  with 
NASA’s FY 1976 budget  es t ima te  increasing to $3.539  billion, up  from 
$3.231  billion  in  F” 1975,  an   increase   of  more  than   $300  million. 
Space   R&D  would  continue  with  projects  to  explore  Mars,  Venus, 
and  ou ter  planets,  a s  well  a s  the  sun .  Satellites would continue to be 
used for ea r th  resources assessmen t ,  weather prediction,  and  surveys 
of  potential geothermal energy  sources. 
Th e   Federa l  Aviation  Administration  would  receive  increases  for 
air  traffic  safety,  and   Dept.  of  Defense  increases   would  support 
development  of  the  B-  1 manned   strategic  aircraft,  Trident  missile 
systems,  and  Navy  and  Air  Force  air  combat  fighters.  (Text; OMB ,  
Budget  of  the  U . S .  Gout.,  FY  1976) 
NASA  management had  perm i t ted   inflight  use  of  “undesirable  compo- 
nen ts”   in  the   electrical  sys tem  of  the  Thor-Delta  launch   vehicle  to 
preserve the  program’s schedu le ,  Av ia t ion  Week  & Space  Techne logy  
reported.  At  leas t  two Thor-Deltas had been launched with  the  same  
electrical-system  contamination  failure  potential  tha t   “probably 
caused  the   loss”  of  the  U.K.’s  Skyne t  ZZ  A   military communications 
satellite  18 Jan.  1974. Av   W k   reported  tha t ,   although NASA  officials 
considered  the   policy  undesirable,  they  had  used  the   components 
until they could be recycled o r  replaced,  in the  belief tha t  the  risk had 
been  acceptable.  On   18  Dec.  1974  the   French-West  German 
Symphon ie  1 was almost lost when an apparen t  electrical contamina- 
tion problem occurred  in  the  Thor-Delta s  second  stage. Av  W k  said 
tha t   Symphonie  program  management  had  not  been  aware  of  the  
vehicle’s  electrical-system  failure  potential.  (Av  W k ,  3 Feb  7 5 ,  44) 
0  A  9.6-gram  finely  powdered  lunar   sample  arrived  a t   Marshall  Space  
Flight  Cen ter   where  sc ien t is ts   would  measure   in  a  vacuum  the  
sample’s  thermal  conductivity,  a  fundamental  property  governing 
hea t  flow through the  surface  of  the  moon.  The  da ta ,  correlated with 
da ta   obtained  from  previous  s tud ies   on  simulated  lunar   samples, 
would  b e   used  to  develop  a  thermophysical  model  of  the   moon, 
helping scientists be t ter  to unders tand  the  moon’s origin, history, and  
relationship to t h e  ear th .   (MSFC  Release  75-41) 
0  Kennedy  Space   Cen ter   awarded  a  $79  991  con trac t   to  the   Univ.  of 
Florida’s  Ins t i tu te  of  Food  and  Agriculture  Sc iences  for research  on  

23 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

fi-eeze-terklperature prediction.  Under  the   terms   of  the  con trac t ,   a 
follow-on of  a  1973 con trac t   to  study  the   feasibility of  using  remote- 
sensing  devices  for  tempera ture   measurement  and  evaluation,  the  
zfniv.  of Flodda would receive satellite and aircraft da ta  from K s c  and 
the   National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  tha t   would 
provide  actual  measuremen ts   of  leaf  and  ground  tempera tures   at 
specific  times  and  places.  Following calibration,  the  da ta   would  be 
combined  irlto  a  temperature-prediction  model.  Then,  using  known 
variables  such   as   curren t   temperature,  humidity,  time,  cloudcover, 
add wind  velocity, the  user could accurately forecast where  freezing 
tenipdratures would  occur.  (KSC  Release 21-  75) 
3 -11   February:  A  delegation  representing  the   U.S.S.R.  Communications 
Administrdtipn  met  in  Washington  with  representatives  of  the  
International  Telecommunication  Satellite Organization  (INTELSAT) 
to discuss preliminary arrangements  for the  U.S.S.R.  to use  INTELSAT 
satellites for communications  between  the  Soviet Union and the  U.S., 
Canada,  and Mexico. According to preliminary agreements,  INTELSAT 
would  provide  the  U.S.S.R.  with  “occasional  use”  of  s p a c e  segment 
capacity  in  the   INTELSAT  system  for  preassigned  voice-grade 
serv ices , ,  television  relays,  and  digital  transmission.  Th e   U.S.S.R. 
Communications Administration was constructing an ea r th  station to 
work  with  the  INTELSAT  system  beginning  in  mid-1975.  (INTELSAT 
release4  28 Feb  75) 
4  February:  Air  Force  Systems  Command’s  Aeronautical  Systems  Div. 
announckd  plans  to begin flight evaluation of  €an blades constructed 
of  itdvdnced  composite  materials.  The   new  blades,  made  of  an 
aluminum  alloy  matrix  enforced  by  silicon  carbide-coated  boron 
filaments, would be  flown on a n  F-  111 aircraft over a 2- to 3-yr period 
a t   the   Air  Force  Flight  T e s t   Cen ter   in  California.  The   composite 
blades, 44%  lighter than  convehtional titanium blades, were expected 
to increase operating efficiency by  reducing rotating mass,  increasing 
tip* speeds,  and  eliminating  part-span  shrouds.  (AFSC  Release  OIP 
301.74) 
0  Edward  N.  Cole,  retired  president  of  General  Motors  Corp.,  was 
designing  a  freight  carr ier ,   called  the   Huskie,  twice  the  size of  the  
Boeing 747, the  Ch r i s t ian  Science Monitor reported. Cole, whose plan 
was  still  cin  the   drawing  board,  efivisioned  a  fleet  of  300  Huskies 
c a r d i n g  h e igh t   around  the   world,  ,each aircraft  flying  15 hr  a  day. 
Because  fast  loading  and   ufiloading  was  critical  to  the   plane’s 
economic  success ,   an  automated  modular  loading  and  unloading 
system was  also being  designed  to permit  the  craft  to  take  off  again 
within 30 min of  landing. With the price  tag for the  fleet estimated  a t  
$913 billiofi,  Cole was  counting on  government  in teres t  to bolster  his 
plans. CSM  repotted  tha t  Dept. of Defense officials were interested in 
a  fleet  of  privately  built  cargo  planes-with 
government-insured 
could  be  commandeered  by  the   military  in  an 
mortgage-that 
emkrgency.  (AP,  C S M ,  4 Feb  75,  5B) 
@  NASA   announced  tha t  General Counsel R. Tenney Johnson would leave 
NASA   to  become  general  counsel  of  the  Energy  Research  and 
Development  Administration,  effective  16 Feb.  Johnson  had  been 
with  NASA  since  May  1973.  NASA  Deputy  General  Counsel  S.  Neil 
Hosenball  had  been  named  acting General  Counsel.  (NASA  Release 
75-32) 
, 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
February 
0  Academician  Anatoly A.  Blagonravov,  one of  the   Soviet Union’s  lead- 
ing  space   scientists,  died  in  Moscow  a t   the   age of  80.  Blagonravov, 
chairman of  the  Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space  
Research  and  head  of  the  S ta te   Research  Institute  of  Engineering 
Studies,  was  one  of  the   key  scientists  responsible  for  launching 
the   world’s  first  satellite, Spu tn ik   1 ,   4  Oct.  1957. Blagonravov had 
begun  his  career   in  the   military and  much  of  his  early work  was  on 
the   development  of  automatic  infantry  weapons.  He  la ter   turned 
to the  development of  spacecraft,  making major design contributions 
to  the   Soviet  Union’s  Lunik  I ,   launched  2  J un e   1959,  a s   the   first 
man-made  object  to  f ly   by  the   moon.  Blagonravov  also represen ted  
the   U.S.S.R.  in  many  international  organizations:  He  had  been  vice- 
president  of  the  International  Space   Research  Committee,  perma- 
nent  U.S.S.R.  representative  on  the   United  Nations  Scientific 
and  Technical  Subcommittee  for  the  Peaceful  Use  of  Space, 
and   permanent  deputy  Soviet  representative  on  the   U .N .   Space  
Committee. 
In   1962 Blagonravov  held  discussions with  Dr.  Hugh  L.  Dryden, 
Deputy Administrator  of  NASA,  during which details for exchange of 
satellite  da ta   were  worked  out.  (Moscow  Domestic  News  Service, 
7 F e b  75,  U1; W P o s t ,  7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 
F B I S ~ SOV ,  
75,  34) 
5 February:  Bills were  introduced in the  Sena te  (S. 573) by  Sen .  Frank E. 
Moss  (D-Utah),  and  in  the   House  of  Representatives  (H.R.  2931)  by 
Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.),  “to  authorize  appropriations  to  t h e  
National  Aeronautics  and  Space   Administration  for  research   and  
development,  construction  of  facilities,  and  research   and  program 
management,  and for other purposes.”  Bill S. 573 was referred to t h e  
Committee  on Aeronautical  and  Space  Sciences.  BiU  H .R .   2931 was 
referred to the  Committee on Science and Technology. (CR, 5 F e b  75, 
H659,  61430) 
0  NASA’s  new  Low  Cost  Modular  Spacecraft  (LCMS), a  recoverable 
compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space 
Shuttle,  was.  demonstrated  at  a  news  conference  a t   Rockwell 
International  Corp.’s  Space   Division.  The   LCMS  consisted  of  an 
instrument  and  spacecraft  assembly  joined  by  a  transition  ring. 
Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be a t tached  to 
the   LCMS  for  specific  missions.  Designed  by  Goddard  Space   Flight 
Cen ter  engineers, the  LCMS  would fit into the  5- by 18-m payload bay 
of  the   Orbiter  and  also  could  serve  as  a  platform  for  as  many  a s   14 
satellites. The  system could be placed in orbit by the  Shuttle and la ter  
serviced or  recovered  and   returned  to  ear th   for needed  repairs.  Dr. 
Robert  6. Wilson,  Director  of  Advanced  Payload  Analysis  a t  NASA  
Headquarters,  said tha t   a recoverable  modular satellite system such  
as  LCMS  could save a s  much  as  $100 million anhually over the  cost of 
nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14 F e b  75 ,3 ;  Goddu rdNew s ,  
Feb   75,  8 )  
6  February:  NASA  launched  Sms 2  (SMS-B  Synchronous Meteorological 
Satellite) into transfer  orbit from the  Eas tern  T e s t  Range  a t  5:04  pm 
EST.  Launched  for  the   National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Admini- 
stration,  the  three-stage  inertially guided Thor-Delta booster  placed 
the   satellite  in  an  orbit  with  a  36 810-km  apogee,  197-km  perigee, 
651.0-min period,  and  23.9”  inclination.  Originally scheduled  for  30 

25 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Jan.,  t h e  launch   had  been  delayed  to  replace  the   Inertial Measure- 
men t  Unit of  the launch  vehicle's  flight-control  system with  a newer 
more  reliable  unit.  The   spacecraf t   performed  normally  during  the  
transfer   orbit,  and   a t t i tude   and   reorientation  maneuvers  were 
performed  a s  planned.  The  apogee boost  motor was  fired on second 
apogee  at 9:43  am EST  7 Feb.  placing Sms 2  in  a  synchronous orbit; 
orbital  parame ters   were   36 685-km  apogee,.  35   680-km  perigee, 
1456.4-min period, and  1.1" inclination. By  10 Feb.  the  spacecraf t  was 
drifting westward  a t  6"  per  day toward the  final operational station of 
115" west longitude. Over  several days beginning 10  Feb., the  onboard 
auxiliary  propulsion  system  was  fired  to  place  the   spacecraft  into 
proper a t t i tude  for operational use.  First photos were transmitted  11 
Feb. 
NASA objectives-to 
launch  the  spacecraf t  into a synchronous orbit 
of  sufficient  accuracy  to  enable  the   spacecraf t   t o   accomplish  i ts  
operational mission requ iremen ts ,  conduct an  in-orbit evaluation and 
checkout  of  the   spacecraf t ,   and  turn  operational  control  over  to 
NOM-were  met,  and the  mission  was adjudged successful 22 April. 
NASA  turned  over control of  Srns 2  to  NOAA  10  March. 
The   628-kg  cylindrical  spacecraf t   carr ied   f ive   ins trumen ts   to 
provide  high-quality  day  and   night  cloudcover  da ta ;   take   radiance 
tempera tures   of  the   earth 's  atmosphere;  measure   proton,  electron, 
and  solar x-ray  fluxes,  and  magnetic  fields;  transmit  processed  da ta  
from cen tra l  facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental 
information to  N O M  from  the   thousands  of  manned  and  unmanned 
data-collection  platforms  on  land,  rivers,  lakes,  and  the   sea. 
Sm s  2,  together with  i ts  s is ter  craf t  Srns 1 (launched  17 May  1974), 
provided  continuous  coverage  of  the   Wes tern   Hemisphere,  trans-  
mitting weather photos every 30 min.  SMS photos would be made into 
film  loops  of  clouds  moving  over  oceans   and   land   masses  to  help 
meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and  weather 
conditions might cau se  t h e  destructive tornadoes and  hurricanes tha t  
frequently occur  over  t h e  ea s te rn  U.S. 
Sm s  2 was the  second in a ser ies  of  two operational prototypes and  
to  be   called  Goes  1 in  orbit) 
one  operational  spacecraf t   (SMS-C, 
developed and  funded by NASA   to mee t  the  requ iremen ts  of  the  Dept. 
of  Commerce 's  Geostationary  Operational  Environmental  Satellite 
(GOES) system. Under aNASA-DOC  agreement, NASA was conducting a 
program  to  develop  improved  sensors   and  techniques-based 
on 
technology  developed  in  i t s   Tiros,  Nimbus,  and   Applications 
DOC'S  operational  program. 
Technology  Satellite  programs-for 
Follow-on GOES spacecraf t  were being planned.  Goddard Space  Flight 
Cen ter ,   which  managed  t h e   SMS  program  under   the  direction  of 
NASA's Office of  Applications,  also  had  responsibility  for  the  Thor- 
Delta launch  vehicle.  (NASA MORS,  9 Jan ,   10  Feb ,   23 April  75; NASA 
Re leases  75-6,  75-27;  GSFC  W k l y  SSR, 6-  12 F e b  75) 
0  DOD  announced  t h e   award  of  a  $3.6-million  con trac t   to  Aerojet 
Electrosystems  Co.  for  design,  development,  and   delivery  of  one 
prototype  and  one flight microwave tempera ture   sounder to be  used 
on military meteorological satellites between  1977-1980.  Under  the  
con trac t ,   Aerojet  would  build  and   te s t   one   mechanical-thermal 
simulator  and   associated  ground  equipment  for  calibration  and  

26 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

February 

testing,  and  would  develop  a  software  da ta   package  to  convert 
satellite da ta   to  tempera ture   profiles. 
The  microwave sounder would be  designed to measure atmospheric 
tempera ture   from  the   surface  of  the   ear th   to  altitudes  above  30  km 
without  regard  to  cloudcover.  (AFSC  Release  OIP  028.75) 
France   launched S ta r l e t t e ,   a  passive  geodetic  satellite,  from  Kourou, 
French   Guiana,  on  a  Diamant  WP.4  1auncher.The  satellite  en tered  
orbit with a 1137-km apogee,  804-km perigee,  104.5-min period,  and 
49.8“  inclination. S ta r l e t t e ,  with an inner core of  uranium 238 to give it 
a high mass and  reduce  gravitational effects on the  spacecraft, would 
reflect laser  emissions directed a t  it from ground stations to study the  
earth‘s gravitational field,  elasticity of  the ea r th ,  and moments of  the  
earth‘s  poles. 
The  launch was the  first for the  Diamant booster developed by  the  
Cen tre  National de Recherches Scientifiques.  (GSFC W k l y  S S R ,  6-  12 
Feb  75; Av Wk ,  9 Dec  75,  55;  17 Feb  75,  19) 
7 February: NASA had issued a request for proposals for the procurement of 
telecommunications  services provided by  a Tracking and Data Relay 
Satellite System (TDRSS) developed and  operated  by  industry to meet 
NASA  requirements,  NASA  announced.  TDRSS,  consisting  of  two 
specialized relay satellites in synchronous ear th  orbit and a U.s.-based 
ground  terminal,  would  relay  nearly  continuous  da ta   and  voice 
commands  to  and  from  mission  spacecraft  and  the   ground  control 
cen ter .  The  network could support all earth-orbiting spacecraft below 
5000 km, including the  Space  Shuttle and Spacelab, and provide 85% 
coverage,  compared  with  the   curren t   15%  coverage  by 
the  
conventional ground  tracking  system.  (NASA  Release  75-  37) 
0  An  A-  7D  aircraft with  a DIGITAC  digital flight-control system-first  of 
its kind to be flight-tested by the  Air Force-made 
its first flight at Air 
Force Flight Tes t  Center. DIGITAC was part of  a program to investigate 
the  feasibility of installing digital flight-control systems in curren t  and 
future  tactical  fighter  aircraft. 
The  system,  featuring  a  pilot-selectable  control  mode,  would 
increase  flight-control reliability  with  i ts   component  self-test  capa- 
bility, improve combat effectiveness by  permitting multimode aircraft- 
handling  qualities,  and  cost  less   because  of  the  system’s  inherent 
flexibility and the  general availability of  its digital components.  (AFSC 
Release  OIP 057.75) 
0  Dr.  Hertha  Firnberg,  Austrian  Minister  of  Science  and  Research,  and  
Roy  Gibson,  Director  General  of  the   European  Space   Research 
Organization  (ESRO),  signed  an  agreement  in  Vienna  permitting 
Austria  to  participate  in  individual  European  space   programs-in- 
obligation  of  membership.  (Space lab  
cluding  Spacelab-without 
Newsletter  75-  1) 
A  decrease  in  the  amount  of  ozone in the   stratosphere  would cause  a n  
increase  in  skin  cancer   in  white  (the  most  susceptible) Americans, 
Walter Sullivan wrote in a New  York Times article.  Th e  findings were 
based  on  the   combined  results  of  a  1974  NASA   study  tha t   used 
instrumented  aircraft  to  profile  ozone  and   nitrogen  oxide  in  the  
stratosphere,  the   National  Cancer   Institute’s  1974 Third  National 
Cancer   Survey,  and  the   Dept.  of  Transportation’s  3-yr  study  “The 
Effec ts  of  Stratospheric  Pollution by  Aircraft”  [see   21 Jan.]. 

27 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Th e  NASA  study, which used high-altitude U-2 aircraft,  confirmed 
tha t   atmospheric ozone increased  from  t h e  equa tor  to t h e  poles  and  
was also influenced by regional and seasona l  variations. Ozone mole- 
cules above t h e  la t i tude  of  Houston were only three  fifths a s  plentiful 
a s  above  the   la t i tude   of  Minneapolis.  Correspondingly,  the   Cancer  
Ins t i tu te  survey showed an  annua l  incidence of nearly 400 skin-cancer 
c a s e s  per  100 000 whites in Dallas, Tex.,  and  less than  half tha t  figure 
in   the  Minneapolis area .  
The se  da ta ,  when combined with the  DOT  study, indicated tha t  the  
number   of  skin-cancer  ca se s   in  t h e  U.S.  would  increase  by  6000, or 
I%, a year if  120 supersonic transpor ts  opera ted  in t h e  s tra tosphere  
for 4  hr daily,  thu s  depleting  the   zone  by  0.5%.  (Lowenstein et  a l . ,  
Journal  of Atmospheric Sciences, Nov 75,2185-  90; Sullivan, NYT,  7 
F eb   75,  11) 
7  February-1   March:  T h e   eight  prime  and  backup   Soviet  cosmonauts 
training for the  July Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project joined with U.S.  prime 
and   backup  as tronau ts   in  the   U.S.  to  continue  training  for  t h e  joint 
mission. The  cosmonauts-Aleksey  A.  Leonov,  Valery N.  Kubasov, 
Anatoly  V.  Filipchenko,  Nikolay  N.  Rukavishnikov,  Vladimir  A. 
Dzhanebekov,  Boris  D.  Andreyev,  Yury  V.  Romanenko,  and  
Aleksandr S. Ivanchenkov-arrived 
in Washington, D.C.,  7 Feb.  a nd  
traveled  to  Kennedy  Space  Cen ter   t h e  following morning. 
Th e   group  toured  KSC  8  Feb.  giving  the   cosmonauts  the ir   first 
glimpse of  the  U.S.  launch  complex. Col. Leonovcommen ted  tha t  the  
pad  from  which  Alan  B.  Shepard   was  launched   in  1961  “is  a  very 
simple launch   s tand  compared  to  the   ones  we  use  now.” 
Following a tour of  Disney World in  Florida 9 Feb.,  t h e  cosmonauts 
spen t   10 Feb.  inspecting  the  Vehicle  Assembly Building,  where  the  
Apollo would b e  s tacked  on the  Sa tu rn  IB launch  vehicle; the  Launch  
Control  Cen ter   firing  room,  from  which  the   rocket  would  b e  
controlled;  and  Launch  Complex 39  Pad   B,  from  which  the   Apollo 
spacecraf t  would be  launched. P re s s  coverage of  the  first Soviet visit 
to KSC  noted  tha t   previous  invitations for Soviet officials  to visit KSC 
had been  turned  down,apparently  because  of  Soviet unwillingness to 
reciprocate  with  invitations  to  Baykonur  Cosmodrome.  But  in  May 
U.S.  astronauts would  re turn   the   visit  by  going to  the  Soviet  launch  
site. 
Th e  as tronau ts   and  cosmonauts flew  to Johnson  Space  Cen ter   to 
begin  a 2-wk training period tha t  included exercises in command and  
docking  module  simulators  and  mockups;  joint  language-training 
sessions; briefings on experiments, contingencies, and mission  rules; 
and  practice run-throughs of  the  planned joint activity days. Following 
a press  conference at which U.S.  and  Soviet ASTP  crew members  were 
introduced  to JSC  employees, the Soviet cosmonauts re turned   to  the  
in  two  groups,  on   28  Feb.  and   1  March.  (NASA  Release 
U.S.S.R. 
75-34;  JSC Release 75-07;  NASA ASTP S ta tu s  Report No. 7 ; S p a c e p o r t  
News ,  21 Feb 75; JSC Roundup ,  28 Feb 7 5 , l ;  McElheny, NYT,  10-  17 
Feb  75) 
10  F e b r u a r y   More  than   19 000 aerospace  workers  s truck   McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  facilities in Missouri,  California,  and  Florida,  saying 
tha t   their  demands   for  increased  wages  and   benefits  had   not  been 
met.  In  McDonnell’s St. Louis plant, where the  Defense Dept.’s  F-4 
Phan tom  je t s  and  F-  15 Eagle fighters were built,  12 000 employees 

28 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

February 

walked off  the  job. The  press  quoted company officials a s  saying tha t  
the   s tr ike  would  slow,  and   perhaps   stop,  production.  Only t h e   few 
aircraft  ready  for  final  assembly  and  flight  testing  would  be  
completed.  About  7000 workers walked  ou t   of  California facilities, 
including Vandenberg Air Force Base. A t  Kennedy Space  Cen ter ,  200 
McDonnell  Douglas  employees  s truck ,   causing postponement of  the  
Telesat-  C  launch   schedu led   6  March  on   a  McDonnell-built  Delta 
launch  vehicle.  (C T r i b ,   11 F e b  75; NASA  PIO,  interview,  14 Feb   75) 
Federa l   Interagency 
Formation  of  a  Federa l   interagency  group-the 
Ta sk   Force  on  Inadver ten t   Modification  of 
the   S tra tosphere  
(1MOS)-to 
investigate  t h e  relationship of  freons  (fluorochlorohydro- 
carbons) to ozone reduction in the  s tra tosphere  was announced by t h e  
Chairman  of  t h e  Council on Environmental Quality,  Dr.  Russell W. 
Pe terson ,   and  the  Chairman of  t h e  Federa l  Council for Sc ience  and  
Technology, Dr.  H.  Guyford Stever. The  group included representa- 
tives  from  NASA;  the   Depar tmen ts   of  Agriculture,  Commerce, 
Defense,  Justice,  and  Transportation; Dept.  of  Health,  Education,  and 
Welfare;  Energy Research and Development Administration; Environ- 
mental  Protection Agency;  National  Science Foundation; and  Inter- 
depar tmen ta l  Committee for Atmospheric  Sc iences .  
IMOS  would  prepare   a  repor t   summarizing  atmospheric,  medical, 
and  ecological information on  the  freodozone  relationship. The  report 
would  also  evaluate  possible  economic  impac ts   and   alternatives  to 
industry, consider what Federa l  action could be taken ,   and propose a 
Federa l  program  to resolve the  issues.  (Fed  Council for Sci and  Tech  
Release  1) 
11   February:  Dr.  John  F.  Clark,  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen ter  Director, 
and Dr. James  W.  Smith, president of Greenbelt Homes, Inc.,  signed 
a cooperative agreement to install experimental solar heating units in 
four  four-family  housing  units  in  Greenbelt,  Md.  During  the   first 
phase  of  the   project,  all four  of  the   units would  be   ins trumen ted  to 
measure  heat  loss and  fuel-consumption  characteristics,  and  two of 
the  four would  be  fully insulated.  Based on the  cost-effectiveness  of 
the   first  phase,  the   two  insulated  buildings would  be  equipped with 
solar heating  units  designed  to  augment  existing  hot-water  radiator 
systems.  Th e   remaining  two  units  would  serve   a s   control  for 
comparison. The  solar units, which would be  designed at GSFC, would 
be installed in time for the 1975-1976  heating season. (Goddard News, 
March 75,  1-2;  GHI manager’s  ofc,  interview,  5 Oc t   1976) 
@  The   first  airborne  terminal  for  an  Air  Force  communications satellite 
system was  being installed in a C-  141 aircraft as par t  of  a flight-test 
program to develop a system for transmitting high-priority messages 
throughout  the  world  via Air Force repea ter   satellites.  In addition to 
the  C-  141 terminal,  the  sys tem  included six additional airborne and  
four ground terminals.  Results of  the  6-mo te s t  would help DOD decide 
whether the  terminals should be  produced  in quantity. (MSc Release 
OIP  303.74) 
12 February: Water vapor was de tec ted  for the  first time deep  in the  atmos- 
phere  of  Jupiter  in  October  1974  by  a  group  of  Univ.  of  Arizona 
scientists  aboard  NASA ’ s   C-  141  Airborne  Infrared  Observatory, 
Ames  Research   Cen ter   announced.  The   da ta ,   combined with  da ta  
gathered  by  the  P ioneer   10  and  1 1   flybys of  t h e  planet  in  1973  and 
1974, added to the  speculation tha t  organic compounds being formed 

29 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

in Jupiter’s  a tmosphere  might account for the  red, brown,  and  orange 
coloring of  t h e  planet’s  clouds. 
The  discovery  was made with  a 91.5-cm infrared telescope,  newly 
installed aboard t h e  C-  141, which was flying above virtually  all the  
water vapor  in  the  earth‘s  atmosphere.  Scientists would use the  new 
da ta   to  predict  Jupiter’s  tempera ture   and   pressure ,   develop  a 
s truc tura l  model of  the  planet’s atmosphere,  and  determine Jupiter’s 
charac ter   a t   the   time  of  i ts   formation.  (ARC  Release  75-3;  ARC 
Airborne Astronomy Prog Mgr,  interview,  26  July  76; Larson e t   a l . ,  
Astrophysical  Jou rna l ,   1 May  75,  L137-40) 
0  Communications  Satellite Corp.  released  i ts  1974 annua l  report:  earn-  
ings during 1974 had  increased to a record  $44 918 000, or $4.49 per 
share ,   up  from  $36 299 000 o r  $3.63 pe r   sha re  in  1973. 
In  his  “Message  for  the   Shareholders,”  ComSatCorp  Pres iden t  
Joseph V.  Charyk  a t tr ibu ted  the  growth to the  continued increase  in 
communications  traffic  over  ComSatCorp’s  global  network.  Ex- 
cluding the  u.S.  mainland-Hawaii service,  the  number  of  half-circuits 
leased  by  ComSat  to U.S.  international carr iers  increased  during the  
year by about 20%,  from 2933 a t  the  end  of  1973 to 3510 a t  the  end  of 
1974. 
Responding to the  increased demand  for service, ComSatCorp and 
i ts   par tners   in  t h e   International  Telecommunications  Satellite 
Organization had continued to improve and  expand the  system during 
1974. A  sixth Intelsat  IV  satellite, Zntelsat  ZV  F8 ,   had been launched 
21  Nov.  Three   higher  capacity  Intelsat  IV-As  were  schedu led   for 
launch   during  1975,  and  three   additional  Intelsat  IV-As  were 
scheduled  for  launche s   beginning  in  1977.  Even  higher  capacity 
Intelsat  V  satellites were  being  planned  for use  in  the  1980s. 
The ground  network had been expanded to  a year-end  total of  104 
an tennas   at  84  ea r th   station  s i tes   in  60  countries.  Construction  of 
additional  an tennas  was  begun  at  ComSatCorp-operated stations  in 
Maine and West Virginia. (ComSat Release 75-7;  ComSatCorp 1974 
Annual  Rpt,  3 March   75) 
14  February:  High-temperature  core  reactors,  fueled  by  fissioning  ura- 
nium  plasmas,  could  be   used  to  “burn   up”  or eliminate radioactive 
wastes produced  in t h e  fission process, NASA  announced.  In  a NASA- 
sponsored  program  to  develop  advanced  nuclear-powered  rocket 
propulsion,  scientists  had  found  tha t   long-lived  radioactive  wastes 
could  be  transformed  into  harmless  materials  by  bombarding them 
with  neutrons. Th e  uranium-compound  fuel could  be  circulated  and  
re turned  to the  reac tor  to  burn up the materials produced  in the  fuel. 
Computer analyses showed tha t  a gaseous fue l  reactor could establish 
a balance in ra tes  of production and elimination of  the  waste produced 
af ter   3  yr  of  operation;  once  this  equilibrium  was  established,  no 
additional  long-lived  radioactive  wastes  would  be   produced.  The  
gaseous  fuel  reac tor   also  could  be   designed  to   burn  wastes  from 
conventional nuclear-fission reactors.  (NASA Release 75-  44; Schnei- 
d e r  et  a l . ,  Nuc lear   Technology,  Sep t   75,  34-50) 
0  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  announced t h e  award of a 10-mo $149 325 
con trac t  to Econ, Inc.,  to study the  technical and  economic feasibility 
of  two different solar power plants,  both in space  and  on  the  ground, 
and   compare  them   with  conventional  terres tr ia l   plants  expec ted   to 
exist  ih  the   future.  The   first  system was  a n  orbiting  system  which 

30 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

February 

would  generate  electrical  power  from  the   sun   and   transmit  it  to 
indus tr ies   and   cities  on  earth.  A  second  kind  of  solar-power 
generating  system,  located  on  a  remote  area   of  the   ea r th ,   could 
transfer   power  via  an   earth-orbiting  satellite  to  users   thousands  of 
kilometers  away.  Econ,  Inc.,  would  use resu l ts  from  earlier concept 
s tud ies  to  define  requ iremen ts  for  payload  packaging,  development 
and  checkou t ,  and  resupply  for launch  on  the   Space  Shuttle.  (MSFC 
Release  75-  37) 
@  Th e  government of  Indonesia se lec ted  Hughes Aircraft Corp. to build a 
satellite communications system linking  120 million residents  of  the  
Indonesian  islands.  Under  the   $23.6-million  contract  signed  in 
Jakar ta ,   Hughes would  build  two  satellites, a mas ter  control sys tem ,  
and 
-~  nine  ear th   stations.  Thirty  additional  stations would  be  built  to 
Hughes  specifications  by  two  other  U.S.  firms.  The   satellites  were 
tentatively  scheduled for launch  in  fall  1976.  (LA  T im e s ,  16 Feb   75) 
14  February-17  June: Flight  Research  Cen ter   flew  16  flights  using  an 
instrumented  B-57 
to  gather  detailed  information  on  jet  streams, 
thermal  turbulence,  and  mountain  waves  over  the   western  U.S. as 
part  of  the  Measurement  for Atmospheric Turbulence program.  On- 
board  instruments  measured  velocity and  acceleration in  the   various 
samples  as  the   B-57  flew  through  the   turbulence  for  10 min  on  a 
straight-line  course  a t   altitudes  up   to  15 000  m.  Langley  Research 
Center,  which  had  been  making  similar  flights  over  the   eastern  U.S. 
since March  1974, would  analyze  the   da ta   for  use  in  making  future 
aircraft  safer in  turbulent  air.  (FRC  Release 4-75) 
15 February:  The  Indonesian  government concluded  a  $120.6-million (4.6 
billion  Belgian francs) agreement with the General Bank of Belgium  to 
finance  construction  of  two  communications  satellites,  a  satellite 
control  station in  Jakarta,  and 39 comsat network  stations throughout 
the  Indonesian  islands.  (Jakarta  Domestic  Service,  FBIS-Indonesia, 
19 Feb  75,  N1) 
The  U.S. could  land  men  on  Mars  in  10 yr  if  a  commitment  similar  to 
Pres iden t   Kennedy’s  pledge  in  1961 to  make  a  moon  landing were 
made,  Dr.  Wernher   von  Braun,  former  NASA  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator,  said  in  a  speech  a t  the  Johns  Hopkins Univ.  Applied 
Physics  Laboratory.  Dr.  von  Braun,  vice  president  for  engineering 
and   development  at  Fairchild  Industries,  Inc . ,   said  tha t   nuclear- 
powered  command  sh ips   could  be   sen t   to  orbit  the   planet  while  a 
lander  traveled to the  Martian surface. The  cos t  of the  program  would 
approximate the  near-$25  billion cost of  the  Apollo program.  (B Sun, 
16 Feb  75, B16) 
0  Soviet  and  American fraternizing at Cape  Canaveral and  Florida’s Dis- 
ney World  in recen t  weeks were evidence of  how much the  world had 
changed  s ince  the  1950s, a New York  Times editorial said. “Wha t  was 
once a ferociously pursued  race   in space  has  given way  to de ten te   in 
space ,”  with  the  preparations for the  joint Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project 
in  July.  Skep t ics ,   complaining  that  Moscow would  be   the   “big  net 
gainer”  in  the  project,  were  correc t  only from  a  narrow  intelligence 
point  of  view.  They  missed  t h e   main  point  for  de ten te   in  space. 
Neither  the  u.S.  nor  the   Soviet  Union  had  resources  sufficient  for 
fruitful  human  activity  in  space  for  decades  ahead.  “I t   is  simply 
enlightened selfishness for Washington and  Moscow to work together 
in space.”  And this was only a s tar t .  Wha t  was needed even more was 

31 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

“broadly based cooperation in space efforts embracing the  personnel 
and talents of all nations for the  benefit of  all humanity.”(NYT,  15 Feb  
75,  28) 
18  February:  U.S.S.R.  and   India  signed  a  5-yr  agreement  on  scientific 
exchange and  cooperation between  t h e  Soviet Academy of  Sciences 
and   India’s  Dept.  of  Science  and   Technology.  The   agreement  pro- 
vided  for  wider  cooperation  between  the   two  countries  in  various 
fields of  science and technology, and  for the  exchange of delegations 
and   information. (Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 6 March  75,  J1) 
19  February-19   March:  Hairline  cracks   were  discovered  in  the   hold- 
down  fittings  on  the   f ins  of  the   Sa turn   IB  launch  vehicle  scheduled 
to  launch   the Apollo  spacecraft  in  the  Apollo-Soyuz T e s t  Project  in 
July. After an earlier routine inspection a t  Michoud Assembly Facility 
had  turned   up   one  crack ,   a  more  detailed  inspection  a t   Kennedy 
Space  Center  19 Feb .   revealed 25-cm cracks  on the  fittings of  two of 
the   eight  fins.  A  decision  was  made  to  replace  the  two  fins.  The  
cracks  would not affect flight, but were in an area  carrying the  weight 
of the  vehicle as  it sa t  atop the  mobile launcher. During a la ter  inspec- 
tion,  cracks   also  were  found  in  the   remaining  six  fins,  making  it 
necessary  to  replace  all eight. 
Replacement  work  began  11 March.  Engineers  strengthened  the 
cracked  areas  by  placing  compressive  s tresses   in  the  surface of  the 
material, by pneumatically pounding it with a small bundle of  rods. Six 
of  the  fins were  replaced  by  15 March. 
The   spacecraft  was  placed  atop  the  Saturn  IB  on  17 March  and 
replacement of  the remaining two fins was completed by 19 March. (KSC 
Release 27-75;  NASA Release 75-50,75-57;  Marshall S ta r ,  19 March 
75) 
0  The  Air Force System Command’s Materials Laboratory had successfully 
static-tested  a  full-scale F-  15 aircraft  wing constructed  of  advanced 
composite  materials,  AFSC  announced.  The  wing  had  withstood  a 
maximum  load 45%  greater than  expected during actual flight, before 
giving way at the point where the titanium rear  spur flange and upper 
skin were bolted together. The composite wing, 18% lighter than an all- 
metal wing, was  made  of  a  brown  epoxy  thin  honeycomb  sandwich 
material  reinforced  with  graphite-epoxy  stiffeners.  T h e   ribs  were 
graphite-epoxy  and  the   spurs   were  metal.  Th e   wing,  the   largest 
aircraft wing ever  built  of  advanced composite materials,  was 4.9  m  
wide a t  the root chord and 1.5 m  wide a t  the  tip chord ,  and had a 4.3-m 
span .  
The  program  had  begun  in May  1971 with  a n  $8.2-million  contract 
award  to  McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  for  development  of  the   wing, 
which was expected to reduce fuel requirements by  increasing range, 
speed ,   and maneuverability.  (AFSC  Release OIP  021.75) 
Despite  the  immediate  need  for  aircraft  noise-abatement  regulations, 
little or nothing had been  done,  Sen .  John  V.  Tunney (D-Calif.)  said 
in a speech  on the  floor of  the  Sena te .  The  Federa l  Aviation Adminis- 
tration was considering proposals to c u rb  jet-fleet  noise by retrofitting 
engine nacelles of  JT-3D  and  JT-8D  aircraft with  sound-absorbing 
material.  Delay  had  come  in  part  from  industry,  which  favored  an 
alternate NASA refan program costing f ive  times tha t  of retrofit and  not 
technologically  feasible  for  several  years.  In   addition,  the   NASA 
program  could  not  quiet  the  JT-3D  aircraft-the  Boeing  707s  and 
McDonnell Douglas DC-  8s-which  made up  the  noisiest fourth of the  

32 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

February 

nation’s je t  fleet.  Sen. Tunney  said  that  the  potential benefits  of  the  
NASA  program did not justify waiting until the  technology was ready at 
a  cost  five  times  grea ter   than  retrofitting.  If  FAA  was  to  prove 
responsible  in  the  area   of  aircraft  noise  aba temen t ,   it  could  not 
Cb su c cumb  to industry pressure  against retrofit.”  A retrofit regulation 
should be put into final form a t  the  first available opportunity.  (CR, 19 
F eb  75,  S2160) 
20 February:  Some “very heavy”  influential politicians had  been  rallying 
around  NASA’s  “little  known  and  unglamorous”  Ear th   Resources 
Technology Satellite  [renamed  Landsat  14 Jan.]  program,  inducing 
Pres iden t  Ford to overrule his budget  advisers and  provide money for 
a  third  spacecraft  in  1977, Arlen  J.  Large  said  in  the   W a l l  Street 
Jou rna l .  It wasn’t only NASA  but “ the  ERTS community-geographers, 
foresters, pollution fighters and  land-use planners”  that lobbied for a 
third  satellite  to  continue  the  work  of  Landsa t   1  and 2  (launched  23 
July  1972 and  22  Jan.  1975). Th e  Office of  Management  and Budget 
had  wanted  to  delay  funding  until  NASA  developed  cameras   with 
be t ter   resolution,  but  the  “lobbying blitz”  convinced Pres iden t  Ford 
to overrule OMB;  money for the   satellite was  included  in  the  FY  1976 
budget.  (Large, W S J ,  20  F e b  75,  44) 
Zntelsat I V F 4  communications satellite was destroyed by a NASA range 
safety officer 415 sec  after launch from Eas tern  T e s t  Range when the  
Atlas-Centaur  tes t   vehicle  tumbled  out of  control.  Lifting off  a t  6:35 
pm EST,  the mission had been normal to Atlas booster-engine cutoff a t  
138  sec.  Then   telemetry  d a t a   indicated  several  malfunctions,  in- 
cluding electrical problems a nd  loss of  altitude. After destruction, the  
vehicle impacted  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean  800 km  downrange from the  
launch  site.  An  investigation  of  the  failure  was  begun  under  the  
direction  of  Lewis  Research  Cen ter   and  the   mission  was  officially 
judged  unsuccessful 6 March.  The  failure was  the  first for an Atlas- 
Cen taur  since May 1971, when a circuit problem in the  Cen taur  ended 
the   launch  of  the  Mariner  8 Mars  probe. 
The  1400-kg In te lsa t   ZV  F - 6 ,   launched  by  NASA  on  a  cost-reim- 
bursable basis for the  Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of  the  
89-member-nation International  Telecommunications  Satellite Con- 
sortium,  was  intended  to   be  the   primary  spacecraft  over  the   Indian 
Ocean  region, w i th zn te l sa t  IV F A ,  launched 13  June  1972, becoming 
the  backup.  The failure of  Intelsat  IV F-6  would have no  immediate 
effect on  Intelsat  global communications; In te lsa t  N F - 5  could pro- 
vide the  primary function and Zntelsat IZI  F - 3 ,  launched 6 Feb.  1969, 
was  still capable  of  providing limited  backup. 
The   Zntelsat  ZV  F - 6   mission  had  been   scheduled  originally  for 
launch in February 1973 but experienced a ser ies  of delays from prob- 
lems in both the  satellite and the  launch vehicle.  (NASA MORS,  26 Feb 
75,  13 March  74;  PAO,  interview,  21 F e b  75; NASA  Releases  73-83, 
75-7,  75-47;  NASA  “Note  to Editors,”  3 May  73,  27 June   75; SBD, 
24 J an  75,  127) 
21  February:  The  unexplained  loss of  calcium by  astronauts  during pro- 
longed  manned  missions  “ seem s   to  be   a  slow  persistent  loss,”  Dr. 
David L.  Winter,  NASA Director for Life Sciences, said during a press  
briefing. Data indicated calcium had  been  lost in space  a t  the  ra te  of 
0.5% a month, a ra te  tha t  showed “no evidence of  leveling off.” Bones 
tended  to  lose calcium  at  varying rates,  weakening  selective bones. 

33 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Scientists were studying various ways, including d ie t  management,  to 
compensate  for  the  calcium loss. 
Dr. Winter sa id  tha t  the  observed decrease  in red  blood cells during 
t h e  Skylab missions was not because  of red-cell destruction but ra ther  
a slowdown of t h e  red-cell production.  “We seem  to have stumbled on  
a  way  in  which  red   blood  cell  production  is  suppressed .”   This 
mechanism,  unknown  before,  would  b e   a  very  interesting  and  
important  process  to  study. 
Physical  cr i ter ia   for  the   selection  of  as tronau ts   for  the   Space  
Shu t t le   would  vary  according  to  function,  Dr.  W in ter   said.  Pilots 
would  be  selected  using  very  rigid  cr i ter ia ;   the se  would  not  be   im- 
posed upon as tronau ts ,  i.e.  mission specialists, whose function would 
be  primarily  scienti-fic. Because  the   objective  for  Shu t t le   missions 
would be  to get the  bes t  qualified sc ien t is ts ,  it would be  impossible to 
predict what  size,  shape ,   age, or sex  these   scientists would  be.  The  
purpose of  the  Shu t t le  was to permit  anyone with a legitimate need  to 
go  into  space ;   therefore,  NASA’s approach would  be   to  broaden  the  
selection criteria  a s  much   a s  possible.  (Transcript) 
0  Dr.  Philip Handler, 18th president of  the  National Academy of Sc iences ,  
had  been  elected for  a second 6-yr term ,  NAS  announced. Dr. Handler 
had served a s  NAS  president since 1 July 1969. Before tha t  he  had been  
cha irman  of  the  Department  of  Biochemistry  at Duke Univ.  Medical 
Cen ter .  
NAS,  established  in  1863 by  a n   ac t   of  Congress,  was  a  private 
organization of  over  1000 scientists  and   engineers  frequently called 
upon to advise the  Federa l  government on policy questions related to 
science  and technology.  (NAS  Release,  21 Feb  75) 
0  DOD  announced the   award of a $3 500 000 firm-fixed-price  con trac t   to 
TRW ,   Inc . ,   for  software  suppor t  of  t h e  Space  Shuttle.  (DOD  Release 
83-  75) 
24F eb rua r y :  Design and  fabrication of  the  first Space  Shu t t le  Orb i ter  was 
progressing  well,  with  all  major  s truc tura l   elements-forward 
fuselage,  tail,  wings,  mid  fuselage-scheduled 
for final  assembly in  
mid-1975, NASA  Deputy Director of  t h e  Space  Shuttle LeRoy E.  Day 
told  the  Canadian  Sc ience  Writers Association  in Toronto,  Canada. 
Th e   main  rocket  engine,  the   most  difficult  development  item,  was 
being  built  on  a  10-yr  technology  base   in  which  government  and  
industry  had  invested nearly $100  million. During  1974, initial com- 
ponent engine firings had been  made, and  firings of the  first integrated 
subsystems test  bed  engine were  scheduled  for July. 
The  emphasis  for  the   expendable external  tank   had  been  on  sim- 
plified  low-cost  production.  An  inexpensive  spray-on  insulation  had 
been developed to protect the  aluminum sk in  from excessive tempera- 
tu re s   during  ascent. 
In   summary,  NASA   and   i ts   contractors  were  making  steady 
progress,  holding  within cos t   and  schedule  commitments.  The   first 
Orb i ter  would b e  rolled ou t  in 1976, with i ts  first captive flight on the  
back  of  t h e  Boeing  747 aircraft  schedu led  for  the  second  qua r te r  of 
1977. Th e  first approach  and  landing tes ts ,  in 1977, would be  made by 
separating the  Orb i ter  from  the  747 a t  about  8500 m,  permitting the  
Orb i ter  to glide down  and  land  on the  runway  at Edwards Air Force  
Base.  The  second Orb i ter  would  be  used for t h e  first orbital flight in 
1979,  with  six  developmental  flights  schedu led   before  the   Space  
Shu t t le  became  operational in  1980. (Transcript) 
34 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
February 
0  Th e  recen t  detection of wa ter  vapor, and  therefore oxygen, on  Jup i ter  by 
Univ.  of  Arizona  scientists  aboard NASA’s C-  141 Airborne  Infrared  
Observatory [see  12 Feb.]  could  stimulate  additional suppor t   for  a 
probe mission to obtain more detailed information, Av ia t ion  Week  and  
Space   Techno logy  reported.  Scientists  had  already  known  tha t   the  
proportions  of  helium  and   hydrogen  on  Jup i ter   were  approximately 
the  same  a s  on the  sun. Th e  additional information tha t  oxygen existed 
on Jup i ter  would  s treng then  t h e  belief  tha t  t h e  planet’s  composition 
was similar to tha t  of the  sun ,  and  tha t  t h e  sun  and the  planet had been  
formed from the  same  raw material.  The  conclusion was important to 
many  scientists  who  believed  tha t   earth‘s  atmospheric  composition 
had  evolved  from  one  similar  to  Jupiter’s.  If  th is   were  t rue   and   if 
Jupiter’s atmosphere had changed little from i ts  primitive  s ta te ,  then  
t h e  Jovian  a tmosphere   could  serve  a s  a  laboratory for  studying  the  
evolution  of  life on  ear th .  Th is  new  information could influence NASA 
sc ien t is ts  charged with making recommendations for new  s tar ts .   (Av 
W k ,  24 Feb   75,  58) 
0  Tokyo  Univ.’s  Ins t i tu te   of  Space   and   Aeronautics  launched   S ra t s  
(Taiyo )-Solar 
Radiation  and   Thermospheric  S truc ture   Satellite- 
from  Uchinoura  Space  Cen te r   a t  2:25  pm  local  time  af ter   a  10-day 
delay  because   of  faulty  instrumentation.  The   three-stage  MU3C 
liquid-fueled launch  vehicle placed the  86-kg spacecraft into a n  orbit 
with a 3130-km apogee, 247-km perigee,  120.2-min period,  and  31.5” 
inclination.  Th e   purpose  of  the   satellite  was  to  observe  solar  and 
cosmic phenomena.  By 25 Feb .   the  satellite was reported  to b e  func- 
tioning normally,  with  two  NASA  tracking  s t a t i o n s - o n e  in  Ecuador  
signals from S r a t s .  (Kyodo, FBIS-Japan, 
and  one  in Chile-reporting 
18-26  Feb   75) 
24-27  February:  The  American  Ins t i tu te  of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
held  i ts   11th annua l  meeting  and  technical  display  in Washington, 
D.C. “Frontier  Technology  and   Shu t t le  Country”  was  the   theme   of 
t h e  session chaired by  Grant L .  Hansen  of  General Dynamics  Corp. 
An  Aerospace Day was  observed  27  Feb. 
Sessions were held in four areas :  transportation efficiency, national 
defense, space  applications, and  frontier technologies. The  more than  
500  a t tendees   of  the   techn ica l   sessions  listened  to  papers   on   com- 
pu ters  in aerospace,  short-haul aircraft systems, advanced communi- 
cations,  and   satellite technology. 
Harris M.  Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion  Laboratory’s  manager of  the  
Mariner  Jupiter-  Sa turn   1977  project,  delivered  the   von  Karman 
Lec ture   24  Feb.,  “Planetary  Exploration:  Earth’s  New  Horizon.” 
Schurme ir   said  tha t ,   despite  American  virtuosity  in  the   unfolding 
drama  of solar-system exploration, the  never-abating high launch  ra te  
of the  Soviet Union would make  them  competitors if  t h e  U.S.  failed to 
exercise its mission  options in  t h e  la te   1970s and   1980s. 
On  25  Feb.  Hans   E.  W.  Hoffman,  managing  director  of  Wes t  
Germany’s  E R N 0   Raumfahrttechnik  GmbH,  said  tha t   t h e   develop- 
ment of  Space lab  was exactly on schedule, with a complete engineer- 
ing model to b e  delivered  to NASA   in April  1978. The  first flight unit 
would  be   delivered  1 yr la ter .  
Th e  first mission of  the Space lab  would  b e  a joint U.S.  -European 
venture.  A  call for  ideas  for experiments  had   ne t ted   243  proposals, 
from  which  a  selection  would  be   made;  the   selection  process  for 
European  payload  specialists would  begin  in  1975. 
35 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Dr.  Jame s  C. F le tcher ,  NASA Administrator,  addressed  the  gather- 
ing 26 Feb.  He  noted  tha t ,   although aerospace  technology  had been 
one of the  “key drivers”  in retaining the  U.S.  lead  in world technology, 
a   feeling  of  the   importance  of  technology  was  “not  universally 
shared.”  A  decline in the  national emphas is  on technology “ha s  much  
to do with the decline  in productivity in  this country.” The  increasing 
cos t  and  complexity of  applying new technology had become a  vexing 
national problem. Finding new ways to reduce  cos ts  was a  key man- 
agement  task   tha t   the   aerospace  business  must  face. 
Caspar  W. Weinberger,  Secre tary  of  Health,  Education,  and  Wel- 
fare,  said  in  an  add re s s  26  Feb.  tha t   satellite-delivered  services  in 
Alaska had been  so successfu l  tha t  the  Alaskan Federation of  Natives 
-a 
highly  represen ta t ive  broad-based grassroots  organization-had 
made them the  organization’s top priority.  The  goal was  to achieve an 
operational  satellite  service  for  health,  educa t ion ,   and  o ther   com- 
munications needs. 
The   formation of  the   Public  Service  Satellite  Users  Consortium, 
consisting  of  health  and   educational  organizations,  represen ted   the  
first effort to organize a  market of  small independen t  u se r s  sufficient 
to a t t rac t  private investment cap i ta l  for large-scale technology to mee t  
their  collective  needs .   HEW  was  investigating  the   possibility  of  a  
“social service satellite” to meet the  need s  of various public and  social 
service  communities by  means  of  an  inexpensive ground  receiver. 
The  satellite could dramatically reduce  the  cost of such  servioes while 
greatly  increasing  the   quality. 
At  the   Honors  Night  Banquet  26  Feb.,  Chairman  Hansen  was 
installed  a s   the   13 th  pres iden t   of  the   A I M .   The   19  newly  e lec ted  
fellows included Hans  M.  Mark, Director of Ames Research  Cen ter ,  
and  William  H.  Phillips  of  Langley Research  Cen ter .   O the r  awards 
presen ted   at  the   banquet  included: 

Goddard  Award 
(for  contributions 
in  propulsion 
energy conservation) 
Robert  M. Losey Award 
(for contributions  to 
meteorology a s  applied 
to aeronautics) 
G.  Edward Pendray  Award 
(for contributions to 
aeronautical  and  astronauti- 
c a l  l i tera ture)  
Sylvanus Albert Reed Award 
(for contributions  to 
aeronautical engineering 
design or aeronautical 
sciences) 
deFlorez.Award 
(for improvement in  aerospace, 
aviation, o r  astronaut 
training) 
Louis W.  HP Award 
(for en terpr ise  and   ingenuity 
in art and  sqience of space  
flight) 

R e c i p i e n t  
( M i t i o n )  

C i t a t i o n  

Gordon F.  Holbrook 
(General Motors Corp.) 
George Rosen 
(United Aircraft Corp.) 
Pau l  W. Kadlec 
(Continental Air Lines,  Inc.) 

Prof. William R.  Sears  
W.  of Arizona) 

For  leadership  in  development 
of 
tu r bo - p r op e l l e r   p ro pu l -  
sion  systems 

For  identifying  fac tors   iodicat- 
ing  c lear   a ir   turbulence  and  
publications  on meteorological 
features  of  high  atmosphere 
For  contributions  to  aeronauti- 
c a l   and   as tronau t ica l  l i tera ture  
s ince  1938 

Prof.  Antonio F e m  
(New York U.) 

For  advances   in  air-breathing 
propulsion  and   airplane  design 

Prof.  Hugh H.  Hurt, Jr. 
(U.  of  Sou thern  Calif.) 

Dr.  Roeco A.  Petrone 
(NASA) 

36 

For contributions  to flight safety 
by  development  of  military and 
civilian  tex ts   and   training  pm- 
grams 

For contributions to  sp a c e  tlight 
technology  while  Director  of 
KSC   d u r i n g   l a s t   6  Apollo 
missions 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

February 

Awa rd  
@ u m 4  

R e c i p i e n t  
(A f f i l ia t ion )  

citation 

John Jeffries Award 
(for contributions  to aerospace 
medical  research) 
Spacecraft Design Award 
(for advancement  io  spacecraft, 
launch  vehicle,  reentry  vehicle, 
or missile  design) 

Space Science Award 
(for achievements in  studies of 
physics  of a tmo sp le re s  of 
celestial bodies  and dynamics 
and energy) 
Lawrence  S p e n y  Award 
(for contributions  to advance- 
ment  of aeronautics) 

Col.  Malcolm C. Lancaster 
(USAF) 

For  clinical  research  in  aero- 
space  medicine 

Dr.  Herbert  A.  Lasseo 
(TRW,  tnc.) 

Dr.  Murray  Dryei 
(NOAA) 

Jan  R. Tulinius 
(Rockwell Int’l  Corp.) 

For  conceptual  design  of  spin- 
stabilized  Pioneers 6-21  using 
high-gain  antennas  and  com- 
munications 
link  for  attitude 
reference 

For contributions to understand- 
ing  of 
in te rp lane ta ry   shock 
phenomena  generated  by  solar 
disturbances 

For  development  of  advanced 
theoretical  aerodynamic  design 
methods 

(A&,  Feb  75,  April  75; AIAA  Re leases  10-20  Feb  75; AIAA  Bulletin, 
Aug  74; Fletcher  speech,  text) 
26 February: Press briefings on  t h e  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held a t  
Johnson  Space   Center.  ASTP  participants  would  be   conducting 
experiments in  space  sc iences ,  life sciences,  and  applications,  ASTP 
Project  Scientist  Dr.  Thomas  Giuli sa id   at  an  experiments  briefing. 
The  five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment 
to  study radiation  by  scanning across  the  celestial mode,  pointing a t  
known d iscre te  sources in the  soft par t  of  the  spec trum  from 2 kev to 
0.1 kev,  and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources  known to emit only 
in regions below  2 kev.  A  helium-glow  experiment would  investigate 
tempera ture  and  density of  t h e  interstellar medium  in the  vicinity of 
our   solar  system  by  observing  two  special  frequenc ies  of  ex treme  
ultraviolet  light  emitted  from  t h e   sun   after  they  traveled  into 
interstellar  space ,   hit  the   interstellar  medium,  and   were  reflected 
back again. O ther  space-science experiments included a study of  the  
sun’s  ou ter   atmosphere  during  an   artificial  eclipse  crea ted   by 
maneuvering the  Apollo  spacecraft.  During the  “eclipse,”  the  Soyuz 
crew would  photograph  the   sun’s  corona. 
Among  the   ea r th  environmental  and   applications  s tud ies  was  an  
experiment  to  measure   neu tra l   atomic  oxygen  and   neutral  atomic 
nitrogen of the  earth‘s  upper  atmosphe-re. Another experiment would 
try to devise a simple means  of monitoring  th e  aerosol con ten t  of  the  
earth‘s  atmosphere.  A  water-resources  management  experiment, 
planned and  coordinated with  the  government of  India, would photo- 
graph   the   Himalayan  area   to  map   drainage  pa t terns   and  water- 
reservoir locations. 
Life-science experiments included a s tudy  to observe optical sensa- 
tions  from  cosmic rays experienced  by  the crew,  an  investigation of 
mutation  in  cells grown  in   space ,   and   s tud ies  of  the   effect  of  space  
flight on  the  ability of microbes to infect humans  and  of changes  in the  
human  immunity system to resist  infections under   space  flight con- 
ditions. 
At  a  mission  profile  briefing,  Kenneth  A.  Young  of  JSC’S  Mission 
Planning and Analysis Div.  said tha t   plans called  for a 9-day  Apollo 

37 

February 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

mission  beginning  7.5  h r s  af ter   t h e  launch   of  Soyuz  by  the   U.S.S.R. 
The  planned  rendezvous  period  would  be  2  days,  with  docking 
schedu led  for the  30th inertial orbit, o r  third day  in  flight, of  t h e  Apollo 
spacecraf t .   Following  much  negotiation,  u.S.  and   Soviet  mission 
planners determined  tha t   the  two spacecraf t  would dock over Soviet 
territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the  Soviet Union, 
bu t   a t   a location where NASA’s Ats 6  communications satellite could 
provide  communications  coverage  to  t h e   U .S .   The   first  handshake  
would  take   place  over  Spain. 
The   spacecraf t  would  undock  on the  5 th  day  and  perform  several 
joint experiments while  separa ted .   Soyuz was  scheduled  to land  the  
following day.  Apollo would  continue unilateral experiments in orbit 
before  landing a t  the   end  of  the   9 th  day  in  space .  
Astronaut  Richard  H .   Truly  said,  during  a  joint  crew  activities 
briefing,  tha t  while  the  Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communi- 
cations would be  conducted  in the  language of the  listener regardless 
of  the   nationality of  the   speaker .   (Transcript) 
Both the  Soviet and u.S. Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project crews had  reached  a 
level  of  language  proficiency  where  “we  can   speak  to  each  other,” 
commander of  the  Soviet crew Aleksey A.  Leonov  said in anzzvestiya 
interview. Leonov sa id  tha t  the  crews’ first meeting had been  “merely 
a  glance”  and   “we  wondered  whether  we  would  come  to  like  each  
other.”  In preparing  for the  mission,  the  Soviets and  the  Americans 
had not only come to trea t  each  o ther  “a s  crew  member to crew mem- 
ber”  but  had  also  developed  a  degree  of  comradeship.  It  would  be 
impossible to work without this.  In the  event of  some emergency, if ‘‘I 
have to carry him on my  shoulders or he  has  to carry  me,  how could I 
do th is  unless I respec t  him  and  value him  a s  a comrade? For we a r e  
virtually cand ida tes  of  the  whole world.  Despite the  difference of  our 
social formations, desp i te  the  contradictions which have existed  and  
continue  to  exist  to  this  day,  we  have  found  points  of  contact.” 
(Kondrashov, lzvestiya, F B E -   Sov,  28 Feb   75,  U1) 
@  NASA   announced the   signing of  a memorandum of  understanding with 
Zaire  to  build  the   first  African  ground  station  designed  to  receive 
earth-resources da ta  from Landsa t  1 (launched a s  E r t s  1  23 July  1972) 
and  Landsa t  2  (launched 22 Jan.).  Zaire’s new  station would  produce 
both  computer  tapes   and   photographic  imagery  tha t   would  include 
da ta   on  the  African  continent  from  Chad   to  Sou th  Africa  and   from 
Kenya  to  the   Ivory  Coast.  Currently,  da ta   from  tha t   area   had  been 
stored  by  onboard  tape   recorders  for  transmission  to  U.S.  ground 
stations.  (NASA  Release  75-53) 
28 February:  The  preliminary design review  of  Space  Shu t t le  Orb i ter  102 
for the  first manned orb i ta l  flight was completed on schedule.  (NASA 
Gen Mgmt  Rev  Rp t ,   17  March  75,  39) 
*  Energy  Research   and   Development  Administration  announced  t h e  
award  of  a  $2 612 000  con trac t   to  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.’s  Hughes 
Research  Laboratories to develop a new mercury valve for use in high- 
voltage  direct-current  transmission.  The   liquid-metal  plasma  valve 
was  a  spinoff from a  spacecraf t  ion engine developed by  Hughes  for 
NASA.  The   valve,  a  single-anode  device  tha t   fired  a  vacuum  arc   on 
signal,  would  b e   used  to  convert  between  alternating  curren t   and 
d irec t   curren t   a t  the   terminals  of  high-voltage  direct-current  trans- 
mission  lines.  (ERDA  Release  75-25) 

38 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
February 
0  Soviet  and  F rench  sc ien t is ts  had  completed  the  “Araks”  s tudy  of  the  
earth’s  magnetically  interlinked  points,  Zzvestiyu  reported,  by  ob- 
serving what  happened   when  a  bundle  of  electrons  was  artificially 
injected into the  magnetosphere.  French  Eridan  sounding rockets- 
equ ipped  with  electron accelerators,  plasma  generators,  and  instru- 
men ts   for  measuring  and   recording  wave  radiation  and   particle 
launched on 26  Jan .   and 15 Feb.  1975 from Kerguelen 
streams-were 
Island. During the  ascen t  the  accelerator emitted electron impluses at 
various angles to the  line of magnetic force while the  plasma generator 
emitted  a  s tream   of  cesium  plasma  to  compensa te   for  t h e   positive 
charge  of  the   rocket. 
At  the   same   time  Soviet  and   French   specialists  in  Arkhangelsk 
Ob las t   made  optical  observations  using  supersensitive  TV  installa- 
tions,  photometers,  and  electron  optical-image  intensifiers.  Radar  
and  radio  spectrographs in Kostroma and  Vologda Ob las ts  observed 
the  dispersal of  radio waves and  radio emission in the  area  where the  
electrons  penetrated  the   dense   s t ra ta  of  the   atmosphere. 
From  the  Araks  da ta ,   Scientists  hoped  to  de term ine   the   true  
position of  the  magnetically interlinked spot and to learn  more of  the  
interaction between the  electron  bundle  and  i ts  medium.  (Zzvestiyu, 
FBIS-SOV., 13 March  75,  E2) 
Aerodynamically  designed wind-flow aids could reduce  wind resistance 
to tractor-trailer trucks  by up to  24%,  NASA  announced.  In  a ser ies  of 
te s t s   conducted  in  1974  at  Flight  Research  Cen ter ,   NASA  and  the  
Department of Transportation evaluated performance gains of  a 15-m 
trailer  outfitted  with  five  different  commercially  available  drag- 
reduction  devices  and   two  different  trailer-cab  spacings.  The   tes ts  
had  been conducted without and  then  with the  devices, a t  speeds  from 
45 to 30 km  per  hour,  to evaluate changes  in  fuel economy resulting 
from  reductions in  air  drag.  (NASA  Release  75-39) 
During February: NASA  biochemist B.  C. Walverton  began planting large 
quantities  of  water  hyacinths  a s   part  of  a  study  to  determine  the  
plant’s  ability to  absorb and concen tra te  toxic metals and  to metabo- 
lize various o ther  chem ica l  pollutants.  Scientists  at NASA’s  National 
Space  Technology  Laboratories had  been  experimenting since  1971 
with  vascular  aquatic  plants,  which  a re   equipped  with  a  system  of 
vessels to carry  nourishment from  the  roots to  t h e  leaves.  Results of 
the   experiments  were  so  promising  tha t   NASA,  in  cooperation  with 
Mississippi s ta te  officials and  the  city of Bay S t .  Louis, had installed a 
special  system  using water  hyacinths  a s   a  final  filtration  to  remove 
nitrates,  phosphates,  and  o ther  chemical pollutants from  the  245-sq- 
kmBay  St. Louis, Miss.  sewage lagoon. The  water hyacinths would be  
harvested  and   analyzed  to  determine  the   amounts  and   kinds  of 
impurities assimilated; saturated plants would then  be recyc led ,  using 
one   of  two  methods  being  developed  by  NASA,  into  a  mixed 
hydrocarbon  fuel  similar  to  natural  gas.  (NASA  Release  74-332) 

39 

March  1975 

1 March: A Ba l t imore  Sun editorial d iscussed  “Distorted  Priorities in  the  
R&D  Budget.”  Th e   President’s  R&D  budget  for  N 1976 had   little 
chance  of passage in i ts  existing form because  of  the  hostility of much 
of  t h e  98th Congress  to  some  of  i ts   proposals.  Defense-related  R&D 
would be  reduced ,  the  energy proposals would be  juggled to give more 
to  solar  and   geothermal  energy,  and   the   proposed  large  c u t s   in 
biomedical  research  would  be   restored. 
Congress  might  be   more  sympathetic  to  NASA.  Once   seen   by 
congressional  critics  a s   a  quasi-military  organization or  a t   leas t   ‘‘2 
space  c ircus  tha t  siphoned dollars away from  more pressing needs, 
NASA  was “beginning to prove  itself a valuable scientific tool” in such  
valuable  areas   a s   environmental  monitoring.  Tha t   the   Office  of 
Management and  Budget had not, a s  once threa tened ,  scrapped  funds  
for the  Landsat-  C satellite “may reflect an  effort to make NASA  more 
attractive  by  fur ther   pushing  the   agency  into  the   areas   tha t   have 
gained humanist and  environmentalist approval.” (BSun, 1 March 75, 
A18) 
2-7  March:  A  meeting  a t   Goddard  Space   Flight  Cen ter   of  US.  and  
U.S.S.R.  officials  to  discuss  a  cooperative  meteorology  program 
recommended tha t  in May-  July 1976 each  country, within a single 27- 
day solar rotation,  launch  two ser ies  of  sounding r o c k e t s - o n e  under 
quiet  magnetic  conditions,  t h e   o ther   unde r   d is turbed   magnetic 
conditions.  In   1977  the   two  countries  should  hold  a  rocket-data 
comparison tes t  in the  vicinity of  Wallops  Island, Va.  Both  countries 
should  launch   more  meteorological  rockets  during  atmospheric 
warming  periods.  In   1976-  1978  both  coun tr ies   should  research  
radiation  transfer  a s  a factor in tempera ture   sensing from satellites. 
From  1975-  1978 joint  remote-sensing experiments using  microwave 
were  proposed,  along with  exchange  of  information  on  frequenc ies  
and  da ta  format to  be   used  with  direct-broadcast  equipment.  (NASA 
Gen Mgmt  Rev  Rpt,  17  March  75) 
3  March:   NASA’s Remotely  Piloted  Research   Vehicle  (RPRV)  was  being 
equ ipped  with landing gear  to enab le  it to land under  control of a pilot 
on   t h e   ground,  Flight  Research   Cen te r   announced.  Previously 
helicopters and  parachu tes   had  been   used  in  midair  recovery of  the  
vehicles. 
Developed  by.FRC,  the   RPRV-a 
scale-model  airplane  up   to  9 m 
long-was  an  economical and  safe way to tes t  advanced aircraft. After 
air  launch  of  the   W R V ,   a  test  pilot  in  a  ground-based  cockpit  used 
flight controls and  ins trumen ts  to “fly”  the  RPRV  through maneuvers, 
while  a  camera  provided  visual information.  First  application of  the  
landing gear  would  b e  for a spin  tes t  of  a 318-scale model  of  the  Air 
Force  F-  15 fighter.  ( n c  Release 3-  75) 
0  In  NASA’s 5-10  yr  Global  Air  Sampling  Program  (GASP),  a  second  
ins trumen ted ,  Boeing  747  jumbo   aircraft  began  sampling  flights 

41 

March 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

monitoring pollution  in the  earth‘s  atmosphere.  GASP da ta  on carbon 
dioxide,  ozone,  wa ter   vapor,  and  particles  larger  than  0.3  microns 
would help determine whether the  amount of ozone was being altered, 
whether  vapor  trails  from  je t s   contributed  to  cloud  cover,  and  the  
amount  of  pollution  caused   by  aircraft. 
Th e  first GASP-instrumented 747  began  flights in December  1974. 
Four a i r c r a f t - o n e  each  from United Airlines, P a n  American, Qan tas  
Airways,  and  Scandinavian  Airlines-would 
be  instrumented  for 
global sampling.  (NASA  Release  75-60) 
e For  coating  solar  collectors  tha t   heat  and  cool  homes  and  buildings, 
black  chrome  had  been  demonstrated  by  a  Lewis Research   Cen ter  
scientist to be  some 20% more efficient than  curren t  coatings. Being 
“solar  selective,”  black  chrome  allowed  absorption  of  sunlight  but 
prevented  the   ensuing  hea t   from  radiating  out  of  the   collector.  Be- 
cause  of  this,  black  chrome would  raise  the   tempera ture   of  water  in 
the   system  as  much   as  5°C  (40°F) over  the  95°C  (200°F) provided by 
curren t   coatings.  A  system  with  hotter  water  would  require  fewer 
collectors  to  hea t   or  cool an  area.  (NASA  Release  75-55) 
0  Sen .  William  Proxmire  (D-  Wis.)  had  said  tha t   NASA’s Space  Shuttle 
program  “might  be   on  the   verge  of  a  financial  breakdown,”  the  
Wash ing ton  Pos t  reported. Citing a General Accounting Office report, 
Sen. Proxmire warned tha t  the  risk of  cost overruns had increased and 
that Congress should look for “cheaper  alternatives.”  (AP, W Po s t ,   6 
March  7 5 )  
6 March:  NASA announced early findings of  the 3 Dec. 1974PioneerZZ flyby 
of  Jupiter.  Data  re turned-by  P ioneer  ZZ   (launched  5 April  1973,  and 
renamed P ion e e rSa tu rn  following the  flyby) suggested tha t  Jupiter’s 
magnetic  field  might  be   crea ted   by  a  large  ring  curren t   and  many 
eddies deep within t h e  planet. Earlier measurements from P ioneer  10 ,  
launched toward Jupiter  on 2  March 1972, had indicated only a simple 
magnetic envelope with a single “ring curren t”  much like earth‘s. The 
more  complex magnetic  field  could  explain  the  Jovian  field’s  high- 
energy  particle  pa t tern   a s  well  as  the   burs ts   of  intense  radio  energy 
observed  emanating  from  the   planet.  Jupiter’s  magnetic  field 
s tre tched  across  14  million km  in  some places  and  shrank  in  volume 
by  three-fourths  or  more  in  others;  inside  this  pulsating  field  were 
belts  of  intense  radiation  with  trapped  electrons  10 000 times  more 
intense  than  those  in  earth‘s  Van Allen  belts. 
Pioneer had  experienced peak  intensities of  high-energy electrons 
tha t   were  moderately  higher  than  those  found  by  P ioneer   IO, 
encountering 10 times as  many electrons a s  predicted by earth-based 
studies.  Peak  intensities of  very high-energy protons were  100  times 
stronger  than  predicted  but  concentrated  in  small  shallow  regions. 
O ther   early findings  of  P ioneer   11  included  the   observation  tha t  
Jupiter’s  cloud tops were  substantially  lower a t  the  poles  than  a t  the  
equator and were covered by a thicker transparen t  atmosphere. Also, 
the  clouds at the planet’s  south pole were lower than those at the  north 
pole.  Although  P ioneer   11  found  much   less   evidence  of  rapid 
circulation  at  the   poles than  a t  the  equator,  the   polar  a rea s   showed 
many small convective cells dwarfing similar ear th  d is turbances  such  
as   thunderstorms.  “Blue  sky”-attributed 
to  multiple  molecule- 
scattering  of  light  by  gases   of  the  transparen t   atmosphere-was 
visible a t   the   poles. 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
March 
P ioneer  11  accurately determined,  for the  first time, tha t  t h e  mass  
of Jupiter’s moon Callisto was 15 times tha t  of  earth‘s  moon.  Seen  for 
t h e  first time was an  extensive white south polar c a p  on Callisto. (NASA 
Re lease  75-  49) 
0  A fleet satellite communications-system simulator developed for the  Air 
Force  by  TRW  Systems  Group  had  been  delivered  for  testing,  Air 
Force Systems Command announced. The simulator would be  a low- 
cos t   means  of 
testing  compatibility  between  FLTSATCOM-an 
operational near-global satellite communications system for Air Force 
and  Navy Communications-and 
preproduction terminals for  the  Air 
Force Satellite Communications (AFSATCOM) system, which provided 
reliable worldwide  satellite communications for command and  control 
of  d DOD  forces. 
The  simulator contained all the  communications channe ls  tha t  the  
ac tua l   satellites would  have,  but  used  cheape r  off-the-shelf  compo- 
nen t s   ins tead   of  high-reliability  electronic  parts.  (Wsc Release  OIP 
022.75) 
Rep.  Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.)  and Rep. Char les  A.  Mosher (R-Ohio) 
introduced H.R. 4461 “to es tab l ish  a sc ience  and  technology  policy for 
the   u.S. to  provide  for   scientific  and  technological  advice  and  
assistance  to  the   Pres iden t ,   to  provide  adequa te   administrative 
organization  to  assure   effective  Federa l   support  and   utilization  of 
research   and  development,  to  amend  the  National  Aeronautics  and  
Space  Act of  1958, to amend the  National Sc ience  Foundation Act of 
1950,  and   for  other  purposes.’’  The   bill  was  sen t   jointly  to  the  
Committees  of  Sc ience   and   Technology  and   on   Government 
Operations. 
Th e  legislation proposed the  establishment  of  a  new  cabinet-level 
Dept.  of  Research   and   Technology  Operations  to  bring  together 
Federa l   research-related  activities  through  a  unified  and  efficient 
governmental structure; a five-member  Council of Advisors on. Science 
and   Technology  to  he lp   form  and   implement  policy  a t   the   highest 
levels of  government; and  a Sc ience  and Technology  Information and 
Utilization  Corp.  to  assure   the   widest  possible  dissemination  of 
scientific  and  technological  information. 
Th e   proposed  legislation  would  administratively  relocate  NASA, 
Energy Research  and  Development Administration, National Bureau 
of  S tandards ,   National  Sc ience   Foundation,  and   National  Ocean ic  
and   Atmospheric  Administration  within  the   new  depar tmen t ,   but 
would not alter the  bas ic  mission  and  purpose of  each  agency. (CR, 6 
March  75,  H1464; House Com  of  Sc i  & Tech   Pr in t  48-694) 
7  March:  Approximately  31  000  contractor  personnel  in  47  s ta te s  were 
cu r ren t   a t   work  on  t h e   development  of  the   Space   Shuttle,  NASA 
announced. Tha t  number  was expected to  increase  to 34 000 by June  
and  to reach  a maximum of 50 000 persons within 2 yr. (NASA Release 
75-  63) 
9 March: West German Federa l  Research  Minister Hans  Matthoefer said, 
in an  interview with the  West German news agency (Deutsche Presse 
Agenturf, tha t  West German and  French  officials had withdrawn the ir  
own cand ida tes  and  agreed tha t  United Kingdom’s Roy Gibson would 
become  secre tary   of  t h e   European  Space   Agency  (ESA).  This 
agreement removed subs tan t ia l  obstacles to t h e  establishment of ESA. 
Gibson,  who had been administrative director of  t h e  European Space  

43 

March 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

11 

Research   Organization  (ESRO),  was  curren t ly   acting  Secre tary  
General until  the   organization merges  into ESA,  possibly  in April. 
Another  important  agreement  specified  tha t   two  of  the   f ive  
directorships  would go to Wes t  Germans, two to French ,  and  one to a  
Belgian.  (DPA,  FBIS-FRG,  11 March  75,  56) 
10 March:  NASA  signed a   con trac t  with  Italy’s  Consiglio Nazionale  delle 
Ricerche  (National  Research   Council)  to  launch   the   SIR10  experi- 
men ta l  communications satellite. The  contract-signed  by Dr.  James  
C.  F le tcher ,  NASA  Administrator,  and Prof.  Alessandro Faedo,  CNR 
President-provided 
for  the  launch   of  the   microwave  propagation 
satellite aboard a  Thor-Delta launch  vehicle in the  fall of  1976. (NASA 
Re lease  75-  67) 
0  NASA  announced  the   selection  of  Goodyear  Aerospace  Corp.  for 
negotiations  leading  to  a   $1 000 OOO  con trac t   to  provide a   special- 
purpose  processor  to  suppor t   the   Large  Area  Crop  Inventory 
Experiment  (LACE)  a t  Johnson  Space  Cen ter .   (JSC  Release  75-  17) 
0  Orders   for US-manufac tured   commercial iet  transport  aircraft  at  t h e  
end   of  1974  totaled  564,  valued  a t   $7 587 000 000,  the   Aerospace 
Indus tr ies  Association repor ted .  The  aircraft total was down from 573 
aircraft,  valued  at  $7 252 000 000, on  order  at  the  end   of  1973. The  
orders   included  210  aircraft  from  Boeing  Co.,  178 from  Lockheed 
Aircraft Corp.,  and 176 from McDonnell Douglas Corp. (AIA  Release, 
10 March 75) 
March:   Kennedy  Space   Cen te r   announced  the   award  of  a   10-mo 
$30 000 con trac t  to the  Univ. of Miami for preliminary design of a  la se r  
system capable of  pene tra t ing  wa ter  to  a  dep th  of  100 m  to measure 
factors  affecting wa ter   quality.  The   use  of  la se r s  to  provide remote 
sensing of  the  ocean dep th s  had  been proved  feasible  during a  NASA 
con trac t   awarded  to   the   school  in  1974.  The   system,  which would 
provide  continuous  information  on  tempera ture ,   salinity,  and 
backsca t ter  turbidity, would be  tes ted  first in a labora tory ,  then  from a  
ship,  and  finally from  an   aircraft.  (KSC  Release  35-75) 
March:  The   Soviet  Union’s  Tu-144  supersonic  transpor t   made  its 
inaugural  scheduled flight from Moscow to Alma-Ata in  a  little more 
than   1.5  hr.  Alma-Ata  is  capital  of  the   Kazakh  Republic,  in  South 
Cen tra l  Asia  bordering the   Caspian  Sea .  The   aircraft,  designed  by 
Aleksey A.  Tupolev, f l ew  at  an  altitude of  17 400 m and  a speed  of 
2300  km  per   hr.  (Alma-Ata  Domestic Service.  FBIS-SOV. 14 March 
75,  R1) 
* 
0  A  scientific conference of  Soviet scientists  and officials was  being held 
in  Zvenigorod,  near  Moscow,  to  discuss  the  study  of  the   ear th   from 
outer  space,  Ta s s   reported.  Tass   quoted  Academician  Roald 
Sagdeyev, Director of  the  Space  Research Institute,  as  saying that  the  
main  task   of  the   conference  was  to  work  out  unified  scientific 
principles and methods for exploring ear th  resources from outer space 
and for organizing a  systematic control over the  environment with the 
help of  artificial ear th  satellites. To da te ,  scientists had made progress 
in certain lines of  research  such  as meteorology, but in other areas  had 
received  only  bits  of  information.  The   task  was  to  move  from 
individual discoveries to a qualitative geological study of  the  planet  as 
a   whole.  The   task   called  for  combined  effort  by  geologists,  soil 
scientists,  foresters,  and  hydrologists. 

13 

44 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 
March 
Sagdeyev said that  the  study of  earth from space  was becoming an 
important  aspect  of  international  relations  because  man’s  active 
influences  on  the  environment  went  beyond  national  b o h d a r i e s .  
(Tass FBIS-Sov, 18 March  75,  U l )  
14  March:  Th e  House Committee  on  Science and  Astronautics  favorably 
reported  out H.R.  4700 authorizing FY  1976 appropriations  for NASA. 
Changes  recommended  by  the   Committee  would  increase  the   total 
NASA authorization by $46.9 million, to $3.586 billion. [See  also 3 Feb.] 

Recommended Changes in the FY   1976  NASA Authorization 
by  the House Committee 

Program 

Differenee 
R e e o n n u e n d e d  
from S u b m i s s i o n   A u t h o r i z a t i o n  
(m i l l ion s )  
(m i l l ion s )  

P u r p o s e  for 
R e e o n n u e n d e d  
C h a n g e  

Research  a n d  Development 

Space  Shuttle 
Space  Flight Operations 
Advanced  Missions 

Physics and Astronomy 
Lunar  and  Planetary 
Exploration 
Launch Vehicle Pmcure- 
ment 
Space  Applications 

Aeronautical  Research and 
Technology 
Space  and  Nuclear  Research 
and Technology 

E n e r p  Technology Applications 
T rac   mg and  Data Acquisition 

Technology Utilization 

R&D Totals 
Research  and Program Management 
Basic  submission* 
R&PM Totals’ 
Construction  of Facilities 
Modification of  11-  by  11-ft 
transonic  wind  tunnel a t  
ARC 
Modification of 40- by W f t  
suhsonic wind  tunnel a t  
ARC 
Addition to  lunar sample 
curatorial facility  at JSC 
Addition  for composite model 
and  metal finishing shops 
at LaRC 
Construction  of  transonic  re- 
sea rch  tunne l  at  LaRC 

0 
-4 .0  

f1 .5  
+ 1.0 
- 1.0 
0 

+6.5 

0 

+2.0 

0 
-2.2 

+2.0 

12w . o  
203.1 
3.0 

156.8 

258.9 

166.9 

181.5 

175.4 

16.9 

5.9 
240.8 

9.0 

Accepted  a s  presented. 
To dec rea se  development, test,  and 
mission-operation  activities. 
To   increase  studies  of large  space 
structures,  manned  orbital  systems 
concepts,  and in-orbit maintenance. 
To   i n c r e a s e   s t r a t o s p h e r i c   r e -  
search. 
To  dec rea se   funding  for  the  Lunar 
Research  Program. 
Accepted  as  presented. 
To   increase  emphasis  on  weather 
and   chmate  research,  ea r th   re- 
sou rce s   surveys,  advanced  com- 
m u n i c a t i o n s  
r e s e a r c h ,   d a t a -  
mana  ement techniques, and Space  
Shut&  payload definition and  early 
fight  tests. 
Accepted a s  presented. 
To   accelerate  high  pressure  hydro- 
gen  propulsion  systems  te s t s   and 
high  temperature  composites  re- 
search. 
Acce  ted  a s  presented. 
To   &crease  operations  and  ad- 
vanced  missions  activity. 
To  accelerate  effort  of  NASA  TU 
teams  to  work  with  the  public  and 
increase  space   benefits  analysis 
documentation. 

+5 .8  

2 684.2 

776.0 
776.0 

Accepted  as presented. 

2.7 

Accepted  a s  presented. 

12.5 

0 

1.9 

27.5 

To   repower  tunnel.  Not  in  original 
request. 
Deleted  from funds. 

Accepted a s  presented. 

Con s t ruc t ion   of  high  Reynolds 
numbe r   transonic  wind 
tunnel. 
Not  in original request. 

0 
0 

0 

+ 12.5 

-2.5 

0 

+27.5 

45 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
March 
Recommended Changes in the FY   1976  NASA Authorization 
by  the House Committee (continued) 

P r o g r am  

D i f f e r e n c e  
R e e omm e n d e d  
f r om  S u bm i s s i o n   Au thor iza t ion  
(m i l l i o n s )  
(m i l l ion s )  

Purpose for 
R e c omm e n d e d  
C h a n g e  

Construction a/  fiocilures  ( c o n t . ~  
Space Shuttle  facilities 

Rehabilitation of  facilities 
Minor construction of new 
facllities or  additions to 
old 
Facility planning and design 

-0.9 

0 
0 

+4.5 

46.3 

16.0 
5.0 

13.8 

Deferment  of  modifications of  two 
hypergohc checkout  and  refurbish- 
ment  facilities  and  construction of 
facilities  to  house microwave scan- 
ning beam landing system. 
Accepted  a s  presented. 
Accepted  a s  presented. 

For planning and design work  asso- 
c ia ted   with  con s truc t ion   and 
modification  of  two  wind  tunnels 
mentioned above. 

C of F Totals 
Grand Totals" 

+ 4 1 . 1  
+43.7 

125.7 
3 585.9 

'Doe s   n o t  i n c l u d e  a  s u p p l em e n t a l  r e q u e s t  for pay   increa se s ,   c o n s i d e r e d  s e p a r a t e l y  a s  H .R .   131 72  
a n d   s i g n e d   i n t o  P.L.  94-303  1 J u n e  1976 .  

In  addition,  for  the   transition period  1 July  to  30  Sept.  1976,  the  
committee recommended  decreasing NASA's total budget  reques t   of 
$958 900  000 to  $922 450 000. One  specific recommended  reduction 
was in the  C of F reques t ,  from $14 500  000 to $8 050 000, which would 
allow construction to continue at the  same  ra te  a s  during FY 1976; the  
committee  recommended  reduction  of  t h e  $730 600 000  reques t   for 
R&D   to  $700 600 000.  Th e   committee  allowed  NASA  management 
flexibilitv in  apportioning  the   reductions.  (H.R.  Com  of  Sc i  & Tech  
- -  
Rp t  94 -63) 
I 
15 Murch: Helios 1 ,  the  U.S.-West  German so lar  probe launched  10 Dec. 
1974,  passed  within  0.309 AU  (46 million km)  of  the   sun   a t   5:13  am  
EDT,  closer than  any previous spacecraf t  had come to t h e  sun .  During 
the  perihelion, while  traveling  a t  238  000 km  per  hr, Helios  1  meas- 
ured  the  solar wind, magnetic  fields,  solar and  galactic cosmic rays, 
electromagnetic  waves,  micrometeoroids,  and  zodiacal  light.  Al- 
though  the   spacecraf t   encountered  a  hea t   load  from  t h e   sun   10.5 
times  tha t   encoun tered  on  ear th ,   good  da ta   were  obtained  and   t h e  
spacecraf t  continued to opera te  well. Helios  1  was  in a solar elliptical 
orbit  with  a  0.985-AU  aphelion,  0.3095-AU  perihelion,  190.15-day 
period,  and  0.02" inclination.  I t  would  reach   a  second  perihelion  21 
Sept. 
Helios  1 ,  built by  West Germany in cooperation with  the  U.S.,  car- 
ried  10 experiments, 7 of  them  West German.  Spacecraf t  operations 
were  controlled  from  the   space   operations  cen te r   near   Munich. 
Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter  was  responsible  for U.S.  participation. 
A  second  spacecraf t ,  Helios-B,  was  schedu led  for  launch   in  early 
1976. (NASAMORs 16 Jan  76 ,1 1  April 76; Powers, GSFC Helios thermal 
control mgr,  interview,  21  Sep t  76) 
0  NASA  announced  establishment  of  the   Office  of  Program  Assurance 
under the  Office of  the  Associate Administrator.  Responsibilities and 
personnel of  the   former  Reliability  and  Quality Assurance  Div.  and  
t h e  Systems Safety Branch of  the  Office of  Safety and  Reliability  and 
Quality Assurance were  being transferred  to  the  new  office.  George 

46 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
March 
C .  White, who had been  d irec tor  of the  Office of Safety and  Reliability 
and  Quality Assurance, had  been appointed d irec tor  of the  new office. 
(NASA  anno) 
16  March:  Mar iner  10  made i t s  las t  and  closest flyby of  Mercury  at a dis- 
tance  of 327 km a t  6:39  pm EDT.  To  prepare for the  flyby, t h e  trajectory 
had been corrected  on 30 Oc t .   1974 and  13 Feb .   1975. An additional 
correction  7  March  was  to   reduce   the   probability  of  Mar iner   10’s 
impacting the  surface of Mercury from 30% to  1%, targeting Mar iner  
10  to  approach  the   planet  from  the   sunlit  side,  then   loop  around 
behind  it. 
One  last-minute problem was navigational difficulty in locking onto 
t h e   s ta r   Canopus  so  tha t   the   spacecraf t  would  point  in  the   proper 
direction  for  da ta   collection.  Because  a  commanded  roll  search   for 
Canopus would expend all remaining attitude-control gas, Mar iner  10 
had  to  be  maneuvered  using  solar-radiation  pressure   on  t h e   solar 
panels  and high-gain  an tenna .  The  problem was  intensified  because  
of  the  tandem demands  of Helios 1  and Mar iner  10  on the  an tennas  of 
NASA’s deep-space  tracking network.  However,  the  primary  users- 
Wes t  German scientists tracking Helios 1-gave 
receiving time to the  
Mariner  10  flight controllers,  who obtained Canopus  lock in time for 
the   encounter. 
Major  objective of  the   third  encounter  was  to  determine  whe ther  
Mercury had an intrinsic o r  induced magnetic field.  In a press  briefing 
17 March, Dr. Norman F. Ness, principal investigator of  the  magnetic 
fields experiment,  said  tha t  Mercury  did  have  an   intrinsic  magnetic 
field,  encountered  on  t h e   incoming trajectory  a t   precisely  t h e  time 
predicted  from the  first Mercury pass. Mar iner  10  had measured  the  
field to be a maximum of 400 gamma. Plasma science experiment da ta  
supported  the   presence   of  the   field;  Dr.  Ness   observed  tha t   the  
interface  between  the   solar wind  and Mercury’s  magnetic  field  ap- 
peared  to  be  a  scaled-down  version  of  the   interaction  between  the 
solar wind  and  the   magnetic  field  of  ear th .  
The  spacecraft re turned   about 300 TV  pictures  of  the  planet’s  sur- 
face  between 12 and  17 March ,  with best resolution at 100 m obtained 
from  quarter-frame near-encounter  pictures.  All  photos were  trans- 
mitted in real time  and  a t  22  kilobits  per  sec ,  ins tead  of  the  planned 
117, because  of overheating of  the  spacecraft.  (NASAMOR s ,   10 March 
75,  7 April  75; NASA  Re leases  75-58,  75-59;  NASA  A c t i v i t i e s ,  April 
75,  12-13;  A v  W k ,  24 March  75,  24-25) 
17 Ma r ch :  Vanguard  1 ,  oldest satellite still in orbit, completed i ts  17th year 
in  space .   The   1.5-kg  16.5-cm  solar-powered  spacecraf t ,  which  had 
revealed that the  ea r th  was slightly pear-shaped, had circled the  ea r th  
more than  67 000 times since i ts  launch  in  1958. The  satellite, fourth 
to orbit ear th  following two Soviet sputniks andExp lorer  1 ,  was one of 
3304 man-made objects tracked   by  the  North American A ir  Defense 
Command.  (A&A 1915-1960; A&A  1968;  Miles, LA  T im e s ,  18 March 
75) 
@  NASA  announced the  award of  a $334  100 con trac t  for the  design,  fabri- 
cation,  delivery,  installation,  and   checkout  of  a n  optical bench   and  
alignment system for an  x-ray telescope tes t  facility at Marshall Space  
Flight Center. The  facility would be used to test x-ray verification and  

47 

March 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

to  calibrate  x-ray  mirrors,  telescope  systems,  and  instruments  for 
NASA’s High  Energy  Astronomy  Observatory  (HEAO) program.  T h e  
HEAO program was to launch between  1977 a nd  1979 th ree  unmanned 
scientific  satellites into low  circular ea r th  orbit to  study black  holes, 
neutron  s tars ,   quasars ,   and   supernovae.  (MSFC  Release  75-  50) 
European  spending for space  programs  would  rise  significantly during 
1975 a s  major projects begun  in t h e  pas t   reached  a maximum  pitch, 
A v ia t ion  Week and  Space  Techno logy  reported.  Most space  spending 
was  reflected  in  the   European  Space  Research   Organization  (ESRO) 
budget  which  had  jumped  50%,  from  $220 million  in   1974  to  $350 
million  in  1975.  Two  programs-the  Ariane  launch   vehicle  and  the  
Spacelab for use on  the   Space  Shuttle-accounted 
for half  the  ESRO 
budget  for  1975. 
Av  Wk  reported tha t  officials of France’s Cen tre  National d’Etudes 
Spatiales (CNES), prime contractor for the Ariane,  had estimated tha t  
the  booster would  be   used  to  orbit between  20  and  39  geostationary 
satellites during  the   10-yr period  from  1980 to  1990. 
O ther   European  space   programs  under  way  included  the   Orbital 
T e s t  Satellite  (OTS),  a  tes t   bed  to  evaluate  equipment  and  concepts 
planned  for a European comsat to be launched  around 1980; Aerosat, 
a  Canadian-ESRO-U.S. 
comsat  program,  with  the   first  of  two 
satellites  scheduled  for  launch   in  1978; Marots,  a  maritime  comsat 
planned for launch in 1977; and  Exosat, an x-ray astronomy satellite to 
be  launched  in  1979. 
All ESRO  programs would  be  reviewed  in the  spring  to  resolve any 
pending disagreements, and to obtain approval of  a 3-yr financial plan 
tha t   called  for  a  budget  of  $410  million  in  1976  and  $415  million  in 
1977.  (Av  W k ,  17 March  75,  65-68) 
“A  significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in 
the   face  of  possibly  unstable  funding  will  be  the   extent  to  which 
commercial and foreign government users participate in the  develop- 
ment  and  financial  support  of  future  payloads,”  Av ia t ion   Week  and  
Space   Techno logy  reported.  Av  W k  interviewed  the Director  of  Mis- 
sion  and  Payload  Integration  in  NASA’s Office  of  Manned  Space 
Flight,  Philip E.  Culbertson, who  said  that  it would  be  better,  in the  
long term ,   to move  into a  position where  more organizations outside 
NASA  were  sponsoring  and   paying  for  missions  and  payloads.  The  
agency was encouraged by the  in teres t  of industries in flying and fund- 
ing Space  Shuttle missions involving a wide range  of  basic  scientific 
and  technical operations. 
Foreign reimbursable  payloads,  already  an important part of  NASA 
launch  operations, were  seen a s  a n  even larger factor in Shuttle pay- 
loads development.  Japan,  already  holding discussions with NASA  to 
lay  the   groundwork  for  a  viable  national  space   program,  was  con- 
sidered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both 
scientific  and  ear th   applications  programs  in  the   communications, 
navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in position- 
ing domestic  communications  satellites over  its territory would  con- 
tinue into the  Shu t t le  era .  Even individual Soviet scientists had made 
inquiries into the  possibilities of flying payloads on the  U.S.  Shuttle. 
Culbertson  pointed  out  tha t ,   unlike  earlier  NASA  manned  space  
programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, 
NASA  in-house  Shu t t le   payload  development  was  the   sole  responsi- 

48 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

March 

bility  of  the   specific  NASA  disciplines  themselves.  NASA’s  FY 1976 
budget  reques t  contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts 
tha t   could  evolve  into Shu t t le  payloads,  and  the   budget  for FY 1977 
would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the  budget 
crunch ,   funding  for  Shu t t le   payloads  would  compete  directly  with 
other programs and  the  payload proposals “will have to s tand  on their 
own merit.”  Culbertson also said  that major decisions would have to 
be made on how long to keep  which expendable launch vehicles in the  
program. 
In another interview, NASA  Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. 
Lord  said  that  upcoming  major  decisions c on c e rn in g   Spaceiab  in- 
cluded  a  follow-on  procurement  plan  for  Spacelab  hardware  and  
priorities on how often ESRO  (Ehropean Space  Research Organization) 
and   o ther  crews  and  experimental  hardware  would  fly  on  Shuttle- 
Spacelab missions. 
Lord  said  that  operations  of  overall  Space lab   functions  would 
probably be  maintained  separately from payload operations: Johnson 
Space  Cen ter  was the  logical place  to handle overall operations, and 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen ter   was  the   leading  candidate  for  the  
Spacelab  payload  operations  cen ter .   Goddard  Space   Flight  Cen ter  
had  expressed  interest  in  handling  operational  needs  of  the   high- 
energy experiments on Spacelab pallets.  (Covault, A v  Wk, 17 March 
75,  59-60) 
18 Ma rch :  “The  expertise and facilities of  LeRC  [Lewis Research Center], 
a s  well a s  other NASA   cen ters ,   a r e  being considered by ERDA [Energy 
Research  and  Development  Administration]  a s   part  of  its  overall 
definition of  a  total  institutional  s truc ture   required  to  carry  out  the 
nation’s  energy  R&D   program,”  Dr.  Jame s   C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator, and  Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans ,  Jr.,  ERDA Administrator said 
in a le t ter  to Representative Charles A.  Mosher (R-  Ohio). The  le t ter  
was  a  reply  to  correspondence  from  members  of 
the   Ohio 
congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen  and  industrial- 
is ts  to President  Ford calling for increased use of  LeRC  talent  to meet 
the   nation’s  energy  crisis. 
Dr.  Fletcher  and  Dr.  Seaman s   noted  tha t   the   newly  established 
ERDA was the lead  Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. 
ERDA  intended  to  use  the   expertise  and  facilities  of  o ther   Federa l  
agencies where it was feasible and in the  national in teres t  with respec t  
to  cost,  timeliness,  and  program  management. 
LeRC,  NASA’s lead c e n t e r  for aerospace propulsion and power, was 
already  involved  in  ERDA-sponsored  projects  in  solar  heating  and  
cooling, wind energy,  and topping cycles to increase  the efficiency of 
coal-fueled  steam  plants.  But  LeRC   would  continue  its  main  task   to 
work  on  propulsion  technology,  conducting energy  research   in  sup- 
port  of  ERDA  “when  it  was  consistent  with  the   requirements  of  i ts  
principal mission within NASA.”  (Text,  le t ter  to Mosher from F le tcher  
and   Seamans,  18 March  75) 
0  A N ew  York  Times editorial  commented  on Ma r ine r  10 .  Men  had  be- 
come  so  blasB  tha t   even  near-miracles  were  taken   for  granted. 
Consider Mar iner  10, which had  traveled nearly  a billion miles since 
its launch in 1973: The  spacecraft had taken  the  first close-up photos 
of  Venus  and  provided  us  with  sharp   pictures  of  a  large  part  of 
Mercury’s  surface  during  its  three   flybys of  tha t  planet.  “In   a world 

49 

March 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

where so much  tha t  is manufactured is shoddy,  faulty in  conception, 
or  the   end  result  of  workers  who  could  not  care   less ,   i t   is  worth 
remembering 
tha t   men  can   also  build  durable,  reliable  and 
trustworthy  mechanisms  like Mariner 10 whose historic  contribution 
to knowledge has substantially enhanced man’s  understanding of  the  
solar  system.”  T h e   J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  of  the   California 
Ins t i tu te  of  Technology and  its  contractors,  responsible  for Mar iner  
10 and   its  superlative  performance,  have  every  reason  for  pride  in 
their  creation,  the  Times said.  (NET, 18 March  75,  36) 
0  NASA  announced  establishment within the  Office of  Cen ter  Operations 
of  the   Office of  Safety  and   Environmental  Health  under   the   acting 
directorship  of  Reuben  P.  Prichard.  The   new  office, which  would 
have  agency-wide  functional  responsibility  for  all  safety  ma t ters ,  
except  systems  safety,  and  for environmental health,  would  also  be 
the  focal point for agency coordination on policy and program matters 
pertaining  to  the   Occupational  Safety  and   Health  Act  of  1970. 
Transferred  to  the   new  office were  environmental  health  functions 
formerly  assigned  to  the   Office  of  Occupational  Medicine  and 
Environmental  Health.  (NASA  anno,  18 March  75) 
19  March:  NASA  announced  tha t   lunar   samples  would  be  available  to 
colleges  and  universities  for  teaching  purposes.  Under  a  new  NASA 
program,  a “thin-section  educational package,”  consisting of  severa l  
0.03-mm  slices  of  representative  lunar   material  plus  brief  descrip- 
tions,  could  be  borrowed  for  several months  by  institutions offering 
undergraduate  or gradua te  work  in  the  geosciences.  The  purpose  of 
the  program was to broaden the  use of NASA’s  lunar  sample collection. 
(NASA Release  75-  76) 
19-20   March:  A special conference a t  Lewis Research Cen ter ,  “Selected 
Technology  for  the   Gas  Industry,”  discussed  how  NASA-developed 
technology could  aid  the   u.S.  gas  industry  in  ways  su ch   a s   satellite 
search   for  fossil  fuels,  turbine  machinery  and  compression  tech- 
nology,  heat  transfer ,   fluid  flow  and  fluid  properties,  safety, 
technology for liquefied  natural  gas,  instrumentation,  materials  and 
life  prediction,  and   reliability and  quality  assurance. 
Addressing a conference dinner 19 March,  Dr. J am e s  C. Fletcher, 
NASA  Administrator,  said,  “In  an  age  when  space  research   and 
technology was measured  by its immediate v a lu e  in the  marketplace, 
s tud ies  of the  planets often are  considered little more than a n  exercise 
in curiosity. Nothing could  be  far ther  from the  truth.”  When  space- 
craf t  were developed to meet the  specialized needs  of  space  travel and 
planetary  exploration,  technology  was  advanced.  “NASA  cannot  lay 
claim to the  development of the  electronic computer, but it c a n  take a 
large credit fox spurring a revolution in the  electronics industry.”  The 
need  for  lightweight  components  in  spacecraf t   led   to  electronic 
microminiaturization. Th e  IUiac 4 computer, developed a t  the  Univ. of 
Illinois  for  DOD  and   now  operated  jointly  by  DOD  a nd   NASA,  could 
perform  300 million  calculations  a  second  and  store 1 trillion bits  of 
information a t   a  time,  more  than  the   en t ire   surviving output  of  the  
Greek and  Roman civilizations. Operational since 1973, Illiac’s speed  
and refinement allowed scientists to simulate and study global climate 
changes,  study  long-range  effects  of  pollution  on  the   atmosphere, 
distinguish  between  ear th   tremors  from  natural  sources  and 
underground  nuc lear  blasts,  develop seismic pictures  of  the   earth‘s 

50 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

March 

outer  shell,  and  enhance   medical  x-rays  so  tha t   tumors   could  be 
discovered in earliest s tage  of development.  Illiac 4 has  helped solve 
problems  tha t   had  e luded  sc ien t is ts  for decades. 
O the r  space  technology  was being used effectively to preserve and  
manage the  earth‘s  resources  and  enhance  the  quality of life for all i ts  
inhabitants.  Communications  satellites  were  making  global  com- 
munications  a  reality.  Meteorological  satellites  had  advanced  the  
sc ience   of  weather  forecasting  on  land  and   sea.  Sensors,  smg ica l  
instruments,  biological  isolation garments,  lenses ,   portable card iac  
ca re   systems,  and  eye   switches were  jus t   a  few  examples  of  space  
technology  used  in  the   medical  field.  New  alloys  and   materials 
developed to withstand t h e  rigors of space  were being used for longer- 
lasting  automobile  and   aircraft  engines;  temperature-resistant 
lubricants  and  fireproof  materials  added  to the   safety of  homes  and 
buildings. 
“The  fast-growing list of  things tha t  are  and will be  a s  a result of our 
venture into the  cosmos is almost beyond  imagination. Everyone who 
lives  will  b e   affected  by  them.  And  because   of  them ,   the   world  a 
decade   or  so  hence  will  b e   quite  different  from  the   world  we  now 
know.”  (LeRC   Release  75-  11; F le tcher   speech ,   text) 
20 -28   March:  U.S. and   U .S .S .R .   flight  controllers  and   crews   for  the  
Apollo -Soyuz  Test Project  participated  in  simulations  of  phases  of 
the   joint  mission  to  check   out  the   interaction  of  control-center 
personnel  under   ac tua l   flight  conditions,  using  voice,  teletype, 
datafax,  and   TV  communications.  Beginning  with  rendezvous  of 
Apollo and  Soyuz,  the  simulations were conduc ted  with Houston and  
Moscow  control  cen ters   fully  manned-including 
some  specialists 
from  the   o ther   nation-and  U .S .   and   Soviet  crew  members  were  in 
simulators  in  their  respective  coun tr ies ;  even ts   simulated were  the  
launches ,  undocking, Apollo separation, 2nd and  3rd crew transfers, 
and   joint  activities.  Fu r the r   simulations  were  scheduled  for  May, 
June,  and   early  July.  (NASA  Release  75-77;  Ta s s ,   FBIS-SOV, 19 
March  75, U1) 
21 March:  Dow Jones and  Co.’s W a l l  Street Journa l   signed a 7-yr con trac t  
with American Satellite Corp. for the  design and  construction of ea r th  
stations  and   provision  of  high-speed  communications  tha t   would 
permit a Florida-based WSJ  printing plant to receive,  via satellite, full 
printed  pages  for  facsimile  reproduction.  Full  pages  would  be 
transmitted,  a t   an  average  ra te   of  3  min  a  page,  from  WSJ ’ s  
Massachuse t ts  printing  plant  to  a  receiving  an tenna  in Florida.  Th e  
an tenna   would  connect  to  printing  equipment  in  the   Florida  plant, 
which would transform  the  communications signal into printed pages 
again.  (AmSatCorp  Release,  25  March  75;  AmSatCorp  Marketing 
Services Mgr.,  interview,  30 Nov  76; Jones,  W  P o s t ,   1 April  75) 
22 -23   March:   The  International Association of Machinists continued i ts  
s tr ike  against McDonnell Douglas Corp. af ter  turning down a con trac t  
offer. Although the  union sa id  it would re turn  to  the  bargaining tab le  to 
try to resolve the  impasse, NASA announced tha t  all Delta  launches  in 
the  nea r  future-including  Telesat-  C ,  Marisat-  A,  Nimbus-  F,  a nd  
oso-~-would  be   postponed.  (NASA  PA 0   audio  news  recording,  24 
March  75) 
24  March:  Radio  transmissions  from Mar iner   10  ceased   af ter   attitude- 
control  gas   was  dep le ted   and   flight  controllers  a t   Je t   Propulsion 

51 

March 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Laboratory sen t  the  command  for the  spacecraft to stop operations at 
8 2 0  am  EDT. Before  shutdown,  spacecraft  engineering  tests were 
conducted  to  try  to  open  t h e   stuck  door  on  the   plasma  science 
experiment, rotate the  solar panels to various positions, stow the  scan  
platform a t  18@, opera te  t h e  s tuck  tape  recorder, and provide da ta  for 
fu ture   spacecraft  design. 
During  its  more  than   16  mo  in  heliocentric  orbit,  Ma r ine r   10 
(launched  3  Nov.  1973) had  traveled  more  than   1.6 billion  km  and 
made four planetary  encounters,  one of  Venus  and  three of Mercury. 
I t  had passed within 5800 km of Venus 5 Feb.  1974, and  transmitted to 
ea r th  the  first closeup photographs ever taken  of  the  cloud-shrouded 
planet. 
Mar iner   10  had  confirmed  the   high-speed  circulation  of  Venus’ 
upper atmosphere and revealed circulation pa t terns  that swirled from 
the  equator toward the  poles. I t  had also revealed a long tail of charged 
particles trailing behind the  planet and away from the  sun; verified the  
presence  of  a bow  shock w av e  created  by the  solar wind acting upon 
the  dense   atmosphere;  de tec ted   hydrogen,  helium,  and  argon in  the  
Venusian  atmosphere;  and  discovered  temperature-inversion  zones 
suggestive of  deeper   stratiform cloud  layers. 
First spacecraft to use the  technique, Ma r ine r  10  used the gravity of 
Venus to  speed it  on toward Mercury. Th e  probe  flew by  tha t   planet 
th ree   times,  on  29 March  and 21  Sept.  1974 and   16 March  1975. At 
Mercury,  Mar iner   10  photographed  a  highly  cra tered   lunar-like 
surface with  large  scarps   hundreds  of  kilometers  long and over  1 .6  
kilometers  high.  Ma r ine r   10  da ta   also  revealed  the   existence  of  a 
chemically differentiated light crus t ,   lunar-like  near  the   surface and 
earth-like  a t  its interior,  and a n  unexpected  magnetic field 100 times 
smaller than earth’s.  A slight but measurable atmosphere w a s  found, 
in  addition  to  s treams   of  high-energy  electrons  and   protons  on  the  
planet’s dark  side. On  i ts  las t  encounter with Mercury [see  16 March] 
Ma r ine r   IO  came  within  327  km  of  Mercury  to  take   the   closest 
photographs ever  made of  another primary planet.  (NASAMOR ,   7 April 
75; NASA  A c t i v i t i e s ,   April  75,  12-13;  NASA  Release  75-59;  A&A 
1974) 
The  Sa turn  IB scheduled to launch  the  Apollo spacecraft for the  Apollo- 
Soyuz T e s t  Project in June  left the  Vehicle Assembly Building on its 
crawler  to  begin  the   5-km  journey  to  Launch   Complex  39  P a d   B. 
Witnessed  by  6000  people,  the   rollout  was  completed  a t   3:15  pm, 
followed  by  a  ceremony  attended  by  the   ASTP  astronauts  and   KSC 
Deputy Director Miles Ross commemorating this a s  the  last Sa turn  IB 
and  Apollo rollout.  Then   the   slow journey  w a s   resumed.  (NASA  PA 0  
audio news  service,  24 March  75;  KSC  Release  48-75) 
0  Assembly of  the  first main  engine of  the   Space Shuttle had  been  com- 
pleted by Rockwell International Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div.  1 mo ahead 
of  schedule,  NASA  announced.  After  assembly  the   engine was  auto- 
matically checked out-for 
the  first time in history-by 
the  engine’s 
in terna l   controller  and   integral  digital  compu ters   for  functional, 
electrical,  and mechanical operations. Known a s  the  Integrated  Sub- 
systems  Test  Bed,  this  engine w a s   not  built  for flight but  for  static 
firing tes ts   at  the   National  Space  Technology Laboratories. 
Th e  Space  Shuttle would use 3 of the  liquid-hydrogediquid-oxygen 
engines.  Designed  to  perform  a t   high  in terna l  pressures  for  greater 

52 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
March 
specific  impulse,  each  engine  would  produce  more  than   2.1  million 
newtons thrus t  and  would b e  used  for up to 55 missions before over- 
haul,  with  between-mission maintenance  comparable  to  techn iques  
used   by  commercial  airlines.  (NASA  Release  75-83;  Rocketdyne 
Release RD-  7) 
25 March: The  computer aboard Landsa t  2 (launched 22 Jan.) was the  most 
advanced  of  its  type  ever   flown  on  an  unmanned  NASA  satellite, 
NASA  announced. Able  to  hand le  up  to 55 ground-station  commands 
controlling spacecraf t  operations  for up to 24 hrs,  the  compact digital 
computer  was  a   forerunner  of  the   NASA  S tandard   Space  Compu ter  
tha t  will  be   used  in  a  wide  variety of  unmanned  missions.  Managed 
by  Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter ,   the   s tandard   space  compu ter  pro- 
gram w a s   par t   of  an  agency-wide program to  develop  standardized 
satellite components, both to reduce  cos ts  and to increase  reliability. 
The  program also covers o ther  spacecraf t  hardware  such  a s  nickel- 
cadmium  batteries,  transponders ,   attitude-control  thrusters,  pyro- 
techn ic   initiators,  silicon  so lar   cells,  and   t ap e   recorders .   (NASA 
Release  75-85) 
0  Two  solid  rockets  on  the   Space   Shu t t le   acoustic  model  accidentally 
e scaped   from  the   t e s t   s t an d   dur ing   a   cap t ive   s ta t ic   firing.  The  
model's  liquid-propellant rocket  engines had opera ted  normally for a  
few  seconds  when  the   two  solid  rocke ts   ignited  on  schedule.  Both 
solid rockets  then   sepa ra ted  from the  te s t   s tand .  One was propelled 
north  for  1.2  km,  landing  in  a  pine  thicket;  a  brush   fire  caused  
by  the   rocket  was  quickly  extinguished  and  no  one was  injured.  A  
nine-member  board  was  appointed  to  investigate  the   cause   of  the  
accident,  de term ine   the   amount  of  property  damage,  investigate 
the  adequacy of  safeguards to  prevent fur ther  incidents,  recommend 
corrective  measures,  and   assure   containment  of  facilities  and  sur-  
rounding areas   in  case   of  recurrence .  
Although  the   te s t   s tand   was  damaged,  the   Orb i ter   and   ex terna l  
tank   of  the  model were  not.  The  model would  be  re turned   to opera- 
tion  with  the   rep lacemen t   of  some  wiring  a nd   ins trumen ta t ion .  
(Marsha l l  Star, 2  April  75,  2) 
0  The   new  Soviet  100-seat  j e t   airliner,  Yak  42,  was  being  air-tested 
in  the   Soviet  Union,  Ta s s   reported.  The   aircraft  was  expec ted   to 
replace  outdated  airliners  on  Aeroflot's  medium-distance  routes. 
(Tass,  mrs-Sov,  26 March  75,  U1) 
26 March:  Langley  Research  Cen te r  was flight-testing  a  new-generation 
ATLIT  (Ad- 
light  twin-engine  P iper   PA-34  Seneca   aircraft-alled 
vanced  Technology  Light  T w i n t f i t t e d  with  several  improvements 
using NASA  advanced  aerodynamic  technology.  One  important  new 
component,  the   GAW -1  (General-Aviation-Whitcomb)  airfoil,  was 
27% smaller  than  the  original wing but was expec ted  to  be  safer  and  
more efficient,  and to  reduce   fue l  consumption by  a s  much  a s  10%. 
(NASA  Release  75 -84.) 
The   Japanese   National  Space   Development Agency  announced  the  
award  of  a   con trac t   to  t h e   Mitsubishi E lec tr ic   Corp.  to  design  two 
experimental  stationary  communications  satellites  for  launch   in  Fy 
1978. Design was expec ted  to  be   complete by  20 Sep t .  E a c h  130-kg 
satellite,  to  be   launched   by  a   Japanese   N  rocket,  would  be   used 
to  s tudy   technology  for  launch ing   stationary  satellites,  satellite- 
tracking  technology,  and   attitude-control  techniques.  (Kyodo,  FBIS- 
Japan,  3 April  75,  6 2 )  

53 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
March 
27  March:  Soviet  sc ien t is ts   told  U.S.  scientists  and   journalists  touring 
pensive  electricity  with  less  pollution  than   o ther   method I . Called 
Soviet  scientific  facilities  that  they  had  successfully used!  a rocke t  
engine  and   gigantic  magnets  to  produce  large  amounts  o  less  ex- 
magnetohydrodynamics  and  first  proved  feasible  in  t h e   u:S.  in  t h e  
early  1960s,  the   new  system  was  one  of  the   cooperative  programs 
between  the   two  countries. 
1 
A recen t  tes t  tha t  produced 12.4 mw of power for 1.5 hr wab t h e  first 
time the  system had achieved tha t  power and  duration.  Based on the  
knowledge .that  electricity could  be   generated  by  passing  a  charged 
gas  through a magnetic field,  the  Soviet experiment burned  55 kg per  
sec  of  natural  gas  with  oxygen-enriched  air  into  which  a  potassium 
compound was  injected  to  c rea te   a  plasma  of  positive  and   negative 
particles;  when  passed   between  the   poles  of  a  great  magnet,  the  
charges   separa ted  onto  e lec trodes   and   crea ted   large  voltages.  The 
Wash ing ton  Post  la ter   reported  tha t   the   Soviets were  committed to 
building,  by  1981,  a  1000-mw  magnetohydrodynamic  plant  with 
expec ted  conversion efficiency of  50%.  Conventional steam-turbine 
plants using oil o r  coa l  for fuel operate a t  40%  efficiency, those using 
nuclear fuel a t  33%. (Toth, LA  Times News Service, W Post, 28 March 
75,  A3) 
0  Canada’s d e  Havilland Dash  7 four-turboprop short-takeoff-and-landing 
(STOL)  transport  made  i ts   f irs t   flight  te s t   near   Ontario,  Canada. 
The  first  of  two  preproduction  prototypes  of  the   50-passenger  air- 
craf t   got  off  the  runway  in  274  m.  During  the   2-hr  10-min  flight, 
Dash  7 reached  2896 m altitude and  a maximum speed  of 204 km  per 
hr.  Purpose  of  the   first  flight was  to  perform  power-on  and   power- 
off  tes ts   of  longitudinal  and   latitudinal  stability.  (Av  W k ,   7  April 
75,  18) 
Langley  Research  Cen te r   announced  the   appointment  of  Robert  E. 
Smylie  as  Director  for  Space ,   replacing Eugene  S.  Love,  who  was 
retiring.  Smylie  had  been  in  NASA  Hq  a s  Deputy  Associate  Admin- 
istrator  for  Space,  Office  of  Aeronautics  and   Space   Technology. 
In his new position he  would direct Langley’s work in space  systems, 
space  applications  and  technology,  environmental quality programs, 
and  the   Scout launch   vehicle.  (LaRC  Release  75-11) 
0  NASA  Hq  announced the   disestablishment of  its Office of Organization 
and  Management.  All personnel  and  responsibilities  were  assigned 
to  o ther  offices within  NASA  Hq.  (NASA  anno,  2 April  75) 
31 March:  Boeing C o .  sc ien t is ts  were  studying a way  to  c u t  aircraft  fuel 
consumption  a s  much   a s  40%,  according  to  t h e  Ba l t imore  Sun .The  
techn ique  involved  cutting many tiny  holes in  the  aircraft wings  and 
applying  suction  from  within.  Th is  would  control  the   laminar  flow 
of  the   airstream,  preventing  drag-producing  turbulence  from  being 
crea ted   by  the   change  in  pressure   as  t h e   air  flows  over  the   wing 
surface.  In  the  1960s Northrop Corp.  had built t h e  Air Force a plane 
incorporating  the   concep t   but  technical  problems  had  discouraged 
fur ther   development.  Rising  fuel  cos ts   and   recen t   improvements 
in  s truc tura l   materials  and   manufacturing  techniques  had   sparked  
new  in teres t   in  the  method.  (AP,  B Sun ,   31 March 75,  A7) 
During March: NASA’s A t s  6  (Applications Technology  Satellite, launched 
30  May  1974) was  the  means   for  coordinating  long-distance  emer-  
gency  operations  of  sh ips   near   the   Azores  Islands  during  sea rch  

54 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

March 

and   rescue   te s t s   conduc ted   by  Goddard  Space   Flight  Center.  T h e  
tests evaluated the effectiveness of A ts  6 functioning a s  a communi- 
cations  relay  between  a  sh ip   in  d is tress   and   a  coordination  cen te r  
thousands  of  kilometers away. 
I n   the   tests,  a  “stricken”  sh ip   dropped  a  buoy  equipped  with  a 
position-indicating  radio beacon  into the  ocean. A t s  6  picked  up  the  
signals  and   transmitted  the  ship’s  identification  and   position  to  a 
NASA  ground  station, which relayed .them to  the  Coast Guard’s New 
York  Rescue  Coordination Center.  The  rescue   cen te r  then   sen t  the  
information  to  rescue   aircraft  and  ships.  As  they  neared   the   area, 
they  could  home  in  on   t h e   buoy’s  signals.  Within  2  h r   of  the   time 
the   buoy  was  dropped,  t h e  sh ip  and  the  buoy  were  located. 
The   sea rch   and  rescue   communications  tes ts   were  par t   of  con- 
tinuing joint L-band  experiments using A ts  6 and  conducted by GSFC 
and   the  Depts.  of  Commerce  and   Transportation,  a s  well  as by  the  
European  Space   Agency  and   the   Canadian  Dept.  of  Communica- 
tions and Ministry  of  Transpor t .   (GSFC Goddurd  News ,  O c t  75,  3) 
0  Prepara t ions  continued a t  Kennedy Space  Cen ter  for the  launch  of  two 
Viking  spacecraft  to  Mars.  Lander   1 was  mated  with  i t s   Orb i ter  
on 8 March to tes t  compatibility. The  Lander  and  Orbiter were mated 
with the  Cen taur  launch  vehicle  shroud and  moved  to Launch  Com- 
plex  41  on  27  March   to  undergo  a  flight-events  demonstration, 
Orb i ter   and  Lander   precountdown  tests,  and   terminal  countdown 
demonstration with  t h e  complete vehicle. 
During  a  complete  18-hr plugs-out  tes t   of  Lander  2  on  13 March, 
d a t a  were  transmitted  to J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory to provide train- 
ing for the  Viking flight-control team.  (KSC Spaceport  News ,   6 March 
75,  6; 20 March  75,  5) 

55 

April  1975 

1 Ap r i l :   NASAcommemorated the  15th anniversary of  the  launch of T iros  1 
(Television  Infrared Observation  Satellite), the  world’s  first weather 
satellite.  Since its launch  1 April 1960 a t  Cape  Canaveral on a Thor- 
Delta  booster,  30  experimental  and  operational  weather  satellites 
of  increasing  complexity  had  been  launched  to  provide  continuous 
information on earth’s environment. Over the  15-yr span the  weather 
satellites had taken  more than 2.2 million photographs while traveling 
through  12.1 billion  km   of  space.  Not  a  single  major  hurricane  or 
storm had  gone  undetected  or  untracked. 
Pres iden t  Ford  issued a  statement in recognition of  the  Tiros 1 an- 
niversary:  “More  accura te   daily weather  forecasts.  . .have  had  an 
immeasurable  impact  in making the   lives of  millions more  pleasant, 
productive, and secure. No major storm anywhere goes undetected by 
NASA   or   NOAA  [National Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration] 
satellites. We  can be proud  tha t  people everywhere can  benefit from 
this  practical  application  of  U.S.  space   sc ience   and   technology.” 
(NASA Release  75-73;  NASA  Ac t iv i t ies ,   April 75) 
A   prototype  of  a  flexible tunne l   to  connect  the   Space  Shuttle  airlock 
with  the   forward end   of  the   Spacelab  was  being  tested  a t  Marshall 
Space  Flight Center. The  tunne l  would provide a pressurized passage- 
way for crew members and  scientists to move to and from the  orbiting 
laboratory without  spacesuits.  The  flexible circular  tunnel,  built  by 
Goodyear Rubber Corp.,  would accordion-fold to 0.6 m  and extend to 
a  length  of  more  than  4.3  m.  Made  rigid  by  s tee l   rings,  the   tunnel 
was  cons truc ted  of  layers  of  aluminum foil,  Capran  film,  and  nylon 
cloth  covered  by  a  spongy meteoroid  shield. 
MSFC engineers were testing the  tunnel, which would be exposed to 
the  space  environment when  the Orbiter bay doors were opened,  for 
s truc tura l   strength,  airtight  integrity,  and  materials  compatibility. 
(MSFC  Release  75 -63) 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen ter   had  issued  a  single-source  request  to 
Sunstrand  Corp.  to  submit  a proposal  for  the  design,  development, 
manufacture,  test.,  and  delivery  of  the   auxiliary  power  unit  for  the 
Space   Shu t t le   Solid  Rocket  Booster’s  thrust-vector  control  sub- 
system.  The   APU   would  include  a  gas  generator,  turbine,  gearbox, 
fue l   pump,  e lec t r ica l   controls,  con tro l   valves,  ins trumen ta t ion ,  
mounting  system,  and  the   mechanical  and   electrical  connections 
required  to  interface with  other  SRB   subsystems. 
Two  APU s   would  be  used  during  prelaunch  and  ascen t   phases 
of  flight to provide hydraulic  power  to  the   thrust-vector  control  sys- 
tem  of  each  booster.  (MSFC  Release  75-62) 
e  The  Air Force was  again studying the  feasibility of  a nuclear-powered 
the   Wa sh ing ton  S ta r   reported. 
aircraft  twice  the  size  of  the  C-5, 
In   an  interview  with  the   S ta r ,   Dr.  Lawrence  W.  Noggle, 
rogram 
manage r   for  nuc lear   aircraft-propulsion  technology  a t   &right - 

57 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
April 
Pa t terson  Air  Force  Base,  said that  nuc lear  power could b e  used  a s  
an  alternative power source  for large subsonic aircraft.  O ther  poten- 
tial fuels under study were liquid methane, liquid hydrogen,  and  coal. 
A  nuclear-powered  aircraft,  which  would  require  larger   engines  to 
carry   a  larger  cargo,  could  use  conventional  fuel  for  takeoff  and  
landing and  then   switch to  nuclear power  a t  cru ise   speed .   The  S t a r  
quoted Dr. Noggle as saying, “W e  could use modified je t  engines.  . . 
with  the   reactor  totally  isolated  from  the   engine  through  contain- 
ment,”  He predicted  tha t  nuclear-powered  aircraft could f l y  for  days 
without  refueling.  (IT’  S t a r ,   1 April 75,  A4) 
e  NASA   announced   pub l ica t ion   of  t h e   S k y l a b   E a r t h   Resources  D a t a  
C a t a l o g   (JSC  09016),  con ta in ing   3 5  000  ph o t og r ap h s   t ak en   on  
1973-74  Skylab Orb i ta l  Workshop missions.  The  volume  described 
in detail the  earth-resources  equipment  and  techn iques  used  aboard 
the   station;  explained  how  the   photos  could  be   used  in  disciplines 
related to land-resource management, marine resources and  manage- 
ment,  land  surveys  and   mapping,  and   environmental  applications; 
and   supplied  a detailed  index for finding space  photographs,  a s  well 
a s  instructions on  locating da ta   available through o ther   government 
agencies.  (NASA  Release  75-92) 
0  NASA  executed  a  $3.65-million  supplement  to  a  cost-plus-award-fee 
con trac t   with  Serv-Air,  Inc . ,   to  con t inue   to  provide  a ircraf t   for  
ear th-observa t ion   and   as tronau t-prof ic iency   tra in ing   a t   Johnson 
Sp a c e   Cen ter .   Con t rac t   provisions  also  ca l led   for  ma in tenance ,  
modification,  and  related  ground  support of  the  JSC  aircraft; mainte- 
nance   and  ground  suppor t  of  transient  aircraft;  engineering,  design, 
fabrication,  and  installation  of  electronic  and  mechanical  systems, 
subsystems,  components  and  equ ipmen t ;   and  related  logistic  func- 
tions. 
Th i s   agreement  provided  for  the  third  and   final  year  of  the   con- 
trac t   which  had  an estimated  total  value  of  $7.57  million.  (JSC Re- 
lease  75-23) 
1 -4  Ap r i l :   I n  Montreal,  the  89-nation  International Telecommunications 
Satellite Organization held its third ordinary meeting of signatories in 
conjunction  with  the   25th  anniversary  of  the   Canadian  signatory, 
t h e  Canadian Overseas Telecommunications  Corp. 
Significant  accomplishments of  the   meeting  included  agreement 
tha t   domestic  services  provided  for  Chile  by  I N E L S A T   would  be  
considered  on   the   same   basis  a s   international  services,  thu s   in- 
creas ing   Chile’s  voting  representation  on  the   board  of  governors; 
tha t   any  signatory  owning  shares   in  INTELSAT  totalling  1.25%  or 
more would  be  entitled  to representation  on t h e  board  of governors; 
and   tha t   the   capital  ceiling  of  $500 million  for  payments  and   con- 
t rac tua l   comm i tmen ts   for   deve lopmen t   of  In te l sa t   V  sa te l l i tes ,  
planned  for  launch   in  t h e   late  1970s, would  have  to  be   increased  
by  from  $200  to*$41)0 million.  (INTELSAT Release,  April  75) 
3 Ap r i l :   Robert 6. Strom, Univ.  of Arizona  Lunar  and P lane tary  Labora- 
tory  scientist,  was  quo ted   by  the   Baltimore Sun a s   saying  in  a  31 
March   interview  tha t   75%  of  the   500  photographs  taken   during 
Mar iner   10’s  third  and   final  pass  of  Mercury  [see  16 March]  “did 
not  turn  out.”  Because   of  a  receiver malfunction  a t   the   Canberra ,  
Australia,  tracking  station,  Mar iner   10  could  not  be   maneuvered 
quickly  enough to photograph  all  the   des ired  area.  However,  Strom 

58 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

April 

emphasized tha t  Mar iner  10’s third pass was ‘‘actually a bonus”  and  
the  mission had  been  a  complete  success.  (B Sun, 3 April 75,  A8) 
4 Ap r i l :  NASA had awarded a $ 1  388  498 firm-fiied-price con trac t  to Good- 
year Aerospace Corp.  to produce a special-purpose processor  to aug- 
ment  existing computing  capability  for NASA’s Large  Area  Crop  In- 
ventory Experiment  (LACE),  Johnson  Space  Cen ter  announced.  Th e  
contract included design, fabrication, delivery, and installation of  the  
processor and  any associated  system  software.  LACE ,   a  cooperative 
program  shared  by  U.S.  Dept.  of  Agriculture, National Oceanic and  
Atmospheric  Administration,  and NASA,  aimed  a t   improving wheat- 
production  forecasts  by  use  of  satellite  earth-resources  da ta .   (JSC 
Release  75-  20) 
0  The   tes tbed   aircraft  for  the   Air  Force  Airborne  Warning  and  Con- 
trol System (AWACS) was deployed to Europe for a series of  exercises 
with  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Alliance  (NATO)  ground,  air,  and  sea  
forces.  The  Air Force was  developing AWACS  a s  an airborne  surveil- 
lance  command  and  control  cen ter   to  de tec t   and  track  airborne 
targets  a t   any  altitude,  a t   long  ranges,  and  over  all types  of  terrain 
and water. 
During  the   tes t   exercises  the  aircraft,  topped  by  a  9-m-di- 
ame ter   rotating  radome  assembly,  would  work  in  the   United 
Kingdom  with  British  naval  forces  and  with  the   u.S.  Navy’s  sixth 
fleet,  and   in  West  Germany  with  the   NATO  and   U.S.  air  defense 
ground environment system and with Hawk defense missile batteries. 
NATO  Hq  in  Brussels would  provide ground  static  displays  for NATO 
officials. 
During all exercises AWACS would coordinate with ground, sea, and 
air  forces through  a  time-division multiple-access  da ta   link. 
Th is  was the   second deployment  of  AWACS to Europe.  Since  1973, 
when the  system had been demonstrated  there ,  it had been equipped 
with  additional  major  elements  including  communications,  da ta-  
processing,  navigation,  display,  and  identification  instrumentation. 
( M s c  Release  OIP 99.75) 
NASA  announced  the   appointment of  Kenneth L.  Woodfin a s  Assistant 
Administrator  for Procurement,  replacing  George J.  Vecchietti  who 
had  retired.  (NASA Release  75-94) 
5  Ap r i l :   A  Soyuz  spacecraft,  launched  by  the   U.S.S.R.  from  Baykonur 
Cosmodrome  and   carrying  Cosmonauts  Vasily  Lazarev  and  Oleg 
Makarov, wa s  returned  to ea r th  shortly after launch  when  the  launch 
vehicle failed to perform normally. Tass  reported,  “On the third-stage 
s tre tch   the   parameters  of  the   carrier  rocket’s  movement  deviated 
from  the   preset  values  and  an  automatic  device  produced  the   com- 
mand  to  discontinue  the   flight  under  the  program  and  de tach   the  
spacecraf t  for  re turn   to  earth.”  Tass   also reported  tha t   the   purpose 
of  the   mission  had  been  to  continue experiments  aboard  the Sa l yu t  
4 space  station (launched 26 Dec.  1974). The  Soyuz softlanded south- 
west  of  Gorno-Altaisk  in  Western  Siberia.  Th e   search   and  rescue 
service  brought  the   cosmonauts,  both  in  good  condition,  back  to 
the   cosmodrome. 
During  a  telephone  conference  on  8 April,  Prof.  Konstantin  D. 
Bushuyev,  U.S.S.R. 
technical  director  for  the   Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t  
Project,  told  his  U.S.  coun terpar t ,  Glynn  S.  Lunney,  tha t   the  launch 
vehicle  tha t   failed  was  not  the   version  of  the   booster  tha t   would 

59 

April 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 
be  used  for  t h e  Ju ly   ASTP  launch.  He  promised  to  provide  Lunney 
(Tass,  FBIS-SOV,  7  April  75,  u1; NASA  Release  75-97;  w S t a r ,   7 
with  additional  de ta i ls   on   the   failure  af ter   they  became  available. 
April 75, A4) 
7 Ap r i l :   Thor-Delta  launch   operations  at  the  Eas tern   and  Wes tern  Test 
Ranges had resumed  on  a limited basis despite  the  continuing s tr ike  
by  employees  of  t h e   launch   vehicle’s  manufac turer ,   McDonnell 
Douglas  Corp.  [see  10 Feb.and  22-23  March],  A v ia t ion   Week and  
Space  Technology reported.  W i th  supervisory  personnel a t  the  com- 
pany’s plant completing the  hardware in  the  place of striking workers, 
McDonnell  Douglas  hoped  to  finish  10  of  t h e   12  launch   vehicles 
schedu led   for  delivery  to  NASA  launch   sites  by  t h e   end   of  1975. 
NASA’s G E o s  -C   Geodynamic  Exper imen ta l   Ocean   Sa te l l i te   a nd  
Canada’s   T e l e s t a r  -C  commun ica t ions   sa te l l i te ,   bo th   originally 
schedu led  for March,  had been  rescheduled for April and  May launch  
on  Thor-Delta  vehicles  delivered  before  the   s tr ike   began.  O the r  
launch  da tes  would  depend   on  the  buildup and  checkou t  o f  booster 
hardware  at  the   launch   site,  and   on  availability  of  hardware  still 
a t   the  plant. 
O ther  scheduled launches  affected by the  s tr ike  included Nimbus- 
F  experimental  satellite,  O S O -   1  Orbiting  Solar  Observatory,  and  
Communications Satellite Corp.’s  Marisat-  A maritime communica- 
tions  satellite.  (Av  Wk,  7 April  75,  17) 
9  Th e   European  Space   Research   Organization  (ESRO)  announced  the  
award  of  a  $4.4  million f3 . 5  million  accounting units]  con trac t   to  a 
European  consortium  to  provide  software  for  ESRO’S  Meteosat 
meteorological  satellite, scheduled for launch  in April 1977. Under the  
te rm s   of  the   con trac t   the   consortium,  consisting  of  companies  in 
France ,   United  Kingdom,  Wes t   Germany,  Belgium,  Italy,  and  
Sweden,  would  provide  data-acceptance  capability,  image  process- 
ing,  operational  mission  support,  da ta   archiving,  analysis  and   dis- 
semination of  image da ta ,  and  monitoring  of the  overall data-process- 
ing  system. 
Meteosat,  ESRO’S  first  applications  satellite,  would  record  and 
transmit da ta  for more accura te  weather forecasting. (ESRO Release, 7 
April 75) 
0  The   relationship  of  the   scientific community  to  any White  House  ad- 
visory panel should be  the  “same  a s  for any o ther  pressure  group,” 
Haywood  Blum  said  in   a  le t ter   to  the  editor of  the  New   York  T imes .  
Based on pas t  performance, “it  seem s  to be  unlikely fo r  t h e  scientific 
community  to  agree  on   any  substantive  issue ;   witness  t h e   ABM 
[antiballistic  missile],  SST  [supersonic  transport],  National  Cancer  
Ins t i tu te ,   underground  nuclear  testing,  use  of  DDT  and   breeder  
reac tor  development fights, to name only a few.”  Fur ther ,  the  wisdom 
and   perspective  of  the  scientific establishment  “remain  in doubt.” 
One  example was in  scientific training in a time of the  over-production 
of  Ph.D.s:  Dwindling  fund s  were  being  used  not  to  develop  young 
scientists but to suppor t  “ the  Gran t  Swinger,” who flew from place to 
place around t h e  world “making con tac ts  while recen t  gradua tes  were 
squeezed out of the ir  disciplines.”  Th e  Pres iden t  needed counsel but, 
because   the   scientific community  could  not  provide  truly  objective. 
and  balanced  advice,  “would  it  not  be   be t ter   for [this] advice to  be  
exposed  to public  scrutiny?”  (NYT ,  7 April  75,  30) 

60 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
April 
9 Apr i l :   TherHouse of Representatives,  by a vote of 318 to 72, passed  H.R. 
4700, the bill authorizing NASA  $3 585 873  000 in  fund s  for FY 1976 and  
$922 6 0  000  for the  transition  period  1 July  through 30  Sept.  1976. 
T h e   bill  was  passed  a s   repor ted   out  of  t h e   House  Committee  on  
Sc ience  and  Astronautics  14 March.  (CR,  9 April 75,  H2549-75) 
0  NASA would  store $900 million worth of surp lus  Apollo-Saturn  hardware  
ins tead  of scrapping it a s  planned earlier, Dr. James  C. F le tcher ,  NASA 
Administrator,  said in a  letter to Rep.  Olin E.  Teague,  Chairman of 
the  House of Representatives Committee on  Sc ience  and  Technology. 
T h e  flight hardware would  b e   stored  in a  manner  to  minimize  cos ts  
and  to permit restoration, if required,  to flight condition. Dr. F le tcher  
also  wrote  tha t ,   a s   Space   Shu t t le   launch-readiness  schedule  and  
program cos ts  required, NASA  would convert Launch  Complex 39 and  
i ts   supporting facilities  to  handle  the   Space  Shuttle. 
A s  reques ted   by  t h e  Committee  during a  25  March  meeting with 
Associate  Administrator for Manned  Space  Flight  John  F.  Yardley, 
NASA  would  supply  the   Committee  with  a  summary  of  options  for 
missions tha t  could be  flown using the  remaining Apollo-Saturn  flight 
hardware. 
Dr.  F le tcher  also s ta ted  tha t ,  because of the  “considerable cost” to 
the  government of storing the  equipment, NASA would like to d iscuss  
the  ma t ter  with  the  committee once again during the  FY 1977 author- 
ization hearings.  (Text, letter F le tcher  to Teague,  9 April  1975; UPI, 
NYT,  17  April  75,  7) 
0  TheHe l ios  1 (launched  10 Dec.  1974 by NA SA f o r  Wes t  Germany) mission 
objectives-to 
investigate  the  fundamental  solar processes  and  solar 
terres tr ia l  relationships  by t h e  s tudy  of t h e  solar wind,  magnetic  and  
electric  fields,  cosmic  rays,  and   cosmic  dust-had 
been  accom- 
plished and  t h e  mission was adjudged successful. (NASAMOR ,   11 April 
75) 
0  NASA  announced  tha t  Dr.  Rocco A.  Pe trone ,  Associate Administrator, 
would  leave NASA  in May  to  join  t h e  National  Cen te r   for  Resource 
Recovery a s  president  and  chief executive officer. Dr.  Pe trone ,  who 
in 1960 was assigned on  loan from t h e  Army to Kennedy Space  Cen ter  
as  Sa turn   project  officer,  la ter   became  Apollo  program  manager 
responsible for  planning,  developing, and  activating all launch  facil- 
ities  for  the   Apollo  program.  Upon  re t iremen t   from  the   Army  h e  
served  a t  KSC a s  director of launch  operations from 1966 to 1969, when 
h e  was  appointed  Apollo  program  director.  In  1972 he  was  assigned 
additional  responsibilities  a s   program  director  of  the   NASA  portion 
of  the  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project.  In   Dec.  1972  he  was  appointed 
Director  of  Marshall  Space   Flight  Center,  a  position  h e   held  until 
his appointment in  1974 as Associate Administrator.  (NASA  Releases 
69-124,  75-98) 
0  Sen. William  Proxmire (D-Wisc.)  said in a  speech  on  the  Sena te  floor 
tha t  h e  had asked  the  Cen tra l  Intelligence Agency to assess  t h e  safe ty  
of  Soviet manned space  technology.  “The inlaunch failure of  another 
Soviet  manned  satellite  last  Sa turday  [7  April1  reinforces  my  deep  
concern   tha t   the   upcoming  joint  Apollo-Soyuz  experiment  may  b e  
dangerous  to  American  astronauts.  . . . Th e   history  of  the   Soviet- 
manned program shows a n  appalling lack of  consistency.  A s  soon a s  
one  severe  problem is solved anotheroccurs.”  (CR, 9 April 75,55527) 

61 

April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

0  Johnson Space  Cen te r  announced t h e  award to Martin Marietta Corp. of 
a 10-mo $373 000 s tudy  con trac t  to investigate curren t  technology and  
develop  several concep tua l  designs of  a manned  maneuvering unit. 
When   t h e   most  promising  concept  was  selected,  Martin  would 
execu te  a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of  t h e  unit and  i t s  
support station. Th e  con trac t  also called for Martin to design and  build 
a  prototype  hand  controller for  t h e  unit. 
Themaneuver ing  unit, a direct spinoff from the  “Buck Rogers” unit 
tha t   successfully  demons tra ted   on  1973-  74  Skylab  missions  t h e  
precision and control with which an  astronaut could maneuver in zero- 
g, would allow Space  Shu t t le  crew members  to maneuver outside the  
Shu t t le  for maintenance,  inspection, repair,  retrieval,  assembly, and  
photography.  (JSC Release  75-24) 
9-22  April:  NASA  launched   &os  3  Geodynamic  Experimental  Ocean  
Satellite  from  Wes tern   Te s t   Range  a t   4:50  pm  PDT  on  a  two-stage 
Thor-Delta  1410 launch   vehicle.  The   satellite en tered   orbit with  an  
844-km  apogee,  837-km  perigee,  101.9-min  period,  and   115.0“ 
inclination. Forty-one investigators would participate  in the  mission, 
whose  primary  objective  was  to  perform  an  in-orbit  radar   altimeter 
experiment  demonstrating  the   feasibility  and   utility  of  mapping  the  
s e a  surface with a 1- to 2-m precision. Geos 3 would also measure  wave 
heights  and  contribute  to  the   development  of  technology  for fu ture  
satellite radar  altimeter systems. O the r  objectives included support of 
t h e   calibration  of  NASA   and   o ther   agencies’  ground  C-band  radar  
sys tems ;  demonstration of  a satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment 
w i thA ts6  (launched  30 May 1974); comparison of new and  established 
geodetic and  geophysical measuring sys tems ;  suppor t  investigations 
in  solid-earth  dynamic  phenomena  such   a s   polar  motion,  ea r th  
rotation,  ear th   tides,  and   continental drift;  and   fur ther  definition of 
orbit determination techn iques  using precisior, tracking systems such  
a s  lasers  and  doppler ground  stations. 
All spacecraft subsys tems  were checked  out 9-  10 April with telem- 
e try   indicating  normal  performance.  Gravity-gradient  stabilization 
maneuvers were also begun with t h e  firing of the  squ ibs  tha t  released 
the   end   mass  and   extended  the  boom  to  0.7  m.  Additional  boom 
extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the  
maximum extension of  6 m  occurring that  day. 
axis stabilization; the  desired pitch damping of * 1” was achieved by 
The  momentum  wheel was  energized,  providing  additional three- 
20 April. 
By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler  and  C-band tran- 
sponders  and began  tracking.  Solid  acquisition  of  return-pulse  da ta  
was occurring on all passes,  and  the  radar  altimeter had operated  in 
the  high-intensity  mode twice over t h e  Atlantic  Ocean .  Engineering 
te s t s   of  the  Ats  6 -Geo s   3  satellite-to-satellite  tracking  experiment 
were completed. Calibration of radar  altimetry began on  21 April and  
would  continue un t i l  20 May. 
First  of  i ts   kind,  the   satellite-to-satellite  tracking  experiment  by 
Geos 3  and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more pre- 
cise  than   tha t   obtainable  by  ground  observations.  From  i ts   geo- 
synchronous orbit Ats  6  tracked  &os  3  for more  than   half  i t s  orbit 
while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through i ts  S-band transponder  to 
Ats  6 ,  which  relayed  t h e  signals  to  ground  stations. 

62 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

April 

Geos  3  carr ied   an   array   of  quar tz   reflectors  tha t   permitted  laser  
ranging measuremen ts  accura te   to  10 cm.  A  la se r  beam  sen t   to  the  
satellite would b e  reflected, and  then  received back  a t  t h e  originating 
ground  site,  one of  a network of  la se r  ranging stations which would 
t rack  Geos 3  during  i ts  mission  lifetime. 
Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the  34&kg,  8-sided spacecraf t  was 
the  third in a series of GEOS spacecraf t  designed to gain knowledge of 
the   earth’s  shape   and   dynamic  behavior  a s   par t   of  the   National 
Geodetic  Satellite  Program  (NGSP).  The   NASA-managed  program, 
begun  in  1964  with  the   cooperation  of  t h e   Depts.  of  Defense  and  
Commerce  and   severa l  universities  and  international organizations, 
was  initiated  to  generate  a  unified  world-survey  network  and  to  de- 
velop  a more  precise mathematical model of  the  earth‘s  gravitational 
field. 
Geos  1 (Explorer 2 9 ,  launched  6 Nov.  1965) and  Geos 2  (Explorer 3 6 ,  
launched   11  Jan.  1968) had  demons tra ted   tha t   t h e  U.S. could  make  
most  observations  using  one  satellite  and   tha t   errors   in  any  system 
could  be   discovered  and   correc ted   by  reference  to  other  systems. 
O ther   missions  in  the   NASA   geodesy  program  included Exp lorer  22 
(launched  10 Oct.  1964), Exp lo re r27  (launched  29 April  1965), Pageos  
1  (launched  1 July  1966),  and   the   Ear th   Resources  Experiment 
Package @REP,  launched  15 May  1973 aboard Sk y lab  1). 
Th e  Geos 3  program  was managed by Wallops Flight Cen ter  under  
the   direction  of  the   Office  of  Applications  a t   NASA   Headquarters. 
Mission operations and the  Thor-Delta launch  vehicle were managed 
by Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter .  Th e  spacecraft,  designed and  built 
by the  Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about 
$12.5 million.  (NASA  MORS,  8  April  75,  22  April  75; W k l y  S S R ,   3-9  
April  75; NASA  Release  75-88) 
10 A p r i l :   The  first ground-test hardware  for the  Space  Shuttle, a hydraulic 
actuator  for  t h e  main  engine,  had  arrived  at Marshall  Space  Flight 
Cen ter  for functional checkout, MSFC  announced. Each  of the Orbiter’s 
three main engines would use two of the  actuators to gimbal the  engine 
of  8  to  be 
for  steering  control.  After  checkou t   the   actuator-one 
tested-would  be  s e n t  to the  National Space  Technology Laboratories 
where  the  main  engines  would  be  tes ted .   (MSFC  Release  75-68) 
0  Dust  storms had  been observed on  the  moon  every  sunrise and  sunse t  
by  a  three-axis  microparticle  de tec tor  left  on t h e  moon  by Apo l lo  17 
as tronau ts  during the ir   December  1972 mission,  a Na ture   magazine 
article  reported.  Th e   article,  based   on  a  repor t   by  sc ien t is ts   a t  
Goddard Space  Flight Center, sa id  the  GSFC  sc ien t is ts  suspec ted  tha t  
the  du s t  was being lifted from the  lunar  surface and  then  driven away 
from  t h e  rising or  setting  sun  by  electrostatic  fields  associated with 
the   transition  from  day  to  night,  or vice  versa. 
The  finding supported a  theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr.  Thomas  
Gold  of  Cornell  Univ.,  who  had  suggested  tha t   electrostatic  forces 
transported du s t  from lunar  highlands to lowlands,  accounting for the  
smooth  appearance  of  the   lunar   seas .   Although  the  Apollo  landings 
had  shown tha t   those  sea s  had  been   formed  by  lava flooding ra ther  
than   deep  du s t   accumulations,  the ir   surface  was  covered with very 
fine  dust.  Also,  because  neither  wind  nor  rain  existed on  the  airless 
moon,  some o ther  process mus t  have been responsible for the  evident 
erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested a s  one possible 

63 

April 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

explanation. Because the  lunar  vacuum ac ted  a s  an insulator, the  du s t  
cloud hugged the  surface,  reaching only between 20 and  30 cm  high, 
explaining why  it had been de tec ted  from a  low angle by  ins trumen ts  
on  the  lunar  surface  but  never  by  orbiting as tronau ts  or  ear th-based  
equipment.  (Hughes, Nature,  10 April  75,  481 -2) 
e The  Air Force’s  new  B-1  bomber broke the  sound barr ier  for the  first 
time  while  making  i ts   sixth  flight  test,  from Vandenberg  Air Force  
Base. During the  6-hr 23-min mission, the  B-1  also took on fuel from 
a  KC-  135 tanker  for the  first time and opened its weapons-bay doors. 
(AP, W Star, 11 April  75,  4) 
11  April:  Pres iden t   Ford,  in  a   White  House  ceremony,  presen ted   the  
National Space  Club’s  Dr.  Robert H.  Goddard Memorial Trophy  to 
Skylab 4 Commander Gerald P. Ca r r  on behalf of  the  nine as tronau ts  
who  inhabited  the  Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 14 May  1973) 
“exceptional accomplishments in the  Skylab program  . . . . When the 
during periods  in  1973 and  1974. The   as tronau ts  were cited  for their 
en t ire   mission  was  jeopardized  the   first  crew ,   through  uncommon 
ingenuity,  saved the  mission. The  scientific con ten t  of  the program is 
of  extraordinary  significance,  in  all  disciplines.  The   demonstration 
tha t   men  can  live  and   work  in  space   for  extended  periods  se t s   the  
s tage  for fu ture  exploration of  space .”  
At  the  Space  Club’s  18 th  annua l   Goddard  memorial dinner,  the  
following awards were  p r e s en t ed  

Awa rd  

Dr.  Robt.  H.  Goddard 
Memorial Trophy 

Astronautics  Engineer 
Award 
Nelson  P.  Jackson Aerospace 
Award 
Hugh L.  Dryden Memorial 
Fellowship 

Dr.  Robt.  H.  Goddard 
Scholarship 

Dr.  Robt.  H.  Goddard 
Historical Essay 
Nat’l  Space  Club P re s s  
Award 

R e c i p i e n t  
(A f f i i a t i o n )  

NASA  Skylab  Astronauts 
C h d e s  P.  Conrad 
Jo seph  P.  K em i n  
Pau l  J.  Weitz 
Alan L.  Bean 
Owen K.  Garrioti 
Jack  R.  Lonsma 
Gerald  P .   Cam 
Edward  G.  Gibson 
William  R.  Pogue 

John M.  Thole (NASA) 

NASA-Fairehild Industries 
A t s  6 team  
Dr.  Bruce F.  Smith  (NASA) 

Alice K.  Babcock 
(Georgetown Univ.) 

Jame s  E.  Oberg (U SA 0  

Roy Neal  (NBC) 

C i t a t i o n  

For  their  exceptional  accomplishments 
in  Skylab program 

For  direction  of  the  OS0  and   ATS  pro- 
g a m s  
For  demonstration  of  a  significant  ad- 
vance  in  space  communications 
For demonstrated  abilities  in  addressing, 
theoretically  and  experimentally.  a broad 
range  of  astrophysical  problems 
To continue  higher scientific education 

For  essay,  “Ru s s ia   Mean t   to  Win  t h e  
Moon  Race?” 
For resourcefulness in reporting the  U.S. 
space effort 

(PD ,  14  April  75,  372;  program) 
e NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t   Pro jec t  Director  Ches ter   M.  Lee  said  a t   a  
NASA Headquar ters  p re s s  briefing tha t  a  number  of modifications had 
been  made on the  Apollo command and service modules to accommo- 
d a t e   the   spec ia l   requ iremen ts   of 
the   Ju ly   US.-U.S.S.R. 
ASTP  
mission. 

64 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
April 
Changes  to  the  command  module  included  a  modified  umbilical 
to accommodate docking-module functions,  a n  additional TV  camera  
and   recorder  for  coverage  of  joint  activities,  modified  controls  and  
displays for new  equipment  and  experiments,  additional equipment 
for  communications  and  TV  coverage  via A t s   6  (Applications Tech-  
nology  Satellite,  launched  30   May  1974),  modified  stowage,  added  
intervehicular  intercom,  and   additional  VHF-FM  communications 
capability  a t  the  U.S.S.R.  frequency. 
Changes in the  service module included added hea ters  and  insula- 
tion of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added  propellant 
storage  module  for  increased   attitude-control  and   backup   deorbit 
capability,  and  deletion  of  the   unused  main propellant  tank. 
The  docking module would be  carr ied  in the  same  position in which 
the   lunar   module  had  been  during lunar  landing missions.  I t  would 
be   extracted  in  the   same   manner,  by  separating  the   CSM  from  the  
booster  once  in  orbit,  turn ing   around,  and   pulling  out  t h e   docking 
module with  the  nose  of  the   CSM. 
In  response to questioning,  Lee said  tha t  the  U.S.  cos t  of  the  ASTP 
mission  would  fall  within  the   8245-mdion  congressional  authoriza- 
tion.  Although  the   Soviets  had  not  quoted  a  specific  amount,  Lee 
believed  tha t   t h e  launch   of  t h e   two  unmanned  Soyuz  spacecraf t  to 
check   out  modifications  made   for  MTP ,   the   launch   of  a  manned 
mission,  and  the  preparations for two complete spacecraf t  and crews 
would  indicate  tha t   t h e  Soviets were  investing  "at  least  the   equiva- 
lent"  in   resources.  (Transcript) 
14 April:  Flight  Research   Cen ter   pilots  began  flight  te s t s   a s   part  of  a 
cooperative industry-government  program to measure  noise  levels of 
five  bus iness-c lass   je t   a ircraf t   dur ing   various  land ing   approach  
maneuvers.  Object  of  t h e   te s t s   was  to  define  noise  characteristics 
for  this  c lass   of  aircraft  and   t h e  effectiveness  of  alternate  landing- 
approach  procedures  in  reducing  community  noise  levels.  Using  a 
Rockwell  Sabreliner,  Grumman  Gulfstream  11,  Gates  Learjet, 
Beech-Hawker  125  provided  by  the   National  Business  Aircraft 
Association,  and   Lockheed  Je t   S ta r   provided  by  NASA,  FRC  pilots 
flew  four  landing  approaches   over  a  microphone  array.  A  normal 
3"  approach  provided  baseline  information;  a  3"  decelerating  ap- 
proach  with  engines  a t   reduced   power,  a  4" approach  with  normal 
power,  and   a  two-segment  app roach   s tar t ing   with  6"  angle  and  
shallowing into a 3" approach provided additional da ta .  (NASA  Release 
75 - 103) 
14-30 Apr i l :   U.S.  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project  flight  crews,  accompanied 
by  32  members  of  Working  Group  1, met  in  the  U.S.S.R.  with  the ir  
Soviet  coun terpar ts   for  t h e   final  training  session  in  Soviet  Russia 
before  the   scheduled  July  launch.  US.  as tronau ts   included  prime 
crew members Thomas P.  Stafford, Vance D.  Brand, and  Donald K. 
Slayton;  backup   crewmen  Alan  L.  Bean,  Ronald  E.  Evans,  and  
Jack   R.  Lousma;  and   suppor t  crewmen Karol J.  Bobko,  Robert  L. 
Crippen,  and  Eugene A.  Cernan .  
During practice  sessions similar to  those  held  i n  the  u.S.  7 Feb.- 
1 March,  t h e  participants  prac t iced  communications skills,  transfer  
procedures,  joint  activities,  and   contingency  situations,  using  the  
Soyuz  simulator a t  the   Gagarin Cosmonaut Cen ter   in  S ta r  City. 

65 

April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

On  19 April the  crews  visited the  mission-control cen te r  at Kalinin- 
grad and ,  on 28 April, became  the  second group of Westerners to visit 
the  Baykonur cosmodrome (French  Pres iden t  Charles d e  Gaulle  had 
been  the  first western visitor when he witnessed the  launch  ofcosmos 
122 on  25 June   1966). At  Baykonur t h e  U.S.  crewmen saw t h e  ac tua l  
flight hardware a s  well a s  the  primary launch pad 2 km away,  and  t h e  
prime and backup crews  each  spen t  an  hour in the  Soyuz spacecraft. 
Th e   as tronau ts   la te r   reported  to  the   press   tha t   they  had  found  no 
significant  differences  between  the   ac tua l   spacecraf t   and   the  
simulators  used  during  training.  (Ezell  et  al.,  The  Partnership:  A 
H i s to r y   of  the  ApolloSoyuz  Test  Project,  278-280;  JSC  Releases 
75-22,75-25;  W Pos t ,  30 April 75, A21; S B D ,  18 April 75,273;A&A 
6 6 ,  223) 
15  Ap r i l :   The   Council  of  the   European  Space   Research   Organization 
me t  and  approved appointment of  directors proposed by ESRO’S  Com- 
mittee for the  soon-to-be-established European Space  Agency. When  
ESA became  operational a t  t h e  end  of May,  the  new directorate would 
include  Roy  Gibson  (United  Kingdom)  a s  Director  General,  Andre 
Lebeau  (France) a s  Director  of  P lann ing  and  Fu ture   Programs ,  Dr. 
Erns t   Trende lenburg  (West  Germany) a s   Director  of  Scientific  and  
Meteorological  Programs,  and George Van Ree th  (Belgium) a s  Direc- 
tor  of  Administration. 
Directors already in office who would continue af ter  the  establish- 
ment of ESA  were Bernard Deloffre (France), Director of  t h e  Space lab  
Program;  Prof.  Gianni  Formica  (Italy),  Director  of  the   European 
Space  Operations Cen ter ;  Ove  Hammarstrom  (Sweden), Director of 
the   European  Space   Research   and  Technology Cen ter ;   Dr.  Walter 
Luksch  (West Germany),  Director of  Communications  Satellite Pro- 
grams; and Prof.  Massimo Trella (Italy), Technical  Inspector.  (ESRO 
Release,  21 April 75) 
*  Flight  Research   Cen te r   announced  the   award  of  a  30-mo  cost-plus- 
fixed-fee  contract,  valued  at  $13 million,  to  Rockwell  International 
Co rp .   to  design  and   build  two  subsca le   model  aircraft  for  NASA’s 
Highly Maneuverable Aircraft  Technology  Program.  Th e  two-phase 
con trac t  called  for an   initial 60-day effort for detailed program  plan- 
ning;  upon  satisfactory completion of  phase  1 ,  NASA  would  approve 
the  final design  and   fabrication. 
The  two vehicles were scheduled for delivery to FRC  late in 1977 for 
flight-testing,  using  the   Remotely  Piloted  Research   Vehicle  tes t  
technique  [see   3 March]  developed  by  FRC. Air-launched  from  a 
carr ier  aircraft, t h e  vehicles would b e  flown through maneuvers by a 
ground-based  pilot  using  TV ,   telemetry,  and   radar.  (FRC  Release 
7-  75) 
*  Th e  Air Force Systems Command announced  the  award of  a $100 000 
con trac t  to Aero Co.  to study the  feasibility of using parafoils half the  
size  of  a  C-5   aircraft’s  wing  to  recover  remotely  piloted  vehicles 
(RPVs) .   RPV s  were curren t ly  retrieved by recovery helicopters, a relia- 
ble  but expensive system affected by  weather  conditions.  The  para- 
foil, par t  of  an  AF effort to find cheape r  ways to land RPV s ,  was a high 
glider which,  when deployed like a parachute,  would  take  on an  air- 
foil shape  and descend  a t  a ra te  of  1 m forward for e a ch  0.3-m  loss in 
altitude. Under t h e  terms  of  t h e  con trac t  Aero would design and  build 
two 12- by 24-m parafoils for testing schedu led  to begin  in May.  (AFSC 
Release OIP  81.75) 

66 

-. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

April 

16  Ap r i l :   The   U.S.S.R.  was  planning  to  flight-test  the   SLX-14,  a launch  
vehicle larger than  the   Sa turn  5, from Tyuratam  during t h e  summe r  
of  1975, Kenneth W.  Gatland reported in the  Ch r i s t ian  Science Mon i-  
t o r .   Launch  preparations,  observed  by  the   Air  Force's  Big  Bird 
reconnaissance  satellites,  had  been  under   way  since  1974.  Gatland 
reported  tha t  the  project had  been delayed for more than 5 yr when a 
previous  prototype  caught  fire  and  exploded  during  a  1969 fueling 
test.  Two  others  had  failed  in  flight,  in  1971 and   1972.  After  con- 
sidering cancellation of  the  project,  Soviet officials ordered a dras t ic  
design review and the  program continued with increased emphasis on 
systems reliability and ground testing.  (Gatland, C S M ,  16 April 75, 1) 
18 A p r i l :  NASA  announced  the  appointment of  David R.  Scott a s  Director 
of Flight Research Cen ter  to replace Lee R.  Scherer, who had become 
Director  of  Kennedy  Space  Center.  Scott  had  been   an  astronaut  on 
Gemini  8 (16  March  1966),  on Apo l lo   9  (3-13  March  1969),  and  on 
lunar landing mission Apo l lo  15 (26 July-7  Aug.  1971). After leaving 
the astronaut corps in  1972, Scott served a s  technical assistant to the  
Apollo  Program  Manager  at  Johnson  Space   Center,  and   a s   special 
assistant  for  mission  operations  and  government-furnished  equip- 
ment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75) 
19  Ap r i l :   The  U.S.S.R.  launched A ryabha ta ,   India's  first  scientific  satel- 
lite,  from  Kapustin  Yar  in  the   Soviet Union.  The   satellite  en tered  
orbit  with  a  611-km  apogee,  568-km  perigee,  96.5-min  period,  and 
50.7"  inclination.  The  Delhi  Domestic  News  Service  said  tha t   the  
360-kg  satellite,  named  for  a  fiith-century  Indian  astronomer  and 
mathematician,  carried ins trumen ts  to measure x-rays  from celestial 
sources,  look  for  neutrons  and   gamma  radiation  from  the  sun,  and  
measure  ionospheric  parameters.  Ground  tracking  stations  in  India 
and  the   Soviet Union  reported  the   instrumentation  was  functioning 
normally. 
A ryabha ta ,   designed  and  built  by  scientists  a t   India's  Space  Re- 
s e a r ch  organization  with  technical  assistance  from Soviet scientists 
and  specialists, was completed under  an  agreement for joint  Indian- 
Soviet collaboration signed on  10 May  1972. The  press  reported  the 
estimated  cost of  the project  to be  $6 million. (Delhi Dom News Ser, 
FBIS-India,  22-24  April 75; Weintraub, NYT,  21 April 75,  49; GSFC 
W k l y  SSR,  17-23  April  75;  educ'l  attache,  Indian  Embassy,  Wash 
DC,  interview,  18 Nov  76) 
21  A p r i l :  West  Germany  was  studying  the   possibility  of  purchasing  a 
Spacelab  pressurized  module  for  use  on  the   u.S.  Space   Shuttle, 
A v ia t ion  Week and  Space  Technology reported. Th e  German Spacelab 
would be configured for research  in  space processing,  a field of  con- 
siderable  in teres t   to  Germany.  I t s  missions  on  Spacelab,  launched 
by NASA  aboard the Space Shuttle on a cost-reimbursable basis, would 
be  separa te   from  missions  conducted  by  the   European  Space   Re- 
search  organization.  (Av W k ,  21 April  75,  27) 
0  Th e  Air  Force Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory  and NASA  Lewis Research 
Cen ter   had  begun  a joint  research   program  to  determine  the   feasi- 
bility  of  using  synthetic fuels  to  power  military  and   commercial je t  
aircraft,  the  Air Force  Systems Command announced. As part  of  the  
10-yr $&million study, Exxon  Corp.  had  been  awarded  a contract  to 
study the   refining processes  like  hydrogenation required  to produce 
fuels  from  coal  and  oil-shale  synthetic  crudes ,   and  to  compare  the  
chemical  and  physical properties  of  these   fuels with  those  of  petro- 

67  

April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

leum  derivatives. Cos ts  ofprocess ing  the  syn the t ics  would depend  on 
definition of  engine  and   fuel-system  needs .  
The  decision to begin research  on syn the t ic  fue ls  was pa r t  of  an  Air 
Force  conservation  effort.  U.S.  aircraft,  military  and  commercial, 
accoun ted  for 8% of  U.S. petroleum consumption; fue l  cos ts  for mili- 
tary  j e t s  alone had  more than  tripled  in the  previous 18 mo.  Th e  cos t  
of  fueling a C -5  cargo aircraft had r isen  from $6780 in April 1973 to 
$22 400 in April  1975.  ( M s C  Re lease  OIP  070.75) 
A  NASA-sponsored  research   program  at  Massachuse t ts   Institute  of 
Technology  had   demons tra ted   tha t   ultraviolet  l i i h t   could  convert 
wa ter  into a hydrogen fuel, NASA  announced. MIT researchers  placed 
a titanium dioxide crys ta l  and a piece of  platinum connected by a wire 
into  a  beaker   of  wa ter   in  which  inert  ionic  sub s tance s  were  dis- 
solved  to  allow an  electric curren t   to flow.  The  titanium  dioxide and 
platinum acted  a s  electrodes,  establishing electrical con tac t  with the  
water.  When  ultraviolet  light  from  a  la se r   illuminated  the   titanium 
dioxide,  application  of  electrical  potentials  a s   low  a s  0.2  volts  pro- 
duced   hydrogen  and oxygen  gases. 
The   process  thu s   f a r  was  inefficient, only  1% of  the   light  energy 
being converted into chem ica l  energy. Researchers  were experiment- 
ing  with  d ifferen t   e lec t rode s   and   reac t ion   tempe ra tu re s   to  find 
methods  tha t  would decompose water  using low-energy  visible  light 
ins tead  of  high-energy  ultraviolet light, which was only  a  small frac- 
tion  of  the   l i i h t  available  from  the   sun .   (NASA  Release  75-106) 
21-24  Ap r i l :   The  National  Academy  of  Sc iences   held  i ts   112th  annua l  
meeting  and  the   National  Academy  of  Engineering  held  i ts   11th 
annua l  meeting,  in  Washington, D.C.  The   s ta te  of  the   sc iences   and  
the ir  potential contribution  to the  solution of  national problems were 
d iscussed .  During one  session  Dr.  J .   Herber t   Holloman,  Massachu- 
se t t s   Institute  of  Technology  professor  and former Assistant  Secre- 
tary  of  Commerce for Sc ience  and Technology, said tha t  the  u.S.  “no 
longer dominated the  world’s technological process.  We have now be- 
come the  strongest nation  among many.”  Dr.  Holloman said tha t  the  
growth  of  productivity  in  the   U.S.  during  the   la s t   15 yrs  had   been 
“the  lowest  of  any  industrial  nation  in  the  world  with  the  exception 
of  the  United  Kingdom.” 
Dr.  Michael Boretsky, Dept.  of  Commerce analyst,  agreed ,  saying 
tha t   the  productivity decline  could be  a t tr ibu ted  in par t  to the  “rela- 
tive  decline  in. the   overall  ra te   of  the   United  S ta te s   technological 
advance.”  S ince  the  mid-l960s, output pe r  man-hour had been  grow- 
ing a t  half  the  average  ra te  of  the  previous 100 yr, while productivity 
gains  had  been   speed ing   up  in  o ther   countries.  Funds   tha t   could 
correc t   this  situation  by  supporting  the   development  of  new  tech-  
nology  had  ins tead  been   channeled  into  social commitments. 
Dr.  Ralph  Landau ,   chemical  eng ineer   and  pres iden t   of  Halcon, 
Inc.,  sa id   tha t ,   because   labor  cos ts   in  the   U.S.  and   leading  foreign 
nations  were virtually  equal,  it was  no  longer advantageous for u.S. 
companies  to  sell l icenses   to  foreign  en terpr ises   to  use   American 
pa ten ts .   Ins tead   pressures   existed  t o  keep   the   technology  a t  home, 
crea t ing  jobs  in  th e  U.S.,  and  to  sell US.-made  goods abroad. 
During the   bus iness  meeting on  22  April,  84 new members   were 
e lec ted  to  NAS  “in  recognition of  the i r  distinguished  and  continuing 
achievements in  original research.”  NAE  e lec ted  86 U.S.  engineers to 

68 

April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
i ts  membership, including Dr.  Kurt H.  Debus, former Kennedy Space  
Cen te r  Director; Dr.  Rocco A.  Petrone,  NASA  Associate Administra- 
tor;  and  Dean  R.  Chapman,  Ames Research   Cen te r   scientist.  (NAS 
Release, 22 April 75; NAE  Release,  1 April 75; joint NAS-NAE   Release, 
9 April  75; McElheny, NYT, 27  April  75,  15) 
23 Ap r i l :   NASA marked the  60th anniversary of  the  first meeting of  NASA’s 
predecessor  institution,  the  National Advisory  Committee  for Aero- 
nau t ics  (NACA)  Established  by  a  law  signed  by  Pres iden t   Woodrow 
Wilson  3 March  1915,  NACA  had  12 presidentially  appointed  mem- 
bers   from the  military and  scientific  communities “ to  supervise  and 
d irec t   the   scientific  study  of  the   problems of  flight,  with  a  view  to 
their  practical  solution”  and  “to  direct  and  conduc t   research   and  
exper imen ts  in  aeronautics.” 
During its nearly half-century  of  operation,  NACA  was  responsible 
for the  techn ica l  proficiency of  U.S.  aviation.  Early NACA wind-tunnel 
research  yielded the  unique NACA cowling and wing shapes  that would 
dominate  aeronautics  into  the   1940s.  NACA’S  fundamen ta l  research  
and  its  direct  application  to  industrial,  military,  and  c iv i l   aviation 
helped crea te  the  world‘s  grea tes t  commercial air transportation  net- 
work before World War I1 and  the  world’s  strongest  air forces  during 
tha t   conflict.  In   1947,  it  was  the   NACA-Air  Force  X-1  aircraft  tha t  
broke  the   sound barrier. 
The   agency had  remained  small in  size  and  budget  through  1939 
when 523 persons worked with $4.5  million in funds. By the mid-1940s the 
staff  had  grown  to  6800  and   i ts   budget  to  an  annua l  $40 million.  In  
1958 the   National  Space   Act  dissolved  NACA,  transferr ing  its  8000 
workers  and   “a l l   functions,  powers,  du t ies   and  obligations”  to  the  
new National Aeronautics and  Space  Administration.  (NASA Release 
75-86;  Anderson,  Orders of Magnitude, 1-3) 
NASA  announced the  award of  a $11-million cost-plus-fixed-fee con trac t  
to  Cutler-Hammer,  Inc.,  AIL  Div.,  for  acquisition  of  the   Microwave 
Scanning Beam Landing Sys tem  ground s ta t ions  for the  Space  Shu t t le  
Orbiter.  AIL would perform the  research  and  development necessary  
to  build  the   ground  s ta t ions   for  the   Shu t t le  landing  sites.  Ground- 
station  hardware would  be   able  to  transmit  localizer and  glide  slope 
signals to  the  Orb i ter  and  respond  to  distance-measurement  interro- 
gations  from the  Orbiter.  (JSC  Release  75-32) 
24 A p r i l :  NASA  announced the  award of  a $2 376 400 con trac t  to Reinhold 
Construction Co.  for  phase   2  of  the   Space   Shu t t le   landing  facility, 
including  the   landing  a ids   control  building,  Orb i ter   landing  instru- 
mentation facilities, and re la ted  communications and utility systems. 
Pha se  2 was  scheduled  for  completion by  the   end  of  1976. 
Phase   1, which began in April  1974 a s  a $21 812  737 con trac t  with 
Morrison  Knudsen  Co.,  included  construction  of  the   4570-m-long, 
91-m-wide runway, towway  apron,  and towway.  Site preparation  was 
nearing completion and  the  paving with nearly 200 000 cu  m  of cemen t  
would  begin  in  July.  Pha se   1 was  schedu led  for  completion by  the  
summer  of  1976.  (KSC  Re lease  62-75) 
25  A p r i l :   NASA  announced  the   selection  of  Sperry   Rand  Corp.  for  the  
negotiation  of  a  fixed-price  $&million con trac t   for  a  Space   Shu t t le  
mission-simulator  compu te r   complex  at  Johnson  Space   Cen te r .  
Sperry would  design,  develop,  fabricate,  test,  and   deliver  a  com- 
puting complex and  all assoc ia ted  hardware  for  the   Shu t t le  mission 
simulator.  (JSC  Release  75-  37) 
69 

April 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

28  A p r i l :  NASA  announced  t h e   beginning  of  a  broad  program  of  strato- 
spher ic  research   to  de term ine  the   effects  of  na tura l  and   manmade 
pollutants  on  the   ear th’s  ozone  shield.  In  a cooperative  effort  with 
o ther   Federal  agencies,  universities,  and   private  industry  to  assess  
the  threa t  posed by Freon,  a t rade  name for gases used a s  refrigerants 
and  in aerosol spray cans, NASA  would use high-altitude U-2  aircraft, 
balloons,  sounding  rockets,  and   satellites  to  measure   amoun ts   of 
these   compounds  an d   the ir   decomposition  products  already  in  the  
upper  atmosphere. The se  da ta  combined with da ta  obtained in labora- 
tories  would  he lp   to  de term ine   the   validity  of  predictions  of  Freon- 
induced  ozone  depletion  in  the   stratospheric  layer.  Some  scientists 
feared  tha t  a serious reduction of  the  protective ozone and  a resulting 
increase  in the  amount of  ultraviolet  light striking the  ea r th  could in- 
c rea se  the  incidence of sk in  cance r  and  could change the  average tem- 
pera tures  of  the   earth‘s  atmosphere. 
The  NASA   program, managed by  the  Office  of  Space  Science, em- 
phasized  basic  re sea rch   needed   to  unders tand   the   physical  and  
chem ica l  processes occurring in the  a tmosphere ;  this understanding 
was necessary to the  assessmen t  of changes caused by human activity. 
(NASA  Release  75 - 124) 
29 A p r i l :   NASA was  inviting scientists  to  propose  experiments for a 1979 
mission  tha t  would fly by Jup i ter  in 1981 and  then  travel to a mid-1985 
encoun ter  with  Uranus.  Although  the  mission  was not yet approved, 
NASA  officials wanted  to  select flight  investigations  early  to  initiate 
necessary  science planning and  development. (NASA Release 75 -127) 
30 A p r i l :   Th e  f i is t  set of  wings for NASA’s Space  Shu t t le  Orb i ter  began a n  
18-day  land  and  wa ter   journey  from  Grumman  Aerospace  C o r p . ’ ~  
facility in New  York  to  Palmdale,  Calif.,  for final assembly with the  
Orb i ter .  Th e  two wing  panels,  each  9 m long from tip to fuselage and  
18 m wide  at the  fuselage edge, would travel aboard transpor ters  spe- 
cially  designed  to b e  pulled  by  a  truck-at 
16  km  per   h r - o r  loaded 
onto an ocean-going  container ship. From New York the  wings would 
make  a 13-day trip through the  Panama  Cana l  to Long Beach,  Calif., 
and  then   travel overland to  Palmdale. 
Th e   double-delta  aluminum  wings  had  been  designed,  manufac- 
tured ,   and   tes ted   by  Grumman  under   a  $40  million  subcon trac t  
awarded  by  the   prime  Space  Shu t t le  contractor,  Rockwell Interna- 
tional Corp.,  in March  1973.  (JSC Release  75-38) 
0  NASA announced the  appointment of Dr.  John E.  Naugle,  Deputy Asso- 
c ia te   Administrator,  to  be   Acting  Associate  Administrator  until  a 
replacement  was  named   for Dr.  Rocco A.  Petrone.  (NASA  anno,  30 
April 75) 
During  Ap r i l :   Soviet  spend ing  for  research   and  development  had   risen 
50% between 1968 and  1973, representing an  increase  of from 2.5%  to 
3.8%  of  the   Soviet  gross  national  product,  the  A i r   Forces  Journal 
International  quoted  a Dept.  of  Commerce report  a s  saying. During 
t h e  same  period,  outlays  for U.S.  R&D  had fallen from 3%  to 2.4%  of 
t h e  GNP.  The  number   of  Soviet  scientists  and  engineers working  in 
R&D functions nearly  doubled in the period, from 594 000 to 1 069 000; 
by  contrast,  t h e   U.S.  tec6nological  pool  had  risen  from  454 000  to 
531 000. The  growth s temmed  from a  Soviet decision,  announced in 
1968, to  increase  Soviet expenditures  for science  and  technology by 
more than  60%. Th e  report es t ima ted  tha t  90% of the  Soviet technical 

70 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
April 
workforce  was  in  the  military  and  space  fields.  (AF Journ Znt,  April 
75,  20) 
NASA’s flying  laboratory  Ga l i l eo   ZI,  a n   ins trumen ted   Convair  990, 
participated  in  a month-long  cooperative  investigation  of  the  Arctic 
seas .   Researchers   from  NASA ,   the   U.S.  Geological  Survey,  U.S. 
Army,  U.S.  Navy,  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administra- 
tion,  and  several Canadian agencies hoped  to find methods  of  meas- 
uring  critical  changes   in  t h e   Arctic  environment  tha t   would  he lp  
environmentalists  find  ou t  how  best  to  manage  Arctic  resources .  
A  major  objective  of  the   program  was  a n  e xp e r im e n t - c a l l e d   t h e  
A IDEX ,   the  Arctic  Ice Dynamics Joint Experiment-to 
investigate the  
re la t ionsh ip   among  ice  motion,  wea ther ,   and   o c e a n   cond i t ions .  
Combined da ta  from aircraft- and  ground-based  investigations would 
be  used  to  in terpre t   satellite d a t a  obtained  a t  t h e   same  time. 
BESMEX,  the  Bering S e a  Marine Mammal Experiment,  would  s tudy  
the  migration  pa t terns   of  marine  mammals  and  the   relationship  be- 
tween  mammal population,  migration,  and  sea-ice  conditions. 
In  a  third  experiment,  sc ien t is ts  would  measure  microwave  emis- 
sion charac ter is t ics  of polar ice, hoping to find a key to  global monitor- 
ing of  ice distribution by climate and size. Th i s  information would aid 
in  predicting  the   survival ra te  of  offshore  drilling  rigs.  (ARC   Release 
75-11) 
Goddard Space  Flight  Cen te r  awarded  a $20 000 re sea rch  grant  to  the  
University of Florida to es tab l ish  the  feasibility of the  electromagnetic 
wave  energy-conversion  (EWEC)  concep t .   The  EWEC  converter  used  
electromagnetic  an tenna s  to absorb  the  sun’s  electromagnetic  radia- 
tion in to  an  array of  insulated  components and then  convert it directly 
to electricity. Th e  absorber  opera ted  similarly t o  insec t  an tennae  and 
the   re t ina  of  the   eye:  In sec t s  communicated  by  the   reception  of  in- 
frared   and  o ther   electromagnetic  radiation  or   energy,  using  the ir  
an tennae   tuned   to  the   proper   frequency   by  nature’s  design.  Once 
received,  the   energy  was  converted  into  e lec tr ica l  impulses.  (NASA 
Release  75 - 102) 
Dur ing   Ap r i l  -M a y :   NASA  conduc ted   Atmospheric  Variability  Experi- 
ment  IV   and  Atmospheric  Variability  Severe  Storms Exper imen ts  I 
and I1 in cooperation with  the  U.S. Air Force ,  Army, National Weath- 
e r  Service,  and several universities.  Coordinating da ta  collected over 
the   eas tern   two-thirds  of  the   U.S. by  sa te l l i tes ,   aircraft,  rada r ,   and 
wea ther  balloons,  participants  hoped  to  develop  new  techn iques  for 
predicting  where  and  when  tornadoes  might  s tr ike .   Th e   d a t a   col- 
lected,  including information  on  thunderstorms,  updrafts,  and  wind 
and cloud data, would be  compared with ground-truth observations to 
de term ine   the   relationship  between  severe   s to rm s   and  the ir   en-  
vironment.  Participating  in  t h e  exper imen ts  were 41 radiosonde  s ta-  
tions,  18 radar  stations,  7 ins trumen ted  aircraft, and 5 meteorological 
satellites.  (MSFC  Release  75 - 102) 

71 

May  1975 

1  May :   A  decision  had  been  made  to  designate  Viking  Lander   2  and  
Orb i ter  2  a s  Viking  Spacecraft-  A,  Kennedy  Space  Center’s S p m e -  
po r t   News  reported.  Lander   1  and   Orbiter  1 would  become  Viking 
Spacecraft-B.  The   change  had  been  made  to  permit  early  sterili- 
zation  of  Lander   2  to  meet  the   11  Aug.  launch   date.  (Spacepor t  
News ,   1 May  75,  2) 
0  Dr. Noel W.  Hinners, N k 3 A  Associate Administrator for Space  Science, 
and   Major  General  Soehardjono,  Director  Genera l   of  Po s t s   and  
Telecommunications  for the  Republic  of  Indonesia,  signed an agree- 
ment  for  the  July  1976  launch   of  Indonesia’s  first  communications 
satellite on a NASA Thor-Delta rocket. The new comsat, in synchronous 
equatorial orbit over Indonesia where  its signal could be  transmitted 
to  40  ground  receiving  stations,  would  permit  Indonesia  to  begin 
development  of  a  national  communications  network.  (NASA  Release 
75 - 134) 
A  telescope  aboard  NASA’s Oao   3 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 
(named Copernicus  and  launched  21 Aug.  1972) was observing three 
nearby stars---epsilon Eridani, tau  Ceti, and epsilon Indi-for 
signs of 
other  civilizations  that  might  be  trying  to  contact  ear th   with  laser  
beams. 
The  telescope  had  scanned  the  first s ta r  in November  1974 for  14 
orbits while  the   spec trome ter   scanned  the   ultraviolet  spec trum   for 
potential  laser   signals  to  ear th .   The  da ta   were  being  analyzed  and 
scientists were planning to scan  tau  Ce t i  and  epsilon Indi again during 
the   summer  and  fall of  1975.  (NASA  Release  75-130) 
0  Under  an  agreement with  the  Air Force,  Flight Research  Cen ter  pilots 
would  fly  the   YF-17  a i r c r a f t - c o n t e n d e r   for  selection  a s   the   Air 
Force combat fighter-in 
a research  program to acquire flight da ta  of 
a  high-performance  aircraft  for  comparisons  with wind-tunnel  tes ts  
and  other  analytical  methods,  FRC  announced.  The  comparisons 
would be used to update prediction techniques required for the  design 
of fu ture  highly maneuverable  aircraft.  During the  25 flight hrs, pilots 
would  measure  performance  and   stability a t  high  angles of  a t tack  a t  
both  high  and low  altitudes,  and  perform  maneuverability  tes ts   and  
pilot physiological studies  during  sustained  high  acceleration levels. 
(FRC  Release  11-75) 
0  An  overactive  sun  and excessively bright moon  had  caused  brief  shut- 
downs of  instruments aboard  Intelsat (International Telecommunica- 
tions  Satellite) communications  satellites,  the  New  York  T imes   re- 
ported.  Showers of  particles  during solar flares on  11 March  and  13 
Oct.  1974 had  built up excess  electrical charges on satellite surfaces 
tha t   had  not  been  electrically  grounded.  Noise  from  the   resulting 
electrical discharges confused  readings of  which way onboard anten- 
nas were pointing, causing the  an tennas  to point away from the  ear th  
and  temporarily  cu t   off  communications. 

73 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
A similar problem occurred  27 March when a spinning comsa t  inter- 
pre ted   infrared  light  from  a n  exceptionally  bright  moon  a s  coming 
from earth.  Because of this, the  satellite’s controls were receiving an  
e a r th   indication  twice  a s   of ten   a s   usual,  t hu s   command ing   the  
pointing system to compensa te  by despinning a t  twice i t s  normal rate. 
Communications were  blacked  out because  t h e  an tennas  were  spin- 
ning relative to the  ea r th  ra ther   than  remaining  stationary and  point- 
ing toward  earth. 
The   NYT  quoted  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  engineers  a s  
saying tha t  these  occurrences  pointed  out t h e  need  for more  knowl- 
edge   about the   exact  behavior of  Intelsat  satellites in  space   so  tha t  
changes  could b e  made   in the   design of  fu ture   satellites. The   solar- 
particle problem had led  to more thorough electrical grounding aboard 
the   newest  Intelsat  satellites.  (McElheny, NYT,  1 May  75,  83) 
2  M a y :   Dr.  John F.  Clark,  Director of  Goddard Space  Flight Center,  and 
Daniel J. Fink,  Vice  Pres iden t  of  General Electric Corp.  Space  Div., 
were awarded the  National Aeronautic Association’s  Robert J. Collier 
Trophy  for  individual  accomplishment  in   making  t h e   Landsat- 
formerly  the   Ear th   Resources   Technology  Satellite-program 
the  
outstanding aerospace  even t  of  1974. The  presentation was made a t  a 
dinner  in  Washington,  D.C.,  jointly  sponsored  by  the   NAA  and  the  
National Aviation  Club. Choice of  the  two officials as representative 
of the  NASA-industry team  “which abundantly proved during 1974 the  
value of  remote sensing to space”  was the  unanimous decision of  the  
selection committee of  26 distinguished leaders  and  authorities. The  
comm i t tee   also  paid  par t icu lar   tr ibu te   to  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.’s 
Aerospace  Group  and  RCA’S Government  and   Commercial Systems 
Group  for  the ir   ro les   in  t h e   ear th-resources   and   env ironmen ta l  
surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA A c t i v i t i e s ,  April 
75; Goddard News, June   75) 
*  Pres iden t  Ford presen ted   the  Harmon Aviation  Awards,  given €or out- 
standing feats of individual pilot skill, worthy of  international recogni- 
tion,  and   contributing to  t h e  a r t   and  sc ience  of  flight. 
The   1974 Astronauts’ Trophy  was  awarded  to  the  Sky lab  2  crew 
who,  during the ir   25 May  to  23 June   1973 mission,  became   the  first 
as tronau ts  to successfully accomplish major repairs on a spacecraft in 
space .  Sky lab  2 commander  Char les  Conrad, Jr.,  accep ted  the  award 
on  behalf  of  himself and  crewmembers  Pau l  J. Weitz  and Joseph P. 
Kerwin. 
Pres iden t  Ford  presen ted   the   1974 Aeronauts’ Trophy  to  the   son 
of  Malcolm  S. Forbes  for  the  latter’s  series-of 21 flights  in  a  hot-air 
balloon  tha t  took  him 4000 km  across  t h e   U.S.  from Coos Bay,  Ore., 
to  Gwynn Island,  Va. 
The   1974 Aviators’ Trophy went  to Col.  Edward J.  Nash ,   Deputy 
Chief of  Staff for Operations of  the  21st Air Force, for his 21  000-km 
round-trip airlift mission in a C -5  aircraft from the  U.S. to  Israel, and  
for his  direction of  continuous C-5  and  C-141  operations from t h e  
U.S.  to the  Azores  and  on to Israe l  between 14  Oct.  and  14  Nov.  1973. 
The  1973 Aviators’ Trophy was awarded to L/C Edgar L.  Allison for 
piloting  a n   HC-130H  aircraft  of  the   Air  Force  57th  Aerospace 
Rescue  and  Recovery Squadron nonstop on 20 Feb.  1972 from Taiwan 
to  Sco t t   Air  Force   Base,  Ill.,  a  d i s tance   of  14  053  km,  without 
refueling.  This established  a record for the  longest straight-line non- 
stop flight  in  a  turboprop  aircraft.  ( P D ,  5 May  75,  480-481) 

74 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 
May 
5 May:  The   Sena te   Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space   Sc iences  
favorably  reported  out  H.R.  4700  authorizing FY  1976 appropriations 
to  NASA.  Changes  recommended  by  the   committee would  raise  the  
NASA  authorization  by  $5.7  million  to  $3.545  billion. 

Recommended Changes in  the  FY  1976 NASA 
Authorization by  the Senate Committee 

Program 

D i f f e r e n c e  
f r o m  S u bm i s s i o n  
(millions) 

R e c o m m e n d e d  
A u t h o r i z a t i o n  
(millions) 

Purpose 

Research a n d  Deuelopment: 

Space  shuttle 
Space  flight operations 

Advanced  missions 

0 

-4.0 

-1.5 

1206.0 

203.1 

0 

Physics and  astronomy 

C7.0 

162.8 

Lunar  and  planetary 
exploration 

Launch  vehicle procure- 
ment 
Space  applications 

Aeronautical  research 
and  technology 
Space  & nuclear 
research  & 
technology 

Energy  technology 
applications 
Tracking & da ta  
acquisition 
Technology  utilization 

R&D Totals: 
Research  and Program  Management: 
Basic  submission 

R&PM Totals: 
Construction  oflihcilitcees: 
Modiiication of  11-by-11- 
f t  transonic  wind 
tunnel  at  ARC 
Addition to Lunar 
Sample Facility  at JSC 
Addition for composite 
model and metal finish- 
ing shops a t  LaRC 

0 

0 

+8.9 

0 
n 

0 

-2.2 

0 

+8.2 

0 
0 

0 

-2.5 

0 

75 

Accepted  as presented 
Allocation of  reduction 
left todiscretionofNASA 
Recommended deletion of 
this  item;  activities  to  he 
integrated with  simdar 
and  related  functions in 
other programs 
To increase knowledge of 
u  pe r  atmosphere, 
i&ntifylng  problems 
and developing 
new  technology  for 
dealing with  them 
Accepted  a s  presented 

Accepted  a s  presented 

To  increase emphasis on 
weather  research, 
L A C E  p r o a am ,  ad- 
vanced  communica- 
tions  r e s e a r c h   and 
Space Shuttle  payload 
definition 
Accepted  as presented 

Accepted  a s  presented 

Accepted  a s  presented 

To seek economies  in  the  
progr.am 
Accepted a s  presented 

Accepted  a s  presented 

259.9 

166.9 

183.9 

175.4 

74.9 

5.9 

240.8 

7.0 

2686.6 

776.0 

776.0 

2.7 

Accepted  as presented 

0 

Deleted  from  funds 

1.9 

Accepted  as presented 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Recommended Changes in the FY  1976 NASA 
Authorization  by the Senate Committee (continued) 

Program 

Differenee 
from S u bm i s s i o n  
(m i l l ion s )  

R e e omm e n d e d  
Au thor iza t ion  
(m i l l ion s )  

P u r p o s e  

Construction of Facilities:  ( c o n i . )  
Space Shuttle facilities 
Rehabilitation of facil- 
ities at  various 
locations 
Minor construction of 
new facilities  or 
additions to old 
facilities 
Facility planning and 
design 
C  of F Totals: 
Grand Totals’ 

0 

0 

0 

47.2 
16.0 

Accepted  as  presented 
Accepted  a s  presented 

5.0 

Accepted  a s  presented 

0 
- 
-2.5 
i-5.7 

- 
Accepted  as presented 
9.3 
82.1 

3544.7 

‘Total  does  not  include  a  supplemental  authorization  for  increased  pay  costs  introduced and  considered  as 
H.R.  13172. 

For  the   transition  period  1  July  to  30  Sept.  1976,  the   committee 
recommended decreasing NASA’s total budget  request  of  $958 900 000 
to  $929 900 000.  Th e   r e q u e s t ed   $730 600  000  fo r   r e s e a r ch   and  
development was reduced  to $704 600 OOO,  leaving NASA management 
to apportion the $26 million reduction.  The  committee reduced  funds  
requested for construction of  facilities from $14 500 000 to $11  500 OOO 
in  a   ser ies  of  minor economies. (Sen Com on Aero & Space  Sci Rpt 
94  - 103) 
0  The  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Pro jec t  was “one of  the  few tangible survivors of 
tha t  champagne-bubble a tmosphere  of  de ten te   along with  the  badly 
tarn ished  SALT [S tra teg ic  Arms Limitations Talks] agreements,” A v i -  
a t i o n  Week and  Space  Technology sa id  in an editorial. From the  Soviet 
viewpoint  the  goals were obvious:  to t a p  into  the  mainstream  of  u.S. 
technology,  to blur the  international image of  u.S.  superiority with the  
appearance  of  parity by flying a  joint manned mission,  and to develop 
the  technical  base  for  international  space   rescue   capability.  U.S. 
goals  remained obscure.  The  mission  would  provide the   answers  to 
some  experimental  questions:  Could  the   U.S. and   U.S.S.R.  work  to- 
ge ther  in a  joint space  program? Could an international  rescue  capa-  
bility be  developed? Could the  ASTP experience be expanded to fu ture  
joint  space  ven tures?  
Tha t  ASTP had survived to the  final countdown was a  tribute to the  
flexibility, stamina,  and  in  enuity of  the  techn ica l  working groups of 
both  coun tr ies .   A  fo rm i fab le   se r ie s   of  technical,  philosophical, 
linguistic,  and operational  problems had been   solved and the  invest- 
ASTP had been “partially worth the  effort.  . . to have a  sizable group 
men t   by  both coun tr ies  had  been  substantial. 
of  NASA  and  indus try   technicians  get  some  prac t ica l   hard-headed 
experience in working with their Soviet coun terpar ts  and acquiring a  
realistic view of  the ir  techn ica l  capabilities and  philosophy. We think 
the  re s t  of  the   value  of  the   mission will  come  from determining ju s t  
76 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
how  serious  the   Soviets a re  about fu ture  joint  ven tures  in  space  and  
how much they really want to  give and  how  much they want to take.” 
(Hotz, A v  W k ,  5 May  75,  7) 
5 -22  M a y :   Representatives  from  the   five  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Pro jec t  
Working  Groups,  including  55  NASA  employees, met  in  Moscow  to 
conclude preparations  for the  schedu led  15 July launch  da te .  Part of 
the   U.S.  contingent  left for  the   Soviet Union  on  5 May  and  the final 
group,  led  by  NASA  Deputy Administrator George M.  Low,  depa r ted  
16 May. 
U.S.  communications  equ ipmen t   checkout  and   docking  targe t  
alignment te s t s  were completed at the  Baykonur cosmodrome by mid- 
May,  in  time  for  Dr.  Low  and  a   group of  NASA  officials to  take   an 
inspection and orientation tour  of  the cosmodrome. The group visited 
the   launch   pad  from  which  the   ASTP  Soyuz  spacecraf t   would  be 
launched   and  the   Soviet  equivalent  of  Kennedy  Space   Center’s 
Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) where the  group inspec ted  the  prime 
launch   vehicle and  prime  backup  Soyuz  spacecraf t .  
At the  22 May flight read iness  review (FRR) cha ired  by Dr. Low  and 
Vladimir  A.  Kotelnikov,  acting  pres iden t   of  the   Soviet  Academy  of 
Sc iences   replacing  the   ailing Mstislav  V.  Keldysh,  Soviet  and   U.S. 
space  officials  signed  the   repor t   indicating  tha t   the   “Apollo-Soyuz 
Te s t  Pro jec t  was proceeding in accordance  with  the  agreed schedu le  
and  ready to proceed toward the  launching planned for July 15,1975.” 
Before  the  signing, U .S .  ASTP  Techn ica l  Director Glynn S.  Lunney 
and his Soviet coun terpar t  Konstantin D. Bushuyev gave a  5-hr review 
of  the   technical  histories  of  their  respective  spacecraf t .   Reporting 
tha t  no major problems remained, Lunney and Bushuyev said tha t  133 
documen ts  had  been  negotiated  and   signed  and  only  the   postflight 
review remained  to  be  prepared .  
Working Group chairmen made their final presen ta t ions  indicating 
tha t  all major ta sk s  had been completed. (NASA Release 75 -156;  Ezell 
et  a1 ., The  Partnership:  A   H i s to ry   of  the  A p o l l o S o y u z   Test  Project, 
285-301;  Reuters,  N Y T ,  23 May  75,  33) 
6 M a y :   Pres iden t  Ford announced the  recipients  of  the  1974 Pres iden t ia l  
Management  Improvement  Awards,  given  annually  a s  the   highest 
recognition for outstanding contributions  in  improving  the   effective- 
ne s s   and  economy of  government operations.  Among the   rec ip ien ts  
was NASA’s  Mariner-Venus  1973 management  team  a t  NASA  Head- 
qua r te r s  and  Je t   Propulsion Laboratory.  (PD ,  12 May  75,  504) 
Detente,  while  relaxing  tension  between  the  U.S.  and  Soviet  Union,  had 
produced  ‘ba technology  drain  from  the  United  States  to  the  Soviet 
Union tha t  has cost the  United S ta te s  millions of  dollars, thousands  of 
jobs  and   some  valuable  scientific  secre ts ,”   J a c k  Anderson  and  Les 
Whitten  reported  in  a   Wash ing ton  Post  article.  Soviet  technology, 
which lagged years behind the  US. in fields including computers and  
space  sc ience ,  had   little  to  offer  and much  to gain  from  the  techno- 
logical exchange. With official government encouragement U.S.  firms 
had  exported or  were planning to  export millions of  dollars worth of 
techn ica l  information and produc ts   including aircraft  and  advanced 
computers. 
Anderson and Whitten repor ted  tha t  the  Soviets often pu t  finished 
products  to  military  use.  They  were  using  detente and  some  advanced 
U .S .   compu ters   to  ca tch   up  in  their  10-yr  lag   behind  the   U.S.  in 
compu ter   sc ience ,   a   key  to  the   US’S 
overall  technological  superi- 
77 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

ority.  One   u.S.  firm,  Control  Data  Corp.,  had   signed  preliminary 
agreements  to  he lp   t h e   Soviet  Union  build  plants  to  manufacture 
compu ters  and  per iphera l  equipment. 
The Soviets were also eager  to ca tch  u p  with the  U.S.  in the  produc- 
tion of wide-bodied  je ts .   Holding  out possible  con trac ts ,   t h e  U .S .S .R .  
had  obtained  detailed  plans  for  wide-bodied  j e t s   from  Boeing  Co., 
Lockheed Aircraft  Corp.,  a nd  McDonnell Douglas  Corp.  (Anderson 
e t   a1 ., W Po s t ,  6 May  75,  B13) 
Astronomers  in  the  People 's  Republic  of  China  said  they   had  dis- 
covered two minor planets between Mars and  Pluto, repor ted  a British 
p re s s  delegation visiting Nanking Observatory.  The  press  quoted the  
Ch inese  a s  saying tha t   the  planets,  observed in January,  were  rarely 
visible because of  the ir  position in the  solar system. The Ch inese  had 
named   the  planets Pu rp le  Mountain One  and Purp le  Mountain Two, 
for the  name of  the  mountain on  which the  Nanking Observatory was 
located.  (Reuter, W P o s t ,  7 May  75) 
0  Rockwell International Corp., holder of the  prime con trac t  with NASA to 
build the  Space  Shu t t le  Orbiter, announced tha t  more than  $109 mil- 
lion  in  subcon trac ts   for  the   Space   Shu t t le   main  engine  had  been 
awarded  by  the   Rocketdyne Div.  since work  on  the   engine began  3 
yr ago. Figures to d a t e  showed tha t  firms in  4@ s ta te s  were participat- 
ing in  the   Space  Shu t t le  program. 
Rockwell re   orted  tha t   Space   Shu t t le  develo  ment  would  funnel 
an   estimated 
billion  into  the   u.S.  economy \y  1978  and   c rea te  
employment  for  approximately  50 000  workers.  (Rockwell  Int'l 
Re lease  RO -9) 
0  Canada  would develop the  remote manipulator  system (Ms) for NASA's 
Space   Shuttle  to  permit  as tronau ts   inside  the   Shu t t le   Orb i ter   to 
deploy or retrieve payloads in space, NASA  announced. Canada  would 
fund   the   $30  million  project,  providing  the   first  flight  unit  to  NASA 
without  charge  in  1979.  Canada   would  also  supply  flight  units  for 
follow-on  Orbiters.  Costs  for  these   units  would  not  include  charges 
for  Canada 's  research   and  development.  (NASA Re lease  75-135) 
7  May:  An  Italian  launch   crew  launched   Explorer  53  @AS -C )   Small 
Astronomy  Satellite  for  NASA  from  San   Marco  launch   platform, 
located  in  the   Indian  Ocean   off  t h e  coast  of  Kenya,  a t  6:45  pm  EDT 
(1:45 am local time 8 May) on a Scout launch  vehicle. Th e  spacecraf t  
en tered   near-equatorial  orbit  with  a  523.35-km  apogee,  502.18-km 
perigee,  94.88-min  period,  and  2.995"  inclination. 
Primary objectives of  the  Exp lorer  53 mission  were to measure  the  
x-ray  emission  of  d iscre te   extragalactic  sources ,   to  monitor  the  
intensity and spec t ra  of galactic x-ray  sources  from 1.0 kev  to 50 kev, 
and   to  monitor  t h e  x-ray  intensity of  the   s tar   Sco X-  1. 
During a preliminary  in-orbit  checkou t ,   controllers noticed  tha t   a 
s tuck   nutation  dampe r   was  causing  the   spacecraf t   nutation,  o r  
coning, angle  to b e  4"  ra ther  than  the  planned 0.2". Energizing the  z- 
axis coil reduced  the  coning angle to 0.5".  Although  the  dampe r  could 
not  be   freed desp i te   repea ted   a t temp ts ,   the  nutation could  be  kep t  
within  reasonable  limits  so   tha t   scientific  objectives  could  be 
achieved.  A  committee would  evaluate  t h e  problem. 
O the r  spacecraf t  anomalies  included intermittent operation of  the  
spinning digital solar-aspect detector,  and  irregular and  noisy opera- 
tion  of  the  spacecraf t   s t a r  sensor.  Neither  problem was expec ted  to 
seriously  degrade  t h e  mission. 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

May 

The   195-kg  satellite  was  designed  to  extend  and   complement  the  
capabilities of Explorer 42  (Uhum, launched 12 Dec.  1970 a s  the  first 
satellite dedicated  entirely to the  study of  x-ray  sources in  space) and 
Explorer 48 (launched  16 Nov.  1970 to study galactic and extragalactic 
gamma radiation). Explorer 5 3 ,  with its broad  spectral range, provided 
higher  energy resolution than previous  satellites and permitted a study 
of  physical  conditions  near   a n  x-ray  source.  The   spacecraft’s  quasi- 
three-axis  stabilization  system  allowed  much   longer  continuous 
observation  of sources. Data from Explorer 53 would provide the  basis 
for the  more detailed x-ray  studies to be made by High Energy Astron- 
omy Observatories A  and B  scheduled  for launch  in  1977 and  1978. 
The  experiment aboard Exp lorer  53 was  designed and  built  by  the  
Cen ter   for Space  Research   of  the  Massachuse t ts  Ins t i tu te  of  Tech-  
nology.  The  spacecraf t  control section was  designed by  the  Applied 
Physics Laboratory of  the  Johns Hopkins Univ. Goddard Space  Flight 
Cen ter  managed t h e  program for the  Office of Space  Science. Langley 
Research  Cen ter  was  responsible  for the  Scout launch  vehicle.  Italy 
was  responsible for t h e  assembly, checkou t ,  and  launch  of  the  Scout 
on a cost-reimbursable basis.  (NASAMORS 6 May 75’15 May 75; NASA 
Releases  75-  101, 75-  121) 
9  Canada’s Anik  3   (Telesat-  3) domestic  communications  satellite  was 
launched by NASA at 7:35 pm EDT from Eas tern  Test Range on  a three- 
stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch  vehicle. Originally sched- 
uled for March, t h e  launch  had  been  postponed because  of  a s tr ike  by 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.  workers [ see   10  Feb.1.  The   satellite was 
placed in the  planned highly elliptical transfer  orbit with a 35  945-km 
apogee,  231.4-km  perigee,  634.3-min  period,  and  24.75’  inclination. 
Ground control fired  the   spacecraft’s  apogee kick  motor  at  1:30 pm 
EDT on  10 May,  circularizing the  geosynchronous orbit a t  38 000 km ;  
the   spacecraf t  was  drifting  toward  i t s   final  operational  location  a t  
approximately  104’  west  longitude. 
Anik  (Eskimo word  for brother) 3 was th ird  in a ser ies  of  Canad ian  
domestic comsats; Anik 1 (launched 9 Nov.  1972) andAn ik2  (launched 
20 April  1973) were  operating  at  114’  and   109” west  longitude,  pro- 
viding TV and telephone service to the  most remote areas  of  Canada. 
Built by Hughes Aircraft Co.,  Anik 3  was  1.8 m in  diameter and 3.3 m 
high, weighing 544 kg a t  launch  and  272 kg in orbit. With power from 
23 000 solar cells and  enough battery capacity to maintain full service 
during  a  solar eclipse.  Anik  had  13 channels  that  could  transmit up  to 
10  color  TV  transmissions  or  9400  telephone  circuits  or  analog  or 
digital data. 
The   NASA-  Telesat  Canada   contract  defined  the   NASA  mission 
objective a s  the  placement of  the  satellite  in  a  synchronous transfer  
orbit  of  sufficient  accuracy   to  allow  onboard  propulsion  sys tems  to 
place  the   spacecraf t   into  a  stationary  orbit  with  enough  residual 
stationkeeping  propulsion  to  meet  mission-lifetime  requirements. 
This objective was met and  the  mission was adjudged successful on  20 
May. 
NASA would be  reimbursed for launch  hardware, services, and DOD 
range  support.  The   project  was  managed  by  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Cen ter  under the  direction of the  NASA Office of Space  Science. (NASA 
MORS,  25 A p d  75,  20 May  75;  GSFC W k l y  S S R ,   1-7  May  75; NASA 
Releases  75-  113, 75-  131) 

79 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
0  NASA ,   in cooperation with t h e  Dept. of Transportation,  was investigating 
aircraft wake vortices-turbulent 
air trailing from an aircraft’s wing- 
tips and swirling a t  velocities up  to half the  flight speed  of  the  aircraft. 
Safety  required  an   aircraft  to  travel  far  enough behind  a   preceding 
airplane  to  permit  the   vortices  to  dissipate,  adding to  congestion at 
already  busy  airports.  NASA’s objective  was  to  develop methods  to 
reduce   the   intensity  of  the  vortices  and  rende r  them  harm less  3 km 
behind  the   aircraft.  Th is  would  decrease   the   amount of  fue l  wasted 
and  the   pollution produced  when  aircraft  were  sub jec ted  to holding 
pa t terns   and waits  to  taxi  to  a  runway,  and would  permit  aircraft  to 
land   and  take   off  a t  a   fas ter   rate. 
Engineers  and  scientists  at  Ames  and  Flight  Research   Cen ters  
were investigating the  vortices by flying an ins trumen ted  Learjet  and  
a   T-37  jet  tra iner   through  wakes  crea ted   by  larger  aircraft.  Data 
collected  during  the se   flights,  checked   against  wind-tunnel  da ta ,  
suggested several possible ways of  alleviating the  wake-vortex prob- 
lem,  including tailoring the  lift  across  the   aircraft  wings,  modifying 
engine placement,  and  adding wing spoilers and drag devices.  (NASA 
Release  75-  136) 
8 Ma y :   A  new  antireflection-coated  metal  oxide  semiconductor  (AMOS) 
solar  cell  developed  by  Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory  scientists  might 
have potential use  in the  nation’s  solar energy program, JPL  scientist 
Richard J. S te rn  repor ted  a t  a  Photovoltaic Specialists Conference in 
Phoenix. The solar cells, made from oxidized gallium’arsenide with an 
extremely  thin  nearly  transparen t   film  of  gold  on  the   surface ,   had 
demonstrated an efficiency of  about 15% in terrestrial sunlight, be t ter  
than  the  average silicon solar cell now  in  s tandard  use.  The  new  cell 
also had  superior res is tance  to radiation,  promising a  longer lifetime 
in space.  Dr.  S tern  sa id  tha t  the  technology was potentially adap tab le  
to very low-cost polycrystalline th in  fiims, with only  a  modest reduc- 
tion  in  efficiency.  (NASA   Release  75-  133) 
0  The  International  Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization  announced 
the  award  of  a   $99  894   15-mo  contract  to  the  Research  Founda- 
tion  of  the  State  Univ.  of  New  York  for  a   study  of  radiation- 
induced  defects  in  solar  cells.  The  Foundation  would  develop  an  in- 
formation base  for  predicting  electron  damage  to  silicon  solar cells 
over a  wide range of  parame ters  for the  materials from which the  cells 
were  made.  (INTELSAT Release  75-32) 
I I  M a y :   Employees of  McDonnell Douglas Corp.  ratified  a  new  con trac t  
by  a   4609  to  2796  vote,  ending  a   13-wk  strike  [ see   10  Feb.].  The  
con trac t  agreement called for a  31%  across-the-board  wage  increase  
dur ing  the  first year  and  3% boosts during the  second and  third years. 
The strike of  19  000 McDonnell aerospace  workers,  including 200 at 
Kennedy Space  Cen ter ,  had delayed all NASA ’ s  schedu led  Thor-Delta 
launches.  (W Post,  12 May  75, A16) 
12 May: Th e  Sena te  passed   by  voice  vote  H.R. 4700,  the   NASA  Authori- 
zation  Bill  for  Fy 1976  and   t h e   transition  quar ter .   Reported  out  of 
the   Sena te  Committee on  Aeronautical and   Space  Sc iences  5 May, 
the  Sena te  version  of  the  bill authorized $3.545 billion for NASA  in FY 
1976,  an increase  of  $5.7 million  over the  original reques t ,   and  $930 
million  for  the  transition  period  1 July  1976  to  30  Sep t .   1976,  a  
decrease  of  $29 O00  million  from  the  request.  (CR ,   12  May  75, 
S7890-96) 

80 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
space  cen te r  d uring a  tour  of  the main Soviet flight-control cen te r  24 
Soviet  officials  ave western  newsmen  their  first  glimpse of  a   Soviet 
km from Moscow. The  Wa sh ing ton  Po s t  repor ted  tha t  the  group led  by 
the  center’s  techn ica l  director, Dr.  Alberty V. Militsin, toured a  5-yr- 
old  six-story  brick  and   sands tone   building  acknowledged  by  Dr. 
Militsin  to  b e   one  of  severa l   space   facilities  nea r   Moscow.  The  
operations  room,  which was  similar  to  the   control  room  at  Johnson 
Space  Cen ter ,  contained f ive  rows of  consoles,  each  with  telephones 
and   closed-circuit  TV screens .  Mission  Control Director Aleksey S. 
Yeliseyev  told  the   newsmen  tha t   the   consoles  were  staffed  during 
missions  by  from  15  to  24  officials  and   technicians.  An  illumi- 
nated world map  on the  wall showed tracking  s ta t ions  and the  orbital 
pa ths   of  spacecraf t .   Electronic  sc reen s   flashed  flight  information. 
O ther   suppor t   consoles,  communications  systems,  and  computers 
were  located  elsewhere  in  the   building. 
Dr. Militsin said tha t  the  cen te r  had  con tac t  with Soyuz spacecraf t  
i n s a c h  orbit  for  5  to  25 min,  depending on  the   orbit. 
The   newsmen  also  visited  the   three-room  suite  near   t h e   main 
operations room  assigned to nine US. technicians  for the  July Apollo- 
Soyuz  Te s t  Project.  (Osnos, W Po s t ,   13 May  75,  A10) 
0  Rockwell  International  Corp.  Space  Div.  announced  the   award  of  an  
es t ima ted  $1  million  subcon trac t   to  the   United  Technologies Corp. 
Hamilton  S tandard  Div.  to  build  the   flash  evaporator  subsys tem ,   a  
par t   of  the   Space   Shu t t le  Orbiter’s  environmental control  and  life- 
suppor t  system. The  evaporator would  use exce s s  heat  genera ted  by 
Orb i ter  subsystems to tu rn  water from the  spacecraft’s  three  power- 
producing fue l  cells into s team  vented into space ,  handling a s  much a s  
60 kg of  water  per  hr.  (United Aircraft  became  UTC in  May.) 
Rockwell held the prime con trac t  with NASA to build the  Orb i ter  and  
integrate  the  complete  Space   Shu t t le   system.  The   evaporator  sub- 
system con trac t  was the  third of three  con trac ts  totaling more than  $27 
million  awarded  to  Hamilton.  Under  previously  awarded  subcon- 
t rac t s ,   Hamilton  was  also  developing  the   Orbiter’s  atmospheric 
revitalization  subsystem,  Freon coolant  loop, wa ter  boiler  hydraulic 
thermal-control  unit,  and  ground-support equipment hydraulic  oart. 
(Rockwell Int’l  Space  Div  Release  SP -17 )  
13 Ma y :   The  Air  Force  Sys tems  Command repor ted   tha t   researchers   a t  
the   Air  Force   Avionics  Laboratory were  tes t ing   fiber  optics-thin 
s t rand s  of  glass tha t  transm i t  light-to 
transm i t  avionic signals from 
one point  to  another in  an  aircraft.  Fiber-optics  da ta   transfer  began 
with an electronic signal tha t  was converted into light by a  transducer ;  
the   light  traveled  through glass  s t rand s  and  was  reconverted  a t  the  
o ther  end   into  electrical  signals, with  minimal  loss  of  energy.  AFSC 
quoted  Avionics  Lab  researchers   a s   saying  tha t ,   unlike  the   usual 
copper  wire,  fiber optics were unaffected by  s ta t ic  from nearby elec- 
trical  equipment  and  were  immune  to  lightning,  nuc lear   radiation, 
electrical sparking, fires, and grounding problems. Because extensive 
lab   testing  was  nearly  complete,  the   next  s tep  would  be  a   low-cost 
flight-test program, perhaps   on a   remotely piloted  vehicle  (RPV). 
The  Avionics  Lab   also  had  awarded con trac ts   to  develop passive 
optical couplers,  a  fiber-optics da ta  bus,  and a  wideband fiber-optics 
system tha t   would  handle  large  da ta  rates.  The  proposed Air  Force 
Advanced Development Program could put a  total fiber-optics system 

81 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
on manned and unmanned aerospace  vehicles by 1980. (AFSC Release 
OIP 087.75) 
9  Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph  H. McConnell told a 
stockholders’ meeting tha t  ComSatCorp was finalizing a con trac t  with 
Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s 
Marisat  maritime  communications satellite  schedu led  for  launch   in 
summer  1975. McConnell also  sa id  tha t   ComSatCorp had  agreed to 
lease  one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium 
led by  Phillips Petroleum Co.  Marisat would make  available,  for the  
first  time,  reliable  voice,  da ta ,   teletype,  and   facsimile  communica- 
tions to ships at  sea  and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell  sa id  tha t  
the  success  of the  Marisat program would depend  on  the  Navy’s  use of 
the   system  and  on   ComSatCorp’s  ability  to  develop  a  subs tan t ia l  
marke t  in the  commercial shipping industry.  (Snider, W S t a r ,  14 May 
7 5 ,  F1) 
13 -14 M a y :   More  than  500  representatives  from  government,  industry, 
and   universities  a t tended   a  2-day  conference  a t   Lewis  Research  
Cen ter   to  review  progress  in  aerospace  propulsion.  Av ia t ion   Week 
and  Space  Technology repor ted  tha t  high-speed  performance was no 
longer the   top  priority  among the   propulsion  researchers ,   emphas is  
having switched to quiet, clean, and  fuel-conserving engines. Presen-  
ta t ion s   and   pane l   d iscuss ions   inc luded   a ircraf t   noise-reduction 
technology,  fuel-conservative  engine technology,  upper-atmosphere 
pollution-measurement  programs,  and   engine  sys tems   and   compo- 
nen t   technology. 
LeRC’s  John  B.  Whitlow  reported  tha t   new  technology  generated 
by  NASA’s supersonic cru ise  airplane research  (SCAR) would develop 
a n  engine far different from the  afterburning supersonic turbojet tha t  
was  to  have powered  the  first U.S. supersonic  transport.  A  potential 
new  engine might be  a duct-burning turbofan with fea tures  such  a s  a 
variable-geometry fan   tha t   allowed  t h e   engine  to  move  a s  much   a s  
possible between  straight  turbojet  and   straight turbofan operational 
cycles.  O ther   objectives  for  future  NASA-developed  SST  propulsion 
sys tems   included  a  7400-km  range  with  outstanding  economy  a t  
speeds   from  mach  2.2  to mach 2.7,  good  subsonic cruise  character- 
istics,  good  hold  endurance   and  economy,  and low  takeoff noise. 
Whitlow  stressed  that,  because   of  noise  limitations,  future  SSTs 
would  not  b e   straight  turbojets,  and   SCAR  researchers   were  con- 
cen tra t ing  on low-bypass-ratio  turbofans.  As bypass ratio also affects 
engine weight,  fue l  consumption,  drag,  and  cost-effective  perform- 
ance,  no  single  bypass  ratio  of  a  conventional  engine  could  mee t  
a l l  des ired  goals simultaneously. Thu s  SCAR  researchers  were devel- 
oping variable-cycle  engine  technology  tha t   could  tailor  the  bypass 
ratio  and   perhaps  t h e  f a dp r e s su r e   ratio  for optimum  performance. 
Cand ida te  engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass 
superson ic   turbofan,  a  duc t-burn ing   turbofan,  a nd   a  rear-valve 
variable-cycle engine.  (LeRC Release 75-  19; Yaffee, A v  Wk, 14 July 
75,  46-49) 
13-20 M a y :   The   second  in  a  ser ies  of  flight  simulations  between  flight 
controllers and  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project crew members  in Houston 
and  Moscow was completed in  preparation for the  July mission.  The  
first  of  the  three  simulations schedu led  for the  session began  a t  6:20 
am  CDT  13  May,  1 hr  before  Soyuz  launch   time,  and  continued  for 

82 

M a y  

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1975 
25.5  hr  into t h e  simulated mission.  With  both  Soviet and  US.  crew- 
men  participating in  simulators in the ir  respective countries and  con- 
trol  cen ters   fully  manned,  t h e   Apollo  and   Soyuz  spacecraf t   were 
“launched”  and   put  through  various  maneuvers.  Communications 
between the  two control cen te r s  included voice, teletype, datafax, and  
TV .   During t h e  simulation,  a  technical problem prevented observers 
in  Houston  from  hearing  the   two  Soviet  cosmonau ts ;  NASA  officials 
said la ter  tha t  tha t  problem should not happen during a real flight. No 
o ther  major problems  were  reported. 
A second  simulation begun a t  6:30  am CDT  15 May  and continuing 
for  56  h r  rehearsed   Apollo-Soyuz  rendezvous,  docking,  crew  trans- 
fers, and  undocking and  final separation. A third simulation, begun a t  
6:30  am  CDT  19  May,  was  cancelled  when  the   command  module 
simulator in  Houston  did  not work  properly.  Th e  simulation,  a  9-hr 
rehearsa l  of  rendezvous  and  docking, was successfully completed 20 
May. 
Final  simulations  by  Houston  and   Moscow  control  cen te r s   and  
crewmen  were  scheduled  for  30  June   and  1 July.  (NASA  Release 
75-141;  Tass ,   FBIS-SOV, 16 May  75,  U1;  Ezell et  a l . ,  The Par tner-  
sh ip:  A   H is tory   of  the  A p o l l o S o y u z  Test Pro jec t ,   285;  UPI,  hWT, 14 
May  75, 69) 
14 May :   The   U .S .S .R . ’ s   Baykonur  cosmodrome,  located  in  the   city  of 
Leninsk  near  Tyuratam,  was  th ree   to  four times  a s   big  a s  Kennedy 
Space  Cen ter ,   U.S.  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  commander  Thomas 
P.  Stafford  said  a t  an ASTP  press   briefing a t  Johnson  Space  Center. 
ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand sa id  tha t  50  000 persons inhabited the  
launch   complex.  The   briefing  followed  the   crew’s  re turn   from  the  
Soviet Union where they had participated  in the  final training session 
before  the   schedu led  July  launch  [see   14-  30 April]. 
Th e   as tronau ts   said  tha t   a t   the   Soviet  spacepor t   they  had  been  
shown “everything  we  had  a  requirement  to  see,”  the   launch   pad, 
spacecraft,  tes t   and   checkout  facilities,  automatic  checkout  equip- 
ment  (ACE) rooms,  and crew  quarters.  T h e  one  “drastic  difference” 
between  the   tour  received  by  the   Soviet cosmonauts  in  the  U .S .   and  
tha t   of  the   American  as tronau ts   in  t h e   U .S .S .R . ,   said  Stafford,  was 
“we  didn’t  go  to Disneyland  over  there.” 
Astronaut  Donald  K.  Slayton  descr ibed   the   launch   pad  a s   “rel- 
atively simple.”  The   spacecraft,  assembled on top  of  a railroad  ca r ,  
was hauled to the  pad about 4 days  before launch. Th e  s tacked  vehicle 
was jacked   up   and   set on  the   pad;  after  checkou t ,   t h e  vehicle  was 
ro ta ted  to the  proper launch  azimuth. The  booster was held to the  pad  
by  four  suppor t   arms   which  were  popped  out  of  the   way  by 
counterweights once  the   vehicle  s tar ted   to move. 
Stafford  said  tha t   Len insk  was   a  new  city  built  in  a  desert.  The  
continued  construction  activity  indicated  tha t   t h e   Soviets  “are  not 
slowing down  orie bit  in  the ir   space  program.”  Th e  Soviets had  told 
their  U.S.  coun terpar ts   tha t   they   would  continue  to  have  severa l  
manned   flights  a  year  operating in  low  ea r th  orbit.  (Transcript) 
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  had issued  a reques t  for proposals for a 10- 
mo s tudy  of a space-based power-conversion  and power-relay  system, 
MSFC announced. The  proposed study would examine alternate means 
for  generating  electrical  power  in   space ,   with  emphas is   on  

83 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

identification  and delineation  of  problem  a rea s  and  new  technology 
required  for  these   power  systems.  (MSFC Release  75-90) 
0  Fifteen years  ago the  launch  of two U.S. satellites on the  same  day would 
have  “b las ted  the   top  off  of  Page  One,”  E rne s t  B.  Furguson sa id  in 
a  Wash ing ton  Star  article.  But when  it  happened   7 May-Explorer 
53  and  An ik  3-it 
“drew  le s s  coverage than   two  swallows re turn ing  
to  Capistrano.”  At  a  total cos t  of  $44 million,  to  be   shared  by  NASTA 
and  foreign  friends,  Exp lorer  53  Small  Astronomy  Satellite  would 
s tudy  x-ray  sources  within  and   beyond  the   Milky  Way,  and An ik   3 
would  transm i t  communications back  and  for th  across  Canada. 
The   NASA  space  budget  for  FY 1975 was  nearly  $3 billion.  “Con- 
sidering  inflation,  tha t   seems  a  bargain.”  The  cu r ren t  space  budget 
was “not  quite  12 t imes  what  the .P re s iden t  has   asked  to  handle the  
Vietnamese refugee  effort for each  of  two years.  You  are  free  to  say 
for  yourself  where  the   two  programs  s tand   on  the   relative  sca le  of 
things.”  (Furguson, W S ta r ,   14  May  75,  A17) 
15 May:  The  National Sc ience  Foundation marked  the  25th anniversary 
of  i ts  es tab l ishmen t  a t  a d inner  at  the  Dept.  of  S ta te  in Washington, 
D.C.  Dr.  Norman  Hackerman,  chairman  of  the   National  Sc ience  
Board,  presided  a t   the   d inner   hosted  by  the   25-member  board,  t h e  
policy-making body  of  NSF.  Among those  presen t  were many former 
board  members,  including  the   six  cha r te r   members  appointed  by 
P re s iden t   Truman   in  1950,  and   represen ta t ives   of  the   scientific 
community, industry,  and   the   executive  and   legislative branches   of 
government. 
Pres iden t   Ford  sen t   a  message  saluting  NSF:  “In.  the  last  qua r te r  
century  the   National  Sc ience  Foundation  has   become  the   Nation’s 
principal  agency  for  the   suppor t   of  basic  research   and   education 
in  all  fields  of  scientific  endeavor.  The   creation  of  the   National 
Sc ience  Foundation represen ted  a culmination of  our national under- 
standing of  the  role of  sc ience  in our society. In the  last two and a half 
decades ,  the  Foundation has  built  a prestigious  reputation  for sound 
scientific  exploration to  improve the   quality of  life for all.” 
Dr.  H.  Guyford Stever, NSF Director, announced plans to es tab l ish  
an Alan T.  Waterman Award for research  and  advanced study in the  
mathematical, physical,  medical,  biological,  engineering,  social,  and  
o ther  sc iences .  Dr.  Waterman  had been  the   first NSF  Director.  (NSF 
Re lease  PR75-47) 
* NASA had   awarded a  definitive $141) 577  924 con trac t  to Thiokol Corp. 
Wasa tch   Div.  for  solid  rocket  motors  for  the   Space   Shuttle,  MSFC 
announced. A previous le t te r  con trac t  issued  26 June  1974 had given 
Thiokol authority  to  proceed  with  the   work which  included  design, 
development, test,  and evaluation of  the  solid rocket motor. The  con- 
t rac t s   also  called  for  Thiokol  to  provide  suppor t  equ ipmen t ,   tool- 
ing   and   suppor t   pa r t s ,   sys tems- in tegra t ion   suppo r t   and   spec ia l  
studies,  and  da ta  and  documentation.  (MSFC  Release  75-91) 
The  National Sc ience  Foundation and the Univ.  of Wyoming announced 
plans  for construction  of  a 213-cm  infrared  telescope  near  Laramie, 
Wyo.  To  cost  $1.6  million  and   be  operational  in  late  1977,  it  would 
b e   th e   larges t   of  its  kind  in   the   con t inen ta l   u.S.  and  one   of  t h e  
larges t  in  the  world. 
To  be  used  for  s tudy  of  ob jec ts  in our  galaxy  and  beyond  and  for 
study of the  more d is tan t  s ta r s ,  the  ins trumen t  would be a Cassegrain 

84 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 
May 
telescope  mounted on a  ring 3 m  high and  housed in a  building with a  
14-m  dome  capab le   of  operating  automatically  in  subzero weather. 
The  facility would  also contain  equipment for infrared  detection  sys- 
tems   and  a  laboratory-dormitory for  observers. 
The   s ta te   of  Wyoming  had  committed  $975 000  for  construction 
and  NSF  was committing $625 000.  Operating cos ts  would b e  shared  
by  the   s ta te   and  users.  (NSF Release PR75-42) 
0  Kennedy Space  Cen te r  announced the  selection of  Modular Computer 
Systems,  Inc.,  for  final  negotiations  on  a   $6.7-million  fKed-price 
con trac t   for  equipment  associated  with  the   Space   Shu t t le   launch- 
processing system. The  company would  provide  minicomputers and 
their  associated  equipment,  software, maintenance,  spares ,  and  en- 
gineering support. The  launch-processing system now under  develop- 
ment  at KSC would provide  automatic test,  checkout, launch  control, 
and   operational  management  for  NASA’s Space   Shu t t le   program. 
(KSC  Release 69-75) 
Kennedy Space  Cen ter  had issued  $7.5 million in awards  and con trac ts  
to small bus inesses  during the  first 9  mo of N 1975, bringing t h e  total 
awarded to small bus inesses  s ince  N 1970 to $61 million. The  KSC set- 
as ide   program  requ ired   tha t   a l l   procurement  reque s t s   exceeding 
$2500 be reviewed by  the  center’s  small-business  specialist  to de ter-  
mine  if  they  could be   se t   aside  exclusively for  small  businesses.  In  
addition,  KSC  had  successfully  participated  in  a   program  aimed  at 
awarding con trac ts  to minority-owned firms, with $7 million in awards 
made   s ince  the   program began.  (KSC  Release  70-75) 
15-16  M a y :   u.S.  and European  scientists met  a t  a  Goddard Space  Flight 
Cen ter  symposium to d iscuss  the  importance of  a  never-before-flown 
space   mission  out  of  t h e   ecliptic  plane,  the   pancake-like  plane  in 
which  all planets  orbit  t h e   sun.  Symposium cha irman  Dr.  Leonard 
A.  Fisk  said,  “A  view  of  the   solar  cavity  [the  region  dominated  by 
the   sun  through the   flow  of  the   solar wind] from outside  the  ecliptic 
plane  is  expec ted   to  expand   greatly  man’s  knowledge  of  inter- 
p lane ta ry   phys ics ,   so la r   phys ics ,   and   p lasma   p roce s se s   in  the  
universe.  To  place  a   spacecraf t   in  such   an   orbit  brings  expecta- 
tions tha t  we will witness new and exciting phenomena tha t  we  could 
neither  observe  nor  pred ic t   from  our  presen t   vantage  point  in   t h e  
ecliptic  plane.” 
The   scientists  agreed tha t  the  missions under  consideration  could 
be  undertaken  jointly  by  NASA  and   the   European   Space   Research  
Organization:  ESRO would  have primary responsibility for the  space-  
craft,  and NASA  would  provide the  launch  vehicle.  (NASA Activities, 
June   75) 
16 May: Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  had issued  a  reques t  for proposals 
for  an   x-ray  source   sys tem   for  the   x-ray  te lescope   facility  being 
cons truc ted  a t  MSFC  for use in  the  High Energy Astronomy Observa- 
tory  (HEAO)  project,  MSFC  announced.  The  proposed  con trac t  would 
include design, fabrication,  assembly,  preliminary in-plant checkout, 
installation,  and   verification.  The   con trac tor   would  also  have  the  
option of  building a  cover for the  system. Under the  terms  of  the  con- 
tract,  the   x-ray  source  system  would  be  installed  on  a   4 .6-cm-by-  
39.3-cm  s tee l  flange by  20  Feb.  (MSFC  Re lease  75-93) 
0  F la t   conductor  cab le   developed  by  NASA   for  rocke t   and   spacecraf t  
wiring was  being installed  in Marshall Space  Flight  Center’s  experi- 

85 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

mental  solar  house,  MSFC  announced.  Th e   surface-mounted  cab le  
was  being  considered  for  commercial  and   residential  applications, 
to  provide  a  wiring  sys tem  tha t   was  lower  in  cost,  eas ier   to  install, 
adap tab le   to  all  types  of  w a l l   construction,  and   a s  safe   a s  or  safer  
than  conventional roundwire electrical systems. Flat conductor cable 
could  be   routed  under   a l l   paneling,  tile,  and   carpet,  and   t h e   low- 
voltage  flat  cab le   for  lights  a nd   recep tac les   could  be  routed  under  
wallpaper  o r   simply  painted.  Th e   cable  had  already  been   installed 
successfully in  a n  MSFC  conference  room  and   in  six  apar tmen ts   in 
Yonkers, N .Y . ,   a s  a joint effort between NASA and  t h e  New York S ta te  
Urban  Development Corp.  (MSFC  Release  75 -94) 
17  May :   France   launched   two  satellites, Cas tor   and  P o l l u x ,  on  a  single 
Diamant BP-4  booster from Kourou, French  Guiana.  I t  was the  f irs t  
time  France   had  orbited  two  satellites  on   a  single  booster.  Ca s to r  
en te red   orbit  with  a  1269-km  apogee,  273-km  perigee,  100.3-min 
period;  and  30“  inclination;  Po l lux   en tered   orbit  with  a  1283-km 
apogee,  270-km  perigee,  100.4-min  period,  and  30“  inclination.  Th e  
press   reported  tha t   Cas tor   carr ied   an   accelerometer  to  measure  
changes in the  earth‘s  a tmosphere  for a 5-to-6-yr period.  Po l lux   car- 
ried a micrometer for experiments in satellite propulsion. (GSFC W k l y  
SSR,  15-21  May  75 ;SF ,  Nov 75,406; Agence France-Presse ,  T o d a y ,  
18 May  75) 
18  May :   Equipment  aboard  U .S .   reconnaissance  satellites  could  photo- 
graph  a  pack  of  cigarettes  or monitor a  radio  conversation between 
foreign  pilots  from  an   orbit  of  130  km,  the   Ph i lade lph ia   Inquirer 
reported.  Satellites could also instantly de tec t  the  launch  of  an inter- 
continental ballistic  missile  and  determine  where  it was  going. 
Early  reconnaissance  satellites  were  of  two  types:  SAMOS  (satel- 
l i te   and   missile  observation  sys tem)   sa te l l i tes   carr ied   wide-area 
cameras  to determine  ground targe ts  of  in teres t ;  film was processed 
on  board  and  imagery  radioed  to  ground.  Discoverer  satellites from 
lower  orbits used  high-resolution  cameras  for closeups;  the   satellite 
e jec ted   i ts  film,  which  parachu ted   down  for midair  recovery  by  Air 
Force  aircraft. 
These   satellites  were  rep laced ,   in  t h e   1970s,  by  the   11  340-kg 
“Big  Bird”  spacecraft.  Th e  Inquirer  reported  tha t   technical  experts 
believed  that  Big  Birds  carr ied   TV  cameras   which  allowed  human 
monitors to maintain continuous watch on ground; if  they saw some- 
thing  of  interest,  they  could  order  immediate  photographs  by  the  
satellite’s  high-resolution  cameras .   The   exper ts   also  believed  tha t  
Big  Bird  carr ied   side-looking  radar   to  pene tra te   cloudcover  and  
equipment sensitive enough to distinguish between old and  new grass. 
Resolution was  no  longer measured  in me ters   but  in  centimeters. 
The  Inquirer  also  reported  tha t   other  satellites  carrying  infrared 
and   o ther   de tec tors  were  used   to  monitor  missile  launches,  de tec t  
hidden hea t  sources  such  a s  underground powerplants,  and  spot t h e  
warmth  of  buried missile  silos.  (Coughlin, P   Inq,  18 May  75,  5E) 
19 M a y :  The  unemployment ra te  for scientists  and  engineers,  which had 
been   1.1%  in  1970, rose  to  1.9%  in  1972 and  then  fell to  1.1%  again 
in  1974, the  National Sc ience  Foundation reported. Of  t h e  employed 
engineers  and  scientists,  only  0.5%  were  not  working  in  their  field 
because   of  a  lack  of  available  positions.  Business  and  industry was 
by  fa r  the  largest employer, with  60% of  a l l  the  employed engineers 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
and   scientists  throughout  the   1970-74  period.  Educational  insti- 
tutions  employed  about  13%;  Federa l   and   s ta te   and  local  govern- 
men ts  employed about  10.5 and  8%, respectively.  Between 1972 and  
1974 the  proportion of engineers in the  group had  increased from 62% 
to 64%.  Physical sc ien t is ts  constituted  12% of  the  science and  engi- 
neering workforce.  Environmental scientists were the  smallest group, 
making up  2.5% of the  sc ience  and engineering workforce. (NSFHigh- 
l i gh t s ,   19 May  75) 
20 May: NASA’s A t s  6 Applications Technology  Satellite (launched  30 May 
1974 into geosynchronous orbit) began  a 6-wk  move  from  its position 
35  900 km  over the  Pacific Ocean  west of  t h e  Galapagos Is lands  to  a 
new  location  above  Lake   Victoria  in   ea s te rn   Africa.  Th e   satellite, 
which  was  expected  to  reach   i ts   new  location  by  1 July,  would  be 
checked  out in time to participate in  t h e  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project in 
mid-July.  During tha t  mission A ts  6 would t rack  t h e  Apollo and  Soyuz 
spacecraf t  and   relay  TV  and   da ta   from  t h e  two  spacecraf t   to  ear th ,  
marking  the   first  time  a  satellite  had  been  used  to  relay  T V  from  a 
manned   spacecraft. 
The  new  location also would  bring A t s  6 within range  of  India for 
t h e   1-yr  Satellite  Instructional  Television  Experiment 
(SITE) 
scheduled  to  begin  1 Aug.  During  the   experiment-a 
cooperative 
effort  by  NASA  and  the   Indian  Space   Research   Organization-the 
Indian government would relay daily educational TV  programs to 5000 
villages  and  cities  throughout  India.  After  t h e   experiment,  the  
satellite would  be  moved  back  to  a position within range of  the  U.S., 
where  it  would  be  used  for  further  experimentation.  (NASA  Release 
75-153) 
8  Two U.S.  Air Force  communications satellites,  launched  from  Eas tern  
Te s t  Range, failed to reach  orbit when  the  third stage of t h e  T i tan  IIIC 
launch   vehicle  malfunctioned  and   tumbled  out  of  control.  United 
P r e s s  International quoted an Air Force spokesman a s  saying the  two 
satellites,  valued  at  $57  million,  were  to  have  been  placed  in  geo- 
stationary orbits,  one  over  the  Pacific  Ocean  and   the o ther  over t h e  
Indian  Ocean.  The  544-kg comsats-designed 
to  handle  a s  many  a s  
13 000  telephone  calls  or  to  relay  televised  or  printed  messages 
without danger of jamming or eavesdropping-would  have completed 
t h e   worldwide  military  communications  network  begun  in   1973. 
Officials  believed  tha t   a  power  problem  was  responsible  for  the  
failure.  @P I ,NYT ,  21  May  75,  40) 
8  F rank   Briscoe  Co.,  Inc.,  and  San ta   Fe  Engineers,  Inc.,  were  the  
apparen t   successful b idders   on  two  major  Space   Shu t t le  con trac ts  
which would be  awarded by Kennedy Space  Cen ter ,  KSC  announced. 
Frank   Briscoe  Co.  had  bid  $8  733  300  on   a  contract  for  the   con- 
struction  of  the   Orb i ter   processing  facility,  Orb i ter   towway,  and  
associated  site  work  and   utilities  a t   KSC .   It  was  in  the   processing 
facility  tha t   the   Orb i ters  would  b e   safed,  serviced,  and  maintained 
after returning from flights into space  and then  prepared for the ir  next 
mission.  Pha se   1  of  the   construction-scheduled 
for  March   1977 
a 5000-sq-m building with a low bay area 88 m 
completion-included 
long, 30 m wide, and  8 m high  and two high bay a rea s  61 m long, 46 m 
wide,  and  29 m  high. 
San ta  Fe Engineers  had  bid  $3 567  567 on  a con trac t  to cons truc t  
the   Shu t t le   approach  and   landing  tes t   facilities  at  Flight  Research  

87 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Center. Th e  con trac t  would include site preparation, construction of a 
maintenance  hangar  and   shops,  Shuttle  Orbiter  mating  s truc ture  
area,  hypergolic fuel and  oxidizer area,  fire protection  pump  station, 
concre te  towway  and  service  aprons,  parking  area   and  road  paving, 
and  necessary  utilities. Th e  project was scheduled  for completion in 
Sep tember  1976.  (KSC  Release  73-  75) 
0  Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory 
scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes a s  
part  of  a  NASA-requested  anthropometric  study  to  help  engineers 
design cockpits and crew  stations for future use. NASA  engineers who 
wanted to lay out the  Space  Shuttle work station were concerned tha t  
body sizes of the  pilots might change before the  station was used. Th e  
scientists performing the  study, using both curren t  d a t a  and da ta  tha t  
went back a s  fa r  a s  the  Civil War,  estimated tha t  in 1985 a pilot would 
average nearly  2 kg heavier and   1.5 cm  taller than   in  1967, when  he 
had  weighed  78.5 kg  and  was  177 cm  tall. 
In   addition  to  statistics,  NASA   requested  drawing board  manikins 
for designing the  Shuttle’s work areas.  The  study had produced two 2- 
dimensional manikins like cardboard  dolls with movable joints;  each  
manikin was  articulated in nine places  to represen t  typical  ranges  of 
body movement. A  95% manikin represen ted  a person 189.0 cm tall; a 
5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or  pilot, was designed 
so  tha t   only  5%  of  the   1985  pilot-astronaut  population  would  be 
smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station 
or cockpit tha t  would  accommodate 90% of  all astronauts and  pilots. 
(AFSC  Release  OIP 072.75) 
21 Ma y :  NASA’s Airborne  Infrared Observatory,  a four-engine 6- 141 je t  
transport  equipped with a 91.5-cm infrared  telescope, was dedicated 
to  the   memory  of  Dr.  Gerard  P.  Kuiper,  the   founder  and  former 
director  of  the  Univ.  of  Ariz.  Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory.  The 
Kuiper  observatory,  based  a t   Ames  Research   Center,  would  fly  a t  
altitudes up to 13 500 m  with the  telescope operating through a cavity 
in  the   aircraft’s  fuselage. 
Dr.  Kuiper,  who  had  died  in  1973,  had  been  one  of  the   foremost 
authorities on lunar  science.  He  had  played  a n  active  role in NASA’s 
Ranger and  Surveyor programs  and,  as head of  the  Ranger  scientific 
team,  had  directed  the   photographic  analysis  to  select landing  sites 
for the Apollo astronauts.  He  also had participated  in the  Mar iner  10 
mission, launched 3 Nov.  1973 to Venus and Mercury,  and the  P ioneer  
10  mission,  launched  2  March  1972  toward  a  December  1973 
encoun ter  with Jupiter.  (NASA  Release  75-  149; A&A  73,  350) 
NASA   announced  the   appointment  of  Robert  E.  Smylie  as  Deputy 
Associate Administrator  for Aeronautics  and   Space  Technology, ef- 
fective  immediately,  a nd  the   re turn   of  J.  Lloyd  Jones,  Jr.,  to Ames 
Research  Center  as Chief  of  the   Planning  and  Analysis Office. 
Smylie had  been  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  (Space), OAST, 
since July  1974. From October 1973 to July  1974 he had been Deputy 
Associate Administrator  for Technology af ter  serving as chief of  the  
Crew  Systems Div.  at Johnson  Space  Center. 
Jones  had come to Hq.  in 1972 a s  director of the  Aerodynamics and 
Vehicles  Systems  Div.  in  the   Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space  
Technology,  a  position  he  held  until  appointed  Deputy  Associate 

88 

ASTRONAUTICS  ANI)  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
Administrator (Aeronautics), OAST,  in July 1974. (NASA  anno,  21 May 
75) 
0  The  Energy Research  and  Development Administration had  awarded a  
45-mo  $17 736  000  con trac t   to  General  Electric  Co.  Space   Div.  to 
provide nuc lear  generators  for NASA's two Mariner-  Jup i ter-   Sa tu rn  
missions  schedu led   for  launch   in  la te   1977.  GE  would  build  seven  
radioisotopic  thermoelectric  genera tors  for  use   during  the   mission; 
three  of  the  nuc lear  g e n e r a t o r s - e a c h  providing 150 w a t t n w o u l d  be 
used  for  each   spacecraf t ,   and   the  seven th  would  serve   a s  a   spare .  
(ERDA  Release  75-  79) 
Marshall Space  Flight  Cen te r  had   issued  a   reques t   for proposals for a  
study  of  alternative  means  for  generating  electrical  power  in  space  
and  relaying the  power  to ear th ,  with emphas is  on problem areas  and 
new  technology,  the  Marsha l l   S ta r   reported.  Previous  studies  had 
defined  concep ts   for  the   use   of  large  solar-cell  panels  to  genera te  
power  in  geosynchronous orbit  and  transmit  it  to  ea r th   via  micro- 
waves; also  s tud ied  had  been  the  transmission  via  an  orbital  micro- 
wave  system of  power  genera ted   a t   a   remote  location  on  ea r th   and 
transm i t ted   long  d is tances   to  the   user   location.  (Marsha l l  S ta r ,   21 
May  75,  1) 
22 Ma y :  NASA  successfully launched  In te lsa t  IV F - 1   for the  Communica- 
tions  Satellite Corp.,  as  agent for the   In terna t iona l  Telecommunica- 
tions Satellite Organization, from Ea s ten i  Tes t  Range at 6:04 pm EDT. 
The  1400-kg satellite  en tered  the  desired  synchronous transfer  orbit 
with  a  35 870-km  apogee, 534-km  perigee,  10-hr 40-min  period,  and  
26"  inclination.  ComSatCorp successfully  fired  the   apogee motor  at 
6:45  pm EDT on 24 May, placing the  satellite in synchronous orbit over 
the Indian Ocean (36  184-km apogee, 35  704-km perigee, 2 4 h r  4-min 
period,  and 0.5"  inclination) with  a  final operational  position to be  at 
61"  ea s t   longitude.  When  it  became  operational  in  June ,   it  would 
replace  In te lsa t   IV  F - 5   a s   the   primary  opera t ing   satellite  in  the  
Indian Ocean a rea  in the  global 6-active-satellite Intelsat network; it 
would b e  able to transm i t  3500 two-way telephone conversations or 12 
TV  channels. 
The  launch  was  the  second  recen t  a t temp t  to  place  an Intelsat  IV  
satellite over the  Indian Ocean ;  on 20 Feb.,  the  first a t temp t  failed and 
Intelsat  IV  F-6  had  to  be  destroyed when  the  Atlas-Centaur  launch  
vehicle  tumbled  out  6f  control. 
INTELSAT launched  its first comsat, In te l sa t  I F -   1 (Ea r ly  Bird), on 6  
April  1965.  Between  1967 and   1970  12 Intelsat  I1  and  111 satellites 
were launched  before  the  In te lsa t  IV  launches  began in  1971.  (NASA 
MORS,  16 May  75,  25  Sep t   75;  NASA  Re lease   75-125;  NASA  Audio 
News, 23 May 75; GSFC W k l y  S SR ,   25-28  May 75; Salmanson, Atlas 
mgr.,  NASA  Hq.,  interview,  25 May  77) 
A  @ant 283 200-cu-m  balloon carrying  a  Marshall Space  Flight  Cen ter  
gamma  ray  de tec tor   was  launched   from  Pa les t ine ,   Tex.,  by  the 
National  Cen ter   for  Atmospheric  Research.  Th e   balloon  reached  
an altitude  of  40 km and  traveled  800 km  before touching down  near  
Ft. Stockton, Tex., 23 hrs later. The  purpose of  the  f i g h t  was to de tec t  
the   sources  and  determine  the   na ture   of  sudden   bu r s t s   of  gamma 
rays  coming  from  various  directions  in  space.  (MSFC  Re lease   75- 
100) 

89 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
0  Land sa t  2  (launched  22 Jan.)  was monitoring wa ter  resources  in Miss. 
and  t h e  effects of pollution on  the  wa ter  system, Marshall Space  Flight 
Cen ter   announced.  A s   par t   of  the  NASA  earth  resources  program, 
three   data-collection  buoys  placed 
in  t h e   Pea r l   River  were 
transmitting water-quality d a t a  to Land sa t  2 ,  which relayed t h e  da ta  
to  a  tracking  station  at NASA’s National  Space  Technology  Labora- 
tories  (NSTL) for processing.  Processed   da ta   on water  tempera ture ,  
dissolved oxygen,  aciditylalkalinity,  and  conductivity were  received 
in the  Miss. Air and  Water Pollution Control Commission, where s ta te  
investigators  could  identify  a  pollution  source  within  15  min  of  a 
satellite pass  over  the  buoys. 
A similar experiment was being conducted  in Mobile Bay by NASA  
and  t h e  Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium.  Data from  the  
experiments  would  help  evaluate  the   usefulness  of  the   system  and  
suggest improvements.  (MSFC Release  75-  97) 
0  Pres iden t   Ford  told  a  group  of  eight  congressmen  at  a  White  House 
meeting tha t   he  would work to reestablish  t h e  Office of  Sc ience  and  
Technology a s  a permanen t  par t  of the  White House organization, t h e  
New  York Times reported. The  office had been abolished by Pres iden t  
Nixon 1 July  1973. The  Times quoted Director of the  Domestic Council 
J am e s   Cannon  a s   saying  tha t   Pres iden t   Ford  would  propose 
legislation creating the  post of  science advisor with a staff of  10 to  15 
persons  and  an  annua l  budget of  $1 million to  $1.5 million.  ( W T ,  23 
Mav  75,  14) 
Rockwell  International Corp.  announced tha t   i ts  Electronics Research  
Div.,  under   a  con trac t   awarded  by  NASA  on  18  Feb.  1974,  had 
developed  a  single-chip  bubble-domain  memory  element  with  a 
capacity of  102 400 bits,  believed to be  the  largest capacity memory 
device  ever  built.  The  new  da ta   recorder-a  major  milestone  in 
NASA’s continuing program to develop an  all-solid-state da ta  recorder  
for fu ture  U.S.  spacecraft-was 
one-third  the   size  and  one-half  the  
weight  of  curren t   equipment.  It was  expec ted  to  use  half  the  power 
and  have 10 times t h e  life expectancy of presen t  recorders. Objective 
of  the   effort was  to  demonstrate  the   feasibility  of  fabricating high- 
capacity  memory  e lemen ts   with  reasonable  yield  and   operating 
margins.  (Rockwell  Int’l Release Em-1; LaRC  proj off,  interview,  18 
Jan  77) 
M a y - 7   June:  The   U.S.  and   Pe ru   launched   more  than   40  sounding 
rocke ts  and  balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for t h e  Inca  god 
of  flight,  to study the  earth‘s  atmosphere and  ionosphere from Chilca 
Launch  Range in Pe ru ,  a location on the  magnetic equa tor  where the  
earth‘s  magnetic field  is horizontal.  Ins trumen ts   aboard  the   rocke ts  
and   balloons  measured   the   composition  of  the   neutral  and   ionized 
atmosphere,  density  and  tempera ture ,   wind  shear ,   and  turbulence. 
Th e  measuremen ts  would  be   compared with da ta  from Explorer  51  
(Atmosphere  Explorer-Cy  launched  15 Dec.  1973) and   the   ground- 
based   Jicamarca  and  Huancayo  Observatories.  Th e  overall mission 
included t h e  launch  of 4 Nike-Tomahawks,  8 Nike-Apaches,  7 Supe r  
Arcas, and  10 Supe r  Lokis, a s  well a s  two balloons measuring 36 m in 
d iame ter  and   12 ozonesonde  balloons. 
Project  h t a r q u i  was  a  continuation  of  a NASA  sounding-rocket 
program conducted during the  1964-65  International Quiet Sun  Year  

22 

90 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
when 77 sounding rocke ts  had  been  launched  during t h e  first 4 mo of 
1965 from  a  sea-going  launch  platform,  the  USNS  Croa tan .  
Wallops Flight Cen ter  managed the  program for NASA;  the  Instituto 
Geofisico  del P e ru  arranged for the  use of  the   range,  supplied range 
operation  and   logistics  suppor t   in  Pe ru ,   correlated  ground-based 
measuremen ts  from J icamarca   and   Huancayo,  ass is ted   in  recovery 
operations,  and  performed  some preliminary work  at  the   range. 
In  addition to WFC,  Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter ,  Dudley Observa- 
tory,  Univ.  of  Pittsburgh,  Univ.  of  Ill., Penn .   S ta te  Univ.,  Univ.  of 
Denver,  and  GCA Corp.  supplied scientific payloads for t h e  sounding 
rockets and  balloons.  (WFC  Release 75-6;NASA  Activities, June  75, 
14; WFC  proj mgr,  interviews,  11-12  J an   75) 
24 May -26   Ju ly :   The  U.S.S.R.  launched Soyuz  18 ,   carrying cosmonauts 
Pyotr Klimuk and  Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 
7:58 pm local time (10:58 amI?DT). According to the  Ta s s  news agency, 
the   spacecraf t  en tered  orbit with  a 247-km  apogee,  193-km perigee, 
88.6-min  period,  and   51.6”  inclination.  Ta s s   announced  tha t   the  
purpose of  the  mission  was “to conduc t  fur ther  experiments with t h e  
orbital research  station ‘Salyut-4,’  s ta r ted  on  January  12, during the  
joint  flight  of  the   delivery  spacesh ip   ‘Soyuz-17’  and   the   station 
‘Salyut-4’  a s  well a s  to  te s t   individual e lemen ts  and   systems of  the  
spacesh ip  in  various modes  of  flight.” 
During the first day in orbit Klimuk  and  Sevastyanov checked  out 
essen t ia l  spacecraft and life-support sys tems  and  prepared for orbital 
maneuvering. The  crew switched on the  main engines twice on 25 May 
to raise the  spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and  dock- 
ing w i th s a lyu t  4 .  O n  26 May Soyuz 18 approached  the  station by  an 
automatic control system. A t  a d is tance  of  100 km the  crew took over 
control and manually docked t h e  spacecraf t  with the  Sa lyu t  4  station 
in pitch darkness.  After docking,  the  crew switched on t h e  station’s 
lights and began activation and  checkou t  of the  onboard systems. The  
crew transferred  equipment and  boarded t h e  station where they found 
a “Welcome to ou r  common  home”  sign left by the  station’s previous 
tenan ts ,  Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and  Georgy Grechko. 
The   cosmonauts  reported  tha t   all  systems were  operating normally 
and  tha t  they themselves were  in good health.  By  28 May the  station 
and  spacecraf t  were in  an  orbit with  a 349-km  apogee, 338-km  peri- 
gee,  91.4-min  period,  and  51.6” inclination. 
During  their  63  days  in  orbit,  t h e   cosmonauts  studied  the   sun ,  
planets,  and s ta r s  in various bands  of the  spec trum  of electromagnetic 
radiation using severa l  x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; 
investigated  geological-morphological ob jec ts  on t h e  earth’s surface, 
photographing  the   U.S.S.R. 
in  the   medium  and   southern  latitudes; 
studied  physical  processes  in  the   earth‘s  a tmosphere  and  in   space ;  
performed medical and  biological research  with  particular emphas is  
on  t h e  impact of  weightlessness on  the  human organism; and  tes ted  
the  station’s design and  onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised 
a garden of onions and  pea s  a s  a forerunner of providing self-sufficient 
food supplies in space .  Tass reported  tha t ,   for t h e  first time during a 
space   flight,  the   polar  lights  were  investigated  using  integral 
photography  and  spectrography methods. 
Twice  during  the  mission  Klimuk  and   Sevastyanov  spoke  with 
cosmonauts Aleksey A .  Leonov and  Valery N. Kubasov who were also 
in  orbit  participating  in  the   joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t  
Project  begun  15 July. 
91 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

By  23 July  the   cosmonauts  were  preparing  the   space   station  for 
automatic  operation.  On  26 July  a t  3:56  pm  Baykonur time  (6:56  am 
EDT), S o y w  18  and i t s  crew undocked  from Sa lyu t  4 .  They softlanded 
56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan  a t  7:18 pm  Baykonur time 
(10:18  am EDT). 
Tass  reported tha t  by27  July the  cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood 
pressure  fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned  to 
normal.  Decreases  in  erythrocytes  and   increases   in  leucocytes 
disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and  
res is tance  to functional tes ts  had  almost reached preflight baselines. 
Both Klimuk  and  Sevastyanov had  lost  some weight-  3.8  kilograms 
and   1.9  kilograms respectively-during 
the  mission. 
The  Soyuz  18  crew’s  62-day 23-hr  40-min  mission  broke  the   pre- 
vious 29-day  13-hr 20-min  Soviet record  for time in  space  se t  by  the  
Soyuz  1 7 .  The  curren t  world’s record for time in space  w a s  held by the  
Sky lab  4  astronauts for their 84-day l - h r  16-min mission, 16 Nov.  1973 
to  8 Feb .   1974. 
Salyut  4 ,  which  had  been  visited  by  the  two  crews  of  Soyuz  17  and 
18, was  the  fourth  space  station  orbited  by  the  U.S.S.R.  Salyut  1   had 
been  launched  19 April  1971. A  three-man  crew,  launched  on Soyuz 
10 ,  docked with the  station on 24 April but  returned  to ear th  without 
entering.  The Soyuz 11   crew, launched 6 J un e  1971, boarded  the  sta- 
tion and  conducted  experiments for 24 days but were  killed during a 
reentry accident. Sa lyu t  2  was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion 
of  wildly firing thrus ters  sen t  the station out of  control, tearing off the  
solar  panels  and  making  the   station  uninhabitable.  Sa lyu t   3  was 
orbited 25 June  1974 and  a two-man crew,  carried  bySoyuz 1 4 ,  lived 
and worked  aboard the  station from 3-  19 July  1974. A  second crew, 
launched 26 Aug.  1974, returned  to ear th  in 48 hr  after an unsuccess- 
fu l  attempt to dock with t h e  station, which itself reentered  the  earth‘s 
atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS-  Sov, 24 May-  28 July 75; GSFC 
W k l y  SSR, 22-28  May 75; AP,  BSun ,  27 Ju l y  75, A3; Lib of Congress, 
“S&T News  Alert,”  No  2600,  19 Sep t  75) 
2 7 - 2 8   May :  The  Saturn IB launch  vehicle scheduled  to launch  three  u.S. 
astronauts  into orbit  in July  a s  part  of  the  joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo- 
Soyuz  T e s t   Project  underwent  flight-readiness  te s t s   a t   Kennedy 
Space  Center.  During  abort  tes ts   on  27  May,  automatic  checkout 
equipment  was  connected  and  the   mobile  service  s truc ture   placed 
around  the   vehicle.  Sa turn   IB heavy  ordnance  and  the   spacecraft’s 
launch  escape   system were  installed  but  not  connected.  Two abort- 
procedure rehearsals were held. After a 28 May simulated countdown 
sequence ,   including propellant  loading,  umbilical ejection,  ignition, 
holddown arm release,  and  liftoff, a 6-hr simulated mission was held. 
Th e  launch team and a crew of  astronauts conducted post-orbital and 
insertion  checks,  launch-vehicle  guidance  tes ts ,   computer  upda tes ,  
simulated  burns  of  the   spacecraft’s  engine,  deorbit,  reentry,  and 
splashdown.  (KSC  Release  74-75;  Spaceport News, 30 May  75,  1) 
27  Ma y -1 4   June: A  one-third-scale  model  of  the   Space  Shuttle Orb i ter  
was  tes ted   in  Awes  Research  Center’s  40-  by  80-ft wind  tunnel,  to 
gather low-speed  flight d a t a  in support of  approach and landing tes ts  
of  the   first  full-scale Orbiter  a t   Flight  Research  Cen ter   in  1977.  I n  
addition, da ta  were gathered to calibrate the  vehicle’s air da ta  probes. 
Th e  model, built by  Shu t t le  prime contractor  Rockwell International 

92 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
Corp.,  was  13.1  m   long  and   weighed  20 NO  kg.  Additional  wind- 
tunnel  tes ts  were  scheduled  for November  1975 and  February  1976. 
(q s t rog ram ,  5 Jun e  75,  1; Young, JSC  aerodynamic  subsystems mgr, 
interview,  21 April 77) 
28 -29  May:  More than  200 persons from 30 countries  participated  in  an 
observance of  “European Space  Days,”  a demonstration  of  Europe’s 
space   capability  held  a t   the  European  Sp a c e -R e s e a r c h  and  Tech- 
nology  Cen ter   (ESTEC)  in  Noordwijk,  Netherlands,  by  the  European 
Space   Research  Organization  [scheduled  to   become  the  European 
Space  Agency on  30 May]. 
I n  a speech,  Secretary General of  the  International Telecommuni- 
cations Union M.  Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s  intention to play 
an important role in the  peaceful uses of outer space ;  the  programs of 
ESRO-ESA   offered  a  particularly  well chosen  range  of  satellites for 
research   and   applications. 
Y.  Demerliac,  Secre tary  General  of  Eurospace-Groupement 
In- 
the   audience  that 
dustriel Europken  D’Etudes  Spatiales-reminded 
since  1962 Europe  had  developed  43  satellites,  including  four  com- 
munications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of 
the  104 ground stations or  an tennas  in the  network of the  International 
Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization  (INTELSAT).  More  than 
two-thirds of  these   had  been  sold to  non-European  countries. 
Director  General of  ESRO  Roy  Gibson  (United  Kingdom) said  the  
creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: 
the  convention of  the  new  agency gave it  a specific mandate  to work 
toward  a  rationalization  of  Europe’s  space  program  which  its  pre- 
decessors ESRO  and  ELDO  (European Launcher Development Organi- 
zation) did not have.  He hoped  that  the  3-day presentation of ESRO- 
ESA   and other European programs would give the  visitors an impres- 
sion of  the   total  competence  and  capability  of  Europe’s  up-to-date, 
29 May:  Lewis Research  Cen ter  was  testing a version o P an ion-thruster 
ra ther   dispersed  space   effort.  (ESRO  Release  28 Ma  75) 
engine with reduced  propellant  requirements  tha t  would permit  pay- 
load  increases  of  up  to  20%  on  future  spacecraft,  NASA  announced. 
The   ion-thruster propulsion  system used  solar  cells  to  convert  solar 
energy into electrical power, tailored to the  curren t  and voltage neces- 
sary for the   ion  thrus ter .   The  propellant-mercury, 
cesium,  or  rela- 
tively stable gas-was 
ionized in the engine and electrically exhausted 
to  produce  thrust. 
During  the  tes ts   the   NASA  version  of  the   engine  had  become  the  
first electric propulsion system to exceed 10 000 hr of operation. LeRC  
was  continuing  the   testing  toward  an  endurance   goal of  15  000  hr. 
The  engine was the  second of  i t s  kind to be tes ted  by  NASA.  Th e  first 
had experienced  internal sputtering and erosion which had degraded 
performance.  Testing had  been  stopped a t  9715 hr for modifications. 
(NASA Release  75 - 150) 
0  Kennedy  Space  Cen ter   announced  the   selection  of  General  Electric 
Co.’s  Space Div.  and Martin Marietta  Corp. for competitive negotia- 
tion of  a con trac t  to check  out, control, and monitor subsystem hard- 
ware for the  Space  Shuttle launch processing system.  The  contractor 
would  design,  develop,  build,  test,  and   install  t h e   hardware.  The  
launch  processing  system  would  use  modern  industrial  automation 
techniques,  applied  to  a modular  concept,  to meet maintenance  and  

93 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

refurbishment requirements for turn-around  and  launch  of  the Space  
Shuttle.  The  other  cand ida tes   for  the   contract  had  been  Grumman 
Aerospace  Corp.  and  Aeronutronic Ford  Corp.  (KSC Release 94-75) 
30  M a y :   Both Viking Landers  were  1 wk  behind  schedule because  of  an 
electrical interface problem between two onboard power control units, 
Kennedy Space Center’s Spacepor t  News  reported.  (Spacepor t  News ,  
30 May  75,  2) 
0  A   team  of  Federal  and   university  scientists  were  using  three   instru- 
mented aircraft and  an elaborate ground network to construct a three- 
dimensional map of  the  atmosphere’s electrical fields around Kennedy 
Space Cen ter  and  to determine  the  conditions under which  a launch 
penetrating  these   fields would  trigger  a lightning  strike.  By July  the 
team  hoped to be  able to predict what the  electrical conditions would 
be a t  the  launch pad  10 to 20 min before liftoff. Th e  project,  d irec ted  
by  the   Dept.  of  Commerce’s Environmental  Research  Laboratories 
and furided by NASA,  included scientists from NASA, National Oceanic 
and  Atmospheric  Administration,  Naval  Research  Laboratory,  N. 
Mex.  Inst.  of Mining and Technology, and Univ.  of Ariz.  The  experi- 
menters  would  conduct  a month  of  aircraft flights under  and  around 
various  convective  clouds,  measuring  electrical  fields  and  making 
penetrations of frozen cloud a n v i l s - c i r r u s  clouds swept off the  tops of 
thunders torms   by  upper   level  winds.  I n   addition,  d a t a   from  the  
electrical-field-measuring  s ta t ions  
mapping  ground  network-24 
installed  around  KSC  by  NOAA  in  1973-were 
fed  into  a  computer 
whose  video  component  displayed  a  map  of  the   area   and  ground 
stations,  total electrical activity in nearby storms, weather radar  con- 
tours  of  precipitation,  electrical-field  contours,  and  the   positions of 
lightning  strikes. 
Th e  project was a continuation of  one begun for NASA by N O M  after 
the   Apollo  12  launch   on  12  Nov.  1969  when  lightning  s truck   the  
spacecraft,  shutting off  the  spacecraft’s electrical power and  setting 
off numerous alarms. The  spacecraft automatically switched to back- 
up battery power while the  crew restored  the primary power system. 
(NOAA Release  75-91;  A&A  69,  372-378) 
0  Scientists believed  that  light flashes  observed  by Sky lab  4  crew mem- 
earth’s magnetic field where  the  Van Allen radiation  be T t dipped  un- 
bers   during  their  16 Nov.  1973 to  8 Feb.  1974 mission  a s  they  flew 
through  the   South  Atlantic  Anomaly-a 
slight  asym  etry  in  the  
usually  low  over  Brazil-were 
a  previously  unsuspec ted   form  of 
radiation, Science  magazine  reported.  The   radiation  seemed  to  con- 
sist of  atomic nuclei heavier than  hydrogen which,  when  stripped of 
electrons,  would carry   multiple  positive electric  charges. 
Th e   astronauts  had  seen   the   flashes  when  the   spacecraft  cabin 
was  dark   and  they  were  preparing  for  sleep.  Scientists  suspected 
tha t   the   flashes  were  stimulated within  the   retina  of  the   ey e  by  the  
high-energy cosmic-ray particles.  Normally ear th  was  shielded  from 
cosmic rays by  the  magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays 
could  reach  a s  fa r  into  the   field  as   the   Skylab orbit. 
Because the  magnetic-field shielding of  the  ea r th  weakened toward 
the  geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic- 
ray exposure  a s  Skylab moved  away from  the   poles.  During two tes t  
periods,  light-flash  observations  of  Astronaut  William  R.  Pogue 
showed  a  close  correlation  with  exposure  variations.  (Pinsky e t   a l . ,  
Science,  30 May  75,  928-930;  Sullivan, NYT, 29 May  75,  10) 
94 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
30-31  M a y :   The  Convention  of  the   new  European  Space  Agency  was 
formally adopted  and  opened for  signing a t  a conference of  plenipo- 
tentiaries held 30 May in Par is  and  resided over by French  Minister 
of  Industry  and  Research  Michel 3 0 r n a n o .  Under  the   terms  of  the  
Convention, ESA came  into d e  facto  operation  31 May.  The  conven- 
tion was  signed by  the   10 member-countries  of  the  former European 
Space   Research  Organization-Belgium,  Denmark,  France,  West 
Germany,  Italy,  The  Netherlands,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  and 
United  Kingdom-and  would  remain  open  for  signature  by  o ther  
countries until 31 Dec.  1975.  Ireland, which had  had  observer s ta tus  
in ESRO,  had  indicated  i t s   intention  to  sign. 
The  new sp a c e  agency’s symbol was a rounded “ e yYy  for European, 
on  a  globe  representing  ear th ,   with  fine  lines  suggesting  both  orbit 
and axis and a white dot representing  a satellite in space.  (ESRO -ESA 
Releases  20 May  75,  23 May  75,  2 June   75) 
30 M a y - 8   June:   Th e  31st Annual Par is  Air  Show was held  a t  Le  Bourget 
Airport in France.  New  restrictions on  flight demonstrations by  high- 
performance  aircraft,  imposed  by  the   French   government  af ter   the  
1973 Air Show crash  of  the  Soviet Tu-144  supersonic transport,  had 
placed  the  show’s emphasis on displays of  the la tes t  aerospace hard- 
ware  and  technology  from throughout  the  world. Av ia t ion  Week and  
Space  Technology reported tha t  the  general turndown in the  economy 
throughout the  western world had caused a decline of  20% in exhibitors 
from  the   1973 show. 
France   emphasized the   cooperative  nature  of  i ts  major  programs, 
displaying  the   French-British  Concorde  SST,  the   French-German 
Alpha  Je t   trainer-attack  aircraft,  the   French-British  Jaguar   close- 
air support aircraft, and the  multinational A-300B  twin-engine wide- 
body  transport. 
The  U.S.  pavilion reflected  the  changing environment  a t  the  show, 
reserving  66%  of  i ts   floor  space   for  company  exhibits  restricted  to 
industry  visitors;  the  remaining  33%  contained exhibits  open  to  the  
general  public.  In   1973 60%  was  exhibitor  space   and  40%  for  the  
general public. 
Boeing Co.  and McDonnell Douglas Corp.  displayed  aircraft  tha t  
were potential replacements  for t h e  Boeing 707 and  McDonnell DC-  8 
on commercial airlines.  Th e  Boeing aircraft, a three-engine  member 
of  the  7 x 7   family,  incorporated  the   NASA-developed  supercritical 
wing. 
“Blue Planet”  was the  theme of  the  public section of  the  U.S. pavil- 
ion  which  emphasized  technological  fallout  and  practical  uses  on 
ear th   of  space   technology.  Included  were  full-scale  models  of  the  
Viking spacecraft  scheduled for launch  to Mars la ter  in the  year,  and 
of  Martin Marietta  Corp.’s  large  space   telescope. 
The  80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s 
capability  in  avionics  a nd   equ ipmen t   and   aerospace   technology. 
Among  the   new  aircraft  exhibited  by  the   British  were  the   BN2  Is- 
lander,  a  floating  aircraft  for  service  between  islands;  the   Lock- 
spieser LDA-  1, for cargo and  agricultural uses;  and a new version of 
the   BAC  111 fighter  aircraft. 
West  Germany’s  display  s tressed  i ts  participation  in international 
consortiums  a s  a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt - 
Boelkow-Blohm  GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of  its rev- 

95 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

enues  in  1974 had been  derived from multinational projects.  (Av W k ,  
2 Jun e  75,  14-20;  9 June   75,  12-17) 
31  M a y :  Pres iden t  Ford’s  announcement  tha t   he   intended  to  regtore t h e  
White  House Office of  Sc ience  and  Technology was  discussed  in  a 
Wash ing ton  Post  editorial:  most  sc ien t is ts  were  hear tened  by  Presi- 
den t  Ford’s  announcement.  They  had  unanimously  deplored  Presi- 
den t  Nixon’s  decision  to  abolish the  office, believing tha t  it was vital 
to the  nation’s well-being  for the  Pres iden t   to get the  most objective 
possible scientific assessmen t  of new weaponry, as well a s  of medical, 
economic,  and  environmental policies.  However,  sc ien t is ts  also felt 
tha t   the  establishment  of  the  office and  t h e  possible  appointment of 
National  Science Foundation Director  Dr.  H.  Guyford  S tever  a s  its 
head would  not  solve the   problem.  A repor t  drafted  by  a  committee 
of  13 leading scientists  had  spelled ou t  what  was  n e e d e d   establish- 
ment  of  a Council for Sc ience  and  Technology tha t   would  carry  the  
same  weight  a s  the  Domestic  and Economic Councils and  could hold 
its own with  t h e  Office of  Management and  Budget  and  DOD. 
Any  serious  cand ida te  for  the   top  science job  would  want  to  con- 
s ider  whether the  Pres iden t  ‘‘really intends to make constructive use 
of  a science adviser.  Pa s t  experience tells u s  tha t  t h e  bes t  mechanism 
for  advice  from  the   scientific community  is  of  no  avail  if  the   Presi- 
den t   isn’t  listening.”  (W Po s t ,   31 May  75,  A12) 
During May :   Preparations continued for la te  summer  launches  of  the  two 
Viking spacecraf t  to Mars.  A  Lander  1 plugs-out  tes t  was completed 
8 May,  2  days la ter   than   planned,  because   of  a  grounding  problem. 
By  26  May  all  flight  equipment,  except  for  the   gas   chromatograph 
mass   spectrometer,  had  been  installed  on  Lander   1.  Lander   2 was 
mated with  i ts  protective  aeroshell on  28 May. 
Orb i ter   1 was  undergoing final mechanical  assembly  a s  the   flight 
subsys tems  became available  after individual reworking.  By  31 May 
all  tempera ture-con tro l   louvers,  pro tec t ive   covers,  a nd   the rma l  
blankets had been installed. In i t ia lo rb i te r  2 system testing was com- 
pleted 5 May,  and  Orb i ter  block validation te s t s  were begun. A l l  solar 
panels  for both Orbiters  had  been  assemb led  and  swing-tested,  and  
were  awaiting buildup of  t h e  low-pressure  gas  system. 
On   13 May  a  major  hardware  review  of  both  landers  was  held  a t  
Kennedy Space  Cen te r  with 100 NASA  and industry participants. Th e  
review was the  final chance  to discuss modifications  in the  spacecraf t  
before  closure  of  the  bottom  plates  and  sterilization.  Following  the 
review,  Langley  Research  Center’s  Viking  Project  Manager  James  S. 
Martin,  Jr.,  said,  “Everything  is going jus t   great  and  right on  sched- 
ule.”  (Viking launch  and  mission  operations s ta tus  bulletins  4, 5, 6 ;  
N A S A  Ac t iv i t ie s ,   June   75) 
* Th e   vertical  tail  assembly  for  the   Space   Shu t t le   arrived  a t   Rockwell 
International Corp.,  in Palmdale, Calif.,  af ter  being shipped by Shut- 
tle  subcontractor  Fairchild  Republic Co.  The   tail  unit,  more  than  8 
m  high,  had  a root chord  of  nearly  7 m.  (FRC X-Press ,   6 June  77,  2; 
Space f l igh t ,   Jan  76,  25) 
* NASA  Life Sc iences  Director, Dr.  David L. Winter,  issued an  invitation 
to sc ien t is ts  to help plan NASA’s fu ture  life sc iences  program in space. 
The   invitation,  sen t   to  30  000  biological  scientists  in  the   US, 
sa id  
tha t  NASA  was  considering a ser ies  of  manned laboratories staffed by 
scientists,  engineers,  and   technicians  to  be   launched  aboard  the  

96 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
May 
Space   Shuttle.  One   en t ire   lab   devoted  to  life-science  experimenta- 
tion  would  be  launched  every  6  mo.  O ther   small  highly  auto- 
mated life-science  experiments could be performed  during Spacelab 
and  Space   Shu t t le   missions  dedicated  to  other  disciplines;  NASA 
estimated  that  a s  many  a s  200  life-science  flight experiments could 
be  conducted  in  space   during  the   1980s. 
The  invitation s ta ted  tha t  “in order to take maximum advantage of 
future  research   opportunities,  NASA  intends  to  involve a large  cross 
section of  the Life Sciences community in  shaping scientific program 
objectives,  in  selecting  spacecraf t  laboratory  equipment,  and  in  the  
planning  and  execution  of  Flight Experiments. ” 
NASA estimated  that approximately 200 scientists could participate 
as principal  investigators  of  future  flight experiments  and  tha t  50 of 
those  could  perform  the ir   research   in  space   a s  crew members. 
A s   part  of  the   first  phase  of  the   life-science  program,  NASA  re- 
ques ted   that  interested  scientists  suggest  general  topics  for  future 
research  and  identify  equipment  needed  to  carry  out  life-science 
investigations.  (Winter letter,  text;  NASA  Release  75-140;  UPI, NYT ,  
9 May  75,  7) 
0  The  launch of Sk y lab  1  on  14 May  1973 had  torn  a temporary  “hole”  in 
the   ionosphere, Phys ics  T o d a y  reported.  The  journal  said  scientists 
speculated  tha t   the  hole,  a depletion  of  the  total electron count,  was 
caused by molecular hydrogen and water vapor from the exhaust of  the  
Sa turn   V  engines  which  had  continued  to  burn  well  into  the   lower 
region of  the ionosphere. The  exhaust caused  the  oxygen atoms in the  
ionosphere to recombine, losing one electron each ;  the  electrons were 
removed  fas ter   than  could  be  replenished  by  the   sunlight, thus   the  
hole.  Th e  sun  did  replace  the  electrons,  patching  up  the hole within 
3 hr  after  the   spacedraft  passed. 
The  electron loss triggered by the  Skylab launch was similar to ones 
caused,  on  a  larger  scale,  by  magnetic  storms.  Because  the   launch 
occurred  on the  second  day of  s u c h  a storm,  scientists  found it  diffi- 
cult to trace  any radio interruptions-typical  during decreases  in the  
electron content  of  the   ionosphere-to  Skylab.  (Phys ics  T o d a y ,  May 
75,  17-18) 
0  The  Air  Force  Systems  Command  Newsreview  reported  that  the   Air 
Force  had  awarded  an estimated  $17 649  042 contract  to McDonnell 
Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Aircraft Co.  for the  development, manufac- 
ture, and testing of  a wide-body cargo aircraft fuselage segment using 
adhesive  bonding  instead  of  conventional  riveting  of  the   primary 
structures.  E i ther   the   Yc-14  or   the   YC-15,  advanced  medium- 
short-takeoff-and-landing transport prototypes,  would be used  as  the  
engineering baseline against which the  technology could be developed 
and  evaluated.  Th e  contract  was   X'S primary  adhesively bonded 
s truc ture   (PABST)  portion  of  the   advanced  metallic  s truc tures   (AMS) 
program  to  improve  s truc tura l   integrity  and  durability  of  future  air- 
c ra f t  while  minimizing weight  and  costs  of  acquisition  and  mainte- 
nance.  ( M S C   Newsreview, May  75,  4) 
0  Flying magazine  discussed  “Relevant  Research”  at  NASA:  NASA  had 
often  been  accused  of  neglecting  aeronautics  research   in  favor  of 
space.  But  the  $6.2 million for general  aviation, of  NASA’s  total $3.5 
billion budget,  was  “ a  lot  of  money,  even  for a Government  agency, 
and if used  wisely.  . .can make  significant contributions  in the  many 
areas  where  technology advancements  are  sorely needed.” 
97 

May 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
NASA  w a s   particularly  we l l   suited  to  investigate  stalls  and  sp ins  
and weather prediction-two  of the  most prominent factors in general 
aviation accidents-as  well a s  to develop simple autopilots and  flight- 
control  systems. 
With  the   aircraft  industry  becoming  increasingly  competitive, 
NASA  was “one  place  to s e e k  help”  to  produce  a technically superior 
product.  NASA  was responding to  the  need,  allocating manpower and  
dollars  to  relevant  general  aviation research   programs. 
More important was the  new attitude of  NASA  and  industry toward 
communicating about capabilities and needs.  In the past NASA did its 
research   “in  a vacuum,  oblivious  to  the   needs   of  the   aviation com- 
munity  and to  the  unique  conditions  tha t   constrained  the  industry’s 
ability to apply NASA  research  results.”  But recently  NASA  initiated  a 
series of  workshops between  key industry technical experts and  their 
NASA  counterparts,  designed  to  coordinate  industry  technological 
problem  areas  and NASA   research   programs.  Also,  in  1974, NASA   es- 
tablished  the  General Aviation Technology Advisory Pane l  and gave 
it equa l  s ta ture  with  the  committees and  panels  tha t  constituted  the  
influential NASA  Research  and  Technology Advisory  Council. 
The  atmosphere for effective communication and  relevant research  
wa s   improving.  “While  the   threa t   of  bureaucratic  inefficiency  and 
self-serving  growth  seems   ever-present  in  Government  endeavors, 
w e   see   a  conscientious  effort  on  the  part  of  NASA  to  apply  their 
r e sou r c e s   to  the   n e e d s   of  genera l   aviation.”  (Flying magazine, 
May   75) 

98 

June 1975 

2 June:  The  Netherlands,  Denmark, and  Norway  had   signed preliminary 
con trac ts  and  memorandums of  understanding with  t h e  U.S.  to pur- 
cha se  348 General Dynamics Corp.  F-16  fighter  aircraft  for a  total 
of  $2.1  billion, A v ia t ion  Week  and   Space   Techno logy  reported.  The 
countries  were  par t   of  a  four-nation  consortium-with  Belgium-to 
evaluate  the   F-   16,  French   Dassault-Breguet  Mirage  F lE ,   and  
Sweden’s  Saab   Viggen  a s   possible  rep lacemen ts   for  the   Lockheed 
Aircraft  Corp.  F-104  opera ted  by   these   countries.  Th e  preliminary 
con trac t  was contingent on  a full commitment to the  F-16  by all four 
coun tr ies  by  15  June. 
Av ia t ion   Week   reported  tha t   Belgium  had  reques ted   a  two-week 
delay  in  making  i t s   choice  but  then   announced  i t s  selection of  the  
F-16  on  7 June   af ter  t h e  countries had  received  assurance  tha t   the  
consortium would be permitted to produce,  in Europe, 10% of all parts 
for the  F-16.  I n  addition,  the  four countries would  produce  15% of 
the   aircraft  for  sa les  to  th ird   world  countries  a s  well  a s  40%  of  the  
components for the  aircraft bought by the  consortium.  ( A v  W k ,  2 June  
75,  21;  16 June   75,  17; AFsc  Release 280-75) 
e  Pr iva te   indus try   and   government  agencies  in  t h e   US. and   in  Europe 
were  investing money  in  designs  and   prototypes  of  giant  dirigibles 
tha t   could  carry   cargo  and   passengers  more  cheaply  than   conven- 
tional  aircraft,  Newsweek  reported.  In   May  a  9-m-wide  helium- 
filled prototype dirigible named Skyship,  shaped  like a flying saucer, 
had been flight-tested at a Royal Air Force station in England; a flight 
model  was  expected  to  go  into  commercial  operation  within  3  yr. 
Shell Oil Co. had  spen t  more than  $1 million studying the  possibility 
of  developing dirigibles  to  transport  natural  gas, Newsweek  said. 
Th e  U.S.  Air Force was investigating dirigibles a s  a means of ferry- 
ing missiles from silo to silo, and  the Navy was studying the ir  ability 
to  t rack   submarines. 
A reason for the  resurgence  of in teres t  in lighter-than-air craf t  was 
the  energy crisis.  Airships require hardly any fuel to get aloft and  use 
very  little for propulsion,  and   they  also produce  less noise  and  less 
atmospheric pollution. 
New designs for dirigibles included the  substitution of  inert helium 
for highly flammable hydrogen a s  the  lifting gas, and  the  replacement 
of  t h e  familiar cigar shape  with other configurations to do away with 
the   problem  of  instability  near   the   ground.  (Newsweek, 2 June   75) 
e  U.S.  helicopter manufacturers  were increasing production  to capitalize 
on heavy worldwide demand  for helicopters, A v ia t ion  Week  and Space  
Techno logy  reported.  I n  1974 U .S .  manufac turers  exported 420 heli- 
cop ters  a t  a value of  $124 million, an  increase  of $39 million over  1973 
sales and  double  1971 sales.  (Av  W k ,  2 June   75,  114) 
e  Luna  22, launched  29 May 1974 by the  u.S.S.R.,  had  been  in luna r  orbit 
more than  a year.  Tass repor ted  tha t ,   af ter  3296 orbits of  the  moon, 

99 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
the planned program for a comprehensive exploration of the  moon a nd  
near-moon  space  had  been  fully carried  out  and   additional  explora- 
tion was continuing. All systems aboard the  spacecraft were function- 
ing normally.  (Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 18 June  75,  U1) 
2-7  June: Th r e e  NASA  scientists and  two Europeans conducted a Spacelab 
simulation mission aboard NASA’s Galileo I1 airborne laboratory. Th e  
series of  five night flights was designed by  NASA  and European Space  
Agency representatives to permit Spacelab mission planners to evalu- 
Ate  experiment  techniques a nd  operations.  The simulations, part of  a 
study  program  called  the   Airborne  Science  Spacelab  Experiments 
System  Simulation (ASSESS), would  provide  valuable  information  on 
the   interaction  between  scientific  investigators  on  the   ground  and  
experiment  operators  aboard  Spacelab  and  would  aid  in  estimating 
the   training  needed  by  Space lab  experiment  operators. 
Experiments  flown  in  the   simulation  mission  included  infrared 
observations of the earth‘s upper atmosphere, Venus, stars, and  other 
celestial  features,  and   ultraviolet measurements  of  planetary  atmo- 
pheres.  (NASA  Release 75-177;  ESA Releases, 27 May 7 5 , 1 8  June 75) 
3 J u e :   Explorer 49-Radio  Astronomy Explorer B,  launched 10 June 1973 
into lunar  orbit to measure  galactic  and solar radio noise  at  frequen- 
cies  below  ionosplieric  cutoffs  and  beyond  terres tr ia l   background 
interference by  using the  moon for obcultation, focusing, or  aper ture  
blocking for increased resolution and discrimination-had  completed 
nearly  2 yr of  successful operation  and was  adjudged  successful. 
Explorer49’s lunar  orbit, away from the  noisy environment of  earth, 
had  increased  the   effectiveness  of  the   instrumentation.  Th e   space- 
craft  had  been  able  to  de tec t   very  weak  solar-noise burs ts   up  to  13 
mhz  and   as   low  a s   25  khz.  I t s   predecessor,  Explorer  38-Radio 
Astronomy Explorer A,  launched  4 July  1968-had  been  able to  ob- 
serve  relatively intense solar-noise burs ts  only in the  200 khz to 9 mhz 
range because of  its orbit within the  earth‘s magnetosphere. Explorer 
49  also was able to observe  and follow  solar burs ts  out of  the  ecliptic 
plane. 
Data  from  Explorer  49  had  verified  two  major  magnetospheric 
noise  regions,  one on the  morning side of  the  ear th   and  the  other on 
the   evening  side.  I n   addition,  spacecraft  da ta   showed  that  intense 
noise occurred in the   8 to  12 pm  time  zone with less  intense  noise  in 
midmorning.  The   intense  late-evening  noise  was  generated  within 
10 000 to  12 000 km of  the  earth‘s  surface,  and the  dayside emission 
seemed   to  come  from  a n   a l t i tude   of  le s s   t h a n   4000  km.  (NASA 
MOR,  3 June  75) 
3-6  June:  A Kennedy  Space  Cen ter   team  tes ted   a parachu te   system  de- 
signed to lower an  instrumented  probe through the dense  atmosphere 
of  Venus  to its surface.  T h e  tests-made 
for Ames Research  Cen ter  
in  preparation  for  a  Pioneer  mission  to  Venus  in  1978-were  con- 
duc ted  in KSC’s  Vehicle Assembly Building, an ideal wind-free testing 
facility.  Full-scale  3.7-m  parachu tes   with  simulated  pressure  
vessels weighing 204 kg were  dropped 13 times from heights of  up to 
137 m  to the  floor of  the  VAB with impact cushioned by  a honeycomb 
cardboard impact arres ter .  Th e  performance  of the  parachute  system 
was  monitored  photographically  during  the   drop  to  determine  the  
aerodynamic  trim  characteristics  of  the  parachute. 

100 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Jun e  

The  1978 Pioneer-Venus  mission would  include  the launch  of  two 
sepa ra te  spacecraf t  toward  Venus.  The   first would  orbit  the   planet 
collecting da ta  for  about 250 days;  the  second  would carry  one large 
probe, which would use  the  parachu te  to descend  to the  surface,  and  
three   small probes dece lera ted  by  aerodynamic drag  only.  The  para- 
chu te  on the  larges t  probe would be  used  to  sepa ra te  an  ins trumen t-  
bearing pressure  vessel and  stabilize it for a  s e e e s  of  critical scientific 
measuremen ts  as  it passed  through the  Venusian cloud layer. None of 
the   probes  was  designed  to  communicate  with  ea r th   after  impact. 
(KSC  Release  98-75;  Lockyer,  Public  Affairs  Office,  interview,  6 
Oc t   75) 

FY  1976 
NASA  Budget Authorization 
Congressional Adjustments 
(millions) 

P r o g r a m  

B u d g e t  
R e a u e s t  

H o u s e  
C h a n g e s  

Senate 
C h a n g e s  

C o n f e r e n c e   Total C o n f e r e n c e  
C h a n g e s  
R e c o m m e n d a t i o n  
- 

0 
1206.0 
-4.0 
207.1 
+1.5 
1.5 
155.8 
+1.0 
259.9 
-1.0 
166.9 
0 
+6.5 
175.0 
175.4 
0 
74.9 
+2.0 
5.9 
0 
-2.2 
243.0 
- 
- 
7.0 
+2.0 
2678.4 
C5 .8  

Research & Developmen6 
Space Shuttle 
Space  F l i ih t   Operations 
Advanced Missions 
Physics & Astronomy 
Luna r  & Planetary 
Exploration 
Launch Vehicle 
Procurement 
Space Applications 
Aeronautical R&D 
Space & Nuclear R&D 
Energy Technology 
Applications 
Tracking & Data 
Acqui%tion 
Technology Utilization 
R&D Totals 
Research and Program Management 
- 
776.0 
Basic Submission' 
776.0 
R&PM Totals* 
Construction  of Facilities 
Modification of  11- by 
11-ft Transonic Tunnel 
(ARC) 
Modification of  40-  by 
80-A  Transonic Tunnel 
(ARC) 
Addition to Lunar 
Sample Facility 
(JSC) 
Addition to Composite 
Model & Metal 

0 
0 

0 

+12.5 

-2.5 

2.7 

0 

2.5 

1.9 

0 

0 
-4.0 
-1.5 
+7.0 
0 
0 
+8.9 
0 
0 
0 
-2.2 
- 
0 
+8.2 

- 
0 
0 

0 

0 

-2.5 

0 

0 
-4.0 
+ O S  
C7.0 
0 
0 
+6.5 
0 
0 
0 
-2.2 
- 
+1.0 
+8.8 

1206.0 
203.1 
2.0 
162.8 
259.9 
166.9 
181.5 
175.4 
74.9 
5.9 
- 
240.8 
8.0 
2687.2 

0 
0 

0 

t12.5 

-2.5 

0 

776.0 
776.0 

2.7 

12.5 

0 

1.9 

0 

0 
+27.5 
0 
-0.9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Facilities 
+4.5 - 
0 - 
- 
+4.5 - 
0 
0 
M ior  Construction 
5.0 
0 
9.3 
Facility Planning & 
Design 
+14.5 - 
-2.5 - 
- 
- 
C of F Totals 
84.6 
C41.1 
- 
._  
3539.0 
+4f.9 
+23.3 
'Grand  Totals' 
+5.7 
.. 
*Does  not  include  a  supplemental  rcquest  for  pay  increases  introduced  as  H.R. 13172 and  signed  into  P.L. 
94-303 on  1 J u n e  1976. 

0 
5.0 * 
47.2 
16.0 
- 
99.1 
3562.3 

101 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Transitional Period 
NASA Budget Authorization 
Congressional Adjustments 
(millions) 

Program 

B u d g e t  
R e q u e s t  

House 
C h a n g e s  

S e n a t e  
C h a n g e s  

C o n f e r e n e c  
C h a n g e s  

C o n f e r e n c e  
R e c omm e n d a t i o n  

Research & Development 
Reseamh & Program 
Management 
Construction of 
Facilities 
Totals 

730.6 
700.6 
-26.0 
-30.0 
-30.0 
213.8 
213.8 
0 
0 
0 
- - -  -  - 
-6.5 
14.5 
-3.0 
10.8 
-3.7 
958.9 
-36.5 
-29.0 
-33.7 
925.2 

4  June:  A  House  of  Representatives  and   Sena te   conference  committee 
reported  out  H.R.  4700,  the   FY  1976  and   transitional-period  NASA 
authorization  bill,  after  resolving  the   disagreeing  votes  of  the  two 
Houses. 
In  addition,  for the  transition period  1 July through  30 Sep t .   1976, 
t h e   conference  committee  recommended  a  total  authorization  of 
$925  150 000.  (H.R.  Comm. Rpt 94-259;  CR, 4 June   75,  H4874-77) 
0  Th e  Cen tra l  Intelligence Agency  reported to the  Sena te  Appropriations 
Committee on i t s  secre t  monitoring of  t h e  Soviet space  program and  
on  the   safety  risks  tha t   might  exist  during  the   Apollo-Soyuz  Test 
Project mission, t h e  Wush ing ton  Post  reported.  Details of the  report, 
which  was  reques ted   by  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wisc.),  would 
be  made public  by  the  committee within  a  few weeks.  (AP, W  Po s t ,  
5 June   75,  A3) 
e  A  new  medical diagnostic  system  known  a s  time-delay  spectrometry, 
using high-frequency sound waves, had  been  developed by scientists 
a t  Je t  Propulsion Laboratory. The  new  technique passed  continuous, 
varying  high-frequency  sound  waves  through  t h e   body;  the   waves 
were  received  and   digplayed  as  pictures  on  a  cathode-ray-tube 
screen .   Existing  ultrasound  sys tems   had   operated  less  effectively, 
sending into the  body a pulse of sound waves and  timing the  echo after 
the  waves were  reflected  from  the   body’s  various  internal organs. 
A picture from  the  JPL sys tem  looked like a n  x-ray and  took  shape  
in  2  to  4  min.  Bones,  muscles,  organs,  and   differences  in   soft 
tissue  could  be  clearly  seen.  Th e  varying  pitch  of  the   sound waves 
and  the  differences in frequency response  and  absorption properties 
of  various body  t issues  would  aid the  diagnostician  in discriminating 
between,  for example,  a  cys t   and  a  tumor. 
JPL researchers  were planning to evaluate the  system’s usefulness 
in  hospital  applications,  first  by  demonstrating  i t s   ability  to  de tec t  
and   identify  tumors  in  the   female breast.  (NASA  Release  75-162) 
0  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  announced the  selection of Bendix Corp. 
Guidance Systems Div.  for negotiations leading to a con trac t  for inte- 
gra ted   e lec tron ic   assemb l ies   for  t h e   Sp a c e   Shu t t le   solid  rocke t  
booster.  Th e   cost-plus-incentive-fee  con trac t   would  cover  design, 
development,  tes t  an d  evaluation, and  fabrication of  assemblies and  
assor ted   te s t   equipment  for  the   first  6  Shu t t le   flights.  The   initial 
con trac t  would call for 33 units,  including flight articles,  spares,  and  
development  and  te s t   versions,  with  delivery  to  begin  in  1976. 

102 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

June 

Each   solid  rocket  booster  would  have  two  assembly  units,  one 
forward and one aft.  Ignition commands would route from the  Orbiter 
through  the   aft  assembly  to  the   forward  assembly.  During  launch, 
the   aft  assembly  would  route  commands  from  the   Orbiter  to  the  
thrust-vector  control  system.  Th e   forward  assembly  would  release 
the   nose  c ap   and  frustum,  jettison  the   solid  rocket  nozzle,  de tach  
the   parachutes  from  the   solid  rocket  booster,  and  turn   on  recovery 
aids.  (MSFC Release  75-106) 
0  The  Ch r i s t ian  Science Mon i tor  quoted Dr.  H.  Guyford Stever,  National 
Science Foundation Director, on  the  future role of  science: Dr.  Stever 
said  tha t   scientists  should  stop looking back  to  days when  research  
money flowed freely and sc ience  was valued  for its own  sake.  Scien- 
t is ts  must face the  fact tha t  ‘‘ ‘the social environment in which sc ience  
is   performed  has  changed.’  ” Scientists  were  bewildered  as   they 
watched  research   support tightening  and jobs  dwindling, and  public 
questioning of  the  values of  basic research  grants. Yet science would 
become  involved,  as  never before,  in the economic success  or failure 
of  this country and the  world.  Society wanted research  effort devoted 
to solving mankind’s  problems of  food, energy, and  environment. Dr. 
Stever noted that the e r a  was long gone when the  scientific community 
could  conduct  its  affairs  as   “ ‘a  pure  search   for  tru th   apar t   from 
serious  considerations  of  its  human  consequences.’  ” From  now  on 
“ ‘ t h e  drive to understand  nature.  . .must be seen  to be carried on in 
the  public in teres t  and not merely to satisfy the  private curiosity of  an 
intellectual elite.’  ” (Cowen, CSM, 4 June  7 5 ,  25) 
5 June:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched  comsat Mo ln iya   I-30  and  France’s Sret  2 
on  a  single  booster  from  P lese tsk .  Mo ln iya   I-30  entered  elliptical 
orbit with a 39 876-km apogee, 448-km perigee, 712.2-min period, and  
62.8”  inclination.  Sret  2  e n t e r ed   orbit  with  a  40  824-km  apogee, 
512-km  perigee,  737.8-min  period,  and 62.8”  inclination. 
Tass   reported  that  Mo ln iya   1-30  would  ensure   long-range  tele- 
phone,  telegraph,  and  radio  communications  as  well  as   transmit  TV 
programs  to  Orbita  network  stations  in  extreme  northern  Siberia, 
the   F a r  East,  and  cen tra l  Asia. 
Sret  2  (Satellite d e  RBcherches e t  d’Environment Technique),  ac- 
cording to  Tass,  would  study  the   efficiency of  a  radiation  system of 
thermal  protection  in  outer  space.  I t  was  the  second  of  three   space- 
craft  in  a  program  of  Soviet-French  cooperation.  Sret  1 ,   launched 
4 April  1972,  had  studied  the   characteristics  of  solar  batteries  for 
space operations  and  the  degeneration of  solar cells from cosmic-ray 
exposure in the  Van Allen Belt. (GSFC W k l y  SSR, 5-11  June  75; Tass, 
FBIS-SOV, 17 June   75,  U1; A&A  1972,  128) 
6 J u n e :  The  establishment of  a science advisory office in the  White House, 
when  it  has  to  be  urged  on  the   Pres iden t   ra ther   than  conceived  by 
him or his close associates,  “is  virtually irrelevant to the  workings of 
the   White  House,”  Daniel  S.  Greenberg  said  in  a Wash ing ton  Post 
article. Greenberg pointed ou t  tha t  the  Pres iden t  already had National 
Science  Foundation  Director  Dr.  H.  Guyford  Stever,  whose  office 
was assigned a pared-down version of  the  presidential advisory func- 
tion when Pres iden t  Nixon dispensed with in-house science advice in 
1973. Although Dr.  Stever  possessed  all the   right qualifications  and  
was eager  to  serve,  “Mr.  Ford  has  had  more conversations with golf 
pros  over  the   years  than  he  h a s  had  with Mr.  Stever.” 
Th e   science  community  had  agitated  for  the   re turn   of  a  science 

103 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

adviser  by  appealing  to  Congress  and  appointing  committees  of  dis- 
tinguished  scientists  who  duly  certified  that  the  President  suffered 
from  the  absence  of  a  science adviser close at  hand. 
Although  Pres iden t  Ford dec ided  in favor of  the  appointment, still 
unresolved was whe ther  a  sc ience  office would  be more  useful  than  
the   NSF-based  operation.  P a s t   Pres iden ts   had mot  often  used  the ir  
science  advice.  “The   bookshelves  of  the  Executive Office Building 
bear   innumerable  aging  repor ts  of  early warnings by  scientiists con- 
cern ing  problems  of  energy,  food,  resources,  pesticides,.  pollution, 
drug  safety,  and   so  forth,  but  few [Presidents]  chose  to  hsten.” 
Sc ience  advice was a valuable resource  for a Pres iden t  d o  chose 
to  employ it, “for  a s  grating a s  they often a re  with  their  contentions 
of  superior wisdom,  scientists  do possess experience  and  talent  tha t  
can   be   pu t   to  good  political use.”  Pres iden t   Ford’s  move  had  little 
significance a s  far  as the  Ford  administration was concerned,  and  it 
would  “add   up  to  nothing  more  than   a  cosmetic  device”  if  the   new 
science office had no jurisdiction over military research  and  develop- 
ment,  a function  sliced  away from  t h e  advisory role under Pres iden t  
Nixon’s  reorganization. 
“But  if  a  science  office  is  in  place  a t   the  White  House,  the   next 
administration can  get good  service from it if  it chooses to do so. The  
sad   history  of  the   ma t ter   i s   that,  with  rare   exceptions,  Pres iden ts  
have not  made tha t   choice.”  (Greenberg, W Post,  6 June   75,  A28) 
e  During  recovery  operations  of  the   U.S.  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project 
as tronau ts ,  the  Apollo spacecraf t  would not be  retrieved by helicopter 
a s  usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E.  Stullken, chief of Johnson 
Space  Center’s Mission Suppor t  Branch, sa id  during a p re s s  briefing. 
Ins tead ,   the   recovery  ship would  s team   up  alongside the   command 
module  and  haul  it  aboard  using  the   ship’s  boat  and   aircraft crane .  
Navy personnel would open the  ha tch  and  the  crew would  s tep  ou t  on 
the   ship’s  deck .  
Arnold  D.  Aldrich,  deputy manager of  the  Apollo  Spacecraf t  Pro- 
gram Office at JSC,  said tha t  the  most extensive modification  required 
for the  ASTP  mission was redesigning the  Soyuz spacecraf t  to accom- 
moda te  t h e  newly  added  docking system.  The  front end  of  the  Soyuz 
had  been  modified  with  respec t   to  s truc tura l  configuration,  therma l  
design, and  the  requirement to fit all the  new system under  the  launch  
shroud  tha t   covered  the   en t ire  Soyuz  during the  boost  phase. 
John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said tha t  NASA  would 
provide  U.S.  and   Soviet  air-to-ground  communications,  air-to-air 
communications,  and   U S . -   and   U.S.S.R.-originated  commentary  for  
newsmen during the  mission.  All Russian would be  translated  simul- 
taneously  into English,  using  a  “voice-over”  techn ique ;   a  few  com- 
munication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation.  The 
U.S.S.R.  would  provide  an   in terpre ter   to  assist  newsmen  in  the  U.S. 
with  interpretation  or  explanation,  if  necessary. 
Questioned  about  the   political  significance  of  the   ASTP  mission, 
U.S.  crew member Donald  K.  Slayton replied,  “I think we’d  be  naive 
to assume  tha t  th is  program  i s  going to end  all conflicts between our 
two  societies,  certainly.  I think  . . . it’s a  s tep  in  tha t  direction,  but 
there’s  little doubt  in my  mind  tha t   we’re  going  to  continue  to have 
c o n a c t s  in  many different areas. However,  if we c a n  kind of break the 
ground  and   get  a t   leas t   one  area   where  we  continue  to  work  con- 

104 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
structively on  s om e t F n   , we’re  certainly not  going to  end  up  in  any 
major  confrontation.  ( f ran sc r ip t s )  
0  Marshall Space Flight Cen ter  issued a reques t  for quotations  for a pro- 
posed  study  contract  to  design,  build,  tes t ,   and  deliver  a  full-scale 
solar-array wing for solar electric propulsion and  Space  Shuttle pay- 
load  applications.  T h e   se lec ted   coQtractor  would  establish  design 
requirements  and  develop  techniques  for  low-cost  fabrication  and 
testing  incorporating  all -prev ioudy   developed  tecfmology.  (MSFC 
Release  75-  109) 
7 June  : Rockwell International Corp.  Rocketdyne Div.  s u c c e s s f j lY  con- 
ducted  the  first  ignition tes t   of  the   Space  Shuttle’s  in tegra ted   Sub- 
system T e s t  Bed engine a t  the  National Space  Technology Laborator- 
ies.  The  tes t ,  conducted for Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter ,  lasted  for 
0.8 sec. It was first of  a ser ies  of 8 ignition tes ts  leading up to  the  firipg 
of  the  Space Shuttle main engine. ’Initial evaluation of  da ta  indicated 
tha t   all  the   tes t   parame ters   were  satisfactory  and  tha t   the   te s t  
objective was achieved.  All  ignition tes ts  would be  of  short duration, 
none  reaching full engine  thrus t .   (Roundup ,  20 June   7 5 ,  4; Marsha l t  
S t a r ,   11 June  7 5 ,  4) 
8 June: If NASA had unlimited funding, “ I  would move fairly guickly on a 
manned  station  because  tha t   will  become  an  important  outpost  for 
anything  tha t   we  do  in  space ,”   Dr.  George  M .   Low,  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator,  said in an interview with t h eS a n  D iego  Un ioh .  Dr. Low 
added that he would move quicker in launching a space  telescope and  
bringing back  soil samples  from Mars,  “both  enormougly  important 
from  a  scientific  point  of  v iew .”  
Dr.  Low  expressed  concern  tha t  “we   really aren’t  being  inventive 
enough. We haven’t discovered a new propulsion system.”  All NASA’s 
rockets  so  far,  including  the   Space   Shuttle,  had  used  conveqtional 
mean s  of  propulsion,  and with i t  man was limited.  Dr.  Low  said tha t  
the   moon  landing  “was  enormously  difficult because  we  a re   tied  to 
chemical  propulsion  systems.”  NASA  was  experimenting  with  solar 
electric propulsion but  to  da te  no one had  invented  a fission or anti- 
gravity  system.  (Sun  D iego   Un ion ,  8 June   7 5 )  
8-17  June :   The   U.S.S.R.  launched  Venera  9  and  10  to  continue  Soviet 
exploration of  the  planet  Venus.  Venera 9 was  launched on 8 June   at 
7:37  am  local  time  (10:37  pm  EDT  7  June)  from  Baykonur 
Cosmodrome, near  T y u r a t a q ,  on  course for a rendezvous with Venus 
in October. T a s s  announced  the  purpose of  the  mission was “to carry 
on  scientific  research   on  the   planet  of  Venus  and   the   surrounding 
space ,  which is carried out by means of  an automatic craft.” T a s s  also 
said tha t ,  on the  earth-  Velius flight path,  the  probe would study the  
physical  characteristics  of  interplanetary  space   including  magnetic 
fields,  solar winds,  and ultraviolet radiation.  Tass  said tha t  Venera  9 
was  the   heaviest  in  the   u .S .S .R .’~   Venera  ser ies   and   had  “certain 
distinguishing design fea tures  .” 
On  14 June at 9:30 am  local t ime  (12:30 am EDT) Yenera 10 was  suc- 
cessfully  launched  toward  Venus  from  Baykonur  Coemodrome.  Tass 
reported  that  “in design and  purpose  it is analogous to the  ‘Veneru-9’ 
station launched  on  Jun e  8”  a nd  tha t  a l l  spacecraf t  systems were func- 
tioning  normally.  Venera  10 was  also  expected  to  reach   Venus  in 
October. 
In  an interview 17 June with the   Chr is t ian  Science Monitor, Boris N. 
Petrov,  cha irman   of  the   U .S .S .R .   Council  of  International  Coopera- 
105 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

tion  in   the   Study and  Exploration of  Ou ter  Space,  revealed  tha t   the  
Venera  mission called  for  a  landing  ra ther   than  jus t   a  flyby.  (GSFC 
SSR ,  30 June 75; FBIS-SOV, 8-  17 June 75; Pond, C SM ,  17 June  7 5 , l ;  
W P o s t ,  8-  17 June  75; NYT ,   8-  17 June   75) 
9 J u n e :  Th e  House of Representatives, by voice vote, agreed to the confer- 
ence  report on H.R.  4700,  the  NASA  authorization bill for FY  1976 and  
the  transitional period 1 July through 30 Sept.  1976. [See also 4 June.] 
Th e  conference committee authorized a total of $3 562 310 000 for FY 
1976,  an  increase  of  $23 310000   over  the   budget  reques t ,   and 
$925 150 000 for the  transition period, a decrease  of $33 750 000 from 
the   budget  request.  ( C R ,  9 June  75,  H5106-08) 
0  Pres iden t   Ford  transm i t ted   to  both  Houses  of  Congress  proposed 
legislation to crea te ,  within the  Executive Office of  the  Pres iden t ,   an 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology Policy  headed  by  a  director who 
would  also  serve  a s  presidential  science  and   technology  advisor. 
In  his le t ters  of  transmittal to Speaker  of  the  House of  Representa- 
tives Carl Albert  and Pres iden t   of  the  Sena te  Vice Pres iden t  Nelson 
A .   Rockefeller,  Pres iden t   Ford  said  that  the   new  director  would 
“identify  new  opportunities for using  science  and  technology  to  im- 
prove  our  understanding  of  national  problems  and  to  contribute  to 
their  solution. He will also cha ir  the  Federal  Council on  Science and  
Technology, and I expect him  to provide advice on  the  scientific  and 
technological considerations in Federa l  policies,  programs,  and bud- 
gets.” 
The  Pres iden t   said  tha t   the  director  and deputy director would be  
presidential  appointees.  The   office  would  draw  extensively  on  the  
nation’s  scientific and  engineering community for advice  and  assist- 
ance ,  and the director a nd  staff would also call upon Federa l  agencies 
for assistance  in carrying out  their responsibilities.  ( P D ,  16 June  75, 
610) 
Pres iden t   Ford  transmitted  to  Congress  the   Aeronautics  and  Space  
Repor t   of  the Pres iden t:   1974 A c t i v i t i e s .  Th e  Pres iden t   said  that  the  
“Nation’s  activities  in  aeronautics  and  space  continued  to  produce 
significant benefits,  to experiment with and develop new applications, 
to  increase  scientific  knowledge,  and   to  advance  technology.”  He 
cited  the   continued  expansion  of  international  communications 
satellites;  testing  of  earth-observation  satellites  for  crop  surveys, 
water resource management,  and pollution management; completion 
of  the   successful  Skylab manned  space-station missions;  continued 
planetary  exploration,  with  successful  missions  to  Jupiter,  Venus, 
and Mercury; continued development of new aeronautical technology 
including the  reduction of  energy requirements,  noise,  and  pollution, 
and  modernization  of  the  traffic-control  system;  and  milestones  in 
military  aircraft  development,  including  the  rollout  of  the  B-1 
bomber  and  delivery  of  the   F-15  fighter  aircraft.  ( C R ,  9  June  75, 
H5106) 
e Th e  Par is  Air Show [30 May-8  June] reflected the international trends  
in aerospace with a dep th  and clarity fa r  beyond what the  most inten- 
s ive   study  by  individual  nations  could  yield,  an A v ia t ion  Week and  
Space   Technology  editorial  said.  Among  trends   evident  a t   the   1975 
show  a t  LeBourget Airport was  the   “tremendous  resurgence  of  the  
helicopter  market,  particularly  in  the  commercial  field where  sales 
were now  approaching parity with the  traditional military market and 

106 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
promise to outstrip them during the next few years.”  Helicopters had 
been  found  particularly  useful in the   exploration,  development,  and  
production  of  oil and minerals. 
O ther   expanding  markets  included  the   executive  je t   and  short 
rugged-field  transports  for both  military and   civilian duty. 
Within  the  military marke t ,   fighter  aircraft had  moved  into a new 
e r a  of  technology with a new emphasis on weapons for both air-to-air 
and air-to-ground operations.  “ I t  is evident tha t  they [fighter aircraft] 
must serve a s  platforms for new generations of weapons and  advanced 
delivery systems tha t  c a n  produce a degree of military efficiency com- 
mensurate  with their  high  cost.” 
The   American  presence  was  strong  a t   LeBourget  and  the   “U.S., 
through  the  performance of  its new  stable of  fighters-F-14, 
F-15, 
and   F-16.  . .-and 
i ts   curren t   generation  of  advanced  technology 
transports  is demonstrating what  a truly tough competitor it can be.” 
Th e  Europeans  were  going to have  to  streamline their management, 
be t ter  organize the ir  resources,  and cu t  through national bureaucracy 
if  they were  to have  any hope of  keeping pace.  “Europe  cannot con- 
tinue a t  the  same glacial development pace of the  Concorde and MRCA 
[multirole  combat  aircraft]  and  expect  to  produce  products  that  are  
technically  competitive  in  the   global market.”  However,  its  success  
with  helicopters,  tactical  missiles,  small transports,  and  the  Airbus 
was  indicative  of  what  could  be  accomplished. 
Noteworthy  at’LeBourget  was  the   evidence  of  the   “slow  pace  of 
Soviet  civil  aviation  caused   by  a  series  of  development  difficulties 
across their whole spec trum  of  transports and helicopters.”  Th e  most 
visible  evidence  was  the   Tu-144  supersonic  transport,  which  ap- 
peared  in  the   fifth version off  the  assembly  line,  only the  third  such  
aircraft  produced  by  the   Soviet Union  in  the  previous  2  yr. Av   Wk  
quoted  an  expert  as   saying  there  was  an  estimated  1-yr slippage  in 
Aeroflot  plans  to  begin  regular  supersonic  service.  (Hotz, A v  W k ,  9 
June  75,  7) 
10  June:  Th e   Sena te ,   by  voice  vote,  agreed  to  the   conference  report 
on  H.R.  4700  authorizing NASA   $3 562 310 000  in  funds  for FY  1976. 
[See also 4 June.]  The  authorization was  $23 310 000 more  than  the 
budget  reques t .   I n   addition,  the   conference  committee  authorized 
$925  150 000,  a  decrease   of  $33 750 000  from  the   reques t ,   for  the  
transition  period  1 July  through  30  Sept.  1976.  Th e  House of  Repre- 
sentatives  had  agreed  to  the   conference  report  on  9  June .   (CRY 10 
June   75,  510157) 
by  Dr.  James  R.  Schlesinger,  Secretary  of 
Th e   U.S.-represented 
Defense-signed 
a  memorandum  of  understanding  with  Belgium, 
Denmark,  the  Netherlands,  and  Norway tha t  finalized selection of  the  
General  Dynamics  Corp.  F-16  air  combat  fighter  as   the   four 
countries’  replacement  for  the   F-lO4G.  The  U.S.  and   the   four 
countries  entered  into  a  co-production  agreement  under  which  the  
Europeans  planned  to produce  up  to 348 aircraft-at  a value of  $2.1 
billion-for 
the ir  own use.  The  proposal permitted  aircraft manufac- 
turers   in th e s e  countries to  share in  the  manufacture  of  aircraft and  
parts for U.S. and  third world sales, which could more than offset the ir  
initial investment [see 2 June].  The Europeans would  share  logistics, 
maintenance,  and  training  facilities  in Europe. 

107 

June  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
The  agreement would he lp  enable the North Atlantic Trea ty  Organ- 
ization (NATO) and  allied forces to standardize their weapon systems. 
The U.S.  Air  Force  had  announced  earlier  plans  to  procure  a t   leas t  
650 F-16.5,  with a large number of  these  deployed to European bases. 
(AFSC  Release  280 -75) 
11 June:  Pioneer 10 (launched  2 March  1972), on  its way out of  the  solar 
system  1.2  billion  km  from ea r th   and  halfway between  the   orbits of 
Jup i te r   and  Saturn,  w a s   making  unexplained  orientation  changes, 
Ames Research Cen ter  announced. The  spacecraft’s axis of  rotation 
wa s   changing  by  1” every  2  wk.  Project  officials had  said  tha t   the  
changes  could  be  caused   by  a  slight malfunction  or  by  some  inter- 
planetary phenomenon, but evidence was contradictory. Fur ther  tes ts  
were  planned  to find the  cause  of  the change.  (ARC Release 75-30) 
0  Rep. Olin E.  Teague (D-Tex.)  and Rep.  Charles A.  Mosher  (R-Ohio) 
introduced  H.R.  7830,  the  President’s bill [see 9 June]  “to strengthen 
staff capabilities  for providing advice and assistance to the  Pres iden t  
with  respec t   to  scientific  and  technological considerations  affecting 
national  policies  and  programs.?’ The  bill was  referred  to  the  Com- 
mittee  on  Science  and Technology. 
H.R.  7830  called  for  establishing a n   Office  of  Science  and  Tech- 
nology  with  a  director w b  would  be  the  Presidential  science adviser, 
a  deputy  director,  and  a  15-member staff.  Th e  office would  have  a 
budget  of  $1.5 million. 
H.R.  7830  was  the   second  bill  concerning  Presidential  science 
advice introduced  by  Reps.  Teague  and  Mosher; H.R.  4461 had  been 
introduced  6 March  to  establish  a  national  science  and  technology 
policy. It also included provisions for a council of science  advisers and 
a cabinet-level Dept.  of  Research  and Technology.  (CR, 11 June   75, 
H5346; 6 March  75,  H1464) 
@  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen ter   announced  the   award  of  a  $3.2-million 
contract  by  Space  Shuttle  prime  contractor  Martin  Marietta  Aero- 
space   Co.  to  Avco  Corp.  Aerostructures  Div.  to  manufacture  the 
intertank  section of  the   shuttle’s external tank.  The  intertank would 
provide support between the  liquid-oxygen tank and  the  larger liquid- 
hydrogen tank. The disposable external tank,  47 m  long and 8.4 m  in 
diameter,  would  carry  liquid propellant  for the  Space  Shuttle’s three  
main  engines.  (MSFC  Release  75 - 116) 
12  June:  NASA   launched  Nimbus  6  on  a  thrust-augmented  Thor-Delta 
booster  from  the Western  T e s t  Range  a t   1:12  am  PDT   af ter  a  6-min 
delay  to  clear  a  ship from  the  jettison  trajectory  of  the  Delta’s solid 
rockets.  Th e  spacecraft  entered  sun-synchronous  polar orbit with  a 
1103-km apogee,  1094-km perigee,  107-min period,  and  99.96’  incli- 
nation.  Separation  of  the   spacecraft  from  the   launch  vehicle  was 
normal, a t  59 min into the flight. The  solar panels were deployed and 
the   attitude-control  system  quickly acquired  ear th .   A wheel control 
provided three-axis stabilization. Checkout of  the power system, tele- 
metry? command links,  and tape  recorder was  completed on the  first 
day  of  operation. 
At  7  h r   after  launch,  a  cryogenic  vent  va lve   associated  with  the  
limb-radiance  inversion radiometer was pyrotechnically  ac tua ted   a s  
planned.  This caused  unexpected high torques and  excessive control- 
gas  usage.  Nimbus  6  was  put  into  a  safe wideband  gravity-gradient 
mode  to  conserve  gas,  and  an  investigation  was  begun  to  find  the  

108 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
cause  of  the problem  and  determine  possible  remedies.  By % June  
the  9  experiments and   all spacecraft  systems had  been  checked  out 
and  all  instrumentation,  except  for  2  tape  recorders,  was  working 
normally. 
The  primary objective of  the  Nimbus 6 mission was to contribute to 
the  Global  Atmospheric  Research  Program  (GARP)  by  refining  and  
extending the   capability  of  vertically sounding  the  tempera ture   and  
moisture of  the  atmosphere, with particular regard to altitude resolu- 
tion and intet-ference effects of clouds. GARP,  a cooperative worldwide 
wea ther   program,  was  established  to  improve  understanding  of 
meteorological atmospheric processes  in  the  tropics  and   to  improve 
observation  and   computing  systems  for  wea ther   prediction  and  
analysis. Nimbus 6 would also monitor environhiental conditions such  
a s  s e a  ice and rainfall and  would measure the  earth 's  radiation budget 
with  a precision  never  before  attained. 
Secondary objective of  the  mission was  to demonstrate  the   ability 
to  track   and  relay  da ta   from  a  low-altitude  polar-orbiting  space-  
craft  using  a  geosynchronous  satellite  a s   a  communications  relay. 
A t s  6, the  Applications Technology Satellite launched on  30 May 1974, 
would  be  the  relay  comsat. 
A  data-collection,  processing,  and  relay-to-earth  system was  also 
on  board  to  collect  da ta   from  approximately 300  balloon-borne plat- 
forms, designed to float a t  a n  altitude of  20 km,  and a large number of 
ear th-   and  sea-based  da ta   platforms.  Nimbus  6,  unlike  previous 
spacecraft, could receive and process  up to eight incoming signals a t  
a  time. 
The  satellite carried nine new instruments to extend measurements 
of  atmospheric  parameters  to  significantly higher altitudes  than  had 
previously been  possible:  the   tracking and  data-relay  (T&DR)  experi- 
ment;  a  high-resolution  temperature  sounder  (HIRS) and  a  scanning 
microwave  spec trome ter   (SCAMS)  to  take   tempera ture   soundings  in 
the atmosphere outside the  tropics; a tropical wind-energy conversion 
and reference  level experiment  (TWERLE)  to provide d a t a  on  tropical 
areas ;   a  limb-radiance  inversion  radiometer  (LRIR) and   a  pressure- 
modulated  radiometer  (PMR)  to  provide  high-altitude  tempera ture  
soundings; an ea r th  radiation budget (Em) experiment to establish the  
earth's  atmospheric radiation balance; an electrically scanning micro- 
wave radiometer 
to map  the  liquid-water content of  the  clouds, 
ocean  rainfall,  and distribution  and  variation of  sea-ice cover;  and  a 
temperature/humidity  infrared  radiometer  (THIR) to  provide da ta   on 
cloud  cover, ground  temperatures,  and  water-vapor  distribution. 
Nimbus 6 was next to las t  in a planned ser ies  of  seven experimental 
meteorological  satellites.  Nimbus  1  (launched  28  Aug.  1964)  and 
Nimbus  2  (launched  15  May  1966)  achieved  all  the ir   objectives. 
Launch of  the  third Nimbus, on  19 May 1968, failed when the  launch 
vehicle malfunctioned; an identical spacecraft launched 14 April 1969 
successfully  functioned  a s  Nimbus  3.  Nimbus  4  and  5 (launched  8 
April 1970 and  10 Dec.  1972) had  both completed all mission objec- 
tives  and were  still operating. 
General  Electric  Co.  was  the   prime  contractor  responsible  for 
Nimbus  6  integration  and   test,  stabilization control,  control-subsys- 
tem  integration,  and  spacecraft  s truc tures  a nd  an tennas .   Seven US. 
and two British companies,  in addition to the  Je t  Propulsion Labora- 

109 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

tory,  provided  the   nine  instruments.  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen ter  
managed the Nimbus program under the  direction of  t h e  NASA Office 
of  Applications  and  was  also  responsible  for  the  Thor-Delta  launch  
vehicle.  (NASA  MORS 21 May 74 ,12  June 75 ,24  June  75; NASA Release 
75 - 145) 
0  An Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project flight read iness  review  a t  Kennedy Space  
Cen te r  was  a t tended  by Dr.  George  M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy Adminis- 
trator; ASTP Program Director Ches ter  M.  Lee; and  top management 
from NASA Headquar ters  and  Marshall,  Johnson, and  Kennedy Space  
Cen ters .  
During the  meeting Lee said tha t  “ASTP is on schedu le  and ‘go’ for 
launch  on July  15.” Top  management had reviewed and  closed ou t  all 
aspec ts  of  flight preparations.  ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lun- 
ney reported tha t  no hardware problems remained tha t  might interfere 
with  an. on-time  launch. 
MSFC  Sa turn  Program Manager Ellery B.  May  reported  tha t  t h e  8- 
yr-old  Sa turn  IB launch  vehicle had been  carefully checked  out and  
dl components were being monitored by periodic inspections; during 
one of  these  inspections corrosion c rack s  had been discovered in t h e  
fins,  requiring  them   to  be   replaced  [see  19  Feb.-19  March].  May 
reported  tha t   the   vehicle was  ready  to  fly. 
William H. Rock, manager of the  Sc iences  and  Applications Project 
Office at JSC,  said tha t  modifications, including a larger, more  effec- 
tive  lightning rod  on the  launch  tower,  had  been  made  to  the  launch  
pad  to minimize  t h e  hazards  from  lightning strikes.  Jesse   R.  Gulick, 
KSC  meteorologist,  said tha t  thunderstorm  probability for launch  day 
was  23%  and  tha t   t h e   probability  of  a  tropical  storm  or  hurr icane  
winds was less than  3%. Based on previous years’ data, chance s  were 
good that, even if  bad weather postponed the  primary launch  date, the  
Apollo  spacecraf t  could  be   launched  within  4  days.  (MSFC  Release 
75-119;  KSC  Release  104-75;  Marshall  S t a r ,   18  June   75,  1; Ezell 
et  a1 ., The Par tnersh ip:  A  H is tory   of  the  A p o l l o S o y u z  Test Project, 
310-12) 
* Viking Lander  1 would undergo a critical milestone in i t s  development, 
terminal  sterilization,  beginning  13  June,  Robert  S.  Kramer,  NASA 
Director of  Planetary  Programs,  sa id  a t  a Viking news conference in 
Washington,  D .C .   The  Lander  would  remain  in t h e  oven  for 2.5  days 
and  then   be  removed  and  checked  out.  Pa s t  missions had failed be- 
cause   “maybe  we  knew  how  to  sterilize  a  spacecraf t   but  we  didn’t 
know  how  to  make  one  work  after  it was  sterilized,”  Kramer  said. 
However,  “we   think  we  know  a  lot more  now  than   we  did  15  years  
ago. W e  believe we have developed the  techn iques  to be  fully reliable, 
but when we  complete tha t   te s t  along about  next Tuesday  morning, 
then  we  are going to  find ou t  for  sure.” 
A. Thomas Young, Viking Mission Operations Manager a t  Langley 
Research   Cen ter ,   said  tha t   plans  called  for  launch   of  Viking  1  on 
11  Aug.  and  launch   of  Viking  2  on   21  Aug.  Mission  planners  had 
deliberately arranged for the first Viking  to arrive a t  Mars on 18 June  
1976,  after  10 mos of  travel,  and Viking  2 to  arrive  on 7 Aug.  1976, 
about  1 yr  after it was  launched.  Both  spacecraf t  would  spend  about 
17  days in orbit examining landing s i tes  “to a s su re  ourselves tha t  they  
continue to be  safe.”  The s i tes ,  which had  not been  examined s ince  
1971, mus t   b e   checked   again  because  Mars was  a  dynamic  planet. 

110 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

June 

Lander 1 was scheduled to begin its descent 4 July and start black-and- 
white photography immediately upon landing. Color photography would 
begin 18 hr later. The first soil sample would be collected on the eighth day. 
Analysis of  the sample would take 12 days to complete, and 20 days would 
be required  to complete one cycle of  all surface science. Young noted 
tha t ,   to  avoid confusion  during  the  mission,  Martian  days would  be  
called  “sols”  because  they were  a half-hour longer than  ear th  days. 
During surface operations, the  Orbiter passing overhead once a day 
would remain synchronized with the  Lander; on the  pass,  the Orbiter, 
acting  a s   a  communications  satellite,  would  relay  information  from 
the  Lander  to  ear th .   When   the   Lander  completed  its  work,  the  
Orbiter would  perform observations of  its own, studying Martian sur- 
face  fea tures ,   including  the   proposed  Lander   B  landing  site,  from 
orbit.  (Transcript) 
e  A  theory  tha t  the  moon was  actually  a piece  of  the  ea r th  broken  away 
early in the  planet’s  formation 4.5 billion yrs  ago was  presented  in  a 
paper by  Dr.  John A. O’Keefe,  a Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter  scien- 
tist,  and   Professor  Harold  C.  Urey,  Nobel  Prize  winner  from  the  
Univ. of California. The  paper,  presented by Dr. O’Keefe a t  a meeting 
of  the   Royal  Society  in  London,  s ta ted   that  although  the  moon  had 
little,  if  any,  metallic  core,  da ta   from  Apollo lunar-landing  missions 
and earlier unmanned  lunar  flights had  provided chemical  evidence 
that  lunar rocks were  once  a part  of  a mass  that  had  included  a con- 
siderable portion  of  molten  iron. 
Th e  higher  proportion of  molten metal  in  the  ear th   supported  the 
theory  that,  before  the   split,  the   iron  in  the   ear th   had  sunk  to  the  
center, drawing with it the  gold, platinum, and o ther  rare metals found 
in molten rock originally mixed with the  iron. According to the  theory, 
the  moon was pushed  to  i ts  present  distance  from the  ear th  by  inter- 
action  with  the   tides  of  the   body  of  the   ear th .  
O ther  theories  about the  formation of  the  moon included  the  possi- 
bility  tha t   the  moon  had  been  cap tured   by  the   earth‘s  gravitational 
field when it passed  near  the  earth, or that  it had  been formed simul- 
taneously  with  the   ear th .   Neither  of  those  theories  explained  the  
moon’s  lack of  a  substantial  metallic  core.  (NASA  Release  75-  171) 
e  S. Neil Hosenball, NASA’s Deputy General Counsel, had been appointed 
General  Counsel,  effective  immediately,  replacing  R.  Tenney John- 
son, who  had  been  named General Counsel of  the  Energy  Research  
and  Development Administration  in  February. 
Hosenball, who had  been Deputy General Counsel  since 1967, had 
been  Assistant General Counsel for Procuremen t   from  1966 to  1967 
and  previously  had  served  for  4 yr  a s   Chief  Counsel  a t   Lewis  Re- 
search  Center.  (NASA Release  75-  173) 
14 June:  France   would  begin  deactivating  its  space   cen ter   a t   Kourou, 
French  Guiana, in September,  the  New York T imes  reported. A  space  
cen ter  spokesman was quoted as saying, “We’ll have to put the  space  
cen ter   to  sleep  for a while  because   of  lack   of  funds.” 
The   deactivation  did  not  mean  that  the   French   were  abandoning 
their  ambition to achieve independence from the  u .S .   in  space  opera- 
tions  but  that  it  would  take  longer  than  originally  thought.  Th e  
European  space  program  a t  Kourou would  resume  with  launches  of 
several experimental rockets scheduled in 1979 a nd  a satellite launch 
planned  for the   1980s. 

111 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
S ince   i ts   estqblishment  in  April  1968,  the  Kourou  cen te r   had 
launched   more  than   225  balloons,  satellites,  and   sounding rockets. 
I t s  location 5" north  of  t h e  equator made Kourou especially  suitable 
for equatorial launches .  Th e  largest of  i ts  disappointments had been 
the  failure of  the  Europa 2 launch  vehicle  in  1971,  a  program  finally 
abandoned  in  1973  in  favor  of  the   Ariane  booster.  (Howe, NYT,  14 
Jun e   75) 
15 -1 7 June:   The  first [VLC 2; see 1 May] of 2 Viking Landers  schedu led  
for  launch   in August  underwent  more  than   47  hr  of  sterilization  a t  
Kennedy  Space  Center.  Preliminary electrical testing indicated tha t  
a l l  subsys tems  survived the  process,  including 30 hrs a t  the  mqximum 
chamber  tempera ture  of  112" 6. Additional te s t s  would check   o make  
sure   tha t   the   onboard  science  experiments  were  in  good  ho rk ing  
condition.  (Daspit, LaRC  Viking Pro j  Off,  interview, 21 June   7; Vik- 
ing Pro j  Off  Rpt M75-155-0-1;  Viking  S ta tus   Bulletin  7,  723  J un e  
75; NASA  Release  75-181) 
16 June:  Wes tern  Union Te legraph  Co. announced that af ter  We s ta r  1 and  
2  (launched 13 April 1974 and  10 Oct.  1974) began video transmission, 
users  would  save up  to 66% of  the  cost of  land-based  transmissions. 
Ra tes   of  the   new  system,  filed  with  the   Federa l   Communications 
Commission,  were  schedu led   to  go  into  effect  14  July.  The  multi- 
point reception capability of the  Wes tar  system would a t trac t  a variety 
of  broadcast  applications,  including independen t  networks and  links 
to  cab le   systems. 
Savings by users  of the  satellite system would depend  on the  type of 
service and  the  route s e l e c t e d  Wes tar  offpeak video service between 
Los Angeles and  New York would cos t  $715 for the  first hour,  a  sav- 
ings of  61% over t h e  $1832 charged  for a  landline  transmission.  For 
each  additional hour the  Wes tar  ra te  drops to $620, a reduc t ion  of 66% 
over landline transmissions. 
Initially,  c i t ies   with  e a r th   stations-New  York,  Los  Angeles, 
Chicago,  and  Dallas-would 
receive  the   service,  which  could  be  
ex tended   beyond  those  cities  via  connecting  carrier.  (WU release, 
16 June   75) 
0  Sc ien t is ts  a t  I tek  Corp.  had developed  a new  telescope optical  system 
tha t  would dramatically reduce  atmospheric distortion, the  Baltimore 
Sun  reported.  The  new  system, which could improve viewing resolu- 
tion  10- or 20-fold,  used mirrors and  a compu ter  to cance l  out distor- 
tions  so  tha t  observers could get  a c learer  image of celestial objects. 
In  the  system,  a shear ing  interferometer and  a de tec tor  measured 
the   amount of  distortion  in the  light en ter ing  the  lens;  the  computer 
calculated the  amount of  correction needed  in the  light to cance l  out 
the  distortion, and  a special mirror tha t  changed i ts  shape  when elec- 
tr ic  charges were applied correc ted  t h e  light before the  viewer saw it. 
I tek  was manufacturing a prototype tha t  would be  tes ted  on a work- 
ing telescope  in  1976.  (AP,  B Sun ,   16 June  75, A3) 
17 June:  Kennedy  Space   Cen te r   announced  t h e   award  of  a  $1  612 948 
extension to a $600 000 con trac t  to Reynolds, Smith, and  Hills Co.  for 
Space  Shu t t le  arch i tec tura l  and  engineering services.  The  contract, 
which would run  until June   1977, provided for modification  to Pad  A 
and   Mobile  Launcher   3  a t   Launch  Complex  39,  both  being  recon- 
figured  for the   Space  Shuttle.  (KSC  Release  109-75) 
18 June:  Wes tern  Union Telegraph Co.  and  RCA Global Communications, 
Inc.,  had  been  selected  for  negotiations  leading  to  phase-one  con- 

112 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

June  

t rac t s  to provide  detailed systems-design  proposals  for the  Tracking 
and  Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS),  NASA  announced.  TDRSS,  to 
be developed and  operated by industry  to meet NASA  service require- 
ments,  would  consist  of  three   or  more  specialized  satellites  in  syn- 
chronous  orbit  to  continuously  relay  tracking  information  and  da ta  
and  voice  commands  to  and  from NASA  satellites. 
Western  Union  and RCA  would both provide a  technical,  cost,  and 
business proposal for leased services to  be provided in the  phase-two 
operational  period.  The   proposals  would  be  evaluated  and  a  single 
contract  for  phase  two  would  be  awarded.  The   selected  contractor 
would  provide tracking,  command,  and data-acquisition  services for 
essentially all spacecraft orbiting below 5000 km, including the  Space  
Shuttle  and  Spacelab,  a s  well as  automated spacecraft  to be  orbited 
by the  Space Shuttle, for a 1- to  10-yr period beginning in 1979. TDRSS 
spacecraft and ground stations would be the  property and  responsibil- 
ity of  the   selected  contractor.  (NASA  Release  75-  176) 
*  Scientist Herbert  F.  Wischnia  was  using Oao  3  (Copernicus, Orbiting 
Astronomical Observatory  launched  21  Aug.  1972) satellite  and  its 
onboard optical telescope  to look for possible flashes of  an ultraviolet 
laser   from  another  world,  the   Chr is t ian   Science Mon i tor   reported. 
Although radio  signals would  be   a  better  way  to  communicate  once 
contact w a s  established, Wischnia believed that  an optical telescope 
could  pick  up  a whole  spec trum  of  frequencies  at  a glance.  A  radio 
telescope required years to cover a significant band of  frequencies be- 
cause   of  the   complex d a t a   processing  necessary;  an  optical  signal, 
once detected, would probably indicate which radio frequency would 
provide  fur ther   information.  The  biggest  difficulty was  making  the  
initial contact. 
C SM   reported  that  Wischnia  was  looking  at  three   s tars   likely  to 
have  planets,  all  older  than  the   s un   and  about  11  light  yr  distant. 
(Cowen, C S M ,  18 June  75,  25) 
* Marshall  Space  Flight  C e n t e r   announced  award  of  two  contracts  for 
parallel studies on space-processing equipment for Space Shuttle and 
Spacelab missions.  TRW  Systems Group was  awarded  $299  981  and 
General Electric  Co.  was  awarded  $284 974  to  provide  preliminary 
designs  for  equipment  tha t   could  be  used  to  process  various  mate- 
rials,  such  a s  metals  and crystals,  in  space.  (MSFC  Release  75-125) 
19 June:  Pres iden t   Ford  signed  Public  Law  94-39  (H .R .   4700,  the   NASA 
Authorization Act  for FY   1976 and   the   transition  period  1 July  1976 
through  30  Sept.  1976). P.L.  94-39  authorized  NASA  $3 562 310 000 
for FY   1976 and  $925  150 000 for the  transition period.  (PD, 23 June 
75,  664) 
*  The  House of  Representatives’ Committee on Appropriations reported 
out  H.R.  8070,  the   Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development- 
Independent  Agencies Appropriations  Bill for FY   1976. 
Th e  committee proposed t h e  continuation of  the  Space  Shu t t le  and 
Viking projects; various planetary,  weather,  and scientific satellites; 
and  fur ther   development  of  a  strong  aeronautics  program.  No   new 
s tar ts   were  proposed.  The  committee  also  directed  deferral  of  the  
Pioneer-Venus  mission for 1 year to permit a budget-priority decision 
in  1977  between  the   Large  Space  Telescope  a nd   Pioneer-Venus. 
The  committee recommended reducing the  $57  600 000 reques ted  for 
Pioneer-Venus  to  $9 200 000 to maintain  a  management  capability 
during the   1-yr deferral. 

113 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
NASA I;'y  1976 Budget 
Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House- 
Recommended Appropriations 
(millions) 

I t em  

B u d g e t  
R e q u e s t  

Au th o r i za t ion  
(diff.  f r om   r e s . )  

H .R .   Appropr iat iona  
Comm i t t e e  
(diff.  f r om  req.) 

Research & Development 
2678.4 
Research & Program Management*  - 
Construction of  Facilities 
84.6 
776.0 
3539.0 
Totals 

2687.2  (+8 .8)  
99.1 (+1 4 .5 )  
776.0 (0) 
3562.3 ( + U . 3 )  

2629.0 (-49.4) 
82.1 (-2.5) 
775.5 (-0 .5)  
3486.6 (-52 .4)  

*Does not  include a supplemental request for pay mcreases, introduced as  H.R. 13172 and signed mto P.L.  94-  
303 on  1 June  1976. 
The   committee  also  recommended  denial  of  $1  000 000  of  the  
$5  000 000 reques t  for continued s tud ies  of  the  LST,  and  reduction to 
$2 000 000 of  the  $3 000 000 reques ted  for the  transition  period.  Th e  
remaining  amounts were judged  sufficient  to  complete LST  studies. 
Within  the   Construction  of  Facilities  category,  the   committee 
denied funds  reques ted  for construction of t h e  Lunar Curatorial Facil- 
ity.  No  funds  were  to  be   used  for  modifying  the   40-  by  80-ft  wind 
tunne l   at Ames  Research   Cen ter   until  the   committee  had  reviewed 
a  formal budget  reques t .  
Reduction in  the  Research   and  Program Management reques t  re- 
flected a 10% reduction in t h e  payment of  General Services Adminis- 
tration  space-ren ta l   charges .   Th e   comm i t tee   also  recommended 
language  in  t h e  bill  to  permit  the   replacement  of  f iv e   older  aircraft 
with  more  modern  aircraft  for  grea ter   efficiency  and   safety.  Th is  
would  reduce   operating cos ts  by  $1  300 000  annually. 
The committee recommended a total appropriation of $925 028 000 
for the  transition  period  1 July  through 30  Sep t .  1976. Th is  total was 
$33 872 000 under the  total budget reques t  and  $122  111 less  than  the  
authorization. 

NASA Transition Budget 
Comparison of Request, Authorization, and House- 
Recommended Appropriations 
(millions) 

I t em  

____  
Research & Development 
Construction of  Facilities 
Research & Program Management 
Total 

B u d g e t  
R e q u e s t  

Au th o r i za t ion  
(d i f f .   f r om  r eq . )  

H .R .  Appropr iat ions  
Comm i t t e e  
(d i f f .  f r o m  req.) 

730.6 
14.5 
- 
213.8 
958.9 

700.6 (-30.0) 
10 .8  (-3 .8)  
213.8 (0) 
925.2 (-33 .8)  

700.6 (-30.0) 
10.8 (-3 .8)  
213.7 (-0.1) 
925.0 (-33 .9)  

(H.R.  Com Rpt No.  94-313;  Budget Chron Hist FY   1976, NASA Ofc of 
Budget  Operations,  16 June   75) 
0  Th e  first radar probes of  Jupiter's  moon Ganymede had  been  made by 
Dr.  Richard  M.  Goldstein  of  Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  NASA  an- 

114 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

June 

nounced.  Ganymede,  a t  the   time  some 600 million  km  distant  from 
earth,  was  found  to  have  a  rougher  surface  than  the   inner  planets 
Mercury, Mars,  or  Venus.  Dr.  Goldstein scanned  Ganymede three  or  
four times on each  of  six nights in August 1974, using the 64-m  antenna 
at JPL’S  Goldstone station of  the  Deep Space  Network; the  radar em- 
ployed  a  400-kw  microwave beam  a t   a  frequency  of  12.6 cm. 
Writing  in  Science  magazine,  Dr.  Goldstein  and  co-investigator 
George A.  Morris said the  most likely surface of Ganymede was rocky 
metallic material imbedded in a matrix of  ice. Such a surface could be 
smooth with  a  top  layer of  ice  rubble  but would  appear   rough  to  the  
radar  because  the   ice would be  transparen t   to  the  microwave beam. 
The  theory was particularly  interesting in view of  the  finding by  the 
P ioneer   10  and 11   flybys (3 Dec.  1973 and  3 Dec.  1974) that  Jupiter 
itself seemed totally gaseous, with no solid surface to produce  a radar 
echo.  The  JPL  sc ien t is ts   theorized  that  Ganymede  was  probably 
meteoritic in origin. (NASA  Release 75-  170; Goldstein et a l . ,  Science, 
20  June  75,  1211-1212) 
0  Flight Research  Cen ter   announced  the   award of  a $146 000 cost-plus- 
fixed-fee con trac t  to LTV  Aerospace  Corp.’s  Vought Systems Div.  to 
study  the  possibility of  flight-testing the  oblique wing  on  an F-8  je t  
aircraft. LTV would investigate technical and mechanical problems in 
modifying the   tes t   aircraft  and would  estimate  the   cost of  modifica- 
tions. 
The oblique wing,  developed  by  Dr.  Robert T.  Jones  of  Ames  Re- 
search  Center, was a conventional straight wing mounted on top of  an 
aircraft so that  it could be  swiveled around a cen tra l  pivot point.  The 
wing could be fixed a t  zero degrees-perpendicular 
to the  fuselage- 
for takeoff and landing, and moved to various sweep positions a t  dif- 
ferent  speeds  for the   best  performance.  Wind-tunnel  tes ts   had  indi- 
ca ted  the  new  design could opera te  with maximum  efficiency over a 
wide range of  flight conditions, offering either increased  speed or  sig- 
nificant  fuel savings.  (FRC  Release  17-25) 
20  June:   Dr.  Harold  Brown,  Pres iden t   of  California  Institute  of  Tech- 
nology,  announced  the  appointment of Dr.  Bruce C. Murray as Direc- 
tor of  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory,  succeeding Dr.  William H.  Picker- 
ing who  was  retiring  after  21  yr  in  the   position. 
Dr.  Murray,  a Caltech  professor  of  planetary  sciences  for  15  yr, 
had  also been  a  researcher   on JPL  space  missions  for more  than  10 
yr. He was completing  scientific  descriptions  of  Venus  and Mercury 
from Mariner  10  data,  gathered  during  a  February  1974  encounter 
with  the   planet,  and   comparing  the   surface  histories  of  Mercury, 
Venus,  Mars,  and  the   moon with  the   history  of  the   ear th .  
Dr.  Pickering had  been  with JPL  since  1944 and  had  served a s  its 
Director  since  1954.  A s  Director,  Dr.  Pickering led JPL  in  designing 
and  building the   first orbiting U .S .   satellite, Explorer  1  (launched  31 
Jan.  1958). Also’under his leadership,  JPL  had  designed  the  Ranger ,  
Surveyor, and Mariner  spacecraft  that were launched to gather infor- 
mation on  the  moon  and  nearby  planets.  (NASA  Release  75-179) 
0  Sen.  Frank E.  Moss (D-Utah)  introduced,  for himself  and  Sen.  Barry 
Goldwater (R-  Ariz.),  S.  1987, the  President’s  biU[see also 9 June]  to 
“strengthen  staff  capabilities for providing advice  and  assistance  to 
the  Pres iden t  with respect  to  scientific  and technological considera- 
tions  affecting  national  policies  and  programs.”  The   proposed  bill 

115 

June 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

would  c rea te  an Office of  Sc ience  and  Technology  Policy within  the  
Executive Office of  the   Pres iden t .  
The   bill  was  referred   jointly  to  the   Sena te   Committee  on  Aero- 
nau t ica l  and   Space   Sciences,  Committee on  Commerce,  and  Com- 
mittee  on  Labor  and  Pub l ic   Welfare.  S.  1987 was  similar  to  H.R. 
7830  introduced  11 June   by  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague   (D-Tex.)  in  the  
House of  Representatives.  (CR, 20  June   75,  Sl1117) 
0  Marshall Space  Flight Cen te r  announced the  formation of  a  solar heat- 
ing  and  cooling  task   team   to  suppor t  reque s t s  made  by  the  Energy 
Research   and  Development Administration (ERDA).  The   task   team, 
under  the  leadersh ip  of  Donald R.  Bowden,  would  d irec t  MSFC’S  role 
in ERDA’S  program  to  demons tra te   heating  and   cooling applications 
of  solar energy.  The   team  would  acquire  examples of  existing  solar 
heating and cooling sys tems  and  would direct additional development 
of  the se   systems to  increase  efficiency and  lower  costs. 
ERDA  had  authorized  a p   roximately  $50  million  to  MSFC  for work 
which would  cover 5 yr  anti use  100 persons  a t  MSFC.  (MSFC  Release 
75-  130). 
0  Indecision  and  lack  of  a   national  policy  had  preven ted   the   U.S. from 
having  its  own  domestic  communications satellite  system after  9 yr 
of  planning, a  Wash ing ton  S t a r  article quoted Communications Sa te l-  
lite Corp. Pres iden t  Joseph V.  Charyk a s  saying. In  le s s  than  10 yr a  
global comsat  system developed under  U.S.  leadersh ip  was  carrying 
more  than   two-thirds  of  the   world’s  transocean   communications. 
Canada  had  had  its  own  s ince  1972. The  problem, Charyk said, was 
that,  after the   success  of  the  global system,  “everybody wanted in.” 
Compan ie s ,   inc lud ing   Ame r ican   T e l e pho n e   &  T e l e g r a ph   Co., 
Wes tern  Union Te legraph  Co.,  Hughes Aircraft  Co.,  RCA Corp.,  and 
Fairchild  Industries,  Inc.,  expressed  in teres t  in developing a  domes- 
tic  system. The  Federa l  Communications Commission, whose job   it 
was to decide who would  opera te  such  a  system,  seemed only in ten t  
upon keeping ComSatCorp and AT&Tfrom dominating the  field. Quot- 
ing Charyk, the  S ta r  said the  net effect of  this lack  of  a  positive policy 
by the  White House, Congress, and  the regulatory  agencies was  tha t  
all the  U.S.  had  to  da te  were  two  or  three   ea r th  stations  using repro- 
ductions  of  the   Canadian  system. 
Despite  the   problems,  Charyk   sa id   t h a t   two  of  ComSatCorp’s 
domestic programs were nearing operational stages: Marisat,  a  mari- 
time  comsat  planned  for  a   summer   1975  launch,  and  Comstar  1, 
schedu led   for  launch   in  1976.  ComSatCorp would  also  participate 
with  several European  coun tr ies  and Canada  in  the  Aerosat program 
to  te s t   the  use  of  comsa ts  for  aircraft  navigation. 
However,  Charyk sa id  that,  under  the  “open  sk ies”  policies of  the  
F C C ,   ComSatCorp had  no  guaran tees   of  permanent  service.  “ I t   is 
hard to get cus tomers  with these  rules  in effect.”  (Snider, W S t a r ,  20 
Jun e   7 5 ,  D7) 
0  A digital Stoland navigation, guidance, control, and  display system in an 
augmentor wing  aircraft  (a modified  C-8A  Buffalo) guided  the   air- 
craft  to  an automatic landing at  the  short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) 
te s t  facility at Crows Landing, near   Pa t terson ,   Calif. The  automatic 
landing,  first for a  STOL  aircraft,  was a  milestone in the  flight accep t-  
ance  of  the  Stoland system being developed by Sperry  Flight Sys tems  
under  con trac t  to Ames Research  Cen ter .  The  system would be te s ted  
on o ther  SmL  aircraft.  (ARC As trogram ,   17 July  75,  2) 
116 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

June 

0  A   Science magazine  article  detailed  some  ea r ly   findings  from  the 
Atlantic  Tropical  Exper imen t   (GATE)  of  the   Global  Atmospheric 
Research   Program  (GARP).  GATE,  a  72-nation  research   effort  during 
the   summer  of  1974  to  gather  meteorological  information  on  the  
tropics,  found  very  few cumulus clouds.  Clouds  in weather  disturb- 
ances   tended  to  be   grouped  in  patterns,  usually  in  roughly  linear 
bands.  Prior  to  GATE  the   only  visible  indicators  of  these   weather- 
disturbance  pa t terns   were  cloud  c lus ters   seen   on  satellite  photo- 
graphs, but the details were unknown; GATE demonstrated  tha t  these 
clusters were  high  cirrus  clouds  tha t   formed  above the  weather  dis- 
turbance  and might persist  long af ter  the  rainclouds  themselves had 
dissipated.  The   organization  of  active  rainclouds  then  came  under 
intensive  study  as   the   essential fea ture  of  atmospheric  convection. 
Although scientists had previously thought tha t  cloud bases  formed 
a t  a given level in the  atmosphere,  clouds in the  GATE area  were found 
to  form  at many different  altitudes;  many  did  not  reach   the   heights 
often  associated with  tropical  cumulus clouds  until the  la t ter  part  of 
the  summer. The s treng th  of  weather  disturbances  intensified during 
the   experiment,  indicating  tha t   the   tropical  atmosphere  probably 
altered over the  course of  the  summer as  i ts  moisture con ten t  and con- 
vection  increased,  causing  the   clouds  to  grow  taller  a s   higher  and 
higher  levels  of  the   atmosphere  were  warmed. 
GATE  scientists  also  investigated  the  air  layer  between  the  cloud 
bases  and  the  sea  surface,  finding tha t   the   subcloud  layer was  pro- 
foundly altered by  the   passage of  a cloud. Warm  moist air taken  up 
into the  cloud to  fuel the  convection was replaced  by  cooler drier air 
from higher in  the  atmosphere.  Scientists believed  that  the resulting 
mix  might explain  cloud  spacing  and  lifetime,  and  might  indicate  a 
continually changing subcloud  layer in marked contrast  to conditions 
prevailing in  fair weather.  GATE  experiments  documented the  exist- 
ence   of  atmospheric  waves  in  the  tropics and   showed tha t  weather 
disturbances  developed  near   the  low-pressure  portion  of  the  wave. 
Sc ien t is ts   also  discovered  a  peculiar  rapid  meandering  of  the  
intense  eastward flowing stream  100 m  
equatorial undercurrent-an 
below  the  s e a  surface  a t   the   equator-that 
shifted  north  and  south 
about  1" in  latitude  on  e i ther   side  of  the  equator  with  an  apparen t  
period  of  16 days.  (Hammond, Science, 20 June  75,  1195-98) 
0  Kennedy  Space   Cen ter   announced  the   award  of  a  $6 473 074  fixed- 
price  indefinite-quantity  contract  to  Modular  Computer  Systems, 
Inc.,  for minicomputers  and  associated equipment  and  services  for 
the Space  Shuttle. The  con trac t  included $4 226 646 in hardware and 
services  already  ordered   and   $2 246  428  in  additional  hardware. 
Modular Computer Sys tems  would supply minicomputers,  peripheral 
equipment,  special interface  devices,  associated software, engineer- 
ing and  maintenance  support,  spares,  and  documentation.  (KSC  Re- 
lease   114-75) 
21  June:  NASA  successfully  launched  Os0  8 Orbiting  Solar Observatory 
at 743 am EDT from Eas tern  T e s t  Range on a thrust-augmented Thor- 
Delta booster, after a 1-day delay because of  a n  electrical malfunction 
in the launch  vehicle. Th e  spacecraft  en tered  a near-perfect  circular 
orbit with  a 560-km  apogee,  544-km  perigee,  95.74-min  period,  and 
32.94"inclination. By 23 June  Os0 8 was stabilized and was accurately 
tracking the  cen ter  of the  sun  a s  planned.  All spacecraf t  systems were 

117 

June 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 
operating normally. By  27  June   all eight  experiments  had  been  acti- 
vated  and were  acquiring  da ta .  
Primary objective of  the  Os0 8 mission was to investigate the  sun’s 
lower corona  and  its chromosphere,  and  the ir   interface  in  the   ultra- 
violet  spec tra l   region,  to  be t ter   understand  the   transport  of  energy 
from  the   photosphere  into  the   corona.  Secondary  objective  was  to 
study solar x-rays  and  earth-sun  relationships  and to  investigate  the 
background  component  of  cosmic  x-rays. 
The   1 0 6 4 k g  spacecraft  had  two  sections:  A  rotating  cylindrical 
bottom section-the  wheel-accommodated  experiments that did not 
require  solar reference  pointing or tha t  scanned  the  celestial sphere .  
The  nonspinning rectangular sa i l  section mounted on top of  the  wheel 
accommodated  experiments tha t  required  s tab le  pointing a t  the  sun. 
The  spacecraft carried eight experiments. Th e  two on the  sail sec- 
measure  solar-ultraviolet line  profiles in  the  range of  1050 to 2300 1 
tion were  a Univ.  of  Colo.  high-resolution ultraviolet spectrometer  t 
s truc ture  simultaneously  in  six lines from 1000 to 4000 a originating 
and their variation with time  and  position, and   a spectrometer  and a 
cassegrain  telescope  tha t   would  observe  the  solar  c h  omospheric 
from  different  levels  in  the   sun’s  atmosphere.  This experiment  was 
provided  by  France’s  Laboratory  for  Stellar  and  Planetary  Physics 
under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the  French  Cen tre  
National  d e  la  Re‘cherche Scientifique. 
Other  experiments-all 
on  the  wheel  portion  of  the  spacecraft  and 
supplied  by  u .S .   universities,  industry,  and  government  agencies- 
included  a high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer  to monitor t h e  sun’s 
emission  in  the   2-  to  8-kev  range,  obtain  a  complete  spec trum   of 
the  sun every 10 sec  during flares, and  obtain high-resolution spec tra  
of  many celestial x-ray  sources ;  a mapping x-ray heliometer to meas- 
ure   location,  spec trum ,   and  intensity  of  intermediate-energy  x-rays 
from individual solar-active regions and to acquire da ta  on extrasolar 
x-ray  sources ;   an  investigation  of  soft  x-ray  background  radiation 
using  proportional  counters;  a  cosmic  x-ray  spectroscope  to 
determine  the   spec tra  of  sources  and  the  diffuse cosmic x-ray  back- 
ground  in  the  energy  range  of  2  to  60 kev,  and  to  measure  intensity 
variations  and  identify  possible  emission  lines  of  discrete  x-ray 
sources;  a  high-energy  celestial  x-ray  experiment  to  measure  the  
spectrum of  all point x-ray  sources observable in the  energy range  of 
0.01 to  1 megaelectron  volts,  and to search  for temporal variations in 
the  intensity and spectrum of  the  point sources de tec ted ;  and a study 
of  extreme ultraviolet radiations  from ear th   and  space ,  to determine 
the   behavior  of  atoms  such   a s   hydrogen  and  neutral  and  ionized 
helium in the  earth‘s  atmosphere by measuring  the  intensity  and dis- 
tribution  of  solar  radiation  resonantly  sca t tered   by  these   atoms. 
Os0 8 was the  ninth,  and last,  in a ser ies  of  spin-stabilized orbiting 
solar observatories designed  to gather new knowledge of  the  sun, the 
earth‘s  atmosphere,  and  sun-activated  terres tr ia l  phenomena  over  a 
broad  range   of  t h e   electromagnetic  spec trum   not  de tec tab le   by 
ground-based  equipment. Of  the  eight os0 launches  tha t   began with 
Os0  1 on 7 March 1962, only one, oso-c,  was unsuccessful,  because 
of  a  launch-vehicle  failure.  Discoveries  made  by  OS0 spacecraf t  
included gamma-ray emissions from the  galactic cen ter ;  a previously 
unknown isothermal plateau  in the  chromosphere of  the  solar atmos- 

118 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
phere;  differences in the  s truc ture  of  the  extreme ultraviolet corona 
above  quiet  and   active regions  on  the   solar  disk;  evidence  tha t   the  
corona  above  the  solar poles was  significantly cooler  than  nonactive 
coronal  regions  n e a r   t h e   equa tor ;   and   synoptic  observations  of 
“holes”  in  the   corona  that  survived  several solar rotations. 
Os0  8-built  by  Hughes  Aircraft  Co.-was  managed  by  Goddard 
Space   Flight  Cen ter   under   the   direction  of  NASA’s Office  of  Space  
Science. GSFC was also responsible for the  Thor-Delta launch vehicle. 
(NASAMORs,  4 June 75 ,23  June 75,27 June 75; NASA Release 75-158) 
23 June: NASA  and the  Energy Research and Development Administration 
signed an  interagency cooperative agreement to enhance  the  national 
energy  effort.  ERDA  and  NASA  management  would  identify  specific 
program  tasks   that  could  be  undertaken  by  NASA cen ters   in  support 
of ERDA programs. ERDA would use NASA’s  basic  and applied research  
capabilities in areas  including solar heating and  cooling systems,  gas 
turbines,  fuel  cells,  hydrogen  technology,  ground-propulsion  tech- 
nology,  bearings,  seals, combustion,  automatic  control  systems,  and 
materials  and  s truc tures   technology. 
NASA would  submit  proposals  and plans  to ERDA  for specific  tech- 
nology  developments  including  testing,  evaluation,  and  demonstra- 
tion  of  projects  or   hardware;  ERDA  would  also  call  upon  NASA  for 
specific  short-  and long-term  technical  and  administrative expertise 
su ch  a s  technical review boards, evaluation groups, and other assess- 
ment  techniques. 
The  agreement would establish an ERDA-NASA  program committee 
to  annually  review  NASA  research   and  development work  in  support 
of ERDA.  (NASA  Release  75-182;  ERDA  Release  75-99) 
*  NASA was  conducting  design  s tud ies  and  component  testing  for an  ex- 
perimental laser-energy  system using a nuclear-fission reac tor  fueled 
with gaseous uranium  or a gaseous uranium compound s u c h  a s  hexa- 
fluoride, Dr.  Karl Thom  said in an article released by NASA.  Whereas 
conventional  laser   power  used  various  processes  of  energy  con- 
version  tha t   required  costly  equipment  and   resulted  in  net  loss  of 
energy,  a nuclear  system  could produce  large  amounts of  high-grade 
power  very cheaply  and  efficiently. 
Some  scientists  were  using  various  nuclear-powered  lasers   for 
experiments,  but  most  used  systems  that  transferred  energy  from 
external reactors to  the  laser  gas within the  laser  tube.  NASA,  with i t s  
in teres t   in  gaseous  fuel  reactors  a s   high-performance  space   power 
and  propulsion  systems,  was  looking  a t   a  more  efficient  system  in 
which  the   fission  fragments  tha t   energize  laser   gas were  energized 
within  the  laser  tube  itself creating,  a t  fission, a powerful chain reac- 
tion. 
Dr.  Thom  said  that,  in  combination with the  research   on nuclear- 
pumped  lasers,  Los  Alamos  Scientific  Laboratory  scientists  were 
testing gaseous fuel reactors  using components,  reflectors,  and  con- 
trols  salvaged from the  nuclear rocket  program. If  the system proved 
practical “a  new e ra  of  nuclear energy utilization will  begin,  in space  
and on Earth.”  Space  engineers could c rea te  a nuclear-powered laser  
station in ear th  orbit to beam power via lasers  to various customers in  
space,  to o ther   space   probes  for propulsion,  to  lunar  bases   for  their 
power  needs,  and  to  ear th   for  clean  and  abundan t   energy.  (NASA 
Release  75-  169) 

119 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
24 June:  Th e  House  of  Representatives,  by  a  vote  of  391  to   25,  passed 
H.R.  8070,  the  Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  and  Inde- 
pendent Agencies Appropriations Bill for FY 1976 and the  transitional 
period from 1 July  1976 through 30 Sept.  1976. Th e  bill-appropriat- 
ing  for  NASA  $3.489  billion  for  FY 1976  and   $925.0 million  for  the  
transition  period-was  passed as reported out by the  House of Repre- 
sentatives  Committee  on  Appropriations  on  19  June.  (CR ,  24 June 
75,  H6003 - 12) 
24 June:  Apollo-Soyuz T e s t  Project  crew members Thomas  P.  Stafford, 
Vance  D.  Brand,  and  Donald  K.  Slayton  began  a  3-wk  preflight 
medical  isolation at  12 pm  CDT.  Called the   flight health  stabilization 
plan, the  isolation limited the  as tronau ts  to specific working and  train- 
ing  areas   at  Johnson  Space   Center.  In   offhours  they  were  being 
housed in special mobile homes. Only previously screened  personnel, 
wearing  surgical  face  masks,  could  come  into  face-to-face  contact 
with the  astronauts. (JSC Release 75 - 5 9   Ezellet a l . ,   The Partnership: 
A  History  of  the ApolloSoyuz  Test  Project,  313) 
0  Rockwell  International Corp.  Rocketdyne  Div.  successfully  test-fired 
the  main chamber of  the  Space  Shuttle main engine for the  first time, 
a t   NASA’s National  Space   Technology  Laboratories.  Initial  evalua- 
tion of  ignition-test da ta  indicated that all test objectives were achieved. 
During a second firing the  engine’s high-pressure  fuel pump reached 
a maximum speed of  almost 7000 rpm,  19% of  full power. The  tes t  was 
seventh in a planned ser ies  of  10 to 15 short-duration ignition tes ts  that 
began  11 June  and would culminate in  the operation of  the  engine at 
20%  of  maximum  thrus t   level  of  2 090 664  newtons  (470 000  lbs). 
Subsequen t   tes ts   would  attempt  higher  mainstage  thrus t   levels  to 
evaluate engine-starting  characteristics  and  performance. 
The   Space  Shuttle  main  engine,  the  most  advanced  liquid-fueled 
rocket engine ever built, was the  first to use an electronic digital com- 
pu ter  for automatic control.  Three  of  these  engines, designed  for re- 
u s e  up to 55 times, would power the  Space  Shuttle Orbiter.  (Marshall 
S ta r ,   2  July  75,  1;  Rocketdyne  Release  RD-15;  MSFC  Release 
75-  115) 
0  The   A ir   Force  System  Command’s  Arnold  Engineering  Development 
Cen ter  was developing a technique  to  study,  under flight conditions, 
the physical behavior of  the  spray-on insulating material proposed for 
the   Space   Shuttle,  AFSC  announced.  Using  procedures  similar  to 
those used  in analyzing aerial photographs, a series of  reference lines 
was  projected  onto  the   original  surface  and  photographed  before 
wind-tunnel  testing.  The   same  pattern  w a s   then  projected  onto  the  
surface  during the   testing.  T h e  shift  in  the   apparen t   position  of  the  
projected  lines  a s  the  surface eroded  from the position  shown on the 
original photograph allowed analysis of  the  behavior of  the  materials. 
(MSc Release  OIP  157.75) 
24-25  June:  At  i ts   first  meeting,  the   council  of  the   European  Space 
Agency  (ESA) elected  Wolfgang Finke  (West  Germany) as  chairman 
for  1 yr.  General  Luis  d e   Azcarraga  (Spain)  and  J an   Stiernstedt 
(Sweden) were  elected  vice  chairmen.  (ESA Release,  27  June   75) 
25 June:  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  announced the  award of  two 9-mo 
con trac ts  for parallel design s tud ies  of  a biological holding facility for 
Spacelab. 
Lockheed  Missiles and  Space  Co.  received  $242 640 and McDon- 
nell  Douglas  Astronautics  Co.  received  $177 360  to  develop 
120 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

June 

conceptual designs of  hab i ta ts  for live biological spec imens  support- 
ing  life-sciences  space  flight research  programs.  Th e  h ab i t a t s - c on -  
sisting  of  t h e   s truc ture   and   the   environmental-control,  food  and  
watering,  waste-management,  lighting,  and   instrumentation  sys- 
to  be  suitable  for  a  wide  variety  of  specimens  with 
tems-were 
emphas is  on  the   adult  rhesus   monkey  and  t h e  adult  laboratory  rat. 
(MSFC  Release  75-  133) 
25 J u n e - 3   July:  T h e  countdown demonstration test, a step-by-step  d re s s  
rehearsa l   for  t h e  July  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project,  was  successfully 
completed  a t   Kennedy  Space   Cen ter .   The   rehearsa l   culminated  in 
ac tua l  fueling of t h e  Sa turn  IB and a simulated launch  of  the  Apollo a t  
3:50 pm EDT on 2 July. Th e  cryogenic propellants loaded for the  “wet” 
portion of  the   te s t  were  off-loaded  and the  final portion  of  the  count 
repea ted  with crew members  Thomas P.  Stafford,  Vance  D.  Brand, 
and   Donald  K.  Slayton  aboard  the   spacecraft.  A  second  simulated 
ignition  and  liitoff  occurred  at 2  pm  EDT  on  3  July. 
During the  te s t ,  a leak de tec ted  in Brand’s  spacesu i t  was traced  to 
one of  the  pressure-sealing slide fasteners.  Modifications  were made  
and  the  spacesuit was successfully retested.  (Spacepor t  New s ,  26 June  
7 5 , l ;  KSC Release 115-75;  Eze l le t  a l . ,  The Par tnersh ip:  A  H is tory  o f  
the A p o l l o S o y u z   Test Pro jec t ,   314) 
27  J u n e :   The  European  Space   Agency  announced  the   appointment  of 
Hans   Hinterman  (Switzerland)  a s   director  of  the   European  Space  
Research   and  Technology  Cen ter   (ESTEC),  effective  in  Sep tember .  
Hinterman  would  replace  Ove  Hammarstrom  who  was  leaving  to 
accep t   a post  in  industry. Hinterman was director of  research  of  the  
Laboratoire  Suisse  d e   RBcherche  Horlogeres  in  Switzerland.  @SA  
Release,  27 June   75) 
0  Most of the  40 participants a t  a space-food exhibition banquet in Zvezdny 
Gorodok,  U.S.S.R.,  found  the   meal  tasty  but  not  very  filling,  the  
Wash ing ton   Post  reported.  Presiding  over  the   affair,  cosmonaut 
Aleksey A.  Leonov,  Soviet commander for t h e  schedu led  July Apollo- 
Soyuz Te s t  Project,  said tha t   after the  third day of  spaceflight, when 
an  astronaut’s appetite improved, he could consume four meals a day. 
Th e   banquet  menu  included  fruit  juices,  coffee,  borsch,  cabbage 
soup, bite-sized  bread,  and  a  compote of  cucumber ,  ch icken  necks, 
and  kidney. 
During the   dinner Leonov revealed  tha t   the  Soyuz  18  cosmonauts 
Pyo tr  Klimuk  and  Vitaly Sevastyanov, launched 24 May  and in orbit 
aboard the  Sa lyu t   4  space  station, would con t inue  in orbit during t h e  
ASTP mission  and would  probably remain in orbit for another month. 
(Piper, W  P o s t ,  27  June   75,  A2) 
*  U.S.  airlines  carried  more  than  207  million passengers  during  1974,  an  
increase   of  2.6%  over  1973  and   a  new  record,  the   Air  Transpor t  
Association announced.  In addition,  U.S.  lines carr ied  4 . 9  billion ton- 
miles  of  freight,  an  increase   of  3.2%  over  1973.  Total  operating 
revenues in 1974 were $14.7 billion, up from $12.4 billion for 1973. Net 
profit rose  by 41.9%, from $226.7 million in  1973 to  $321.6 million in 
1974.  (ATA  Release,  27  June   75) 
28 June:  When commercial communications via satellite began with  the  6 
April  1965 launch   of  E a r l y  B ird   1 ,  t h e  u.S.  was  expected  to  be   the  
prime  user   of  the   new  global  communications  system,  a New  York 
Times article said. Exper ts  assumed  the  system would be  used chiefly 
for occasional live events such  as sports, s ta te  affairs, space  missions, 

121 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
etc.  However,  these   uses  had  actually  accoun ted   for only  a  fifth of 
transglobal  comsat  T V   volume.  A  number   of  poor  and   developing 
coun tr ies  had come to depend  heavily on  the   International Telecom- 
munications Satellite Organization’s seven Intelsat comsats. Although 
major  events were still the  sub jec t  of much  global TV  traffic,  t h e  most 
extensive  and   consistent  use  of  commercial  comsa ts   was  for  daily 
news. 
News  packages  were  sen t   from  one   country  to  another.  U.S.  net- 
works used almost daily satellite news reports from correspondents in 
various par ts  of  the  world.  Spain and  Mexico were linked full time by 
satellite. Madrid also transmitted  15 min of  daily news to Argentina, 
Brazil,  Chile,  Colombia,  and   Venezuela.  When   even ts   warranted, 
these  countries transm i t ted  news to Span ish  TV .   France  transmitted 
daily news to Israel,  Iran ,  Jordan,  and  Martinique a s  well  a s  several 
North African countries.  News from London was transmitted  daily to 
Australia. 
The  NYT  quoted officials  of  Communications Satellite Corp.,  U.S. 
manager  of  the   In te lsa t   system,  a s  saying  tha t   in  1965  the  comsats 
carr ied   about  six TV   transmissions  a month  for a  total of  less than  6 
hours of  programming; in 1975, the  Intelsat  system was handling 400 
transmissions a month, more than  200 h r s  of  programming not includ- 
ing  the   200  hrs   a  month  carr ied   on  the   Spain-Mexico  channel. 
(Brown, NYT,  28 J un e   75,  43) 
29 June:  Final joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
simulations  for  the   Apollo-Soyuz  Test 
Project  crews  and  flight controllers  began  a t  Johnson  Space  Cen ter  
and   a t   t h e   Moscow  Mission  Control  Cen ter   a t   6:30  am  CDT.  Th e  
simulations picked up the count a t  47 h r s  10 min into the  mission  and  
continued  for  56  hrs,  covering  t h e   joint  portion  of  the   mission 
including  rendezvous,  docking,  crew  transfers   and   joint  activities, 
and  undocking  of  the  Apollo  and   Soyuz  spacecraf t .   U.S.  and  Soviet 
crewmen participated in simulators in the ir  respective countries while 
both  flight-control  cen te r s  were  fully  staffed.  The   U.S. crew  would 
also  participate  in  the   countdown  demonstration  test  a t   Kennedy 
Space  Cen ter  on 3 July. (JSC Re lease  75-61;  Ezellet al., The Pa r tne r -  
ship:  A  History of  the ApolloSoyuz  Test Project,  314) 
30 June:  NASA’s permanen t  employment level decreased  by  521, o r  2.1% 
during FY  1975, NASA’s Office of Personne l  reported in  “The In-House 
Work Force.”  Average age of  NASA employees had  risen 0 .3  yr to age 
43  and   the   average  executive  age  fell  1 .3  yr  to  age  49.6.  Average 
grade  of  permanen t   employees remained  a t  GS-11,  constant  since 
FY   1973. 
New  hires  and   separations  were  down  by  4 .4   and  6.5%,  respec- 
tively. Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  had had the  only NASA reduction- 
in-force,  resulting  in 76  separations. The  62 in tercen ter  professional 
transfers  were down from 72 in FY 1974, and  the  789 re t iremen ts  were 
30%  below  the   FY  1974  level,  although  disability  re t iremen ts   con- 
tinued to rise, totaling 220 in FY  19’75-a  147% increase  over FY  1970. 
(Off of  Personnel Rp t ,   “The   In-House Work  Force,”  30  June   75) 
0  The  Skylab program was closed out at Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  and  
personnel assigned to the  program had been reassigned, the Marshall 
S t a r  announced. Responsibility for the  deactivated offices, including 
storage of  hardware  and  phaseout of  remaining con trac tua l  and  doc- 
umentary activities, was assigned to t h e  Administration and  Program 
Suppor t  Directorate’s Logistics Office.  (Marshall S t a r ,  2 July  75,  4) 
122 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
0  “After spending some $1.5  billion over more than   10  years,  the  United 
States, through the  loss of  its will  to go forward in space ,   gave up on  
this  next  generation of  rockets  even  though  t h e  nuc lear   technology 
worked,”  Gary L. Bennett sa id  in a le t ter  to the  editor of the  Wushing- 
t o n  S t a r .  Noting that u.S.  basic rocket technology was close to 40 yrs  
old,  Bennett wrote,  “We  have  shown  no  inclination  to  develop  new 
rocke t   concep ts   despite  the   fact  tha t   these   concep ts   have  definite 
terres tr ia l  advantages in  terms  of  energy and  employment.  It’s sad  to 
think tha t  we came  so close to realizing our  destiny in space  and  then  
we  gave it  all up  for a  sense less  enervating policy of  introspection.” 
(W S t a r ,   30 June   75) 
*  NASA  announced t h e  award of  a  $287-million  con trac t   to Air  Produc ts  
and  Chemicals, Inc.,  to supply liquid hydrogen for the  government’s 
Ea s t  Coast requ iremen ts  over a 12.5-yr  period beginning 1 July  1975. 
Th e  liquid hydrogen  would b e  used primarily in  Space  Shu t t le  engine 
testing a t  the National Space  Technology  Laboratories and  for Space  
Shu t t le  launches.  (NASA  Release  75-  192) 
During J u n e :   Activities continued  a t  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r  in  prepara- 
tion for t h e  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project launch  in July. During t h e  week 
of  2-6  June,  KSC  engineers  and  technicians  checked   the   Apollo 
spacecraf t  for propellant leaks, filled the  liquid-oxygen  storage tank  at 
t h e  pad,  loaded oxygen  and   nitrogen  onto  t h e  docking module,  and  
installed  conax valves on  the   Sa turn  IB first  stage. 
Spacecraf t  ordnance  was  installed  9-13  June   and   the   command 
module was  checked   for leaks   and  prepared  for hypergolic  loading. 
Also  during t h e  week  the   liquid-hydrogen tank   was  filled. 
Pr ime  crew members-Thomas  P.  Stafford,  Vance D.  Brand,  and  
backup   crew  members-Jack  R.  Lousma, 
Donald  K.  Slayton-and 
Alan  L.  Bean,  and  Ronald  E.  Evans-arrived 
a t  KSC  on  10 June   for 
command and  docking-module crew compar tmen t  fit  and  functional 
checks .  The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrange- 
ments.  (Spaceport New s ,   12  June  75,  5;  26  June  75,  3) 
9  Development of  the Space lab  by the  European Space  Agency for NASA’s 
Space  Shu t t le  continued. 
An annua l  Space lab  s ta tus  review 4-5  June  a t tended  by Dr.  Jame s  
C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  and   Roy  Gibson,  ESA  Director 
General,  established  schedu le  milestones,  de term ined  read iness  for 
the   preliminary  design  review,  and  d iscussed   arrangemen ts  for  the  
first  Space lab  flight.  They  also discussed  plans  for  the   instrument- 
pointing  system  and   the   first Space lab  payload,  follow-on  Space lab  
procurement by NASA,  and  terms  and  conditions for use of  t h e  Space  
Shuttle-  Space lab  system. 
O n  6 June,  the   recommendations of  10 teams-which  had met  a t  
Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r   in  May  to  discuss  Space lab  systems, 
avionics,  s truc tures ,   environmental  control  and   life  support,  soft- 
ware,  tes t  and  integration, and  payload  operations and  accommoda- 
tions-were  presen ted  to the  NASA Office of Manned Space  Flight for 
concurrence.  At  the   same   t ime   ESA  was  preparing  similar  recom- 
mendations a t  the  European Space  Research  and  Technology  Cen te r  
(ESTEC). 
Beginning on 9 June ,  combined NASA-ESA   teams  met in Noordwijk 
to  consider  t h e   1772  review-item  d iscrepanc ies   prepared  by  both 
agencies  and ,   after  2.5  days,  had  processed  all of  them.  (Space lab  
News le t ter   75-2,  3  July  75) 

123 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
June 
Goddard Space  Flight Center’s Goddurd News repor ted  tha t  the  John C. 
Lindsay  Memorial  Award,  given  annually  to  a   GSFC  employee  in 
recognition of  an ou ts tand ing  contribution to sc ience  and  technology, 
had  been presen ted  to Dr. Norman F. Ness. Dr. Ness had  received the  
award for his pioneering work in the  investigation of magnetic fields of 
planetary  bodies  and  the   interaction  of  the   solar  wind  with  the se  
magnetic fields. Dr.  Ness,  who had  been  a  participating  scientist  on 
the  Explorer In terp lane tary  Monitoring Platform  (IMP) satellites  and 
Mariner  10,  and  P ioneer   satellites,  spearheaded   the   first  measure- 
men ts  of  the  earth’s d is tan t  magnetic fields and  magnetic tail. He was 
also the  first to explore the  moon’s magnetic field. On theMu r ine r  10 
flybys of  Jupiter,  Dr.  Ness  made the  surprising  discovery of  a  small, 
bu t  measurable, intrinsic magnetic field. (Goddurd New s ,  June  75, 1) 
The Air Force  continued i ts  development of  the  remotely piloted vehicle 
(RPV),  the  Air  Force  Sys tems  Command’s Newsreview  reported.  The  
Air Force  awarded th ree  1-yr firm-fixed-price con trac ts  for definition 
s tud ies   of  an   advanced  remotely  piloted  vehicle  and   associated 
elements.  Rockwell  In terna t iona l  Corp.  received  $699 684;  Boeing 
Aerospace Co.,  $646  750; and  Northrop Corp.,  $499 614,  to produce 
designs of  an  RPV  for  use   in  the   1980s. The   system was  expected  to 
provide  an  improved  cost-effective  capability  of  carrying  out 
electronic  warfare,  reconna issance ,   and  strike  missions.  The   three  
companies would define the  vehicle and  i ts  avionics, options of  launch  
and recovery, ground-support e lemen ts ,  and  systems maintenance to 
permit  rapid  mission  turnaround .  
The  Newsreview repor ted  the  award of  a  $100 000 con trac t  to Aero 
Co.  to  study the  feasibility of  using parafoils, half  the  size of  a  C -5 
aircraft  wing,  to  recover  RPV s   returning  from  missions.  Aero  c o .  
would  design and build  for flight testing  two  12- by  2 4 m  parafoils- 
high-glide parachu tes  that,  when deployed like  a  parachute,  take  on 
airfoil  charac ter is t ics ,   descend ing   a t   a   rate  of  1  m   forward  for 
each  0.3-m  loss in  altitude.  (MsC Newsrev iew ,  J un e  75, 1) 

124 

Ju ly  1975 

1 Ju l y :   Marshall Space  Flight Cen te r  observed the  15th anniversary of  the  
transfer  of  personnel,  facilities, and responsibilities from the  Depart- 
ment  of  Defense’s  U.S.  Army  Ballistic Missile  Agency to  NASA .   The 
cen te r   had   been  formally  ded ica ted   a t   a   ceremony  8  Sep t .   1960 
a t tended  by  Pres iden t  Dwight D.  Eisenhower; Dr.  T. Keith Glennan, 
NASA  Administrator; Alabama Governor John Pa t terson ;  MSFC Direc- 
tor Dr. Wernher  von  Braun; and Mrs.  George C.  Marshall, widow  of 
the   s ta tesman ,  soldier,  and  Nobel Peace   Prize  winner for whom  the  
cen te r  was  named. 
With  the   transfer   had  gone  responsibility  for  continued  develop- 
ment  of  the   Redstone  and  the   Sa turn  I;  soon  to  come would  be  the 
Sa tu rn  IV and V launch  vehicles tha t  would carry  u.S.  as tronau ts  into 
ear th  orbit and, eventually, to the  moon. More than 100 000 employees 
in  12 000 companies  across  t h e   U.S.  worked  during  the   peak  of  de- 
veloping the  Sa turn  family and its 31 launches  with 100% launch  suc-  
ce s s   rate.  MSFC  developed  the   Lunar   Roving  Vehicle  tha t   carr ied  
moon-based  as tronau ts  severa l  km  from  the  landing site across  rug- - 
ged  lunar   terrain. 
MSFC  was  also  responsible  for  the  Sky lab   1 Orb i ta l   Workshop. 
Launched  into ea r th  orbit  14 May  1973, Sky lab  1 carr ied  o ther  MSFC 
developments  including  solar-observation b s t r um e n t s ,   the  docking 
adapter,  and  many  experiments.  Three   three-man  crews   occupied 
the   space   station  for a   total of  171 days. 
To da te ,  as  the  last Sa tu rn  booster was preparing to ca r ry  th ree  U .S .  
as tronau ts  to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts 
for the  joint Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project, MSFC  was heavily involved in 
development  of  the   Space   Transpor ta t ion   System,  including  the  
Space   Shuttle,  Space   Tug,  Spacelab,  and   related  payloads.  MSFC 
employees were also working on the  development of  solar heating and 
cooling  systems  and  other  applications  projects. 
In   a   message  to  MSFC  Director  Dr.  William  P.  Lucas,  Pres iden t  
Gerald R.  Ford  sa id  tha t  “From its inception, the  Marshall cen te r  has 
continued in th e  forefront of  this Nation’s  tremendous  advancement 
tions  . . . from  the  Marshall cen te r  in  the  years  ahead  a s  the  United 
in  the   exploration of  space.  We  look  forward  to  more vital contribu- 
S ta te s  continues to lead   the  way  in  using space  for the  benefit  of  all 
mankind.”  (MSFC  Releases  75-131,  75-140;  H is tor ica l   Origins  of 
The George C. Marsha l l  Space  F l igh t  Cen te r ,  MSFC Historical Mono- 
graph  No.  1,  Dec  1960) 
@  Rockwell  International  Corp.  Space  Div.  was  studying  the   economic 
and techn ica l  feasibility of  using a  rotating flywheel for electrical stor- 
age  in  commercial,  utility,  and   transportation  applications.  The   9- 
mo  s tudy   for  the   Energy  Research   and  Development  Administra- 
tion  was  based  on  technology  developed for  a   prototype  spacecraf t  
energy-momentum  flywheel  tha t   Rockwell  had  built  for  NASA’s 

125 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Langley Research Cen ter .  The  small prototype spinning a t  speed s  up  
to  35  000  rpm  could  provide  2500  w  of  electrical  power  a s   well  a s  
spacecraf t  attitude  control. 
In   the   flywheel  concept,  e lec tr ic  motor  generators would  spin  up  
specially  cons truc ted   flywheels which  kinetically  stored  energy  by 
the ir   rotation.  When   electrical power  was  needed,  the   rapidly  spin- 
ning  flywheels  would  drive  generators.  A  significant  application  of 
the  flywheel  would  be  to  store energy  for electric  utility companies; 
the   flywheels,  spun   up   during  off-peak  hours,  would  drive  power- 
producing  generators  during  peak-demand  periods.  (Rockwell Int'l 
Re lease  SP -   18) 
0  NASA  announced award of  a $6.8-million  cost-plus-award-fee con trac t  
to  International Business Machines Corp.  for developing and  testing 
the   Space   Shu t t le   avionics  software  sys tem .   IBM  would  design, 
develop,  test,  an d   ma in ta in   t h e   avionics  software  for  t h e   da ta-  
processing  system on the  Shu t t le  Orb i ter  tha t  would  include electric 
and electronic sys tems  for guidance, navigation,  and control capabil- 
ity; communication;  computation; displays  and  controls; instrumen- 
tation;  and  electrical power  distribution  and   control for  the   orbiter, 
ex terna l  tank,  and  solid-rocket boosters.  (JSC  Release 75 -63) 
2 July:  Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived  at i t s  new operat- 
ing  station a t  35" ea s t  longitude  over  equatorial Ea s t  Africa  where  it 
would  relay  communications  from  the   docked  Apollo  and  Soyuz 
spacecraf t  during t h e  July Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project  mission.  Upon 
completion of  ASTP,  Ats 6 would be  used  by  India to transmit  educa- 
tional TV  programs  to  severa l  thousand  remo te  villages. 
Th e  satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one 
of  the  three  momentum wheels used to control spacecraf t  attitude.  A 
group of  hydrazine gas thrus ters  was  being used  a s  a backup  system 
for  stabilization  while  ground  controllers  a t   Goddard  Space   Flight 
Cen ter  were  analyzing the   problem and  developing remedies.  (NASA 
Release  75 - 194) 
0  Prof.  Hyron  Spinrad,  Univ.  of  Calif.  astronomer,  had  photographed  a 
galaxy 5 to  10 times larger than  the  Milky Way.  Prof.  Spinrad photo- 
graphed t h e  galaxy, designated  3C123,  using  the   120-in telescope  a t  
Lick Observatory and  a new device tha t  filtered ou t  backlighting. The  
huge  galaxy  was  moving  away  from  ea r th   a t   a  speed   of  about  4.3 
trillion  km  per  year.  (AP,  B Sun ,   2 July  75,  A3) 
0  Th ree   high-speed  F-  104G aircraft  formerly belonging  to  the   German 
Air  Force  arrived  a t  Flight Research  Cen ter   to  be  used  for research  
purposes. FRC  had been flying F-IOBAs,  an  early version of t h e  same  
aircraft,  but  replacement  par ts  were  becoming  scarce .   Pa r t s   for the  
F-104G  would be  available through the  1980s. Th e  three  aircraft left 
Jeve r  Air Force Base in  Wes t  Germany on 27 June  and  made s tops  in 
Scotland,  Iceland,  Greenland,  and  Labrador  before  arriving a t  FRC. 
@-Press,  18 July  75,  4) 
3 July:  The  Washington  Post  reported  that  NASA  had  turned  down  a 
reques t  by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wisc.)  to postpone the  Apollo- 
Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for launch  on 15  July) until the  U.S.S.R. 
brought back the  twoSoyuz 18 cosmonauts who had  been  docked with 
the  orbitingSalyut 4  space  station since 26 May  1975.  Sen .  Proxmire 
said tha t  the  Soviet Union would be unable to maintain ground control 
of  two manned missions simultaneously.  He had based  his judgment 

126 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
July 
on  closed-door  testimony  given  him  a s  cha irman  of  t h e  Appropria- 
tions Subcommittee by Car l  Duckett,  deputy d irec tor  for sc ience  and  
technology a t  the  Cen tra l  Intelligence Agency.  The Pos t   quoted Prox- 
mire a s  saying tha t  the  Soviet  command  cen te r  would  be  s tra ined  to 
handle  two  manned  flights,  particularly  if  one  were  in  trouble  in 
space.  Sen. Proxmire said tha t   it would be  a simple ma t ter  to deorbit 
the   two Soyuz  18  cosmonauts  and  bring them   home. 
In   a  telephone  interview w i th   the  Post,  ASTP  Techn ica l  Director 
Glynn  S. Lunney sa id  tha t   the  Soviet Union had two mission-control 
centers,  one  managing  the   Salyut  flight,  the  o ther   managing  ASTP. 
Lunney  said  NASA  had  calculated  tha t   the   two  Soviet  spacecraf t  
would  cross  over  the   same  Soviet tracking  stations only  twice:  One  
overlap might las t  a s  long a s  30 sec and  t h e  o ther  90 sec.  Soviet offi- 
cials had assured  NASA  tha t  ASTP  communications would have priority 
during these   two  shor t  passes .   (O’Toole,  W  P o s t ,  3 July  75,  A33) 
0  NASA  was  inviting  U.S.  and   foreign  corporations,  universities,  and  
government organizations to propose experiments for the  A t s  6 Appli- 
cations  Technology  Satellite  (launched  30  May  1974) af ter   it  com- 
pleted i t s  year of service to Ind ia  [see 2 July].  After the  Indian experi- 
ment, A ts   6  would  be   moved  westward  to  the   west  coas t   of  South 
America  where  it  would  opera te   within  range  of  North  and   Sou th  
America  and  ad jacen t  ocean  areas.  NASA’s announcemen t  of  experi- 
ment  opportunities  for  the   cornsat’s  third  year  of  operation  invited 
proposals  in the  fields  of  societal,  communications,  or  technological 
disciplines.  (NASA  Release  75 -187) 
0  The  Energy Information Cen te r  a t  the  Univ. of N. Mex. had  compiled for 
NASA  a bibliography, W in d  Energy  U t i l i za t ion .  T h e  496-page  volume 
included foreign and domestic literature on  wind-power  plants, wind- 
ower generators, wind machines,  and  wind-energy  storage facilities. 
cen te r  at Albuquerque, established in 1974 a s  a cooperative effort 
!he 
between the  university and  NASA,  had also published  comprehensive 
bibliographies on hydrogen and  solar thermal energy. (NASA Release 
75-186) 
7 J u l y :   NASA  had begun a demonstration of hydrogen-injection  technology, 
a technique tha t  could help reduce  fuel consumption in large aircraft 
engines by 20 to 25% and lower emissions of pollutants from general- 
aviation engines. 
Working with  the   Federa l  Aviation  Administration  and   industry, 
NASA   was  studying  minor  engine  modifications  tha t   would  reduce  
characteristic  engine  emissions.  A  separa te  NASA-industry program 
was investigating emission reduction and  fuel efficiency by means  of 
more  extensive  changes  in  the  basic  design of  aircraft engines.  In   a 
third program,  NASA  was investigating both the  noise and  the  emission 
charac ter is t ics   of  small  general-aviation  engines.  (NASA  Release 
75 - 198) 
9  J u l y :   Action  by  t h e   House  of  Representatives  to  defer   for  1 yr  the  
funds  budgeted  for t h e  Pioneer-Venus  project [see 19 and  24 June] 
would  “jeopardize  t h e   possible  success   of  Pioneer-Venus,”  Sen .  
John V.  Tunney (D-Calif.)  said in a le t ter  to Sen .  William  Proxmire 
(D -Wisc.),  cha irman  of  the  Sena te  Appropriations  Committee.  Th e  
House  recommended  the   delay to  permit  a  budget  decision  in  1977 
between the  Large Space  Telescope and  the  P ioneer  -Venus  mission. 
Sen .  Tunney’s letter said tha t  t h e  probe was timed for the  19781aunch 

127 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

window when  ea r th  and  Venus would b e  in unusually favorable rela- 
tive positions; the  next favorable window would not appear  for almost 
2  yr,  during  1980,  and   Venus  would  be   considerably  fur ther   away 
from t h e  ea r th  a t  tha t   time  than   it  would  be   during 1978. A  delay in 
funding would postpone the program for a t  leas t  18 mo, would require 
design changes,  and  might  cost $50  million more  than   original  esti- 
mates. 
Sen.  Tunney said tha t  t h e  ca se  for continued funding was a  strong 
one. Most scientists felt tha t  investigation of the  Venusian atmosphere 
would  provide  valuable  meteorological  information  tha t   might  sub- 
stantially  enhance  weather-prediction capabilities. 
Another reason for continuation of  the  program i s  that, in an  e r a  of 
high  unemployment,  few  sec tors  had  suffered more  devastating se t-  
backs   than   the   aerospace   industry.  The   Pioneer -Venus  program 
had crea ted  more than  1500 jobs, which would be  threa tened  by termi- 
nation  or  delay of  the   program. 
Curtailment of  a n  ongoing  scientific  concep t  like Pioneer-Venus 
would severely reduce  credibility of  the  government’s long-term com- 
mitments,  with  added  time,  difficulty,  and  cos t  for fu ture  projects as 
private  contractors would  seek  to  protect  themselves. 
Sen .   Tunney  pointed  out  tha t   t h e   House’s  juxtaposition  of 
funding  for  Pioneer-Venus  with  funding  for  the   Large  Space  
Telescope was inappropriate; the  programs were not competing,  but 
complementary.  Pioneer-  Venus  would  provide  information  on  ou r  
closest  neighbor,  whereas   LST  would  collect  deep-space  da ta   of 
unprecedented  scope and  detail. “Cutting one program for the  sake  of 
the  o ther  would  mean  sacrificing a distinguishable body  of  scientific 
knowledge which would not b e  replaceable.”  (Text, le t ter ,  Tunney to 
Proxmire, 9 July  75; C R Y  26 July  75,  513882-83) 
0  The  rocket-powered  M2-  F3  lifting  body-a  wingless  vehicle  tha t  
derives aerodynamic lift from  i ts  body  shape-arrived 
for display  a t  
the   Smithsonian  Institution’s  National  Air  and   Space   Museum  in 
Washington,  D .C .   In  a flight program beginning in  1963 and  ending i n  
1972, the  three versions of  the  M-2  vehicle had  demonstrated tha t  a 
manned reentry vehicle could reen ter  from  space ,  maneuver through 
the   atmosphere,  and   safely make  a  deadstick  landing. 
M2-F3  was  the   thjrd  version  of  Ames  Research   Center’s  M-2 
lifting-body  design.  The   first,  M2-F1,  was  a  lightweight  plywood 
glider towed  to  altitude by  a C-47 and  released,  whereupon the  pilot 
guided  the   craf t   to  a  landing.  A  heavier  version,  M2-F2,  was 
launched from undernea th  the  wing of  a B-  52 aircraft. After nearly a 
year of  testing the  unpowered  vehicle, an  XRL-  11 rocket engine was 
installed in preparation for rocket-powered flight; on  the  second glide 
flight  af ter  engine installation,  the   vehicle crashed ,   badly  damaging 
the   vehicle  and   injuring  the   pilot.  Th e   lifting  body  was  rebuilt,  in- 
corporating  modifications,  and  designated  M2-  F3.  The   M2-  F3 
made  more  than   37  glide  and   powered  flights  with  a  je t   reaction- 
control system tha t  successfully demons tra ted  the feasibility of using 
a  single  system from  orbit  to  landing. 
A  lifting  body  design  tha t   had  been   considered  for  the   reen try  
vehicle in the  Mercury, Gemini, and  Apollo programs was rejected  in 
favor of  a  ballistic  reentry  design.  The   use  by  Space  Shu t t le  of  t h e  
maneuver-to-a-deadstick-landing  concept  was  possible  largely  be- 

128 

J ~ Y  
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
cause  of  the  confidence level built up by 9 yr of lifting-body flight tes ts .  
(NASA Release  75-  199; A&A  62  through A&A   74 )  
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  announced award of two con trac ts  for 356 
aluminum  hand  forgings for  Space  Shuttle  solid-rocket boosters.  A 
$465 935  contract  went  to  Aluminum  Co.  of  America  and  $62 900 
went  to  Weber  Metals  & Supply  Co.  for  forward-skirt  thrus t   post 
fittings,  inboard  aft-skirt  actuator  support  bracke ts ,   aft-skirt  splice 
fittings,  and  aft-skirt  holddown  posts.  (MSFC  Release  75-  151) 
11 July: NASA  announced  the  appointment  of  Donald P.  Hearth  a s  Direc- 
tor  of  Langley  Research  Center,  effective  in  September.  Hearth, 
Deputy Director  of  Goddard  Space Flight Cen ter   since  1970, would 
replace Dr.  Edga r  M.  Cortright,  who  is leaving NASA  to  pursue other 
interests. 
Prior  to  being  at  GSFC,  Hearth  had  served  3  yr  a s   Director  of 
Planetary  Programs  a t  NASA   Hq.  He  came to  NASA  in  1962 from the  
Marquardt Corp.  where  he managed  research  on hypersonic propul- 
sion  and  flight  systems.  Before  tha t ,   he   had  been  an  aeronautical 
research  scientist a t  Lewis Aeronautical Laboratory of NASA’s prede- 
cessor ,  the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.  (NASA anno 
11  July  75) 
0  Didier Ratsiraka, Pres iden t  of  the  Supreme Council of Revolution of  the  
Malagasy Republic, said in a radio broadcast to Malagasy citizens that 
his  government  would  ask  t h e   u.S.  to  close  its  satellite  tracking 
station there   if  the  U.S.  did not  “raise  concrete  and  satisfactory pro- 
posals before July 14.” Ratsiraka said tha t  “TO avoid possible maneu- 
vers  of  sabotage,  the   government  has  taken   necessary  measures  to 
place  the   station  under  control  of  the   armed  forces  from  this  day.” 
People’s Republic of  China’s Hsinhua news agency quoted Ratsiraka 
a s  saying tha t  the U.S.  was  reluctant to fulfill its obligations under the  
agreement  signed  in  October  1963  by  the   U.S.  a nd  Malagasy  gov- 
ernmen ts ,   being  in  “flagrant  violation of  the  written  engagements.” 
(FBIS-PRC, 15 July  75,  A3) 
0  NASA  announced  the   beginning  of  a  cooperative  NASA-university- 
industry  program  to  flight-test  a  low-cost  flight-control system  tha t  
would improve ride quality, reduce pilot workload, and improve flight 
safety.  The   control  s y s t em -d e v e l op ed   and  ground-tested  by  the  
Univ.  of  Kansas-was  being  installed  on  a Beechcraft 99 commuter 
airliner for a flight-test program  under  the  direction of  NASA’s Flight 
Research Cen ter .  Nearly a third of the  aircraft’s control surfaces were 
controlled  by  the   new  automated  avionics  system,  with  two-thirds 
remaining  under d irec t  control of  the  pilot.  Any  failures in t h e  auto- 
mated  control  system could  be  easily overridden  by  the   pilot,  elimi- 
nating the  need for redundancy in the attitude-control system and per- 
mitting mechanization  a t   a much  lower cost. 
With  automated  controls  off,  the  separa te   surfaces  responded  to 
the  pilot’s  commands  and  the  control  system was  essentially  tha t  of 
the  Beechcraft airplane.  Th e  flight-test program would include func- 
tional tes ts ,   envelope expansion,  system optimization,  and  quantita- 
tive and  qualitative evaluation by  the  three tes t  pilots. (NASA  Release 
75-207;  FRC  Release  22-75) 
0  The  Sena te  passed resolution, S. Con. Res. 47, setting aside the  week of 
16-22  Ju ly  a s  “United S ta te s  Space  Observance Week.”  (CR, 11 July 
75,  S12438) 

129 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

0  Marshall Space  Flight Cen te r   announced  award  of  a  $5  768 612 cost- 
plus-incentive-fee con trac t  to Sperry Rand Corp. for design, develop- 
ment,  test,  and  delivery  of  37  multiplexer-demultiplexers  (MDM)  for 
the Space  Shu t t le  rocke t  boosters. The  MI)M,  a n  electronic device tha t  
permitted sending o r  receiving more than  one  message, signal, or unit 
of information on a single communication channe l ,  was housed in  t h e  
solid  rocket  boosters’  integrated  electronics  assembly.  It  would 
process  signals for  such  functions a s  ignition,  thrus t   vector  control, 
re lease  of nose c ap  and  frustum, jettison of  solid rocket motor nozzles, 
de tachmen t  of  parachu tes ,   and  turn-on  of  recovery  aids.  (MSFC  Re- 
lease   75-  154)  - 
Q  The   midwest’s  Cen tra l   Telephone  and   Utilities  Corp.  Cengas  Div. 
surveyed  hea t   loss  from  hbmes  and  commercial  buildings  in  f iv e  
Nebraska   and  South Dakota  communities using  an  aerial technique 
developed  with  NASA  support.  In   t h e   survey-taken 
on  cold  c lear  
nights  during winter 1974-75-an 
aircraft equ ipped  with a thermal- 
infrared  scanner  flew  a t  488 m,  making  successive  run s  over  s tr ips  
th ree  city blocks  wide.  The  scanne r  surveyed  the   roof-surface  tem- 
pera tures ,   which were   recorded  on  magnetic  tape.  After the   flight, 
ground-based  equipment  converted  the   da ta   to  strips  of  fiim  for 
printing  on  photographic  paper.  The   resulting  imagery,  called 
thermograms, were silhouettes of  individual buildings in which warm 
roofs  appeared   in  light  tones   and  cool roofs  in dark   tones.  Property 
owners were  notified  of  the   results.  (NASA  Release  75-201) 
12  J u l y :  Kuwait’s  Communications  Minister  Sulayman  Hammud  al- 
Khalid  signed a con trac t  with  Siemens AG,  a Wes t  German company, 
to import and install Kuwait’s second ground station for satellite com- 
munications.  (AR-RA’Y AL-’AMM,  FEHS-  Arabian Peninsula,  18 July  75, 
c 1) 
13  J u l y :  Prepara tory   work  was  nearing  completion  on  the   Satellite  In-  
structional Television Experiment (SITE), a joint India-  NASA program 
to  broadcast  educational  TV  via  the  A t s   6  Applications  Technology 
Satellite launched  30 May  1974.  Installation of  400 TV  sets had been 
completed,  and   the   buildings  to  house  them   had  been   wired  for 
electricity.  (Delhi Domestic  Service, FBIS-  India,  18 July  75,  U2) 
14 J u l y :   Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey  A.  Leonov  and  Va le ry   N.  Kubasov, 
relaxing on  the  eve  of the ir  launch  for the  Apollo-Soyuz Tes t  Project, 
viewed t h e  fdm Wh i te  Sun of the  Deser t .  Th e  film, following a tradition 
set by  the  cosmonauts’  predecessors  in space ,  was a Russian action 
movie set during the  civil war  after the  Bolshevik  revolution  in  1917. 
(Wren, NYT, 16 Ju ly  75,  1) 
Q  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-  Wisc.)  inserted  into  the   Congressional 
Record  a summary of  the  Cen tra l  Intelligence Agency’s report on the  
Apollo-Soyuz  Tes t   Project.  The   summary  indicated  tha t   “although 
the  Soviet have experienced many space  problems the  prospects for a 
successfu l  mission  a re  good.”  The  repor t   continued  tha t   the   Soviet 
preparations  were  more  extensive  and   thorough  than   for  previous 
efforts, and  tha t  pas t  failures had occurred  at a phase  during the  mis- 
sion  which  would  not  jeopardize  U.S.  as tronau ts   should  there  be   a 
recurrence.  The report did point out tha t  t h e  Soviets had encoun tered  
severe  problems  in  space .   (CR ,  14 July  75,  512511) 
Q  NASA  closed  its  tracking  station  on Madagascar  af ter   the   agency  was 
unable  to  reach   agreement  with  t h e   government  of  t h e   Malagasy 

130 

JdY 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Republic  for continued  operation of  the  station.  Functions of  the  sta- 
tion would be taken  over by the  A t s  6 Applications Technology Satel- 
lite  launched  30 May  1974. 
Th e  Madagascar  station had  opened  in  1964 under   an  agreement 
tha t   called  for  station  operation  by  NASA  a nd  Malagasy  personnel. 
Data  collected  by  the   station  were  made  available  to  the   Malagasy 
Republic.  The   agreement  had  not  called  for  an  exchange  of  funds 
between  the   cooperating  governments.  The   agreement  expired  in 
December 1973, and a new one could not be reached when Madagascar 
claimed rent for the  station retroactive to 1964. (AP, NYT ,  15 July 75; 
NASA  Release  63-279;  NASA   Contracts  Div.,  Phillips,  interview,  2 
Aug  77) 
e  The  U.S.S.R.  had  turned  down a U.S.  invitation to participate  in another 
joint  manned  space   mission  in  1976,  Thomas  O’Toole  of  the  
Wash ing ton  Pos t   reported  a  U.S.  space   official  as   saying.  O’Toole 
reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator  Dr.  George M.  Low 
had  suggested  to  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  President  Vladimir 
Kotelnikov  that  two  Soviet  cosmonauts  and   three   American  astro- 
nauts  dock with  a  Soviet  Salyut  space   station  and  work  together  in 
ear th  orbit for up to 2 wk.  However, the  Soviets had  replied tha t  they 
would undertake a repea t  of  the  Apollo-Soyuz Tes t  Project (scheduled 
for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to f l y  an Apollo-Salyut in any 
reasonable length of  time.  The  Post  quoted Dr.  Low  a s  saying, “Any 
second  American-Russian  space   flight  will  have  to  wait  until  the  
1980s.” 
The  Post  also quoted Dr.  Low  as  saying tha t  NASA had suggested an 
Apollo-Salyut mission a s  early a s  1971, but the  Soviets had requested 
a  change  back  to  an  A  0110-Soyuz  mission  during  a  presummit 
meeting in April 1972 ju s t  i e f o r e  Pres iden t  Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. 
Low said tha t  the Soviets had said tha t  it was too  expensive to modify 
Salyut  to  accep t  both  a Soyuz and   an Apollo  spacecraft  a t   the   same 
time.  (O’Toole, W P o s t ,   14 July  75,  A l )  
e  NASA  announced  award  of  a  $150 000  10-mo  study  contract  to  The  
Boeing Co.  to  determine  the  basic  design,  costs,  and  environmental 
impact  of  potential  power-generating  satellite  systems  in  space. 
Boeing’s Aerospace  Co. would investigate  solar and  nuclear families 
of  space-based  power generators,  studying two different energy con- 
verters for each; define the  satellites; study their cost; and determine 
potential  environmental  effects.  One  converter was  to  be   a  thermal 
engine  converter  like  a  s team   turbine  that  transformed  heat  into  a 
usable  form  of  energy.  The   o ther ,   a  thermionic  converter,  would 
produce  electrically  charged  particles  to  power a  passive  electrical- 
generation system. Power generated by e i ther  method would be  trans- 
formed  into  microwaves  and   beamed  to  ea r th   for  reconversion  into 
electricity.  (MSFC  Release  75-  156) 
15-24   J u l y :   Th e   joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Tes t   Project  was 
successfully  completed  when  NASA’s  Apo l lo   spacecraft,  carrying 
three  American  astronauts,  and   the   Soviet Soyuz  19 ,   carrying  two 
cosmonauts,  docked  in orbit for 2 days and performed joint scientific 
investigations.  The   two  crews  also  shared  meals  and  exchanged 
mementoes of  their  flight. 
Soyuz  Launch:   Soyuz 1 9 ,  carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A.  Leonov 
and Valery N.  Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur 

131 

J ~ Y  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20  am  EDT)  15 July. The  space-  
craf t  en tered   orbit with  a 221.9-km  apogee,  186.3-km  perigee,  88.5- 
min  period,  and  51.8‘  inclination. 
Foreign correspondents,  barred  from the  launch  site, watched  the  
launch   on  color T V   sets in   a Moscow  press   cen ter .   T h e  first  Soviet 
launch  to be  televised  l ive ,   it was transm i t ted  to viewers throughout 
t h e  Soviet Union,  t h e  u.s.,  and  eas tern   and  western  Europe.  Pres i-  
den t   Ford  watched  from  a U .S .   S ta te  Dept.  auditorium with  Soviet 
Ambassador to the  U .S .  Anatoly  P.  Dobrynin  and  NASA Administrator 
James  C.  Fletcher,  before  Dr.  F le tcher   and   Ambassador  Dobrynin 
flew  to  Kennedy  Space  Cen ter   to  watch  the  Apollo  launch. 
On the  third orbit  the  Soyuz 19 crew established  con tac t  with  U .S .  
mission  control  in  Houston,  putting  into  operation  the   global 
Moscow -Houston-Soyuz-Apollo 
communications  system.  On   the  
fifth orbit  the  cosmonauts made   the  first  of  two maneuvers  to place 
Soyuz 19 into  a  circular docking orbit.  New  orbital parame ters  were 
231.7-km  apogee  a nd   192.4-km  perigee.  Th e   spacecraf t  was  spin- 
stabilized  a t  3” per   sec with  all  sys tems  operating normally. 
Apollo Launch:   At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July-7  h r  30 rnin af ter  theSoyuz 
Sa turn   ZB  flawlessly  lifted  t h e   Apollo  spacecraf t   from 
launch-a 
Kennedy  Space   Center’s  launch   complex 39,  carrying  Apollo  com- 
mander   Thomas  P.  Stafford,  command-module  pilot  Vance  D. 
Brand,  and  docking-module pilot Donald K.  Slayton. The  spacecraf t  
en tered   orbit  with  a  173.3-km  apogee,  154.7-km  perigee,  87.6-min 
period,  and  51.8‘  inclination. The  spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adap te r  
was jettisoned  at 9 h r  4 min  ground  elapsed  time (9:04 GET,  coun ted  
from theSoyuz 19 launch)  and  the  crew  maneuvered the  Apollo 180“ to 
dock with the  adap te r  and  ex trac t  the  docking module.  These  even ts  
were  videotaped  and   transmitted  to  ea r th   la ter   via  A t s   6  (NASA’s 
Applications  Technology  Satellite  launched   30  May  1974).  A 
maneuver 2 h r  la ter  a t  7:35  pm  circularized  the  orbit  at  172 km .  The  
Sa turn  S-ZVB  stage was deorbited into the  Pacific Ocean  1 h r  30 min 
la ter .  
A secondSoyuz 19 circularization burn  of  18.5 s e c  a t  8:43 am EDT 16 
July  placed  tha t   spacecraf t   in  a  c ircu lar   orbit  of  229  km,  with  all 
sys tems  functioning normally. 
Rendezvous  and  Dock ing:   A ser ies  of Apollo maneuvers, with  the  
final braking maneuver at 8:51 am  EDT  17 July,  put the  Apollo space-  
craft in a229.4-km c ircu lar  orbit matching the  orbit ofSoyuz 19. A few 
minutes  la te r   Brand  reported,  “We’ve  got  Soyuz  in   the   sextant.” 
Voice con tac t  was made soon after. “Hello.  Soyuz, Apollo,”  Stafford 
said in Russian. Kubasov replied  in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to 
you, Tom and  Deke. Hello there ,  Vance.”  All communications among 
t h e  five crew members  during the  mission  were made in t h e  language 
of  t h e   listener,  with  the   Americans  speaking  Russian  to  the   Soviet 
crew  and  the  Soviet crew speaking English to the  Americans. Contact 
of  the  two spacecraf t  51 h r  49 min into t h e  mission  (12:09 pm  17 July) 
was transmitted l i v e  on TV  to the  ea r th ,  and  Stafford commented, “We 
have  succeeded.  Everything  is  excellent.”  “Soyuz  and   Apollo  a re  
shaking hands   now,”  t h e  cosmonauts  answered.  Hard  docking was 
completed  over  t h e   Atlantic  Ocean   a t   12:12  p m - 6   min  earlier 
than   t h e   prelaunch  flight  plan-watched 
by  millions  of  TV  viewers 
worldwide.  “Perfec t .  Beautiful. Well done, Tom.  I t  was a good show. 
We’re  looking  forward  to  shaking  hands   with  you  in  board  [sic] 
132 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

July 

Soyuz,” Leonov said. T a s s  la te r  reported  tha t  Kubasov told Moscow 
ground controllers tha t  “we felt a  slight jolt at the  moment of docking” 
bu t   tha t   all wen t   according to  plan. 
Jo in t   A c t i v i t i e s :   At  3:17  pm  ha tch   3  opened ;  Apollo  commander 
Stafford  and  Soyuz  commander   Leonov  shook  hands   2  min  later. 
“Glad to see  you,”  Stafford told Leonov in Russian.  “Glad to see  you. 
Ve ry  very happy to  see  you,”  Leonov  responded  in English.  “This  is 
Soyuz  and  the   United  S ta tes ,”   Slayton  told  TV  viewers  around  t h e  
world.  Both  Soviet  Communist  Par ty   General  Secre tary   Leonid  I. 
Brezhnev and  Pres iden t  Ford congratulated  the  crews and  expressed  
their  confidence  in  the   succe s s   of  the  mission.  Stafford  then   pre- 
sen ted  Leonov with “f ive  flags for your government and  the  people of 
the   Soviet Union” with  the  wish  tha t  “our joint  work  in  space  serves 
for  the   benefit  of  all  coun tr ies   and  peoples  on  the   ear th .”   Leonov 
presen ted   the   U.S.  crew  with  Soviet  flags  and   plaques.  Th e   men 
signed  international  certificates  and   exchanged o ther   commemora- 
tive items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a  meal aboard 
the   Soyuz,  the  Americans  re turned   to  the  Apollo  and  the  ha tch  was 
closed  at  6:51 pm. 
An  integrity  check  of  the   ha tches   indicated  a n   atmospheric  leak 
on the  Soviet  side.  Ground controllers la te r  a t tr ibu ted  the  indication 
to  tempera ture   chapges   in  the   sea led   docking  module  tha t   were 
de tec ted   by  the   sensitive  Soviet  instrumentation.  Fu ture   integrity 
checks  of  the   ha tches  would  be  more  rigorous,  however. 
Following a  sleep period, the  crews  prepared  for another day of joint 
activity.  Kubasov described  the  mission  to  Soviet  TV  viewers while 
the  re s t  of the  crews  erformed experiments in their respective  space- 
craft. At 5:05 am 18 fuly  Brand en te red  the  Soviet spacecraf t ;  Leonov 
joined  Stafford  and   Slayton  in  ApoUo,  greeting  them   with  “Howdy 
partner.”  Kubasov gave American TV  viewers a  tour  of  his Soyuz, and  
Stafford followed with  a   tour  of  the  Apollo.  Then  both Kubasov and 
Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission  to ea r th  
later. Kubasov and Brand a te  lunch in the  Soyuz while Leonov a te  with 
Stafford  and  Slayton in  Apollo. 
During a   third  transfer,  Stafford  and  Leonov went  into  the   Soyuz 
and Kubasov and  Brand joined  Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet 
viewers  a   Russian-language  tour   of  the   ea s te rn   U.S.  a s   seen   from 
space.  Further  speeches  and  exchanges  of  commemorative  items 
were  made  for  both  U.S.  and  Soviet  viewers  before  the  final  hand- 
shakes  at  4:49  pm  EDT 18  July,  when  the  crews  returned  to  their 
respective  spacecraft.  The   ha tches   were  closed  after  Brand  told 
Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the  best of success .  I’m su re  tha t  
we’ve opened up a  new e ra  in history. Ou r  next meeting will be  on  the  
ground.”  To ta l  time for all transfers  and joint  activities was  19 h r  55 
min.  Stafford  had   spen t   7  h r   10 min  aboard  Soyuz;  Brand,  6  h r   30 
min;  Slayton,  1 h r  35  min.  Leonov spen t  5 h r  43 min  in  the  Apollo, 
Kubasov 4 h r  57 min.  During nearly 2 days  of joint  activities,  the  f ive  
men  carr ied  ou t  five joint  experiments. 
Undock ing   a n d   S epa ra t ion :   The   Apollo  and   Soyuz  spacec ra f t  
undocked  at  95:42  (XT   (80 2   am EDT  19 July).  While  the   spacecraf t  
were in station-keeping mode,  the  crews  photographed them  and  the  
docking appara tus ,  transm i t t ing  the  p ic tures  live on TV  to ear th .  The  
Apollo spacecraf t  then  served  a s  an occulting disk,  blocking  the  sun 
from  the   Soyuz and   simulating  a   solar eclipse-the 
first  man-made 
133 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

eclipse.  Leonov  and  Kubasov  photographed  the   solar corona a s  the  
Apollo  backed  away  from  the   Soyuz  and   toward  the   sun.  Th e   two 
spacecraf t  then  redocked a t  8 3 4  am  EDT with t h e  Apollo maneuvering 
and   the   Soyuz  docking  sys tem   active  while  good  quality  TV   was 
transm i t ted   to  ear th .   T h e  second  docking was  not  a s  smooth  a s  the  
first because  a slight misalignment of the  two spacecraf t  cau sed  both 
to  pitch  excessively  a t  contact. 
Final undocking-also  with  the   Soyuz active-went 
smoothly and  
was  completed  at  11:26  am.  As  the   spacecraf t   separa ted ,   the   two 
crews  performed t h e  ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, 
making unsuccessful da ta  measuremen ts  a t  150 m and  then  moving to 
a distance of 500 and  1000 m,  where da ta  were successfully collected. 
The  Apollo maneuvered  to within  50 m of  Soyuz  and  took  intensive 
still photography of  t h e  Soyuz.  Separation maneuvers  to put t h e  two 
spacecraf t  on sepa ra te  trajectories began a t  2:42  pm with a reaction- 
control system burn. W i th  t h e  maneuvers completed, Leonov told t h e  
Apollo crew, “Thank  you very much for your v e ry  big job.  . . . I t  was a 
very good show.”  Brand answered ,  “Thank  you, also. Th is  was a very 
good  job.” 
Soyuz Orb i t  and  Land ing:   Soyuz 19  remained  in orbit nearly 30 h r s  
after  the   undocking.  The   cosmonauts  conducted  biological  experi- 
men ts  with microorganisms  and  zone-forming  fungi.  At  2 3 9  am EDT 
21 July  the  Soyuz  crew closed ha tch  5 between  the ir   orbital vehicle 
and   descen t   module  and   began  depressurizing  the   orbital  module. 
Braking  burns  of  the   descen t   engines  began  at  6 0 6  am   when  the  
spacecraf t   was  772  km  from  t h e   Apollo.  The   194.9-sec  burn 
slowed  t h e   spacecraft  to  120  km  per   sec.  After  another  burn  to 
stabilize  the   spacecraf t ,   the   orbital  and  descen t   modules  separa ted  
over Cen tra l  Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the  first landing of 
a  Soviet  spacec ra f t   te lev ised   in  r e a l   t ime ,   t h e   main  pa rachu te  
deployed a t  7 km and  jettisoned before the  soft-landing engines fired. 
Soyuz  19  landed  about  11  km   from  the   target  point  northeast  of 
Baykonur Cosmodrome at 651  am EDT 21 July,  after a 142-hr 31-min 
mission. The  rescue  helicopter approached the  capsu le  immediately 
and  specialists  opened  ha tch   5.  Kubasov  s tepped   out  waving  to 
rescue-team  members,  followed  by  Leonov,  both  cosmonauts  in 
appa ren t   good  hea l th   a n d   sp ir i ts .   T h e   cosmonau ts   re tu rned   to 
Baykonur  for medical  check s  and   debriefings. 
Apo l lo   Postdocking  Orb i ta l   Ac t iv i t ies:   Apollo  remained  in  orbit 
while  i ts   crew  continued  u.S.  science  experiments  begun  during 
predocking.  Searching  for  ex treme   ultraviolet  radiation,  the   ASTP 
crew marked the  birth of a new branch  of astronomy when they found, 
for the  first time, ex treme  ultraviolet sources  outside the  solar sys tem ;  
some scientists had believed tha t  such  sources  could  never be  found. 
One   of  the   newly  discovered  sources   turned   out  to  be   the   hottest 
known  white  dwarf  s tar .   T h e   Apollo  de tec to r   also  revea led   t h e  
existence of the  first pulsar discovered outside t h e  Milky Way. About 
200 OOO  light  years   from  earth’s  galaxy,  in  the   Small  Magellanic 
Cloud,  it  was  the   most  luminous  pulsar  known  to  astronomers,  10  
times  brighter  than   any  discovered  so  far.  After  repairing  some 
malfunctioning equipment, the  as tronau ts  also mapped x-ray  sources  
throughout  the  Milky  Way. 

134 

J ~ Y  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Th e  crew completed nearly  all t h e  110 earth-observation  tasks  as- 
signed. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by 
six groups of  scientists on the  ground, on sh ips  at sea, and  in  aircraft. 
The   astronauts  looked  a t   ocean  currents,  ocean  pollution,  deser t  
geography,  shoreline  erosion,  volcanoes,  iceberg  movements,  and  
vegetation  patterns. 
On 23 July  the  command-module  tunnel was  vented  a nd  the  crew 
put on spacesu i ts  to  jettison the  docking module. Th e  command  and 
service  module  undocked  from  the   DM  at  3:45  pm  EDT,  and   a  1-sec 
engine firing put the  CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km  apogee, 219.0- 
km perigee) so tha t  the  DM could move ahead. A  second maneuver put 
the  CSM in  a 223.2-km  by 219.0-km  orbit.  Deorbit began a t  4 3 8  p.m. 
Th e  command module and service module separated,  the  drogue and 
main parachu tes  deployed normally, and the  Apollo splashed down a t  
22458  GET  ( 5 1 8  p.m.  EDT  24 July) in  the   Pacific  Ocean   163”W and 
22”N, 500 km w e s t  of Hawaii. This was the  last ocean landing planned 
for  U .S .   manned  space  flights;  future  flights  on  the   Space   Shuttle 
would  be  wheeled  touchdowns  at  land  bases. 
The  CM landed in “s tab le  2’’  position (upside down) 7.4 km from the 
prime  recovery  ship,  U .S .S .  New Orleans.  After  swimmers  from  the  
rescue   helicopter righted  the  spacecraft and  a t tached  a flotation col- 
lar,  the  Apollo was lifted by  c r a n e  on to the  deck  of  the  recovery ship 
and  Stafford,  Brand,  and   Slayton  stepped  out  to  the  cheers   of  the  
ship’s  crew.  Pres iden t   Ford  telephoned  congratulations.  During the  
welcome,  t h e   c r ew   wa s   e v i d e n t l y   e x p e r i e n c i n g   e y e   a n d   l u n g  
discomfort;  subsequen t  conversations  and  spacecraft  da ta   revealed 
that, during reentry, the  ear th  landing system had failed to  jettison the  
apex   cover  and   drogues  a s   schedu led   a nd   had  had  to  be  fired 
manua l ly ,   w i thou t   f i r s t   d i s a b l i n g   t h e   r e a c t i on - c o n t ro l   s y s t em  
thrusters. With the  CM oscillating, the thrus ters  began firing rapidly to 
compensate, and  combustion products -including  a small amount of 
nitrogen tetroxide-  en tered  through the  cabin-pressure relief valves. 
As soon as  the  RCS system had been disabled, fresh  air w a s  once again 
drawn into the  cabin. T h e  crew members told flight officials tha t  they 
had  put  on  oxygen  masks  once  the  spacecraft  had  landed,  and then  
activated the   postlanding  vent  system. 
Because  of  the   crew’s  discomfort,  fur ther   shipboard  ceremonies 
had been canceled and the  crew had been sen t  to sick bay and then to 
Tripler  Hospital  in Hawaii for observation  until  8 Aug. 
Primary ASTP mission objectives were  to evaluate the  docking and 
undocking  of  an Apollo  spacecraf t  with  a  Soyuz, and  determine  the  
adequacy  of  the   onboard  orientation  lights  and   docking  targe t ;  
evaluate  the  ability  of  astronauts  and   cosmonauts  to  make  inter- 
attitude-hold  control of  the   docked  vehicles  and per P orming a t t i tude  
vehicular  crew  transfers  and  the   ability  of  spacecraft  systems  to 
support the transfers;  evaluate the Apollo’s capabilit  of maintaining 
maneuvers;  measure  quantitatively  the   effect  of  weightlessness  on 
the   crews’  height  and  lower  limb  volume,  according  to  length  of 
exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and  d irec t  synchronous-satellite 
navigation tracking da ta  to determine their accuracy for application to 
S p a c e   S h u t t l e   nav iga t ion-sys tem   d e s i gn .   T h e   ob j e c t iv e s   w e r e  
successfully completed,  and  the  mission was adjudged  successful on 

135 

J ~ Y  

r 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
7 July  75,  15 Aug  75; mission 
15  Aug.  (NASA  MORS  M-966-75-01, 
transcr ip ts  15 to 24 July  75; change  of  shift press  briefing tr  nscr ip ts  
15  to  24 July  75; W P o s t ,   14 to  25  July  75; NYT ,   14  to  24  July  75; 
FBIS-SOV,  14  t6  25  July  75;  NASA  Release  75-118;  NASA   Apo l lo -  
Soyuz  Tes t   Pro jec t:   Informa t ion  f o r   Press ,   1975;  Froelich,  Apo l lo -  
SOYUZ, NASA  EP-  109; Ezell, et  a l .  , The Par tnersh ip:  A  H is to   of  the 
A p o l l o S o y u z   Test Pro jec t;   NASA  SP-  4209,  317-  49) 
15  J u l y :  Pres iden t  Gerald R.  Ford  sen t  a  prelaunch  message to  0 th  the  
U.S.  and   U.S.S.R.  crews  of  t h e  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t   Project:  “ n  a  few 
short hours, you w i l l  be  opening a new e r a  in the  exploration of  space. 
Although  o thers  have goae before you,  you will be blazing a new  trail 
of  international space  cooperation.”  In  the less than  2 decades  since 
Yuri Gagarin and  John  Glenn orbited the  ea r th ,  realizing t h e  dreams  
of those early rocket pioneers who had believed firmly tha t  man could 
fly in space, spaceflight had expanded considerably our knowledge  of 
earth,  moon,  planets,  and  universe.  “Your  flight  represen ts   ahother 
stage in man’s efforts to fur ther  his understanding of his environment. 
I t  ha s  already demonstrated  something else-that 
the  United  S ta te s  
and  the   Soviet  Union can   cooperate in  such  an  important endeavor. 
Since  t h e   Apollo-Soyuz  project  was  agreed  to   3  years  ago,  crews, 
scientists,  and  specialists  of  both  countries  have  worked  diligently 
and  productively,  and  in  a spirit of  cooperation, to bring u s  where we 
are  today.  I  am   hear tened   b y   the   example  of  dedication  dnd 
cooperation  you  have  displayed.  I  am   confident  your  efforts  and  
example will lead to fur ther  cooperation between our two countries.” 
(PD ,  21  July  75,  750) 
0  Wes tern  Union Corp.’s  Wes tar  satellite system, which included We s ta r  
1  and  2  (launched 13 Apr.  74 and  10 Oct.  74), began commercial video 
service with  the   transmission  of  ApoUo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project  mission 
coverage from Houston to Chicago. TVN Independen t  Newservice,  t h e  
first customer,  used  a  transponder  on We s ta r  1  to transmit  coverage 
for 75 clients  in the  u.S.  and  Canada.  The two  satellites,  in  synchro- 
nous orbit, were  linked  to  ear th   statibns near   major  cities.  (WU Re- 
lease ,   15  July  75) 
0  The  upper  stage and ins trumen t  unit of the  Sa turn  IB  rocket tha t  carried 
the   U.S.  astronauts  into  orbit  for  the   Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project  re- 
en tered   the  earth’s a tmosphere  a t  9 4 5  pm EDT.  The  14 100-kg stage 
and  instrument  unit,  empty of 320 c u  m of liquid hydrogen and liquid 
oxygen,  broke into pieces  a s  they  reen tered   over the  Pacific Ocean. 
Reentry was activated by ground commands; excess  fuel was dumped  
through the  engine, slowing the  stage and  ensur ing  tha t  disintegration 
came   in  a  remote ocean   area .   (MSFC  Release  75-160) 
0  The  Wash ing ton  Post  reported  that,  af ter   launch   of  t h e  Apollo-Soyuz 
Test Project,  more than   1800 persons would lose their jobs. With t h e  
liftoff came  the  end  of t h e  Apollo and Sa tu rn  programs which had be- 
gun 25 May 1961 with Pres iden t  Kennedy’s  reques t  for ana t iona l  com- 
mitment to a lunar-landing program.  Layoffs would cu t  the  Kennedy 
Space  Cen ter  workforce to less than  8500, down from a peak  of 28 000. 
Of those who would lose their jobs,  1100 worked for NASA contractors- 
Rocketdyne Division  pf  Rockwell,  Boeing  Co.,  Chrysler Corp.,  and  
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.-who 
built  and   mated  t h e   s tages  of  the  
Saturn launch vehicle  to the  Apollo spacecraft. Another 700 worked for 
contractors such as International Business Machines Inc., TRW  Inc.,  Grum- 
man Corp.,  Aerojet General Corp.,  a nd  Rockwell International Corp. 
136 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

July 

Only  100 launch-operations  con trac t   employees  would  remain  to 
help plan the  launches  of  the  Space  Shuttle. The  Shuttle launch force 
would begin to increase  in size in 1977, but would never r e a ch  the size 
of  the   Sa turn   team  because   of  increased  automation.  (O’Toole,  W 
Post,  15 July  75,  A9) 
@  NASA  awarded  a $5.5 million cost-reimbursable con trac t  to the  Univ.  of 
. Hawaii for construction of an infrared telescope facility on the  summit 
of  Mauna  Kea,  an  extinct  volcano on  Hawaii  Island.  Th e   con trac t  
covered  the   second  part  of  a  $6-miJlion  two-phase  project  covering 
design,  construction,  installation,  and  assembly  of  the   facility. 
Th e  3-m infrared  telescope,  scheduled for 1977 completion, would 
be the  world’s largest. Th e  Univ.  of Hawaii would operate it in support 
of  NASA ’ s   planetary  exploration  programs,  particularly  the   1977 
Mariner  mission to  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  Th e  facility would  provide a 
national capability of  observing interstellar dus t ,   exploding galaxies, 
and  galactic  nuclei  in  the   middle  and   far   infrared  portions  of  the  
electromagnetic  spectrum.  (NASA  Release  75-209) 
16 July:  At  a Moscow  exhibition of  space  ar t   to  commemorate  the   joint 
U.S.  -U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t   Project,  Soviet  ar t   glorified man’s 
role in space ,  whereas US. art emphasized technology, the  Baltimore 
Sun reported. 
U.S.  artists,  commissioned  by   NASA  and   the   National  Gallery  of 
Art to record  the  space  program,  showed basically factual trea tmen ts  
of  blastoffs, launch towers, and mazes of  s tee l  gridwork. Artist Alden 
Wicks depicted Kennedy Space  Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building 
as   “The  New  Olympus.”  Men  played  subordinate  roles  in  U.S.  ar t ;  
they swarmed through control cen ters  or, a s  in Jamie Wyeth‘s “Firing 
Room,”  sa t   by  the   dozens  in  front  of  individual  TV  monitors.  En- 
gineers ministered  to launch vehicles like priests before an idol. Even 
in  the   pen-and-ink  drawings  of  individual  astronauts,  faces   were 
diminished  by  the   detailed  minutiae  of  spacesuit  and  life-support 
paraphernalia. 
By con tras t ,  man dominated the  Soviet ar t .  Artist Anatoly Yakushin 
depicted  pioneer  rocket  theoretician Konstantin  Tsiolkovsky against 
a geometric  maze,  but  man  controlled  the  idea.  A  painting  by Boris 
Okorokov  showed  a  young  flight  controller  commanding  abs trac t  
equipment,  in  contrast  to Wyeth’s passive  TV-monitor watchers. 
The  irony of  the two artistic visions was tha t  they “reverse the  tech- 
nological visions  of  the   nations’  manned  space   programs,”  the  Sun 
said. In  reality, U.S. flights left muchof  the  flying up  to the  astronauts, 
while the  Soviets had  kept  their cosmonauts  a s  passive as possible. 
Also  included  in  the   exhibition  were  paintings  by  Apollo-Soyuz 
T e s t  Project cosmonaut Aleksey A.  Leonov, the  only one of the  ar t is ts  
who  had  seen   ou ter   space.  He  painted  cosmic  scenes   in  brilliant 
colors: His deep  space  was not a flat black,  but  a composite of  black 
and  indigo,  s treaked   with  magenta  and  s ta r s   with  violet  coronas. 
The   Leonov  earth a s   seen   from  space  was  deep   marbled  blue  with 
atmospheric  shea ths   surrounding it  in hard-edged  layers,  pale  hues  
close to the  planet,  darkening in stages to  the  night of  space.  (B Sun, 
16 July  75,  ALE) 
0  Department  of  Defense  said  the   Navy  had  understated  the   long-term 
cost of  building the  new F-  18 carr ier  aircraft by  a t  leas t  $1.6 billion, 
the  Washington Star reported. T h e S t a r  said the  Navy Bad chosen the  
F-18  under  pressure   from  DOD  and  Congress,  after  the   Air  Force 
137 

M Y  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
se lec ted  the  F-  16 for i ts  low-cost  fighter ins tead  of t h e  fighter version 
of the  F-  18. At the  time the  Navy es t ima ted  t h e  cost of each  F-  18 as 
$7.8  million,  o r   $2.6  billion  to  develop  and   produce  the   first  128 
F-18s;  however,  the  S t a r   reported,  a  DOD  analysis  found  the   5-yr 
cos ts  would  b e  c loser  to  $4.3  billion. 
The   fu ture   of  the   program  was  under  discussion.  One   alterna- 
tive would  be to raise projected Navy budget  to accommodate the  in- 
c rea sed  costs  of  t h e  F-18.  Another would  be   for  the   Navy  to  drop  
F-18  and   go  back   to  industry  to  design  and   develop  a lower  cos t  
fighter tha t  would fit into the  original budget and ,  in t h e  interim, to let 
the  Navy  buy  fighter-bombers from  McDonnell Douglas  to mee t   its 
fleet-modernization  needs   in  the   early  1980s.  (Finney,  W  S t a r ,   17 
July  75,  A16) 
17 July: P ioneer  10, launched  2 March 1972 and  traveling out of  the  solar 
system a t  43 200 km  per  hr,  was operating normally  desp i te  a report 
tha t  the  spacecraf t  was making unexplained orientation changes  [ see  
11 June].  The  apparen t  changes  were cau sed  when, during a routine 
change   in  spacecraf t   orientation  on  6  May,  t h e   spacecraft’s  s t a r  
sensor  made a n  unde tec ted   shift in i ts  lock from  the  s t a r  Betelgeuse 
to t h e  s t a r  Sirius. Th is  shift twisted the  frame  of  reference for measur- 
ing direction, and  for changing the  direction of  spin-axis pointing.  As 
a resu l t ,  onboard and  ground compu ters  had recorded a gradual north- 
ward  shift of  the   sp in  axis relative  to  the   earth‘s  motion  around  t h e  
sun.  Also, when  t h e  thrus ters   were  fired  to  move  the   sp in  axis with 
the  earth‘s east-west course,  “southward”  impulses were necessary. 
No loss of  da ta  had occurred ,  and  techn iques  were being designed 
to  verify  s tar   reference   during  intervals  when  t h e   s ta r   sensor  was 
used.  (ARC As trogram ,   17 July  75,  1) 
0  Two  Ames  Research   Cen te r   research   aircraft  would  be  stationed  in 
Hawaii for  scientific research   missions. 
A  U-  2  earth-resources  survey  aircraft  would  probe  the   strato- 
sphere  up  to  20 km  to measure  t h e  distribution and ex ten t  of  ozone, 
nitric oxide, and aerosol particles in the  a rea  between the  equa tor  and 
4V N latitude. Conduc ted  by ARC to aid a national study, the  sampling 
program  was  par t   of  a  semi-global study of  the   effect  of  ozone  and  
nitric oxide on  the  world’s climate over a long period of  time.  Similar 
missions  had  been   flown  over  higher  la t i tudes   and   polar  regions. 
Another objective of  the  U-2  flights was  to  collect remotely  sensed  
da ta   on   the   Hawaiian  Islands  in  suppor t   of  several  investigations, 
including one of  the  decline and  die-back of Ohia and  Manami t ree s  in 
the   forested  a rea s  of  Hawaii. 
je t   aircraft 
NASA’s Kuiper  Airborne  Observatory,  a  C-141 
equ ipped  with a 91.5-cm  infrared telescope, would make 16 flights to 
collect  previously  unobtainable  da ta   from  the   region  of  the   galactic 
cen ter ,   a  highly  complex  intense  source  of  infrared  emission.  (ARC 
As trogram ,   17  July  75,  1) 
0  Th e   International  Telecommunications  Satellite Organization’s board 
of  governors had authorized issuance  of  a reques t  for firm fixed-price 
proposals  for  design,  development,  manufacture,  and   test  of  seven 
In te lsa t  V satellites, with options for u p  to eight additional satellites. 
I n  1979 Intelsat V satellites would rep lace  the  Intelsat IV-  A ser ies  
to  be   deployed  in  Sep tember   1975. Intelsat  V satellites would  have 
increased  capacity by a fourfold use of the  614 ghz frequency band, use 

138 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

July 

of  both  antenna-beam  separation  and   dual-polarization  concepts; 
introduction of t h e  14/11 &z  band for limited coverage in high-traffic 
regions;  and  a  maximum effective bandwidth  of  2280 mhz.  A  single 
satellite design would be  used in  all three  ocean regions of  the  Intelsat 
global systems.  Intelsat V  satellites were expec ted  to have a capacity 
of 12  000 two-way voice circuits plus one color TV channel.  (INTELSAT 
Release  75-  8) 
0  Lewis  Research   Cen ter   had  awarded  a  con trac t   to  Rockwell Lnterna- 
tional Corp.  Rocketdyne Div.  for a  laser-heated  rocket  thrus t  cham- 
ber  for  spacecraft.  The   concep t   included  transmitting  laser   energy 
from  a  ground  laser-generating  station  to  a  spacecraf t ;   propellant 
carr ied   aboard  the   spacecraf t  would  convert  laser   energy  into  pro- 
pulsive thrust.  The  potential improvement in performance included a 
400%  increase  in  payload  capability  for  a  Space  Tug. 
Rockwell would build an experimental thrus ter ,   to be  powered  by a 
10-kw laser  beam and tes ted  at LeRC  using an  in-house  carbon-dioxide 
laser   system,  and  would  provide  a  preliminary design for a 5000-kw 
thruster.  (Rocketdyne Release  RD- 16) 
0  NASA   announced appointment of  Gerald D.  Griffin a s  Deputy Associate 
Administrator for Operations  in  the  Office of  Manned  Space  Flight, 
effective  1 Aug.  In  his  new  position  Griffin would  plan  for the  most 
economical and  flexible operation of  the  Space  Shu t t le  and  Spacelab. 
Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator  for  Legislative Affairs  be- 
fore th is  appointfnent,  would  be  replaced by Dr.  Joseph  P.  Allen,  a n  
astronaut assigned to  the  Astronaut Office  at Johnson Space  Center. 
(NASA  anno  17 July  75) 
18 J u l y :  Th e  Los Angeles  T imes  discussed  the  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project 
mission  in  an editorial: At  the  instant  the  Apollo  and  Soyuz docked, 
“ the  two ships ceased  to be two and became one. And at tha t  moment, 
the  common fa te  of  the   five adven turers  was  indissolubly linked  for 
the   next  44  hours,  symbolic  of  the   shared   destiny  of  the   4  billion 
passengers  on   the   mother  spacesh ip   140  miles  below.”  Tha t   the  
passengers were from  two different countries was of  no significance. 
“They  communicated  in  each   other’s  language,  and   they  saw  the  
lovely blue  ea r th   across  the   vistas  of  space  through  the   same  eyes, 
with  the  same  perception.  I t  is a vision tha t  i s  desperately needed by 
ear thbound   s ta tesmen .”   (LA T ime s ,  18  July  75) 
19 J u l y :  Japan’s National Space  Development Agency  and  NASA  signed a 
con trac t   for  launch   of  three   Japane se   geosynchronous  satellites  in 
1977  and  1978. NASA   would  launch   the   satellites on  a  Delta  launch  
vehicle on  a  cost-reimbursable  basis. 
The  satellites-GMS,  a meteorological satellite; CS,  a n  experimental 
medium-capacity  comsa t ;   and   BS,  an   experimental  medium-scale 
broadcast  s a t e l l i t e w o u l d   participate  in  the   worldwide  Global 
Atmospheric  Research   Project  (CARP)  sponsored  by  the   United 
Nations World Meteorological Organization. (Kyodo, FBIS-  Japan,  22 
July  75,  c3; NASA  MOR  M-492-  101-77-01,  12 July  77) 
20 J u l y :  The Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project  docking  system  functioned  well 
even  though  “conditions  were not  too  favorable in  the   second  dock- 
ing,”  spacecraf t  designer Vladimir  Syromyatnikov said a t  a Moscow 
press  conference. Although  he said he was not y e t  familiar with all t h e  
details,  Syromyatnikov  said  there  had  been   a  great  dea l   of  pitch 
between  the  two  craft.  “We  know  tha t   t h e  Soyuz  system,  af ter  cap- 

139 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
ture ,   i s  turned off, while  t h e  manual operation of  t h e  Apollo ship.  . . 
should have been  turned   into a different mode.”  A t  point of  cap tu re  
Soyuz  began  to  turn  on  i t s  axis a t  approximately 3”  pe r  sec, and  the  
shock absorbers on  t h e  Soyuz “were very  strained in order  to absorb 
this  strain.”  All  the   pitch  was  “quelled”  af ter   about  40  sec, 
Syromyatnikov added. 
When   a reporter  asked  why  this  happened ,   flight engineer  Sergei 
Tsibin said, “We know tha t  a t  one moment on  the  Apollo there  was a 
folding of the  gyroscopic  system. We  also know tha t  a t  the  moment of 
locking  and  latching  the   Apollo  and   Soyuz  were  rolling  at  approxi- 
mately  1 degree  a  second.  Th is  should not  have  taken   place.” 
The  Los Angeles  T imes  reported on 21 July  tha t  the  Russians were 
worried about a pressure  drop in Soyuz and  had voiced  concern over 
possible  damage  to  the   Soyuz  by  the   hard  docking.  However,  the  
Times quoted NASA officials in Moscow a s  saying tha t  the  docking had 
been   within  prescribed  limits  though  conceding  tha t   “it  may  have 
been a little harder”  than  t h e  first one. (USSR press  briefing transcript, 
20 July  75; Toth, LA  T im e s ,  21 July  75) 
0  Pope Pau l  V I  told  a crowd of  5000 a t  the  papal palace near  Rome  tha t  
he  was  enchan ted  by  the  unique encoun ter  of  the  Apollo  and  Soyuz 
crews in space  [see 15-24  July].  He  said, “We  too,  our  eyes  dazzled 
by  sky light or wide  open  toward  the  dep ths  of  nighttime  space, will 
shout out,  long live the  heroic men  of  such  a fantastic feat.  Man  ha s  
won and  we cannot refrain from foretelling more wonderful advances 
in  the   dominance  of  na ture   beyond  t h e   heavenly  sphere .   Man  will 
win.”  (ASTP  air-to-ground  transcripts,  20  July  75) 
0  The   fierce  rivalry  between  t h e   U.S. and   U .S .S .R .   was  not  confined  to 
ground,  air,  and   sea ,   but  extended  to  space ,   the   People’s  Republic 
of  China’s The People’s  D a i l y   sa id   in   an   article  entitled  “Competi- 
tion in  Space  and  Hardsh ip  on Earth.”  Both superpowers had invested 
huge  amounts  of  money,  manpower,  and   materials  to  turn   cosmic 
space  into an  arena  for arms  expansion and  war preparations a s  well 
a s   espionage.  U.S.  and   U .S .S .R .   military  satellites,  which  accounted 
for most satellite launchings, were  used mostly  to  spy on each  other. 
In   recen t   years  their  rivalry  in  space   had  become  more  and   more 
acute,  disturbing tranquillity  in  space.  (Peking NCNA,  FBIS-PRC,  21 
July  75,  Al) 
21 J u l y :  Th e   14-nation Arab League,  joined  by  6 o ther  African  and  Mid- 
Ea s te rn   s ta te s   in  a  20-nation  satellite  organization,  had  finished 
initial technical and  economic feasibility s tud ies  for a n  Arab satellite- 
communications network and  were beginning to define specific tech- 
nical  requirements  for  the   system, A v ia t ion   Week a n d   Space  Tech- 
no logy   reported. 
Program  goals were  to  mee t   telecommunications requirements  of 
Arabic-speaking s ta te s  in North Africa  and  the  Middle Ea s t  for police 
work, weather broadcasting, civil aviation communications, and  ship- 
ping,  and   to  expand  Arab  technology  into  space .   Th e   Arab  S ta te s  
Broadcasting Union  es t ima ted  immediate need  of  15  radio  channe ls  
for direct broadcast  of  educational a nd  cu l tura l  programs  to  remote 
areas ,  and  2 TV channe ls  e a ch  for general and  educational broadcast- 
ing. Estimated need of  the  Arab countries by  1976 would be  a s  many 
as 1060 telephone,  teletypewriter,  and  telegraph channe ls ,  and  up  to 
6200 channe ls  for  this  traffic  by  mid-1984. 

140 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

J
~ Y  
Av  IVk  reported tha t ,   although the  first satellites and initial ground 
stations would be  bought from Western countries,  the long-term goal 
was  to  shift operation  and   control to  Arab  nationals  after  6 mo. 
The  system,  which would  provide communications  and  broadcast 
coverage  for 95%  of  the   Arab world,  would  include  a main  orbiting 
satellite,  a standby orbiting  satellite to replace  the  prime  satellite  in 
quick launch in c a s e  of  satellite failure.  ( d opelewski, Av  W k ,  21 July 
c a s e  of  failure,  and  a  reserve  satellite  ke  t  on  the   ground  ready  for 
75,  56-59) 
* A  recommendation  by  Dr.  Jame s   C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  to 
transfer  Skylab backup  hardware to  the  Smithsonian  Institution was 
agreed  to by  Rep. Olin E.  Teague (D-Tex.),  Chairman  of  the  House 
Science  and  Astronautics  Committee.  In   a  le t ter   to  Dr.  Fletcher, 
Teague  said  he  understood  the   transfer  would  “in  no  way  affect  the  
s ta tus  of  the   Sa turn  launch  vehicles  and Apollo spacecraft  being re- 
tained for possible use.”  Teague  said he  shared  a “belief  that  to dis- 
play  the   Skylab hardware  to  the  public will foster  a be t ter   apprecia- 
tion  and   increasing  support  for our  national  space  program.” 
O ther   equipment  was  being  stored  to  permit  restoration  if  addi- 
tional  space missions  should become  desirable [see  9 Apr.].  (Letter, 
Teague  to  Fletcher,  21 July  75) 
* Cosmic  rays-the  most  energetic  particles  in  the   universe-probably 
originated in supernovas within our own galaxy, Dr.  Floyd W.  Stecker, 
Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter  scientist, wrote in a n  article in Phys ica l  
Rev iew  Le t te r s .  Dr.  S tecker  had  based  his  conclusions  on  da ta  from 
NASA’s  Exp lorer  48 (Small Astronomy Satellite-B,  launched  16 Nov. 
1972). 
Scientists had  been  speculating on the   source of  cosmic  radiation 
since its discovery a t  the  turn  of the century, when it was thought to be 
identical with gamma  rays.  With  the  advent  of  radio  astronomy and  
the   rapid  development  of  new  experimental  techniques  and  instru- 
mentation,  supernovas  had  been   considered  a  possible  source  of 
cosmic rays; however,  other scientists believed cosmic radiation had 
ex traga lac t ic   origins,  s u c h   a s   qu a s a r s .   Exp lo r e r   4 8 ,   m e a s u r i ng  
cosmic-ray  intensity  without  interference  from  earth‘s  atmosphere, 
had  been  able  to obtain  the   gamma-ray information  needed  to  com- 
plement  ground-based  radio-astronomy data. 
The   SAS-B  scientific  team   a t   GSFC  had  measured  a  large  amount 
of  gamma radiation coming from the Milky Way galaxy,  the most  in- 
tense  coming from the  cen ter  of  the  galaxy. A s  gamma rays  resulted 
primarily from collisions of  cosmic rays with interstellar  gas,  and the  
detailed Exp lorer   48  da ta   had  identified  the   direction  from  which 
most  of  the   gamma  rays  came,  Dr.  S tecker   could  pinpoint  a n   area  
of  intense activity midway between the  galactic cen ter  and the  earth. 
The   active  area   was  a  region  containing  numerous  interstellar  gas 
clouds-but  not  enough  to  account  for  all  the   gamma-ray  produc- 
tion-as  well a s  a large number  of  supernova remnants.  Dr.  S tecker  
deduced   tha t   cosmic  rays were  to  be   found  in  t h e   same  regions  a s  
supernova  remnants  and  in  proportion  to  their  number.  (Stecker, 
Phys ica l  Rev iew  Le t ters ,  21 July  75,  188-90;  NASA  Release  75-221) 
22  J u l y :  The   National  Research   Council’s  Space   Applications  Board, 
directed  by  the National Academy of  Sciences and   a NASA  contract, 
released a report entitled ‘‘Practical Applications of  Space Systems,” 

141 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

with  particular  emphas is  on   approaches  to  socioeconomic benefits. 
Th e  report  s ta ted  tha t   presen t   institutional arrangements were  “not 
adequa te”   to  encourage  fu ture   applications  of  space   technology  to 
promising  areas   such   a s  na tura l   resource  exploration  and   manage- 
ment,  telecommunications for education  and   health  care,  and  long- 
range  weather  and  climate  forecasting.  Th e   report  a d d e d   “There  
exists  a t   presen t   no  institutional mechanism  tha t   permits  t h e  large 
body of potential users.  . .to express  the ir  need s  and  to have a voice in 
ma t ters  leading to  the  definition of  new  systems.” 
Recommendations  by  the   board  included  establishment  of  a 
national  space   applications  council  to  direct  policies  affecting  non- 
military space  applications; to set priorities for meeting user  needs ;  to 
provide  for  exchanges  between  users   and   providers  of  space  tech- 
nology; and  to encourage non-Federal investment in the  application of 
space   systems.  The   council could  opera te   a s  an   interagency group, 
with  representation  from  state and  local governments. 
To meet the  launch  needs  of  future applications satellites, t h e  board 
recommended  tha t   plans  for  the   Space  Shu t t le  provide  an  early  op- 
portunity  to orbit payloads  in  e i ther  polar or geosynchronous orbits. 
The  Shuttle-launched payloads would have applications in hazardous 
weather  warnings  and   long-range  weather  and   climate  predictions; 
land-use  planning;  agriculture,  forest,  and   range  management;  ex- 
ploration for food, water, energy, and mineral resources;  and environ- 
men ta l  monitoring. 
O the r  specific recommendations included lower cos t ,  more acces- 
sible ground data-collection and  readout  stations; long-term  observa- 
tions of  climatic factors-such 
a s  albedo,  heat control of  mixed layer 
in  ocean,  cloud  distribution,  and   climatically  significant changes  in 
vegetation, land use, and  snow and  ice  cover-to  help provide a sound 
basis  for long-range  weather  prediction; a resolution of  3 to  10 m  for 
land-use applications;  greater emphasis on Federa l  research   and de- 
velopment  programs  for  spaceborne  sensors   of  wa ter   resources ;  
continued development of  ea r th  physics techn iques ,  including a sy s -  
tem  to measure relative displacement of  tectonic plates within 3 cm ;  
and vigorous continuation of the  SEASAT-A  and  Nimbus-  C programs. 
Th e  board had based  i t s  findings on the deliberations of  110 poten- 
tial users  of space-derived information and services who had a t tended  
a  July  1974  study  group  in  Colorado.  The   participants  represen ted  
Federa l  agencies,  s t a t e  and  local governments,  industrial  and  busi- 
ne s s  communities, and  educational institutions.  (“Practical  Applica- 
tions  of  Space  Systems,”  NAS   publ,  July  75) 
e  Although  more  than   26  million Americans watched  the   Apollo-Soyuz 
Tes t  Project handshake  in space, TV coverage was “adequa te  without 
being  particularly  outstanding,”  TV  critic  Lee  Winfrey  said  in  the  
Ph i lade lph ia  Inqu irer .  Two obstacles were insurmountable.  NASA “is 
doggedly  efficient,  it  got u s  to  the  moon  first and  it did the  job again 
t h i s  time. But it is a s  colorless a s  a pane  of glass and invariably capab le  
of  making the  highest excitement look like the  dullest routine.’’  NASA 
had  an   unshakable  air  of  the   1950s  about  it:  all  white,  all  male, 
crewcut,  and  straight-shouldered. 
The  second obstacle was tha t  the  mission was “another goodie tha t  
Richard Nixon drearned up  for us.  Which means  it was all show and  
no  substance.”  Th e  U.S.  paid  $250 million for  an   aerial handshake. 

1 42 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

J ~ Y  

“Nixon  made  us  buddies  with  Brezhnev  and   so,  through  shadow 
shows  like  Apollo-Soyuz,  we  a re   supposed  to  remain.”  (Winfrey, 
P  Znq,  22 July  75) 
0  Jackson  M.  Balch,  director  of  NASA’s National  Space  Technology 
Laboratories  (NSTL)-formerly 
the  Mississippi  Test  Facility-an- 
nounced plans  to  retire.  A s  head  of  the  test facility  for 10 yrs,  Balch 
managed  testing of  Sa turn  V  rockets  for both  the  Apollo  and  Skylab 
programs.  (NASA  anno,  22  July  75) 
22-23  J u l y :  Nearly  200  NASA  managers,  engineers,  and   scientists- 
headed  by  Dr.  Edgar   M.  Cortright,  Langley  Research   Cen ter  
Director,  and  Viking  Project Manager James   S.  Martin,  Jr.-met 
a t  
Kennedy  Space   Cen ter   for  the   Viking  launch-readiness  review. 
Those   attending-including  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle,  NASA  Deputy 
Assoc ia te   Adm in is tra tor ,   and   D r .   Noel  H inne r s ,   Assoc ia te  
Administrator for Space  Science-heard 
s ta tu s  reports on t h e  launch  
vehicle,  spacecraf t ,   and   launch   and  tracking  preparations.  Every- 
thing was “in  excellent  shape”  for the  11 Aug.  launch  of  the  nation’s 
first mission to land unmanned  spacecraft on Mars,  said Martin. “We 
still have three  weeks of  work  ahead,  but  time  to  do it  in  a n  orderly 
fashion,  and  no  significant open  items.’’ 
Viking-  A would b e  mated with  the  Titan-  Cen taur  launch  vehicle 
on  28  July,  followed  by  specialized  tes ts ,   including  an  operational 
readiness  test  6  Aug.  during which  the   en t ire  NASA  and   contractor 
Viking  team  would  go  through  the  countdown  and   several hours  of 
simulated flight. 
Problems discussed during the  review included the  x-band radio on 
the   Viking-B  Orb i ter   in  which  a  defective  coaxial cab le   had  been 
replaced.  A  leak  discovered  in  the   Viking-  A  gas  chromatograph 
mass   spec trome ter   after  sterilization  was  found  to  be  so  small- 
0.000864  cubic  cen t ime ters   pe r   day-that 
it  would  not  affect  the  
mission.  (NASA  Releases  75-  210,  75-216;  KSC  Release  156-  75) 
24  Ju ly :   Th e   Sena te   Committee  on  Appropriations  reported  out  H .R .  
8070,  the   Dept.  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development -Independen t  
Agencies Appropriations  Bill for FY  1976. 

NASA  FY  197 6  Budget 
Comparison of  Request, Authorization,  and Senate 
Recommended Appropriations 
(millions) 

I t em  

B u d g e t  
R e q u e s t  

Au thor iza t ion  
(diff.  from   req . )  

S e n a t e  A p p r o p r i a t i o n s  
C omm i t t e e  (d i f f .  f r om r e q . )  

Research & 
Development 

Construction of 
Facilities 

2678.4 

84.6 

2687.2 (+8.8) 

99 .1  (+14.5) 

2685.4 (+7.0) 

82.1 (-2.5) 

Research & Program 
776.0 
- 
Management* 
3562.3 (+23.3) 
3539.0 
3543.0 (+4.0) 
Totals* 
*Does not include a su  lemental request for pay  increases,  introduced a s  H.R.  13172 and slgned mto public law 
P.L. 94-303 on  1 June %6 

775.5  (-0.5) 

776.0  (0 )  

143 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

The   committee  appropriation  allowed  for  no  new  s ta r t s   but  did 
permit a n  increase  of  $400 million in  funding for t h e  Space  Shuttle. 
Th e  committee supported manned NASA  activities such  a s  a n  interna- 
tional  cooperative  space-docking mission  built  on  the   successes   of 
Apollo and  Skylab programs,  and  the  development of  t h e  Space  Shut- 
tle  a s  an  economical,  versatile transportation  system to  give  a wide 
variety of users  access  to space. The committee also endorsed a space  
sc ience   flight  program  furthering  knowledge  of  the   ear th ,   atmos- 
phere,  moon,  sun,  planets,  interplanetary  space ,   and   s tars ;   a  re- 
sea rch  and  development program to identify and  demonstrate useful 
applications of  space  techniques in areas  such  a s  weather and climate, 
pollution  monitoring,  earth-resources  survey,  ea r th   and  ocean 
physics,  communications,  and   space   processing;  U.S.  leadership  in 
aeronautics  and   space   programs;  worldwide  tracking  and   da ta   ac- 
quisition support for NASA’s manned and  unmanned programs; a pro- 
gram to assist in the  development of  national energy self-sufficiency; 
and  a technology  utilization  program to  speed  dissemination of  tech- 
nological and  engineering information  gained during NASA  programs 
to  government,  industry,  and   other users. 
The   committee  restored  $48.4 million for  the   two-spacecraft  Pio- 
neer-  Venus mission  scheduled for launch  in 1978; the  House had cu t  
the   funds   reques ted   by  NASA  in  the   original  budget.  The   Sena te  
agreed with NASA  tha t  the  project had  high scientific priority, and  tha t  
delaying it to a less  opportune launch  window when Venus was fur ther  
from  t h e  ear th   would  require  redesign  of  the   spacecraf t   and  would 
cost  $50 million more  than  originally planned. 
The  committee also restored $1 million cu t  by the House from the  $5 
million requested  for  definition  s tud ies  and   advanced  technological 
development of  the  Large Space  Telescope. The  s tudy  was necessary 
for NASA  to  define  an  optimum  design  a t  minimum cos t .  
The  committee added  $7 million to the  $7 million NASA  reques t  for 
research   and  development to  help  understand  and monitor physical 
and   chemical processes   in   the   upper   atmosphere,  emphasizing the  
need  for  studies of  the   depletion  of  stratospheric  ozone. 
Because some committee members had had reservations about the  
high  cos t   and  safety hazards  of  the  joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz 
Te s t  Project,  the   committee  said  it would  like  to  be   notified  well in 
advance of  any  fu ture  joint  space  mission  to  permit  an  accura te   as- 
sessmen t  of  potential  benefits  and   costs. 
The  committee’s recommendation of $82.1 million for construction 
of  facilities,  $25 million less  than  the  reques t ,  would  allow  continua- 
tion  of  previous  work  including  Space   Shu t t le   facilities,  facility 
rehabilitation  and  modification  and  minor  construction,  and  facility 
planning and  design.  Not only  did  the  committee,  agreeing with  the  
House  action,  cu t   t h e  $2.5  million reques ted   for  an   addition  to  the  
Lunar-Sample  Curatorial  Facility  a t  Johnson  Space  Cen ter ,   it  also 
agreed with the  House in denying funds  to modify t h e  40- by 80-ft wind 
included in the  original reques t  
tunne l  at Ames Research  Center-not 
but  authorized  by  Congress-until 
the   committee  had  had  an  
opportunity  to  review  the   necessary  funding  in  a  formal  budget 
request. 
The   recommendation of  $775.5 million for research   and   program 
management,  the   same   amount  approved  by  the   House,  was  $0.5 

144 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   AERONAUT IC S ,   1975 

J d Y  
million less than  NA SA ’ s  request.  The  reduction reflected a 10% c u t  in 
General Services Administration  rental  charges. 
The   Sena te   committee  recommended  a  total  of  $925 028 000  in 
fund s  for  the  transitional period  1 July-30  Sept.  1976. 

NASA Transitional Budget 
Comparison of Request, Authorization, and 
House-Recommended Appropriations 
(millions) 

I t em  

B u d g e t  
R e q u e s t  

Au thor iza t ion  
(d iff .   from res.) 

H .R .   A p p r o p r i a t i o n s  
C omm i t t e e ( d i f f .  fromreu.) 

10.8 ( - 3 . 8 )  

213.8 101 

700.6 (-30.0) 

10.8 ( - 3 . 8 )  

730.6 

14.5 

213.7 (-0.1) 

700.6 ( -30 .0 )  

Research & 
Development 
Construction  of 
Facilities 
213 .8  
Research & Program 
- 
Management* 
TOTALS* 
925  0  ( -33 .9 )  
925.2 ( -33 .8 )  
958 9  
*Does not include  a supplemental request  for pay raises  introduced a s  H.R  13172 and slgned  into P  L  94-303   on 
1 June  76 
Recommended  funding  was  $33 872 000  below  the   total  budget 
reques t  and  $122  111 less  than  the authorization. (Sen Com Rpt 94- 
326; Budget Chron Kist  FY 1976, NASA  Off  of  Budget Operations,  16 
June   75) 
0  “We  have jus t   witnessed  ano ther  flawless Apollo  splashdown  and   the  
successfu l   completion  of  the   world‘s  first  international  [manned] 
spaceflight,” Dr.  James  C.  F le tcher ,  NASA  Administrator, said a t  an 
ASTP  postrecovery  press   briefing.  “At  this  time  it  is  difficult,  if  not 
impossible, to assess  the  full significance of t h e  ASTP mission, or even 
its ultimate influence on  international affairs.”  However,  “to  a world 
beset by tension and suspicion it must, indeed ,  b e  a heartening sign to 
see Russians and  Americans cheering e a ch  other.  . . . By  going into 
space   together,  we  have  shown  a  sometimes  skep t ica l  world  tha t  
perhaps   there   is  a  rea l   chance   of  world  unity.”  (ASTP  Transcr ip t  
PC  - 55) 
relations between our two nations and   . . . the  successes  of the  policy 
0  The   Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project  reflected  t h e   “progress  made  in  the  
of  peaceful coexistence,  and  promotes  a fur ther  improvement of  the  
international situation,  and  the  strengthening of  mutually rewarding 
contacts,”  Acting  Pres iden t   of  the   Soviet  Academy  of  Sc iences  
Vladimir  Kotelnikov  sa id  at a  press  briefing. 
General Vladimir  Shatalov,  head  of  cosmonaut  training,  told  the  
newsmen,  “While  placing  great  emphasis on  the   importance of  th is  
joint  flight,  t h e   Soviet  Union  also  a t taches   grea t   importance  to  its 
national  space  program,  which  at  presen t   cen te r s   on  the   establish- 
men t  of long term  manned orbital stations of the  Salyut type.”  He said 
tha t   the   success  of  ASTP  along with  tha t   of Salyut 4  “testifies  to  the  
maturity of  t h e  Soviet space  program, to the  fac t  tha t  it is able to man 
and   launch   several  spacecraf t   at  the   same   time  and   control  their 
flight.” 

145 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
ASTP  cosmonaut Aleksey A.  Leonov, who had been promoted from 
Soviet Air  Force  colonel  to major  general,  said he   had   thought  lan- 
guage would be  the  biggest problem during t h e  joint session but “we 
understood  each  o ther  very well.”  He added ,   “we  didn’t  have prob- 
lem s  during our joint  operation.” 
When  asked  about  fu ture   joint  projects,  Willis  Shapley,  NASA 
Associate Deputy Administrator,  said,  “For  the   fu ture  I see  accom- 
plishments in  two directions.  . . . On  one  hand  we  must jointly plan 
and  execu te  fur ther jo in t  technical projects. At the  same  time we must 
fur ther  develop the  a rea s  of  political understanding  and  cooperation 
between our  two countries.  . . . Preliminary discussions are  already 
underway between specialists. . . from both sides.” (Soyuz crew press  
conf.  transcript,  Apollo  news cen ter ,   Houston,  24 July  75) 
0  Walter Cronkite, U.S.  broadcaster  who had  covered the  space  program 
from  i t s   beginnings  to  da te ,   reminisced  about  the   space   program 
during  an  interview  with Kennedy  Space  Center’s  Spacepor t   New s .  
Cronkite recalled tha t  news coverage in the  early 1950s was done from 
the  beach  with  very  little official information.  “A l l  we  had were  t ips  
from  engineers and  o thers  we  met  in bars.”  By  Alan  B.  Shepard’s  5 
May  1961 launch,  things  had  improved only  slightly;  coverage  took 
place  from  the  back of  a  station wagon with  a microphone,  monitor, 
and  v e ry  little incoming information. La ter  launches  had seen  dras t ic  
changes.  “We’ve  got  so  much   information today  that  it’s the   traffic 
cops’ job to take  ca re  of the  flow, whereas before it was more imagina- 
tion  and   fill-in-the-blanks.” 
Asked if h e  would b e  in teres ted  in riding aboard the  Space  Shu t t le ,  
Cronkite  said, “I think  newsmen will  go  on  the  Shuttle.  . . . Jus t   a s  
soon a s  we prove out t h e  equipment.  . . . I would guess tha t  somehow 
o r  o ther  we’re going to see tha t  a pool man gets aboard, and I hope  it’s 
me.” 
Regarding the  apparen t   apathy of  the  American  public toward ihe  
space  program, Cronkite s ta ted  tha t  it would be difficult in th is  age to 
sustain  the   “high  intensity  of  feeling  about  the   space   program,  the  
race  to the  moon,  [and]  landing on the  moon.  . . . We  don’t have  an  
attention span  in the  modern world,  with so much going on, tha t  per- 
mits u s  to remain  a t  tha t  high  level of  excitement.”  (Spaceport News ,  
- 
24 July  75,  6) 
0  A  terres tr ia l   solar-energy  recording  system  now  installed  a t  Marshall 
Space  Flight Cen ter  would provide  accura te  da ta  on sunfall for use in 
developing  solar-energy  measuring  systems,  MSFC  announced.  De- 
signed and  built by  International Business Machines Corp.  a s  part of 
t h e  center’s earth-based  solar-power  activities, the  monitor would use 
a  sun   tracker   and  stationary  sensors  to  measure  and   record  solar 
energy.  The  203-cm  by  178-cm instrument  included a pyrheliometer 
to measure  energy coming directly from the  solar disc and 2 pyranom- 
e te r s  to measure d irec t  and  sca t tered  energy from  any direction in i t s  
hemispheric field of  view.  The  system could also evaluate the  ability 
of developmental devices to convert o r  reflect solar energy. Collected 
da ta   were  recorded  on  tape   for  compu ter   analysis.  (MSFC  Release 
75-  168) 
0  NASA   announced  completion  at  Lewis  Research   Cen ter   of  one  of  the  
largest  indoor  echo-free  chambers   in  the   US.  T h e   1416-cu  m 
aid 
ch amb e r - c a l l ed   t h e  Engine  Fan   and  Jet Noise Facility-would 

146 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
July 
th e  center’s research  into jet-aircraft  noise by permitting engineers to 
te s t  noise charac ter is t ics  of  quiet  fans  for  advanced aircraft engines 
and   to  evaluate  new ways of  reducing the   rumble  of  je t   nozzles.  All 
surfaces   of  the   16-m  wide,  17-m  long,  5-m  high  facility  had  been 
trea ted  with anechoic (echo-free) 76-cm fiberglass wedges tha t  absorb 
sound.  Acoustic  te s t s   had   shown  t h a t   t h e   facility  could  absorb  
essentially all the  sound in the  region of  interest for aircraft-engine fan 
models up to 51 cm in diameter, or je t  nozzles up to 10  cm  in diameter. 
Engineers could study noise coming from e i ther  the front or the  rear  of 
the   fan.  The   facility’s  control  room  was  linked  directly  to  LeRC’s 
cen t ra l  computer,  permitting  ins tan t   analysis  of  much  of  the   da ta .  
(NASA  Release  75-212) 
25 July:  At  an  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project  crew-status  briefing, Richard S. 
Johnston,  Director of  Life Sciences,  told  repor ters  tha t  Houston con- 
trol could not make voice con tac t  with the crew during Apollo reen try  
[see  15 -24  Julyj.  The  first medical bulletin on the  astronauts’ condi- 
tion,  received  at Houston severa l  hours later,  had  informed Houston 
officials of  the  crew’s eye and  lung irritation. After splashdown, astro- 
nau ts   Thomas  P.  Stafford  and   Donald  K.  Slayton had  noticed  tha t  
fellow crewman Vance D.  Brand had passed out. He had revived after 
about 1 min when  Stafford  adjusted  his  oxygen mask  and ensured   a  
proper  flow  of  oxygen. 
Johnston also said tha t  preliminary diagnostic procedures had indi- 
ca ted  tha t   the  crew did  not  have “any  apparen t  medical problem at 
tha t  time”  but tha t  x-rays had  shown increased  hylar markings origi- 
nating  from the  cen te r  of  the  ches t .  The  doctors  e lec ted  to  move  the  
crew  to  sick  bay  and  keep   them  under  observation.  The   as tronau ts  
had  been  given  cortisone  to  decrease   the   inflammation of  their  lung 
t issue  and relieve the  symptoms of cough and subs terna l  discomfort. 
During  the   briefing,  word  came  tha t   the  as tronau ts  had  arrived  at 
Tr ip ler  Hospital in Hawaii where they would  e n t e r  the  intensive  care  
unit.  “They  walked  in  smiling  and   they  looked  happy,”  said  JSC 
Public  Affairs  Officer  Robert V.  Gordon.  (ASTP Transcr ip t  PC-  56) 
The  House  of  Representatives’  $48-million  cu t   in  NASA ’ s   Pioneer- 
Venus  program  [see  19 June]   had  taken   the   agency  by  surprise,  a  
Science  editorial  reported.  “Not  only  had  the   program  been  scru-  
tinized and endorsed by House and Sena te  authorization committees, 
bu t  construction  of  th e  spacecraft,  for which planning began 4 years 
ago,  is now  well advanced.”  Th e  potential loss was even  more bitter 
because   it was  the   “child  of  the   scientific community.” 
Although th e  House action was intended not to eliminate P ioneer-  
Venus  a l toge ther   bu t   ra the r   to  delay  it,  to  cons ider   the   relative 
priority  between  the   project  and  the  Large  Space  Telescope,  “they 
a re   not  in  any  way  comparable  in  their  scientific  objectives.”  The  
House Appropriations Committee’s action seemed  to  be  based on “ a  
misunderstanding  of  the   physical  cons tra in ts  of  launching  a   space- 
craft  to Venus.”  Once  the   1975 launch  window  had  passed,  the  next 
p  P ane t s  would  require  spacecraf t  approach  a t  higher velocities tha t  
o  portunity  would  be   in  1980, when  the  relative  position  of  the  two 
would  call for a   larger  retro-propulsion  motor  and  more  fuel.  These  
requ i remen t s   would  r e du c e   the   scientific  payload,  n e c e s s i t a t e  
redesign,  and was te  much of  the   40 million  already  spent. 
The  subcommittee’s decision seemed  to have been made abruptly 
without any  real  a t temp t   at  investigating  the   consequences.”  The  
< b  

147 

J ~ Y  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

subcommittee staff had never asked NASA whether the  mission could 
be  delayed. 
Even  more  remarkable,  said  Science, was  the   motivation  given 
for the  action in the  committee report: ‘‘Some astronomers have been 
critical of NASA’s  Space  Science Program because they contend tha t  a 
disproportionate  level  of  NASA  dollars  have  been  used  on  planetary 
astronomy  missions, while  little  or  no  funds   have  been   allocated  to 
d e ep   sp a c e  astronomy  which  is  the   principal  mission  of  the   Large 
Space   Telescope.”  Th e   public  bickering  over  funds  among  scien- 
tists  tended  to  give  “ the   budget  cu t ters   . . . a  field day.” 
To many  space   scientists,  the  deferral  raised  questions  about  the  
credibility of  the  long-range planning  process for large science proj- 
ec ts .   Scientists argued  tha t   “cutting  the  mission after  it  has  already 
been  approved by  Congress and  after money and considerable  talent 
have  been  committed  to  i ts   development  may  jeopardize  efforts  to 
design  efficient  spacecraf t   and  plan  a  logical program  of  planetary 
exploration.”  (Hammond, Science, 25  July  75,  270-71) 
0  NASA  announced  the   development  of  an  improved  inorganic  paint,  a 
potassium  silicate zinc-rich coating with a silicon additive that  could 
provide  long-term  protection  from  salt  spray,  fog,  heat,  and  rapid 
tempera ture  changes.  Produced  a t  Goddard  Space  Flight Center  as 
an  anticorrosion coating for use  in  the   space  program,  the paint  had 
shown no  deterioration  af ter  5300 hr of  continuous exposure  to a 3% 
brine  spray. The paint had  also been  applied to a 2-m  panel mounted 
under  t h e  Golden  Gate  Bridge  in  San  Francisca  for  fur ther   testing. 
(NASA  Release  75-213; Newsweek  (int’l ed),  18 Aug  7.5) 
0  Comsat  General  Corp.  of  the   Communications  Satellite  Corp.  an- 
nounced  its intent  to  pay MCI Communications  Corp.  and Lockheed 
Aircraft  Corp.  $1.5  million  e a ch  for their  common  stock  in the CML 
Satellite Corp.  Restructured  in  1972 by  Comsat  General  Corp.  and 
with  thirds  owned  by  Comsat,  Lockheed,  and MCI,  CML was  to  have 
en tered   the   domestic-communications-satellite  business  but  had 
stopped  short because  of  the   financial difficulties  of  MCI  and  Lock- 
heed. 
On  3  July  1974,  Comsat  and  International  Business  Machines 
Corp.  had  announced  plans  to  buy  out  the   shares   in CML  owned  by 
Lockheed  and MCI,  sub jec t  to  approval by  the   Federal  Communica- 
tions  Commission. Restrictions  imposed  in  a 23 January  1975 ruling 
by  the   FCC -conce rned   tha t   the   combination  of  the   two  companies 
would crea te  a monopoly-required 
tha t  no one par tner  own less  than 
10% or more than 49% of  the  stock. Under this “balanced CML”  ruling, 
Comsat and IBM  were seeking a third par tner ;  to tha t  end ,  Comsat was 
acquiring all of  the stock so tha t  it could be reapportioned in the  pro- 
posed  new  s truc ture .   (Comsat General  Release  75-45) 
26 July:  By  a  vote  of  73  to  7,  the   Sena te  passed  H.R.  8070,  the   Dept.  of 
Housing  and  Urban  Development-  Independent  Agencies’  Appro- 
priations Bill for FY 1976, a s  reported out by the  Appropriations Com- 
mittee  on 24 July.  NASA   was  provided  a  total of  $3.543 billion for FY 
1976, and  $925 million for the  transition period from 1 July to 30 Sept. 
1976.  (CR,  26  July  75,  513863-98) 
0  Th e  lung condition of the  Apollo-Soyuz T e s t  Project astronauts, who had 
inhaled nitrogen  tetroxide  fumes  during  Apollo  reentry  [see  15-  24 
July] , had  improved,  NASA   Flight  Surgeon  Dr.  Arnauld  Nicogossian 

148 

J ~ Y  
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
told  reporters  a t   a  crew-status  briefing.  The   as tronau ts   had  been  
transferred  from  the  intensive-care  unit  of  Tripler  Hospital  to  other 
hospital quar ters .  Astronaut  Donald K.  Slayton’s x-rays showed a 70 
to 80% improvement in the  condition of his lungs; as tronau ts  Vance D. 
Brand  and Thomas P.  Stafford had improved, but not a s  much.  (ASTP 
Transcript  PC-  58) 
0  Th e  Sena te  passed  a resolution,  S.  Res.  222,  congratulating NASA  and 
the   Soviet Academy  of  Sciences  on   the   outstanding  success   of  the  
joint  Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t   Project  [see   15-24  July].  (CR ,  26  July  75, 
S13914) 
0  People’s  Republic  of  China  launched  its  third  satellite  into  an  ear th  
orbit  with  a  455-km  apogee,  182-km  perigee,  90.9-min  period,  and 
69.0” inclination.  PRC’s  Hsinhua  news  agency  reported  27  July  tha t  
the   satellite  had  been  launched   “under  the   guidance  of  Chairman 
Mao’s  [Tse-tung]  proletarian  revolutionary  line  . . . promoting  pro- 
duction  and   other  work  and   preparedness   against  war.”  Hsinhua 
also reported  tha t  the instruments  on board  the  satellite were operat- 
ing normally. 
The  satellite was  PRC’s  first in 4 yr.  Baltimore S u n  correspondent 
Edward  K .   Wu  attributed  the   apparent  slowdown  in  the   PRC  space  
program to an estimated 25% cutback in military spending. PRC’s  first 
two  satellites  had  been  successfully  launched  24  April  1970  and  
2 March  1971.  (Wkly S S R ,  25-30  July  1975; FBIS-PRC,  28 July  75, 
E l ;  Wu,  B Sun, 28  July  75, A4;  W Po s t ,   28 July  75,  A14; A&A  70; 
A&A  7 1 )  
27  July:  The   Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t   Project  crew  was  making  “excellent 
progress”  recovering  from  lung  ailments  tha t   developed  when  the  
crew  inhaled  nitrogen  tetroxide  during  Apollo  reentry  [see   15-24 
July],  Johnson  Space   Cen ter   Director  of  Life  Sciences  Richard  S. 
Johnston  told  a  crew-status  press  briefing  a t   JSC.  Johnston  told  re- 
porters tha t ,  if the  crew continued to progress, they would be released 
from Tripler Hospital on 29 July.  However, their  activities would be  
restricted  for an  additional 10 days to protect them from undue expo- 
sure  to large crowds, to ensure  continued  improvement,  and to avoid 
respiratory  complications.  (ASTP Transcr ip t   PC-59) 
28 July:  Soviet engineers  had  been working  on  a  “spaceplane”  to  carry  
cosmonauts to and  from orbit a s  part of along-term project to establish 
a  major  space   platform  in  the   1980s, the  Christian Science Monitor 
reported.  Wes tern  observers had expected the  reusable spacecraft to 
be  launched  by  a n  expendable  booster,  but  C SM   reported  tha t   the  
rumored  aim  was  to  fly  it  from  the  back  of  a  ramjet-powered  boost 
vehicle  that would  return  to  base.  The project was  thought to   be  linked 
with development of  a large multiman modular space  station tha t  the  
Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. C SM  reported tha t  
U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations a t  the  
Baykonur Cosmodrome to re tes t  the  huge SLX-  1 4  booster,  scheduled 
to launch the  station. Th e  SLX-  14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a ser ies  
of mishaps: Two launch  complexes had  been built for the  SLX-  14, one 
of  which  burned  during  a  1969  fueling  test.  Intelligence  reports 
indicated  it  had  been  rebuilt. 
I n  an  August  1975 issue  of  Sputnik  magazine,  reprinted  from  the  
Soviet Nauka Z Z h i n ,  U.S.S.R.  Chief of  Cosmonaut Training Vladimir 
A.  Shatalov  confirmed  Soviet  interest  in  a  reusable  space   vehicle. 

149 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

29 

Although “the  fu ture  of cosmonautics i s  largely connec ted  with  long- 
term   orbital  stations,”  he   said,  the   fac t   t h a t   carr ier   rockets  were 
extremely expensive and   could  be   used  only  once was  “becoming  a 
serious  brake   on  the   development  of  cosmonautics  and   relevant 
research .”  Neither the  airplane nor t h e  spacesh ip  had proven capab le  
of  flying into orbit  and  then  reentering.  But  the re   is every reason  to 
believe  tha t   in   the   not-so-distant  fu ture   aviation  and   cosmonautics 
would  “draw  appreciably closer together.”  Shatalov sa id  Soviet and  
U.S.  scientists  had   already  made  important  high-altitude  and   high- 
speed   experiments.  Shatalov  visualized  “a   new-type  spaceship” 
consisting of  a smaller one launched  from  a larger one af ter  reaching 
required  speed. The  ca r r ie r  craft would re turn  to  a landing field, and  
the  smaller craf t  would  orbit,  accomplish i ts  mission,  and  then  land. 
“Creation of  an appara tus  with grea ter  orbital maneuverability would 
. . . make  it  possible  . . .  to  deliver  satellites  on  orbits  in  the  
spacecraft’s freight compar tmen t ,  serve and  repa ir  them  in space  and 
bring back  to ea r th  samp les  of explorations and observations and even 
t h e  satellites themselves if  they  go out of  order.”  Although “creation 
of  th is   new  type  of  space   appara tus”   posed  a  host  of  technical 
problems,  “modern sc ience  and  technology  can  solve them”  and “ the  
time was not far  off when such  a Dlane would make  i ts  maiden flight.” 
(Gatland, CSM,  28  July  75,  11;?3putnik, “P lane   for  Ou ter   Space ,”  
Aug 75,  68-71) 
July:  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA  Administrator,  and   Donald  P. 
Hearth,  Deputy  Director  of  Goddard  Space   Flight  Center,  gave  in 
the ir   testimony  before  the   Subcommittee  on   Space   Sc ience   and  
Applications  of  the   House  Committee  on  Sc ience   and   Technology 
a  preview  of  t h e  new  NASA   report  “Outlook  for  Space.”  The   report 
had  been  submitted  to  NASA  by  a  21-member  study  group  estab- 
lished by Dr. Fletcher in June  1974 to develop an  unconstrained listing 
of  desirable  and   practical  civilian  space   activities;  to  group  the se  
around goals,  objectives,  and   themes ;   to  define R&D  tasks   required 
by  potential  commercial  and   operational  uses   of  space ;   to  identify 
soc ia l   and   economic  cha l lenges   tha t   cou ld   benef i t   from  space-  
reported  da ta ;   and   to  relate  space   goals  and   objectives  to  national 
ones. All  space   objectives  defined  by  the   study  group  were  evaluated 
in  te rm s   of  their  contribution  to  national  interests,  which  included 
expansion  of  human  knowledge,  physical  benefits  to  the   u.S. and  
humanity,  contribution  to  the   vitality  of  the   nation,  exploration  of 
the   unknown,  national  prestige  and  self-esteem,  and  international 
cooperation. 
The  report  suggested categorizing space  missions  a s  e i ther  earth- 
oriented  o r   extraterrestrial.  Earth-oriented  programs  for  the   res t   of 
the  cen tury  should help increase  food production by improved weather 
a n d   wa ter-ava i lab i l i ty   fo reca s t ing ,   imp roved   c r o p   fo reca s t ing ,  
improved  detection  and   monitoring  of  d iseases   and   infestations  in 
vegetation. The  consequen t  economic benefits and  stabilization of the  
commodity  market  could  gain  hundreds   of  millions  of  dollars  per 
year. 
O the r  earth-oriented  space   programs  should emphasize improved 
forecasting of  seasonal  and   climatic  trends,  to  aid  in  the   managing 
of  food  and  energy resources   and  associated  transportation  require- 

150 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

J ~ Y  

ments.  Benefits from improved climate forecasting  could reach  hun- 
dreds  of  millions of  dollars  annually. 
The   space   program  should  also  address   itself  to  the   challenge 
of  the  unknown by  adding to man’s  knowledge of  cosmic and  human 
evolution and destiny.  Spacecraf t  could take   ins trumen ts  above the  
“da rk   and   dirty  glass”  of  earth‘s  opaque  atmosphere,  and  should 
continue to ca r ry  ins trumen ts  to other planets,  setting up laboratories 
there   a s  well  a s  bringing  samp les  back  to  ea r th   for  analysis.  Extra- 
terrestrial  missions  should  include  textural,  chemical,  and  isotopic 
planetary  s tud ies   and  comparisons  of  atmospheric  trends   for  all 
planets  and the ir   satellites. 
P lans  should also continue for human activities in space ,  using both 
the   space  shu t t le  and  free-flying laboratories  to  repa ir  and maintain 
orbiting  spacecraf t   sys tems   and  perform  re sea rch   in  space .   Al- 
though  the   study  panel  had  found  it  difficult  to  asser t   tha t   manned 
orbiting or  planetary  bases  should be under taken  in the next 25 yrs,  it 
found tha t  man was an integral and necessary par t  of the  more creative 
space-exploration  programs.  If  the   US.  was  to  avail  itself  of  the 
potential  benefits  of  space ,   the   next  logical  s tep  for NASA’s manned 
program could be  development of  a  permanent space  facility in which 
crews  could work  for  ex tended  periods.  (H.R. transcr ip t)  
0  Communications  Satellite  Corp.  had  received  initial  orders   to  lease  
terminals  on  tankers   and   o ther  commercial vessels  for  communica- 
tions  via  th e   Marisat  maritime-satellite  sys tem .   Exxon  In terna-  
tional  Corp.  had  ordered  f ive   shipboard  terminals  to  provide com- 
munications with Exxon  tankers   at  sea.  The  US. Maritime Adminis- 
tration  had  ordered  terminals  for  six  U.S.-flag  sh ips   a s   par t   of  a  
cooperative  cost-sharing  program  between  USMA  and   the   vessel 
owners. 
The  Marisat  system,  schedu led  for  commercial service  la te r  this 
year, would provide high-quality telex, da ta ,  and  telephone communi- 
cations  24  hrs  a   day  to  sh ips   and  offshore  facilities.  (ComSatCorp 
Re lease  75-48) 
30 July:  Rep.  Olin  E.  Teague  (D-Tex.)  and  Rep.  Charles  A.  Mosher 
(R-Ohio)  introduced  H.R.  9058,  a   revised  bill  to  es tab l ish  national 
sc ience   policy  and  organization,  incorporating  the   most  promising 
fea tures  of  H.R.  4461  [see 6  March] and  the  Administration bill  H.R. 
7830  [see 9  and   11 June]. 
The  proposed bill  included  a   s ta temen t   of  national  policy  similar 
to  tha t   in  H.R.  4461,  but  with  language  recommended  dur ing   an 
earlier  3  wk  of  hearings.  Th e   proposal  to  es tab l ish   an   Office  of 
Sc ience  and  Technology Policy was  based on the  Administration bill 
with  three  major changes:  First,  H.R.  9058 would  give  the  Pres iden t  
the   power  to  appoint  up  to  four  ass is tan t   directors,  giving  him  the  
potential of  a  three-  to  five-man  council a s  h e  chose;  this would g ive  
la te r   Pres iden ts  more  flexibility of  organization.  Second,  the   Pres i-  
dent-appointed Director and ass is tan ts  would be  sub jec t  to confirma- 
tion  by  the   Sena te .   Third,  H.R.  9058  described  the  du t ies  and  func- 
tions  of  the   new  office more  precisely  than   had  the   Administration 
bill. 
H.R.  9058  would  es tab l ish ,   within  the   Executive  Office  of  the  
Pres iden t ,   a  Federa l   Sc ience  and Technology  Survey Committee to 
survey the  Federa l  sc ience  effort,  including missions,  goals,  person- 

151 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
July 
nel,  funding,  organization,  facilities, and  genera l  activities.  The  5 to 
12 committee members would  repor t  findings and  recommendations 
to  t h e  director  of  t h e  new  advisory office,  with  particular  attention 
to  organizational  reform,  science  information  systems,  technology 
innovation  and   transfer,  Federal-state  and   Federal-industry  liaison 
and   cooperation,  and   improved  science  budgeting  process.  Upon 
completion of the  report,  t h e  committee would cease  to exist.  (CR, 30 
July  75,3421265) 
0  NASA   announced  selection  of  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  for  a  $22.8 
million cost-  lus-award-fee con trac t  for checkout, control,  and  moni- 
toring  of  s d s y s t e m   hardware  for  the   Space   Shu t t le   launch   proc- 
ess ing  system (LPS). Martin would design,  fabricate,  tes t ,   and  install 
hardware for the  subsystem, composed of hardware assemblies com- 
municating directly with compu ters  and  with flight and  ground equip- 
ment  of  the   Space  Shuttle.  Th e  LPS was designed  to  use  automated 
and  modular techniques to mee t  Space  Shu t t le  launch, maintenance, 
and   refurbishment  requirements.  (NASA  Release  75-219) 
0  A t   the  Air  Force  Flight  Dynamics  Laboratory’s  50 mw  open-jet  wind 
tunnel,  engineers  had  been   able  to  more  precisely  measure   the  
material  and  shape  endurance   of  model  nosetips  for  spacecraft  and 
missiles.  Using  a  newly  developed  flared  nozzle  with  a  smoothly 
decreasing  pressure   field,  and   a  new  technique  for  reentry  simula- 
tion,  engineers  could  gradually  bring  t h e   sample  nosetip  up  to  the  
nozzle  mouth,  simulating the   transition from  moderate  to  maximum 
tempera ture   and  pressure .   Previous  techn iques   could  show  only 
variations  between  distinctly  different  materials;  use  of  the   new 
nozzle could de tec t  sub t le  differences between very similar materials. 
(AFSc Release OIP  172.75) 
During  July:  Th e   world’s  news  media  commented  on  t h e   joint  u.s.- 
U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t   Project  [see 15-24  July]. 
A  15 July  article in Wes t  Germany’s  Frankfurter Allgemeine  said 
tha t   “technically  t h e   Apollo-Soyuz  en te rp r i se   will  show  nothing 
much.”  The   reason  for  t h e  mission  had  been  political  since  it  was 
agreed  upon  in  1972.  I t  was  “fully  in  line with  the de ten te  and rap- 
prochement policy of the  two superpowers.” The  astronautic field was  
particularly useful for propaganda because  it could mark the  “begin- 
ning of an  intellectual and  scientific exchange of opinion of advantage 
to both  sides.”  However,  “if  one looks.  . .a t  rapprochement  in o ther  
fields,  such  a s  SALT. . . , one mus t   remain  skep t ica l  regarding  ‘at- 
-  -  _ _  improvements to  be   achieved  outside the  a tmosphere  of 
mospheric’ 
t h e  world.” 
Milika Sund ic ,  a Yugoslavian  commentator, said concerning ASTP, 
“Nobody  doub ts  i t s  success, or.  . . the  good intentions and  will of the  
two  superpowers.”  Th e   technical  aspec t   of  the   mission  was  leas t  
important,  and the  political s ide  “constitutes  i ts  essence.”  The  joint 
undertakings  both  on  ea r th   and  in  space  reflected  the  superpowers’ 
belief in a “full equilibrium of forces ra ther  than  t ru s t  in one  another.” 
Th is  lack  of  trus t  was the  consequence  not only of  different systems 
but different in teres ts  which went beyond national borders.  The  fac t  
tha t  the  U.S.  and U.S.S.R.  were leaders  of  two military alliances could 
not  lead   to  greater  t ru s t   between  them.  But,  “without  blocs  and  
be.  . .more favorable both for the  superpowers and  for the  res t  of the  
without ambitions going beyond national borders,  the  situation would 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

J ~ Y  

world.” One hoped that nobody intended to divide up space  along bloc 
lines  and  that  nobody would  misuse  it  for  solving th is  world’s  prob- 
lems.  “Third World countries may not be  present  a t  today’s rendez- 
vous in space, but they have a claim on the part played by science in the  
Soviet-American undertaking.”  Regarding the ir   rights  on  the   earth, 
“ the  Third World has no intention of  renouncing them,  and even  less  
of  abandoning the  fate of peace to the  big powers, for peace is  indivisi- 
ble  both  on  ear th   and  in  space.” 
Hungary’s  15 July issue of Nepszabadsag   said the  joint space  flight 
was  a  scientific  undertaking  inseparable  from  “normalization”  be- 
tween  the  two  s ta tes   and  reflecting the  advance  of  peaceful  coexist- 
ence .   The   joint  cosmic  attempt  called  attention  to  the   vast  pos- 
sibilities inherent  in dynamic  scientific cooperation between  the  two 
countries  in  other,  no  less   important,  areas .  
Bulgaria’s  15 July Rabotnichesko  said in  an editorial  tha t  ASTP  not 
only would mark  “ a  new  stage in the development of  space research  
and  will open  up new  prospects  for cooperation  between t h e  U.S.S.R. 
and  U.S.A.  but will also be a telling example to be followed by all other 
s ta tes   and  peoples  on  the   earth.  . . .” 
A  26 July  commentary  by  a Peking correspondent  in the   People’s 
Republic  of  China  said  tha t   the   U.S.-U.S.S.R.  handshake 
in 
s p a c e - d e s p i t e   the  show  and  all  the   money  spen t   to  advertise  it- 
could  not  “cover  up  the ir   fierce  struggle on  earth.”  In   fact,  the   two 
superpowers  “regard  each   other  a s  the   enemy  in  space.  They  have 
been  contending  for military superiority in  space  ever  since the  first 
satellite was  launched.”  The   handshake  was  but  a  contention  with 
“each   trying to  cheat  and  outwit the   other.” 
Finland’s Ka r ja la imen   called the joint mission “historic”  from the 
point of  view  of  both space  technology and world politics.  The  super- 
powers had found it necessary to begin together to regulate the  world’s 
conflicts to prevent a world conflagration or  wars that could endanger 
the  interests of  the  superpowers. ASTP  was one of  the  public symbols 
of  this policy. (NCNA, FBIS-PRC,  28July 75, A I ;  FBIS-Bulgaria,  16 Ju ly  
75,  c 1 ;  FBIS-Hungary,  16 July  75,  F1; FBIS-Yugoslavia,  16 July  75, 
11; FBIS-Finland,  16 July  75,  P1) 
*  Preparations continued for August launch of  the  two Viking spacecraft. 
Following the mating of  Viking Lander-Capsule  2 (VLC-2Gwith  Or- 
biter 2 (v0-2)-to 
become the  Viking-A s p a c e c r a f t - c a b l in g  connec- 
tions between the  two were made and precountdown tes t  was run on 3 
July.  Propellants were  loaded  on 9-  10 July  and  final encapsulation 
inside  the   shroud was completed  on  11 July. Viking-A was mated  to 
the  Titan  IIID  launch  vehicle  on  28 July. 
The  Lander (VLC -1)  and Orbiter  (VO - 1) of  Viking-B  were mated 
on 21 July and  the  spacecraft was encapsulated on 24 July,  to be kept 
in a planned holding mode until it was ready for mating with its launch 
vehicle.  (Viking s ta tus  bulletins 8 & 9,  8 July  75,  29  July  75) 
The  Air  Force  had  announced operational  concepts  for Space  Shu t t le  
launches  a t   Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base.  Construction,  planned  to 
begin in mid-1978, would cost $50 million less  than  original es t ima tes  
through  maximum  use  of  existing  facilities  s u c h   a s   Space   Launch 
Complex No.  h o n s t r u c t e d  in the 1960s for the  A ir  Force’s manned 
orbiting  laboratory  cancelled  in  June   1969-and 
existing  roadways 
and railroad tracks .  An  “integrate on the  pad”  concept and modifica- 

153 

July 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
tion of  surp lus  Sa turn  IB rocke t  transpor ters  to move the Orb i ter  and  
external tank s  to the  launch  pad  had  eliminated the  need   for a new 
highway  and   railroad  system.  A  s tudy   coordinated  with  the   Navy 
showed tha t   the  solid-rocket booster  tha t   dropped off  the  main tank  
into the  ocean  could be  successfully recovered with a minimum of new 
facilities by using an  existing Navy dock  and  large stationary crane. 
Operations  facility  requ iremen ts   would  be   programmed  in  two 
phases:  Phase one,  construction  of  a complete  ground-support  sys- 
tem,  would  allow  the   DOD to  opera te   Space   Shu t t le  missions  from 
Vandenberg by December 1982. Pha se  two called for completion of  a 
second  launch  pad  in late  1986. ( A F S ~  Newsreview,  July  75,  16) 
0  The  Space  and Missile Sys tems  Organization had announced award of a 
$2  059 000  con trac t   to   Raytheon  Co.  Equ ipmen t   Div.  for  a  self- 
repairing  onboard  satellite  compu ter   system.  The   11-kg  compu ter  
would  carry  two o r  more  spa re s  for each  of  i ts  basic  subunits,  and  a 
configuration-control unit  (ccu) to  monitor the  computer’s operating 
subunits  and   diagnose problems;  if  a  subun i t  failed,  the  CCU  would 
diagnose the  problem and  switch to a spare .  Th e  compu ter  would also 
perform satellite housekeeping including power control, an tenna  posi- 
tioning,  tempera ture   control,  attitude  control,  and   navigation,  jobs 
normally  performed by a computer on the  ground.  ( A F S ~  Newsreview, 
July  75) 
0  Arnold Engineering Development Cen ter  was studying the  feasibility of 
the  secondary burning-called 
external b u r n i n g - o f  fuel-rich exhaust 
to  increase  the  efficiency of  solid rocket motors.  The  concept called 
for t h e  diversion of  the   exhaus t  of  burning propellant  through ports 
tha t   ring  the   rear   end  of  the   motor  casing,  and   i t s   injection  a t   right 
angles into the  airstream. Miniature nozzles  in each  port would accel- 
e ra te  t h e  exhaus t  gas to sonic speed .  Turbu len t  mixing of the  fuel-rich 
sonic  gas and  the   supersonic  airflow would  cau se  a  secondary com- 
bustion,  increasing pressure  a t  the  base  of the  motor and overall thrus t  
of  the   propulsion  system.  (NSC Newsreview,  July  75,  12) 
Potential propellants for the  Space  Shu t t le  had been tes ted  a t  a n  under- 
ground  facility  a t  Arnold  Engineering  Development  Center,  the   Air 
Force  Systems  Command  reported.  Tes t ing  was  part  of  a  selection 
process  to find a compatible propellant  for the  auxiliary motors tha t  
would  separa te   the  Orb i ter  from  the  two  solid-rocket  boosters. 
Th ree  candidate  propellants were tes ted   a t  a simulated altitude of 
40  000  m.  Reusable  ballistic  test-evaluation  system  motors,  each  
loaded with 45  kg of  propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 
sec  and   generating  53  400  newtons  of  thrust.  Exhaust  plumes 
were  directed  a t   15- by  15-cm  tiles of  therma l  protective material a t  
various d is tances  and  angles; after the  tes ts ,  the  tiles w e r e  checked  for 
erosion  of  the   surfaces   and   edges.  P re s su re   and   tempera ture   were 
measured in the  rocket plumes, and  surface tempera tures  and  heating 
ra tes  were  measured  on 2 1  se lec ted  material  samples.  All da ta   and  
samp les  were sen t  to Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  for analysis. (AFSC 
Newsreview, July  75,  3 )  
0  NASA  awarded a  1-yr con trac t  to Boeing Co.  to s tudy  a proposed  Large 
Lift Vehicle (LLV) made  up  of  Space  Shu t t le  engines, fuel tanks,  and  
avionics.  Launched without t h e  Space  Shu t t le  Orbiter, t h e  LLV could 
carry   tons  of  freight  into  space,  or could  rocket  to  the  moon  with  a 
second stage attached.  I t  would  be  less expensive than  the  Sa turn  V 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
July 
because the avionics package could be retrieved in orbit and the twin 
boosters  were  recoverable.  In  a  1974 interview with  the Huntsville 
T ime s ,  John H.  Disher, NASA  Director for Advanced Programs, had 
said that no definite mission for the LLV was planned, but  that NASA 
was  looking  to  the  future.  (Casebolt, Huntsville  T ime s ,   12  Aug  74; 
NASA  Hq  Adv  Progs Off,  Fero,  interview,  10 Aug  75) 

155 

August 1975 

1  August:  The  Indian  Space  Research  Organization began  transmitting 
instructional  programs to  inexpensive ground receivers  in more than  
2400 isolated  villages  throu  hout  Ind ia ,  using NASA’s  A t s  6 Applica- 
tions  Technology  Sa te l l i teqaunched   30  May  1974.  As  par t   of  the  
1-yr  satellite  instructional  television  experiment  (SITE),  the   trans-  
missions would s t re s s  improved agricultural techn iques ,  family plan- 
ning  and  hygiene,  and  school  courses  per t inen t   to  Indian  villagers’ 
needs .   After  the   experiment, A t s  6  would  be  repositioned  over the  
western  hemisphere. 
During i ts  first year in operation, A t s  6 had transm i t ted  medical and 
educational  programs  to  remo te  communities in  Alaska,  t h e  Rocky 
Mountains,  and  Appalachia.  During  the   15-26  July  Apollo-Soyuz 
T e s t  Pro jec t  mission,  th e  satellite  had  helped  relay communications 
from  the   Apollo  spacecraf t   to  ground  stations,  increasing  coverage 
from  the   usual  17% to  55%  for  e a ch   orbit.  (NASA  Release  75-221; 
7  July  75;  Borders, NYT, 3 Aug  75,  10) 
NASA MOR  M-966-75-01, 
*  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wisc.),  a   critic  of  the   joint  U .S .-U .S .S .R .  
Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Pro jec t ,  repor ted  tha t  the  Soviet Union had  bugged 
the   conversations  of  U.S.  as tronau ts  and  technicians  at  the  Moscow 
space  cen te r  before th e  July s p a c e  flight. Using information received 
from  two  sources   and  confirmed  through  official  channe ls ,   Sen .  
Proxmire sa id  tha t  the  bugs were discovered while the  as tronau ts  and  
technicians were watching a  televised Soviet hockey game. Wanting a  
closer  view  of  the   game,  U.S.  as tronau t  Robert F.  Overmyer moved 
his cha ir  nearer  the  TV screen ,  caus ing  a wire leading from t h e  cha ir  
into the  floor t o  snap.  The  Wash ing ton  Pos t   quo ted  a spokesman for 
NASA as  confirming the  incident,  bu t  saying the re  was no evidence the  
wire “had  anything to do with  a listening device.”  (AP,  W  P o s t ,  2  Aug 
75; Av   W k ,  11 Aug  75,  17) 
Kennedy  Space   Cen ter   announced  award of  a   $5  137 000  con trac t   to 
Mayfair  Construction Co.  to  modify  the   Vehicle  Assembly Building 
(VAB)  for Space  Shu t t le  operations.  The  con trac t  provided for modifi- 
cations to High Bay 3’s extensible work platforms,  installation of  new 
checkout cells in High Bay 4,  and’modifications to the  nor th  door of the  
VAB transfer  aisle and related  suppor t  facilities. (KSC Release 160-75) 
2 August:  Landsa t   2 ,  launched  22  Jan .   1975, developed a noise  problem 
with  one  of  its  two  image  tape   recorders,  A v ia t ion   Week & Space 
Technology reported.  The   satellite’s  mission  was  not  in  danger  be- 
cause  the backup recorder  was functioning properly.  (Av  W k ,  l l  Aug 
75,  13) 
3 August:  Space   expend i tures   resu l ted   in  tangible  economic  benefits, 
according to  a   report,  “The   Economic  Impact  of  NASA  R&D  Spend- 
ing,”  being prepared for NASA by Chase  Econometric Associates, Inc., 
the  Ph i lad e lph ia   Inquirer  reported.  Using  methods  developed  for 
regular national  economic forecasts,  Chase  predicted  that,  if  NASA’s 
research  and development budget were increased  by $1  billion for the  
157 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

1975-84  period,  the U.S.  gross  national product  (GNP) would  swe l l   by 
$23 billion or  2%  over the normal  rate  of  growth.  Labor  productivity  in 
the  nonfarm areas  of  t h e  economy would  rise more  than  2% over the  
normal growth rate,  and  more than  one million jobs would be  created, 
reducing  the   unemployment  ra te   by  nearly  0.4% by  1984. 
According to Chase,  the  key  to NASA’S  domestic economic  impor- 
tance   was  in  the   agency’s  widespread  technological  advances  tha t  
benefited a wide range of  industries. Although the  technological ben- 
efits were  readily visible,  NASA’s  influence on  the  nation’s  economy 
was  more  subtle,  taking  about  5  yr  to  work  i ts   way  through  t h e  
system. (Text, NASA Final Rp t ,  CR  144351, April 76; Holland, P I n q ,  3 
Aug 75) 
@  Appointment of  Dr.  S. Ich t iaque  Rasool,  special ass is tan t  to the  NASA 
Deputy Associate Administrator, to b e  the Deputy Associate Adminis- 
tra tor  for Space  Science became effective. In  tha t  position Dr.  Rasool 
would b e  primary adviser to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Adminis- 
trator  for  Space   Science.  He   would  also  serve   a s   cha irman   of  the  
Space  Science Steering Committee, responsible for drawing skills a nd  
resources  of  the   nation’s  scientific  community  into NASA  programs. 
Dr.  Rasool had joined NASA  in January  1965 a s  senior research  scien- 
tist a t  the  Goddard Ins t i tu te  for Space  Studies; in 1971 he  was named 
Deputy Director for Planetary  Programs,  serving until 1974 when he  
became   special  ass is tan t   to  the   Deputy  Associate  Administrator. 
(NASA  anno,  22 Aug 75) 
3 August-6  November: Ar ie l  5, a U .S .-U .K .   cooperative satellite launched  
15 Oc t .  1974 to study galactic and extragalactic x-rays, de tec ted  weak 
cosmic x-ray  emissions from  the  constellation  Orion  on  3 Aug.  Th e  
emissions,  subsequently  confirmed  by  NASA’s Exp lorer   53  (SAS  3 
Small Astronomy Satellite launched  7 May  1975), steadily increased  
in   intensity  until  they were  five  times  grea ter  than   any observed  to 
date.  New  York  Times repor ter   Walter  Sullivan  quoted  Dr.  Terry  
Matilsky, Massachuse t ts  Ins t i tu te  of  Technology  scientist,  a s  saying 
tha t  when the  emissions were first observed “we  couldn’t  believe it.” 
Sas   3-operated 
by  Goddard  Space   Flight  Center-was 
ab le   to 
pinpoint  t h e   location  of  t h e   emissions  to  within  1  o r   2  arc-min. 
With  this  clue  scientists  hoped  to  explain  the   phenomenon  using 
ground-based  optical and  radio telescopes.  Observataries  around the  
world  had  been   a ler ted  and  were  trying to  pinpoint  t h e  source. 
The  Ph i lad e lph ia  Inquirer  reported  MIT’S  Dr.  Sau l  A.  Rappaport 
a s   specu la t ing   tha t   the   emissions  probably  had  been   caused   by 
masses   of  material falling from  a  large  s t a r  into  an  extremely den se  
neutron  s ta r  or black hole.  Th e  falling ma t ter  would  hea t  up enough 
to  emit burs ts   of  x-rays  and  visible  light. 
Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, 
reported 6 Nov. to t h e  House  Committee on Sc ience  a nd  Technology’s 
Subcommittee  on   Sc ience   and   Applications  tha t   the  Explorer  53 
observa t ions   had   identified  t h e   op t ica l   coun terpar t   of  t h e   x-ray 
emissions as a faint, otherwise normal-looking s ta r  that had brightened 
100  t imes   over  previous  observations.  Dr.  H inners   repea ted   Dr. 
Rappaport’s theory and  told the  subcommittee that, because  a similar 
brightening  of  this  s t a r   had  been  observed  in  1917,  it  was  being 
classified  a s   a  recurren t   nova.  (1977  NASA  authorization  hearing 
transcr ip ts ,   vol  1,  par t   1;  Sullivan, W T ,  17  Aug  75,  21; AP ,   P Inq ,  
31  Aug 75) 

158 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 
4  August:  NASA  announced  completion of  a   program  conducted  by  Je t  
Propulsion Laboratory to measure the  cons t i tuen t  gases of  the  strato- 
sphere   to  help  de term ine   the   effects on  the  earth‘s  ozone  layer  of 
gases   released  from  aerosol  spray  cans.  Using  a   Fourier  interfer- 
ome ter  onboard a  U-2  aircraft,  JPL  scientists  had measured  the dis- 
tribution of hydrogen  chloride molecules  at a l t i tudes  between 10 and  
21 km during 6 separa te  flights in May.  Hydrogen chloride-produced 
by  the  breakdown of  aerosol gas molecules in  the  upper  atmosphere 
and released  naturally, in small amounts, from the  ocean surface  and  
volcanic eruptions-was  one  of  several t race  gases  thought to play  a  
major role in controlling the  equilibrium of  the  protective ozone layer. 
JPL  had found t race s  of  the  chloride beginning at 15 km,  and  reaching 
a  maximum of  almost 1 par t  pe r  billion at 20 km.  Although the results 
did not  represen t   a  d irec t  effect  of  aerosol gas,  or  Freons,  on strato- 
spher ic   ozone,  JPL  scientists  recommended  continuing  measure- 
men ts   to  de tec t   any  fu ture  buildup. 
The   ozone measurements,  par t   of  NASA’s S tra tospher ic  Research  
Program,  had  begun  when  a  JPL-designed  ins trumen t  was  flown  on 
the   Anglo -French   Concorde  superson ic   transpor t   in  1973.  Data 
collected  on  these   flights included the  first detection  of  nitric  oxide, 
along with new information on the  geographic and vertical distribution 
of  wa ter ,   ca rbon   monoxide,  ca rbon   dioxide,  and   me thane ,   and  
furnished  a  base  for  the   1975  study.  (NASA  Release  75-223;  Miles, 
LA  Times, 21  Aug 75) 
0  The Vertical Motion  Simulator (ms), an aeronau t ica l  facility designed 
to  reproduce  up-and-down  and  sideways motions  of  aircraft  during 
takeoff  and landing, was being built a t  Ames Research  Center,  NASA 
announced. Costing about $3.5 million, the VMS  would move a s  much 
a s  18 m  in height  and 12 m  sideways,  accurately  simulating flare  and 
touchdown.  Prac t ice   in  the   simulator  would  enab le   pilots  to  cope 
be t ter   with  the   complexities  of  flying  sophisticated  aircraft  such  a s  
short  takeoff  and  landing  (STOL)  and  vertical  takeoff  and  landing 
(VTQL)  types.  (NASA  Release  75 -224) 
* Michael Collins, Director of  the   Smithsonian Institution’s National Air 
and  Space  Museum,  and  Santiago Astrain,  Secre tary  General of  the  
In terna t iona l  Telecommunications Satellite Organization,  signed  an 
agreement to  transfer  three   early  Intelsat  communications satellites 
to  th e  Museum  a s  par t   of  i ts   1976 inaugural  display.  INTELSAT  was 
providing  the museum with  a  backup model of  the   INTELSAT’S Early 
Bird 1 ,  launched 6 Apr.  1965 a s  the first commercial comsat. A back- 
up   model  of  the   second-generation  Intelsat  II  and  an  engineering 
model of  third-generation  Intelsat  I11 satellites would also be sen t  for 
display. Fourth-generation  satellites would not be represented because 
they were  too  large  for display. 
The  new Air  and Space  Museum, located in Washington, D.C., was 
schedu led  to open 4 July  1976.  (INTELSAT Release  75-9) 
Wes tar  communications satellites would  soon be  used  for communica- 
tions  to  and   from  offshore  oil  drilling  platforms  and   exploratory 
vessels  in  waters  ad jacen t   to  the   continental  U .S . ,   Western  Union 
Telegraph  Co.  announced.  The  offshore  facilities  previously  had 
depended   for  communication  on  microwave  relay  ne tworks   and  
cabling,  methods  tha t   had  become  increasingly  expensive  and  im- 
prac t ica l  a s  the   facilities  were moved  fa r the r  and  far ther  off  shore. 
(Westar news re lease ,   4 Aug  75) 
159 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

0  “Technology will  be  available  for manned  €lights  well  before  the   year  
2000, allowing even be t te r  research  of  the  planet’s  [Mars’]  composi- 
tion,”  Dr.  George  Sand s ,   a s soc ia te   Viking  P ro jec t   sc ien t i s t   at 
Langley  Research  Cen ter ,   s ta ted   in  an  interview  with  the   Newport 
News  T imes  H e r a ld .   “The   Viking  missions  [scheduled  for  August 
launch]  a t e  just  the  prelude of  things to come.” Dr.  Sands  continued, 
“The   results  of  [the]  probe  to Mars  this  month will be   very  signifi- 
can t   for  the   fu ture   of  planetary  exploration  and   additional  t r ip s   to 
Mars.”  (Biggins, T ime s  He ra ld ,   4 Aug  75) 
0  Marshall Space  Flight Cen te r  was  seek ing  industry  proposals  for pro- 
curemen t  of  parallel  definition s tud ies  of  the   atmospheric, magneto- 
spheric,  and  plasmas  in  space   (AMPS)  payload,  a   reusab le   re sea rch  
facility to  be  integrated  with Spacelab.  The  proposed 12-mo s tud ies  
were  to  define  an   overall  AMPS  program  with  spec ia l  emphas is   on  
ground-  and  flight-support  sys tems   and   subsystems,  systems  engi- 
neering and integration, and  groundorb i ta l  opera t ions  with the  Space  
Shu t t le  and  Spacelab. 
AMPs,  a   single  laboratory  system  flown  with  the   Space   Shu t t le ,  
would perform exper imen ts  and  observations in atmospheric science, 
magnetospheric physics, and  plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75 -172) 
4 -6   August:  The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,  at 
its  1975  aircraft  systems  and  technology  meeting  in  Los  Angeles, 
Calif.,  presented  the  following aerospace awards. 

Award 

Aircraft Design 

Octave Chanute 

R e c i p i e n t  
(a f f i l ia t ion )  

Walter E.  Fellers 
(Northrop Corp.) 

Alan L.  Bean 
Jack  R .   Lousma 
Dr. Owen K .   Garriott 
(NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) 

38th  Annual Wright 
Brothers Lecture 

Henri Ziegler 
(Airbus, France) 

Purpose 

For 30  yr of outstanding achieve- 
ment  in  design and development of 
fighter aircraft to meet  rapidly 
changing requirements 
For  outstanding contrihutions to 
manned space flight  and scientific 
research. Using the most 
sophisticated instruments ever 
flown  m space,  crew performed 
scores of  scientific  experiments 
and  observations vastly expanding 
man’s knowledge and enhancing 
quality of  life on earth 
Topic: International Cooperation 
in Aerospace Projects: cooperation 
hetween European  industries and 
between Europe and United States 

( A I M  Release,  22 July  75) 
5  Augu s t :   The   Sa tu rn  IB,  used  to  launch   th ree   U.S.  Apollo-Soyuz  T e s t  
Pro jec t   as tronau ts  into  space  [see  15-24  July],  had   exper ienced  no 
unscheduled  holds whatever  during countdown, making i t   the most 
perfec t  launch   of  the   Sa tu rn  series,  Ellery B.  May,  manager  of  the  
Sa tu rn   Program  Office  at  the   Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter ,   said. 
Sa tu rn  210, manufactured  in  1967, was  10th of  the  IB series and  had  
the  oldest engine used .  All Sa tu rn  launches  had  been  successful  and 
The  ASTP   mission  marked  the   end   of T t  e  Sa tu rn   series,  bu t   its 
had  me t  their objectives; although some had anomalies, such  a s  leak s  
es were ever necessary. 
or  faulty wiring, no major configuration c h a  
impac t  on  technology would  continue.  “Space   Shu t t le  main engines 
(Ssm) a re   an  outgrowth of  technology  from  Sa tu rn   engines,”  May 
explained. The  major difference between the  two was tha t  the  Shu t t le  
160 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 

must  have much  higher  pressure   systems t h a n  ever before  required 
and  must  be   reusable.  (MSFC  Release  75-174) 
e  The wingless unpowered X-24B  lifting body  had made its first  landing 
on  a concrete  runway  at Edwards,  Calif.,  to  demonstrate  maneuver 
and  safe landing of  an  unpowered  reentry  vehicle on  a conventional 
runway. After launch from a B  -52  aircraft flying a t  14  000 m,  tes t  pilot 
project,  had ignited a small rocket engine, prope P ling t h e  X-24B  to  a 
John  N.  Manke,  chief  Flight  Research  Cen ter   go t   for  the   X-24B 
speed of  1381 km per hr and  altitude of  18 300 m.  Manke then shut off 
the   engine  and  glided  to  a  perfect  300-kph  landing  on  the   4600-m 
runway. 
Th e   11.3-m-long X-24B  was  a part of  a joint NASA-Air  Force  pro- 
gram to study transonic flight characteristics  and landing ability of  a 
vehicle  designed  for  hypersonic  speeds.  (FRC  Release  24-75;  LA  
T ime s ,  6 Aug  75) 
e  Sen.  John  Tunney  (D-Calif.)  defended  the   nation’s  space   program 
during  a  tour  of  Space  Shuttle  facilities  at  Rockwell  International 
Corp.  in Downey, Calif.  According to  Sen.  Tunney,  the  most  impor- 
tan t  justification for the  space  program was to provide new technology 
in weather mapping  and control, to help increase  the  amount of  land 
available for food production, and to locate additional s tocks  of natural 
resources  in this country.  Sen. Tunney stated, “I quite frankly think 
without  a  space   program.  . .mankind  is  going  to  have  a rendezvous 
with destiny which would be catastrophic.  . . .” But with this kind of 
program, a world food supply and adequate resources can “keep  this 
country  going indefinitely. ” (Pa sadena  S ta r  News ,   6 Aug  75) 
An  Ames  Research  Center  wind  tunne l  used  primarily  for testing  the  
Space  Shuttle had  been  shu t  down  after a s tee l  flange failed,  setting 
off  a high-powered  explosion of  compressed gas. The  blast  sca t tered  
hundreds  of  hot  aluminum  oxide  pebbles  over  a wide  area,  causing 
several fires but  no  serious injuries.  Space  Shuttle  testing had  been 
postponed  until  the   facility,  which  generated  pressures  up  to  126 
kg/cm2 (1800  psi) in  testing models  at  14 times  the   speed  of  sound, 
could  be  declared  operational  again.  An  investigation  board  was 
formed to determine the  cause  of the accident and recommend actions 
to prevent recurrence.  (ARC As trogram ,  14 Aug 7.51;  ARC Experimen- 
tal Fluid Dynamics Br,  interview, 27 June  77;  UPI,  W Po s t ,   7 Aug 75, 
A17) 
0  Two Boeing Co.  scientists had proposed construction of  a 64-million-kg 
solar power satellite, with 57 s q  km of  mirrors, to collect and concen- 
tra te   solar  energy,  together  with  thermal  engines  to  convert  solar 
power  into  electricity,  the   Ch r i s t ian   Science  Mon i tor   reported.  A 
microwave  transmission  system  would  convert  the   electricity  to  a 
form suitable for transmission  to earth. CSM quoted Boeing as saying 
tha t  within 2 decades   “Powersat”  could provide  up  to  10 000 mw  of 
useful power, twice t h e  hydroelectric capacity of  Grand Coulee Dam. 
(AP,  C SM ,  6 Aug 75,  7) 
Kennedy Space Cen ter  announced award of a n  $18 749 million con trac t  
to Blount Brothers Construction Co. for modification of Launch Com- 
plex 39 Pad  A,  to accommodate  all early Space  Shu t t le  missions.  The  
complex  had  been   the   s i te   of  all but  one  of  the   historic  Sa turn   V 
launches;  Pad   B,  from  which  the   Skylab  Orbital  Workshop  was 
launched, would be  modified la ter .  Th e  contract included conversion 
of  the  mobile launcher  for Shu t t le  operations.  (KSC  Release  164-75) 

161 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

7 August:  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   announced  selection of  United 
Technologies Corp.  for negotiation of  a fiied-price  contract of  $1.775 
million for solid-propellant booster separation motors (BSM) for use on 
the  first 6 development  flights  in  the   Space  Shuttle  program,  begin- 
ning in  1979. The  BSM s  would separa te  the  two reusable  solid rocket 
boosters  ( S m h a c h  SRB  requiring eight BSMs,  four forward and four 
aft-approximately  110 sec   after  launch.  (MSFC  Release  75- 175) 
* European  Space  Agency  announced  a  postponement  in  the   launch  of 
COS -B ,   scheduled  for  a  6  Aug.  6:56 pm  PDT  launch  from  Western 
T e s t  Range,  because of  hydraulic-valve failure in a telemetry aircraft 
needed  to  monitor  third-stage  ignition  of  the   launch   vehicle.  Th e  
launch had been  rescheduled  to 8 Aug.  a t  6:48 pm PDT.  COS-B  would 
be ESA’S  first satellite launch  since the  new agency’s establishment on 
30 May.  (ESA  Release,  7 Aug  75) 
Scientists were  calling for names for the  thousands  of  mountains,  cra- 
ters ,   and  chasms  being  found  on  planets  fas ter   than  they  could  be 
named,  the   Ch r i s t ian   Science  Mon i tor   reported.  Th e   two  Viking 
spacecraft scheduled to reach  Mars in 1976 and the  two Soviet Venera 
spacecraft  scheduled  to  approach Venus  in October would  no  doubt 
uncover  a host of  new  unnamed  features.  Names  for known fea tures  
on Venus, Mars, and the  moon would be officially chosen a t  the  August 
1976 meeting  of  the   International  Astronomical  Union  (IAU),  world 
clearinghouse  for  solar-system  nomenclature.  (Jones,  CSM,  7 Aug 
75, 2) 
8 August:  NASA  launched  C o s B   scientific  satellite  for  the   European 
Space Agency  at 3:48 pm  PDT  from Western  T e s t  Range on  a three- 
stage  thrust-augmented  Thor-Delta  booster.  Launch  had  been  de- 
layed  for  2  days  because  a  telemetry  aircraft  was  grounded  with 
hydraulic-valve failure. T h e  satellite en tered  the planned highly ellip- 
tical  polar  orbit  with  a  99 886-km  apogee,  344-km  perigee,  36.7-hr 
period, and 90.13” inclination. NASA’s objective for the  launch was to 
place  Cos-B  into  a  highly  elliptical  near-polar  orbit  with  sufficient 
accuracy to allow the  satellite to conduct i ts  planned  scientific exper- 
iments. 
Purpose  of  the Cos-B mission was to  study extraterrestrial  gamma 
radiation in the energy range 25 mev to  1 gev in order to establish the  
intensity of  the   average  gamma-ray  flux; examine  large-scale  aniso- 
tropy of  the  radiation  over angular regions  corresponding  to  galactic 
features; study quasars, x-ray,  and radio sources of small angular size 
in  supernova remnan ts ;   measure  energy  spec tra   of  various galactic 
radiations;  and study time variations of  radiation  from pulsars,  x-ray, 
and  radio  sources. 
On  11 August,  ground controllers sen t  low-voltage commands  from 
ESA’S  space  operations  cen ter   (ESOC)  in West  Germany to  check out 
spacecraft and experiment performance.  After a second switch-on a t  
high  voltage,  a  ser ies   of  inflight tes ts   fur ther   validated  all onboard 
systems and experiment  performance.  On 15 Aug.  a complete review 
of  spacecraft  operational  s ta tus   showed  all  air  and   ground  systems 
were operating normally; by 19 Aug.,  the  first da ta  had been returned 
to  ear th .  
Cos-By first satellite launched  for the  newly organized ESA,  was the  
eighth developed by ESA’s  predecessor, the  European Space Research 
Organization  [see 30-31 May].  Under  the  direction  of  the  European 

162 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
August 
Space Research and  Technology Cen ter  (ESmC) and prime contractor 
Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm  GmbH, C o s B  had been designed and 
built by organizations in 7 of the  1OESA member countries. Th e  single 
experiment-a  115-kg spark  chamber-had  been assembled from f ive  
primary and  two subsidiary experiment units supplied by  six institutes 
in four European countries.  After separating from the  launch vehicle, 
C o s B  transmitted da ta  in real time to  ground stations of  the  European 
Space Tracking Network with cen tra l  control a t  the  European  Space  
Research Operations Cen ter   in West  Germany. 
For NASA,  Goddard Space  Flight Center  had  the   responsibility for 
the  Thor-Delta  launch  vehicle  under  the   direction  of  the   Office  of 
Space  Science. GSFC  also had  responsibility for limited tracking sup- 
port.  (NASA  MOR  S-492-301-75-01, 
22 July  75,  10 Sept.  75; NASA 
Release  75-214;  Releases  7-19  Aug  75) 
Science  magazine  reported  tha t   U.S.  scientists  had  reprogrammed 
NASA’s Land sa t   1  ear th   resources  satellite  (formerly called Er ts   1, 
launched 23 July  1972) to photograph large areas  of  the  Soviet Union, 
although  not  specifically reques ted   to  do  so by  Soviet officials. The  
magazine  reported  tha t   the   in ten t   of  the  u.S. scientists  was  to  aid 
Soviet  scientists,  after  discussions  a t   a  series of  1972 joint  working 
group m e e t i n g s 4 o n v e n e d  for geological studies of  comparable land 
sites in each country-indicated 
tha t  the Soviets had nothing available 
to them equivalent to this kind of satellite imagery. Because the  Soviet 
government  was  sensitive  about  u.S.  satellites  flying  over  the  
U .S .S .R . ,   the   Soviet  scientists  who  were  to  benefit  had  never  been 
directly  informed  about  the   reprogramming  decision.  Resulting  im- 
ages had never been directly handed  over to the  Soviet scientists les t  
doing so should violate the 1972 joint space  agreement signed by  both 
countries. Science  quoted Goddard Space  Flight Center’s Dr. WiUiam 
Nordberg,  scientist  responsible  for  the   reprogramming,  as   saying, 
“They  knew where  they could buy them.” Science  also reported tha t  
the  Soviet  scientists  had  ordered  the  Landsat  images  from  the  U.S. 
Geological  Survey’s  Sioux  Falls  distribution  cen ter .   Dr.  Nordberg 
denied  tha t   any  of  the   reprogrammed  imagery  had  been  done  for 
b L  economic espionage.”  (Sc ience ,  8 Aug  75,  444-2) 
*  Photographs  from Landsa t   1  (launched  23  July  1972 as Er ts   1 ,  Ear th  
Resources Technology Satellite) indicated tha t  a continental collision 
had  been  in  progress  between  India  and  Eurasia,  pushing  China 
eastward  at the  ra te  of  2.54 centimeters  a year, Massachusetts  Insti- 
tu te   of  Technology  scientists  reported  in  Science.  This  eastward 
m o v em e n t   c o u l d   a c c o u n t   f o r   C h i n a ’ s   u n u s u a l   p a t t e r n   of 
earthquakes-widespread 
ins tead  of  along narrow fault lines, the MIT 
geologists suggested.  Despite  the  curren t  theory  that  the Indian sub- 
continent was sliding under Eurasia,  the  MIT scientists had concluded 
tha t  rigid  Indian plates of  rock were  causing China to  be pushed  into 
the  Pacific.  (Molnar et a l . ,  Sc ience ,  8 Aug 75,419-425;  NYT ,  10 Aug 
75,  49) 
10 August:  During a panel discussion a t  a 4-day meeting of the  Astronomi- 
ca l  Association  of  Northern  California,  scientists  rejected  the   idea 
that  inhabitants  of  other  planets  would  send   manned  spacecraft  or 
unidentified  flying  objects  to  establish  contact  with  ear th .   Such   a 
venture would  require  enormous  expenditures of  energy  and  funds. 
The  Wash ing ton  S ta r   quoted  Ames  Research  Cen ter   scientist John 
Billingham  a s   saying,  “The  most  logical way  to  establish  contact  is 

163 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

radio  communication.”  Billingham  was  devoting 2  yr to  the   sub jec t  
of  intelligent ex tra terres tr ia l  life, and  how  to reach  it if  it existed.  He 
sa id  that several persons around t h e  globe had been constantly trying 
to make radio con tac t  with outer space  by aiming a radio telescope at a 
su i tab le  s tar ,  hoping tha t  a n  inhabited planet might b e  orbiting.  (UPI, 
W  S t a r ,  11 Aug 75,  A16) 
0  Contrary  to   the   impression  of  peaceful  cooperation  crea ted   by  t h e  
U.S.-U.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project  docking  mission  [see 
15 -26  July],  both countries had increasingly emphasized the  military 
potential of  manned space  flight,  the  Ph i lade lph ia   Inquirer reported 
the  Cen te r  for Defense Information a s  saying.  Th e  Cen ter ,   a private 
organization  critical  of  defense  spending,  charged  tha t   the   1967 
United  Nations  trea ty  which  reserved  ou ter   space  for peaceful  uses  
had  not  prevented  e i ther   country  from  exploiting  space   for  mili- 
tary purposes. Although  t h e  Pentagon had listed i t s  space  spending a t  
$2.25  billion, it had acknowledged the  existence of  ano ther  $667 mil- 
lion in Air Force “miscellaneous” reques ts  for secre t  space  programs. 
The  Cen ter  said tha t ,  although the  Soviet Union’s space  program was 
15 yrs  behind  t h e  U.S.,  frequen t   launches   indicated  tha t   they  were  
attempting to  ca tch  up.  Th e  Cen ter  concluded  that,  contrary  to  the  
spirit of  the  outer  space  treaty,  space   technology  and   systems were 
being  developed  tha t   had  the  potential  for  new  confrontations  be- 
tween  the   superpowers.  (UPI, P   Znq,  10  Aug  75) 
0  Launch  of  the  Viking-A  spacecraf t  to Mars was postponed  because of 
a faulty thrust-vector control valve found in  the  solid booster  stage of 
the  Titan-Centaur launch  vehicle during countdown tes ts .  The  launch  
team   decided  to  remove  and   replace  t h e   va lve ,   rescheduling  the  
launch  for 14  Aug.  (Viking S ta tus  Bulletin No  10 ,20  Aug 75; O’Toole, 
W  Po s t ,   12 Aug  75; McElheny, NYT,  12 Aug 75) 
0  Dr.  Harrison H.  Schmitt, Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs 
since May  1974,  would  resign  effective  30 August.  Previously,  Dr. 
Schmitt had been chief of  the  Astronaut Office,  Science and  Applica- 
tions Directorate,  a t  Johnson  Space  Cen ter .   Selected  a s  a  scientist- 
astronaut  by  NASA   in  1965,  he   had  been   the   lunar   module  pilot  on 
Apo l lo   1 7  (7-19  Dec.  1972) and  the  only civilian scientist  to walk on  
t h e  moon. Dr.  Schmitt planned to re turn  to his home s ta te  of  N .  Mex. 
to  pursue  geological  consulting  and  personal  activities.  (NASA  anno, 
11 Aug  75) 
We s ta r   I,  first  US.  domestic  commercial  communications  satellite 
(launched  by NASA  for Wes tern  Union Te legraph  Co.  13 April  1974), 
had transmitted its f irs t  live sports event-the  Milwaukee Brewers vs .  
the  48 contiguous  s ta tes ,   wu 
Texas  Rangers baseball  game-within 
announced. WU Vice P re s iden t  Dow C. Pruitt noted tha t  the low-cost 
transmission reflected “ the  power of technology to change basic living 
patterns.”  (Westar News, 11 Aug  75) 
12  August:  In  the   genera l   purpose  laboratory  (GPL)  at  Marshall  Space  
Flight  Center,  investigators  from  MSFC  and   Johnson  Space   Cen te r  
were  conducting experiments  in  high-energy  cosmic-ray  astronomy, 
superfluid  helium,  optical  x-ray  astronomy,  and   life  sciences.  T h e  
objective  of  t h e   experiments,  designated  concept  verification  te s t  
(CVT)  5,  was  to  verify  operational and  integration concep ts  for  the ir  
applicability to Spacelab, the reusable manned space  laboratory being 
built  by  the   European  Space   Agency  a s   a  payload  for  the   Space  
Shu t t le .  

164 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 
The purpose of  the  high-energy astronomy experiment was to dem- 
ons tra te   the  use   of  minicomputers  for  experiment  operation,  con- 
trol,  and  da ta  management,  a nd  the   real-time  interaction of  payload 
specialists with experiment operations.  Th e  superfluid helium exper- 
iment  examined  charac ter is t ics  of  helium  droplets  a t   tempera tures  
near   2.2  K (-512T),  which  would  help  in  developing  cryogenic 
techniques  for  use  in  Spacelab.  The  optical astronomy  experiment, 
which demonstrated  remote  experiment  operation  by  obtaining da ta  
from a Ferson 40.6-cm  telescope 9.2 kilometers away, gave practice in 
investigator-experiment interaction and helped in developing comput- 
e r  control  techniques,  display  requirements  for  telescope  operation 
and da ta  management,  and astronomy training requirements for crew 
members.  The   four  life-sciences  experiments  included  s tud ies   of 
sporophore  formation,  the   vestibular  function,  a  clinical  diagnostic 
system,  and  muscle-like  contractile  protein.  Investigators  also  par- 
ticipated  in  an  experiment  to  demonstrate  the   use  of  a computer  in 
real-time  mission planning,  scheduling,  and  applications. 
By  involving investigators  in  the  CVT  simulations,  NASA  would  be 
able  to  plan  the   most  cost-effective  use  of  Spacelab.  (MSFC  Release 
75 - 178) 
* The  development of  space  law, which had  begun  about  the  time of  the  
launch  of  U.S.S.R.’s  Spu tn ik   1 in  1957, was  a  unique  process.  “The 
problems are  both literally and symbolically out of  this world,” NASA 
General  Counsel  Neil  S.  Hosenball  said  in  an  interview  with  the  
Orlando  Sentinel  S t a r .   Does  any  s ta te   have  the   right  to  claim  the  
natural resources  of  celestial bodies? Were earth‘s  criminal and civil 
laws  applicable  in  space?   What  was  the   difference  between 
establishing  a  planetary  base   and  planting  a  nation’s  flag?  Which 
court would  rule  on  extraterrestrial  squabbles? These  were  some of 
the   questions  lawyers  and  politicians would  have  to  consider  in  the  
space  age. Few preceden ts  existed, and no judge had yet heard a c a s e  
in a legal dispute originating outside the  earth‘s atmosphere.  In fac t ,  a 
world  court,  recognized  by  all major  powers,  did  not  exist. 
In   1962, a United  Nations  ad  hoc  committee  on  peaceful  uses  of 
ou ter  space had developed principles la ter  incorporated into the  1967 
Ou ter  Space  Treaty. These  included  a ban against military activity in 
outer  space and  against  any nation’s claiming a section of  space  or  a 
planet  a s  its own. O ther  trea t ies  dealt with specific points s u c h  a s  the 
rescue  of  astronauts  and  the   registration  of  spacecraft  and  space  
stations.  Hosenball  s tressed   that  most  char ters   and  trea t ies   were 
drawn up ahead of  time in anticipation of  problems likely to occur a s  
space  exploration expanded.  The  Sentinel quoted G.  P. Zhukov, chief 
legal  counsel  of  the   U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences,  a s   saying  tha t  
de ten te   between  the   U.S.  and  U.S.S.R.  had  been  assisted  by  the  
success   of  “legal  regulation  in  space.  . . . Man’s  foot  had  not  yet 
s tepped  on  the   surface  of- the  moon  and we  had  already  formulated 
what man could and could not do on the  moon.  T h e  law was ahead of 
science.”  (Orlando Sentinel  S ta r ,   12 Aug  75) 
9  NASA commemorated t h e  15th anniversary of  the  12 Aug.  1960 launch of 
Echo  1, world’s  first  communications  satellite.  Visible  to  millions 
around  the   world,  the   30-m  gas-inflated  mylar  (0.0013-cm  thick 
aluminum-coated plastic) balloon served a s  a passive radio reflector in 
space,  bouncing  signals  from one  point on  ear th   to  another.  I t s  first 
transmission  sen t   the   recorded  voice  of  Pres iden t  Eisenhower  from 
165 

August 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Goldstone,  Calif.,  to  Holmdel,  N.J.;  during  its first year   in  orbit,  it 
served  in  approximately  150 experiments,  including  voice,  teletype 
and  facsimile communications. Echo  1 ’ s   large size,  small mass,  and  
ex treme  sensitivity to solar radiation pressures  and  aerodynamic drag  
helped  scientists  confirm  orbital behavior  theory. 
Despite i ts  original 1-yr life expectancy, Echo 1  remained in orbit for  
nearly  8  yr  until,  leaking  gas   through  i ts   sk in   bombarded  by 
meteorites,  it reen tered  t h e  atmosphere and  burned up  23 May  1968. 
(NASA  Releases  61-177,  75-217;  A&A  68,  23 May) 
13 August:  Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun-German-born 
rocketry pioneer  and  
former  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   Director  and   NASA  Deputy 
Associate Administrator-had 
undergone successfu l  surgery a t  Johns 
Hopkins University  Hospital in Baltimore for removal of  a malignant 
tumor,  t h e  Wash ing ton  Pos t   reported.  (AP,  W Po s t ,   13 Aug  75) 
The  launch  of Viking A had been postponed for the  second  time [see  11 
Aug.]  when Jet Propulsion Laboratory technicians discovered tha t  t h e  
batteries had dropped from the ir  normal charge  of  37 volts to 9 volts. 
The   batteries  had  been  drained  because   a  motorized  rotary  switch 
tha t   should  have  remained  off  until  7  min  before  launch   had 
accidentally turned  on. Th e  dangerously low voltage decided officials 
to remove the  en t ire  spacecraf t  from t h e  launch  vehicle  and  re turn  it 
to  the   spacecraft  assembly  and   encapsulation  facility  for  trouble- 
shooting.  A t   the   same   time,  the   Viking-B  spacecraft,  in  a  planned 
holding  mode  before mating with i t s  launch  vehicle, would be moved 
to the  launch  complex to rep lace  i ts  ailing sistercraft and  become t h e  
Viking-A mission.  The  launch  had been rescheduled for 20 Aug.,  with 
the  launch  window opening a t  5:22 pm.  (Viking S ta tu s  Bulletin No 10, 
20 Aug 75; NASA Audio News, 14 Aug 75; O’Toole, W P o s t ,  14 Aug 75, 
A23; McElheny, NYT ,   14 Aug 75) 
Pau l  B.  Price and Dr. Edward 
14 August:  A  team of  four physicists-Dr. 
K .  Sh irk  of  the  Univ.  of  Calif.,  and Dr.  Weyman A.  Osborne and Dr. 
Lawrence   S.  Pinsky  of  t h e   Univ.  of  Houston-reported 
finding 
evidence of  a particle with only one  magnetic  pole.  Th e  discovery of 
the  monopole,  if  confirmed,  could  have  a major  impact  on  physics, 
with  practical  applications  such   a s   new  medical  therapies,  new 
sources   of  energy,  extremely  small  and   efficient  motors  and  
generators, and new particle accelerators of much  higher energy than  
any yet  built. 
The  monopole,  represen t ing  t h e  basic  indivisible unit  of  magnet- 
ism, would exist in two forms of  opposite polarity, the  north pole  and  
the  sou th  pole. Th is  would  be  analogous to  the  basic electric charge, 
the  electron, which existed in  the  positive  and  negative charges,  the  
proton and  electron. Existence of  the  monopole had been predicted in  
1931 by  Pau l  Dirac,  Fla.  S ta te  Univ.  professor. 
The   four  physicists  de tec ted   tracks   of  the   particle  tha t   had  ap- 
parently pene tra ted  a  sandwich of more than  33 layers of  plastic  and  
emulsion  photographic  film  suspended   from  a  balloon  floating  at 
39 600 m.  (Sullivan, NYT,  15 Aug  75,  1; AP ,   B Sun ,   15 Aug  75,  A3; 
Joffee,  W Po s t ,   15 Aug 75,  B1) 
0  U.S.  intelligence  repor ts   indicated  tha t   t h e   Soviet  Union  had  fired  22 
missiles  and  orbited  9  satellites  in July,  making  it  one  of  the   most 
active months in Soviet space  history, the  Baltimore Sun reported.  In  
an  impressive display on 2 July,  the  Soviets fired 11 ballistic missiles 

166 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
August 
from  four  different  sites  within  an hour,  launched   eight  SSN-6 
submarine-based  rockets  a t  &see  intervals,  and  launched   an SS-7, 
SS-8,  and  SS-11  all within  2 min.  O ther   tests  included  submar ine  
missile launchings by  nor thern  and  fa r  ea s te rn  fleets,  medium-  and  
intermediate-range missile firings from Kapustin Yar, and  a te s t  fl’  h t  
of  t h e   new  SS-17   missile  which  could  carry   four  warheads.  ?he 
month’s  only  failure  was  t h e   malfunction  of  t h e   second  s tage   of  a 
ss-19   missile,  a  vehicle  believed  to  be   capab le   of  delivering  six 
nuclear  warheads  to  separa te   targets  over ranges  of  9260 km. 
Th e   nine  satellite  launches   included  six  Cosmos  satellites,  a 
Molniya communications satellite, a Meteor meteorological satellite, 
and  the  manned Soyuz 19,  the  Soviet  spacecraf t  participating in  the  
joint  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project.  (Corddry, B Sun, 14  Aug 75, A2) 
The   first  10   automatic  landings  of  a  powered-lift  short-takeoff-and- 
landing  (STOL)  aircraft  equipped  with  a  STOLAND  automatic  flight- 
control  system  had  been  completed  by  Ames  Research   Cen ter  
personnel a t  the  Naval Auxiliary Landing Field in Calif. The  STOLAND 
system,  a versatile onboard digital computer,  provided  the  pilot with 
navigation,  guidance,  and   control information.  Automatic  controls, 
including  control  of  the   aircraft’s  lift  with  automatic  flaps  and  
augmenter  nozzles,  permitted  s teeper   climbouts,  approaches,  and 
landings, offering potential relief  for  airport  traffic  congestion.  Half 
the   aircraft’s  lift was  provided by  engine thrus t ,   permitting  flight  att 
much   lower  speed s  than   conventional  aircraft. 
The  STOLAND  system was developed by  Sperry  Flight  Systems for 
use in the  joint NASA-Dept.  of Transportation operating experiments 
program and  t h e  augmentor-wing handling qualities and  flight-control 
programs.  (NASA  Release 75-226) 
15 August:  Flight  Research  Cen ter   pilot E inar  Enevoldson,  in  a  ground- 
based  ins trumen ted   cockpit,  guided  the   remotely  piloted  research  
vehicle  (RPRV)   to  i ts  first unpowered  landing,  at FRC.  Following  air- 
launch   from  a  B-52  aircraft  flying  at  14.6  km ,   the   7.3-ti  three- 
eighths-scale  vehicle  performed  maneuvers  to  measure  control 
effectiveness  during  spinning  flight.  The   sp in   was  continued  until 
4.6-km  altitude  when  Enevoldson  deployed  the   landing  geav  and  
performed  a  ser ies  of  stability  and  control maneuvers.  He  initiated 
final approach a t  1 5 2 4m  altitude. The  RPRVlanded on the  d ry  lakebed 
using  small  s tee l   sk ids   individually  mounted  on   t h e   end s   of  th ree  
conventional  automobile  shock  absorbers  installed  inside  the   air- 
craft’s  fuselage. 
Th e  RPRV  had been  developed by FRC to provide a more economical 
and  far  less  hazardous means  of  flight-testing new  vehicles.  Earlier 
versions of  the  RPRV  had been recovered  in midair using a parachu te  
and  helicopter.  (FRC  Release 26-75;  FRC  Pro j  Off, Rezek, interview, 
12  Sep t  75) 
0  Kennedy  Space   Cen te r   deactivated  its  hyperbaric  decompression 
chamber  after 6 y r  of  operation. The  chamber  had  never been used for 
save the  lives of  as tronau ts  in the  event of a 
i t s  intended purpose-to 
malfunction  during atmospheric  chamber  tests-but 
had  trea ted   12 
local civilian divers for the  bends ,  a painful crippling illness caused  by 
formation of nitrogen bubbles in  the  bloodstream when a diver moves 
too  quickly  from  high-pressure water  dep ths   to  the   surface. 

167 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

The  $100 000 chambe r  in tended  for the manned  space  program had 
been opened to public use  by the  cen te r  director. With the  end  of t h e  
Apollo  program  and   the   next  manned  flight  4  yr  in  t h e   future,  t h e  
decision was made  to  deactivate t h e  chamber .  The  Orlando Sentinel 
S t a r  quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the  Suppor t  Operations 
b iv . ,   a s   saying  the   possibility  existed  tha t   the   chamber   would  b e  
reactivated  for the  Space  Shu t t le  program,  but  for the  t ime  being  it 
would  remain  closed.  (Lloyd,  interview,  19  Sep t   77;  Upchurch, 
Orlando Sentinel  S t a r ,   17 Aug  75) 
*  NASA  and  t h e  U.S.S.R. Academy of  Sc iences  had   agreed on  a joint  tour  
of  the U.S.  and  the  Soviet Union by the  5 crew  members  of the  Apollo- 
Soyuz Test Project mission [see 15-26  July].  U .S .  as tronau ts  Thomas  
P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and  Donald K.  Slayton would join Soviet 
cosmonauts Aleksey A.  Leonov and  Valery N.  Kubasov on 21 Sep t .  in 
Moscow  for  a  2-wk  tour   of  the  U .S .S .R .  P lans   for  t h e  U.S.  tour were 
not disclosed.  (NASA  Release  75-230) 
18-20  August:  A  workshop  on  “Operational  Applications  of  Satellite 
Snowcover Observations” was held  a t  Lake  Tahoe ,  Nev.,  to d iscuss  
recen t  progress in extracting meaningful snowcover information from 
satellites.  Albert  Rango,  Goddard  Space   Flight  Cen te r   scientist, 
repor ted  tha t ,  with the  cooperation of nine Federa l  and  s ta te  agencies, 
NASA  had  developed  a n   applications  sys tems   verification  te s t  
(ASVT tu s ing  da ta  from satellites and  ins trumen ted  aircraft, conven- 
tional ground  information,  and  prediction  models-to 
quantitatively 
de term ine   the   usefulness  of  remote-sensing  technology  in  an  
operational applications  system. 
In ano ther  paper  Rango reported tha t  low-resolution  meteorological 
satellite  da ta   and   high-resolution  earth-resources  satellite  da ta   had 
been   used  to  map  a  snow-covered  area   over  Wyoming  mountains. 
Predictions  based  on   satellite  da ta   of  t h e  April  through  June   1972 
streamflow were within 3%  of the  ac tua l  total. Also, composite resu l ts  
from 2 yr of da ta  over t h e  mountains indicated tha t  Landsa t  snowcover 
s treamflow . 
observations  could  be   useful  in  predicting  runoff  and   seasonal 
Jame s  C. Barnes of Environmental Research  and  Technology, Inc., 
reported  tha t   the   ea r th   resources   experiment  package  @REP)  flown 
aboard the  1973-74  Skylab Orbital Workshop missions had provided 
the  first opportunity  to  examine reflectance  charac ter is t ics  of  snow- 
cover in several spec tra l  bands  from  the  visible  to the  near   infrared. 
Results  indicated  tha t   near-infrared  methods  could  distinguish 
between  snow  and  water  droplet  clouds  and   could  de tec t   areas   of 
melting  snow.  (NASA  H q  WB ,  28 Feb   76,  2;  NASA   SP-391, 
text) 
18-21   August:  Evidence of  a 10th planet  existing in earth‘s  solar system 
16  million  yrs  ago  was  presen ted   a t   t h e   146th  annua l   meeting  of 
t h e   American  Astronomical  Society  in  S a n   Diego  by  Dr.  Thomas  
C.  Van Flandern,  U.S.  Naval Observatory astronomer.  Studying t h e  
orbits of 60 long-period  comets,  including 1974‘s Kohoutek, Dr.  Van 
F landern  had concluded they had  shared  a common origin 16 million 
yr  ago- 
Th e   evidence  was  consistent  with  calculations  made  in  1971 by 
Canadian  astronomer  Dr.  Michael  W.  Ovenden.  Dr.  Ovenden’s 
s tud ies  of irregularities in the  orbits of  planets, especially Uranus and 
Nep tune ,  suggested tha t  a major disruptive even t  had occurred  in the  

168 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 

solar system approximately 16 million yrs  ago. He  had  arrived at this 
time by age-dating carbon-bearing meteorites tha t  had fallen to ear th ,  
and  theorized tha t  the  event could be explained by the  explosion of  a 
huge  planet  90  times  the   size of  earth. 
During the meeting Dr.  S tuar t  Bowyer, Univ.  of Calif.  astronomer, 
surprised the  740 astronomers attending the  meeting by reporting tha t  
a Univ.  of  Calif. telescope  flown aboard the Apollo spacecraft during 
the   joint  U.S.  4J.S.S.R.  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Pro jec t   [see  15-26  July] 
had picked up  the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation of  a s tar .  EuV,  a 
small segment of the  spec trum  between normal ultraviolet and  x-rays, 
had been  considered by  astronomers  a s  practically invisible because 
of  probable  absorption  by  interstellar du s t  and  gas.  Dr.  Bowyer said 
tha t  the  
had come from a white dwarf s ta r  300 light yrs away in the  
constellation Coma Berenices.  (NASA Gen Mgmt Review Rpt,  18 Aug 
75,  9; Alexander, LA  T imes ,   26  Aug  75) 
19 A ugu s t :   The  Soviet Union  might  attempt  to  land  a n   automatic  micro- 
biological  laboratory  on  Mars  before  the   U.S.  Viking  spacecraf t ,  
whose  twice-delayed  launch  is  now  scheduled  for  20  Aug.,  could 
arrive,  the   Chr is t ian   Science  Monitor  reported  Finnish  astronomer 
Heikka Oja a s  telling the  British Interplanetary Society. By launching 
a  probe  between  17 Sept.  and   3 Oct.  and  using  higher  speeds   and 
shor ter  trajectories, the  Russians could reach  Mars in May 1976 ,2  mo 
before  the   scheduled  Viking  arrival.  Between  1971  and  1973 the  
Soviets  had  made  4  a t temp ts   to  land  probes  on  Mars;  only Mars  3 
(launched 28 May 1971) succeeded  in softlanding a capsule (on 2 Dec. 
1971).  Landing  in  a  dus t   storm,  i t   ceased  transmitting  after  20  sec. 
Oja sa id  the   Soviets hoped  to repea t   this  experiment,  this  time  in  a 
region near the  south polar c a p  of Mars where the thin, mostly carbon 
dioxide  atmosphere might contain moisture.  (Gatland, C S M ,  19 Aug 
75) 
0  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen ter   announced  the   award  of  a $1.9-million 
firm-fixed-price con trac t  to the  Martin Marietta Corp.  for fabrication, 
acceptance  testing,  and  delivery  of  322  pyrotechnic-initiator  con- 
trollers  (PIC)  for  the   Space  Shu t t le  solid rocket  boosters.  (MSFC  Re- 
lease  75-  182) 
20 Augu s t :  V i k ing  1  was successfully launched a t  5:22  pm EDT from East- 
ern   Tes t   Range’s  Launch  Pad   41  on  a  Titan  III-Centaur  launch 
vehicle. The  launch,  first scheduled for 11 Aug.,  had been postponed 
until  14  Aug.  to  replace  a  faulty  thrust-vector  control  valve  on  the 
launch vehicle [see  11 Aug.].  A  second delay had occurred when the  
spacecraft’s  internal  batteries  had  discharged to  9 volts, we l l  below 
safe limits [see  13 Aug.].  The  spacecraft, Viking A,  had been removed 
from the  launch vehicle and replaced  by  Viking B.  Th e  range  safety 
officer  had  issued  a  waiver  of  s tandard   procedures  and  permitted 
removal  and  installation  of  the   spacecraft  without  detanking  and 
depressurizing  the  launch  vehicle,  thus  allowing the  launch to be  re- 
scheduled  for 20 Aug, 
V i k ing  1 ,  consisting  of  a  2360-kg  orbiter  a t tached   to  an  1180-kg 
lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the  designed 3-sigma 
limits.  Nearly  35  min  after  trajectory  insertion,  the   Centaur  stage 
separa ted   from  the   spacecraft.  Th e  solar panels were  deployed  and 
oriented toward the  sun, and the  biocap-a  container used to hermeti- 
jettisoned.  On 
cally sea l  the  l and e r  while in earth‘s atmosphere-was 

169 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

27 Aug.  a t  2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted t h e  
spacecraf t  to i t s  Mars orbital insertion point.  By 28 Aug.  all sys tems  
aboard the  spacecraf t  were operating normally and  in a cru ise  mode. 
Trave l  time  to  Mars  was  estimated  a t   10 mo,  with  a  possible  Mars 
landing on  4 July  1976,  the  height of  the  U.S.  Bicentennial.  A second  
spacecraf t ,   Viking  B,  had   been   schedu led   for  a  1  Sept.  launch   to 
arrive  a t  Mars  in  12 mos. 
T h e  Viking missions suppor ted  NASA's planetary program goals of 
exploring  the  solar  system  and   gaining knowledge  of  i ts   origin  and  
evolution,  and of  t h e  origin  and  evolution  of  life  and  of  the   dynamic 
processes   tha t   shaped   man's  terrestrial  environment.  Specific  pur- 
pose of  the  two Viking missions was to increase  knowledge of Mars by 
making observations from Mars orbit and  by  direct measuremen ts  in 
the   atmosphere  and   on   the   surface,  with  particular  emphas is   on 
biological, chemical, and  environmental da ta  on  pas t  or present exist- 
ence  of  life  on  the   planet. 
Viking 1 was targeted to land  in the  Martian equatorial region,  in a 
very low area  resembling the  fluvial plain of  a dry river bed-an 
ideal 
s i te   to  search   for  organic  material.  Alternate  s i tes   for  both  Viking 
landers   had  been  se lec ted  and  there  would  be   some  flexibility until 
insertion  into Mars  orbit,  after which  the   available  band  of  landing 
s i tes  would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once  in orbit, the  orbiter 
would survey prospective landing sites; when the  decision on where to 
land  had been made,  retrorockets would  separa te  the  lander  from the  
orbiter  and   the   lander   would  descend   to  t h e   surface,  sequentially 
braked  by  i ts   aeroshell's  drag,  by  a  parachute,  and   finally  by  its 
retrorockets.  After  landing,  the   science  instrumentation  would  be 
activated  and  exploration  would  begin;  da ta   would  be  transmitted 
back  to ear th  by the  lander  radio or through a radio-relay link with the  
orbiter. 
The  orbiter's  main  body,  an  octagonal ring 46  cm high with  alter- 
nating 140- and 51-cm  s ides ,  consisted of  16 modular compartments. 
Th e  en t ire  s truc ture  was  10 m  across  the   t ips  of  the   extended  solar 
panels and 3 .3  m high from the  lander  a t tachmen t  points to the  launch  
vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation  and  control, communications, 
power,  computer, and data-storage subsys tems ,  the  orbiter carr ied  i t s  
science instrumentation mounted on a scan  platform tha t  could move 
with 2 degrees of  freedom.  The  three   science  ins trumen ts  were twin 
high-resolution,  slow-scan  TV  cameras ;   an   infrared  atmospheric 
water  detector;  and   a  high-resolution  infrared  thermal  mapper  for  
detecting  surface-temperature  variations. 
The   lander   was  a  six-sided  aluminum  and   titanium  box  46.2 
cm  d e ep  and   enclosed top  and  bottom  by  cover plates;  it measured 
3  m  wide  and  2  m  high  from  the   footpads  to  the   top  of  the   S-band 
an tenna .  The six s ides  measured  109 cm  and  56 c m  alternately, with 
t h e   th ree   landing  legs  a t tached   to  the   three   narrower  sides.  T h e  
three  retrorockets  were  mounted  a t   120" intervals  on  the   lander; 
generating  up   to  2838  newtons  (638  lbs)  thrus t ,   they  would  b e  
ignited  a t   an   altitude  of  1220 m  to  slow  the   lander 's  descen t   from 
222  kph   to  9  kph   a t   landing.  Four  small  engines  provided  a t t i tude  
control. 
In   addition  to  subsys tems   for  thermal  control,  power,  and   com- 
munications,  the   lander   carr ied   six  instruments:  twin  scanning  TV 

170 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 

cameras ,   a  sophisticated  biology  laboratory,  a  gas   chromatograph 
mass  spec trome ter ,  a n  x-ray  fluorescence spectrometer,  a meteorol- 
ogy  ins trumen t ,   and   a  seismometer.  Used  with  numerous  tempera- 
ture ,  pressure ,  and  magnetic sensors ,  t h e  ins trumen ts  would perform 
entry,  landed ,   and  radio  experiments. 
NASA’s investigation of  Mars had  begun in  1964 with t h e  launch  of 
M a n n e r  4 .  Tha t  spacecraft’s  flyby on  15 July  1965 had revealed the  
planet  to  be  moonlike  with  a  dry,  barren ,   cra tered   surface  showing 
little  evidence of  wind  or wa ter   erosion  and  no  magnetic  field.  Th e  
be t ter   instrumented Mariners  6  and  7  tha t   flew  by  the  planet  during 
the  summer  of  1969 repor ted   a  chaotic  view  of  jumbled  ridges  and  
valleys  unlike  anything found on  the  ea r th  o r  moon.  The   spacecraf t  
also showed wide fea ture less  expanses  where c ra te r s  had been some- 
how  eroded,  suggesting  tha t   Mars  had  been   geologically  active. 
Mar iner  6  and 7  photographs  showed a thin  layer of  snow-probably 
carbon   dioxide-and 
ins trumen ts   measured  a  thin  atmosphere  of 
mostly  carbon  dioxide. 
High-quality  photographs from Mar iner  9 ,  placed  in Martian orbit 
on  13 Nov.  1971,  provided  evidence  of  fluid  erosion,  glacial  action, 
and   volcanoes.  The   Viking missions  had   continued  t h e  Mariner ex- 
plorations  of  Mars. 
Viking  was  managed  by  Langley Research   Cen te r   under   overall 
direction of NASA’s Office of  Space  Sc ience ;  LaRC  also had manage- 
men t  responsibility for the  lander  system designed and  built by Martin 
Marietta Corp.  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  designed  and  built  the  
orbiter  system.  The  Titan-Centaur  launch   vehicle  was  the   respon- 
sibility of  Lewis Research   Cen ter ;   LaRC  managed  launch  and   flight 
operations execu ted  by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space  Center,  and  
JPL.  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen te r  was  responsible for tracking  and  
da ta   systems,  and  JPL  managed  the mission  control and  computing- 
cen te r  system.  (NASA MORS S-815-15-01/02, 
1 Aug 7 5 , 2 8  Aug 75, 
16 Sep t  75; NASA  Release 75-  183; LaRC  Launch  and  Mission  Opera- 
tions  S ta tu s   Bulletins  Nos  9-11;  V ik ing:   M iss ion   t o   Mars  (NASA 
SP-334);  W P o s t ,   18-22  Aug 75; NYT ,   18-22  Aug  75) 
*  Doctors  had  rechecked  x-rays  of  Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  astronaut 
Donald K.  Slayton’s lungs taken  before the  15 July launch  and  found 
tha t  they also had  shown a  shadow revealed  by postflight  x-rays,  Dr. 
Arnauld  E.  Nicogossian,  NASA’s ASTP  physician,  said  a t   a  Johnson 
Space  Cen te r  p re s s  briefing.  Dr.  Nicogossian sa id  tha t  the  spot had 
not been noticed before because  the  x-rays were difficult to read and  
the  spot had been covered by normal vasculature and bony s truc ture .  
Only  a 6 Aug.  tomogram [see 25 Aug.]  had verified tha t   the  shadow 
was  a  lesion.  Dr.  Nicogossian said  the  nitrogen  tetroxide  inhaled by 
the   ASTP  as tronau ts   during  reen try   [see 15-26  July]  had  not  been 
shown  to  have  caused  o r   increased   the   size of  the   lesion. 
Dr.  Nicogossian added   tha t ,   if  cancer   were  diagnosed  during  the  
surgery, the usual medical procedure  was to remove a par t  of  the  lobe, 
but  he   did  not  think  tha t   would  prevent  Slayton  from  flying  in   the 
future. 
Slayton  said that  he felt “pre t ty   damn  lucky”  tha t   t h e  lesion  had  
been discovered when it was.  “This thing could have been discovered 
before  the flight.  . . . And  I  could  have   easily gotten jerked   off  the  
flight, so tha t  would have been  bad. Secondly, if we hadn’t had t h e  gas 

171 

August 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
in t h e  cockpit on reentry,  . . . [the doctors] could very easily not have 
picked  this  thing  up   until  my  next  annua l   physical  which  is 6 o r  8 
months off.”  Then   it would  have  been   a  “lot  tougher”  to  fix. 
Slayton,  one   of  t h e   seven   original  U .S .   as tronau ts ,   had  been 
grounded  in  1962 because   of  an   erra t ic  hea r t   ra te ,   first de tec ted   in 
1959, bu t   had  been  re turned   to  flight s ta tu s  March  1972 in  time  for 
assignment to A S P .  He told t h e  briefing tha t  h e  hoped to be  out of t h e  
hospital within  7 days and  back  to work  in 2 wk,  and  on  flight s ta tu s  
again within  a month.  (Transcript,  ASTP   PC-63,  20 Aug 75) 
NASA  announced tha t  the  U.S.  tour by the  five Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project 
crewmembers  had  been  postponed  to  13  Oct.  because  of  astronaut 
Donald  K.  Slayton’s  scheduled  lung  surgery.  The  crew’s  tour  of  the 
U .S .S .R . ,   scheduled  to  begin  22  Sept.,  would  continue  on   schedule 
[see 15 Aug.].  (NASA  Release  75-236) 
0  Lt.  Col.  Michael  Love  successfully  completed  the   28th  flight  of  t h e  
X-24B  lifting body,  making i ts  second and final runway landing [see 
5 Aug.]  a t  Flight Research   Center.  Th e  purpose  of  the  flight was  to 
land  on  a  concrete  runway,  survey body  pressure ,   study  a  lefthand 
fin  tuft,  check   out  the   therma l   protection  system,  and  perform 
stability and  control  maneuvers  with  the   rudder   bias  a t  5” toe-out. 
Launched   from  a  B-52  aircraft  a t   13 700  m,  Col.  Love  ignited  t h e  
vehicle’s rocket engine and  t h e  X-24B  reached  a speed  of mach 1.53 
glide  and   landing.  - 
and  a n  altitude of  21 900 m  before  engine shutdown and  unpowered 
Flights of  the   11-m delta-shaped  vehicle were  par t  of  a joint NASA- 
Air Force  program  to s tudy  transonic flight charac ter is t ics  of  an aero- 
dynamic  shape   tha t   could  be   the   forerunner   of  fu ture   hypersonic 
cru ise  vehicles.  (X-24B  flt rp t ,  NASA   Prog off;  FRC  Release 25-75) 
0  The  Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment  (LACE),  a low-budget co- 
operative  NASA-  Department  of  Agriculture-  National  Ocean ic   and  
Atmospheric Administration program designed to  assess  U.S.  wheat- 
crop yields and  to forecas t  production, could develop into a worldwide 
crop  program,  J.  F.  t e r  Horst  reported  in  the  Los Angeles  T ime s .  If 
elevated in s ta tus  and  budget priority by Pres iden t  Ford,  LACIE could 
accurately  measure   a  worldwide  grain  feas t   o r   famine  each   year, 
identifying  regions  of  big  harvests  and   potential  shortages,  vital  in 
allocating  world  food  supplies  to  meet  t h e   needs   of  growing  world 
population. T e r  Horst quoted  an advisor of  Pres iden t  Ford a s  saying 
tha t ,   if  the   L A C E   sys tem  were  in  worldwide  operation,  “we  would 
know what the  Russian grain crop was likely to be, what they would be  
buying,  and  jus t  how much  of our crop we could afford to sell them.” 
T e r  Horst  added  tha t   intelligence  sources  indicated  the  Russians 
had  already  measured  U .S .   crops  by  satellite.  “If  true ,   tha t   could 
explain the confidence of  Russian grain-purchasing moves  this year. 
It also indicates an  acce lera ted  U .S .  political need  to play  catch-up in 
this  phase  of  the   space   race.”  (ter Horst, LA   T ime s ,  20 Aug  75) 
@  A T o d a y  editorial had commented on  the  planned Viking flight to Mars: 
suppor t  for more sophisticated flights in the  future.  . . . It will b e  al- 
“Success   of  the   Viking  flight  could  mean  additional  Congressional 
most  another year  before we will  have  the  answers to  the  Viking ex- 
periments.  . . .A t   tha t  time, we will be  celebrating the  200th birthday 
of  our   country-and  what  be t ter   way  to  ce lebra te   t h e   birth  of  one 
nation  than  with  the  discovery of  another?”  (Today ,  20 Aug  75) 

172 

ASTRONAUTIC5  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
August 
21 Augu s t :  The Titan-Centaur launch  vehicle for the Viking-  B had been 
moved to the   ad  a t  Launch  Complex 41 ‘ust 24 h r  af ter  the  successful 
launch   of  Vifing 1. Technicians  would  ma te   the   spacecraf t   to  t h e  
launch  vehicle  on  27  Aug.,  preparing for the  schedu led  launch  on  1 
Sep t .   (KSC  Release  174-75) 
0  The  Space   Shu t t le  was,  in  many ways,  the   “ultimate  recycling  pro- 
gram,”  Robert  Anderson,  president  and   chief  executive  officer  of 
Rockwell  International  Corp.  said  on  Transportation  Day  a t   t h e  
Canadian  National  Exhibition  in  Toronto.  Anderson  said  tha t   the  
Shu t t le   program,  with  i t s   international  scope   and   emphas is   on  re- 
usability, was t h e  first major s t e p  toward economical and  effective use 
of  space .  
More advanced Shuttle-launched satellites would benefit the  world 
by  aiding  crop   control;  locating new  sources  of  minerals  and  fossil 
fuels; monitofing  weather,  pollution,  and localized  disasters  such  a s  
oil slicks ahd forest fires; mapping oceans  and urban  areas ;   and im- 
proving  communications.  “For  the  job of  transportation i s  not jus t   to 
is to also move history 
move people and goods from point to point-it 
forward by enabling t h e  pioneers to explore t h e  new frontiers and  by 
enabling society to  capitalize on  their discoveries.”  (Text; Rockwell 
In t l  Release R-42)  
0  NASA   announced  appointment  of  Herber t   J .   Rowe,  cha irman   of  the  
board  of  PEMCOR,  Inc.,  a s  Associate  Administrator for External Af- 
fairs.  Rowe  would  coordinate  activities  of  the   Office  of  Indus try  
Affairs  and  Technology Utilization  and  t h e  Office of  Public  Affairs, 
the  offices tha t  oversee NASA  interactions with external organizations 
and   individuals  and   disseminate  information about NASA   programs. 
(NASA  anno,  26 Aug 75) 
0  NASA  announced  re t iremen t   from  military  service  of  NASA  Sky lab   4 
(16 Nov.  1973-8  Feb.  1974) as tronau ts  Gerald P. Ca r r  and William R. 
Pogue  effective  Sep tember   1.  Carr,  a Marine  Corps  colonel,  would 
remain with NASA  a s  a civilian astronaut. Pogue,  an  Air Force colonel 
and  an  astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice 
president of  High Flight,  a n  interdenominational evangelistic founda- 
tion founded by former astronaut James  R.  Irwin. A s  crew members  
on Sky lab  4 Pogue and Carr ,  along with Dr. Edward 6. Gibson,  share  
t h e  world record for individual time in space  of 2017 h r  15 min 32 sec. 
Pogue’s depa r tu re  would reduce  the  number  of NASA  as tronau ts  to 31. 
(NASA  Release  75-  233) 
0  The Knights  of  Columbus,  a  U.S.  Catholic fra terna l  organization,  had 
agreed  to  pay  for  worldwide  satellite  coverage  of  three   live  90-min 
Vatican events, the Wa sh ing tonPo s t  reported. Four Intelsat satellites 
would  telecast  the  midnight  mass   a t   Christmas,  the   Stations of  the  
Cross  from  t h e  Roman  Colosseum  on  Good  Friday,  and   the   Pope’s 
Easter  Sunday  message.  E a c h   broadcast  would  cost  an  estimated 
$25 000.  (W P o s t ,   21  Aug  75) 
22  August:  Defense,  space ,   and   energy  accoun ted  for most  of  a record 
increase  in Federa l  research  and  development funding in Fil1976, the  
National  Sc ience  Foundation’s report A n  Ana ly s i s  of Federal  R  & D 
Fund ing  b y  Function, Fiscal Years 1969-  76 s ta ted .  The  largest dollar 
increase ,  $1860 million, was  for national defense; t h e  second and  third 
largest  increases,  $343  million  each ,   were  for  space   and  energy. 

173 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Relative  increases   in  N 1976 were  largest  for  education,  102%; 
energy,  37%;  national  defense ,   20%;  and   space ,   13%. 
Total Federa l  obligation for R&D in the  1976 budget of $21.7  billion 
was  a record high.  Th e  $ 2 . 7 - b a o n  increase  over F’Y  1975 was also a 
record increase  for  any one  year, enough to indicate a rea l  rise in R&D 
activity, allowing for a reasonable inflation factor. Th e  upward change  
con tras ted  with an average annual decline of  2.7%  in cons tan t  dollars 
over  the   period  1969-75.  (NSF H igh l igh t s ,  25 Aug 75,  1) 
0  NASA  announced  selection  of  McDonnell Douglas  Astronautics Co.  for 
negotiation  of  a  $14.8-million  fixed-price  incentive  con trac t   to 
develop,  build,  and deliver  Space  Shu t t le   solid rocket  booster  (SRB) 
s truc tures ,   and  to  design and  build  t h e  tooling necessary  to produce 
them.  Th e   SRB  s t ruc tu re s  would  suppor t   the   Space   Shu t t le   on  the  
launch  pad,  transfer  thrus t   loading to the  Orb i ter  and external tank ,  
and  provide s truc tura l  suppor t  for the  SRB recovery system, electrical 
components,  and   thrust-vector  control  system.  (NASA  Release 
75-  238) 
0  A group  of  2% scientists,  engineers,  sociologists, and  economists con- 
cluded a 10-wk (16 June-22  Aug.) NASA-   Stanford University  study at 
Ames Research  Cen ter  by recommending tha t  the  U.S.  adopt a space  
colonization program using available technology.  The  “city in space”  
envisioned by  t h e  s tudy  group could  be  a  1.5-km-wide  wheel-shaped 
habitat  for  10 000  persons  positioned  on  the   moon’s  orbit  a t   a point 
385  000  km  from  both  ear th   and  moon.  Costing  an   estimated  $100 
billion, t h e  454-million-kg wheel,  or torus, would rotate around its hub  
at 1 rpm to simulate earth‘s gravity. The  rim would house inhabitants 
a s  well a s  shops,  schools, light industry, and  closed-loop  agriculture; 
heavy  industry  could  b e   located  outside  to  take   advantage  of 
weightlessness and  high  vacuum  in  space. 
A major commercial activity of  the  first colony would be to construct 
solar-power  satellites.  P laced   in  geosynchronous  orbit  above  the  
ea r th ,  the  satellites would collect and  convert sunlight into energy and  
beam  it  to  ea r th   a s  low-density microwaves. 
The  space colony would have severa l  advantages tha t  might make it 
self-supporting:  weightlessness  for  manufacturing  and   transporta- 
tion,  massive  use  of  luna r  minerals,  and continuous natural  sunlight 
for  increased  agricultural  productivity.  The   study  group  had  con- 
s idered  social,  cultural,  safety,  and  ecological difficulties of  a  space  
colony, but had found “no unsurmountable problems tha t  would pre- 
vent humans  from living in space.”  (NASA Re leases  75-229,75-249; 
ARC  Release  75-41;  Dunstan,  W  P o s t ,   23 Aug  75) 
0  The  p re s s  commented on t h e  mission  of  t h e  Viking  spacecraf t  to Mars  
[see 20 Aug.].  The  Wa sh ing ton  Po s t  said tha t  t h e  essence  of  the  space  
program  had  been  “ to   provide mankind with  new  knowledge,  not  in 
hopes   tha t  th is  knowledge will be   useful  immediately  here  on  Ea r th  
which  we  live  and   . . . enab le   u s   to  reach   be t ter   solutions  to  our  
bu t  in hopes  tha t  it will  expand our  understanding of  t h e  universe  in 
philosophical  and  political,  a s   well  a s   practical,  problems.”  The  
Viking missions had opened  a new e r a  in which the  sea rch  for knowl- 
edge  was  to be  done largely by machines; t h e  rewards  promised to be  
rich,  beyond  measure   in  strictly monetary  terms. 
The  Ch r i s t ian  Science  Mon i tor   agreed,  commenting  that  Viking 
represen ted   “an   opportunity for mankind‘s  self-awareness  to  take   a 

174 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 
grea ter  s tr ide  away from ear th-cen tered  thinking than  was afforded by 
Neil Armstrong’s  historic  s t e p  on to  the  moon.”  Discovering  organic 
life  on   Mars  would  s treng then   the   conviction  tha t   life  existed 
abundantly throughout t h e  universe and  tha t  we were not alone.  Some 
had  questioned  whether  the   U.S. should  spend   a  billion  dollars  on 
such  aprogram  when resources  were hard pressed on ear th ,  but a n ew  
discovery,  tha t  life was not a meaningless  chance  but par t  of  a grand 
design,  could give new  inspiration  to  humanity’s  efforts to dea l  with 
earthly problems. 
Here  was  a  challenge  for  t h e   architects  of  dAtente,  the  Mon i tor  
asser ted .  The  U.S. and  Russia had  been needlessly duplicating scien- 
tific  efforts,  the ir  cooperation  amounting  to  little  more  than   “arm’s- 
length information exchange.”  The  two countries had much to share .  
By abandoning costly competition for a truly joint program,  the  two 
( 6  
countries could gain from e a ch  other’s capabilities, minimize t h e  cost 
to each  of them, and pursue th is  cosmic ou treach  on  behalf  of all man- 
kind.”  (W P o s t ,  22 Aug  75,  A24; C S M ,  22 Aug 75,  28) 
23 August:  An editorial in the  Wash ing ton  Star commented on  the  Viking 
spacecraf t  . . . is tha t   the  American  people,  pinched  a s  they  a re  by 
mission to Mars: “Pe rhap s  the  most miraculous thing about the  Viking 
hard  times, would more or less cheerfully d ispa tch  a billion dollars on 
a  one-way  . . . journey  into  the   track less  void.”  Still,  enough might 
have been learned in  the  making of this remarkab le  vehicle to “consti- 
tu te  fair recompense for all the  money  it represen ts ,”   and  whatever it 
discovered at journey’s end  might be worth twice the  cost. (WS ta r ,  23 
Aug  75) 
24 August:  A planet’s size and  bulk might b e  more important than  i ts  loca- 
tion in the  solar system in determining whether it can  suppor t  life, Dr. 
Robert  Jastrow,  Director  of  NASA’s Goddard  Ins t i tu te   for  Space  
Studies,  said  in  a  New York   Times article.  Conventional  scientific 
thought had always been tha t  the  chance  of  life’s  evolving on  a planet 
was narrowly restricted  by  the  planet’s  d is tance  from  i ts  parent  star. 
However,  planetology-the 
s tudy   of  comparative  geology  of  the  
planets, made possible by space  probes such  as Pioneer, Mariner, and  
Viking-provided 
evidence for  t h e  newer  theory. 
The  most important single factor in the  geology of earth-like planets 
was  the  amount of  internal hea t  left over from the ir  birth.  P lane ts  a s  
large as earth conserved heat,  losing it  very  slowly  through volcanic 
action  over  long  periods  of  time.  Molten  volcanic  material  carr ied  
gases,  including  wa ter   vapor,  tha t   had  been  trapped   below  the  
planet’s  surface ;   t h e   vapors  condensed  into  oceans,  o ther   gases  
formed an atmosphere,  and  life began.  Mariner’s  photos of Mars had 
confirmed  the   existence  of  volcanoes;  but,  because   of  the   planet’s 
relatively  small size,  the se  exhausted  their  in terna l  hea t   supply and  
died  out  rapidly  about  100 million yr  ago.  During  i ts   active  period, 
Mars  mus t   have  had  in  i t s   atmosphere  large  volumes  of  volcanic 
gases,  including water  vapor; Manne r  photos had   shown what were 
apparently dry river beds.  When  the   volcanoes  became  extinct,  the  
water  and   atmosphere  leaked   away  into  space   and  the   small planet 
was left dry  and  nearly airless. Any life forms found on Mars by Viking 
or  future  space   probes would  probably be   fossils. 
The  study of  lunar  material added  another example to the  compara- 
tive  geology  of  earth-like  planets:  The  moon  rocks  brought  back  by 

175 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Apollo astronauts had revealed volcanic activity on the  moon: because 
the  moon was smaller than  Mars, this activity had stopped even earlier 
and   the   gases  and  moisture  escaped   even  more  quickly,  leaving 
another  dry,  airless,  and   lifeless  body. 
Scientists concluded tha t  Mars was cold and lifeless not because  it 
was  far ther  from  the  sun   than  ear th  but  because  it was  smaller and 
geologically inert. If the  ear th  were moved out to the  orbit of Mars, the  
average tempera ture  of the ea r th  would drop somewhat but its insulat- 
ing atmosphere,  continually  replenished  by  volcanic gases for  some 
billions of  years  longer,  would  maintain  a  livable  tempera ture   over 
large  areas  of  the   surface.  (Jastrow, NYT ,   24 Aug  75,  E7) 
0  Soviet  ground  controllers  altered  the   trajectory  of  Luna   2 2 ,   the   un- 
manned  lunar  probe launched  29 May  1974, bringing it closer to  the  
moon’s  surface. Resulting parame ters  were  1286-km apogee,  100-km 
perigee, 3-hr period, and 21” inclination. T a s s  reported 3 Sept. tha t  all 
onboard  systems  were  operating  well  and  tha t   the   spacecraft  was 
continuing to transmit to ea r th  information about the  moon’s surface. 
(Tass, FBIS-SOV, 3 Sep t  75 ,  U1) 
25  August:  ApoUo-Soyuz  T e s t   Project  astronaut  Donald  K .   Slayton 
en tered   Texas Medical  Cen ter   to  undergo  exploratory  surgery  for  a 
small  lesion  on  his  left  lung.  NASA  physicians  had  discovered  the  
lesion in x-rays taken  during the  astronaut’s  postflight recovery from 
gas i n h d a t k n  [see   25 July].  Slayton’s x-rays  had  shown  a complete 
clearing  of  lung  infiltrates  but  revealed  a  4-mm  discrete  shadow. 
Specialized  x-rays,  called  tomograms,  taken  6  Aug.  had  confirmed 
tha t  the  shadow was indeed a lesion and not a part of  the  normal lung 
s truc ture .   NASA  physicians,  conferring with  ches t   specialists  at  the  
Texas Medical Cen ter ,  recommended  surgery;  all the  doctors  agreed 
tha t  the  lesion had not resulted  from the gas inhalation.  (JSC  Release 
75-  69) 
0  Th e  People’s Republic of China had confirmed tha t  i ts  three  satellites- 
Ch ina   1 ,  launched  24 April  1970; Ch ina  2 ,  launched  3 March  1971; 
and  Ch ina  3 ,  launched 26 Ju ly   1975-had 
earth-observation  capabil- 
ity,  Defense  Space   Business  D a i l y   reported.  Although  the  PRC’s 
People’s  D a i l y  had  published  cloud photos t ak e n  by  one of  the  satel- 
lites,  and  the  implication was  tha t   the   satellites were  forerunners of 
meteorological satellites,  their  performance  suggested  the   develop- 
ment  of  higher  resolution  observation-reconnaissance  satellites.  All 
three   satellites  had  been  placed  into  orbits with  perigees  a t   recon- 
naissance altitudes sufficient to cover all targe ts  of  interest to the  PRC. 
(SBD ,  25 Aug  75,  290) 
e NASA’s use  of  the  firefly s two light-producing chemicals,  luciferin and  
luciferase, to tes t  for the  chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP),  an  energy-storage  compound  presen t   in  every  living cell,  had 
increased interest in luminescence a s  a tool for medical research,  the  
New  York  Times  reported.  Research  done  in  1948 by  Johns  Hopkins 
Univ.  scientists  had  demonstrated  tha t   ATP  was  the   third  essential 
ingredient-along  with  luciferin  and   luciferase-necessary 
for  the  
firefly’s  glow,  and   tha t   the   amount  of  light  generated  was  directly 
proportionate to the  level of  ATP present.  The  Hopkins scientists had 
also  developed  a  simple  tes t   for  life  itself,  since  luciferin  and  
luciferase  added  to  any  living  ma t ter   could  reproduce  the   firefly’s 
glimmer. NASA  applied this information, with more sophisticated light- 

I 76 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 

detection ins trumen ts ,  to develop a tes t  for life on Mars for use aboard 
the  Viking  spacecraf t  (launched  20 Aug.) 
NASA  scientists  working  with  the   firefly  chemicals  at  Goddard 
Space  Flight  Cen te r  had  developed  many  applications,  including  a 
method of de tec t ing  bacteria  in  water;  this permitted  speedy diagno- 
sis of  urinary  infections,  a s  well  a s  testing t h e  effect of  various anti- 
biotics on particular  infections. 
Univ. of Calif. scientists continued the  research ,  adapting the  tech- 
n iques  for related work in measuring crea t ine  phosphokinase  (CPK) in 
the  bloodstream.  CPK,  presen t   in  all human  blood,  was  produced  in 
abnormally  high  quantities  during  muscle-cell  degeneration  tha t  
accompanied  card iac   a r re s t   o r   muscular  dystrophy.  CPK  could  be 
trea ted  to produce ATP  and ,  with  the  application of  firefly chemicals, 
to  produce  a  glow  proportionate  to  the   amount of  CPK  in  the  blood- 
s tream .  Researchers  had used the  measuremen ts  a s  a qu i c k  blood tes t  
to tell whether a patient had suffered a hear t  a t tack .  (N Y T ,  25 Aug 75) 
26 August-3  September:  NASA  launched  Symphonie 2, France   end  West 
Germany's  second experimental communications satellite a t  9:42  pm 
EDT  26  Aug.  from  Ea s te rn   Te s t   Range.  A  three-stage  thrust- 
augmented Thor-Delta  launch   vehicle  boosted  the   spacecraft  into  a 
synchronous transfer  orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 
678.3-min period,  and  13.2" inclination. On  29 Aug.  at 11:48 am  EDT, 
ground controllers  activated t h e  onboard liquid-fueled  apogee motor 
to  circularize  t h e   orbit  at  geosynchronous  altitude.  By  31  Aug. 
Symphonie 2  was  in  an   orbit  with  a  35  870-km  apogee,  35  364-km 
perigee,  23-hr  47-min  period,  and   0.0"  inclination.  NASA's primary 
launch   the   Symphonie  2  into  a 
objective  for  the   mission-to 
synchronous  transfer  orbit  with  sufficient  accuracy   to  enable  the  
satellite to accomplish i t s  operational mission-had  been successfully 
completed,  and  the  mission  was  adjudged  successfu l  on 3 Sep t .  
When  finally positioned  at  11.5"  west  longitude  over  the  equator, 
t h e  402-kgsymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone,  8 voice, and 2 
TV  channe ls  for experimental  communications between Europe  and  
the  African  and  South American  continents. 
Second   of  two  experimental  comsats  developed  by  the   French- 
Wes t   German  Consortium  Industriel  France-Allemand  pour  le 
Satellite  Symphonie 
(CIFAS),  under  the  direction  of  Germany's 
Gesellschaft  fur  Weltraumforschung  GFW  and  France's  Centre 
National  $Etudes  Spatiales (CNES),  Symphonie 2  would  expand  the  
French-West  German  experimental  satellite  TV   and   telegraph 
communications program begun with t h e  launch  ofsymphonie 1 on 18 
Dec.  1974. 
In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide  the  launch  vehicle and 
services on a cost-reimbursable basis,  and  in  June  1974 had signed a 
launch  services contract with the  consortium. Estimated cos t  of hard- 
ware  and   services  was  $12  million.  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen ter ,  
under the  direction of the  Office of Space  Science, was responsible for 
the   launch  vehicle  and  for limited  tracking  during initial  activities. 
When  the   satellite separa ted   from  t h e  vehicle  third  stage,  the   Sym- 
phonie Project Operations Group in France  and  Wes t  Germany would 
assume  operational responsibility.  (NASA MORS  s- 492-  204-  75-  02, 
25 July, 3 Sep t ;  GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21-27  Aug 75; 
NASA  Release  75-  234) 

177 

August 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
0  A prototype of  the  Yc-  15 advanced medium  short-takeoff-and-landing 
(AMST) cargo transport successfully completed i ts  first flight. Airborne 
for 2  h r   26  min,  the  Yc-15  was  flown  from  Long  Beach  municipal 
airport to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.,  achieving a peak  altitude of 
5500  m  and   a  top  speed   of  485  kph.  During  t h e   flight  the   pilots 
evaluated the  aircraft’s flight controls, handling and slow-speed-flight 
qualities,  and  speed   advance  to  t h e  assigned maximum. 
Built by McDonnell Douglas Corp.  for the  Air Force, t h e  YC-  15 was 
the  first  large  transpor t  aircraft to  include both  t h e  NASA-developed 
supercritical wing for improved flight performance and  reduced  fuel 
consumption, and  externally blown flaps for powered lift. Th is  aircraft 
and a second nearing completion would be  evaluated, during a 12-mo 
flight-test program,  against established Air Force performance goals 
and  against two YC-  14 prototype AMSTs built by Boeing c o .  (Fink, A v  
W k ,  11 Aug 75 ,18-20;   NYT ,  27 Aug 75 ,58 ;  AFSC Newsreview,  16 Oc t  
75,  16) 
27Augu s t :   Astronomers had picked up microwave  signals tha t  da ted  back 
10  billion  yrs  to  the   creation  of  the   universe,  S i r  Bernard  Lovell, 
director  of  the   Jodrell  Bank  radio  telescope  station,  told  the   137th 
annua l  meeting  of  the   British  Association  for  the   Advancement  of 
Science.  First  picked  up  accidentally  by  equipment  testing  space  
communications,  and  la ter   monitored  by  a  sounding  rocket,  the  
signals apparently had originated in  the  cataclysmic explosion-the 
“big bang”-  caused  when a single primeval fireball exploded to form 
the  universe. The  observed radiation was “ a  relic of the  high-tempera- 
ture  phase  of  the  universe,”  Lovell stated,  “perhaps  within a second  
or  so  of  the   beginning of  the   explosion.” 
Lovell  urged  scientists to  reexamine the ir  responsibility to  society 
during  their  ques t   for  knowledge  of  the   universe  and   life  on  other 
planets;  he   questioned  whether  man  could  “survive  for  long  the  
consequences  of  the   probing  of  scientists,”  saying  tha t   the   search  
might produce answers  too overwhelming for the  mind of man to com- 
prehend. He warned tha t  extensive military involvement  might lead to 
great  human  disaster,  recalling how  man’s  ques t  for knowledge had 
led to  the  development of  nuclear weapons.  (AP, W S t a r ,  28 Aug 75) 
0  NASA  announced  tha t   astronaut  Thomas  P.  Stafford would  leave  the  
NASA  astronaut  corps  effective  1 Nov.  to  become commander of  the  
Air  Force  Flight  Test  Cen ter   a t   Edwards   Air  Force  Base,  Calif. 
Serving a s  a NASA  astronaut since Sep tember  1962, Stafford made  the  
first rendezvous in space  when he  flew the  Gemini 6 mission (launched 
15  Dec.  1965) to  mee t   t h e   already orbiting Gemini  7  crew.  He  also 
commanded Gemini 9 (3-6   June  1966), which rendezvoused with  the  
previously  launched augmented target docking adap ter .  Stafford was 
commander  ofApoZZo 10 (18-  26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission 
to use the  complete Apollo spacecraf t ;  during the  mission he and  crew 
member  Eugene A.  Cernan  flew t h e  lunar  module to within  15 km of 
the   surface  while  John   W.  Young  orbited  t h e   moon  in  t h e   Apollo 
spacecraf t .  In  July  Stafford headed  the  three-man Apollo crew for t h e  
joint  U .S .-U .S .S .R .   Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  mission  (15-24  July 
1975); h e  had accumulated a total of 507 h r  43 min in space  and flown 6 
space  missions.  (NASA  Release  75-241) 
Field  operations  of  an  ocean  bathymetry 
27  Augus t-7   Sep tember:  
expedition  sponsored jointly  by  NASA  and  the  Cousteau  Society had 

178 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

August 

been  successfully completed in the  Cen tra l  Bahamas. Objective of the  
expedition was to evaluate t h e  usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors  
for   measuring  wa ter   dep th   in  shallow  s e a s   and   for  improving  the  
accuracy  of  mapping  ocean-bottom  features.  Th ir teen   satellites- 
including NASA’s Land sa t  1 a n d 2 ,  Sms 1, and A t s  3 ; National Ocean ic  
and  Atmospheric Administration’s  Noaa 3 and  4  and  Essa 8; and  six 
satellites of the Navy’s Trans i t  Navigation  System, plus two research  
v e s s e l s - cou s t e au   Society’s Calypso and  the  Johns  Hopkins Univer- 
sity’s  Beayondan-recorded 
bathymetric  da ta   a t   se lec ted   sites. 
Scuba   divers  measured  ocean   floor  reflectivity  and   water  trans- 
parency with  sophisticated underwater  instruments. 
Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques 
Cous teau  and  his son Philippe; NASA  Project Manager Dr.  Enrico P. 
Mercanti  and  science  monitor  Ross  McCluney,  both  of  Goddard 
Space   Flight  Cen ter ;   and  Dr.  Fabian  Polcyn  of  the   Environmental 
Research  Ins t i tu te  of Michigan.  NASA Director of User Affairs Russell 
L.  Schweikart coordinated  the  project. Also  participating was Presi- 
den t  Gerald R. Ford’s  son Jack ,  who  accompanied the  expedition for 
the  first phase ,  assisting with several underwater and  onboard experi- 
ments.  (NASA  Releases  75-  2 4 ,  75-  257) 
28 Augu s t :   The  Air Force  announced successful te s t  flight of  an F-111D 
equipped with a turbofan je t  engine having all-composite third-stage 
fan  blades 40% lighter  than  conventional  titanium  blades.  This was 
the  first military operational evaluation of  a rotating s truc tura l  engine 
component made of  composite materials.  (AFSC Release OIP 214.75) 
0  A  red-tide  detection  program  had  been  approved  by  Goddard  Space  
Flight  Cen ter   and   t h e   Florida  Department  of  Natural  Resources 
(FDNR).  Caused   by  an   ocean-borne  phytoplankton,  Gymnodinium 
breve, “red  tide”  had left thousands of dead  fish rotting on beaches  in 
on Land sa t  1 and  
coas ta l  es tuar ies .  Ocean-color scanners-mounted 
2 (launched  23 July  1972 and  22 Jan.  1975) and  on  NASA ’ s  U-2  research  
a i r c r a f t - cou ld   de tec t   sub t le   color  variations  in  coas ta l   waters,  to 
warn of  changes  in concentration and species of  marine phytoplank- 
ton  populations  and   indicate  possible  red-tide  invasions.  Research  
vessels  would  verify  the   findings  by  on-site  sampling.  Program 
managers  hoped  the  da ta  would  lead  to  the  development of  an  early 
warning  system tha t  would  allow crews to  combat  effects of  the  red  
tide.  (NASA  Release  75-  242) 
29 Augus t:   Successful lung surgery performed 26 Aug.  on Apollo-Soyuz 
Te s t   Project  Astronaut  Donald  K.  Slayton  revealed  no  evidence  of 
malignancy,  the  Johnson Space  Cen ter  Roundup reported. During the  
2.5-hr  surgery,  doctors  a t   t h e   Texas  Medical  Cen ter   removed  a 
triangular  wedge  tha t   included  the   4-mm  nodule  de tec ted   during 
postflight  x-rays  [see  20  Aug.]  plus  a  small  amount  of  normal 
surrounding tissue.  Adjacent  lymph nodes were  biopsied  and  found 
normal; doctors found no signs of  any other lesions.  Slayton would re- 
main in the  hospital for  7 to 10  more days. (JSC Roundup ,  29 Aug.  7 5 , l )  
A backup  Skylab Orbital Workshop and  an airlock module and  multiple 
docking  adapter  would  be  shipped  by  barge  to  Washington,  D.c., for 
display  at  the  Smithsonian  Institution’s  National  Air  and  Space 
Museum.  S tr ipped  of  all equipment tha t  could be  used for fu ture  pro- 
grams,  the  workshop would  be  cu t  into  three   sections for transport; 

179 

August 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

two dciors would b e  added  and  the  floor s treng thened  to accommodate 
t h e  flow of tourists.  T h e  museum  was schedu led  to open  4 July 1976. 
(MSFC Release  75-  189) 
0  Rockwell International Corp.,  prime  contractor  for  the   Space  Shuttle, 
announced selection of Consolidated Controls for a $l.5-million  con- 
trac t   to provide high- and  low-pressure  helium valves  for the  Shu t t le  
Orb i ter   reaction-control  system  (RCS).  The   valves  would  control 
helium  output  in  t h e   RCS propellant  tanks ,   serving  a s   a  manifold 
shutoff  valve  in  the   vernier  engine  and   a s   a  low-pressure  helium 
shutoff valve.  (Rockwell Release  SP-29) 
31  August:  Communications  Satellite  Corp.,  U.S.  representative  in  t h e  
International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, transmitted 
i ts   twelfth  annua l  report  to  the   Pres iden t ,   covering  the   activities  of 
ComSat  from  1 July  1974-30  June   1975. 
Two more Intelsat  IV  satellites had  been  orbited, In te lsa t  IV  F-8 
21 Nov.  1974 over the  Pacific Ocean  and  In te lsa t  IV F -   1 22 May 1975 
over  the   Indian Ocean .   A  th ird   satellite,  In te lsa t   IV  F-6,  failed  to 
achieve orbit when  the  launch  vehicle  malfunctioned. 
By  30  June   1975  a  network  of  112 antennas-27  more  than   las t  
year-at  88 ear th  stations was providing  379 ComSat pathways, with 
107  countries  leasing  satellite  services,  a n   increase   of  7  over  t h e  
previous year. 
Comsa t   General  Corp.,  a  subsidiary,  had  en tered   into  a  joint 
venture  with  the   European  Space  Agency  and   t h e   Government  of 
Canada   on  3 Dec.  1974 to  provide  satellite  capacity  for  a n  Aerosat 
(aeronautical satellite) communications tes t  and  evaluation program. 
Comsat  General  and   International  Business  Machines  Corp.  had 
notified  the   Federa l   Communications Commission  tha t   they  would 
seek   to  en te r  the  domestic  satellite bus iness  with  one o r  more  part- 
ners .   ComSat’s ear th   stations  in  Connecticut  and  California neared  
read iness  for Marisat (maritime satellite) communications services in 
the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Ocean   areas. 
ComSat reported a ne t   income of  $44 918 000, o r  $4.49 per  sha re ,  
up   from  $36  299 000 or $3.63  per  share   in  1973. (Text) 
During Augu s t :   “The  importance of  space  to our  defensive military effort 
c an   only  increase  in  t h e   fu ture ,”   Gen.  Samue l  C.  Phillips,  retiring 
commander  of  the  Air  Force  Sys tems  Command  and NASA’s  Apollo 
Program Director from  1964-69,  said in  an  interview.  Gen.  Phillips 
specu la ted  tha t   aircraft,  including  the   B-  1 bomber  under   develop- 
ment by the  U.S.,  would b e  an  important par t  of t h e  military force “for 
a s  many decades  ahead  a s  anyone ca re s  to project.”  However,  h e  saw 
energy  scarcities  increasing  the   need  for  training  simulators  and  
alternative aircraft  fuels.  (AFSC Newsreview,  Aug 75,  1) 

180 

September 1975 

1 September:  NASA’s Small Astronomy  Satellite  (Sas  2,  launched   a s  Ex -  
p lo re r48  16 NOV. 1972) had  observed a  pu lsar  in the  Vela constellation 
tha t  generated two burs ts  of gamma rays for each  burs t  of radio waves, 
theAstrophysica1 Journal  repor ted .  No  other pu lsar  had been found to 
exhibit such  properties.  The  new observation indicated  tha t  pulsars- 
small,  dense ,   rapidly  spinning s t a r s  thought to  be  remains  of  a  huge 
stellar explosion  or  supernova-were  much more  complex than   had 
been  believed. 
Detection of gamma rays from Vela mean t  t h a t  pu lsars  were a  likely 
source  of  cosmic rays.  Many  astrophysicists  had  believed  tha t   only 
very  young  pu lsars   could  produce  cosmic  energies,  but  the   S a s   2 
observations cas t  doubt on this conclusion:  Scientists believed  that the 
Vela  pu lsar  was  more  than   10 000  yrs  old.  (D.J.  Thompson e t   al., 
Astrophysical Jou rna l ,   1 Sep t  75; GSFC  Release  G -   75-20) 
0  Appointment of  Lt.  Gen.  William  J.  Evans  a s   commander  of  the   Air 
Force  Sys tems  Command  became  effective.  Gen.  Evans,  who  had 
been deputy chief of  staff for research  and development at Air Force 
Hq, was  replacing  retiring  Gen.  Samuel 6. Phillips.  AFX  had  been 
responsible  for  developing Air  Force  aerospace   technology.  (AFSC 
Newsreview,  Aug.  75) 
2  September:  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen te r   announced  the   award  of  a  
$4 4@9  000 cost-plus-incentive-fee  con trac t   to  Bendix Corp.  for  de-  
sign, development, test  and  evaluation,  and fabrication  of  integrated 
electronic  assemblies ( E A )  for Space  Shu t t le  solid rocket boosters on 
the  first six Shu t t le  developmental flights. Each  booster would requ ire  
two  E A s :  The  forward E A  would  initiate  re lease  of  the  nose c a p  and  
frustum, jettison the  solid-rocket-motor  nozzle, de tach  the  parachu te ,  
and   turn   on  recovery  aids.  The   aft  E A  would  interface  with  the 
Orbiter,  the   forward EA,  and  o ther   avionic  systems.  Delivery  of  the  
IEAs  would  begin  in  1976  and  continue  through  1 Apr.  1979.  (MSFC 
Release  75 -190) 
3  September:  Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory  scientists  had  re leased   “Au- 
tomobile  Power  Sys tems   Evaluation  Study,”  urging  adoption  of  a  
billion-dollar  program   to  ma s s -p roduce ,   by  1985,  a   fue l-sav ing  
pollution-free  rep lacemen t  for  the   s tandard   in terna l  combustion en- 
gine,  Richard Witkin repor ted   in  the  New  York  Times.  Funded  by  a  
$500 000 gran t  from the  Ford Motor Co.  with the  understanding  tha t  
th e   s tudy  would  b e   independen t   and   unbiased,  JPL’S  report  recom- 
mended accelerated,  parallel development of  the  Brayton gas turbine 
and Stirling ex terna l  combustion engine until a  c lear  choice could be 
made between them. The  s tudy  found tha t  e i ther  engine not only was 
virtually pollution-free and  cu t  fuel consumption by 30 to 4% bu t  also 
could be  mass-produced a t  a c o s t  differential sma l l  enough to be  easily 
recovered  through  fuel  savings  by  the   first owner. 

181 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
September 
The  JPL engineers defined the fuel economy,  emissions, and  cos ts  of 
vehicles powered  by  nine  o ther  engines a s  well  a s  by  improved  ver-  
sions of the  conventional in terna l  combustion engine. Six sizes of c a r s  
were analyzed,  covering the range of consumer  preferences. Electric 
and  hybrid  power sys tems  were   also  evaluated. 
Aside  from  development of  the   Brayton  and   Stirling engines,  the  
report recommended o ther  programs to reduce  fuel consumption 15 to 
35% by improved vehicle packaging, weight  reductions, and  transmis- 
sion improvements.  The repor t  also recommended tha t  t h e  U.S.  work 
in  the   interim  to  improve  the   fuel  economy  and   emissions  level  of 
conventional car  engines.  (JPL  Laboratory,  197515,  21; Witkin,  NYT, 
4  Sept  75,  18) 
22 
0  Marsha l l   Sp a c e   Flight  C e n t e r   was   reque s t ing   proposals-due 
Sept.-from 
t h e  aerospace  indus try  for a s tudy  leading to design and  
development of a n  Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory (ACPL) a s  a 
payload  aboard Spacelab, MSFC announced. ACPL experiments would 
give scientists  a knowledge  of weather processes  important for long- 
range wea ther  prediction and  weather modification. After evaluating 
the proposals, MSFC would  award two parallel 12-mo f irm-fxed  price 
contracts.  (MSFC  Re lease  75-  192) 
0  Dale  D.  Myers,  president  of  Rockwell  International  Corp.’s  North 
American  Aircraft  Operations,  announced  appointment  of  Bastian 
Hello  a s  president  of  Rockwell’s  B -1   Bomber  Div.  Hello, who  had 
b e en   vice  pres iden t   of  t h e   division  s ince   1973,  was  succeed ing  
Robert E. Greer, who was  retiring. Before joining t h e  B-1   Div.,  Hello 
was vice  president  and  genera l  manager of  Rockwell’s  Space  Div.’s 
Apollo launch  operations organization a t  Kennedy Space  Cen ter .   (RI 
Release  LA -2 )  
4  September:  Former  as tronau t   Alfred  M.  Worden,  Chief  of  Ames  Re- 
sea rch   Center’s  Application  Div.,  announced  tha t   he  would  leave 
government  service, effective 5 Sept. Worden was  also retiring from 
the  Air Force after 20 yrs. During the  Apo l lo  15 lunar  landing mission 
(26 July-  7 Aug.  1971), Worden was command module pilot and, with 
fellow crewmen David  R.  Sco t t  and  James   B.  Irwin,  spen t   12  days 
7  h r   12 min  in  space. 
Worden transferred  to ARC in Sep tember  1972 a s  a research  scien- 
tist in the  Airborne Sc ience  Office. He was also Chief of  the  Systems 
S tud ies  Div.  before  his  appointment  to  t h e  Application Div. 
In  his announcement Worden said he would spend  one year lectur- 
ing  on  “Spacesh ip  Ear th”   and  writing  a  book  commissioned  by  the  
High  Flight Foundation,  a n  interdenominational evangelistic organi- 
zation  based  in Colo.  (NASA  Release  75-248) 
5 September:  A Viking Data Review Management Cen ter  had been estab- 
lished  a t  Kennedy  Space  Center,  t h e  Spaceport  News  reported.  Th e  
cen te r  would  promptly disseminate d a t a  from the  two Viking  space-  
craft to all concerned government agencies and  contractors, and would 
aid  in  solving launch-related  problems  a s  quickly  a s  possible. 
During  the  Viking 1 launch   on 20 Aug.,  da ta  and  review teams   of 
NASA   and   contractor  personnel  a t  KSC  were  responsible  for  rapidly 
analyzing incoming d a t a  for top management. Any anomaly tha t  could 
affect  t h e   launch   of  Viking  B  had  to  b e   de tec ted   and   resolved  a s  
quickly a s  possible. Cen te r  personnel had tracked  some 20 problems 
from discovery  to  resolution.  (KSC Spaceport  News ,   5  Sep t  75,  2) 

182 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

September 

Je t   Propulsion Laboratory had proposed  some economically sound and  
technically  feasible  alternatives  to  the   automobile  industry’s  ineffi- 
c ien t   and   polluting  in terna l  combustion engine  [see 3  Sept.],  a Los 
Angeles Times  editorial said.  Development of  a new  economical and  
pollution-free engine on a mass-production basis would take  time and 
money  bu t  “ the   auto industry can  well  afford t h e  $150 million a year 
tha t  would be  needed.”  Th e  JPL  repor t  voiced skepticism tha t  industry 
could do the  job alone.  “Additional  funding from the  federa l  govern- 
men t   i s  required,  as w e l l   a s  a commitment  tha t   introduction of  an 
alternative engine by  1985 is a national goal. JPL  makes  a persuasive 
ca se   tha t   all  th is   is  feasible  and   in  the   national  interest.  Given  the  
p o t e n t i a l   in   f u e l   s av i ng s   a n d   r e d u c e d   a i r   po l lu t ion ,  
t h e  
money.  . .would  be   a  solid  investment.”  (LA T im e s ,  5 Sep t  7 5 )  
*  A  group of  35 represen ta t ives  from  cen tra l  H a .   planning  agencies at- 
tended   a  1-day  workshop  a t   Kennedy  Space   Cen te r   to  assess   the  
possibility  of  using  satellite  da ta   for  land-use  planning.  Edward J. 
Hecker  of  the  KSC Office of  Ea r th  Resources  told  t h e  group tha t  the  
4cen t-per-sq-m i  cost of obtaining satellite da ta  was one-third the cost 
of  aircraft-obtained data. Data collected by “on foot” surveys cost $20 
per   sq  mi,  and   the   cost of  using  a n  automobile for  th is   purpose  ran  
about  $2  per   sq  mi. 
Dr. Garland L. Thomas, coinvestigator for the  ear th-resources  mis- 
sion  of  Landsa t   2  (launched  22 Jan.)  and   employee  of  t h e  Brevard 
County (Ha .)  Planning and  Zoning  Dept.,  told  the  group that,  using 
satellite da ta  and  photography,  p lanners  could de term ine  which areas  
were developable and  which were  not,  p:oduce  comprehensive land- 
use  planning maps,  monitor wa ter   quality,  and   trace   the   process  of 
eutrophication in  cen t ra l  Fla.’s  many  lakes.  (KSC  Release  181 -75) 
8 ,  9 ,   and   17  September:  Data  collected  by  sounding  rockets,  satellites, 
ins trumen ted   balloons,  and   high-flying  aircraft  had  supported  the 
hypothesis  tha t   fluorocarbons  such   a s  those  found  in   aerosol  spray 
can s  might  b e  breaking down  the  earth‘s  ozone  shield, scientists told 
hearings  of  t h e   Sena te  Committee  on  Aeronautical  and   Space  Sci- 
ence s ’   Subcomm i t tee   on  t h e   Upper   A tmosphere .   Ozone  in  t h e  
s tra tosphere   screened   the   ea r th   from  harmful  ultraviolet  radiation 
tha t  might increase  incidence of  cance r  and  o ther  sk in  d iseases  and  
prove  le tha l  to  many  life  forms  a s  well  a s  damage  eyes,  crops,  and  
livestock. An increase  in atmospheric fluorocarbons could also have a 
greenhouse effect, permitting sunlight to pa s s  freely but inhibiting t h e  
escape  of hea t  in the  form of infrared radiation.  Th is  would warm the  
lower  atmosphere  and   the   earth,  altering  aquatic  and   terrestrial 
eco sy s tem s   and   env ironmen ta l   chem ica ls ,   a n d   c rea t ing   c l ima te  
changes. An  ex treme  greenhouse effect had been  blamed  for Venus’ 
oven-hot  tempera tures .  
Dr.  Warren  R .  Muir,  cochairman of the  Interagency Ta sk  Force on 
Inadver ten t  Modification  of the  S tra tosphere ,  told t h e  subcommittee, 
“Based on  our preliminary assessmen t  there  seem s  to b e  a legitimate 
cau se   for  concern.”  If  additional government  research-with  NASA 
coordinating-had 
proved more conclusively t h e  danger to  the  envi- 
ronment, the  government should t ak e  action for “prompt enac tmen t  of 
toxic  subs tances  legislation.” 
Dr.  Wilson  K. Talley  of  t h e   Environmental  Protection  Agency 
agreed tha t  fluorocarbons might pose a problem to  t h e  stratosphere, 

183 

September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

and tha t  the  total effect of  releasing fluorocarbons and other halocar- 
bon  compounds  into the   atmosphere might not  become  apparen t  for 
10 yrs. But, with evidence of public danger not strong enough to s tand  
up  to  a court challenge  by  manufacturers,  government  regulation  of 
the  offending subs tances  would be unenforceable.  (Transcript; Sulli- 
van, NYT,  10 Sep t  75,  1) 
9 September:  Viking 2 was successfully launched  at 2 3 9  pm EDT from the  
Eas tern   T e s t  Range  on  a  Titan-Centaur  launch  vehicle.  The  space-  
craf t   en tered   on  a  trajectory  toward  Mars  accura te   to  within  the   3- 
sigma  tolerance.  If  flown  without  midcourse  correction,  Viking  2 
would  reach  Martian  orbit  279 259 km  from  the   target. 
Th e  launch   had  been  rescheduled  from  1 Sept.,  after  the  launch  
crew during a 28 Aug.  precountdown tes t  discovered a degradation in 
the   detection  threshold  of  the   orbiter's  S-band  radio  receiver.  On  1 
Sept.,  project  officials  decided  to  remove  the   spacecraft  from  the  
launch vehicle for additional evaluation. Th e  launch was rescheduled 
for  9  Sept.  after  evaluation  concluded  tha t   the   anomaly  had  been 
caused  by  a faulty connector or  conductor between  the  diplexer mod- 
ule  and  the   high-gain  antenna.  Since  the   faulty  part  could  not  be 
isolated,  the   antenna  and  cabling  were  replaced,  the   orbiter  and 
lander retested,  encapsulated,  and mated to the  launch vehicle. After 
launch,  all onboard  systems  and  experiments  were  checked   out.  A  
trajectory  correction  maneuver  on  19 Aug.  targeted  Viking 2  for  a 
rendezvous  with Mars  on  7 Aug.  1976. 
Viking 2 was  the  second  of  two  identical planetary  probes  [see 20 
Aug.],  each   consisting  of  an  orbiter  and  a  lander,  launched  toward 
Mars  in  1975 for  rendezvous  and  orbital  and  surface  exploration  in 
1976.  (NASA  MOR  S-815-75-01-02, 
16  S e p t   75;  Viking  Science 
Activities  rpt  no.  89; Mission Operations  S ta tus  Bulletins  10-14) 
0  Japan 's  N  booster  launched ,   from  Tanegashima  launch  site,  i t s   first 
payload--li;iku,  an  83-kg spacecraft  designed  to measure  launch  vi- 
brations and spacecraft temperatures in space. Kiku entered orbit with 
a  1104-km apogee, 977-km perigee,  106-min period,  and  47"  inclina- 
tion.  The  launch vehicle consisted of  a Rocketdyne MB-  3 first-stage 
engine,  modified  from  the   U .S .   Thor  program,  with  three   Thiokol 
Corp.  Castor 2 solid-rocket strap-ons.  Th e  second  stage,  designated 
LE-  3,  had  been  designed  by  Japan 's  National  Space  Development 
Agency with  Rocketdyne  assistance.  Th e  third  stage was  a Thiokol 
TE-364-4  solid-rocket motor. (GSFC Wkly S S R ,  4-  10 Sep t  75; Av Wk, 
22  Sep t   75,  50) 
0  A  s ta r  tracker, STELLAR(Star Tracker  forEconomica1 Long Life Attitude 
Reference), was  being developed  by  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory for a 
variety  of  future  manned  and   unmanned  space  missions.  STELLAR 
used  a  solid-state  silicon  detector,  called  a  charge-coupled  device 
(CCD),  for image sensing and  a microcomputer  to  process and format 
the   data.  Previous  s ta r  trackers   had  used  high-voltage vacuum-tube 
image  dissectors  for  image  sensing;  the   t ub e s  were  difficult to  pro- 
duce,  had  a  limited  lifetime,  developed  errors,  and  could  provide 
attitude-reference da ta  from only a single s ta r  in any given observation 
frame. STELLA&  which subs t i tu ted  a single low-voltage 6-mm-sq CCD 
ch ip  for  the  complex  and   expensive  tube,  offered  the   advantages of 
solid-state  reliability and  of  simple programming to  adap t  to  varying 
mission  requirements.  I n   addition  to  substantial  savings  in  cost  of 

184 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

September 

flight  hardware,  the   CCD  imaging  devices  were   expec ted   to  rev- 
olutionize  TV camera   design,  permitting  miniature  low-cost  home 
monitors within  the  next  several  years. 
STELLAR,  which  had  been  developed  under   the   management  of 
NASA's Office of  Aeronautics and  Space  Technology,  would  provide 
t r a c k e r s  
fo r   p l a n e t a r y   M a r i n e r  
s p a c e c r a f t  
a f t e r  
t h e  
Mariner-Jupiter-Saturn  mission in 1977 and for such  Space  Shu t t le  
payloads a s  the  proposed Shu t t le  infrared  telescope  facility. For the 
telescope  facility, STELLAR would t rack  a s  many a s  10 s t a r s  simultane- 
ously,  providing  position  coordinates  and  s ta r  magnitudes  for  each. 
(NASA  Release  75-251) 
0  The   aft  fuselage  for  Space   Shu t t le   Orb i ter   101  arrived  at  Rockwell 
In terna t iona l   Corp.'s  Palmdale,  Calif.,  assembly  facility  a f te r   a  
160-km t ruck  journey from Rockwell's  Downey plant. The  aft fuselage 
joined the  midfuselage, vertical tail, and wing panels delivered earlier 
by  Rockwell  subcon t rac to r s .   T h e   forward  fuse lage   was  due   in 
Pa lmda le  in October, with rollout of  the  first orb i ter  scheduled for the 
third qua r te r  of  1976. Approach and landing te s t s  would begin during 
the   second qua r te r  of  1977. (JSC Roundup ,   12 Sep t   75,  4) 
0  NASA  had   awarded  a   $3.358-mUion  con trac t   to  RCA  Corp.'s  Astro- 
Electronics  Div.  to build  a  return-beam  vidicon (RBV)  two-camera TV 
system  for  the   Landsat-C  spacecraf t .  With  twice  the  resolution  of- 
fered by  the cameras  on Land sa t  1 a n d 2 w h i c h  viewed three  identi- 
ca l  ground  scenes   160 km  sq  through  sepa ra te  spec tra l  filters-the 
RBV  camera   system  would  produce  side-by-side  panchromatic  pic- 
tures,  each   covering  80  km  sq.  (NASA  Con trac t   NAS   5-22-350; 
Raizen, GSFC  Landsat  Procuremen t  Off,  interview,  15 S e p t  77; SBD ,  
21 Aug  75) 
0  NASA  announced selection of the  Boeing Co.  and Martin Marietta Corp. 
for negotiations leading to a  con trac t  for delivery of  a  base module for 
the   first  of  NASA's  Applications  Explorer  Missions  (AEM-A),  also 
known  a s   the   Heat  Capacity  Mapping Mission  (HCMM).  The   base 
module would b e  a  platform for the  heat-capacity-mapping radiome- 
t e r  and all suppor t  instrumentation,  including receivers,  transm i t ters ,  
power  system,  and   attitude-control  system.  The  con trac t  would  call 
for delivery of  the  base  module within  20  mo  of  the   award. 
Planned  for  launch   in  1978, AEM-A  would  ga ther   thermal-inertia 
da ta   from  the  earth's  surface,  da ta   which  should  distinguish  rock 
types,  locate  mineral resources,  de tec t   soil moisture,  and  read   tem- 
pera tures   of  vegetation  cover.  (NASA  Release  75 -253) 
10 September:  Dr.  George M.  Low,  NASA  Deputy Administrator,  told  the  
Sena te  Committee on Aeronautical and Space  Sc iences  tha t  t h e  com- 
bined efforts of government and  industry could reduce  fuel consump- 
tion of  civil air transpor t  by 40 to 50% without degrading the  environ- 
ment or  reduc ing  aircraft safety. The  conclusion was based  on a  study 
by  NASA,  Federa l  Aviation Administration,  DOD, and   industry  at  the  
reque s t  of  the  committee. Need for a  vigorous  fuel-conservation pro- 
gram  had  been  underscored  by  es t ima tes   from  the   Federa l  Energy 
Administration and   Air  Transpor t  Association  of  America  tha t   U.S. 
outlays for imported oil had  increased  from $3 billion in  1970 to $24 
billion in 1974, and could reach  $32 billion by  1977. Je t  fuel cos ts  had 
risen from 12 cen t s  a  gallon (4.4 cen t s  per liter) in 1973 to 29 cen t s  (10.5 
cen t s )  in  1975. 

185 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
September 
NASA  studies had  shown tha t ,   by the  year 2005,  the  U.S. could save  
one   million  barrels  of  refined  aircraft  fue l   per  day  by  use  of  new 
technology in civil air transport.  NASA’s proposed fuel-efficiency plan 
would include six major programs of  research  on engine components, 
engine  efficiency,  aircraft  design,  turboprop  performance,  laminar 
flow  control  and  drag   reduction,  and  increased  use  of  composite 
materials  for aircraft  parts.  (Transcript,  NASA  Release  75 -252) 
0  Engineers a t  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  were completing tes ts  seek-  
ing to refine the  means of  towing to shore for refurbishment and reuse  
recovered  solid rocket  boosters  from  Space Shuttle launches.  These  
tes ts   explored  the  question  of  whether  the   parachu te   recovery lines 
and riser lines on the  three  recovery parachu tes  to be a t tached  to e a ch  
booster would, when under  tension during descent,  s tre tch  enough to 
develop sufficient la ten t  energy to deploy the  52-mm-dia by 15-m long 
tow  rope  from a tray located in the  booster’s forward skirt.  The  te s t s  
employed  a  10-m  Sa turn   S-11-stage  a d a p t e r   ring,  to  which  the  
parachu te  lines were attached.  A crane  hoisted the  adap ter  ring until 
the   s tress   on  the   rings  was  12 000  kg,  about  one-half  the   s tress   ex- 
pected on the parachutes  lowering the  booster. An explosive bolt was 
detonated,  abruptly freeing the  parachute  lines; they contracted  and  
the  lines and fitting to which they were a t tached  were yanked upward 
more  than  60 m,  quite  enough  energy  to  deploy the   tow  line. 
Th e   recovery  system  parachu tes   would  be  fitted  with  flotation 
devices  so  they  could be  recovered.  On  the  first six Shuttle develop- 
mental  flights,  the   se t   of  parachutes  would  be  cu t   free  from  one 
booster in each  set of two and  both would be tes ted  to determine which 
configuration made  it  eas ier   to  retrieve  and   tow  the   booster.  (MSFC 
Marsha l l   S ta r ,   10 Sep t   75,  2) 
Apo l lo  17 Astronaut Harrison H.  Schmitt, the  only scientist astronaut to 
walk on t h e  moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from 
N.  Mex.,  the  Wash ing ton  Pos t   reported.  A  Republican,  Dr.  Schmitt 
would oppose Democratic  Senator Joseph  M.  Montoya, who was ex- 
pec ted   to  seek   reelection.  (V Po s t ,   10 Sep t   75) 
0  The  appearance  of  a  supernova  on  5 July  1054 had  been  recorded  in 
primitive  ar t   by  ancient  Indians  on  the  wa l l s   of  a N.  Mex.  cave,  the  
New York Times reported.  Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter   astronomer 
Dr.  John  C.  Brandt,  leader  of  the  team  of  astronomers who  had  dis- 
covered the  cave art,  said tha t  the da te  of  the pictograph-a 
crescen t  
moon  with  a nearby  object  variously  described  a s   a  circle,  cross,  or  
a s t e r i sk - co in c id ed  with  records  of  the   Chinese  Sung dynasty.  Th e  
Chinese had reported that, on the  morning of 5 July  1054, a minor s t a r  
in  the   constellation  Taurus   appeared  to  explode  into  extraordinary 
visible Y n  daylight  for  23  days  before 
brilliance.  Ancient  Chinese  astronomers  had  described  the   event- 
which  modern  astronomers  identifie  a s   the   supernova  tha t   had 
crea ted   the   Crab  Nebula-as 
fading and a t  night for another 633 days. Although the  modern astron- 
omers  could  not  prove  tha t   the   cave  art depicted  the   Crab   Nebula 
supernova,  “What  we  have  is   circumstantial  evidence  that,  to  us, 
looks  pretty  good,”  Dr.  Brandt  said.  No  other  supernova  of  known 
d a t e  had  been  visible from North  America  near   a crescen t  moon. 
Th e  supernova pictographs were not the  only evidence of  astronom- 
ical observations by American Indians; Navajo gourd ra t t les  and sand  
paintings  often  depicted  the   Pleiades  and  Orion  constellations,  and  

186 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

September 

Hopi designs  included  representations  of  the  Milky Way,  constella- 
tions,  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  Heaps  of  s tones   strategically  placed 
cen tur ies  ago in Wyo.  hills could have  been  used  by  Indians  to sight 
s ta r s   and  to  predict  and  confirm  the   summer  solstice.  (Rensberger, 
NYT,  10 Sep t  75,  39) 
11  September:  NASA  launched  a  two-stage  solid-propellant  Nike-Hawk 
sounding rocket  from Wallops Island,  carrying an 84-kg payload  to a 
164-km  altitude.  The  flight,  to  demonstrate  successful  mating  of  a 
surplus  Hawk  engine with  the   Nike M-88  first  stage,  also  tes ted   a 
newly developed recovery system for both the  single-stage Hawk and 
the   Nike-Hawk  vehicle.  The  system,  designed  for  both  land  or  air 
recovery,  could  re turn   up   to  136 kg  of  payload  by  parachute.  The 
sounding rocket  carried  a Univ.  of  P i t tsburgh  high-resolution photo- 
electron spectrometer  to measure  daytime photoelectron  energy dis- 
tribution  with  a  very  high-energy  resolution.  The  payload  impacted 
178 km  downrange  and w a s  retrieved by  t h e  research  vessel Annan -  
da le .   (WSC  Release  75-10) 
0  NASA was considering resuming exploration of  the moon in 1980, using a 
low-cost  unmanned  satellite  to  map   the  entire  lunar  surface  from 
orbit, Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter  scientist Marius B.  Weinreb  told 
United  P r e s s   International  in  a  telephone  interview.  Th e   proposed 
satellite,  together with a small communications  relay satellite, would 
gather information needed by scientists to organize the  vast amount of 
da ta   collected  during  the   Apollo lunar  landing  missions. 
One mission of  the  satellite would be  to  provide a detailed chart  of 
the   lunar   gravitational field,  including  field  variations,  to  tell  scien- 
tists  more  about  the   composition of  the  moon  and  perhaps  about  its 
origin and evolution. Previous lunar orbiters had merely mapped  and 
photographed  the   lunar   surface.  Although  scientists  had  learned 
much  from  Apollo  d a t a   about  the   gravitational  field  of  the   moon’s 
near  side, they knew little about the  far  side. The  proposed satellite- 
equipped with instruments including x-ray and gamma-ray sensors- 
and  i ts   accompanying  high-orbiting comsat,  which would  remain  in 
range of both the  satellite and  the ear th  a t  all times, would  send back 
to  ear th  d a t a  on  the   entire  lunar   surface. 
Weinreb  told  UP1  that  NASA   administrators  had  considered  in- 
cluding  the   proposed  project  in  the   FY  1977 budget.  Budget  restric- 
tions  might  prevent  NASA   from  initiating  new  projects.  (UPI,  W T ,  
11 Sep t  75,  11; interview, Weinreb,  13 June  78) 
12 September:  Former  astronaut William R.  Pogue  ( U ~ A F ,  Ret.)  received 
the   1974 Thomas  D.  White  Space  Trophy  during ceremonies  a t   the 
National  Geographic  Society  Headquarters  in  Washington,  D.C. 
Pogue received  the  trophy-given 
annually to the  military or civilian 
member  of  the   Air  Force  who  made  an  outstanding  contribution  to 
U .S .  progress in aerospace-for  his achievements a s  pilot o f s ky l a b  4 ,  
third  and final mission  aboard the  U .S . ’ s   first manned  orbiting work- 
shop.  The   mission  (16  Nov.  1973 to  8 .F e b .   1974), longest  manned 
flight in history,  had  established  the   foundation  for future  long-term 
missions in space.  Pogue had  retired from both the  A ir  Force and the 
astronaut  corps on  1 Sept.  (DOD  Release  456-75) 
0  Flight Research  Center’s F-111  Integrated Propulsion Control System 
(IPCS)  aircraft  had  made  i t s  first  flight with  the   new  system  operat- 
ing, FRC’sx-Press reported.  The  IPCS used digital electronics ins tead  

187 

September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

of  conventional hydromechanical controls for actuating the  aircraft’s 
supersonic je t  engine and  engine inlet. Th e  new  system was expec ted  
to  allow  aircraft to fly a t  full high-speed  performance  limits without 
adverse interaction among the  engine, the  inlet, and  the  aerodynamic 
flow  over  the   fuselage.  During  the   1-hr  flight,  t h e   modified  inlet 
and  engine were opera ted  entirely under  compu ter  control, with rou- 
tine tes t  transfers  between digital and  hydromechanical control a t  all 
flight  conditions.  (FRC X-Press,  12  Sep t  75,  2) 
0  NASA  had  se lec ted  Brooks Air Force Base in San  Antonio,  Tex.,  a s  the  
site for a remote storage facility for  10 to 20%  of  the  382 kg of  lunar  
material brought back  from the  moon  by  the  Apollo crews,  the  John- 
son  Space  Cen ter  Roundup  reported. All lunar  material had previous- 
ly  been   stored  in  JSC’s  curatorial  facility;  the   additional  s i te  would 
safeguard against any ca tas trophe  tha t  might affect the  material a t  the  
main  site. 
Samp les  a t  Brooks,  a cross  section of  all lunar  materials collected 
during the  Apollo missions,  would  be held  in “dead   storage” to keep  
them   in  pristine  condition  for  analysis  by  fu ture   generations.  (JSC 
Roundup,  12  Sep t  75) 
0  Char les  M.  Duke, Jr.,  a n  astronaut since 1966 and  lunar  mobile pilot on  
the Apollo 16 lunar  landing mission (16-27  April 1972), announced he 
would leave NASA,  effective 1 Jan .   1976. He would also resign from t h e  
Air Force af ter  nearly 19 yr of  service. DuringApollo 16, Duke logged 
11 days 1 hr 43 min in space ,  including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the  lunar  
surface.  He  and  John  W .   Young  made  3 surface  explorations of  t h e  
Descar tes  region  for  a  total of  20  h r   15 min  of  lunar  excursion. 
Since  April  1973 Duke  had  served  a s   technical  ass is tan t   to  t h e  
manager for Space  Shu t t le  systems integration.  (JSC Release 75 -74) 
15 September:  In  a  le t ter   to  Rep.  Don  Fuqua,  chairman  of  the  House  of 
Representatives’ Committee on  Sc ience  and Technology Subcommit- 
tee  on   Space   Sc ience   and   Applications,  NASA  Administrator  Dr. 
Jame s  C. F le tcher  summarized options for missions tha t  could use the  
remaining Apollo-Saturn  flight hardware. Options included an ear th-  
orbital mission  a s  a n  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project backup;  a Skylab re- 
visit;  a n  Apollo  geosynchronous mission;  a lunar  orbital mission;  an  
earth-orbital  mission  to  visit  a  Soviet  space   station; a nd   a manned- 
satellite inspector.  Th e  hardware could also be  used to launch a U.S. 
unmanned   space   station  carrying  a  large  U.S.S.R.  payload,  a  large 
orbiting  reflector,  a  space   solar-power  demonstration,  a  planetary 
probe,  or multiple payloads.  Another possibility might be to carry  a n  
Apollo  spacecraf t  into  space   aboard  the   Space  Shu t t le  to  provide  a 
crew-rescue capability o r  to  serve  a s  a habitable module,  to  demon- 
s t ra te  a Shuttle-serviced  free-flying module,  or to inspec t  and  service 
orbiting  satellites. 
Dr.  Fletcher’s le t ter  added  tha t  he  did not foresee tha t  funds would 
be   available  to  suppor t   additional  Apollo-Saturn  missions  in  the  
period preceding t h e  Space  Shu t t le  operation. Th e  subcommittee a t  a 
25 March meeting had a sked  NASA  to summarize t h e  options when the  
agency  had   sought  permission  to  dispose  of  surp lus   Apollo-Saturn 
equ ipmen t   [see 9 April].  (Text,  le t ter   from  F le tcher   to  Fuqua   and  
a t tachmen t  “Conceptual Flight Possibilities for Saturn-Apollo  Hard- 
ware,”  15 Sep t  75) 
0  Norman Pozinsky’s  appointment as Deputy Associate Administrator for 
Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition  became   effective.  Pozinsky was  re- 
188 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
September 
PD irector  of  the   Network  Development  and  Engineering Div.  in  the 
lacing  H.  R.  Brockett,  who  retired.  Pozinsky previously had   been 
Office of  Track ing  and  Data Acquisition.  (NASA  anno  17  Sep t   75) 
16  September:  Dr.  James  C.  F le tcher ,  NASA  Administrator,  presen ted  23 
awards   to  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   employees and   con trac tor  
personnel for contributions  to the  Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t  Project mission 
(15-26  July).  Ellery B.  May,  former manager of  the  Sa turn  Program 
Office  a t   W F C ,   received  NASA’s highest  award,  t h e   Distinguished 
Service Medal. Exceptional Service Medals were awarded to 14 MSFC 
employees; Public Service Awards went  to  six con trac tor  employees 
active  in  the  ASTP  mission.  The  Group Achievement Award went  to 
the  ASTP Experiments Team and  the  S t re s s  Corrosion Review Team. 
ASTP  as tronau ts  Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D.  Brand, and  Donald 
K.  Slayton, as  well a s  NASA Deputy Administrator Dr.  George M. Low, 
Associate Administrator for the  Office of  Space  Flight John F. Yard- 
ley,  and  ASTP  Program Director Ches ter  M.  Lee,  a t tended  the  cere-  
mony  honoring MSFC  workers who  had  provided  the   Sa turn   launch  
vehicle a s  well  as   10 of  t h e  21 onboard exper imen ts  for  t h e  mission. 
(MSFC Release  75-196;  Marshall S ta r ,   17  Sep t  75,  1-2) 
NASA  announced appointment of  Gonzalo Fernatldez  a s  Assistant Asso- 
c ia te   Administrator  for  Cen te r   Operations,  replacing  Raymond 
A.  Kline,  appointed  Assistant  Administrator  of  Institutional  Man- 
agement.  Fernandez ,  who  came   to  NASA  from  the  Air  Force,  would 
be   responsible  for  the   Offices  of  Administrative Data  Process ing  
Management,  Information  Sys tems ,   NASA  Aircraft,  Safety  and 
Environmental Health,  and Operating Systems. (NASA  anno,  16 Sep t  
75) 
17  September:  One of  th e  most  highly  detailed  and ins trumen ted  models 
of  the  Space  Shu t t le  ever  cons truc ted  had been wind-tunnel-tested  at 
the Arnold Engineering Development Center,  the  Air  Force Systems 
Command announced. Located throughout the  92-cm model were 835 
tempera ture   sensors  to measure  heat  levels of  major  components at 
jettison  of  the   two  expended  solid-propellant boosters. 
Two o ther  Shu t t le  te s t s  also had been completed for NASA  at AEDC: 
A smaller model and  computer-controlled sys tems  were used to study 
aerodynamic  forces  dur ing   the   separa t ion   of  t h e   expended   solid 
boosters.  During  the   t e s t  the  Orbiter  and  ex terna l  fuel-tank  models 
were  a t tached   to  the  tunne l   suppor ts  and   a   solid booster  model was 
a t tached   to  the   computer-controlled  support.  Measurements  were 
recorded with a  single booster model at various points below,  beside, 
and  behind  the  Orb i ter- tank  combination and  with  the   booster  and 
Orbiter-tank  at  various  p i tch   and  yaw  angles. 
In   the   third  test,  heating  da ta  were obtained on  an Orb i ter  model 
positioned  a t   a   high  angle  of  a t tack   at  mach  8 .   Spec ia l  paints  tha t  
changed  from  a   solid  to  a   liquid  at  specified  tdmpera tures   were 
used  to  record heating  histories  on the  surface  of  the  model,  and oil- 
coating techn iques  were used  to  examine a i d ow .   (AFSC  Release OIP 
226.75) 
18  September:  Pres iden t   Gerald  R.  Ford  presen ted   the   1974  National 
Medal of  Science,  the   nation’s  highest  sc ience   award,  to  13 distin- 
guished American scientists.  Among those honored during the  White 
House ceremony was Dr. Rudolf Kompfner of Bell Telephone Labora- 
tories Research  Communications Div.,  who received the award for his 

189 

September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

invention  of  the   traveling-wave  tube   and   for major  contributions  to 
communications satellites  and   to optical communications. 
Dr.  Linus  C .   Pauling  received  the   award  for  his  contributions in 
t h e   fields  of  s truc tura l   chemistry,  molecular  biology,  immunology, 
and  genetic  diseases.  Dr.  Pau l i ig ,   two-time  winner  of  the   Nobel 
Prize,  had   been  long  bypassed  for  t h e   national  award,  despite  re- 
pea ted  recommendations of a scientific advisory committee, because  
of  his outspoken criticism of much of  American foreign policy. Victor 
Cohn of the  Wash ing ton  Po s t  reported tha t  the  award signaled “an end  
to  a White House war on unfriendly  sc ien t is ts  conduc ted  during t h e  
Johnson  and  Nixon  administrations.” 
Pres iden t  Ford told the  200 persons attending the  ceremonies that, 
looking back  over 200 yr of t h e  nation’s history, we owed a great deb t  
to  sc ience  and  to  all the  men   and  women  who  have  “carried  on  the  
scientific  en terpr ise  of  th is   country.”  The  whole  spirit of  science- 
one  tha t   urged  us  to  innovate,  to  explore  the   unexplored,  and  to 
answer  the   unanswered-was 
the   true   spirit  of  America.  Although 
sc ien t if ic   priorities  had  changed   ove r   t h e   years,  t h e   “Nation’s 
has   not  diminished.  . . . Ou r  Nation’s  fu ture   and   tha t   of  the  world 
commitment  to  tha t   most  basic  of  all  inquiries-basic 
research- 
depends  on the  creativity and  the genius of men  and women  such  a s  
these  we  honor  today.”  (PD, 22 Sep t  75,  1027-28;  Cohn, W Po s t ,   18 
Sep t  75,  A I ;  NYT,  19  Sep t  75,  23) 
e  Th e   Na t iona l   Aeronau t ic   Association  announced   t h e   se lec t ion   of 
C larence  L. Johnson to receive its Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy 
for  1975.  Johnson,  retired  from  Lockheed  Aircraft  Co.  after  42  yrs 
with the  company, would receive the  award for his “vital and  endur ing  
contributions over a period of  40 years to t h e  design and  development 
of  m i l i tary   and   comme rc ia l   a i rc ra f t .”   As  head   of  Lockheed ’ s  
Advanced  Development Projects,  he  had  played leading roles  in the  
development and  design of more than  40 of  the  world’s finest aircraft 
i n c l u d i n g   t h e   W o r l d   W a r   I1  f i g h t e r   bom b e r ,   t h e   P - 3 8 ;   t h e  
Constellation  and   Supe r  Constellation;  the  f irs t  U.S. operational je t ,  
the  F-80;  the  high-altitude U-2  reconnaissance  aircraft; and  one  of 
t h e  first  business  je ts ,   t h e  Je t   Star. 
The  trophy had been  awarded annually for significant public serv- 
ice of  endur ing  value to  aviation in the  U.S. (NAA News,  18 S e p t  75) 
0  The   American  Ins t i tu te   of  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics  announced 
tha t  James  B.  Lazar,  NASA’s Chief  of  E lec tr ic  Propulsion  and  Flight 
Experiments  Branch  in  the   Office  of  Aeronautics  and   Space  
Technology,  and   Roderick  W.  Spence  of  the  Los  Alamos  Scientific 
Laboratory would receive t h e  James H. Wyld Propulsion Award.  Th e  
award was given annually  in recognition of  “outstanding leadership of 
this nation’s  advanced propulsion programs in the   separa te  fields of 
nuclear  and  electric  rocke t  propulsion.” 
Lazar  had  been  responsible  for  NASA’s electric  propulsion  pro- 
gram,  providing  NASA  with  the  option for a highly reliable,  efficient, 
and  flight-proven  space   propulsion  system. 
Dr.  Spence   had  d irec ted   design  and   development  of  the  nuc lear  
r o c k e t   r e a c to r s   a t   t h e   Lo s   A lamos   labo ra to ry ,   p rov id ing   t h e  
foundation  of  technology  for  the   nation’s  nuclear  rocket  program. 
(AIM Re lease   18 S e p t  75) 
A giant washing machine capab le  of  doing 318 kg of laundry would he lp  
to  develop economical and  efficient  methods  of  cleaning and   refur- 
190 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

September 

b i s h i i g   the   Space   Shu t t le   solid-rocket  booster  parachutes,  and   to 
identify  the   problems  encoun tered   dur ing   t h e   process,  Kennedy 
Space  Center’s Spaceport News reported. The  washer-2  m wide by 2 
m high and  10  m long, and  holding 23 668 l i ters  of water-would  wash 
a 23-m  318-kg 80-gore  parachute.  Once  washed,  the  parachute,  136 
kg  heavier, would be taken  by monorail to a drying area. A team  of five 
technicians was  required  to  complete the  4 h r  process.  (KSC  Space -  
po r t  News, 18 Sep t  75,  6) 
19  September:  Sa lyu t   4 ,   launched   into ea r th  orbit on  26 Dec.  1974, was 
continuing its  flight,  Tass  reported.  To  date,  the  space   station had 
completed 42200  revolutions of  t h e  ea r th  and, in automatic mode, was 
collecting da ta   and  making  astrophysical observations  with  the   on- 
board  instrumentation.  All  systems were functioning normally. 
S ince   its  launch,  Sa lyu t   4  had  been  inhabited  by  two  two-man 
crews.  Th e  f u s t  crew,  launched  11 Jan.  1975 aboard Soyuz 1 7 ,  lived 
and  worked  aboard  the   station  for  nearly  30  days.  A  second  crew, 
launched   24  May  1975  aboard  Soyu z   18 ,   visited  the   station  for  a 
Soviet  manned  space   flight  record  of  63  days.  A  third  mission, 
launched  5 Apr& was aborted when  the  booster third stage malfunc- 
tioned.  (Tass,  FBIS-SOV, 23  Sep t  75,  U1;  A&A  7 4 )  
Th e  American  Ins t i tu te  of  Aeronautics and  Astronautics presen ted  its 
Haley  Astronautics  Award  to Sky lab   4  as tronau ts   Gerald  P.  Carr, 
Edward  G.  Gibson,  and   William  R.  Pogue  a t   t h e   AIAA-American 
Geophysical  Union  Conference   on  t h e   Exploration  of  the   Ou t e r  
P lane ts ,   in  S t .   Louis,  Missouri.  The   award  was  presen ted   “for 
demonstrated  outstanding  courage  and   skill  during  the   record- 
breaking  84-day  Skylab  mission.’’  During  the   mission,  which  had 
begun  16 Nov.  1973, t h e  crew had successfully completed 56 experi- 
ments,  26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed  subsystem objectives, 
and   13 s tuden t   investigations.  They  also  collected  extensive  earth- 
resources  da ta   and logged  338 hrs of  Apollo Telescope Mount  data, 
making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 
3 Sep t  75,  4) 
20 September -5  October:  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t   Project  as tronau ts  Thomas  
P. Stafford, Vance D.  Brand, and  Donald K. Slayton and  their families 
visited  t h e   U .S .S .R . ,   joining  Soviet  ASTP  cosmonauts  Aleksey  A. 
Leonov and  Valery N. Kubasov and  the ir  families for a goodwill tour of 
the  Soviet Union. The  two crews  had not met s ince  they  said goodbye 
in   sp a c e   du r ing   the i r   h is tor ic   mission  [ see   15-24  July].  Af ter  
greetings a t  the  Moscow airport with wide grins,  bear  hugs,  and  back  
slaps,  Stafford  told  t h e   airport  crowd  in  Russian,  “We   a re   very 
pleased to be back in t h e  Soviet Union again. Now we can  say ou r  joint 
work ha s  been fulfilled successfully. I am  confident tha t  our  flight will 
s e r v e   p rog r e s s   a n d   p e a c e   on   e a r t h . ”   Du r ing   t h e   we lcom ing  
ceremonies  Boris  Petrov,  U.S.S.R.  Chairman  of  t h e   Intercosmos 
Council, told t h e  Americans, “The  Soviet people were glad to see your 
succe s s   and   a re   eager  to  welcome  you  on  ea r th   and   in  the   Soviet 
Union.” 
The  astronauts, cosmonauts, and  the ir  families visited S ta r  City on 
21  Sep t .  to thank  the  Soviet space  community for i ts  work on the  ASTP 
mission.  “For  2 years  S t a r  City was  a  second home  to us,”  Stafford 
told  t h e   crowd  of  Soviet  space   workers.  “Thank  you  for  all  your 
work.”  Th e  astronauts’ families laid flowers at t h e  memorial to Yuri 
Gagarin,  first  man  to  fly  in  space.  Stafford,  Brand,  and   Slayton 

191 

September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

presented  S ta r  City with  a plaque  bearing  the   Soviet and American 
flags and   exchanged  o ther   gifts with the   Soviets. 
On  22  September  Leonid  I.  Brezhnev,  General  Secretary  of  the  
Communist  Party  Cen tra l  Committee,  met  the  ASTP  astronauts  and  
cosmonauts a t  the  Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each  as “hero”  and  
congratulating them  on  their historic mission,  saying it would  “pave 
the  way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the  35- 
min reception he told the  crews of  his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear 
arms.  “Both  sides-the  United  S ta te s   and  the  Soviet  side-should 
make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations,  really good, 
in  all aspec ts ,   from every point of  view,”  he  said. 
On  23 Sept. the  two crews and their families began a six-city tour of 
the   Soviet  Union  tha t   took  them  to  Leningrad,  Kiev,  Volgograd, 
Novosibirsk, Sochi, and  Tbilisi. Everywhere the  crews were swamped 
by  enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of  up to 3000 persons waiting on 
corners   and  at  airports  for  hours  to  cheer   the   spacemen.  “The  
hospitality  is  fantastic,”  Stafford  remarked  a t   Volgograd. The  New 
York  Times  reported  tha t   each   appearance  of  the   spacemen  was 
greeted with applause  and  cheering and  they responded  with waves 
and   autographs. 
Th e  astronauts ended   their Russian  tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell 
press   conference  back  in  Moscow.  Stafford,  Brand,  and  Slayton 
praised  the  “enthusiastic  people  with  warm  hear ts”   they  had  met 
exactly  18 yr 
during  their  tour.  During  the   press   conference-held 
after  the  U .S .S .R .  had  launched  the  first manmade  satellite, Sputnik 
1,  on  4  Oct.  1957-Stafford 
encouraged  continued  cooperation 
between  the   U.S.  and   U .S .S .R .   in  such   areas   a s  lunar   a nd  planetary 
exploration,  space  medicine,  space  meteorology, and  ear th   environ- 
ment. 
Th e  three   u.S.  as tronau ts  a nd  their families  flew to London for an 
overnight  stay  before  flying back  to  Houston  on  5 Oct.  (B  Sun,  21 
Sep t -6   Oct  75; NYT ,   21 Sept-6  O c t  75) 
22  September:  NASA  and   the   Air  Force  Systems  Command’s  Space  and 
Missile Systems Organization had jointly contracted for procurement 
of  12 advanced  meteorological satellites,  saving more  than  $37 mil- 
lion,  AFSC announced.  Both  agencies  had  developed  satellites  to 
observe and report worldwide weather conditions  and were negotiat- 
ing procurement of  improved,  longer lived meterological spacecraft. 
Th e  contracts for long-leadtime parts  for the  new  satellites-nine 
for 
NASA  and three  for the  Air F o r c e w e r e  a follow-on to  an earlier Air 
Force procurement program for a meterological satellite identified a s  
Block  5D.  Although  some  of  the   systems  differed,  similar  technical 
requirements  permitted  the   basic  spacecraft  to serve  both  agencies. 
Use of  an already developed basic design would  save NASA  about $33 
million,  and  the  joint  production  contract  would  save  both  agencies 
nearly $2.4  million in material and assembly costs.  (AF sC  Release OIP 
186.75) 
0  The  appointment of  Lt. Gen. Duward L.  Crow (USAF,  Ret.)  a s  Associate 
Deputy Administrator became effective. Gen. Crow succeeded  Willis 
H.  Shapley,  who  retired.  Before joining NASA   in  Sep tember   1974 as 
Assistant Administrator for Dept. of Defense and Interagency Affairs, 
Gen.  Crow  had  been  Assistant  Vice  Chief of  Staff of  the   Air Force 
since October  1873. He  had  previously been  Comptroller  of  the  A i r  
Force. 

192 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 

September 

Replacing  Gen.  Crow  as  Assistant  Administrator  for  DOD  and 
Interagency Affairs was Lt. Gen. William W.  Snavely (USM  Ret.) who 
had  been  Air Force Deputy Chief of  Staff for Systems and  Logistics 
since January  1973.  (NASA  Release  75-260) 
9  A  NASA-developed  low-cost  highly  efficient  solar  thermal-energy  col- 
lector and a ball bearing design with a l ife  expectancy 20 times greater 
than  that of  presen t  ball bearings  had been  selected to receive Zndus- 
trial Research  magazine’s  award  for  two  of  the   108 most  significant 
new  products  developed  during the   year,  NASA  announced. 
Developed  a t  Lewis Research  Cen ter  in  cooperation with Honey- 
well,  Inc.,  the   solar  collector  absorbed  20%  more  solar-radiated 
energy  and produced  a grea ter  flow of  high-temperature  fluids.  The  
flat-plate  collector  combined  a n   efficient  flow  scheme,  insulation, 
dua l  antireflective glass covers,  and black chrome absorption coating 
to  provide  heating  and  cooling,  with  low  cost  and   low  pollution,  for 
both  commercial  buildings  and  homes. 
LeRC  developed the   bearing  with General Electric  Co.  and  Indus- 
trial Tectonics,  Inc.,  using computer analysis for maximum perform- 
ance  and reliability. Advanced techniques  for producing and  melting 
s tee l  provided  a  cleaner,  longer  lived  material  for  the   bearing,  and 
advanced  fabrication  and   machining  methods  contributed  greater 
accuracies and surface finishes to the bearing rings. The  bearing was 
lubricated through holes in the  bearing’s split inner ring ra ther  than by 
a  conventional  lubricant  jet  pointed  at  the  bearing  rings.  This 
advanced  bearing  design  was  expected  to  replace  mainshaft-thrust 
ball  bearings  presently  used  in  large  turbine  engines,  pumping 
systems,  electric  utilities,  and  petroleum  pipeline  operations.  (NASA 
Release  75-258) 
23  September:  A  Sena te  and  House  of  Representatives  conference  com- 
mittee  reported  out  H.R.  8070,  appropriating FY  1976  funds  for  the 
Department  of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  and  sundry  inde- 
pendent  executive agencies,  after resolving the  disagreements of  the  
two congressional  bodies.  Total NASA  Ey  1976 appropriation  recom- 
mended  by  the   committee  was  $3 551 822 000,  changed  only  with 
respec t   to  funds  allotted  for  research  and   development.  The  
FY   1976  
NASA  Budget Appropriation 
Congressional Adjustments 
to Budget Request 
(millions) 

Program 

Research & 
Development 
Construction 
of Facilities 
Research & Prog 
Management 
Totals 

B u d g e t  
R e q u e s t  

H o u s e  
C h a n g e s  

S e n a t e  
C h a n g e s  

C o n f e r e n c e   Total C o n f e r e n c e  
C h a n g e s   R e c omm e n d a t i o n  

+7.0 

- 1.0 
-49.4 
2678.4 
- 2.5 
84.6 
-2.5 
82.1 
-2.5 
-  -  -  -  - 
-0.5 
776.0 
775.5 
-0.5 
+0.5 
3539.0 
-52.4 
+4.0 
-4 .0  
3535.0 

2677.4 

(H.R. Comm Rpt  94-502;  C R ,  23 Sept  75,  H9035-38) 

193 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
September 
committee appropriated to NASA $2 677 380 000 for R&D,  qkM.4 m a o n  
more than   the  $2 628 980 000 proposed  by the  House [see  19 and 24 
June]  and $8.0 million less   than  the   $2 685 380 000 proposed  by  the  
Sena te  [see  24  and  26  July]. 
The   conference  committee  agreed  tha t   NASA  could  reprogram 
$7  000 000 from  the   R&D  total  for  an  upper  atmospheric  research, 
technology, and monitoring program. The committee also agreed that 
$1  000 000 of  the  total funding of  $48 400 000 proposed for a Pioneer- 
Venus  mission  might  be  reprogrammed  for  fur ther   planning  of  the  
Large  Space   Telescope,  though  not  beyond  evaluation  of  phase  B 
studies.  Appropriations for construction of  facilities and for research  
and  program  management  had  been  previously  agreed  on  and  re- 
mained  unchanged. 
23 September: NASA  Pilot William H.  Dana made  the  las t  rocket-powered 
flight  of  the   X-24B  lifting body,  from  Flight  Research   Center.  Al- 
though a four-chamber  firing had been planned,  only three  chambers  
ignited,  and  a  three-chamber  flight plan was  executed.  The  X-24B 
reached  an  altitude  of  17 678 m   and  a speed  of  mach  1.2. Six more 
glide flights were  planned. 
Objectives  of  the   flight were  to  observe  stability  and  control with 
rudder  bias a t   lo",  to test handling qualities with  all dampe r  gains  a t  
zero, to survey body pressure ,  to perform a qualification tes t  of  a high- 
density  reusable  surface  insulator,  and  to  make  a  lefthand  fin  tuft 
study. The X-24B  was part of  a joint NASA-&  Force program  to tes t  
concepts  for  a  manned  vehicle  tha t   could  reen ter   the   atmosphere 
from  space ,   and  to provide  advanced  technology for a future  hyper- 
sonic  cruise  aircraft.  (FRC X-Press ,   26  Sep t   75,  2; NASA  Hq X-24B 
F l t   Rpt) 
September:  A  NASA  Atlas-Centaur vehicle  launched Zntelsat-IVA F - 1  at 
8:17  pm  EDT  from  Eastern  Test  Range  into  the  planned  synchronous 
transfer  orbit.  The   communications  satellite had  been  launched  for 
the   Communications  Satellite  Corp.  under  a  cost-reimbursable 
contract.  At  11:18 pm  EDT  26  Sept.,  ComSatCorp  fired  the   apogee 
kick motor to put the  satellite in a geosynchronous orbit with a 35  821- 
km  apogee,  35  294-km  perigee,  23-hr  44-min  period,  and  0.1" 
inclination. 
NASA  objectives  for  the   mission were  to  review  design,  perform- 
ance,  and  flight  read iness   for  the   Federa l   Communications  Com- 
mission  and  to  assure   compatibility  of  the   In te lsa t   spacecraft  with 
NASA  launch  vehicles  and   launch  environmental  conditions,  and  to 
launch Zntelsat-WA F-1  into a  transfer  orbit  that  would  enable  t h e  
spacecraft apogee boost motor to inject the  spacecraft into a synchro- 
nous  orbit.  Objectives  were  completed  and  the   mission  adjudged 
successful  29 Jan.  1976. 
ComSatCorp objectives were  to  fire the  apogee boost motor,  posi- 
tion the  satellite into the  planned geostationary orbit,  and operate and 
manage  the   system  for  the   International  Telecommunications 
Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). 
Intelsat-ZVA F - 1 ,   built by Hughes Aircraft Co.,  w a s  698.5 cm high 
and 238.2 cm in diameter, with a liftoff weight of  1515 kg and orbital 
weight of  825.5 kg. Th e  spin-stabilized satellite consisted of  two main 
elements:  A  rotating  section  contained  the   power  subsystem,  a 
cylindrical  solar  array   and   two  nickel-cadmium  batteries;  the  
anhydrous hydrazine-powered positioning and orientation system; the  
194 

25 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D   A E R O N A U T I C S ,   1975 

September 

solid-fueled  apogee  motor;  and   the   despin-control  system.  The  
despun   earth-oriented  platform  section  contained  the  communica- 
tions  repea ter ,   an tennas ,   and   associated  e lemen ts   of  the   telemetry 
and  command  subsystems.  All spacecraft  an tennas  were  suppor ted  
by  a  single tubu lar  mast. 
For  24  h r   af ter   apogee-motor  firing,  Zntelsat-ZVA  F - 1   drifted 
eastward a t  a ra te  of  lo"  per  day; then  a velocity-correction maneuver 
slowed the spacecraf t  drift to 2.9'  east per day. While the spacecraf t  
was  drifting,  the   Hawaii  ea r th   station  checked   ou t   the   spacecraft 
systems.  I ts  final operating location, over the  Atlantic Ocean  a t  335" 
ea s t   longitude,  would  be   reached   by  mid-December.  A s   primary 
Atlantic  satellite  in  INTELSAT'S  global  commercial communications 
satellite system,  it would  serve more than  40 ear th   stations, offering 
users  6250  two-way  voice  circuits  and two TV channels. 
Zntelsat-ZVA F - 1   was the   first in  the  Intelsat  IVA ser ies ;  i ts  com- 
munications  capacity  was  two-thirds  grea ter   than   satellites  in  the  
Intelsat  IV   series,  seven of  which were  still operating. The  Intelsat 
system  began  with  the  launch  of  Zntelsat-Z  F - 1   (Ea r l y  B ird   1 )  on  6 
April 1965; since then  NASA  had launched  16 successful comsa ts  for 
ComSatCorp in  the   Intelsat  11, 111,  and   IV   series. 
Although  Intelsat  IVA   satellites  had  been  designed  primarily for 
use over the  Atlantic with i ts  heavy communications traffic, INTELSAT 
planned  to launch  a s  many a s  five additional IVAs ,   some  to provide 
service for the Pacific and Indian Ocean  regions.  In te lsa t  IVAs had  
a  design  lifetime  of  7  yr and   a  capacity  sufficient  to  mee t   inter- 
national communications requirements  through  1979, when  the  sy s -  
tem   would  b e   augmented  with  the   even   larger   capacity  Intelsat 
V  comsats. 
INTELSAT,  crea ted   in  August  1964  by  adoption  of  the   Interim 
Agreements  for  the  Establishment  of  a  Global  Commercial Comsat 
System,  now  comprised 91 member  nations;  a 24-member board  of 
governors  exercised  overall  responsibility  for  design,  development, 
construction,  establishment,  operation,  and  maintenance  of  the   In- 
te lsa t   space   segment.  ComSatCorp,  a  privately owned  carr ier  com- 
pany  operating  under   a  U.S.  congressional  mandate,  had  provided 
technical and  operational management services to INTELSAT  and the  
global system under  a cost-plus-fixed-fee  management  services con- 
tract. 
NASA  had been  responsible  for procuring the  Atlas-Centaur  launch 
ducting  preflight  testing,  and  launching  the   spacecraft 
s te rn   Te s t   Range  into  a  synchronous  transfer   orbit. 
engineers in the  INTELSAT Spacecraf t  Technical Control 
Cen ter   in  Washington,  D .C . ,   then   assumed   responsibility  for  the  
mission. 
Overall management for the  NASA  portion of  the  mission was under 
the   direction of  the   Office of  Applications.  Lewis  Research   Cen ter  
was  responsible  for   Atlas-Centaur  development  and  operation. 
Kennedy Space  Cen te r  was responsible  for vehicle checkout  and  for 
launch. (NASAMOR s  E-491-633-75-01,25 
Sep t  75 ,30  Jan  76; NASA 
Re lease  75-231;  INTELSAT Releases,  21  Sep t   75,  1 Oc t  75;  Singer, 
Toda y ,  26 Sep t  75; NASAPIO,  interview, 26 Sep t  75; GSFC W k l y S S R ,  25 
Sep t-1   Oct 75) 
26  Sep tember:  Johnson  Space  Center 's  Glynn  S.  Lunney,  U.S. Technical 
Director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had  been named  manager 
195 

September 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

of  the  Space  Shuttle  Payload  Integration  and  Development Program 
Office, JSC’s Roundup   reported.  Th e  office had  been  created  to plan 
and  develop JSC payload for the  Space  Shuttle. Th e  Apollo Spacecraft 
Program  Office had  been  abolished,  and   personnel  from  that  office 
and the  Payloads Coordination Office had been reassigned  to the new 
program  office.  Besides  managing  Shuttle  payloads  and  compo- 
nents-including 
the   Interim  Upper-Stage  low-cost  modular  space-  
craft,  long-duration  exposure  facility,  and  Large  Space  Tele- 
scope-the 
new  office  would  manage  JSC  participation  in  inter- 
national  space   activities,  including  any  fu ture   U .S .  -U .S .S .R .   activi- 
ties.  (JSC  Roundup ,   26  Sep t  75,  1) 
X-ray  satellites-including  Uhuru (Explorer 42  launched  12 Dec.  1970) 
and Os0  7 (Orbiting Solar Observatory  launched  29  Sep t   1 9 7 1 b h a d  
revealed  a  previously unidentified  c lass   of  x-ray  sources  associated 
with  very  old  s ta r   clusters,  Science  reported.  In   a t   least  five  docu- 
men ted   cases ,   sa te l l i tes   had  de tec ted   x-rays  from  globular  s t a r  
c lus ters  coming from above and  below the pinwheel disk of  the Milky 
Way  galaxy. These  clusters,  left behind when the   rest  of  the primor- 
dial galactic ma t ter  fell into the  disk of  the  galaxy over  10 billion yrs 
ago, stillorbited the galactic center, bound to it by gravitational forces. 
Scientific evidence had  indicated tha t  t h e  birth of  new s tars  within 
c lus ters  ended soon after the  formation of the c lus ters  themselves; the  
c lus ters   had  not  been  expected  t o   contain  any  young  binary  s ta r  
systems,  those  believed  to  make  up  the  majority  of  galactic  x-ray 
sources.  This  fact,  along with  the  finding  that  sources  were  much 
more plentiful in globular clusters than in the  galactic disk, indicated 
tha t   some different  process  of  x-ray  production  was  at  work. 
Scientists offered three   explanations  for the  findings: existence of 
v e ry   large  black holes,  1000 times  a s  massive  as   the   sun,  within  the  
c lus ters ;   a  smaller black  hole  steadily  fed with ma t ter   from the   sur-  
rounding  disk;  and  origin  of  the   x-ray  emissions  in  binary  s ta r s  
behavinglike x-ray binaries in the galactic disk but with very different 
origins. 
Scientists were hoping tha t   two more x-ray satellites, U .K . ’ s  Ariel  5 
(launched  15 Oct.  1974) and  Ans  1  (Netherlands Astronomical Satel- 
lite  launched  30 Aug.  1975), would  contribute  additional  da ta   to  the  
study.  (Metz, Science,  26  Sept  75,  1073-74) 
0  A  vertical motion simulator  to  reproduce  the  critical maneuvers  of  air- 
craft  during  takeoff  and   landing was  being  built  a t   Ames  Research 
Center.  Costing $3.5 million,  the  VMS would  use  an existing c a b  and  
computer system, but would have new hardware to provide large-scale 
vertical motions. I t  would move  as  much a s  18 m  vertically and 12 m  
horizontally and  would  accurately  simulate  flare  and  touchdown  of 
such   aircraft  a s   the   short  takeoff  and   landing  (STOL)  and  vertical 
takeoff  and  landing  (VTOL).  (FRC X P r e s s ,  26  Sep t   75,  4) 
e Johnson  Space   Center’s  Roundup   reported  that  Sco t t   Aviation  Co. 
would  begin  commercial  production .of  a new  lightweight breathing 
system for firefighters based on concep ts  and hardware developed by 
JSC  engineers.  Called  the   Scott Air-Pak  4.5,  the   new  appara tus  was 
the  first major improvement  in compressed-air breathing  systems in 
more  than   20  yrs.  New  fea tures   of  the   equipment  included  a  40% 
weight  reduction;  an  improved  pack  frame  and  harness,  with  the  
unit’s  weight  carried  on  the   hips  ra ther   than  the   shoulders;  and   a 
redesigned  face mask  for be t ter   vision. 
196 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

September 

NASA’s part  in  developing the  apparatus  had  begun  in  1970 when  a  
national  meeting  of  municipal  officials  identified  the  need  for  an  im- 
proved system a s  their highest priority. NASA ’ s  effort had been carr ied  
out  at  JSC  as   an  engineering  applications  project  under   the   Tech- 
nology Utilization  Program.  After  a design had  been  chosen  from  a  
number  of  cand ida tes ,  prototype units were successfully field tes ted  
under  ac tua l  firefighting conditions by the  Houston, New  York City, 
and  Los Angeles  fire  depar tmen ts .  
Sco t t  Aviation was the  first manufacturer to annovnce commercial 
production of  an  appara tus   based  on NASA  effort.  (JSC Roundup,  26 
Sep t  75,  4) 
0  Aetna Life and Casualty would  become the third par tner  with Comsat 
General Corp.  and  International  Business Machines Corp.  in  a  ven- 
ture   to  es tab l ish   a   domestic  satellite  system,  the   three   companies 
jointly announced. 
In  a  le t te r  to  the  Federa l  Communications Commission, the   three  
companies had  proposed a   corporate  s t ruc tu re  of  the  jointly  owned 
CML Satellite Corp. under  which each  of  the  th ree  companies would 
own a  par t  of  the  organization. IBM would purchase  42.5% and Aetna 
would purchase 15% of CML stock, with Comsat holding the remaining 
42.5%.  Aetna would  also  purchase   a   convertible  note,  bringing  its 
investment to  the  same  level a s  Comsat and  IBM;  the  th ree  par tners  
would  have  equa l   represen ta t ion   on  the  board  of  directors.  The  
arrangement  would  comply with  FCC’s  requ iremen t   tha t   no  par tner  
own le s s  than  10% nor more than  49% of  CML’S stock [ see  23 Jan.]. 
After FCC approval, the  th ree  par tners  would each  invest up to $55 
million with  additional funding obtained from outside  financing. 
CML had been formed in 1972, with o ther  stockholders, to en te r  the  
U.S.  domestic communications satellite business;  Comsat had  owned 
all the  stock of  CML since July  1975 and ,  with IBM,  had been seeking a  
third  partner.. Both Comsat and   IBM  had  been  providing  the   interim 
financing.  (Aetna-Comsat-IBM Release,  26  Sep t  75) 
28 September:  P lans  had been  completed for the  first  U.S.  experiments to 
be flown on  a  Soviet spacecraf t ,  Dr.  David  L.  Winter, NASA  Director 
of  Life  Sciences,  announced.  As  a   resu l t   of  joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
working  group meetings on  space  biology  and  medicine, 4  U.S.  life- 
sc ience  experiments  and 7 t issue  investigations were to f ly  aboard a  
Soviet biological satellite  schedu led  for launch  la te r  in the year.  The  
U.S.  experiments-all 
passive  and  completely  autonomoue  from 
spacecraf t  power, telemetry,  and da ta  recording-would  be  housed in 
5 Soviet-built con ta iners ,  each  17.8 cm long by  12.7 cm wide by 11.5 
cm high. Maximum weight for each  container, including experiments, 
would be 2 .5  kg. Unique to  this  spacecraf t  was  a  Soviet-designed on- 
board  centrifuge.  U.S.  experiments  would  b e   flown  both  on  the  
centrifuge  and  on   a   stationary  platform. 
The  4 flight exper imen ts  included a  plant tumor-growth experiment 
x 
to  study  the   effec ts  of  weightlessness on  sensitive  plant  systems;  a  
carrot-cell-culture  experiment to a s se s s  the  effec ts  of weightlessness 
on plant  systems and on normal development of emb   onic tissues; a  
heavy-particle radiation experiment to measure high-c 
arge and high- 
energy  particle  radiation  aboard  the  spacecraf t ;   and  a   killifish  or 
mummichog  (minnows)  embryogenesis  experiment  to  evaluate  the 
effect  of  weightlessness  on  development  of  the   vestibular  system 
dur ing  embryonic development in  a  ver tebra te  animal. 
197 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 
September 
S i x   of  the   t issue   investigations  would  use  ra t   tissue-and 
t h e  
seventh flies-supplied  by the  Soviets from their animal experiments. 
Soviet scientists would prepare  t h e  animal  tissues  for U.S.  scientists 
to  use  in  their  investigations  and   would  re turn   the   U.S.  experiment 
packages  upon  completion  of  the   flight. 
Ames Research  Cen ter  was managing 3 of  the  life-science  experi- 
ments  and   all  tissue  investigations.  Johnson  Space  Cen ter   would 
manage  the   fish-egg  development  experiment.  (NASA  Release  75 - 
264) 
0  Transfer of  the  Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Program from the  Office 
of Space  Science to the  Office of Manned Space  Flight, and transfer of 
the   NASA   Directorate  for  Life  Sciences  from  the   Office  of  Manned 
Space  Flight to  the  Office of  Space  Science  became  effective. Also, 
the  name  of  the  Office of  Manned  Space  Flight had been  changed  to 
Office  of  Space  Flight,  a nd   the  name  of  the  Launch   Vehicle  and  
Propu ls ion   P rog ram   had   been   c h a ng e d   to   Ex p e nd a b l e   L au n c h  
Vehicle  Programs. 
In   announcing  the   changes,  NASA   Administrator  Dr.  Jame s   c. 
F le tcher  had said tha t  the  exchange of  these  functions would “provide 
a more  logical alignment  of  responsibilities  a s  we  move  into  Space 
Shuttle operations. Th e  new Office of  Space Flight will be concerned 
primarily with launching.  . . and conducting Shuttle operations, while 
Space  Science w i l l  have responsibility for the  science to be  performed 
on  these   flights.”  (JSC Roundup ,  26 Sep t   75,  1) 
29  September:  Johnson  Sp a c e   Cen ter   announced  tha t   the   first  of  two 
Space  Shuttle  training  aircraft  had  been  tes t   flown  a t   Grumman 
American Aviation’s Bethpage, N.Y ., plant.  The modified Gulfstream 
I1 would b e  used  to  train  crews  for Orbiter  descen t  and  landing pro- 
cedures .  The cockpit layout and the  aerodynamic modifications of  the  
tra iners   provided  motion  a nd   visual  c u e s   and   handling  qualities 
similar  to  those  of  t h e   ac tua l  Orbiter.  The   two  trainers  would  be 
delivered  to Johnson  Space   Cen ter   early  in  1976.  (JSC Roundup ,   10 
Oc t   75,  1) 
30 September:  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  had resumed acoustic testing 
of  a  6.4%-scale  model  of  the   Space  Shuttle  to  provide  information 
needed  in  designing  the   Shuttle  and  i ts   launch  facilities,  MSFC 
announced.  The  tes ts   would  also  produce  da ta   on  effects  of  hot 
exhaust  gases  on  the   aft  portion  of  the   Shuttle  immediately  af ter  
ignition. Data  from  earlier  testing of  the   model,  which  included  the  
liquid-fueled engines and  solid rocket motors,  had  alerted designers 
tha t  special provisions would be needed to deflect hot gases out of  the  
solid rocket boosters away from the  facility fuel lines near  the  launch 
pad. A  pad design based on this analysis had been tes ted  and proven. 
During  the  tests,  which  had  begun  originally  in  Ahgust  1974,  the  
model was held in a tes t  s tand  while its engines were fired from 6 to 10 
sec.  (MSFC  Release  75-205) 
During  September:  NASA  had  invited nearly  5000 scientists worldwide to 
propose experiments for a possible 6-yr mission to Uranus,  beginning 
with  a November  1979 launch.  Th e  mission,  which  could  include  a 
swing by  Neptune, was being studied for inclusion in NASA’s FY 1977 
budget  request.  A  mission  to Uranus  and  Neptune  would mean  tha t  
every planet in the  solar system except Pluto would have been probed 

198 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 

September 

by  a U.S.  spacecraft by  1988. T h e  spacecraft  itself would be  adapted 
directly  from  the   Mariner  probe  now  under  development  a t   Je t  
Propulsion  Laboratory  for  a  planned  1977  mission  t o   Saturn;  like 
Mariner-Saturn,  the  Uranus  mission would use  the  gravity of  Jupiter 
to  hurl  the   spacecraft  on  toward  the   more  remote  planet.  If  the  
spacecraft remained healthy after it investigated Uranus,  it would use 
the  gravity of tha t  planet to f ly  on to Neptune,  more than 1.6 billion km 
deeper  into space.  (GSFC Goddard News,  Sep t  7 5 , 2 ;  UPI, NYT,  4 Sep t  
75,  20) 

199 

October 1975 
1 October:  NASA  and  Rockwell International Corp.  Space  Div.  had  signed 
a $1.8-billion supplemental agreement for the  follow-on development 
of  the   Space   Shuttle  Orbiter,  NASA  announced.  The  agreement 
formally  incorporated  into  an  existing  con trac t   awarded  for Orbiter 
design,  development,  and  tes t   and  evaluation,  the   construction  of 
Orb i ters  101 and 102, approach and land ing  tes ts ,  and six orbital flight 
tests.  The  supplemental  agreement  for the   additional  work  brought 
the   value of  the   Rockwell contract  to  more  than  $2.7  billion.  (NASA 
Release  75-  266; JSC  Release  75-  90) 
0  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen ter   had  opened  for  competition  a  research  
and  development  program  to  develop  and  demonstrate  cryogenic 
components far  the Space  Tug vehicle. Work would include design of 
a reusable cryogenic storage system, and fabrication and evaluation of 
a testing system. Proposals were to be submitted by 31 October.  (SBD, 
1 Oc t   75,  159) 
0  NASA  and the  U.S.  Coast Guard were jointly designing and developing a 
lightweight  portable  firefighting  module  to  combat  shipboard  and 
dock fires, NASA announced. The  module, a completely self-contained 
pumping system including pumps,  hose, and firefighting suits, would 
pump  sea  water a t  a ra te  of  up to  7300 liters per  min (2000 gallons per 
min)  for  periods  up  to  3  hr.  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   was 
designing a prototype scheduled for construction early in 1976 and for 
testing 18 mos later.  The  Coast Guard  had  asked  NASA  to  participate 
in  the   project  because. of  i ts   long  experience  with  high-capacity 
lightweight fuel pumps developed for rocket engines. The project w a s  
being  managed  for  NASA  by  MSFC’S  Technology  Utilization  Office. 
(NASA  Release  75-  267) 
0  NASA  announced  selection  of  Bendix  Field  Engineering  Corp.  and 
Raytheon Service Co. for competitive negotiations leading to  award of 
a single contract to operate and  maintain portions of NASA’s worldwide 
Spaceflight  Tracking  and  Data  Network.  Contractor  services would 
include  technical  support,  operation,  and   maintenance  of  the  
Goddard Space  Flight Center’s Network Operations Control Center, 
GSFC’S Network T e s t  and Training Facility, ten  STDN stations, and the  
laser   tracking  s u b n e t - o n e   fixed  station  a t   Goddard  Space   Flight 
Cen ter   and  8 mobile  stations  a t   various  sites  around  the   world  to 
support  the   S an  Andreas  Fault  Experiment,  the   Laser  Geodynamic 
Satellite network,  and the  Geodynamic Experimental Ocean  Satellite 
program-as  well  a s   operation  of  the   magnetic-tape  certification 
facility a t   GSFC.  (NASA  Release  75-268) 
0  Dr. Wa l ter  6. Williams’ appointment as NASA  Chief Engineer became 
effective.  In   his  new  position,  Dr.  Williams,  who  had  been  vice 
president  and  general  manager  of  the   Aerospace  Corp.  Vehicle 
Systems  Div.,  would  be  responsible  for  reviewing  the   technical 
excellence of  all NASA  programs and for assuring the ir  development on 
a  sound  engineering  basis  with  proper  programmatic  controls. 

201 

October 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
From 1940 to 1958 Dr. Williams had been employed by the  National 
Advisory  Committee  for Aeronautics  and,  af ter   1958, by  NASA.  His 
previous  positions  included  chief  of  t h e  High-speed  Flight  Station, 
Associate  Director  of  Manned  Space  Cen ter ,   Associate  Director of 
Mercury’s  Space   Ta sk   Group  a t   Langley  Research   Cen ter ,   and  
Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Manned  Flight  Operations  a t  
NASA   Headquarters.  (MSFC Marsha l l  S t a r ,  10  Sep t   75,  2) 
0  The   appointment  of  Pau l   E.  Cotton  a s   Assistant  Administrator  for 
Cen ter  Operations became  effective. Cotton would be  responsible for 
special  s tud ies   and  analyses  relating  to  institutional  and   organiza- 
tional activities,  and  for implementing decisions resulting from  these  
studies.  Cotton joined  NASA  in  1958, serving in various management 
capacities  until  1972,  when  h e   joined  t h e   Social  Security  Admin- 
istration.  He  had  re turned   to  NASA  in  1974  a s   special  ass is tan t   to 
the   Associate  Administrator  for  Cen ter   Operations.  (NASA  anno,  1 
Oct  75) 
3  Oc tober:   Johnson  Space   Cen ter   announced   award  of  a  $11.5-m3lion 
con trac t   to  General E lec tr ic  Co.  Space  Div.  to  provide  acceptance- 
checked   equipment  for  the   Space   Shu t t le   orbiter.  The   equipment 
would  b e   used  to  conduc t   s tandard   te s t s   and  to  de tec t   variances  in 
spacecraf t  systems  in  assembly at  the  Rockwell  International Corp. 
plant.  GE  would  also provide  checkout  support during the  approach 
and  landing phases  of  the   Shu t t le  missions.  (JSC  Release  75-92) 
0  Johnson  Space   Cen ter   announced  signing  of  a  $44 800 000  con trac t  
amendment  with  Lockheed  Electronics  Co.,  Inc.,  for  electronic, 
scientific, and computing-center suppor t  services at JSC. The  services 
would  support  JSC  programs  including  Space   Shuttle,  ea r th  
resources,  aircraft,  health  applications,  and   the   Large  Area  Crop 
Inventory Experiment.  Th e  amendmen t  brought  the  estimated  value 
of  the  Lockheed con trac t   to  $173 100 000.  (JSC  Release  75-93) 
5 Oc tober:   Design  and  construction  of  a  cost-saving  municipal  sewage- 
trea tmen t   plant,  using  a  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory-developed 
process,  would  begin  la te   in  the  year  in Orange  County,  Calif.,  JPL 
announced. The  new  sys tem  used a pyrolytic reac tor  to convert solid 
sewage materials to  activated  carbon,  which was  then   used  to  trea t  
incoming waste water.  Besides reducing  sewage-treatment cos ts  by 
25%,  t h e   new  sys tem   was  expected  to  virtually  eliminate  sewage 
solids, produce c leaner  waste water for delivery to the  ocean, remove 
heavy  metals  contained  in  t h e   sewage,  and   eliminate  odors.  Gases 
genera ted  by  the  sewage solids would  be  used  a s  a source of  power. 
The  plant-a  pilot project  funded by Federal,  s ta te ,   and municipal 
gran ts   totaling  approximately  $2  million-would 
replace  a  small 
mobile  unit  installed  by  JPL  in  1974.  Project  officials  hoped  tha t ,  
following evaluation,  the   system  could  b e   scaled  up   100-fold  and  
adopted  for urban waste  treatment.  (JPL Release  5 Oct  75) 
0  The  Univ.  of  Chile would  build and opera te  a ground station to receive 
earth-resources da ta  directly from NASA’s Land sa t s  1 a n d 2  spacecraft 
launched   23  July  1972  and   22  Jan.  1975,  NASA   announced.  A 
memorandum  of  understanding  between  NASA  and   the   university 
provided  for  Chile’s  use  of  the   Spaceflight  Tracking  and  Da ta  
Network  station  a t   Santiago  until  the   ground  station  becomes 
operational. 

202 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
October 
Th e   station  would  aid  Sou th   American  investigators conducting 
research  in cooperation with NASA  and  the  United Nations. Th e  Univ. 
of  Chile station would be  t h e  ten th  Landsat station worldwide.  Three  
stations were located in  t h e  U.S.  Brazil, Canada ,  and  Italy each  had  
stations in operation, and  I ran  and  Zaire were constructing facilities 
for  da ta   acquisition.  In  addition,  Canada   was  planning  a  second 
station.  The   Univ.  of  Chile  station  would  be  able  to  acqu ire   da ta  
directly  from  t h e   satellite  a s   it  passed  over  Bolivia,  Uruguay, 
Argentina,  Chile,  and  sections  of  Pe ru   and   Brazil.  (NASA  Release 
75-  265) 
6 October:  A massive new  power  source for earth-transmission 
of  solar 
been  under   s tudy   by  the   Jet 
energy  by  microwave  frequency-had 
Propulsion  Laboratory  a t   the  Goldstone  station near  Barstow,  Calif. 
Th e  dish an tenna  equipped with a 450-kw klystron tube  for microwave 
transmission, represen ted  a space  station; the  tower a mile away with 
an  array of so lar  receivers to which the  experimental power converted 
to microwave  energy had been beamed represen ted  a ground station. 
Th is  research  had been designed to lead to a network of  space  stations 
tha t   would  collect  solar  energy  24  hr  a  day  and  beam  it  to  ground 
s ta t ions ;  the  Goldstone tes ts  had been the  first high-power  field trials 
of  the   system.  Tiny  rectifying  dipole  a n t e nn a s - c a l l e d   rectennas- 
collect  and   convert  the   radio-frequency  beam;  the   17 panels  in  the  
tower  receiver  contain  4590  of  the   rec tennas .   The   system  had 
demonstrated  a  maximum  output  of  30.4  kw  converting  the  
microwave beam  to usable electricity, an efficiency of 82.5%. A space- 
to-earth  system  would  be   6  times  more  effective  than   a  surface  
system,  the   Los  Angeles  T ime s   commented,  and   could  probably 
supply  15% to 20% of  the  earth‘s  energy  needs   in  the   next  century. 
Development  of  a  utility  operating  system  delivering  10 000 mw  of 
power would cost about $60 billion, a s  much  a s  NASA ha s  spen t  to da te  
on  space programs.  A  single equatorial space  station carrying a  l-km- 
diameter  antenna  transmitting  to  a  U.S.  earth  station  15  km  long  and 
10 km  wide could supply all the  electrical needs  of New York City or a 
th ird  of  the  need s  of  t h e  Los Angeles  basin.  (LA  T im e s ,  6 O c t  75, 1; 
NYT ,   10 Oc t   75,  2) 
7  October:  Dr.  William  R .   Lucas ,   Director  of  Marshall  Space   Flight 
Cen ter ,   announced  the   establishment  of  an   advanced  mineral- 
extraction  task   team  within  the  Program Development  Directorate. 
Working with the  Dept. of  Interior’s Bureau of Mines, the  team  would 
use NASA  expertise and  technology  to  increase  the  nation’s  ability to 
ex trac t   energy  and   minerals  a t   acceptable  cos t   and  with  minimum 
effect  on  the   environment.  One   of  NASA’s first  tasks   would  be  to 
improve  the   efficiency  of  t h e   long-wall  shearer-a 
coal-removing 
machine  used  by  miners  tha t   could  leave  a  foot  or  more  of 
unrecoverable  coal  along  t h e   edges   of  a  vein-by 
using  sensors, 
remote  controls,  and   TV monitors  to  guide  t h e   machine.  (MSFC 
Re lease  75-215) 
8 October:  NASA  announced  award  of  a  $1.5  million  cost-plus-fixed-fee 
con trac t  to Rockwell International Corp.  for development of  a solid- 
s ta te  bubble-memory  da ta  recorder  to m e e t   spacecraf t  data-storage 
requirements.  The   recorder,  which  would  have  no  moving  parts, 

203 

October 

ASTRONAUTlCS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

would  offer  a  capac i ty   of  100  million  bits,  ser ia l   or   parallel  d a t a  
inpudou tpu t  operation,  user-selected  da ta  ra tes ,   and d irec t  acce s s  to 
th e   memory.  Rockwell  would  complete  the   work  in  two  phases:  A 
prototype would b e  completed by  early  1977, and  a flight-qualifiable 
model  would  be  produced  by  early  1978.  Langley  Re sea rch  Cen te r  
would  manage  the   con trac t  for  NASA.  (NASA  Re lease  75-272) 
0  Cosmos  775,  believed  to   be   third  of  a  ser ies   in  the   Soviet  Union’s 
S ta ts ionar   communications-satellite  program,  was  launched   from 
Baykonur  Cosmodrome  into  a  very  low  near-circular  earth  orbit.  Its 
predecessors,  Cosmos  637  and  Molniya  I - S ,   had  been  launched  2 6  
March  and  29 July  1974.  Th e  satellites were  to  supply  communica- 
tions,  including  telephone, 
telegraph,  Tv ,   and  phototelegraph 
transmissions,  between the  Soviet Union and Europe and between the  
cap i ta l   and  ex treme   ea s te rn   portions  of  t h e   U .S .S .R .   Once   t h e  
S ta ts ionar   communications  system  was  es tab l ished ,   the   U.S.S.R. 
was  expected  to  under take   implementation  of  a  synchronous 
meteorological satellite sys tem  a s  early a s  the  1976-77  period.  ( S BD ,  
16 Qct  75,  232) 
10 Oc tober:   T h e  first of  a  ser ies  of  5 conferences  on design  requ iremen ts  
for  Space  Shu t t le  and  Space lab  payloads  had  been  held  a t  Marshall 
Space   Flight  Cen ter .   About  50  sc ien t is ts   and   eng ineers   from 
government,  industry,  and  universities  had  met  to  define  functional 
requ iremen ts   for  payload  equipment  to  fur ther   NASA ’ s   Space  
Processing Applications  (SPA) program,  including analysis of  se lec ted  
design approaches  and recommendations  for getting t h e  most u se  out 
of  SPA  payloads for the  materials  sc ience  and technology community. 
T h e  meeting  would  hea r   presen ta t ions  on  the   two  SPA   competitive 
engineering designs by General Electric  and TRW  Sys tems ,  Inc.  Th e  
nex t   2  days   would  be   used   by  working  groups  to  d iscuss   the ir  
specialties-biological 
preparations;  chemical  processes   and  fluid 
phenomena;  glasses  and  ceram ics ;   and   solidification  of  me ta ls ,  
alloys,  composites,  and  electronic  materials.  The   5  schedu led  
meetings  should  define payloads  tha t   are compatible with  the  Space  
Shu t t le  and Space lab  and tha t  would meet  the  re sea rch  need s  of  the  
indus tr ia l  and  scientific communities.  (MSFC  Release  75-  218) 
0  NASA  announced  signing  of  an   agreement  with  the   Federa l   Aviation 
Administration  to  ac t   a s   a  third  party  for  the   purpose  of  receiving, 
processing,  and  analyzing  safety  repor ts   filed  under  FAA’s  Aviation 
Safety  Reporting  Program.  Th e   third-party  arrangemen t   would 
s t imu la te  the   free  and  unres tr ic ted  flow of  information,  by  assuring 
u se r s   tha t   FAA’s objective  in  the   program  was  to  provide  the   safes t  
possible  aviation  system  by  identifying  and   correcting  unsafe 
conditions  before  acc iden ts   occur.  The   agreement  provided  for 
specific procedures  to  protect  the  identity of  persons  involved  in  the  
repor ts   subm i t ted  to  NASA,  excep t  in  cr im ina l  c a s e s  or  accidents. 
NASA would se t  u p  a n  aviation safe ty  reporting working group under 
i ts  Research and Technology Advisory Council to advise NASA  on the  
reporting system, to  eva lua te  and review the  program once it is under 
way,  and  to  en su re  the   anonymity  of  those   submitting  reports.  T h e  
group  would  include  aviation  and   consumer  groups  and  o the r s  
involved  in operational  a spec t s  of  the  national aviation system.  (NASA 
Re lease  75-  273) 

204 

. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
October 
12 October:  Soviet  cosmonauts  Valery  Kubasov  and  Gen.  Aleksey  Leonov 
arrived  in  Washington,  D .C . ,   to  begin  a  2-wk  tour  of  the  U.S.  by 
visiting Pres iden t  Ford  at t h e  White House  and   touring  the  capital. 
The American crew of  t h e  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and  the ir  wives 
would accompany the  cosmonauts on the  tour, which would also visit 
Chicago, Omaha, Sa l t  Lake  City, San  Francisco, Reno, Lake Tahoe, 
Los Angeles, Atlanta, Nashville, and  New York City. The  cosmonauts 
were  accompanied by  the ir  wives and three  of  the ir  children,  a s  well 
a s  the  director of cosmonaut training, Gen.  Vladimir Shatalov, plus a 
suppor t   staff  and   Soviet  journalists.  The   Apollo-Soyuz  crews  had 
completed  a  2-wk  tour  of  the   Soviet  Union  4  Oct.  (NASA   Release 
75-276;  SBD,  14  Oc t  75,  216) 
13 October: A t   a  news conference  in Washington,  D .C . ,   with  members  of 
the  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew today,  as tronau t  Donald  “Deke” 
Slayton said h e  is convinced tha t  man eventually will fly to Mars,  and  
tha t   such   a  mission  “is  a  natural  for  an   international  mission  a s  
opposed to  any national  mission.”  Maj.  Gen.  Aleksey Leonov  of  the  
visiting cosmonauts  agreed  tha t   the  ASTP  mission  was  “only  the  be- 
ginning of  our   fu ture   cooperation  in  space”   and   tha t   it  would  b e   a 
“shame”  for the  U.S.  and  the   Soviet Union  to  conduct parallel  space  
programs tha t  could b e  conduc ted  as joint missions. (SBD ,  15 Oct 75, 
224) 
14 October: Manufactyre  of  unique  items  in  space  is nearing reality with 
the   availability  of  the   Space   Shuttle,  scientists  from  TRW   Sys tems  
Group  told  t h e   6 th   U.S. -European  conference  on   partnership  for  
space  applications. Five practical processes in the  space  environment 
would be  crystal growth, purification and separation, mixing,  solidifi- 
cation,  and processes  in  fluids.  The  gravity-free environment would 
permit the  manufacture of  i tems  such  as contamination-free glass for 
laser  requ iremen ts ,  pure  crys ta ls  for semiconductors, and highly pure  
vaccines. Also, if materials like copper-lead alloys tha t  do not mix on 
ea r th  could be  combined in zero gravity, real breakthroughs in aircraft 
and   automotive par ts  manufacture  might  be  possible.  (SBD,  14 Oc t  
75,  221) 
Je t  Propulsion  Laboratory sc ien t is ts  reported  tha t  a joint JPL-Univ.  of 
Texas astronomy team had detected carbon monoxide in the  atmosphere 
of  Jup i ter   for the  first time.  Instrumentation  a t  McDonald  Observa- 
tory,  t h e  Univ.  of Texas’s 27-m  telescope facility in Austin, made the  
discovery  by  using  high-resolution  spec tra .   Dr.  Reinhard  Beer,  JPL  
leader of  the  team ,   reported  tha t  the  near-infrared  spec tra  had been  
produced  by  a  Connestype  Fourier  spec trome ter   in  1974;  spec tra l  
lines-the 
“signatures”  of  various  molecules-had 
disclosed  tha t  
carbon monoxide molecules were present  to a dep th  of  at leas t  50 km 
into  the   lower  atmosphere.  Carbon  monoxide  had  been   previously 
found  in  minor  amounts  in  the   a tmospheres   of  ea r th ,   Venus,  and  
Mars. Although the  spec tra  had shown no indication of carbon  dioxide 
in  the   Jovian  atmosphere,  Dr.  Beer  reported,  fu ture   telescope 
searches  from higher altitudes might reveal its presence  there.  (NASA 
Release  75-  269) 
15  October:  A  “ra ther   exciting  development”  in  the   ability  of  manned 
spacecraf t  sys tems  to navigate accurately should b e  available in 10  yr, 
General  William  J.  Evans,  Commander,  Air  Force   Sys tems   Com- 
mand,  told  t h e   57th  annua l   meeting  of  the   American  Defense 

b 

205 

October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Preparedness  Assn. in  Los Angeles.  The  NAVSTAR Global Positioning 
System,  the   "most  precise  and   accura te   positioning,  velocity,  and  
navigation  ass is tance  air o r  surface  vehicles have ever  had,"  may re- 
place as many  a s  five sepa ra te  systems now  required for these  func- 
tions.  ( M s c  Release  15 Oct 75) 
16  October:  NASA  launched   the   first  geostationary  operational environ- 
mental  satellite, GOES-A,  a t  6:M  pm EDT  for  the  National  Ocean ic  
and  Atmospheric  Administration  aboard  t h e  106th successfu l  Delta 
from Kennedy Space  Cen ter .  Transfer  orbit e lemen ts  were:  apogee, 
36  795  km;  perigee,  200  km ;   inclination,  23.7";  period,  650.9  min. 
Apogee  boost  motor fired  a t  10:51 am  EDT  17 Oct. had put the space-  
craf t  into  a  synchronous orbit  at 36  200  km  altitude, where  it w o d d  
drift to its scheduled position approximately 50"N. When the  GOES-  A 
had been  moved to position and  checked  out,  it would be  designated 
Goes  1 and  turned   over  to  NOAA  for  operational use. 
GOES was the  first operational version of t h e  prototype synchronous 
meteorological  satellites (Sms 1, launched  17 May 74 into geostation- 
ary orbit  at  75"W,  and  Sm s  2 ,   launched  6 Feb.  75  and  positioned  a t  
115"W). 
S m s   1 ,  originally  stationed  over  t h e   eas tern   Atlantic  in  suppor t  
of  the   Global  Atmospheric  Research   Program,  had  provided  the  
first  near-continuous  daylight  coverage  of  a  major  hurricane 
(Carmen) in  Sept.  1974.  The   day-night  time-lapse  motion  pictures 
produced from Sms 1 images had  aided understanding of  hurricanes 
and   tropical  storms,  a s   well  as  t h e   total  weather  pa t tern   in   the 
Atlantic.  Sms  2 ,   from  its  station  over  t h e   equator,  had   viewed  t h e  
western  half  of  t h e  U.S.,  including  Hawaii.  O the r   N O h i   satellites 
in   polar  orbit  ( E s s a   8 ,   N o a a   3 ,   and  N o a a   4 )  had   collected  global 
da ta   for   transmission  to  ground  stations  in  Alaska  and  ea s te rn  
U.S.  This  information  has  been  available  worldwide  to  any   indi- 
vidual  or  agency  with  equipment  tha t   could  receive  the   trans- 
missions. 
Goes 1 would  provide NOAA  scientists with  images of  a  quar ter   of 
earth's  surface a t  30-min intervals, day and  night. The satellite would 
also collect and relay nonvisual environmental da ta  transmitted from 
thousands  of  manned and unmanned remote-sensing facilities on land  
and   sea.  I t s   radiation  sensors   would  monitor  solar  activity  and  
transmit i t s  findings to N O M ' S   Environmental Research  Laboratories 
in Boulder, Colo.,  for use in predicting solar s torms  tha t  would affect 
radio  communications on ear th .  Goes 1 would  also transmit  weather 
maps  and  other material from NOAA's  station a t  Wallops  Island, Va., 
in  a  format  suitable  for  use  by.ground  stations  at  regional forecas t  
cen ters .  (NASA Release 75-270;  KSC   Release 251-75;  MORS E-608- 
75-03,22  Sep t  and  17  Oc t  75; KSCSpaceport N ew s ,  31 Oc t  7 5 , l ;  N O M  
Release  75-188) 
power  package  built  a s  a backup  for t h e  unit 
9  Th e  Ancient Mariner-a 
flown  pas t  Venus  on  Ma r ine r  5 in  1967-was 
still going  strong af ter  
more than  5 yr of  operating in a space  environment,  t h e  Boeing Space  
Cen ter   a t  Kent,  Wash.,  said.  Function  of  the   package  had  been   to  
transform  raw  power  collected  by  solar panels  into  electric curren t  
accep tab le  to  the  spacecraft.  NASA  had   asked  Boeing  to  find  out  if 
electronic units like this could s tand  the rigors of long-distance space  
flights  such  as  a  12-yr  Grand Tour  of  the  ou ter  planets. 

206 

October 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Boeing  put  the Manne r   instrument  in  a  tes t   chamber-part 
of  an  
extensive  vacuum  and   space   simulation facility-in  which tempera- 
ture   had  been  fixed  a t   1.6"C  and  other conditions had  been made  to 
conform with those in  space .  The duplicate had  performed perfectly, 
outlasting much  of i ts  ground-support equipment and  all but one of t h e  
technicians originally assigned to the experiment. The  te s t  had proved 
tha t  flight hardware could  s tand  tempera tures  a s  much  a s  30°C cooler 
than  those encountered on  missions already completed, and tha t  simi- 
la r  electronic packages  had  a  life expectancy of  more  than  5  yr, fa r  
longer  than   the  period  for which  they  had  been   designed.  (Newport 
News T imes-Hera ld ,   16 Oc t   75,  15) 
Goddard  Space   Flight  Center  announced  selection  of  PW Facilities 
Management  Corp.  for  a  2-yr  $3 500 000  cost-plus-award-fee  con- 
trac t  to provide processing,  preparation, retrieval,  reproduction, and  
distribution  of  space-science  da ta   for  t h e  National  Space   Sc ience  
Data Center.  PMI would also maintain,  upgrade,  develop,  and imple- 
ment  plans  for  improved  data-handling  information  sys tems ,   and 
would provide scientific analyses and programming, prepare  reports, 
maintain  files,  order   supp l ies   and   equipment,  and   opera te   photo- 
graphic  and microfilm  equipment. 
Th e   Data  Cen te r   served  a s   a  NASA-wide  depository  for  space- 
sc ience  da ta   and   a means  of  analyzing  and  disseminating th is  infor- 
mation beyond tha t  provided by principal investigators. (GSFC Release 
G-  24-  75) 
17  October:  More  than   1000  instrumented  p l a t fo rm s - e i t h e r   floating 
buoys or balloons-were  being used to provide  information on tropical 
and   polar  weather  and  ocean   and  ice  conditions,  NASA   announced. 
Th e  platforms would transmit da ta  from their sites to NASA's Nimbus 6 
meteorological  research   satellite,  launched  12  June   1975,  which 
would record  and play  back  t h e  da ta  on command to ground stations 
around  the   world.  The   stations  would  then   disseminate  the   infor- 
mation  to  investigators in Australia, Brazil,  Canada, France ,  Norway, 
South Africa, and  the  U.S.  Platforms would be  located in such  remote 
areas  a s  the  South Pole, Indian Ocean ,  Africa, Samoa, and  the  Arctic. 
Th e  National Cen ter  for Atmospheric Re sea rch  was releasing more 
than   400  balloons  to   altitudes  up   to  14 km   from  American  Samoa, 
Ghana, and Ascension I. to s tudy  the  a tmosphere  in the  tropics. About 
50 low-level balloons were being released to an  altitude of  750 m from 
the  Seychelles island group, ju s t  north of  the  Malagasy Republic,  by 
t h e  Laboratoire d e  Meteorologie  Dynamique in Par is  to  study the  air- 
s e a  interface to de term ine  its effect on  monsoons in India. About  30 
ice buoys were being placed in the  Arctic and  Antarctic, one only 45 m 
from  the   South  Pole,  as  part  of  a  major  U.S.  government  project  to 
unders tand  ice packs ,  icebergs,  and  weather pa t terns  near  t h e  poles. 
Sc ien t is ts  from the  Norsk Polarinstitut in Norway were deploying four 
drifting  buoys  to  help  cha r t   ice   drift  in  the   Greenland  area.  (NASA 
Re lease  75-  271) 
20 October:  Kennedy Space  Cen te r  announced a reorganization to prepare  
for t h e  Space  Shu t t le  e r a  of space  operations. John  J. Neilon,  Director 
of  Unmanned  Launch   Opera t ions   since  1970,  was  named  Deputy 
Director of  Technical  Support;  George  F.  Page,  Chief  of  Operations, 
Div.  of  Manned  Spacecraft  Operations,  would  move  into  Neilon's 
former post. 

207 

October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

T h e  Launch  Operations Directorate would be  reorganized into four 
major second-level groups:  engineering,  payloads,  space  transporta- 
tion  sys tems   processing,  and   expendable  vehicle  operations.  (KSC 
Release  253-  75) 
0  Th e  Soviet Union may es tab l ish  a ground station to receive da ta  directly 
from  the  U.S.  Landsa t  ea r th  resources  satellites, under  a cooperative 
program  in which  t h e   US.  would  establish  facilities  to  receive  d a t a  
from  Soviet weather  satellites,  NASA  Administrator J am e s  F le tcher  
announced  in Moscow.  Landsa t   could  be   of  enormous  value  to  the  
Soviet Union,  which is judged  to  have vast  untapped  oil and  mineral 
deposits, which depends  heavily for power on  i ts  water resources, and  
which needs  help in improving crop yields and  forecasting.  (SBD,  20 
O c t  75,  255) 
20-22  October:  More  than   100 astronomers  from  the  United  S ta te s  and  
severa l   foreign  coun tr ies   had  ga thered   at  Goddard  Space   Flight 
Cen ter  to exchange information on x-ray  astronomy. Th e  symposium 
had been  arranged to d iscuss  compact double-star sys tems  tha t  emit 
x-rays  and  tha t   had b e e n  observed  in  other  spec tra l   bands-radio, 
optical, ultraviolet. Earth’s galaxy alone contained 100 binary (double- 
s tar)  x-ray objects, discovered by spacecraf t  observing the ir  emissions 
beyond  the  radiation-absorbing  blanket  of  earth‘s  atmosphere. 
Astronomers  had  considered  the   compact  s ta r s   in  these   binary 
sys tems  the  most exciting objects of  cu r ren t  research:  the  s ta r s  have 
masses  close to tha t  of  earth‘s  sun ,  but d iame ters  of only about 10  km. 
Neutron s tars ,  for example, had been found so dense  tha t  a teaspoon- 
ful would weigh a billion metric tons ,  and  “black holes’’ would be even 
more dense .  Five satellites currently in ea r th  orbit had been observing 
celestial x-rays: Copern icus ,  Os0 8 ,  and  Sas 3, managed by GSFC,  and  
the  U .K .’s   Ariel  5  and  the  Netherlands’ Am  I ,  for  which  GSFC  had 
coordination  responsibility.  In  the  past  year  spacecraft  had  dis- 
covered six new  and extremely powerful x-ray sources ,  brightness in  
t h e  sky, known a s  x-ray novas from the ir  sudden  brightening and  sub- 
sequen t  fading af ter   several months.  One   of  these   x-ray  novas  is  a s  
bright  a s  earth’s sun  and  more than  10  times brighter than  the  easily 
visible C rab  Nebula, most famous of t h e  supernovas (exploding stars). 
(NASA  Release  75-279;  JSC  Roundup ,   24  Oc t  75,  1) 
21  October:  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen te r   had  awarded  a  $45.8-million 
con trac t  to RCA  Astro-Electronics Division for design a nd  production 
of eight third-generation Tiros-N spacecraft, the  company announced. 
Schedu led  for launch  in  1978, the  635-kg spacecraf t  would  forecast 
weather 2 days in advance with accuracy  equa l  to tha t  of presen t  1-day 
predictions. RCA ear l ier  had received a $16.6 million NASA con trac t  for 
long lead-time  items for the  Tiros-N ser ies ,  bringing t h e  total cost of 
the   satellites to  $62.4  million.  (SBD,  21 Oc t  75,  259) 
0  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  and   the   Energy  Research   and   Develop- 
ment Administration  announced  selection  of  16 organizations  to  ne- 
gotiate con trac ts  for  t h e  development of  low-cost  solar cells for  resi- 
dential and  commercial use.  Twenty-two  con trac ts ,  totaling approxi- 
mately $12 million, would b e  awarded as par t  of t h e  Low Cost Silicon 
Array Project managed by JPL for ERDA.  Objective of  t h e  project was 
to  c rea te  by  1985 a n  industrial  capability of  producing  silicon  solar 
cells or arrays a t  a marke t  pr ice  of less than  $500/kw. Cos t  to da te  had  
been  $20 OOOkw. The  demand  for solar cells was expected to increase  
from  100 kw  annually  in  1975 to  500 000  kw  annually by  1985. 

208 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
October 
JPL negotiations included production of  low-cost solar-grade silicon, 
economical production of  silicon in large-area  shee ts  suitable for use 
in solar cells, development of economical encapsulation materials and 
techniques  for  an  array lifetime  of  20  yr,  and   development  of  auto- 
mated  processes  and  facilities  for low-cost  production  of  arrays. 
Fu ture  contracts would be negotiated to proeure array modules for a 
ser ies  of  ERDA-funded  tes ts   of  photovoltaic systems,  in  cooperation 
with t h e  Department of Defense to determine the  technical feasibility 
of  using  photovoltaics  for  military  applications,  and  in  cooperation 
with  Lewis  Research  Cen ter   for  a  similar civilian effort.  (NASA  Re- 
lease   75-  280) 
22-25  October: Two unmanned  Soviet probes,  Venera 9 a nd  10, dropped 
landers  to  the  surface of  Venus  after 4.5-mo  journeys  and relayed  to 
ear th   through  297  million  km  of  space  the   first  photographs  of  the  
Venusian  surface.  Th e   two  main  probes  went  into  differing  2-day- 
period orbits about the planet.  The  Venera 9 lander  functioned  for 75 
min in  the  atmosphere and 53 min on the  surface,  and  the  Venera 10 
for 75 min  in the   atmosphere  and 65 min  on t h e   surface. 
Th e  descent  module  of  Venera 9  separated  from  the   main  space- 
craft 20 Oct.,  2 days before it reached the  Venus atmosphere, which it 
en tered  at 11:58 pm EDT 21 Oct.,  landing on the  surface at 1:13 am EDT 
Oct. 22. When the  atmosphere had slowed the  descent  sufficiently, a 
parachute  system  had  been  deployed  a t   about  50  km  above  the  
surface, and the  lander  studied the cloud layers and atmosphere dur- 
ing the  res t  of  the  descent.  The  lander modules had been built to with- 
s tand   the   hostile  environment  a t   the  Venus  surface,  with  tempera- 
tures   tha t   reach  500°C  and  pressures  up  to  100 times  tha t   of  earth‘s 
atmosphere. Before landing, the  modules had been cooled to - 10°C to 
provide a reserve of  cold tempera ture  tha t  would permit operation for 
about  an  hour  before overheating.  Venera 10, launched  14 June  and 
following the same procedure,  had separa ted  from its orbiter 23 Oct. 
and  had  landed  on  Venus  at  1:17 am  EDT  25  Oct. 
Venera 9, launched 8 June  from the  Baykonur cosmodrome, was the  
third Soviet spacecraft to make a soft landing on Venus: Venera 7 and 
8, which landed on Venus  in Dec.  1970 and July  1972, respectively, 
had transmitted technical d a t a  for 23 and 50 min, respectively, but did 
not  carry  cameras. 
P ic tures  s e n t  by  the  Venera 9 lander showed a rugged  surface with 
sharp-angled  and  flat-surfaced  rocks  30  to  35  cm   across  and   some 
boulders.  P ic tures  sen t  by the Venera 10 lander, which touched down 
2200 km from t h e  site of  Venera 9, showed what seemed  to b e  an older 
mountain formation with smooth rounded rocks.  Soviet scientists had 
expressed amazement  that both sites were bathed in light. Th e  dense 
cloudcover tha t  hides Venus from ear th  had been  thought to keep the  
planet in perpetual shade. Dr.  Arnold Selivanov, one of  the  TV system 
designers,  said tha t  they had  “expected poor lighting conditions and  
built  our   ins trumen ts   accordingly”;  this  is  why  they  had  received 
good pictures.  . .that  c a n  be   used  by  newspapers without  any pre- 
( 6  
liminary  processing.” 
Th e  horizon of  Venus discernible in a corner  of  the  Venera photos 
did not appear  concave (ends ben t  upward), a s  had been expected as a 
result  of  the   theorized  distortion  resulting  from  the   planet’s  dense  
atmosphere.  The   apparen t   geological  youth  of  the  rocks  on  Venus 
testifies  to recen t  catastrophic  processes like  volcanic eruptions or  
( 6  

October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

earthquakes-we 
took  place 
should  say  Venusquakes-which 
recently,”  said Soviet mineralogist Dr. Aleksandr Basilevsky.  “Venus 
apparently  is  internally  active.”  Th is   conclusion  had  affirmed 
American theory tha t  Venus resembled ea r th  in having a liquid core, a 
mantle,  and  a  rocky  c ru s t .  
Four Soviet sc ien t is ts  reviewing  the Venera  9 and  10  program in an  
article in P ra vda  had summarized the  descent-module findings: Tem- 
pera ture  and pressure  a t  the  landing sites, 468°C and  90 atm,  respec- 
tively;  surface  illumination,  about  10  000  lux; local wind  velocity  a t  
landing site, 0.4 to 0.7 me ter  per  sec  (Venera 9) and  0.8 to 1.3 me ter  per 
sec   (Venera  10); na tura l   radioactive  e lemen ts   in  Venus  rock,  0.3% 
potassium, 0.0002%  thorium, and  0.001%  uranium.  Orbiting module 
findings  were:  Tempera ture   of  Venus  clouds  a t   upper   boundary, 
about  -35°C;  cloud  tempera tures   on   nocturnal  side,  about  10°C 
higher;  atmospheric  tempera ture   decreased   with  altitude,  but  local 
tempera ture   elevations  were  observable  at  the   66  to  55   km  level; 
Venus  ionosphere was  th inner   than  the   terrestrial  and  closer  to  the  
surface;  and  the   electron  concentration  on  t h e   daytime  side  was 
significantly  higher  than   on  the   nocturnal  side  but  about  10  times 
smaller  than   in  the   terres tr ia l   ionosphere.  Much  of  the   information 
relayed  from  Venus  had  still  to  be  processed. 
Cameras   in  the   orbiting  spacecraft  of  Venera  9  and   10  had  pro- 
ceeded  with photographing t h e  dense  cloudcover of  Venus, their first 
pictures  received 26 Oc t .   showing a panorama of  more  than  1500 km 
of  the  clouds circulating around the  planet’s equator. Scientists a t  the  
Deep  Space   Communications  Cen ter   in  Moscow  said  the   pictures 
“confirm the  presence  of  powerful s t ream s  of circulating flows in the  
planet’s  atmosphere,  first  de tec ted   on  board  the   American  probe 
Mar iner  10 in February 1974.” There  was no indication, the  Baltimore 
Sun   commented,  how  long  the   two  Venus  mother  sh ips  would  con- 
tinue in orbit. ( W T ,  23 Oc t  7 5 , l ;  26 O c t  75 ,1 ,  sec. 4 p 7; FBIS 208,210, 
25 Oc t  75; W S t a r ,  23 Oc t  75, A3; BSun ,  26 Oc t  75, A l l ;  27 Oc t  75, A4; 
DefenseISp Bus D a i l y ,  23 Oc t  75,272; 28 Oc t  75 ,289 ;  29 Oc t  75 ,301 ;  
P r a v d a ,  21  Feb   76,  3-4) 
23  Oc tober:  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r   announced  selection  of  In te-  
grated  Systems  Suppor t ,   Inc.  to  negotiate  a  $2.8-million  cost-plus- 
award-fee  contract  for  computer  support  and  facility  operations  a t  
MSFC’S  Slidell Computer Complex.  The  1-yr contract had  provisions 
for four  additional  1-yr  extensions.  (MSFC  Release  75-  224) 
24  Oc tobe r :  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen te r   announced  selection  of  nine 
experiments on processing materials in space  to be carr ied  aboard a 
Black Brant 5C sounding rocket scheduled for December launch. The  
launch  would  be   first  in  a  5-yr  ser ies  of  space-processing flights  in  
MSFC’S  Space  Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR)  project  to  find 
improved methods of  materials processing on  ea r th ,  and  ultimately to 
produce  materials in  space   that  could  not  be   produced  on ear th .  
The  nine experiments were: dendr i te  remelting and macrosegrega- 
tion;  liquid  mixing;  lead-antimony  eu tec t ic ;   foams  from  spu t ter-  
depo s i ted   me ta l s ;  
tho r ia -d i spe r sed   magne s ium ;   d i spe r s ion -  
strengthened  lead-silver  alloys;  particle-interface  interactions;  bub- 
ble  behavior  in  melts;  and  contained  polycrystalline  solidification. 
The   low-cost  rocket  launches ,   each   of  which  provided  approxi- 
mately 5.5 min of  low gravity (0.001 of  earth’s) during the  coas t  phase 
of  the   trajectory,  would  offer  the  only  means  of  obtaining scientific 

210 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

October 

da ta   on  space   processing  of  materials  in   near-zero  gravity  until 
flights of  the   Space  Shu t t le   in   the   early  1980s.  (MSFC  Release  75- 
225) 
9  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen te r   had  issued  reques ts   for  proposals  for 
development  of  solar-energy  cooling  and   heating  sys tems   for  both 
residential and  commercial applications. Th e  ~ W P S  had been issued  in 
five  areas   of  procurement:  firms  already  producing  and   marketing 
solar heating  and  cooling  subsystems;  firms  developing marketable 
subsys tems  and  needing government ass is tance ;  firms with complete 
sys tems   under  development;  firms  designing  innovative  complete 
sys tems ;  and firms to compete  for test and  evaluation of  the  subsys- 
tem s  procured under the  first two WPS. Th e  Solar Heating and  Cool- 
ing Demonstration  Act  of  1974, which  requ ires  demonstration of  the  
practical use  of  solar heating in  the  U.S.  within 3 yr  and  of  combined 
solar heating and  cooling within 5 yr,  made t h e  Energy Research  a nd  
Development  Administration  responsible  for managing  and   coordi- 
nating  the  national  program.  ERDA  assigned MSFC  t h e  responsibility 
for developing solar heating and  cooling sys tems  in an  all-out effort to 
c rea te  a viable industrial and  commercial capability of producing and  
distributing such  systems.  (NASA Release  75-284) 
25  Oc tobe r :  Travelers  on  the   scen ic   Beartooth  highway  in  Cus ter  Natl. 
Forest, Mont.,  had  access  to  the  first solar-powered privy,  t h e  Balti- 
more S u n   reported.  The   installation  had  advantages  in  addition  to 
making t h e  Rock  Creek  Vista  area   a  national leader   in  progressive 
plumbing,  according to  the  U.S. Forest Service: it had  overcome two 
basic problems  of  t h e  s i te ,  lack  of  water and  lack  of  power.  The  oil- 
based  flush system, which cost $29 878 with toilets and storage vaults, 
recycled a white oil. The  solar panels over the  two-sided  toilet installa- 
tion,  which  cos t   $9750,  had  almost  no  upkeep   expense;  they  had 
offered unlimited power without the cost of  installing electrical lines, 
solving the  problem of  power  sources tha t  plagued many mountaintop 
areas  of  t h e  nation’s  forest  system.  (B  Sun ,  25  Oct 75,  11) 
26  Oc tobe r :   NASA  announced  approval  of  Rockwell  International 
Corp. to begin final design and  construction of two subscale models of 
highly  maneuverable aircraft.  The  construction would  be  completed 
under  an $11.3-million con trac t  awarded earlier. Th e  Rockwell design 
called  for a 6.3-m-long  1260-kg model with  a  “coke  bottle”  fuselage 
and  two  large cana rd s  mounted  on  each  end  of  the  2.5-m  wing.  The  
model  would  be   powered  by  a  General Electric  Co.  supersonic 585 
supersonic je t   engine. 
The  two unmanned models would be  flown from NASA’s Flight Re- 
sea rch   Cen ter   in  a  joint  NASA-&-   Force  program  to  develop  ad- 
vanced  technology  in  high-maneuverability  aircraft.  The   models 
would be  air-launched from large carr ier  aircraft and  maneuvered by a 
pilot  in  a  ground  cockpit,  using  tes t   techn iques   developed  during 
NASA’s  Remotely Piloted  Research  Vehicle program.  (NASA  Release 
75-  279) 
27 Oc tobe r :  Th e  Commerce Dept. had awarded Aeronutronic Ford,  Inc.,  a 
con trac t  for $5 581 824 to design and build a space  environment moni- 
tor for the  National Ocean ic  and  Atmospheric Administration, which 
had  commissioned  it  to  make   constant  measuremen ts   of  energetic 
solar particles when Tiros-N would b e  launched   in  1978. Tiros-N,  a 
joint mission of N O M  and NASA,  would be first of a new series of polar- 
orbiting  satellites  to  be   operated  by  the   National  Environmental 
211 

October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Satellite Service a s  “ a  major improvement  in our capability of  moni- 
toring  environmental  phenomena,”  according  to  Dr.  George  H. 
Ludwig, director of NESS’S Office of Operations.  Detecting changes in 
the   space   environment  and   learning  how  they  affect  conditions  on 
ea r th  would  help  scientists  to  predict  and  prepare  for these   effects. 
T h e  NOAA  space-environment  monitor,  the only se t  of  sensors facing 
away from  the  ear th ,   would  provide  much  of  the   needed  data.  (DOC 
Release  G 75-  180) 
28 Oc tober:  Heos 1 , Europe’s longest-living satellite,  reentered  the earth‘s 
atmosphere  a s   predicted  after  exceeding  its  nominal  lifetime  by 
nearly 6 years. Launched 5 Dec. 1968 by the  European Space  Agency, 
Heos  1  was  third  of  eight  scientific  satellites launched  by  ESROESA 
between  1968 and 1975.  I t s  full payload of  7 experiments gave excel- 
len t  results 4 months longer than the  nominal lifetime; the  experiment 
to  study the   interplanetary magnetic  field worked until  reentry,  pro- 
viding invaluable da ta  on the  field f&  almost 7 of  the   11 yr of  a solar 
cycle.  Experiments  were:  interplanetary magnetic  field, high-energy 
galactic  cosmic  rays,  and   solar protons  (Imperial  College,  London); 
solar wind (Universities of Florence,  Rome, and  Brussels); low-energy 
cosmic  rays  (Centre  d’Etudes  Nucleaires);  high-energy  electrons 
(CEN/University of  Milan); barium  cloud  (Max Planck  Institut).  (ESA 
Release  29 Oc t   75) 
0  NASA  Administrator Dr. Jame s  C. Fletcher and Secretary of  the Interior 
Thomas S. Kleppe announced the  selection of  Dr.  William Nordberg, 
Goddard  Space Flight Cen ter   scientist,  and  Dr.  Carlos  Brockmann, 
director of  the  Landsat project in Bolivia, to receive the  1975 William 
T.  Pecora  Award.  Dr.  Nordberg was  selected  for his meteorological 
contributions  to the  Landsat program and for his management of  day- 
to-day research  operations using da ta  from Landsa t   1  a n d 2 ,  launched 
(as Erts 1 )  on  23 July  1972 and  on  22 Jan.  1975. Dr.  Brockmann was 
selected  for  his  leadership  of  a  multidisciplinary  team  of  Bolivian 
scientists  responsible  for  the   evaluation  and  application  of  Landsat 
images.  Within  1  year,  the   team  had  produced  evaluation  reports 
covering  geology,  volcanology,  forestry,  hydrology,  and  land  use 
of  Bolivia;  the   group  also  published  an  improved  national  atlas  of 
Bolivia. 
Given annually by NASA  and  the Dept.  of  Interior  in  recognition of 
“outstanding contributions of individuals or groups toward the under- 
standing of  the  Ear th  by means of  remote  sensing,”  the  award would 
be  presented  a t   the   joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.  4 d a y   symposium  on  ear th  
resources  a t   Sioux  Falls,  S.  Dak.,  28-31  Oc t .   (NASA Releases 
75-283,  -285) 
0  Eight  Soviet scientists would  a t tend  a meeting  a t  the  Ear th  Resources 
Orbiting Satellite (EROS) Data  Center  in S. Dak.  this week  to review 
remote-sensing  projects  [see  20  Oct.]  and  
previous  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
to discuss  future  cooperation on remote sensing of  geology and agri- 
culture. The  meeting was par t  of  a joint effort by NASA  and  the  Soviet 
Academy of  Sciences to advance studies of  the  earth from space; the  
Soviets might se t  up  a ground  station to receive remote-sensing  da ta  
directly from  u.S.  Landsats.  (SBD ,  28 O c t  75,  295) 
28 -29  October: Principal investigators and  o ther  scientists meeting a t  the  
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  had  presen ted  preliminary findings on  
the  space-processing experiments conducted during the  U.S. -Soviet 
Apollo-Soyuz Tes t  Project in July. F irs t  day’s discussions would be on  
212 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 
October 
the U .S .   and  West German  experiments  on electrophoresis-separa- 
tion of biological materials by means of an electrical f i e l d - c o n s id e r e d  
a key to the  development of drugs to fight strokes, hear t  a t tacks ,  clots, 
and blood diseases.  Six of  the  seven materials-processing experiments 
using a multipurpose  electric furnace would be discussed  the  second 
day;  a  Soviet experiment  using  the  furnace  would not  be  discussed. 
Th e   furnace  experiments  had  demonstrated  use  of  a  weightless 
environment to investigate crystal growth, convection,  and  solidifica- 
tion  processes  for  fu tu r e   u se   in  space   as  well  as  for  applications  to 
presen t   ear th   technology.  (MSFC  Release  75-  226) 
29 Oc tober:  NASA  and  the  Energy Research  and Development Administra- 
tion  dedicated  a  100-kw  wind  turbine  designed  and  built  by  Lewis 
Research Cen ter  a t  plum Brook Station for ERDA.  NASA Administrator 
Dr. James C. FletcherandERDA Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr . ,  
attended  the   ceremony  conducted  by  LeRC  Director  Dr.  Bruce  T. 
Lundin. Objective of  the  wind turbine project w a s  to tes t  the  perform- 
ance  and define the  operating and economic characteristics  of wind- 
energy  systems  for  generating  commercial  electric  power  in  the  
future. T h e  installation will provide da ta  for use in developing larger 
and more advanced  systems that  could be produced  commercially by 
private  industry.  The  Plum  Brook  installation was  the   largest wind- 
energy  system  in  operation  and  the   second  largest  ever  built;  the 
largest,  a  1250-kw system  operated  between  1941 and  1945 in  Ver- 
mont,  had  been  abandoned  because  of  economic  difficulties  and 
availability of less expensive fossil energy. The  new generator, with its 
38-m-wide propeller blades, was built on top of  a 30-m-high open-truss 
s tee l  tower and could supply the  power needs of  about 25 homes. NASA  
was  participating  in  the   ERDA  program  because  of  its  capability  in 
energy-related  technology.  (NASA  Release  75-  277) 
0  T h e   Political  8r  Security  Committee  of  t h e   u.N.  General  Assembly 
unanimously  adopted  a resolution  seeking wider  adherence  to  inter- 
national agreements on the  peaceful  uses of  ou ter  space. The  resolu- 
tion  called  for  continued  U.N.  work  on  s p a c e  agreements,  including 
one  covering natural  resources  of  the  moon;  on principles  governing 
direct  TV broadcasting by  satellite;  and  on  legal  issues  arising from 
remote  sensing of  ear th   and  its  resources  from  space.  (SBD,  29 Oc t  
75,300) 
30  Oc tober:  The   Sa turn   V  dynamic  tes t   s tand   a t   Marshall  Space  Flight 
Cen ter  was being modified  under  a $ 1  923 400 contract  between  the  
Army Corps of  Engineers  and  the  Universal Construction Co.,  to pro- 
vide  a  Space   Shuttle  Mated  Ground  Vibration  T e s t   Facility,  MSFC 
announced.  Th e   123-m-high  s truc ture   would  be  used  to  tes t   the 
vehicle in launch  and boost  configuration,  to  determine  the   bending 
modes  and  dynamic  response  during  launch  and  ascen t   conditions. 
(MSFC Release  75-  230) 
NASA  announced appointment of William N. Rock a s  Deputy Director of 
Flight  Research  Center,  effective 9 Nov.  Rock  joined  NASA  in  1964 
and  had served a t  NASA  Headquarters,  a t  Goddard Space  Flight Cen- 
ter ,   and  since  1968 a t  Kennedy  Space  Center,  where  he was  associ- 
a ted   with  various  applications  and  manned  flight  programs.  (NASA 
anno,  30 Oct  75) 
31 Oc tober:  Kennedy Space  C e n t e r  announced  award of  a $4 778 000 con- 
trac t   extension  to  Bendix  Corp.’s  Launch  Support  Div.  for  support 
services including operation and  maintenance of Launch Complex 39, 
213 

October 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

mobiie  launchers,  mobile  service  s truc ture ,   industrial  complexes, 
technical  shops,  propellant  systems,  life-support  facilities,  and   a 
components-cleaning  laboratory.  Th e   4 m o   extension  brought  the  
total value of the  con trac t  to  $266 662  753. Complex 39, launch  site for 
the  Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz Tes t  Project missions, would be 
the   launch  and  landing  site  for  Space  Shuttle.  Modification  of  the  
facilities was  under  way.  (KSC  Release  260-75) 
e  Marshall  Space Flight C e n t e r  announced  selection  of  Moog,  Inc.  for a 
$6 685 584  cost-plus-incentive-feelaward  fee  con trac t   to  design, 
produce,  tes t ,   and maintain  the   Solid Rocket  Booster Thrus t  Vector 
Control (TVC)  electrohydraulic  servoactuators. The devices move the  
solid rocket  booster  exhaust  nozzle,  providing directional control by 
gimballing the  nozzle during propellant burn.  (MSFC Release 75-  232) 
0  Langley Research Cen ter  had  awarded General Electric of  Phila.  a 2.5- 
y r   $3.2 million  con trac t   to  provide  an  orbital  sca t terome ter   for  the  
SEASAT-  A  spacecraft  scheduled  for  launch   in  1978.  The   scatter- 
ometer  would  measure  wind  speed   and  direction.  (SBD ,  31 Oc t   75, 
317) 
During  Oc tobe r :  Air  Force  scientists  under  con trac t   to  NASA  had  com- 
pleted a study of  the  physiological effects on man resulting from trans- 
fers   from  one  atmosphere  to  another  during  the   15-24  July  Apollo- 
Soyuz T e s t  Project.  The  difference  between  the   Soyuz 7031-kg-per- 
sq-m  atmosphere  of  30% oxygen and   70% nitrogen  and  the  Apollo’s 
3515.5-k&per-sq-m  100% oxygen represen ted  the  transition  between 
3048 m  and 8230 m in  altitude. In  1973, scientists, using a hyperbaric 
chambe r  to  simulate  spacecraf t  environment,  had  found  that  volun- 
teer   sub jec ts   showed  symptoms  of  decompression  sickness  ( the  
bends) when  moving  from  one  atmosphere  to  the   other.  During  the  
following year  the  scientists  had  found a way  to  lessen  the  chance of 
decompression  sickness:  The   most  satisfactory  procedure  was  to 
increase the  time allowed for denitrogenation (breathing 100% oxygen 
a t   ground-level pressure).  Th is  helped  to  remove  excess  nitrogen- 
cause  of  the  bends-from 
the  body.  The  Air Force  study had  helped 
NASA  and   Soviet ASTP  planners  schedule  the   ac tua l  transfers.  (ASFC 
Newsreview,  Oct  75,  8) 
e  A  50 000-kg  towing  trac tor ,   first  piece  of  operational ground-support 
equipment manufactured by International Harvester Co. for Kennedy 
Space  Center’s Space  Shuttle operations, was accep ted  for delivery to 
KSC.  Th e  T-500s  Paymover  tractor  would  tow  NASA’s Boeing  747 
carr ier   aircraft or  the  orbiter,  or   the   mated  747-orbiter combination 
after  use   a t   the   Flight  Research  Cen ter ,   Edwards,  Calif.,  during 
orbiter  tes ts .   (KSC  Release  25 74 ’5 )  
e  A  new  computer-controlled  tracking  device  for  telescopes,  called  VIP 
(video  inertial  pointing),  had  been  developed  a t   Ames  Research 
Cen ter   to  improve  the   aim  of  balloon-borne,  airborne,  and  space  
telescopes. Th e  two main functions of VIP were to help the  astronomer 
s tee r  the   telescope,  and  to  continuously upda te   the  automatic stabi- 
lization system  that holds  the  telescope steady during viewing. Auto- 
matically  stabilized  telescopes  heretofore  had  used  gyroscopes  to 
keep   the   telescope  aimed  a t   a  point  in  space   and  counteract  the  
rotation  of  the   ea r th   and   other  d is turbances ;   gyroscopes  had  been 
found subject to drift, causing the telescope to wander off target. VIP, 
using a single video sensor, could generate the  signals required for all 

214 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

October 

three  control  axes-roll,  pitch,  and   yaw-and 
could  use   the   visual 
information to point at nonvisible (infrared) sources. Previous sys tems  
using s ta r  trackers  had needed  from two to six conventional sensors  to 
do  the   same  job. 
Development  of  VIP  had   made   use  of  severa l   state-of-the-art 
devices: the  microprocessor,  a complete digital compu ter  on a single 
printed circuit ca rd ,  was the  compu ter  inside t h e  VIP electronics. Two 
types of  video sensors  used  by VIP were t h e  solid-state imaging device 
called  a  CCD  (charge-coupled  device) tha t   incorporated  a  matrix  of 
light-sensitive  e lemen ts  on   the   surface   of  a  silicon  ch ip   measuring 
0.01  mm  on  a  side,  and   an   advanced  vidicon  tube   for   night  vision 
called  a n   ISIT  (intensified-silicon  intensified-target)  camera.  By 
reducing the  amount of hardware  required for good performance, u se  
of  these  new  ins trumen ts  had  lowered the  cost of  the  system.  Ames 
would  use VIP  to  provide  accura te   automatic pointing of  the   Space- 
lab   Infrared   Telescope  Facility  for  the   Shu t t le   tha t   was  under  
development  a t   Ames  and   on  con trac t .   (Ames Astrogram,  9  Oc t  
75,  1) 
0  NASA   had  awarded  a  $45.8-million  con trac t   to  Radio  Corporation  of 
America  Astro-Electronics  Div.  to  design  and   build  eight  Tiros-N 
third  generation  meteorological  satellites.  Th e   635-kg  Tiros-N 
(Television  InfraRed  Operational  Satellite) would  have  4  times  the  
payload  capacity  of  t h e   previous  generation  of  me tsa ts ,   and   was 
expec ted   to  be   able  to  forecast  weather  2  days  in  advance with  ac- 
curacy  equa l  to the  1-day predictions.  In addition to providing day and 
night  imagery,  the   Tiros-N  spacecraf t  would  take   atmospheric  and 
sea-surface  tempera ture   readings;  measure   proton,  electron,  and  
alpha-particle  activity  surrounding the   ea r th ;   and   collect  da ta   from 
weather platforms on balloons  and  from ocean buoys. (GSFC Goddard  
News,  Oc t  75,  1) 
0  The  Mass.  Inst.  of  Technology Lincoln  Laboratory, under   con trac t  to 
the  Air Force, was developing an experimental ground electro-optical 
deep-space  surveillance (GEODSS) system to  scan  nighttime skies for 
orbiting  and   geosynchronous  satellites.  The   system  was  being  in- 
stalled  a t  White  Sand s  Missile  Range,  first  of  a  proposed  five-site 
GEODSS worldwide surveillance network. Th e  network would augment 
the  Air Force’s Aerospace Defense Command’s  space track  coverage 
which  maintained  a  day-by-day  count  of  all  satellites  and   debr is  
circling  the  ear th .  
GEODSS combined two sophisticated telescopes with electro-optics, 
a  TV  camera ,   and  a  digital  computer,  a s   well  a s   system-related 
equipment. Mounted a t  the  focal plane of the  larger telescope was aTV 
came ra   to  transmit  t h e   signal  to  t h e   observatory  control  room  for 
ins tan t   screening and  analysis.  (AFSC Newsreview,  Oc t  75,  14) 
The   Air  Force  had  successfully  test-flown  an   F - l l lD  
turbofan  je t  
engine  with  all-composite  third-stage  fan  blades  40%  lighter  than  
conventional  titanium  fan  blades.  The   te s t s -made   at Edwards  Air 
Force  Base-marked 
the   first military  flight evaluation  of  a  rotating 
s truc tura l   engine  component  made   of  composite  materials.  Objec- 
tives of  t h e  flight-test program were to de term ine  long-term environ- 
mental  effects  on the  material  and  to  verify potential operation and  
maintenance  cost benefits.  Use  of  composites could  provide  a  15 to 
20%  weight  savings  in  je t   engines,  allowing  increased   payloads  o r  
extended  range.  (AFSC Newsreview,  Oc t  75,  1) 
215 

October 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

e  Limitations  imposed  by  the   Strategic  Arms  Limitation  Talks  (SALT) 
agreements had  made  the  development of  the  B-1 bomber essential, 
the  Air  Force  Systems  Command Newsreview  reported  Secretary  of 
Defense James  R.  Schlesinger a s  telling Rep.  Richard  Bolling in  an 
interview. Because  the  U.S.  would be limited in megaton s tr ike  capa- 
bility  and   approximately  60%  of  U.S.  megatonnage  was  carried  by 
bombers,  it was essential to maintain a significant and highly effective 
bomber  force.  (AFSC  Newsreview,  Oct  75,  2 )  
e  Two  visiting  research   associates  working  under  2-yr  associateships 
awarded  jointly  by  NASA   and  the  National  Research  Council  com- 
pleted  their research   a t  NASA.  While  a t  NASA  Dr.  Ditmar Kranzer  of 
the  Technical University of  Vienna, Austria,  had designed  and fabri- 
ca ted   charge-coupled  devices  on  silicon  and   sapphire wafers.  This 
type of electronic device would be used a s  part of  an electronic circuit 
for  imaging,  storage,  and  signal processing.  The   device  had  a  high 
speed  capacity,  a  low  power  requirement,  and   a  very  high  packing 
density,  which  would  decrease  the  number  of  outside  connections 
needed for the  circuits and reduce the area  required for da ta  storage. 
Dr.  Tsuneo  Yoshikawa  had  developed  steering  laws  for  single- 
gimbal and double-gimbal control-moment gyro systems during his 2- 
yr  tenure   a t   NASA.  These   laws,  which  apply  to  any  spacecraft 
requiring highly accura te   attitude-control  systems,  had  been  formu- 
lated  in  an  effort  to minimize performance  deterioration.  (MSFC  Re- 
lease  75-213,  -219) 
According to International Telecommunications  Union figures,  a satel- 
lite had been launched every 3 days in 1974. Of the total of  124 launched, 
18  belonged  wholly  or   partly  to  the   US.,  and   the   Soviet Union  ac- 
counted  for 95.  (GSFC  Goddard News,  Oct  75, 3 )  

216 

November  1975  

1  November:  A   newly  discovered  dwarf  galaxy  called  Sn ickers ,   55  000 
light years  from  the   sun ,   and  neares t  neighbor  to  the  Milky Way y e t  
found,  could  lead  to  more  accura te   es t ima tes   of  the   size of  earth‘s 
galaxy. Announcing his find in the  As trophys ica l  Journal L e t t e r s ,  Dr. 
S. Christian  Simonson of  the  U.  of Md.  said the  new galaxy had been 
hidden  from ear th   view  by  dense  s ta r  fields  and  cosmic dus t  clouds. 
Spots of hydrogen gas de tec ted  on radioastronomy maps were the  clue 
tha t   led  to  the   discovery,  first  to  be   made  solely  through 
radiotelescope  observations  of  hydrogen  gas.  Until now,  the  Magel- 
galaxies  about  205  000  light  years  away-had 
lanic  Clouds-twin 
been considered the galaxies nearest  to  the Milky Way.  Dr.  Simonson’s 
new galaxy had been chr is tened  Sn ickers  by his colleagues, who said 
“it was  like the  Milky Way,  only  peanuts.”  (B Sun ,   2 Nov  75, A23) 
2 November:  Efforts  to  charge  batteries  on  the  V ik ing  2 lander  failed for 
unknown reasons,  but  controllers at Jet Propulsion  Laboratory were 
confident  that  time  would  allow  them  to  solve  the   problem.  Both 
V ik ing  1 and 2  were  launched  with their  lander  batteries  essentially 
uncharged  t o   prolong  their  lives;  the   batteries  aboard  the   V ik ing   1 
lander   were  charged  without  difficulty  2  wk  ago,  and  the   same 
procedure had been  scheduled for Viking 2.  Th e  spacecraf t  carried a 
backup  a s  well  as  a  prime  battery  charger ,   but  NASA  had  not  at- 
tempted  to  use  it  in  case   the   problem  had  originated  outside  the  
charger  system.  Use  of  the   backup  before  the   problem  had  been 
identified might have damaged  it a s  well as the prime charger. V ik ing  
2 ,  originally scheduled to be  launched first, had  been  pulled back for 
repair  after  i ts   orbiter  batteries  had  been  accidentally  drained; 
officials  said  there   was  no  connection  between  prelaunch  orbiter 
problems and the lander situation. (NASA Release 75-288;  Aero D a i l y ,  
4 Dec  75,  10; S B D ,  4 Nov  75,  16) 
0  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter   forwarded  the   experimental payload  for 
the   first  launch  of  NASA’s  Space   Processing  Applications  Rocket 
(SPAR) project  to  Goddard  Space   Flight  Cen ter ,   where  the   payload 
would be integrated with its launcher ,  a Black Brant sounding rocket. 
The  integrated unit  would  undergo checkout before being sen t  to N. 
Mex.  for firing by White Sands  Missile Range  early in Dec. The  pay- 
load consisted of  nine scientific experiments on processing materials 
in  near-weightlessness.  After  the   first launch,  three   flights per  year 
carrying  similar  payloads  had  been  planned  through  1980.  All  pay- 
loads were to be  recovered by parachute for ground analysis. Th e  low- 
cost  SPAR   missions  would  provide  da ta   on  space  processing  until 
Space  Shuttle flights began in the  early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75-233) 
4 November:  Inflation and procurement  reforms had hiked NASA’s charge 
for a Delta launch by about 20% for the average customer, Aerospace 
D a i l y  said.  Prospective users  2 y r  ago had  been quoted less than $10 
million per launch; curren t  cost had risen to  $11-  12 million, and those 
wanting  1978 launches  had  been  quoted  $13-14  million.  Th e  Delta 
217 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

had  been  the NASA  launcher  most  in demand  because  of  its size and 
price,  most  widely  applicable  among  government  and  commercial 
users;  the Kennedy Space  Center,  capable of  one launch every 5 wk, 
had  been  booked  solid  for  the   foreseeable  future.  NASA  had  been  
renegotiating payment  schedules,  but  no  launch  schedules  had been 
changed except for technical reasons not related to cost. (Aero Daily, 
4 Nov  75,  11) 
e Largest of  U .S .   air carr iers ,  United Airlines,  and All Nippon Airways of 
J a p a n - o n e  of  the  10 largest airlines in the  world-supported  NASA’s 
10-yr program to reduce aircraft fuel use. Testifying before the Sena te  
Aeronautical  and  Space   Sciences  Committee,  executives  of  both 
companies  said the  airlines needed  the   improved technology but did 
not  have  the   financial  ability  to  conduct  the   research,  estimated  to 
cost  $490  to  $670  million.  A  spokesman  for  the  Federal  Energy 
Administration  said  more  analysis was  needed  before  Congress  de- 
cided  to  fund  the  NASA  program;  the   airlines  should  consider  less  
expensive ways of  conserving  fuel,  such   as  operating a t  higher  load 
factors.  (Transcript,  256,  271,  299) 
0  Soviet  polar  station  Severny  Polyus-22  had  been  scheduled  to  get  a 
companion, a Moscow Tass  broadcast  reported. Drifting on an ice floe 
in the  Arctic for the past 3 yr,  the  station’s scientists had made about 
200 scientific landings on the  ice  since las t  spring to  observe the  ice, 
the   ocean,  and  the  atmosphere.  Another  ice  floe  in  the   area   of  the  
inaccessibility pole” was to  receive station Severny Polyus-  23,  and 
64 
the   first deliveries of  prefab  houses  and  stocks of  fuel and   food  had 
already been made by  air. Scientists were to  arrive a t  the new  station 
in  a  few  days.  The   high-latitude  expedition,  called  Sever-27,  was 
described as  the  biggest in the  history of Arctic exploration, aimed a t  a 
comprehensive  survey of  the  Arctic Ocean between  the  coasts of  the  
U .S .S .R . ,   Canada,  and   Greenland;  about  50  scientists  had  par- 
ticipated.  Work  had  also been  done  under   an  international program 
called  Polex,  to  photograph  the  bottom  of  the   Arctic  Ocean  and  to 
study the  lower surface of  the  polar ice cap .   (FBIS No  2 1 4 , 4  Nov  75) 
4 - 5   November:  A  study  called  “Outlook  for Aeronautics,”  on  probable 
aeronautical progress  during  the  next  25  yrs,  had  forecast  develop- 
ment  of  a  Concorde  I1  supersonic  transport  and  an  entirely  new 
second-generation SST, NASA  witnesses told the  House Subcommittee 
on Aviation and Transportation R&D.  The  hearing was first of  a ser ies  
called  to  get  an  early  s ta r t   on  H.R.  11573,  NASA’s  Ey  1977 budget 
authorization.  Earliest  da tes  of  introduction  for the  Concorde I1 and  
advanced  SST  had  been  se t   a t   1985 and  1995 respectively.  Recent 
NASA  technology work  on  the  advanced  SST  included  an anticipated 
engine-noise  breakthrough  based  on  noise-suppressor  research,  as  
well a s  on changes in engines and aircraft configurations. (Transcript, 
Vol.  I1 Part 1: 9,  67,  117) 
5 November:  “Clear  and   immediate  benefits  to  society”  that  NASA  could 
produce  would  justify  a  25%  increase  in  i ts   budget,  said  Rep.  Don 
Fuqua  (D-Fla.),  chairman  of  the   House  subcommittee  on  Space  
Science  and Applications,  urging  the   space   agency to  come  up with 
plans  for  such   a  program.  Noting that  the   Administration  had  been 
considering across-the-board  cu t s  in the  Federa l  budget,  Rep. Fuqua  
said the  Pres iden t  and  the  Office of  Management  and  Budget should 
reconsider the NASA  cu ts ,   as  re turns  from the  space  program  should 
give  it  higher  priority t h a n  nonproducing  areas   of  the   budget. 
218 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

November 

T h e   subcommittee’s  three-volume  report,  “Fu ture   Space   Pro- 
grams,”  called  for  new  space   systems  for  educational  and   medical 
services,  and   for  new  earth-survey  satellites  to  provide  maritime, 
agricultural,  geological,  and demographic  data.  The  report  s tressed  
tha t  the  agency should offer both short-term and  long-term  plans. The  
la t te r   should  include  plans  for  lunar   bases ,   orbital  colonies,  extra- 
terres tr ia l  communications, planetary  and   stellar exploration,  satel- 
lite  solar power,  and  disposal of  nuclear  waste. 
Chairman  Olin  E.  Teague   (D-Tex.)  of  the   House  Committee  on 
Sc ience  and Technology  endorsed the  subcommittee report, which he  
said contained “sensible  recommendations,”  noting particularly  the  
concept of  space-based generation of  electrical power.  Growth of the  
nation,  said Teague,  “is fundamentally dependen t  upon  our continu- 
ing i ts  number  one ranking in science and technology.” (W P o s t ,  6 Nov 
75,  A10; NYT ,  6 NOV  75,  51; SBD,  6 NOV 75,  28-30) 
0  HASPA-the  Navy’s  high-altitude  superpressured   powered  aerostat- 
failed  to  reach   i ts   predicted  altitude  when  the   balloon-inflation 
mechanism malfunctioned.  When fully extended,  HASPA  had  meas- 
ured  101.5 m  long  and 20.4 m  in  diameter.  The   launch   at Kennedy 
Space  Cen ter  had been planned a s  a 3-  to 5-hr flight; during launch, 
the   mylar  con ta iner  was  inflated  with  the   helium  contained  in  the  
upper  third  and  restrained  there  by  a collar tha t  would  drop away  to 
give the  gas room  to expand with altitude.  The  mechanism failed and  
t h e  balloon inverted at 11.26 km, releasing the  helium through a vent 
in  the   nose  of  the   balloon,  which  impacted  a t  KSC  a  half  hour  af ter  
launch.  HASPA  had  been  designed  to  function  a s  a low-level satellite 
for a variety of  payloads.  (Spaceport New s ,  14 Nov 75; ETR PIO,  inter- 
view.  5  Nov  75) 
6  November:  NASA   ’had  awarded  a  $2 548 265  con trac t   amendment  to 
Aeronutronic  Ford  Corp.  of  Houston  for  operation  of  the   Mission 
Control Cen te r  a t  Johnson  Space  Cen ter .  Th e  amendment  to  a  con- 
trac t  originally awarded in 1963 called for additional labor and mate- 
rials  tha t  would bring the  value of  the  con trac t  to $267  710  123. The 
work would employ 513 persons at the  three  AFC  facilities in Houston, 
and   in  Penn.  and  Calif.  (JSC  Release 75-94) 
Workmen  on  the   largest  building  in  the   world  using  solar energy  for 
heating  and   cooling  had  doubted  tha t   the   system would  work,  until 
they turned  on  a water hose, said Dr.  Robert San  Martin of the  Energy 
Ins t i tu te  a t  N. Mex.  S ta te  Univ. When the time came  to put the  collec- 
tors on  the  roof,  the  foreman told the  crew to run  water through them  
with a garden hose ;  the  workmen forgot tha t  t h e  collectors had been  in 
the  sun  and  were qu i te  hot.  “When they  ran  the  wa ter  through, violent 
s team   came   shooting out  the  o ther  end ,”   said  Dr.  Martin.  “At  tha t  
moment  they were convinced.” 
The  one-story building,  a facility for the  N.  Mex.  Dept. of Agricul- 
ture ,  would use 330 units mounted on i ts  roof a s  a solar collector. Fluid 
circulated through the  collectors heated by the  sun  would provide 80% 
of  the   heating  and   cooling  of  the   23@-sq-m  s truc ture .   Biggest  tes t  
would  be   use  of  solar  energy  for  cooling,  relatively  untried  a s  yet. 
(NYT ,  6  Nov  75,  34) 
0  Harnessing  nuclear  fusion  reactions  to  genera te   electricity  on  ea r th  
moved a s tep  nearer  reality when scientists at t h e  Mass. Inst. of Tech- 
nology reported achieving a fivefold improvement in  the  confinement 
of hydrogen  in a magnetic container where it could b e  hea ted  and  com- 
2 19 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

pressed to the  point of  fusion. A  tes t  reactor a t  MIT called Alcator had 
successfully  raised  the   magnetic  field  containing  the   hot  plasma  to 
75 000  gauss,  about  150 000  times  t h e   s treng th   of  earth‘s  magnetic 
field  a t  the   equator;  this,  said Dr.  Robert  C.  Seamans,  Jr.,  Admin- 
istrator  of  the   Energy  Research  and  Development  Administration, 
“exceeds by a factor of five anything previously achieved anywhere in 
the  world.” 
The   Soviet Union  in  the   1960s had  developed  toroidal  (doughnut- 
shaped) machines  called  Tokamaks  tha t   produced  be t ter   tempera- 
ture ,   containment  time,  and   particle  density  in  combination  than 
anything  before;  a  similar  machine  built  in  France   had  achieved  a 
figure of 2 trillion for the  density-multiplied-by-containment-time,  a t  a 
temperature  of  20 million’c.  M E ’ S  Alcator had achieved 10 trillion, a t  
a tempera ture  of  10 million’c.  ERDA officials and university scientists 
noted that the plasma confinement would have to be another 10 times 
a s  effective, at tempera tures  10  times higher, than those of the  Alcator 
experiments  before  fusion  could  be  achieved  artificially  in  the  
laboratory.  Although  the   U.S. had  begun  a program  to  build the  first 
fusion-power plant by the  end  of  this cen tury ,  the  economy of  this new 
power  source  would  remain  doubtful  in  sp i te   of  the   availability of 
cheap   fuel from  the   ocean:  The   cos ts  of  s u c h  plants  had  been  esti- 
mated a t  billions of dollars each .  (NYT, 6 Nov 75,27; CSM, 6 Nov 7 5 , l ;  
B S u n ,  6 Nov  75, A l )  
Th e  Aerospace  Industries Association called  on NASA  to abide by  gov- 
ernment  policy  that  relied  on  the   private  sector  for  goods and  serv- 
ices, charging tha t  increasing  in-house activity by the government had 
been  detrimental  to  the   economics  of  the   private  sector.  Karl  G. 
Harr,  president  of  AIA,  told the  House Subcommittee on Aviation & 
Transportation  R&D  during  hearings  on  H.R.  11573  tha t   a  proper 
partnership between NASA and the aerospace industry should be main- 
tained, and warned of the  prospect tha t  the  government might move to 
“increase  its  share of  tha t  partnership.”  Involvement of  government 
in  postresearch  activities  s u c h  as  prototype  development  “ threa tens  
to weaken our private technological base,”  Harr said. “We do not feel 
tha t   NASA  and  o ther   government  agencies  should  both  identify  the  
needs  and pursue the  solutions on their own.”  Commending NASA for 
its  10-yr aircraft fuel-reduction  program,  Harr  said the  program was 
“an  ideal opportunity  to develop  the  government-industry  team  into 
i ts  most efficient and cost-effective form.”  (Transcript, Vol I1 Pa r t  I, 
149 f f )  
9  November:  All four  batteries  on  the   Viking 2  lander  had  been  fully 
charged,  NASA’s Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  reported.  The   problem 
had  been  solved  by  using  a  backup  charger   system  carried  on  the  
orbiter af ter  the primary  system failed earlier [see  2 Nov.].  Recharg- 
ing  took  about  24  h r  per  battery.  Th e  voltage had  to  be  replenished 
before  the   spacecraf t   en tered   Mars  orbit  and   before  the  lander 
separa ted   from  the   orbiter.  Th e  difficulty with  the   lander’s  primary 
charger  had  been  traced   to  failure of  one of  four  resistors  in the  cir- 
cuitry.  To  prevent  unforeseen  problems  with  the   backup  charger, 
Viking project officials had decided to keep  a t  leas t  one of  the batter- 
ies charged throughout  the  remainder of  cru ise  flight, to ensure  acti- 
vation of  the  switch shifting the  lander  from  its solar-panel power to 
tha t   from radioisotope thermoelectric  generators.  The  two RTGs  had 
not  been  used  for  primary  power  during  flight  to  avoid  thermal 
220 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

November 

problems from the hea t  given off by the  units. (LA T ime s ,  6 Nov  7 5 , l ;  
A v  Wk, 10 Nov  75 ,6 ;  SBD, 12 Nov 75 ,64;  Lang ley  Researcher ,  14 Nov 
75,  1) 
9  S ta te s  from New England to California had joined  the  competition to be 
se lec ted   a s   the   site  of  a   proposed Federa l   Solar  Energy  Research  
Institute  tha t  might be spend ing  up to $50 million annually within 3 yr 
after i ts  establishment.  Competition had begun even  before issuance  
of  formal criteria describing the  center’s mission and needs, expec ted  
la te r  in November. A repor t  on the  cen te r  by  a  spec ia l  committee of 
the  National Research  Council-an 
agency of  the  National Academy 
of  Sc iences  and the  National Academy of  Engineering-had 
forecas t  
a   staff  of  about  800  professionals  and  800  support  people.  The  
committee  had  recbmmended  a   single  institute  administered  by  a  
nonprofit corporation, like those tha t  govern many other large national 
laboratories;  geographical  location  had  not  been   cons idered   a s  
important  as   “intellectual  atmosphere,  techn ica l   suppliers  and 
availability  of  services  for  a   subs tan t ia l   laboratory.”  Issuance   of 
criteria  by  the   Energy  Research   and  Development Administration 
would  call  for  proposals  early  next  year,  with  site  to  be   chosen   in 
April  or May  1976 by  Dr.  Robert C.  Seamans ,  Jr.,  Administrator of 
ERDA. 
Among  those  already  in  competition were  the   s ta te   of  N.  Mex., 
which had pu t  a  proposal for the  solar cen te r  in Feb.  1975 when ERDA 
. was a  month old; a consortium of  universities and industries  on Long 
Is land ,  N .Y . ;   the  governors of  six New  England s ta te s ,  sitting a s  the  
New England Regional Commission, who voted to “work as  a  regional 
force”  to ge t  the  cen te r  for New England; and the  s ta te  of  N.Y., which 
had designated a  coordinator  to work on getting the  cen te r ,  including 
assembling  the   necessary  real  es ta te”   from  various  areas   of  the  
6 b  
state.  (NYT ,  9 Nov  75,  33) 
10 November:  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  had awarded con trac ts  worth 
$500 000 each  to Martin Marietta’s  Denver Division and to TRW   Sys- 
tems  Group, to define the  Space lab  payload called AMPS (atmospheric, 
magnetospheric, and plasmas in space). The  definition s tud ies  would 
emphasize  flexibility,  low  cost,  and  an  evolutionary  approach  to 
environmental research .  
One of  the  first payloads considered for Space lab ,  AMPs  had  been 
conceived a s  a  manned orbiting scientific laboratory to study the  near- 
space  environment of  ea r th  and the  effects on it of changes in incident 
solar energy and of  emissions from earth.  Instrumentation would  in- 
c lude  a  la se r  beam  to define  the  composition of  the  various constitu- 
en t s  of earth‘s atmosphere. Missions would last from 7 to 30 days, with 
extensive  involvement  of  the   scientist  crews   in  conducting  the  
experiments.  (MSFC  Release  75-239;  SBD, 20 Nov  75,  108) 
The   u.S.  space   program  was  an  adventure  whose  potential  benefits 
were undefinable and incalculable,  NASA Administrator Dr. James  C .  
F le tcher  told the  National Academy of  Engineering.  Speaking on the  
“Outlook for the  Space  Program,” Dr. F le tcher  noted tha t  the  public 
and   the   Congress were  “now”  oriented,  and  tha t   concentration  on 
immediate  benefits  might  jeopardize  “ the   vast  potential”  of  the  
national space  program. Admitting tha t  “NASA’s presen t  actions seem 
to  speak  louder  than  its words,”  in tha t   its money had been  spen t  on 
cu r ren t  needs  ra the r  than  on tomorrow’s goals, Dr.  F le tcher  sa id  this 
did  not  result  from  lack   of  vision  but  from  “accommodation  with 

221 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

cu r ren t   constraints.”  Pro jec ts   to  be   considered  for  NASA’s fu ture  
should  include  satellite  sys tems   to  beam  solar  energy  PO ea r th ;   a 
permanen t  manned space  station in orbit,  a s  a forerunner of the  space  
colony tha t  had been proposed; exploration of the  planets expanded to 
interstellar  missions;  and   making  con tac t   with  another  intelligent 
race-“the  most significant achievement of  th is  millennium.”  (Text; 
NASA  Release  75-  294) 
0  A  25-member  delegation from  the   Soviet Union,  headed  by  Professor 
K.  D.  Bushuyev,  U.S.S.R. 
technical  director  for  the   Apollo-Soyuz 
Test Project in July, had begun work a t  the  Johnson Space  Cen ter  on  a 
report  on  the   mission.  Cosmonaut  Aleksey  S. 
joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
Yeliseyev,  who  had  been   U.S.S.R.  flight  director  for  ASTP,  was  a 
member  of the  delegation, which had  been schedu led  to remain a t  JSC 
until  November  21.  Dr.  Glynn  S.  Lunney,  who  had  been   U.S. 
technical director for ASTP,  headed  t h e  NASA  group working with the  
Soviet  specialists.  (JSC  Release  75-  95) 
11  November:  Development of  a reusable  single-stage Space  Shuttle tha t  
could  perform be t ter  than  t h e  curren t   partially reusable  design,  and  
cost less, would b e  feasible before the  e nd  of  this cen tury  “if  pushed 
aggressively enough,”  Robert  E.  Smylie,  Deputy Associate  Admin- 
istrator  for  Aeronautics  and   Space   Technology  for  NASA,  told  the  
House Subcommittee on  Space  Science and  Applications. S tud ies  by 
t h e  agency had  shown tha t   s truc tura l  weight  reductions  of  25% and  
propulsion-system improvements of 5 to 6%, relative to curren t  space  
flight technology,  could be achieved in the  la te  1990s. In  o ther  a rea s  of 
space  technology,  Smylie cited  t h e  concep t  of  solar-electric  propul- 
sion tha t  had been considered for planetary missions using the  Space  
Transportation  System,  and   described  re sea rch   in  automated  pro- 
cessing  of  microcircuits,  robot  vehicles  for  planetary  exploration, 
vitreous materials res is tan t   to laser  radiation,  and dry lubricant with 
application  in  space   payloads.  (Transcript,  Vol  I  Pa r t   1,  696,  726, 
1130 ff) 
NASA  had  begun preliminary long-range  planning for a fourth ea r th  re- 
sources  satellite, Landsat-D,  Sen. F rank  E. Moss (D-Utah)  told t h e  
American Mining Congress, and  “ the  odds a re  tha t  it will be optimized 
for  agricultural  studies.”  Moss  had  predicted  tha t   t h e   US.  would 
people who will decide  . . . if  we  need  a  specialized  satellite will  be  
eventually  have  a  Landsa t   optimized  for  mineral  exploration;  “ the  
NASA   in the   . . . proper  utilization  of  the   environment of  space.” 
the   scientific  and   engineering  community  itself.  They  must  guide 
NASA  had reported tha t  both Landsats 1  and 2 were  operating satis- 
factorily  but  under  reduced   capability  in  areas   without  ground  sta- 
tions  because   of  tape-recorder  deterioration.  To  expedite  flow  of 
Landsa t   information  to  users,  NASA  had  planned  expansion  by May 
1977  to  handling 200 Landsa t   scenes  a  day  and  delivering magnetic 
tapes  from the  da ta  cen te r s  to the  user  within 24 to 48 h r  after rece ip t  
of  da ta   a t  GSFC.  ( C R ,  11 Nov  75,  S19689; SBD,  17 Nov  75,  84) 
12 November:  NASA  and  the Energy Research  and  Development Adminis- 
tration were near  agreemen t  on  a plan to build a coal gasification plant 
near  NASA’s Michoud  assembly facility in La.  to provide hydrogen gas 
for testing and  operating t h e  Space  Shuttle, said Dr. Myron S. Malkin, 
d irec tor   of  the   Space   Shu t t le   program  for  NASA ’ s   Office  of  Space  
Flight.  In   testimony  before  the   House  Subcommittee  on  Space  

222 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

November 

Science and Applications, Dr. Malkin said ERDA would hire  a private 
contractor  to build a $ 6 5 -m a o n  plant and  would operate it for 3 yr to 
obtain da ta  on coal gasification; after tha t ,  it would turn the  plant over 
to  NASA.  The   facility would  produce  enough  gas daily to provide  30 
tons of  liquid hydrogen for the  Shuttle. (Transcript, Vol I Pa r t  1 ,  858, 
910) 
0  NASA  had  decided  to  eliminate  all expendable  launch  vehicles  except 
s c o u t   after  t h e   Space   Shu t t le  became  operational,  NASA   Associate 
Administrator  John  F.  Yardley  told  the   House  Subcommittee  on 
Space  Science and Applications,  but  the  Air Force wanted  to play  it 
safe. AI? officials wanted  extra vehicles on hand  after Shuttle in c a s e  
problems developed, he said. NASA had planned  about 20 launches  of 
expendable vehicles a year through  1 9 8 0 - 4  Scouts,  10 Deltas, 3 or  4 
17 launches  in  FY 
Atlas-Centaurs,  and  1  or  2 Titan-Centaurs-with 
1977 and  27  in  FY  1978.  (Transcript, Vol  I Part  1, 899) 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  had  selected  Moog  Inc.  Controls  Div. 
to  negotiate  a  cost-plus-incentive-feelaward-fee  contract  totaling 
$6  685  5W for the  design, development, production,  and  acceptance 
testing of  a thrust-vector control electrical-hydraulic servoactuator on 
the   Space  Shu t t le   solid  rocket  booster.  The  servoactuator  would 
control the  SM’s exhaust  nozzle.  (Murshall S ta r ,   12 Nov  75,  4) 
13 November:  The   earth‘s  ozone  layer,  a  shield  of  heavy  molecules  of 
oxygen tha t  prevents some harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching 
t h e  earth‘s  surface, might be in less  danger from aerosol sprays than 
from the increasing worldwide use of  chemical fertilizers. Michael B. 
McElroy,  professor  of  atmospheric  sciences  a t   Harvard  University, 
had  predicted  tha t   a  projected  increase  in  the   use  of  nitrogen 
fertilizers over the  next 25 yr could reduce the  ozone layer 20 to 25%. 
Theoretically,  e a ch   1%  reduction  in  the  ozone  layer  could  lead  to 
thousands-as  many as  15 000-additional  cases  of  skin cancer  in the  
U .S .   alone. 
All life needs  nitrogen to  make  proteins, McElroy pointed out. The  
earth‘s  atmosphere would have lost all its nitrogen long ago except for 
the  process by which bacteria  “denitrify”  decayed ma t ter  in the soil; 
most nitrogen returned  to the  atmosphere  in the  same inert pure  form 
in which it was taken  and converted to use by earth’s plant life, which 
then  formed  a  source  of  nitrogen  for  other  plants  and   animals; 
however,  some nitrogen re turned  in a form that  acted as  a catalyst to 
destroy ozone. Man had recently been extracting nitrogen from the  air 
and  putting it into plant life in the  form of  fertilizer on a scale rivaling 
na ture ;   by  the   year  2000,  said  McElroy,  the   amount  of  nitrogen 
extracted  from  the   air  would  be  double  that  removed  by  natural 
causes .  With  a sharp  increase  in the natural  denitrification  process, 
more  nitrogen  catalysts  destructive  to  ozone  would  be  released. 
Serious effects should be evident within the  next 4 yr, McElroy said. 
Although aerosol sprays could be dispensed with, nitrogen fertilizers 
were  a  necessity  for  increased  world  food  production.  Increased  
incidence of  skin cancer  concerned light-skinned  humans,  who were 
unlikely  to  get  much  sympathy  from  darker-skinned  inhabitants  of 
a rea s   where  the   fertilizers-and 
increased  food  production-are 
urgently  needed.  (W S J ,   13 Nov  75,  13) 
First major inflight tes ts  of  the  Viking 1 lander  scheduled to touch down 
on Mars  in July  1976 had  shown  the  craft  to  be  in  excellent  health, 

223 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

flight controllers at J e t  Propulsion Laboratory reported. JPL engineers 
completed  thorough  check s   of  the   nuc lear   power,  propulsion, 
guidance,  attitude control,  computer,  tape  recorder ,  telemetry,  heat 
control,  and  radar   landing  systems,  a s  we l l   a s  four  of  the   scientific 
ins trumen ts ,   including  two  cameras   to  photograph  the   Martian 
surface  in  closeup.  The   second  Viking  lander ,   scheduled  to  reach  
Mars  in  Sept.  1976,  would  undergo  similar  checkou t   the   following 
week.  (Pasadena  S tar-News ,   14 Nov  75,  1) 
0  Calculation of  crop acreage  from satellite images had proven “generally 
adequa te”  in NASA te s t s  involving wheat acreage in nine Great P la ins  
s ta te s  during  the   pas t   year,  NASA  Associate Administrator Char les  
W.  Mathews  told  the   House  Subcommittee  on  Space   Sc ience   and  
Applications. Reporting on the  9.9% error  ra te  in the  L A C E  (large  a rea  
crop   inventory  experiment) te s t   using  Landsa t   da ta ,   Mathews  said 
tha t  the  U.S.  had demons tra ted  the  feasibility of  an  operational global 
forecasting  system  for  wheat.  Mathews  mentioned  o the r   Landsa t  
da ta   applications:  The Geological Survey  and   NOAA  had  developed 
computer  techn iques  for processing multispectral  Landsa t  da ta  tha t  
made oil slicks clearly visible.  O the r  computer techn iques  using the  
da ta   had  de tec ted   sub t le  differences  in  surface  soils and  rocks  tha t  
revealed mineralization and potential ore deposits.  (Transcr ip t ,  Vol I 
Pa r t   1,  931,  938,  939) 
0  Estimated  cost  of  the   Space lab  being  built  for  the   first  Space   Shu t t le  
flight had risen from $400 million to $500 million dur ing  the  last year, 
and  the  program had fallen 3 to 6 mo behind schedu le ,  NASA’s Space-  
lab  program director  Douglas Lord  told t h e  House Subcommittee on 
Space  Sc ience  and Applications. The European Space  Agency, which 
was developing Space lab ,  was confident of  delivering it in time to fly 
on the  Shuttle.  Lord and  NASA  Associate Administrator John F.  Yard- 
ley said the  increased development cost would not affect NASA’s cos t  
in purchasing the  modules, because  NASA’s   agreement with ESA pre-  
cluded  the  Europeans  from recouping development costs.  NASA  had 
been committed to buying one se t  of Space lab  hardware at a  cost “rea-  
sonable to  NASA,”  although pricing proposals would  not  be received 
for 6 to 8 mo. The  two officials said European  cooperation on the  pro- 
gram had   been  “exceptional.”  (Transcr ip t ,  Vol  I P a r t   1,  889) 
14  November:  Pan   American  World  Airways  announced  the   industry’s 
f i is t   nonstop  flights  from  New  York  and   Los  Angeles  to  Tokyo, 
beginning early in  1976.  The   announcement came   a  day  after  a  new 
Boeing 747SP jetliner  had made  a   demonstration flight New York  to 
Tokyo in  13 hrs  33 min, fastest commercial serv ice  to Japan  from the  
U.S.  Curren t   commercial  time  on   tha t   route,  which  requ ired   a  
refueling  stop,  was  more  than   17  hr.  The   Boeing  7 4 7 ~ ~  
(special 
performance) was 100 s e a t s  smaller than  the  747-21, bu t  had the  same  
fuel capac i ty  and  the   same  four engines as  the  larger  model.  The  SP 
had   been  capable  of  cruising  fa s te r   and  higher  than   any  o the r  
commercial jetliner  and   had  a   range  of  1200 km  beyond  tha t   of  the  
s tandard   747.  (B Sun, 15  Nov  75,  A9) 
15  November:  Observation  of  the   sun’s  magnetic  fields  might  make  it 
possible to pred ic t  wea ther  4 days in advance with grea ter  reliability, 
sa id   scientists  at  the   Institute  for  P lasma   Research   at  S tanford  
University.  Investigators  at  the  National Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration in Boulder, Colo.,  and  at Stanford said tha t  magnetic 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

November 

forces from the  sun  played a role in formation of  pressure  troughs on 
earth,  which  bring  rainy  weather;  observations  from  space,  cor- 
roborated  from  ear th   measurements,  indicate  influence  on weather 
from  solar flares,  sunspots,  and   high  velocities of  the   solar wind. 
The  weather  effect  involved two phenomena,  the   sun’s  magnetic- 
sector  s truc ture   and  a  concept  called  the   vorticity-area  index.  The  
index  is  a  measure  of  the   size  of  low-pressure  troughs  in  square  
kilometers,  calculated  by  computer  from  twice-daily  s tandard  
weather-service  maps.  As  solar  magnetic  sec tors   and  boundaries 
were  measured  regularly  a t   Mt.  Wilson  Observatory,  the  Astro- 
physical  Observatory  in  the   Crimea,  and  the   Stanford  Solar 
Observatory,  scientists  could  compare  the   solar  magnetic  s truc ture  
with the  vorticity-area index to see  whether the  sun  s truc ture  affected 
the  nature and size of  low-pressure troughs that bring rain and  stormy 
weather.  (NYT, 16 Nov  75, 40) 
9  A  nova tha t  exploded about  10 000 yr ago and a t trac ted  the  attention of 
primitive farmers  in  the  Near  East may  have  been  a  stimulus to  the  
rise  of  man’s  first  known  civilization,  according  to  the  New  York 
T im e s .  Reporter Boyce Rensberger,  writing on  the  theory  published 
in  the  Explorers Journal  by  amateur  scholar George Michanowsky, 
described clues found by Michanowsky in cuneiform texts regarding a 
gigantic s ta r  in the  constellation Vela.  No particularly bright s ta r  was 
to  be  found in Vela in modern  times,  Michanowsky pointed  out,  but 
astronomers  had  agreed  tha t   a  supernova  of  uncertain  da te   had 
probably  been  the   forerunner  of  the  present  Gum  nebula,  a  huge 
glowing  cloud  of  hot  gases   cen tered   on  a  relatively  cold  pulsar. 
Occurrence of  the  supernova had been placed  anywhere from 6000 to 
15 000  yr  ago.  In   the   times  after  the  s tarburs t ,   the   primitive 
peop les-espec ia l ly   Sumer ians-deve loped   astronomy, mathematics, 
and  writing;  Michanowsky  had  suggested  tha t   the   supernova  had 
stimulated  great  attention  to  stellar  phenomena  and  led  to  a  more 
carefu l  study of  the  heavens,  to formal astronomy and mathematics, 
and   to  the   need  to  make  written  records.  (NYT,  15 Nov  75,  29) 
17  November:  The  U.S.S.R.  launched  i t s   76th  space   mission  for  1975,  a n  
unmanned  Soyuz 20,  from  Baykonur  Cosmodrome  near   Tyuratam, 
and established a new  procedure  by  identifying the  unmanned  flight 
a s   a  spacecraft  designed  for  manned  flight.  Reu ters   quoted  Soviet 
scientist Dr.  Konstantin Feoktistov a s  saying the  purpose of  the  flight 
was to develop a transport system e i ther  to supply a space station with 
expendables, or  to serve a s  an emergency rescue ship. One  possibility 
would be to automatically dock a Soyuz with the  manned station after 
one of  the  cosmonauts  had  removed the  original Soyuz, or  perhaps  a 
new  Soyuz  would  be   used  a s   a  new  re turn   vehicle:  one   of  these  
procedures  would  be  required  unless  the   Salyut  space   station  had 
been  designed  with  two  docking positions. 
The  Soviet director of July’s Apollo-Soyuz T e s t  Project, Konstantin 
Bushuyev,  in Houston  for a conference,  said Soyuz 20  had  not  been 
designed  to  transfer   expendables  to  the   curren t   Sa lyu t   4  space  
station;  Christopher  S.  Wren,  reporting  from  Moscow  for  the  New 
York T ime s ,  pointed out tha t  i t  was not known how provisions could be 
transferred  from  the   Soyuz to  the   space   station,  since  neither  craft 
had been  reported to have s u c h  an automatic capability. (NYT, 20 Nov 
75;  21 Nov  75,  25; SBD,  18 Nov  75,  90; 21 Nov  75,  114) 

225 

November 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
0  Dr.  Detlev  W.  Bronk,  president  emer i tus   of  Rockefeller  Univ.  and  
former  president  of  Johns   Hopkins  Univ.,  t h e   Natl.  Academy  of 
Sciences,  and the  American Assn.  for the  Advancement of  Sc ience ,  
died a t  the  age of  78. A  scientist who had been  adviser to Pres iden ts  
Truman ,   Eisenhower,  and   Kennedy,  Dr.  Bronk  had  been  cred i ted  
with formulating the  modern theory of  the  science of  biophysics-ap- 
plication of physics to the  life sys tems  of  p lan ts  and  animals.  He had 
been chairman of  the  National Research  Council from  1946 to  1950, 
and president of the  National Sc ience  Foundation for three  te rm s  from 
1950 to 1960. In  1964 he had received the  Medal of  Freedom,  highest 
civilian award  to be  gran ted  by  a u.S.  Pres iden t .   (B S u n ,  18 Nov 75, 
A13; NYT, 18 Nov  75,  38M) 
* Alexander  P. Vinogradov,  leading geochemist of  t h e  U.S.S.R.  and  vice 
president  of  the  Soviet Academy of  Sciences,  had died a t  Moscow a t  
the  age of 80, according to Tass ,  the  Soviet news agency. Vinogradov 
had  identified  41) chemical  e lemen ts   in  earth’s  soil  zones  and  had 
developed  a  new  field  of  investigation  called  cosmochemistry-the 
chem ica l  analysis of lunar  and  Venus composition.  He had remained 
active  a s   the   head  of  Moscow’s  Ins t i tu te   of  Geochemistry  and  
Analytical Chemistry. (Tass, in FBIS,  17 Nov 75; N Y T ,  19 Nov 75 ,38 ;  
Aero  Daily, 20 Nov  75,  112) 
18 November:  NASA expec ted  to add  3800 contractor personnel in FY  1976, 
mostly for the  Space  Shuttle, NASA Comptroller William E.  Lilly told a 
joint  session  of  the   House  Subcommittees  on   Space   Sc ience   and 
Applications  and   on  Aviation  and   Transportation  R&D .   However, 
overall  employment  on   the   space   program  had  been  forecast  down 
68%, or 278 000 workers, from i ts  peak  of 409 000 in 1965. NASA would 
lose  17  more  Federa l   positions  in  FY   1976  after  losing  521  Federa l  
employees in FY  1975. NASA  is paying more for fewer employees, Liuy 
pointed  out,  because   agency  manpower  expenses   go  up  about  $6 
million a year,  offset  by  only  $1 million in  replacing retired workers 
with new workers in lower grades. Total Federa l  employment a t  NASA 
had   hit  a  high  of  33  924  in  1966;  NASA  Federa l   employees  now 
numbered  24  316.  (Transcript,  Vol  I  Pa r t   1,  995,  1024,  1031) 
0  Boeing Co.,  which had a 44-mo $Smillion subcon trac t  from Rockwell to 
de tec t   electrical problems with  the   Space  Shu t t le ,   reported  tha t   35 
design  or  hardware  changes   had  been  necessary  in  main-engine 
electrical circuits of  the  Shu t t le  so far. Boeing was conducting a sneak  
circuit analysis of t h e  first Shu t t le  orbiter, to be  used for approach and  
landing tes ts ;  la te r  s tud ies  were schedu led  for the  second orbiter, the  
solid  rocket  booster,  and   t h e   external  fuel  tank ,   a s  well  a s   critical 
ground-support  equipment.  (SBD,  18  Nov  75,  92) 
0  A t  leas t  five of  NASA’s  25 000 employees had made use  in past years  of 
hunting  facilities owned  by  Rockwell International,  and  the   agency 
and   Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-  Wis.)  had  begun  investigating  t h e  
matter.  The  investigation had  not  been confined  to en ter ta inmen t  a t  
the  Rockwell  facility in Md.,  but included “rece ip t  of  o ther  gratuities 
such  as Redskin  (football) tickets  and   u s e  of hospitality  su i tes ,”   the  
sena tor  said. Rockwell  had been prime con trac tor  for t h e  $6.4-bd&on 
Space  Shuttle program tha t  accoun ted  for more than  a third of NASA’s 
budget.  Sen.  Proxmire,  vice  chairman  of  the   Joint  Committee  on 
Defense Production,  had directed  the  committee staff to assist NASA  
in determining the  full ex ten t  of “unethical or illegal lobbying by NASA  

226 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
November 
contractors.”  NASA  had placed  five inspectors on  the  case .   (NYT,  19 
Nov  75,  1) 
0  INTELSAT had awarded a 15-mo $60 000 con trac t  to EIC  Inc.  of Newton, 
Mass.,  to  develop  improved  hydrogen  e lec trodes  and   separa tors  for 
use   in  nickel-hydrogen  cells  in  communication-satellite  batteries. 
NiH batteries would provide improved reliability and  weight-to-power 
ratios over nickel-cadmium  batteries  now  in  use.  (INTELSAT Release 
75-  19) 
19 November:  The   Space  Shu t t le   orbiter  might  travel  by  ground  ra ther  
than  a ir  from Rockwell  International’s assembly facility a t  Palmdale, 
Calif.,  to Edwards Air Force Base for i ts  approach  and landing tests, a 
Rockwell official said a s  the  orbiter made i t s  first appearance  for the  
press. Original plan had been to send the  orbiter piggyback on  NASA’s 
Boeing 747 scheduled to launch  the  unpowered craf t  during i ts  te s t s  at 
Edwards.  Trave l  on  the   ground would  take   6 h r  to  go  about  32  km, 
using a n  off-the-road  vehicle inherited from t h e  Apollo program,  and  
would  cost less.  (NASA  Release 75-293;  Aero Da i ly ,   20 Nov  75,  107) 
19 November:  Soyuz 20 ,   the  unmanned  Soviet  spacecraf t  launched  from 
Baykonur 17 Nov.,  docked automatically w i thSa lyu t  4  using onboard 
radio devices and  compu ter  installations for a program of  “testing unit 
constructions  and   onboard  systems.  . .in  joint  flight,”  Tass   an- 
nounced. Sa lyu t  4 ,  the  orbiting space  station, had been visited by the  
crew of Soyuz 17 for almost 30 days and  by  the  crew of Soyuz 18 for 
more  than   60  days.  T h e   Soyuz  20  mission  had   been  analyzed  a s  
transfer   of  fuel  to Sa lyu t   4 ;  in   orbit  since  26  Dec.  1974, t h e   space  
station was thought to be running low on maneuvering fuel. Reporters 
had  specu la ted  tha t   a  new  two-man  crew might  be  sen t   to Sa lyu t  4 
la ter  this year for a stay of 3 mo o r  longer tha t  would break  the  84-day 
record  se t   by  U.S.  as tronau ts   in  1974.  The   value  of  the   automatic 
docking for resupply would be  the  economy of  not  sending men with 
e a ch  flight, although the  Soviets had never indicated the  cost of their 
launches. 
T a s s  reported tha t  the  “space  complex Salyut-4-  Soyuz-20” was in 
an  orbit with  apogee 367 km,  perigee 343 km,  51.6”  inclination,  and  
91.4 min  period  of  revolution.  (W Post,  21  Nov  75,  B14; NYT, 21 Nov 
75,  25; FBIS  No.  225,  19  Nov  75,  No.  226,  20 Nov  75; Aero Da i ly ,  20 
Nov  75,  108) 
19 November-23  December:  Atmosphere Explorer-E,  third in a series of 
new  deep-dipper  spacecraf t  designed  to  investigate  the   ionosphere, 
was launched  from Ea s te rn  Test Range aboard a Delta vehicle at 9:07 
pm  EST  (0206GMT)  into  an   almost  perfect  orbit:  apogee,  3026  km ;  
perigee,  157 km ;   inclination,  19.7”; period,  118.1 min.  In  orbit  the  
satellite became Explorer 55. 
Major difference between the  original and  new generation of atmos- 
phere   explorers was  t h e  unusually large onboard  propulsion  system 
tha t   enab led  t h e  la ter   spacecraf t  to  move  themselves  up o r  down  in 
space  by hundreds  of km  o r  go from highly elliptical to circular orbits. 
Th e  name  “deep-dippers”  mean t  tha t  t h e  spacecraf t  could drop  into 
the  atmosphere and  pull ou t  again, taking measuremen ts  only while in 
the   upper   reaches   of  t h e   thermosphere.  Th is   region,  important 
because  it absorbed most ultraviolet light and  hea t  received from the  
sun  and because  movement of  tha t   hea t  de term ined  the  s truc ture  of 
t h e  upper  atmosphere, had been difficult to s tudy  because  the  altitude 

227 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
November 
was  too  high  for all aircraft  and most  balloons and  too  low  for o ther  
satellites. The  dipping orbit prevented accumulation of excessive hea t  
in  the  metal  skins of  the   AE spacecraft. 
Exp lorer   55  would  also  c a n y   a  backsca t ter   ultraviolet  spectro- 
photometer  to obtain  a vertical  profile and density measurements  of 
the   ozone  layer  between  20”N and  S;  the   measurements  would  be  
compared with those from Nimbus 4 ,  launched in 1970, to evaluate the  
long-term accuracy of the  Nimbus instrumentation. A mission opera- 
tions  report  23 Dec.  said Exp lorer  55  had  completed  more  than  400 
orbits  and  all subsystems were  performing well.  (NASA  Release  75- 
290 ,70-29 ,72-212;   KSC  Release 266-75;  S B D ,  21 Nov 75,114; KSC 
Spacepor t  New s ,  31 Oc t  75,  3; MORS  13 Nov  75,  3 Dec 75 ,2 3  Dec 75) 
20  November:  P ioneer   1 1   had  been  scheduled  to  take   i t s   first  look  at 
Saturn,  according to  controllers a t   Ames  Research  Center.  Upon  i ts  
encounter  with  Jup i ter   on  2  Dec.  1974,  Pioneer’s  trajectory  was 
altered  by  the   gravitational  effects of  Jupiter  to one  tha t  would  take  
Pioneer  to  Sa turn   on  or  about  1  Sep t .   1979.  The   spacecraft  had 
re turned   the  only pictures  ever  taken  of  Jupiter’s  polar  regions  and 
probed  the   planet’s  intense  inner  radiation  belts  for  the   first  time, 
attaining  the  highest  speed  ever  attained  by  a  manmade  object 
(171 000 km  per  hr). 
Pioneer was  still more  than  1287 million km  from Sa turn ,  but  in  a 
position to observe  the   ringed planet  at  a phase  angle 4 times larger  
than the  largest angle at which Sa turn  could be  seen  from earth. Th e  
total amount of  light and t h e  polarization of  sunlight reflected  from a 
planet’s  atmosphere at different  angles could reveal the  composition 
of  the atmosphere; scientists would watch Saturn throughout Pioneer’s 
approach  to  note  changes  in  intensity  and  polarization  of  light  re- 
flected  from  the   planet  with  changes  in  phase  angle.  The  viewing 
angle would also permit study of  the  light-reflecting characteristics of 
Saturn’s  rings in large areas  of  shadow from the  planet,  an effect not 
visible  from  earth.  Pioneer  was  headed  upward  out  of  the  plane 
containing  the  sun’s  planets,  and  in  1977  would  attain  a  distance 
above  this  plane  of  about  161  million  km,  allowing  it  to  measure 
phenomena  coming from higher latitudes on  the  s un  than  previously 
observable.  (ARC  Release  75-53;  MOR  S-811-73-07, 
19 Nov  75) 
Je t  Propulsion Laboratory had  awarded  a 920-million contract to Lock- 
heed Missiles and  Space  Co.  for design a nd  development of  Seasa t-  
A,  an ocean survey satellite tha t  would circle the  ear th  14 times a day 
and  view  95%  of  the   surface  every  36  hrs.  Scheduled  for  launch  in 
1978,  Seasa t   would  record  radar   imagery  of  waves  and  ice  fields, 
ocean  topography,  tides,  and   curren ts ,   and  would  measure  wave 
height, length, and  direction; force and direction of sea-surface winds; 
and temperatures of  the  s e a  surface and the  airlsea interface.  (W S t a r ,  
21 Nov  75, A2; A v   Wk, 8 Dec  75,  6; S B D ,  21 Nov  75,  118) 
0  A new satellite-fed printing plant  tha t  would  speed delivery of  the  W a l l  
Street  Journa l   to  i ts   readers   in  t h e   southeastern  United  S ta tes   had 
been introduced to Orlando, Fla.,  area  business leaders and dedicated 
by  the  Journal’s publishers,  Dow  Jones  and Co. T h e  $2-million plant 
could print 70 000 copies of  the  newspaper per hour,  and would serve  
readers  in Ga.  and Fla.  a t  first, with distribution  into five other south- 
eas tern   s ta tes  coming later. 
The  paper would be printed in Orlando on the  da te  of  publication in 
Chicopee,  Mass.,  by  the   use  of  W e s ta r   1  facilities  provided  by 

228 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

November 
American  Satellite  Corp.  Fullsize  facsimiles  of  pages  would  be  put 
under   a   high-intensity  scanne r   tha t   would  convert  the   images  to 
electronic impulses beamed to We s ta r  1 .  The  satellite would relay the 
impulses to the  Orlando plant where they would be received on page- 
size photo  film;  sending and  receipt  of  da ta  for a   full page had  been 
clocked at 3.5 min.  The  film would be  used to make photolithographic 
p la tes  for  the   Orlando press. 
The  Orlando plant would be  the  ten th  regional printing plant for t h e  
Journal.  The   ea s te rn   edition  previously  delivered  to  60  000  sub-  
scr ibers  in Fla.  and Ga.  had been airmailed from Silver Spring, Md., 
arriving a   day  late.  (Orlando S e n t i n e l S t a r ,   20  Nov  75,  20A) 
9  The   Air  Force's  Space   and  Missile  Systems  Organization awarded  a  
$36.3-m=on  con trac t   to  McDonnell Douglas  Astronautics  Co.  for 
building  and  testing  in  ea r th   orbit  a   space   la se r   communications 
system. The  5-yr con trac t  would produce three  synchronous satellites 
to relay high-data-rate messages by  laser  to aircraft, ground stations, 
or o ther  satellites,  with a  capability of  transmitting  a  billion pieces of 
da ta  per  sec-about  20  times  the   da ta  volume possible with  present 
commercial communications-satellite  systems.  The   award  includes 
development of  the  space  and ground-station equipment. McDonnell 
would work  on  high-accuracy pointing  of  the  la se r  beams,  within  10 
millionths of  a  degree.  (S t .  Louis P - D ,  20 Nov 75 ,13 ;  LA T im e s ,  9  Dec 
75,  15C; SBD ,   20  Nov  75,  107) 
21  November:  Goddar&Space  Flight Cen ter  awarded Boeing Co.  a  fixed- 
price incentive con trac t  for $8 236 000 to provide modules for the  first 
two Atmospheric Explorer missions: AEM-  A (hea t  capacity  satellite) 
and  AEM-  B  (the  s tra tospher ic   aerosol  gas  experiment-SAGE). 
AEM-A,  schedu led  for  launch   in  1978, would  carry   a   heat-capacity 
mapping radiometer tha t  NASA would acquire independently, to ga ther  
thermal-inertia  da ta  on rock types,  location of  mineral resources ,  soil 
mo is ture ,   and   vege ta t ion-cover   t em p e r a t u r e   mea su remen t s .  
AEM-  B's  SAGE  would  measure   spatial  distribution  of  s tra tospher ic  
aerosol and ozone on a  global basis.  I t  had been schedu led  for launch  
in  1979.  (NASA  Release  75-299;  WSJ ,  24  Nov  75,  28) 
23  November:  Dr.  John  E.  Naugle  became  Associate  Administrator  of 
NASA,  a   position  in  which  he  had  ac ted   s ince   the   depar ture   of  Dr. 
Rocco A.  Pe trone   in April.  Beginning his service with  NASA  in  1959, 
Dr.  Naugle  had  been  appointed  Associate Administrator for  Space  
Sc ience  and Applications in 1967, and Deputy Associate Administra- 
tor of  NASA in 1974. A s  Associate Administrator, he would be respon- 
sible for directing  the research ,   development, and  operational activi- 
ties conducted by the  Offices of Applications, Aeronautics and Space  
Technology,  Space   Science,  and  Tracking  and  Data  Acquisition. 
(NASA  anno, 23 Nov  75;  SBD,  24  Nov  75,  122) 
25 November:  The   U.S.S.R.  launched  Cosmos  782,  a   biological  satellite 
carrying 4  U.S. exper imen ts  a s  well as  materials from Russia, Czecho- 
slovakia, France ,  Hungary, Poland, and  Romania, to be recovered in 
Soviet territory  in about 3 wk s .  Launched from P le se t sk  into a n  orb i t  
with 405 km  apogee, 227 km perigee,  62.8" inclination,  and  90.5 min 
period,  the  satellite  provided an  opportunity  for U.S.  scientists  to fly 
biology  and   weightlessness experiments  tha t   would  otherwise have 
had   to  await  flights  of  the   Space   Shu t t le   in  t h e   1980s.  Las t   U.S. 
biology  research   spacecraf t ,   B io sa te l l i te   3,  had  been  launched   in 
1969. 

229 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Cosmos  782 was  the   first satellite equipped  to  simulate gravity  in 
space,  to  compare  effec ts   on   biological  processes   with  those  of 
weightlessness.  A  specially  cons truc ted   centrifuge,  consisting of  a 
small  disk  tha t   would  ro ta te   at  a  cons tan t   speed,  would  create  a 
centrifugal force equa l  to gravity on ea r th  for packages placed  a t  the  
right spo t  on the  disk.  Comparing t h e  spec imens  exposed  to lack  of 
gravity during orbital flight with similar spec imens  feeling the pull of 
gravity  would  prove  any  effec ts   had  resulted  from  weightlessness. 
Results of  the  experiments  should be available in about 90 days,  ac- 
cording to  the  Ta s s  news  agency. 
Ames  Research   Cen ter   managed  the   U.S.  participation  in  t h e  
Cosmos  782 flight.  I t  had  had  no  advance notice  of  t h e  launch  da te ,  
place of launch, o r  mode of orbital operation, although life limitations 
of t h e  biology materials had d ic ta ted  a launch  near this date. NASA had  
been  invited to participate  in  a second  Soviet biosat mission  in 1977, 
and  had planned to fly Russian experiments on i ts  Space  Shu t t le  in the  
early  1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov  75,  62M;  NASA  Release  75-292;  SBD ,  28 
Nov  75,  145; Aero  D a i l y ,   28 Nov  75,  148) 
*  A  metering  truss   made  of  g r a p h i t e - o n e  of  the   few  materials  tha t   ex- 
pands  with cold  and  con trac ts  with  heat-and 
epoxy, which expands  
with hea t  and con trac ts  with cold in the  usual way, had  been designed 
to  hold  stable the  mirrors of NASA’s Large  Space  Telescope without 
being distorted by  tempera ture   changes.  Built by  Boeing Aerospace 
Co.  under   a  $185 000  contract  with  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter ,  
the  s truc ture  had been  sub jec ted  to a 2-day  vacuum-chamber te s t   at 
Boeing’s  Space  Cen ter   in  Seattle  under  tempera tures   ranging  from 
-84°C  to  +21”C  without  suffering  lens-limiting  therma l   distortion. 
(Hun tsv i l le  T ime s ,  25 Nov  75;  Boeing Release  A-0459) 
Th e  Soviet Academy of Sc iences  chose Anatoly Alexandrov,  a 72-yr-old 
nuclear  physicist,  a s   its  new  president,  t h e   Ta s s   news  agency  re- 
ported.  Pe te r  Osnos commented in the  Wush ing ton  Po s t  tha t  the  main 
speaker   a t   the   Academy  meeting-Mikhail 
Suslov,  t h e  Communist 
Party’s chief ideologist, who i s  not  even a member of  t h e  Academy- 
made  t h e   only  speech   on   Alexandrov’s  behalf.  This,  said  Osnos, 
showed  the   extent  to  which  the   choice was  de term ined  by  Kremlin 
l e a d e r s h i p   a n d   t h e   Pa r ty ’ s   grow ing   i n f l u e n c e   ov e r   t h e   on c e -  
autonomous  scientific  establishment.  Academy  members  tradition- 
ally  had  voted  in  secret  ballots and  had  maintained  their own  organiza- 
tional s truc ture  in running t h e  country’s  important research  facilities; 
Alexandrov was chosen  on  a secre t  ballot,  but  apparently there  were 
no o ther  candidates. Alexandrov,  head of t h e  atomic research  institute 
in Moscow,  was one of  the  few Academy members  also a member of 
the   Par ty   cen tra l  committee.  (W Po s t ,  26 Nov  75,  A8) 
26 November:  Under a decision of t h e  Federa l  Communications Commis- 
sion,  t h e  Communications  Satellite Corporation  (ComSat) had  been  
making too much  money and  would have to reduce  i ts  ra te s  on interna- 
tional  communications services by  up  to 35%.  Th e  order  followed  a 
10-yr FCC  investigation of the  en t ire  range of ComSat services. Essen-  
tially a wholesaler of communications, ComSat had been  selling satel- 
lite circuits to telephone a nd  telegraph firms tha t  retailed the  services 
to  consumers.  The   FCC  order   could  substantially  reduce   overseas  
telephone and  telegraph charges ;  an accompanying order  requ ired  the  
international  firms  tha t   had   been  dealing with  ComSat  to  pass  the  
reduced   ra tes   on  to  the ir   customers.  FCC  ruled  tha t   ComSat  was 
230 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

November 

entitled to a re turn  ranging from 10.8 to 11.8%, bu t  ComSat’s  ra te  of 
re turn   in  1974 was  about 34.6%.  (W S ta r ,   27  Nov  75,  A2) 
Th e  People’s  Republic of China successfully launched  an  earth-orbiting 
satellite into a n  orbit with 483 km  apogee,  173 km  perigee, 63” inclina- 
tion,  and  91-min  period,  t h e  New   China News  Agency  announced. 
(FBIS No.  230,  26 Nov  75; W S ta r ,   27 Nov  75,  A2) 
0  The  U.N.  General Assembly  adopted  a  resolution  [see  29  Oct.]  calling 
for  wider observance of  international agreements on peaceful uses of 
ou ter   space ,   and  providing for continued US.  work  on  new  interna- 
tional  accords  relating  to  space.  Among  these   were  a  moon  treaty, 
principles  governing direct television broadcasting  by  satellite,  and  
legal  issues   involved  in  remote  sensing  of  ea r th   from  space.  The  
resolution also called for continuing review of ways to help developing 
countries  apply  space  technology.  (SBD, 26  Nov  75,  140) 
28  November:  The   National  Ocean ic   and   Atmospheric  Administration 
(NOM) awarded a $145 000 con trac t  to  RCA’S  Astro-Electronics Div. 
for  a  first-phase  design  s tudy   of  the   Tiros-N  data-acquisition  and  
control  system  (DACS).  DACS  would  provide  operational  control  of 
Tiros-N  in  orbit,  and   would  collect  and   t ran sm i t   te leme try   and  
weather information to N O M  facilities in  Md. RCA’S Astro-Electronics 
Div., which had been  developing the  new generation of weather satel- 
l i tes  for NASA,  had  scheduled  t h e  first flight for  1978. As  par t  of  the  
design study, RCA would provide descriptions of materials and proce- 
du re s  needed   to  implement  the   DACS,  a network  of  ground  stations 
including  the   Md.  cen te r   and   the   command  and   data-acquisition 
stations (CDA)  in Alaska  and  Va.  (Aero Daily, 28 Nov  75,  149) 
29  November:  Radio  astronomers  in  both  the   U.S.  and   U.S.S.R.  had 
intensified the ir  search  for possible civilizations ou t  in space ,  Walter 
Sullivan wrote in the  New  York Times. Little publicity had been given 
the  sea rch  to prevent raising public expectation for “what  i s  likely to 
be a prolonged  effort.”  Costs were minimal, becau se  the  observations 
had  made  use  of  equipment  also used  for o ther   research .   Dr.  Hans  
Mark,  Director  of  Ames  Research  Center,  had  told  students  at  the 
Polytechnic Inst.  of  N .Y .   that  the  search  for  other  civilizations would 
become “one of the  major scientific enterprises,”  and  c i ted  his belief 
tha t  “communicative  civilizations” had  been  a na tura l  consequence  of 
biological evolution. Dr.  Mark pointed  out tha t  the  U.S. giant an tenna  
a t  Goldstone, Calif.,  used for spacecraf t  communications,  could pick 
up emissions only from t h e  vicinity of the  neares t  s tars .  One  American 
search  is  using  the  largest  antenna  on  earth-the 
dish  at  Arecibo, 
P.R.-to 
scan  the  f ive   nearest  galaxies at  1420 mhz,  the  frequency  of 
radio  waves given  off  by  hydrogen  atoms,  long considered  a  logical 
frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The  Arecibo search  
had  been  conduc ted  by  two Cornell professors,  Dr.  Frank  B.  Drake 
and   Dr.  Car l   Sagan.  Another  American  sea rch  had  been  using  t h e  
National  Radio Astronomy Observatory  a t   Green  Bank,  W.  Va.,  to 
scan   700  s tars   (resembling earth‘s  sun) within  80  light  years  of  the  
solar  system  for  signals  a t   t h e   1420-mhz wavelength.  No  obvious 
signals had been  de tec ted ,  but the  recordings had not been  sub jec ted  
to detailed analysis,  according to Dr.  Pa tr ick  Pa lmer  of  t h e  Univ.  of 
Chicago and  Dr.  Benjamin M.  Zuckerman of  t h e  Univ.  of  Md. 
Th e   Soviet  program,  scanning  the   en t ire   portion  of  the   celestial 
sphere   visible  from  the   Soviet Union,  had  been   using  two  networks 
with a total of eight stations spread  across  the  vast width of the  Soviet 

231 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Union.  Th e  moven&er  issue of karus, international journal  of  solar- 
system studies, had carried a prospectus of the  Soviet CETI (communi- 
cation  with  extraterrestrial  intelligence)  program  divided  into  two 
phases.  CETI  1, scheduled from 1975 to 1985,  included  the  whole-sky 
scan   by  eight  stations  plus  monitoring by  two  space   stations  and   a 
survey of nearby galaxies like the  one under way at Arecibo. Only the  
eight-station prdject had been initiated, as far  a s  U .S .  scientists knew. 
CETI  2,  from  1980 to  1990, had   been   scheduled  to  continue  satellite 
monitoring  but  would  also  use  semirotatable  an tennas   such   a s   the  
RATAN-600  an tenna   6 0  m   wide,  known  to  be   located  high  in  the  
to  perfprm  this  ro 4 e.  The   Soviets  also  envisioned  a 
Caucasus;  the  system  consisted  of  numerous  plates  tha t   had  to  be 
aimed individually$ calling for han  alignment since no computer had 
monitoring station  at  the  point  beyond  the   moon  where  the  gravita- 
tional fields of  ear th  and  moon would balance  each  o ther ;  a station a t  
tha t  point would  be  protected  from  the  earth‘s  own radio  emissions. 
Identical  fluctuations  of  signal  recorded  simultaneously  at  widely 
separa ted   points would  be   considered  to  have  extraterrestrial  origin 
ra ther   than  to result  from  a local manmade  effect.  (NYT ,  29  Nov  75, 
C13) 
During November:  An x-ray telescope assembled a t  Marshall Space Flight 
Center fdr the  study of  remnan ts  of  an exploded s ta r  had been shipped 
from  England,  where  it  had  undergone  payload  integration,  to  the  
Woomera  Rocket  Range  in Australia  for launch.  The  project,  called 
Skylark for the  British sounding rocket on which the  telescope would 
fly,  was  a joint  British-American  undertaking  to  study  a  supernova 
remnant. known as  Pupp is  A  for information on the  evolution of s ta r s  
and  perhaps  on  the   formation  of  neutron  stars.  Th e   flight  would 
provide  at  least  3  min  20  sec   for  the   346.5-kg  payload  to  make  its 
observations  above  120-km  altitude.  (NASA Release  75 -287;  MSFC 
Release  75-238) 
e S ta tes   iqvolved in NASA’s land-use  satellite  applications  had  included 
Ala.,  Miss.,  and  Tenn.,  which  had  organized  statewide  survey  pro- 
grams, and  Mo.,  which had ju s t  begun such  a program. The Southern 
Growth  Policies Board,  a  15-state group monitoring t h e  South‘s  de- 
velopment,  had  investigated  application  of  Landsat  capabilities  to 
identify prime farm land, potential commercial sites, a nd  land values. 
Georgia, working through  Ga.  Tech.,  Marshall  Space  Flight Center, 
and  the  U.S.  b e p t   of  Agriculture,  had  begun  aerial su rv ey s  of  Geor- 
gia’s peach orchards to study the  problem of premature loss of  the  fruit 
trees. IM[SFC aircraft provided multispectral photos and thermal da ta  to 
be   processed  through  Ga.  Tech.  computers,  detecting  stages of  de- 
cline  not  visible from  the   ground.  (MSFC  Release  75-247,  75-251) 
0  The  first successful a ir  drop of  data-collection  platforms for u se  by  the  
Nimbus 6 polar-orbiting weather  satellite would lead to  another first: 
successful  day-to-day  tracking  of  ice-pack  movement  in  the   Arctic 
Sea  north of Alaska’s oil-rich Prudhoe Bay area. Knowledge about the  
interaction between the  winter s e a  ice and the  continental shelfwould 
be important to government and  to oil companies;  government would 
use  the   information in  allocating driUing  a rea s   and  overseeing  their 
use by private industry. Oil companies would need to  know whether to 
locate drilling rigs on the  ice o r  sink them into the  s e a  bed; whether to 
bury pipelines under the  ocean floor, lay them along the  bottom, or  run  
them   over  the   ice  to  loading  areas.  Th e  exterior  sphere   of  the   plat- 

232 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 
November 
forms,  built  to   b e   dropped  on   t h e  ice  from  sma l l  aircraft,  had  been  
cons truc ted  of a tough material to foil the  hunger and  curiosity of polar 
bears, which reportedly would a t temp t  to chew on  anything appearing 
different from  t h e  usual  surroundings. 
The  tracking and  data-relay experiment aboard Nimbus 6 had suc- 
cessfully completed its sha re  of  a  transmission  test tha t   sen t  sensor, 
telemetry,  and   ranging  signals  from  i ts  near-polar  1110-km orbit  to 
NASA’s A t s  6 in geostationary orbit 35  900 km above India. The  signals, 
relayed  to  NASA’s Madrid  receiving  station,  were   immediately  re- 
transmitted to GSFC. Information gathered in t h e  te s t  would be  used to 
design the  Track ing  and Da ta  Relay Satellite System (TDRSS)  planned 
for  late  1979. The   system would  use  two  geostationary satellites  to 
relay tracking data, commands, and  communications between a cen- 
tral ground terminal and  a number  of  spacecraf t  in low ea r th  orbit; th is  
would increase  low-orbit spacecraf t  access  to ground stations from 15 
to  %%,  reducing  NASA  requ iremen ts   for  ground-station  networks. 
General Electric’s  Space  Div.,  reporting on   the   succe s s  of  the   test, 
said the  quality of  all da ta  received was excellent.  (Marsha l l  S ta r ,  26 
Nov  75,4; Sun  D iego  Un ion ,  9 Nov 7 5 , l ;  Aero D a i l y ,  26 Nov 75,140; 
SBD ,  26  Nov  75,  143) 
0  The   Bangui  Anomaly-a  massive  magnetic  d is turbance   in  the   ea r th  
along the  equa tor  in Africa,  suggesting rich depos i ts  of heavy  metals 
been  accidentally  discovered by Ogo  1, 
like iron  and  uranium-had 
launched  in  1964 with  magnetometers  tha t   were  stiU  measuring the  
earth‘s  magnetic field in 1970 when the  Geological  Survey decided to 
use  them   for o ther   purposes. 
Attempting  to  measure   the   ionosphere  for  traces   of  a  je ts tream  
above the  equator, Survey scientists noticed a “kink”  in the  da ta  and  
had  checked  the ir   findings by  scanning the  region with magnetome- 
te r s  in aircraft.  Results showed a magnetic difference so great tha t  it 
could b e  cau sed  only by  an  ore body  larger than   the  Mesabi range in 
Minn.,  largest in t h e  U.S. Sc ien t is ts  had deemed  t h e  find so important 
tha t  NASA  had  suggested putting a  satellite in  orbit to do nothing bu t  
char t   t h e  earth‘s  magnetic field. 
The   anomaly  was  named   for  the   capital  of  t h e   Cen tra l   African 
Republic,  an   extremely  poor  nation  almost  a s  big  a s  Texas  with  a 
population of about 2 million. The  deposits had been  localized in  hilly 
regions  away  from  the   Ubangi  River,  so  tha t   a  railroad  o r  highway 
would  be  needed   to  carry o re s  to  the  river  for  shipping.  S ta te  Dept. 
sou rce s   sa id   tha t   in te re s t   in  the   region  among   foreign  mineral- 
extraction companies  had  risen.  (O’Toole, LA   T ime s ,  15 Nov  75,  1) 
9  Energy from  the  Mideast had been  forecast for cooling buildings  in the  
Pers ian  Gulf countries-but  without  using  a drop  of  oil,  according to 
the  Ch r i s t ian  Science Mon i to r .   Solar energy would  provide  power  to 
sweeten  the  wa ters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  heat wa ter  for householders in 
Cyprus   and   Israel,  and   desalinize  water  for  military  units  in  Saud i  
Arabia. First desalination plant of i ts  kind to use solar energy would be  
built a t  Aqaba by the  Jordanian Royal Scientific Society working with 
Dornier  of  W e s t  Germany;  the   la t ter   company would  also  build  the  
small desalting  plants  for  the   Saudis.  A world  conference  on   solar 
energy had been  schedu led  for the  new Dhahran campus  of the  Saud i  
Arabia University of Petroleum and  Minerals,  a t  t h e  e nd  of November. 
(CSM ,  18 Nov  75,  2) 

233 

November 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

0  A  simple  device  familiar  for  centuries-the 
been  the  
flywheel-had 
sub jec t  of  a  national  symposium  a s  a  possible  solution  for  some of 
America’s  critical energy problems.  Th e  first conference on  flywheel 
technology,  held a t  Berkeley, Calif.,  under  sponsorship of the  Energy 
Research  and  Development Administration and  the  Lawrence Liver- 
more Laboratory, had been  told that modern materials and  design had 
made  possible  a  superflywheel tha t  could  transform  the  energy  pic- 
ture.  The   principle  upon  which  flywheels  performed-storage 
of 
mechanical energy  by  a  spinning wheel-had 
been   enlarged  by  the  
use  of fiber composites developed for use in spacecraf t  nosecones tha t  
had  grea ter   strength-to-weight  ratios,  being  10  to  20  times  stronger 
than   steel and  much lighter.  A s  the   amount  of  energy stored  by  the  
flywheel varied a s  the  square  o f t h e  rotation speed, the  limit had been  
on the  tensile s treng th  of  t h e  material used ;  t h e  fiber wheel could be  
spun  fas ter  to s tore  more energy per  kg than   the  conventional metal 
one, and  would also cost less. A superflywheel might sp in  at 100 000 or 
even 200 000 rpm. Both  the  Soviet Union and  American industry had 
displayed in teres t  in developing the  flywheel; use of the  technology in 
automobiles  would  reduce   pollution  and   would  represen t   a  safety 
improvement.  The   flywheels  also  could  ac t   in  backup   systems  for 
homes  using  solar  energy  and   windmills  for  the ir   energy  needs. 
Fur ther  investigation of  t h e  materials under  s tress-rup ture  te s t s  was 
being conducted a t  the  Lawrence laboratory and  elsewhere. (MT, 30 
Nov  75,  L84) 
0  National laws and  national governmental institutions were inadequa te  to 
dea l  with  problems  arising  from  possible  depletion  of  ozone  in  t h e  
s tra tosphere  by manmade  fluorocarbons,  said a study by  the  Library 
of  Congress. The  Sena te  Committee on Aeronautical and  Space  Sci- 
ence s  said the  study would be  “most useful”  in  i ts  continuing investi- 
gation of  pollution  in t h e  upper   atmosphere.  The s tudy  called  for an  
international system of  da ta  gathering and institutional control, at the  
s am e   t im e   emph a s i z i ng   t h e   l a ck   of  conc lu s ive   e v i d e n c e   t h a t  
fluorocarbons  had  reduced   atmospheric  ozone-although 
it  found 
“very  strong  grounds”  for  believing  tha t   probable  cau se   of  harm 
existed.  ( SBD ,  4 Nov  75,  12) 

234 

December  1975  

1  December:  National Sc ience  Foundation held  in  Chicago the   first  of  7 
meetings  schedu led  nationwide to  obtain  public  views  on  a Federa l  
program  for  grea ter   public  involvement  in  sc ience   policy  issues. 
Subsequen t  meetings would  be  held  during Dec.  in Atlanta,  Dallas, 
Denver,  San  Francisco,  Washington,  D.C.,  and  Boston.  Ora l   and 
written s ta temen ts  presen ted  at the meetings would be included in an 
N SF   report  to  Congress.  (SBD ,  3  Dec  75,  173) 
2 December:  Space   programs  tha t   crea te   new  commercial  activity,  new 
wealth,  and new jobs were essen t ia l  to the  growth of  both the  US. and 
Europe, Sen. Frank  E. Moss (D-Utah)  told the  Assembly of Western 
European  Union.  Reviewing  policies  tha t   had  governed  agreements 
on  space   with  Western  Europe,  Moss  warned  tha t   continued 
cooperation in space  would hinge on Europe’s  paying its full sha re  of 
the  expenses. Concentration on programs with immediate application 
to ea r th  problems should not mean abandonment of space  science,  or  
loss  of  “ the  vision and imagination tha t  have been  so important to our 
achievements  to   date,’’  the   sena tor  said.  (CR,  10 Dec  75,  S 21650; 
SBD ,   5  Dec  75,  185) 
DefenselSpace  Business  D a i l y   reported  tha t   “a   NASA  spokesman” 
had  sa id   the  proposed  Mariner  Jupiter-Uranus  mission  scheduled 
for  1979 had not  been  eliminated  from  the   agency’s FY  1977  budget 
and   was  “still  planned.”  The   Federa l   budget  squeeze   announced 
for FY  1977 had  put the  8177-million project in ser ious  question.  NASA  
reportedly  might  try  to   use  one of  i ts  Mariner Jup i ter-Sa turn   1977 
spacecraf t   as   an   alternative  to  permit  a   flight  to  Uranus.  (SBD ,  3 
Dec  75,  175) 
3 December:  Dr.  Maxime  A.  Faget,  director  of  engineering  and  devel- 
opment  at  Johnson  Space   Cen ter ,   received  the   gold  medal  of 
the   American  Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers  at  its  annua l  
winter meeting honors assembly in  Houston. Faget had been  responsi- 
ble for design and testing  of  t h e  Mercury, Gemini,  and ApoUo  space-  
craft  and  the   Skylab space   station,  as  well  a s  of  the   Space   Shu t t le  
scheduled for flight in  the  l a t e  1970s.  Previous JSC recipients  of  the  
ASME  gold  medal  had  been  JSC  Director  Dr.  Christopher  C.  Kraft, 
Jr.,  in   1973 and  former JSC  Director Robert  R. Gilruth in  1970.  (JSC 
Release  75-98) 
Dr.  Erns t   Stuhlinger,  associate  director  for  sc ience  at Marshall Space  
Flight Cen ter ,  would retire after 30 yrs of  Federa l  service on 28 Dec., 
NASA  announced.  Born  and  educated  in  Germany,  Dr.  Stuhlinger 
became a  physicist and had been  involved in rocketry and space  work 
s ince   1943  when  he  joined  the   rocket  development  team  at 
Peenemunde ,  Germany. He had  come to the  U.S.  after World War  I1 
and  worked for the  US. Army before transferring  to NASA when MSFC 
was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo 
telescope  mount had been carr ied  out under  h is  direction,  a s  well a s  
early planning on the  High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial 

235 

December 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

phases  of the  Space  Te lescope  project. His work had included electric 
propulsion  studies  and   scientific  payloads  for  the   Space   Shuttle. 
(MSFC  Release 75-  256) 
0  Th e  Peoples Republic of China announced it had successfullyrecovered 
an   artificial  ear th   satellite  for  the   first  time,  becoming  the   third 
country after the  U.S. and  the  Soviet Union to develop a technique for 
returning  a  satellite  from  orbit.  Th e   satellite,  which  had  been  
launched  26 Nov.,  was  China’s fourth; t h e  third had  been  orbited in 
July  and  the  f i is t   two  in   1970 and   1971. Edward K.  Wu ,  Hong Kong 
correspondent of  the  Baltimore  Sun ,  noted tha t  Chinese scientists and 
engineers  apparently  had  solved  technological  problems  including 
development of  a  heat-resistant  alloy to  withstand  reentry  tempera- 
tures ,   automatic techn iques  for remote control,  and a trigger  system 
to  fire the   satellite  back   to  ear th .   (B  Sun ,  4 Dec 75, A4) 
The   automated  docking  of  t h e   U.S.S.R.’s  pilotless  Soyuz  20  with  t h e  
unmannedSaZyut 4  space  station [see 19 Nov.]  had been a preliminary 
to Soviet experiments aimed at building a permanent  space  base,  the  
Chr is t ian  Science Monitor said. Recalling the  failure of the  automatic 
docking  system  in  August  1974, C SM   quoted  Maj.  Gen.  Vladimir 
Shatalov-head 
of  the   cosmonaut  group-as 
saying  tha t   the   Soyuz 
was  being  developed  a s   a  universal  spacecraf t   for  carrying  crews, 
fuel,  and  provisions  to  scientific  stations  and   for  assembling com- 
plex s truc tures  in orbit; craf t  of  this kind would “undoubtedly become 
assembly s i tes  for large space  stations to be  se t  up  in orbit.”  European 
observers had said the  Soviet plan would b e  to launch  the  cen tra l  part 
of  the   space  platform  first,  followed  by  separa te   laboratory modules 
tha t  would plug into docking ports to draw on the  power and facilities 
of  the   mother  station.  Th e   orbital  stations  would  be   supplied  with 
consumables  by  a  modification  of  the   existing  Soyuz,  and  this 
experience would be applied la ter  to  shu t t les  and  space  tugs.  ( C SM ,  3 
Dec  75,  7) 
9  Evidence tha t  aerosols from spray  can s  had damaged earth‘s ozone layer  
had  been  under  study by  an independent  scientific panel tha t  would 
make i ts  report early in 1976, the  ‘wall Street Journa l   sa id ,  but Federa l  
action  against  fluorocarbons was  not  considered  likely  before  tha t  
time, and  foreign governments were considered unlikely to ac t  before 
the  U.S.  did. Fluorocarbon manufacturers a nd  users  had insisted tha t  
the   ozone-depletion  theory  had  not  been  proved,  and   warned  of 
damage  to  a n  industry  tha t   had  made  products  worth  $400 million 
to  $450  million  a  year,  with  manufacturing  facilities  worth  $300 
million. U.S. producers had  accounted for about half t h e  world’s  pro- 
duction of  fluorocarbons, which was  approaching about 0.9 billion kg 
a  year. 
Two Univ.  of  Chicago chemists-Mario  J. Molina and  F.  Sherwood 
advanced a theory 18 mo ago tha t  fluorocarbons used  in 
Roland-had 
spray containers and  in refrigerators and  a ir  conditioners were getting 
into the  upper atmosphere, encountering ultraviolet light (more intense 
a t   high  altitudes)  tha t   split  the   fluorocarbon  molecules  to  re lease  
highly  active  chlorine.  Th e   chlorine  had  dep le ted   the   atmospheric 
ozone by converting it to ordinary oxygen. Th e  theory had been partly 
confirmed in  the  laboratory by National Bureau of S tandards  chem is ts  
who  showed  tha t   ultraviolet  lamps   would  split  fluorocarbons  to 
produce e i ther  one o r  two chlorine atoms, depending on t h e  ultraviolet 

236 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

December 

wavelength used.  However, no one had discovered  a way to measure 
the   ozone  to  tell  whether  it  had  been  affected  by  chlorines  from 
fluorocarbon  dissociation.  Another  clue  had  been  to  search   for 
chlorine  products  su ch   as   hydrochloric  acid  in  the   stratosphere; 
tes ts  conducted by the  Jet Propulsion Laboratory using U-2 flights and 
balloons  had  confirmed  the   presence  in  the  s tra tosphere   of  hydro- 
chloric acid tha t  had not originated from the  ear th .  Granting the  effect 
of aerosols,  opinions had been divided upon the  significance of ozone 
depletion:  possible  consequences   of  additional  ultraviolet  radiation 
impinging upon  ea r th   included  increased  incidence  of  skin  cancer ,  
harmful effects on animal and plant life, and alteration of  temperature 
pa t terns   in  the   s tra tosphere   with  resulting  alteration  of  weather 
pa t terns  on ear th .  Even without proof of damage, public apprehension 
of  risk  had  increased  pressure  for  a  ban  on  the   suspec t   chemicals, 
especially  in  aerosols.  (Tannenbaum  in W S J ,  3 Dec 75,  1) 
0  The   Aerospace  Gorp.  had  donated  its  $2-million  San   Fernando  Ob- 
servatory to Calif.  S ta te  Univ.  at Northridge a s  an educational cen ter  
for solar research ,  Aerospace  president Dr.  Ivan Getting announced. 
The  nonprofit company, which had used the  observatory in support of 
flights in the  Apollo and Skylab projects, was giving away the 7-yr-old 
facility because i ts  planned solar research  had been completed.  (SBD, 
3 Dec  75,  173) 
4  December:  NASA’s winter  phase  of  meteorological rocket  and  satellite 
comparisons had been completed  a t  Wallops Flight Center, where 31 
single and  two-stage rockets  had  been  launched  since  18 Nov.  Data 
obtained  from the   launches  had  been  compared with measurements 
received from the  Nimbus 6 satellite passing over the  Wallops facility. 
The   Super-Loki  single-stage  rocket  had  carried  three   types  of  pay- 
load:  inflatable  spheres   of  mylar  to  obtain  atmospheric  density  and 
wind measurements;  datasondes to obtain temperature and wind data; 
and ozone-measuring devices.  T h e  Nike-Cajun,  a  two-stage vehicle, 
carried  acoustic grenade payloads to measure wind  and tempera ture  
by  recording  time  and  location  of  detonation  on  arrays  of  sensitive 
microphones  a t   the   launch  s i te   that  could  measure  time  lapse   and 
direction  of  sound  arrival. T h e  rocket  and  satellite da ta   comparison 
had  been  the   la tes t   of  several  conducted  from  the   Wallops  facility 
since  1970.  (WFC  Release  75-  14) 
0  Landsat  2 ,  launched  22 Jan.  75, had  successfully completed more than 
10 mos of  orbital operations during which  it  had  acquired more  than 
53 000  frames   of  imagery.  Nearly  300 000 messages  from  data- 
collection platforms had been received,  processed,  and sen t  to users; 
imagery from more  than  2600  sample  s i tes  for  the  Large  Area  Crop 
Inventory  Experiment  (LACIE)  had  been  processed  and  shipped  to 
Johnson  Space   Center.  About  62% of  domestic  investigations  and 
43%  of  foreign  investigations  had  been  supplied  enough Land sa t   2 
da ta   to  meet  the   major  objectives.  Primary  mission  objectives  had 
been  declared  satisfied, a s  well as  all secondary objectives tha t  were 
4 Dec  75) 
not  time-dependent.  (MOR  E-641-75-02, 
0  Th e  Soviet Union had landed  Arctic explorers on a n  ice floe 600 km from 
Chukotka  to  sei  up   Severny  Polyus-23,  a  drifting  observatory  to 
study weather and  ice conditions in the Arctic Sea, Tass  announced. 
Air s e a r ch  last spring had  discovered  a flat berg 7 km  long and 3 km  
wide  about  500 km  from Wrangel  Island  north  of  the   eas tern   tip  of 

237 

December 
ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Siberia.  N. Blinov, head of  the Soviet high-latitude expedition Sever- 
27,  called  this a rare  find because  the  ice appeared  to be  20 m  thick. 
Research  stations on  s u c h  floating islands  made  it  possible  to  trace  
circulation  of  Arctic  ice  over  many  years;  the   Severny  Polyus-22 
station  operating  in  t h e   Arctic  for  3 yr had  moved  in  a  clockwise 
anticyclone  circular  drift  and  “repeatedly  found  itself  in  both  the  
eas tern   and western  hemispheres.”  The  new  station,  larger than   its 
predecessor, was expected to last longer. (Tass, in FBIS No. 24 0 , 4  Dec 
75) 
5  December:  Launch  of  the   Dual  Air  Density  (DAD)  spacecraf t   from  the  
Western  T e s t  Range  failed when  a  catastrophic  event  during  third- 
stage burn caused  loss of  vehicle control and failure to  achieve orbit. 
T h e  des truc t   signal was  transmitted  341 sec  af ter   ignition. 
The   four-stage  Scout-D launch  was  to  have  placed  into orbit  two 
small  rigid  sphere   of  aluminum  and  a  large  inflatable 
satellites-a 
sphere   of  mylar-similarly 
instrumented  with  a  mass  spectrometer 
and  associated  electronics.  Th e   satellites were  to  have  been  in  90“ 
polar orbits  intersecting periodically, to measure  atmospheric  densi- 
t ies   a i  two  differing  altitudes  but  a t   the   same  la t i tudes   a t   the   same 
local-hour angle of  the  sun. Th e  measurements would show effects on 
upper  atmosphere  readings  of  changes  in  solar  heat  input  and  the  
relationships  between  upper  and  lower atmospheres. 
The  launch,  scheduled  for 3 Dec.,  had  been  delayed  because  of  a 
malfunction in the ignition system of  the  Scout launch vehicle. (NASA 
6 Jan  76;  HQ  memo,  Goozh, 
Release  75-300;  MOR  S-863-75-05, 
9 Dec  75; SBD ,   5 Dec  75,  186) 
0  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  issued  a  reques t   for  quotations  from 
industry  for  development  of  a  flat  conductor-cable  wiring  system 
suitable  for use  in  residences  and  commercial  establishments.  Sur-  
face mounting, a feature of  the  flat cable system originated by NASA to 
reduce  the  size  and  weight  of  wiring  harness   in  space  capsu les ,  
would  eliminate  the   need  for  routing  wires  in  walls,  ceilings,  and 
floors  because  it  could  be  covered  by  paneling,  tile,  or  even  wall- 
paper.  Use  of  the   flat wiring would  reduce  costs of  wiring new  con- 
struction  and  permit  savings  in  renovating,  remodeling,  and  re- 
wiring of  existing buildings.  The  successful  proposer  would  develop 
a  surface-mounted  baseboard  system  using  a  cable  63.5  mm  wide; 
total  thickness  of  the   b a s e b o a r d - c h a n n e l ,   airspace,  and  cover- 
would  be  about  11  mm,  th ickness  of  the   thinnest  lumber  baseboard 
strips  in  use.  (MSFC Release  75-257) 
8 December:  Th e  Sena te  passed  H.R.  8674, the  Metric Conversion Act  of 
1975,  after  substituting  the   provisions  of  i ts   own  bill  S.  100.  Th e  
legislation would establish a 17-member United  S ta tes  Metric Board, 
appointed  by  the   Pres iden t ,   to  carry out  a program  of  planning  and  
public education to implement the  adoption of  the  metric system on a 
voluntary basis. Board members would serve staggered terms  of up  to 
6 yr,  and  would  report  to  the   Pres iden t   annually  on  the   conversion 
process with recommendations  on necessary legislation o r  executive 
action.  (CR ,  8 Dec  75,  S21368) 
9 December:  The  Communications Satellite Corporation fiied with the  U.S. 
Court of  Appeals for the  District  of  Columbia a petition  for review of 
the Federa l  Communications  Commission decision  of  4 Dec.  on  the  
allowed  ra te   base ,   ra te   of  return,  and   rate  s truc ture   for  ComSat’s 
international  satellite  services.  ComSat  intended  to  apply  to  the  
238 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

December 

to the  court-for  a stay of  the  FCC order  tha t  new tariffs be 
FCC-and 
fded  by  5 Jan .   1976.  Th e   corporation  had  prepared   a  le t ter   to  i ts  
stockholders on  the  FCC  decision.  (ComSat Release  75-61) 
10 December:  Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  announced it would distribute 
t h e   f irs t   NASA  S tandard   P a r t s   List  (NSPL)   to  all  NASA  cen ters   and 
contractors in Jan .   The  NSPL was to include electronic par ts  selected 
from  experience  in  flights,  tes ts ,   failure  analyses,  and  recent  plant 
surveys,  to  ensure   reliability.  The   standardization had  been  under- 
taken  to  solve  problems  of  small-quantity  buying,  high  cost,  long 
delivery schedules,  market  fluctuations, ‘part failures,  and extensive 
rework. The cost of correcting problems resulting from failure of par ts  
had been estimated a s  100 times the  cost of  preventing the  use of poor- 
quality  par ts   to  begin  with.  The  NASA   S tandard   Pa r t s   Lead  Office, 
located  a t   MSFC  because   of  i ts   experience  in  par ts   management 
developed during the  Sa turn  program, would es tab l ish  requirements 
for par ts ,   coordinate  the  effort with  all NASA  Cen ters ,   and  issue  and 
maintain  the  list.  (NASA  Release  75-303;  MSFC  Release  75-259) 
0  The Air Force had formally en tered  into an agreement with NASA  on de- 
velopment of  an  experimental hypersonic research  aircraft capable of 
mach  6  flight.  The   two  agencies  had  agreed  after  a joint  1974-75 
study tha t  ‘‘the combined objective and the  national  interest”  would 
be  best  served by  a joint  hypersonic  flight-test  program.  The   agree- 
ment provided that  the report of  the  joint study would be the baseline 
document  for  program  development;  tha t   technology  development 
and experimental tests would be completed in 1976 so  preliminary design 
study could begin in f l 1 9 7 7 ;  tha t  personnel from both agencies would 
participate in all phases  to the  maximum extent practicable; and that 
an  ad  hoc  steering  committee  would  be   established  to  prepare  a 
project plan for use in vehicle procurement.  (Memo of understanding, 
10 Dec  75) 
e  A long-duration free-flying manned  space  station in ear th  orbit appeared 
to  be   the   most  economical  way  of  providing  a  continuing  manned 
presence  in  space ,   according  to  “Manned  Orbital  Systems  Con- 
cepts,”  a  study  conducted  for  Marshall  Space   Flight  Cen ter   by 
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. A station tha t  could significantly 
extend  the  time  in  space  planned  for  the  Space   Shuttle would  offer 
advantages  for  doing a given  amount  of  work  with fewer flights  and 
reducing the  numbe r  of  turnarounds,  checkouts,  and  similar opera- 
tions.  A  permanent  facility could  offer maintenance  and  repair  and 
even reconfiguration of  payloads. The  study envisioned development 
of  four-man facilities  tha t  would  serve a s  building blocks for growth 
into  larger  stations  for  12  or   24  workers  as   needed;  the   four-man 
configuration would consist  of  a subsystems  and  habitability module 
carried  into  orbit  by  one  Shu t t le   and   joined  with  a  logistics  and 
payload module carried on a second mission. Several payload modules 
could be  docked in tandem with t h e  core vehicle, o r  in radial locations 
through  use  of  a  multiple-port  docking  adap ter .   The   core  vehicle 
would  be  left  on  station  for  a nominal  lifetime  of  5 yr,  logistic  and 
payload modules being replaced  a t  90-day  intervals.  Crew exchange 
and  resupply  would  occur  every 90 days.  The   study  concluded  tha t  
problems anticipated by the  world in the  1990s should be solved in the  
19809,  and   tha t   an  extended-duration  manned  orbital  facility  could 
contribute  significantly to  those  solutions.  (MSFC Release  75-  26) 

239 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
December  
*  INTELSAT-the 
International  Telecommunications  Satellite  organiza- 
awarded  a 20-mo  fixed-price  con trac t   for $220 000 to  the  
tion-had 
Messerschmitt-  Boelkow-  Blohm Co.  of  Munich for design,  fabrica- 
tion, and  test of  a prototype lightweight deployable solar array for use 
in synchronous satellites.  Th e  new array would provide 30 to 33 watts 
per  kg a t  the  end  of a 7- to 10-yr mission, compared to the  curren t  level 
of  10 to  15 watts  per   kg.  (INTELSAT  Release  75-20) 
11 December:  A Black Brant  VC  sounding rocket,  first  of  a series  sched- 
uled  over  the  next  5 yrs   in  a Space  Processing Applications Rocket 
(SPAR)  project  managed  by  Marsha l l   Sp a c e   Flight  Cen ter ,   was 
launched  to  an  altitude  of  225  km  from  the   Army’s  White  Sands  
missile  range  and traveled  downrange  about  80 km,  providing about 
5 min of  near weightlessness  during its coast phase.  The  rocket  car-  
ried  nine  space-processing  experiments  in  a  143-kg  payload  as- 
sembled a t  MSFC.  Th e  next flight had been scheduled for the  spring of 
1976.  (MSFC Release  11 Dec  75) 
e  NASA   issued  a  reques t   for  proposals  from  industry  on  a  space-station 
systems  analysis  study.  The  proposals  would  be  due  26  Jan.  1976. 
Two $700 000 con trac ts  would  be  issued  in April for  parallel  18-mo 
concept studies, one to be managed by Marshall Space  Flight Center, 
the   o ther   by  Johnson  Space   Center.  Contractors  would  study  low- 
orbit  and   synchronous-orbit  facilities,  to  begin  module  construction 
in  the   mid-1980s.  T h e  space   station would  be  used  a s  a  tes t   facility 
and  construction  base   to  support  the   manufacture  and  assembly  in 
space of  various kinds of  space  structures-e.g., 
generation  of  elec- 
tric power by large solar collectors and  transmission to ea r th  by micro- 
wave  antennas. Other uses would be  the retrieval and repair of  auto- 
mated  spacecraft,  or   storage  and  transfer   of  fue l   and   o ther   ex- 
pendables.  Elements  of  the   station  would  be  compatible  with  the  
Shu t t le  cargo bay,  18.3 m  long by 4.6  m  in diameter.  (NASA  Release 
75-310;  MSFC  Release  75-262;  JSC  Release  75-99) 
e  Kennedy  Space  Cen ter   awarded  a  $1 279  000  con trac t   to  George  A. 
Fuller  Co.,  a division of  Northrop  Corp.  of  Chicago,  for  fabrication 
and  erection of a s truc ture  for mating and  demating the  Space Shu t t le  
Orbiter  and its Boeing 747 carr ier  aircraft a t  NASA’s  Flight Research 
Cen ter   in Calif. KSC  had  been  given responsibility  for Space  Shuttle 
launch  operations  and  for  Orbiter  ground  operations  and  support 
equipment  both  a t  KSC  in  Fla.  and  a t  FRC,  which was  to  be  Orbiter 
landing site for the  first four missions. The  contractor was to complete 
the   structure-including  hoist  system,  access   platforms,  and  utility 
328  days   af ter   notice  to  proceed.  (KSC  Release 
systems-within 
290-  75) 
0  Fluorocarbon  levels  in  the   stratosphere  over  N.  Mex.  had  more  than  
doubled  since  1968,  reported  Dr.  David  G.  Murcray,  professor  of 
physics  a t   Univ.  of  Denver.  The   average  annual  increase  of  about 
14%  approximated  the   annua l   increase   in  fluorocarbon  use.  Dr. 
Murcray’s  experiments,  funded by  the  National  Science Foundation 
and  the  Manufacturing  Chemists Assn.,  used  a  balloon-borne high- 
resolution infrared spec trome ter  to measure the  wavelengths a t  which 
fluorocarbons  absorbed  light.  “The  measurements  of  the   fluoro- 
carbons  made  using  this  technique  are   of  particular  interest,”  said 
Dr.  Murcray,  “since  I  had  made  similar  measurements  in  1968.” 
T h e   1968 measurements  had  been  the   only  ones  of  the   amounts  of 
fluorocarbons presen t  in the  s tra tosphere  made before 1974. In 1968, 

240 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 
December 
fluorocarbon 11 was measured a t  20 par ts  per  trillion; in 1975, a t  about 
50.  Comparable figures  for  fluorocarbon 12 were 50  to  60 par ts   pe r  
trillion in  1968 and  140 to  160 pa r t s  pe r  trillion in  1975. (NSF Release 
PR75-  101) 
0  NASA   announced   selection  of  Boeing  Commercial  Airplane  c o .   of 
Sea t t le  for negotiations leading to  award of  a  $9.8-million  con trac t  to 
develop a  computer  software  system tha t  could substantially  reduce  
design time and  cos ts  of  aircraft  and  space  vehicle design and  en su re  
improved  vehicle  performance.  The  system,  called IPAD  (integrated 
programs for aerospace-vehicle design), would process installation of 
engineering information on compu ters  a t  major  U.S.  aerospace  com- 
anies,  ac t ing  a s  th e  key communications and  calculations integrator 
!or  many designers  and increasing the i r  effectiveness  by  speeding up 
computations and data management required in  design. I t  would serve 
large engineering staffs from the  design concept through detailed de-  
sign,  and  would  help  to  organize  and  assemble  design  da ta   in  sup- 
port  of  manufacturing processes.  (NASA Release  75 -312) 
0  The  Soviet Union  launched  Intercosmos  14  into  an orbit  with  1707-km 
apogee, 345-km  perigee,  105.3-min  period,  and  7 2  inclination.  Th e  
satellite  had  been  equipped  to  study low-frequency electromagnetic 
fluctuations  in  the  magnetosphere,  the   s t ruc tu re  of  the  ionosphere, 
and  the  intensity of  micrometeorite fluxes. Ta s s  reported  tha t  flags of 
nine  socialist  coun tr ies  had   waved  over  “one  of  the   Soviet  cosmo- 
dromes” where the  launching took place;  mentioned a s  participating 
in  this  particular  mission  were  scientists  from  Bulgaria,  Czecho- 
slovakia,  and Hungary, a s  well a s  the  U .S .S .R .   Satellites of  the  Inter- 
cosmos series were considered “closest  to purely ea r th  problems” in 
tha t   they  had   been   connec ted   with  specific  orders   placed  by  geo- 
physicists,  physicians,  meteorologists, and radiocommunications ex- 
perts.  Academician  Boris  Petrov,  head   of  the   Soviet  Intercosmos, 
sa id  the  launch  ended  the  first decade  of  cooperation between scien- 
tists  and  engineers  of  the   socialist countries,  who  had  made  signifi- 
can t  discoveries  regarding sun   and  ea r th  climate,  influence  of  solar 
activity on  magnetic weather,  and   dispersal  of  radio waves.  Collec- 
tives of  exper ts   in  all nine  member  coun tr ies  of  Intercosmos would 
take   part  “a s   usual”  in  processing  information  received  from  the  
satellite,  working  at  the   scientific  flight headquar ters   nea r  Norilsk, 
beyond the  polar circle, where parallel ground observations would be 
conducted.  (Tass,  in   IS 240  and  243,  12 Dec  75) 
12  December:  Sa tcom  I ,  first of  th ree  domestic communications satellites 
to be  placed in geostationary orbit around the  equa tor  for RCA Corp.  to 
transm i t   long-distance  telephone  calls  and   service  data,  had  been 
launched at 8 5 6  pm EST from Cape  Canaveral on a  Delta vehicle into a  
parking  orbit  with  35 980-km  apogee  and  182-km  perigee.  A  kick 
motor was to be  fired a t  5 4 1  pm EST  15 Dec.  to put the  satellite into a  
synchronous orbit.  The  RCA  Satcom was  the   second  domestic com- 
munications satellite  to  be launched  by  communications companies; 
the  Wes tern  Union Corporation’s Wes tar  system became operational 
earlier  this  year.  Each  Satcom would  receive  and   transmit  da ta  on 
24  channels.  Westar-a 
two-satellite  system-had  only  12 message 
channe ls  per   satellite.  Each   Satcom  channe l  was  built  to  transm i t  
1000 telephone calls at a  time,  or  one color TV channe l ,  or 64 million 
bits p e r  sec of  computer da ta .  Sa tcom  1 would be  stationed  at 119”W, 
and the  two subsequen t  Satcoms would be located a t  99”W and 1 2 9 T  

241 

December 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

over the equator to handle television, voice channels,  a nd  high-speed 
da ta   between  the   contiguous  U .S . ,   Hawaii,  and   Alaska.  (NASA  Re- 
lease  75-302;  NYT, 13 Dec 75,37; SBD, 16  Dec 75,242; KSC Releases 
289-75,  295-75) 
N A S h   marked  the   10th year  in  space   of  Pioneer  6,  launched  16 Dec. 
1965 to  make  the   first  detailed  measurements  of  the   interplanetary 
medium,  some  spanning  more  than  805  million  km.  Pioneer  6  had 
measured  the  sun’s  corona,  returned  da ta   on  solar  storms  from  the  
invisible side of  the   sun,  and measured  the   tail of  Comet Kohoutek, 
during what was believed to b e  the  longest operating life yet attained 
by  an interplanetary spacecraft;  i t  had  also helped  to  char t  the  solar 
wind,  solar  cosmic  rays,  and  the   solar  magnetic  field,  all of  which 
extend  fa r   beyond  the   orbit  of  Jupiter.  Pioneer  6,  and  three   s is ter  
craft-Pioneers  7,  8 ,   and  9-all 
years  beyond  the ir   6-mo  design 
lives, had  constituted  a network  of  solar weather  stations tha t   circle 
the  sun  in locations millions of  kilometers apart. Two younger craft- 
Pioneer 10 and 11-had 
flown past Jupiter  in 1972 and 1973 and were 
headed  for the outer reaches  of  the  solar system.  (NASA  Release  75- 
311; ARC  Release  75-65) 
14 December:  The  Air  Force  launched  a  “spy  satellite”  from  Kennedy 
Space  Center  a t  12:15 am EST into a stationary  orbit  at  about  36 000 
km  above earth.  Although  no  announcement  had  been  made  of  the  
success  o r  failure  of  the   launch,  observers  next  day  concluded  tha t  
the  launch had been   successful. Th e  satellite was one of  a ser ies  de- 
signed to monitor missile launchings in China and the  Soviet Union to  
give a 30-min warning of a land-launched  a t tack  or about 10-min warn- 
ing of  a missile  a t tack   from  submarines.  It  had  been  launched  by  a 
Titan  IIIC,  24th  of  th is   type  launched  from  Cape   Canaveral,  and 
wa s  thought to carry both infrared sensing equipment and still and  TV 
cameras   to  permit  day  and  night  monitoring.  (NYT ,  16 Dec  75,  14; 
C Trib,  15 Dec  75,  5) 
15 December:  Giant  designs  stretching  for miles  on  the   Nazca  plains  of 
P e ru  had possibly been laid out by observers in hot-air balloons, Time 
magazine reported, as members of the  InternationalExplorers Society 
constructed and flew such  a balloon over the  area  using materials and  
techniques available to the  ancient Indians. Documents discovered in 
Portugal had  revealed  tha t   in  1709 a missionary had  demonstrated  a 
model of  a hot-air balloon reportedly used by the Indians. Textiles re- 
covered  from deser t   graves  provided  evidence  tha t   the   Nazcas  had 
the  materials to make a balloon envelope, and  a picture of  an ancient 
ceramic  appeared  to  represen t   a  hot-air bag. Th e  IES members  built 
a balloon about 27 m  high with fabric resembling the  Nazca material, 
with lines and fastenings from local fibers a nd  a gondola woven from 
reeds   growing in  Peru’s  Lake Titicaca.  Named Condor I, the device 
f lew  about 4 km in 18 min and  reached an altitude of more than 300 m. 
(Time,  15 Dec  75,  50) 
0  Kennedy Space  Cen ter  had  awarded a $265 700 con trac t  to Charter  In- 
dustries  of  Raleigh,  N .C . ,   for  rental  of  14 geodesic  domes  to  house 
displays  at a bicentennial exposition of  science and  technology to be  
sponsored  by  the   government  next  summer  at  the   spaceport.  KSC 
would  be   host  for  the   exposition,  which  would  consist  of  exhibits 
from  government  and  industry  showing applications  of  science  a nd  
technology  to  improve  living conditions  during  the   next  200  years. 
(NASA  Release  75 -313) 

242 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  197s 
December 
16  December:  Astronaut  Donald K.  (Deke) Slayton had   been  appointed 
Deputy Director of  Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Te s t  
at the  Johnson Space  Center,  announced Cen te r  Director Dr. Christo- 
pher   C.  Kraft,  Jr .   In   th e   newly  crea ted   position,  Slayton would  be 
responsible  for planning and  implementing the  approach  and landing 
te s t   project  for  the   Space   Shu t t le   program.  He  most  recently  had 
been   docking  module  pilot  of  the   U.S. crew  for  t h e   Apollo-Soyuz 
Te s t  Project.  (NASA  Release  75-314;  JSC  Release  75-100) 
0  Langley  Research   Cen ter   awarded  a   $1.5-million  30-mo  con trac t   to 
Rockwell International’s Autonetics Group for a  h igh ly  reliable  solid- 
s ta te   satellite  da ta   recorder   using  bubble-domain  technology.  The  
new  recorder,  with  a   memory  capacity  of  100 million  bits,  would 
achieve a  tenfold improvement in reliability over mechanically driven 
recorders  now  in  use.  The   bubble-domain technology  would  make 
the   recorder  about  a   third  the  size  and  half  the  weight  of  presen t  
recorders   and  would  require  only  half  the   power  for  operation.  Dr. 
R.  L.  S termer  of  LaRC  sa id  a NASA  decision to define hardware using 
the   bubble-domain  technology  for  use  in  the   late  1970s would  be 
greatly influenced by  succe s s  of  the new recorder.  (Rockwell Release 
AG -9) 
17 December:  The Peoples Republic of  China announced the  launch  of  its 
fifth ear th   satellite,  third  launched  this year.  Reuters,  quoted  in  the  
New  York  T ime s ,  said  observers  believed  it  had  been  a   s tep  toward 
Peking’s  first  manned  space   flight.  The   fourth  Ch ina   spacecraf t ,  
launched 26 Nov.,  had been recovered, leading observers to believe the 
Chinese engineers had perfected  soft-landing techniques.  Weights of 
the  three craft launched  th i s  year  had not been  disclosed, to hide the  
capacity  of  the   type  of  rocket  used  for  launch,  nor  had  the  curren t  
announcement disclosed  the  satellite’s orbit or height.  (NYT, 18 Dec 
75,  26;  New  China News  Agency,  in  FBIS  243,  17 Dec  75) 
Evidence  tha t   the   Arabian peninsula  is  rotating  toward  Asia  exists  in 
photographs taken  during the  Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project,  according to 
Dr.  Farouk  el-Baz,  director  of  the  Smithsonian Cen ter  for Ea r th  and  
Planetary S tud ies  at the  National Air and Space  Museum. Dr.  el-Baz, 
who coordinated the  earth-observation  study of ASTP,  said the  photo- 
graphs  provided  geologic  evidence of  the   continental  drift  theory  in 
color sho ts  of  a vast complex of  fault lines  extending north from the  
Red  Sea   through  the   Gulf  of  Aqaba,  the  Dead  Sea,  and   the   Sea  of 
Galilee.  The   fan-shaped  pa t tern   revealed  the  movement of  the  Ara- 
bian landmass  to be  a  rotation  ra ther   than   simply  an  eas tward  drift, 
Dr.  el-Baz  said.  Until  the   ASTP   pictures  became  available,  the  fault 
line had not been known  to ex tend  beyond the Golan Heights region, 
probably a   pivotal  spot  geologically as  well  a s  politically.  (NYT, 18 
Dec  75 ,24)  
0  Kennedy  Space   Cen te r   awarded  a   $74998   con trac t   to  the   Univ.  of 
Fla.  Institute of  Food  and Agricultural Sc iences  for continuation of  a  
freeze-prediction study. A  1973 con trac t  had provided for study of  the  
application of  satellite  therma l  and infrared  imagery to development 
of  a   freeze-prediction  model;  results  were  so  encouraging  tha t   a  
second con trac t  had  been awarded m 1974. Also involved in this effort 
had  been  meteorologists  from  the   Lakeland  office  of  the  National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and its Environmental Serv- 
ices   Cen te r   a t   Auburn,  Ala.  Freeze-warning  information  had   pre- 
viously been provided  by  N OM ’ S   Ruskin, Fla.,  facility on the  basis of 
243 

December 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 
d a t a  from  300  recording  thermometers  operated  by  a  Federal-state 
agricultural weather  system  and  o ther   reporting  stations;  the   KSC 
con trac ts  had aimed a t  developing a computerized  system using ther- 
mal  scanning and  infrared  imagery from  spacecraft  and   aircraft  for 
more  accura te   predictions.  Th e   study  used  da ta   from  all agencies, 
including  spacecraft  readings  and  actual  ground-  and  leaf-tempera- 
ture   measurements  provided  by  Univ.  of  Fla.  personnel  a t   specific 
t imes   in  selected  tes t   areas,  combined  a t   KSC  for  analysis  in  its 
ea r th   resources  data-analysis  facility.  Th e   analyzed  da ta   had  then  
gone to the  university and  to N O M  for predictive model development. 
(KSC  Release  294-75) 
NASA  had  awarded Bendix Field Engineering Corp.  a $104-million con- 
t rac t   to  operate  and maintain  portions of  the  worldwide  Spaceflight 
Tracking  and  Data  Network  tha t   serves   the   needs   of  NASA’s earth- 
orbital  space  programs,  manned  and  unmanned.  Th e   2-yr  cost- 
plus-award-fee contract would permit negotiation of  up to three addi- 
tional  1-yr extensions,  and  would  be  supervised  by  Goddard  Space  
Flight  Center.  Th e   contractor  would  provide  technical  support  for 
STDN  stations and facilities as  well a s  for the Laser  Tracking Subnet 
and   for  the   Magnetic  T a p e   Certification  Facility  and   the   NASCOM 
facilities  located  a t   GSFC.  (NASA  Release  75-315) 
18  December:  Allegations tha t   the   Soviet Union  had  been  testing  a  laser  
system  to blind u.S.  spy  satellites  were  discussed  in  an article in  the  
Ch r i s t ian  Science Mon i to r .  A satellite watching Russia  from a spot in 
the   sky  over  the  Indian Ocean  had  se t  off  false  alarms  of  a missile 
a t tack   18 Oct.  when  its  sensitive  instruments  de tec ted   heat  such   a s  
might result from the  firing of  missiles. The  heat had originated from 
a  fire  caused  by  breaks   in  a natural  gas  pipeline,  a s   la ter   satellite 
photographs confirmed,  but  between  the   alarm and the   photographs 
U.S.  intelligence  had  speculated  tha t   the   Soviets  had  trained  lasers  
on  the  satellite  to  prevent  detection,  in  violation  of  the   U.S.-Soviet 
agreement on arms. The  gas  fires had  se t  off o ther  warnings after  18 
Oct.,  apparently because  the  rup tures  a nd  fires occurred a t  different 
times  and  places  in  Russia  in  both  October  and  November.  CSM 
quoted  an   article  in A v ia t ion   Week  magazine  questioning  whether 
lasers  could be  used  to prevent  monitoring of  military activity on  the  
ground  by  satellites,  noting  that  officials  a t   the   u .S .   Arms  Control 
Agency had  discounted  the  reported  incidents. Both the  U.S.  and the  
Soviet  Union  were  known  to  be  spending  large  amounts  on  laser  
research,  and the  December issue of  the  authoritative Jane ’ s  W ea pon  
Sys tems   had  discussed  the  implications of  laser  research  for military 
uses in both countries.  (CSM ,  18 Dec 75,3; M iam i  He ra ld ,  24 Dec 75, 
8A; Ft.  Myers News-Press,  28 Dec  75,  1) 
e Th e  Soviet Union for the  first time had discovered atoms of  “natrium”- 
sodium,  a s  it  is  known  in  the  U.S.-at 
an  altitude  of  nearly  100 km, 
in  the   lower  ionosphere.  The   experiment  was  difficult,  said  Tass ,  
because  a t   tha t   altitude  only  1 atom  of  natrium  exists  per  1000 
million  molecules  of  nitrogen  and  oxygen.  A  laser   unit  had  es tab-  
lished  a  relationship  between  natrium  content  in  the   upper  at- 
mosphere and meteor showers; the  announcement said the  discovery 
would  be  s ign ifcan t   because   of  the   effect  of  natrium  on  long- 
distance television and  radio communications.  (Tass, in FBIS No. 248, 
18 Dec  75) 

244 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
December 
22  December:  A  new  domes t ic   communications-satellite  p a r t n e r sh i p  
named Satellite Business  Systems f i e d  applications with the  Federal 
Communications  Commission  seeking authorization  to  establish  an 
all-digital  system  to  serve   large  industrial,  government,  and  other 
users   beginning  in  1979.  The   new  partnership  had  been  formed  by 
subsidiaries of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General, and IBM,  each  
of  which  intended  to  own  one-third.  Th e   proposed  system,  using 
higher  frequencies  a t   12 and  1 4  gigahertz and  advanced  technology, 
would permit customers in geographically d ispersed  locations to com- 
bine  voice,  data,  and image communications  into a  single integrated 
private-line  network;  small automated  ground  stations would  be  lo- 
ca ted  a t  customers’.premises and connected where possible to exist- 
ing terminals to minimize terres tr ia l  communications costs. The  sy s -  
tem  would  use  two  satellites  in  geostationary  orbit  a t   about  36  000 
km  altitude,  one  serving a s  a  backup,  to  provide  coverage of  the  48 
contiguous s ta tes .   (Comsat Release  75-63) 
0  Th e   Soviet  Union  launched  Prognoz  4 ,   a  905-kg  automatic  station  to 
s tudy  corpuscular and electromagnetic emissions of  the  sun, flows of 
solar plasma,  and  near-earth  magnetic  fields,  to  determine  solar  in- 
fluence on the  earth’s magnetosphere.  The  satellite’s orbit would have 
a 40 836-km apogee,  451-km  perigee,  12 hr  16 min period,  a nd  62.8” 
inclination.  (Tass,  in FBIS  No  247,  22 Dec  75) 
0  Th e  Soviet Union  launched  a  communications  satellite called Raduga  
(Ra inbow )  into a stationary circular orbit a t  35 000 km, with a 23 hr 54 
min period and a 0.3”inclination. The satellite had been instrumented 
to provide continuous round-the-clock  telephone  and  telegraph  radio 
communications with  simultaneous transmission  of  color a nd  black- 
and-white  central. TV  programs  to  the  network  of  Orbita  stations. 
(Tass, on  FBIS  No.  248,  23  Dec  75) 
23 December: Pioneer  11, about  a  third  of  the  way  on  its  course  toward 
Sa turn ,   had  successfully  completed  its  riskiest  course-change  ma- 
neuver in response to signals from ear th ,  458 million km distant. Con- 
trollers  a t  Ames  Research  Center  ceased  communications  with  the  
Pioneer  for  several  hours,  giving  the   spacecraft  time  to  command 
itself into a change of  position, fire its thrus ters ,   and  reposition itself 
with an tenna  pointing back  to earth.  The maneuver increased space- 
craft  velocity  by  108 km  per  hr,  to  ensure   tha t   Pioneer  would  have 
a  choice of  approach as it neared  Saturn:  between  the  rings and  the  
planet,  or  under  the   rings  and   upward  outside  them.  Recen t   te s t s  
had  shown  the   onboard  came ra  working well; P ioneer   11 had  been 
scheduled  to  take   the   first  closeup  pictures  of  Sa turn   and   its  rings 
upon  arrival  a t  the   planet  in  1979.  If  i ts  course  had  been  se t   inside 
the   rings, P ioneer  11 should be  able  to look closely a t   Saturn’s  sixth 
moon, Titan, which is larger than  the planet Mercury.  (NASA  Release 
75-319;  ARC  Release  75-69) 
The   Pentagon,  checking  out  reports  of  Soviet  laser   devices  tha t   had 
blinded  U.S.  reconnaissance  satellites,  had  found  the   reports  to  be 
wrong,  said  new  Secretary  of  Defense  Donald  H.  Rumsfeld  a t   his 
first press   conference  since  taking  over  from  Jame s  R.  Schlesinger 
a month  ago.  Rumsfeld  declined  to  say how  it  had  been  determined 
tha t   intelligence  reports  were  wrong,  but  said:  “After  examination, 
any implication that the activity that was reported.  . . did in fact exist 
was  not  correct.”  He  said  it was  clear  there  w a s  no  violation of  any 

245 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
December 
arms  control agreement,  nor any evidence to s up   ort the  laser report, 
which he sought to portray as press  speculation. &S ta r ,   23  Dec  75 ,6 ;  
NY News,  23 Dec  75,  2) 
The  National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration  had developed 
a  new  remote-sensing  technique  to  “see”  nitrogen  oxide  in  the  
stratosphere,  permitting  scientists  for  the  first time  to  calculate  the  
ac tua l   ra te   a t   which  the   nitrogen  compounds  destroy  stratospheric 
ozone.  Much  of  the   work  on  the   ozone  cycle  had  been  theoretical, 
based on computer models and  laboratory te s t s ;  seasonal variations in 
the   stratosphere  at  high  latitudes,  revealed  by  spectrometers  on je t  
aircraft, had not been predicted by  theory, which meant tha t  the  com- 
pu ter  models had not provided close simulation. Th e  new  technique, 
using  a  spectrometer  to measure  the  light  spec trum  and  isolate tha t  
portion caused  by  nitrogen dioxides, would  permit  routine  checks  on 
daily, seasonal, and  latitudinal variations in the content of  the strato- 
sphere.  The   method  would  be  applied  by  small  automated  instru- 
ments  run  by  minicomputers  a t   N o h i   stations  in  Alaska,  Samoa, 
Hawaii, and  the South Pole, a nd  a t  the  Air Force base  in Greenland. 
(NOAA  Release  75-220) 
24 December:  The  National Research Council, in i ts  pro  am  of  conduct- 
ing technical  studies on  behalf  of  the  National A c a g m y  of  Sc iences  
and the  National Academy of Engineering, had mailed out announce- 
ments to more than 5000 individuals and organizations inviting state- 
men ts  on the  role of nuclear power in the  context of  alternative energy 
systems.  Hearings in f ive  major cities had been scheduled for January 
and  early February  1976 to obtain  the  broadest  possible perspective 
for a comprehensive  study.  The  Energy  Research  and  Development 
Administration  had  asked   the   academies  to  conduct  a  2-yr  study, 
and  the  announcement represen ted  the  first time in the  112-yr history 
of the  National Academy of Sciences tha t  s u c h  an extensive effort had 
been  made  to  solicit the  views of  the   informed public on  a projected 
study. The  committee conducting the  study would attempt to set forth 
the curren t  and probable s ta te s  of  energy technology through the  year 
2010, various policy options, and  consequences of each. (NRC Release 
24 Dec  75) 
0  Th e  Air Force had  awarded  a $28.5-million contract  to  Lockheed  Air- 
craft  Corp.  for  design,  development,  and   testing  of  a  strengthened 
wing for the  C  -5A  transpor t  airplane tha t  the  New York Times called a 
symbol of  Pentagon  “cost  overruns.”  Aim of  the  original C  -SA  con- 
trac t   with  Lockheed  had  been  to  produce  a  transport  capable  of 
carrying a 99 700-kg payload and  having a service l i e  of 30 000 flying 
hours.  Even  before  it  had  gone  into  full operational  use,  the   C-5A 
wing had been  shown in s ta t ic  ground tes ts  to be too weak to carry the  
prescribed load and had  developed fatigue cracks  in. the  metal struc- 
ture. Th e  cracking had been  attributed to high s tress leve ls  inherent in 
the  design, ineffective fas teners  on the  wing panels,  and  difficulty in 
mating  the  stiff contours of  the  wing and  joints during manufacture. 
Th e  Air Force had  paid  $4.5  billion on  delivery of  81 C-5As;  it  had 
already  spen t  more  than   $198 million  through  June   1975 correcting 
deficiencies for which  Lockheed  was  responsible  under  the  original 
contract,  renegotiated  when  Lockheed  was  in  financial difficulty in 
1971. I n  addition to $1.3 billion for furing the  wings, the  AF planned to 
spend  another  $200 million  to  fiu  o ther   defects.  Cost  of  the   repairs 

246 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

December 

would  nearly  double the   original AF  es t ima te   of  $3.4  billion  for  the  
C  -5A  program. However, without the  repairs,  the  C-5A  fleet would 
have  to  be   grounded beginning in  1979 when  the  flying-time  safety 
limit  had  been  reached.  Because  of  the   defects,  service  life  had 
recently  been re-estimated  at 8750 hr and payload limit at 78 900 kg. 
(NYT, 15 Dec  75,  1; V S J ,  24  Dec  75,  3) 
0  Citing  “new  scientific  evidence”  supporting ozone-depletion theories, 
th e  Na tura l  Resources Defense Council and 10 s t a t e s  had  petitioned 
t h e   Con sum e r   P r o d u c t   Sa fe ty   Comm iss ion   to  b a n   t h e   u s e   of 
fluorocarbon propellants  in  aerosol  products.  Th e   commission had 
denied  a  previous petition  from the  resources  council;  the  Food  and  
Drug Administration-which  had responsibility for regulating all food, 
drug,  and  cosmetic  aerosol  products-had 
also  rejected  a  petition 
from  the   group.  Copetitioners  with  the   resources   council  were  the  
Environmental Defense Fund   and the Minnesota Public  In te re s t  Re- 
sea rch  Group;  the   10 s t a t e s  were  Colo.,  Ha . ,   Mass.,  Mich.,  Minn., 
N.H.,  N.Y.,  Ore.,  Vt.,  and   Wis.  Both  N.Y.  and  Ore.  had  already 
passed  laws banning the  use of  fluorocarbon sprays,  and more than  a  
dozen other s ta te s  were sa id  to be considering this action. The  Aerosol 
by  indu s t ry   to  oppo se   a   ban   of 
Educa t ion   Bureau-sponsored 
fluorocarbon-containing  products-issued 
a   s ta temen t   tha t   restric- 
tions would  be   “inappropriate.”  (VSJ, 24  Dec  75,  5) 
26  December:  The   Christmas  Day  inaugural  flight  announced  for  the  
U.S.S.R.’s  supersonic  jetliner  had  been   delayed  a  day  by  weather 
conditions variously reported  a s  runway ice or fog at the  destination, 
but  i ts   first  flight  carrying  freight  and  mail  from  Moscow  to  Alma 
A t a - c a p i t a l  of  the  cen t ra l  Asian republic of Kazakhstan-took  onIy 4  
h r  for the  8000-km  round trip.  The Tupolev-  144 airliner,  rival of  the  
British-French  Concorde,  could fly  at  an   altitude  of  up  to  46.3  km, 
higher  than   conventional  airliners.  Although  the   flights  had  been 
billed as  the first commercial service by a  supersonic je t ,  and had been 
schedu led   to  get  ahead  of  the   Concorde  passenger  service  set  for 
January   between  Par is   and   Rio  and  between  London and   Bahrain, 
Tu-144  would  not  carry  passengers  until  the   second half  of  1976 a t  
the  earliest, and  then on in terna l  routes,  according to Deputy Aviation 
Minister Nikolai Boikov. (NYT, 27 Dec 75 ,2 ;  M iam i  He ra ld ,  27 Dec 75, 
20A) 
27  December:  In   a   M iam i   He ra ld   article  presenting  “ the   ca se   for  the  
Concorde,” S. Fred  Singer-who  had served  in 1970-71  a s  chairman 
of  an   interagency  ta sk   group  to  evaluate  environmental  effects  of 
supersonic transports-pointed  out tha t  the effect of  Concorde pollu- 
tion  would  be   completely swamped  by  o ther   factors  tha t   had  been 
shown  to  decrease   atmospheric  ozone-nitrogen 
fertilizers,  carbon 
tetrachloride,  and fluorocarbons. Banning the  Concorde from the  U.S. 
would not prevent it from depositing pollutants elsewhere; in any ca se ,  
military planes flying in the  s tra tosphere  and  subsonic planes pushing 
to higher  altitudes  to  avoid  traffic would  produce  the  same  pollution 
effec t   a s  the   Concordes.  Singer,  now  a   professor  of  environmental 
sc iences  a t  U.  of Va.,  called for more study of the  effects of Freon and  
fertilizers  and for modification  of  the  engines of  fu ture  SSTs. (M iam i  
He ra ld ,   27 Dec  75,  7A) 
28  December:  Lutz  T.  Kayser,  an   aerospace  eng ineer   from  Stuttgart, 
Germany,  had  es tab l ished   a   bus iness   called  Orb i ta l  Transpor t   and  

247 

December 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Raketen  A.G.  to  build  and  launch  rockets  on  a  commercial  basis, 
starting  in  1980:  if  successful,  it  would  be  the   world's  first  private 
space-launch  venture.  NASA  had been charging a t  leas t  $25 million to 
put  a $lZmillion  satellite into  space; Kayser  had  designed  a "space 
truck"   to  put  satellites  in  orbit  for half  the   NASA  price.  His  rockets 
could not be  used for military purposes,  he said, a s  he had no plans to 
sell  equipment,  but  would  do  the   launches   himself  and  sell  only 
booster  services.  A s   the   launches  could  not  take   place  in  crowded 
We s t  Germany, they would have to be done from e i ther  a sh ip  a t  sea or 
from a base in some sparsely populated country. After ground tes ts  of 
x 
Kayser's  rocket  engines  las t   summer,  German  sc ien t is ts  had  been  
convinced  tha t   his  spacecraft  would  f ly .  
Kayser  said  that  if  the  Germans would not  s u   port  him,  he would 
sia.  He  had  hoped 
seek   backers  elsewhere,  in  South America  or  
more than  half the backing would come from private investors, and the  
rest  from banks.  Th e  West  German  government  had  spen t  about  $2 
billion to encourage  German and  Eu ropean  space  projects that  could 
offer an  alternative  to the  NASA  monopoly,  but  such  projects  had not 
succeeded. 
The  first "space  truck"-now  under construction for suborbital te s t  
next year-would  b e  39.62 m  high and consist of inexpensive conven- 
tionally produced  materials.  To  make  mass  production  possible,  all 
stages  would  use  identical  engines;  the   stages  would  be   placed  in 
concentric rings tha t  would drop off a s  the  craft climbed. (NYT, 28 Dec 
75,  18) 
30 December:  Pulsars  had  been discovered  to be not only superdense  but 
also superfluid, Columbia University physicists reported indstrophys- 
ical Journal.  Pulsars,  collapsed  remnants  of  exploded  s ta r s  formed 
almost  entirely  of  neutrons,  had  been  shown  to  be  so  dense   tha t   a 
spoonful would weigh millions of metric tons. Theorists had suspected 
tha t   such   objects,  even  with  a  thin  rigid  crus t   of  iron,  would  be 
superfluid-a 
s ta te  produced experimentally on ear th  in small helium 
specimens  cooled  almost  to  absolute  zero,  where  both  friction  and  
viscosity disappear.  Material  inside  such   an object,  stirred  into mo- 
tion, would  swirl indefinitely. 
The Columbia Univ.  experimenters  had  attempted  to measure the  
surface  temperature  of  a young pulsar,  s u c h  a s  the   one  in  the   Crab  
Nebula.  If  the   tempera ture  were  less   than  8 .8  million'c,  the   object 
would probably be superfluid; a fast-spinning neutron s ta r  would cool 
rapidly because  of  its  reduced   heat  capacity.  Tempera tures  of  s u c h  
objects could  be  de tec ted   by  x-ray  wavelengths,  but  the  x-rays pro- 
duced could not pene tra te  earth 's  atmosphere. Space  observation was 
necessary,  and rockets  launched  by  NASA  from Hawaii and N.  Mex. 
tes ted   the   Crab  nebula  pulsar,  using  the  moon  as a  curtain.  A s   the  
moon  passed  across  the   whole  nebula  several  times,  cutting  off  its 
various x-ray emissions,  the   physicists  had   been  able to  identify the  
x-rays  indicating  temperature.  Since  the  Crab   nebula  pulsar's  tem- 
pera ture  was  shown to  be  less than  5 million  "C,  the   hysicists  con- 
cluded  tha t   the   pulsar  must  be  superfluid.  (NYT, 30  f ;  e c  75,  40) 
*  Predictions  of  a trend  toward  harsher  winters  for North  America  had 
been  put  in  question  by  satellite monitoring  of  snowcover over  the  
northern  hemisphere  during  the   past  9  yr,  according  to  the   Na- 
tional  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration.  NOM ' S   National 

248 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

December 

Environmental Satellite Serv ice  had published a  document, “Monthly 
Winter Snowline Variation in the  Northern Hemisphere from Satellite 
Records, 1966-  1975,” containing the  most complete record available 
of  hemisphere  snowcover.  Analysis  of  the   cha r t s   had  revealed  no 
significant  change   in  North  American  snowcover dur ing  the   en t ire  
period.  Predictions  of  harsher   weather  had  ra ised   the   possibility  of 
southward movement of  t h e  polar ice cap, which could be  caused  by a  
ment concluded tha t  “Lack  of  systematic  increase  in . . . snow cover 
drop  of only a  few degrees  in  average winter tempera ture .  The  docu- 
tends  to con trad ic t  the  ev idence .   . . tha t  the  cu r ren t  c l ima te  is chang- 
ing adversely.”  ( N OM  Re lease  75-217) 
0  Pres iden t   Ford  had  signed  legislation  establishing  a   17-member U.S. 
Metric  Board  to  plan  for  voluntary  conversion of  t h e   nation  to  the  
metric system. Dr. Ernes t  Ambler, ac t ing  head of the  National Bureau 
of  S tandards ,  sa id  the  signing of  t h e  bill would  encourage U .S .  indus- 
try  and   commerce  to  export  products  made  to  metric  dimensions, 
which “should s t imu la te  additional international trade .”   (SBD, 30 Dec 
75,  299) 
Du r ing  December:  Goddard  Space Flight  Cen ter   and   the   Fla.  Dept.  of 
Na tura l  Resources had  approved the first  long-range,  space-assisted 
program to  develop an  “early  warning system”  for  the   onset  of  red 
tide, an ocean-borne organism tha t  had left tons of dead  fish rotting on 
beaches  around the  world. Dr. Warren  A. Hovis of GSFC had  designed 
an  ocean-color scanner  capab le  of  de tec t ing  sub t le  variations  in the  
color of  coas ta l  waters  tha t  might  ind ica te  changes  in  concentration 
and   spec ies   of  marine  phytoplankton,  especially  the   red-tide  dino- 
flagellate  Gymnod in ium  breve .   Red  tide  had   been  a  major  problem 
because  of  oxygen depletion in ocean water from fish decomposition, 
and  e y e  and  respiratory  infections caused by toxic par t ic les  produced 
in the organism. Shellfish beds affected had been closed for months by 
authorities.  An ou tbreak  of  red  tide in  1971 had  cos t  the  s ta te  of  Fla. 
more  than  $20 million  in  lost  tourist  business.  The   ocean  scanne r ,  
developed  for  use  in  the   Nimbus-G  pollution-sensing  spacecraf t  
schedu led   for  launch   in  1978,  could  be  used  in  photographic over- 
flights by  aircraft and Landsa t  spacecraft,  in connection with on-site 
sampling of ocean waters by research  ships, to de tec t  the  organism in 
time  to  t ak e   coun termeasures   and  warn  t h e   public  about  affected 
areas .   (Spacef l igh t ,  Vol  17 No.  12, Dec  75,  425) 
0  The   boards  of  d irec tors  of  t h e  All-Women  Transcon t inen ta l  Air  Race  
and the  Ninety-Nines, Inc.,  had decided to term ina te  the  Powder Puff 
Derby-world‘s 
largest and  longest speed  race  for light aircraft-after 
the   1976 bicentennial  race,  because  of  the   nation’s  curren t   financial 
and   energy   problems,  t h e   Na t iona l   Aeronau t ic   Association  an-  
nounced. Sponsored by N M  s ince  its beginning in 1947, the  derby  had 
a  safety record unparalleled  in air race  history: no fatalities.  The  N U  
news le t ter  noted tha t  the  derby  had  inspired  countless  women to fly, 
and  tha t  recen t  race s  had  more than  100 aircraft competing. Th e  final 
derby  had   been  schedu led   for  12-19  July  1976  from  Sacramento, 
Calif.,  to Wilmington,  Del.  (NAA  News,  Dec  75) 
0  Space   scientists  and   as tronomers  had  been  wrestling with  a  “cu l tura l  
crisis”  in putting names  to fea tures  of  d is tan t  worlds tha t  had  never  
been clearly seen  before,  a s  closeup views of  severa l  p lane ts  became 
available  and  more were on   t h e  way.  Working through  the   In terna-  

249 

December 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 

t i o n d   Astronomical  Union,  the   scientists  had  been  forced  to  look 
beyond  the   names  of  scientists  and   explorers  tha t   had  been  used 
almost exclusively for objects on the  moon and on Mars. A meeting on 
the  problem in Moscow in July  1974 had agreed that objects on Venus 
would  be  called  af ter  women  famous  in mythology and  history. New 
maps of  the  recently photographed surface of Mercury would bear  the 
names of  contributors  to the  a r t s  and  other humanities;  the  scientists 
had  sought  advice from  scholars  in  the   humanities  to get  the  widest 
possible  representation  from  past  and  present  cultures. 
The  Moscow  meeting  on  new  approaches  to  names  for  planetary 
fea tures  had  been  preceded  by  intense  work  on  naming  newly  dis- 
covered configurations on the  moon and  on Mars. A complete scheme 
of  names  for more  than  500  large  formations  on  the   far   side  of  the  
moon-visible  only  to  spacecraft  because  one  side of  the  moon  had 
always been turned toward earth-had  been  approved in 1970. Soviet 
scientists had rejected  suggestions of  names from the  humanities  for 
features  on  the   moon  and   on  Mars;  they  had  urged  a  fresh   s tar t   on 
Mercury, a new planet, with formations named not only for authors, as 
the  Americans  had originally suggested,  but also for persons in other 
branches  of  the   humanities.  (MT, 25  Dec  75,  C10) 
0  Space  communities tha t  could supply enough energy to the  ear th  to end  
its energy crisis permanently  had been  described  in a n  article by Dr. 
Gerard K. ON e i l l  in Aerospace magazine. Recalling the  conclusions of 
Princeton Univ.  conferences on space  colonization in 1974 and 1975, 
and his  own  testimony  before  the   Subcommittee on  Space  Sciences 
and  Applications of  the  House Committee on Science and  Technology 
23  July  1975,  Dr.  O'Neill  said  tha t   within  13  yrs  af ter   beginning 
construction in space, the  amount of usable electricity delivered to the  
point where power would en te r  the  distribution system would exceed 
the  peak capacity of  the  Alaska pipeline. An investment of  about $96 
billion  over  a  6-yr  period  would  serve  to  establish  the   beachhead 
colony, and even with program costs of up to $300 billion the payback 
after  9  yr  would  exceed  the   total  investment  and  interest,  he 
estimated.  (Aerospace, Dec  75,  3) 
0  Establishment  of  manufacturing  facilities  in  space  might  be  feasible 
within th is  century, Dr. Gerard K. O'Neill wrote in the  December issue  
of  Science  magazine.  Construction  of  satellite  solar  power  stations 
(SSPSs)  from  lunar  materials,  for  example,  could  be  shown  more 
economical than building such  stations on ear th  and lifting them into 
orbit. The  space manufacturing facility (SMF) tha t  had been  envisioned 
by Dr. O'Neill and o thers  would be a self-sustaining habitat for a large 
number  of  people whose  energy  needs   could  be  met  by  solar power 
used  directly  for agriculture,  a s  process heat  for industry when con- 
cen tra ted   by  mirrors,  or   indirectly  a s   electricity.  Dr.  O'NeiU  had 
assembled  tables  and   figures  from  the   l i tera ture   to  accompany  his 
argument for the  SSPs a s  a means of  meeting  increased  demands for 
electricityon ear th  in a time of  shortage of fuels and concern about use 
of  nuclear  energy.  (Sc ience ,  Vol  190,  4218) 

250 

Appendix A 
SATELLITES,  SPACE PROBES ,  AND 
MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,  1975 

World  space  activity increased  in 1975. Total launches,  125, increased 
from 106 in  1974. Of  this total,  the u.S.  had 28 ,  described  in the  introduc- 
tion to Appendix B.  The  U.S.S.R.  had 89 launches with  112 payloads, 85 of 
these   in  the  Cosmos  ser ies ;  Cosmos payloads  included  such   specialized 
spacecraft as  Cosmos 775, part of the  Statsionar series for TV relay, and the  
Cosmos 782  biosat carrying 4 U.S.  experiments. Th e  Soviets also launched 
10  spacecraft  in  the   Molniya  comsat  ser ies ,   4  in  the   Meteor  ser ies ,   2 
Intercosmos  spacecraft  carrying experiments from other countries,  the  2 
Venus landers  (Venera 9 and l o ) ,  the  magnetospheric  investigator Prognoz 
4 ,  a  color-TV  comsat  called R a d u g a   (Ra inbow ) ,  and   5 Soyuz  spacecraft 
including the  April 5 “anomaly” and theSoyut 19 tha t  participated in ASTP. 
T h e  U.S.S.R.  also launched  A ryabha ta   for  India  in   April,  and  Sret  2  for 
France  a s   a  piggyback  payload  with Mo ln iya   1 - 3 0   in  June. 
Th e  number and variety of launches by other countries also increased  in 
1975. In Feb.,  France  launched S ta r le t te ,  a passive geodetic satellite, first 
for the  Diamant booster developed by cms; in May it launched Cas tor  and 
Po l lux ,  first 2  satellites launched by France on  a single booster;  in Sept., 
the   industry-managed  satellite Au ra   went  into orbit  on  the  las t  Diamant 
booster.  Th e   U.S.S.R.  had  launched  France’s  Sret  2  in  June,  and  a 
French-West German consortium sponsored the  launch of Symphonie 2 by 
NASA in Aug.  I n  Feb., Japan launched Ta iyo  to observe solar radiation and 
thermospheric  s truc ture ;  in  Sept.,  it launched K i k u  to measure  tempera- 
tures  in  space.  The  People’s  Republic  of  China  in  July  launched  its  third 
it  launched  a fourt ZI  satellite and  shortly announced its successful recov- 
satellite, first  in  4  r  (previous launches were  in  1970 and  1971); in  Nov., 
ery,  becoming the  third country to retrieve  a payload from orbit.  In  Dec., 
the  PRC  launched  its  fifth  satellite,  third  for  1975,  in  what  observers 
considered  a  s tep   toward  its  first manned  space  flight. 
The   following table  includes  all  payloads  tha t   have  (a) orbited;  (b)  as 
probes,  ascended  to  a t   leas t   the   6500-km  altitude  tha t   traditionally  had 
distinguished  probes from  sounding rockets;  or (c) conveyed one or  more 
human beings into space, whether or not orbit was attained. Th e  1975 table 
lists for the  first time in this ser ies  the  identities of  Soviet launch vehicles; 
for  details  on  these   vehicles,  see Soviet  Space   Programs  1971 -75,  US. 
Sena te  Comm. on Aeronautical & Sp. Sciences, 30 Aug. 76, Vol.  I, 39-61. 
For details on U.S.  launch vehicles,  see  Aeronautics & Space Repor t  of the 
Pres iden t ,   1975 Ac t iv i t ie s ,   GPO  stock number  033-000-00649-  1, App. 
D,  110. 
Sources  of  these   da ta   include  the   United  Nations  Public  Registry  of 
Space  Flights; the  Sa te l l i te  S i tua t ion  Repor t   compiled by Goddard Space  
Flight  Center’s  Operations  Control  Center;  press   re leases   of  NASA,  De- 

25 l 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

par tmen t  of  Defense, National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration, 
and  o ther  government agencies,  a s  well a s  the  Communications Satellite 
Corporation. Soviet da ta  derive from s ta temen t s  in the  Soviet press, trans-  
lations from the  Tass news agency, and international news-service reports, 
a s  well  a s   announcements  and   briefings  by  Soviet  officials on  ma t ters  
affecting the  Apollo-Soyuz Tes t  Project.  Data on satellites of o ther  nations 
also  come from the  announcemen ts  of  their  respective  governments and 
international  news  services. 

252 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Append ix   A 

d f 
W a 
e s 
f 
a 

00 
8 

1 
- 
00 
\o W 

t- m m 

.# 

b 0 )  
a 

d 
9 
0) N 

d 
4 
a N 

253 

Appendix  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

e 
I 
P 

I .- 
3 d 

I 
3 

0 m W 
In m 

: 
W 

d: 
2 
t- 

3 
In 

3 
d 

c9 t 

2 
0 3 

d 
0 00 

t- 
3 
3 

h! 
OI W 

'4 2 
3 

m 
3 W 

3 
3 d 3 

c 
0 : .  

d 
4 8 

B 
L* 
In 

1 
W 

1 
W 

1 
0 

254 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix A 

a 
B 

6 
W 

2 m 

2 
W 

2 
E. 

N 
r( d d 

N 
Qi d r( 

3 
t- 

d: 
M 

CI 

d 
0, d l-l 

c m 
L a 
a 

2 
t- 

c! 
M 
4 m 

N c 
d m 

c 
h a 
s 

o! 8 

t 
a 
c 
0 : .  

1 
e4 r( 

1 
d N 

1 
9 N 

a 
k 
0 
N 

255 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

M - 
I  :: 
d 
I- 
0 2 

v) OI 
N 

256 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix A 

d: 
l-4 t- 

0, 1 
2 

1 
o) N 

t- 
eQ 
W 
l-4 

x 2 

M W o) 

N 
OI o) 

r 
% 

d M N 

3 
N 

257 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
- 
C .- 
,.a 
u 
.1 

$ 
E d 

9 
M W 

f 
d 

* OI 
e 

r2, 
e 
co 

E 
v 
e 
a 

258 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
." 
c 
.- 
3 
m 

Appendix  A 
h a + 
3 

M 

2 
a 

W e4 c.l 

m 
0 -3 

2 a 

ce 
W M 

CI 3 

1 .- 
E .- 
B 

I- I- a 
- 
a 
0 
0 

W 
5 e 
2 
a t 

OD 
W c 

M 
W N 

4 

a 0 
- 
M 
W 
M 

s 

0 In m 
4 

259 

(0 f 

2 
m rg 

c.l 
0 cy 
- 
a 
a 
In m 

P 
h 

Appendix  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

4 
w N 

N 

2 m 

c( 0 N 

m 
0 
N 

d 0 E- 
v) m 

d m e 
\o a 

E- 0 m 

L m 

h d m 

$ -  is 
4 

I 
B 
a 
4 P 

260 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 

Appendix ‘ A  

f 
t- 

9 z 

f 
t- 

M 0 d d 

F 
d 
d 

c 
0 : .  

d M 3 

J 
%I s P 

f 
t- 

9 3 
d 
7 
d 

J 
u s P 

9 * t- 

9 z 

Y 3 
d 

d t- 1 d 

b a 
p. 
c 
0 : .  

261 

Appendix  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

5 

- 
d 
a 
3 3 
Q 
0 Y 
2 
El 
: 
00 

d 
a 
lc) 
In H 
a 
f 
4 
El 
2 
W 

2 
E. 

9 
In W 

In d 3 

O d  3 m  v)d 

262 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix A 

0 - 
x 

I f 

0 
OI N 

- 
.$ 
0 
E 
T 2 
B e 
I- 

0 0 
N 
0 n 

0 0 a 
0 * 

0 0 W 

* 
n) W 

a 

263 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

co 
d M 

v 
M h 

-3 
In 

0 
\o M 

f 
t- 

n! 
N m 

N W N 

N 
M d 

264 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix  A 

2 
W 

2 
F 
9 

e0 
v) 
m 
0 cr 

rr! z 

1 
ln 

2 
-? I  OD 
13 

W 
3 

a 
OD 
OD 

2 
N 

0 
m 
N 

c9 
13 In 

9 a OD 

2 
01 

0 
m 
N 

9 
13 t- 

". x 

0 
t- 
N 

N 

t 
\o 

'9 
01 
m 
E 

In 3 m 

c: 
v) W 

s 
a 

CO \o 
d 

m 
r( In 

265 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

266 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Append ix   A 

2 
W 

L 
\o 

P 
\o 

2 
W 

R 
d 

0 co 3 

N N \o 

N t- 3 

d 
4 
m 

In \o 
\o 
0 d 

co 0 
m 

m 
N d 

\o d co 
0 d 

t- E. 
m 

d 0 
3 3 

L f 
0 '5 
3 
8 
T 
J 
F 
3 
8 
'2 s 
e 
3 
& 
I 
F: 

267 

2 
0, 

0 N W 

3 
m 
\o 

l. 
a 
a 

LI 

ti 4 
N N 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

L ." 
c 
U 

e 
m 
.m 

U 

'9 
d 
3 3 

3 
0 d 3 

c 
a 
I 
u. 
0: 

2 
t- 

2 
t- 

eq 
In 
3 3 

3 
t- 

2 
3 3 

t- 
o 
d 3 

3 3 2 

I'. 
N 2 

268 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix  A 

9 B 

0 m 2 

ch R 

s 
3 CI 

ch 
3 
d 
CI 

VI a 
d 3 

o! R 

o! 
3 00 

CQ E 

? m 
m 

o! 2 
w 

t- 
In d 3 

00 m 
d 3 

Y 2 
3 

m t- 2 

N 
0, d 3 

3 
0 N 

a 
2 
d 

In 0 
m 

In ch 
w r( 

a 
3 

269 

Appendix  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

o! 
3 

W 
g\ d 

a El m 

p: 
m OI 

d 
0 M 

oo 
0 0 
d 

a 
a I'. 

\o 0 a 

270 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix  A 

I 
0 01 

I 
0 

n! 
m W 

E: 
m 0 

9 
13 

co 
e4 \o 

9 
v) 10 

- 
m 
3 

m m - 
0 
0 

v) t- t- 
m m 

N a 0 
10 m 

a 01 3 

a 
N d 

d 
m 
e4 

d 
-3 -3 

s 
t- 13 

ii 
01 N 

Appendix A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1975 

x 
m 
t- 

\o w In 

m m I- 
0 d 

-! 
3 
01 

In 3 m 

N 
d m 

.e 
I 
op 

t- 
In r( 

In N 
0 m 

m 
d v) 

i 
2 
d 

J 
2 
d 

2 
j 
d 

- 
i 
2 
N 

L 2 
CI 
N 

i 
2 
0 N 

I- - 
2 
i 
272 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS, 
0 - 

1975 

Appendix  A 

3 m 

t- 
rl 
N 

m m m 

I 
3 m 

m l- 
3 

I’. * 
01 

w w  
I n N  
-e4 

2 m 

m 
rl 
N 

01 N El 

h 
a a 

w 
0: 

z 
5 
v) N 

8 
E .  
W N 

5 
L 
m 
N 

si n 
m 

bi 
CI 
3 
d 

si n 
2 

si 
CI 
d 

273  

Appendix  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

o! 
0 

o! 
0 

M 
c1 W 
In 
m 

W o 0 
\o 
m 

m 
r( 

0 
i? 
In m 

0 0 a 
In 
m 

d - 
hi n 

W - 
s 
n 
274 

hi 
n 
W 

s 
n 
t- 3 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Append ix   A 

3 
m cp 
C .- 

9 
M * 

Y 
6 

d m \o 

0 
0 0 
m 
01 
4 4  

d 
0 
N N 

n 
3 
CQ 

f 
0 
3 

0 
d m 

0 0 
m 

t9 
N 
9 

1 
In 2 
3 

ey * t- 
0 
d 

8%  
0 0  

ij 

n d 
In N 

d 
r- N 

275 

Appendix B 
MAJOR NASA  LAUNCHES,  1975 

The following table of major NASA  launches includes payloads carried by 
all rocket vehicles larger than sounding rocke ts  launched  in 1975 by NASA 
or  under  NASA  direction. 
During 1975, the  U.S.  had 34 launches of  which 28 were  successful. Of 
these,  7 were launches  by DOD.  The  remaining 21  were NASA  launches,  10 
for  its  own  program,  including  ASTP  in  July;  the   two  Viking  spacecraft 
launched toward Mars in Aug.  and Sept. ; 3 applications satellites, Landsa t  
2, Geos 3, and Nimbus 6; and  4 scientific s a t e l l i t e s - o s o  8 ,  Sas-C (Explorer 
53,  launched  by  an  Italian  crew  from  the  San   Marco  platform  into  an 
equatorial  orbit); AE-D  (Explorer 5 4 ) ,  and   AE-E (Explorer 5 5 ) .  In   1974, 
NASA  had  launched  only  one  a l l -U .S .   scientific  payload.  Launches  for 
IV   in May  and 
others included  3  spacecraft  for DOD;  3 comsats-Zntelsat 
Zntelsat IVA   in Sept.,  and the  RCASatcom 1 ; 2 for NOAA,  Sms 2 in Feb. and 
Goes  1 in  Oct.;  and  3  international  satellites-Anik 
for  Canada  in  May, 
C o s B  for  ESA  in  Aug.,  and Symphonie 2  in  Aug.  for  the  West  German- 
French   consortium. 
The  table includes vehicle and payload performance  under categories S 
for successful, P for partially successful, and  U for unsuccessful. A  fourth 
category (Unk) indicates payloads  that did not operate because of  vehicle 
failure. The  categories,  which are  unofficial, do not take into account that 
U missions may produce valuable information, or that payloads with along- 
life  design  may  fail  to  meet  design  requirements  and   become  officially 
unsuccessful  at  a  la ter   date.  Fur ther   information  on  these  launches  ap- 
pears  in Appendix A  and  in  the   indexed  en tr ies  in  the   text. 

277 

Appendix  B 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

9 
I f 

01 B 

I

m

m

m

m

  m

m

 

I m m m i

n

 

i

n m  

278 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix  B 

279 

Appendix C 
MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,  1975 

A  high  point  in  NA SA ’ s   activity  in  1975  was  t h e   Apollo-Soyuz  Test 
Project,  in which three  as tronau ts  in the  Apollo (ASTP) spacecraf t  and  two 
cosmonauts in the  U.S.S.R.  Soyuz 19  flight-tested  a mechanism for joining 
two orbiting manned spacecraf t  from different countries, in  history’s  first 
international manned  space  flight. Th e  ASTP  achieved a number  of  firsts: 
First space  flight involving crews  and  spacecraf t  of  more than  one nation; 
first linking in orbit of spacecraf t  of more than  one nation; first detection of 
a pu lsar  outside earth’s galaxy; first separation of  l ive  biological materials 
in  space ,   by  electrophoresis;  first  communications  between  a  manned 
orbiting spacecraf t  and  ground controllers  through an  orbiting unmanned 
satellite (A ts  6 ) .  The  Soyuz  19  liftoff for ASTP  was  the   first Soviet launch  
shown  on  l ive   television,  and  its  parachute  descent  and  landing  were  the 
first to  be  televised  live.  Of  the  28 ASTP  experiments, 21  were U.S.,  5 were 
joint  U.S.-U.S.S.R.,  and   2  were  Wes t   German.  All  primary  mission  ob- 
jectives were met.  ASTP  was  the  only U.S.  manned  flight of  the  year,  and  
would  be   the  las t  until the Space  Shu t t le  flights scheduled  for t h e  1980s. 
The   U.S.S.R.  a t temp ted   4  manned  launches   including  Soyuz  19  for 
ASTP;   3 of  these  were  successful.  The  April anomaly was  a t tr ibu ted  to a 
booster failure, and  the  crew was  retrieved  safely; the  incident called into 
question t h e  safety of crews dur ing  ASTP ,  but the  la t ter  ended  successfully. 
By  t h e   end   of  1975,  the   u.S.  had  made  31  manned  space   flights:  2 
suborbital,  20 in ear th  orbit, 3 in lunar orbit,  and  6 lunar  landings, with  a 
total of  43  different crewmen.  T h e  U.S.S.R. had  made  27  manned  flights, 
all in ea r th  orbit, with 34 cosmonauts. The  U.S.  total of manned-spacecraft 
hours in flight was 7681 h r  10 min;  the  U.S.S.R.  total,  5265 h r  3 min.  Total 
cumulative man-hours  in space  for the  US.  were 22 503 h r  39 min; for the  
U.S.S.R.,  10 734 h r  48 min. 

281 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

0 )  B 

282 

Appendix D 
NASA  SOUNDING  ROCKET LAUNCHES,  1975  

Th e  table following lists the  83 sounding rockets of  t h e  Arcas c lass  and  
above  launched  by  NASA  in  1975.  The   launches   took  place  in  Pe ru ,  
Greenland, Canada ,  and  the  Kerguelen Islands of t h e  Indian Ocean  a s  well 
a s   in  the   United  S ta tes .   Payloads  were  carr ied   for  the   Naval  Research  
Laboratory,  the  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and  th ree  NASA 
cen ters ;   fifteen  universities;  and   two  u.S.  corporations.  Onboard 
experiments included 35 physics; 18 meteorology;  11 each  astronomy and  
aeronomy;  7 performance  tes ts ;   and   1 space-processing experiment. 
Information  fcr   the   table  came   from  Goddard  Space   Flight  Center’s 
Quick  Look  Sounding Rocket  Data  sheets,  issued  af ter   launches ,   with 
additional  information  from  some of  the   experimenters  concerned.  The  
Kerguelen  Islands launches  in January  and February  were par t  of  a joint 
aurora  between  Ker- 
Soviet-French  exercise  called  ARAKS-artificial 
guelen  and  Sogra  (U.S.S.R.)-from 
which  the   usual  telemetry  reports 
were not available. Launch  da te s  in the  table a re  local time, with  the  da te  
by  Greenwich Mean  Time  given  if  different. 

283 

Appendix D 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

284 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix  If 

0 E 
'5 
P 
I 
h 
f 
a a 
6 
P, 
r 
b 
c 
j .- 
3 

I e a2 E 
'E k 
I 
h E 
e" 
0 
.- 
L 
1 
I 
d 
a 
% 
c) 

285 

Appendix D 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

R 
m 

R 
01 

9 
M t- 

286 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix D 

N ; 
0 
P - 
1 
$ 
.Y 
.a  I 
'i B P 
c w, 
9 
c a 

c 

L .- 5 

L 5 

287 

Appendix D 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

288 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

Appendix D 

d - 
3 
c 

E 
ij 

s .- s 

289 

Appendix  D 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

290 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix D 

291 

Appendix E 
X-24B LIFTING-BODY FLIGHTS,  1975 

Lifting bodies a re  wingless  vehicles tha t  receive  aerodynamic lift from 
their  shape   alone.  NASA  undertook  in  the   early  1950s a   program  to  de-  
velop concep ts  for a  maneuverable manned vehicle tha t  could reen ter  the  
atmosphere  from  space   and  to  provide  a   technological  basis  for  hyper- 
sonic cru ise  aircraft.  S ince   1963, NASA's Flight  Research   Cen te r  (called 
Dryden Flight  Research  Cen ter   after January  1976) has   flight-tested  the  
M2  conf igura t ion   des igned   by  Ames  Re sea rch   Cen te r ,   t h e   HL-10 
designed  by  the  Langley  Research  Cen ter ,   and  the  X-24A  and  X-24B 
in  a  joint  program with  the  Air  Force. 
The  X-24B  program began with a  captive flight in 1973 and ended  with 
the   36th  and  fmal  flight  on  26  Nov.  1975.  The   X-24B  was  launched  
from  a   B-52  aircraft,  usually  at  an   altitude  of  13 700 me ters ;   in  captive 
flight,  the   vehicle  remained  a t tached   to  the  B-52. 
In   unpowered  free  
flight, the  vehicle glided through maneuvers to landings on a  dry lake  bed; 
in  powered  flight,  the   rocket  engine was  ignited  to  take   the   vehicle  to 
higher  altitudes  and  achieve higher  speeds. 
Th e  following tab le  lists all X-24B  missions tha t  left the  ground in 1975, 
even  those  eventually  aborted  because  of  weather  or  mechanical  prob- 
lems.  The   flight  number   inc ludes   vehicle  designation  (B  for  X-24B 
carry  number.  "B - 19 -30"  was  the  
vehicles)-free-flight 
number-B-52 
19th  f ree   flight  of  the   X-24B  and  the  30th  time  it  was  carr ied   by  the  
B-52.  C  or  A appearing ins tead  of  a  free-flight number  ind ica tes  a  captive 
or  an  aborted  flight. 
Information for the  table  appears   in  flight repor ts  issued  by  the Office 
of  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  a t  NASA  Headquar ters   and  in  the  
X-24B  flight  summaries  issued  by  the  Flight  Research  Cen ter .  

X-24B LIFTING-BODY FLIGHTS ,   1975  

Flight Date 
and 
Number 

Pilot, 
Maximum Altitude, 
Maximum Speed 

14  Jan. 75 
-19-30) 

John A.  Manke 
22 098 m 
Maeh  1.76 

31 Jan.  75 
(B-A-31) 
20 Mar.  75  
( 5 2 0 - 3 2 )  

mSj.  M ichae l  V.  Love 

Maj. Micheel V.  Love 
22 860 m 
MBch  1.40 

Remarks 

Ohjeotivegto evaluate lon@tudinal stability and controlat maeh 
1.8; perform with upper &pat  -3O'and  approach with upper 
5 p  at  -24";  and perform boundary-layer noise and  vibration 
experiment-were attained. 
of weather. 
Flight aborted -use 

Ohjeetives-to  evaluate &ability and control at  speeds up  to 
maeh  1.30; perform with upper flap at  -35";  approaeh with 
upper flap at -24'.  s u r v e y  fin, rudder, and flap pressure; and 
make boundary-la;er  noise and vibration experiments-were 
attained. 

293 

Append ix   E 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Flight Date 
and 
Number 

Pilot, 
Maximum Altitude, 
Maximum Speed 

18 April 75 
(B-21-33) 

John A.  Manke 
16 764 m 
Mach  1.17 

6 May  75 
(B-22-34) 

Lt.  Col. Michael V.  Love 
22 250 m 
Mach  1.5 

22 May  75 
(B-23-35) 

John A.  Mauke 
22 250 m 
Mach  1.6 

6 June  75 
(B-24-36) 

Lt.  Col.  Michael V.  Love 
22 250 m 
Mach  1.68 

Remarks 

Primary  objectives were  to  evaluate stability  and control  at 
speeds up  to meeh  1.60; operational checkout of Ay  feedback 
system;  to  a p   roach  with  upper  fla  at  -24";  to  survey  fm, 
rudder, and &p  pressure; to make fPS qualifiiation test; and 
to check handling qualities with all dampers at zero gain. Three 
chamhers of XLR-11  engine ignited, not  the four planned  for 
this flight. All objectives w e r t :  achieved except for the stability 
and control evaluation, which was  limited to  data on speeds up 
to mach 1.17. 
Shutdown in  #3  engine E 5 2  30  miu. aftcr takeoff attributed 
to  fm* launch  altitude  12  800  m  instead  of  13  700 m.  All 
o b j e c tL e e t o   evaluate  stability  and  control  at  speeds up  to 
flap at  -24";  survey fin, rudder, and flap pressure; make &% 
mach  1.60, and with  aileron bias at 3"; approach with  up  
quatifsation  test; and check performenee and  trim at 18" and 
with  upper  flap at  30"-were  attained except  for  the  stability 
and control evaluation, which  was  limited  to  data  up  to mach 
1.15. 
Primary oh jec t ivee to  evaluate stability and control at speeds 
up  to mach  1.60, and with  aileron hias at  3"; approach with 
upper flap at -24O;  survey fin, rudder, and flap pressure; make 
TPS qualilication test (SLA 220); check 
rfornmnce and trim 
at 204 and with 30" upper flap; andchecrflying qualities with 
Ay  feedback systcm-were attained, except for hinge-moment 
data  on aileron hias  erformauce.  Hinge-moment gauges did 
not operate as desires. 
AU  objectives-to  evaluate  stability  and  control  at  speeds  up 
to mach  1.70; approach with  upper  flap at  -24"; survey fm, 
rudder,  and  flap  ressure.  make TPS  ualifieation  test.  and 
check  stability an3  control  at  2 0 " ~  wit2  upper  flap  at  50'- 
were attained. 

John A.  Manke 

Flight aborted because of winds. 

24  June 75 
(B-A-37) 
25  June  75 
(B-25-38) 

John A.  glanke 
18 590 m 
Mach  1.43 

15 July  79 
(B-26-39) 

Lt.  Col. Michael V.  Love 
21 175 m 
Mach  1.585 

5 Aug.  75 
(B-27-40) 

John A.  Mauke 
17 678 m 
Mach  1.23 

20 Aug.  75 
(B-28-41) 

Lt. Col. Michael V.  Love 
21 945 m 
Mach  1.53 

9 Sept. 75 
(829-42) 

William H.  Dana 
19 200 m 
Mach  1.48 

23 Sept. 75 
(B-30-43) 

William H.  Dam 
17 678 m 
Mach  1.2 

AU  oh jee t ivee to   evaluate  power  effects on directional sta- 
bility; approach and land with  upper  flap at  -28"; survey fm, 
rudder,  and flap  pressure; make  TPS  q u a l i f i t i on   test- and 
evalunte  stability  and  control  with  aileron hias  at  30"Lwere 
attained. 
All  objectives-to evaluate stability and control at speeds up  to 
mach 1.68; approach and land with u  r flap at  -28';  survey 
fin, rudder, and flap pressure; make '#?qualifmtion 
test; and 
evaluate stability and control with aileron bias at  11"-wcre  at- 
tained.  First flight after realignment of engine in yaw  axis. 
First landing of X-24B  on prepared concrete NUWII~; 
touch- 
down was within 1.5 meters of marker. Ohjectiveelandmg on 
concrete runway, survey of body  pressure,  study  of  left-hand 
fin tuft,  study of TPS qnalifiiatiou, and evaluation of  stabilit 
and  control  with  aileron  hias  at  3'-wcre 
attained elthougg 
only three of engine's  four chambers ignited. 
Second successful landing on mw ay .  O h j e e t i v e 4 n d i u g  on 
concrete  runway,  body-pressure  survey,  left-hand fiu  study, 
TPS qualifiition study, and evaluation of stability and control 
with rudder bias at 5" toe-out-were  attained. 
Objective-ilot 
checkout, evaluation of  stability and control 
at  speeds up to mach 1.45, body-pressure survey, TPS q u a l i i  
cation test (high-density MI), and study of left-hand fin tuft- 
were attained.  First X-24B  tli  ht  for this pilot, who  had  pre- 
viously  flown M2-F3  and H L f O .  
Last of scheduled powered flights; six remaining flights before 
end  of  CY  75  to  be  glide  flights.  Objectivcs-evaluation of 
stability  and  control with  rudder  bias  at  lo", evaluation  of 
handling qualities with all damper gains at zero, survey of body 
pressure, HRSI  qualification test,  and study  of  left-hand fin 
tuft-were  attained. Subsonic data attained for all ohjectivcs. 

9ocL 75 
(B-31-44) 

Einar Euevaldson 
13 716 m 
Mach  0.7 

Unpowered  flight.  Ohjectivee-pilot checkout,  evaluation  of 
handling qualities, and TPS q d i f i i t i o n  test (HRSI+were  at- 
tained. 

294 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Appendix  E 

Pilot, 
Maximum Altitude, 
Maximum Speed 
& 716 m 
Ce  t. Franeis R.  Scobee 
Meoh  0.7 
Thomas C .  MeMurtrp 
13 716 m 
Meoh  0.7 
Einar Enevoldson 
13 716 m 
Mach 0.7 
& 7 1 6m  
Ca  t.  Francis R.  Scobee 
Mach 0.7 

Flight Date 
and 
Nnmher 

21 Oct.  75 
( 5 3 2 4 5 )  

3 Nov.  75 
( 5 3 3 - 4 6 )  

12 Nov.  75 
(534 -47 )  

19 NOT. 75 
(535-48)  

26 Nov.  75 
( 5 3 6 - 4 9 )  

Remarks 

Unpowered  flight.  Objectives-pilot  checkout,  evaluation of 
handbag qualities, and TPS qua l if i i t ion  test (HR S IW e r e  at- 
tained. 
Unpowered  f l i h t .   Objectives-pilot  checkout,  evaluation of 
handling qualities, and TPS qualification test (HR S IW e r e  at- 
tained. 
Unpowered flight. Objectives-evalnatiou of handling qualities 
with eem damper, TPS qualifmtion test (HRSI), approach with 
upper  flap at  24*, and  landing  with  upper  &p  at  22"-were. 
attained. 

Uppowered Riiht.  Objectives-evaluation of handling qualities 
with  zem  damper  p i n s ,   TPS  qua l ifb~ t iou  test  (HRSI),  ap- 
proach with  upper  flap at  243 landing with  upper flap at  22', 
and survey of left-hand fin pressnre-were  attained. 
Unpowered flight.  Final  flight  of X-24B  in  NASA/Air  Force 
lifting-body  flight  research  program.  Ohjeetives-evaluatiou 
of handling qualities with  zero damping gains, TPS q u a l i i -  
tion test (HRSI), appmaeb with u per flap at  24',  lending with 
upper  flap at  22". and survey ofyeft-hand fin pressnre-were 
attained. 

295 

Appendix F 
ABBREVIATIONS  OF  REFERENCES 

Listed here are  the  abbreviations used for citing sources  in the  text. Not 
all the   sources  are  listed,  only  those  tha t   are   abbreviated. 

AAAS   Bu l l  
A&A  
A&A   1974 

ABC 
AEC  Release 
Aero Da i l y  
Aero Med 
AF  Mag  
AFHF Newsletter 
AFJ 
AFSC Newsreview 
AF SC   Release 
AM  Release 
A l A A   Facts 
A lAA  Release 
A IP  Newsletter 
AP 
ARC Astrogram 
Astro Jou rn  
A t lan ta   JC 
A v  W k  
B  News 
B S u n  
Bu l l  A tom  Se i  
Bus  W k  
C Da i l y  News 
C Trib 
Can P r e s s  
C B S  

CSM 
CTNS 
- _  - D News 
I  D Post 
DASA  Release 

American Association for th e  Advancement of Science’s 
AAAS  Bu l l e t in  
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
magazine, Astronautics & Aeronautics 
NASA’s  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1974:  A  Chro- 
nology (this publication) 
American  Broadcsting  Company 
Atomic  Energy Commission news  release 
Aerospace  Da i ly   newsletter 
Aerospace  Medicine magazine 
Air  Force Association’s  A i r  Force Magazine 
A i r  Force  Historical Founda t ion  Newsletter 
Armed Forces Journa l   magazine 
Air  Force  Systems Command‘s  Newsreview 
Air  Force  Systems Command  news  release 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  of  America  news 
release 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics’ 
Fac ts  
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics 
news  release 
American  Institute  of Phvsics Newsletter 
Associated  Press  news  service 
NASA   Ames  Re sea rch  Center’s Astrogram 
American  Astronomical  Society’s  Astrophysical  Jour-  
na l  
A t lan ta  Journa l   Cons t i tu t ion  newspaper 
Av ia t ion  W e e k  & Space  Technology magazine 
B irm ingham  News  newspaper 
Baltimore Sun newspaper 
Education  Foundation  for  Nuclear  Science’s  Bu l le t in  
of  t h e  A tom ic  Scientists 
Business Week magazine 
Chicago Da i l y  News  newspaper 
Chicago Tribune  newspaper 
Canadian  P r e s s  news  service 
Columbia  Broadcasting Sy s tem  
Chem ica l  & Engineering News  magazine 
Cleveland P l a i n  Dealer  newspaper 
Cleveland Press  newspaper 
Co lumb ia  Journa l ism  Review  magazine 
Communications Satellite Corporation  news  release 
Congressional  Quar ter ly  
Congressional  Record 
Chr is t ian  Science Monitor  newspaper 
Chicago Tribune  News  Service 
Detroit  News  newspaper 
Denver Post  newspaper 
Defense  Atomic  Support Agency  news  release 

297 

Appendix F 

DFRC 
DJ 
DOC P I 0  
DOD  Re lease  
DOT  Re lease  
EOP  Re lease  
FAA  Re lease  
FBIS-sov 
FonF 
FRC  Re lease  
FRC  X - Press 
GE Forum 
Goddard News 
GSFC  Re lease  
GSFC S S R  
G T ~ E  Re lease  
H  Chron 
H  Post 
J A  
JPL L a b a r a t o r y  
JPL  Re lease  
JPRS 
JSC  Re lease  
JSC Roundup  

J S R  
KC  S ta r  
KC  Times 
KSC  Re lease  
LA Her-Exam 
LA  T imes  
Lang ley  Researcher 
LARC  Re lease  
LATNS 
LERC Re lease  
Lewis News 
M  Her 
M  News 
M  T r ib  
Marshall  S ta r  
MJ 
MSFC Re lease  
N   Hav Reg 
N  News 
N   V u  Sun  
NAA  News 
NAA  Record  Book 
NAC  Re lease  
NAE  Re lease  
NANA 
NA S   Re lease  
NAS-NRC  Re lease  
NAS-NRC-NAENCWS 
R p t  

NASA  ann0  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

See  FRC. 
Dow  Jones   news  service 
Depar tmen t  of  Commerce  Public  Information Office 
Depar tmen t  of  Defense  news  release 
Depar tmen t  of  Transportation  news  release 
Execu t ive  Office of  th e  P re s iden t  news   release 
Federa l  Aviation Adm in is tra t ion  news  release 
Foreign Broadcas t  Information Service, Soviet number  
Fac ts  on  F i le  
Flight  Research   Cen ter   news  release  (after  8  Jan. 
1976, became   Dryden  Flight  Research   Cen ter   news  
release) 
NASA  Flight  Research   Center’s x -P re s s  
General Electric  Forum  magazine 
NASA  Goddard Space  Flight Cen ter’s  Goddard News 
NASA  Goddard Space   Flight Cen ter   news  release 
NASA  Goddard  Space   Flight  Center’s  Sa te l l i te   S i t u a -  
t ion  Report 
Genera l  Te lephone  & Electronics news  release 
Houston Chronicle  newspaper  
H ow t o n  Post  newspaper  
Journa l  of A ircra f i  magazine 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory 
Je t   Propulsion Labora tory  news  release 
Depar tmen t  of  Commerce  Joint Publications Research  
Service 
NASA  Lyndon B.  Johnson  Space  Cen ter  (Manned  Space-  
craft  Cen ter   until  l? Feb .   1973) news  release 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space   Center’s Space News 
Roundup  
American  Institute  of  Aeronau t ics   and  Astronautics’ 
Journal  of Spacecra f i  and   Rockets  magazine 
Kansas  C i t y  S ta r   newspaper  
Kansas  C i t y  Times  newspaper  
NASA John  F. Kennedy  Space  Cen te r  news  release 
Los  Angeles Herald-Examiner  newspaper  
Los  A n g l e s   Times  newspaper  
NASA  Langley Research  Center’s Lang ley  Researcher 
NASA  Langley  Research   Cen ter   news  release 
Los  Angeles T imes  News  Service 
NASA  Lewis Research  Cen ter   news  release 
NASA  Lewis Research   Center’s Lewis News 
M iam i   Herald  newspaper  
M i am i  News  newspaper  
Minneapolis  Tribune  newspaper  
NASA George C .  Marsha l l  Space  Flight Cen ter’sMarsha l l  
S ta r  
Milwaukee Journa l   newspaper  
NASA  George C .  Marsha l l  Space   Flight Cen ter  news 
release 
New Haven Register  newspaper  
Newark News  newspaper  
Northern  V irg in ia  S u n   newspaper  
Na t iona l  Aeronau t ic  Association News 
Na t iona l  Aeronau t ic  Association’s World  and  U.S.A. 
Na t iona l   World Av ia t ion-Space   Records 
National Aviation C lub  news  release 
National Academy of  Eng ineer ing  news  release 
Nor th  American  Newspaper  Alliance 
National Academy of  Sc iences  news  release 
Na t iona l   Academy  of  Sc iences-   National  Research  
Council news  release 
National  Academy  of  Sc iences-Na t iona l   Research  
Counc i l-Na t iona l   Academy  of  Eng ineer ing   News 
Report 
NASA  announcemen t  

298 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Appendix  F 

NASA  Gen Mgmt  Rev  Rp t  
NASA  HHR-39 
NASA  Hist  o f f  
NASA  Hq  Wi? 
NASA  h t  Aff 
NASA L A R ,  XIII/8 
NASA  Leg  Off 
NASA MOR 

NASA  prog off 
NASA  proj  Off 
NASA  Release 
NASA  Rpt  SRL 
NASA  SP-4019 
Nut1 Obs 
Nature 
NBC 
NGS  Release 
NMI NN  
NOAA  Release 
NRL  Release 
NSC  Release 
NSC Letter 
NSC News 
NSF Highlights 
NSF  Release 
NSTL  Release 
NY  News 
N Y T ,  5:4 
NYTNS 
0 S e n  S ta r  
Oak land  Trib 
Omaha  W -H  
ONR  Rev  
P Bull 
P Inq  
PA 0  
PD  

P I 0  
PMR  Missile 
PMR  Release 
P r e s  R p t  74 
S A 0  Release 
SBD 
Sc i  Amer 
Sc i  & Gout R p t  
SciServ 
SD  
SD   Un ion  
SET  Manpower Comments 
SF  
SF  Ch ron  
S F  E x am  
Sou Aero 
Sou R p t  

NASA  Headquarters  “General  Management  Review 
Report” 
NASA  Historical Report  No.  39 
NASA  History Office 
NASA  Headquarters  W e e k l y  Bu l le t in  
NASA  Office  of  International Affairs 
NASA Legislative Activities Repo r t ,   Vol.  XIII,  No.  8 
NASA  Office  of  Legislative Affairs 
NASA  Headquarters  Mission  Operations  Report,  pre- 
liminary  prelaunch  and  postlaunch  report  series; 
information may  be   revised  and  refined  before  pub- 
lication 
NASA  program  office  (for  th e  program  reported) 
NASA  project  office (for  the  project  reported) 
NASA  Headquarters  news  release 
NASA  report  of  sounding rocket  launching 
NASA  Special Publication  No.  4019 
Na t iona l  Observer magazine 
Nature Physical Science  magazine 
National Broadcasting Company 
National  Geographic Society news  release 
NASA  Management  Instruction 
NASA  Notice 
National  Oceanic  and   Atmospheric  Administration 
news  release 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  news  release 
National  Space  Club  news  release 
National  Space C lub  Letter 
National  Space  Club News 
National  Science  Foundation’s  Science  Resources 
Studies  Highlights 
National  Science Foundation news  release 
NASA  National  Space   Technology  Laboratories  news 
release 
New York Da i ly  News  newspaper 
New  York Times  newspaper,  section 5 ,  page  4 
New  York Times News  Service 
Orlando Sentinel  S ta r   newspaper 
Oak land  Tribune  newspaper 
Omaha World-Herald  newspaper 
Navy’s  Office  of  Naval Re sea rch  Reviews 
Philadelphia Evening  and Sunda y  Bu l le t in   newspaper 
Philadelphia  Inquirer  newspaper 
Public  Affairs  Office 
National Archives  and  Records  Service’s  Week ly  Com -  
p i la t ion  of Presidential  Documents 
Public  Information Office 
USN  Pacific Missile  Range’s  Missile 
USN Pacific Missile  Range  news  release 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Report  of  the  President:  1974 
Activities 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  news  release 
DefenselSpace  Business Da i ly   newspaper 
Scientific  American  magazine 
Science  &  Government  Report,  independent  bulletin 
of  science  policy 
Science  Service News  service 
Space Digest  magazine 
S u n  Diego  Un ion  newspaper 
Scientific  Manpower  Commission’s  S c i e n t i f i ,   Eng i -  
neering,  Technical Manpower  Comments 
British  Interplanetary  Society’s  Spaceflight  magazine 
S u n  Francisco Chronicle  newspaper 
S u n  Francisco Exam ine r  newspaper 
Soviet  Aerospace  newsletter 
Cen te r  for Foreign Technology’s  Soviet Report  (transla- 
tions) 

299 

Appendix F 

S P  
Spaceport  News 
Spacewarn 
SR   list 
SSN 
S t   Louis  G -D  
S t   Louis P - D  
T -  P icayune  
Tech  Rev 

Tes t imony  
Text 
Transcript 
UN   Reg 
UP1 
USGS  Re lease  
USPS  Re lease  
w Post 
W Star-News 
WFC  Re lease  
WH  Re lease  
WJT 
WS  Re lease  
WSJ 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Space   Propulsion  newsletter 
NASA  John F.  Kennedy Space  Center 's  Spaceport News 
IUWDS  World  Da ta   Cen ter   A  for  Rocke ts   and  Satel- 
lites'  Spacewarn Bu l l e t in  
NASA  compend ium  of  sound ing  rocket  launches  
Soviet  Sciences  in   the  News,  publication  of  Electro- 
Optical Sys tems ,   Inc. 
S t   Louis Globe-Democrat  newspaper  
S t  Louis  Pos t-D ispa tch   newspaper  
New  Or leans  Times-Picayune  newspaper  
Massachuse t ts   Institute  of  Technology's  Technology 
Review 
Congress iona l  testimony,  prepared   s ta temen t  
Prepared   report or  speech   text 
Official transcript  of  news  conference  or congressional 
hearing 
United  Nations  Public  Registry of  Space  Flight 
United  P re s s   International  news  service 
U S .   Geological Survey  news  release 
U.S.  Postal  Service news  release 
Washington Pos t   newspaper  
Wash ing ton  Star-News  newspaper  
NASA  Wartops  Flight  Cen ter   news  release  (after  26 
April 1974; formerly Wallops Station News  Release) 
Wh i te  House News  Re lease  
Wor ld  Journal  Tribune  newspaper  
NASA  Wallops Station news  release  (see  also WFC) 
W a l l  Street Journal  newspaper  

300 

INDEX  AND LIST  OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AND ACRONYMS 

A 

A-300B  (European  airbus),  95 
AAAS.  See  American  Association  for  the  
Advancement of  Science. 
AAS.  See American Astronautical  Society; 
Americ,p  Astronomical Society. 
Abbott Laboratories,  4 
ABM  (antiballistic missile),  60 
ABMA (Army Ballistic Missile Agency),  125 
Accident  on Soyuz 1 1 ,  92 
ACF.  See air combat  fighter. 
Acoustic  gretlade payloads,  237 
Acoustic  tests,  147 
ACPL (Atmosphere Cloud Physics Labora- 
tory),  182 
ACS.  (Attitude  control  systems) 
Adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP),  176 
Advanced  medium  shart-takeoff-and-land- 
ing aircraft  (AMST),  178 
Advanced  missions  appropriations,  45 
Advanced Technology Light Twin (ATLIT), 
53 
AE  (Atmospheric Explorer  satellites),  13 
AEC.  See Atomic  Energy Commission. 
AE-D  (Atmospheric Explorer),  1 
AEDC.  See  Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
- 
men t  Center. 
AEM  (Atmospheric Explorer Mission),  229 
AEM-A  (Applications Explorer  Mission), 
185 
Aero Company,  66,  124 
Aero  D a i l y ,   217,  231 
Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory  (USAF),  67 
Aerobee  (sounding rocket) 
Aerobee  150A-MII, 285 
Aerobee  170,  288,  290 
Aerobee  170A,  286,  289 
h e ro b e e   180,  289 
Aerobee  200A, 284,  285,289 
Aerobee  350,290 
Aerojet  Electrosystems Cb.,  26 
Aerojet  General Corporation,  136 
Aerojet  mechanical-thermal  simulator,  26 
Aeronautical  and  Space   Sciences,  Sena te  
Committee  on,  25,  80,  116,  183,  185, 
218,  234 
Aeronautical  research,  19,  101 
Aeronautics a n d  Space Report  of the  Pres i-  
den t:   1974  Ac t iv i t ies ,   106 
Aeronautics and  Space Report  of the Pres i-  
den t:   1975 Ac t iv i t ies ,   251 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology, NASA 
Office of  (OAST),  22,  293 

comsat 

Aeronutronic  Ford  Corporation,  94,  211, 
219 
Aerosat  (Canadian-ESRO-U.S. 
program),  48,  116 
Aerosol,  159,  229,  236 
Aerosol  Education Bureau,  247 
Aerospace  Corporation  Vehicle  Systems 
Division,  201,  237 
Aerospace  Day,  35 
Aerospace Defense Command (USAF), 215 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  (MA), 
44,220 
Aerospace  industry,  36 
Aerospace  hagaz ine ,   250 
Aetna  Life  and  Casualty  Company,  197, 
245 
AFCRL.  S e e  Cambridge Re sea rch  Labora- 
tories  (USAF). 
Africa,  38,  140 
AFSATCOM (Air Force Satellite  Communi- 
cations  System), 43 
AFSC.  See Air  Force  Systems Command. 
Agriculture, U.S.  Dept.  of,  1,9,29,59,232 
Agriculture,  solar power  for,  250 
AIA.  See Aerospace Industries Association. 
A I M .   See  American  Institute  of  Aero- 
nautics  and  Astronautics. 
AIDJEX  (Arctic ice  dynamics joint  experi- 
ments),  71 
Air and Space  Museum,  Smithsonian Insti- 
tution,  128,  159,  179,  243 
Air  combat  fighter F-16,  4,  99,  107,  138 
AirForce,U.S.  SeeU.S. AirForce(USAF). 
Air  Force  Systems  Command  (AFSC),  24, 
66, 67,  81,  120,  124,  154,  189,  192 
A i r  Fbrbes Journal  In terna t iona l ,   70 
Air  freight,  24 
Air P roduc t s  a d  Chemicals,  Inc.,  123 
Air  rescue,  54-55,  74 
Air  Sampling  Program,  Global  (GASP), 
41  
Air Show,  Paris,  95,  106 
Air  traffic  safetv.  23 
Air  Transport ’ Association  of  America 
(ATA),  185 
Air  transportation  re sea rch  budget,  19 
Airborne  Infrared  Observatory,  29,  88 
Airborne  Science  Spacelab  Experiments 
System Simulation (ASSESS),  100 
Aitborne  Warning  and   Control  System 
(AWACS), USAF,  59 
Airbus,  107 
Aircraft,  4,  6,  8,  13,  23,  57,  115,  211 
AirfloC, supersonic,  149 

301 

Index  

Airfoil,  General-Aviation-Whitcomb,  53 
Alabama,  232 
ALADDIN (Atmospheric Layering and Den- 
sity  Distribution  of  Ions  and  Neutrals 
program),  6 
Alaska,  9 ,   157, 231-232,  246 
Alaskan  Federation of  Natives,  36 
Albedo,  142 
Albert,  Rep.  Carl B.,  106 
Albuquerque,  N.  Mex.,  127 
Alcator (reactor  at MIT),  220 
Alexandrov,  Anatoly,  230 
Algeria,  3 
All Nippon  Airways,  218 
Allen,  Dr .   Jose  h P.,  139 
Allison,  L/C  E f g a r  L.,  74 
Alloy,  heat-resistant,  developed  in  China, 
236 
All-Women Transcontinental Air Race, 249 
Alma-Ata,  U.S.S.R.,  44 
Alpha J e t  (aircraft), 95 
Aluminum  Company of  America,  129 
Aluminum  vapor,  6 
Ambler,  Ernest,  249 
American  Airlines,  Inc.,  2 
American  Association  for  the   Advance- 
men t  of  Science  (AAAS), 226 
American Astronomical Society (AAS), 168 
American  Defense  P repa redne s s   Assn., 
205-206 
American Geophysical Union,  191 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics (AIAA), 35 ,160 ,190 ,191  
American  Mining  Congress,  222 
American  Satellite Corporation,  51, 229 
American  Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME) ,   235 
American  Telephone  &  Telegraph  Com- 
pany,  10 
Ames As trogram ,   215 
Ames  Re sea rch  Cen te r  (ARC), 22,  29,  36, 
69 ,80 ,88 ,100 ,108 ,114 ,116 ,128 ,138 ,  
144,  159,  161, 167, 174, 198, 214,  228, 
231,  245,  293 
AMOS  (antireflection-coated  metal  oxide 
semiconductor),  80 
AMPS  (Atmospheric,  Magnetospheric  and 
Plasmas-in-Space)  Spacelab  payload, 
13,  160,  221 
AMST  (advanced medium  STOL  aircraft), 
178 
Ancient Mariner,  206 
Anders,  William  A.,  6 
Anderson,  Jack ,   77 
Anderson,  Robert,  173 
Andreyev,  Boris  D.,  28 
Anik  (Canadian comsat),  79,  84,  259,  277, 
278 
Ani&& 
in  space  flight,  121 
Annanda le   (research vessel),  187 
Ans 1. See  Netherlands astronomical satel- 
lite. 
Antarqui  (project), 90 
Antennas,  3,  231,  232 
Antiballistic  missile  (ABM), 60 
Antireflection-coated metal-oxide  semicon- 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 
1 
ductor  (AMOS), 80 
Apathy  toward  space,  U.S.,  14.6 
Apogee  motor,  solid-fuel,  195 
Apollo-Salyut  proposal,  131 
Apollo-Saturn  hardware  storage  61 
Apollo-Soyuz Te s t  Project  (AST  ; see  also 
Apollo, Soyuz), 1 , 1 1 , 2 1 , 3 1 , 5 1 , 5 9 , 7 6 ,  
130,  131,  167,  189,  195, 22  , 281,  282 
A p o l l o S o y u z   Test  Project:  I 
forma t ion  
f o r  Press ,   136 
Apollo  spacecraft  launch,  1,  131, 278 
a r t  exhibit,  137 
astronauts  visit  U.S.S.R.,  168  191 
A ts   6 coverage,  65,  87,  126.  1k7 
backup  mission,  188 
briefings,  37,  137,  145,  147 
C IA  warning,  127 
comment,  140,  142,  145, 152, 153 
communications,  7,  12, 104,  1/32,  157 
control  cen te r s   (Houston  and  Moscow), 
82-83,  122 
cosmonauts visit  U . S . ,   168, 205 
cost,  65 
c rew  members,  5,  6 ,  28,  178 
docking,  5,  12,  104,  139-14C 
experiments,  4,  37,  38,  133,  134-135, 
169, 212 
joint  activities  in orbit,  133 
joint  training,  7,  12, 28,  83 
languages used,  28,  132 
launch  s i tes ,  214,  265 
medical  conditions,  120,  134,  147,  149, 
171, 214. 
meetings,  7,  65 
military  potential,  164 
objectives,  135 
photography,  134-135,  243 
preparations,  4-5 
Proxmire,  Sen.,  61,  102,  126 
readiness  review,  12, 110 
recovery,  104,  135,  145 
safety  risks,  94,  102,  110,  144 
Saturn  IB   (launch  vehicle),  52,  92,  136, 
160 
simulations,  5,  51, 82,  83,  121 
Soviet delegation,  222 
space-food  exhibition,  121 
Soyuz  19  launch,  265 
technician  housing,  81 
telemetry  coverage,  38 
tracking,  12 
training,  12, 28,  38 
TV  broadcasts,  132,  133, 136 
working groups,  7,  77 
Apollo  spacecraft 
Apo l lo   9 ,  67 
Ap o l lo  10,  178 
Apo l lo   12, 94 
Apo l lo   1 4 ,  11 
Ap o l lo  15 ,  67,  182 
Ap o l lo  16 ,  11, 188 
Apo l lo   I ? ,   11, 63 
ASTP  check,  123 
atmospheres,  133, 214 
corrosion,  110 
design,  11, 12, 64,  104 

302 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Index 

Apollo s p a c e c r a f t - co n t in u e d  
hatches,  133 
launch  s i te ,  214 
life-support  systems,  1 2  
malfunction on ASTP,  135 
oxygen  supply,  135, 147 
propellants,  121  
Apollo luna r  missions,  11, 63,  143, 214 
Apollo Telescope Mount (ATM), 14,  191 
Appalachia,  157 
Applications  Explorer  Mission  (AEM-  A), 
185 
Applications  Systems  Verification  T e s t  
(ASVT), 5, 9 
Applications  Technology  Satellite  (ATS) 
(See also Ats 6), 26,  54,  87,  109 
, 
Appropriations,  House Committee  on,  120 
Appropriations, Sena te  Committee on, 143- 
144 
Aqaba,  Gulf  of,  243 
Aquatic  plants,  vascular,  39 
Arab League,  140 
Arabian  peninsula,  ASTP  images,  243 
ARAKS  (artificial  aurora  between  Ker- 
guelen  and  Sogra),  39,  283 
Arcas  rocket  (see  also  Supe r  Arcas),  288 
ARC.  See Ames  Research  Center. 
Arctic,  71,  207,  218,  237 
Arctic  I c e   Dynamics  Joint  Experiment 
(AIDJEX),  71 
Areciho,  Pue r to  Rico,  231,  232 
Argentina,  122, 203 
Ariane  (launch  vehicle), 48 
Ariel  5  (US.-U.K.  cooperative  satellite), 
158, 196, 208 
Aries  (rocket), 289 
Arizona,  Univ.  of,  29,  35,  36,  58, 88, 94 
Arkalyk,  U.S.S.R.,  92 
Arkhangelsk  Oblast,  U.S.S.R.,  39 
Army  Corps  of  Engineers,  U.S.,  9, 213 
Arnold  Engineering  Development  Cen te r  
(AEDC-AFSC),  120,  154,  189 
Artificial  aurora  between  Kerguelen  and 
Sogra  (ARAKS), 39,  283 
Aryabhata  (India science satellite), 67,251, 
259 
Asia,  103,  243 
ASME.  S e e  American Society of Mechani- 
ca l  Engineers. 
ASSESS (Airborne Science Spacelab Exper- 
iments System Simulation),  100 
ASTP.  S e e  Apollo-Soyuz T e s t  Project. 
Astrain,  Santiago,  159 
Astrobee F,  286 
Astronaut  Office,  JSC   Science  and Appli- 
cations Directorate,  164 
Astronautics programs,  military,  19 
Astronauts,  11,  33-34,  58,  88,  147-148, 
157,  167,  171 
Astronomers,  microwave signals picked u p  
by,  178 
Astronomical Association of Northern Cali- 
fornia,  163 
Astronomy,  141,  164, 225 
Astrophysical Journal,  30,  181, 248 
Astrophysical Journal  Letters,  217 

ASVT  (Applications  Systems  Verification 
Test), 5, 9 
ATA.  See Air  Transport  Association. 
Atlantic  Ocean   communications  services, 
180 
Atlas-Centaur  launch  vehicles,  2,  33,  89, 
194,  195, 223 
ATLIT  (advanced  technology  light  twin 
aircraft),  53 
ATM.  See Apollo Telescope Mount. 
Atmosphere  modification,  183 
Atmosphere  Cloud  Physics  Laboratory 
(ACPL),  182 
Atmospheric Explorer (AE) satellites, 1,13, 
227,  229 
Atmospheric  layering  and   density  distri- 
bution of ions and neutrals (ALADDIN) 
program,  6,  15 
Atmospheric,  Magnetospheric  and Plasmas- 
in-Space  (AMPS),  Spacelab  payload, 
13, 221 
Atmospheric  Sciences,  Interdepartmental 
Committee for,  29 
Atmospheric  variability experiments (AVE), 
71 
Atomic Energy Commission  (AEC), 6 
Atomic  Re sea rch  Institute,  Moscow,  230 
ATP.  See adenosine  triphosphate. 
Ats  6  (Applications  Technology  Satellite), 
38,  54-55,  62,  64-65,  87,  126-127, 
130,  157, 233 
AT&T.  See  American Telephone  and  Tele- 
graph Company. 
AU:  astronomical  unit. 
Auburn,  Ala.,  243 
Auburn,  Mass.,  historic s i te  acquisition, 12 
Aura  (French  satellite),  251,  270 
Aurora,  artificial,  283 
Australia,  207,  232 
Australia-London  news  satellite  link,  122 
Austria,  27,  216 
“Automobik  Power  Systems  Evaluation 
Study,  181 
Avco Corporation,  108 
AVE.  .See  atmospheric  variability  experi- 
ment. 
Aviation  and  Transportation  R&D,  House 
Subcommittee on,  220 
Aviation  Safety Reporting Program,  204 
Aviation  Week  a n d  Space  Technology,  23, 
35,  48 ,60 ,  67 ,76 ,   82 ,95 ,  99,  106, 107, 
1 4 ,  157, 244 
Avionics  control  system,  automated,  129 
Avionics  Laboratory,  USAF,  81 
AWACS.  S e e  Airborne Warning  and  Con- 
trol  System. 
Awards 
AIAA   annual,  36 
ASME,  235 
ASTP,  189 
ATS,  64 
Collier,  Robert J.,  Trophy,  74 
de  Florez Award,  36 
Harmon Aviation,  74 
Landsat,  212 
Lindsay,  John  C.,  Award,  124 

303 

Ind ex  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Awa rd s -con t inued  
Losey,  Robert M.,  award,  36 
Manner-Venus  team  award,  77 
NASTRAN,  7 
National  Space  Club,  64 
Pecora,  Wm.  T.,  Award,  212 
Reed,  Sylvanus A.,  Award,  36 
Space  Science Award,  37  
Spacecraft  Design  Award  (MAA), 37 
Waterman,  Alan  T.,  Award,  84  
White, Thoma s  D.,  trophy,  187 
Wright Brothers,  190 
Wyld,  J am e s  A.,  190 
Azcarraga,  Luis de,  120 

B 

B - 1   (strategic  bomber),  10,  19,  64,  106, 
180,  182 
Babcock,  Alice  K.,  64 
Bacteria,  177, 223 
Bahamas,  Central,  178-179 
Balch,  Jackson,  143 
Ball-bearings,  193 
Ballistic  Missile Agency  (U.S.  Army),  125 
Ballistic  motors,  reusable,  154 
Balloons,  13, 74,  89-90,  109, 207,  242 
Baltimore  Sun, 41,  54,  58,  112,  137,  149, 
166, 210,  211,  236 
Bangui Anomaly,  233 
Barium cloud,  212 
Barnes,  J am e s  C.,  168 
Barstow,  Calif.,  203 
Basilevsky, Aleksandr,  210 
Bathymetry,  178-  179 
Batteries,  solar,  103 
Bay  St.  Louis,  Miss.,  39 
Baykonur  cosmodrome  (U.S.S.R.),  3,  28, 
59 ,66 ,   83,91,  105, 131-132,  134, 149, 
225 
Beame,  Mayor Abraham D.,  11 
Bean,  Alan  L.,  6,  64,  65,  123 
Beartooth highway,  Cu s te r  National Forest, 
Montana,  211 
Beayondan  (Johns  Hopkins  University  re- 
sea rch  vessel),  179 
Beechcraft  99  (commuter  aircraft),  129 
Beech-Hawker  125 (aircraft), 65  
Beer,  Reinhard,  205 
Belgium,  31,  60, 99,  107 
Bell Telephone Re sea rch  Division,  189 
Bendix  Field  Engineering Corporation,  15, 
102, 201,  213,  244 
Bends,  167, 214 
Bennett,  Ga  L.,  123 
Bering  Sea %%ne 
Mammal  Experiment 
(BESMEX).  71 
Betelgeuse  (star),  138 
bev:  billion  electron  volts. 
Bicentennial,  U.S.,  172 
“Big  bang”  theory,  178 
Big Bird  (reconnaissance satellites),  67, 86 
Billingham,  John,  163-164 
Biological experiments in space, 3,  197-198 
Biology,  molecular,  190 

Biosatellite 3 ,   229 
BIS.  See British  Interplanetary  Society. 
Black  Brant VC  (sounding rocket),  11,210, 
217,  240,  284 ,288 ,290  
Black holes,  48,  158, 196, 208 
Blackout of  communications,  73-74 
Blagonravov,  Anatoly  A.,  25  
Blinov,  N.,  238 
Blood pressure,  cosmonauts’,  92 
Blount  Brothers  Construction  Company, 
161 
“Blue  Planet,”  at  Pa r i s  Air  Show,  95 
Blum,  Haywood,  60 
BN2  Islander  (British  aircraft),  95 
Bobko,  Karol  J.,  65  
Body  size,  pilots’,  88 
Boeing Company, 2,44,54,78,95,124,131, 
154,  161,  185,  226,  241 
Boeing 707,  noise from,  3 2  
Boeing  747, Global Air  Sampling Program, 
41 
Boeing  747 Space  Shuttle  carrier,  34,  214, 
240 
Boeing  747SP aircraft,  224 
Boeing  Space   Cen te r ,   Kent,  Wash.,  206, 
230 
Boikov,  Nikolai,  247 
Bolivia,  203,  212 
Bolling,  Richard,  216 
Bomber force.  U.S..  216 
Booster  separation motors  (BSM), 162 
Booster,  solid-pro  ellant,  189 
Boretsky,  M i ch a e t  68  
Boulder,  Colo.,  NOAA  laboratories,  206 
Bow  shock wave  at Venus,  52 
Bowden,  Donald  R.,  116 
Bowyer,  S tua r t ,   169 
Brand, Vance D.,  1 ,5 ,65 ,83 ,120 ,121 ,123 ,  
132,  133,  134,  135, 147,  149, 168,  189, 
191,  192, 265,  282 
Brandt,  John  C.,  186 
Brayton gas-turbine engine,  181 -182 
Brazil,  3, 4,  94,  203 
Breathing  systems,  11, 12 
Brezhnev,  Leonid  I.,  192 
British  Association  for  the   Advancement 
of  Science,  178 
British exhibits a t  Pa r i s  Air  Show,  95 
British  Interplanetary  Society (BIS),  169 
British  cooperation  in  AWACS,  59 
British  sounding rocket,  232 
Brockett,  H.  R.,  189 
Brockmann,  Carlos,  212 
Bronk,  Detlev  W.,  226 
Brooks  Air Force Base,  Texas,  188 
Brown,  Harold,  115 
Brussels,  Univ.  of,  Belgium,  212 
BSM  (booster  separation motors),  162 
Bubble-domain technology,  90,  243 
Bubbling behavior  in melts in  space,  210 
Budget, NASA, 20 ,21 ,22 ,45 ,75 ,76 ,101 -  
102,  107,  114,  143-145,  218 
Bugging, Moscow ASTP  control cen te r ,  157 
Bulgaria,  153, 241 
Bureau of Mines, U.S.  Dept. o f t h e  Interior, 
203 

304 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Index 

Burning,  ex terna l  exhaus t ,   154 
Bushuyev, Konstantin D.,  7 ,12 ,59 ,77 ,225  
Business Aircraft Association,  National,  6 5  

C 

C-141  (Airborne Infrared Observatory), 29, 
30,  35 
C-5A  (military  cargo  aircraft),  68,  246 
Cable,  flat  conductor,  85, 8 6  
Calcium  loss  bv  astronauts.  33-34 
California,  167; 180 
California  Ins t i tu te  of  Technology,  17,  115 
California S ta te  University, observatory, 237 
California, Univ. of, 111 ,126 ,166 ,169 ,177 ,  
284 
Callisto  (Jupiter’s  moon), 43 
Ca lyp so  (Cousteau Society research  vessel), 
179 
Cambridge Research  Laboratory  (USAF), 6 
Cameras ,  high-resolution,  86  
Canada,  2,  4,  48,  54-55,  71,  78-79,  116, 
203,  277,  283 
Canadian National Exhibition, Toronto, 173 
Canadian  Overseas   Telecommunications 
Corporation,  58 
Canadian  Sc ience  Writers  Association,  34 
Canberra ,  Australia,  tracking  station,  58  
Cancer ,  27,  28,  183, 223 
Cannon,  James ,   90 
Canopus  lock  for Mariner  1 0 , 4 7  
Cape  Canaveral,  57,  241 
Carbon  dioxide on  Mars,  171 
Carbon  monoxide  de tec ted   in  a tmosphere ,  
205 
Carbon  tetrachloride,  247 
Cardiac  c a r e  sys tems ,  portable,  51 
Cargo  aircraft  (YC-15), 178 
Carmen  (hurricane),  206 
Carr,  Gerald  P.,  64,  173,  191 
Carrot-cell-culture  exper imen t ,   197 
Castor  and   Po l lux   (French  satellites),  86, 
251,  260 
CCD.  See charge-coupled  device. 
Celestial  bodies  and   space  law,  165 
Celestial Observation  Satellite  (Cos - B ) ,   2, 
162, 266,  277,  278 
CEN  (Centre  #E tudes   Nucleaires),  212 
Census ,  U.S.  Bureau  of,  1 
Cen tra l  African  Republic,  233 
Cen tra l   Intelligence  Agency  (CIA),  102, 
127,  130 
Cen tra l   Telephone  and   Utilities  Corpora- 
tion,  130 
Cen t re  #E tudes   Nucleaires  (CEN), 212 
Centre National #Etudes  Spatiales (CNES), 
48,  177 
Cernan ,  Eugene  A.,  65,  178 
Cesium  propellant,  93 
CETI  (communication with  ex tra terres tr ia l  
intelligence),  232 
Chamberlain  Manufacturing  Corporation, 
12  
Chapman,  Dean  R.,  69 
Charge-coupled  device  (CCD), 184 

Cha r te r  Industries,  Raleigh,  N.C.,  242 
Charyk,  Joseph  V.,  30,  116 
Chase  Econometric  Associates,  157 
Chemistry,  13, 68,  190, 226 
Chicago,  Ill.,  112, 231,  235-236 
Chilca  Launch  Range,  Peru ,   90 
Chile,  58,  202,  203 
China,  People’s  Republic of,  129, 149, 231 
anc ien t  supernova  records,  186 
astronomers’  discoveries,  78 
comment  on ASTP,  140,  153 
heat-resistant  alloy,  236 
recovery  of  e a r t h  satellite, 236 
satellite launches ,  149,176,236,243,251 
China I ,  2 , 3 , 4  a n d 5  (satellites),  176 ,266 ,  
273,  274 
Chlorine,  236 
Chlorofluoromethanes,  13 
Christian Science Monitor, 24 ,67 ,103 ,105 ,  
149, 161,  162,  169,  174, 236,  244 
Christy-Sackmann,  Juliana,  17 
CIA.  See  Cen tra l  Intelligence  Agency. 
CIAP .   See  Climatic  Impac t   Assessment 
Program. 
“City  in   space ,”   174  
Civil aviation,  107 
Civilian R&D  programs,  Federa l ,   23 
Civilization(s), 73,  225.  231 
C lark ,  John  F.,  29,  74 
Climate,  50,  150 
C l ima t ic   Impac t   Assessmen t   Program  
(CIAP,  DOT),  8 
Cloud l ay e r ,   Venus,  101, 210 
Cloud  research ,   117 
CNES  (Centre National #Etudes  Spatiales), 
48,  177 
Coal,  8,  49,  203,  222 
Coast  Guard,  U.S.,  55,  201 
Coastal  d isas ter  warnings,  2 
Coating,  anticorrosion,  148 
Cockpit  design  for  Space  Shu t t le ,  88 
Cockpit,  ground-based  ins trumen ted ,   167 
Cole,  Edward  N.,  24  
Collier,  Robert  J.,  trophy,  74 
Collins, Michael,  159 
Collision,  continental,  163 
Colonization  of  space ,   Princeton  Univ. 
conference,  250 
Colorado,  Univ.  of,  118,  142, 288,  289 
Columbia Univ.,  248 
Coma  Berenices,  dwarf  s tar   in,  169 
Comets,  168 
Command  and   data-acquisition  cen ters ,  
NOAA,  231 
Commerce,  U.S.  Department  of  (DOC), 15, 
26,  29, 55,  63,  70,  94,  211 
Commercial  activity  and  space ,   235 
Communications  blackout  on  In te lsa t ,   73 
Communications  satellites  (comsats:  see  
individual satellites),  1, 2,  3,  4,  19, 43, 
48.  87.  180 
Cornminications  Satellite  Corporation,  1, 
10,  30,  33,  74,  82,  89,  116,  148,  151, 
180, 194, 230,  238,  245 
Communist Party ideologist Mikhail Suslov, 
230 
Composite materials,  24,  179 

305 

Index 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Compression  technology,  50 
Computers,  13,  17, 53,  77,  117,  167, 241 
Comsat  Genera l   Corporation  (subsidiary), 
10 ,230 ,238 .  See  also Communications 
Satellite  Corporation. 
ComSatCorp.  See  Communications  Satel- 
lite Corporation. 
“Conceptual  Flight Possibilities for Sa turn-  
Concep t  verification  tes t   (CVT), 164 
Apollo Hardware,  188 
Concorde  (U .K .  -France   supersonic  air- 
craft),  95,  107, 159, 218,  247 
Condor I  (balioon replica),  242 
Conductor  cab le ,   flat,  85, 86 
Congress,  House  of  Represen ta t ives  
Appropriations,  Committee on ,   120 
Aviation  and  Transportation  R&D,  Sub- 
committee  on,  220 
Science and  Astronautics,  Committee on. 
See   Sc ience   and   Technology,  Com- 
mittee  on. 
Sc ience  and  Technology,  Committee  on, 
8 ,  45,  61,  108,  158, 250 
Space   Sc ience   and   Applications,  Sub- 
committee  on,  223,  224 
Congress,  Sena te  
Aeronautical  and  Space  Sc iences ,  Com- 
mittee  on,  25,  80,  183,  185, 218,  234 
Appropriations,  Committee on,  140-  143 
Labor  and   Public  Welfare,  Committee 
on,  116 
Congressional authorization for NASA tran-  
sitional aeriod.  102 
Congression&! Record ,   130 
Connecticut,  180 
Connestype  Fourier  spec trome ter ,   205 
Conrad,  Char les  P.,  64,  74 
Consiglio  Nazionale  delle  R icerche ,   Italy, 
44 
Consortium of  European  aircraft  manufac- 
turers ,   99 
Constellation  (aircraft),  190 
Construction  and  modification of  facilities, 
budget,  101 
Consumer Produc t  Safety Commission, 247 
Continental  Airlines,  Inc.,  36 
Contract,  NASA, 4 4 ,7 9 , 11 2 , 113 ,137 ,174 ,  
201,  208,  226,  227,  240 
Control  Data  Corporation,  78 
Coos Bay.  Oree..  74 
Coperni&  (Orrbiting Astronomical Observ- 
atory),  73,  113, 208 
Copper-lead  alloys,  205 
Core  reactors,  30 
Cornell Univ.,  63, 231 
Cortisone,  147 
Cortright,  Edgar  M.,  129, 143 
Co s -B :   Celestial  Observation  Satellite. 
Cosmic  rays 
as tronau t  exposure,  11, 37,  94 
astronomy  experiments,  164 
background  component,  118 
degenerating  solar cells, 103 
measuremen t ,   11, 4.6 
sources,  141, 212 
Cosmochemistry,  226 
Cosmonauts,  91,  92,  132,  134, 205 

Cosmos  (U.S.S.R.  satellites),  167 
Cosmos 122 ,   66 
Cosmos 63 7 ,  204 
Cosmos 70 2 ,  253 
Cosmos 7 0 3 ,  253 
Cosmos  7 0 4 ,  253 
Cosmos 70 5 ,  253 
Cosmos  70 6 ,  254 
Cosmos  70 7 ,  254 
Cosmos 70 8 ,  254 
Cosmos  70 9 ,  255 
Cosmos  7 1 0 ,  255 
Cosmos 71 1 ,  255 
Cosmos 71 2 ,  255 
Cosmos  71 3 ,  255 
Cosmos  7 1 4 ,  255 
Cosmos  71 5 ,  256 
Cosmos  71 6 ,  256 
Cosmos  71 7 ,  256 
Cosmos  71 8 ,  256 
Cosmos 7 1 9 ,  256 
Cosmos  72 0 ,  257 
Cosmos  72 1 ,  257 
Cosmos  72 2 ,  257 
Cosmos  72 3 ,  257 
Cosmos  72 4 ,  257 
Cosmos  72 5 ,  258 
Cosmos  72 6 ,  258 
Cosmos 72 7 ,  258 
Cosmos  72 8 ,  258 
Cosmos  72 9 ,  259 
Cosmos  73 0 ,  259 
co smo s   73 1 ,  260 
Cosmos  73 2 ,  261 
co smo s   73 3 ,  261 
Cosmos  734 ,  261 
Cosmos  73 5 ,  261 
Cosmos  736 ,  261 
Cosmos  73 7 ,  261 
Cosmos 7 3 8 ,  262 
Cosmos  73 9 ,  262 
Cosmos 7 4 0 ,  262 
Cosmos  7 4 1 ,  262 
Cosmos  742 ,  262 
Cosmos  74 3 ,  263 
Cosmos  7 4 4 ,  263 
Cosmos  745 ,  264 
Cosmos  74 6 ,  264 
Cosmos  74 7 ,  264 
Cosmos  74 8 ,  264 
Cosmos  74 9 ,  264 
Cosmos 75 0 ,  265 
Cosmos  7 5 1 ,  265 
Cosmos  752 ,  265 
Cosmos 7 5 3 ,  266 
Cosmos  7 5 4 ,  266 
Cosmos  75 5 ,  266 
Cosmos 75 6 ,  267 
Cosmos  75 7 ,  267 
Cosmos 7 5 8 ,  267 
Cosmos 7 5 9 ,  268 
co smo s   76 0 ,  268 
Cosmos  76 1 ,  268 
Cosmos  7 6 2 ,  268 
Cosmos  76 3 ,  268 
Cosmos  76 4 ,  268 
Cosmos  76 5 .  269 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Index 

Cosmos  766 ,  269 
Cosmos  767 ,  269 
Cosnws  768 ,  269 
Cosmos 7 6 9 ,  269 
Cosmos 770 ,  269 
Cosmos 7 7 1 ,  270 
Cosmos 7 7 2 ,  270 
Cosmos  773 ,  270 
Cosmos  774 .  270 
Cosmos  775; 204, 251, 271 
Cosmos 7 7 6 ,  271 
Cosmos  777 ,  271 
Cosmos 778 ,  272 
Cosmos 7 7 9 ,  272 
Cosmos 780 ,  272 
Cosmos  781 ,  272 
Cosmos  7 8 2 ,  229, 230, 251, 273 
Cosmos  783 ,  273 
Cosmos  7 8 4 ,  273 
Cosmos  7 8 5 ,  273 
Cosmos 7 8 6 ,  274 
Cost  containment,  36 
Cost overruns ,  246 
Cotton,  Pau l  E.,  202 
Cousteau,  Jacques ,   179 
Cous teau ,  Philippe,  179 
Cousteau  Society,  178- 179 
CPK (crea t ine  phosphokinase),  177 
Crab  Nebula,  186,248 
Creation  of  the  ea r th ,   178 
Crimea  Astrophysical Observatory,  225 
Crippen,  Robert  L.,  65 
Cronkite,  Walter,  146 
Crop  acreage ,   Landsa t   measuremen ts ,   9, 
224 
Crow,  Duward L.,  192 
Crows Landing,  Calif.,  116 
Crys ta l  growth in zero-g, 213 
CS  (Japanese  comsat),  139 
Cu lber tson ,  Ph i l ip  E . ,   48 
Cus ter   National Fores t ,  Mont.,  211 
Cutler-Hammer,  Inc.,  69 
CVT (concept  verification test),  164 
Cyprus,  233 
Czechoslovakia, 229, 241 

D 

DACS  (data-acquisition  and   control  sys- 
tem).  231 
DAD  (D u a l  Air  Density) spacecraf t ,  238 
DAD  I 
Dallas,  Tex.,  112 
Dallas,  Tex.,  112 
Dana,  William H.,  194, 294 
Dana,  William H.,  194, 294 
Dash  7 (Canadian  aircraft),  54 
Dash  7 (Canadian  aircraft),  54 
Dassadt-Breguet Mirage FIE (French lighter 
Dassadt-Breguet Mirage FIE (French lighter 
aircraft),  99 
a irora f t )   00 
E 
Data-acquisition  and   control  system  (DACS), 
23 1 
z3 I 
Landsat,  10 
Data%&&, 
Data Center, Federal, 9 
Data  processing on  Shuttle Orbiter, 126 
Data recorder, solid-state, 90, 243 
Day,  LeRoy E., 34 
Days,  Martian (sols),  111 

DC-8 (jet  transport),  32 
Dead  Sea ,  233, 243 
Debus,  Kurt H.,  12, 69 
Decompression,  167, 214 
Deep Space  Communications Cen ter ,  Mos- 
cow,  210 
Defense, U.S.  Dept. of, 2,19,23,26,29,63, 
96. 137. 209 
Defense military effort and   space ,   180 
Defense  procurement,  20 
Defense  Research ,   Development,  Tes t ,  
and  Evaluation,  19 
Defense Space  Business D a i l y ,   176 
deFlorez Award,  36 
deGaulle,  Charles,  66 
Delhi Domestic News  Service,  67 
Deloffre,  Bernard,  8, 66 
Delta launch, 29, 51, 139, 217 
Demerliac,  Y.,  93 
Dendrite,  210 
Denitrogenation, 214 
Denmark,  99,  107 
Denver,  Univ.  of,  91, 240 
Desalination, 233 
Desert  geography,  135 
Detente,  31, 175 
Deutsche  P re s se  Agentur,  43 
Diagnostic  sys tem ,  102 
Diamant B/P.4  (French  launcher),  27, 86 
DIGITAC (digital flight control system), 27 
Dirac,  Pau l ,   166 
Dirigibles, 99 
Discoverer (satellites),  86 
Disher, John  H., 154 
Disney World, 28 
“Distorted  Priorities  in  the  R&D Budget,” 
41 
Divers in  decompression,  167 
Dobrynin,  Anatoly P., 132 
DOC.  See  Commerce,  U.S.  Dept.  of. 
DOD.  See  Defense,  U S .   Dept.  of. 
DOD  spacecraf t ,   256, 259, 260, 263, 271, 
273, 274, 278 
DOL  See  Interior,  U.S.  Dept.  of. 
Domes,  geodesic,  242 
d‘Ornano,  Michel, 95 
Dornier company (West  Germany), 233 
DOT.  See  Transportation,  U.S.  Dept.  of. 
Dow  Jones   and  Company, 228 
Downey, Calif.,  161 
Drag  reduction  on  trucks ,   39 
Drake,  Frank  B.,  231 
Dryden,  Hugh  L.,  25 
Dryden  Flight  Research   Cen ter ,   293. See  
Flight  Research  Cen ter .  
Dryer, Murray,  37 
Dual Air Density (DAD) spacecraf t ,  238 
Duckett,  Carl,  127 
Dudley Observatory, Albany, N.Y.,  91,287 
Duke,  Char les  M.,  Jr.,  188 
Duke University Medical Cen ter ,   34 
Dwarf  s ta r  in Coma Berenices,  169 
Dynamic Te s t  Facility  (MSFC),  15 
Dystrophy, muscular,  177 
Dzhanebekov,  Vladimir A.,  28 

307 

I n d e x  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

E 

EarLyBird  (In te lsa t  IF-  I), 89,121,159,195 
Ea r th  
galaxy,  size of,  217 
gravity field,  63  
-moon  relationship,  111 
-oriented  space  missions,  150 
resources ,   1, 3,  23,  44,  90,  138 
s ta t ions ,  51,  112 
-sun   relationships,  118 
tremors   simulation,  50 
Ear th  Orbiting Teleoperator System (EOTS), 
Id 
Ea r th  iad ia t ion   budge t  (ERB), 109 
E a r t h   Re sou rce s   Exper imen t   Package  
@REP) ,  10,  168 
Ea r th  Resources  Orbiting Sa te l l i te  (EROS) 
Data  Cen ter ,   212 
Ea r th   Resources   Technology  Sa te l l i te  
(ERTS),  1, 5,  74,  168.  See  Landsa t .  
ERTS-B  (Landsat Z),  1, 5,  8 ,  253 
Erts  I (Landsat  I ) ,   5,  163 
Earth  sciences budget,  18 
East Afiica.  126 
Eas tern   Te s t   Range  (ETR), 25,  33,  60, 79, 
87,  89,  117, 169,  177,  195, 227 
Echo  I ,  commemoration,  165 
Echo-free  chambers ,   146 
Eclipse,  solar,  37,  133 
Ecliptic  plane,  85  
Econ,  Inc . ,   30 
Economic  benef i ts  of  space  program,  157 
Educational  TV  by  satellite,  87,  157 
Edwards  AFB,  Calif.,  178,  214,  215 
“Effec ts  of  S tra tospher ic  Pollution  by  Air- 
craf t”   (DOT study),  7,  18, 27 
EIC   Inc.,  227 
Eisenhower,  Pres iden t  Dwight D.,  125,165, 
226 
el-Baz,  Farouk,  243 
ELDO  (European  Launcher   Development 
Organization), 93  
E lec tr ic  power generation,  54,  89, 93,  126, 
213,  219-220 
E lec tr ic  propulsion,  93,  190 
E lec tr ica l  fields,  atmospheric,  9 4  
E lec tr ica l  svstem  failure.  23 
Electrically scann ing  microwave radiometer 
(ESMR),  109 
Electricity  furn ished   from  space   colony, 
_ _  - 
2sn 
Electromagnetic  wave  energy-conversion 
(EWEC) concep t ,   71 
Electron  loss,  ionospheric,  13, 97 
E lec tron ic   Research   Division  (Rockwell), 
90 
Electrophoresis  experiments,  4,  212 
Emission  from  a ircraf t ,  8 
Employees,  fewer  Federal,  4 
Employment,  NASA,  122,  226 
Energy  (See  also Fuels;  Solar energy) 
budget,  17,  18, 22 
chemical,  68  
conservation,  68,  106 
e lec tr ic  autos,  182 

flywheel,  125, 234 
fue l  efficiency,  186 
internal-combustion  engine,  181, 182 
laser  energy,  44,  63,  119, 229,  244 
national  policy,  49 
nuclear,  219,  220 
power satellites,  30-31,  131, 161 
research   and  development,  18, 221 
sa te l l i tes  generating  power,  30-31,  131, 
161 
space  communities,  250 
storage,  176 
technology, 45,  101 
thermionic  conversion,  131 
wind  energy,  127 ,213  
Energy Administration, Federa l  (FEA), 185 
Energy  Information Cen ter ,   127 
Energy Institute at New Mexico S ta te  Univ., 
2 19 
Energy  Reorganization Act  of  1974,  6 
Energy Research  and  Development Admin- 
istration (ERDA), 1 8 , 1 9 , 2 1 , 2 3 , 2 4 , 2 9 ,  
38,89,111,116,119,125,213,221,246 
es tab l ishmen t ,  6 
projects,  49,  208,  211,  222 
relocation,  43 
Enevoldson,  Einar,  167, 294,  295 
Engine materials,  composite,  179 
Engine  noise  reduction,  2 
Engineering, National Academy of, 68,221, 
3LM 
Environment,  5,  9,  45,  71,  103,  142,  179, 
213, 214 
Environmental  Defense  Fund ,   247 
Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA), 
7.  9.  183 
  - 
Environmental  Quality,  Council on,  29 
I
,
Environmental  Research   and  Technology, 
Inc.,  168 
Environmental  Research   Ins t i tu te ,   Michi- 
gan,  179 
Environmental  Research  Laboratories,  94 
EOTS.  S e e   Ear th   Orbiting  Teleoperator 
System. 
EPA. See  Environmental Protection Agency. 
Epsilon Eridani  (star),  73 
Epsilon  Indi  (star),  73 
Equa tor ,  90,  233 
Equatorial  space   station,  203 
Equatorial  undercurren t ,   117 
ERB  (ear th   radiation  budget)  experiment, 
109 
ERDA.  See  Energy Research  and  Develop- 
ment  Administration. 
ERE P   (ear th   resources  experiment  pack- 
age),  10, 168 
Eridan  (French  sounding  rockets),  39  
E R N 0  Raumfahrttechnik  GmbH,  35 
EROS (Earth Resources  Orbiting Satellite) 
Da ta  Cen ter ,  212 
ERTS.  See   Ear th   Resources   Technology 
Satellite. 
Erythrocytes  decrease  in cosmonauts,  92 
ESA.  See  European  Space  Agency. 
ESMR  (electrically  scann ing   microwave 
radiometer),  109 
ESOC (ESA’s space  operations center), 162 

308 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

I n d e x  

ESRO.  See   European  Space   Re sea rch  
F-4  (Phantom jets),  28  
F-  1 4  (Tomcat  fighter),  107 
Organization. 
F-  15 (Eagle fighters),  28,  32,  41,  107 
E s s a 8 ,   179  
ESTEC  (European  Space   Research   and  
F-16,  4,  99,  107,  138 
Technology Center),  8, 93,  163 
F-18,  137, 138 
ET.  S e e  Ex terna l  tank. 
FlOO  (engine), 4 
ETR.  See  Eas tern  Te s t  Range. 
F-104G  (mach 2  fighter),  107,  126 
Euras ia ,   163 
F-111,  24,  187 
Europa  2   (launch  vehicle),  112 
F-111D  (turbofan jet),  179, 215 
European  Launcher   Development  Organi- 
FAA.  See  Federa l  Aviation Administration. 
zation  (ELDO), 93  
Facilities  construction,  101 
European  Space  Agency  @SA),  2,  43,  4, 
Faedo,  Alessandro,  44 
66,  95,  120, 121, 162, 212,  224,  277 
Faget,  Maxime A.,  235 
“European  Space  Days,”  93 
Fa irbanks ,  Alaska,  9 
European  space  programs,  48,  93,  116 
Fairchild  Indus tr ies ,   116 
Fairchild  Republic  Company, 96 
European  Space  Research  and Technology 
Cen te r  (ESTEC), 8, 93,  163 
Fan   blades,  24,  179 
European   Space   Research   Organization 
Fa r  Ea s t  Orb i ta   s ta t ions ,  103 
(ESRO), 8 ,27 ,44 ,48-49 ,60 ,67 ,85 ,93 ,  
FCC.  See   Federa l   Communications  Com- 
mission. 
95,  162. (See also ESA.) 
European-U.S.  cooperation, inspace ,  3 5 , 8 5  
FEA.  See  Federa l  Energy Administration. 
Federa l  Aviation Administration (FAA), 23, 
Europeans, F-16  combat  aircraft  for,  107  
32,  127, 204 
Eurospace  (Groupement  Industriel  Euro- 
Federa l   Committee  on   Sc ience   and  Tech-  
peen  #Etudes  Spatiales), 93 
Eutrophication,  183 
nology,  151 
EUV (extreme  ultraviolet  radiation),  169 
F e d e r a l   Commun ica t ion s   Comm iss ion  
ev:  e lec tron  volt. 
(FCC),  10, 112,  116,  148,  194, 230 
Evans ,   Ronald E.,  6,  65,  123 
Federa l   Council  for  Sc ience   and   Tech- 
Evans,  William J . ,   181, 205 
nology,  29,  106 
EWEC  (electromagnetic  wave  energy-con- 
Federa l  Data  Cen ter ,   9 
Federa l  Energy  Administration  (FEA),  18, 
version) concep t ,   71 
218 
Exhaus t   pollution,  19,  154 
Federal-industry  liaison,  152 
Exosat  (European  x-ray  astronomy  satel- 
Federa l   Interagency  Task   Force  on  Inad- 
lite),  48 
vertent Modification of the  Stratosphere 
Expendable Launch  Vehicle Programs,  198 
(IMOS), 29 
Exploded  s ta r s ,  248 
Explorer  satellites,  1 
Federa l  Power Commission (FPC),  18 
Explorer  I ,  47,  115 
Federa l   Sc ience   and   Technology  Survey 
Explorer 29  (Geos  I ) ,   63  
Committee,  151 
Explorer  36  (Geos 2 ) ,  63  
Federa l   Solar  Energy  Research   Ins t i tu te ,  
Explorer  4 2 ,  79 
221 
Explorer  48  (Small  Astronomy  Sa te l l i te  
Federal-state  liaison,  152, 244 
B),  79,  141 
Fernandez ,  Gonzalo,  189 
Explorer  4 9 ,   100 
Ferri,  Antonio,  36 
Explorer51  (Atmospheric Explorer-C),  90 
Ferson  telescope,  165 
Fertilizers,  chemical,  81, 223,  247 
Explorer  53  (SAS-C  Small  Astronomy 
F iber  optics,  81 
Satellite),  1, 78-79,  84, 158,259,  277, 
Fighter  a ircraf t ,  99 
278 
Explorer  5 4 ,  1, 271,  277,  279 
Filipchenko,  Anatoly V.,  28  
Fink,  Daniel J.,  74 
Explorer 5 5 ,   1,  227,  228,  272,  277,  279 
Finke,  Wolfgang,  120 
Explorer  5 6 .  1 
Finland,  153 
Explorer  5 7 ,  1 
F i r e f i h t e r s  breathing  system,  11-  12  
Explorer  In terp lane tary   Monitoring  Plat- 
Firefighting module,  201 
form (IMP),  124 
Firefly chemicals,  176-  177 
Explorers  Jou rna l ,   225 
Fires,  stellar,  17  
Explorers  Society,  International,  242 
F imberg ,   Her tha ,   27 
Ex terna l  tank   (ET),  14,  108 
F ish  embryogenesis,  197 
Ex tra terres tr ia l   life,  intelligent,  164,  231, 
Fisk,  Leonard  A.,  85 
232 
Extreme  ultraviolet  radiation 0, 169 
Flaps,  178 
Flashes,  stellar,  17 
Exxon Corporation,  67,  82,  151 
Eye-controlled  switches,  51  
F la t   conductor  cab le ,   238 
F le tcher ,  James   C.,  11, 13, 20,  21,  36, 4, 
49 ,50 ,61 ,123 ,131 ,141 ,145 ,150 ,188 ,  
198, 208,  212,  213,  221 
Flight-control system,  129 

F 
F-  1 (French  f i ih t e r  aircraft),  99 

309 

Index 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Flight Re sea rch  Center,  12, 22,  31,  39, 41, 
65 ,66 ,73 ,80 ,87-88 ,92 ,115 ,129 ,167 ,  
172, 187,  194, 240,  293 
Florence,  Univ.  of  Italy,  212 
Florida,  23 ,   166,  179,  183, 243,  244,  249 
FLTSATCOM  (Air  Force-Navy 
satcom 
system),  43 
Fluids  research,  50 
Fluorocarbons,  183, 234, 236,  240 
F ly ing   magazine,  97 
Flywheel,  125, 234 
Food,  103, 121,  142 
Forbes,  Malcolm  S.,  74 
Ford,  President  Gerald, 4 , 6 ,  1 7 , 2 1 , 3 3 , 4 9 ,  
57,  64,  74,  77,  84,  90,  103,  104,  106, 
113, 125,  132, 135, 136,  172, 179,  189, 
190, 205,  249 
Ford,  Jack ,   179 
Ford Motor Company,  181 
Forest  management,  142 
Forest  Service,  U.S.,  211 
Formica,  Gianni,  66 
Fort  Stockton,  Tex.,  89 
Fossil  fuel  sea rch  by  satellite,  50 
Fourier  interferometer,  159 
F P C  (Federal Power Commission), 18 
F rance  (see also Au ra ,  Mirage  F I E ,  Sret 2 ,  
S tar le t te ,   Symphonie  2 )  
Cen t re  #Etudes  Nucleaires,  212 
Cen t re   National  #Etudes  Spatiales,  48, 
177 
Centre  National  d e  la  Recherche  Scien- 
tifique,  118 
comsats,  4 
ESRO  contract,  60 
experiments,  229 
Franco-  Soviet cooperation,  103 
launchings,  2,  27,  86,  103,  177, 251 
nuclear  reactors,  220 
space  cen te r  i nF r en ch  Guiana, 111-112 
F rank  Briscoe Co.,  Inc.,  87 
Frankfurter A l lgeme ine ,   152 
FRC.  See  Flight  Research  Center. 
Freeze-prediction  model,  contract  for,  243 
Freeze-temperature prediction research, 24 
Freight  carrier,  giant,  24 
F rench  Guiana,  111-112 
Freon,  13, 70,  247 
“Frontier  Technology and  Shuttle  Country,” 
35 
Frutkin,  Arnold  W.,  iii 
Fuels,  19, 21,  52,  54, 67-68,  92,  218, 
Fuller,  George A.,  Company,  240 
Funding,  17,  18,  19,  148, 173 
Fungi,  zone-forming,  134 
Fuqua,  Don,  188, 218 
Furguson,  E rne s t  B.,  84 
Furnace,  space  experiments,  213 
“Fu tu re   Space  Programs,”  219 

220 

G 

Gagarin,  Yuri,  136, 191 
Gagarin Cosmonaut Center,  U.S.S.R.,  65 
Galapagos Islands,  87 

Galactic  center,  138 
Galilee,  S e a  of,  243 
Gulileo  ZZ (instrumented Convair  !NO),  71, 
100 
Gamma  rays,  11, 89,  141, 162,  181,  187 
Ganymede  (Jupiter’s moon),  114-  115 
Garments,  biological  isolation,  51 
GARP (Global A<mospheric Research  Pro- 
gram),  109,  117 
Garriott,  Owen K.,  64 
Gas  industry,  50 
Gas,  natural,  11, 99 
Ga s  pipeline,  Soviet,  244 
Ga s  storage safety,  11 
Gas,  stratospheric,  159 
GASP (Global Air Sampling Program), 41-42 
GATE  (GARP  Atlantic  Tropical  Experi- 
ment),  117 
Gates  Learjet,  65  
Gatland,  Kenneth W., 67 
GAW.  See  General Aviation-Whitcomb. 
GCA Corporation,  91  
Gemini program,  67,  128,  178 
General  aviation  engines,  noise  investi- 
gations,  127 
General  Aviation  Technology  Advisory 
Pane l   (NASA), 98 
General Aviation-Whitcomb (GAW) airfoil, 
53 
General  Dynamics  Corporation,  2,  4,  99, 
107 
General  Electric  Company,  89,  93,  109, 
193, 202,  204,  211,  214,  233 
General  Services  Administration  (GSA), 
114,  145 
Generation  of  electricity,  54, 89 
General Motors Corporation,  24,  36 
Geochemistry  and   Analytical  Chemistry, 
Moscow  Institute  of,  226 
Geodesic  domes,  242 
GEODSS  (ground  electro-optical  deep- 
m a c e   surveillance).  215 
Geod$namic  Experimental Ocean   Satellite 
(GEOS), 1 ,  60,  201 
Geography,  ASTP  observations,  135 
GeologicalSurvey, U.S.  (USGS), 19 ,71 ,233  
Geology,  comparative,  175-  176 
Geophysical Union,  191 
Geophysics Corporation,  287,  288 
George  A.  Fuller  Company,  240 
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology,  232 
GEOS  (Geodynamic  Experimental  Ocean  
Satellite),  1 ,  60,  201 
Geos  I  (Explorer 29) ,  63  
Geos 2  (Explorer 36),  63 
Geos 3 ,  62-63,  258, 277 
Geostationary  Operational  Environmental 
Satellite  (GOES),  1 ,   26,  206,  271, 
277-279 
Geosynchronous orbit, A ts   6 ,  87 
Getting,  Ivan,  237 
Ghana,  207 
ghz:  gigahertz (1 billion cycles pe r  second) 
Gibson,  Edward G.,  64,  173,  191 
Gibson,  Roy,  27,  43,  66,  93,  123 
Gilruth,  Robert  R..  235 
Giuli,  Thomas,  37 

3 10 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Ind e x  

Glenn,  John,  136 
Glennan,  T.  Keith,  125 
Global Air  Sampling Program  (GASP),  41 
Global  Atmospheric  Research  Program 
(GARP),  109,  117, 207 
GMS (Japanese meteorological satellite), 139 
GNP  (gross national  product) U.S.,  158 
Goddard News,  124,  199 
Goddard,  Robert  H.,  12, 64 
Goddard Soace  Flieht  Center.  2.  9.  22.  26. 

283 
WES.  See  Geostationary  Ope ra t iona l  
Environmental  Satellite. 
Golan Heights,  243 
Gold,  Dr.  Thomas,  63 
Golden Gate  Bridge,  paint  tes t ,   148 
Goldstein,  Richard M.,  114-115 
Goldstone,  C a l i .   (NASA  facility),  9,  166, 
203,  231 
Goldwater,  Senator  Barry,  115 
Goodyear Aerospace  Corporation,  44,  59 
Goodyear Rubber Corporation,  57 
Gordon,  Robert  V.,  147 
Gorno-Altaisk,  U.S.S.R.,  59 
Graphite,  qualities of,  230 
Gravitational field,  ea r th ,  6 3  
Gravity,  11, 205,  230 
Grechko,  Georgy M.,  3,  91,  253,  282,  283 
Green Bank,  W.  Va.,  observatory,  231 
Greenbelt  Homes,  Inc.,  29 
Greenbelt, Md.,  TDA  station,  9 
Greenberg,  Daniel S.,  103 
Greenhouse  effect,  183 
Greenland,  207,  218,  246,  283 
Greer,  Robert  E.,  182 
Griffin,  Gerald  D.,  139 
Grobecker,  Alan  J.,  8 
Gross national  product  (GNP),  U.S.,  158 
Ground  electro-optical  deep-space  surveil- 
lance  (GEODSS),  215 
Groupement  Industriel  Europken  #Etudes 
Spatiales (Eurospace),  93 
Grumman  Aerospace  Corporation,  70,  94, 
136 
Grumman American Aviation  Carp.,  198 
Grumman  Gulfstream  (aircraft), 65,  198 
GSA  (General  Services  Administration), 
114,  145 
GSFC.  See Goddard Space  Flight  Center. 
Gubarev,  Aleksey  A.,  3,  91,  253,  282 
Gum  nebula,  225 
Gwynn Island,  Va.,  74 
Gymnodinium  phytoplankton red-tide,  179, 
249 
Gyro anomaly  investigation,  15 
Gyroscopic systems,  214,  216 

H 

Hackerman,  Norman,  84 
Halcon,  Inc.,  68 
Haley  Astronautics Award,  191 

Hammarstrom, Ove, 66,  121 
Hammud  al-Khalid,  Sulayman,  130 
Handler,  Philip,  34  
Hansen,  Grant L.,  35,  36 
Harmon Aviation  Awards,  74 
Harr,  Karl G.,  220 
HASPA.  See High-altitude supe rp re s su red  
powered  aerostat. 
Hawaii,  135, 137,  138, 195, 206,  246,  248 
Hawkes,  John,  8 
HC-  130H (rescue  aircraft),  74 
HCMM.  S e e  Heat  Capacity Mapping Mis- 
sion. 
Health,  Education,  and  Welfare,  U.S. 
Dept.  of  (HEW),  29 
HEAO.  See High  Energy  Astronomy  Ob- 
servatory. 
Heart  attack,  177 
Hearth,  Donald  P.,  129 
Heat  Capacity Mapping Mission  (HCMM), 
185 
Heat,  130,  175 
Heavy-particle  cosmic  ray  exposure  re- 
ceived by  astronauts,  11 
Hecker,  Edward J.,  183 
Helicopters,  66, 99,  107 
Helios 1, 46,  47,  61,  212 
Helium,  17, 37,  99,  180 
Hello,  Bastian,  182 
HEW.  See  Health,  Education,  and  Wel- 
fare,  U.S.  Dept.  of. 
High-altitude  research,  13, 49  
High-altitude  superpressured  powered  aero- 
s t a t  (HASPA),  219 
High  Ene rgy   Astronomy  Ob se rva to ry  
(HEAO),  10,  14, 48,  79,  85 
High Flight  (evangelistic foundation),  173, 
182 
High-temperature  core  reactors,  30 
Highly  Maneuverable  Aircraft  Technology 
(HIMAT) program,  66 
Hinners,  Noel W.,  73,  143,  158 
Hinterman,  Hans,  121 
HIRS (high-resolution temperature sounder), 
109 
Hoffman,  Han s  E.  W.,  35 
Holbrook,  Gordon F.,  36 
Hole  in  ionosphere,  97 
Halloman, Dr.  J. Herbert,  68 
Holmdel,  New  Jersey,  166 
Homes,  hea t  loss,  130 
Honeywell,  Inc..  13 
Hopi  Indians,  supernova  record,  186 
Hosenball,  S.  Neil,  24,  111, 165 
Housing  and   Urban  Development,  U.S. 
Dept. of  (HUD), 113 ,120 ,143 ,148 ,193  
Houston, Tex.,  ASTP  mission control,  132 
Houston,  Univ.  of,  166, 192, 219,  235,2&, 
285 
Hovis,  Warren A.,  249 
Hsinhua  (PRC  news  agency),  149 
Huancayo Observatory,  Pe ru ,   90-91 
HUD.  See Housing and Urban Development, 
U S .   Dept.  of. 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  31,  38,  74,  79,  116, 
119,  194 
Human  immunity,  37 

311 

Index 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Hungary,  153 ,229 ,%1  
Huntsville  T ime s ,   155, 230 
Hurr icanes ,  26,  57,  206 
Hurt,  Hugh H.,  36 
Huskie  giant  a ircraf t ,  24 
Hydrochloric acid  in  s tra tosphere ,  237 
Hydrogen,  17, 68,  127,  159, 217,  219,  220 
Hypersonic  research ,   129, 239 

I 

IAU  (International  Astronomical  Union), 
162, 249-250 
IBM (International Business Machines Cor- 
poration),  10,  126,  136, 146, 148, 180, 
197.  245 
Icarus,  232 
Ice   research ,   142, 207, 218,  232,  237 
Ice-warn  (program), 5 
E A  (integrated electronic assembly), 7 ,181  
Iliac 4  (computer),  50 
Illinois, Univ.  of,  50, 91, 287 
Immunity  sys tem ,   human,  37 
Immunology,  190 
IMOS (Inadvertent Modifcation of the Strat- 
osphere) ,   Federa l   Interagency  Task  
Force  on,  29 
IMP   (Explorer  Interplanetary  Monitoring 
Platform),  124 
Improved  TIROS   Operational  Satellite 
(ITOS  E-2),  2 
India, 32 ,37 ,67 ,87 ,126 ,127 ,130 ,157 ,163 ,  
n r  1 131 
Indians,  American,  supernova  record ,   186 
Indian  Ocean ,   89,  180,  195, 207 
Indonesia,  4,  31  
Industrial  Research,  193 
Indus tr ia l  Tectonics,  Inc.,  193 
Industry-Federal  liaison,  152 
Inefficiency, 98 
Infections,  urinary,  177 
Inflation,  21 
Infrared  observation  of  upper  a tmosphere ,  
100 
Infrared  Observatory,  Airborne,  29,  88 
Infrared  telescope  project,  84 
Instituto  Geofisico de l  Pe ru ,   91 
Ins trumen ta t ion  of  aircraft,  6 
In tegra ted   electronic  assembly  (IEA),  7, 
181 
In teg ra ted   Propu ls ion   Con tro l   Sys tem  
(IPCS),  187 
In tegra ted  Subsys tems  Tes t   Bed,  52 
Intelligent  ex tra tewes tr ia l   life,  164,  231, 
232 
INTELSAT  (International  Telecommuni- 
ca t ions   Satellite  Organization),  4,  24, 
30,  58,  73,  80, 93,  122, 138,  159,  195, 
227,  240 
Intelsat  I  F - 1   (Ea r ly  B i rd ) ,   89 
Intelsat N F - 1 ,   2,  89,  180, 195, 260,  277, 
278 
I n t e i a t  IV   F - 6 ,   33,  180 
Intelsat  IV  F - 8 ,   30,  180 
Intelsat  IVA   F - 1 ,   2,  270,  277,  279 

In te lsa t  V  satellites,  138 
Intensified-silicon  intensified-target  (ISIT) 
camera ,   215 
Interagency  cooperation,  119,  127,  161, 
1 8 3 , 1 9 4 , 2 0 4 , 2 1 3  
Interagency  Ta sk  Force,  183 
Interim  Agreements  for  the   Establishment 
of  a  Global  Commercial  Comsat  Sys- 
tem ,   195 
Interior, U.S.  Dept. of (DOI), 6 , 8 , 9 , 1 8 , 2 0 3  
In terna l  combustion  engine,  181, 183 
Intercosmos  (organization), 241 
Intercosmos  (U.S.S.R.  satellites),  251 
Intercosmos  13 ,   257 
Intercosmos  14, 241,  273 
International  Association of Machinists,  51  
International  Astronomical  Union  (IAU), 
162, 249-250 
In terna t iona l  Business  Machines  Corpora- 
tion.  See   IBM. 
In terna t iona l   commun ica t ions ,   Co rn sa t  
ra te s   for,  230 
International  cooperation  on  space ,   1,  31, 
32 ,39 ,41 ,103 ,   130 ,131 ,139 ,197 ,198 ,  
212 
International  Explorers  Society,  242 
International  Harvester  Company, 214 
International  Quiet  Sun  Year,  90 
International  Space   Research   Committee, 
25 
International Telecommunications Satellite 
Organization. See  INTELSAT. 
International  Telecommunications  Union, 
93,  216 
In terp lane tary   Monitoring  Platform.  See  
IMP. 
In terpre ta t ion  of  satellite  imagery, 9 
Ionosphere,  13, 97, 244 
Ion-thruster  propulsion  system,  93 
IPCS   (Integrated  Propulsion  Control  Sys- 
tem),  187 
IR:  infrared. 
Iran ,   3,  4,  203 
Irwin,  Jame s  R.,  173, 182 
IS IT   (intensified-silicon intensified-target) 
camera ,   215 
Isolation,  biological,  51 
Israe l ,   233 
Italy,  44,  60, 78,  203 
I tek  Corporation,  112 
ITOS  E-2 (Improved T IROS  Operational 
Satellite),  2 
Ivanchenkov,  Aleksandr  S.. 28  
I zve s t iya ,  38,  39 

J 

Jaguar   (close-air-support aircraft),  95  
Jakar ta ,   Indonesia,  31 
Jane’s  Weapons S y s t e m ,  244 
Japan ,   4,  35,  48,  53,  139, 184, 251 
Jastrow,  Robert,  175 
Javelin,  rocket,  284 
J e t  engines,  32,  215 
Je t  Propulsion Laboratory, 2,22,50,51-52, 
55 ,77 ,80 ,102 ,159 ,166 ,181 ,183 ,184-  
185 ,202 ,203 ,   205 ,208 ,223-224 ,228  

312 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Index 

Je t   S t a r  (business jet),  190 
Jet aircraft,  44 
Je ts tream ,   31, 233 
Jever  Air Force  Base,  We s t  Germany,  126 
J icamarca  Observatory,  Peru ,   90-91 
Jodrell  Bank  radio telescope  station,  Eng- 
land ,   178 
John  C .   Lindsay  Award,  124 
John  Jeffr ies  Award,  37 
Johns  Hopkins  University,  31,  63,  79,  166, 
176,  179, 226,  285 
Johnson,  C larence  L.,  190 
Johnson.  R.  Tennev.  24.  111 
Johnson 'Space   C e i t e r ,   11-12,  22,  28,  37, 
44, 49,  58, 59,  62,  67,  69,  83,  88,  104, 
110,  120,  139, 144, 164,  195, 196,  198, 
202,  219, 222,  235,  237,  2 4 ,  243 
Johnston,  Richard  S., 147,  149 
Jones,  J.  Lloyd,  Jr.,  88 
Jones,  Robert  T.,  115 
Journal  of Atmospheric Sciences,  28 
JPL .   See  Jet Propulsion  Laboratory. 
JSC.  See Johnson  Space  Cen ter .  
Jup i ter  (planet), 29 -30 ,35 ,42 -43 ,89 ,108 ,  
114-115,  124, 199, 228,  242 
Justice,  U.S.  Dept.  of,  29 

K 

Kuiper Airborne  Observatory,  88,  138 
Kuiper,  Gerard  P.,  88 
Kuwait,  ground  station,  130 

L 

Labor and  Pub l ic  Welfare,  Sena te  Commit- 
tee  on ,   116 
Laboratoire  d e   Meteorologie  Dynamique, 
207 
LA C E .  See  Large a reac rop  inventoryexper- 
iment. 
LAGEOS. See Laser  Geodynamic Satellite. 
Lake  Tahoe,  Nev.,  168 
Lake  Victoria,  Africa,  87 
Lakeland,  Fla.,  243 
Laminar  flow,  54 
Lancaster,  Malcolm C.,  37 
Land-use  planning by  satellite,  9 ,   183 
Landau,  Ralph,  68 
Landsat program, 5 ,9 ,74 ,168 ,208 ,212 ,232 .  
See  ERTS. 
Landsat-B,  5 
Landsat-C,  21 
L a n d s a t l ,  5 ,9 ,33 ,38 ,163 ,179 ,185 ,202 ,  
a'.'. ZLZ 
Landsat 2 ,5 ,8 -9 ,33 ,38 ,53 ,90 ,157 ,185 ,  
Landsat 2 ,5 ,8 -9 ,33 ,38 ,53 ,90 ,157 ,185 ,  
202,  237,  242,  253, 277,  278 
202,  237,  242,  253, 277,  278 
Langley Research  Cen ter  (LaRC), 2 ,22 ,31 ,  
Langley Research  Cen ter  (LaRC), 2 ,22 ,31 ,  
36,  53,  54,  79,  96, 110,  126,  129,  143, 
36,  53,  54,  79,  96, 110,  126,  129,  143, 
160, 171, 202,  204,  214,  243,  293 
160,  171, 202,  204,  214,  243,  293 
LaRC.  See L a n d e v  Research   Cen ter .  
LaRC.  See L a n d e v  Research   Cen ter .  
Large,  Arlen J.,-33 
Large  a rea   crop 
inventory  experiment 
(LACE ) ,   5,  9,  44,  59,  172, 224,  237 
Large  Lift  Vehicle  (LLV), 154 
Large Space  Telescope (LST), 14 ,105 ,113 ,  
127, 144, 147,  148, 194, 230 
Laser  Geodvnamic Satellite (LAGEOS) net- 
work,  201 
Laser  Tracking  Subne t ,   244 
Lasers.  44. 63.  119.  229.  244 
Lassen,  Herber t  A',  37 
Launch  complex,  39 ,61 ,   112 
Launch  processing  system  (LPS),  93,  152 
Launch  vehicles,  45,  101, 223 
Launchings,  1-2,  21,  89,  163, 277,  283 
Lawrence  S p e n y  Award,  37 
Law,  space ,   165 
Lawrence  Livermore Laboratory,  234 
Lazar,  Jame s  B.,  190 
Lazarev,  Vasily,  59, 282 
LCMS. See  Low-Cost Modular Spacecraf t .  
Lead-antimony  eu tec t ic ,  210 
Lead-silver  alloys,  210 
LeBeau,  Andre,  66 
LeBourget  Airport, Par is ,   95  
Lee,  Ches ter  M.,  64,  110, 189 
Leningrad,  192 
Leninsk, U.S.S.R.,  Baykonur Cosmodrome 
a t ,  83 
Leonov, Aleksey A.,  1 ,28 ,38 ,91 ,121 ,130 ,  
131, 133, 134,  137, 146, 168,  191,205, 
265,  282 
LeRC.  See  Lewis Research  Center. 
Leucocytes  increase   in cosmonauts,  92 
313 

Kadlec,  Paul W.,  36 
Kaliningrad,  U.S.S.R.,  66 
Kansas,  Univ.  of,  129 
Kapustin  Yar,  U.S.S.R.,  167 
K a j a l a i m e n   (Finnish publication),  153 
Kayser,  Lutz T.,  247 
Kazakhstan,  247 
Kennedy,  Sen .  Edward  M.,  12 
Kennedy,  Pres iden t  John  F.,  136, 226 
Kennedy Space  Cen ter  (KSC), 2 , 4 ,5 - 8 ,11 ,  
12 ,22 ,23 ,   28 ,29 ,32 ,44 ,61 ,67 ,69 ,73 ,  
77 ,80 ,85 ,92 ,93 ,94 ,96 ,100 ,110 ,112 ,  
117, 121,  123, 132,  137, 143,  146,  157, 
161, 167,  168,  171, 183, 195, 206,  207, 
213,  214,  218,  219,  240,  242,  243 
Kent,  Wash.,  Boeing  Space  Cen ter ,   206 
Kenya,  San  Marco  launch   platform,  78 
Kerguelen  Is.,  launches ,   39,  283 
Kerwin,  Joseph  P.,  64,  74 
Kidney-cell  experiment,  4 
Kiev,  U.S.S.R.,  192 
K i ku   (Japanese  satellite),  184, 251,  267 
Kleppe,  Thomas  S.,  212 
Klimuk,  Pyotr,  91, 92,  121, 282 
Kline,  Raymond  A.,  189 
Knights of  Columbus,  173 
Kompfner,  Rudolf,  189 
Kostroma  Oblast,  U.S.S.R.,  39 
Kotelnikov,  Vladimir  A.,  77,  131,  145 
Kourou,  French   Guiana,  86,  111 
Kraft,  Chr is topher  C.,  235,  243 
G a m e r ,  Robert  S.,  110 
Kranzer,  Ditmar,  216 
Kremlin,  192 
KSC.  See  Kennedy  Space  Cen ter .  
Kubasov, Valery N.,  1 ,28 ,91 ,130 ,131 ,132 ,  
133,  134, 168, 191, 205,  265,  282 

Index  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Lewis Research  Cen ter(LeRC) ,  2 ,22 ,33 ,42 ,  
49 ,50 ,67 ,82 ,93 ,111 ,139 ,146 ,171 ,193 ,  
195, 209,  213 
Lick Observatory,  Univ.  of  California,  126 
Life,  35,  164,  176 
Life  sciences,  33,  165, 197 
Life-support  system  for Space   Shu t t le ,  81 
Lifting body  (aircraft),  128,  172-173 
Light  flashes  observed  by Sky lab   4 ,  94 
Li  htning  s tr ikes ,   94,  110 
L a y ,  William  E.,  22,  226 
Limb-radiance inversion rad iome ter  (LRIR), 
109 
Lindsay,  John  C . ,   Award,  124 
Liquid-metal  plasma  valve,  38  
Liquid  mixing  in  space ,   210 
Lloyd,  Russell  P . ,   168 
LLV.  See  Large  Lift Vehicle. 
Lockheed  Aircraft Corporation,  10, 44,  78, 
99,  148, 190, 246,  284 
Lockheed  Electronics  Co.,  Inc.,  202 
Lockheed  Je t   S ta r  aircraft,  65 
Lockheed Missiles and Space  Go.,  Inc . ,  14, 
120, 228 
London,  England,  111, 122,  212 
Long Beach,  Calif.,  178 
Lord,  Douglas  R.,  49,  224 
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory,  119 ,190  
Los Angeles,  112,  160 
Los Angeles T im e s ,  47,139,159,172,183,203, 
229,  233 
Louis W.  Hill Award,  36 
Lousma,  J a c k  R.,  6,  64,  65,  123 
Love,  Eugene  S.,  54 
Love,  Michael V.,  172, 293,  294 
Lovell,  S ir  Bernard,  178 
Low, George M.,  21,77,105,110,131,18.5, 
189 
Low-Cost Modular  Spacecraf t  (LCMS), 25 
Low-Cost  Silicon Array  (JPL  project),  208 
Low-gravity processing,  11 
LPS  (launch  processing  system),  152 
LRIR (limb-radiance inversion radiometer), 
109 
LST.  See  Large  Space  Telescope. 
LTV Aerospace  Corporation,  115 
Lucas ,  William  P . ,   125, 203 
Luciferase,  176 
Luciferin,  176 
Ludwig,  George H.,  212 
Luksch,  Walter,  8,  66 
Luminescence,  176-  177 
Luna  2 2 ,  99,  100,  176 
Lunar  and planetaryexplorations,  11 ,14 ,45 ,  
101 
Lunar  Cura tor ia l  Facility,  114 
Lunar  Orb i ter  (NASA program),  12 
Lunar   Roving Vehicle,  125 
Lunar   samp les ,  23,  50,  114, 144,  188 
Lundin.  Bruce  T..  213 
Lung le’sion in  as tronau t ,  171 
Lunik I, 25 
Lunney, GlynnS.,  7 ,59 ,60 ,77 ,110 ,127 ,195  
M 

M2  (lifting  body),  128 

Machinists, International Association of, 51  
Madagascar,  130 
Madrid,  233  
MAF.  See  Michoud Assembly Facility. 
Magellanic Clouds,  217 
Magnetic  equa tor ,   rocke ts  launched  a t ,  90 
Magnetic  field,  105, 233,  245 
Magnetic  particle,  166 
Magnetic-tape certification facility, 201,244 
Magnetically  interlinked  points,  39 
Magnetohydrodynamic generator,  54 
Magnetosphere,  100, 241 
Makarov,  Oleg,  59,  282 
Malagasy Republic,  129-  130 
Mallcin,  Myron S.,  222,  223 
Man,  effec ts  of  space   flight, 214 
Management and Budget, U.S.  Office of, 96 
Manami trees ,   138 
Manikins  used   by  NASA,  88 
Manke,  John  N.,  161, 293,  294 
Manned  laboratories  in  space ,   96-97 
Manned  maneuvering  unit,  62 
“Manned Orbital Systems Concepts” (MSFC 
study),  239 
Manned Space  Flight,  NASA Office of, 48 
Manned space  flights, 22 ,160 ,164 ,251 ,281  
Manned space  s ta t ion ,  U.S.,  105 ,222 ,  239 
Mannheimer,  Harry,  5 
Manufacturing  Chemists  Association, 240 
Mao Tse-tung,  149 
Maps,  radioastronomy,  217 
Marine  Environmental  Sc iences   Consor- 
tium,  90 
Mariner-  Jup i ter-   Sa tu rn  mission, 14 ,35 ,89 ,  
185, 235 
Mariner-  Jup i ter-   Uranus mission,  14, 235 
Mariner,  Ancient,  206 
Mariner-  Sa turn ,   199 
Mariner  missions,  88, 89,  185, 199 
Mariner 5 ,  206 
Mariner 6  and   7,  171 
Mariner  8, 33 
Mar iner10 ,47 ,49 ,50 ,51-52 ,58 ,88 ,115 ,  
124,  175, 210 
Mariner-  Venus  team  award,  77 
Marisat  (maritime-satellite  system),  2, 51, 
60, 82,  151, 180 
Mark,  Hans  M.,  36,  231 
Marots (ESRO’s maritime orbital tes t  sa te l-  
lite).  48 
MarquGd t   Corporation,  129 
Mars(planet),  1 ,8 ,14 ,31 ,55 ,78 ,96 ,110 ,111 ,  
115, 143, 160, 162, 164, 169 ,170 ,   171, 
172,  175,  176,  184, 205 
Marshall,  Mrs.  George C.,  125 
Marshall Space  Flight Cen ter  (MSFC), 4 , 7 ,  
8 ,10 ,12 ,13 ,14 -   15 ,22 ,23 ,30 ,47 ,49 ,57 ,  
61,83,85,89,90,102,105,108,110,113, 
116, 120, 125, 129, 130, 146, 154, 160, 
162, 164, 181, 182, 186, 198, 201,  203, 
210,  211,  212,  213,  217,  221 ,223 ,   232, 
235,  238,  239,  240 
Marshall S t a r ,  5 ,53 ,89 ,110 ,120 ,122 ,233  
Martin,  James S.,  Jr.,  96 ,   143  
Martin Marietta Corporation, 14 ,15 ,62 ,93 ,  
95.  108.  152.  171.  185.  221 
Maryland,  Univ. ’of, 231 

314 

Index 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Massachusetts InstituteofTeclmology (MIT; 
see also Alcator;  Cen te r  for Space  Re- 
search) ,  79,  215,  219-220,  289 
Materials  processing,  24,  179, 205,  210 
Mathews,  Char les  W.,  5,  224 
Matilsky,  Terry,  158 
Matthoefer,  Hans,  43 
Mauna Kea,  Hawaii,  137 
Max-Planck  Ins t i tu t ,   212 
May,  Ellery  B.,  110, 160, 189 
Mayfair  Construction  Company,  157 
McCluney,  Ross,  179 
McConnell,  Joseph  H.,  82 
McDonald Observatory,  205 
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, 
120, 174, 229,  239 
McDonnell.Douglas Corporation, 2,28-29, 
32,  44,  51,  60,  78,  79,  80,  95,  97,  178 
McElroy,  Michael  B.,  223 
MCI  Communications Corporation, 10,148 
McLeaish,  John  E.,  104 
McLucas.  Tohn  L..  4 
McMur t j ,"ThomaL   C.,  295 
MDM  (multiplexers-demultiplexers),  130 
MechanicalEngineers,  American Society of, 
0 9 c  
433 
Mechanical-thermal  simulator,  26-27 
Medical  isolation of  ASTP  crew,  120 
Medicine and  space  technology, 51,177,219 
Megaton  s tr ike  capacity,  U.S.,  216 
Memory  device,  90 
Mercanti,  Eurico  P.,  179 
Mercury (planet),  47 ,49 ,52 ,   106, 115 ,250  
Mercury  propellant,  9 3  
Mercury  valve,  38 
Mesabi  range,  Minn.,  233 
Messerschmitt-  Boelkow-  Blohm Company, 
95,  163, 240 
Metals,  111, 205 
Meteor  (U.S.S.R.  meteorological  satellite), 
167, 251 
Meteor 21 ,   257 
Meteor 2  -1 ,   265 
Meteor 22 ,   269 
Meteor 23 ,   275 
Meteorology, 2 ,9 ,24 ,26 ,27 ,41 ,71 ,117 ,142 .  
168, 207,  225,  244 
Metric  conversion,  238,  249 
mev:  m a i o n  electron  volts. 
Mexico-Spain  satellite  l ink ,   122 
mhz:  megahertz  (one  million  cycles  per  
second). 
M iam i  Hera ld ,   244,  247 
Miami,  Univ.  of, 44 
Michanowsky,  George,  215 
Michigan,  Environmental  Research   Insti- 
tu te  of,  179 
Michigan,  Univ.  of,  284,  286 
Michoud Assembly  Facility  (MAF), 14, 32 
Microbes,  37 
Microbiological laboratory,  U.S.S.R.,  169 
Micrometeoroids.  46 
Microorganisms,  134 
Microprocessor,  215 
Microwave  energy,  161,  178 
Microwave  Scann ing   Beam  Landing  Sys- 
tem,  69 
Milan,  Univ.  of,  212 

Mili, M.,  9 3  
Militsin, Albesy-V2  81 
Milky Way (galaxy), 84,  134, 141, 187, 196, 
0 7 7  
01 1 
Mineral extraction,  8,  203 
Mineral  resources,  9,  142, 185 
Minicomputers  for Space  Shu t t le ,   85 
Minnesota Public In teres t  Research  Group, 
247 
Minnesota,  Univ.  of,  285 
Minnows,  197 
Mirage  (Fl-E;  French  f q h t e r  aircraft),  99  
Missile (see also individual  missiles,  kinds 
of  missiles,  and missile  systems). 
early warning system,  19  
launchings  monitored  by  U.S.,  86,  242 
nosetip  design,  152 
U.S.S.R.  firing,  166-167 
Mississippi  (state),  Landsa t   applications, 
39,  232 
Mississippi Air and  Wa ter  Pollution Control 
Commission,  90 
Missouri,  Landsat  applications,  232 
MIT.  See  Massachusetts  Ins t i tu te  of  Tech- 
nology,  68,  79,  215,  219-220,  289 
Mitsubishi Electric  Corporation,  53 
Mobile Bay,  90 
Modular  Computer  Systems,  Inc.,  85,  117 
Molina, Mario J., 236 
Molniya (U.S.S.R.  comsat  ser ies) ,  167, 251 
Mo ln iya  1 ,  259,  262,  267 
Mo ln iya  I - 3 0 ,   103, 251 
long-range  communications  and   TV, 
for,  103 
Mo ln iya  2 ,  254,  265,  267,  274 
Mo ln iya  3 ,  258,  272,  275 
Molniya  I-S,  204, 
Monkeys  in  space  program,  121 
Monopole discovery,  166 
Montoya,  Joseph  M.,  186 
Moog  Inc .   Controls  Division, 223 
Moon  (see  also  lunar   headings),  14,  23, 
63 -64 ,74 ,99 -100 ,111 ,124 ,187 ,213 ,  
226 
Morris,  George A.,  115 
Morrison,  Jame s  R.,  5 
Morrison  Knudsen  Company,  69 
Morton,  Rogers  C.  B.,  8 
Moscow,  U.S.S.R.,  3,  81,  137,  191,  208, 
210,  226,  230,  250 
Moscow Mission  Control  Cen ter ,   122,  127 
Mosher,  Char les  A.,  43 ,49 ,   108, 151 
Moss,  Sen .  Frank  E.,  25,  115, 222,  235 
Mount Wilson Observatory,  225 
MRCA (multirole  combat  aircraft),  107 
MSFC.  See Marshall Space  Flight  Center. 
Muir,  Warren  R.,  183 
Multiplexers-demultiplexers  (MDM), 130 
Multirole comba t  aircraft  (MRCA), 107 
Munich  space  operations  cen te r ,   46 
Murcray,  David G.,  240 
Murray,  Bruce C.,  115 
Myers,  Dale  D.,  I82  
Mylar balloon  (Echo  l ) ,   165 
N 
NAA  (National  Aeronautic  Assn.),  190, 
249 

315 

Index 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1975 

NACA.  See  National  Advisory  Committee 
for Aeronautics. 
NAE:  See National Academy of  Engineer- 
ing. 
Names for new planetary features, Moscow 
meeting  on,  250 
Nanking Observatory,  China,  78 
NAS.  See National Academy of  Sciences. 
NASA. S e e  National Aeronautics  and Space 
Administration. 
Nash,  Edward J.,  74 
NASTRAN  (NASA  structural  analysis), 
7 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  (NAE), 
6 8 , 2 2 1 , 2 4 6  
National  Academy  of  Sciences  (NAS),  34, 
68,  141, 246 
National Advisory Committee for Aeronau- 
tics  (NACA), 69,  202 
National Aeronautic Assn.  (NAA) 190, 249 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space   Admini- 
stration  (NASA;  s e e   also  individual 
C e n t e r s ,   o f f ice s ,   an d   p rog r am s ;  
Awards;  Budget,  NASA;  Contract, 
NASA;  Employment,  NASA;  Inter- 
agency  cooperation;  International  Co- 
operation,  space;  Launchings;  and 
Personnel, NASA),  1 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 1 1 , 1 3 ,  
1 9 , 2 9 , 3 5 , 3 7 , 3 8 , 4 1 , 4 3 , 5 4 , 5 7 , 6 3 , 6 9 ,  
71 ,82 ,85 ,93 ,94 ,97 ,98 ,105 ,119 ,123 ,  
127, 129, 144, 151,  158, 165, 168, 171, 
173, i 7 a - i 7 9 , i a 6 , i a 7 , i 9 0 , 2 0 6 , 2 0 7 ,  
218 ,222 ,226 ,24 t3  
National Aviation  Club,  74 
National  Bureau  of  S tanda rd s   (NBS),  43, 
236, 249 
National  Business Aircraft  Association,  65 
National Cance r  Institute,  27-28,  60 
National Cen te r  for Atmospheric Re sea rch  
@CAR),  8 9 , 2 0 7  
National Cen te r  for Resource Recovery, 61 
National  Environmental  Satellite  Service 
(NESS).  NOAA.  211-212.243.248-2.29 
National Gallery of'Art,  137 ' 
N a t io n a l   G eo d e t i c   S a t e l l i t e   P r o g r am  
(NGSP),  63 
Natiopal Medal of  Science,  189-190 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Ad- 
ministration.  See NOAA. 
341 -" - 
National  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory, 
National  Re sea rch   Council,  14,  216,  221, 
246 
National  Science  Board.  84 
National  Science  Foundation  (NSF), 6,  18, 
29,  84,  103, 235 
National  science  policy,  151 
National  Space  Club awards,  64 
National  Space  Science Data Cen te r ,  207 
National  Space   Technology  Laboratories 
(NSTL), 22,  39,  52, 63,  90,  123,  143 
National Wea the r  Service.  71 
NATO  (North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organiza- 
tion),  59,  108 
Natrium  (sodium), 244 
Natural  gas.  See Gas,  natural. 
Natural  Resources Defense Council,  247 

Natural  resources  information,  5 
Nature  magazine,  63, 64 
Nature,  103 
Naugle,  John  E.,  70,  143, 229 
Nauka  I Zh in ,   149 
Navigation,  116, 205-206 
NAVSTAR  (navigation  system  using  time 
and  ranging),  global  positioning  sys- 
tem.  19. 206 
Navy,  U:S.  See U.S.  Navy. 
Nazca  plains,  242 
NBS.  See National Bureau  of  Standards. 
NCAR.  See  National  Cen te r   for  Atmos- 
pheric  Research. 
Neal,  Roy,  64  
Neilon,  John J.,  207 
Neptune  (planet),  168, 198 
Nepzabadsag ,   153 
NESS.  See National Environmental  Satel- 
l i te  Service. 
Ness,  Norman F.,  47,  124 
Netherlands,  8 ,  99,  107 
Netherlands  astronomical  satellite  (Am  I ) ,  
196, 208 
Neutron  stars,  48,  232 
New  Hampshire,  Univ.  of,  285 
New  Mexico  Department  of  Agriculture, 
219 
New Mexico  Institute of Mining  and  Tech- 
nology,  94 
New  Mexico,  launchings,  248 
New  Mexico  S ta te  Univ.,  127, 219 
New  York  City,  N.Y.,  11,  112 
New York  S ta te  Development Corporation, 
86 
New  York,  S ta te  Univ.  of,  15, 36,  80 
New  York  Times, The ,   1 ,  27,  31, 49, 6 0 , 9 0 ,  
111, 121,  175, 176, 181,  186, 192, 225, 
231,  243,  246 
Newport  News Times H e ra l d ,   160, 207 
Newsreview  (AFSC  publication),  97,  124, 
154,  178,  181, 215,  216 
Newsweek,  99 
Newton,  Mass.,  227 
NGSP  (National  Geodetic  Satellite  Pro- 
gram).  63 
Nicoioss(an,  Arnauld E.,  148-149,  171 
Nike-Apache,  90,  284,  285,  287,  288 
Nike-Cajun,  237,  286,  288,  290 
Nike-Hawk  (sounding rocket),  187, 289 
Nike-Javelin,  290 
Nike-Tomahawk.  90.  285.  286.  287.  288. 
289, 291 
Nimbus  (satellites),  13, 26,  142 
Nimbus-F  experimental  meteorological 
satellite,  1 ,  51, 60 
Nimbus  1 ,   109 
N im b u s 2 ,   109 
N im b u s 3 ,   109 
Nimbus 4 ,   109, 228 
Nimbus  5, 109 
Nimbus  6 ,  108-109,  207,  232,  233,  237, 
263 ,277 ,278  
Ninety-Nines,  Inc.,  249 
Nitrogen,  223,  247 
Nitrogen-oxide  emission  standards,  8 
Nitrogen  tetroxide,  148 

316 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1 9 7 5  

Ind e x  

Nixon, Pres iden t  Richard M.,  90,  104, 142, 
143 
NOAA (National Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration).  (See   also  National 
E n v i r o nm e n t a l   S a t e l l i t e   S e r v i c e  
(NESS)), 2,  19, 24,  25,  37,  43,  57,  59, 
71,  94,  179,  206,  211,  212,  231,  243, 
246,  248-249 
N o m  satellites:  see ITOS E-2,  Sms,  Goes 
Nobel Pr ize ,   125,  190 
Noggle,  Lawrence  W.,  57, 58 
Noise 
galactic,  100 
je t ,   32-33,  147 
reduction,  2,  19, 65,  127 
Noordwijk,  the  Netherlands,  93 
NORAD. See  North American Air Defense 
Command. 
Nordberg,  William,  163, 212 
Norsk  Polarinstitut,  Norway,  207 
North  American  Air  Defense  Command 
(NORAD), 47 
N o r t h   A t l a n t i c   T r e a t y   O r g a n i z a t i o n  
(NATO), 59,  108 
Nor thrup  Corporation,  4,  54,  124, 240 
Nor thrup  Services,  Inc.,  14 
Norway,  99,  107 
Nosecap  on  Space  Shu t t le ,  7 
Nosetip  designs,  152 
Novosibirsk,  U.S.S.R.,  192 
NRC  (Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission),  6- 
7. (See also National Research Council) 
NRL  (Naval  Research   Laboratory).  See  
U.S.  Navy. 
NSF.  S e e  National  Sc ience  Foundation. 
NSPL   (NASA S tandard  Pa r t s   List),  239 
NSTL.  See   National  Space   Technology 
Laboratories. 
Nuc lear  energy,  119, 219,  220 
Nuc lear  fusion,  219-220 
Nuclear-powered  aircraft,  57,  123 
Nuclear-powered  lasers ,   119 
Nuclear  reactors,  220 
Nuc lear   Regulatory  Commission  (NRC), 
6-7 
Nuclear  Techno logy ,  30 

0 
OA  (Office of  Applications,  NASA Hq), 110 
Oao  3  (Cop e rn i cw ,  Orbiting  Astronomical 
Laboratory),  73,  113 
OAST  (Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space  
Technolo  NASA  Hq),  7,  88,  293 
Oberg,  James%,  64 
Objects  in  space ,  manmade,  47 
Observatory,  88,  138, 237 
Oceanography,  2,  117,  142,  179, 218 
Office of Management  and  Budget  (OMB), 
1, 33 
Office  of  Occupational  Medicine  and   En- 
vironmental Health,  50 
Office  of  Sc ience   and   Technology  (White 
House),  90,  116,  151 
Offshore  oil, 159, 232-233 
Ogo 1 ,  (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory), 
233 

Ohia  trees ,   138 
Oil,  107, 151, 159,  185, 232-233 
Oja,  Heikka,  169 
O’Keefe,  John  A.,  111 
Okorokov,  Boris,  137 
OMB (Office of  Management  and  Budget), 
1 ,  33 
OMSF   (Office  of  Manned  Space   Flight, 
NASA Hq),  48,  123, 198 
O’Neill,  Gerard  K.,  250 
OPA  (Office of  Program  Assurance),  46 
Opportunities  and Choices in  Space Science, 
1974,  14 
Optical  bench ,   47 
Optical  sensa t ions  from  cosmic  rays,  37 
Orange  County,  Calif.,  202 
Orbita  network  (U.S.S.R.)  103, 245 
Orbital  behavior  theory,  166 
Orbital Test Satellite  (OTS), 48 
Orbital Transpor t  and  Rake ten  A.G.,  247 - 
24% 
Orbiter,  Shu t t le ,  34,  185, 189, 201 
and  Lander   1  to  Mars,  55 
Orbiter 2,  73 
Orb i ter  102, 38 
Orbiting  Astronomical Observatory  (OAO), 
73,  113 
Orbiting  Geophysical  Observatory  (OGO), 
233 
Orbiting Solar Observatory.  See  OSO. 
Orders  of Magn i tude ,   69 
Orion (constellation), 158 
Orlando Sentinel S ta r ,   165,  168, 229 
Orthostatic  stability  in  cosmonauts,  92 
Osborne,  Weyman A.,  166 
Osnos,  Pe ter ,   230 
O S 0   (Orbiting  Solar  Observatory),  1,  10, 
60,  117-118 
Os0  1 ,  51,  118 
os0  5,  10 
os0  7,  10 
Os0  8 ,  117,  118, 208,  264,  277,  278 
OSS (Office of  Space  Sc ience ,  NASA Hq), 
13,  198 
OST.  See  Office  of  Sc ience  and  Technol- 
om. 
OTDA (Office of Tracking and  Data Acqui- 
sition,  NASA HqJ,  189 
OToo le ,  Thomas,  3,  131,  137, 233 
OTS  (Orbital T e s t  Satellite), 48 
Ou ter  solar  system,  14 
Ou ter  space ,   165, 213,  231 
“Outlook  for Ae rony t ic s ,”   (study), 218 
“Outlook  for  Space ,   150 
“Outlook for the Space  Program,”  (speech), 
22 1 
Ovenden,  Michael W.,  168 
Overmyer,  Robert  F.,  157 
Oxygen,  147 
Ozone 
air  sampling,  42 
depletion,  144,  159,  183, 223,  234,  236- 
237,  246,247 
skin cancer,  27-28,  223 
supersonic  t r a n s   orts,  8 
stratospheric  po in t ion ,   27-28,  70 
Ozonesonde  balloons,  90 

317 

Index 

P 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Pioneer  I I ,   42-43 
Pioneer 6,  242 
Pioneer  10,  29,  42,  88,  108,  138, 242 
Pioneer  1 1 ,   29,  242,  245 
Pioneer-  Jupiter  orbiter,  14  
Pioneer-Saturn  (formerly Pioneer  ZI), 42, 
228 
Pioneer-Venus  project,  14,  100-101,  113, 
127-128,  144,  147,  175,  194 
P ipe r  PA-34  Seneca  aircraft,  53 
Pittsburgh,  Univ.  of, 91, i 8 7 ,  284, 285, 287 
“P lane  for Ou te r  Space ,   150 
“Planeta,?  Exploration: Earth‘s  New  Hori- 
zon,  35 
Planets,  19,  78,  163,  175,  198, 206 
P lan t  tumor  experiment,  197 
Plants,  aquatic,  39 
Plasma  processes,  85 
Plasma  experiment  on Mariner  I O ,   52 
Platforms,  109, 207,  232 
Plesetsk  (U.S.S.R.  launch  s i te) ,  229 
Plum  Brook  Station  (ERDA), 213 
Plume  simulation,  14 
Pluto  (planet), 78,  198 
PMI  Facilities  Management  Corporation, 
207 
PMR (pressure-modulated radiometer), 109 
pndb:  perceived  noise  in  decibels 
Pogue,  William  R . ,   64, 94,  173,  187,  191 
Poland.  229 
Polar  station,  Soviet, 218 
Polcyn,  Fabian,  179 
Pollution,  19, 21,  27-28, 39,  106, 154, 181- 
183, 247. 
Pollux  and  Castor  (French  satellites),  86, 
251,  260 
Polycrystalline  solidification,  210 
Pope  Pau l  VI ,   140 
Pope’s  Ea s te r  Message,  173 
Powder  Puff  Derby,  249 
Power  from  orbit,  30-31 
“Powersat”  (solar power  sa te l l i te) ,  161 
Pozinsky,  Norman,  188-189 
PPG  Industries,  13 
“Practical  Applications of  Space Systems” 
(NRC report),  141 
P ra t t   & Whitney  Aircraft  Division  (United 
Aircraft  Corp.), 2 
P ravda ,   210 
PRC   (People’s  Republic  of  China).  S e e  
China. 
Precipitation,  94  
Presidential  Management  Improvement 
Awards,  77 
P re s su re  groups,  60 
Pressure-modulated 
1 n9 
P r ic i , -Pau l   B.,  166 
Prichard,  Reuben P.,  50 
Princeton  Univ.,  250 
Productivity,  36,  68  
Production  in  space ,  210 
Prognoz 4 ,  245,  251,  275 
Program  Assurance,  NASA  Office  of, 
46-47 
Propellant  research,  154 
Propulsion technology,  49 ,82 ,93 ,   10.5,  119, 
129,  190 

P-38 (fighter aircraft),  190 
Pacific  Ocean,  180,  195 
Page,  George  F.,  207 
Paint,  inorganic,  148 
Paintings  following ASTP,  137 
Paiute-Tomahawks,  6 
Palestine,  Tex.,  8 9  
Palmdale,  Calif.,  185 
Palmer,  Patrick,  231 
Pan  American  World  Airways,  42,  224 
Parachutes,  100,  160,  186,  190-191,  217 
Paris,  95,  106-107,  207 
Particle-interface  reactions,  210 
Particle  s t ream  measurements,  39 
Particle  with  one magnetic  pole,  166 
Partnership: A  History of  the Apollo-Soyuz 
Test Pro jec t ,  66,  77,  83,  110,  120,  121, 
136 
Pa sadena  S ta r  News,  161 
Patterson  Air  Force  Base,  58 
Patterson,  John,  125 
Pauling,  Linus C.,  190 
Pea r l  River  buoys,  90 
Pecora,  William  T.,  Award,  212 
Peenemunde,  Germany,  235 
Pendray,  G.  Edward,  Award,  36 
Pennsylvania S ta te  Univ.,  91, 286,287,288 
Pentagon,  164, 245, 246 
People’s  D a i l y ,  The  (China), 140,  176 
People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC ) .   S e e  
China,  Peolde’s  Republic of. 
Pe rmanen t  space  facility,  151 
Personnel,  NASA 
appointment,  24-25,  47,  88,  122,  129, 
173,  189, 207 
force  reduction,  13 
Peru.  90.  203.  242.  283 
Peterson;  kusLfW., 29 
Petrone,  Rocco A.,  36,  61,  69,  70,  229 
Petrov,  Boris  N.,  7,  191, 241 
Ph.D.s,  overproduction,  60 
Ph i lade lph ia   Inquirer,  86,  142,  157,  158, 
164 
Phillips,  Samuel C.,  180,  181 
Phillips,  William  H.,  36 
Phosphates,  water hyacinths  absorbing, 39 
Photochemical  processes  caused  by  solar 
ultraviolet  radiation,  13  
Photoelectron  distribution  measurement, 
187 
Photography  by  satellites,  86,  134 
Photovoltaic conference,  8 0  
Photovoltaic  systems,  209 
Physical  changes  in  cosmonauts,  92 
Physical  Review  Le t ters ,   141 
Physics  and  astronomy,  45,  101 
Physics  Today ,   97 
Physiological  effects  of  environment,  214 
Phytoplankton  Gymnodinium,  179 
Pickering,  William  H.,  115 
Pictoerauhs  of  suuernova.  186 
Pilot-istionaut  pdpulation  in  1985, 88 
Pilot  body-size  changes,  88 
Pilots of  lifting-body  flights,  293-295 
Pinsky,  Lawrence  S.,  166 

radiometer  (PMR ) ,  

318 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 
Proxmire,  Sen.  William,  42,  61,  102,  126, 
127, 130,  157, 226 
Prudhoe  Bay,  Alaska,  232 
Pruitt,  Dow  C.,  164 
Public  sc ience  policy,  235 
Public  Service Satellite Users Consortium. 
36 
Puerto  Rico,  231-232 
Pulsars,  134, 162,  181, 24.8 
pupp i s  A  (supernova  remnant), 232 
Purple Mountain O n e  and  Two,  78 
Q 

Qantas Airways,  1.2 
Quasars,  48,  162 
Quiet  Sun ,   International Year  of,  90 

R 

Rabotnichesko,  153 
Radar,  71,  94 
Radiation  (see  also  Cosmic  ray,  Gamma 
ray,  Solar radiation,  Ultraviolet  radia- 
tion,  X-ray),  1 3 ,4 1 ,  105, 141, 162, 178 
Radio,  39,  140 
Radio Astronomy  Explorers A and  B,  100 
Radio Corporation of  America  (RCA), 1, 2, 
74,  112,  116, 215,  241 
Astro-Electronics Division,  185 ,208 ,231  
Radioactivity, 30,  210 
Radiosonde,  71 
Rudugu  (Rainbow),  (U.S.S.R.  satellite), 
245,  251,  275 
Ranger  and  Surveyor  programs,  88 
Ranger  (spacecraft),  115 
Rango,  Albert,  168 
Rappaport,  Saul A . ,   158 
Rasool,  Ichtiaque  S., 158 
Rats,  121,  198 
RATAN-600  antenna,  232 
Ratsiraka,  Didier,  129 
Raytheon  Service Company,  154, 201 
RBV  (return-beam  vidicon) cameras,  185 
RCA.  S e e  Radio Corporation  of  America. 
RCA-Satcom  1 ,  2 
Reaction  control  system (RCS), 135 
Reconnaissance  satellites,  67,  86,  176 
Recovery  helicopters,  66 
Recu r ren t  nova,  158 
Red-cell  production  in  astronauts,  34 
Red stars, 17 
Red  tide  (phytoplankton,  Gymnodiniurn), 
179.  249 
Redstone  (missile), 125 
Reed,  Sylvanus Albert,  award,  36 
Refan  program  for noise  reduction,  32 
Reimbursable payloads,  foreign,  48 
Reinhold  Construction Company, 69 
Reliability,  aircraft,  19 
Remote Manipulator  System (RMS), 78 
Remote-sensing  technology,  9-  10, 41,  168 
Remotely piloted  re sea rch  vehicle  (RPRV), 
Rescue Coordination Cen te r  o 9 U.S.  Coast 
41,  66,  167 
, 66,  124 
Remotely  piloted  vehicle (RP 
Guard,  55 
319 

Index 

Research,  25,  45,  50 
appropriations,  19,  21,  45,  46,  49,  159 
composite materials,  24,  179 
energy,  21,  49, 67-68,  82,  119, 154 
hypersonic  flight,  239 
meteorology,  41,  71,  117 
solar,  221,  237 
space,  50,  162,  232 
stratosphere,  70,  159 
Return-beam  vidicon  (RBV)  came ra s   for 
TV,  185 
Reusable  space  vehicle,  149 
Reu te r s  news  agency,  225 
Reynolds,  Smith,  and Hills Company,  112 
Rice Univ.,  285 
RMS (remote manipulator  system), 78 
Robert M.  Losey  Award,  36 
Robot  vehicles,  222 
Rock,  William  H.,  110, 213 
Rockefeller,  Nelson  A.,  106 
Rockefeller Univ.,  226 
Rocketdyne  Division  of  Rockwell  Interna- 
tional Corporation,  78 
Rocket  technology,  11, 13, 21,  41,  53,  57, 
84,  90,  102,  111,  119,  123,  186,  190, 
235,  248, 283 
Rockwell  International  Corporation,  7,  25, 
37,  52, 66,  70,  78,  81,  90,  92-93,  96, 
105, 120, 124,  125, 126, 136,  139, 161, 
173, 180, 182,  185, 201, 202,  203, 211, 
226-227,  243 
Rocky  Mountains,  157 
Roland,  F.  Sherwood,  236 
Romanenko,  Yury  V.,  28 
Romania,  229 
Rome,  Univ.  of,  212 
Rosen,  George,  36 
Ross,  Miles,  52 
Roundup  ( JSC  publication),  188,  196 
Rowe,  Herbert  J . ,   173 
Royal  Society,  the,  London,  111 
RPRV  (remotely piloted  re sea rch  vehicle), 
41,  66,  167 
RPV  (remotely piloted  vehicle),  66,  124 
Rukavishnikov, Nikolay  N.,  28 
Rumsfeld,  Donald  H.,  245 
Russia.  See  U.S.S.R. 

S 
Saah Viggen  (Swedish fighter aircraft), 99 
Sabreliner,  Rockwell,  65 
Safety,  aircraft,  19 
Safety  and  Environmental  Health,  NASA 
Office  of,  50 
Sagan,  Carl,  231 
Sagdeyev,  Ronald,  44 ,45  
SALT  (Strategic  Arms   Limitation  Talks), 
152, 216 
Salyut  (U.S.S.R.  scientific  sp a c e   station), 
225 
S a i j i t  2 ,   92 
suzyut 3, 11 
Salyut  4 ,   3 ,   59,  91 ,   92,  126,  145,  191, 
225,  253 
Samoa,  207,  246 
SAMSO.  See   Space   and  Missile  Systems 
Organization (USAF). 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 
Ind ex  
Sche re r ,  Lee  R.,  12, 67  
San  Andreas  Fault Experiment,  201 
Schlesinger,  Jame s  R.,  107,  216,  245 
San  Antonio,  Tex.,  188 
Sun Diego  Union,  105, 233 
Schmitt,  Harrison  H.,  164, 186 
Schurmeir,  Harris M.,  35 
San  Fernando Observatory,  237 
San  Marco  platform,  2,  78,  277 
Schweikart,  Russell  L.,  179 
San  Martin,  Robert,  219 
Science,  103,  104, 106,  151, 190, 235,  242 
Sand s ,  George,  160 
Science  magazine, 11, 13 ,94 ,  115, 117, 147, 
San ta  Fe  Engineers,  Inc.,  87 
148,  163,  196, 250 
Santiago,  Chile,  202-203 
Scientists,  86,  87,  198 
SAO.  See  Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Ob- 
Scobee,  Francis  R.,  295 
servatorv. 
Sco t t  Air  Force Base,  Ill.,  74 
SAS  (Small Astronomy  Satellite),  1 
Scott Air-Pak  4.5,  196 
Sas-C,  277 
Scott,  David  R.,  67,  182 
S a s 2 ,  181 
Scout-D  launch,  238 
Sas  3 ,  158, 208 
S e a  of  Galilee,  2 4%  
Satcom  (communications  satellites).  241 - 
Sea-ice,  109, 232 
242 
Sea  satellite (SEASAT),  2,  142, 228 
Sa tcom   I  (RCA  l), 274,  277,  279 
Seamans,  Robert C.,  6,  49,  213,  220,  221 
Satellite  applications  (see  also  individual 
Sea rch  and  rescue,  54-55 
Sea r s ,  William  R.,  36 
satellite names) 
atmospheric,  21  
SEASAT  (specialized  experimental  appli- 
biological,  Soviet, 229 
cations  satellite) mission,  2,  142, 228 
climate  forecasting,  150 
Seismic  pictures  of  the  ea r th ,  50-51 
comsats,  44,  121,  165, 229 
Selivanov,  Arnold,  209 
c rop  acreage  calculation,  and,  224 
Serv-Air,  Inc.,  58 
ea r th   resources,  23,  33,  74,  106 
Servoactuator,  223 
educational TV,  87 
Sevastyanov,  Vitaly,  91,  92,  121, 282 
fossil fuel  searches,  50  
Sever-27,  (Soviet high latitude expedition), 
geodynamic,  201 
218 
geostationary  environmental,  206 
Severny Polyus-22,  218 
high-altitude  research,  13 
Severny Polyus-23,  218,  237 
land-use  planning,  183 
Sewage,  39,  202 
meteorological, 21,  51,  71,  192,  215 
Seychelles Islands,  207 
Shapley, Willis  H.,  146,  192 
microwave  communications,  44 
mineral  location,  185 
Shatalov,  Vladimir  A.,  149,  150, 205,  236 
offshore communications,  159 
Shearing  interferometer,  112 
power  stations,  131, 250 
Shell Oil Company,  99  
printing  reproduction,  51 
Shepard,  Alan  B.,  28,  146 
radiation  transfer,  41 
Ships,  82,  135, 248 
Shirk,  Edward  K.,  166 
reconnaissance,  67,  86, 242 
snowcover measurement,  249 
Short  takeoff  and  landing (STOL) aircraft, 
solar  power,  161 
54,  116,  167 
"spy  satellite,''  242 
Shuttle Orbiter,  contracts  for,  126 
tracking  and  data  relay,  21,  109 
Siberia,  103, 238 
water measurement  by,  179 
Siemens AG,  West Germany,  130 
X-ray  research,  196 
Silicon  devices,  216 
Satellite  Business Systems,  245 
Silver Spring,  Md.,  229 
Satellite  de   Recherches  e t   #Environment 
Simonson,  S.  Christian,  217 
Technique  @ret 2), 103 
Simulator,  communications,  43 
Satellite  Instructional  Television  Experi- 
Singer,  S.  Fred,  247 
ment  (SITE), 87,  130 
Sioux  Falls,  S.D.,  212 
Sa te l l i te   S i tua t ion  Repor t ,   251 
S IR1 0  (Italy's  microwave-propagation  com- 
sat).  44 
Sa tu rn  ( launch  vehicle).  125 
Sa tu rn  I,  125 
Sa tu rn  I,  125 
Sirius (H;ar), 1% 
Sa tu rn  IB,  4-5,  32,  52,  132,  136, 160 
Sa tu rn  IB,  4-5,  32,  52,  132,  136, 160 
S ITE   (Satellite  Instructional  Television 
Sa tu rn  IVB, 132 
Sa tu rn  IVB, 132 
Experiment),  87,  130 
Skin cance r  and  stratospheric  ozone,  27 
Saturn  V.  3.  13.  161. 213  
Saturn  V.  3.  13.  161. 213  
Saturn  Program  offici, 160 
Sky lab  Ear th  Resources  Ca ta lo g ,  58 
Sa tu rn  (planet),  108,  199, 228,  245 
Skylab (program),  10-11,  15, 58,  94,  122, 
Saud i  Arabia,  4,  233 
141,  143,  191 
Skylab  Orbital  Workshop,  3,  13,  64, 97, 
S-band  radio  receiver on V ik ing  2,  184 
SCAMS  (scanning  microwave  spectrome- 
125,  161,  168,  179 
Sky lab   I ,  3,  13, 97,  125 
ter),  109 
Sky lab   2 ,  74 
Scandinavian Airlines,  42 
Sky lab   4 ,  15, 94,  168,  187 
S c a n n i n g   m i c row a v e  
(SCAMS),  109 
Skylark (British sounding rocket),  232 
Scatterometer,  214 
Skynet  IIA   (U.K. military comsat),  23  

s p e c t r o m e t e r  

320 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Index 

Skyship dirigible,  99  
Slayton, Donald  K.,  1, 5,  65, 83,  104,  120, 
121,123,  133, 135,147,  149,168,171- 
172,176,  179,189,  191-192,205,243, 
265,  282 
Slidell Computer Complex, MSFC,  210 
SLX-14  (Soviet launch  vehicles), 67,  149 
Small Astronomy  Satellite.  See SAS. 
Small Magellanic  Cloud,  134 
SMF (space manufacturing facility),  250 
Smith,  Bruce F.,  64 
Smith,  Jame s  W.,  29 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory 
(SAO), 283,  285 
Smithsonian  Cen te r   for  Ea r th   and   Plane- 
tary  Studies, 243 
Smithsonian Institution,  128, 159, 179 ,243  
SMM.  S e e  Solar Maximum  Mission. 
SMS (Synchronous Meteorological Satellite), 
1, 26 
SMS-B,  1 
sms  1 , 2 0 6  
Sm 2,  25,  206,  254,  277,  278 
Smylie,  Robert  E.,  54,  88,  222 
Snavelv,  William  W.,  193 
Snickers  (galaxy),  217 
Snowcover and  snow-melt  prediction  pro- 
&ram, 5 
Snowcover observations,  168, 248-249 
Sochi, U.S.S.R.,  192 
Socioeconomic  benefits  from  space   sys- 
tem s   applications,  142 
Soehardjono, Maj.  Geu.,  73 
Sol,  111 
Solar array,  105, 240 
Solar  cavity,  85 
Solar cells, 80,  108, 208 
Solar collectors,  12-13,  42,  193 
“Solar  eclipse”  during ASTP,  133 
Solar energy 
agriculture,  use  in,  250 
bibliography,  127 
collector  for,  193 
conversion  to electric  power,  93  
cooling and  heating systems,  13 ,29 ,  116, 
211,  219,  233 
demonstration mission,  188 
desalination,  233 
generating system,  terrestrial,  31 
heating and cooling systems,  13 ,29 ,  116, 
211,  219,  233 
plants,  two  kinds  of,  30 
privy,  211 
propulsion,  105 
recording  system,  terrestrial,  146 
satellite,  161, 250 
thermal energy,  127,  193 
330-unit  installation,  219 
transmitted  by  microwave,  203 
Solar Energy  Research  Institute,  221 
Solar  flares,  73  
Solar  Heating  and  Cooling  Demonstration 
Act  of  1974, 21, 211 
Solar heating,  13, 29,  116, 211,  219,  233 
Solar maximum mission (SMM), 14  
Solar noise  bursts,  100 
Solar particle  problem,  74 

Solar power.  S e e  Solar energy. 
Solar Radiation  and Thermospheric  Struc- 
tu re   Satellite  (Sru ts) ,  35 
Solar  system,  14,  134,  168, 232 
Solar radiation,  13 
Solar winds,  52,  85,  105 
Solar x-rays,  118 
Solid-fueled  rocket  booster (SRB), 57,  102, 
174 
Sound barrier,  69 
Sound-waves diagnostic  system,  102 
Sounding rockets,  11, 39, 41,  90,  178, 240, 
283 
Sou thA f r ica ,  207 
South Atlantic  Anomaly,  94 
South  Dakota,  130 
South  Pole,  207,  246 
Southern  California,  Univ.  of,  36 
Soviet Academy of Sciences,  131, 145, 165, 
226,  230 
Soviet Space Program, 1971 -75,  251 
Soviet Scientific Conference, 44 
Soviet  Space  Re sea rch  Institute,  44 
Soviet  S ta te   Research  Institute  of  Engi- 
neering  Studies,  25 
Soviet  Union.  See  U.S.S.R. 
Soyuz  spacecraft  ( see  also  ASTP),  59,  65, 
140. 251.  257 
Soyuz 1 0 , 9 2  
I~ 
I 
Soyuz 11, 92 
S o y u  1 4 ,  11, 92 
Soyuz  15, 11 
Soyuz 16,  12 
Soyuz 1 7 ,  3, 91,  92,  227,  253,  282 
S o y u  1 8 ,  91,  121,  126, 227,  260,  282 
SOVUZ 1 9   IASTP).  1.  131-132,  134,  167, 
’ 251,  2k5,  281,  282 
Soyuz 20 ,  225,  227,  236,  272 
Space ,  47,  150, 180, 205 
Space   and  Missile  Systems  Organization 
(SAMSO, USAF),  154, 229 
Space  applications,  45,  101, 205 
Space biology and medicine, 4,197-198,214 
Space  colony,  250 
Space-environment  monitor,  212 
Space  flight  operations,  45,  101 
Space  Launch  Complex,  153 
Space  law,  165, 213 
Space manufacturing  facility  (SMF), 250 
%ace  objectives  and  the  national  interest, 
150 
Space  probes,  175, 251 
Sp a c e   Processing  Applications  Rocket 
(SPAR), 210,  212,  217 
Space  program,  national,  146, 226 
Space  research,  25 ,  4.5, 50-51 
Space   Science,  NASA  Office  of,  13,  22, 
70.  79 
Space  ‘Science  and  Applications,  House 
Subcommittee on,  223,  224 
Space  Science Award,  37  
Space   Shuttle  (see  also  AMPS;  Apollo- 
Soyuz  Test  Project;  Employment, 
NASA;  External  tank;  Launch  Pro- 
ce s s ing   System;  Low  Cost  Modular 
Sp a c e c r a f t ;   MDM;  s e rvo a c tu a to r ;  
Sp a c e   Shu t t le   main  engine;  Space  

32 1 

Ind ex  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Space  Sh u t t l e - c o n t in u ed  
Shu t t le  orbiter,  Space  Tug,  Spacelab; 
SRB), 11 ,13 ,34 ,43 ,53 ,67 ,85 ,96 ,113 ,  
135,  137,  154,  168, 173,  180,  185, 188 
appropriations FY 1976, 45,  % 
budget,  21,  42,  101, 224 
construction of  facilities,  61,  69,  87-88, 
153-154,  214 
contracts,  7,  14, 34, 69, 84, 85,  93,  105, 
108,  112, 113, 130, 152, 202,  213, 226, 
240 
development  status,  19, 34,  222 
economics effects,  7 8  
fuel,  52 
payloads,  48-49,  78,  142, 204 
press  comment,  146 
testing,  15, 63,  189,  198, 213 
tracking and dataacquisition,  11 ,31 ,  %- 
97,  113,  142, 151 
use,  48, 142 
Space   Shu t t le  main  engine  (SSME),  105, 
120,  160 
Space  Shuttle orbiter,  1 4 ,3 4 , 38 ,69 ,70 ,78 ,  
81, 87, 92,  185, 227 
Space  station, 149,150,151,203,236,239- 
240,  250 
Space  Telescope  (project), 236 
Space  Transportation  System  (STS), 222 
“Space  truck,”  248 
Space  Tug,  14,  139, 201 
Space  vehicle,  reusable,  149 
Spacecraft,  6 ,   19, 86,  110,  133,  163 
Spacecraft Design  Award  (AIAA), 37 
space f l igh t   (BIS publication),  249 
Spaceflight  Tracking  and   Data  Network 
(STDN),  244 
Spacelab (ESA payload for Shuttle), 21 ,27 ,  
35-36,  48,  49,  57,  67,  100,  113,  123, 
160,  165,  182 
Spacelab  Newsletter,  123 
Spaceplane,  149 
Spaceport News, 5 , 73 , 9 2 , 9 4 ,1 23 ,146 ,182 ,  
191, 219 
“SDaceshiu  Ea r th”   (lecture),  182 
S p k e s u i t  leak ,   121 
Space t rack  coverage,  215 
Spain-Mexico  satellite  link,  122 
SPAR   (Space  Processing  Applications 
Rocket),  210, 217 
Spectrometry,  102 
Spectrophotometer,  228 
Spence,  Roderick W.,  190 
Sperry Flight  Systems,  116,  167 
Sperry Rand  Corporation,  69,  130 
Spinning  flight,  167 
Spinrad,  Hyron,  126 
Sputnik  (magazine),  149,  150 
Spu tn ik   1 ,   25,  165,  192 
Sputter-deposited materials,  210 
Spy satellites,  U.S.,  242,  244 
Srats  (solar  radiation  and  thermospheric 
s t ruc tu re )  Japane se  sa te l l i te ,  35 
SRB (solid-fueled  rocket  booster),  57,  102, 
174 
Sret  2  (Satellite  de   Recherches  e t  d’Envi- 
ronment Technique),  103, 251 

SS  (U.S.S.R.  missiles)  (SSN-6,  SS-7, 
SS-8,  SS-11,  SS-17,  SS-19),  167 
SSMJL  See Space  Shuttle main  engine. 
SSN-6   (U.S.S.R.  submarine-based rocket), 
167 
SST (supersonic transport), 8, 60,  82,  107, 
218,  247 
St.  Louis.  Mo..  191 
S t .  Louis P o s tD i s p a t c h ,  229 
Stafford, Thomas P.,  1 ,  5 ,65 ,83 ,   120, 123, 
132,  133, 135, 147, 149,  168,  178, 189, 
191,  192, 265,  282 
Standardization of weapons in NATO coun- 
tr ies ,   108 
S tanda rd  P a r t s  List,  NASA,  239 
Stanford  Solar Observatory,  225 
S t a r  City,  U.S.S.R.,  191-192 
S t a r   T racke r   for  Economical  Long-Life 
Attitude Reference (STELLAR),-l84- 
185 
S tar le t te  (passive geodetic satellite), 27,254 
S ta r s ,  48,  73,  196 
State-Federal  liaison,  152 
STDN.  See Spaceflight Tracking and  Data 
Network. 
Steam  plants,  49 
Stecker.  Flovd  W..  141 
Steering by  gyro,  216 
STELLAR  (Star  T racke r   for  Economical 
Long-Life  Attitude  Reference),  184- 
185 
Stellar  fires,  17 
Sterilization,  110,  112, 143 
Stermer,  R.  L.,  243 
S te rn ,  Richard J.,  80 
Stever,  H.  Guyford,  29,  84,  103 
Stirling external  combustion  engine,  181- 
182 
STOL-(short  takeoff  and  landing) aircraft, 
54,  116,  167 
Storms.  See  Meteorology. 
Strategic  Arms  Limitation  Talks  (SALT), 
l c 2 ,  216 
Stratosphere,  13 ,21 ,29 ,70 ,144 ,159 ,183 -  
184.  237 
Streamflow observations,  168 
Strike  of  aircraft  workers,  28-29 
Strom,  Robert  G.,  58 
S t ruc tu ra l  surveys,  9 
STS.  See  Space  Transportation System. 
Stuhlinger,  E rn s t ,  235 
Stullken,  Donald  E.,  104 
Submarines,  19, 242 
Sullivan, Walter,  1, 27,  158, 231 
Sumerians,  225 
Sun-earth  relationship,  118 
Sun  ( see  also  solar headings),  10,  19,  118, 
224-225,  245 
Sundic, Milika,  152 
Sung  Dynasty,  186 
Sup e r   Arcas  (sounding  rocket),  90,  284, 
285,  286,  287,  289,  290,  291 
Supe r  Loki (sounding rocket),  90,  237 
Supernovae, 48,  162,  181,  186-187,  232 
Supersonic transport  (SST), 8, 60 ,82 ,   107, 
154, 247 

322 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1975 

Index 

Surueyor  (spacecraft),  115 
Suslov, Mikhail, 230 
Sweden,  60, 99 
Symphonie-B,  (French-German  experi- 
mental  comsat),  2 
Symphonie I ,   23,  177 
Symphonie 2,  177, 251,  267,  277,  279 
Symphonie Project  Operations  Group,  177 
S y n c h r o n o u s   Me teo ro log ica l   S a t e l l i t e  
(SMS), 1, 25 
Synthetic  fuels,  67-68 
Syromyatnikov, Vladimir,  139, 141) 
T 
T-500s   (Paymover tractor),  214 
T&DR  ( track ing  and  da ta   relay),  109 
Tu iyo ,   251, 255 
Talley,  Wilson K.,  183 
Tanegashima  launch   site, Japan ,   184 
Tape   recorder  on  Landsa t ,   222 
Targe t  visibility,  6 
Tass   news  agency,  91,  99,  100,  105,  218, 
226,  230,  241,  244 
Tau  Ce t i  (star).  73 

Texas  Medical Cen ter ,   176,  179 
Texas ,  Univ.  of,  205,  289 
Therma l  energy,  31,  127,  185 
Thermionic  conversion,  131 
Thiokol Corporation,  84 
TH IR   ( t em p e r a t u r e l h um i d i t y   i n f r a r e d  
radiometer),  109 
Thole,  John  M.,  64  
Thom, Kari,  :!B 
Thomas,  Garland  L.. 183 
Thor-De l ta launch  vehk le s ,  2 , 8 , 2 3 , 2 5 , 4 4 ,  
6 0 , 6 2 , 6 3 ,   73,  79,  108, 110, 119, 162- 
163,  177 
Thoria-dispersed  magnesium,  210 
T iros-N   (Television  Infrared   Operational 
Satellite) spacecraf t ,  26 ,208 ,211 ,215 ,  
231 
Tiros 1 ,  57 

Titan-Centaur  launch   vehicles,  2,  87,  143, 
Titan-Centaur  launch   vehicles,  2,  87,  143, 
164,  171,  173, 223 
164,  171,  173, 223 
Titan  (Sa turn  moon),  245 
Titan  (Sa turn  moon),  245 
T od a y  editorial,  172 
T od a y  editorial,  172 
Toilets,  solar-Dowered. 211 
Toilets.  solar-Dowered. 211 
Tokamak (nudlear reactor),  220 
Tokyo Univ.,  Ins t i tu te  of  Space   and  Aero- 
nautics,  35 
Toronto,  173 
Toxic  chemicals,  39 
Tracking and  da ta  acquisition,  22,45,  101, 
188 - 189 
Tracking  and  da ta   relay  (T&DR),  109 
Tracking  and   Data  Relay  Satellite  System 
(TDRSS), 27,  113, 233 
Tracking  stations,  21,  130, 201 
Tractor,-towing,  214 
Transit  (U .S .  Navy navigation  system),  179 
Transonic  flight,  161,  172 
Transpor t  aircraft,  8, 82,  107 
Transportation,  U.S.  Department  of, 8 , 2 7 ,  
29,  55,  80 
Trella,  Massimo,  8, 66 
Trendelenburg,  Erns t ,   66 
Tr iad  2  (U.S.  Navy  satellite), 271 
Trident  missile,  19, 23 
Trime thylaluminum , 6 
Tripler Hospital,  Hawaii,  147,  149 
Tropical wind-energy conversion and refer- 
ence  leve l  experiment (TWERLE), 109 
Truman,  Pres iden t   Harry  S, 84, 226 
TRW Company, 43 
TRW Sys tems  Group, 37 ,43 ,136 ,204 ,221  
Tsibin,  Sergei,  144l 
Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin,  137 
Tu-144  (U.S.S.R.  supersonic  aircraft),  44 
Tulinius,  Jan   R.,  37 
Tunuey,  Sen .   J o h nV . ,   32,  127,  128, 161 
Tupolev,  Aleksey A.,  44 
Tupolev-  144 airliner,  supersonic, 44,  247 
Turbine technology,  50 
Turbofans,  82 
Turbojet,  82 
TWERLE (tropical wind-energy conversion 
and  reference  level experiment),  109 
Tyuratam,  U.S.S.R.,  67 

U 
U-2 
(high  a l t i tude   aircraft),  13,  70,  138, 
190, 237 
UAL.  See  United Air Lines. 
Ubangi River,  Africa,  233 
Uchinoura Space  Cen ter ,  Japan ,   35 
Uhuru (Explorer 42) ,   79 
U.K.  (United Kingdom), 23,  60,  93  
Ultrasounct diagnostic  sys tems ,   102 
Ultraviolet  radiation,  13, 68,  105,  134, 223 
U.N.  S e e  United  Nations. 
Unemployment of  sc ien t is ts  and engineers, 
86 
Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics.  See  
U.S.  S.R. 
United Air  Lines,  Inc .   (UAL),  2,  42,  218 
United Aircraft  Corporation,  4,  36 
United  Kingdom.  See  U.K. 

323 

Index  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

United  Nations (U.N.) 
ad  hoc committee on uses of ou te r  space, 
165 
General Assembly,  231 
Political  and  Security Committee,  213 
Scientific  and  Technical  Subcommittee 
for  the   Peaceful  Use  of  Space,  25 
World Meteorological  Organization,  139 
United  Nations  Public  Registry  of  Space  
Flights,  251 
United  S ta te s  (see U.S.),  68,  121,  158 
United  S ta te s  Air  Force  (USAF) 
Aero  Propulsion  Laboratory,  67 
AFSC.  See Air Force Systems Command. 
airborne comsat  terminal,  29 
Airborne  Warning  and  Control  System 
(AWACS),  59 
Avionics  Laboratory,  81 
Cambridge  Research  Laboratories,  6 
comsat  failures,  87 
dirigibles,  99 
Flight  Dynamics  Laboratory,  152 
Flight  Te s t  Center,  Calif.,  10, 24,  27 
hypersonic  aircraft,  239 
manned  orbiting  laboratory,  153 
-NASA  joint  programs,  293 
nuclear-powered  aircraft,  57 
reconnaissance  satellites  (Big Bird), 67 
satellite communications  (AFSATCOM), 
43 
Space and Missile  Systems Organization 
(SAMSO),  154, 229 
upper  atmosphere  experiments,  6 
United  S ta te s  Army,  71 
Ballistic  Missile  Agency,  125 
Corps  of  Engineers, 9 ,   14, 213 
United  S ta te s  Navy  (USN),  71 
Auxiliary  Landing Field,  Calif.,  167 
combat  fighter development,  23 
Naval Observatory,  168 
Naval  Re sea rch  Laboratory  (NRL), 94 
sixth  f lee t ,  5 9  
T ran s i t  navigation  system,  179 
United Technologies  Corporation,  81,  162 
Universal Construction  Company,  213 
Universe.  19.  178 
Upper  atmosphere,  6,  100 
Uranium,  119, 233 
Uranus  (planet),  168, 198-199,  235 
Urey,  Harold  C.,  111 
Urinary infections  detection,  177 
Urokinase,  4 
Uruguay,  203 
USAF.  S e e  United  S ta te s  Air  Force. 
USDA.  See  Agriculture,  U.S.  Department 
of. 
U.S.  -European  joint  venture,  Spacelab's 
first mission,  35 
USGS.  See Geological  Survey,  U.S. 
U.S.  -Malagasy  agreement on tracking sta- 
tion,  129 
USN.  See United  S ta te s  Navy. 
- -- 
U.S. -U.K.  cooperative  satellite  (Ar ie l   5 ) ,  
138 
U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
coope ra t ion   (see  also 
Apollo-Soyuz  Te s t   Project),  31 -32, 
41,  131,  140, 191-192 

U.S.-West  German solar probe (He l ios  I), 
46 
U.S.S.R.  (Union of  Soviet Socialist Repub- 
lics), 24 ,28 ,42 ,44 ,53 ,54 ,70 ,77 ,107 ,  
121,  127, 1%, 168, 204,  222,  234 
missile (see also individual missiles.  su ch  
a s  SS-19.  SSN-6).  166-167 
satellites  and  spacecraft  (see  also  indi- 
vidual  satellites  and  spacecraft,  such 
a s  Cosmos,  Intercosmos,  Luna,  Mars, 
Meteor,  Molniya,  Salyut,  and   Soyuz), 
4,  47,  67, 99,  100,  103,  149,  169,  176, 
188, 204,  208,  209 
space   program,  81,  102,  130,  149,  218, 
LSl 
0 0 1  
Ute-Tomahawk rockets,  6 
UV:  ultraviolet  (radiation). 

V 

VAB:  Vehicle Assembly Building  (KSC). 
Van  Allen  radiation belts,  42,  94,  103 
Van  Flandern,  Thomas C.,  168 
Van  Reeth,  George,  66 
Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base,  29,  64, 153, 
154 
Vanguard 1 ,   47 
Vatican  satellite coverage,  173 
Vecchietti,  George  J.,  59 
Vela  (constellation), 181, 225 
Venera  spacecraft,  106, 162, 209,  210 
Venera 9 ,   105,  209,  210,  251,  263 
Venera 10,  105, 209,  210,  251,  263 
Venus  (planet;  see  also  Mariner  10,  Pio- 
neer-Venus,  Venera  9,  and   Venera 
l o ) ,  49 ,52 ,100 ,101 ,105 ,106 ,113 ,115 ,  
127, 144,  162,  183, 209-210,  226 
Vertical Motion Simulator (VMS), 159, 196 
Ve r t ica l   takeoff  and   land ing   a i rc ra f t  
(VTOL), 159, 1% 
Vibration  testing of  Space  Shuttle,  15 
Video  inertial  pointing  (VIP), 214 
Video  sensors,  215 
Videp,:ervice 
by Westar  (Western Union), 
11L 
Vidicon  tube,  215 
, 
Viking  Data  Review  Management  Center, 
182 
V ik i ig:-M iss ion   t o  Mars ,   171 
Viking  (program),  8,  21,  113,  143,  160, 
172-173,  174-175 
Viking  (spacecraft),  1 ,  55,  73,  95,  96,  112, 
153, 164,  169-170,  277 
Viking-A  spacecraft,  153,  166 
Viking-B  spacecraft,  143, 153,  166,  182 
V ik ing  I ,  110,169, 170-171,217,223,266, 
279 
V ik ing-1  lander,  110, 111, 170-171 
V ik ing  2 lander,  73 ,94 ,   184, 217, 220, 267, 
279 
Vinogradov,  Alexander  P.,  226 
V IP  (video inertial  pointing),  214 
Virginia,  Univ.  of,  247 
VMS  (Vertical Motion  Simulator),  159 
Volcanoes on Mars,  175 
Volgograd,  U.S.S.R.,  192 
Vologda Oblast,  U.S.S.R.,  39 
324 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1975 

Ind e x  

von Braun,  Wernher ,   31,  125,  166 
von  Karman  lec ture ,   35  
Vortices,  wake,  80 
VSTOL:  vertical  or   short  takeoff  and  
landing. 
VTOL.  See  Vertical  takeoff  and   landing 
aircraft. 

W 

Wake  vortices,  80 
W a l l  S tree t  Jou rna l ,  33,  51,  228,  236 
Wallops Flight Cen te r  (WFC), 2 ,22 ,91 ,237  
Wallom  Island.  Va..  41.  206 
Wa lvekon ,   Briksh  Columbia,  39 
Washington,  D.C.,  128,  159,  195 
Washington Po s t ,   The, 3 ,  4,  42,  54,  77, 81, 
96, 102,  126,  127,  131,  136,  137,  157, 
166,  173,  174,  186,  190, 219.  230 
Washington S ta r ,   The ,   10, 57,  58,  84,  116, 
137, 163,  175, 231,  246 
Water,  37,  44,  90,  142,  177,  179 
Wa ter  hyacinths,  39 
Wa terman ,  Alan T.,  Award,  84 
Wave  radiation  measuremen ts ,  39 
Weapons  standardization  in NATO,  108 
Weather.  See  Meteorology. 
Weber  Metals  and   Supply Company,  129 
Weightlessness,  3 ,   135, 197, 213,  229 
Weinberger,  Caspar  W.,  36 
Weinreb,  Marius  B.,  187 
Weitz,  Pau l  J., 64, 74 
Wes t  Germany, 2 , 4 , 3 5 ,  %,  5 9 ,60 ,67 ,126 ,  
152,  177, 247-248,  277 
Wes tar   (Wes tern   Union  comsat),  4,  136, 
159.  241 
W e s t u r j ,  112, 136, 164, 228-229 
We s ta r  2,  112,  136 
Wes tern  European  Union,  235 
Wes tern   T e s t   Ran   e  (WTR;  see  also 
Vandenberg AFB,  Calif.),  2 , 8 , 6 0 ,   62, 
108,  162, 238 
Wes tern   Union  Telegraph  Company,  112, 
116, 136,  159, 164, 241 
WFC.  See  Wallops  Flight  Cen ter .  
Whea t ,   9, 264 
White.  Ceoree  C . .   47 
W h i t iH o u s g ,  60,7103, 190, 205 
White  Sand s  Missile  Range  (WSMR), 215, 
7A.n 
W f i i i T u n  of  the  Desert  (fiim), 130 
White,  Thomas  D.,  Space  Trophy,  187 
Whitlow, John  B.,  82 
Whitten,  Le s ,   77 
Wicks,  Alden,  137 
Wide-bodied  je ts ,   78 
Williams,  Walter  C.,  201-202 

Wdmington,  Del.,  249 
Wilson,  Robert  G,,  25 
“Wind  Energy  Utilization”  (bibliography), 
127 
Wjnd  tunneI,-67);  73,  152 
Wmfrey,  Lee ,   142 
Wing-sweep  control on  8- 1, JO  
Wingless lifting body,  X-24B,  161 
Wingless  vehicle,  M2-F3,  128 
Winter,  David L , ,   33,  34,  96,  197 
Wischnia,  Herber t  F.,  113 
Wisconsin,  Univ.  af,  284,  289 
Witkin,  Richard,  181 
Woodfm, Kenne th  L . ,   59 
Woomera  Rocket  Range,  Australia,  232 
Worden,  Alfred M.,  182 
World Meteorological Organization (U. N.), 
139 
World Wa r  11,  69,  235 
Wren,  Christopher  S.,  225 
Wrieht  Brothers  Memorial TroDhv.  190 
W S k R .   See  Wh i te  Sands  Miss&  Range. 
WTR.  See  Wes tern  Tes t  Range. 
Wu,  Edward  K . ,   149, 236 
Wyeth,  Jamie,  137 
Wyld,  James  H., Propulsion  Award,  190 
Wyoming,  168,  187 
Wyoming, Univ.  of,  84 

XYZ 
X-1  (NACA-USAF  aircraft),  69 
X-24  (lifting  body),  161,  172,  194 ,293  
X-ray 
astronomy,  208 
medical,  51 
Orion  constellation,  158 
sensors,  187 
sources,  84,  118,  134,  158,  196 
telescopes,  10, 48,  91  
Yak  (U.S.S.R.  airliner), 53 
Yakushin,  Anatoly,  137 
Yardley,  John  F.,  61,  189, 223,  224 
YC-  15   [shor t- takeoff-and- land ing   a ir-  
craft),  178 
Yeliseyev,  Aleksey  S.,  81,  222 
Yoshikawa,  Tsuneo ,  216 
Young.  A.  Thomas,  110,  111 
Young,  John  W.,  188 
Young, Kenneth  A.,  37 
Yugoslavia,  152 
Zaire,  38,  203 
Zhukov,  G.  P.,  165 
Zodiacal  light,  15, 46 
Zuckerman,  Benjamin  M.,  231 
Zvenigorod, U.S.S.R.,  44 
Zvezdny Gorodok,  U.S.S.R.,  121 

325 

ERRATA 

In  Earlier Volumes of Astronautics and Aeronautics 

Astronautics  and Aeronautics,  1967 
p.  65:  In  second  item  on March  7,  “Impact  of  Jan .  27 Apollo  accident.  . . ,” add  th ree  
ellipsis dots at end  of  f irs t  paragraph.  Substitute  for source at end of item:  “(NASA 
Auth.  Hearings transcript,  pp.  151-2,  186-7)” 
p.  442:  Index:  Under  “Apollo  (program)”  in  left  :olumn, 
substitute  “Apollo  6”  for 
“Apollo  5”  in  parentheses  after  “AS-502. 
In   right  column  after  “Apollo  5,” 
substitute  “AS-204,  originally  AS-206”  for “AS-502” 
in  parentheses. 
Astronautics  and Aeronautics,  1968 
p.  316:  In  4th  paragraph,  1 s t  line,  change  “Sonnett”  to   “Sonett.”  Make  corresponding 
change  in  Index,  p.  417,  lef t   column. 
p.  355:  In  Appendix A,  1st column,  add  two  asterisks  after  Sep t .   16,  for Zond  V. 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1969 
p.  64:  In 2nd  paragraph  from  bottom,  change time  of A p o l l o  9  splashdown  to  12:00:53 
pm  EST. 
p.  376:  In  8 th  line,  change  “July  21”  to “July  20”  [using Ea s te rn   Standard T ime  ra the r  
than  Greenwich Mean  Time]. 
In  paragraph  3,  line  4,  for  “contingency  sample”  sub s t i tu te  “contingency  and 
selected  samples.” 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1972 
p.  345:  In  13th line  from bottom,  change identification of  Dr.  Robert R .   Gilruth to “NASA 
Director  of  Key  Personnel  Development  and  former MSFC  Director.” 
p.  148: In  paragraph 3, line 3, change liftoff d a t e  to April 23. [ I t  was  1:26 am April 24 by 
Greenwich  Mean Time.] 
Astronautics  and Aeronautics,  1973 
p.  432:  Index:  After Gilliland,  Whitney,  change “5”  to  “4.” 

327 

NASA  HISTORICAL   PUBL ICAT IONS  

HISTORIES 
* Anderson, Frank W.,  Jr.,  o rde r s  o fMagn i tude :  A H i s to r yo fNACA  and NASA ,  1915- 
1976,  NA SA   SP-4403,  1976, GPO.* 
Benson,  Cha r le s  D.,  and  William  Barnaby  Faherty, Moonport: A  History  of Apo l lo  
Launch  Facilities  and  op e ra t ion s ,  NASA  SP-4204,  1978, GPO. 
* B r o o k s ,   Courtney  G.,  J am e s   M.  Grimwood,  and   Loyd  S.  Swenson,  Chariots f o r  
Apollo: A  History of Manned Luna r  Spacecraft,  NASA  SP-4205,  1979, GPO. 
* Byers,  Bruce K.,  Destination Moon: A  History  of the  Luna r  Orbiter Program, NASA 
TM  X-3487,  1977, NTIS.? 
* Corliss,  William  R.,  NASA   Sound ing  Rockets,  1958-1968:  A  Historical  Summa ry ,  
NASA  SP-4401,  1971, NTIS. 
* Ezell,  Edward C.  and Linda N.,  Th e  Partnership: A  History of the Apo l loSo yu z  Test 
Project,  N A S A   SP-4209,  1978, GPO. 
* Green,  Constance McL.,  and Milton  Lomask,  Vanguard: A  History,  NA SA   SP-4202, 
1970, GPO;  also,  Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution  P re s s ,   1971. 
* Hacker,  Barton C.,  and Jame s  M.  Grimwood, O n  th e  Shoulders of  Titans: A  History 
of Project  Gem in i ,  NASA   SP-4203,  1977, GPO. 
* Hall,  R.  ca rg i l l ,   Lunar Impact:  A  History  of Project  Range r ,  N A S A  SP-4210,  1977, 
GPO. 
Hartman,  Edwin P., Adventures  i n  Research:  A History of  the Ames Research Center, 
1940-1965, N A S A   sP-4302,  1970, NTIS. 
* Link,  Mae Mills,  Space Medicine  in  Proj6ct Mercury,  N A S A   SP-4003,  1965, NTIS. 
* Rosholt,  Rohert L.,  A n  Administrative  History  of NASA ,   1958-1963, NASA  SP-4101, 
1366, NTIS. 
* Slocp,  John  L.,  Liquid  Hydrogen  as  a Propulsion  Fuel,  1945-1959,  NA SA   SP-4404, 
1978, GPO. 
* Swe.ison,  Loyd S., James M.  Grimwood,  and Charles C. Alexander, Th i s  New Ocean: 
A  History of Project  Mercury,  N A S A   SP-4201,  1966, GPO. 
REFERENCE  WORKS 
* Aeronautics and  Space Report of the  President, annual volumes for 1975-  1978, GPO. 
The  Apollo Spacecraft; A Chronology, NA SA  SP-4009,  vol.  1 ,  1969, NT IS ;   vol.  2,  1973, 
GPO;  vol.  3,  1976, GPO;  vol.  4,  1978, GPO. 
* Astronautics  and   Aeronautics:  A  Chronology  of  Science,  Technology,  and   Policy, 
annual  volumes  1961-  1974,  with  an  earlier  summary  volume,  Aeronautics  and  
Astronautics, 1915-  1960. Early volumes available from NTIS,  recent one s  from GPO. 
* Hall, R. Cargill, ed., Essays on  the History of Rocketry and Astronautics: Proceedings 
of  the  Third  through the  S i x th  History Symposia of the  International  Academy  of 
Astronautics,  NA SA   CP-2014,  2  vol.,  1977, GPO. 
* Roland,  Alex F., A  Guide to  Research  in NASA  History,  HHR-50,3rd ed.,  Feb.  1979, 
looseleaf,  available from  NASA  History Office,  Washington,  DC  20546. 
*S k y lab :  A  Chronology, NASA  sp-4011,  1977, GPO. 
* Van Nimmen, Jane ,  and Leonard C.  Bruno, NASA  Historical Data Book ,  1958-1968, 
NA SA   SP-4012,  vol.  1, NASA  Resources,  1976, NTIS. 
*We l l s ,   Helen T.,  Su san  H.  Whiteley,  and Carrie E.  Karegeannes,  Origins of NASA  
Name s ,  NASA  SP-4402,  1976, GPO. 

*GPO: 
Order from Superintendent of  Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, 
DC  20402. 
TNTIS: 
O rd e r  from National Techn ica l  Information  Service,  Springfield, VA  22161. 

329 
PRINTING  O F F I C E   : 1981 0 - 300-780 : QL 3 

*U.S. 

National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Administration 
Washington,  D.C. 
20546 
Official  Business 
Penalty for Private Use, $300 

SPECIAL  FOURTH  CLASS M A I L  
BOOK 

Postage and  Fees Paid 
National Aeronautics and 
Spars Administration 
NASA451  

POSTMASTER: 

I f   Undeliverable (Section  1 5 g  
Postal Manual) Do Not R e tw  

