NASA  SP--4022 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND 
AERONAUTICS,  1977 
A  Chronology 

Eleanor  H .   Ritchie  ' 

The  NASA  History  Series 

1986 
Scientific and  Technical  Informat ion  Branch 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration 
Washington,  DC 

Four spacecraft launched by NASA in 1977: left to  right,  top, ESA’s Geos 1 and 
NASA’s Heao  1;  bottom,  ESA’s  Isee  2  on  NASA’s Isee  1,  and  Italy’s W o .  
(NASA  77-H-157, 77-H-56, 77-H-642, 77-H-484) 

Contents 

Preface  ...................................................... 
v 
January  ..................................................... 
1 
February  ....................................................  21 
March  ...................................................... 
47 
April  ....................................................... 
61 
May  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
77 
June  ...................................................... 
101 
July  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   127 
August  .................................................... 
143 
September  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
165 
October  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
185 
November  .................................................  201 
December  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
217 
Appendixes 
A . Satellites, Space Probes, and Manned Space Flights,  1977  . . . . . . .  237 
B . Major NASA Launches, 1977  ............................... 
261 
C . Manned Space Flights, 1977  ................................ 
265 
D . NASA Sounding Rocket Launches,  1977  ..................... 
267 
E . Abbreviations of  References  ................................ 
273 
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   279 

Illustrations 
.. 
Four spacecraft launched by NASA.  1977  ......................... 
n 
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise en route to  testing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17 
Artist’s concept.  world’s  largest wind-turbine blade  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  34 
Artist’s  concept.  solar sail rendezvous with comet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  49 
Landsat images.  Sierra Nevada snowcover.  1975 and 1977  . . . . . . . . . .  81 
Dr . Wernher von Braun with Saturn V.  1969  ..................... 
116 
“Sounds of Earth” recording goes on  Voyager2 spacecraft  . . . . . . . . .  144 
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on  first free flight  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  151 

iii 

NASA  m a in t a in s  a n  i n t e r n a l  h i s to ry  p ro g r am  f o r  two  p r i n c i p a l  reasons :   (1)  S p o n -  
so r sh ip  o f   re sea rch  in  NASA - r e l a t ed  h is tory   is o n e  way  in  which NASA   r e spo nd s  
t o  t h e  p rov i s ion  o f  t h e  N a t ion a l  A e ron au t i c s  a n d  S p a c e  A c t  of   1958 t h a t  requ ires  
NASA  t o  “p r ov id e  f o r  th e  w ides t  p r a c t i c a b l e  a n d  a p p r o p r i a t e  d i s sem ina t ion  of  in-  
f o rm a t i o n  conce rn ing  i ts  ac t iv i t ies  a n d   t h e  resu l ts  th e r eo f . ”  (2) T h o u g h t f u l  s tu dy  
of   NASA   h i s to ry  can   he lp  agency  m an a g e r s  accomp l i sh  t h e  m iss ions  assigned  t o  
t h e  agency .  U n d e r s t a n d i n g  NASA’s  p a s t   a id s  in   un d e r s t and in g   i ts  p re sen t   s i tua -  
t ion   a n d   i l lum ina tes  poss ib le   f u t u r e  d irec t ions .   T h e  op in ion s  a n d  conc lu s ion s  se t  
f o r t h  in  th i s  book  a r e  tho s e  of   t h e  a u t h o r ;  n o  o f f ic ia l  of   t h e  agency  necessarily en -  
do r se s   tho s e  op in ion s  o r   conc lu s ion s .  

For sale  by  the  Superintendent of  Documents,  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,  D.C. 
20402  (paper cover) Library of  Congress Catalog Number 65-60308 

Preface 
Astronautics and Aeronautics for 1977 is the 17th volume in a series of 
annual  chronological  digests  of  principal  events  in  the  fields  of 
astronautics  and  aeronautics.  Initiated  in  1961 with  a  compendium  of 
events  from  1915-1960,  this series is designed t o  serve as a reference for 
policymakers,  reference  librarians,  and  researchers.  Each  entry  is  fol- 
lowed  by  one or  more  citations  of  sources t o  which  users may  turn  for 
further information on  the particular  event or development being chron- 
icled. 
The  Astronautics  and  Aeronautics  series  is  one  way   in  which  the 
NASA  History  Office  has  attempted  t o   implement  its  charter  t o  
disseminate information about the activities of  the National Aeronautics 
and  Space Administration,  and  to   provide  support  for  historians  and 
other researchers in the area of United States aeronautical and space pro- 
grams. As a result of  staff and budgetary limitations, the NASA History 
Office has been unable t o  maintain the annual currency of  this series. We 
expect, however, to  bring the series up to  date with  a  forthcoming  com- 
pendium  volume covering principal events over a  six-year period. 
This  volume was  written  by  a member  of  the NASA  History  Office 
staff,  Eleanor H.  Ritchie. Michael  A.  Dennis,  Stuart Rosenbaum,  and 
Charles Scott also worked  on the volume. 
Reliability is essential t o  the usefulness of  any  reference work  of  this 
scope. As with previous volumes, readers can contribute by notifying our 
office of  any errors so that we  can publish them  in subsequent volumes. 

Sylvia D.  Fries 
Director, NASA History Office 

December  1985 

V 

January 

January  2:  Leaders  of  28  major U.S.  scientific  societies had  endorsed 
tests  to  determine  the  value  of  a  “science  court”-an  impartial  quasi- 
judicial body - in evaluating conflicting claims on controversial national 
issues such as nuclear-reactor safety, food additives, pesticides, and off- 
shore  oil  exploration,  and  in  determining the  facts,  according  to  New 
York Times science reporter  John Noble Wilford.  The concept, debated 
for several yr, had  received  the endorsements in the last months of  1976. 
Although it had  the support of  President Ford’s  scientific advisers, pro- 
ponents were not sure how President-elect Carter’s advisers stood. (NYT ,  
Jan  2/77,28) 

January 3:  NASA  announced award of  what Aviation  Week called “the 
largest NASA  contract ever  issued  for  an unmanned  space program” to  
Western Union  Space Communications Co.,  TRW  Systems, and Harris 
Electronics Systems Div.  for development of  the tracking and data-relay 
satellite system  (TDRSS) aimed  at  replacing  present  ground  stations by 
offering orbital-communications coverage for 85  t o  100%  of  spacecraft 
orbit,  compared  to   15%  coverage  now  available  from  ground-based 
facilities. The system would consist of  two specialized relay spacecraft in 
synchronous earth  orbit plus  a ground  terminal  at White  Sands, N.M., 
supporting 20 or  more  satellites orbiting  at  up  to  5000km  altitude.  The 
lOyr  contract  at $79.6 million  per  yr  would  include work  on spacecraft 
and ground  stations, as well  as  all operating  costs. 
TRW  would  be  prime  manufacturer  under  subcontract with  WU  to  
build  six  spacecraft  plus  components  for  a  seventh,  using  technology 
developed  for  the  FltSatCom  spacecraft  and  hardware  used  in  WU’s 
Westar  domestic  comsats;  Harris  Electronics  would  build  the  White 
Sands  station  and  provide  antenna  components.  Missions  using  the 
TDRSS  would  include  scientific,  applications,  and  manned  satellites 
such  as  Space  Shuttle,  Spacelab,  and  Shuttle-launched  spacecraft 
scheduled  for  the  1980s. (A vW k ,  Jan 3/77,  14;  NASA  Release 76-213) 
Seven European nations planning t o  use data from the U.S. Seasat A, 
due for launch in May  1978, were forming an organization to  coordinate 
their  activities,  Aviation  Week magazine  reported.  Denmark,  Finland, 
France,  West  Germany,  Britain,  Norway,  and  Spain would  use  Seasat 
measurement  of  wave  heights  to   forecast  floods in  the  North  Sea area 

1 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

and to  design  ships or  offshore structures  such  as oil  rigs,  or  in  harbor 
construction.  The group planned to  have  five laser-ranging  stations and 
up  t o   10 Doppler  tracking  stations ready  by  the  time  Seasat would  be 
operational.  (A vWk ,  Jan 3/77,  20) 

January  4:  Kennedy  Space  Center  announced  it  would  hold  a  sym- 
posium  Jan.  15 on minority  opportunities at  the  Spaceport,  to   include 
talks on KSC  procurement,  future construction plans,  and explanations 
of  the KSC  affirmative  action  plan  and equal  employment opportunity 
program. KSC had invited representatives of minority business firms and 
the general public  to  attend the  symposium.  (KSC  Release 2-77) 

January 5: The U.S.  Air Force Systems Command reported it had work- 
ed out a way  to suppress noise of  jet-aircraft engines during maintenance 
operations  on  the  ground,  as  a  means  of  reducing  hearing  loss  in 
maintenance personnel  and noise  impact  on the community.  Fifty-eight 
Air  Force bases worldwide had  received  the  suppressor units,  consisting 
of  primary  and  secondary  air  intakes  and  enclosures,  augmenter  tube, 
exhaust  muffler,  and  support  structure  t o   house  controls  and  water 
pumps.  After  backing  an aircraft  into the secondary enclosure,  workers 
would enclose the air intakes at the front in the primary-intake mufflers; 
the  secondary  enclosure, covering  the  aft  fuselage  and  engine  exhaust, 
would  include openings to be  sealed against the  fuselage and stabilizers 
to  keep  noise  inside.  Inside  the  augmenter  tube,  secondary cooling  air 
would  mix  with  the  exhaust,  and  spray  bars  in  the  tube  would  spray 
water  at  800gal  per  min  during  afterburner  operation.  (OIP  Release 
284.76) 

0  The  International  Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization 
(INTELSAT)  announced  it  would  award  to a British  company, AERE 
Hartwell,  a  15mo $71 540  fixed-price contract to  develop low-pressure, 
nickel-hydrogen power  cells  that would  use  a  lanthanum-alloy member 
both  as hydrogen reservoir  and as negative electrode. Use of  lanthanum 
would  lower  pressure  in  the  cells,  reduce  the  heat  dissipated  during 
discharge,  and  reduce  the  volume  of  cell  density.  If  successfully 
developed, the cells would  operate at a maximum pressure of  about 6 at- 
mospheres  and  would  have  a  minimum  life  of  500   charge-discharge 
cycles  when  used  in  synchronous-satellite  applications.  (INTELSAT 
Release 77-1-M) 

INTELSAT announced award of  a  15mo $72 536 fixed-price contract 
t o  EIC Corp.  of  Newton, Mass.,  for development of  an  improved high- 
pressure nickel-hydrogen  power  cell  that would  increase  reliability  and 
attain a minimum  lOyr cyclical life in synchronous-satellite applications. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

JANUARY 

Such an advance would permit about 4O00 daily charge-discharge cycles, 
or  about  lOyr  of  maintenance-free  operations.  (INTELSAT  Release 
77-2-M) 

January  6: NASA  formally  adjudged  the  Viking  75  mission,  launched 
toward Mars on  Aug.  20 and Sept. 9,  1975, successful, according t o  the 
post-landing mission  operations  report.  All  Viking  instruments  except 
the  seismometer  on  the  first  lander  (which  failed  to   uncage  itself‘) 
operated  successfully  and  were  continuing  to   send  data  to   earth.  The 
prelaunch mission  objectives  (advancing  knowledge  of  Mars  by  orbital 
observation  and  by  direct measurements  in  the  atmosphere and on  the 
planet’s  surface)  had  been 
realized, 
the  report  said.  (MOR 
S-8 15-75-01/02) 

0  NASA  announced that  a  test model  of  Pioneer  I O ,   first spacecraft to  
reached Jupiter, would be on display at the Natl. Air and Space Museum 
in  Washington,  D.C.,  beginning  Jan.  11.  The  actual  spacecraft, 
launched March 3 ,   1972, had  reached  Jupiter in Dec.  1973 and was now 
about  1.6 billion km (about a billion miles) from earth headed for the or- 
bit  of  Uranus,  which  it  should reach  in Sept.  1979, by  the time its sister 
spacecraft Pioneer  I 1  would  reach  Saturn. 
Headed  generally  toward  Aldebaran  in  the  constellation  Taurus, 
Pioneer  I O  would  reach  the orbit  of  Pluto  (about 4 billion miles out)  in 
1987, but  radio-signal reception would  be  doubtful beyond  the orbit of 
Uranus.  The model  of  the  first spacecraft scheduled to leave the earth’s 
solar  system  would  appear  in  the  Milestones  of  Flight  hall  with  the 
Wright Flyer,  the Spirit of  St. Louis, and the Apollo 11. (NASA Release 
77-1; ARC  Release 77-1) 

0  NASA Hq announced appointment of  Curtis M.  Graves as director of 
the Community Affairs Division, effective Jan.  3. Graves came to NASA 
from the  Natl.  Civil  Service League,  where  he  was  managing  associate 
for continuing education from 1973 to  1977. For 6yr he was a member of 
the Texas  legislature,  representing  a Houston district beginning  in  1966 
as the  first black  elected to  that body since 1891. Born  in New  Orleans, 
he  received a bachelor’s  degree from Texas Southern University and an 
honorary  doctorate  from Union  Baptist  Bible College  in  Houston.  He 
also served as- branch manager of  a savings and loan association and as 
advertising manager  and editor of  two Houston newspapers. In  his new 
assignment  with  NASA  he  would  supervise the  agency’s  relations with 
communities  where  NASA  centers  and  installations  are  located,  pro- 
moting  understanding  of  NASA’s  economic and social  impact  on these 
areas  among  local  citizens  and  NASA  personnel  nationwide.  (NASA 
Release 77-3) 

3 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

India  and  the  Soviet Union  had  reached  agreement on  coordinating 
their  satellite  systems,  said  the  Indian  news  agency  Samachar,  as 
@ 
reported  by  the Foreign Broadcast  Information Service. The agreement 
resulted  from a  recent visit to  Moscow by a team of  experts from India’s 
Ministry  of  Communications and  Department  of  Space.  The  problem 
arose  because  of  possible  interference  between  the  proposed  India 
domestic comsat  Insat,  to  be placed  in geostationary  orbit over  the  In- 
dian Ocean, and existing or  proposed satellite systems of  the USSR. The 
aim of  the talks was to  ensure avoidance of satellite interference through 
discussion of  the technical aspects of  the systems, including the distance 
between  satellites.  Satellites  already  in  operation  in  that  area  included 
those of  the Intl.  Telecommunications Satellite Organization, Indonesia, 
and  others.  (FBIS, Delhi Patriot,  Dec  26/76,  1) 

January  7:  NASA  announced  that  four  customers  had  signed  up  for 
“getaway  special”  payloads  to   f ly   on  the  Space  Shuttle  on  a  space- 
available  basis  beginning  in  1980.  The  small  self-contained  payloads 
must  weigh  no  more  than  90kg  (2001b)  each,  measure  no  more  than 
0. 15m3 (5ft3), and require no services such as electrical power or deploy- 
ment  into  space. 
Owners  of  the  research  and  development  packages  were  R.  Gilbert 
Moore of  Utah,  a  private citizen who offered  half  his payload  to  Utah 
State Univ., which in turn would make the space available to  high school 
students who submitted proposals to  f ly  their own experiments; Dr. L.R. 
Megill,  chairman  of  the  space  science experiment  committee  a t   Utah 
State, who funded a payload as a  follow-on to  Moore and also planned 
to   invite  student  proposals;  and  Reiner Klett , representing independent 
West German  researchers,  who signed for  two payloads,  one biological 
and  one  for  space processing.  (NASA Release 77-4) 

Radio signals between the  four Viking spacecraft on Mars and earth- 
based  antennas  had  provided  the most  accurate confirmation  so  far  of 
Einstein’s theory of  relativity in an experiment conducted Nov. 25,  1976, 
when Mars moved  behind  the  sun  relative  to   the  earth,  causing a  total 
blackout  of  communications with  the Viking  spacecraft.  Radio  signals 
transmitted to  the Viking spacecraft from antennas a t  Goldstone, Calif., 
and  Canberra,  Australia,  had  produced  “incredibly  precise”  measure- 
ment of  the radio  transmission. According to  Adam I.  Braufman of  the 
Mass.  Institute  of  Technology, the  “uncertainty” over  a  space of  some 
322 million km  was  less than 2m, an accuracy of  five parts in  10 million 
millionths. 
The Viking radio science team was trying to  confirm Einstein’s predic- 
tion that the sun’s gravitational force would bend and delay radio signals 

4 

ASTRONAUTICS’ AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JANUARY 

(or any form of  radiation)  traveling close t o  a massive body such as the 
sun.  Previous tests using the spacecraft communications  systems tended 
t o  confirm  the  theory,  but  the Viking  test  proved  much  more  accurate 
than the previous ones.  (NYT ,  Jan  7/77,  A-8;  W Post,  Jan 7/77,  A-1) 

Q  NASA  announced  it  would  participate  in a joint  agro-environmental 
monitoring system that would  improve crop management in the state of 
Virginia  through  knowledge  gained from the automated data-collection 
and processing systems developed for satellite and space-exploration pro- 
grams.  Funded by Wallops Flight Center a t  Wallops Island, Va.,  and by 
the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ.  a t  Blacksburg, a net- 
work of  data collection stations would automatically track “degree-day” 
units  necessary  for  the  emerging  of  certain  insects  or  diseases; when  a 
certain  total  was  reached,  the  system would  alert  a  farmer  t o  spray his 
crop.  Savings would  result  from  reduced  use of  insecticides during less 
effective  periods,  reduced  possibility  of  pollution,  and  fewer  re- 
quirements for labor  and equipment.  Loyd  C.  Parker, Wallops project 
manager,  said  design  work  w a s   complete and  by  early  spring  the  five 
monitoring  stations  and  central  computer  should  be  ready  for  use. 
(NASA Release 77-6) 

Q  Marshall Space Flight Center announced  it would accept proposals for 
a study contract to  define possibilities of  receiving electrical energy from 
the  sun  in  large  quantities  for  use  on  earth,  through  a  concept  called 
Satellite  Power  Systems,  consisting of  a  number  of  spacecraft  in  sta- 
tionary orbit using photovoltaic or  solar-thermal power  instrumentation 
t o  capture  solar  energy,  convert  it  to  electrical energy, convert that  to  
microwave energy,  transmit  it  t o  earth  stations  for  conversion back  to  
electrical energy, and distribute the power t o  users. Other NASA studies 
had  established the technical and economic feasibility of  satellite power 
systems, but an agreement between NASA and the Energy Research and 
Development  Administration  would  result  in  additional  data  on  key 
issues and critical areas, and the ability of  the concept t o  deal with  these 
issues and  areas.  MSFC would  accept  proposals  for  the  study through 
Jan.  24.  (MSFC Release 77-1) 

January 8:  James  B.  Irwin,  eighth  astronaut  to  walk  on the moon,  re- 
mained  in satisfactory condition after  triple bypass surgery at the Texas 
Heart Institute. “He is still in intensive care but is doing very well,” said a 
spokesman  a t  St.  Lukes Episcopal Hospital  in Houston.  The  operation 
consisted  of  replacing  three  vein  segments with  veins  removed  from 
Irwin’s  legs. Irwin, 46, lunar-module  pilot on  the Apollo I5 mission July 
26,  1971, had resigned from the astronaut corps in May 1972. (NYT ,  Jan 
8/77,  17) 

5 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

January IO :  A v  Wk  reported that the seismometer carried on  the Viking 2 
lander  might  have  recorded  the  first  seismic event  since the  spacecraft 
touched  down  Sept.  3,  1976, on  the Utopia  Planitia  area of  the planet 
Mars.  Beginning about 7pm local time for the lander, on  Sol 60 (Nov.  7, 
1976), the activitq continued for about  30min.  Viking project observers 
said the data seemed t o  have  the “proper  signature” of a seismic event, 
similar  to   data  recorded  on  the  lunar  surface  during  seismic  events. 
Donald  Anderson,  leader  of  the  Viking  seismology  team,  said  rough 
estimates put  the  center  of  the  activity  several thousand  km  from  the 
lander,  but  cautioned  against  labeling the  activity a  “marsquake”  until 
further  studies were  done.  (AvWk ,  Jan  10/77,  21) 

MSFC  reported  that  the number  of  visitors to  the center in  1976 had 
increased 11 Vo  over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each 
of  the  50 United  States  and  several  foreign countries.  The  guided bus 
tours of  the center,  cosponsored  by MSFC and the Alabama  Space and 
Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some 
of  the former  Saturn test sites. The tour  stop presenting the story of  the 
Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of  the Shut- 
tle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of  Skylab 
to  see how  the astronauts lived  in orbit; and the east and west  test  areas 
being  converted for Shuttle testing were now  available for viewing.  The 
Redstone  test  stand already on the tour  route had  been  refurbished and 
was added  to  the Natl.  Register of  Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3) 

0  The U.S.  Dept.  of  Defense  had  begun  development of  plans to  wage 
war  in outer  space,  the  Washington Post  reported,  and had  contracted 
with  six  manufacturers  to   study ways  of  letting  its  satellites sound  an 
alarm  if  approached, sound  another alarm  if  attacked, and defend  itself 
from an enemy satellite that  approached  too close. 
Quoting  “knowledgeable sources . . . close to  the Pentagon,” the Post 
said  the  USSR’s  resumption  last  year  of  hunter-killer  satellite  testing 
after  a  5yr  hiatus had  caused growing concern  over  the threat of  war  in 
space. The Pentagon presently had  at least a dozen comsats in orbit link- 
ing  U.S.  military  bases,  ships,  and  aircraft  around  the  world,  and 
another dozen navigation satellites t o  guide Navy  surface ships and sub- 
mqrines.  A killer satellite launched by an enemy could knock  out the en- 
tire U.S.  defense communications  system within  a wk,  according to  the 
Post  account,  and the Pentagon had  considered putting  an entire array 
of  comsats in orbit and turning off their radios until needed:  “With their 
radios  off,’’  said  a  source,  “the  opposition  couldn’t  track  their  radio 
beacons. And if  they can’t  track them they can’t  find them.” No one had 
forecast a war in space within the next  lOyr, the Post added, but the Pen- 
tagon  planned  t o  be prepared after  that. Asked if  the U.S.  could fight a 

6 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

JANUARY 

war  on  earth  today  if  it had  lost  its satellites in  space, a  source  replied: 
“Not  successfully.”  ( W Post,  Jan   10177, A-26) 

January 17: NASA announced plans to launch NATO  111-B,  second in a 
new  series of  comsats  to serve the North  Atlantic Treaty Organization, 
from  the  Eastern  Test  Range  at  Cape  Canaveral,  Fla.,  on  Jan.  27  as 
NASA’s  first launch of  1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase I11 series, 
funded  entirely  by  NATO,  were  built  by  Ford  Aerospace;  the  third 
would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space 
Flight Center that would put NATO 111-B in orbit had  successfully laun- 
ched  three previous NATO  satellites: Nato ZI-A  and -B,  in March  1970 
and Feb.  1971, and Nato 111-A in April  1976. (NASA  Release 77-5) 

0  Rockwell Intl.’s  B-1 Division  announced award of  contracts  for more 
than  $3  million  to  two  Phoenix,  Ariz.,  firms-Sperry  Rand  Flight 
Systems Division  and AiResearch Manufacturing Co. - for work  on the 
new  USAF B-1  strategic bomber.  The B-1 Division was  system contrac- 
tor  to  the Air  Force  for the  program,  which  received  DOD  production 
approval on Dec.  2,  1976. Sperry would  receive a $1   840 500 contract to  
build  a gyrostabilization subsystem and a vertical situation display for a 
B-1  prototype  that would enter flight testing  in  1979; AiResearch would 
receive  a  $1 218  102 contract t o  produce  a  secondary power  subsystem 
for  the  same prototype.  The gyrostabilization subsystem would  provide 
the €3-1 crew with the aircraft’s course heading and flight angle with rela- 
tion to the horizon; the secondary power  subsystem would provide extra 
power  for  engine  start  and  operation  of  support  systems  on  the  B-1. 
(Rockwell Release LA-1) 

January 18: MSFC announced that the state of  Georgia would be  first in 
the nation to have its own  Landsat digital-analysis system, under  a con- 
tract  between  the Georgia  Institute of  Technology and MSFC  enabling 
state  planners  to   assess  land-resources  usage  and  to   monitor  changes, 
and to set up a standard data base for a statewide land-use program. The 
two Landsat  satellites now  in near-polar orbit would provide images and 
recorded  magnetic  tape  transmitted  to  a  ground  receiving  station.  A 
data-retrieval system developed by  Johnson  Space Center would  help in 
establishing  a  state  organization  structure  to  distribute  the  data  to 
regional,  county, and local  users.  A local  official could  find  out  how  a 
tract as small as  10 acres was being used, merely by dialing a central com- 
puter  at Ga.  Tech  and getting  a  printout  by  telephone into  a  local  ter- 
minal.  (MSFC Release 77-8) 

January 19: NASA  announced it would share with  the city of  Hampton, 
Va.,  the  cost  of  building  a  refuse-burning,  steam-producing  plant  to  

7 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

serve the city and four federal agencies in the Tidewater area. First of  this 
type of  community facility to  be jointly sponsored by  a city government 
and  federal  agencies,  the  project  was  the  result  of  studies  at  Langley 
Research Center on better  use  of  potential energy  sources and improve- 
ment  of  the environment. Cost of  the plant,  about $8 million,  would be 
shared by Langley Air Force Base, the City of Hampton, and LaRC, and 
should  be  amortized within  2Oyr.  Beginning in  1979,  it  would  consume 
about  70%  of  the  city’s  waste  and  all  refuse  from LaRC,  the  air  force 
base,  the Army’s  Fort  Monroe,  and  the VA  hospital  in  Hampton, and 
would  produce  about  306  million  lb  of  steam  per  yr.  Bcilt  on NASA- 
owned land, the plant would  remain  the property of  NASA  though leas- 
ed  to  and operated  by  the city  for at least  2Oyr.  Ash  produced  through 
special  incineration  at  up  to  1800°F would  be  sterile,  nonorganic,  and 
nonpolluting,  amounting  to   a  seventh  of  the  refuse  bhrned.  (NASA 
Release 77-8) 

0  A  Trident  missile  successfully  launched  from  Cape  Canaveral  had 
passed  its first flight test and met all major test objectives, according to  a 
NY  Times account. The U.S. Navy reported that the missile, carrying an 
inert payload,  flew nearly its 9500km range to an area near Ascension Is. 
in  the  South Atlantic.  Like  its  predecessors,  the  Polaris  and  Poseidon 
strategic  missile  systems,  Trident  would  become  the  nation’s  primary 
undersea intercontinental weapon. At a cost of  $21.5  billion,  the Trident 
missile  would  be  operative well  into  the  1980s. New  Trident  class  sub- 
marines  would  carry  24  of  the  new  missiles,  whereas  the  Polaris  and 
Poseidon had  carried only  16.  Ohio,  first Trident class submarine under 
construction, and costing $882 million, would be ready for patrol duty in 
1979  with  a  full  complement  of  24  Trident  missiles,  the  report  said. 
(NYT ,  Jan   19/77,  A-14;  W Post,  Jan  19/77,  A-16) 

0  The Dept. of Defense announced plans to begin full-scale development 
of  cruise  missiles  made  by  Boeing  Go.  and  General  Dynamics  Corp., 
with  the  first  to   be  available  in  1979,  the  Wall St.  Journal  reported. 
Cruise  missiles  (small  low-flying  pilotless  jet  planes  designed  to   evade 
enemy  radar)  could  carry  either  nuclear  or  conventional warheads  and 
could  be  launched  from  ships,  planes,  or  trucks,  or   submerged  sub- 
marines.  Boeing  and  General  Dynamics  had  each  developed  a  cruise 
missile: Boeing the Air  Force version,  and General Dynamics, the Navy 
version called the Tomahawk, designed for launch from submarines and 
surface vessels. Although the two versions used different airframes, they 
used  the same engines, guidance systems, and warheads. After reviewing 
both versions, the DOD decided to  continue both, and established a joint 
program office under  the direction of  Navy Capt.  Walter  Locke, whose 
orders required maximum cooperation with the Air Force. In addition to  

8 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JANUARY 

its “short” cruise missile,  1083cm long with a range of  1127km, the Air 
Force  supported  development of  a  stretch  version  1470cm long with  a 
range of  2254km  for more distant targets. The DOD also expressed sup- 
port  for advanced technology to  refine missile accuracy and for a super- 
sonic version to  exceed present speed of  885kph.  It had asked Congress 
for $402.7 million for the programs in FY 1978, up from $198.7 million 
in  1977. (WSJ,  Jan  19/77,  38) 

January 20: The Netherlands had “finally decided” a t  the end of  1976 to  
join  the U.S.  and ESA in financing a second astronomy satellite (IRAS, 
the infrared astronomy satellite), but not all its citizens were enthusiastic 
over the anticipated expense, said a report  in Nature magazine.  Starting 
with  a  preliminary definition  study  in  Jan.  1975,  followed  by  13 pro- 
posals  for  experiments  in  response  to   a  NASA  announcement,  a  U.S. 
study  team  of  11  astronomers  had  begun  discussion  with  Dutch 
colleagues on  the  scientific program  and  had  reached  agreement  a t   the 
beginning of  1976. 
NASA  had  expected signing of  a memorandum of  understanding be- 
tween the U.S.  and the Netherlands by  July  1976; the Dutch government 
had  agreed in principle  in  July,  but  it had  taken  6mo to  find the money 
for the project.  The U.S.  and the Netherlands would each pay about  110 
million  guilders,  and  the  United  Kingdom  Science  Research  Council, 
which had  taken  active part  in  the U S -D u t c h  negotiations, would con- 
tribute  10 million guilders. Plans were to  launch IRAS from the Western 
Test Range in  the  spring of  1981, to  trace and map about  10 million in- 
frared  sources. Dutch associations of  scientific workers had protested in 
1974  against  further  space  activity,  especially 
in  behalf  of 
underdeveloped  countries  lacking means  to  take  advantage of  such ef- 
fort.  (Nature, Jan 20/77,  202) 

*  The Max Planck  Institute of Astronomy announced that,  for the first 
time,  astronomers  had  observed  the  presence  of  water  outside  earth’s 
galaxy,  indicating  the  possibility  of  life  in  outer  space,  the  NY   Times 
reported.  Astronomers from the U.S.,  France,  and West Germany, us- 
ing  the  32.91m  Effelsberg  radiotelescope,  largest  in  the  world,  found 
rotating  molecules  of  water  a t   the  edge  of  nebula  IC  133, 2.2  million 
light-years  from  earth.  The water  molecules, when  struck  by  light,  ap- 
parently emit excess energy and (like laser beams) vibrate in unison,  giv- 
ing off  radio  signals. The discovery meant that  other  solar systems with 
the  same physical conditions  as  earth’s  might  exist,  along with  planets 
and  stars  also  formed  by  condensation  of  dust  and  gas,  with  the  same 
type of lifespan. 
“What  is  decisive,”  according  to   Otto  Hachenberg,  director  of  the 

9 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Bonn  Institute  for  Radio  Astronomy,  “is  that we  find  the same  condi- 
tions  of  physical  matter  one  billion  light years  away  from  earth  as on  
earth.”  Discovery  of  water  vapor  in another galaxy was expected  t o  in- 
spire  scientists  to   look  for  such  vapor  in  other  galaxies.  (NYT ,   Jan 
20/77,  23) 
January 2Z: The United States planned  t o  orbit in  1983 a 9080kg 645cm 
telescope that would observe images almost to  the edge of  space and the 
beginning of  time,  Thomas O’Toole  reported  in  the  Washington Post. 
“Without  the  blurring  of  the  atmosphere,”  said  Dr.  John  Bahcall  of 
Princeton Univ.’s  Institute for Advanced Study, “we would be able to  see 
things  that  are  10 times  smaller than we  have  seen,  or   10 times  farther 
away. It would be like reading the writing on  a quarter that we could only 
tell was  round  before.” 
If  approved  by Congress, the $435 million  Space Telescope would  be 
carried  from  earth  by  astronauts  manning  the  Space  Shuttle.  The 
telescope  would  investigate  quasars  radiating  thousands  of  times  the 
energy generated by  ordinary  stars of  the  same size, and would  observe 
the  birth  of  stars,  map  nearby  planets  and  galaxies,  and  compute 
distances to  the nearest stars. 
In  addition  t o   optics  half  the  size  of  Mount  Palomar’s,  the  Space 
Telescope would  carry lenses  and instruments to  scan ultraviolet and in- 
frared  spectra  not  accessible  to   earthbound  telescopes  because  of  at- 
mospheric blockage. The telescope would  relay its views  to  earth using 
geostationary  satellites  over  the  U.S.  NASA  would  send  Shuttle 
astronauts  t o   the  telescope  every  5yr  to   replace wbrnout  or  damaged 
parts.  ( W  Post,  Jan 21/77,  C-24) 
0  The Communications  Satellite Corporation  announced  that  its  earth 
stations  in Andover,  Maine;  Etam, W.Va.;  and Jamesburg,  Calif.,  had 
operated  with  two  TV  channels  in  each  of  four  Intelsat  satellites  to  
transmit coverage of  President Jimmy Carter’s inauguration to  about 70 
countries around  the world. Total transmit-receive time for the  satellite 
TV  coverage was  61-1/6  half-channel  hr.  The  European  Broadcasting 
Union  (EBU),  the U.S.  Information Agency  (USIA),  the Armed Forces 
Radio and TV Service, and other organizations had reached audiences in 
both  western  and  eastern Europe through  the ComSat  network.  Coun- 
tries in Africa,  the Middle East,  Latin America, Asia, and Australia had 
seen  inaugural  events  transmitted  either  live  or  on   film and  videotape 
news  services transmitted  by  the satellites. (ComSat Release 77-8) 
The Soviet Union had radioed commands to  its orbiting Salyut 5 space 
station t o  position  it  for  rendezvous with  a forthcoming  Soyuz launch, 
according  to   a  story  in  the  Washington Post.  Ideal  time  for  a  Soyuz 
launch would be within  the next  5  days,  the report  said, and two Soviet 
tracking ships were already on  station in the Atlantic Ocean and Carib- 
bean Sea to  keep in touch with  the cosmonauts.  ( W  Post, Jan 21/77, C8) 

10 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

JANUARY 

January 24:  NASA  Hq announced  appointment  of  R.D.  Ginter  as  as- 
sistant  administrator  for  energy programs,  effective Jan.  2.  Ginter  had 
been acting in that position since Sept.  1975, following the departure of 
astronaut  (now U.S.  Senator) Harrison H.  Schmitt (R-NM). 
Ginter had  joined  NASA  in  1960 after  8yr as a missile project  officer 
with  the U.S. Navy and served in  a variety of  positions,  including chief 
of  the  Scout  launch  vehicle  program,  director  of  the  Technology Ap- 
plications  Division,  and  director  of  the  Energy  Systems Division.  He 
received NASA’s  Exceptional Service Medal in  1966 for his work as pro- 
gram  manager  for   the  Atlas-Centdur  launch  vehicle.  (NASA  Release 
77-9) 
January 25: MSFC announced  selection of  a  Huntsville, Ala.,  firm  for 
award  of  its  largest  contract  to   a  minority  business  under  the  Small 
Business Act.  Robinson Printing  Co. would  receive $998 474  to  provide 
reproduction,  documentation,  and  photographic  services  for  the 
Michoud Assembly Facility a t  New Orleans; the cost-plus-fixed-fee con- 
tract would be for  lyr  with two  lyr  renewal options.  Robinson would be 
one of  four minority  firms working  a t  Michoud under MSFC  contract. 
(MSFC Release 77-12) 
0  MSFC  announced  that  four of  its engineers had  received awards con- 
ferred  by  the  Soviet  Union  for  participating  in  the  Apollo-Soyuz  test 
project of  1975. Dr. William R.  Lucas, director of  MSFC, presented the 
S. Korolev medal to  Harold Ledford  (now of  the Shuttle projects office) 
for “outstanding management and technical proficiency as chief engineer 
for  science and engineering” from  beginning to  end of  the ASTP. 
The USSR  also sent Yuri Gagarin diplomas for “exemplary leadership” 
to  three  engineers who  had  chaired  stress-corrosion review  teams  after 
prelaunch inspection of  the long stored Saturn 1B launch vehicle revealed 
a  cracked  fin.  The  teams  had  investigated  all  launch  stages  and 
associated  hardware, 
independently  assessing  use  of  corrosion- 
susceptible materials.  Jewel  W.  Moody’s  review  team  and  a  Chrysler 
Corp.  team  assessed  flightworthiness  of  the  Saturn  1B;  Charles  E. 
Cataldo’s  team,  with  personnel  from  McDonnell  Douglas  and  the 
Rocketdyne  Division  of  Rockwell,  investigated  the  S-IVB  stage  and 
rocket  engines  used  on  the  various  launch  stages  to   assure  they  were 
flightworthy;  and  Paul  H.  Schuerer’s  team,  with  personnel  from  IBM 
and the Bendix Corp.,  assessed flightworthiness of  the Saturn instrument 
unit  and  inertial-guidance platform.  (MSFC Release 77-1 3) 
0  The  Natl.  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  (NOAA)  an- 
nounced plans to  use a new tool-  satellite pictures - in establishing hunt- 
ing  regulations  for  Canada  geese  and  other  arctic-nesting  game birds. 
Wildlife managers in Canada and the U.S.  would use imagery from the 
Noaa 5 polar-orbiting satellite, showing snow and ice conditions in tradi- 

11 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

tional nesting areas too remote for on-site inspection, to  monitor habitat 
conditions. 
Identification of  probable areas of  castastrophic or outstanding goose 
production  would  enable  managers  to  impose  restrictions  to  prevent 
overkill of birds or to  bring the populations to  levels suitable for hunting. 
Factors  affecting  the  nesting  of  arctic  geese  would  include  the  timely 
disappearance of  snow  and  ice,  and  availability  of  melt  water  to  allow 
rearing  of  young;  late seasons or adverse weather  could  prevent  nesting 
or  reduce  clutch  or   brood  sizes.  (Dept.  of  Commerce/NOAA  Release 
77-13) 
*  Timothy Leary, once described by  the media  as “high priest of  LSD,” 
visited  Washington,  D.C.,  on  behalf  of  his  latest  enthusiasm,  space 
migration, according to a story in the Washington Star. Leary, at his first 
press  conference  in  7yr,  described  “a  raging  epidemic  of  hope  in  this 
country” and sqid it was  time to  find a new  frontier. He wanted  his sup- 
port  taken  seriously,  and  cited  the  studies  by  Gerard  K. O’Neill  of 
Princeton Univ.  and those of  the L-5  Society. “Soon  people  will  find  it 
cheaper  to build  a  new  world  than  to  fight over  an old  one,” he  added. 
When would  space migration become a reality? “Ten years after people 
stop laughing  about  it,” Leary  replied.  ( W Star,  Jan  25/77,  D-3) 

January  26:  Lewis  Research  Center  announced  it  would  participate  in 
programs  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  using  an  airborne  infrared 
scanner  to  pinpoint  residential  heat  loss.  The cities of  Cleveland, Ohio, 
and  Springfield,  I l l . ,   would  reimburse  the  center  for  its  services.  A 
NASA  C-47  aircraft,  flown  over  areas  designated  by  Cleveland’s  city 
council  as  eligible  for  low-interest  winterizing  and  rehabilitation  loans 
from the U.S.  Dept.  of  Housing and Urban Development  (HUD), would 
record  on  magnetic  tape  the  images  of  rooftops  showing hot  areas  as 
white, warm  areas as gray, and cool areas as black.  Homeowners in the 
target  areas could  view  the  results  at  community  centers  and apply  for 
block  grant money  from HUD as necessary.  The city of  Springfield had 
requested similar assistance for a HUD loan program.  LeRC had  used  a 
thermal  infrared  technique in  1975-76  to  scan NASA  centers  for energy 
loss,  saving  the  agency  about  $350 OOO  in  the  first  yr  of  the  program. 
(NASA Release 77-13; Lewis News, March  11/77,  3) 

0  A television relay satellite 22 OOO miles in space was the focus of  an ex- 
periment  Jan.  25  in  using  TV  transmissions  to  conduct  judicial  pro- 
ceedings,  reducing the travel time and cost of witnesses and lawyers, and 
to  increase the efficiency of  the courts,  the New  York Times reported. 
The project,  result  of  a yr’s  planning between  the Univ.  of  Maryland 
law  school  in  Baltimore  and  that  of  Ohio  Northern  in  Lima,  was  only 

12 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

JANUARY 

partly  successful because the yr-old communications technology satellite 
Cts  orbiting  over  the  equator  south  of  Denver  repeatedly  sent  to  
Baltimore the jagged  horizontal  lines  of  TV  “snow” during  the  closing 
arguments  of  the  mock  hearing  at  Lima.  Also,  the  voice-activated TV 
cameras,  two  a t   each  location  t o  cover  the  two  pairs  of  lawyers  and 
judges,  would  take over  the projection  screen whenever  anyone wearing 
a  lapel microphone coughed or  cleared  his  throat. 
The Maryland  Center  for  Public  Broadcasting, which  sponsored  the 
experiment, had  paid  nothing  for use of  the system, and the Cts project 
leader  (Herbert  Nunelly  of  Westinghouse Electric  Corp.)  operating  the 
teleconference for NASA said he could not compute the cost of an hour’s 
or  day’s  use  of  the  satellite. The American Bar  Assn.  had  approved  the 
mock  appeals  hearing  before  Judge  Joseph  F.  Weis,  Jr . ,   of  the  U.S 
Court of  Appeals  for  the Third Circuit, and three lawyers before whom 
law  school  students  were  arguing  the  case.  Judge  Weis’s  ABA  project 
director,  Howard  Primer  of  Chicago,  cited  several  actual  trials  con- 
ducted  with  TV  assistance.  (NYT ,  Jan  26/77,  B-1) 

First appraisals pf  a Soviet MiG-25 aircraft  flown by  a Soviet pilot to  
Japan on Sept.  6,  1976, had  been  revised,  according to  U.S.  Air  Force 
specialists quoted  by  the N Y   Times. Further  analysis  had  revealed  that 
the airctaft  did not  lag behind  the advanced technology of  U .S  aircraft, 
as previously stated,  but  contained  some  surprises. After  7wk  of  study, 
officials  reported  the  MiG-25’s  radar  to   be  more  powerful  and  less 
vulnerable  to  enemy  jamming  than  U.S.  radars,  although  operated  on 
vacuum-tube  technology.  The  Soviet  aircraft’s  radar  also  lacked  the 
“look-down” capability of  U.S.  aircraft,  so that  Soviet MiG-25’s  could 
not  detect low-flying enemy aircraft that  blended  in with the earth’s sur- 
face.  Similarly,  Air  Force specialists described  the MiG-25’s  Tumansky 
jet  engines  as  15yrs outmoded:  the  flight  computer - called  impressive 
even  though  it  too   was  based  on  vacuum-tube  technology -required 
extra space, maintenance, and cooling mechanisms. The USSR apparent- 
ly  was reluctant  to  entrust  its  pilots  with  total  control of  their  aircraft, 
which  explained the “very sophisticated data base” which could not only 
handle  fire control and sensor systems but  could also return the craft  to 
any of  four  predesignated  landing  fields.  “The biggest  advantage,”  said 
one U.S.  Air Force officer, “is that we  allow, we  train, our men to think, 
to adapt.  This does not  occur  in many  cases with  the  Soviet air  force.” 
Designed  in  1960 to   combat  the  U.S. B-70  bomber,  which  never  went 
into  production,  the MiG-25  had  been  altered  later  for  use  against  the 
highflying  Lockheed  SR-7 1  reconnaissance  plane.  (NYT ,   Jan   26/77, 
A-1 1) 
*  The New  York  Times reported  that  France  had  inaugurated  its  first 

13 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

operating  solar power  plant,  in what  officials predicted would b.e  a race 
with  the U.S.  to  sell solar power  to  Arab and third world countries. The 
plant,  located at Odeillo in  the Pyrenees mountains  of  southern France, 
would  contribute  about  64 kilowatts  to   the  national  electricity  grid 
(enough to  run  about  60 household electric irons,  the NYT said).  Jean- 
Claude  Colli,  the  government’s  director  for  new  energy  sources,  noted 
that  the  French  could  claim  operational  equipment,  whereas  “the 
Americans  are presenting  futuristic projects.” France  expected to  sign a 
major solar  energy  development  contract with  Saudi Arabia  within  the 
week  and to  host a sales meeting at the end of  the week wiih 26 countries 
from the  Persian  Gulf  and Mediterrranean  regions.  The new  plant  was 
said to receive about  180 days of  sun per y r ,  and to  use collector mirrors 
for reflecting the rays to a boiler heating steam to  drive a turboalternator 
that would  produce  the  electricity.  (NYT ,  Jan 26/77,  A-9) 

January 27: NASA  announced publication of  a “space photo  album”: an 
atlas-size  book  containing  400  images  of  earth’s  natural  and  cultural 
features taken  by  the  Landsat  earth  resources  satellite, most  of  the pic- 
tures  in  full color  and  ne&  full-page  size. Authors were  three  scientists 
from GSFC (Drs.  Nicholas M. Short, Paul D.  Lowman, and Stanley C. 
Freden)  and  Dr.  William  A.  Finch,  Jr . ,   from  San  Diego  State Univ. 
Designed  as  a  reference,  a  textbook,  a  teachers’  guide,  and  a 
supplemental tool  for research  specialists,  the book  devoted  40%  of  its 
content  to  images of  the 50 United  States but  included  images  from all 
over  the  world,  and  repeated  some  standard  views  to   show  seasonal 
changes.  The pictures  had  a  grid-number  system  for  quick  location  of 
geological and geographical features described in the captions. The book 
included  sections  telling  the  story of  the Landsat  program,  its  systems, 
applications,  and accomplishments, and  a  supplemental teacher’s guide 
with  glossary and suggestions for classroom use.  (NASA Release 77-14) 

January  28:  NASA  launched  from  the  Eastern  Test  Range  on  a  Delta 
vehicle the  second  in  a  series of  three  communications satellites  for  use 
by  the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,  into an orbit with  35,797km 
preliminary  apogee,  35 777km  perigee,  1436.2min  period,  and 2.6”  or- 
bital  inclination. The cylindrical Nato ZZZB  spacecraft had  a covering of 
solar cells for power generation and was gyrostabilized, providing stabili- 
ty  for  the  antenna  system  which  would  counter-rotate  to   point  to   the 
earth  at  all  times.  All  active  communications components were  redun- 
dant,  having  an  identical  backup  part  on  board.  After  fifth  apogee, 
about 48hr  after launch, firing of  an apogee motor would  put Nato ZZZB 
into  a  circular  synchronous orbit  at about  35  900km  altitude, where  its 
onboard reaction-control  system would  take  it  to a predetermined  loca- 

14 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

JANUARY 

tion.  The U.S.  Air  Force’s  satellite-control facility would  operate  these 
activities on  behalf of NATO, which had  funded  three Phase I11 comsats 
built by Ford Aerospace to  replace the Nato IIsatellites in the NATO in- 
tegrated  communications  systems.  (NASA  Release  77-5;  Spacewarn 
SPX-280;  Sf Satellite Digest,  July-Aug  77,  298) 
*  NASA  announced  resumption  of  communication  with  the  four 
Viking-mission vehicles -two  landers and two orbiters - a t  the end of the 
“conjunction” period during which contact was degraded and temporari- 
ly  lost  because  of  the  changing  position  of  Mars,  behind  the  sun  with 
relation  to  the earth  since Nov.  1976. 
The Viking mission  extended into the post-conjunction  period would 
use the functioning spacecraft t o  obtain seasonal-variation data, do  long 
duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and gather ad- 
ditional information not possible during the primary  mission  because  of 
time or observational constraints.  No known limitations would preclude 
completion of  tit least a year of  extended mission and probably more, the 
announcement  said, as the orbiters  had  made minimal  use of  their  con- 
sumables during the early mission and had  performed  a minimal number 
of  battery-recharge cycles.  Lander B’s  location a t  Mars 44”N would en- 
counter temperatures below  the qualification limits in the winter  season, 
but the effect of this was unpredictable because lander tests had not gone 
beyond  qualification  limits. 
Extended-mission data collection had  actually begun  last Nov.  when 
controllers  had  used  the  spacecraft  transponders  passively  to   measure 
ranging, tracking,  signal-time delay, and solar-corona-induced perturba- 
tion.  The  extended mission  would  continue  through May  1978, the  an- 
nouncement  said, and data analysis would continue through Sept.  1977; 
requirements  for  data  analysis  beyond  F Y   1978  were  under  study. 
(MOR-S-8 15-75-01 /02) 
*  NASA  announced  plans  to   join  with  the  Energy  Research  and 
Development Administration  (ERDA) in  a program  to  use  solar energy 
for  heat  and  hot  water  supply  at  6  space  centers  from  Va.  t o   Calif. 
NASA  would  invest  $500 000  and  ERDA  $1.25  million  in  up  t o   10 
separate  projects  that  had  been  scheduled  for  completion  a t   NASA 
facilities by  the  end  of  the  fiscal year,  Oct.  1977. The  programs  could 
reduce utility bills by  up  t o  a quarter million dollars/yr. 
Five of  the solar projects,  all a t  MSFC, would heat an office building; 
heat  liquid  nitrogen  to   a  gas,  for  experiments and manufacturing  a t  2 
MSFC  facilities; supply hot  water  for  the  cafeteria  and  restrooms  in  a 
10-story building; and heat a warehouse used for storing hydraulic equip- 
ment.  Other  projects  would  supply hot  water  for  cafeterias  at  Dryden 
Flight Research Center  in Calif.  and KSC  in  Fla.;  hot  water  for photo 

15 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

labs at Ames Research Center in Calif.  and LaRC in Va.;  and heat  and 
dehumidification for areas containing sensitive computer and other elec- 
tronic  equipment  in  the  mission  control  center  at  JSC  in  Tex.  NASA 
would also provide funds for 5  smaller solar heat projects at ARC, KSC, 
and MSFC,  to  be  operational by  the  end  of  Aug.  The program  should 
demonstrate the  possibility  of  offsetting  the  comparatively  high  initial 
cost of  solar energy systems through substantial savings on  oil, gas, and 
electrical  energy.  (NASA  Release  77-15;  MSFC  Release  77-15;  ERDA 
Release  77-18) 

0  The European  Space Agency  (ESA) announced  that  its  1977  budget 
for  scientific and general  activities  had  been  unanimously  approved  by 
the  ESA  Council  meeting  in  Paris.  Individual  budgets  for  projects 
Aerosat,  Ariane,  Marots,  Meteosat,  OTS,  and  Spacelab  had  already 
been  approved  by  their  respective  program  boards.  The  Council  had 
reduced by  3 million accounting units (MAU) the total  481.8 MAU  pro- 
posed  for  all  ESA  work  in  1977,  approving  the  equivalent  of  $526.68 
million in U.S.  dollars. (In  1977, one AU was equal to  1 . 1   U.S.  dollars.) 
(ESA  news  release,  Jan  28/77;  ESA  newsletter,  Jan  77,  1) 

January 29: H.  Julian Allen, originator of  the concept of  bluntness as an 
aerodynamic  technique  for  reducing  heating  of  spacecraft  reentering 
earth’s  atmosphere,  died of  a heart  attack at Stanford Univ.  hospital at 
the age  of  66. A major  figure in modern  aerospace technology,  Allen’s 
work  had  made possible the safe return to  earth of  U.S.  astronauts and 
had  revolutionized  the  design  of  ballistic  missiles.  After  earning 
bachelor’s  and  engineering  degrees  from  Stanford,  Allen  in  1936  had 
joined  the  Natl.  Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics  (NACA)  at  its 
Langley laboratory in Hampton, Va.,  and had returned  to Calif. in  1941 
when  the Ames  installation  came  into being.  He  had  worked  there ever 
since,  serving as ARC  director  from  1965  to  1969. 
His scientific contributions included  a general  theory  of  subsonic air- 
foils which  led  to  use  of  low-drag airfoils  in World  War  I1 on  aircraft 
such  as the Mustang  fighter. He led  in  developing high-speed  wind  tun- 
nels  at ARC, now  recognized  as primary national resources for advanc- 
ing aircraft design and national defense. He had received national and in- 
ternational  honors,  including  NASA’s  distinguished  service medal  and 
medal  for  exceptional  scientific  achievement.  He was  a  fellow  of  many 
societies,  including  the  Royal  Aeronautical  Society of  London.  (ARC 
Release  77-06) 

January 30: The possibility of  teleportation-transfer  of  objects from one 
place to another by  radio waves came closer with the announcement of  a 
new way  to  create identical copies of  a three-dimensional object by  using 

16 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JANUARY 

a  sculpture-photography  system  based  on   the  same  principles  of 
chemistry  and  electronics  now  used  in  making  printing  plates.  As 
reported  in  the  Chicago  Tribune, Wyn  Kelly  Swainson,  a  young  man 
with  a degree in English literature and some training in science, had ob- 
tained  his first patent  on  a device being  developed with  the help  of  the 
Battelle Memorial  Institute in  Columbus,  Ohio. 
Swainson began with the idea of  reproducing great works of  sculpture 
without painstaking handwork:  a plastic material hardened by  light rays 
would  be  targeted by  intersecting laser beams,  controlled by a computer 
programmed  with  the  image  of  the  object  to  be  copied.  Swainson  said 
IBM  had  already  produced  an   instrument  to   record  computerized 
shapes, convert the electronic data into light rays,  and feed them through 
the  lasers  scanning a  container  of  plastic.  Where  the beams  intersected, 
they would  cause a chemical  reaction hardening the plastic; washing off 
the  unhardened  material  would  leave  an  exact  copy  of  the  object 
previously computerized. In theory, a three-dimensional hologram of  an 
object even of  complex metals could be analyzed for its precise composi- 
tion,  converted  to  electronic data,  transmitted, and reproduced  as often 
as desiqd.  (C Trib, Jan  30177,  1-5) 

Space  Shuttle  orbiter Enterprise,  with  tailcone covering  engine-nozzle location, 
moves on a 90-wheel rig January 31 f rom  the Rockwellplant to  DFRC35mi away 
in preparation f o r  approach and  landing tests. (NASA 77-H-77) 

January 30-Febmary  I :   Enterprise,  the first Space Shuttle, towed atop 
a %-wheel  trailer  from Rockwell  Intl.’s  plant in Palmdale, Calif.,  made 
its first trip to Edwards AFB 57km away. Escorted by a convoy of  securi- 
ty and patrol  cars,  the Enterprise moved  at 8kph and drew hundreds of 
spectators  to   view  its  configuration  (24m  wingspan  and  21m  vertical 
tailfin).  Tests of  the 38m-long space vehicle would  begin  Feb.  18 with a 
series of  “captive”  flights;  first manned  flight to an  unpowered  landing 
would  occur  July 22.  (WS tu r ,  Jan  30/77,  A-7, NYT ,  Jan 31/77,  12; W 
Post, Feb  1/77, A-3) 

17 

JANUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

January 31:  MSFC  announced  that  on   Jan.  28  NASA  had  invited  in- 
dustry  t o   submit  proposals  for  supplying  design,  development,  and 
manufacture  of  Space  Telescope  support  systems  module  and  optical 
telescope  assembly.  The telescope  should  permit  observation  of  about 
350 times the volume of  space now acessible to ground-based telescopes. 
MSFC  said  it expected  award of  contracts by  Oct.  or Nov.  1977 if  Con- 
gress authorized  the mission  and appropriated the necessary  funds. 
The 2.4m  telescope,  included in NASA’s  FY  1978 budget recently sub- 
mitted to Congress, would weigh about  10 tons. The Space Shuttle would 
carry  it  as  a  payload  in  1983,  launching  it  to   orbit  a i   about  500km 
altitude at  an  inclination  of  28.8”  to  the  equator.  Once  there,  it  could 
serve for a decade as an in-space observatory operated remotely from the 
ground, but would be designed for maintenance and servicing by a space- 
suited  astronaut  or  for  retrieval  and return by  Shuttle  for overhaul and 
subsequent relaunch. NASA would  announce to  the scientific communi- 
ty  in  Feb.  an opportunity to submit proposals  for  scientific instruments 
to be carried on  the Space Telescope for its initial launch. (MSFC Release 
77-16; NASA  Release 77-19) 

0  LaRC  announced  that  Alex  Haley,  author  of  Roots,  would  be  the 
speaker  Feb.  7  at  an  LaRC  colloquium  and  at  an  “Our  Future  in  the 
Cosmos”  public  lecture.  Demand  for  tickets  to  the  lecture,  part  of  a 
series sponsored by  LaRC and the College o f  William and Mary, was  so 
great  that  LaRC had  shifted  the  Haley  lecture  from  the  Hampton high 
school to  the Hampton Coliseum.  Title of  Haley’s  talk  was  “A  Saga of 
Black  History.” (LaRC anno Jan  31/77) 

0  The U . S  Air Force Systems Command  announced plans to experiment 
with  dispersal  of  cloudcover by  sowing minute amounts  of  silver iodide 
into  supercooled  clouds  over  a  sparsely  populated  area  of  Michigan, 
using  two  small  civilian  aircraft,  one  to  dispense  the  chemical  and  the 
second to  photograph effects of  the treatment. North American Weather 
Consultants  of  Goleta,  Calif.,  contractor  to  the  AF  Geophysics 
Laboratory,  would  conduct  the experiments to  disperse cloudcover that 
could  interfere with  military  or  civilian  flight operations. 
The experiments,  aimed at clearing specific areas of  cloud during lan- 
dings,  would  occur  only  on  days  that  were  overcast  with  little  or  no 
precipitation, said Bruce A. Kunkel, project  scientist for AFGL.  Clouds 
sought  for  the tests would  be  supercooled (consisting of  water  drops re- 
maining  liquid  though  below  freezing  temperature)  so  that  they  would 
form ice crystals when treated with the chemical and would  fall from the 
sky,  clearing  up  to  a  few  square miles  for  up  to  an  hour.  Some  snow 
might reach the ground, but most should evaporate after falling from the 

18 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

JANUARY 

cloud,  and the amount of  silver iodide needed would be extremely small 
notwithstanding its  visually dramatic effect.  (OIP Release 004.77) 

Canadians  monitoring  the  mysterious radio  signals  emanating  from 
the Soviet Union,  said to  have disrupted worldwide communications [cf. 
A&A76, Oct.  29  and Nov.  10-111,  suggested that  the  signals might  cor- 
respond  to   transmission  of  electrical  energy without  the  use  of  wires, 
through  a  process  developed  by  Nikola  Tesla,  Yugoslav  inventor  who 
died  in  1943. 
A&ording  to  a s to ry  in  the  Wash. Star,  the Canadian Department of 
Communications  received  a  request  some months  ago  to  have  its  nine 
listening posts analyze the radio signals in an effort to  identify electrical- 
energy problems in eastern Canada.  By  this time, the signals had  caused 
complaints  from European governments and were  becoming shorter  in 
duration.  Although  the  signals were high  frequency (3 to   30megahertz) 
and Tesla’s experiments had been on low frequencies (6 to   10k cycles per 
second), the Canadians theorized that the transmissions might have been 
harmonics of  VLF  transmissions. Tesla had  discovered in  1900 that  the 
earth itself could serve as a conductor of  electricity, being “responsive as 
a tuning fork” to electrical vibrations of a certain pitch; he had succeeded 
in lighting 200 electric lamps from a distance of  25mi without wires. One 
scientist working with the Canadians suggested that the signals might aid 
in modifying weather by  affecting electrically charged particles in the up- 
per  atmosphere.  ( W  Star,  Jan  31/77,  A-5) 

During January: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn.  reported that  1975 was one 
of  the  safest  years  experienced  by  scheduled  U.S.  airlines,  with  a 
passenger-fatality rate  of  0.07  per  100 million  passenger miles,  beating 
the railroads’ record of 0.08  fatalities per  100 million passenger miles.  In 
1975, over 205  million passengers on scheduled U.S.  airlines (almost as 
many as live in the entire country, the newsletter noted) had  flown more 
than  162 million passenger miles; only  124 persons had died in 3 U.S.air- 
carrier  accidents, whereas  highway accidents had  killed  44  690.  On  the 
basis  of  the  1975 accident  rate,  the  newsletter  calculated  a  passenger’s 
chances of safe arrival at destination to  be 99.99998%.  (NAA newsletter, 
Jan  77,  3) 

0  MSFC  employees Alfred  G.  Orillion, Advanced  Projects Office, and 
James  E.  Downey,  111,  deputy  director  for  program  develspment,  re- 
ceived special awards for  the Alabama section of  the American  Inst.  of 
Aeronautics  and  Astronautics  at  the  A I M   honors  banquet  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  Jan  13.  The  awards  were  for   a  1975  space 
industrialization  symposium  a t   MSFC  of  which  Downey  was  general 

19 

SA N U A R Y 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

chairman;  Orillion was  chairman  of  AIAA’s  Alabama  section.  (MSFC 
Release 77-9) 
Av Wk reported that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking proj- 
ect,  would  receive  the  Goddard  award  for  “brilliant  leadership of  the 
Viking  project  to   land  an   instrumented,  automated  spacecraft  on   the 
planet  Mars.”  (AvWk ,  Jan  10/77,  9) 

0  Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany 
had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR,  late in Dee.  to  begin  training 
for  flight  positions  on  Soyuz/Salyut  missions.  Flight  candidates  from 
Bulgaria,  Hungary,  Cuba,  Mongolia,  and  Romania  were  to  arrive  for 
training  a t  the center during  1977.  (AvWk ,  Jan  10/77,  9) 

20 

February 

February  I :   NASA  announced  it  had  received  1147 applications  for its 
Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least  15 
pilot  and  15  mission  specialist  candidates.  Deadline  far  applications 
would  be  June  30,  1977. Those  selected  would  report  July  1,  1978,  to  
Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; ap- 
pointment  as astronaut would  depend on satisfactory completion  of  the 
course. 
NASA had  mailed  11 822 applications to persons  outside the agency, 
and  another  350 to  employees  at  NASA  centers.  All  the  applications 
received  so  far  had  been  from  civilians;  the  astronaut  selection  board 
would  receive  applications  from  members  of  the  military  services  just 
before  the  deadline.  Most  of  the  applications  were  for  the  mission 
specialist category:  922 for that group,  225  for pilot,  and  118  for  both. 
Pilot  astronauts would  control  the  Shuttle  during  launch,  orbit,  and 
landing,  and  would  be  responsible  for  vehicle  systems.  Mission 
specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with 
the  commander  and  pilot  in  areas  of  consumables  usage,  experiment 
operations, and crew  activities. Crews would  number  up  to  seven:  com- 
mander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists 
(who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors 
of  the  payload  being  flown).  Payload  specialists would  operate  specific 
payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to  
recruit  qualified  minorities  and  women  as  Shuttle  astronauts.  (NASA 
Release 77- 1 8) 
*  Kennedy Space Center reported  that  NASA had  awarded the Univ.  of 
Ariz.  a $50K contract extension to  continue studying thunderstorm elec- 
trical  fields and other phenomena  in the Spaceport area.  Total value of 
the contract, awarded in April  1974 and now  extended to  Jan.  15,  1978, 
would  be  $1 16  OOO. 
Under the direction of Dr. Phillip Krider of UA’s Inst. of  Atmospheric 
Physics,  scientists  working  with  UA  graduate  and  undergraduate 
students would  use KSC’s  sophisticated instrumentation during summer 
thunderstorms  to  study  electrical-field  changes  and  recovery  curves 
created by lightning under varied conditions, and would create computer 
programs  to  determine and  display  the  location of  lightning  discharges 
and  thunderstorm  characteristics. Techniques  resulting  from  the  study 

21 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

would  help make  Space Shuttle vehicle-processing,  launch, and landing 
at KSC  safe and efficient even  in marginal weather. 
The  U.S.  studies  would  supplement  a  program  known  as  TRIP 
(thunderstorm research international program), cosponsored by the Am. 
Geophysical  Union  and  the  Am.  Meteorological  Society,  under  which 
teams of  atmospheric scientists would  conduct research at KSC between 
1976 and  1978.  (KSC  Release 33-77) 
At  least 7 defense contractors had performed  studies on space defense 
systems, Aerospace Daily  reported,  predicting that spending on this  ac- 
tivity would double in the upcoming  federal budget  (from $61 million  to  
$126 million in FY  1978,  and double again  to $265 million in FY  1979). 
In  its  concern  for  detection  of  hostile  satellites,  especially  in  the  in- 
frared  frequencies,  the  Dept . of  Defense  had  officially confirmed  four 
USSR  intercept  launches  last  yr.  DOD  considered  comsats  and  early- 
warning satellites in synchronous orbits most vulnerable;  the USAF was 
also concerned about its reconnaissance satellites, especially the Big Bird, 
only one of  which  is  normally  in orbit at a time. 
Contractors working on the problem were Science Applications, Inc.,  ' 
doing a  $60 OOO  study of  charge-coupled device (CCD) sensors for a ter- 
minal  optical-warning system;  Rockwell  Intl.,  with  a  $50 OOO  study  of 
potential  maneuvers  for  the  NavStar  global-positioning satellite  to  be 
used  for guidance aid in tactical-weapons delivery; TRW, Inc., a $50 OOO 
study to  identify maneuvering possibilities for the AfSatCom (USAF sat- 
com)  system;  and  three  other  firms  studying  standby  survival  launch 
capabilities applicable to  all USAF missions (Hughes, $250 OOO; Boeing, 
$250 OOO;  and  Lockheed,  $100 OOO).  The Air  Force  also  reported  that 
Westinghouse had made a $50 OOO study of  an impact sensor to detect at- 
tacks  with  non-nuclear  pellet  warheads  against  a  spacecraft  in  orbit. 
(ASD ,  Feb  1/77,  158) 
Western  Union  Corp.,  first  of  the  1OOO  largest  U.S.  industrial  com- 
panies  required to  publish  replacement-cost data called  for this year  by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission, claimed  that its  1976 earnings 
of $34 million would  be  erased  had  it  based  its depreciation charges on 
current  costs  of  replacing  its  entire  physical  plant.  New  York  Times 
reporter Robert D.  Hershey,  Jr.,  cited the argument of  many companies 
that  releasing  the  figures required  by  the  SEC would  depress  prices  of 
their  stocks.  WU  said  its  plant  and  equipment would  have  cost  $1.61 
billion  to  replace  at  the  end  of  1976,  not  the  $1.11  billion  its  books 
showed  as historical cost.  The SEC  ruled  that,  for  fiscal  yrs  beginning 
after  Dec.  1975,  the  annual  reports  of  companies  with  at  least  $100 
million  in  physical assets representing  at  least  10%  of  total  assets must 
give actual replacement-cost data, to  let stockholders see the effect of  in- 
flation on  financial statements.  (NYT ,  Feb.  1/77,  37) 

22 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

FEBRUARY 

0  The Institute of  Space and Aeronautical Science at the Univ.  of Tokyo 
announced  postponement  (until  Feb.  15  or  later)  of  the  launch  of  a 
satellite-carrying MU-3H  rocket,  because of mechanical trouble.  An  in- 
spection had revealed problems with the rocket’s  attitude-control system, 
the announcement said.  (FBIS,  Tokyo Kyodo  in English,  Feb  1/77) 

February  2:  The  new  administration  of  President  Jimmy  Carter  was 
reevaluating the NASA  budget  submitted by  President Ford,  and would 
study  the  possibility  of  increases,  however  marginal,  in  that  budget, 
Defense/Space  Dairy  reported.  NASA’s  energy  program,  budgeted  a t  
$4.5 million in FY  1958 ($1 million to  study satellite solar power and $3.5 
million  for  energy  technology  that  could  be  transferred  to   ERDA), 
would probably be recommended for increase within the next  few weeks, 
the  report  said.  (D /SD ,  Feb 2/77,  185) 

February  3:  Tass  reported  that  Soviet space  station Salyut  4 ,  launched 
Dec.  26,  1974,  to  house  cosmonauts  working  in  space  up  to  90 days, 
disintegrated over the Pacific Ocean when it moved on ground command 
into  “a  descent  trajectory” and  burned  up.  Tass  noted  that  the  station 
had  flown for  3mo joined  to  the unpiloted  space capsule Soyuz 20. The 
longest,  most  successful career  of  a  Salyut  in  the  16yr-old USSR  space 
program had included what Tass called “an extensive program of medical 
and biological research” as well as study of  the sun, stars, and planets in 
the electromagnetic spectrum; views of  Soviet territory in the middle and 
southern latitudes;  and a great  amount of  data on  physical processes  in 
earth  atmosphere and in  space. 
Cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Aleksey Gubarev had docked Soyuz 
17  with  Salyut  4  for 29 days  between  Jan.  10 and Feb.  9,  1975;  Vasily 
Lazarev and Oleg Makarov failed to  dock with Salyut 4 on Apr. 5 of  that 
yr; and Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov had docked Soyuz 18 with 
Salyut 4 May 25  and remained  for 63 days, during which they talked with 
their  compatriots on  the  ASTP mission  and  returned  July  24  with  the 
Soviet duration  record  for  a  manned  mission.  SaQut  4  had  completed 
12,188 orbits  around  the  earth  before  being  destroyed,  Tass  said.  (To- 
day ,  Feb  4/77,  1OA;  FBIS,  Dom  Svc Rusn,  Feb  3/77) 
February  4:  NASA  announced  a  yr-long  schedule  of  test  runs  and 
captive-flight  tests  on  the  first-built  Space  Shuttle  orbiter,  Enterprise, 
that would  take  place  a t  the Dryden  Flight  Research Center,  Edwards, 
Calif. Called approach and landing tests (ALT), the series of  flights with 
a  modified  Boeing  747  serving  as  a  ferry  aircraft  and  airborne  launch 
platform would  begin with  several taxiing  tests with the orbiter atop the 
carrier;  following would  be  six  inert-captive flights  in  which  the jumbo 
jet would carry the unmanned orbiter to  a 762Om (25  OOOft) altitude. Un- 
manned  flights would  verify  performance  of  the  two  vehicles in  mated 

23 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

flight.  Then  would  come  a  series  of  captive-active  flights  with  the 
orbiter’s systems powered up and the Enterprise manned by 2 astronauts. 
The  first  orbiter  off  the assembly line arrived a t  DFRC Jan.  31  from 
Rockwell  Inti.% Palmdale  plant;  upon  completion of  ALT,  the  carrier 
would  take  the  prototype  to  Marshall  Space Flight Center  for  ground- 
vibration tests. After these tests, NASA said, the Enterprise would return 
to  Palmdale to  be prepared  for orbital  flight in  the early  1980s. The or- 
biter  now  under construction  (OV-102) would be the  first used  in actual 
orbital-flight  tests,  now  scheduled  to  begin  in mid-1979;  six test  flights 
would demonstrate the orbiter’s capabilities in earth orbit before the start 
of operational  flights, scheduled to  begin in 1980. (NASA Release 77-16) 

0  Two giant  crawler-transporters  that  had  ferried  Saturn  V  rockets  to  
the launch pad  a t  KSC and were scheduled for similar work in the Space 
Shuttle  program  had  been  designated  National  Historic  Mechanical 
Engineering Landmarks,  Today newspaper reported. At ceremonies held 
Feb.  3 beneath  one of  the vehicles, more than  100 persons watched the 
unveiling of  a  plaque noting the creation  of  the  18th national  landmark 
identified since the Am.  Society of  Mechanical Engineers began singling 
them  out  in  1973. 
Present  a t   the  ceremony were KSC  employees who had  helped  build 
the pair  of  2.7-million-kg platforms; ASME officials and members from 
across the U.S.  on  their way to  a national meeting in southern Fla.;  and 
former astronaut Donn F.  Eisele, who had been command-module pilot 
on the 1968 Apollo 7 flight that resumed moonshots more than a yr  after 
the  fatal  fire  in  an Apollo  training  exercise.  Eisele  had  since become  a 
manager  for  Marion  Power  Shovel  Co.,  the  Ohio  firm  that  built  the 
transporters a t  a cost of  $14 million.  Ray Clark, KSC director of  design 
engineering,  accepted  the  plaque  from Dr.  Stothe P.  Kezios,  president- 
elect  of  ASME,  with  the  comment  that  the  transporters  were  “barely 
broken  in”  with  mileage  on  each  a t   just  over  800km;  they  might  ac- 
cumulate  10 times that  amount carrying Shuttle equipment during  their 
second yr  of  operation,  he  added.  (Today, Feb 4/77,  1OA) 

JSC  announced  award  of  a  cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  worth 
$9 083 303 to  Northrop Services, Inc.,  for operation and maintenance a t  
JSC of  life sciences and engineering laboratories and the lunar curatorial 
facility, effective Feb.  1,  1977, and expiring Jan.  31,  1978. (JSC Release 
77-08) 

February 7:  NASA revealed the contents of  the space and aeronautics ex- 
hibit that would appear  in the U.S.  pavilion a t  the 32nd Paris Air Show, 
under 
the 
theme  “The  Continuous  Challenge:  50  Years  Since 
Lindbergh.”  NASA  planned  to   display  concepts of  space communities 

24 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

FEBRUARY 

and their construction;  living, farming,  and manufacturing  in space; and 
solar-power stations  in  space,  together  with  a  3-screen  presentation  of 
the 50yr of  flight since Lindbergh. A 2.4m  Shuttle model would include 
the  European  Space  Agency's  Spacelab,  part  of  a major  international 
cooperative space program,  in its  cargo bay. 
Also  on  display would  be  the Galileo 2  flying laboratory,  its  interior 
configured t o  simulate the reusable Spacelab with  facilities for space ex- 
periments  in  medicine, manufacturing,  astronomy,  and  production  of 
pharmaceuticals. A life-size model of Mars landscape viewed by the Vik- 
ing  lander  would  demonstrate  space  exploration,  and  Landsat  stereo 
photographs of earth would show the increasingly routine use of  space to  
survey crops and natural resources, monitor pollution and weather, and 
collect global weather data. Other models and presentations would show 
the scope of NASA programs  such as government-industry work to  halve 
fuel consumption  by  transport  aircraft and  to  develop safer, more  effi- 
cient,  and  more  environmentally  acceptable  civil  aircraft.  (NASA 
Release 77-20) 

0  MSFC announced  award  of a 15-mo contract worth  $99 663 to  Desert 
Research  Institute - part  of  the Univ.  of  Nevada  system - for  develop- 
ment and fabrication of a prototype particle generator for possible use in 
the Atmospheric  Cloud  Physics Laboratory  (ACPL),  a payload  sched- 
uled  for  an early Shuttle or Spacelab flight. The generator would  form 
nuclei with  diameters of  a  hundredth  to a thousandth  of  a micron  (one 
thousandth of a mm) upon which water would condense to  form clouds. 
Researchers would use the zero-gravity environment  on  Shuttle flights t o  
perform  cloud-physics  experiments  leading  to  an  understanding  of 
microphysical processes  in  the  atmosphere,  and t o  eventual prediction, 
alteration,  and control of  weather.  (MSFC Release 77-19) 

0  MSFC  announced  that  a  special hammer  developed in  the  1960s  for 
Saturn fabrication had  solved a major problem  of  manufacturing  exter- 
nal tanks  for the Space Shuttle. Martin Marietta Aerospace, prime  con- 
tractor  for  the  tanks,  in  welding  four  large  sections of  a  liquid-oxygen 
container  a t   the Michoud  assembly  facility, had  found  that  peaking of 
the weld joints left some areas as much as 5"  out of tolerance. The special 
tool  MSFC  had  created  for  removing  distortions  in  component  welds 
would  not  impact  a surface in the usual  sense but, when  in contact with 
the metal, would send a hydrodynamic  force uniformly  into the thickness 
of  the  metal when  an  electrical charge  dumped  into  the hammer's  coil 
created  an  expanding  magnetic  field.  The  field  would  exert  an  evenly 
distributed  three-dimensional  force  that  would  remove  the  distortions 
without  leaving  hammer marks on  the target. 
After  Robert  M.  Avery  of  MSFC's  Materials  and  Processes 

25 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

Laboratory showed how to  use the tool a t  the Michoud facility, the con- 
tractor  was  able  to  remove most  of  the  distortions  during  the  week  of 
demonstration.  Two  working  hammers  would  remain  at  the  plant  for 
future use.  (MSFC Release 77-21) 

0  U.S.  aviation  experts  had  changed  their  minds  about  the  USSR’s 
MiG-25  “Foxbat”  interceptor  plane  and  now  considered  it  superior  to  
western planes  of  its type,  the Chicago Tribune reported.  New Scientist 
magazine  had  quoted  aviation  experts who  had  examined  the  Foxbat 
flown to  Japan last Sept. by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclu- 
sions were completely opposed  to  earlier assessments that  described the 
Foxbat  as crude and  outdated. 
Shortly  after  its  landing  in  northern  Japan,  the  Foxbat  had  been 
described  as a  “manned rocket”  less advanced than previously thought. 
The magazine  said  that  U.S.  officials now  considered it  unsurpassed in 
ease  of  cockpit  maintenance  and  a  masterpiece  of  standardization  un- 
matched in the U S .  The experts said they were impressed not  only with 
the speed and rate of  climb, but  also with the electronics on the Foxbat, 
now believed to  have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the 
world  as  well  as  a  highly  sophisticated  computerized  flight- 
communications system that could perform most of  the missions without 
the pilot  [see Jan. 261.  U.S.  and Japanese experts had examined the Fox- 
bat  for 2mo before returning  it to  the USSR; Belenko, now  in the US., 
was  still being  debriefed.  (C Trib, Feb 7/77,  1-2) 

February  7-25:  The Soviet Union launched  a manned  Soyuz spacecraft 
from its Baykonur space center a t  9:12  local time (1612 GMT) to  try for a 
rendezvous  with  the  Salyut  5  space  station,  following  an  unsuccessful 
docking attempt last Oct. Soyuz 24 carried as commander Col. Viktor V. 
Gorbatko,  who had  flown on Soyuz  7 in  Oct.  1969 as part  of  a  7-man 
mission  using  3  Soyuz  spacecraft,  and  rookie  engineer  Lt.  Col.  Yuri 
Glazkov, who became the 39th cosmonaut launched into space. Lt. Gen. 
Vladimir Shatalov,  chief  of  cosmonaut  training,  described the Soyuz 24 
mission  as  routine,  adding tha t  the  scientific and  economic possibilities 
for  using the  Soyuz-Salyut combination were “inexhaustible.” 
Orbit parameters reported Feb.  8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee, 
89.2-min period,  51.6”  inclination. This first manned launch of  the year 
was part  of  a USSR  program  of  earth-orbital  research using  the  Soyuz 
capsules  on  a  one-mission  basis,  according  to   N Y   Times  reporter 
Christopher  S .  Wren,  who noted  that  the USSR  had continued manned 
flights  while  the  U.S.  was  waiting  until  the  Space  Shuttle  became 
available in  1979 or  1980. Thomas OToole reported  in  the  WP o s t  that 
the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been 

26 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

FEBRUARY 

trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated 
that  Soyuz 24 might be a military mission, 
Tass  reported  successful docking  and  occupation  of  the  Safyut 5;  it 
later  described  housekeeping  and  biological  experiments,  plus  com- 
munications with ocean-going vessels,  studies of  crystal growth and sur- 
face tension,  and use of  a n  infrared  radiometer  for long-distance night- 
time  observation  of  earth’s  surface  and  temperatures.  The cosmonauts 
continued exercising with special equipment to  measure body functions. 
On Feb.  21,  they tried  a new  system for recharging the space‘station at- 
mosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the 
system  for  future  prolonged  flights.  A  multifunctional  system  would 
supply compressed air to  control stabilization or  to  ctmpensate  for leaks 
in  the compartments.  Tass announced Feb.  23 that  the crew had  begun 
preparations  for  leaving the  station. 
(The unexpectedly early termination  of  the  Soyuz 24 mission recalled 
reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Safyut 
5  environmental-control  system  had  produced  an   “acrid  odor”  that 
“became unbearable”  [A&A 76, Oct  181.) 
A  commentary  recorded  by  Gen.  Shatalov  for  broadcast  Feb.  24  on 
the  Moscow  Domestic  Service  noted  “a  whole  series  of  cyclones  and 
strong winds with snow” over  the landing site in Kazakhstan. However, 
the cosmonauts landed safely a t  dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on 
the Kustanay steppe, and were brought  to  the local airport by helicopter 
and  flown  from  there  to   Baykonur.  They  held  a  press  conference  at 
Baykonur  Feb.  24,  in  which  Glazkov  called  the  Safyut 5  spacecraft  “a 
fine  old  work  horse”  that  had  brought  them  home  safely.  (NYT ,  Feb 
9/77,  11, B6;  WP o s t ,  Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77,  A12;  C Trib, Feb 9/77, 
1:12;  FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77;  Moscow Dom Svc Rusn,  Feb 
IO-25/77;  Moscow  Intl Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77;  W Star, Feb 25/77,  A4) 

February  9: Fifteen  yr  almost  to  the  day  after  the U.S. placed  its  first 
man  in  earth  orbit,  NASA  would  begin  flight  tests  of  the  Enter- 
prise-  first  Space Shuttle  orbiter  off  the  assembly  line-  to   be  carried 
piggyback on a  Boeing  747  on  Feb.  11,  1977, for  its  first  trip  through 
earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 
20,  1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 
22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on  3 1 separate manned 
missions that  included 9 trips  around  the moon,  6 moon  landings,  and 
3mo earth-orbital  missions on Skylab. 
Glenn’s  Mercury  spacecraft  Friendship  7 weighed  only  1315kg, with 
barely  enough  room  for  the  pilot  and  a  few  instruments,  and  had 
parachuted  into  the  Atlantic  after  its  one-time use.  The  orbiter  would 
weigh  67 500kg  empty,  could  carry  up  to   7  crew  members,  and  was 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

designed t o  land on a runway  and be prepared  for another flight within 
weeks.  In contrast to  Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by 
the  Shuttle might  last  from  7  to  30  days.  First  of  6  orbital  tests  of  the 
Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 
77-21;  NASA  pre-ALT  rept  Feb  11/77) 

0  NASA  announced it  had  certified  the  General  Aviation Design  and 
Analysis  Center  a t   Ohio  State  Univ.  airport  in  Columbus  to   make 
analyses of  single-element  airfoils,  a  first step toward providing  a com- 
plete service for the general aviation community. Developed under  a 3yr 
contract with  LaRC and OSU’s  aeronautical  and astronautical research 
laboratory,  the ADAC would  provide directly  to  aircraft  designers and 
manufacturers  services such as analysis and design of  2-dimensional air- 
foil shapes, investigations of  high-lift devices and aerodynamic controls, 
compilation  of  airfoil  aerodynamic  characteristics,  and  technical 
assistance  (including  consultation  and  data  interpretation)  for  wind- 
tunnel and flight testing of  airfoils. ADAC would provide the services on  
a fee basis. ADAC personnel under Dr. G.M.  Gregorek would work with 
NASA  on   refining  present  codes  used  in  computation;  as  NASA 
developed new techniques and improved codes, ADAC would use the im- 
provements  t o   solve  more  difficult  design  problems.  (NASA  Release 
77-22) 

0  JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans  for  the  8th an- 
nual lunar  science conference in Houston, March  14-18.  More than 600 
scientists  from  around  the  world  would  discuss  new  data  about  the 
moon,  derived  from studies of  lunar  samples and  from Apollo  surface 
and  orbital  experiments,  as  well  as  new  interpretations  of  previous 
models  of  lunar  origin  and  history.  Several Soviet  scientists would  at- 
tend, to  give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr. 
Michael  G.  Duke,  acting  chief  of  JSC’s  Lunar and Planetary  Sciences 
Division, and Dr.  Robert Pepin,  outgoing director of  the Lunar Science 
Institute, would  cochair the conference. 
The  conference  would  also  be  the  second  meeting  on   “planetary” 
science, continuing the practice of  the  1976 conference,  where planetary 
interests were discussed  for the first time as a result of the accumulation 
of  data from NASA  and USSR missions t o  Venus,  Mercury, Mars,  and 
the outer planets.  The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution 
had proved  of  primary  interest to  lunar scientists.  (JSC Release 77-09) 
February  10: KSC announced  it would  reduce  its  dependency on  fossil 
fuels as early as Oct.,  when 3 of  its buildings would begin heating water 
with  solar  energy:  the  Visitors Center  cafeteria  and  the  Banana  River 
repeating station, which  should be  operating on solar by’late May,  and 

28 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

FEBRUARY 

the KSC headquarters building. Up to  70%  of  hot water for the cafeteria 
would  be  heated  in  a  flat-plate  collector  on  the  ground  next  t o   the 
cafeteria, with a conventional water heater as backup for long periods of 
cloudy weather. 
A  larger  flat-plate  collector would  provide  up  to  70%  of  the  energy 
needed by the Banana River station, an electronic-communications relay 
near the eastern shore of Merritt Is. , for hot water used in heating and air 
conditioning reheating. All three systems would  be  able to  heat water  to  
about  370K,  although  flow  through  the  collectors  wou’rd move  the  hot 
water  into  storage tanks  a t  a maximum  333K.  The flat-plate  collectors 
would  face south a t  a 28”  angle  for maximum  efficiency. ERDA would 
fund the headquarters conversion jointly with NASA, which would fund 
the  other  projects  alone.  Energy  savings  over  an  8yr  period  would  be 
about  $185K.  (KSC  Release 56-77) 
*  Soviet news  agency Tass reported  the  death  at age 82 of  Sergei V.  11- 
yushin,  designer  of  more  than  50  planes  from  dive  bombers  of  World 
War  I1  to  modern  passenger  jets.  The  report  did  not  give  the  date  or 
cause of  death. 
Mobilized  into  the  czarist  army  in  1914,  Ilyushin  had  begun  as  a 
sweeper in  an airplane hangar, became  a mechanic, and graduated from 
flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the 
Soviet army and rose  to  be  a  lieutenant general.  After  graduating  from 
the  air  force  engineering  academy,  where  he  had  designed  and  built 
gliders,  he  was  put  in  charge  of  airplane construction and  after  1931 
devoted  himself  exclusively  to  aircraft  design.  His  most  famous  design 
was  the 11-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of  the first to prove 
the effectiveness of  small single-engine craft operating near ground level. 
The  11-2,  a  two-seater  carrying a rear  gunner  behind  the  pilot,  was  the 
first close-support plane to  fire rockets to  any degree and was known to  
the  German  forces  in  WWII  as  the  “flying  death.”  The 11-62,  a  4-jet 
passenger  plane,  had  begun Aeroflot passenger  service from Moscow to  
New  York  in  July  1968. 
Ilyushin  was  fourth  of  the  “big  six” Soviet  aircraft  designers to  die: 
A.A.  Mikoyan,  who  with  M.I.  Gurevich  designed  the  MiG  series  of 
fighter planes,  died  in  1970; A.N.  Tupolev,  father of  the Tu-144 super- 
sonic  transport,  in  1972;  Gurevich  in  Nov.  1976.  Survivors were  O.K. 
Antonov, designer of  An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close 
associate  A.S.  Yakovlev,  whose  Yak  fighter  usually  teamed  with  the 
11-2.  Ilyushin’s  son  Vladimir,  a  test  pilot,  might  have  beaten  Yuri  A. 
Gagarin  into  space  in  1961  by  several  days;  officials denied  this.  (NY 
Times, Feb  11/77,  A24;  W Post, Feb  1 1/77,  C6) 

Japan’s Natl.  Space Development Agency announced that launch of  a 

29 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

three-stage  “N”  rocket  carrying  an   engineering  test  satellite  had  been 
postponed  to   Feb.  14  because  of  trouble  in  the  control  system  of  the 
rocket’s  first  stage.  Launch  had  been  scheduled  originally  for  Feb.  6 
from  the  space center  at  Tanegashima  Is.  (FBIS,  Hong  Kong  AFP  in 
English, Feb  10/77) 
February ZI:  Langley Research Center announced award of  a cost-plus- 
fixed-fee contract worth about $1.8 million to  Vought Gorp.  for design, 
development,  and  qualification  of  a  Scout  launch-vehicle  guidance 
system. Teledyne would do the designing under subcontract and Vought 
would  integrate  the  system  into  the  Scout. Work would  proceed  at  the 
Vought plant  in Dallas and Teledyne’s plant in Northridge, Calif.,  under 
LaRC direction.  (LaRC Release 77-3) 

0  NASA  announced  it  had  adjudged  successful the mission of  Gravity 
Probe  A  (GP-A),  launched  June  18,  1976,  on  a  Scout  vehicle  from 
Wallops Flight Center. Trajectory  parameters computed  for GP-A were 
within preflight predictions, and the experiment and support systems had 
operated  normally.  Principal  investigator Dr.  R.F.C.  Vessot  had  begun 
data  reduction  and  reported  achieving  an  accuracy  of  150  parts  per 
million,  surpassing  the  prelaunch  accuracy  objective  of  200ppm. 
Associate Administrator  for  Space Science Dr.  Noel W.  Hinners noted 
that the payload had impacted in the Atlantic Ocean as planned and was 
not  recovered.  (MOR S-879-76-01  [postlaunch], Feb  14/77) 

Analysis of telemetry data and flight films from the SPAR 111 mission 
launched Dec.  14 a t  White Sands Missile Range indicated successful per- 
formance of the electromagnetic levitation device designed to  provide the 
first  “containerless”  way  to  process  materials  in  space,  MSFC  an- 
nounced. 
ContainerIess  processing,  in  which  materials  could  be  suspended, 
melted,  and  resolidified  without  touching  a  container,  was  thought  to  
permit  a  degree  of  purity  never  before  achieved  in  high-temperature 
processing, as the material in a conventional container would always ex- 
hibit contamination  in some degree from the container  itself. Apparatus 
used  on  SPAR  I11  to   process  beryllium  satisfied  all  operational  re- 
quirements,  like  two  other  items  in  the  payload:  thermal  migration  of 
bubbles, and liquid mixing. An apparatus anomaly resulted in only “pro- 
bable” success of  an  experiment on epitaxial growth; a  fifth experiment, 
on coalescing of  viscous bodies,  apparently  failed but  would  be  carried 
again on a later  flight. SPAR 111 rocket flights could offer 5min of near- 
weightlessness in  suborbital  coast.  (MSFC Release 77-23) 

0  WPo s t  staff writer Thomas O’Toole quoted administration sources as 
saying President Carter had chosen Dr.  Frank Press, head of  the depart- 

30 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

FEBRUARY 

ment of  earth and planetary sciences a t  the Mass. Inst. of Technology, to 
be  White  House  science  adviser.  Press,  considered  one  of  the  world’s 
leading seismologists, had  been  one of  a team of  geophysicists who  first 
described  Antarctica  as  a  continent  rather  than  as  an  island  of  ice 
floating  on  earth’s  crust.  He  had  also  helped  design  and  build  the 
seismometers  left  on   the  moon  by  six  crews  of  Apollo  astronauts.  A 
member  of  the  Natl.  Science  Board,  Press  had  been  consultant  to   7 
federal agencies including DOD,  the State Dept.,  and the Arms Control 
and  Disarmament  Agency.  Offered  the  job   of  science  adviser  to  the 
president,  Press  apparently  had  not  accepted  it  at  once,  and  said  by 
telephone from MIT that  “nothing is settled.” ( W P o s t ,  Feb  11/77, A-2) 

February  13: NASA  announced  it had  commanded the  Viking 1 lander 
on Mars  to dig a  ft-deep trench  in the surface and bring up  soil samples 
to   use  in  finding out  more  about  the  complex chemistry of  the planet. 
The sequence, which  would  continue through March  15, would  include 
pictures taken by  the lander to  show mission controllers how  the digging 
progressed.  The  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory had  sent  commands  to   the 
Viking 2  lander Feb.  10 and would  start the  Viking 2 lander’s digging se- 
quence  about  Feb.  16.  Viking 1 ’s   orbiter would  make  a  series  of  close 
passes  near  Mars’s  satellite  Phobos  to  take  pictures  and  measure  its 
temperature, while observing the effect of  its gravity on the course of  the 
spacecraft.  Afterward,  mission  controllers  would  drop  the  orbiter  to 
about 300km altitude over Mars from the current close-approach altitude 
of  1500km. (NASA Release 77-24; JPL  Release Feb  10/77) 

February  25:  A  project  known  as  DUMAND  (deep  underwater  muon 
and neutrino detection) would  use a large area of  the Pacific Ocean near 
Hawaii  to  detect  the  arrival  of  extremely  high-energy  particles  from 
space, Walter Sullivan reported  in the N Y   Times. 
Neutrinos, considered the clues to several astronomical mysteries,  had 
been  hard  to  detect  because  of  their  lack  of  mass  or  electrical charge; 
moving at the speed of  light, they apparently could pass entirely through 
the  earth with  no  trace.  A new  science,  neutrino  astronomy,  would  use 
an  array  of  microphones  laid  out  on  the  sea  bottom  northeast  of  the 
island of  Maui,  in  an area shown to be  “pool-table flat” by  survey ships 
from  the  Hawaiian  Inst.  of  Geophysics,  to   listen  for  sound  impulses 
generated by high-energy neutrinos colliding with atoms in the sea water. 
Collision  would  produce  particle  showers  that  should  generate  sound 
pulses as well as  flashes of  light known as Cerenkov radiation, resulting 
from the passage of  particles through the water at speeds faster than  the 
speed  at  which  light  proceeds  through  water.  The original  plan  would 
have recorded  the flashes to  detect particles ejected by  stellar explosions 

3 1  

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

(supernovas); Soviet scientists had offered the use of  10 OOO  photodetec- 
tors  for  the experiment. 
The  first  stage of  the  project  would  probably  use  acoustic detection, 
however,  because  of  its  greater  sensitivity  and  economy:  sound  waves 
would  travel  through  water  far  more  efficiently than  light  would,  the 
report said, and the project could use microphones spaced as far apart as 
900meters in an array measuring lOkm*, linked by a 56km undersea cable 
carrying data to  a laboratory on  Maui and supplying electrical power to  
the detectors. Recording the precise arrival time of a pulse a t  each detec- 
tor  would  indicate the  direction  from which  the  neutrino  came.  As  the 
neutrinos’  paths  (unlike those  of  other  particles) would  not  be  bent  by 
magnetic fields in space, the way in which they had come would point to  
the source, first clue to  cosmic ray origins. The high-energy particles and 
the muons produced when they hit the atmosphere were among the most 
energetic radiation  known.  (NYT ,  Feb  15/77,  14) 

0  Telesat  Canada  expected  to   award  contracts  in  Nov.  1977  for  three 
commercial  telecommunications  satellites,  the  Wall  Street  Journal 
reported.  The  new  comsats would  use  higher  frequency bands  than  the 
three Telesat Canada satellites now  providing television,  telephone, and 
message  communications  throughout  Canada.  First  of  the  high- 
frequency comsats would  be  delivered early in  1980 p d  launched later 
that  yr.  (WSJ ,  Feb  15/77,  3) 

February  Id:  NASA  announced  selection of  222  scientists  representing 
the U.S.  and  14 other countries to  participate  in the first Spacelab flight 
scheduled for  1980. More than 2 OOO  candidates had responded to  invita- 
tions to  participate in the joint NASAIESA mission. NASA chose 86 of 
the  scientists, 81 from the U.S.  and  others  from  India,  Japan, Canada, 
France,  and Belgium. ESA had selected  136 from  10 other ESA-member 
states plus Austria  and Norway. 
Prime objective of  the  first Spacelab flight would be to  verify systems 
and subsystems performance and to  measure the environment around the 
Shuttle;  secondary objective would  be  the  scientific,  applications,  and 
technology data  that  would  demonstrate  Spacelab’s ability  to   perform 
space  research.  First-flight  emphasis  would  be  on  stratosphere  and 
upper-atmosphere  research,  with  other  experiments  in  plasma  physics, 
biology, botany, medicine, astronomy,  solar physics, and earth observa- 
tions,  plus  areas  such  as  thermodynamics,  materials  processing,  and 
lubrication. 
Manager of NASA’s  Spacelab 1 payload would be the Solar Terrestrial 
Division of  the Hq Office of  Space Science; manager of  ESA’s  payload 
would be its office of  Spacelab Payload Integration and Coordination in 

32 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

FEBRUARY 

Europe (SPICE) a t  Porz-Wahn in West Germany. (NASA Release 77-26; 
MSFC Release 77-27) 

0  NASA  announced it had developed a new  system with the U.S.  Army 
Corps  of  Engineers  to   monitor  the  Mississippi River  from  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  to   the  Gulf  of  Mexico  this  spring,  providing  information  to   the 
Corps  on the  vast  water  resources of  the  river valley,  including the At- 
chafalaya River  basin  in La. 
Using  off-the-shelf  space  technology,  the  system - called  Geosta- 
tionary  Operational  Environmental  Satellite  (GOES) Data-Acquisition 
System - would  take  vital  measurements  using  data  transmitters  a t  
strategic locations along the  river and its tributaries,  and would relay in- 
formation  on  river  or   reservoir  water  level,  rainfall,  and water  quality 
through  the  GOES  satellite to   a  central  ground  station.  There,  Corps 
workers would process, store, and display the data on a board that would 
give water-control managers real-time data on the  river’s  status.  NASA 
had set up the system a t  the request of the Lower Miss. Valley Div. of  the 
Corps,  to   permit  quicker  response  to   flood  situations  and  levee- 
reinforcement calls than  in  the past.  The automated system would  start 
with  80 stations,  20  now  operating.  (NASA Release 77-25) 

0  Launch  preparations  had  begun  for  the 2-spacecraft mission to  outer 
planets  Jupiter  and  Saturn  scheduled  for  late  summer  1977,  KSC  an- 
nounced.  The  center  described them  as “almost  a  replay” of  the Mars 
Viking  launches in  1975. 
Launch date for the first Mariner Jupiter/Saturn  (MJS) at complex 41 
would be Aug.  20, with the second scheduled  10 days later.  Preparation 
for  two  major  launches within  a  10-day timeframe  had  required  “the 
choreography  of  an   intricate  ballet,”  the  center  said.  Checkout  of  the 
Titan  Centaur  rockets 6 and 7 was  in progress; operations personnel ex- 
pected arrival Apr.  11 of a pathfinder  spacecraft to  be used for pad tests, 
along  with  2  flight  craft  expected  Apr.  25  and  May  23.  The  MJS 
spacecraft  would  weigh  3  times more than  the  Pioneer  10 and  ZZ that 
reached  Saturn  in  1973 and  1974, respectively,  and  would  carry  addi- 
tional  instrumentation  such  as  narrow-  and  high-resolution wide-angle 
TV  cameras,  cosmic-ray  detectors,  and  infrared  spectrometers  and 
radiometers to  study the  outer planets and satellites. 
John Noble Wilford reported  in the NYT that  the new  vehicles would 
have a  new  name-either  Voyager or  Discovery-fitting  the new  design 
for  outer  planet  environments characterized by  pale  sunlight and  great 
radio  distances. The new  craft  looked like “a giant  round  ear,” Wilford 
said,  consisting  of  a  dish  antenna  with  struts  and  booms  resembling 
spider  legs.  The  powerful  lightweight  radio-transmitter  tubes  that  had 

33 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

been  the major problem  in building the spacecraft had  arrived from the 
contractor  a  year  behind  schedule, reducing the  time  for  “life  tests”  of 
their  durability  and performance. 
Each of the spacecraft would also carry a 3-computer system to  handle 
failures during  flight,  in view  of  the 2.5hr  required  for round-trip  radio 
signals  between  earth  and  Saturn.  Trajectories  chosen  should  provide 
data on particles and magnetic currents (magnetosphere) around  Jupiter 
and Saturn, and if possible Uranus; on the atmospheres of  those planets, 
believed to  have gaseous rather  than solid surfaces; and on the surfaces 
of any solid moons of  the outer planets. The Uranus encounter would oc- 
cur  in  Jan.  1986, nearly  8.5yr  after  launch  from  earth.  (KSC  Release 
65-77; NYT ,  Feb 22/77,  15) 

Februury 17: NASA  announced  that  Lewis Research Center had named 
Kaman  Aerospace  Corp.  of  Bloomfield,  Conn.,  to   build  the  world’s 
largest windmill  blade: 45.7  meters, more than twice as long as the  19m 
blades  powering  the  lOOkw  generator  a t  LeRC’s  Plum Brook  station in 
Sandusky, 0. The  $Zmillion  contract  would cover  design,  fabrication, 
and test and evaluation of the giant turbine-rotor  blade,  representing the 
type needed  for production  windmills generating  1.5 megawatts of  elec- 
tricity,  enough  for  several hundred  homes. 

Artist’s concept of  the  15-story wind-turbine blade,  world‘s  largest at  150 f t  and 
weighing about 17  tons,  to  be built  of gIassj?ber a i  a cost of $2 million f o r  LeRC 
by Kaman Aerospace of  Conn. (NASA 77-H-156) 

The  15-story blade,  weighing about  19 400kg and made of  glass fiber, 
would require expensive special tooling and technology advances to  per- 
mit  large-scale production  of  such blades  in  future.  NASA  and  ERDA 
planned  detailed design studies on 2-megawatt wind  turbines  using two 
e giant  blades  to  produce  power  in  average winds of  22km per hr. 
A’s  decision  to   develop  giant  wind  turbines  had  followed  studies 

34 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

FEBRUARY 

showing that the big machines could produce electricity at lower cost per 
kwh.  (NASA Release 77-27) 
*  LaRC announced  it had awarded  a contract worth  about $3 million t o  
Lockheed  Aircraft  Corp.  for  development  and  flight  testing  of  active- 
control concepts for subsonic commercial-transport airplanes. Scheduled 
for  introduction  in  the  1980s,  the  concepts  (including maneuver  load 
control, gust alleviation, elastic-mode suppression, augmented  stability, 
and  envelope limiting) would  help make  future  aircraft  safer,  quieter, 
more  comfortable,  and more  energy-efficient. Work  uvcler  the contract 
would  be  done  a t  Lockheed’s Burbank  plant  over  the  next  2yr.  (LaRC 
Release 77-4) 

MSFC  announced  that  United  Space  Boosters,  Inc.,  the  firm  that 
would assemble and check out the solid-fuel rocket for the Space Shuttle, 
had  begun a manpower buildup that would eventually include about  150 
employees.  The  present  contractor  work  force  of  about  60  had  been 
housed  in  Bldg.  4666  a t   the  center.  The  firm,  a  subsidiary of  United 
Technologies Corp.  of  Sunnyvale, Calif.,  had  received  in  Dec.  1976 a 
contract  for work  at  both  MSFC and KSC  to   include stacking,  launch 
operations, and refurbishing the reusable rockets. Responsibilities would 
include designing  tools  for  applying thermal-protection materials to  the 
boosters, electrical and instrument-verification testing, and installing in- 
strumentation on  the booster  structure and  on  the booster  aft  skirt  for 
tests scheduled a t  MSFC and a t  the Thiokol plant in Utah. Employees of 
USB  doing MSFC work  at KSC  later in  1977 would number  from  150 to  
200, but the contractor would keep a cadre of  about 80 at MSFC through 
the Shuttle test  period.  (MSFC Release 77-26) 

0  LaRC  announced  that Katherine G.  Johnson,  aerospace technologist 
at  LaRC’s  flight  dynamics  and  control  division,  was  among  24  black 
scientists  and  inventors  honored  in  Philadelphia  who  had  “advanced 
technology  and  helped  move  the  world  forward.”  For  Black  History 
Month,  Philadelphia’s Afro-American  Historical and Cultural Museum 
had  unveiled  a display including Johnson’s  portrait among “examples of 
singular  achievement  in  technology” to   “inspire the  young,  gratify  the 
old, and encourage all who are made aware of  these accomplishments.” 
Johnson  was  cited  for  her  work  on  interplanetary  trajectories,  space 
navigation,  and spacecraft orbits.  (LaRC Release 77-5) 

President Carter would propose  budget changes to  reduce emphasis on  
nuclear power  and  increase research on energy conservation,  predicted 
Les Gapay  in the  Wall Street  Journal. Sources in and out of  the Carter 
administration  said  that  Carter  would  amend  the  Ford  budget  for  FY  

35 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1917 

1978 by cutting money for two major nuclear-power research projects: a 
multimillion-dollar program  t o   develop a  fast-breeder  nuclear  reactor 
that would produce more fuel than it consumed, and research on nuclear 
fusion,  a  new  technology  intended  t o   provide  commercial  electrical 
power within several decades. Fusion was said to  be more environmental- 
ly acceptable than other nuclear programs,  and the U.S.  had been spend- 
ing  several hundred  million  a yr  on  this  research.  Funds  cut  from  the 
Energy  Research  and  Development  Administration  would  go  toward 
research on  energy conservation; ERDA had been studying ways t o  save 
fuel  in  building,  transportation,  and  industrial  processes.  The  Ford 
budget  had  asked  for  a  28%  increase in  energy  research  for  FY  1978 
(from  $2.9 billion to  $3.7  billion), most of  it  for ERDA and for nuclear 
power  studies.  (WSJ ,  Feb  17/77,  3) 

February  18:  The  $500-million  Space  Shuttle  with  no  crewmembers 
aboard took its first  ride over the Calif. desert, carried piggyback  on its 
converted Boeing 747 for a 2hr test a t  nearly 5km altitude. Operating the 
747  were  veteran  NASA  test  pilot  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr.;  copilot 
Thomas C.  McMurtry;  and flight engineers Victor W. Horton and Lewis 
E.  Guidry,  Jr.  The Enterprise,  prototype of  the reusable craft designed 
to  carry cargo and scientists into space in the  1980s, was  secured  to  the 
747  by  mounts  a t  its  nose and tail;  the combination  craft  stood almost 
20m  from the ground  t o  the top of  the orbiter’s tail.  The explosive bolts 
provided to  separate the two craft  in  free flight were  armed  during this 
first test,  in case of  emergency. 
NASA officials said the weight  of  the Enterprise (about 65  000kg) did 
not strain the capacity of the 747, which weighed nearly 200 00Okg empty 
and  had  carried much  greater  loads  in  cargo and passengers.  “Most of 
the time we couldn’t even tell the Shuttle was here,” Fulton said after the 
flight,  which  reached ‘speeds of  about  450kph  as the  crew  turned  and 
banked the combined ships, shut down some of the 747 engines, and per- 
formed  other maneuvers to  check stability. The Enterprise would be un- 
manned  during  the next  5  combined  test  flights; in May,  a 2-man crew 
would conduct 6 more tests of  the 747/orbiter  combination, and in July 
the orbiter  would  be  released  from its carrier  for a series of  unpowered 
flights. (W Post,  Feb  19/77, A3;  W Star,  Feb  19/77, A-8) 

0  The U.S.  Air Force announced plans t o  launch an Honest John-Hydac 
rocket from Santa Rosa Is.  near Pensacola, Fla.,  after sunset on Feb. 22 
to   release  a  high-altitude  multicolor  cloud  visible  throughout  the 
Southeast. Release of  a 48kg payload of barium  72km above the Gulf of 
Mexico would  reveal whether or  not the resulting cloud would  interfere 
with radio signals between an  airplane and a comsat, a USAF spokesman 

36 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

FEBRUARY 

said.  A  similar  test  Dec.  1,  1976, created a  colored  cloud  visible  as  far 
away  as Tennessee.  (W P o s t ,  Feb  18/77, A23) 

0  NASA  announced  it  had  signed  an  agreement  with  McDonnell 
Douglas Corp.  allowing the company as a commercial venture to  design, 
manufacture,  and test an upper-stage  system,  including integration serv- 
ices,  for Space Shuttle missions having payloads weighing up to  2000kg. 
Carried into low earth orbit on the Shuttle, the upper stage called SSUS- 
A  (for  spinning  solid  upper  stage,  Atlas  Centaur  class)  would  take 
payloads into transfer orbit where  a kick motor would  put  it  into a cir- 
cular geosynchronous  orbit  35  900km  above earth. 
A similar agreement last yr with McDonnell Douglas was for an upper 
stage  called  SSUS-D  (for  Delta  class)  suitable  for  use  with  payloads 
weighing up to  1100kg, like those being orbited on Delta vehicles. NASA 
had  planned to  procure SSUS-A systems only  from firms with which  it 
had such an agreement; under the agreements, firms would be  free to  sell 
stages either  to  NASA  or  directly t o  customers.  The agreements would 
specify  performance  requirements,  define  a  delivery  schedule  to   meet 
NASA’s  Shuttle schedule,  and establish unit  ceiling prices  and  a ceiling 
profit.  (NASA  Release 77-29) 

Six NASA  rockets launched from Australia  in Feb.  would  investigate 
@ 
stars,  hot  stars,  white  dwarfs,  and  exploding  galaxies,  NASA  an- 
nounced.  Goddard Space Flight Center’s Richard M.  Windsor, working 
as  project  manager  with  the  Australian  government,  the  Univ.  of 
Adelaide,  and  several  U.S.  universities  and  scientists,  would  oversee 
launch  of  the  lorn-long  Aerobee  sounding  rockets  from the Woomera 
range  during  the  wk  of  Feb.  16-24.  The  Aerobee,  which  could  lift  a 
l8 lkg  payload  t o  an  altitude of  210km,  had  carried  nearly  a  thousand 
scientific payloads since i t  came  into use  in  1947. 
U.S. investigations would  include a Columbia Univ.  study of  bursting 
x-ray  stars  t o   see  if  they  resembled  black  holes;  a  Naval  Research 
Laboratory  study  to   determine  whether  the  Large  Magellanic  Cloud 
resembled  earth’s  galaxy,  comparing  x-ray  stars  for  luminosity, 
temperature,  and fluctuation; another NRL study of x-ray sources in the 
Coma Cluster;  a  Johns Hopkins Univ.  study of  Alpha Centauri A,  4.5 
light-years distant, and other stars similar to earth’s sun,  for evidence of 
a  solar  corona  in  far  ultraviolet;  another  JHU  study,  this  one  in  UV 
measurement of  early or “hot” stars, to  obtain data for use in calibrating 
satellite-borne UV  telescopes; and a GSFC study of  the Large Magellanic 
Cloud using UV  filters on  a Schwarzchild camera to  define distribution 
of hot  stars,  galactic dust,  high-energy  gas,  young  remnants  of  super- 
novas,  and other  celestial phenomena.  (NASA Release 77-28) 

31 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AER~NAUT ICS ,  mi 

February  19:  Global  communications  systems  used  by  the  Dept.  of 
Defense were inadequate, inefficient, and incapable of  surviving nuclear 
attack, according to  the investigation subcommittee of  the House Com- 
mittee on Armed Services. 
A  United  Press  report  carried  in  the  W Star  quoted  subcommittee 
criticism  of  the  Pentagon’s  topsecret  command  post  which,  “while 
located in  the basement  of  the Pentagon,  [showed] little possibility  that 
the National Military Command Center would  survive a nuclear attack 
directed against it.”  The report cited “dismay over the department’s in- 
ability to  deploy a satellite communications system after  16 years of  ef- 
fort,” “security deficiencies” in the computer software of  the worldwide 
Military Command  and Control System, weaknesses  in  the Tri-Service 
Tactical Communications program,  and “urgent need  for  early deploy- 
ment of  improved voice security equipment throughout the military serv- 
ices.” The report commended the use of  airborne command posts such as 
the  converted Boeing  747  “doomsday  plane”  that  had  taken  President 
Carter  to  Georgia the previous wk.  (WS ta r ,  Feb  19/77,  A-3) 

Canadian scientists recovered a fragment weighing about 2kg  from a 
meteorite seen streaking across the sky over Alberta earlier in Feb.,  the 
Associated Press reported.  Ian Halliday of  the Natl.  Research Council 
noted that the find was only the third time a meteorite had  been located 
after it had been photographed coming down; most meteorites reported- 
ly  had  burned  up  or  exploded  before  reaching  earth.  The  AP report 
noted  that  four  fragments  of  a  meteorite  that  exploded  Jan.  31  over 
Louisville, Ky.,  had  been  recovered, and  that all four had  struck man- 
made objects (two rooftops, a house window,  and an automobile hood), 
reportedly a rare occurrence. ( W  Post,  Feb 20/77,  A19) 

The  Univ.  of  Toyko’s  Inst.  of  Space  and  Aeronautical  Science 
launched  a  13kg  experimental  satellite  called  Tansei  3  from  the 
Uchinoura  space  center  into  an  orbit  with  3940km  apogee,  826km 
perigee,  using  a 3-stage MU 3H  rocket  developed a t  the university.  The 
rocket,  used  in preparation  for  next  yr’s  launch  of  Japan’s  5th aurora- 
observation satellite, was  23.8m  long and weighed  49  tons.  The MST-3 
satellite, 7th launched by the university and 9th by  Japan, carried control 
equipment  for  testing  and  would  sent  back  scientific  data  for  an 
estimated  15 days.  (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo  in English, Feb  10/77) 

February 20: Distant planets Uranus and Neptune had turned out to have 
spin rates similar to  earth’s,  so  that  their days correspond to  earth days 
and  they  had  probably  come  from  the  same  debris  that  earth  did, 
reported  Kitt  Peak  astronomers  Michael  J.S.  Belton  and  Bethanne 
Hayes.  Using  the  observatory‘s just-over-400cm telescope,  world’s  sec- 

38 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

FEBRUARY 

ond  largest,  the  astronomers found  that  (contrary to  previous  theory) 
spin rates of the outermost planets (except for Pluto) resembled not those 
of Saturn and Jupiter but  rather those of  earth and Mars. The discovery 
indicated they were solid ice-like bodies,  not big balls of  gas, Dr.  Belton 
said. 
Using  a  smaller telescope at Kitt  Peak,  a separate 4-member  team  of 
scientists had reported the first observation of weather patterns in the up- 
per  atmosphere of Neptune.  Dr. Richard Joyce and 3 scientists from the 
Univ.  of  Hawaii had  found  a marked  increase in Neptune’s  reflectivity 
between  April  1975 and  March  1976,  suggesting  the  presence  of  thin 
transient clouds high in that planet’s atmosphere. Astronomers had been 
using the planet as a standard measure of brightness, thinking that it ex- 
perienced no atmospheric changes.  ( W Post, Feb 20177, F16) 

0  Meteorites-so  rare  that  museum  collections  around  the  world  con- 
tained  no more than  2000,  and  no curator  had  reported finding one on 
his own-  had turned up in quantity in Antarctica several years ago when 
a team of  Japanese scientists found an area of  the ice-covered continent 
where  hunting  meteorites  was  “as  easy  as  picking  mushrooms,”  the 
Chicago Tribune reported. 
Dr.  Edward J. Olsen, chief of  geology a t  Chicago’s Field Museum and 
curator of one of the largest meteorite collections, had returned from the 
first U.S.  meteorite expedition to  Antarctica reporting that his team had 
found pieces  of  11 different meteorites, weighing about 450kg in all, a t  
two  sites more  than  200km  northwest  of  the U.S.  research  station  on 
McMurdo  Sound where  movement  of  the  ice  cover  had  concentrated 
meteorites at certain spots. 
Scientists valued the meteorites as the oldest objects yet located, dating 
back  as  far  as 4.5  billion  yr,  whereas earth’s oldest rocks were only 3.7 
billion  yr  old.  Meteorites  in  pristine  condition,  preserved  by  the  ice, 
might contain information about organic chemicals in space, Olsen said, 
and cosmic-ray traces might show whether the sun was running down or 
getting hotter.  (C Trib, Feb 20177,  1-3) 

February 22: A lack of  sunspots during the past yr and a half might have 
caused recent unusual cold weather and drought in the U.S.,  Dr.  John A. 
Eddy  of  the  Natl.  Center  for  Atmospheric  Research  told  the  143rd 
meeting of the Am. Assn.  for the Advancement of  Science. Dr. Eddy, an  
astronomer who had  studied the complex relation between solar activity 
and historic and climatic events, had traced  short- and medium-term ef- 
fects  over  several  thousand  yr  in  history  records  and  as far  back  as 
7000yr by measuring  carbon-14 levels in tree rings. 
The theory wa s  that sunspots increased the solar wind  (solar particles 
and radiation that fan the earth) which determined the amount of  cosmic 

39 

/ 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

and galactic radiation striking the earth. Tree-ring studies echoed abnor- 
mal  conditions  of  cold  weather  and  drought when  the  rings  exhibited 
high  levels  of  carbon- 14  resulting  from  reduced  solar-wind  activity, 
resulting  from fewer  sunspots. 
. . The record  of  climate  [has] a one-to-one correspondence  that’s 
so good  I  don’t  want  to believe  it,” Dr.  Eddy  told  the Denver meeting. 
History reported  the reign of King Louis XIV of France (1643-1715)  as a 
time  of  high  carbon-14  levels;  Eddy  said  the  most  severe  temperature 
drops  on  earth  in  the  last  thousand  yr  occurred  in  that  period.  Crops 
failed in the British Isles, a Norse colony in Greenland perished of  cold, 
and Spanish conquistadors had ridden their  horses into Mexico across a 
frozen Rio Grande. The aurora borealis produced by solar particles strik- 
ing earth’s magnetic field did not appear during that period; astronomer 
E h u n d  Halley was  60yr old when  he  first saw northern lights in  1715, 
when  the “little ice age” ended.  “The fact is, we  should have been  into a 
rise  of  solar activity  in  the  autumn of  1975,” Eddy noted,  “and here we 
are a year and a half  overdue into getting that rise.”  ( WP o s t ,  Feb 22/77, 
A-3;  NYT ,  Feb 22/77,  13) 

Japan’s Natl.  Space Development Agency  announced rescheduling to  
Feb.  23  of  the  launch  of  a  3-stage N  rocket  carrying  the  first  geosta- 
tionary meteorological  satellite to  be  orbited by  Japan.  The launch had 
been  postponed  because  of  trouble  with  the  system  controlling  the 
rocket’s  first  stage.  (FBIS,  Tokyo Kyodo  in English,  Feb 21/77) 

February 22:  Pressures from inside and outside the scientific community 
might result in restricting the freedom of  inquiry that had enabled science 
to  flourish since the Renaissance,  the annual meeting  of  the Am.  Assn. 
for  the Advancement  of  Science heard.  Walter  Sullivan reported  in  the 
N Y   Times  that  a  session  on  the  role  of  science  as  the  key  to   man’s 
political future had  as discussion leaders George W.  Ball, senior director 
of  Lehman  Bros.  investment  bankers;  Lord  Zuckerman,  former  chief 
science adviser  to  the British  government;  and Charles  J.  Hitch,  presi- 
dent  of  Resources  for the Future,  Inc.,  of  Washington, D.C.  The panel 
cited controversies in the Cambridge, Mass.,  city council over regulating 
use  of  genetic  material  in  that  city’s  research  laboratories;  the  Calif. 
legislature’s proposal  to regulate research  on genetic hybrids;  and other 
attempts to  control the directions of  research. 
The panel  expressed  the  feeling  that  checks and balances  within  the 
scientific community should be able to  deal with such problems, and said 
that misgivings  about “too much knowledge” harked back  to prehistoric 
and  classical times when  mankind  feared  probing  into  nature’s  secrets. 
Although restraints on export of  equipment and knowledge might  delay 
the  spread  of  nuclear  weapons,  Ball  noted  that  the  only  real  control 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

FEBRUARY 

would  be  “to  create  a  climate  where  nations  don’t  find  it  [nuclear 
weaponry] useful.”  (NYT ,  Feb 23/77,  B-4) 

February 23-27: Japan’s  Natl.  Space  Development  Agency  announced 
launch  Feb.  22  of  its  engineering  test  satellite ETS-I1  from  the  space 
center at Tanegashima at 5 5 0  local time (0850 GMT) on a 3-stage 32.5m 
N  rocket  developed  with  the  help  of  U.S.  technology.  The  rocket 
weighed  about 90 tons  and had  a  thrust  of  148 tons at liftoff. 

The satellite, a  1.4lm-diameter cylinder 93cm long, carried a transmit- 
tedreceiver and five small rockets for attitude control, orbital shift, and 
speed adjustment. At about 6:45  pm  local time,  the satellite (called Kiku 
2  in  orbit)  reached  an  elliptical  transfer  orbit  with  191km perigee  and 
apogee of  about  36  000km,  the  altitude at which  it  would  go  into  syn- 
chronous  orbit within  a  few  days.  Its  synchronous station would  be  at 
130”E  over  Indonesia,  the  announcement  said.  This  was  the  third 
satellite  orbited  by  the  agency  and  the  tenth  by  Japan.  (FBIS,  Tokyo 
Kyodo in English, Feb 23/77;  NYT ,  Feb 25/77,  A7; CSM, Feb 24/77,2) 
NSDA  officials announced Feb.  25  that Kiku 2 would  change orbit a 
day early, on its seventh pass over the Indian Ocean,  as data from track- 
ing  stations  in  Japan and on Christmas Is.  had  confirmed its success in 
elliptical  orbit.  The satellite would  reach  station by  March  5  if  all went 
well,  the  announcement  said.  (FBIS,  Tokyo  Kyodo  in  English,  Feb 
25/77) 
The NY  Times carried a Feb.  26  item from Associated Press confirm- 
ing  that “Japan’s  first experimental stationary satellite” had  shifted to  a 
circular orbit.  (NYT ,  Feb 27/77,  7) 
NSDA  announced Feb.  27  that Kiku 2’s  apogee motor  ignited at 2:32 
pm  local time on Feb.  26  to move the satellite from an elliptical to  a cir- 
cular  orbit with  apogee of  35  756km  and perigee of  34  034km,  close  to 
preflight predictions and fast enough to permit drift to  its permanent sta- 
tion  over  Indonesia  a t   35  800km  altitude.  (FBIS,  Tokyo  Kyodo  in 
English,  Feb 27/77) 

February 24: JSC announced plans for NASA Symposium 77 to  be held 
at  the  center  March  1-3  for more  than  2000 students from  junior  and 
senior  high  schools  in  Texas,  a  first-of-its-kind  event  for  NASA,  de- 
signed  to   motivate  youth  (especially  female  and  minority  students)  to  
seek careers in engineering and science.  Special guest a t  the event would 
be  actress Nichelle Nichols,  best  known  as Lt.  Uhura, communications 
officer  on  the  Star  Trek  television  series.  JSC and  contract  employees 
would  conduct workshops and describe their own careers as scientists or 
engineers, and would  take the students on tours of various work areas a t  
the center. 

41 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

The symposium would include a seminar for college and university ad- 
ministrators  from  schools  having  high  enrollments  of  minority  and 
female  students,  giving  information  on  NASA  research,  training,  and 
employment  opportunities.  NASA  had  conducted  programs  similar  to  
Symposium 77  at 3 universities,  but  not  at a field center.  (JSC Release 
77-10) 

The  initial  phase  of  Shuttle  approach  and  landing  tests  (ALT)  that 
began Feb.  18 at DFRC might end ahead of  schedule, DFRC announced, 
if  the  4th  and  5th  flight  of  the  combined 747-and-orbiter  vehicles  con- 
tinued  to  meet  program  objectives.  Donald  K.  Slayton, ALT  program 
manager,  said  that  if  performance  measured  up  to  previous  successful 
flights,  the 6th test  (now scheduled for Mar.  4) would  be  dropped.  Pro- 
gram officials had praised the performance of  the 747  and its piggyback 
passenger,  Slayton  said;  flight  data  had  verified  preflight  wind-tunnel 
test  results  and simulations conducted by  Boeing. 
Early  completion  of  inert  tests with  an unmanned  orbiter  would  put 
the orbiter in its hangar  a week  ahead of  schedule to prepare for its next 
flight,  in  the  captive-active phase.  Five  flights  scheduled  in  this  phase 
would  carry astronaut  crews to  perform  systems checks and go  through 
crew procedures as the 747 went through maneuvers up to, but just short 
of, actual release of  the  orbiter. Tests later in the summer would  release 
the  orbiter  for  an unpowered  landing  on DFRC’s  dry  lakebed.  (NASA 
Release 77-36;  DFRC  Release 8-77) 

February 25: NASA announced selection of Hughes Aircraft Co.’s  Space 
and Communications Group, El  Segundo, Calif.,  for  negotiation  of  a 
cost-plus-award-fee contract valued at between $37.5  and $43.5  million, 
depending  on  the  option  selected,  for  design  and  fabrication  of  a 
thematic mapper to  be used on Landsat D, scheduled for launch early in 
1981. The thematic mapper would be a remote-sensing instrument offer- 
ing  improved  data  for  land-resources  management by  making  observa- 
tions with repetitive temporal coverage and delivering to the users  infor- 
mation  with  better  spatial  and  spectral  resolution  (mapping  on  a 
1 :250 OOO  scale compared to   1 : 1 OOO  OOO  on the present  Landsat.) 
The  basic  contract,  including  assembly,  test,  and  qualification  of  a 
prototype flight model  and  one set  of  bench-test  and calibration equip- 
ment, as well as support services, would have two options: either an addi- 
tional  flight unit  with  an  additional set  of  test  equipment  and  support 
services, or two additional flight units  and support services. Completion 
and  delivery  of  the  prototype  would  be  scheduled  for  late  1980. GSFC 
would  manage the  thematic-mapper  program.  (NASA Release 77-34) 
*  NASA  announced  development  of  ultrathin  large-area  silicon  solar 

42 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

FEBRUARY 

cells  thinner  than  a  sheet  of  newspaper  for  increasing  the  power-to- 
weight capability of solar arrays, considered a major breakthrough in ap- 
plying solar energy to missions requiring multikilowatts, even millions of 
watts, of  electricity. The Solarex Corp. of  Rockville, Md.,  had made the 
thin cells some 40 to  50 microns thick  (only one-sixth as thick as cells in 
present solar arrays) in sizes up to  38cmZ, proving both structurally flexi- 
ble and less fragile than expected. Energy conversion of the new cells vir- 
tually  equaled that  of  conventional cells,  11% compared  to   12 or   13% 
for the  thicker  cells. 
Lightweight  cells would  mean  larger  solar  arrays  for  ion-propulsion 
systems in extended space exploration,  and could supply power  for plat- 
forms  and  remote-satellite  power  stations  in  the  future.  Solarex  had 
delivered hundreds of  the new  cells to  JPL  a t  Pasadena, Calif.,  for test, 
evaluation,  and  design-application studies. (NASA Release 77-3 1) 
*  More  than  half  the  1497 reports  received  under  the  NASA  aviation 
safety  reporting  system  (ASRS)  in  its  second  quarter  of  operations  in- 
cluded  unsolicited  recommendations  for  solutions  of  a  variety  of  air- 
traffic problems, NASA announced. The reports,  dealing with air opera- 
tions nationwide, reflected an increase in the quality of  reporting for the 
period  ending Oct.  14,  1976, the  agency said.  NASA’s  ASRS  had  been 
designed  as  an  “early  warning  system” consisting  of  voluntary  reports 
submitted  by  pilots,  air  traffic  controllers,  and  others  in  the  national 
aviation  system. 
During the first and second quarters, an average of  100 reports came in 
each wk;  the  number  of  reports  from pilots  declined during the  second 
quarter, with reports from controllers now constituting half  rather  than a 
third of  the total. At least three-fourths of all reports concerned incidents 
occurring in controlled air  space, and some type of  flight plan had been 
filed in 84% of  the flights described. NASA had prepared and sent to  the 
Federal Aviation Administration  a  total  of  58  alert  bulletins during  the 
report  period. 
NASA personnel had initially screened all ASRS reports to  remove the 
names  of  persons reporting;  the  reports  went  for  analysis  to  the ASRS 
office  of  Battelle’s  Columbus  Division  in  Mountain  View,  Calif.  At- 
tempts to  verify information  in 340  of  the  reports,  by telephone contact 
with  the  reporter,  were  successful  in  270  instances.  Names  of  persons 
were  removed  to   protect  the  right  of  free  comment  without  fear  of 
reprisal, and 80% of  the reports were reviewed within 2 working days of 
their  receipt.  (NASA Release 77-30) 
*  NASA  issued  requests  for  proposals  from  industry  to   design  and 
manufacture  the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) recently approved 
by  the U.S.  and  the Netherlands.  Scheduled for  launch in March  1981, 

43 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

the observatory would use a telescope furnished by the U.S.,  a spacecraft 
built  by  the  Netherlands,  and  a  control  facility  supplied  by  the United 
Kingdom.  The IRAS in a 900km polar orbit would  survey the entire sky 
for  a  yr,  a t   infrared  wavelengths  not  usable  by  earth-based  telescopes 
because  of  atmospheric  interference,  t o  study stars  forming and  at  the 
end of  their  life cycle. 
JPL  would manage the project and would design and operate a facility 
to  produce an infrared sky map and a catalog containing up to  1 million 
infrared  sources.  NASA’s  Ames  Research  Center would  be  responsible 
for  the 60m-aperture infrared telescope.  Prof.  Gerry Neugebauer  of  the 
Calif.  Inst.  of  Technology  (operating  JPL   for  NASA)  would  head  the 
U.S.  scientific team, working with as many as 5 0 0  U.S.,  Dutch, and U.K. 
scientists,  engineers,  and  technicians.  Industry  proposals  were  due  by 
Mar.  1 ,   with contractor selection  later  in  1977.  (NASA Release 77-33) 
0  MSFC  reported  NASA’s  Michoud  assembly  facility  had  shipped  the 
first of  four major pieces of test hardware for the Space Shuttle external 
tank,  an intertank  structural-test article scheduled  to  arrive by  barge  at 
MSFC  about  Mar.  5 .   I t  would  go  from New  Orleans  to  Huntsville  by 
way  of  Mississippi, Ohio,  and  Tennessee  Rivers,  the  route  NASA  had 
used  to  ship Saturn  stages  for  testing  during  the Apollo  program.  The 
other  test  articles  (liquid-hydrogen  tank,  liquid-oxygen  tank,  and 
another  intertank) would  arrive later in  1977. 
The external tank, one t o  be used for each Shuttle mission, would hold 
containers for liquid oxygen and  liquid hydrogen, connected by the inter- 
tank;  the combined assembly would measure about 47m  long.  Test data 
would  serve to verify the intertank‘s structural integrity before static test 
firing  of  the  Shuttle’s  main  propulsion  system  at  the  Natl.  Space 
Technology Laboratories  later in  1977. The test  firings would  use a full- 
size  external  tank,  three  Shuttle  engines,  and  an  Orbiter  aft-structure 
simulator,  attached  to   the  test  stand  through  the  intertank.  (MSFC 
Release  77-30) 

0  JSC announced it  had  awarded  a  cost-plus-award-fee  contract worth 
$12 million  to  Lockheed Electronics Co.  for  a third  yr  of  site-support 
services  to   JSC’s  White  Sands  Test  Facility  at  Las  Cruces,  N.M. 
Estimated total  value of  the  3yr  contract was  $24 million.  (JSC Release 
77-1 1) 
NASA  Administrator  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  gave  the  agency’s 
distinguished  public  service medal  to  United  Nations  Secretary General 
Kurt Waldheim,  a t  a ceremony a t  the Natl. Air  and Space Museum.  Dr. 
Waldheim received the award for outstanding leadership as chairman of 
the UN  Committee on  the  Peaceful Uses  of  Outer  Space  from  1965  to  
1968  and  from  1970  to   1971,  and  for  “enduring  contributions  t o   the 

44 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

FEBRUARY 

development  of  a  constructive  international  consensus,  during  the 
critical formative years, on  the challenging issues presented by man’s  first 
uses  of  outer  space.”  (Text of  presentation) 

February 28: NASA  announced  that MSFC had  issued  requests for pro- 
posals  from industry  to  make  studies of, and supply data  for NASA to  
use  in  developing techniques  for  packaging,  transporting,  fabricating, 
erecting, and operating large structures in space, in preparation  for a ma- 
jor demonstration in space in 1983 or  1984. An early Shuttle flight would 
carry an automated beam-fabrication module  to  make  aluminum  struc- 
tural  members;  later  flights would  demonstrate use  of  both  aluminum 
and composite materials. After a few beams were manufactured  on early 
flights,  later  missions  would  perform  limited  assembly, culminating  in 
fabrication and erection of  a large structure for continuing use, such as a 
lOOkw  solar-power  facility  to   supplement  onboard  Shuttle  power  for 
various experiments. 
The  capacity demonstrated  in  these missions  would  aid  in  creating a 
more  complex assembly  as part  of  a  space-construction base in  1985 or 
thereafter. The proposal called for completion in 9mo and another 2mo 
to  prepare  a report.  MSFC would receive proposals until Mar.  18,  1977, 
and  would  manage  the  study  project  for  the  Office  of  Space  Flight. 
(NASA Release 77-35) 

0  JSC  announced  it  had  awarded  a  contract  worth  $2  million  to  
Hamilton  Standard  Division,  United  Technologies  Corp.,  Windsor 
Locks, Conn.,  to  supply space suits for Shuttle crews. The system, an ex- 
travehicular mobility unit (EMU), would consist of a suit with integrated 
life-support  backpack  for  use  outside  the  Shuttle orbiter’s pressurized 
cabin.  The  suit  would  come  in  small,  medium,  and  large  upper-  and 
lower-torso standardized  sections, to   replace the  individualized suits of 
earlier manned  programs.  The contract called for equipment  and spares 
for  seven  suits and supporting hardware,  plus training,  manpower,  and 
field  support at  JSC  and other NASA  centers,  at an estimated ultimate 
cost  of  about $18.5 million.  (JSC Release 77-12) 

0  JSC reported  it  had  signed  a contract valued  a t  $200K with American 
Airline’s  maintenance  and  engineering  center  a t   Tulsa,  Okla.,  for 
maintenance  and  operations  support  of  NASA’s  Boeing  747  Shuttle- 
carrier aircraft NASA 905. Work would be done primarily a t  DFRC, site 
of  the  first  atmospheric and glide-flight landing tests of  the Shuttle or- 
biter.  Eventual  value  of  the  contract  could  reach  $806K.  (JSC Release 
77-13) 

During February: Japan, one of  five countries that previously had agreed 

45 

FEBRUARY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

to  be  major  investors in  a  $200 million  international  maritime satellite 
organization  (Inmarsat),  had  declined  to   participate  in  a  preparatory 
committee  set  up  to   act  until  formal  documents  were  ratified,  A vW k  
reported. 
Forty countries would be Inmarsat members; besides Japan,  the other 
four major  shareholders were to  be  the U.S.,  the U.K.,  the USSR, and 
Norway.  The preparatory committee had  met  in  London in  Jan.  under 
sponsorship of  the  Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organiza- 
tion,  an  arm  of  the UN,  and  had  set  up  three  panels:  one on  satellite- 
system parameters;  one on economic, marketing, and  financial matters; 
and one on organization procedures, all of which were to  meet in the in- 
terval before  the next  committee meeting  set  for  Oct.  1977.  Japan gave 
no  reason  for withdrawing.  (A vWk ,  Feb 7/77,  23) 

46 

March  I:  NASA  announced  the  first  use  of  a  link  between  the  com- 
munications  technology  satellite  Cts  and  the  portable  earth  terminal 
(PET):  a  teleconference  between  Housing  and  Urban  Development 
Secretary Patricia Roberts Harris in Washington, D.C.,  and a group of 
California  mayors  at  the  Ames  Research  Center  in  Mountain  View, 
Calif. Mrs.  Harris conferred with  the mayors  from the PET bus  parked 
outside  the  HUD  building.  Cts,  a  joint  effort  between  the  Canadian 
Dept.  of  Communications and NASA,  had  been built and integrated by 
Canada; NASA provided the 200w transmitter  and developed the PET at 
Lewis  Research  Center.  The  PET  bus,  based  at  LeRC,  would  travel 
around the U.S.  demonstrating how  to  save money  through teleconfer- 
encing.  (NASA Release 77-40) 

0  NASA  announced  it  would  join  the  Interior Dept.’s  Bureau  of  Land 
Management  in  using  Landsat,  the earth  resources monitoring satellite, 
to  inventory  wild  land  resources  (major  streams,  ground  cover  and 
vegetation  types,  reservoirs,  and  fire hazards)  in  south  central Alaska, 
northwestern Arizona,  and  southwestern Idaho.  The project  would  ex- 
amine each of  the 3 different regional ecologies for about  lyr. During the 
3yr  project,  the BLM  and NASA would  set up  an automated  inventory 
system to  provide  accurate and timely data on BLM  land as another ex- 
ample  of  Landsat  usefulness  in  solving  public  and  private  resource- 
oriented  problems.  (NASA  Release 77-37) 

Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  announced  it  had  awarded  a  $634 250 
contract  to  Grumman  Aerospace  Corp.  to   design,  build,  and  test  a 
machine that would demonstrate, on earth,  the automatic fabrication of 
beams  for  space construction.  Ground demonstration would  be  needed 
to  develop a safe and efficient facility for use in space. Beam fabrication, 
part  of  the  Space  Industrialization  Program, would  be  the  first  step  in 
building  large space structures.  (MSFC Release 77-33) 

MSFC reported that the contractor for the first high-energy astronomy 
observatory  (HEAO-A),  TRW  Systems  of  Redondo  Beach,  Calif., 
would  ship the  spacecraft to  Kennedy Space Center  on Mar.  7.  HEAO- 
A,  a  2660kg  unmanned  mission  scheduled  for  launch  Apr.  15  into  low 

41 

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

circular earth orbit, would  survey celestial x-ray sources and gamma-ray 
flux.  (MSFC Release 77-32) 

March  3:  President  Carter’s  first  budget  proposal  contained  additional 
funds  for NASA,  Nature magazine noted.  The new  administration  had 
recommended  $15 million for studies of  potential missions to  Mars after 
Viking;  the previous administration had  requested  $ 5  million.  Planetary 
scientists,  pleased  with  the  increased  budget  request  as  well  as with 
Carter’s  recent  remarks  on  the  Space  Shuttle,  viewed  these  actions  as 
presidential  support  of  the  space  program.  (Nature,  Mar  3/77,  5 ;  
Spaceflight,  Mar  77,  8) 

NASA announced it had used Landsat, the earth resources monitoring 
satellite, to  inventory irrigation systems in Nebraska. The 12 OOO central- 
pivot irrigation systems proved easily recognizable by their circular shape 
in photos from Landsat’s  1480km-altitude orbit. Annual inventory of the 
irrigation  systems  had  become  necessary  when  the  number  of  central- 
pivot  sites  increased  by  40 to   60%  each  yr,  affecting  property  values, 
land use, and fuel and water allocation. Landsat had proved the cheapest 
way  to acquire an accurate and timely  inventory. (NASA Release 77-38) 

Prof.  James  L.  Elliot  of  Cornel1  Univ.  reported  sighting  a  large 
number  of  objects -possible 
satellites  of  Uranus, 
the  seventh 
planet - while  he  was  using  the  91cm  telescope on NASA’s  Kuiper  Air- 
borne  Observatory  flying  above  the  Indian  Ocean.  Another  U.S. 
astronomer,  Dr.  Robert  Millis  of  the  Lowell  Observatory  in  Ariz., 
reported  similar  observations  while  viewing  Uranus  from  Perth  in 
Australia.  Each  of  the  scientists  claimed  that  the  planet  might  have  as 
many as  100 satellites ranging from 18 to 24mi in diameter. If  confirmed, 
the  new  observations would  give Uranus more  satellites than  any  other 
planet  in  the  solar system.  (NYT ,  Mar  3/77,  77; C Trib, Mar  12/77) 

March  4:  NASA  announced  the  return  to   Johnson  Space  Center  of 
former  astronaut  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson,  science  pilot  on  the  84-day 
Skylab 4 mission  in  1973-74,  after a yr with ERN0  of  Bremen,  W. Ger- 
many,  prime  contractor  for  Spacelab  (a  future Space Shuttle payload). 
Gibson,  a Ph.D.  in  physics  and engineering,  had  left NASA  in  1974 to  
become  senior  staff  scientist  a t   Aerospace  Corp.,  El  Segundo,  Calif. 
Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed 
by  astronaut  Joseph P.  Kerwin, M.D.  (NASA Release 77-43) 

NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  announced  that,  as  part  of  the 
Solar  Sail Development  Project,  it  had  awarded 6 contracts  to  build  a 
spaceship powered  by  solar wind.  The craft,  using  large extremely  thin 

48 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MARCH 

Artist’s concept  of  solar  sail  making  rendezvous in  1982  with Halley’s comet. 
Launched f rom  an  orbiting Space Shuttle,  an  800m-sq structure could  carry an 
800 t o  900kg spacecraft on such  a mission. (NASA  77-H-128) 

metallic  sails t o  capture the energy of  solar  photons,  would  tack  like a 
sailboat  into  the  “wind” to   head  toward  the  sun  or   would  use  photon 
energy to  head  for the outer planets.  Speed of  the ship would vary with 
distance from the sun, following the inverse-square law that solar intensi- 
ty would decrease as the reciprocal of  the distance from the sun, squared. 
Cost  of  the  contracts  for  fabricating  sail material  and  designing  sails, 
booms,  and  navigation  systems  would  total  $800 OOO.  (NASA  Release 
77-39) 

0  A 25-article series in ScienceNews by Jonathan Eberhart on  the Viking 
mission  won  the  1976 AAAS-Westinghouse science writing award  Feb. 
22,  Science  reported.  Henry  S.F.  Cooper’s  New  Yorker article  on   the 
Space Shuttle received  honorable mention.  (Science, Mar 4/77,  864) 

March  7: Dr.  James C.  Fletcher,  NASA  administrator, announced  that 
the planetary probes scheduled for launch Aug.  20 and Sept.  1 would be 
named  Voyager  1 and  Voyager  2.  The  two  craft  would  view  Jupiter, 
Saturn,  and  their  respective  satellite  systems,  and  might  also  look  a t  
Uranus  and Neptune.  JPL  had  designed  and built  both  probes. 
In March  1979 Voyager  1 would pass within 357 OOOkm  of  Jupiter, the 
solar  system’s  largest  planet,  and   go  on  to   rendezvous with  Saturn  in 
Nov.  1980,  passing  within  209 OOOkm  of  the  ringed  planet’s  cloud  tops 
and within 6430km of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon and the only satellite 
in the solar system known to  have an  atmosphere. (NASA Release 77-41) 

49 

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

0  NASA’s upcoming 5yr plan (1978-1982) had projected annualbudgets 
for  fiscal  yrs  1980-1982  in  excess  of  $4.7  billion,  Aviation  Week 
reported.  The  plan,  an  internal  document  used  to   guide  the  agency, 
would  allow NASA as many as 7 major  new  mission  starts in FY  1979, 
including a Mars  rover and a Halley’s Comet  rendezvous. (A v  Wk ,  Mar 
7/77,  47) 

MSFC announced  it would consider using the Space Shuttle’s external 
fuel tank (ET) as a permanent  space platform. James E. Kingsbury, head 
of  MSFC’s  Science  and  Engineering Directorate,  proposed  to   replace 
57m3 of  an ET’S liquid oxygen with provisions for 90 days, then launch 
another  Shuttle t o  bring  a crew, a Skylab-airlock module and multiple- 
docking adapter, and a solar electric-conversion wing to  the orbiting ET  
to  constitute a habitable space station. All the required equipment, now 
in  storage or  on  display  in  the  Smithsonian’s  National  Air  and  Space 
Museum,  had  been  flight-tested. (MSFC Release 77-36; NASA  Release 
77-42; Htsvl  Times, Feb 20/77,  8) 

JSC announced  it would use CAMAC, a European innovation used in 
worving between computers and hardware t o  produce  standard scientific 
electronic subassemblies, as  a  link  between  Shuttle computers  and  on- 
board  experiments. CAMAC  would  reduce  costs  by  permitting  actual 
onboard  assembly  of  major  electronic  sections  from  a  CAMAC 
subassembly  pool.  MSFC  had  been  studying  the  equipment  to   ensure 
reliability during Shuttle operations.  (JSC Release 77-14) 

0  JSC announced  award of  a $2 752 OOO  contract to  Hamilton  Standard 
Division  of  United  Technologies Corp.,  Windsor  Locks,  Conn. , for 
development and production of  a Space Shuttle portable oxygen system 
for use  independently o r  connected to  the orbiter’s oxygen system. Con- 
sisting of  a  face mask,  rebreather  loop,  heat  exchanger, oxygen  bottle, 
and  recharge kit,  the system would  operate  during emergencies and  for 
prebreathing  before  spacewalks to   denitrogenize the  crew’s  circulatory 
systems.  (JSC Release 77-18) 

NASA might  undertake  a Cosmic Background  Explorer satellite pro- 
gram,  A v  Wk  reported.  The  satellite  would  examine  the  character  of 
cosmic  background  radiation  claimed  by  many  scientists to   prove  the 
big-bang theory  of  the universe’s  formation.  (A v  Wk ,  Mar  7/77,  11) 

A  cryogenically  cooled  infrared  telescope  carried  aboard  the  Space 
Shuttle would  become the major  infrared  research instrument  in space, 
A vWk   reported.  NASA  studies  had  indicated  such  a  telescope  could 

50 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MARCH 

gather spectroscopic data on  objects 1000 times fainter than now visible. 
( A v W . ,  Mar 7/77,  11) 

*  New  infrared  detectors  at  Kitt  Peak  Natl.  Observatory  might  have 
detected  frozen  methane  on  the  surface  of  Pluto,  A vWk   reported.  If 
verified,  the  observations would  indicate  a  smaller  size  for  Pluto  and 
would change current  theories of  Pluto’s  interaction with other planets. 
(A vW k ,  Mar 7/77,  11) 
c 
March 8: MSFC announced a $1 046  100 amendment of  a contract with 
Rocketdyne Division of  Rockwell Intl.  Corp., Canoga Park, Calif.,  con- 
tractors  for  the  Space Shuttle main  engine (SSME).  The amended con- 
tract,  totaling more than $66 million, would include equipment to  build 
SSME.  (MSFC Release 77-37) 

March  9: NASA  announced  that  Ronald  E.  Evans,  former  command- 
module pilot of Apollo 17 ,  would leave Mar.  15 to  become executive vice 
president  of  Western American Energy Corp.  (WAEC) and  director  of 
marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. 
Evans,  selected as an  astronaut  in  1966,  flew  on Apollo 17 in  1971 and 
made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent 
phase  of  Space Shuttle  orbital-test  flights  scheduled  for  1979.  (NASA 
Release 77-44) 

*  Reduction  of  data  from  NASA’s  1976 gravity  probe  (GP-A)  experi- 
ment  had  confirmed  the  equivalency  principle,  a  cornerstone  of 
Einstein’s general theory of  relativity, MSFC  reported.  Using data  from 
two  identical  atomic  maser  clocks,  principal  investigator  Dr.  Robert 
Vessot  of  the  Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory  (SAO)  in  Cam- 
bridge,  Mass.,  had  demonstrated  that  time  actually  went  faster  in  a 
weaker gravitational field, one removed from the earth’s mass. The clock 
that had been carried aboard a rocket to  an altitude of  10 OOOkm  had run 
faster.  (MSFC Release 77-41) 

MSFC  reported  plans  to  request  another  $18 610 000 in  NASA’s  FY  
1978 budget  for  construction  or  modification of  facilities to  be  used  in 
building  the  Space  Shuttle  external  fuel  tank  (ET)  at  the  Michoud 
assembly facility (MAF) near New Orleans. With addition of  a chemical 
waste-treatment  plant  and  alterations  of  the  manufacturing,  vertical- 
assembly,  final-assembly,  and  checkout buildings,  MAF could produce 
28  ETs each yr.  (MSFC Release 77-35) 

March IO :   NASA launched Palapa 2 (formerly Palapa-B), an Indonesian 

5 1  

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

telecommunications  satellite,  from  the  Eastern  Test  Range  at  Cape 
Canaveral on a Delta at 2316 GMT, into a transfer orbit with  36 499km 
apogee,  231.2km  perigee, and inclination of  24.6”.  Palapa 2 ,  second In- 
donesian domestic comsat,  would  use  its apogee kick  motor  Mar.  12 to  
move  into synchronous orbit above the  Indian Ocean.  Forty ground sta- 
tions  throughout  the  archipelago  would  link  the  islands  with  the  2 
satellites, each capable of  handling 4OOO  phone calls or  12 simultaneous 
color  TV  channels.  (MORS M-492-208-77-02,  [prelaunch]  Feb  2/77, 
[postlaunch] Apr  12/77; NASA  Release 77-23; FBIS,  Jakarta Domestic 
Service in  Indonesia, Mar  1 1/77) 

0  MSFC  reported  it  had  established  a  project  office  responsible  for 
managing  all  Space Telescope activities. Manager and deputy would  be 
William  C.  Keathley  and  James C. McCulloch.  (MSFC Release 77-38) 

NASA  planned  to  send a  roving laboratory over  the Martian  surface 
during the next Mars landings,  Nature  reported.  Dr.  Gerald A.  Soffen, 
chief  Viking  project  scientist,  said  that,  although  no   future Mars mis- 
sions  were  officially  scheduled,  the  outlook  was  favorable  given  the 
scientific success of, and public  enthusiasm  for,  the two Viking  landers. 
Speaking at a Paris conference to  disseminate Viking information, Sof- 
fen invited U.S. and foreign scientists to  participate in examining Viking 
data and in developing experiments for the next  generation of Mars mis- 
sions.  (Nature, Mar  10/77,  112) 

0  President Carter had  suggested the U.S.  and USSR  “forgo the oppor- 
tunity to  arm satellite bodies  and also forgo the opportunity t o  destroy 
observation  satellites,”  the  W Post  reported.  Recent  Soviet antisatellite 
experiments had  alarmed Pentagon officials, who revealed that the U.S. 
military space program budget for FY  1978 was $478 million greater than 
the FY  1977 appropriation.  (WP o s t ,  Mar  10/77,  A-11) 
March  11:  The  W Post  reported  that  NASA  Administrator  James  C. 
Fletcher would  resign effective May  1. Appointed by President Nixon  in 
1971, Dr.  Fletcher  had  headed  the agency during the end of  the Apollo 
project;  the  successful Skylab missions;  the  Apollo-Soyuz  test  project; 
and  numerous  unmanned  missions  including  the  launch  of  the  earth 
resources monitoring system,  Landsat,  and the Mars probe  Viking.  Dr. 
Fletcher  planned  to return  t o  private life after his resignation.  ( W Pos t ,  
Mar  11/77,  A3;  NASA  Release 77-48) 

0  NASA announced it had awarded a cost-plus-fee contract worth about 
$43.5  million t o  McDonnell Douglas Technical Services, Inc.,  Spacelab 
Integration  Division,  Huntsville,  Ala.,  for  Spacelab  integration.  The 

52 

ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MARCH 

contract,  lasting  from March  1977  thmugh  Dec.  1983,  would  include 
design, development, manufacturing,  and operational testing of NASA's 
Spacelab components. NASA planned to provide all operational services 
including  flight  operations,  crew  training,  and  maintenance,  after  the 
European Space Agency delivered the lab. Spacelab would remain in the 
Space Shuttle cargo bay  to  perform earth observations and experiments 
in materials  science,  physics,  life  science,  communications, navigation, 
and space systems.  (NASA Release 7747)  
*  MSFC reported that parachutes to  recover the Space Shuttle's reusable 
solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  (SRB)  were  undergoing  dynamic  testing  a t  
Martin Marietta Corp.,  Denver,  Colo.  Scheduled  for  completion  Mar. 
31,  the  tests  simulated  in-flight  parachute  deployment  from  the  SRB. 
(MSFC Release 77-44) 

March  14:  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Maj.  Gen.  Kenneth  R. 
Chapman, USAF (Ket.),  as assistant administrator for  its Hq Office of 
DOD  and  Interagency Affairs,  effective Apr.  1.  He would  replace  Lt. 
Gen. William.  W.  Snavely, USAF  (Ret.),  who  left NASA  in Sept.  1976 
to  accept a position  in Saudi Arabia.  Chapman, a nuclear  chemist, was 
formerly  director  of  the  Office  of  Nuclear  Material  Safety  and  Safe- 
guards  at  the Nuclear  Regulatory Commission  (NRC).  (NASA  Release 
77-50) 

0  NASA  announced  that  LeRC  had  supplied  news  media  in  the 
Cleveland area with  readings of  daily solar energy available for use dur- 
ing the winter. Using a pyranometer,  a device to  record total solar energy 
reaching a surface, LeRC staff measured the kilowatt hrs of  solar energy 
received  on  a  150mz surface facing south  at  a  37" angle.  Other NASA 
centers  had  made  similar  measurements,  all  related  to  solar  energy 
research  being  pursued  by  the  Energy  Research  and Development Ad- 
ministration  (ERDA).  (NASA Release 7749)  
*  JSC announced construction of  a new lunar curatorial facility, a $2.02 
million  4200m2  addition  to  the  old  facility,  Bldg.  31.  The  new  facility, 
being built by Spaw Glass, Inc.,  of  Houston, would provide clean secure 
storage space as well  as processing,  experiment,  and simulation labs  for 
NASA's  480kg  of  lunar  samples.  (JSC Release 77-20) 

0  NATO had not made a choice between the US.-built  Boeing AWACS 
(airborne warning  and  control  system)  or  the British  Hawker  Siddeley 
Nimrod  as  its  airborne-radar  plane,  the  W Star  reported.  Britain and  
France favored selection of the already operational Nimrod in retaliation 
fo r  U.S.  refusal  to grant New  York  landing rights  to  the Anglo-French 
Concorde,  and in order to  preserve 7000 jobs on the Nimrod production 

53  

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

line.  Nimrod's  performance on North Atlantic patrol might hamper sale 
of  the AWACS  to  NATO,  the  Star  noted.  ( W Star, Mar  14/77,  A-1 1) 

Researchers a t  Goddard Space Flight Center using data from Orbiting 
Solar Observatory 8 (Os0  8 )  determined that  iron-line x-rays  had come 
from  hot  gas  between  the  galaxies  in  the  Milky  Way's  local  cluster, 
A v W k  reported,  meaning  that  the  space between  galaxies  in  the  local 
cluster  was  not  a  perfect  vacuum,  but  the  amount  of  matter  between 
local  galaxies  was  probably  about  the  same  as  that  present  within  the 
galaxies.  (AvWk, Mar  14/77,  11) 

NASA  had  planned  to  fly approximately  150 research missions on its 
Gates  Learjet  during  1977,  Av Wk  reported.  Eight  different  research 
groups,  using  the  30cm  telescope  on  board,  would  conduct  infrared 
observations  t o   obtain  upper-atmosphere  and  magnetodynamic  data. 
(AvWk, Mar  14/77,  11) 

0  A  NASA  earth  resources  monitoring  satellite,  Landsat  1,  had  ex- 
perienced a malfunction in band  1 of  its multispectral scanner on Mar. 3 ,  
Av Wk reported. Although the malfunction affected only band  1 (a green 
spectral  band  identifying sunlight  reflected  from  green  plants),  NASA 
had shut  down the entire scanner pending a safety investigation by  con- 
trollers.  Landsat  1  had  performed  satisfactorily  since  its  1973  launch. 
(AvWk, Mar  14/77,  16) 
0  The  USSR  had  increased  its  military  use  of  space, A v W k  reported. 
Killer-satellite  systems  tested  during  1976  appeared  operational.  The 
Soviets  in  1976  had  launched  33  reconnaissance  missions  (the  core  of 
their military space program) and apparently had added to  their military 
comsat system as  well.  (Av Wk, Mar  14/77,  63) 

March 15: DQD would request $2.77 billion for space-related activities in 
FY   1978,  $478.5 million more than  its FY 1977 appropriation, Defense 
Daily  reported. The increase, resulting from procurement of  the Navstar 
global  positioning  satellite  system  and  increased  DOD  activity  on  the 
Space Shuttle,  would  include costs of  ground  security a t  JSC  and KSC 
for defense-related Shuttle payloads. DQD had planned to  use the Shut- 
tle  for  critical manned military observations,  and  had  agreed  on  a  for- 
mula  to   reimburse NASA  for  launching military  payloads.  (DD ,  Mar 
15/77,  57) 

March  16:  MSFC  announced  award  of  a  $279 714  contract  to   Sperry 
Support Services, a division of  Sperry Rand Corp.,  Huntsville, Ala.,  for 
design,  construction,  and  delivery of  equipment  for  the  mated  vertical 

54 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MARCH 

ground-vibration  test  (MVGVT)  of  the  Space  Shuttle,  scheduled  for 
1978.  The  test  would  confirm  the  theoretical  model  used  in  dynamic 
analyses  of  the  Space  Shuttle,  external  tank,  and  solid-fuel  rocket 
boosters.  (MSFC Release 77-39) 

0  Dr.  Albert Rango of  GSFC and Dr. K.I.  Itten of  the Univ.  of  Zurich 
announced that orbiting earth satellites could monitor winter snowpacks 
and their runoff  as accurately as ground-based or airborne observations, 
NASA  reported.  Their  findings  appeared  in  the  journal  Nordic 
Hydrology.  Comparing costs and relative accuracy of  ground,  airborne, 
and  satellite measurements,  the  two  scientists  decided  that  the  use  of 
NASA’s  Landsat  earth  resources  monitoring  satellite  and  the  Natl. 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental satellite Noaa 
2 would  provide timely and accurate information  a t  lower cost than the 
alternatives.  (NASA Release 77-52) 

March  17:  A  short-circuit  in  the  power  supply  of  Viking  Z’s  gas- 
chromatograph  mass  spectrometer  (GSMS)  had  forced  controllers  a t  
J PL  to  turn  off  the  instrument Mar.  12, NASA  reported.  JPL  received 
confirmation  of  the command  from  the Viking  system Mar.  14. NASA 
had  shut down the GCMS, which had analyzed the composition of Mar- 
tian  atmosphere and soil early in  the mission,  to  avoid damage to  other 
instruments such as the onboard computer and communications system. 
(NASA Release 77-51) 

March 18: NASA  reported  that  an F-8  aircraft  using  the  digital fly-by- 
wire  control  system  would  simulate  the  Space  Shuttle’s  flight-control 
system  during  a  series  of  3  flights  at  NASA’s  Dryden  Flight  Research 
Center.  The  flights,  simulations  of  orbiter  maneuvers after  separation 
from  the  Boeing  747  Shuttle-carrier  aircraft,  would  determine  the 
thresholds of sensor failure and would test the programming of the Shut- 
tle’s  flight-computer system. (NASA Release 77-53; DFRC X-News, Mar 
25/77,  2) 

0  NASA announced a successful 60-sec firing of  the Space Shuttle main 
engine  on  Mar.  12  a t   rated  thrust  conditions  of  2 082 560   newtons. 
Employees of the Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell Intl. Corp., contractor 
for  the  SSME,  conducted  the  test  a t   NASA’s  Natl.  Space Technology 
Laboratories.  (NASA Release 77-54) 

NASA  announced  it  had  turned  over  the  Saturn-rocket  test  stand  a t  
NSTL  to  Rockwell Intl.  Space Div.  for testing the Shuttle’s main propul- 
sion  system.  Modification  of  the  90m-high  stand  to   accept  Shuttle 
elements ended in late 1976. Static firing tests would begin in Dec.  1977. 
(NASA Release 77-55) 

5 5  

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

March 21: Candidates for the post of  NASA administrator, according to  
the WPo s t ,  included Christopher C. Kraft, director of  JSC; Al Kelly and 
Rocco Petrone,  former NASA  officials; and Frank Moss,  former chair- 
man  of  the Senate Space Committee and an early Carter  supporter. ( W 
Post, Mar  21/77,  A3) 

ESA  and  Canada’s  Centre  for  Remote  Sensing  (CCRS)  announced 
they  had  signed  an  agreement  t o  cooperate  in  studying remote-sensing 
applications,  developing  microwave  remote  sensing,  and  improving 
ground  stations for  processing  satellite data.  (ESA release,  Mar  21/77) 

March 22: NASA  reported that MSFC had  awarded a  l y r  $150 000 con- 
tract  to the Illinois Institute of  Technology Research  Institute (IITRI) in 
Chicago  to   set  up  a  team  to   find  uses  for  aerospace  technologies  in 
manufacturing.  The  team  would  work  with  U.S.  industries,  industrial 
associations,  and professional groups  in  areas related  to machine tools, 
electronics  assembly,  and  light  fabrication  and  assembly.  The  team 
would  be  another  of  the  groups  created  by  NASA’s  technology- 
utilization  office  to   expand  the  use  of  aerospace  technology  on  earth. 
(NASA Release 77-57) 

0  TROPEX, an international tropical weather  experiment sponsored by 
the Soviet Union,  would  use USSR  satellites with  research  vessels  from 
some of  the 70 participating countries to gather data on atmospheric con- 
ditions,  the FBIS reported.  (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 22/77) 

March 23: NASA announced it had  invited scientists to submit proposals 
for use  and development of  the unfunded Space Telescope  [see Feb.  11. 
Capable  of  holding  five  different  instruments a t   the  focal  plane  of  its 
2.4m  mirror,  the Space Telescope would  expand  the volume  of  observ- 
able space 350  times beyond  that  of  the largest ground-based telescope, 
offering new  information  for astronomers and other scientists interested 
in  fundamental  questions  of  cosmology  and  astronomy.  GSFC  would 
manage operations of  the telescope’s missions and develop its instrumen- 
tation;  MSFC  would  be  responsible  for  overall  management  of  the 
telescope system.  (NASA Release 77-58) 

March 24:  The White  House  had  ordered  a  review  of  NASA’s  28  ad- 
visory committees with the idea of  abolishing all those lacking a compell- 
ing  need  for their  services,  a  balanced membership,  or  open conduct of 
business  within  the  framework  of  the  law  and  their  mandate,  NASA 
reported.  The review  should  serve to  reduce  the number  of  committees 
except  as  required  by  statute  and  to  ensure  quality  and  utility  in  their 
recommendations.  (NASA Release 77-59) 

56 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

MARCH 

0  ARC  announced selection of  10 women  volunteers  aged 35  to  45 with 
nontechnical backgrounds  as  test  subjects in  an experiment  t o  help  set 
medical standards for  future Space Shuttle passengers. The experiment, 
w e  of  a series using varying ages and sexes, would require 9 days of  total 
bedrest to  simulate weightlessness, and occasional spins in a centrifuge to  
simulate  Shuttle  reentry.  Results  would  show  whether  or  not  age  and 
gender affected the ability to  cope with spaceflight.  (ARC Release 77-15; 
NASA  Release 77-61) 

e The eighth annual session a t  JSC of  the Lunar Science Conference had 
discussed  the  possibility  of  mining  asteroids  for  the  raw  materials  of 
space  industrialization,  the  Chicago  Tribune  reported.  Dr.  David 
Criswell,  associate scientist a t  the Lunar Science Institute, said that two 
developments would make asteroid mining feasible: an engine capable of 
towing  an   asteroid,  and  a  method  of  locating  asteroids  rich  in  needed 
resources.  Materials  from asteroids  would  be  loo0  times  cheaper  than 
materials launched from earth  into  orbit.  ( C  Trib, Mar  24/77,  4-11) 

e The  Soviet  Union  had  successfully tested  a  submarine-based  missile 
with  a  range  twice  that  of  its  U.S.  counterpart,  the  Chicago  Tribune 
reported.  Two SSN-8 missiles  fired from a Soviet Delta-class submarine 
in  the  Barents  Sea had  traveled  approximately 9120km  to targets  in  the 
Pacific  Ocean.  Ships  carrying  the  missiles  reportedly  could  endanger 
U.S.  targets without  leaving their home-port areas. (C  Trib, Mar 24/77, 
1-2) 

March 25: KSC  announced  award  of  a $25  970 contract to the research 
institute at the Georgia Institute of  Technology in Atlanta to develop an 
automatic manatee-tracking system for the U.S.  Fish and Wildlife Serv- 
ice. Attempts to  track the manatee, an endangered aquatic mammal, had 
failed because of  poor monitoring  systems. Tracking the movements  of 
about  100  manatees  in  the  Banana  and  Indian  Rivers  and  Mosquito 
Lagoon  near  KSC  would  provide  scientists  with  data  on  their  living 
habits.  (KSC  Release 77-77) 

March  26:  The  U.S.  should  orbit  solar-power  stations  and  mine  the 
moon for  raw  materials,  science fiction writer  Isaac Asimov  told Presi- 
dent Carter in an open letter printed  in the  Chicago Tribune. Citing the 
benefits  of  orbital  stations  capable  of  transmitting  solar  energy  in 
microwaves to  earth stations, Asimov stressed the need for international 
cooperation in using space and in preventing the extinction of  humanity. 
(C  Trib, Mar  26/77,  1-7) 
March  28:  Direct-readout  equipment  for  GOES, the  geostationary 

57  

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

operational environmental satellite, installed in the USAF global weather 
center  at  Offutt  AFB,  Neb.,  to   support  Air  Force  meteorology  re- 
quirements, would improve the center’s forecasting and accuracy, Av  Wk 
reported.  (Av Wk, Mar  28/77,  11) 

Project  Halo  (high-altitude  large  optics),  a  space-based  system  pro- 
posed by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency to  detect and track 
foreign missiles  and aircraft,  would  require 6 Space Shuttle payloads  to  
orbit  its  structures  and  equipment,  A v Wk reported.  ARPA’s  Halo 
research  had  focused on systems analysis,  infrared  focal planes,  optics, 
cryogenic cooling,  power  sources, data utilization,  and phenomenology. 
(Av Wk, Mar  28/77,  11) 

0  The USAF  Rocket  Propulsion Laboratory  had  successfully test-fired 
small solid-fuel rocket motors having nozzles molded  into the end of  the 
propellant  grain instead of  externally mounted, Av Wk reported.  Use of 
integral  nozzles  would  reduce  costs  of  manufacture  and  would  allow 
more propellant  per  rocket.  (AvWk,  Mar  28/77,  11) 

0  Japan’s  Natl.  Space  Development  Agency  planned  to  launch  2 
satellites  in  1978  to   replace  missions  that  failed  during  1976,  AvWk  
reported.  Scheduled for  Feb.  1978 was  an ionospheric-research mission 
to replace an identical craft  that malfunctioned in  orbit in March  1976. 
An  x-ray research  satellite similar to  a mission  that failed during launch 
Feb.  4,  1976, might  lift off  in  Aug.  or  Sept.  1978.  (AvWk,  Mar  28/77, 
26) 

March 29: NASA  announced it had ended an aerial survey of  the Pacific 
Ocean along the west coast of  the U.S.  that was an operational prelude to  
the use of  SeaSat-A,  the oceanographic satellite scheduled for launch in 
May  1978.  The survey  had  used  high-flying NASA  aircraft  to test  four 
sensors  from SeaSat-A: a synthetic aperture imaging radar,  a wind-field 
scatterometer,  a scanning multifrequency microwave  radiometer,  and a 
radar altimeter. The mission was a rehearsal in research cooperation that 
scientists would  need  when  SeaSat became  operational.  (NASA Release 
77-62) 

0  The  future of  Japan’s  space program was  not  a  sure thing,  the  Wall 
Street Journal said. Those who had claimed that a program of  launching 
satellites  for  resource-rich,  technology-poor  nations  would  increase 
Japan’s  technological  growth  and ensure a  supply of  raw materials had 
met with complaints that the program wasted tax money and that J a p e  
should have relied  on  the U.S.  and NASA  to orbit the payloads.  Japan’s 

58 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 191 

MARCH 

space agency would have to  convince official and public skeptics of  the 
program’s  value,  the paper  said.  (WSJ ,  Mar 29/77,  44) 

*  A  yr-long  (Dec.  1978-Nov.  1979) international  program of  global at- 
mospheric  research  using  Soviet  and  U.S.  satellites would  attempt  to  
construct  a  model  of  the  atmosphere,  Tass  reported.  (FBIS,  Moscow 
Tass in English, Mar 29/77) 

*  Soviet  satellites  might  help  predict  the  cotton  harvest  in  South 
Transcaucasia,  Tass  reported,  through  enhanced  photographs  of  the 
regional  cotton  crop.  (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Mar 29/77) 

March 30: NASA announced that Project FIRES (firefighters integrated 
response  equipment  system),  a  joint  program  of  NASA’s  Technology 
Utilization Office and the Natl. Fiie Prevention and Control Administra- 
tion, had begun with NASA’s  award of  a $478 375 contract to  Grumman 
Aerospace  Gorp.,  Bethpage,  N.Y.,  for  new  standards  in  firefighting 
clothing and  for  development and  fabrication  of  a  complete ensemble. 
The project  would  use  space technologies to  achieve greater safety and 
maneuverability of  firefighting equipment. A Users Requirements Com- 
mittee  of  firefighters  and  safety  officials  would  evaluate  Grumman’s 
products  and  fire-test  them  in  10 cities  under  actual  firefighting condi- 
tions before commercial production  began.  (NASA Release 77-64) 

MSFC  announced  that  NASA  had  invited  researchers  to   propose 
materials-processing  experiments  to   be  performed  on  the  Space 
Transportation  System (STS),  as  the  Shuttle missions would  be  called. 
The experiments, basic or  applied research projects  in materials science, 
would  exploit the weightless and ultra-high vacuum conditions of  space 
to   demonstrate  their  applications  in  materials  science  and  technology. 
(MSFC Release 77-52) 

The Pentagon  had been working on an interceptor spacecraft capable 
of  knocking Soviet satellites out of  orbit,  DOD  officials told  Congress. 
The  Washington Post  reported  that the program,  begun under President 
Ford,  had  aimed  a t  producing  weapons  to  protect  U.S.  space systems 
from attacks by  foreign satellites. ( W  Post, Mar  30/77,  A-8) 

March  31:  Dr.  James  L.  Elliott  of  Cornel1 Univ.  announced  he  had 
found 5 rings around the planet Uranus. Observations above the Indian 
Ocean with  a  91cm  telescope  on NASA’s  Kuiper  airborne  observatory 
had revealed the rings during Uranus’s occultation of  a bright star (SA0  
158687). Dr.  Elliott had  concluded earlier [see Mar.  31  that Uranus was 

59 

MARCH 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

surrounded by  100 moons;  during the  occultation,  the same objects ap- 
peared as rings, not moons. Uranus and Saturn were the only two planets 
in  the  solar  system  found  so  far  to   have  ring  systems.  Dr.  Elliott’s 
original  mission  was  to   check  Uranus  for  atmosphere  and  diameter; 
discovery  of  the  rings was  unexpected.  (NYT ,  Mar  31/77,  63) 

0  Developing  future  telecommunications  systems  would  pose  few 
technical problems, Nature reported:  the real bottlenecks would  be find- 
ing  the  financial  resources  to  build,  and  estimating the’social implica- 
tions of, such systems. A British Royal Society conference on “Telecom- 
munications in the  1980s and After” had discussed the possible social ef- 
fects  of  highly  developed  telecommunications  systems,  especially  the 
ability of  a system to  foster integration in different populations or to in- 
crease  isolation  of  individuals  within  their  local  groups.  (Nature, Mar 
3 1 /77 ,409 )  

During March:  A  House  subcommittee on  aviation  and  transportation 
R&D had  called on NASA  to  expand its program on aircraft energy effi- 
ciency (fuel conservation), said Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine. 
The subcommittee report  with  16  specific recommendations,  signed  by 
chairman  Rep.  Dale Milford  (D-Tex),  said  the  U.S.  should  establish a 
comprehensive national policy on civil aviation R&D.  (A&,  Mar 77, 7) 

April 

Ap r i l  I :  NASA  reported it had begun working on its plan  to make Ames 
Research  Center  the  lead  center  for  helicopter  research.  Approved  last 
summer, the plan resulted from NASA’s assessment of  its research to  see 
where realignment would improve effectiveness and reduce costs. As lead 
center, ARC would do research on small- and large-scale helicopter hard- 
ware using its aeronautical facilities such as the 40 x 80ft wind tunnel and 
flight-simulation equipment,  and  flight-test  items  like the  tilt-rotor  and 
rotor-systems research  aircraft. 
A  helicopter  program  office  at  NASA  Hq  would  direct  the  overall 
helicopter  program  and  coordinate  research  between  ARC  and  the 
Langley  and  Lewis  Research  Centers.  LaRC,  working  mainly  on 
helicopter  structures,  would  continue  its  studies  of  acoustics,  airfoils, 
aeroelasticity, and avionics.  LeRC would continue to  emphasize propul- 
sion,  its  first task being a proposed new  program  in helicopter transmis- 
sion technology  leading later to  work  on helicopter  engines. 
NASA estimated that over the next 3yr the change would result in add- 
ing  72  positions to   the ARC  staff; LaRC helicopter  work  would  phase 
down during that period but would continue to  employ 72.  The expected 
growth in  long-haul aircraft  technology at LaRC would  add up to little 
long-term  impact  on  that  center’s  manpower  or  the  local  economy. 
(NASA Release 77-8;  ARC  Release 77-19) 

0  Dryden Flight  Research  Center  announced it  had  commenced  studies 
on turbulence caused by  insects sticking to  aircraft wings.  It would use a 
small jet  transport  flown at low  altitudes to  collect insects on the wings, 
in  turbulence  tests  at  higher  altitudes  and  greater  speeds.  The  Johnson 
and Kennedy Space Centers would assist the studies aimed at developing 
high-speed  fuel-efficient aircraft,  by  taking advantage of  their  differing 
insect  populations.  (DFRC  Release  13-77; KSC  Release 93-77) 

0  KSC  reported that the number  of  visitors in the first 3mo of  1977 was 
283  734;  the number  in March,  114 845, highest so far this yr was 2.8% 
below  the March  1976 level.  The 3mo  total was  9.3470  less than  the  first 
3mo of  1976. The visitor center had  displays, exhibits, space science lec- 
tures,  and  space  movies,  plus  a  new  hall  of  history  opened  in  1976. 
Visitors  could  see  the  vehicle  assembly  building  for  Space  Shuttle 
preparations and the Apollo Saturn on display nearby,  drive around Pad 

61 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

A  where  Shuttle  operations  were  in  progress,  and  visit  the  Cape 
Canaveral Air  Force station.  (KSC Release 87-77) 

0  LaRC announced that Dr.  Charles Thiel,  director of  the Natl. Science 
Foundation's  advanced environmental research division, would  speak a t  
the  LaRC  colloquium Apr.  11  on   earthquakes.  Dr.  Thiel  had  been  in 
charge of  U.S. research  on earthquake phenomena  for the past  5yr  and 
had  traveled  the  world  to   view  effects  of  quakes,  analyze  prediction 
techniques,  and evaluate construction  practices  in quake-prone regions. 
His illustrated talk would  cover causes and probabilities of  quakes, with 
modern  methods  of  forecasting  and  monitoring  them.  (LaRC  Release 
77-9) 

NASA  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  John  R.  Carruthers  as  first 
director  of  a  new  division  in  the Hq Office  of  Applications that would 
manage materials processing in  space.  Dr.  Carruthers,  formerly of  Bell 
Labs, had headed crystal-growth and glass research in developing optical 
fibers  for  lightwave communications.  (NASA Release 77-67) 

0  Reform  of  the  aviation  industry  was  in  order,  Transportation Dept. 
Secy.  Brock Adams  told the aviation subcommittee of  the Senate Com- 
mittee on  Commerce, Science, and Transportation.  Regulatory  changes 
should  include  freer  entry  into  the  system,  competition  in  routes  and 
rates, and provisions  for exiting the system.  Any changes should protect 
service to  smaller communities, he said, and should address the problems 
of  how market shifts would  affect airline users and of  financial damage 
to  airport owners and airline investors. Secy. Adams noted that the presi- 
dent  should  retain  his  authority  over  international  aviation,  since  the 
Constitution required  him  to  conduct  foreign policy  there  as well  as in 
other  fields.  (DOT Release 44-77) 

April 4: The rapid approach of  the Martian winter,  whose  temperatures 
would fall below  - 123"C, had halted science experiments using the  Vik- 
ing 2 lander, NASA  announced.  Problems with the lander's  sample arm 
had  forced controllers a t  the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to cancel a final 
biology experiment. The meteorology station and the seismic instrument 
would use power to gather data during the winter; all other power would 
go  toward maintaining  survivable heat  levels  inside  the  lander.  (NASA 
Release 77-69) 

0  Aviation  Week  reported  that  President  Carter  had  nominated 
Langhorne  M.  Bond,  state  secretary  of  transportation  for  Illinois,  t o  
head  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration,  and  Quentin  Taylor,  FAA 

62 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APRIL 

director  in  New  England,  as deputy  administrator.  (AvWk ,  Apr  4/77, 
23) 

The Apollo program was a tough act to follow, Space Shuttle pilot Lt. 
Col. Charles Fullerton said in a  Today wire service report. Acknowledg- 
ing  the  declining  public  interest  in  space,  Fullerton  noted  that,  after 
Apollo,  “Everything else has to  be anticlimactic.” (Today ,  Apr 4/77,  1A) 

April  5:  NASA,  which  had  issued  a  press  kit  on  plans  for  an April  15  
launch of  the high-energy  astronomy observatory HEAO-A, said it had 
postponed the launch because of  a malfunction in one of  the gyroscopes 
controlling altitude,  essential  to   the mission.  The agency  had  not  set  a 
new  date  f o r  the launch;  it  had  returned  the defective gyroscope  to  the 
manufacturer, Bendix Corp.,  in Teterboro, N.J.  (NASA Releases 77-45, 
77-71; Marshall  Star, Apr  6/77,  1) 

NASA announced it would join EPA and the Univ.  of Md.  in sponsor- 
ing  a conference on  the  use  of  remote  sensing to  solve Chesapeake Bay 
ecological problems.  The 80  participants  would  discuss use  of  satellites 
(particularly NASA’s  earth resources monitoring satellite Landsat) to  ob- 
tain  information  on  land  use,  resources  exploitation,  and  pollution. 
(NASA Release  77-70) 

0  Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of  a $918 523 contract 
to  T.H.  Taylor Construction Co.,  Montgomery,  Ala.,  for  construction 
of  permanent  and  semipermanent  steel  working  platforms  on  the 
modified dynamic test stand. The stand would hold an entire Space Shut- 
tle  assembly  during mated  vertical  ground-vibration tests  scheduled  for 
1978.  (MSFC Release 77-54) 

0  NASA  announced  that Miles Ross,  KSC  deputy director  since  1971, 
had  resigned  to  become  European regional manager  in Brussels  for  his 
previous  employer,  TRW  Systems  Intl.  (NASA  Release  77-76;  KSC 
Release 88-77) 

April  6: NASA  announced  it would  join  the EPA in  field-testing a  new 
detector  of  fecal  coliform  bacteria  at  the  New  York  Bight  off  Craven 
Point,  N. J.  The  electrochemical  monitor,  developed  by  Dr.  Judd 
Wilkins  of  LaRC,  was  a  buoy  with  10  coliform-sampling  units  and  a 
transmitter  to   relay  data  to   a  monitoring  center  in  a NASA  truck  on 
shore  about  3mi  away.  Surveillance  of  fecal  coliform  concentrations 
would  measure the  environmental  impact  of  public  sanitation.  (NASA 
Release 77-73; LaRC Release 77-1 1) 

63 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

0  NASA  reported  that  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  engineers  had 
tracked  a  sailboat  through  the  Bermuda  Triangle  to  test  the  use  of 
satellites for small craft search-and-rescue missions. Signals from a small 
transmitter  on  the  vessel,  relayed  by  meteorological  satellite Nimbus 6 
and applications technology satellite A t s  I, allowed GSFC controllers to  
monitor  the  ship’s  position.  The  experiment  also  successfully  tested  a 
push-button  distress-alarm  system  designed  by  retired  NASA  engineer 
James L.  Baker.  (NASA Release  77-72) 

0  MSFC announced it had  awarded a $276 5 9 7  contract to Bryson Con- 
struction Co.,  Decatur, Ala.,  for  modification of  the Redstone Arsenal 
airfield  t o  accept  the  Space Shuttle and its  Boeing  747  carrier  aircraft. 
The contractor would install a concrete pad 75m long and 55m wide for a 
derrick to  unload  the  orbiter  from the 747.  (MSFC Release 77-56) 

0  LaRC  reported  that  its  visitor  center  was  showing  a  NASA  film, 
“Universe,” one of  5  documentaries recently nominated for a motion pic- 
ture Academy Award.  The 28min Graphic Films Corp. movie,  showing 
an imaginary trip through space, offered a new  look a t  the solar system, 
the release  said.  (LaRC Release 77-10) 

0  The  Carter  administration would  not  request  government  funds  to  
develop  a  supersonic airliner,  OMB  Director  Bert  Lance  assured  Sen. 
William Proxmire (D-Wis).  The Chicago Tribune story noted that Prox- 
mire,  who had worked to  defeat  the U.S.  supersonic transport  program 
in  1972,  was  concerned  because  the  House Committee on  Science had 
asked NASA to  do  a feasibility study on advanced supersonic aircraft. (C 
Trib, Apr  6/77,  1-5) 

April 7: MSFC announced i t  had begun test assembly of  large-scale space 
structures  in  its  neutral  buoyancy  facility.  The NBF,  a  12m-deep water 
tank  simulating the weightless environment of  space, was  in use  for  the 
first  time  since the Skylab program.  (MSFC Release 77-57) 

The  liquid-oxygen  tank  of  the  Space  Shuttle’s  external  tank  had 
undergone  successful  hydrostatic  tests  at  NASA’s  Michoud  Assembly 
Facility near New Orleans, MSFC reported. Martin Marietta Aerospace, 
prime  ET  contractor,  had  scheduled  additional tests  to  simulate  flight 
pressures.  (MSFC Release 77-58) 

NASA  officials, assuming a constant purchasing power  for the agency 
over the next  10 to  15yr, had made plans for some 560 Shuttle flights be- 
tween  1980 and 1991, averaging 60 flights per yr between  1985 and 1991, 
Nature  reported.  Assuming  a  maximum  payload  of  about  29  500kg, 

64 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

APRIL 

Shuttle  users  (including  NASA,  DOD,  other  government  agencies, 
private industry,  and foreign organizations) would pay  fees  from $3000 
for  a simple automatic  payload  to  $20 million  for  the  entire cargo bay. 
NASA  had  claimed a 40%  savings in  launch costs  for  the Shuttle com- 
pared  to  expendable rockets;  a higher discount for U.S.  users would in- 
crease its cost-effectiveness. Nature said early Shuttle critics,  like space 
scientists  who  viewed  it  as   a  competitor  for  limited  NASA  resources, 
were now  supporting  the Shuttle as a research  tool.  (Nature, Apr 7/77, 
489) 
*  Spacelab, ESA’s manned reusable space laboratory scheduled to  f ly  on 
the  Space  Shuttle,  would  perform  experiments  in  life,  physical,  and 
materials  science,  Nature  reported.  Although  Spacelab’s multinational 
management and unique financing scheme (ESA members would pay for 
the  laboratory on  a  voluntary  basis)  could  limit  its  scientific potential, 
participants  would  receive  a  proportionate  share  of  construction  con- 
tracts  and  experiment  facilities.  Management  problems  included  the 
question  of  apportioning  payment  of  NASA’s  $10  million  launch  fee. 
(Nature, April 7/77,  491) 
*  ComSatCorp, in a notice of its upcoming election of directors, said the 
nominees for  a first term were Howard  J. Morgens, director and chair- 
man  emeritus of  Procter  & Gamble;  and  Charles J.  Pilliod,  Jr.,  board 
chairman  and  chief  executive officer  of  Goodyear Tire & Rubber  Co. 
The  other  10 nominees were  current  board  members.  (ComSat Release 
77- 14) 

April  8:  President  Carter  announced  that  the  U.S.  would  “defer  in- 
definitely”  commercial  reprocessing  and  recycling  of  plutonium  from 
nuclear power  plants,  and would stop developing a commercial breeder- 
reactor  (a nuclear power  facility producing more fuel than it consumed), 
the  Chicago Tribune reported.  Critics had  contended the reactor  would 
increase  proliferation  of  nuclear  weapons.  The  administration  would 
significantly  increase  funding  for  solar  energy  research  and  synthetic 
production  of  oil and gas  from coal,  the paper said.  (C Trib, Apr 8/77, 
1-2) 
*  INTELSAT,  the  Intl.  Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization, 
reported  it  had  appointed  three  deputy  directors general to  serve under 
Director  General Santiago Astrain:  Reginald Westlake of  the  U.K.  for 
finance;  Andrea  Caruso  of  Italy  for  administration;  and  H.  William 
Wood,  formerly  with  the  U.S.  Navy  and  Defense  Communications 
Agency and systems management director for ComSatCorp, to  supervise 
operations  and  development.  Transfer  of  functions  from ComSat,  cur- 

65 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

rent  contractor  for  management services,  to   the  INTELSAT executive 
would  occur  over  the next 2yr.  (INTELSAT Release 77-5-1) 

April  9:  Kitt  Peak  astronomers  had  suggested designs for  a  telescope 5 
times larger than the 4.5m  telescope a t  Mt.  Palomar,  Calif.,  to  comple- 
ment  the  Very  Large  Array  radiotelescopes  in  New  Mexico  and  the 
planned Space Telescope,  the N Y  Times reported.  An  instrument using 
multiple-mirror  technology (several mirrors  connected by  laser,  aligned 
by computer to  within an  eighth of  the wavelength of the observed light) 
would have the  light-gathering potential  of  a huge single mirror without 
the  high  cost  of  manufacture  or  maintenance.  The  resolution  possible 
with  such  telescopes would  permit  observation  of  weather  patterns  on 
other  planets.  (NYT ,  Apr 9/77,  22) 
*  Operators  of  the  Anglo-French  supersonic  airliner  Concorde  had 
claimed that new  flight procedures  would lower Concorde noise levels to 
those of  subsonic aircraft, and should get it approved to  land a t  Kennedy 
Intl.  airport. 
A  40-page  report  to   the  NY  Port  Authority,  obtained  by  the  N Y  
Times, said that Concorde takeoff  noise (though it would affect a larger 
area  than  noise  from  other  aircraft)  was  actually comparable  to  noise 
from  the  long-range Boeing  707.  The  Concorde  had  also  met  airport 
noise standards.  Residents of  the Five Towns area of  Long  Island, who 
had  opposed  Concorde  overflights,  would  be  subject  to   fewer  than 
originally  planned,  the  report  added.  Port  Authority  commissioners, 
scheduled  to  meet  during  the  upcoming week,  had  refused  to  make  a 
decision without spending more time on the report.  (NYT ,  Apr 9/77,22) 
April ZZ: A v  Wk  reported that French space technicians would be allowed 
on site a t  the USSR’s Kapustin Yar launch facility for the first time when 
the Soviets launched Signe 3 in  June.  Swedish technicians had been pre- 
sent  there last  July  27  when Intercosmos 16  carried a Swedish solar ex- 
periment  into  space. Third French  satellite scheduled for  launch by  the 
USSR, Signe 3 was  designed by France’s Natl.  Center for Space Studies 
(CNES) for astronomical and atmospheric research;  it had arrived a t  the 
USSR  Cosmic  Research  Institute  recently  for  launch  preparation. 
( A v  Wk,  A p r  ZZ/77,  9) 

April  12: GSFC controllers  and Navy  meteorologists at  the U.S.  Navy 
Fleet  Weather  Facility  in  Suitland,  Md.,  had  used  since  1971  a 
microwave radiometer on weather satellite Nimbus 5 to  track an  Antarc- 
tic  iceberg the  size of  Rhode  Island,  NASA  reported.  Satellite tracking 
had  allowed Navy  forecasters to minimize ice damage to  ships  in polar 
ice fields.  (NASA Release 77-68) 

66 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APRIL 

April 13: NASA announced that principal  investigators for Spacelab ex- 
periments  would  attend  briefings  at  MSFC  Apr.  13 to   15 on  Spacelab 
mission  management  as  an  Investigative Working  Group  (IWG).  Dr. 
C.R.  Chappell, mission  scientist at the MSFC space sciences laboratory, 
and Dr. Bernt Feuerbacher, ESA project scientist, as IWG chairman and 
vice chairman, would  channel recommendations on selection of  payload 
specialists directly t o  management. (NASA Release 77-77; MSFC Release 
77-61) 

. 

0  The  Dept.  of  Commerce  reported  that  a  Boeing  747  in  regular 
passenger service for  Pan American World Airways had been doing dou- 
ble  duty  as a  flying  laboratory  for 2  government  agencies,  NASA  and 
N O M ,  carrying  an electronic package  collecting data from the plane’s 
instruments to  show that  ordinary planes could get weather information 
in flight and relay it to  the ground. This yr,  five more packages would be 
put  on planes  of  international carriers. 
The prototype package, weighing about  lSkg and the size of  an electric 
typewriter, used about 200w  power  and transmitted a t  401.7MHz.  LeRC 
had  built  the  package  under  technical  management  from GSFC  to  tap  
into  the  inertial-navigation systems of  widebodied  jets  like the  747  and 
DC-10  series,  recording  data  on  air  temperature,  wind  direction  and 
speed, and aircraft location and altitude. The package converted the data 
to  a  format  transmitted  hourly to  the ground  through NOAA’s  Goes 1 .  
The idea was  to  enable planes  flying  over  areas where  such informa- 
tion was  sparse or unobtainable to  collect and transmit the data as a help 
to  aircraft  operations  as  well  as  to  weather  prediction  and  analysis. 
NOAA  had  begun  negotiations with  foreign weather  services and inter- 
national  airlines  to   put  the  packages  on  their  aircraft,  especially  those 
flying  over  equatorial regions.  (NOAA Release 77-91) 

0  The Natl. Air  and Space Museum  in Washington, D.C.,  counted its 7 
millionth  visitor, Mrs.  Elizabeth Weber  of  Queens, N.Y.  However,  she 
and many  other visitors  exemplified  the  fading public  interest  in  space: 
none  of  them  recognized  the  date  as  the  16th  anniversary  of  Yuri 
Gagarin’s historic  feat, man’s  first  spaceflight. 
A NY  Times article contrasted the  festive feeling  at the museum  (the 
capital’s largest tourist draw) and the almost melancholy mood at NASA 
Hq across the street. NASA employees had cause for despair, said the ar- 
ticle, with a space program rarely in  the public eye and funding that had 
delayed  long planned  projects.  Even President Carter,  during a cursory 
30-minute inspection  of  the museum, omitted mention  of  the space pro- 
gram  or  the  space agency.  (NYT ,  Apr  13/77,  D-10) 

April 14: NASA  reported  that it and the’European Space Agency (ESA) 

67 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

had  invited  scientists  to  propose experiments  for  a joint  out-of-ecliptic 
(OOE) mission  in  1983  that would  study  the  interstellar/interplanetary 
medium as a function of  solar latitude. Although the mission still lacked 
Congress’s approval, the agency wanted proposals for investigations that 
would  allow  definition  of  the  undertaking  and  give  it  a  prompt  start 
when  approved. 
As  planned,  the  Shuttle would  launch  2  spacecraft  (one  supplied  by 
NASA, one by ESA) on similar paths from earth to  Jupiter, deflected by 
that planet’s gravity into trajectories at right angles to the plane of  earth’s 
orbit.  One  craft  would  enter  over  the  sun’s  northern  hemisphere,  the 
other over the southern;  both would  reach  solar latitudes near  the sun’s 
pole.  So f a r  studies of  the sun had covered only a narrow region on the 
ecliptic plane;  the OOE,  o r  solar polar,  mission  would  look  at  the  sun 
over  a  full  range  of  heliographic  latitudes  and  enable  more  accurate 
assessment of  the total solar environment. The mission would  last about 
5yr .   (NASA Release 77-79) 

0  NASA  announced  award  of  $350 OOO  design  study  contracts both  to  
McDonnell  Douglas Corp.,  St.  Louis, Mo.,  and to  a  team  representing 
Hughes  Aircraft  Co.,  El  Segundo, Calif.,  and General  Electric  Co.  in 
Philadelphia. The companies would  develop  for NASA’s  Jupiter-orbiter 
mission  a  probe  able to  measure the Jovian  atmosphere during descent. 
The mission wouId reach Jupiter in 1984 if  the project were approved for 
FY   1978.  ARC  would  manage  development  of  the  probe  under  JPL’s 
general direction.  (NASA Release 77-78;  ARC Release 77-20) 

0  KSC  announced it had awarded a $39  812 contract to  Ky.  State Univ. 
for continuing research on effects of  prolonged exposure of  experimental 
animals t o  variations in the atmospheric level of oxygen. Previous studies 
in  the  field had  been  on short-term  exposure to  100%  oxygen,  but  little 
was  known  about  prolonged  exposure  to   oxygen  at  low  to   moderate 
concentrations. 
Ky.  State’s first grant for this work in March  1974 had exposed vinegar 
flies to higher levels of  oxygen than normal and drastically shortened the 
life  span,  whereas  exposure  to   lower  than  normal  levels  had  greatly 
reduced reproductive capacity. This work had also suggested that certain 
individuals might prove better  adapted genetically  for survival in abnor- 
mal oxygen environments. The findings would  be  useful  in planning at- 
mospheres  for  long-term  manned  space  missions  aboard  the  Space 
Shuttle or  on space colonies.  (KSC Release 91-77) 

0  KSC  announced  award  of  a  $95  025  OOO  contract  to  the  Space 
Division,  Rockwell  Intl.  Corp.,  Downey,  Calif.,  for  activation  of  the 
Space  Shuttle  facilities  and  systems,  and  for   Orbiter  support  during 

68 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APRIL 

checkout, launch, and postflight operations, in the first six Space Shuttle 
missions.  Rockwell  would  also  support  postflight  operations  a t   the 
DFRC landing site for  the  first  four missions.  (KSC Release 92-77) 

0  MSFC  announced  it  had  requested  price  quotations  on  designing  a 
space  spider  (a  device  capable  of  building  large-scale  structures).  The 
spider, containing prefabricated materials, would attach itself to the core 
of  a  planned  structure  and  spin  a  larger  structure,  of  any  diameter, 
around the core. MSFC engineers had sought estimates of  costs and data 
on the best  size of  spider to  fit inside the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 
77-62) 

0  Wallops  Flight  Center  announced  it‘ would  welcome  visitors  to   the 
rocket  launching  facilities  on Wallops  Island  Apr.  23-24  as  part  of  a 
special  observance  by  federal  a c tk t i e s   in  the  area.  Assateague  Natl. 
Seashore  Park,  Chincoteague  Coast  Guard  Base,  Chincoteague  Natl. 
Wildlife  Refuge,  the  Natl.  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration, 
and  Wallops  Flight  Center  had  all  planned  special  exhibits  or  tours. 
Visitors to  Wallops Island could drive their own cars to  see launch pads, 
rocket  storage  structures,  long-range  tracking  radars,  weather  towers, 
blockhouses,  rocket  assembly shops,  actual launch vehicles,  and related 
range  facilities.  Cameras  would  be  welcome.  The  main  NASA  base 
would  not be  included  in  the  visit.  (WFC Release 77-2) 

9  Nature magazine reported  further  on  the recognition  of  ring  systems 
around  the planet  Uranus  announced  earlier by  Dr.  James L.  Elliot  of 
Cornel1 Univ.  [see March  311.  The occultation  (shutting off  from view) 
by  Uranus  of  a  bright  object  (star  SA 0   158687  in  Libra)  had  been 
predicted by the Royal Observatory at Greenwich as visible only from an 
area on earth extending from equatorial Africa across the Indian Ocean 
to  western  Australia.  No  useful  observations of  a  Uranian  occultation 
had  been  made  before;  astronomers  considered  such  observations 
important  because  they  could  furnish  data on  the  size of  the  planet  or 
stellar object,  on limb darkening, and on extent and composition of  any 
atmosphere, as well as an accurate measurement of  the object’s position, 
valuable  in  calculations of  celestial mechanics. 
Heavy  rain  at  Johannesburg prevented  observations there  on March 
10,  but  astronomers  on  the  Kuiper  observatory  plane  flying  over  the 
southern Indian Ocean east of  Kerguelen Is.  were able to  see an occulta- 
tion  lasting  about  25min with  secondary  occultations lasting  8  to 9min 
before  and after.  Observers a t  Madras  and Perth  also viewed  the event 
and  decided  independently  that  the  extended occultation  resulted  from 
satellites forming a belt about 48  OOOkm  from the center of Uranus. The 
belt  was  apparently  circular,  lying  in  the  plane  of  the  planet’s  equator, 

69 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

and about  12 OOOkm  wide. Nature reported  that Dr.  Elliot was  continu- 
ing  detailed study of  the event,  and that  direct observation of  the  belts 
might  be  possible  with  a  sufficiently  large  telescope.  (Nature,  April 
14/77,  587) 

April  15:  JSC  announced  award  of  a  $ 5   189 500  supplement to   an ex- 
isting  contract  with  Rockwell  Intl.’s  Space  Division,  Downey,  Calif., 
covering  8  engineering  changes  in  the  Space  Shuttle  orbiter  to  
accommodate  the  European-built  Spacelab in  the  Shuttle’s cargo  bay. 
(JSC Release 77-26) 

0  Industrial  exploration  had  made sweeping changes in  today’s  society, 
ranging from thumbnail-size computers to  Space Shuttles operating with 
the  regularity  of  commercial  airlines,  Rockwell  Intl.  chairman  W.F. 
Rockwell, Jr.,  told the annual Explorers Club dinner in New York City. 
A microprocessor small enough to  balance on the end of  a thumb  could 
compute  10 times  faster  than  a 30-ton  device  introduced  in  1946,  and 
would  cost $15 to  $20,  compared to  the millions of  dollars that  the  old 
computer  cost,  he  said.  Forecasting  the  potential  of  the  Shuttle,  being 
developed largely by Rockwell for NASA,  he  reviewed possible payloads 
including solar power  satellites and navsats; he ended by  comparing ex- 
plorers setting out in search of  new  discoveries and new  knowledge with 
the  explorers  in  industry  searching  to   improve  products  and  service. 
(Rockwell Release R- 18) 

0  ERDA  announced  it  had  selected  Shenandoah,  Ga.,  as  the  site  for 
building  a  second  solar  total-energy  experimental plant.  The  factory, 
manufacturing  knitwear,  would  be  the  first  in  the  U.S.  to   get  all  its 
electric power,  steam,  heating,  and  cooling  from  solar  energy.  A West 
German firm, Wilhelm Bleyle K.G.,  would  operate  the  factory and  the 
Georgia Power Co. would operate the solar-energy plant to  provide up to  
200kw  of  electricity  and  1200kw of  heat  energy.  Construction  should 
begin  in  1979 and be completed in  1981. 
Robert  Fri,  acting  ERDA  administrator,  said  the  knitwear  factory 
would demonstrate the production of  hot water and steam as byproducts 
of solar-power generation, making year-round use of  the heat that would 
otherwise be  wasted  during  the  mild  weather  of  spring and  fall  in  that 
area.  ERDA had planned another experimental total solar-energy plant, 
scheduled to  begin construction  in  1978 to  serve Ft.  Hood army base  in 
Killeen,  Tex.  (ERDA Release 77-70) 

April 18: The Viking I lander’s gas-exchange experiment had developed a 
leak  during  the  final analysis of  soil  from  a  deep  trench  a t   the  Chryse 
Planitia  landing  site,  NASA  reported.  Failure  of  the  gas-exchange 

IO 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APRIL 

package, designed to  detect respiration in soil samples, would not affect 
the  lander’s  other  biology experiments.  (NASA Release 77-82) 

0  MSFC reported it had purchased 5  large solar collectors to  heat an  ex- 
hibit  a t  the Ala.  Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville.  The collectors 
would provide 70% of  the  heat  for  the  Lunar Odyssey, a  space voyage 
simulation in  a  modified  Sdturn  launch vehicle.  (MSFC Release 77-65) 

MSFC announced it would sponsor a 2-day symposium May 11-12  on 
engineering  and  productivity  advances  from  space  technology.  The 
center’s  technology  utilization  office  and  the  Huntsville chapter  of  the 
Ala.  Society of  Professional Engineers would  cosponsor discussions by 
speakers  from  industry,  universities,  NASA,  and  other  government 
agencies  on  industrial  uses  of  space technology  in  energy management, 
materials processing,  and electronics.  (MSFC Release 77-66) 

0  A  Space  Shuttle  orbital-maneuvering system  engine  had  completed 
acoustic environment testing a t  JSC, and a second engine had  fired  lo00 
times in  life-cycle testing  a t  the White Sands, N.M.,  test  facility, Avia- 
tion  Week  reported.  The  latter  achievement demonstrated  the  engine’s 
ability  to   perform  100  missions,  a  project  requirement.  (AvWk ,   Apr 
18/77,  13) 

Rockwell Intl.’s  Space Division and Autonetics group had won an Ad- 
vanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) design competition for a Teal 
Ruby  sensor  to   detect  and  track  aircraft  targets  from  space,  A vWk  
reported. The DOD sensor, using up to  a quarter million mosaic infrared 
detectors with charge-coupled processors, would fly on the Space Shuttle 
in  1980.  A  Lockheed-Grumman team had  also competed.  (AvWk, Apr 
18/77,  13) 

0  During  confirmation  hearings,  Dr.  Frank  Press,  President  Carter’s 
nominee as director of the Office of  Science and Technology Policy, had 
stated that NASA should broaden the scope of  its technology-transfer ef- 
forts and  its planned use of  the Space Shuttle, A vWk  reported.  The ad- 
ministratiofi  should  continue  funding  planetary  exploration  and  space 
science (areas adaptable to  the Shuttle’s unique capabilities), but  should 
also make NASA’s  technological knowledge available to  industry. Press, 
former chairman of  MIT’s Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 
had  specialized  in  earthquake  research  and  detection  of  underground 
nuclear  tests.  (Av Wk,  Apr  18/77,  21) 

Israel  Aircraft  Industries  had  modified  an   Arava  twin-turboprop 
transport  plane  using  winglets  designed  by  Richard  T.  Whitcomb  of 

71  

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

LaRC, Av Wk reported.  Winglets would  reduce drag during takeoff and 
enhance short  takeoff  and landing capabilities.  (AvWk, Apr  18/77,  21) 

~ 

NASA  had  decided t o  plan  construction  of  an orbiting  space station 
-from existing hardware because the Carter and Ford administrations had 
refused  funds  for  major  space  station  development,  Av Wk reported. 
Four  station concepts were  under  examination:  increasing  the duration 
of  Space  Shuttle  missions,  using  Skylab  Apollo  telescope-mount 
components  t o   supply  additional  electricity  for  any  extended  mission; 
making a Space Shuttle external fuel tank into a Skylab-type station [see 
Mar.  71;  launching unmanned  platforms  t o  be  occupied  in  the  future; 
and  modifying  the  ESA-NASA  Spacelab  to   fly  as  an  independent 
orb$ing  laboratory,  without Space Shuttle.  (Av Wk, Apr  18/77,  42) 

*  Comsat  General,  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the  Communications 
Satellite Corp.,  announced that former FAA  administrator Dr.  John L. 
McLucas  had  been  elected  president  and  a  member  of  the  board  of 
directors.  ComSatCorp.  president  Dr.  Joseph  V.  Charyk  said  the 
subsidiary would  benefit  from Dr.  McLucas’s  “long  and  distinguished 
career  as  administrator,  engineer,  and  scientist.”  Holding  a  Ph.D  in 
physics and electrical engineering from Penn.  State Univ.,  Dr. McLucas 
had  been  president  of  the  Mitre  Corp.  before  serving  as  assistant 
secretary  general  for  scientific  affairs  of  NATO,  undersecretary  and 
secretary of  the Air  Force,  and FAA  administrator before April  1977. 
Programs engaged in by  Comsat General  included Marisat (maritime 
satellite  communications),  Comstar  (domestic  satcoms),  and  Satellite 
Business Systems, in which it shared with IBM and Aetna Casualty plans 
for  a U S .  domestic satcom system.  (CGC Release 77-2) 

Apr i l  19: The gyroscope malfunction [see Apr.  51 that delayed the launch 
of  HEAO-A planned  for Apr.  15  would  postpone  the launch until mid- 
June or  later, NASA  reported.  HEAO-A,  which  could  observe the elec- 
tromagnetic  spectrum  a t   altitudes 
inaccessible 
to   ground-based 
observers, would  seek out celestial x-ray sources.  (NASA Release 77-83) 

0  ASSESS 2 (airborne science/Spacelab  experiment-system simulation), 
scheduled on May  16-26  at ARC, would simulate a Spacelab mission us- 
ing  NASA’s  flying  laboratory  Galileo  2  (a  converted  Convair-990  jet 
transport) to  acquire data on earth resources, atmospheric pollution, and 
infrared  astronomy.  A  mobile  van  would  isolate  the  crew  (mission 
specialist Karl  Henize  of  JSC  and  four  payload  specialists:  Robert  T. 
Menzies and David  S.  Billiu of  JPL ,   and Claude Nicollier  and Michael 
Taylor of ESA) when they were not flying. ASSESS 2 would also serve to  

12 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APRIL 

rehearse  Spacelab’s  joint  NASA-ESA  management.  (NASA  Release 
77-80;  ARC Release 77-21;  MSFC Release 77-67) 

April 20: NASA  launched Geos I, planned as the first “purely scientific” 
geosynchronous satellite, for ESA  from Eastern Test  Range  on a Delta 
rocket  at  1015  GMT,  into  an   anomalous  transfer  orbit  (11,710km 
perigee,  241.5km  apogee,  26” inclination) because of  premature separa- 
tion  of  the  Delta  second  and  third  stages.  Failure  t o   achieve  spin 
stabilization  would  prevent  Geos  I  from  attaining  the  desired  geosyn- 
chronous  orbit.  ESA  planners  said  they  would  meet  April  26  with  the 
mission’s  prime  investigators  in  an-attempt  to   salvage the  $12  million 
mission.  Geos 1, chief  tool  of  the  Intl.  Magnetospheric Project,  carried 
instruments  to  gather  data  on  effects  of  the  solar  wind  on  earth’s 
magnetic field. (NASA Release 77-66; MOR M-492-302-77-01  [preflight] 
Apr  13/77,  [postflight] Aug  10/77;  ESA  Release  Apr  22/77;  W Post, 
Apr 21/77,  B10) 
*  Rockwell Intl. Corp. reported higher earnings and sales for the second 
quarter  of  FY  1977 in spite of  a  3wk  strike in  its automotive operations 
and an energy crisis last winter.  Earnings of  $36.2 million  ($1.05  a share) 
increased 13% over same quarter earnings in 1976, $32.1 million ($0.95  a 
share).  Robert  Anderson,  president  of  Rockwell,  said  the  earnings 
resulted  partly  from  improvements  in  the  aerospace  operations  area, 
which  had  done  more  business  in  military  aircraft.  (Rockwell  Release 
R- 19) 

Apr i l  21: The USAF reported  it had  begun joint  research with LeRC on 
use of  synthetic fuels in military and commercial jet  aircraft, which  cur- 
rently  accounted for  about  8% of  the nation’s  petroleum  consumption. 
The proposed  lOyr study, costing $8 million, would look into the refining 
required  to use  as  fuel liquids derived from coal or  oil  shale. 
The USAF energy conservation effort arose from increasing fuel costs, 
which  more than  tripled  for military jets  alone in the last  18mo. NASA 
and the USAF had  contracted with Exxon Corp.  to  define chemical and 
physical  properties  of  coal  and  oil  shale  synthetic crudes  compared  to  
fuels derived  from petroleum.  Usability of  the crudes would  depend  on 
their adaptability to  existing engine and component requirements and on 
the  environmental  impact  of  such  fuels.  Processing  (mostly  hydro- 
genation) of  the  synfuels would  be costly but could be  affected by more 
specific data on engine and fuel system needs.  Saving only 1 CC  per gallon 
would  save  the  USAF  alone more  than  $50 million  a  year,  the  report 
said.  (USAF Release OIP  070.75) 

0  Columnist  Jack  Anderson  reported  in  Today  that  a  Senate  sub- 

73 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

committee  had  asked  the  Pentagon  for  military  equipment,  including 
planes,  radar,  sensors,  and  satellites,  to   be  used  in  the  “battle  against 
drug abuse.” 
Senators Sam Nunn  (D-Ga.)  and  Charles Percy  (R-I l l .)   had  sent  a 
private letter to  Defense Secy. Harold Brown saying that drug abuse was 
costing the U.S.  $17 billion a yr and that more than 5000 Americans were 
dying  each yr  from drug abuse.  DOD  alone had  the vehicles  needed  to 
pursue  and  overtake  the  drug  traffickers,  the  senators  said,  calling the 
fight against drugs a “war.” “When fighting a war,” they added, “you use 
the best  resources available and make every effort to  win.  This is not be- 
ing  done.”  A  spokesman  for  the  Pentagon  said  an  answer  was  being 
prepared.  (Today,  Apr  21/77,  16A) 

April  22:  JSC  reported  that  its  engineers had  designed,  built,  and  in- 
stalled  an  emergency  communications console  at  the medical  center  in 
Odessa,  Texas,  control  center  for  the  17-county  Permian  Basin 
emergency  medical  system.  The  prototype  console  would  allow  physi- 
cians and nurses to  consult with paramedics in the field, receive incoming 
electrocardiograms,  set  up  radio-to-telephone  patches,  page  hospital 
staff  members,  and  automatically  dial  special  care  centers  and  other 
facilities  in  the  area.  After  field  tests  and modification,  JSC  engineers 
would  make  console  plans  available  to   interested  communities, 
according  to   a  NASA  announcement.  (JSC  Release  77-27;  NASA 
Release 77-86) 

MSFC announced receipt from Bendix Corp.,  Teterboro, N.J.,  of  the 
first two integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle’s solid fuel 
rocket boosters. Each SRB would contain 2 electronic assemblies to  con- 
trol  communications  and  internal  power  distribution.  (NASA  Release 
77-68) 

April  25:  NASA  reported  it  had  selected  Trudy  Tiedemann,  former 
public  information specialist at DFRC,  as its first  female commentator. 
She would  serve as announcer  during the  Shuttle orbiter  flight-test pro- 
gram.  (NASA  Release 77-84) 

0  MSFC announced award of  a  1-yr $450 540 contract to  Sperry Univac, 
Washington,  D.C.,  for on-site maintenance  of  the center’s  Univac  1108 
computer  system.  (MSFC Release 77-69) 

April 25-28:  Controllers a t  ESA’s  European space center a t  Darmstadt, 
West  Germany,  had  fired  Geos Z’s  apogee kick  motor  at 0738 GMT  to 
boost  the  satellite  into  a  new  12hr  elliptic  orbit  (38 498km  apogee, 
2131 km  perigee, 25.85’  orbital  inclination) that would  maximize return 

74 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APRIL 

of  scientific data.  Although ESA officials had  hoped  to delay  the  orbit 
change until  after  a meeting  of  Geos  experimenters  scheduled for April 
26,  the  spacecraft’s anomalous  transfer orbit,  caused  by  a malfunction 
during launch Apr.  20,  had endangered its solar cell power supply. (ESA 
Release Apr 25/77) 
ESA officials and Geos  satellite experimenters during a meeting April 
26 at the European space operations center in Darmstadt agreed on a se- 
quence  for  experiment  activation and boom  deployment.  After  increas- 
ing  satellite “visibility” at  the  Odenwald  ground  station  near  ESOC  by 
moving the Geos I apogee from 90”E to  35”E, controllers planned to ex- 
tend  the short radial booms completely and the long booms  to  10cm. If 
this  ploy  worked,  the  20m-long  radial  booms  would  extend completely 
Apr.  30  to   help  establish  the  satellite’s  moment-of-inertia  ratio  and 
dynamic  stability.  (ESA Release Apr  27/77) 
Scientists of  Geos I believed  its new  orbit,  whose  apogee was  high  as 
that of  the intended orbit,  could  salvage most of  its scientific objectives, 
Nature  reported.  The  new  path  would  put  Geos  I  where  ESA  had 
planned  to   orbit  its  spare  “qualifications” geosynchronous  satellite  in 
1979;  launch costs  had  made  use  of  the  spare unlikely,  the  report  said. 
(Nature, Apr  28/77,  767) 

April  26:  Central  Florida  officials who  had  counted  on  Space  Shuttle 
employment  to  stimulate the local economy hoped  it would  differ from 
the boom-and-bust cycle of  the Apollo program, the NY  Times reported. 
The Apollo  program  had  brought  about 26  000 employees to  KSC,  but 
the economy declined with layoffs when  the missions ended. NASA  had 
estimated  an  11 000-employee strength at KSC  for  the  first Shuttle mis- 
sion;  the  Shuttle  program  should  continue  for .a t   least  5yr,  agency  of- 
ficials  said.  (NYT ,  Apr  26/77,  13) 

April 27: A series of  Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified 
the  existence  of  quarks,  hypothetical  fundamental  pieces  of  matter 
possessing  fractional  electric  charges,  the  N Y   Times  reported.  Dr. 
William  Fairbank,  professor of  physics at Stanford,  described the  find- 
ings - first  evidence  of  quarks  since  their  theoretical  exposition  in 
1964-at  the Am.  Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. 
If  matter consisted of  protons,  electrons,  and neutrons (carrying charges 
of  + 1,  - 1,  and 0,  respectively),  quarks-the  building  blocks  of  these 
particles-would  have  fractional  charges  of  + 1/3,  - 1/3,  +2 /3 ,   and 
- 2/3.  Fairbank emphasized that the results were not  final, and that the 
university  had  scheduled  follow-up  tests.  (NUT, Apr  27/77,  A18) 

April  29:  MSFC  announced  award  of  a  $110 096  contract  to   General 
Dynamics Convair Div.,  San Diego, Calif.,  t o  study and define ideas for 

APRIL 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

an  automatic  structural-beam  fabrication machine  for  use  in  the Space 
Shuttle [see Mar.  11.  The beams,  made of  a composite material, would 
support  large scale space structures and act as electrical and thermal  in- 
sulators.  (MSFC Release 77-72) 

0  MSFC  announced  award  of  a  $695 OOO  contract  to   Rockwell  Intl. 
Space Div.,  Downey, Calif.,  for a study of  solar power  satellite systems. 
The study would  identify and  suggest  solutions for technical and social 
problems that might occur in harnessing solar energy from space. (MSFC 
Release 77-73) 

During  April:  The  Natl.  Aeronautic  Assn.  reported  that  Kingswood 
Sprott,  Jr.,  had  broken  his  own  world  class  hot  air  balloon  altitude 
record  March  26  when  he  reached  41  Oooft  over  Lakeland,  Fla.  The 
previous  record  set March  26,  1977,  also by  Sprott,  had  been  38  789ft. 
(NAA newsletter Apr  77) 

0  Recent photographs of  the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by 
the  Viking I  orbiter in Feb.,  had revealed  “the nature of  that satellite in 
unprecedented  detail,”  said  Scientific American.  Earlier  pictures  by 
Mariner 9 or  the  Viking 2  orbiter were a t  a distance of  880km;  the new 
pictures  were  taken  at  a  distance  of  660km  to  as  little as lOOkm,  with 
resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than  10m across. 
The surface of  Phobos was known to  be pitted with craters from the im- 
pact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of  irregular craters like 
those  seen  on the  surface of  the moon, although Phobos’s  crater  chains 
paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars.  Pictures from  Viking 2 had 
shown grooves on Phobos concentrated  near  its northern pole;  the  new 
pictures defined  the grooves  as crater  chains  possibly caused  by  objects 
hundreds  of  meters  across.  Further  study  of  the  images  should  reveal 
more  about  the  nature of  Phobos,  the magazine said.  (SciAm, Apr  77, 
57) 

0  Nature  reported  that  the  largest  radiotelescope  in  the  world-the 
Soviet RATANdOO - was  “at  last” officially in operation at Zelenchuk, 
USSR.  A  formal message  of  congratulations from Soviet leader Leonid 
Brezhnev  had  been  issued March  20.  Constructed  jointly  by  the USSR 
Academy of  Sciences, the Ministries of  Power and Electrification and of 
Power  Plant  Construction,  and  the  Univ.  of  Moscow,  the  device  had 
four  sections  each  able t o  operate  independently.  Par t   of  the  RATAN 
had  been  receiving  signals  since  1974,  Nature  said,  and  had  already 
undertaken  studies of  the moons of  Jupiter, the galactic nucleus, and the 
fine radio  structure of  the  sun.  (Nature, Apr  7/77,  493) 

76 

May  I :  RCA (formerly the Radio Corporation of America) observed the 
17th anniversary of the first weather picture received from space through 
the  first  Television  Infrared  Observation  Satellite  (TIROS),  Today 
newspaper reported. The 26011b TIROS delivered “a pretty shabby prod- 
uct  compared  to   today’s  images  from  space,”  RCA  admitted.  The 
company  had  since built  a  series of  24  other weather  watchers  that had 
taken 3.5 million pictures and logged more than  7 billion miles in orbit. 
Managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,  the 
spacecraft had gone from pinpointing major storms to  predicting runoff 
from  snowmelt,  helping  ships  navigate  through  icefields,  and  assisting 
commercial fishermen to  find promising areas for their efforts. RCA was 
currently  developing  a  fourth-generation  TIROS.  (Today, May  1/77, 
1 8A) 

May  2: Aviation.Week  reported  that  a  controversy within  the U.S.  in- 
telligence community had  kept  the  U.S.  National  Security Council  and 
the  president  from  learning  that  the  USSR  had  developed  a  directed- 
energy weapon designed to  destroy U.S.  intercontinental and submarine- 
launched  ballistic  missile  nuclear  warheads.  (Directed-energy weapons 
was  a term  coined  to include both  laser beam  weapons  and high energy 
lasers.)  Events  that  convinced  some U.S.  analysts  that  USSR  weapons 
were nearing prototype test  stage included: 
-Detection  by  a  USAF  early-warning  system  of  large  amounts  of 
gaseous hydrogen  in  the upper  atmosphere with  traces  of  tritium,  con- 
sidered relics of  charged particle beam  device tests carried out since 1975 
at Semipalatinsk. 
-USSR  ground tests of  a small high energy laser destined for spacecraft 
launch,  possibly  related  to  manned  space station activities. 
-Tests  of  a new magnetohydrodynamic generator to provide power  for 
a  charged  particle  beam  system  near  the  Caspian  Sea,  monitored  by  a 
TRW early-warning  satellite stationed over  the  Indian Ocean. 
-Establishment  of  a  new  test  site a t  Azghir,  the Caspian  Sea location, 
under  direct control of  the USSR  national  air  defense force. 
-Confirmation  by  a  USAF-sponsored  team  of  U.S.  physicists  and 
engineers that  the USSR  had achieved success in 7 areas of high  energy 
physics  needed  to  develop a beam weapon. 
-Admission  by  previously unconvinced  U.S.  physicists that  the  USSR 

77 

M A Y  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

could have developed the technology for a charged particle beam device. 
-Hints  by  a visiting Soviet physicist last summer that the USSR was far 
ahead of  the U.S.  in controlling fusion by compression of  small pellets of 
thermal  nuclear  fuel,  and  thus  in  potential  weapons  based  on  fusion 
technology. The information given by Leonid I. Rudakov during his visit 
t o   the  Lawrence  Livermore  Laboratory  had  later  been  classified  top 
secret by  DOD and ERDA. 
Maj.  Gen.  George J. Keegan (USAF,  Ret.),  former head of Air Force 
intelligence, had in  1975 reported  t o  CIA head William Colby on  Soviet 
beam  technology;  the  CIA’S  nuclear  intelligence  panel  had  written  a 
report,  no  CODY  of  which was ever  given  to  USAF  intelligence. 
A vWk  s a d  Colby  just  before a meeting  on  strategic arms  limitation 
had  notified then  Secretary of  State Henry Kissinger of  a Soviet facility 
“related  to   nuclear  functions  that were  unknown”;  except  for  that,  no 
mention  of  the  beam  weapon  potential  had  ever  been  made  t o   the 
president, the secretary of state, o r  the National Security Council. A v  Wk 
also charged that influential U.S.  physicists had sought to  discredit Gen. 
Keegan’s  report,  their  general  attitude being  that  “if  the U.S.  could not 
successfully  produce  the  technology  t o   have  a  beam  weapon,  the 
Russians  certainly could  not.”  (A vWk ,  May 2/77,  16) 
The  next  issue of A vWk  quoted President  Jimmy  Carter’s  reply  t o  a 
breakthrough  in high  energy weapons:  “. . . Is there any such develop- 
query from the  Washington Post’s Dave Broder on the report of  a Soviet 
ment and does it threaten  the U.S. strategic deterrence?” Carter replied: 
“We have no  evidence,  Dave,  that  the Soviets have achieved any major 
breakthrough  in the kind of weapon described  . . . the assessment of  the 
report  in  the  aviation  magazine  has  been  exaggerated.”  (AvWk,  May 
9/77,  13) 

May 3:  Langley Research Center  announced award of a 5yr  $23 million 
contract to  Wyle  Laboratories  for  electronic instrument  support to  test 
and  research  facilities  a t   the  center.  The  contract,  running  from  Oct. 
1977 through Sept.  1979 with options to  extend for another 3yr, covered 
inspection,  calibration,  maintenance,  and  satisfaction  of  measurement 
requirements  on  some  30 OOO  instruments  and  transducers  valued  at 
more than  $50 million;  also,  design, modification,  and maintenance  of 
hardware  and  computer  programs  associated  with  digital data systems 
and  special  purpose  computers  used  in  the  research  facilities.  (LaRc 
Release 77- 15) 

The Senate confirmed the nomination of  Dr.  Richard C.  Atkinson as 
director  of  the National  Science Foundation.  (NASA  Legis.  Act.  Rpt., 
May  3/77) 

78 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MAY 

May  4:  Marshall Space Flight Center  announced it  had  awarded to  the 
Rocketdyne Div.,  Rockwell Intl.,  a contract modification for additional 
work  and  services to  the  Space Shuttle main  engine program,  covering 
long leadtime hardware and material procurement to  provide  follow-on 
engines.  Each  engine,  designed  for  use up to  50 times before overhaul, 
would  be  capable of  1 668 075 newtons  (375K lb)  of  thrust  at  sea  level 
and 2 090 654 newtons (470K lb) at altitude.  (MSFC Release 77-78) 

0  Ames Research Center  reported  that on May  10, 10 female volunteers 
would  complete  a  month-long  test  [see March  241  to  set  standards  for 
passengers on  future  spaceflights.  The test  included 9 days of  total  bed 
rest,  to   simulate  effects  of  weightlessness,  and  centrifuge  rides  to 
simulate reentry into earth atmosphere. ARC had scheduled a press con- 
ference  to   announce  and  discuss  the  results  of  the  test;  Dr.  Harold 
Sandler, principal  investigator, would  attend with members  of  his  staff 
and the volunteers.  (ARC anno’May 4/77) 

May  5:  NASA  announced  it  had  awarded McDonnell Douglas Aircraft 
Go.  a  6.5yr, $15.6 million  contract  to  develop and evaluate composite 
vertical stabilizers for DC-10 transport aircraft. A NASA program called 
ACEE  (aircraft  energy  efficiency) would  pursue  the  use  of  composite 
materials to  decrease structural weight  of  aircraft by  about 25%  and to 
reduce fuel consumption by 10 to  15 Vo . LaRC would manage work under 
the contract a t  the Douglas plant in Long Beach.  (NASA Release 77-89; 
LaRC Release 77-16) 

0  NASA  announced  that  Det  Norske Meteorological  Institute in Oslo, 
Norway,  had  asked  that  the Nimbus  6 satellite help  it  track  a  huge  oil 
slick resulting  from an oil well blowout  in the North Sea. By May  16 the 
Norwegians  would  put  5  random-access measurement-system  (RAMS) 
buoys  into  the  oil  slick  to   send  environmental  information  to  the 
spacecraft.  Goddard Space Flight  Center engineer William W.  Conant, 
noting  that  similar  buoys  earlier  this  year  had  helped  the  U.S. Coast 
Guard track an oil slick off Nantucket Sound, said NASA would support 
the  Norwegian  effort  by  transmitting  locations  of  all  the  buoys  twice 
daily  for 30 days,  adding “We don’t  normally  provide  daily teletype  in- 
formation.”  For more  than  a yr,  the Norwegians  had  been  tracking  ice 
drift  in  the Spitzbergen region  north  of  Norway,  using a RAMS  system 
as an  accurate method of  tracking in all weather.  (NASA Release 77-30) 

Transportation  Secretary  Brock  Adams  gave  Congress  proposals  by 
the  Carter  administration to   help  the  airlines  finance  modification  or 
replacement  of  commercial jet  aircraft  failing  to  meet  FAA  noise-level 
standards, through revising  the present 8% passenger  ticket and waybill 

79 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

taxes now earmarked  for the Airport and Airway Trust Fund.  The Civil 
Aeronautics  Board  would  let  the  airlines  add  a  2%  surcharge  to   be 
deposited in a special environmental fund to pay  for retrofitting existing 
aircraft or acquiring replacement aircraft that would meet  the new  noise 
standards. Airlines whose revenues reached a certain allowable cost level 
would  have  the  surcharge terminated.  (DOT Release 55-77) 

May 6: MSFC announced its engineers had  found a new way to recondi- 
tion  and  lengthen  the  lifespan  of  nickel-cadmium batteries used  in  low 
earth  orbit  space missions.  Using  a device with  a  converter  circuit and 
load-resistor relays t o  ensure proper  discharge and avoid damage to  the 
cells,  the engineers had tested batteries with 2yr normal life in orbit, and 
had  kept  them  running  for 4.5yr,  the equivalent of  23  600 orbits.  Main- 
taining  stored energy  on low-orbit missions  had  been a NASA  concern, 
especially after a power  failure during the Skylab I  mission had meant a 
loss of  battery capacity  that equipment  then  available could  not correct 
in orbit. Besides offering longer life and higher reliability,  the new device 
could detect low cell voltage and bypass failed cells.  MSFC would build 
and test a battery  of  116 series cells, using  the new  device for protection 
and reconditioning.  (MSFC Release 77-8 1) 

MSFC announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Aerospace’s Denver 
division a $928 217 contract for construction work on a test stand for the 
Space Shuttle program. Modification of  the giant hydrodynamic support 
system  last  used  for  Saturn  V  dynamic  tests  in  the  1960s  would  allow 
mating  all elements of  the Shuttle for vertical ground  tests  scheduled t o  
begin in 1978. The complete vehicle (orbiter, external tank, and two solid 
fuel rocket boosters) would  occupy the stand together for the first time. 
(MSFC Release  77-79) 

0  Earth-orbiting satellites had  improved  forecasts of  water  availability 
and warned  of  impending  low water  supply as a valuable tool  to water 
management  agencies  in  Arizona,  California,  Colorado,  and  Oregon, 
NASA  announced.  Other  cooperating  agencies  included  the  U.S. 
Geological Survey, the U.S.  Soil Conservation Service, the U.S.  Bureau 
of  Reclamation, and the Bonneville Power Administration.  The 4 states 
had  begun  a  combined  4yr  operational program  using  NASA  Landsat 
earth  resources  satellites  and  Natl.  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration meteorological satellites to  produce imagery of  the snow 
lines along the Sierra Nevada that was faster and less expensive than con- 
ventional aerial surveys. Satellites also offered  repeated mapping of  the 
same snow  cover  area with  a relatively constant perspective. 
A  continuing drought  in  the  western  U.S. had  resulted  from  below- 
normal snowfalls in the mountains, source of stream flow water supplies; 

80 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

ORjGi 

Landsat  images  of  the same  area  of  the  Sierra  Nevada show  the difference  in 
snowcover  between  Feb.  1975  and  Feb.  1977.  The  1977  snowline  was  2OOOft 
higher than in 1975, a y r  of near-normalsnowfall. Lake  Tahoe is in  the center of 
both pictures. (NASA 77-H-225, -226) 

reservoirs on the western  slopes of  the mountains had  already dried up. 
Some  areas  had  experienced drought  for  a  longer  period  than  others; 
Calif.  had  been  hardest hit,  with minimal snowfall in  the Sierra Nevada 
for the  second consecutive yr.  (NASA  Release 77-91) 

0  ESA  announced  it  had  completed  a  revised  program  of  switching  on 
and  testing  the  Geos satellite launched  Apr.  20,  since  a malfunction  of 
the  launch  vehicle  had  prevented  the  spacecraft  from  achieving  its  in- 
tended  geostationary  orbit.  The  7 experiments  were  reported  opera- 
tional,  and the  two 20m  booms had  been extended to 2.5m  without dif- 
ficulty. Although the satellite could transmit 8hr of  data a day, only half 
would be  outside 5  earth radii (where the experiments had been  designed 
to operate). The booms should deploy fully during the upcoming wk;  the 
journal Nature called for prompt launch of  the backup Geos. (ESA anno 
May  6/77; Nature, May  5/77, 8 ;  May  12/77, 100) 
*  Science magazine carried an article by  Drs.  T.B.H.  Kuiper  of  the  Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory and M.  Morris of  the Calif. Inst.  of  Technology 
on the search  fo1 extraterrestrial intelligence, based  on extrapolations of 
known  physical  processes  and  known  behaviors  of  terrestrial  animals 
and humans.  Concluding that interstellar travel would be practicable and 
that  advanced  beings  might  have  reasons  for  making  contact  with 
humans, the authors reviewed the options and the interstellar-beacon fre- 
quencies proposed  for  use  in  such contact.  (Science, May 6/77, 616) 

May 9: Australia’s Minister for Science J. J.  Webster  announced that his 
department had studied the technical  feasibility of  installing a temporary 

81 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

NASA  satellite-tracking laser in the western area of  the continent for use 
in geodetic research, mapping, and earthquake prediction. NASA would 
operate  the  laser  for  about  a  yr,  beginning  in  mid-1978,  but  neither 
government had made a final commitment.  The proposed site in western 
Australia would be part of  a future network  of  tracking lasers scattered 
around the world  for use by  geologists and geophysicists, in conjunction 
with NASA’s S e q a t  and existing lasers such as the one near Canberra at 
the  Orroral  Valley  satellite-tracking station,  t o  gather  data  for  use  in 
research  such  as refining  the  measurement  of  the  shape  of  the  earth. 
(NASA Release 77-92) 

0  Kennedy Space Center reported  it had  loaned its hyperbaric chamber 
to   the  Univ.  of  Fla.  College  of  Medicine  a t   Gainesville,  for  use  in 
research.  KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or  recompression) chamber in 
its  operations  and  checkout  building  to   treat  astronauts  affected  by 
decompression  sickness  (the  “bends”) during manned  altitude-chamber 
tests of  the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, 
carbon monoxide  poisoning,  or  gas gangrene might  require  administra- 
tion of  hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) 
for  periods  up  to  24hr. 
The end of  the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in  1975 had ended NASA’s 
immediate  need  for  the  altitude  or  the  hyperbaric  chambers,  but  KSC 
had  kept  them  for  possible use  in  Space Shuttle training.  (KSC Release 
101-77) 

May  10: MSFC  reported  that the NASA  barge Poseidon was  on its way 
to  Seal Beach,  Calif.,  to  pick  up  a  Space Shuttle orbiter  simulator  and 
deliver  it  to  the Natl.  Space Technology Laboratories  at Bay  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  to  stand in for the orbiter during firings next year of  the main pro- 
pulsion test article, consisting of  the simulator with an external tank and 
thrust  structure covering 3 main  engines.  MSFC  had  used  the Poseidon 
in  the  1960s t o  move  stages of  Saturn rockets.  (MSFC Release 77-84) 

0  MSFC  announced completion of  pressure and structural-load  tests on  
the liquid hydrogen tank  that would  be part of  the Shuttle external tank 
being  built  at  the  Michoid  assembly  facility  by  Martin  Marietta 
Aerospace. The tests to  certify that the tank met  design and manufactur- 
ing standards included filling the tank with nitrogen at 42psi for 14hr and 
applying hydraulic loads as high  as 600tons where the orbiter and solid- 
fuel rocket boosters would  be  attached.  Largest of  3 major  elements of 
the  external  tank,  the  hydrogen  container  about  30m  (97ft)  long  and 
8.3m  (27.6ft)  in diameter would  now  go  for  cleaning,  corrosion protec- 
tion,  and  insulating.  (MSFC Release 77-83) 

82 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MAY 

May  ZZ:  Johnson  Space Center  announced  i t  had  awarded  a $399 600 
cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to  ESL,  Inc.,  of  Sunnyvale, Calif.,  for using 
Landsat data in a vegetation inventory for eastern Alaska under a NASA 
project  conducted  jointly  with  the  Bureau  of  Land Management.  The 
BLM  had  begun  an  automatic  inventory  system  for  474  million  acres 
under its jurisdiction;  the Alaska area would  represent a tundra ecology. 
If  the  joint  task  were  successful,  NASA  had  options  for  work  on  
grassland  and sagebrush  ecologies.  (JSC Release 77-3 1) 

NASA  announced  it had  awarded a  $2.3 million  contract to Douglas 
Aircraft  Co.,  as  part  of  its aircraft  energy efficiency (ACEE) program, 
for  improving wing  lift-to-drag ratio  to  reduce  fuel use.  Douglas would 
design  and  test  a  supercritical  wing  like  that  invented  by  LaRC’s  Dr. 
Richard Whitcomb,  shaped  to  decrease shock waves  on wing  surfaces, 
with  a  high  aspect  ratio  (long  span  relative  t o  its width).  LaRC would 
manage work to  be done under the contract at the Douglas plant in Calif. 
(NASA  Release 77-93;  LaRC Release 77-17) 

0  MSFC  announced i t  had  awarded a 45mo contract to the Universities 
Space Research Association of  Houston to provide support for develop- 
ment of  the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory,  scheduled to fly as 
a partial payload twice a year on  Spacelab beginning in 1980 or 1981. The 
Texas-based  consortium  would  review  proposals  for  scientific  ex- 
periments  and  provide  a  liaison  between  NASA  and  the  cloud-physics 
community as  an aid  to the project  scientist.  (MSFC Release 77-86) 

0  Strategic arms  limitation might  suffer  another blow,  the  Washington 
Post  said  in a  column by  Victor  Zorza,  from  the USSR’s  test  of  a killer 
satellite viewed by  the U.S.  as a new weapon intended to deactivate U.S. 
observation  satellites  if  and when  the  Soviets decided  to   launch  a  first 
strike.  Zorza noted  that  current  agreements did  not  cover  hunter-killer 
satellites; by  the time a aew agreement was  reached, both  powers might 
have passed  another point  of  no  return in  the arms race.  ( W Post, May 
11/77,  A21) 

May  12:  The U.S.  Air  Force  launched  a  pair  of  “jam-proof” Triple-7 
defense  satellite  communications  system  spacecraft  from  Cape 
Canaveral Air  Force Station a t   10:27am  on a Martin Marietta Titan 3C 
booster,  largest  developed by  the USAF,  into an elliptical parking orbit 
with 35  943km (22  333mi) apogee,  285km  (177mi) perigee,  and 26.6”  in- 
clination. At 5:30pm the USAF confirmed that the two 13001b spacecraft 
had separated and had been  fired by the Titan third stage into stationary 
orbit  at  about  22  300mi  where  they  would  remain  for  2mo  above  the 
Galapagos Islands in  the Pacific  for  system checkout. 

83 

M A Y  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

The two satellites (fourth attempt in 6yr to  launch a Triple-7 package, 
but  only  the  second  successful one),  with  a DSCS  already in  orbit  and 
another  pair  scheduled  for  launch  in  November,  would  form  a  global 
communications network that the USAF had been trying to  establish for 
several yr. A Titan 3C malfunction  in  1975 had  prevented an earlier pair 
of  spacecraft  from  akhieving  orbit.  (Today,  May  12/77,  12A;  May 
13/77,  1A; C Trib, May  14/77,  1-9; NYT,  May  11/77,  19; AvFVk, May 
16/77,  19) 

0  NASA  announced  that  simulation  of  a  1980s Spacelab mission  using 
the Galileo  I1 (a Convair  990 jet  transport  converted to a  sophisticated 
flying  laboratory) would  begin  May  16 with  the  first  of  nine  daily  6hr 
flights  from  ARC  carrying  four  payload  specialists  and  a  mission 
specialist.  Known  as  ASSESS  (airborne  science/Spacelab  equipment- 
system simulation), the flights would rehearse NASA and ESA personnel 
in  the  roles they would  perform in  actual  Spacelab missions,  giving the 
managers practice  in coordinating payload management between experi- 
ment  operators  on  Spacelab  and investigators on  the  ground  [cf.  Apr. 
191. The actual missions would be the first chance for scientific personnel 
without astronaut training to  obtain in orbit data on earth resources,  in- 
frared  astronomy, medicine,  and atmospheric pollution. 
The Spacelab program  that began  in  1972 had  included 6 simulations 
to  gather  data  on  Shuttle-Spacelab operations;  the  first  set  of  flights, 
called ASSESS  1, had  consisted  of  5 simulations on Galileo over 6 days 
in June 1975. The new  series, ASSESS 2, would f ly  a different route each 
of  the 9 days, ranging over  the Pacific and to  the northern and southern 
borders  of  the United States, as far  east as the Dakotas,  and would  end 
May  26.  The Galileo I1 would  fly to  Paris May  30  for  exhibition  at the 
Paris Air Show, then f ly  to  Cologne in West Germany where the ESA ex- 
periments  would  be  removed. 
Mission  specialist  on ASSESS  2  would  be  astronaut  Karl  Henize  of 
JSC  with  astronaut  Robert  Parker,  also  of  JSC,  as  backup.  NASA 
payload  specialists on ASSESS 2 would be David S. Billiu and Robert T. 
Menzies of  JPL,  with  Leon  Weaver  of  MSFC  as backup  to both;  ESA 
payload  specialist  would  be  Claude  Nicollier  of  Switzerland,  with 
Juergen  Fein  of  West Germany as backup.  The other payload  specialist 
position  would  be  shared  by  Michael Taylor  of  England  (on  6 flights) 
and Klaus Kramp of West Germany (on 3 flights). The simulation would 
confine the  crew  to  the aircraft  and an  adjacent  mobile van  containing 
living quarters similar  to  those available on the Shuttle.  (NASA Release 
77-94;  ESA  anno May  10/77) 
*  The Natl.  Space Club announced that Dr.  Robert S. Cooper,  director 
of  GSFC  since  July  1976,  would  speak  a t   its  May  26  luncheon.  Dr. 

84 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MAY 

Cooper came to  NASA  from DOD, where he had been assistant director 
for  research  and  engineering  since  1972,  heading  establishment  of  the 
joint  services NavStar  global positioning  system. He had begun a t  Mass. 
Inst.  of  Technology  in  1958 as  instructor of  electrical engineering,  was 
assistant professor  there from  1963 to  1966, and had been a manager  a t  
MIT’s  Lincoln  Laboratory until joining DOD.  (NSC anno May  12/77) 

May 13: JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a 
7-day  simulation  of  a  typical  Spacelab mission  planned  for  the  Space 
Shuttle  in  the  1980s.  Living  aboard  a  high-fidelity  mockup  of  the 
Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would  be  physician Dr. William 
E.  Thornton,  mission  specialist,  and  Dr.  Carter  Alexander,  payload 
specialist,  both  of  JSC,  plus  payload  specialist Dr.  Bill A.  Williams  of 
ARC.  Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health serv- 
ices  for  the  simulation crew. 
ARC had  shipped a rack of  20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the 
simulation,  and  JSC  had  provided  6  other  experiments.  Life  sciences 
payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab 
missions to  show the effects of  space on living organisms, improve health 
care for the crews of  actual missions,  and help in designing life-support 
systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC 
Release 77-32) 

May 15: NASA announced the expected arrival of  a USSR  research ship 
off  the Virginia  coast  near  Wallops  Flight  Center  about  June  1 to par- 
ticipate in a series of  rocket  launches to  investigate ionization sources in 
earth’s  upper  atmosphere.  The  research  ship  Professor  Vize  would 
operate  offshore  as  the  Soviet  launch  platform.  The  joint  American- 
Soviet  particle  intercalibration  (JASPIC)  project  would  compare  tech- 
niques  used  by  both  nations  to  measure  the  intensity  of  electrons  and 
protons  entering  the  lower  ionosphere,  and  t o  define  the  role  of  these 
particles  in  nighttime  ionization  of  the  lower  ionosphere  in  the 
midlatitudes , thought  to cause high-latitude auroras. 
The  researchers  would  base  comparisons  on  results  of  4  sounding- 
rocket launches from Wallops and 5  Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from 
the  ship. One of  the NASA  rockets would  release a chemical  cloud  that 
might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint  activity in Aug.  1976 
had  launched  22  pairs  of  rockets  over  a  2wk  period.  U.S.  and  Sov  et 
scientists had  decided in  1975 that discrepancies shown by  the scientific 
literature in measurements  of  ionosphere energetic particles might  arise 
from instrumentation differences, and had agreed t o  joint measurements 
and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place.  (NASA Release 
78-7 1) 

85 

M A Y  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Airline  service  between  the  U.S.  and  the  United  Kingdom  might  be 
disrugted  by  failure  to   agree  on  new  rules  for  sharing  the  traffic, 
Transportation Secy. Brock Adams told the  Washington Post. The Ber- 
muda Agreement  that had  governed air  transportation  between  the two 
countries since 1946 would  expire in June,  and talks  had begun  in Sept. 
1976 on new provisions. The British government was said to  want exactly 
half  the passengers traveling between  the two nations or  their  territories 
to   fly  on British  carriers,  although almost  two-thirds  of  the  passengers 
were Americans. U.S.  officials were reported  in dismay at the British de- 
mand  for a bigger share of  the traffic, although the U.K.  had earned $1.4 
billion  in  revenues  from  aviation  and  tourism  combined,  5 5 %   of  the 
total  between  the two  countries. 

The U.S.  had  generally  viewed  international  aviation  as  part  of  its 
overall foreign policy, whereas other nations generally had  a single car- 
rier  either publicly  owned or  publicly  supported whose officials were in- 
terested  solely  in  increasing  their  carrier’s  share  of  passengers;  U.S. 
philosophy  had  favored  more  rather  than  less  competition  in  both 
domestic  and  international  aviation,  U.S.  Ambassador  Alan  S.  Boyd, 
who  would  head  the U.S.  delegation  to  the  talks,  said  he could  give “a 
succinct summary of  our differences  . . . The United States wants equal 
opportunity for all carriers; the British want equal benefits.” A complica- 
tion would be the New York  port authority’s refusal to  allow British and 
French Concordes to  land at JFK Airport,  declared unlawful by  a recent 
court decision presently under  appeal.  ( W  Pos t ,  May  15/77, K1) 

The  W Post reported  that 9 USSR  ships would join U.S.  ships during 
June in “Polimode,” a joint  study of  ocean currents in the so-called Ber- 
muda  Triangle where  numbers  of  ships over  the  years  had  disappeared 
without  trace,  inspiring  best-selling  books  on   the  subject.  A  USSR 
research  team  had  detected  by  satellite “powerful whirl  formations” ex- 
tending  hundreds  of  miles  and  resembling  cyclones  on  land,  the 
Washington Post said. Tass,  the Soviet news agency, said the formations 
apparently  reached  from  the  surface  to   a  depth  of  several  thousand 
yards.  ( W  Post,  Parade, May  15/77, 6) 

0  Threats  to   the  earth’s  ozone  layer  remained  a  matter  for  concern, 
Walter  Sullivan  reported  in  the  N Y  Times,  especially  fluorocarbons 
widely  used  as  aerosol  propellants  and  accumulating  as  chlorine 
byproducts in  the atmosphere where  they would  break  down  ozone and 
expose  the  earth  to   more  ultraviolet  light.  Health  records  from  the 
United  Nations  had  shown that people living in  low  latitudes where  the 
ozone  layer  was  thinner  and  sunlight  more  abundant  had  a  markedly 
higher  rate  of  skin  cancers,  especially  of  the  often  fatal  melanoma. 

86 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MAY 

Although some scientists noted that atmospheric ozone would normally 
vary with latitude, season, and even with the sunspot cycle, public health 
officials  said  any  total  increase  in  ultraviolet  exposure would  probably 
increase the incidence of  cancer. 
Other dangers to  the ozone layer included supersonic planes and other 
high-flying  aircraft,  nuclear  explosions,  and  the  heavy  use  of  nitrogen 
fertilizers.  The  Natl.  Academy  of  Science  had  proposed  outlawing 
fluorocarbon  gases  as  propellants  except  in  medical  products.  (NYT ,  
May  15/77,  4-9) 

May  26:  NASA  announced  that  the  10th  annual  U.S.  industrial  film 
festival had presented the Chairman’s  Special Award, Best of  Festival, to 
NASA’s  motion picture “Universe.”  Finalists among 970 movies  from 5 
nations were the NASA film, the Smithsonian Institution’s “TO Fly,” and 
IBM’s  “Parade  of  the  Tall  Ships.”  Produced  for  NASA  by  Graphic 
Films,  “Universe” had  also  received  an Academy Award  nomination,  a 
CINE gold-eagle rating,  and awards from the San Francisco and Golden 
Gate Festivals.  It Would  be  the U.S.  entry in a  number  of  international 
film  festivals during  1977. (NASA Release 77-96) 

0  The Natl.  Aeronautic  and Atmospheric Administration  announced it 
would  conduct  a  pilot  project  this  summer  with  the  U.S.  Dept.  of 
Agriculture to  improve accuracy of  crop forecasting, based largely on the 
amount of  solar radiation, available moisture, and air temperatures for a 
given area.  Using  devices on NOAA  spacecraft  to measure cloud cover 
and  relate  it  to   the  amount  of  sunlight  reaching  ground-based 
pyranometers,  NOAA  and USDA  investigators  would  compare hourly 
readings from the Goes I geostationary satellite with measurements from 
a  network  of  pyranometers  across  the  Great  Plains,  to  determine  the 
amount of  solar energy  available to  crops in  any given period. 
The  researchers  emphasized  solar  energy  as  a  vital  factor  in  plant 
photosynthesis and in evapotranspiration (loss of water directly from the 
soil  by  evaporation  and  from plants  by  transpiration).  A  Great  Plains 
Agricultural  Council  representing  land  grant  colleges  in  Texas,  N.M., 
Okla.,  Colo.,  Kans.,  Nebr.,  S.D.,  N.D.,  Wyo.,  and  Mont.,  and  the 
USDA  agencies serving those states had requested the pilot project as an 
aid  in  the  production  of  corn,  wheat,  and  sorghum.  (NOAA  Release 
77-122) 

Aviation Week reported that NASA had chosen “key missions” fo r  the 
six orbital flight tests of  the Shuttle and had assigned payloads as well as 
the weight  and volume available for additional experiments.  Chester M. 
Lee,  director  of  Space Transportation  System  operations,  would  give 
Associate  Administrator  John  E.  Naugle  a  list  to  begin  assigning  ex- 

87 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

periments  on  the  basis  of  the  key  payloads.  For  the  first mission  (ten- 
tative schedule, March  1979) the Shuttle would carry only a developmen- 
tal flight-instrumentation unit  that would  also ride on other  flight hsts. 
On the  second mission  (July  1979),  the  first true Shuttle payload would 
be  an  instrumented  pallet  for  scientific  research  amounting  to   only  a 
small weight in the payload bay but offering the NASA program office a 
first research  opportunity on the Shuttle. 
On subsequent missions the Shuttle would carry (Sept.  1979) a remote 
manipulator  built  by  Canada  to  maneuver  a  payload  on  the  end  of  a 
jointed arm,  plus a scientific payload;  (Dee.  1979) a large spin-stabilized 
upper  stage to  boost  an undetermined spacecraft payload  into a higher 
orbit;  (Feb.  1980)  an  interim upper  stage  for  attachment  to  Skylab,  to  
boost  it  into a higher  orbit,  or  an   alternate payload  such  as the  long- 
duration  exposure  facility;  (March  1980)  a  possible  classified  payload 
(such  as the USAF Teal Ruby  system for detecting and tracking aircraft 
from space) plus a GSFC-designed multimission spacecraft. The seventh 
orbital  mission  set  in  May  1980  would  probably  be  a  NASA-ESA 
Spacelab launch, unless another flight test was needed.  NASA noted that 
unforeseen circumstances could change the key-payload schedule for the 
first orbital flight tests.  (AvWk ,  May  16/77,  13) 

May  Z7:  NASA  announced  it  had  investigated  a  unique  propulsion 
system  for  sending  a  spacecraft  to   rendezvous  with  Halley’s  Comet  in 
1986. The comet had made some 30 visits since 467 B.C.,  and its next ap- 
pearance would  offer NASA  an opportunity to find out more about the 
origin of  the  solar  system. 
A  device  using  solar  electric  propulsion,  suggested  by  MSFC  and 
tested  for  several yr  a t  Lewis  Research  Center,  would  aim  solar  energy 
concentrated by  reflectors a t  conventional solar cells  to  provide electric 
power  for a system of  8 ion engines capable of  taking a spacecraft to  an 
encounter with the Halley comet around Christmas Day 1985 just outside 
earth’s orbit. The spacecraft would reach the comet during its most active 
state as it  passed  near  the  sun,  and could  send pictures  of  the comet  to  
earth,  possibly  sending  a  probe  through  the  comet’s  tail  toward  its 
nucleus  t o   define  its  properties.  NASA  would  decide  in  August  1977 
whether to  use the solar electric system, or a solar sail being developed by 
JPL,  in  its  rendezvous  with  Halley’s  Comet.  (NASA  Release  77-97; 
MSFC  Release 77-87) 

0  NASA  announced  it  would  launch  on  or   about  May  28  a  new  en- 
vironmental  monitoring  satellite  GOES-B,  latest  in  a  series  to   be 
operated by NOAA,  to  keep watch over  the eastern half  of  the U.S.  and 
the Atlantic Ocean,  just  in time  for this yr’s  hurricane season. Built  like 
the  first  three  in  the  series by  Ford Aerospace  Corp.,  GOES-B  would 

88 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

N A Y  

replace  Goes  1 as NOAA's  east  coast  satellite at  about 75"W;  Goes  I 
would move  to  standby status a t  about  105"W.  (NASA  Release 77-88) 

0  NASA  announced  it  had  awarded  Computer  Sciences  Corp.  a  $41 
million  contract for support services to  communications and instrumen- 
tation  a t   KSC,  the  major  site  for  Space  Shuttle  launches  beginning  in 
1979. 

Services would be in 2 categories: the first, covering 3yr, would include 
modification, installation, operation, and maintenance of an operational 
intercommunications  system,  operational  TV  system,  and  checkout- 
control-monitor  subsystem. The second category,  lyr  with 2yr  option to  
renew,  would  cover  KSC  work  on  communications,  measurements, 
telemetrics,  computer services, data storage and retrieval, program plan- 
ning,  and reliability and quality assurance.  (NASA Release 77-104; KSC 
Release  104-77) 

0  MSFC  reported  that  the  Energy  Research  and  Development  Ad- 
ministration had  selected 80 new projects for installing solar heating and 
cooling, on 27  of  which MSFC would monitor technical design and con- 
struction. MSFC was  already monitoring  32 commercial demonstration 
projects  selected  by  ERDA in April  1976 as the  first of  a  series;  ERDA 
would  issue a  third  solicitation for  proposals later this  summer,  the an- 
nouncement  said. 
Dr.  Henry  H.  Marvin,  director  of  ERDA's  division  of  solar  energy, 
said cooperative agreements negotiated  by  MSFC with  the 27  proposers 
of  projects  would  be  signed  within  approximately  3mo.  Government 
funding  on  a  cost-sharing  basis  would  cover  only  the  solar portions  of 
the  projects;  more  than  90%  of  the  funds  would  go  to   projects  with 
substantial small business participation,  and more  than  half  the awards 
would  go  to   teams  using  solar  energy  systems  supplied  by  small 
businesses.  (MSFC Release 77-89) 

9  NASA  announced  that  it  and  the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences  had 
agreed  to   continue  joint  technical,  scientific,  and  operational  activity 
developed in the Apollo-Soyuz mission July  1975 by  starting studies of 2 
programs, one for a joint orbital manned flight, the other for an interna- 
tional space station. 
The agreement signed May 6 by Acting NASA Administrator Dr. Alan 
M.  Lovelace  and May  11 by  Anatoly  P.  Aleksandrov,  president  of  the 
Soviet Academy  of  Sciences,  envisioned  preliminary  project  documents 
within  6 to   12mo and definitive documents within  a  yr, noting  that  the 
working  groups  should  proceed  on   the  assumption  of  a  first  flight  in 
1981. Working  groups to study experiments, basic and applied, and the 

89 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

operation  of  a  Salyut-Shuttle mission  would  be  named  within  3  days 
after  the agreement  became  effective;  a third  group,  which  would  con- 
sider  development  of  an  international  space  platform,  would  be  ap- 
pointed within 2mo.  NASA  stressed  that  neither  side would  be commit- 
ted  beyond  initial  studies,  and either  could  proceed  with  its  own  space 
station  interests.  (NASA Release 77-98; NYT ,  May  18/77, A15) 

May 18: NASA announced it would launch on or about May 26 the third 
Intelsat  IV-A  commercial  comsat  from KSC  on  an Atlas  Centaur  for 
service over the Atlantic Ocean,  initially as a  backup  for Intelsats IV-A 
F-1 and F-2 offering communications services to  countries from Central 
America to Iran. The IV-A spacecraft built by Hughes Aircraft Co.  had 
communications capability almost two-thirds greater than the Intelsat IV 
series now  operating:  i t  had  a 7yr design life and capacity to relay more 
than  6 OOO  simultaneous telephone calls and two TV  programs.  (NASA 
Release  77-99;  MOR  E-491-633-77-05  [prelaunch]  May  20/77; 
INTELSAT Release 77-10-M) 

0  NASA  reported  that  its  research  and  technology  advisory  council 
(RTAC) panel on general aviation technology had named stalls and spins 
as the greatest safety problem  for designers of  light  aircraft,  accounting 
for 30% of all fatalities in those planes. LaRC had established a program 
in response to requests for additional research on the problem,  including 
definition of  the aerodynamic characteristics of  aircraft at high angles of 
attack; ways to avoid stalling; ways to recover from spin; and ways to  en- 
sure  satisfactory  spin  characteristics.  The  program  would  also  cover 
development of  test methods such as use of  radio-controlled models, and 
consultation services to  industry. LaRC had been a leader in such studies 
since the  1930s when  it  began  operating  a  15ft spin  tunnel,  enlarged  in 
1941 to 20ft and used since then in testing more than 400 aircraft designs; 
this was  still  the only  operating  spin tunnel  in  the U.S.  (NASA  Release 
77-100;  LaRC Release 77-21) 

0  NASA  reported  that  its data-analysis facility at KSC  had been using a 
GE  multispectral  image  analyzer  developed  for  screening Landsat  im- 
agery to  detect early stages of  breast cancer, where diagnosis would  nor- 
mally be  difficult and rapid multiplication of  cancerous tissue would  re- 
quire massive  surgery.  The only  solution  previously available had  been 
repeated diagnoses by  x-ray,  itself  a health  hazard. 
Radiological examinations of  x-rays had  been  limited by  the range  of 
intensity detectable by  the human  eye,  which was  unable  to  distinguish 
more than 32 shades of gray, meaning that much of the data would be ef- 
fectively invisible.  However,  the microdensitometer  on the GE analyzer 
was  able  to   differentiate 256  shades  of  gray  with  great  accuracy.  The 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS. 1977 

MAY 

computerized output  of  the densitometer would  enter  the analyzer with 
orders  for  enhancement,  so that  data  previously  invisible to  a  doctor’s 
eye could  be  available for earlier diagnosis. 
Robert  L.,  Butterfield,  electronics  engineer  a t   the  KSC  data-analysis 
facility, had  worked with radiologist Br. William L. Walls of  Titusville, 
Fla.,  for 2yr  on  a process  for automatic enhancement of  mammograms 
to   detect  early  stages  of  breast  cancer  before  radical  surgery  would 
become necessary.  The aim of the study had been to  differentiate women 
a t  low risk of  breast cancer  from those a t  high risk,  based on the rate of 
change in the gray shades of  the enhanced images, to reduce the need for 
repeated x-ray  diagnoses.  (NASA  Release 77-102;  KSC  Release  105-77) 

The  Intl.  Academy of  Astronautics announced that the 28th congress 
of  the  Intl.  Astronautical  Federation would  take place  from Sept. 25  to  
Oct.  1,1977, in Prague, in conjunction with the 1 l t h  symposium on con- 
tributions  to   the  history  of  rocketry.  Theme  of  the  congress would  be 
“Using  Space-Today  and  Tomorrow.”  Dr.  Charles Stark  Draper  was 
IAA  president.  (IAA  anno) 

May  19: NASA  reported  that MSFC  had  received  119 proposals for ex- 
periments  in materials processing to be performed on Space Shuttle and 
Spacelab flights. As  lead center for the Spacelab program, a cooperative 
venture of  NASA  and ESA, MSFC had  been  given project management 
responsibility  for the  first three Spacelab payloads.  An MSFC team had 
evaluated the proposals,  and the center would  announce selection of  be- 
tween  10 and 20 experiments by  the end of  July.  (NASA Release 77-103; 
MSFC  Release 77-91) 

NASA  announced  it had  issued proposals  to buy 6 spinning solid fuel 
upper  stages  (SSUS)  for  boosting  spacecraft  launched  from  the  Space 
Shuttle into higher orbits. The decision was the first step following agree- 
ment  earlier  this  yr  with  McDonnell  Douglas  and  Boeing  Aerospace, 
allowing them  to  design, build,  and test the devices and market  them  in- 
dependently  of  NASA.  The agency as part  of  a procurement agreement 
would  normally  bear  cost  of  development  and  production;  the  current 
bidding would  be  limited to  the 2 companies that had  agreed to  develop 
the  stages with  private  funds. 
The purchase would include hardware, analyses, logistics, and services 
needed  to put a spacecraft into higher  orbit after launch and orientation 
by  the  Space  Shuttle.  The contractor  would  build  the  vehicle,  provide 
services, and operate the systems.  First delivery in Dec.  1979 would be a 
flight demonstrator; 3 others would launch advanced Intelsat V comsats; 
the  other  2  would  serve  for  other  missions.  (NASA  Release  77-101; 
MSFC  Release 77-90) 

91 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

0  Press  reports  said  a  23  9001b  solid-fuel  rocket  had  fallen  off  a Delta 
launch vehicle standing on its pad at KSC May 18 awaiting the mid-June 
launch of  ESA’s  high-frequency  communications test satellite (CTS).  In  
its  12ft fall,  the booster  had  plunged  through  a platform  and damaged 
the  Delta’s  liquid-oxygen  tank;  the  entire  assembly  would  have  to   b% 
removed  for  repairs.  Cause  was  probably  failure  of  one  of  the  at- 
tachments holding the motor in place, a spokesman said; an investigation 
was  under  way.  The  Delta  had  on  its  first  stage  9  of  the  solid-fuel 
boosters,  each  more  than  36ft  tall  and  4ft  in  diameter,  normally  jetti- 
soned  about  a  minute  and  a half  into  flight.  (Today,  May  19/77,  8A; 
photo,  1A; AvWk ,  May  23/77,  27) 

Nature magazine reported tha t  the NASA  budget had met unexpected 
opposition  in  Congress,  endangering  2  major  scientific  missions:  the 
large space  telescope,  long regarded  by  space scientists  as NASA’s  top- 
priority  project,  and the  Jupiter  orbiter probe  planned  as a  twin  launch 
in  1982 of craft  to  orbit  the planet  and send probes into its atmosphere. 
Lobbying by NASA  and the scientific community might rescue the proj- 
ects,  but loss of  either would  be a serious blow to  the agency’s program. 
Nature  said  this  yr’s  efforts  would  be  crucial  because  space  science 
money  had  been  squeezed  out of  NASA’s  budget  for 4yr  to  pay  for the 
Space Shuttle, and further delay would  probably kill  future chances for 
approval of  these missions.  (Nature, May  19/77,  196) 

0  The Chicago  Tribune reported  that U S .  Secy.  of  State Cyrus Vance 
and USSR Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko had begun high-level arms 
control  talks  in Geneva  by  signing  a  convention against environmental 
warfare and extending a previous agreement on space that had governed 
the  1975  hookup  between  Apollo  and  Soyuz  spacecraft,  calling  for 
cooperation in space science such as exchange of  data on Mars, Venus, 
and the moon.  (C Trib, May  19/77,  1-1) 

May 20: LaRC announced it had  developed  an ocean-surface wind  sen- 
sor  for  SeaSat-A,  managed  by  JPL  and  scheduled  for  launch  in  1978. 
SeaSat  instruments  would  record  wind  and  pressure  data  over  the 
oceans;  lack  of  this  information  had  prevented  accurate  long-range 
weather  forecasting.  LaRC  research  had  shown  the  sensitivity  of 
microwave  scatterometers  to  sea-surface  winds;  LaRC’s  sensor  for 
SeaSat contained a scatterometer able to  measure wind  speed and direc- 
tion over a thousand-kilometer  area.  (LaRC  Release 77-20) 
*  ARC  reported  successful completion May  19 of  a  test  to qualify  the 
Pioneer/Venus  probe  for entry  into  the Venus  atmosphere.  One of  the 
two spacecraft scheduled for the Pioneer/Venus mission arriving there in 
C - 2 -  

YZ 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

M A Y  

1978 would  carry a main  probe and three smaller probes to  be dropped 
off  a t   8000km intervals t o  measure the Venus  atmosphere  from top  to  
bottom.  At 47km  above the surface of Venus,  the probe would  separate 
from  its  heatshield,  leaving  its  parachute behind,  to   descend  as far  as 
possible before the planet’s  heat destroyed it. Venus surface temperature 
would  exceed  500°C (92OoF), hotter  than  the melting point  of  zinc. 
At White Sands Missile Range, N.M.,  the U.S.  Air Force’s Geophysics 
Laboratory  launched  a high-altitude plastic balloon  measuring 90K m3 
(about 3 million ft3) to  an altitude of  about 28km;  about 8hr later when 
wind  conditions were right,  the balloon  released  from a height of  about 
30km  an   instrumented  probe  equipped  t o   record  system  performance 
while White Sands personnel tracked  and recovered the probe pressure- 
vessel and parachute.  At an altitude of  15km above earth,  the heat and 
density  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  probe  velocity  resembled  those  ex- 
pected  on   Venus  a t   67km  above  the  surface,  the  point  of  actual 
parachute deployment.  (ARC Release 77-30) 

NASA  announced it had awarded to Lockheed-California Co.  a con- 
tract  to   demonstrate  compositematerial  technology  in  manufacturing 
L-1011 vertical  stabilizers.  NASA would  cover  $1.57  million of  the cost 
of  the 6.5yr  contract, Lockheed $1.7  million,  like others in the agency’s 
program  t o  increase by  50%  the fuel efficiency of  civilian transport  air- 
craft.  LaRC would  manage  the contract.  (LaRC Release 77-22; NASA 
Release 77-108) 

May 23: President  Carter announced  the  nomination  of  Dr.  Robert A. 
Frosch, 49,  associate director of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institu- 
tion  in Mass.  since  1975, t o  head  the Natl.  Aeronautics and Space Ad- 
ministration.  Dr.  Frosch  would  succeed  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  who 
resigned May  1 after 6yrs as administrator of  the  agency. 

A native New  Yorker,  Dr.  Frosch had  earned A.B.,  A.M.,  and Ph.D 
degrees  from Columbia Univ.  From  1973 to  1975 he was asst.  secretary 
general  of  the  United  Nations  and  assistant  head  of  its environmental 
program.  From  1966  to   1975  he  was  asst.  secretary  of  the  Navy  for 
research  and  development,  working  on  naval-research  projects  a t   the 
Hudson Laboratories  of  Columbia  Univ.  where  he  had  been  director 
from  1956  to   1963.  Dr.  Frosch  had  received  the  Arthur  S. Flemming 
award in 1966 and the Navy’s  distinguished public service award in 1969. 
(NASA  release 77-107;  NYT, May  24/77,  19) 

0  MSFC reported results of a gamma-ray detector launched on a balloon 
May  11 from the Natl.  Scientific Balloon Facility  at Palestine, Tex.,  to  
study sources of bursting and pulsating x-rays and gamma rays during an 

93 

MAY  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

18hr flight. MSFC scientists headed by Dr. Charles Meegan, principal in- 
vestigator  and  associate  of  the  Natl.  Research  Council,  had  sent  a 
420 000m3 (15  million  ft3) balloon  carrying  an  array  of  12 large-area 
detectors with  total  payload  weight  of  590kg  (13001b)  to  an altitude of 
39km (126 OOOft)  to  transmit  data back  to the launch site for recording. 
High  winds  had  interrupted  the  successful  mission  and  brought  the 
balloon  down  with  some  payload  damage.  Investigators would  use  the 
data for the scheduled June 30 launch of NASA’s high-energy astronomy 
observatory (HEAO).  (MSFC Release 77-93) 

0  NASA  announced  that  the  Arizona  Dept.  of  Transportation  and  2 
federal agencies had  demonstrated solar energy potential by  using an ar- 
ray  of  solar cells to  power  a dust-storm warning  system in central Ariz. 
The state had  installed the system over an 80mi area on  Interstate 10 be- 
tween Phoenix and Tucson,  and west  on Interstate 8 near Casa Grande, 
to   help  motorists  avoid  accidents  in  low-visibility  conditions  resulting 
from blowing  dust.  In  normal mode,  the signs would display directional 
information; when dust storms struck, the message would change to give 
motorists the radio frequencies on which  storm-alert instructions would 
be  available. 
The  state  agency  (working  with  LeRC,  which  had  managed  the  ap- 
plications project for the Energy Research and Development Administra- 
tion)  would  replace  propane-fueled  6Ow  generators  at  40 signs  in  the 
system with solar arrays, halving the cost. Each sign would use solar elec- 
tricity to  power the lighting,  changeable-message feature, and radio com- 
munications activated by a link from Phoenix when dust storms were im- 
minent.  (NASA Release 77-106) 

0  MSFC  reported  that Teledyne Brown  Engineering  Co.  had  built  for 
Shuttle  tank  testing  at  the  center  an  “upper  reaction  structure”  resem- 
bling  a mammoth doughnut,  42ft  in  diameter,  12ft high,  and weighing 
124 500kg (137tons), so large that the manufacturer had to remove a wall 
at its plant to get it out of  the building. The structure, riding on a special 
32-wheel lowboy trailer with a 16-wheel dolly, would block  roads during 
a 3 to  4hr trip from the builder to  the MSFC test stand where Bendix per- 
sonnel would  install it at the 46m  (150ft) level, to  support the structural 
test  article  simulating  the  external  tank  and  to  record  test  loads  and 
stresses.  (MSFC Release 77-94) 

May 24:  The  Washington Star  reported  that the USAF had  launched  a 
“spy satellite” from Cape Canaveral a t  2: 13pm May 23 as part of  a series 
to  monitor rocket  tests in the USSR  and PRC and give early warning of 
any missile attack. Defenseh’pace Daily said the “experimental payload” 
launched on an Atlas Agena was  either a test of  improved early-warning 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

M A Y  

equipment  or  part  of  a  more  advanced  early-warning  system.  Orbit 
parameters  deleted  from  NORAD  and NASA  records  but  reported  by 
the UK  Royal Aircraft Establishment were 40 800km apogee,  30  200km 
perigee,  and 9”  inclination.  The USAF  had  not  announced  the  launch, 
visible to  residents of the area, before liftoff and issued only a brief  state- 
ment  afterward.  ( W Star, May  24/77,  A-3;  D /SD ,  May  25/77,  138) 

0  NASA  announced  it  would  launch  no  earlier  than  May  25  GOES-B, 
second  in  a  series  funded  by  NOAA  to  meet  DOC  requirements  for  a 
geostationary operational environmental satellite system. Sms I and Sms 
2, prototypes  funded  by  NASA  and still in  orbit,  had  been  launched  in 
May  1974 and Feb.  1975; Goes 1, first operational spacecraft funded by 
NOAA,  was  launched  Oct.  1975.  GOES-B  would  augment  existing 
coverage  of  earth  weather  and  would  become  part  of  the  global  at- 
mospheric  research  program  (GARP).  (MOR  E-608-77-04  [prelaunch] 
May 24/77) 

0  ESA  announced  it  had  postponed  launch  of  its  experimental  comsat 
OTS (orbital  test  satellite)  originally  scheduled  to,  go  June  16.  The 
spacecraft  had  left  Amsterdam’s  Schiphol  airport  May  9  headed  for 
prelaunch checkout at ETR; it had not been mounted on its launch vehi- 
cle  at  the  time  when  one  of  the  solid-fuel  booster  rockets  fell  off  and 
damaged  the  first  stage  [see  May  191.  An  inquiry  into  the  April  20 
malfunction  of  a  Delta  carrying ESA’s  GEOS  had  already  delayed  the 
OTS  launch  for a t  least  a wk.  (ESA  release May  24/77) 
*  MSFC  announced  it  had  completed modifications  of  the  Saturn  test 
stand  used  in  the  1960s  for  static-test  firings  of  the  first  stages  of  the 
Saturn  1 and  1B and scheduled  for  structural tests of  the Space Shuttle 
solid-fuel rocket booster. The tests would use a short-stack SRB (lacking 
two center segments, measuring  18.3cm less than  the actual boosters) to  
simulate prelaunch,  flight,  and recovery  reactions. Each  Shuttle launch 
would  need  two  SRBs  each  simultaneously  generating  11.79-million 
newtons (2.65 million  lb )  of  thrust at liftoff; separating at burnout from 
the  external  tank,  the  casings  would  parachute  into  the  ocean  for 
recovery  and reuse in as many  as 20  flights.  (MSFC Release 77-95) 

0  NASA reported that Dr. Herbert Frey, a NASA-Univ. of Md.  scientist 
working a t  GSFC,  had  prepared  a  paper  for presentation  June 2 a t  the 
meeting  of  the American Geophysical Union  in Washington,  D.C.,  sug- 
gesting  that  asteroid  bombardment  more  than  4  billion  yr  ago  that 
created earth’s  ocean basins  had  resulted  in  the  development  of  life on 
this planet. 
Building on the work of  other scientists, including that of  GSFC’s Dr. 

95 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Paul  Lowman  on  earth’s  crustal evolution,  Dr.  Frey  used  data  from 
Apollo  lunar  landings and  photography  from  spacecraft studies of  the 
moon,  Mercury,  and Mars  to  show  that  during the reference period all 
the  inner  bodies  suffered heavy  asteroid impacts which  must  have  af- 
fected earth as well.  The impacts led to geological changes on earth that 
resulted in plate tectonics and  the formation of  seabeds.  If  the presence 
of  life had eventuated from catastrophic bombardment by asteroids, the 
paper  noted,  then  life  elsewhere might  also  depend  upon  such  events. 
(NASA  Release  77-105) 

May 25:  Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had  developed an 
autopilot  device  during  flight  tests  of  the  YF-12  aircraft  that  would 
enable future high-speed planes to  fly closer t o  the preset flight path. Ex- 
perience gained  from aircraft cruising at high  speeds and high  altitudes 
had shown deviations up to   f 4OOOft  in altitude and more than 30mph in 
speed from those planned. An aircraft flying across the country a t  Mach 
3 could encounter normal changes in temperature and pressure as rapid 
changes that  could affect the Mach number; conventional techniques to  
correct for those changes had caused large altitude deviations and poor- 
quality passenger  comfort.  The  deviations could  degrade  aircraft per- 
formance or overrun the plane’s  operating limitations. The new  control 
system  combining  surface motion  and  throttle motion, a o t  previously 
used together, with newly developed data sensors, had kept the YF-12 on 
a highly precise flight path even a t  high-speed conditions over extended 
periods of  time.  (DFRC Release 19-77)  , c 

0  KSC  announced  it  had  awarded  to   the Univ.  of  Fla.  a $16 200  sup- 
plemental grant to  continue a  study of  the  effects of  lightning strikes. 
University  personnel  had  been  doing  research  on  lightning under  this 
grant  since  1973;  working  as  consultants,  they  had  used  advanced  in- 
strumentation available at KSC  together with  engineers from  the space 
vehicle operations and information systems directorates to measure high- 
frequency radiation from lightning activity within  a  cloud,  intensity of 
lightning strikes,  and  the  extent  of  damage  to   structures or  aerial and 
underground  cables.  The  study  would  improve  handling  of  Shuttle 
launch,  processing,  and  landing  under  marginal  weather  conditions. 
(KSC Release 108-77) 

0  A KSC  spokesman  said work  was  proceeding  slowly  on  dismantling 
the Delta vehicle  that had  lost one of  its solid-fuel rocket boosters May 
18 while waiting on the launch pad a t  Cape Canaveral, Today newspaper 
reported.  The  second  stage  of  the  Delta  had  already been  removed  to  
clear  the way  for  detaching  the boosters from  the  first  stage and  then 
removing  the  first  stage,  damaged when  one  of  the 9 boosters crashed 

% 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

M A Y  

12ft through  a  support  platform.  The  accident,  which  interrupted  an  
ESA  comsat launch  scheduled for  June,  had  also  delayed  launch  of  a 
US. weather  satellite.  (Today ,  May 25/77,  12A) 

9  The Natl.  Science Foundation reported that Census Bureau figures for 
the end of  1975 had shown a 5yr  decline in private industry employment 
of  scientists and  engineers. Private  industry had been by  far  the largest 
employer  of  scientists  and  engineers,  using  about  2/3  of  all  those 
employed.  Engineers  constituted  72%  (850000)  of  all  <that group 
employed  by  private  industry,  the  largest  numbers  being  electrical 
engineers  (292 OOO)  and  mechanical  and  aeronautical  engineers 
(201 OOO).  Computer scientists were  the  largest group  (143 OOO)  among 
scientists,  as  well  as  the  largest  group  (100 OOO)  employed  by  non- 
manufacturing industries. Among physical scientists (104  OOO),  the most 
numerous specialty was chemists (65  OOO),  more than 3/4 of  them work- 
ing in nondurable goods manufacturing industries including chemical in- 
dustries.  Private  industry  employment  of  scientists  and  engineers 
decreased  5670  between  1970  and  1975,  compared  to   a  14%  gain  in 
1965-1970  and  a  19% gain  in  1960-1965.  The drop in employment be- 
tween  1970 and  1975 was mostly in durable goods manufacturing; non- 
manufacturing industries showed an  11% increase in engineers employed 
during that  period.  (NSF 77-132) 

May 26: NASA launched Intelsat IVA F-4,  third in the series of  Intelsat 
IVA global comsats, from Cape Kennedy on an Atlas Centaur at 5:47pm 
EDT  into  a  transfer  orbit  with  35,904.4km  apogee,  548.9km  perigee, 
21.8"  inclination, and 641.87min period. ComSatCorp, U.S. member of 
the  Intl.  Telecommunications  Satellite  Corp.  (INTELSAT)  and  its 
management services contractor,  fired the apogee kick motor a t  850pm  
EDT May 27 over the western Pacific, putting the spacecraft into a near- 
circular synchronous orbit a t  about 35  784km (22 24Omi) altitude to  drift 
eastward  to  its station over the Atlantic a t  34.5"W  after  a mo  of  com- 
munications tests.  INTELSAT, owner of  the comsat series, would reim- 
burse NASA  for  costs of  the  launch vehicle and  launch services. 
The Hughes Aircraft-built spacecraft weighing 1515kg (33401b) a t  lift- 
off measured about 7m (23ft) tall and 2.4m  (8ft) in diameter and carried 
a  new  design  of  antenna  that  would  provide  coverage  from  Central 
America t o  Iran by using shaped beams.  The 320MHz bandwidths point- 
ing east and west were  sufficiently isolated to  allow the frequency spec- 
trum  to  be  used  twice,  once eastward and  once westward,  doubling the 
use  of  that  spectrum.  The  spacecraft  with  a  7yr  lifetime would  offer 
about 6250 two-way voice circuits plus 2 TV channels, two-thirds more 
capacity  than  that  of  the  Intelsat  IV  series.  It  would  initially  serve  as 
backup to the two Atlantic area comsats, Intelsat IVA F-I a t  24.5"W  and 

97 

MAY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Intelsat,IVA F-2 at 29.5”W.  (NASA Release 77-99; KSC Release 103-77; 
MOR E-491-633-77-03  [prelaunch] May 20/77,  [postlaunch] Aug 30/77; 
INTELSAT Release 77-11-M) 

DFRC announced that the first manned test flight of  the Space Shuttle 
orbiter,  previously scheduled for May 26,  had been postponed to  a date 
no earlier  than  June  9,  depending  on  successful completion  of  orbiter 
ground tests.  The manned  test would  begin  the second phase of  Shuttle 
approach  and  landing  trials  t o   verify  aerodynamic  and  flight-control 
characteristics of  the orbiter.  Cause of  the postponement was delay in or- 
biter systems checkout and verification testing after completion in March 
of  the first flights of  the orbiter linked to  its 747 carrier.  (DFRC Release 
18-77) 

0  KSC  announced  i t  had  awarded  to   Planning  Research  Corporation, 
McLean,  Va.,  a $25 720 364 contract extension for engineering support 
services  to   the  Space  Shuttle  program  and  other  activities  where  the 
design-engineering directorate a t  KSC  had  design  responsibilities.  The 
12mo cost-plus-award-fee  extension  through May  1978 had brought  the 
value of  the contract originally awarded in May 1974 to  $72 616 061. The 
company employed more than  1100 workers at KSC and Cape Canaveral 
Air  Force  Station  in  Fla.,  and   a t   DFRC  and  KSC’s  Western  Launch 
Operations Division  in Calif.  (KSC Release  11 1-77) 

May 27: MSFC announced it had issued requests for proposals to  build a 
tethered  satellite  system  for  launch  on  an  orbiting  Space  Shuttle.  The 
idea  had  been  to   provide  long-duration  measurement,  observation,  or 
performance time in earth’s atmosphere between 80 and 120km altitude, 
where  density  would  be  insufficient to   support  the  flight  of  aircraft  or 
balloons,  but  too   thick  for  free-flying  satellites.  Exploration  here  had 
been  limited  to   short-term  flight  of  sounding  rockets  or  low-level 
satellites. 
One  concept  had  been  t o   use  a  l00km  cable  to   “troll”  a  tethered 
satellite from an orbiting Shuttle;  the pull of  gravity, with constant ten- 
sion on  the cable,  would  keep  the  captive craft  at the end  of  its  string, 
oriented toward earth. Typical missions for a tethered satellite would be 
global mapping  of  earth’s magnetic  or  gravity  fields;  cargo transfer be- 
tween space vehicles;  retrieval of satellites or space debris without Shuttle 
maneuvering;  transfer  of  large  amounts of  energy  to   a  remote  experi- 
ment, or  from a remote (possibly hazardous) power source t o  a space sta- 
tion.  MSFC would manage  tethered  satellite activity  for NASA’s  Office 
of  Space Flight.  (MSFC Release 77-82) 
A NY Times editorial said that criticism of  the Apollo-Soyuz mission 

98 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

MAY 

on the basis that the U.S.  learned too little and the USSR  too much was 
misguided:  the U.S. space program  from its beginning was open “to any 
Russian  who  reads American  publications.”  I t  was  the Soviet program 
that  was  secret,  and  only  because  of  Apollo-Soyuz  had  American 
observers  been  able  to   visit  key  Soviet  space  installations.  Proposed 
cooperation  in  space  would  cost  comparatively  little  and  bring  con- 
siderable benefit from sharing costs and improving relations. (NYT ,  May 
27/77,  A-24) 
*  Science  magazine  said  the  stir  caused  by  Aviation  Week’s claim  [see 
May  21  that  the  USSR  had  tested  a  charged-particle beam  capable  of 
neutralizing U.S.  strategic missiles had  been “the sensation of  the week” 
in Washington, giving rise to  secret briefings for congressmen, an “infre- 
quent”  statement  from the CIA,  and even  a  presidential assurance that 
the US. was  not  in jeopardy.  A vWk  responded  that  the president  had 
been  “screened from vital  technical  developments” by  the  CIA and the 
Defense  Intelligence  Agency.  Science  said  AvWk   has  made  use  of 
technical and intelligence information “too esoteric for easy evaluation” 
that  Science  had  been  unable  to  verify  independently. 

An  article  in  Nature  magazine  on  the  same  subject  said A vWk   had 
based  its charges of  Soviet weapons testing  on “hydrogen with  traces of 
tritium  in  the  upper  atmosphere - which  could  mean almost anything.” 
(Science, May 27/77,  957; Nature, May  26/77,  304) 

May 3Z: JPL  announced that  its  controllers had  turned off  the biology 
instrument on Viking  lander 2 May 28  and that  on lander  1  on May  30. 
Lander  1 had  started biology investigations  July 28,  1976, and lander 2 
on Sept.  1 1 ,   both operating continuously since that time,  depleting their 
high-pressure  helium,  nutrients,  and other consumables.  They  had  car- 
ried  out  all  the  tests  originally  scheduled and “several that  hadn’t  been 
planned,” the announcement said. Both of  the landers would continue to 
operate  except  for  the  biology  and  organic  analysis  instruments,  and 
both  of  the  orbiters  had  continued  to   operate  normally.  Biologists  in 
laboratories across the U.S.  were trying various combinations of  soil and 
chemicals t o  duplicate results from the biology  instruments on the Mars 
landers.  (JPL anno May  31/77) 

During  May:  Natl.  Research  Council’s News  Report  said  a  committee 
chaired  by  MIT’s  Wilbur  B.  Davenport,  Jr.,  had  recommended  that 
NASA  resume support of  comsat services research and development but 
stay out  of  the business of  operating such  services.  The committee  said 
that agency support of  an operational program of  public service satellite 
communications would  “obscure  the  real  costs  of  the  public  service”; 

99 

M A Y  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

agencies that needed to use or  provide such services “would not be  faced 
with the hard reality of  determining whether a program is worthy of  ex- 
ecution when compared with its actual cost,” the report said. (NRC News 
Report, May  77,  1) 
*  The  Natl.  Aeronautic Assn.  newsletter  reported  that  the  USAF  in- 
dustry team that produced and demonstrated the B-1  aircraft system was 
1976 recipient of  the Collier trophy,  rather than the NASA Viking proj- 
ect with  its “spectacular success” in landing spacecraft and instrumenta- 
tion on Mars. The AFSCNewsreview said that the B-l team represented 
the  Air  Force,  Rockwell  Intl.  Corp.,  General  Electric,  Boeing  Co., 
Cutler-Hammer’s  airborne  instruments  laboratory  division,  and  more 
than 3000  other subcontractors and suppliers. 
The NAA  noted  that  50yr  earlier the solo flight of  Lindbergh  across 
the Atlantic, considered a shoo-in, had  failed to  receive the trophy given 
for “the greatest achievement in aviation in America,  the value of  which 
has  been  demonstrated by  actual  use  during  the  preceding  year”;  that 
trophy committee had  unanimously awarded it to  Charles L.  Lawrence, 
designer  of  the  Wright  Whirlwind  aircooled  radial  engine  that  had 
powered not  only Lindbergh’s Spirit of  St. Louis, but  also a number  of 
other  notable  flights  in  1927.  (NAA  newsletter,  May  77,  1;  AFSC 
Newsreview, May  77, 4) 

100 

June 

J u n e  1: NASA  announced  it  had  appointed Gerald D.  Griffin,  deputy 
director of Dryden Flight Research Center since 1976, to  be deputy direc- 
tor of Kennedy Space Center as of  July 1. He would replace Miles Ross, 
who resigned  from NASA  in May.  Griffin had worked at NASA Hq for 
3yr, as asst. administrator for legislative affairs, then as deputy associate 
administrator for operations in  the Office of  Space Flight.  A t  Johnson 
Space Center, Griffin had been a flight controller during the Gemini pro- 
gram, a flight director on all  11 Apollo missions,  and lead flight director 
on Apollo  12,  15,  and  17.  Among  his awards were NASA  exceptional 
service medals for his work on Apollo 12 and 15, the presidential Medal 
of Freedom group achievement award for Apollo 13, and the Hq creative 
management  award.  (NASA Release 77-109;  DFRC Release 20-77) 

0  DFRC  announced  it  would  drop-test  a t   the  Natl.  Parachute  Test 
Range,  El  Centro,  Calif.,  the  parachutes  for  recovering  the  reusable 
solid-fuel rocket boosters  on  the Shuttle. The tests would  be  a  series of 
air  drops  to   evaluate  design,  deployment,  performance,  and  structural 
integrity of  full-scale parachutes loaded with two configurations of drop- 
test  vehicles  offering  various  limit  and  overload  conditions  for  the 
drogue  and  main  parachutes  a t   reefed  and  full  open-canopy  shapes. 
Engineers from Marshall  Space Flight  Center, which  had  responsibility 
for  developing  the  Shuttle  boosters,  and  from  Martin  Marietta, 
developer of  the parachute  system, would use the results to  evaluate the 
adequacy  of  the  system.  (DFRC  Release 21-77;  MSFC  Release 77-98) 
The  Washington Post reported  that biology instruments on both  Vik- 
ing  landers  on  the  surface  of  Mars  had  been  shut  off,  according  to  a 
spokesman  at the  Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who  added  that  they  had 
detected  no  signs  of  life,  although combinations  of  soil  and  chemicals 
like those on  the landers were under  test in  laboratories  across the U.S. 
trying  to  duplicate  the  unexpected  results  of  the  instruments  on Mars. 
Those  results were  still being  studied,  and one test  “leaves the question 
very much open.” Don Bane of JPL  said the two landers were continuing 
other  operations  such  as meteorology  and  telephoto  transmission.  ( W  
Post, June  1/77,  A-10;  NASA  Release 77-111) 
0  The  W. Post  reported  that  the  latest  test  of  a  satellite-destruction 

101 

JUNE  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

weapon  conducted  by  the USSR  despite  an appeal by  President  Carter 
had  apparently  ended  in  failure.  In  a  test May 23,  first by  the USSR  in 
about  5m0,  the  Soviet  interceptor  spacecraft  had  missed  the  target 
satellite by  about 50mi,  according to  U.S.  intelligence sources.  The of- 
ficials  said  that,  without  knowing  the  objectives  of  a test,  it  would  be 
hard  to   assess  results,  but  the  consensus was  that  the  operation  had 
failed.  Five USSR  tests  in  the past  18mo had  failed t o  destroy  a  target 
satellite; the attempts had not been aimed a t  any U.S.  satellites but were 
confined  to   their  own.  Both  nations  had  used  observation satellites  to 
monitor  each  other’s  military  activities,  including  strategic-weapons 
testing,  missile-base  construction,  and  similar  indicators.  Still  in  the 
research stage was a U.S.  system to  knock out Soviet satellites, with  first 
flight tests a t  least 3yr away and first deployment estimated in about 5yr. 
( W Post,  June  1/77,  A-21) 

June 2: NASA  announced it had  selected Boeing  Services Intl.,  Seattle, 
Wash.,  for  final negotiations leading to  award of  a cost-plus-award-fee 
contract  to   provide  ground-systems  support  for  launch  operations 
managed  by  KSC  and  for USAF  operations  a t  the Eastern  Test  Range 
and  Cape  Canaveral,  to  include  operation  and maintenance  of  launch 
systems  and  facilities;  estimated  cost  of  the  3yr  contract  would  be 
$80 500 OOO.  (KSC  Release 77-113;  NASA  Release 77-113) 

9  U.S.  interplanetary  spacecraft  had  confirmed  that  the  planet  Jupiter 
was  emitting high-energy  electrons over  a  vast  region  of  space, Walter 
Sullivan  reported  in  the  N Y   Times. The  spring  meeting  of  the  Am. 
Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.  heard Dr.  John A.  Simpson of 
the Univ.  of Chicago and others describe the Jupiter emissions as similar 
to   pulsars - electromagnetic  radiation  appearing  as  pulses  sweeping 
through space  like airport beacons - but  carrying  the “signature” of  the 
planet’s  spin rate, picked up every  lOhr as a rotation was completed. Dr. 
Simpson said Jupiter was not a direct analogy of  pulsars but would offer 
common features that might provide clues to  an  understanding of  both. 
Observations  of  the  Jupiter  emissions  had  come  from  Pioneer  I O ,  
which  had passed  Jupiter in Dec.  1973 and was now  beyond  the orbit of 
Saturn, and from Pioneer I I ,  which had first passed Jupiter in Dec.  1974 
and  was  scheduled  to   approach Saturn  in  Sept.  1979.  The  volume  of 
Jupiter’s magnetosphere had been  estimated as 5  times that  of  the sun’s; 
Io,  innermost moon  of  Jupiter,  had  an orbit within  the magnetosphere 
and its  radiation belt  (a greatly intensified  version of  earth’s  Van Allen 
belt),  and  the  unusual  brightness  of  Io  on  emerging  from  Jupiter’s 
shadow had been attributed to particle activity. The 2 Voyager spacecraft 
to  be launched this yr  toward Jupiter and Saturn would be programmed 

102 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

to   investigate  further  when  they  arrived  nearby  in  March  and  July  of 
1979. (NYT ,  June 2/77,  B4) 

June 3: NASA  reported  that Pioneer ZZ would cross the orbit of  Jupiter 
on  June 10 for the second time on its trip to  the outer reaches of the solar 
system.  I t   had  first  flown  past  Jupiter  in  Dec.  1974 when  the  planet’s 
gravity had kicked  it into a path that would go past Saturn in Sept. 1979. 
This  was  the  first  time  a  spacecraft  had  used  the  gravity  of  an  outer 
planet t o  accelerate it toward  a different  planet; the Voyager  spacecraft 
t o  be  launched  this  summer would  also use  this maneuver. 
Pioneer ZZ had covered two-thirds of  its 2.3-billion-km (1.5-billion-mi) 
- - -  
journey from Jupiter to  Saturn; passing Saturn, it would head  out of  the 
solar  system  in  the  direction  that  the  solar  system  takes  through  the 
galaxy, nearly opposite the path of Pioneer IO, now between the orbits of 
Saturn  and  Uranus,  also  on  its  way  out  of  the  solar  system.  Ames 
Research Center had managed the Pioneer project  for NASA’s  Office of 
Space  Science;  TRW  Systems,  Inc.,  had  built  the  spacecraft.  (NASA 
Release 77-112; ARC Release 77-33) 

0  DFRC announced that a malfunction during a June 2 test of  the Space 
Shuttle  orbiter’s  auxiliary  power  system would  delay  the  orbiter’s  first 
manned  captive flight from June 9 for  1 or 2 weeks,  depending on suc- 
cessful completion of  ground tests.  (DFRC Release 22-77) 

0  United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim and delegates from 
14 nations  had  recorded messages to  be  carried with music and natural 
sounds on  a copper  phonograph  record  by  the Voyagers  scheduled  for 
launch  from  Cape Canaveral  Aug.  20  and  Sept.  1,  Today  newspaper 
reported.  Messages  were  from  Australia,  Canada,  the  U.S.,  Chile, 
France,  Belgium,  Austria,  Sweden,  Egypt,  Nigeria,  Sierra Leone,  Iran, 
Pakistan, and Indonesia. They included poems in French and Swedish, a 
passage  from  the  Koran  in  Arabic,  and  various  texts  in  Esperanto, 
English,  Flemish,  German,  Spanish,  Persian,  Urdu,  Indonesian,  the 
Creole language of  Sierra Leone,  and the Efik  language of  Nigeria. 
-  --  - -- 
In   his  message,  Waldheim  said:  “AS the  Secretary  General  of  the 
_.__~. 
United  Nations,  an  organization  of  147 member  states  who  represent 
almost all of  the human inhabitants of  the planet Earth,  I send greetings 
on  behalf  of  the people of  our planet.  We  step out of  our  solar system 
into  the  universe  seeking  only  peace  and  friendship,  to  teach  if  we  are  
called  upon,  to   be  taught  if  we  are  fortunate.”  NASA  spokesman 
Timothy Ferris said the messages,  aimed at extraterrestrial intelligences, 
would  be  “like a note in a bottle for the extraterrestrials,  if  they  exist.” 
Voyager 1, which would reach Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in 1980, would 

103 

JUNE  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

pass  out  of  the  solar  system  several yr  later.  (Today, June  3/77,  l O A ,  
NYT ,  June 3/77,  A4) 
*  Scientists  at  the  McDonald  Observatory  in  Los  Alamos,  N.M.,  had 
discovered  that the red-giant star Betelgeuse, familiar feature of  the con- 
stellation  Orion,  was  3 250 OOO  times  larger  than  earth’s  sun.  Pictures 
taken  at  the  observatory,  using  a new  process  with  a  special  one-of-a- 
kind  television  camera  tube  produced  by  RCA,  had  shown  the  star ex- 
panding  and  throwing  off  matter  into  space  at  a  prodigious  rate;  the 
photographs for the first time had viewed and measured the shell of mat- 
ter  around a red  giant. 
Betelgeuse and its shell had proved to be 400 times larger than the orbit 
of  Pluto;  it  had  measured  nearly  3  trillion  miles  across  (2800  billion 
miles).  Earth’s  sun  in  comparison  was  864 OOO  miles  in  diameter  at  its 
equator,  and  earth  itself  was  only  about  8000 miles  in  diameter  at  the 
equator.  The pictures  had  verified  a  theory  that  red-giant  stars were  a 
primary  source  of  raw  material  for  making  new  stars,  according  to 
astrophysicist  Maxwell  Sandford  of  McDonald  laboratory.  The  red 
giants would routinely lose matter to  relieve internal pressures built up by 
consumption of  nuclear  fuel,  and the  pictures had  shown  the  loss to  be 
much  greater  than  previously  thought.  (Today, June  3/77,  11A) 

NASA  belt-tightening measures  that might  cut pay  for about 60 high- 
ranking  JSC  employees  might  have  the  same  effect  at  KSC,  Today 
newspaper  reported.  The  Houston  Post  reported  earlier  that  the  JSC 
employees  had  heard  their  Civil  Service job   grades  would  be  reduced, 
with possible loss of  $5000  to  $10 OOO in annual pay to follow 2yr later. A 
JSC spokesman said the grade reductions had resulted  from a slowdown 
in  space programs requiring reorganization of  the center. Similar grade 
reductions were a possibility for KSC, which had been told by NASA Hq 
to  cut its operating budget from $1  19 million to  $109 million. KSC Direc- 
tor  Lee Scherer had  ordered a  freeze on new  hiring  to  allow a  complete 
review  of  operations  and  consideration  of  measures  to  save  money. 
KSC’s director of  public affairs, Charles Hollinshead, said activities sub- 
ject to  possible funding cuts after Oct. 1 would be “things we  can cut that 
don’t impact the launch schedule [for expendable rockets] or Space Shut- 
tle preparations.”  (Today,  June  3/77,  16A) 

June  4:  The NY   Times  reported  that  the  General  Accounting  Office, 
Congress’s  investigative arm,  had  told  the lawmakers to consider delay- 
ing  completion of  the Space Shuttle fleet,  originally planned  to  include 
five  ships.  Two  had  been  built  so  far.  GAO  said  Congress  should  go 
ahead will building a third Shuttle but should put off construction of  the 
other two until “there is sufficient confidence in the shuttle development 

104 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

program  and more  information is available on  the  space transportation 
system operations cost and plans  for  future space activity.” 
Today noted  that  this  report  was  “the  most  sweepingly and  harshly 
critical” of  a  number  of  negative  assessments  of  the  Shuttle  issued  by 
GAO.  Among its charges were that the Shuttle would  cause sonic booms 
over Calif. and Fla. upon landing; that its tires would blow out and cause 
a crash when it tried to land; that it could make too few orbits; that there 
was  no  proof  it  would  reduce  the costs  of  carrying  cargoes into space; 
and that  hardly anyone would  want  to use  its services except DOD and 
NASA  itself.  GAO  pointed  out  that  other  nations,  led  by  Japan,  had 
been developing their own launch vehicles and were likely to  use them in- 
stead of  paying to use the Shuttle; it also said NASA  had erred in setting 
its  fees low  to  encourage users  to  change over  from expendable launch- 
ers. NASA’s  plan to recover expenses later, when costs had  fallen with in- 
creased use,  might  never  be  possible,  the GAO said. 
Former NASA administrator James C. Fletcher said he disagreed with 
most of  GAO’s  comments: NASA would  solve the technical problems as 
it had  solved others,  he  said, and delaying acquisition of  the  fourth and 
fifth Shuttles would be wasteful.  “If  they are procured while tooling and 
assembly lines  are  in  place,  they  unquestionably  can  be  procured  at  far 
less cost than would be incurred by delay.” A 3-yr delay would  run up the 
program  cost  by  from  $3  billion  to  $4.5  billion,  he  said.  (NYT ,  June 
5/77,  43;  Today, June 4/77,  8A) 

The N Y   Times reported  that  a  new  USAF  A-10  antitank  attack  jet 
crashed  June  3  at  the  Paris  Air  and  Space  Show,  killing  Howard  W. 
Nelson,  chief  test  pilot  for Fairchild  Industries. Nelson, who had  flown 
105 missions during the Korean War  and had  over  10 OOOhr  total  flight 
time,  had  flown  5OOhr  in  A-10s;  he  was  over  the  runway  and  hit  the 
plane’s tail on the ground in view of  his wife and thousands of spectators. 
No  one else was  injured.  This was  the 6th crash  in  12yr at these shows, 
held yearly to  exhibit the latest aircraft to the world market;  a t  the 1973 
show, a Soviet Tupolev SST jetliner had  crashed  into a group of  houses 
near  the  field  killing  5  crewmembers  and 8 residents. 
A  Fairchild  spokesman  said  the USAF  would  set  up  a  board  to   in- 
vestigate the crash.  The USAF had  bought  30 A-10s  a t  $4 million each, 
and  a  squadron of  these was  scheduled  to go  into  operation  June  10 at 
Myrtle Beach AFB, S.C.  This was the first major accident since the A-10 
was  first flown  in  1972. (NYT, June 4/77,  3;  Today, June 4/77,  8A) 
June  6: MSFC announced that SPAR IV, fourth of  the space-processing 
applications  rockets,  would  be  launched  June  21  carrying  four  ex- 
periments  including  a  new  acoustic-levitation  device  for  containerless 
processing and a device to  magnify in-flight photographs of the materials 

105 

J U N E  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

being  processed.  Principal  investigators would  be  Dr.  Taylor  Wang  of 
JPL, using acoustic pressure to  handle a drop of water without touching 
it;  Dr.  Donald  Uhlman  and  Dr.  Bennett  Joiner  of  MIT,  studying 
solidification of  7 different materials in low gravity; Dr.  John Papazian 
of  Grumman Aerospace,  studying castings produced in low gravity; and 
Dr.  Arthur Lord of  Drexel Univ.  with Jerry Wouch of General Electric, 
using  the  electromagnetic levitator  to  make an alloy  in  low-g  and study 
its properties.  (MSFC Release 77-80) 

INTELSAT announced it had awarded to Miteq Inc.,  Happauge, NY, 
a $34 800 contract for up-converter and down-converter units to  be used 
with  time-division  multiple-access  test-bed  equipment.  (INTELSAT 
Release 77-13-M) 

0  The Natl.  Space Development Agency of  Japan had decided to build a 
third  version  of  its  N  launch  vehicle  before  the  mid-l980s,  A vWk  
reported. The N-3 would be able to  put into synchronous orbit a payload 
weighing  500kg  (more  than  1OOOlb).  N-1,  first of  the series, had  used  a 
liquid-propellant  first  stage  like  that  in  the  McDonnell Douglas  Delta, 
with three Nissan-designed strap-on motors instead of  the 9 on the Delta. 
( A v  Wk, June 6/77,  203) 

June  7: The N Y  Times reported  that Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch,  testifying at 
the  Senate  hearing  on   confirmation  of  his  nomination  as NASA  ad- 
ministrator,  had  told  the  committee  that  no  U.S.  manned  landing  on  
Mars could occur before 1990.  If NASA had  an operating Space Shuttle 
by  1980 that could be used  to assemble a vehicle in space and to store the 
fuel needed  for a trip to  Mars, work on  a manned Mars ship could begin 
in 1984 or 1985 a t  the earliest, Frosch said, with completion a year or two 
later.  (NYT,  June 7/77,  13) 

The Chicago Tribune reported  that A.  Thomas Young,  NASA’s  head 
of  lunar  and  planetary  programs,  had  presented  to   the  Washington, 
D.C.  meeting  of  the  Am.  Geophysical  Union  a  planetary-exploration 
plan  to   launch  two  roving  vehicles  to  Mars  in  1984,  a  possible  robot- 
vehicle  landing  on  Mercury,  and  flights  t o   Venus,  Jupiter,  Saturn, 
Halley’s  Comet,  and  four  asteroids.  The plan  also  included  launch  of 
automated ships to  Mars in  1990 to  collect samples of  rock and soil and 
return them  to  earth.  (C Trib, June 7/77,  4-16) 

June 8: NASA announced it had published a book, Space Settlements: A 
Design Study (NASA SP-413),  describing construction and operation of 
permanent  settlements  in  space where up to  “lO,OOO  people work,  raise 
families, and live out their lives.” The 185p volume contained results of a 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

10-wk study in 1975 sponsored by NASA and the Am. SOC. of Engineer-  , 
ing  Education  a t   ARC  and  Stanford  Univ.  Chapter  topics  included 
physical properties of  space, human needs in space, habitat design, space 
manufacturing,  agriculture,  and  settlement  locations.  Concluding  that 
permanent  communities  could  be  built  and inhabited  away  from earth, 
the  report  said  the  obstacles  t o   further  expansion  of  human  frontiers 
were  “principally  philosophical,  political,  and  social  rather  than 
technical.”  (NASA Release  77-1 18) 

The  Wall St Journal reported  that  the government of  France had an- 
nounced  plans  for  a  major  overhaul  of  its  “financially  troubled 
aerospace industry,” tha t  would include partial nationalization of Avions 
Marcel Dassault-Breguet, maker of  the Mirage jet fighter. A sharp drop 
in  orders  for  civilian  and  military  aircraft  had  forced  companies  to  
dismiss workers  and cut  down operations;  the government hoped  to  in- 
troduce new products,  step up sales, and increase cooperation with other 
European aircraft  firms.  ( WSJ, June 9/77,  13) 

June  10: ARC announced that a team of  scientists using the 91cm (36in) 
infrared telescope on the Kuiper Airborne Observatory and the ground- 
based 230cm  (9Oin) infrared telescope at Steward Observatory, Univ.  of 
Arizona, had made the first discovery of  planet formation in process and 
the  first identification of  a flat disc-shaped  luminous stellar object.  The 
object,  MWC  349  in  the constellation Cygnus,  exhibited a surrounding 
mass of  intensely glowing gas with a diameter 20 times that of  the central 
body,  emitting  10  times  as much  light;  the luminous area would  disap- 
pear  in about a century as disc material spun into the central body.  The 
find  had  been  significant because  it  might  show  how  planets  had  been 
formed  in earth’s  solar system. 
Members  of  the  team  were  Drs.  Rodger  Thompson  and  Peter 
Strittmatter of  the Steward Observatory, and Drs. Edwin Erickson, Fred 
Witteborn, and D.W.  Strecker, all of  ARC.  Infrared  instruments could 
view the object through dust shrouding the disc:  the Kuiper telescope had 
detected  infrared  spectra  that  could  not  penetrate  earth’s  atmosphere, 
and  the Steward telescope could offer higher  resolution.  (ARC Release 
77-33;  NASA  Release  77-119;  NYT ,   June  16/77,  A21;  W Post,  June 
16/77,  B-11) 

NASA  announced  that the  first manned  test  flights of  the Shuttle or- 
biter  Enterprise would  begin  at DFRC about June  16.  In  these  captive 
flights (phase 2 of Shuttle approach and landing tests) all orbiter systems 
would  be  ON  to  verify crew procedures  and determine the best  separa- 
tion  profile  for  upcoming manned  free flights.  In the  initial phase  that 
ended Mar. 2, the orbiter fastened to  its Boeing 747 carrier had made five 

JUNE  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

captive  inert  (unma&ed)  flights at DFRC  to  check  out  its  systems;  in 
phase 2,  the orbiter would make four flights still attached to the 747 but 
with  crew  aboard  to  check  flutter,  steering,  and  other  performance 
items.  (NASA Release 77-1 17) 

0  Two main  items  in NASA’s  $4  billion  budget  request  for  FY   1978- 
the  Jupiter-orbiter  mission  and  the  Space  Telescope-  had  met  with 
strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported  in the N Y  
Times. The items were two of  three major new  starts sought by  the agen- 
cy;  the third,  a new  earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), 
had  not  been  opposed,  nor  had  additional  funding  for  Space Shuttle 
development. 
NASA  officials  had  not  expected  opposition to  the  Jupiter  project, 
which had the endorsement of  numerous scientists and the White House 
and  had  been  authorized for  eventual  development  by  both  houses  of 
Congress.  However,  Rep.  Edward  P.  Boland  (D-Mass) had  persuaded 
the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which 
he chaired, to  block  funds for  the  Jupiter project  in view  of  charges by 
many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of  its 
funds on planetary science rather  than  on deep-space astronomy, which 
would  be  the  aim  of  the  Space Telescope.  The House Appropriations 
Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote ac- 
cordingly. 

NASA  had  concentrated  &s  Jupiter  appeal on  the  Senate appropria- 
tions subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime 
critic of  NASA  spending, who  had  nevertheless been  impressed by  JPL  
officials who  argued  that  the  Jupiter  project  should  receive immediate 
funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter 
would  be  relatively  close  to   earth,  which  would  not  occur  again  until 
1987. Without the new  start, JPL  would have to lay off 300 to  400 scien- 
tists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch 
of  two  Voyagers this  summer.  If  the Senate should approve the  Jupiter 
project  and  reject  the telescope,  a  conference committee would  have  to  
settle the matter; NASA might have to  choose between the two projects, 
or t o  start both with greatly reduced  first-year funding, Wilford noted. 
(NYT ,  June  10/77,  A-17;  Nature, June 23/77,  659) 

June  11: A  new  estimate of  the cost of  building three more Shuttle or- 
biters  might  run  as  high  as  $600  million  apiece,  Thomas  O’Toole 
reported in the  W Post.  NASA  had  told Congress 3mo ago that  the re- 
maining  Shuttles  would  cost  $550  million  apiece;  the  increase  had 
resulted  from  the  rising  price-of  aluminum and  titanium,  the  two  key 
metals in Shuttle construction. NASA had bought the materials for two 

108 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

vehicles 3yr ago when  prices were lower but had  held off  buying  for  the 
last  three. 
Only one of  the  five Shuttles presently proposed had  been completed, 
at  a  cost  of  about  $500  million.  A  second  being  assembled  a t   the 
Rockwell  Intl.  plant  in  Palmdale,  Calif.,  would  cost  just  over  $500 
million.  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  director  of  JSC  (the  Shuttle-, 
management center), said that NASA expected “by the end of  this month 
a new  proposal  from Rockwell for the last three spacecraft.  . . . I don’t 
know how much Rockwel19s going to suggest but they’re for sure going to 
cost more  than  the  last estimate we  got.” 
NASA  had  hoped  Congress  would  approve  starting construction  of 
the third  Shuttle before  the end  of  1977. This vehicle was  to  be  sent to  
Vandenberg AFB in March  1982 for Pentagon  use.  The  fate of  the last 
two Shuttles was  not certain, since GAO had told Congress to delay fur- 
ther  action  on  them.  NASA  and  the USAF had  expressed  concern  that 
delay  would  mean  not  only  the  shutdown  around  the  country  of  con- 
tractor  and subcontractor  work  forces that would  be  both  difficult and 
costly to  reestablish, but also further and more rapid escalation of  prices: 
OToo le  quoted a NASA  estimate that a 2yr  delay would boost to about 
$1 billion  the price of  each Shuttle affected.  (WP o s t ,  June  11/77, A-2) 

The N Y   Times reported  that  ERDA’s  Sandia Laboratories  in  N.M. 
had produced the first fusion neutrons in the U.S.  by firing a high-energy 
electron beam  at pellets of  heavy hydrogen. Use of  electron beams was  a 
late development in the search for economical methods of  fusion-energy 
release.  Existing  atomic-energy  plants  had  operated  by  fission,  or  the 
splitting  of  large  atoms;  fusion  would  squeeze  small  atoms  to   make 
heavier ones. Each reaction would convert a small amount of matter into 
large  amounts  of  energy.  Whereas  fission  generally  used  uranium,  a 
relatively scarce material,  fusion could  use  the  heavy  form of  hydrogen 
called deuterium abundant in sea water.  The process  used  at Sandia had 
differed from that used by  researchers a t  Moscow’s Kurchatov Inst. who 
last year  reported  success in releasing  fusion energy.  (NYT, June 11/77, 
22;  ERDA Release 77-99) 

June  Z2: A new  $1.6-million  infrared telescope with  a 92-in-dia.  mirror 
(the world’s  largest)  to be  installed soon in an observatory atop 9656-ft 
Jelm  Mt.  in Wyo.  would  be  sensitive enough  to measure  the  heat  of  a 
warm  iron  on  the  moon,  according  to   Today  newspaper.  Professors 
Robert  Gehrz and  John Hackwell of  the Univ.  of  Wyo.  had  supervised 
design  of  the  telescope,  which would  incorporate a sensor also of  their 
design:  a computerized  device sensing heat energy collected by  the large 
mirror  and converting  it  to  an infrared contour chart depicting heat  in- 
tensity  as a topographical  contour map would  depict  terrain.  Jelm Mt. 

109 

JUNE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

was considered the best  site for the observatory because of  the low water 
vapor  in  the  area,  a requirement  for good  IR  reception.  The two d e n -  ’ 
tists had  persuaded  the  state legislature of  Wyo.  in  1975 to appropriate 
$975 OOO  for   the  project;  remaining  funds  had  come  from  the  Natl. 
Science Foundation.  (Today, June  12/77,  12A) 

J u n e  13:  NASA  announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Airplane 
Co.,  Seattle,  Wash.,  a  $1.7-million  contract  for  work  on  control 
technology for the Boeing 747 civil-transport aircraft,  part of  a program 
to  increase fuel efficiency of  future aircraft by  up  to  50%. Work would 
include design,  wind-tunnel  tests,  and  evaluation of  modifications such 
as winglets,  wingtip extensions,  and active controls for load maneuvers, 
gust  alleviation,  and  suppression of  structural vibrations.  LaRC  would 
manage the contract for work  to  be  done within 2yr  at the Boeing plant 
in Seattle.  (NASA  Release 77-120;  LaRC Release 77-25) 

0  INTELSAT  announced  that  the  Republic  of  Chad  had  become  the 
96th  member  of  the  organization,  and  the  23rd  from  Africa.  The  IN- 
TELSAT operating agreement had  been  signed June 9 by  the  Societe de 
Telecommunications  Internationales  du  Chad.  (INTELSAT  Release 
77-14-1) 

0  NOAA  reported  it  had  used  two  of  its  operational  environmental 
satellites with NASA’s Landsat 2  to obtain imagery that could give early 
warning  of  river  ice  melts  causing  ice  jams  and  flooding.  David  F. 
McGinnis, Jr.,  and Stanley R.  Schneider of  NOAA’s Natl. Environmen- 
tal  Satellite  Service  (NESS)  had  studied  the  Ottawa  River  separating 
Quebec and Ontario provinces and joining the St. Lawrence River below 
Ottawa and Montreal  over  12 days in April  1976 to  find which  sections 
were  covered  with  ice.  By  the end  of  the period,  all but  three of  the  14 
sections  studied had  been  free of  obstructing  ice.  Disappearance of  ice 
monitored  by  the  team  in  the  Chaudiere  River  of  SW  Quebec  had 
resulted  from  hydraulic  transport  rather  than  melting,  which  had  oc- 
curred  in  the  Ottawa  River  because  of  the  blocking  effect  of  dams, 
islands,  and sharp bends  in  the  river.  (NOAA Release 77-145) 

The Energy  Research  and Development Administration  reported  that 
its  scientists had  deveIoped  a new  way  to  reclaim  used  automotive oils, 
removing  solid  and liquid  impurities  in  a  solvent-and-distillz@ion treat- 
ment.  After  heating  the  used  oil to  drive off  volatile  hydrocarbons and 
water,  the  process  would  add  a  solvent  to  make  sludge  of  the  con- 
taminants;  the  remaining  oil  would  go  through  normal  processes  of 
distillation,  improvement of  color and odor,  and reformulation with ad- 

110 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

JUNE 

ditives. Iowa State Univ. had run a vehicle-fleet test for more than  lOmo 
using  the  re-refined  oils  with  no  abnormal  wear  or   performance;  the 
product  had  not  generated polluting  byproducts.  Most  commercial  re- 
refining  had  used  an   acid-based  technology  producing  wastes  more 
polluting than the  used  oil itself.  (ERDA Release 77-14) 

0  ERDA announced that  the world’s largest aircraft would airlift one of 
the  heaviest  loads  ever  transported  by  air  June  19 when  a  USAF C-5 
Galaxy carried a U.S.-built  40-ton magnet from Chicago to  Moscow  for 
tests  of  an   experimental  magnetohydrodynamic  (MHD)  process  for 
generating electricity. The USSR’s U-25  facility near Moscow, operated 
by the Soviet Institute for High Temperatures, was the largest  MHD test 
facility in  the  world.  Dr.  William D.  Jackson,  head  of  ERDA’s  MHD 
program,  said that using the Soviet plant would speed commercialization 
of  the  process  in  the U.S.  a t  reduced cost to  the American public.  The 
magnet  would  aid  in  tests  conducted  jointly  for  about  2yr  under  the 
U.S.-USSR  Energy Agreement  of  1974.  (ERDA Release 77-100) 

0  The new administration of President Carter would not initiate a work- 
ing  Landsat  ear th  resources  monitoring  system until  it  found  out  how 
much money Landsat  data  users would  invest  in  such a  system, A v  Wk 
reported.  The  president’s  science  adviser  Frank  Press,  director  of  the 
White  House  office  of  science and  technology  policy,  would  set  up  a 
committee to  study the user-cost question. Press had told the Senate sub- 
committee on science, technology, and space that it would be “premature 
to  commit the  federal government” to  support of  an operational  system 
because  of  many  uncertainties  about  remote  sensing;  he  said  that 
development of a sector to  be served by Landsat data had not evolved “as 
rapidly as some anticipated several years ago,” and that “no comprehen- 
sive  assessment”  had  been  made  “of  the  overall  market  structure  for 
Landsat  data applications.  . . .” 

The subcommittee was considering a bill cosponsored by Sen. Wendell 
H. Ford (D-Ky) and former astronaut Sen. Harrison M. Schmitt (R-NM) 
that would establish an  operational Landsat system, the space segment to  
be run by NASA and the ground data distribution by the Dept. of the In- 
terior.  A v  Wk  noted,  however,  that  the  Interior  testimony  had  been 
altered a t  the last minute to  deny support of the bill.  (A v  Wk, June 13/77, 
91) 

J u n e  14: NASA  annaunced that,  because of  recent  flight and  checkout 
problems,  it had revised the launch schedule of  its Delta rockets: GOES- 
B,  June 16; GMS (Japan’s meteorological satellite), July 14; Sirio (Italian 

111 

JUNE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

comsat),  Aug.  11;  OTS/ESA  (comsat),  Sept.  8;  ISEE-A/B,  Oct.  13; 
Meteosat  (ESA metesat),  Nov.  3;  and  CS  (Japanese  comsat),  Dec.  12. 
(NASA  Release 77-123) 
*  NASA  announced  that  LaRC  had  undertaken  a  program  called 
CLASS (cargo logistics airlift-systems study) to  see whether  tailoring an 
advanced  air  freighter  design  t o   an  integrated  transportation  system 
could  mean  air-cargo  growth  and  higher  carrier  profits.  NASA  had 
negotiated  twin  study  contracts  with  Lockheed-Georgia  Co.  and  with 
Douglas Aircraft Co. to  survey air-cargo operations at major airports; to  
estimate present and future air-cargo demand, based on shipper response 
t o  reduced cost and improved service; and to  study the need  for improv- 
ed efficiency in air-cargo operations, and for research and technology to 
support the design of  future cargo aircraft. The studies had begun June 1 
and would continue for  1 lmo. LaRC would exchange information in the 
study with government and industry organizations including the Dept.  of 
Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Dept. of Defense, and 
private  companies  such  as  airframe  manufacturers,  air  shippers,  com- 
mercial airlines,  and  freight  forwarders.  (NASA  Release 77-122;  LaRC 
Release 77-26) 

June 16: Rockwell Intl.'s  B-1 division announced it had made significant 
savings in  awarding  a contract to Honeywell Inc.'s  avionics division for 
equipment to  test electronic systems on the USAF B-1 strategic bomber. 
B-1  division president  Bastian  Hello  said  the new  equipment would  use 
large  amounts  of  off-the-shelf  items  and  would  be  able  to  test  a  wide 
range of  systems supplied by  Rockwell, Boeing,  and the AIL division of 
Cutler  Hammer.  The contract would  direct Boeing  and AIL  to get  test 
equipment  from  Honeywell  under  separate  purchasing  agreements. 
Rockwell  should  receive  first  deliveries  of  the  equipment  in  1978. The 
USAF would  use the test equipment to maintain B-1  operations; Boeing 
(offensive-avionics  integrator) and  AIL  (defensive-avionics contractor) 
would  use the equipment  in  supplying electronic instruments to the pro- 
gram.  (Rockwell Release LA-6) 

June 16-Aug.  18: NASA  launched Goes2 ,  second in a series of  geosta- 
tionary  operational  environmental  satellites,  from  the  Eastern  Test 
Range  at 6:51am  EDT  June  16 on  a Delta  vehicle into a transfer  orbit. 
On  second  apogee  the  boost  motor  fired  a t   11:26pm  EDT  t o  put  the 
spacecraft in a nominal orbit where it would move to  a position specified 
by  NOAA  a t   75"W,  and  be  turned  over  to   NOAA  for  operations  in 
about  30  days.  Orbital  elements  were  36  859km  apogee,  188.6km 
perigee,  23.7"  inclination,  and 651.8-min  period. 
NASA announced on Aug.  18 that it had turned Goes2  over to NOAA 

112 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

for operational use on  July 29 at 16002. NASA engineers had completed 
a planned orbital checkout to  ensure proper operation, having moved the 
satellite to  66.5”W over the equator where most of  the tests occurred. Of 
the original 801b of  hydrazine carried for stationkeeping, more than 671b 
remained unused.  The engineers had  found minor  problems in the data- 
handling  equipment  used  t o   reliiy  signals  from  earth-based  data- 
collection  platforms,  and  in  the x-ray  section  of  the  solar-environment 
monitor;  the  data-collection problem  had  resulted  from  interference by 
VHF equipment that could be turned off for most of  the mission, but the 
x-ray problem arose from faulty cabling that might require more calibra- 
tions.  Goes 2 was  officially certified as successful on Aug.  5-15,  having 
achieved  its  mission  objectives.  (MOR  E-608-77-05  [postlaunch]  June 
20/77,  [postlaunch] Aug  18/77) 

J u n e  Z7: NASA  announced that preparations  at KSC  for  launching the 
Space  Shuttle  had  required  only  two  new  major  constructions:  an 
orbiter-landing facility, one of  the largest runways in the world  (roughly 
twice as long and twice  as wide  as an average commercial landing strip), 
with  a microwave scanning-beam  landing  system to assist the  orbiter  to 
an automatic landing;  and  a  large hangar  called  the “orbiter processing 
facility” with  two  high  bays  for  checking  out and servicing  the  orbiters 
immediately after  landing. 
Existing facilities modified  for Shuttle use were the Vehicle Assembly 
Building,  2 of  its 4 high  bays  being altered for Shuttle assembly,  and the 
launch-control  center  being  equipped  with  an  automated  launch- 
processing  system  developed  for  Shuttle  checkout  and  launch,  using  a 
tenth of  the manpower for Shuttle that had been used  for Apollo: 45 per- 
sons, compared to more than 450.  Final countdown for Shuttle launches 
would take only 2.5hr compared to the 28hr needed in countdown for an 
Apollo/Saturn  V.  Much  of  the  work  had  been  completed,  NASA 
reported, and the eventual cost of  the modifications would be about $240 
million, less than a fourth of  the 1960s cost of building the Spaceport for 
Apollo.  (NASA  Release 77-124) 

MSFC  announced  it  had  awarded  to  Contractors Cargo  Co.,  South 
Gate, Calif.,  a $227  120 fixed-price contract for moving the Space Shut- 
tle orbiter  Enterprise eight  separate times during  its testing  at MSFC  in 
1978. Now  in the midst  of  approach and landing tests (ALT)  at DFRC, 
Enterprise would  fly  on  its  Boeing  747  carrier  to MSFC  on March  17, 
1978,  to  be  mated  with  an external tank  and  solid-fuel rocket  boosters 
and erected on a dynamic test stand for vertical ground-vibration testing. 
The contract called  for  design,  testing,  and delivery  to MSFC  of  an or- 
biter  ground-transporter to  travel  about  6 km  between  the  airfield and 

113 

JUNE! 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

the  pretest-preparation  building,  a trip  to  be  completed within  2hr  on 
March  18,  1978. 
The  “prime  mover,”  a  480-hp  tractor  with  10 wheels,  would  be  at- 
tached to  2 rear dollies each having 32 wheels and a forward dolly with 16 
wheels.  The  segments would  be joined  by  a  “strongback” construction, 
and the entire rig would weigh about 24 OOOkg  (52  9001b).  Length of the 
transporter would be nearly 50m (about  16Oft), the width of  about 24m 
would accommodate the orbiter’s wingspan, and the height from ground 
to  top of  a vertical  stabilizer would  be  about  16m (about  54ft).  For  a n  
operating demonstration  before  the arrival of  the orbiter  at MSFC, the 
transporter  would  carry  a weightload  of  nearly  100 Owkg (220 0001b), 
half  again  the  weight  of  the  orbiter.  Contractors Cargo  was  the  same 
firm  that  had  moved Enterprise  from  the Rockwell plant  at  Palmdale, 
Calif.,  to  DFRC in  Jan.  1977. (MSFC Release 77-106) 

Dr.  Robert  A.  Frosch,  awaiting  confirmation  as  NASA’s  fifth  ad- 
ministrator,  probably had “more experience in research administration” 
than any of  his predecessors in that position, Science magazine said. The 
article  pointed  out  that  Dr.  Frosch-former  assistant  secretary of  the 
Navy  for  research  and development, former assistant executive director 
of  the  UN  environmental  program,  former  associate  director  of  the 
Woods Hole Facility, and director a t  age 28 of Columbia Univ.’s Hudson 
Laboratories - had been stressing science in his initial public statements. 
“I’d  like to  be  remembered as the  guy who was  able to  help NASA  im- 
agine new  uses for  space and aeronautics and who helped the agency do 
good  science,”  Frosch told  Science in an  interview. 

The magazine noted,  however, that  the new  administrator would take 
office  a t   a  time  when  Congress was  cutting NASA  projects and taking 
the agency “completely by  surprise.”  NASA had enjoyed good relations 
with the chairman  and ranking minority member of  the Senate commit- 
tee authorizing NASA  programs,  who were also ex  officio members of 
the  appropriations  committee;  but  the  old  authorizing  committee had 
been  dismantled,  and NASA  had  come under  the jurisdiction  of  a  sub- 
committee of  the Senate commerce committee headed  by  Sen. Adlai E. 
Stevenson (D-Ill). Also, aside from his introduction to  the president (“He 
sure  gives  a  tough  job  interview,” Frosch  said),  the  new  administrator 
had  not  been  dealing with  the president or  his  immediate staff.  Overall 
administration attitude toward  the space agency was a big unknown,  the 
magazine stated,  and  rumors had been  circulating that NASA would be 
taken  over by  the Commerce Dept.  or the Dept.  of Defense, although a 
spokesman for Carter’s government reorganization chief  had denied the 
rumors. Although Dr.  Frosch might preside over a stronger science pro- 
gram  for  NASA,  the  article  concluded,  he  might  also  preside  over  a 

114 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

change  in  the  agency  to   “some  new,  perhaps  unrecognizable  form.” 
(Science,  June  17/77,  1301) 

Newspapers  and  news  services  reported  the  death  June  16  of  Dr. 
Wernher  von  Braun,  65,  former  director  of  NASA’s  Marshall  Space 
Flight Center,  whose  name had  become synonymous with  “America in 
space” when  the  team  he  headed  used  a  Jupiter-C  rocket  developed by 
him  for  the U.S.  Army  to  launch  Explorer I,  the western world‘s  first 
earth satellite, on Jan .  31,  1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 
1975;  he had  spent most  of  his  time since Oct.  1976 in  the hospital. 
Dr.  von Braun,  an  enthusiast of  space travel and astronomy  from his 
childhood in East Prussia  (now part  of  Poland),  in his early teens came 
across a picture of a rocket traveling to  the moon that illustrated an arti- 
cle by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the 
von Braun team  a t  Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s 
book  on rocketry,  he realized he would need mathematics to  progress in 
his studies, and went on to  obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. 
of  Berlin  in  1934 a t  the  age of  22 with a  thesis on  rocket engines. 
He had  continued his interest in  the amateur Society for Space Travel 
(Verein fur  Raumschiffahrt,  VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed 
the German army seeking weapons not  forbidden by  the Treaty of  Ver- 
sailles that  ended World War  I.  Employed by  the ordnance department 
after  1934,  von  Braun  had  continued  his  work  with  rockets,  up  to   the 
success of the V-2 used against Britain, until  1945. The von Braun team 
a t  Peenemunde then  decided  to  go south  and  surrender  to  U.S.  forces 
rather  than  be  captured  by  the  Soviet army. About  120  of  von  Braun’s 
associates  were  taken  with  him  to   the  U.S.  in  Operation  Paperclip  to  
demonstrate  their  achievements with  captured  V-2  rockets.  The  group 
went to  the U.S.  Army’s  Redstone Arsenal in  1950 to  work on a ballistic 
rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik I  went  into orbit  in  1957 and the 
Navy’s  Vanguard  rocket  blew  up  on  its  pad,  a  version  of  von  Braun’s 
Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1)  put Explorer I into orbit for the U.S. 
in  1958,  and  another  version carried Alan  B.  Shepard,  Jr.,  on the  first 
U.S.  suborbital  flight  in  1961.  Weeks  later,  when  President  Kennedy 
called for  a moon  landing within the decade, von Braun got  the task  of 
creating  the  rocket;  his  Saturn  V  won  the  race  to   put  a  man  on  the 
moon’s  surface  in  1969. 
When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had 
transferred  to  that agency from the army and he had become director of 
the  Marshall  Space Flight  Center  a t   Huntsville,  Ala.  After  the  moon 
landings, Dr.  von Braun went to  NASA Hq in  1970 as deputy associate 
administrator  to  promote  post-Apollo  space activities  for  the  U.S.  But 
public interest and support had declined, and Dr.  von Braun resigned in 
May  1972 to  become vice president  for  engineering and development a t  

115 

JUNE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual 
Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first  U.S. astronauts to  the moon. 
(MSFC 9-00841) 

Fairchild Industries,  Inc.  In  1975  he founded and became first president 
of  the  Natl.  Space  Institute,  a  private  group  to   increase public under- 
standing and  support  of  space activities;  in  1976, when  illness overtook 
him, he remained chairman and was a c t N  in formulating policy. He had 
resigned from Fairchild late in  1976,  effective in  Jan.  1977. 
At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral,  tributes came 
from  former  astronaut Michael Collins; Dr.  Ernst  Stuhlinger, longtime 
associate of  von  Braun  in  development of  rockets;  and  Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher,  former NASA  administrator.  An  editorial  in  the  W Post that 
described  Dr.  von  Braun  as  “an  American  national  hero  in  the  1960s 
after  being  a n  American national  enemy in  the  1940s”  said that  his  life 

116 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 
JUNE  
should be judged “as one of  the new breed of  international scientists . . . 
You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of 
him as he apparently thought of  himself - as a man indentured only to  a 
dream  . . . And,  unlike most of  us,  he saw a large part of  it come true.” 
(MSFC Release 77-1 11; AP  wire service obit,  June  17/77, nos.  17 & 20; 
WS tar ,  June 17/77, A-1; NYT,  June 18/77,1;  WPost, June 18/77, A7; 
June 23/77,  C11, A24  (ed);  C Trib, June 18/77,  1;  Today? June 18/77, 
1A; June 23/77,  8A) 

9  FBIS carried an announcement by  Tass that  the USSR  had  launched 
“this morning” the French satellite S igne  3,  product of  a 2yr  collabora- 
tion between the Toulouse Space Research Center and the USSR’s Space 
Research  Inst.  of  the Academy  of  Sciences.  The spacecraft had  carried 
French-made  instruments  to  observe ultraviolet  emission  from the  sun; 
objective of  the  mission  was  t o  continue  study  of  “already discovered 
sources of  gamma radiation in galaxies and also to  replenish the catalog 
of  stars.”  The  announcement  said  that  originally  the  French  were  to  
design  the  spacecraft  and  provide  the  equipment,  while  the USSR  en- 
sured launch;  however,  “the Soviet colleagues suggested so many design 
novelties  . . . that  it  is  actually more correct t o  regard  the  S igne  3 as a 
Soviet-French  satellite,”  according  to   French  project  director  Antoine 
Miosi. This launch had begun a second decade of USSR-French coopera- 
tion in space exploration: Soviet spacecraft had  carried French-made  in- 
struments,  and the French  Araks experiment had  orbited a Soviet elec- 
tron  accelerator  to   study  polar  lights.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  June 
17/77) 

Jun e  19: The moon landing effort was possible only because the U.S.  had 
laid the basic theoretical groundwork in the 1940s and 1950s, the  WPos t  
reported,  quoting  Richard  C.  Atkinson,  new  head  of  the Natl.  Science 
Foundation.  The  man  who  “probably  controls  more  basic  research 
spending than  anyone else in the world” said that Americans should not 
hope  science  would  come  up with  an  overnight  solution  t o  the  energy 
crisis  that  would  preserve  their  current  lifestyle - “Science just  doesn’t 
operate with those turnaround  times,” he said. The fact that many people 
expected  such  solutions  indicated  “a  basic  incomprehension  of  what 
science is all about,” an ironic byproduct of  the mind-boggling scientific 
achievement in the past 2Oyr. “After Sputnik  . , . there was a big rush to  
catch up here  . . . They put in a lot of  high-powered  curricula .  . Now 
we  have  a  small core of  students really  well  educated  in  science and a 
huge group that  just  [drops out]  . . . Those people  never  have  any  ex- 
posure again. Even college graduates now  a r e  really  poorly  informed on 
science matters.” 
Liberal  education,  Atkinson  said,  should  include  solid  grounding  in 

117 

JUNE  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

basic  sciences  so  that  citizens  could  understand  issues  like  the  fate  of 
nuclear reactors and the gene-manufacturing possibilities of recombinant 
DNA.  “I worry,”  he said, “that  the nation may  turn to  applied research 
so strongly that it neglects basic research, and basic research remains our 
fundamental commitment.”  ( W Post,  June 19/77, C-4) 

J u n e  19-20:  Newspapers carried reports of  the first manned  flight of  the 
Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise June 18, riding piggyback  on its Boeing 
747  transport  during the 54-min trip  over DFRC,  and carried to a  land- 
ing.  The orbiter,  designed  for  reuse as many  as  100 times,  remained at- 
tached  to  its carrier by  3 struts,  two  aft and one on the  nose,  for  its in- 
vestigation  of  structural  flutter  on  the  craft’s  brakes  and  flaps.  Flying 
under the control of  JSC in Houston, the two astronauts (Fred W. Haise, 
the  civilian  commander,  and  rookie  USAF  Lt.  Col.  Charles  Gordon 
Fullerton) rode the piggyback craft to  15 0o0ft at 209mph for most of the 
flight. 
Earlier  unmanned  tests  of  the  piggyback  orbiter  in  Feb.  and March 
had  gone  smoothly; since then,  engineers had  installed control systems, 
guidance instruments, and power units whose repeated malfunctions had 
delayed the manned tests originally scheduled to  begin May 26. The June 
18 test had  been  delayed  for 24hr  by  problems with  the entry hatch and 
by  the  failure  of  guidance-system computers.  The  astronauts  reported 
trouble with a cabin-pressure valve and with radio communications, and 
said  they  had  experienced  more  airframe  surface  noise  than  expected. 
NASA  had  scheduled a second “manned inert” test for June 28,  with the 
first free flight set for late July  or early Aug.  ( W Star,  June  19/77, A-6; 
C Trib,  June  19/77,  1-3; NYT,  June  19/77,  19;  W Post,  June  19/77, 
A-18;  June 20/77,  A-6) 

J u n e  20:  JSC announced it had  signed a  $40 million  letter contract with 
Rockwell Intl.  Corp.  Space Division  for modifications to the first Space 
Shuttle  orbiter  Enterprise  and  for  starting  design  of  a  third  orbiter. 
Funded  in  part  by  the  Economic Stimulus Bill,  the  contract  had  been 
directed  at  generating  more  employment  opportunities.  (JSC  Release 
77-37) 

0 JSC announced  it had  signed a  supplemental agreement with Rockwell 
Intl. Corp. Space Division deleting two items from the Space Shuttle or- 
biter contract:  a neutral-buoyance trainer, and vibroacoustic tests on the 
af t  fuselage of  the orbiter. This work had been scheduled for Rockwell’s 
plant  in Downey,  Calif.,  with  support  from JSC and KSC  field offices. 
The  decrease  of  $25 334  750  had  lowered  the  value  of  the  cost-plus- 
award-fee  contract  with  Rockwell  to  $3 013 971 603.  (JSC  Release 
77-38) 

118 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

*Av Wk reported  that the USSR  and France had  agreed  on  a joint  m i s -  
sion to  Venus in 1983 for which France would design a balloon 26 to  30ft 
in diameter to  float in the planet’s atmosphere for up to  l 0 h r  collecting 
data,  and the USSR would  design an orbiter weighing more  than 6 0 k g  
(13221b).  Jacques  Blamont,  chief  scientist  for  the  French  space  agency 
CNES  (Centre  National  d’Etudes  Spatiales),  said  a  Soviet  mission 
planned  for Venus  next  year  would  also carry  French  multiwavelength 
ultraviolet spectrometers on  at least two spacecraft scheduled for flybys. 
(Av Wk, June 201’77,  27) 

J u n e  21:  JPL  announced  that  NASA  had  followed its recommendation 
and selected a  12-bladed spinning solar sail spacecraft as a candidate for 
the  automated  interplanetary  shuttle  to   be  used  within  earth’s  solar 
system in the 1980s and beyond. Also known as a heliogyro, the set of  ex- 
tremely  long  blades  or  sails made  of  reflective aluminized plastic would 
be  deployed  in  two  tiers  of  six  each  by  centrifugal  force  after  its 
spacecraft  had  been  launched  from  the  Space Shuttle late  in  1981. The 
spacecraft  and  its  scientific  payload,  mounted  at  the  center  of  the 
heliogyro, would be propelled by photon radiation from the sun to  rotate 
once every 3min. The spinning-sail concept had  been  chosen by program 
engineers and  designers for  development  as  being  more  feasible than  a 
square-sail concept  that  would  have used  an 850sq.m  (half-mile square) 
sail  configuration.  NASA  would  choose  in  mid-Aug.  between  the 
heliogyro and a proposed  ion-drive (solar-electric propulsion) spacecraft 
for a Halley’s Comet mission  in  1986.  JPL  had been working with other 
NASA  centers and a dozen industrial and research groups on parallel ef- 
forts  to   develop  low-thrust  long-life  spacecraft  for  the  1980s.  (JPL 
Release 826) 

Jun e  22:  MSFC announced it had received 26 proposals from researchers 
in the U.S.,  the U.K., and Italy for cloud-physics experiments to  be per- 
formed on Spacelab.  Cloud-physics research would  try  to explain cloud 
formation and release of  precipitation. Preventing or limiting the effects 
of  adverse weather such as severe storms or  floods would enable man  to 
avoid  yearly  losses  of  lives,  property,  and  agricultural  crops.  MSFC 
teams  would  evaluate  the  proposals  from  engineering,  management, 
cost,  and  scientific peer  group  standpoints;  in  July NASA  would  select 
experiments that would  fly  in  1980 or  1981. (MSFC Release 77-1 14) 

MSFC announced it had successfully tested the recovery system for the 
Shuttle  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  June  15  at  the  Natl.  Parachute Test 
Range.  Engineers  had  used  an  SRB  simulator,  a  drop-test  vehicle 
weighing more  than 21  773kg (48 0001b)  released  from beneath  the wing 
of  a B-52 aircraft at a speed of  about 85  meters per  sec (190mph) and an 

119 

JUNE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

altitude of  about  5500m (18 OOOft).  Primary purpose of  this test was  to  
measure the maximum load on the drogue chute that would open first to  
stabilize  the vehicle  and pull  out  the  other  chutes.  The measured  load, 
about 114 OOOkg  (a quarter of  a million lb), was about that expected. The 
next  test,  scheduled for late July or early Aug.,  would measure loads on 
the  other  parachutes.  Each  Shuttle launch  would  use  two  SRBs,  jetti- 
soned  a t   about  43km  (27mi)  altitude  to  descend  by  parachute  into  the 
ocean  and be  towed  to  shore  for  reuse.  (MSFC Release 77-115) 

June 23: The USAF launched the Navy's  navigation  technology satellite 
Nts 2 from Vandenberg AFB on an Atlas F booster  into a  12hr circular 
orbit of  63" inclination at about 11 6OOmi altitude. First of a system to  be 
called  NavStar,  the  Nts  2  carried  two  cesium-beam  time  standards 
(atomic  clocks)  to  produce  precise  time  signals  and  14  solar-cell  ex- 
periments  for  its  builder,  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory.  The  joint- 
service NavStar  system upon completion would consist of  24  satellites (8 
in  each  of  3  circular-orbit  planes)  to  provide  users  with  longitude, 
latitude,  and  altitude  information  around the  clock  in  any  weather.  It 
would  give  a customer his  location within  33ft,  his  speed  within  about 
4in/sec,  and  the  correct  time.  Uses  of  NavStar  would  include  tactical- 
missile navigation and precision  delivery of  weapons;  aid  to  space,  air, 
land,  and sea  travel;  grid mapping  and geodetic surveys;  aerial rendez- 
vous  and  refueling;  and  search-and-rescue  operations.  The USAF  had 
announced plans to  launch five of  its own satellites later in 1977 and 1978 
for NavStar testing.  (D/SBD, June 20/77,279;  June 27177,320; A v Wk, 
Oct  11/76,  47;  NRL  Release 20-7-77C;  A Q C  Newsreview,  Aug  77,  3) 

June  24:  ComSatCorp  (Communications  Satellite  Corporation)  an- 
nounced  that  the  U.S.  Navy's  navigation  technology  satellite  launched 
June 23 from Vandenberg AFB had been the first satellite to  use a nickel- 
hydrogen battery  for energy storage. Nts 2 had carried two 7-cell storage 
batteries  said  to  be  rechargeable,  highly  reliable,  and longer-lived  than 
the  nickel-cadmium  batteries  used  by  satellites, having  three  times  the 
amount  of  energy  stored  per  unit  of  weight  and  five  times  the  cyclic 
lifetime  of  the  nickel-cadmium  type.  The Naval  Research  Laboratory 
had  sponsored  development  of  the  new  batteries  by  ComSatCorp 
Laboratories  in Clarksburg,  Md.  (ComSat  Release 77-19) 

0  MSFC  announced  arrival  June  24  a t   the  Natl.  Space  Technology 
Laboratories  of  a  huge  steel  structure to  simulate the Space Shuttle or- 
biter  in  main  propulsion-test  article  firings  later  in  1977.  The  article 
would  include the  simulator with an aft fuselage, an  external tank,  and 
three  Shuttle  main  engines;  first  test  would  take  place  in  Dec.  The 
simulator,  about  29m  (95ft)  long  and  weighing  about  110 OOOkg 

120 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

(243  OOOlb),  had  moved  from  the Michoud  assembly  facility  near  New 
Orleans to NSTL in Miss. on the barge Pearl River, having traveled from 
Calif.  to  Michoud via  the Panama Canal on the NASA barge Poseidon 
[see May  101.  (MSFC  Release 77-118;  NASA  Release 77-132) 

0  NASA  announced  that  Skylab  4  commander Gerald  P.  Carr  would 
leave JSC  June 25  to  join  a Houston  firm, Bovay Engineers,  Inc.  Carr, 
one  of  19  astronauts  selected  in  Apr.  1966,  had  shared  a  spaceflight- 
duration  record  of  2017hr  (84  days)  with  Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson  and 
William R.  Pogue, and had retired  from the U.S.  Marine Corps in Sept. 
1975  to   become  a  NASA  civilian  employee.  His  departure  left  27 
astronauts on the active list a t  JSC.  (NASA Release 77-129) 

June 25:  MSFC  officials had  said the Space Shuttle main  engine might 
cost  nearly  twice  the  original  estimate,  Today reported.  In  1972 when 
Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division got the contract to  build  the engine and 
deliver 24  units,  the estimated cost was  $500 million;  latest estimate was 
$450 million more.  Project director James R.  Thompson and his deputy 
John Harlow said the  increases had  resulted not  only from design prob- 
lems and  inflation  but  also from delays and  changes ordered by  NASA 
and Congress.  (Today, June 25/77,  6A) 

June 27: NASA announced a new way  to control the flight of  its sound- 
ing rockets and point  their  instruments more accurately in astronomical 
and  other  scientific studies:  a  small TV  camera  in  the  nose  cone would 
allow an operator  on  the ground  to  remotely aim the onboard  attitude- 
control system precisely  a t  the  desired  stellar object.  In  the  first  use  of 
“manned” rocket observation Apr.  15  a t  the White Sands Missile Range, 
N.M.,  scientists  from  Johns Hopkins Univ.  had  made the  first  sighting 
of  a quasar in the ultraviolet spectrum. The quasar (quasi-stellar object, 
a  celestial source resembling a  star but probably a galaxy) was 3 billion 
light-yr  from earth;  it was  the faintest and most remote object observed 
from  above earth’s atmosphere.  Dr.  Arthur  Davidsen of  JHU’s  depart- 
ment of  physics had operated the rocket controls while watching the TV 
screen;  his  colleagues  were  Professors  William  G.  Fastie  and  George 
Hartig. Observations in the ultraviolet range would let scientists compare 
properties  of  relatively near  and more  distant  quasars.  (NASA Release 
77-13 1) 

*  The U.S.  superconducting magnet  flown  to  a  USSR  magnetohydro- 
dynamic facility near  Moscow  [see June  131 had  been  bolted  into  place 
June 20,  ERDA reported.  The successful installation,  said Dr.  William 
D.  Jackson,  head  of  ERDA’s  MHD  program,  was  comparable  to   the 
1975  linking  of  the  Apollo  and  Soyuz  spacecrafts.  Final  leg  of  the 

121 

JUNE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

magnet’s  journey had been  a 10-mile trip on  a U.S.  truck  flown in with 
the  magnet  on a USAF  C-5  Galaxy  aircraft,  escorted to  the  facility  by 
Soviet police. Operation of  the system would begin in Oct.,  and about 20 
U.S.  scientists  and  engineers  would  take  part  in  the  2yr  experiment. 
(ERDA update,  June 27/77) 

0  Interest expressed by  the USSR in joint  development with  the U.S.  of 
spaceborne  systems  for  navigation,  air  surveillance,  and  air-to-ground 
communications  had  come  a t   an  awkward  time  for  the  US., A vWk  
reported.  Congress  earlier  in  1977  had  killed  the  Aerosat  program  to 
launch  two  air-to-ground  comsats  sponsored  jointly  by  the  FAA  and 
ESA with  Canadian participation;  ESA  might  seek  its  own joint  effort 
with  the USSR.  Also,  the Dept.  of  Defense’s NavStar  system,  designed 
mainly for military navigation users  through  a secure signal system, had 
offered a “clear” system for civilian use that the DOD had been trying to 
sell to  airlines and other potential civilian markets. Soviet officials (who 
had  told  a visiting  delegation  from the U.S.  radio-technical commission 
for  aeronautics  that  they  had  been  keeping  tabs  on  NavStar  develop- 
ment)  were  apparently  more  enthusiastic  prospects  for  NavStar  than 
U.S.  users.  (AvWk ,  June 27/77,  17) 

J u n e  28:  NASA  announced  that  the  second manned  inert  flight  of  the 
Shuttle orbiter Enterprise atop its Boeing 747 carrier, with astronauts Joe 
Engle and Richard Truly a t  the controls, was so successful that the agen- 
cy had canceled a fourth test and would  limit the captive flights to three. 
The third  flight would  be  put  off  until  July 28  to allow  replacement  of 
main  landing-gear  actuators and a leaky power  unit,  and installation of 
l00gal hydraulic reservoir tanks. The orbiter would  remain mated to the 
747 during  the work. 
The  faulty auxiliary power  unit had been activated on schedule about 
16min into the  flight; a small leak noticed before the captive-active tests 
had  not  been  thought  serious  enough  to  require replacement.  After  the 
747  had taxied  to  a ramp area for  shutdown,  the leak  appeared to  have 
increased. 
The June 28 test had included tasks originally scheduled for the second 
and  third  manned  tests:  low-  and  high-speed  flutter  and  speed-brake 
evaluations;  a  separation-maneuver  test;  and  a  fly-through  of  the 
microwave scanning-beam landing system that would guide the orbiter to 
earth  in  its  first free flight. The flutter test had  begun  about  3min after 
takeoff,  moving  the control surfaces first of  the orbiter, then of  the car- 
rier aircraft. The pilots deployed the orbiter’s speed brakes to 60,80, and 
100% open positions, pausing between each setting for rudder-deflection 
test  and  flight assessment. The high-speed  flutter tests at an altitude of 
about 20 OOOft  and a  speed of  270 knots,  followed by  speed-brake tests 

122 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

between  20 OOO  and  16 OOOft,  were  in  the  same  sequence as  the  earlier 
tests except  that the brake  settings were in  10% increments. 
Upon  completion  of  these  testsi(34min  into  the  flight)  the  carrier 
climbed  to  20  600ft  for  a  separation  data run.  “Pushover” occurred  at 
43min into the flight; the data run terminated with an “abort separation” 
order at 14 OOOft.  The carrier returned  to 17 500ft for the automatic fly- 
through,  followed by  landing after  a  total  flight time  of  63min. 
Early data from this test indicated that separation conditions would be 
satisfactory for free flight; that the mated configuration was  flutter-free 
for  the  flight envelope; and  that operating  the  speed  brake  would  pro- 
duce no significant buffeting.  (Postflight rept,  orbiter ALT  #7, captive- 
active flt #2, June 28/77;  W Post, June 29/77,  A-3;  B  Sun, June 29/77, 
3; LA  Times, June 29/77,2;  W Star, June 29/77,2;  Today, June 29/77, 
10A; A vW k ,  July 4/77,  18) 

June  29:  NASA  announced  the  E.S.  (Todd)  Groo,  associate  ad- 
ministrator  for center operations since 1974, would leave the agency July 
23.  Ray  Kline would  succeed him,  remaining assistant administrator  for 
institutional  management.  Deputy  NASA  Administrator  Alan  W. 
Lovelace  said Groo had  benefited the  agency by  clarifying the missions 
of  the field centers and instituting training  for  future managers.  (NASA 
Release 77-134; NASA  anno June 29/77) 

June 30: The N Y  Times reported that a team of  two Soviet crewmen,  ac- 
companied  for  a  time  by  a  woman  plant  expert,  had  completed  a 4mO 
stay in an isolation chamber to test an artificial environment designed for 
long  interplanetary  space missions.  The team  had  breathed  oxygen  and 
consumed  water  and  food  produced  by  miniature  wheatfields  and 
vegetable  gardens  occupying  about  half  the  space  of  their  1260ft2 test 
chamber  called  Bios  3. The plants,  grown by  hydroponics  (mineralized 
solutions  rather  than  soils),  had  exuded  enough  moisture  for  drinking 
and household  needs  and had  provided  a  third  of  the  proteins  and fats 
and  half  the  carbohydrates  in  the  crew  diet,  supplemented  with 
dehydrated rations  of  animal  fats  and proteins stored for  the mission. 
The  Times  quoted  an  Izvestia  story  describing  the  experiment  and 
reporting  “no  significant  changes  in  the  physiologic,  biochemical  and 
psychological functions of  the  subjects.  Their weight has  also remained 
virtually  the  same.”  Dr.  G.  Lisovsky,  head  of  the  Controlled  Biosyn- 
thesis Laboratory of  the Krasnoyarsk  Physics  Inst.  in  Siberia, said  that 
earlier experiments in  the series begun  shortly after the Gagarin flight of 
1961 had  tried  chlorellas  (green single-cell algae) as  a  source of  protein 
and  B-complex vitamins for long space trips. The algae had yielded suf- 
ficient oxygen and water but did not provide a balanced diet; researchers 
had  then used  early-maturing wheat and vegetables. Agronomist Mariya 

123 

JUNE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Shulenko  had  done  the  cooking  while  checking  out  the  hydroponics; 
after she left,  Gennady Asinyarov and Nikolay Bugreyev had shared the 
job.  (NYT ,  June 30/77,  28) 

During June:  John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for space 
flight, was  one of  92 persons honored  by  election to  membership in  the 
Natl.  Academy  of  Engineering.  His  citation  was  for  “contributions  to  
engineering  theory  and  practice  and  leadership  of  organizations  that 
pioneered major  space programs.”  (NAS News  Report,  June/77,  7) 

0  Nature  reported  that  a May  13 meeting  of  the  Royal  Astronomical 
Society in London had discussed Mars’s  moons Phobos and Deimos, the 
100th anniversary of whose discovery would occur in Aug. Observations, 
both  ground-based  and  from  satellites, had  revealed  oddities:  Phobos, 
the only satellite in earth’s solar system that circled its central body faster 
than that body could spin on its axis, would appear to  an observer on the 
planet’s surface to  rise  in  the west  and set in the east, whereas its  fellow 
Deimos would  appear  to  rise  in  the east  and  set  in  the west  like earth’s 
moon.  Also,  the  orbit  of  Phobos  was  coming nearer  to   the  surface of 
Mars (a body approaching within  8700km would be pulled  apart by  dif- 
ferential  tidal  forces,  the  article  said).  A  Soviet  astrophysicist,  I.S. 
Shklovsky, had  claimed in  the  1950s that  the low  density of  Phobos  in- 
dicated  it  was  a  hollow  artificial  satellite  produced  by  an  advanced 
civilization on Mars. Viking spacecraft images had shown that the moons 
were blackish gray rather  than the red of Mars, indicating different com- 
position;  astronomer  Joe Veverka  of  Cornel1 Univ.  concluded  that  the 
moons  had  originated  in  the  asteroid  belt.  Viking  had  found  that  the 
10km-diameter Stickney crater on Phobos covered 40% of  the maximum 
diameter  of  Phobos  itself.  The  two  Mars  moons  had  almost  identical 
shapes (triaxial ellipsoids) and both  rotated synchronously with their or- 
bital  periods and their long axes pointing directly at Mars (Nature, June 
30/77,  758) 

0  Reductions made by  the  House  subcommittee on  defense appropria- 
tions in funding for the defense satellite communications system (DSCS) 
and  the USAF/Navy  Fleet  Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) pro- 
gram would  force  the DOD  to  lease its communications channels from 
commercial carriers, A v Wk charged. The  subcommittee had  eliminated 
the DOD’s  entire $60-million  request  for  R&D  funds to  proceed with a 
contract  awarded  in  Feb.  to  General Electric for  a  qualification model 
and  two  flight-demonstration  DSCS-3  satellites.  I t   also  had  denied 
money for a fourth and fifth FltSatCom satellite to  be built under a con- 
tract  awarded to  TRW in  1972; the Navy had been leasing capacity since 
March  1976 on  the  Marisat  system managed  by  Comsat  General.  The 

124 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JUNE 

subcommittee, headed by  Rep.  George Mahon  (D-Tex), had  advocated 
continued leasing despite DOD testimony that leasing would be more ex- 
pensive, and had refused the funds requested for two other DOD satellite 
systems:  it had rejected  outright  DOD’s  international  global-positioning 
system to  be  built  by  Rockwell,  and  had  reduced  the  $83.2  million  re- 
quested  by  the USAF  for  a  Hughes-built satellite data  system by  more 
than  half,  postponing  procurement  of  a  fifth  spacecraft.  (A vWk ,  June 
6/77,  60) 

JPL  officials were considering an 8mo extension of  the Viking mission 
through  early  1979,  instead  of  terminating  it  May  31,  1978,  A vWk  
reported.  Viking  mission  director  G.  Calvin Broome had  estimated he 
would need a team of about  180 for a continuation mission; he currently 
had about 300 people working on it,  and had had as  many as 700 a t  the 
height  of  the mission. 
tw o   landers  would  continue 
In   the  extended  mission, 
the 
photographing  the  sites  a t   Chryse  Planitia  and  Utopia  Planitia  and 
transmitting data to  earth; their biology instruments had been shut down 
earlier [see June 11. The orbiters would  also continue to  photograph  the 
planet,  as the  flight team had  conserved sufficient gas  supplies for  pro- 
pulsion and attitude control.  (A vWk ,  June 20/77,  79) 

125 

July 

Jury  I :   NASA  announced  it  would  conduct  sounding-rocket tests with 
the USSR Hydromet Service for 2wk in Aug. to  compare U.S. and Soviet 
measurements of upper-air temperatures and detect discrepancies in their 
meteorological  instruments.  NASA  would  launch  a  series  of  rockets 
from  Wallops  Flight  Center  and  the  Hydromet  representatives would 
launch  rockets  from  the  research  ship Akademik Korolev off  the U.S. 
east coast.  Under  a  1971  agreement on  space sciences and applications, 
the two nations  in  1972 had begun exchange of  data that  had  shown the 
temperature field in the eastern hemisphere to  be consistently colder than 
that  of  the  western  hemisphere.  Both  sides  had  evaluated  their  rocket 
systems  for  sources  of  error;  direct  comparisons  made  in  1973  a t  
Kourou,  French Guiana, had  again shown discrepancies in  temperature 
and wind  data.  Improvements in  instruments and techniques since 1973 
had  made  further  comparisons  necessary, NASA  said.  (NASA Release 
77-133) 
*  Kennedy Space Center  announced  it  would  host  for  the  second  con- 
secutive yr  a gathering of  more than  85   meteorologists and atmospheric 
physicists for TRIP 77  (Thunderstorm Research Intl.  Program  1977),  in- 
cluding 21  principal  investigators and  their  associates, continuing  their 
studies  of  lightning and  thunderstorms  and  the  hazards  resulting  from 
them.  The  1976  program  had  yielded  much  data  on  electrical  charges 
within  and  between  clouds  and  from  clouds  to   earth's  surface.  (KSC 
Release  127-77) 

0  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  announced  it  had  resumed  the  at- 
mospheric variability experiments (AVE)  begun  in  1964 to  study  proc- 
esses  associated  with  the  onset  and  development  of  severe  storms. 
Originally conducted to  aid in scheduling Saturn rocket firings at MSFC, 
the experiments were designed to  detect unusual weather conditions com- 
E 
mon  to   different  localities  before  sever  storms  occurred,  to   improve 
short-term  predictions  based  on  data  from  weather  balloons,  weather 
satellites, and ground-observation posts.  Sixth of the AVE series recently 
conducted over 24hr  in an  area  including Texas, Alabama,  Illinois,  and 
North  Dakota had monitored  severe storms with  hail  and  tornadoes  in 
Missouri and western Tennessee, and a frontal system with low-pressure 
disturbances in Alabama.  (MSFC Release 77-122) 
f$3T  F6b' 
UGk  .I2 6 . - - ~ ~ T € ~ ~ l 0 ~ A L l ~  
127 
BLANK 

~~~~~~ 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

0  KSC  announced  it  had  awarded  a  $480  193  fiied-price  contract  to  
Reynolds,  Smith  and  Hills  of  Jacksonville,  Fla.,  for  modifications  to  
Complex 39B to  adapt it  for Shuttle launch operations as had been done 
t o  Complex 39A. KSC  had used  39B to  launch Apollo 10; Skylabs 2, 3, 
and  4;  and  the  U.S. spacecraft  of  the  Apollo-Soyuz  mission.  (KSC 
Release  125-77) 

July 5: NASA announced that its aviation safety reporting system begun 
in  1976 for the Federal Aviation Administration  had  been  a success, as 
evaluated  by  a  NASA  Advisory  Council  subcommittee  established  in 
Feb.  1977. During  the  system’s  first year,  pilots,  air traffic controllers, 
and others working in national aviation had voluntarily submitted about 
5 5 0 0   safety-problem reports that had  been  fed  into a computer  to  note 
trends and monitor  corrections. Next evaluation would be  in  June 1979. 
(NASA Release 77-137) 

July 6: NASA announced publication of  the first book of a series on the 
Skylab  mission,  Skylab,  Our  First  Space  Station  (NASA  SP-400), a 
general introduction to  and overview  of  the mission’s problems and suc- 
cesses.  The  10 chapters  tell how  Skylab grew  from existing technology; 
how  it  nearly  failed  when  its micrometeorite  shield and one of  its  solar 
panels  were  lost,  and how  it was  saved;  how  3 manned  visits  occurred, 
one  of  them  for  a  record  84-day  occupation;  and  how  it  proved  the 
possibility of  living and working for extended periods in a space environ- 
ment.  (NASA Release 77-135) 

July  7: NASA  announced  it  had  awarded  Boeing Commercial Aircraft 
Go. of  Seattle a contract to  design and ground-test composite structures 
for the  Boeing  727  aircraft. NASA’s  aircraft energy-efficiency program 
to   decrease  transport-aircraft  fuel  consumption  by  50%  had  included 
contracts with  several manufacturers to  reduce aircraft weights  by  using 
composites  (high-strength  filaments  in  a  polymer  matrix,  lighter  than 
metal  structures).  Boeing  would  build  five  shipsets  of  composite 
elevators  (five right-  and  five  left-handed) using  manufacturing  techni- 
ques  that  might  become  standard  procedure.  Costs  would  be  shared, 
$8  100 OOO  contributed  by  the  government  and  $890 OOO  by  the  con- 
tractor.  Langley  Research Center wouJ’  manage  contractor effort  over 
3.5yr.  (NASA Release 77-139;  LaRC Release 77-27) 

0  MSFC  reported  that  employees Whitt  Brantley,  Jr.,  and  Robert  W. 
Rood had  invented  a solar energy device capable of  300 OOO  Btu  per  hr, 
enough to heat or air condition  several buildings.  It would  offer a 50 to  
70%  efficient solar energy option  for uses requiring temperatures above 

128 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JULY 

200’F,  costing  as little  as $5  per  ft2 for  units  25  to   50ft  in  diameter. 
(MSFC Release 77- 123) 

0  NASA  announced  that  a  team  of  astronomers  a t   the  Harvard- 
Smithsonian Center  for  Astrophysics using  data  from  NASA’s  Uhum 
satellite  had  discovered  what  seemed  to  be  “superclusters”  of  galaxies 
more than  150 million  light-years in diameter,  bounded  by  areas of  ex- 
tremely hot gas acting as x-ray  sources. The mass of gas required to pro- 
duce x-rays would be 5  to 10 times greater than all material seen at other 
wavelengths,  and would  suffice to  bind  the galaxies into  superclusters. 
Primarily hydrogen and  helium,  the gas was  thought  to  be “primordial 
material” from an explosion that  created the universe. 
In the debate over origins, “open universe” theorists supported the idea 
of  a  big  bang  20  billion  yr  ago  expanding  outward  forever;  “closed 
universe” advocates said gravitational collapse would halt expansion and 
the material would fall back on itself, perhaps to repeat the cycle. Tradi- 
tional  optical and  radio  techniques had  not  found  enough material  in 
space to  supply the gravity needed to “close” the universe; the new  data 
indicated  the missing  mass might  exist  as vast  amounts  of  hot  gas  be- 
tween  galaxies. 
Uhum,  first  of  a  series  of  small  astronomical  satellites  (SAS)  for 
studying cosmic x-rays, had been launched Dec.  12,1970, as Explorer 42. 
The  astronomers  had  noted  the  x-ray  emissions  while  compiling  the 
fourth  Uhum catalog from observations in  the early  1970s. The project 
was  managed  for  NASA  by  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center.  (NASA 
Release 77-138) 

Ju f y  8:  NASA  announced  it  and  ERDA  had  contracted  with  Boeing 
Engineering and Construction Co.  to  design and build on a utility com- 
pany  site  chosen  by  ERDA  the  largest windmill  in  history,  a  2500kw 
generator with  300ft  blades,  to   provide data  on  such  systems coupled 
with  conventional power  plants.  Lewis Research Center would  manage 
the project  for ERDA.  (NASA Release 77-141) 

July 10: Television programs beamed by satellite to the whole world were 
unwelcome to some delegates a t  the Vienna meeting of  the UN Commit- 
tee on  Peaceful Uses of  Outer Space, the  W. Post reported.  Its reprint of 
a London Observer article said that the major technical problem remain- 
ing  for  global  TV  transmission  was  overcrowded  frequencies,  but 
political problems remained. 
A majority of  UN members including the Soviet bloc had pressed for 
regulation  of  TV  transmission,  claiming  the  right  to   intervene  between 
their citizens and the broadcasts they could receive. The Soviet group ob- 

129 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

jected to “propaganda” especially on its Eastern European borders where 
“Western  TV  programs,  soap  operas  and  all,  are  often  more  welcome 
than  the  home  product.”  Developing  countries  unable  to  afford  their 
own TV  broadcasts  claimed  that  unrestricted foreign TV  from satellites 
would  result  in “cultural  imperialism.” 
The delegates seemed t o  want data from satellites scanning the earth to 
be  generally  available,  but  differed  over  what  should  go  to  whom.  A 
U.S.  satellite  detecting  a  new  Soviet  oil  field  might  have  to   ask  per- 
mission  before  reporting  the  find;  discovery  by any  satellite-operating 
nation  of  resources  (uranium,  for  instance)  in  a  developing  country 
might start a “gold rush” by major powers wanting to  “help” that country 
exploit  those  resources.  The  committee  agreed  to   formulate  guidelines 
for  UN  General  Assembly  approval,  but  western  European  and North 
American  nations  wanted  to   prevent  anything  resembling  censorship. 
Because  of  a Belgrade conference in  session  “only a  few  hundred miles 
further  east,”  the  Soviet  bloc  also  was  sensitive  to   any  measures  that 
could  be  interpreted  as infringing human  rights or  the  free exchange of 
information.  ( W Post,  July  10/77,  A-14) 
Ju ly  ZZ:  MSFC announced it had selected General Electric Co.  of  Valley 
Forge,  Pa.,  to  negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee  contract  for a prototype 
Atmospheric  Cloud  Physics  Laboratory  (ACPL)  to   be  flown  on  a 
number  of  Spacelab missions carried by  the Space Shuttle [see June 221. 
The prototype with software and spares was due for delivery to MSFC by 
Oct.  1,  1979,  and  to  KSC  for  Shuttle  launch  by  Jan.  1,  1980.  (MSFC 
Release 77- 124) 

July Z2: KSC  reported  that an experimental homemade airplane built by 
John  Murphy  of  the  center’s  Technology  Utilization  Ofc.  had  used  a 
NASA-developed  winglet  set  to  increase  its  efficiency  by  about  8%. 
Murphy  had  begun  work  on  the  plane  in  Dec.  1976  from  plans  by  a 
California  designer  and  had  completed  it  on  June  12.  Except  for  the 
engine and engine mount,  the plane consisted entirely of  fiberglass and 
Styrofoam and weighed only 6301b.  Its lOOhp Continental aircraft engine 
could  carry two passengers a t  2OOmph,  requiring  lOOOft  for takeoff  and 
about 2000ft for landing. Murphy, a graduate of Georgia Tech, had been 
flying for 30yr and owned another aircraft that he had  built himself.  He 
had  completed  24  of  the  50hr  flying  time  needed  for  Federal  Aviation 
Administration approval, so that he could fly it to the annual meeting of 
the  Experimental Aircraft  Assn.  in  Wisconsin  later  this  summer  and 
show  it  off  to the designer.  (KSC Release  128-77) 

0  LaRC announced  it would  close its Technology Utilization  House to  
the public Aug.  1 to  prepare for the arrival of  the family that would  live 

130 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JULY 

in the house €or a year to demonstrate the innovations built into it, many 
of  them  deriving  from  NASA  space-program  technology.  The  family 
consisted of  a professor  from Florida  State Univ.,  his wife  (a registered 
nurse), and their teenage daughter and 12yr-old son. The new equipment 
included  solar  energy  collectors,  special  insulation,  a  water-recycling 
system,  automated  heating  and  cooling,  emergency  lighting,  an   im- 
proved  fireplace,  and a special security system. Materials in the contem- 
porary  style 3-bedroom house, chosen to  save energy and water and thus 
reduce  costs,  could  save more  than  $20 000 over  a  20yr  period.  (LaRC 
Release 77-28) 

0  Political  interference  had  delayed  development  of  science  and 
technology  in  China,  according  to  Chien  Hsueh-shen,  director  of  the 
mechanics  institute  of  the  PRC  Academy  of  Sciences.  The  W.  Post 
quoted his statement in the journal Red  Flag that China would “catch up 
with  and  surpass the world  advanced  levels.” Chien,  now  China’s “top 
missile  scientist” according to  the Post,  had  been  a  colonel  in  the  U.S. 
Army  Air  Corps  before  returning  to   China  in  1955. Meanwhile,  pro- 
vincial  radio  reports  monitored  in  Hong  Kong  said  that  “political  in- 
fighting” at a PRC base  for nuclear weapons  and missiles  had  “crippled 
defense construction” for months  in  1976. ( W  Post,  July  12/77,  A-15) 

July  Z4:  NASA  launched  a 280kg  (6201b)  geostationary meteorological 
satellite (GMS) for Japan from Cape Canaveral at 10:56 EDT on a Delta 
vehicle into an elliptical orbit,  to  be  boosted  at third apogee into  a geo- 
synchronous orbit at about 35  500km altitude over  the equator south of 
Tokyo.  Gms I ,   known  as Himawari  in  Japan,  was  that  country’s  con- 
tribution  to  GARP , the global  atmospheric research  project  sponsored 
by  the  Intl.  Council of  Scientific Unions  and the World Meteorological 
Organization.  The cylindrical  craft  had  carried  a  visible  infrared  spin- 
scan  radiometer  (VISSR)  and a  space  environment  monitor  to  identify 
and  photograph  weather  patterns  from  Hawaii  to  Pakistan  and  detect 
solar energy activity that might disrupt communications on earth. More 
than  half  the  world’s  tropical  storms had  begun  in  the  western  Pacific 
and eastern  Indian Ocean,  said  Kazuo Watanabe,  project  manager  for 
Japan’s  national  space  development  agency;  Gms I could  provide  de- 
tailed weather photos and other data every 30min to  give instant warning 
of typhoons in the area. Watanabe noted that Japan had been depending 
on  data  from  a U.S.  satellite in  polar  orbit  that  furnished images  only 
twice a day.  (NASA Release 77-1 10; MOR M-492-101-77-01  [prelaunch] 
July  12/77;  Hughes Aircraft Co.  release  July  12/77;  NYT,  July  15/77, 
A-8;  W Post,  July  15/77,  A-22) 

0  NASA Administrator Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch announced that President 

131 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Carter  had  declared  July  16-24  as a U.S.  Space Observance,  the  dates 
chosen by  Congress  to   coincide with  the  anniversary of  the Apollo  ZZ 
moon landing as well as Apollo-Soyuz and the Viking I landing on Mars. 
Dr.  Frosch said that the president’s  recognition  of  NASA  achievements 
“should  serve  as  inspiration  and  encouragement  to   all  of  us.”  (NASA 
anno July  14/77) 
July IS: NASA  announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for 
the  30  to  40 openings  as  Space  Shuttle  astronauts  after  a  yr-long 
recruiting  effort.  Candidates  selected  would  report  in  1978  for  a  2yr 
training  period  at Johnson Space Center.  Of  the  8037 applicants,  6735 
were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot;  1142 of the applicants 
were  women.  NASA  would  announce  selections  in  Dec.  1977.  (NASA 
Release 77-145;  JSC Release 77-39) 

0  LaRC announced it would  dedicate on July  19 the site of  a new wind 
tunnel,  the  National  Transonic  Facility,  scheduled  for  completion  in 
1980 at a cost  of  about  $85  million.  The on ly   facility  of  its  kind  in  the 
world,  the tunnel would use cryogenic nitrogen to  test aircraft models in 
a realistic flight environment; cooling the medium t o   - 300°F would per- 
mit  accurate  simulation  of  Mach  numbers  and  atmospheric-density 
ratios. Although NASA and DOD would be principal users of  the tunnel, 
the schedule would be shared by  other federal agencies, private industry, 
and  the scientific community.  Speakers at the  dedication would  be Dr. 
John  J .   Martin,  assistant  secretary  of  the  Air  Force  for  research  and 
development;  Donald  F.  Hearth,  LaRC director;  and Oran W .   Nicks, 
LaRC deputy director. A display of  aircraft developed  from LaRC tran- 
sonic  research  would  include  a  B-747  freighter;  a  wide-bodied  DC-10 
passenger plane; USAF fighters F-14, F-15,  and F-106; a Learjet business 
aircraft;  LaRC’s  B-737  flying  laboratory;  a  T-38  jet  trainer;  and  a 
UH-1H  helicopter.  (NASA Release 77-144;  LaRC Release 77-29) 

July  Id:  About  300  people  had  assembled  at  Cape  Canaveral,  the  W. 
Post  reported,  to  celebrate the anniversary of  the  launch of  Apollo I I ,  
the mission  that  first landed  humans on the moon.  On July  16,  1969, a 
Saturn  V rocket  launched  from  Kennedy  Space  Center  had  carried  3 
astronauts,  none  of  whom  attended  the  observance.  ( W  Post,  July 
17/77,  A-18) 

July Z8:  MSFC  announced that one of  its orbiting  satellites, Pegasus I ,  
silent since  Jan.  13,  1968,  had  suddenly come  to  life;  GSFC’s  network 
operations group had  picked  up  signals from  its beacon  June 27  as  in- 
terference with data transmission by another satellite. Pegaus I  had been 
launched  Feb.  16,  1965, to.acquire meteoroid  data on its 2300ftz of  in- 

132 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1 9 l l  

JULY 

strumented  surface  and  transmit  its  findings  t o  earth  stations.  After  a 
silence of  nearly  lOyr,  its  revival  was  a  puzzle  t o  NASA  officials who 
were  checking circuit drawings  still available.  After  notifying MSFC  of 
the  occurrence,  GSFC  network  operations  had  sent  a command  from 
Australia’s Orroral station t o  turn off the satellite’s AM beacon,  only t o  
find  that the FM  beacon was also working.  The transmitters, operating 
when the vehicle was in full sunlight, were sending strong signals; the net- 
work  group had  recorded  signal  strengths  of  both  transmitters  before 
commanding  them  off.  (MSFC Release 77-130) 

MSFC  reported  it  had  fired  for  2min  the  largest  solid-fuel  rocket 
motor  ever  developed,  a t   Thiokol  Corp.3  installation  24mi  from 
Brigham  City, Utah,  and 2mi  from  the  nearest  occupied building.  The 
Thiokol  motor,  the  propulsive part  of  the  Space Shuttle booster,  con- 
tained  502 454kg  (more than  1.1 million  lb) of  propellant,  half  again as 
much as the next  largest motor ever  f i e d  a t  the  site. A composite fuel, 
mixed and poured into the 4 segments of  the SRM, had been cured for 4 
days  before  the  segments  were  joined  horizontally  a t   the  test  site  by 
special handling  devices.  The segments would go by  rail to KSC  for ver- 
tical  assembly.  Each  Shuttle  launch  would  use  two  of  the  boosters, 
designed  for  reuse  up  t o   20  times.  (MSFC  Releases  77-125,  77-133; 
NASA  Release 77-142) 

0  NASA  announced it had awarded a 12th grader from Calif.  a prize in 
addition to  the grand prize for 1977 in a nationwide student science com- 
petition.  Jonathan  Holman, who had worked with control mechanisms 
in blood clotting,  received his award from his older brother  Jeffrey, top  
winner  in  the  1976 competition and now  a  student a t  the Mass.  Inst.  of 
Technology. Jonathan had chosen his experiment because his family had 
a  history  of  hemophilia,  in  which  the  blood  fails to  clot  properly.  The 
competition was  sponsored by  the Natl.  Consortium  for Black  Profes- 
sional Development. NASA coordinator for the program was Everett P. 
Colman, EEO officer at LeRC, who said it was a part of  NASA’s  effort 
to  increase the  number  of  people with  scientific skills the agency would 
need  in  future.  (NASA Release 77-140) 

@  MSFC  reported  that NASA  had  issued  a request  for  proposals to  in- 
tegrate mission payloads,  in preparation for the first three Spacelab mis- 
sions and the sixth Space Shuttle orbiter flight test.  Integration would in- 
clude  combining  a  number  of  experiments  into a  compatible payload; 
controlling  the  configuration  during  instrument  development,  testing, 
and flight operations;  and disassembly of  the payload after the mission. 
Proposals,  due  Aug.  15,  would  be  reviewed  by  a  source  evaluation 
board.  (MSFC Release 77-131) 

133 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

July  19:  The  Natl.  Science  Foundation  reported  that  research  and 
development spending in the U.S.  would reach an estimated $40.8 billion 
in  1977,  9%  more  than  the  1976  level  of  $37.3  billion.  The  federal 
government expected  to   increase its  R&D  outlay  from  $19.8  billion  in 
1976  to   $21.8  billion  in  1977,  emphasizing defense,  space,  and  energy. 
(NSF Release PR77-73) 

0  The  Natl.  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  (NOAA)  an- 
nounced it had completed the first phase of  a project funded by the Natl. 
Science Foundation to  learn more about earth’s magnetic field and near- 
space environment. The task consisted of placing special magnetometers, 
devices  to   measure  earth’s  magnetic-field  densities,  a t   more  than  25 
strategic and remote sites in Alaska, Canada, Brazil, and several Pacific 
islands.  Two NOAA  geostationary  spacecraft  of  the  GOES  series (one 
over  the  Pacific  and  the  other  over  Colombia,  South America) would 
transmit  data  from  the  devices  to   Boulder,  Colo.,  for  immediate 
distribution  to  earth,  atmospheric,  and  space scientists. 

Using the network of magnetometers with instant  relay of  the data to  
earth would permit continuous and precise monitoring of magnetic-field 
changes  over  the  western  hemisphere.  The  information  would  aid 
research  on  the  possible  connection  between  magnetic-field  variations 
and  climate  changes;  on  reducing  magnetic  interference  with  com- 
munications and power systems; and on the use of magnetic fluctuations 
as  a  tool  in  locating geothermal,  mineral,  and  other  natural  resources. 
(NOAA Release 77-195) 

July  20:  WFC  announced  it  would  receive  this  week  the  first  of two 
rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) for contractor flight tests.  Sikor- 
sky Aircraft,  which would conduct the  tests, had  designed the RSRA  (a 
joint project of NASA and the U.S.  Army) to  f ly  as a regular helicopter, 
as a compound helicopter  (both  rotors and wings), or  as a conventional 
fixed-wing  aircraft.  As  the  RSRA’s  engines  or  wings were changeable, 
NASA planned to  use it as a “flying wind  tunnel” for trying out various 
rotor  systems:  articulated,  hingeless,  or  gimbaled,  or  with  variable 
geometry, variable diameter,  or  controllable twist.  (WFC Release 77-7; 
NASA  Release 77-149) 

NASA announced that LeRC, under the agency’s general aviation tur- 
bine  engine  (GATE)  program,  had  awarded  study  contracts  totaling 
$300 OOO  to  4  different  companies for  using  in  small lightweight planes 
with less than lO00hp the advanced turbine technology used in large com- 
mercial  aircraft.  The  companies  were  Teledyne  Corp. ;  Garrett 
AiResearch; Detroit  Diesel Allison;  and Williams Research Corp. 

134 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JULY 

LeRC  spokesman Bill  Strack  said  most  engines  in  the  light-aircraft 
class (reciprocating engines of  less than 4OOhp) dated  from  lOyr ago and 
lacked  the  advantages  of  turbines:  reduced  vibration  and  noise,  less 
maintenance, lighter weight,  and greater safety and reliability. The large 
production  base existing for  piston  engines might  make it hard  to  pro- 
duce  small  turbine  engines  cost-effectively,  he  said.  (NASA  Release 
77-147) 

0  NASA announced it would conduct the third  “manned inert” flight of 
the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise on or about July 26 at Dryden Flight 
Research Center. At the  controls of  the orbiter  atop its Boeing 747 car- 
rier would be astronauts Fred W.  Haise and C.  Gordon Fullerton, mak- 
ing their second piggyback run in this test series. They had made the first 
captive  flight  June  18;  the  second,  on  June  28,  had  Joe  Engle  and 
Richard Truly  as pilots. 
In the first flight, lasting 56min, Haise and Fullerton had checked out 
the  orbiter  flight controls  a t  low  altitude  and  low  speed.  For  the  third 
test,  the  747  would  carry  the  orbiter  to   an  altitude  of  7895  meters 
(25 905ft) where it would “push over” in a practice separation; the orbiter 
and 747 crews would go through all the motions except actual separation. 
The  flight would  be  a  dress rehearsal  for  the  first  free flight  of  the  or- 
biter,  scheduled  on  or  about  Aug.  12.  (NASA  Release  77-146;  JSC 
Release 77-41) 

July  2Z:  INTELSAT  announced  that  Paraguay  had  become  the  97th 
member  of  the  organization  on  July  18,  and  the  22nd  nation  in  the 
western hemisphere to  join.  Paraguay’s ANTELCO (Administracion Na- 
cional  de  Telecomunicaciones)  had  signed  the  operating  agreement. 
Created  in  1964,  INTELSAT  claimed  to   provide  more  than  half  the 
world’s  transoceanic telecommunications and domestic communications 
for  9 countries through  its global satellite system.  (INTELSAT Release 
77-19-1) 

0  Today reported that Congress had approved June 20 the largest NASA 
budget  in nearly  lOyr,  including new  starts on three major programs.  In 
conference committee, the House (which had cut $20.7 million requested 
by NASA to  begin work on an unmanned 1982 Jupiter probe) had agreed 
with  the Senate on $17.7 million for the project,  which NASA  said was 
enough to  start with. The budget also contained $36 million for the large 
orbiting  telescope,  a  frequently  delayed  major  scientific  project,  and 
$26.6  million  for  Landsat-D,  fourth  of  a  series  of  earth  monitoring 
satellites.  The  newspaper  said  the  only  real  disagreement was  over  the 
Jupiter mission, which Rep.  Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) wanted to  kill 
[see June 101 because of  its eventual cost, estimated to  reach $435 million 

135 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

by the time it wa s  scheduled for launch in 1983. The House conferees had 
finally  accepted  the  Senate’s  figure.  Planned  to   take  advantage  of  a 
favorable alignment of  the earth with Jupiter in 1982, the mission would 
not only be the first to orbit Jupiter but would also drop a probe into the 
planet’s  atmosphere.  During  its  20mo  in  orbit,  the  mission  would  also 
view  Jupiter’s moons  at close range.  (Today,  July 21/77,  20A) 

July 25:  NASA  announced  it  had  on  July 21  and 24  adjudged  the Ex- 
plorer 52 and 55  (Atmosphere Explorer)  missions  successful. Launched 
Qct. 6,  1975 (as AE-D) and Nov.  20,  1975 (as AE-E), the two spacecraft 
had  carried instruments to  study energy transfer and chemical processes 
in the atmosphere. AE -D  had  “performed properly” until Jan.  29,  1976, 
when  a  power  system  failure  ended  control  of  the  spacecraft,  which 
reentered  earth’s  atmosphere  March  16.  Its  perigee  had  moved  from 
equatorial a t  launch,  northward to the winter  pole and southward to  the 
summer pole, producing “excellent measurements” at all latitudes. AE-E, 
still in operation, “continues to  acquire and contribute worthwhile data” 
on the Atmosphere Explorers’ findings, which had resulted in 250 formal 
presentations  a t   scientific  gatherings  and  130 publications  in  technical 
journals.  (NASA MOR  S-852-75-04/05) 

0  NASA  announced it had  selected Ball Bros.  Research Corp.,  Boulder, 
Colo.,  to negotiate a $13.8 million contract for  the telescope system on 
the  infrared  astronomy  satellite ( I U S ) ,  a joint  US.-Netherlands  mis- 
sion  to   survey  the  celestial  sphere  in  the  infrared  spectrum.  The  U.S. 
would  provide  a  large  cryogenically  cooled  instrument  and  the 
Netherlands would  provide  the  spacecraft and would  supervise integra- 
tion.  NASA would  launch I U S  from WTR  early in  1981 on a Delta for 
its yr-long scientific mission. The Ball Bros. contract would cover design, 
fabrication,  test,  and launch  support  for  the  telescope,  plus  spares,  an 
engineering model,  and ground-support  equipment. The Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory would manage the project, and Ames Research Center would 
be  responsible  for the  telescope system  (NASA  Release 77-154) 

NASA  announced  it  had  selected  Lockheed Missiles and  Space Co., 
Sunnyvale,  Calif.,  and  Perkin-Elmer  Corp.,  Danbury,  Conn.,  to  
negotiate  contracts  totaling  more  than  $131  million  for  two  major 
elements of  the Space Telescope. Lockheed would design, fabricate, and 
integrate  the  telescope  support-systems  module,  provide  systems 
engineering and analysis, and support NASA  in ground and flight opera- 
tions.  Perkin-Elmer would  design,  manufacture,  and deliver  the optical 
assembly and equipment,  including  systems engineering,  support of  the 
launch,  verification of  the orbit,  and plans  for mission  operations.  The 
8ft-diameter telescope, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 

136 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JULY 

1983, would offer  an  astronomical  capability beyond  anything possible 
from the earth’s surface o r  any telescopes launched so far because of  its 
improvements  in  resolution,  power,  light  sensitivity,  and  wavelength 
coverage.  It  would  be  refurbished  periodically  in  orbit  or   could  be 
returned  to   earth  on the  Shuttle  for  repair  or  upgrading.  The  support 
module would provide electric power,  communications, data processing 
and storage, attitude sensing and control,  and environmental control to  
the  telescope assembly and  up  to  5 additional  scientific instruments ac- 
commodated  by  the  telescope.  MSFC,  which  had  overall  project 
management responsibility,  would manage the contracts  for the support 
module and the optical assembly; GSFC would manage scientific instru- 
ment development.  (NASA Release 77-153) 

*  ARC  announced  that  its  1977 summer  study under  the  leadership of 
Dr.  Gerard  P. O’Neill on  space settlements and  industrialization  using 
nonterrestrial  materials would  offer  a  briefing Aug.  2  on the  technical 
areas  covered:  life-support  systems,  habitat  design, materials transport 
and processing,  and space manufacturing.  (ARC anno July 25/77) 

July 26: NASA announced that the launch of HEAO-A (the high-energy 
astronomy observatory) originally scheduled for April  1977 had been set 
for Aug.  12. Problems with the spacecraft’s gyroscopes, required for at- 
titude  control,  had caused the delay. Analysis and testing had produced 
design  changes  to   improve  gyroscope  reliability  for  the  expected  6mo 
mission  lifetime.  HEAO-A would  be  first  of  three  astrophysical obser- 
vatories orbited  over the next 3yr to  study radiation  from stellar sources 
throughout  the  universe.  (NASA Release 77-156) 

NASA announced it would hold a briefing at Hq Aug. 4 on the scien- 
tific  studies  to   be  conducted  by  the  Voyager  spacecraft  scheduled  for 
launch  later  this  year  tow ih l   the  giant  planets  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and 
possibly Uranus. Participants  in the briefing would be Dr. Noel W. Hin- 
ners,  NASA’s  associate  administrator  for  space  science;  Dr.  Edward 
Stone, Calif.  Inst.  of Technology, project scientist; John Casani of JPL ,  
project  manager;  Dr.  Bradford  A.  Smith, Univ.  of  Ariz.,  leader of  the 
imaging  science  team  for  the  Voyager  project;  and  Dr.  James  W. 
Warwick,  Univ.  of  Colo.,  principal  investigator  for  planetary 
radioastronomy.  (NASA Release 77-1 55) 

J u b  27: NASA announced that the Soviet ship expected to  participate in 
comparisons of atmosphere-measuring instruments [see July 11 would ar- 
rive  off  the  Virginia  coast  about  Aug.  7  to   serve  as  the  platform  for 
USSR  rocket  launches.  The  tests  would  consist  of  paired  launches  of 
about 22 U.S.  Super Lokis and  about  33  USSR  M-lOOBs,  plus 6 Super 

137 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Loki  sphere  systems  t o  be  launched  by  Wallops;  statistical  evaluation 
would  require  from  14 t o  22  successful paired  launches.  (WFC Release 
77-8;  NASA  Release 77-151) 

0  NASA  announced  that  a  disaster  simulation in Texas using  the com- 
munications  technology  satellite - world’s  most  powerful  comsat - had 
turned  into  an  actual  emergency  operation  providing  communications 
between  Red  Cross  headquarters  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  flood- 
stricken Johnstown,  Pa.  ComSatCorp and the Red  Cross had  set up an 
experiment  t o   demonstrate  emergency  use  of  satellites  in  natural 
disasters;  the  Texas  results  had  led  Red  Cross  officials  t o   ask  for 
assistance in  the actual emergency a t  Johnstown. 
The Cts equipment transferred from Houston to  Johnston July 23 and 
set  up  a t   a  vocational  high  school  near  the Univ.  of  Pittsburgh was  a 
portable  station with  a  4ft  antenna  to  send  and  receive  signals to   and 
from  the  synchronous  satellite  orbiting  over  the  equator  just  west  of 
South America.  During the emergency it had  sent messages through  the 
Cts  to  ComSat  offices  in  Clarksburg,  Md.,  connected  by  land  line  to  
Washington.  The disaster-related communications  included requests  for 
medical and physician services,  supplies and administrative services, and 
transmission  of  situation maps.  Johnstown’s residents also could use the 
Cts link  to  communicate with  relatives  around the U.S.  when  the  Red 
Cross was not  using  the lines.  The emergency had  preempted  Canadian 
and U.S.  experiments scheduled for July 25-26.  (NASA Release 77-157) 

0  WFC  announced  it  had  completed  tests  using  rockets,  balloons,  and 
supporting  ground  observations to   obtain  data on  the  natural  state  of 
earth’s ozone  layer  and on   stratosphere pollution,  As  part  of  the  joint 
WFC-GSFC  applications  sounding-rocket  program  (ASRP),  the  tests 
July19-22  had measured daylong variations in the vertical distribution of 
ozone to establish a model  for studying the effects of  pollutants.  (WFC 
Release 77-1 1) 

0  LaRC and WFC  announced  arrival  of  an LaRC airplane  at Wallops 
for  tests  of  spin  characteristics,  using  four  different  tail  designs 
developed  at Langley  as part  of  a  larger  program  begun  in  1972 to  im- 
prove  safety  in  light  airplanes by  investigating  spin  and  stall  [see May 
181. About  30% of fatalities in light planes resulted  from spins or stalls. 
The low-wing, single-engine test plane had been modified to make use of 
the viyious  tails and of  a spin recovery parachute to  counter  the effects 
of  some of  the configurations.  Two high-wing lightweight  planes  would 
share  the  tests.  Besides  full  scale  planes,  the  program  would  also  use 
spin-tunnel models and powered  radio-controlled  free-flight models  in- 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JULY 

strumented  to  give  detailed  information  on   each  flight  in  real  time. 
(WRC Release 77-10; LaRC Release 77-33) 

July 28: NASA announced plans to  launch the first Italian experimental 
comsat Sirio on or about Aug.  17  from ETR on a Delta vehicle. A large 
segment of  Italian industry interested in space technology had worked on 
the  spacecraft  and  would  use  the  experience  for  future  international 
space programs. In synchronous orbit over the equator off the west coast 
of  Africa,  the comsat would  transmit voice, data, and TV  in  the  super- 
high  frequency  (SHF)  range  from  Europe  t o   North  America;  its  ex- 
perimenters  would  study  propagation  of  SHF  during  adverse  weather 
conditions  including  rain,  snow,  and  fog.  Use  of  SHF  had  become 
necessary because  conventional frequencies were overcrowded. 
Italy’s  research  agency,  Consiglio  Nazionale  della  Richerche  (CNR), 
had  contracted  with  NASA  for  launch  and  support  services  until  the 
craft  reached  its station 30  to  45  days after  launch.  The name Sirio was 
an   acronym  for  Satellite  Italian0  Ricerca  Industriale  Orientata  (in- 
dustrial research-oriented  Italian satellite).  (NASA  Release 77-152) 

KSC  announced  it  had  awarded  a  $7  325  OOO  fixed-price contract to 
Algernon  Blair  Industrial Contractors,  Inc.,  of  Norcross,  Ga.,  for con- 
verting  a Saturn/Apollo mobile launcher to  a mobile-launcher platform 
for  the  Shuttle program.  Work  would  include  removal  of  a  400ft  um- 
bilical tower  and crane and replacement of  the single exhaust opening in 
the  original  platform with  three  openings required  by  the  Shuttle main 
engines. One of KSC’s three mobile launchers had almost completed con- 
version  and  the  new  contract  would  cover  work  on  a  second.  The 
reusable Shuttle had  been  scheduled for  its  first manned  orbital mission 
in  the  spring of  1979.  (KSC Release  137-77) 

Comsat General Corp.  announced  that the U.S.  Navy  had  agreed  to  
extend its use of  three Marisat satellites for an additional 2.5yr,  ending in 
1981, at a cost  of  about $138 million  [see During  June].  The Navy  had 
begun  using  the Atlantic Marisat  in March  1976, the Pacific satellite in 
June 1976, and the Indian Ocean satellite in Jan.  1977. Each of  the three 
Marisats had  a design life of 5yr and could operate in three frequencies: 
UHF (ultrahigh frequency) for Navy service, and the L-band and Gb and  
for commercial maritime users.  The Navy had leased all UHF capacity in 
all three Marisats for communications between its own fixed and mobile 
terminals.  The Marisat  system  was  owned  and  operated  by  four  com- 
panies under a joint-venture arrangement approved by the Federal Com- 
munications  Commission:  Comsat  General,  which  acted  as  system 
manager,  with  nearly  87%  ownership;  RCA  Global  Communications; 

139 

JULY 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Western Union Intl.; and ITT World Communications. (Comsat General 
Release CG  77-3;  WSJ,  July  29/77,  6) 

July  29:  NASA  declared  the  launch  of  Japan's  geostationary 
meteorological  satellite Gms I on  July  14 successful,  as of  July  26-27. 
The satellite was  being  maneuvered  over  the  South Pacific  to  a  station 
about  140"E  above  the  equator,  due  south  of  Tokyo.  (MOR 
M-492-101-77-01 [postlaunch] July 29/77) 

0  NASA  announced that the first 20 of  about 200 Shuttle astronaut ap- 
plicants would report to  JSC Aug.  2 for a week  of  individual interviews 
and physical exams. Ten of  the group were from the USAF, 7 U.S.  Navy, 
2 Marines,  and  1 civilian. Although  all the  initial group  had  been  pilot 
applicants, NASA  expected the number  interviewed at JSC would divide 
evenly  between  pilot  and  mission  specialist  applicants.  NASA  would 
complete processing by mid-November and hoped to  select as many as 20 
astronaut  candidates  in  each  of  the  two  categories  in  December.  Can- 
didates would  report to  JSC  in  1978 for 2yr  of  training  and evaluation; 
final selection as astronaut would  depend  on satisfactory completion  of 
training.  (JSC Release 77-42) 

lOyr 
ERDA announced that the longest space mission ever planned-a 
trip  by  two  Voyager  spacecraft  to   the  outer  planets - would  get  power 
from  RTGs  (radioisotope  thermoelectric  generators)  developed  by 
ERDA as successors to  nuclear systems that had powered earlier missions 
t o  Mars  and Jupiter. 
ERDA's  predecessor,  the Atomic Energy Commission, had  begun  the 
research  on   nuclear  power  for  space  missions.  ERDA  plans  included 
developing  high-efficiency  thermoelectric materials  and  dynamic  con- 
verters  for  NASA  missions  such  as  a  Jupiter  orbiter  in  1982 or  a Mars 
rover  in  1984,  and  DOD  satellites  in  the  1980s.  (ERDA  Release 
NF-77-20) 

ERDA  reported  that  the  U.S.  atomic  energy  detection  system  had 
recorded seismic signals, presumably from a Soviet underground nuclear 
explosion, a t   lpm  EDT on July 26.  The signals had originated in central 
Siberia, north  of  the Arctic circle.  (ERDA Release 77-129) 

During July:  NASA  reported  that  researchers  a t   LaRC  had  devised  a 
nuclear pumped laser output  100 times more powerful than that available 
from noble or  inert gases, 3 . 5 ~  in a volume of only 1 cubic centimeter. A 
major  step  in  laser  technology,  the  experiment  had  converted  kinetic 
energy from the splitting of  atoms directly into photons (light energy,  in 

140 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

JULY 

the form of laser beams) without the energy-wasting intermediate step of 
converting heat  to electricity. 
The aim of  the research had been to produce and transmit large quan- 
tities of power in space, using high-power laser beams as highly efficient 
energy  conductors with  transmitters  and  receivers measured  in  meters 
rather than in kilometers for similar microwave equipment. Laser beams 
could connect central power  plants  in space with  settlements, materials 
processing centers, or  scientific operations in earth orbit;  laser powered 
vehicles  could  transport  payloads  to  geosynchronous orbit  from  lower 
altitudes. (NASA Release 77-143) 

*  An  idea  tried  61yr  ago  had  come  of  age,  NASA  reported,  with  the 
piggyback flights of  the orbiter Enterprise on  its Boeing 747  carrier.  In 
1916, to put  a Bristol Scout airplane at an altitude where it could attack 
Zeppelin  bombers  over  England,  the  British  had  loaded  it  on  a  three- 
engine Felixstowe flying boat for a single flight May 17 of  that year. Both 
aircraft  had  landed  safely,  but  the  experiment  had  not  been  repeated. 
(NASA Release 77-148) 

NASA  noted  that  Landsat  I ,   first  satellite  t o   focus  specifically on  
earth and its natural resources, had completed its 5th yr  in orbit. Launched 
July 23,  1972, with a life expectancy of  only lyr, Landsat had monitored 
air  and  water  pollution,  geological  resources,  agricultural production, 
and  potential water  supply. Dr. Wernher von Braun had predicted that 
this program alone could give the U.S. “a return exceeding its total space 
program investment,” (NASA  Release 77-150) 

*  In a  W .  Post column,  science writer Daniel S.  Greenberg commented 
on   the  “leaky  embargo  system  that  is  supposed  to   deny  the  Soviets 
western  technology of  strategic value.”  The  principal  feature of  a new 
DOD  plan  drawn  up  for  State and  Commerce  Dept.  approval before 
presentation  next  spring  t o   the  Coordinating  Committee  of  Nations 
(‘?VAT0  minus  Iceland,  plus  Japan”) on restricting  strategic export  to  
Communist  bloc  nations  was  that  “it  isn’t  confined  to   hardware,” 
Greenberg  noted.  The  new  embargo  scheme,  he  said,  was  aimdd  a t  
technological know-how;  its enforcement would  admittedly encompass 
“the entire span of  advanced American  technology.  . . . Hardware can 
be stopped at the loading dock, but know-how, being intangible or  con- 
fined to paper,  calls for  different barricades.” 
The truth  about the embargo, Greenberg charged, was that “virtually 
no one is interested in it except certain military and industrial elements in 
the U.S. Furthermore, most of what we won’t  sell is easily available from 
sales hungry producers elsewhere. And,  finally, there is ample evidence 

141 

JULY 
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 
that  . . . the Soviets, despite their many technological shortcomings, can 
home produce whatever  they  deem  necessary.”  The proposed  embargo, 
Greenberg concluded, might retard the Soviets a bit, but the presence of 
DOD  “gumshoes in the American  scientific and technological enterprise 
is  a stiff  price  to  pay”  for  that delay.  ( W  Post,  July  12/77,  A19) 
*  JPL  reported  that Donald Lynn  and Jean Lorre of  its image process- 
ing  laboratory  had  shared  in  a  scientific investigation  of  the Shroud of 
Turin, preserved in Italy since 1578. At the request of  groups in N.Y.  and 
N.M.,  Lynn  and  Lorre  had  used  advanced  NASA 
techniques 
(mathematical and contrast enhancement)  to  obtain a noticeably clearer 
image from negatives and color slides taken at a 1973 display of  the cloth 
and the  image  appearing on  it.  (JPL  Universe, July  1/77,  1; Natl Inq ,  
July  19/77,  4) 

142 

August 

August  1: NASA  announced it had  scheduled the  first free flight of  the 
Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug.  12 a t  Dryden Flight Research Center. 
Briefing  the  press  Aug.  11  would  be  Deke  Slayton,  ALT  program 
manager  a t   Johnson Space Center,  and  John  Young,  chief  of  the  JSC 
astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems 
operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron 
Cohen,  manager  of  the  orbiter  project  at  JSC,  on  orbiter  systems. 
(NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77) 

0  NASA announced it would put on each of  the Voyagers to  be launched 
in  Aug.  a  phonograph  record,  “Sounds  of  Earth,”  containing  natural 
noises  of  surf,  wind,  and  thunder,  and  of  birds,  whales,  and  other 
animals.  The 12in disk would  include greetings from earth in a  number 
of  languages  [see June  31  and samples of  music  from  different  cultures 
and eras. The disk contained electronic data convertible by  an advanced 
technological  civilization  into  diagrams,  pictures,  and  printed  instruc- 
tions  designed  to  give  beings  that  intercepted  the  craft  an  idea  of  20th 
century  earth  and  its  inhabitants.  “The  spacecraft  will  be  encountered 
and the record played only if  there are advanced spacefaring civilizations 
in interstellar space,” said Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornel1 Univ.,  originator of 
the message sent into space on  Pioneers 10 and 11 .  The copper disk in its 
aluminum jacket could survive as long as a billion yr; the Voyagers might 
take  40 OOOyr  to   approach  another  star,  and  other  predictable  ap- 
proaches would occur in  147 OOO  and 525  OOOyr.  (NASA Release 77-159) 

0  Langley Research Center announced that 21 area high school students 
had completed a 4wk hands-on career exploration program at the center, 
applying classroom concepts t o  actual situations. Each student had been 
assigned to  a sponsor in science, computers, engineering, or mathematics 
to  supervise the  unpaid  8hr workdays.  (LaRC Release 77-34) 

Despite U.S.  revulsion at Soviet domestic oppression of  scientists and 
the resulting condemnation of such practices, the U.S.  and the USSR had 
found “enough  common  ground”  in  the  sciences  to  renew  cooperation 
for  another  5yr,  the  Christian Science Monitor  noted.  Renewal  of  the 
1972  accord  signed  by  President  Nixon  and  Leonid  Brezhnev  was 

143 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Technicians attach “Sounds of Earth”  recording  to  Voyager  2  spacecraft  before 
encapsulating it f o r  launch,  scheduled  later  i n  August. (NASA 77-H-509) 

“neither  casual  nor  automatic,” CSM  said.  In  view  of  charges  that  the 
agreement  mainly  benefited  the  USSR,  a  committee  of  the  U.S. Natl. 
Academy  of  Sciences  had  reviewed  scientific  detente  and  had  told 
presidential science adviser  Frank Press  that “positive benefits”  for  the 
U.S.  made  continued  cooperation  valuable.  Subsequent  negotiations, 
CSMnoted, went on without mention of human rights. “. . . There is on- 
ly  so  much  one  nation  can  do   in  holding  up  a  moral  standard  for 
another,” the article concluded,  adding that “. . .Two powerful  nations 
holding  seemingly  irreconcilable political views  should  . . . continue  to  
seek ways  to  live peacefully  together  on the  same small planet.”  (CSM, 
Aug  1/77,  11) 

August 2: JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due 
for  screening.  Center  Director  Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr.,  said  that  the 
quality of  the-applicants would make it “difficult t o  narrow the fieId  . . . 
paring  that number  will  be  a real challenge.” (NASA  Release 77-161) 

0  NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam,  IV,  deputy direc- 

144 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

tor of  DFRC,  succeeding Gerald  D.  Griffin,  recently appointed  deputy 
director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla.  Gillam, who had directed Shut- 
tle operations at Dryden in  the current approach and landing tests,  had 
joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch 
Jcrew commander,  and  ROTC  instructor.  After  receiving  a  B.A.  from 
Howard Univ.,  he had done graduate work a t  Tenn. State Univ.  and had 
been  assistant professor  of  air science there.  NASA  had  appointed him 
assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in 
1968.  In  1973,  he  became  program  manager  for small launch  vehicles, 
and had  gone t o  DFRC  in  1976. He had  received NASA’s  distinguished 
service medal  for his work  with  launch vehicles.  (DFRC Release 27-77; 
NASA  Release 77-164; NASA  anno Aug  4/77) 

August  4:  NASA  announced  it  had  scheduled  launch  of  two  Voyager 
spacecraft toward the outer planets, one on Aug.  20 and the other about 
12 days later. The Voyager 2 would  go  first and the Voyager  1, flying a 
faster  trajectory,  would  go  later;  it  would  reach  Jupiter  4mo  ahead of 
Voyager  2,  probably  in  March  1979.  By  the  time  it  reached  Saturn, 
Voyager  1 would be 9mo ahead of  the other craft. NASA  planned to  use 
the  gravitational  field  of  Jupiter  to  send  the Voyagers  on  to Saturn  by 
means of a “slingshot” technique; Voyager  1 would reach Saturn in 1980, 
3.2yr  after  launch,  on a trip  that would  take 6.lyr  without  the  gravity 
assist.  Estimated  cost  of  the  Voyager  project  (not  counting  launch 
vehicles,  tracking and data acquisition, or  flight support) would be $320 
million.  (NASA Release 77-1 36) 
*  NASA  announced  that  IBM  Corp.,  under  contract  to  LaRC,  had 
developed the most efficient solar cell for space use reported to date. The 
new  solar  cells,  derived  from  compound  semiconductors  gallium 
aluminum  arsenide and gallium  arsenide, had  an efficiency of  18%  in- 
stead of  13 to  14% for commercially available silicon-derived cells. High- 
efficiency  cells  could  fill  a  power  requirement  with  fewer  numbers, 
meaning less weight to  be launched and maneuvered as well as reduction 
in mission cost. The new cells had a “window layer” of gallium aluminum 
arsenide  on   the  surface  of  the  gallium  arsenide  cell.  Absorption  of 
sunlight  in  an ultra  thin  layer  just  below  the  surface of  a solar cell had 
meant  loss of  some of  the energy at the surface,  accounting for the low 
efficiencies of  previous cells;  presence of  the window layer had  reduced 
this  loss.  (NASA Release 77-163) 
*  JSC  announced that a summer workshop  at the Univ.  of  Calif.,  San 
Diego,  would  discuss scientific  and  technological  exploitation  of  lunar 
and asteroid materials.  Participants selected for the workshop were geo- 
scientists and  geoengineers  from government,  private  industry,  and the 

145 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

university community. Univ.  of Calif. professor and lunar researcher Dr. 
&James Arnold,  chairman  of  the workshop committee,  would  present t o  
NASA’s  Office  of  Space  Science  the  group’s  recommendations  on 
research to  be attempted and on the exploitation possible at present levels 
of  understanding.  (JSC Release 77-43) 

August  5:  NASA  announced  that  Bradford  Johnston,  associate  ad- 
ministrator for the Office of Applications since June 1976, would resign 
effective  Sept.  30.  Dr.  Robert  Frosch,  NASA  administrator,  said  that 
Johnston’s  contributions to  useful  applications of  space techniques  had 
made the program more responsive to national needs.  (NASA anno Aug 
5/77;  NASA  Release 77-166) 
0  The  W.  Post  reported  that London’s  Intl.  Assn.  Against  Painful Ex- 
periments on Animals had protested Soviet government use of  white rats 
in  space  research,  following  USSR  launch  of  a  spacecraft  carrying 
several white  rats  for an international study on weightlessness. ( W Post, 
Aug  5/77,  A-13) 

August  8:  NASA  reported  a  first-time continuous  operation by  NASA- 
funded Univ.  of  Fla.  researchers of  a nuclear pumped gas laser reported 
earlier  by  LaRC scientists  [see During  July].  Confirming  the  results  of 
the  Georgia  Tech  experiment,  the  Fla.  group  had  transmitted  laser 
energy  for  15min and  reported  that  longer  transmission  was  possible. 
Earlier nuclear pumped lasers had produced only short bursts of  energy. 
(NASA  Release 77-165) 
*  NASA  announced  it  had  patented  a way  to  control cell division that 
might mean a new treatment for cancer or replacement of  lost cells in the 
brain or other parts of  the human nervous system. Studying at LaRC the 
effects  of  space  radiation  on   living  cells,  Dr.  Clarence  D.  Cone,  Jr., 
former head  of  LaRC’s molecular biophysics lab, now  chief  of  the near- 
by  VA  molecular  biology  laboratory,  had  changed  electrical  potential 
across hamster  cell membranes.  Studies had shown cell division could be 
either blocked or  stimulated by  various agents, most of  which could not 
produce  both  effects.  Cone’s  method  of  surrounding  the  cells  with 
various  concentrations  of  sodium,  potassium,  and  chloride  ions,  pat- 
terned after  ionic mechanisms used by  the body  to control cell division, 
could either  turn  on  or  turn  off  the  process. 
Cone’s successful attempts t o  stimulate cells to  divide or proliferate, or 
prevent  dividing  and  proliferating,  had  not  damaged  the  cells,  and 
showed  that  the processes were reversible.  Manipulating the ionic levels 
in human body  cells might permit  reversal or  inhibition of  uncontrolled 
proliferation,  such  as that  of  cancer  cells.  (NASA Release 77-162) 

146 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

August 9: JSC announced  it had  awarded Lockheed Electronics Co.  of 
Houston a  2yr  cost-plus-award-fee  contract estimated  at $4 004 715  for 
technical  support  services  a t   the  Slidell  Computer  Complex’s  earth 
resources  facility  in  La.  Lockheed  would  furnish  about  80  persons  to  
operate  and  maintain  the  data  acquisition  laboratory,  data  systems 
laboratory, data processing laboratory, and data preparation laboratory. 
(JSC  Release 77-45) 

0  NASA  announced  that  Dr.  Hans  Mark,  former  director  of  Ames 
Research Center, had been sworn in at the Pentagon, Washington, D.C., 
Aug.  9,  as Undersecretary of  the Air Force by Defense Secretary Harold 
Brown.  Dr.  Mark,  ARC  director  from  Feb.  1969  to  July  1977,  had 
taught  nuclear  engineering  at  the  Univ.  of  Calif.  a t   Berkeley  and 
engineering at Stanford Univ.;  he  had  also taught a t  Boston Univ.  and 
the Mass.  Inst.  of  Technology. 
Born  in Germany  in  1929,  he  had  become  a U.S.  citizen in  1945 and 
had been  a consultant to the Institute for Defense Analysis  (1958-1961), 
the  USAF  Scientific Advisory  Board  (1969-1976),  and  other  defense- 
related  and  scientific  organizations.  C.A.  Syvertson  would  be  acting 
director  of  ARC  until  a  successor  was  named.  (ARC  Release  77-38; 
NASA  anno Aug  15/77) 

0  NASA announced that Dr. Bruce T. Lundin would retire as director of 
Lewis  Research  Center  Aug.  26  after  34yr  with  NASA  and  its 
predecessor, NACA.  LeRC deputy director Dr. Bernard Lubarsky would 
be acting director until a successor was named.  In 1943, Dr.  Lundin had 
begun working a t  the NACA Lewis Research Center on improvement of 
World War  I1 aircraft engines. 
When  NASA  was  established  in  1958,  Dr.  Lundin  became  assistant 
director of LeRC; in 1961 he became associate director for development, 
working on space propulsion and power generation. In May  1968 he was 
deputy  associate  administrator  at NASA  Hq,  then  acting associate  ad- 
ministrator  for  advanced  research  and technology.  He became  director 
of  LeRC as of  Nov.  1,  1969, and had led the center’s research on solving 
the  nation’s  energy  problems.  He  had  not  announced his  future plans. 
(NASA Release 77-167; NASA  anno Aug  9/77) 

LaRC  announced  that  the  NASA/ASEE  engineering  systems  design 
team  would  give  a  final presentation  Aug.  12 on  the  role  of  aerospace 
technology  in  agriculture.  The  team  of  faculty  from  local  colleges and 
universities would  discuss agricultural aircraft,  remote sensing, and  im- 
pact  on  the  social and  physical environment.  The Old Dominion  Univ. 
would  distribute the team’s  written report  later in  1977.  (LaRC Release 
77-36) 

147 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

August  ZZ:  NASA  announced  it  had  selected  Hughes  Aircraft  Co .3  
Space and Communications Group for negotiation of  a $33 million con- 
tract  to   build,  test,  and  deliver  three  geostationary  operational  en- 
vironmental satellites, GOES-D,  -E,  and  -F,  as follow-ons  in  the  syn- 
chronous meteorological satellite (SMS)  series providing near continuous 
high  quality observation of  the  earth  and  its environment.  The GOES 
spacecraft  would  carry  a  visible  infrared  spin-scan  radiometer  at- 
mospheric sounder (VAS) to  obtain day or night cloud cover  photos of 
the  portion  of  the  earth  viewed  from  geostationary  orbit,  with 
temperature readings at various levels of  the atmosphere; the $33 million 
contract  did  not  include  the  three  VAS  instruments  being  produced 
under contract by Santa Barbara Research Center. They would also carry 
a  space  environment  monitoring  system  of  three  separate  sensors  to  
monitor  solar emissions. 
Goddard Space Flight Center would be project manager for the GOES 
systems developed and procured by NASA  on a  reimbursable basis  for 
the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration,  which  would 
operate  the  spacecraft  after  launch  and  checkout  by  NASA.  (NASA 
Release 77-170) 

JSC  announced  that  the  second  group  of  20 Shuttle astronaut  ap- 
plicants would report Aug.  15 for individual interviews and physical ex- 
aminations. Like the  first group,  all those in  the second group had  ap- 
plied for pilot positions. The second group included 1 1  USAF applicants, 
7 Navy,  1 Marine,  and  1 civilian. (NASA Release 77-171; JSC Release 
77-44) 

a  LaRC  announced  that  the  Charles W.  Swain  family of  Tallahassee, 
Fla.,  would move into the Tech House Aug.  15 for a yr-long demonstra- 
tion of  NASA designed systems in and around the house to  save energy 
and water  and make the home more secure. They would pay a prorated 
rent and all utilities during their stay. Dr.  Swain, a humanities professor 
a t  Fla.  State Univ.,  would work with LaRC personnel in career counsel- 
ing  and  employee  relations.  Mrs.  Swain,  a  registered nurse,  hoped  to  
continue  in  her  profession  while  living  a t   LaRC.  Their  two  children 
would attend local high schools. LaRC had chosen the Swains from a list 
provided  by the American Council on Education, a nonprofit organiza- 
tion sponsoring university professors  for  lyr assignments to  the federal 
government. (LaRC Release  77-37) 

Calif. Gov. Edmund G.  Brown, Jr.,  hailed the advent of  the space age 
a t  a Space Day gala in Los Angeles sponsored by  1 1  aerospace companies 
and  the United  Bank  of  Calif.  More than a thousand  persons  attended 
the exhibit, prelude to  the Shuttle orbiter free flight Aug.  12 over the Mo- 

148 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

jave desert. The program included two space movies, as well as speeches 
by Carl Sagan on planetary exploration, Gerard K. O'Neill  on  space col- 
onies, and  Jacques Yves  Cousteau on spaceflight and  the oceans of  the 
world.  (WP o s t ,  Aug  12/77,  A-9) 

August  12:  NASA  launched  the  first  high-energy  astronomy  obser- 
vatory, HEAO-A,  from ETR on an Atlas Centaur at 2:29am EDT into a 
near  circular  orbit  with  456.3km  apogee,  431.4km  perigee,  93.5min 
period, and  22.75"  inclination. 
Heao I, nearly  19ft long and nearly 9ft in diameter, weighting 56261b 
at  liftoff  (including  29601b  of  experiments  and  an  8311b  separation 
system), had a 6mo design lifetime but would carry enough consumables 
and  orbit  a t   an  altitude to allow  extension of  its mission up  to   lyr.  It 
would  operate  in  2  modes,  pointing  and  scanning:  its  batteries  would 
point continuously a t  the sun as the vehicle moved  l"/day  in the ecliptic 
longitude,  and  its detectors would  scan in wide  circles perpendicular to  
the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  TRW  had  built  the  spacecraft  equipment 
module (SEW containing all the subsystems used by all the experiments 
for  operation  and  control,  and  a  mission  unique  experiment  module 
(EM) filling the requirements of  each payload segment. Dr.  Fred Speer, 
HEAO manager  at Marshall  Space Flight  Center,  said  the  spacecraft, 
rotating  end  over  end,  would  survey  the  entire  sky  within  its  6mo 
lifetime. 
This launch was  the  first in  a  three mission program  to  study x-rays, 
gamma  rays,  and  cosmic  rays  emitted  by  stellar  sources,  the  other 
launches  to   be  in  1978 and  1979.  The  HEAOs  would  carry  large  and 
heavy scientific instruments needed  for  observations a t  the high-energy 
and  low-flux levels of  these phenomena. Estimated cost of  the 3 obser- 
vatories was $237 million. 
The original plan  in  1968 had  been  to  launch a 4Oft  vehicle weighing 
22 0001b;  budget  problems  had  reduced  the  size  of  the  undertaking. 
However,  the x-ray detector built by  NRL as 1 of  4 experiments carried 
by  Heao  I  was  the  largest  instrument  ever  flown  on  an  unmanned 
satellite, weighing almost 1OOOlb.  The NRL package, called the large area 
x-ray  survey,  was  a  7-module  array  20  times  as large  as  any  of  its 
predecessors that would  map  the  sky by  recording incident x-ray  fluxes 
and would determine the spectrum, time, and intensity variations of new- 
found  x-ray  sources.  NRL's  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  noted  that  known 
x-ray sources now numbered about 200; Heao 1 might increase the list to 
several  thousand.  Celestial  sources  of  x-ray  emission  included  white 
dwarfs,  neutron  stars,  and  black  holes,  products of  stellar catastrophe, 
as well as quasars and radio galaxies; also, a class of ministars almost too 
small for detection by the biggest optical telescopes might emit radiation 
10 OOO  times as great  as all the radiant  energy of  earth's  sun. 

149 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

The  other  experiments  on Heuo  I  were  a  scanning-modulation col- 
limator  to   make  parallel  observations,  using  instruments  designed  by 
Harvard and MIT,  to  pinpoint  locations of  sources and determine their 
structure; a cosmic x-ray experiment designed by NASA and CalTech, to  
look  for  diffuse  x-rays  or  cosmic  rays;  and  another  experiment  from 
MIT and the Univ.  of  Calif. San Diego, to  look for hard x-rays and low- 
energy  gamma  rays.  NASA  planned  a guest  observer  program  for  this 
mission, participants t o  be selected from responses t o  a “Dear Colleague” 
letter issued by  the Office of  Space Sciences. 
A malfunctioning rate gyro had  delayed the planned  June 30  launch; 
the  Bendix-built  instrument  had  been  removed  and  returned  to   the 
manufacturer  March  31,  but  further  similar  delays  occurred  [see  July 
261.  Early  data  from orbit  showed  spacecraft  systems  and  experiments 
were  operating  normally.  (NASA  Releases  77-45,  77-56,  77-71,  77-83, 
77-87;  OSS  rept  5-832-77-01  [prelaunch] May  16/77,  July 29/77;  MOR 
5-832-77-01  [postlaunch] Aug  12/77,  Apr  3/78;  MSFC  Releases 77-32, 
77-64,77-107,77-142;  KSC Releases 85-77,140-77; Spacewarn SPX-284; 
NYT ,  Apr  10/77,  23; Aug  13/77,  33;  NRL  Release 23-8-77s) 

The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its  first free flight a t  Edwards Air 
Force Base in Calif. with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave 
desert  53min  Slsec after  taking  off  at 8am  local  time  ( l l am  EDT) and 
Smin 22sec after release  from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W.  Haise, 
Jr.,  and  Charles  Gordon Fullerton  were  the  Enterprise  pilots;  veteran 
test  pilots  Thomas C.  McMurtry and Fitzhugh L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  flew  the 
Boeing  747. 
Spectators, estimated to  number about 70 OOO,  had  begun arriving the 
previous  night  (Thursday, Aug.  11) to  cheer  the  landing just  after 9am 
local  time  with  the  desert  temperature nearing  100°F.  The  orbiter  had 
separated  from  its  carrier  3min  late  because  the  heat  of  the  air  had 
slowed  the climb.  The 747  had  “strained its engines” to  carry  the 73ton 
Shuttle as high  as possible;  it had  climbed  to 27 O0Oft  (81OOm)  before  it 
started  downward,  in  order  to   gain  speed.  The  122ft-long orbiter,  re- 
leased  at  22  lOOft  (6738m)  altitude,  had  soared  one  way,  the  747 
another,  to  ensure separation.  Pilots of  the T-38 chase planes  following 
the flight had  assured the crews of  the 747 and the orbiter that they were 
clear of  each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew  as the 
craft  separated. 
Haise  had  rehearsed  the  free flight  the  previous  day  in  a  small twin- 
engine jet modified to  behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which 
could not  be  rehearsed  in  advance,  was  the  only way  to  prove  that  the 
Shuttle would  lift cleanly over  the tall vertical tail  fin of  the 747. 
Separation had  occurred without  difficulty, however, and both pilots 
reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in un- 

150 

Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from  its Boeing  747 carrier in first free 
flight, August  12,  1977.  (NASA 77-H-552) 

powered  flight as  easily as design engineers had  predicted.  It was  “a lot 
like flying a Concorde,” according to  Haise, and Fullerton described it as 
a “very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had 
pulled  up  in  three  inflight  “flare”  maneuvers  to   test  its  landing 
characteristics. One of  the identical redundant computers on the orbiter 
had  failed  at  separation,  cutting  off  flight-control  accelerometers, 
without  affecting the  flight. 
The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its bat- 
tery of  computers and “the most  advanced control system ever  installed 
in  a  spacecraft.”  It  had  approached  the  ground  at  an  11 O  angle,  more 
than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed 
of  338kph (2lOmph) compared to  a typical 747 landing speed of  170mph. 
The  orbiter  had  touched  down  a  mile  in  front  of  the  aiming  point, 
because  Haise underestimated  its  glide capability; it  had  rolled  another 
2mi before  stoppping. 
For  this  first free flight,  the orbiter wore  a tail cone over  its three  aft 
rockets;  on the  fourth  flight,  scheduled for Oct.,  NASA would  remove 
the  cone,  causing  the  orbiter  to   land  more  steeply  (as  it  would  upon 
returning  from  space).  In  regular  use,  the  Shuttle  as  a  weight-saving 
measure would  have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no air- 
breathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed 
by air friction only and would  glide down a t  200mph or more to  a  land- 
ing.  For the actual spaceflight early in  1979, the Shuttle would  ride into 
orbit pushed by  solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by 
the liquid-fuel  rockets on its tail. 

151 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Purpose of  the free flight exercises was to  verify  the orbiter’s subsonic 
airworthiness,  the  operation  of  the  integrated  system,  and  the  pilot- 
guided  vs.  automatic approach and landing  capabilities.  The  ability  to  
land at an airport instead of  parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle 
the “versatility and economy required  to make  space operations routine 
in  the  next  decade,” according  to  the  W .  Star.  (NASA Release 77-160; 
NASA Ac tv . ,  Aug/77,  2 ;  NYT ,  Aug  13/77,  1; WPo s t ,  Aug  13/77, A l ;  
WS ta r ,  Aug  13/77, A-3;  B Sun, Aug  12/77,7;  C Trib, Aug  13/77,  1-1; 
Time, Aug  22/77,  64) 
*  MSFC announced that a young student assistant under the first NASA 
research grant awarded Alabama A&M Univ.  12yr ago, now a nationally 
known  organic  mass  spectrometrist,  had  become  a  NASA  researcher 
again,  representing  Meharry  Medical  College  and  the  Natl.  Inst.  of 
Health  as  a  summer  faculty  fellow.  Dr.  Stanley  L.  Evans,  one  of  23 
researchers selected for the Aeronautics and Space Research Faculty Pro- 
gram  sponsored by  NASA  and the Am.  Society of  Engineering Educa- 
tion,  would  study  separation  and  preserving  of  cells  in  zero  gravity. 
(MSFC Release 77-144) 

August  23:  The  W .  Post reported  that  the U.S.  Naval Observatory had 
honored  the memory of  its astronomer Asaph Hall with a 2:30am  party 
attended  by  Hall’s  descendants  (“a  fine  crop  of  teen-agers  and  young 
adults”) on the  100th anniversary of  his discovery of  the moon of Mars, 
which  he had named Deimos  (flight) and Phobos (fear) after the horses 
that drew the war god‘s  chariot. “It now  turns out,” the Post added, that 
the little moons would crash into Mars within the next 70 million yr  [see 
During  June].  Other  Naval Observatory observances honoring Hall  in- 
cluded a reception, a group of  technical meetings,  a dinner,  and a 100th 
anniversary  memorial  entry  in  the  logbook  of  the  observatory’s  26in 
refracting telescope.  ( W  Post,  Aug  13/77,  B1) 

August  15: LaRC reported  it  had  held  a luncheon Aug.  11 to  recognize 
the  contributions of  26  inventors on  the center  staff  to  NASA’s  patent 
program.  Director  Donald  P. Hearth  and  Patent  Counsel  Howard  J. 
Osborn  presented  awards,  including  one  to   Richard  T.  Whitcomb  as 
1976 coinventor of  the yr  for his patent “Airfoil Shape for Flight at Sub- 
sonic  Speeds,”  shared  with  Robert  T.  Jones  of  ARC.  (LaRC  Release 
77-38) 

August  26:  NASA  announced  i t   had  chosen,  from  more  than  lo00 
respondents to  invitations, 59 scientists (47 from the United States and 12 
from the United Kingdom) to participate in the second flight of Spacelab 
scheduled for launch in  1981.  The Solar Terrestrial Division  in NASA’s 

152 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

Office of Space Sciences, responsible for managing Spacelab 2’s  payload, 
would  choose  experiments  t o   provide  new  data  on   very  high  energy 
cosmic rays;  x-ray  emissions in  galactic clusters;  diffuse cool objects in 
earth’s  galaxy;  and  relationships  between  solar  activity  and  magnetic 
fields.  (NASA Release 77-172; MSFC Release 77-148) 

0  NASA  announced that Kenneth  S. Kleinknecht,  assistant manager  of 
the orbiter project at JSC, would begin an assignment in Paris Aug. 28 as 
deputy  associate  administrator  for  spaceflight  (European  operations) 
acting as senior NASA  adviser  to  ESA  on Spacelab.  (NASA  anno Aug 
16/77) 

August 17: MSFC announced it had begun the first of  a series of  tests on  
the external propellant tank of  the Shuttle to  verify its ability to  stand the 
structural stresses of  launch.  The proportions of  the tank  required  con- 
duct  of  the  test  in  phases;  the  first tests would  check  out  the  intertank 
structure joining the two main segments of the external tank and contain- 
ing  the forward attach points  for  the two solid-fuel rocket  boosters car- 
ried  by  the  Shuttle.  The heaviest  loading would  occur  at  these  points, 
both  while  the  Shuttle  was  on  its  pad  and  while  the  boosters  were 
thrusting during  flight. 
The tests would  apply upward  loads as great as 4.35  million  lb to  the 
intertank  cylinder  subjected  t o   opposing  downward  forces.  The  loads 
would come from computer-actuated hydraulic jacks,  28 on the forward 
end  of  the  test  article  and  as  many  as  10 in  the  center  section.  Chuck 
Verschoore,  MSFC  test  engineer,  said  the  forces  exerted  by  the  jacks 
could  simulate bending  and  twisting  effects  as well  as  straight  up-and- 
down loading, and could go as high as  140% of  the tank’s design limits. 
Test  engineers would  receive  data  from  as many  as 2800  measurement 
channels.  Follow-on  tests would  check  the  external tank  segments  con- 
taining  the  liquid  oxygen  and  liquid  hydrogen  propellants.  (MSFC 
Release 77-149) 
0  The N Y  Times reported  an announcement by  Hughes Aircraft Com- 
pany that Telesat Canada had chosen it to  negotiate a contract for a new 
generation of Anik comsats operating.at frequencies of  12 and 14 billion 
cycles per second, to  replace in the 1980s the 4- and 6-billion-cps now the 
standard  fo t  national  and  international  communications  systems.  The 
higher  frequencies would  ease radiocommunications crowding in 22  300 
mile altitude equatorial orbits, and would expand the number of  satellite- 
communications  channels  t o   approach  the  number  available  on   ter- 
restrial microwave  and cable links. 
Telesat  Canada, which  had  operated  that country’s  domestic comsat 
system  since  1972,  said  that  two  rival  companies-RCA’s  Astroelec- 

153 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

tronics  Div.  and  GE’s  Space  Division-remained  in  the  running  with 
Hughes for award of  the contract, which could go as high as $50 million. 
RCA had built the Satcoms used by the U.S.,  and GE had built a direct- 
broadcast  comsat  for Japan.  The NYT  said the electronics industry had 
been watching the competition closely because the same three companies 
had  been  vying  t o   build  3  data-transmission  satellites  for  Satellite 
Business Systems in the U.S.  (NYT ,  Aug  17/77,  49) 

INTELSAT  reported  that the Peoples Republic of  China  on Aug.  16 
had  become the 98th member  of  the organization.  Peking’s Administra- 
tion  of  Long  Distance  Telecommunications  had  signed  the  operating 
agreement,  making  the PRC the 28th Asian  nation to  join  INTELSAT. 
China,  which  had  used  INTELSAT  since  1972, currently had  3 ground 
stations,  2  near  Peking  and  1 near  Shanghai.  I t   currently  operated  23 
full-time satellite circuits  on   the  INTELSAT  system  and was  using  TV 
capacity on an  as-needed  basis.  (INTELSAT Release 77-20-1) 

0  The  Natl.  Space Club  announced  that  the  guest  speaker  at  its  Aug. 
luncheon would be Col. W.J.  Mellors, head of  the Washington, D.C.  of- 
fice of  the European  Space Agency  (ESA) since 1973. Col. Mellors had 
begun  his  career  with  the  British  army  in  1942 and  had  become  com- 
mander  of  the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in the Middle 
East  by  1965.  After  joining  ESA  in  1970,  he  worked  until  1973 with 
ESTEC,  the  technology  center  in  the Netherlands.  ESA  had  united  the 
programs of  its predecessor organizations, the European Space Research 
Organization (ESRO) and the European  Organization for Development 
and Construction of  Space-Vehicle Launchers (ELDO); its members na- 
tions  were  Belgium,  Denmark,  France,  West  Germany,  Italy,  the 
Netherlands,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
(NSC bulletin  Aug  17/77) 

August  18: MSFC  reported  that  a new  pattern of  painting Shuttle solid- 
fuel  rocket  boosters  for  orbital  flight tests  in  1979 and  1980 could  save 
the  agency  an  estimated  $300 000.  The  center’s  system  dynamics 
laboratory had changed the 6 black stripes running the length of  the giant 
motors to  4  large rectangles in  a  spiral  pattern  that would  let  engineers 
measure  roll  and pitch  rates  of  the boosters on  reentry.  (MSFC Release 
77-150) 

August 20: Today newspaper reported that two USAF fighter planes had 
dropped about 20 bombs July 8 across a lake bed runway used by aircraft 
from the Je t  Propulsion Laboratory, which operates for NASA the deep- 
space  network  antennas  at  Goldstone.  NASA  and  the  Department  of 

154 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

Defense  had  been  a t   odds  over  the  Mojave  desert  airspace,  and  “the 
military is winning,”  the paper  said. 
Twice  in  the  past  6mo  a  B-1  bomber  had  narrowly  missed  the 
multimillion-dollar  tracking antennas, and over the past yr USAF planes 
with  electronic  devices  had  been  jamming  space  signals  to   and  from 
Goldstone.  In the July 8 incident, all bombs from the USAF planes had 
fallen no more than  half  a mile  from the  5  big-dish  antennas serving as 
the  sole  links  to   satellites  in  orbit  around  the  earth,  the  sun,  and  the 
planet  Mars  and to one spacecraft headed  for  the planet Saturn. 
The  commandant  of  the  Marine  base  at  El  Toro,  where  the  planes 
came  from,  had  grounded  the  pilots  for  2wk,  blaming  the  incident  on 
“navigation error”  and misreading  of  the  target.  However,  on  July  22, 
the  B-1  bomber  that  had  previously  buzzed  the Goldstone  station  flew 
with its chase plane low over the heads of  station technicians to check the 
sky  for  radio  interference from other  military  craft.  According  t o  JPL  
officials, - the B-1 was  “far off  the course it normally  flies on a test run.” 
Fighter  planes  from  the  Georgia  air  force  base  had  interfered  “no 
fewer than 60 times” with Goldstone radio links t o  its space vehicles. Last 
Oct. a fighter pilot  had “accidentally” turned on an electronic device and 
disrupted contact with the Viking orbiter a t  Mars for more than an hour. 
Had  the  spacecraft  been  in  a maneuver  or  an  emergency,  the  mission 
would have been  lost, the Viking scientists said. (Today ,  Aug 20/77,  1A) 

August 20-29:  Two yr  to the day after  launching the Viking mission  to  
Mars, NASA  launched  Voyager2 at 10:29am EDT from ETR on a Titan 
IIIE-Centaur.  Countdown was  smooth  except  for  a brief  hold  to  check 
the status of  a valve. Minutes after launch, problems began to appear:  a 
suspected gyro failure,  incomplete data  transmission, and failure of  the 
boom  holding  the science platform to  deploy. 
NASA  later reported the gyro was working and data transmission was 
satisfactory.  The  boom,  which  was  supposed to  deploy  53min  into  the 
flight,  had  not  extended  and  locked.  To   determine  its  position,  con- 
trollers  12hr after launch had activated a plasma instrument on the scan 
platform  and  combined  its  readings  relative  to   a  known  axis  and  the 
direction  of  the  solar  wind  (data  supplied  by  GSFC)  to  show  that  the 
boom  had  extended to  within  2” of  full deployment. 
JPL  reported  Aug.  22  that  the  spacecraft had  been  stable since 3pm 
EDT Aug.  20,  except  for  a  pitch  and yaw  disturbance at 5am  Aug.  21; 
flight controllers  were  investigating.  I t  reported  Aug.  25  that  the  craft 
had undergone another disturbance like that of Aug.  21; controllers had 
ruled out the propulsion module’s having bumped the spacecraft. On the 
morning  of  Aug.  29,  JPL   calibrated  the  sun  sensors and  removed  the 
dust cover on the infrared interferometer spectrometer. It had tried Aug. 

155 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

26  to  move  the  science boom  to  the  locked  position,  but  the  computer 
system had aborted the command,  showing that a problem existed. Con- 
trollers  tried  jettisoning  the dust cover while reorienting the  spacecraft, 
to jolt the assembly enough to  open the boom hinge and lock it into posi- 
tion,  but  this  was  unsuccessful.  JPL  had  decided  to  put  Voyager 2  on 
hold  to   allow  controllers  to   concentrate  on  the  launch  of  the  other 
Voyager  Sept.  5 .   (Voyager mission  status bulletins  3 through 6) 

August 23: MSFC announced that all systems aboard the  Heao I obser- 
vatory  launched  Aug.  12  had  been  turned  on  and  were  operating  as 
planned.  Dr.  Fred  Speer,  project  manager  for HEAO,  said  the  obser- 
vatory was  already acquiring x-ray sources. Experimenters using Heao I 
reported  they  were  pleased  with  the  early  performance  of  their  in- 
struments.  (MSFC Release 77-153) 

August 23-26:  The N Y  Times reported  JSC had  announced it  could  no 
longer  afford  to   monitor  instruments  left  on  the  moon  by  Apollo 
astronauts.  “I  sure  hate  t o   see  them  go,  but  NASA  headquarters  has 
notified  us  there will  be  no  funds for operations beyond  Sept.  30,”  said 
Wilbert F. Eichman, chief of  JSC’s payload  requirements and operations 
branch. 

Longest-lived  lunar  instruments  were  seismometers recording  moon- 
quakes  and  hits  on  the  lunar  surface  by  outer  space  objects;  four 
seismometers  were  still  operating,  and  scientists  said  some  could  send 
data for up  to  4yr  more.  Data  from other  instruments,  monitored  in  a 
small  control  room  at  JSC,  had  included  measurements  of  the moon’s 
field of  gravity, heat  inside the  lunar surface, and solar wind  and lunar 
ionosphere samples.  Roy Kelly,  a  senior engineer  for Bendix  (manufac- 
turer of  the instrument packages),  said the transmitters would  be left on 
with  no operational support available. 
An Aug.  26 NYT  editorial said NASA’s  decision to  abandon monitor- 
ing  was  unfortunate  because,  if  it  continued  the  program  “for  just 
another year,  there will be  that much more data  on lunar seismography 
and structure.” Apollo had  cost the nation close to  $30 billion;  shutting 
down  to  save a  few  hundred  thousand dollars seemed to  be  “a repudia- 
tion  of  one of  the  finest  chapters in American  exploration,”  the  paper 
said  (NYT ,  Aug  23/77,  16; Aug  26/77,  A-20) 

August  25:  NASA  launched  Italy’s  first  experimental  domestic  comsat 
SIR10 from ETR  at 7:50pm  EDT on a Delta  into a transfer orbit with 
37 670km  apogee,  229.7km  perigee,  and  23”  inclination.  At  1057am 
EDT on Aug. 27, its apogee boost motor fired it into a near-circular orbit 
where i t  would drift by Sept.  8 t o  a station on the equator above the west 

156 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

coast  of  Africa  a t  about  15”W. NASA  would  transfer operation to  the 
Telespazio VHF/SHF control center at Fucino, Italy, about 45 days after 
launch.  Italy’s  National  Research  Council  (CNR)  would  reimburse 
NASA  for the cost of  the launch vehicle and support services, estimated 
a t  $15.7  million,  as agreed  in March  1975. 
The  Satellite  Italian0  Richerche  Industriale  Orientata  (industrial 
research-oriented  Italian  satellite), 2m  (6.5ft)  high  and  1.4m  (4.6ft)  in 
diameter, weighing 398kg (8781b) at liftoff, would transmit TV and voice 
data at  superhigh frequencies  (SHF) from Europe to North America  in 
adverse weather conditions. The project had begun  in  1969 as part  of  an 
ELDO program,  specifically to  carry out  a communications experiment 
in  the  12 and  18GHz  bands  proposed  by  Prof.  Francesco  Carassa  of 
Milan Polytechnic Inst. The idea of  using higher frequency  ranges (30 to  
60GHz) because  of  overcrowding  on  conventional  frequencies  had  of- 
fered the advantages of  greatly increased traffic in communications, less 
interference with  present  ground and satellite communications, and the 
use of  small ground terminals. The Compagnia Industriale Aerospaziale 
(CIA) had designed and developed the spacecraft and was responsible for 
system management  and orbit  operations. 
Defense/Space Daily said the original Aug.  17 launch date had slipped 
because  of  possible  interference  between  the  SIRIO  antenna  and  the 
third-stage system that might  hinder separation. The N Y  Times said that 
“adverse  wind  conditions”  Aug.  16  that  delayed  a  test  launch  of  the 
Navy’s  Trident missile had  automatically postponed  the  SIRIO launch. 
A vWk   said  that  the  SIRIO  launch  was  important  to   Italy  not  only 
technically  but  also  politically:  it  said  NASA  officials  believed  major 
changes would  have occurred in the  Italian government if  the spacecraft 
had  failed.  (NASA  Release  77-152;  KSC  Release  140-77;  MOR 
492-209-77-01  [prelaunch] Aug  9/77,  [postlaunch]  Nov  9/77;  D /SD ,  
Aug  22/77,  275;  NYT ,  Aug  17/77, A-11; A VWk, Sept 5/77,  23) 

0  NASA  announced that a third group of  20 astronaut applicants, all in 
the mission  specialist category, would  report to  JSC Aug.  29  for a week 
of  individual interviews and physical examinations. Eight  of  this group 
were women;  all 20 had Ph.D.  or medical degrees, or both, and one had 
a degree in veterinary medicine.  (NASA Release 77-176) 

0  MSFC announced plans for a 3-day meeting beginning Aug.  31  for the 
59 investigators selected earlier this mo [see Aug.  161 to  collaborate on  11 
experiments  for  the  second Spacelab mission.  Dr.  Eugene W.  Urban of 
MSFC’s  space  sciences  laboratory,  mission  scientist  for  Spacelab  2, 
would chair the meeting of  the Investigators Working Group to brief  the 
participants  on   engineering  and  management  requirements.  (MSFC 
Release 77-155) 

157 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

August  26:  LaRC  announced  selection  of  RCA  Service  Company, 
Camden,  N.J.,  to   negotiate  a  $3.5  million  contract  for   electronics 
fabrication services to  the center. Work  on  the contract, covering a 2-yr 
period with options for three 1-yr extensions, would  begin  in Jan.  1978. 
(LaRC Release 77-40) 

0  The NY Times reported  that “observers in the U.S.  and abroad” were 
puzzling over a Soviet space vehicle called Cosmos 929 that had  been or- 
biting for a mo and was large enough t o  be manned, but apparently car- 
ried  no  passengers.  Orbital  and  radio  telemetry  characteristics of  the 
vehicle were  like those usually related  to  a manned mission;  speculation 
was that the vehicle might  be the first unit  of  a large space station  to  be 
assembled in orbit. 
Reports from Europe that the USSR would launch a space vehicle dur- 
ing the  summer had assumed that the mission would  be  another Salyut, 
five of which had previously been orbited, the first early in 1971. Cosmos 
929,  launched  July  17,  had  drawn  attention  because  of  its  size  and  its 
unusual telemetry,  apparently two distinct systems, as though it were two 
objects joined  together. On Aug.  18, after a major change in  orbit,  one 
of  the two radio transmissions had also changed “significantly,” and part 
of  the  vehicle might  have  been  detached  at  that  time.  Members  of  the 
Kettering Group, an international group of  nongovernment space watch- 
ers,  had  confirmed that  the vehicle was  as large as a Salyut and that its 
5 1.6” orbital inclination had  usually,  though  not  exclusively, been  used 
for  manned  flights  as  had  its  telemetry  signals.  Cosmos 929  had  pro- 
duced no voices,  however,  and the group was “virtually certain” that no 
crew was  aboard.  (NYT, Aug  26/77,  A10) 

August 28:  The  W .  Post  reported  that the  leader of  a USSR  expedition 
on  the  first  surface  ship t o  reach  the North Pole had  told  a  news  con- 
ference tha t  his major problem  was deciding when  the  ship had  reached 
its  destination.  Soviet  Minister  of  Merchant  Marine  Timofey  B. 
Guzhenko said that, as the  ship neared  the pole Aug.  17, fog had made 
sun  readings  impossible;  the  polar  daylight  obscured  the  stars;  and 
magnetic  compasses were  worthless  when  they  “began  to   jump  at  the 
pole.” 
The vessel’s officers had  to  spend several hr determining whether  they 
had  reached the pole.  They finally relied on a satellite navigation system 
accurate within about  800yd, and made two passes  through  the ice floes 
to make sure they had reached their goal.  The crew of  the 13-day 3582mi 
expedition  on   the  nuclear-powered  icebreaker  Arktika  had  planted  a 
Soviet  flag and  capsule containing  a  copy  of  the  USSR  constitution to  
mark  their  accomplishment.  ( W Post, Aug  28/77,  A24) 

158 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

AUGUST 

August  29: NASA  announced i t  had  tentatively  chosen  114 scientists to 
participate in the Jupiter-orbiter probe mission scheduled for 1981-1982. 
More  than  500  scientists  had  submitted  proposals  for  research  in 
response t o  a  1976 invitation from NASA.  Thirteen selectees would have 
interdisciplinary  jobs,  helping  with  mission  plans  and  coordinating 
research  and  instrumentation  t o   ensure  best  results  from  the  mission. 
NASA  would  assign  the others t o  17  individual-experiment areas;  prin- 
cipal investigators for 3 of  those areas would be  from nations other than 
the U.S.  JPL  would manage the Jupiter-orbiter project, and ARC would 
manage  the probe  system.  (NASA Release 77-177) 

0  NASA  reported  that LeRC had been  operating a power  generator for 
30,OOOhr  without  a  break  and  was  aiming  for  50 OOOhr  of  continuous 
operation, hoping to  use the system in deep space missions. The Brayton 
space power generator,  a closed-cycle gas turbine, had  been running  for 
more  than  3yr  under  rigorous  space  environment  conditions  of 
temperature, pressure,  and speed. 
For  the  test,  ordinary electric lab heaters had  provided  energy  to  the 
generator;  in  space,  the  generator  would  draw  energy  from the  sun  or  
from a nuclear  source. The Brayton engine had dispelled the “myth that 
only  static  nonrotating  systems  have  the  endurance  potential  for  long 
space voyages,” said Jack A.  Heller, LeRC engineer in charge of  the ad- 
vanced engine work. The system, he said, “not only is showing reliability 
but  it  is  performing  a t   a  high  energy-efficiency  level  of  25%  or  better 
without any signs of  degradation.”  (NASA Release 77-178) 

0  The WPo s t  reported conflict between the USAF and NASA  not only 
over  use  of  the Mojave  desert  area  [see Aug.  201  but  also  over  use  of 
radio  frequencies  that NASA  considered  the key  to  contacting alien in- 
telligences,  and  that  the  Air  Force  wanted  for  a  satellite  global- 
navigation  system. The USAF wanted to use a band  scientists called the 
“waterhole,”  in which hydrogen and oxygen radiate natural radio signals 
into space (the combination of  the two into water had given the band the 
name), thought to  be the area in which alien civilizations might conduct a 
dialogue in space. The USAF had  selected these  frequencies for naviga- 
tion  signals  as  carrying  less  interference.  Should  the  USAF  have  a 
navigation-satellite network in place by  1984, its signals would drown out 
any other signals on those  frequencies.  (W P o s t ,  Aug  29/77,  A l )  

August 30: ARC announced that 7 U.S.  biological experiments launched 
Aug.  3 on the USSR’s  Cosmos 936 had  landed  by  parachute  in  Siberia 
Aug.  22.  The  Soviet  satellite  also  carried  experiments  from  France, 
Czechoslovakia,  Poland,  Romania,  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  and  East 

159 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Germany.  Five  of  the U.S.  experiments  had  followed  up  those  on  the 
first cooperative U.S.-USSR  biological satellite Cosmos 782 launched in 
Nov.  1975; 4  of  them  had  Soviet  coinvestigators,  and all of  them  used 
some Soviet  scientific or  technical assistance.  The  last  U.S.  biosat  was 
Biosatellite 3,  launched  in  1969; without  the  Soviet  flight  opportunity, 
the U.S. biology experiments would have to  wait for Shuttle flights in the 
1980s.  (ARC Release 77-37;  NASA  Release 77-169) 

0  MSFC  reported  that  astronaut  Paul  Weitz  had  arrived  on  center  to  
check  out  a  procedure  developed  for jettisoning  a jammed-open  outer 
door  of  the  Shuttle  scientific  airlock while  on  a  space mission.  Weitz 
would  wear  a  pressurized  space  suit  for  the  task,  t o  be  carried  out  in 
MSFC’s  neutral buoyancy simulator. The 75ft-diameter  tank  filled with 
water 4Oft deep would duplicate movement of  people or hardware almost 
as  if  weightless  in  space.  Engineers  and  technicians  could  design  in- 
struments  and  procedures  to   handle  almost  any  foreseeable  problems 
before  actual spaceflight, and unforeseen  problems  (such  as solar array 
failure on Skylab) could  be  solved  during a space mission. 
Center  workers had  been  devising a way  to remove  the outer  door  of 
the airlock in case it could not be  closed at the end of  a mission, using a 
full-scale mockup of  the Shuttle cargo bay  in the simulator. Underwater 
TV  cameras would  record  the  astronaut’s  movements on control  room 
monitors,  and both video and voice communications would be  recorded 
for  later  study.  Scuba  divers  in  the  simulator  would  help  as  needed. 
(MSFC Release 77-158,  77-166) 

0  NASA announced that the largest Space Shuttle component - its exter- 
nal  propellant  tank-would  roll  off  the  assembly  line  in  New  Orleans 
Sept.  9.  The  huge  tank  would  then  go  by  barge  to   the  Natl.  Space 
Technology Laboratories in Miss.  for the first static firing of  the Shuttle 
main  engines. 
The  external  tank  consisted  of  2  propellant  tanks  and  an  intertank 
structural connector; the forward tank would contain liquid oxygen, the 
larger aft tank  liquid hydrogen.  I t  would  be  the main structural member 
carrying the  orbiter  and  the  two  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters.  At  launch, 
the tank  would  feed  cryogenic propellants  to  the three main  engines on  
the  orbiter;  the  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  on  each  side of  the  external 
tank would use their own fuel and would separate about 2min into flight 
for later recovery.  The mated orbiter and external tank would  thrust for 
another 6min,  separating just before the Shuttle reached orbital velocity. 
The complete  external tank  was  47m  (154ft) long;  the Shuttle orbiter it 
would  carry was 37.2m  (122)ft  long.  (NASA Release 77-179) 

A a g w  31:  NASA  reported  it would join NOAA  in a 5mo test to  detect 

160 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

AUGUST 

turbulence in the  flight paths of  2 planes  in the skies over Colorado, “a 
built-in  turbulence  laboratory,”  according  to  Dr.  Peter  M.  Kuhn.  An 
earlier study by Dr. Kuhn and others from NOM ’ S  atmospheric physics 
laboratory  had  used  infrared  radiometers  to   detect  fluctuations in  at- 
mospheric water  vapor,  indicating turbulent areas ahead of a plane with 
81 070  reliability  [see A&A 76,  Nov  111.  Successful tests could produce an 
inexpensive  turbulence-warning  instrument  for  a  plane’s  control  panel. 
(NASA  Release 77- 180) 

GSFC  announced  “a  comprehensive  programmatic  and  institutional 
review” of  its FY  1978-1979  program to  define the skills it  needed to  do 
its job  “within  its  allotted  resources.”  The review  would  result  in  fewer 
Civil  Service employees,  the announcement  said,  and a  work  force  ad- 
justment  would  require a center-wide review and validation of  position 
descriptions  to  match  program  redirection  and  “changes  in  manpower 
levels.”  GSFC Director  Robert  S .  Cooper called  on all center employees 
to  cooperate fully “in the updating of  our position descriptions.”  (GSFC 
anno Aug  31/77) 

0  The N Y   Times reported  that  the  Voyager  spacecraft  being  launched 
toward  Jupiter  and Saturn would  use  a  little-known  power  source  that 
had made possible much of  the dramatic space activity of the last decade: 
a capsule of  plutonium 238 producing heat convertible into electricity. In 
localities  far  from  the  sun,  or  on  planetary  bodies  with  drastic 
temperature  swings between  day  and  night,  the  plutonium  capsule had 
proved  far  superior to  solar  cells. 
Early missions such as Skylab and Salyut space stations; the Mariner 9 
and 10 that surveyed Mars,  Venus,  and Mercury;  and communications, 
weather,  and  navigation  satellites had  all used  solar  cells.  But  in  1959 
President Eisenhower  had  revealed  the  possibility of  nuclear  power  for 
spacecraft,  and  in  June  1961  a  grapefruit-sized  2.7watt  generator  had 
gone into orbit on the Navy’s  Transit 3A navsat. NASA had used a larger 
system  called  SNAP  19  on  Nimbus 3.  Later  models  powered  the  still- 
active Pioneer 10 and 11 launched in  1972 and  1973 that reached Jupiter 
in  1973  and  1974,  as well  as  the  Viking  landers  that  touched  down  on 
Mars in July and Sept.  1976 t o  search for evidence of  present or past life. 
Another  model  called  SNAP 27  had  powered  the  still-active stations 
left on the moon by Apollo missions between  1969 and 1972; the Apollo 
12  station  had  lasted  nearly  8yr,  the  length  of  time  the  late  version 
nuclear  capsule on the Voyagers would  have to  last to  permit observing 
Uranus  in  1985.  The  long-lived  moon  stations  had  attracted  notice 
recently  [see Aug.  23-26]  when NASA announced it would  stop monitor- 
ing them in order to  save “something less than $1 million a yr,” the article 
said. 

161 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

The plutonium  power  sources,  known  as  SNAP (system  for  nuclear 
auxiliary power)  or  RTG  (radioisotope  thermoelectric generator),  had 
been a byproduct of U.S.  production of  power  for nuclear weapons. The 
Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA),  destined to 
be  part  of  a  new  federal  Department  of  Energy,  had  undertaken  a 
$30-million-per-yr  development of  even larger nuclear power  systems for 
space,  including  selenide thermoelectric units  with  plutonium  238  heat 
sources for an orbiter with probe scheduled for launch toward Jupiter in 
1982,  and  a  system  generating  between  lo00  and  2000  watts  being 
developed  for DOD.  (NYT ,  Aug  31/77,  45) 

During August: NASA  announced  it  had  detailed astronaut  Russell  L. 
(Rusty) Schweikart to  the state o f  Calif. effective Sept.  1 as assistant for 
science and technology to the governor. The assignment would be for ly r  
under  the  Intergovernmental Personnel Act. 
Schweikart, one of  the third group of  astronauts, had  come to  NASA 
in 1963 and had flown the first lunar module in 1969 on Apollo 9. He had 
been  backup  commander  for  the  first  Skylab mission  in  1973.  In May 
1974 he  had  joined  the  NASA  Hq  office  of  applications,  and  in  Sept. 
1976  became  assistant  for  payload  operations  to  the  Assistant 
Administrator  for  Planning  and  Program  Integration,  working  on 
policies  and  plans  for  payloads  in  the  Shuttle  era.  In  the  new  postion, 
Schweikart would  coordinate the application of  emerging technology to  
the  state’s  needs  and  become  informed  about  the  problems  and 
challenges  facing  state governments.  (NASA  anno Aug  24/77) 

The  Natl.  Aeronautic  Association  announced  that  127  planes  had 
finished  in  the  last  Powder  Puff  Derby  on  the  30th  anniversary  of  the 
transcontinental air race  for women.  Pilots represented  36  of  the United 
States as well as Australia, West Germany, and the Bahamas; 3 were fly- 
ing  their  24th  Powder  Pu f f   Derby.  NAA  had  decided  in  1976 to make 
this  run  the  last  because  of  shortages  of  fuel  and  financing.  The  30th 
flight was  not  a race but  a “sentimental  journey,” the NAA said  (NAA 
newsletter,  Aug/77,  1) 

0  NASA  announced it had established a fare structure for Space Shuttle 
payloads on flights scheduled to  begin  in 1980. Depending on the weight 
and volume of  cargo, the price would run from less than $10 000 to  more 
than  $21  million.  Other  factors would  be  the  optional  services  desired 
and whether  the payload would  go on  a  reserved  basis  or as a standby. 
Costing $10 000 or less would be the “getaway special” (GAS), a small 
research package weighing less than 2001b, self-contained, with a volume 
of  less than  5ft3,  flying on  a space-available basis.  The $21-million fare 
would be for a payload using the full capacity of  the Shuttle on a reserva- 

162 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1971 

AUGUST 

tion basis by non-U.S.  government customers. Lesser charges would  ap- 
ply to  customers  sharing flights with other customers; those willing t o  fly 
on  a  standby  basis;  and those having  made  a  substantial  investment  in 
Space Transportation  System  development  (e.g.,  The European  Space 
Agency,  its member  nations,  and Canada). 
Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA had set the prices 
t o  encourage Shuttle use  by  making  costs attractive but  still recovering 
operating expenses. Commercial and foreign users would pay  fees cover- 
ing  depreciation  of  facilities  and  equipment,  and  amortization  of  or- 
biters.  The  pricing  plan  would  undergo  review  in  3yr  to  make  any 
necessary  adjustments,  Lee  said;  it  contained  provisions  for  cost  in- 
creases due t o  inflation. NASA prices would include space in the Shuttle, 
with  standard services such as design review,  safety review,  flight plans, 
transmission  of  payload  data,  and  services of  a  3-man  crew.  Optional 
services,  costing more,  would  include special training,  upper  stages and 
services,  special  mission  kits,  revisit  or  retrieval  of  satellites,  or  any 
special equipment.  (NASA Release 77-173) 

9  NASA  announced it had identified about 40 payloads to  be carried on 
11 Space Shuttle flights  in  its  first yr  of  operation,  beginning  in  1980. 
Three  civilian  firms  had  deposited  “earnest  money”  with  NASA  for 
payloads  on 8  flights; NASA  had  plans  for  5  payloads,  and DOD had 
plans for  one. 
Chester M. Lee, STS operations director, said NASA also had forecast 
12  non-NASA  civilian  payloads,  10  NASA  payloads,  and  4  DOD 
payloads  for  launch  during  1980 and  1981.  Allocating  the  payloads  to  
specific  flights  would  not  be  firm  until  about  a  yr  before  launch,  he 
noted.  A working model  for Shuttle traffic in the first 12yr, totaling 560 
Shuttle flights, would  show NASA  flying about half  the missions on  its 
own;  20%  would  be DOD missions;  6%,  other U.S.  government  agen- 
cies;  12070,  commercial  firms;  and  12070,  foreign  customers.  (NASA 
Release 77-175) 

0  NASA  announced it had awarded Boeing Commercial Airplane Co.  a 
contract to  demonstrate advanced technology for  fabricating composite 
horizontal stabilizers to  be used on B-737 transport aircraft. Managed by 
LaRC,  work  under  the  contract would  be  done over  a 4yr  period  on  a 
cost-sharing basis,  NASA  contributing  about  $1 1.7 million  and Boeing 
contributing  about  $1.3  million.  Boeing  would  devise  advanced 
manufacturing methods suitable for producing composite-material struc- 
tures,  and would  carry out  all analysis and testing  needed to  meet FAA 
requirements.  Boeing Commercial Airplane Co.  had previously  received 
a similar contract to  fabricate and devise techniques for using composite 

163 

AUGUST 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

materials  in  elevator  shipsets  for  B-727 aircraft  [see July  71. (NASA 
Release 77-174) 
*  Researchers from the Soviet ship Akademik Korolev,  anchored off the 
coast of Virginia near Wallops Flight Center for joint U.S.-USSR rocket 
launches,  had  discovered the charms of  the Eastern Shore and were en- 
joying  their  contacts  with  the  natives,  according  to   reports  in  the 
Washington Star  and  Washington Post. The meteorological  soundings 
had been completed by the last week of August,  the newspapers said, and 
the  134 Russians waiting on the ship for results to  be correlated had time 
to  visit  the mainland  on  trips planned  by  local officials in  cooperation 
with NASA. 
Coming ashore in groups of  about 50, the visitors (mostly young) had 
seen Pocomoke City, Md.,  a small U.S. city; the village of Chincoteague, 
Va.;  the Assateague wildlife refuge; and a tour of Accomack county that 
included  a  visit  to  a  private  home,  a  farm,  and  a  chicken-processing 
plant.  Through NASA  interpreters, the visitors asked scores of  questions 
on  topics  from  labor  relations  a t   the  plant  to   the  history  of  local 
buildings. They had joined in a Frisbee game with local youngsters, eaten 
largely of  the  local  seafood,  and bought  out the entire beer  supply of  a 
local general  store. 
Capt. Oleg Rostovsev, commanding officer of  the 409ft research ship, 
said he had  found the visit “a very  interesting experience.” His assistant 
for scientific affairs, Evgeny Nelepov,  said that many of  the researchers 
had  visited  U.S.  cities  before,  but  that  major  cities  everywhere  had 
become more and more  alike,  “losing the individual characteristics and 
cultural tradition  . . . To  find these national characteristics one must go 
to  the small villages and rural areas where traditions and local culture en- 
dures. That is why  this visit here has meant so much to  us.” The Russians 
had held  a press tour and reception on the Akademik Korolev as a thank 
you before the ship departed for Baltimore. ( W Star, Aug 28/77, D-1; W 
Post,  Sept  1/77, A-1) 

164 

September 

September  1:  The  Space  Age  might  not  yet  be  out  of  its  teens,  the 
Chicago  Tribune reported,  but  the  two  decades  that would  end Oct.  4 
since  the  launch  of  Sputnik  1  had  brought  many  wonders.  The 
newspaper  cited  worldwide  television;  photographs  from  space  of  the 
blue-white earth in the vastness of  space; color pictures of  the surface of 
Mars;  close-ups of  the planet Jupiter; men walking - and riding - on the 
surface  of  the  moon;  astronauts  living  aboard  a  space  station  for  84 
days;  and  men  “walking”  in  space,  outside  their  ships.  Satellites  had 
changed human  life as  few  other  objects (the wheel,  the printing press, 
gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educa- 
tional  system  to   politics,  from  ideas  about  ecology  to  ideas  about 
humanity  itself  and about  its  future. 
Predictions  of  things  to   come  in  the  next  2Oyr  of  the  Space Age  in- 
cluded weather modification,  energy transmission from space,  and per- 
manent outposts in orbit and on the moon.  People would use satellites to  
monitor  air  and  water  pollution,  find  minerals,  chart  water  currents, 
predict earthquakes, map land use,  keep tab on crops,  look  for fish, and 
make  worldwide  live  television commonplace,  the  paper  said.  (C Trib, 
Sept  1/77,  1-7) 

The  Washington Post said NASA  was  looking  for “someplace else to 
land the space shuttle.” Its second free flight  had  been  postponed  when 
Hurricane Doreen turned the planned landing strip (a dry lakebed a t   Ed- 
wards AFB) into a “mud puddle.”  A NASA  source said officials had  in- 
vestigated other sites for the flight, tentatively rescheduled to Sept. 7. ( W 
Post,  Sept  1/77,  A-27) 

Johnson Space Center  confirmed  that  NASA  would  turn off  science 
instruments  on  the  lunar  surface and would  dismantle the  JSC control 
center  for  Apollo  lunar-surface  experiment  packages  (ALSEP)  as  of 
Sept.  30.  The five stations still operating were  put there by Apollo mis- 
sions  12,  14,  15,  16,  and  17.  In  July  1969 the  original moonwalkers of 
Apollo 1Z  had left behind a prototype station with a design life of  only 14 
days;  i t  had  smvived for 45  days and quit when  its power  supply failed. 
Specifications for rhe remaining  five had included a lyr  design life for 4, 
and 2yr  for the Apollo 17 station; the Apollo 12 station was “well into its 

165 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

Built to  record and transmit  long-term lunar-surface data,  the stations 
with their long life had provided researchers with a real bonus: instead of 
data  from  only one  seismometer a t  a  time,  for  instance,  the group had 
operated  as  a  sensor network,  greatly enhancing available information 
on the moon’s  internal temperature and magnetic field, charged particles 
in  its environment,  and especially moonquakes and meteoroid impacts. 
Although  the experiments would  be terminated,  the  transmitters would 
continue to  operate,  serving earth  as an  astronomy reference point.  The 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use the signals in deep space work such 
as  astrometrics and  spacecraft  navigation or monitoring  the motion  of 
the lunar  orbit against a background of  extragalactic stars to  test gravity 
theories. 
The lunar  stations had  had  problems: The Apollo  14 ALSEP ran  for 
4yr,  quit  for  2 days  in March  1975, started  up again,  and had  repeated 
this  6 times since.  Understanding  the  trouble  (temperature  fluctuations 
resulting from the sun’s position had caused short circuits) would help in 
designing  future  science  stations.  (JSC  Release  77-47;  NASA  Release 
77-203) 

September 2: Ames Research Center announced  that NASA had chosen 
29  experimenters for  the  atmosphere probe  portion  of  the  Jupiter  mis- 
sion [see Aug. 291.  The probe would carry 6 experiments into Jupiter’s at- 
mosphere;  5 of  the  experimenters would  be  interdisciplinary scientists, 
and 24  would  be  assigned to  the 6 experiments:  helium  interferometer, 
Dr. U l f  von Zahn, Federal Republic of Germany, principal investigator; 
mass  spectrometer,  Dr.  H.B.  Niemann,  Goddard  Space Flight  Center; 
atmospheric  structure,  Dr.  Alvin  Sieff,  ARC;  nephelometer, Dr.  Boris 
Ragent,  ARC;  net-flux  radiometer,  Dr.  R.W.  Boese,  ARC;  sferics 
receiver, Dr.  L. J.  Lanzerotti,  Bell  Laboratories. 

The probe would  separate from  the  orbiter  about  55  days away from 
the planet,  continuing on a separate flight path for about 30min of  high- 
speed  descent  while  relaying  information  to  earth  through  the  orbiter. 
After  the entry probe concluded its work,  the orbiter would  f ly  close to  
Jupiter’s  moon  Ganymede and  near  the  large moons  Io,  Europa,  and 
Callisto. 
ARC’S Dr.  Lawrence Colin would  be  project  scientist for  the  Jupiter 
probe;  J P L   would  manage  the  Jupiter  orbitedprobe  project.  (ARC 
Release 77-40) 

0  ESA  announced  selection of  53 candidates  from  12 European  coun- 
tries for the single ESA opening on the first Spacelab mission scheduled 
for  late  1980. By  the  end  of  1977, ESA would  pick  6 from  the 49 can- 
didates chosen by  their  respective countries and the 4 from ESA’s  staff, 

166 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

SEPTEMBER 

to  undergo further tests and evaluation by NASA between Jan. and April 
1978. By mid-1978,3 candidates would be appointed as European experi- 
ment  specialists;  several months  before  the  mission,  one would  be  the 
first  West  European scheduled  to   travel  and  work  in  earth  orbit,  the 
other two  serving as backup.  (ESA release Sept 2/77) 

September 4: FBIS reported a Tass announcement that the USSR had in- 
stalled  its  first cameras  designed  to  photograph  bolides (celestial bodies 
invading  the  earth's  atmosphere)  in  a  30-unit  network  in  the  Ukraine, 
The cameras would  permit  astronomers  t o  calculate the  trajectory and 
place of  fall of  the bolides,  the release said.  (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 
2/77) 

0  FBIS carried the official report by  L.A.  Aleksandrov, chairman of  the 
USSR-U.S.  group on space meteorology,  that  the joint  rocket  launches 
over  the Atlantic  to  compare instrument  results  [see July  11 had  been  a 
success.  (FBIS, Krasnaya  Zvezda  in  Russian,  Sept 4/77) 

September  5-7:  NASA  launched  the  18201b  Voyuger  I  from  Cape 
Canaveral on a T i t ad c en t au r  vehicle at 8:56am EDT Sept. 5  in a  firing 
'  described as flawless by project manager John Casani.  A second burn of 
the Centaur a t  9:49am  boosted  the  spacecraft out  of  earth orbit;  firing 
and jettison of  the onboard propulsion module sent  Voyager I on a  tra- 
jectory  toward  Jupiter, where  it  should arrive 4mO  before  its  sister ship 
launched Aug.  20.  JPL  reported  Sept. 6 that  Voyager 1 was  proceeding 
"without  any  of  the  problems  that  plagued  Voyager  2."  NASA  had 
postponed the  Voyager I launch to permit installation of  extra springs to  
lock the second spacecraft's  science boom in place. The Voyager I launch 
would be the last time NASA would use the T i t ad c en t au r ,  although the 
USAF would continue to  use its Titan for future missions, most of  them 
secret.  (Voyager mission  status bulletin  6;  W Star, Sept 6/77,  A-2;  Sept 
7/77,  A-14; NYT,  Sept 6/77,  1, 22; Sept 7/77,  A-18; C Trib, Sept 6/77, 
1-1,  1-24;  W Post,  Sept  6/77,  A-2;  P  Ing ,   Sept  6/77;  LA   Times,  Sept 
6/77;  Today, Sept 6/77,  1A; D /SD ,   Sept 7/77,  8) 

September  7: NASA  reported  that  Kenneth  Souza  of  ARC  and  Dr. 
Eugene Benton  of  the Univ.  of  San Francisco  had  returned  to  the U.S. 
from Moscow  Sept.  2 with  the  biological samples carried  on  the USSR 
biosat  Cosmos 936  [see Aug.  301.  This mission was  the  first  to  subject 
laboratory rats t o  artificial gravity in the'weightlessness  of  space. NASA 
would send the samples (tissue from the rats and live fruit flies, processed 
'  and packed in dry ice at the mobile landing site in Siberia) with  radiation 
records  to  U.S.  laboratories at  the Univ.  of  Calif.,  Berkeley; Univ.  of 
Wash.,  Seattle; Univ.  of  San Francisco;  Univ.  of  Southern  Calif.;  and 
ARC,  for analysis.  (NASA Release 77-182) 

167 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

*  NASA  announced  that  JSC’s  space  and  life  sciences  directorate 
payload  to  be managed by  the Hq Office of  Applications on the second 
flight of  Shuttle orbiter  102 (sister  ship to  the Enterprise used  in recent 
approach-and-landing  tests  a t  Dryden  Flight  Research  Center)  in  1979 
would  investigate  earth  resources,  environmental  quality,  and  severe 
storms.  The instrumentation and other  hardware carried  on the second 
flight would  be  reusable,  t o  permit  adjusting or  modifying  it  for  later 
flights a t  relatively low cost.  The first orbital flight would mainly record 
performance and monitor space immediately around the orbiter for con- 
tamination;  the monitor would  fly on all 6 orbital flight tests in 1979 and 
1980. NASA  had  estimated the  cost  of  payload  hardware,  science and 
technical  integration,  and mission  support  a t  about  $10 million.  The 6 
orbital test launches from Kennedy Space Center would aim at preparing 
the Shuttle for regular  operations by May  1980. (NASA Release 77-181; 
JSC Release 77-48) 

*  ESA  announced  that  NASA  would  launch  the  orbital  test  satellite 
OTS,  ESA’s  first  comsat,  from  Cape  Canaveral  Sept.  13  or  14  on  a 
Delta.  The  European  launcher  Ariane  would  launch  the  operational 
European comsat system to  follow OTS between 1981 and 1990, carrying 
domestic telephone, telegraph,  and telex traffic besides relaying Eurovi- 
sion TV.  OTS would operate in the 11- and 14-GHz bands, an advantage 
over  the  European 4-  and 6-GHz  links  subject  to   radio  interference in 
regional  service. OTS’s  original June launch date had  slipped because  a 
motor prematurely separated  from the vehicle sitting on a  launch stand 
in May.  NASA had redesigned the bolt that  failed, and had replaced the 
damaged  motor  and  vehicle  booster.  (ESA  Release  Sept  7/77;  MOR 
M-492-210-77-01 [prelaunch] Sept 8/77;  NASA  Release 77-168) 

September 8: NASA  announced  that GSFC  and Marshall Space Flight 
Center  would  join  the  USAF  in  solving  a  yrs  old  problem  of  comsat 
makers  and  users:  flying  in  a  synchronous  orbit  at  about  34  500km 
(22 OOOmi)  altitude,  the  comsats  routinely  encountered  electrically 
charged particles from  the magnetosphere that built up static electricity 
ower 
on the spacecraft surface, causing arcing that could d 
cells  and  thermal  insulation,  interfere  with  signal 
and 
switch  spacecraft  functions  erroneously.  The  joint  project  called 
SCATHA (satellite charging a t  high altitudes) wou 
in specific data 
on the phenomenon.  The USAF planned to launch 
to   study  electrostatics  a t   geostationary  orbit.  MSFC  would 
light ion-mass spectrometers t o  measure speed, temper 
of  low-energy ions and detect their points of  origin. GS 
two  instruments,  one  to   measure  space  electric  fields,  the  other  to  

168 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

SEPTEMBER 

measure space magnetic  fields.  (NASA  Release  77-183;  MSFC  Release 
77- 164) 

*  NASA  announced plans t o  develop a prosthetic urinary sphincter for 
patients losing control of  bladder functions because of  injury or disease. 
Patients  now  used  external  collection  devices,  implanted  catheters,  or 
prosthetics difficult to  operate.  John Richardson of MSFC’s  technology 
utilization office said NASA’s biomedical applications office had recom- 
mended  MSFC  for this job  because of  its expertise in design,  manufac- 
ture, assembly, and operation of miniature valving. MSFC would have a 
contractor  design  and  test  the  device and  prepare  documents  for  Food 
and  Drug  Administration  approval,  as  well  as  manufacture the  device 
commercially. A successful device would permit safe and quick emptying 
of  the  bladder  and  avoid  infection,  the  prime  source  of  fatal  kidney 
failure  among  those  without  bladder  control.  (NASA  Release  77-1 84; 
MSFC  Release 77-163) 

*  NASA  announced  that  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  had 
called for an agency ceiling of  23  237 permanent  positions by  the end of 
FY  1978,  500  fewer  than  current.  Dr.  Alan  M.  Lovelace,  deputy  ad- 
ministrator, said work  force adjustments to  meet the goal would include 
greater  use  of  contractor  R&D;  consolidation of  applications work  a t  
ARC,  GSFC,  and the Natl.  Space Technology Laboratories;  reduction 
of  support manpower at JSC, KSC,  and MSFC; consolidation of  GSFC 
data management; transfer of helicopter research from Langley Research 
center to  ARC; and reductions in support office and facility staff agency- 
wide. MSFC would lose 150; Lewis Research Center,  108; JSC, 90; KSC, 
80;  LaRC, 77; GSFC, 74. DFRC, Hq, and Wallops Flight Center would 
lose 30,  20,  and 5 ,   respectively.  The shift  in programs would  add 45  to  
ARC and 6  to  NSTL.  (NASA Release 77-185) 

September 9: The quality of  information from the Voyagers would great- 
ly  surpass  that  of  earlier  missions,  said  Philip  Abelson  in  Science 
magazine.  “A decade ago the level of  knowledge concerning the planets 
and  their  satellites  was  such  that  almost  any  arm-waving  explanation 
would  fit the facts. This is no longer true.” Citing the potential of 5 of the 
11  instruments,  Abelson  noted  the  Voyager  cameras  could  “achieve a 
resolution  and  observing  time  a t   Jupiter  better  by  a  factor  of  40 than 
those  of  the  Pioneer  spacecraft.  . . . The  radio  infrared,  visible,  and 
ultraviolet  instruments  can  all  participate  in  a  mutually  reinforcing 
fashion.”  (Science, Sept 9/77,  1858) 

*  ComSatCorp  said  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  had 

169 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

asked for a status report on the escrow account the FCC ordered set up in 
1976 to cover possible rate refunds  to  its customers.  ComSatCorp said it 
had  “meticulously complied” with  the FCC order, but would respond in 
detail to the  inquiry.  (ComSatCorp Release 77-22) 

September  IO :   The Washington Star reported that the first Space Shuttle 
fuel tank emerged from the Michoud assembly facility near New Orleans 
on  its  way  to  tests  at  the  Natl.  Space Technology Laboratory  in Miss. 
NASA contractor Martin Marietta had built the 5 2 0  OOOgal  tank, half  as 
long as a football field,  at a cost of  about $2.5 million.  If  successful, as 
many as 500 similar tanks would  be built during the next  15 to  20yr. The 
153ft-long tank,  almost  30ft  in  diameter,  was  built  of  aluminum  alloy 
and  was  disposable,  designed  to  fall  away  and  disintegrate  in  the  at- 
mosphere just before the Shuttle reached orbit. Shuttle flights would cost 
about  $10 million  each,  as  compared  to   $150  million  each  for  earlier 
launches.  ( W  Star,  Sept  10/77,  A-3) 

September 12: NASA  announced it had  scheduled the  second free flight 
of  the  Space Shuttle  orbiter  Enterprise  on  or  about  Sept.  13 at DFRC 
with  astronauts  Joe  Engle  and  Richard  Truly  as  pilots.  The  free-flight 
test series called  for 3 more flights before the orbiter would go to  MSFC 
for  vibration  tests  early  in  1978. (NASA  Release 77-186) 

0  MSFC  announced that  Roy Gibson, director general of  the European 
Space  Agency,  had  visited  the  center  for  the  first  time  to   discuss  the 
NASA/ESA  Spacelab  and other  NASA  programs  with MSFC  director 
Dr. William R.  Lucas and his staff. Thomas J .  Lee, manager of MSFC’s 
Spacelab program office, said the visit would familiarize the ESA official 
with NASA capabilities and programs “in which the Europeans might be 
interested  as  potential  areas  for  future  cooperative ventures.”  (MSFC 
Release 77-167) 

JPL   announced  that  NASA  had  selected  an  ion-drive  propulsion 
system rather  than  the solar sail  [see June 211  for use by  automated  in- 
terplanetary  shuttles in earth’s  solar system toward  the  end  of  this cen- 
tury.  NASA  scientists had  studied  the  concepts  for  a  yr  before making 
the  choice  on the  basis  of  lower  risk  and greater  potential  for  growth. 
LeRC had orbited ion rockets, forerunners of  the ion-drive spacecraft, in 
1969 as part of SERT (space electric rocket tests).  Those rockets were still 
operating in space. An  ion-drive ship would  carry a cluster  of  mercury- 
ion engines and generate power from solar-cell arrays converting sunlight 
to  electricity. First use of the ion-drive system might be a Halley’s Comet 
rendezvous in 1986 by  a spacecraft launched from the Shuttle in 1981 or  

1 70 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

SEPTEMBER 

early 1982. (JPL release Sept 12/77; NASA Release 77-187;  WS ta r ,  Sept 
13/77,  A-6) 

0  The  Natl.  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  reported  a  new 
device  to   supply  near-instantaneous  information  on  hurricane  growth 
and movement  in the Caribbean  and North Atlantic. The device, an air- 
borne  data  collection  platform  on  a  weather  research  aircraft,  would 
relay  information  on  pressures,  wind  speeds,  temperatures,  and  other 
hurricane data within  15sec from NOAA’s  Goes 2 orbiting a t  35  400km 
(22 OOOmi)  to   the  Natl.  Hurricane  Center  in  Miami.  Conventional 
transmission of  voice radio from aircraft to  a ground station would take 
5  to   15min.  Quick  transit  of  information  as hurricanes  approached 
populated  centers would allow time for alerts. As no Atlantic hurricanes 
had  occurred this yr  until the end of  Aug.,  NOAA  had  tested the device 
in actual flight  over a  tropical depression and would  install it  in 2 other 
planes  next  yr. (NOAA Release 77-240) 

September 13: The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its second free flight 
a t  Edwards AFB in Calif.,  a 5min unpowered glide from about 24 OOOft 
altitude, during which  it reached a speed of  more than 330mph and per- 
formed several maneuvers to test its handling before air brakes slowed it 
to   a  landing  at  250mph.  Separation  from  the  Boeing  747  carrier  was 
delayed 3min because a power  failure at DFRC made mission control in 
Houston iose  radio  contact;  the  delay  caused  no  problems.  For  about 
50min before separation, pilots  Joe Engle and Richard Truly took turns 
a t   the  controls  and  the  computer  to  monitor  the  orbiter’s  behavior  a t  
various  speeds.  Pilots  of  the  747  were  Fitzhugh  L.  Fulton,  Jr.,  and 
Thomas  C.  McMurtry.  The  flight  had  been  postponed  from Aug.  30 
because of  a tropical storm [see Sept. 11; a third test was set for late Sept. 
(Postflight  rpt,  free  flt 2,  SpSh orbiter ALT;  W P o s t ,  Sept  14/77,  A6) 

September  13-November 9: NASA  announced that the Delta vehicle on  
which  it had launched ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS a t  7:21pm  Sept. 13 
from ETR  had  exploded 54sec after  liftoff. The booster  and 5  strap-on 
motors  [see Sept.  71  had  performed  properly  before  the  explosion.  On 
Sept.  14  John  F.  Yardley,  NASA’s  associate  administrator  for 
spaceflight,  had  appointed  a  failure  review  board  whose  investigation 
concluded  from  flight  data  analysis,  photo  records,  and  “substantial” 
vehicle  debris  recovered  near  the  launch  site  that  the  no.  1  strap-on 
motor had  failed from causes unknown.  NASA  had  scheduled  an OTS 
backup launch for April  1978. (MOR M-492-210-77-01 [postlaunch] Nov 
9/77;  NASA  newsrm  rept  Sept  14/77;  W Pos t ,  Sept  14/77,  A9;  NASA 
Release 77-193) 

171 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

September 14: NASA  reported that its Nimbus 6 had helped rescue from 
the Atlantic off  Iceland a 2-man balloon crew attempting a transatlantic 
flight.  The  balloonists-Maxie  Anderson,  44, and Ben  A b r m o ,  47- 
were  unharmed  after  an  after-sunset  pickup  Sept.  12  by  a  USAF 
helicopter.  They had  lifted off  Sept.  9 near  Bedford,  Mass., carrying  a 
compact satellite-tracking unit giving out signals received by  the satellite 
and  relayed  to   GSFC,  which  plotted  the  balloon's  location  and  for- 
warded  it  t o   the  control  center  a t   Bedford.  The  balloon  ran  into  a 
snowstorm  that blew  it  off  course and broke  radio  contact;  it  splashed 
down 1930km (12OOmi) short of its target in France. The crew owned the 
balloon,  gondola,  and tracking  equipment, the  latter purchased  from a 
commercial firm. GSFC had cooperated earlier in search-and-rescue tests 
of  the  tracking unit.  (NASA Release 77-190) 

The Natl.  Aeronautic  Assn.  announced  it  would  present  the  Wright 
Brothers  Memorial  Trophy  for  1977  to   Lt.  Gen.  (ret.)  Ira  C.  Eaker, 
former chief  of  air staff and a central figure in U.S.  military and civilian 
aviation.  He would  receive the trophy-a  miniature silver replica of  the 
original  plane  flown  Dec.  7,  1903-at 
the  annual  dinner  Dec.  9  spon- 
sored by  the Aero Club  of  Washington. 
Gen.  Eaker  had  been  commissioned  lieutenant  in  the U.S.  Army  in 
1917 and  received  pilot  rating  a t  the  age of  21.  After  World War  I,  he 
and  other  Army  flyers  set  world  flying  records  including  the  first 
transcontinental  flight  using  refueling,  and  a  transcontinental  blind 
flight on instruments in 1936. In  1942 he had led the first attack by Army 
bombers  in Europe.  He had  retired  from the USAF in  1947; since then, 
he  had  been  an  executive  for  Hughes Tool Co.,  Douglas Aircraft,  and 
the U.S.  Strategic Institute,  and had  set up a program  to hire physically 
handicapped  persons  in  the  aircraft  industry.  (NAA  newsletter  Sept 
14/77) 

September 15:  LaRC announced  it would  open a major educational ex- 
hibit on energy Sept.  22  through 29. Assembled by  the Energy Research 
and Development Administration,  the exhibit in two 50-ft trailers would 
include  films,  animated  sections,  and visitor-operated consoles describ- 
ing  all types  of  energy  now  in  use  and  possible  future  energy  sources. 
Operating the displays for ERDA on the U.S.  energy situation and what 
could  be  done about  it would  be  Oak  Ridge Associated  Universities,  a 
nonprofit  educational  and  research  organization  of  45  colleges  and 
universities  in  the  southeast.  (LaRC Release 77-41) 

September  16:  NASA  announced  that  a  fourth  group  of  20  Shuttle 
astronaut  applicants would report to  JSC Sept.  19 for a week of  physical 
examinations and individual interviews.  All of  this group were pilot ap- 

172 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

SEPTEMBER 

plicants,  one a civilian. Of  the others,  12 were USAF; 4,  U.S Navy;  3, 
U.S Marine  Corps.  A  final  group  would  report  to   JSC  in  mid-Nov. 
(NASA Release 77-192) 
NASA announced that ARC had awarded two San Francisco Bay  area 
firms  a  $2.5  million  contract  for  managing  construction  of  a  major 
modification  to   the  largest  wind  tunnel  facility  in  the  western  world. 
Turner Construction Co.  and Lord Electric Co.  would modify the ARC 
40-by 80-ft wind tunnel built in 1944 by adding a new 80- by  120-ft (24 by 
36m)  test  section  and  increasing  drive  power  from  36 OOOhp  to 
135 Ooohp. The modifications should enable ARC to  handle new types of 
aircraft,  especially  large helicopters  and vertical- and short-takeoff  and 
landing aircraft.  (NASA  Release 77-191) 

0  Two balloonists attempting a transatlantic crossing from Bar Harbor, 
Maine,  on or about  Sept.  19 would  carry a lightweight satellite-tracking 
beacon  like the one that helped save Maxie Anderson and Ben Abruzzo 
when  their  balloon  ditched  near  Iceland on  Sept.  12.  The FAA  had  re- 
quired  Charles  E.  Reinhard  and  Charles  A.  Stephenson  to   carry  the 
device as an air  traffic control aid  and in case of  a need  for search and 
rescue.  This type of  beacon  had previously  gone around the world  on a 
polar flight, and another rode a 33ft sailboat on  a 6OOmi  trip through the 
Bermuda  Triangle east  of  Fla.,  both  successfully  tracked  by  a  Nimbus 
satellite.  The  balloonists  would  cover  the  cost  of  the  beacon;  NASA 
would  take  no  part  except  for  use  of  the  satellite  link  and  ground 
systems,  which would  operate 24hr anyway.  (NASA Release 77-194) 

0  NASA  announced it had  awarded to McDonnell Douglas Aeronautics 
Co.  a  contract  t o   build  spinning  solid  upper  stages  for  the  Space 
Transportation  System.  The  contract,  amounting  to   about  $9 million, 
had  resulted  from  previous  NASA  agreements  with  Boeing  Co.  and 
McDonnell Douglas  that  the  firms  could  design,  test,  and market  the 
stages independently.  Bids had  been  limited to  those  two  firms because 
velop  the  stages with  private  funds.  The contract 
Dec.  1979 of  the  first  SSUS with  a l l  hardware, 

173 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

tersputnik  to   use  satellites and  ground stations  for  international  com- 
munications were Bulgaria, Hungary,  the German Democratic Republic, 
Cuba,  Mongolia,  Poland,  Romania,  the  USSR,  and  Czechoslovakia. 
(FBIS, Tass in English,  Sept  16/77) 
*  FBIS  reported  a Tass  interview with  Boris  Petrov,  chairman  of  the 
Intercosmos  council,  on  the  high  points  of  the  program,  including 
cooperation with capitalist countries in exploration of  space. France 1 ly r  
ago  was  the  first  capitalist  country  to   cooperate;  India’s  satellite 
Aryabhata  had  orbited  on  a  Soviet  booster  2yr  ago;  Soviet-Swedish 
cooperation  was  developing;  and  the  U.S.  and  USSR  would  work 
together on space biology, medicine, meteorology, environment, and the 
moon and planets.  (FBIS,  Tass  in English,  Sept  16/77) 

September 17: X-ray sensors on the U.K.’s  Ariel satellite had detected an 
explosion  of  “catastrophic  dimensions”  in  the  constellation Ophiuchus 
[the Serpent-Bearer], the N Y  Times reported. Similar sensors on Heao 1 ,  
the  U.S.  high-energy  astronomy  observatory  launched  Aug.  12,  had 
made  the  same  observation.  Dr.  Daniel  A.  Schwartz  of  the  Harvard- 
Smithsonian Center  for Astrophysics said  intensity  of  x-rays  from that 
area  increased  a  thousandfold  in  the  past  2wk,  making  it  the  second 
strongest  source  in  the  sky  (that  in  the  constellation  Scorpius,  a  con- 
tinuous  source  of  x-rays,  was  the  strongest).  No  star  of  comparable 
brilliance appeared in previous photographs of  the region. Ariel had first 
detected the x-rays Aug.  31; Heao 1  began  recording the source Sept. 7. 
An  observatory in Australia  that had  received  data on the explosion had 
also  recorded  it  in  visible  light;  Dr.  Herbert  Friedman  of  the  Naval 
Research  Laboratory  said  that  a  nova  was  rarely  observed  at  widely 
separated  wavelengths  such  as  those  of  visible  light  and x-rays.  (NYT, 
Sept  17/77,  B8) 

September  19:  MSFC  announced  it would  sponsor  a data-management 
symposium  Oct.  18-19  jointly  with  the  Univ.  of  Ala.  in  Huntsville 
(UAH)  to  discuss  use  of  space-acquired  or  remotely  sensed  data  in  the 
1980s. MSFC deputy director Richard G. Smith would chair the session; 
Daniel  J.  Fink  of  General  Electric’s  Space  Division  would  deliver  the 
keynote  addkess.  Representatives  of  NASA  and  other  government 
agencies,  industry,  and  universities  would  deliver  3 1 papers  during  the 
meeting.  Leonard  B.  Jaffe,  NASA  deputy  associate administrator  for 
applications, would  speak at a banquet Oct.  18. (MSFC Release 77-172) 
*  ESA  announced  that  the  U.S.  delegation  to   an  Aerosat  Council 
meeting  in Washington,  D.C.,  Sept.  15-16,  had  notified  it  that  lack  of 
funds  would  prevent  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  from  pro- 

174 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

SEPTEMBER 

ceeding  with  the  program  as contemplated.  The Aerosat memorandum 
of  understanding  had  provided  that ESA,  the  government  of  Canada, 
and a U.S.  company (ComSatCorp was selected in  1974) would proceed 
with  development,  production,  launch,  and  operation  of  the  satellite, 
with  ESA  and  the FAA  (leasing  from the U.S.  firm)  using  the  comsat 
capability in equal portions.  (ESA Release Sept  19/77) 

September 20:  NASA  announced  it  would  sign  a  $5.6 million  contract 
with  General  Electric  Co.  to   build  an  atmospheric  cloud  physics 
laboratory  for  launch  on  the  Shuttle  in  the  early  1980s  [see  July  111. 
NASA  had  already selected  8 of  26  experiments for  the ACPL on  early 
Spacelab missions.  (NASA  Release 77-197; MSFC  Release 77-173) 
*  NASA  announced  that  Dr.  Robert  A.  Frosch,  the  agency  ad- 
ministrator,  had  approved  awards  totaling  $39 800  to   7  NASA  and  2 
contractor  employees  for  their  contributions  to  the  agency’s program. 
The awards covered 5 major efforts: a central timing system for tracking 
stations  using  microwave  signals  bounced  off  the  moon;  a  new  silica 
insulation  material  to   protect  the  Shuttle  during  reentry  into  the  at- 
mosphere;  a  temperature-resistant  coating  to  cover  the  Shuttle  insula- 
tion;  an economical and durable black-chrome  coating  for commercial- 
type solar collectors; and a new  optical glass surface to improve Landsat 
images.  Largest  single award,  $10 OOO,  went  to  Mahlon F.  Easterling  of 
JPL  for  development of  the  timing  system.  (NASA  Release 77-195) 

NASA announced i t  had appointed Dr. Anthony Calio as Hq associate 
administrator  for  applications  as  of  Oct.  1 .   Dr.  Calio  had  served  as 
deputy associate administrator for space science since Nov.  1975. He had 
begun  working  for  NASA  in  1963  at  the  electronics  research  center  in 
Cambridge, Mass.,  then at NASA Hq.  In 1968 he transferred to  JSC and 
in  1969  became  its  director  for  science  and  applications.  He  had 
previously been a nuclear physicist with Westinghouse and the American 
Machine and Foundry  Co.,  and was  in  the U.S.  Army Chemical Corps 
from  1954 to   1956. Among  his  honors  were  NASA  medals  for  excep- 
tional  service,  1969;  exceptional  scientific  achievement,  197 1 ; dis- 
tinguished  service,  1973.  (NASA  anno  Sept  20/77;  NASA  Release 
77-200) 

September 2Z: DFRC  announced  that  employees John  G.  McTigue and 
Stanley Markey  would  share  a  $5000 award  for  working  out  a way  to  
truck  the Shuttle orbiter  overland from the Rockwell plant  in Palmdale, 
Calif.,  to DFRC  rather  than  use  the Boeing  747  carrier, eliminating the 
need for a mate/demate  device costing $2.53 million and saving the Shut- 
tle program nearly $800 OOO.  The two men used  their knowledge of  local 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

terrain, geography, and manpower to  set up a ground route with relative- 
ly  minor  problems.  (DFRC Release 30/77) 

0  NOAA  reported  that  airline  passengers  between  Miami  and  Latin 
America  could  enjoy  smoother  flights  because  of  satellite  weather 
images.  Lineas Aereos Nicaragua  (LANICA)  and  8 other  carriers were 
sharing Goes 2 weather  photos  of  the  area  from the  southeastern U.S. 
into South America,  including all of  the Gulf  of Mexico and the Carib- 
bean Sea. A LANICA official said that,  until now,  the airlines had little 
idea  of  the  location  of  storms;  now  they  could  avoid  them,  or  use  the 
windflow  t o  save time and  fuel.  (NOAA Release 77-247) 

0  ERDA  announced  it  had  selected Windworks,  Inc.,  of  Mukwonago, 
Wisc.,  to   negotiate  a  contract  for  design  and  production  of  advanced 
small windmills  for  farms,  rural  homes,  and  other  uses.  The  $388 OOO 
contract covered  designing  a machine  to  produce 8kw  of  electric power 
from 29ft-diameter  blades in a 20mph wind,  and delivering it  for testing 
by  prime  contractor  Rockwell  Intl.  a t   ERDA’s  test  facility  in  Colo. 
(ERDA Release 77-168) 

September 22: NASA  announced  that  Thomas C.  Duxbury,  a guest  in- 
vestigator  at JPL,  would  use  the  shadow  of  Martian moon Phobos on 
Sept. 20,24, and 28 to  pinpoint the exact location of  the  Viking I  lander 
on the planet’s  surface. 
JPL explained that the spacecraft had landed within a known area but 
was too small for detection by orbiter cameras, which had been unable to  
tie in photographs  of  the site to  the lander’s position. Duxbury had  pro- 
grammed both the lander and the orbiter to take a picture as the shadow 
of  Phobos passed  over  the landing site; the time of  the photograph  and 
the exact position of the shadow on 3 occasions would permit calculation 
of the  lander’s  position. 
Duxbury  was  one of  20  chosen  to  participate  in  the Viking  guest  in- 
vestigator  program  set up by NASA  to  offer experimenter opportunities 
beyond  those originally planned for the mission.  (NASA Release 77-199) 

0  The USSR  announced it had  launched  a 910kg Prognoz 6 to  continue 
study  of galactic energetic particles  and of  solar  activity  impact  on the 
magnetosphere and the  interplanetary  medium.  (FB 
Russian,  Sept 22/77), 

keroflot’s  IL-62 jet passenger  flagship had 
by a crew of 6 women, the IL-62 set a world 
distance record along a closed route of  10 388km 
d a world record  for 

176  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

SEPTEMBER 

average speed along a closed  10 OOOkm  route of  804kmph. (FBIS, Tass in 
English,  Sept 22/77) 

September 23:  The  W Post  said  that  the U.S.  had  “quietly decided” to  
build  a device for  destroying enemy satellites in  space:  a small (ft-long, 
8in-dia)  heat-sensing  vehicle  “resembling  a  tomato  can”  without  ex- 
plosives  but  relying  on  collision  at thousands of  mph  to  accomplish  its 
purpose.  The Post said the USAF had  “carefully camouflaged” this step 
in a Sept. 8 release announcing award to  Vought Corp. of  a $58.7 million 
contract “for development and test of  hardware in  support of  the Space 
Defense Technology Program.” 

A 1967 treaty between the U.S  and USSR  had prohibited both nations 
from orbiting  any object  “carrying nuclear  weapons  or  any other  kinds 
of  weapons of  mass destruction.  . .”; both sides had apparently decided 
this did not  outlaw shooting a t  their  own  target  satellites. U.S.  military 
officials deduced  that  certain USSR  launches were  tests of  hunter-killer 
satellites with  non-nuclear  charges  to blow  up  on  approach to  a target. 
William J.  Perry, DOD research chief,  told the Post that the  U.S.  could 
either  build  antisatellite weapons  also,  or  provide  more  protection  for 
U.S.  satellites. The DOD had begun on  defensive measures such as mak- 
ing  satellite wiring  less  vulnerable,  but  had  also  decided  on  offensive 
measures as shown in  the Vought contract. 
The small highly maneuverable U.S.  device would have sensors allow- 
ing  it  to   home  in  on  slight  temperature  variations  between  a  target 
spacecraft and its surroundings;  it would  be so light that a single launch 
vehicle could carry several into effective orbit. (W P o s t ,  Sept 23/77,  A l )  

0  NASA  announced it had  joined with  Rockwell Intl.  Corp.  in granting 
funds  for  a  new  solid-state  electronics  facility  at  Howard  Univ., 
Washington,  D.C.,  dedicated  Sept.  20 a t   ceremonies with  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch as speaker, attended by more than 200 
persons  from  NASA,  Rockwell,  Cornel1  Univ.,  ERDA,  Bell  Lab- 
oratories,  and other public and private groups. Cornel1 Univ.,  a leading 
school in  electronics research,  had  helped  set up  the Howard project  at 
the request  of  Rockwell.  (NASA Release  77-201) 

0  LaRC announced NASA had awarded Lockheed Aircraft Corp. a con- 
tract  to  produce  advanced-composite ailerons to  decrease weight  of  the 
L-1011  transport  aircraft.  Lockheed,  working  with  Avco  Corp.  in 
Nashville,  Tenn.,  would  demonstrate  techniques  of  designing  and 
fabricating 10 shipsets of composite ailerons for FAA approval. Costs of 
the 4yr  contract,  like those with other  firms in NASA  ’s  aircraft energy- 
efficiency program  (ACEE)  to   reduce  fuel  needs  of  civil-transport air- 

177 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

craft by  50%  [see May  5 ,   July 71,  would  be  shared, $5.85  million  t o  be 
contributed by NASA and $650 @ by Lockheed.  LaRC would manage 
the contract.  (LaRC Release  77-43; NASA  Release 77-204) 

0  WFC announced  it  would  officially open  a  new  management  educa- 
tion  center  Sept.  30  with  Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch,  NASA  administrator, 
presiding.  A  unit  of  the  Hq  office  of  professional  development,  the 
center  would  offer  short-term  residential  programs  (3-day  seminars  to  
2-wk  courses)  designed  to   train  future  agency  leaders.  (WFC  Release 
77-12;  NASA  Release 77-202) 

0  MSFC  announced  it  was  developing  a  coal  mining  machine  using 
technology borrowed  from the  lunar rover  to  make mining  safer, more 
productive, and more economical. The Interior Dept.’s  Bureau of Mines 
had asked NASA to  automate the mechanics of mining and eliminate the 
need  for human  operators in  the unsafe and unhealthy  environment  of 
the cutting operation. 
The longwall-shearing machine  in  current use would  gr:nd  coal  from 
the  face of  a seam in  a  linear direction,  sending  the coal out  on  a  con- 
veyor  and advancing with its roof  supports as it went deeper in the seam. 
Operators could  not  mine  coal  to   the  edge  of  a seam at  roof  or  floor 
without breaking into surrounding shale,  so that much coal was  left un- 
mined.  An  operator  would  find  guidance  difficult  and  progress  slow 
because of  poor  visibility  from dust. 
An  automated  guidance  and  control  system would  allow  removal  of 
nearly all the coal a t  a much  faster rate,  recovering more of  the coal left 
by  other methods,  in  a purer  state with  less rock  and other matter.  The 
system  would  also  reduce  wear  on  the  longwall machine’s  cutters  and 
minimize  downtime.  The  contractor  to  be  selected  would  work  with 
results  of  a  2yr  MSFC  study of  a  system using  sensors such  as gamma 
rays,  radar,  impact devices, and reflected light to  guide a shear’s cutting 
drums. (MSFC Release 77-175) 

FBIS reported  that the USSR  had  opened a television  station in Duki, 
town of  Khabarov Krai on the Pacific coast of  Siberia near Bering Strait 
and the Sea of  Okhotsk, permitting  reception  of  both  central and  local 
programs in all villages of  the area. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, 
Sept 23/77) 

September 24: The press  reported  that the third  free flight of  the Shuttle 
orbiter  Enterprise  over  Edwards  AFB  had  successfully  tested  the 
microwave  scanning-beam  landing  system  originally  developed  for  the 
Navy to land planes on ships a t  sea. Pilots Fred W. Haise, Jr.,  and USAF 
Lt.Co1.  Charles  Gordon  Fullerton  turned  over  orbiter  control  to   the 

178 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

SEPTEMBER 

system for part of  its steep glide down, and ground transmitters kept the 
craft in line with the runway  during the 5min 34sec free flight.  Installed 
at Edwards earlier in  1977, the system would  also be installed at KSC  to  
handle Shuttle landings  there. 
Despite  radio-transmission  problems  between 
the  orbiter  and 
Houston, the launch went off  on schedule. At 24 OOOft  in a shallow dive 
a t  287mph the orbiter separated from its Boeing 747 carrier and reached 
a maximum  speed  of  more  than  333mph  during  its  landing  approach. 
(NYT ,  Sept 24/77,  24;  W Star,  Sept 24/77,  A-5;  W Post, Sept 26,  A-4) 

September 26: JSC reported that another 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants 
would  report  for  individual  interviews  and  physical  examinations;  the 
group included  17 pilot  and 3 mission  specialist applicants. Eight  of  the 
applicants were from the USAF; 6, Navy; 2, Marines; 4, civilians. Of  the 
more than 8000 applicants, about 200 would go to JSC  for screening, the 
final group due in mid-Nov.  and selections in Dec.  (JSC Release 77-54; 
NASA  Release 77-205) 

MSFC  announced  that  solar  energy would  provide  heat  for  some of 
the center this winter. A system already completed would supply 50% of 
the  heat  for  one  office  building;  solar  cplilectors  being  installed  on 
another  would  supply  hot  water.  A  flat-plate  solar  collector  on  the 
10-story center  headquarters  building  would  be  supplying hot  water  by 
July  1978. (MSFC Release 77-178) 

September 27: MSFC  reported  on  the  dedication  of  the world’s  largest 
solar-energy  cooling  system  at  a  hotel  on   St.  Thomas,  U.S.  Virgin 
Islands.  The  hotel,  surrounded  by  the  ocean  on  three  sides,  had  used 
diesel fuel for energy. The $554 OOO  system, part of ERDA’s solar-energy 
demonstration  program,  used  13 OOOft2 of  solar  collectors to  air condi- 
tion the 300-rm  hotel,  saving an estimated  $100 OOO  per yr  over the cost 
of  diesel  fuel. 
MSFC  engineer Bob Middleton,  design and installation manager,  ex- 
plained  that the system was unique in not  storing energy:  it provided  air 
conditioning during  the day only,  and the  oil-fired  system took  over  a t  
night,  as the most economical arrangement available. MSFC had worked 
on installations  at a  total of  59 sites under  ERDA’s  demonstration pro- 
gram;  ERDA  had  shared  costs  of  this  system  with  the  hotel  owners. 
(MSFC Release  77-179;  NASA  Release 77-207) 

0  INTELSAT  announced  that  the  People’s  Republic  of  Angola  had 
become  the 99th member  of  the organization on Sept. 23,  and the 25th 
African nation t o  join.  Angola’s  Empresa Publica de Telecomunicacoes 

179 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

(EPTEL)  had  signed  the  operating  agreement.  (INTELSAT  Release 
77-25-1) 

September 28:  NASA  reported  that  LeRC  research  under  the Aircraft 
Energy  Efficiency Program  (ACEE)  might  bring  back  the  use  of  pro- 
pellers,  once  considered  obsolete,  in  fast  commercial  aircraft  service. 
Advances  in  composite-material  technology  had  led  to  design  of  small- 
diameter  8-blade propellers  that might  save 20  to  40%  in  fuel over  cur- 
rent  turbofan  engines.  (MSFC Release 77-206) 

September 29: NASA  launched  Intelsat  IVA  F-5  from Cape Canaveral 
on an Atlas Centaur that exploded less than a minute after launch, drop- 
ping  the 33321b spacecraft into the Atlantic Ocean.  This Intelsat and an  
identical craft scheduled for  launch in Nov.  were to  replace two Intelsat 
IVs now in orbit over the Indian Ocean and provide 6OOO telephone chan- 
nels  and 2 television  channels  for use by 40 countries, compared to 4OOO 
telephone  and 2 TV  channels offered by  the Intelsat IV  spacecraft. 

At 60sec into the  flight a range safety officer destroyed  the secondary 
Centaur stage which  had  separated prematurely from the Atlas.  Failure 
of  the  $49.4  mission  was  similar  to  the  Sept.  13 explosion  of  a Delta 
rocket  carrying  a  $42  million  orbital  test  satellite  (OTS)  NASA  was 
launching fo r  ESA.  (NASA Release 77-214;  W Post,  Sept 30/77,  A-3) 
An  investigation  concluded  that  a  leak  in  the  high-pressure  gas 
generator  system  had  ignited  combustibles  in  the  Atlas  35sec  after 
launch, damaging engine components and terminating the flight.  (MOR 
E-491-633-77-04  [postlaunch] Jan  5/78) 

FBIS reported  that the USSR had  launched space station Sabut 6 into 
an orbit with  275km  apogee,  219km  perigee,  89.lmin  period,  51.6”  in- 
clination.  A  control  center  near  Moscow  would  process  information 
from  the  station  aided  by  tracking  stations on  Soviet  territory  and  on 
Soviet Academy  of  Sciences ships in the Atlantic. Onboard systems were 
functioning normally.  (FBIS,  Tass  in English,  Sept 29/77) 

Rockwell  Intl.  reported  that George W.  Jeffs,  its president  for  space 
operations, had  told the House  subcommittee on  space science and ap- 
plications  that  the  U.S.  needed  “bolder  and  more  imaginative  steps” 
toward  space industrialization,  and called on the federal government  to  
demonstrate an  aggressive  “make  it  happen” program  with  a  theme  of 
Power  from Space. 
Space industrialization  funding in the  1980 budget,  Jeffs said,  should 
approach $500 million for building-block phases leading to manufactur- 
ing, communications, or space power centers operational by  the yr 2000. 

1 80 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

SEPTEMBER 

Such  funding would  speed  up   the  goal  by  a t   least  5yr  and  would  en- 
courage  increased  private  investment.  “As  dramatic  and  technically 
rewarding  as our  space missions  have  been,”  he  concluded,  “they were 
more  significant  for  creating  enormously  promising  opportunity.” 
(Rockwell Release SP-5) 

- 
September  30:  MSFC  announced  that  NASA  had  selected  Martin 
Marietta  Corp.  and  Ball  Brothers  Research  Corp.  for  negotiations  of 
flxed-price contracts for parallel $290 OOO  definition studies of  a Shuttle 
tethered satellite system  [see May 271.  MSFC would manage  the studies 
for the NASA  Hq Office of  Space Flight.  (MSFC Release 77-181) 

*  The  Natl.  Aeronautic  Assn.  announced  that  the  Federation 
Aeronautique  Internationale (FAI) wodd  present  the gold  space medal, 
given  yearly  as  the  world’s  highest  award  for  spaceflight,  to   former 
astronaut Michael Collins, director of  the Natl. Air and Space Museum, 
a t  ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3.  The award would recognize Collins’s total 
contribution to  manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot 
during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The 
U.S.  would  also  receive  11 other  international aviation  awards  a t   the 
world  aviation  body’s  70th  annual  conference:  3  USAF  pilots  had  set 
records  last  yr, giving  the U.S.  5  of  6 possible  absolute world  records. 
Capt.  Eldon W.  Joersz  achieved  top  speed  over  a  straight  course  of 
2193mph; Maj.  Adolphus H.  Bledsoe achieved  speed  over  a closed  cir- 
cuit  of  2092mph;  and  Capt.  Robert  C.  Helt  set  an  altitude  record  in 
horizontal flight of  85  068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine air- 
craft.  (The USSR  held  the  altitude record  of  118 897ft.) 
Other U.S.  award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of  S.D.  for a 
world-record balloon flight of  2475mi from Maine to  the Azores,  lasting 
107hr, and Bruce Comstock of  Mich.  for  being  the  only person  to  win 
the U.S.  national hot-air  balloon championship twice. Associate NASA 
Administrator  Dr.  Noel W.  Hinners would  receive a  group  diploma of 
honor  awarded  t o   the  Viking  project  team,  LaRC,  JPL,  and  Martin 
Marietta  for  the  first  significant scientific information on  Mars  and its 
environment. 
The FAI, formed  in  1905, was the world governing body  for aviation 
records;  NAA was  its U.S.  representative.  (NAA release Sept 30/77) 

During September:  INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Air- 
craft  Co.’s  electron  dynamics  division  a  $126 099  contract  to  identify 
traveling-wave  tube  structures in  the  4GHz  frequency  range  with  high 
reliability  and  uniform  performance  for  use  in  future  INTELSAT 
comsats.  (Intelsat Release 77-24-M) 

181 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

0  ESA announced it had  received a delegation of  9 telecommunications 
experts from the PRC’s  Electronics Society visiting Europe Sept. 12-Oct. 
20  to   see  the  principal  national  space  facilities  and  industrial  firms  of 
ESA  member  nations.  The  visitors,  headed  by  Lei  Hung  of  the  Elec- 
tronics  Society  council,  would  discuss  all  aspects  of  communications- 
satellite programs and would give ESA and European industrialists their 
first opportunity  to meet  with  people  from  PRC  in  the  space  business. 
(ESA Release Sept  13/77) 

0  The  Natl.  Aeronautic  Assn.  reported  Dr.  Paul  MacCready,  U.S. 
aeronautical  engineer  famous  for  his  manpowered  Gossamer  flying 
machines,  had  claimed  the  Kremer  Competition  prize  offered  through 
the Royal Aeronautical Society of  50 000 British pounds (about $86 OOO 
U S )  for having  completed on Aug.  23  the required  course of  clearing a 
start/finish  line  loft high,  flying a  figure 8 around 2 pylons  a half-mile 
apart,  and completing the  flight over  the  same  loft-high  finish  line. 
The Gossamer Condor, a  craft made  of  corrugated  cardboard,  balsa 
wood,  aluminum,  piano  wire,  Styrofoam,  transparent  tape,  and 
cellophane,  with  a  96ft wingspan but weighing  only 771b,  was  powered 
by  Bryan  Allen,  an  experienced  hang  glider  and  bicycle  racer,  who 
transferred  energy  through  bicycle  pedals  to   a  propeller.  The  Kremer 
prize was  the largest ever  offered for a  single aeronautical achievement. 
Dr.  McCready’s claim was  subject to  RAS approval upon submission of 
flight documentation.  Although  the NAA,  as RAS contact  in  the U.S., 
had  distributed  numerous  copies  of  the  Kremer  rules,  only  2  other 
vehicles had been constructed and actually flown in the U.S.,  one a solo 
manpowered  craft  like  the  Gossamer  Condor,  the  other  a  multi- 
manpowered  triplane  built  by  engineering  students  at  MIT.  (NAA 
newsletter  Sept 77) 

The  Natl.  Aeronautic  Assn.  reported  that  Pan   American  Airways 
would mark  the 50th anniversary of  its first flight Oct.  28  by  attempting 
a  world-record  round-the-world,  over-the-poles  flight  in  less  than  48hr 
with  a  Boeing  747  jumbo  jet.  Carrying  an  official  observer  to   certify 
record  performance,  the  747  would  leave  San  Francisco,  fly  over  the 
North Pole to  London, then to Cape Town, South Africa, over the South 
Pole to  Auckland, New  Zealand,  and back  to San Francisco,  a distance 
of 26 642 statute mi.  A Boeing 707 had flown the polar route in 1965 in a 
record 62hr 27min 35sec.  In May  1976 Pan Am’s  747 had set an east-west 
record,  a bicentennial  flight covering 23,137mi  over  a New  York-Delhi- 
Tokyo-New  York  route  in  46hr  50sec.  That  flight  had  carried  98 
passengers, many of whom would be aboard the polar  flight in Oct.  Pan  
Am’s  first  flight  had  taken  place  Oct. 28,  1927,  when  a  Fokker  F-7 

182 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

SEPTEMBER 

trimotor lifted off a dirt runway at Key West, Fla.,  for an hr-long  flight 
over  90 miles of  ocean  to  Havana, Cuba.  (NAA  newsletter  Sept 77) 

*  NASA  announced  its  yrs-old  promise  that  scientists  would  operate 
their own equipment in earth orbit would become a reality, with selection 
of payload specialists for the first Spacelab mission in 1980 not by NASA 
but  by  scientists  participating  in  the  mission.  One  of  the  two  payload 
specialists  would  be  a  representative  of  the  European  Space  Agency 
(ESA),  developer of  Spacelab. A special panel  from an international In- 
vestigators Working Group had interviewed 19 U S .  candidates at MSFC 
and  would  soon  interview  candidates  in  Europe.  The  entire  working 
group would select four trainees for a two-yr program a t  MSFC; one pair 
would  fly on Spacelab  1.  (NASA  Release 77-1 89) 

*  NASA Activities reported  on  international cooperation  in  space.  Dr. 
Alan  M.  Lovelace  last  year  had  signed  an  agreement  with  the  USSR 
Academy  of  Sciences,  effective May  11 when  signed  by  academy presi- 
dent A.P.  Aleksandrov,  to  study joint  operation of  Shuttle and Soyuz- 
Salyut spacecraft in scientific and applications “objectives of merit,” and 
the  potential  uses  of  a  space platform  and  developing such  a  platform 
bilaterally or multilaterally. By the end of  1978, within a yr of  beginning 
work  on  space-platform  proposals,  two  study  groups  would  bring  in 
recommendations.  The  publication  cited  US -USSR   cooperation  in 
rocket instrument tests during Aug.,  the U.S.  biological experiments car- 
ried on a Soviet launch,  and the arrangement for delivery to NASA  of  7 
lunar soil samples from the Soviet Luna 24 mission. 

NASA’s  mandate  called  for  “cooperation  by  the  United  States with 
other nations and groups of  nations  . . . and in the peaceful application 
of  the  results of that cooperation.”  Best  known  current example would 
be Spacelab, funded by  10 member  nations of  ESA,  and the concurrent 
development  by  Canada  of  the  Shuttle’s  remote  manipulator  system. 
NASA’s  Landsat program had made data available to  130 countries, 7 of 
which  had  agreed  to  set  up  ground  stations  for  direct  reception  of 
Landsat information. A joint NASA-AID project based on A t s  6 broad- 
casts of  instructional TV to  some 5000  remote villages in  India had  sent 
special  films  and  live  discussions  to   27  countries  in  Asia,  Africa,  the 
Middle  East,  and  Latin  America.  Other  joint  efforts  included  solar- 
terrestrial  studies,  solar  probes, 
the  Space 
infrared  astronomy, 
Telescope,  and  a  satellite-assisted  global  search-and-rescue  project.  A 
major benefit  to  the U.S  from such  cooperation  would  be  a  favorable 
balance  of  payments  resulting  from foreign purchases  of  data  from re- 
imbursable launches.  (NASA Activities, Sept 77,  14) 

183 

SEPTEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

The Naval Research Reviews  reported  on  satellite use  in  the  oceanic 
biology program of the Office of Naval Research, covering biodeteriora- 
tion  (growth  of  fouling  and  boring  organisms),  sound  in  the  ocean 
(marine mammals),  dangerous marine  organisms, and  special projects. 
Sound  in  the  sea,  second  major  research  area  in  the  program,  had 
centered  on  whales  and  seals,  especially  sounds  produced  by  whales. 
Navy scientists had  implanted radio transmitters in large whales such as 
blues,  fins,  and  grays,  to   track  them  by  boat,  plane,  or  satellite. 
Knowledge  of  whale  behavior  and  movements  would  be  valuable  to  
designers and  operators of  naval equipment.  (NR  Rev,  Sept 77,  6 )  

0  FBIS  reported  on  the  28th  congress  of  the  Intl.  Astronautical 
Federation in Prague,  celebrating the 20th anniversary of  the launch of 
Sputnik  I. Chairman Marcel Barrere of  France reviewed a t  a press con- 
ference the "tempestuous impact of  space exploration on the planet's  in- 
dustry,"  mentioning  the joint  U.S.-USSR  approach to  a manned  flight 
project using the Shuttle and the Salyut orbital station. Presentations a t  
the  congress  had  included  papers  on  the  search  for  extraterrestrial 
civilizations, the U.S.  scientists reporting on  the Voyager  mission,  and 
the USSR on  remote probes of planetary atmospheres for signs of gas ex- 
change between soil and atmosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 24/77, 
Sept 28/77) 

184 

October 

October  I :   The  new  federal  Dept.  of  Energy  opened  its  doors  with 
Secretary  James  R.  Schlesinger promising “to resolve  our  energy  prob- 
lem s .   . . through  the  effective  work  of  all  the  people  of 
this 
department.”  Proposed by  President  Carter  March  1,  the  department 
had  become  a  reality  Aug.  4  upon  signing  of  its  organization  act  and 
Schlesinger’s  confirmation  as  secretary  the  following  day.  The depart- 
ment  inherited  nearly  20 OOO  employees  and  had  a  first-yr  budget  of 
about  $10.4  billion.  Programs it  would  administer  included  conserva- 
tion,  resource  development and production,  research  and development, 
data  management,  environment,  and  regulation.  (DOE  Release 
R-77-001) 

Reporting on the end of  the  Intl.  Aeronautical Federation’s  28th con- 
ference in Prague, FBIS quoted “American scientist O’Neal”  [Gerard K. 
O’Neill] on whether  “his project of  big  settlements on near-terrestrial or- 
bits was  not  too remote  from reality”:  “Mankind will  never  give up the 
idea of  settlements in space  . . . The question is only how  fast will space 
industry and rocket technology reach the necessary level to  enable people 
of  the  earth  to  start building  the  first cities in  orbit.” 

The  congress  discussed  for  the  first  time  the  efficiency  of  space 
research, concluding that  spacecraft created  in different countries would 
inevitably have a uniform  appearance,  depending on their use.  The idea 
of  merging  engineering ideas was “a dominant one.”  Marcel Barrere of 
France  was  reelected  president  of  the  organization.  (FBIS,  Tass  in 
English,  Oct  1/77) 

October 3:  Johnson Space Center  aMounced that  a  sixth  group  of  20 
Shuttle astronaut applicants would  report this week  for individual inter- 
views  and  physical examinations. This group,  all  mission  specialist ap- 
plicants,  included  one  woman.  (JSC  Release  77-56;  NASA  Release 
77-215) 

Kennedy  Space Center  announced  award  to   Intl.  Business Machines 
Corp.  of  a $3 203  666  contract  for  a system  to  test  Shuttle cargoes  for 
compatibility with  the orbiter  before loading into the payload  bay.  The 
system, called CITE (cargo  integration test equipment), would  simulate 

185 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

the  orbiter’s  electrical  and  electronic  environment,  stimulate  the 
payloads,  monitor  their  response,  and  record  the  results.  Keeping  up 
with  the  fast  turnaround  time  planned  for   Shuttle  missions  required 
payloads  ready  to  plug  into  the  orbiters  without  extensive  onboard 
testing.  The  CITE  would  be  mobile  for  use  either  in  the  assembly 
building  t o  check  out  cargoes  in  vertical  positions or  in  the  operations 
building  to  check  out  horizontal payloads.  (KSC Release  156-77) 

October 4:  Postlaunch reports on the Voyagers said both were  function- 
ing  as  expected.  The  one  launched  first,  called  Voyager 2  because  it 
would  arrive  second  at  Jupiter  and Saturn,  had  had  difficulty with  at- 
titude control as well as with its science-platform boom;  its data showed 
that the craft was merely obeying faulty software, which ground control 
had corrected. The boom was  stable enough to  capture satisfactory star- 
field  images.  Voyager I,  launched  later,  had  not  achieved  the  proper 
velocity  during  two  trajectory  corrections;  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory 
engineers said  rocket  exhaust was  apparently  pushing  against the craft, 
and  had  changed  the  procedure  accordingly.  (NASA  Release  77-209; 
MOR  S-802-77-01/02  [postlaunch] Oct 6/77) 

NASA  announced  that  its  administrator, Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch,  and 
Chairman A.B.  Wolff  of  the  Netherlands Agency  for  Aerospace  Pro- 
grams  had  signed  a  memorandum  of  understanding  on  the  Infrared 
Astronomical  Satellite  (IRAS)  project,  a  cooperative  undertaking  in 
which the United Kingdom would also share under a separate agreement. 
An  earth-orbiting  observatory  built  by  the  Netherlands  and  scheduled 
for  launch  in  1981  would  carry  a  cryogenically  cooled  IR  telescope 
furnished  by  the  U.S.  and  a  package  furnished  by  the  U.K.  for  com- 
mand,  control,  and  data  acquisition.  Nearly  500  scientists,  engineers, 
and  technicians  from  the  participating  nations  would  join  in  the  first 
survey of  the  entire sky  a t   infrared wavelengths  undetectable by  earth- 
based telescopes obscured by  the atmosphere. The mission would have a 
ly r  lifetime. Ames Research Center would manage the telescope,  built by 
Ball  Bros.  Research Corp.;  JPL  would  have U.S.  project  management 
responsibility.  (NASA  Release 77-210) 

0  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  announced  award  to  Intl.  Business 
,Machines of  a  $1 344 950  contract  for  134  site  data-acquisition  sub- 
systems  to  monitor  performance  of  ERDA’s  solar  heating  and  cooling 
demonstration program  a t  sites throughout the U.S.  The IBM machines 
would  provide  data  on   solar  energy  at  each  site,  amounts  used  for 
heating,  cooling,  and  hot  water,  and  other  areas  of  performance, 
efficiency,  and fuel saving. Each  site would  feed data to a central com- 
puter  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  for  compilation  of  reports  to   business,  in- 

186 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

OCTOBER 

dustry,  and  the  general  public  on  the  most  economical  and  practical 
systems tested.  (MSFC Release 77-184) 

9  The  Washington Post  reported  on  Sputnik  1’s  20th  anniversary  as 
observed  in  the  Soviet  Union.  Sputnik  had  set  off  a  “search  for 
nationhood  in  the United  States even  as  it  seemed  to  confirm  it  in  the 
Soviet Union  . . . Ask  any Soviet citizen above  the  age of  24 and each 
can tell you exactly where they were and wha t  they were doing when they 
heard  . . . a Soviet satellite was  in  orbit.” 
The U.S.  search ended “in a symbolic and real  sense” with  the moon 
landing 8.5yr  ago.  However, the certainty of power that Sputnik gave the 
USSR  “has never quite materialized  out of  the void  of  space.” The A-2, 
early main launch vehicle for the USSR “civilian” program, was still that 
today.  U.S.  experts  in  the  joint  Apollo-Soyuz  project  had  been 
“dismayed  by  the  crudeness  of  Soviet  space  hardware”:  one  compared 
the Soyuz craft to  a “hot water radiator  . . . it works, but that’s about all 
you  can  say  for  it.”  An  aviation weekly,  interviewing the  experts,  said 
they  rated  the  Soyuz  with  the  Mercury  capsule,  first  U S .   manned 
spacecraft. “Their scientists are every bit as good as ours,” said one U.S. 
physicist,  “but the  technical gap is still huge.” 
The article  noted  that -the U.S.  had  dropped  its  space medicine  pro- 
gram in the early 1970s but the USSR had kept on with its, and had main- 
tained large space stations in orbit since 1971 manned with crews up to  63 
days at a  time.  The Soviet space program had  had  less trouble  than  the 
U.S.  program  “because  of  the  closed  nature  of  the  system.  . . no 
citizens groups or congressional critics to  question the need for a manned 
space program.”  Competition for limited resources was the same in both 
countries,  but  “lack of  public  debate allowed managers  luxuries of  con- 
tinuity not available to their counterparts in a democracy.” ( W Post, Oct 
4/77,  A-1) 

October  6:  NASA  announced  that  its  administrator,  Dr.  Robert  A. 
Frosch,  and Hans Matthoefer, minister  for  research and technology for 
the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany,  had  signed  a  memorandum  of 
understanding for participation in a Jupiter orbitedprobe mission to  be 
launched  by  the Space Shuttle in  1982. 
The mission would send an  orbiter and a probe on the most detailed in- 
vestigation to  date of the environment and moons of  Jupiter, the first op- 
portunity  for  114  investigators  to  measure  Jupiter  directly  as well  as 
remotely  from various orbital positions  over  a  long period  of  time.  The 
orbiter, carrying  10 instruments,  would  circle Jupiter  for at least 20mo; 
the probe,  carrying 6, would plunge into the atmosphere. West Germany 
w o d d  provide a retropropulsion module to  inject the orbiter into its path 

187 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

around Jupiter, as well as ,the scientific instruments and the services of  14 
German investigators in preparing the two spacecraft and analyzing their 
data.  JPL   would  manage  the  U.S.  project,  ARC  the  probe,  JSC  the 
Space Shuttle. An office in West Germany would manage FRG’s  share. 
(NASA  Release  77-21 1) 

0  MSFC reported that a highly sensitive gamma ray telescope carried to 
40km  (25mi)  altitude by  a giant helium-filled balloon  on a 40-hr  flight 
had  studied  an  unusual  binary-star  system  (AM  Herculis  in  the 
constellation Hercules) in which material from the larger star was  falling 
onto the dwarf  companion. 
Dr.  Thomas A.  Parnell of MSFC’s  space sciences  laboratory said the 
flight was seeking discrete gamma-ray emissions from particular celestial 
bodies to identify the chemical elements and isotopes existing there; AM 
Herculis  was  one  of  6  unusual  objects  sought by  the  0.75m-diameter 
(2.5ft)  telescope loaned by  Rice Institute to  MSFC  in a joint astronomy 
project. The balloon instrumentation was similar to  part of  the payload 
on Heuo I ,   launched Aug.  12 to  make high-energy astronomy surveys. 
Detection of  gamma rays in  objects by  Heuo  I  would  be  confirmed by 
the balloon  flights,  the  two  sets of  information  being  complementary. 
Dr.  Parnell  noted  that  balloons  had  carried  models  of  HEAO  in- 
struments  in  preliminary  tests;  another  MSFC  balloon  launched  last 
week  had carried a cosmic-ray detector like one to  be flown on HEAO-C 
in  1979.  (MSFC Release  77-186) 

ARC  reported  that  the  city  of  Genoa,  Italy,  had  awarded  it  the 
Columbus gold medal for the multibillion-mile flights of  two Pioneers to  
Jupiter. The medal,  presented annually during Columbus Day  celebra- 
tions  in  the explorer’s birthplace, would  be  accepted Oct.  12 by  acting 
ARC  director  Clarence A.  Syvertson,  who  would  be  in  Europe  a t   the 
time.  (ARC Release  77-42) 

Langley Research Center announced it would dedicate Oct.  11 the site 
of  Project RECOUP (refuse-consuming utility plant),  first jointly fund- 
ed  federal  and  municipal  project  of  its  kind,  to   generate  steam  from 
burning refuse  [see Jan.  191.  Construction would  begin  in  1978 and  be 
completed in 1980; NASA would share the $8.4 million cost of  the plant 
with  the US Air  Force  and  the city of  Hampton,  Va.  The plant would 
burn more than  80% of  the refuse from Hampton,  LaRC,  the Langley 
Air Force Base,  the Army’s  Fort Monroe, and the Veterans Administra- 
tion hospital;  in a 24-hr operation, it would  burn about 200  tons a day, 
doubling the capacity of  Hampton’s landfill. LaRC would use the steam 
generated  by  the  plant  to   augment  its  present  heating  system,  saving 
about 2.4  million gallons of  oil per  yr.  (LaRC Release  77-46) 

188 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

OCTOBER 

October  7: ESA  announced that  NASA  Administrator Dr.  Robert  A. 
Frosch  and  Roy  Gibson,  director  general  of  ESA,  had  signed  at  a 
meeting  in  ESA  headquarters  a  memorandum  of  understanding  on 
cooperation in NASA’s  space telescope program. 
The European contribution would  include  a  faint-object camera  for 
high-resolution imagery in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared por- 
tions  of  the  spectrum,  with  associated photon-counting  detector,  to  be 
left in orbit as long as considered scientifically useful;  the solar array to  
power  the  scope;  and  support  of  a  scientific operations  center  to  be 
established by NASA for managing the observatory. ESA would get 15% 
of  the  observing time  for  the duration  of  the program  in  return  for  its 
participation,  and  would  share  data  with  astronomers  in  its  member 
states and  the international community. 
NASA would  develop and integrate the telescope, launch it into orbit 
on the Shuttle, supply tracking and data-acquisition services, and main- 
tain  the  telescope  throughout  the  program.  MSFC  would  manage  the 
space telescope, Goddard Space Flight Center would manage instrument 
development  and  observatory  operation,  and  the  European  Space 
Technology  Center  (ESTEC)  would  manage  the  ESA  effort.  (ESA 
Release Oct 7/77;  NASA Release 77-212) 

0  LaRC  announced  that  Sir  Robert  Mark,  former  director  of  New 
Scotland  Yard  (his  official  title  was  Commissioner  of  Police  of  the 
Metropolis), would be guest speaker at a center colloquium on terrorism 
and law enforcement as part of  the public lecture series, “Our Future in 
the Cosmos.”  The  lecture would  contrast philosophy and methodology 
of  British  and  U.S. criminal  justice  systems,  including  the  areas  of 
capital punishment, terrorism, and political influence on police matters, 
reflecting the speaker’s feeling that a free society is governed by consent 
rather  than by  force.  (LaRC Release 77-45) 

October 9-12:  Newspapers reported the launch Oct.  9 of  Soyuz 25  carry- 
two  rookie  cosmonauts - Vladimir  Kovalenok  and  Valery 
ing 
Ryumin-toward  a  linkup  with  new  space  station  Salyut  6 launched 
Sept. 29. Western observers said Soyuz 25-first  manned Soviet mission 
since Feb.,  when Col.  Viktor Gorbatko  and  Lt.Co1.  Yuri Glazkov  had 
spent 18 days aboard Salyut 5 -  was probably connected with the Sputnik 
1 anniversary and  the upcoming 60th anniversary celebration Nov.  7 of 
the Russian revolution. The observance might  include either an attempt 
a t  a new  record of  more than  63 days in orbit or the launch of  another 
space station to link with Salyut  6 and  form a huge orbiting laboratory. 
Officials had canceled Soyuz 25 only 26hr into the mission because of 
unspecified  trouble,  although  the  craft  had  come  within  13Oyd  of  the 
Salyut  6. The Moscow  domestic  service in  Russian  said  only  that  the 

189 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

linkup was called off  “due to  deviations from the planned procedure for 
docking.”  The  word  that  the  flight  was  canceled  came  after  24hr  of 
silence, which had caused fears for  the safety of  the crew. Tass said Oct. 
12 that the capsule had returned safely, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:25am 
local time Oct.  11. 
U.S. officials speculated that,  like Soyuz 15 in Aug.  1974 and Soyuz23 
in Oct.  1976,  this mission  failed because  the  cosmonauts had  overshot 
the docking point and could not make another attempt because their bat- 
tery  power  allowed  insufficient  time  to   correct  the  navigational  error. 
When  a  crew  last  overshot its Salyut, 4mo  elapsed before another crew 
made  a docking  attempt.  ( W  Star,  Oct  10/77,  A-1;  Oct 11/77,  A-6;  W 
Post, Oct 11/77, A-1; Oct 12/77, A-21;  FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 9/77, 
Oct  10/77,  Oct  11/77) 

October  11:  ARC  announced  that  a  tegm  of  its  scientists had  made  a 
“major breakthrough” in explaining the origin of  life.  ARC’S Dr.  James 
Lawless,  team  leader,  presented  a  report  on  the  work  to   the  Pacific 
Conference on Chemistry meeting  in Anaheim,  Calif.  Chemical evolu- 
tion experiments in the past  several yrs  had  applied electrical discharges 
to   ammonia.,  methane,  and  water  to   produce  basic  life  molecules,  in- 
cludiog  amino  acids  and  nucleotides,  but  with  no  indication  how  the 
molecules  formed  organic building  blocks in ever more complex groups 
&til  a  group appeared  that could  replicate  itself. 
The  new  experiments  had  used  metal  clays  normally  present  on  
primordial  earth  and  ocean  shores.  Mixing  amino  acid  solutions  with 
everyday metal  clays showed  that the clays attracted the thousand vary- 
ing  aminos  out  of  solution.  One  nickel-containing  clay  preferentially 
attracted the 20 amino acids making up protein, main ingredient of  living 
cells; of  8 clays tried,  only the nickel clay did this. The other metal clays 
destroyed nonprotein-forming amino acids faster  than protein  acids, in- 
dicating how  the life-forming  acids were  selected and concentrated. Ex- 
periments simulating tidal action on the clays produced chains of  amino 
acids,  as many as 8 so far; time would eventually produce the far longer 
chains  found in  life.  A  zinc clay,  only one of  9 metal  clays tried,  had  a 
similar  effect  on  DNA  building  blocks;  the  presence  of  metals  in  life 
systems  today  had  resulted  from  prebiological  chemistry,  Dr.  Lawless 
said.  (ARC Release 77-43;  NASA  Release 77-220) 

JPL  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Rochus  E.  Vogt,  professor  of 
physics  a t   CalTech  and  principal  investigator  for  the  cosmic  ray  ex- 
periments on   Voyagers I  and 2,  as chief  scientist. (JPL anno Oct  11/77) 

October 12: NASA’s  Space Shuttle orbiter  Enterprise successfully went 
through  its fourth  free flight with its streamlined 57001b tailcone off, in- 

190 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

OCTOBER 

creasing drag and  reducing  the  altitude achievable by  its 747  carrier  (to 
about  18 0oOft)  as well  as the  distance  it  could  glide  after  separation. 
Three  previous  free  flights,  tailcone on,  had  lasted  about  5.5min  each; 
this  time  the  Enterprise,  fitted  with  16 OOOlb  of  dummy  engines  with 
nozzles  8ft  in  diameter,  wide  enough  for  a  man  t o   stand  upright  in, 
would  have  a glide  time of  only  about 3 min. 
Pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly,  alternating at the controls of  the 
orbiter, brought it to  a stop on  a runway a t  Edwards AFB after recording 
a touchdown speed of  212mph  and 5000ft of  landing roll. NASA’s  goal 
had  been  no more  than  9OOOft  of  landing roll,  showing that  the orbiter 
could land at any major airport in the world. Fitzhugh L. Fulton, pilot of 
the  747  carrier  plane,  said  the  aerodynamic  resistance  created  by  the 
dummy engines had  caused “heavy shaking” on both the orbiter and the 
747 during the hr-long ascent to launch altitude. Tom McMurtry, copilot 
of  the 747,  said  the turbulence resembled “what you might get in a com- 
mercial airliner  . . . only we  couldn’t  change altitudes to get  away  from 
it  as an airline pilot  does.” 
NASA  officials said the  last  free flight,  scheduled for Oct.  26,  would 
end  with  the  microwave  landing  system  controlling  the  touchdown. 
(DFRC  Release 31-77; postflt  rept,  free flt 4,  SpSh orbiter ALT;  NYT ,  
Oct 13/77, A18;  WPo s t ,  Oct 13/77, C-11; LA  Times, Oct 13/77,  1; JSC 
Roundup,  Oct  14/77,  1;  WS ta r ,  Oct  13/77,  A-10;  C  Trib, Oct  13/77, 
1-13) 

JSC  announced  that  another  set  of  20  Shuttle  astronaut  candidates 
would  report  to   the  center  Oct.  17  for  physical  examinations  and  in- 
dividual  interviews.  All  of  this  group  would  be  mission  specialist  ap- 
plicants, 8 of  them women. Applicants screened at JSC so far had totaled 
140, 77 of  them pilots and 63 mission  specialists; the  17 women were  all 
mission specialist applicants. (JSC Release 77-59; NASA Release 77-21 8) 

NASA  announced that Dr.  David  R.  Scott,  director of  Dryden Flight 
Research Center,  would  leave  the agency  Oct.  30  to  form with  others a 
firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer.  Deputy Director 
Isaac  T.  Gillam  would  be  acting  director  until  a  replacement  was 
selected. Before becoming director of  DFRC in  1975, Dr. Scott had been 
deputy director since 1973. He had  left the astronaut corps in  1972, hav- 
ing  flown  on   Gemini  8,  Apollo 9,  and  as spacecraft  commander  of 
Apollo  15  (fourth  manned  lunar  landing,  during which  he  was  first  to 
visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been 
technical  assistant  to   the Apollo  program  manager  a t   JSC  and  special 
assistant  in  the  Apollo  spacecraft  program  office.  (NASA  anno  Oct 
12/77;  NASA  Release 77-217;  DFRC  Release 34-77) 

191 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

October 13: LaRC announced that NASA had awarded Boeing Commer- 
cial  Aircraft  Co.  a  $1.5  million  contract  t o   develop  advanced 
aerodynamic and active-control concepts for civil transport aircraft. The 
contract included 6 tasks that would  apply studies of  aircraft systems to  
initial  design  processers.  LaRC  would  manage  the  contract.  (LaRC 
Release 77-48; NASA  Release 77-219) 

October 14: NASA  announced plans  for Noise-Con  77,  third  in a series 
of  national conferences on noise control, to  be held a t  LaRC Oct.  17-19. 
Sponsored  jointly  by  the  Institute  of  Noise  Control  Engineering  and 
LaRC,  the  conference  would  center  on  transportation  noise.  Some 40 
technical  papers would  discuss control of  noise  from railways,  aircraft, 
motor vehicles, and highways,  as well as community impact of  transpor- 
tation  noise,  standards  and  measurements,  and  federal  programs  for 
noise control.  (NASA Release 77-221) 

October 17: NASA  announced  it had  selected 5 materials-processing ex- 
periments to  be  flown on an early orbital-test flight of  the Space Shuttle 
beginning  in  1979.  The Materials  Experiment  Assembly  (MEA)  would 
offer  scientists  an  interim  opportunity  t o   conduct  studies  before 
Spacelab missions  began;  it  would  be  automated  and unattended,  con- 
taining its own  power  source and a minicomputer  to  collect  data.  Prin- 
cipal investigators and their experiments were Dr.  J. Bruce Wagner,  Jr., 
Ariz.  State  Univ. -solid  electrolytes  containing  dispersed  particles; 
Ralph A.  Happe,  Rockwell Intl. - containerless preparation of  advanced 
optical  glass;  Dr.  Herbert  Wiedemeier,  Rensselaer  Polytechnic 
Inst. -vapor  growth of  alloy-type semiconductor  crystals; Dr.  John W. 
Vanderhoff,  Sinclair  Laboratories,  Lehigh  Univ. - large-particle-size 
monodisperse  latexes;  Dr.  S.H.  Gelles,  Gelles  Associates,  Columbus, 
0. -liquid  miscibility gap materials.  (NASA Release 77-222) 

0  Wallops Flight Center announced its annual Woman’s Day observance 
Nov.  2  would  stress the need  for  equal opportunity  for women  to con- 
tribute to  all phases of  national life.  Speakers would  be  Lillian Levy  of 
NASA Hq and Jill Barbon of the Salisbury, Md.,  chamber of  commerce. 
(WFC Release 77-13) 

0  The Dept.  of  Transportation  announced  it  had  awarded contracts  to  
Perkin Elmer Gorp, and United Technologies Inc.  for devices to measure 
the effect of jet-engine emissions on the stratosphere. The first contract, 
valued a t  $385 OOO,  would be for a system to  measure nitrogen oxides in 
the  stratosphere between  50 OOO  and  115 OOOft  altitude and  predict jet- 
emission  effects.  The  second  contract,  funded  jointly  at  $458 OOO  by 
FAA, NASA, EPA, USAF,  and the U.S.  Navy, would document and ex- 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

OCTOBER 

plain  the differences in reported measurements of nitrogen oxides in jet- 
engine  exhausts,  comparing  optical  measurements  with  the  sampling 
technique.  (DOT Release 98-77) 

October  18:  NASA  announced it  had  reached  an   agreement  with  the 
Navajo Tribal Council in A rk .   for a 2-yr project t o  use Landsat data for 
an automated resource inventory of  the 16-million-acre reservation in the 
southwest U.S. 
The tribe had asked NASA whether satellite and aerial remote sensing 
could  help  solve  inventory  and multiple-use management  problems  in- 
cluding range rehabilitation,  timber, agriculture, harvest prediction, and 
wildlife counts.  Phase one of  the project would  demonstrate how  Land- 
sat  data  could  apply  t o  specific  tribal  needs  and  changes  in  resources; 
phase  two would  include  training of  tribal personnel and setting up  an 
operational  system  at Navajo  headquarters.  The Navajo  would  assist 
other  tribes  to   realize  the  benefits  of  satellite  information  systems. 
(NASA  Release 77-223) 

0  DFRC  announced  that  the  final  free  flight  of  the  Shuttle  orbiter, 
scheduled for Oct.  26,  would  have Fred Haise and Gordon Fullerton as 
pilots, and that Prince Charles, Britain’s  Prince of Wales, would attend. 
(DFRC Release 35-77) 
*  The Dept.  of  Transportation reported it had asked for suggestions on 
solving  the  problem  of  ozone  irritation  encountered  on  high-altitude 
flights.  Ozone,  a colorless atmospheric gas  found in  increasingly higher 
concentration  a t  higher  altitudes, had been  identified earlier in  1977 as 
the cause of eye, nose, and throat irritation in airline passengers and crew 
on  high-altitude  long-range  flights.  Higher  concentrations  were  found 
closer  to   earth  in  late  winter  and  early  spring months,  increasing  the 
number  of  aircraft exposed. 
The FAA  had  issued an advisory on avoiding encounters with ozone, 
but  wa s   now  seeking  a  permanent  solution  and  soliciting  views  of 
manufacturers,  crew  organizations,  health  groups,  high-altitude  re- 
searchers,  and  airline  customers,  to  be  submitted  by  Dec.  6.  (FAA 
Release  100-77) 

October 19: ESA announced  that the tandem launch of  a single Delta of 
the  U.S. ISEE-A  and  the  European  ISEE-B,  originally  scheduled  for 
Oct.  19 and postponed to Oct. 21, had been postponed again. NASA was 
making additional checks of  the Delta launch vehicle.  (ESA Release Oct 
19/77) 
*  The  Dept.  of  Commerce  announced  that  2  oceanographic  research 

193 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

ships  and  4  aircraft  had  scanned  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  during  Oct.  to 
demonstrate measurement  of  ocean  properties  using  satellite-borne in- 
strumentation. 
Dr.  Warren  Hovis,  director  of  NOM ’S   satellite  experiment 
laboratory,  said the program was a preliminary  to  launch in  1978 of  the 
Nimbus-G  with  a  coastal-zone color  scanner.  The joint  NASA-NOM  
tests  had  used  aircraft  equipped  with  models  of  the  scanner  to   record 
data  that  could  be  confirmed  by  surface  measurements  taken  on  the 
ships.  ( N O M  Release 77-265) 

The  Natl.  Science  Foundation  reported  that  federal  funding  for 
research and development had  risen significantly between fiscal yrs  1974 
and  1978,  having  shown  only  slight  growth  in  the  1%9-1974  period. 
Total  federal  W D  funding  for FY 1978 was  about  $26.3  billion,  $8.9 
billion more  than  for FY  1974. For  the  1974-1978  period,  6  functional 
areas  accounted  for  nearly  all  the  increase  in  federal support:  defense, 
44%;  energy,  25%;  space  and  health,  7%  each;  environment,  5%; 
science and technology base,  4%.  (NSF Release PR77-93) 

October 20:  JSC reported  the 8th group of  Shuttle astronaut applicants 
would  report  to the center Oct.  25  for physical  examinations and inter- 
views.  The 20 mission  specialist applicants in this group were all military 
except  for  one civilian;  they  represented  the USAF  (13),  the Army  (3), 
the  Navy  (2),  and  the  Marines  (1).  The  group  included  one  woman, 
USAF Capt.  Jane L.  Holley.  Of  the  160 applicants screened at JSC,  77 
wanted  to  be  pilots  and  83   mission  specialists.  (JSC  Release  77-66; 
NASA  Release 77-225) 

October 21: LaRC announced it would  hold  the 33rd annual completion 
exercises  Oct.  28  for  34  engineering  technicians  trained  a t   the  center. 
James P. Mitchell,  deputy administrator of  the Dept.  of  Labor’s Bureau 
of Apprenticeship and Training, would be keynote speaker. LaRC Direc- 
tor  Donald  P.  Hearth  would  preside  a t   the  ceremony  and  give  special 
recognition  to honor  graduates.  Woodrow W.  Midgette,  Jr.,  top honor 
graduate,  would  be  speaker  for  the  class  of  1977,  consisting  of  7  elec- 
trical  engineering  technicians;  7  electronics  technicians;  2  engineering 
draftsmen;  and  18  engineering  technicians  in  the  areas  of  aerospace 
models,  facility  operations,  materials  processing,  mechanical  develop- 
ment,  and systems environments.  (LaRC Release 77-5 1) 

NASA  announced  it  had  named  Dr.  James  J.  Kramer  associate ad- 
ministrator  for  aeronautics and space technology,  effective Oct.  23.  He 
had  been  acting  in  that  capacity  since  Dec.  1976.  Starting  a t   Lewis 
Research Center in  1951, Dr.  Kramer had come to  NASA Hq in  1971  as 

194 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

OCTOBER 

chief of OASTs noise and pollution reduction branch.  (NASA anno Oct 
21/77;  NASA  Release 77-227) 

0  The  Washington Post  reported  Senate confirmation  of  11 high-level 
nominees to the new Dept.  of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale 
D.  Myers,  former  NASA  associate  administrator  for  space  flight,  as 
undersecretary  of  DOE.  Myers,  an  aeronautical  engineer  with  North 
American  Rockwell  since 1943, had  joined NASA  in  Jan.  1970; he  had 
been  a  vice president  and manager  of  the Apollo program  at Rockwell. 
(WPOSt, OCt  21/77,  B-5) 

October 22: NASA  launched two international satellites, the U.S.  ISEE- 
A  and ESA’s  ISEE-B,  on a single Delta  rocket  a t  953am  EDT (1353hr 
GMT) from ETR  at Cape Canaveral into a highly elliptical orbit ranging 
from about 138,OOOkm  apogee t o  280km  perigee,  28.7”  inclination, and 
2.4-day  period. The ISEEs had  separated an hr after launch, the A craft 
(Isee 1 )  spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic and the B spacecraft (Isee 
2 )  spin  axis  parallel  to  the  ecliptic  to  permit  magnetometer  calibration 
and boom extension.  The satellites would measure earth’s  environment, 
assisted  by  a  third  spacecraft  ISEE-C  scheduled  for  launch  in  1978. 
(NASA Release 77-123;  ESA  Release Oct.  24/77;  MOR  S-862-77-01/02 
[prelaunch] Oct 11/77,  [postlaunch] Oct 25/77;  WPo s t ,  Oct 23/77, A13; 
W Star,  Oct 23/77,  A-2) 

October 23:  The  N Y   Times  reported  that  Capt.  Edgar  D.  Mitchell, 
astronaut on the Apollo 14 mission, had taken 55 special stamp covers on 
his  flight and had  just  sold  the  first  for  $4200. The San Francisco firm 
that auctioned the stamp earlier in Oct. said the buyer was a major stamp 
dealer in  Italy. 
In  1972 NASA  had  reprimanded the Apollo  15 astronauts  for  smug- 
gling 400 first-day covers to  the moon and selling 100; the 300 covers not 
sold were turned over to  the U.S.  for “safe storage in the archives.” The 
Apollo  14 crew  had  carried 200  silver medals on the  1971 moon  flight, 
keeping  150 for  “private  use,”  but  had  not  been  reprimanded because 
none of  the medals had been sold. The Calif.  dealer said Mitchell, now a 
civilian living in Fla.,  had brought in the covers for appraisal and was ad- 
vised to  find the market value by selling one. NASA  said it knew Mitchell 
had taken the covers in his “personal preference kit”; when it asked about 
them,  he replied  “It’s.none  of  your  business,” and a  few days later  had 
announced his retirement. Official NASA comment on the sale:  “Unfor- 
tunate.”  (NYT ,  Oct 23/77,  45) 

October 24: FBIS said the USSR  in  1978 would  install a second genera- 
tion  of  laser  long-distance  satellite rangefinders usable  in  daylight,  in- 

195 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

creasing  the  range  t o   40 ,Wkm   with  an  accuracy  of  k1Ocm.  USSR 
engineers were working in Czechoslovakia on the new  rangefinder.  The 
report  said  Intercosmos  engineers  from  Hungary,  East  Germany, 
Poland, Czechoslovakia,  and the USSR  had built a rangefinder measur- 
ing  distances  up  t o   3000km  accurate  up  to   f 5 m ;   however,  it  could 
operate only at night.  Ground stations in Poland, Egypt, Bolivia,  India, 
and Cuba had  used  the  device.  (FBIS,  Intl Serv  in Russian,  Oct 24/77) 

October 25: NASA announced it had agreed with the St. Regis Paper Co. 
in N.Y.  to  use the Landsat for monitoring from 9OOkm  (56Omi) commer- 
cial timberlands owned by  the company over a 5-state area in Fla.,  Ga., 
Ala.,  Miss.,  and La. St.  Regis would  use the satellite data to  manage its 
timberland.  JSC would manage development of  an automatic system for 
classifying  forested  areas,  to   identify  kinds  of  trees,  estimate  timber 
volume, and detect changes in health or growth of  the forests, combining 
the  new  system with existing data from aerial photography  and ground 
surveys.  Software and techniques  from this  first major undertaking be- 
tween NASA  and a  private company would  be  in the public domain,  to  
benefit other forest-resource managers. Past cooperative uses of Landsat 
had been between NASA and other U.S.  or foreign government agencies. 
(NASA Release 77-226; JSC Release 77-73) 

October 26:  NASA  reported  that  the  fifth  and  final  free  flight  of  the 
Shuttle orbiter Enterprise,  testing  its braking on a concrete runway,  had 
successfully made  a landing on  concrete a t  Edwards AFB-although 
it 
had  a bumpy  finale when  the  orbiter  touched  down and bounced  twice 
before  stopping. 
At a postflight press conference, pilots Fred W.  Haise and C. Gordon 
Fullerton  said  the  craft  had  reached  speeds  higher  than  expected  after 
separating from its Boeing  747 carrier.  Shortly after  8am local  time the 
747  had  taken  off  with  the  orbiter  attached  to   the  top  of  its  fuselage, 
climbing during the next  50  minutes to about 20 000ft altitude,  where it 
nosed  over  and began  to  dive.  At  about  17  000ft  the  orbiter  separated 
and came  straight down without  the turns made  in previous  flights;  the 
dive  angle  was  25-22”  compared  with  a  commercial  jetliner’s  descent 
slope of  about 3 ” .  Touchdown, which came lm in  55sec after separation, 
overshot the 5000ft mark  on the concrete runway  by  about  1000ft. The 
rear  landing gear  had  touched,  but  the  craft  hopped  back  into  the  air, 
bounced,  and tipped  slightly before  the pilots steadied it  and stopped  it 
with 2000ft  of  runway remaining.  Approach  speed had  reached 330mph 
on the indicators, and the pilots described “oddities in the way  the speed 
dropped” during the descent. 
Donald K. Slayton,  in  charge of the landing tests,  said engineers this 
week would check out the airspeed indicators and the vehicle’s calculated 

1% 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

OCTOBER 

energy profile,  but  further tests were not probable.  Plans for  future or- 
biter  landings would  change  on   the  basis  of  data  from  the  fifth  test, 
modifying  the  aim  point  t o  allow  for  higher  lift/drag  coefficients with 
the  tailcone  off  and  the  slower  bleed-off  of  airspeed.  (NASA  Release 
77-224;  postflt  rept  free  flight  5 ,   SpSh  orbiter ALT  NYT,  Oct  27/77, 
A-18;  LA   Times,  Oct  27/77,  2;  W Post,  Oct  27/77,  A10,  B-3;  JSC 
Roundup,  Oct 28/77,  1; AvWk ,  Oct 31/77,  16) 

0  NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A.  Frosch announced reorganization 
of  the  agency  effective Nov.  8  "to strengthen NASA  organization  and 
improve our effectiveness . . . we will reduce the number of  staff offices 
reporting directly t o  the Administrator." Headquarters operations would 
consist  of  3  functions:  the  office  of  the  Administrator,  for  general 
management;  the  chief  scientist, chief  engineer,  and  5  program  offices 
for  program  planning,  management,  and review;  and  8 staff  offices to  
give program,  staff,  and functional  support. Each  of  the 5  program of- 
fices would  have  an associate administrator to manage aeronautics  and 
space  technology;  space  sciences;  space  and  terrestrial  applications 
(formerly  applications);  space  transportation  systems  (formerly  space 
flight); and space tracking and data systems (formerly tracking and data 
acquisition). (NASA Release 77-228) 

October 27: NASA  launched  the  Navy's  Transat spacecraft a t  9:52pm 
PDT from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle into an  orbit with 
600.7nmi  apogee,  572.6nmi  perigee,  89.9"  inclination,  and  106.9min 
period.  The  spacecraft,  a  modified  Transit  navigation  satellite,  would 
join  5  others in  a  system  being  used  by  U.S.  Navy  and other  ships  for 
global navigation,  as  the  first to  carry  2 modified  transponders  with  a 
capability  called  Satrack  t o   support  Trident  (fleet  ballistic  missile) 
development. 
Built  by  Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  Applied  Physics Laboratory,  Transat 
would  receive,  translate,  and  relay  NavStar  global-positioning  signals 
simulating  a  Trident  missile  in  flight,  to   evaluate  Satrack  procedures 
before using them in Trident  test  flights and to  check  out Satrack proc- 
essing at JHU/APL.  NASA had agreed with DOD in Jan.  1970 to  launch 
Scouts,  carrying  15 Transit  satellites and  3 Transit  Improvement  Pro- 
gram (TIP) satellites so  far, the Navy to  reimburse NASA  for the launch 
vehicles,  launch  services,  and mission  support.  The Transit system  nor- 
mally operated 5  satellites, with 2 on standby. (Langley Researcher, Nov 
28/77,  2;  MOR  M-490-601-77-03 [prelaunch] Sept 30/77) 
NASA's  launch participation was  judged  successful as of  Nov.  8-10. 
(MOR M-490-601-7743  [postlaunch] Nov  15/77) 

0 F'BIS reported that the USSR had completed a series of  rocket launches 

197 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

in cooperation with France to compare procedures and instruments used 
by  the two countries in high-altitude atmosphere sounding.  The rockets 
were launched simultaneously from the French  space center a t  Kourou, 
French  Guiana,  and offshore from the Soviet research vessel Akademik 
Korolev recently at work with the U.S. off the Atantic coast. (FBIS, Tass 
in English, Oct 27/77) 
*  INTELSAT announced  that the People’s  Republic of  the Congo had 
become  the  100th member  of  the  organization  Oct.  26,  and  the  26th 
African nation to  join. Created in 1964 with an initial membership of  11 
nations,  INTELSAT was providing communications service through  152 
stations in 86 countries.  (INTELSAT Release 77-27-1) 

A 
October 28: MSFC  announced plans  for  a teleoperator retrieval system 
(a retrievable reusable low-thrust stage for maneuvering payloads  in low 
earth orbit) to  fly  on  the  Space Shuttle in  the  early  1980s, its  first use 
probably  a  Skylab-orbit  adjustment  to  permit  revisiting  or  control  its 
reentry  over  an  open  ocean  area.  Riding  into  orbit  on  the  Shuttle,  the 
TRS would be  deployed and remotely operated by  an astronaut aided by 
a  television  image  from  a  camera  mounted  on  the  TRS.  It  could  also 
maneuver  to  higher  orbit and  return,  using  its own  guidance and  com- 
puter systems, to be remotely controlled again for retrieval into the Shut- 
tle  when  it  came  within  range  of  the  TV  signal.  MSFC  would  manage 
development of  the TRS,  and Martin Marietta would  be  responsible for 
vehicle integration. (MSFC Release 77-201) 

0  INTELSAT  announced  that  Upper  Volta  had  become  the  lOlst 
member  of the organization Oct. 27, and the 27th African nation to  join. 
The Office des Postes et Telecommunications de Haute Volta had  signed 
the operating agreement for Upper  Volta.  (INTELSAT Release 77-28-1) 

October 30: The  Washington Post reported that NASA would  try to save 
the Skylab space station ‘’which is moving closer to earth and may  fall in 
bits and pieces over the next  few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch 
a ”remotecontrolled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new  orbit, 
where  it would  be  available for  future astronaut visits. 
The  118ft Skylab launched  in  1973 had  been  circling the globe  every 
1.5hr at a uxhn i  altitude. I t  had  been home  for three 3-man crews for as 
long as 12wk a t  a time;  its last 84-day manned mission in  1974 was  still 
the  world‘s  endurance  record  for  time  in  space.  (W  Post,  Oct  30/77, 
A-10) 

October  32:  The  Washington Star  reported  that  U.S.  and  European 
scientists were  planning  a  two-spacecraft mission to  an  unexplored  area 

198 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

OCTOBER 

of  space to  get  a  fiist look  a t   the sun and  its solar  system  from a new 
perspective. No spacecraft had as yet  ventured off the so-called plane of 
the ecliptic (the solar equatorial plane) by more than 15” latitude relative 
to  the sun. Using two spacecraft, one below the plane of  the ecliptic and 
the other in the usual latitude relative to  the sun,  scientists could  learn 
more  about  solar  physics  and  conditions  responsible for  variations in 
earth’s  climate. 
The  mission  would  use  two  unmanned  spacecraft weighing  650  to  
8001b  each,  launched by  a Space Shuttle. The report said NASA would 
request funds for the “solar polar” (or out-of-ecliptic, OOE) project in its 
next  budget,  giving  engineers  time  to   meet  a  favorable 10-day  launch 
period in Feb.  1983. ESA, whose members included most western Euro- 
pean nations, w a s  said to  be ready t o  share in the mission; i t  would build 
one of  the vehicles,  the U.S. the other. JPL  would manage NASA’s  part 
of the mission, estimated to  cost about $141 million. ( WStur, Oct 31/77, 
A-6) 
During  October:  The  USAF reported  that  the  fiist  two-seater  F-16 
airplane,  a  fighter-trainer version  known  as F-16B,  had  made  a  suc- 
cessful first flight a t  General Dynamics Corp.’s  Ft. Worth, Tex.  facility. 
The test  flights were  to  evaluate the handling of  this  version, weighing 
6OOlb less than the standard single-seat F-16 when fueled, and to  use rear- 
cockpit controls to  put i t  through takeoff and landing, formation flying, 
and  roll and pitch. 
The one- and two-seat versions of  the F-16 were almost identical in size 
and  appearance, each 48ft  long with  a 300ftz wing  area,  but  the F-16B 
had a larger canopy to  cover the second pilot and would carry 1100 fewer 
gallons of  fuel.  Development of  the new plane,  fiist fighter designed to 
withstand  forces up  to   9g,  was  managed  by  the Aeronautical  Systems 
Division a t  Wright Patterson Air  Force Base.  (AFSC Newsreview,  Oct 
77,  1) 
*  ERDA announced it had signed a contract with the Ford Motor Co., 
to  be managed by JdeRC,  for developing the Stirling passenger-car engine 
to  the point of  deciding in 8yr whether or not to  produce it commercially. 
A Stirling engine would be a t  least 30070 more fuel efficient than those of 
comparable size  and performance in  current cars.  It  differed from  the 
conventional internal combustion engine in being powered by  heat from 
an  external source: a burner using any of  a variety of  fuels  ww ld   heat 
hydrogen  gas inside the engine whose expansion and contraction would 
move pistons t o  generate power. 
Invented  in  the  1800s,  the  Stirling predated  the  internal-combustion 
engine and had been used  to  pump water  for mines and quarries. By  the 
1930s the availability of  gasoline-powered cars had overshadowed other 

199 

OCTOBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

development.  N.  V. Philips of  the Netherlands and United Stirling of 
Sweden  had  pioneered  and continued work  on  the Stirling engine  and 
had licensed Ford to  work on  it in 1971. ERDA and Ford had become in- 
terested  because of  the engine’s  high  fuel efficiency,  flexibility in choice 
of  fuels,  low noise and pollution, and good driving characteristics.  Cost 
of  the 8-yr effort would be about $160 million,  $110 million contributed 
by ERDA and $50 million by Ford; if  the Stirling should go into produc- 
tion,  Ford’s  investment  might  eventually  amount  to  more  than  $500  
million.  (ERDA Release 77-179) 

November 

November2: Marshall Space Flight Center director William R.  Lucas an- 
nounced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA 
t o  the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy 
manager  of  the Space Shuttle main  engine project since 1976 and served 
previously  as assistant manager  in  the  Shuttle  Projects Office.  (MSFC 
Release 77-206) 

November 3:  NASA  announced  that  biologists  working  for  it  and  the 
Natl.  Science Foundation had identified a “new” form of  life that might 
date  back  to   earth’s  first  billion  yr:  a  methane-producing  organism 
representing  what  might  be  the  oldest  form of  life  as well  as  a line  of 
evolution totally  separate from  the  two  traditionally  recognized  lines of 
bacteria,  and  animals and  plants.  A  research  team  headed  by  Dr.  Carl 
Woese  of  the Univ.  of  111.-Urbana,  described  as a  world  expert  on  the 
genetic code,  said the organisms were a distinct class no more related to  
typical bacteria than to  higher forms.  Biologists working with a group of 
methane-producing organisms had assumed they were ordinary bacteria; 
however,  analysis  of  ribosomal RNA  had  shown  the  genealogy  of  the 
new  form t o  be distinct from those of  both  bacteria and the animals or  
plants.  Dr.  Woese said  the  study might  shed light  on a missing  stage of 
evolution, the chemical stage that immediately preceded  identifiable life 
on earth.  (NASA Release 77-229) 

November 4:  Johnson Space Center  announced that  the ninth group of 
Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov.  7 for physicals and inter- 
views.  The group, 21  mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants, 
included  12 civilians; 2 were women,  bringing the number of  female ap- 
plicants  interviewed to  20.  Of  the military  applicants,  5  were  Navy;  4, 
USAF; and 1  each from the Army and Marines.  NASA had screened  183 
applicants so far, 79 seeking to  be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC 
Release 77-70; NASA  Release 77-232) 

0  JSC announced it had selected ILC Industries, Inc.,  of Fredrica, Md., 
to   negotiate  a  $1.2-million  contract  for  Shuttle  crew  equipment  and 
stowage provisions.  The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract running  from Jan. 
1978 to  the end of Sept. 1980 would cover items such as crew clothing, an 

201  

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

orbiter  survival kit,  and  personal  hygiene  kits,  as well  as  replacement, 
servicing, and maintenance, with special studies of  the crew equipment. 
(JSC Release 77-71) 

November 5: Today newspaper reported that two launch failures in Sept. 
a t  Cape Canaveral (explosions of  an Altas Centaur and a Delta rocket) 
had  altered the schedule to include launch of  a Meteosat Nov.  17  on a 
Delta; an  Intelsat Dec.  8 on an  Altas Centaur; and the Japanese comsat 
(originally scheduled for launch Dec.  8)  Dec.  14 on  another Delta. ESA’s 
Meteosat, originally scheduled to go on Nov.  15, had been put off 2 days 
for  further checkout of  the Delta; the Intelsat was put off  from Nov.  10 
to  Dec.  8  for  further  checkout of  the  Atlas  Centaur.  The  15  missions 
scheduled for launch from the Cape next yr had risen to  17: a FltSatCom 
launch  for  the Navy  originally scheduled  for  Dec.  15  had  been  pushed 
forward to  1978, and a launch of ESA’s OTS backup had been added to 
replace the one that  failed. (Today, Nov  5/77,  1A) 

November 7: Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had scheduled 
four ferry-test flights of  the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise mated to  its Boe- 
ing 747  carrier  for Nov.  14,  15,  17,  and  18  to prepare for  the orbiter’s 
cross-country  ferry  flight  in  March  1978  from  DFRC  to  MSFC  for 
ground-vibration  testing.  Later  flights  would  ferry  orbiters  from 
Rockwell  Intl.3  facility in  Calif.  to  Kennedy  Space Center  in Fla.  for 
launch. 
Besides determining the best speeds and altitudes for the ferry flights, 
the  test would  measure  holding-pattern and  engine-out performance in 
cruise  and  landinghikeoff.  The  747  crew  would  be  Fitzhugh  Fulton, 
commander,  and  Tom McMurtry,  pilot,  with  Victor  Horton  and  Skip 
Guidry  as  flight engineers;  the 4  had  flown the 747  in recent  approach 
and  landing  tests.  (DFRC  Release  37-77;  NASA  Release  77-233;  JSC 
Release 77-74) 

MSFC  reported  its  engineers  had  prepared  electronic simulations as 
dress rehearsals of  Shuttle orbital missions set for  1978, with computers 
in  the  roles  of  major  hardware.  The  simulations,  carried  out  a t   JSC, 
would  check out Shuttle avionics (electrical and electronic systems con- 
trolling the Shuttle during flight and sending signals to pilots and ground 
controllers monitoring the mission).  MSFC’s  engineers would  deliver to  
JSC  in  Jan.  1978  the  Marshall  mated-elements  system  (MMES) 
simulating items for which MSFC was responsible: main engines, solid- 
fuel  rocket  boosters,  and  external tank.  JSC would  provide an orbiter 
simulator and a computer to simulate Shuttle dynamics, a system called 
SAIL (Shuttle avionics integration laboratory) able to simulate a Shuttle 
flight beginning 20min before launch under  normal or abnormal condi- 

~ 

202 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

NOVEMBER 

tions. The MMES could simulate failure of almost any MSFC element to 
see  how  the  systems would  react with  one main  engine  out  or   if  high 
temperatures or  pressures  should  occur  in  vital  areas.  (MSFC  Release 
77-208) 

0  NASA  announced changes  in  organizations or  titles  for  operational 
purposes  during  the  transition  period  of  its  reorganization (Nov.  8  to 
Dec. 4)  in the Office of  Management Operations and the Office of  Exter- 
nal Relations, as well as establishment of  the position of special assistant 
to  the  Administrator  to  direct  implementation  of  the  reorganization. 
(NASA anno Nov 7/77) 

0  The Natl.  Geographic Society announced that Gen. William J. Evans 
would be recipient for  1976 of  the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy 
given annually since 1961 to  the USAF member, military or civilian, con- 
tributing  most  significantly to   U.S. aerospace  progress.  Gen.  Evans, 
commander of  the Air Force Systems Command at Andrews AFB from 
Sept.  1975  to  Dec.  1976,  had  played  a  key  role  in  developing defense 
space systems. (NGS Release Nov  7/77) 

November  8:  Langley  Research  Center  announced that  Dr.  Edgar  M. 
Cortright, who had been director of  the center 1968-1975  and was now a 
vice  president  of  Owens-Illinois,  Inc.,  would  speak  a t   the  center  colo- 
quium Nov.  14  on recent  developments in solar energy. 
Dr.  Cortright,  in  charge  of  overall  technical  direction  a t   the  large 
multinational corporation now  interested in uses of  solar energy, would 
discuss technical, economic, and legislative aspects of  the newly develop- 
ing  industry that would  depend  for  wide  application upon being  price- 
competitive with other energy sources in spite of  being inexhaustible and 
nonpolluting. The next few years would see its first domestic applications 
in  areas  such  as  space  heating  and  air  conditioning.  (LaRC  Release 
77-54) 

0  NASA  Hq  notified  its  employees  of  changes  in  operational  control 
during the  reorganization,  including requests  for communications serv- 
ices,  travel  services,  parking  permits  and other  transportation  support, 
assignment and  scheduling of  senior duty officers,  library services,  and 
other administrative functions. Changes would be effective immediately. 
(NASA anno Nov  8/77) 

November 9: The  Washington Post reported that Charles Kowal of  the 
Calif.  Inst.  of Technology had discovered “something out there in space 
that orbits the sun roughly 2 million miles out once every 115 yr or so,” 
but had not “the slightest idea” what  it was.  “You might  say it’s  a mini- 

203 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

planet,”  far  too  small  to   be  a  conventional planet  but  as big  as some 
asteroids,  about  100  to   4oOmi  in  diameter;  “It  really  doesn’t  resemble 
anything  else.  I t   is  definitely  not  a  satellite  of  any  planet  or  a 
comet.  . . .” 
Kowal,  a veteran  a t  discovering new  objects in  the solar  system, had 
detected the 13th moon of  Jupiter and another object that might be the 
14th; he had located the latest unusual body while working with the 48in 
telescope a t  Mt.  Palomar Oct.  18-19  and had been trying to  establish its 
orbit  so  that  other  astronomers could  check  i t   out.  Researchers would 
need 2 or 3wk  to  determine the orbit, lying beyond Saturn and possibly 
both inside and outside the orbit of  Uranus, “maybe going out as far as 
Neptune,” between 1.3 million and 2.7  million miles from the sun.  If  the 
object should be defined as a planet, Kowal by  tradition would have the 
privilege of  naming it.  Final decision on whether  or not i t  was  a planet 
would  be  made by  the  Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory  in Cam- 
bridge, Mass. (WP o s t ,  Nov  9/77,  A-17) 

November IO:  The Chicago Tribune reported that astronaut Walt Cun- 
ningham had written “the first kiss-and-tell treatise about the space pro- 
gram,”  a  book  called  The All-American Boys,  intended  as a  “candid, 
close-up, even critical look” a t  NASA,  the space program, and his fellow 
“partynauts,” none of  whom had dared to be  as critical as Cunningham 
in his  first “but probably not  last” book.  The review said the book was 
“about  people - imperfect  mortal  men - and  what  happens  when  they 
suddenly  find  themselves  cast  as  superheroes  in  a  world  that  literally 
knows no bounds.”  (C Trib, Nov  10/77,  1-17) 

November  11:  Lewis  Research  Center’s  2-yr  program  of  sampling  air 
around  the  world  to  detect  substances detrimental to   the environment 
had  been  unable to  cover  the polar  regions,  the Lewis News  said, until 
last month when its air monitors rode the polar route on Pan American’s 
50th anniversary flight. 
Known as GASP (global air sampling program),  the LeRC effort had 
used instruments designed a t  the center to  detect and measure small par- 
ticles  and  pollution-related  gases,  as   well  as carbon  monoxide,  water 
vapor,  ozone,  and  various  other  oxides,  operating  automatically  and 
recording data on magnetic tape for analysis a t  NASA labs and distribu- 
tion  to   scientists  and  engineers  anywhere  for  air-quality  evaluation. 
Sampling the upper-air over the poles would show “what clean air is ac- 
tually  like,”  said  GASP  director  Porter  J.  Perkins.  “What  kind  and 
amount of manmade pollutants are up there, if  any? Especially are wejn- 
terested in fluorocarbons from aerosol cans . . . What we may  find . . . 
may  conceivably alter presumptions we’ve  made  about  global distribu- 
tion of  certain airborne contaminants.” (Lewis News, Nov  11/77,  3 )  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1917 

NOVEMBER 

0  KSC’s  Spaceport News reported  on Center  efforts  to  recover  launch- 
vehicle  and  payload  wreckage  from  the  “unprecedented” back-to-back 
explosions of  a Delta and an Atlas Centaur carrying an OTS and an In- 
telsat spacecraft. 
In  “the  most  comprehensive  and  painstaking  recovery  in  the  Space 
Center’s  history,”  land,  sea, and  air  crews  searched  every  foot  of  the 
50miz impact area. Two Patrick AFB helicopters and a private chopper 
worked to  spot scattered wreckage from the air; the USAF crew made 19 
flights in 2wk,  with  a  total  of  88hr in the air,  covering a  12miz area and 
locating  about  95%  of  the  wreckage  recovered.  Ground  crews  in  ar- 
mored  personnel carriers  and  sea  crews  in  Navy  and private  craft  then 
took over  to  retrieve and identify each piece,  check  it  for live ordnance, 
and  catalog  its  recovery  location.  USAF  ordnance  disposal  personnel 
often  had  t o  penetrate  thick,  snake-infested  vegetation  to   reach  Delta 
and Atlas  Centaur  fragments.  Personnel from Por t  Everglades and the 
Navy’s  harbor-clearance  unit  using  an  Air  Force  landing  craft-utility 
(LCU)  boat  retrieved  the Delta’s  solid-fuel motor #1  from the water  as 
prime  suspect  in the OTS launch  failure. 

The teams worked  from early morning t o  dusk,  even over weekends, 
and  recovery  work  for  the Delta was  still under  way.  Hundreds of  per- 
sons helped  on the  recovery,  from  directors t o  office clerks.  Personnel 
from  KSC  had  the  aid  of  representatives  from  McDonnell  Douglas, 
General Dynamics, Patrick AFB, and Pan American Airways operations 
in  the  extensive  ground  search.  To  reward  the  combined  efforts,  KSC 
would  present  a  group achievement award  t o  the Delta  134/Atlas  Cen- 
taur 43 recovery team at an awards ceremony Nov.  22. (Spaceport News, 
Nov  11/77,  4) 

0  MSFC  reported  successful completion of  structural tests on the Space 
Shuttle external tank’s  intertank  section,  carrying  the attach  points  for 
the Shuttle’s two  solid-fuel rocket boosters and subject to heavy loading 
both  on   the  launch  pad  and  during  flight  while  the  boosters  were 
thrusting. 
MSFC  engineers would  now  proceed with  vibration  tests  on the  for- 
ward portion of  the external tank ,  the liquid-oxygen container, attached 
to  the  intertank.  Structural  tests  would  follow  later  in  1978.  (MSFC 
Release 77-212) 

0  JSC announced  that  the  lo th  group of  Shuttle astronaut applications 
would  report to  the center Nov.  14 for physical examinations and inter- 
views.  This group consisted  of  24 mission  specialist applicants and one 
pilot  applicant;  17  were  civilians,  1  a  woman,  and  8  were  from  the 
military-  3 each from the USAF and Navy,  1 each from the Marines and 

205 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

Coast Guard. This group would bring the total t o  80 pilot applicants and 
128 mission  specialist (21 women)  applicants screened at  JSC.  In  Dec., 
NASA  hoped  to  name as many  as 20 in each category for 2 yrs’  further 
training before  final selection as astronauts. (JSC Release 77-75;  NASA 
Release 77-236) 

JSC announced that NASA  and the Soviet Academy of Science would 
send  representatives  to   a meeting  Nov.  14-17  in  Moscow  t o  discuss  a 
joint program  for the 1980s using the flexible delivery and large capacity 
of  the Space Shuttle and the Salyut’s longer stay time  in orbit. Dr.  Noel 
W.  Hinners,  NASA’s  associate administrator  for  space  science,  would 
head  the  U.S.  delegation,  and  Dr.  Boris  Petrov,  chairman  of  the 
academy’s  Intercosmos council,  would  head  the Soviet delegation.  (JSC 
Release 77-78;  NASA  Release 77-234;  FBIS, Moscow  Dom  Sv in Rusn, 
Nov  18/77) 

NASA  announced that Wallops Flight Center  would  host  the 8th an- 
nual meeting  of  the NASA-Soviet Space Biology and Medicine working 
group Nov.  19-25,  preceded  by  a  workshop  Nov.  16-18  on  simulated 
weightlessness,  as part  of  a continuing program under  a 1971 agreement 
between  NASA  and  the  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences.  Meeting  par- 
ticipants  would  discuss  biomedical  results  of  the  Cosmos 936  mission 
carrying U.S.  experiments, the Sulyut 5 / S O y U Z   19 mission, and a JSC test 
demonstrating  Spacelab  missions,  as well  as research  on  space motion 
sickness and health in weightlessness.  Dr.  David Winter, NASA’s  direc- 
tor  for  life  sciences,  would  head  the  U.S.  delegation,  and  Dr.  Rufus 
Hessberg,  director  of  space medicine,  would  head  U.S.  workshop  par- 
ticipants.  Soviet leader at both meetings would be Dr. Nikolai Gurovsky 
of  the  Soviet  Ministry  of  Health.  (JSC  Release  77-78;  NASA  Release 
77-234;  WFC Release 77-15) 

Communications  Satellite Corporation  (ComSatCorp)  announced  it 
would buy back  1.5 million shares of  its common stock for $37 cash per 
share until Dec.  6. The organization had decided on the repurchase as a 
preliminary step in possible future acquisitions, and a restructuring of its 
accounts  to  show  a substantial debt,  as the  FCC had  indicated its  rate 
making would be based on such a debt in the organization’s capital struc- 
ture.  ComSatCorp emphasized that it was currently debt free.  (ComSat- 
Corp Release 77-28) 

November 14: Despite NASA’s  failure to  win FY 1979 funding for a new 
Mars mission,  such  a  mission  remained  the  major  planning  element  in 
the agency’s  planetary programs office, Aviation  Week reported. A Mars 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

NOVEMBER 

rovedorbiter  mission  had  strong  support  from  the  Natl.  Academy  of 
Sciences, to lay the groundwork for a sample-return mission using either 
briefing, T . Thomas  Young,  NASA’s  director  of  planetary programs, 
Martian-  bit rendezvous or direct ascent from earth to Mars. At a KSC 
said  the  highest  priority missions NASA  might  implement  “in  the  near 
term” would include the Venus-orbiting imaging radar  (VOIR), a lunar- 
polar  orbiter,  a  Saturn  orbiter  probe,  and  a  rendezvous  with  comet 
Halley or Encke, or  both,  or possibly with  an asteroid. 
“As we  go  through  the  budgetary  process,  on  one  side  I  wish  Mars 
would go away,” Young said. “But when you stop and think about rivers, 
volcanoes, enormous Mars icecaps,  the chemistry potential for life, and 
the  atmosphere,  you  realize  that  understanding Mars  is  so  important 
toward understanding where earth has been and is going that you’ve  got 
to  treat  it  in  a  responsible manner.”  He  said  NASA  planning  should 
benefit  from  the  2.4m-diameter  space  telescope,  aimed  primarily  at 
bodies  outside the  solar  system but  sure t o  provide  significant data  on 
objects nearer earth.  (AvWk ,  Nov  14/77,  5 5 )  

0  Av  Wk reported  the  Intl.  Telecommunications Union’s  frequency 
board had distributed to  its 100-plus member nations the technical details 
of  a  USSR  plan  to  launch  7  geostationary Volna  satellites for  global 
maritime and air communications service. Members questioning possible 
interference with  existing  or  projected  systems had  until  Jan.  9  to   re- 
spond. The 7 spacecraft would work  in separate systems: numbers 2,  4, 
and  6 would  each  operate in 4  frequency bands,  2 allocated exclusively 
for  mobile  maritime  service  and  2  for  mobile  aeronautical  service. 
Numbers  1, 3,  5 ,   and  7 would  also use  these bands,  plus  a 240-4OOmc 
band now used by  the US Navy for its maritime service which the Volnas 
would  use  for  land-mobile service. The Volna proposal did not  include 
fixed  shore  terminals,  although  USSR  officials  had  said  the  system 
would  be  a  national  rather  than  international  system.  (A vWk ,  Nov 
14/77,  20) 

November 15:  JSC announced it  had  signed a  supplemental agreement 
with  Rockwell  Intl.  Corp.  for engineering-change orders  on  the  Space 
Shuttle orbiter.  The  supplement,  valued  at  about  $226 million,  would 
bring the value of  the Rockwell contract to about $3.2 billion.  The sup- 
plement  would  cover  changes such  as  addition of  lightning protection, 
payload and systems integration, avionics changes, provision of  spares, 
and  support of  the carrier  aircraft  during ALT.  (JSC Release 77-76) 
JSC  announced  it  had  signed  a  contract  modification  with  Ford 
Aerospace  covering  hardware  and  software  systems  engineering,  plus 
maintenance  and  operation  of  JSC’s  mission  control  center and  other 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS.  1977 

ground-based data systems. The modification, valued at more than $1.4 
million,  would  bring  the  value  of  the  Ford  contract  to   about  $51.3 
billion.  (JSC Release  77-77) 

November 16: NASA  announced i t  would join with Canada in a 3-day 
meeting  Nov.  29-Dec.  1  to   assess  performance  of  Cts,  world’s  most 
powerful comsat, now  in orbit  for  nearly 2yr. The meeting would  hear 
experimenters  discuss  their  results  and  the  social,  technical,  and 
economic aspects of CTS-type comsats. Canada and the U .S .  had shared 
time on Cts, which p e d  a LeRC-developed transmitter tube to  operate in 
a new  frequency band a t  power  levels  10 to  20 times higher than those of 
other  comsats,  making  it  possible  to   use  smaller  and  less  expensive 
ground  receivers.  Cts  had  permitted  2-way  TV and  voice  contact  ex- 
periments for health, education, business, and similar purposes. Besides 
managing all U .S .   experiments on  Cts. LeRC had  also used  a portable 
earth terminal in an  over-the-road van resembling a TV studio to  connect 
the satellite with  local events to  be broadcast.  (NASA Release  77-237) 

MSFC reported that DOD had lent NASA a crew of Navy divers for 2  
yrs  to   support  tests  in  the  neutral  buoyancy  simulator  studying 
weightlessness.  All 5  had been fleet-salvage divers for the Navy with 5  to  
17 y r s  experience in scuba, hard hat, mixed-gas, and other types of  diving 
apparatus. Selected for  their  ability  to  use  special tools  to  assemble or 
dismantle structures or equipment underwater, the crew would help test 
hardware,  instruments, and  tools  to  be  used  in  space and would  work 
underwater in full-scale Shuttle or Spacelab mockups to  aid engineers in 
planning contingency procedures,  equipment operation, space construc- 
tion,  and other manned-mission activities. 
Each  trainee working  underwater  in  a  space suit would  have 2 Navy 
divers responsible for  his  safety, with  others assigned to  prepare hard- 
ware and ensure the necessary tools were  in place before the test started. 
During the test, divers would  stand by  to  retrieve dropped tools or reset 
apparatus for  repeat  testing; between tests,  the divers would  dismantle, 
remove,  or  rearrange  hardware  under  water  or   install  new  hardware, 
Chief  Petty Officer Richard Wiebe,  a veteran  diver with  17 yrs  in  the 
Navy, said the crew had found work on the Shuttle program challenging. 
(Marshall Star, Nov  16/77,  4) 

November 17: NASA reported that a team of  researchers using  ultrasen- 
sitive radio equipment aboard an Ames Research Center U-2 jet aircraft 
to  measure the background microwave radiation in the cosmos had  con- 
cluded that the event initiating the universe had begun not with a violent 
and uncontrolled “big bang” but with “an extremely smooth process,” in 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

NOVEMBER 

which matter and energy were uniformly distributed and kept expanding 
at an equal rate in all directions. 
Drs.  k c h a r d  Muller and George Smoot, with graduate student Marc 
Gorenstein,  of  the  Lawrence  Laboratory  and  the  Univ.  of  Calif.  a t  
Berkeley,  had designed and operated the radio equipment for the project 
funded  by  NASA  and  the  Dept.  of  Energy.  The  plane  had  flown  a t  
65,000ft altitude above 90% of  earth’s atmosphere to  make the sensitive 
experiments indicating that  the Milky Way  galaxy (including earth and 
its solar system) was flying through space toward the constellation Hydra 
a t  a uniform speed of more than 1 million mph-so  uniform that “it pro- 
vides a universal reference for measuring this motion,” said Gorenstein. 
The  large-scale regularity  found in  the expansion of  the universe made 
the speed of  the local motion discovered for the earth “all the more sur- 
prising,” said Dr. Muller. Furthermore, the measurements “seem to  show 
that there is no rotation of  the universe,” Dr. Smoot said, which was  sur- 
prising  because  “we  can  see  that  everything  within  the  universe  is 
rotating-planets,  s ta rs ,   and galaxies.  If  there is rotation it has to  be less 
than  one  hundred  millionth  of  a  rotation  in  the  last  billion 
years.  .  . Either conditions before  the beginning were  very regular,  or 
processes we don’t yet know about worked to  make the universe extreme- 
ly uniform.” The uniformity was greater than 1 part in 1000 for matter, 1 
in  3000  for  energy,  and  1 in  10 000  for  expansion.  (NASA  Release 
77-235;  ARC Release  77-45) 

NASA announced i t  had appointed Raymond A.  Kline as associate ad- 
ministrator  for management  operations,  effective Nov.  20.  Coming  to  
NASA Hq in 1968, he had been acting associate administrator for center 
operations from  July of  this year.  Previously he  had  served for 6yr  on 
Dr.  Wernher  von  Braun’s  executive staff  a t  MSFC.  (NASA  anno Nov 
17/77) 

November 21:  NASA announced that the next  launch of  an Atlas Cen- 
taur rocket from KSC would be no earlier than Jan. 6,1978, carrying an  
Intelsat  IVA  commercial  comsat.  Originally  scheduled  for  launch  in 
Nov.,  the mission was  f i s t  delayed for investigation of  a previous Atlas 
Centaur launch that failed Sept. 29. That investigation was  almost com- 
plete;  the  associate  administrator  for  transportation  systems,  John 
Yardley, was to  receive a report in early Dec.  The postponement to  Jan. 
was  not  caused  by  the  investigation, NASA  said,  but  by  discovery of 
faulty feedback transducers in the Atlas engine-control actuators during 
routine testing. The new  date would  allow removal  and replacement of 
components  from  that  manufacturing  batch  and  revalidation  of  the 
engine systems.  (NASA Release 77-241) 

209 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

*  NASA  announced tentative  selection of  18 scientists to participate in 
the Space Telescope project.  The 10-ton spacecraft scheduled for Shuttle 
launch  in  1983 to  orbit  at 500km (310mi) altitude would make observa- 
tions  deeper  into space, and with  more detail,  than  heretofore possible, 
covering  about  350  times  the  volume  of  space  now  visible  from earth- 
based  telescopes.  I t   had  been  designed  for  remote  operation  from  the 
ground,  including  maintenance or  retrieval  by  a  space-suited astronaut 
for return to earth to  be overhauled and relaunched.  The telescope could 
accommodate 5  different  instruments  at  its  focal plane:  both  the  faint- 
object  camera  (ESA)  and  the wide-field  camera  could  cover  ultraviolet 
and blue spectra, the latter the red and near-infrared regions as well;  the 
two  spectrographs would  offer  a range  of  resolution  impossible with  a 
single  instrument;  and the  photometer  could  calibrate the other  instru- 
ment  and  image the galactic background.  (NASA Release 77-239) 

*  NASA  announced that  on Nov.  29 it would present  first results of  the 
scientific  experiments  on  high-energy  astronomy  observatory Heao  I 
launched Aug.  12.  Dr.  Noel  Hinners,  associate  administrator for  space 
science; Dr.  Frank B.  McDonald of  Goddard Space Flight Center, proj- 
ect scientist; and principal investigators for the experiments would report 
findings on pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes.  Scien- 
tific  instruments  on  the  observatory  offered  highly  sensitive  detection 
and  resolution  of  x-rays  emitted  by  stellar  sources  throughout  the 
universe;  the  spacecraft,  rotating  end over  end,  could  survey  the entire 
sky within  6mo.  (NASA Release 77-242) 

November 22: NASA  launched the ESA Meteosat  at 8:35pm  EST  from 
the Eastern Test Range on a Delta vehicle into a synchronous transfer or- 
bit  with  37 OOlkm  apogee,  147km perigee,  and  27.5"  inclination.  The 
apogee boost motor fired a t  1:19 pm EST Nov.  23 to  begin maneuvering 
it  to   a  position  on  the  Greenwich  meridian  at  0"  longitude  above  the 
equator,  where  it  would  provide  long-range  forecasting  coverage  to  
Europe,  the Near  East,  and Africa  for  at least  3yr. 
The cylindrical craft 3.2m  long and 2.lm  in diameter weighed 697kg a t  
launch  and  300kg  in  orbit;  its  payload  was  a  telescope  radiometer  to  
observe earth and cloud formations, providing relay and transmission of 
meteorological data. The World Meteorological Organization had set up 
a chain of 5  such satellites,  1 European,  1 Soviet, 1 Japanese, and 2 U.S. 
Besides transmitting t o  user stations the data from a center at Darmstadt, 
West  Germany,  Meteosat would  relay Atlantic Ocean  images  from the 
U.S.  Goes. (NASA Release 77-230; MOR  M-492-102-77-01  [prelaunch] 
Nov  16/77,  [postlaunch] Feb 28/78;  KSC Spaceport News Nov  11177,l; 
ESA  releases Nov  3/77,  Nov  16/77,  Nov  23/77) 

210 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

NOVEMBER 

November  22:  MSFC  announced  it  had  awarded  t o   Martin  Marietta 
Corp.  a $1.735 million contract for analysis and design activities needed 
for  a  preliminary  design  review  in  March  1978  of  the  teleoperator 
retrieval  system(TRS). 
MSFC had been managing development of  the TRS to adjust the orbit 
of  Skylab [see Nov. 21,  based on in-house NASA studies and earlier work 
by Martin Marietta on the astronaut-maneuvering unit  and a free-flying 
teleoperator  system.  The  contractor  would  make  wide  use  of  already 
qualified hardware in preparing for TRS assembly,  test, and integration. 
(MSFC Release 77-220) 

November  23: The Marshall  Star  reported  that,  before  the  real  Shuttle 
orbiter  arrived  in  Ala.  next  year,  a  homemade  orbiter  constructed  of 
scrap rocket parts  and steel beams would  stand  in  for  it during practice 
lifts  into the  tower  where  the  real  thing  would  be  tested.  The  stand-in 
would  first  make  use  of  the  device  that  would  remove  the  Enterprise 
from its 747 carrier, then follow the route to be taken by the real orbiter, 
in  order  to  check  clearances on  the  sides.  Its major  tryout  would  come 
when MSFC engineers put  it into the 430ft  (131m) test stand to  see what 
effect the wind  would  have  on  installation. 
The simulator, basically a motor casing from a Titan solid-fuel rocket 
lof t  (3.04m)  in diameter and 80ft (24.39m) long with added framing, col- 
lars, nose and tail  structures,  and wings  plus  aluminum sheeting for  the 
outer skin, would closely match the Enterprise in size, shape, weight, and  
center of  gravity.  After  its performance at MSFC,  it would  go by  barge 
to KSC  to  take  part  in  launch-procedure checkouts,  and from there  to  
Vandenberg  AFB  for  DOD  use  in  preparing  Shuttle  launch  facilities. 
(Marshall Star, Nov  23/77,  4) 

MSFC  announced it would  conduct on Dec.  1 at the Natl.  Parachute 
Test Range in Calif. the third airdrop test of a parachute system designed 
to   recover  the  Shuttle’s  reusable  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters.  Royce 
Mitchell  of  MSFC  said  the  test  article,  a 48 OOOlb  (21  773kg)  dummy 
boostercarried-under the  wing  of  a B-52 aircraft, would  encounter 30% 
more dynamic pressure  than  the system should experience during a  real 
deployment. 
To  test the durability of  the drogue chute that would open first to pull 
out the main chutes, fins added to the test article would increase its speed 
and reduce drag.  The drogue would  deploy at a speed of  about 42Omph 
(676kph)  20sec  after  the  plane  released  the  dummy  booster  at  an  
estimated speed  of  230mph  (370kph)  and  an altitude of  about  19 4OOft 
(5913m).  The  2  boosters  t o   be  used  on  each  Shuttle  launch  would 
separate after burnout at an altitude of  about 27mi (43.5km), descending 

21 1 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

slowly  by  parachute  into  the  ocean  for  recovery  and  reuse.  (MSFC 
Release 77-221) 

0  LaRC announced that NASA Administrator  Robert A.  Frosch would 
speak  at  the  center’s  annual  awards  ceremony  Nov.  29,  presenting 
awards  for  outstanding  leadership,  exceptional  service,  group  achieve- 
ment,  and 45-yr  service. LaRC Director  Donald Hearth would present 4 
awards for  40-yr service and 83 for 3 5 9  service. An award for  outstand- 
ing volunteer  service would  go t o  4 employees,  and 3 would  receive the 
center’s highest honor,  the H.J.E.  Reid Award,  named  for the man who 
had headed the center for 35yr, starting as engineer-in-charge in 1926 and 
retiring as  director  in  1961.  The  center  would  also make  an  award  for 
technology utilization  for  the  first time.  (LaRC Release 77-55) 

November  28:  The Dept.  of  Transportation  reported  that  the  Federal 
Aviation  Administration  would  demonstrate  an   advanced  all-weather 
microwave landing system Dec.  5-9  at JFK  International Airport using a 
NASA  Boeing  737  to   fly  a  series of  curved  approaches  and  automatic 
landings  like  those  recently  flown  a t   other  locations,  most  recently 
Buenos Aires.  The Intl.  Civil Aviation Organization had  recently  tested 
the  equipment  as  a  replacement  for  40-yr-old  instrument-landing 
systems. Beginning Feb.  22,  the British government would demonstrate a 
different  MLS on  the  same  runway  to  obtain comparative data on  the 
two systems;  similar  comparisons  would  proceed  at  other  locations 
abroad.  In  March  1977 the  ICAO all-weather operations panel  had  en- 
dorsed  the MLS  design proposed  by  the U.S. and Australia,  to  be  con- 
sidered by  the full membership of  ICAO meeting in  1978. (DOT Release 
FAA-1 18-77) 

November  29:  NASA  held  a  press  briefing  on  results  from  Heao  1 ,  
launched  3.5mo  ago,  described  by  the  project  manager  Dr.  Frank 
McDonald of GSFC as “probably the largest scientific satellite” flown by 
the U.S.  On hand  for  the briefing were Dr.  Noel Hinners,  associate ad- 
ministrator for space sciences; Dr. McDonald and Dr. Elihu Boldt from 
GSFC; Dr. Herbert Friedman of NRL, principal investigator on the large 
x-ray survey;. Dr.  Gordon Garmire of  CalTech, who with Dr.  Boldt had 
worked  on the cosmic ray experiment; Dr.  Hale Bradt of MIT, principal 
investigator for the scanning-modulation collimator; and Dr. Hale Peter- 
son of  the Univ.  of  Calif.  San Diego,  principal investigator  for the low- 
energy  gamma-ray  experiment.  The  scientists  gave  the  press  brief 
statements of their results and responded to  questions.  (Text, Nov 29/77) 

November 30:  LaRC reported  it  had  selected Klate Holt  Co.  of  H a m p  
ton,  Va.,  to  negotiate a $13 million contract for on-center support serv- 

212 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

NOVEMBER 

ices for 3yr  starting in March 1978, with two 1-yr extension options. The 
contract would cover refrigeration and air conditioning, electric systems 
(compressors, large valves, and pumps),  building-trades services such as 
carpentry,  painting,  masonry  work,  roofing,  and  street  repairs,  plus 
engineering  services  including  drawings  and  specifications.  (LaRC 
Release 77-56) 

9  The Marshall  Star  reported that the Nov.  22  launch of  Meteosat  for 
ESA  had  encountered  a delay because of  a “weak  but  spurious” radio 
signal that had reached the command destruct system. Although officials 
considered  the  signal  too  weak  to  affect  the  launch,  they  delayed  it 
anyway to  trace its origin.  They  ran  tests to  try  and pick  up  the signal 
again,  tracing  it  finally  to   the  advanced  range-instrumentation ship 
Redstone, which had  not sent the signal but had leaked it from onboard 
computer  testing.  Upon  identifying  the  source,  officials  allowed  the 
launch to  proceed.  (Marshall Star, Nov  30/77,  3) 

ComSatCorp announced that the FCC had decided to  make it pay ex- 
tra  sums  into  an  escrow  account  ordered  by  the  agency pending  court 
review  of  an FCC rate order in  1975.  Since then ComSatCorp had  con- 
tinued to  charge the  rates in effect a t  the time  of  the  order,  putting  in 
escrow  the difference between the amount.collected and the lower rates 
ordered  by  the  commission.  ComSatCorp  said  the  FCC’s  new  order 
would require i t  to  put  about $25  million more in escrow,  and it would 
petition for  reconsideration of  the order.  (ComSatCorp Release 77-30) 
*  The  Natl.  Aeronautic  Assn.  reported  on  a  nationwide  poll  of  its 
members asking what  three problems aviation faced today:  the govern- 
ment  rated  first,  then  fuel  costs  and  air  traffic  control,  including the 
quality of  weather  information a t  airports. Inconsistent policies and the 
need  for  regulatory  reform  were  the  main  complaints.  U.S. efforts to 
control business arrangements for foreign military sales displeased 71 Yo, 
who  said  the  effort  harmed  U.S.  aircraft  manufacturers.  Members 
wanted  the U.S.  to  build  an  SST and open its airports to  the Concorde 
(by  an   84%  vote);  on  subcontracting construction of  some aircraft to  
European  nations,  to   standardize and  render  interchangeable NATO’s 
military equipment, the members split 52 to  48%  in favor of  keeping the 
business a t  home.  (NAA  newsletter Nov  30/77) 

During November: The USAF reported completion of 4Omo  of  tests in a 
joint  U.S.-Canadian  project  using  an  XC-8A  Buffalo  military  cargo 
plane  from Canada with  a huge air-filled rubber doughnut  for  landing 
gear,  to  prove  the feasibility of  an  air cushion landing system for large 
transport aircraft. 

213 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Tests mostly  a t  Wright  Patterson  AFB  consisted  of  84  flights,  34  of 
them air cushion takeoffs and 39 landings on grass,  snow, and hard  sur- 
faces,  with  25mi  of  taxiing  over  the  same  surfaces and over  obstacles. 
Wallace  Buzzard,  program  manager  for  the  USAF  flight-dynamics 
laboratory,  said  that besides  being  able  to  operate on  difficult  surfaces 
the air-cushioned plane “also taxied smoothly over a 3Oft-long ramp with 
a 9in dropoff,  crafters 6ft in diameter, and ditches 2ft wide. An aircraft 
with a conventional landing gear simply can’t do  those things; it would be 
seriously damaged  if  not wrecked.” 
The tests  included  numerous  inflight  inflations and deflations  of  the 
air cushion, and tests of  flying quality: the pilot  found he could control 
the  aircraft  in  crosswinds  as  high  as  2Omph,  letting  the  pressure  assist 
him in  moving  it  t o   a  particular  point  although  taxiing  sideways. 
Whereas most  planes would  descend for a soft landing at about  3ft per 
sec, the air cushion plane could soft-land a t  a rate of 8ft per sec with a 6”  
nose  angle. 
The XC-8A weighed  33,0001b during the tests without cargo; Buzzard 
said it could have tested  the same fully loaded, probably becoming more 
efficient  with  increased  weight,  “Outfitting an  aircraft  weighing  more 
than  a million  lb with  conventional landing gear  will  be  extremely dif- 
ficult,” he said. “An  ACLS could handle aircraft as heavy as 3 million Ib 
and be competitive in weight with conventional landing systems.” (AFSC 
Newsreview, Nov  77,  1) 
*  NASA reported that JSC had produced a compact medical kit contain- 
ing most of  the instrumentation of  a well-equipped physician’s office, us- 
ing techniques and tools developed to  monitor astronauts’ vital signs dur- 
ing spaceflight. The NASA  “black bag,” weighing less than  14kg and fit- 
ting into a case 18cm by 56cm by  36cm, would  contain electronic equip- 
ment,  drugs,  bandages,  and  instruments  needed  t o  diagnose  and  treat 
many  kinds  of  illnesses  or  accidents;  electronic  tools  included  an  elec- 
trocardiograph  and  electroencephalograph,  plus  either  a  strip-chart 
recorder  or a cassette tape  recorder,  with  a coupler built  in t o  transmit 
data  over  a  standard  telephone  line.  The  package  would  improve  the 
treatment  possible on emergency or house calls and provide more com- 
plete data before hospital  admission.  (NASA Ac tv ,  Nov  77,  24) 
0  MSFC  reported  that  the  new  manpower  level  required  at  the  center 
would  mean  dropping  some  70  employees  in  1978  by  “involuntary 
separation.”  In  Sept.,  NASA  Hq  had  announced  that  MSFC  would 
probably  lose  about  150 positions,  but  had  not  said  whether  the  loss 
would  come through  attrition  or  reduction  in  force.  Although  resigna- 
tion,  retirement,  and other causes had produced some vacancies,  MSFC 
director  Dr.  William R. Lucas  had  notified a l l  employees that a reduc- 
tion in force would take place by April  1978, and that NASA would ask 

214 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

NOVEMBER 

the Civil Service Commission for “early-out” authority to  let employees 
with  certain combinations of  age plus  yrs  of  service retire early  on re- 
duced annuity, granted in some reductions in force. (Marshall Star, Nov 
77,  4) 

GSFC reported that  it and the Univ.  of  Maryland had designed an ex- 
periment  called  GUMPS  (Goddard/Univ.  of  Md.  particle  study)  for 
detecting cosmic ray proton  energies up to   IOTev,  20 times greater than 
available from manmade accelerators, to clarify the interaction between 
particles accelerated from active supernova-explosion remnants and the 
magnetic field in Milky Way interstellar space. Comparing intensities at 
the top of and deep inside the atmosphere would  reveal much about the 
fundamental properties of matter. 
Borne  in  a  giant  spherical  aluminum  gondola,  the  instrumentation 
would include a calorimeter of  large iron plates to interact with incoming 
cosmic rays, producing a cascade of  particles in numbers proportional to 
the energy of  the incoming particle; 8 sensitive detectors would measure 
the energies. A multiwire proportional-counter hodoscope produced by 
the  Univ.  of  Md.  would  determine  the  trajectory  of  the  mass  of 
originating  atoms.  The  experiment  would  fly  on  a  balloon  at  80 OOOft 
altitude before  its Shuttle launch.  (Goddard News,  Nov  77,  2) 
*  KSC  reported that the 10th anniversary of  the maiden flight of  Saturn 
V,  world‘s  most  powerful rocket,  had  passed without  fanfare. Apollo 4 
had  lifted off  Nov.  9,  1967,  from KSC’s  Complex 39A  in  a successful 
demonstration of  Saturn V’s  flightworthiness and the Apollo spacecraft’s 
ability  to  withstand  the  intense heat  of  reentry.  (KSC Spaceport News, 
Nov  11/77,  2) 

0  MSFC  announced  selection  of  William  A.  Brooksbank,  Jr.,  as 
manager of  the solar heating and  cooling project  in the center’s special 
projects  office.  MSFC  director  Dr.  William  R.  Lucas  said  that 
Brooksbank, most recently deputy manager of  the Spacelab program of- 
fice, was well qualified for the position by his background in engineering 
and  management.  Brooksbank  had  come  to   the  Redstone Arsenal  at 
Huntsville  in  1958  as  atomic  energy  project  engineer  for  the  Army’s 
ballistic missile agency; he had worked a t  MSFC  since its establishment 
in  1960. (MSFC Release 77-218) 

0  JSC announced selection of  John C.  Stonesifer as head of  the center’s 
new  life sciences experiments program office, which would manage plan- 
ning,  development, and operation activities at JSC, ARC,  and KSC  for 
all such experiments to be  carried on the  Space Shuttle and  other m i s -  
sions  in  the  future.  Stonesifer would  continue to  act  as  chief  of  JSC’s 

215 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

bioengineering  systems division  until  designation of  a replacement.  He 
had  joined  NASA  a t  LaRC in  1957 and transferred  in  1962 during  the 
Mercury  project  to   the  space  task  group;  he  had  been  chief  of  JSC’s 
recovery  branch  before becoming head  of  bioengineering systems.  (JSC 
Release 77-72) 
0  NASA  reported  that Dr.  Lo I.  Yin,  x-ray researcher a t  GSFC,  had in- 
vented a hand-held device producing an instant x-ray image from a small 
source of radioactive material. The lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging 
scope) had resulted from research on space energy sources that converted 
their x-rays to  visible images; Dr. Yin  said the idea had not been  feasible 
until  the  Army  declassified  an   image  intensifier  produced  at  its  Ft. 
Belvoir night vision  laboratory. Cost of  the unit,  not yet on the market, 
might be less than $5000. Using no new technology,  it contained off-the- 
shelf  items such as  the radioactive source and an x-ray  phosphor  screen 
besides  the intensifier. 
Pulling  a  trigger  unshielded  the  source,  sending  through  the  object 
being examined a low x-ray dose which the phosphor screen converted to  
visible  light.  The unit’s  high  intensification would  allow use  of  a small 
radiation source of  10 t o  20 millicuries resembling a pen-size battery;  an  
attached camera could produce instant x-ray pictures with exposure 1000 
times weaker  than  that of  a conventional x-ray machine.  Dr. Yin  said a 
device invented  for x-ray  astronomy “where there is  a scarcity of  x-rays 
should  [be]  of  obvious  value  in  medical  fluoroscopy  where  there  are 
many x-rays.’’ 
Cooperating  in  evaluating the  device would  be  the National  Institute 
of  Dental  Research,  Howard  Univ.3  College  of  Dentistry,  Howard’s 
cancer research  center,  and the Duke Univ.  Medical  Center a t  Durham, 
N.C.  NIDR  researchers  had  already worked  up  a  configuration  of  the 
lixiscope for use in dentistry, and the cancer research center would com- 
pare it with existing techniques for detecting soft-tissue tumors or  foreign 
bodies  and  for  looking a t  bone  fractures.  Prime  advantage of  the  unit 
would  be  for emergency and other field use requiring quick  fluoroscopy 
(NASA Release 77-238) 

0  Calspan Corp.  of  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  reported it was  continuing technical 
work  on the XV-15 tilt-rotor research aircraft from Bell Helicopter Tex- 
tron  that  made  its  maiden  flight  earlier  in  1977 at  the  Bell  facility  in 
Arlington,  Tex.  Bell  had  awarded  the  company  a $678 OOO  contract  to  
design and fabricate the automatic flight-control system for the XV-15, 
and  a  $62 OOO  contract  to   support  ground  and  flight  checkout  of  the 
system. NASA’s ARC had awarded Calspan a $1 17 OOO contract to  study 
modifications of  future  XV-15s t o  adapt  the craft for  research  into  its 
handling  qualities.  (Calspan News, Nov  77, 3) 

216 

December 

December  I :   The Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) 
reported  it would  proceed  with  its plan  to  buy  back  its common  stock 
[see Nov.  111,  noting  that  the  FCC  had  authorized  i t   to  borrow  $25 
million  to  finance  part  of  the  cost  of  the  repurchase.  A  letter  to  
stockholders said the corporation would contest FCC’s  attempt to  make 
it  put  more  money  in  an  escrow  fund  for  possible  repayments  to 
customers, because it said the FCC’s  action was “neither lawful nor  ap- 
propriate.”  (ComSatCorp Releases 77-3 1,  77-32) 

December 2: The Washington Post reported that NASA had asked Con- 
gress to let it use $100 million of  Space Shuttle production funds to  pay 
for  higher  costs  and  delays  in  developing  the  first  two   Shuttles.  Dr. 
Robert A.  Frosch,  NASA  Administrator,  told  the  appropriations sub- 
committee headed by  Sen.  William Proxmire (D-Wis.)  that  $65 million 
would bring production up  to  schedule and the other $35 million would 
go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million; 
they  were  “down  near  zero  right  now,”  Frosch  said.  Associate  Ad- 
ministrator John@. Yardley said the rocket to  put  the Shuttle into orbit 
wa s  5mO  behind  schedule;  also running behind were computer controls 
and  fuselage parts.  Asked why NASA  requested a fund shift that might 
cause problems in  the  future,  instead  of  a  supplemental appropriation, 
Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemen- 
tal budget increases,  it had  had  to  wait until the next  fiscal year  for ap- 
proval.  ( W  Post, Dec 2/77,  A-2) 

Dryden Flight Research Center reported that Ralph “BUZZ” Sawyer of 
its flight systems laboratory had made a “paper airplane” to test a theory 
of  reducing elevator flutter and had come up with a new  type of  aircraft 
its  builder  named  Skyjacker.  Sawyer,  working  on  radio-controlled 

217 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

models,  decided to  change their airfoils into booms but wanted to  test the 
idea without  risking the $60 radio  systems. He made a foot-long card- 
board model  and “heaved  [it] off  the roof” of  DFRC’s  heat  facility;  the 
“paper  plane”  had  demonstrated  amazing  stability.  Sawyer  obtained  a 
patent  on   the  design  and  built  a  demonstrator  18ft  long  with  an   18ft 
wingspan  that he flew for the first time in Jan.  1975. With a 2OOhp  fuel- 
injected  engine  and  a  3-blade  constant-speed  propeller,  the  Skyjacker 
had “very good low-speed” handling, was easy t o  fly and land,  and (ac- 
cording  t o   the  designer)  would  not  stall  or  spin.  The  craft  had  “lift 
panels”  6ft wide  instead  of  actual wings,  but  derived  lift  from its con- 
figuration just  as DFRC lifting bodies did; the design had no compound 
curves, and its flat surfaces would make it inexpensive to produce. Possi- 
ble  applications  would  include  crop  dusting  and  firefighting.  (NASA 
X-Press, Dec 2/77,4) 

0  DFRC reported it had made further study of  the effect of  insects stick- 
ing to  the leading edges of  aircraft wings  [see A&A 76, Nov.  231  by  flying 
a  small jet  transport  from  four  airports  (Los Angeles,  San Francisco, 
Sacramento,  and San Diego)  t o  study  actual environments from which 
long-range commercial flights would be made. The program,  conducted 
jointly  with  Langley  Research  Center,  was  part  of  NASA’s  aircraft 
energy-efficiency program  t o  achieve  20  to  40%  fuel  savings  in  a  1985 
long-range transport  aircraft.  Such a  craft would  probably  use  laminar 
flow-control technology,  depending  on smooth airflow over  the leading 
edge of the wings; insects adhering to  the wings had made the airflow tur- 
bulent,  canceling the  fuel savings achieved with  the laminar  flow. 
NASA  had  equipped  the  wings  of  the  test  aircraft  with  a  modified 
leading edge consisting of  5 panels of  different materials, to  demonstrate 
changes  in   the  airflow  caused  by  insects  adhering  to   the  different  sur- 
faces;  it  had  also added  a  water  cleaning  system  to  study  its  ability t o  
either wash  off  or  keep  off  the  insects encountered during  takeoff  and 
climb.  I t  had  then flown the plane over alfalfa fields and sewage ponds, 
and a t  Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, to encounter as 
many  different  quantities,  kinds,  and  sizes  of  bugs  as  possible.  Bob 
Baron,  DFRC project  manager,  said  results  indicated a need  for  some 
sort of washing system to  reduce effects of  insect impacts on the laminar- 
flow surface.  (DFRC Release 40-77) 

December 4: The Dallas Morning News applauded “NASA official Dave 
Williamson”  [assistant administrator  in  the Office  of  Special  Projects] 
for  rejecting  a White House proposal  t o  resume UFO investigations:  he 
had  termed  it  “not  wise  to   do   research  on  something  that  is  not  a 
measurable phenomenon.”  The paper said there was no reason to  reopen 
the  matter,  except  that  President  Carter  had  mentioned  it  in  his  cam- 

218 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

DECEMBER 

paign  and  that  interest  in  flying saucers was  up  again.  Such “detached 
reserve”  should  apply  to  any multimillion-dollar  government  proposal, 
the paper  said.  (Mn News,  Dec 4/77,  15) 

December 5: NASA  announced that the Jet Propulsion  Laboratory had 
negotiated contracts with 5 firms for enough silicon (photovoltaic) solar 
cells to  supply a combined total of  190kw of power  for use by the federal 
government.  JPL  would  manage  the  contract  for  the  Dept.  of  Energy 
(DOE),  sponsor of  the program to reduce the price of the cells below 50C 
per peak watt  by  the end of  1986, while raising production  capability to  
500,000kw  annually. The DOE  program,  besides  reducing costs, would 
study the use of  solar-cell materials potentially less expensive than silicon 
crystals and of  alternatives such as optical concentrators. 
Firms  receiving  contracts  were  ARCO,  20kw,  $321 950;  Motorola, 
50kw,  $676 614;  Sensor  Technology,  N k w ,   $643 907;  Solarex,  30kw, 
$559 454;  and  Solar  Power,  50kw,  $757 665.  Panels  of  solar  cells 
previously  purchased  under  the  program  were  powering  an  irrigation 
system  in  Nebr.,  a  test  system  for  residential  use  a t   MIT’s  Lincoln 
Laboratory in Mass.,  a dust-storm warning system in Ariz.  [see May 231, 
automatic weather-reporting systems in 6 states,  and other remote uses. 
(NASA Release 77-246) 
*  NASA  reported  it  had  certified as  fully operational the  general  avia- 
tion  airfoil design  and  analysis  center  at Ohio  State Univ.  airport  near 
Columbus.  The center,  established under  a 3-yr  LaRC contract with  the 
university’s  aeronautical  and  astronautical  research  laboratory,  would 
provide directly to  aircraft designers and manufacturers, on a fee basis, 
services  such  as  analysis and  design  of  two-dimensional  airfoil shapes, 
high-lift  devices and aerodynamic controls, and technical assistance and 
consultation  on  airfoil wind  tunnel  and  flight  testing.  (NASA  Release 
77-247) 

0  NASA  announced retirement effective Dec.  3 1 of  Gerald M. Truszyn- 
ski,  associate administrator  for  space  tracking  and  data  systems,  after 
33yr  of  service  to  NASA  and  its  predecessor,  NACA.  In  1944,  he  had 
begun  working  a t   NACA’s  Langley  aeronautical  laboratory  as  an 
engineer  in  instrument  research  and  development,  and had  transferred 
3yr  later to  the NACA  station a t  Edwards,  Calif.,  an instrument project 
engineer on the rocket-powered X-1 , first airplane to  surpass the speed of 
sound.  In  1954 he  had  become  chief  of  the  instrumentation division at 
Edwards,  heading  development  and  operation  of  systems  for  NACA’s 
jet-  and  rocket-powered  craft  (X-1,  X-2,  D-558,  and  X-15)  that 
pioneered  supersonic and hypersonic  flight. 
At NASA  Hq  after  1960, Truszynski occupied his  present position  in 

219 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS A N b  AERONAUTICS, 1971 

1968, succeeding from the post  of  deputy that he had held  since its crea- 
tion  in  1961.  He had  been  responsible  for  planning,  development,  and 
operation  of  global  tracking  systems, networks,  and  facilities  for  com- 
munications  and  for  data  acquisition  and  processing  in  all  NASA’s 
spaceflight  programs.  In  1969  he  had  received  NASA’s  highest  award 
(the distinguished  service medal)  twice,  for  support  of  Apollo manned 
flights to  lunar orbit and of  the first moon landing. Upon his departure, 
Norman Pozinski would be acting associate administrator. (NASA anno 
Nov  5/77;  NASA  Release 77-248) 

0  The Natl.  Space Club announced  that Dr.  John E. Naugle,  appointed 
NASA chief scientist Nov.  8, would speak at its Dec. meeting and present 
awards  t o  Washington-area  high  school  students  in  American  Univ.’s 
19th summer  research  program.  Dr.  Naugle had  been  NASA  associate 
administrator since 1975  in  charge of  much of  the agency’s R&D  work. 
(NSC newsletter Dec  77) 

December  6:  NASA  announced  appointment  of  Andrew  J.  Stofan  as 
deputy associate administrator for the Office of Space Sciences, effective 
Jan. 8,  1978, succeeding Dr. Anthony J .  Cali0 who had become associate 
administrator  for  the  Office  of  Space  and  Terrestrial  Applications. 
Stofan  had  been  director  of  launch  vehicles  at  Lewis  Research  Center 
since  July  1974;  he  had  begun  there  in  1958  as  a  research  engineer, 
assigned in 1962 to  the Centaur project and becoming project manager of 
the Titan-Centaur vehicle  in  1970.  (NASA Release 77-245) 

December  7: NASA  announced  it had  negotiated  12-mo contracts worth 
about $4 million with 9 firms, 3  of  them small businesses,  for developing 
low-cost  automated  solar-cell  fabrication  processes  that  could  be 
adapted  to  automated assembly and mass  production  of  the  cells.  The 
firms  were  Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Co.,  $213  163;  M.B. 
Associates,  $230 OOO;  Motorola,  Inc.,  $433  870;  RCA,  $846 900; Sensor 
Technology,  $395  000;  Solarex Corp.,  $392 OOO;  Spectrolab,  $706 OOO; 
Texas  Instruments,  $537 460;  and  Westinghouse,  $426 000.  The  small 
businesses were M.B.  Associates,  Sensor Technology,  and Solarex. The 
contracts were  part  of  DOE’S low-cost  silicon solar-array project  man- 
aged  by  JPL.  (NASA  Release 77-249) 

December 8: FAA predicted  the number of passengers on U.S. scheduled 
airlines over the next  12yr would  increase from the current 232.1 million 
to   418.4  million  in  1989.  Commuter  airlines  (carrying  fewer  than  30 
passengers  in  at  least  5  scheduled  flights per  wk)  would  double  opera- 
tions,  triple  fare miles,  and f ly   14.5  million passengers compared  to  the 

220 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

DECEMBER 

current 6.5  million. Size of  the general (non-airline) fleet would increase 
65%.  (FAA Release  121-77) 

December 9: KSC  announced  it  had  selected  2 companies to  negotiate 
a  contract  for  a  10-yr  administrative  teIephone  system  a t   the  center, 
including  switching  equipment,  telephones,  cabinets,  switchboards 
and  consoles,  interior  wire  and  cable,  and  other  equipment  needed  for 
proper  operation.  The  contract  would  contain  an   option  to  purchase. 
Companies remaining  in competition were GTE Automatic Electric and 
Northern Telecom, Inc. ; other firms submitting proposals were Southern 
Bell Telephone and Telegraph, and Independent Business Telephone Co. 
(KSC Release 207-77) 

LeRC announced it had awarded a $2 895 750 contract to  Teledyne In- 
dustries,  Inc.,  of  Northridge,  Calif.,  for management, engineering, and 
repair  services to  Centaur  digital  computers  and  remote  multiplexers. 
The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract would run for  lyr  beginning Nov.  1. The 
digital computer would work  with  the Centaur  inertial guidance system 
to  compute and adjust  flight without  ground  command,  permitting the 
Centaur  t o   deliver  its  payload  to   a  preselected  orbit;  the  remote 
multiplexer would work with the digital computer to  supply inflight data 
during  launch.  Centaur,  first U.S.  liquid hydrogedliquid  oxygen high- 
energy  rocket,  had  been  a  second  stage  on  both  Atlas  and  Titan  111. 
Recently it had  assisted the  launch of  the Voyagers,  and was  scheduled 
during  the  coming  yr  to   launch  several  commercial  comsats  and  the 
Pioneer mission  to  Venus.  LeRC would manage the Atlas-Centaur  and 
Titan-Centaur  through all phases of manufacturing,  testing, and launch. 
Teledyne wouId perform  its job as contractor  both  a t  Northridge and a t  
KSC  in Fla.  (Lewis News,  Dec 9/77,  2) 

0  J PL  reported it had assisted DFRC with an  engine problem on a possi- 
ble Mars reconnaissance plane,  a small remotely powered vehicle (RPV) 
called the Mini Sniffer developed by DFRC’s Dale Reed for environmen- 
tal  research a t   100 OOOft  above earth’s  surface.  The  13ft aircraft with  a 
22ft wingspan, powered by an  airless 30hp engine running on hydrazine, 
was  the  first  propeller-driven  plane designed to  operate  above 50  000ft. 
JPL  had  taken  a  hand  when  asked  by  DFRC  to   help  with  an  engine- 
catalyst problem; Dr.  Jose Chirivella, who solved the  problem, saw the 
possibilities of  using the miniplane on Mars. 

Deployment of  16 mini RPVs, 8 from each of 2 carrier spacecraft, over 
Mars so that  each could make 5  or  more separate takeoffs and landings 
in different  locations, could achieve a  total of  80 possible missions. The 

22 1 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

carriers,  orbiting  about  Mars,  would  serve  as comsats  t o  collect  data 
from  the mini RPVs  for  relay to  earth. 
The Martian  RPVs would  be  instrumented  to collect seismographic, 
meteorological,  and  geochemical  data;  they  would  conduct  aerial 
magnetic and gravity surveys, take high-resolution photos, look for sub- 
surface  water,  and  study  the  speed  and  direction  of  winds  and  the 
pressure and density of  the atmosphere. They might also collect surface 
samples from widely  separated areas,  storing them at a central location 
for return to earth by later missions. The small craft could be folded into 
3m-long  canisters  protected  by  coverings  that  would  fall  away  when 
parachutes unfolded to support the vehicles as they opened out to flight 
configuration  for  descent  and  cruise  through  the  lower  Martian  at- 
mosphere,  landing  like  helicopters  under  power  from  variable-thrust 
retrorockets. (JPL  Universe, Dec 9/77,  1) 

0  LaRC  reported  on  a  recent  visit  to  Buenos Aires,  Argentina,  by  its 
Boeing  737  research  aircraft  outfitted  with  a  new  microwave  landing 
system  being  demonstrated  for  F A A  by  a  NASA  team.  The  trip  was 
scheduled  during  an  Inter-American  Telecommunications Conference 
sponsored by  the Organization of  American  States that  had  invited  the 
FAA t o  demonstrate the landing system. 
Part of  the LaRC team  flew  to  Buenos Aires on a C-5i4 packed with 
support  equipment  for  the  737,  including their  own  power  supply;  the 
rest  of  the  team  flew on  the 737 with  stops in Puerto Rico,  Belem,  and 
Rio de Janeiro. The 44-member team operated from 2 airports during its 
visit:  the  demonstration  flights went  from Ezeiza  airport  21mi  outside 
the city to  the Aeroparque George Newbery in mid-town near the Rio de 
la Plata.  The LaRC plane made 68 landings with the system, 56  of  them 
automatic,  and  demonstrated it  to  more than  100 persons including of- 
ficials  from Argentina and other countries, and  the press.  Jack Reeder, 
chief  of  the  terminal  configured  vehicle (TCV) program,  said the  team 
made the first automatic landing at the Buenos Aires airport and the first 
automatic  landing  by  a  commercial  plane.  (Langley Researcher,  Dec 
9/77,  3) 

0  JSC  reported  on  the medical  evaluations of  astronaut  applicants for 
which  the  center’s  Flight  Medicine  Clinic  had  been  responsible.  The 
evaluation had  four parts:  the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, 
etc.);  a  thorough  physical  exam;  specialty  evaluations  (neurology, 
otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.);  and special tests such as the 
treadmill,  pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry 
examinations. (JSC Roundup,  Dec  9/77,  1) 

December  I&31:  The  USSR  launched  Soyuz  26  from  Baykonur  at 

222 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

DECEMBER 

4: 19am Moscow time Dec.  10 in what Tass described as a mission “joint- 
ly  with  the Sabut  6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 
cosmonauts,  flight  commander  Lt.Col.  Yuri  Romanenko  and  flight 
engineer  Georgy  Grechko,  into  an   orbit  with  329km  apogee,  267km 
perigee,  90.2min  period  and  51.6”  inclination. Tass  reported  that  the 
crew would  rest  for  12 to  21hr  while  the spacecraft was beyond  radio 
contact  with  Soviet  territory,  during  which  time  two  research  vessels 
would  receive  and  relay telemetry from the satellite. 
The Soyuz 25 mission  launched in Oct.  carrying Vladimir Kovalenok 
and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Sabu t  6, although it had come 
within 393ft  of  the  orbiting station [see Oct.  9-12].  The crew  returned 
safely 48hr  after  liftoff.  The  “deviation” causing  the  cancellation was 
never  explained. 
Tass reported  Dec.  11  that  Soyuz  26 had  docked  successfully with 
&&ut  6 a t  6:02am Moscow  t h e .  The news agency noted  that Salyut  6 
had been equipped with 2 docking ports,  1 on the transfer compartment 
of  the station and the other opposite it  in  the equipment bay,  to allow 2 
spacecraft to  service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its un- 
successful approach from  the transfercompartment  side,  but Soyuz 26 
had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking 
units  on orbital  stations  considerably  expands  the  opportunities  and 
possibilities of  future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows 
two ships to dock with a station, which  is important for replacing crews, 
for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equip- 
ment  to  an  orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass  said the 2 crewmen  had 
crossed  into the space station. 
Lt.  Gen.  Vladimir  Shatalov, training chief  for  the program,  said on 
TV  that  during the docking he  had watched  it “with greater excitement 
than my  own, which I performed in  1969.” Press reports called it “an im- 
portant  recovery” for  the Soviet space program,  after the failure of  the 
previous docking attempt which was  to  have marked  the 60th anniver- 
sary of  the Russian  revolution.  Grechko’s outside assignment would  be 
to   inspect  the  docking  device  on  the “main  entrance,” and  some  press 
reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be  preparing for the dock- 
ing of  a second Spacecraft. 
On  the  following days  the  cosmonauts  “changed  into  light  working 
clothes” and began  to “mothball the onboard systems of  the transport” 
S o y a  26, according to  Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space 
station, where they would  live on a time pattern “as close as possible to  
that  of  MOSCOW.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of  being  able to  
communicate through the research vessels  instead of  staying up to  make 
contact while  over ,their home  territory, besides being more convenient 
for “the hundreds  of  specialists who  support the  flight here  on  earth.” 
The cosmonauts were  the fiist to  call “ready” for  the first communica- 

223 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

tions  session with  the control  center Dee.  12.  The  next  day was  a  rest 
period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few 
days. 
Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in 
both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems 
of  the space station, aimed a t  increased reliability, length of  service, and 
better  conditions  for  the  cosmonauts.  Scientific  equipment  for 
astrophysics and  earth  monitoring had  been  improved  on  the  basis  of 
previous  experience.  Feoktistov  emphasized  the  addition  of  another 
docking port as a  safety device, citing the possibility  of  accident to  the 
ferry craft (failure of  the engine or some automatic device, or encounter 
with a meteorite) and  the  risk  necessary in undocking it for  inspection. 
Having two ports would permit sending up another craft  for rescue and 
return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He 
also  noted  that  the  water-regeneration  unit  labeled  experimental  on 
Sat’yut 4 was now  standard equipment, and that the new  design includes 
an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of 
weightlessness:  “If  water  is  let  into  the  chamber  it  will  immediately 
spread all around  and get  into the  respiratory organs.” 
Another  improvement was  incorporation  of  a  “Delta” autonomous 
system for navigation that would permit the station to  determine its orbit 
without participation of  earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic 
instruments  to   monitor  the  area  around  the  station  had  detected 
“micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar  observa- 
tion. 
On Dee.  20  the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits 
and  left  the  space  station  t o   check  the  transfer  compartment and  its 
docking unit  and  to carry out any necessary repairs.  In addition to  the 
special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV  camera 
that he used to  send views of  the docking elements to  earth. No damage 
was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in  full working order. 
Tass said the men spent most  of  the 88min in space depressurizing and 
repressurizing  the  airlock  leading  to   outer  space,  again  suggesting the 
possibility of  further visits. 
Grechko’s  spacewalk was  the  first by  a Soviet spaceman in 9yr.  The 
new  spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a 
small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch  in back. 
In   a Dec.  20  recorded  interview,  Gen.  Shatalov described  the  lengthy 
training  in  a  special  simulator  apparently  resembling  the  neutral- 
buoyancy  tank  a t   JSC,  where  the  cosmonauts  had  practiced  their  ex- 
travehicular  activity,  and  the  orbital-station  mockup  on  “flying 
laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new  spacesuits in con- 
ditions of  weightlessness. 

224 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

DECEMBER 

Ensuing  days  saw  performance  of  experiments  in  medical  research, 
earth  resources  monitoring  (during which  they  reported  forest  fires  on 
the African  continent),  and distortions  caused by  the  optical properties 
of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched 
out of  frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born 
on  earth;  the  earth-born  tadpoles  had  reacted  to   weightlessness  by 
“swimming  disorderly,”  not  distinguishing  top   from  bottom,  bu t   the 
newborns were swimming in  spirals. 
For  the  remainder  of  Dec.,  the  crew  proceeded  with  a  schedule that 
each  research  center  had  helped  to establish, with  each center “looking 
forward  to   its  hour.”  The  cosmonauts  reported  a  burning  meteorite 
flashing past the station Dec.  27; one that struck a window had left a tiny 
scratch. On Dec.  28 Tass reported  that  so far the crew had  not  used  any 
of  the  onboard recreation  facilities  (chess,  a  small  library,  a  videotape 
recorder).  The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in 
checking the control systems,  and by  Grechko with camera and sketch- 
book  near  the  transfer-compartment  portholes.  Tass  reported  a  New 
Year  tree was  in place,  “packed for the journey by  friends from the Star 
Town  together with  toys.” 
At  year’s  end  the  cosmonauts  reported  that  onboard  systems  were 
working  normally,  they were  feeling well,  and the planned  program  of 
research  and experiments was being  “completely fulfilled.”  A motor  on 
Soyuz 26 had been  used Dec.  29 to correct the Sdyu t  6 flight trajectory. 
(W Post, Dec  11/77,  A-36;  Dec  20/77,  A-7;  Dec  21/77,  A-28;  W Star, 
Dec  10177, A-4;  Dec  12/77,  A-4;  FBIS, Tass in English, Dec  10, 12,  13, 
20,21,23,24,28/77;  Tass Intl Sv in RUSS, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to 
Afr ,  Dec 28/77;  Mosc Dom  Sv in  Rus, Dec  13, 15,  19, 20, 30) 

December  13:  ESA  announced  that  the Societe Europeenne de  Propul- 
sion (SEP) had successfully conducted the  first test of  the complete first 
stage of  its M a n e  launcher a t  the Vernon test center north of  Paris. The 
stage was in its flight configuration for this test, and consisted of  the pro- 
pulsion  bay  (containing  4 Viking  I1 engines), the  flight-standard  tanks, 
the  forward  skirt,  and  the  intertank  skirt. The stage  functioned  during 
the  test  for  l l l s e c .   The  purpose  of  the  test  was  to   verify  first-stage 
behavior,  especially  with  regard  to   the  hot-gas  pressurization  system; 
thermal  environment  of  the  engine  bay,  tanks,  and  skirts;  and  the 
dynamic aspect. 
This test was  a  follow-up to  previous  tests of  the propulsion bay  that 
had  accumulated 404.5sec of  successful operation, making it possible  to  
include  flight-configuration tanks in  this series of  first-stage tests.  ESA 
had  planned 2 more development tests before May  1978, followed by  3 
qualification tests of  the first stage before final qualification.  (ESA anno 
Dec  13/77) 

225 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

December  Z4:  In  its  final launch  of  1977, NASA  sent Japan’s  domestic 
comsat  Cs (Sakura) into a synchronous transfer orbit  from the Eastern 
Test  Range  on  a  Delta  a t  7:47pm  EST.  Transfer-orbit  elements were: 
35  936km apogee,  166km perigee,  28.82’  inclination. The apogee boost 
motor fired at  10:27pm EST Dec.  15 to  begin maneuvering  the Cs over 
the South Pacific to  a station at about  135’E  above New  Guinea on the 
equator  south of  Japan. 
The  677kg  hatbox-shaped  spacecraft  (including  apogee  motor)  was 
3.48m  long  and 2.18m  in  diameter,  covered with  solar cells,  and would 
weigh 340kg in orbit. It would be the first comsat to  carry both C-band (6 
t o  4GHz) and K-band (30 to 20GHz) frequency ranges: K-band coverage 
would be for the main islands, C-band for the remote  islands. An anten- 
na horn reflector extending 128.8cm above the solar array would provide 
33db  K-band  coverage  to  the  main  islands  and  25db  to   the  remote 
islands.  Ford  Aerospace  had  built  the  spacecraft  under  contract  from 
Mitsubishi  Electric Co.  of  Nagoya,  which  had  prime  contract  respon- 
sibility under  Japan’s  Natl.  Space Development Agency  (NASDA).  Cs, 
designed  for  both  telephone and  television communications  technology 
experiments,  relaying  signals between  fixed  and mobile stations,  would 
provide coverage to the  Japanese  islands for a t  least  3yr. 
NASDA would reimburse NASA for providing launch support for this 
mission,  a t  an estimated  cost of  $16 million.  The NASA  portion of  the 
mission  was  adjudged  successful  on  Feb.  23-24,  1978.  (NASA  Release 
77-244; mission summary M-492-211-77-01 [prelaunch] Dec 14/77, MOR 
M-492-211-77-01 [postlaunch] Feb  28/78) 

NASA  announced that  Pioneer  ZZ would  fly just  outside the rings of 
Saturn  during  its  first  encounter  with  the  giant  planet  in  1979.  The 
spacecraft would  pass  30 OOOkm  (18 OOOmi)  from  the edge of  the outer- 
most ring and would swing in under the plane of the rings to a distance of 
25  OOOkm  (15 OOOmi)  from  the  planet’s  surface.  Dr.  Noel  W.  Hinners, 
NASA associate administrator for space science, and A.  Thomas Young, 
director of  planetary programs,  had made the decision to  fly the Pioneer 
outside rather than  inside the rings mainly because NASA wanted to  use 
it  as a pathfinder  for the two Voyager  spacecraft headed  for Saturn en- 
counter  in  1980-81.  The Pioneer would cross the ring plane at about the 
same distance as the trajectory that would use Saturn’s gravity to propel 
Voyager 2 toward Uranus. 
The  uncertainties  regarding  a  ring  crossing  even  at  30OOOkm 
(18 OOOmi)  from  the  outer  edge  of  the  rings  called  for  NASA  “to do  
everything we  reasonably can t o  ensure Voyager’s  success,” said Young. 
Should the Pioneer not  survive the rings, NASA would have to revise its 
plan  of  sending  Voyager 2 on to Uranus;  however,  a  successful pass  by 
Pioneer  I Z  would  increase  confidence in  committing  Voyager 2  to   the 

226 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1 9 7  

DECEMBER 

Uranus  option  even  if  Voyager Z  had  not  achieved all its  objectives at 
Saturn. An outside pass offered much better odds for success than an  in- 
ner one, which would bring the spacecraft as close as 6000km (3700mi) to 
Saturn’s surface.  The  1979 flyby by Pioneer  Z Z   would  be the  first  close 
encounter with Saturn; until the rings of Uranus were discovered, Saturn 
was considered the only ringed planet in earth’s solar system. The origin 
of  the  rings  remained unknown,  but  their  composition was  defined by 
astronomers  in  1970 as ordinary  water  ice,  and  radar  readings  in  1973 
detected snowball-size chunks of  solid material. (NASA Release 77-250) 

0  LaRC  announced  that  Dr.  J.H.  WiIkinson  of  the  U.K.’s  National 
Physical Laboratory,  author  of  textbooks on algebraic processes, would 
speak  a t   the  Dec.  19  colloquium.  Wilkinson,  who  broke  ground  in 
floating-point  and backward error analysis and in  eigenvalue solutions, 
would describe  the  early days  of  electronic computer  development,  his 
experiences using one of  the first working computers, and the beginnings 
of  numerical analysis on a n  automatic digital computer.  (LaRC Release 
77-58) 
LaRC announced that Ed Yost, who made the world’s longest manned 
balloon  flight, would speak a t  the center Dee.  20 on his attempt  to  cross 
the Atlantic  that  failed just  short  of  the  coast  of  Portugal  but  broke  8 
world  records,  “most  successful  failure  in  ballooning  history.”  (LaRC 
Release 77-59) 

Marshall Space Flight Center reported it had coped with the threat of a 
serious  power  shortage  when  maintenance  and  emergency  shutdowns 
dropped the Tennessee Valley Authority’s generating capacity by  a third 
a t   the  same time  that  severe cold weather moved into  the  area.  On Fri- 
day, Dec.  9, TVA had asked NASA and the U.S.  Army to reduce power 
use  by  half,  as  it  expected the  shortage  to  continue  for  some time.  C. 
Horton  Webb,  director  of  MSFC’s  facilities  office,  said  the  plant 
maintenance division had worked  around  the clock turning heat on and 
off  to  keep buildings from freezing, and had asked employees to  help in 
minimizing use of  electrical equipment. Security guards helped by closing 
blinds  and  turning  off  lights and  equipment  wherever possible.  Webb 
said the combined effort had reduced power use by 50% on Saturday and 
65%   by Sunday morning.  (Marshall Star, Dec  14/77,  1) 

December 15: NASA  announced that  Voyager I ,  launched Sept.  5 ,  had 
overtaken its sister ship  VoyagerZ, launched Aug. 20, about 77.5 million 
miles  from  earth  o n   its  way  to  encounters  with  Jupiter  and  Saturn. 
Voyager Z  would  arrive  a t   Jupiter  in  1979 in  the  lead  by  4m0,  and  a t  
Saturn  in  1980 ahead  by  9mo.  If  all  went  well  by  the  time  Voyager 2 
reached  Saturn  in  Aug.  1981,  NASA  might  send  it  on  toward  Uranus 

227 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTfCS AND  AERONAUTICS. 1977 

where  it  should  arrive by  Jan.  1986. Both  spacecraft would  eventually 
escape earth’s solar system.  (NASA Release 77-252) 

0  JSC  reported  it  had  modified  its mission  control  center  to  use  solar 
power  for dehumidifying the building.  Solar panels installed on the roof 
would  provide heat 60% of  the time,  according to weather  calculations 
for the Houston area, and would save about 1.5  million ft3 of  natural gas 
per  yr a t  a  construction cost of  about  $240 OOO.  The modification was 
part  of  a joint  NASA/DOE  solar-energy  demonstration project.  (JSC 
Release 77-86) 

December  19:  MSFC reported on the first meeting of  a science working 
group  for  a  proposed  earth-orbiting  system  called  Advanced  X-Ray 
Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), to study stellar structure and evolution, 
large-scale galactic phenomena, active galaxies and galactic clusters, and 
cosmology. Chaired by  Prof.  R.  Giacconi of  Harvard Univ.  and repre- 
senting  universities  and  government  laboratories  working  on  x-ray 
astronomy in the U.S.  and Europe, the group would define the scientific 
requirements. The  12.8m (42ft) craft weighing about  9oookg (20 OOOlb) 
would be designed for Space Shuttle launch and repair or retrieval in or- 
bit.  (MSFC Release 77-227) 

0  NASA  reported  that  its  announcement  on  selection  of  Shuttle 
astronauts,  set  for December, would  not be  forthcoming until January. 
Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch,  agency administrator, had met Dec.  12 with  of- 
ficials of the selection program but, because of  current NASA budget ac- 
tivity, had not reviewed the data presented.  On Dec.  16 Dr.  Frosch had 
notified JSC director Dr.  Christopher C. Kraft, who had supervised the 
selection  program,  that  the  review  would  proceed  after  the  end  of  the 
year.  (NASA Release 77-254) 
*  ComSatCorp reported its shareholders had  tendered 5 827 678 shares 
in  response to  its recent  offer  of  repurchase at $37 per  share [see Nov. 
1 I].  Those holding 10 or  fewer shares would be reimbursed first; the re- 
maining owners would be  included in the repurchase on a prorated basis 
a t   about  34%  for  a  total  buy-back  of  2 million  shares.  (ComSatCorp 
Release 77-36) 

December 20: NASA  reported KSC  was  preparing  its facilities for next 
yr’s Space Shuttle arrival and prelaunch work, more than 3yr after it last 
launched a Saturn rocket from Complex 39. In Oct.  1978, Shuttle orbiter 
102 would  fly  in  from  Calif.  on  its Boeing 747 carrier, with  the main 
engines,  external tank,  and  solid-fuel  rocket boosters due in Nov.  and 
Dec.  for  assembly  and  test  before  launch  March  1979. KSC’s  orbiter 

228 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

DECEMBER 

landing strip had  been completed in Aug.;  support facilities to be com- 
pleted by April 1978 would include a device to  unload the orbiter, plus a 
microwave  landing  system  to  guide  i t   to   an   automatic  landing.  An 
orbiter-processing  facility  to   store  fuels  and  handle  payloads  was  the 
only new  construction except the landing strip, the rest being modifica- 
tions of  Apollo facilities.  (NASA Release 77-253) 

December 21: NASA  reported it had  scheduled 25  launches in 1978,  11 
on Deltas and 8 on  Atlas Centaurs. It would provide support for 3 Atlas- 
F  launches from Vandenberg AFB, Calif.  KSC  would  launch  10 of  the 
Deltas and all the Atlas Centaurs; one Delta would go from the Western 
Test  Range  a t   VAB.  Paying  customers would  subsidize  15  launches: 
ESA,  ComSatCorp,  the  U.S. Navy,  Japan,  NOAA,  the  U.K.,  and 
Canada. 
Whereas most  of  its  1977  launches were  in  the  area  of  applications 
(communications,  environmental,  navigation,  meteorological,  earth 
resources, or geodetic),  its  1978 mission would  divide between  applica- 
tions and scientific missions almost equally. Scheduled in Jan. would be 
Intelsat IV-A F-3 for ComSatCorp,  FltSatCom-A for the Navy,  and its 
own  IUE;  the Intelsat IV-A F-6 would  follow in Feb.  March would see 
launch  of  NASA’s  Landsat-C  and  Japan’s  experimental  broadcast 
satellite BSE.  In  April NASA would launch its own heat-capacity map- 
ping mission (HCMM)  and Comstar-C,  as well  as the backup OTS  for 
ESA.  May  would  see  4  launches:  GOES-C,  and  NASA’s  TIROS-N, 
Pioneer Venus-A,  and SeaSat-A.  Scheduled in  June would  be  GEOS-B 
for ESA and a backup satellite for Japan.  In  July NASA would  launch 
from Wallops on a Scout the UK-6  to measure radiation particles, and 
from  KSC  its  own  ISEE-C.  August  would  see  launch  of  NASA’s 
N im b u s 4  and Pioneer Venus-B.  In Sept. NASA would launch NOAA- 
A; a navsat for the Navy;  and comsat NATO-IIIC. NASA would launch 
its own HEAO-B  in Oct. Two launches set  for Nov.  would be Canada’s 
Telesat-D and FltSatCom-B for the Navy.  George F.  Page, KSC’s  direc- 
tor  for  expendable vehicles,  noted  that  the center’s  workload would  be 
heavy with  a  schedule calling for 3 launches in Jan.  and 2 each in some 
other months.  (NASA Release 77-256;  KSC  Release  21 1-77) 

0  MSFC reported that Mack Vinson of its personnel office had been one 
of  only 25  people,  and the only one from Alabama, selected for a 2-wk 
study tour in March  1978 of  the Peoples Republic of China. The group, a 
delegation from the American Society for Public Administration, would 
view  firsthand the ways in which PRC officials solved public policy and 
administrative issues.  Other objectives would be  to  set up a 2-way inter- 
change of  administrative ideas and  techniques, obtain information for 
use  in  university courses, and  broaden understanding  of  China and  its 

229 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

people. Vinson said the tour was a matter of  personal interest and would 
be made a t  his own expense.  He had been a member of ASPA since 1965 
and was president of  its northern Alabama section in 1975-76.  (Marshall 
Star, Dec 21/77,2) 

December 22: NASA  and ESA  announced that 6 U.S.  and 4 European 
candidates were finalists in the competition for 2 payload specialist posi- 
tions,  1 U.S. and  1 European,  on  the  first  flight  of  ESA’s  Spacelab 
scheduled  to   go  on  the  Space  Shuttle  in  1980.  For  the  U.S.,  Byron 
Lichtenberg of  Natick,  Mass.,  Ph.D.  candidate a t  MIT,  and  MSFC’s 
Ann  Whitaker,  M.S.  a t   the  Univ.  of  Ala.,  were  the  only  non-Calif. 
finalists.  The  others  were  Craig  L.  Fischer,  M.D.,  of  Indian  Wells; 
Michael L.  Lampton,  Ph.D.,  of  Berkeley;  and  Robert T.  Menzies and 
Richard  J.  Terrile,  both Ph.D.s  from CalTech  (Terrile employed there 
and Menzies at JPL) and both from Pasadena. ESA’s  4 were electronics 
engineer Franc0 Malerba of  Italy;  physicist Ulf  Merbold of  West  Ger- 
many;  and  2  from  the  Netherlands,  astronomer  Claude Nicollier  and 
physicist Wubbo Ockels. (NASA Release 77-255; MSFC Release 77-229; 
ESA Release Dec 22/77) 
0  FBIS reported a Tass claim that Soviet physicists at the USSR’s  joint 
institute for nuclear research a t  Dubna near Moscow had synthesized the 
106th element with a mass number of  259,  by bombarding a lead  target 
with  ions  of  chromium  (accelerated  heavy  particles).  Academician 
Georgy  Flerov  said  his group  had  been  working  for  y r s   to   synthesize 
trans-uranium elements (those with atomic nuclei heavier than uranium) 
and  had  already  obtained  the  102nd  through  105th  elements  on  the 
periodic  table.  The  U.S.  and  the  USSR  (both countries having  “suffi- 
ciently powerful heavy-ion accelerators”) had  begun work  on the  106th 
element about the same time.  After the group a t  Dubna reported success, 
the U.S.  scientists said they had  found another isotope of  the  106th ele- 
ment,  with mass number 263.  (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 22/77) 

December  23:  MSFC  reported  that  its  homemade Shuttle orbiter  [see 
Nov.  231  had  made  its practice run through  the center and  had  played 
stand-in during practice hoists into the 430ft (131m) test stand where the 
Enterprise would be mated to  the other Shuttle components for the first 
time. Werner H.  Rubel, supervisor in MSFC’s  product planning branch, 
said  the  idea  and  design for  the  stand-in  orbiter had  originated  in  his 
group,  where  Jerry B.  Bennich  and  John  L.  Ransburgh  had  done the 
engineering work;  the mockup and prototype assembly branch had  per- 
formed final assembly. (MSFC Release 77-232) 
MSFC announced successful completion of the first loading test of  the 

230 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

DECEMBER 

Space Shuttle external  tank  to  ensure that  tne  test  article,  test  facility, 
and hardware could handle the super cooled propellants (liquid hydrogen 
and liquid oxygen) to  be used by the Shuttle main engine. (MSFC Release 
77-234) 

0  KSC reported successful conclusion of the first open-sea tests on Shut- 
tle retrieval equipment staged Dec.  5-16  from Port Everglades, in strong 
winds  and  seas  from  3  to  6ft  that  had  hampered operations both wks. 
Test manager Bob Everette said the hugh waves created conditions vital 
to  the test although “it was hard even to  stand up on the boat” and the aft 
section  of  the  158-ft  offshore-support vessel  was  often  under  a  ft  of 
water. 
The first group of tests simulated parachute recovery; retrieval of the 6 
main parachutes and 2 drogues would use 2 support vessels, each respon- 
sible  for  recovering  3  main  chutes  and a  drogue.  The  second  series  of 
tests was  to  verify performance of  the nozzle  plug  in  open waters.  The 
plug  was  designed  to   “swim  out”  from  the  ship  to   a  booster  casing 
floating vertically, dive to  the bottom  of  the casing,  secure itself  to  the 
aft portion and pump out the water.  The booster,  rotating to  a horizon- 
tal position,  would  be  ready  for tow  to  the Spaceport for refurbishing. 
The tests were also to  confirm the deck layout of  the support vessels and 
how  they  kept  position  while  the  plug  was  docking with  the  booster. 
Everette  said  retrieval  gear  would  be  modified  according  to   the  test 
results. 
More ocean  tests would  follow about  lmo  before the  first launch  of 
the Shuttle, pre-mission exercises to  train personnel who would work on 
the recovery. Everette praised the teamwork of  the support agencies tak- 
ing part in the test:  staff from KSC and MSFC; Tracor Marine, operator 
of  the support vessel; Everglades Towing Co.;  the Naval Ocean Systems 
Center;  U.S. Booster,  Inc.;  Battelle  Memorial  Institute;  Pioneer 
Parachute Co.;  the U.S. Navy supervisor of  salvage; and Martin Mariet- 
ta.  (Spaceport News, Dec 23/77,  4) 

0  In   its  year-end  issue,  the Lewis News  described  the  relationship be- 
tween U.S. Army and NASA activities at the center. Civilian employees 
of  the  Army  Propulsion  Laboratory had  been  working  among  LeRC 
employees  since  1970,  as  1  of  3  Army  air-mobility  research  and 
technology  labs  working  jointly  with  NASA  centers:  Ames  Research 
Center  housed  the  aeromechanics  laboratory  and  the  research  and 
technology lab headquarters, and LaRC included the Army’s  structures 
laboratory.  The  only AMRT  lab  complex  not  on a NASA  installation 
was  the applied technology lab at Ft.  Eustis, Va. 
LeRC and  the  Army  pursued  R&D  activities under  a  unique  agree- 

23 1 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

ment,  with  the Army  providing  funds  for  programs  of  mutual  interest 
and  adding  about  40 persons  (mostly  engineers,  scientists,  and  techni- 
cians) t o  the LeRC staff, all of  them supervised by Lewis personnel.  Ar- 
my  interests included the joint  aeronautical  research group, working on  
compressors,  turbines,  bearings,  seals, and gears, with  special attention 
to  Army  needs  in small-engine technology;  the technical  support group 
of  scientists  and  skilled  technicians,  set  up  t o   help  with  the  inhouse 
workload  created  by  Army  activities at the center;  and a small staff  of 
engineers  called  the  Army  aeronautical  research  group,  using  LeRC 
facilities to  pursue investigations of  interest to  the Army specifically. An 
instance  was  the  engine  test  cell  in  Bldg.  14  recently  activated  and 
primarily  operated  by  the  Army,  with  help  from  LeRC  experts  and 
resources,  said Propulsion Laboratory director John Acurio. 
Aiding Acurio  in  lab  operations and efforts  to  improve aircraft  pro- 
pulsion  were Curtis L.  Walker,  chief  of  the Army aeronautical research 
group, and administrative officer Gus Gold.  (Lewis News, Dec 23/77,4) 
*  JPL   reported  that  Dr.  M.  Kudret  Selcuk  of  its  energy-conversion 
systems section had developed a  fixed  solar collector using  a vee-trough 
concentrator and vacuum-tube  receivers to  produce temperatures above 
350°F for generating steam or  organic vapor,  or electricity to  drive tur- 
bines.  The system, on which NASA  had  obtained  a patent,  had  proved 
“far  superior t o  flat-plate systems,” Dr.  Selcuk said. 
The new  system had  no moving parts,  which made it unique.  Located 
on  the  roof  of  JPL’s  Bldg.  248,  its torpedo-like  g l a s s   tubes and piping 
would  remain  on  a  tilted  rack,  and the sheet-metal troughs  in an asym- 
metrical  V shape could  be reversed  a t  the spring and autumn equinoxes 
to   take best  advantage  of  the  sun’s  rays.  Heat  collected could  be  used 
directly for  shaft power  t o  drive conventional air conditioning systems, 
for space heating, or for other uses such as supplying process heat.  (JPL  
Universe, Dec 23/77,  2) 

JSC reported  that NASA  administrator Dr.  Robert A.  Frosch had ap- 
proved  development  of  a teleoperator  retrieval  system  to  be  flown  no 
later than Feb.  1980 as a Skylab-revisit  mission.  JSC would  be responsi- 
ble for integrating the TRS into the Shuttle and for planning and opera- 
tions.  Harold E.  Gartrell,  assistant manager of  the Shuttle payload  in- 
tegration and development  office a t  JSC, would  manage  JSC activities 
for the Skylab revisit and would work with the Shuttle program office on 
integrating that mission with the Shuttle orbital-flight test planners.  His 
office would  be  responsible  for interfaces outside JSC in preparing and 
conducting the mission.  (JSC  Roundup,  Dee 23/77,  1) 

0  MSFC  reported that Corning Glass Works, Canton, N.Y.,  had begun 

232 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

DECEMBER 

work  on   a  huge  primary  mirror  blank  for  NASA’s  Space  Telescope, 
designed t o  give astronomers a view to  the edge of  the universe. Corning 
would  work  under  a  $1.74  million  subcontract  from  Perkin-Elmer 
Corp.,  which would be responsible  for assembling the optical telescope. 
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. would build the spacecraft and support 
system and integrate the telescope into it. 
Scientists expected the space telescope  to  detect light  from  objects  14 
billion  light-years  from  earth;  it  might,  therefore,  be  able  t o   provide 
views  of  the  first  galaxies  a t   the  time  they  were  formed.  The  Hale 
telescope at the Mt.  Palomar observatory in Calif. could penetrate only 
about  2  billion  light-years  because  of  the  optical  degradation  from 
earth’s  atmosphere. The space telescope would be  carried by  the Shuttle 
to an orbit more than  3OOmi  above earth to  avoid  that  interference. 
Corning would deliver the first of  two 8ft discs t o  Perkin-Elmer within 
a yr and the spare by April 1979, for the process of grinding the blanks to  
an optical curvature,  The blank  would  be  l f t  thick  with  a 2ft-diameter 
center hole,  and would consist  of  solid inch-thick  top and bottom plates 
separated  by  a  weight-saving  structure of  open  cells  loin  long  and 4in 
square.  I t  would carry a thin metal film constituting the mirror or reflec- 
tive  surface;  glass  had  long  served  as best  mirror  material  because  its 
shape would change only slightly with changes in temperature,  so  that it 
maintained  image  quality.  More  than  4Oyr  ago  Corning had  made  the 
200in blank  for the Hale telescope out of borosilicate glass, having an ex- 
pansion of  32.5  on a  scale used  by  physicists;  the material  it would  use 
for the space telescope blank would have an expansion of  zero.  Corning 
had  chosen  the  new  material,  a  titanium  silicate called ULE  (ultra-low 
expansion) first formulated  in  1967, for ease of  handling and ultrasonic 
testing.  (MSFC Release 77-233) 

0  LaRC reported  that  its  plans  for  a  trash-burning  steam  plant  called 
Project RECOUP [see Oct. 61 had hit a snag when the center opened con- 
struction bids Dec.  7.  All four bids were higher than expected, the lowest 
being  about  $1.4  million  more  than  the  government’s  estimate,  which 
was  about  $8  million.  Funds  available  t o  the  center  for  the  plant,  in- 
cluding  contingencies,  totaled  no more  than  $8.4  million.  Leo  Daspit, 
LaRC project manager,  said he would have to  meet with his counterparts 
in  the city  of  Hampton  and at Langley AFB t o  “explore our  options.” 
(Langley Researcher, Dec 23/77,  3) 
*  LaRC  announced  i t   had  selected  a  firm  called  Mercury,  of  Tustin, 
Calif.,  to  negotiate a 3yr $2.4-million  contract for support services to  the 
center’s  steam  and  air-compression  facilities.  The  contract,  beginning 
Jan.  1,1978, would have two  lyr  unpriced options for extension. (LaRC 
Release 77-60) 

233 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

A  year-end  summary of  NASA  activities included  16  launch  efforts 
and  completion of  two  series of  manned Shuttle orbiter  tests.  Three of 
the  16  launches  had  failed,  2  destroying  launcher  and  spacecraft  im- 
mediately  after  liftoff;  the  third  resulted  from  upper-stage failure and 
did not put the spacecraft into proper orbit. (NASA Release 77-257; KSC 
Release 212-77) 

December 27: NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro-Electronics 
Division  of  Princeton,  N.J.,  a $10.5  million  fixed-price contract  for  a 
closed-circuit  television  system  to   support  the  Space Shuttle program. 
The contract,  running  from  Jan.  1978  through June  1982,  would  cover 
design,  development, production,  qualification, and  delivery of  CCTV 
systems for training, certification, and flight. I t  would include hardware 
for the first orbital test vehicle design, with options for TV equipment on 
additional  orbiters  and  for  Canada-built  remote  manipulator  systems. 
Cameras  and  monitors  would  fly  in  the  crew  compartment  and  the 
payload bay,  and on the arm of  the remote manipulator. JSC would pro- 
vide  technical direction.  (NASA Release 77-259) 

*  FBIS  reported that  “the world’s  northernmost New  Year’s  tree”  had 
been  lighted 500km from the geographical North  Pole,  carried there by 
members of the USSR’s  high-latitude North 29 air expedition with “New 
Year gifts and mail” for the drifting station North Pole 23.  Tass said the 
arctic “Fathers Frost” then visited an icebound island, base of  the North 
Pole  22  scientific station,  near  the  Canadian Arctic  archipelago in  the 
part  of  the Arctic  Ocean  most  remote  from  the  Soviet Union.  (FBIS, 
Tass in English, Dec 27/77) 

December 29: KSC  announced that the Thunderstorm Research Interna- 
tional Program (TRIP) combining efforts of  atmospheric physicists and 
lightning researchers from the U S . ,   Europe, and Africa would continue 
in  1978 as they had for the past 2 summers. At the recent meeting of  the 
American  Geophysical  Union  in  San  Francisco,  KSC  had  invited  the 
researchers to  continue their studies of  electrical properties,  origins, and 
effects of  thunderstorms. 
The KSC  Spaceport would  benefit  from  the  studies by  applying  the 
findings  in  Shuttle  launch  and  landing  operations;  to  have  many  in- 
vestigators in  the  same  area  studying the  same  storms and  exchanging 
data  would  offer .more  chances of  gaining  new  knowledge than  might 
come from  isolated studies. The researchers had  funded  their own pro- 
grams,  KSC  providing meteorological instrumentation, use of  the  local 
National Weather  Service  office,  and  normal  support  services  such  as 
power, communications, and  file processing. 
KSC,  hosting  the  program  for  a  third  consecutive  yr,  had  unique 

234 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

DECEMBER 

meteorological  facilities accumulated during the Apollo and Skylab pro- 
grams, plus a large number of summer thunderstorms occurring normal- 
ly in the area. Although KSC would not host the group after next yr, the 
1979  study  site  for  continuations  of  TRIP  would  be  the  Langmuir 
Laboratories a t  Socorro,  N.M.,  for  studies of  mountain  storms  of  the 
southwest.  (KSC  Release 217-77) 

0  ARC  reported  that  the  Galileo  memorial  scholarship  program 
established  in  1973 by  the  San Francisco  section  of  the  American  In- 
stitute of  Aeronautics  and Astronautics  and ARC  would  award  a  $750 
scholarship  and  other  prizes.  The  program  was  open  to   high  school 
seniors planning a career  in physical or natural  sciences, engineering, or 
mathematics, residents of  the area or children of  employees or retirees at 
ARC  or  of  Galileo crewmembers.  The program  was  a memorial  to  the 
men  who  died April  12,  1973,  in  an  accident involving the Galileo  I  (a 
modified Convair operated by ARC as a flying laboratory for research in 
aeronautics,  astronautics,  astronomy,  and  earth  observation).  (ARC 
Astrogram,  Dec 29/77,  4) 

During December: NASA reported  that Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr.,  civilian 
test  pilot  for  DFRC  since  1966 and  a  23-yr  veteran  of  the USAF,  had 
received  from the  Society of  Experimental Test  Pilots the  Iven  C.  Kin- 
cheloe award  as test  pilot  of  the year  for  his  work  in  the Space Shuttle 
approach-and-landing test program in which he piloted  the orbiter on 13 
test  flights beginning in Feb.  and ending in mid-Nov.  1977. Fulton was 
also flying the “triplesonic” YF-12 aircraft for NASA; in the past, he had 
flown  the XB-70  and was  launch pilot  for  the X-15  and other research 
vehicles. 
This  award was  the  second  top-level honor  for Fulton,  who won  the 
Harmon Trophy in  1962 as  an Air  Force  pilot  in  the  B-58 Hustler  test 
program a t  Edwards AFB that set an international altitude record.  In his 
work  for  the  Air  Force  Fulton  had  received  3  Distinguished  Flying 
Crosses, plus another DFC and 5 air medals for 5 5  missions in Korea and 
scores  of  humanitarian  missions  during  the  Berlin  Airlift  of  1948-49. 
(NASA Actv Dec  77,  8) 

0  The  USAF  announced  it  had  issued  contracts  to   Martin  Marietta 
Aerospace a t  Denver and General Dynamics Corp.3 Convair Divison a t  
San Diego for design of  a large space structure to  be carried into orbit on 
the Space Shuttle and erected and deployed in space. The contracts, each 
for  $750,000,  called  for  conceptual  design  of  a  flight-demonstration 
model  of  an  antenna-like  structure  to  be  assembled and  deployed  in  a 
form  exceeding  the  size  of  the  orbiter  cargo  bay  (6Oft  long  by  15ft  in 
diameter).  Plans  called  for  automated assembly  in  space with  manned 

23 5 

DECEMBER 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS. 1977 

supervision.  The  flight  article would  also  serve  to  verify  the  Shuttle’s 
ability to deploy other DOD  craft that might require assembly  in  orbit. 
(AFSC Newsreview, Dec  77, 4) 

236 

Appendix A 
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE 
FLIGHTS,  1977 

World  space activity in  1977  approached  the level  of  previous years: 
1 2 4  recorded launches, compared with  128  in  1976 and  125  in  1975. Of 
the total, the U.S.  had 26 launches, 24 of  them successful, as described in 
Appendix B.  The USSR  had 98 launches with  1 1  1  possible payloads, in- 
cluding a single eightfold comsat launch like those of  earlier years,  plus 
two  probes:  a Vertikal rocket launched to  a height  of  about  500km  on 
Aug.  30,  1977,  and  another  launched to   a height  of  about  1 5 0 km  on 
Oct.  25.  The  79  launches  (accounting  €or 86 payloads)  in  the Cosmos 
series, besides  the usual photo-reconnaissance,  radar-calibration,  com- 
munications,  electronic-intelligence, navigation,  and  test  vehicles,  in- 
cluded 4 antisatellite spacecraft and 3  targets; the ASATs (Cosmos 910, 
918,  961,  and 970) either plunged  into the Pacific Ocean or exploded in 
orbit.  The ocean-surveillance satellite Cosmos 954  exhibited difficulties 
with its control system 2mo after launch and finally crashed in Canada’s 
Northwest Territory in January 1978 with its nuclear reactor aboard. The 
USSR  also launched 6 spacecraft in  the Molniya  series; 4  in  the Meteor 
series;  3  manned  Soyuz  vehicles;  and  one  each  in  the Raduga,  Ekran, 
Prognoz,  Intercosmos, and Salyut series.  The remaining launch was  the 
cooperative  French-Soviet  spacecraft Signe  3 equipped  for  gamma-ray 
studies. 
Two  other  launches during  1977 were  Japan’s  test  vehicles,  Tansei 3 
launched  Feb.  19  from  the  Uchinoura  Space  Center,  and  Kiku  2 
launched Feb.  23  from  the Tanegashima Space Center. 
Sources of  the data in the accompanying table include the United Na- 
tions Registry of  Space Flights; the Satellite Situation Report compiled 
by  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center;  and  press  releases  of  NASA,  the 
Department of Defense, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra- 
tion,  and  other  government  agencies,  as  well  as the  Communications 
Satellite Corporation.  Soviet data  derive from  statements in  the  Soviet 
press,  international news service reports, and announcements and brief- 
ings by Soviet officials. Data on satellites of other nations come from an- 
nouncements of  their governments and international news services. 

237 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

9 
1 
-I 

cc 
1 
c, 

8 
1 
c, 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1971 

APPENDIX A 

2 
N 

2 
W 

I- 
d 
k 

239 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

n m 

240 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX A 

241 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

242 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

APPENDIX A 

s 

w 

z 

z 

v; 
m f 

n 10 ea 
n 
m 

P 
v1 

2 
P 

P 
r; 

E 
P 

R 
P 

!a 

243 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1917 

n N P 

8 
P 

9 
0 m 

P 
w 
m 

n 
8 
c) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

APPENDIX  A 

n m 
3 
W m 

n 2 

3 

245 

APPENDIX A 

'\ 
ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

n! 
8 

P x 

n z 
2 

I- B 
a 

9 
GJ 
3 
I- 
Q 

3 
cn 
m 

246 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX A 

.B B 

247 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX A 

09 3 

2 

m 00 m 

5 

w 
0 

z 
m f 

$ 
n m 
a 
4 

Y 
m m 

n 7 

(0 3 

249 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1917 

m 
Y d 
- 
P 
2 
a 

250 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX  A 

8 

2 
P 

N 2 

In - 
f 

9 
f 

2 
f 

25 1 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

R 

* 
A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

6 .; 
P C  

253 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

B 

3 

f 

m n 
m 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1971 

APPENDIX A 

f 

255 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

256 

ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX A 

9 
9 

9 
P 

z 
9 

cr 
Q 

cr 
Q 

cr 
Q 

s 
m 

t- n 
m 

3 
n 

2 

2 
z 

d 
111 

d n 

n m N 

E! 
d n 

257 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

R 
W 

Y 52 

R 

-. 
0 

m s 
n m 

m 8 

+- 

u 

m 
u d 
am 
mx 
a 

- 
m 
d n 

f 
d 
n 

- 
n 
d n 

r! 
d 
0 

2 
d n 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX A 

4 
s: 

B 
o! 

oc D 

Y 

J 

Y 

- 
N 
d cl 

hi !a 

A 
m 
N 

R 
8 

259 

Appendix B 
MAJOR  NASA LAUNCHES,  1977 

The following table of  major NASA  launches  includes payloads  car- 
ried by all rocket  vehicles larger than sounding rockets launched in  1977 
by NASA  or  under NASA  direction. 
During  1977, the U.S.  had  26  launches,  of  which  24 were  successful. 
Of  these,  10  were  launches  by  DOD.  Of  the  remaining  14,  3%   were 
launches  by  NASA  for  its  own  programs:  Heao  I, the  two  Voyager 
spacecraft launched in August and September, and Isee  I  (part of  a twin 
payload).  Launches  for  others  included 2%  for ESA  (Geos, Meteosat, 
and Isee 2 ) ;  2 for Japan (Himawari and S a b r a ) ;  Nato IIIB for NATO, 
Palapa 2  for  Indonesia,  Intelsat  IVA  F-4  for ComSatCorp,  Goes 2  for 
N O M ,  Sirio  for  Italy,  and a  Transat payload  for  the U.S.  Navy.  The 
unsuccessful attempts, both  in September, were OTS, a comsat for ESA 
destroyed  shortly after  launch,  and an Intelsat  IVA  launched  for Com- 
SatCorp that exploded  1 minute  into its  flight. 
The table includes vehicle and payload performance under categories S 
for  successful,  P  for  partially  successful,  and  U  for  unsuccessful.  A 
fourth category, Unk,  indicates payloads that did not operate because of 
vehicle failure. These unofficial categories do not take into account that 
U missions may  produce valuable information, or  that payloads with  a 
long-life  design  may  fail  to  meet  design  requirements and  become  of- 
ficially  unsuccessful  at  a  later  date.  Further  information  on  these 
launches appears in Appendix A  and in  the indexed  entries in  the text. 

I 

APPENDIX  B 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1911 

262 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX B 

263 

Appendix  C 
MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,  1977 

Manned spaceflight in 1977 was limited to 3 Soviet launches, Soyuz 24 
(to  dock  with  Salyut  5) and  Soyuz  25  and  26   to   dock  with  Salyut  6 ,  
launched Sept.  29,  1977. 
The space station Sulyut 5 ,  which had  been  launched  June 22,  1976, 
decayed from orbit Aug.  8,  1977 after  being used  for docking by  Soyuz 
flights 2 1 ,2 2 ,  and 23. The first attempt a t  docking with Salyut 6 was un- 
successful,  but  the  crew  of  Soyuz 26  occupied  the  station without  dif- 
ficulty  and  let  their  visitors  in  Soyuz  27  take  their  vehicle  home  the 
following January;  the men  from Soyuz 26 remained  in orbit,  returning 
in Soyuz 27  the  following March. 
At . the  end  of  1977,  the  U.S.  had  made  3 i   manned  spaceflights:  2 
suborbital, 20 in earth orbit, 3 in lunar orbit,  and 6 lunar landings, using 
43  different  crewmen.  The  USSR  had  made  30  manned  flights,  all  in 
earth orbit, with 38 cosmonauts. Total hours of  manned flight were,  for 
the US., 7681hr 10min; for the USSR,  6997hr  18min. Total cumulative 
man-hours  in space were,  for  the U S ,  22 503hr 39min;  for  the USSR, 
13 519hr  18min. 

APPENDIX C 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Appendix D 
NASA SOUNDING ROCKET  LAUNCHES,  1977 

The following table lists the 53 sounding rockets of  the Arcas class and 
above launched by NASA  in 1977. The launches took place in Australia, 
Canada, Norway,  and Sweden, as well  as in the United States. Payloads 
were  carried  for  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory,  the  Smithsonian 
Astrophysical  Observatory,  the  Uppsala  Ionospheric  Observatory, 
NOAA,  and  3  NASA  centers;  14  universities;  1  domestic  institute, 
M.I.T.;  and 3 foreign, the Univ.  of Adelaide,  the Univ.  of Bern,  and the 
Max-Planck  Institut.  Onboard  experiments  included  18  physics;  12 
astronomy;  10 aeronomy;  9  astrophysics;  3 vehicle-system  tests;  and  1 
space-processing test. 
Information  in  the  table  came  from  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s 
Quick-Look  Sounding Rocket  Data  sheets,  issued  after  launches,  with 
additional  information  from  some  of  the  experimenters  concerned. 
Launch  dates  in  the  table  are  local  time,  with  the  date  by  Greenwich 
Mean  Time (2) if  different. 

267 

APPENDIX  D 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1911 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX  D 

.g 
3 

.P 
R ca 
4 
1 
a 

.5 

c 

c 

c 

269 

APPENDIX D 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1977 

APPENDIX  D 

27 1 

APPENDIX D 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

272 

Appendix  E 
ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES 

Listed  here are  the abbreviations used f o r  citing sources  in the 
text. No t  all  the sources are listed, only those that are abbreviated. 

A A A S  Bull 

A&A 

A&A  I977 

ABC 
AEC  Release 
Aero Daily 
Aero Med 
A F  Mag 
AFHF Newsletter 
AFJ 
AFSC Newsreview 
AFSC  Release 
AIA  Release 

AIAA Facts 

AIAA Release 

AIP Newsletter 
AP 
ARC Astrogram 
Astro Journ 

Atlanta JC 
A v  W k  
B News 

American Association for  the Advancement  of 
Science’s A A A S  Bulletin 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics’  magazine,  Astronautics  &  Aero- 
nautics 
NASA’s  Astronautics and  Aeronautics,  1977: 
A  Chronology (this publication) 
American Broadcasting Company 
Atomic Energy Commission news  release 
Aerospace Daily newsletter 
Aerospace Medicine magazine 
Air  Force Association’s  Air Force Magazine 
A ir  Force Historical Foundation Newsletter 
Armed  Forces Journal magazine 
Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview 
Air  Force Systems Command news  release 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  of  America 
news  release 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics’ Facts 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astro- 
nautics news  release 
American  Institute  of  Physics Newsletter 
Associated  Press  news  service 
NASA Ames Research Center’s Astrogram 
American  Astronomical  Society’s  Astrophysi- 
cal Journal 
Atlanta Journal  Constitution newspaper 
Aviation  Week & Space  Technology magazine 
Birmingham News newspaper 

213 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Baltimore Sun newspaper 
Education  Foundation  for  Nuclear  Science’s 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
Business  Week magazine 
Chicago Daily News newspaper 
Chicago Tribune newspaper 
Canadian Press news  service 
Columbia Broadcasting System 
Chemical & Engineering News magazine 
Cleveland Plain Dealer  newspaper 
Cleveland Press newspaper 
Columbia Journalism Review magazine 
Communications Satellite Corporation news re- 
lease 
Congressional Quarterly 
Congressional Record 
Christian Science Monitor newspaper 
Chicago Tribune News  Service 
Detroit News  newspaper 
Denver Post newspaper 
Defense Atomic Support Agency news  release 
See FRC. 
Dow  Jones  news  service 
Department  of  Commerce Public  Information 
Office 
Department  of  Defense news  release 
Department  of  Transportation  news  release 
Executive Office of  the President news  release 
European Space Agency news release, use dated 
(not  numbered) 
Federal Aviation Administration  news  release 
Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet 
number 
Facts on File 
Flight  Research  Center  news  release,  after 
8 Jan.  1976, became Dryden Flight Research 
Center  (DFRC) news  release 
NASA  Flight Research Center’s X-Press 
General Electric Forum magazine 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard 
News 
NASA  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  news  re- 
lease  - 

APPENDIX E 

B Sun 
Bull A tom  Sci 

Bus  W k  
C Daily News 
C  Trib 
Can Press 
CBS 
C&E News 
C1 PD 
GI  Press 
Columbia J  Rev 
ComSatCorp Release 

CQ 
CR 
CSM 
CTNS 
D News 
D Post 
DASA Release 
DFRC 
DJ 
DOC P I 0  

DOD  Release 
DOT Release 
EOP Release 
ESA Release 

FAA Release 
FBIS - SOV 

FonF 
FRC Release 

FRC X -P r e ~ s  
GE Forum 
Goddard News 

3SFC  Release 

274 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX E 

GSFC SSR 

GT&E Release 
H  Chron 
H Post 
INTELSAT Release 

J A  
JPL Lab-Oratory 
JPL  Release 
JPRS 

JSC Release 

JSC Roundup 

JSR 

KC Star 
KC Times 
KSC  Release 

LA Her-Exam 
L A   Times 
Langley Researcher 

LaRC Release 
LATNS 
LeRC Release 
Lewis News 
M HER 
M News 
M  Trib 
Marshall  Star 

MJ 
MSFC  Release 

N Hav Reg 
N News 
N  Va Sun 

NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center’s  Satellite 
Situation Report 
General Telephone & Electronics news  release 
Houston Chronicle newspaper 
Houston Post  newspaper 
Intl.  Telecommunications Satellite  Org.  news 
release 
Journal  of Aircraft magazine 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory news  release 
Department  of  Commerce  Joint  Publications 
Research  Service 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space  Center 
(Manned  Spacecraft  Center  until  17  Feb. 
1973) news  release 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space  Center’s 
Space News Roundup 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and Astro- 
nautics’ Journal  of Spacecraft  and  Rockets 
magazine 
Kansas City Star newspaper 
Kansas  City Times newspaper 
NASA  John F. Kennedy Space Center news re- 
lease 
Los Angeles Herald-Examiner newspaper 
Los Angeles  Times newspaper 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center’s  Langley 
Researcher 
NASA  Langley Research Center news  release 
Los Angeles Times News  Service 
NASA  Lewis  Research Center news  release 
NASA  Lewis  Research Center’s  Lewis News 
Miami Herald  newspaper 
Miami News newspaper 
Minneapolis Tribune newspaper 
NASA  George 6. Marshall  Space Flight  Cen- 
ter’s  Marshall Star 
Milwaukee Journal newspaper 
NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center 
news  release 
New Haven Register  newspaper 
Newark News newspaper 
Northern  Virginia Sun newspaper 

275 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, ~ w i  

National Aeronautic Association News 
National  Aeronautic  Association’s  World 
and  U .S .A .   National  World  Aviation - 
Space Records 
National Aviation Club news  release 
National Academy of  Engineering news release 
North American Newspaper  Alliance 
National Academy  of  Sciences news  release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences - National  Re- 
search Council news  release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences - National  Re- 
search  Council - National  Academy  of 
Engineering News Report 
NASA Activities 
NASA  announcement 
NASA  Headquarters  “General  Management 
Review  Report” 
NASA  Historical Report No.  39 
NASA  History Office 
NASA  Headquarters  Week& Bulletin 
NASA  Office of  International Affairs 
NASA Legislative Activities Report, Vol. XIII, 
No.  8 
NASA  Office of  Legislative Affairs 
NASA  Headquarters  Mission  Operations  Re- 
port,  preliminary  prelaunch  and  postlaunch 
report series (information may be revised and 
refined  before publication) 
NASA  program  office  (for  the  program  re- 
ported) 
NASA  project  office  (for  the  project  re- 
ported) 
NASA  Headquarters news  release 
NASA  report of  sounding rocket  launching 
NASA  Special Publication  No.  4019 
National Observer magazine 
Nature Physical Science magazine 
National Broadcasting  Company 
National Geographic Society news  release 
NASA Management  Instruction 
NASA  Notice 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Adminis- 
tration  news  release 

APPENDIX E 

NAA News 
NAA  Record  Book 

NAC Release 
NAE Release 
NANA 
NAS  Release 
NAS - NRC  Release 

NAS-NRC-NAE 
News Rpt 

NASA Ac tv  
NASA  anno 
NASA  GMR 

NASA  HHR-39 
NASA  Hist Off 
NASA  Hq  WB 
NASA  Int Aff 
NASA  LAR,  XIIIA  

NASA  Leg  Off 
NASA  MOR 

NASA  prog  off 

NASA  proj  off 

NASA  Release 
NASA  Rpt  SRL 
NASA  SP-4019 
Natl  Obs 
Nature 
NBC 
NGS  Release 
NMI 
NN 
NOAA  Release 

276 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS, 1977 

APPENDIX  E 

NRL  Release 
NSC  Release 
NSC  News 
NSC  Letter 
NSF Highlights 

NSF Release 
NSTL  Release 

N Y  News 
N Y T  
NYTNS 
0 Sen  Star 
Oakland  Trib 
Omaha W-H 
ONR  Rev 
P  Bull 

P Znq 
P A 0  
PD 

P I 0  
PMR Missile 
PMR Release 
Pres Rpt 74  

SA 0  Release 

SBD 
Sci Amer 
Sci & Govt Rpt 

SciServ 
SD 
SD  Union 
SET Manpower 
Comments 

SF 

SF Chron 
SF Exam 

Naval Research  Laboratory news  release 
National Space Club news  release 
National Space Club News 
National Space Club Letter 
National  Science  Foundation’s  Science  Re- 
sources Studies Highlights 
National  Science Foundation news  release 
NASA  National  Space  Technology  Labora- 
tories  news  release 
New  York Daily News newspaper 
New  York Times newspaper 
New  York  Times News  Service 
Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper 
Oakland Tribune newspaper 
Omaha  World-Herald newspaper 
Navy’s  Office of  Naval  Research  Reviews 
Philadelphia  Evening  and  Sunday  Bulletin 
newspaper 
Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper 
Public Affairs Office 
National Archives and Records Service’s Week- 
ly  Compilation of Presidential Documents 
Public  Information Office 
USN  Pacific Missile  Range’s Missile 
USN  Pacific Missile  Range  news  release 
Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 
1974 Activities 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  news 
release 
Defense/Space Business Daily newspaper 
Scientific American magazine 
Science  &  Government  Report,  independent 
bulletin of  science policy 
Science Service News  service 
Space Digest magazine 
San Diego Union newspaper 
Scientific Manpower  Commission’s  Scientvic, 
Engineering,  Technical  Manpower  Com- 
ments 
British  Interplanetary  Society’s  Spaceflight 
magazine 
San Francisco Chronicle newspaper 
San Francis0 Examiner newspaper 

271 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

Soviet Aerospace newsletter 
Center  for Foreign Technology’s  Soviet Report 
(translations) 
Space Propulsion newsletter 
NASA  John F Kennedy Space Center’s  Space- 
port News 
IUWDS World Data Center A for Rockets and 
Satellites’ Spacewarn Bulletin 
NASA  compendium  of  sounding  rocket 
launches 
Soviet  Sciences  in  the  News,  publication  o f  
Electro-Optical Systems,  Inc. 
St. Louis Globe-Democrat newspaper 
St. Louis Post-Dispatch newspaper 
New Orleans  Times-Picayune newspaper 
Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology’s  Tech- 
nology Review 
Today newspaper 
Congressional testimony,  prepared  statement 
Prepared  report  or  speech  text 
Official  transcript  of  news  conference or   con- 
gressional hearing 
United Nations Public Registry of  Space Flight 
United  Press  International news  service 
U.S.  Geological Survey news  release 
U.S.  Postal Service news  release 
Washington Post  newspaper 
Washington Star-News newspaper 
NASA Wallops Flight Center news  release 
White House  news  release 
World Journal  Tribune newspaper 
Wall Street Journal newspaper 

APPENDIX  E 

Sov Aero 
Sov Rpt 

SP 
Spaceport News 

Space warn 

SR  list 

SSN  

St Louis G-D 
St Louis P-D 
T-Picay une 
Tech Rev 

Today 
testimony 
text 
transcript 

UN  Reg 
UP1 
USGS Release 
USPS Release 
w Post 
W Star-News 
WFC Release 
WH  Release 
WJT 
WSJ 

278 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS.  1977 

INDEX 

Index 
A-2,  187 
'4-10,  105 
AAAS. See Am.  Assn.  fo r  the Advance- 
ment  of  Science. 
abort,  123,  155-156,  189,  190 
Abruzzo, Ben,  172,  173 
absorption,  145 
Academy  of  Sciences,  PRC.  See China, 
Peoples Republic of. 
Academy  of  Sciences,  USSR.  See Soviet 
Academy of  Sciences. 
acceleration,  accelerator;  accelerometer 
117,  151,215,230 
accessibility, 224 
accidents,  19,  94,  105,  154-155,  224, 
235 
accuracy, 4,  9,  30,  55,  58,  79,  96,  121, 
158,  1% 
acoustics,  32,  61,  71,  105-106,  118 
ACPL.  See  atmospheric  cloud  physics 
laboratory. 
Acurio, John.  232 
Adams, Brock, 62 
additives,  1 
Adelaide, Univ.  of,  37 
Administracion National  de  Telecomun- 
icaciones. Paraguay,  135 
Administration  of  Long  Distance  Tele- 
communications, PRC,  154 
advanced civilizations,  143 
advanced  research  and  technology,  147, 
159 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
(ARPA), 5 ,  8 ,71  
Advanced  X-Ray  Astrophysics  Facility 
(AXAF), 228 
AEC. Atomic  Energy  Commission.  See 
Energy  Research  and  Development 
Administration. 
AE-D,  AE-E.  See  Atmosphere  Ex- 
plorers. 
AE R E Hartwell  Co.,  2 
aerial  survey.  See  monitoring;  sur- 
veillance. 
Aero Club of  Washington, 172 
Aerobee (sounding rocket), 37 
aerodynamics, 16,  28,  108,  118,  122-123, 
150-152,  154,  217-218,219 
Aeroflot  (USSR  passenger  plane  serv- 
ice),  29,  176-177 
aeronautical,  28,  61,  182,  195,  207, 
231-232,  235 

Aeronautics and  Space Research Faculty 
Program,  152 
aeronau t ica l   a n d   space   technology 
(AST). See NASA. 
Aeronutronic  Ford  Corp.  See  Ford 
Aerospace & Communications Corp. 
Aeroparque  George  Newbery.  Buenos 
Aires, 222 
Aerosat (ESA project),  16,  122.  174-175 
aerosols.  See atmosphere pollution. 
Aerospace Corp.,  48 
aerospace  environment.  See  environ- 
ment. 
aerospace  industry,  62,  107,  112.  134, 
148,  172,  182,  193,  213,  219 
aerospace  technology.  See  technology 
applications. 
Aetna Casualty & Surety Co.,  72 
affirmative  action.  See  equal  employ- 
ment  opportunity. 
Africa,  10,  110,  139,  157,  179,  198, 
210,225,  234 
Afro-American  Historical  &  Cultural 
Museum, 35 
age,  39,  214-215 
agricultural  production;  agriculture. 
See crops. 
agro-environmental  programs,  5,  106- 
107, 119,  147 
AIL  (division of  Cutler Hammer),  112 
ailerons.  177 
aiming.  121,  149-150,  150-152 
air cargo.  See air  freight. 
air carriers. See  airlines. 
Air  Force,  U.S.,  8,  13,  15,  36,  72, 
73,  105,  109.  111,  124-125,  132,  140 
145,  147.  148,  154-155,  159,  167, 
169.  172,  173,  177,  179,  181,  188, 
194,  201,  203,  205,  235 
-contractors,  7,  8,  18,  22,  73,  112, 
192,  235 
- F l i g h t   Dyn am i c s   L a b o r a t o r y ,  
U .S . ,   214 
-Geophysics  Laboratory  (AFGL), 
18.  93 
-Global  Weather Center, 58 
-Satellite  Communications  System 
(AFSATCOM), 22 
-Scientific  Advisory Board,  147 
-Systems  Command  (AFSC)  2,  18, 
203,  214 
air  freight,  112 
air pollution. See atmosphere pollution. 
air  sampling. See GASP. 

279 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

air  show. See Paris, France. 
air traffic,  43,  128,  173,213 
airborne monitoring, 55,  72,  204 
airborne  warning  and  control  system 
(AWACS),  53-54 
airconditioning, 29,  128,  179,  203,  213. 
232 
aircraft 
-civilian,  25,,60,  107,  130,  134,  192, 
222 
-communications,  13 
-design.  See design. 
- e n e r g y  
( A C E E )  
e f f i c i e n c y  
program, 79,  110,  128,  177,  180,  218 
-guidance,  7 
-industry.  See aerospace industry. 
-manufacturers.  See  aerospace  in- 
dustry. 
- m i l i t a r y ,   73,  74,  107,  147. 
154-155,  199 
-power  systems, 7 
-safety.  See safety. 
-targets,  71 
-testing,  61,  217-218 
-transport,  25,35,64,71,79,  128.218 
in  research,  58,  60, 61,  84, 
-use 
96, 134.  138-139.  161,  171,  180, 
192,  193-194,  199,  204,  208-209, 
216,  218.  221-222,  235 
aircushion (landing  system).  See landing. 
airdrop.  See drop. 
AiResearch Mfg.  Co.,  7 
airflow.  See aerodynamics. 
airfoils.  See  design, aircraft. 
airlift,  11 1 
airlines, 62.  122,  176,  177.  180,  190-191, 
193,  218,  220-221 
airlock 
Dec  10-31  (Soyuz 26 launch),  224 
airplanes. See aircraft. 
airports,  62,  66,  112,  152,  191,  213, 
218,  222 
airspace, 155 
airworthiness.  See  handling. 
Ak ad em ik   Ko ro lev   (USSR  sh i p ) ,  
127,  164,  198 
Alabama,  127,  1%.  211 
Ahbama  A&M  Univ.,  152 
A l a b am a   So c i e ty   o f   P r o f e s s i o n a l  
Engineers,  71 
Alabama Space & Rocket Center, 6,  71 
Alabama, Univ.  of,  74.  230 
alarm. See safety devices. 

280 

Alaska, 47,  134 
Alberta, Canada,  38 
Aldebaran (star),  3 
Aleksandrov, Anatoly P.,  89,  183 
Aleksandrov, L.A.,  167 
alert.  See safety devices. 
Alexander,  Dr. Carter,  85 
algae,  123 
algebra. See mathematics. 
Algernon  Blair  Industrial  Contrac- 
tors  Inc.,  139 
alien.  See  extraterrestrial. 
“All-American Boys”  (book), 204 
Allen,  Bryan,  182 
Allen,  H. Julian,  16 
alloys,  106,  170,  192 
Alpha Centauri (star),  37 
alterations. See modifications. 
altitude  (altimeter),  12,  58,  61,  63,  67, 
76,93,98,  135,  141,149.  150,  181,191, 
192,  193,  1%,  198,  202,  209,  211,  215, 
221,235 
aluminum, 45,  108,  119,  143,  170,  211, 
215 
American Airlines, 45 
American Assn.  for the Advancement of 
Science (AAAS), 39,  49 
American Bar Assn.,  13 
American Council on Education,  148 
American  Geophysical  Union, 22,  102, 
106,234 
American  Inst.  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics (AIAA),  19,  235 
American Machine & Foundry Co.,  175 
American Meteorological Society, 22 
American Physical Society, 75 
American  Society  for  Public  Adminis- 
tration, 229,  230 
American  Society  of  Engineering  Ed- 
ucation.  107,  152 
American  Society  of  Mechanical  En- 
gineers (ASME).  24 
American Univ.,  220 
Ames laboratory (NACA),  16 
Ames Research Center (ARC) 
-contracts,  173,  216 
-missions,  103,  159 
-people,  16,  85.  107,  147,  152,  166, 
167,  169,  190 
-programs,  15-16,  44,  47,  57.61,  68, 
72,  84,  85,  92,  107,  136,  137,  159, 
166,  167,  186,  188.  190,  208,  215, 
231,235 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

amino acids.  See organic. 
ammonia. See organic. 
ammunition.  See  weapons  systems;  ex- 
plosions. 
amplitude modulation (AM),  133 
Ams  2 ( U S A F  metesat), 244 
analog. See computers. 
analysis, 70,  167,  201,  211,  227 
Anderson, Donald, 6 
Anderson, Jack,  73 
Anderson,  Maxie,  172,  173 
Anderson, Robert, 73 
Andover,  Maine,  10 
Andrews AFB, Md.,  203 
Angola, Peoples Republic of,  179 
Anik  (Canadian comsat series). See Tele- 
sat Canada. 
animals, 68,  143,  146,  167,  201 
animation  (equipment,  exhibits,  etc.), 
172 
anniversaries. See observances. 
anomaly.  See  failure;  malfunction; 
problem. 
Antarctic, 31,  39,  66 
antennas, 33,  235 
-airborne,  spaceborne, 55,  235 
-ground-based,  4,  154-155 
antisatellite measures.  See interceptor sa- 
tellite. 
Antonov, O.K., 29 
Apollo,  28,  31,  44,  52,  63,  72,  75,  101, 
113,  115,  156,  191,  195,220,229,  235 
Apollo  4,  2 1 5 
Apollo  7 ,  24 
Apollo 9,  162,  191 
Apollo  IO, 128 
Apollo  11, 3,  132,  165,  181 
Apollo  12,  101,  161,  165 
Apollo  13,  101 
Apollo  14,  165,  195 
Apollo  IS, 5,  101,  165,  191,  195 
Apollo  16,  165 
Apollo  17,  51,  101,  165 
Apollo  lunar-surface  experiment  pack- 
ages (ALSEP), 156,  161,  165 
Apollo-Soyuz  Test  Project  (ASTP),  11, 
23,  52,  89-90,  121,  128,  132,  187 
applications, 56,  59,  176,  162,  168,  169, 
175,203 
Applications, NASA Office of  (OA).  See 
NASA. 
applications  sounding-rocket  program 
(ARSP),  138 

applications technology satellite.  See A t s  
1 .  
Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hop- 
kins Univ.  (JHU/APL),  197 
applied  research,  118 
approach  and  landing  tests  (ALT).  See 
also  Space  Shuttle,  testing,  143,  145, 
212,235 
appropriations.  See  Congress;  NASA 
budget. 
Arab nations. (See also Middle East),  14, 
103 
Araks (French experiment),  117 
Arava (Israeli transport aircraft),  71 
archives,  195 
arcing.  See insulation. 
ARC0  Inc.,  219 
Arctic,  140,  234 
Argentina, 222 
Ariane @SA launch vehicle), 16,  168,225 
Ariel  (U.K. satellite),  174 
Arizona, 47,  48,  80,  94,  193,  219 
Arizona  State Univ.,  192 
Arizona, Univ.  o f ,  21,  107,  137 
Arkalyk, USSR,  27 
Arktika (USSR  ship), 158 
Armed  Forces Radio and TV Service,  10 
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 
31 
Army,  U.S. See also Defense, U.S.  Dept. 
of ,   115,  134,  172,  194,  201,  216,  227, 
23 1-232 
-Air  Corps, U S . ,   131 
-Ballistic  Missile  Agency  (ABMA), 
215 
-Chemical  Corps,  175 
-(Corps  of)  Engineers, 33 
-Propulsion  Laboratory, LeRC, 23 1 
Arnold, Dr.  James,  146 
artifacts,  124 
artificial environment. See environment, 
Aryubhatu (India domestic comsat), 174 
Ascension Island, 8 
Asia,  10,  154 
Asimov,  Isaac, 57 
Asinyarov, Gennady, 124 
Assateague  (Wildlife  Refuge;  Coast 
Guard sta.),  Va.,  69,  164 
assembling;  assembiy,  45,  50,  64, 106. 
113,  133,  158,  160,  192,  208,  211,  220, 
228,  230,  233,235 
ASSESS  (airborne  science/Spacelab  ex- 
periment-system  simulation), 72,  84 

28 1 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

ass,essment. See  evaluation. 
asteroids, 157, 106, 124, 145, 207 
Astrain, Santiago, 65 
astrometrics, 165 
astronauts  (See  also  individual  names.), 
5, 6, 10, 11, 18, 84, 85. 121, 132, 140, 
144, 157, 162, 172, 179, 181, 185, 191, 
198, 201, 204, 205-206, 210, 211, 214, 
222,228 
astronomers, 9, 10, 18,25,31,32.47,48, 
56, 63, 66, 69, 72, 84, 108, 121, 137, 
152. 165, 167, 189, 204, 206-207, 210, 
216,227, 233, 235 
astrophysics,  137, 224, 228 
Atchafalaya River, 33 
Atkinson, Richard C.,  117-118 
Atlantic Ocean,  8, 10, 27, 30, 127, 139, 
167, 171, 172, 180, 198, 210, 227 
Atlas  (NASA launch vehicle), 229 
Atlas Centaur,  11.37, 149, 180,202,205, 
209, 221, 229 
atmosphere 
-interference,  10, 186, 233 
-ionosphere,  58, 85 
-magnetosphere,  34,  102, 168-169, 
176 
-planetary,  39, 49, 55, 59-60, 66, 68, 
69, 92-93, 102, 119, 121, 136, 156, 
161, 166, 184, 187, 207, 221-222 
-pollution,  72, 84, 138, 141, 165, 204 
-research,  21-22, 54, 56, 59, 66, 68, 
127, 131,  137-138, 148, 166, 175, 
197-198, 234 
-stratosphere,  138, 192 
-upper  atmosphere, 19, 54, 193, 208- 
209 
Atmosphere Explorer  (AE) missions,  136 
atmospheric  cloud  physics  laboratory 
(ACPL), NOAA,  25, 130, 175 
atmospheric physics  laboratory.  See  at- 
mospheric cloud physics laboratory. 
a tmospher ic   variability  experiments 
(AVE),  127 
atomic  energy.  See  power  sources, 
nuclear. 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  (AEC).  See 
Energy Research and Development Ad- 
ministration (ERDA). 
Ats  I, 64 
attitude  control  (See  control  systems.), 
182 
auroras, 38, 40, 85 
Australia, 10, 37,48,69,81-82, 103, 133, 
162, 174, 212 

282 

Austria, 32, 103 
automated  systems, 45, 47, 74, 76, 106, 
109-110, 113, 119, 131, 151-152, 153, 
170, 178, 192, 193, 196, 198, 216,219, 
220, 221-222, 224, 225, 229, 235 
automobiles. See  vehicles. 
autopilot, 96 
Avco Corp.,  177 
Avery,  Robert M.,  25 
aviation industry. See aerospace industry; 
airlines. 
aviation research, 60, 213 
aviation safety reporting system (ASRS), 
43, 128 
avionics, 61, 112, 202, 207 
Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet, 107 
awards, 11, 19,20,44,49,71,87,93,101, 
124, 133, 145, 152, 175, 181, 182, 188, 
203, 205, 212, 220, 235 
Azores Islands, 181 

B-1  (bomber),  7, 112, 155 
B-52 (U.S. aircraft),  119, 21 1 
B-58, 235 
B-70 (planned U.S. bomber),  13 
B-707. See Boeing 707. 
B-727. See Boeing 727. 
B-737 (LaRC  flying  laboratory).  See 
Boeing 737. 
B-747. See Boeing 747. 
background, 208-209, 210 
backup.  See  schedule; support systems. 
bacteria, 63, 201 
Bahamas, 162 
Bahcall, Dr.  John,  10 
Baker,  James  L., 64 
Ball, George W., 40 
Ball  Brothers Research  Corp.,  136, 181, 
186 
ballistic missile.  See weapons systems. 
balloons,  76, 93, 98, 119, 127, 138, 172, 
173, 181, 188, 215, 227 
Baltimore, Md.,  12, 164 
Banana  River,  28-29, 57 
Bane, Don,  101 
Barbon, Jill,  192 
Barents Sea,  57 
barge, 160, 211 
barium, 36 
Baron, Bob, 218 
Barrere, Marcel,  184, 185 
basic  research, 117-1 18 
Battelle Institute, Columbus div.,  43 
Battelle Memorial  Institute,  17, 231 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

batteries, 15,  84,  94,  120,  149,  216 
battery power.  See power sources. 
Baykonur,  USSR,  222 
beacons,  6,  132-133,  172,  173 
beam fabrication. See space construction. 
Bedford.  Mass., 172 
Belem, Brazil, 222 
Belenko.  Lt.  Viktor, 26 
Belgium,  32,  103,  154 
Belgrade, Yugoslavia,  130 
Bell Helicopter Textron Co.,  216 
Bell  Laboratories, 62,  166,  177 
Belton, Dr.  Michael  J.S.,  38-39 
Bendix Corp.,  11,  63,  74,  150,  156 
"bends."  See hyperbaric research. 
Bennich,  Jerry D.,  230 
Benton,  Dr.  Eugene,  167 
Bering Strait,  178 
Berlin,  Germany, 235 
Berlin, Univ.  of,  115 
Bermuda Triangle,  64, 173 
beryllium,  30 
Betelgeuse (star),  104 
bicentennial, U.S., 182 
big-bang theory. See theory. 
Big Bird  (USAF reconsat), 22 
Bilfiu, David S.,  72,  84 
binary stars.  See stars. 
biochemistry,  123,  190 
bioengineering. See biology. 
biology,  4,  32,  62,  65,  68,  71,  85,  101, 
125,  159-160,  161,  167,  174,  184,  190, 
201,  206,  215-216 
biomedical  applications  office,  MSFC. 
See medical research. 
biophysics,  146 
Bios  3  (Soviet experiment).  123 
BiosateIIite 3 (U S .  mission),  160 
biosats.  159-160,  167 
black history,  18,  35 
black  holes,  37,  149,  210 
blackout (communications), 4 
blades,  propeller. See propellers. 
Blamont, Jacques, 119 
Bledsoe, Maj.  Adolphus H.,  181 
Bleyle, Wilhelm,  KG,  70 
blood,  133 
boats. See ships. 
Boeing  Commercial  Airplane  Co.,  1 10, 
128,  163.  192 
Boeing  Company, 8,  22,  42,  53,  112,  173 
Boeing  Engineering  and  Construction 
Co.,  129 

Boeing Services Intl.,  102 
Boeing 707,66,  182 
Boeing  727,  128,  162 
Boeing 737,  132,  163,  212,  222 
Boeing 747,  27,  45,  55,  64, 67,  107-108, 
110,  113,  118,  122,  132,  135,  141, 
150-151,  171,  175.  179,  182,  191.  196, 
202,201,211,228 
Boese,  Dr. R.W.,  166 
Boland.  Rep.  Edward P . ,   108,  135 
Boldt,  Dr. Elihu, 212 
bolides.  See meteorites. 
Bolivia,  196 
bombs.  See explosives. 
Bond,  Langhorne M.. 62 
bones.  See medical  research. 
Bonn  Institute for Radio Astronomy,  10 
Bonneville  Power  Administration, U.S., 
80 
book.  See publications. 
boom  (aircraft;  spacecraft), 75,  155-156, 
167,  186,  195,  218 
boosters. See rockets. 
borosilicates,  233 
Boston Univ.,  147 
botany,  32,  201 
Bovay  Engineers,  Inc.,  121 
Bradt, Dr. Hale, 212 
brain,  146 
brakes;  braking,  122-123,  150-152,  171, 
1% 
Brantley, Whitt Jr.,  128 
Braufman, Adam  I.,  4 
Brayton engine,  159 
Brazil,  134,  222 
breeder  reactor. See power  sources, 
nuclear. 
Brezhnev,  Leonid,  76,  143 
briefing. See media. 
Brigham City, Utah,  133 
Bristol Scout (WWI U.K.  plane), 141 
Britain.  See United Kingdom. 
British  Isles  (See also  United  Kingdom.), 
40 
British Royal Society. See  Royal. 
broadcasting. See frequencies, broadcast; 
media. 
Brooksbank, William A.  Jr.,  215 
Broome, C.  Calvin,  125 
Brown, Gov. Edmund G.,  Jr.,  148 
Brown, Harold,  74,  147 
Brussels, Belgium, 63 
Bryson Construction Co.,  64 

.  283 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

BSE,  229 
budget 
-federal,  35-36 
-military,  22,  52,  54 
-NASA.  See NASA,  budget. 
Buenos A r e s ,  Argentina, 212,222 
Buffalo, 213 
Bugreyev, Nikolai,  124 
buildings;  building  trades  (see  also  con- 
struction of  facilities.), 213 
Bulgaria, 20,  159,  174 
buoy, 63,79 
buoyancy,  118 
Bureau of  Land Management,  DOI, 47 
burn; burner; burnout,  188,  199,211,233 
business.  See  aerospace  industry;  com- 
mercial  applications;  industrializa- 
tion. 
Buzzard, WalIace, 214 

C-5  galaxy,  111,  122,  222 
c-47,  12 
C-band communications, 139 
cabling, 98,  113 
calculations;  calculators.  See  computa- 
tions. 
calibration,  37,  42,  85,  113,  155,  195, 
210 
California,  36,  40,  47,  80,  81,  105,  148, 
162,  202.  228 
Ca l iforn ia   Ins t i tu te   of  Technology 
(CalTech),  44,  137,  150,  190,  203, 
230 
California, University of 
-Berkeley,  147,  167,  209,  230 
-San  Diego,  145-146,  150,  212 
Calio, Dr. Anthony J.,  175,  220 
Callisto, 166 
calorimeter. See instrumentation. 
Calspan Gorp.,  216 
CalTech.  See  California  Institute  of 
Technology. 
CAMAC (electronic assembly system), 50 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  40 
cameras (See also photography; imaging), 
216 
-earth-based,  167 
-satellite,  37,  176,  189,  210 
-television,  12,  33,  104,  121,  160,  198, 
224,  234 
camouflage, 177 
Canada,  11,  19,  32,  38,  56,  103,  110. 
122,  134,  138,  153,  163,  175,  208, 
213,  229 

284 

Canadian  Department  of  Communi- 
cations, 19,  47 
Canberra, Australia, 4,  82 
cancer,  146,  216 
capacity, 206 
Cape Canaveral, Fla.,  8,52,62.  102,  103, 
132,  167,  168,  195,  202 
Cape Town,  South Africa,  182 
capital punishment.  See  law enforcement; 
public  policy. 
captive  flight,  17,  103,  107-108,  118, 
122-123,  135 
Carassa, Prof.  Francesco, 157 
carbon  14 dating, 39-40 
carbon compounds, 206 
careers, 41 
cargo-integration test  equipment  (CITE), 
185-186 
cargo 
logistics  airlift-systems  study 
(CLASS),  112 
cargo transfer (see also payloads),  98 
cargoes  (See  also  air  freight;  payloads; 
shipping.),  162,  214 
Caribbean Sea,  IO, 171,  176 
Carr,  Gerald A.,  121 
carrier aircraft.  See Boeing  747. 
Carruthers, Dr.  John R.,  62 
cars. See vehicles. 
Carter,  President  Jimmy,  1,  10,  23,  30, 
38,  48,  52,  56,  62,  64, 65,  67,  71, 
72,  93,  102,  111,  114,  131-132,  185, 
218 
Caruso, Andrea, 65 
Casani, John,  137,  167 
castings, 106 
Cataldo, Charles E.,  11 
catalog, 44,  117,  129,  205 
catalyst, 221 
catastrophe, 149 
celebrations.  See observances. 
celestial, 69,  188 
celestial sphere. See galaxy. 
cells,  146,  152 
censorship, 130 
Centaur,  180,  220,  221 
centers,  NASA.  See  individual  center 
listings. 
Centre  National  d’Etudes  Spatiales 
(France),  66,  119 
centrifugal force, 57,  119 
Cerenkov radiation, 31 
certification, 182 
Chad, Republic of,  110 
changes. See modifications. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

channels  (communications).  See  Fre- 
quencies, broadcast. 
Chapman, blaj.  Gen. Kenneth R.,  53 
Chappell, b r .  C.R.,  67 
charge-coupled devices, 22,  71 
charged particles.  See energetic particles. 
Charyk, Dr.  Joseph V., 72 
Chase P I W S  (See also T-38.),  155 
Chaudiere River,  110 
checkout, 11,211,223-225 
chemicals,  18,  73,  85,  101,  136,  146, 
161-162,  188,  201,  230 
chemistry,  17,207,222 
Chesapeake Bay,  63 
Chicago, Ill.,  11 1 
Chicago, University of,  102 
Chien.  Hsueh-shen,  131 
Chile,  103 
China,  People’s  Republic  of,  131,  154. 
182,229 
Chincoteague,  Va.,  69, 164 
Chirivella, Dr.  Jose, 221 
Chiron, 204 
chlorella, 123 
chlorine compounds, 146 
Christmas Islands, 41 
chrome;  chromium, 175,  230 
Chryse Planitia (region of  Mars),  70.  125 
Chrysler Corporation,  11 
cinema.  See  films. 
circuits,  133,  154 
city-federal cooperation, 8,  188 
civil aviation, 60, 110,  122,  178,  192 
Civil Service Commission, U S .   (See also 
employment;  NASA  management.), 
104,  161,  215 
civilians, 21,  25,  121,  140,  148,  163.  173. 
179,  195,  201,  205,  231,  235 
Clark,  Ray, 24 
Clarksburg, Md.,  138 
clay,  190 
cleaning, 218 
Cleveland, Ohio,  12 
clocks,  5 1  
closed universe.  See theory. 
clothing, 59, 201 
clouds (cloudcover), 18.25,36-37,39,85, 
119,  127,  130,  210 
coal (see also fuel.),  65,  73,  178 
Coast Guard, U.S., 79,  206 
coastal zone color scanner, 194 
Cohen, Aaron,  143 
cold,  227 

Colin, Dr, Lawrence,  166 
College of  William and Mary,  18 
Colli.  Jean-Claude, 14 
collimator. See instrumentation. 
Collins, Michael,  116,  181 
collision (See also crash;  accident.),  155, 
156,  177 
colloquium.  See  meetings. 
Colman, Everett R..  133 
Cologne. W. Germany,  84 
Colombia, 134 
color,  142,  165,  194 
Colorado, 80,  161,  176 
Colorado, University of,  137 
Columbia University, 37,  93,  114 
Columbus, Ohio, 17 
Columbus medal,  188 
Coma cluster (stars),  37 
comets.  204,  207 
commands, 133,  186 
commemoration.  See observances. 
(See  also 
Commerce,  U.S.  Dept.  of 
N O M . ) ,  67,  114,  141,  193 
commercial airlines.  See airlines. 
commercial applications (See also indus- 
trialization.),  59,  139,  163-164,  169, 
195,  199-200 
commercialization.  See  industrialization. 
committees, congressional. See Congress. 
communications 
-global  Systems, 38,  124-125.  198,220 
-lightwave,  62 
-problems,  118,  131,  134,  157 
-radio,  19,  74,  139 
-relay.  See relay. 
-satellites.  See  comsats. 
-spacecraft,  55,  136-137,  226 
-systems,  74,  118,  122,  180 
Communications  Satellite  Corporation 
(ComSatCorp),  10,  65,  72,  120,  138, 
169-170,  175,  206,  213,  217,  228, 
229 
Communications  Technology  Satellite 
(Crs), Canada,  13,  47,  138,208 
communist bloc.  See Soviet bloc. 
community  relations  (See  also  public 
relations.)  3,  74.  192 
Compagnia lndustriale Aerospaziale,  157 
comparisons, 13,26,  121,212 
compass. See  instrumentation. 
compatibility, 185 
competition (See also contest.),  71 
-economic,  8.  62,  153-154,  187,  203 

285 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

-national  Science,  133 
Complex 39B,  KSC.  128 
components.  See  instrumentation. 
composite. 
-fuels,  133 
-materials,  45,  76,  79,  128,  163-164, 
177,  180 
computations  (See  also  measurements.), 
27,  142,  227 
computers, 70,  143,  227 
-airborne,  26 
-assembly,  50 
-enhancement.  See data processing. 
-maintenance,  74,  221 
-programs,  21,  128,  202-203 
-software,  38 
-spacecraft,  33-34,  55,  66,  150-152, 
155-156,  192,  217 
-systems,  118,  155-156,  198,  213 
computerization. See  automated systems. 
ComSatCorp. See Communications Satel- 
lite Corporation. 
Comsat  General  (subsidiary  of  ComSat- 
Corp).  72,  124,  139 
comsats  (See also  names  of  individual 
communications  satellites.),  4,  6, 
7-14,  22,  32,  36,  38,  51-52,  54, 
72,  122,  135,  153-154,  156-157,  161, 
168,  173,  175,  181,  182,  202,  207, 
208,  209,  221,  226,  229 
Comstar system (domestic comsats).  72 
Comstar-C, 229 
Comstock, Bruce,  181 
Conant. William W.,  79 
concept, 98 
Concorde, 53,  66,  151.213 
concrete, 1% 
condensation. 9 
conduction, 141 
Cone, Dr.  Clarence D..  Jr.,  146 
conferences.  See meetings. 
configuration, 17,  133,  134,  138,216,218 
222,225 
confirmation, 188,  1% 
Congo, Peoples Republic of  the,  198 
Congress, U.S.,  108,  121,  132 
-conference  committee, 108,  135 
-House  of Representatives, 38,60,64, 
108,  124-125,  180 
-Senate,  56,  62,  111,  114,  195,  217 
conjunction period  (astronomical),  15 
conservation.  11-12,  185 

286 

Consiglio  Nazionale  della  Richerche 
Italy.  See  Natl.  Research 
(CNR), 
Council. 
console, medicai communications, 74 
constellations, 104 
Constitution, U S . ,   62 
construction of  facilities,  53,  62,  63,  64, 
65,  70,  72,  80, 113,  131,  132,  139,  188, 
208.228-229.233 
consumables. See supplies. 
containerless processing  (See  also  new 
techniques.),  30.  105,  192 
contamination  (See  also  pollution.)  30, 
110-111,  168,  204 
contest,  162,  182 
Continental (aircraft engine),  130 
contingency. See emergencies. 
contour mapping.  See topography. 
Contractors Cargo Co.,  113-1 14 
control;  control  centers,  14.  15,  101, 
155-156,  171,207,  228 
-Systems,  23,  30,  55,  63,  74,  %,  110, 
118,  121,  125,  133,  134 ,   135,  136-137, 
146,  149-150,  150-152,  157.  160, 
161,  178-179,  186,  192,  199,  202-203, 
207,  216,  221,  223-225 
control, weather.  See meteorology. 
Controlled  Biosynthesis  Labora tory ,  
USSR,  123 
controllers.  See controls. 
controversy, 40-41 
Convair Division. See General Dynamics. 
Convair 990. See Galileo. 
conventional.  8,  %,  129,  134.  199-200, 
213-214,  216 
conversion,  energy/power.  See  power 
sources,  conversion;  solar conversion 
devices. 
cooking,  124 
cooling  (See  also cryogenics.).  132,  153, 
213,  231 
Cooper, Henry S.F., 49 
Cooper, Robert S., 161 
coopera t ion   (See  a lso   city-federal; 
industry-government; international; in- 
terservice;  NASA  research;  state- 
federal.),  59 
Coordinating Committee of Nations,  141 
coordination, 33.61,  84,  159,  162 
copper,  143 
Cornell University,  48,  59,  69,  124,  143, 
177 
Corning Glass Works,  232-233 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

I N D E X  

corrosion, 11 
Cortright, Dr. Edgar M . ,  203 
Cosmic Background Explorer, 50 
cosmic  radiation,  rays,  31-32,  39-40, 
149-150,  153, 188,  190, 208,  212, 215 
Cosmic Research  Institute, USSR, 66 
cosmology, 56,  228 
cosmonauts  (See  also  the  names  of  in- 
dividuals.), 10, 20, 23, 26-27,  189-190, 
223-225 
Cosmos 782,  159-160 
Cosmos 888,238 
Cosmos 889,238 
Cosmos 890,238 
Cosmos 891,239 
Cosmos 892, 239 
Cosmos 893, 239 
Cosmos 894,240 
Cosmos 895, 240 
Cosmos 896,240 
Cosmos 897, 240 
Cosmos 898,241 
Cosmos 899, 241 
Cosmos 900, 241 
Cosmos 901, 241 
Cosmos 902, 241 
Cosmos 903, 242 
Cosmos 904.242 
Cosmos 905, 242 
Cosmos 906,242 
Cosmos 907, 243 
Cosmos 908. 243 
Cosmos 909, 243 
Cosmos 910,  243 
Cosmos 91 I ,  244 
Cosmos 912, 244 
Cosmos 913, 244 
Cosmos 914,  244 
Cosmos 915, 245 
Cosmos 916, 245 
Cosmos 91 7, 245 
Cosmos 918, 245 
Cosmos 919,  246 
Cosmos 920, 246 
Cosmos 921, 246 
Cosmos 922,247 
Cosmos 923, 247 
Cosmos 924, 247 
Cosmos 925, 247 
Cosmos 926, 247 
Cosmos 927, 247 
Cosmos 928,  248 
Cosmos 929,  158,248 

Cosmos 930, 248 
Cosmos 931,248 
Cosmos 932, 248 
Cosmos 933, 249 
cosmos 934,249 
Cosmos 935, 249 
Cosmos 936,  159,  167, 206, 249 
Cosmos 937, 250 
Cosmos 938.250 
Cosmos 939,250 
Cosmos 940,250 
Cosmos 941, 250 
Cosmos 942, 251 
Cosmos 943,251 
Cosmos 944, 251 
Cosmos 945, 251 
Cosmos 946, 25 1 
Cosmos 947, 252 
Cosmos 948,252 
Cosmos 949, 252 
Cosmos 950, 252 
Cosmos 951, 253 
Cosmos 952.  253 
Cosmos 953, 253 
Cosmos 954, 253 
Cosmos 955,253 
Cosmos 956,  254 
Cosmos 957,  254 
Cosmos 958, 255 
Cosmos 959,255 
Cosmos 960, 255 
Cosmos 961, 256 
Cosmos 962, 256 
Cosmos 963, 257 
Cosmos 964, 257 
Cosmos 965, 257 
Cosmos %6, 258 
Cosmos %7,  258 
Cosmos 968. 258 
Cosmos 969, 259 
Cosmos 970, 259 
Cosmos 971,  259 
Cosmos 972, 259 
Cosmos 973, 259 
cost reduction,  12, 15, 35, 47,  50, 55 ,   57, 
58,61,65,66,73,80,94,  104, 108-109, 
111,  118.  131,  145,  156,  161, 162-163, 
175,  178,  179,  188,  208,  218,  219, 
220,  228 
cotton, 59 
counseling, 148 
countdown. See launch control. 
counting.  189, 193 

287 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

court trials.  See judicial proceedings. 
Cousteau, Jacques-Yves, 149 
crash,  105 
craters, 76, 124 
Craven Point,  N.J.,  63 
creation of  universe. See theory. 
Creole,  103 
crew  (See  also  astronauts;  cosmonauts; 
Space Shuttle, crew; pilots;  payload or 
mission  specialists;  manned  flight;  in- 
dividual names.),  193, 198, 223-225 
criminal  justice.  See  law  enforcement; 
judicial proceedings. 
Criswell,  Dr.  David,  157 
criticism, 58-59, 105, 187, 204 
crops, 5, 25, 59, 119, 141, 147, 165, 193, 
218 
cross-country  Shuttle  flights.  See Space 
Shuttle testing. 
crowding. See frequencies, broadcast. 
cruise missiles.  See weapons systems. 
cryogenics (See also cooling.), 50,58. 132, 
136. 160, 186 
crystal growth, 62, 192 
Cs (Sakura, Japan cornsat), 112,226,258, 
261, 263 
Cuba, 20, 174, 183, 196 
cultural affairs,  130, 131, 143, 164 
Cunningham, Walt, 204 
Cygnus (constellation), 107 
Czechoslovakia, 20, 159, 174, 1% 

damage, 66, 80, 119, 146, 154-155, 168, 
180, 213-214 
danger  (See also  safety.),  98, 127, 160. 
184 
Darmstadt, W. Germany, 74, 210 
Daspit,  Leo, 233 
data 
-acquisition,  4, 5, 14, 15.  62, 63, 72- 
73, 112-113, 145, 147, 171, 186, 189, 
192, 194. 207,219-220 
-analysis.  15, 171 
-collection.  See  data acquisition. 
-distribution,  111,  134, 186-187, 189 
-management,  169, 174, 185 
-processing,  7, 56, 71, 136-137, 142, 
143, 147, 234 
-relay.  See relay. 
-transmission,  63, 125, 132-133. 139, 
154, 155.  157, lS8, 163, 171, 214 
-users,  58, 111,  143, 186-187, 210 
Davidsen, Dr.  Arthur,  121 
288 

daylight;  daytime,  158, 195 
DC-10,  67, 79, 132 
death,  16. 19, 29, 74, 105,  115, 235 
debris, 98 
decompression sickness (“the bends”). See 
hyperbaric  research. 
deep space network,  154, 165-166 
defectors. 13, 26 
defects.  See malfunctions; problems. 
Defense Communications Agency, 65 
Defense,  U.S. Dept.  of  (DOD)  (See also 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency; 
Air  Force, U.S.; Army,  U.S.; Marine 
Corps,  U.S.; Navy,  U.S.), 6, 7, 38. 
52, 53, 54, 59, 65, 74, 105, 109, 112, 
114, 122, 132, 140, 141-142, 154-155, 
162, 163, 177, 197, 203, 211, 236 
-contractors,  7, 8, 22, 109 
-unidentified  spacecraft, 83, 177, 197, 
239, 241,243. 246,254, 258 
defense  satellite-communications  system 
(DSCS), 83-84, 124, 243 
defense spending, 134, 194 
defense systems.  See weapons systems. 
dehumidifying, 16 
Deimos (moon of Mars),  124, 152 
delay (See also problems.),  103, 131, 137, 
149-150, 157,  168,  171.  193.  209, 
217 
delivery, 206.  221 
Delta (NASA  launch vehicle),  14, 37, 52, 
73, 106, 111,  112, 145, 156, 168, 171, 
180, 193, 195, 202, 205, 210, 229 
demonstration  (See  also  exhibits.),  45, 
113-114,  130-131,  148,  173.  179, 
186,  1%.  206, 212,  217-218,  222, 
228,235 
Denmark,  1,  154 
density.  93,98, 124, 132, 168, 222 
Denver, Colorado,  13 
deployment, 75, 93, 155, 198, 211, 221, 
235-236 
depreciation, 163 
Desert  Research  Institute. 25 
deserts, 150 
design 
-a ircraft ,28 ,29 ,61 ,71 ,110 .112 ,130 ,  
138, 151,  152, 180, 192, 199,  217- 
218, 219 
-engineering,  24. 34. 107,  147, 153, 
154, 160, 169, 173, 207 
-instrumentation,  42, 47. 64, 68, 69, 
71. 135, 165, 208-209, 211 
-ships,  2 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

INDEX 

-spacecraft,  43,  48-49,  117,  121,  137, 
156-157,  160,  162-163,  235-236 
destruction;  destruct  system  (See  also 
interceptor satellites.),  177,  213,  234 
detection; detectors, 22,31-32,58,63,71, 
80,  101,  127,  140,  149,  160-161,  176, 
188,  189,  196,  204,  210,  215,  216,  233 
detente, 144 
Detroit Diesel  Allison,  134 
deuterium, 109 
developing nations,  130 
deviations (See  also  malfunctions.),  96, 
190,223 
devices. See  equipment;  instrumentation. 
diagnosis.  See medical  research. 
diesel,  179 
diet.  See food. 
difficulty. See problems. 
digital.  See computers. 
dimensions.  See  size. 
diplomacy.  See international relations. 
direct broadcast,  129-130,  154 
direct  readout.  See real-time monitoring. 
direction.  See  aiming; orientation; man- 
agement. 
disaster. See emergencies. 
discoveries (See  also  new  products;  new 
techniques.), 48,  59-60,  69,  124,  129, 
130,  152,  158,  201,  203-204,  208-209 
Discovery, 33 
disease.  See medical  research. 
dispersion, 192,  209 
display.  See exhibits. 
disposable,  160,  170 
distance,  10,  33-34,  57,  76,  176-177, 
182-183,  195-196,  226-227,  233 
distortion, 25-26 
divers; diving,  160,  208 
DNA.  See genetics. 
docking, 26-27,89-90,189-190,223-224, 
23 1 
documentation, 89,  169,  182,  192-193 
domestic comsats. See comsats; names of 
individual satellites. 

drop,  93,  101,  119-120,  211 
drought,  39-40,  80-81 
drugs. See pharmaceuticals. 
Dryden Flight  Research Center 
-contracts,  45 
-people,  74,  101,  144-145,  169,  175, 
191,  217-218,  221,  235 
-programs,  15.23-24,42,  55,61,69, 
96,  101,  103,  107-108,  113-114,  118, 
135,  143,  168,  170,  171,  193,  202, 
218,  221-222 
Dscs 11-7, 11-8. See defense satellite-com- 
munications system. 
Dubna, USSR,  230 
Duke,  Dr. Michael G.,  28 
Duke University, 216 
Duki, USSR,  178 
dummy.  See simulations. 
durability, 34,  71,  143,  159,  175,  211 
duration,  71,  98,  121,  145,  189,  198,  206 
Durham, N.C.,  216 
dust,  94,  107,  178,  219 
Dutch. See Netherlands. 
Duxbury, Thomas C.,  176 
dwarf  stars.  See stars. 
dynamic,  55,  203,211 

Eaker, Gen.  Ira C.,  172 
early-warning 
-satellites,  22 
-aircraft,  43 
earth,  103,  143,  183,  209,  235 
-resources  monitoring, 47,  48,  54,  63, 
84,  108,  111,  130,  134,  141,  147,148, 
168,  225,  229 
earth  station; earth terminal. See ground 
station. 
earthquakes.  See  seismology;  seismom- 
eter. 
East  Germany.  See  German  Democratic 
Republic (GDR). 
Easterling, Mahlon F., 175 
Eastern Europe. See Soviet bloc. 
Eastern Shore,  164 
Eastern Test Range (ETR) (See also Cape 
Canaveral;  KSC Spaceport.),  2,  52, 
73,  102,  112,  155,  210,  226 
Eberhart,  Jonathan, 49 

economic policy, 2,  3,  75,  76,  208 

education, 115,  117,  157,  165,  177,  208 

289 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Edwards Air  Force  Base  (AFB),  Calif., 
17,  150.  171,  178,  179,  191,  1%.  219, 
235 
Effelsberg  radiotelescope  (Max Planck 
Inst.),  9 
efficiency,  13.79,  112,  145,  159,200,214 
Efik,  103 
Egypt,  103,  196 
EIC Corp..  2 
Eichman, Wilbert  F., 156 
Einstein  theory of  relativity, 4,  51 
Eisele, Donn F., 24 
Eisenhower, President Dwight D.,  161 
Ekran 2,  253 
elasticity. See design, aircraft. 
ELDO, (former) European launch-vehicle 
development organization; see ESA. 
electric power.  See power  sources. 
electrical  systems; electricity,  21,  71,  75, 
94,  111,  127,  168,  170,  190,  194,  202, 
213,  227,  234 
electrocardiograms;  electrocardiograph 
(EKG), 74,  214 
electrochemicals, 63 
electroencephalograph, 214 
electrolytes,  192 
electromagnetism, 23,  63,  72,  102,  106 
electronics, 26,  50,  71,  74,  112,  153,  155, 
158,  177,  194,  202,  214 
Electronics Research Center, Mass.,  175 
Electronics Society, PRC,  182 
electrons  (See also  energetic  particles.), 
75,  85,  102,  109,  117 
electrostatics. See insulation. 
elevators;  elevons,  128,  164 
Elliot,  Dr.  James L.,  48,  59-60,  69-70 
elliptical orbit. See orbit, planetary; orbit, 
spacecraft. 
El Toro,  Calif.,  155 
embargo,  141-142 
embolism. See medical research. 
emergencies,  36,  50,  74,  138,  155,  160, 
208,  214,  216,  217,  227 
emissions. See radiation. 
employment (See alsb Civil Service Com- 
mission,  U.S.;  NASA  management.), 
35,  41-42,  61,  75,  104,  107,  109,  113, 
118,  125,  161,  169,  175,  214-215 
Empresa  Publica  de  Telecomunicacoes 
(EPTEL),  179 
Encke,  comet, 207 
encounter. See  impact;  trajectories. 
endangered  species,  57 
endurance. See duration;  lifetimes. 
290 

energetic  particles  (See  also  ions;  elec- 
trons;  neutrons;  protons;  radiation.), 
19,  25,  31-32,  75,  85,  109,  166,  176, 
215 
energy 
-conservation,  12,  14,  28-29,  35-36. 
60, 61,  73,  79,  94,  117,  128,  130, 
147,  148,  159,  162.  177-178,  180, 
185,  186-187,  188,  199-200,  218 
-conversion.  See power  sources,  con- 
version; solar conversion devices. 
-crisis.  See energy conservation. 
-efficiency.  See  energy conservation. 
-heating  and cooling, 28-29,  128-129, 
179,  186,  188,  203.  215 
-levels,  208 
-research,  53,  117-118,  134,  185,  194 
-shortage.  See energy conservation. 
-sources. See power  sources. 
-storage,  80,  120,  179 
-technology,  22,  71,  80,  145 
-transfer 
(transmission)  (See  also 
power  sources, conversion.),  61,  98, 
136,  141,  146,  165 
Energy Agreement  of  1974,  US.-USSR, 
111 
Energy  Research  and   Development Ad- 
ministration  (ERDA),  U.S.,  5,  29, 
36,  53,  70,  94,  109,  110,  111,  121,  129, 
140,  162,  172,  176,  177,  179,  186, 
199-200 
Energy,  U.S. Dept  of  (DOE),  162,  185, 
195,  209,  219,  220,  228 
engineering,  70. 71,  80,  124,  136,  143, 
151,  182,  196,  199,  213,  219,  230, 
231,  235 
engines.  See power sources. 
England. See United Kingdom. 
Engle,  Joe,  122,  135,  170,  171,  191 
English,  103 
Enterprise,  17,  23-24,  27,  107,  113,  118, 
122,  135,  141,  150,  151,  168,  170, 
171,  178,  190-191,  196,  202,  211,  230 
entry (atmosphere).  See reentry. 
environment, 8,21-22,32,63,64,68,71, 
73,  93,  123,  132,  137,  147,  159,  167, 
168,  174,  181,  187,  194,  218,  222,  225 
environmental monitoring, 5,  55,  62,  63, 
110,  148,  194,  229 
Env i ronm en t a l   P r o t e c t i o n   Agency 
(EPA),  U .S . ,  63,  192 
epitaxial growth, 30 
q u a i  opportunity, 2,  21,  192 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

equator,  18,  67,  113,  136,  138,  153,  156, 
210 
equipment  (See  also  instrumentation.), 
54,  58,  59,  63,  80,  84,  106,  112,  113, 
149,  163,  208.  212,  214,223,224,  231 
equivalency principle, 51 
Erickson, Dr.  Edwin,  107 
E RN 0  (Raumfahrttechnik GmbH.  VFW- 
Fokker subsidiary), 48 
error,  127,  155,  190 
Esperanto, 103 
ESRO,  (former)  European  Space  Re- 
search Organization. See ESA. 
estimates,  1% 
Etam, W.Va.,  10 
Ets  N (Japan  engineering  test  satellite. 
Kiku  2) .  41 
Europa.  166 
Europe,  19,  107,  157,  188,  210,  228,  234 
European Broadcasting Union (EBU),  10 
European  Space  Agency  (ESA),  16,  25, 
32,  53,  56,  65,  67-68,  72,  73,  74-75, 
85,  112,  122,  153,  154,  163,  166,  168, 
170,  171,  174-175.  180,  182,  183, 
189,  193,  199,  202,  210,  213.  225, 
229,  230 
European  Space  Operations  Center 
(ESOC).  75 
European  Space  Technology  Center 
(ESTEC),  189 
Eurovision, 168 
EVA.  See extravehicular  activity  (space- 
walk). 
evaluation, 138,  197 
Evans,  Ronald E.,  51 
Evans,  Dr. Stanley, L., 152 
Evans,  Gen.  William  J . .   203 
Everette,  Bob,  231 
Everglades Towing Co.,  231 
evolution, 201 
exercises. See practice. 
exhaust,  186,  192-193 
exhibits, 24-25.  61,  69, 71,  132,  148,  172 
exobiology. See biology. 
expansion  (See  also  theory.),  199,  209, 
233 
expendable, 65,  104,  105,  229, 
expense,  105,  145,  162-163,  168,  170.  173 
experiment  specialists.  See  mission  spe- 
cialists. 
Experimental Aircraft Association,  130 
Experimental Test  Pilots, Society of.  See 
Society. 

experiments, 
-biology,  4,  65,  101 
-communications,  5,  138,  208 
-materials  research,  59,  130 
-scientific,  65,67,  75,  156,  157,  159, 
210 
-systems,  72,  75,  84,  133.  149,  150, 
159,  165,  175,  224,  225 
exploitation, 130,  145-146 
exploration (planetary;  terrestrial),  6,  49, 
52,  70,  106,  149,  156,  158,  161,  162, 
169,  198-199,207,221-222 
Explorer 1 ,  1 15 
Explorer 42.  See Uhuru. 
Explorer  54,  55.  See  Atmosphere  Ex- 
plorer  (AE) missions. 
Explorers Club, 70 
explosives,  36 
external tank.  See  Space Shuttle. 
extraterrestrial, 9-10 
extravehicular activity (EVA),  18.  51 
extravehicular mobility unit  (EMU), 45 
Exxon Corp.,  73 
eyesight. See vision. 

F-8,  55 
fabrication  (See  also  construction.),  25, 
42,  45,  47,  49,  56,  59,  128,  136,  158, 
163,  177,  211,  216,  220 
facilities, 61,  65.  113,  132,  161-162,  163, 
169.  173,  177,  194,  211,  228-229.  231 
facilities support. See support services. 
failures (See also malfunctions.).  58,  70, 
80,  102,  118,  136,  151,  160,  165-166, 
168,  171,  180.  189-190,  202,  203,  205. 
209,  223,  224,  227,  234 
Fairbank, Dr.  William,  75 
Fairchild  Industries, 105,  116 
fares.  s e e  fees. 
farming.  See crops. 
Fastie, Prof.  William G., 121 
fatality. See death. 
fear, 40 
feasibility, 64, 81,  213,  216 
Federal Aviation  Administration (FAA), 
43,62,72,  112,  122,  128,130,  163,  173, 
174-175,  192,  193,  212,  220,  222 
Federal  Aviation  Agency.  See  Federal 
Aviation Administration. 
Federal  Communications  Commission 
(FCC),  139,  169-170,206.  213.  217 
federal employees. See employment. 

29 1 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

federal  funding.  See  funding,  govern- 
ment. 
Federal  Republic  of  Germany  (West 
Germany),  1,  4,  33,  48,  70,  74-75,  84, 
154,  162,  166,  187-188 
Federation  Aeronautique  Internationale 
(FAI).  See  Intl.  Aeronautical Federa- 
tion. 
fees,  65,  105,  143,  162-163 
Fein,  Juergen, 84 
Felixstowe (WWI U.K.  flying boat),  141 
females. See women. 
Feoktistov, Dr.  Konstantin, 224 
ferry  test  flights.  See  Space  Shuttle, 
testing. 
Feuerbacher, Dr.  Bernt, 67 
fiberglass,  130 
Field  Museum, Chicago,  39 
fighter planes.  See aircraft,  military. 
films, 61,  64,  87,  149,  172 
financing.  See funding. 
Finch, Dr.  William A.,  14 
Fink, Daniel,  174 
Finland,  1 
FIRES  (firefighters’  integrated  response 
equipment system), 59 
Fischer,  Craig L.,  M.D.,  230 
fish,  165 
Fish  and Wildlife Service, 57 
fission. See power  sources, nuclear. 
Five Towns, 66 
fixed-wing aircraft,  134 
flare.  See maneuvering. 
fleet  satellite-communications  system. 
See FltSatCom. 
Fleet Weather  Facility, USN, 66 
Flemish,  103 
Flemming, Arthur S.,  award, 93 
Flerov.  Georgy, 230 
Fletcher,  Dr.  James  C.,  44,  49,  52,  93, 
105,  116 
flight,  182 
-control.  See control. 
-dynamics  laboratory. See Air  Force, 
u s .  
-operations,  8 
-path,  96 
-quality.  See handling. 
-test 
aircraft.  See aircraft testing. 
instruments, 96 
missiles, 8 
Flight Medicine Center, JSC, 222 

292 

flightworthiness. See handling. 
flooding, 1,  33,  110,  119,  138 
Florida, 75,  105,  128,  196,  202 
Florida State University,  13 1,  148 
Florida, University o f ,   146 
flotation, 231 
FltSatCom, 1,  124,  202,  229 
fluorocarbons. See atmosphere pollution. 
fluoroscopy. See x-rays. 
flutter.  See aerodynamics. 
flux,  166 
flyby,  119,226-227 
fly-by-wire controls. See control systems. 
flying laboratory. See Galileo 11. 
flying quality. See handling. 
“flying wind  tunnel”, 134 
FM.  See frequency modulation. 
fog,  158 
Fokker F-7,  182 
food,  1,  123-124,  224 
Food  and  Drug  Administration (FDA), 
169 
force (See also pressure.),  153,  189 
Ford, President Gerald M.,  1,  23,  35,  59, 
72 
Ford,  Sen. Wendell H.  (D-Ky),  11 1 
Ford Aerospace Co.,  7,  15,  207-208,  226 
Ford Motor Co.,  199-200 
forecasting.  See  future  plans;  meteorol- 
ogy; predictions. 
foreign, 62,  213 
forests,  193,  196 
Fort Belvoir, Va.,  216 
Fort Eustis, Va.,  231 
Fort  Hood,  Tex.,  70 
Fort Monroe, Va.,  8,  188 
Fort Worth, Tex.,  199 
Foxbat. See MiG-25. 
France,  1,  13,  32,  53,  66,  103,  107,  117, 
119,  154,  159,  172,  174,  184,  185,  198 
Freden, Dr.  Stanley C., 14 
free  flight.  See  aircraft,  use  in  research; 
Space Shuttle testing. 
freedom of  inquiry,  40 
freight.  See air freight; cargo;  shipping. 
French Guiana,  127 
frequencies,  broadcast,  129-130,  139, 
153,  157,  159,  168,  207,  208 
frequency modulation (FM),  133 
Fri,  Robert, 70 
friction,  151 
Friedman, Dr.  Herbert,  149,  174,  212 
Friendship 7,  27 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

Frosch.  Dr.  Robert  A.,  93,  106,  114, 
131-132,  146,  175,  177,  178,  186,  187, 
189,  212,  217,  228,  232 
fruit  flies, 167 
Fucino, Italy,  157 
fuel (See also power sources.),  14,25,  36, 
58,  60,  61,  65,  110,  113,  128,  133,  146, 
159,  160,  176,  199-200,  213,  231 
-conservation.  See  energy  conserva- 
tion. 
-shortage.  See energy conservation. 
-storage,  106 
Fullerton,  Lt.Col.  Charles Gordon,  63, 
118,  135,  150,  151,  178,  193,  1% 
Fulton,  Fitzhugh  L.,  Jr . ,   36,  150,  171, 
191,  202,  235 
funding, government,  58-59,  64,  65,  67, 
68,  72,  108-109,  111,  117,  124-125, 
134,  141,  156,  174,  180-181,  188,  194, 
199,  206-207,  217 
fuselage,  118,  120,  217 
fusion. See power  sources, nuclear. 
future plans, 40-41,50,58,60,64-65,72, 
89-90, 
115,  167,  188,  189,  197,  198, 
206-207,  229,  233,  235-236 

g  forces. See  gravity. 
Gagarin, Yuri A.,  29,  67,  123 
Gagarin award (USSR),  11 
galactic energy. See power  sources. 
galaxies, 9,  10,  37,  54,  76,  117,  121,  129, 
136,  149,  153,  176,  210,  228,  233 
Galaxy. See C-5. 
Galileo I,  235 
Galileo 11,  25,  72,  84 
Galileo scholarships, 235 
gallium compounds, 145 
gamma  radiation, 48,  117,  149-150,  178, 
188,  212 
Garmire, Dr. Gordon, 212 
Gartrell. Harold E.,  232 
Garrett AiResearch,  134 
gas;  gasoline. See fuel. 
gas-chromatograph  mass  spectrometer, 
5 5  
gas-exchange experiment, 70-7  1 
gaseous bodies, 34,  39 
gases,  15,  54,65,  107,  129,  140,  146,  204, 
228 
gasoline. See fuels. 
GASP (global air-sampling program), 204 
Gates Learjet. See Learjet. 
geese,  11-12 

Gehrz, Robert,  109 
Gelles, Dr. S.H.;  Gelles Associates,  192 
Gemini program,  101,  191 
General Accounting Office (GAO),  104- 
105,  109 
General Assembly,  UN.  See United  Na- 
tions. 
General Aviation Design & Analysis, 28 
general-aviation  turbine engine (GATE), 
134 
General Dynamics Corp.,  8, 75,  199,  205, 
235 
General  Electric  Co.,  68,  106,  124,  130, 
154,  174,  175 
generators. See power  sources. 
genetics, 40,  68,  118,  201 
Genoa, Italy,  188 
geochemistry. See chemistry. 
geodesy,  82,  229 
geography,  14,  176 
Geological Survey, 80 
geological resources.  See  earth-resources 
monitoring. 
geology,  14,  39,  82 
geophysics, 31,  82,  145 
George AFB,  Calif.,  155 
Georgia,  7,  196 
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology.  See 
Georgia Tech. 
Georgia Power Co.,  70 
Georgia Tech  (Georgia Institute of  Tech- 
nology), 7,  57,  130,  146 
Geos I, 73,  74-75,  242,  245,  261,  262 
GEOS-B, 229 
geostationary  meteorological  satellite. 
See GMS. 
geostationary operational  environmental 
satellite(GOES),33, 111,  112-113.134, 
148,  157,  171,  176,  210,  229 
geostationary satellites, 4,  10,  33,  168 
geosynchronous satellites, 73,  74-75 
geothermal sources.  See power  sources. 
German, 103 
German Democratic  Republic (East Ger- 
many),  20,  159-160,  174,  196 
Germany, World War  I ,   115 
Germany, Federal Republic of; West Ger- 
many.  See  Federal  Republic  of  Ger- 
many. 
getaway specials (GAS), Shuttle payloads, 
4,  162 
Giacconi,  Prof.  R.,  228 
Gibson,  Dr.  Edward G.,  48,  121 

293 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Gibson.  Roy,  170,  189 
Gillam,  Isacc T.  IV,  144-145,  191 
Ginter, R.D.,  11 
glass,  62,  175,  192,  232-233 
Glazkov. Lt.Col.  Yuri,  26,  27,  189 
Glenn, Sen.  John H.  (D-Ohio), 27-28 
glider,  151 
global air-sampling program. See GASP. 
global atmospheric research  project.  See 
CARP. 
global  communications (See  also  radio; 
television.),  10,  135,  207 
global positioning.  See navigation. 
global TV  transmission. See television. 
Gms I, 111,  131,  140,  248.  261,  262 
Goddard award, 20 
Goddard Space Flight Center 
-contracts,  42,  148 
-missions,  56 
-people,  14,  55,  79,  166,  169,  210, 
216 
-programs,  7,  42,  54,  64, 66,  67, 
129,  132-133,  137,  138,  148,  155, 
161,  168,  172,  189,  215 
Goes  I ,  67 
G0m2 ,  112-113,  245,  261,  262 
Gold, Gus, 232 
Goldstone, Calif.,  4,  154,  155 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.,  65 
Gorbatko, Col.  Viktor  V.,  26,  189 
Gorenstein, Marc,  209 
Gossamer Condor,  182 
government  employees.  See  Civil  Service 
Commission, US . ;   employment. 
government funding. See  funding. 
government-industry  cooperation.  See 
industry. 
Graphic Films Corp.,  64, 87 
Graves,  Curtis M.,  3 
Gravitational Probe A. See gravity probe. 
gravity, 4.68,98,  106,  129,  145,  156,  165, 
167,  199,211,222,226 
Gravity Probe-A,  30,  51 
Great Britain.  See United Kingdom. 
Grechko, Georgy,  23,223-225 
Greenberg,  Daniel S., 141-142 
Greenland, 40 
Gregorek,  Dr.  G.M.,  28 
Griffin. Gerald D.,  101,  145 
Groo, E.S.  (Todd),  123 
ground control. See control systems. 
-crews,  205  
-data;  ground truth,  1% 

294 

-stations  (See also individual locations 
and  systems.),  1,  10,  55,  56.  154, 
157,  174,  207, 210 
-testing,  80, 103,  178.  202 
-transporter.  See vehicles. 
growth,  192 
Grumman Aerospace Corp.,  47.  59,  71, 
106 
GTE Automatic Electric Co.,  221 
Gubarev, Aleksey,  23 
guest observer, 150 
guidance  (See  also control systems.),  22, 
30,  107-108,  118,  122-123,  178 
Guidry,  Louis E. Jr.  (Skip), 36,  202 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  33,  36,  176,  194 
GUMPS  (Goddard-University  of  Mary- 
land particle study), 215 
gunpowder, 165 
Gurevich, M . I . ,   29 
Gurovsky, Dr. Nikolai, 206 
Guzhenko, Timofey B., 158 
gyroscope, 63,  137,  150,  155 
gyrostabilization, 14 

habitat,  107,  137 
Hachenberg, Otto,  9 
Hackwell,  John.  109 
Haise, Fred,  118.  135,  150-151,  178,  193, 
196 
Hale telescope, Mt.  Palomar. 233 
Haley, Alex,  18 
Hall, Asaph,  152 
Halley, Edmund, 40 
Halley’s  comet,  50,  106,  119,  170,  207 
Halliday,  Ian,  38 
Halo, highaltitude large optics,  58 
Hamilton  Standard  Div.,  United  Tech- 
nologies, 45,  50 
Hampton, Va.,  8,  18,  188,  233 
hamsters,  146 
handbooks. See publications. 
handicapped, 172 
handling,  133,  150,  1%.  199,  214,  215, 
216,  218,  233 
hangar,  113 
Happe, Ralph A..  192 
hardware, 44,45,50,61,72,79,141, 
168, 
173,  177.  187,  202-203,  207,  208,  211, 
230-23  1 
Harlow,  John H.,  121,  201 
Harmon trophy, 235 
harmonics,  19 
Harris, Patricia Roberts, 47 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

INDEX 

Harris Electronic Systems Div.,  1 
Hartig,  Prof.  George,  121 
Harvard-Smithsonian Center  for  Astro- 
physics.  See Smithsonian. 
Harvard University,  129,  150,  228 
harvest.  See crops. 
hatch, crew,  118 
Havana, Cuba,  183 
Hawaii,  31,  32,  131 
Hawaii, University of,  39 
H a w a i i  Institute of Geophysics, 31 
Hawker Siddeley Ltd.,  53 
Hayes, Bethanne,  38 
hazard. See danger. 
health  (See  also  medical  research.),  8 5 ,  
193,206,208 
Heao  I ,  63,  72,  137,  149-150,  156.  210, 
212,249,261,262 
HEAO-B,  229 
hearings.  See  Congress. 
heart,  5 
Hearth, Donald  F..  132,  152,  194,  212 
heat,  12,  62,  70,  71.  93,  109.  150,  156, 
159,  161.  162.  177,  179,  188,  199,215, 
228,  232,  233 
heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM), 
229 
heating and cooling. See energy. 
heatshield,  93 
heavy hydrogen.  See deuterium. 
helicopters,  61,  134,  169,  172.  173.  205, 
222 
heliogyro.  See solar sailer. 
helium,  129,  166.  188 
Heller,  Jack A.,  159 
Hello, Bastian (Buz),  112 
Helt, Capt.  Robert C., 181 
hemophilia, 133 
Henize, Karl,  72,  84 
Hercules,  188 
heroes, 204 
Hessberg, Dr.  Rufus,  206 
high-altitude  atmosphere  sounding.  See 
atmosphere, upper. 
high-energy  a s t ronomy   observa tory  
(HEAO),  47,  63,  137,  149-150,  156, 
174,  188.  210,  212 
high-speed  aircraft  (See  also  super- 
sonics.),  % 
highways, 94,  192 
Himawari.  See Gms  1. 
Hinners,  Dr.  Noel  W., 30,  137,  181,  206, 
210,212,226 

128,  141, 

history, 6,24,35,39-40,61,67, 
164 
Hitch, Charles J.,  40 
hodoscope, 215 
Holland. See Netherlands. 
Hollinshead.  Charles,  104 
Holman, Jonathan,  133 
holography.  17 
homing devices,  177 
Honest John  (rocket),  36 
Honeywell,  Inc.,  112 
Hong Kong,  131 
honors. See  awards. 
“Hopkins.”  See  Johns  Hopkins  Univer- 
sity. 
Horton,  Victor W., 36,  202 
hospitals (See  also medical  research.),  5, 
8.  74,  214 
hotels,  179 
House of Representatives, U.S.  See Cong- 
gress. 
housing, 148 
Hou s ing   a n d   U rb an   Development 
(HUD),  U.S.  Dept.  o f ,   12,  47 
Houston, Texas,  3.  5 
Hovis.  Dr. Warren,  194 
Howard University,  145,  177,  216 
Hudson Laboratories, Columbia  Univer- 
sity, 93,  114 
Hughes Aircraft Co., 22,42,68,125,148, 
153-154,  181 
Hughes Tool Co.,  172 
human rights,  130,  144 
humane groups,  146 
humans,  103,  143,  146,  165,  178,  185 
Hungary, 20,  159,  174,  1% 
hunter/killer satellite. See interceptor sat- 
ellite. 
hunting,  11-12 
hurricane. See meteorology; storms. 
Hydac.  18.  36 
Hydra, 209 
hydraulic, 153 
hydrazine,  113,221 
hydrodynamics, 25,  80 
hydrogen  (See also  liquid  hydrogen.), 
109,  129,  159,  199 
Hydromet Service, USSR,  127 
hydrophones, 31-32 
hydroponics,  123-124 
hydrostatic tests, 64 
hygiene, 202 
hypersonics. 219 

295 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

hypotheses.  See t h e o y .  
ice,  18, 39,  66,  79,  110, 158, 227 
Iceland, 141,  172 
Idaho, 47 
identification, 43,  188,  196, 205,  213 
IL-62,  176 
ILC Industries, Inc., 201 
Illinois,  127 
Illinois Institute of  Technology, 56 
Illinois, University of ,  201 
illness.  See medical research. 
Ilyushin, Sergei V.,  29 
Ilyushin, Vladimir,  29 
image processing. See data processing. 
imaging, 7,  10,  11, 58,  80,  110,  131, 137, 
148,  175, 176,  186,  189, 210, 216, 224, 
225 
IMEWS-7.  See  integrated missile/early- 
warning satellite. 
impact, 22, 76,  178, 205,  218, 226 
improvements.  See  new  products;  new 
techniques. 
inauguration, 10 
Independent Business Telephone Co., 221 
India, 4,  32,  174, 196 
Indian Ocean, 4 , 4 1 , 4 8 , 5 9 , 6 9 ,   131, 139, 
180 
Indian River, Fla.,  57 
indicators. See instrumentation. 
Indonesia, 4,  41,  51,  103 
industrialization (See also space industri- 
alization.),  57, 65, 71,  111,  180, 208 
industry-government cooperation, 25 ,37 ,  
45,  57,  59, 65,  71,  119,  132,  145-146, 
163,  174, 177, 178,  196,  199-200,  205, 
213,  219, 220 
inert  flights,  Shuttle orbiter.  See Shuttle 
testing. 
inertia.  See moment of  inertia. 
inertia1 guidance.  See control systems. 
inertial navigation. See navigation. 
inflation. See pressure. 
-economic,  22,  121,  163 
information  (See  also data;  media.),  74, 
130,  193 
infrared,  9 ,   22,  51,  54,  58,  72,  84,  109- 
110,  131,  161, 169,  189 
-scanning,  12,  148, 161 
-sources,  44 
-spectra,  10, 107, 210 
-systems,  22, 71,  155 
inhibition. See prevention. 
injection, 187 

296 

injuries.  See accidents; safety. 
INMARSAT:  International  Marine  Sat- 
ellite Organization, 46 
innovation.  See  discoveries;  new  prod- 
ucts;  new  techniques. 
lnsat, 4 
insecticides, 5 
insects, 5 ,  61, 68, 218 
inspection. See checkout. 
installations,  179, 21 1 
Institute for Advanced  Study, Princeton 
University,  10 
Institute for Defense Analysis, U S . ,   147 
Institute  for  High  Temperatures, USSR, 
111 
Institute of  Noise Control and Engineer- 
ing,  192 
Institute  of  Space  and  Aeronautical 
Science, Japan, 23,  38 
instrumentation  (See  also  equipment; 
sensor  systems.),  3,  10,  18,  21,  25, 
3 3 - 3 4 , 5 3 , 5 6 , 5 7 - 5 8 , 6 3 , 6 6 , 7 1 , 7 3 , 7 4 ,  
85 ,93 ,96 ,   101, 109, 112, 117, 119, 127, 
132-133,  134,  137,  148,  154-155,  156, 
158, 159,  161,  164,  165, 167,  168, 169, 
171,  175, 177, 181, 188,  189,  194,  196, 
198, 208-209,  21 1, 212,  2 14, 21 5,  216, 
219, 220,  222, 234 
insulation, 1JL76,  131,  168,  175 
integrated missile/early-warning  satellite 
(IMEWS-7), 239 
integration, 74,  133,  136,  162,  168,  189, 
198, 202, 207, 211, 232, 233 
intelligence, military.  See spy  systems. 
Intelsat  program,  10,  97-98,  173,  180, 
202, 205,  209, 229 
Zntelsat IVA F4, 97-98,  244, 261,  262 
intensity,  149, 215, 216 
interagency affairs,  53 
In ter-Amer ican   Te lecommun ica t ion s  
Conference, 222 
interceptor  satellites  (See  also  weapons 
systems.),  6-7,22,  52,  54, 59,  102, 177 
intercontinental  weapon.  See  weapons 
systems. 
Intercosmos,  174, 196, 206 
Intercosmos 16, 66 
Intercosmos 17 ,  254 
interference, 4,  19,36,  113, 131, 132, 134, 
155,  157, 159,  168, 207, 218,  233 
interferometer, 155,  166 
Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative 
Organization, UN,  46 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

Intergovernmental Personnel Act,  162 
Interior, U.S.  Dept of (DOI), 47,  11 1,178 
International Association against Painful 
Experiments on Animals,  146 
international  aviation.  See  international 
relations;  International Civil  Aviation 
Organization. 
International  Business  Machines  (IBM), 
72,  145,  185,  186 
International  Civil  Aviation  Organiza- 
tion, 212 
international cooperation, 24-25,  44-45, 
46,  57,  65,  67,  81-82,  87, 
115-117, 
129-130,  139,  141-142,  159,  183,  208 
-inter-European,  1-2,  56,  65,  85 
-USSR  and  others,  4,  20,  28,  31-32, 
56,  59,  111,  117,  121-122,  127,  137- 
138,  143-144,  159-160,  164,  167, 
173-174,  184,  206 
-U.S./Europe,  9,  32,  53-54,  79,  85, 
136,  170,  174-175,  186,  187-188, 
189,  193,  196,  198-199 
In terna t iona l   Council  of  Scientific 
Unions,  131 
International Magnetospheric Project,  73 
international relations, 62,  177 
international  sun-earth  explorer  (ISEE), 
112,  193,  195 
International  Telecommunications  Sat- 
ellite  Organization  (INTELSAT),  2, 
65-66,  106,  110,  135,  154,  179,  181,  198 
International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU),  207 
international  ultraviolet  explorer  (IUE), 
229 
interplanetary,  68,  102-103,  119,  123, 
170,  176 
interpreters, 164 
interservice cooperation, 7-8 
Intersputnik, 173-174 
interstate.  See highways. 
interstellar space, 143 
intertank.  See  Space  Shuttle  external 
tank. 
inventions.  (See  also new  products;  new 
techniques; patents.), 35,  63,  152 
inventory.  See resource management. 
investigations, 38,  142,  170,  209 
Investigators Working Group, 67,  183 
investment,  in  space program.  See  fund- 
ing, government. 
Io,  102,  166 
ion-propulsion devices, 43,  119,  170 

ionization, 85 
ionosphere.  See atmosphere. 
ions,  146,  230 
Iowa, State University of, 11 1 
Iran,  103 
iron, 215 
irrigation, 48,  219 
Irwin, James B.,  5 
Isee  1, 2,  195,  255,  261,  263 
ISEE-C, 229 
isolation, 60,  72,  123 
isotopes. See chemicals. 
Israel Aircraft Industries, Inc.,  71 
Italy,  65,  11 1,  119,  139,  142,  154, 
156-157,  195 
ITT World Communications, Inc.,  140 
Itten,  Dr. K.I.,  5 5  

Jackson, Dr.  William D.,  111,  121 
Jaffe, Leonard B.,  174 
Jamesburg, Calif.,  10 
jamming,  13,  155,  160 
Japan,  13,  23,  26,  29,  32,  38,  39,  40,  41, 
45,  46,  58,  105,  106,  111,  131,  140, 
141,  154,  202,  210,  226,  229 
Jeffs, George W.,  180 
Jelm Mt., Wyoming,  109 
jet 
-aircraft,  2,  8,  67,  73,  150,  151,  196, 
208,  218 
-engines,  13,  73,  192 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
-contractors,  43,  136,  219,  220 
-missions,  62,  108,  125,  154,  155,  159, 
199 
-people,  72,  84,  106,  137,  142,  175, 
176,  190,  221,  230,  232 
-programs,  44,  48-49,  55,  68,  101, 
154,  155-156,  159,  166,  167,  170, 
181,  186,  188,  221-222 
jettison,  119,  156,  160,  167 
JFK. See Kennedy International Airport. 
Joersz, Capt. Eldon W.,  181 
Johannesburg, South Africa, 69 
Johns Hopkins University, 37,  121,  197 
Johnson, Katherine G.,  35 
Johnson Space Center 
-contractors,  24,  44,45,  70,  118,  147, 
201,  207,  234 
-people,  48,  56,  84,  101,  104,  109, 
121,  143,  153,  169,  175,  215-216 
-programs,  7,  16,  21,  28,  41-42,  50, 
53,  54,  61,  71,  74,  85,  109,  118,  132, 

297 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

140, 143, 144, 145-146, 148, 156. 
157, 165, 168, 172-173, 179, 185, 
188, 191, 194, 196, 201, 202, 205- 
206,214,215-216,218,222,228,232 
Johnston, Bradford,  146 
Johnstown, Pa.,  138 
Joiner, Dr.  Bennett, 106 
joint  American-Soviet  particle-intercali- 
bration (JASPIC) program, 85 
Jones, Robert T., 152 
journals, scientific. See publications. 
Joyce,  Dr.  Richard, 39 
judicial proceedings,  12 
Juno  1,  115 
Jupiter,  3, 33, 39, 49, 68, 76, 102. 103, 
106, 108, 115, 135-136. 137, 140, 145, 
159, 165, 166, 167, 169, 186, 187-188, 
204, 227 

Kaman Aerospace Corp.,  34 
Kapustin Yar, USSR,  66 
Kazakhstan, USSR, 27, 190 
Kelly,  AI, 56 
Kelly, Roy,  156 
Kennedy, President John F.,  115 
Kennedy  (,  John  F.)  International  Air- 
port,  NYC,  66, 212 
Kennedy Space Center 
-contractors,  21-22, 35, 57, 68-69, 
102, 118, 128, 139, 185-186, 221 
-missions,  33-34, 47 
-people,  101, 104, 130, 145, 169, 229 
-programs,  2, 15, 16, 21-22, 24, 28- 
29, 54, 61, 62, 68, 75, 113, 127, 168, 
202, 215, 218, 234-235 
-Spaceport,21,75,113,132, 133,179, 
205,207,209,211,228-229,231,234 
Kentucky State University, 68 
Kerguelen Island, 69 
Kerwin,  Joseph P., M.D.,  48 
Kettering Group,  158 
Key  West,  Fla.,  183 
Kezios, Dr.  Stothe P.,  24 
Khabarov Krai, USSR,  178 
Kiku 2, 41, 237, 240 
Killeen, Tex.,  70 
killer  satellites. See interceptor satellites. 
Kincheloe,  Iven P.,  235 
Kingsbury, James E., 50 
Kitt  Peak  National Observatory, 38-39, 
51.66 
Klate Holt Co.,  212 
Kleinknecht, Kenneth S., 153 

298 

Klett,  Reiner, 4 
Klimuk,  Pyotr,  23 
Kline,  Raymond A.,  123, 209 
Koran,  103 
Korean War, 235 
Korolev medal (USSR),  1 1  
Kourou, Fr.  Guiana,  127, 198 
Kovalenok, Vladimir,  189, 223 
Kowal.  Charles, 203-204 
Kraft,  Dr.  Christopher C.,  56, 109, 144, 
228 
Kramer,  Dr.  James J . ,   194 
Kramp, Klaus, 84 
Krasnoyarsk  Institute of  Physics,  USSR, 
123 
Kremer prize.  182 
Krider, Dr.  Phillip, 21 
Kuhn,  Dr.  Peter M.,  161 
Kuiper airborne observatory (NASA), 48, 
59, 69. 107 
Kunkel, Bruce A.,  18 
Kurchatov  Institute,  USSR,  109 

L-5 Society,  12 
L-1011, 177 
L-band  communications, 139 
Labor, U.S.  Dept. of,  194 
labor relations, 164 
laboratory, 72, 235 
Lakeland, Fla.,  76 
laminar flow.  See  aerodynamics. 
Lampton, Dr. Michael, 230 
Lancaster, Calif.,  17 
Lance,  Bert, 64 
land lines,  138 
land use, 7, 48, 63 
lander, Viking.  See Viking. 
landing, 69, 113, 122-123, 150-152, 165, 
196-197, 212, 213-214, 221, 222, 229, 
234 
landing rights.  53 
Landsat program,  7, 14, 25, 42, 47, 48, 
52. 54, 55, 63, 80, 108, 110, 111, 135, 
175, 193, 196, 229 
Landsat  1.  141 
Langley AFB.  Va.,  8, 188, 233 
Langley aeronautical laboratory, NACA, 
16,219 
Langley Research Center 
-contractors,  8, 28, 30, 35, 79, 110, 
128, 145, 158, 163, 177-178, 192, 
212-213, 219, 233 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

-people,  35,  63,  71,  132,  152,  169, 
212,  215-216,  227,  233 
-programs,  8,  18,  61,  112,  130-131, 
132,  138-139,  140-141,  143,  146, 
147,  148,  172,  181,  188,  192,  194, 
203,  212,  218,  222,  227,  233 
Langmuir Laboratories, N.M.,  235 
languages,  143 
lanthanum, 2 
Lamerotti, Dr.  L.J.,  166 
Large Magellanic Cloud, 37 
large  orbiting  telescope.  See  space tele- 
Scope. 
lasers, 2,9,  17,66,  82,  140-141,  146,  195 
latex,  192 
Latin America (See also individual coun- 
tries  in  Central and  South America.), 
10,  176 
latitudes, 85 
launch control. See control. 
-program,  64-65,  145.  189,  211,  229, 
234 
-reimbursable.  See reimbursable. 
-rockets.  See rockets. 
-support.  See support services. 
-vehicles.  See  name  of  individual 
rocket:  Ariane,  Atlas,  Centaur, 
Delta,  Saturn, Scout, Titan. 
law enforcement.  189 
Lawless, Dr.  James,  190 
Lawrence Laboratory, Calif.,  209 
Lazarev, Vasily,  23 
lead (element),  230 
leak,  180,  213 
Learjet, 54,  132 
Leary, Timothy.  12 
leasing,  124-125,  139,  175 
lecture, 189 
Ledford, Harold,  11 
Lee,  Chester M.  (Chet),  143,  163 
Lee,  Thomas J.,  170 
Lehigh University,  192 
Lei  Hung, 182 
levitation, electromagnetic, 30.  106 
Levy,  Lillian,  192 
Lewis Research Center 
-contractors,  34,  129,  134,  199,  221 
-peopie,  133,  134,  147,  159,  169,  194, 
220 
-programs,  12,47,  53,61,67,73,94, 
134435,159,  180,204,208,231-232 
Libra, 69 
Lichtenberg, Byron, 230 

life.  See lifetimes. 
life;  life detection; life forms; life sciences. 
See biology. 
life support, 45,68,85,123,137,223-224 
lifetimes, 80,  119,  120,  139,  143,  150,  159, 
165,  186 
lift.  See aerodynamics. 
lifting bodies,  217-218 
light;  lightwaves,  66,  107,  131,  178,  233 
lightning, 21,  127,207,  234 
Lima,  Ohio,  12,  13 
limb darkening, 69 
Lincoln Laboratory, MIT,  219 
Lindbergh, Charles A.,  24,  25 
Lineas Aereos Nicaragua (LANICA), 176 
liquid-fuel  rocket  (See  also liquid  hydro- 
gen;  liquid oxygen.),  106,  151,  153 
liquid hydrogen (See also hydrogen.),  44, 
153,  160,  231 
liquid  oxygen  (See also oxygen.),  25,  44, 
50,  64, 153,  160,  205,  231 
liquid  propellant. See liquid-fuel  rocket; 
fuel. 
Lisovsky, Dr.  G.,  123 
lixiscope, 216 
loads.  64, 110,  111,  119-120,  153,  205, 
214 
location, 67,  79,  176,  205 
Locke, Capt. Walter (USN).  8 
Lockheed Corp.,  22,  35,  71,  177,  178 
Lockheed Electronics Co.,  44,  147 
Lockheed-Georgia Co.,  112 
Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Co.,  136, 
220,233 
Lockheed SR-71, 181 
log book,  152 
London, England, 46,  124,  146,  182 
Long  Island, N.Y,,  66 
Lord, Dr. Arthur,  I 0 6  
Lord Electric Co.,  173 
Lorre.  Jean,  142 
Los Angeles, Calif.,  148,  218 
Louisiana, 1% 
Louisville, Kentucky, 38 
Lovelace, Dr.  Alan M.,  89,  123,  169,  183 
Lowman,  Dr.  Paul D.,  14 
Lubarsky.  Dr.  Bernard, 147 
Lucas, Dr. William R., 11,  170,201,214, 
215 
lumber. See  forests. 
Luna  24,28 
lunar curatorial facility,  JSC, 24,  53 
-exploitation.  145-146 

299 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

-module.  See moon  landing. 
Lunar Odyssey,  71 
lunar-polar orbiter mission,  207 
-research,  145-146,  156 
-rover,  178 
-samples,  53 
Lunar Science Institute, 28,  57 
Lundin,  Dr.  Bruce T.,  147 
Lunokhod,  117 
Lynn,  Donald,  142 

M-l00B,  137 
MacCready,  Dr.  Paul,  182 
McCulloch,  James C.,  52 
McDonald,  Dr.  Frank B.,  210,  212 
McDonald  observatory, N.M.,  104 
McDonnell  Douglas  Corp.,  11,  68,  79, 
106,  173,  205 
McDonnell  Douglas  Technical  Services, 
Inc.,  37,  52 
McGinnis,  David F.,  110 
McLucas,  Dr.  John L.,  72 
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica,  39 
McMurtry,  Thomas  C.,  36,  150,  171, 
191,202 
McTigue,  John G.,  175 
Mach  numbers,  132 
Madras,  India,  69 
magazines.  See media. 
magnet;  magnetic 
instruments;  mag- 
netometer,  111,  121,  158,  195 
magnetic  fields,  40,  73,  98,  134,  153, 
165,  169,  215,  222 
magnetodynamics,  54 
magnetohydrodynamics,  11 1,  121 
magnetosphere.  See atmosphere. 
magnification,  105,  106 
Mahon, Rep.  George  (D-Tex),  125 
Maine,  181 
maintenance,  2,  13,  18,  26,  45,  66,  74, 
134-135,  202,  207,  210,  227 
Makarov,  Oleg, 23 
Malerba, Franco, 230 
malfunction  (See  also  failure.),  54,  55, 
58.62,  63,  70-71,  72,  73,  75,  103,  118, 
122,  150,  155-156,  160,  168,  171,  213 
management,  65,  66,  123,  178 
manatees, 57 
maneuvering;  maneuvers,  71,  15 1,  177, 
198,  199,  210,  211 
manned  flight 
-international,  206 

300 

-Shuttle  (See  also Shuttle crews.),  17, 
68,  107,  118,  160,  208,  222,  234 
-Soviet,  10,  67,  158,  187 
-U . S . ,   27-28,  45,  54,  121,  128 
manpower.  See employment. 
manuals. See publications. 
manufacturers; manufacturing. See aero- 
space  industry;  fabrication;  space  in- 
dustrialization. 
mapper,  thematic, 42 
mapping,  10,  14,44,  80,82,98,  109,  138, 
165 
Marine  Corps,  US., 121,  140,  148,  155, 
173,  179,  194,  201,  205 
Mariner missions,  33-34,  76,  161 
Marion  Power Shovel Co.,  24 
Marisat  system,  72,  124,  139 
maritime  (See  also  individual  satellites 
and systems.),  1-2,46,  72,  81,207,229 
Mark,  Dr.  Hans,  147 
Mark,  Sir Robert,  189 
Markey,  Stanley,  175 
Marots,  16 
Mars,  3,  6,  15,  25,  28,  31,  39,48,  50,  52, 
62,  76,  101,  106,  124,  132,  140,  152, 
155,  161,  165,  181,  206-207,  221-222 
-rover,  50,  52,  106,-207 
Marshall  Space Flight  Center 
-contractors,  5,  7,  11,  18,  25,  35,  45, 
51,  54,  56,  59,  64,  74,  75,  76,  79,  80, 
113,  130,  137,  175,  181,  186,  188,211 
-missions,  18,  56,  132-133 
-people,  11,  19,  50,  67,  84,  115-117, 
128,  149,  152,  157,  169,  174,  179, 
201,  209,  211,  215,  227,  229-230 
-programs,  6,  15-16,  18,  24,  30,  44, 
50,  51,  59,  64,67,  69,  71,  80,  95,  98, 
101,  105,  119,  127,  152,  153,  154, 
157,  160,  168,  170,  174,  178,  179, 
183,  198,  201,  202-203,  205,  208, 
211,  228,  230,  231 
marsquake,  6 
Martin,  James S.  Jr.,  20 
Martin,  Dr.  John  J.,  132 
Martin  Marietta  (Aerospace)  Corp.,  25, 
53,  64,  80,  101,  160,  170,  181,  198, 
211,  231,  235 
Maryland  Center  for  Public  Broadcast- 
ing,  13 
Maryland,  University of,  12,  63,  215 
masers,  51 
mass spectrometers, 152,  166 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
(MIT),  4,  31,  71,  106,  133,  147,  182, 
212, 219, 230 
materials,  57, 59, 6 5 ,  76, 79, 95,  108, 124, 
129, 130, 131,  145, 218, 219,  227, 233 
-applications,  11, 45,  59,  69 
Materials Experiment  Assembly,  192 
-processing,  4 ,30 ,32 ,59 ,62 ,71 ,   105- 
106, 137, 141,  192, 194 
mathematics  (See  also  data  processing.), 
143, 227, 235 
mating,  80,  113 
matter (See also theory.),  54,75,209,215, 
227 
Matthoefer,  Hans,  187 
Maui,  Hawaii,  31-32 
Max  Planck  Institute of Astronomy,  9 
M.B.  Associates,  220 
measurements,  4,  69,  80, 82,  8 5 ,  98,  127, 
137,  154,  187,  192, 194, 195, 208-209 
mechanics,  science of;   mechanisms,  131, 
194 
Medal of  Freedom.  See awards. 
medals.  See awards. 
media (See also publications;'television.), 
10, 12 ,49 ,53 ,64 ,74 ,87 ,143 ,  157, 158, 
164, 212 
medical  research,  23,  25,  32,  57,  74,  84, 
85,  146,  157,  169,  174,  187,  193,  194, 
206,  214,  216, 222 
medicine.  See medical  research;  pharma- 
ceuticals. 
Mediterranean Sea,  14 
meetings,  2,  8, 28,  39-40,  41,  52,  57, 60, 
63,  67,  71,  75,  89,  137,  142,  145-146, 
147, 152,  154,  157,  174,  189,  192, 203, 
206, 212, 220,  227,  228,  234 
Megill,  Dr.  L.R.,  4 
Meharry Medical College,  152 
Mellors,  Col. W.J.,  154 
memorials.  See observances. 
Menzies, Dr.  Robert  T.,  72,  84, 230 
Merbold,  Ulf, 230 
mercury,  170 
Mercury,  28,  161 
Mercury program,  27,  187, 216 
Mercury  (support services firm), 233 
metals,  108,  128,  190 
Meteor  1-28  (USSR metesat),  247 
Meteor 2-02, 238 
Meteor 2-03,  258 
Meteor 2-07,  241 
meteorite;  meteoroid,  38,  39,  76,  128, 
132,  165, 224, 225 

meteorology,  18,  19,  25,  39-40,  56,  58, 
62,  64,  66 ,67 ,   101, 119, 127, 134, 164, 
165,  167,  171, 174, 176, 198,  199, 210, 
212,  222,  234 
Meteosat  @SA  project),  16,  112,  202, 
210, 213, 256, 261, 263 
metesats  (See  also  individual  satellites.), 
40,  112, 161, 229 
methane,  51,  190, 201 
Mexico, 40 
MF-12 (USSR rocket),  85 
Miami,  Fla.,  171, 176 
Michigan,  18 
Michoud  Assembly  Facility  (NASA),  11, 
25-26,  44,  51,  64,  121,  170 
micrometeorites.  See meteorites. 
microphones,  31-32 
microwaves. See power  sources. 
microwave  landing  system.  See  micro- 
wave scanning-beam  landing  system. 
microwave radiation,  208 
m ic rowave   s c an n i ng -b e am   l a nd in g  
system,  113, 122, 178, 191, 222, 229 
Middle  East  (See  also Arab  nations;  in- 
dividual nations in that area.),  10, 154, 
210 
Middleton,  Bob,  179 
Midgette,  Woodrow W.,  Jr.,  194 
MiG-25  (Foxbat; USSR  aircraft),  13, 26 
Mikoyan, A.A.,  29 
Milan  (Italy)  Polytechnic  Institute,  157 
Milford,  Rep.  Dale (D-Tex), 60 
military,  154-155,  213 
Military  Command  and  Control System, 
US . ,   38 
-flight  operations,  18,  154-155 
-personnel,  22 
-use  of  space,  54,  122,  155 
Milky Way,  54,  209,  215 
Millis, Dr .   Robert,  48 
minerals,  134,  165 
Mini Sniffer, 221 
miniaturization, 70,  169 
mining,  57,  178, 199 
ministars.  See stars. 
minority  business,  11 
minority  employment;  recruitment  (See 
also women.),  2,  21,  41-42,  133 
Miosi, Antoine,  117 
Mirage  (French jet  fighter  aircraft),  107 
mirrors,  66,  109,  233 
miscibility,  192 
missiles.  See weapons  systems. 
mission control.  See control. 

301 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

mission  specialists;  payload  specialists 
(See also individual astronaut.), 21,  67, 
72,  84,  132,  140,  157,  167,  179,  183, 
191,  194, 201,  205-206 
mission  support. See support services. 
Mississippi,  1% 
Mississippi River, 33,  44 
Missouri,  127 
Mitchell,  Capt.  Edgar  D.,  195 
Mitchell, James P.,  194 
Mitchell, Royce, 211 
Miteq  Inc.,  106 
Mitre Corp.,  72 
Mitsubishi Electric Co.,  226 
mobile equipment, 72,  84,  139, 167, 185- 
186, 207,  224.  231 
mockup.  See simulation. 
models,  5 5 ,   59,  132,  136,  138,  163,  188, 
194, 217-218 
modifications, 55,  64, 71,  72,  95,  113, 
1 1 8 ,  
121,  150,  168,  173, 197,  199, 207-208, 
216, 229,  231 
Mojave Desert, 148-149,  150, 155,  159 
molecules, 9,  146,  190 
Molniya 1-36,  241 
Molniya 1-3 7. 246 
Molniya 1-38,  252 
Molniya 2-1 7, 239 
Molniya 3-7,  242 
Molniya 3-8,  256 
moment  of  inertia,  75 
money.  See budget;  funding. 
Mongolia,  20,  174 
monitoring, 57 ,63 ,  80, 85,  156, 160.  161, 
186, 202, 214 
-space-based,  1-2,  11-12,  18, 25,  33, 
47,  55,  58,  84,  102,  112-113,  129- 
130,  134,  165-166 
Montreal, Quebec,  110 
Moody, Jewel W., 11 
moon  (earth's)  (See  also lunar research.), 
28,  31,  57, 76,  109,  115, 145-146,  174, 
175 
-landings,  28,  115,  117,  132, 165, 181, 
191, 220 
moonquakes.  See seismology. 
moons. See planetary satellites. 
Moore,  R.  Gilbert, 4 
Morgens,  Howard J..  65 
Moscow, USSR,  111, 121, 167,  173, 206 
Moscow, University of ,  76 
Moss,  Frank,  56 

302 

mothballing.  See deactivation. 
motion pictures.  See films. 
motion sickness.  See  medical research. 
motor cars; motorcycles. See vehicles. 
Motorola, Inc.,  219,  220 
motors. See power  sources, engines. 
Mt.  Palomar  Observatory,  10,  66,  204, 
233 
mountains, 80-81 
movies. See films. 
M S T J  (Tansei, Japan experimental satel- 
lite),  38 
MU 3 C  (Japan rocket  launcher), 38 
MU 3H ,  23,  38 
Muller,  Dr.  Richard,  209 
multiplexers (MUX),  221 
muon, 3 1-32 
Murphy,  John,  130 
music,  143 
Mustang (U.S.  fighter  plane),  16 
Myers,  Dale P.,  195 
Myrtle Beach  AFB, S.C.,  105 

N  rocket  (Japan  launch  vehiole), 29,  40, 
'\ 
41,  106 
Nantucket  Sound, 79 
NASA 905  (aircraft). See Boeing  747. 
Nashville, Tenn.,  177 
National Academy of  Engineering, U S . ,  
124 
National Academy of  Sciences, U.S.,  144, 
207 
National Advisory Committee  for  Aero- 
nautics (NACA),  16.  147 
National Aeronautic Association (NAA), 
19, 76,  162,  172.  181,  182,  213 
National Aeronautics and Space Adniini- 
stration (NASA) 
-advisory  committees/council, 56, 128 
-budget,  18,23,48,50,64-65,61,68, 
72,  104, 108,  114,  135-136,  156, 161, 
199, 206-207,214-215,  217, 228 
-centers,  123, 209 
-contractors 
(Headquarters),  1,  18, 
42,  5 5 ,  68 
-future  plans, 50,64435.67,  106,114- 
115,  116.  117 
-Headquarters.  See management. 
-management.  3,  51,  56.  61.  65,  104, 
115-117,  121,  123,  161,  169.  197, 
203,  209, 214-215 
-Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Technology (OAST),  195 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

lNDEX 

114, 

-Office  of  (Space  and  Terrestrial) 
Applications  (OA),  62,  146,  162, 
168,220 
-Office  of  Space Flight,  181 
-Office  of Space Science, 32,146,150, 
153,  220 
-people.  3,  11,  51,  52,56,62,93, 
115-117,  123,  169,  218,  220 
-research.  5 5 , 6 0  
-Defense,  Dept. of,  134,  197 
-Energy,  a p t .   of/ERDA,  5,  15- 
16,94,199-u)0,209,219,220,228 
-ESA.  See  international  coopera- 
tion. 
-Federal  Aviation  Administration, 
222 
-Housing  and Urban Development, 
Dept.  of,  12 
-Interior,  Dept.  of,  57 
National Air  and Space Museum (Smith- 
sonian),  3,  44,  50, 67,  181 
National  Center  for  Atmospheric  Re- 
search, US., 39 
National Civil Service League,  3 
National  Consortium  for  Black  Pro- 
fessional Development,  133 
National Environmental Satellite  Service 
(NESS), Doc, 110 
National  Fire  Prevention  and  Control 
Administration, 59 
National Geographic Society, 203 
National Humcane Center,  171 
National  Institute  of  Dental  Research, 
U.S.,  216 
National Institutes of  Health, U.S., 152 
National Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Ad- 
ministration (NOAA),  US . ,   11,25,55, 
67,69,80,  110,112.  134,  148,160-161, 
171,  176,  194 
National  Parachute  Test  Range,  U.S., 
199,211 
National Physical Laboratory, U.K.,  227 
national  policy,  1,  3,  48,  56,  58-59,  60, 
106-107,  108,  147,  187,  213,  229 
National Register of Historic Places, 6 
National Research Council (CNR).  Italy, 
157 
National Science Board,  U.S., 31 
National  Science  Foundation,  US . ,   62. 
110,  117,  134,  194,201 
National Space Club,  154,  220 
National  Space  Development  Agency, 
Japan,  29,  41,58,  106.  131,226 

National Space Institute,  116 
National Space Technology Laboratories 
(NSTL). NASA,  44 ,55 .   120,  160,  169, 
170 
National Transonic Facility, LaRC,  132 
National Weather  Service, US., 234 
Nato 11 A,  11 B,  7 
Nato 111 A,  7 
Nato 111 E ,   7,  14,  238,  261,  262 
NATO-IIIC.  229 
natural disasters. See emergencies. 
natural gas.  See gases. 
natural resources,  130 
Naugle,  Dr.  John E.,  220 
Navajo Tribal Council, 193 
Naval Observatory, U .S . ,   152 
Naval Ocean Systems Center, US., 231 
Naval  Research  Laboratory,  U S . ,   120, 
149,  174 
navigation, 35.53,67,122,  124-125,  155, 
158,  159,  165,  190,  197.224 
Navigation  Technology  Satellite  (NTS), 
U.S. Navy,  120 
navsats  (See also  names  of  individual 
satellites.),  6,  70,  120,  158,  159,  197, 
221 
Navstar.  22,  54,  122 
Navy,  U.S., 6,  65,  66,93,  114,  120,  124, 
139,  140,  148,  157,  173,  178,  179,  184, 
194,  197,  201,  202,  205,  207,  208,  229, 
23 1 
-contractors,  8.  192 
Near East. See Middle East. 
Nebraska, 48,219 
nebula  IC  133,  9 
Nelepov, Evgeny,  164 
Nelson, Howard W., 105 
nephelometer,  166 
Neptune,  38-39,49,  204 
Netherlands, 9,43,44,  136,  154,  186,200 
network,  82,  133.  165,  207,  210 
Neugebauer, Prof.  Gerry,  44 
neutral buoyance facility, MSFC, 64,118, 
160,208,  224 
neutrons, 75,  109,  149 
Nevada,  University of,  25 
New  Delhi,  India,  182 
New  England, 63 
New  Guinea, 226 
New  Jersey,  63 
New  Mexico, 66 
New  Orleans, La.,  44,  160,  170 

303 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

new products (See also discoveries; inven- 
tions; patents.),  2-3,  42-43,  58,  59,  62, 
71,  96,  107,  120,  130-131,  140-141, 
145,  169,  175,  195-196,  208,  213-214, 
224,230 
New  Scptland Yard  (London),  189 
new  techniques  (See  also  discoveries; 
inventions; patents.), 25-26,45,  56,67, 
69,85,96,  109,  127,  128,  132,  141,  142, 
146,  159,  160,  177,  178,  196,  214,  216, 
220,  224 
New  York, N.Y.,  182 
New  York  Bight, 63 
New  York  Port Authority, 66 
newspapers.  See media. 
Nicaragua, 176 
Nichols, Nichelle,  41 
nickel,  190 
nickel-cadmium  batteries.  See batteries. 
nickel-hydrogen power  cells, 2,  120 
Nicks, Oran W.,  132 
Nicollier, Claude, 72,  84,  230 
Niemann,  Dr.  H.B.,  166 
Nigeria,  103 
night,  196 
Nimbus  program,  194 
N imbus3 ,   161 
Nimbus 5 .  66 
Nimbus 6. 64,  79,  172 
Nimbus-G, 229 
Nimrod  (British  airborne  radar  craft), 
53-54 
Nissan Motor Co.,  Ltd.,  106 
nitrogen; nitrogen compounds, 132,  192- 
193 
Nixon,  President  Richard M.,  52,  143 
Noaa 2,  55 
Noaa 5 ,   11 
NOAA-A, 229 
noise, 2,  66,  118,  135,  143,  195,  200 
Noise-Con 77,  192 
nominations, 93 
non-nuclear  weapons.  See  weapons  sys- 
tems. 
Norske Meteorological Institute, Oslo, 79 
North American Rockwell.  See  Rockwell 
International Corp. 
North American Weather Consultants, 18 
North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization 
(NATO), 7,  14-15,  53-54,  72,  141,  213 
North Dakota,  127 
North Pole,  158,  182,  234 
North Sea,  1,  79 

304 

northern lights.  See  auroras. 
Northern Telecom,  lnc.,  221 
Northrop Services, Inc.,  24 
Norway,  1,  32,  46,  79 
NOSS 2,  257 
nova,  174 
N ts  2,  120,  246 
nuclear  energy;  nuclear  power;  nuclear 
reactors;  nuclear  research.  See  power 
sources, nuclear. 
-testing,  71 
-weapons  (See also weapons  systems.), 
8,  40-41 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 53 
numbers;  numerical analysis.  See mathe- 
matics. 
Nunelly, Hubert,  13 
Nunn,  Sen.  Sam (D-Ga.),  74 
nutrition. See  food. 
N.V.  Phillips  (Netherlands firm), 200 

Oak  Ridge Associated Universities, 172 
Oberth, Hermann,  115 
observances,  67,  69,  124,  132,  148-149, 
152,  162,  165,  182,  184,  187,  189,  192, 
215,  223,  234 
observations, 48,  59,69-70,  98,  127,  158, 
182,  210 
observatories  (ground-based),  109-1 10, 
156 
obsolete,  180 
obstacles.  See problems. 
occultation, 69 
ocean,  149,  152,  184,  198,  212,  231 
oceanography, 58,  93,  109,  193-194 
Ockels, Wubbo, 230 
Odenwald, W.  Germany,  75 
Odessa  (Tex.)  Medical Center,  74 
odor, 27 
Office des Postes et Telecommunications, 
Upper  Volta,  198 
Office  of  Management  and  Budget 
(OMB), White House, 64, 169 
Office of  Science and Technology Policy, 
White House, 71,  111 
Ohio River, 44 
Ohio State University, 28,  219 
oil (See also fuel.),  1,  16,65,73,79,  110- 
111,  130,  188 
Okhotsk, Sea of ,  USSR,  178 
Olsen, Dr.  Edward  J.,  39 
O’Neill, Gerard K.,  12,  137,  149,  185 
Ontario, Canada,  110 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

OOE.  See  out-of-ecliptic  mission.  See 
solar polar. 
open universe. See theory. 
Operation Paperclip. See Paperclip. 
Ophiuchus (constellation),  174 
optics, 58,  62,  175,  192,  193 
orbit, pjanetary, 13,  124,  204 
-spacecraft,  75,  151,  158,  163,  168, 
198,  211,  223 
orbital-test satellite @SA).  See OTS. 
orbiter. See Space Shuttle orbiter; Viking 
project; individual spacecraft. 
orbiter-processing  facility.  See  Space 
Shuttle orbiter. 
Orbiting  Solar  Observatory (OSO)  pro- 
gram, 54 
ordnance.  See  explosives;  weapons  sys- 
tems. 
Oregon, 80 
organic matter,  39,  184,  190,  201 
Organization of  American States (OAS), 
222 
orientation, 98,  156,  158 
origins. See theory. 
Orillion, Alfred G.,  19-20 
Oriol (USSR spacecraft), 117 
Orion (constellation),  104 
Orroral Valley, Australia, 82,  133 
Osborn, Howard J . ,   152 
OTS  (ESA’s  orbital  test  satellite),  16, 
112,  168,  171,  180,  202,205,  229 
Ottawa, Ontario,  110 
Ottawa River,  110 
out-of-ecliptic  (OOE)  mission.  See  solar 
polar. 
outer planets, 28,  34,  49,  140,  145 
Owens-Illinois, Inc.,  203 
oxygen (See also liquid  oxygen.),  50,  68, 
123,  159 
ozone,  138,  193,  204 

Pacific Conference on Chemistry,  190 
Pacific  Ocean, 23,  31,  57,  58,  131,  134, 
139,  140,  178,  226 
package.  See payload. 
Page, George F.,  229 
paint,  154 
Pakistan,  103,  131 
Palapa 2,  51-52,240,  261,  262 
Palmdale, Calif.,  17 
Pan  American World  Airways,  67,  182, 
204,205 
P a n   American  Union.  See  Organization 
of American States. 

Panama Canal,  121 
Papazian, Dr.  John,  106 
Paperclip, Operation, 115 
parachutes, 53,93,95,  101,  119-120,  152, 
159,  211-212,  222,  231 
Paraguay,  135 
Pans ,  France, 24,  52,  84,  105,  153 
Parker, Loyd C.,  5 
Parker, Robert, 84 
Parnell, Dr.  Thomas A.,  88 
particle generator, 25 
particles,  energetic.  See  electrons;  ions; 
muons;  neutrons. 
parts. See instrumentation. 
passengers (See also airlines.), 19,29,  130, 
193,  199,  220 
patents  (See  also  inventions.),  152,  218, 
232 
pathfinder spacecraft, 33,  226 
Patrick AFB,  Fla.,  205 
patterns,  154 
payload 
-missile;  launch vehicle, 8,  221 
-Shuttle.  See Space Shuttle payloads. 
-specialists.  See mission specialists. 
Peaceful Uses  of  Outer Space, UN  Com- 
mittee on, 44,  129-130 
peaceful uses  of  space, 57,  143-144 
Pearl River (NASA barge),  121 
Peenemunde (German launch site WWII), 
115 
Pegasus 1 ,  132 
Peking,  China (PRC),  154 
Pennsylvania,  138 
Pennsylvania State University, 72 
Pensacola, Fla.,  36 
Pentagon. See Defense, U.S.  Dept.  of. 
People’s  Republic  of  China.  See  China, 
People’s Republic of. 
Pepin, Dr.  Robert, 28 
Percy,  Sen. Charles (R-lll.),  74 
performance, 37,  42,  92-93,  96,  98,  108, 
111,  156,  159,  168,  171,  186,  231 
Perkin-Elmer Corp.,  136,  192,  232 
Perkins, Porter C.,  204 
Perry, William J.,  177 
Persian,  103 
Persian Gulf,  14 
personnel.  See employment. 
Perth,  Australia, 69 
perturbation,  15 
pesticides,  1 
Peterson, Dr.  Haie,  212 
petroleum.  See oil. 

305 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

Petrone, Roceo la.,  56 
Petrov, Dr.  Boris.  174,  206 
Phobos (moon of Mars),  31,76,124,152, 
176 
pharmaceuticals.  25.  74,  214 
Phoenix, Mi.. 94 
phonograph  record.  See  recording  sys- 
tems. 
photodetectors. See  detection. 
photography (See also cameras;  film.),  7, 
14,  23,  27,  48,  59,  104,  105,  125,  131, 
142,  165,  174,  176,  1%.  222 
photometry, 210 
photons, 49,  119.  140,  189 
physics,  23,  65,  75,  115,  230,  233 
physiology.  See biology. 
piggyback  flights,  118,  135,  141 
Pilliod, Charles J..  Jr.,  65 
pilotless vehicle,  17 
pilots,  13,  26,  128,  132,  140,  148,  150, 
172.  179,  181,  191,  196,  201,  202.  205; 
235 
Pioneer  mission, 92,  143,  188,  221,  226- 
227 
Pioneer  IO, 11.  3,  33,  102,  103,  143,  161, 
169,  226-227 
Pioneer  Parachute Co..  231 
pitch  rate,  154 
Pittsburgh, University o f ,  138 
planetary environment.  See environment; 
atmosphere, planetary. 
planetary exploration. See exploration. 
planetary satellites,  48,  59,  69,  76,  102. 
124,  136,  152,  187-188,  203-204,  207. 
226-227 
planetary science,  28,  48,  62,  66,  92-93, 
102-103,  107,  108.  161,  174,206-207 
planning.  See future plans. 
plants.  See botany. 
plasma physics, 32,  155 
plastic,  17,  93,  119 
platforms, data collection,  113,  171 
Plum  Brook  station, LeRC, 34 
Pluto (planet), 3,  39,  51,  104 
plutonium, 65.  161-162 
Pocomoke City, Md.,  164 
Pogue, William R.,  121 
pointing.  See aiming. 
poisoning.  See medical research. 
Poland, 20,  115.  159,  174,  1% 
polar-orbiting satellite (See also names of 
individual spacecraft.), 11,  131,  136 
polar research,  66.  117,234 

306 

polar  route,  173,  182,204 
Polaris (weapon),  8 
police, 189 
politics,  107,  129-130,131,143-144.157, 
172,  187,  195 
poll.  See public opinion. 
pollution. See also contamination. 
-ash,  8 
-atmosphere.  See atmosphere. 
-chemical,  5 ,   110-111 
-environmental,  25,  63,  79,  141,  165, 
195,  200 
population, 60 
Port Everglades, Fla.,  205,  231 
portable earth terminal, 47,  138,  208 
portable systems,  50,  138 
Portugal, 227 
Porz-Wahn, W.  Germany, 33 
Poseidon (weapon), 8 
postage.  See stamps. 
postponement. See delay. 
potassium,  146 
Powder Puff  Derby,  162 
power  levels. See  energy levels. 
power sources, 58,98,  159,  165-166,  172, 
199,  208,  216 
-atomic.  See power  sources,  nuclear. 
-batteries,  2,  3,  94,  190 
-conversion  (See also solar conversion 
devices.).  140-141,  216,  232 
-electric,  5,  34,227 
-engines,  61,  73,  159,  199-200 
-galactic,  43 
-generators,  159 
-geothermal,  134 
-lasers,  146 
-magnetohydrodynamics,  111,  121 
-microwaves,  5,  56,  57,  66,  141.  153, 
175 
-nuclear,  35-36,  65,  104,  109,  118, 
140,  146,  158,  159,  161-162.  215, 
216,  230 
-satellites.  See solar power  satellites. 
-solar  (See  also  solar conversion  de- 
vices;  solar  power  satellites.),  5, 
14,  15-16,  23,  43,  45,  53,  65,  75, 
76,  94,  145,  159,  161,  168,  179,  189, 
203 
-steam,  7-8,  14,  188,  233 
-wind,  34, 129,  176 
power  supply. See power sources. 
power systems, spacecraft. See spacecraft. 
powersats.  See solar power satellites. 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

INDEX 

Pozinski.  Norman, 220 
practice.  150,  211,  230-231 
Prague, Czechoslovakia,  184,  185 
precipitation, 119 
precision. See accuracy. 
predictions (See also meteorology;  future 
plans.),  25,  58,  59,  62,  80.  127.  165, 
192 
prefabrication, 69 
preservation,  152 
press;  press conferences.  See media. 
Press,  Dr.  Frank,  30-31,  71,  111,  144 
pressure,  2,  64, 93,  159,  171,  203,  213- 
214,  222 
pressurization, 45,  118,  224 
prevention,  146 
prices.  See  fees;  competition.  economic. 
prime mover.  See vehicles. 
Primer, Howard,  13 
Prince of Wales,  193 
Princeton University,  10,  12 
printing  (See  also  media;  publications.), 
165 
prizes.  See awards. 
probe, 68,  92-93,  136.  159,  161-162 
problems,  27,  62,  63,  111,  113,  118,  129- 
130,  137,  154-155,  156,  158,  159,  160, 
162,  165,  167,  171,  176,  186,  189-190, 
193,  I%,  209,  213,  214,  221,  233 
Procter & Gamble,  65 
procurement,  18,  79,  219 
-policy,  2,  37,  105,  124-125 
productivity, 71,  219 
Professor Vize  (USSR research ship), 85 
Prognoz  (USSR  spacecraft  series).  117, 
176 
Prognoz 6, 253 
programming,  55,  176 
propaganda,  130 
propagation,  139 
propane, 94 
propellant. See fuel. 
propellers,  180,  221 
propulsion, 61,  125,  133,  147,  167,  170, 
225 
prosthesis, 169 
protection (See also insulation.), 207 
protonosphere. See atmosphere. 
protons, 75,  85 
prototypes, 36.  42,  67,  74,  130,  165,  188, 
230 
Proxmire,  Sen.  William  (D-Wis.),  64, 
108,  217 

psychology,  123 
public opinion,  116,  156,  213 
public policy.  See national policy. 
public  relations (See  also  community  re- 
lations.),  6,  63,  67,  74 
publications (See  also media.),  106-107, 
128,  136.  204 
publicity.  See media. 
Puerto Rico,  222 
pulsars.  102,210 
pump.  199 
pyranometer , 53 

quality,  169 
quarks, 75 
quasars,  10,  121,  149,  210 
Quebec,  110 

racing.  See contest. 
radar,  8,  13,  26,  58,  74,  78,  224,  227 
radiation;  radioactive  material  (See  also 
electromagnetism; energetic particles.), 
39-40,  50.  102,  129,  137,  146,  167, 
208,  216 
radio  (See  also  frequencies;  broadcast.), 
4,  19,  94,  118,  153,  155,  158,  159,  179, 
209,  217,224 
radio-technical  commission  for  aero- 
nautics,  U S ,  122 
radioastronomy, 76,  137 
radioisotope thermal generators (RTGs). 
See  power  sources, nuclear. 
radiometer, 66,  131,  148,  161,  166,  210 
radiotelescope, 9,  66,  76 
Ruduga  3  (Statsionar  comsat,  USSR), 
249 
Ragent,  Dr. Boris,  166 
railroads, 133,  192 
rain, 69 
random-access measurement system, 79 
range, 57,  82,  195-196,  198 
Rango,  Dr.  Albert,  55  
Ransburgh.  John L.,  230 
RATAN-600 (USSR radiotelescope), 76 
rates,  213,  217 
rats,  146,  167 
RCA  (formerly  Radio  Corporation  of 
America),  104.  153-154,  220 
RCA Astroelectronics Div.,  153-154,  234 
RCA Global Communications, Inc.,  139 
RCA Service Co., 158 
reactivation, 132-1 33 
reactors. See  power  sources, nuclear. 

307 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

real-time monitoring,  57 
receivers;  reception,  208 
Reclamation,  U.S.  Bureau of,  80 
reconditioning.  See rehabilitation. 
reconnaissance (See also monitoring;  sur- 
veillance.),  22,  54,  221 
record  setting,  23,  67,  76,  121,  128,  133, 
149,  158,  172,  176,  181,  182,  198, 
219, 227,  235 
recording,  133, 143, 174 
recording systems, 67,  143,  160, 214 
RECOUP   (refuse-consuming  utility 
plant),  88, 233 
recovery,  equipment;  materials,  38,  53, 
91,  101, 119, 138, 205,  211-212,  231 
recycling, 65,  110, 131, 188,211,229,233 
Red  Cross, American,  138 
Red Flug  (PRC journal),  131 
red  giant.  See stars. 
Redstone (ballistic rocket),  6,  115 
Redstone  (range  instrumentation  vessel), 
213 
Redstone Arsenal,  64,  115, 215 
reduction  in  force  (RIF).  See  employ- 
ment. 
redundancy,  14,  151 
Reeder,  Jack,  222 
reentry,  from  orbit,  154,  175,  198, 215 
refinery;  refining.  See fuel. 
reflectivity, 39,  119 
reform,  62 
refrigeration.  See cooling; cryogenics. 
refuse.  See waste disposal. 
regularity,  209 
regulation,  62,  129,  185, 213 
rehabilitation,  80,  137,  139,  224, 228 
rehearsal.  See practice. 
Reid, Henry  John Edward,  212 
reimbursable,  54,  65,  148,  197, 226, 229 
Reinhard,  CharIes E.,  173 
relativity, 4,  51 
relay,  1, 67,  113, 134, 166, 197,210, 222, 
223-224,  226 
reliability, 2,  50,  80,  120,  135,  137,  159, 
161, 223-224 
remote,  98,  121,  198, 201, 210, 211, 219, 
221,  232, 234 
-sensing,  42,  56,  63,  110,  147,  174, 
193 
remotely powered  vehicles, 221 
rendezvous 
-orbital,  10, 207 
-planetary,  49,  207 

308 

-spacecraft,  10, 89,  170 
Rensselaer Polytechnic  Institute,  192 
reorganization,  government,  114,  185, 
197,203 
repair.  See rehabilitation. 
reporting  systems, 43,  128, 130 
reprimand,  195 
reprocessing, 65 
rescue,  172, 233-234 
research,  atmospheric.  See atmosphere. 
research  and  development  (R&D),  fund- 
ing fo r ,  65,  117, 134, 194 
reservoirs,  81 
resolution,  optical,  42,  66,  76,  107,  137, 
169,  189, 210, 222 
resource  management,  42,  47,  63,  161, 
185,  193,  196 
Resources for the Future,  Inc.,  40 
respiration,  71 
retirement,  195, 214-215,  219 
retrieval  (See  also  rehabilitation.),  98, 
137,  163,  198, 205, 210, 211, 228,  231 
retropropulsion,  187, 222 
reusable  (See also  recycling.),  36,  53,  79, 
95,  101,  118,  120,  133,  168,  198, 211- 
212 
revival.  See reactivation. 
Reynolds, Smith & Hills,  128 
Rhode  Island,  66 
Rice Institute,  188 
Richardson,  John,  169 
rings,  planetary.  See planetary  satellites. 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 222 
Rio de  la Plata,  Argentina,  222 
Rio Grande, 40 
rivers,  110 
RNA.  See genetics. 
Robinson  Printing  Go.,  11 
robots,  106 
Rocket  Propulsion  Laboratory,  USAF, 
58 
Rocketdyne  Div.,  Rockwell  Corp.,  11, 
51,  55,  79,  121 
rockets  (See  also  names  of  individual 
rockets.),  37,  98,  105,  121,  137,  138, 
151,  164,  167,  197-198,  211, 215,  217, 
267-272 
rocks,  106 
RockweIl, W.F., Jr.,  70 
Rockwell International  Corp.,  7, 17, 22, 
24,  51,  55,  68-69,  70,  71,  73,  76,  79, 
109,  112, 114,  118,  125,  175,  176, 177, 
180,  192,  195, 202,  207 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

INDEX 

Romanenko, Lt. Col. Yuri,  223,  225 
Romania, 20,  159,  174 
Rome,  Italy,  181 
Rood, Robert W.,  128 
Ross, Miles,  63,  101 
Rostovsev, Capt. Oleg,  164 
rotation.  See spin rate. 
rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA), 
61,  134,  216 
Royal Aeronautical Society, London,  16, 
182 
Royal Astronomical Society, U.K., 124 
Royal  Electrical  and  Mechanical  Engi- 
neers, U.K.,  154 
Royal Observatory Greenwich, V.K., 69 
Royal Society, U.K.,  60 
RTG,  radioisotope  thermal  generators. 
See power  sources,  nuclear. 
Rubel, Werner H.,  230 
runoff,  water, 55 
runway,  113,  154 
Ryumin, Valery,  189,  223 

Sacramento, Calif., 218 
safety 
-automobile,  19 
-aviation,  19,  43,  128,  135,  138 
-devices,  94,  161,  224 
-fire,  47,  131,  159,  218 
-nuclear,  1 
-range,  180 
-systems,  47,  54,  64,  163,  178,  208, 
224 
Sagan, Carl,  143,  149 
sailboats. See ships. 
St.  Lawrence River,  110 
St.  Louis, Mo.,  33 
St. Regis Paper Co.,  196 
St. Thomas, V.I.,  179 
Sakura. See Cs. 
Salisbury, Md.,  192 
salvage.  See recovery. 
Salyut program (USSR space vehicle), 20, 
90, 158,  161,206 
Salyut  4,  23 
Salyut  5,  10,  26,  27,  189,  206 
Salyut 6, 180,  189,223,  254 
sampling, 63,  106,  167,  193,204,207,222 
San Diego, Calif., 218 
San Diego State University,  14 
San Francisco,  Calif.,  182,  195,  218,  234 
San Francisco,  University o f ,  167 
Sandford, Maxwell,  104 

Sandia Laboratories, N.M.,  109 
sanitation, 63 
Santa Barbara Research Center,  148 
Santa Rose Island, Fla.,  36 
Satcom series (U.S. comsats),  154 
Satellite Business Systems, Inc.,  72,  154 
Satellite Experiment Laboratory, NOAA, 
193- 194 
satellite network.  See network. 
Satellite  Power  Systems  (proposed  mis- 
sion), 5 
satellites, planetary. See planetary. 
Satrack  (USN  Trident  support  system), 
197 
Saturn (family of  launch vehicles), 11,24, 
44,  55,  61,  71,  95,  113,  115,  127,  132, 
139,  215,  228 
Saturn (planet), 3,  33-34,  39,49,60,  102, 
103,  106,  137,  145,  155,  161,  186,  204, 
207,  226-227 
Saudi Arabia,  14,  53 
savings. See cost reduction. 
Sawyer, Ralph  (Buzz), 217 
scanning, 17,  54,  149,  150,  155,  194,  212 
SCATHA, satellite charging a t  high  alti- 
tude,  168 
schedule 
-launches,  37,  64-65,  162-163,  202, 
229,  234 
-operations,  42,  217 
scheduled airlines,  19 
Scherer, Lee,  104 
Schlesinger, James R.,  185 
Schmitt, Sen. Harrison M.  (R-NM),  11, 
111 
Schneider, Stanley R.,  110 
scholarships.  See awards. 
Schuerer, Paul H.,  11 
Schwartz, Dr.  Daniel A.,  174 
Schweikart, Russell L.  (Rusty),  162 
science adviser, White House, 31,  144 
Science Applications, Inc.,  22 
science court,  1 
science writing, 49 
scientific community, 1,  18,  40,  132 
scientists,  32,  35,  75,  84,  107,  131,  133, 
143,  183,  220 
Scorpius (constellation), 174 
Scott, Dr.  David R.,  191 
Scout (NASA launch vehicle),  11,  197 
scrap, 21 1 
sea.  See  oceanography;  name  of  geo- 
graphical area. 

309 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

seals,  184 
search and  rescue,  64, 172,  173,205 
SeaSat-A,  1-2,  58,  82,  229 
Seattle, Wash.,  102 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission, 
U.S.,  22 
security measures,  17,  38,  54,  122,  130 
seismology,  31,  62,  71.  82,  156,  165,  222 
seismometer, 3,  6,  140.  165 
Selcuk, Dr.  M. Kudret, 232 
selenide (thermoelectric units),  162 
semiconductors, 192 
Senate, U.S.  See Congress. 
sensitivity,  188,  208 
sensor systems 
-aircraft,  13,  % 
-ground-based,  109,  178 
-spacecraft,  22,  55,  58,  66,  7 1,  74, 
137,  155,  174,  177,  215 
Sensor Technology,  Inc.,  219,220 
separation,  73,  93,  107,  122-123,  135, 
150,  151.  158,  160,  166,  168,  179,  180, 
191.  195,  1%.  211 
SERT, space  electric  rocket  tests  (LeRC 
program),  170 
Sevastyanov, Vitaly.  23 
707;  737;  747.  See Boeing. 
sferics,  166 
shadow, 176 
Shanghai, China,  154 
shapes, 124 
Shatalov, Lt.Gen.  Vladimir,  26-27,  223, 
224 
Shepard, Alan B.,  Jr.,  115 
shipping (See also air freight; cargo.),  44, 
112 
ships, 56,  64, 66,  85,  127,  137,  158,  164, 
173,  178,  180,  194,  198,  205,213,  223, 
23 1 
Shklovsky,  1.S.  (USSR  astrophysicist), 
124 
shore (facilities; terminals),  207 
Short, Dr.  Nicholas M.,  14 
short-stack SRB, 95 
short  takeoff  and  landing  (STOL).  72. 
173 
shortage. See fuel conservation. 
Shroud of  Turin,  142 
Shulenko, Mariya,  123-124 
Shuttle. See Space Shuttle. 
Siberia, 123,  140,  159.  167,  178 
Sieff, Dr.  Alvin,  166 
Sierra Leone,  103 

310 

Sierra Nevada,  80 
signals,  132-133,  140.  155,  159,  168, 
175,  198,  202,213 
Signe  3 (French/USSR  scisat),  66,  117, 
237,245 
Sikorsky Aircraft Co.,  134 
silicon, 42,  145,  175.  219,  220 
silver compounds, 18-19 
Simpson, Dr.  John A.,  102 
simulations, 42,44,53,55,61.64,71.72, 
84,  85,  119,  120,  123,  132,  138,  153, 
160,  185,  190,  191,  202-203,  206.  208, 
211,224,230.231 
Sinclair Laboratories, 192 
Sirio  (Satellite  Italian0 Richerche  Indus- 
triale  Orientata),  Italy  comsat,  111, 
139,  156-157.  251,261,  262 
size,  149,  158,  160 
Skyjacker (DFRC  experimental aircraft), 
217-218 
Skylab  program,  6,  27,  50,  52,  64, 72. 
121,  128,  160,  161.  165,  198,  211, 
232,  235 
Skylab  1.  80,  162 
Skylab 4,  48,  121 
Slayton, Donald K.  (Deke), 42,  143,  1% 
Slidell Computer Complex (NASA),  147 
slingshot effect. See gravity. 
small astronomical satellites (SAS), 129 
Small Business Act,  11 
small craft.  See ships. 
Smith, Dr.  Bradford A.,  137 
Smith, Richard B.,  174 
Smithsonian Astrophysical  Observatory, 
204 
Smithsonian  Center  for  Astrophysics, 
Harvard,  129.  174 
Smithsonian Institution, 50 
Smoot, Dr.  George.  209 
SNAP,  system  for  auxiliary  nuclear 
power.  See power  sources,  nuclear. 
SNAP 19,  SNAP 27,  161 
Snavely, Lt.Cen.  William W., 53 
snow,  55.80-81,  172,214 
social goals,  60,208 
social policy.  See national policy. 
social problems  (See  also community re- 
lations.),  76,  147,  189 
socialist bloc.  See  Soviet bloc. 
Societe  de  Telecommunications  Inter- 
nationales du Chad,  110 
Societe Europeenne de Propulsion (SEP), 
225 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

INDEX 

Society  for  Space  Travel  (Verein  fur 
Raumschiffart/VfR),  German  rocket 
society,  115 
Society of  Experimental Test  Pilots, 235 
Socorro, N.M.,  235 
sodium, 146 
Soffen, Dr.  Gerald A,,  52 
soft landing. See landing. 
software, 130,  186,  196, 207 
soil,  101,  106 
Soil Conservation Service, U.S.,  80 
soil samples,  31, 70-71 
sol (Mars day), 6 
solar activity, 39,  117,  119,  148,  153, 176 
solar  cells. See solar conversion devices. 
solar conversion devices 
-arrays,  43,  94,  128,  160,  170,  189, 
228 
-cells,  43,  75,  145, 161, 220,  226 
-collectors,  14, 29,  71,  128,  130,  175, 
179, 232 
-panels.  See array. 
solar corona,  15,  37 
solar energy.  See power  sources,  solar. 
solar environment, 113 
solar heating and cooling. See  energy. 
solar particles.  See solar activity. 
solar physics, 32,  199 
solar  polar  mission  ( W E ,  out-of-eclip- 
tic), 68,  199 
solar-power  satellites  (powersats),  5 ,   23, 
57,  70, 76,  180 
Solar Power,  Inc.,  219 
solar radiation. See solar activity. 
solar research.  See  sun. 
solar  sailer  ( JPL   future  project),  48-49, 
119,  170 
solar system, 3,  9,  48,  64,  103,  104, 107, 
119,  199, 204, 207, 209,  226-227,  228 
solar wind,  39-40,  48-49,  73,  155 ,   156 
SoIarex Corp.,  43, 219, 220 
solid-fuel rocket,  35,  53,  58,  74,  80,  95, 
101,  119,  133,  151,  153,  154,  160.  205, 
211, 228 
solid  rocket  (booster).  See  solid-fuel 
rocket. 
solvents.  110 
sonic booms,  105 
sounders; soundings.  148 
sounding rockets.  See  rockets. 
sounds,  31-32,  143, 184 
sources of  radiation.  See power  sources, 
nuclear; radiation. 

South Africa, Union of,  I82 
South America,  138, 176 
South Pole (See also Antarctica.), 182 
Southern  Bell  Telephone  and  Telegraph 
eo., 221 
Southern California, University of,  167 
Souza, Kenneth,  167 
Soviet Academy of  Sciences, 76, 89,  180, 
183,206 
Soviet Air  Force,  13 
Soviet bloc,  129-130,  141-142 
Soviet Ministry 
-of  Health, 206 
-of  Power  and  Electrification;  of 
Power  Plant Construction, 76 
Soviet  space  activity  (See  also Union  of 
Soviet Socialist Republics.),  10,  22, 23, 
2 6 - 2 7 , 2 8 , 5 2 , 5 4 , 5 6 , 5 9 , 6 6 , 7 6 , 8 9 - 9 0 ,  
117,  127,  146,  158,  164,  167,  176, 180, 
184,  187,  189-190,  195-196,  197-198, 
206,  207,  210,  222-225 
Soyuz  program  (USSR manned  flight), 
10, 20,89,  187,  189-190,  222-225 
Soyuz  7.  26 
Soyuz 15.  190 
Soyuz 17, 23 
Soyuz  19, 206 
Soyuz 20,  23 
Soyuz 21,  27 
Soyuz 23,  190 
Soyuz 24.  26, 239,  265, 266 
Soyuz 25,  189, 223,  254, 265,  266 
SOYUZ 26,  222-225,251,265,  266 
Space Age,  148.  165 
Space  Biology  and  Medicine  working 
group, U.S./USSR,  206 
space 
-colonization,  12,24-25,68,  137,141, 
149,  185 
-communities.  See space colonization. 
-construction; 
structure  (See  also 
space  station.),  45,  47,  58,  64,  69, 
76,  106, 235-236 
Space Day,  148 
space defense  systems (See   also intercep- 
tor satellites; weapons systems.), 22, 58 
Space  Defense  Technology  Program 
(DOD),  177 
space 
-environment.  57,  85,  148 
-exploration.  See exploration. 
-flight,  NASA office of.  See NASA. 
-industrialization,  25 ,47 ,57 ,   137, 180 

311 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

in.  See  funding,  govern- 

-investment 
ment. 
-manufacturing.  See  materials  proc- 
essing; space industrialization. 
-medicine.  See medical research. 
-observance,  U S ,  132 
-platform.  See space station. 
- powersat. See solar-power  satellites. 
-processing.  See materials  processing. 
Space Research  Institute (USSR Acad.  of 
Science),  17 
-science,  49-51,  53,  65,  71,  73,  134, 
135-136 
-settlement.  See space  colonization. 
Space Shuttle 
-astronauts.  See Space Shuttle crews. 
-boosters.  See  Space  Shuttle  propul- 
sion. 
-Costs,  65,  108-109,  121 
-crews,  21,  42,  45,  63,  107-108,  132, 
140,  143,  144,  148,  163,  172-173, 
185 ,201 ,202 ,205-206 ,208 ,222 ,228  
-experiments.  See Space  Shuttle  pay- 
loads. 
-external  tank,  25,  44,  50,  51,  5 5 ,  64, 
72,  80,  113,  120,  151,  153,  160,  170, 
202, 228,  231 
-facilities,  64,  113, 201-202,  228-229 
-fees,  65,  143,  163 
-funding,  104-105,  108-109,  121, 217 
-impact,  75 
-launch,  50,  113,  128,  139, 211,  228, 
234 
-main  engine  (See also  Space  Shuttle 
propulsion.),  6 ,  5 1 ,   5 5 ,  79,  120,  121, 
160, 201,  202 
-management,  143,  153, 201 
-military  use,  54,  163 
-operations,  1, 21, 23-24,  50, 62, 68- 
69,  106, 113-114,  143,  145, 150-152, 
162-163,  165, 168,  175, 208, 234 
-orbiter,  17, 23-24,  27-28,  36 ,42 ,45 ,  
5 5 ,   63,  74,  80,  103,  107,  108,  113, 
118,  135,  143,  153,  165,  168,  170, 
178-179,  190-191,  193,  196-197, 
202,  207,  211, 230 
-passengers,  57 
-payloads,  4 , 6 ,  10, 18 ,25 ,48 ,  50,52- 
53,  54,  5 8 ,   64-65,  68,  69,  70,  71, 
76,  98,  104-105,  119,  143,  160, 
162-163,  170,  185-186,  187-188, 
192,  198,  199, 207, 215, 228,  234 
-performance,  107-108 
312 

-policy,  48,  90,  104-105,  143,  162- 
163, 206 
-prices.  See Space Shuttle fees;  Space 
Shuttle users. 
-propulsion,  35,  44, 5 5 ,   74,  79,  95, 
101,  113-114,  119-120,  151,  154, 
202,211 
-solid-fuel 
rocket  booster.  See  Space 
Shuttle propulsion. 
5 5 ,   68-69,  143,  178-179, 
-systems, 
234 
-testing,  6 ,   17, 23-24,  36, 42,  44,  45, 
51,  5 5 ,   63,  64,  71,  74,  80,  95,  101, 
103,  107-108,  113-114,  118,  120, 
135,  143,  148,  160,  165,  168,  170, 
178,  185,  190-191,  193,  196-197, 
202,205,207,211,228,230,234,235 
-training.  See Space Shuttle crews. 
-upper  stages,  37,  163 
-users,  143, 163 
space spider, 69 
space  station,  23,  50,  72,  89-90,  98, 
106-107,  128,  158,  165,  187, 223 
space  structure.  See  space  construction; 
space  station. 
space suits, 45,  160, 208,  210,  224 
Space Task Group, 216 
Space Telescope 
-contractors,  18, 232-233 
-planning/management, 
10,  18,  52, 
56, 66,  108,  135,  136-137,  189, 207, 
210 
Space  Transportation System (STS)  (See 
also Space Shuttle.), 59,  105,  143, 163, 
173 
space travel,  71,  115-116 
spacewalk.  See  extravehicular  activity 
(EVA). 
spacecraft 
-communications,  4-5 
-power  systems, 74-75,  136 
-retrieval,  18 
Spacelab 
-crew,  84,  8 5 ,   166-167,  183, 230 
-experiments,  32, 65, 67,  72, 8 5 ,   119, 
152-153,  157 
-management,  16, 48, 64-65,67,  153, 
215 
-mission,  72, 73,  206 
-operations,  1, 28, 65 
-payloads,  25,  8 5 ,   130,  133,  175 
-preparation,  25,  52-53,  70,  72-73, 
84,  8 5 ,   133,  152-153,  166-167,  170, 
215 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

lNDEX 

Spaceport.  See  Kennedy  Space  Center, 
Spaceport. 
Spain,  1,  154 
Spanish (language),  103 
SPAR ,   space-processing  app l ica t ions  
rockets,  30,  105 
spare,  207 
Spaw Glass,  Inc.,  53 
specifications,  165 
spectrograph;  spectrometer,  155,  166, 
168,  210 
Spectrolab, Inc.,  220 
spectroscopics,  5 1 
spectrum,  149 
speed  (See  also  high-speed aircraft.),  61, 
67,  96,  150,  151,  152,  160,  168,  176- 
177,  179,  181,  186,  191,  196,  197,  202, 
209,  211,  218 
Speer,  Dr.  Fred,  149,  156 
Sperry  Rand  Corp.,  7,  54 
Sperry Support Services, Inc.,  54 
Sperry Univac,  74 
spin, aircraft,  134,  138 
-motor;  spacecraft,  119,  131,  195 
-rate  (planetary, galactic),  38-39,  124, 
209 
-stabilization,  73 
-stages  (spacecraft),  173 
Spirit  of  St.  Louis,  3 
Spitzbergen  (Norway),  79 
Springfield,  Ill.,  12 
Sprott, Kingswood,  Jr . ,   76 
Sputnik  I  (USSR  satellite),  115,  117, 
165,  184,  187,  189 
spy  systems. See surveillance. 
SR-71 ( U S .  reconnaissance  aircraft).  See 
Loc kheed . 
SSN-8  (USSR  missiles), 57 
stability,  36,  75,  151,  186,  218 
stabilization;  stabilizers,  79,  163 
stalling,  aircraft.  See safety, aviation. 
stamps,  195 
stand-in.  See Space Shuttle orbiter;  simu- 
lation. 
standards,  59,  213 
Stanford University,  16,  75,  107,  147 
Star Trek, 41 
stars; stellar,  37,  104,  107,  117,  121,  137, 
143,  149,  158,  188,  209,  210,  228 
State, U.S.  Department  of,  141 
state-federal  cooperation, 80, 94,  162 
state funding of  projects,  110 
static electricity. See insulation. 

static testing,  44,  55,  95,  159,  160 
stationkeeping (satellite),  113 
statistics,  138 
steam.  See power  sources. 
steering.  See guidance. 
stellar object.  See star. 
Stephenson, Charles A.,  173 
Stevenson, Sen.  Adlai E.  (D-Ill),  114 
Steward  Observatory  (Univ.  of  Ariz.), 
107 
Stickney crater (on  Phobos),  124 
Stirling  engine,  199-200 
Stofan, Andrew  J.,  220 
Stone, Dr.  Edward P.,  137 
storage  (See  also  energy  storage.),  51, 
222,  229 
Stormovik  (11-2.  USSR  attack plane), 29 
storms, 94,  119,  127,  131,  165,  168,  171, 
176,  234-235 
Strack, Bill,  135  
strap-on motors,  106 
strategic  weapons.  See weapons  systems. 
stratosphere. See atmosphere. 
Strecker, Dr.  D.W.,  107 
strength (signal),  133 
stress,  153 
Strittmatter,  Dr.  Peter,  107 
structures,  44,  61,  69,  79,  95,  120,  128, 
149,  153,  156,  160,  163,  205,  211,  231 
students, 4,  41-42,  133,  143,  152,  235 
Stuhlinger, Dr.  Ernst,  116 
Styrofoam,  130 
submarines, 6,  8,  57 
subsonic aircraft,  35,  66,  152 
s u n ,  66,  68,  104,  133,  145,  149,  158,  161, 
199 
sunspots.  See solar activity. 
Super Loki  (U.S.  rocket), 37 
superclusters,  galactic,  129 
superhigh frequencies  (SHF),  139 
supernovas, 32,  37,  215 
supersonic  (aircraft;  transport),  29,  64, 
66,213 
supersonics,  9,  64,  219 
supplies,  21,  224 
suppor t   (funding,  services,  systems, 
teams),  42,  44,  45,  55,68-69,  102,  113, 
139,  147,  156,  168,  169,  197,  207,  208, 
212,  221,  222,  226,  228-229,  231-232, 
234 
surface,  145,  168,  175,  214,  226 
surgery, 5 

313 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

surveillance  (See  also  monitoring.),  58, 
63,  101-102,  122,  136,  149-150,  221- 
222 
survival, 22,  68,  202,  226 
Swain, Charles W., 148 
Swainson, Wyn  Kelly.  17 
Sweden, 66,  103,  154,  174,  200 
Switzerland, 84,  154 
symposium.  See meetings. 
synchronous  (orbits;  satellites),  2,  124, 
138,  139,  148,  210 
synthesis, 65,  73,  230 
system  for  auxiliary  nuclear  power 
(SNAP). See power  sources, nuclear. 
systems engineering. See design, engineer- 
ing. 
Syvertson, C.A.,  147,  188 

T-38  (U.S.  trainer/chase  aircraft),  132, 
150 
tactical weapons.  See weapons systems. 
tadpoles, 225 
tail,  airplane. See design, aircraft. 
tailcone, 151,  197 
takeoff,  66 
Tallahassee, Fla.,  148 
tandem  launch,  193,  195 
Tanegashima  (Japan  launch  site), 30,  41 
Tansei  3  (Japan  experimental  satellite), 
38,  239 
tape recording.  See recording systems. 
target  satellites. See interceptor satellites. 
Taylor, Michael, 72,  84 
Taylor, Quentin, 62 
Taylor, T.H.,  Construction Co.,  63 
teaching, 14 
Teal Ruby (DOD project).  71 
teamwork, 231 
Tech House (LaRC),  130-131,  148 
technicians,  182,  194 
techniques,  improved.  See  new 
niques. 
technology 
-applications,  11,  56,  71,  141-142, 
145-146 
-comparisons,  13 
-funding,  194 
-problems.  76 
-transfer,  71 
-utilization.  51,  130,  131,  208,  212 
telecommunications, 60. 182 
teleconference, 47 
Teledyne.  Inc.,  30,  134 

tech- 

314 

Teledyne Industries, Inc.,  221 
telegraph, 168 
telemetry,  158 
teleoperator retrieval system. See remote. 
telephone,  74,  168,  214,  221,  226 
telephotography, 101 
teleportation, 16 
Telesat Canada,  32,  153,  229 
telescope,  18,  37,  38-39,  48,  50,  66,  70, 
72,  107,  109,  136-137,  149,  152,  188 
Telespazio (Italy comsat  control), 157 
television,  10,  12-13,  33,  52,  104,  121, 
129-130,  154,  165,  178,  198,  208, 
223-224,  226,  234 
temperature, 39-40,  62,67,  93,  127,  128, 
148,  150,  159,  161,  165,  168,  171,  175, 
177,203,232 
Tennessee,  127 
Tennessee River, 44 
Tennessee State University,  145 
Tennessee Valley  Authority (TVA),  227 
terminal  configured  vehicle  (TCV).  See 
microwave landing system. 
terrain.  See topography. 
Terrile, Dr.  Richard  J.,  230 
terrorism, 189 
Tesla, Nikola.  19 
test  pilots.  See pilots 
testing 
-aircraft,  132,  235 
-ballistic  missiles, 8,  57 
-equipment,  58,  59,  80,  112,  128,  163 
-instrumentation,  93 
-Space  Shuttle.  See  Space  Shuttle 
testing. 
tethered satellite,  98,  181 
Texas, 3,  41,  127,  138 
Texas  Instruments, Inc.,  220 
Texas Southern University, 3 
textbooks, 14 
thematic mapper, 42 
theory, 51,55,75,  117,  129,  190,208-209, 
217 
thermal-infrared scanning. See scanning. 
thermal insulation. See insulation. 
thermodynamics,  32 
thermoelectric materials, 140 
thermosphere.  See atmosphere. 
Thiel, Dr.  Charles, 62 
Thiokol Corp.,  35,  133 
third world.  14 
Thompson, James R.,  121 
Thompson, Dr.  Rodger,  107 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

lNDEX 

Thornton,  Dr.  William E., 85 
thrust,  153,  160,  205 
thunders torm   research  in terna t iona l  
program (TRIP), 21-22,  127,234-235 
thunderstorms, 21,  127 
Tiedemann, Trudy,  74 
tidal  forces, 124 
tilt-rotor  aircraft,  61,  216 
timber.  See forests. 
time,  51,  82,  149,  208 
timing,  175 
TIROS-N, 229 
Titan (moon of  Saturn), 49 
Titan (U.S.  solid-fuel rocket), 211 
Titan  Centaur  (rocket),  33,  155,  167, 
220,  221 
titanium,  108,  233 
Tokyo, Japan,  131,  140,  182 
Tokyo, University of ,  23,  38 
Tomahawk (USN cruise missile), 8 
tomato can.  See interceptor satellites. 
tools.  See instrumentation. 
topography,  109,  176 
T o u l o u s e   Sp a c e   Re sea rch   C e n t e r  
(France),  117 
tourism.  6.61,  67,  69 
towing, 231 
tracking, 57,  93,  155,  175,  189,  221,  222 
-ground  stations,  1,  82,  180 
-radio  beacons,  6,  172,  184 
-ships,  10,  64, 66,  180 
-space-based,  58,  71,  79 
-and  data  acquisition, NASA  office 
of.  See NASA. 
- a nd   da ta-re lay   satellite  system 
(TDRSS),  1 
Tracor Marine, Inc.,  231 
tractor.  See vehicles. 
traffic.  See  air  traffic;  communications 
problems;  orbit,  spacecraft. 
training, 193,  194,  231 
-astronauts 
(See  also  Space  Shuttle, 
crews.),  21,  84,  107,  118,  132,  208 
-cosmonauts,  20,  223-224 
trajectories,  35,  68,  145,  167,  186,  215, 
223,  226 
Transat (USN navsat), 197,256,261,263 
Transcaucasia, USSR.  59 
Transit  (USN  global  navigation  system), 
1 97 
Trunsit 3A  (USN navsat),  161 
Transit improvement program  (TIP),  197 
transmission.  See energy transfer. 

transmission,  47.  179,  208,  210 
transonic, 132 
transponder,  15,  197 
transport aircraft.  See aircraft. 
transportation,  60, 111,  113-114,  121, 
122,  137,  141,  175,  192 
Transportation,  U.S.  Department  of, 
112,  192,  212 
trash.  See wastes. 
traveling-wave tube  (TWT),  181 
treaty. See international relations. 
trees,  39-40 
trials, l a w  court. See judicial proceedings. 
Trident  (USN  ballistic  missile),  8,  157, 
197 
Tropex  (USSR-sponsored  international 
tropical weather experiment),  56 
trophy. See awards. 
TRS,  teleoperator  retrieval  system.  See 
remote. 
truck.  See vehicles. 
Truly, Richard, 122,  135,  170,  171,  191 
Truszynski, Gerald M.,  219-220 
TRW Systems, Inc.,  1,  22,  47,  103 
Tucson, Ariz., 94 
Tulsa, Okla.,  45 
tumors.  See medical  research. 
Tupolev (USSR SST jetliner),  105 
Tupolev, A.N.,  29 
turbines,  134-135 
turbulence,  61,  161,  191,  218 
turnaround time,  186 
Turner Construction Co.,  173 
typhoons, 131 

U-2 (U.S.  jet  reconnaissance  aircraft), 
208 
U-25 facility, USSR,  11 1 
Uchinoura (Japan launch site),  38 
UH-1H  (U.S.  helicopter),  132 
Uhlman, Dr.  Donald,  106 
Uhuru (Explorer 4 4 ,  129 
UK-6  (British  radiation-measurement 
spacecraft), 229 
Ukraine,  region of  USSR,  167 
ultrahigh  frequency (UHF),  139 
ultrasonic,  233 
ultraviolet,  10.  37,  117,  119,  121,  169, 
189,210 
underground  testing,  71,  140 
undersea; underwater, 8,  208 
unemployment, 75,  107,  108 
unidentified  flying objects, 218 

315  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 

uniformity,  185,  209 
Union  Baptist Bible College, 3 
Union of South Africa. See South Africa. 
Union  of  Soviet  Socialist  Republics 
(USSR),  146,  158,  176,  234 
-international  cooperation,  4,  46, 52, 
85,  89-90,  111,  119,  121,  127,  143- 
144 
-manned  spaceflight,  10,  89,  123-124, 
180,  189-190,  206,  222-225 
-technology,  13,  111,  121,  195-196 
-weapons  systems,  13,  57,  101 
United  Bank  of California,  148 
United Kingdom,  1,40,44,46,53,65,66, 
84,  115,  119,  141,  152,  154,  186,  193, 
212,  227,  229 
United Kingdom National Physical Labo- 
ratory,  227 
United  Kingdom Science Research Coun- 
cil,  9 
United Nations, 44,93,  103,  114,  129-130 
United  Space Boosters,  Inc.,  35  
United  States, 24,  46,  53  
United  S ta te s   In fo rma t ion   Agency 
(USIA),  10 
United  States Strategic  Institute,  172 
United  Stirling  (Sweden), 200 
United Technologies Corp . ,  35,  50,  192 
Univac  1108 (computer), 74 
“Universe” (NASA  film),  64,  87 
universe,  origins of.  See theory. 
University  (of).  See rest  of  name. 
university  community,  71,  146,  148,  172, 
174,  188,  228 
unmanned  flight,  missions,  36,  42,  72, 
149 
unpowered  flight,  17,  36,  42,  150-151 
upper  atmosphere. See atmosphere. 
upper  stages.  See Space Shuttle. 
Upper Volta,  198 
uranium,  109,  130,  230 
Uranus  (planet), 3,  34,  38,  48,  49,  59-60, 
69,  103,  137,  161,  204,  226-227 
Urban,  Dr.  Eugene W.,  157 
Urdu  (language),  103 
U.S.  Booster,  Inc (See also United  Space 
Boosters.),  231 
users;  user  community  (See  also  da ta  
utilization.),  143 
Users Requirements  Committee,  59 
Utah  State University,  4 
utilities,  private,  15-16,  129 
Utopia  Planitia  (region  of  Mars),  6,  125 

316 

V-2  (WW I1 German rocket weapon),  115 
vacuum,  space, 54,  59 
-tubes,  13 
Van Allen belt,  102 
Vandenberg  AFB,  Calif.,  109,  120,  211, 
229 
Vanderhoff,  Dr.  John W.,  192 
Vanguard  (USN rocket),  115 
vapor,  192 
variable  systems,  134,  138 
vegetation  (See also botany.),  47,  123 
vehicle  assembly  building  (VAB),  KSC, 
61,  113 
vehicles (See also transportation.),  19,63, 
74,  111,  113-114,  122,  175,  192,  199- 
200 
velocity.  See speed. 
Venus (planet),  28,  92-93,  106,  119,  161, 
22 1 
Venus orbiting imaging radar. See VOIR. 
verification,  32,  43 
Vernon,  France,  225 
Versailles, Treaty of ,   115 
Verschoore,  Chuck,  153 
vertical  takeoff  and  landing  (VTOL) 
craft,  173 
vertical  test stand,  80 
very large array  (VLA), 66 
Vessot,  Dr.  Robert,  30,  51 
Veterans  Administration  (VA),  U.S.,  8, 
146,  188 
veterinary  medicine,  157 
Veverka,  Joseph,  124 
VHF (very high  frequency),  113 
vibration, 55,63,  110,  113,  118,  135,  170, 
202,  205 
videotape,  10 
Vienna,  Austria,  129 
Viking:  lander,  orbiter.  See Viking  proj- 
ect. 
Viking  mission,  3,  15,  33,  49,  52,  125, 
155,  161 
Viking project,  3,  15,  20,  25,  48,  52,  70, 
101,  125,  181 
Viking 1,  31,  55,  70,  132,  176 
Viking 2,  31,  62,  76 
vinegar  flies, 68 
Vinson,  Mack,  229-230 
Virgin Islands, U.S.,  179 
Virginia,  5,  137,  164 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI),  5 
visibility, 69,  75,  94 
visible,  174,  178,  189,  210,  216 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

INDEX 

vision,  216 
vitamins,  123 
Vogt,  Dr.  Rochus E.,  190 
voice communications,  158, 

volcanoes,  207 

von  Braun,  Dr.  Wernher,  115-117,  141, 
209 
von  Zahn,  Dr.  Ulf,  166 
Vought  Corp.,  30,  177 
Voyager  mission,  33,  49,  102,  103,  108, 
137,  140,  143,  145,  155-156,  161,  167, 
169,  184,  186, 221,  226-227 
Voyager I ,   167,  186, 227,  252,  263 
Voyager 2,  155-156,  186, 227, 250, 262 

Wagner,  Dr.  J .  Bruce,  192 
Waldheim,  Dr.  Kurt, 44, 103 
Walker, Curtis L.,  232 
Wallops Flight  Center 
-launches,  30,  127,  164 
-programs,  5 ,   69,  8 5 ,   127,  134,  138, 
164,  169, 178, 192, 206 
Wang,  Dr.  Taylor,  106 
war, 74 
warning.  See  safety  devices;  safety  sys- 
tems. 
Warwick,  Dr.  James W.,  137 
Washington,  University of ,   167 
wastes,  51,  111,  188, 233 
Watanabe,  Kazuo,  131 
water,  106,  123,  160, 218,  224 
-pollution.  See  pollution,  environ- 
mental. 
-survey,  33, 48,  80,  141 
-tank,  64 
-vapor,  10, 110, 161, 204 
“waterhole.”  See frequencies,  broadcast. 
waves,  231 
weapons  systems,  162, 203 
-aircraft,  29 
-interceptors.  See  interceptor  satel- 
lites. 
-intercontinental,  8 
-missiles, 
rockets,  8-9,  16,  57,  58, 
115,  197 
-nuclear,  65,  131,  177 
-satellites,  6-7,  22,  101-102,  177 
weather;  weather  control.  See  meteor- 
ology. 
Weaver,  Leon, 84 

Webb, C. Horton,  227 
Weber,  Mrs.  Elizabeth, 67 
Webster,  J.J.,  81 
weight,  45,  79,  114,  123,  128,  134,  145, 
150, 162, 177,  182, 211, 214 
weightlessness (See also zero gravity.),  30, 
57, 59, 64, 146,  160, 167, 206,208, 224 
Weis,  Judge  Joseph F.,  Jr.,  13 
Weitz,  Paul,  160 
welding, 25 
West  Germany.  See  Federal  Republic  of 
Germany. 
Western  American  Energy Corp.,  51 
Western Test Range (WTR),  9 ,   197, 229 
Western Union Corp.,  22 
Western Union  International,  140 
Western  Union  Space  Communications 
Go.,  Inc.,  1 
Westinghouse  Electric  Corp . ,   13, 22, 49, 
175, 220 
Westlake,  Reginald,  65 
whales,  184 
wheel,  165 
Whitaker, Ann,  230 
Whitcomb,  Richard  T . ,  71,  152 
White  (Gen.  Thomas  D.)  space  trophy, 
203 
white dwarfs. See stars. 
White Sands, N .M . ,   1 
-Missile  Range,  30, 93,  121 
-Test  Facility,  44, 71 
Whitecloud (USN navigation  system). See 
NO S S   2 .  
Wiebe,  CPO  Richard,  208 
Wiedemeier, Dr.  Herbert,  192 
wildlife,  47,  157,  193 
Wilkins,  Dr.  Judd ,  63 
Wilkinson,  Dr.  J.H.,  227 
Williams, Dr.  Bill A , ,   85 
Williams Research Corp.,  134 
Williamson,  Dave,  218 
wind,  67, 211, 214,222,  231 
wind  power;  windmills.  See  power 
sources. 
wind  tunnels,  28,  42,  61,  110,  132,  138, 
173 
Windsor,  Richard M . ,   37 
Windworks,  h e . ,   176 
winglets,  71-72,  110, 130 
wings, aircraft.  See design. 
Winter,  Dr.  David,  206 
wireless,  19 
wiring,  177 

317 

lNDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,  1977 

Wisconsin,  130, 176 
Witteborn,  Dr.  Fred,  107 
Woese,  Dr.  Carl, 201 
Wolff,  A.B.,  186 
women,  in  air  and   space  program  (See 
also names of  individuals.),  41,  57, 74, 
79,  123,  132,  157,  162,  176,  185,  191, 
194, 201, 205-206 
Wood,  H.  William,  65 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute,  93, 
114 
Woomera,  Australia, 37 
work  force adjustment.  See employment. 
working groups. See meetings. 
work  load, 232 
workshops.  See meetings. 
World Meteorological  Organization, 131, 
210 
World War  I ,   115, 141, 172 
World War  11,  16,  115, 147 
worldwide  communications.  See  global 
communications. 
Wouch,  Jerry,  106 
wreck,  205,  214 
Wright Flyer  (airplane),  3 
Wright Patterson AFB, Ohio,  199, 214 

Wright  trophy,  172 
Wyoming,  University of,  109 

X-1  (NASA experimental aircraft),  219 
X-15  (U.S. research aircraft), 235 
XB-70  (experimental aircraft),  235 
XC-8A.  See Buffalo aircraft. 
XV-15.  See tilt-rotor research  aircraft. 
x-ray,  37,  48,  54,  58,  72,  113,  129,  149- 
150, 153,  156,  174, 210,  212, 216, 228 

Yakovlev,  A S . ,   29 
Yardley,  John  F.,  124, 171, 209, 217 
YF-12  ( U S  aircraft),  235 
Yin,  Dr.  Lo I.,  216 
Yost,  Paul E.  (Ed),  181, 227 
Young,  A.  Thomas,  106, 207, 226 
Young,  John,  143 

Zelenchuk, USSR,  76 
Zeppelin,  141 
zero gravity,  25,  152 
zinc,  93,  190 
Zuckerman,  Lord  (Baron) Solly, 40 
Zurich,  University of,  55 

318 

The NASA  History Series 

HISTORIES 

And e r son ,  F r a n k  W.,  Jr . ,   Orders of Magnitude: A  History of NACA  and NA SA ,  
1915-1980 (NASA   SP-4403. 2d  ed.,  1981). 
Ben son ,   Ch a r l e s   D . ,   a n d   William  B a rn aby   F ah e r ty ,   Moonport:  A  History  of 
Apollo  Launch Facilities and  Operations (NASA  SP-4204,  1978). 
Bilstein,  Roge r   E . ,   Stages  to   Saturn:  A  Technological  History  of  the 
Apollo/Saturn  Launch  Vehicles (NASA   SP-4206,  1980). 
Boone ,   W .   Fred ,   N A S A  Office of Defense Affairs:  The First  Five  Years (NASA  
HHR -32 ,   1970, multilith). 
B rook s ,   C o u r t n e y  G . ,   J am e s  M .   G r imw oo d  a n d   Loyd  S. Swen son .  J r . ,  Chariots 
f o r  Apollo: A  History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft  (NASA   SP-4205,  1979). 
Byers,  B ruce   K . ,   Destination Moon:  A  History  of the Lunar  Orbiter Program 
(NASA  T M  X-3487,  1977, mu l t i l i th) .  
C o m p t o n ,  W .   Dav id ,   a n d   Ch a r l e s  D.  Benson,  Living and  Working in Space:  A 
History of  Skylab (NASA  SP-4208,  1983). 
Cor l iss ,  William  R.  N A S A  Sounding Rockets,  1958-1968: A  Historical Summary 
(NASA   SP-4401,  1971). 
Ezell,  E dw a r d  C l in ton ,   a n d   L in d a   N eum a n   Ezell,  On Mars:  Exploration of  the 
Red  Planet,  1958-1978 (NASA  SP-4212,  1984). 
Ezell,  Edw a r d  C l in ton ,   a n d   L in d a  N eum an  Ezell,  The Partnership: A  History o f  
the Apollo-Soyuz  Test Project  (NASA  SP-4209,  1978). 
G r e en ,   Con s t a n c e   McL.,  a n d   M i l to n   Lom a sk ,   Vanguard: A  History  (NASA  
SP-4202,  1970; a l so  W a sh i ng t on :   Sm i th son i a n  Ins t i tu t ion   Press,  1971). 
H a ck e r ,   B a r ton   C.,  a n d   J am e s   W .   G r imwoo d ,   On  the Shoulders of  Titans: A 
History of Project Gemini (NASA   SP-4203,  1977). 
Ha l l ,   R .   Carg i l l ,   Lunar   Impact:  A  History o f  Project  Ranger (NASA  SP-4210, 
1977). 
Ha l l ion ,   R ichard   P . ,   On the  Frontier:  Flight  Research  at  Dryden,  1946-1981 
(NASA   SP-4303,  1984). 
H a r tm a n ,   Edw in   P . ,   Adventures  in  Research:  A  History  of Ames   Research 
Center,  1940196.5 (NASA  SP-4302,  1970). 
Levine,  A r n o l d ,  Managing N A S A   in  the Apollo ERA   (NA SA  SP-4102,  1982). 
Newell,  H om e r   E.,  Beyond  the  Atmosphere:  Early  Years  of  Space  Science 
(NASA   SP-4211,  1980). 
P i t ts ,   J o h n  A . ,   The Human Factor:  Biomedicine in  the Manned Space Program 
to  I908  (NASA  SP-4213,  1985). 
Ro land ,   Alex,  Model  Research:  The  National  Advisory  Committee  f o r  
Aeronautics,  1915-1958 (NASA   SP-4103,  1985). 
Rosen tha l ,   A l f r ed ,   Venture into  Space:  Early  Years of  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center (NASA   SP-4301,  1968). 
Rosho l t ,   Rob e r t   L . ,   A n  Administrative History  of NA SA ,   1958-1963  (NASA  
SP-4101,  1966). 
Sloop,  J o h n   L.,  Liquid  Hydrogen  as  a  Propulsion  Fuel,  1945-1959  (NASA  
SP-4404,  1978). 
Swen son ,   Loyd   S.,  J r . ,   J am e s  M. G r imw oo d ,   a n d  Ch a r l e s  C.  A lexander ,   This 
New Ocean: A  History of Project Mercury  (NASA  SP-4201,  1966). 

REFERENCE WORKS 

Aeronautics and  Space Report  o f   the President,  a n n u a l  vo lumes   f o r   1975-1982. 
The Apollo  Spacecraft:  A  Chronology  (NASA   SP-4009 ,   vo l .   1 ,   1969;  vo l .   2 ,  
1973; vol.  3,  1976; vo l .   4 ,   1978). 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics:  A  Chronology  of  Science,  Technology,  and 
Policy,  a n n u a l   vo lumes   1961-1976,  w i th   a n   ear l ier   summa ry   vo lume ,  
Aeronautics  and Astronautics,  1951-1960. 
D i ck son ,   Ka ther ine   M . ,   ed . ,   History  o f   Aeronautics  and  Astronautics:  A 
Preliminary Bibliography (NASA   HHR -29 ,   1968, mu l t i l i th) .  
Ha l l ,   R .   Ca rg i l l ,  e d . ,  Essays on  the History  of Rocketry and Astronautics:  Pro- 
ceedings of the Third  through  the Sixth History Symposia of the International 
Academy of  Astronautics  (NASA   CP-2014 ,   2   vo ls . ,   1977). 
Ha l l ,   R.  Carg i l l ,   Project  Ranger: A  Chronology ( J PL /HR - 2 ,   1971, mu l t i l i th) .  
Loon ey ,   J o h n   J . ,   ed . ,   Bibliography  of  Space  Books  and  Articles f r om   Non-  
Aerospace  Journals,  1957-1977 NASA   HHR -5 1 ,   1979, mu l t i l i th) .  
Ro l a nd ,   Alex  F . ,   A  Guide t o  Research  in N A S A  History  (NASA   HHR -50 ,   6 th  
ed . ,   1982, ava i lab le   from   NASA   H is tory   Off ice) .  
Skylab:  A  Chronology  (NASA   SP-4011 ,   1977). 
Van  N imm en ,   J a n e ,   a n d   L eo n a rd   C .   B ru no ,   with  Rober t   L .   Ro sho l t ,   N A S A  
Historical Data  Book,  1958-1968, vol.  1, N A S A  Resources (NASA   SP-4012 ,  
1976). 
We l ls ,   He len   T . ,   Susan   H .   Wh i te ley ,   a n d   Ca r r ie   E .   Karegeannes ,   Origins of 
N A S A  Names (NASA   SP-4402 ,   1976). 

Recent vo lumes  a r e  ava i lab le  f rom  Supe r in tenden t  of  Documen ts ,   G ov e rnm en t  
P r in t ing   Off ice ,   Wash ing ton ,   D C  20402;  ear ly  vo lumes   f rom  Na t iona l   Techn ica l  
In f o rm a t ion   Serv ice ,  Spr ingf ie ld ,   VA  22161. 

1.  Report  No. 
NASA  SP-4022 
4.  Title  and  Subtitle 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1 9 7 7 :   A  Chronology 

2.  Government  Accession No. 

7.  Authorkt 
Eleanor H.  Ritchie 
1 
9.  Performing Organization Name and  Address 
NASA Headquarters History Office 
Washington, D.C. 

2.  Sponsoring  Agency  Name  and  Address 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Washington, D.C. 
5.  Supplementary  Notes 

3.  Recipient's  Catalog  No. 

5.  Repon  Date 
Code h3f Or  nization Coda 
6.  Performin 

8.  Performing Organization  Report  No. 

10.  Work  Unit  No. 

11.  Contract  or  Grant  No. 

13.  Type of  Report  and  Period  Covered 
Special Publication 
14.  Sponsoring  Agency  Code 

6.  Abstract 
S  This publication is a chronolbgy of events du'ring the year 1 9 7 7   in the 
fields of aeronautical and space research, development, activity, and 
policy.  It  includes appendixes, an index, and  illustrations. 
Chronological entries list sources f o r   further inquiry 

7.  K e y   Words  (Suggested  by  Author(rl), 

~- 
18.  Distribution  Statement 
Unc lass ?f ied--Unl imited 

IS. Security  Qassif.  (of this report1 
Unclassified 

20.  Security Clawif. (of  this  page) 
Unclassified 

21.  NO. of  Psger 
-4et+ 

22.  Price 

11-305 

For  s a l e  by the  National  Techn ica l   Information Service.  Springfield.  Virginia  22161 

Subject Category 99 

National  Aeronautics  and 
Space  Administration 
Washington,  D.C. 
20546 
o f f l o a t  B U S I n s a  
Penalty for Private Uae, $3300 

SPECIAL  FOURTH  CLASSMAlL 
BOOK 

Ponags and  Fees Paid 
National A m m t i c s  and 
Srmcs Administration 
NA SA 4 5 1  

POSTMASTER: 

If  UndelivtralYle (Section  1 5 8  
Portal Manual)  Do No1 Return 

