ASTRONAUTICS  AND 
AERONAUTICS,  I9794984 
A  Chronology 

by  Bette  R .   Janson  and  E leanor  H .   Ritchie 

THE   NASA  HISTORY  SERIES 

NASA 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Office of  Management 
Scientific and Technical information Division 
Washington, DC 
1990 

NASA maintains an internal history program  for two principal reasons.  (1) Spon- 
sorship of  research  in NASA-related history is one wiy  in which NASA responds 
to  the  provision  of  the   National  Aeronautics  and  :Space Act  of  1958 that  re- 
quires NASA to  “provide  for the widest practicable  and appropriate dissemina- 
tion  of  information  concerning  its  activities  and  the  results  thereof.”  ( 2 )  
Thoughtful  study of  NASA  history  can  help agency managers  accomplish  the 
missions  assigned to the agency.  Understanding  NASA’s past aids in understan- 
ding  its  present  situation  and  illuminates  possible  future  directions.  Selection 
of  items  for  inclusion  in  the  chronology  is  the  responsibility  of  the  History 
Office employee assigned  to  assemble them ;  omission o r  manner  of  treatment 
has  no  relationship  to  agency  policy. 

Fo r   sale  by the  Super in tenden t  of  Documen t s ,  U S .  Gove rnmen t  Pr in t ing  Off ice ,  Washington,  D.C.  20402  (paper  
cover). Library of Congress catalog numbe r   656038  

Preface 

Astronautics  ana'  Aeronautics  for  159-1984 completes the   series  of  annual 
chronologies of  events in  aeronautics, aviation, and  space  sc ience  and explora- 
tion  prepared  by  the History  Division  of  the National  Aeronautics and Space  
Administration  s ince  1961. The  concluding volume of  the  series, Astronautics 
and Aeronautics  for  1985,  was  published  in  1988. 
The present  volume was  written  by Bette R .  Janson and E leanor  H .  Ritchie 
under the  editorial supervision  of  the director of  the NASA  History  D iv is ion .  
Items  for  inclusion  in  this  volume were  collected  by  E leanor  H .   Ritchie  and 
Lee   D.  Saegesser  of  the  NASA  History  D iv is ion .  
As  with  any  work  of  this  nature,  its  extensive  scope  has  made  the   use  of 
primary sources prohibitive. Thus, entries are based  largely on normally  reliable 
secondary sources. All  entries are  followed by  their sources  to  provide resear- 
chers   gu ides   for  further  investigations. 

July  1989 

Sy lv ia  D.  Fr ies  
Director,  NASA  History  Division 
Washington, D.C. 

... 
111 

Contents 

Page 
... 
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  1979 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  1980 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
101 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  1981  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
247 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  1982  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
319 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  1983  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
389 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics.  1984  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
457 
Appendix  A   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . .   527 
Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space Flight.  1979  . . . . .   529 
Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space Flight.  1980  . . . . .  
549  
Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space Flight.  1981  . . . . .   571 
Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space Flight.  1982  . . . . .  
599  
Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space Flight.  1983  . . . . .   625  
653  
Satellites.  Space  Probes.  and  Manned  Space Flight.  1984 
Appendix  B 
Major  NASA  Launches.  1979-1984  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Appendix  C 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Abbreviations  of  References 
699  
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
707 
. . . .   777 
The  NASA  History  Series  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

683 

. 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS ,   1979 

Januapy 

January  I :  The  International Telecommunications Satellite Organization  (IN- 
TELSAT)  announced  that  this  week  it  would  complete  taking  over  all  of  its 
own  managerial  and  operational  activities,  performed  by  the  U.S.  Com-  
munications  Satellite  Corporation  (ComSatCorp)  since  INTELSAT’s  foun- 
ding  in  1964. ComSa tCorp  had  been  handing  back  responsibilities gradually 
since  1973 and  would  continue  to  provide  technical  and  laboratory  services 
under contract. Jobs done by  ComSa tCorp  had  included procuring  spacecraft 
and  launch  services,  operating  and  maintaining  facilities,  carrying  out 
technical  studies,  and  performing  research  and  development.  This  would  be 
the  first  time  in  INTELSAT  history  that  it  would  incorporate  all  of  its  own 
executive functions,  both  administrative and  technical.  (INTELSAT  Release 
79-1-1) 

January  2:  Wire  services  reported  that  an  explosion  that  damaged  a  Space 
Shuttle  engine  during  test  firing  at  Bay  S t .   Louis,  M iss . ,   on  December   27 
might delay  the first Shuttle launch,  now  scheduled for  the end of  September. 
Further  tests  would  await  determining  the  cause of  the  accident-apparently 
failure of  a  valve  in   a  high-pressure pump  feeding  oxygen  to  a  combustion 
chamber.  The  engine  had  completed 255  seconds  of  a  52-second  test  firing 
when  the pump   exploded,  damaging  the engine,  and  NASA  would  also  need 
3  to 4 weeks to  repair damage  to  the test  stand.  Last  September, when  NASA 
announced  delay  of  the  first  launch,  originally  scheduled  for  March, 
Associate Administrator John  F.  Yardley  warned  of  further  delays  “ i f   unfore- 
seen problems arise  o r   the  tests  are  not  entirely  successful.”  (NY  Ernes, Jan 
2/79  [UPI],  A-13;  W Post,  Jan  4/79 [AP],  A-2) 

January  3: George C.  Marshall Space Flight Center  (MSFC)  announced that 
the five “payload  specialists” selected last July  to operate experiments on  the 
first Spacelab mission  in  1981 would  begin  training  January  9 at  seven  cities 
in  the United  States and  two  in  Canada.  Selection and  training  of  non-NASA 
scientists to f ly  in space was  a  “famous first”  for NASA;  the scientists chosen 
by  their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would  be  the first 
noncareer  astronauts and  would  include  the  first Western  Europeans  and  the 
first  non-U.S.  citizens  to  fly  on  a  U.S.  space  mission.  Three  payload 
specialists  were  Europeans:  Ulf  Merbold  of  West  Germany,  representing 
Max-Planck  Institute of  Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of  Switzerland,  represen- 
ting  Europe’s  Space Technology  Center  (ESTEC);  and  Wubbo  Ockels  of  the 
Netherlands, representing Groenigen  University.  U.S. selectees were Michael 
L .   Lampton  of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  and  Byron  K .  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  19m 

Lichtenberg  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT) .   Since  Oc- 
tober  1978,  the   five  had  been  in  Europe  learning  to  operate  experiments 
designed  by  European  scientists.  Two  of  the  selectees  would  actually  fly  on 
Spacelab  1, and  the  other  three  would  operate  the  experiment  equipment  on 
ear th .  
Spacelab  1  would  carry  40  instruments,  about  equally  divided  between 
NASA  and  European  Space Agency  (ESA)  experiments  in  terms  of  weight, 
volume,  and  power  requirements;  fields  of  investigation  would  include  solar 
physics,  space  plasma  physics,  stratosphere  and  upper-atmosphere  physics, 
biology,  medicine,  astronomy,  earth  observation,  materials  processing,  and 
technology  areas,  such  as  thermodynamics  and  lubrication.  After  leaving 
MSFC,  the  trainees  would  visit  Redondo  Beach  (Ca l if .) ,   the  Johnson  Space 
Center (JSC), Philadelphia,  Boston, and Montreal  (Quebec) and Toronto  (On- 
tario)  in Canada; return to JSC in Houston;  visit Pa10  Alto,  Calif; and be back 
at  MSFC   in  Huntsville  on  March  22 .   (MSFC  Releases  79-1,  79-4) 

MSFC  reported  that a delegation from the People‘s Republic of China (PRC) 
visiting  the  United  States  since November  would  arrive  at  MSFC   January  5 
to  investigate  peaceful  uses  of  space  technology.  Following  up   a  visit  to  the 
PRC  last  Ju ly   by  Presidential  Science Advisor  Dr.  Frank  Press,  the  Chinese 
delegation,  accompanied by  NASA  representatives, had visited  several  NASA 
centers  and  U.S.  aerospace  industry  establishments.  Among  items  of  interest 
to  the  visitors  at  MSFC   would  be  the  Space Shuttle  orbiter  Enterprise,  cur- 
rently  undergoing  tests. 
The  PRC  representatives were  to be   in  the  United  States until  mid-January 
and  had  concluded  an  informal  agreement  on   developing  a  civilian  com- 
munications  system  for  the  PRC  and  on  buying  equipment  to  receive  Earth 
resources  data  from  Landsat  remote-sensing  satelllites.  NASA  Administrator 
Dr. Robert A .   Frosch headed the U.S.  delegation,  and Dr. Jen Xin-min,  direc- 
tor  of  the  PRC’s  Academy  of  Space Technology,  headed  the  PRC  delegation. 
(MSFC  Release  79-2) 

Janua iy   7:  Th e  N a v   York  Ernes  reported  that  a  huge  international  scientific 
project  supported  by  147  nations  would  begin  this  week.  Th e   $500 million 
Global Weather Experiment (GWE), part of the Global Atmospheric Research 
Program  (GARP),  would  be   a  joint  effort  of  the  World  Meteorological 
Organization and  the  International  Council  of  Scientific  Unions,  financed by 
the meteorological group.  It would  expand the existing  World Weather Watch, 
now generating more than 40,000  daily observations, by  using  10  satellites, 50 
research  vessels,  110  aircraft,  300  high-altitude  c onstant-level  balloons,  and 
300  instrumented  ocean  buoys,  in  addition  to  o ther   measuring  devices. 
The   widely  dispersed  instruments  and  large  numbers  of  scientists  would 
study  seasonal  weather  cycles  in  Earth’s  atmosphere  and  would  gauge  the 
practical  limits of  present  technology  for weather forecasting, to compile what 
would  be  the  most  complete  record  of  global  weather  data  ever  attempted. 

A 

JANUARY  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Twice  daily,  about  50  oceanographic  research  ships  from  22  nations  would 
release  balloon-borne  packages  for  atmosphere measurements;  U. S .   resear- 
chers would release  150 balloons in  the Atlantic and Pacific oceans to monitor 
winds  and  temperatures  at  an  altitude of  47,000  feet.  Satellites would  record 
wind  forces  and  directions  by  photographing  changes  in  cloud  shapes  and 
positions;  they  and  other  spacecraft would  record  atmospheric  temperature 
and  humidity  as  well  as  ocean  rainfall  and  sea  surface  temperatures. 
The   head  of  the  U.S. team,  Rex  Fleming of  the  National  Oceanic  and  At- 
mospheric  Administration  (NOAA),  said  that  the  belt  of  tropical  oceans 
around Earth‘s equator was an enormous heat sink absorbing solar energy and 
creating much of  the world’s weather and that observations there were meager. 
“This  will  be  the  first  time  that  an  annual  record  of  weather  data  will  have 
been  taken  over  the  whole  world,”  Fleming  said.  “The   world  can’t  afford  to 
do  this  every  year,  but we  hope  from  all this to  design  a weather-observance 
system  that  the  world  can  afford.”  U.S.  organizations  besides  NOAA  taking 
part  in  the  G W E  would  include  the  Departments  of  Commerce   (DOC) ,  
Defense  (DOD) ,   Energy  (DOE) ,   Interior,  State,  and  Transportation  (DOT); 
the National  Center  for Atmospheric Research; NASA;  the National  Science 
Foundation  (NSF); Defense Nuclear Agency;  the Air Force, Army,  Navy,  and 
Coast  Guard;  and  many  academic  institutions.  (NY  Ernes,  Jan  7/79,  1) 

January  10: NASA  reported  that  its  first high-energy  astronomy observatory, 
Heuo  I ,  had  exhausted its attitude-control gas supply, ending a  17-month map- 
ping  of  celestial X-ray  sources.  Launched  August  12, 1977, and  designed  for 
a  6-month lifetime, Heao I had  returned data of such quality that  NASA had 
extended  its  mission.  Its  systems  and  experiments  had  functioned  well 
throughout,  though  the  primary  mission  ended  in  February  1978.  Results in- 
cluded  raising  the  number  of  X-ray  sources  from  the  350 previously  known 
to  nearly  1,500; locating  a  new  black-hole possibility  near  the  constellation 
Scorpius,  bringing  the  total  to  four;  and  discovering  a  universal  hot  plasma 
constituting a  major  part  of  the  mass  of  the  universe,  as  well  as  a  dust  and 
gas cloud with  a mass probably  sufficient to  ‘%lose” the universe (prevent its 
perpetual  expansion).  The   results  had  already  engendered  more   than  160 
technical papers  and  scientific presentations, and  analysis of  the  Heno  I data 
would require years of work by  high-energy astrophysicists; the findings might 
change fundamental concepts of  the  universe, the NASA  report  said. Heuo  1 
would  probably  reenter  Earth‘s  atmosphere  in   late  March.  (NASA  Release 
79-4;  MSFC   Release  79-3). 

January  16: NASA  declared the launch of  Comstar  C  on June 29,  1978, to  be 
successful.  Put  into  a  transfer  orbit  by  an  Atlas  Centaur  at  the  Eastern  Test 
Range  (ETR),  the  spacecraft on July  1 successfully  fired  its  apogee motor  to 
go into the desired synchronous orb i t .  The  assessment was  signed January  12 
by  Joseph B.  Mahon ,  director of  the expendable launch-vehicle program in the  
Office of  Space Transportation Systems, and by  John E  Yardley,  associate ad- 

5 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

JANUARY  lmS 

ministrator  for  space  transportation  systems.  (NASA  MOR  M-491-201-78-03 
[postlaunch]  Jan  16/79). 

January  20:  At  a  press  conference  on  NASA’s  budget  for  fiscal  year  1980 
(FY80),  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch,  NASA  administrator,  said  the  1980  budget 
year  would  not  “go  down  in history  a s  my  favori1.e.”  Th e  request  NASA  sub- 
mitted  to  Congress  was  jus t   over  $4 .7   billion,  an  increase  of  about  $160 
million over the FY79 budget,  counting in the latter a $185 million supplemen- 
tal NASA had  asked for. The  FY80 request would  amount to  slightly  less than 
the  rate  of  inflation,  Dr.  Frosch  said;  not  counting  the  $185  million  sup- 
plemental  in   the  F Y B  budget,  the  1980 request  would  be  “about  equal  to  in- 
flation.”  Whereas  funding  sought  for  space  science and  app l ica t ions  was  up 
about 20% and  the  total  amount  included  support for  all  ongoing programs, 
it  contained  no  money  for  “new  flight  project  starts  of  any  major  kind”  in 
space  sciences  or  applications.  Th e   budget  did  contain  “some  increases  in 
aeronautics,  where  it  is  more  difficult  to  identify  a  major  new  start  in  any 
case.” 
“Current  best  estimate”  for  the  first  Space Shuttle flight was  November 9, 
postponed  from  September  28,  and  NASA’s  schedule  had  been  adjusted 
accordingly. 
Money  requested  for  space science had  increased  $100 million,  about  2 0%  
over  FY79;  this  covered  major  projects  and  research  and  development  now 
under  way,  such  as  Space Telescope, Galileo  (the Jupiter-orbiter  probe) ,   the 
high-energy  astronomical observatory,  Spacelab,  the   solar polar  mission,  in- 
frared astronomy satellite, and  solar maximum mission.  Applications  fbnding 
included  money  for joint  multiagency  research  in  crop  monitoring  and  com- 
modity  projection  by  NASA,  together  with  the   Departments  of  Agriculture, 
Commerce,  and  Interior  and  the  Agency  for  International  Development 
(AID).  Funds  for  aeronautics  would  increase  14 %  to  cover  current  research 
and  technology  and  to  continue the  aircraft  energy  efficiency  program,  with 
research  on  reduction  of  noise  and  pollution. 
In manpower,  NASA would  lose 674 permanenl  Civil Service positions over 
FY79  and FY80,  part  of  this  the agency’s  share of  a government-wide 2 %  cut 
in  personnel.  Frosch  summarized  the   budget  as   one   that  “in  key  program 
areas continues momen tum .   . .while it’s  tight,  WI:  think  we  can  make  a  good 
transition to the Shuttle era and we can keep going on the science,  the applica- 
tions,  and  the  aeronautics.  . .”  (Text;  W  Star,  Jan  22/79,  A-10) 

January  22:  Th e   Washington  Post  reported  that  Pluto,  known  for  some  40 
years  as the outermost planet  of  the  Earth’s  solar  system,  would  no  longer be 
furthest  from  the  Sun  as  of  this  date,  when  it  would  edge  inside  the  orbit  of 
Neptune  and  remain  there  until  March  1999.  Discovered  in   1930  by  Clyde 
Tombaugh  at  the  Lowell  Observatory,  Pluto had  :in elliptical orbit that  would 
bring  it  inside that  of  Neptune  every  248  years  (that  is,  the crossing  last hap- 
pened  in  1731,  and  before  that  in  1483) and  keep  it  there  for  about  20  years. 

6 

JANUARY  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Scientists at  the  U.S.  Naval  Observatory said  that  elliptical orbits of  the  two 
planets were  so inclined that Pluto and  Neptune could never  come  closer than 
about 240  million miles to one another. Last year, photographs of  Pluto reveal- 
ed  a  large  satellite visible  from  only  on e   side  of  the  planet;  it  was  named 
Charon,  for  the  ferryman  on  the  river  Styx  in   Pluto’s  realm  of  Hades. 
(Washington Post, Jan  22/79,  A-9) 

January 25: NASA  announced  that  it  had  named  the  first  four  Space Shuttle 
orbiters  that  would  operate  in   space  to  honor  U.S.  explorer  ships.  The   first 
orbiter  (102) scheduled for  launch  later  in  1979 was  named  for  the  Columbia, 
which  located  the  Columbia  River  in  1792;  Captain  Robert  Gray  named  the 
river  for  his  sloop.  Challenger  (orbiter  099)  was  named  for  the  ship  that 
gathered data December   1872-May  1876,  filling 50 volumes on Earth’s oceans. 
Discovery  (orbiter  103)  was  the  ship  looking  in  1610-1611  for  a  northwest 
passage  from  the Atlantic  Ocean  to  the  Pacific Ocean  by  exploring Hudson’s 
Bay.  Atlantis  (orbiter  104) was  the  first  US.-operated  vessel  designed  for 
ocean  research,  a  two-masted ketch  that  logged  half  a million  miles between 
1930 and  1966. Enterprise,  the  first orbiter  built, was  named  for  a  vessel  ex- 
ploring the Arctic from  1851 to  1854, as well as for  the  flagship in  television’s 
Star  Trek;  as  the  test  orbiter,  it  was  not  intended  for  use  i n   space.  (NASA 
Release  79-10;  Washington Post, Jan  26/79,  C-2;  WSJ, Jan  26/79,  1). 

NASA  reported  that  engineers  at  MSFC  and  controllers  at  JSC,  who  had 
been  trying to maintain the orbiting Skylab space station in an attitude of  least 
atmospheric drag to  keep  i t   in   space until  the  Shuttle could try  to  reboost  o r  
deorbit,  had  turned  their  efforts  toward  preserving  some   control  over  the 
spacecraft’s final  reentry,  since NASA  had  decided  in   December  to  abandon 
rescue  attempts.  The   controllers  had  put  the  Skylab  into  a  solar-inertial at- 
titude,  pointing its  solar panels  at  the  Sun  at all  times  to  ensure  full  electric 
power, offering the  possibility of  some  influence over the  craft during reentry, 
Engineers had  not  agreed on  the  feasibility of  such control but  did  agree  that 
steps should be  taken  to preserve the  option while  studies continued.  (NASA 
Release  79-12;  MSFC   Release  79-12) 

Dr.  Frank  Press,  director  of  the  Office  of  Science and  Technology  Policy, 
told  the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space that President 
Carter’s May  directive reaffirmed  the policy of  five previous administrations: 
separation of military and  “open”  civilian space programs; data sharing, hard- 
ware sharing, and technology transfer between civilian and military programs; 
and  domestic  civilian  remote  sensing  regulated  by  the  government. 
The   United  States had  spent $100  billion  over  the  past  20  years  on  federal 
space  activities:  about  $67  billion  for  civilian  programs  ($25  billion  for 
Apollo  alone)  and  $33 billion  in  military  programs.  Today,  the  expenditure 
was  about  half  and  half.  The  FY79  budget  request  had  been  $7.1  billion,  and 
the FYSO  request would  be  $7.9 billion  (up by  12%).  These  sums  did  not  in- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1979 

clude  private  investment  in  space,  more   than  $2  billion  in  communications 
satellites  alone.  (Text,  Jan  25/79) 

January 30: NASA  launched  for the U.S.  Air  Force a satellite called SCATHA 
(spacecraft  charging a t  high  altitudes)  from Cape  Canaveral Air  Force Station 
a t  4 :42   p .m .   EST  on  Delta  into  a  transfer  orb i t  pending  its  boost  into  opera- 
tional  orb i t   February  2 .   Later  orb i t  elements  were  43,297-kilometer  apogee, 
27,512-kilometer  perigee,  1,416.6-minute  per iod ,   6.5*  inclination.  SCATHA 
carried  twelve experiments,  three provided  by  NASA,  to collect data on  high- 
energy  solar-wind particles  causing  false signals  from satellites by  building  u p  
electrical  charges  on   their  surfaces.  Military  and  commercial  satellites  in 
geostationary  orb i t   over  the  Ear th   at  35,900 kilometers  (22,300 miles)  had 
been  the  major  sufferers;  the  charges  could  efiectively  disable  vital  com-  
munications  by  causing  equipment  failure,  false  recording  of  unachieved 
events,  o r   initiation  of  unplanned  events. 
SCATHA would  meet  the  greatest  challenge  of  its  planned  1-year  lifetime 
during  a  solar  eclipse  period  beginning  in  March ,   when  electrical  charging 
would  reach  its height;  Goddard  Space Flight  Center  (GSFC) had  included  an 
electric-field  detector,  a pair  of  50-meter  antennas  to be  extended  in  opposite 
directions  in  March  to  form  a  single  instrument  longer  than  a  football  field. 
Extension  of  the antennas might  effect the spacecraft’s dynamics.  The  USAF’s 
Space  and  Missile  System  Organization  (SAMSO)  would  reimburse  NASA 
about  $9   million  for  the   launch .   (NASA  Release  79-3;  NASA  MOR 
M-492-303-79-01  [prelaunch] Jan  17/79, [postlaunch] Oct 251789; 0 Sen Star, 
Jan  31/79,  1;  Today, Jan  20179,  8A; Jan  22/79, 6A; Jan  30179,  1OA;  W Star, Jan 
23/79,  A-6) 

During  January:  The  ESA  announced  that  it planned  to  launch  one  of  its  In- 
telsat  V  communications  satellites  on  Europe’s Ar iane  booster.  The  first  four 
of  this  series  of  seven would  be   launched  from  mid-1979  to  late  1980 on  U .S .  
Atlas Centaurs;  ESA’s  board opted for a  1981 Ar iane  launch of  its sixth  Intelsat 
V  and  for  Shuttle  launches  for  the  other  two.  (ESA  Release  Jan  1979,  1) 

February 

Febnuzry  1:  Flight  controllers  at  JSC  reported  that  they  would  halt  their 
24-hour  Skylab watch  February 2 ,   following NASA’s  decision  to  abandon  at- 
tempts  to  boost  or  deorbit  the  space  station.  The   January  25  maneuver  that 
positioned Skylab’s solar panels for constant sun tracking had  removed i t  from 
the minimum-drag  position  and  would  result in  speeding up  its  orbital decay. 
The   repositioning was  intended  to  increase power  available to  controllers  to 
alter  the  path  of  Skylab’s  descent,  now  expected between  June  and  August. 
(JSC  Release  79-03) 

February 5 :  NASA  announced that  i t   had  signed a contract with  Rockwell  In- 
ternational corporation’s  space systems group to  build  two  Space Shuttle or- 
biters (OV-103 and OV-lW), convert a ground-test orbiter (OV-991,  and modify 
the  first  orbiter  (OV-102);  this  would  give  NASA  four  orbiters  for  Shuttle 
operations.  JSC  would  administer  the  $1.9-billion  contract  at  Rockwell’s 
California  facilities  and  at  the  Kennedy  Space  Center  (KSC)  in  Florida. 
(NASA  Release  79-15;  JSC  Release  79-07) 

February  6:  The   Foreign  Broadcast  Information  Service  (FBIS)  reported 
Japan’s  successful  launch  of  an  experimental  communications  satellite Ec s ,  
also called Ayame,  from  Tanegashima  Space Center on  an  N-1  rocket at  5 : 46  
p.m. 
local  time.  Ea r ly   orb i t   elements  were  34,411-kilometer  apogee, 
193-kilometer perigee, 604-minute period,  and 24.1O  inclination. Designed  for 
communications  tests  at  very  high  frequencies,  Ayame  would  later  be 
maneuvered  into  stationary  orbit,  the  National  Space  Development  Agency 
said.  (FBIS,  Tokyo  Kyodo  in  English,  Feb  6/79) 

February 9: NASA  reported that,  in keeping with  President Carter’s directive 
on  space policy,  it would  undertake a  study with NOAA  to  determine how  far 
private industry could participate directly in U.S.  civilian remote-sensing pro- 
grams. Under  the direction of  Arnold  Frutkin,  NASA  associate administrator 
for  external relations,  and Wilbur  H .  Eskite,  Jr.,  NOAA  special assistant for 
studies and analysis, the agencies would ask for private-sector views on capital 
investment,  system  ownership,  system  concepts,  development  of  commercial 
products, market  assessments, incentives needed  to  participate, and  the  roles 
of  government and  private  industry  in  remote  sensing.  (NASA  Release 79-16) 

Febnuzry  17: The   Washington Post  reported  that  NASA’s  failure to  tell  a  con- 
tractor  about  classified information  on  the  USSR’s  early-warning  radar  net- 
work  had  cost  the  federal government  $75  million,  the  cost of  rebuilding  the 

9 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1979 

Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite  System  (TDRSS)  to maintain  communica- 
tions  with  crews  on  the  Shuttle  in  its  first  10  years, of  operations.  NASA  had 
had  to  renegotiate  a  $786  million  contract  awarded  3  years  ago  to  Western 
Union,  which  designed  the TDRSS without  knowing about  the problem  of  in- 
terference  from  USSR  installations  located  between  the  Baltic  and  the  Black 
Seas and  using  frequencies  high  enough  to  overpower  transmissions  between 
the TDRSS and  the Shuttle orbiter.  An unidentified  source  told  the  newspaper 
that  U.S.  intelligence  had  given  such  a  “superclassified”  designation  to  data 
on  Soviet  radar  frequencies  and  power  outputs  that  NASA  could  not  give  the 
information  to  Western  Union  and  its  subcontractor  TRW  Systems,  Inc. 
Renegotiation  and  rework  had  delayed  the  satellite  system by  at  least  a  year, 
NASA told Congress, but would not impair Shuttle operations already  delayed 
by  engine  development  problems.  (W  Post,  Feb  17/79,  A-9) 

February  18:  Wallops  Flight  Center  (WFC)   launched  SAGE  (stratospheric 
aerosol  and  gas  experiment)  at  11:18  a .m .  EST  on  a  Scout  into  an  orb i t  with 
655. I-kilometer  apogee,  554.6  kilometer  perigee,  96.9-minute  period,  and 
54.90 inclination.  The  32-pound  spacecraft would obtain data  on  aerosols and 
ozone  in  the  stratosphere,  to  be  used  in  studying  climate  and  environmental 
changes  that might adversely affect  life at the  surface. Data  from SAGE would 
be  checked  with  surface  measurements  from   teams  in  the  United  States, 
Japan ,   and  Europe.  SAGE  would  obtain  readings  from  tropical  to  high 
latitudes;  similar  data  for  the  polar  regions  would  come   from  an  aerosol 
measurement  experiment  on  Nimbus  Z  (WFC  Release  79-4) 

February 20:  NASA  reported  that  four  organizations  in  the  United  States  and 
Canada  had  formed  a  jo in t   sounding-rocket  program  to  study  this  mon th s  
total  so lar   eclipse  and  its  effect  on  Earth’s  atmosphere  and  ionosphere.  The  
February  26   event,  visible  in  totality  only  in  the  northwestern  United  States 
and  central  Canada ,  would be the  last one  in  this  century  observable from  the 
North American  continent. Working  from two  laurich sites  in western  Ontario 
north  of  Minneapolis,  M inn . ,   NASA,  the  Army’s  Atmospheric  Sciences 
Laboratory,  the  Air  Force  Geophysics  Laboratory,  and  Canada’s  National 
Research  Council  (NRC)  would  gather  data  or  predicting  atmospheric 
responses  to  such  disturbances. 
NASA,  through WFC ,  would be  the U.S.  lead  agency  for  seven rocket  laun- 
ches  during  the  operation.  The  NRC  in  Canada  would  provide  construction, 
ground  and  flight  safety,  launch  coordination,  and  other  support.  The  Army 
lab  would  sponsor  an  experiment  measuring  electron  densities,  and  the  U.S. 
Air  Force  lab  would  operate  a mobile  observatory  to measure  infrared  radia- 
tion  from  the  upper  atmosphere.  (NASA  Release  79-18) 

February  25 :  The  Soviet Union  launched  Soyuz  32  from  the  Baykonur  site a t  
2:54  p .m .   local  time,  carrying  a  two-man  crew  to  occupy  the  orbiting  Sulyut 
6  space  station  for  the  first  time  since  November  1978,  when  the  Soyuz  29 

10 

FEBRUARY  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

astronauts returned after a  record  139 days  in  space. Soyuz  32 was  manned  by 
L t .   Co l .   Vladimir  Lyakhov,  37,  acting as  commander  on  his  first  flight,  and 
civilian  flight  engineer  Valery  Ryumin,  39,  who  was  aboard  Soyuz  25 when 
it  failed  to  dock  with  Salyut  6 in  October  1977  and  had  to  return  to  Earth  2  
days  later. 
Gen.  Vladimir  Shatalov,  head  of  the  USSR‘s  space  training  program,  said 
Salyut  6 had  been  “an  effective platform  for work  in   space,”  having  been  oc- 
cupied  for  8 of  the  16 months  since  its  launch  in  September  1977.  It  had  seen 
five  successful  manned  dockings  (three  by  international  crews  including 
cosmonauts  from  Czechoslovakia,  East  Germany,  and  Poland  as  part  of  the 
Intercosmos program),  as  well  as  dockings by  a  number  of  unmanned  supply 
vessels  delivering  food  and  fuel.  (N Y  T imes ,   Feb  26/79,  A-14;  W Post,  Feb 
26/79) 

During  February: The  National  Aeronautic Association  (NAA)  reported  that 
the  Federation  Aeronautique  International  (FAI)  had  admitted  the  People’s 
Republic of  China as  an active member effective January  1.  (NAA  News ,  Jan- 
Feb  79) 

MSFC   reported completion of  a  number  of  Shuttle tests precedent to quali- 
fying  the  engine  and  combined  elements of  the  configuration for  flight  later 
in   1979.  Thiokol  Corporation,  prime  contractor  to  MSFC  for  Shuttle motor 
development,  completed  static  firing  tests  of  the  solid-fuel  rocket  motor 
February  17  at  its  Wasatch  Division  in   Utah. During  the  two-minute  firing, 
the   motor  th ru st  reached  abou t   3  million  pounds,  and  the  system  gimbaling 
the  nozzle for guidance underwent  the most  severe duty  cycle expected to oc- 
cur  during  flight.  This  motor,  more   than  35  meters  long  and  3.5 meters  in  
diameter,  was  the  largest  of  its  type  ever  developed  for  space  flight  and  the 
first  built  for  use  on  a   manned  craft. 
Qualification tests  later  this  spring would  check out  production,  assembly, 
and  firing cycle to  support a   full  flight  schedule. Each   launch  would  use  two 
of  the motors, separated a t  burnout and parachuted  into the ocean  for  recovery 
and  reuse.  On  February  23,  MSFC   also concluded  ground  vibration  tests  of 
the  complete  Shuttle  configuration,  assembled  for  the  first  time  to  provide 
data  on  liftoff  and  flight  conditions.  (MSFC   Releases  79-18,  79-19,  79-21) 

11 

March  I :  NASA  reported  that arrangements for press coverage of  the overland 
trek  of  Space  Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia  from  Rockwell’s plant  at  Palmdale, 
Ca l if . ,   to  Dryden  Flight  Research  Center  (DFRC)  and  the  flight  from  there 
to  KSC,  would  begin March  7  for  DFRC  and March  5-9 at KSC.  The  trip  by 
truck  would  precede  the  mating  of  Columbia  to  its  Boeing  747  carrier,  the 
brief  flight test March  9 of  ferry preparations and tile status, and the departure 
soon  after  for  KSC.  The  Shuttle would  be  off-loaded and  moved  into  the  or-  
biter  processing  facility  March   10-11.  (NASA  Release  NE79-2) 

NASA  announced  preparations  for  Voyager  l’s  encounter  with  the  planet 
Jupiter  about  March  5.  The   Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL)  would  provide 
television  coverage  of  the  event;  employees  at  Langley  Research  Center 
(LaRC) would have a special 7 a .m .  colloquium  in  the center’s cafeteria, com-  
plete with breakfast service and television monitors throughout the area. After 
18  months  of  space  travel,  the  encounter would  take  place  at  7:42  a .m .   EST 
at  a  distance  of  278,000  kilometers  (172,750  miles)  from  the  planet’s  cloud 
tops.  Real-time  images  and  live programming  through  Comsat  I  would  con- 
tinue  for  about  two  hours.  (NASA  Release  79-26;  LaRC  anno,  undated) 

March 2 :  At  “encounter minus 4 days,” JPL  issued  a Voyager bulletin showing 
a  nine-photo  mosaic  of  Jupiter’s  surface  constructed  from  time-lapse 
photographs taken  7.8  million kilometers  (4.7  million  miles)  from  the planet. 
The  bulletin also gave data on expected Sun and  Earth occultations by  Jupiter 
o f f e r i n g   o p p o r t u n i t i e s   f o r   “ u n i q u e   r a d i o   s c i e n c e   a n d   u l t r a v i o l e t  
measurements”  and on  the close approaches to  the  five large Jovian  satellites 
that  would  also  occur  Mp-ch  5.  (Mission  status  report  37) 

March  5-6: Voyager  I  successfully  met  its  objectives  at  the  encounter  with 
Jupiter,  NASA  reported,  “streaking”  past  the  planet,  “threading  its  way 
among  the  five astounding  satellites, and discovering  that Jupiter,  like Saturn 
and  Uranus,  is  a  ringed  planet.”  The   spacecraft had  performed  a s  predicted 
upon  close approach,  disappearing behind  Jupiter  for  two  hours,  penetrating 
its  flux  tube,  and  passing  close  to  both  Ganymede  and  Callisto.  It  had  been 
subject to hazards from Jupitefs  enormous magnetosphere and ,h igh  radiation; 
reception of  emergency  information  and  issuance of  corrective orders  would 
require  more   than  an  hours  travel  time  to  Earth  and  back.  However,  results 
were  “beyond  its creators’ wildest dreams,”  especially the imagery of  volcanic 
eruptions  and  other  details on  Jupiter’s moons.  NASA  Administrator  Robert 
Frosch  and  Deputy  Administrator Alan  Lovelace  said  “superlatives  fail  us.” 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  l!9?9 

The  Voyager project manager, JPL‘s Robert Parks, called it  “spectacularly suc- 
cessful.”  (NASA  MOR  S-802-77-01/02;  mission  status  reports  38,  39) 

March  6:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  assigned  MSFC  responsibility  for 
developing a  solar electric propulsion  stage to be  used  first  in  a planned  flyby 
of  Halley’s  comet upon  its  return  in  1985, and after that  for a  rendezvous with 
comet  Tempe1  11.  MSFC   had  been  studying  for  several  years  the  concept  of 
a  system using  solar energy  to provide electrical power  for  ion  engines. Other 
uses  for  such  a  system  would  be   high-energy  planetary  and  Earth-orbiting 
missions.  (NASA  Release  79-31;  MSFC  Release  79-24) 

March   7:  NASA announced  tha t  Dr. Noel  W.  Hinners,  associate administrator 
for  space  science,  had  accepted  appointment  as   director  of  the  National  Air 
and  Space Museum,  effective  in April.  H e  had  joined  NASA  in  1972 as  chief 
scientist and deputy  director  of  Apollo  lunar exploration  in  the Headquarters 
Office of  Manned  Space Flight  and had  held  his  present job   since  June  1974. 
(NASA  Release  79-32) 

March 8-12: Columbia,  the  first  reusable  Space  Shuttle orbiter,  started on  its 
way  to  space  Thursday,  March  8,  with  a  nine-hour  tow  by  truck  from  the 
Rockwell  International  hanger  at  Palmdale,  Calif.,  where  it  was  assembled, 
to  the  DFRC  a t   Edwa;ds  Air  Force  Base,  38  miles  away,  where  it  would  be 
mounted  on  a Boeing 747  for  a brief  test of  the orbiter plane  assembly  before 
flying  to KSC.  In  Lancaster,  Ca l if . ,   the  orbiter’s 78-foot wings  hung  over  the 
sides  of  the  two-lane  road  into  town,  barely  clearing  utility  poles,  and  some 
street  lights  had  to  be  moved  to  clear  the  way.  Spectators  lined  the  route  to 
see   the  five-story-high  122-foot-long  orbiter  pass  by  on  its  90-wheel  trailer, 
dwarfing  its  train  of  security  vehicles,  trucks,  and  a  fire  engine.  Onlookers 
commented on  the heavy  security  arrangements,  but  NASA  officials said that 
they  had  to  protect  the  craft  from  bystanders  who  might  touch  the  fragile 
thermal-protection  tiles  on  the  spacecraft  surface.  Obviously  missing  were  a 
number  of  black  tiles  on  Columbia’s  belly  and  white  tiles  on  its  sides,  to  be 
added  in  Florida  along  with  the  engines  and  computers. 
The  scheduled takeoff  for Florida might  be delayed  because of  bad  weather, 
NASA  spokesmen warned,  to  lessen  chances of  an  accident during the cross- 
country  flight;  adverse  conditions  had  developed  along  the  route. 
The   15-minute test  flight  Friday  of  the  orbiter-745‘ combination  resulted  in 
extensive  damage  to  the  protective-tile  surface  of  the  orbiter,  said  former 
astronaut  Deke  Slayton,  NASA’s  manager  for  orbiter  flight  tests.  As  the  747 
took off  down  the  runway  at Edwards, parts of  the dummy tiles,  some  as  long 
as  2 .5   feet  began  to  fall  off  the  spaceship. When  tht:  flight  ended,  Columbia 
had  lost not  only  some  of  the plastic-foam  dummy tiles attached by  tape to  the 
areas around  the windows,  fuselage sides,  wings,  and midtail,  but  also  some  
of  the  26,000  actual  protective  tiles  bonded  to  the  spaceship  at  the  plant. 
“When  the  dummies  began  to  fall  off,  the  tape  which  was  attached  to  them 

14 

MARCH  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

started to  swirl around and  damage  some  of  the  real  tiles,”  said Slayton, who 
flew  one  of  two  chase  planes  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  orbiter-747 test  flight. 
NASA  had  decided  to  send Columbia to KSC  without  about  8,000 tiles that 
could be installed there; dummies had  been used  to cover areas where  in-flight 
problems might arise,  but  after  seeing  the  test  results,  engineers decided  that 
not  all  the  dumm ies  were  needed.  Slayton said  that  the  orbiter-747 assembly 
was  now  scheduled  to  depart  for  Florida  on  Monday,  March   12.  The  
3,000-mile ferry  flight had  originally been  set for Friday,  March  9,  but  a pro- 
b lem  arose in  mounting  the orbiter on the 747,  caused  by  misalignment  of  the 
orbiter  to  the  three  struts  atop  the  747,  and  the  test  flight was  delayed  until 
Friday  afternoon,  after  which  the  tile  problem  occurred. 
Although  NASA  engineers  said  March   10  that  the  combination  could  still 
f ly  cross-country March   12, a  later report  said that  34 dummy  tiles were  lost 
and  39  damaged;  7  real  tiles  were  destroyed  or  lost  and  100  damaged. 
Replacement of  missing  tiles would  delay  the  trip  at  least to  Saturday, March 
17; NASA  planned  to  complete the  fix  without  removing  the  orbiter  from  its 
carr ier   aircraft.  ( N Y   Times,  Mar   9/79,  A-20;  W  Post,  Mar   9/79,  A-3;  Mar  
12/79, A-7;  W Star,  Mar  10/79, A-5; Mar   11/79, A-6; Mar  12/79, A-4;  Today,, 
Mar  9/79,  lA ,   16A;  Mar   10179,  L4, SA; NASA  Dly  Ach, Rept,  Mar   13/79) 

March  15:  ESA  announced  approval  of  a  remote-sensing  study  to  be  carried 
out  by  member  states,  including  Denmark ,   France,  Italy,  the  Netherlands, 
Sweden, and the United  Kingdom,  with  other member  states expected to join 
later.  Starting with defining optical and microwave instruments for monitoring 
land  and  ocean  surfaces,  to  be  used  by  European  remote-sensing  satellites 
planned  for  launch  in  the mid-eighties,  ESA  would  stress developments  now 
under  way  in  the  respective nations,  such  as  a  multimission  platform  being 
produced  by  Centre  National  d’Etudes  Spatiales  (CNES)   for  the  SPOT 
satellite  and  a  synthetic-aperture  radar  proposed  by  West  Germany  for 
Spacelab  flights  in  1983.  (ESA  anno  Mar   15/79) 

March  16:  The   DOD  launched  two  spacecraft  from  Vandenberg  Air  Force 
Base  on  a  Titan  3D,  with  no  word  on  mission  o r   orbital  elements.  A   later 
report  in   Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology’said that  the  10:30 a .m .   local 
time launch put a Lockheed-built high-resolution film-return satellite in an or- 
bit  with  244-kilometer  apogee,  177-kilometer perigee,  and  96.4O  inclination, 
to  supplement a KH-11  high-resolution recon  vehicle  that  had  been  operating 
in   space  since  June  1978,  furnishing data  by  digital  transmission  rather  than 
film  returned  to  Earth  in  reentry  capsules.  The  digital system  allowed  much 
longer  life  for  this  type  of  spacecraft,  whose  usefulness  did  not  depend  on 
depletion of  its  film pod.  “As  is  often  the  case  with  film-return  spacecraft,” 
said  Aviation  Week & Space  Technology,  the  March  16  launch  had  included 
i n   o rb i t   with 
a  piggyback  payload,  probably  a  ferre t   m iss ion ,   put 
625-kilometer  apogee,  623-kilometer  perigee,  and  95.70  inclination.  (WTR 
cover  Mar  16/79; AvWk,  Apr  9/79,  18) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1979 

March  19-23: JSC was host to  the  10th annual lunar a.nd planetary  science con- 
ference  o r   more   than  700  scientists  from  the  United  States,  western  Europe, 
Africa,  Australia,  and  the  Soviet  Union.  The   conference  had  evolved  to  in- 
clude  reports  not  only  on  lunar  studies  but  also  con  planetary  studies  and 
astrophysics. The  five-day  schedule  included a presentation  on Pioneer-Venus 
and  on  Voyager I’s   Jupiter  encounter,  plus  a  three-dimensional  film  on  Mars 
produced  during  the  extended  Viking  mission.  (JSC  Releases  79-10,  79-11) 

March 20: MSFC   reported  that  the  NASA  barge  Poseidon  carrying  a  Space 
Shuttle external  tank  and  other  components  had  begun  an  11-day  trip  to  KSC 
by  way  of  the  Tennessee  River  and  the  Gulf  of  Mer ico .   KSC  would  use  the 
items  to  check out  assembly  and movement  of  the  components  i n   the  vehicle 
assembly  building and to  train personnel  in  stacking the Shuttle on  its mobile 
launch  platform.  MSFC   said  the  waterways  to  the  Gu lf ,   swollen  by  recent 
rains,  had  receded  enough  to  permit  a  normal  trip  to  KSC.  (MSFC  Release 
79-27) 

March 23:  MSFC   announced  that  payload  specialisls  selected  for  Spacelab 2 
would begin training  in  April with  an orientation  tour  to visit most of  the prin- 
cipal  investigators  whose  experiments  would  ride  on  the  1982 mission.  Each 
of  the  selectees  had  been  a  co-investigator  on  one   of  the  Spacelab  2  ex- 
periments.  Th e  three men  and one woman  selected  would  visit  six sites in the 
United  States  and  three  i n  the  United  Kingdom  for a  first  look at many  of  the 
experiments  and  to  allow  them  to decide with  MSFC management how  much 
training  they  would  need  before  the  flight.  To  be  visited  were  Chicago,  Iowa 
City,  Pa10  Alto,  Pasadena,  Washington,  D.C.,  and  Cambridge, Mass.,  in  the 
United  States;  and  Abingdon,  Dorking,  and  Birmingham  in  England.  Those 
selected were  Dr.  Loren W.  Acton,  research  scientist at Lockheed’s  Palo Alto 
laboratory;  Dr.  John-David  E  Bartoe  and  Dr.  Dianne  K .   P r im ,   research 
physicists  at  the  U.S.  Naval  Research  Laboratory, Washington,  D.C.;  and  Dr. 
George  W.  Simon,  chief  of  the  solar  research  branch  at  the  Air  Force 
Geophysics Laboratory,  assigned to  the Sacramento Peak observatory  in New 
Mexico.  Two of  the  specialists would  actually fly on  Spacelab 2  to operate the 
scientific experiments;  the others would  operate ground-based  equipment and 
assist  the  two  in  orb i t .   Spacelab  2’s  payload  woulld  consist  mainly  of  ex- 
periments  in  astronomy,  high-energy  astrophysics,  and  solar  physics,  plus 
plasma  physics,  botany,  medicine,  and  space  technology.  (MSFC  Release 
79-30) 

March 24 :  Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter destined for launch into space, land- 
ed with its Boeing  747 carrier a t   11:03 local  time on a!  15,000-foot runway  built 
for this  and future landings at KSC.  Among the 3,000 persons awaiting  the  ar-  
rival  were  astronauts  John  W.  Young  and  Robert  L .   Cr ippen ,   scheduled  as 
crew  on  the maiden  flight  set  for  November  9.  NASA  officials  said  “a  series 

16 

MARCH  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

of  minor  snafus”  might  delay  the  first  launch  until  1980. ( W  Star,  Mar  25/79, 
A-3;  W Post,  Mar   25179,  A-6; N Y   Times, Mar  26/79] 

March 30: NASA announced  that Dr. Robert A .  Frosch ,  NASA administrator, 
and  Roy  Gibson,  director  general  of  ESA,  on  March  29   signed  a  memoran- 
dum  of understanding  in Washington,  D.C., on a jo in t  international solar-polar 
mission  to  b e   launched  in  1983.  NASA  and  ESA  would  each  provide  a 
spacecraft,  and  ESA  would  supply  software  and  personnel  to  support  ESA’s 
flight operations  in the United  States. NASA would be  responsible for mission 
con tro l ,   launch  operations,  and  tracking  and  data  acquisition,  and  for  several 
experiments.  JPL  would manage  the NASA  scientific effort  and  development 
of  a  NASA  spacecraft;  JSC  would  manage  the  Shuttle  launch  portion  of  the 
mission;  ESTEC  would  manage  the  European  effort. 
The  objectives  of the mission would be  to  study  the  structure  and  emissions 
of  the  Sun  a s  a  function  of  latitude  from  the  solar  equator  to  the  solar  poles 
and  to  study  the  interplanetary  medium  Earth-to-Jupiter  and  the  Jovian 
magnetosphere.  Launched  from  a Shuttle,  the  two craf t ,  each propelled  by  an 
upper-stage  booster,  would  take  a  path  in  the  ecliptic  plane  (that  containing 
all  the  planets  in  Earth’s  system)  toward  Jupiter,  using  its  gravity  to  propel 
them  ou t   of  the  ecliptic  toward  the  Sun  on  trajectories  to  pass  one   over  the 
north  and  one  over  the south  solar  poles,  retrace  the  ecliptic  track,  pass  over 
the   opposite  poles,  and  fly  back  toward  Jupiter.  Mission  lifetime  would  be  
about  five  years.  (NASA  Release  79-37; ESA  anno  Mar   30179) 

During March:  FBIS  carried regular  reports  on  the progress of  the  Soyuz   32 
cosmonauts aboard  the Sulyut  6 orbiting  space station.  Upon  arrival February 
26, the crew had  begun  reactivating  the thermal  regulators, water  regeneration 
system,  and  ventilation.  On  March  1,  they  had  begun  checkout  of  individual 
consoles and  scientific instruments,  tested  the manual  attitude control  system, 
and  corrected  the   flight  path  of  Safyu t  6 using  Soyuz  32  propulsion. 
The  following day  the  crew  did  baseline  medical  checkups  using  Polynom 
apparatus;  the  flight  engineer  was  tested  in  the morning,  and  the  commander 
was  tested  in  the  af ternoon .   In  an   interview  March  4, the  crew’s  doctor 
reported  that  Lyakhov had  needed  1.5 days to  adap t  to weightlessness  but was 
now  feeling  well.  Th e   crew  had  asked  to  begin  their  exercise  program  on 
trainer machines and  cycles several days ahead of  schedule. Lyakhov’s regime 
emphasized his  “vestibular  system”;  Ryumin’s, the  cardiovascular.  On March 
5, Tass, the Soviet news agency, said that the doctors were keeping  c lose  watch 
on  Commander   Lyakhov,  “a  thick-set  m a n . .   .on   his  first  flight  in  outer 
space.” The  commentator  said  “unhasty  adaptation”  was important  during the 
first  few  days  on  the   space  station,  which  imposed  three  peak  loads  a t   one  
time:  adaptation  to  weightlessness,  complicated  docking  and  transfer  pro-  
cedures,  and  emotional strain.  More  time had  been  allowed on  this  flight  than 
usual  for  the crew  to check all the  station  systems, both  those governing  flight 
and  those  controlling  living  conditions  (the  “boost  week,”  a  term  used  by 

17 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1979 

cosmonaut  Vladimir  Kovalenok,  one  of  the  communications  team  keeping  in 
touch  with  the  Soyuz  32  crew). 
A  March  6  broadcast  interview  with  a  ‘‘scientific  employee  at  the  Flight 
Center”  on  repair  and  servicing  of  the  Salyut  said  that  the  intensive  activity 
“did  not mean  that  anything is broken or needs mending.” On Sulyut 6, unlike 
its predecessors,  individual  items of  equipment  for  the  first  time could  be  ex- 
changed  when  their  resources  were  exhausted.  Thc   station  had  been  in  orbit 
for  18  months  and  carried  almost  1,000  different  instruments,  the  reporter 
said.  Important  systems,  such  as  life  support,  had  been  designed  to  be   prac- 
tically  failure  proof  by  using  interchangeable  units  within  easy  reach, 
facilitating  periodic  exchange  of  equipment.  Introduction  of  the  Progress 
automated cargo ships meant that new  instruments,  equipment, and tools were 
available upon crew request. Progress 2 had broughir the Soyuz 29 crew  a globe 
indicator  for  the   control  panel  to  show  the  station’s  location  in  relation  to 
Earth;  it had  also brought new  computer units  for the Delta  automated naviga- 
tion  system. 
The   first job  in  reactivating  the  Sulyut  6 station  had  been  to  check  out  the 
docking  unit  on  the  transfer  module,  with  its  opening  into  outer  space;  the 
Soyuz  26 crew  had  done   this  last  year.  Lyakhov  and  Ryumin  would  have  to 
test  each  on-board  system  and  plug  i n   reserve  circuits  or   replace  units.  The 
reporter pointed out that,  notwithstanding the long use of the station,  “not one 
reserve circuit  i n  any  system  has  so far  been  switched  on.”  The current  crew 
would  replace  ventilators  in  the  thermal  system,  light  bulbs,  cables  in  the 
television  and  communications  systems,  components  of  the  exercise  equip- 
ment,  and  filters  and  regenerators  in  the  life-support  systems. 
On  March  12, Progress  5  was  launched  with  a  !load of  fuel  for  the  Sulyut 
6 propulsion  unit  and materials  for  its on-board  systems.  A  commentator  said 
that  portable cables and o ther  mobile elements of  radiocommunication  “wear 
out heavily”  on  long  flights; the crew had  replaced headsets,  cables, and swit- 
ches.  They  had  also  set up  and  operated  an  on-boa.rd videotape  recorder  and 
a  video monitoring  device.  An  interview March  13 with  cosmonaut Vladimir 
Aksenov  said  that  the  Salyut  represented  a  new  stage of  technology,  not  only 
because  it  could  be  supplied but  also because  it could  be  overhauled  in  space 
with  Components  and  assemblies  flown  there  by  freight  and  crew  transport 
vessels. Aksenov  noted  that the crew  had  used  an ordinary soldering iron ,  said 
to  be  an  enormous  departure  for  repairs  in  a  closed  weightless  space.  Also, 
he  said, basic  scientific apparatus had  heretofore been  assembled  in  a ground 
workshop  and  checked out  in  a ground  station; for  the  first  time,  the  installa- 
tion  and  test  of  new  apparatus would  take  place  on an operating  space  station 
in  orbit.  This  was  made  possible  by  a  wide  selection  of  tools  designed 
especially  for  use  in  space:  pliers,  screwdrivers,, clamps,  and  special  in- 
struments  to  handle  special  nuts  and  bolts. 
Upon  the  arrival March  14  of  the Progress  5 ,  bringing  fuel,  equipment, ex- 
periment  materials,  and  mail,  the  crew’s  doctor  said  in  an  interview  that 
previous  flights had  indicated  that  weightlessness  had  some tricky aspects and 

I8 

MARCH  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

that  the  consequences  of  exposure  to  it  could  be   very  serious.  The   curren t  
crew  were  apparently  beginning  to  feel  at  home  in  the   new  surroundings, 
however.  After  unloading  the  ferry,  the  crew  had  the  job   of  dismantling  the 
Kristall  electric  furnace  used  for more  than  40 experiments  in  space process- 
ing  of  materials  and  installing  new  apparatus  better  designed  to  operate  in  
weightlessness;  they  had  also  plugged  in  a  new  chemical  battery  to  rein- 
vigorate  the power  system. By  March  21,  the unloading  of  the  supply  ship was 
completed,  and  the  crew  was  ahead  of  schedule  using  the   new  equipment, 
especially  a  co lor   television  camera  to  show  the  interior  of  the  station  with 
equipment  replacements  including  new  sensors  installed  in  the   work  area   to 
detect  minimal  a i r   pollution  in  the  station’s  atmosphere.  On  March  24,  the 
crew  communicated by  television  with  the  flight  con tro l  center  “in  the  direc- 
tion  from   ear th   to  the  spaceship.  . . for  the   first  time  in   the  history  of  space  
flight.”  The  control  center  could  now  transmit  drawings,  plans,  and  working 
documents from  the ground  to the Salyut;  “in  principle,”  said the repor t ,   “any 
central  TV  transmission  can  be  sent to  the  spaceship.”  By  month’s  end ,   Tass 
said  that  the  crew  had  adapted  to  weightlessness  and  were  proceeding  with 
scheduled  tasks.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Mar  1-28/79) 

19 

April 

April  2:  NASA  reported  that  35   candidates  for  Space   Shuttle  astronaut  had 
completed  classroom  instruction  and  moved  into  engineering  assignments  at 
JSC.  The  courses  had begun  in July  1978, and the  successful  candidates would 
become  astronauts  in  July  1980.  NASA  had  brought  in  personnel  from  o ther  
NASA  centers  and  from   universities  to  conduct  courses  on   subjects  such  as 
space  physics,  ascent  and  reentry  aerodynamics,  spaceflight  physiology,  and 
tracking  techniques;  veteran  astronauts  had  lectured  on  the  budget  process, 
people,  and  requirements  in  the  space  program  and  on  being  a  CAPCOM 
(capsule  communicator).  Videotapes  of  the  classes  would  be   available  to  all 
employees  a t   JSC. 
The  first crews  selected for Shuttle flights had  begun  lessons  in  the mission 
simulator,  and  the astronaut candidates would be observers.  Lessons would  in- 
c lude  tests of  every  sort of  emergency  the crews might encounter dur ing  a mis- 
s ion ,   supervised  by  instructors  who  had  spent  six  months  learning  how  to 
harass  the  astronauts  in  their  simulator  exercises.  The  lesson  p lan ,   scheduled 
to  take  nine months  “not  coun t ing .  . .problems,”  would prepare  the  crews  for 
nearly  any emergency, NASA said.  (NASA Release 79-34; JSC Release 79-20) 

April  3:  The   NAA  announced  that  Sam  B.  Williams,  president  of  Williams 
Research  Corporation  of  Walled  Lake,  M i c h . ,   would  receive  the  Collier 
Trophy,  the  oldest  U .S .  aviation  award.  Williams  had  designed  and  developed 
the  world’s  smallest  high-efficiency  fanjet  engine,  a  low-cost  lightweight 
means  to  realization  of  the  cru ise  missile.  Th e  Williams  engine measured  12 
x 37  inches,  weighed  145  pounds,  and  produced  more   than  600  pounds  of 
thrus t ;  it had qualified for both Air Force  and  Navy cru ise  missiles.  The  NAA 
had  presented  the  trophy  annually  since  1911  for  the  greatest  achievement  in 
aeronautics  o r   astronautics  in  the  United  States,  demonstrated  by  actual  use 
in  the  preceding  year.  (NAA  Release  Apr   3/79) 

April  4:   NASA  reported  that  improved  components  and  techniques  could 
lower  the  “now  prohibitive”  cos t  of  using  turb ine   rather  than  piston  engines 
in  small  general  aviation  aircraft.  If   turbines  cost  only  half  again  instead  of 
three times a s  much  a s  piston  engines,  small plane users  could reap  the advan- 
tages of one-third  the weight,  proven  reliability  and  safety, multifuel  capabili- 
ty,  and  less  maintenance,  vibration,  noise,  or  pollution. 
A  study by  Lewis Research  Center  (LeRC)  said that an advance turbine  air- 
craf t  would  be  25%  cheaper  to  operate,  would  use   10% less  fuel,  and  would 
cost  15%  less  to  purchase  than  an   equivalent  aircraft  powered  by  a  typical 
reciprocating  engine.  Although  only  8%  of  general  aviation  a ircraf t  flying  in 
the  United  States,  were  turbine  powered,  the  study  said  that  the  market  for 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1979 

an  advanced  turbine  engine  could  reach  25,000  units  per  year  by  the  late 
1980s.  The   general  aviation  field  included  9 8%   of  U.S.  civilian  aircraft. 
(NASA  Release  79-29) 

INTELSAT  reported  that  two  new  regional  satellite  systems  proposed  by 
member  groups  would  be   technically  compatible with  its  present  system  and 
would  not  threaten  its  economic  well-being.  A  proposed  European  Com-  
munications  Satellite  (ECS)  system  would  provide  telecommunications  ser- 
vice  to  countries  in  Eastern  and Western  Europe  and  North  Africa  beginning 
in  1982, working with Europe’s  terrestrial  network.  A  Palapa  B system,  a joint 
venture  of  Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN)  countries  in- 
cluding Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,  Singapore, and Thailand, would 
serve remote areas  not  having  access  to  INTELSAT’s  system,  also  beginning 
in  1982.  (INTELSAT  Releases  79-07-1,  79-09-1) 

Apr i l   5: MSFC   reported  that  Shuttle orbiter  Enterprise  would  go  to  KSC  to 
give  NASA  workers  experience  in  prelaunch  handling.  After  a  year  of  tests 
at  MSFC,  Enterprise  would  resume  the  tailcone  on  its  main-engine  area  for 
piggyback  flight,  and  the  dummy  pods  removed  during  testing  would  be 
replaced.  After  the  refit,  NASA  would  tow  the  Enterprise  to  Redstone Army 
Air  Field  for  loading on  its  747  carrier,  with  departure  set  for April  12  or  13, 
depending  on  weather.  (MSFC  Release  79-36;  NA.SA Release  79-42) 

Ap r i l   10: NASA announced  that Dr.  Robert A .   Frosch,  administrator,  and Dr. 
Willy  Moenandir  Mangoendiprodjo,  director  of  Indonesia’s  telecommunica- 
tions  agency,  had  signed  a memorandum  of  understiinding  April  9 for  launch 
of  two  Indonesian  domestic  communications  sate1lil:es. NASA  would  furnish 
reimbursable launch and associated  services for a  second generation of Palapa 
spacecraft.  Th e   new  satellites  would  replace  existing  communications 
satellites: Palapa A-1,  launched July  8,  1976, and Pul,zpu A-2 ,  launched March 
10,  1977. The  Shuttle would  launch the first Palapa  B  in June  1982; the  second 
during  the  first  half  of  1983.  (NASA  Release  79-43) 

April  13:  NASA  announced  it  would  jo in   Soviet  scientists  for  the  first  time 
in  a  study  of  physiological  changes  due  to  simulated  weightlessness.  Tests  in 
each  country  on  10  subjects  aged  between  35   and  4 0   would  comprise  two 
weeks  of  control  observations,  one  week  of  bed  rest,  and  two  weeks  of  post- 
rest  measurements,  including  stress  tests  and  blood  and  urine  samples.  Half 
of  each group  would  be  horizontal during  the  total  bed  rest,  the others would 
rest with  heads lowered  6O  for horizontal. U.S.  tests had kept  subjects horizon- 
tal only,  and  the  identical  studies would  indicate the best  procedure.  The  pro- 
gram would  begin  in mid-May  at  the Moscow  Institute  of  Medico-Biological 
Problems  and  continue  at Ames  Research  Center  (ARC)  in  July. Both  NASA 
and  USSR  scientists  would  take  part  in  each  experiment.  (NASA  Release 
79-46;  ARC  Release  79-17) 

2 2  

APRIL  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NASA  reported  that  its small astronomy  satellite Sus  3 had  reentered  the  at- 
mosphere  April  9 over  the   Pacific  Ocean  after  nearly  four  years  of  scanning 
the   skies  for  X-ray  da ta ,   although  its design  lifetime had  been  only  one  year. 
Launched  May  7,  1975, from  the  San  Marco  platform  off  the  coast  of  Kenya, 
the  195-kilogram. Sus 3 in a 500-kilometer orbit had discovered 2 new quasars 
and  about  half  the  35  known  X-ray  bursters  (stars  emitting  huge  brief  bursts 
of  X-rays  once  every  few  hours).  Sas  3  indicated  that  these  bursts  resulted 
from   thermonuclear  reactions  on  the  surfaces  of  neutron  stars.  (NASA 
Release  79-44) 

April  15: The  Nor th  American  A ir  Defense Command  (NORAD)  issued a fact 
sheet on  satellite decay predictions by  its Space Defense Center, watching over 
more  than 4,500 man-made  satellites  in orbit around  the Earth.  The  Tracking 
and  Impact  Predictions  (TIPs) gave time  and  position  for  large  items  such  as 
payloads  and  rocket  motors  that  might  survive  reentry  and  impact  on  Ear th ;  
for  smaller  objects  likely  to burn  up  without  reaching  the  ground ,   the  center 
would  compute  only  a  probable  da te  of  decay.  Predictions  would  depend  on 
many  variables  but  were  necessary  under   a  1971  pact  between  the  United 
States and  the Soviet Union  that  both  nations  would help  identify  objects  that 
might  reenter  over  the  other’s  territory;  TIPs  would  prevent  mistaking  a 
reentering  object  for  an  incoming  warhead  and  triggering  warning  networks. 
(PAO,  Peterson  AFB,  Apr   15/79) 

April  16:  NASA  announced  that  an  experimental  balloon  launched  April  12 
at  6 : 2 3  p.m.  from  the   National  Scientific  Balloon  Facility  in  Texas  to  test  a 
new  heavy-lift  design  had  apparently  failed  at  about  10:42  p .m .   somewhere 
over  northwestern  Louisiana.  The   balloon  measured  about  41  million  cubic 
feet  and  carried  an  instrumented  payload  weighing  about  5,300  pounds.  (Hq  
PA0  anno   Apr   16/79) 

Ap r i l  24 :  NASA  reported  that  the Shuttle orbiter  En terpr ise ,  which  arrived  a t  
KSC  April  10-after  a  piggyback  flight  from  MSFC,  would  be   rolled  out  to 
Launch  Complex  39   on  May  1  a s   part  of  an  exercise  to  clear  the   way  for 
launch  of  its  sister ship,  Co lumb ia ,  which  had  arrived  a t  KSC March   24   for 
checkout  and  final  installation  of  thermal  tiles.  Th is   would  be   the  first  time 
a  complete  Space  Shuttle  configuration  had  been  put  together  in  the  Vehicle 
Assembly  Building  (VAB) and moved to the launch pad;  use  of  the En terpr ise  
would  confirm  compatibility  of  assembly  and  launch  facilities  and  ground 
support equipment with  elements of  the  Shuttle and  would  rehearse KSC  staff 
in  Shuttle  handling  operations. 
On   April  17,  a  15-story external  tank  was  mated  with  two  inert  solid-fuel 
rocket boosters on a mobile launcher platform  in high bay  3 ;  more  than 75,000 
visitors  to  the  center  viewed  the  assembly  moving  down  the  2-mile  towway 
to the  VAB,  into which Enterprise  was moved April  18. Th e  delta-wing orb i ter  

23  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

A PR I L   1979 

would  be  mated  with  the  external  tank  in  a  19-hour  operation  before  its 
3.5-mile  ride  to  Pad  A ,   former  site  of  Apollo  lunar  launches  modified  for 
Shuttle operations,  where it would  remain until  the  first week  of June.  (NASA 
Release  79-50) 

DOT announced that Secretary Brock Adams had  sent to Congress proposed 
legislation  to  provide  $6.6  billion  for  improving  U.S.  airports  and  airway 
systems  over  5  years,  beginning  October  1,  1980.  ‘The  proposal  emphasized 
aviation safety  measures  to meet  expected  1980s growth  in  a ir  transportation. 
Financed  by  a  10 year continuation of  the  airport/airway  trust  fund and  related 
aviation user  taxes,  the bill  would  include airport  development and planning; 
acquisition  and  upgrading  of  airway  facilities  and  equipment;  research  to 
reduce congestion and delays  at  large  U.S.  airports;  improvement  of  air traffic 
control,  instrument  landing  systems  and  radars,  and  other  navigation  aids; 
reduction of  aircraft noise;  and funding for smaller airports to  reduce the load 
on  larger  ones.  (DOT  Release  51-79) 

During  Apr i l:   NASA  reported  new  data  on  Venus  -from the  Pioneer  mission 
and  the radar  at  the Arecibo observatory  in Puerto R.ico.  Radar had  given  best 
information  on  the  surface  of  Venus,  not  visible  through  optical  telescopes 
because  of  heavy  cloud  cover.  Radar  images  covering  an  area  80   million 
square  kilometers  showed  craters  on  Venus  as   large  a s   320  kilometers  i n  
diameter;  like  lunar  craters,  which  they  resemb led ,   they  apparently  resulted 
from  meteorite  impacts. 
A  circular  area  1,120  kilometers  in  diameter  called  Alpha,  first  noticed 
because  of  high  radar  reflectivity,  consisted  of  many  parallel  ridges  iden- 
tifiable  for  great  distances.  Th is  area  had  no  Earth  counterpart  except  exten- 
sive dune  systems  i n   the Arabian  peninsula;  Alpha  :showed a  central  dark  ob- 
jec t ,   possibly  a volcano.  Another radar  feature known  as  Beta,  with  long  rays 
of  rough  material extending out as far as  48  kilometers, also had  a central dark 
area  like a volcano crater. Th e  radar  also detected  parallel  ridges  about  2,100 
miles  high,  extending more   than  960  kilometers  across  the  surface of  Venus, 
forming  a  structure  exceeding  the  Grand  Canyon  in  scale. 
A report on Pioneer Venus orbiter and multiprobe mission  findings  included 
discovery  of  the  largest  canyon  in  the  solar  system.  bigger  than  Mar’s  Vallis 
Marineris,  previously  thought  largest.  Lightning  activity  detected  by  USSR 
Venera  spacecraft  was  continuous  from  altitudes  of  32  kilometers  down  to  2 
kilometers, with discharges as frequent as 25  per  second.  Pioneer’s  orbiter ap- 
parently  saw  this  lightning  also;  experimenters  Dr.  Boris Ragent  of  ARC  and 
Dr.  Jacques  Blamont  of  the  University  of  Paris  now  theorized  that  a  glow 
measured  by  Pioneer  instruments  was  continuous  indistinguishable  lightning 
on Venus,  rather  than an occurrence on the  spacecra!ft. The  orbiter also  found 
an  1,100-kilometer-wide  hole  containing  few  o r   no  clouds  i n   t h e  North  Pole 
cloud  cover,  suggesting  a  downflow  of  atmosphere  there.  (NASA  Release 
79-47;  ARC  Release  79-12) 

24 

May  3: NASA  announced  that  i t s  satellite system ASDAR  (aircraft-to-satellite 
data  relay)  had  started  operation  as  part  of  the  GWE  that  began  ear l ier   this 
year  [see January  71,  collecting  and  relaying  weather  observations  from  a ir-  
craf t  in  flight  and  leading  to possible million-dollar  savings annually  in  avia- 
tion  fuel  costs.  The   system,  consisting  of  a  power  supply,  c lock ,   80-watt 
transmitter,  small  computer,  and  antenna,  would  monitor  and  repor t   eight 
times  per  hour  the  aircraft’s  location  and  altitude,  together  with  weather  data 
generated  by  equipment  already  aboard  each  ASDAR-equipped  airliner. 
The   system  would  relay  the  information  through  a  NOAA  satellite  to 
weather  data  centers  and  on  to  the  users.  Relay  of  quickly  changing  weather 
information  to  subsequent  flights  within  two  hours  could  save  time  and  fuel 
by  taking  advantage  of  favorable winds  o r  avoiding threatening  storms.  Also, 
the  17  widebody  je ts   using  ASDAR  would  regularly  cross  the  southern 
hemisphere  and  the  tropics,  where  data  were  not  usually  available.  Par- 
ticipating  countries  included  England,  Australia,  the  Netherlands,  the  Scan- 
dinavian  countries,  Singapore,  and  the  United  States  (NASA  Release  79-51) 
NASA  also  reported  that  ARC’S  research  aircraft  Galileo  I1  had  gone  to 
Saudi  Arabia  to jo in   a n   international  study  of  the  monsoon,  a  s torm   system 
bringing  nearly  all  the  Asian  subcontinent’s  annual  rainfall  in  June,  July,  and 
August,  supplying  torrents  of  moisture  for  the  crops   and  overwhelming  the  
area  in   floods. In  1978  the  s torms  killed  more  than  900 people  and  left more  
than  3 million  homeless.  MONEX   (the monsoon experiment)  would trace  the  
origin  of  the  s torms  and  attempt  to  provide  weather  forecasts  that  would  be  
“extremely  useful”  in  an  area   “practically  devoid of  basic  weather  data,”  ac -  
cording  to  Joachim  Kuettner,  director  of  the   U.S.  effort.  (NASA  Release 
7 9 - 5 5 )  

May  4 :  NASA  launched  FltSatCom-B,  second  in  a  series  of  five  fleet  satellite 
communications  system spacecraft,  from  Cape  Canaveral  on an Atlas Centaur 
at  2:56  p.m.  into  a  transfer  orb i t ,   before  firing  its  apogee  kick  motor  May  6 
to move it toward a 23,300-mile altitude  synchronous-orbit  station over 23  OW, 
which  it  should  reach  in  late July.  Th is  was  the  50 th  launch  by  an Atlas  Cen-  
taur.  The  TRW-built 4,100-pound FltSutCum 2 was  about  880 pounds  heavier 
than any  previously  launched  by  this vehicle,  requiring  it  to  take  a path  offset 
2 . 4 ”   from   the  equator.  Like  its  predecessor  FZtSatCom  1 launched  in  1978, 
now  on  station  over  lOOW,  FltSatCom  2  would  link  ships,  submarines,  and 
planes  to  various  ground-based  control  centers  and  would  provide  serv ice  to 
White House  communications  centers.  The  Air  Force  reported  that  about 420  
surface  sh ips  and  90  submarines  contained  equipment  for  communicating  by 

2 5  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTlCS 

MAY  19’79 

satellite,  and  the  number  was  growing.  (NASA  Release  79-49;  NASA  MOR 
M-491-202-79-02  [prelaunch]  May  1/79,  [postlaunch]  Nov  5/79;  W  Post, 
May6/79,  17;  LA  Times, May  5/79) 

May  8: NASA  reported  that  LaRC  staffers were  using  the SAGE satellite laun- 
ched  from  WFC   February  18  to  measure  and  track  into  the  stratosphere  the 
ash  and  gases  from  an  eruption  of  La  Soufriere,  a  volcano  on  S t .   Vincent 
island  in the  Caribbean,  between April  13 and  17.  Th e  eruption,  detected  first 
by  SAGE while passing over  the  island  April 23,  deposited as much as  an  inch 
of  dust  on  neighboring  islands  and  provided  an  opportunity  to  study 
stratosphere  distribution  of  aerosols  from  a  single  source.  NASA  alerted 
scientists  around  the  world  to  use  ground-based  and  balloon-borne  i n -  
s trumen ts  in checking between 6 ”N  and 20 ”N  latitudes  for effects of  the erup- 
tion.  SAGE might  answer  questions about  the effect of  aerosols and  ozone  on 
climate  and  environmental  quality.  (NASA  Release  79-56;  LaRC  Release 
79-29; W FC   Release  79-8) 

NASA  reported  that  since  February  14  the  infrared  instrument  on  Pioneer 
Venus  orbiter  had  been  returning  “degraded  data”;  efforts  to  solve  the  pro- 
blem  had  not  succeeded.  The   instrument  began  to  register  a  power  input  of 
6 to 7 volts instead  of  the required  10 volts;  i t  had  dsone  this three  times before, 
but  each  time  ground  command  was  able  to  reset  ):he instrument  with  almost 
no  loss  of  information.  The   orbiter  had  returned  excellent  data  for  72  orbits 
of  Venus  (one  per   day)  including  more  than  800,000  temperature  profile, 
albedo,  humidity,  and  cloud  height  measuremenls,  enough  for  a  thorough 
survey  of  the  planet.  NASA’s  radiometer-science  team  reported  that  results 
already  exceeded  mission  objectives  despite  the  apparent  loss  of  the  instru- 
ment.  Dr.  Fred  W.  Taylor  of  JPL   said  the  instrument  might  yet  be  revived. 
(NASA  Release  79-59) 

May   10:  MSFC  reported  that  1.5-second  ignition-test  firings  May  4  of  a 
cluster  of  three  Space  Shuttle  main  engines  at  National  Space  Technology 
Laboratories  (NSTL)  had  been  successful,  clearing  the  way  for  the  second 
phase  of  verification  tests.  The   three  flight-type  engines,  previously  accep- 
tance  tested  individually  a t   the  facility,  had  undergone  the  cluster  test  in  an 
assembly including  the engines, a simulated orbiter midbody,  and a flight-type 
aft  fuselage  to  which  the  engines  were  fitted.  Frank  Stewart,  MSFC  test 
manager,  said that  sequencing was good and that  he foresaw  no problems with 
the  first  long-duration  firing  scheduled  for  May  15.  Th e  tests  would  evaluate 
system  performance  in  a  static-firing  environment  as  a  step  in  verifying  the 
system  for  the  first  manned  orbital  Shuttle  flight.  Cluster  firings  would  take 
place about once per month  through July;  the third  phase of  long-duration fir- 
ings  would  begin  in  September  and  conclude  in  November,  after  the  equip- 
ment  had  been  modified.  (MSFC  Release  79-47) 

26 

MAY  1975’ 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

M a y   14: MFSC  reported  that  the  first  Space  Shuttle engine  tested  for  flight 
acceptance had  “passed with  flying colors”  a  520-second  endurance test May 
12  that  simulated  launch  conditions.  Scheduled  for  use  on  Columbia,  this 
engine would  undergo  electrical  and  mechanical  checkout  before  formal  ac- 
ceptance. The  tests began April 25 with  1.5-second ignition-test firing, follow- 
ed  by  a   100-second calibration-test firing  May  2 .  After formal acceptance, the 
engine would  go by  truck to KSC  for installation. The  other two  of  the cluster 
of  three  Rockwell-built  engines  to  be  used  on  Columbia  were  at  Space 
Technology  Laboratories  for the  same  series of  tests.  (MSFC Release 79-45; 
NASA  Release  79-68) 

May  16:  NASA  reported  that  the  multispectral  scanner  on  Landsat  3  had 
begun  sending  defective  images  at  random;  the  pulse  to  trigger  a   line-start 
signal  was  not  working.  The   scanner  images,  line-by-line  transmissions  of 
views  from an oscillating mirror, would  form a  continuous line unless arrang- 
ed one  under  the other by  line-start and line-end scan pulses. GSFC  engineers 
noticed that  lines normally printed  under the preceding line to  fill  in   a  picture 
were  either  missing  a   start  signal  or  lacking  about  a   fourth  of  the  line.  Last 
fall  they  had  solved  a   similar  problem  by  switching to  a   backup  system,  the 
one   now  malfunctioning. 
Since its launch March  15,  1978, Landsat 3 had  transmitted more  than 91,000 
scenes each  representing an area  185 square kilometers of  Earth’s surface, us- 
ed  to  produce  either  photographs  or  computer  tapes.  The   equipment needed 
to  correct  for  the missing  data would  not  be  available until  later  in  1979,  the 
agency  said;  however,  most Landsat  3 data  we re   still  accurate,  and  Landsat 
2 .  was  still  “going  strong”  after producing  more  than  325,000 scanner  scenes 
since  1975.  (NASA  Release  79-67) 

May 17: NASA  announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch,  its administrator, would 
head  a   13-member delegation  of  U .S .   officials  to  the  People’s  Republic  of 
China May  19-June 3   to  learn  about  PRC  space  activities and  discuss  areas 
of  planned  cooperation,  including a   PRC  domestic communications  satellite 
system and ground station for PRC  reception of  Landsat data. The  U.S. group, 
including  representatives  of 
the  White  House   Off ice   of  Science  and 
Technology  Policy,  National  Security  Council,  State  Department,  National 
Telecommunications  and  Information  Administration,  NOAA,  and  U.S. 
Geological  Survey,  would  meet  with  PRC  officials  in  Beijing  and  tour  their 
space installations. Frosch  would  return to  the United  States, after the Beijing 
meetings.  The  group  had  been  invited  by  Dr.  Jen  Xin-min,  head  of  the  PRC 
Academy  of  Space  Technology  and  leader  of  a   space  delegation  that  visited 
NASA  and  space  industry  firms  in  1978;  President  Carter  and  PRC  vice 
premier  Deng  Xiaoping  had  signed  an  agreement  on  space  cooperation 
January  31,  1979. 
Meanwhile,  the  press  reported  that  ComSa tCorp  president  Joseph  Charyk  
had  told  the  corporation’s  annual  meeting  in  Washington  of  talks  with  PRC 

n 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

M.4Y  I579 

representatives  on  providing  ComSat  technical  assistance  in  building  a  net- 
work  of  satellites  and  ground  stations  estimated  to  cost  “ i n   the  hundreds  of 
millions  of  dollars,”  most  of  the  necessary  equipment  to  be  purchased  in  the 
United  States  (NASA  Release  79-70;  W  Star,  May  16/79,  F-1;  W  Post,  May 
16/79,  D-7) 

Ma y  23:  ESA  reported  that  the  first  qualification  test  of  its  Ariane  launcher 
first stage had been  “satisfactory” May  17 with  further tests scheduled  for ear- 
ly  autumn.  Th e   139-second  duration  (nominal  operating  time)  had  tested  the 
resistance  of  nozzle-throat  linings,  which  had  been  modified,  and  propellant 
depletion.  The   second  stage had  completed  tests  that  began  last  October;  the 
third  stage  was  currently  undergoing  tests.  (ESAKNES   Release  No .   17) 

Ma y   28:   The   U.S.  Air  Force  launched  a  DOD  surveillance  spacecraft  from 
Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base  at  11:30 a .m .  PDT  on  a  Titan  3B-Agena  into  an 
orbit  with  323-kilometer  apogee,  126-kilometer  perigee,  89-minute  period, 
and  96 .4 ”  inclination.  DOD   made  no  announcement,  but  press  reports  said 
that  the  launch  was  probably  a  low-resolution  search-and-find  mission;  this 
type  of  system  would  remain  i n   orbit  about  2 .5   months.  (NASA  wkly  SSR, 
May  24-30;  D /SD ,   May  31/79,  149; AvWk ,   June  11/79, 23) 

May  29 :  Th e  Washington Star  reported  on  a NASA  Pioneer Venus briefing  at 
the  annual meeting  of  the American  Geophysical  Union  in Washington,  D.C., 
which  revealed  that  Venus  (far  from  being  the  dull  and  featureless  object  it 
appeared, covered  by  heavy  cloud layers) had  spectacular terrain  and a unique 
atmospheric circulation  system.  Pioneer  E n u s  1 had  been  sending back  radar 
and  other  information  since  i t   arrived  at  Venus  in  December  1478; Pioneer 
E n u s  2 had  arrived  shortly  thereafter,  separating  into  five probes  to study  the 
atmosphere,  four  of  which  reached  the  “smoldering  9 0 0 ”  F  surface.” 
Dr.  Harold  Masursky  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  reported  that  radar 
scans of  Venus had  shown  a mountain  estimated a t  37,000 feet, far higher  than 
Earth’s  29,028-foot  Mt.  Everest.  Dr.  Alvin  Seiff  of  ARC  said that  Venus’s  at- 
mospheric  circulation  was  different  from  any  known  elsewhere:  Earth’s  sur- 
face  absorbed  sunlight,  and  the  resulting  heat  i n   combination  with  Earth’s 
rotation  made  the  atmosphere  flow  west  to  east.  However,  the  atmosphere of 
Venus  absorbed  the  sunlight  30  to 35  miles  above  the  surface, and  heat  varia- 
tions  in  the  atmospheric  layers  apparently  drove  one   another  with  their  mo- 
tion.  ( W  Star,  May  29179,  A-2) 

May  30:  INTELSAT  announced  a  first  step  toward  intersatellite communica- 
tions  links:  an  award  of  a  $170,000 contract  to Hughes  Aircraft  Company  for 
design and fabrication of  a traveling-wave  tube,  a vital  component of  an  inter- 
satellite link. Direct  transmission  via  satellite was  now  possible only  between 
points within  one  satellite’s coverage  area  (about one-third of  Earth’s  surface); 
messages  for locations outside that  area had  to use  land-based  links o r  ground 

28 

MAY  1’779 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

relay  to  a   second  satellite. The  planned  communications links  could  transmit 
directly  from one  satellite to  another,  saving one down  and  one  up  transmis- 
sion,  freeing that  link  for  other  use,  and making  the whole  system more   effi- 
cient and  economical by making more   stations available to direct access.  (IN-  
TELSAT  Release  79-10-1) 

M a y  31:  Photographs  of  Jupiter’s moon  Io  taken  by  Vbyager  I had  revealed  a  
strange “blue snow,”  identified a s  volcanic gases released by  continuous erup- 
tions in the equatorial region,  the New  York  Times  reported.  Dr.  Laurence A .  
Soderblom  of  the  U .S .   Geological  Survey  told  the  American  Geophysical 
Union  spring meeting  in  Washington, D.C.,  that  wisps  of  the gas  appeared  in 
Io’s  south  polar  area  along  faults o r   fractures  in   the  crust;  this  was  the  first 
finding  of  erupting  volcanoes  anywhere  except  on  Earth,  and  the  intense 
volcanic  activity  was  “endlessly  repaving  [Io’s]  surface  with  volcanic 
material .” 
Dr.  Edward  C.  Stone of  the  California  Institute  of  Technology  (CalTech), 
chief Voyager  mission scientist, said that a  change in the  Voyager 2 plan  would 
include time-lapse photography of  Io to pinpoint  the nature of  the volcanic ac- 
tivity.  Dr.  John  C .  Pearl  of  GSFC   said  k y a g e r  I’s  infrared detectors  showed 
that the main constituent of  the  gases was  sulfur dioxide, also found  in  Earth’s 
volcanic  eruptions.  Dr.  Norman  E  Ness,  also  of  GSFC,  said  Jupiter’s 
magnetic  field  extended  far  beyond  Io’s  orbit,  creating  a   “big  power  station 
in  the  sky.”  (NY   T imes ,  May  31/79,  B-16) 

During  May :   NASA  reported  that  the  X-ray  telescope  on H e a o   2  had 
photographed  for  the  first time  an X-ray  “burster,”  a   “bizarre”  phenomenon 
occurring  when  compact  celestial objects less  than  SO  kilometers  (30  miles) 
in  diameter increase suddenly and intensely  i n  X-ray brightness. Such a  burst, 
releasing more  X-ray  energy  in   10  seconds than  the  Sun  does  in   a week,  was 
first discovered by  a Nether1andsKJ.S. cooperative satellite carrying Harvard- 
Smithsonian detectors  i n   1976. 
Scientists had  not defined  the nature of  the bursts, which  might  result from 
explosions  similar  to  a  helium  bomb  on  the  surface of  a   neutron  star o r   from 
violent  instabilities  in  gas  flow  down  a  black  hole.  Heao  2’s  picture,  said 
Jonathan  Grindlay  of  the  Harvard-Smithsonian  Center  for  Astrophysics, 
established the  presence  of  a   “steady”  X-ray  source  in  a   “globular  cluster” 
called Terzan 2,  bringing  the  number  of  such clusters known  to harbor  X-ray 
sources  to  at  least  eight,  six  of  these  being  bursters.  The   cores  of  globular 
clusters  (oldest  objects  in  the  galaxy,  consisting  of  round  swarms  of  about 
100,000 stars) were  under  study  as  possible  precursors  of  black  holes  or  of 
compact  binary  systems  containing  either  neutron  stars o r   black  holes  being 
formed  to  produce  bursting  X-ray  sources.  (NASA  Release  79-65) 

NASA  reported  a   number   of  personnel  changes  during  May. 
-Dr.  John  E .   Naugle,  longtime  associate administrator  currently  serving 

29 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

MAY  lmS 

as   chief  scientist,  announced  plans  to  retire  June  ;!9,  1979.  After  receiving  a 
doctorate  in  physics  in  1953  from  the  University  of  Minnesota,  where  he 
worked  before joining the Convair scientific research  laboratory, he began  his 
NASA  service  a t   GSFC  in  1959  as   head  of  the  nuclear  emulsion  section. 
Naugle served in  1961 as  chief of  physics  in Physics  and Astronomy  Programs, 
Office of  Space Science; as  director of physics  and :astronomy programs  i n  the 
Office of  Space Science and  Applications  from  1962 to  1966; as associate ad- 
ministrator for space science and applications in  1967; and as deputy associate 
administrator  of  NASA  in  1974, becoming  associate  administrator  in  1975.  In 
a  reorganization  of  1977, he  assumed  the  duties  of  chief  scientist.  Dr.  Robert 
A .   Frosch,  NASA  administrator,  said Naugle was  “an  effective proponent  for 
space,  an  international  negotiator  of  distinction,  a  leader  and  a  guide  to  a 
generation  of  managers.”  (NASA  anno   May  9/79;  NASA  Release  79-63) 
-Dr.  Robert  S.  Cooper,  director  of  GSFC  since  July  1,  1976,  announced 
he  would  resign  June  1 to  become  vice  president  for  engineering  at  Satellite 
Business  Systems.  Cooper  came to GSFC  from DOD,  where he  was  assistant 
director  for  defense  research  and  engineering,  beginning  in  1972.  He   was  a 
research engineer  at the Massachusetts  Institute of  ‘Technology (MIT) Lincoln 
Laboratory  and ,   before  that,  a  professor  at  MIT.  He   attended  the  University 
of  Iowa and Ohio State University  and  received  a doctorate in  1963 from  MIT  
in  electrical  engineering.  (NASA  Release  79-60) 
-JSC  announced  retirement  May  18 of  deputy  director  Sigurd  A .   Sjoberg 
after  37  years  of  service  with  NASA  and  i t s   predecessor,  the  National  Ad- 
visory  Committee  for  Aeronautics  (NACA).  He  joined  NACA  in  1942 as   an 
electrical  engineer  and  went  to  Houston  when  his  group  was  relocated  from 
Hampton,  Va.  H e   became  director  of  flight  operations  in  1969  and  deputy 
director  of  JSC  in  1972. H e  would  manage Houston operations  for OAO  Cor- 
poration  (JSC  Release  79-24;  NASA  Release  79-58) 
-NASA  announced  appointment of  Dr. Thomas A.  Mutch as  associate ad- 
ministrator  for space science,  effective July  1.  Mutch,  professor of  geological 
sciences at Brown  University,  received a doctorate  in   geology  from Princeton 
University  in  1960 and  had  been  a  member  of  NASA’s  lunar  science  review 
board  from  1969 to  1973, leader of  the Viking  project’s lander  imaging science 
team,  and  chairman  of  several  NASA  committee.s  planning  post-Viking  ex- 
ploration  of  Mars.  A  mountain  climber,  he  had  visited  the  Himalayas  twice, 
most  recently  in  1978  with  a  group  from  Brown  Ilniversity.  (NASA  Release 
79-72) 
that  astronaut  Fred W.  Haise,  J r . ,  would  resign  at  the end 
-NASAreported 
of  June to become vice president  for  space programs  at Grumman Aerospace. 
He  began  as  a NASA  research  pilot  a t  LeRC  in  19.59, followed by  three  years 
at  DFRC,  and  was  one   of  19  astronauts  selected  in  April  1966.  As  pilot  of 
Apollo  13’s  lunar module, h e  assisted  in converting  it  into a  ‘‘lifeboat’’ for  the 
crew  after  an  explosion  in  the  service  module  ablout  5 5   hours  after  launch. 
He  had  been  technical  assistant  to  the  manager  of  the  Space  Shuttle  orbiter 
project  and  commanded  one   of  the  two  crews  piloting  the  Enterprise  in 

30 

MAY  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

approach-and-landing  tests  in  1977.  (NASA  Release  79-79) 
-MSFC  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Mathias  P.  Siebel  a s  manager  of 
the  Michoud  Assembly  Facility  in  New  Orleans,  L a . ,   succeeding  Robert  C. 
Littlefield,  who  died  May  12.  (MSFC Release  79-52) 
-KSC  announced  retirement  of  Dr.  Walter J.  Kapryan,  director  of  Shuttle 
operations,  and  appointment  of  George  E  Page  to  fill  that  position,  effective 
June  1. Kapryan  began  in  1947 a t  the  Langley  laboratory  when  it  was  NACA 
headquarters  and  went  to  Cape   Canaveral  as  project  engineer  for  Mercury  
Redstone  1. In  1963 he established  the Gemini program  office at KSC;  he was 
deputy  director  of  launch  operations  until  September  1969. He   had  assisted 
with  KSC’s  transition  from  Apollo  to  the  Shuttle  e ra .   (KSC  Release  100-79) 

FBIS  reported  on  the   status  of  the   Soyuz  32  crew  in   its  continuing  flight 
aboard  Salyut  6.  Since  launch  February  25,  Vladimir  Lyakhov  and  Valery 
Ryumin had  done  daily  exercises and physical tests,  noted  by  Soviet press  ser-  
vices  a s   “ the   cosmonauts  are   feeling  well.”  The ir   May  3  activity  was  ex- 
p e r im e n t i n g   o n   t h e   K r i s t a l l   e q u i pm e n t ,   m a k i n g   “ s em i c o n d u c t o r  
monocrystals”  of  indium  arsenide.  On May  4 they operated  a  “submillimeter 
telescope”  gathering  data  to  predict  cyclones  in   tropical  zones  of  Ear th .   A 
commentator  noted  that  this  equipment  was  complicated,  requiring  exact 
calibration  each  time  it was used ,   and  could  be  aimed  only by  turning  the  en-  
t ire   station.  On  May  6  they  used  a  “gamma  telescope”  to  measure  gamma 
radiation  and  charged  particles  in  near-Earth  space.  On  May  8 they  replaced 
the ir  television  transmitter  with a new one  brought by  Progress 5. On May 9-10 
they  used the   Kristall  to  experiment  w i th   cadmium  sulfide. 
Tass reported May  13  the  launch  of Progress  6 ;  a commentator  said that  the 
cargo  sh ip  contained  “an  unusual  present”  to  the   crew,  a  tu l ip   scheduled  to 
bloom  in  space.  An  ongoing  task  was  to  study  the  efforts  of  weightlessness 
and  “other  space  flight  factors”  on  plant  growth;  sma l l  hothouses  aboard  the 
Salyut  could  provide  fresh  food  containing  vitamins.  The   crew  was  growing 
green  onions;  they  had  reaped  the ir   first  harvest  and  “ate  it with  the  permis- 
sion  of  biologists.”  They  a l so  had  fennel,  parsley,  and  gar l ic ;  Tass  noted  that 
“Despite  successes  of  chemistry.  . .scientists  have  not  yet  managed  to  create 
the  same  vitamins  as in  nature.”  T h e  cosmonauts  on  Soyuz  29 had  repeatedly 
described  the  mushrooms  they  were  picking  as  “really  strange.  . . the ir   form  
was unusual with  curly  s tems .  . .”.  “Nevertheless,”  Tass sa id ,   “[the  crew  had 
been]  greatly  pleased.  All  living  things  evoke  the ir   enhanced  in teres t .   . . a  
psychological backup  in their difficult work.”  The  tulip in ou ter  space,  “mere-  
ly  an  experiment  to  scientists,”  was  for  the  cosmonauts  “a  symbol  of  spring” 
and  an  expression  of  solicitude  for  the  crew  that  had  been  working  for  a  long 
time  in  isolation.  Progress  6 docked  May  15,  and  the  crew  was  unloading 
cargo and  reloading  used  equipment  for the next  fortnight.  The  ma jor  job  was 
refueling,  difficult  and  complex  in  space,  but  the   crew  had  completed  it  by 
May  28.  (FBIS,  Moscow  Tass  in  English,  Dom  Svc  in  Russian,  Intl  Svc  in 
Russian,  May  3-28/79) 

31 

June 

June  1: NASA  announced plans  to  shift Skylab into a   lower-drag attitude that 
could  extend  its  life up  to  12 hours,  during which  the  reentry  area might  shift 
by  thousands  of  miles.  Reentry  was  predicted  between  June  27  and  July  21; 
the  “footprint”  of  resulting  debris  would  be  about  160  kilometers  wide  and 
6,400 kilometers  long. About  24  hours before  reentry,  it  might  be  possible  to 
predict  the  most  likely  area  where  debris  might  reach  the  surface,  but  with 
a  wide margin of  error.  “Drag modulation” would offer the possibility of  shif- 
ting  Skylab’s orbit  to  pass  over  less  populated  areas,  reducing  the  chance  of 
damage  or   injury.  (NASA  Release  79-80;  JSC  Release  79-37) 
June  2:  NASA  launched  UK 6 from WFC  at  7:26 p.m.  EDT  on  a   Scout into 
an  orbit  with  656  kilometer  apogee,  607-kilometer  perigee,  5 5  O  inclination, 
and  97.5-minute period.  Under  the terms of  a  contract of  March  16,  1976,  bet- 
ween  NASA  and  the  U .K .   Science Research  Council,  the  launch  was  the  se- 
cond  on  a   fully  reimbursable  basis,  at  an  estimated  cost  to  the  United 
Kingdom of  $4,956,733, including booster, support services, tracking and data 
acquisition,  and  use  of  U.S.  facilities. 
The  British-built spacecraft,  weighing  340.6 pounds  carried  an  experiment 
to  measure  t h e  charge  a n d  ene rgy   spectra of  galactic  cosmic  rays,  and  two X- 
ray  astronomy  experiments on  structure  and  position  of  low-energy  sources 
and  on  fluctuations in  X-ray  emission from  low  galactic latitude  sources.  UK 
6 would  carry  two  experiments for  the  Royal  Aircraft  Establishment to  study 
performance in  orbit of  new  types of  solar cell and the  susceptibility of metal- 
oxide semiconductor devices to radiation in a  space environment. NASA judg- 
ed  the  mission  successful  as  of  October  1979.  (NASA  Release  79-61,  79-78; 
NASA  MOR  M-490-301-79-02  [prelaunch]  May  14/79,  [postlaunch]  Oct 
181 79) 

June  4:   The   $220  million  requested  by  the  President  as  an  amendmen t   to 
NASA’s Space Shuttle program was  “essential to allow the .   . . program to pro- 
ceed in  a  reasonable manner,” Dr. William J.  Perry, undersecretary of  defense 
for  research  and  engineering,  told  the  Senate  subcommittee  on  science, 
technology, and  space. Noting  that NASA’s  launch predictions were based  on 
the supplemental funding, Perry said DOD  was  concerned about the adequacy 
of  the  Shuttle  fleet  to  meet  traffic  demands   sure  to  build  rapidly  “once  the 
Shuttle is operational .” DOD planned  to  transfer “several programs  important 
to  our  national  security”  to  Shuttle  launch  by  1983,  and  delays  in  orbiter 
delivery would mean  further use of  expendable launch  vehicles, with  “adverse 
operational  and  economic  impact.”  A   House   a  
ropriations  subcommittee 
PREGEDliNG  P i & &  BLANK  NOT  FILMED 

ASTRONAUTICS  ANI)  AERONAUTICS 

JUNE   1979 

had  dropped  $70 million  for  construction  of  Shuttle  facilities  at  Vandenberg 
Air  Force  Base  from  FY80  budget  requests,  and  the  f u l l   committee  was  not 
likely  to  ignore the  subcommittee’s recommendation.  (Text,  June 4/79;  Today, 
June  6/79,  1A) 

June  6: DOD  launched  a  Block  5D  defense  meteorological  satellite (DMSP)  
from  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base,  Calif.,  at  11:22 a .m .   local  time  on  a  Thor  
booster  into  an  orbit  with  837-kilometer  apogee,  818-kilometer  perigee, 
101.5-minute period,  and 98.8 O inclination.  DOD made no announcement, but 
Aviation Week  &  Space  Technology  reported  that  the  1,131-pound  spacecraft 
would  be  tested  for  about  15  days  before  being  put  into  operation  i n   its  near- 
polar  Sun-synchronous  orb i t .   (NASA  wkly  SSR ,  May  31-Junc 6; AvWk,  June 
18/79,  56) 

June 7: Th e  Soviet  Union  launched Bhaskara,  an Earth-observation  satellite, 
for  the  Indian  Space  Research  Organization  (ISRC)) from  the  Kapustin  Yar 
cosmodrome a t  2  p .m .   local  time  on  an SS-5 Skean vehicle  into an  orbit with 
541-kilometer  apog e e ,   518-kilometer  per igee ,   50.7 O  inc l ina t ion ,   and  
95 .2-m inu te   p e r i o d .   Named   for   an  a n c i en t   Ind ian   a s t ronom e r ,   the  
1,000-pound  India-built  spacecraft  was  the  second  Ilaunched  for  India  by  the 
Soviet  Union;  i t   carried  television  cameras  and  equipment  for  studying 
hydrology,  meteorology,  and  forestry.  India’s  first  satellite,  launched  about 
four  years ago. was  still  in orbit and functioning well.  (NASA wkly  SSR ,  June 
7-13/79; Spacewarn  SPX-308; W Post,  June  8179, A-15; AvWk,  July  23/79, 59 ;  
DED ,   June   11/79,  200;  July  3/79,  10) 

June  10: DOD   launched  a  “classified  payload”  at  9 :38   a .m .   local  time  from 
C a p e   Canavera l   on   a  T i tan   3C   in to   a  g eoqyn ch ronou s   o r b i t   with 
36,261-lulometer  apogee,  35,802-kilometer  perigee,  1,448.6-minute  period, 
and  2 .0”   inclination.  Th e  U.S.  Air  Force  had  no  comment on  press  specula- 
tion  about  the  launch.  Th e  N a y   York  Times  said  “such  satellites  are  used  to 
monitor  Russian  and  Chinese  launches  [and to  warn]  American  officials  if  a 
missile  is  launched  from  a  submarine  at  sea.”  Aviation  Week  &  Space  
Ethnology  said  that  the  payload  had  “orbital  characteristics  of  previously 
launched  early  warning  satellites.”  (NASA  wkly  SSR ,   June  7-13;  NY   Times, 
June  11/79, B-6;  W Post,  June  11/79,  A-9;  Today, June  11/79,  IA,  8A; AvWk, 
June  18/79,  13) 

June  11: MSFC   announced  that  on  June  13  it  would  begin  flight-qualification 
testing  of  a  Space Shuttle  solid-fuel  rocket  booster  a t   the  Thiokol  range  near 
Promontory  Point, Utah,  to demonstrate the production,  assembly, and  firing 
cycle  for  a  full  series  of  Shuttle  flights.  Assembled  from  four  segments,  the 
35-meter-long motor would  first be  static-fired  to demonstrate  “ablative  safety 
factors”  of  the  motor  nozzle,  which  would  be  gimbaled  to  simulate  control 
during  a  launch.  Designed  to  move  8 ”  in  any  direction,  the  nozzle  would  be 

34 

JUNE   1579 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

part  of  the  Shuttle  guidance  system.  Insulation  and  ablative  materials  would 
protect  the  motor  from  heat  dur ing   firing.  (MSFC  Release  79-54) 
The   first  flight-qualification  firing  of  a  Shuttle  motor  was  “quite  satisfac- 
tory,”  said  George  Hardy,  manager  of  the  booster  project  at  MSFC.  After 
witnessing  the  firing  in  the Utah  deser t ,  Hardy  said  that  the  amount  of  thrust 
developed  and  the  performance  of  the  steering  nozzles  was  “well  within 
specifications.”  The  motor  and  igniter  had  been  modified  as  a  result  of  test 
firings  of  four  development  motors  dur ing  the  past  two  years.  Static  tests  of 
the flight-configured  solid-fuel  rocket  booster  that each Shuttle mission  would 
use  in  pairs  would  complete  qualification  testing.  (MSFC   Release  79-60) 

June  12:  After  almost  a  month  of  waiting  for  good  weather,  the  first  man- 
powered  flight  across  the  English  Channel  took  off  at  5 : 5 0   a .m .   from 
Folkestone,  arr iv ing  at  Cap   Gr is   Nez  in  2  hours,  55  minutes.  Bryan  Allen, 
26,  a  cyclist,  hang-glider,  and  biologist  from  California  who,  at  137  pounds 
was  nearly  twice  a s   heavy  a s   his  craf t ,   pedaled  the  70-pound  gossamer 
Albatross  (built  of  carbon-filament  tubing  and  covered  in   transparent  mylar) 
nonstop  for 25  miles.  Rules were  that  the  craft must be  heavier  than  air, must 
be   propelled  only  by  the  crew,  must  not  f l y   higher  than  160 feet,  and  must 
not  discard  any  parts  in  flight.  Allen  had  traveled  an  average  of  6  to  8  feet 
above  the  water  but  had  dipped  to  within  a  foot  of  the  surface  several  times 
when  strong  winds  arose   about  halfway  over. 
The  flight won  a $205,000 Kremer  prize  (“almost  enough  to pay  the  costs”) 
and  a  niche  in  history  for  aeronautical  designer  Paul  MacCready,  who  also 
bu i lt   the Gossamer  Condor  that in  August  1977 won  a  $102,500 Krcmer  prize 
for  the  world’s  first  controlled  man-powered  flight,  steered  by  Allen  around 
a  1.15-mile figure-8 course  in  California.  The  Condor  was  now  on  display  in 
the  National  Air  and  Space  Museum .   U.K.  industrialist  Henry  Kremer   had 
established  the prizes  to  be  awarded by  the  Royal  Aeronautical  Society, which 
called  the  Channel  crossing  “a  tremendous  achievement.”  (N Y  Times,  June 
13/79, A-1,  A-8;  W Post,  June  13/79; A-1;  W Star,  June  12/79, A-1;  June  14/79, 
A-18) 

The  May  25   crash  of  a  DC-10  aircraft  killing  275  was  predictable  in  view 
of  previous  problems  with  that  plane,  Rep.  John  L .  Burton  (D-Ca l if .) ,   chair- 
man ,   told a House  subcommittee on  transportation  June  11.  H e  asked  Federal 
Aviation Administration  (FAA) Administrator  Langhorne  Bond  why  the  FAA 
had  twice previously  grounded  the DC-10s  for  inspection  and  twice  sent them 
into  the   a ir   again.  After  the  accident,  the  FAA  waited  for  13 days  to  ground 
the DC-lOs,  “and  then only because a federal judge .   . .acting on a suit brought 
by  the Airline Passengers Association  ordered  them  to d o  it,”  Washington Star 
columnist  Mary  McGrory  noted. 
Engine-mounting pylons,  which  an FAA  memo  from  California not  seen by 
Bond had called a design fault, apparently caused  some of  the problems.  Bond 
said  that  what McGrory  called  “the  worst  plane  tragedy  in  U.S.  history”  was 

35 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

J U N E   lY79 

“a  single,  severe  event”  when  “that  pylon  experienced  an  overload  of  that 
wing and those fasteners,”  insisting that FAA’s  actions were proper at the time. 
Rep.  Burton  said  that  since  1974  the  FAA  had  had  many  pylon  problem 
reports; Bond  said they  did  not  form a pattern,  as  they  concerned  “individual 
and  random defects  in an entire a r e a .  . . there  was no  trend.”  In  1975, McDon- 
ne11  Douglas  had  suggested  some  remedies  for  problems  with  the  pylons; 
Bond  told  the  subcommittee  that  manufacturers’  suggestions  were  not  man- 
datory,  and  the  FAA  did  not  make  the  airlines  folllow  them.  ( W  Star,  June 
12/79,  A-2,  A-4) 

Neil  Armstrong,  “America’s  reluctant  space  hero,”  said  the  United  States 
should  develop a  permanent  manned  orbiting  space  station  for  long-duration 
exposure of  people  and  equipment to  the  space environment.  At  an  interview 
about  the  10th anniversary  of  the moon  landing,  the University  of  Cincinnati 
engineering professor who i n   1969 had  been the first: man  to walk on the moon 
said  that,  if  the  United  States  had  an  ongoing  manned  space  program,  “we 
could  have  solved  the  problems”  with  Skylab.  (Toduy ,  June  12/79,  16A) 

June  14:  MSFC  reported  that  the  seven-member  science  crew  for  the  first 
Spacelab  mission  was  conducting  a  three-day  crew-station  review,  using  a 
Spacelab  mockup  just  completed  i n   MSFC’s  Materials  and  Processes 
Laboratory. The  review would  evaluate experiment designs together with writ- 
ten  procedures,  the  ensure  proper  crew-equipment  interface,  especially  the 
location  of  switches,  controls,  and  displays.  (MSFC  Release  79-57) 

MSFC said a long-duration test  firing of  the  Shuttle main propulsion  system 
scheduled June  12 w a s  successful, even though  a glitch  in the automatic-cutoff 
instrumentation  had  terminated  the  test  about 50 seconds  into  the  520  second 
program. 
Frank  Stewart,  test  manager  for  MSFC’s  Shuttle projects  office,  said  that 
the  test  was  successful  “in  the  sense  that  the  system  performed  as  predicted 
and yielded a great deal of  valuable  data”  needed  before  the first Shuttle flight. 
Stewart  said the  firing  sequence was  excellent.  For  the  first  time  in  test  firing 
of  three flight engines, the rated  power  level was attained, and the  test produc- 
ed pogo pulsing  (a deliberate  oscillation  from very  low  to  very  high  frequen- 
cies generated by  a piston  in the  liquid-oxygen  manifold,  to  show  if  vibrations 
in  flight  would  constitute  resonance  dangerous  to  structures). 
This  first  long-duration  firing  of  the  clustered  flight-type engines  and  pro- 
pulsion  system  had  already  been  delayed  by  malfunction  of  a  development 
engine during  single-engine tests.  Inspection  after  the  failure  revealed  a crack 
in  the  coolant  pipe,  requiring  removal  of  the  engine  nozzle.  Engineers 
modified  a  spare  nozzle  for  installation  in  the  test  article.  Stewart  said  the 
event  should  not  delay  the  total  test  schedule,  which  included  cxtra  time  for 
unforeseen  difficulties.  System  verification  should  be   complete  “in  ample 
time  for  the  first  Shuttle  flight,”  he  said.  (MSFC  Release  79-58) 

36 

JUNE   1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

June  15: LaRC announced it would crash a twin-engine  aircraft June 20  a s  part 
of an FAA/NASA general aviation crash test program.  The  test,  using  a swing- 
ing  pendulum  approach ,   would  aid  studies  of  the  plane’s  structure,  seats, 
restraints,  and  emergency  locator  transmitters,  to  increase  the  probability  of 
survival  and  lessen  the  probability  of  injury.  (LdRC  Release  79-37) 

Ceremon ies  at Block  Is land ,  R . I . ,  dedicated the  third NASA-Department  of 
Energy  wind  turbine,  designed  to  provide  5 %  to  15 %  of  the  island’s  power 
and  up  to  half  in  winter  when  winds  are   strongest.  The   windmill’s  125-foot 
aluminum  blades  would  interfere  with  local  television  reception,  officials 
sa id ;  DOE  would  spend about  $700,000 for  a cab le  television  system,  besides 
$2 .3  million  for the windmill.  Later versions might have wooden  or fiberglass 
blades  to  avoid  interference. 
Residents  said  that  their  electric  rates were the nation’s highest-20%  more  
than  New  York  City’s  and  double  those  of  the  mainland  12 miles  away.  The  
island  used diesel generators, with  fuel brought  by  barge.  (W P o s t ,  June  16/79, 
A-3) 

June  20:  NASA  announced  an MSFC  award  to  General  Dynamics  Convair  of 
a  $250,000  contract  to  study  feasibility  of  a  space  platform  in  geostationary 
Earth  orb i t   carrying  many  separate  payloads.  The   platform  would  contain 
plug-in  equ ipmen t   to  accommoda te   commun ica t ions ,   Ear th   resources ,  
meteorology,  and  similar  studies  now  flown  on  separate  satellites. 
Preliminary  MSFC  investigations  indicated  that  a  platform  could  be  built 
in space and located in a synchronous orb i t  a t  40,000 kilometers  to offer power 
and o ther  functions  to  “tenant”  missions parked  there  for a fee-like ren t .  Plat- 
form serv ices  such a s  power,  available to all tenants,  would eliminate the need 
for  antennas,  so lar  arrays,  or   batteries  on   individual  payloads,  reducing  size 
and  launch  weight.  Locating  packages  on  a  single  platform  would  also 
simplify  in-orbit  repair  and  servicing.  (NASA Release 79-82;  MSFC  Release 
79-63) 

June  20-21:  Newspapers  nationwide  reported  that  NASA  was  now  predicting 
Skylab  reentry  between  July  7  and  25,  probably  July  16.  Thomas   O’Toole 
wrote  in  the  Washington Post  that  the descending  space  station  would  be  visi- 
ble  in  the   sky  over  Washington,  D .C . ,  this  week  for  the  Last  time  before  it 
broke  up   and  fell  to  Ear th .   Atmospheric  friction  would  destroy  most  of  i t ,  
NASA  said,  but  two  heavy  pieces  (an  airlock  shroud  and  a  lead-lined  film 
vault)  weighing  3,900  pounds  and  5,000  pounds  would  probably  hit  Earth 
about  500 miles  apar t ,   the  airlock  being  outside  the  station  and  the  vault  in-  
side. Th e  Washington Star said JSC controllers had  “prodded”  the Skylab into 
a  sidewise  attitude  that  might  allow  them  to  steer  the  station  away  from  in- 
habited  areas.  NORAD  agreed that  reentry was  probable  on or before July  16. 
( W  Post,  June  20/79,  A-11;  W Star,  June   21,  A-4) 

37 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE   1979 

June 25: MSFC  said the propellant  tank  for Columbia’s  engines was ready  for 
flight and would  leave the Michoud Assembly  Facility June 29  for KSC, where 
i t  would  be  fitted to t h e  orbiter and two  solid-fuel  rcocket boosters.  The Martin 
Marietta-built  154-foot tank  with  140,000 gallons of‘ liquid  oxygen and 380,000 
gallons of  liquid  hydrogen  was  the  only  part  of  the  Shuttle assembly  that  was 
expendable;  like  the boosters,  it  would  separate  from  the  Shuttle at  about  75 
miles  altitude  and  d rop   into  t h e   ocean  but  would  not  be  recovered.  (MSFC 
Release  79-66) 

June  26:  NASA  issued  a  press  kit  on  kbyuger  2’s  coming  encounter  with 
Jupiter  July  9, describing  the modifications  resulting  from  V6yager I findings. 
As  the  images  from   the  latter  in  i ts   January  approach  revealed  changes  on 
Jupiter  differing  from  observations  by  Pioneer  I1  four  years  earlier,  so 
Voyager 2  had  sent  back  images  that  differed  in  Ihe  shorter  term  on  its  ap- 
proach.  Its  pictures  of  Jupiter  relayed  from 5 6  million kilometers  had  already 
exceeded  the  best  resolution  possible  with  Earth  telescopes.  (NASA  Release 
79-86) 

June  27:  NASA  launched  the  NOAA-A  at  11:52 a .m .   EDT  from  the Western 
Test  Range  (WTR)   on  an  Atlas  into  an  orbit  with  823-kilometer  apogee, 
807-kilometer  perigee,  101-minute period,  and  98.7 O  inclination.  It  carried  six 
devices  to  measure  Earth’s atmosphere,  surface,  and  cloud  cover,  and  near- 
Earth  proton/electron  flux.  It would  also receive, process, and relay  data from 
balloons,  free-floating buoys,  and  remote  automatic  stations.  Named  Noaa  6 
in orb i t ,   it  should have a 2-year  lifetime.  (NASA wkly  SSR June 28-July 4/79; 
NASA  MOR  E-615-79-01  [prelaunch] May  8/79; daily  actv  rept,  June  28/79; 
AFSC  Newsreview,  Sept  79,  12) 

June  29: MSFC   reported  completion  of  flight-certification  test  firings  of  the 
Space Shuttle main engines  June 27, with a  simulai.ed  abort mission  requiring 
the  engine to  fire  823  seconds.  To  detect  potentiall  weaknesses  in  systems  o r  
hardware,  engineers would  remove  selected components  and  inspect  them  for 
wear  and  tear;  after  inspection  and  analysis  of  test  data,  the  same  test  series 
would  be  repeated  on  the   same  engine  to  simulaie  typical  mission  profiles. 
J .R .   Thompson,  MSFC’s main-engine project  manager,  said  that  engine per- 
formance and operation during the test  series was  very  satisfactory.  Rockwell 
conducted  the  tests  a t   NSTL.  (MSFC  Release  79-69) 

June  30: NASA  said  that  it  had  turned  off  Applications  Technology  Satellite 
6 ( A 7 3  6) and  would  boost  it  to  a higher  orbit  August  6. ATS  6 had  lost  three 
of  its  four  thrusters  and  would  be  a  hazard  to  other  spacecraft  if  it  failed  on 
station.  Launched  in  May  1974,  it  had  exceeded  its  design  lifetime  by  three 
years;  transmitting  directly  to  small  ground  receivers,  it  had  relayed  educa- 
tional,  scientific, and health programs  to  stations worldwide.  “Firsts”  includ- 

JUNE   I979  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

ed  the  first  educational  courses by  satellite,  first  two-way  teleconference  and 
“telemedicine,”  and  first  successful  satellite-to-satellite  communications. 
(NASA  Release  79-81) 

During  June:  NASA  announced  that  Arnold  W.  Frutkin,  associate  ad- 
ministrator  for  external  relations  since November  1978, would  retire  June 27. 
For  18  years  before  his  present  appointment,  h e   had  headed  NASA’s  Office 
of  International  Affairs  and  was  credited  with  “an  extraordinarily  successful 
series’’  of  international  space endeavors  and  policy  initiatives  including  ATS 
6  broadcasts,  US .-USSR   arrangements  for  Apollo-Soyuz,  ESA  Spacelab 
agreement,  and  multinational  work  on  NASA  science  and  applications  mis- 
sions.  H e  had  come to NASA  from the National  Academy  of  Sciences, where 
he  was  depu ty   d irec tor   of  th e   U .S .   comm i t tee   for  th e   International 
Geophysical  Year  (IGY).  (NASA  anno  June  1/79;  NASA  Release  79-85) 
JSC  announced the  appointment  of  Kenneth  S .  Kleinknecht,  veteran  NASA 
manager  for  manned  spaceflight  projects,  to  direct  JSC  operations  a t   KSC, 
completing  installation  of  the  thermal  protection  tiles  and  internal  vehicle 
systems  on  the   orbiter  Columbia.  Kleinknecht,  who  had  joined  NACA  in 
1942, would  report  to  KSC  from  permanent  assignment  in  Paris  as   deputy 
associate  administrator  for  STS (European operations).  (JSC  Release  79-39) 
W FC  announced  that  its  associate director,  Abraham  Spinak,  would  be   on 
special  assignment as executive  assistant to a special NASA  senior-staff group 
evaluating  management  of  the  STS.  The   group  would  study  Shuttle  funding 
problems,  uncertainties  of  program  predictions,  and  information  flow  and 
control.  (WFC  Release  79-E) 

ESA reported successful completion of  exercises at Kourou, French Guiana, 
to prepare  for  Ariane  launches,  including  assembly  of  a  test  launcher,  filling 
and  draining  of  propellant,  and  automatic  countdown.  Th e  operation  was  to 
verify  the  launch  team’s  competence  and  the  suitability  of  the  site  for  the 
launch  program  scheduled  to  begin  in  September.  (E SAKNE S  Release  June 
6/79) 

FBIS  continued  to  report  th e  status  of  the  Soyuz  32  crew  aboard  Sulyut  6. 
Beginning  their  14th week  in  orb i t ,   the crew  prepared  the  shower  stall  and 
used  it;  they  also used  the  Splav  (alloy)  furnace  to make  “foam  metals”  in  a 
Soviet-Bulgarian  experiment  for  low  weight  and  high  mechanical  qualities. 
(On  June  2 ,   Reuters  reported  that  a  joint  Soviet-Hungarian  flight  had  been 
called off  because  of  “serious  trouble”  with  the  Sulyut  6 and predicted  delays 
of  4  to  5 months  o r   even  a  year  i n   further  joint  manned  flight.  This  would 
have been  the   5th  USSR  joint  mission  with  eastern-bloc  countries.)  On  June 
4 ,   in  the  15th  week,  the  crew  observed  Far  Eastern  forests  and  corrected 
Sulyut  6‘s  orbit  using  the  Progress  6 engines.  On  June  5,  the  crew  was  con- 
gratulated  by  the  Soyuz  29  record-holding  crew  for  completing  100  days  in 
orb i t .  

39 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE   1979 

Soyuz  34 ,   an  unmanned  ferry  vessel  launched  June  6  “to  check  a  crucial 
engine  that  failed  during  a  manned  mission  in  Apl-il,” might  serve  as  return 
vehicle  for  the  Soyuz  32  crew  besides  bringing  supplies,  press  reports  said. 
Th e  April  mission that  failed  to  dock  (Soyu z  33 )  had been  crewed  by  Nikolay 
Rukavishnikov  (veteran  of  Soyuz 10 and 16) and Gecrgy Ivanov, first Bulgarian 
cosmonaut.  A  June  6  report  said  the  specific  part  found  at  fault  in  Soyuz  32 
had  previously  been  tested  8,000 times  with  no  defect  evident;  nevertheless, 
the  modified  Soyuz  34  was  launched  unmanned  to  prevent  possible  casualty. 
Soyuz 34  docked  successfully  June  9  i n   the  space  rormerly  used  by  Progress 
6, which  had  been  set  loose  June  8  to  deorbit  over  the  Pacific  Ocean. 
The  crew  sent away  Soyuz 32 ,   loaded  with  used  #equipment and  experiment 
material,  for a soft landing June  13. Later June reports from scientists studying 
the  returned  material  said  that  future  stations would  allow  for  larger  numbers 
of  meteorite  impacts;  for  the  first time,  returned  equipment was  available  for 
analysis,  such  as  devices  that  operated  for  600  days  rather  than  the  planned 
100, and  lamps that  “had  not  worked  out  their term.”  (FBIS, Tass  in  English, 
Intl  Svc  in  Russian,  Dom  Svc  in  Russian,  June  1-30/79) 

40 

July 

Ju ly  3:  JSC  reported  that  it  had  amended  its  contract  with  Rockwell  Interna- 
tional  Corporation  to  cover  56  engineering  changes  in  the  Space  Shuttle  or- 
biter.  Th e  f irs t  amendment,  covering 32  changes, would  cost $14,338,000; the  
second ,   covering  24  changes  plus  testing,  repairs,  and  spares,  would  cost 
$2,869,833.  The   control  value  was  now  about  $3.43  billion.  (JSC  Release 
79-48) 

INTELSAT  reported  from  its meeting jus t   ended  in Washington,  D.C.,  that 
international  telecommunications  by satellite would  increase  nearly  100%  by 
1983.  More   than  200  delegates  representing  more  than  100  nations  at  the 
week-long meeting  had pooled  forecasts of  services needed  from INTELSAT’s 
satellite  system.  Th e  biggest  growth  would  be  in  the   Atlantic  region,  where 
traffic  might  increase  114% by  year-end  1983.  The   new  Intelsat  V  satellites 
soon  to  be   launched  could  carry  12,000  simultaneous  phone  calls  plus  two 
television  channels-double 
the  capacity  of  present  satellites.  Planning  was 
under   way  for  satellites  with  40,000-circuit  capacity.  (INTELSAT  Release 
79-16-1) 

Ju ly   6:  ESA  reported  signing  a  contract  with  NASA  July  5  authorizing  the 
order  of  long  lead-time materiel  and  components  for construction  of  a  second 
Spacelab flight unit to  be delivered  “progressively”  to NASA in 1982-83. ESA 
had  signed  a  simultaneous  contract  with  ERNO   of  Bremen,  Germany,  a s  
pr ime   contractor.  ESA  said  that  this  was  the  first  time  the   United  States  had 
placed  an order   for  “work  of  such  importance”  with  the  European  industrial 
consortium  representing some  50 firms,  headed  by  ERNO.  (ESA Release July 
6/79) 

Ju ly  9: NASA announced  that MSFC had  appointed  a board  to  investigate the 
automatic  cutoff  of  a  test  firing  July  2  at  NSTL  of  the  Space  Shuttle  main- 
eng ine  test  ar t ic le  (three  main  engines  mounted  in   an  orbiter  aft  section  and 
attached  to  an  external  tank).  A  liquid-hydrogen  leak  from  a  main  fuel  valve 
caused  the  cutoff  af ter   18.5 seconds;  no  explosion  occurred ,   and  the  gaseous 
nitrogen  and water  fire-control  systems put out an external  f ire  resulting  from  
hydrogen  accumulation  around  the  test  article’s  a f t  area .   Inspection  revealed 
damage  to  the  aft heat  shield  and  charring  of  external-tank  insulation,  but  the 
engines  appeared  generally  in   good  condition.  (NASA  Release  79-92) 

J u l y   9-13:  NASA’s  Voyager 2  passed  within  404,000 miles  of  Jupiter  July  9, 
making  its  closest  approach  a t  6 :29   p .m .   EDT  and  sending  from  more   than 

41 

A STRONAUT IC S  AND   AERONAUT IC S  

JULY   lR9 

570 million  miles  a  flood  of  scientific data  and  “stunning  photographs  of  the 
planet  and some of  its moons,”  as the New York  Tirncs described  them.  Scien- 
tists at t h e  J PL ,  control center for the mission,  said that the flight was continu- 
ing  to  provide  them  with  “new  surprises.’’ They  had  modified  observing  se- 
quences on  b y u g e r  2 to benefit  from discoveries by  Ibyuger  I on its encounter 
i n   March.  Changes  included  more  darkside  images  of  the  planet  to  measure 
lightning  and  aurora;  images of  Jupiter’s ring,  taken  away  from  the  equatorial 
plane;  and  about  nine  hours  of  continuous  imaging of Io for  volcanic  activity. 
Voyuger 2’s  inward  track  past  three  of  the  four  “Galilean”  satellites had  let  i t  
see  regions  not  viewed  by  Voyager I ;  its  path  was  “more  conservative,”  as   it 
passed  10 Jupiter  radii  above  the  visible  clouds  compared  to  Ibyager  l’s  4 . 9  
radii,  for  “complementary  obscrvations.”  b y zg e r   .2  studies  began  April  25 
and  would  continue  for  a  seven  month  look  compared  to  Voyager  l’s  three 
month  look.  Voyager 2 had  been  launched August  20,  1977; Lbyuger 1, launch- 
ed  September  5 ,   1977, on  a  faster  and  shorter  course,  had  overtaken  its  sister 
ship  before  the  end  of  the  year. 
Scientists  found  that  Jupiter  and  its  moons  did  not  resemble  planets  or  
satellites  nearer  the Sun ,  nor  one  another.  Surprises  in  the  findings were  due, 
they  said, to  real differences between the outer and inner  solar system and  lack 
of  previous  knowledge, a  result of  the distance  separating  Earth  from Jupiter. 
Before  Voyager I ,   “we  thought we  had  some  idea of  what  planets  were  like,” 
said  Laurence  A.  Soderblom  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  after  seeing 
Europa  images  from  Byuge r   2.  Instead  of  a  sphere  heavily  pocked  such  as 
Earth’s  moon  and  Mars  from  meteor  impacts,  h y u g e r   2  images  showed 
Europa  “as  smooth  as  a  billiard  ball,”  with  hardly  any  craters  on  a  surface 
covered  by  a  mantle  of  slushy  snow  and  ice  up  to  60  miles  deep,  with  far- 
reaching  shallow  marks  like  cracks  in  an  eggshell.  Th e   spacecraft  passed 
Callisto and Ganymede on  its way  toward Europa and ,  after  its encounter with 
Jupiter,  had  begun  a  10-hour  watch  for  Io,  where  it  photographed  six 
volcanoes  erupting.  On  its  approach  to  Jupiter,  Ryuge r   2  had  encountered 
radiation  so intense that JPL  had  turned  off  a  sensitive ultraviolet  (UV)  detec- 
tor  six  hours  earlier  than  planned;  howevcr,  project  director  Ray  Heacock 
declared  “no  problems  and  no  failures  i n   any  of  our   instruments.”  (JPL 
Release  901;  NASA  MOR  S-802-77-01/02,  June  261‘79; N Y   Times, Ju ly   10179, 
C-1;  W Post,  July  10179,  A-10;  W  Star,  July  11179,  A-4;  July  13/79, A-10) 

July  10-15: Amid disaster predictions,  Skylab deorbited  over  the Indian Ocean 
with  pieces  falling on Australia:  impact at  1637 GMT  (about  11:37  a .m .   EDT, 
or  37  minutes  after  midnight  local  time)  July  1:1  sent  debris  across  the 
Australian  outback,  with  no  reports  of  damage  or   in ju ry .   Australian  officials 
had  only  an  8-minute notice of  Skylab’s approach:  “‘We nearly had  a heart  at- 
tack”  when told  that it would cross the coast,  said one. (NORAD had  lost con- 
tact  at  l2:02  a .m .   local time  and  assumed  splashdown into  the Indian  Ocean, 
with  debris  coming  no  closer  to  Australia  than  a  few  hundred  miles.) 
Th e   PRC  news  service  told  of  the  difficulties  encountered  by  Skylab  and 

42 

JULY  lmS 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

the U.S. government’s offers of assistance and compensation in  case of  damage  
or  injury,  noting  that  some  airlines had  suspended  flights during  the  critical 
period.  Tass  said  that  western  Australia  authorities had  “warned  the  popula- 
tion  that  some  parts  of  Skylab  might  be  radioactive  and  urged .   . .caution  in 
approaching them.”  At  a NASA  press conference a  few days earlier, a reporter 
asked how  NASA  could  tell  if  someone  brought  in  a piece of  debris  claiming 
falsely  that  it  was  part  of  Skylab.  Richard  G.  Smith,  deputy  associate  ad- 
ministrator,  space  transportation  systems, who  had  been  “actively  in  charge 
of  Skylab activities for NASA,”  replied  that  “it  is  very  easy  to  identify an ob- 
ject  that’s  been  in  space.  The   high-energy  particles  that  penetrate  it  in  orbit 
give an extremely low-level but characteristic radiation background-no 
radia- 
tion  for  anybody  to be  worried abou t .   . .Bu t   it’s very  easy  to determine  that.” 
United  Press International (UPI) reported July  13 that the Kalgoorlie town hall 
had  squeezed  into  its  lobby  the  biggest  fragment recovered  so  far,  a  6.5-foot 
by  3.25-foot cylindrical piece of  metal  bearing  a  stamped  number   102:  “very 
good  for  the  tourist  industry,”  said Mayor  Ray  Finlayson.  (NASA press  conf 
July  6/79;  coord  c tr   bltns  July  9,  10,  11/79; NASA  D ly  Acm Rept  July  12/79; 
W S t u r ,  July  12/79, A-1;  UPI,  July  14/79, A-7;  FBIS,  Xinhua  in  Chinese, July 
12/79; Tass  i n   English,  July  13/79; A vw k ,   July  16/79, 22) 

Ju ly   12:  INTELSAT  would  mark   the  10th  anniversary  of  its  global  com-  
munications  satellite system begun  July  15,  1969, when  an  Inrelsut 3  satellite 
went  into  service  over  the  Indian  Ocean;  Intelsut  3  satellites were  already 
covering  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific.  It  had  been  jus t   over  5  years  since  launch 
of  the  first commercial communications satellite  (Early Bird, nickname of  In- 
telsut  r )  April  6,  1965.  “Best  of  all,”  INTELSAT said,  its  charges  for  leased 
telephone circuits by  satellite had decreased 71.2% over  10 years despite infla- 
tion.  (INTELSAT  Release  79-17-1) 

Ju ly   13: Pioneer 10 had  become  the first U.S.  craft to fly beyond  Mars,  %day 
reported.  An  Associated Press  (AP) story said Pioneer IO, now  2 billion miles 
from home,  had  crossed the orbit of  Uranus July  11  on  its way  out of  the solar 
system. Launched  in March  1972, Pioneer IO sent back the first close-up views 
of  Jupiter  21  months  later  and  continued  to  transmit  “valuable  data  about 
unexplored  space  and  the  outer  solar  system,”  said  NASA  spokesman  Duke 
Reiber.  A   spokesman for  TRW,  which  built  both  Pioneer  10 and  Pioneer  11, 
said  Pioneer  10  would  cross  Pluto’s  orbit  in   1987.  ( E d u y ,  July  13/79,  1OA; 
NASA  Release  79-84) 

The  House  Committee on  Science and Technology announced that  it would 
hold  a joint  hearing  July  19-20  with  the  House  Select Committee  on  Aging 
on  space technology applications for the elderly and handicapped, to mark  the 
10th anniversary of  the  first Moon  walk.  Committee chairman  Rep.  Don  Fu- 
qua  (D-F la .)   said that the hearings  would  emphasize the  importance of  space 
program  spinoffs in  solving  problems  here  on  Earth.  NASA  would  release a 

43 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JULY   1979 

report  “Technologies  for  the  Handicapped  and Aged”  on  innovations  such  as 
a  lunar-gravity  simulator  to  speed  rehabilitation  therapy;  a  voice-controlled 
vehicle  for  paraplegics  that  could  pick  up  packages,  open  doors,  and  handle 
eating  utensils;  a  human-tissue  stimulator  to  reduce  chronic  pain;  health- 
monitoring  systems; and  fabrics  to prevent  bedsores.  (H  Rept  Release  96-60) 

Th e   Washington Stur  reported  that  DOD   would  begin  next  week  a  long- 
awaited  fly-off  to  see  who  would  get  a  $2   billion  contract  to  produce  air- 
launched  cruise  missiles.  The   U.S.  Air  Force  said  that  the  missile  was 
“desperately  needed”  to  f i l l   a  gap  i n   the  U.S.  weapons  system  created  by 
President  Carter’s  decision  to  scrap  the  B-l  bomber.  Launched  from  a  B-52 
flying off  t h e  coast  of  California,  the  missiles would  fly  to  a  target  southwest 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  U t a h .   W Srur,  Ju ly   13/79, A-4.) 

July  15:  Astronauts  interviewed  in  Las  Vegas,  Nev.,  on  the  eve  of  an Apollo 
I1   10th anniversary  commemoration  noted  the lack of  funding and  support  for 
the  space program  on  the part  of  the  U.S.  government.  James McDivitt,  who 
commanded  Apollo  9,  said  that  he  foresaw  nothing  like  the  Apollo  program 
coming  along.  Ron  Evans,  command-module  pilot  for  Apollo  17,  said  that 
spectacular  space events  were  not  in  the  cards  for  the  next  2 0  years.  Charles 
Duke,  10th  man  to  walk  on  the  Moon;  AI  Worden,  Apollo  15  command- 
module pilot;  and  Dick  Gordon,  Apollo  12  command-module  pilot,  said  the 
Shuttle  system was  not  as  safe  as  craft  used  in  previous  manned  programs,  as  
“Congress  isn’t ready  to give NASA  the  money  it  needs.”  (Today, July  15/79, 
20A;  W Post,  July  15/79, A-4;  P ln q ,   July  17/79,  11) 

J u l y   16:  ComSatCorp  announced  the  official  beginning  of  the  new  Interna- 
tional  Maritime  Satellite  Organization,  INMARSAT,  to  operate  a  global 
maritime communications  network.  ComSatCorp would  represent  the  United 
States  in  the  new  body.  INMARSAT’s  board ,   which  would  eventually  repre- 
sent  22  member  nations,  had  met  for  t h e   first  time  this  date  at  Brighton, 
England. Th e  new  group would  begin  its  operations  in  the  1980s after  taking 
over  from Marisat  (developed  and  managed  by  ComSatCorp’s wholly  owned 
subsidiary  Comsat General), which  for three  years had  provided  communjca- 
tions  services  to  the  U .S .   Navy  and  commercial  shipping  and  offshore  in- 
dustries.  (ComSatCorp  Release  79-28) 

July  16-21: U .S .  observances of  the  10th anniversary  of  Apollo  Il’s  Moon walk 
included  a  July  16  Library  of  Congress  exhibition  opening  attended  by  only 
one  of  the  Apollo  11  crew:  Michael  Collins,  pilot  of  the  module  that  circled 
the Moon awaiting  the return  of  astronauts Neil  Almstrong and  Edwin Aldrin, 
Jr.,  from  the  surface.  At  the  reception,  James  Webb  (head  of  NASA  during 
Apollo  14  said  that  national  interest  i n   the  space program  had  waned  during 
the  last  decade.  Barry  Jagoda,  former  Carter  advisor  who  had  headed  CBS 
News  coverage  of  Apollo  11,  said  “on  the  way  ol’er  here  I  couldn’t  help  but 

44 

JULY l9i9 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

compare  the  difference  of  the  price  tag  for  the  energy  effort-$142  billion 
stretched over  a  10-year period  versus  the $20  billion  the Apollo program  cost 
us   for  10  years.” 
Th e  Washington Star  said  July  19  that  all  three Apollo  11  astronauts  would 
attend  an  Air  and  Space  Museum  ceremony  the  evening  of  July  20;  on  July 
20 it reported  that the  ceremony had  been  held  at  11  a .m .   A Star editorial July 
2 0  asked  why  the   United  States had  stopped  abruptly  after  taking  “our  first 
steps into the universe,”  concluding  that the United  States was  reluctant to pay 
for  more  space  missions;  assumed  that  “Americans  had  become  bored  by 
space  voyages”;  and  now  leaned  “toward  introspection  and  consumption.” 
Like  the  Star  editorial,  a  Tom  Wolfe  commentary  in  the  July  20  New  York 
Ernes drew  a  parallel  between  the Apollo  program  and  Columbus’s voyages, 
with  support and excitement  at  the beginning and  loss of  public  interest a t  the 
end .  
Th e  July  21  New  York  Times said that  the Air  and Space Museum ceremony 
drew  “some  2,000 people”;  the  “engineers  and managers  and astronauts  who 
made  possible”  the  giant  leap  for  mankind  had  gathered  for  a  “family  reu- 
n i o n .  . .When they  spoke of  the  future,  they  wished  it  somehow  could  recap- 
ture  the  spirit of  the past  they  remembered.”  Later,  the  three  astronauts  took 
copies of  the NASA history,  Chariots of Apollo to the White House;  President 
Carter  said  “We  will  win  energy  security  for  our   nation  in  the  same way  we 
won  the  race  to  the  moon.” 
As  part  of  the  observance,  the  Senate  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science, 
and Transportation and the House Committee on Science and  Technology  held 
a  symposium  July  19:  “Next  Steps  for  Mankind-The  Future  in  Space.” 
Moderated  by  Jules  Bergman  of  ABC  News,  speakers  were  Professor  Car l  
Sagan, Cornel1  University;  Dr.  Noel  Hinners,  Air  and  Space Museum direc- 
tor;  and George  Jeffs,  president  of  Rockwell  International’s aerospace opera- 
tions.  A  NASA  release  had  recalled  events  of  the Apollo  11  launch  July  16, 
1969,  and  an  MSFC   release  announced  a  nine-day  observance  in  Alabama, 
home  of  the  center  and  its  Saturn  V  that made  the mission  possible.  (NASA 
Release 79-74,  79-76; MSFC  Release 79-72; W Star, July  17/79, D-1, D-2 ;  July 
19/79, B-1; July 20/79, A-10,  A-11,  B-2; NY  Times, July 20/79,  A-12, A-25; July 
21/79,  A-1,  A-21;  symp  rept,  Sen  Cte  Comm /H   Comm  Sci,  July  19/79) 

J u l y   18: NASA  announced  it would  test  a modified  U.S.  Air  Force j e t  July  2 0  
a t  DFRC  to  see   if  winglets  @-foot  airfoil  sections)  attached  to  wingtips  of  a 
KC-135 could  improve performance and  save  fuel.  Dr.  Richard T. Whitcomb, 
LaRC’s  inventor-engineer,  had  had  the  idea  of  using  normal  drag  from  a 
wingtip vortex  as lift to improve performance. NASA would vary  the winglets’ 
cant  angle  and  incidence  between  test  flights  to  measure  effects  of  different 
positions;  DFRC  had  already  flown  the  plane  without  winglets  to  obtain 
baseline  measurements  for  comparison.  (NASA  Release  79-94;  DFRC 
Release  27-79) 

45 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1979 

Ju ly   19: The  Library  of  Congress  Science  and  Technology  Division’s  NASA 
support project  issued  two  news  alerts,  the first on a Soviet “space mini  shut- 
tle”  like  the  French  project  Hermes,  reportedly  designed  to  carry  five or  six 
crew  members  (or  the  equivalent  in  cargo)  to  visit  and  replenish  orbital  sta- 
tions.  Th e   vehicle  would  use  a  normal  expendable  Soviet  rocket  for  launch 
and  make  a  gliding  reentry  into  Earth’s  atmosphere.  Th e  translation  pointed 
out  that  the  Soviet concept  differed  from  the  United  States  reusable  Shuttle, 
more  closely  resembling  the  CNES   manned  hypersonic  glider. 
The   second  notice  covered  government  and  CNES   decisions  affecting  the 
scope  and  timing  of  Hermes.  The   French  Council  of  Ministers  on  March  7 
had  approved  a  Hermes   launch  capability  of  seven  tons  to  carry  a  materials- 
processing  program  called Minos,  using  a  space  transport  vehicle  like a mini 
shuttle  to  bring  back  products  made  i n   the  space  factories.  A  Hermes  would 
be   launched  by  the   last  of  five  versions  of  the  Ariane  vehicle;  development 
of  the  Hermes   and  the  Ariane  5  would  take  from  seven  to  eight  years. 
(LC/S&T Alerts  5498,  5499) 

Ju ly   20:  Th e   Washington  Star  reported  that  the  Federal  Communications 
Commission  (FCC) had  voted  to let American Telephone  and Telegraph  Com- 
pany  (ATBrT)  and  GTE  Satellite  Corporation,  operators  of  the  Comstar 
satellite system, integrate their domestic  communications  satellite and ground 
networks.  Before  ihe decision, AT&T  could  use  only  ground  lines  to  transmit 
private  line  communications.  The   FCC   had  put  a  moratorium  on  AT&T  in 
1972 to  keep  it  from cutting  circuit  costs and  further dominating  the telecom- 
munications market; since then, the company  had  bseen  able to use  its satellites 
for  some  phone  service  but  not  for  transmission  of  commercial  private-line 
service. AT&T Comstar craft were currently providing  the U S .  mainland  with 
communications  to  Hawaii,  Puerto  Rico,  and  the  Virgin  Islands. 
FCC   said  AT&T  would  have  to  file rate  schedules  i f   it  operated  a  satellite- 
only  service;  the  company  would  integrate  the  satellites  into  its  “national 
telephone  network,”  the  Washington  Star  said.  American  Satellite  Corpora- 
tion,  which already  had  an operating  satellite,  wanted  the FCC   to  limit ATBIT 
use of  its satellites to services provided  through  separate subsidiaries;  Satellite 
Business Systems had asked FCC  to ensure that AT&T  did not  fund its satellite 
services  with  money  from  telephone  ratepayers.  (IY Star,  July  20179,  E-10) 

Today  newspaper  said  that  representatives  of  Western  Union  and  Hughes 
Aircraft  Company  had  announced  plans  to  launch  Westar  3,  an  $8.3 million 
spacecraft bought  in  1974 as  a ground-based  spare to  supplement Westar 1 and 
Westar 2 ,  launched  in  1974, and now  in  orbit over  the equator  south  of  Dallas 
and  southwest  of  San  Francisco,  respectively.  Western  Union  said  Westar  3 ,  
needed  because  of  increasing  demands  on  the  other  two  satellites,  would  be 
stationed over  the Galapagos  Islands  in   the  Pacific  west  of  Ecuador.  Western 
Union had made  “substantial savings”  in buying  the spacecraft  five years  ago 
when  prices  were  lower:  the  same  item  would  cost  about  $14  million  if  built 

46 

JULY  I979  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

today.  The  firm was holding  electronic parts  for a  fourth Westar in a Delaware 
warehouse.  NASA would launch  Westar 3 on a Delta from  Cape  Canaveral Air 
Force  Station  on  or   about  August  9,  it  said  in  a  release.  (Today, July  20/79, 
16A;  NASA  (press  kit)  Release  79-96) 

July  23:  “Once  again,”  wrote  editor  Robert  Hotz  in  Aviation  Week  &  Space 
Technology  magazine,  “ the   American  public  is  far  ahead  of  its  political 
leadership”  in  grasping  the  significance of  NASA’s  program  of  planetary  ex- 
ploration.  NASA  Headquarters  was  “astounded  by  the  vast  amount  of  un- 
solicited  public  reaction  to  the Viking  and  Voyager  missions,”  in  the  form  of 
17,000  letters  it  received  in  the  first  weeks  after  the  Mars   pictures  reached 
Ear th ;  the  “Voyager flybys of  Jupiter.  . .have aroused  s im i lar  public  interest.” 
In Europe  and Japan,  interest  in U.S.  planetary  exploration was even stronger;’ 
media  coverage  there   “far  surpasses  domestic  interest.”  Hotz  criticized  the  
“penny-wise,  pound-foolish  policy”  that  would  force  NASA  to  use   a  single 
spacecraft  for  fu ture  planetary  missions,  not  the  dual-spacecraft  approach  us- 
ed  through  Voyager.  “Some  day,”  he  added ,   “the  high  pr ice  for  this  folly will 
be   paid  in  spectacular  ‘low  cost’  failures.”  (AvWk ,  July  23/79,  9 )  

July 24 :  NASA announced plans to demonstrate emergency use  of  commercial 
tugboats  a s  auxiliary  fireboats,  by  mounting  lightweight  firefighting  modules 
on  their  decks.  A program  jointly  supported  by  NASA,  the  DOC’S Maritime 
Administration, and the U .S .  Coast Guard had produced the Firefly,  a portable 
f ire  pump   made  by  Aviation Power  Supply  Company,  Burbank,  Ca l if . ,   after 
a  prototype originated by  NASA  for  Coast Guard  use  on  small  patrol  craft, 
based  on   pumps  developed  for  space  liquid  propulsion  systems. 
The  Mar i t ime  Administration  had  a s  a pr imary  mission  the  improvement  of 
f ire   protection  equipment  in  ports;  studies  had  shown  the  need  for  a  small 
number   of  modules  in  custody  of  the  local  port  authority’s  f ire   serv ice   for 
regular  use in emergency  firefighting.  NASA’s  module used  an aerospace-type 
gas  turb ine  to drive  a  two-stage  pump  providing  7 meters  (22  feet) of  suction 
from   the  nearest  source  of  water  (river,  ocean ,   or  lake)  for  up   to  four  hours  
on   ordinary  diesel  fue l .   Automatic  controls  offered  a  continuous  range  of 
pressures  to  emit  steam,  fog,  or  foam. 
The  city  of  S t .   Louis,  Mo.,  and  the  S t .   Louis  Port  Authority  would  work 
out  arrangements  for  a  series  of  tests,  maneuvers,  and  operations,  including 
public  demonstrations  of  the  module  in  training  and  simulated  emergency 
situations. The  Port Authority  and a contractor  would compile  information  for 
evaluating the concept and would make it available to o ther  port  cities.  (NASA 
Release  79-95;  MSFC   Release  79-77) 

July  25:  FBIS  reported  that  the  Sulyut  6  cosmonauts  were  working  on  ex- 
periments  to  find  out  “whether  tulips  will  flower  in outer  space”  (see During 
M a y ) .  In  five months  of  scientific research,  they  had  found  that  plants  under 
weightless  conditions  generally  would develop only  to a certain  stage:  “tulips 

47 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JULY  I979 

produced  a  nearly  half-meter  (18  inch)  shoot,  yet  the  buds  refused  to  open.” 
Scientists had  decided  that  weightlessness affected  normal  plant  development 
at  the  cellular  level.  The  cosmonauts  would  try  to  verify  this  theory  through 
experiments to  lessen  “the  negative  influence of  wcightlessness”  through  “ar- 
tificial  gravitation”  available  i n   a  “biogravistat,”  il  centrifuge  producing  ac- 
celeration  “equal  to  what  we  experience  on  earth,”’ with  a  rotating  disc con- 
taining  seed  holders  i n   which  plants  would  grow.  The   station  also  kept  a 
s im i l a r   d i s c   w i thou t   ro ta t ion ,   p lan ted   with  the   s am e   s amp l e s ,   and  
simultaneous  tests  were  proceeding  on  the  ground.  First  results  showed  the 
shoots  produced  under  artificial  gravity  were  much  larger  than  those  in 
weightlessness.  Tass  said  the  tests  were  “of  tremendous  importance.”  (FBIS, 
Tass  i n   English,  July  25/79) 

Ju ly  26; NASA  reported  successful demonstration  July  24  of  in-flight  switch 
from  helicopter  mode  to  airplane  mode,  by  a  research  aircraft  combining 
features  of  helicopters  and  conventional  turboprop  airplanes.  Th e   aircraft, 
designed  and  built  by  Bell  Helicopter  Textron  under  a joint  program  of  ARC 
and  the  U.S.  Army  Research  &  Technology  Laboratories,  had  a  7.5-meter 
(25-foot)-diameter rotor  at each wingtip,  each powered  by  a turboprop engine 
and  capable  of  pivoting  from  a  straight-up  to  a  straight-ahead  position. 
Oriented  up,  the  rotors  would  take  the  craft  up  or  down  and  hover  like  a 
helicopter;  rotated  forward,  the  blades  would  function  as  propellers,  and  the 
craft would  fly  like an airplane. The  demonstration  at the Bell plant of  conver- 
sion  from  helicopter  to  airplane mode  proceeded  gradually, with  steady-state 
flight a t  each  5 O  of  nacelle  rotation;  the craft was dlesigned to be  much  quieter 
than  current  helicopters  and  turboprop  planes.  Th e  XV-15  craft  had  logged 
about  15  flight  hours  since  tests  began  in  April,  in  preparation  for  delivery 
to  ARC  for  a  proof-of-concept  flight  program.  (NASA  Release  79-98) 

Ju ly   2 %  ESA  announced  that,  pending  an  INMARSAT  decision  on  the  con- 
figuration  of  its  worldwide  maritime  space  system,  member  states  in  the 
Maritime  European  Communications Satellite  (Miirecs)  program  had  agreed 
at  a  July  26  meeting  in   Paris  to  prefinance  a  third  maritime  communications 
satellite, Marecs-C, under a new arrangement  whereby,  instead  of ESA’s  offer- 
ing  INMARSAT  the Murecs-A and Murecs-B satellites through  Interim  Euro- 
pean  Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), E S P .  would  offer  three Marecs 
satellites directly  to INMARSAT. Th e  agreement  authorized ESA  to  sign with 
the  satellite contractor  for about 45 MAU  (million  accounting unit)  and begin 
arranging  for  a  Pacific-area  ground  station.  (ESA  Release  July  27/79) 

Ju ly   30 ;  NASA  announced  that  Russell  L .   (Rusty)  Schweikart had  resigned 
to  take  a position  with  a  State of  California  commission  on  energy  resources 
that plans  and regulates the state energy system. Schweikart flew the first lunar 
module on Apollo  9 i n   1969 and  was  commander  ‘of the  backup  crew  for  the 
first  Skylab  mission.  In  May  1974  h e  became  director  of  user  affairs  in  the 

48 

JULY  1 9 9  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

Office  of  Applications  a t   NASA  Headquarters;  in  September  1976,  he  was 
named  assistant  for  payload  operations  in  Planning  and  Program  Integration 
and  was  detailed  in  September  1977  to  the  State of  California  as   assistant  to 
the  governor  for  science  and  technology.  (NASA  anno  July  30/79) 

July 31: KSC  reported  that  NASA’s  third  spectacular  of  the  year  would  come 
in  August-September when Pioneer  11  passed  within  13,300 miles  of  Saturn’s 
cloudtops.  Launched  April  5 ,   1973, the craft would  give scientists a first close 
look a t  the giant planet  with  rings and  10 moons.  Data  from Pioneer  11  would 
help them plan Saturn flybys  in  1980-81 of  Voyagers I  and 2 ,  now headed there 
after passing Jupiter  in March and July  this year. Th e  Saturn encounter would 
b e   the   second  planetfall  for  Pioneer  11,  which  had  used  Jupiter’s  gravity  in 
1974  to  put  it  on  a  trajectory  toward  Sa turn .   (KSC  Release  142-79) 

During  July:  Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology noted  a  record  number  of 
USSR  spacecraft  launches  in the first  six months of  1979 compared  to the past 
year:  4 9  launches through  June,  compared with a previous record  of 4 5  in  the 
first half  of  1978. Th e  record  year  for Soviet  launches,  1976, had  seen  9 9  laun- 
ches;  the  1978  total  was  88.  (AvWk, July  9/79,  11) 

FBIS  carried  almost  daily  reports  on  Sulyut  6 cosmonauts  Valery  Ryumin 
and Vladimir Lyakhov, from unloading Progress  7 beginning July  2  to  perfor- 
mance  of  new  metal-combination  experiments  on  the  newly  installed Kristall 
furnace at month‘s  end .  Noting  that the current  crew had broken  the previous 
r e c o r d  of  140 d a y s   i n   s p a c e   o n   or a b o u t   J u l y   14,  th e   Washington Post  p icked  
up  a  Tass  report  that Valery  Ryumin had  achieved another  space first:  h e  had 
added  a  “svelte”  1.5 pounds,  first  weight  gain  in  orbit.  Th e  Soviet  press  at- 
tributed  the  gain  to  “space  meals”  like  those  on   Ear th ,   including  about  70 
i temsL‘mea t   and  diary  products,  confectionery,  fruits,  ju ices   and  spices.”  A 
July  16 story said that  the new  spaceflight record was  “double the overall dura- 
tion  of  manned  expeditions  aboard  American  Skylab.”  Unfolding  a  30-foot- 
wide radiotelescope antenna made of  fine wire petals and pushing  it into space 
was  done  by  July  20,  when  Progress  7undo ck ed   for  reentry.  (FBIS,  Tass  in 
English,  July  2-30179;  W Post,  July  15/79, A-14;  Avwk ,   July  9/79,  20 ;   July 
16/79,  23) 

49 

August 

August  I :   As decided  earlier  in  1979  [see June 301,  NASA took  the  first  steps 
to take A i 5  6 out of geostationary orb i t  and boost it  to a higher altitude to keep 
it from colliding with other spacecraft. On  the evening of July 30, NASA fired 
the  minus-pitch  attitude-control  thruster;  the  firing  was  successful,  but  ATS 
lost  Earth  acquisition  because  of  intermittent  telemetry problems.  In  order  to 
reacquire Ear th ,  the spacecraft was put  i n  a Sun-acquisition mode the  morning 
of  July 31; boost procedures resumed about  1:30 p.m.  and proceeded  as  plann- 
ed ,   with  completion  expected  in  about  30  hours. 
Since  its  May  1974  launch,  the  five-year-old communications  satellite  had 
exceeded  its  planned  lifetime  by  three  years,  but  three  of  its  four  station- 
keeping  thrusters had  failed,  and  the  fourth  was  shaky. GSFC  would  use  the 
remaining  thruster  to  l i f t   ATS  to  a  level  several  hundred  kilometers  higher, 
where  it would  remain  i n   orbit  indefinitely.  (NASA Release 79-81; NASA  D ly  
Actv  Rpt  Aug  1/79) 

NASA  announced  that  it  would  accept  on  an  annual  basis  applications  to 
become Space Shuttle astronauts; the  1979 time for civilian  applications would 
begin  October  1 and  end  December  1.  Successful applicants  would  report  to 
JSC  for a year’s astronaut training,  after which NASA would  choose pilot  and 
mission-specialist  candidates  to  be  assigned  by  the  Astronaut  Office  to  jobs  
that  would  continue to  train  them  in  their  scientific  or  technical  field.  NASA 
now  had  27  selectees,  including  11  scientists,  available  as   Shuttle  crew;  35 
more candidates were in  training  to  qualify  for selection. The  number of  can- 
didates to be  selected in  1980 would  depend on mission  requirements.  (NASA 
Release  79-101;  JSC  Release  79-50) 

NASA  announced  that  JPL   had  selected  TRW’s  Space  Systems  Division, 
Redondo  Beach,  Ca l i f . ,   to  negotiate  a  contract estimated  a t   $80  million  for 
designing,  building,  and  testing  one   of  two  spacecraft  to   explore  the   Sun’s 
polar  regions  in  the   1980s. A  second  spacecraft would  be  developed by  ESA. 
The  solar-polar mission  sponsored jointly by  NASA and ESA would  study the 
Sun ,  cosmic rays,  and magnetic  fields  in uncharted  areas of  the  solar  system. 
The   four-year  mission  would  begin  with  launch  of  both  spacecraft  by  the 
Space Shuttle in  1983; a  gravity-assist  flyby of  Jupiter  in  1986 would  put  the 
craft  over  the  solar  poles  in  1986 and  again  in  1987.  This  would  be  the  first 
mission using spacecraft out of  the plane  in which Earth and other planets o r -  
bit  the  Sun.  J PL   would  manage  the  project  for  NASA’s  Office  of  Space 
Science. The  TRW contract covered the spacecraft system and ground-support 
equipment,  integration  of  the   science payload,  tests  and  launch preparation, 
and  spacecraft-system  support  during  the  mission.  (NASA  Release  79-100) 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

AUGU ST   1979 

FBIS  carried  a  Tass  report  that  “local  monitoring  services”  had  revealed 
launch of  a  “carrier  rocket”  by  the  People’s Republic of  China,  “with  the aim 
of  putting  into  orbit  an  artificial  satellite.”  Th,e  satellite  was  not  orbited 
because  the  carrier  rocket  malfunctioned  and  “fragments  fell  on  the  territory 
of  the PRC,”  the  dispatch  said,  adding  that  this  w . 3 ~  PRC’s  fourth  abortive  at- 
tempt  to  launch  a  sputnik.  (FBIS, Tass  i n   Englirh,  Aug  1/79) 

August 2:  ComSatCorp announced  that  it was considering  a system  to  provide 
subscription  television  service  directly  to  homes  by  satellite.  For  a  monthly 
fee,  the  service  would  offer  programming  over  a  number  of  channels 
simultaneously, broadcast  by  satellite to  small  antennas on  subscribers’ roofs. 
Programming  “without  commercials”  would  include  first-run  movies,  sports 
events,  educational  and cultural  programs,  transmissions  of  data  or  text,  and 
other  formats. Dr. Joseph  V.  Charyk ,   chief  execulive  officer of  ComSatCorp, 
said  technology  for  such  a  system  already  existed  and  was  being  tested  in 
Japan;  Canada  and  the  United  States  had  already  tried  it,  and  ComSatCorp 
had  demonstrated  use  of  Canada’s  CTS  satellite  with  a  ComSat-developed 
antenna.  Th e  new  service could  begin  as early as   1983, but  would  require ap- 
proval  by  the  FCC.  (ComSatCorp  Release  79-32) 

August  3 :  NASA   repor t id   that  LeRC  engineers  had  worked  for  six  years  on 
perfecting a new  power  transmission  system:  the Nasvytis multiroller  traction 
drive,  capable  of  transmitting  high-power  loads  at  high-speed  ratios  without 
using  toothed  gears.  Between  1879 and  1971 about  34 patents had  been  issued 
on  various  fixed-ratio  traction-drive  concepts;  8  of  these  were  issued  to  Dr. 
Algirdis  L .   Nasvytis.  NASA  engineers  working  with  Nasvytis  had  made  key 
design  changes  in  traction-drive  roller  geometries  to  produce  a  test  rig  that 
could  operate  in  a  15-to-1 speed  ratio.  LeRC had  developed  for an  automotive 
gas-turbine engine a similar drive that  could transmit  7 horsepower per pound 
compared  to  conventional  gears  with  about  4  horsepower  per  pound. 
Stuart H .  Loewenthal,  lead  LeRC  engineer  on  tthe  project,  said the  “quiet, 
almost  vibrationless  means  of  transmitting  power  [could  aid  in]  minimizing 
the  noise  pollution  that  now  surrounds  us.”  The   (device would  be  cheaper  to 
make  because  it  needed  no  gear-tooth  design  or  cutting;  it  was  lighter  and 
smaller  than  conventional gearboxes;  it  had  performed  a t  95  %  efficiency  for 
15-to-1  ratios  at  speeds  to  73,000  r pm ,   and  was  more  reliable,  being  less 
susceptible  to  wear  and  breakdown.  (Lewis  RC  Release  79-104) 

August  7:  NASA  reported  that  the  V ik iug  2  lander  cameras  had  photographed 
a new  layer  of  frost on  the Utopia  Planitia  site,  creating  “a  scientific puzzle” 
for  researchers.  In  September  1977,  the  lander  recorded  frost  on  the  surface 
of  Mars during its northern  winter  (one Mars year  and almost two Earth  years 
ago); scientists had explained the frost as  the resulr of a major dust storm, dur- 
ing  which atmospheric particles picked  up moisture that  wound  up as  frost on 

52  

AUGUST   1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

the  surface.  However,  latest  observations  of  Mars  showed  the  atmosphere 
clearer  than  it  had  been  since  the  Vikings  arrived  in  1976,  so  that  the  frost 
could  not  be  explained  as   before.  (NASA  Release  79-107;  J PL   Universe Aug 
17/79,  1) 

MSFC   reported  that  i t   had  delivered  most  of  the  hardware  that  would  be 
needed by  the first Shuttle mission: main engines, external tank,  and solid-fuel 
rocket boosters.  All  three main  engines had  arrived  a t  KSC;  two had been  in- 
stalled,  and  the  third  was  scheduled  for  next  week.  Th e   first  external  pro- 
pellant  tank had  been  barged  to KSC  and  installed  in  the VAB  to  await arrival 
of  Columbia  from  the  processing  facility  nearby.  Flight  hardware  for  two 
solid-fuel  rocket  boosters,  except  for  the  loaded  motor  segments,  had  been 
delivered  to  KSC,  and  the  loaded  parts  were  to  arrive  about  September  20. 
(MSFC  Release  79-82) 

Th e  Washington Star  reported  that  faulty  aluminum  might  have  been  built 
into the  Space Shuttle and  newly  constructed military  and civilian  aircraft.  A 
German  aircraft  f irm ,   Fokker,  had  discovered  the problem  in May; Reynolds 
Aluminum  Company,  the  manufacturer,  told  a  high-level  team  of  officials 
from NASA,  DOD,  and  FAA  that  the  plates might  have  “soft  spots”  because 
they  were  not  cooled  properly  during  fabrication. 
Walter  Williams,  NASA  chief  engineer,  said  that,  until  records  of  the 
disposition  of  the  faulty  aluminum  were  located,  “we  have  to  worry  about 
everything.”  Th e  agency  suspected  that  the  large  external  tank  (which  would 
carry  the Shuttle during  blastoff)  might  contain some  of  the  metal,  as  might 
the  Shuttle  itself,  as  well  as   its  solid-fuel  rocket  engines.  External-tank 
strength was crucial because it bore the weight  of the liquid-oxygen  and liquid- 
hydrogen  fuel under  high  pressure,  as  well  as the  solid-fuel rockets during lif- 
toff.  Spokesmen for Reynolds and the  Pentagon were  “vague about the amount 
of aluminum involved,”  the Star  said, but a n  internal NASA memo said it was 
about  15 million  pounds  of  aluminum  plates.  (W  Star,  Aug  7/79,  1) 

August  9: NASA  launched  Westar 3,  the  last  of  three  craft  built  for Western 
Union  by  Hughes Aircraft,  from ETR  at  8 : 2 0  p.m.  on  a Delta  into a  transfer 
orbit  before  going  into  synchronous  orbit  a t   91-B-W  over  the  equator  south 
of  New  Orleans,  La .   Launch was  53 minutes behind  schedule because of  two 
problems:  a USAF computer a t  ETR  shut down about 4 minutes before liftoff 
and took 37 minutes to correct;  then,  30 seconds before liftoff, a liquid-oxygen 
valve  door   showed  open,  and  several checks  were needed  to  confirm  that  the 
door was  shut before  launch.  McDonnell  Douglas  was  to  get  a million-dollar 
incen t ive   bonu s   fo r   15  s t r a igh t   successfu l   launches .   (NASA  MO R  
M-492-203-79-03  [prelaunch]  Aug  7/79,  [postlaunch]  Oct 25/79;  Today,  Aug 
10/79,  14A; D /SD ,  Aug  13/79, 205;  Aug  17179,233; NASA  Hq  WB Aug 20179) 

53 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

AUGU ST   lmS 

August  10: Enterprise,  the  first  Space Shuttle orbiter built,  began  its  last  trek 
across the United  States from KSC  to  DFRC,  where  “its  flight  log books will 
be closed,”  said the Marshall  Star.  DFRC said the craft, which  served as  pro- 
totype  in  all  Shuttle  tests  to  date,  would  be  trucked  to  Rockwell’s  Palmdale 
facility, where parts would be removed  for additional testing and possibly  used 
in  constructing  future  orbiters. 
Enterprise had  made eight captive and five free-flight approach-and-landing 
tests at DFRC  in  1977; i t  then  was  ferried  to MSFC  for ground  vibration  tests, 
t h e n   to KSC  in April  this  year  to  check out  facilities for  handling  Columbia, 
first  Shuttle  scheduled  for  launch.  JSC  Roundup  later  reported  that  750,000 
people  had  crowded  airports  during  t h e   return  to  California  and  that  Enter- 
prise was a two-day  front-page story  in   area papers  a t  each of  the six stopovers 
and  a  lead  story  on  television  and  radio.  Donald  “Deke”  Slayton,  now  pro- 
gram  manager  for  Shuttle  flight-test  operations,  piloted  the  T-38 chase plane 
flying  with  Enterprise  and  was  spokesman  for  the  Shuttle  program  during 
press briefings.  (DFRC Release 29-79; Marshall Star, Aug  8/79,  1; JSC Roun- 
dup ,   Aug  24/79,  1) 

August  11: Th e  Washington Post  reported  that  India’s “problem-plagued  space 
program”  had  suffered  another  setback  August  10  when  a  seven-story-tall 
launcher, product  of  11  years of  work,  crashed  5 minutes  15  seconds  after  lif- 
toff  and dropped its payload  into  the Bay of  Bengal  300 miles  from the takeoff 
point.  The  failure was  a  real disappointment, following  USSR  launches of  two 
India  satellites,  both  of  which  developed  serious problems:  the  first,  orbited 
in  April  1975,  lost  power  after  a  few  days.  A  much  more  complex  satellite 
launched  in  June  1979  from  a  Soviet  site would  have  mapped  India’s surface 
using  television  cameras  to  record  mineral deposits,  water  reservoirs,  forests, 
and  Himalayan  snowcover;  the  cameras  failed  to  switch  o n ,  and  scientists got 
only  the  data  from  lesser  experiments  on  oceans. 
This  launch  was  India’s first  attempt  to  orbit  its  own  spacecraft  on  its  own 
launcher  from  its  own  site  (the  small  island  of  Sriharikota  north  of  Madras, 
whose  residents  were  moved  to  the  mainland  a s   a  precaution).  Though 
reporters  were  not  allowed  to  attend,  government  cameramen  were  present. 
All  publicity  on  India’s  space  program  discussed  mineral  location  and  o ther  
social uses, but the  Washington Post  noted  the military  element:  India was try- 
ing  to  join  the  “club”  that  included  the  United  ,States, France,  the  Soviet 
Union, China,  and Japan; India had  lost  a border war  with China  in  1962 and 
had  been  a t  war  with  Pakistan  three  times  in  the  past  30 years.  A  rocket  able 
to  orbit  a  spacecraft  could  give  India  intermediate-range  ballistic-missile 
capability; a satellite transmitting television  images of mineral  resources could 
also monitor  troop movements.  The  lost  booster  w,as a  four-stage rocket  with 
solid-propellant  motors  designed  to  orbit  an  88-pound  satellite.  The   launch 
had  been  successful  until  first-stage  burnout;  the  anomaly  had  occurred  in 
second-stage  flight.  (W  Post,  Aug  11/79, A-13) 

54 

AUGUST  lmS 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

The  JSC  Roundup carried  a  report  by  J .M .   Jones,  public  affairs  officer,  on 
the  trip  to Australia  by  four MSFC  employees acting  a s  a Skylab investigating 
team  to check up  on  the path  of  debr is  over an  area 20 miles  wide and  several 
hundred miles  long.  The  team  left Huntsville,  A la . ,   July  13, two days after  the 
midnight  spectacular  that  occurred  a s  the  77-ton Skylab descended  and  broke 
up   over  the  Indian  Ocean.  NASA  needed  interviews  with  eyewitnesses  and 
finders of  the  fragments  to  verify  the  location  of  the  trajectory  and  the  condi- 
tion  and  precise  location  of  the  debr is ,  and  if  possible  to  get  samples  for  ex- 
amination  of  the   effects  on  spacecraft  materials  of  more   than  six  years  of 
exposure. 
Arriving  in Canberra ,  the team held press conferences to explain  the assign- 
ment and assure  finders  that they could  keep any  fragments  they  found,  which 
would  be  returned  if  submitted  for  scientific  study.  At  the  coastal  town  of 
Esperance,  local  groups   similar  to  U .S .   rescue  squads  had  spread  the  word 
and  gathered  about  30  numbered  and  cataloged  specimens  laid  out  in  a 
warehouse  for  examination;  most  of  them  were  “apparently  really  Skylab.” 
The   team  expressed  appreciation  of  the  local  people’s helpfulness.  Going  in- 
land  several hundred  miles  to  the  goldfield  region  where  heavier  pieces  were 
more  probable,  the  team  found  the  people jus t   a s  friendly  and  helpful.  When 
light-plane  flights  over  30  o r   40  miles  of  uninhabited  territory  produced  no 
further  finds,  the  team  returned  with  a  stop a t  Canberra  to  thank  officials  for 
the  “extraordinary  assistance  and  friendliness”  they  had met.  (JSC  Roundup, 
Aug  10179,  3) 

August 16: NASA pronounced  the mission of  international  ultraviolet explorer 
h e  successful:  observatory  performance  had  “substantially  exceeded  design 
and  mission  objectives.”  Gyros  used  on  h e  would  serve  the  Space  Telescope 
(ST);  the  spectrograph  and  cameras  would  influence  the  design  of  those  on  
the ST;  and  operational  software and  guest-observer operations  would provide 
an   experience  base  for  the  ST.  (NASA  MOR   S-868-78-03  [postlaunch]  Aug 
16/79) 

August  21-24:  At  a  NASA  Headquarters  press  conference  on  the  Pioneer  11 
encounter  with  Saturn  expected  about  September  1 ,   reporters  heard  predic- 
tions  of  the  findings  from  Dr.  Thomas  A .   Mu tch ,   associate  administrator  for 
space  science;  Fred   D.  Kochendorfer,  program  manager  for  P ioneer   Sa turn ;  
and Dr.  John Wolfe of  ARC, project  scientist for Pioneer  Sa turn .  A  self-styled 
space exploration buff,  Mutch  recalled  his  experience  with  Viking  lander  im- 
aging  and  the  delight of  a  first  look  at pictures  relayed  from  a  planetary  mis- 
sion.  Kochendorfer  described  the  Pioneer  spacecraft  and  instruments,  ex- 
plaining  how  power was obtained a t  great distances for guidance and  transmis- 
s ion ,   and  lauding  the  Deep  Space  Network’s  remarkable  support  in  getting 
“absolutely  the  most  we  can  wring  out  of  this  [communications]  system.” 
Wolfe  said  that  all  the  experimenters  who  worked  on  the  mission  i n   1969 
were  still alive,  and  only  one had  been  changed  (the principal  investigator  for 

5 5  

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   I979 

infrared,  who  had  t a k e n   a  sabbatical).  He  called  the  media  coverage  of  the 
Pioneer  10 and  Pioneer  11  Jupiter  encounters  in  1973 and  1974  “outstanding.” 
A  plaque  in  the  National  Air  and  Space  Museurn  described  Pioneer  as  “a 
spacecraft  designed  to  fly  by  the  planets  Jupiter  and  Saturn’l-Wolfe  con- 
gratulated the museum on  its  forecast. He  enurneraled the options for imaging, 
explaining how  the Pioneer would  approach  Saturn and  its moons and  how  the 
information  returned  would  assist  the  upcoming  Voyager  encounters. 
A  NASA  release  August  21  said  controllers  a t   ARC  had  ordered  a  “left 
turn”  for  P ioneer   11  to  permit  one-at-a-time  aclivation  of  its  onboard  i n -  
struments.  Images  of  Saturn’s  rings  from  16  million  kilometers  looked  no 
larger  than  a  penny;  by  August  26,  investigators  expected  them  to  be  better 
than  a n y   taken  from   Earth  and  20  times  better  by  September  1 .   (NASA  
Release 79-108  [press k it] ,   79-109;  ARC  Release 79-37;  text,  press  conf ,   Aug 
21/79) 

During  August:  NASA  announced  selection  of  a  number  of  investigators  and 
experiments  for  its  missions. 
-NASA 
selected  24   scientists  to  use  data  from  the  laser  geodynamics 
satellite Lageos  launched  May  4,  1976.  Having  completed  an  initial  phase  of 
settling  into  orbit and  checking  out  its  laser  tracking  system, the  satellite was 
now  ready  to provide mobile  and  f i x e d   receivers  around  the world  with  rang- 
ing  data  on  crustal-plate  motion,  density  distribution  within  the  Ear th ,   and 
polar  motion/Earth  rotation.  Th e  investigators  would  become  part  of  a work- 
ing  group  chaired  by  Dr.  David  Sm i th ,   Lageos  project  scientist  and  were  to 
meet  August  29  and  30   at  GSFC.  Seventeen  investigators  were  from  U.S. 
universities  (six),  private  firms  (five),  or   other  government  agencies  (six); 
others  were  from  France  (four),  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Netherlands,  and 
West  Germany  (one  each) .   (NASA  Release  79-10:2) 
-NASA 
se lec ted   32  research   p ropo s a l s   that  would  use   g loba l  
measurements  of  the  near-Earth  magnetic  field  from  Magsat,  scheduled  for 
launch  in  October.  The   19  U. S.  investigators  represented  universities  (12), 
private  firms  (6),  and  government  agencies  (1).  Th e   13  foreign  investigators 
were from Canada (4), France and Australia (2 each), and Brazil,  India, Italy, 
Japan,  and  the  United  Kingdom  (1  each).  The  6-month  mission  managed  by 
GSFC   would  remedy  shortages  and  discrepanlcies 
i n   data  from  many 
geographic  areas.  (NASA  Release  79-103) 
-NASA  selected  40   scientific  investigations  for  Spacelab/Shuttle  flights 
scheduled  between  1983 and   1985; 33 of  those  ch,osen were  from  the  United 
States, and 7  from  other  nations  (Canada,  France,  Japan ,   and  Belgium)  each 
funding  its  own  experiments.  The   studies,  chosen  from  some 200   responses 
to  a  request  for  proposals,  would  be  on  astronomy,  solar  physics,  upper- 
atmosphere  physics,  space-plasma  physics,  and  high-energy  astrophysics. 
(NASA  Release  79-112) 

56 

AUGUST  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

NASA  announced  a  number  of  personnel  changes. 
-Eldon  D.  Taylor,  formerly  of  the  NASA  Headquarters  Office  of  Space 
Science  and  Applications,  most  recently  assistant  director  of  administration 
for  the NSF   was  approved  by the  president  July  30  as  NASA's  first  inspector 
general.  He  had also been deputy  assistant  administrator  for  resource manage- 
ment  a t   the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)  before  going  to  NSF. 
(NASA  anno  Aug  3/79) 
-Dr.  Lee  R.  Scherer, director  of KSC  since January  1975, would become 
assoc ia te   adm in is tra tor   for   ex terna l   re la t ions   at  NASA  Headquar ters  
September  2 ,   succeeding Arnold  W.  Fru tk in ,  who  retired  June   22 .   Scherer, 
who  retired  in  1964  from   the  Navy  as  a  captain,  was  program  manager  for 
the  lunar   orbiter  manned  spacecraft  while  on  assignment  from   the  Navy  in 
1962 and was director  of DFRC  1971-1975. (NASA Release 79-106; NASA anno  
Aug  8/79) 
-Succeeding  Scherer  a s  KSC  director  would  be  Richard  G.  Sm i th ,   the 
deputy  director  since  1974  of  MSFC  who  had  been  on  detail  to  Headquarters 
a s   deputy  associate  administrator  for  STS  (the  Shuttle  program).  Smith  had 
been  in charge of operations during  the Skylab reentry. At MSFC, he  had  been 
program  manager  for  the  Saturn  5 rocket  engine  that  made  Apollo  possible. 
( W  Post,  Aug  9/79,  A-11;  NASA  anno  Aug  8/79) 
-Dr.  Walter B. Olstad, chief of  space systems division at LaRC since July 
1975, would  become  deputy  associate administrator  for  aeronautics  and  space 
technology  at  NASA  Headquarters  effective  October  1,  succeeding  Dr.  John 
M .  Klineberg, who  became deputy  director  of  LeRC July  1 .  Olstad had  begun 
a s  a research engineer at the NACA  Langley  laboratory i n   1954, working first 
with  transonic  tunnels,  then  in  reentry  physics.  (NASA  Release  79-110) 
-JSC  announced  that Clifford  E .   Charlesworth  had  become  acting  depu-  
ty  director  August  10,  succeeding  Sigurd  A .   Sjoberg,  who  retired  May  18. 
Charlesworth  for  three  years  had  been  deputy  manager of  the Shuttle payload 
integration and development program  office,  responsible for coordinating JSC 
technical  management  and  Shuttle  users.  He   was  deputy  manager  of  the 
Skylab  program  1970-1972, then  manager  of  JSC's  Earth-resources  program 
office.  He  jo ined   JSC  as  a  flight controller  in  1962, working  on  Gemini  and 
Apollo  missions  and  was  one  of  the   flight  directors  during  Apollo  U s  1969 
Moon  landing.  (JSC  Release  79-51) 

Rep.  Don   Fuqua  (D-F la .) ,   cha irman  of  the  House  Committee  on  Science 
and  Technology,  sent  committee  members  a  report  prepared  by  staff  of  a 
review  of  cos t ,   performance,  and  schedule  aspects  of  the  Space  Shuttle pro-  
gram ,   based  on   NASA's  request  for  a  $220-million  addition  to  the  FYSO 
budget  request.  The   staff  director  wrote  that  recommendations  in  the  report 
would,  if  implemented,  improve  budget  requirement  estimating,  program 
cost,  and  schedule  control,  as  well  a s  NASA  communications with  the  com-  
mittee.  (Text,  oversight  rept  Aug  79) 

5 7  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1979 

August  19  saw  the  end  of  the  record-breaking  flight  in  the  Sulyut  6  space 
station of  Soyuz 32 cosmonauts Vladimir  Lyakhov  and Valery  Ryumin, return- 
ed safely  in the Soyuz 34 capsule after  175 days  in !space since launch  February 
25.  FBIS  had  carried  daily  reports  of  their progre:ss. Besides  the  experiments 
i n   materials  processing  (alloys  and  coating  processes)  and  the  intensive 
physical  routines  designed  to  assist  long-term  assignments  in  space,  the crew 
i n  their  last days  in orbit had  worked  with  the KRT-10  radiotelescope  sent last 
month  by  cargo  craft  and  unfurled  in  space  to  study  extraterrestrial  radio 
sources and  nonatmospheric  radioastronomy. As  (early as August  15,  they  had 
begun  to pack  the  return  capsule with  items demonstrating  the  results of  their 
space  stay. 
Difficulty  with  the  radiotelescope  had  presented  another  challenge  to  the 
crew;  upon  completion April  9 of  the  scheduled  scans,  the  antenna was  to  be 
jettisoned,  leaving  the  docking  unit  free.  “Space  sprung  another  surprise,” 
Tass  reported,  when  the  antenna  became  entangled  with  a  projection  on 
Salyut’s  surface.  The   crew  tried  to  free  it  by  “a  minor  j e rk   of  the  station,” 
which  was  not  successful.  A  space  walk  was  already  scheduled  to  check  the 
exterior  of  the  station,  dismantle  outside  scientific  equipment,  and  retrieve 
samples of  materials  exposed  for  a  long  time  to outer  space.  Ground  control 
wanted  to spare  the  cosmonauts  the  stress  of  an  extra  task  in  outer  space,  but 
the  crew  insisted  it  was  the  only  sure  way  to  solve  the  problem. 
On August  15, the crew  in   “full pressure suits”  opened  the hatch, and  flight 
engineer  Ryumin  moved  to  the  attachment  point,  releasing  the  10-meter 
(30-foot)  antenna with  pliers, and  “imparted  the antennae acceleration relative 
to  the  station”  (in  other  words,  pushed  it  away  toward  the  Earth  for  reentry). 
Then ,  Ryumin and  Lyakhov  disassembled  and  brought  in  the micrometeorite 
registration  instruments and  the panels  with  samples of  structural, optical,  in- 
sulation, and  polymer materials,  some  of  which were  in orbit  since Salyut  6‘s 
launch  in  September  1977, others  installed by  the Soyuz  2 9  crew  in  July  1978. 
Total  time of  the  space walk  was  1 hour,  2 3  minutes:  Tass noted  that the  suits, 
“fitted  out with  metal  shielding against cosmic rasdiation  and possible concus- 
sions”  from meteorites,  had  previously  served Kcwalenok and  Ivanchenkov  of 
Soyuz  2 9  and  Grechko  and  Romanenko  of  Soyuz 26.  Th e  cosmonauts  landed 
safely August  19 and appeared to be in the best shape yet:  they  wanted  to  walk 
but  were  not  allowed  to  do   so  immediately,  although  they  did  get  brief  dips 
in  the hotel  swimming pool.  Later  reports praised  the  exercise routine  for  its 
good  effects  on  the  crew,  who  agreed  that  even  longer  flights were  possible. 
(FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Aug  1-25/79;  C SM ,   Aug  14179,  2 ;   N Y   Times, Aug 
16/79, A-19) 

5 8  

September 

September  1-7:  NASA’s  Pioneer  11  had  encountered  Saturn’s  bow  shock 
(where  the  solar  wind-a 
stream  of  electrified particles  from  the  Sun-bent 
around Saturn’s magnetic  field), project  manager  Charles Hall  reported  from 
ARC,  adding that  solar storms during the past few  days had  played havoc with 
Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was  not designed in   1967 to  f ly  to Saturn; that 
mission  arose only  after  a   successful Jupiter  flyby  in   1974,  calling at  first for 
Pioneer  to  fly  through  Saturn’s  rings  on  what  the  Washington Post  called  a  
“kamikaze  mission.”  The  most  dangerous moment  of  the  6.5-year 2-million- 
mile  journey  would  be  crossing  September  1  through  belts  of  unknown 
material  beyond  the  ring  systems  around  Saturn  that  had  been  visible  from 
Earth,  during  which  Pioneer  would  risk  a   potentially  fatal  collision. 
Because  of  intense radiation  (solar-particle interference was  degrading  the 
quality  of  Pioneer  images), mission  controllers at ARC  had  reduced  the data 
transmission rate by  half.  Solar  storms had  occurred  late  in  July  and  in  mid- 
August,  and  high-energy  particles from  the  second  storm had  reached  Saturn 
at  the  same  time  as  slower  particles  from  the  first  storm.  Reducing  the 
transmission  rate  would  diminish  effects of  interference and  also  the  quality 
of  the images. Pioneer  would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring 
system  at  1 0 4  a .m .   EDT,  but  scientists  would  not  know  for  86  minutes 
whether  i t  had  survived  (the time the  signals n e e d e d  to  reach  Earth).  No   one 
knew  the  composition  of  the  2  minute-wide  third  ring;  if  it  consisted  of 
boulders, Pioneer could probably  get past  it safely,  but a  ring  of dust particles 
could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr.  John 
Wolfe  said  chances for  survival were  half  and half;  pictures already  transmit- 
ted  by  Pioneer  were  better  than  any  yet  taken  from  Earth  telescopes. 
The   Washington Post  reported September  1 that  solar  storms had  increased 
the  noise  level  in   space  to  10  times  normal.  In  early  afternoon,  Pioneer  had 
flown  into a   detectable magnetosphere,  showing  that  Saturn  was  surrounded 
by  a  strong and  sizable magnetic  field estimated at 700 to  1,000 times the  size 
of  Earth’s  but  roughly  equivalent  in  strength.  The  N a v   Yurk  Ernes  reported 
September 2  that,  as of  l2:31 p.m.  EDT September 1, Pioneer  ll had  survived 
a   hail  of  fine particles  to  get within  13,000 miles  of  Saturn  for  a  4-hour  first 
encounter. During  the  approach,  scientists were  keeping  watch  on  the  plane 
of  the  visible  rings  through  which  Pioneer  was  descending:  Dr.  James  Van 
Allen  of  the  University  of  Iowa  was  first  to  note  Pioneer’s  approach  to 
“dangerous  ring  debris”  in   its  path.  However,  the  10:30 a .m .   crossing  at  a  
speed of  48,000 mph  had  taken  only  a   second,  though  ARC  had  to  wait  until 
2:02  p.m.  to  learn what  had  happened; when  the radio signals continued past 
that  moment  without  interruption,  “a  cheer  went  up.” 

59 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

SE PTEMBER   I979 

LaRC’s Donald  H .  Humes  said that  Pioneer  I1  might  have had  a  close  call, 
as  the  micrometeoroid  detector  had  registered  two  impacts  during  the  cross- 
ing:  this  was  the  limit  of  the  instrument’s counting  ability, and  more  impacts 
might  actually have occurred .  The  impacts apparently  caused no damage. The 
sharp  rise  i n   radiation  encountered  by  Pioneer  before  it  flew  under  the  rings 
had  fallen  as abruptly  as  i t   rose,  and  by  the  time  Pioneer  was  under  the  rings 
(closer  to  the  planet)  the  radiation  reading  had  disappeared  completely.  Dr. 
John  Simpson of  the University of  Chicago  said  the  rings  were  big  enough  to 
“scour  out”  nearly  all  the  radiation  trapped  by  the  planet’s  magnetic  field. 
(The New   York  Times quoted  D r .   Van  Allen  as  sayjhg  that  the  radiation  count 
while  Pioneer  flew  under  the  rings  was  even  lower  than  while  the  spacecraft 
was  sitting  o n   its  launching  pad  at  Cape  Canaveral,  F l a . ,   6 .5   years  ago. 
Saturn’s radiation, although i t  would be  lethal  to an unprotected human, posed 
no  hazard  to  spacecraft,  Van  Allen  added.) 
After its close approach,  Pioneer  swung behind the planet, out of  radio con- 
tact  for  78  minutes,  during which  its  on-board  instruments  recorded  data  for 
later  transmission.  Upon  reemerging,  the  spacecraft  had  to  cross  the  ring 
plane again  on  its outward  journey;  the outbound  crossing came at 2:32  p .m . ,  
and  controllers  again  had  to  wait  for  indication  that  the  spacecraft  was  safe. 
At  3 : 5 5  p .m .  the  signals affirmed  that  Pioneer  I1   had  survived another cross- 
ing.  This  was  the  last  predicted  hazard  for  the  spacecraft, which  would  con- 
tinue past Saturn to the outer edge of  Earth’s  solar system and enter  interstellar 
space  i n   1993, by  which  time  its  radio  would  no  longer  be  audible. 
Th e   safe  passage  meant  that  Pioneer  could  spend  September  2  and  3 
photographing  Titan  and  measuring  Saturn’s  rings  from  the  dark  side  of  the 
planet; also, that  the two Voyager spacecraft  following Pioneer  could  approach 
without  fear  of  damage.  In  its  two-hour  passage,  besides  recording  impacts, 
Pioneer  had  photographed  a  new  ring  previously  undetected  by  Earth 
telescopes,  called  the  F  ring:  scientists  already  knew  of  four  rings  called  A 
through  D  (in order   of  discovery,  not  location),  three  of  them  bright  enough 
to  be  seen  from  Earth  telescopes,  and  a  fifth  (or E)  ring  had  been  suspected 
close to the A ring  although  Pioneer did  not  report  i t .   Pioneer had  also tracked 
what  might  be   a  new  Saturn  moon  orbiting  about  70,000  miles  out;  some 
thought  it  might  be  a  known  moon,  Janus,  but  i t  was  in  a  position  indicating 
that  it  was  an  entirely  new  satellite that  would  bring  Saturn’s count  to  11,  one 
short  of  Jupiter’s  12. 
Pioneer  11  photos  of  Saturn  showed  dark  blue  and  green  stripes  across  it 
just below  the north  pole;  the colors,  not  so vivid  from Earth,  probably  came 
from  sunlight  scattering  in  upper-atmosphere  clouds.  Jet  streams  like  those 
seen  on  Jupiter  appeared  to  whirl  around  Saturn  at  speeds  of  300  mph. 
Pioneer  images  could  give  a  better  idea  of  the  dimensions  and  composition 
of  the  rings  when  compared  with  Earth-based  ph’otographs. 
In  the  s ix   years  it  had  taken  to  reach  Sa turn ,   Pioneer  11  had  reported  a 
space-particle strike only once every  two months or  so, LaRC’s Humes recall- 
ed .   Once  past  Saturn,  Pioneer  was  to  photograph  Titan  from  about  221,000 

SEPTEMBER  1579 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

miles,  record  its temperature  and atmospheric methane,  and  try  to detect  “life 
chemicals”;  a s  no  life  was  evident  on  Venus o r  Mars,  this  might  be   the  last 
chance to find  extraterrestrial  biology  in the Earth’s solar system.  First  images 
of  Titan  had  shown  a  fuzzy  ball  of  light  indicating  a  stratospheric  layer  of 
orange  smog  with  blue  streaks  that  might  denote  an  atmosphere  beneath  the 
smog and clouds.  The  closest approach  at 2 9 4  p .m .  September 2 was 220,000 
miles,  and  Pioneer  had  taken  the  first pictures  at 260,000 miles.  The  pictures 
would  be   enhanced  by  computer  before  scientists  could  make  detailed 
analysis.  On  September  3,  Pioneer  was  already  more  than  a  million  miles 
from  Sa turn ,  relaying  no   ill  effects  from  the  planet’s rings  o r   radiation  belts. 
Early  on   the  morning  of  September  2 ,   NASA  reported  loss  of  about  two 
hours  of  Titan  data  from  Pioneer  transmissions  to  the  Madrid  station;  ARC 
controllers  did  not  know  whether  the  loss  occurred  between  spacecraft  and 
station  o r  between  Spain  and  the  control  center  about  40 miles  south  of  San 
Francisco.  A  loss  between  spacecraft  and  station  would  be   irretrievable: 
Pioneer  had  only  the one  opportunity  for  Titan observations after  its close ap- 
proach.  It  was  not  sending  images  at  the  time,  but  about  15  minutes  of  a 
CalTech  infrared  sensor’s  readings on  Titan temperature  were  lost.  The  cause 
might  have  been  electrical  storms  in  space  or  on  Ear th ,   o r   passage  of  the 
signals close to the  surface of  the  Sun on their way  to  the  Ear th ,   any  of  which 
would make  it difficult  o r   impossible  for  the  Madrid  station  to  lock  on  to  the 
signals. A  dramatic  difference  in  day-night  Titan temperatures  would  suggest 
a  thin  atmosphere;  a  thicker,  warmer  atmosphere  might  be  more   hospitable 
to   life  forms. 
Project manager Charles Hall  reported Septernbcr 4 that the  T i tan  data loss 
previously  attributed  to radiation  disturbances  was  now  thought  to result  from  
radiofrequency  interference  by  a  Soviet  satellite.  Both  Pioneer  I I   and  three 
USSR  satellites  had been  operating on  a frequency  reserved  for scientific use. 
The  Soviet Union  had twice agreed  to shut down dur ing  Sa turn  encounter, and 
Hall  said NASA had  “no doubt the Soviets would have acted”  if  they had been 
asked;  “we  did  not  request  them  to  turn  off  their  satellite on  Monday,”  U.S. 
scientists  did  not  realize  at  first  that  signals  from  a  recently  launched  Soviet 
satellite  might  interfere  with  reception  of  Pioneer  da ta ,   being  “between  100 
and  1,000  times  stronger  than  the   signals  we  were  receiving  from   our  
spacecraft.” 
Aerospace Da i ly   said  September  6   that  the  three  Soviet  satellites  that  had 
stopped  transmitting  September  1-2  for  the   benefit  of  Pioneer’s  Saturn  flyby 
were  early-warning  satellites  designed  to  detect  U.S.  ballistic  missile  attacks 
on  the  Soviet  Union.  Cosmos 1024, 1109,  and  1124 had  suspended  transmis- 
sions  September  1 and  2  at  NASA’s  request;  however,  no  request  was  made  
regarding  September  3 ,   and  Cosmos  1124  had  operated  a s   usual.  Western 
analysts  questioned,  Aerospace  Da i ly   noted,  “whether  the  U.S.  would  sus- 
pend  communications  with  any  of  is  early-warning  satellites  if  the  Soviets 
made   such  a  request”  dur ing   a  planetary  mission. 
Pioneer  project  officials  told  a  September  6  news  briefing  that  the  loss  of 

61 

A STRONAUT IC S  AND   AERONAUT IC S  

SE PTEMBER   I979 

Titan  data  was  not  the  fault  of  the  Soviet  satellite,  which  was  broadcasting 
before but  not  during  the  lost  transmission.  Poor  data  had  resulted  from  the 
combination  of  solar  storm  and  poor  transmission  from  Madrid.  Some  data 
had  in  fact  reached  ARC,  but  was  so  “noisy”  as  to be  useless.  Scientists said 
the moon  discovered  by  Pioneer was  inside  the  orbit  of  Janus,  previously  the 
innermost known  satellite of  Saturn; the new  ring  (labeled G )  was between  the 
orbits  of  Rhea  and  Titan,  beyond  the  rings  visible  to  Earth  telescopes.  ( N Y  
Times,  Sept  2179,  1;  Sept  3/79,  A-1;  Sept  4179,  C-1;  Sept  7179,  A-I;  W  Post, 
Sept  1179, A-3;  Sept 2/79,  A-I;  Sept  5179,  A-IO;  W S t a r ,  Sept  1/79, A-4;  Sept 
2179, A-1;  Sept 7/79, A-1; AID, Sept 6/79,  17; Today, Sept  1/79, 4 A ;  Sept 2179, 
[A) 
September  6:  NASA  reported  that  an  unmanned  S,oviet Cosmos  satellite to be 
launched  in  mid-September  would  carry  13  experiments  from  the  United 
States  along  with  some from the Soviet  Union and other  countries,  all design- 
ed  to  study  effects  of  weightlessness  on  physiological  processes.  ARC  would 
manage the U.S.  portion  of  the project,  in  which  410 scientists  representing  18 
U.S.  universities  and  research  groups  would  participate. 
Major  payload  would  be  38 white  rats  and  60  fertile  Japanese  quail  eggs, 
scheduled  to  orbit  about  three  weeks.  Th e  Soviet  Union  would  make  a  first 
attempt  to  breed  rats  in  space,  separating males  and  females until  the  second 
flight day; two control sets of  rats on Earth would be housed and fed  like those 
in  space,  one   exposed  to  stresses  such  as  launch  and  reentry  but  not  zero 
gravity.  Three  U.S.  experiments  would  use  material  handcarried  to  Moscow 
a  week  before  launch  and  returned  to  ARC  after  recovery.  (NASA  Release 
79-114;  ARC  Release  79-39) 

Neil E. Goldschmidt, nominated as  secretary of  transportation, told  a Senate 
commerce committee hearing  that  after confirmation  h e  intended to  look  into 
FAA  safety  policies,  the  Washington  Star  reported.  FAA  was  criticized  after 
two major crashes:  the collision over  San Diego  of  a small plane and a jetliner 
that  killed  144 persons  and  the  crash  of  a  DC-10 :let  near  Chicago  that  killed 
273.  Sworn  in  as   a  recess  appointee  in  August,  Goldschmidt  would  require 
confirmation  to  continue  i n   the  position.  ( W  Star,  Sept  6/79,  A-20) 

September 10: JSC reported  on trials of  a Buck Rogers-style maneuvering unit 
designed  for  moving  about  and working  outside  the  Space Shuttle.  Officially 
named  Manned  Maneuvering  Unit  (MMU ) ,   the  device  worn  on  the  back  of 
a  spacesuited  astronaut  would  allow  movement  in  the weightlessness  of  space 
using  nitrogen  gas je ts   to  control  direction. 
Martin  Marietta,  the manufacturer,  had  submitted a prototype  the previous 
week  for  three  months  of  testing  on  different-sized  astronauts  (including 
female candidates)  for  fit  and  mechanical  performance  in  use.  Astronaut  Dr. 
Bruce McCandless  had  successfully  checked  out  the unit’s compatibility with 
the  self-contained  portable life-support system,  wearing  a  spacesuit and back- 

62 

SEPTEMBER  I979 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

ing  into  the  maneuvering  unit  a s  it  would  be  located  in  the  orbiter  cargo  bay, 
“like  backing  into  a  phone  booth  with  a  large knapsack  on  your  back,”  KSC 
would  get  the  first  flight  unit  early  in  1980.  (JSC  Release  79-55) 

September  ll: NASA  declared  the  International  Sun-Ear th  Exp lorer   (ISEE) 
missions  1, 2 ,  and  3 successful. The  international  cooperative effort of  NASA 
and ESA, a s  a jo in t  contribution  to an  international  magnetospheric  study, had 
used  three  spacecraft (two launched  in October  1977, the  third  in August  1978) 
to  measure  Earth’s  magnetosphere  and  the  solar  wind  from  widely  separate 
orbits  to  better  understand  processes  controlling  Earth’s  near-space  environ- 
men t ,  Maximum  value  of  ISEE  stated  in  1977 was  simultaneous  operation  of 
all  three  spacecraft  for  several  solar  rotations;  the  mission  operations  report 
signed  by  Harold  Glaser,  director  of  the  solar  terrestrial  division,  Office  of 
Space  Science,  on  September  5 and  by  Dr.  Thomas  A .   Mu tch ,   associate  ad-  
ministrator  for  space  science,  on  September  9 declared  the mission  a  success 
with respect  to prelaunch mission  objectives.  (NASA MOR S-862-77-01/02/03 
[postlaunch]  Sept  1/79) 

MSFC   reported  that  Industrial  Research  and  Development  magazine  had 
chosen  the  power-factor  controller  invented  by  aerospace  engineer  Frank  J. 
Nola  [see  A&  75,  May  21  a s  one  of  the  “100  most  significant  new  technical 
products marketed  in  1978.” Nola’s  invention could  sense the amount of power 
required by  an electric motor  and automatically vary  the power to provide only 
a s  much a s  actually  needed  at a given time.  NASA  had licensed 26 U.S.  firms 
to  produce  and market the  device; about 3 0  others  had  applied  for  licensing. 
Results  of  MSFC   tests  had  indicated  that,  if  all  electric  typewriters  in  the 
United  States  (for  instance)  were  equipped  with  the  device,  the  energy  saved 
would  equal  that generated  by  2,000  to  3,000 barrels  of  oil  per  day.  Nola  and 
o ther   winners  would  attend  an  awards  banquet  September  20  a t   the  Science 
and  Industry  Museum  in  Chicago,  which  would  display  the  100 products  for 
a  month  afterward.  (MSFC   Release  79-92;  Marshall  Star,  Sept  12/79, 2 )  

September  13:  NASA  said  it  would  jo in   the  Canadian  Department  of  Com-  
munications  and  France’s  CNES   in  a  15-month demonstration  in  1982 of  a 
search-and-rescue  system  to  speed  detection  and  location  of  distress  signals 
by use  of  satellites.  The  three  countries  would set up  ground  stations and  con- 
duct  simulated  search-and-rescue.  A  satellite  in  polar  orb i t   could  cover  the 
globe  every  12 hours,  listening  on   the  emergency  frequencies  used  by  ships 
and  aircraft.  Minutes  after  receiving  an  a ler t ,   ground  computers  could  pin- 
point  its  origin  within  20   kilometers  (13  miles)  and  flash  it  to  coordination 
centers. 
Canada would provide  transponders,  and  France  receiver-processors,  to  fly 
on  NOAA  satellites  in  polar  orb i t ;   the  United  States  would  modify,  fit  with 
antennas,  integrate,  and  launch  the   satellites  and  develop  emergency  beacons 
for  ships  and  aircraft  to  use  with  the  systems.  The   parties  to  the  agreement 

63 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  I979 

were also negotiating  for  cooperation  with  the  Soviet  Union.  (NASA  Release 
79-118) 

September I4: NASA  announced  i t  would  deploy seven  laser  satellite-tracking 
systems  in the United  States  and the Pacific  Ocean as part  of  a global  network 
to extend conventional measurements  of  strain  in  ithe Earth’s  crust and to  seek 
the  causes  of  earthquakes.  The   lasers,  to  be  in  f u l l   operation  by  October, 
would  work  with  microwave  devices  using  signals  from  satellites  and  radio 
stars  to  measure  crustal  movements  and  the  buildup  of  strain. 
Laser  systems  using  corner-cube  reflectors  put  on  the Moon  by  the United 
States  and  t h e  Soviet Union were operating  in Texis, Australia,  and West Ger- 
many;  satellite-laser  systems  were  operating  in  France,  Spain,  Germany, 
Greece, Egypt, England, and the Netherlands.  Thl:  Smithsonian Astrophysical 
Observatory  had  laser  systems  in  Peru ,   Brazil,  and  eastern  Australia.  NASA 
had  joined  NOAA,  the U.S.  Geological  Survey,  NSF,  and the Defense Mapp- 
ing Agency  in a program  using  space technology  to reduce earthquake hazards 
and  possibly  to  develop  a  capability  of  predicl.ing  them.  (NASA  Release 
79-117) 

September  17: In  a  move  “necessary  and  proper  to  achieve  the  objective  of 
national  technical  superiority  through  joint  action  with  U.S.  domestic  con- 
cerns,”  NASA  administrator  Dr. Robert A .   Frosclh  announced  that  the agency 
would offer industry  “equity  partnership ventures”  i n  use of  the Space Shuttle, 
NASA  technical  advice,  data,  equipment,  and  facilities  for  commercial 
purposes. 
NASA  had  set  up  guidelines  to  ease   U.S.  industry  entry  into  an  area  that, 
because of  high  technology and high  economic risk, had traditionally been  left 
to  the  federal  government.  Such  a  government- industry  relationship  would 
combine  industry’s  risk  capital  and  experience with  NASA’s  resources  to  en- 
sure U .S .  leadership  in space processing  of materials.  Areas of  potential  com- 
mercial  interest  included  semiconductors,  infrared  and  nuclear  detectors, 
metallurgy,  microwave  devices,  and  medicine.  (NASA  Release  79-119) 

ESA  announced  that  the  first  stage of  its Ariane  launcher  had undergone  its 
last  ground  qualification  test  September  13; CNES  had  scheduled  the  launch 
phase  to  begin  October  1,  with  first  launch  between  December  8  and  18. 
Aerospatiale  had  shipped  the  flight-qualification  model  from  Le  Havre 
September  15,  bound  for  the  launch  site  at  Kourou,  French  Guiana.  (ESA 
Release  Sept  17/79) 

September  19: The   Washington Star  said that  three je t   planes  in  four  days had 
lost  large parts  while  in  flight:  on  September  15,  a  Boeing  707  passenger  je t  
operated  by  American  Airlines on  a  flight from  Detroit  to  San Francisco had 
dropped  a  wing  flap  into  San  Francisco  Bay;  on  September  17,  a  DC-9 
passenger je t   of  Air  Canada,  60 miles  north  of  Eloston’s  Logan  International 

SEPTEMBER  I 9 i 9  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Airport  en   route  to  Nova  Sco t ia ,   had  dropped  is  tailcone  into  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  from  25,000  feet up.  An American  Airlines  Boeing  cargo je t   had  scat- 
tered  200-pound chunks of  its left wing over Chicago September  18  before lan-  
ding  safely  at  O’Hare  a irpor t .   No  one  had  reported  injuries  from  falling 
debris.  (W  Star,  Sept  19/79, A-9) 

September 20: NASA  launched  the high-energy  astronomy  observatory  Heao 
3 at  1:28 a .m .  EDT  from Cape  Canaveral  Air Force  Station  on  an Atlas Cen-  
taur   into  an  o rb i t   with  492-k i lome ter   apogee,  477-kilometer  per igee ,  
94 .3-m inu te  per iod ,   43.6”  inclination.  I t   was  third  of  a  series  designed  to 
survey  the  sky  for  X-ray  sources,  measure  gamma-ray  flux,  and  define  the 
composition  of  cosmic-ray  nuclei. 
Th e  first Heao,  launched  in  1977 with  a 6-month  design  lifetime,  measured 
and  mapped  X-ray  and  gamma-ray  sources  for  17  months,  reentering  Earth’s 
atmosphere  in  March  1979.  It  had  increased  the  number  of  known  X-ray 
resources  from  350 to  1,500 and  had  discovered  a  new  black-hole  candidate 
a s  well as a dust cloud  enveloping a supercluster of  galaxies.  The  second,  call- 
ed  Einstein,  carrying  the  largest  X-ray  telescope  ever  built,  was  launched 
November  1978 with  a  1-year lifetime  to examine  in  greater detail the  findings 
of  Heao  1. 
Heao  3 carried  a gamma-ray  spectrometer and  experiments on a cosmic-ray 
isotopes  and heavy cosmic-ray  nuclei.  Data  from the  three  observations would 
cast  light  on  the  origins  of  high-energy  radiation  in  space  and  the  formation 
of  elements  and  of  the  universe.  (NASA  Release  79-113;  NASA  MOR 
$432 -79 -03   [prelaunch]  Aug  10/79,  [postlaunch]  Sept 20 /79 ;  prelaunch  sum -  
mary,  Sept  10/79) 

NASA  announced  that  JSC  was  studying  two  ways  to  repair  Space  Shuttle 
tiles  in  orb i t ,   both  requiring  crew  members  to  go  outside  the  Shuttle.  JSC 
d irec tor  Christopher Kraft called  it  “prudent”  to be  ready  for  in-orbit  repairs, 
in case  the tiles did not come  up to specifications in actual  fight:  the thousands 
of heat-resistant  blocks  covering  the underparts  and  sides  of  the orb i ter  might 
be   damaged  at  launch  and  need  patching  before  reentry. 
The   first  idea,  using  an  extendable  boom  carry ing   television  cameras  and 
a platform,  would  relay  images of  a damaged area  into  the  cockpit and  sustain 
a  spacesuited  astronaut making  external  repairs.  The  o ther  concept would use  
a j e t  backpack  to  maneuver  an  astronaut  around  the   orbiter  to  inspect  it  and 
make repairs wherever  necessary.  JSC had  three  studies under way  by  General 
Electric,  Martin  Marietta,  and  McDonnell  Douglas  on  repair  materials  and 
tools  suitable  for  outer  space.  (NASA  Release  79-120;  JSC  Release  79-58) 

September 24 :  KSC  reported  receipt  of  two  experiments  that  would  form  part 
of  OSTA  1, first  Shuttle payload  to  f ly   into  space:  an  imaging  radar  antenna 
and  an  ocean  co lor  experiment.  The  30-foot by  7-foot  imaging  radar  antenna 
would  test the  potential  of  such a  system for geological  use  in mineral  location 

6 5  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  I979 

and  fault  mapping;  the  ocean  color  experiment  would  test  a  technique  for 
mapping  concentration  of  color-producing  phytoplankton  in  the  open  ocean. 
All  seven  OSTA  1  experiments  would  have  Earth-resources  applications. 
Th e   five  others  would  be  an  infrared  radiometer;  a  device  to  measure  air 
pollution  (levels  of  natural  and  synthetically  carbon  dioxide)  i n   the  orbiter’s 
flight  path;  a  system  of  identifying  and  locating  surface  features or  clouds;  a 
dayh igh t   survey  of  thunderstorm  and  lightning;  and  a  study  of  the  amount of 
moisture  needed  for  plant  growth  in  zero  gravity.  (KSC  Release  161-79) 

September 26: FBIS  reported  a Tass announcement  that  the Soviet  Union  had 
launched  a geophysical  rocket  for shortwave  solar-radiation  research. Vertikal 
8 was launched at 6:20 a .m .   Moscow  time  from an unspecified point  i n  Euro- 
pean  Soviet  Union  to  a n   altitude of  505 kilometers.  At  100  kilometers  on  the 
upward  trajectory,  a  high-altitude  astrophysical  probe  carrying  instruments 
from  Poland,  Czechoslovakia,  and  the  Soviet  l ln ion   separated  from  the 
rocket;  a recoverable package  containing measurement  results separated  from 
the  probe  at  95  lulometers  on  the  downward  flight  path  and  launched  by 
parachute.  Tass  said the participating countries woiild  process  the information 
obtained from  the probe. In  an  interview on Moscciw domestic  service,  a Ver- 
tikal  experimenter,  Academician  S .  L.  Mandelshtam,  said  some of  the  equip- 
ment was  unique  and  could  obtain  a  television  image of  the  Sun  in  the  short- 
wave  band,  which  they  had  never  done  before.  Eivaluation  of  the  magnetic 
tapes had  been  “a  weak  point  with  us,”  he  said,  sometimes  requiring  a  year 
or two,  but  must be dealt with  i n   five to  seven months because  “ i t   is  the active 
year of  the  sun.”  (FBIS, Tass  in English, Sept 26/79; Moscow  Dom  Svc, Sept 
26179) 

September  26-Oc tober   3 :   After  a  two-month  delay,  a  100-foot  high  balloon 
with  a  crew  of  four  took  off  Wednesday,  Septernber  26,  from  Tillamook. 
Oreg . ,   to try a nonstop balloon  crossing of  the United  States. Th e  planned  s ix-  
day 229-mile  trip of  the DaVinci  TransAmerica carrying 8,488 pounds of  gear 
under  216,000  cubit  feet  of  helium  had  lasted  out  continuous  westbound  in- 
stead  of  eastbound  winds,  court  battles  between  two  major  television  net- 
works,  and  investigation  by  a  federal  agency,  said  the  Washington Post. 
The   crew  consisted  of  Vera  Simons,  German-born  artist  and  balloon  pilot 
from McLean,  Va.,  who  had  been  planning  the  flight  since  1971; Dr.  Rudolf 
J .   Engelmann,  director  of  the  DaVinci  project  and  an  employee  of  NOAA  a t  
Boulder,  Colo.;  Dr.  Fred  Hyde,  an  eye  surgeon  from  Prairie Village,  Kans.; 
and  Randy  Burch,  a  cameraman  for  NBC  televisbm.  In  August  ABC  televi- 
sion  had  sued  the  group  to  prevent  NBC  from  having  exclusive  coverage of 
the  flight;  the  suit was  thrown  out  of  cour t ,   but  Simons  said  i t   had  upset  her 
and  delayed  flight  preparations. 
The  flight,  originally  called  a blend  of  science and  a r t ,   had  lost  its  science 
aspect two weeks previously  when  NOAA  reclaimed $28,000 of equipment for 
measuring  a ir   pollutants,  ozone  levels,  and  radiation  on  the  cross-country 

66 

SEPTEMBER  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

flight.  NOAA  said  it  had  acted  because  “an  agency  employee”  might  have 
sought  “personal  gain,”  and agency lawyers were investigating any  illegal con-  
flict  of  interest.  Englemann  said  he  knew  of  no  conflict  of  interest,  calling 
charges  against h im   “a  helluva  thing,”  according to  the   Washington Post.  The  
7-Up Company, which put  100 empty containers on board  for distribution after 
the  flight,  would  cover  most  of  the  $250,000  cost.  O ther   sponsors  included 
NBC;  Louisiana  Pacific,  a  wood  and  paper  combine  whose  small  balloons 
DaVinci  would  d rop   for  finders  to  exchange  for  free   trees;  and  camera 
manufacturer  Nikon  Inc. 
The  transparent plastic  balloon  “larger  than  the Goodyear blimp”  had  lifted 
off  at  8:16 a .m .   September  26   into  strong westerly  winds,  rising  300 feet per 
minute and  drifting  a t  about 50 mph  toward the western  slope of  the  Rockies. 
Over  the Teton mountains  of Wyoming  the crew had  to don  oxygen masks and 
stay  4,000  feet  above  the   peaks,  to   escape   downdrafts  that  could  put  the 
balloon  into  an  irreversible drop.  In  this  “most  dangerous”  part  of  the  flight, 
the  crew  found  that  its  9-radio  system was  not  working  and  they  could  com- 
municate only on  a  radiotelephone  with meteorologists  in Massachusetts;  they 
guessed  that  an  antenna  on  the  balloon  had  snagged  in  the  rigging  dur ing  
launch.  The   private  meteorologists  in  New  England  reported  that  crew 
members,  frequently  on  oxygen,  sounded  “strange.  . . not  a s   sharp,  like  hav- 
ing  a  couple  of  drinks”;  they  had  postponed  discussing  plans  until  the  craf t  
descended  to  lower  alti’tudes.  Traveling  a t   between  17,000  and  18,000  feet, 
DaVinci had  gone down  to  about  10,000 feet over Denver,  Co lo . ,  but  dropped 
ballast  to  regain  altitude  east  of  that  city.  More  than  500 miles  south  of  their 
planned route,  the crew  on  Saturday was flying at  1,000 feet over Kansas, hav- 
ing  covered  more   than  1,380 miles  in  4 days.  Governor  John  Carlin  tried  to 
radio  thanks  for  DaVinci’s  visit  “even  if  they  didn’t  intend  to  come.” 
DaVinci  stayed over Kansas  for  2  days,  about  24  hours  behind  schedule  for 
an arrival at Norfolk,  Va.,  or Kitty Hawk,  N.C. The  crew  complained of  small 
planes  flying  close  to  the  balloon:  the  FAA  told  them  to  note  the  registration 
numbers  so  that  the  agency  could  “deal  w i th ’   the  offending  pilots.  (Under 
federal  rules,  balloons-lighter-than-air 
craft-had 
right  of  way  over  all o ther  
aircraft.) 
The  balloon  had   unexpectedly  crossed  the  Mississippi  River  a t   S t .   Lou is ,  
Mo.,  world headquarters  of  the  7-Up Company  that  was ma jor  sponsor  of  the 
flight; officials had thought  the route would b e  50 miles nor th .  Air  traffic con- 
trollers  a t   S t .   Louis’s  Lambert  Field  (11th  busiest  in  the  United  States)  had 
diverted  airline  flights  because  of  the  balloon,  which  had  right  of  way  over 
all  other  aircraft. 
On  its  stray  southward,  DaVinci  set  a  new  long-distance  record  for  balloon 
flight  over  the  United  States:  1,084 miles  a t   Denver,  breaking  a  1,058-mile 
record  set  in  1924.  As  it  sailed  over  Kansas  and  Iowa  in  a  more  northerly 
direction  toward  its  original  course,  it  a lso  passed  the  100-hour mark   to  ap -  
proach  the  137-hour endurance  record  set by  Double  Eagle  I1  in  August  1978 
on   its  transatlantic  crossing.  While  the  crew  ate  its  Sunday  dinner  over 

67 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

SE PTEMBER   1979 

Nebraska  wheatfields,  waiting  for  good  winds,  they  got  a  call  from  Boston: 
Maxie  Anderson,  the  Albuquerque  balloonist  who  had  been  aboard  Double 
Eagle  I1 on  the  first  transatlantic  balloon  trip,  said  “We’re  pulling  for  you.” 
Nearly six days after takeoff,  at  11:56 p.m.  Monday,  October 2 ,  DaVinci was 
forced  down  in  a  northwest  Ohio  bean  field  after  a  thunderstorm  chased  it 
across  Missouri,  Illinois,  and  Indiana,  caught  i t   in  the  dark  (after  11  p .m . ) ,  
and  dumped  snow  and  heavy  rain  into  the  gondolla.  Three  of  the  crew  came 
down  safely, but  Vera  Simons  fractured  her  left  leg.  DaVinci  had  not  broken 
Double  Eagle  11’s  endurance  record  (which  would  have  occurred  a t   4 :23  
a .m . ) ,   but  it  had  achieved  the  longest  overload  wind-borne  balloon  flight, 
2 ,003  miles,  surpassing  the  nearly  1,897 miles  f l o m  65  years  ago  by  a  Euro- 
pean  balloon.  ( W  Po s t ,   Sept 26179, B-1;  Scpt  27/79, A-1;  Sept  30179, A-1;  Oct 
1/79, A-22;  Oct  2/79,  A-I;  Oct  3179,  A-I;  W Star,  Sept  28/79;  Oct  1/79, A-3; 
Oct  2/79,  A-1;  N Y   Times, Oct  3/79,  A-16) 

September  28:  NASA  announced  that  i t   would  launch  the  third  applications 
explorer  mission,  AEM-C,  from  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base  on  a  Scout  on 
o r  about October 29. Called Magsat  (magnetic-field satellite),  the  craft would 
map  E a r th s   magnetic  field  and  record  distribution  of  crustal  anomalies with 
a  resolution  of  350  kilometers,  first  global  vector  measurements  of  the  near- 
Earth  field. Magsat was a cooperative effort of  NASA and the U.S.  Geological 
Survey, which would  use the data to update its magnetic charts.  (NASA MOR  
E-662-79-01  [prelaunch]  Sept  28/79) 

During  September:  Th e   White  House  Office  of  Science  and  Technology 
Policy  announced  that  the United  States  and Japan  had  formally  agreed  to  ex- 
tend  their  research  and  development  cooperation  into  nonenergy  fields.  A 
meeting  i n  Tokyo Scptcmber 20-21 had  issued a U.S.-Japan joint  communique 
recalling  summit  talks  in  May  between  President  Carter  and  Prime  Minister 
Ohira  on  cooperative  efforts  in  basic  and  applied  research;  working  groups 
at  the  September  meeting  had  looked  at  possible  joint  projects  in  areas  such 
as  environment,  health,  and  outer  space  development.  Further  meetings 
would  be  held,  the  next  in  Washington.  (Executive  Office  of  the  President 
release,  no  date) 

NASA  announced  that  a  special  staff  of  consultants appointed  in  May  1979 
to  assess  Shuttle  management  had  submitted  its  report  to  Deputy  Ad- 
ministrator  Dr.  Alan  M .   Lovelace.  The   report  contained  eight major  conclu- 
sions  (and  comments). 

1) When the Shuttle program  began,  NASA managers  took  an  economical ap- 
proach  to  space  transportation.  Subsequent  budgets  challenged  managers  to 
bring  in  a  difficult  technical  program  with  limited  funds. 
-(NASA  originally envisioned a $5.15 billion program, predicting first mann- 
ed  orbital  flight  in  1978.) 

68 

SEPTEMBER  1 5 9  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

2)   Shuttle management  had  achieved  “a  commendable  level  of  accomplish- 
men t .   . .considering  fiscal  constraints  placed  upon  the  program  since  its  in- 
ception.” 
(Though  this  report  necessarily  focused  on  deficiencies,  it  noted  that 
Shuttle-program  personnel  had  individually  and  collectively  achieved a  great 
deal  in  a  large  and  very  complex  program,) 

3 )  Shuttle management,  in  an effort to proceed  toward  completion  even  under 
funding  limitations, had  set up work  schedules demanding more  performance 
than  could  be  delivered. 
(This approach had  resulted  in deferment of  some of  the planned  work  each 
year,  as   funds  required  exceeded  those  available.  When   critical  new  work 
became  necessary  within  a  fiscal  year,  as  technical  problems  came   up,  even 
more   scheduled work  had  to b e  deferred.  This  resulted  in  continual  planning 
adjustments  that  precluded  establishment  of  a  stable baseline  and  led  to  pro- 
gram   inefficiency. 
(Example:  subcontractor work increased or decreased repeatedly as funding 
changed  in  critical  areas  such  a s   tile  manufacturing.  Program  changes  and 
associated up-and-down  expenditure rates had led to termination of experienc- 
ed  contractor  and  subcontractor  personnel,  who  became  unavailable  later 
because  of  aerospace industry  demand.  Th e  subsequent  employment of  inex- 
perienced  personnel  reduced overall  efficiency. Th e  report called  this a major 
cause  for  concern ,   especially  in  the  production  phase  of  the  program,  also, 
costs  due  to  delays  in  solving  technical  problems  had  increased.) 

4 )   Long-range  planning  and  status  reporting  were  lacking:  emphasis was  on  
the  current  fiscal year  with  only  secondary attention  to  work  remaining  to be  
done.  Near-term  planning  took  so  much  attention  that  long-term  impact  of 
deferred  work  was  not  integrated  into  the  budgets. 
(Effective  long-range  planning  requires  clear  understanding  of  what  has 
been  accomplished,  plus  accurate  prediction  of  remaining  work.  Shuttle 
management  faced  budgets  showing unrealistic  costs  of  its  goals,  with  no  ef- 
fective  status-reporting  system.  Most  program  planning  consisted  of  constant 
near-term  replanning  to  count  up  expenditures  in  a  timely  manner,  although 
measuring the work achieved  through these expenditures and estimating work 
still needed were weak. Management tools lacking in some  major Shuttle con- 
tracts,  such  as  cost  reporting  integrated with work measurement,  were useful 
but  did  not  provide  an  automatic  solution. 
(The  only  available  means  of  assessing  even  the  partial  funding  re- 
quirements  of  the  Shuttle  was  an  agencywide  budget  plan  called  POP   [pro- 
gram  operating  plan]  inadequate  for  program  control:  it  appeared  only  twice 
a  year  and  contained  little  pertinent  data  between  July  and  March.  NASA 
needed a reliable way-lending 
itself  to  independent  evaluation-to  know pro- 
gram  baseline  and  status,  with  realistic  cost  and  schedule  projections. 

69 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMHER  1979 

Management  must  overcome  the  cumulative  impact  of  previous  constraints 
and  pressures,  while  making  allowance  for  the  need  to  rely  on  contractor 
input.) 

5 )  Th e  Shuttle  organization  functioned  well  from  a  technical  standpoint  but 
not  in  the  areas  of  schedule  and  budget.  0rganiz.ation needed  strengthening, 
and  two-way  communications  needed  improvement. 
(The original  concept  of  Shuttle organization  was  a  Level  1 program  direc- 
tor  at NASA  Headquarters,  a  Level  2  [integratiori] program  manager  at  JSC, 
and  Level  3  separate  program  offices  at  the  various  centers:  JSC  for  the  or- 
biter; MSFC for the main engine,  external tank,  and  solid-fuel  rocket  booster; 
and KSC  for checkout and  launch.  Prime contractor  support to project offices 
would  be  Level  4. Time  had  altered  the  concept:  the  Headquarters  Level  1 
associate  administrator  had  become  the  de  facto  program  director,  who  re- 
quired  the  directors of  JSC,  MSFC,  and  KSC  to  take  more  part  in  activities 
reporting  to  them;  responsibility  for  funding shifted  from Level  2  to  Level  1. 
This seemed a feasible arrangement, but  the report  said  “none of  the manage- 
ment  levels  in  Rockwell  and  NASA  had  a  good  grasp”  of  undone  work  and 
other  items  needing  completion  before  shipping  Columbia  to  KSC.  In- 
vestigators  said  Level  I  “broad  and  detailed  involvement”  with  technicalities 
meant  less  time  for  cost  and  schedule.  NASA  needed  cost  awareness  “in- 
dependent  of  contractor  input”  and  sensitivity  to  “lower-level  cost  trends.”) 

6 )  Schedule changes were no longer a valid way  to cope with  reduced program 
or  funds; fixed  delivery  schedules and milestones in  the  initial  operating  pro- 
gram  not  yet  achieved  required  a  new  management  approach. 
(Work  schedules  and  budgets  must  allow  for  modifications  required  after 
the first  few  Shuttle flights.  Users must  recognize that  initial operations would 
include development; NASA  should make Shuttle users  aware of  realistic per- 
formance and  schedule  commitments,  with  priority  to  successful  completion 
of  development.) 

7)  Transition  to  the  operational  phase  remained  to  be  worked  ou t ;   manage- 
ment should ensure that current organization alignments for Shuttle operations 
are   appropriate.  Th e  NASA/DOD  interface  needed  clarification. 
(NASA Headquarters  managed  program  operations,  with  operations offices 
at  JSC,  MSFC,  and  KSC;  cooperation  between  the  operations  and  program 
offices was evident, but  transition  from development to operations would need 
work.  Since needs and plans of  the DOD  user  conimunity would  affect NASA 
planning  and  budget,  management  to  forestall  problems  should  maintain 
“high-level  near-term  understanding”  of  DOD  plans.) 

8) The potential  was  high  for  unexpected  technical  problems,  schedule  slips, 
and  cost  growth.  All  program  planning  should  include  appropriate  reserves. 
(Although  the  report  noted  that  some  parts  of  a  total  management-control 

70 

SEPTEMBER  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

and  information  system were in  place and  functioning well,  significant poten- 
tial  for  problems  would  remain  until  deficiencies  cited  in   the  report  were 
corrected.) 
(Shuttle Program Management Assessment rept,  Sept  12/79 [issued to press 
Oct  18/79], HistOfc  fls; NASA  note  to  editors NE79-20;  JSC  Roundup,  Sept 
21/79? 1) 

NASA  reported  that  28-year  employee Dr.  James  J.  Kramer,  Headquarters 
associate  administrator  for  aeronautics  and  space  technology,  would  retire 
September 30.  In  1951 he had  gone to work  for  the NASA  Lewis  center where 
he had  managed  the quiet-engine project and the 260-inch  solid-rocket project 
and  was  an  aeronautical  research  scientist.  He  was  manager  of  the  Head- 
quarters  refan  program   office  1971-1973  and  directed  many  Office  of 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  (OAST)  activities  before  becoming 
associate  administrator  in  October  1977.  (NASA  Release  79-123) 

The   Air  Force  Systems  Command   (AFSC)  Newsreview  reported  that  a 
NASA-USAF  pilotless research  vehicle  called HiMAT  (highly maneuverable 
aircraft  technology)  made  its  first  flight  at  the  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  test 
center.  Purpose  of  the  HiMAT  program  was  to  improve maneuverability  of 
U.S.  fighter craft at  transonic speeds  (700-780 rnph) and  in   air-to-air combat. 
No  other  remotely  piloted vehicle or  aircraft had  the design  features used  on 
HiMAT,  which  would  be  incorporated  into  future  USAF  vehicles  if  suc- 
cessful:  winglets  (airfoils at  the  end  of  each wing)  and  unique  close-coupled 
canards  (small  winglike  surfaces located  c lose   to  the  main  wings)  to  reduce 
a ir   drag,  and  aeroelastic  tailoring  that  originated in  the  early  1970s using  the 
directional  properties  of  graphite  composites  i n   the  wings  and  canards 
(representing  about  2 5%   of  HiMAT’s  total  weight)  to  control  deformations 
under  aerodynamic  loads.  The   first  flight  was  to  test  vehicle  aerodynamics 
during  separation  from  the  carr ier   and  during  approach  and  landing.  Taken 
to  an  altitude of  45,000  feet under  the  right wing  of  a B-52.  HiMAT  flew  for 
22 minutes under  control of  a NASA  research pilot on  the ground  before  lan- 
ding on  skids at a dry  lakebed.  HiMAT was  built by  Rockwell  International’s 
North  Amer ican  Aircraft  Division  under  contract  to  DFRC,  using  concepts 
from the Air Force Flight Dynam ics  Laboratory.  (AFSC  Newsreview, Sept 79, 
6)  

FBIS  continued  its  reports  on  the  experiences  of  cosmonauts  Vladimir 
Lyakhov  and  Valery  Ryumin  during  their  175  days  aboard  Salyut  6  At  a 
Kremlin  ceremony  September 8,  General  Secretary Leonid  Brezhnev  confer- 
red  the  titles  of  heroes of  the  Soviet Union  and  the orders  of  L a i n  and  Gold 
Star;  Lyakhov  also  received  the  title  “Pilot  Cosmonau t   of  the  USSR.”  A  
September 10 report said that they  told  a press conference that the most impor- 
tant  thing about their  flight was  not  the duration but  the volume and diversity 

71 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1979 

of  the  research;  they  also said they  looked  forward to  future  “lengthy  expedi- 
tions.” 
Dr. Konstantin  Feoktistov  told  Soviet  and  foreign journalists of  plans  for  an 
investigation  of  Salyut  6,  which  had  been  in   orbit  for  two  years;  future  use 
would  depend  on   results  of  a  check  of  on-board  systems  (which  would  take 
several months).  A postflight talk with  Feoktistov  m d  A.S. Yeliseyev reported 
that  the big  design difference  i n   Sa lyu t   6 was  the change  to  two  docking  units 
plus  a  new  propulsion  system,  which  made  the  supply  service  possible  and 
enabled  successive crews  to  occupy  the  station:  “in  practical  terms,  we  were 
limited  only  by  the  life of  those  systems.  . .impossible  to  replace  in  flight,” 
Yeliseyev  noted. 
Sulyut  6 saw  17  dockings  and  6  r e f u e l ing   and  produced  6  times  as   much 
work  as previous  stations;  about 80  flight  corrections were performed,  and  3 
space walks  were made.  Fourteen  cosmonauts  had  spent more  than  a  year  on 
the  station.  Without  extensive  repair  and  maintenance,  “the  station would  be 
already  defunct,”  Feoktistov  said.  Breakdowns  that  did  not  affect  the  main 
system  were  the  videotape  recorder,  some control  consoles,  and  communica- 
tions equipment  that had  stopped working. Access  to  items  that had  been  used 
on  the  station  had  proved  important:  a  harmful-contaminants  filter  returned 
from  the  station exhibited  corrosion,  and  the  experts could  have  spent a  long 
time  looking  for  the  answer  without  having  the  actual  filter  to  work  with. 
(FBIS,  Tass  i n   English,  Moscow  Dom  Svc,  Aug  23/79-Sept  5/79) 

R 

October 

October I :  Effective  this  date, A ir  Force Secretary Dr. Hans  Mark  announced 
that  the  U .S .  Air  Force would  realign  its  space  and  missile  systems  research, 
development,  and  acquisition  elements,  establishing  two new  organizations  in 
the AFSC:  Ballistic Missile Office  (BMO) and Space Serv ice  Division  (SSD). 
The  SSD  would  assume  space-related  activities  for  which  SAMSO  (the  U.S. 
Air  Force   space  and  missile  systems  organization)  had  been  responsible, 
realigning  operations  on  the  east  and  west  coasts:  the  Eastern  Space   and 
Missile Center  (ESMC) would be  formed  at Patrick Air  Force Base,  F l a . ,  and 
the   Western  Space   and  Missile  Center  (WSMC)  at  Vandenberg  Air  Force  
Base,  Calif.  These   centers  would  report  through  a  Vandenberg  unit  not  yet 
named.  ESMC   would  include  the  present  Eastern  Test  Range  (ETR) ,   the 
6,555th  aerospace  test  group,  and  6,550th  air  base  wing.  WSMC  would  in- 
clude  the  Western  Test  Range  (WTR)  and  the  6,595th  aerospace  test  wing. 
(AFSC  Newsreview,  Sept  79, 1) 

ESA  reported  that  the  West  German  f irm ,   Dorn ier   System,  leader  of  the 
STAR  industrial  consortium,  would  be  pr ime   contractor  for  a  European 
spacecraft  to  participate  in  the  international  solar-polar  mission  (ISPM),  a 
cooperative  ESA-NASA  pro jec t .   The   contract  would  cover  design,  develop- 
ment,  manufacture,  and  testing,  at  a  cost  of  more   than  47MAU  (million  ac- 
coun t ing   un i t s ,   wo r th   U.S.  $1.2  in  1979).  T h e   I SPM   wou ld   make  
measurements outside the ecliptic plane and observations of  the Sun using  two 
spacecraft,  one  each  from  ESA  and  NASA,  to  be   launched  in  February  1983 
on   the   U.S.  Space   Shuttle.  (ESA  Release  25) 

October 2:  Today reported  launch  of  an  unannounced  classified payload  from  
Cape   Canaveral  Air  Force   Base  on   a  Titan  3C   a t   7:22  a .m .   Monday, 
September  30.  The  craft  was  a  reconnaissance  satellite,  military  sources  said 
later,  and  would  be  used  to  photograph  Soviet  troop  movements.  (Today ,  Oct 
2/79,  SA )  

NASA  reported  it would  speed  up  development  of  the  MMU  to be  built  by 
Mar t in  Marietta  for  astronaut  use   in   inspecting  and  repairing  Space  Shuttle 
insulating  tiles  while  in  orb i t .   The  MMU,  an  improved  version  of  a  gas-jet 
backpack  tested  inside  the  orbiting  Skylab  in  1973-1974,  should  be  fully 
developed by  next August for the second Shuttle flight  in October  1980. NASA 
would  not  consider  further  an  alternate  method  of  tile  inspection  (an  exten- 
dab le  platform  on  a  boom  with  a  television  camera) .   (NASA  Release 79-125) 

73 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1973 

October  5:  MSFC   announced  that  it  had  issued  requests  for  proposals  to 
design  a  25-kilowatt  power  system  to  provide  suplplemental  solar  power  for 
long-duration Shuttle missions or  support free-flying payloads.  In early spring 
of  1980 NASA  would  award  two  or  more parallel  contracts  at  $1  million each 
for  studies  to  be  completed  within  12  months. 
Development would  begin  in  1982; the  system would  fly  its  first mission  in 
1984-1985  attached  to  a  Shuttle orbiter  carrying  a  ,Spacelab, to  provide  addi- 
tional  power  and  attitude  and  heat  control.  Th e  power  system on  this mission 
would  carry an experiments pallet and would be  left in space (after the orbiter 
completed  its mission)  to  power  the  long-duration  experiments  riding  on  the 
pallet.  Luther  E.  Powell,  MSFC  project  manager,  said  the  power  system 
would  be  forerunner  of  future  large  systems  in  space,  such  as  service  plat- 
forms  and  other  unmanned  large  space  structures.  (MSFC   Release  79-103) 

Ocrober  6: FBIS  reported  that  U .S .  scientists  and  (engineers visiting  traclung 
stations,  research  institutes, and  “cosmic centers”  iin  the People’s Republic of 
China  had  seen  their  achievements  in  rockets  and  cosmonautics.  At  one 
center,  the Chinese showed  their  U.S.  counterparts the  latest  “spy  in  the sky” 
satellite planned  for  launch  in  late  1979.  (FBIS, Moscow  to  Asia  in  English, 
Oct  6/79) 

October 8:  KSC  reported  another  step  toward  Spzce  Shuttle  launch:  mating 
of  the first two segments of  the solid-fuel  rocket motors to aft skirt assemblies. 
The  first major element of  the  system, the orbiter,  was  in  the KSC processing 
facility being  prepared  for  launch:  the three main  engines had  been  installed, 
and work  was in progress  on  other items, especially  installation of  the thermal 
protection  tiles.  Th e  second major  element,  the huge  external  tank ,  had been 
delivered  to  KSC  for  checkout  before  being  mated  to  the  rest  of  the  system. 
Th e  third  major  element,  the  two  solid-fuel  rockel  motors  that  would  fire  in 
parallel  with  the  orbiter  engines  a t   liftoff,  had  been  built  in  sections  to  be 
assembled  at  KSC  and  were  designed  for  reuse  after  cleaning,  refurbishing, 
and  reloading. 
Before  the  first  test  flight  in  1980,  the  remaining  tiles  would  be   installed; 
orbiter  systems  checked  ou t ;   remaining  motor  segments  delivered  and  stack- 
ed ;  major elements mated  on  the mobile  launch platform;  assembly  rolled out 
to the launch pad; and three main  engines actually test-fired,  in a final systems 
checkout.  (KSC  Release  174-79) 

October 9: NASA  announced creation  of  a  new  Headquarters  program  office 
called  Space  Transportation  System  Operations,  h!eaded by  an  associate  ad- 
ministrator  not  yet  appointed,  to  be   responsible  for  Shuttle  operations  in- 
cluding  scheduling,  pricing,  launch-service  agreements,  the  Spacelab  pro- 
gram ,   and  expendable  launch  vehicles  (except  Shuttle  upper  stages).  Dr. 
Robert  A .   Frosch  said  the  move  would  centralize  Shuttle  services  in  a  user- 
oriented  organization. 

OCIQBER  lmS 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

The  former Office of  Space Transportation Systems  (STS) was renamed Of- 
fice of  Space Transportation System Acquisition;  John Yardley  would continue 
a s  associate administrator  for STS development  and acquisition,  including  the 
Shuttle  and  its  upper   stages,  associated  ground  facilities  and  equ ipmen t ,  and 
system  improvements.  (NASA  Release  79-127) 

October  10:  NASA  reported  a  prediction  by  NORAD   that  the  Pegasus  2 
spacecraft  assembly  launched  by  NASA  in  May  1965 would  reenter  Earth’s 
atmosphere  about November  5 .  Pegasus 2 ,  one  of  three  satellites  launched  in 
1965  to  gather  micrometeoroid  data  for  use   in  designing  fu ture   spacecraft, 
weighed  considerably  less  at  10,430  kilograms  than  the   70,300-kilogram 
Skylab that  reentered over Australia  in July. The  predicted  descent area  would 
b e  31.7  north  and  south  of  the  equator,  an  area  three-fourths  water.  After  the  
reentry  of  Pegasus 1 and  3  (September  1978  and  August  1969,  respectively), 
no parts of  either  spacecraft were found or recovered.  (NASA Release 79-126) 

October 12: FBIS reported  completion of  the  19-day flight of Cosmos 1129 and 
recovery  of  rats,  insects,  plants,  and  o ther   items  flown  on  it  [see  September 
61.  Tass  said  a  field  laboratory-a 
huge  inflated  shed  made   of  several 
set  up  at  the  landing  site  so  that  “mor-  
hermetically  connected  tents-was 
phologists,  biochemists,  and  physiologists”  could  inspect  the  samples  and  d o  
the  first  research. 
Samples  then went  to the Moscow  Institute of  Medico-Biological  Problems 
where  scientists  from   the  Soviet  Union,  Bulgaria,  Czechoslovakia,  France, 
Hungary,  German  Democratic  Republic,  Poland,  Romania,  and   th e   United 
States  would  make   ear ly   estimates  of  the  results  obtained.  Some   of  the 
materials  would  be   sent  to  laboratories  in  participating  nations.  (FBIS,  Tass 
in  English,  Oct  14/79) 

October  15: NASA  reported  that  scientists  and  engineers  from  five countries 
(Australia,  Canada,  Ind ia ,   Japan ,   and  the   United  States)  had  met  at WFC   to 
compare   techniques  of  gathering  data  on  ozone  in  the  stratosphere.  In- 
struments  in use  worldwide had used  different techniques of measurement  and 
had  never  compared  for  system  e r ro r s   or  o ther   biases.  Th e  jo in t   effort  was 
sponsored  by  the  World  Meteorological  Organization,  FAA,  and  NASA. 
Over  a  14-day  period  beginning  October  21,  the   group  would  perform  20 
rocket-borne experiments to establish  instrument  precision and comparability; 
the   resulting  information  should  define  ozone  variability  dur ing   the  per iod .  
Measuring  instruments would fly on four kinds of  rockets  (Or ion ,  Nike Or ion ,  
Super  Arcas,  Super Loki)  scheduled  to coincide with  orbiting-satellite passes, 
to  compare   rocket  measurements  with  those  from   the  satellites.  Ozone  data 
would  also  come   from  meteorological  rockets  and  balloons  a s  well  as  from 
ground-based  equipment.  (NASA  Release  79-130; WFC   Release  79-17) 

15 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1979 

October  16:  NASA  reported  that  pictures  taken  by  Vbyager 2  i n   July  during 
its trip through  the planet Jupiter’s system had revealed  a new moon  i n  the ring 
plane.  CalTech  researchers  David  Jewitt  and G.  Edward Danielson,  the  latter 
a  member  of  the  Voyager  imaging-science  team,  had  found  a  starlike  object 
in  pictures  of  the  ring  plane  taken  less  then  24   hours  before  the  closest  ap- 
proach  to  Jupiter.  When  exhaustive  search  found  no  star  to  account  for  the 
trace in the photograph, the  searchers examined another higher  resolution  im- 
age  showing  the  same portion  of  the  ring,  trails  of  known  stars,  and  the  same 
unidentified  object.  Th e  presence  of  a  moon  was  shown  by  differing  angles 
and  lengths  of  actual  s tar   trails  compared  with  tbe  trail  left  by  the  object. 
Jewitt  and  Danielson  would  make  a  further  study  of  pictures  taken  four 
months  earlier  by  Voyager I  in  an  effort  to  identify  the  same object.  (NASA 
Release  79-132) 

JSC announced  that  all  Space Shuttle orbiters would  have an optical  landing 
aid  presently  used  by  pilots  of  more  than  20  U.S.  and  foreign commercial  and 
military  aircraft.  Rockwell  International,  prime  contractor  for  the  Shuttle, 
would  provide for the commander and pilot  of  all orbiters a  “head  up”  system 
to project  instantaneous displays  of  spacecraft  speed,  rate of  descent, altitude, 
and  other  critical  flight  factors  on  a  transparent  viewing  glass  located  above 
the cockpit window  to be  pulled  down  like the sun visor of  an automobile. Th e  
system  would  be  placed  on  Columbia  i n   time  for  i.he  first  operational  flight, 
expected  early  in  1981 after completion of  the  flight-test program,  and in  JSC 
simulators  and  trainers.  (JSC  Release  79-64) 

October  18:  Th e  N e w   Ynrk  Times  said  that  Dr.  Tlhomas  A .   Mutch,  NASA’s 
associate administrator  for  space science, had  told a  House subcommittee that 
problems with  the  Space Shuttle would  delay  flight  of  the Galileo mission  for 
two years.  NASA  now  planned  to launch the mission  i n   1984 in  two parts: one 
Shuttle flight  would  take  a  Galileo  orbiter  into  Earth  orbit  for  launch  toward 
Jupiter, and another Shuttle flight would  take another spacecraft  for launch in- 
to  the  atmosphere of  Jupiter  carrying  instruments  to  record  its  composition. 
Earlier mission plans were  for a  1982 Shuttle launch carrying a  single Galileo 
package  including orbiter and  Jupiter  probe;  the change would  add more  than 
$184  million  to  the  cost  of  the  project,  previously  estimated  at  about  $450 
million. 
NASA  had  had  problems not  only  with  the  Shuttle  insulating  tiles  but  also 
with  the rocket  engines. An  improved  engine was to be standard after the  first 
test flights. Angelo  Guastaferro, NASA’s head of  planetary programs,  said  that 
the 4,600-pound Galileo spacecraft would be too heavy  for the Shuttle to carry 
into  Earth  orbit  without  the  improved  engines.  ( N Y  Times, Oct  18/79, A-15) 

ESA  reported  a  fifth  Japan/ESA  meeting  October  15-17  in  Paris,  with  Roy 
Gibson,  ESA  director  genera l ,   and  N .   Kozu,  of  Japan’s  science  and 
technology  agency,  leading the delegations.  In  several  working-group sessions 

76 

OCTOBER 1979 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

the  parties  reviewed  continuing  exchange  of  information  on   use   of  com- 
munications  satellites;  acquiring  data  from  each  other’s  remote-sensing 
satellites; flying Japanese scientific instruments on Spacelab launches;  mutual 
use  of  Japan  and  ESA  tracking  stations;  and  using  Spacelab  for  research  in 
materials  and  life  science.  A  sixth  meeting  was  set  for  Tokyo  in  1980.  (ESA 
Info  Bltn  26)  
ESA  reported  a design  review  of  the  Marecs  project  October  9-10  with  the 
pr ime  contractor,  British  Aerospace,  after  which  the  agency  approved  a  start 
on  satellite  assembly  so  that  a  flight  unit  would  be   ready  for  launch  by  the 
Ar iane   LO4  vehicle.  (ESA  Info  Bltn  27) 

October  20:  FBIS  carr ied   a  Tass  report  that  U.S.  and  USSR  scientists  had 
agreed  on   jo in t   research  headed  by  Moscow  University  and  CalTech  on 
gravitational  waves.  The  agreement  covered development  of  extrasensitive  in- 
struments and of  laboratories  insulated  against acoustic and  seismic noises,  as 
well  a s   coordinating  simultaneous  measurements  taken  a t   two  widely 
separated  laboratories,  in  Los  Angeles  and  in  Moscow.  Soviet  physicists 
would use cryogenic  electronic  devices;  the United States would develop  laser 
systems to  record  small-scale oscillations.  (FBIS,  Tass in  English,  Oct 20/79) 

October 22: NASA  held a press conference on  the launch  of Magsat,  schedul- 
ed  for  the  end of  the month  from  the WTR .  Pitt  Thome ,  director  of  space and 
terrestrial  applications,  described  the  mission  a s   an  effort  to  obtain  a  global 
picture  of  Earth’s  magnetic  field,  data  previously  available  mostly  from 
ground  o r   aerial  surveys  a n d   therefore  both  fragmen tary   and   unreliable.  A 
series  of  satellites  (POGO) in  the  1960s  and  1970s had  done   some  magnetic 
mapping,  and   this  would  be  the  first  update  of  that  information,  used  for 
navigation  and  for  locating  natural  resources.  Magsat  would carry  both  scalar 
and  vector  magnetometers,  so  that  it  could  measure  not  only  the  extent  but 
a lso   the  direction  of  magnetic  forces  in  Earth‘s  crus t .   Variations  in  the  data 
from  those  in  previous  studies would a lso  shed  light on  tectonic  plate  motion, 
the constant  though  small movement  of  rigid  plates  forming  the  Earth’s crus t .  
Th e  project  scientist, Dr.  Robert  A .   Langel  of  GSFC  and John Denoyer  of  the 
U.S.  Geological Survey  described  potential  use  of  the  Magsat  data.  Denoyer 
said he  had been  in  southeast Asia  recently  with officials  interested  in oil pro- 
specting,  who  would  use  the  data  in  the  next  few  years  to  look  for  petroleum 
a s   well  a s   minerals.  (NASA  Release  79-129  (press  kit);  briefing  text,  Oct 
22/79) 

October  23:  MSFC   reported  the  launch  at  7:40  a .m .   CDT  October  17  from  
White Sands Missile Range, N .M . ,  of  the sixth  in a series of  space-processing 
applications  rockets  (SPAR)  carrying  four  experiments  to  be  performed  dur-  
ing  five  minutes  of  near  weightlessness  in  the  coast  phase  of  the  suborbital 
trajectory.  The  payload  landed  at 6,000  feet  in mountains  50 miles  downrange 

77 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT IC S  

OC IDBER   199  

from  the  launch  site;  on  impact  the  package  tumbled  and  landed  on   a  rock ,  
knocking  a  hole  in  the  side  of  the  container  and  damaging  one  of  the  ex- 
periments.  Th e  payload  would  be  returned  to MSFC   for  disassembly  and  in- 
spection;  two  of  the  experiments  would  be  refurbished  and  reflown.  In- 
vestigators  should begin  forwarding results  of  SPAlR  6  experiments  to  MSFC 
within  two  weeks.  (MSFC  Release  79-113) 

NASA  reported  delivery of  a second experimental turbofan  engine produced 
by  AVCO  Corporation  for  a  program  called  QCGAT  (quiet  clean  general- 
aviation  turbofan) to LeRC for testing.  The  program aimed a t  decreasing noise 
and exhaust emissions while maintaining or  reducing  fuel consumption, com- 
pared  with  present general-aviation turbofans. Th e  first engine i n  the  program 
arrived  at  LeRC  last  winter  from  its  designedbuilder  Garrett  AiResearch; 
results of  tests on that engine  showed  noise  reduction of  about  10 decibels and 
emission  reduction  of  54%   for  carbon  monoxidi:  and  76%   for  unburned 
hydrocarbons. 
Preliminary  AVCO  results  showed  noise-level  reduction  of  a t   least  14 
decibels  compared  to  the  quietest  business  je t   now  in  service,  and  emission 
levels even  lower  than  those  of  the  first engine.  Noise  reduction  in  the  AVCO 
engine  resulted  from  improved  design  of  internal  engine  parts  (using  sound- 
absorbing  materials  to  muffle  noise  from  fan,  compressor,  and  turbine)  and 
reduced  engine-exhaust  velocity.  LeRC  project  manager  G .   Kenneth  Sievers 
said  test  results  from  both  engines  showed  “noise  need  not  be  a  major  con- 
straint’’  on  use  of  turbofan-powered  aircraft  for  general  aviation.  (NASA 
Release  79-137) 

October 24 :  NASA  reported  that  Pioneer  11  was  working  well  on  its way  out 
of  the  solar  system  after  a  successful  flyby  of  Sa turn ,   during  which  i t   found 
two  new  rings  and  possibly  a  new  moon  of  the  planet.  Barring  a  failure,  the 
Pioneer could continue to return  useful  data until  the late  1980s when  it would 
pass  beyond  radio  contact  with  Earth.  Th e   spacecraft  was  built  by  TRW 
Systems  Inc . ,   and  the  project  was  managed  by  ARC  in  California. 
After  a  six-year  trip of  more  than  3.2 billion  kilometers  (2  billion  miles)  in 
space,  Pioneer  11  spent  10  days  photographing  and  measuring  the  ringed 
planet.  Th e  spacecraft  experienced  a t  least  two hits  from  meteroids  above  the 
rings  of  Saturn  and  three  more  hits  below  the  rings;  i t   recorded  no  damage 
from high-velocity  ring particles,  showing that  spacecraft could operate  safely 
near  the  visible  rings.  Major  findings  of  the  flyby  included  a  magnetic  field 
around  Saturn;  analysis  of  the  gravity  field  and  composition  of  the  planet’s 
core ;   radiation  into  space  of  2 .5   times  more  heat  that  Saturn  received  from 
the  Sun ;   and  low  temperatures  on  the  moon  Titan  that  might  remove  the 
possibility  of  life  there.  (NASA  Release  79-135;  ARC  Release  79-42) 

ESA  announced  the  signing  of  an  agreement  in  Vienna  October  17  giving 
Austria  an  associate  membership  for  five  years,  during  which  it  would  take 

7x 

OCIOBER  197y 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

part  in  general  studies of  future  space projects  and  contribute to  the  costs of 
those  studies,  being  represented  on  ESA’s  council  by  no  more   than  two 
delegates.  (ESA  Info  Bltn  29) 

October  25:   NASA  declared  the August  9  launch  of  WESTAR-C  (known  as 
Westur 3  in  orbit)  to  be   satisfactory. The   satellite,  third  of  Western  Union 
Telegraph  Company’s  communications  satellites  to  be  launched  by  NASA, 
was  performing  satisfactorily on  its  station at  91”W over  the  equator.  (NASA 
MOR  M-492-203-79-03  [postlaunch] Oct  25/79) 
NASA  declared satisfactory the January 30 launch for U.S.  Air Force SAM- 
SO  of  the  SCATHA  mission  into  a  transfer  orbit  from  which  i t   went  into 
operational  mode,  a  controlled  westward  drifting  of  5 ”  per  day  a s   planned. 
(NASA  MOR  M-492-303-79-01  [postlaunch] Oct  25/79) 

MSFC   reported  cancellation of  a Shuttle propulsion-system static test  firing 
October  24  because of  a  hydrogen  leak  in   the  orbiter’s aft  compartment  near 
the  main  engines.  Sensors  detected  hydrogen  in  the  compartment  about  10 
a .m .   during  tanking;  attempts  to  isolate  the  leak  continued  until  3  p.m. 
without  success. Frank Stewart, MSFC  test  manager,  said the leak apparently 
came   from  a  17-inch or  smaller  hydrogen  feed  line  in   the  aft  compartment. 
“It  is  an  inert  area,”  he  said,  “and  if  we  could  have  isolated  it  to  one  of  the 
l ines .  . .disconnected  after  ignition  we  could  have  safely  fired  the  engines.” 
Since  the  exact  source and  cause of  the  leak  could  not  be  established with 
hydrogen  in  the  system,  officials decided  to  postpone  firing,  drain  the  pro- 
pellants, and g ive  engineers access  to  the area  for   additional  checking. Wh i le  
isolation checks  went  on ,   the countdown  continued  through  fuel loading pro- 
cedures;  several tests  of  the main  propulsion  system were conducted,  such as 
inspection  for  ice  and  frost  on  the  external  tank  after  the  fuel  was  loaded. 
Stewart said  the  problem  had  no  connection with  the  main  fuel valve  leak 
that  started an  external  fire during a July  2  test.  This postponement,  he  said, 
should have  “very  little impact  on  ou r   target  date”  for  completing main  pro- 
pulsion  system  tests.  (MSFC  Release  79-116) 

October 29: NASA  reported that DFRC in conjunction with the FAA  was  con- 
ducting tests  with  a  Boeing  747 aircraft to  generate wake  vortices for probing 
by  small  instrumented aircraft.  The   tests,  performed  both  in  a  simulated ap- 
proach  and  in  actual  approaches and  landings, would  try  to  verify  op t imum  
spoiler  arrangements  suggested by  wind-tunnel  tests. 
Wake  vortices,  normally  invisible  turbulent  airflows  that  stream  in  funnel 
shape  from  wingtips  and  flaps  of  aircraft  in  flight,  could  be  hazardous  to 
smaller aircraft; for  this  reason FAA  required spacing of  3  to  6 miles between 
aircraft approaching terminals for landing,  to  allow  time  for  vortices to break 
up.  However,  the  spacing had  slowed flight operations and  added to delays ex- 
perienced  by  passengers  because of  airport  congestion. To  allow closer  spac- 
ing  of  aircraft  and  reduce  delays,  NASA  had  begun  using  wind-tunnel  and 

79 

A S l ' K O N A U l I C S   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER   lY79 

other experimental techniques to  study  reduction of  strength  i n  wake  vortices; 
one  method  was  partial  deployment  of  wing  spoilers,  normally  used  to 
decrease  l i f t   after  landing.  (NASA  Release  79-140;  DFRC  Release  79-38) 

MSFC  announced  that  NASA  would  buy  from  Rocketdyne  Division, 
Rockwell  International,  12  more main  engines  for  the  Space Shuttle  under  a 
$365.7  million  amendment  of  t h e   original  1972  contract  that  would  bring  its 
value  to  $1,263,215,058. The  original  contract  was  f,or purchase of  27  engines; 
the amendment would bring  t h e  total ordered  to  19. The  amendment  also call- 
ed  for  overhaul  and  test  of  10  engines  to  109%  of  rated  power  level,  plus  a 
second  overhaul  and  flight  test  of  t h e   3  engines  being  used  for  propulsion 
testing. 
Rocketdyne  had  delivered  the  engines  for  the  first  Shuttle  flight,  three 
ground-test engines, and a spare flight engine under the original  1972 contract. 
The  three  flight  engines delivered to KSC  had  been  installed  on Columbia  for 
next  year's  first  spaceflight.  (MSFC  Release  79-11'7) 

October  30:  NASA  announced  that  Space  Shuttle  flights  through  early  1984 
were  almost completely  booked  up  for  payloads,  with  firm  commitments  for 
the  first  37  operational  flights  beginning  in  1981. The  47   payloads  scheduled 
for  those  flights  belonged  to  14  government,  commercial,  and  foreign  users 
and  ranged  from  launches of  ESA's  Spacelab  to  navigation,  communications, 
and weather  satellites.  NASA payloads  would  account  for 3 2%  of  the number; 
DOD, about  15 % ;   and all other users,  about 5 3  % .   Payloads  normally  received 
assignments on  a  first-come  first-servcd basis,  but  missions affecting  national 
security  would  get priority,  as  would  missions  with1  time-critical  launch  win- 
dows  o r   pr ime   scientific  o r   technical  objectives.  Flights  for  which  NASA 
would  be  fully  reimbursed  would  take  precedence  over  routine  scientific  or 
technical  launches. 
Services  available  to  Shuttle  users  would  include: a  basic  launch  with  sup- 
port  and  options  (available  at  extra  cost)  such  as   special  hardware,  tests,  and 
analysis;  use  of  KSC  services  and  facilities; or   special operations  such  a s  ex- 
travchicular  activity  or  longer  duration.  In  addition  to  the  47  large  payloads 
designed  for  the  cargo  bay,  more  than  200  organizations  and  persons  had 
reserved  (at  a  cost of  $3  thousand  to $10  thousand)  space  for  up  to  300  small 
self-contained  payloads  called  getaway  specials  (GAS),  research-and-  
development  packages  weighing  200 pounds  o r   less.  (NASA Release  79-142) 

MSFC  reported  the  successful  conclusion  October  26  of  three  separate 
static-firing  tests of  the Space Shuttle main  engine.  'The three  test engines had 
completed  a  scheduled  total  of  1245  seconds  of  firing  time  in  less  than  12 
hours;  two  engines were  tested  at  NSTL  in   Mississippi;  the  other,  in Califor- 
nia.  One  of  the  pair  tested  in   Mississippi  fired  for  520  seconds,  the  running 
time  needed  for  Shuttle  launch;  the  other  fired  for  665  seconds,  the  time  re- 
quired  for  a  mission  abort.  Both  these  tests  were part  of  a  preliminary  flight 

OCIDBER   lmS 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

certification  series.  NASA  had  postponed  a  510-second  static  test  scheduled 
for  October  24   [see  October  251  because  of  a  faulty  sensor  that  indicated  a 
hydrogen  leak.  (MSFC  Release  79-119) 

October  31:  NASA  announced  a  short-term  research  program  using  the 
human-powered Gossamer Albatross  2 ,   sister  ship of  the  craft  that  flew  over 
the  English  Channel  this  summer,  powered  by  a  pilot  pedaling  a  bicycle-like 
system  to drive the propeller.  The  study,  funded jointly  by  DFRC  and  LaRC, 
would  fly a lightweight data system on the aircraft to measure its stability, con- 
trol,  and  performance characteristics  in human-powered  flight; under  tow  (in 
propeller-off  flight);  and  under  electric-motor  in  steady-state  conditions. 
NASA  would  use  results  of  the  study  in  future low-speed  lightweight aircraft 
flying  at  extreme  altitudes.  (NASA  Release  79-141) 

During  October:  NASA  reported  personnel  actions. 
-Dr.  Lee  R .   Scherer,  associate  administrator  for  external  relations  at 
NASA  Headquarters and  former  director  of  KSC,  received  for  a  second  time 
the agency's  highest  honor,  the distinguished  service medal,  from Dr.  Robert 
A .  Frosch  in a Headquarters ceremony October 4. Scherer previously  receiv- 
ed  NASA's  exceptional  service medal  and  exceptional  scientific  achievement 
medal.  (KSC  Release  169-79) 
-L.  Michael  Weeks,  formerly  with  General  Electric,  would  be  deputy 
associate  administrator  for  Space  Transportation  Systems  Acquisition  under 
John  Yardley  at  Headquarters  effective November  5.  (NASA  Release  79-138; 
NASA  anno Oct  29 /79)  
-The  AP   reported  the  death  October  22   of  Dr.  Hans  Gruene,  69,  KSC 
director of  launch  vehicles  from  1964 to  his  retirement  in  1973. Born  in  Ger-  
many,  he  entered  the  United  States  in  1945 with  a  group  headed  by  Wernher 
von  Braun  assigned  to  launch  V-2  rockets  captured  from  the  German   army. 
He  had  come  to  Cape Canaveral  in  1952 to  set up   a jo in t   long-range  proving 
ground  that  became  the  ETR.  H e   had  concluded  his  career  with  the  four 
Skylab launches  in  1473.  (W  Star, Oct 25/79, B-5; Spaceport N e w s ,  Oct 26/79, 
1) 

81 

November 

November  2 :  NASA  announced  a  new  five-year  development  program  to  re- 
tain  U.S. leadership  in  satellite  communications  and  assigned  LeRC  to  work 
with private  industry,  DOD, and o ther  NASA  centers to launch  a  sophisticated 
communications  satellite  in  1985 o r   1986.  Daniel  J.  Shramo,  LeRC  director 
of  space  applications,  explained  that  NASA  in  1973 had  “phased  down”  its 
work  in  communications  satellite  technology  because of  budget  pressures  and 
“ the  strong capabilities present  in  the private  sector.”  Industry  since then had 
been  improving  antenna  performance,  increasing  the  number  of  circuits  per  
satellite, and decreasing satellite weight per  channel. Technical studies already 
under  way  a t  LeRC should result  in a communications satellite  system capable 
of  transmitting  data  anywhere  regardless  of  population  size  o r   electronic 
sophistication.  (NASA  Release  79-143) 

November  3:  NASA’s  public  affairs  office  reported  that  the  23,000-pound 
Pegasus 2 satellite  reentered  the  Earth’s  atmosphere  at  about  4 :20  p .m .   EST, 
coming  down  in the Atlantic Ocean northwest  of Ascension  Island.  The  “foot- 
print”  of  de scend ingdeb r i s  would  have  spread  over  a  path  60 miles  wide  by 
1,500 miles  long over the  South Atlantic,  the  report  said.  (Hq  PAO,  Nov  3/79) 

November  5 :   The   Washington Post  said  NASA’s  inspector  general  and  the 
DOD  were  investigating  charges  that  Rockwell  International’s  Space  System 
Group  beginning  in   1977 had  hidden  cost  overruns  by  charging  expenses  to 
the  wrong  projects.  Work  on  the  USAF’s  Navstar  satellite  was  charged  to 
NASA’s  Space Shuttle con trac t ,  employees  alleged,  and curren t  costs of  Shut- 
tle development  were charged to  future operations,  in violation of  government 
budget  rules. 
Present  and  former  Rockwell  employees  had  provided  company  documents 
to  back  up   their  statements.  Ray  Sena ,   an   employee  who  had  complained  to 
higher  management  and   to  NASA  officials,  was  formally  suspended  by 
Rockwell.  Company  officials  admitted  an   investigation  was  in  progress  but 
refused  comment.  Although  NASA  learned  of  the   situation  in  1977,  it  only 
recently  admitted  that  the   Shuttle  was  at  least  $500 million  over  budget.  ( W  
Post,  NOV 5/19, A-2) 

The  New  York  Ernes  said President  Car ter  planned  to meet  with  NASA  of- 
ficials  to  review  Shuttle management  and  f ind ing .   The  report  said NASA  ad-  
ministrator  Dr.  Robert A .  Frosch would ask  for more  money to prevent  further 
ser ious  delays  in  Shuttle  production  and  testing.  Estimated  Shuttle  spending 
for  FY81  would  be   $1  billion.  NASA’s  original  estimate  of  Shuttle  cost  was 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER   1979 

$5.15 billion  i n   1971 dollars,  to  include delivery  of  two  of  four of  the planned 
spacecraft;  current  estimate was  $6.1  billion  i n   1W1  dollars,  a  20% increase. 
Rockwell  International  had  delivered only one   fliglht  vehicle,  now  at KSC  for 
preflight  checks and  installation  of  insulating  tiles.  ( N Y  T imes ,  Nov  5/79, A-1) 

NASA  reported  that  a  scheduled  510-second  firing of  the main  Shuttle pro- 
pulsion  system  test  article’s  three-engine  cluster  at  the  National  Space 
Technology  Laboratories  had  failed  November  4 when  a  sensor  detected  ex- 
cessive  pressure  in  the  oxygen  pump  of  the  No.  3  engine  and  shut  the  test 
down  after  9  seconds.  The  No.  1  engine  was  damaged  during  the  cutoff  se- 
quence, when a hydrogen  line ruptured  near the basie  of  the engine nozzle. Ex- 
tent  of  the  damage  was  unknown;  the  engine  would  be  sent  to  Rockwell’s 
California  plant  for  inspection  and  repair. 
MSFC   and  the  contractor  were  investigating  the  failure  and  the  possibility 
of  replacing the damaged article in  the test  stand.  Impact on  Shuttle schedules 
had  not  been  assessed.  Meanwhile,  the  orbiter  Columbia  had  successfully 
passed  a  series of  ‘‘ hot  fire”  tests at KSC  of  the auxiliary  power  units to  steer 
main-engine  nozzles  during  launch  and  to  drive  control  surfaces  during  at- 
mospheric  flight.  The   tests  simulated  ascent  and  descent  phases  of  a  Shuttle 
mission.  Next  milestone  for  Columbia  would  be  an  integrated  test  of  all 
systems.  (NASA  Release  79-146;  MSFC  Release  ‘79-122) 

NASA  declared  successful  t h e  May  4  launch  of  FlfSatCom 2  from  ETR  on 
an  Atlas  Centaur  into a  transfer  orbit.  An  apogee  kick  motor  fired May  6 had 
put  the  spacecraft  into  the  desired  synchronous  orb i t .   All  spacecraft  systems 
were  operating  normally.  John  F.  Yardley  declareid  November  1 that  NASA 
o b j e c t iv e s   had   been   a c c om p l i s h e d .   (NASA  MO R   M-491-202-79-02 
[postlaunch]  Nov  5/79) 

November  7:  NASA  announced  flight demonstrations  of  an  experimental pilot 
advisory  system  for  high-density  uncontrolled  airport  environments  (where 
more  than  half  of  midair  collisions  occur).  Th e   ’WFC  test  program  used  a 
computer-generated  voice  technique  to  send  messages  on   air-traffic  location 
and  headings  every  2 0  seconds,  airport  advisories  every  2  minutes  and  colli- 
sion  warnings  as  necessary.  (NASA  Release  79-145;  WFC   Release  79-18) 

NASA  reported  that,  after  five years  of continuous  service,  Landsat  2  had 
begun  having  difficulty with  its on-board  attitude-control  system  November  5 
and might have to be  retired  like Landsat  1 (launched  in  1972 and serving until 
1977).  In  that  event, Landsut  3 would  be  the  only  Earth-resources  monitor  i n  
orbit  until  Landsat  D’s  launch  i n   1981. Landsat  2’s  design  life  was  only  one 
year,  but  NASA  hoped  it  could  supplement  Landsat  3 coverage  until  1980. 
GSFC  controllers  said the  aging  lubrication  of  a  spacecraft  flywheel gover- 
ning  yaw  motion  might  have  caused  it  to j am ;   they  had  succeeded  in pointing 

84 

NOVEMBER  1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

the so lar  panels at the Sun ,  trying to maintain  attitude until  the  flywheel  could 
be  freed  or  an  alternate  procedure  could  be  tried.  (NASA  Release  79-148) 

November 8: NASA announced that  it and  the ESA had  asked  scientists to pro- 
pose  experiments  for  an  international  mission  to  comets  Halley  and  Tempel 
2 .  The   total journey  would  span  four  years  and  cover  more   than  2.5  billion 
kilometers  (1.6 billion  miles).  A  spacecraft  using  solar-electricity  propulsion 
engines  for  the  first time  in deep  space would  fly past  Halley’s comet  in  1985, 
release  an  instrumented  probe,  and  proceed  to  an  encounter  with  Tempel  2 
in  1988, flying  side by  s ide  with  it  for  a  year  o r  more  on  its  path  around  the  
Sun .  Science objectives  would be to define the chemical-physical  nature of  the  
comets’  nuclei,  of  the  comas,  gases,  and  dust  surrounding  the  nuclei,  and  of 
the  comets’  tails.  As  comets  differ  widely,  NASA  wanted  to make  su re  of  this 
opportunity  to  sample  two  different  types.  (NASA  Release  79-147) 

November  9: NASA  reported  that  JPL  had  awarded  a  16-month $1.2  million 
contract  to  General  Electric’s  Space Division  for  three  dish-shaped  prototype 
units  12 meters  (40  feet)  in  diameter  with  a  sun-tracking  mechanism,  ab le  to 
produce  so lar  energy  for electric power  to  small communities  and  rural  areas .  
J PL   acted  for  DOE   in  the  second  phase  of  a  program  to  develop  a  point- 
focusing  solar  concentrator  that  would  give best  thermal  performance  for  the 
lowest  cos t .   (NASA  Release  79-149) 

NASA  reported  that  LaRC  had  developed  a microwave device under  test  at 
Norfolk  General  Hospital  to  destroy  cancerous  tissue  by  heating  tumor  ce l ls .  
Used  outside  the  body  and  emitting  no  radiation,  the  device  had  already 
demonstrated  that  it  could  locate  tumors  in  14  known  cancer  patients  and  in 
one  patient  had  found  a  cancerous  site  undiscovered  by  conventional  means. 
The  applicator could  sense cancerous  tissues,  hotter  than normal  tissue,  much 
deeper  in  the   body  than  could  infrared  thermography,  limited  to  finding 
tumors  near  the   body  surface.  (NASA  Release  79-150) 

November  11:  FBIS  carr ied   a  story  from   Tokyo  Kyodo  in   English  that  a 
Japanese  fact-finding  mission  to  the  People’s  Republic  of  Ch ina   cited  as 
evidence of  the  PRC’s  “superior  space  technology”  its CSSX-4  rocket  fueled 
by  liquefied  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  ab le  to  carry   up  to  700 kilograms;  Japan’s 
latest could carry  only about  130 kilograms.  As  vehicle  for an  intercontinental 
ballistic  missile (ICBM),  the CSSX-4 could take a 3-megaton  nuclear warhead 
more  than  10,000 kilometers  (6,000 miles),  in  range  of  both  the  United  States 
and  the  Soviet Union.  The  three-stage  rocket,  4 3  meters  long,  and  3 .3  meters 
in  diameter,  reportedly  weighed  about  200  tons.  (FBIS,  Kyodo  in  English, 
Nov  11/79) 

November  15:  NASA  announced  that  tests  of  the  Shuttle’s  main  propulsion 
system would  resume  about December  14.  A  November  4  test  stopped  when 

85 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER   1979 

a  sensor detected overpressure  in  a turbopump and  rupture  of  a hydrogen  line 
damaged  one   of  the  engines.  Upcoming  tests  would  use  a  stub  nozzle  like 
those  used  in  successful  ground  tests  conducted  since April  1978; other  tests 
with  flight  nozzles  would  be  scheduled  later.  (NASA  Release  79-153) 

November 18: Th e  Washington Post reported  that  five states were vying  for the 
Large  Space Telescope  “even  though  it  will  be  300  miles  above  everybody’s 
head.”  The   actual  bone  of  contention  was  the  science  institute  that  would 
direct  use  of  the  unique  orbiting  observatory. One  astronomer  said  the  loca- 
tion  of  the  institute  would  be  “the  astronomical  capital  of  the  world”  for  the 
next  30 years;  it was  “the  biggest  astronomical  prize  to  come along  since  the 
200-inch  was  built  at  F’alomar  for  the   Hale  Observatory.” 
Th e  five  competing  states  were  Maryland,  New  Jersey,  Illinois,  Colorado, 
and  California  (the  University  of  Arizona  and  University  of  New  Mexico, 
where  numerous  ground-based  telescopes  were  already  located,  were  con- 
sidered  “occasional”  contenders).  Competition  for the  institute was so serious 
that  three  of  the competing  groups represented  74 universities:  the  University 
Research  Association  (URA),  with  53;  Associated  Universities,  Inc.  (AUI), 
with  7;  and  the  Association  of  Universities  for  Research  i n   Astronomy 
(AURA),  with  14.  URA  backed  the  Fermilab  outside  Chicago;  AUI  wanted 
it  at  Princeton;  AURA  wanted  it  at  Johns  Hopkin:;  University  i n   Baltimore. 
Princeton boasted  of Einstein’s work  there  for over 20 years.  Hopkins  said  that 
it  had  been  doing  spaceborne  astronomy  for  20  years  and  was  closer  to 
Washington and to GSFC, which  would  track and ccintrol  the Space Telescope. 
NASA  said  it  would  not  decide  for  a  year;  the  Washington Post said  that 
nobody  at  the  agency  would  talk  about  i t .   ( W  Post,  Nov  18179, A-4) 

November  19: NASA  reported  that  failure of  a hydrogen  line  on  the nozzle  of 
a  Shuttle  engine  being  tested  November  4  resulted  from  use  of  improper 
welding  wire  that  “severely  decreased  the  strength of  the weld”  on  a  segment 
of  hydrogen  line  near  the  base  of  the  nozzle.  Rupture  of  the  line  caused  an 
oxygen-rich  combustion  that  damaged  the  test  engine.  Investigators  from 
MSFC and Rockwell  would  check all  similar welds., using  an  oxalic-acid  etch 
to  identify  the  weak  welds  and  would  decide  what  remedial  steps  to  take. 
(NASA  Release  79-157) 

November  20:  President  Carter  designated  the  NOAA  to  manage  all  civilian 
remote  sensing  from   space.  A  space  policy  rcvizw  committee  chaired  by 
Frank  Press  had  assessed  future  U.S.  civilian  remote  sensing  requirements 
and  decided  that  a  single  agency  could  best  handle  operational  satellite  ac- 
tivities. NOAA  had managed three generations of  weather  satellites to prepare 
it  for responsibilities  i n   land  remote sensing as well  as atmosphere and ocean .  
Th e  directive  said the United  States would  continue to  supply Landsat  data  to 
foreign  users; the DOC would  foster private-sector involvement  i n  remote sen- 
sing  and would  coordinate  and  regulate  civil  remole  sensing  through  a  board 

86 

NOVEMBER  1 9 9  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

representing  federal  and  state organizations  including  NASA  and DOD.  (Text, 
Nov  20/79) 

NASA  declared  successful  the  launch  of  Magsa t ,   third  in  the  applications 
explorer  mission  series,  from  WTR October  30,  delayed  for  a day  because  of 
high  winds.  Orb i t   had  351.9-kilometer  apogee,  578.4-kilometer  perigee, 
93.9-minute per iod .  The  sensor boom deployed November  1, and  star cameras  
were  turned   o n   November  2.  Magnetic-field  data  analysis  that  began 
November  3 already  showed substantial differences from  1970s measurements. 
Cesium  cells  on   the  scalar  magnetometer  exhibited  random  interference,  but 
the  60% of  scalar  data  unaffected  was  enough  to  fulfill  mission  objectives. 
(NASA  MOR  E-662-79-01  [postlaunch]  Nov  20/79) 

November  23:  FBIS  reported  from  Tass  that  Soviet  scientists  had  found  no 
pathological  changes  in  animals  that  underwent  weightlessness  on  biosat 
Cosmos 1129 September  25-October  14. The  animals  in orb i t  gained  as much 
weight  a s  o thers  of  their  species  in  the  control  group  on  the  ground.  Lack  of 
gravity  was  also  no  obstacle  to  the  development  of  embryos.  The   tests 
established  that  weightlessness  had  no  effect  on   formation  of  seeds  and 
flowers;  plants  bloomed  in  space,  and  their  seeds  were  obtained  later  on   the 
ground .  Observation  of  biological  material  flown  on  Cosmos 1129 was  conti- 
nuing  at the Moscow  Institute  of  Medico-Biological  Problems,  with  scientists 
of  France   and  the  United  States  participating.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Nov 
23/79) 

November  27:  ESA  announced  that  it  had  scheduled  the  first  test  flight  of  its 
Ar iane  launcher  for December  15 from  Kourou,  French  Gu iana .  Firing  of  an 
Er idan   sounding rocket November  14 had  confirmed  operational  status of  the 
launch  base  and  downrange  stations  in  Brazil  and  on  Ascension  Island.  (ESA 
Info  Bltn  32) 

November 28: NASA said the  launch  of  a FltSatCom  scheduled  for December 
4  had  been  postponed  to  January  1980.  A  leak  in   the  Atlas  vehicle’s  high- 
pressure  pneumatics  system detected dur ing  routine  testing  November  26  was 
traced  to a cracked  sleeve and nut assembly;  defective parts were removed and 
replaced.  Analysis  of  the  sleeve  showed  that  it  had  been  made   from   stainless 
steel  that  did not meet  specifications;  NASA  immediately  began  investigating 
all  similar  sleeves  on  the  launch  vehicle  and  made  changes  a s  necessary.  In- 
vestigation  revealed  that  the  problem  was  more   serious:  o the r  sleeves  located 
in  stock did  not meet  specifications,  and  NASA now  planned  to  check  all  ap-  
propriate  fittings  on   the  launch  vehicle.  (NASA  Release  79-163) 

November  30: NASA  set June  30,  1980, as the  da te  of  the  first  Shuttle launch ,  
depend ing   on   several  milestones:  Co lumb ia   rollout  from   the   orb i ter-  
processing  facility  to  the  vertical-assembly  building  in  late  March  1980; 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER   I979 

rollout  of  the  complete  Shuttle  stack  (orbiter,  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters,  and 
external  tank)  from  the  VAB  to  launch  pad  39A  i n   mid-April;  and  a  flight- 
readiness  (20-second)  firing  of  the  Shuttle’s main  engine  on  the  launch  pad 
in mid-May.  Also needed  to make this schedule was certification of  the Shuttle 
main  engine by  June  30,  1980. Administrator  Dr.  Robert  A .  Frosch  said  that 
“some  time  i n   August  or   September”  would  be  a  much  more  likely  date  as 
unforeseen  problems  could  delay  the  launch.  NASA  planned  nine  unmanned 
launches  in  1980,  eight  of  them  reimbursable  by  other  organizations.  (NASA 
Release  79-162) 

During  November:   NASA  announced  appointment  effective  immediately  of 
Glynn  S.  Lunney,  manager of  JSC’s Shuttle payloa’d and  integration develop- 
ment  program,  as acting  associate  administrator  for  STS operations  at Head- 
quarters.  Lunney would  set up  the new  office that  resulted  from NASA’s  deci- 
sion  to  separate  STS  acquisition  from  operations,  reporting  to  Deputy  Ad- 
ministrator  Dr.  Alan  M .  Lovelace.  Lunney  had been  with  NASA  since  1959, 
serving  at  LeRC  and  LaRC  and  going  to  Houston  when  the  MSFC  was 
created.  There,  he  was  technical  director  of  the  Apollo-Soyuz  test  project 
1972-1975  and  was  deputy  associate  administrator  for  space  flight  at  Head- 
quarters  before  taking  the  position  at  JSC  in  Aug,ust  1977.  (NASA  Release 
79-156;  NASA  anno  Nov  16/79) 
-NASA  announced’appointment  of  A .   Thoinas  Young  as   director  of 
GSFC,  succeeding  Dr.  Robert  Cooper, who  left  gcwernment  service  in  June. 
Young,  deputy  director  of  ARC  since  February  1979,  had  been  with  NASA 
since  1961 and had worked  at LaRC as mission  director  for the Viking mission 
to  Mars  and  mission-definition  manager  for  the  lunar  orbiter  project.  Before 
assignment to ARC,  h e  had  headed the Headquarters Office of  Space Sciences 
planetary  program.  (NASA  Release  79-164;  NASA  anno  Nov  30/79) 
-NASA  announced  that  John  W.  Boyd,  on  detail  as  deputy  director  of 
DFRC since January  1,  would  return January  1,  1980, to  his  post  as  associate 
director  of  ARC.  He   had  begun  working  at  ARC  in  1949 as  an  aeronautical 
engineer,  becoming  research  assistant  to  the  director  of  ARC  in  1966  and 
deputy director  for aeronautics and  flight systems  in  1970, serving i n  that posi- 
tion  until his detail  to  DFRC. He  was named associate director of  ARC  in  July 
1979.  (NASA  anno  Nov  19/79) 
-DFRC  announced  that Robert P.  Johannes would  become  deputy direc- 
tor  of  DFRC,  effective  December  1,  replacing  John W.  Boyd.  Formerly  with 
the  U.S.  Air  Force  Flight  Dynamics  Laboratory,  Johannes  joined  NASA  i n  
1979  and  had  been  director  of  engineering  at  DFRC.  (DFRC  Release  79-40) 

The   Washington  Slur  reported  that  MSFC  engineer  Frank  J.  Nola  had 
received  the  first  Excalibur  award  for  his  invention  of  a device  that  could  cut 
power  consumption  of  electrical  appliances by  30  to 6 0%  [see September  111. 
A  committee  selected  Nola  from  120 nominees  to  receive  the  award,  set  up 
to  honor  the  contributions  of  federal  workers.  ( W  Star,  Nov  30179,  D-1) 

88 

NOVEMBER 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

The   Washington Post  reported  the  death  November  17  of  Dr.  Immanuel 
Velikovsky,  84 ,   Russian-born  author  and  scholar  “whose  theories  of  cosmic 
evolution  unleashed  decades  of  scientific  controversy.”  He   had  come   to  the 
United  States in  1939 and had done the research  for his book  Worlds in Colli- 
sion (1950) at Columbia University Library  in New York. His ideas in this and 
other  books  were  widely  denounced,  but  evidence  gathered  later  by  deep  
space probes  appeared  to  bear  out  some  of  his  predictions.  When  Worlds in 
Collision had  its  72nd  printing  in  1974, Velikovsky  said  he  looked  forward  to 
ultimate  vindication:  “I  have been  proven  correct  too many  times,”  h e  added. 
A  Washington Star editorial  said that,  “however  farfetched  his  theories, he ar-  
rived  at  them  honestly  and  stood  by  them  courageously.”  ( W  Post, Nov  19/79, 
B-7;  W  Star,  Nov  21/79,  A-8) 

89 

December 

December   3:  The   ESA  reported  from   its  November  29  meeting  that  British 
Aerospace,  chosen  a s   pr ime   con trac tor   for  ESA’s  Large  Satellite,  would 
receive  a  con trac t   for  the  first  part  of  a  study  phase.  Con trac ts  for  payload 
studies would  go  to  Selenia  (Italy)  for  a  television  broadcast  payload  and  a 
20-30  GHz  transponder  payload;  to BTM  (Belgium)  for  a 20-30 GHz  beacon 
payload;  to  United  Kingdoms  Marconi  Space  and  Defense  Systems  for  a 
specialized-services  payload;  and  to  Marconi  with  Telespazio  (Italy)  and 
Ph i l ips   (Ne ther lands)   for  m iss ion   s tud ies   related  to  the   20-30  GHz 
transponder.  Con trac tor   work  would  be  done  by  April  1980, with  launch 
scheduled  for  early  1984. 
Objectives  of  the  Large  Satellite  program  were  to  build  a  mu l t ipurpose  
space  platform  to  match  user  requirements  in  telecommunications  and  to 
demons tra te  a  serv ice   payload  that  would  advance  ESA  technology,  assess  
potential of  new  satellite services, and promote satellite usage.  (ESA Info Bltn 
33)  
ESA  reported  that Meteosut  1  had  put  itself  into  standby  mode  November 
24,  one   day  after  its  second  anniversary  of  successful  opera t ion   in  orbit, 
because  of  an apparen t  power  overload.  Attempts  to  switch  it  back  to  fu l l  
operating  mode  succeeded  only  briefly.  ESA  had  begun  a  step-by-step  unit 
switching to detect the area  of failure and isolate i t ;  the Eault apparen t ly  occur-  
red  in  the   electronics  that  turned off  the  main  power  supply  in  case  of 
overload. 
Periodic  instability had  appeared in this protection  unit,  but  the data collec- 
tion  function  was  fully  opera t iona l  and  Meteosut  I  was  ab le   to  collect  and  
relay  data  from   meteorological  platforms  within  its  field  of  view.  ESA  was 
analyzing the  prob lem  for possible effect on Meteosut 2, scheduled for  launch 
in  Sep tember   1980.  (ESA  Info  Bltn  34) 

December  4 :  Rockwell International said that  its Autonetics Strategic Systems 
Division would  develop an  a irborne  imaging-sensor au toprocessor  under  a $1 
million con trac t  with the  U.S. A ir  Force Avionics Labora tory  covering des ign ,  
fabrication,  and  testing.  The  dev ice  would  automate func t ions  such  a s  target 
recognition  and  cueing  for  sensors  such a s   the  forward-looking  infrared  sen-  
sor   (FLIR)   used  in  tactical  fighters  for  air-to-ground  comba t .   (Rockwell 
Release  ESG  19) 

December  5: The   Washington Post  reported  that  the  Air  Force  had  taken  an  
‘‘unusual step”  December  4 in  formally defending  the  h t t  & Whitney  ROO 
engine powering the F-15 and F-16 fighter planes.  Robert J. Hermann ,  assistant 

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  lmS 

secretary  for  research,  said  the  U.S. Air  Force  hlad  no  plans  to  use  another 
engine because of  FlOO  problems. Conceding that  FlOO engine durability was 
“less  than  anticipated,”  Hermann   said  F-15  engine-related  safety  was  better 
than  that  of  any  Air  Force  fighter  after  comparable  service. 
On November 21,  the head  of  the USAF  Systems Command told  the Senate 
Armed  Services  Committee that  “as  many  as  43”  F45 s   and  F-16s  would  be 
without  engines by  next  summer because of  FlOO production delays and other 
problems;  at  Congress’s insistence,  the  Pentagon  had  financed  limited  work 
on General Electric’s FlOlX engine as  a possible adternative.  Pratt & Whitney 
and General Electric were  competing  “hotly”  for flight-engine contracts, the 
Washington Post said, and Pratt & Whitney  had  announced plans to spend $10 
million on expansion of  its jet production capabiliiies. (W P o s t ,  Dec 5 / 7 9 ,  D9) 

December  6: Gen.  Lew  Allen,  Jr.,  U.S.  Air  Force chief of  staff,  told  the an- 
nual meeting  of  the Military Operations Research  Society that  the  priority  of 
the  Space Shuttle program  had  “shifted  to  matters  of  national  defense,”  the 
Sunta Burbum News Press reported [see October 301. Whatever else the Shut- 
tle does and whatever other purposes  it will have,  “the priority, the emphasis, 
and  the  driving  momentum  now  has  to  be  those  satellite  systems which  are 
important  to  national  security,”  said Allen,  a  member   of  the  Joint  Chiefs of 
Staff. 
Emphasizing the  “change from what had  been  true a year o r  so ago,” Allen 
said the change was  “apparent  and accepted now,  and it’s a change which will, 
if  there  are   additional  technical  difficulties. . . , become  more   and  more  
significant.” The  Shuttle, he  said, was  “quite critical for concerns of  national 
defense  and  for .  . .verification of  treaties.  . .Confidence in  the  Shuttle and  its 
reliability  must  be   sufficiently  high  for  us  to  place  what  is   a  substantial 
amoun t  of  the security of  the nation on  the performance of  that system.”  (Sun- 
tu  Barbara  News  Press,  Dec  6/79,  14) 

NASA  reported  that  researchers  from JPL  and  the U .S .  Geological  Survey 
had  carried  out measurements  using  radio  noise  from  distant quasars  that  in- 
dicated  rapid  increase  in  southern  California’s width. 
Dr.  Arthur  E .   Niell  of  JPL‘s  astronomical  radio-interferometric  Earth- 
survey team  reported an  increase of  20.3 centimeters (8  inches) over 7 months 
between JPL and  NASA’s Goldstone deep-space station about  193 kilometers 
(EO miles)  away.  At  the  American  Geophysical  IJnion meeting  in  San  Fran- 
cisco, Niell  and J.C.  Savage of  the U.S. Geological Survey  described making 
simultaneous  recordings  at  the  two  radiotelescopes  of  radio  noise  from 
quasars  and  comparing  the  signals’  time  of  arrival  using  extremely  precise 
clocks.  Changes  in   distance between  the  telescopes  could  be  measured  with 
accuracies of 5 centimeters (2 inches) or  less,  and  could  be  important to  the 
Survey’s  earthquake  prediction  mission.  (NASA  Release  79-166) 

92 

DECEMBER lmS 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NASA  reported  results of a 22-month government-industry study of poss ib le  
damage to electrical equipment from  release of  carbon  fibers in  fires after ac- 
cidents  to  civil  aircraft.  R.  R .   Heldenfels,  LaRC  director  for  structure,  told 
a conference a t  LaRC  that  pub l ic  risk from  use  of  carbon  fibers  on  civil  air- 
craft  was  so  small  as  to  be  insignificant. 
The   President  in  July  1977  had  directed  the  Off ice   of  Sc ience   and 
Technology  Policy  to  study  potential  problems  of  using  carbon-composite 
ma ter ia ls  and  to  provide  a  plan  for  federal  action  if  needed.  NASA  got  the 
assignment to  assess  risks of  such use  in civil aviation, with  suppor t  from  the 
National  Bureau  of  S tandards ,   some  DOD  laboratories,  and  private  firms. 
O ther   federal  agencies  studying  the  problem  were  DOC,  DOT,  DOE ,   and 
EPA . 
The  perceived  risk  was  that  breakdown  of  composite materials  in  burning 
would  put  into  the   a tmosphere   short  lengths  of  carbon   fiber  thought  to  be 
hazardous  to  electrical  equipment  because  of  their  high  heat  resistance  and 
electrical  conduc t iv i ty ;  their  extreme  light  weight  would  allow  them  to  float 
for  miles  before  touching  electrical  equipment,  causing  short  circuits  o r  
malfunctions.  (NASA  Release  79-171;  LaRC  Release  7 9 - 8 5 )  

NASA  announced  that  it  had  selected  33  scientific  investigations  for  4 
satellite missions  scheduled  for  launch  in  1982-1985.  The   investigations,  23  
from  the  United  States and  10  from 6 o ther  nations,  would  be  in  c l ima te  and 
upper-a tmosphere  research.  The  23  U.S.  investigations represented  11 univer- 
sities,  1 private  organ iza t ion ,  and  2  government  agencies.  Foreign  coun tr ies  
represented  were  Canada,  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany,  France,  Italy, 
Japan ,   and  the  United  Kingdom.  Each  country  would  fund  its own  investiga- 
tions;  the cost of  the  U.S.  studies would  be  about  $5 million  over the  next  five 
years,  including  ins trumen ts .  Spacecraf t  used  would  be  the  earth radiation- 
budget  satellite,  two  po lar-orb i t ing  NOAA  metesats,  and  Spacelab 3.  (NASA 
Release  79-165) 

December  U :   The   Washington  Post  repor ted   that  techn ic ians   at  Cape  
Canaveral  had  lost  touch  with  Satcom  3  December  10  after  firing  a  small 
eng ine  at  1:57  p .m .   to put it on  station over the  Pacific.  RCA  spokesman John 
Williamson said that  no one  knew  what had happened and  “ there  is certainly 
cause  for dismay.”  Launched December  6,  the  1-ton  communications satellite 
designed for  television  and te lephone  relay  was in  a  temporary elliptical orbit 
a t   the   t ime   of  loss.  (W Post,  Dec  W79, A-6) 
-On  CBS Evening News, Walter Cronk i te  and  Char les  Osgood broadcast 
a  “Night Before Chr is tmas”  parody on the loss of  Satcom 3,  concluding with, 
“And  from  somewhere  in  space  comes  the  seasonal  call:  Merry   Chr is tmas .  
Good  night.  And  you  can’t  win  ‘em  all.”  (Text,  Dec  W79)  
-The  Washington Post  December   12  ran  a  feature  story  abou t   cab le  
television companies that  planned to  use  Satcom 3 for  alternative programm- 
ing,  such as Ted l h r n e r  who wanted  a 24-hour news  “superstation”  (channel 

93 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER   lmS 

17  in  Atlanta),  and  two  religious  networks  (“I  guess  they  didn’t  pray  hard 
enough,”  said an RCA  spokesman). NASA  had  charged RCA  $19.9  million to 
launch  Satcom 3,  most of  it already  paid,  but  RCA, had  insured the  spacecraft 
with  Lloyds  for more  than  its  $50 million market  value.  (W  Post, Dec  12/79, 
c-1) 

JSC said  that  Columbia,  first  Shuttle orbiter,  would  undergo  a  first major 
simulated-flight all-systems test  on or  about December   15 at KSC.  Astronauts 
and ground-support teams would  conduct a 24-hour  5-day  critical operations 
test  including  five  launch-and-ascent  flight profiles; on-orbit operations;  and 
one entry  simulation. John W.  Young  and  Robert Crippen,  crew members  for 
the  first  flight,  would  take  part  in  the  test  along  with  the  backup  crew,  Joe 
Engle and Richard Truly. First actual launch was  scheduled for June 30,  1980. 
(JSC  Release  79-73; KSC  Release  246-79) 

NASA  adjudged the mission of  Heao 2 successful. Launched  November  13, 
1978, the observatory had made more  than 5,000  discrete observations and had 
worked  well  for  more   than  11  months,  though  #design lifetime  was  only  9 
months. 
On  the  basis  of  significant new  findings  (X-ray  detection of  more   than  60 
known  quasars and  discovery of  more  than  a  dozen  previously  unknown;  the 
absence  of  hot  neutrod  stars a t   the  center  of  histloric  supernovas,  calling  for 
new  theories to  explain  the  remnant  cores; X-ray  emissions far more   intense 
than  predicted  from  main-sequence  stars) and  of  “an  active  and  enthusiastic 
guest  observer  program,”  Dr.  Thomas   Mutch,  associate  administrator  for 
space  science,  recommended   extension  of  the  mission.  (NASA  MOR 
[postlaunch]  S-832-78-02) 

December  12:  NASA  announced  that  it  would  ask  scientists to  propose  ex- 
periments  for  a  satellite-measurements  program  called  OPEN  (origins  of 
plasmas  in  Earth’s neighborhood) that  would  attempt for  the  first  time  to  ex- 
plain  collective  behavior  of  components  of  the  geospace  system:  the  in- 
terplanetary  medium  near  Earth,  magnetosphere,  ionosphere,  and  upper 
atmosphere. 
Previous programs detected extensive interaction among  all  geospace com-  
ponents. The  new  mission would  use a m in imum  of  four  spacecraft in widely 
different orbits  in  key  regions  of  space  for  measurement  and  remote  sensing 
of  electromagnetic  radiation,  fields  and  particlm,  and  plasmas  (electrified 
matter)  and  defining  the  flow  of  mass,  momenh im ,   and  energy  through  the 
solar  wind  and  electrified  environment  near  Earth.  Launched  during  a  year 
in  the mid-1980s  by  the Shuttle, each  spacecraft would  be  capable of  signifi- 
cant orbit changes over a  four-year lifetime to permit observing a vast  volume 
of  space.  GSFC   would  manage  the  project.  (NASA Release  79-173) 

94 

DECEMBER  1973 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

December  13:  NASA  announced  that  JPL   had  selected  Mar t in   Mar ie t ta  
Aerospace  and  Hughes  Aircraft’s  Space   and  Communications  Group   for 
award  of  $500,000 contracts  for  study  of  an   unmanned  Venus  mapper  to  fly 
in the mid-1980s. Upon completion of  the study in summer  1980, NASA might 
choose  one   company  to  develop  a  Venus-orbiting  imaging  radar   (VOIR) 
spacecraft  for  a  two-month  gravity  study  of  the  planet  followed  by  a  EO-day 
radar  mapping  sequence,  if  Congress  approved the m iss ion .   (NASA  Release 
79-176) 

INTELSAT  reported  that  it  would  turn  off  Zntelsat  3 F 3  this  da te  after  10 
years  of  serv ice   that  gave  the   organization  the  first  truly  global  telecom- 
munications  system.  The   Inteisat  3  series  of  nine  communications  satellites 
was  built  by  TRW  Systems  Inc.,  three  of  them  having  failed  to  orbit  o r  
destroyed  at  launch ;   Intelsat  3  F 3  was  the   last  of  the  series  in  opera t ion .  
Or ig ina l  design  life  was  five  years. 
Launched  into  synchronous  orbit  in  February  1969,  the  communications 
satellite operated over the Ind ian  Ocean until July  1972, carry ing  among o thers  
a worldwide telecast of  Pr ince  Charles’s investiture as Pr ince  of  Wales.  It was 
placed  on  standby  in  May  1977,  and  its mechanically despun  antenna  stalled 
in  Apr i l   1979, more   than  10 years  after launch ,   rendering  it  inoperable.  As i t  
had  enough fuel remaining to push  it 4 ,000  to 5,000 kilometers  further out into 
space ,  INTELSAT would  turn   off  spacecraf t  electronic  systems  and  activate 
small propulsion  motors to  put  it where  it would  need  4  to  5  million  years  to 
re turn   to  its  old  altitude,  drifting  at  the  rate  of  a  me ter   a  year.  (INTELSAT 
Release 79-28-I) 

December   14:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  lost  contact  with  Vbyuger 1  late 
December  13  after  a  maneuver  to  refine  its  path  to  Sa turn .   Launched  in 
September  1977,  Voyager  I  was  now  996   million  k i lome ters   (660  million 
miles)  from  Earth, heading for encounter with Sa turn  in November  1980. The  
maneuver,  commanding  the   spacecraf t  to  turn   and   fire  its  thrusters,  should 
automatically orient the  antenna toward Earth; the  maneuver occurred ,  bu t  the  
alignment  was  faulty.  The   agency  said  it  had  had  previous  prob lems   with 
orientation. 
Several hours  later on December   13, controllers  at JPL  acqu ired  a  faint  in- 
termittent  signal confirming that  Voyager I had  received  and  executed  the   in- 
itial command  signals to  switch  to  the  low-gain an tenna  and pu t   it  into a  two- 
way  mode. JPL would  now  try to analyze the  difficulty and  correc t  a l ignmen t  
without  wasting  attitude-control  gas.  (NASA  Release 79-180) 

NASA  announced  that  its  manned  oblique-wing  research   aircraft  would 
make  its  first  flight  December  19  at DFRC  with  pilot  Tom  McMur try   at  the  
controls.  The   AD-1  (so  named  for  Ames  and  Dryden  centers)  would  use  a 
pivoting wing  to reduce  noise and fuel consumption. Studies at ARC  indicated 
that  such planes  flying  at  1,600 kilometers  (1,000 miles)  per   hour  would  use  

95 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1979 

half  as  much  fuel  as  conventional  swept-wing  aircraft.  Built  by Ames  In- 
dustrial  Co . ,   Bohemia,  N.Y.,  the  907-kilogram  (2,000-pound)  aircraft  was 
about  12.2 meters (40 feet) long with  a wingspan  of  9.7 meters  (32  feet),  and 
was powered by  two small 99.8-kilogram (220-pound) thrust turbojets. (NASA 
Release  79-177;  DFRC  Release  39-79) 

NASA  announced award  of  a  $4.7  million  contract to  Goodyear  Aerospace 
Corp.,  Akron,  Ohio,  for fabricating a high-speed  image-processing computer 
(called  massively  parallel  processor)  to  analyze  data  from  future  Earth- 
observation  spacecraft.  Current  computers  had  to  process  one   at  a  time  the 
thousands of  picture  elements  (pixels) constituting a  satellite image,  a  time- 
consuming  and  expensive  procedure.  The   new  computer  would  use  16,384 
simple interconnected elements to process the pixe.ls simultaneously,  10 to  100 
times  faster  than  now  possible  and  at  a  greatly  rcduced  cost.  Scheduled for 
delivery  to  GSFC   in  1982,  it  would  process  data  in  the  hundreds  of  images 
received  there  from  NASA’s  Earth-resources  spacecraft.  (NASA  Release 
79-181) 

The   W h i n g t o n  Star  reported  on  RCA’s  plans  lo  launch  within  18  months 
a  replacement  for  the  $20  million  Satcom  3  that  vanished  from  orbit 
December   10.  The   company  said  that  it  wanted  FCC  authority  to  launch  a 
spare satellite now  being built; a complete search for the missing commun ica-  
tions  satellite  could  take  several  weeks,  but  so  far  “contact  has  not  been 
regained.”  (W  Star,  Dec  15/79, C-8) 

December  17:  The   Washington  Star  reported  thad  NASA  had  reestablished 
radio  contact with  Voyager 1 speeding  toward  Saturn  after  the  spacecraft ap- 
parently  became  disoriented December   13 during  a  commanded  course  cor- 
rection  and  aimed  its  antenna  in  the  wrong  direction.  JPL  controllers  had 
managed  to make  it  “reorient  itself  and  aim its antenna directly at earth.”  ( W  
Star,  Dec   17/79,  A-4) 
The  press  reported that  a  14-hour dry-run  test  of  Space Shuttle orbiter Col- 
umbia  got under  way  at  Cape  Canaveral December   16  after  a  day’s  delay  for 
routine  checks.  The   orbiter  integrated  test  would  check  out  Columbia’s 
systems using equipment and engineering teams in control centers at the Cape  
and  JSC.  (NY Ernes,  Dec  17/79, D-15;  W Star, Dec   17/79, A-2;  W Post,  Dec 
17/79,  A-28) 
Dr.  Paul  MacCready,  builder  of  the  lightweighit  Gossamer  Albatross  that 
made  the world’s  first manpowered  flight across the  English  Channel  in  June 
this  year,  saw  his  creation  go  on  display  in  Philadelphia’s Franklin  Institute, 
the  Washington Star reported. MacCready  was  now  planning  a  solar-powered 
Albatross,  the  paper  said.  ( W  Star,  Dec   17/79,  A-2) 

The   Washington Post  reported  that  the  Soviet  l ln ion   had  launched  an un- 
crewed Scryuz T ,  an improved version of  its usually crewed  Soyuz craft,  to jo in  

96 

DECEMBER   1979 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS  

the Earth-orbiting  Sulyut  6 station. Tass  said the  launch at  W30 Moscow  time 
December  16  put  the   Soyuz  T  into  an   orbit  with  232-kilometer  apogee, 
201-kilometer  perigee,  88.6-minute  per iod ,   and  51.6-f8-  inclination.  Tass 
reported  linkup  with  Sulyut  6 December  19,  the  station’s  16th dock ing  with 
ano ther   spacecraf t  in  its  26-month  flight. 
Dr.  Konstantin  F e o h s t o v   said  Soyuz T would  test  a  new  propulsion  unit 
combining former  autonomous systems  for  orientation,  orbit  correction,  and 
docking,  and new  life-support, flight-control, and descent  systems. O ther  new 
on-board  systems included radiocommunications, orientation, movement con- 
trol,  and  a  computer  complex  to  handle  maneuvers,  systems  control,  and 
transmission  of  processed  data.  ( W  Post,  Dec  17/79; FBIS,  Tass  in  Eng l ish ,  
Dec  16-19/79) 

December 18: NASA  reported  successful completion December   17  at  NSTL 
in Mississippi  of  a  full-duration  9-minute  10-second run  of  the  Space  Shuttle 
main-engine  test  article,  a  time  longer  than  that  needed   to  launch  an  actual 
Shuttle into orbit.  This  was  the   first  time  the  whole  system was  opera ted  for 
full  duration.  No  problems  occurred ,   and  MSFC  test  managers  said  that  all 
goals  were  achieved. 
The   test  article  consisted  of  a  cluster  of  three  main  engines  mounted  in  a 
simulated orbiter  aft  section, drawing  propellants  from  a  flight-type  external 
tank. The   three  engines  were  throttled  back  from  100% rated  power  level  to 
9 0 % ,  8 0 % ,  and  70%; engine  gimbaling  and  pulsing  were  successful.  To 
check out  two-engine  performance,  one  engine was  cut  off  early  as p lanned ,  
and  the  remaining  two  were  operated  at  70% rated power  level  for  the  last  5 
seconds of  testing.  (NASA  Release  79-178;  MSFC  Release  79-133) 

December  19:  Continuing  flight  tests  of  the   orbiter  Columbia  were  halted 
December  18  after  two  technical  failures.  Simulated liftoff  occurred   at  4:30 
p.m.  EJYI  with  backup  crew  members  Joe Engle  and  Richard  Truly  in  the  
cockpit,  but  two  minutes  later  they  failed  to  receive  signals  of  the  simulated 
separa t ion  of  the   solid-fuel  rocket  boosters;  8  minutes  50  seconds  into  the  
flight,  they  failed to  receive a  signal  showing  successful  separa t ion  of  the ex- 
ternal  tank. ( W  Star,  Dec  19/79,  A-4) 

ESA  announced  that  a  halt  in  Ariane’s  launch   sequence   December   15 
resulted  from a  faulty  sensing of  operating pressure  in one  of  the  four engines 
that inhibited the  release command.  The  engines functioned normally, and lif- 
toff  would  have  proceeded  normally  except  for  the   erroneous   reading.  After 
detailed checks of  the launcher  and launch pad ,   subject to satisfactory reports, 
ESA  said  the  launch  countdown  would  resume  December  22  for  launch 
December  23.  (ESA  Info  Bltn  39) 

December 20:  The  W sh ing ton  Post  said the empty Soviet spacecraft that  link- 
ed  up  December  19  with  Sulyut  6 was  probably a  three-person  version  of  the  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUT ICS  

DECEMBER   l!?79 

vehicle the  Soviet  Union  had  been  launching  for  10  years.  Th e  Soyuz  T  (pro- 
bably  for  Transport)  docked  on  ground  command  at  one  end  of  the  two-part 
space  station  i n   the  fourth  unmanned  test  of  the  new  configuration  (the  first 
was  Cosmos 869, November-December  1976; the  slecond,  Cosmos 1001, April 
1978;  the  third,  Cosmos  lU74, January,  31-March  1,  1979).  Th e   Washington 
Post  said  the  interior  of  the  Soyuz  “command  craft”  probably  was  changed 
to  accommodate  three  instead  of  two  cosmonauts,  making  it  easier  for  the 
Soviet  Union  to  use  the  Sulyut as   a  permanent  orbital  station  with  inter- 
changeable  crews, difficult with  only  two  men  a t  a  time.  (WP o s t ,  Dec  20179, 
A-27) 

ESA  announced  appointment of  Erik  Quistgaard of  Denmark as  its director 
general,  to  succeed  Roy  Gibson  on  May  15,  1980.  (ESA  Info  Bltn  40) 

December  21:  The   Washington Star  reported  that  three  U.S.-built  Singapore 
a i r  force jets  had  disappeared  simultaneously  a t   noon  December  19 during  a 
training  flight  from  Clark  Air  Force  Base  near  Manila,  Philippines,  toward 
a bombing range 20 miles away.  Maurice Baker,  Singapore ambassador to  the 
Philippines,  said  “the astonishing thing is that  they  all disappeared  at the same 
time without a trace.”  Th e  planes were on  the  same route flown by  four Philip- 
pine  air  force  planes  when  they  mysteriously  disappeared  more  than  5  years 
ago.  (W  Star,  Dec  21/79,  A-7) 

December  24 :   ESA  announced  the  successful  launch  of  its  Ariane  LO1  at  17 
hours,  14 minutes,  38 seconds GMT  from  Kourou;  all  three  stages  functioned 
normally  and  the  fairing was jettisoned  as  planned.  Achieved  orbit  was  close 
to planned  orbit.  Space center  facilities and all downrange stations functioned 
“faultlessly”  and  permitted  continuous  tracking  of  launcher  telemetry.  (ESA 
Info  Bltn  41) 

December  27:  NASA  said  that  it  would  stop  acvquiring  Goes  3  data  after 
February  1980; on  July  1 it  had  shut down  the  altimeter, primary  experiment 
device.  DOD   would  use  the  C-band  transponders  to  calibrate  tracking  and 
would  monitor  and  control  Goes  3  after  March  1,  1980.  (NASA  MOR 
E-855-75-01  [postlaunch]  Dec  27/79) 

During  December:  The   AFSC  Newsreview  reported  completion  of  the  first 
phase  of  construction  at  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base’s  Space  Shuttle  facility. 
Launch  complex  6,  built  in  the  1960s  for  the  Ma.nned  Orbiting  Laboratory 
program,  had  never  been  used  (the MOL program  was  canceled  in  1969) and 
was  available  to  WSMC  as   a  Shuttle  launch  site.  Phase  1,  carried  out  by 
Morrison-Knudsen, Inc.,  under  a $3.9 million  Army Corps of Engineers  con- 
tract,  had  moved  680,000 cubic yards  of  earth  and  10,000 cubic yards  of  rein- 

98 

DECEMBER  lmS 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D   AERONAUTICS 

forced  concre te  and  had  dismantled 2,400 tons  of  steel.  (AFSC Newsreview, 
Dec  79,  6) 

A United A ir l ines  newsletter reported the  first solar-powered flight of an air- 
craft:  Larry Mauro's  Solar Riser, a homemade tailless biplane with  about 600 
solar cells  in upper-wing  panels, generating  about 60 pounds of  thrust to turn 
a 3-foot fiberglass propeller,  enough to carry  a 165-pound pilot and  125-pound 
craft  aloft. Mauro  flew  his  p lane   about  a  mile  a t   a  height  of  40  feet  dur ing  
the  annua l  exper imen ta l-a ircraf t  convention in Oshkosh, Wisc. Astronaut Neil 
Armstrong had  watched assembly of  the  craft,  now  in  a Wisconsin museum. 
(UA  rept  Dec  79) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1980 

PRECEQllNG  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILMED 

January 

January  4: NASA  announced that proposals  for establishing a space  telescope 
institute  in  the   United  States  were  due   March  3  a t   Goddard  Space   Flight 
Cen ter   (GSFC) . 
The   institute, at  a  sight to  be  chosen  [see November  18,  19791,  would  be  a 
national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space  telescope and 
should  be  fully  operational  in  the  early  1980s.  It  would  be   responsible  for 
selecting and suppor t ing  users of  the  telescope;  sc ience  planning  and schedul- 
ing; rou t ine  conso le  opera t ions ;  and data archiving,  calibration, and analysis. 
The   winning  con trac tor  would  staff  and  operate  a  sc ience  suppor t  cen ter   at 
GSFC   and  would  staff  the  institute  with  personnel  and  facilities needed  to 
house   and  suppor t  principal  investigators and  general  observers .  
The   space  telescope  itself,  scheduled  for  launch  in  1983  o r   1984, would 
observe   about  350   times  the  volume  of  space  visible  from   ground-based 
observatories.  The  data it acqu ired  would go through a track ing  and data-relay 
satellite to a  con tro l  center  at GSFC,  then  to the  sc ience  institute for process- 
ing and analysis. The  telescope should remain in orbit until the end of  the  cen- 
tury, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space  Shuttle to per- 
form maintenance  and  rep lace   instrumentation.  If  needed ,   the  Shuttle could 
re turn   i t   to  Earth  a t   five-year  intervals  for  major  repair,  which  would  take 
about  1  year, then could  launch  it  again. 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen ter   (MSFC)  would  be  project  manager  for  the 
space  telescope;  GSFC would  manage  the  on-board  ins trumen ta t ion  and  the 
sc ience  institute; the Headquar ters  Office  of  Space would  have overall respon- 
sibility  for  the   program .   (NASA  Release  80-1) 

Today reported  that Rockwell International, prime Space  Shuttle contractor, 
had   m a d e   “key   m a n a g em e n t   c h a n g e s   a n d   m a j o r   o r g a n i z a t i o n a l  
rea l ignmen ts .  . .similar  to  ones  made  within  the   space  agency  recently.”  The  
paper   said  NASA  now  hoped  to  launch  the  Shuttle  in  September, two years 
behind  schedule.  ( E a k y ,  Jan  4/80,  E A )  

January  8:  NASA  announced  that,  con trary  to  recently  published  reports,  it 
was  not  taking  reservations  for  travel  on   Space  Shuttle missions.  Recent  ar- 
ticles on NASA  plans to carry  sm a l l  experimental payloads on  the  Shuttle had 
mentioned a depos i t  of  $500 to reserve  payload  space ;  the  reference to a reser- 
vation  had been  taken  to  imply  passenger space.  NASA  said that  it would  not 
offer  seats  on   Shuttle  flights  to  paying  passengers.  (NASA  Release  80-2) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1980 

The   Washington Star  said  that  Boeing  Company had  awarded  Fairchild  In- 
dustries, Germantown, Md . ,   a multimillion-dollar contract to  build  forward- 
fuselage parts for a new-generation 757 jetliner. The award by  Boeing Military 
Aircraft  Company  as  subcontractor  for  Boeing  C’ommercial Aircraft  Com- 
pany  was  the  third  given  to  Fairchild,  which  received  in  October  a  contract 
for fuselage above the wing and in November  a contract for leading-edge wing 
slats.  The   twin-engine 757  would  f l y   in  1982.  (W  Star,  Jan  8/80,  B-4) 
-The  United  States  should  develop  a  way  to  send  nuclear  wastes  into 
outer  space,  Stanley G.  Rosen  told  an American Association for the Advance- 
ment  of  Science meeting  in  San  Francisco.  The   Whshington Star  said Rosen, 
a  test  manager  for  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Defense  Satellite  Communications 
system,  described  the  problem  of  ”extremely  toxi’c‘‘ residues  from   nuclear- 
power  programs  around  the  world.  Extraterrestrial  disposal  of  such  wastes 
would  have  a  “short-term r i s k ’  during  launch  and  injection, but  “zero  risk” 
thereafter,  he  said.  (W S t u r ,  Jan  8/80,  A-5) 

January  9: The  New   York  Ernes  reported  from Beijing  that  the  United  States 
had  agreed  to  sell the  People’s  Republic of  China  (PRC) a  ground  station for 
reception  of  Landsat  Earth-resources  data  that  might  have  military  applica- 
tions.  Defense  Secretary Harold  Brown,  on  an  eight-day  tour,  made  the  an- 
nouncement after a two-hour meeting with PRC  Deputy Prime Minister Deng 
Xiaoping.  The  PRC  sought to  buy  such a  station more  than  a year  ago; Land- 
sat  instruments  collected  data  for  agriculture,  forestry,  drought  prevention, 
and  oil  and  mineral  exploration,  and  20  nations  (none  Communist)  had 
already  bought  Landsat  ground  stations. 
Brown’s  trip,  the  first by  a  senior Department of  Defense (DOD)  official to 
China since the Communists came  to power in  1949. originally was  for general 
broadening of  contacts to  inform the  United  States of  Peking defense strategy 
in  the post-Mao era.  The  Carter  administration apparently decided  last  week 
to use the visit  to give Moscow  the impression of  greater cooperation between 
Beijing  and  Washington,  in   view  of  the  Soviet  thrust  into  Afghanistan.  ( N Y  
Ernes,  Jan  9/80,  A9)  

January  10: Johnson  Space Center  (JSC)  announced that  it  had  extended for 
18  months  a  cost-plus-award-fee contract  with  Boeing  Company  for  safety, 
reliability,  and  quality-assurance  engineering support.  The   extension,  valued 
at  $11,184,430,  brought  the  total  value  of  the  JSC:  contract  with  Boeing  to 
$36,712,703.  The  extension would  cover  current  anti  future JSC  programs  for 
space  vehicles  and  for  ground-support  equipment,  facilities,  and  payloads. 
(JSC  Release  80-001) 

Junuary lZ: U.S. Air Force Chief of  Staff Gen. Lew Allen, Jr.,  said in an inter- 
view that a current chill in  U.S.-USSR relations would  accelerate the develop- 
ment  of  weapons  designed  to  wage  war  in  outer  space o r  knock  down  USSR 
satellites  for  spying,  navigation,  and  communications. 

104 

JANUARY  1960 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Allen  said  that,  although  he  still  hoped  for  an  agreement  on   continued 
noninterference  with  satellites  maintained  in  space by  both  the  United  States 
and  the  Soviet Union,  the  U.S.  Air  Force  was  experiencing  pressure  to move 
quickly  on  antisatellite weapons.  He  indicated  that  extra  money  would  go  for 
weapons  already  in  the  works  such  a s  the  “flying  tomato  can”  (operating  by 
collision  with  a  target)  ra ther   than  more  distant  possibilities  such  a s   lasers. 
( W  Post,  Jan  11/80, A-1) 

January 12-14: The  newspaper  Wen Hu i ,  published  in  Shanghai,  reported  that 
the People’s Republic of  China was training  astronauts for space travel and that 
the  forthcoming  first  issue  of  a publication  called  Science  Life  would  contain 
photographs  of  “pilots  in  space  clothes  in  a  simulated  spacecraft,  lying  on   a 
vibration platform o r  being  thrown down from  a height  of  20 meters in a shock 
test,”  as well a s  in  a weightless  environment,  according to  the  Foreign  Broad- 
cast  Information  Serv ice   (FBIS). 
Th is   was  the  first  time  the  Chinese  press  had  mentioned  training  of  space  
crews.  FBIS  said  that  the  new  publication  would  contain  an  ar t ic le  on   space  
food  and  that  the  simulations  of  space  life  had  already  been  made   into  a 
documentary  film.  The   Wen Hui  article  did  not  say  when  or  if  China  would 
send  someone  into  space;  however,  during  U.S.  Defense  Secretary  Harold 
Brown’s  visit,  a  deputy  chief  of  staff  for  PRC  armed  forces  said  a  manned 
space  program  was  not  one   of  China’s  top  priorities.  FBIS  also  reported 
publication  in  a  Shanghai  paper  of  pictures  of  a  dog  that  had  returned  from 
space;  an  editorial  in  that  paper  called  China  the  third  nation  to  master  the 
technology of  satellite retrieval.  (FBIS, Beijing X i n h u u ,  Jan  12/80; Hong  Kong 
Wen  Wei  Po,  Jan  14/80;  W Post,  Jan  13/80,  16) 

January  14: Aviation  Week  & Space  Technology reported  that  Rocketdyne  of- 
ficials  had  decided  that  widespread  modification  of  Space   Shuttle  flight- 
engine  welds  made  with  welding  rods  from   a  suspect  lo t   would  not  b e  
necessary.  Last  month  the  company  reported  that  it  might  have  to  straighten 
a large number  of  welds,  but  it had  now  decided  to  limit  the modifications  to 
an  area   of  hydrogen  line  located  near  the  base  of  the  engine  nozzles.  The  
modified  engines  would  be   reinstalled  on   Orb i ter   102  by  m id-March ,   the  
magazine  said.  (AvWk ,  Jan  14/80,  21) 

January  15:  NASA  reported  that  X-ray  data  from   Heao  I ,   a  high-energy 
astronomy  observatory  launched  in  August  1977 and  terminated  in  1979, had 
gigantic  shell  about  6,000  light 
revealed  a  superhot  superbubble  of  gas-a 
years  away  from  Earth  and  1,200 light-years  in diameter-in 
the  constellation 
Cygnus,  the  Northern  Cross.  Dr.  Webster  Cash ,   of  the  University  of  Co l-  
orado’s  Laboratory  for  Atmospheric  and  Space  Physics  at  Boulder,  and  co- 
investigator,  Dr.  Philip  Char les   of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley, 
had  analyzed  the  information  from  a  cosmic  X-ray  instrument  on  the  obser-  

105 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1980 

vatory  that  had  been  devised  by  Dr.  Elihu  Boldt  of  GSFC   and  Dr.  Gordon  
Garmire  of  CalTech. 
In a speech for delivery to  a meeting of  the Amer ican  Astronomical Society 
in  San Francisco January  16, Cash explained that parts of  the bubble had  been 
seen  before  in  brief  X-ray  glimpses,  but  no  one  realized  what  was  being 
observed:  one  part  was  thought  to  be   a  supernova  remnant,  another  part  to 
be  hot gas escaping from a galaxy. Because of  its size, the bubble was  not visi- 
ble  in  its  entirety  until  Heao  I  picked  it  up   in  an  X-ray  sweep. 
Cash  said  the  huge  halo  was  never  spotted  before  because  “it  flows  so 
energetically that  it cools through emission of  x-rays”  instead of  more  normal 
emissions  visible  in  the  optical  or  infrared  regions  of  the  spectrum.  A   cool 
gas  cloud  known  as  the Great R ift   of  Cygnus,  measuring  800   to  1,300 light- 
years, could be  seen obscuring the Milky Way  in Cygnus on a dark night; this 
cloud,  containing  “enough  material  to make  5  million  stars,”  lay  beside  the 
bubble and  served to  hide  its  central area from Earth  view.  Supernova explo- 
sions impacting  this  cloud  over millions of  years  clould  compress and heat  its 
interior,  forming  a  shell  of  superheated hydrogen  materials  that  became   the 
superheated bubble visible in X-ray data today.  Caslh  said that  these explosions 
were a major mechanism  for making new  stars: Earth‘s Sun might have form- 
ed at  the  edge  of  a  similar  bubble,  he  said.  (NASA  Release  80-3) 

The   New  York  Ernes  reported  that  Apollo  ll  .astronaut Michael  Collins 
would  resign  effective January  28  as  undersecretary  of  the  Smithsonian  In- 
stitute, an office held  since 1976,  to become vice president for field operations 
of  Vought,  Inc.,  in  Washington,  D.C.  Collins had  joined  the  Smithsonian  in 
1971 as director of  the National Air and Space Museum .  (N Y  Ernes, Jan  15/80, 
C  -16) 

Communications Satellite Corporation (CornSatCorp) announced that it had 
filed with  the  Federal  Communications Commission  (FCC)   a  5 %  reduction 
of  its basic charges to U.S.  common carriers for international communications 
satellite services, It claimed frequent price cuts, most  recently by  15 %  in May 
lmS,  since  it  began  commercial  service  with  Early  Bird  in  1965.  (ComSat- 
Corp  Release  80-3) 

January  ZT  A   military  communications  satellite ihred  into  orbit  from  Cape  
Canaveral in  an  Atlas Centaur January  17  had  “settled into  temporary  orbit” 
and  was  performing  superbly,  according  to  U.S.  Air  Force  Col.  George 
Breton,  mission  director.  The   4,100-pound  Fleet  Satellite Communications 
spacecraft originally was  scheduled for launch in December  1979.  (WPo s t ,  Jan 
19/80, A-9) 

NASA  announced  that  it  would  extend  the  mission  of  Heao  2,  nicknamed 
Einstein,  beyond  its  projected  lifetime of  11  months.  Dr.  Thomas  A .   Mutch, 
NASA  associate  administrator for  space  science, said Einstein,  second of  the 

106 

JANUARY 1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

three high-energy astronomy observatories,  had not  only produced  significant 
results  [see December   11, 19791 but  had  also  lent  itself to  a guest-investigator 
program that had  garnered  about 400 proposals  from 80  groups  in  the  United 
States and o ther  nations,  including Great Britain, France ,  West  Germany, Ita- 
ly,  the  Soviet  Union,  India,  and  Japan. 
H e m  1,  launched  in  1977,  had  mapped  about  1,500  X-ray  sources  and 
measured  for  the   first  time  the   uniform  high-energy  X-ray  background  of 
space. Heao 3,  launched in September  1979,  was making an  all-sky  survey  of 
cosmic and gamma rays  at higher  energ ies  and  from  a  higher  orbital  inclina- 
tion  than  the  first  observatory.  (NASA  Release  80-6) 

January  18:  Langley  Research  Cen ter  (LaRC) announced that  it had  awarded 
Computer Sc ience  Corpora t ion  a 3-year  contract valued at $3  million for com- 
putational  analysis  and  programming  support  services  to  bas ic   and  applied 
research  at LaRC,  includmg computer documen ta t ion ,  technical  reports, pro-  
gram des igns ,  training courses ,  and p lans  for  follow-on work.  (LaRC Release 
80-3) 

January  21:  JSC  reported  that  it  would  conduct  a  30-hour mock  mission  of 
Space  Shuttle Columbia beginning at 8 a .m .   Wednesday, January 23,  running 
through orbital opera t ions  to  landing.  Flight directors and  their  teams of  con- 
trollers  would  monitor  system  performance ,   carry   ou t   navigation  and 
targeting, and watch  support-crew adherence  to mission timelines.  Simulation 
specialists would  spr ing  problems on  the  controllers and  on  the orbiter  crews 
going  through  routine  duties  in  the Shuttle  simulator  and another  orbiter 
mockup. 
About  500 persons  would  participate  in  the  “flight,”  including pr ime   crew 
John Young  and  Robert Cr ippen  and backup crew Joe  Engle  and D ick  Truly. 
F l igh t  directors would  be  Neil  Hutchinson for the launch team ,  Chuck  Lewis 
for  the  orbit  team, and  Don  Puddy  for  the   landing  team. Th is   simulation 
would  check  out  opera t iona l  procedures   over  an   extended per iod ;   previous 
simulations had not  lasted a s  long.  More  30-hour prac t ice  flights would occur  
every  six weeks to  two months  in  prepara t ion  for  the  real  thing.  (JSC Release 
80-003) 

The   European  Space   Agency  (ESA)  reported  that  detailed  evaluation  of 
records  from  the Ariane’s  first  test  flight December  24,  1979,  conf irmed  that 
it  was  a  complete  success.  Each  of  the   three  powered  stages  had  performed 
better  than  predicted,  and  the  results  would  allow  integration of  the  second 
launcher  to  proceed  without  change except  for  a  pogo-correction  device  not 
used  on  the  first  flight.  The   second  flight was  set  for  late May  o r   early  June 
1980.  (ESA  Info Bltn  1) 

January  22:  NASA  announced  that,  after  five  years  of  studying  Ear th  
resources   and  environment  from   an  altitude  of  920  kilometers  (570   miles), 

107 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1980 

Landsat 2  ceased operation when  its primary  flight-control mechan ism  failed 
because  of  wear.  A   two-month  effort  to  use  other  on-board  devices  to  keep 
the  craft  pointed  at  Earth  had  failed,  and  NASA  staff  had  put  it  into  an 
engineering-test  mode  that  would  allow  further  study  of  the  attitude-control 
problem. 
Landsat  2,  launched  in  1975  with  a  one-year  :lifetime,  was  second  of  a 
remote  sensing  series  that  could  also  collect  data from  beacon  platforms  in 
remote areas. A  major  asset of  the Landsat system was  its  repetitive observa- 
tion,  as  often as  every  nine  days  with  two  satellites, which  would  permit  im- 
mediate  detection  of  short-term  changes.  Laruhat  1, launched  in  1972,  was 
retired  early  in  1978; Landsat  3,  launched  in  March   1978,  would  continue  to 
furnish  data to  more   than  400  U.S.  and  foreign  Earth-resources  programs. 
NASA  planned  to launch a fourth and more  advanced Landsat  in   1981. (NASA 
Release  80-9) 

JSC  reported  signing  of  a  letter  contract  with  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace 
for development and production of  an  in-orbit tile-repair kit to be  used  on  the 
Space Shuttle. The  letter preceded an official award of  contract and authorized 
the  firm to go  ahead with  design and development {Of the kit.  Estimated  value 
of  the  contract  was  $2.1  million.  (JSC  Release  801-004) 

ESA  reported  from  the Villafranca  tracking  station near Madrid  that  its  in- 
ternational ultraviolet explorer ( h e )  had  detected comet Bradfield January  11. 
The   comet,  named  for  the Australian  amateur  as tmnomer   who  discovered i t  
in  1979,  made   its  closest  approach  to  Earth  January  22  and  would  be  visible 
in  the  northern  hemisphere  by the  end  of  January.  (ESA  Info Bltn  2) 
-ESA  noted  the  second  anniversary  January  26  of  h e ,  now  in  a  syn- 
chronous orbit  18,000 miles above the Atlantic, far beyond Earth‘s atmosphere 
and the cloud cover o r  interference from background  light that hinder observa- 
tions  on  Earth.  The   ultraviolet-sensitive  television  cameras  and  processors 
supplied  by the  Science Research  Council  (SRC)  had  garnered  “a  wealth  of 
information” both physical and chemical on astronomical objects, because the 
strongest  characteristic  emissions  of  many  of  the  most  common  atoms  and 
ions  lie  in  the  ultraviolet. 
More   than  500  scientists from 20 nations  were  situdying  12,000 ultraviolet 
spectra of  planets,  stars, the  interstellar med ium ,  and  galaxies.  ESA  said that 
it  expected  the  spacecraft to  exceed  its  design  life  of  three  years,  which  was 
fortunate  because  observation  time  requested  by  astronomers  was  already 
more   than  double  that  available.  The   sponsoring  ,agencies (ESA,  SRC,  and 
NASA)  had  decided  to keep h e  operating  as  long as  feasible. (ESA Info Bltn 
4) 

January  24 :   The   Washington Star  reported  that  the  Federal  Aviation  Ad- 
ministration  (FAA) had  declared  the basic  design and  certification process  of 
the  McDonnell  Douglas  DC-10  satisfactory, but  hiid  fined  the  manufacturer 

108 

JANUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

$300,000 for poor  con tro l  of  quality dur ing  the manufacture of  DC-10 engine- 
moun t ing   py lons .   Th e   Na t iona l   Transpor ta t ion   Safe ty   Board   b lamed  
American  A ir l ines  maintenance procedures  for  allegedly  crack ing  one   such 
pylon  on  a  DC-10  that  failed  over  Chicago May  25,  1979,  causing  a  crash   in 
which  273  persons  died.  McDonnell Douglas  agreed  to  pay  the   fine,  denied 
any  wrongdoing, and  said  it  was  accepting  the  fine  “ to  avoid  further  expense 
and  the  d isrup t ion  of  business.” 
After  the  Chicago crash,  Transportation  Secretary  Neil  Goldschmidt asked 
the  National  Academy  of  Sciences to  investigate procedures  used  by the  FAA 
to  certify planes  [see December  12, 19791. The  academy  named  a  committee 
of  its  National  Research Council  (NRC)  to  handle  the   investigation.  Jack  D. 
Howell of  the  A ir l ine  Pilots Association  (APA)  told  investigators that  a  “pro-  
tective relationship”  between  the  FAA  and  the manufacturers had  allowed the  
companies to  “use  their own  employees  as  ‘FAA-designated representatives”’ 
to  oversee  p lane  design  and  produc t ion .  In  discussing  the  FAA  report,  FAA 
Administrator  Langhorne  Bond  defended  the procedure  for  certifying planes. 
( W  Star,  Jan  24/80,  A-7) 

January 25:  NASA  announced  the   first  step  to  s t imu la te  commercialization 
of  space ,  signing a joint-endeavor  agreement with  McDonnell Douglas Com- 
pany  on  a  new  technique  for  materials  processing  in  space.  McDonnell  and 
a  pharmaceu t ica l   f irm   would  investigate  separating  biological  ma ter ia ls   by 
continuous-flow e lec trophores is  in  space,  thought  to  have high  probability  of 
producing  substances  useful  against  human  o r   animal  diseases.  These  
substances were not produced in sufficient quantity or purity by  ground-based 
facilities. The  joint-endeavor  concept would  make NASA  and the private firm 
responsible  for  specific parts  of  the  effort, with  no  transfer  of  funds.  (NASA 
Release  80-12) 

January  26:  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  A.  Frosch   conducted  a  press 
briefing  on   the  FY8l  budget,  assisted  by  Dr.  Alan  M .   Lovelace,  deputy  ad- 
ministrator;  C .   Thomas  Newman,  deputy  comp tro l ler ;   and  Dr.  Anthony  J. 
Calio,  associate adm in is tra tor  for  space  and  terrestrial applications. Warning 
the  reporters that the information was  “embargoed”  until Pres iden t  Car ter  for- 
mally  gave  his  budget  address   to  Congress   January   28,  Robert  J.  Shafer, 
NASA  deputy director of  pub l ic  affairs, cited  the   releases on  Frosch’s  recent 
trip  to China as  “not  embargoed.” Frosch   said that,  a l though  NASA’s  budget 
was  increasing  at  a  slower  rate  (9.8%  for  research  and  development  [R&D] 
and  11.5 76 for  space  science), he   considered  it a  “good  start”  for  the  decade, 
compared to last year when extra costs of  the Space Shuttle had prec luded  new 
space  sc ience  program  starts.  The   figures  included  an  extra  $300  million  re- 
quested  as  a  1980  supplement  for  Shuttle  development  expenses,  which 
Frosch  said  were  increased  by  delays  last  summer  that  threatened  mission 
schedu les .  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1980 

NASA's  1981  request  included  new-start  money  for  the  National  Oceanic 
Satellite System  (NOSS),  to  be  funded jointly  with  DOD   and  the  National 
Oceanic  and  Atmospheric Administration  (NOAA),  as  well  as  a  gamma-ray 
observatory to explore the most energetic form of  radiation known,  exploiting 
the  discoveries of  the  small  astronomy  satellite Sas  2 ,  ESA's  Cos B ,   and  the 
first high-energy astronomy  observatory Heao  1. Frosch  replied  to a question 
that NOSS  would be  the  first scientific  satellite shared with DOD  and  said its 
cost would be  split among DOD ($13.9 million) and  NOAA  and NASA, which 
would  pay  about  $6.4  million  and  $5.8 million,  respectively. 
NASA's  total budget  request  was  $5,736  billion,  including  $4,569.5  billion 
for  R&D,  $120 million  for  facilities  construction,  and  $1,047 billion  for  pro- 
gram   management.  (Briefing  text,  Jan 26/80;  N,4SA  Releases  80-7,  80-11, 
80-13; W Star,  Jan  28/80,  A-7,  B-2;  Na tu re ,   Jan  31/80, 416) 

NASA  announced the  signing  of  a memorandum  of  understanding  January 
24  in  Beijing with  the  PRC  Academy  of  Sciences covering China's  participa- 
tion  in the Landsat program.  Under  a January  1979 understanding on  coopera- 
tion  in  space technology, the People's  Republic of  China would buy  from U .S .  
industry  a  Landsat  ground  station  to  be   installed  near  Beijing. 
The  Landsat memorandum ,  the  first  formal  agreement on   space since  nor- 
malization  of  U.S.-PRC  relations,  provided  that  the  People's  Republic  of 
China,  like other  foreign ground-station operators, would  make  Landsat  data 
available to others  according to distribution policies of  NASA  and  other U .S .  
agencies.  The  PRC  academy would pay an annual fee  of  $200,000,  starting six 
months  after  its  station  began  to  receive  data.  Landsat  stations  already 
operating  outside  the  United  States  were  two  in  Canada  and  one  each  in 
Brazil, Italy,  Sweden, and Japan; new  stations now  receiving data  in  Australia 
and  India  would  be  operational  soon,  and  one   was  under  construction  in  
Argentina.  (NASA  Release  80-14) 

January  28:  Rockwell  International  announced  that  GSFC   had  awarded  it  a 
$6.5 million contract to produce seven more  RS-27 engine systems for NASA's 
Delta launch vehicle, to be delivered beginning  in October. Each of  the liquid- 
fuel  systems consisted  of a  main  engine and  two  vernier  engines  combining 
to  produce  about  207,000  pounds  of  thrust;  Rocketdyne-built  hardware  left 
over  from  the  Saturn  program  would  be  used  in   the  new  system,  reducing 
costs to the taxpayer. Rockwell would static-test the systems at its Santa Susana 
laboratory  in  California before delivering them  to  NASA;  it  had  delivered 60  
RS-27  systems  since  production  began  in  1973.  In  the  150-launch history  of 
Delta,  101  launches had  used  the  older  Rocketdyn'e Thor MB-3  engines;  the 
other  49  used  the  newer,  more   powerful  RS-27s.  i(Rockwel1 Release  RD-1) 

January 29: Dr.  Robert A .   Frosch,  NASA  administrator, appeared before the 
House  Committee  on Science and  Technology  to  present  the agency's  budget 
request  for  1981. After reviewing events of  last year, Frosch  said NASA  would 

110 

JANUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

need by July  1 the  extra $300 million  requested a s  a supplement to stay within 
Shuttle cos t  es t ima tes  and  maintain  development and  production  schedules. 
Problem  areas   had  been  the   Shuttle  engines  and  the  therma l   protection 
system  (TPS);  recent  tests  had  given  NASA  “increased  conf idence”   in  the 
main eng ines ,  but  Frosch  said that he was  “no t  completely satisfied” with  the  
tiles  and  their  attachment  to  the  Shuttle surface.  He  said  the   tiles  might  not 
be  installed and  fully  tested before the end of  summer, so that  the  first launch 
might not  come until  the  end of  1980. The  original da te  of  launch was  March 
1979,  and  the  last  previous  prediction  was  June  of  1980.  Frosch  said  he  ex- 
pected the  first flight  “between November and  the  end  of  March  1981. A  year 
from   now  might  be   a  more   realistic  date.”  (Text,  Jan  29 /80 ;   NY Z im s ,   Jan  
30/80, A-17) 

January 30:  The   Wshington Post  said  the  mystery  explosion  detected  by a 
U.S.  Vela satellite September 22,  1979,  was  still a mystery, although additional 
da ta   had  come  to  light  s ince   the   State  Department  announced  a  suspected 
nuclear  explosion. 
The  Cen tra l  Intelligence Agency  (CIA)  had  told  “a  few  select  committees 
of  the   House   and  Senate”  that  the  Union  of  South Africa  was  conducting  a 
secret naval  exercise  in  the   area  where  Vela  saw  the  explosion.  A   committee 
a ide  briefed by the  CIA  said the  explosion might  be  “a  rocket  launched from 
one   of  those  Sou th  African  ships.”  On  the   same   night,  scientists using  the 
world’s  largest  radiotelescope had  seen  a ripple in the  ionosphere  over h e r t o  
Rico a  few hours  after  Vela saw  a doub le  flash 4,000 miles  away;  it had  come  
‘‘from  the  right  direction and at the right  velocity  to have been  caused by  a 
nuclear  explosion  near  South Africa.” 
Ever  s ince  the  State Depar tmen t  announcemen t ,  the   Car ter   administration 
had  tried to  discount  the  possibility  of  a nuclear  exp los ion ,  convening a panel 
of  scientists who first said  Vela saw a freak lightning strike that coincided with 
a  meteor  burnou t ,   then  suggested  the   sighting  was  either  a  malfunction o r   a 
mistake.  However,  the Los  Alamos  Scientific Labora tory   said  that  &la  had 
picked  up  the  “unmistakable”  s igna ture  of  an   atomic  exp los ion ,  a  “double 
flash”  caused by  a  fireball blacked out momentarily by a  shockwave surroun-  
d ing   the  exp los ion ,   then  showing  99  times  more   in tense  a s   the   shockwave 
dissipated. 
The   Vela, it  turned  ou t ,  had  carr ied  not  one  but  two  optical detectors: one  
very  sensitive ins trumen t  to  spo t  fireballs from   small  nuc lear  explosions  and 
a  less  sensitive one   in  case   an   atomic  blast  overloaded  the   first  ins trumen t .  
As both  ins trumen ts   saw  the   flash  September  22 ,   ins trumen t   mistake  was 
unlikely. Also,  the ripple arr ived  at the Arecibo observatory a t  the proper  time 
to  have  been  the  shockwave of  an   explosion  seen  by  Vela.  No  radioactive 
debr is  had  appeared  in  sou thern-hem isphere  rainwater  to  conf irm  an  atomic 
exp los ion ,  but  the  United  States had  taken  up  to  three weeks  after  last  year’s 
explosion  to  samp le   rainwater  in  the  area.  ( W  Post,  Jan  30/80, A-I) 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

JANUARY   1980 

MSFC  announced  that  NASA  had  signed  a  $183,960,000 contract  with  ESA 
for a second Spacelab to  be  delivered in  1984. Like the first,  the new  Spacelab 
would  be  built  by  E R N 0  of  West  Germany,  prime  ESA  contractor,  with  at 
least  26  subcontractors  in  ESA  nations  as  well  as  the  United  States  to  make 
components and  subassemblies. MSFC was  responsible  for technical  support; 
JSC would handle operations; Kennedy  Space Center (KSC) would be respon- 
sible  for  integrating  Spacelab with  the  Space Shuttle and  for  launch.  (MSFC 
Release  80-11) 

Presidential  science  adviser  Dr.  Frank  Press addressed  a  conference  of  the 
Department  of  Agriculture  science  and  education  administration  a t   Reston. 
Va.,  on expanding horizons for agriculture,  which  he said was of prize impor- 
tance  to the world’s  future. On the  relationship of  agriculture and space, Press 
cited  climate  and  weather  research  by  satellite  a s   a  useful  guide  in  future 
policy;  he  also  said  a  useful  tool  in  immediate  decisions  would  be  the  new 
AgRISTARS  system  (agricultural  resources  inventory  surveys  through 
aerospace  remote  sensing),  used  by  five  agencies-NASA,  Commerce,  In- 
terior, and Agency  for International Development  (AID) ,  plus the Department 
of  Agriculture-to 
obtain  early  warnings  and  quantitative  estimates  of 
worldwide  crop   conditions.  (Text,  Jan  30/80) 

January 31: MSFC reported  that  i t  had  shipped  two segments of  a  Space Shut- 
tle  solid-fuel  rocket  motor,  used  during  1979  in  m,ited vertical  ground  vibra- 
tion  tests,  to Thiokol’s  Wasatch  division  in Utah  to  be  refurbished  and  loaded 
with  propellant  for  use  as  a  flight  motor  after  being  combined  with  other 
segments  shipped  earlier  i n   January.  (MSFC  Release  80P-12) 

Nature  reported  that  the  ESA  council  voted  to  transfer  launch  capability  to 
the private firm of  Ariane-Espace, which  would handle production and launch 
of  all  future  ESA  satellites.  (Nature, Jan  31/80,  422) 

During  January: Th e  Washington Post  reported  the  death January  13 of  James 
J .   Donegan,  63,  “a  pioneer  i n   space  technology”  at  NASA  since  1958. An 
aeronautical engineer  specializing in  spacecraft tracking,  data acquisition, and 
computing  techniques  at  GSFC,  Donegan  was  an  original  member  of  the 
ground  instruments  unit  attached  to  the  first Space Task  Group  (STG) formed 
in  1958 to  meet  the  challenge  of  Sputnik.  He   was  a  designer  of  the  original 
manned  spaceflight network  and directed GSFC’s manned  spaceflight activity 
until  1973,  when  he  became  head  of  a  new  Operations  Support  Computing 
Division  responsible  for  computer  support  to  bolh  manned  and  unmanned 
scientific  spacecraft.  He  was  operations  director  for  Project  Mercury  and 
coordinated  instantaneous  computer  services  for  Gemini  and  Apollo  flights, 
receiving  NASA’s  exceptional  service medal  i n   1969 for  his  work  on  Apollo. 
( W  Post,  Jan  18/80,  C-10) 

112 

JANUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS  

Aviation  Week  C?  Space  Technology reported  the  death  of  John  A .   (Shorty) 
Powers,  57,  who jo ined  NASA  as  a U.S.  Air  Force  lieutenant  co lone l  to  help 
manage  the  original  seven  Mercury   astronauts  and  became  known  a s   “ the  
voice  of  Mercury   control.”  Powers,  who  retired  from   NASA  in  1964,  was 
found  dead  of  natural  causes January  1 at his home   in  Phoen ix ,  Ar iz .   (AvWk ,  
Jan  7/80,  21) 

FBIS reported  further  comment on  the joint  flight of  Soyuz  T and Salyut  6, 
predicted  to  con t inue  “for   several months”  so that  experts  could  test  systems 
and  opera t ions  before proceeding to build  the new  spacecraf t  “in series.”  The  
propellant  tanks used  by the  engines  for  cru ise  and  for  dock ing  now  formed 
a  single  system;  in  the   past,  overuse  of  propellant  in  attitude  con tro l  mean t  
a  Soyuz would  have  to  re turn  to  Earth even  if  plenty  of  prope l lan t  was  left  in 
the  cru ise  engine.  This would  not be so in the new  engine.  The on-board com-  
pu ter  now  carr ied  out duties previously handled by  the  crew,  such as data pro-  
cessing  and  flight  or  system  control.  Also,  Soyuz  T h a d   a  panel  of  solar  bat- 
teries,  which  previous  spacecraft  did  not  have.  The   commentary  said  that 
previous S o p  spacecraf t  would  continue to be used  for the  immediate future, 
the  presen t  trial flight serv ing  a s  dress  rehearsal  for the  “many novel  technical 
features.”  (FBIS,  Moscow  Wrld  Svc  in  Russian,  Jan   8 /80)  

February 

February  6: NASA  announced  that  a joint  government-industry team would 
des ign ,  fabricate, and test a solar-power 20-kilowatt genera tor  for use by  small 
communities,  industries,  farms ,  military bases,  and  similar users.  Sponsored 
by the   Depar tmen t   of  Energy  (DOE) ,   the   project  would  foster  inexpensive 
ways  to use  solar energy to produce  electric power  and  industrial heat.  Under 
a $1.3 million Lewis Research Center (LeRC) contract, AiResearch Manufac- 
turing Company would  build the  engine,  and  Jet Propulsion  Laboratory (JPL) 
would  develop the  solar power  system  including the solar m irror  and receiver. 
(NASA  Release  80-17) 

Februury  7: NASA  reported  that  it  had  selected Boeing  and  Genera l  Electric 
for  con trac t  negotiations to  des ign ,  construct,  install, and  test multimegawatt 
advanced  wind-turbine  systems, in an LeRC-directed project  sponsored by  the  
DOE .   The  turbines, costing $ l5-$20  million each ,  would be used  at  sites with 
annual mean  wind  speed of  23 kilometers  (14  miles),  to be  selected by  DOE ,  
and  would  supply  electricity to  conventional  local  utility  systems  for  use  by 
the  general  public.  (NASA  Release  80-18) 

February 8:  NASA held a press briefing on  the  solar maximum mission slated 
for  launch  February  14.  Dr.  Thomas   A.  Mu tch ,   associate  adm in is tra tor  for 
space science,  said that exploration of Earth‘s nearest  star w a s   significant both 
scientifically  and  technologically.  Dr.  Harold  G laser   of  NASA’s  solar  ter- 
restrial division noted  that the  Sun ,  dominant energy source  for the  Earth, was 
a  variable  star  in  that  its  energy  output  varied  in  per iods   running  from   10 
minutes  to  11  years  (the  so-called  solar  cycle)  as  well  a s   over  per iods   of 
centuries. 
The  solar variations causes  variations on  Ear th ;  for  instance, the  solar flares 
known  to have  a  periodicity  of  ll years.  In  shor t  t ime  per iods ,   a  flare  is  the 
most  energetic  manifestation of  solar  changes,  with  significant effects:  Earth 
suffers  communications problems  along  with  a tmospher ic  heating  and  o ther  
phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed  into the  solar system would  affect 
a lmos t   all  the   planets.  The   focus  of  the  So lar   Max imum   Mission  (SMM) 
would  be to understand more  about solar flares in order  to predict  their occur-  
rence.  The   magnetic  field  of  the  Sun had  also  been  found  to  vary  with  a 
22-year  periodicity,  strongly  correlated  with  drought  in  the  U.S.  western 
plains. 
During the  17th century, solar activity apparently  ceased for about 80 years, 
a  period  called  the   Maunder  Minimum  which  featured  a  “m in i-Ice   Age” 
documented in nor thern  Europe .  Th is  seems to have happened more  frequen t-  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1980 

ly  than  previously  realized.  Space research  during;  the  last  20  years  had  pro- 
duced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be chang- 
ing  sides, with  a  corresponding  increase of  luminosity  or  incident radiation. 
Also,  the Sun  appeared to  oscillate rather  like a fluid, probably  because of  in- 
terior  activity  whose  nature  was  as  yet  unknown 
Joseph  Purcell  of  GSFC,  standing  in  for  project  manager  Peter  Burr  who 
was  ill,  described the spacecraft and its planned  reirieval by  the Space Shuttle, 
and the modular design that would  allow  it to be  serviced in orb i t  if  necessary. 
The   SMM  would  be  the  first NASA  satellite designed  for  retrieval  and  first 
to  include the  tracking and  data-relay  satellite capability;  at  5,000  pounds,  it 
would  also be  the heaviest payload  launched by  a Delta.  Purcell explained the 
24-hour  computer watch  on  the  SMM ,  calling  it  an  operation with  “very  in- 
tense man-machine  relationships.” 
Kenneth  J.  Frost,  also  of  GSFC   as  SMM  project  scientist,  described  the 
payload  as essentially one  experiment to determine the  nature of  solar  flares, 
using  seven  instruments  and  a  “very  detailed  :scientific  game  plan.”  In- 
vestigators needed  a 24-hour watch to  evaluate the plan’s  progress and to  react 
to  targets  of  opportunity  on  the  Sun.  For  instance, a  flare  on  the  Sun’s  west 
limb would be  observed on  Earth and by  a  series of  spacecraft in orbit around 
the Earth,  so that the quality and  completeness of  the observations would  “far 
outstrip anything  we’ve  ever had  before.”  The  SMM spacecraft would  have  a 
productive  lifetime of  about  two  years,  Frost  said,  and  the  scientific group  at 
GSFC  would  consist of  investigators prepared  to  spend  that  much  time  away 
from  their  home   institutions.  In  response  to  a  question,  he  pointed  out  that 
the  broad  range  of  the  electromagnetic spectrum 110 be  investigated by  SMM 
could  not  penetrate  Earth’s  atmosphere.  (Text,  Feb  8/80;  NASA  Release 
80-16) 

The   Washington Star  quoted  Defense  Secretary  Harold  Brown’s  statement 
before the Senate Committee on  Commerce ,  Science, and Transportation that 
NASA’s  Space Shuttle program  was  “critical”  to diefense planning.  The  com-  
mittee was considering the FY81 budget requests of  NASA  and DOD. ( WS ta r ,  
Feb  8/80, A-5) 

The   Naval  Research  Laboratory  (NRL)   reported  that  NASA’s  Heao  I had 
detected  “surprisingly intense”  X-ray  emission  from  a  pair  of  common  Sun- 
like stars in  the constellation Cepheus. The  pair  formed a  tight binary  revolv- 
ing around each other with  a period  of  only  six hours,  in  a  rotary motion  like 
“the  twin  blades of  an  eggbeater.”  The  gas  in  the  intervening space would  be 
stirred  violently  and  the  magnetic-field  lines  twisted,  stretched,  and  torn  in 
a  furious  turbulence,  the  resulting  X-ray  emission  being  “millions  of  times 
that expected from either  star alone.” The  Heao I  discovery was  recently con- 
firmed by the large telescope aboard Heao 2 (Einstein), and other stars of  that 
sort  would  be  checked  for  X-ray  emissions;  two  other  binaries  had  been 
detected  as  X-ray  sources.  (NRL  Release  3-1-80F) 

116 

FEBRUARY 1980 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

LaRC  reported  award  of  a  3-year  $4.6  million  con trac t  to  Sperry   Suppor t  
Serv ices  for development, opera t ion ,  and maintenance of  flight simulators, in- 
cluding  real-time  digital  programs  for  solving  research   problems  and  for 
aerodynam ics   and  space   flight.  Sperry  would  design  and  opera te   flight 
simulators and would  develop, integrate, and test electronic subsystems to use 
with  existing  data  systems.  (LaRC  Release  80-9) 

February 11: The  Washington Star said that an Aeroflot jetliner carry ing  Soviet 
Olympic con tenders  had landed at Kennedy International Airport in New York 
February  10.  This was the  second time in two weeks that the airline had broken 
its agreement not to land in New York; union ground crews had refused  to  ser- 
v ice  Soviet planes a s  a protest of  Soviet incurs ion  into Afghanistan.  New York 
airport  officials  had  unloaded  Aeroflot  passengers’  baggage  two  weeks 
previously  after  the   State  Department  intervened;  the  plane  had  sat  on  the  
ground  for  two  days  dur ing   arguments about  servicing  i t .   The   February  10 
flight went on after a two-hour  delay  to  Dulles  airport  in  Virginia,  where  122 
of  the   145 passengers boarded buses for  Lake Placid.  (W  Star, Feb  ll/80, A-1) 

February 12: On  the  basis of  photographs from  Manne r  9 and  Viking Orb i ter  
2,  Dr.  Kevin D.  Pang  and  a  team of  JPL  scientists decided  that  the   surface  
of  the   two  small  satellites of  Mars (Deimos  and  Phobos)  were  like  those  of 
meteorites  known  as  carbonaceous  chondrites,  strongly  suggesting  that  the  
two  or ig ina ted  elsewhere and were captured  by  the gravity  of  Mars   in  a  c lose  
encounter with the planet,  the New  York Ernes reported. The surfaces differed 
superficially, Phobos marked by  long grooves and Deimos with  a  covering  of 
loose  material,  but  reflected  light  identically.  (NY i ’ im s ,   Feb  12/80,  C-4) 

NASA  announced that  it would join the Ca l iforn ia  counc i l  of  the Amer ican  
Institute  of  Architects  (AIA)  and  the  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company 
(PG&E) in  building  an  Advanced Technology  Display  House  to open  in  1982 
at  Ames  Research  Cen ter   (ARC) ,   to  demons tra te   new  ma ter ia ls   and 
technology  from  aerospace   and  energy  research.  The   sponsors   signed  on 
February 4 this first-of-a-kind  par tnersh ip  agreement under which A IA  would 
con tr ibu te  innovative  architectural expertise; PG&E  would  share  its  research 
on  energy conservation;  and NASA  in  association  with  the   U.S.  Department 
of  Housing  and  Urban  Development  (HUD)  would  translate  aerospace 
technology  into  the   “down-to-earth  challenge”  of  home  building. 
The  design  would  inc lude   self-contained  water  and  sewage-treatment 
systems  and  energy-saving  lighting,  plumbing,  ventilation,  electrical  wiring, 
and app l iances ,  with  extensive use  of  solar energy, a l l  managed and monitored 
by a  centralized  computer.  Using  advanced  systems  and  materials  instead  of  
those  now  available to the building  industry,  the AIA would  design  the  house 
to  allow  addition  o r   deletion  of  components  (office  space,  physical  fitness 
areas) and to be dismantled for exhibition across  the United  States. Wider use  

117 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1980 

of  the  innovations would  lead  to  economies  in  mass  production  and  put  the 
new  ideas  within  reach  of  average  customers.  (ARC  anno  Feb  12/80) 

February  13:  NASA  announced  that  i t  would  maintain  an  expendable launch- 
vehicle capability at the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC)  in Florida 
as  a  backup  to  the  Space  Shuttle  during  transition  to  Space  Transportation 
System  (STS) operation.  It  would  use  the  standlard  Delta  launch  vehicle, 
capable of  putting  spacecraft weighing  up  to  1,100 kilograms  (2,400  pounds) 
into  orbit.  NASA  would  charge  commercial  Delta  users  $22  million  per 
launch  at  the  outset.  (NASA  Release  80-22) 

NASA reported  studies by  Western  Union  and  U . S .  Telephone & Telegraph 
warning of  a  fivefold  increase  in  satellite video  and data traffic by  the  end  of 
the  century,  By  the  year  2000,  executive  telecommunications  would  be  a 
substitute for business travel;  9 0%  of  the messages would  need  real-time (in- 
stantaneous) service  and  only  10% (such  as  electronic mail  delivery) would 
be   non-real-time.  The   demand   for  telecommunications  would  saturate 
domestic communications satellite capacity in the 4-6 GHz  (C-band) and  11-14 
GHz   (Ku-band)  frequencies. 
Having  decided  to  resume  advanced  communications  satellite  research, 
NASA would work  toward opening the frequency bimd a t  20 -30 GHz for com-  
mercial  use  in  the  next  two  decades.  This band  had  not  yet  been  used  in  the 
United  States.  The  20-to  30-GHz  (Ka-band)  o f f end   a  far  greater  range  than 
the  C-or  Ku-band;  capacities  of  communications  satellite  systems  using  it 
would  be  50  to  100  times  greater  than  those  working  in  C-band.  (NASA 
Release  80-19) 

NASA  announced  that  i t   had  deferred an  experiment to  use  zero  gravity  in  
studying cloud-physics phenomena,  formerly scheduled as a Spacelab payload 
in  1982. Technical problems in  transition from ground laboratory to space en- 
vironment  had  caused  delays  and  increased design  and  construction costs of 
the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory to the point of  terminating the GE 
contact.  NASA  would  use  the  equipment  in  its  :ground-based weather  and 
climate  research.  (NASA  Release  80-23) 

NASA  said that  it would  launch  seven sounding  rockets February  15 and  16 
from  the  San  Marco   platform  off  the  coast  of  Klmya  to  study  a  total  solar 
eclipse  visible  in  that  area  but  not  in   North  America,  recording  changes  in 
the electrical structure of Earth's  middle atmosphere and temperature distribu- 
tion  in  the  solar  corona  during  an  eclipse.  Two  Astrobee D  and  three  Super 
Arcas  rockets would  carry  payloads  from  Pennsylvania State University,  and 
two Black Brant rockets would carry payloads from the Los Alamos Scientific 
Laboratory  in  New  Mexico.  Piggyback on  one  of  the Black  Brants  would  be 
a  Johns Hopkins  University  experiment  to measure  ultraviolet  zodiacal  light 
from  the  solar  corona.  Instrument  packages  carried  to  330  kilometer 

118 

FEBRUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

(205-mile)  altitude  would  make  measurements dur ing   parachute  descen t .  
GSFC  would  manage  the   eclipse  study  with  suppor t   from Wallops  F l igh t  
Cen ter   (WFC)  in  rocketry,  ins trumen ta t ion ,  and  range  suppor t .   The   mobile 
launch platform  in the Indian Ocean was operated by  the  University of Rome’s 
cen ter   for  aerospace   research .   (NASA  Release  80-24 ;  WFC   Release  80-1) 

February  15: NASA  launched  a t   1 0 5 7  a .m .   February  14  the  SMM   obser-  
vatory  from  Cape  Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a circular  orbit  360 miles 
above  the   equator.  The   5,200-pound  spacecraf t  c am e d   ins trumen ts  to  study 
solar flares [see February  81  over a period  of 2 years;  the   11-year cycle of  solar 
activity was  entering  its most turbu len t  phase,  with  flares erup t ing  on  the Sun 
once  o r   tw ice   a  day  and  superf lares   causing  a tmospher ic   d is turbances   on 
Earth once  a month.  The  SMM  launch cos t  the United  States $99  million,  in- 
cluding  $20  million  for  the  Delta.  (WP o s t ,  Feb  W/80,  A-7;  NASA  Release 
80-16) 

NASA  reported  that a final test firing of  the Shuttle solid-fuel boos ter  mo tor  
February  13 in the  Utah deser t  was  successful,  and  the motor would  be  ready 
for  flight  a s   soon  as  test-data  results  were  available. Tests  of  this  motor  had 
begun in July  1977 with  static firing of  the  first of  four pro to types ;  three more  
development tests followed,  the   last  February   17,  1979. 
A  series of  test  firings of  flight-type motors began June   13, 1979,  to qualify 
them  for manned  flight; the  test ju s t  concluded was  the   third  and  final  firing 
of  that  series.  Robert E.  L inds trom ,  manager of  the  Shuttle projects o f i c e  of 
MSFC,  said completion of the  tes ts   meant  that  the  solid-fuel booster motors 
would  perform successfully  in  flight.  After  prope l lan t  burnou t ,   the  boos ters  
would  separa te  and  plunge  into the   ocean   for  retrieval  and   reuse. 
Two of  the  solid-fuel boos ters  were already on the  launcher  a t  KSC  awaiting 
integration  with  o ther   components  (external  tank and  the   orbiter  itself)  in 
prepara t ion  for  the   first  Shuttle  flight  later  this  year.  The  assemb led  motor, 
major component of  the booster, was  more  than  35 meters (ll5 feet) long  and 
3.5 meters (12 feet) in diameter,  largest  rocket motor of  its type  developed for 
space   flight  and  the   first  built  for  manned  spacecraft;  i t   would  genera te   3 
million  pounds  of  thrust.  (MSFC  Release  80-18;  NASA  Release  80-25) 

NASA  reported  a  major  milestone  for  a  Shuttle main  eng ine   February   8, 
with completion of  a  second series of  flight certification tests  at  the  National 
Space  Technology  Labora tor ies  (NSTL) near  Bay  S t .  Lou is ,  Miss.  In the  two 
series of  tests  (mostly  run  for  520  seconds a t   100% of  rated power  level), the 
engine accumulated more  than  l0,OOO  seconds  of  firing time, equivalent to that 
requ ired   for  19  Shuttle flights;  in  one   test,  the  engine  ran at  102% of  rated 
power,  and  in  ano ther  it ran  for  823  seconds to  simulate  an  abor ted  m iss ion .  
The   first  series of  tests last year  began March  27  and  ended  June 27.  (MSFC 
Release  80-19;  NASA  Release  80-26) 

119 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1980 

February  17: The   General Accounting Office  (GAO)  warned  that  the  United 
States was  in danger of  losing its space technology  lead unless it invested more  
in the new  area of  space manufacturing. On Ear th ,  gas bubbles rise in a liquid, 
heavy particles and  dense metals settle at the bottom of  a solution, and heated 
fluids  swirl  in  random  and  unpredictable directions,  all  because  of  gravity. 
The   weightlessness  of  space  permits  formation  of  composite  materials  and 
facilitates  both  separation  and  synthesis. 
The  NY   Ernes  reported  a  GAO  statement  that  the  United  States  should  be 
spending  two  to  three  times  the  $20 million  in  NASA’s  current  budget,  just 
to maintain parity with other nations  such a s  the Soviet Union, Japan,  and  the 
11  European  members   of  ESA.  GAO  said  that  industrialists believed  being 
“first  to  market”  with  new  products would  give a  firm the best  chance of  re- 
maining  competitive. GAO  predicted  that  by  the  end  of  the  century  orbiting 
factories would be producing new  or better metals  and alloys, perfect crystals, 
composite  materials,  glass,  semiconductors,  and  high-purity  chemicals, 
medicines,  and  vaccines  that  cannot  be  made  on  Earth.  If  the  United  States 
is to exploit this new  field, the GAO  said, its goveniment must work out a plan 
with  private  industry,  and  both  must  be  prepared  for  financial  risks.  (N Y  
Ernes,  Feb  17/80, 59) 

February 18: ESA announced the inauguration March 6 in Geneva of  the Stella 
experiment using the Ors satellite to  transmit scientific data a t  high speeds bet- 
ween  high-energy  physics  laboratories.  Participating in  the  ceremony  would 
be  Roy  Gibson,  ESA  director  general;  J.B. Adams,  executive director of  the 
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) ;  L .  van  Hove, research 
director  for  CERN ;   and  F.  Braun,  director  geneiral  for  the  European  com-  
munities  commission  on  internal market  and  industrial  affairs. 
Some   1,600 scientists from  ESA  member   states used  CERN’s  accelerators 
and high-energy  particle detectors for fundamental  research into the  structure 
of  matter.  Stella would  transmit  electronic  data  at  speeds  up  to  1 megabit  (1 
million bits  of  data) per  second  from  CERN   to member-state  laboratories at 
Hamburg,  Germany ;   Saclay,  France;  Didcot,  United  Kingdom;  Pisa,  Italy; 
Dublin,  Ireland;  and  Graz,  Austria.  The   speed  of  transmission  would  be 
similar to  the working  speeds of  computers  in  the  participating  laboratories, 
eliminating the delay  of  sending magnetic  tapes  through  the mail.  (ESA  Info 
Bltn  6) 

February 20: Eighteen years  after he blasted  away  from a  launch pad  at Com- 
plex  14,  Cape   Canaveral Air  Force  Station,  to  become  the  first Amer ican  to 
orbit  the  Ear th ,   Sen.  John  Glenn  (D-Ohio)  returned  to  dedicate  a  marble 
memorial  of  his  flight  and  those  of  Mercury  astronauts  Scott  Carpenter, 
Walter Schirra,  and Gordon  Cooper, donated  in  1978 by  the Amer ican  Monu- 
ment  Association  but  held  back  for  dedication  until  gantries  at  the  site were 
removed  and  sold  for  scrap. 
The  Washington Star said the site was now  desolate, “surrounded by  palmet- 

120 

FEBRUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

tos and visited only by  an  occasional  alligator o r  rattlesnake.”  About 600 per-  
sons a t  the  ceremony heard  Glenn descr ibe  the new  U.S.  goal  of  rou t ine  and 
economical access  to  space with  the   Space Shuttle.  ( W  Star, Feb  2Y80,  A-2; 
Feb.  12/84 1OA;  NASA  Actv,  May  80,  19) 
T&y, 

NASA  reported  that  Dr.  Cyr i l   P o n n a m p e m a ,   director  of  the   University 
of  Maryland labora tory  of  chemical evolution, and  his researchers  had recent- 
ly  discovered  am ino   ac ids   (basic  building  blocks  of  life)  in  Antarctic 
meteorites presented  by NASA.  The  Antarctic program began  three  years  ago 
as a coopera t ive  venture of NASA  and the National Sc ience  Foundation (NSF) 
to  collect meteorites under  extremely clean conditions  like those under which 
Apollo  astronauts  obtained  lunar   samples,  so  free of  contamination that  they 
could  offer  ev idence  of  any  organic  history  before  they  impacted Ear th .   The  
agency  had  given  the  team Antarctic meteorite  and  lunar  surface  samples,  as 
well  as  data obtained  by deep-space probes  on  a tmospheres  of  o ther  planets. 
The   labora tory   examined  the   lunar  and  meteor  samp les   for  evidence  of 
organic ma ter ia l  and tried to create molecules similar to those  present  in Ear th  
and  the  planetary  a tmospheres  before  life  began. 
Using  gas-chromatograph  techniques  to  identify  right-and  left-handed 
molecules  of  amino  ac ids   (the  direction  in  which  a  beam  of  polarized  light 
sent  through  a  solution  of  the  material  would  turn),  the   team  had  obtained 
strong  evidence of  both  right-  and  left-handed  amino  ac ids   in  the  Antarctic 
meteorites.  S ince  all  Earth  life forms contain only  left-handed molecules,  the  
preorganic  matter  in  the  meteorites  had  to  be  formed  somewhere  else.  The  
meteorites used  by  the  team were about 4 . 5  billion years old; the  oldest Earth 
material  identified  so far  was  3.7  billion  years  old,  and  some  of  it  contained 
evidence of  organic  matter.  “The   processes  we  postulated  as  taking  p lace  on 
the  ear th   before  life  began  seem  to  have  taken  place  somewhere  else  also,” 
Ponnamperuma said.  “Wha t   this  implies  is  that  all those  events which  led  to 
life may  be  common  in  the  universe,  so what we  said  happened  on  the  earth 
may  be  happening  somewhere  else.”  (NASA  Release  80-21) 

The  Washington Star reported on a campaign to raise $1 million  for a Viking 
fund  to  collect  and  preserve  data  from Mars.  The  Viking  landers   “sitting  on 
the  red  sands of  Mars  and  sending back  informa t ion”  could keep doing so for 
the next  10  years,  the   story  said,  but  NASA  had  decided  that  no  life existed 
on Mars  and stopped listening to the Viking transmissions.  Among  those  sup- 
por t ing   the   fundra is ing  campaign was  Ben  Bova,  editor  of  Omni magazine, 
who  said  “ the   only  people  who  have  lost  interest  in  space   a re   here   in 
Washington.”  NASA  had  not  officially endorsed  the  effort,  but  “at  least one  
spokesman” said the agency would be delighted to accept the  contribution.  (W  
Star, Feb  20/80,  C-1) 

F e bm r y  21: Radio Corpora t ion  of  America  (RCA)  said it would  lease capac i-  
ty  on   an  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  (AT&T)  satellite to  make  up  for 

121 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1980 

its own  satellite that disappeared after launch  [see ]December 11,  19791.  Eleven 
cable television companies that were  to use  the  lost  satellite could now  begin 
sending programs  to  cable  systems as  early  as April  1.  Loss of  RCA  Satcom 
3  had  threatened  the  cable  television  industry;  twenty  channels were  in  use 
on  one  RCA  satellite,  and  eleven  more   had  been  scheduled  for  the  lost 
satellite.  Under  the arrangement with  AT&T,  RCA  would pay  $70,000 a month 
for  each channel which  it would  then  lease at  $4O,OOO  a month;  an  l8-month 
lease  would  lose  RCA  about  $5.9 million  including  expenses.  ( W  Star,  Feb 
2V80,  C-9) 

February  22:  NASA  reported  that  the  SMM   launch  February  14  was  suc- 
cessful, the orbit close to  prediction and  no  functional problems in spacecraft 
o r  experiment systems. The  only  anomaly during early orbits was   inability to 
compute roll reference positions, a  figure needed  to conduct slew maneuvers. 
The  cause was  incorrect  axis translation by  ground processing of  star-tracker 
output;  the  program  was  modified  and  all  systems  were  now  performing 
within  specifications.  (NASA  MOR  S-826-80-01  [postlaunch]  Feb  22/80) 

FBIS reported launch of Japan’s second communications satellite CS-B from 
Tanegashima Island at 5:35 p.m.  local time. CS-B would replace Ayame (Iris), 
whose  signal was  lost when it  collided with  its apogee motor  12 seconds after 
ignition February 5,  1979. Ayame 2 would  reach  sta.tionary orbit over northern 
New  Guinea by March   10:  First  stationary comsat  designed  to use millimeter- 
wave  transmissions in  communications experiments, Ayume  2 was  1.4 meters 
long and  1.6 meters tall, weighed about  130 kilograms, and  cost 6 billion yen; 
it  would  be  Japan’s  fifth  stationary  satellite. 
[FBIS  reported  February  25  that,  8  seconds  after  firing  an  apogee motor 
to put the spacecraft into a circular orbit, Japan’s National Space Development 
Agency  lost radio contact with Ayame 2 also. With 30 billion yen  spent to build 
and  launch  the  two  experimental  comsats,  the  siuccessive  failures  were  “a 
shock to the agency and the Science and Technology Agency.”  Japan’s tracking 
stations continued to send radio signals in an effort to restore contact, officials 
said,  but  the  two  failures would  cast  a  shadow  on   future  satellite-launching 
plans.]  (FBIS,  Tokyo  Kyodo  in  English,  Feb  22,  25/80) 

Today  newspaper  said  NASA  Associate  Administrator  John  Yardley  had 
“acknowledged  for  the  first  time”  that  NASA  engineers were  so  concerned 
with  the  Shuttle tiles  guarding  against heat  of  reentry  that  they  “virtually  ig- 
nored whether  the tiles  would  remain  stuck to  the  spaceship.” Yardley  said at 
a  briefing  that  tiles  still headed  the  list  of  Shuttle: problems;  he  said  NASA 
was  studying alternative heat protection systems using  technology unavailable 
10 years ago. He  added  that  “NASA  and Rockwell both  have to  take  a  share” 
of  blame  for  not  testing  the  insulating  system  sooner.  NASA  originally 
estimated  the  cost  of  each  custom-built tile  covering  the  Shuttle at  $500  for 
fabrication and  installation; Yardley  said  that  the  tiles  would  now  cost  three 

FEBRUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

to  four  times  that  much.  The  actual price  tag  for  the  Shuttle was  now  about 
$8.7  billion;  the  cost  projected  i n   1971  was  $5.2  billion.  (Today, Feb  22/80, 
18-A) 

February  25 :  The   Washington Star  reported  that  the  Space Environment Ser- 
vices  Center  at  Boulder,  Colo.,  was  predicting  an  ll-year  peak  in  sunspots; 
solar outbursts in  coming months  could  raise magnetic  storms on Earth,  foul 
up  radio  communications,  and  cause  computers  to  go  haywire.  Gary  
Heckman ,   head  of  the  center,  said  solar  flares  might  have  set  off  a  civil- 
defense  circuit  in  Canada  that  automatically  put  radio  stations  in  an  alert 
mode.  The   upcoming  flare  peak  might  be  the  second  most  active  since  the 
record  of  1957.  ( W  Star,  Feb  25 /80 ,   A-9) 

February 26: A  United Press International (UPI) report from Moscow  said the 
Soviet Union had unveiled its 350-passenger airbus with  a timesaving baggage 
compartment where  riders  would  load  and  unload  their own  luggage. The  I l-  
yushin  86,  20  feet  wide  and  193  feet  long,  carried  70  more   passengers  than 
the A-300  French/German  airbus;  it  had  maximum  range  of  3,000 miles  and 
a cruising speed of  600 mph.  It had  been  test-flown to  the Black  Sea area and 
to  Tashkent  and  would  begin  regular  service  June  1  to  Sochi,  a  resort  area; 
the  new  plane  would  eventually  absorb  a  fifth of  USSR  domestic  passenger 
service,  officials  said,  especially  on  peak  Black  Sea  routes.  The   prototype 
flew  in  1976,  and  fulltime  construction began  in  1977. 
The  new  baggage-handling  feature had  a  short  ladder  by  which  boarding 
passengers  could  reach a  lower  compartment  with  bins  numbered  to  match 
their  seats. After putting  their  luggage in  the proper  bin,  they  would  climb to 
the  passenger  sections on  an  upper  deck.  Officials  said  the  system  tested  in 
a  mockup  could  load  or  unload  all  350 passengers within  20  to  25  minutes. 
(Western  aviation  experts  said  the  11-86  was  a ’  gas-guzzler,  its  four  “fuel- 
inefficient” engines capable of  generating only  28,000 pounds  of  thrust com-  
pared  with  45,000  pounds  for  western  widebody  planes.)  (UPIIW  Star,  Feb 
280,  C-11) 

The   Washington Star  reported  that  cable  television  operators  awaiting  a 
replacement  for  the  lost  RCA  Satcom  3 had  found  that  they  would  need  big 
new  dish  receivers  for  signals  from  the  Comstar  satellite RCA  planned  to 
lease.  (W  Star,  Feb  27/80, C-3) 

February 28: ARC  said that it would  close the Pioneer project office effective 
February 29  after  16  years  of  sending spacecraft to various planets and  to  or- 
bits  around  the  Sun.  The   Space Missions  Branch  at  ARC  would  handle  the 
seven Pioneers  still in interplanetary space: numbers 6  through  9 had  formed 
a  network  of  solar  weather  stations  around  the  Sun,  and  Pioneer  10  and 
Pioneer Saturn was  both  headed  out of  the  solar system after  flights to  Jupiter 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1980 

and  Saturn. Pioneer Venus  was  in orbit about  that  planet photographing cloud 
circulation  and  sending  back  the  first  detailed  maps  of  Venus’s  surface. 
ARC  director  C .A .   Syvertson  in  a  staff  memo  said  that  [project manager] 
“Charles  Hall  and  all who have participated  in  the program  deserve  our  con- 
gratulations  and  a  hearty  well  done.”  When  NASA  Headquarters  recently 
presented  a  number  of  NASA  medals  and  other  recognition  to  Pioneer  in- 
dividuals  and  teams,  Hall  received  NASA’s  distinguished  service  meda l ,   its 
highest  award,  before  his  retirement  after  30  yea.rs  with  the  agency.  (ARC 
Release  80-4) 

Th e  International  Telecommunications  Satellite ,Organization  (INTELSAT) 
reported  that  i t  had  boolungs  for 260 h o u r s  of  international  satellite television 
when  the winter Olympic games opened a t  Lake Placid,  N.Y.;  a tally  after the 
games  showed  that  448 hours  had  been  used ,   nearly  double  the   original  de- 
mand.  Countries receiving direct broadcasts  of  the games included the United 
Kingdom, France, West  Germany, Yugoslavia,  Australia,  Japan,  Mexico,  and 
Venezuela;  these  would  have  relayed  many  of  the  telecasts  to  a  large  number 
of  other  nations  through  Earth  networks,  INTELSAT  said.  (INTELSAT 
Release  80-02-1) 

February  29:  MSFC   said  that  a  second  full-duration  test  of  the  Shuttle main- 
engine system February 2 8  was  successful,  and all  objectives were met during 
the 555-second  firing.  For  the  first  time,  the  three  engines  in  the  system were 
steered while being throttled back  from  100% thrust,  and the oxygen  tank  was 
allowed  to  run  dry.  (MSFC  Release  80-27;  NASA  Release  80-31) 

NASA  announced  selection  of  General  Electric  and  TRW  Systems,  Inc . ,   to 
negotiate  contracts  for  $500,000  six-month  design  studies  of  the  gamma-ray 
observatory  mission.  One   of  the  contractors  would  be  chosen  to  build  and 
operate  the  satellite  under  a  follow-on  contract  after  Congress  approved  the 
mission. 
If approved,  the observatory  would  carry  five large gamma-ray  instruments 
into  space to observe gamma-ray sources and obtain  fundamentally new  infor- 
mation about stars,  the  galaxy,  and the universe.  It would be  a Shuttle payload 
in  the  mid-1980s  designed  for  retrieval  after  a  i:wo-year  mission  lifetime; 
GSFC   would  manage  the  project.  (NASA  Release  80-30) 

D u r i n g   February:   D r .   R i ch a r d   T.  W h i t c om b ,   59 ,   t h e   “ l e g e n d a r y  
aerodynamicist”  inventor  of  the  area  rule  and  the  supercritical  wing,  retired 
February  29  after  37  years  of  service  with  NASA.  Graduated  in  1943 with 
honors  in mechanical engineering  from Worcester  Polytechnic Institute, Whit- 
comb  said  an  article  in Fortune magazine  impelled  him  to  apply  for  a job   a t  
NACA’s  Langley  Memorial  Aeronautical  Laboratory.  His  “brilliant  career” 
there  included  three  landmark ideas,  all  radical  deipartures  from  conventional 

124 

FEBRUARY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

aerodynam ic   theory,  all  developed  in  Langley  wind  tunne ls ,   and  all 
successful, 
His  honors  included  the  Collier  Trophy  for  applying  his  “area  rule”  to 
design  of  supersonic  a ircraf t ,   and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  exceptional  serv ice  
medal  (highest  civilian  award)  in  1954;  NACA’s  first  distinguished  service 
medal  in   1956; NASA’s  medal  for  exceptional  scientific  achievement  and  the 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautic’s  Sylvanus  Albert  Reed 
award,  1969; the National Medal of Science, highest honorary  scientific award 
of  the  U.S. government,  1973; in  1974,  the  National  Aeronautic  Association’s 
Wright  Brothers  memorial  trophy,  the  AIAA  aircraft  design  award,  and  a 
$25,000  cash  award  (largest  ever  given by  NASA  to  an  individual)  for  inven- 
tion of  the  supercritical  wing;  in  1978, the National  Business Aircraft  Associa- 
tion  award.  (NASA  Release  74-148,  80-38) 

NASA announced that Dr. William C. Schneider, associate administrator  for 
space  tracking  and  data  systems,  would  retire  from  federal  serv ice  February 
29.  H e  joined  the  Gemini  program  in  1963 after  two  years  a t   International 
Telephone  and  Telegraph’s  (ITT)  federal  Laboratories  as  director  of  space 
systems,  having  also  worked  for  the  U .S .  Navy  and  for  NACA.  H e   received 
NASA’s  exceptional  service  medal  for  h is   work  as  mission  director  for  7  of 
10 Gemini  missions.  From   July  1967 to  December  1968 he   directed  Apollo 
missions  beginning  with  Apollo  4  and  won  NASA‘s  distinguished  serv ice  
medal  for  the  success  of  Apollo  8,  first  manned  flight  around  the  moon.  H e  
directed  the  Skylab program  from  December  1968 to  July  1974,  and  with  the 
three Skylab  crews  received  the Collier  Trophy  in  1973.  H e   would become  a 
vice  president  of  Computer  Sciences  Corpora t ion .   (NASA  anno ,  Feb  22 /80 ;  
NASA  Release  80-27) 

LaRC announced that four of  its top managers  left NASA February  29. They 
were  deputy  director  Oran W.  Nicks;  associate director  Dr.  John  E. Duberg; 
Richard R .  Heldenfels,  director  for  structures;  and James E. Stitt, director  for 
electronics.  The  latter three ,  who began the ir  federal  service  in the  1940s with 
NACA  (Dr.  Duberg  in  1943,  Heldenfels  and  Stitt  in  1947),  would  retire. 
Nicks,  who  since  1970  had  been  deputy  director  a t   LaRC,  began  a t   NASA 
Headquarters  1960 working  on   unmanned  programs;  he   would  become   ex- 
ecutive director  of  the  research  foundation  a t  Texas A&M  University.  (LaRC 
Release  80-14) 

Th e   Air  Force   Systems  Command  (AFSC)  Newsreview  reported  that  A ir  
Force  Secretary  Dr.  Hans M .  Ma rk  proposed  establishment of  a  consolidated 
space  operations  center  near  Peterson  A ir   Force  Base,  Colorado,  combining 
two major mission  elements of  the  U .S .  Air  Force:  satellite control  and d irec-  
tion  of  future  DOD   Shuttle  operations.  The   Colorado  location,  pr ime   can-  
didate  ou t  of  13 potential  sites,  would  offer  proximity  to  the  North  American 
Air  Defense  Command  (NORAD)  complex  at  Cheyenne  Mountain;  it  would 

125 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1980 

employ  about  300 military,  100 U.S.  Air  Force civilian,  and  1,400 contractor 
employees.  (AFSC  Newsreview,  Feb/80,  1) 

FBIS reported  the 11-18 airliner that  carried a group of  Soviet journalists and 
researchers  to  check  the possibility  of  regular  a ir   service  through  Africa  and 
the  Middle  East  to  the  Antarctic,  had  returned  safely  to  Moscow  after 
establishing the  flying  time  for the  new  route  as  2;'  hours.  Previously,  the  trip 
home  by  sea  had  taken  1 month.  (FBIS,  Moscow  Wrld  Svc,  Feb  23/80) 

126 

March 

March  3: NASA  reported  award  of  contracts  to  Martin  Marietta  and  Aerojet 
worth  $750,000  and  $350,000,  respectively,  for  a  liquid-propellant  boost 
module  to  increase  the  cargo-carrying  capacity  of  the  Shuttle’s external  tank .  
The   goal  would  b e   to  provide  additional  thrust  by  adapting  portions  of  the 
Titan,  still used  by  the  U .S .  Air  Force  a s  its  heaviest  intercontinental  ballistic 
missile.  The  companies, which  had been building  the Titan and  its engines for 
the  U.S.  Air  Force,  were  considered  the  logical  choice  for  adapting  the 
booster  to  the  Shuttle.  Th e   studies,  managed  by  MSFC   would  be   completed 
by  the  end  of  September  1980.  (NASA  Released  80-32;  MSFC   Released 
80-28) 

LaRC,  manager  of  the  Scout program,  announced  that  NASA  had  awarded 
Hampton  Technical  Center  (a  division  of  Kentron  International,  Inc . ,   of 
Dallas)  a  $2 .2  million.contract  modification  calling  for  ten  Algol  l l lA  Scout 
rocket  motors  by  March  31,  1981.  Pr ime   contractor  for  Scout  was  formerly 
Vought Corpora t ion ,  a lso  of  Dallas;  the modification  was made with  the  same  
parent  f irm ,  Ling  Temco Vought. Name  changes  and  other  corporate  restruc- 
turings  would  streamline  the work  done  for NASA,  with  estimated  savings of 
about  $1  million  to  be   gained  by  contracting  with  a  subsidiary  already 
qualified  to build  and  load  the motors.  To  be  qualified,  a f irm  must  have fired 
two  o r   three  launch  vehicles,  a  process  costing  about  $1  million.  Scou t ,  
NASA’s  smallest  vehicle,  was  a  four-stage  solid-propellant  rocket  that  had 
launched  payloads  for  NASA,  DOD,  and  several  foreign  countries.  (LaRC 
Release  80-15) 

FBIS  carried  a  Reuters  dispatch  quoting  diplomatic  sources  in  Beijing  that 
the People’s Republic  of  Ch ina  had  launched  a CCS-3  limited-range  intercon- 
tinental  ballistic  missile  (ICBM)  February  9  from  Jilin  province  in  northeast 
China to an impact area  in the  far western  Xinjiang  region,  a 2530-mile  flight 
across a largely unpopulated, mainly deser t  region.  The  People’s Republic had 
conducted  a t   least  six  missile  tests  in  1979 over  distances  much  shorter  than 
the  February  9  test.  O ther   sources  said  the  Chinese  were  working  on  a  full- 
scale ICBM  with  a range  that  would bring  the United  States,  western  Europe, 
and  all  of  the  Soviet  Union  within  striking  distance.  Test  of  such  a  missile 
would  need  an  ocean-impact  area  such  as  the  southern  Indian  Ocean ,  but  no 
such  firings  had  occurred .   (FBIS,  Reuters  in   English,  Mar   3 /80)  

March 5:  Newspapers  reported  a  consent  agreement  in  a  suit  by  Ted  Turner’s 
Cable  News Network  (CNN)  against  RCA,  for  space  on  Sutcom 1 to  replace 

I27  

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

MA R CH   1980 

that  lost  when  Satcom  3  disappeared,  whereby  C N N   would  use  a  Satcorn  1 
channel  for  six months and would  drop a demand  for $35 million  in  damages. 
RCA had  said  its clients could  use  transponders  on  the  Cornstar 0 2  leased by 
AT&T  from  Comsat  General;  however?  cable  operators  whose  antennas 
received  Satcom signals would  need  additional  expensive ground  receivers  to 
get  signals  from  Comstar.  Turner’s  CNN   clients  around  the  United  States 
could  now  continue  to  receive  the  24-hour  all-news  service  for  six  months 
without  the  additional  expense.  The   lawsuit  would  continue  in  Atlanta’s  U.S. 
district  court.  ( W  Star,  Mar  5/80,  C-5;W Post,  Mar  7/80,  C-10) 

March  6: Press  reports  said  NASA  faced  a $760 million  (14%) cut  in   its F B I  
funding  as  President  Carter  announced  a  $20 billion  cut  in  the  entire  federal 
budget.  Th e  Washington Post  said Dr.  Robert A .  Frosch, NASA  administrator, 
had  protested  the   size  of  the  cut  to  the  Office  oii‘ Management  and  Budget. 
Th e  White House had  originally  asked  NASA  to  suggest  reductions of  $630 
million.  Defense/Space Business Daily  said  the cuts would  eliminate  two  new 
NASA  starts  in  FY81,  the  gamma-ray  observatory  and  the  national  oceanic 
satellite  system,  as   well  as  the  Galileo  mission  to  Jupiter.  On  March  5  the 
House  subcommittee  on  space  science  and  applications  had  unanimously 
passed  NASA’s  $300  million  FY80  supplemental  request  for  Shuttle- 
development  funds;  subcommittee  chairman  Rep.  Don  Fuqua   (D -F l a . )  said 
NASA  should  share the FY81 cuts, but  18%  was  too  high.  (DISBD, Mar  6/80. 
25;  W Post,  Mar   7/80,  A-2) 

ESA  announced  it  would  undertake  a  new  scientific  project  called  Hippar- 
cos,  an  astrometric  satellite  to  measure  positions,  proper  motions,  and 
parallaxes of celestial bodies and define the position and displacement velocity 
of  about  100,000  stars.  Th e  data  would  help  solve  fundamental  problems  i n  
astronomy.  The   376-kilogram  advanced-design  satellite  with  a  2.5-year 
lifetime  would  be  launched  into  a  geostationary  orbit  by  Ariane  in  mid-1986. 
(ESA  Info  Bltn  7) 

March   7:  Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) reported  that  test pilot  John 
M a k e  had made test  flights i n   the Gossamer Albatross,  part of a jo in t  DFRC- 
LaRC  program  using  the  humanpowered  vehicle  to  collect  data  on  large 
lightweight  craft.  Manke’s  first  flights were  human  powered,  as  h e  pedaled  a 
bicycle-like  arrangement  to  turn  the  propeller;  for  later  flights,  under  the 
direction  of  veteran  Albatross  pilot  Bryan  Allen  who  had  flown  it  over  the 
English Channel, he used  small battery-powered  samarium cobalt motors pro- 
viding  about  0.7  horsepower. 
Manke reached  an  altitude of  15  to  2 0  feet, mo te  than he  “ felt comfortable 
with,”  and  reported  that  the Albatross  was  nothin:  like anything  he had  flown 
before,  requiring  concentration  to  keep  it going  straight.  Short  flights did  not 
require  an extra amount of  legpower  to  keep  it gorng,  b u t  longer flights would 
be   “an  exercise  i n   exercise.”  (FRC  X-Press,  Mar   7/80,  3) 

128 

MARCH  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Aviation  Week & Space  Technology magazine  reported  the  launch  March   3  
of  a  DOD  ocean  surveillance system  from  Vandenberg Air  Force Base on  an 
Atlas F   into  a   1,115-kilometer by  1,053-kilometer (715  by  654 mile) orbit with 
107.1-minute period,  and  63.5  inclination. The   report  said  that,  on  the  basis 
of  earlier  tests,  the  system  would  use  three  spacecraft carried  into  orbit  on  a  
mother  satellite  and  dispersed  into  parallel  orbits  with  latitude  as  well  as 
time/distance separation. (Earlier clusters developed by  the NRL  under code- 
name  Whitecloud  were  launched  April  30,  1976,  and  December   8,  1977,  into 
orbits  having  parameters  nearly  identical  to  those  of  last  week’s  launch.) 
The  feasibility of  using multiple satellites to eavesdrop on  and direction-find 
USSR  ships and  submarines was  first demonstrated by  three NRL  spacecraft 
launched December  14,  1971,  and dispersed into separate orbits. The   1976 and 
1977 missions that preceded  the March  3 launch incorporated a   107-minute or- 
bital  period  to  allow  about  1,666  miles  between  successive  cluster  passes. 
From   a   700-mile  altitude  the  spacecraft  could  receive  signals  from  surface 
vessels  more  than  2,000 miles  away,  offering  overlapping  coverage  on  suc- 
cessive passes.  Similarity of  displacement distances  perpendicular  to  the  or- 
bital  planes  of  the  1976  and  1977  clusters  indicated  the  use  of  interferometry 
to  pinpoint  the  location  of  Soviet vessels.  Deployment  of  the  active  satellites 
by  the  carrier  normally  occurred  over  a   period  of  days;  late  last  week, 
NORAD  was  still  logging  the  mission  a s   a   single  spacecraft.  (A vw k ,  Mar  
10/80,  18) 
-Aviation  Week & Space  Technology reported that  the U.S.  Court of  Ap- 
peals  had  upheld  a   FCC  authorization of  January  1977 that  allowed  Satellite 
Business Systems (SBS) to  own  and  operate a  specialized all-digital domestic 
communications satellite system. AT&T, Western  Union, AmSa tCorp ,  and the 
U .S .  Justice Department had  appealed  the FCC   ruling. SBS had  proceeded to 
develop  the  system,  its  first  satellite scheduled  for  launch  in  October  1980. 
(Avwk ,  Mar   10/80,  2 2 )  

March  12:  MSFC   reported  that  a   major  reclamation  effort  had  recovered 
thousands  of  dollars  worth  of  critical  o r   valuable  materials  from  center 
laboratories. Used for electrical contracts, o r  for plating to protect against cor- 
rosion,  were  go ld ,   silver,  platinum, 
ir id ium ,   o sm ium ,   rhodium,  and 
ruthenium;  other  substances  not  necessarily  “precious”  but  consisting  of 
strategic  materials  were  a lum inum   oxide,  beryllium,  cadmium,  cobalt, 
chromite, industrial diamond,  ruby  and  sapphire bearings,  and  other  rarities. 
DOD  and  the  General  Services Administration  operated  a   government-wide 
program to conserve such materials, recover them  where  feasible, and  transfer 
them  to  a   defense  stockpile. 
Before  recycling  materials at  the  center,  MSFC  property  managers  had  to 
decide whether  recovery was  possible or profitable: for  instance,  some center 
groups had  been  “banking”  silver recovered from X-ray  f i lms  and  developing 
solution.  The   photo  lab and  documentation  repository had  contributed much 
because of  the amounts  of  film  used;  the medical  center also turned  in  silver 

129 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

MARCH   1980 

recovered  from  X-ray  film  developing  as  well  as  :scrap X-ray  film.  Materials 
from  MSFC   were  sent  to  a  federal  “bank”  in  N I : ~  Jersey  for  recovery  and 
credit to NASA’s  account. Last year  MSFC  recovered  and  shipped to  the bank 
324  troy  ounces  of  silver-bearing  photoprocessing  residue  and  2 , 400  pounds 
of  scrap  film;  assuming  90% recovery  from  the  residue  and  2%-by-weight 
recovery  from scrap, MSFC’s yield  would be  worth  $30,000 at current prices. 
(MSFC  Release  80-34) 

Th e  National Aeronautic Association (NAA) announced that  it would  award 
the Collier Trophy,  oldest U.S.  aviation  award,  to  :Dr.  Paul  MacCready  for his 
Gossamer  Condor  (first  vehicle  to make  control1e:d  sustained  humanpowered 
flight) and Gossamer Albatross  (first humanpower(-d aircraft to  f l y  the English 
Channel).  The   N A A  said  the  Albatross  flight  might  result  in  more  practical 
applications  than  Bleriot’s  first  engine-powered  crossing  in  1909.  (NAA 
Release  Mar   12/80) 

ESA  announced  that  its  member  nations  participating  i n   the  Spacelab  pro- 
gram  had  voted  to  fund  i t   under  a  new  scale that  would  ensure  completion  of 
the project by  providing  120 to  140% of previously  agreed amounts. West Ger- 
many  would  contribute  6 4 . 4 % ;  France,  12.07%; the  United  Kingdom,  7 . 6% ,  
and  seven  other  countries,  the  remainder.  (ESA  Info  Bltn  8)  

March  13:  INTELSAT said that  i t   would  reduce by  2 0%  its  charges  for  com- 
munications  satellite  capacity  leased  to  nations  for  domestic  use.  Th e  board 
of  governors decided  to  charge  $800,000 (U.S.)  per  year  per  transponder;  the 
previous  fee  had  been  $1  million.  Fifteen  nations  were  currently  leasing 
capacity  on  INTELSAT  spacecraft  for  their  own  domestic  use.  (INTELSAT 
Release  80-03-1) 

March  14: MSFC  reported  successful  completion  March  13  of  the  first  full- 
power  test  (10% of  rated  power  level)  of  the  Space  Shuttle main  engine.  Th e  
test  consisted  of  a  125-second  run  on  a  single engine,  10  seconds  at  109%; a 
total of  26   seconds ran  above  normal  rated  power.  This major  step toward cer-  
tification  of  the  engine  for  full-power  abort  capability  envisioned  possible 
malfunction  of a  single engine,  requiring  thrust  in  excess of  rated  power  from 
the other two engines to ensure achievement of  orbit o r  return for safe landing. 
Rockwell  International,  prime Shuttle contractor,  conducted the tests at NSTL 
in  Mississippi.  (MSFC  Release  80-36;  NASA  Release  80-36) 

NASA  announced  the  first  use  of  a major  new  llight-simulation  facility  for 
Shuttle support.  The  vertical-motion simulator a t  ARC  would  start next  week 
evaluating  the  effect of  an  adaptive gain  device  to  be  attached  to  orbiter  con- 
trols  because  of  oscillation  experienced  during  approach  and  landing  tests 
conducted  at  DFRC  i n   1977.  (NASA  Release  80-34) 

130 

MARCH  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

March  18:  NASA  reported  that  it  and  NSF   had  found  a  promising  new 
meteorite  source   in  the  Antarctic,  two  fields  known  as  Recking  Peak  and 
Elephant moraines,  three or four  times as large a s  the Allen Hills area covered 
by meteorite hunters during  the past  four years-also  “more  promising.  . .and  
more   dangerous,”  said  curator  John  Annexstad,  one   of  the  discoverers. 
The   finds  had  been  handled  like  the  lunar  samples  brought  to  Ear th   by 
Apollo  astronauts;  the  unusual  preservation  aspects  of  the  ice  shelf  kept  the 
meteorites  a s   they  had  been  when  entering  Earth  atmosphere  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  years  ago,  providing  evidence of  organic  history  predating  their 
arrival  on   Ear th .   The   search  for  meteorites  on  the  ice  shelf  had  begun  with 
the  Japanese,  who  found  large  amounts  in  the  Yamato  mountains  of  Queen 
Maud  Land .   Dr.  William  Cassady,  University  of  Pittsburgh,  theorized  a 
transport  system  explaining  the Antarctic  icefield  concentrations,  and  several 
seasons  of  hunting  tended  to  confirm  the  theory.  The   total  of  Antarctic 
meteorites  found  topped  1,600, many  of  them  rare   or   unique  types.  (NASA 
Release  80-28) 

The   Washington Post  reported  that  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch  had  approved  a 
NASA  regulation  covering  the  situation  “when  a  barroom  brawl  breaks  out 
in space.”  The  ru le  would permit  a Shuttle commander  to  “use  any  reasonable 
and  necessary  means,  including  physical  force,”  to maintain  order   on  board .  
The   police  power  would  include  authority  to  arrest  a  person  in  space   and 
charge  him o r  he r  with  a  cr ime  punishable  by  a $5,000 f ine ,  a year  in  pr ison ,  
or  both. 
Eugene  Cernan,  veteran  of  two  trips  to  the Moon  and  o n e   in  Earth  orbit, 
commented  that  “I  never  felt the need  for  a written  regulation  or  the need  for 
brute  force  to  get things done.”  NASA‘s  lawyers  said  that  times  had  changed: 
the Shuttle would carry  seven people  compared  to the  three on Apollo and two 
on  Gem in i ;  up   to  four  could  be   civilians,  not  professional  astronauts,  and  up  
to  three  of  them  could  be   foreigners  unfamiliar  with  NASA  procedures. 
NASA  General  Counsel  Neil  Hosenball  said  NASA  “had  to  establish  a 
chain of command with all those people on board.”  Legal precedents were two 
assault  cases  where  people  were  ou t  of  touch  with  the  rest  of  the world:  one  
occurred  on   a  plane  flying  from  Puer to  R ico   to  New  York,  the  o ther   on  an 
ice   f loe  carry ing  civilian  scientists  in  the Arctic.  In  1956 two  Puerto  Ricans 
on   the ir   way  to  New  York  were  toasting  each  o ther   in  rum   while  the   plane 
was  over  the  Atlantic;  a  fist  fight  ensued  that  drew  most  of  the  passengers  to 
the   rear   of  the   plane  to  watch.  Th e   plane  became  tail-heavy  the  pilot  in- 
terfered;  and was bitten  in the  shoulder.  A New  York  cour t  released  the accus- 
ed ,   ruling  that  it  was  without  jurisdiction  over  a  plane  in  flight  above  the 
ocean.  When  one  of  a  team  of  technicians  doing  research  on  an  ice island  off 
Alaska  attacked  three others before one  of  them killed  h im ,  a cour t  of  appeals 
in  Alaska  ruled  that  it  had  no jurisdiction  in  a  c r ime  committed  on  an  island 
floating  through  the  Arc t ic   Ocean.  ( W  Post,  Mar   18/80, A-8;  Nature,  Ma r  
27/80,  296) 

131 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

MA R CH   1980 

March  20:  MSFC  reported  successful  firing  of  three  Space  Shuttle  main 
engines mounted  in a test article  for 535 seconds in the  eighth  test  of  the main 
propulsion  system.  A  similar  firing  for  555  seconds  occurred  3 weeks  ago. 
In  the  latest  test,  engineers  for  the  first  time  gimbaled  the  engines  while  in- 
cluding  a  “pogo”  effect  (a  phenomenon  of  cyclic  pressures  in  the  propellant 
system  that  had  occurred  in earlier launch vehicles)  to demonstrate the engine 
accumulator’s  ability  to  prevent  pogo  during  flight.  Another  successful  first 
was the simulation of  failure in thrust-vector  control  to see whether  redundant 
systems would perform  properly. The  test had  been planned  for early morning 
so  that  engineers could  observe  ice  and  frost  conditions  on  the  external  tank 
when  it  was  filled  with  supercold  propellants  during  nighttime  hours,  i n   the 
absence  of  heat  from  the  Sun .   Rockwell  International’s  space  systems  group 
conducted  the  main  propulsion-system  testing  for. MSFC  at  NSTL.  (MSFC  
Release  80-41) 

JSC  described  a  simulated Shuttle mission  ending  i n   a  return-to-launch-site 
abor t ,   as  one   of  a  series  run  i n   the  Shuttle  avionics  integration  laboratory 
(SAIL)  i n   preparation  for  launch  later  this  year.  The  SAIL  resembled  a  full- 
size orbiter  stripped  of  its  skin,  with  wires  and  connectors  bared,  configured 
with  the  same flight-qualifiable hardware and  electrical  systems being used  on 
the  real  orbiter  a t   KSC.  SAIL  employees  would  r u n   test  sequences  on  a 
24-hour basis  to  check’out  the  complex Shuttle avionics system;  a typical  test 
would  begin  with  a  nominal  phase  (all  systems  operating  normally),  then 
engineers  would  inject  failures  to  see  if  the  flight  system  could  cope.  The  
Shuttle  dynamic  simulator  would  feed  equations  [or  aerodynamics,  environ- 
ment,  and  motion  of  the  orbiter,  solid-fuel  rocket  booster,  and  external  tank 
into  the  test  system.  More  than  300 mock  missions  would  f l y   i n   the  JSC  lab 
before  the  projected  November  launch.  (JSC  R e k a s e   80-016) 

JSC  reported  that  the  third  group of  20 astronaut applicants  from  the  3,122 
received  in  the fall  of  1979 would  report March  24  for  interviews  and physical 
exams.  This  group  included  9  pilot  and  11  mission-specialist  applicants;  5  of 
them  were  women.  (JSC  Release  80-017) 

NASA  noted  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  first  research  of  the  X-15  rocket 
plane  that  opened  up  the   realm  of  hypersonic  flight  and  contributed 
significantly  to  the  U.S.  space program.  Th e  X-15  made  199 flights  in  a joint 
NASA-U.S.  Air Force-Navy  research program between  1960 and  1968, during 
which  it  set  the  standing  records  for  altitude  and  speed  of  winged  aircraft: 
altitude  of  1,796  kilometers  (354,200  feet,  morc  than  67  miles),  and  on 
another  flight  7,274 kilometers  per  hour  (4 ,520  miles  per  hour) ,   or   6.7  times 
the  speed  of  sound.  X-15  pilots  included  Scott Crossfield,  the  first;  astronaut 
Joe  Engle;  and  Neil  Armstrong,  first  man  on  the  Moon .  
In  1954,  at  the beginning  of  the  X-15  program,  hypersonic  flight  had  many 

132 

MARCH  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

unknowns:  effects of  weightlessness,  high  heat  rates,  steep  reentry  angles,  at- 
titude  control  in  space-questions 
that  only  actual  flight  could  answer.  The  
program  would  also  explore  capabilities  and  limitations  of  a  human  pilot  in 
an aerospace vehicle;  analysis of  the  first 44 flights showed that  13  would have 
failed  without  a  human  pilot.  Positive  result  of  the  program  was  the  finding 
that  human  capabilities  of  sensing, judg ing ,  coping with  the  unexpected,  and 
using  a  variety  of  acquired  skills  remained  undiminished  in  all  key  problems 
of  aerospace  flight.  A  significant X-15  contribution  to  the   space  program  was 
to  demonstrate  that  simulators  could  be  used  for  crew  training:  no  X-15s  had 
two  seats,  so the  pilots  had  to  train  in  simulators.  Success  of  this  method  led 
to  all-out use  of  simulators  for  the  space program.  Total cost  of  the  program ,  
including  construction  of  three X-15  aircraft,  was  about  $300 million.  (NASA 
Release  80-37; NASA  Actv,  May  80,  8) 

March 24 :  The  White House  issued  a  statement on  President  Carter’s  presen- 
ting the Goddard Trophy of  the National  Space C lub  to  NASA’s  Voyager  team, 
for  the  “outstanding  achievement  in  advanced  spaceflight  programs  con-  
tributing  to  American  leadership  in  space.”  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  Robert 
A.  Frosch  would  accept  the  trophy  on  behalf  of  the Voyager  team  for  its  suc- 
cessful  planetary  mission  to  Jupiter.  The   award  was  established  in  1958  to 
honor  Dr.  Robert  Goddard  (1882-1945),  considered  the  father  of  modern 
rocketry;  receipts  in previous  years  included Wernher von Braun,  John G lenn ,  
the Apo l lo  11  crew,  the  Skylab astronauts,  and  the  Viking  project  team.  (WH 
Anno,  Mar   24/80) 

Defense  Da i ly   reported  that  DOD’s plans  to  let  civilian  aircraft  and  ships 
use  its  NavStar  global-positioning  systems  to  obtain  navigation  signals  with 
200-meter  accuracy  had  met  with  difficulty.  Tests  showed  that  the  “coarse” 
signal,  considered  insufficiently  accurate  to  be   militarily  useful,  was  much 
more  accurate  than  DOD thought.  DOD was  studying techniques  to deny use  
of  the  “precise”  NavStar  signal  to  others  and  to  degrade   coarse-signal  ac-  
curacy  that  “could  provide  improved  capabilities  to  an  adversary.”  (D /SBD ,  
Ma r   24/80,  119) 

Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology  reported  that  NASA  scientists  and 
engineers  were  “concerned  tha t   political  maneuvering,  a s   opposed  to 
thoughtful  planning,  was playing too  strong a par t”   in FY8l budget  cuts affec- 
ting  NASA  science  and  applications  programs. 
Delay  in bringing NASA’s  program  before  a House  appropriations  subcom- 
mittee  scheduled  to  meet  March  25   could  force  the  agency  off  the  hearing 
schedule  for  weeks,  further  endangering  approval  of  the  $300 million  Space 
Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA  and congressional observers  feared  ad-  
ministration  efforts  to delay announcement  of  federal  program  cuts until  af ter  
pr imary   elections  set  for  the  coming  week.  (AvWk, Mar   24/80,  21) 

133 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

MARCH   1980 

FBIS carried  a Tass  report  that  Soyuz T separated  from Salyut  6, which  was 
continuing to  fly  “in  the automatic  regime”  after  ‘completing a joint  program. 
More  trials  of  new  Soyuz  systems  - -   power  unit,  orientation  and  position- 
control  systems,  and  computer  complex-would  proceed  during  further  flight 
of  that  spacecraft. Tass  reported  later  that  Soyuz  Tm a d e  a  soft landing March 
26   to  end  a  100-day  flight.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Mar  24 ,   26/80) 

March  27:  The   Washington  Post  reported  that  Ihe  House  Armed  Services 
Committee  had  voted  $50  million  to  expand  production  of  Fairchild  In- 
dustries, A-10  plane  from a  one-seat  to  a  two-seal  configuration.  Th e  aircraft 
was  originally  designed  to  accommodate  two  cockpits.  Fairchild  said  DOD 
would  save  $10.5  million  a  year  in  fuel  costs  because  it  would  not  need  a  se- 
cond  plane  to  follow  the  first  in  training  flights.  Besides  the  added  sea t ,   the 
new model had  the capability of  flying  in  bad whether  and at night.  Th e  com- 
pany  tested  the  two-seater  for  five  months  in  1YJ9  and  turned  over  the  pro- 
totype  to  Eglin Air  Force  Base  for  testing;  the  U.S.  Air  Force had  completed 
its  tests  and  was  assessing  results.  ( W  Posr,  Mar  27/80,  B-1) 

March  28:  NRL   announced  that  one   of  its  scientists,  James  C.  Ritter,  had 
received  a patent on  a  radioisotope photoelectric  generator  to  produce  energy 
for  spacecraft  on missions  to  distant  planets  that  would  last  for  years  without 
dependence  on  thermal  heat  or  solar  radiation.  The   generator,  built  like  a 
storage battery,  used  low-energy  photons  from a radioactive source interacting 
with  high  atomic  number  material  to  eject  pholtoelectrons.  (NRL   Release 
80-3-8OC) 

March 31:  Aviation  Week  C?  Space  Technology said  that  cuts  in  NASA’s  FY81 
budget  would  delay  the  international  solar  polar  mission  to  1985,  although 
$135  million  in  contracts  had  already  been  awarded  i n   the  United  States  and 
Europe.  Delay  would  force  “major  restructurj ng  of  the  contracts’’$80 
million to TRW  for  the U.S.  spacecraft  and  $55.8 million  to Dornier  as prime 
contractor  for  the  European  spacecraft-and  wou Id  give ESA  additional  pro- 
blems  with  its  budget,  although  NASA  expressed  hope  last  week  that  ESA 
would remain a part of  the project. A split mission with  the U.S.  and European 
spacecraft  on  separate  launches  would  increase  costs  substantially. 
Aviation Week & Space  Technology said  that  NASA  was  “unable  to  discuss 
this  situation  before  Congress  last  week”  because  of  an  administration  em- 
bargo  on new  budget  projections.  Although  NASA  could  testify  on  the Space 
Shuttle  need  for  a  $300  million  FY80  supplemeintal  appropriation,  the  em- 
bargo  had  forced  the  House  appropriations  subcommittee  to  cancel  two  days 
of  NASA  hearings  on  FY81  space  science  and  applications.  NASA  Ad- 
ministrator  Robert  A .   Frosch  said  that,  unless  the  supplement  was  passed, 
contractors  would  lay  off  up  to  20,000  skilled  workers,  and  the  overall  cost 
of  the Shuttle program  could  increase by  $600 to $900 million. The  combined 

134 

MARCH   1980 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT rC S  

impact on NASA  and DOD could go a s  high as $1.1  billion,  according to  sub- 
committee  members.  (Avwk ,  Mar   31/80,  27) 

Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology reported  that  Southern  Pacific  Com-  
munications  Company  (SPC)  had  applied  to  the  FCC   for  authority  to  build 
a domestic communications  satellite system starting with two satellites in orbit 
and  a  third  maintained  as  a  spare.  Capacity  of  the  system  would  exceed  that 
of  any  other domestic  system  now  i n   orbit  o r   i n   construction;  each  proposed 
satellite would  have twice the  capacity of  the  largest communications  satellite 
now  in  domestic  service  (AT&T's  Comsat  o r  RCA's  Satcom)  and  a  voice  o r  
digital-data  capacity  60 %  higher  than  Western  Union's  Westar. 
SPC  predicted  that  the demand  for transponders  would  triple between  1980 
and  1985 and  said  that  no  existing  o r   planned  system  would  be  adequate  to 
provide SPC  with the capacity  it would  need  by  mid-decade.  It had petitioned 
earlier to deny requests of  RCA  for orbit  slots at  132 OW  and 83  "w, of Western 
Union  for  83  "w,  and Hughes  for  79 O W  and  75 OW.  Given  authority  to  orbits 
its  satellites  a t   132" and  8 3  W, with  assignment  of  a  third  slot  a t  mow, the 
company  said  it  would  provide  service  to  all  50  states,  Puerto  Rico,  and  the 
Virgin  Islands.  It  would  also  build  a  control  center  in  Maryland  and  launch 
its  communications  satellite  in  1982-1983.  (AvWk,  Mar   31/80) 

135 

April 

April  1: MSFC  reported  the first sustained operation of  the Space Shuttle main 
engine  at  f u l l  power  level,  109% of  rated  power  for  6 minutes,  in  static  firing 
tests March  31  a t  NSTL .  The  engine  ran  for  10 minutes,  10 seconds,  reaching 
the objectives  attempted  in an aborted  run  the previous  week.  (MSFC  Release 
80-47;  NASA  Release  80-42) 

NASA  reported  that  LaRC  would  manage  a  nine-month  $900,000  design 
study of alternative thermal  protection  for  the Shuttle orbiter,  aimed  at reduc- 
ing  costs  and  determining  whether  the  present  system  was  the  best  now 
available.  The  ceramic  covering  originally  chosen  in  the  early  1970s was  the 
best  then  available;  no  study of  alternative  systems had  taken  place  since.  The  
study  would  center  on  technological  advances  in  reusable  surface-insulating 
materials  such a s  metallic  o r   reinforced  carbons;  coping with  various  loading 
conditions  as well  as handling,  inspection,  and maintenance;  and deficiencies 
in  present  technology  needing  further  research.  (NASA  Release  80-40) 

JSC  reported  that  the  Gossamer  Albatross,  a  human  powered  aircraft  that 
crossed  the  English  Channel  last  June,  would  appear   on  display  at  JSC’s 
Building  9A  dur ing  April  as  part  of  a  nationwide  tour.  NASA  had jus t   com-  
pleted  a  month  of  tests  o n   a  sister  ship  at  DFRC  to  study  its  unique 
aerodynamic  traits,  especially  its  low-speed  flight  at  low  Reynolds  numbers. 
The   test  flights  used  various  power  sources  (motor  power,  cycle  power,  and 
towing)  to demonstrate  the  craft’s maneuverability  and  to  define performance 
under  varying  conditions.  (JSC  Release  80-020) 

MSFC   announced  the  award  to  BDM  Corpora t ion ,   McLean ,   Va.,  of  a 
$699,864  contract  for  engineering  support  of  a  Tennessee  Valley  Authority 
(TVA)  coal-gasification  plant,  first  large-scale  commercial  operation  of  this 
type in  the  United  States. Besides helping to ensure  efficient opera t ion ,  MSFC 
would work  with  TVA  to  define advanced  technology  that  could  be  applied  in 
areas   where  NASA  had  some  expertise,  such  as  materials,  combustion 
dynamics,  instrumentation,  and  con tro l .   (MSFC  Release  80-49) 

April  4: ARC  said that  it would test  for  the  first time  the  ability  of  males aged 
55   to  65   to  withstand  the  physiological  stress  of  weightlessness.  Previous 
studies had  tested males and  females  aged  35 to 45  and 45  to 55. Women  aged 
55  to  6 5  would  be   tested  later  in  1980 to  complete  the  baseline  data  for  use  
in  establishing  medical  criteria  for  space  flight. 
For  the  first briefing  ear ly  in  February, 46  volunteers  reported  and  20 were 
chosen  for  orientation  March  24.  The   preliminary  orientation  and  testing 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

APR IL   1980 

would  give researchers  a chance  to  see how  the  subjects performed  and allow- 
ed  the  subjects to  decide  whether  they  wanted  to  participate  i n   the  entire test. 
Two  sets  of  four  subjects would  be  selected:  four would  begin  9 days  of  con- 
trolled  observation April  10 at ARC’S human  research  facility,  followed by  10 
days of  bed  rest  and 5 days of  recovery  and tests  of  the  cardiovascular system. 
Another  group  of  four  would  begin  the  same  series  April  13.  Dr.  Harold 
Sandler, ARC project  scientist, would  supervise the tests.  (ARC  Release  80-7; 
NASA  Release  80-43) 

April 6:  NOAA  reported  that  it would  submit to OEAB  by  midyear a transition 
plan  for NOAA  to  assume  responsibility  for  opera1:ing  a  Landsat-type  system 
to  be  launched  in   the  late  1980s. Based  o n   technology  derived  from  NASA’s 
experimental  Landsat  program,  the  system  would  provide  essential data  from 
space for use  in  food  production,  mineral  exploration,  Earth  resources  inven- 
tory, management of rangeland,  forests, and water  rlzsources, and environmen- 
t a l   protection. 
NOAA  had  operated  meteorological  satellites  for  14 years,  developing  the 
ability  to process,  disseminate,  and archive  “ e n o n o u s  qualities”  of  satcllite- 
generated  data  for users  who  need  it  for  decision making.  NOAA  would  also 
have to determine not  only  the data  requirements  o.F various  sectors of  society 
but  also how  quickly the  information was  needed  and  in what  format. NOAA 
would  hold  a  series of  regional meetings with users of  satellite data  to develop 
a  system  meeting  their  needs.  (NOAA  Release  80-48) 

April  7 NASA  reported  a  further  development  in  its  ongoing  work  with  the 
S t .  Regis  Paper  Company  in  New  York:  an  arrangement  under  which  the  in- 
itiating  company  would  share  the  cost  of  satellite  data  gathering,  but  the 
technology  developed  would  be   available  to  all  other  timber  companies.  In 
1977 S t .  Regis  had  begun  a  test  program  with  NASA  to  see  if  Landsat  data 
could  improve  the  company’s  data  base  on  forest  lands;  i t   wanted  to  use  the 
information  to  plan  timber  harvesting,  leasing  and  buying  new  timber  lands, 
and monitoring more than  2 .3  million acres across the southern  United  States 
[see A d d 7 7   Oct  251.  Th e   success  of  the  project  led  to  the  authorization  by 
S t .  Regis Southern Timberland Division in Florida of more than  $300,000 new 
capital investment for an  information  system  using  Landsat  data to  support  its 
general  operations. 
St.  Regis  was  the  first  private  company  to  participate  in  NASA’s  test  pro- 
gram on resource-observation  applications.  Th e  program began  a unique  rela- 
tionship between  NASA and the private sector, because  S t .  Regis  (not  NASA) 
initiated  the  project  and  the  company  shared  in  the  cost.  NASA  said  that  the 
entire  forest  industry  would  gain by  the  venture because  technology  from  the 
S t .  Regis  experiment  would  be  in the public  domain,  available  to other  firms. 
NASA  and  S t .   Regis  planned  to  conduct  a  symposium in  1981 to demonstrate 
Landsat data interpretation  to timber  industry management.  Th e  program  was 

138 

APRIL  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

managed  by  JSC  and  h r d u e   University’s  Laboratory  for  Applications  of 
Remote  Sensing,  a s   well  as  by  S t .   Regis.  (NASA  Release  80-44) 

INTELSAT  announced  that  its  “assembly  of  parties”  in  Florida  last  week 
had  agreed  to  technical  and  economic  coordination  of  the  proposed  Arabsat 
communications  satellite  system,  a s  Arabsat  would  lack  significant economic 
impact on ,  and would be technically  compatible with,  the  INTELSAT  system. 
I t   would  be   the   third  regional  system  coordinated  with  INTELSAT;  o thers  
were  the   European  and  Indonesian  systems.  (INTELSAT  Release  80-06-1) 

April  9:  The   Soviet  Union  launched  Soyuz  35  [see  During  Apr i l;   Appendix 
‘41. 

Aerospace  Da i ly   carr ied   a  chart  showing  Car ter   administration  cuts  in 
federal  R&D  funding  for FY80 and  FY81. The  DOD would  absorb  21% of all 
cuts  but  would  retain  46.6% of  the  remaining  federal  R&D  funds.  NASA 
would  take  20.8% of  the  cuts  and  get  15.4% of  the  revised  total.  The   cuts 
would  have  a  bigger  impact  at  NASA  (3.9% of  the  agency’s budget)  than  a t  
DOD  (1.3%),  the  report  pointed  ou t .   (AID ,  Apr   9/80,  222) 

INTELSAT announced  that  it had awarded Oh io  State University  a $150,000 
contract  for  a  rain  measurement  study  that  might  improve  satellite  transmis- 
sion quality in regions  with heavy  rain.  Satellite signals above the  10-GHz fre-  
quency  would be  weakened when  sent through  rain;  the  study  would help  IN-  
TELSAT de term ine  how  much  extra  power  a  satellite would need  to  compen- 
sate  for  rain  effects.  Having  two  stations  a  few  miles  apar t   in  heavy-rainfall 
areas  would permit  use of  the station with  better  weather dur ing  stormy  times. 
The   study  would  send  radar   signals  into  rainclouds  and   measure  the  return 
signal to find  the rain’s effect o n  signal strength.  (INTELSAT  Release 80-07-1) 

April  14:  NASA  reported  that  it  was  studying  options  for  restructuring  the 
Landsat  D  project  because  of  persistent  engineering  and  management  pro-  
blems  in  manufacturing  the  spacecraft  instruments  and  ground   systems. 
Fourth  and  most  advanced  of  NASA’s  experimental  Earth-resources  monitor- 
ing  spacecraft,  Landsat  D was  designed  to  carry   an  advanced  scanner  called 
a  thematic mapper,  to provide  Ear th   images  in  more   spectral  bands  and  with 
twice  the  resolution  (30 meters)  of  ear l ier   Landsats.  Hughes  Aircraft  pro-  
blems  with  the   mapper  resulted  in  increased  cost  estimates  and  delivery 
delays.  Mission-system  contractor  General  Electric  was a lso  having  problems 
and had  projected  schedule delays that would  increase  costs  of  both  the  flight 
system and the ground  system it was building  for  Landsat D.  Both  sets of pro-  
blems  would  effect Landsat  D’s  launch  schedule,  increasing  the  risk  of  a  gap 
in  data  for  present  users.  Landsat  3,  launched  in  March  1978,  was  still 
operating  but  had  had  problems  with  its  sensor,  a  multispectral  scanner  that 
collected  data  for  conversion  to  images  of  Earth‘s  natural  resources. 

139 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

A PR IL   1980 

NASA  was  considering  three  possibilities:  launch  Landsat  D  as   soon  as  
possible  with  a  thematic  mapper  and  a multispectral  scanner  like that  carried 
on Landsat  3 ;  launch Landsat  D as  soon as possible with  only a multispectral 
scanner,  following  as  soon  as  possible  with  another  Landsat  carrying  the 
thematic mapper  and a multispectral  scanner; o r  launch Landsat D with Land- 
sat  D  Pr ime   (the  backup)  each  carrying  only  a  inultispectral  scanner.  The 
decision  weighing  budget  constraints  against  providing  an  ongoing  Landsat 
data  capability  should  take  weeks,  NASA  said,  including  consultations  with 
NOAA,  which President Carter had  designated to manage a follow-on  remote- 
sensing  satellite  system.  (NASA  Release  80-46) 

JSC  announced   the  award  of  a  $63,640,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  to 
Canadian  Commercial  Corporation,  Hull,  Quebec,  for  production  of  three 
remote-manipulator  systems  for  the  Shuttle.  Th e   system,  a  50-foot  jointed 
a rm ,   would  be  operable  from  inside  the  crew  compartment  to  deploy  or  
retrieve  payloads  in  space.  Under  a  1975  agreement  between  NASA  and 
Canada’s  National  Research  Council,  Canada  would  develop  the  first  flight 
unit of  the remote manipulator and provide it  free to NASA; NASA would buy 
additional  systems  from  Canada  as   necessary.  (JSC  Release  80-023;  NASA 
Release  80-47) 

Ap r i l   15: NASA  reported  successful testing  April  14  of  a  Space Shuttle main 
engine at  109% of  rated  power  for  six minutes,  in  the  second  such  test  i n   two 
weeks  conducted  by  Rockwell  International  a t   NSTL.  The   10-minute, 
10-second test met all objectives;  NASA  said that  it  planned a t  least one  more 
firing  i n  this  series on this  engine, which had  accumulated  183 minutes of  fir- 
ing  time  in two  series of  preliminary  flight-certification tests.  (NASA Release 
80-49;  MSFC   Release  8 0 - 5 5 )  

MSFC   said  several  companies  had  proposed   definition  s tud ies   to 
demonstrate  performance  of  a  large  space  antenna  in  low  Earth  orb i t .   Wide 
use  of  such  a  system  could  revolutionize  satellite  communications  and  radar 
and  radiometry. Large space antennas might  solve problems preventing  expan- 
sion  of  satellite  communications,  Earth-resources  survey,  weather  research, 
and  other  services.  Dozens  of  small  satellites,  each  with  its  own  antennas, 
were now  providing  such services,  but  their growing number  had  crowded  t h e  
transmission  frequencies  and  filled  up  the  orbital  slots.  Th e   MSFC  study 
would  define the structure of  a large antenna as  well  as  packaging, transporta- 
tion,  and  orbital  deployment.  (MSFC  Release  80-54;  NASA  Release  80-48) 

INTELSAT  announced that  Niger on  April  14 had  become the  103rd nation 
to join  the  organization.  Niger  was  already  linked  to  the  INTELSAT  system 
through  a ground station at Niamey  that operated with an Intelsat TV-A  satellite 
over  the  Indian  Ocean.  (INTELSAT  Release  80-08-1) 

140 

A PR IL   1980 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

April  16: NASA  reported  shutdown of  a planned  10-minute test  of  the  Shuttle 
main-engine  cluster  after  about  six  seconds;  probable  cause  was  overheating 
in  a high-pressure  fuel  turbopump  of  engine no.  2 of  the  three-engine  cluster. 
Test  stand  and  engines  were  apparently  undamaged.  Had  all  gone  well,  each 
engine would  have  shut  down  at  a different  time:  engine  no.  1 was  scheduled 
to fire for 8 minutes  (480 seconds),  no.  2 (which  shut down after 4.71 seconds) 
for  565  seconds,  and  no.  3 for  591 seconds.  Evaluation  of  test  data  was under  
way  at  NSTL   to  find  the  cause  of  the  overheating.  (NASA  Release  80-50) 

April  17: The   Washington Post  reported  that  a  U.S.  Air  Force  estimate  of  the 
cos t  of building  a West Coast launch pad  for the Shuttle was $82 million  shor t .  
Less  than  3  years  ago,  the  estimate  was  $118  million  for  a  Vandenberg  Air 
Force  Base  pad  to  launch  polar-orbiting  (as  opposed  to  equatorial-orbiting) 
satellites.  Military  satellites  used  a polar  orb i t  to  cover  the  globe  as  it  rotates; 
spacecraft  could  not  use  the  Florida  facility  for  launches  into  polar  orb i t  
because of  the danger of  coming down on land  in case of  a mishap.  First phase 
of  the  Vandenberg  program  (excavation  of  the  area  where  the  launch  pad 
would be  built)  was complete,  the  U.S.  Air  Force said,  but bids  for the  second 
phase  ranged  from  $103.9  to $112  million  instead  of  the  $79.6  million  U.S.  Air 
Force had  estimated.  Bidders  said  inflation  caused  the higher  bids,  especially 
the pr ice  of  assembled  electrical  equipment and  copper  cable.  U .S .  Air  Force  
could  ask  permission  of  Congress to  reprogram  funds from o ther  construction 
projects  to  the  Vandenberg  construction.  ( W  Post,  Apr   17/80, A-14) 

April  18: LaRC  said  that NASA had  awarded  three major  U.S.  manufacturers 
contracts  for  14.5-month  studies  of  advanced  supersonic  transport  a ircraf t .  
Boeing  Company,  Lockheed  California,  and  McDonnell  Douglas,  each  
received  a  $1.15 million  contract  to  work  in  the  same  discipline,  but  each  on 
its own concept.  Boeing’s was a 270-passenger delta-wing,  cru ise  speed Mach 
2 .4 ;  Douglas’s was  an  arrow-wing carrying  225-500  passengers,  cru ise  speed 
Mach  2 . 2 ;  Lockheed’s  was  an  arrow-wing  carrying  290   passengers,  cru ise  
speed  Mach  2.5. 
Each  firm would broaden  its research  in aerodynamics,  lightweight titanium 
and  composite-material  structures,  and  variable-cycle  engines  for  subsonic 
and  supersonic  operation.  Past  studies  by  these  contractors  on  reducing  fuel 
consumption  and  noise  and  on  economic  considerations  needed  updating. 
LaRC  would  manage  the  work  at  the  contractors’  facilities.  (LaRC  Release 
80-29 ;   NASA  Release  80-51) 

WFC   awarded  a  $1.239  million  fixed-price  noncompetitive  contract  to 
Automation  Industries,  ln c . ,   a  Vitro  subsidiary,  for  a  mobile  C-band  in- 
strumentation  radar  system  to  replace  an  existing  MPS-19  radar,  updating 
WFC’s  tracking  capabilities.  (WFC  Release  80-3) 

141 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  A E RONAU T I C S  

A P R I L   1980 

LaRC  said  that  it  would  close  the  Environmenial-Quality  Projects  Office 
(EQPO)  set  up  in  1972  to  lead  NASA’s  programs  in  that  area  and  would  turn 
over  future work  to  the Office of  Space and Terresirial Applications at NASA 
Headquarters.  LaRC was chosen  for  its experience  in remote-sensing research 
and  in  developing  advanced  instrumentation.  0thi:r  centers  worked  on  par- 
ticular  prob lems :   JSC,  Ear th-resources   s tudy ;   GSFC ,   meteorological 
research;  and  ARC,  aircraft  flight  problems.  EQF’O  head  John  Mugler  said 
LaRC’s  leadership  had  helped  that  center  build  a  growing  atmosphere  and 
water-quality  program.  (LaRC  Release  80-28) 

April  19:  The   N e w   York  Ernes  and  Aerospace  D d y  said  the  Soviet  Union 
t e s t e d   a “ k i l l e r   s a t e l l i t e ”   i n   s p a c e ,   e n d i n g   a   t w o - y e a r   g a p   i n   t e s t i n g   a n t i s a t e l l i t e  
weapons.  (A  killer  satellite  is  an  orbiting  vehicle: designed  to  wreck  other 
satellites by  hitting  them  in  direct  collision  or  exploding  nearby,  o r  by  direc- 
ting  a  force  such  as  a  laser  beam  against them. j  Cosmos 1174, launched  from 
Tyuratam April  18,  apparently  neared  its  target  (Cosmos 1121, launched  from 
Plesetsk  April  3) on  its  first  orbit  and  exploded.  Sources  said  the  test  was  a 
failure. 
The   Soviet  Union  first  tested  an  antisatellite  weapon  (ASAT)  in  1963  and 
apparently  was  successful  in  destroying  targets  at  altitudes  up  to  150  miles. 
The  Soviet  tests  aroused  concern because of  U.S.  d’ependence on  satellites  for 
a number of  military  uses:  reconnaissance,  communications,  and  early  warn- 
ing  of  attack.  Though  many  U.S.  satellites  orbit  20,000 miles  o r  more  from 
Earth’s  surface,  many  systems  for  reconnaissance  and  electronic  intelligence 
might  be vulnerable.  In  1978 Defense  Secretary Harold Brown  announced that 
the  Soviet Union had  an operational  ASAT  capability; after launching a killer 
satellite in  May  of  that  year,  it  had  suspended  tests  when  talks  began  on  con- 
trolling  such  weapons.  U.S.  sources  said  Moscow  stopped  the  tests  as  proof 
of  its  interest  i n   a  treaty  to  limit  strategic bombers  ;and missiles.  A  treaty  was 
signed,  but  President  Carter  asked  the  U.S.  Senate  earlier  this  year  to  hold 
off  action  because  of  Soviet  intervention  i n   Afghanistan.  Talks  on  limiting 
ASATs  was  also  suspended. 
A U.S.  antisatellite system  in preparation  but  not  expected before  1982- 
t h e  
Vought  miniature  homing  craft  carrying  a  heat-seeking  guidance  unit-was  a 
small rocket  for  launch  from high-altitude  aircraft.  The  DOD was  also work- 
ing on a laser-powered  system for possible deployment in the  1990s. With talks 
on  limiting ASATs  now  suspended, and  the outlook  for  a rm s  control  increas- 
ingly  bleak,  officials  said  the  Soviet  Union  might  have  decided  to  revive  its 
space  weapons  program.  Any  agreement  i n   the  m a r   future  was  said  to  be 
unlikely.  ( N Y  Ernes,  Apr  19/80,  28 ;   A /D ,  Apr  21/80,  280) 

April  21:  NASA  reported  “highly  successful’’  completion  of  a third  static test 
on  a  Space Shuttle main  engine  at  NSTL April  19, last  of  a  series  simulating 
power  levels  necessary  to  abort  at  f u l l   power  i n   a  Shuttle  launch.  Previous 
tests  were  on  March  31  and  April  14.  The   engine  used  (2004) was  fired  for 

142 

APRIL  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

10  minutes,  10  seconds with  6  minutes  at  the  109%  power  level;  this  engine 
had  a  total  firing time  of  12,911  seconds  (3.58 hours),  equivalent  to  about  25 
Shuttle flights.  It  would  now  undergo preliminary  flight certification tests,  13 
static  firings  at  102%  of  rated  power  level.  (NASA  Release  80-55;  MSFC 
Release  80-58) 

April 22 :  Aerospace Daily  reported that malfunction of  a  portable life-support 
system caused a  flash fire April  18 at JSC  in which Robert Mayfield (employed 
by  the  contractor,  Hamilton  Standard  Division,  United  Technologies)  was 
hospitalized with  second-degree burns.  The  system included  two  tanks of  ox- 
ygen  pressurized  at  3,000  pounds  per  square  inch.  The   fire  started during  a  
performance  test  when  a  regulator was  switched to  the  extravehicular activity 
mode.  Extensive  damage  occurred  to  a   test  spacesuit  and  the  life-support 
system  as  well  as  the  cleanroom  at  JSC’s  crew  systems  laboratory. Mayfield 
was  reported  in  stable condition April  20.  JSC  had  appointed  a   board  to  in- 
vestigate  the  accident.  ( A /D ,  Apr  22/80,  289) 
-Aerospace  Da i ly  reported an Aerospace Corporation  study  for the U .S .  
Air Force on the risk that a  large active satellite might collide with debris from 
inactive satellites  or  launchers. Probability of  collision for a   large  satellite on 
a   1,000-day  mission  in  low  orbit  (500  to  1,500  kilometers  up)  was  high 
because of  the great  concentration of  debris  at  those  altitudes. As  the objects 
were  moving  in   different directions,  velocity  for  any  satellite would  be  at  a  
max imum .  Collision in  synchronous orbit was  less likely to the extent that the 
objects were  all moving  in  the  same direction; however,  debris in  those orbits 
tended to collect at certain points because of E a r th s  gravity. (A /D ,  Apr  22/80, 
294) 

The  Washington Star said that the FCC  would  call for restructuring of  Com-  
SatCorp  to  differentiate between  its  regulated  and  its  competitive activities. 
ComSa tCorp ,  now  sole U.S. representative in two global satellite communica- 
tions  systems,  would  have  to  put  all  its  competitive  operations,  including 
research  and  development,  into  a   separate  subsidiary. 
Restructuring would  answer complaints that  ComSa tCorp ,  a   congressional 
creation,  could  use  its  unique  monopoly  status  in  global  communications 
systems to  is advantage in  highly  competitive ventures  it  is considering. With 
two  other  major  companies,  it  was  starting a   long-distance telephone system 
to compete with AT&T;  it  also had  considered a  satellite-to-home subscription 
television  service  to  compete  with  the  three  major  television  networks  [see 
April  81. 
ComSa tCorp   already  had  a   subsidiary,  Comsa t   General,  that  handled  its 
competitive activities; the  FCC  said  that  a   sharper  separation was  necessary 
between  the  two:  Comsa t  Laboratories and  other  research  and  development, 
for instance, should be put  into the subsidiary to avoid  the possibility of  cross 
subsidies. A  newly  purchased  environmental monitoring  f irm ,  Environmental 
Research  & Technologies Inc.,  would  have  to  be  in the  subsidiary, FCC   said. 

143 

ASTROKAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL  1980 

The   parent  company  would  include  only  those  activities  relating  to  IN- 
TELSAT and INMARSAT  (International Maritime  Satellite Organization), in- 
ternational systems  i n  which  ComSatCorp acts as U S .  representative.  ( WS tu r ,  
Apr 22/80, C-6 ;  WPo s t ,  Apr 23/80, B-1; ComSatCorp Releases 80-22 ,  80-23, 
80-24,  80-25) 

Apr i l  23:  NASA  announced  award of  a $70,a72  mill ion contract  to McDonnell 
Douglas  for  Delta  expendable  launch  vehicle  services.  The   company  would 
continue for 2 years  the launch services work  it had  done for the past  18 years, 
including  mission-peculiar  vehicle  changes,  checkout,  and  launch.  KSC  
would  supervise  the  work  at  ESMC  and  Vandeniberg  Air  Force  Base  for 
GSFC,  w h i c h   h a d   o v e r a l l   Delta  m a n a g e m e n t   r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .   (NASA   R e l e a s e  
8 0 -53 )  

April  24 :  The  Department of  Commerce  (DOC)  reported  that more  than  700 
representatives of  business  f irms ,   trade  associations,  educational  institutions, 
and  state and local government agencies had  responded to NOAA’s  request  for 
assistance  in  developing  a  national  civil  operational  land  remotc-sensing 
satellite  system. 
At  March meetings in Seattle, Chicago, Tallahass-e, Washington,  D.C., and 
Albuquerque,  NOAA  satellite  managers  received  many  suggestions for  using 
such  a  system  in  food  production,  mineral  exploration,  land-use  planning, 
resource  assessment  and management,  and  environmental protection.  Wilbur 
H .  Eskite,  Jr.,  of  NOAA’s  task  force,  who  chaired  i:he  meetings,  said  that  in- 
terest  i n   an  operational  system  offering  a  continuity  of  data  within  specific 
timeframes was  “larger  than  we  had  believed”  before  the meetings  [see April 
61. 
Questions  raised  a t  the meetings that would  require policy  decisions  includ- 
ed  what  instruments  to  carry  into  orbit,  their  capabilities,  how  quickly  and 
in  what  form  users  should  receive  the  data,  and  whether  education  and 
government agencies should pay  the  same fees  for data as  profit-making  com- 
panies.  The  White House made NOAA  responsible  last November  for moving 
to  an operational  program  of  satellite remote  sensing.  (NOAA  Release  80-55) 

April  25:  NASA  announced  selection of  26  scientific  investigations  for possi- 
ble  inclusion  on  upper-atmosphere  research  missioiis  in  the  late  1980s. Con- 
gress had  not  approved  the  program,  but  early  solicitation of  participants  and 
experiments  would  allow  prompt  start  when  approved.  U.S.  researchers  had 
suggested 2 3  of  the investigations,  the United  Kingdom,  2 ,  and France,  1. The  
chosen  ideas,  selected  from  75  proposals,  included  16  experimental  and  10 
theoretical  investigations.  U.S.  investigators  were  from  8  universities,  6 
government  laboratories,  and  two  private  organizations.  Cost  to  the  United 
States  of  the  initial  study  phase  would  be  about  $5   million  over  two  years. 
(NASA  Release  80-56) 

APRIL  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

The  last of  six science workshops  sponsored by  NASA's  exobiology program 
on  the  origin  of  life  was  at  Rockefeller  University  April  25.  An  extensive 
report  on  the  series would  be  available before  the  end  of  1980. A   press  con- 
ference  with  workshop  cochairman  Professors  Philip  Morrison  (MIT)  and 
Melvin  Calvin  (UCB)  and  workshop host  Dr.  Joshua  Lederberg,  president of 
Rockefeller University, was  followed by  a public  symposium with  lectures and 
presentation of  findings  by  Lederberg.  (NASA Ac tv   Rpt, May  5/80,  2) 

April  29:  NASA  reported  that  France  and  West  Germany  signed  an  in- 
tergovernmental agreement  today  for joint  development  of  a  direct-broadcast 
television  satellite  to  be  launched  on  Ariane  late  in  1983.  The   two  nations 
would split the cost of the initial three-satellite system, estimated at $250-$300 
million.  The   sponsors said major  return  on  the  investment would  come   from 
sales of  15  to 20 such television satellite systems over the next  10 years to  third 
parties  such a s  Scandinavia's Nordsat,  Radio Luxembourg's  Luxsat, and  Peo- 
ple's  Republic  of  China.  ESA  would  continue  definition  work  on  LSat,  a 
parallel  television-satellite  effort  without  French  and  German   participation. 
(NASA Actv  Rpt, May  1/80) 

Aerospace  Da i ly   reported  that  the  Soviet  Union  today  launched  Cosmos 
1176,  possibly  the  first  nuclear-powered  ocean-surveillance  satellite  since 
radioactive  fragments  of  Cosmos 954 crashed  into  Canada  in  January  1978. 
Orb i t   parameters  were  265-kilometer  apogee,  260-kilometer  perigee, 
89.6-minute period,  and  6 5 "   inclination.  Until  the  1978  incident,  the  Soviet 
Union  had  rou t ine ly  used  radar-carrying satellites powered by  nuclear sources 
traveling  in  pairs  in   similar  orbits  to  detect  ships;  at  end  of  mission,  the 
nuclear  source would  be  propelled  into  higher  orbit  to  decay  in  outer  space, 
but  Cosmos 954  had  malfunctioned.  ( A /D ,  Apr  30180,  338) 

April 30: The  Washington Post reported  that AT&T  would  launch  and  operate 
its  own  satellites for  use  with  its  domestic  satellite communications  system. 
The   firm  filed with  the  FCC   a  plan  to  launch  three  satellites-one  each  in 
1983,  1984, and  1986-to 
replace  three  Comsa t  satellites it  had  been  leasing 
from  Comsat  General  Corporation  (a  subsidiary  of  ComSatCorp).  It  would 
use  its  satellites to  provide  long-distance  telephone  service  and  specialized 
business  services  for  10  years  in   the  continental  United  States,  Alaska, 
Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S.  Virgin Islands. Each  satellite would be able 
to  handle  up  to  21,600  simultaneous  telephone  conversations.  ( W  Post, Apr 
30/80,  B-4) 

During  Apr i l:   NASA  announced  appointment  of  Robert  E.  Smylie,  deputy 
director of  GSFC  since December   1976  and  acting director  from June  1979  to 
February  1980, as Headquarters associate administrator for  space tracking and 
data  systems.  He  had  joined  NASA  in  1962  at  JSC,  where  he  worked  in 
various  positions  until  assigned  to  Headquarters  in   1973 as  deputy  associate 

145 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

APR IL   1980 

administrator  for  aeronautics  and  space  technology.  He   was  previously 
employed  by  Douglas  Aircraft  Company.  (NASA  anno  Apr  2 /80 ;   NASA 
Release  80-41) 

The   AFSC  Newsreview  reported  on  tests  i n   Arnold  Engineering  Develop- 
ment Center wind  tunnels of  insulating  materials for NASA  to use on the Shut- 
tle’s external tanks.  One or  more of  these materials would  cover  the tanks car- 
rying  cryogenic propellants  for  the  orbiter’s main  (engines, to  protect  against 
liquid-hydrogen  temperatures  of  -420 O F   and  liquid-oxygen  temperatures  of 
-295”F, and  to  prevent  ice  buildup  on  the  tanks  before  launch. 
Although  insulation  would  minimize  the  icing  problem,  NASA’s  concern 
was  t h a t   at  l a u n c h   c h u n k s   of  ma ter ia l   might  break  off  where   it  protected  at- 
tachment  brackets.  Lumps  the  size  of  a  sugar  cube  could  damage  the 
thousands  of  fragile  heat-shield  tiles  designed  to  protect  the  orbiter  from 
overheating. Tests  showed  that  the material would  not  fragment  if  streamlined 
shapes  were  used  ahead  of  the  brackets.  (AFSC Newsreview,  Apr  80, 7) 

The   Washington S tar   reported  that  the  Am e r i cm   Newspaper  Publishers 
Association  (ANPA)  approved a proposed  system 01‘  satellite communications 
between  wire services and newspapers.  A joint  task  force representing ANPA, 
UPI,  and  Associated  Press  (AP)   conducted  a  two-year  study  of  economic, 
technical,  legal,  and  regulatory  aspects of  such a  syijtem.  ( W &r,  Apr  22/80, 
C-6) 

The   NAA  newsletter  paid  tribute  to  former  Senator A.S.  Mike  Monroney 
(D-Ok la .) ,  who died  February  13 at  the  age of  77.  Known  as  “Mr.  Aviation” 
during  his  30-year  tenure  in  Congress,  he  was  president  of  NAA  1970-1972. 
Longtime chairman of the Senate subcommittee on aviation, he introduced the 
1955 Federal Airport Act  promoting  civil  aviation, which  led  to establishment 
of  the FAA.  He received  in  1961 the Wright Brothers memorial  trophy  for  ser- 
vice  to  aviation,  and  the  first  Collier  award  for  distinguished  congressional 
service.  (NAA  newsletter  Mar-Apr  80,  4 )  

The  British Interplanetary  Society’s  Spaceflight armounced  that  Skylark  12, 
a  rocket  launched  from Natal,  Brazil, by  British  Aerospace,  reached  a  record 
altitude  of  834   kilometers  ( S E   Apr  4/80,  177) 
Spaceflight  reported  a  discovery  by  USSR  scientists that  the  lunar  regolith 
(the  dust  covering  the  Moon’s  surface)  contained  nonoxidized  iron.  Lunar 
samples  proved  to  be   corrosion  resistant  when  exposed  to  terrestrial  at- 
mosphere.  The  finding,  registered at  the  USSR  Committee for  Inventions  and 
Discoveries,  was  confirmed  a t   other  USSR  and  U.S.  laboratories.  This 
unusual  form  of  element  resulted  from  the  action  of  the  solar  wind  on  the 
Moon’s  surface,  said  Dr.  Valery  Barsukov,  director  of  the  Institute  of 
Geochemistry.  Particles  from  the  solar  wind  “seize  the  oxygen  of  the  lunar 
matter  and carry  it  away  into  space,”  leaving  pure metal on the lunar  surface. 

146 

APRIL  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

The  iron  had not oxidized  during the eight years  since the Luna 16 expedition. 
( S E   Apr  4 /80 ,   164) 

The   Soviet  Union  launched  Soyuz  35  at  1638 hours  Moscow  time  April  9 
f rom   th e   Baykonu r   s i te   in to   an   o rb i t   w i th   346 -k i lom e t e r   apog e e ,  
336-kilometer  perigee,  91.3-minute per iod ,   and  51.6 O  inclination.  Headed  for 
a  linkup  with  the  obiting  station  Sulyut 6 were  two  cosmonauts,  engineer 
Valery  Ryumin,  40,  who  spent  175  days  there  last  year,  and  rookie  L t .   Col. 
Leonid  Popov,  34 ,   a  former  je t   fighter  pilot. 
The  cargo  carr ier  Progress 8 launched  March  27  had  automatically  docked 
March  29  with  Sulyut 6, which  used  the  Progress  engine  to  adjust  its  orb i t .  
The   supply  ship  was  still  docked  to  Salyut,  waiting  for  the  new  arrivals  to 
unload  i t ,   Sulyut 6,  launched  September  29,  1977, had  been  in  orb i t   for  more  
than  3 0  months;  when  the  Soyuz 35 crew docked  with  it a t  6:16  p.m.  Moscow 
time  Apr i l   10,  Ryumin  said  in  a  telecast  “Look ,   the  station  is  absolutely  in 
the  same  condition  a s  we  left  it.”  Tass said  the  crew  would  c lean ,  repair,  and 
restock  the  station  and  resume  research  on  medical  and  biological  effects  of 
long-term  spaceflight.  The  Soviet  television  program  said  that  Ryumin  was  a 
last-minute  choice  for  this  flight,  apparently  taken  from   a  backup  crew  to 
replace  an   unidentified  flight  engineer  who  “had  trouble  during  his  physical 
exercises.” 
First  task was to turn  on  station  systems:  lights,  a ir  and water  regeneration, 
communications,  and control desk ,  all of which had been off for seven months 
while  Sulyut  6 was  unmanned.  The   crew  began  April  11  to  unload  Progress 
8 and  activate systems and  in s t rumen t s  inc lud ing   plant-life  installations  Oaziz, 
Vazon,  and  Malakhit,  the  latter  an  orchid-growing  greenhouse  the  crew  had 
brought  with  them  on  Soyuz 35.  Ground  control  said  that  observing  growth 
of  the  orchids  would  encourage  “good  spirits”  in  the  crew. 
By  April  15 the  crew  had  dismantled  and  replaced  apparatus  that  had  worn 
ou t ,   putting  the  used  equipment  into  the  freight  compartment  of  Progress 8. 
They  had  installed  new  storage  batteries  and  replaced  solar  batteries  in  the 
attitude-control  system  and  parts  in  the  water-regeneration  system.  They  had 
also prepared  to  refuel  the  propulsion  unit.  At  the  end  of  their  first week,  Dr. 
Anatoly  Yegorov  said  that  the  cosmonauts  were  adapting  “more  quickly  than 
expected”  and  were  working  ahead  of  schedule,  “the  most  convincing  proof 
of  their  physical  wellbeing.” 
[Nature  magazine  reported  speculation  that  Ryumin’s  return  flight  meant 
the  Soviet  Union  might  be   preparing  for  a  manned  mission  to  Mars. 
“Classical”  Soviet  projects  for  space  exploration,  following  the  lead  of 
Tsiolkovsky, assumed  the  establishment  of  a permanent  orbital  station  staffed 
by  “several  tens”  of  male  and  female  crew  and  scientists  for  several  months 
at a  time;  lunar  and  planetary  exploration,  for  this  century  at  least,  would  be 
left to automatic vehicles.  However, Soviet experts had  shown considerable  in- 
terest in biological  effects of  long-term  spaceflight; they had found “no  signifi- 
cant  organic  changes”  that  might  limit  the  duration  of  future  flights.  Sending 

147 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

A PR IL   I Y X O  

Ryumin  aloft  again  after  his  record  175-day  flight  (which  Nature  called 
“serendipitous”)  should  have  especially  interesting  rcsults.  Nuture  quoted  a 
Tass  report  that  Ryumin  was  included  at  the  last  minute  when  “Flight 
Engineer  Lebedev”  hurt  his  leg.] 
By  April  22  the  crew  had  almost  finished  unloading  the  freighter  and  had 
refueled  the joint  propulsion  plant,  preparatory  to  filling  the  station  with  ox- 
idizer.  Dr.  Konstantin  Feoktistov  said  that  the  most  productive  period  of 
cosmonauts  in  space  would  begin  one  month  to  six  weeks  after  a  mission 
started;  the  Soyuz  35  crew  had  been  doing  repair  and  fault-prevention  work 
so far, but  had  also begun to resume  experiments.  l h e y  used  Progress  8’s  pro- 
pulsion  unit for another orbit adjustment April 24. On April 25 they  separated 
the freighter from the Salyut-Soyuz  complex; on April  26 they  ignited  the pro- 
pulsion  unit  at  9:54 Moscow  time  to  put  it  into  a  descent  trajectory  over  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  where  it  “ceased  to exist.”  On  April 27  the Soviet  Union  laun- 
ched Progress  9 at 9 :24   p.m.  Moscow  time;  it  docked with  the  Soyuz-Salyut 
complex  at  11:09  a .m .   April  29,  bringing  more   apparatus  and  equipment, 
materials  for  the  life-support  systems,  additional  fuel,  and  mail  for  the 
cosmonauts.  As  usua l ,   the  report  ended  with  the  statement  that  the 
cosmonauts were “feeling fine.”  (Tass in English,  Apr 3-29/80; Moscow  Dom 
Svc  in  Russian,  Apr  3-29/80;  W Post,  Apr  10/80, A-18;  W Stur,  Apr  10/80, 
A-15;  Apr  12/80, A-10;  NY   Ernes,  Apr  11/80, D-15;  Nature,  Apr  17/80, 5 8 5 )  

148 

M a y   1:  Changes  made  during  the  past  year  to  the  three  main  engines 
designated  for the first flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia had  led NASA 
to  set  up  further  tests,  the  agency  announced.  Modifications  included  high- 
p iessure   turbopumps,  valves,  and  nozzles.  Acceptance-tested  between  April 
and July  1979, the engines would be  shipped  from KSC to NSTL  in Mississip- 
pi  for  reacceptance  firing  and  return  to KSC.  The  two-  to  three-month  testing 
would  not  affect  the  timing  of  the  first  flight,  now  scheduled  for  a  da te  bet- 
ween  November  1980  and  March  1981.  About  6  weeks  before  the  planned 
launch ,   the  engines  would  be   fired  again  for  20   seconds  on  the  launch  pad. 
(NASA  Release  80-60;  JSC  Release  80-030) 

JSC  reported  signing  a  noncompetitive  $12.931  million  contract  with  the 
Char les   Stark  Draper   Laboratory  for  development  of  Shuttle  avionics  soft- 
ware.  Draper   would  perform  most  of  the  work  under  the  21-month  contract 
a t   Cambridge,  Mass.  (JSC  Release  80-029) 

M a y  2:  Fur ther  press  comment  on  the USSR  launch  April  29  of  Cosmos  1176 
included  a  Washington Post speculation  that  the  United  States  might  dep lore  
t h e   nuclear-powered  vehicle  for  more   reasons  than  its  deterrent  effect  on  
United  Nations  negotiations. 
Recalling  the  aborted  attempt  April  24-25  to  rescue  U.S.  hostages  in  the 
Tehran embassy,  the  Washington Post noted  that the  Cosmos 1176 launch  came  
only  four  days  later.  Just  before  it began  the  rescue  attempt,  the  U.S.  aircraft 
carr ier  Nimitz  “sped  away  from a Soviet spy  ship that  had been  trailing  i t ,  and 
apparently  was  ab le   to  launch  the  rescue  helicopters  on  their  secret  mission 
without  notice.”  Satellites  spying  with  radar   needed  nuclear  sources  for  the 
necessary  power;  solar  cells,  e.g.,  could  not  produce  enough  electricity.  The  
new  satellite  “passing  daily  over  the  Indian  Ocean  and  Middle  E a s t .   . .may  
well  b e  meant  to  keep  the  Kremlin  from  being  surprised  again  by  providing 
radar  surveillance  of  the  U.S.  fleet,”  the  Washington Post sa id .  
The   Washington Star cited  the  January  1978  breakup  of  Cosmos  954  that 
scattered  radioactive debr is  across  a remote  region  of  Canada ;  one  expert  sug- 
gested  that  the  Soviet  Union  might  have  solved  the  problem  causing  the 
Canada crash or might have developed  a new  nonnuclear  power  source  for  the 
new  satellite’s radar.  However, U.S.  officials  were  “virtually  certain”  that  the 
new  satellite was,  like those  in the  Cosmos  954 series,  powered  by  radioactive 
thermal  generators  creating  heat  that  turned  turbines  to  produce  electricity. 
The  United States had  already detected  radar  emissions  from  Cosmos 1176, in- 
dicating  that  it was  looking  for  U.S.  and  o ther   ships.  Its  radar  was  90% ab le  

149 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1980 

to  detect  objects the  size of  aircraft  carriers,  50% cruisers,  and 30% frigates. 
Soviet  leader  Leonid  Brezhnev  had  revealed  that  such  satellites carried  about 
1001  pounds  of  uranium;  after  about  75  days,  they  were  supposed  to  be 
rocketed  to  500-mile-altitude  orbits  where  they  would  remain  for  about  100 
years,  or   until  the  materials  were  no  longer  dangerous.  (WP o s t ,  May  2/80, 
A-6;  W Star,  May  2/80,  A-1) 

M a y   4:  The   U.S.  Coast  Guard  signed  an  agreement  with  NASA  April  29  for 
work  leading  to  an  operational  lighter-than-air  machine that  might  constitute 
a  fleet of  blimps by  the  early  1990s,  according  to  the New   York  Times.  Coor- 
dinating  the  two  agencies’  research  would  reduce  costs:  NASA  scientists had 
been  studying  use  of  lighter-than-air  craft  to  l i f t   heavy  equipment  and  would 
now  work on developing stronger synthetics and beirter  adhesives for the blimp 
bag,  more  sophisticated  electronics,  and  more  automated  procedures  for 
ground  handling  to  do   away  with  the  need  for  large  ground  crews. 
Lt.  Cdr.  Kenneth  Williams,  chief  of  the  Coast  Guard  technology  branch, 
said that  they  sought a vehicle for use  i n   “search  anld rescue,  law enforcement, 
and  other  patrol  functions.”  Th e  Navy  had  abandclned  its  airship  program  i n  
the  early  1960s because  fuel was  cheap;  i t   “costs  a heck  of  a  lot more  today,” 
Williams said, and a Coast Guard-Navy study  had  found  fuel-efficient airships 
operationally and  technically  feasible for maritime patrol  work  in combination 
with  cutters  and  conventional  aircraft.  ( N Y  T imes ,  May  4/80,  56) 

M a y   6: NASA  announced  that  a  J PL  scientist? Dr.  Stephen P.  Synnott of  the 
Voyager  optical  navigation  team,  had  discovered  a  15th moon  of  Jupiter  from 
T/oyager I  photos taken  in March  1979. Checking March photos to confirm the 
discovery  of  another satellite (1979 J1)  i n  October  1979 photos taken  by  Pbyager 
2,  Synnott detected an unexplained  shadow  on the planet  that,  once recogniz- 
e d ,   was  evident  on  seven  earlier  images.  The   new  satellite,  labeled  1979  52, 
had  a  16-hour orbit  around  Jupiter  between  moons  Amalthea  and  Io ;   1979 J1 
had  a  7-hour  orbit.  (NASA  Release  80-61;  JPL   Release  930) 

INTELSAT announced  that  Honduras  had  become  its  104th member.  In  a 
ceremony  at  the  U.S.  State  Department  Roberto  Nunez  Montes,  general 
manager of  HONDUTEL   (Empresa Hondurena  de ‘Telecomunicaciones)  sign- 
ed  t h e   operating  agreement.  Honduras  already  wa:;  a  user  of  the  INTELSAT 
system through ground stations in neighboring countries.  (INTELSAT  Release 
80-09-1) 

M a y   7:  NASA  announced  selection  of  two  firms,  McDonnell  Douglas  and 
TRW,  to  receive  parallel  $1  million  one-year  contracts  for  design-definition 
studies of  25-kilowatt  power  systems  for  the  STS.  The   power  systems,  using 
solar energy  to  support  large payloads left  in   orbit,  would be placed  in a  fixed 
orbit  by  the  Space  Shuttle  to  provide  electric  power,  heat  rejection,  attitude 
control,  communications,  and data  handling  for  a  variety  of  payloads  freeing 

150 

MAY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

the  Shuttle from  extended  time  in orbit  and  reducing  payload  cost  per  day  in 
orbit.  MSFC   would  manage  the  study  contracts  and  any  follow-on  develop- 
ment  flight  system.  (NASA  Release  80-63) 

May   8:  NASA  announced  that  it  and  the  ESA  had  selected  37  scientific  ex- 
periments  for  the  first  flight  of  Spacelab,  scheduled  for  launch  on  the  Space 
Shuttle  late  in  1982. Th e   experiments  were  in  five  categories:  atmospheric 
physics  and  Earth  observation;  space  plasma  physics;  material  sciences  and 
technology;  astronomy and solar physics; and life science. NASA would  spon- 
sor   13  of  the  37;  ESA  (a  consortium  of  11  nations),  the  others. 
Deferred  for  assignment  to  later  flights were  three  NASA  experiments  and 
a major ESA facility; the factor preventing  selection of  all the experiments was 
mass.  Each  agency  would  be   allowed  to  fly  1,392 kilograms  (3,062  pounds) 
of  equipment on the mission.  Unlike Skylab, Spacelab would  no t   be  left unat- 
tended  in  space;  it  would  remain  in  the  Shuttle  and  be  returned  to  Earth  for 
use  in  another  mission.  (NASA  Release  80-62; MSFC  Release  80-66; ESA 
Info  9) 

Ma y   9:  JSC  announced  NASA  selection  of  two  California  aerospace  firms  to 
negotiate  contracts  for  production  of  solar  cells  as   a  supplemental  power 
source  for  the  Space  Shuttle orbiter.  Applied  Solar  Energy  Corporation  and 
Spectrolab  would  each  receive  a  $300,000  contract  to  develop  a  large-area 
low-cost  solar  cell  for NASA's  proposed  power-extension  package,  to  be  pro- 
duced  a t   the  rate of  144,OOO space-qualified  solar cells  per  year,  reducing  the 
cost  to  $30   per  watt.  (Solar  cells  now  cost  from   $80  to  $120  per  watt.)  The 
power-extension item would  be  a 2,000-pound  package  folded into the orbiter 
cargo bay;  in orb i t ,  the item would b e  moved out by  a remote mechanical  a rm ,  
the   177-foot wings  unfolding to supply the  Shuttle with  26 kilowatts  of  electric 
power.  (JSC  Release  80-032) 

Th e  Naval Research Laboratory  (NRL)  reported  that  a  team  of  its  scientists 
was working on  a solar-ultraviolet  (UV) spectral  irradiance monitor (SUSIM) 
for  use  on  the   Space  Shuttle  to  study  long-term  variations  in  solar  flux  for 
more  accurate monitoring  of  UV  radiation  from  the  so lar   chromosphere  and  
corona .   So lar   radiation  in  the   wavelengths  under  study  control  many 
photochemical  processes  in  Earth's  atmosphere  at  altitudes  below  100 
kilometers;  variations  in the  radiation  may  alter  the  composition  of  the  lower 
atmosphere,  affecting  the  lifetime  of  pollutants  and  ion  density  in  the   D 
region.  Th e  Navy  also  considered  the D  region  of  the   atmosphere  important 
because  of  its  direct  effect  on  communications  systems. 
T h e   p r in c ip a l   inves t iga tor ,   D r .   G u e n t e r   E .   B ru e ckn e r ,   sa id   th a t  
measurements  by  conventional  methods  in  the   120-  to  400-nanometer 
wavelength  range were  not  accurate enough  for  scientists  to  define values  for 
solar-flux  variations over  time.  Th e  monitor would  travel as  a  solar sensor on 
an early orbiter flight; the spacecraft pilot would  use  its real-time data to point 

151 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1980 

directly at the Sun i n  order  to monitor the entire solar disk and measure varia- 
t ion   of  its  intensity  with  solar  activity.  Brueckner’s  team  consisted  of  three 
scientists-Michael  E .  VanHoosier,  Dr. Dianne K .  Pr inz ,  and Dr. John-David 
E  Bartoe-developing 
and  testing  the  SUSIM  for  Shuttle  flight.  Both  Prinz 
and  Bartoe  had  passed  mental  and  physical  tests  for  astronaut-scientists  and 
had  been  chosen  to  make a  Shuttle  flight; one  of  them  might obtain  firsthand 
data  on  solar  activity  by  actually  using  monitor  on  a  Shuttle  flight.  (NRL 
Release  20-5-8OC) 

M a y  12: NASA  reported  that  the National  Archives  had  formally accepted  its 
records of  the  1967 Apollo 204 spacecraft  fire, to he retained  permanently  for 
use  by  scholars  studying  the   space  program  in  general  and  t h e   failure  and  
subsequent  redesign  of  the  spacecraft.  (NASA  Actv  Rpr  May  12/80) 

JSC  reported  that  parts  of  the  remote-manipulator  system  (the  robot  crane 
that  would  handle  inflight  transfer  of  Space  Shuttle  cargo)  were  being  tested 
in its Shuttle avionics integration laboratory.  Th e  system would  be used on  the 
Shuttle beginning with  the  second flight  to place o r  retrieve satellites in  space, 
to  assemble  structures  o r   components,  or   if  necessary  to  rescue  crews  by 
transferring  them  to  another  vehicle. 
Th e   manipulator  was  a  50-foot  arm   with  movable  joints  at  the  shoulder, 
elbow,  and  wrist;  associated  motors,  gears,and  sensors;  and  an  end-effector 
serving as  an  ingenious hand.  The  test parts were a display  and  control  panel, 
rotational  and  translational  hand  controllers,  and  an  interface  unit  for 
manipulator  control  belonging  to  the  electrical  subsystem.  The   arm   and  its 
movement  would  be  simulated  by  computers  in  thc  lab. 
In the tests, engineers and technicians  from NASA  and the contractor  Space 
Aerospace,  astronauts,  and  representatives  of  the Canadian Research Council 
would  try  to  duplicate  events  to  be  encountered  while  operating  the  space 
crane in orbit.  Astronauts Drs .  Sally  Ride,  Judy Resnick,  Norm Thagard,  and 
Story Musgrave would  controls  arm   movement  by  using  the  hand  controllers 
in  a  mockup  of  the  orbiter’s  aft  station.  System  operators  would  watch  a 
computer-generated  television  scene duplicating the: view  the crew  would  have 
out  of  the  cockpit  aft  window. 
Th e  difficulty would  come  in operating  the  arm  with  the dynamics  induced 
by  arm  movement:  in  the  weightlessness of  space,  once  a  mass  (the arm  and 
its  load) were  moved,  it  would  keep  going until  stopped  by  an  equal  and  op- 
posite  force. When  a  command  moved  the  a rm ,   the  control  system  had  to  be 
ready  to  command  a  counteracting  move.  Also,  the  orbiter  would  move  in 
response  to  the a rm ,  and vice versa.  Interaction between  a rm  and  orbiter con- 
trols must be explored before  flight;  the  simulations  in this  investigation  were 
among  the  most  sophisticated  ever  attempted  at  JSC.  (JSC  Release  80-034) 

In  the  first  transcontinental  balloon  trip,  a  father-son  team  landed  the 
75-foot-tall  helium-filled  Kitty  Hawk  on  Canada’s  Gaspe  peninsula  at  7:27 

152 

MAY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

EDT  after  a  May  8 liftoff  in  San  Francisco,  Calif.  Maxie  Anderson ,  48,  and 
his  son Kris,  23,  of  Albuquerque,  N .M . ,   had  planned  to  land  in Kitty  Hawk, 
N.C.,  but  were  blown  by  brisk  winds  toward  Maine  and  Canada .   They  had 
met with bad weather  beginning  with strong winds,  ra in ,  and  snowstorms over 
Wyoming.  Despite  their  failure  to  land  a t  Kitty  Hawk,  the  team  set  distance 
records:  a previous  balloon  record  was  set  last year by  a 2,002-mile  flight  that 
ended  in  a  snowstorm  in  Ohio.  The   Andersons  on  May  11  had  gone  2,417 
miles. 
In August  1978 Maxie Anderson  and two companions had crossed the Atlan- 
tic  in   137 hours   in  the  balloon  Double  Eagle  I1 from  Presque  Isle,  Maine,  to 
Paris.  The   Washington Star  said  in  a  May  21  editorial:  “Mr.  Anderson  says 
he  has  no  plans  for  further  reco rd -b reahng   trips,  but  refuse  to  believe  it. 
There’s the Pacific Ocean jus t  waiting to yield  to helium and human  dexterity.” 
During  a  visit  to  North  Carolina  the  week  after  the   flight,  Anderson  was  in- 
ducted  into  the  Man  Will  Never  Fly  society,  a  group   with  the  motto  “Birds 
F ly ;   Men  Drink.”  The  society’s Dr.  Ed  North  said  it  had  awarded  Anderson 
and his son memberships without  knowing whether  they were drinkers.  “They 
missed  the ir   landing  site  by  over  a  thousand  miles,”  North  sa id ,   “so  I  jus t  
assumed  that  they  were.”  ( W  Star,  May  12/80,  A-1;  May  20180,  A-2;  May 
21/80,  A-12) 

M a y  13: NASA’declared the mission of  Heao 3 successful  in its prelaunch  ob- 
jectives.  Launched  September 29,  1979, the  satellite had  in  its  first  six months 
of  operation  made  a  full  gamma-ray  sky  survey  and  detected  a  wide  range  of 
cosmic-ray elements. Dr. Thomas A .  Mutch, associate administrator for space 
science,  said  Heao  3 should  “continue  to  provide  excellent  scientific  data.” 
(NASA  MOR   S-382-79-03  [postlaunch]  May  13/80) 

NASA  announced  plans  to launch  NOAA-B on or about May  21  from  WTR  
on   an  Atlas  F.  A  third-generation  environmental-monitoring  spacecraft 
operated  by  NOAA  for  the  National  Operational  Environmental  Satellite 
System  (NOESS),  NOAA-B  would jo in  N O M - A   ( N o m  6) in acquiring  quan- 
titative  data a s  input  for GARP  (the Global Atmospheric  Research  Program) .  
Known a s  the  “TIROS  twins,”  the NOAA  satellites  would be  the only  civilian 
operational  spacecraft  whose  orb i ts   cover  the  polar  regions.  (NASA  MOR  
E-615-80-02  [prelaunch]  May  13/80; DOC   Release  NOAA  80-67) 

NASA  reported  that  it would  negotiate  with  the  National  Science  Teachers 
Association  (NSTA)  to  run  the  student  involvement  project,  a  nationwide 
yearly  competition  among  secondary-school  students  for  scientific  and 
engineering  experiments  to  fly  on  the  Shuttle on  a  space-available  basis.  The  
NSTA would manage the competition to the point of  selecting  10 finalists from 
20  semifinalists  in  each  of  10 regions;  NASA  would  decide  whether  to  fly  a 
particular  experiment. 
Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch ,  NASA  administrator,  noting  “The   vitality  of  NASA 

153 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1980 

depends  heavily  on  an  infusion  of  fresh  ideas,”  said  the  student  connection 
would  be  important  to the agency  program.  NASA  held  a  similar competition 
before  the Skylab mission i n   1973; it was also considering a program  to involve 
college  students.  (NASA  Release  80-65) 

MSFC  announced  that  the  second  round  of  acceptance  tests  declared 
necessary  for  Columbia’s  main  engines  because  of  modifications  on  them 
since acceptance  [see May  13  would  consist of  a  sin.gle 520-second  static firing 
of  each engine. No.  2007 was mounted  in test  stand  A-2  for  firing  late i n  May; 
no.  2006  would  be  tested  on  stand  A-1  in  m i d J u n e ;   and  no.  2005,  on  stand 
A-2  i n   late June.  (MSFC  Release  80-67; JSC Release 80-036; NASA  Release 
80-68)  

JSC said  that  it had  selected Barrios and Associaites  for  negotiations leading 
to  award  of  a  cost-plus-award-fee contract  for  flight-design  support  services 
to  operational  flights  of  the  Shuttle.  Cost  of  the  first  two  years  of  a  planned 
five-year  program  (June  80  through  May  82)  would  be  $1.9  million.  (JSC 
Release  80-035) 

Th e   Wushingron  Post  said  that  Pratt  &  Whitncy  d iv is ion ,   United 
Technologies, had  signed a pact  with Rolls Royce of  England to jointly  develop 
and  produce  engines  for  AV-8B  aircraft.  Th e  company  said  that  the  Pegasus 
engine  could  be   worth  up  to  $1.5  billion,  $350  million  of  it  for  Pratt  & 
Whjtney.  ( W  Post,  May  13/80, D8) 

ESA  reported  that  representatives  from  Canada., France,  India,  Japan ,   and 
the United  States,  as  well  as ESA,  met  in  Ottawa  May  8-9  to  discuss  interna- 
tional  cooperation  in  remote-sensing  satellite  systems.  ESA  would  host  a 
follow-up meeting in  1981. A series of  regional meetings with  nations planning 
to use  remote-sensing  data would bring  the needs of user states to  t h e  attention 
of  satellite operators  and  would  help  in  preparing  for  a  1982  United  Nations 
conference  on  exploration  and  peaceful  uses  of  outer  space.  (ESA  Info  11) 

Muy   15: NASA  reported  that  astronomers  using  data  from  the  international 
UV  explorer  were  continuing  to  study  the  halo  discovered  around  the  Milky 
Way  in  early  observations  by  the  satellite.  Th e  halo  material  was  found  to  be 
hot  (about  100,000”), to extend  50,000  light-years  from the galaxy,  and to con-  
ta in   oxygen,  sulfur,  iron,  silicon,  and  carbon.  h e  launched  January  26,  1978, 
was  a joint  mission  of  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  ESA. 
For most of  history,  visible light was  the  only medium  for studying celestial 
objects,  but  many  types  of  electromagnetic  radiation  were  now  available  for 
observation:  radio  waves,  infrared,  X-ray,  gamma  rays,  and  ultraviolet  rays. 
Earth’s  atmosphere  blocked  most  of  these  types  of  energy,  which  must  be 
studied  through  spacecraft above  the  atmosphere.  h e ,  in  a  synchronous  orbit 
keeping  it  in  continuous  touch  with  either  the  United  States  or  the  European 

154 

MAY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

ground  station,  could  be  used  by  astronomers  located  either  at  GSFC  o r   the 
Villafranca  station  in  Spain  (Vilspa) much  like  a  ground-based telescope but 
observing in  the ultraviolet  instead of  visible-light  spectrum.  A   scientific col- 
loquium at GSFC  during May  heard  92 papers  on h e ,  findings; Prof.  Robert 
Wilson,  University  College London,  said  “there  is hardly  an  area  of  modem  
astronomy  that  hasn’t  been  affected.”  Scientists from  25  countries were  par- 
ticipating,  and  478  astronomers  had  been  assigned  observing  time  on  the 
satellite.  (NASA  Release  80-67) 

NASA  might  decide to  remove  and  strengthen every  heat-protection  tile on 
Columbia  not  already  removed  and  treated,  Today  newspaper  reported.  As 
many  as  l0,OOO  tiles  could  be  affected,  delaying  Shuttle launch  by  months. 
Recent  tests had  shown weaknesses  in  tile faces  that were glued  to  the Shut- 
tle  surface;  NASA  had  removed  thousands  for  “densification,”  painting  the 
bonding  surfaces  to  increase  their  sticking  power.  NASA  was  now  testing 
16,000 of  the  30,922 tiles a t  points  of  greatest  stress  to  see  if  they  needed  to 
be densified. Tiles  failing the test had been  removed and densified; those pass- 
ing were  left  intact.  However,  NASA  was  now  thinking  of  doing  all  the  tiles 
as  a  safety  measure.  Installation was  about  80%  complete,  but  a  decision  to 
densify  all  would  leave  only  a  few  thousand  tiles  on  the  ship. 
Officials would  not  give  an  exact count  of  the number  of  tiles already  den- 
sified;  technicians  gluing  the  tiles  in  the processing  facility  at KSC  had  been 
averaging  about 700  a week.  JSC  structural design  chief Tom  Moser   said  that 
he  could  not  predict  whether  all  the  tiles would  be  densified o r   how  long  i t  
would  take.  (Toduy, May  15/80, 1A) 

M a y  16: Aviation leaders from across the United  States attended a banquet at 
the Washington Hilton,  Washington, D.C.,  to  honor  Dr.  Paul  B.  MacCready, 
designer  of  the   Gossamer   Condor   and  Gossamer   Albatross,  who   won  the 
Robert J. Collier trophy  for the first human  powered  flight across the 22-mile- 
wide  English  Channel.  Master  of  ceremonies  was  NBC  news  correspondent 
Peter  Hackes,  a  fellow  enthusiast of  sail planing.  The  audience  saw  the  film 
of  the  Channel  flight  and  applauded  the  touchdown  of  the  Albatross  on  the 
beach  a t  Cap  Gris  Nez,  France.  MacCready  accepted  the  trophy  for  himself 
and  for  the  “engine”  of  the  Albatross,  cyclist  Bryan  Allen,  who  was  unable 
to  attend. 
MacCready  reported that NASA  was  negotiating  to use his backup aircraft 
Gossamer  Albatross  II in  tests  aimed  at  design  and  operation  of  a  remotely 
powered  vehicle  at  100,000  feet  altitude.  The   Albatross’s  extremely  light 
weight  “exaggerates the apparent mass effects in  stability and control, and also 
the effect of  turbulence on wing efficiency.”  “These  are areas heretofore unex- 
amined and deal with phenomena never before encountered,” he added.  (NAA 
newsletter  May/June  80;  NAA  Release  May  19/80) 

155 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1980 

M a y   18: The  People’s  Republic  of  China  launched  a  long-range missile  May 
18 capable of  delivering a nuclear warhead  a s  far  a:; Moscow  or  the west  coast 
of  the  United  States,  Xinhua  press  agency  announced.  Australian  navy  ships 
reported  the  rocket’s  splashdown  in  the  ocean  about  750 miles  northwest  of 
Fiji.  Diplomatic  sources  in  Beijing  said  the  rocket  may  have been  fired  from 
a complex about  1,000 miles west  of  there,  or from  the Lop Nor  nuclear-arms 
test  area  in  northwest  China.  If  so,  the  rocket made a  flight  of  5,000 miles  or  
more.  (W S t u r ,  May  19/80, A-6;  FBIS, Xinhua  in  English, May  23 /80 ;  Hong 
Kong  AFP   in  English,  May  18/80; Moscow  World  Svc  in  English;  Tass  i n  
English,  May  16-25/80) 

M a y   19:  AP   said  that  NASA  and  DOE  had  awarded  Boeing  Aerospace  a 
$296,000 contract  to  study  disposal of  nuclear  wasle  (long-lived  radionuclides 
radioactive  for  thousands  of  years)  i n   space:  whether  to  launch  the  “nuclear 
trash”  on  an  unmanned  rocket,  or   by  a  manned  Shuttle  whose  crew  would 
eject it  in orbit and propel  i t   further ou t ;  where  in  space to  put  it;  how  to pro- 
tect  it  during  launch  and  i n   space;  and  how  to  retrieve  it  i n   case  of  an  abort 
at  liftoff.  (NASA  Release  80-69 ;  MSFC  Release  130-69; AP   in  W Post,  May 
21/80,  A-5) 

NASA  announced  that  it  had  renewed  a  cost-plus-management-fee contract 
with  the Universities Space Research  Association  for management  and opera- 
tion  of  the  Lunar  and  Planetary  Institute.  Th e   fee  through  March  31,  1982, 
would  be  $4,292,700.  Work  would  be  done  a t   the  institute,  adjoining  JSC  in 
Houston. 
Th e  institute,  a  focal  point  for  the  lunar  and  planetary  science  community 
to  pursue  solid-body  geosciences  such  as  mineralogy,  petrology,  and 
geochemistry,  was  created  in  October  1968  in  response  to  NASA’s  quest  for 
a  university  consortium  to  work  with.  Th e  association  was  incorporated  the 
following  March as  a means  for  universities  and other  research  organizations 
to  work  with  each  other  and  with  NASA  i n   space  research.  (NASA  Release 
80-73) 

M a y   20:  ESA  reported  that  European  and  U.S.  astronauts  scheduled  to  fly 
with  the  first  Spacelab on  the ninth  Shuttle  flight  would  attend  a training  ses- 
sion May  27-30 on  using  an  infrared-grill  spectrometer  to check the composi- 
tion  of the stratosphere to monitor the effect of  human activity on its evolution. 
Besides  a  commander  and  copilot  of  the  Shuttle,  the  Spacelab crew  would 
include two payload  specialists (one each  from ESA. and the United  States) and 
two  mission  specialists  in  charge  of  the  interface  between  the  Shuttle  and 
Spacelab.  Two  of  the  five  payload  specialists  attending  the  training  session 
would  be   selected  six months  before  flight:  physicist  Ulf  Merbold  of  West 
Germany;  astronomer  Claude  Nicollier  of  Switzerland;  physicist  Wubbo 
Ockels of  the Netherlands;  physicist  Michael Lampton,  University  of  Califor- 
nia  at  Berkeley;  and  biomedical  engineer  Byron  Lkh tenberg ,   Massachusetts 

156 

MAY 1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS  

Institute of  Technology. NASA  mission  specialists attending  the  training  ses- 
sion  would  be  atmospheric  physicist  Owen  Garriott  and  astronomer  Robert 
Parker.  (ESA  Info  13) 

M a y  21:  Jack Anderson wrote in the Washington Post  that the controversial B-1 
bomber,  “like  the wondrous  Phoenix of  Egyptian  mythology,  seems  about  to 
rise from  the ashes”  3 years  after the President  “shot  it  down  in  flames”:  the 
House  Armed  Services  Committee  had  voted  $600 million  for  B-1  research 
and  procurement. 
The   committee  had  asked  Rockwell  International,  “which  still  hopes  to 
build  the big  bird,”  to prepare  a  brochure  comparing the  B-1  with  the  FB-111 
preferred  by  the U.S. Air  Force to  carry  cruise missiles. The  Post  said  an  in- 
ternal  Air  Force  report  prepared  for  Rep.  Robert  Ca r r   (D-Mich.)  indicated 
that  Rockwell  had  “drastically”  oversold  B-1  capabilities.  The   brochure 
“grossly  understated  the  range  of  the  FB-Ill”  by  almost  900  nautical  miles, 
comparing it on  a  low-level mission with  a B-1  flying at  a  higher,  fuel-saving 
altitude,  the  U .S .  Air  Force  noted.  Rockwell  also  “fudged  on  the  delivery 
dates it promised  in  the brochure”  by  three to  four months in  one case, almost 
a year  in  another. The  U.S. Air Force report  said  that  there were  “many  other 
areas  that  are   inaccurate.”  (W  Post,  May  21/80,  B-16) 

NASA  reported  that  a  team  using  Voyager  data  found  that  Saturn’s period 
of  rotation  (the length of a day  on  that planet) was  24 minutes  longer than was 
thought  earlier.  Astronomers  using  Earth-based  observations had  calculated 
the  length  of  a  Saturn  day  as   10  hours,  15  minutes  but  admitted  that  their 
figures  lacked  accuracy.  The   inaccuracy  of  the  earlier  measurements  arose 
from  Saturn’s lack  of a  solid  surface;  viewers  could  see  only  the  cloud  tops 
of  the  planet,  with  no  sharply defined  features to  permit  accurate determina- 
tion  of  rotation. 
The  two  Voyager  spacecraft had  recorded bursts of  radio noise  from Saturn 
and other  sources in  the  sky  during January  1980. By  isolating Saturn signals 
from  those  recorded  from  the  Sun,  Jupiter,  and  other  sources,  the  Voyager 
planetary  radioastronomy  team  found  that  Saturn’s  originated  at  the  planet’s 
north pole and were precisely controlled by  its rotating magnetic field.  (NASA 
Release  80-72) 

Ma y  22:  NASA  announced a change of date to April  1982 for completing or- 
bital  flight tests of  the Shuttle.  “Several  factors”  such a s  continuing engineer- 
ing  assessment and  improvement  of  the  thermal-protection  system  led  to the 
decision.  First  operational  flight  of  Columbia,  now  slipped  from  March  to 
September 1982, would  carry  the tracking and data-relay satellite TDRS-A  in- 
to  a  geosynchronous  orbit.  Other  schedule  adjustments  would  be  discussed 
with  users at KSC May  29-30. Changes in  the manifests had  been  coordinated 
with  DOD,  NASA  said;  it  would  make  use  of  Deltas during  the  transition to 

157 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

MAY   1980 

full Shuttle operations. Others set to use the Delta included Telesat of  Canada, 
Hughes Aircraft,  and  Indonesia.  (NASA  Release 80-74; JSC Release  80-037) 

May  23 :   Th e   Washington Post  reported  that  Summa  Corporation,  holding 
company  for  the  late  billionaire Howard  Hughes’:; estate,  would  “immediate- 
ly”  disassemble the Spruce Goose, Hughes’s  140-ton flying  boat,  since a  last- 
minute public  appeal  for $750,000 to preserve  it  had  failed.  The  Port  of  Long 
Beach,  Ca l if . ,   had  wanted  the  220-foot  boat,  80-feet  high  with  a  320-foot 
wingspan,  to  display  with  another  transportation  mammoth,  the  ocean  liner 
Queen  Mary.  Designed  to  be  a  World  War  I1  troop  carrier,  the  eight-engine 
Spruce Goose  (actually  made mostly  of  birch)  had  flown  only  once   in  1947. 
Parts  of  i t   would  go  to  nine  museums,  including  the  Smithsonian.  ( W  Post, 
May  23/80,  F3) 

ESA  reported  that the Ariane LO2  launched from Guyana at  14:29 GMT  had 
fallen  into  the  sea.  Liftoff  was  norma l ,  but  7  seconds  later,  telemetry  showed 
pressure fluctuations in a first-stage motor  that caused the other motors  to  fail. 
Th e  launcher  self-destructed  at  108 seconds.  Teams  evaluating  the  telemetry 
data later reported events during launch in detail; further study would be need- 
ed  to  find  the  cause  of  the  malfunction.  (ESA  Release  May  23,  Info  15) 

LaRC  said that NASA had  sent an airborne-particle measurement  team from 
WFC  as far west  as  Missouri  May 21-22 to measure dust layers  resulting  from 
the eruption of M t .  S t .  Helens,  which  had  caused (dense concentrations of  par- 
ticles  in  five  distinct  clouds  in  the  stratosphere  over  the  United  States  and 
Canada. The  leading edge of  the volcano plume (a tropospheric  cloud  contain- 
ing  the  largest amount of  particles)  had  already  piissed  over  the  United  States 
and  was  out  to  sea. 
NASA  had  detected  concentrations  of  from 200   to  800 particles  per  cubic 
centimeter  (typical  readings  were  only  half  a  particle  per  cubic  centimeter) 
May  21  and 22  in  a  stratospheric  dust  layer  over  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Illinois, 
and  Indiana at an altitude of  13-14 kilometers  (43,000-46,000  feet).  Four other 
stratospheric  dust  clouds  had  been  detected  over  eastern  Canada,  the  Ohio 
Valley,  the  Great  Plains,  and  the  far  west,  with  particle  concentrations  far 
above  normal.  Besides  airplane  and  high-altitudle balloon  observations  the 
week  of May  19-23, scientists were waiting  for  a  NASA  satellite carrying  the 
SAGE (stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment) to come to a point in its orbit 
over  the  United  States  and  Canada  where  i t   could  provide  more  detailed 
measurements  of  atmospheric profile  i n   latitudes  from  5 5 ”  to  30”N  before  it 
went  out  of  range  May  28.  (LaRC  Release  80-42) 

May  26: Th e  Soviet Union  launched  Soyuz  36 M.ay 26   at  9:21  p .m .  Moscow 
time  (2:21  p.m.  EDT)  carrying  a  Russian  commander  (Valery  Kubasov,  45, 
veteran  of  three space missions) and Hungarian en,gineer (Bertalan  Farkas, 30) 

MAY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

to  the orbiting Sulyut  6 station already occupied  by  Leonid  Popov  and  Valery 
Ryumin.  ( W  Star,  May  27/80, A-8) 

May  27:  LaRC  announced that  NASA  had  selected Rockwell International to 
study  alternate  thermal-protection  systems  for  the  Shuttle  orbiter  [see April 
11.  The   nine-month  study  beginning  in  late June  would  cost  about  $900,000. 
Boeing Aerospace also bid on  the study. (LaRC Release 80-43; NASA  Release 
80-77) 

May  28: The   WZl  Street Journal  said  that  the Ariane  rocket  failure in   its  se- 
cond test  flight was  a blow  to  western  European  development of  a competitor 
for  the  U.S. Shuttle.  ESA  experts had  not  solved the mysterious engine shut- 
down that  dropped  the  Ariane  into  the  ocean  after  launch  from  Guyana  [see 
May  231.  The   difficulty  seemed  to  be  with  the  Ariane  feature  they  valued 
most,  the  first-stage engine  that  had  been  fired 200  times  on  the  ground  and 
had  worked  flawlessly during  test  flights.  The   same   engine had  been  highly 
reliable  in  the  French  rocket  Diamant,  now  being  phased  out  after  years  of 
successful  use. 
ESA  and  France  (which  paid  64% of  Ariane  expenses  and  had  done much 
of  the  development)  hoped  to  put  Ariane  into  service  in  mid-1981,  ahead  of 
the Shuttle, which  was  able to  orbit  six times  the weight of  an Ariane payload 
and return to Earth for reuse. Shuttle problems had  put NASA  behind, but  the 
Wall  Street  Journal  said  prolonged  delay  in   Ariane  development  would  have 
“serious consequences” for ESA. The  Europeans had bid vigorously  for  laun- 
ching assignments for Ariane because  i t  would be  available earlier as  well  as 
less  expensive,  bu t   engine problems  could  undermine  the  claim.  (WSJ, May 
28/80,20) 

NASA  reported  that  scientists were  beginning  to  identify major  features on 
the  surface of  cloud-shrouded Venus  on  the basis of  data  returned by  Pioneer 
and had met with the working group on planetary nomenclature of  the Interna- 
tional Astronomical Union  (IAU) on a policy of  naming  the major  features for 
goddesses  from  various  cultures,  with  minor  features  named  for  other 
mythical females and  smaller features for famous women  no  longer alive. The  
Washington Post  said that women’s  groups  such  as the National Organization 
for Women  (NOW) had  immediately protested  “a  typically male response”  of 
naming  planetary  features  for  myths  instead  of  real  women.  Dr.  Harold 
Masursky  said  the  IAU at  its  Budapest  meeting  next  week  would  consider 
names  for Venus  sites, most of  the 30 submitted being  those of  actual women. 
(NASA  Release  80-70;  ARC  Release  8 0 4 7 ;   W Post,  May  29/80,  A-2) 

May   29:  NASA  launched  NOAA-B  from  the  Western  Space  and  Missile 
Cen te r   (WSMC)   in to   an  e l l ip t ica l   orb i t   of  1,453-kilometer  apogee ,  
273-kilometer  perigee,  72.9” inclination,  and  90.4 minute  period,  instead  of 
the  planned  circular  orbit  at  470-540-kilometer  altitude.  Malfunction  of  the 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1980 

Atlas  F  launch  vehicle  put  the  $15  million  payload  where  it  could  not  carry 
out  its planned  mission,  and NASA  expected  it  to  remain  in  orbit  only  about 
six  months.  Attempts  by  NASA  and  NOAA  to  correct  the  orbit  were  unsuc- 
cessful.  A  replacement  called  NOAA-C  would  be  sent  up  in  about  five 
months.  ( N Y  Ernes, May  30180, B-6;   W Star,  May  30/80,  A-7;  W Post,  May 
30/80, A-9;  NASA  Release  80-82; NASA  D ly  Actv  Rp t ,   June  2/80) 

NASA  announced  selection  of  Ford  Aerospace  to  negotiate  a  contract  for 
overall  system-design  engineering  on  preliminary  operations  requirements 
and test-support  system  for the  Space Telescope.  Work under  the $9.2 million 
contract  should  be   done  by  December  1983,  to  support  the  space-telescope 
mission.  Ford  Aerospace  would  run the  system  for  s ix  months before  turning 
it  over  to  NASA. 
The system  located  a t  GSFC  would  control  telescope attitude,  point  it,  and 
monitor  the  on-board  systems  24  hours  a  day,  ‘7  days  per  week.  Besides 
engineering  design,  hardware and  software,  and  support  for  facility  construc- 
tion,  the contract  covered  design of  the project  operations-control  center plus 
required  software  and  hardware.  Ford  Aerospace  would  provide  testing,  in- 
tegration,  installation,  maintenance,  documentation,  training,  and  operating 
services  for  the  system,  including  launch  on  the  Space  Shuttle.  (NASA 
Release  80-80) 

KSC  reported  on  steps taken  by  NASA  to ensure  survival  of  an endangered 
species,  the  manatee  or  sea  cow,  whose  entire  U .S .   population  estimated  at 
about  1,OOO  lived  in  Florida  waters.  Brevard  County,  site  of  KSC,  had  the 
highest  incidence of  manatee  deaths in  the  state. KSC  included  the  site of  the 
Merritt  Island  National  Wildlife  Refuge  containing  hundreds  of  species  of 
plants,  birds,  mammals,  and  reptiles;  12 of  the  latter  were  endangered, more 
than  in  any  other  single  site  i n   the  48  states.  About  20%   of  the  nation’s 
manatees  spent  part  of  the year  on  the  Space Center,  and KSC  activities  had 
been  arranged  for  minimum  interference  with  the  indigenous  wildlife. 
Aerial  surveys  over  KSC  furnished  informaticin  about  group  migratory 
habits,  feeding  grounds,  and  times  for  scheduling  work  in  areas  when  the 
manatees would  be elsewhere.  Space technology provided  tracking devices  to 
monitor  the  routes  traveled  by  individual  animals.  Ships that  recovered  spent 
Shuttle boosters docked in the Banana River, a prime manatee feeding  ground. 
NASA  had  fitted  its  ships with  a  propulsion  unit  it0  maneuver  them  without 
use  of  large  propellers  found to  be  highly  dangerous  to  the  slow-moving  and 
air-breathing  manatee;  the  unit  proved  to  be  better  at  retrieving  booster 
parachutes  without  tangling  the  lines.  (KSC  Release  95-80) 

NASA said MSFC’s Spacelab program office had  ordered a second Spacelab 
instrument-pointing  system  from ESA  and Dornier  Systems of West  Germany 
for delivery  by  the  end  of  1983.  The  major  Spacelab subsystem  was  valued  at 
about $20 million. Th e  number  of experiments currently planned  for Spacelab 

160 

MAY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

that  needed  highly  accurate  pointing  required  NASA  to  buy  a  second  unit  to 
supplement the one  NASA  would  receive as  basic Spacelab equipment provid- 
ed by  ESA.  Earlier  this  year  ESA  had  signed a contract with  NASA  for  a  se- 
cond  Spacelab  unit;  each basic  unit would  now  have  its  own  pointing  system. 
Mounted  on   a  Spacelab  pallet  in  the   Shuttle  cargo  bay,  the  instrument- 
pointing  system  (IPS)  gimbaled  in  three  directions  offered  highly  accurate 
pointing  to  scientific  instruments  weighing  from  200  to  2,000  kilograms, 
belonging  to  disciplines  such  as  astronomy,  solar  physics,  high-energy 
astrophysics, o r  Earth observation,  and needing more stability than the  Shuttle 
provided.  It  could  lock  on   and  track  targets  such  as   stars,  solar  flares,  o r  
specific items of  interest  on the Earth’s  surface without being affected by  slight 
changes in Shuttle attitude.  (NASA Release 80-79; MSFC  Release 80-75; ESA 
Info  14) 

M a y  30: Newspapers reported NASA’s  selection of  19 astronaut candidates for 
Space  Shuttle training,  the   second  group  of  pilots  and  scientists  specifically 
picked  for  that  purpose.  Those  chosen  in  the  1978  group of  35,  including  the 
first women  and  blacks  among  civilian  astronauts,  received  astronaut  wings 
a t  JSC   in August  1979.  In  the  new  group was Dr.  William F.  Fisher,  husband 
of  Dr.  Anna  Fisher,  who  was  selected  two  years  ago;  the  Seabrook,  Tex., 
physicians were  the  first married  couple  chosen  by  the  United  States.  The   8 
new  pilot  candidates  (one  black)  and  11  mission  specialists  (two women  and 
one  Hispanic)  would,  if  successful, jo in   the  62   astronauts  now  on   duty  with 
NASA.  The   Shuttle  was  scheduled  to  fly  30  or   40   missions  a  year  with  up 
to  seven  astronauts  on   a  mission. 
Pilot  selections were L t .  Col.  John E .  Blaha, U .S .  Air Force; Maj.  Charles 
E  Bolden,  Jr . ,   U.S.  Marine  Corps ;   Lt.  Co l .   Roy  D.  Bridges,  Jr . ,   U .S .  Air 
Force; Maj.  Guy S .  Gardner,  U .S .  Air Force; Ma j .  Ronald J. Grabe,  U.S. Air 
Force;  Maj.  Brian  D.  O’Connor,  U.S.  Marine  Corps ;   L t .   Cdr.  Richard  N. 
Richards,  U .S .  Navy;  and  L t .   Cdr.  Michael  J.  Smith,  U .S .  Navy. 
Mission-specialist  selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr.  James  P. 
Baglan,  anesthesiologist;  Dr.  Franklin  R .   Chang,  physicist;  Dr.  Mary  L .  
Cleave,  research  engineer;  Bonnie  J.  Dunbar,  JSC   flight  controller;  Cap t .  
David .C:  Hilmers,  U.S.  Mar ine   Corps;  Lt.  Cdr.  David  C.  Leestma,  U .S .  
Navy;  John  M .   Lounge,  JSC  flight  controller;  Cap t .  Jerry   L.  Ross,  U .S .  A ir  
Force;  Maj.  Sherwood C.  Spring,  U.S. Army;  and  Maj.  Robert  C .   Springer, 
U.S. Marine  Corps.  (N Y  Times, May  30t80, A-11;  W Post,  May  30t80, A-8; 
NASA  Release  80-78; JSC  Release  80-038) 

MSFC   reported  successful test  firing  of  the Shuttle main  propulsion  system 
May  30  at  NSTL.  Firing  time,  9 minutes  38  seconds,  exceeded the  duration 
required  to  place  a  Shuttle  in  orb i t .   Total  test  time  on   the  main  propulsion 
system  (three  engines,  external  tank,  and  associated  parts  of  the  orbiter)  was 
now  41.3  minutes,  in  addition  to  19  hours  of  single-engine  tests  conducted  in 
a  separate program.  The  Shuttle engines  were  gimbaled  (steered)  during  the 

161 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1980 

test  firing,  throttled  in  stages  from  100% of  rated  thrust  down  to  6 5% .  The  
Shuttle  would  have  the  first  human-rated  engines. capable  of  throttle  control 
during  flight.  (MSFC  Release  80-79) 

During M a y :  GSFC  reported discovery  by  a team  of  its scientists of  the largest 
gamma-ray burst ever recorded  and the first tracing of  such  a burst to a known 
astronomical  object,  providing  for  the  first  time  evidence of  the  vibration  of 
a neutron  star. Th e  burst,  trillions of  miles away, occurred March 5,  1979, and 
was  recorded  by  a network  of  nine  satellites. Th e  uniqueness of  the  event  and 
the  time needed  to  coordinate  data  from  the  Soviet  Union,  France,  and  West 
Germany  delayed  completion  of  analysis  until  recently;  a  GSFC   colloquium 
April  24 heard  a report on  the theoretical  developments. The  GSFC  team  was 
headed  by  Dr.  Thomas  L .   Cline  and  Dr.  Reuveri  Ramaty. 
Gamma  rays,  the most  energetic  form  of  electromagnetic  radiation,  exhibit 
energy  from  tens  of  thousands  to  tens  of  billions  of  volts.  Th e   amounts  of 
energy  required  to  produce  gamma  rays  had  to  come   from  extremely  high- 
energy processes  such as explosion of  an  atomic b'omb or  a  star.  Until  the ex- 
plosion of  March 5,  l q 9 ,  astronomers could only  speculate that  neutron  stars 
went  through  giant  vibration  episodes  explosively  propelling  their  substance 
outward, then being  pushed jus t  as explosively  by  (external forces back  to  their 
original  shape.  The  theory  of  relativity  says  that  these  vibrations  should emit 
gravitational  waves.  Th e  March  5  burst,  said to  ra.diate more   energy  than  the 
Sun could  produce in  1,000 years, was measured by  devices on nine spacecraft 
including  five  launched  by  t h e   United  States  (three  Velus, the  Pioneer  Venus 
orbiter,  and  the  international  Sun-Earth  explorer  Isee  3 ;  three  by  the  Soviet 
Union  (Prognoz  7,  Veneru  11,  and  &enera  12,  carrying  French  instrumenta- 
tion);  and  one  launched jointly  by  the United  States and  the Federal  Republic 
of  Germany  (He l io s  2).  The   satellites  were  widely  separated  in  space  or  i n  
Earth  orbit  when  they  detected  the  burst. 
By  timing  and  triangulation,  scientists could  trace  the  source of  the March 
5 event  to  a decaying  star  (supernova)  in  the  Large Magellanic  Cloud  (one of 
two  galaxies  nearest  the Milky  Way)  and  specifica.lly to  a  supernova  remnant 
identified  as   N-49. A  supernova  would  have  blown  its  contents  all  over  sur- 
rounding  space,  leaving  a  large  compact body  called  a  neutron  star  so dense 
that  a  spoonful  of  material  from  i t s   center  would  weigh  a  billion  tons.  The  
unusually  large  output  of  energy  and  the  fact  that  its  release  was  very  rapid 
led to the vibrating-source conclusion.  Celestial gamma rays a r e  detected only 
by  aircraft  above  the  atmosphere,  o r  by  spacecraft; detection of  future bursts 
would  require  highly  sensitive  devices  like  the  gamma-ray  observatory 
scheduled  for  Shuttle  launch  in  1985.  (GSFC  Release  G-80-23) 

Control  of  motion  sickness might be   learned  as  one  learns  to  balance  o r  to 
ride a bicycle,  according to ARC'S Dr.  Patricia Cowings. Half  of  all  astronauts 
exposed  to  the  weightless  environment  of  space  had  symptoms  of  motion 
sickness;  young  athletes  were  often  the  persons  most  sensitive  to  motion. 

162 

MAY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Cowings and her team had taught about 50  volunteers to suppress illness when 
subjected  to  a  chair  spinning  ever  faster;  another  60   subjects  were  studied 
without  the  training.  Of  the  trained  subjects, 8 5%  improved  their  ability  to 
withstand effects of motion, 65  % being able to  suppress their symptoms com- 
pletely.  The  other 20 %  took  significant increase in   rpms before becoming  i l l .  
In  the  control group of  60  subjects who  received  no  training, no  one  showed 
any  significant improvement  with  time. 
The   trained  subjects monitored  their  own  respiration  and  heartbeat  during 
the tests,  biological  feedback  long used  by  researchers and  known  to  produce 
positive results. After the subjects were  trained to detect the onset of  sickness, 
65  %  were  able to  suppress the  symptoms by  using  the  feedback.  Biofeedback 
was  preferred to conventional treatment, which  is use of  drugs, because  i t  had 
no  side  effects,  such  as  sleepiness. 
The  success of  the theory  led Cowings to propose a  life-science experiment 
tentatively accepted  for  a  Spacelab flight  on  which  two  trained  crew  persons 
would  wear  a harness  feeding eight channels of  a  small  data  recorder  collec- 
ting information on heart rate and other factors and providing the subjects with 
a  feedback  display.  A   subject feeling  ill  would  consciously use  the  feedback 
training  for  a  maximum  30  minutes.  When  subjects  succumbed  to  motion 
sickness, they  would mark  the point where  they  became  ill  so the  researchers 
could  learn  which  responses  led  to  the  sickness.  So  far  Cowings  had  found 
no  sex  differences in  susceptibility to  motion  sickness; also, of  a  group  aged 
18  to  45,  older  subjects appeared  less likely  to  suffer.  (NASA  Release 80-57; 
ARC  Release  80-32) 

FBIS  carried  Tass  and  other  Soviet news  reports  on  the  flight  of  Salyut  6 
and  Soyuz  35 with  cargo  ship  Progress  9.  On  May  2 ,   cosmonauts  Leonid 
Popov  and  Valery  Ryumin,  in  their  fourth  week  of  flight,  used  “bilateral 
television  communication”  to  visit  with  their  families who  had  come   to  the 
mission control  center. A  May  6  report  said  that  for the  first time  in manned 
space  flight  the  crew  had  pumped  water  from  the  freight  ship  to  containers 
on  the  station,  using  a  system  called  Rodnik.  The   crew  had  completed 
unloading  the  food,  regenerators,  and  fresh  equipment  from  Progress  9 and 
refueled  the jo in t   propulsion  unit;  they  would  use  the  cargo  ship  to  dispose 
of  used  material. 
On May  8,  the chief of  the aerogeology organization said Ryumin and Popov 
before the launch of Soyuz 35 had  flown over certain linear and ring geological 
structures to acquire data for comparison with satellite observations; the Soyuz 
26  crew  (Romanenko and  Grechko)  had  identified 25  such  structures  in  the 
Soviet Un ion   that  proved  to  contain  mineral  deposits. 
By  May  13  the crew  repaired  the on-board  videotape  recorder and  replaced 
a motor  in  the biogravistat and  a  filter in   the gas  analyzer;  some  items would 
be   returned  to  Earth  for  study.  On  May  16  they  were  putting  plant  sprouts in 
various stages of  development into a  special solution for  study on  Earth;  they 
also  used  the  Progress  9 propulsion  unit  for  another  orbit  adjustment.  The  

163 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1980 

cargo ship separated  from  the orbital  complex May  20  a t  21:15  hours Moscow 
time;  on May  22  ground  command  switched on  its  engine,  and  it  “ceased  to 
exist”  upon  entering  t h e  atmosphere.  Th e  next  big  event  was  launch  at  21:21 
hours Moscow time May 26 of  Suyuz 36 carrying  veteran  Valery Kubasov  and 
Bertalan  Farkas,  first  Hungarian  cosmonaut,  to join  Popov  and  Ryumin  who 
had  occupied  Sa lyu t   6  since  April  9.  Docking  occurred  at  22 :56   hou r s  
Moscow  time,  and  the  visitors  went  aboard Salyut for  a  7-day  program  of  in- 
ternational  research.  Kubasov  and  Farkas  would  return  to  Earth  in  S u p z  35, 
leaving  Soyuz  36  for  later  use.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  May  2-27/80) 

June 

June  3: The   Washington Post quoted  a  White  House   source  as  saying  that 
“We’re running out  of  patience on  the Space Shuttle. . .There’s a  feeling here 
that we  can’t  tolerate any more  delays  in   the Shuttle program.”  Noting  the  six 
postponements that had  done  “serious harm  to  the space agency’s credibility,” 
the  Washington Post said that  “ in   fairness. . . the  delays caused  by  engine and 
tile troubles are not  all  its  fault.” When  Pratt & Whitney  lost  the engine con- 
tract  to  Rocketdyne,  it  sued  NASA,  delaying engine tests  for  a  year;  lack  of 
money  also  caused  delay. 
JSC  Director  Christopher  Kraft  pointed  out  that  money  cutbacks  in  1978 
meant  that  “we  delayed  building  the  tiles,  and  that  naturally  delayed  our  test 
procedures,  which  naturally  delayed  us  from  getting  at  the  answers  we  now 
have.”  The   custom-built  tiles,  each  shaped  to  f i t   a  specific  place  on  the 
fuselage,  took  25  hours  apiece  to  install.  After  many  were  attached,  NASA 
found  that half  had  lost their  strength in  the bonding process;  technicians had 
to  remove  and  coat  the  tiles  before  replacing  them. 
When  NASA  shipped  the  Shuttle orbiter  piggyback  on  its  Boeing  carr ier  
from Palmdale, Ca l if . ,   to Cape  Canaveral in  1979, only  10 %  of  its 30,922  tiles 
were in  place, and  some of  those fell off during the trip. NASA  enlisted a force 
of  1,200 workers to install the  tiles, working two  10-hour shifts six days a week 
at  the Cape.  When  the  coating problem  developed,  the  crews were  attaching 
750 tiles a week but removing 100. About 5,000 cavities on the frame remained 
to  be  filled,  and  NASA  forecast  August  as  the  finishing date  for  the  task. 
The   other  technological  challenge  was  the  Shuttle’s  engine  cluster,  three 
liquid-hydrogen engines,  each  10  times  as  powerful  as  the  largest je t   engine 
and  burning  1,000 degrees  hotter  than  any  engine before  it.  These  were  the 
first  liquid-fuel  rockets  designed  for  reuse;  said  Shuttle  program  manager 
Robert  Thompson :   “We  had  to  expect  that  in  heating  it  and  stressing it  with 
repeated  use we  were  going to  run  into problems.”  During  tests,  engines had 
caught fire and  even blown  up;  6 of the last  12  tests of  the three engines  firing 
together had  to be  stopped because of overheating. By  summer’s end  the tests 
would  have  cost  $1  billion  more  than  the  $500 million  NASA  estimated. 
NASA’s  costs by  the  time  the  first  Shuttle  flew  would  be   $264 million  for 
solid-fuel rocket  engines; $381 million for tiles;  $442 million for the external 
fuel  tank;  $1.5  billion  for  development  of  the  main  liquid-rocket  engine, 
amounting  to  an  overrun  of  almost  $1.6  billion. 
Money  was  a lesser concern,  however, than the slips in  schedule. The  Shut- 
tle  was  the  first  civilian vehicle  designed  to  carry  surveillance satellites for 
the  DOD;  those  due  to  f ly   in  1983 were  the  biggest  and  most  sophisticated 
ever  built,  weighing  up  to  25   tons  each,  too  big  to  be  carried  by  any  other 

165 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

J U N E   1980 

rocket  including  DOD’s  Titan.  Former  astronaut  Sen .   Harrison  Schmitt  (R- 
N .M . ) ,   ranking  Republican  on  the  Senate  subcommittee  on   space,  said  that 
DOD   would  have  to  alter  its  craft  to  f i t   on  the  Titan  if  they  could  not  f l y   on 
the  Shuttle  i n   1983.  (W P o s t ,  June  3 /8 0 ,  A-2) 

June  4:  U .S .  newspapers  carried  Tass  reports  that  two  cosmonauts  launched 
May  27  in Soyuz  36  to join  Leonid  Popov  and Valt:ry  Ryumin  on Sulyut 6 had 
returned  safely  to  Kazakhstan  t h e   night  of  June  2-3  in  the  Soyuz  35  that  took 
Popov  and  Ryumin  to  Salyut  6 on April  9.  Soyuz  36  remained  with  Sulyur  6. 
Veteran  cosmonaut  Valery  Kubasov  and  rook:ie  Bertalan  Farkas,  first 
Hungarian  in  space,  performed  the  fifth  Soviet-bloc  Intercosmos  mission, 
photographing  land  and  ocean  surfaces  and  testing  the  effects  of  spaceflight 
on  the  human  body.  ( N Y   l i m e s ,   June  3/80,  A-14;  W Post,  June  4/80,  A-25; 
W  Srur,  June  4/80,  A-18) 

June   5: The  Soviet  Union  launched  L t .   Co l .  Yuri  V.  Malyshev  and Vladimir 
V.  Aksyonov  toward  the  orbiting  station  Sulyut  6 i n   Soyuz  72, an  “improved 
model”  of  its  manned  capsule.  An  uncrewed  Soyuz  Tl  tested  in  December 
1979 docked automatically with  Sulyut  6 and remained  for 99 days.  A U.S. ex- 
pert  on  USSR  space  activity  said  that  T2  was  “a  new  ship”  except  in  ap- 
pearance:  the  main  change  was  an  on-board  computer  that  for  the  first  time 
let  cosmonauts  navigate  independently  of  ground  control.  Launched  from 
Tyuratam,  the  T2  arrived  June  6  to join  Leonid  ~Popov and  Valery  Ryumin. 
( W Star, June 5/80, A-12; June 6/80, A-10;  June 7/60, A-12;  W Post, June 6/80, 
A-22;  N Y   Times,  June  6/80,  B-6) 

NASA  announced  award  by  LeRC  of  parallel  1-year $1  million  contracts  to 
TRW’s  Defense and  Space Systems  Group  and  to  Hughes  Aircraft  Company 
for  designing  an  advanced  commercial  communications  satellite  system. 
Operating  i n   a  high-frequency  30-  to  20-GHz  band  not  used  in  the  United 
States  commercially, the system would help handle: the increased communica- 
tions  expected  in  the  next  2 0   years  which  would  saturate  existing  domestic 
communications  satellite capacity.  The  new  system,  a network of  ground  sta- 
tions  using  two  shuttle-launched  spacecraft,  would  lower  costs  of  services 
such  as   videoconferencing,  teletext,  and  electronic  mail  delivery.  (NASA 
Release  80-84) 

The   House  Committee  on  Science and  Technohgy   said  that  on  June  11-12 
its  subcommittee  on  space  science  and  applications  would  hold  hearings  on 
the Space Industrialization Act of  1980 (H .R .  7412) for private commercializa- 
tion  of  space.  Rep.  Don Fuqua  (D-F la .) ,   committee and  subcommittee chair- 
man,  said that the bill he sponsored would  create a  space industrialization cor- 
poration  to  develop  new  products,  services,  and  industries  using  space 
technology  and  the  properties  of  the  space  environment.  NASA  would  con- 
tinue  to advance national capabilities  in space, Fuqua said, but  the corporation 

166 

JUNE  lY80 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

would  be  responsible  for  encouraging  private  development.  (Committee 
Release  96-196) 

NASA  announced that the Shuttle main engine had  reached a milestone June 
5  when  two  of  the  three main engines that would  f l y  on Columbia’s first mis- 
sion demonstrated  flight  readiness  in  test  firings at  NSTL  that  sent  total  test 
time  over  the  80,000-second mark.  This  was  the  minimum  needed  to  assure 
reliability of  the  liquid-fuel main  engines. A   third  engine would  undergo  an 
identical test  in  two  weeks.  (NASA  Release  80-85) 

NASA  reported  that  GSFC   had  chosen  Canadian  Astronautics,  L td . ,   to 
negotiate  a  $3,042,500  contract  for  local-user  terminals  to  process  signals 
from  search-and-rescue  instruments  aboard  the  NOAA-E,  NOAA-F,  and 
NOAA-G  satellites  in  the  early  1980s.  The   instruments  would  relay  signals 
from  distressed ships and  aircraft to  the  terminals,  which  would  use  them  to 
locate the distressed craft and  aid  rescue operations. The   first terminal would 
be  at Kodiak,  Alaska, with  others at Scott Air Force Base,  I l l . ,  and  the Coast 
Guard  station at San Francisco. The  Soviet Union, Canada,  and France would 
demonstrate  the  search-and-rescue capability.  (NASA  Release  80-87) 

June  9:  The  Earth  34 million years ago might have  had  a  ring  like  those  that 
circle  Saturn  today,  said  Dr.  John  A .   O’Keefe  of  GSFC’s  Laboratory  for 
Astronomy  and  Solar  Physics.  A   sudden  event  34  million years  ago,  known 
to  geologists as  the  terminal  Eocene event,  caused dramatic  climate changes 
i n   Ear th’s   t em p e r a t e   zon e s ,   d r opp ing   n o r t h e r n - h em i s p h e r e   w in t e r  
temperatures  abou t   35 OF 
(20 °C ) .   Botanical  studies  revealed  that  the 
temperature change,  the most profound climatic event between 65 million and 
2  million  years  ago,  occurred  at  the  end  of  the  Eocene,  but  it  had  no  accep- 
table  explanation as  yet. 
O’Keefe  noted  that  the  changes  coincided  with  a  massive  fall  from  outer 
space  of  tektites  (glass  meteorites)  possibly  from  an  eruption  on  Earth’s 
Moon ;   studies of  these tektites  showed  similarities to  rocks brought  from  the 
Moon.  Whatever the  source, the tektites that hit Earth made  a path around the 
globe  from  the  eastern  United  States across  the  Pacific  to  the  Philippines. 
Tektites  that  missed  the  Earth  would  have  formed  a  ring  like  the  rings 
around Saturn; such a ring in the winter would block  the Sun’s  rays in the nor- 
thern  hemisphere when  the  Sun  was  below  the  equator,  and  the  shadow  cast 
by  the  ring  would  lower  winter  temperatures.  The   ring  disappeared  when 
forces (such as pressure of  sunlight or drag of  the atmosphere) pulled  it either 
into the atmosphere, where some  particles burned  and  others fell  to Earth,  o r  
upward  into  space  away  from  the  Ear th .   (NASA  Release  80-86) 

June  10: JSC  said  that  a  NASA  board  investigating the  April  18  flash  fire  in 
a space suit backpack  [ s e e  April 221  had  found where  the  fire started and had 
recommended  11  changes  to  improve  system  safety.  Apparently,  when  a 

167 

ASTRONAUTlCS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1980 

technician  during a test  in the crew  systems  laboratory  switched  the secondary 
oxygen  pack  to  the  “spacewalk”  position,  ignition  occurred  in  a  V-shaped 
passage  restricting  oxygen  flow between  a  shutoff  valve and  a  chamber  in  the 
pack’s  regulator  module.  In  the  accident,  which  destroyed  an  unoccupied 
Shuttle  space  suit  and  life-support  backpack,  Hamilton  Standard  technician 
Robert  A .   Mayfield  was  severely  burned  but  was  recovering. 
After  five weeks  of  engineering  detective work  (including more  than  2,000 
unsuccessful  attempts to  reproduce  the fire),  the board had  not  found  the exact 
cause,  but  reported  to  JSC  Director  Christopher C .  Kraft,  J r . ,   the  four  most 
probable causes of  the  fire:  heating  by  compress io i~  o r  shock of  a  thin  section 
of  aluminum  between  the  flow-restrictor  passagt:  and  the  adjacent  cavity; 
heating  by  compression  or  shock   of  contaminants  in  the  flow  restrictor; 
heating  of  internal  surfaces  through  mechanical  shock  from  incoming  high- 
pressure  oxygen,  or  heating  of  particles;  similar  heating  of  shutoff  valve  0 
rings.  Th e  regulator  module  had  undergone  19  cycles  with  high-pressure  ox- 
ygen before  the accident. The  board  found  that  all procedures followed during 
the  April  18  test  were  proper. 
Technicians  at  JSC’s  White  Sands  Test  Facility  could  not  duplicate  the 
failure,  although  they  cycled  four  regulator  modules  from  the  same  factory 
batch  2,228’ times.  Disassembly  after  the  tests  revealed  contamination  inside 
the modules.  The  board  recommended  redesign,  design  reviews,  inspections, 
and  collection  of  high-pressure  oxygen  data  to  establish  standards  for  equip- 
ment  design  and  use.  (JSC  Release  80-039; NASA  Release  80-91) 

NASA  reported  award  to  United  Space Boosters,  Inc . ,   subsidiary  of  United 
Technologies  Corporation,  of  a  contract  for  a  two-ship  recovery  force  to 
retrieve used  Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket  boo s t en  from the Atlantic  Ocean. 
This supplemented a  contract under which  the  firm assembled  and processed 
solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  for  flight.  The   ships  would  locate  and  retrieve  ex- 
pended  booster  casings,  parachutes,  and  other  equipment  from  the  Atlantic 
and  deliver  them  to  a  disassembly  facility  at  Cape   Canaveral Air  Force  Sta- 
tion.  Th e  disassembly  facility  was  on   the  eastern  !shore of  the  Banana River, 
a  shallow  area  where  an  endangered  species,  the  !sea cow  o r  manatee,  made 
i t s  home.  Th e  ships would  use a 425-HP waterjet  stern thruster instead  of pro- 
pellers  that  could  maim  or  kill  the  manatees  [see May  291. 
The   ships,  UTC Liberty  and  U P 2  Freedom,  were  being  built  and would  be 
delivered in October  1980 and January  1981; both  would be  used  on each Shut- 
tle  mission,  each  retrieving  one  booster  and  its  components.  At  liftoff,  the 
boosters would bum   simultaneously with the three-engine cluster on the Shut- 
tle.  After about  two minutes  they  would  be jettisoned and land  in  the Atlantic 
about  257  kilometers  (160  miles)  downrange  from  KSC,  their  descent  being 
slowed  by  three  parachutes  on   each  casing.  Each  vessel  would  carry  four 
parachute-rollers  to  handle  the  three  main  and  single  drogue  parachutes  on 
each  booster  and  cranes  to  hoist  aboard  the  collat1:ral  flight  equipment.  The  
ships would  carry  equipment  to  plug  the nozzles,  pump water  out  of  the cas- 

168 

JUNE  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

ings, and  ready  them  for towing to the disassembly facility, where  they  would 
be  cleaned  and taken apart for shipment to  Utah and  reloading with  solid-fuel 
propellant. Each casing could be used  for up  to 20 missions,  reducing the cost 
of  flight operations.  The  ships would  also have  sophisticated electronic com- 
munications  and  navigation  gear  such  as  radars,  sonars,  loran,  direction 
finders,  fathometers, and  gyrocompasses.  (NASA  Release  80-89) 

DFRC  reported  that  it  and  the  FAA  had  resumed  wake  vortex  flight  tests 
using  an  L-1011  widebody  je t   transport.  The   wake  produced  by  a  widebody 
aircraft  could  be  severe  enough  to  delay  takeoffs  and  landings  at  airports; 
planned  time  separations were  in  effect  because  the  wake  could  upset  other 
aircraft landing or  taking off. Diminishing  the wake  vortex  could  reduce  traf- 
fic  congestion,  with  significant savings  in  fuel  and  time. 
Previous  tests  using  a  Boeing  747  [see  October  29,  19791  showed  that 
selected use of  ailerons and  spoilers on  the aircraft could break  up  the vortex, 
an  invisible flow  of  turbulent a ir   streaming from  flaps and  wingtips  in  a  tor- 
nado  shape.  Spoilers,  normally  used  as  speed  brakes  and  to  decrease 
aerodynamic  lift  after  landing,  would  serve  in  flight  to  break  up  the  vortex 
trailing  from  the  flaps;  ailerons,  normally  used  for  turning,  would  serve  to 
break up  the wing vortex. The  L-1011 being tested was  the Lockheed  prototype 
with  a  direct-lift flight-control system using  spoilers deflected  upward  at  8"; 
the proposed vortex alleviation system would  not  differ much  from the  system 
already in  use on  the L-1011.  The  tests would  use a  small highly  instrumented 
NASA  test  aircraft for high-altitude recording of  the L-1011  vortex, marked  by 
smoke  generators.  (DFRC  Release  80-7;  NASA   Release  80-92) 

The   W s h i n g t o n  Star  carried  a  Tass  report  that  cosmonauts  Vladimir  Ak- 
syonov  and  Yuri  Malyshev  had  soft-landed in  Central Asia  after  a  visit  to  or- 
biting space station Salyut 6.  The  two were  launched June 5 in a new  transport 
vehicle called Soyuz  T-2. Sulyut  6 had  been  occupied  since April 9 by  Leonid 
Popov  and  Valery  Ryumin,  who  would  probably  remain  in  orbit  to  greet 
visitors to the Moscow  Olympics, the dispatch said.  (WS tu r ,  June  10/80, A-8) 

June U :  UP1 reported that the 500-pound Mugsat that gathered data indicating 
that  Earth's  magnetic poles  would  reverse  in   1,200 years  had  fallen  into  the 
Norwegian  Sea  between  Greenland  and  Norway  at  3 : 3 0  a .m .   EDT.  NASA 
said that  no debris  survived  the plunge.  NORAD  said  earlier  that  the  reentry 
occurred  northwest  of  Spain but  later  moved  the  location  north. 
The   Magsat  program  cost  $19.7  million;  project  scientist  Dr.  Robert  A .  
Langel  said  the  findings predicting  a magnetic reversal were  only  the  first  in 
a  series  expected  a s   scientists  from  nine  nations  studied  Magsat  data.  The  
magnetic-field reversal should have  no bad  effects, Langel said;  reversals had 
occurred  more  than  130  times  in  Earth's  history.  Besides  the  United  States, 
nations  participating  in   the  project  were  Australia,  Brazil,  Canada,  France, 

169 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE   1980 

India,  Italy,  Japan,  and  the  United  Kingdom.  (U1?1-045,  June  11/80; NASA 
Release  80-90) 

DFRC   announced   that  th e   HiMAT  (highly  maneuverab le   a ircraf t  
technology) plane would  fly again  in mid-June  after four months of modifica- 
tions,  scheduled during the rainy  season when  flooding would prevent landing 
the  plane  on  a  dry  lakebed.  Modifications  included  airframe,  flight-control 
and instrumentation  systems,  and data  link. Th e  3,400-pound craft had  reach- 
ed  speeds up to 595  mph a t  altitudes to 40,000 feet and a maximum  load  factor 
of  4 . 5  grams.  (DFRC  Release  80-8) 

June   12: DFRC  reported  that  an  unmanned  r em o tdy  piloted  vehicle crashed 
during  a  research  flight,  impacting  a  dry  lakebecl  north  of  the  center.  Air- 
launched  from  a  B-52  mother  ship  at  7:lO  a .m .   PDT,  the  small  plane  called 
DAST  (drones  for  aerodynamic  and  structural  testing)  exhibited  wing- 
structure  problems  about  10  minutes  later.  NASA  was  investigating.  The  
DAST program,  to demonstrate the control of  wing  flutter by  advanced flight- 
control  systems, used  a  remotely  piloted  vehicle that  could  be   launched  from 
a mother  ship and  flown  through  the maneuvers  using  telemetry  from  a  pilot 
in  a  ground  cockpit.  The  likelihood of  structural  damage during  flight  called 
for  a  safer  and more  economical  way  of  testing  advanced high-risk  concepts. 
(DFRC  Release  80-9) 

NASA  announced  that  WFC   would  begin  testing  this  month  at  the 
Manassas, Va.,  municipal  airport  an  experimental  computer-advisory  system 
that would  increase data available  to pilots  using  small  airports without control 
arrangements.  Designed  as  an  extension of  the procedural  system  now  in  use 
at uncontrolled airports, the system would keep  track of aircraft  in the vicinity 
and  supply  pilots  with  air-traffic  information. 
Computer-generated  voice,  radar,  and  weather-sensing  information  would 
automatically  broadcast  an airport  advisory  every  2  minutes  and  a  traffic  ad- 
visory every  20 seconds:  the airport advisory woulcl offer an airport identifier, 
broadcast  time,  windspeed  and  direction,  favored  o r   active  runway,  altimeter 
setting,  and  ambient  and  dew-point  temperature.  ‘The traffic  data  would  in- 
clude the number of  aircraft  on  each pattern,  and  position  and heading of  ar- 
riving  o r  departing  aircraft. Manassas  was  estimatcd to handle  about  200,000 
operations  (landings  and  takeoffs)  yearly;  the  demonstration  would  allow 
pilots  using  the  system  i n   an  uncontrolled  high-density  environment  to 
evaluate  its  effectiveness.  (NASA  Release  80-88;  ‘WFC Release  80-7) 

FBIS  carried  a Tokyo Kyodo  story that Japan’s  Space Development Council 
had  decided  that  the  failure  last  February  of  its  Ayame  2  communications 
satellite was  caused  by  malfunction  of  the  apogee motor.  The   ground  station 
lost  contact with  Ayame 2  three days after  launch when  engineers tried  to  fire 
the  motor  to  put  it  into  proper  orb i t .   Th e  council  report  called  for  domestic 

170 

JUNE   1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

production  of  the  apogee  rocket  and  other  major  satellite  components  i n  
future;  the  apogee motor  had  been  made  in   the  United  States.  (FBIS,  Tokyo 
Kyodo  in   English,  June  12/80) 

June 13: The  House  Committee on  Science and  Technology  said that  its  sub- 
committees on  space  science  and  applications and  on  natural  resources  and 
environment  would  hold  hearings  June  24-25  on  administration  plans  to 
develop  a  Landsat  remote-sensing  system  with  private-sector  participation. 
(House  anno  96-204) 

The   Washington Post reported  that Rep.  Bruce Vento  (D-Minn.)  had  called 
for congressional investigation of  the Navy’s new  F-18 je t   fighter, claiming the 
multibillion-dollar project was  in  “deep  financial and  technical  trouble.”  The  
F-18  was  the biggest  single item  in  the military  budget  now  before  Congress; 
despite  critical  reports,  Vento  said  the  project  had  “eluded  congressional 
scrutiny.” 
The  GAO,  Congress’s investigative a rm ,   in  February reported that  the F-18’s 
planned  performance  had  been  reduced  and  various  problems  remained  un- 
corrected.  GAO  said that during  its  investigation at Navy,  DOD,  and  contrac- 
tor facilities “we  were not granted access to  information we  felt critical to  our 
evaluation.”  Vento  pointed  out  that  the  GAO  report  received  little  official 
notice and  said  that  he  had  “startling information” as  a  result of  his  own  in- 
vestigation.  In  the  past  15  months  alone,  he  said,  F-18  costs  increased  $10.9 
billion,  and  the Pentagon was  talking a  $32.8 billion total  cost for  the project 
previously  estimated at  $24  b i l l ion .   (W Pos t ,   June  13/80, A-16) 

June  16: MSFC reported  that the  last of  the three main  engines scheduled for 
flight  on  the  Co lumb ia   had  successfully  completed  its  second  flight- 
acceptance test with  an 8-minute 40-second  test  run that exceeded the time re- 
quired  to  put  a  Shuttle into  orb i t .   Engine  no.  2007  underwent  throttling and 
gimbaling during the test  to show its ability to change speed and direction after 
liftoff,  The   other  two  engines  (2005  and  2006)  had  completed  their  second 
acceptance  tests  June  2  and  5 ,   respectively.  Although  the  engines  had 
undergone acceptance test  firings last year, modifications made  since that time 
had  led NASA  to  retest them.  Successful retest  also demonstrated the on-line 
componen t  replacement that  would  be   required  in   repeated  reuse.  Testing  of 
associated  main  propulsion  equipment  would  continue  at  NSTL .   (MSFC 
Release  80-86) 

The   Washington Post reported that heat-resistant tiles  on Columbia had  sur- 
vived without  damage  a critical test  June  14  simulating  separation of  the giant 
fuel  tank.  Engineers  scanned  the  tiles  for  10  hours  and  were  “all  pretty 
ecstatic,” said a NASA  spokesman, adding that they would  spend the next few 
days evaluating results  of  the  “pyrotechnic shock test”  before  pronouncing  it 
a  complete  success.  Dr.  Robert  Gray,  project  office manager,  said  previous 

171 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

J U N E   1980 

simulations  had  damaged  Shuttle  tiles;  “if  there  a r e  no  major  problems,  we 
could  launch our  first flight  in February,”  he added.  (WPo s t ,  June  16/80, A-11) 

NASA  reported  that  its  five-year-old  Landsat  2  spacecraft,  after  nearly  six 
months  of  inaction,  was  restored  to  service  through  “intensive  efforts”  by 
engineers  at  GSFC.  Problems  had  developed  November  5 ,   1979,  when  the 
yaw-attitude  flywheel  i n   the  Landsat’s  Earth-pointing  system  stopped  func- 
tioning,  probably  because  of  a  lubrication  breakdown.  Th e   attitude-control 
system could not  keep the spacecraft  sufficiently  stabilized  to acquire pictures 
of  Ear th ,  o r  keep  the  solar panels  facing  the Sun  to  collect enough energy  for 
operation. 
T h e   spacecraft  was  “retired”  on  its  f i f t h   birthday,  January  22 ,   1980,  bu t  
GSFC  engineers  began  trying  to  use  magnetic  compensation  operating 
without  either  the  flywheel  o r   the  control-system  gas,  which  had  been 
depleted.  Magnetic  control  required  defining  the  spacecraft’s  magnetic 
characteristics  in order   to plot  interaction with  Earth’s  magnetic  field.  As  the 
spacecraft  had  no  system  for  direct  measurement  of  yaw  attitude,  engineers 
had  to  find  a  way  to  use  the  solar-array  output,  which  varied  with  the 
spacecraft’s attitude  and  its  latitude  position  relative  to  Earth. 
On  May  5,  1980, apparently  as  a  result  of  redistribution  of  the  lubricant, 
the  flywheel  responded  to  an  ON   command  and  started  running  again,  and 
the  attitude-control  system  was  once more able to  keep  the  spacecraft  pointed 
properly  toward  the  Earth  and  Sun .  However,  lack  of  gas  required  use  of  the 
magnetic  system  to  keep  roll  and  yaw  flywheels  i n   a  safe  range. 
Experience gained  in magnetic control of  attitude was applied to controlling 
wheel  speeds  without  delays  in  development.  Thl.  GSFC  engineers  believed 
that this new procedure would  let Landsat 2 operate almost at previous capaci- 
ty,  although  this would be  limited  to  readout  since the  tape  recorders  were  not 
functioning.  The   return  to  operational  status  was  important  because  the 
multispectral  scanner,  principal  Earth-imaging  device,  would  again  provide 
data to three U .S .  and  nine  foreign  sites, supplementing operations of Landsat 
3.  (NASA  Release  80-94) 

June  17:  ESA  reported  the complete engine D that malfunctioned May 23  dur- 
ing  the  launch  of  Ariane  LO2  had  been  located  the  morning  of  June  16 about 
5 kilometers  south  of  the  Iles du  Salut off  French  Guiana,  and brought  to  the 
surface early  i n   the afternoon.  It was  i n  good condition, capable of  being  sub- 
jected  to  a  thorough  inspection.  Engineers  from  CNES   (Centre  National 
d’Etudes Spatiales) and  SEP  (Societe Europeenne de  Propulsion)  dismantled 
it  at  the  Ariane  launch  site  and  would  send  it  tci  SEP’s  facility  a t   Vernon, 
France,  with  propulsion  elements  of  the  other  engines  that  had  been 
recovered,  B  entirely  and  A  and  C  partially  (serv’omotors and  turbopumps). 
Working  groups  studying  launch  data would  report  their  results  a t   the  end  of 
June;  a  schedule of  further  test  flights  would  not  be  set  up  until  then.  (ESA 
Info  16) 

JUNE   1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

The   Washington Post  reported  that  demonstrators  trying  to  keep  Howard 
Hughes’s  Spruce Goose  from  being  carved  up  rallied  at  its  hanger  Saturday, 
June  14,  to voice concern about  sending parts of  the plane  to  museums.  Sum-  
ma  Corporation,  the  Hughes  holding  company,  said  that  it  would  go  ahead 
with plans to dismantle the plane in two weeks:  A  spokesman for the Comm i t-  
tee  to  Save  the  Hughes  Flying  Boat  said  the  group  had  received  no  replies 
from  corporations  it  asked  to  donate  the  $750,000  needed  to  keep  the  plane 
in  one  piece.  ( W  Post,  June  17/80, B-3)  

MSFC reported selection of  two firms, Grumman  Aerospace and the Harris 
Corporation,  to  negotiate  parallel  contracts  for  concept-definition studies  of 
a  deployable space antenna  [see April  151. MSFC  would  demonstrate use  of 
such an antenna flown in low  Earth orbit until completion of definition studies 
by  the  two  firms.  (MSFC  Release  80-87) 

The   Washington Post  reported  that  Great  Britain’s  postal  service  June  17 
became  the  first  international  public  service  to  send  letters  by  satellite.  In- 
telpost,  the  new  system,  used  a  satellite  25,000  miles  above  Earth  to  send 
documepts  and  letters  by  facsimile,  an  electronic means  of  transmitting  the 
written  word  from one  place to  another.  The  first letter using  the  new  system 
took  jus t   over  1 minute  to  get  from  Great  Britain’s  Post  Office  chainnan- 
designate Ron  Dearing  to  a  receiving  center  in  Toronto.  (W  Post,  June  18/80, 
c - 2 )  

June 23: INTELSAT announced election of  Irving Goldstein, previously  vice 
chairman of  its board of directors, to  be chairman succeeding Randolph Payne 
of  Australia. Goldstein, U.S. signatory in  the organization, had  been working 
with  the board  since its  formation  in  1973.  He  was  vice president and general 
manager  for  international  communications of  ComSatCorp,  responsible  for 
activities including planning,  installation, and operation of ground stations us- 
ing  the  INTELSAT  system.  (INTELSAT  Release  80-10-1) 

June  24:  INTELSAT  said  that  its  board  meeting  in  Bogota  approved  use  of 
time-division  multiple-access  equipment  with  its  global  communications 
satellite system; the new  devices, to be installed in the  198Os, would offer three 
times  more   telephone channels  on  INTELSAT  satellites than  available  from 
frequency-modulation  (FM )   equipment  now  in  use.  (INTELSAT  Release 
80-11-1) 

ESA  said that the six groups investigating the malfunction at the Ariane LO2 
launch  ended  four weeks  of  study on  one of  the four first-stage engines.  They 
reported  that  the  suspect engine  recovered  from  the  sea  [see  June  171  had  a 
foreign  body  at  the  injector  level:  an  identification plate  was  found  near  the 
injection orifices,  and  they  were  trying  to  determine  if  it was  there  at  launch 
or  got  there  during  the  engine’s  immersion  in  the  sea. 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1980 

Analysis  of  engine  noise  showed  differences  from  results  recorded  at 
ground  tests in Europe; also, engine start-up parameters  (combustion-pressure 
build-up  time)  showed  abnormal  dispersions,  but  researchers  had  not  been 
able  to  link  them  to  observed  phenomena.  ESA  said  that  the  LO3  test  flight 
originally  set  for  November  1980 might  not  occur  until  February  1981,  and 
the  fourth  test  flight  by  midyear,  to  qualify  the  rocket  for operational  launch. 
(ESA  Info  Bltn  17) 

June  25 :  NASA  reported  that  MSFC   had  chosen  Ball  Aerospace  Division  to 
negotiate  a  $9.5  million  contract  for  design,  development,  and  manufacture 
of  a  chemical  release  module  for  use  in  the  first  large-scale  controlled  in- 
vestigations  of  dynamic phenomena  outside  Earth’s  atmosphere.  Information 
on  such  processes  in  Earth‘s  magnetosphere,  ionosphere,  and  upper  at- 
mosphere  was  hard  to  obtain  because  the  areas  were  so  enormous  and  the 
dynamic  activity  was  invisible. 
Scheduled  for  mid-1983  launch  on  the  Space  Shuttle,  the   self-contained 
free-flying module  would  release  in  space  chemical  elements  that  would  ab- 
sorb sunlight and  reflect  distinctive colors; other chemicals would  glow when 
reacting  with  oxygen  particles  in  the upper  atmosphere.  Motion  of  atoms  and 
ions  colored  in  this  way  could  be   tracked.  During  the  module’s  six-month 
lifetime,  it  would  make  20  to  30  chemical  releases  for  visual,  camera,  and 
radar  observation.  (NASA  Release  80-99;  MSFC  Release  80-89) 

June  26: NASA  announced  that  scientists studying data from Heao 2 had  con- 
firmed  the  emission  of  X-rays  from Jupiter,  making  the giant planet  the  only 
one  besides  Earth  to  produce  X-rays.  Heao  2 ,   launched  November  13,  1978, 
carried  a  focusing  X-ray  telescope  with  four  different  instruments  that  could 
be   positioned  at  the  focus,  including  the  imaging  proportional  counter  used 
to view Jupiter.  Dr. Albert Metzger  of  JPL ,  leader of  the  scientific team  mak- 
ing  the  discovery,  reported  it  to  a  meeting  of  the  American  Astronomical 
Society  at  the  University  of  Maryland  last  week. 
Th e  X-ray  find  indicated the power  needed  by  the  intense  radiation  belts  in 
the  Jovian  magnetosphere:  from  the  brightness  observed,  scientists  said  that 
energetic  electrons  in  the  system  emitted  nearly  a  (quadrillion watts  of  power. 
To  maintain  the  radiation  belts,  an  equal  amount  of  power  had  to  come  from 
the planet’s  rotational  energy and  the  force of  the  solar wind.  Also,  energetic 
ions  and  electrons  impacting  the  surfaces  of  satellites orbiting  inside  the  Jo- 
vian  radiation  belt  might  also produce X  rays;  observing  those X  rays  might 
help  determine  the  composition  of  Io,  Europa,  Ganymede,  and  Callisto. 
(NASA  Release  80-98) 

MSFC  announced  that  i t   would  mark  its  20th  anniversary  July  1 with  an 
assembly honoring  the  1,039 “charter members”  who had been  there  since its 
founding.  In  1960,  the  Development  Operations  Division  of  the  Army’s 
Ballistic Missile  Agency  (ABMA)  became  the  nucleus  of  a  center  belonging 

1 74 

JUNE  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

to  the  space agency  founded  in  1958,  bringing  to  NASA  property  worth  hun- 
dreds of  millions of  dollars and  a staff headed by  Dr. Wernher von Braun,  the 
center’s  first  director.  President Eisenhower  had  decided  to  name  the  center 
after George C.  Marshall,  five-star general,  Secretary of  State, and winner of 
the  Nobel  Peace  Prize,  an  appropriate  name  for  an  organization  devoted  to 
peaceful  uses  of  space.  (MSFC   Release  80-92) 

June 27: A  panel of  the NRC said that the FAA had  lost the engineering exper- 
tise  to  say  whether  airplanes  were  safe  and  waited  until  accidents  occurred 
before  seelung  regulations  that  might  have  prevented  them. 
Both  the  Washington Post  and  the  Washington Star  reported  a  briefing  by 
panel  chairman George M .   Low,  president of  Rensselaer  Polytechnic Institute 
and former deputy administrator of  NASA.  “The  FAA  engineering staff today 
is considerably less  competent than  the  engineering they  regulate,”  Low  told 
the press. The  latest of  a series of  studies of  the crash of  an Amer ican  Airlines 
DC-10  in   Chicago  May  25,  1979,  that  killed  273  people,  the  panel  study  was 
sought  by  Transportation  Secretary  Neil  Goldschmidt,  who  said  he  had 
ordered  an  immediate  analysis of  the panel’s  findings  “with  the  intent of  put- 
ting  into  effect  promptly  any  recommendations  that  will  improve  our  pro- 
cedures.” 
The  Chicago accident was  blamed on  improper maintenance procedures  by 
American  Airlines,  but  a  contributing  cause  was  found  to  be  the  plane’s 
design.  The  panel  said  that  the  FAA  relied  too  much  on  manufacturers and 
was  performing  “only  a  cursory  review”  of  industry  tests;  FAA  officials 
charged with  supervising manufacturers and  airlines had  “gotten too  c l o s e  to 
their  industry  counterparts,  weakening  their  independence  and  objectivity.” 
The   panel  recommended  reassignment  of  officials on  a  periodic  basis  to 
work  with  different  manufacturers  and  airlines.  It  also  recommended   new 
licensing  and  training  certification  rules  for  airline  and  airplane  mechanics 
“more   like those  for  aircraft  flight crews.”  FAA  should require  aircraft  to be 
designed to continue flying after any structural failure unless the failure would 
prevent  flight, such as loss of  a wing.  In  the Chicago  crash,  an engine moun t  
had ripped from the plane, destroying vital controls in the cockpit; the mount, 
certified  as  safe,  would  not  have.  failed  except  for  maintenance-induced 
damage.  Asked  if  the  DC-10  would  have  survived  if  the  proposed  rule  had 
been  in  effect,  Low  replied  “Yes.”  ( W  Post, June  27/80,  1A;  W  Star,  June 
26/80, A-1) 

JSC reported that  its engineers were working on automated ways  to  fabricate 
in  space  the  beams   and  trusses  needed  in  space  construction projects  of  the 
future.  Recently  arrived  on  center  was  a  truss  such  as  a  “beam   builder”  in 
space would  form,  the product  of  three  years  of  analysis, design,  and  testing 
a t   Gene ra l   Dynamics-Convair  D iv is ion .   JSC   eng ineers   would  begin 
evaluating  i t   in   July  using  a  hydraulic  cylinder  to  apply  various  loads  to 
measure  stiffness and  strength of  the  truss.  (JSC  Release  80-040) 

1 75 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

J U N E   1980 

June  30: NASA  announced that MSFC had  awarded  a $230 million cost-plus- 
award-fee  contract  to  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  for  full-scale production  of 
Space  Shuttle  external  tanks,  the  only  part  of  the  Shuttle  not  recovered  for 
reuse.  Martin  Marietta  had  an  earlier  contract  foI  design,  development,  and 
delivery  of  nine  tanks-three 
test  articles  and  six  flight  articles-for  Shuttle 
test  flights. 
The  new  contract,  for delivery of  7 flight tanks  to support Shuttle operating 
m i s s ion s ,   inc luded   long   l e a d - t im e   p r o c u r em en t   of  compon en t s   and  
subassemblies  for  5  additional  tanks  and  raw  material  for 24  other additional 
tanks.  Manufacturing  of  the  external  tanks  would  take  place  at  NASA’s 
Michoud  assembly  facility.  (NASA  Release  80-100;  MSFC  Release  80-90) 
-MSFC  announced that  it planned to reduce t h e  weight  of  the Shuttle ex- 
ternal  tank   by  6,000  pounds,  a  change  that  could  increase  the  Shuttle’s 
payload-carrying  capability  by  about  the  same  amount.  Th e  center  amended 
its  tank  design  and  development contract  with  Martin  Marietta,  adding more 
than  $42.9 million  to  cover  the weight-reduction  effort  and modify  tools  used 
i n   future production.  Th e  change would affect tank:, built  under a new contract 
for  full-scale  t a n k   production  to  support  operational  Shuttle  launches.  The  
first  lightweight  external  tank  would  be  delivered  i n   the  summer  of  1982. 
(MSFC  Release  80-93;  NASA  Release  80-102) 

In  an  editorial  headed  “Shuttle  a t   the Crossroads,”  Aviation  Week & Spuce 
Technology  reviewed  the  delays  and  difficulties  besetting  NASA’s  program, 
starting with the  budget problem in Congress.  Th e  first flight, now  set for ear-  
ly   1981,  would  be  two  years  behind  schedule,  and  “even  that  date  may  keep 
on  slipping.”  Technical  problems  other  than  tiles  included  retest  of  the  first 
set of  flight-rated  engines  “over  objections of  technical  management but  with 
the  endorsement  of  the  flight  crew.”  NASA’s  dilemma  in  risk  assessment  was 
real,  particularly  because  of  the  tile  problem.  Aviation  Week  &  Space 
Technology said:  “Loss  or   damage  to  one  of  the  clrbiters of  its  limited  fleet, 
not  to mention of  a crew,  could decimate public  support and disrupt operations 
of the  shuttle program.  On  the  other hand,  a t   some point  fairly  soon  NASA’s 
top  management  is  going  to  have  to  decide  that  risk  has  been  reduced  to  a 
reasonable minimum,  draw  a deep breath  and commit to  first flight.”  ( A v w k ,  
June  30/80,  9) 

During  June:  Republic Airlines  said June 9 that  its representatives had  signed 
a  pact  with  Summa  Corporation  and  the  estate  of  Howard  R .   Hughes,  Jr . ,  
under which  it would purchase Hughes Airwest  for $38.5 million.  Acquisition 
would occur  next  fall,  if  legal and other regulatory problems  were solved. ( W  
Star,  June  10/80,  C-10) 

United  Airlines  began  a  six-month  test  June  11  of  air-to-ground  telephone 
service for passengers,  using  a standard  12-button wall model  installed on one  
of  the  airline’s DC-10s.  The   firm was  conducting  the  test with  Sky-Tel, a  sub- 

I 76 

JUNE   1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

sidiary  of  Page-America.  The  caller  would  press  buttons  for  connection  with 
the  ground  station  nearest  to  flight  path,  where  an  operator  would  place  the 
call.  Th e  charge would  be  $10  plus  cost  of  the  call.  (WPo s t ,  June  11/80, B-2) 

The  FCC  authorized  the ComSa tCorp  to begin  construction  of  a $15 million 
ground  station  on   Sa ipan ,   in  the  western  Pacific  Ocean ,   to  bring  the  first 
satellite  communications  to  the  northern  Mariana  Islands.  The  ComSatCorp- 
owned  and  -operated  station  would  provide  direct  communications  between 
the northern  Marianas  and the United States, Hawaii, Guam ,  Japan ,  and o ther  
points  in  the  Pacific.  ( W  Star,  June  12/80, B-7) 

FBIS carr ied  Tass reports on  the  continuing  flight  of  Salyur  6 with  its  inter- 
national  crew, Bertalan  Farkas of  Hungary  and Valery Kubasov, workmg  with 
longtime occupants Leonid  Popov and Valery Ryumin.  Preparing  Soyuz 35 for 
return  to  Ear th ,   the  cosmonauts  carr ied   into  it  containers  of  materials  on 
which  research  had  been  completed:  exposed  rolls  of  f i lm ,   space  navigation 
charts,  flight  logs,  biological  objects,  and  substances  produced  in  materials 
experiments.  Used-up  equipment  would  be  taken  into  the  “living  compart- 
ment.”  The   crew  had  shot  a  film  about  their  joint  operations,  including 
development  of  plants  in  weightlessness  and  production  of  metal  alloys  and 
castings. 
Tass reported  June  3  that  the  descent module of  Soyuz  35 had  landed  safely 
near Dzhezkazgan  and  that the Intercosmos crew were well.  The  Soyuz 36 that 
took  them  to  Sulyut  6 was  still  attached  to  it;  on   June  4 ,   the  Salyut  6 crew 
moved Soyuz  36 to the other  docking port  to make room for another craft. On 
June  5  a t  1719 Moscow  time the Soviet Union  launched  Soyuz  T-2 carry ing  L t .  
Co l .   Yuri Malyshev  and ,  a s  flight  engineer,  veteran  cosmonaut  Vladimir  Ak- 
syonov,  tenth  crew  to  visit  Salyut  6 since  its  launch.  An  unmanned  Soyuz  T 
launched  in December  1979 had  docked with  Sulyut  6 and  remained  for more  
than three  months,  testing  new  automated  features. Before docking with Salyut 
6, the  crew  turned  the  Soyuz  toward  the  Sun  to  test  its  solar  batteries,  one  of 
the  new  features. 
On  June  6  Soyuz  T-2 docked  with  Sulyut  6 a t   1858 Moscow  time.  Tass  said 
that  the  approach  was  automated  up  to  within  180 meters,  after  which  it was 
controlled  by  the  crew.  Konstantin  Feoktistov  explained  that  “earlier,  dur ing  
manual  approach  the  station  was.  . .automatically  aligned  with  the   ship  and  
was always directed toward it with  its  docking un i t .   . . [ the  crew]  regulated  the 
longitudinal speed and made  sure  that  it went in  straight.  Th is  time  the  station 
was immobile:  the craf t  approached  from  the  s ide .   . . A quar ter  turn was made  
around  the  station and it came  on  to the axis level.  The  manual  control  system 
worked  well.  We  think  the  crew  was  even  better.”  Later  reports  mentioned  a 
malfunction  of  some  automated  part  and  the  need  for  an  unplanned  manual 
docking. 
The   visiting  cosmonauts  performed  “dynamic  operations”  including  a 
photographic  turn  around  the  station,  which  had  not  been  possible  before. 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

J U N E   1980 

After  a  four-day  mission,  Malyshev  and  Aksyoncw  undocked  Soyuz  T-2 June 
9 and  returned  to  the  spot near  Dzhezkazgan  where  the  previous  Soyuz crew 
landed.  Popov and  Ryumin  remained  in  Sa lyu t  6, ,which logged  its  thousandth 
day  of  flight  June  24.  Progress  10  was  launched  June  29.  (FBIS,  Tass  i n  
English,  June  1-29/80;  N Y   Ernes,  June  10/80,  C-2;  A /D ,   June   10/80, 219; 
AvWk,  June   23/80,  18) 

178 

Ju ly   I :   NASA  announced  selection  of  General  Electric  Space  Division, 
Lockheed   Missiles  and  Space  Company,  RCA  Astro-Electronics,  and 
Rockwell International to negotiate 9-month $750,000 fixed-price contracts for 
parallel definition  studies of  alternate ways  to  implement  the  NOSS.  Studies 
would  include  flight  segments,  ground  segments,  and  orbit  operations. 
NOSS  would  acquire  ocean-surface data  for  delivery  to  selected  users  in 
weather  and  sea-ice forecasting, climate research,  fisheries management, and 
ocean  acoustic-propagation predictions.  A  large  free-flying  high-inclination 
spacecraft carrying a coastal-zone color scanner, scatterometer, altimeter, and 
large-antenna multichannel microwave radiometer would measure  the ocean’s 
emitted  and  reflective  energy  in  radio,  infrared,  and  visible  frequencies  to 
satisfy  both  civilian  and  defense  needs.  DOC’S NOAA  and  DOD   would 
cooperate in  the NOSS program with  NASA,  which  had  given GSFC  project 
responsibility.  (NASA  Release  80-103) 

Ju ly  2:INTELSAT  said that its board of governors meeting in Bogota last week 
had  made  decisions  that  would  determine  the  course  of  international  com-  
munications  satellite system development  for  the  decade.  INTELSAT would 
purchase  key  items  needed  for  a  ninth  Intelsat V   series  satellite; order  from 
NASA  three  more   Atlas  Centaur  launch  vehicles  with  improved  capability; 
procure from the ESA  two more  Ariane launch vehicles; and define specifica- 
tions  for  an  improved  satellite, Intelsat  V-A,  and  a  high-capacity  satellite to 
be  called Intelsat VI.  INTELSAT  would  spend more  than  U.S.  $230 million, 
said W.  Wood,  deputy  director general for  operations and development.  (IN- 
TELSAT Release  80-12-1) 

Ju ly   ?NASA  said that  it had  agreed with  ESA  to  let two  European  scientists 
enter tfie mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC  [see 
May  301.  The  Europeans, Claude Nicollier of  Switzerland and Wubbo Ockels 
of  the  Netherlands,  were  both  ESA  employees  and,  a s   Spacelab  1 payload- 
specialist  candidates,  had  undergone  a  screening  and  selection process  like 
that of  U.S. candidates. NASA  agreed  to  train them  in  view  of  Spacelab delay 
and  in  recognition  of  ESA’s  contribution  to  the  STS in  funding  Spacelab 
development;  ESA  would  reimburse  NASA  for  the  cost  of  training  the  two. 
(NASA  Release  89-106;  ESA  Info  19) 

Ju ly   8:WFC  observed  the  35th  anniversary of  the  launch  on  July  4 ,   1945,  of 
its  first  research  rocket,  a  17-foot  Tiamat.  Since  it  became   a  rocket  range, 
Wallops  Island had  seen  the  launch of  about  12,000 research vehicles of  from 

179 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JULY   1980 

1 to  7  stages,  sent  as  high  as  19,000 miles  above  the  Atlantic  at  speeds  over 
38,000 mph,  and  the  launch  of  19  satellites.  From  Wallops,  rhesus  monkeys 
Sam and  Miss  Sam  rode  into  space  on  a  Little  Joe   booster  in  1959-60 to  test 
the  Mercury  spacecraft  before  Alan  Shepard  took  it  into  space;  first  test  of 
the  Echo  balloon  also  occurred  here. 
Early  research  at Wallops  collected  aerodynamic data  at  transonic  and  low 
supersonic  speeds  as  part  of  the  push  to  break  thie  sound  barr ier ;   today,  the 
launches gathered data on space, aeronautics,  and characteristics  of  aerospace 
flight  and  tested  ideas  and  devices  for  future  spaceflight. 
NASA’s  predecessor   agency,  the   National  Advisory  Comm i t tee   for 
Aeronautics  (NACA),  put  its  Pilotless  Aircraft  R,esearch  Station  on  Wallops 
Island  under  the  direction  of  LaRC ;   its  mission  was  aeronautical  research  to 
supplement wind-tunnel  and laboratory  work at LaRC. When NASA  came in- 
to  being  in  1958  and  took  over  LaRC  and  other  field  centers  and  research 
facilities,  it  put  the  Wallops  station  directly  under  NASA  Headquarters  and 
renamed  it  Wallops  Flight  Center  in  1974.  (WFC  Release  80-8) 

NASA  had  no plans  to  carry  tourists  into  outer  space,  the  Washington  Star 
said,  even  though  its  offices  around  the  United  Slates had  floods of  requests 
for rides  since the  Space Shuttle project  was  unveiled  in  1977.  At  least  15,000 
people  had  tried  to  book  seats,  and  1,200 new  requests  arrived  each  week. 
“Non-astronauts may  be  aboard some missions to  conduct  experiments,”  said 
Chester M .   Lee, NASA’s  director  of  space  transportation  systems,  “but  we’re 
not  ready  to  book  tourists.  There  is  absolutely  no  provision  or  thought  for 
non-working  passengers.”  (W  Star, July  8/80,  A-2) 

J u l y   9:JPL  reported  that  Viking  orbiter  1, after more  than  four years  of  circl- 
ing  Mars,  was  reaching  the  end  of  its  mission.  JPL   would  command  it  off 
some  time  between July  2 3  and  30  after  it  had  exhausted  the  attitude-control 
gas that  kept  its  solar panels  pointed  at  the  Sun  and  its  antenna  toward  Earth. 
A  controlled  burn  during  that  time would  change  its  orbit  to  fulfill planetary 
quarantine  requirements,  avoiding  impact with-a  nd  contamination  of-Mars 
before  the year  2019.  Th e  orbiter would  keep  obsei-ving until  commanded  off, 
and  thereafter  circle  Mars  for  decades  in  silence 
V ik ing  I  launched  toward  Mars  in August  1975 arrived  there  June  19,  1976. 
Its  lander  reached  Mar’s  surface  July  20  with  a  planned  90-day  lifetime  but 
on July  20,  1980, would have observed  the planet  for more  than two  f u l l  Mars 
years  (four  Earth  years)  and  would  operate  unati.ended  on  Mars  into  1990, 
perhaps  into  1994.  The   orbiter  and  lander  of  Ek ing  2  had  been  commanded 
off  on  July  24,  1978  and  April  11,  1980,  respectively.  Fewer  than  30  people 
at J PL  remained  i n  Viking  operations  and  data processing.  (JPL Release 940; 
NASA  Release  80-108) 

MSFC’s Marsha l l  Starreported the  return  of  Shuttle main  engines 2005 and 
2007  from  NSTL  to  KSC  after  modification  and  testing.  The   third  engine 

180 

JULY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

(2006) of  the  cluster  scheduled  to  power  orbiter  Columbia  in  its  first  flight 
was  still a t  NSTL .  NASA  had  called for retest after the engines were modified 
on  the  basis  of  flight  readiness  tests  last  year.  (Marshall  Star,  July  9/80,  2) 

Jury  10:ESA  announced  that  its  science program  committee  had  approved  a 
major  space first:  sending a spacecraft to  Halley’s  comet. The  mission,  called 
Giotto,  would  send  a  spacecraft  derived  from  the  Goes   design  through  the 
comet  in   1986 at a  speed of  70  kilometers.  Objective of  the mission  would  be 
to measure the  substances (atmospheric, ionized particles, and  dust) from the 
coma   boiling  off  the  nucleus  under  the  effect  of  solar  heating  and  to 
photograph  the  nucleus with  an on-board  camera.  The  payload  would  consist 
mainly  of  the  camera  and  spectrometers  for  measuring  atomic  composition. 
The   Giotto  mission  was  named  for  the  “Adoration  of  the  Magi”  scene  in 
a  fresco in  Padua’s Arena Chapel done by  Florentine artist Giotto di Bondone. 
The  sky  in  the Adoration  scene shows Halley’s comet,  which  made  one  of  its 
periodic 76-year appearances in  1301; Giotto was  thus able to use  it a s  a model 
for  the  Bethlehem  star  in   his  painting,  completed  in  1304. The   fresco might 
be  called  the  first  scientific description  of  Halley’s  comet.  (ESA  Info  20) 

Ju ly  1I:NASA  reported award  of  an $8.5 million contract to  Thiokol Corpora- 
tion  for  Caster  IV   auxiliary  motors  for  the  Delta  launch  vehicle,  part  of  a 
fixed-price supplement to  an  existing contract being  negotiated  with  Thiokol 
for  63  of  these  motors  at  an  estimated  price  of  $20.9  million,  all  to  be 
delivered  to  the  KSC  launch  site  by  the  end  of  1982. 
The  Wall  Street  Journal commented  that  the  “old-fashioned”  liquid-fuel 
Delta  rockets  had  long  served  to  put  vehicles  into  space,  and  its  job   was  to 
have  been  taken  over  by  the  reusable  Shuttle. But  the  Shuttle was  two  years 
behind  schedule,  so  that  NASA  had  to  buy  more   solid-fuel Castors  to  help 
with  the  extended  schedule of  Delta  launches.  (NASA  Release  80-110;  WSJ, 
July  11/80,  3) 

’ 

Ju ly   14:MSFC  reported  that  a  planned  542-second  test  July  12  of  the  three- 
engine  cluster  for  Shuttle’s  main  propulsion  system  lasted  only  106  seconds 
because of  fire  indication  in  the aft compartment of  the orbiter  simulator. Up 
to  cutoff,  all  engines  and  other  parts  of  the  propulsion  system  apparently 
worked normally,  including completion of  the scheduled gimbaling and  throt- 
tling  of  the  engine.  About  45  seconds  of  the  firing  reached  102% of  rated 
thrust,  first time for the cluster at  this performance  level. Inspection after the 
test showed a small hole in  the no.  3 engine’s fuel preburner  that allowed burn- 
ing gas to escape into the area above the heatshield containing the powerheads. 
Damage was  confined to  the  one  engine, with  none  to  the  facility  or  the  rest 
of  the  test  article,  MSFC  engineers  said. 
The   damaged  engine  would  probably  be  returned  to  the  manufacturer, 
Rocketdyne Division of  Rockwell International a t  Canoga Park, Ca l if . ,   for in- 
spection and  repair. A  committee headed  by  Dr.  Herman  Thompson ,  deputy 

181 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1980 

director  of  the  science  and  engineering  directorate  at  MSFC,  was  appointed 
to  find  the cause of  the accident; no date would  be   set for  further  testing until 
the committee  made  its report.  (MSFC  Release  610-97;  NASA  Release  80-113) 

ComsatCorp  said  that  it  had  signed  a  contract  with  MultiVisions,  L td . ,   of 
Anchorage for the first commercial use of  a new  10-meter multiple-beam  torus 
antenna, a revolutionary  design allowing  a user  to  work  with as  many  as seven 
geosynchronous  satellites at  the  same time.  The  usual  parabolic  dish  antenna 
could  work  with  only  one   satellite  at  a  time. 
Th e  torus,  scheduled  to  be  in  operation  in  Anchorage  next  year,  would  be 
equipped  initially  to  receive  television  programs  from  three  satellites 
simultaneously.  With  three  dual-polarization  receive-only  feeds,  t h e   new 
antenna  could  receive  up  to  72  different  programs   from  72  different 
transponders  from  U .S .   domestic  satellites,  and  additional  feeds  would  pro- 
vide even greater capacity.  Where access  to more  than  one satellite was  need- 
e d ,   the  torus  would  be  cheaper  both  to  build  and  to  operate  than  the  two  or  
more  conventional  antennas  that  would  usually  be  required.  It  would  also 
reduce the amount of  real  estate needed  for several  parabolic antennas and the 
amount of  interference in congested frequency  areas (of which  Anchorage was 
one). ComSatCorp had asked  the FCC  for permission  to locate torus antennas 
at  Etam,  W.  Va.,  Andover,  Maine,  and  Jamesburg,  Calif.  (ComSatCorp 
Release  80-30) 

INTELSAT  announced  that  Guinea  became:  the  105th  member  i n   a 
ceremony  at  the  U.S.  State  Department  when  Ambassador Mamady  Lamine 
Conde  signed  the  operating  agreement.  Guinea  planned  to  operate  a  ground 
station  using  the  Intelsat  spacecraft  located  over  the  Indian  Ocean.  ( IN -  
TELSAT  Release  80-15-1) 

July  I5:The  Wall  Street  Journal  said  that  ESA  uou ld   go  ahead  with  a  $125 
million  probe of  Halley’s comet because original plans for a $370-$470 million 
joint mission with NASA had  become  impossible due to U.S. budget  cuts. The  
original  plan  called  for  launch  of  a  Space  Shuttle  that  would  have  sent  a 
satellite to Halley’s as well  as  to Tempe1 2 ,  a comet much  farther out  in space. 
NASA  had  to  scrub  the  two-comet  mission  because  it  couldn’t  get  the 
money  for a new  kind  of  space engine to make the flight;  the  Wall Street  Jour- 
nal  said that  it was  still studying a  stopgap plan  to use  an  old-fashioned rocket 
to  shoot a spacecraft past Halley’s when  i t  approached Earth.  ESA now plann- 
ed  to  put  up  a  750-pound satellite, Giotto  [see July  IO],  from  Kourou   in  July 
1985  to  rendezvous  with  Halley’s  in  March  1986.  (WS J ,  July  15/80,  30) 

July  l7:The  Washingron  Star  reported  that  discovery  of  a  “serious  potential 
safety  defect”  in  the nation’s most  widely  used  j e t   engine had  led  the FAA  to 
order   mandatory  inspections  for  two-thirds  of  the  short-  and  medium-range 
commercial  jetliners  in  the  United  States.  The   en,gine was  standard  on  three 

182 

JULY 1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

major  planes:  the  medium-range  Boeing  ?27,  with  three  engines,  and  two 
short-range planes with  two  engines each,  the Boeing  737  and  the McDonnell 
Douglas  DC-9.  Each  FAA-ordered  inspection  on  a  Pratt  & Whitney  JT8D 
engine would  take  170  hours  to  disassemble  it  to  the  point  where  it  could  be 
checked.  Some  of  the  engines were  nearly  new;  others had  been  serving  for 
several years: a JT8D  would normally be retired after 20,000 cycles in  service. 
When  a  Hawaiian  Airline  DC-9   blew  up  on  takeoff  at  Honolulu  June  15, 
FAA  inspection  revealed  that  a  portion  of  the  engine  was  subject  to  metal 
fatigue and  failure because of  the  factory machining  of  the metal.  No   serious 
injuries  occurred  in  the  Hawaii  incident.  However,  random  FAA  checking 
showed that other planes equipped with  JT8D engines had  cracks in  the  same  
engine  spot  as  the  Hawaii  plane.  The   potential  flaw  in  the  engines  was  the 
eighth compressor hub,  a  591-pound wheel  with  an  array of  blades located  in 
the  middle  of  the  3,000-  to  4,000 pound  engine.  Each   engine  had  13  com- 
pressor  hubs,  each  with  a  successively  smaller  set  of  fans  to  collect  a ir   and 
force  it  through  smaller areas  into  the  fuel-combustion chamber.  Machining 
of  a  flange on  the eighth compressor hub  was  ground  against  the grain of  the 
metal,  putting  unusual  strain on  that  part.  FAA  spokesman  Dennis  Feldman 
could  not  estimate the  cost of  the  inspection  programs,  thought  to  be  in  tens 
of  millions of  dollars;  nor  could  he  give  any  definitive answer  as  to  whether 
the  manufacturer  or  the  airline  would  have  to  cover  the  cost.  ( W  Star,  July 
17/80,  A-1) 

Ju ly   18:  Newspapers  reported  the  launch  at  8:04  a .m .   local  time  of  the 
771-pound.Rohini I  by  India’s space research organization (ISRO), making In- 
dia the  sixth country  in  the world  to  build and  launch its own  satellite. Rohini 
1 was  launched  from  Sriharikota  Island  near  Madras  on  a  four-stage  SLV-3 
solid-fuel  rocket  into  an  orbit  with  a  919-kilometer  apogee,  306-kilometer 
perigee, 44.7” inclination, and  97-minute period.  “This  is a  great day  for  In- 
dia,’’ said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who estimated the cost of  the launch 
vehicle  at  $25 .2   million. 
The   Washington Post  said  that  the  launch  was  remarkable  “for  a  country 
that  still used  bullock  carts  as  a  prime  mode   of  transportation.”  Despite  its 
poverty, India had  the world’s  third  largest pool  of  technically trained person- 
nel.  Dr.  Satish Dhawan,  head  of  ISRO,  said that  the  successful launch  would 
pave  the  waya3for  liquid-fuel  rockets  carrying  larger  payloads  up  to  1,300 
pounds.  India’s  17-year-old  space  program  had  had  setbacks,  including  a 
failure in  August  1979,  when  its  rocket  dropped  into  the Bay  of  Bengal  about 
5  seconds  after  liftoff  because  the  second  stage  failed  to  ignite.  Launch  of 
Rohini  “underscored  India’s  place  as  the  most  powerful  nation  of  the  South 
Asian  subcontinent,”  said the  Washington Post.  ( W  Post,  July  19/80, A-13;  W 
Star,  July  19/80,  4; NASA  D ly  Acrv  Rp t ,   July  21/80) 

Since  M t .   S t .   Helens  erupted  May  18,  NASA  reported  what  it  called  the 
most  complete observations to  date  of  volcanic  aerosols  in  the  stratosphere. 

183 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

JULY   1980 

Large volcanic  eruptions had  previously  changed Earth’s weather  (short-term) 
and  climate  (long-term).  ARC  had  collected  M!t.  S t .   Helen’s  data  for  its 
aerosol  climate  effects  (ACE)  program,  using  the  U-2  aircraft  in  sampling 
missions  on  May  19,  22 ,   and  27,  and  June  14  and  17. 
A preliminary  analysis of  the volcanic plumes  showed solid ash and sulfuric 
acid, the proportions varying in different samples. Th e  acid in the stratosphere 
was  several  hundred. times  greater  than  before  the  eruptions.  The   first  flight 
found  ash  particles  as  large  as   30  microns,  of  composition  similar  to  ash  on 
the  ground  near  the  volcano.  (Largest  particles  .Found  on  later  flights  were 
about  3 microns.)  Gaseous  sulfur  dioxide  also  increased:  levels  on   the  first 
flight were  10 to  1,000 times ambient  levels, and on the second flight were  100 
times normal.  The second flight  found water  vapor  in the plume to b e   10 times 
the  normal  amount,  showing  that  volcanic  water  was  injected  into  the 
stratosphere. A July  1979 ACE flight over Alaska g.we baseline levels for com- 
parison  with  conditions  after  the  eruption. 
On the day of  the eruption, one of  NASA’s  SAGE teams i n  Wyoming  launch- 
ed  instruments  on  a  balloon  to  enter  and measure  the  dust plume;  it detected 
dust concentrations 400  to  1,600 times  normal  in  tihe  stratosphere.  The  SAGE 
satellite  launched  in  1979  tracked  the  Mt.  St.  Helens’ clouds  as   it  had  those 
of  two  previous  erup t ions .   W FC   sent  an  Or ion   P-3  a  plane  on   an 
“underflight”  as  the  cloud went  over  North Carolina and the Atlantic  Ocean, 
along with  a Super Loki rocket;  these flights gave scientists simultaneous data 
readings from above and below  the atmosphere.  B j ,  late June,  LaRC  scientists 
decided  that,  although  M t .   S t .   Helens  could  h.ave  boosted  stratospheric 
aerosols by  5 0% ,  there  was  as   yet  no  sign  of  adverse  climate  change.  (ARC 
Release  80-62;  NASA  Release  80-107) 

Ju ly   22:NASA  unveiled  the  first  scientific  and  applications  payload  for  the 
STS  (Shuttle) a t  GSFC’s clean room ,  where  instruments were  installed in  the 
package planned  as  an alternate payload  on  orbital  test  flight 4,  scheduled  for 
April  1982.  (Prime  payload  for  this  flight  belonged  to  DOD.)  Called  OSS-1 
for  NASA’s  Office  of  Space  Science,  the  entire  payload  was  designed,  built, 
tested,  and  integrated by  a  team  of  GSFC engineers and  scientists headed  by 
Ken  Kissin,  OSS-1  mission  manager,  and  Jon  Busse,  project  manager  for 
Shuttle  payload  integration  and  rocket  experiments.  Project  scientists  were 
Drs.  Siegfried  Bauer  and  Werner  Neupert.  The   seven  principal  OSS-1  ex- 
periments  were  in  the  disciplines  of  space  plasma  physics,  solar  physics, 
astronomy,  and  life  sciences,  each  represented  by  one  o r   more  instruments. 
(NASA  Release  80-114,  80-117) 

NASA  announced  that  a  sunspot  hotline  set  up  at  GSFC   would  keep  the 
public informed about solar flares during the  1980 peak cycle of  activity. Daily 
recorded  messages  would  contain  information  on  sunspots,  solar  flares, 
geomagnetic  storms,  and  the  impact  of  solar  activily  on  radio  transmissions, 
for  instance.  Th e   recordings  provided  jointly  by  NASA  and  NOAA  through 

184 

JULY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

its  space  environment  services  center  in  Boulder,  Colo.,  would  originate  in 
the  SMM   facility  at GSFC.  The   “Solar  Max”   spacecraft  launched  February 
14  was  an  orbiting  solar  observatory carrying  seven  instruments whose  data, 
coord ina ted   with  data  from  scientists  at  g round -ba sed   observa tor ies  
throughout the world,  would permit  the most  comprehensive investigation of 
solar  flares  ever  made.  Information  from  these  sources  would  be  relayed  to 
GSFC on  a 24-hour basis so  that NASA  scientists could  determine which  ac- 
tive  regions  of  the  Sun  to  study  during  the  next  24  hours.  (NASA  Release 
80-116) 

Ju ly   23:The  Soviet Union  launched Soyuz f l a t  9:33  p .m .  Moscow  time,  car- 
rying Col. Viktor Gorbatko and  a  33-year-old Vietnamese a ir   force pilot,  L t .  
Col.  Pham Tuan,  first Asian  space traveler and sixth citizen of  an eastem-bloc 
country to be part of  the USSR’s Intercosmos program.  The  Soyuz would  link 
up  within  24  hours  with  the  orbiting  Salyut  6  space  station  where  Leonid 
Popov  and Valery  Ryumin had been working for more  than  three months.  The  
Salyut’s docking port  had  been  cleared July  19  by  jettisoning  cargo  ship Pro- 
gress  10,  which  burned  up  reentry.  ( W  Pos t ,   July  24/80,  A-15;  Today, July 
24/80,  L4 ;   W Star,  July  20180,  2 ;   July  24/80,  A-7) 

Forthright criticism of  Carter-administration space policy  came  from Rocco 
A .   Petrone,  former  director  of  MSFC,  and  Dr.  Thomas  A .   Paine,  who  was 
NASA  administrator during  the  early manned  lunar  landing  years,  the  Hunt- 
sville  Em e s   reported.  The  two  testified  July  23  before  the House  Committee 
on Science a nd  Technology’s subcommittee o n  space science and applications. 
Committee  chairman  Don  Fuqua   (D-Fla.)  and  ranking  minority  member  
Larry  Winn  (R-Kans.)  both  expressed  support  of  the  NASA  veterans; Winn 
remarked that it was  :“like old timers’ day up here.”  Under  Carter, Paine said, 
the U.S.  had  “lost both  our  senses of  direction and  ou r  resolution.  . .Ringing 
rhetoric  proclaiming  U.S.  leadership  in  space  is   no  substitute  for  plans  and 
programs.  In my  view  it is self-delusive to give lip service to  leadership while 
avoiding  initiative and  commitment.” 
Petrone  said  the  usual  pause  for  evaluation  after  a  large  program  like  the 
lunar mission  “is now  becoming  dangerously close to  a condition of  stall  and 
possible loss of  minimum momentum  needed”  for  complex  space programs. 
He   expressed concern  over  “technological timidity  in  a  nation  that  has  been 
built  over  the  years  on  technological strength.”  (Htsvl  Tms,  July  24/80,  6 )  

July  25:A  rescue training exercise at KSC  was  about  to  begin:  a mock-up  of 
the  Space Shuttle was  set down  in  a  pond,  and  the  rescue  team  was  ready  to 
practice its procedures in  case the Shuttle overshot the runway  upon  its  return 
to  launch  site and  landed  in  the  drink.  Then,  Fat  Albert  rose  from  the  pond 
and  lumbered up to  Sun himself about  10 feet from the mock-up.  The  test  was 
halted  until  wildlife  officers  arrived  on  the  scene. 
Fat Albert, a local alligator, used to share lunches with KSC employees until 

185 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

JULY   1980 

(so it  is  said) he  ate an  employee’s  tennis  shoe  right  off  his  foot.  Th e  wildlife 
officers who  lassoed and carried away  the alligator  weighed  him  (1,OO pounds) 
and  measured  him  (13  feet,  9  inches).  With  Fat  Albert  gone,  the  maneuver 
continued:  the  rescue  team  dropped  from  a  helicopter  into  the  pond  and 
rescued  two  dummy  astronauts  from  the  mock-up.  (JSC  Roundup, July 
25/80,  1) 

Ju ly   28:NASA  reported  on  a  solar-flare  “first”  resulting  from  coordination 
of  data  from  the  Solar  Max  spacecraft  and  from  a  network  of  sophisticated 
ground  observatories  participating  in  the  International  Solar Maximum  Year. 
On  the  basis  of  worldwide  predictions,  instruments  on  the  Solar Max  and 
at observatories  in  18  nations had  focused o n  an  active region  of  t h e  Sun June 
24 .   On  June  28-29,  that  region  produced  two  m,3jor flares,  captured  by  all 
seven  spacecraft  instruments  (first  all-instrument  simultaneous measurement 
of  the same flare since the spacecraft was launched in February). Th e  observa- 
tion  was  also  the  first  in  which  scientists traced  material  ejected  from  a  flare 
into  the  solar  atmosphere.  (NASA  Release  80-120) 

The  first Viking  soft-landed  on Mars just  four years ago, the  Washington S tar  
noted,  but  “it  seems now  like ancient  history”:  this week,  the Viking  orbiter 
would  shut  down  for  good  [see July  91.  It  had  been mapping Mars with high- 
resolution  photographs  since  1976;  even  more  remarkable  was  the  lander, 
scheduled to  last for 90 days and now programmed  to operate possibly through 
1994. 
“All  this  suggests  an  extraordinary  contrast,”  the  paper  said,  “On  Mars, 
American  technology  is  th r iv ing . .   .on ear th ,   the American  genius  that  made 
such  things  possible  is  not  being  encouraged.”  Pis  the  last  messages  arrive 
from  the  Viking  orbiter,  “its  most  important  message-what 
the  end  of  its 
useful  life  has  to  say  about  America’s  scientific  and  technological  future-is 
the  one   not  heeded.”  ( W  Star,  July  28/80,  A-6) 

Ju ly   30:LaRC  said  that  its  researchers,  working  with  the  FAA  in  a  Radio 
Technical  Commission  for Aeronautics, might  have  solved  a problem  relating 
to  general  aviation  aircraft  distress-signal  equipment,  six  of  every  seven  fail- 
ing  to  transmit  after  a  plane  crash  and  about  7556  of  all  signals  being  false 
alarms. 
Th e   devices,  emergency  locator  transmitters,  emitted  a  signal  on  a 
wavelength  designated  for  emergency  use  to  locate  downed  aircraft  and  were 
supposedly  activated  by  the  impact  force of  a  crash .   The  problem  was  in  the 
sensor  switch,  which  was  sometimes  too  sensitivl:  to  normal  aircraft  vibra- 
tions  (and  sent  false  a larms) ,   sometimes  not  sensitive  enough  to  forces  in  a 
crash .  
Langley  engineer  Huey  D.  Carden had  designed  and tested  an  experimental 
switch  sensitive  to  low-cycle  vibrations  out  of  tha  range  of  normal  aircraft 
vibrations  and  closer  to  the  low-cycle  pulselike  fo:rce of  a  crash.  The   resear- 

186 

JULY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

chers were  also  looking  into  the  general  usefulness  of  the  beacons  and  their 
performance as  a  total  system.  (LaRC  Release  80-53;  NASA Release  80-118) 

MSFC  reported that July 21 had marked  the end of an era :  Gustav A .  Kroll, 
last  of  the original  118-man “von  Braun team”  to  leave the  center,  retired just 
six weeks  short of  having 35 years of  U.S. government service. He  had  headed 
the  structures  division  of  MSFC’s  Structures  and  Propulsion  Laboratory. 
Kroll arrived  in  the United  States in  1945 in Operation Paperclip and  work- 
ed at F t .  Bliss, Tex.,  with  the von  Braun team, which  transferred to Huntsville 
in  1950. Kroll became  a U.S.  citizen in  1954. He  received NASA’s exceptional 
service  medal  in  1976  for  “guiding  the  overall  structural  design  of  the  solid 
rocket boosters,”  two  of  which would be  used  in  the first two  minutes of  flight 
on  each  Space Shuttle launch,  recovered,  and  refurbished  for  reuse.  He   had 
worked  in  structures  throughout his  career:  “all  of  them-every  one  of  Mar- 
shall’s  projects-Redstone, 
Jupiter,  Saturn,  Shuttle-all  of  them,”  he  said. 
Looking back,  “there  are no  favorites, but  the highlight would  have  to  be  the 
Saturn  V  flight  and  landing  on  the  moon.”  (MSFC  Release  80-101) 

e  The   Washington Star  said  that  prospects  of  mining  on  the  Moon  brought 
senators,  scientists, and  lawyers  together  to  discuss profits  that  would  not  be 
earned for years,  if  ever.  Witnesses a t  a Senate commerce  subcommittee hear- 
ing  said  that  some  companies  thought  private  investment  would  be  hindered 
by  any  treaty  that  called  for  dividing  lunar  products  among  Earth‘s nations. 
A  proposed  Moon  treaty  approval  last  year  by  the  United  Nations  said  that 
lunar resources  were  “the common  heritage of mankind,”  a phrase that might 
threaten  profits  of  the  few  nations or  companies  that  could  mount  successful 
moon-mining  expeditions. 
NASA’s  Dr.  Robert  Frosch  said  the  treaty  was  not  a  problem,  noting  that 
years  of  development would  have  to precede  any  actual  “issues of  investment 
or  returns  in  extraterrestrial  resources.”  Former   astronaut  Sen.  Harrison 
Schmitt  (R-N.M.)  asked  if  the  treaty  might  have  a  chilling  effect  on  invest- 
ment; Frosch replied,  “Only  if you  want to be chilled.”  (Wushingron Star, July 
30/80,  G-7)  

Ju ly   31:Following  an  intensive  review  of  the  Space Shuttle program  over  the 
past few  weeks,  NASA confirmed a decision made earlier  in  1980 to schedule 
the first Shuttle launch in March  1981. NASA administrator. Dr.  Robert Frosch 
said the decision was  made  in  spite of  a potential setback when  fire damaged 
a Shuttle engine cluster during a  test  [see July  141. A  study of  the engine fire 
and  its possible impact  had  already begun  but would  not  impede the effort to 
maintain the launch schedule. The  decision to comm i t  to a March  launch came  
after a series of  meetings  in  which  NASA and contractor personnel examined 
the  status  of  hardware  and  software  required  for  the  first  flight. 
On  the  15-week work  schedule from  rollout to  launch,  Frosch  said that  ex- 
perience  of  previous  “first  launches  of  new  vehicles”  showed  that  original 

A STRONAUT IC S  AND   AERONAUT IC S  

JULY  1980 

schedules were  seldom  carried  out  in  the  time  planned,  but  “the  best  chance 
of  the earliest  successful first  flight comes in worlung to a tight but  achievable 
work  schedule.”  (NASA  Release  80-122;  MSFC  ]Release 80-102) 

During  July:  ESA’s  monthly  newsletter  said  that  the  launch  failure  of  its 
Ariane  LO2  launch  vehicle  [see May  23,  June  171  did  not  call  into  question 
the  continuation  of  the  program.  When  the  cause  of  the  engine  failure  was 
known,  program  officials  would  conduct  the  other  two  qualification  firings. 
Th e  s ix  Arianes now  being manufactured would  launch Marecs B,  Sino 2 ,  In- 
telsat  V,  Exosat,  ECS,  and Telecom  M ,  the  organiization said.  (ESA  newslet- 
ter,  July  80) 

NASA announced  appointment of  Dr.  Stanley  I .  ’Weiss, DOE’S deputy assis- 
tant  secretary  for  industrial  and  utility  applications  and  operations,  as  
associate  administrator  for  space  transportation  operations,  effective  July  7. 
He   would  be   responsible  for  STS  functions  including  Shuttle,  Spacelab,  and 
expendable launch  vehicles  during  transition  to  the  Shuttle.  (NASA  anno July 
2/80) 
-NASA  announced  appointment of  Gerald D.  Griffin, deputy director  of 
KSC,  as acting  associate  administrator  for  external  relations  at  Headquarters 
effective  July  7.  H e   would  have  responsibility  for  policy-level  management, 
direction, and coordination  of  NASA’s  Offices of  Public Affairs,  International 
Affairs,  DOD  Affairs,  GovernmentiIndustry  Affairs,  and  University  Affairs, 
reporting to the NASA administrator. His KSC  responsibilities would be given 
temporarily  to  senior managers  at  that  center.  (NASA  Release 80-104; NASA 
anno  July  3/80) 

Th e  Washingron Post  reported  the  death  of  Walter  R .   Dornberger,  84 ,  who 
as   a  German  general  had  supervised  Wernher  von  Braun’s  work  on  the  V2 
rocket  during World  War  11.  Cause of  death  June  26  was  not  given  in  either 
the  Washington Post  or  Aviation  Week &  Space  Technology. Dornberger  was 
visiting  in West Germany.  He had  come to  the  United  States i n   1947 after  two 
years  in  a  British  prisoner-of-war  camp;  like  more  than  100 other  German- 
born  rocket  scientists who worked  for  the  U.S.  Army  and U.S.  Air  Force,  he 
became  a U.S.  citizen.  He  also worked  for Bell Aerosystems  Company,  where 
h e   was  a  vice  president. 
A  volunteer  in the  imperial  German army  of  World War  I ,  Dornberger was 
a  career  soldier  to  the  end  of  the  second  war.  In  1932  h e   was  given  charge 
of  a group of  scientists working  on rocket  concepts and moved  to Peenemunde 
in  1937. When  the  first  test  of  the V2 October  3,  1942, was  successful,  Dorn- 
berger asked von  Braun:  “Do  you  realize what  we  accomplished  today?”  Von 
Braun  said  “Yes,  today  the  spaceship  was  born.”  1.n  1958, nearly  three  years 
before  President  Kennedy  voiced  the  goal  of  landing  a man  on  the  Moon  by 
1970,  Dornberger  predicted  that  man  would  be  on  the  moon  i n   10  years: 

188 

JULY  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

“whether  he  is Russian  or American  depends  on  how  much  money  Congress 
is  willing  to  spend,”  he   said.  (W  Post,  July  2/80,  B-6;  AvWK,  July  7/80,  25) 

The   Washington Star  reported  five  new  members  for  the  Aviation  Hall  of 
Fame:  former  astronaut  Char les  Conrad ,  third man  to walk on  the Moon ;  An- 
thony  H .  G.  Fokker,  founder of  Fokker Aircraft  Company;  William  T.  Piper, 
founder  of  Piper  Aircraft  Corporation;  retired  U.S.  Air  Force  Gen .   Bernard 
A .   Schriever,  “architect  of  the  Air  Force’s  ballistic  missile  program”;  and 
Robert  F.  S ix ,   founder  of  Continental  Airlines.  Fokker  and  Piper  were 
honored  posthumously  in  the  announcement  at  Dayton,  Ohio’s,  exhibition 
center.  ( W Star,  July  21/80,  A-2) 

NASA  announced  that  its  quiet  short-haul  research  aircraft  (QSRA)  had 
made   more   than  500  landings  on  a  simulated  aircraft-carrier  deck  in  a 
NASA/U.S.  Navy  study of  the application of  propulsive-lift  technology  to a ir-  
craf t  carr iers .  The  landings were  made a t  a  naval  auxiliary  landing  field  near  
ARC  in  California.  Using  a  carrier-deck  outline  painted  on  the  runway,  the 
craf t  in 2 3  mph  (37 kmh)  headwinds touched  down at about 52  mph  (84 kmh), 
slow  enough  to  make  unnecessary  the  arresting  gear  normally  used  on 
carr iers .  
Actual  operations  would  be  demonstrated  on  a  U.S.  carr ier   at  sea  off  San 
Diego  later  in  July.  Built  by  Boeing  under   NASA  contract,  the  plane  was 
essentially  a new  aircraft  making extensive use of  existing  parts:  fuselage and 
t a i l   from  a deHavilland  C-8  Buffalo,  landing-gear  parts  from  a Boeing  727 j e t  
transport,  and  engines  from  the  US  A .F .   A-9A  prototype.  (NASA  Release 
80-111) 

FBIS  carr ied  Tass  reports  on  the  flight  of  Salyut  6, with  Leonid  Popov  and 
Valery  Ryumin  aboard  for  12 weeks.  The   crew  spent  the  first  week  of  July 
unloading  cargo  ship  Progress  IO, which  linked  with  the  Salyut  July  1. 
Unloading  was  completed,  and  the  orbiting  station  was  refueled  by  July  15. 
Experiments  with  Isparitel  apparatus  were  performed ,   using  a  powerful 
beam  of  electrons  to plate  metal  and  glass  surfaces  with  precious  metals  and 
alloys  of  aluminum  and  copper.  Properties  of  plating  done  in  weightlessness 
differed  from  those  under  Earth  conditions,  Tass noted.  First  tests  of  the  ap-  
paratus  were  made   last  year  when  Lyakhov  and  Ryumin  brought  back  24 
titanium  plates  with  metal  covering  from   Soyuz  32 ;  the   curren t   tests  should 
produce  about  200  specimens  covered  with  films  of  varied  thicknesses. 
Progress  10 separated  from  the  Salyut  6-Soyuz 36 complex  a t   1:21 Moscow 
time  July  18  after  a  17-day  stay,  dur ing   which  its  engine  was  used  to  adjust 
the   station’s  orb i t .   On  July  19  the  cargo  ship  engines  were  switched  on   by 
ground   command ;   it  reentered  over  the  Pacific  and  “ceased  to  exist.” 
Soyuz  37,  launched  a t  midnight  July 2 3  Moscow  time,  carried  the  first Viet- 
namese  cosmonaut,  L t .   Co l .  Pham  Tuan,  and  veteran  cosmonaut  Co l .  Viktor 
Gorba tko   a s   the  sixth  Intercosmos  crew  to  visit  with  Popov  and  Ryumin, 

189 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1980 

fourth  main  crew  on  Su lyu t   6.  At  the  launch,  Boris  Petrov,  vice president  of 
the  Soviet  academy  of  sciences,  noted  that  “although  space  school  in  Viet- 
namese  science  was  established  later  than  in  other  Soviet  countries,”  ex- 
periments in space medicine and technology and in mapping of land  and ocean 
surfaces  had  been  prepared  for  the  Soviet-Vietn.imese  expedition.  Soyuz  37 
docked with  Salyut  6-Soyuz 36 at  2302  Moscow  time July  24; o n  Ju ly   25,  the 
visitors  began  a  study  of  head  blood  circulation  during  adaptation  to 
weightlessness,  with  Pham  Tuan  as   first  subject.  The   visitors  returned  in 
Soyuz  36 a t   1815  hours  July  31  to  the  preset  area! near  Dzhezkazgan.  (FBIS, 
Tass  in  English,  July  4-31180) 

190 

August 

August 1: WFC  reported the successful launch July 31  or a two-stage sounding 
rocket  to  test  both  the  vehicle  system  and  a  “mother-daughter’’  two-part 
payload,  an  electrodynamics package  to  be  used  in   a  series of  three  launches 
from  Norway  later  in  1980.  Launched  at  8:18  a .m .   on  an  Honest  John-Orion 
rocket,  the 216-kilogram  (476-pound) instrumented payload  was  programmed  
to  separate at about 95 kilometers (59 miles) altitude and measure the electric 
field  and  profiles  of  ion  density  and  conductivity  in   the  atmosphere.  (The 
three experiments to be launched  in Norway  would measure energetic-particle 
and X-ray fluxes and ultraviolet light from the aurora in addition to  the electric 
field  and  ion  density  and  conductivity.) 
Telemetry  showed that  the payloads  separated as planned  and  both  the  sec- 
tions  reached  peak  altitude  of  111  kilometers  (69  miles).  The   “daughter” 
payload,  a  sphere with  six  1-meter booms  extending  from  it,  performed  well 
and  exhibited good  stability until  descent. At  73  kilometers  (45 miles) on  the 
way  down,  a  65-foot-diameter mylar  parachute deployed  from  the  “mother” 
section;  this  was  a  lower  altitude that  planned,  resulting  in  a  faster  fall  than 
planned,  but  the section’s stability allowed  it to  acquire usable data. This  sec- 
tion  also  contained  a  movie  camera  to  film  parachute  deployment;  recovery 
of  the  section  from  the  Atlantic  was  in   progress.  (WFC   Release  80-9) 

August  4 :  The   Wall Street  Journal  reviewed  the  competition  for  locating the 
Large Space Telescope’s science institute at one of  three sites, each the protege 
of  a  university  consortium:  Princeton  University  in  New  Jersey,  the  Johns 
Hopkins  University  in  Baltimore,  and  the  Fermi  National  Accelerator 
Laboratory  west  of  Chicago.  NASA  teams  visiting  the  sites  would  make  a 
decision  in  October. 
In November  1979,  five sites were being promoted  with  two others as minor 
contenders:  Princeton,  Hopkins,  Fermilab,  the  University  of  Colorado,  and 
the  University  of  California  at  San  Diego  (UCSD)   plus  the  Universities  of 
Arizona  and  New  Mexico,  where  numerous  ground  telescopes were  already 
located [see November  18, 19791. Usually the site for an astronomical installa- 
tion would require clear  skies and steady air, but  “any  old kind of  sky”  would 
do   for  the  Space  Telescope,  the  Wall  Street  Journal  said,  as  the  images  its 
computers  received  would  originate above  Earth‘s  atmosphere.  The   winning 
manager  would  provide  his  own  building,  either  a  new  one  o r   a  remodeled 
existing  one;  a  resident  staff  of  100 to  150 persons;  and  room   for  a  constant 
flow  of  visiting  astronomers.  (WSJ ,  Aug  4/80,  15) 
MSFC   repor ted   that  students  f rom   the   Massachusetts  Ins t i tu te   of 
Technology  (MIT)  had  returned  to  the  center  to  continue  a  study  begun  last 

191 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1980 

January  on  in-space assembly  of  large structures i n  MSFC’s neutral-buoyancy 
simulator,  this  time  with  a  manned  maneuvcring  unit  they  had  built 
themselves. The  MSFC  simulator, a  1.3 million-gallon water  tank,  closely ap- 
proximated  a  zero-gravity  environment.  Th e   stualents  had  spent  three  weeks 
on a NASA-MIT  project,  assembling  in  the tank  a tetrahedral truss containing 
48  parts:  36   tubular  beams  11  feet  long  with  12 -ioints, largest  in  number  of 
components  ever  tested  in  the  simulator. 
Since  their  January  stay,  the  students  had  modified  the  beams  and  joints 
(designed  and  made  in MIT  machine shops) on th:  basis  of  data derived  from 
their work  at MSFC and had been  building an alternative crewed  maneuvering 
unit.  Testing  it at MSFC would  show whether  it would  be of use  in assembling 
large  space  structures;  like  one  previously  bu i l t   by  MSFC  engineers,  i t   had 
instead  df  the gas je ts  needed  to move  it  in space five small motor-driven  pro- 
pellers  to  move  it  in  the  tank.  The  motors  were  enclosed  to  prevent  injury  to 
other  divers  o r   damage  to  hoses  and  lines  in  the  simulator.  Th e  unit  would 
fit  on  the  backpack  worn  over  a  pressurized  sipace  suit.  (MSFC  Release 
80-103) 

Press  reports  said  that  Maxie Anderson,  who  made  a  transatlantic  crossing 
in   the  balloon  Double  Eagle  I1  in   1978, crashed  hi:; balloon  Columbine I1  into 
a  lake near  L a c ro s s e ,  Wisc.,  August  4  during opening  ceremonies  of  the  U. 
S .   National  Hot  Air  Balloon  Championships. Anderson,  his  wife  Pattie,  and 
copilot  Don  Ida  escaped  injury,  but  the  balloon  was  destroyed. 

August  6: A  small  device  flown  in  space for  the  first  time  had  detected  small 
changes  i n   the  Sun’s  brightness  over  periods  of  d.ays to  months,  NASA  said. 
An  experiment  on the  Solar Max  satellite had  registered  fluctuations of  about 
a  tenth  of  1%  in  solar  radiation,  corresponding  to  a  change  of  up  to  10°C 
(18°F)  i n   the  Sun’s average  temperature.  This  trend  lasting  for  several  years 
could  make  major  alterations  i n   Earth’s  climate:, measurement  of  even  the 
slightest change  in  the  Sun’s emitted  heat  and  light might  enable  scientists to 
predict future changes in climate. A drop of  1%  in  the output of  solar radiation 
would  lower  Earth’s  mean  temperature  by  more  than  a degree  (2°F) ;   if   solar 
radiation  decreased  by  o n l y   6 % ,  the  entire  Earth  would  be   covered  with  ice. 
Evidence  showed  that  Earth  had  been  cooling  down  for  about  90  million 
years;  it was about 8 °C  (15°F) warmer  150 million  years ago than  it was  today 
and might  cool  by  10” or  more   in  the  next  several  million  years.  Cycles with 
frequencies  ranging  from  22  years  to  millions  of  years  had  caused  ice  ages 
ranging  from  glacial  epochs  to  “little  ice  ages.”  Most  recent  of  the  latter, 
beginning i n   the mid-17th century  and lasting about. 200 years,  was a  1.5 ” drop 
from  mean  global  temperature  of  14°C  (58°F) :   i t   resulted  in  observable  in- 
crease  of  glaciation  i n   the  Alps.  (NASA  Release  80-124) 

August  7:The  Washington Post  reported  that  schoolteacher  Janice Brown,  32 ,  
piloted  Paul  MacCready’s solar-powered  Gossamer Penguin  as  high  as  12  fect 

192 

AUGUST  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

off  the  ground  for  14  minutes,  21  seconds,  going  2  miles  along  a  deser t  
streambed at Edwards Air Force Base in the first  sustained  flight by  an aircraft 
powered  only  by  the  Sun.  Th e   top  speed  was  16.5  mph.  The   Gossamer 
Penguin  had  a  72-foot wingspan  and  weighed  about  6 8  pounds,  including  the 
bank  of  2,800  photovoltaic  cells  mounted  above  the  wing.  Unlike  o ther   elec- 
trically  powered  aircraft,  Penguin  had  no  storage batteries  and  relied  only  on 
direct  solar  power.  ( W  Post, Aug  8/80, A-6; Zndl  D sgn ,  Sept/Oct  80,  18; FRC 
X-Press ,  Aug  22/80,  2) 

JPL  engineers  had  sent  a  command August  7  to Viking orbiter  1,  switching 
off  its  transmitter  and  ending  its  four  year  mission.  Viking  project  manager 
Kermit  Watkins  said  that  its  attitude-control  gas   would  have  been  depleted 
before  it  completed  another  orb i t :   by  commanding  it  to  turn  off,  instead  of 
allowing  it  to occur  automatically,  “we  will  be  su re  that  the  radio  transmitter 
has  been  shut  off.”  Confirmation  of  the  switchoff  was  received  at  4:16  EDT 
August  7.  The  Viking  lander  would  continue  to  transmit  meteorological  and 
engineering  data  weekly  on  command  until  about  December  1994.  (NASA 
Release  80-129; NASA  D ly   A m  Rep t ,   Aug  11/80;  W  Star,  Aug  5 / 8 0 ,  A-2) 

August 8: DFKC  said that  it was awaiting delivery of  a new  aircraft  that would 
take  off  and  land  like  a  helicopter  and  cru ise   in  flight  like  a  conventional 
airplane:  the XV-lSA,  built  for  NASA  and  the  U.  S .  Army  by  Bell Helicopter 
Textron in F t .  Worth, Tex. Another  XV-15  was a t  ARC preparing  for research 
flight  tests.  The  one  being  delivered  to  DFRC  would  serve  to  expand  perfor- 
mance  limits  reached by  NASA,  military,  and  contract  pilots  in  a  flight-test 
program  expected to last one  year ;  the ARC craft would be  flown within  limits 
established  a t   DFRC  to  accomplish  specific  research  objectives.  (NASA 
Release  80-127;  DFRC  Release  80-16) 

NASA  reported  that  its QSRA was the  first  four-engine transport j e t  to land 
and take off  from an aircraft carr ier  a t  sea [see During July].  It made  37  touch- 
and-go landings and  16 full-stop landings  on  the ca r r ie r  during  the evaluation, 
and  16  takeoffs  without  the  aid  of  catapult  gear.  The   tests,  by  a  Navy  pilot, 
L t .   Cdr.  Pete  Strickland,  and  two NASA  research  pilots,  Jim Martin  and  Bob 
Innis,  deomonstrated  QSRA’s  use  on   shor t  runways and  its  quieter  operation. 
(NASA  Release  80-126) 

August 10: DOC   reported  that  the Nimbus  7 satellite  successfully  tracked  bet- 
ween  October  16,  1979,  and  June   ‘15,  1980,  the  800-mile  journey  of  a 
2121-pound  loggerhead  turtle  called  Diane  from  a  point  south  of  Gu lfpor t ,  
M i s s . ,   past  Louisiana  and  Texas  to  an  area  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  near 
Brownsville,  Tex.,  where  D iane   apparently  shed  the  signal  transmitter. 
(NOAA officials  said  tha t ,  after  a break  in  transmission,  a mystery developed 
when  the  signal  resumed,  moving  inland  to  stop  in Kansas-far 
from  the  tur- 
tle’s  ocean or  river  habitat.  A  fisherman had  found  the 7-pound  transmitter  on 

193 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1980 

a  beach  near  Port  Arthur,  Tex.,  and  had  taken  it  home,  where  he  used  the 
$5,000  device  as  a  doorstop.) 
Robert  Timko,  electronic  engineer  at  NOAA’s  Marine  Fisheries  Service 
(NMFS)  laboratory  in  Galveston,  said  that  no  technology  except  satellite 
tracking  could  have  followed  a  wide-ranging  and  generally  inaccessible 
animal  like  the  loggerhead  turtle  (a  threatened  species) over  so large  an  area. 
NMFS   would  use  the  data  to  identify  feeding,  nesting,  and  mating  areas  to 
help  manage  the  stock of  sea  turtles.  The   test  was  inspired  by  previous  work 
with  polar  bears,  which  were  tracked  from  6 0   tci  90  days.  (NOAA  Release 
80-102) 

August  11;  ARC  reported  that  eight  men   aged  35  to  50   would  participate  i n  
a  study  of  weightlessness  to  help  NASA  learn   why  spaceflight  dehydrates 
humans.  Dr.  Joan  Vernikos-Danielis  of  ARC’S biomedical  research  division 
would  use  a head-down  method  in prolonged  bed  rest  for  the  study;  the  rush 
of  blood  to the head  in  the first exposure to zero gravity  might  trigger the body 
mechanism  that  eliminated  fluids  and  salts.  The  Soviets  for  some  time  had 
been  using  bed  rest  with  head  down  6 ”   from  the  horizontal  to  simulate 
weightlessness.  Usable  measurements  were  not  obtainable  during  actual 
spaceflight  because  of  the  heavy  demands  on  astronauts  i n   the  first  stages  of 
a  mission.  (ARC  Release  80-68;  NASA  Release  80-131) 

LaRC  staff  working  this  summer  at  NOAA’s  National  Severe  Storms 
Laboratory  at  Norman,  Ok la . ,   guided  a  modified  F-106B  je t   fighter  plane 
through  severe southwest  thunderstorms to show that lightning  could strike not 
jus t  once but  two or  even  three  times  in  the  same place.  Most  lightning study 
had  been  at  ground  level;  LaRC  was  studying  its  effect  on  planes  in  flight. 
The   F-106,  holder  of  a  world  single-engine  speed  record  set  in  the  1950s, 
was  still used  by  the Air  Force and  could  f l y  up to 50,000 feet (15,250 meters); 
most  flights  would  be  around  15,000 feet  (4,500 meters),  the  altitude  where 
lightning was  most  statistically  likely  to  strike.  LaliC  used  an  F-106B on  loan 
from  DFRC,  considered  top  choice  for  the mission  because  of  its  thick  wing 
skins  and  its  larger-than-average  bay  with  roorn  for  much  experimental 
equipment. 
All  F-106B  work  was  on  storm  hazards,  divided  into  those  that  did  o r   did 
not  involve  lightning  (those  unrelated  to  lightning  were  turbulence,  wind 
shear,  and  storm-hazards  correlation).  Hazards  from  storms  were  factors  i n  
aircraft operations and design.  Through  the summer, WFC  instruments would 
map  thunderstorms  and  the  exact  location  of  the  F-106B in  them,  to  compare 
with pilot and instrument observations.  (NASA R e k a s e  80-130; LaRC Release 
80-56) 

August  13:  W FC   repor ted   that  it  had  m a d e   nighttime  electric-field 
measurements  in  the  “middle  atmosphere”  from  balloon  ceiling  to  the 
ionosphere  (30 to  100 kilometers),  to extend measurement  capability  into this 

194 

AUGUST  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

region, and to compare techniques simultaneously on a worldwide basis. Dur- 
ing  the  past  decade  scientists  had  become  able  to  obtain  reliable  data 
e l sewhe re   in  the   a tmo sphe re   ( troposphere ,   s tra tosphere ,   ionosphere ,  
magnetosphere, and  even  in  deep  space) but  not  in  the  middle  region.  WFC  
used  rockets  and a balloon  for  its local  experiments; radars  in Massachusetts, 
Alaska,  Peru,  Puerto Rico,  France,  and  Scandinavia made  supporting ground 
measurements. 
At  8 :35   p.m.  EDT  August  13,  WFC  launched  a  hundred-thousand  cubic- 
foot balloon  inflated with  helium,  carrying a 21-kilogram (46-pound) payload 
to  measure  AC  and  DC  electric  fields  from  to  10  kHz in  the  middle  at- 
mosphere. The  mission ended  10 hours, and a chase plane located the payload 
near  Roanoke,  Va.  At  10:40 p.m.  EDT,  WFC  launched  a  two-stage Nike- 
Orion  rocket  carrying  a 232-kilogram  (510-pound) payload  that  reached  peak 
altitude of  90.2.kilometers  (56  miles)  and  recorded  data  during  both  ascent 
and  descent. The  payload  included a water-recovery system;  it was  recovered 
at  11:58  p.m,  and  returned  to  WFC. 
At  11:ll  p.m.  EDT,  WFC  launched  a  single-stage Super Arcas  to  reach  90 
kilometer  (58-mile)  altitude,  carrying  an  experiment  called  Blunt  Probe  to 
measure  electric  fields  as  well  as  positive  and  negative  conductivity  in  the 
middle  region,  for  comparison  with  balloon  and  Nike-Orion  measurement. 
(WFC   Release  80-11) 

ARC  would  close  the  free  world’s  largest wind  tunnel  for  an  $85  million 
modification. The  40 x  80 foot (E x 24 meter) tunnel, in continuous use since 
completed in  1944,  would have a 6W-foot (183-meter) addition to house a new 
test  section  80  x EO  feet  (24  x 37  meters)  with  an  a ir   intake  362  feet  (110 
meters) wide and  132 feet  (40 meters) high.  The six 6,000-hp electric motors 
used  since  1944 would  be  replaced  with  22,500-hp  units,  raising  drive  from 
36,000  hp   to  135,000 hp.  (NASA  Release  80-125) 

NASA  reported  results of  a  coordinated balloon  and  rocket  launch a t  WFC  
August  13  to  measure  fair-weather  electric  fields.  A   balloon  carrying 
Aerospace  Corporation  instruments  measured  vector  electric  fields  on  six 
booms  and evaluated the data with  an on-board COSMAC microprocessor. At 
30-kilometer  altitude,  it  saw  unexpectedly  large  fields  for  about  one  hour. 
Rockets carrying payloads from Cornel1 and  Penn State Universities launched 
20 minutes  apart  during the balloon  flight, both  saw  anomalously  large elec- 
tric  fields that  peaked  near  70  kilometers. The  results would  call  for revision 
of  present theories,  as  they  suggested that  some  other  generator of  electricity 
was  active in  addition to  the thunderstorm-driven system and  the  ionospheric 
system.  (NASA  D l y   Acm Rp t ,   Sept  23/80) 

August  20:  NASA  announced  a  student  involvement project,  a jo in t   activity 
with  the  NSTA.  Up  to  200   semifinalists  in  a  competition  to  develop  ex- 
periments for flight on the Shuttle and  their teachers would attend preliminary 

195 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1980 

conferences  in  10 regions  to discuss  the proposals  with  other  students as well 
as NASA  and  industry  scientists;  many  of  the  regional  conferences would  be 
at  NASA  centers.  NASA  awarded  the  science  teachers’  group  a  contract  to 
conduct  the  competition  and  select  the  winners. 
From  the  200,  10  would  be  selected  whose  concepts  would  best  use  the 
capabilities of  the  Shuttle. Th e  10 national winners would attend a special con- 
ference  at  KSC  late  in  1981;  all  entrants  would  receive  a  certificate  of  par- 
ticipation.  Shuttle  flights  should  begin  in  March  1981;  the  winning  ex- 
periments  might  go  on  flights  in  1981 or   1982.  (NASA  Release  80-132) 

Augusr  2 2 :  JSC reported on its new water-immersion facility  (WIF) for Shuttle 
crew  training.  MSFC   would  furnish  some  payload  training  mock-ups;  JSC 
would  build  others  including  a  full-sized  Shuttle bay.  The  new  pool,  measur- 
ing  33  x  78  x  25   feet  and  located  in  a  building  formerly  housing  an  Apollo 
manned  centrifuge,  would  hold  half  a  million  gallons-as  much  water  as  25 
average  backyard  swimming pools-heated 
to  a  constant  85 O F  for  diver com- 
fort  over  long  periods  of  time.  It  would  replace  a  25-foot-diameter tank  built 
in  the  mid-1960s  for  Gemini  and  Apollo  emergency  training. 
Filter  and  chemical  systems  would  reduce  bacteria  and  provide  a  clear 
medium  needed  for  underwater  photography.  Six  submersible  television 
cameras, two  operated by  divers and  four mounted  under water,  would  follow 
the  training  operations,  with  pan,  tilt,  and  zoom  operated  from  a  console  at 
the pool  edge.  The  facility  would  include a  5-ton air-powered  overhead  crane 
to  lift trainers and mock-ups  out of  the water  (and  lzliminate electrical  shock), 
as   well  as   air  compressors  to  fill  scuba  tanks.  (JSC  Roundup, Aug  22/80,  1) 

August  25:  ARC  reported  on  a  space-technology  assessment  workshop  held 
a t  the University  of Santa Clara in California on robotics,  automation,  remote- 
l y  operated  systems,  and artificial  intelligence vital  to  future missions  such as 
an  orbiting  space  factory,  a  self-directed  deep-space  robot  explorer,  a  fully 
automated  Earth-resources  and  Earth-environment  monitor,  o r   a  lunar  base 
able to expand through self-replication of  its elements. The   10-week workshop 
would  end August  29  with  an oral  report  and  submission of  other  reports  for 
publication. 
Drawing  on work  by  research  institutions such as  Stanford  University,  MIT, 
and  SRI  International  as  developers  of  computer-based  “intelligence,”  the 
program  participants  included  18 professors of  eng.ineering,  mathematics,  and 
science,  15  NASA  engineers  and  scientists,  and  several  representatives  of 
manufacturer  groups.  Th e  workshop  emphasized  four  areas: 
-A  versatile  “intelligent”  satellite  information  system  able  to  select and 
interpret  the  data  from  its  sensors  to  give  specific  items  to  a  specific  user, 
unlike  previous  systems  recording  everything  they  saw  to  produce  great 
masses  of  superfluous  data. 
-A  deep-space  exploration  system  for  reconnaissance,  exploration,  and 
intensive  surface  study  of  planetary  bodies,  specifically Saturn’s moon Titan, 

196 

AUGUST  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

bigger  than  the  planet  Mercury   and  with  its  own  atmosphere.  Uniting  func- 
tions  of  previously  separate craft  (orbiter, atmosphere probe,  mobile  surface 
explorer),  the vehicle would  observe an  unknown  environment and modify  its 
“knowledge model”  and exploration techniques according  to  its observations. 
Systems  of  this  sort  could  explore distant  bodies  in   the  solar  system  such  as 
outer  planets  and  their  satellites, comets,  and  asteroids;  such  systems would 
be  required  for  exploring planetary  systems of  other  stars when  communica- 
tions  distances  and  flight  time  of  many  years  would  preclude  manned 
involvement. 
-A  permanent  automated  Earth-orbiting  facility  initially  geared  to  pro- 
cess  Earth-supplied  raw  materials  in  the  space  environment;  later  it  would 
make  progressively  larger  use  of  nonterrestrial materials  from  the  asteroids 
and  moons  of  Earth  and  other  planets.  The   workshop  considered  a   number  
of  processing  and  manufacturing  techniques  adaptable  to  a   space  environ- 
ment,  starter  facilities  capable  of  producing  a   wide  range  of  items,  and  the 
tools  that  would  be  needed  to  expand  the  facility’s  capabilities. 
-A 
factory  on  the  Moon  to  use  lunar  materials  and  replicate  itself,  its 
first  major  product  being  another  lunar  factory  or  factory  segment.  Such  a  
self-replicating facility had been of  theoretical interest for  some time as a  way 
of  rapidly  expanding  space  resources.  The   workshop  had  studied  types  of 
logical  organization  for  such  a   factory,  and  requirements  for  an  Earth-based 
demonstration  of  the  concept.  (ARC  Releases  80-69,  80-70;  NASA  Release 
80-134) 

August  26:  Press  reports  said  that  the  U .S .  A ir   Force  wanted  to  spend  about 
$1.4 billion to replace the wings  of  81  “trouble-ridden C5A  cargo transports.” 
In  1965,  Lockheed  Corporation  had  decided  to  reduce  the  weight  of  C5A 
wings by  5 tons each,  so as to  underbid  Boeing on  a  contract for building  air- 
craft capable of  carrying  outsized  loads.  Robert  B.  Ormsby,  Jr.,  president of 
Lockheed-Georgia, which  built  the planes,  told  a   congressional hearing  that 
the  company’s  sole  objective  was  to  reduce  wing  weight  to  “ the   absolute 
minimum  within  the  design  requirements”  and  denied  any  company  plan  to 
replace  the  wings  la ter   when  they  should  prove  unsatisfactory.  Th e  
10,000-pound weight reduction apparently caused cracks in  the aircraft calling 
for wing  replacement:  “Ormsby  did  not  explain why  Lockheed  did  not know 
that the modification would  reduce the effective life  span of  the wing  from  the 
30,000  hours  specified  by  the  Air  Force  to  an  estimated  7,100  hours,”  the 
Washington Star noted. 
Principal focus of  the hearings  was  on whether  the  30,000-hour service life 
presented  by  Lockheed  and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  as justification  for  the  $1.4 
billion  wing-replacement  program  was  really  necessary.  Sen .   William  Prox- 
mire  (D-Wis.), chairman  of  the  subcommittee on  priorities  and  economy  in 
government of  the House-Senate Joint Economic  Committee,  said Lockheed’s 
$2  billion  cost overrun on  the  contract, discovered i n   1968, was  the  largest in 
defense  procurement  history.  He  said  the  $1.16  billion  Lockheed-Georgia 

197 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1980 

would  get  for  wing  replacement  would  be  “the  biggest  cost  in  history  to  cor- 
rect  a mistake.”  When  Ormsby  said  that  his  firm  would  make  a  $140 million 
profit on  the contract, Proxmire said “a  lot of businessmen would  love to make 
a  mistake  like  that.” 
The  subcommittee heard David  Keating,  legislative director  of  the National 
Taxpayers Union  (NTU) ,  charge that  such a profit  would  set up  “a  terrible  in- 
centive system.”  Th e  message to defense  contractors would be,  “The  more in- 
efficient you  are,  the more  profit  you make. Build failures into the  system  and 
you’ll  be  rewarded.”  Ormsby  responded  that,  in  terms  of  the  critical  need  for 
the C5A  in  the nation’s defense, the $1.4 billion was a  “bargain”  for taxpayers. 
Pau l   C.  Paris,  director  of  t h e   center  for  fracture mechanics  at  Washington 
University  (St.  Louis),  said  that  the U.S.  A ir   Force  set  up  a Structural Infor- 
mation  Enhancement  Program  (SIEP) after  receiving a  3-volume  report  from 
Rand  Corporation  suggesting  that  C5As  could  serve  under  “present  con- 
straints on  operational  use”  until  the year  2000 without  significant modifica- 
t ion .   The   U.S.  Air  Force had  put  “severe  restrictions  on  the  C5A  to  prevent 
it  from  being  flown  in  accord  with  its  design  specifications,”  Paris  said,  or  
it  would  have  lasted  “fewer  than  3,000  flight  hours”;  it  was  “absolutely  in- 
credible”  that.a  major  aircraft  producer would  miss  the  fatigue  life of  a  wing 
by  a  factor  of  more  than  10.  He  said  the  SIEP   assumed  “since  the  [wing 
replacement]  was  going  to  be  done,  other  less  expensive  options  were  not  to 
be   considered.”  (Paris  was  the  only  member  of  the  SIEP  steering  committee 
not  an   employee  of  Lockheed  or   the  U.S.  Air  Force.) 
Th e   Rand  repor t   recommended   appointing  a  panel  of  independent 
specialists  to  assess  the  situation;  Proxmire,  Pari!;,  and  the  NTU   wanted  the 
assessment  done by  the  congressional  Office  of  Technology  Assessment.  ( W  
Star,  Aug  26 /8 0 ,  A-8;  W Post,  Aug  26180, A-8) 

August  27:  ARC  announced  selection  of  Burroughs  Corporation  and  Control 
Data  Corporation  to  study  system design for its supercomputer,  the numerical 
aerodynamic  simulator,  that  would  aid  i n   developing and  testing  new  designs 
for  aircraft  and  other  flight  vehicles  and  perform  research  in  areas  of  fluid 
flow  such  as  meteorology,  gas  dynamics,  and  coinputational  chemistry.  Th e  
two  parallel  fixed-price  studies,  each  valued  at  $350,000,  should  produce  a 
data processor 40 times  faster  and  with  a high-speed memory  60 times  larger 
than  those  presently  i n   use. 
The   new  computer  would  use  fluid-flow  equations  for  continuous  calcula- 
tion  of  three-dimensional  a ir   flows  simultaneously  at  thousands  of  points;  it 
could  simulate conditions of  wind-tunnel  testing  far  more cheaply  than  actual 
model  tests.  It  would  do  a billion  operations  per  second, using  a data  base  of 
40 billion  words,  and  could handle  100 users  simultaneously.  ARC,  with  pro- 
ject  responsibility  for  the  numerical  simulator,  had  been  working  on  the 
system  since  1975.  (ARC  Release  80-71;  NASA  F.elease  80-135) 

198 

AUGUST  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NASA  announced  selection  of  McDonnell  Douglas  Technical  Services 
Company  to  negotiate  a  cost-plus-award-fee  contract  to  support  JSC  STS 
engineering and operations from October  1980 through  September  1986. The  
contract,  divided  into  three  increments, would  cover  technical  and  analytical 
support in  engineering-systems analyses,  flight design,  flight operations,  and 
management-systems support. Contractor estimate of  the cost for  the first two- 
year  increment, plus a  firm two-year option, would be about $25 million. JSC 
would  manage  the  contract.  (JSC  Release  80-053; NASA  Release  80-136) 

August  29:  NASA  announced  that  the  GOES-D  meteorological  satellite, 
scheduled  for  early  launch  from KSC  for  NOAA,  would  carry  a new  type  of 
instrument:  the  visible-infrared  spin-scan  radiometer  (VISSR)  atmospheric 
sounder.  GSFC   would  join  with  the  University  of  Wisconsin  in  long-term 
evaluation of  the  V ISSR s   usefulness  in  predicting  severe  local  storms,  hur- 
ricanes,  and  other  short-term  weather  phenomena. 
Earlier  spacecraft  in  the  series  had  provided  24-hour  two-dimensional 
cloudcover  photography;  the  new  sounder  would  measure  temperature  and 
moisture  in  various  altitude  layers besides  returning high-resolution  images. 
The  synchronous GOES satellites, useful in observing storms during develop- 
ment,  required  observation  schedules,  data  processing,  and  data  analysis 
markedly  different from  those  for  polar-orbiting satellites such  as the TIROS 
series.  GSFC,  NOAA,  and  the  University  of  Wisconsin  had  set  up  facilities 
over  the  past  few  years  to  handle  the  atmospheric  sounder  data.  (NASA 
Release  80-137) 

In the last of  a  series on  “Life Aboard  the Space Shuttle,” KSC’s Spaceport 
News  described  the  unisex  space  suits provided  for  the pilot  and  the  ranking 
mission  specialist on each  flight. No   longer tailor-made for  an  astronaut,  the 
Shuttle space  suit would  come  i n   small, med ium ,   and  large  sizes to  be  worn 
by  men  o r   women.  It  consisted  of  an  upper  and  a  lower  section  snapping 
together  with  sealing  rings,  with  a  life-support  system  in  the  upper  half. 
In  an  emergency,  each  of  the  other  crew  members  would  use  a  ‘‘personal 
rescue  enclosure,”  a  34-inch-diameter ball  fitted with  life-support and  com-  
munications  gear  for  one   person.  Nonsuited  crew  would  climb  into  the 
enclosures,  and  the  suited  astronauts  would  transfer  them   from  a  disabled 
vessel  to  a  rescue  ship  by  carrying  them,  by  attaching  them  to  the  remote- 
manipulator  arm   used  for  deploying  payloads,  o r   by  using  a  pulley  line bet- 
ween  the  two  spacecraft.  (Spaceport New s ,   Aug  29/80,  4) 

During August: NASA distributed its Program P lan ,  Fiscal  Years I981 through 
1985, containing  “initial  guidance  for  NASA’s  activities over  the  short-term 
and ,  to  some  extent, the long-term future.”  The  introduction noted  the current 
drive  to  curb  inflation  and  resulting  cuts  in  the  federal  budgetL‘including 
NASA’s’’-but 
ca l led   for  a  percep t ion   of  th e   work   the  agency  was 
technologically ready  to undertake “and should undertake in the interest of  the 

199 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1980 

Nation.”  Citing problems raised  by  “absence of  major new  initiatives,”  the in- 
troduction  called  for  “sound,  logical,  technological  progression  toward 
achievement”  of  U.S.  goals  in  aeronautics  and  c .;p ace. 
Major  goals  to  be  met  by  the  plan’s  46  “ma jor   initiatives”  were: 
f i l l  the transportation  and orbital operatilons needs of  science and ap- 
-to 
plications  space  missions  and  most  transportation  needs  of  national  security 
space  missions; 
-to 
in  remote  sensing,  communications, 
apply  space  technology 
materials  processing,  and  technology  transfer  that  “hold  promise  for  im- 
mediate  or  potential  benefits  to  humanity”; 
-to  continue  developing  aeronautical  technology; 
improve  “by  a  factor  of  10  to  100”  NASA’s  ability  to  acquire, 
-to 
transmit,  and  process  data; 
-to  advance  knowledge of  how  energy  is  transported  from  the  Sun  and 
through  the  interplanetary  medium  and  how  thait  energy  effects  Earth; 
-to  ensure good health  and performance of  humans  in space and to  study 
the  effects  of  gravity  on  living  systems; 
-to  understand  the origin  and distribution  o-F life  in  the  universe and  the 
relationship  between  life  and  its  habitat. 
Major  initiatives  in  the  field  of  aeronautics  numbered  6 ;   in  space  science, 
8 ;   in  space  and  terrestrial  applications,  20;  and  in  space  transportation 
systems,  12,  for  a  total  of  46. 
Half  the  initiatives  listed  in  a  similar  program  plan  (for  FY80-FY84)  had 
been  postponed:  Of  the  23  missions,  11  were  previously  scheduled  for  1981; 
7  for  1982;  4  for  1983;  and  1  for  1984.  Of  the  11  previously  scheduled  for 
1981, 9  were  now  postponed  to  1982;  and  1 each ,   to  1983 and  1984.  Of  the 
7  missions  previously  scheduled  for  1982,  5  were  postponed  to  1983;  1,  to 
1984;  and  1,  to  a  time  “to  be  determined.”  01:  the  4  missions  previously 
scheduled  for  1983,  1 was  scheduled  for  1984; and  3,  for  1985. Th e  sole mis- 
sion  previously  scheduled  for  1984 had  been  postponed  to  1985. 
International programs  in which  NASA would  tie concerned during the next 
fiscal years would  include cooperative activities  (Space Shuttle and Spacelab; 
space  applications  such  as   remote  sensing,  geodynamics,  materials  process- 
ing,  and  communications;  space  science  such  as   astrophysics,  planetary 
research,  solar-terrestrial  relationships,  and  solar  energy;  exchanges  of  ex- 
periments  with  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  the  Soviet  Union);  reim- 
bursable  launches;  and  foreign  competition  in  remote  sensing,  communica- 
tions,  spacecraft  launching,  and  aircraft  development. 
The  volume  included probable  schedules  for  NASA  missions and  tables  of 
funding and  development needed  to  carry  out  the program.  Space transporta- 
tion  funding,  for  instance,  showed  increases  in  FY81  and  FY82,  then  leveled 
off.  Funding  for  applications  showed  rapid  increase;  that  for  aeronautics, 
space technology,  and  space science would  also  increase but  a t  a  slower  rate. 
The  235-page program plan contained detailed lists of  activities i n  each pro- 
gram  area ,   with  graphs  and  tables  showing  schedules  and  funding  for  that 

2 0 0  

AUGUST  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

area.  The   book  concluded  with  an  index  and  a  list  of  the  abbreviations and 
acronyms  used  in  NASA’s  programs.  (Text,  NASA  Hq  Mgmt  Sppt  Ofc, 
distributed  Aug  80) 

Aviation  Week and  Space  Technology reported  that  the  Secretary of  the  In- 
terior  had  asked  the  Secretary  of  Commerce   to  cancel  the  Hughes-built 
thematic mapper  [see April  141  that was  to form part of  an operational Landsat 
system, originally scheduled for launch on  Landsat-D. Cecil D.  Andrus wrote 
Philip M .  Klutznick  that  the main  obstacle to  achieving an operational Land- 
sat  system  was  “ the   presumption”  that  Landsat-D  research  missions  must 
come   first.  Andrus  noted  that  Interior  had  proposed  two  years  ago  to  give 
priority  to  solid-state multispectral  linear-array technology  [see June  161  in- 
stead of  the  “elaborate,  expensive,  and  research-oriented’’  thematic mapper. 
Andrus,  who  Aviation  Week  and  Space  Technology  said  was  “extremely 
concerned  about  competition”  from  France,  Japan,  and  the  Soviet  Union  in  
remote  sensing,  emphasized  the  “implications  for  the  President’s  policy  of 
leadership in  space if France and others are able to offer better resolution data 
at lower cost before our core system becomes  operational.” (Avwk ,  Aug  11/80, 
17) 

The  British Interplanetary Society’s publication  Spaceflight  carried  an  arti- 
cle by  one  of  its fellows (barrister Cyril Horsford, also a director of  the Inter- 
national  Institute of  Space Law),  on  the  agreement covering  the  activities of 
states  on  the  Moon  and  other  celestial  bodies,  opened  for  signature  at  the 
United Nations  (U .N .)  December  18,  1979. The  ‘‘moon treaty,”  10  years  in  the 
making,  was  adopted by  the U.N.  General Assembly  as  a  resolution;  some  of 
its  principles were  already  in  the  first outer  space  treaty  in  1967,  but  several 
nations,  “notably  the USSR,” had expressed the need  for a separate agreement 
specially  directed  at  exploration  of  the  Moon .   The   treaty  now  awaiting 
signature would apply to all bodies in  the solar system and their orbits, a s  well 
as  the  Moon ;   the  text  (reproduced  a s   appendix  to  Horsford’s  article)  was 
already  the  subject  of  controversy among  international lawyers  and  others  in 
two  particular  areas. 
F irs t ,  Article IV said use  of  the Moon  was  “ the  province  of  all mankind”; 
Article  X I   said  the  Moon  and  its  resources  were  “ the   common  heritage  of 
mankind.”.The  difference had  raised  questions whether  the meaning  was  the 
same.  Article  I of  the  1967  space treaty  had  used  the  words  “province of  all 
mankind,”  whereas  the  words  ‘‘common  heritage”  first  appeared  during  a 
Law  of  the  Sea  conference,  when  a  moratorium  on  exploration preceded  a 
General Assembly  resolution affirming the common-heritage principle. Inter- 
national law  had not defined the limits of  the principle; the new  “moon  treaty” 
would  reserve  privileges  under  it  to  States  Parties  to  it  (although  “all 
mankind”  would be beneficiaries). Also,  the concept of  “common heritage of 
mankind”  was  apparently  limited  to  the  terms  of  Article  X I . l .  
Second, the third paragraph of  Article XI would apparently prohibit any ap- 

c-3 

201 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1980 

propriation  of  resources  found  on  the  surface  or  subsurface  of  the  Moon;  i n  
its literal meaning,  this  wording  would preclude  any  mining o r  exploitation of 
valuable  minerals  found  there  in  future.  Some felt  the  language was  “merely 
legal,”  reaffirming  the  existing  principle  that  no  legal  property  in  lunar 
resources  in place could accrue to an  exploring stale. Th e  U.S. delegate to the 
United  Nation’s  legal  subcommittee  was  confident  that  the  wording  did  not 
place  any  moratorium  on  exploration,  pending  th8e international  “regime  of 
management”  required  under Article  XI.5.  Horsford  noted  that  opposition  to 
Article XI had already  led the U.S.  Senate to postpone ratification of  the treaty 
this  year. 
Although  the  1967  space  treaty  “clearly  enshrined”  the  principle  of  non- 
sovereignty  over  celestial  bodies,  “some  quarters”  feared  that  such   a  clause 
would  inhibit  space  powers  (particularly  the  United  States)  from  embarking 
on  “ t h e   costly  adventure  of  lunar  exploitation”  while  such  a  restraint  existed 
or  where  an  international  regime  of  shared  resources  would  result  in  little o r  
no  profit.  “This  danger  is  already  apparent  i n .  . .deep   sea  mining,  when  an 
international  regime  is  involved,”  said  Horsford.  (SF:  July-Aug  80,  273) 

The  NAA  reported that Howard Hughes’s Spruce Goose would  remain  intact 
under  an  agreement  signed  by  the  Summa  Corporation,  executor  of  the 
Hughes  estate,  with  the  Aero  Club  of  Southern  Calif.  (NAA’s  California 
chapter) and  with  the  Wrather  Corporation  which  would  display  the  aircraft 
near  the  Queen  Mary  a t   the  Port  of  Long  Beach.  :Summa, under  pressure  to 
vacate  the  hangar  site,  had  announced  plans  to  dismantle  the  Goose  and 
display  parts  of  it  at  the  Smithsonian  and  eight  other  museums  [see May  23, 
June  171.  Now  i t   would  transfer  the  flying  boat  to  the  Aero  Club  after  agree- 
ment on  details of  display  and management.  (NAA newsletter,  July/Aug 80, 7) 

NASA  reported  on  its  17-year-old art program  of  inviting  well-known  artists 
to  document  major  agency  activities.  Among participants  were  traditionalists 
like  Peter  Hurd  and  James Wyeth  and  modernists  like  Robert  Rauschenburg 
and Lamar Dodd.  NASA  had  stationed artists at  the closest possible  observa- 
tion  points  during  Moon  launches  and  on  recovery  ships  when  astronauts 
returned  from  space  and  let  them  pilot  simulators  of  travel  to  make-believe 
moons. 
In  1977 NASA  commissioned  Robert  T.  McCall  to document  the  rollout of 
Enterprise  at  DFRC  (McCall  was  muralist  for  the  National  Air  and  Space 
Museum).  In  1978 Franklin McMahon  and  Tom  O’ l lara  painted  the first  flight 
of  the  orbiter.  Arthur  Shilstone  and  Clayton  Pond  covered  vibration  tests  at 
MSFC ;  Shilstone and Nicholas  Solovieff  recorded  Shuttle progress,  including 
rollout  i n  May  1979 at KSC. NASA  would  send a team  to paint  the  launch and 
landing  of  Columbia.  Th e   New  York  Society  of  Illustrators  had  given 
Shilstone a  certificate  of  merit  for  his  painting  “The   Crawler:  Rollout  of  the 
Enterprise”  which  had  been  i n   an  international  exhibition,  including 

202 

AUGUST  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Japan  and  China,  and  would  appear  in  the  society’s  1980 art  annual.  (NASA 
Actv,  Aug  80,  18) 

Science  magazine  carried  R .   Ganapathy’s  report  on  existence  in  Earth’s 
Cretaceous-Tertiary geological boundary  of  debris from a major meteorite im- 
pact 65  million years ago, discussing the possible effects of  such a catastrophe 
as  extinction  of  the  dinosaurs.  (Sc ience ,  Aug  22/80, 921) 

NASA  announced  appointment  of  Roy  S .   Estess  as  deputy  manager  of 
NSTL ,   replacing Henry  E Auter,  who  retired  in  February  1 9 9 .  Estess joined 
NSTL in  1966, working on  the Saturn V acceptance tests and directing the ad- 
vanced  planning  for  Shuttle  testing  at  NSTL.  Since  1977  he  had  managed 
satellite  remote-sensing  research  in  NSTL‘s  Earth  resources  laboratory. 
(NASA  anno  Aug  29/80) 
-The  N e w   York Ernes  reported the death  from a heart attack at her home  
in California of  Jacqueline Cochran,  first woman  to  f l y   faster  than  the  speed 
of  sound  and  director during WWII of  the Women’s Air-Force Service Pilots 
(WASPS),  which  trained  more   than  1,200 women  to  f l y   transport  planes. 
Brought  up  in  poverty  and  working  in  a  cotton  gin  in  Georgia  at  the  age  of 
9,  she took  her  first  flying  lesson  when  2 2   and  in  1935 was  the  first women 
to  enter  the  Bendix  transcontinential a ir   race,  winning  the  Bendix  trophy  in 
1938.  She had  married  Floyd  Odlum  in  1936 and  served  as  a  captain  in  the 
British Air Force Auxiliary, returning to  the United  States after Pearl Harbor. 
She  set more   than  200  flying  records,  breaking  the  sound  barrier  i n   1953  in 
an F-86 j e t  fighter  plane. In  1961  she  set  a  new  altitude record of  55,253 feet 
and  in  1964  a  women’s  world  speed  record  of  1,429  mph  in  an  F-104G 
Superstar.  She retired in  1970 as colonel in  the Air Force Reserve.  (NY  l ime s ,  
Aug  l0/80,  40) 

ESA  observed  the  fifth anniversary of  its  first satellite, Cos B,  designed  for 
an operational life of  one year.  ESA  commended the quality  of  the  spacecraft 
and  its  subsystems,  especially  the  spark  chamber   for  which  no  space  ex- 
perience  existed  at  the  time  of  its  construction.  The   eighth  satellite built  by 
European  industry  for  ESA’s  predecessor,  the  European  Space  Research 
Organization  (ESRO),  Cos B  made  the  first  complete  detailed  survey  of  the 
Milky Way  in  high-energy  gamma-ray  spectra and  discovered a  score of  new  
gamma-ray  sources. The   spacecraft was  made by  the CESAR consortium  led 
by  Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom with  industrial  firms  of  seven  ESA  member  
states:  Belgium,  Denmark ,   France,  West  Germany,  Italy,  Spain,  and  the 
United  Kingdom.  (ESA  Info  21) 

Progress  reports  on  the  continuing  flight  of  Leonid  Ryumin  and  Valery 
Popov  in  the Sulyut  6-Soyuz 37  orbiting space station noted  that  their mission 
had lasted  115 days as of  August  1. The  cosmonauts were busy  redocking Soyuz 
37  (which  Pham  Tuan  and  Viktor  Gorbatko had  used  to  get  to  the  Salyut) to 

203 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AEROKAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1980 

make  room  for more  supply-ship missions.  The  visitors had  returned to Earth 
safely July  31  i n  t h e  Soyuz 36 craft; next on the list  for the long-term occupants 
was  “cleaning  of  the premises  of  the  orbital  complex”  and  physical  training, 
Tass  said. 
On  August  5 Tass  reported  completion of  various crystal experiments  using 
Splav  and Kristall  apparatus  in  “cosmic  material  :studies” of  semiconductors 
cast from gallium arsenide, and crystals of  indium ,antimonide and gadolinium 
cobalt,  a  magnetic material.  Tass  August  9 reported  a  first:  crystallization of 
a  substance  from  a  smelt  in  “directional  microgravitation.”  Th e  idea  was  to 
form  crystals at more  than  “minimum  microacce1t:ration.”  Th e  crew  put  into 
the Splav  an ampule of  raw  material and activated  it;  they  then  used  the  space 
station’s m o t o r s   i n   a  t w i s t i n g   maneuve r   during  w h i c h   t h e   s ta t ion   b e c a m e   “a 
sort of  centrifuge”  for a  few  hours.  Acceleration,  zero at the center,  “near  the 
transfer  compartment  and  transfer  chamber.  . .was  at  its  maximum.” 
Previous  experiments  had  always  been  during  sleep periods,  as  movement 
of  people  around the  station affected  the  results.  For more  data on  crystal  for- 
mation  in  orbit,  the  crew  tried  i t   i n   the  span  betwleen  Earth  gravity  and  zero 
gravity.  Tass  called  the  test  a  first  step  in   a  new  :science of  “weightlessness 
physics”  whose  practical  conclusions  were  already  being  felt.  On  August  12 
Tass  noted  the  crew  had  been  in  space for  18  weeks;  further  tests were going 
o n ,   making  special  glass  in  zero  gravity  and  monocrystals  of  germanium. 
On  August  2 2 ,   Moscow  radio  said  that  this  expedition  had  had  more 
technological  tests  than  any  previous  ones:  the  Isparitel  apparatus  alone had 
provided more  than  186 samples, most of them delivered  to  scientists on  Earth 
by  Pham  Tuan  and  Viktor  Gorbatko.  One  substance,  a  solidified  solution  of 
cadmium  telluroid  and  mercury  telluroid,  would  be   impossible  to  obtain  on 
Earth  where  “when  molten  they  separate  out  as  oil  and  vinegar  do   when 
poured  into  the  same  glass.”  The   large  crystals  of  this  obtainable  in  space 
would  permit  “heat  viewing”  or   detection  of  negligible  variations  i n  
temperature,  important  to  industry  and  to  medicine.  (FBIS, Tass  in  English; 
Moscow  Dom  Svc,  Aug  1-26/80) 

204 

September 

September  2 :   JSC  reported  that  its  television  engineers  were  working  on 
modifications of  a U.S.  Air Force camera for live television broadcast by  crew 
members  on  spacewalks outside the  Space  Shuttle orbiter. NASA  would  buy 
three  systems  for  flight,  training,  and  qualifications at  a  cost  (including  in- 
tegration,  testing,  and  mission  planning)  of  about  $750,000. 
The  camera (which would  include a battery pack,  FM  transmitter, antenna, 
and  a  receiver inside the orbiter, with  other  support hardware),  located on  an 
astronaut's  visor  assembly,  as  miners'  lights are mounted  on  their  foreheads, 
would  see  what  the  astronaut  saw  and  send  black-and-white  pictures  to  a 
television monitor watched by  crew members on the spacecraft. A  wide-angle 
lens  would  give  a  19.7-mm  focal  length  with  a  32"  horizontal  field-of-view; 
lens  range  would  be  present  to  focus  from  about  15  inches  to  the  distance 
needed.  The   inside crew  members  could  see hardware or  spacewalk activity 
in  real  time,  helping  make  joint  decisions  on  repair.  (JSC  Release  80-052) 

September  4 :  NASA  issued  a  prelaunch  summary  of  the  GOES-D   mission, 
sixth  of  a  series  designed  for  continuous cloud-cover  observation  from  syn- 
chronous orbit.  The  program had  two prototypes (Sms 1 and Sms 2) developed 
by  NASA  and  follow-on craft  (GOES-A through GOES-F), funded by  NOAA 
of  the DOC.  The NOAA-funded craft were  designated Geostationary Opera- 
tional  Environmental  Satellites (GOES), 
Since the Srns  1 launch  in May  1974, the  satellites had  continuously viewed 
Western Hemisphere weather  patterns and  relayed  video  scenes from orbit a s  
par t   of  everyday  television  weather  reports.  The   reports  five  were  produced 
by  Ford Aerospace; GOES-D, GOES-E,  and GOES-F would be  from Hughes 
Aerospace. 
The  primary  instrument  on  previous craft  was  a  visiblehnfrared  spin-scan 
radiometer with one  visible and one  infrared channel.  GOES-D would be   the 
first  of  three  carrying  a  modified  VISSR  sounding the  atmosphere  in  12 in- 
frared  bands,  acquiring  temperature  and  moisture  data  profiles  at  various 
levels. 
NOAA's  National  Environmental  Satellite  Service  (NESS)  program  re- 
quired two  operating satellites at all times  to cover Atlantic  and Pacific ocean 
approaches,  as  well  as  the  American  landmass.  Sms  2  launched  in  1975  and 
Goes  3 launched in June 1978 were covering east and west stations, respective- 
ly;  Sms  1 and  Goes  1 and  Goes  2 ,  none  fully  functional, were on  operational 
standby.  GOES-D,  initially  located  at  9 0W  for  a  demonstration  of  the  at- 
mospheric  sounder, would  later  be  located  either  east  or  west  depending  on 
operating need.  Should one of  the operating craft fail before the demonstration 

205 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

S E P T EM B E R   1980 

ended ,   NASA  would  configure  a  time-sharing  operating  mode  to  continue 
coverage.  (NASA  MOR  E-612-80-02  [prelaunch  summary],  Sept  4 /80)  

NASA  announced  that  JPL‘s  Dr.  Stephen  P.  Symnott,  the  Voyager  project 
navigator  who  discovered  a  15th  moon  of  Jupiter  [see  May  61,  had  done   it 
again:  searching  through  Voyager  photographs  taken  in  1979  to  confirm 
discovery  of  a  14th  satellite,  he  discovered  a  16th. 
Th e  new  find  was  about  40  kilometers  (25  miles.)  in  diameter  and  circled 
the planet every  7 hours,  4 minutes, 3 0  seconds. the same process  had  located 
the  15th  satellite,  found  by  Synnott  i n   March  1980;  at  that  time,  he  thought 
he was confirming an earlier  sighting  of  a  14th moon because  they had  similar 
sizes  and  orbits.  B u t ,   upon  comparing  data  from   W y a g e r   I  and  E y a g e r   2 ,  
Synnott  found  that  “the  object  I  was  looking  at  was  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  planet-it  couldn’t  be  514,  so  it  had  to  be   a  new  one.”  Before  Voyager  1 
reached Saturn the planet was believed  to have  13 moons; a  14th (the one  Syn- 
nott  was  trying  to  confirm)  had  been  seen  i n   October  1979.  (NASA  Release 
90-139) 

September 5: Joseph B. Mahon, director  of  NASA expendable launch vehicles 
program,  said that  NASA  would  use  such vehicles  in  18 missions  through  the 
end  of  September  1981. Of these,  7 would be  flown o n  Deltas, 7 on Atlas  Cen- 
taurs,  3  on  the  solid-fuel  Scout,  and  1  on  the  Atlas  E 
Two  flights  would  carry  NASA  science  satellites;  NASA  would  launch  the 
other  16  (for  which  the  energy  would  be  reimbursed)  for  other  government 
agencies or  private firms.  Th e  latter would  include three weather  satellites for 
NOAA;  five  DOD   payloads;  and  eight  commercial  geosynchronous  com- 
munications  satellites  for  SBS,  RCA,  Comsat  General  Corporation,  and  the 
INTELSAT consortium.  Th e  Office of  Space Transportation  Systems  Opera- 
tions  would  run  the  program.  (NASA  Release  80-140) 

September  8:  DOC   announced  that  i t   had  upgraded  the  satellite  division  of 
NOAA and  renamed  it the National Earth  Satellite Service (NESS),  reflecting 
broader  responsibilities  for  the  former National  Environmental  Satellite Ser-  
vice.  Earlier  in  1980, NOAA  became  responsible  for  developing and  manag- 
ing  a  remote-sensing  satellite system  based  on  NASA’s  experimental  Landsat 
program. 
Since  1965, NOAA  had  managed  operational  weather  satellites whose  data 
served in navigation, commercial  fishing, and water-resource management as  
well  as   weather  forecasting.  The   greater  resolutioa  of  the  Landsat  system 
should offer similar monitoring as well  as  data for uses such as farming, urban 
planning,  and  mineral  exploration.  (DOC   Release  80-106) 

Th e  N Y   Eme s   reviewed  advances  in phototypesetting  technology,  including 
satellite transmission,  that had  made  i t   possible  for publications  to  print  iden- 
tical  copies  simultaneously  anywhere  in  the  world. 

206 

SEPTEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

“Co ld   type,”  the  first  generation  of  phototypesetting,  replaced  use   of  in- 
dividual  characters  with  a matrix  of  symbols  on  a  transparent  material.  Light 
sent  through  characters  produced  an  image  on  high-contrast  photographic 
paper .   T h e   second   gene ra t ion   of  type se t t ing   mach ine s   a l so   used   a 
photographic  negative  to  generate  characters,  but  used  digital  computer  scan 
to  produce  the  symbols,  recreating  them  on   a  cathode-ray  tube  a s  a  series  of 
minute dots o r  lines  reproduced  on photographic paper.  The  third  generation, 
developed  in   the  late  1960s,  encoded  text  on  a  disk  and  printed  ou t   entirely 
by  computer,  working  10  times  a s   fast  a s   previous  machines.  By  the  197Os, 
publications  such   a s   US. News  and  World Report, Newsweek,  and  the  New 
York  Ernes  had  switched  from  either  hot  type  or  less  sophisticated  cold  type 
to  the  third-generation  technology,  which  was  amenable  to  satellite  transmis- 
sion.  Some   of  the   machines  could  produce  en t ire  pages  of  newspapers  and 
magazines,  including  advertisements,  ar twork ,   and  text,  reducing  time  and 
cost  of  publication. 
A fourth generation  would abandon photographic  imaging  altogether:  using 
lasers,  it would produce  characters directly on paper  without  use of a cathode- 
ray  tube.  One   such  unit  had  the  advantage  of  producing  its  output  on  non- 
photographic  paper, made without  silver, a t  a price a third that of  conventional 
light-sensitive  paper.  (N Y   Ernes,  Sept  8/80,  D-5) 

INTELSAT  said  that  an  “extraordinary  session”  of  its  signatories  in 
Washington  had  authorized  increasing  the  organization’s  capital  ceiling  from  
$990  million  U.S.  to  $1.2  billion  to  buy  a  follow-on to  the  Intelsat  V  series 
of  satellites and  launch  vehicles  that  could  fill  “booming  wo r ld   d em and ’   for 
international  and  domestic  communications  until  the  Intelsat  VI   is  available 
around  1986. 
INTELSAT’s  announcement  said  that  the  actual  cost  per  unit  of  satellite 
communications was dropping steadily, in spite of  the  increased  investment re- 
quired;  its  charges  were  about  a  sixth  of  the  level  in  1965  when  the  first  In- 
telsat  went  into  service.  (INTELSAT  Release  80-18-1) 

September 9:  NASA  launched  the  fourth  geostationary  orbital  environmental 
satellite (GOES-D)  for NOAA  from ESMC  on  a Delta  at 6:27 p.m.  EDT.  The  
Delta  put  Goes   4  into  a  synchronous  transfer  orb i t   c lose  to  nominal.  Firing 
an  apogee  kick  motor  at  8  a .m .   September  11  would  put  it  into  geosyn- 
chronous  equatorial  orb i t  over  90”w  for  flight  testing,  after  which  it  would 
be   turned  over  to  NOAA  for  operational  use   of  the  VISSR  [see August  291. 
The   103-day  gap  since  NASA’s  unsuccessful  launch  of  NOAA-B  May  29 
almost set a record  for  inactivity.  (NASA D ly  Acm R p t ,  Sept  11/80; Of  D f y ,  Sept 
12/80,  62;  Spucavurn,  Sept  30180) 

September  I S :   NASA  announced  plans  to jo in   a  university  research  team  in 
first-time transcontinental laser-radar  soundings of  the volcanic veil still hang- 
ing  in  the upper  atmosphere  over the  United  States from  the  eruptions  of  M t .  

207 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

S E P T EM B E R   1980 

S t .  Helens.  Using NASA’s  SAGE  satellite with  an  aircraft  “crammed  with  the 
latest  i n   laser  and  electronic  remote-sensing  and  near-sensing  technologies,” 
scientists  from  LaRC  and  WFC  and  from Drexel  ZJniversity,  the Universities 
of  M a r y l a n d ,   A r i zon a ,   and   A l a sk a ,   D a r tm ou t h   Co l lege ,   M ich igan  
Technological  University,  and  the  Oregon  Graduate  Center  would  study 
volcanic  aftermath. 
This joint  effort scheduled  for September  17-21 
teams  for the SAGE pro- 
gram  and  the  Research  o n  Atmospheric  Volcanic  Emissions  (RAVE)  project 
funded by  NASA  and operated  through  the  universities would  measure quan- 
tities  of  gases  ejected  by  M t .   S t .   Helens  and  atmospheric  dispersion  of 
aerosols.  Launched  in  1978, SAGE had  used  a  four-channel  solar  radiometer 
to  track  volcano  plumes  and  take  profiles  of  ozone  and  aerosols  in  the 
stratosphere,  site of most of  the ozone preventing  harmful solar radiation from 
damaging  life  on  Earth.  (NASA  Release  80-143;  LaRC  Release  80-61) 

September  17: A  partnership  of  the  American  Institute  of  Architects,  Pacific 
Gas & Electric,  and  NASA’s  ARC  announced  selection  of  the  architect  for  a 
space-age  advanced  technology  house  to  be  built  at  ARC  and  opened  to  t h e  
public  late  in  1982  [see  February  121.  The  house,  about  2 ,500   square  feet, 
with  additional  facilities  to  accommodate  visitors,  would  incorporate  ex- 
perimental  ’techniques,  new  materials,  and  systems  originating  in  the  U.S. 
space  program. 
Advanced  technology  that  let  astronauts  live  in  the  hostile  environment  of 
space under  a  controlled  life-support  system  would  be  used  in  t h e   house,  as 
would  self-contained  water  and  sewage  systems,  recycling  all  its  water  and 
disposing  of  wastes  by  incineration;  heat  from  the  incineration  would  serve 
as  an  energy  source.  Energy-saving  and  water-saving  design  features  would 
make  the  house  8 0%  self-sufficient.  (AIA/PG&E/ARC  anno,  Sept  17/80) 

September  18: Tass  reported  that  Soyuz 38,  launched  September  18,  carried  a 
Cuban  cosmonaut  and a Soviet mission commander to join  cosmonaut Leonid 
Popov  and  Valery  Ryumin,  who  were within  two  weeks  of  breaking  a  space- 
endurance  record  on   the  orbiting  Salyut  6  space  station.  Armando  Tamayo 
Mendez ,   38,  was  the  seventh  non-Soviet  citizen  to  fly  in  the  USSR’s  Inter- 
cosmos  program.  His  companion  on  Soyuz  38  was  veteran  cosmonaut  Yuri 
Romanenko.  (W  Post,  Sept  19/80, A-30) 

NASA  announced  that  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch  had  signed  a 
memorandum  of  understanding  with  Dr.  David  H .   Jacobson,  vice  president 
of  South Africa’s  council  for  scientific  and  industrial  research,  for  establish- 
ment  of  a  Landsat  ground  station  near  Johannesburg.  The  pact  would  let  the 
South African  council, an early user of  Landsat da ta ,  operate a ground  station 
at  Hartebeesthoek  and  receive,  process,  and  disserninate  data.  The   council 
would  pay  for  a ground  station and  attending costs,  plus  an  annual  access  fee 
of  $200,000 after  the  first s ix  months of  data  receipt,  and would  have to  make 

208 

SEPTEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Landsat  data  available  on  a  nondiscriminatory  basis.  Landsat  users  in 
southern Africa  would have  access to regular  coverage of  the region,  a s  a con- 
tribution  to  development  efforts  of  southern  African  nations. 
Nine  Landsat  stations  were  operating  outside  the  United  States,  two  in 
Canada  and  one  each  in Argentina,  Australia,  Brazil,  India,  Italy, Japan ,  and 
Sweden.  The  People’s Republic  of  China  and  Thailand  were  buying  ground- 
station  equipment,  and  other  ground  stations  were  being  planned.  (NASA 
Release  80-147) 

ComSa tCorp  announced  appointment  of  Dr.  Delbert  D.  Smith,  vice  presi- 
dent for corporate affairs, to a three-year  term on the board of  the International 
Institute of Communications  (IIC) at the  latter’s annual  conference.  Smith  led 
a  con fe rence   d i scu s s ion   of  sa te l l i te   commun ica t ion s   for   soc ia l   and  
developmental  purposes. 
The  IIC,  based  in  London,  was  set  up   to  further  international  cooperation 
in  the  field  of  communications;  it  put  ou t   research  and  policy  studies  of  the 
impact of  media  on   society  and  analyzed  the  implications  of  communications 
technology,  seeking  to  eliminate barriers  to  the  free  flow of  communications. 
(ComSatCorp  Release  80-33) 

INTELSAT  announced  that  it  would  buy  an  additional  Intelsat  V  satellite 
from  Ford Aerospace and an additional NASA Atlas Centaur vehicle to launch 
i t .   The   first  Intelsat  V  launch  had  been  scheduled  for  December  1980.  The  
ninth  in  the  Intelsat  V  series  would  help  fill  domestic  and  international  de- 
mand  un t i l   higher  capacity  comsats became  available  in  the  mid-1980s.  IN- 
TELSAT’s decision would add about U.S. $70 million  to the  cost of  the Intelsat 
V  program,  estimated  at  U .S .  $650 million.  (INTELSAT  Release  80-19-1) 

September  19:  NASA  reported  selection  of  Rockwell  International’s  Energy 
Systems  Group   to  negotiate  a  cost-shared  $9  to  $11  million  contract  under  a 
DOE  program  for  design,  construction,  installation,  and  test  of  an  advanced 
multipurpose  350-kilowatt  wind-turbine  system  with  blades  38  meters  (125 
feet)  in  diameter. 
LeRC  with  its  expertise  in  aerodynamics  and  s truc tures  would  d irec t   the 
project  for DOE;  it was currently  running  a 100-kilowatt turbine  testbed  at  its 
Plum  Brook  test  area  near  Sandusky  and  four 200-kilowatt  versions  built  and 
installed  by  Westinghouse  in  New  Mexico,  Rhode  Is land ,   Puerto  Rico,  and 
Hawaii.  A  2,000-kilowatt  machine  by  Genera l  Electric  was  supplying  power 
to the Blue Ridge Electric  Cooperative System  in North  Carolina.  Boeing was 
building  a  2,500-kilowatt  machine,  three  of  which  would  be  working  in  the 
Bonneville  Power  System  by  the  end  of  1981.  (NASA  Release  80-148) 

The  Washington Post  reported that NORAD  in Colorado Springs, Colo.,  had 
identified  a  flaming  object  that  streaked  across  the  sky  and  plunged  into  the  
Gulf  of  Mexico  ear l ier   in  the  week.  The   object  was  apparently  the  remains 

209 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

S E P T EM B E R   1980 

of  a  Soviet  rocket,  probably  Cosmos  549,  that  had  been  i n   orbit  for  seven 
years.  ( W  Post,  Sept  19/80 A-5) 

September 20: Today newspaper  said that a  13-nation U .N .  committee that met 
in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  had  drafted  a  report  on  .1 proposed  satellite  system 
to  scan  the  Earth  and  spot disarmament violations.  Ending a  closed  two-week 
session  of  the  committee,  the  report  said  that  the  scientific,  financial,  and 
legal experts would meet there again  in February  1981 to consider and approve 
the  draft  for  submission  to  the  United  Nations.  Th e   statement  contained  no 
details  of  the  proposed  satellite  monitoring  system. 
U.N.  Secretary  General  K u r t  Waldheim  had  appointed  the  committee after 
a  special  General  Assembly  session  in  1978 on  diaarmament  received  a  pro- 
posal  by  France  for  U.N.  establishment  of  an  international  satellite agency  to 
check  up   on  disarmament  pledges.  (Today ,   Sept  20/80,  1OA) 

September 22:  JPL  Director  Bruce C. Murray  announced  appointment  of  Dr. 
Freeman Dyson,  theoretical physicist  and  leader  in   studies of  new  systems  for 
spacecraft  propulsion,  as  a  distinguished  visiting  scientist.  A  professor  at 
Princeton  University’s  Institute  for  Advanced  Study,  Dyson  participated  in 
Project  Orion  at  the  General  Atomic  Laboratory,  San  Diego,  from  1958  to 
1965,  studying  the  potential  use  of  atomic  explosions  to  propel  crewed 
spacecraft. In  1977 he  led  a  laser-propulsion  study  for  the  Defense  Advanced 
Research  Projects  Agency  (DARPA)  and  was  later  active  in  studies  of  solar 
sailing  and  NASA’s  SET1  (research  for  extraterrestrial  intelligence)  project. 
Author  of  “Disturbing  the  Universe,”  Dyson  would  jo in   Jacques  Blamont 
of  France,  Klaus  Hasselmann  of  Germany,  Giuseppe  Colombo  of  Italy, 
Michael  Longuet-Higgins  of  the  United  Kingdom,  and  Richard  Goody  and 
Gene Shoemaker of  the  United  States as a  J PL  distinguished visiting  scientist. 
(JPL  anno  Sept  22/80) 

September 23: ComSatCorp  announced  the  formation  of  a  new  organization, 
ComSatCorp World Systems Division, to handle all matters of  global telecom- 
munications  through  the  INTELSAT  system  and  global  maritime  services 
through  the  INMARSAT  system.  John  L .   McLucas,  most  recently  ComSat- 
Co rp  vice president  for  international  communications  and  technical  services, 
would head  the new  division. Joseph V.  Charyk, pr1:sident  and chief  executive 
of ComSatCorp, said that  the change responded  to  FCC concern  expressed  in 
a  study  of  ComSatCorp  organization,  as  i t   would  let  FCC   regulate  rates  and 
costs  within  an  organization  segment.  (ComSatCorp  Release  80-34) 

LaRC  reported  that  staffer Wesley  R .   Cofer,  Jr.  would  participate  during 
October  with  other  researchers  from  the  United  Slates and  Europe  in  an  ex- 
pedition  on  the  Atlantic  Ocean  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  humans  on  Earth’s 
troposphere  by  studying  environmentally  importani.  trace  gases.  Cofer would 
measure  hydrocarbon  concentrations  with  an  insti-ument  he  and  Gerald  C. 

210 

SEPTEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

Purgold  developed  a t   LaRC:  designed  for  marine  operation,  the  device  was 
built during a  1978-1979 LaRC  remote-sensor  technology  study, for  use  in  air- 
craft  tracking  of  atmospheric  pollutants  up  the  eastern  shore  of  Virginia. 
(LaRC  Release  80-64) 

September 27:  Today newspaper  attended  the christening of  the  first  ship built 
to  recover  NASA’s  Shuttle  boosters  from  the  Atlantic  after  launch.  United 
Space Boosters,  Inc.,  subsidiary  of  UTC would  operate the  U7C  Liberty,  first 
to  be  named,  and  U E  Freedom  out  of  KSC.  Today  said  that  everybody  “in- 
volved  in  the  lengthy  process  of  building  the  ship was  in  attendance  from  the 
banker  to  the  builder  to  the  ship’s captain.”  (Today, Sept  28/80,  16A) 

September 30: NASA  reported  that  the Winkfield  tracking  station completed 
its last Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network  (STDN) support pass a t  2 3 4 5 2  
and  was  transferred  to  U.K.  ownership  at  00012.  It  would  now  be   operated 
by  Britain’s Science Research  Council.  Part  of  NASA’s  network  for  about  2 0  
years,  the  station  had  “performed  in  an  exemplary  manner,”  NASA  said. 
(NASA D ly   Actv  Rpt,  Oct  1/80) 

During  September: NRC’s News Report  included an article on  asteroids,  com- 
ets, and meteroids,  subject of a report by  the Space Science Board’s committee 
on  planetary  and  lunar  exploration,  calling  for  investigation  and  analysis  of 
the solar system’s  “primitive objects”  to determine their chemical and isotopic 
composition and deduce their history through Earth-laboratory  and theoretical 
studies  as  well  a s  from  spacecraft and  space probes,  as  part  of  a  strategy  for 
understanding  solar  system  development.  Th e  committee,  chaired by  Eugene 
Levy  of  the  University  of  Arizona,  called  for  initial  exploration  and  recon- 
naissance  of  asteroids  and  comets  by  spacecraft  encounter  as  a  “goal  of  high 
priority”  for  the  period  1980-1990.  (NRC  News   Rept,  Sept  80,  1) 

NASA  issued a  summary  of  Saturn  encounter  events  for  the period  August 
22  through  December  15,  beginning  with  “in-bound  movie  sequences”  from 
Voyager  I 
through  Saturn-Titan  close  approach  and  ending  with  a  post- 
encounter movie  sequence.  Subjects  of  Voyager  research  a t   Saturn  would  be  
the planet itself,  its rings,  its satellites (especially the Mercury-size Titan), and 
Saturn’s  magnetosphere;  the  summary  listed points of  special  interest  and  the 
unique  properties  to  be  investigated.  (NASA  Release  80-145) 

211 

October  I :   Cosmonauts Leonid  Popov  and  Valery  Ryumin  set  a   new  record 
for  spaceflight duration,  breaking  the  mark  of  175  days,  36  minutes  set  last 
year  by  a   crew  i n   Soyuz  32 .  Ryumin  had  been  on  that  record  mission  also; 
he  had  stayed  on  Earth  for  only  236 days  since February 25,  1979.  Popov,  40, 
and Ryumin,  34 ,  had  set out April 9,  1980, in  Soyuz 35 to occupy the orbiting 
Safyut 6  launched  September  29,  lm7,  one  of  13  crews  to  visit  the  20-ton 
49-foot-long  space  station. 
Three times during the spring and  summer  visiting crews brought the  “per- 
manent  occupants”  food  and  experiment  materials,  life-support  equipment, 
and  companionship.  These  relief  missions  included  the  first  Vietnamese, 
Hungarian,  and  Cuban  cosmonauts.  Earlier  this  week,  an  unmanned  cargo 
ship Progress  11  arrived with  fresh supplies of  food, fuel, and technical equip- 
ment  for  the  cosmonauts. The   Soviet  Union  had  not  set  a   time  limit  for  the 
Salyut-Soyuz  flight;  Popov  and  Ryumin  reported  themselves  healthy.  (N Y  
Times, Oct  2/80,  A-17) 

October 2 :  Rep.  Don  Fuqua  (D-F la .) ,   chairman  of  the House  Committee on 
Science and Technology, said that his  space science subcommittee would hold 
hearings at the Severe Storm Forecast Center in  Kansas City, Mo . ,  on the con- 
solidated storm information  system, a joint NASA-NOAA program.  The com-  
mittee heard  about  the project  in  July  1979 when  it  was  merely  a  concept:  “ i t  
will  be  a   pleasure  to  see  it  coming  to  fruition.” 
When  fully  operational,  the  system  would  give  a   forecaster  real-time  at- 
mospheric  data  such  as  temperature,  a ir   pressure,  and  wind  forces  from 
around  the  globe,  a   substantial  improvement  on  current  systems  requiring 
several  hours to obtain the data.  It would combine communications links with 
data  sources,  such as  environmental satellites and  atmosphere soundings, into 
a   single computer  system.  (H   Comm   Sci  Release  96-235) 

Nature magazine described equipment problems on Heao 2, also called the 
Einstein  observatory,  that  might  end  the  mission  prematurely.  Launched  in 
1978,  Heao  2  carried  the  first X-ray  telescope  “as  sensitive as  ground-based 
optical telescopes”;  it  had  a   planned  lifetime of  only  one  year.  Its  success  in  
generating new  scientific data had  led  to extension of  its mission; until  the  re- 
cent setback, NASA scientists hoped that  i t  would continue to return data well 
into 1981 when atmospheric drag would  take it from orbit.  The  outcome would 
depend  on  the  “behavior  of  the  gyroscopes  used  to  position  it.” 
Data  transmission  was  halted  three  weeks  ago  when  two  of  the  six 
gyroscopes failed after a   temporary  blackout. Heao 2  needed  three  function- 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

OCIOBER  1980 

ing  gyroscopes  for  positioning.  One  of  the  other  four  was  already  dead; 
another,  running  erratically,  was  on  standy.  NASA  was  working  on  software 
for  backup  control  using  the  two  gyros  still  functioning,  along  with  either  a 
Sun  sensor  or  star  tracker  on  the  satellite.  (Nuturp, Oct  2/80,  379) 

October  4 :   Cosmonaut  Aleksey  Yeliseyev,  veteran  of  Soyuz  5 ,  Soyuz  8,  and 
Soyuz IO, told a press conference that  the flight of  Ryumin  and Popov on Sulyut 
6  “is  coming  to  an  end .   The  flight will  be  completed  in  the  first  half  of  Oc- 
tober  and no more Soyuz  expeditions will  visit.”  “The   station  today,”  he  add- 
ed, “is  in  a  perfectly  good  state and  the  question  of  its  being  manned  in  the 
future may be  answered  in the affirmative.” (FBIS, lWosc Dom Svc i n  Russian, 
Oct  4/80) 

Oc tober  7: Dr. Robert A.  Frosch,  NASA  administrator,  told  President  Carter 
that  he would  leave  January  20  to become  the  first  president  of  the American 
Association  of  Engineering  Societies,  a  federation  created  in  January  of  39 
major  engineering  societies  of  the  United  States  representing  more  than  a 
million engineers.  In a memorandum  headed  “Dear  Colleagues,” Frosch  said 
that  h e  could  “no  longer  ignore  the  competitive opportunities available  to  me 
and  to  my  family  in  private  life.  . . I  continue  to  be  devoted  to  our  common 
interests  in  aeronautics  and  space.” 
Frosch  was  sworn  in  as  NASA  administrator  June  21,  1977. H e   had  been 
associate director for applied oceanography at Woods Hole Oceanographic  In- 
stitution since  1975. He  had  attended  Columbia University,  where  he  received 
a bachelor’s  degree  in  1947, a master’s i n   1949, and  a doctorate in  theoretical 
physics  in  1952. H e  had been  assistant  secretary  of  the  Navy  for F&D,  assis- 
tant  executive  director  of  the  U .N .   environment program,  and deputy director 
of  DOD’s  DARPA.  (NASA  Release  80-151) 

far  to  a  small  business 
NASA  announced  award  of  its  largest  contract 
firm. KSC  entered  a  fixed-price  contract  of  $6,689,666  to W&T  Construction 
Company  of  Cocoa ,   F la . ,   for  work  on  Pad  B  of  Launch  Complex  39 where 
the  Space  Shuttle  would  be  launched  i n   1982  when  it  became  operational. 
W&T  would  put  i n   long-run  pipes  and  cables  to  pump  and  monitor  fuels, 
coolant,  nitrogen  and  gaseous  helium,  compressed  air,  and  hydraulic  fluids, 
from  storage  areas  to  the  fixed  and  the  rotating  service  structures.  Connec- 
tions  to  the Space Shuttle would  be  from the two  service towers.  The  contract 
would  be   completed  in  20   months.  (NASA  Release  80-152) 

NASA  announced  an  MSFC  award  to  Martin  Marietta  and  Aerojet  Liquid 
Rocket  Company  of  contracts  to  define  a  liquid-propellant  boost  module  for 
the  Shuttle  external  tank,  to  increase  its  cargo-carrying  capacity  to  5,400 
kilograms  (12,000 pounds). 
Under  the  new  terms,  modifying  initial  program-definition  contracts  let 
earlier  in  1980,  the  two  firms  would  study  adapting  Titan  hardware  and 

214 

OCTOBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

systems to the boost module.  They had been building  Titans for years;  the  U.S. 
Air  Force had  used  Titan 2  in  the mid- %1960s to  launch  Gemini  and  was  still 
using  it.  Martin  Mar ie t ta ,   under  a  contract  valued  a t   $1.18  million,  would 
carry  ou t   follow-on studies  and  design  activities  on  the  overall  system;  Aero- 
j e t ,   under   a  contract  for  $782,500,  would  work  on  modification  of  the  Titan 
3 stage  1 engine.  A  modified  version  of  Titan  had  launched  communications 
satellites  and  o ther   Ear th   orb i ters  a s  well  a s  deep-space  Viking  and  Voyager 
payloads.  The   first  use  of the  augmenting  booster  would  be  in  1986.  (NASA 
Release  80454;  MSFC  Release  80-126) 

October 8: ComSa tCorp  announced  that  it would dedicate  its new  ground  sta- 
tion  on  Saipan  in  the  Marianas  in  November  [see  During  June].  At  the 
ceremony  would  be   Car los   Camacho,  governor  of  the  Northern  Marianas; 
ComSa tCorp  head  Joseph  V.  Charyk ;  officials  of  the  U .S .  Department  of  the 
Interior  and  of  U.S.  corngun ica t ions   carr iers ;   and  dignitaries  from   several 
Pacific nations.  The  Saipan  station working with  an Intelsat  22,300 miles over 
the  Pacific  could  offer  a  wide  range  of  services:  in  addition  to  more   reliable 
telephone calls,  residents would have access to television,  telex, da ta ,  and fac- 
simile,  “an  era   of  modern  and  improved  communications,”  the  organization 
said.  (ComSatCorp  Release  80-38) 

October  10:  LaRC  announced  an  award  to  Dynamic  Engineering  Inc . ,  
Newport News, Va.,  of  a three-year  cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  valued a t  $4.3 
million  for design and  fabrication of  dynamic  models  for NASA  research  and 
development programs.  It would include personnel,  equ ipmen t ,  materials, and  
facilities  for feasibility  studies, engineering des ign ,  and assembly  and calibra- 
tion  of  models. 
Used  primarily  in  wind-tunnel  tests,  the  models  would  b e  of  three   kinds: 
general-performance,  holding  a  fixed  geometry  through  a  range  of  angle-of- 
attack  and  dynam ic   pressure;  free-flight  and  spin  models,  simulating  mass 
proper t ies   of  a ircraf t ;   and  aeroelastic  mode ls   simulating  configuration 
changes  ,with  load ,   for  performance  and  flutter  investigations.  Th e   models 
would  consist  of  fiberglass-reinforced  resin,  wood,  metal,  moldable  o r   for- 
mab le  materials,  o r   combinations  of  these.  (LaRC  Release  80-73) 

October .ll: Th e   longest  spaceflight  in  history  ended   a t   12:50  Moscow  time 
when cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin landed near  Dzhezkazgan 
in   the   descent  module  of  Soyuz 37 af ter   185 days  aboard   the   Salyut  6 space 
station.  A  previous  record  of  175  days  was  set  last  year  by  Ryumin  and 
Vladimir Lyakhov; shown on Soviet television  immediately  af ter  landing,  they 
seemed  to  have  trouble  walking  and  talking.  The   Soviet  Union  did  not  have 
television  coverage  of  the  Ryurnin-Popov  landing,  but  the  two  appeared  on 
television  a t   9  p.m.  local  time  in  recliners,  being  interviewed.  A  Reuters 
repor t  from  the  landing,  carr ied  by  the N a u  York  Times, said that  the two men 
appeared  well  when  they  climbed  from   their  capsule  in  the  ra in ,   Ryumin 

215 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1980 

noting  “it’s always  pleasant  to  have  a  soft  landing.”  He  joked  with  journalists 
and  insisted  on  walking  two  yards  unaided  “almosl  without  staggering,”  said 
Trud, a trade-union  newspaper.  Doctors  said  that neither man  seemed to  show 
the  physical  deterioration  suffered  by  other  long-mission  crews:  Popov  had 
gained 6.5 pounds,  Ryumin almost  11.  They had kept up their strength in space 
with  exercises. 
(The N e w   York  Times noted  that  the new  record  f i r  outdistanced the  longest 
U.S.  space mission,  the 84-day mission of  Skylab  4 with  Gerald Carr ,  Edward 
Gibson,  and William  Pogue,  that  ended  i n   1974.  In  the absence of  U.S. space 
exploits since the Moon   landings, Western  observers  said that  the new  Soviet 
feat might  indicate that  the Soviet Union  had  regained the lead in space; coupl- 
ed with the delay  in the U.S. Shuttle program and public  awareness of  growing 
Soviet military might, the Salyut accomplishment might translate into political 
advantage.) 
Salyut  6 had been  orbiting  for three years,  being manned  for about half  that 
time. Four main and eight visiting  expeditions had been working there, backed 
by  automatic cargo craft bringing  fuel  and  supplies.  Tass  said that  the preven- 
tive maintenance and  resupply procedures  carried  out by  the crews were a big 
step  toward  “lasting  manned  complexes  for  scientific  and  national  economic 
purpose.”  (FBIS, Tass  in  English,  Oct  11/80; NY   Times,  Oct  12/80,  23;  Oct 
13/80,  A-13) 

October 14:  The  FCC  called  for public  comment on ComSatCorp  reorganiza- 
tion,  to  prevent  its  role  as  sole  U .S .  representative  in  the global  communica- 
tions  satellite system  from  interfering with  i t s   growing  competitive activities. 
An  official said that  this  “could  lead  to  changes”  in  ComSatCorp operations. 
An  FCC   staff  study  earlier  in  1980 said  that  the  potential  for  conflict  was 
substantial  enough for ComSatCorp to  need  two separate parts:  one  for its role 
in  the  global  system,  the  other  providing  services  like  a  long-distance 
telephone  system  or  satellite-to-home  subscription  television.  As  a  result, 
ComSatCorp  had  set  up  a  World  Systems Division  to  take  charge  of  its  con- 
gressionally  mandated  role  in  the  global  system,  its  competitive activities  re- 
maining  with  its  subsidiary  Comsat  General  [see  September  231.  However, 
research  and development by Comsat Laboratories would  remain  in the parent 
company.  FCC   noted  that  the  subsidiary  could  obtain  new  technology 
developed  by  the laboratories either free or below  cost, enabling it to undercut 
competitor  prices.  It  was  debating  further  action  to  ensure  that  ComSatCorp 
did  not  use   the  knowledge  gained  in  its  monopoly  role  to  compete  unfairly 
with  other  communications  firms.  ( W  Star, Oct  14/80, D-7) 

October 15: NASA  reported  that  it  had  begun  a  three-year  program  with  the 
Pennsylvania  Department  of  Environmental  Resources  using  Landsat  data  to 
detect  gypsy-moth  damage.  Under  an  agreement  signed  recently,  the  data 
would  identify  and  locate damage so that  subsequent  satellite images  could  be 

216 

OCTOBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

used  to monitor affected areas. Foresters could identify infestations and isolate 
areas  for  pest  management. 
Results would  be  passed  on  to  other  states in  the  eastern  United  States that 
could  use  the  techniques  to  control  spread  of  gypsy-moth  damage   initially 
mapped  in New  England in  1910. Damage to hardwood  forests in Pennsylvania 
over  the   past  10  years  was  an  estimated  $32  million;  in  1980 alone,  gypsy- 
moth caterpillars defoliated 440,000 acres of  hardwood  forest. (NASA Release 
80-155) 

MSFC  reported  that  i t   had  recovered  scientific  packages  launched  from 
Palestine,  Tex.,  on  two  30-story-tall  balloons  after  both  balloons  “by  a  
remarkable  coincidence”  floated  directly  over  the  Alabama  center.  The  
300-foot balloons traveled 20-35 mph  about 23 miles up.  Dr. Gerald Fishman, 
of  MSFC’s  space  science  laboratory,  said  that  it  was  “almost  unbelievable” 
that  the  payloads  flew  over  the  center  after  drifting  some  700  miles.  MSFC 
had  run  a   research  balloon  program  for  seven years,  but  not  one  balloon  had 
ever  come   over  the  center,  much  less  two. 
The   two  experiments were  also  the  most  successful, Fishman  said,  recor- 
ding  more   than  28  hours  of  gamma-ray  data  and  more   than  38   hours  of 
cosmic-ray  data.  The   f irs t ,   which  had  been  launched  October  6  with  a  
g a m a - r a y   package,  was  seen  by  unaided  eyes  over  MSFC  about  1:30 p.m. 
October 7; MSFC  scientists tracked  i t  and  took pictures by  telescope. The  se- 
cond,  launched October 7 with  a  cosmic-ray detector, flew over  about  3  a .m .  
October  8.  Both  balloons  were  tracked  by  a   telemetry  station  on  Redstone 
Arsenal  that  received experiment data. A  National Scientific Balloon Facility 
team  recovered  the  gamma-ray package  after  it  came  to  Earth  near  Roanoke, 
Va.,  and  then  sought  the  cosmic-ray  package  in  a   heavily  wooded  area  near 
Elkins,  W.Va.,  where  a  helicopter  retrieved  i t .   Both  packages  were  returned 
to  MSFC   for  analysis.  (MSFC  Release  80-129) 

October  16: ESA  announced that  the  cause  of  the  failure of  Ariane  LO2  May 
23  was  “combustion  instability”  on  one   of  the  four  first-stage engines  5.75 
seconds after  launch.  The  violent  event  “altered  the  characteristics of  the  in- 
jec tor”   and  destroyed  the vehicle  108 seconds after  liftoff.  ESA  had  analyzed 
telemetry,  looked  over  hardware  recovered  from  the  ocean,  conducted 
acoustic  simulations and  37  static firings between  July  and  mid-October,  and 
investigated manufacturing  processes.  It  would  change its  procedure  for  buy- 
ing  injectors.  (ESA  Info  24) 

October 17: ComSa tCorp  announced that it would reduce its charges for inter- 
national satellite communications by  11.8 % .   FCC  was  concerned over  the  in- 
crease in  international carrier earnings for these services and had begun  a  for- 
mal  rate procedure  against ITT  Worldcom  for the  same  reason.  ComSa tCorp  
president  Joseph  V.  Charyk  said  that  the  reduction  could  save  its  members  
about  $19  million  in   1981 and  asked  FCC   to  see  that  the  savings reached  the 

217 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1980 

public.  (ComSatCorp  Release  80-39) 

October  20:  NASA  declared  successful  t h e   mission  of  Magsat,  launched 
Ocober 30,  1979, to measure Earth’s  magnetic field. The  satellite’s lifetime ex- 
ceeded  that  planned  for  it  by  three months  and  met  or  exceeded  accuracy  re- 
quirements  in instrumentation and  in  attitude and position  determination. The  
mission  had  met  the  objectives  of  developing  a  worldwide  magnetic-field 
model;  acquiring  data  for  crustal  magnetic-anomaly  maps;  and  adding  to 
knowledge  of  Earth’s magnetic field and  its temporal variations.  (NASA MOR 
E-662-80-01,  Oct  20/80) 

NASA  reported  that  b y u g e r  I wou ld   approach closest  to  Saturn November 
12,  third  episode  i n   a  10-year multibillion-mile  trip  to  the  outer  planets.  A 
briefing  on  t h e   encounter  would  take  place  October  28   a t   Headquarters  with 
Andrew  Stofan,  associate  administrator;  Angelci  Guastaferro,  director  of 
planetary  programs;  Dr.  Edward  Stone  of  CalTech,  project  scientist;  Ray 
Heacock  of  JPL ,   project  manager;  and  Dr.  Bradford  Sm i th ,   University  of 
Arizona,  of  the  imaging  team.  (NASA   Release  Oct  20/80;  LaRC  Release 
80-77) 

October  21:  The   Washington  Star  reported  a  warning  from  the  Center  for 
Defense  Information  (“an  unofficial  defense  study  group”)  that  technological 
progress  in U.S.  and Soviet space programs  could spark an arms  race in  space. 
Th e  United  States had  a  12 x l3- inch   device-the  miniature homing  interceptor 
vehicle-that  could  home  in on  infrared  radiation  “ to  destroy  a target  satellite 
by  high-speed  impact,’’  the  group   said;  if   the  device  were  actually  tested  in 
space,  “it  could  destroy  more  than  the  target  satellite:  it  could  destroy  U.S. 
and  Soviet  negotiations  aimed  at  limiting  antisatellite  warfare  as  well.” 
Th e   group  said  that  the  Pentagon  believed  that  the  Soviet  Union  had  an 
operational  but  limited  antisatellite  weapon  that  had  been  tested  about  17 
times;  7  of  the  tests  were  failures,  but  10  were  “possible  successes”  in  that 
the  interceptor  passed  less  than  a  mile  from  the  targets.  No  target  was 
destroyed,  suggesting  that  the  Soviet  Union  might  be  working  on  inspection 
of  foreign satellites. PRC  reconnaissance  satellites traveled  in orbits like  those 
of  the Soviet test  targets,  and  an  interception program  might be  aimed mainly 
at  the  Chinese,  the  group  said. 
Rear  Adm. Gene LaRocque  (USN-re t .) ,  head  of  t h e  center,  said  wars  might 
begin  in  space “but  they’re  going to end  right here on earth.  It won’t be a Star 
Wars show  with  a  lot of  robots.  . .vaporizing each  other  in  the  remote  regions 
of  space. . . . Once those nuclear missiles start to  fly,  the science-fiction drama 
will  be  over.”  ( W  Star,  Oct  21/80,  D-10) 

October  23:  Nature  magazine  commented  on  D:r.  Robert  Frosch’s  leaving 
NASA,  “the  latest  to  join  the  exodus  of  science  administrators  from  the 

218 

OCM B ER   1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

federal  government”  with  the  departure  in   June  of  Dr.  Richard  Atkinson, 
director  of  the  NSF,  and  the  “widely  expected”  appointment  of  Dr.  Frank 
Press,  head  of  the White  House  Office of  Science and  Technology  Policy,  as 
president  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences. Dr.  Frosch’s  time  at  NASA 
had  seen “ the  agency struggling increasingly against the escalating costs of  the 
[Shuttle] which  is now  biting deeply into the space research budget.”  (Na ture ,  
Oct  23/80,  673) 

October 27:  DFRC  announced  plans  for  a  ceremony  at  which  ARC  officials 
representing NASA  and the Army’s Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft project would 
accept  the  first  of  two  aircraft  built  under  a joint  program.  One  of  the  two 
planes built by  Bell Helicopter Textron arrived at ARC  in March  1978 for tests 
in  its  full-scale wind  tunnel;  the other arrived at DFRC August  13  for  follow- 
up  of  tests by  Bell.  So far,  two  contractor pilots,  two  NASA  pilots, one Army 
pilot,  and  one   Marine  pilot  had  tested  and  evaluated  the  aircraft.  (DFRC 
Release  80-28) 

MSFC  noted  the  arrival of  the  age  of  automation  in  its  Materials  and  Pro- 
cesses  Laboratory,  where  industrial  robots  were  improving  manufacturing 
techniques  in  Space  Shuttle  hardware  production.  Robotics,  integrated  into 
totally  compuier-controlled  systems,  would  help  meet  high  launch-rate 
fabrication and between-flight refurbishment requirements of  reusable Shuttle 
items. 
One  of  the two MSFC  robots was helping  spray foam  insulation for thermal 
protection o n  booster  structures  such  as  forward  and   aft  skirts  o r  nosecones. 
The   second,  currently  used  for  advanced  welding,  would  serve  in  a  thermal 
protection process  for  the external tank.  A  third  robot  to  arrive  in  December  
would run a high-pressure water blaster to  strip insulation from reusable Shut- 
tle  hardware.  (MSFC   Release  80-138) 

Aviation Week & Space Technology said that General Dynamics  Convair had 
developed  a  prototype  deployable  space  truss  a s   a  building  block  in  large 
space structures,. A  26-foot beam stowed in a flat pack  3 feet long, 5 feet wide, 
and  9 .5  inches high  would  unfold  in  five  segments  to  5 feet  in  width  and  7.5 
feet  in  height.  The   hinged  and  folded  struts  of  graphite-epoxy  bonded  to 
aluminum  would  deploy  in  three  automatic  steps,  forming  first  a  triangular, 
then a diamond-shaped, section. A  Shuttle could carry 24 500-foot beams  into 
space  on  a  single mission.  (AvWk,  Oct  27/80,  49 )  

Ocotober 28: NASA reported that DFRC had conducted a “highly  successful” 
sixth  HiMAT  flight  October  28,  lasting  more   than  32  minutes  and  reaching 
45,000  feet  and  a  maximum  Mach  number   of  0 .9 .  No   anomalies  occurred. 
(NASA D ly  Actv  Rp t ,   Oct  29/80) 

219 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER   1980 

INTELSAT announced  that  its  assembly  had  agreed  to  technical  and  some 
economic compatibility  with  seven  other  satellite  systems.  Found  technically 
compatible  with  existing  and  planned  INTELSAT  systems  were  Eutelsat, 
spare craft for a European communications satellite system; Germany’s TVSat 
broadcasting  system;  India’s  Insat  1-A  and  1nsa.t  I-B  for  television  and 
meteorological  use;  Indonesia’s  Palapa-A  system  for  limited  regional  service 
to  remote  areas  i n   southeast  Asia;  the  Intersputnik  system  for  limited  use  by 
Algeria;  Japan’s  GMS-2  metesat  system;  and  Saudi  Arabia’s  broadcast- 
satellite  system. 
Algeria’s proposal  was  the  first  instance of  an INTELSAT  signatory’s  seek- 
ing  use of  another system  for general  international public  traffic  instead  of  for 
limited  regional service. INTELSAT said  that its permission would  apply only 
through  1985 and  to  a  total  of  22   telephone  lines; similar proposals  by  other 
members would  require  separate handling. The  specific request by  Algeria  for 
use  of  Intersputnik  would  not  constitute  significant  economic  harm  to  IN- 
TELSAT a t  present;  however,  the  assembly  noted  that  INTELSAT’s  objective 
was  to  promote  development  of  “a  single”  global  communications  satellite 
system, and all  signatories must continue to  consider  that a goal.  (INTELSAT 
Release  80-23-1) 

October 29: Newspapers  said  Voyager 1’s Saturn approach had discovered  two 
new  moons,  a  13th  and  14th,  and  confirmed  existence  of  three  previously 
shown  in  Earthbound  observations.  Until  the  recent  discoveries,  the  giant 
planet  was  thought  to  have  only  nine  satellites.  Closing  on  Saturn  at  45,000 
mph,  Voyager I  should  come within  77,000 miles  of  the  surface  on  o r   about 
November  12  and  obtain  high-resolution  photographs  of  the  planet  and  its 
satellites.  It  was  already  returning  pictures  with  resolution  far  higher  than 
those  taken  i n   1979  by  the  less  sophisticated  Pioneer  11. 
Images relayed  over  the past  10 days  showed dozens of  divisions never  seen 
before  between  Saturn’s  rings,  meaning  that  the  six  known  rings  would  have 
to be  recounted.  “Almost  everything we’re  seeing  at Saturn right now  is brand 
new,”  said Dr.  Bradford  Smith,  head  of  the  Voyager  imaging team.  JPL‘s  Ray 
L .   Heacock,  project  manager,  said  that  9  of  Voyager’s  10  instruments  were 
working,  1 having  failed  after  encounter with  Jupiter,  and  the  spacecraft  was 
in  good  shape after  traveling  1.3 bilion  miles  through  space.  ( N Y  Times, Oct 
29/80,  A-20;  W Post,  Oct  29/80,  A-2;  W Star,  Oct  29/80,  D-18) 

MSFC  said  that  it  would  static-fire  for  581  secon’ds a  test  prototype  of  the 
Shuttle main  propulsion  system  in  one  of  two  tests  remaining  before  the  first 
flight  in March  1981.  Rockwell  International  would  conduct  this  11th  firing  of 
the  system  at  NSTL .   The   test  would  serve  to  evaluate  thrust-vector  controls, 
low-level  fuel  cutoff,  and  liquid  oxygen  and  liquid  hydrogen  pressurization. 
Final  main  propulsion-system  test  firing  would  be   i n   late November.  (MSFC 
Release  80-139) 

220 

OCIOBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Comsat  General  announced  that  it  was  providing  consulting  service  to 
Alascom  Inc . ,   based  in  Anchorage,  on  a  new  generation of  communications 
satellites  to  meet  Alaska’s  future  communications needs.  Alascom  was  now 
leasing  15  to  17 transponders on  a  domestic Satcom  to  relay  communications 
throughout Alaska,  but  growth  by  the  late  1980s should  require  double  that 
number.  Comsa t  General  would  help  design  a  spacecraft  to  meet  increased 
transponder  demand.  (Cornsat  Gnl  Release  80-5) 

October 30:  NASA  launched  FltSatCom-D  into  a  synchronous transfer  orbit 
from Launch  Complex  36,  ETR ,   on  an Atlas Centaur  at  1 0 5 4  p .m .   EST. An 
apogee kick  motor  fired November  1 at  fifth  apogee  put  it  (as FltSatCorn 4) 
into the desired synchronous orbit  [see October 201.  Spacecraft systems were 
tu rn e d   on   and  op e r a t ed   norma l ly .   (NASA   MOR   M -491 -202 -80 -04  
[postlaunch]  Nov  21/80) 

October 31:  The   Washington Post  reported that  SBS was  “having a  hard  time 
getting  off  the  ground”  with  launch  of  its  first  satellite put  off  for  the  third 
time  in  a  month.  Technical problems  with  the  Delta  had  delayed  the  launch 
of  SBS  1,  built by  Hughes  Aircraft,  first of  its  kind  to  offer a  high-frequency 
interference-free signal.  Liftoff  had  been  postponed  to  November  6  because 
of  insulation  damage,  then  to  November  12 when  a  motor  bolt  broke.  The  
latest problem was  a leak in the liquid oxygen system. ( WP o s t ,  Oct 31/80, E-3) 

MSFC  reported  signing  a  $2,271,391 contract with  a  small  business,  OAO 
Corporation  of  Be ltsv i l le ,   M d . ,   for  design,  assembly,  delivery,  test,  and  
checkout within  18  months  of  a  data-base management  system  to  handle  an 
“ immense  volume”  of  instrument data  transmitted at  “extremely  high  rates” 
by  spacecraft during missions  between  1985 and  1995. The   system would  ac- 
cept data  at rates up  to  50 million  bits per  second  (44,650 pages of  computer 
printout  per  minute).  “Firsts”  to  be  included  in  the  system  would  be  a  data 
bus of  fiber-optic cabling for use in a computer configuration and use of  lasers 
to transmit and receive data at the high  rates required.  (MSFC  Release 80-141) 

During October:  NASA  appointed  Dr.  Jack  L.  Kerrebrock,  head  of  MIT’s 
aeronautics  and  astronautics  department,  as  associate  administrator  for 
aeronautics and  space  technology  as  of  June  1,  1981.  Replacing  Dr.  James  J. 
Kramer  who retired in October  1979, he would be  responsible for aeronautics, 
space  and  energy  research,  and  technology  programs.  Dr.  Walter  B.  Olstad 
would  act  as  associate administrator  in  the  interim.  (NASA  Release  80-156) 
-JSC  announced that Dr.  Edward  G.  Gibson,  scientist-astronaut, would 
leave October 31 to become  advanced  systems manager  for TRW  Defense and 
Space Systems Group.  The   science pilot  on  the  record  84-day  Skylab 4 mis- 
sion  in   1973-1974, he  had  left  NASA  in   1974  to  work  for Aerospace  Corpora- 
tion  and  for E R N 0  but  had  rejoined  the agency  in  March  1977.  (JSC Release 
80-057) 

221 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OC IOBER   1980 

-C.A.  Syvertson, ARC director,  named Angelo Guastaferro of  the Head- 
quarters Office of  Space Science as his  deputy,  replacing  A .   Thomas Young, 
recently  named  director  of  GSFC.  John  Boyd,  associate  deputy  director, 
would  remain  acting  deputy  director  for  six  moniths.  (ARC  anno  Oct  31/80; 
NASA  Release  80-165) 
-The  NAA  newsletter  reported  that  Maurice  Bellonte,  copilot of  the first 
east-to-west  transatlantic  nonstop  flight  i n   1930, wiis guest of honor  at the Na- 
tional  Air  and  Space Museum  on  the  50th  annive-rsary  of  his  flight  from  Le 
Bourget  airfield  near  Paris  to  Curtiss  Field,  N.Y.  In  1929  Bellonte  and  his 
copilot  Dieudonne  Coste  had  set  a  world  record  for  longest  nonstop  flight, 
4,788  miles  from  Paris  to  Manchuria  in  51  hours,  39  minutes.  Th e  Atlantic 
crossing  had  taken  37  hours,  18  minutes.  (NAA  nsltr  Sept-Oct  80,  2 )  
-The  N e w   York  Ernes  reported  that  after  long  service  in  orbit  and  “a 
galaxy  of  discoveries”  the  astrophysics observatories  Copernicus and  Galileo 
were  nearing  the  end  of  their  useful  lives.  Copel-nicus  ( O m  3 ,   launched  in 
August  1972 and named  to  honor  the 500th birthday  of  the Polish  astronomer) 
carried  the  first  UV  telescope  above  Earth’s  atmosphere  and  made  precise 
measurements  of  the  amount  of  deuterium  in  the  universe.  Galileo  ( H e m  2 ,  
launched in November  1978) carried the only imaging X-ray  telescope ever or-  
bited  and mapped  X-ray  emissions  from every  knciwn quasar.  ( N Y  T ime s ,  Oct 
31/80,  A-19) 
-1NTELSAT  announced  that  its  Italian  signatory  member,  Telespazio, 
had  set  up  an  award  of  U.S.$lO,OOO  for  contributions  to  the  field  of  satellite 
communications.  Established on  the  10th anniversary of  the death of  Dr.  Piero 
Fanti,  first general manager of  Telespazio,  the awaird would go  every two years 
to  a researcher  or  student in  an INTELSAT member country who made a con- 
tribution  of  significant  value  to  the  field.  (INTEILSAT Release  80-22-1) 

FBIS  carried Tass  reports during October on the flight of Popov and Ryumin 
aboard Sa lyu t  6, beginning  with  resupply  of  water  from  the  cargo  vessel  Pro- 
gress   11  October  3  and  completion  of  unloading  by  October  6,  including 
resupply  of  air.  On   October  8  Tass  said  that  the  crew  was  measuring  the 
dynamics  of  the  orbital  complex  for  use  in  designing  new  space  systems. 
Launched September 29,  1977, Salyut 6 had  received  13 Soyuz (7 with  interna- 
tional  crews),  2  Soyuz-T,  and  11  Progress  craft  during  its  three-year  flight, 
manned  about  half  that  time  by  four  main  and  eight  visiting  expeditions;  24 
dockings  occurred ,   plus  4  redockings  from one  port  to  another.  On October 
11,  after Popov  and Ryumin  returned  to  Earth,  Tass reported  that  no irreversi- 
b le  effects of  weightlessness had  occurred.  The  crew’s diet  included meat  and 
dairy  products,  confectionery,  beverages,  and  various  seasonings.  Fresh 
vegetables  and  fruits brought  from Earth during the flight helped diversify the 
meals.  On  October  13,  Tass  said  that  the  cosmoniiuts  had  gone  for  a  walk  in 
less  than  24  hours  after  their  return  from  six  months  in  space  and  had  met 
with  journalists  for  interviews.  Both  said  that  working  in  space  would  be 
possible  for  longer  than  six months;  Ryumin  said  that  he  felt  better  after  his 

222 

OCTOBER 1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

second prolonged  flight,  thanks  to  better  ground  training and  better  schedul- 
ing of  on-board activity. A  rest period every  fourth day  had made  them  “more  
eager to do exercises.”  On  October 29,  the  cosmonauts  reported  to  a meeting 
of  the  State  Commission  representing  400  organizations  and  agencies  in- 
terested  in  their  results  on  the  3,500 photos  and  40,000 atmospheric  spectra, 
more   than  70  materials  experiments,  and  the  medical  and  biological  tests. 
(FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Oct  3-29/80) 

223 

November 

November  1:  OMB  told  Dr.  Robert  A.  Frosch,  NASA  administrator,  that 
President Carter  concurred with  NASA’s  request  for  a  1986 mission  to make 
a  detailed  examination  of  the  surface  of  Venus.  Previously,  both  U.S.  and 
Soviet probes had penetrated the planet’s  cloud  cover  to  send  data over a  few 
minutes to several hours;  Pioneer Venus  returned data on the  atmosphere, but 
none  had  given  an  idea  of  the  surface.  The   President  would  request  the 
necessary  funds  in  his  FYS2  budget. 
The   Venus-orbiting  imaging  radar  (VOIR)  spacecraft,  managed  by  JPL ,  
weighing  about  5,000 kilograms  (11,000 pounds)  at  launch,  and  costing  $500 
to  $600  million,  would  carry  a  synthetic-aperture  radar  (SAR)  and  other 
scientific instruments. Lanched  from  the  Space Shuttle  in   May  o r  August  of 
1986, it would  arrive at Venus  in December  1986 and circle it  for seven months 
in  a  300-kilometer  (180-mile)  near-polar  orbit,  taking  radar  pictures  and 
measuring  atmosphere  as  well  as  surface.  VOIR  images  should  disclose  the 
presence of  contlnents, ocean basins, mountain chains, rift valleys,  fault belts, 
or  volcanoes, as well  as nature and timing of  plate-tectonic activity (continen- 
tal  drift)  o r   the  size and  frequency  of  occurrence  of  impact  craters.  (NASA 
Release  80-166) 

November 2 :   ComSa tCorp   said  that  telephone  and  other  services  i n   Saipan 
improved  with  dedication  of  a  new  ground  station  there  [see  October  81. 
Saipan  communications  carried  by  high-frequency  radio  had  suffered  delay 
and  interference  from  atmospheric  disturbance.  Better  telex,  facsimile,  and 
television  would  also be  possible  through  a  large  dish  antenna  working  with 
an  Intelsat  spacecraft  22,000  miles  over  the  Pacific.  (ComSa tCorp   Release 
80-42) 

November  3 :   NASA  said  that  Dr.  Floyd  W.  Stecker  of  GSFC   had  found 
evidence to suggest that subatomic particles called neutrinos might have mass, 
redefining the nature of  all matter and the ultimate fate of  the universe. Obser- 
vations of  rocket-launch results  had  detected  a  spectral  line  that  might  mean 
neutrino  decay  near  the  W  wavelength  of  0.00017  mm.  Neutrinos  were 
previously  thought  to  lack  mass,  like photons.  In  the  “Big  Bang”  theory,  an 
explosion  of  all  matter  in  the  universe  15 billion  years  ago  formed  galaxies 
that  continued  to  expand  away  from  the  original  site.  The   theory  suggested 
roughly  a  billion  neutrinos  for  every  proton  (protons,  the  nuclei  of  hydrogen 
atoms,  made  up  9 0%  of  the  atoms  in  the  universe). 
If  Stecker’s  findings were  correct,  a  spherical  area  of  “heavy”  neutrinos 
created by  the  Big  Bang  would  surround  the  galaxy;  they  would  live  so  long 
PRECED ING   PAGE  LANK  NO?’ FILMED 
4NTfNTlOHU.Y  W  225 

P Ai; 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER  1980 

that only one in  10 million would  have decayed  since the time of  the Big Bang. 
The  weight  of  a billion  would  equal the weight  of m e  nitrogen  atom, but  they 
would  be  so  numerous  that  they  would  account  fclr  the  mysterious  “missing 
mass”  in large  clusters of galaxies. Absence of this mass had  thwarted  calcula- 
tion  of  whether  the  original  expansion  would  continue  forever  o r  would  col- 
lapse  on  itself  to  produce  another  Big  Bang.  (NASA  Release  80-163) 

Ground  testing  of  Space Shuttle engines  suffered another  setback,  the New 
York  7Tmes  reported,  when  three  engines  shut  down  prematurely  during  a 
static test firing in Mississippi.  Th e  engines,  iden tka l   to three now  on the Col- 
umbia  a t   Cape   Canaveral,  were  supposed  to  fire  lor   9  minutes,  41 seconds, 
the  time  it   would  take to put  a  Shuttle  into orb i t .   ~ I A S A  said that  instruments 
indicated  overheating  in   part  of  a  turbopump.  This  11th  firing  of  the  three 
engines  i n   the  test  series would  have  been  t h e  5th  for  the  f u l l   time  needed  to 
launch  a  Shuttle.  Columbia  was  scheduled  for  its, maiden  launch  in  March 
1981.  ( N Y  Times,  Nov  4/80,  C-3) 

NASA  said that JPL would  arrange for media coverage  of  Voyager I’s   Saturn 
encounter  over  a  47-hour  period  on  o r   about  November  11-13,  relaying  live 
television  to  television  stations,  science  centers,  and  planetariums  across  the 
United  States.  Th e   Smithsonian’s  National  Air  and  Space  Museum  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  also planned  to  change  its  regular  closing  time  from  5 : O O  
to  8 :30   p.m.  during  the  encounter  to  handle  the  expected  crowds  and  had 
scheduled  special  programs  around  the  encounter.. (NASA  Release  80-164) 

November  6: ESA  announced  plans  to mark  a milestone  in  space cooperation 
on  o r   about  November  28   when  prime  Spacela13  contractor  VFW -ERN0  
delivered the engineering model to NASA. After 6.5 years  of  development and 
manufacture,  the  model  would  be  ready  for  shiprnent  to  KSC  for  verifying 
flight-unit  interface  with  ground  equipment  and  fo r   training. 
Delivery of  the prototype,  not meant  for  flight, would  be  the first Spacelab- 
hardware  transfer  under  a  1973  memorandum  of  understanding,  followed  in 
1981 by  delivery  of  the  first  flight unit,  which  would  carry  experiments  being 
developed  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.  NASA.,  which  had  ordered  a  se- 
cond  flight  unit  for  delivery  in  1982-1983, had  scheduled  Spacelab  launches 
for  June  and  November  1983.  (ESA  Info  25 ;   NASA  Release  80-180;  MSFC 
Release  80-152) 

November  10:  Th e   Wushingron Star  reported  the  latest  photographs  from 
Voyager 1 on its way  to  Saturn revealed  that the ring  system was far more  com- 
plex  than  Earth-based  observation  suggested.  Besides  rings  within  rings  and 
a  collection  of  particles  filling  the  gaps between  the  major  rings,  the  images 
showed  in the brightest and widest  inner rings fingerlike shadows  like spokes, 
f i r s t   seen  two  weeks  ago,  that  scientists  could  not  explain.  Dr.  Bradford  A .  

226 

NOVEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Smith,  imaging team  leader,  called  the photos  “baffling.”  (W  Star, Nov  7/80, 
B-2) 

LaRC  announced selection of  Martin  Marietta Corporation  for negotiations 
leading  to  a  $2  million,  two-year  contract  for  design  and  development  of  a 
real-time  signal-processing system  using  new  technologies  to  perform  on  a 
spacecraft  several processing  functions  formerly  carried  out  on  the  ground. 
Elements  to  be  developed  included  radiometric  and  geometric  correction 
and  packeting  of  data. The  contractor would  demonstrate these operations on 
Landsat-type  data  in  a  laboratory  and  would  incorporate  new  signal- 
processing  functions  into  commercial-grade  electronic  components.  Martin 
Marietta  would  do   the  work  at  i ts   Denver  facility.  (LaRC  Release  80-93) 

ESA  reported  that  Professor  P.  Wild,  University  of  Berne,  had  discovered 
a  supernova  in  spiral  galaxy  NGC  6946,  a  relatively  close  galaxy  appearing 
nearly  face-on to  the  Earth  and  a prolific  source  of  supernovas  (5 in  the past 
63  years).  Within  three  hours  after  Dr.  Wild  alerted  the  astronomical  com-  
munity,  the  Villafranca  (Spain)  tracking  station  used  the  international 
ultraviolet  explorer  h e   to  acquire  the   first  spec trum ,   before  optical 
astronomers  could  do  so  from  the  ground. 
Early  spectra taken by the station near Madrid  showed the supernova nearly 
at  maximum  and  fading  slowly,  with  a  strong  continuum  representing  a 
temperature of  about  20,000°C. Before  the  object  faded  too  far,  it   would  be 
a  target  of  concerted  observations over  the  electromagnetic  spectrum.  ESA 
noted  that  such  supernovas were  rare,  on ly   two  occurring per  decade on  the 
average;  h e  observers  were  fortunate  in  witnessing  the  event,  second  seen 
since h e ’ s  launch  in  January  1978.  (ESA  Info  26) 

November U :  Only a day  away  from its closest encounter with Saturn,  Voyager 
1 had  s u r p r i s d  scientists again with  images of  a huge hill  on the moon Tethys 
and  some   distorted  “ringlets”  inside  Saturn’s  concentric  ring  system.  The  
head of  the imaging team, Dr. Bradford Smith,  said Saturn’s rings were a com-  
plex  system  with  dozens  of  small  ringlets  forming  perfect  circles  within 
circles;  traditional  theories  did  not  explain  even  the  series  of  concentric 
ringlets. 
Of  one   ringlet offset  in  a  ring  gap,  Smith  said  that  it  was  not  circular  and 
not  of  uniform  width,  varying  from  15  to  50  miles  wide;  this  and  another 
found  elsewhere might  be  caused by  small moonlets not  yet  visible on  either 
side, distorting the  ring particles with their  gravity.  ( W  Star, Nov  12/80, A-5) 

ESA  announced  that  France  had  deposited  its  “instrument  of  ratification” 
of  the convention establishing  the agency, completing legal  formalities for  its 
going  into  force.  Countries  that  signed  the  convention  May  30,  l q 5 ,   had 
agreed  to  make  i t  applicable immediately, permitting ESA  to  operate de facto 
for  more   than  five  years.  Formalizing  the  agency  meant  that  the  11-member 

227 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER   1980 

states could  now  avail themselves of  all possibilities offered  by  the convention 
intended  to  give  a  “truly  European  dimension”  to  the  space  effort. 
Current member  nations were  Belgium,  Denma1 k ,   France, West  Germany, 
Italy,  Ireland,  Netherlands,  Spain,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  and  the  United 
Kingdom.  Ireland  had  signed  the  convention  Dectxnber  31,  1975, and  would 
soon  deposit  with  ESA  its  own  instrument  of  ra t i lka t ion   to  obtain  the  legal 
status of  a  member  state.  Austria,  under  various azreements  to  participate  in 
ESA  programs,  would  be   an  associate  member  as   defined  in  the  convention. 
Canada  and  Norway,  which  had  also  participated  in  some  ESA  programs, 
would  remain  in  observer  status.  (ESA  Info  23 ,   D f D l y ,   Nov  14/80, 65) 

November  12:  Climaxing  a  1.3  billion-mile,  3Ehnonth  trip  from   Ear th ,  
kbyuger  1 came  within  77,000  miles  of  Saturn  for  “man’s  best-ever  look”  at 
i ts   surface, the Washington Star reported. Cameras surveying  some  of  Saturn’s 
moons  revealed  a  huge  crater  with  a  central  peak  on  Mimas;  bright  cobweb 
markings  on  Rhea  and  Dione;  and  a  500-mile  canyon  cutting  through  the 
frozen  surface  of  Tethys,  all  moons  that  until  now  were  only  points  of  light 
as  seen  by  Earth  telescopes. 
Voyager I  showed  particles  i n   the  narrow  outer  F  ring  orbiting  in  three 
“braided”  strands,  as JPL  scientists described  thern;  from 470,000 miles,  the 
ring  appeared  about  2 0  miles  wide  with  small  “knots”  that  might  be  clumps 
of  ring  material,  or   mini-moons.  ( W  Star,  Nov  l W O ,  A-5) 

November  14: NASA  reported  that  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  had  been 
admitted  as   the  48th  member  of  the  United  Nations  outer  space  committee, 
which  the  General  Assembly  had  expanded  from  48  to  5 3   members.  The  
president of  the General Assembly  would  appoint five new members,  one each 
from the  U.N.’s regional  groups;  those  expressing  interest were  Upper  Volta, 
Syr ia ,  Uruguay,  Peru, Vietnam,  and Bangladesh. Th e  United  States  supported 
admission  of  the  People’s Republic  but  was  the  sole nay  in  a  113-1  vote  to  ex- 
pand  the  committee.  (NASA  D ly   Acrv  Rp t ,   Nov  14430) 

The  Washington Star  reported  that  SBS  had  bet  its  future  on  the  launch  of 
a  $20 million  satellite as   the  basis  of  a  revolutionary  long-distance telephone 
service.  SBS had  promised  new  communications  at  lower  rates  than  those  of 
AT&T;  its network  would  be  the  first  i n   t h e  world  to use  satellites and ground 
stations alone  to  transmit  voice,  data,  and  video  messages  from one  place  to 
a no th e r .   T e l ephon e   f i rm s   had   prev ious ly  
t r an sm i t t ed   messages   by 
underground  cable  or  microwave-relay  towers. 
The  system  would  connect  a  firm with  its faraway  offices without  reference 
to  local  phone  lines:  it  would  use  a  16- to  25-foot-diameter  antenna  installed 
on a roof or  in a parking  lot to signal the satellite, which would  relay  the signal 
to  ground  stations  at  distant  company  offices  and  give  service  not  presently 
available.  Computers  at  far  locations  could  talk  to  each  other  a t   speeds  20  
times  faster  than  was  now  possible;  facsimile  pictures  could  be  transmitted 

228 

NOVEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

2 0 0   t im e s   f a s t e r ;   and   t h e   sys tem   would  a l low   cu s tom e r s   to  ho ld  
videoconferences  with  executives  located  all  over  the  United  States. 
SBS  had  had  difficulty  i n   selling  its  services,  designed  for  companies  or 
government  agencies  conducting  a  large  amount  of  nationwide  business.  It 
estimated  a  need  for  25   to  30  private-line  customers  to  break  even  by  1983. 
Two  of  its  owner  companies,  IBM  and  Aetna,  were  among  its  10  customers, 
and  General  Motors  had  asked  for  three  stations  to  link  Detroit,  Atlanta,  and 
Dayton.  SBS  said  that  the  launch,  scheduled  for November  15,  should  attract 
attention  and  more   customers  to  the  company.  (W  Star,  Nov  14/80,  B-5) 

November  15: NASA  launched  SBS-A,  the  SBS  spacecraft,  from  ESMC   on 
a  Delta  a t  5 :49   p.m.  EST  into  a  transfer  orb i t .   At  5 :30  p.m.  EST  November 
17, the apogee motor  fired  it as Sbs  I  into a circular geosynchronous orb i t  over 
176 W. The  final  station would  be  over  the  equator  a t   106"W,  south  of  Santa 
Fe,  N .M . ,   for  coverage  of  the  continental  United  States. 
Sbs  1, first  of  a  new  satellite  series  built  by  Hughes  Aircraft,  was  a  spin- 
stabilized  1,212-pound  (550-kilogram)  craf t   216  centimeters  (7  feet)  in 
diameter,  282  centimeters  (9  feet,  3  inches)  high  when  stowed for  launch.  In 
geosynchronous  orb i t ,   extension  of  its  telescoping  solar-panel  cylinder  and 
communications antenna would make  its height 660 centimeters (21 feet,  8 in- 
ches).  Sbs  1 would  also  be   the  first  U.S.  domestic  communications  satellite 
to  use  the  less  congested  12- to  14-GHz (K-band)  high  frequencies.  Its  high- 
speed  all-digital  10-transponder  system could  relay  up   to  480  million  bits  per  
second ,  equal  to more  than  10 million  words.  It would  begin  ear ly   in  1981 to 
provide  integrated  all-digital  interference-free transmission of telephone,  com- 
puter,  electronic  mail,  and   videoconferencing  to  SBS business  and  industrial 
clients. 
Th is  launch  was  also  the   first  use  of  a  new  McDonnell  Douglas  solid-fuel 
payload-assist  module  (PAM) a s  par t  of  the  SBS-A payload,  to  increase  Delta 
capability on  launches  to geosynchronous  orb i t  by  2 0%  over that  of  the usual 
Delta  third  stage.  (NASA  D ly  Actv  Rp t ,   Nov  19/80;  NASA  Release  80-167) 

November 18: NASA  reported  that LeRC  awarded  a  two-year $2,917,800 con- 
tract  to  Energy  Research  Corpora t ion ,  Danbury,  Conn . ,   under  a  DOE   pro- 
gram   managed  by  LeRC,  for  fuel  cell  technology  to  provide  EO-kilowatt 
capacity  needed  to meet  all  heating,  cooling,  and  electrical  needs  of an  apart- 
ment complex or small shopping mall with grea ter  efficiency than that of usual 
systems. Fuel cells would comb ine  hydrogen  and oxygen electrochemically  to 
produce  electricity  a s  well  a s  a  usable  by-product,  heat.  A  fuel-conditioning 
system would produce  hydrogen  from  natural  gas o r  naphtha,  oxygen coming 
from  the  a i r ;   future  such  systems  could  make  hydrogen  from  synthetic  fuels, 
liquid  or  gaseous,  derived  from   coal.  The   LeRC  contract  would  aid  the  
government's  effort  to  develop  high-efficiency  means  of  reducing  U. S .  
dependence  on   scarce  fuels  while  meeting  environmental  standards.  (NASA 
Release  80-170) 

229 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

NOVEMBER  1980 

NASA  reported  selection  of  Hughes  Aircraft’s  space  and  communications 
group  for  negotiation  of  a  $40 million  contract  to  be  managed  by  ARC  for  a 
carr ier  spacecraft to transport  the Galileo probe to Jupiter. Launched  from the 
Space Shuttle  in March  1984,  the probe would  reach  the planet  by  July  1987, 
separate  from  the  carrier,  and  enter  the  atmosphere  to  measure  it  for  about 
one   hour  down  to  a  level  where  pressure  would  be   10  times  that  of  Earth’s. 
Th e   c a r r i e r   would  be   powered  by  two  radioisotope  thermoe lec tr ic  
generators  ( R E S ) ;  solar energy at Jupiter’s distance would be too weak to fur- 
nish  power  to  the carrier, which  would  maintain  contact with  Earth during the 
entire  mission,  returning  data  both  in  real  time  and  for  playback  on  tape 
recorders.  Th e  carr ier  would  receive data  from the probe during  its entry  and 
descent  into  Jupiter’s  atmosphere,  transmitting  i t   to  Earth  stations.  Data  on 
Jupiter’s atmosphere,  believed  to  consist  of  the  original  material  that  formed 
the  stars,  would  give  scientists  better  understanding  of  Jupiter’s  and  Earth’s 
weather  mechanisms.  (NASA  Release  80-171; ARC  Release  80-79) 

NASA  launched  an  eighth  space-processing  applications  rocket,  SPAR  8, 
November  18 from the White Sands missile range in New  Mexico.  Its payload, 
developed  and tested  by  MSFC, was three experiments processed  in  about five 
minutes  of  zero  gravity  in  the  coast  phase  of  the  suborbital  flight,  using  a 
three-axis room-temperature  acoustic levitator; a  single-axis acoustic-levitator 
furnace  to  produce  1,575 “C; and  a  specialized  processing  furnace. 
All  experiments  had  apparently  performed  as   expected:  two  were  on 
acoustic  levitation  (use  of  soundwaves  to  keep  liquids  from  contamination  in 
touching the walls  of  a container), one of  them  to  produce a high-temperature 
glass;  the third  experiment  studied  movement  of  bubbles  in molten glass.  Th e  
payload,  damaged  at  impact  on  Ear th ,   was  recovered  for  damage assessment 
and  study  by  the  investigators  of  the  results.  (MSFC  Release  80-148) 

November  19:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  signed  a  memorandum  of 
understanding  with  TVA  on  NASA  support  of  ‘TVA  programs  in  energy 
research,  development,  and  demonstration.  Th e  two  agencies  were  currently 
negotiating  an  agreement  for  TVA  reimbursement  of  NASA  for  MSFC  sup- 
port  of  TVAs  coal-gasification  project.  NASA  for  some  time  had  supported 
DOE  and  other  agencies’  programs  on  energy  research  and  development 
(R&D) because  its  facilities  were  adaptable  to  such  research.  TVA  had  re- 
quested NASA  assistance because of  the NASA  s taff  s experience  in  engineer- 
ing and  scientific disciplines applicable  to  energy  research  and technology,  as 
well  as   in  managing  such  programs.  (NASA  Release  80-172;  MSFC  Release 
80-145) 

November 20 :  NASA  said  that  the  Shuttle orbiter  IColumbia  would  move  out 
of  the orbiter-processing  facility at KSC  no earlier  than  November  23  for  tow 
to  the  VAB  and  mating  with  the  external  fuel  tank  and  solid-fuel  rocket 

230 

NOVEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

booster.  Actual  date would depend  on  results  of  final  inspections  now  in  pro- 
cess;  NASA  would  issue  an  update  November  22 .   (NASA  Release  80-173) 

ESA  reported  that  INMARSAT had awarded  it a  five-year contract  at U.S.$1 
million  a year  for  leasing  MARECS  satellites  A  and  B when  located  over  the 
Atlantic  and  Pacific  oceans.  The  completed  INMARSAT  system would  cover 
the Atlantic,  Pacific,  and  Indian  oceans  by  using  those  satellites  with  Intelsat 
Vs  carry ing   maritime  communications  payloads,  and   with  one   of  the  
MARISAT  satellites  already  in  orb i t .   For   the  first  time  a  European-built 
satellite  would  let  ships  a t   sea  dial  shore-based  subscribers  directly  and 
establish  telephone  and  telex  links  with  them,  through  the  real-time  highly 
reliable MARECS  system operating  in  the 4 -  and  6-GHz  band  and  on  1.5- to 
1.6-GHz frequencies.  (ESA  Info  28) 

NASA  announced  that Dr.  John E .  Naugle,  its former  chief  scientist,  would 
return  December  1  on  a  temporary  basis  a s   acting  chief  scientist,  principal 
scientific  adviser  to  the  NASA  administrator,  and  continuing  member  of  the 
Advisory  Council  responsible  for  planning  long-range  solar  system  explora- 
tion  and  other  long-range  goals  for  the  agency.  Naugle  had  jo ined   GSFC  in 
1959  as  head  of  its  nuclear  emulsion  section  and  retired  from  the  agency  in 
June  1979. 
During  those 20 years,  he had  been  chief, physics and astronomy  programs, 
at  Headquarters  Office  of  Space   Sciences  in  1961;  director  of  physics  and 
astronomy  programs,  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications,  from  June 
1962 to  May  1966; associate administrator for  space  science and  applications 
in  1967; and deputy  associate administrator  of  NASA  in  1974. He  became  ac- 
ting  associate  administrator  in  April  1975  and  associate  administrator  in 
November  1975.  H e  was  appointed  chief  scientist  in , the  1977  reorganization. 
(NASA  Release  80-175; Hq  anno   Nov  21/80) 

November 21: LeRC  awarded  a one-year  $150,980 gran t  to  Atlanta  University 
for research  in high-strength  fibrous polymers  (a  low-cost silicon product)  for 
use .in  solar  cells,  and  complex  iron molecules  for  a  chemical-storage  system. 
Lockheed-Georgia Company would give $25,000 in technical  suppor t .  (NASA 
Release  80-174) 

November  24 :   The   Space  Shuttle  Columbia,  OV-102,  rolled  ou t   of  KSC’s 
orbiter-processing  facility  a t  6:01 p.m.  and  moved  to  the  VAB  for  mating  to 
its  external  tank  and  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters.  Next  rollout,  from   VAB  to 
launch  pad ,   would  occur  late  in  December.  (NASA D ly  Actv Rpt  Nov  26/80; 
NASA  anno  Nov  24/80) 

NASA  reported  that  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch ,   its  administrator,  had  signed  an 
agreement  November  18  in  Bangalore,  Ind ia ,   with  Dr.  Satish  Dhawan, 
secretary  of  the  Indian  government’s  Department  of  Space,  for  launch  by 

231 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

NOVEMBER   1980 

NASA  of  two  India  communications  satellites/mi:tesats. 
In  geosynchronous 
orbit,  India’s national  satellites  (INSAT)  1A and  1B  would provide the  subcon- 
tinent  with  point-to-point  television  and  voice,  coinmunity  broadcasting,  and 
weather data.  Launch would be either by  Shuttle 01,  at India’s option, on Delta 
(expendable)  launch  vehicles. 
Under the agreement, India’s Department of  Space would be  responsible for 
manufacture  of  the  satellites  (under  contract  to  Ford  Aerospace),  and  for 
checkout and integration of  a spinning solid upper  stage  (SSUS) to boost  them 
into  transfer  orbit  for  maneuver  to  geosynchronoiis  sta,tions.  NASA  through 
KSC  would  provide all  other  launch-related services.  INSAT  1A was  schedul- 
cd  for Shuttle  launch  in August  1983, or  on  a D e l u  in  February  1982; INSAT 
lB ,   by  Shuttle  in   December  1983  o r   a  Delta  i n   July  1983.  (NASA  Release 
80-176) 

November  25 :   ARC  announced  that  it  would  host  a  workshop  in  December 
on  the  atmosphere  of  Titan,  largest  of  Saturn’s  moons  and  bigger  than  the 
planet Mercury.  Experts on Titan  from NASA,  t h e  university  community, and 
elsewhere  would  discuss  the  temperature,  pressure,  and  physical  nature  of 
Titan’s  surface,  in  view  of  new  data  from  b y u g u  f’s   flyby.  (ARC  Release 
80-85) 

ARC  announced  a briefing  December  4 on findings from the Pioneer  k n u s  
orbiter  and  five  atmosphere probes.  Scientists could  now  explain  the  planet- 
wide circulation  of  the Venus atmosphere; ultraviolet photography  over a  two- 
year  period  showed  long-term  patterns  of  cloud  circulation;  more  new  work 
seemed to explain the  “hothouse effect”  that  produced  Venus’s heat;  and  new 
measurements  were  available  of  elements  in  that  atmosphere.  For  television, 
ARC  had  prepared  large  color  illustrations  of  Venus  atmosphere  circulation 
as  well  as  new  color pictures  of  the planet  and  mo’dels of  the  Pioneer  orbiter. 
(ARC  Release  80-84) 

NASA  announced  selection  of  Ball  Aerospace  Systems to  negotiate  a  cost- 
plus-award-fee  contract  estimated  at  $21  million  for  an  Earth  Radiation- 
Budget  Satellite ERBS and mission  operations  support. Th e  satellite would be  
integrated,  tested,  and  delivered  for  Shuttle  launch  by  April  1984. Working 
with  NOAA-F  and  NOAA-G,  it  would  become  part  of  a  three-spacecraft 
system  using  scanning  and  nonscanning  radiomettm  to  measure  solar  radia- 
tion  received  and reflected  from various  regions of  Earth.  NASA’s  experimen- 
tal  Nimbus  6  and  N imbus   7 carried  radiation-budget  instruments,  but  the 
(ERBS) would  offer  for  the  first  time  measurement  of  radiation  on  a  global 
basis  24  hours  per  day.  (NASA  Release  80-178) 

NASA  reported  that  Peter  Bird,  a  33-year-old  London  photographer,  who 
in  1974 crossed the Atlantic  with a friend  in a rowboat, had  left Baja California 
for  Australia  November  11  alone  in  the  same  vessel  (Royal Navy  rescue  boat 

232 

NOVEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Britannia  I I )  carrying  a NASA  locator beacon  of  the  type used  on Nimbus  6. 
This  type  of  beacon  had  tracked  a  two-man  balloon cross ing   of  the Atlantic, 
an  expedition  into  the   Egyptian  desert,  and  a  Japanese  explorer’s hike  from 
Canada  to  the  North  Pole  and  the  length  of  Greenland,  all  in  1978,  sending 
data  to GSFC  for computation  and  relay  to  pinpointing  locations.  Bird  would 
use  the  locator  for  his  own  position  computations.  (NASA  Release  80-177) 

November 26: ARC announced plans to flight  test the parachute  system  for the 
Galileo Jupiter-atmosphere  probe,  third and last test of  the system at the Naval 
Weapons  Center  test  range  at  China  Lake,  Calif.  Previous  tests  revealed  the 
need  for  improvements, which  had  been  made  on  the  chutes  to  be   tested.  On 
completion  of  the  test  program,  the  design  would  be   ready  for  delivery. 
Early  i n   1982 a U.S. Air  Force Geophysics Laboratory balloon  would  carry  
a  fu l ly   equipped  probe  to  100,000-foot  altitude  over  the White  Sands missile 
range and release it in a drop  like the Jupiter descent,  including parachute  and 
hardware  staging.  When   launched  by  a  Shuttle  and  released  from  its  carr ier  
a t  the planet in September 1987, the parachute would  slow descent of the probe 
in  the  turbulent  atmosphere,  using  its  six  instruments  to  measure  chemical 
elements  and  compounds,  weather  patterns,  and  pressures.  (ARC  Release 
80-81) 

ESA  said that  Er ik  Quistgaard,  its director  general,  would  meet  in  London 
November 27  with  Olof  Lundberg,  director general  of  INMARSAT,  to  sign a 
contract  for  lease  to  ESA  of  2  Marecs  satellites  [see  Nov.  201.  Th e  contract, 
worth  about  U.S.$65 m i l l ion ,   would  g o  into  e f fec t   in   1982. ESA  was  first  of 
three  entities  expected  to  contract  with  INMARSAT  for  satellites  to  provide 
a  new  worldwide  maritime  telecommunications  service  for  the  international 
shipping  community.  (ESA  Info  29) 

November 27: Th e  Soviet Union  launched  a  redesigned  spacecraft,  Soyuz  73, 
carrying  three  cosmonauts  in  what  the New  York  Times called  a  possible  bid 
to  break  the  185-day  endurance  record  set  in  October.  Launch  a t   5:18  p m .  
Moscow  time was  from  the  cosmodrome  a t  Baykonur  in  Soviet central  Asia; 
Tass  reported  that  all  systems  were  working well.  Th e  pilot  of  the   flight  was 
Lt.  Col.  Leonid  Kizim,  39,  a  first-time  flyer  in  space;  flight  engineer  Oleg 
Makarov,  47,  had  flown  on  Soyuz  12  in  September  1973  and  Soyuz  27  in 
January  1978, as  well  as  the  “anomaly”  of April  1973. Research engineer Gen- 
nady  Strekalov,  40,  also  a  rookie,  had  worked  for  20  years  in  spacecraft 
design.  This was the  first three-person  flight launched by  the Soviet Union  in 
nine  years,  since the crew of  Soyuz  11  died during  reentry  in  June   1971 when 
their  capsule  sprang  a  leak  and  lost  pressure.  Th e  cosmonauts  had  not  worn 
their  space  suits  because  of  crowded  conditions  on   the  capsule. 
Vladimir  Shatalov,  head  of  cosmonaut  training,  said  that  Soyuz 73 had  “all 
the  latest  accomplishments  of  science  and  technology”  including  a  fast  on -  
board  computer  to  free  the  crew  “to  the  maximum  from  . .  . .rou t ine  opera- 

2 3 3  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER  1980 

tions.”  Th e   system  was  said  to  perform  all  calculations  needed  to  dock  with 
another  craft  such as Sulyut  6. However,  Radio Moscow  did  not  say  how  long 
the  flight would  last,  and  Moscow  media did  not  say  whether  Soyuz  B would 
link  with  Sulyut  6,  which  had  been  i n   orbit  three  years-only 
that  the  crew 
would  test  a  new  spacecraft. 
Soyuz  73  was  first  of  that  type  to  carry  a  three--person crew,  39th  in  the 
Soyuz  series, and  sixth manned  craft  to  be  launched  in  1980. Two  tests of  the 
new  design had  been  successful: an unmanned Soyu:; Th ad  docked with  space 
station  Su lyu t   6 i n   December  1979,  and  Soyuz  Z2 carrying  Yuri  V.  Malyshev 
and  Vladimir  V.  Aksyonov  had  joined  the  Soyuz  36  crew  (record-holders 
Valery  Ryumin  and Leonid Popov)  there in June of  this year. Salyut  6, design- 
ed  to  last  only  18 months,  had  supported  four  expeditions over  its  three  years 
in   orb i t .   When  Ryumin  and  Popov  left  i t   s ix   weeks  ago,  after  a  thorough 
overhaul of  its equipment,  they   said that  i t  was  f i t   for   further use.  ( N Y  T ime s ,  
NOV 27/80,  A-3;  W  Post,  NOV 28/80,  A-28) 

During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William  R .  Lucas, center direc- 
tor,  had  appointed  Thomas J.  (Jack) Lee deputy  director,  effective December 
1.  Lee  had  worked  at  the  center  and  its  predecessor  since  1958  and  for  the 
past  six years had  managed the Spacelab program,  ,working with  ESA on  this 
Shuttle  payload.  John  W.  Thomas,  Lee’s  deputy,  would  succeed  as  manager 
of  the  Spacelab  office. 
Lucas  named  John  S.  Potate,  associate  director  for  management,  to  a  new 
position  as  associate  director.  Potate  had  come  to  MSFC  in  1973  from  the 
Apollo  lunar-landing  program  at  KSC  and  at  Headquarters.  (MSFC  Release 
80-149) 

234 

December 

December  1: Astronomer Robert Victor,  a professor at Michigan State Univer- 
sity,  said that  the Christmas  season  would  be  marked  by  a  triple  conjunction 
of Jupiter and Saturn  “worth gazing at”  that would  not  occur again until A .D .  
2238 o r  2239.  The  event had occurred  in  7 B.C.  and  resembled  a  similar con- 
junction  of  Jupiter and  Venus  in  2 B.C.,  either of  which  could  have  appeared 
as the guiding  light of  the Magi  or  star of Bethlehem. ( W Star, Dec  1/80, A-2) 

ARC  announced plans  to mark   the  second  anniversary of  Pioneer  Venus’s 
orbiter  when  it  would  complete  two  Earth  years  (equivalent  to  three  Venus 
days) circling  the  cloud-covered  planet.  It  should  remain  in  orbit  there  until 
1992,  looking  at  Venus  from  a  variety  of  new  vantage  points. 
Since  its  arrival  December  4, 1978,  Pioneer  had  made   730  24-hour  orbits 
and  returned more  than a thousand W pictures of Venus’s  clouds. It has map- 
ped  93%  of  the  surface  by  radar,  showing  a  terrain  of  mountains,  high 
plateaus,  and  wide  plains.  To  transmit  its  40  billion  data  bits  back  to  Earth, 
its  antenna  had  made  more  than  5  million  rotations  relative  to  the  spinning 
spacecraft;  it  had  recorded  75  gamma-ray  bursts  from  other  parts  of  the 
galaxy,  and  i t s   other  instruments had  measured  Venus’s  atmosphere  and  sur- 
face,  interior,  and  surrounding  environment. 
During  the  first  two  years,  Earth  commands  had  kept  Pioneer  in  a  fixed 
position; from now  on i t  would  “float”  in response to pressures of  solar radia- 
tion and of  Venus  and solar gravity,  orbiting over the planet’s equator by  1986. 
I tw o u l d  be  able to  measure the bow  shockwave of  Venus  and  its wake  region 
in  the  solar  wind,  or   “tail,”  possibly  in  cooperation  with  USSR  spacecraft 
scheduled  to  arrive  there  in  1982  and  1984.  (ARC  Release  80-88) 

December  2 :  The  NSTL  in  Mississippi completed a  fourth and  final cycle of 
certification tests on the Shuttle main engine. Certification required successful 
completion  of  four  test  cycles  each  of  13  tests  and  more   than  5,000  seconds 
of  operation,  using  two  different engine assemblies.  A  cluster  of  three  main 
engines and two  solid-&el  rock&  would  thrust  the Shuttle into orbit.  (NASA 
Release  80-182;  MSFC   Release  80-L58) 

MSFC  said that the Michoud  facility near New  Orleans had begun  assembl- 
ing  the  lightweight  external-propellant tank  for  the  Space  Shuttle.  Built  by 
Martin Marietta Aerospace,  the modified  tank would weigh 6,000 pounds  less 
than  its  predecessor,  increasing  Shuttle  payload  capacity  by  about  that 
amount.  Recent structural tests  showed that  reducing  thickness of  skin panels 

235  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1980 

would not affect tank  integrity;  changing materials of  some components would 
also  take  advantage  of  recent  research. 
Th e  external  tank  (actually  two  tanks  connected  by  a  collar-like  intertank) 
would  contain  liquid-hydrogen  and  liquid-oxygen  propellants  for  the  three 
Shuttle main  engines  and  would  be   the  only major  element  not  recovered  for 
reuse.  First  of  the  lightweight tanks  should  be   ready  for  delivery  in  the  sum- 
mer  of  1982  for  the  fifth  Shuttle  launch.  (MSFC  Release  80-155) 

Th e  N e w   York  Times reported  that  the  first  attempt  at  long-distance  solar- 
powered  flight  lasted  22  minutes  when  Solar  Challenger,  Dr.  Paul  Mac- 
Cready’s lightweight high-strength plastic-and-balsa  craft driven  by  a  2.75-hp 
motor,  took off  December 3 about  1:OO  p .m .  from  a n  airport nor th  of  Tucson, 
Ar iz . ,   headed  for  Phoenix,  and  came  down  six  miles  away.  Former  teacher 
Janice Brown,  32 ,  who piloted Challenger,  said that  it was  “fantastic”  and she 
would  “try  again  tomorrow.’’ 
Powered  like other  record-setting MacCready  vehicles by  solar cells cover- 
ing  its  wing  and  tail,  Challenger  apparently  experienced  failure  of  its  motor 
(no larger  than a champagne bottle,  and of  lighter weight,  the New  York  Times 
noted)  and  Brown  set the  1351-pound plane down  on  the deser t ,  where  nearby 
farmers  and  several  American  Indians  came  to  look  at  it.  (NY  Ernes,  Dec 
4/80,  A-18) 

GSFC  said  that  a  team  of  i ts   scientists  and  technicians  had  pioneered  a 
stereo-imaging  technique  for  studying  hurricanes,  using  photographs  of  the 
top  of  the  same hurricane  taken  by  two  spacecraft,  geostationary  operational 
environmental  satellites Goes  East  and Goes West,  hovering  over  the equator 
at  75”W  and  1 3 5 W  Th e   team  combined  time-lapse  cloudcover  photos  of 
Hurricane  Frederic  over  the Gulf  of  Mexico  September  12 in  a  stereo display 
showing  changes  in  the  storm  as  seen  from  spats?  and  allowing  estimates  of 
its  intensity.  (NASA  Release  80-181) 

ESA  said that  it was  training at Toulouse  and  Marseilles  the U.S.  and  Euro- 
pean  Spacelab  mission  and  payload  specialists  ta, give  them  a  better  idea  of 
the  scientific objectives and  let  them  operate  2  of  the  11  French  experiments. 
The   first  Spacelab  payload  would  b e   launched  in  June  1983. 
PICPAB (phenomena  induced by  charged-particle beams), a plasma-physics 
experiment  under  test  at  Toulouse,  would  study  results  of  energetic-particle 
emission  along  Earth’s  magnetic-field  lines,  such  as   neutralization  and  in- 
stability,  for  use  in   remote  measurement  of  electric  fields  and  creation  of  ar-  
tificial  auroras. At  Marseilles  the crew  would  become  familiar with  the very- 
wide-field  camera  for  general W survey  of  most  of  the  celestial  sphere and 
study  of  galactic  and  extragalactic  sources.  (ESA,  Info  30) 

December  4 :   NASA  adjudged  Solar-Maximum  lbiission  Smm  successful  in 
observing  solar  flares  using  five o r   six  experiments  simultaneously, coalign- 

236 

DECEMBER 1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

ing  the  narrow  field-of-view  instruments and  measuring  total  solar  radiation 
over at least six months.  Launched  February  14,  1980,  Smm had  collected the 
most  data ever on solar flares, about 25  in  number,  coordinating with  ground- 
based  optical  and  radio  telescopes  under  the  International  So lar-Max imum  
Year  program.  These  valuable  joint  observations  would  continue.  (NASA 
MOR-S-826-80-01 [postlaunch]  Dec   4 /80 )  

NASA  reported  successful  static-firing  for  591  seconds  December   4   at 
NSTL of  the main Shuttle propulsion system. The  test exceeded the firing time 
needed  to  put  the  Shuttle into  Earth  orb i t .   This  11th  test  of  the  three-engine 
cluster brought  total  test  time on  the main  system  to  almost  32 ,000  seconds, 
in  addition  to  more   than  86,400 seconds of  tests  on  individual engines  con- 
ducted  in  separate  firings.  (NASA  Release  80-184; MSFC   Release  80-160) 

December  5:  KSC  reported  that  Shuttle orbiter  Columbia,  mated  with  other 
elements on  a  mobile  launcher  in  the VAB,  was  ready  for  i t s   first major  test 
as  a  unified  system. On  November  24,  Columbia moved  300 yards  from  the 
VAB  to the orbiter-processing facility where  solid-fuel rocket boosters and ex- 
ternal  tank  had  been  assembled  on  the  mobile  platform.  A   Shuttle-interface 
test  running more  than  two weeks would check electrical and mechanical con- 
nections  between  elements  and  on-board  flight  systems.  Interface  tests 
originally  scheduled  earlier  this  week  were  delayed  by  problems  including 
failure of  a  device providing  umbilical  link  with  the  orbiter. 
This was  the first flow of  flight hardware through KSC processing facilities: 
the  orbiter  Enterprise,  not  built  for  spaceflight,  served  as  “pathfinder” 
through  the  facilities in  1979  but  lacked many  of  the  systems installed  in  Col- 
umbia.  Individual  Columbia  systems  had  passed  checkouts  in  late  1979  and 
early  1980,  but  thesupcoming test  would  check  the  entire  Shuttle system  as  a 
unit w i th , the  prime  and  backup  crews  taking  part  in  simulations of  ascent to 
orb i t ,   abort,  and  descent  to  landing. 
William H.  Shick,  chief of  prelaunch  test  operations,  noted  that  this would 
be   the  first  time  the  astronauts had  occupied  the  cabin  with  the  vehicle  in  a 
vertical  position;  they  would  “get  a  feel  of  what  they  can  and  can’t  reach,” 
he   added,  to  assess  crew  comfort  while  awaiting  launch.  (KSC  Release 
206-80) 

Press  reports  said  that  the  FCC  had  voted  7  to  0  to  approve  construction 
and  launching of  20 new  communications satellites by  8  companies,  tripling 
the  number  of  commercial satellites providing domestic communications ser- 
vice,  in  what  the N e w   York  Ernes called  “in  a  single action  the  greatest  im- 
petus  ever  to  the  expansion  of  satellite service.” 
Besides alleviating a  shortage of  satellite capacity  faced  by  cable  television 
and  other  industries,  FCC  said  that  the  decision would  open  the  way  for  in- 
vestment  of  more  than  $2 billion by  the eight companies.  This was  their  first 
chance  to  compete directly  in   the  long-distance field  with  AT&T,  instead  of 

231 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

D E C EM B E R   1980 

tying  their  local  networks  to  the  Bell  System.  Already  operating  their  own 
satellite  networks  were  three  companies  operating  eight  commercial  com- 
munications  satellites: Western  Union  Telegraph  Company  with  three,  RCA- 
American Communications,  Inc.,  with two,  and Comsat General Corporation 
with  three  leased  entirely  to  AT&T  and  General  Telephone  &  Electronics 
(GTE).  Also  Satellite  Business  Systems  had  finally  launched  its  Sbs  in  
November,  making  nine. 
All  four  current  owners  would  expand  operations  under  the  new  policy: 
AT&T  and  GTE  as   well  as  Hughes  Communications  and  Southern  Pacific 
Communications would build  their own  systems for the first time.  Continental 
Telephone Corporation  and  partner  Fairchild  Industries  would  enter the  field 
through  purchase of  5 0%   of  WU 's   Space Commuriications Corporation.  ( N Y  
Times,  Dec  5/80,  D-1;  W Post,  Dec  5/80,  E-2) 

December  6: NASA  launched  Intelsut  5A  E ,  first  of  a  new  communications 
satellite series,  from  ESMC  at Cape Canaveral, F l i i . ,   at 6:31  p.m.  EST on an 
Atlas  C en t au r ,   in to   a  transfer   orb i t   with  35 ,950-k i lome ter   apogee ,  
166.8-kilometer  perigee,  and  23.75 O  inclination.  ComSatCorp  fired  the  kick 
motor December  8 to put  the craft into near-geosynchronous orbit a t   L5"E  for 
tests.  By  mid-1981  the  communications  satellite  would  be  on  station  at 
338.5 "E.  (NASA  MOR  0-491-203-80-01  [postlaunch]  Dec  29/80) 
-NASA 
issued  a  press  kit  describing  the  spacecraft,  which  weighed 
1,928  kilograms  (4,250  pounds)  at  launch.  Built  by  Ford  Aerospace  using 
system  components developed  by  firms  in  France,  the United  Kingdom, West 
Germany,  Japan,  and  Italy,  it  had  a  capacity  of  1:!,000  voice  circuits  and  2 
television  channels,  almost  double  the  capability  of  earlier  Intelsats.  Cost  of 
the  launch  was  about  $76.6 million,  including  $34  million  for  the  spacecraft 
and  $42 million  for  the Atlas  Centaur  and  launch  services.  INTELSAT,  with 
headquarters  in  Washington,  D.C.,  would  reimburse  NASA  for  costs  of  the 
vehicle  and  launch  services,  under  an  agreement  signed  in  May.  (NASA 
Release  80-179) 

December  8: Th e   Washington Post  reported  that  two  Florida  launches  had  lit 
up  evening  skies with brilliant  colors  and a  streak  o f   light that  prompted  calls 
to  authorities  from  as   far  away  as   Nashville,  Tenn. 
In  the  second  of  four  tests  to  see  whether  ionized  clouds  blocked  com- 
munications  among  aircraft,  satellites,  and  ground  stations,  a  U.S.  Air  Force 
rocket  from  Eglin  Air  Force  Base  in  the  Florida  panhandle  sprayed  the 
ionosphere  116  miles  above  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  with  106 pounds  of  barium 
Sunday,  December  6,  creating  a  pink,  green,  and  purple  haze  monitored  by 
scientists on  the ground  and  in  airplanes. One  aircraft  was  positioned  so that 
the  barium  cloud  passed  between  it  and  an  experimental  satellite  in  orbit 
25,000  miles  up.  About  30  minutes  later,  the  In tdsa t   5 A   E ,  largest  com- 
munications  satellite ever built,  roared  into orbit with  the rocket  trail  familiar 
to  Space  Coast  residents.  ( W  Post,  Dec  8/80,  4) 

2 3 8  

DECEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

December  9:  The   Washington Post  reported  that  Dr.  Paul  MacCready   had 
completed  a  round  of  test  flights  of  his  solar-powered  airplane  Solar 
Challenger to prepare  it  for a  Paris-to-London  flight in  June  1981.  In  six days 
of  tests  at  the  a ir   park  in  Marana,  Ar iz . ,   the  Challenger  had  not  achieved  a 
planned  63-mile  flight  over  the  desert  [see  December  41.  Trouble  with  the 
propeller pitch control and related equipment continued, and MacCready  said 
that  he  wanted  to  consider  some   changes  before  resuming  the  tests.  The  
plane’s  47-foot  wingspan  and  stabilizer  carried  16,000  solar  cells  to  gather 
sunlight and convert it to  power  for the 2.7-hp motor  that  turned the propeller. 
(W  Post,  Dec  9/80,  A-20) 

Responding  to press  reports  on  the  Ariane,  ESA  issued  a  statement  on  its 
program  of  four  flight  tests,  the  second  of  which  failed  when  the  first  stage 
malfunctioned.  ESA  had  identified  the  trouble  and  taken  steps  to  rectify  it. 
Test  3  would  now  take place  in  June  1981 and  test  4  in  the  au tumn  of  that 
year, a timetable ESA  said was  compatible with  i ts  commitments  to  put  scien- 
tific and  communications satellites  into orbit in  late  1981 and  1982. Financing 
arranged  at  the  outset,  which  included  20%   for  contingencies, would  cover 
the  additional  studies and  tests  needed.  (ESA  Info  31) 

December  10:  Press  reports  said  that  the  three  cosmonauts  launched 
November  27  in  Soyuz 23 on  a  repair mission to  the  three-year-old  space sta- 
tion  Sulyut  6 had  returned  safely  from  their  13-day  flight  December   10  at 
l2 :26  p .m .   Moscow  time.  Landing was  in Kazakhstan in  Soviet central Asia. 
Leonid Kizim,  Oleg Makarov,  and Gennady Strekalov were  in  perfect condi- 
tion,  Tass  said.  This was  the  sixth manned  mission  by  the  Soviet Union  this 
year and the first three-person crew orbited since 1971, when three cosmonauts 
died  during  reentry  after  a  valve  blew  on   Soyuz  11. 
A   new  guidance system on Soyuz-73 took  over  after  liftoff  and  guided  it  to 
smooth  docking  with  Sulyut  6.  The   spacecraft,  third  of  an  improved  version 
of  the Soyuz (mainstay of  the Soviet space program  since 1967), carried  solar 
batteries,  an  on-board  computer,  improved  maneuvering  rockets,  and  im- 
provements  in  cabin  comfort  for  the  cosmonauts.  The   crew  had  performed 
repairs  and  maintenance  on   Salyut  6  telemetry,  refueling  systems,  and 
temperature  controls.  (W  Pos t ,  Dec   10/80,  A-2;  Dec   11/80,  A-13;  NY   Times, 
Dec  ll/80, A-23) 

December  ll: ARC  reported that  its Earth-resources  survey aircraft (U-2) was 
helping  the  U.S.  Forest  Service,  National  Park  Service,  and  California 
Department of  Forestry fight  fires by  providing  real-time infrared  imaging  of 
smoke-obscured  landscapes.  The   images,  used  for  the  first  time  October  2 
during a  fire at Kings Canyon National  Park  in the Sierra Nevada  where thick 
smoke  blocked aerial viewing, gave the size, shape, direction of  burn,  and hot 
spots of  the  fire. Crews had  to  hike  four hours each way  to  get  to  some  areas. 

239 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1980 

Steep terrain would  endanger  firefighters and  equipment  if  the  fire perimeter 
was  unknown. 
Flying  at  21-kilometer  altitude  (about  65,000  feet),  the  plane  used  a 
Daedalus  multispectral  scanner  with  a  Fairchild  charge-coupled  linear-array 
scanner  to  send  infrared  (IR)  images  directly  to  ARC,  which  transferred  the 
hard  copy  of  processed  information  immediately  to  U.S.  Geological  Survey 
maps  of  the area .  Within  10 minutes,  fire control  headquarters would  receive 
a  telecopy  for  use  in  deploying  manpower  and  cquipment.  Th e   U-2  could 
photograph  a  fire  for  up   to  5  hours  and  tramm i t   anywhere  within  500 
kilometers (300 miles) of ARC,  located  near  San Francisco,  covering virtually 
all  forested  lands  in  California.  (ARC  Release  80-90) 

NASA announced development of a new  lightweight flame-resistant material 
subject  only  to  charring  even  at  800°F   (426°C): polyimide  resilient  foam,  a 
product  of  International  Harvester’s  solar  division  at  San  Diego,  under  con- 
tract  to  JSC.  Use of  the  new  foam,  available  next  year,  would  reduce hazards 
for  buses,  trains,  and  automobiles  as   well  as   planes. 
Between  1965 and  1978,  fires  occurred  in  20%   of  all  passenger  air-carrier 
accidents and  caused  2,727  deaths,  469  of  them  (17%) attributed  to  effects  of 
fire o r  srnolce. Airlines  and builders of  commercial  planes had  sought improv- 
ed materials  since the  1960s; i n  the  late  1960s, materials  developed  by  NASA 
for  Apollo  and  Skylab were made  available  to  the  industry,  which  chose  not 
to  use  them  because  of  cos t ,   scarcity,  and  lack of  durability.  (NASA  Release 
80-185) 

9  INTELSAT  said  that  the  full  launch  sequence  for  Intelsat  5A   E ,  world’s 
largest  and  most  advanced  commercial  communications  satellite,  was  com- 
pleted  successfully  December  10  when  the  craft  unfolded  its  antennas  upon 
command f rom  the  Washington,  D.C., control center relayed  through a ground 
station  a t   Fucino,  Italy. 
Launched December 6 on an Atlas Centaur into t2  highly  elliptical orb i t ,  the 
satellite  went  into  near-circular  orbit  when  the  apogee  motor  was  fired 
December 8.  For the next  two days the control  cenier staff had been activating 
it  into  operational  configuration,  unfurling  its  giant  51-foot  (15.6-meter) solar 
arrays  and locking its sensors on the Earth,  spinning up  the momentum wheel 
to  stabilize it  facing Earth’s  surface. Final operation  was antenna deployment. 
Intelsar  5A   Fz would  now  drift  in  equatorial  orbit  to  its  station  as  primary 
Atlantic  Ocean  communications  satellite by  May  1981,  when  it  would  begin 
serving as communications link between the weste;rn hemisphere and Europe, 
the  Middle  Eas t ,   and  Africa.  (INTELSAT  Release  80-29-1) 

December  12:  NASA  reported  that  GSFC  scientists  had  developed  a  high- 
precision  radioastronomy  system  to  study  movements  of  Earth’s  crust.  A 
technique known  as  Very  Long  Baseline  Interferoinetry  (VLBI) used  ground 
antennas to observe fixed extragalactic sources, usually quasars.  Arrival of  the 

240 

DECEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

quasar  signal at  the different points at  different times  could  serve to  calculate 
geometrically the distance between the stations with a high degree of  accuracy. 
The  VLBI technique had  been  one means used  by  NASA  with  other  federal 
agencies  to  study movement  and  deformation of  Earth’s crus t ,   including  how 
and  why  earthquakes occur. A   team  representing GSFC ;   the Haystack  obser- 
vatory  at  Westford,  Mass.;  MIT   at  Cambridge;  and  JPL ,   Pasadena,  Ca l if . ,  
had  refined  the  technique  for  ultraprecise  geodesy  using  fixed  o r   mobile 
radioastronomy antennas 4  to 64 meters (13 to 210  feet) in diameter to measure 
Earth  and  polar  rotation with  precision better  than  10  centimeters  (4  inches), 
and  detect  Earth  movement  preceding  large  earthquakes.  Such  movement 
might occur  so slowly and over  so wide a region as to be undetectable by  con- 
ventional  means.  The   project  had  used  fixed  stations  in  California  and 
Massachusetts and  at  Green  Bank, W.Va.,  and  F t .   Davis,  Tex.,  as  well  as  in  
Sweden, West  Germany,  and  England.  JPL   was  also working  the  system into 
a  mobile  station to  measure movement  in  the Western  United  States.  (NASA 
Release  80-187) 

NASA  said  that  the  Shuttle integrated  flight  system was  i n   its  second  week 
of  tests  in  the VAB  at  KSC.  Electrical and mechanical  interfaces between  the 
elements and between the individual Shuttle systems were under extensive test 
the past  week,  including umbilical connections between  launcher and orbiter, 
external-tank  tumble  system,  and  inertial-measurement  unit.  Interface  tests 
began at 2:OO a .m .  December  4  and had  continued around the clock since that 
time.  The   integrated  test  began  early  December   10;  flight  simulations with 
prime  and back-up crews would begin December  14. (NASA Release 80-190; 
KSC  Release  261-80). 

NASA  announced  signing  of  an  agreement  in   Jakarta  December   9  by  Dr. 
Stanley I.  Weiss,  associate administrator  for  space  transportation operations, 
and  Drs  Suryadi,  Indonesia’s  director  general  of  posts  and  telecommunica- 
tions,  for  NASA  launch  of  two  Indonesian  communications  satellites. 
Satellites  Palapa  B-1  and  Palapa  B-2  in  geosynchronous  orbit  would  offer 
voice,  video,  telephone, and  high-speed  data  service  to  member   states of  the 
Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  [ASEAN)  including,  besides  In- 
donesia,  the  Philippines,  Thailand,  Malaysia,  and  Singapore.  NASA  would 
launch  B-1  between  January  1983  and  January  1984,  depending  on  Shuttle 
availability, and B-2 between January and March   1984; it had  launched earlier 
versions  of  Palapa  in  1976-77.  (NASA  Release  80-183) 

December  16: NASA  reported that  it was’test firing Shuttle main engines with 
spalled  (pitted  o r   flaked)  bearings  and  cracked  turbine  blades,  to  show  that 
the liquid-fuel engines could tolerate less-than-perfect conditions and  still per- 
form  Shuttle missions  successfully. Firing  began  this  week  at  NSTL  and  at 
Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division  in  California.  The  bearings and  blades  were 
parts  of  the  engine’s high-pressure oxidizer pump:  in  more   than  153 tests on 

241 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

DECEMBER  1980 

2 3  pumps, totaling  more  than  34,000 seconds of  operation, only  five instances 
of  spalling  on  the  bearings  occurred,  detected  i n   inspections  after  the  tests. 
In  each  instance,  operation  of  engine  and  pump  was  satisfactory. 
Since procedures  for chilling before  operation were  improved, 6 pumps had 
gone  through  25   tests  (7,500  seconds  of  operation)  with  zero  spalling. 
Although engine runs had produced  some cracked turbine blades,  such cracks 
had  caused  no  failures  or  engine  malfunctions  in  more   than  98,000  seconds 
of testing.  NASA had  instituted  the tests for added assurance of  successful per- 
formance even with  cracked blades o r  spalled bearings  in the Shuttle engines. 
Testing  was  under  the  direction  of  MSFC.  (NASA  Release  80-191) 

DFRC  reported  that on December  16 Dr. Roben. A .  Frosch visited  it  for the 
first  time  as  NASA  administrator,  holding  an  all-hands  meeting  in  the  
auditorium  for  an  overview  of  NASA  status  and  a  farewell  speech.  Center 
director  Isaac  T.  Gillam  IV gave  Frosch  a  montage of  photographs  of  DFRC 
research  aircraft.  After  the meeting,  Frosch  briefed  local  reporters  on Shuttle 
status.  (FRC  X-Press,  Dec  19/80, 4) 

December 18: KSC  reported  that  the Shuttle interlace  tests were corning to an 
end .  Th is  first major checkout of  the integrated  flight system was to close with 
a  series of  four  simulations using  prime  and back-up crews of  the first  launch 
to  validate  computer  programs  that  would  serve on-board  flight  systems  dur- 
ing  the  first  STS mission  in  1981; the  last  two  simulations were  scheduled  for 
December  18. 
Tile  work  and  processing  of  gap  fillers  was  continuing,  with  only  a  small 
amount of  gap-filler  work  to  be  completed  after  t h e  Shuttle moved  to  Pad  A 
of  Launch  Complex  39.  At  the  pad ,   filling  of  the  liquid-oxygen  storage  tank 
was  to  be  complete December  17,  as  would  insertion  and  removal  of  dummy 
payloads  to  test  the  service  structure.  Tests  of  U K  Liberty  retrieving  solid- 
fuel rocket  casings from the ocean would  continue through December  19, and 
sister  ship  U K  Freedom  would  begin  sea  trials  later.  (KSC  Release 268-80) 
The  Washington Star carried a UP1 report  that astronauts Richard Truly and 
Joe Engle had  put Columbia through  its third rehearsal  of  the week December 
18  “as  slick  as  silk,”  improving  chances  of  launch  March  14.  ( W  Star,  Dec 
19/80, A-5) 

NASA  announced  that  rollout  of  orbiter  Columbia  to  the  launch  pad  would 
occur  no  earlier  than  December  29   a t   KSC.  The  move  was  postponed  from 
December  26 because of  time  lost in VAB  processing,  intensity of  crew  work, 
and  a  two-day  holiday  vacation. Gap-filler  closure  rate was  averaging  275  per 
day  and  would  not  constrain  the  rollout  data,  N.4SA  said.  (NASA  Release 
80-195) 

INTELSAT  announced  that  its board  of  governors had  decided  to  purchase 
three  more  Intelsat  5A  satellites  in  addition  to  the  nine  already  on  hand  for 

242 

DECEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

the  Intelsat  5  series,  the  latter to be  launched  by  the  end  of  1982. Launching 
of  the 5A  series would begin in  1984; basically similar to Intelsat 5, they  would 
have  increased  reliability and  25 %I  more  communications capacity,  handling 
15,000  telephone calls  compared  to  12,000. (INTELSAT  Release  80-30-1) 

December  19: LaRC  announced  successful demonstration of  the world’s  first 
gas  laser  powered  directly  by  sunlight.  Conventional  laser  systems  required 
intermediate energy conversion to  achieve lasing: LaRC’s device without con- 
version  components  reduced  system  size,  weight,  complexity,  and  cost. 
Researchers J.H.  Lee  and W .R .  Weaver  directed light  from  a  solar  simulator 
onto a quartz tube filled with gaseous iodide; the light excited the iodide, caus- 
ing  lasing  and  emission  of  a  5-W  burst  of  concentrated  light  waves. 
NASA  plans  for  lasers  included  use  of  a  space-based  system  powered  by 
sunlight to  direct  a  laser  beam  at  remote  space operations;  at  the  operations 
site, the laser would  change to conventional energy  such as electricity or heat. 
A  laser might propel  a  special space engine to  provide economical transfer of 
payloads  in  orb i t .   (LaRC  Release  80-96;  NASA  Release  80-196) 

NASA  noted  that Pioneer 6 had  completed  15 years of  circling the  Sun  and 
returning  solar  data,  longest  operating  life  attained  by  an  interplanetary 
spacecraft. Original Pioneer specifications had  called for a working life of  six 
months. 
Pioneer  6  was  first  to  measure  the  interplanetary  medium  in  detail, 
sometimes  over  a  half-billion-mile  distance.  It  measured  the  Sun’s  corona, 
returned data  on  solar  storms, and  measured a  comet’s ta i l .   It  acquired data 
on  solar  cosmic  rays,  the  solar  wind,  and  the  solar  magnetic  field,  all  three 
of  which  extend  far  beyond  the  orbit  of  Jupiter. 
Launched  in  December   1965,  the  140-pound  (64-kilogram) drum-shaped 
TRW-built  craft  was  35  inches  (89  centimeters) high  and  37  inches  (94  cen- 
timeters) in diameter,  covered with  solar  cells, and  carried  three booms   EO” 
apart.  With Pioheer  7, Pioneer 8, and Pioneer  9,  its  sister craft,  it constituted 
a  network  of  solar  weather  stations circling  the  Sun millions of  miles  apart. 
All current Pioneers (6  through U ,  and the Pioneer orbiter at Venus) were still 
operating; mission manager Richard  Fimmel  said that Pioneer 6 was  so good 
“that  we  may  get  another  10  years  out  of  it.”  (NASA  Release  80-194) 

December  23:  KSC reported  final preparations under  way  for moving  the or- 
biter  Columbia  from  VAB  to  pad  A ,   Launch  Complex  39,  within  the  week. 
Mating  Columbia  in  the  VAB  to  its  external  propellant  tank  and  solid-fuel 
rocket boosters November 24 was  followed by  tests of  ground-support connec- 
tions  for  checkout,  fueling,  and  launch,  and  of  the  entire  flight  system. 
December  23  should  see  completion of  the  installation and  checkout of  ord- 
nance  (any explosive devices for parting components like the boosters and ex- 
ternal  tank  from  the  vehicle  in   flight). 
Gap-filler work  needed  before  rollout would  be  complete by  December  27; 

243 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

D E C EM B E R   1980 

the  crawler-transporter  would  take  its place under  the mobile  launch platform 
December  28.  Senior  NASA  managers  would  review  the  VAB  tests  and  pad 
A  status  before  rollout  to  make  sure  no  constraints  existed.  (KSC  Release 
275-80) 

December 24: NASA  said that  ARC  had  begun a  study  of  the effect on airline 
pilots of  irregular work  schedules and  sleep patterns  and  frequent  crossing  of 
time zones.  Studies of animals and humans  showed  that  reduced performance, 
short-term  memory  lapses,  loss  of  attentiveness  and  alertness,  and  fatigue 
were  results  of  “circadian  desynchronosis”  (’jet 
lag),  the  disturbance  of 
24-hour biological  rhythms,  especially  sleep cycles. Previous research  was on 
s h i f t   w o r k e r s ,   t r u c k e r s ,   s h i p   crews ,   a n d   r a i l r o a d   engineers, b u t   l i t t l e   o n  a i r l i n e  
crews. 
A workshop  last August  for airline,  research,  and FAA personnel  agreed on 
pilot  fatigue as   a  problem  but  could  not  agree  on  its  magnitude.  A  group  of 
life  scientists checked  reports  from NASA’s  safety  reporting  system  for events 
possibly  related  to  fatigue;  another  group  reviewed  scientific  literature  to 
prepare  a  bibliography  on jet  lag  in  lay  terms  and  distribute it  to  the  aviation 
community.  ARC  would also do  a  field  study  on  dietary,  sleep, rest,  and drug- 
use patterns  of  commercial  airline crews and study altered  sleep and nutrition 
patterns  in  its  simulation  facilities.  (NASA  Release  80-197) 

December  29:  Dr.  Alan  M .  Lovelace,  NASA’s  deputy  administrator,  submit- 
ted  his  resignation  effective  this  date,  but  agreed  to  be   appointed  agency 
associate administrator  and general manager. Named  deputy  administrator  by 
President Ford  in June  1976, Lovelace  had been associate administrator  for the 
Office of  Aeronautics  and  Space Technology  (OAST)  since  September  1974. 
In  his  new  post  he would  continue the basic  management he did as  deputy ad- 
ministrator  and  be   acting  administrator  during  the  absence  of  departing  ad- 
ministrator  Dr. Robert A.  Frosch  from  January  20  until  appointment of  a new 
administrator  and confirmation  by  the Senate. Th is  arrangement,  agreed to by 
both  President Carter’s and President-elect  Reagan‘s  staffs,  would  give NASA 
maximum  continuity  of  management.  (NASA  Release  80-200) 

Bolted  nose  up  to  crawler-transporter,  Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia  arrived  at 
its  KSC  launch  pad  for  final  tests  before  launch  into  space  in  1981.  The  
transporter  made  the  3.5-mile  trip  over  a  rocky  road  at  1 mph  or  less,  com- 
pleting  the  operation  about  8:OO  p.m.  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch,  NASA  ad- 
ministrator, told  a  “shivering crowd”  that  turned  out to watch  the journey  that 
“we  are  now  at  the  threshold  of  a  new  capability  to  investigate  the universe.” 
Richard G.  Smith, KSC director,  and George Page,  Shuttle launch director, 
said  that  test  firings,  simulated  countdowns,  and other work  at  the pad would 
probably  delay  liftoff  to  the  end  of  March or early  April.  Navy  Cdr.  John W. 
Young,  who  had  gone  into  space  four  times  and  would  command  the  first 
flight,  told  reporters  that  delays  i n   the  program  resulted  from  the concern  for 

244 

DECEMBER  1980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

safety:  more   than  a  year  went  into  attaching,  replacing,  and  strengthening 
thermal  tiles  designed  to  protect  the  Shuttle astronauts from  the heat of  reen- 
try.  ( B  Sun, Dec  30/80,  4) 

245 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS ,   1981 

January 

January  7:  Ames  Research  Center  (ARC)  announced  the  completion  of  a 
flight  program  to  evaluate  the  quiet  short-haul  research  aircraft  (QSRA). 
Twenty-two visiting  pilots  representing  16  organizations  made  2  flights  each 
in  the   modified  deHavilland  Buffalo  (C-8A) with  a  new  wing  design  and  4 
Lycoming  YF-102  engines  mounted  on   the   wing  to  provide  propulsive  lift. 
NASA  offered  the   evaluation  program  to  introduce  QSRA  technology  to 
potential  users,  obtain  feedback  on  the  future  of  the  program,  and  get  an  in- 
dependent  critique.  Participating  pilots  and  engineers  represented  ARC, 
Dryden  Flight  Research  Center  (DRFC) ,   and  Langley  Research  Center 
(LaRC),  a s  well  as the  U.S.  Navy, Mar ine  Corps ,  and  A ir   Force,  the  Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA),  and companies  including  Boeing,  McDonnell 
Douglas,  Lockheed,  de trav i l land ,  Grumman ,  United  Airlines,  U.S.  Air,  Ran- 
some  Airlines,  and the Airline  Pilots Association  (APA).  (ARC Release 81-01) 

January 8:  NASA officially  approved  the  continuation  of  Voyager 2’s journey 
to  encounter  Uranus  in  1986 after  a  Saturn  flyby  this  summer.  The   Uranus 
encounter  in  January  1986  (a  first  close-up  look  at  that  planet,  seventh  from  
the  Sun  and  twice  a s  far from  it  a s  Saturn)  would produce  measurements  and 
photographs  a s  the  spacecraft  passed  on   its  way  to  a  possible  encounter  with 
Neptune. 
NASA’s  decision  to  maintain  Voyager  2’s  present  trajectory  depended  on 
Voyager I’s  November  1980 close approach  to Titan  and  Saturn’s ring  system. 
Successful  so far  in  its scientific aims, NASA judged  the health  of  the  k y u g e r  
2 spacecraft and instruments  sufficient to complete a 5-year journey  to Uranus 
and  a  productive  flyby  of  that  planet.  (NASA  Release  81-3) 

January  13:  NASA  said  that  a  new  instrument  it  developed  for  the  En- 
vironmental  Protection Agency  (EPA) had measured ,  for  the  first  time,  ozone 
concentration  and distribution  in  a column  of  atmosphere.  Ozone  is a compo- 
nent  of  photochemical  smog  possibly  hazardous  to  health;  previous  in- 
struments could  analyze its presence only in  the area  immediately  surrounding 
an  aircraft.  The   ultraviolet  differential-absorption  lidar,  called  UV-DIAL, 
analyzed  light  of  different  wavelengths-one  absorbed   by  ozone,  the  o ther  
not-to  define the amount  and  location of ozone between  aircraft  and ground .  
L idar   (light-intensification  detection  and  ranging)  is  similar  to  radar  but  uses 
electromagnetic  waves  of  much  shor ter   length.  (NASA  Release  81-7) 

January  15:  Outgoing  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch  held  a 
press  conference  on  the  agency’s  1982 budget  proposed  by President  Reagan 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

JANUARY  1981 

in  the  amount  of  $6.7  billion,  an  overall  increase  of  21%  ($1.2  billion)  over 
FY81.  “Given  the  inflation  rate,  the  budget  reflects  real  growth  of  about  9 %  
over  FY   1981. . . [not] as much  as I would  like  to  have  seen, given NASA’s  ex- 
tremely  tight  budgets  over  t h e  past decade.”  The  major emphasis would  be on 
completing  the  development  of  operational  capability  for  the  Shuttle. 
This budget  would also include “a balanced effort  i n  other areas of  the space 
program  and  i n  aeronautics,”  Frosch  said, mentioning the Venus-orbiting  im- 
aging  radar  (VOIR); a geological applications progmm  (GAP); research  using 
the  triagency  flight  program  NOSS  (National  Oceanic  Satellite  System);  an 
upper-atmosphere  research  satellite (UARS) experiment defining  the optimum 
spacecraf t   design  to  improve  understanding  of  th e   s tra tosphere   and 
mesosphere;  and  a  numerical  aerodynamic  simulator  ( N A S )   of  airflow  over 
three-dimensional  aerodynamic surfaces,  with  ma jo r   impact  on  design of  air- 
craft  and  large-scale  computers.  The   budget  was  “good,  but  not  a s  good  as  
i t   should  be  if  we  are   to  revitalize  NASA,”  Frosch  said.  (NASA  Text,  press 
conf,  Jan  15/81) 

In  an  accompanying  statement,  Frosch  reviewed  the situation of  the  inertial 
upper  stage  ( IUS )  to be used  on the Shuttle for launching  spacecraft into outer 
space  from  Shuttle  orb i t .   Within  resources  offered  by  the  1981  and  1982 
budgets,  the  best  alternative  seemed  to  be  modifying  the  Centaur  instead  of 
proceeding  with  a  three-stage  IUS,  in  order  to have  “that very  powerful  com- 
bination  available  for  first  launches  in  1985. No  other  alternative  upper  stage 
is  available  on  a  reasonable  schedule  or  with  comparable  costs.  Therefore, 
NASA  will  expand discussions  with  the  Air Force on  the  best  means  for pro- 
viding  upper  stages.  . . [and continue with]  the  two-stage  IUS ,   which  both  we 
and  the  Air  Force  are   counting  on.”  (NASA  Release  81-14) 

January  16:  NASA  announced the selection of  the Association of  Universities 
for Research  in Astronomy  (AURA), a consortium of  14 universities,  for  final 
negotiation  of  a contract  to  establish,  operate,  and  maintain  a  science  institute 
for  the  13.1-meters  (43-foot)  Space  Telescope  scheduled  for  launch  on  the 
Shuttle  early  in  1985. 
The  space telescope  science  institute, making  scientific  investigations  using 
the telescope for at least  15 years, would be  located on  the Homewood  campus 
of  Johns  Hopkins  University  in  Baltimore.  Th e  estimated  contractor  cost  for 
an  initial  5-year  contract  would  be  $24 million.  Additional  funding would  be 
needed later for a guest-observer  and  archival-research program.  The  contract 
had  options  for  three  5-year  extensions.  The   institute would  receive  data  sent 
from the  telescope via  the Tracking  and Data  Relay  Satellite System  (TDRSS) 
and  NASA’s  communications  network  through  the  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center  (GSFC),  where  the  institute  would  operate  a  space  telescope  support 
center.  Investigations  would be able to ask GSFC  to point the spacecraft at any 
desired  field-of-view. The   2.4-meter  (96-inch,  m irror   in  the  telescope  could 

250 

JANUARY  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

image 350 times  the  volume of  space now  visible  from Ear th .   (NASA Release 
81-12;  MSFC  Release  81-11;  Nature,  Jan  29/81,  339) 

January 17:  NASA  reported success in the  last Shuttle main-engine test  (static 
firing  12); engine 3 shut down as planned at 235 seconds, engines  1 and  2 shut 
down  at 6 2 4 .5  seconds. All major objectives were satisfied,  including gimbal- 
ing and POGO  pulsing;  loading liquid  oxygen  (LOX) with the anti-geyser  line 
removed;  shutting down  engines  1 and  2  using  a  flight  high-pressure  oxygen 
turbopump  overspeed-prevention  sequence;  and  completing  a  full-duration 
run  using  flight  nozzles.  Completion  of  this  test  ended  the  main  propulsion 
test  (MPT)  constraint  on  the  Space  Transportation  System  STS-1.  Th e   test 
facility  would  be   phased  down  until  full  power-level  tests  scheduled  to  take 
place  in  the  spring  of  1982. (NASA D ly  Actv  Rep t ,  Jan  21/81;  NASA  Release 
81-16;  MSFC   Release  81-8) 

January  26:  Th e  government  of  Spain delivered  a  note  to  the  U.S.  embassy 
in Madrid  agreeing  to  use  of  the  naval  base  at  Rota  as  a  contingency  landing 
site for the Shuttle. Th is  completed action on contingency  landing-site negotia- 
tions,  as   NASA  had  already  reached  agreement  with  Japan.  (NA SA  D ly  Actv 
Rep t ,  Jan  28/81) 

January  30:  Johnson  Space Center’s  (JSC) Space News  Roundup  said  that  a 
conference  sponsored  by  NASA  and  the  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics 
and  Astronautics  (AIAA),  attended  by  representatives  of  major  U.S.  in- 
dustries,  heard  briefings  on  systems  developed  for  the  space  program  that 
were  applicable to  Earth-based  activities.  Representatives of  Dow  Chemical, 
Exxon,  ITT,  Johnson & Johnson,  Teledyne,  3M ,  Xerox,  and  numerous other 
corporations  learned  about  pharmaceutical  production 
i n   Earth-orbiting 
laboratories,  1ife;support  systems  designed  for  space  suits,  and  an  elcc- 
tromechanical  alternative  to  conventional  hydraulic  actuators. 
Bryan  E rb   of  JSC’s  Earth-resources  division  described  the  use  of  satellite 
observations  to predict  crop  growth  o r  locate mineral  deposits  or oil  sources. 
From  1974 to  1978 JSC had  managed  the  Large-Area Crop-Inventory  Experi- 
ment  (LACIE),  showing how  sensors on an  orbiting platform  could  read  and 
relay  to Earth  the characteristic  signatures of  Earth  features  used  by  scientists 
and  engineers  to  make  mathematical  models  on  a  worldwide  basis.  Th e  
AgRISTARS  (agricultural  resources  inventory  survey  through  aerospace 
remote  sensing)  project  was  carrying  the  measurements  further,  reading  out 
thermal  conditions, predicting  soil moisture,  and analyzing crops in the visual 
(as  compared  to  infrared)  spectrum.  Erb  said  a  worldwide  remote-sensing 
system  should  be  available  within  the  next  20   years  for  managing  Earth 
resources. 
Another  innovation  would  be to work  i n   space with living cells and proteins 
to  develop  products  for  fighting  disease.  Products  like  beta  cells,  enzymes, 
and  immunoglobulins  produced  by  kidney  cells  were  already  available  in 

251 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

JANU 4RY   1981 

hospitals,  but  at  astronomical  cost.  JSC’s  Dennis  Morrison  said  that  on  the 
ground  this  kind  of  work  was  limited  to  a  microbiological  level;  working  i n  
space with  larger  amounts  would  mean  a 20  to  :;Or0 
improvement.  Pituitary, 
kidney,  and  pancreas  cells  wouId  be  among  candidates  for  spaceflight,  even 
though  weight  limitations  would  delay  early  commercial  processing.  (JSC 
Space   News  Roundup,  Jan  30181,  4 )  

During  January:  NASA  reported  Orbiting Astronomical  Observatory  Oao 3 
(Copernicus),  the  heaviest  and  most  complex  observatory  ever  launched  by 
the agency  and  instrumental i n  discovery  of  the first black  hole  (Cyg X- l) ,   had 
f in i shed   its  career  at  t h e  e n d   of  1980 after  8.5 years  of  operation.  Launched 
from  Kennedy  Space  Center  (KSC) August  21,  1972,  with  a  life  expectancy 
of  1  year,  its  performance  was  “astonishing,”  said  GSFC  engineers  and 
scientists. 
Orbiting  at  an  altitude  of  740  kilometers  (460  miles),  Ouo  3  used  its 
supersensitive  ultraviolet  telescope,  largest  ever  put  into  orbit,  to  view  the 
heavens  “with  a precision  and  clarity  never  before  possible,”  producing  spec- 
tral readings  invisible to  ground-based  observatories because of  the obscuring 
effects of  Earth’s  atmosphere.  Th e  telescope was  capable of  pointing  accuracy 
equivalent  to  seeing  a  volleyball  from  a  distance  of  400  miles.  During  its 
lifetime,  Oao 3 served more  than  160 investigators  from  the  United  States and 
13  foreign  countries  i n   observing  more   than  450   unique  objects. 
Formal  scientific  investigations  using  Uuo 3 ended December  31,  1980, but 
a  series  of  engineering  tests  would  continue  into  mid-February,  when  NASA 
would  terminate  contact  with  the  spacecraft.  GSFC   engineers  were  not  sure 
whether  it would orient  itself  permanently  toward  the Sun, begin  a permanent 
orbital tumble, or combine the two.  (NASA Relea.se 81-10; Goddurd N e w s ,  Jan 
5/81,  1) 

252  

February 

February  2:  Insulation  that  separated  from  the  Space Shuttle’s huge  external 
fuel  tank  would  delay  the  long-awaited  launch  to  a  time  “no   earlier  than  the 
week  of  April  5,”  NASA  announced.  Columbia’s  maiden  flight  was  already 
more than two years behind  its original schedule because of  technical probable 
causing a series of  postponents.  Th e  new  difficulty was discovered  in preflight 
tests  at  Cape  Canaveral  in  which  over  a  half-million  gallons  of  supercold  li- 
quid hydrogen  and  liquid  oxygen  were  pumped  into  the  fuel  tank  for  the  first 
time. 
Th e  new  delay  was  “the  first  substantial”  problem  encountered  since  July 
1980 and  was  not  related  to  earlier  problems  with  the  Shuttle’s  ceramic-tile 
insulation.  During  tanking  tests,  two  areas  on  the  external  tank-one  about 
7 x 8  feet,  the o ther   about  4 x 4  feet-became  debonded.  Th e  loose  insulation 
would  have  to  be  rebonded  before  launch.  (NA SA  D ly   Actv  R p t ,   Jan  28/81; 
NASA  Releases  81-15,  81-25;  W Post,  Feb  3/81, A-7;  W Star,  Feb  3/81,  A-8) 

February  2:  Th e   European  Space  Agency  (ESA)  reported  on  the  May  23, 
1980,  failure of  Ariane  flight  L02 .   Th e  cause  was  “clearly  identified”  as  in- 
herent  instability  i n  one of the  four launch-vehicle  engines.  All external causes 
had   been  exc luded ,   and   the manufacturer  was  able to  reproduce  the  failure at 
a  single-engine  test  stand.  Devices  for  fuel  injection  in  the  combustion 
chamber  provided  unstable  despite  positive  tests  during  development.  Th e  
fault,  “unfortunately  a  very  common  phenomenon  with  liquid-fuel  rocket 
e n g i n e s , ”  
p r o g r a m m e s .   . . 
r o c k e t  
“m o s t  
in 
o c c u r r e d  
h a d  
notably  in  the  American  programmes.” 
ESA  said  that  it  had  abandoned  the  injector  in  its  present  form  and  was 
working  on   modifications.  Th e   report  concluded  with  a  tentative  launch 
schedule  to  b e   confirmed  after  the  modifications  were  validated.  (ESA  Info 
Bltn,  Jan  28/81  for  release  Feb  2/81) 

February  9:  LaRC reported on  a meeting of representatives  from industry and 
six NASA  centers to review  the agency’s large space antenna program.  Shuttle 
flights in  the mid-1980s would  include models of  several antenna concepts:  the 
large antennas designed for communications and other Earth-oriented applica- 
tions,  as   well  as   for  purely  scientific  studies  of  the  solar  system  and  the 
universe,  would  be   transported  into  space  folded  into  the  Shuttle’s cargo  bay 
and deployed  in Earth orbit.  Previous work  concentrated on the  structural and 
material  requirements  of  each  concept;  the meeting  would  identify  work  still 
needed  on system  technology,  ground testing,  and  technical  resources to com- 
plete  development.  (LaRC  Release  81-9) 

253  

ASTRONAUT ICS   4 N D  AERONAI!l-ICS 

FEBRUARY   1981 

February  IO :   Th e   National  Ocean ic   and  A tmospher ic   Administration 
(NOAA)  was  undertaking  the  first  mass  shift  of  satellites  at  22 ,300   miles 
altitude  in  space,  moving  three  meteorological  satellites  to  new  areas  to  im- 
prove  their  product  and to prevent  possible collision of  one of  them  in  its pre- 
sent  crowded  location,  the  Department  of  Commerce  (DOC j  reported. 
NOAA  would  move  Goes  4  (the  geostationary  operational  environmental 
satellite launched  in  September  1980) from 98”W  to   135 W as backup  for fail- 
ing  Goes  3;  NOAA  would  not  move  Goes 3  while  i t   continued  to  function, 
but  would  put  Goes   4  as   near  as  possible  without  its  interfering  with 
communications. 
On January  29, NOAA  moved  a third meteorological satellite, Goes  2 .  from 
105”W to  1W0W to  reduce  the  danger  of  collision  w i th   other  craft  o r   space 
debris;  this satellite served  primarily  to  relay  weatherfax  charts to  ground  sta- 
tions.  NOAA  had  to  operate  two  geostationary  satellites  at  all  times:  “Goes  
Fast”  for  the  eastern  United  States and  Canada  and  for  most  of  the  Atlantic, 
and  “Goes  West”  for  the western  United  States  and  Canada,  for  Alaska,  and 
for  the  Pacific  westward  to  Hawaii. 
On  January  29,  NOAA  also boosted  its  7-year old  S rn s   1 into a 22,600 mile 
high  orb i t ,   where  it  would  remain  indefinitely.  .4fter  NASA’s  launch  of  a 
seventh  geostationary  satellite,  planned  for  March ,   NOAA  would  move  Sms 
2  from  its  station  at  75”W  to  a  nearby  location  on  standby.  (NOAA  Release 
81-16) 

February  11:  Japan  reported  that  its  National  Space  Development  Agency 
successfully launched the first N-2  vehicle  from Tanegashima  carrying the 21st 
Japanese  satellite-the  engineering  test satellite Ers  4 (K iku   3)-into  a transfer 
orbit  with  36,000-kilometer  apogee,  230-kilome~.er perigee,  and  10.5-hour 
period.  Th e  650-kilogram satellite would monitor  vehicle performance.  Japan 
would  launch  seven  N-2s  between  August  1981  and  February  1986  to 
meteorological  and  communications  satellites  and  aeronautical  experiments. 
Although  used  for  five  years,  the  N-l  did  not  have  the  power  to  carry  big 
geostationary  spacecraft  into orb i t .   (FBIS, Kyodo  i n  English,  Feb  11/81; NASA 
D ly   Acrv  Rpr,  Feb  12/81) 

F e b ruan  20:  Columbia,  flagship of  U.S.  Space Shluttles, “proved  that at  long 
last  it  is  ready  to  carry  astronauts  into  orbit,”  said  the  Washington Star, 
describing  “a  successful  and  spectacular  firing  of  its  three  powerful  engines.” 
At  the  end  of the  practice  countdown,  8:45 a .m .   EST,  the  three  engines  at 
the  base  of  t h e   delta-wing  spaceship  “flashed  to  life,  spewing  torrents  of 
almost  invisible  flame,  steam,  and  smoke over  the  launch  pad”  and  sending 
a  thunderclap  of  sound  across  KSC.  “All  engines  are   up   and  running,”  the 
control  center announced. The  world‘s most  sophis:ticated rocket  machine had 
generated  1.1  million  pounds  of  thrust  for  20  seconds,  while  the  122-foot-tall 
orbiter  with  fuel  tank  and  boosters  remained  fixed  to  the  pad  by  eight  3-foot 

254  

F E BRUARY   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

steel bolts.  In actual  launch, explosive charges would  sever  the bolts,  releasing 
the  orbiter,  and  the  solid-fuel  boosters  would  help  lift  it  to  orb i t .  
During  the  final  countdown,  526,000 gallons of  fuel  were  pumped  into  the 
external  fuel  tank.  Technical,  weather,  and  procedural  difficulties  had 
postponed  the  firing,  a  first  test  of  all  shuttle  systems  combined,  three  times 
this  week.  Minor  problems  had  delayed  today’s  test  another  hour. 
Th e  Washington Post  said that  a labor walkout  at KSC  immediately after  the 
8:45  a .m .   firing  might  threaten  the  April  7  date  set  for  the  actual  launch  of 
Co lumb ia ,   About  800  aerospace  workers,  members  of  the  International 
Association  of  Machinists  employed  by  Boeing  in  spaceport  support  work, 
had  struck  in  a pay  dispute.  Richard  Smith, KSC  director,  said that  the  strike 
might jeopardize  remaining  operations;  however,  he  noted  that  the union  had 
a  legal  right  to  strike because  its contract  with  Boeing  had  expired  some time 
ago. 
Columbia  crew  members John  Young  and Robert Cr ippen ,  who had  waited 
out 2 %  years of  delays, viewed  the  test  firing  from the a i r ;  Young  in a Shuttle 
training j e t  a t  4,000-foot  altitude, and Crippen in an identical craft about  1,900 
feet  higher.  ( W  Star,  Feb  20181,  A-1;  W Post,  Feb  21/81,  A-7) 

February  21:  NASA  launched  Comstar-D,  last  of  a  series  of  four  domestic 
communications  satellites built by  Hughes Aircraft  for Comsat General,  from 
KSC  at  6 :23  p .m .   EST  on  an  Atlas  Centaur  into  a  geosynchronous  transfer 
orbit.  Th e  6.1-mile  (20-foot)  high  cylinder called  Comstar 4 in orb i t ,  weighing 
1,516  kilograms  (3,342  pounds)  at  launch,  had  12  transponders  (channels), 
each   capable  of  relaying  1,500 two-way  voice  c ircu i ts   (overall  capability  of 
18,000 simultaneous high-quality two-way  phone transmissions). A postlaunch 
report  said  the  apogee  motor  firing  February  23  was  successful.  (NASA 
Release  81-27;  NASA  MOR-0-491-201-81-04  [prelaunch  summary]  Feb 
1O-l2/81,  [prelaunch] Feb  17/81, [postlaunch] June  17/81; NASA D ly  Actv Rp t ,  
Feb  24/81,  Feb  25/81;  Cornsat  Gnl  Release  81-6; D/SD,  Feb  25/81,  286 ;   Feb 
26/81,  294;  AID,  Feb  26/81,  292;  Spacewarn,  Ma r   31/81,  2) 
FBIS  reported  the  launch  at  9 :30   a .m .   local  time  of  Astro-A,  a  scientific 
experimental  satellite,  by  t h e   University  of  Tokyo’s  Institute  of  Space  and 
Aeronautical Science. Th e  launch from Kagoshima  had been  postponed twice, 
from  February  18  to  19  and  again  to  February  21,  because  of  rain.  NASA’s 
Space  Tracking  and  Data  Network  (STDN)  supported  both  this  launch  and 
that  of  Comsat  4. 
Called Hinotori  (fire bird)  in  orb i t ,   the new  satellite was Japan’s 22d  object 
to orbit and its  7th  scientific satellite. It was  the heaviest  (190 kilograms)  ever 
launched  on   the  MU-3S   rocket.  In   an  elliptical  orbit  with  695-kilometer 
apogee,  568-kilometer  perigee,  and  37-minute  period,  Hinotori  would  study 
X-rays, gamma rays, and other aspects of  solar flares.  Its data would be  of  par- 
ticular  value  because  the  Solar Max  satellite launched  by  the United  States i n  
February  1980 on  a  similar  mission  was  having  instrument  trouble.  (FBIS, 
Kyodo  in  English,  Feb  21/81;  NASA  Dly  Actv  Rp t ,   Feb  23/81) 

255  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

FEBRU .4RY   1981 

February  26:   ESA  announced  that  i t   had  “rejcctcd”  NASA’s  decision  to 
cancel  the  U.S.  spacecraft  that  would  have  been  part  of  the joint  International 
Solar-Polar  Mission  ( ISPM ) .  NASA  told  a  meeting  of  the  two  organizations 
i n   New  York  that  the  cancellation  resulted  from  budget  cuts  imposed  by  the 
Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  i n   preparing  the  Reagan  ad- 
ministration’s  budget  proposal.  ESA  responded  that  canceling  the  satellite 
without  consultation was  a  unilateral  breach  of  a memorandum  of  understan- 
ding  between  the  agencies  and  was  unacceptable.  ESA  asked  that  NASA 
restore  the  program  to  its  original  level,  noting  that  unilateral  actions  of  this 
kind  would  be  detrimental  to  future  space  cooperation  between  the  United 
States and Europe. ESA  said that,  when  its science-program committee decid- 
cd  to  pursue  ISPM  i n   1979:  t h e y   cho se   that  m iss ion   over  a  n um b e r   of  p u r e l y  
European missions because of the value ESA put on  transatlantic cooperation. 
Because  of  NASA’s  decision,  European  scientists  froni  17  institutions  who 
supplied experiments  for  the  NASA  spacecraft  would  not  be  able  t o  fly  them. 
The  experiments,  “ i n   an  advanced  stage of  development”  with  more than  half 
of  the  costs committed, ESA  said, would  be  lost with  no corresponding  scien- 
tific  return.  ESA’s  director  general  immediately asked  all  of  its member  states 
to  protest,  through  their  ambassadors  i n   Washington,  the  decision  takcn  by 
NASA.  Timing  was  crucial,  because  Congress  would  consider  the  federal 
budget  in   March.  (ESA  Inf  2)  

Februury 27:  DFRC reported on a dress  rehearsal  of  Shuttle first-mission lan- 
ding and  postlanding activities on  the dry lake bed  ar  Edwards Air Force Base, 
Calif.  The  crew  that  would  act  as   recovery  convoy  used  an  orbiter  mock-up, 
fitted  with  interfaces  for  ground  connections,  to  practice  postlanding  safety 
and  servicing  procedures:  simulated  activities  included 
testing  for  the 
presence of  toxic  o r  explosive vapors  and gases and  cooling the orbiter by  cir- 
culating  freon  through  its pipes and cool  air  through  its  ducts. To  simulate  the 
landing, a NASA ,T-38 je t  descended along the planned  flight path  from 40,000 
feet up ,   while  test manager Deke Slayton  kept  in touch  with  the  recovery  con- 
voy  and  with  the  flight  director,  Don  Puddy,  at  JSC. 
Meanwhile,  astronauts  John  Young  and  Robert  (Irippen  at  JSC  completed 
a  full-scale  flight  rehearsal,  going  through  the  54 .5-hour   mission  i n   a 
computer-operated  simulator.  Flight directors  monii:ored  the  mock  mission  as  
if  i t   were  the  real  thing.  (DFRC  Release  81-8;  W S t u r ,  Feb  27/81,  A-9) 

D u r i n g   February:  Nature  magazine  reported  that  the  Franco-Soviet  mission 
to  Halley’s comet  i n   1986 entailed  “a  substantial cutback”  for a planned  joint 
mission  to Venus  in  1984. Assignment  of two of  the original  four Venus probes 
to  Halley  was  a  reminder  that  Soviet  space-program  resources,  though  vast, 
“are  not  infinite.” 
Pravdu  had  published  several  articles  aimed  at  putting  the  Soviet  effort  i n  
a  favorable  light;  the  Communist  party  congress  would  be  asked  next  week 

2 5 6  

FEBRUARY  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

to  approve  another  5-year  plan  including  space  exploration.  However,  the 
Soviet  Union  had  never  revealed  the  costs of  the  program.  Nature  said  hints 
of  increasing  financial  constraints  had  appeared  recently:  no  further  Inter- 
cosmos  flights  were  in  view  after  those  with  Mongolia  and  Romania,  and 
Bulgaria  had  been  offered  two  unmanned  probes  instead  of  a  manned  flight 
to  replace  the  failed  trip  of  its  cosmonaut  to  the  orbiting  Sulyut  6.  (Na tu re ,  
Feb  26/81,  741) 

257 

March 

March  5 :   Th e  Japanese government accepted  a U.S.  proposal  to use  the  U.S. 
Air  Forces’  Kadena Airbase  on Okinawa  Island  as an  emergency landing area 
for  the  Space  Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia,  the  Foreign  Broadcast  Information 
Service  (FBIS)  reported.  Tokyo  Kyodo  said  NASA  was  arranging  sites  for 
emergency  landings  at  six  airports,  three  domestic  and  three  abroad.  The  
agreement  with  Japan  covered  only  four  test  flights;  other  flights  would  need 
further negotiations. Officials of Japan’s  foreign  and defense  ministries  would 
discuss  safety  measures  because  nearby  Naha  airport  was  in  constant  use  for 
both  civil  and  military  flights.  (FBIS,  Tokyo  Kyodo  in  English,  Mar   5/81) 

March  9:  Th e   International  Telecommunications  Satellite Organization  (IN- 
TELSAT)  reported  that  it  had  signed  an  agreement  with  t h e   International 
Maritime  Satellite  Organization  (INMARSAT)  to  provide  satellite  com- 
munications  services  to  ships.  INTELSAT  would  put  at  the  service  of  IN- 
MARSAT  three  of  its  satellites  to  be  launched  between  mid-1981  and 
mid-1982:  two  Intelsat  Vs  over  the  Indian  Ocean,  one  over  the  Atlantic. 
Th e  maritime  communications  subsystems  (MCS) ,  each  with  a  capacity  of 
30  voice  channels  plus  data,  would  operate  for  up  to  seven  years  and  would 
bring  more  t h a n   $100  m i l l i o n   (U . S . )   t o   INTELSAT.  I n   a d d i t i o n   to  t h e   MCS ,  
each  Intelsat V  could  carry  up to  12,000 simultaneous international  telephone 
calls  and  two  television  channels.  (INTELSAT  Release  81-1-1) 

Murch  10:  Dr.  Alan  Lovelace,  NASA’s  acting  administrator,  held  a  briefing 
on   the  agency’s  FY82  amended  budget,  which  he  said  “eliminates  o r   defers 
all FY81 and  FY82 new program  initiatives  in space science,  aeronautics, and 
applications.”  At  a  press  conference January  15,  h e  had  discussed  the  budget 
for  NASA  proposed  by  the previous  administration,  jus t   over  $6.7  billion  for 
FY82.  The   revised  budget  would  reduce  NASA  funds  by  $604  million  to  a 
new  total  of  $6.122 billion.  The   revisions  preserved  Space  Shuttle test-flight 
schedules  and  research  and  development;  allowed  continued  production  of  a 
four-orbiter  fleet on  the present  schedule,  which  “meets  the  critical needs  for 
both  civil  and  military  missions”;  and  kept  the  option  for  a  fifth  orbiter. 
However,  the funding would delete the solar-polar spacecraft; cut space and 
aeronautical  technology  development;  delete  construction-of-facilities  pro- 
jects;  and  eliminate  840 civil-service  positions.  It  would  defer  the VOIR  and 
the gamma-ray  observatory  launch  from  1986 to  1988; cancel NOSS,  a three- 
agency  project;  end  the  technology  transfer  program;  and  cancel  funding  for 
energy-technology activities, a geological  applications program,  and  a search- 
and-rescue  mission. 
P R E C E D I N G   PAGE 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  A E RONAU T I C S  

MA R CH   1981 

Aeronautics  programs  canceled  o r   deferred  included  efforts  i n   vertical/ 
sidewise  takeoff  and  landing  (V/STOL)  systems,  supersonic  cruise  research, 
the variable-cycle  engine, and the  proposed  numerical aerodynamic simulator. 
A  initiative  in  large,  composite  primary  aircraft  structures  was  eliminated. 
Other programs  affected  were materials  processing  in  space, AgIUSTARS, 
instrumentation  for  an  upper-atmosphere  research  satellite,  and  the  Spacelab 
flight  schedulc. 
Lovelace said that  adjustments i n  FY81  figures would  reflect  impact of deci- 
sions  on  the  FY82  budget:  an  increase  of  $60 mirllion  i n   1981 Space  Shuttle 
changes and upgrading would  “provide added schedule confidence”  i n  Shuttle 
d e v e l o p m e n t   a n d   t e s t i n g   a n d   i n   p r o d u c t i o n   of  o r b i t e r   v e h i c l e s .   T h e   a m e n d e d  
budget  reflected  NASA’s  decision  announced  in  January  to  discontinue  the 
three-stage version  of  an  inertial  upper  stage  and  to modify  the Centaur upper 
stage  instead.  The modified  stage  would  allow  N .4SA  to  fly  the Galileo mis- 
sion to Jupiter on  a  single launch  i n   1985 and  could be  used  for a  restructured 
solar-polar  mission  in  1986 and  VOIR  in  1988.  i(NASA Text,  Mar  10/81) 

March  12:  The  Soviet Union  announced  the  launch  of  Soyuz  T-4 at  10  p .m .  
Moscow  time  to  link  with  the  orbiting  space  complex  Su lyu t   6-Progress  12. 
Sulyut 6, in space since September 29,  1977, had docked January 26 with cargo 
craft  Progress  12, which  refueled  it  automatically  on  ground  command  and 
used  its  engine  to  raise  the  orb i t .  
S o y z  T-4 carried as  commander Co l .  Vladimir Kovalenok,  veteran  of  Soyuz 
25 that  failed  to  dock  with  Sulyur  6 in  October  1977  and  of  Soyuz  29 ,  which 
docked  there  for  140  days  i n   June  1978.  Also  on  the  T-4  flight  was  Viktor 
Savinykh  as  flight  engineer.  (FBIS,  Tass  in   English,  Mar   12/81) 
said  March  13  that  the  Soyuz  T-4  had  docked  with  the  Salyut  6-  
-Tass 
Progress  I2   complex  March  12  at  11:33  p .m .   Moscow  time  and  the 
cosmonauts  had  transferred  into  the  space  station,  being  the  15th crew  to  oc- 
cupy  it  in  the  3 %  years.  They would  check  on-board  systems  and  equipment, 
do  maintenance.  and  replace  instrumentation  as  necessary.  (FBIS,  Tass  in 
English,  Mar  13/81) 

March  16:  ESA  reported  that  it  had  successfully  tested  injectors  for  the  five 
Ariane engines to  be  used  in  the  LO3  flight,  now  scheduled  for  the   latter part 
of  June. The  LO3  vehicle could carry  a tech  capsule to monitor equipment  and 
environment;  a  second  flight  model  of  the  Meteosat  2  aimed  at  putting  ESA 
into the Earth-observation  field; and an  India communications  satellite known 
as  Apple  (Ariane passenger-payload  experiment)  at  Kourou,  French  Guiana. 
(ESA  Info  3) 

March  17:  NASA  announced  the  selection  of  scientific  instruments  to  be 
flown  on  the  Gamma-Ray Observatory  scheduled  for  launch  from  the  Space 
Shuttle  in  1988. Produced  from  the  most  energetic  processes  in  the  universe, 
gamma  rays  were  the most  direct  source of  knowledge  about  these processes. 

260 

MARCH  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

Gamma  rays  to  be  measured  by  the  observatory  would  begin  at  100,000 elec- 
tron volts  (100 Kev)  and  continue up  to  several  hundred million  electron  volts 
(100  Mev  o r   more). 
Th e   instruments  chosen  were  a  transient-event  monitor  to  detect  short  in- 
tense  bursts of  gamma rays of  unknown  origin  and localize  them  to determine 
their distribution  in the galaxy;  a high-energy gamma-ray telescope that could 
measure  the  energy  spectra  and  arrival  directions  of  the  highest-energy  gam- 
ma  rays  it  finds;  an  imaging  Compton  telescope  to  obtain  gamma-ray  maps 
of  the celestial  sphere at medium energies; and a  low-energy  gamma-ray spec- 
trometer  to  look  for  evidence  of  nucleosynthesis  in  supernovas. 
Th e  observatory, with  a planned 2-year  lifetime would  be one  of  the  largest 
every  orbited,  weighing  23,000  pounds  (10,432-kilograms)  and  measuring  25 
feet  (7.6  meters)  in  length  and  12.5  feet  (3.8  meters)  in  diameter.  (NASA 
Release  81-40) 

March  2 2 :   Th e   Soviet  Union  launched  Soyuz  39  from  the   Baykonur 
cosmodrome  at  5 :59   p.m.  Moscow  time  to  link  with  the  orbiting  Sulyut  6 /  
Soyuz  T-4 complex.  Tass  said  that  the  Progress  12  cargo  ship  had  undocked 
March  19 after being  filled  with  discarded  equipment  to  replace  the  supplies 
it brought and on March 20  had entered  the atmosphere over  the Pacific where 
it  “ceased  to  exist.” 
The   crew  of  Suyuz  39 were  veteran  cosmonaut  Vladimir  Dzhanibekov  as  
commander  and  the  first  citizen  of  Mongolia  to  f l y   i n   space,  Jugderdemidyn 
Gurragcha,  as researcher and  “lOlst  spaceman of  the world.”  They would jo in  
V lad im ir   Kovalenok  and  V ik tor   Savinykh  already  aboard  the   orbiting 
complex. 
Tass said that  the  launch commemorated the 60th anniversary  of  the revolu- 
tion  of  the Mongolian People’s Republic,  10th nation  to participate  in manned 
spaceflight.  United  Press  International  (UPI)  said  that  it  was  in   honor  of  the 
20th  anniversary of  launching Yuri Gagarin,  first man  into  space, on  April  12, 
1961.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Mar   22/81;  UPI,  in  W Star,  May  23/81,  A-8) 

March 23:  Digital  techniques  would  cope  with  “the  coming  world  telecom- 
munications  explosion”  and  cut  the  cost  of  overseas  transmissions  as   well, 
said  INTELSAT Director  General  Santiago Astrain  in his  keynote  address  to 
the fifth  international conference on satellite communications in Genoa,  Italy. 
In  the  first  use  of  the  giant  new  Zntelsat  I/ (launched  December  6,  1980, 
from  Cape   Canaveral  into  geostationary  orbit  22 ,300   miles  up),  the  speech 
was  heard  simultaneously  i n   three  countries.  Th e   telecast  also  marked 
INTELSAT’s  first  use  of  the  14/11  GHz   frequency  band.  Receiving  stations 
were two small 3-meter antennas a t  Genoa; a  10-meter torus antenna at COM- 
SAT  laboratories  i n   Clarksburg,  Md .  ; and  19-meter  antenna  at  Goonhilly, 
England.  (INTELSAT  Release  81-5-1) 

261 

ASTRON4UT ICS   A N D   A E R O U 4 U T I C S  

M A R C H   1981 

Murch  2 4 :   Biggest  and  best  customer  of  the  Space  Shuttle,  developed  and 
operated  by  a  civilian  agency,  would  be  the  Department  of  Defense  (DOD) ,  
said the  Wushingtoti Stur  in   one of  a  series of  articles on  t h e  Shuttle program. 
At  least 21  of  75  spaceflights planned  before  1986 would  be military missions, 
and  neither  NASA  nor  DOD   would  say  what  the  flights  were  for.  DOD  had 
contributed millions of dollars  to  the Shuttle program  i n  hardware and  person- 
nel,  including  a  multibillion-dollar  facility  at  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base  for 
launches  into  polar  orb i t .  
Although  the  Shuttle would  serve  both  civilian  and  military  purposes,  the 
two  sides showed differing degrees of confidence:  current boosters had  reach- 
ed  orbit only  9 0%  of  the  time,  10% dumping expcnsive satellites  into the  sea. 
“We  have  yet  to  achieve  routine  access  to  space,”  said  L t .   Gen .   Richard  C. 
Henry,  commander of  the  U.S.  Air  Force’s Space Division.  Shuttle  reliability 
should  be  “as  close  to  100% as you  can  get.”  Most  NASA  missions  slated  for 
the  1980s and  beyond  could  not  be  flown  without  thc  hugc  cargo  bay  of  the 
Shuttle.  The   military,  however,  would  keep  its  All.las  and  Titan  expendable 
boosters just  in case. Space, said  Henry,  was  the high  ground ,  “crucial  for col- 
lecting  and  disseminating  information,  for  reducing  the  confusion  of  battle, 
even  for  improving  combat efficiency.  . .  .  Everything we  put  up  is  supportive 
of  our   national  security,  but  nothing  is  combative.”  DOD,  he  added,  had 
“made  commitments  far  i n   excess  of  any  civil  u s t r s . ”   (W S t u r ,  Mar  24/81, 
A- 8) 

Murch  26:  Japan’s  National  Space  Developmcnt  Agency  conducted,  for  the 
f irs t   time,  a  successful  30-second  firing test of  its  huge H- l   liquid-fuel  rocket. 
Japan’s  LE5  engine  fueled  with  liquid  oxygen  and  hydrogen  would  serve  as 
the  second stage of  H-I, which  was  scheduled to  launch a 500-ton  satellite into 
orbit  i n   February  1986.  Japan  was  n ow   the  fourth  country  to  have  a  liquid- 
hydrogen  engine;  in   addition  to  the  United  States,  ESA ,   and  Ch ina .   (FBIS, 
Tokyo  K jodo   in   English,  Mar  26/81) 

Murch  30:  Shuttle  launch  dircctor  George  Page  said  that  success  of  the  two 
final  fueling  tests  cleared  the  way  for  launch  April  10,  but  official  announce- 
ment  would  await  a  flight-readiness  review  at  KSC  Page  said  examination  o f  
the  silo-like  tank  revealed  “a  few  foam  cracks”  readily  fixed  with  spray-on 
foam. 
The launch-preparation  schedule  now  in  progres:,  could  indicate  a n  April  9 
launch,  but  Page  wanted  to  give  his  teams  a  day  off  before  the  launch  took 
place.  Inquiry  into the accidental death of  a launchpad worker  would  not  delay 
the  liftoff, Page said, but  the board  would probably  recommend  revising  safety 
procedures.  ( W  Stur,  M a r   30181  A-5) 

Murch  31:  NASA  Headquarters  held  a  press  briefing  on  scientific  results  of 
k y u g e r  I ’ s  Saturn  encounter  in   1980. On  hand  were  project  scientists Dr.  Ed- 
ward  C .   Stone,  California  Institute  of  Technology  (CalTech);  imaging-team 

MARCH   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

leader Dr.  Bradford Smith, University  of  Arizona;  and project  manager  E . K .  
Davis,  JPL .   Initial  results  included  discovery  of  a  ring  system  vastly  more 
complex  than  imagined  and  a  thick  nitrogen  atmosphere  around  Titan, 
Saturn’s  major  moon. 
b y u g e r   I  took  17,500  photographs  of  Saturn  and  its  satellites  between 
A u gu s t   22   a n d   D e c em b e r   15,  1980.  T h e   c l o s e s t   a p p r o a c h   was  
November  12--126,000  kilometers  (78,000  miles)  from  Saturn’s  cloud  tops. 
From   the  spacecraft,  as  from Ear th ,   the  atmosphere of  Saturn  looked grossly 
similar  to  Jupiter’s,  with  alternating  light  and  dark  zones,  circulating  storm 
regions,  and  other  distinguishable  cloud  markings. 
Unlike  Jupiter,  however,  Saturn’s  markings  were  blurred  by  thick  haze 
above  the  visible  cloud  tops;  the  haze  layer  at  Jupiter  was  not  a s   optically 
dense as  Saturn’s.  Wind  speeds were  substantially higher  than  on  Jupiter  and 
did  not  appear  closely  tied  to  belt-zone  boundaries.  Highest  winds,  blowing 
eastward  at  the  equator,  were  four  times  stronger  than  on  Jupiter;  velocity 
decreased  to  near-zero  at  about  40”  latitude  north  and  south. 
Saturn’s  atmosphere  consisted  mostly  of  hydrogen,  helium  accounting  for 
only  11% of  atmospheric mass  above  the  clouds  compared  to  19% at  Jupiter. 
Th e   difference  was  consistent  with  separation  by  gravity  of  helium  and 
hydrogen  in  Saturn’s  interior and  could  explain  the  excess  energy  radiated  by 
Saturn  over  that  received  from  the  Sun. 
b y u g e r   I  found  that  the A ,   B,  and C  rings visible  from Earth  consisted of 
hundreds of  small ringlets, a few of  them elliptical;  the classical gaps also con- 
tained  ringlets.  Intertwining  (“braiding”)  of  the  rings  was  not  explainable, 
although i t  might  stem from electrostatic charging of their dust-sized particles. 
Vayager  1 discovered  three  new  satellites,  photographed  the  D  and  E  rings, 
and confirmed the existence (2.8 Saturn radii from planet center) of  a new  ring 
postulated  on  the  basis  of  Pioneer  11  findings. 
Th e  flyby  observed  all  of  Saturn’s  known  satellites except  Phoebe:  Mimas, 
Enceladus,  Tethys, Dione,  and Rhea, all  appeared roughly  spherical  and com- 
posed mainly  of water  ice.  Titan  was  the most  interesting from an  Earth view- 
point because  of  its atmosphere,  similar to what would  have evolved  on  Earth 
had  it  formed  at  Titan’s  distance  from  the  Sun .   Previously  considered  the 
largest satellite in  the solar system,  Titan was  found  to be slightly smaller than 
the  largest  satellite  of  Jupiter  (Ganymede).  Both  a r e   larger  than  the  planet 
Mercury.  Titan’s atmosphere  consisted  mostly  of  nitrogen,  the  main  consti- 
tuent  of  Earth’s  atmosphere;  pressure near  the  surface was  60% greater  than 
Earth’s.  Th e   surface  was  not  visible  in  photographs  from  Voyager 1 because 
of  the  haze  layer,  though  the  southern  hemisphere was  slightly  brighter  than 
the  northern,  possibly  a  seasonal  effect.  Titan’s  density  seemed  about  twice 
that  of  water  ice,  indicating  that  i t ,   like  Ganymede,  was  made  of  equal 
amounts  of  rock  and  ice. 
Vbyuger  1  was  now  headed  out  of  the  solar  system,  and  ils  platform 
instruments  were  turned   off  December   19.  Mos t   fields-and-particles 
instruments on  b y u g e r  1 were  still monitoring  the  solar wind  and  its  changes 

263 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D   AERONACT IC S  

MA R CH   1981 

with  distance  and  time;  exact  location  of  the   heliopause  (outer  edge  of  the 
solar  wind)  was  unknown,  but  might  be  reached  around  1990,  b y u g e r  2 
would  reach  Saturn  in  August  1981  and  procccd  on   a  trajectory  to  Uranus. 
(NASA  Releases  81-41,  81-44) 

264 

April 

Ap r i l   10:  Nine minutes before  launch  time,  NASA  grounded  the Space Shuttle 
Columbia  until  April  12, because  one of  five computers  in  its nose was  failing 
to communicate properly  with  the other  four. The  decision  to scrub  the  launch 
came  after  a three-hour  delay  from  the  original  6 :50  a .m .   liftoff  t ime ;  a  fuel- 
cell  warning  light  showed  in  the  cockpit  jus t   16  minutes  beforehand.  No 
sooner  was  that  problem  solved  than  a  second  one   appeared ,   when  the  pro- 
gram  in  the  backup  computer  did  not  match  that  of  the  four  pr imary   com- 
puters  controlling  the   ship.  ( W  Star,  Apr   10/81, A-1) 

April  12:  NASA  launched  Space  Shuttle  Co lumb ia ,  designated  STS-1,  from  
pad  A  of  KSC’s launch  complex  39 at 3  seconds after 7 a .m .   EST.  All  launch 
facilities,  systems, and  support  equipment performed  a s  designed;  NASA  said 
that  damage  to  the  launch  pad  was  less  than  predicted.  The   solid-fuel  rocket 
boosters  (SRBs)  jettisoned  after  burnout  fell  within  the  predicted  impact 
“footprint” 
in  the  Atlantic  about  14  nautical  miles  northeast  of  KSC, 
splashing  down  7  minutes  and  100  seconds  after  liftoff.  All  the  SRB  parts 
were  recovered  for  reuse  except  two  of  the  six  parachutes. 
The  external  tank  separated  at  8 minutes  and  58  seconds  into  the  flight  and 
began  to break  up  a t  about  a 280,00O,-foot  altitude without  tumbling  a s  plann- 
ed .  A  tumb le  sys tem  bu i l t   into the  tank to prevent skipping dur ing  reentry  (and  
keep  debr is  within  a preplanned  area)  did  not  work.  The  Indian  Ocean  track- 
ing  ship,  USNS  Arnold,  said  that  the  tank-debris  footprint  was  larger  than 
expected. 
Orb i t-maneuver ing   system  (OMS)   f ir ings   (OMS-1  and  OMS-2)   put 
Columbia  into  an  orb i t   with  133.7-nautical-mile apogee,  132.7-nautical-mile 
perigee,  and  40.3 O  inclination.  Ascent  went  a s   planned,  with  all  events, 
through  payload-bay  doo r   opening,  occurr ing   normally.  (NASA  MOR  
M-989-81-01  [postlaunch]  May  12/81) 

April  13:  Press  reports  on  the Space  Shuttle Columbia’s launch  noted  the  loss 
of  some  insulating  tiles  from  engine-pod  coverings  visible,  television  viewers 
from  an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut  Robert Crippen  opened  the 
payload-bay  doors  to dissipate heat  into  space  a s  a way  of  cooling  the  orbiter. 
The  areas  lacking  tiles,  nine  on  the  right-hand  engine  pod  and  four  to  six  on  
the left-hand pod ,  had undergone the  greatest stress dur ing  blastoff and ascent. 
Astronaut  John  Young  relayed  the  view  to  Earth  so  flight  directors  could 
estimate  the  damage. 
The   two  astronauts  evinced  so  little  concern  about  the  missing  tiles  that, 
dur ing   a  six-minute  telecast  late  on  Monday,  neither  mentioned  the  subject. 
As  flight  directors  wanted  to know whether  the  underside  of  the  fuselage was 

265  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AEROKAUT ICS  

A PR IL   1981 

intact,  Deputy  Operations  Director  Eugene  E  Kranz  announced  that 
supersecret  U.S.  Air  Force  cameras  i n   Hawaii  and  Florida  would  photograph 
the  orbiter  i n   an  attempt  to  discover  further  areas  of  damage.  His  statement 
hinted  at  the  highly  classified  capability  of  DOD   cameras:  photographing 
areas lacking  tiles of a moving  craft  170 miles  u p  would be  like reading license 
plates  i n   a  Moscow  parking  lot  from  orbit,  the  M$shington  Pusr  commented. 
The  fuselage’s underside  housed  Shuttle electronics  and  hydraulics  systems 
that  would  navigate  the  craft  on  its  return;  move  the  elevons,  keeping  i t   on 
course  during  the  last  1,000  miles;  and  lower  the  landing  gear.  Should  loss 
of  tiles expose the surface to  reentry  heat  that  could burn  through  the  fuselage 
and the  underlying systems, the orbiter without  its  landing  gear  lowered would 
h a v e   to  c r a s h - l a n d   a t   m o r e   t h a n   200  r n p h .   I f   p h o t o g r a p h y   s h o w e d   u n d e r s i d e  
tiles missing, Kranz  said  the  crew  would  handle  the  reentry  “to avoid  a possi- 
ble  catastrophe,”  not  specifying  the  alternatives.  Officials  said  that  the  areas 
known  to  be  missing  tiles  were  not  critical  to  reentry;  all  visible  edges of  tail 
and  wings  appeared  intact,  suggesting  that  tiles  vicrc  lost  during  the  stress of 
launch  only  on  the  engine  pods.  ( W  Post,  Apr  13/81,  A-I,  A-20,  WSJ ,  Apr 
13/81  3 ;  NYTimes,  Apr  13/81,  1;  W Srur,  Apr  13.91, A-1) 

A p r i l   14:  Th e  Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a  “flawless”  landing  on a dry 
lake  bed  i n   the Mojave  desert  at  Edwards Air  Force  Base,  California,  at  1:21 
p.m.  EST  before  a  crowd  that  included  NASA  employees,  20,000 VIPs,  and 
about  250,000 spectators  who  had  camped  out  all  night  to  watch  Columbia’s 
return.  Millions  of  people  around  the  world  also  watched  the  return  on 
television. 
Th e  astronauts got a wakeup  call from mission control  about 4 a .m .  on their 
30th  orbit,  with  a  special  message  for  Robert  (Irippen:  “You’ve  waited  12 
years  for this. If you don’t wake up,  you’ll miss  the whole thing.”  Before eating 
breakfast,  the crew took  time  to  check  flight  systems,  guidance and navigation 
instruments,  and  the  44   reaction-control  thrusters  used  during  reentry.  On 
36th  orbit,  the  crew  received  “final  go”  for  deorbit  firing.  Columbia’s 
payload-bay  doors  were  closed  four hou r s   before  the  scheduled  landing  time, 
and  the  astronauts  put  on  their  pressurized  space. suits  i n   case  of  emergency. 
Over  the  Indian  Ocean at  12:22 p .m . ,   an  hour  before  landing and  while out 
of  contact with  any  tracking  stations, Commander John  Young  turned  Colum- 
bia  tail-first  and  fired  two  on-board  maneuvering  rockets  to  brake  the 
spacecraft;  then,  turned  i t   nose-first again,  tilting  i t   slightly  to  permit  f u l l   ex- 
posure  of  underside  insulation.  Reentry  into  the  atmosphere  at  more  than 
17,000 mph  took  place  at  12:48 p .m . ,   400,000  feet  over  the  Pacific  at  Wake 
Island. The  few  tiles missing  from  tail  areas after  liftoff did  not  affect  reentry 
at  heats  up  to  2750°F.  The  8O-ton  122-foot long  vehicle  landed  at  215  mph, 
twice  the  usual  jet  speed. 
As  Columbia’s  wheels  touched  down,  flight-control  chief  Don  Puddy  at 
Houston  told  his  jubilant  team  to  “Prepare  for  exhilaration:“  allowing  them 
about  15  seconds of  celebration before  resuming  their jobs .   For the  first  time, 

266 

A PR IL   1981 

A STRONAUT IC S  A X D  AERONAUT ICS  

a  splashdown  o r   landing  did  not  immediately  end  a  manned  spaceflight. 
“Welcome  home,  Columbia,”  Houston greeted  the craft landing  on  the center 
line  of  the  California  runway.  “Do   you  want  u s   to  take  it  up  to  the   hangar, 
Joe?”  Young  radioed,  and  mission  control  responded  “We’re  going  to  dust  it 
off  first.” 
A  NASA official  said  that  Columbia would  probably  begin  its  return  flight 
to Cape  Canaveral  in  seven  o r   eight days,  riding  piggyback on  its Boeing  747 
carrier.  Arl  “optimistic”  estimate  was  that  the  orbiter  would  f l y   again  under 
its own  power  in  less than  six months, on  a  four-day  flight from which  it might 
be able to  “turn  around”  and be  ready  to  fly again  in four months.  (NYTimes, 
Apr   15/81,  1,  21;  W Post,  Apr  15/81, A-I;  W Star,  Apr  15/81, A-I;  WSJ ,  Apr 
15/81, 2) 

April  15:  NASA  officials  said  that  the  Space  Shuttle  Columbia  was  “in 
excellent  condition”  after  its  flight  and  should  be   able  to  make  at  least  100 
round  trips  into  orbit.  Technicians  were  hooking  up  ground  power  links  and 
monitoring  systems,  photographing  the  tiles,  and  preparing  to  purge  the  fuel 
tanks  and to install  a  shroud over  the tail  section for the  flight back  to  Florida. 
Postflight  servicing was   running about  12 hours behind  schedule.  (WS tu r ,  Apr 
16/81, A-1) 

Apr i l   16:  NASA  reported  that  the  Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia  would  not  be  
ready  by  April  21  for  ferrying  back  to  KSC.  A  first  postlanding  check  a t  
DFRC indicated that no tiles were missing other than  those noted  before; later, 
however,  two  from  i n   front  of  the  windshield  appeared  to  be   missing,  and 
gouges were  ev iden t   o n  the   tile  surface from   nose  to  a f t   fuselage.  Gap  fillers, 
thermal-barrier  seals,  and  ablators were  reported  to  “look  good,”  and  techni- 
cians  said  that  they  could  still  read  the  stenciling  o n   the  tiles  “with  no 
shrinkage  to  speak  of.”  (NASA D ly  Actv  Rp t ,   Apr  16/81, 2) 

April  17:  The   New  York  Times  said  that  launch  pad  39A  a t   KSC,  earlier 
reported  to  have  been  seriously  damaged  by  Columbia’s  blastoff,  suffered 
“very  minimal”  damage,  according  to  a  KSC  damage-assessment  team. 
Wayne  C.  Ranow,  an  assistant  to  pad-site  manager  Tip  Tallone,  supplied  a 
preliminary  list  of  items  damaged  and  added  that jus t   a  few  more   seconds of 
“hang time”  before the Shuttle cleared  the pad would  have caused much more  
damage.  NASA  spokesman Hugh  Harr is   said  KSC  had  expected  “a  lot  more 
damage  than  that;”  although  it  would  take  two  weeks  to  restore  the  pad  this 
time,  “we  will  learn  from  the  experience  and  change  some   things”  to  avoid 
delays  in  the  program.  Th e   impact  of  the   6.6  million  pounds  of  thrust  was 
“similar  to  what  we  saw  with  Apollo,”  Harr is   said.  (NYTimes,  Apr   17/81, 
A-26) 

ARC  reported  the  effects  of  weightlessness  on  physiological  processes 
shown  i n   14  U.S.  experiments  carried  on  unmanned  Soviet  satellite  Cosmos 

267 

ASTkONAUT lCS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

APR IL   1981 

1129  i n   1979.  This  was  t h e   only  U.S.  opportunity  fix  biological  research  in 
space since  1975. The  Vostok spacecraft  sent into elliptical orbit and recovered 
within  the Soviet  Union  18% days later was  like thost: of  two previous Cosmos 
missions  in  which  the  United  States  had  participated  in  1975  and  1977.  Use 
of  Cosmos  vehicles was  inexpensive  for  the  United  States because  the  Soviet 
Union  paid  for  spacecraft,  launch,  and  support  activities; 40  scientists  from 
18  U.S.  universities  and  research  organizations  shared  in  the  mission. 
Th e   U.S.  experimenters  found  changes  in  enzymes  and  i n   animal  bone 
strength,  growth  rate,  and  mineral  content,  like  the  changes  cxperienced  by 
astronauts  and  cosmonauts;  the  results  would  help  (explain some  of  the  pro- 
blems of weightlessness.  The  Soviet  Union  provided  37  white rats and 60 fer- 
tile  quail  eggs,  shared  by  the  experirnentcrs;  U.S.  scientists  provided  carrot- 
tissue  cultures  and  plantlets  and  carrot  slices  inoculated  with  tumor-forming 
bacteria.  One of  two  control  groups of  white  rats kept  in Moscow  lived  in  or- 
dinary  cages  and  ate  the  flight  diet;  the  other,  called  “synchronous  control,” 
was  housed  in an  identical  spacecraft on  the ground a.nd subjected to vibration 
and  gravity  forces  like  those  of  launch  and  reentry:  expericncing  whatever 
changes  in  environment  the  orbiting  Cosmos  transmitted  to  ear th .   The   only 
difference  between  the  synchronous  control  group and  the mammals  in  flight 
was  the  weightlessness. 
After  the  Cosmos  flight,  the  animals  were  recovered  immediately,  before 
they  could  readapt  to  Earth  gravity,  and  a  recovery  iteam  set  up  a  mobile  lab 
at  the  landing  site  to  autopsy  about  a  fifth  of  the  rats.  Th e  rest  were  flown  to 
Moscow,  where  some  were  autopsied  after  6  days  of  readaptation  to  gravity, 
and  the  rest  after  29 days. The  Cosmos  rats  showed  a  20% dcficiency  i n  bone 
mineral  content  compared  to  the  synchronous-control  subjects.  In  the  rats 
readapting  to  normal  gravity,  some changes reversed  within  a few days;  others 
took  longcr  to  return  to  normal. 
Under  normal  conditions,  the  total  amount  of  bone  in  an  adult  human  o r  
animal  remains  constant,  with  bone  continually  resorbed  and  replaced  by 
newly  formed  bone.  In  spaceflight,  production  of  new  bone  seems  to  slow 
down,  but  resorption  continues,  resulting  i n   net  loss  of  bone  and  a  decrease 
in  strength.  Th e   greatest  change  is  in  weight-bearing  bones,  but  even  those 
not  bearing  weight  (as jaw  bones)  show  changes  i n   mineral  content  and  the 
cells  forming  new  bone. 
The  experiments  included  the  first  attempt  to  breed  animals  in  space- 
mating  the  rats  and  examining  how  embryos  developed  in  a  weightless  state. 
This  experiment  did  not  succeed,  however,  and  no  litters  were  produced;  the 
control  group,  to  the  surprise  of  Soviet  and  U.S.  scientists,  showed  the  same 
results. The  scientists were still seeking a reason for the  failure. The quail eggs 
provided  no  information on embryo development because  the  incubator  failed 
on  the  13th day  of  flight.  The  plants  showed no  ill effects; carrot embryos and 
plant  tumors  grew  i n   space jus t   as  on  the  ground ,   suggesting  that  spaceflight 
had  no  effect  on  carrot  tissue.  (ARC  Release  81-21) 

268 

APRIL  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

April  21:  NASA  said  that  the  most  likely  date  for  ferrying  the   Space  Shuttle 
orbiter Columbia back  to KSC  would  be  April  25  for  the  flight  to  Tinker  Air 
Force  Base  in  Oklahoma  and  April  26  for  the  flight  from  Tinker  to  KSC. 
Delays  in  deservicing  were  “mainly  due   to  first-time-thru  problems,”  the 
agency  said,  referring  to  the  lack  of  interface  between  Columbia  and  the 
mate/demate  device  “because  of  the  unavailability  of  OV-2”  which  had  not 
been checked out with the new  ground-servicing  equipment  “for  form ,  fit and 
function.”  NASA  noted  that  the  three-day  stretch  in  the  schedule had  covered 
leaks  in quick-disconnect  systems,  new  position of  the work  stand, the  “unex- 
pected  OV-102  configuration  (engine-bell placement  that  no  longer  fitted  into 
t h e   m a t e /d em a t e   d e v i c e ) ,   a n d   c h a ng e s   in  o p e r a t i o n a l   m a in t en an c e  
instructions. 
A  NASA  press  release  pointed  out  that  deservicing  the  orbiter  involved 
“removal  o r   containment  of  hazardous  propellants  such  as  toxic  hypergolics 
and  cryogenics,”  inspecting  its  systems  (including  the  thermal  protection 
system),  and  raising  t h e  orbiter,  with  its  17-piece tailcone  in place,  to  a  stand 
where  it could be   fastened to  its 747  carrier.  Reviewing  events,  Aviation  Week 
Space  Technology  said  that  ground  personnel  wearing  protective  suits  had 
trouble  connecting  hoses  to  orbiter  interfaces  for  off-loading  propellants  and 
purging  systems  because  of  limited  space;  operations  were  complicated  by 
wind,  rain, and lightning, with  a series of  four power  losses in  service facility, 
each  requiring  a  two-hour  minimum  to  power  up  again  by  following  a 
checklist.  (NASA  D ly   Actv  Rp t ,   Apr  21/81;  NASA  Release  81-50;  DFRC 
Release  81-18;  AvWk,  Apr   27/81,  30-31) 

Apr i l   23:   President  Reagan  announced  the  nom ina t ion   of  business  executive 
James Montgomery  B e g s  as administrator and Dr.  Hans Mark  as  deputy  ad- 
ministrator  of  NASA.  If  confirmed,  Beggs  (who was  executive vice  president 
and  a  director  of  General  Dynamics  Corporation,  which  he  had  joined  in 
January  1974), would  b e   the  sixth  person  to  head  the  civilian  space  agency, 
succeeding  Dr.  Robert  A .   Frosch. 
B e g s  had  been associate  administrator  in  the Office of  Advanced  Research 
and   Techno logy   (OART)  a t   NASA  in   1968-69, 
leav ing   to   b e com e  
undersecretary  a t   the  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT).  M a rk ,   who 
became  secretary of  the A ir  Force in July  1979 the being  undersecretary  since 
1977,  was  formerly  director  of  NASA’s  ARC.  (NASA  Release  81-51;  MSFC  
Release  81-50;  NYErnes,  Apr  24/81,  A-12;  W Post,  Apr  25/81  A-4) 

John Young and Robert Cr ippen ,  the  crew of  Columbia’s  maiden  flight,  told 
of  their  experience a t   at  75-minute  JSC  press  conference  carried  on  closed- 
circuit television to NASA Headquarters and other centers.  They  said that  the 
orbiter was an incomparable flying  machine,  surprisingly  easy  to  control, and 
that the mission was  “what NASA calls nominal,  although I think you’re going 
to  have  to  call  it  phenomenal,”  Young  reported.  Neither  crewman expressed 
concern  over  the  loss of  tiles  from the aft  end  of  the vehicle,  detected  shortly 

269 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A PR IL   1981 

after launch. Young  said that  he was  impressed by  the fact that  the metal  under 
the  tiles  did  not  heat  up  during  reentry  as  much  as  expected:  he  said  “a  lot” 
of  the  thermal  tiles  on  the  topside could  probably be eliminated  in  future mis- 
sions,  lowering spacecraft  weight  and  increasing the  limit  on payload  weight, 
now  set  at  65,000 pounds. 
Young  said  that  he went  immediately  upon  landing  to  look  at  the  underside 
of  the  orbiter, which  had  encountered  the most heat.  “People  had  been  telling 
us  i t   was  impossible  that  some of  these  tiles  wouldn’t  fall  o f f .  Well,  none  of 
them  fell  off,  and  those  tiles  went  through  some  of  the  roughest  ascent  and 
reentry  you  can  imagine.”  “Nothing  failed.  Statistically, I didn’t think  that was 
possible,”  Crippen  added.  “We’ve been  working  3 years  to  learn  how  to  han- 
d le   c a t a s t r o p h e s ,   a n d   a l l   we  d i d   t h e   who le   t i m e   was  s i t   hack  a n d   e n j o y   i t . ”  
The  cruise was  not  perfect,  the  astronauts agreed:  the craft  was  cold  to  the 
point  of  discomfort  some  of  the  time,  and  the  toilet  shut  down  near  the  end 
of  the  flight.  The  crew kept  getting  tangled  in comrnunications  lines,  and Col- 
umbia  “landed  long”  instead  of  at  its  prescribed  touchdown  spo t .  Young  said 
the chill could be avoided by  putting  interior  temperature  sensors nearer  to the 
crew  than to heat-emitting electronic  gear. Cordless microphones would  solve 
the problem of  tangled  cords, and engineers were  already working on the toilet 
program.  Young  said  that  he  had  landed  Columbia  farther  down  the  7-mile 
long  runway  than  he  was  asked  i n   order  to  test  the  Shuttle’s wings  and  t a i l   for 
l i f t ;  he  said  that  the  lift  he  got  at  landing was  “remirkable.”  “We  hardly  used 
our  brakes.  I  tell you  that  was quite a  performance,  taking  99 tons  out of  orbit 
and  getting  i t   back  down  all  i n   one  piece.” 
A  reporter  asked  Crippen  if  his  pulse  rate  of  130  at  liftoff,  compared  to 
Young’s  90,  meant  that  he  was  more  excited.  “You  betchum  I  was  excited,” 
hc  replied.  “What  you  don’t  understand  is:  I  was  e:xcited too,”  Young  added. 
“ I   just  can’t  make  i t   go  any  faster.”  (Young  is  SO ,   seven  years  older  than 
Cr ippen .)  
The   mission  was  so  successful  that  Columbia  might  fly  again  as   early  a s  
September  23,  with  a  third  test  in  December  and  a  final  test  in  April  1982. 
With  that  schedule,  NASA might  begin  operational  flights carrying cargo  into 
space  a s  early  as  September  1982. Young  said  they  had  been  given  135 flight 
objectives and had  completed all  135. “You  really  should be proud of this vehi- 
cle,”  h e   told  the  JSC  audience.  (NASA  Text,  postflight  brfg,  Apr  23/81; 
NYT imes ,  Apr 24181, A-12;  W P o s t ,  Apr  24/81, A-6;  W S t a r ,  Apr 24181, A-12; 
B  Sun ,   Apr  24/81,  A-6) 

Ap r i l   27:  NASA  announced  that  it  would  consolidate  two  major  field 
installations as  of  October  1,  1981:  DFRC  would  become  an  operational  ele- 
ment  and  component  of  ARC,  and  Wallops  Flight  Center  (WFC)  would 
become  an  operational  element  and  component  of  GSFC.  DFRC  and  WFC  
would  retain  their  identity  under  the  overall  management  of  ARC  and  GSFC, 
respectively.  (NASA  anno,  Apr  27/81;  NASA  Releasc  81-54) 

A PR IL   1981 

ASTRONAUTKS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

April  27:  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  (MSFC)  reported  that  Heao  2 ,  
NASA’s  second high-energy  astronomy observatory  (Heao) , had  expended  its 
control-gas  supply  and  ended  its  mission.  One  of  a  family  of  three  “highly 
successful”  scientific  satellites  managed  by  MSFC,  H e m   2  (like  its 
predecessor,  Heao  r )  had  performed  twice as  long  as its predicted  design  life; 
a  third  observatory  was  still  operating. 
Launched  November  13,  1978, Heao  2  carried  the  world’s  largest  focusing 
X-ray telescope and an array  of  astronomical  instruments;  it had provided data 
on  X-ray  output  of  normal  stars,  content  of  supernova  remnants,  distribution 
of  mass  in  galaxies,  and  the  origin  of  the  extragalactic  X-ray  background. 
MSFC   said that  participating  astronomers would  need years  to  analyze all  the 
data  received.  Unable  to  maintain  attitude  after  exhausting  its  control  fuel 
April  25,  the  spacecraft  was  powered  down  April  26.  Reentry  and  burnup 
would  probably  occur  early  in  1982.  (MSFC   Release  81-52;  NASA  Release 
81-56) 

Apr i l  28:  Shuttle orbiter Columbia on its 747 carr ier  landed a t  the Shuttle lan- 
ding  facility  runway  a t  KSC  at  11:24 a .m .  EDT.  Demating  began  i n   prepara- 
tion  for moving  it  into  the processing  facility  for  72  hours of  troubleshooting. 
CBS-TV News  said hundreds  of  employees and  their  families were on hand 
for the  arrival;  reporter  Bruce Hall  said  that,  although  the orbiter’s condition 
was  “excellent,”  a  number  of  NASA  officials did  not  expect  the  next  launch 
to  take  place  before  1982.  Jules  Bergman  of  ABC-TV  said  that  work  on   the 
orbiter  would  include  installing  a  miniature  remote-control  arm   to  deploy 
satellites  and  retrieve  them  on   future  missions.  Th e   second  flight,  STS-2, 
would  test  the  a rm   only.  NASA’s  current  target  date  was  said  to  be  mid- 
October, though much work  remained to be done on  the reusable boosters and 
the  launch  pad.  (NASA   D ly   Actv  R p t ,   Apr  29/81;  DOD   RadioTv  Rpts, 
Apr  29/81) 

NASA’s acting administrator,  Dr. Alan M .  Lovelace,  signed a memorandum 
of  understanding  with  Hans-Hilger  Haunschild  of  the  Federal  Republic  of 
Germany’s  (FRG)  ministry  for  research  and  technology  on   FRG  use  of  the 
STS  (Shuttle),  with NASA  furnishing  launch  and  support  services on  a  reim- 
bursable  basis.  NASA  said  that  the  Federal  Republic  had  “long  been  a  sup- 
porter”  of  STS  and  had  contributed  4 0%  to  ESA’s development  of  Spacelab, 
soon to be  a  Shuttle payload  with  laboratory  facilities like those  on  Earth  but 
adapted  for  zero  gravity. 
Th e  Federal Republic of Germany had already paid  NASA  for  two  reimbur- 
sable  Spacelab  missions:  D-1,  materials  processing  and  life-sciences  ex- 
periments,  and D-4 ,  astrophysics experiments;  it also planned  to  launch an X- 
ray  satellite (Rosat)  from the Shuttle in  1986. In addition, private and scientific 
organizations in West Germany had  reserved 25  small self-contained payloads 
for  eventual  shuttle  flight  on  a  space-available basis.  (NASA  Release  81-58) 

M a y   8:  NASA  announced  that  the  National  Science  Teachers  Association 
(NSTA),  chosen  last  summer  to  run  a  nationwide  student  competition  to 
develop payloads  to  fly  on  the  Shuttle,  had  picked  from  191  semifinal  entries 
10  finalists  to  attend  a  conference  at  KSC  on  preparing  their  experiments  for 
payload  assignment. 
Finalists  and  their  teacher-advisers  would  view  KSC  preparations  for 
Columbia’s second  flight,  now  scheduled  for  October;  the  finalists  and  their 
teachers  as  well  as  their  schools  would  receive  special  medallions. 
Th e  winners  and  their  experiments  were Wendy  A .   Angelo  of  New  York, 
use  of  biofeedback  to  help  Shuttle  crew  members  relax  o r   sleep;  Aaron  K .  
Gillette,  Florida,  growth  of  common  sponges  i n   zero  gravity;  Pritchett  A .  
H a r r i s ,   P e n n s y l v a n i a ,   s im u l a t i n g   p l a n e t a r y   a tm o s p h e r e ;   K a r l a   R .  
Hauersperger,  North  Carolina,  space-travel  effect on chromium  in  the human 
body ;   Michelle  A .   Issel,  Connecticut,  formation  of  crystals  from  super- 
saturated solution in weightlessness; Amy  M .  Kusske, California,  space-travel 
effect on  lipoprotein profiles; Dave D.  Madura,  Indiana,  space-travel  effect on  
human  cell  division;  Todd  E .   Nelson,  Minnesota,  insects  in  zero-g;  D.  Scott 
Thomas,  Pennsylvania, convection  in  zero-g;  Daniel J. Weber,  New  York,  ef- 
fect  of  weighdessness  o n   ar thr i t is   i n   rats.  (NASA  Release  81-59) 

M a y   14:  The  Soviet Union  launched  from  Baykonur  the  Soyuz 40  spacecraft 
crewed  by  Leonid  Popov,  who  in  1980  achieved  a  world  space-endurance 
record  of  185  days  with  fellow  cosmonaut  Valery  Ryumin,  and  Dumitru 
Prunariu  of  Romania’s  a ir   force.  Tass  said  the  ship would  dock  with  orbiting 
space  station  Sa lyu t   6,. occupied  since March  14 by  Vladimir  Kovalenok  and 
Viktor  Savinykh. 
This  flight,  ninth  in  the  Intercosmos  program  of  launching  a  Soviet 
cosmonaut with  one  from another country, would  complete the first round that 
began  in  March  1978  with  representatives  from  Bulgaria,  East  Germany, 
Poland,  Cuba ,   Hungary,  Vietnam,  Czechoslovakia,  and  Mongolia.  (W  S tar ,  
May  15/81,  A-16) 

M a y   15:  NASA  launched  the  U.S.  Navy’s  improved  Transit  navigational 
satellite  Nova  1 at  2:07  a .m .   from  the  Western  Space  and  Missile  Center 
(WSMC)  on  a  Scout  vehicle  into  a  polar  transfer  orbit  with  935-kilometer 
apogee,  353-kilometer  perigee,  90.16 O  inclination,  and  97.67-minute  period. 
Th e  solar  panels  deployed,  and  the  payload  was  in  a  housekeeping  mode.  A 
multiple-burn  spacecraft motor  fired on  later orbit would  raise the 368-pound 
spacecraft’s  altitude  to  about  600  nautical  miles. 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

MAY  1981 

This  102d launch  of  a Scout was  the  ninth  success in a row.  NASA provided 
the  launch  under  a  June  1962 agreement  with  DO11 to  reimburse  NASA  for 
the  cost  of  Scout  vehicles, Western  Test  Range  (WTR)  launch  services,  and 
mission  support, as required.  So far, NASA  had  launched  15 Transit  satellites 
and  3  Transit  improvement  program  satellites,  of  which  5  were  currently 
operating.  The  Navy  would  reimburse  NASA  about  $1.6  million  for  services 
and  hardware  provided  for  the  program  ($1.825  million  for  launch-vehicle 
hardware;  $0.950  million  for  WTR   launch  services  and  mission  support: 
$4.825  million  for  FY81  support  services),  (NASA  MOR  0-490-603-81-01 
[prelaunch]  May  13/81; NASA   D l y   Actv  Rp t ,   May  18/81; SF;  Oct  81,  274) 

NASA  announced  that  it  would  launch  the  next  Shuttle  flight  (STS-2) on 
September  30,  if   turnaround  procedures  went  smoothly.  JSC  spokesman 
Robert  Dotts  said  that  the  thermal-protection  systeni  “exceeded  o u r   expecta- 
tions”  and that  the  amount of  repair  needed  would  not  affect  turnaround  time. 
Only  10 or   12  of  the  foamed-glass tiles  protecting  Columbia’s  fuselage  during 
reentry  would  need  replacement.  Inch-deep gouges  ;dl over  the  surface of  the 
Shuttle  mostly  occurred  during  takeoff.  NASA  cautioned  that  the  orbiter 
would  be  undergoing  turnaround  for  the  first  time,  ,and unforeseen  problems 
could  affect  the  flight schedule.  (NASA  Release  81-65; MSFC  Release  81-61; 
W  Post,  May  16/81, A-2) 

M a y   19:  Some 40  astronauts  were  o n   hand  at  the  White  House  as  President 
Reagan  awarded  John  Young  and  Robert  Crippen,  the  crew  of  Space  Shuttle 
Columbia’s first flight,  the Distinguished Service Medal. Young  also  received 
a  Space  Medal  of  Honor  for  his  five  spaccflight,j  i n   two  decades  as  an 
astronaut . 
The   guest  list  of  160  included  present  and  former  space  officials  and 
astronauts,  including  six of  the  original Mercury  seven:  Alan  B.  Shcpard, first 
American  i n   space;  John  H .   G lenn ,   J r . ?  first  Ame.rican  to  orbit  the  Earth; 
L .  Gordon  Cooper,  M .  Scott  Carpenter,  Walter  M .   Schirra,  and  Donald  K .  
Slayton.  (Virgil  L .   Grissom,  the  seventh,  had  died  1.4  years  ago  in  a  launch- 
pad  fire.)  The  group  included  the  crew  of Apollo  8 that  orbited  the  Moon  at 
Christmas  in  1968:  Frank  Borman,  James  A.  Lovell,  J r . ,   and  William  A. 
Anders.  Also  on  hand  were  the Apollo  I1   moon  walkers,  Neil  A .  Armstrong 
and  Edwin  E .   Aldrin,  J r . ,  and  the  third  pilot  on  their  mission,  Michael  Col- 
lins.  This  was  the  first  time  so  many  former  astronauts  from  the  Mercury, 
Gemini,  Apollo,  and  Skylab  projects  had  come  together.  They  did  so  at  the 
invitation  of  the  president  to  honor  the  reusable  Shuttle,  most  recent  U.S. 
space  cffort,  and  the  men  who  flew  i t   into orbit  for  the  first  time  last  month. 
The  president described  the  Shuttle as  “the world’s  first true space transpor- 
tation  system,”  saying  it  would  affect  American  life  i n   both  subtle  and 
dramatic ways,  “bringing  energy and  excitement  to our  national rcserve.”  The  
Columbia crewmen presented  the  president and vice  president  with  American 
flags they had  carried on  the  Shuttle’s first  flight. They also gave  the  president 

MAY  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   .AERONAUTICS 

a  gold  spaceflight  jacket  with  the  presidential  seal,  and  Reagan  responded: 
“You  won’t  mind  if  I  only  wear  this  in  Earth’s  atmosphere.” 
Reagan  also  awarded  the  presidential  citizen’s  medal  to  Dr.  Alan  M .  
Lovelace,  acting  head  of  NASA,  who  had  been  in  charge of  t h e  Shuttle’s first 
flight.  Lovelace  was  the  fourth  recipient  of  the  medal,  established  in  1969. 
(Text, WhHs   remarks,  May  19/81; NASA  Releases 81-70,  81-71 N f l i m e s ,  May 
20181,  A-22,  W Post,  May  20/81,  A-2;  W  Star,  May  20/81,  A-3) 

May  22:  After  a  series  of  delays, NASA  launched  GOES-E ,   fifth  of  a  series 
of  geostationary  operational  environmental  satellites funded  by  NOAA,  from 
the  Eastern  Space and  Missile  Center  (ESMC) at  6 :29  p.m.  EDT  on  a  Delta 
into  a  transfer  orbit  with  49,768-kilometer  apogee,  192-kilometer  perigee, 
921-minute  period,  and  24.1”  inclination.  The   craft  would  move  into  syn- 
chronous  orbit  at  85”W  by  the  first  week  of  June  for  testing. 
Th e  Hughes-built 875-pound satellite,  Goes  5 in orb i t ,  carried a new  visible- 
infrared  radiometric  atmospheric sounder (VAS)-modified 
from the  original 
visible-infrared  spin-scan  radiometer  (VISSR)  first  carried  by  Goes  4  in 
September  1980-to  provide  not  only  visual  imagery  of  Earth  surface  and 
cloud  cover  and  infrared  sea-surface  temperature  but  also  temperatures  and 
amount,  distribution,  and  movement  of  water  vapor  a t   various  altitudes. 
Goes  5  would  ultimately  replace  an  older  craft  at  75”W,  now  serving  as  
“Goes  East”  to  monitor  the  eastern  United  States  and  Canada ,   Central 
America,  South  America,  and  much  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  (NASA  MOR  
E-612-81-03  [prelaunch]  Apr  28/81,  [postlaunch]  July  23 /85 ;   NASA  wkly 
SSR ,   GSFC,  May  28/81;  D /SD ,   May  29/81,  156;  A v W ,   June  15/81,  5 3 ;  
Spacewarn  SPX-332,  June  30/81) 

May  23:  NASA  launched  the world’s largest telecommunications  satellite, In- 
telsat  V 2 ,  from  Cape  Canaveral  on  an  Atlas  Centaur  a t   6 :42   p .m .   EDT  into 
a  highly  elliptical  transfer  orbit with  35,960-kilometer  apogee,  172-kilometer 
perigee,  633.9-minute period,  and 24.1 O  inclination.  Originally  scheduled  for 
May  21,  the   launch  was  delayed  by  computer  problems  in  the  rocket’s  main 
safety-control  system. 
Th e  huge  communications  satellite, weighing  more  than 2  tons,  was  second 
in a new  series of  nine  international  communications  satellites the first  having 
been  launched  December  9,  1980,  as  an  on-orbit  spare  for  the  Atlantic  net- 
work,  which would  eventually  consist of  four  satellites.  Th e  first  five Intelsat 
Vs  would  be   launched  by  Atlas  Centaur;  the   next  three,  by  Europe’s  Ariane 
booster.  Average  estimated  cost of  an Atlas  Centaur  launch  was  $42  million; 
that  of  an  Ariane  launch  was  $27  million.  Overall  cost  of  the  Intelsat  V  pro- 
gram  was  $680  million,  o r   some   $76  million  for  each  mission;  estimated 
average  cost  of  each  satellite  was  $34  million. 
Intelsat  V-2, after  coming on  station a t  355 “E for a month of  testing,  would 
be   operational  by  July  at  335.5 “E ,   handling  communications  between  the 
Americas  and  Europe,  the Middle East,  and  Africa.  It could  transmit  12,000 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

MAY  1981 

telephone  calls  simultaneously  i n   addition  to  two  television  color  channels, 
having  twice  the  capacity  of  Intelsat  IV-As  previou:;ly  launched  by  NASA  for 
INTELSAT.  The   106-nation  organization  jointly  owned  and  operated  12 
satellites over  the Atlantic,  Pacific,  and  Indian  oceans  i n   order  to  handle  two- 
thirds of  the  world’s  overseas  communications,  from  telegrams and  telephone 
calls  to  television  and  data. 
In  1984,  INTELSAT  would  begin  a  series  of  three  improved  Intelsat  V-As 
capable  of  15,000 simultaneous  telephone  calls  and  two  television  channels; 
1986  would  inaugurate  Intelsat  V IS ,   each  handling  more  than  40,000 
simultaneous  telephone  calls  and  two  television  channels  and  designed  for 
launch by  either  the Ariane or  the Space Shuttle.  (NASA MOR-491-203-81-02 
[ p r e l a u n c h ]   May   20 /81 ,   [ p o s t l a u n c h ]   J u n e   17/81;  NASA  R e l e a s e   81-60;  IN -  
TELSAT  Release  81-10-1;  W Post,  May  24/81,  A-3,  D /SD ,   May  27/81,  140; 
A / D ,  May  28/81,  151;  Spacewarn   SPX-332 ,   June   .?0/81) 

M a y  26:  NASA  announced  the establishment of  two new  divisions within  the 
Office  of  Space  Transportation  Systems  and  the  disestablishment  of  the  Ex- 
pendable  Equipment  Division.  L . M .  Weeks,  NASA  Headquarters  deputy 
associate  administrator  for  space  transportation  systems,  said  the  change 
would  direct  increased  attention  and  impetus  to  the  widebody  Centaur  pro- 
gram  recently  approved  by  NASA. 
A new  Upper Stage Division would manage the widebody Centaur, the iner- 
tial  Upper  stage  ( IUS ) ,  the  spinning  solid upper  stage  (SSUS),  and  the  solar- 
electric propulsion  system  (SEPS) proposed  for  use  on  the Galileo  and  solar- 
polar  missions.  Frank  van  Rensselaer,  director  of  the  former  Expendable 
Equipment  Division,  would  direct  the  new  upper  !stage  Division.  Jerry  Fitts 
would  direct  a  new  Solid  Rocket  Booster  and  External  Tank  (SRBIET)  Divi- 
sion.  (NASA  anno  May  26/81) 

Press reports  said that  two  the cosmonauts who occupied orbiting  space sta- 
tion  Sulyut  6 for  75  days  had  returned  safely  at  4 :38   p .m .   Moscow  time  in 
Soyuz  T-4  to  a  landing  site  i n   Kazakhstan.  Co l .   Vladimir  Kovalenok,  flight 
commander, and  flight  engineer  Viktor  Savinykh  had  two  sets of  visitors  dur- 
ing  the ir   mission:  V lad im ir   Dzhanibekov  and   Mongolian  cosmonaut 
Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha of Soyuz  39 in March and Leonid Popov and Roma- 
nian  cosmonaut  Dumitru  Prunariu  of  S q y u z   40, jus t   a  week  ago. 
The  N ew   York  Times said that  this  was  the  final mission  for Sa lyu t  6, which 
would  probably  be  abandoned.  Launched  in   1977.  i t   had  been  the  base  for 
nearly  four  years  of  record-setting  tests  of  huma.n  endurance.  Last  week, 
Popov  said  that  the  Soviet  Union  would  also  retire  the  old-model  two-person 
Soyuz  spacecraft  used  for  the  past  14  years  in  favor  of  the  Soyuz-T,  a  three- 
man  version  more  maneuverable  and  sophisticated,  with  four  successful 
flights,  including  the one jus t  ended .  (NYT ime s ,  May  27/81, A-1;  W Post, May 
27/81,  A-14) 

276 

MAY  1981 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

During  M a y :   Th e   National  Aeronautic  Association  (NAA)  reported  un- 
official  records  se t  by  Columbia’s  first  flight,  pending  review  for  world  cer- 
tification.  As  the  official  U.S.  certification  authority  for  aerospace  records 
since  1905 and  sole  U .S .  representative  of  the  Federal  Aeronautique  Interna- 
tional  (FAI), NAA gave the following  figures: duration, 54   hours, 20  minutes, 
52  s e co nd s ;   max imum   a l t i tude ,   209   k i lome ters ;   d is tance ,   1,144,709 
kilometers;  mass  carried  into  orbit,  95,201  kilograms;  payload  mass  to 
altitude,  4624 kilograms.  NAA  said  that Columbia  was  “the  world’s  first  and 
only  aerospacecra j? . .  .capable  of  operating  in  space  or   i n   the  atmosphere.” 
NAA  had  awarded  the Voyager mission  team  represented  by  Dr.  Eidward C .  
Stone  the  Collier  Trophy,  oldest  U .S .   aviation  award,  for  space  exploration 
achievement  peaking  in  the  close  examination  of  Saturn  after  a  comparable 
visit  to  Jupiter  the  previous  years.  Established  in  1911  and  first  presented  to 
Glenn Curtiss for development of  a  seaplane,  the Collier Trophy  was awarded 
yearly  for  achievement  demonstrated  by  actual  use.  (NAA  newsletter,  May 
1981) 

June 

June   1:  NASA  said  that  the  principal  investigators  for  the  plasma-wave  in- 
struments  on  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL)-managed  Voyager  2 ,  
heading  for  rendezvous  with  Saturn  in  August  1981,  discovered  that  the 
spacecraft  had  encountered  the magnetic  t a i l   of  Jupiter  almost  two  years  after 
leaving  that  planet,  confirming  a  theory  that  the  huge  magnetosphere  might 
extend  all  the  way  to  Saturn. 
Dr.  Frederick  L .   Scarf ,   scientist  at  TRW  Inc . ,   and  his  colleagues,  Dr. 
Donald  Gurnett  and  Dr.  William  Kurth  of  the  University  of  Iowa,  found 
plasma-wave  phenomena  from  February  1981  identical  to  those  of  July  and 
August  1979,  when  b y u g e r   2  had  left  Jupiter  but  was  still  in  that  planet’s 
magnetosphere.  Scarf  had  published  in  1979  in  the  Journal  of  Geophysical 
Research  his  idea  that  Jupiter’s  magnctotail  might  reach  as  far  as  Saturn  and 
that  the  rare alignment  of  outer  planets  that  permitted  the  successive Jupiter- 
Saturn  encounters  might  put  Vbyager  2  and  Saturn  simultaneously  into 
Jupiter’s  far-flung  influence. 
Inside  the  Jovian  t a i l ,   Saturn  could  experience  unusual  conditions  obser- 
vable  by  the  Voyager  when  it  arrived  in  August.  The   next  Saturn  encounter 
might  differ  widely  from  the  two  previous.  (NASA  Release  81-73) 

June  2:  MSFC   said  that  NASA’s  third  high-energy  astronomy  observatory, 
H e m  3 ,   used  the  last  of  its  attitude-control  thruster  gas  and  was  powered 
down,  completing  a  mission  begun  in  September  1979  to  study  pulsars, 
quasars, exploding galaxies,  and black  holes  in  space, whose high  energy out- 
put  could  not  be  studied  with  Earth-based  telescopes  due   to  atmospheric  in- 
terference.  With  20  m y t h s  of  operation  in  orbit,  Heao  3 was  the  third  of  its 
type  to  perform  for  more   than  twice  its design  lifetime.  It  would  reenter  and 
burn  up  later  this  year.  (MSFC  Release  81-69;  NASA  Release  81-77) 

Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that  it had awarded  four contracts total- 
ing  more  than  $/  million  for  design  and  development  of  a  modified  Centaur 
launch  vehicle  and  components  to  be  used  as  a  Shuttle upper  stage. 
A  $1.545  million  contract  with  Teledyne  Industries  called  for  five  digital 
computer  units  and  nine  remote  multiplex  units.  A  $1.593  million  contract 
with  Honeywell  was  for  three  inertial-measurement  groups,  part  of  an 
automatic  navigation  and  guidance  system.  A  $3.412  million  contract  with 
General Dynamics was  for  design  and  development of  two  modified  Centaur 
vehicles.  A  $.933  million  contract  with  United  Technologies  Corporation 
would  cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket  engines,  two of which  would pro- 
vide  primary  thrust  for  one  Centaur.  Work  under  these  contracts  would  con 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D   AEROXUAUTICS 

J U N E   1981 

tinue  through  September  1981;  they  were  all  to  support  the  Galileo  mission 
to Jupiter,  scheduled  for launch  i n   1985, and  the international  solar-polar m is-  
sion  i n   1986. 
The  Centaur  for  these  missions  would  rescmble  thc  one used  over  the  past 
15  years  as  an  upper  stage  for  Atlas  and  Titan  boosters  on   Mariner  missions 
to  Mars  and  Venus,  Pioneer  missions  to  Jupiter  and  Venus,  Viking  and 
Voyager  missions,  and  the  cooperative  Helios  missions  with  West  Germany. 
It  had  carried  low  Earth-orbit  missions  for  NASA,  such  as   the  Heao  series 
and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; 
NASA  Release  81-75) 

DFRC  said  that  its  newly  refurbished  Canberra  bomber  would  be  the  test 
airplane  for  an  atmospheric-turbulence measurement  program  to  gather  data 
on  sudden  wind  changes  creating  abrupt  and  uneven  pressures  on  different 
areas of  an  aircraft.  Engineers  would  use  the  information  to  improve  aircraft 
design  and  operation,  with  special  attention  to  approach  and  takeoff  during 
strong  winds  and  unstable  atmospheric  conditions. 
Project  e ig ineers   chose  the  B-57B because  of  ii:s  ability  to  withstand  high 
g  forces;  its  wings  were  extremely  rigid  and  strong  enough  to  recover  from 
upsets  during  severe  turbulence.  Its  cockpit  held  two  crewmen,  so  that  a 
meteorologist  could  f l y   as  observer  during  the  lests.  Wen  Painter,  project 
manager  for  the  program,  said  that  scientists  do   not  f u l l y   understand  wind- 
shear  phenomena  and  expect  the  flight  tests  to  produce  valuable  data. 
Th e  B-57B  would  f ly  at  Edwards Air  Force  Bast:,  Denver,  Oklahoma  City, 
Huntsville,  Cape  Canaveral,  and  Wallops  Island,  all  of  which  exhibited 
distinctive types of  turbulence.  Other NASA centers participating  in the  study 
would  be  ARC,  LaRC,  and  MSFC.  (DFRC  Release  81-21) 

June  10:  NASA’s  Atmosphere  Explorer  5  reentered  E a r t h s   atmosphere  aftcr 
31,268  orbits  and  more  than  5 %   years  of  service.  Launched  from  KSC 
November  20,  1975,  the  720-kilogram  (1,587-pound) AE-5   carried  15  highly 
specialized  instruments  to  gather  data  on  Earth’s  near-space  environment.  It 
was the first spacecraft using on-board  propulsion  to make  large  orbit changes 
and  to  use  a  central  computer  to  make  all data  acquired  immediately accessi- 
ble  to  members  of  investigator  teams  at  terminals  i n   their  own  facilities. 
Th e   last  signal  from  AE-5  came  over  Hawaii,  and  no  signal  was  received 
when  i t   was  due over  Ascension  Island.  Trajectorjf of  the  descent  was  across 
the  Pacific,  Central  America,  and  toward  t h e   Atlantic;  the  North  American 
Air Defense  Command (NORAD) confirmed  reentry  into the atmosphere over 
the  Caribbean  east  of  Nicaragua  at  9 :57   a .m .   ELIT.  (NASA  Release  81-86) 

June  11:  The  Soviet  Union’s  space program must  develop  a  low-cost  transport 
vehicle  like the  U.S.  Space shuttle, according  to Konstantin  P.  Feoktistov,  one 
of  the  three  cosmonauts  who  orbited  the  Earth  six  times  in  b s t o k  1 i n   1964. 
Feoktistov,  now  a professor of  technical  sciences doing  research  for the Soviet 

280 

J U N E   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

space program,  did  not  specifically mention  the  successful flight of  Columbia 
in April but called  for  solution of  technological problems  in  space travel  such 
as  cheap  lightweight batteries.  The  New  York  Times quoted  from Pruvdu,  the 
official  Communist Party  newspaper, the  first official acknowledgment  by  the 
Soviet Union that  it would  like to have  a  shuttle-like vehicle for manned  space 
flights. 
Tass  said  June  19  that  Cosmos  1267 had  docked  with  the  empty  Sa lyu t   6 
with  the mission of  testing  systems  “of  the design  of  future spacecraft and  for 
training  in  the  methods  of  assembly  of  orbital  complexes  of  a  big  size  and 
weight.”  Th e  Washington Post  said that the  linkup was  “the precursor of  a very 
large  space  complex  that  U.S.  sources  expect  to  have  military  uses.” 
(NYE rn e s ,  June  11  81,  A-18;  W Pos t ,  June  20/81,  A-9;  FBIS, Tass  in  English, 
June  91/81) 

Jun e   12:  NASA  s igned   an   a g r e em en t   with  th e   West  G e rm a n   f i rm  
Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom  (MBB)  covering  the  first  flight  of  shuttle-pallet 
satellite  SPAS-01  scheduled  for  orbit  on   STS-5,  the  first  operational  Shuttle 
flight,  in  September  1982.  This  would  be  the  first  payload  deployed  and 
retrieved  by  the  Shuttle’s Canadian-built  remote-manipulator  system  (RMS). 
Th e  1,814-kilogram (4,000-pound) payload  would operate inside the payload 
bay and would  also be a free flyer when deployed,  using  an on-board stabiliza- 
tion  and  control  system.  NASA  would  use  it  to  test  RMS  capabilities  during 
the  five-day  mission,  with  a 70-mm camera  on  the  payload  to  record  deploy- 
ment,  free  flight,  retrieval,  and  reberthing.  MBB  would  conduct  materials- 
processing  experiments  while  the  payload  was  in   t h e   shuttle  bay. 
Th e  agreement was  signed  for NASA  by  Dr.  Stanley  I .  Weiss,  associate ad- 
ministrator  for  space transportation  operations, and for MBB by Dr.  Johannes 
Schubert  and  Dr.  Peter  C.  Bittner,  general  manager  and  commercial  director 
of MBB’s  space division. Th e  pact  would  cover  KSC  and JSC  launch  services 
a s  well  as  NASA’s  use  of  the payload  for RMS  testing.  (NASA  Release  81-80) 

June  15:  NASA  said  that  investigators  at  GSFC  and  the  University  of 
Maryland  had  discovered  a  natural  infrared  laser  on  Mars,  a  find  that  could 
help  detect  new  planets  in  the  universe  and  require  rewrites  of  books  on 
general physics  of  the  planetary  atmosphere.  Members  of  the  team  were  Dr. 
Michael  J.  Mumma ,   Dr.  David  Buhl,  Dr.  Gordon  Ch in ,   Dr.  Drake  Deming, 
Fred  Espenak,  and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk,  all  of  GSFC,  and Dr.  David  Zipoy 
of  the   University  of  Maryland.  The   discovery  was  reported  in  Sc ience  
magazine. 
Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention  had  proved  extremely useful 
not  only  in  scientific  laboratories  but  also  in  everyday  life;  for  example,  as  
price  scanners  in  supermarkets. However,  the  investigators  sa id ,   no  naturally 
occurring  laser  had  ever  been  reported,  although  “ the   extreme  variety  of 
physical  and chemical environments of extraterrestrial  objects.  . . argue[d] that 
natural  lasers  must  exist.” 

281 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AkKONAUTICS 

J U N E   I981 

In  theory,  “natural”  lasers would occur whenever  .atoms o r  molecules were 
stimulated  to  release  photons  i n  transition  from higher  to  lower  energy  states. 
A Goddard-developed device (an  infrared heterodyne  spectrometer)  used  with 
the McMath  solar telescope at K i t t  Peak  National  Observatory  i n  Arizona  had 
detected  such  a  process  in  the  Mars  atmosphere  (made  up  almost  entirely  of 
cabon dioxide) between  January  and April  1980. The new  device let the scien- 
tists  confirm  occurrence  of  a  molecular-population  inversion,  necessary  for 
lasing. 
Th e   natural  laser  on  Mars,  identical  in  principle  I:O  man-made  lasers  with 
commercial,  scientific,  and  military  applications,  had  a  total  continuous 
power  o u t p u t   of  m o r e   than  a  million  megawatts,  equivalent  to  that  generated 
by  a  thousand  large  hydroelectric-power  projects;  i n   fact,  the  Mars   laser 
generated more than  five times the total  power  output of  the United  States. The  
investigators  said  orbiting  satellites might  eventually  be  able  to  extract  power 
from  the  natural  laser  and  beam  i t   wherever  needed.  (NASA  Release  81-78) 

June   16:  NASA  announced  that  Perkin-Elmer  Corporation’s  Danbury,  Con- 
necticut,  facility  had  finished  shaping  and  polishing  the  94-inch  (2.4-meter) 
diameter  primary  m irror   for  the  space  telescope,  main  optical  component  of 
the telescope  assembly.  Launched  on  the  Shuttle early  in  1985, the  12-ton un- 
manned telescope would orbit at 600 kilometers  (370 miles)  above  the interfer- 
ing haze  of  Earth’s  atmosphere. It would be able to  see objects 50 times fainter 
than  observable  from  Earth  telescopes,  observing  about  350  times  more 
volume  of  space  and  7  times  further  into  space  than  now  possible,  up  to  14 
billion  light-years.  To  make  fu l l   use  of  this  undistorted  view  of  space, 
telescope  parts had  to be   much  more accurate than  those  in  Earth  telescopes. 
Th e  mirror  exhibited  a  deviation  at  any  point  on  its  surface  of  less  than  one  
millionth  of  an  inch  from  an  ideally  perfect  surface. 
Manufacture  of  the  m irror   blank  began  i n   October  1977  at  Corning  Glass 
Works,  which  delivered  it  to  Perkin-Elmer  i n  December  1978. The  blank  was 
made  of  a  Corning  product  called  ultra-low-expansion  glass,  which  has  ex- 
tremely  low  thermal  expansion  properties.  Optical  fabrication  began  with 
rough  grinding  of  front  and  back  surfaces  of  the  blank,  followed  i n   August 
1980  by  fine  polishing  of  the  front  surface,  using  a  computer-controlled 
polisher.  The  next stage of  fabrication would be t h e  application  to  the polished 
surface  of  two  uniform  extremely  thin  coatings,  one  a  reflective  layer  of  pure 
aluminum,  the  other  a  protective  layer  of  magnesium  fluoride  to  prevent  ox- 
idation  of  the  aluminum.  Coating  would  take  place  at  Perkin-Elmer  i n   the 
world’s  largest  vacuum  chamber,  which  operates  at  a  vacuum  very  near  that 
of  space. After  coating, the mirror  would  be  installed  i n   t h e  optical  telescope 
and  aligned  to  the  secondary  mirror,  focal  plane,  scientific  instruments,  and 
guidance  sensors.  Th e  completed  optical  telescope  would  then  be  integrated 
into a  support-systems module,  a major  element  of  the  space telescope,  under 
construction  by  Lockheed. 
Th e  space telescope project was managed  by  MSFC.  (NASA  Release  81-82) 

2 8 2  

J U N E   1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

June 17:  MSFC  awarded  a  $400,000  contract  to  McDonnell  Douglas  as  the 
follow-up  of  an  initial  study  of  ideas  for  manned  platforms  in  space.  MSFC  
was  the  lead  NASA  center  for  the  study  of  space platforms  designed  to  carry 
payloads  of  science  experiments  left  in  orbit  by  the  Shuttle,  which  would 
return  from  time  to  time  to  replace  equipment  i n   orbit.  As  a  structure grew, 
temporary  manned  modules  would  be   added,  with  the  objective  of  a  perma- 
nent  structure where scientists and technicians would do  research  for extended 
periods of  time.  Th e  McDonnell  Douglas  study  would  be  completed  in  about 
10  months.  (MSFC  Release  81-68) 

June 18: ESA  successfully  launched  its  Ariane  rocket  from  Kourou,  French 
Guiana, a t  2 :33  p .m .  local time,  carrying Indian-built comsat A p p l e  and ESA’s 
own Meteosat 2 into  an orbit with 36,206-kilometer apogee and 201-kilometer 
perigee  and  “breaking  a  quarter-century  two-power  monopoly  on  space 
achievements,”  as  the  Washington Post and  Washington Star agreed. 
Michel  Bignier,  ESA’s  director  of  space and  transport  systems,  said  “space 
is no  longer  the exclusive  preserve of  a  few  powerful  nations but  now  belongs 
to  all  of  humanity.”  Pierre  Morel,  director  general  of  the  Centre  National 
d’Etudes  Spatiales  (CNES) ,   said  the  third  Ariane  launch  “opens  the  way  to 
European  commercial  exploitation of  space.”  ESA had  hoped for a third of  the 
180 to  200   satellite  launches  scheduled  for  the  next  decade;  Ariane  had  firm 
contracts  for  7  launches  through  1985 and  options  for  another  14. 
Ariane’s  second  launch  in   May  1980 had  ended  i n   failure  when  the  rocket 
burst  into  flames moments  after  leaving  the  pad.  The   first  test  in  December 
I979 had been  successful, but  that  rocket carried no  satellites.  The $1.6 billion 
Ariane  program  was  funded  by  10  nations,  with  France  (contributing  about 
6 4% )  and  West  Germany  (about  20% )  as   major  participants.  (ESA  Info  IO, 
11,  12;  WPost, June 20/81, A-9;  W S t a r ,  June  20/81,  D-2;  Nature, June 25/81, 
604) 

June   19:  NASA  Headquarters  released  an official  report  on  the  investigation 
of  the March  19,  1981, accident at KSC  that  killed  two  employees of  Rockwell 
International,  who went  into  the Shuttle’s aft  compartment while  it  was  filled 
with  gaseous  nitrogen.  It  had  been  determined  that  an  all-clear  signal  was 
given  too  soon. 
Primary  findings by  an  investigative  board headed  by  Charles D.  Gay,  KSC 
director  of  expendable-vehicle  operations,  were  that  test  procedures  lacked 
adequate steps to clear a vehicle o r  pad  for hazardous operations, or to partial- 
ly  or   completely  reopen  the  vehicle  or  pad  for  resumption  of  normal  work; 
also,  that  a  breakdown  occurred  in  the  operational  command/coordination 
process.  Th e   report  of  more  than  400   pages  included  19  pages  of  findings, 
observations,  and  recommendations  to  prevent  similar  accidents  i n   future. 
(NASA  Release  81-85;  W Post, June  20/81,  A-5) 

283 

A S I R O N A U T I C S  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

J U N E   1981 

NASA  said  that  astronaut  Alan  L .   Bean,  fourth  man  to  set  foot  on  the 
Moon,  would  resign  effective  June  26   to  devote  f u l l   time  to  his  career  as  a 
painter.  Bean,  selected  i n  the  third group of  astronauts  i n  the  fall of  1963, flew 
on  the second moon-landing mission, Apollu 12, i n  November  1969, exploring 
the  Ocean  of  S torms  with  Charles  (Pete)  Conrad ,   J r . ,   as   Richard  F.  Gordon 
circled  i n   the  command  module.  He  captained  thf- second  Skylab  mission  i n  
July-September  1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the  1975 U.S.- 
USSR  Apolio-Soyuz  mission.  He  noted  that  i n   his  18  years  as  astronaut  he 
had  seen  sights  no  artist  had  ever  viewed  firsthand,  and  he  hoped  to  record 
his  experiences  through  his  a r t .  
Bean's  time  i n   space-l,671  hours 45 minutes-made  him  first among active 
U.S.  astronauts  a n d   fourth  of  all  i n   total  spaceflight  time.  He   was  currently 
head  of  astronaut-candidate  operations  and  training.  His  resignation  would 
leave  i n   the  corps  on ly   one  of  the  12  U .S .   astrona.uts who  had  walked  on  the 
Moon:  John  Young,  chief  of  the  astronaut  office  and  commander  of  shuttle 
Columbia's  f i r s t   flight  last  April.  (NASA  Release  81-87) 

June 23:  A  U.S.  Air  Force  launch  team  from WSMC,  Vandenberg  Air  Force 
Base,  California,  launched  NOAA-C  under  NASA  direction  from  WSMC  at 
6:53  a .m   ED?'  on  an  Atlas  F  into  a  polar  orbit  with  863-kilometer  apogee, 
845-kilometer  perigee,  101.9-minute  period,  and  98 .9"   inclination.  The 
371-centimeter-high  spacecraft,  188  centimeters  i n   diameter  weighing  723 
kilograms  in   orb i t ,   was  fourth of  eight  advanced  weather  satellites to  be  laun- 
ched  in  the  Tiros-N  series  to  measure  Earth-atmosphere  temperature  and 
humidity,  sea-surface  temperaturc,  and  proton-electron  f l u x   near  the  Earth. 
Designated  NOAA  7 in   orbit,  the  spacecraft  with  a two-year  design  life car- 
ried  the  most  versatile  scanning  radiometer  ever  launched,  gathering  visual 
and  infrared  images  and  other  measurements  i n   five  spectral  channels.  (Two 
earlier  craft  i n   the  series carried  four-channel  radiometers:  NOAA 6 was  still 
operational,  but  f i r m  N was  turned  off  February  21  after  operating  for  twice 
its design  life.) NOAA  7 also carried  a joint  U.S.  Air  Force-NASA  instrument 
to  monitor  i n   the  spacecraft  vicinity  any  environmental  contamination  from 
its  propulsion  systems;  such  contamination  could  degrade  performance  of 
future  instruments  planned  for  launch  on  similiair  satellites. 
Successful  launch of NOAA  7 meant that  two  polar-orbiting  satellites would 
circle  the  Ear th ,   viewing  virtually  all  of  its  surface  at  least  twice  each  24 
hours.  NOAA  routinely  used  data and  imagery  from the polar  orbiters as well 
as  from  two  geostationary  spacecraft  i t   was  operating.  N O M   6 and NOAA  7 
would  transmit  unprocessed  sensor  data  in  real  time  to  ground  stations  in  
more   than  120  nations,  while  passing  overhead.  ;Four more   satellites  in  this 
series  would  be  launched  through  1985  on  a  call-up  bas is   to  ensure  uninter- 
ruptcd  data  flow. 
NOAA  7,  built  by  RCA  Astro-Electronics,  under  contract  to GSFC,  industry 
interface  for  NOAA,  cost  about  $15  million  to  build  and  V.5  million  to 
launch.  (NASA MOR  E-615-81-03 prelaunch  summary, June 2/81;  [prelaunch] 

2 84 

JUNE   1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

June 9/81; NASA Release 81-76; NASA wkly  SSR, June  25/81; NASA  D ly  Actv 
Rpt, June  24 ,   30/81;  SPX-332) 

Th e  House  of  Representatives passed  NASA's  authorization  bill  by  a  vote 
of 404-13. The  amount, the same  that appeared  in the amended budget request, 
was  $6.122  billion  for  research  and  development,  construction  of  facilities, 
and research  and program  management.  One  amendment was  adopted, reduc- 
ing  the  authorization  for  aeronautical  research  and  technology  by  $11.2 
million.  ( C R ,  June  23/81,  W 7 3 ;   NASA  D ly   Actv  Rpt, June   24/81) 

June  25:  Th e   Senate  confirmed  appointment  of  James  M .   Beggs  as   ad- 
ministrator  of  NASA.  (CR ,  June  25/81,  W97) 

285  

July 

Ju l y  2:  Dr.  Alan M .  Lovelace, acting adminsitrator,  left the  agency  July  11  to 
become  corporate  vice  president  for  science  and  engineering  a t   General 
Dynamics  Corporation,  S t .   Louis,  Mo . ,   in  charge  of  research,  engineering, 
advanced product and program  development, and  development and implemen- 
tation of  corporate engineering  and research  policy.  NASA’s  new  chief,  James 
M .   B e g s ,   who  began  his  new  job   July  9,  had  been  executive  vice  president 
for  aerospace  at  General  Dynamics. 
Lovelace  had  been  acting administrator of  NASA  since the departure of  Dr. 
Robert  A.  Frosch  in  January  1981;  he  had  actually  retired  as   deputy  ad-  
ministrator  i n   December  1980 but  at  Frosch’s  request  had  agreed  to  remain 
through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of  a new 
administrator.  Lovelace  had  entered  federal  service in  1954 with  the U.S.  Air 
Force  at  Wright-Patterson  Air  Force  Base,  Ohio,  and  became  director  there 
in  1967.  H e  went  to  Andrews  Air  Force  Base  in  1972  as   director  of  science 
and technology  for  the U.S. Air  Force Systems Command and  in  1973 became 
acting  deputy  assistant  secretary  of  the  Air  Force  for  research  and  develop- 
ment.  H e   came  to  NASA  in  1974  as  associate  administrator,  Office  of 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  (OAST)  and  was  appointed  deputy  ad- 
ministrator  of  NASA  in  June  1976  by  President  Ford. 
Lovelace  recently  received  the  Presidential  Citizens Medal  for  his  work  on 
developing the  Space Shuttle.  (NASA  anno,  July  2/81; NASA  Release  81-88; 
NYT imes ,   July  6/81,  D-6) 

J u l y   7:  A  122-pound  Colorado  pilot,  Stephen  Ptacek,  steered  Dr.  Paul 
MacCready’s Solar Challenger  (a 210-pound  aircraft  made of  lightweight  Du- 
Pont  synthetics and  powered  solely  by  16,000 photovoltaic  cells  on  its 47-foot 
wingspan)  across  the  English  Channel  from  Cormeilles-en-Vexin  25   miles 
northwest  of  Paris  to  a  Royal  Air  Force  base  a t   Manston  on  England’s 
southeast coast,  a 5% -hou r  flight  of  165  miles  at  an average  speed of  30 mph 
and  a  cruising  altitude  of  11,000 feet. Other planes  had  flown  on  solar power, 
but Challenger was the only one  to do  so without storage batteries.  Th e  project 
was  largely  financed  by  DuPont,  maker  of  the  Lucite  windscreen,  Mylar 
sheathing,  and  Kevlar-fiber  struts. 
MacCready said that his solar plane was no  serious alternative for air travel, 
but  the flight was to highlight  “irrational”  dependence on fossil  fuels. He had 
built the first human powered  aircraft, Gossamer Condor,  which  flew  in  1977, 
winning the $lOO,OOO  Kremer prize  and  earning  the Condor a place beside  the 
Wright  flyer  in  the  National  Air  and  Space  Museum.  He   had  also  made  the 
Gossamer Albatross,  which  flew  the Channel  in  1979 under human  legpower, 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS 

J U L Y   1981 

winning  a  $213,000 prize  and  a  Royal Aeronautical  Society trophy.  (NYT ime s ,  
June 9/81, C-I;  July  8/81, A-1:  July  12, 22E;  WP o s t .  July  8/81, A-20;  W  Star, 
July  8/81, A-2;  A vW k .  July  13/81, 21:  N s w k ,  July  20181, 50;  Time, July  20181, 
45) 

Ju ly  8:  The  Senate confirmed  the appointment as  NASA deputy administrator 
of  Dr.  Hans Mark ,   former  secretary  of  the  Air  Force  and  former  director  of 
NASA’s ARC. Mark ,   a physicist  and  nuclear enginEer, became diretor of  ARC 
i n   February  1969 and  undersecretary  of  the  Air  Force  in  1977. He   had  been 
secretary  of  the  Air  Force  from  July  1979  u n t i l   1981. 
M a rk   had  taught  a t   Boston  University,  Massachuse t ts   Ins t i tu te   of 
Technology  (M IT ) ,   the  University  of  California,  a n d  Stanford  University.  He 
was  chairman  of  the  nuc lear   eng ineer ing  department  at  Berkeley  from  1964 
to  1969, administering  its  research  reactor.  (NASA  spl anno, July  9/81; NASA 
Release  81-51) 

Ju ly  10:  NASA  reported  “encouraging  initial  results”  from  a  two-month  ex- 
periment  that  it  conducted  jointly  w i th   the  FAA.,  National  Center  for  At- 
mospheric  Research,  and  Northwest  Airlines.  An  instrument  on  Nimbus  7, 
called  total  ozone-mapping  spectrometer,  sent  GSFC   cxperimenters  data  on 
the  total ozone profile  i n  the  atmosphere.  Within  three  hours the GSFC scien- 
tists  relayed  the  d a t a ,   processed 
to  indicate  upper-a ir   pa t terns   and  
meteorological  activity,  such  as  rapidly  moving  fronts:  to  Northwest  Airlines 
meteorologists  in  Minnesota  for  usc  i n   forccasting. 
Knowing  the  location  of  the  fronts  could  help  in  avoiding  them ,   both 
because  they were  associated with  clear-air  turbultmce and  because ozone en- 
countered  by  airlines a t  high  altitudes  had  caused  shortness of  breath  as  well 
as  eye,  nose,  and  throat  irritation  among  airline passengers.  Further  research 
would  lead  to  deduction of  troposphere heights from  total-ozone  data for com- 
parison  with  satellite  temperature-sounding  data.  (NASA  Release  81-90) 

NASA  reported  that  Dr.  Jack  L .  Kcrrebrock,  former head  of  MIT’s depart- 
ment  of  aeronautics  and  astronautics,  had  become  associate  administrator  at 
NASA  Headquarters  for aeronautics  and astronautics, effective July  1, replac- 
ing  Dr.  James  J.  Kramer,  who  retired  i n   October  1979. 
Before  accepting  the NASA  Headquarters position,  Kerrebrock had  been  a 
member  of  the  U.S.  Air  Force  scientific  advisory  board,  the  National 
Research  Council’s  aeronautics  and  space  engineering  board,  and  the  NASA 
Advisory  Committee.  He  had  directed  MIT’s  gas-turbine  laboratory  from 
1968 to  1978. He  received  his  Ph.D.  from CalTech  i n   1956; from  1951 to  1953 
he  was  a  researcher  i n   aeronautics  at  the  Lewis  laboratory  of  NASA’s 
predecessor,  the  National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics  (NACA). 
(NASA  Release  81-91) 

288 

JULY   1981 

ASTROKAUTICS  AND  AERONAUT ICS  

July 23 :   Press  reports  said  that  a Texas-based  firm called  the Percheron pro- 
ject  was  preparing  to  launch  the  first  U.S.  privately  owned  space  rocket  into 
a  50-mile  suborbital  flight  from  Matagorda  Island  northeast  of  Corpus 
Christi. 
Backers  of  thc  project,  named  for  a  breed  of  large  French  draft  horses, 
hoped  to launch their  rocket powered  by  kerosene and liquid  oxygen  at the end 
of  July,  but  had  run  into  trouble  with  the  FAA,  which  said  they  must  seek 
waiver  of  air-traffic  rules preventing  “nonconventional”  use of  U .S .  air  space 
above  12,500 feet.  An  FAA  spokesman  said  that  an  application  for  waiver 
could  take  more   than  two  weeks  to  resolve  and  could  end  by  restricting  Per- 
cheron  to  a  flight  no  higher  than  14,500 feet  and  no  further  out  to  sea  than 
the  three-mile  limit over  which FAA  had jurisdiction.  A flight would  also call 
for  extensive  coordination  with  the  Coast  Guard  to  protect  shipping  and  oil 
rigs  in  the  area. 
Percheron  was  the  idea  of  Gary  C.  Hudson,  a  “self-taught  engineer”  seek- 
ing  to  head  a  company  pioneering  corporate  space  ventures.  In   1979  h e  met 
a  fellow  enthusiast,  Houston  developer David  Hannah,  described  as   “a  disci- 
ple of  Dr.  Gerard K.  O’Neill,”  the Princeton physics  professor  famous for his 
ideas about the commercial and  social possibilities of  space colonies. Hannah, 
a  supporter  of  the  U.S.  space program,  had  developed  a  slide  show  on  com-  
mercial  uses  of  a  cheap,  privately  owned  space vehicle;  to  launch  Perchcron, 
he raised  $1.2  million from a number of  investors  including an oilman and ran- 
cher  who  owned  part  of  Matagorda  Island. 
Hudson  rounded  up  a crew  of  engineers,  scientists,  and  technicians,  some  
from  NASA’s  JPL ,  o t h e r s   from p r i v a t e   a e r o s p a c e   f i rm s .  So much   informa t ion  
and  so many  plans  were  available  that  production  of  Percheron  took  only  six 
months  from  final  design.  Th e  55-foot  single-engine  rocket  used  in  clusters 
might  one   day  orbit  a  5,000-pound  geosynchronous  payload  with  a  conical 
module  able  to  withstand  reentry  heat  and  return  reusable  components  to 
Earth.  ( W  Star,  July  23/81,  A-1;  July  28/81,  A-7;  W Post,  July  29181,  A-1) 

July  26:  Space  shuttle  Columbia  was  still  awaiting  its  trip  to  KSC’s Vehicle 
Assembly  Building  (VAB) because of  a delay  in  the orbiter  integrated test  that 
had  been  scheduled  for July  23.  Th e  test  had  to wait until  technicians  finished 
wiring  the  remote  manipulator’s  system  for  emergency  jettison  of  its  $100 
million  Canada-built  “bionic  arm.”  That  system  would  have  to  be   retested 
before  the  major  integrated  test  could  begin,  probably  not  before  August  9. 
Th e  delay would  not  affect launch date of  STS-2, NASA  said.  (MSFC  Release 
81-90,  81-91;  NASA  Release  81-109;  W Star,  July  27/81,  A-2) 

Ju ly   2 %  MSFC   reported  the  arrival  from  Europe  of  a  jumbo   je t   carrying 
equipment  to  prepare  Spacelab,  the  ESA  reusable  scientific  research  facility, 
for  flight  on  the  shuttle  beginning  in  1983. 
The  gear  for electrical  ground  support and mechanical  servicing  arrived  at 
KSC after formal acceptance  in early July  by  representatives of MSFC,  which 

289 

AS1  KOhALT lCS   A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

J U L Y   1981 

was  responsible  for  monitoring  Spacelab  design  ;md devclnpment  and  would 
manage  the  first  three  Spacelab  missions.  (MSFC   Release  81-92) 

LaRC  said  that  i t   was  studying  a  possible  ‘ h s e m b l y  line  i n   space”  that 
would  allow  astronauts  to  build  large  platforms  or  antennas  in   Earth  orbit 
from   the  shuttle.  A  mobile  work  station  would  position  a  pair  of  pressure- 
suited  astronauts  so that  they  could  move  horizontally  and  vertically  within  a 
prescribed  area  to  set  up  structures  too  large  o r   complex  to  fold  up  and 
transport  inside  the  shuttle.  The  wo rk   station  w o d d   be  located  inside  the  o r -  
biter’s  cargo  bay  or   would  be  a  free-flyer  operating  near  the  shuttle. 
LaRC  was  testing  a  large-scale model  to  detect  possible  problems  i n   space 
and  identify  ways  to  improve  astronaut  productivity:  foot  restraints  to  leave 
hands  free,  for  instance,  and  electrically  operaled  work   platforms.  (LaRC 
Release  81-50;  NASA  Release  81-104; MSFC   Release  81-93) 

J u l y  30:  The  NASA  centers  which  were  directed  i n   April  to  merge  reported 
the  steps  being  taken  to  complete  the  action,  approved  by  t h e   agency’s  new 
administrator,  James  M .   Beggs. 
As  of  October  1,  DFRC,  Edwards,  C a l i f . ,  would  become  a  directorate  of 
ARC,  Mountain  View,  Ca l if . ,   reporting  to  ARC  director  C .A .  Syvertson;  i t  
would  retain  its  name  and  its  “essential  identity”  but  would  function  as  an 
operational  element of  ARC. Aeronautical  research at the two  locations would 
be  integrated  and  staff  functions  for  the  two  centers  would  be  combincd. 
Several  ARC  projects,  such  as   the  quiet  short-hand  research  aircraft  (QSRA) 
and  the  tilt-rotor  research  aircraft  would  be  :moved  to  DFRC  over  the 
30-month  consolidation  period. 
WFC   in  Virginia  would  become  an  operating  clement  of  GSFC  at 
Greenbelt,  M d . ,   responsible  for  suborbital  projects  and  operations.  WFC’s 
applied  sciences  directorate  would  be  a  new  ins1 runient-systems  division  of 
GSFC’s applications  directorate.  GSFC’s  management  operations  directorate 
would  absorb WFC’s  technical  support and  administrative directorates,  except 
for  electronic  and  mechanical  shops.  (NASA  Release  81-107;  WFC   Release 
81-9) 

?YO 

August 

August  3:  NASA  launched  Dynamics  Explorer  A  and  B  from  the  WSMC   at 
2 :56   a .m .   PDT  (5 :56   a .m .   EDT)  on  a  Delta  into  polar  orbits  with 
24,945-kilometer(15,5OO-mile) and  1300-k i lome ter(808-m i le)   apogees ,  
675  kilometer(420-mile)  and  306-kilometer(190-mile)  perigees,  9 0  O  inclina- 
tion,  and 409  and 97.5-minute  periods.  Th e  orbits,  lower  than predicted,  were 
still  suitable  for  the  full  scientific  mission.  Launch  had  been  delayed  three 
successive  days  by  command-system  discrepanies,  high  winds  at  the  launch 
site,  and  problems  with  a  tracking  aircraft. 
Called DE 4   and DE-2  in orbit,  the  satellites would  study  the  interaction of 
solar energy with  near-Earth  space,  simultaneously acquiring  data on auroras 
(northern lights) produced by  solar energy entering Earth's magnetic  field and 
their effect on radio transmission and basic weather patterns.  (NASA Releases 
81-95,  81-114;  NASA  MOR   S-850-81-03  [prelaunch]  July  28/81,  [postlaunch] 
Aug  7/81;  W Star, Aug  4/81,  D-5) 

August 5:  Press reports  said that  test firing of  a rocket  built  by  Space Services 
Inc.  (SSI) seeking to be  the first private company  to  launch satellites for profit, 
ended  with  an  explosion  on  the  launching pad  while  18  of  its  crew  watched. 
The  53-foot  Percheron  [see July  231 broke into four  major parts.  costing the 
f irm  more than  $1.2 million and delaying  the project at least s ix  months.  Flight 
plans  had  called  for  the  rocket  to  climb  to  14,500-feet  and  drop   into  the  Gu lf  
of Mexico  about  three miles  from the  site.  ( N Y  T imes ,  Aug  6/81, B-7,  W Star, 
Aug  6/81,  A-8) 

August  6:  NASA  launched  FltSatCom-E  for  the  Naval  Electronic  Systems 
Command  at  4:16  a .m .   EDT  from  KSC  o n   an  Atlas  Centaur  into  a  transfer 
orbit  with  35,790-kilometer  apogee,  166.7-kilometer  perigee,  and  26.6"  in- 
clination, and turned  the craft after it  separated from the Centaur over  the U.S 
Air  Force  Space  Division. 
Designated  FltSatCom  5  in  orbit,  the  TRW-built  DOD   communications 
satellite  with  a  five-year  design  life  would  jo in   four  similar  craft  now  in 
geostationary orbit 22 ,300  miles over the equator a t  different locations around 
the  Ear th ,   forming  a  worldwise  system  to  provide  two-way  communications 
between  naval  aircraft,  ships,  submarines,  ground  stations,  Strategic  Air 
Command elements,  and presidential command  networks.  FltSatCom 5 would 
serve over the eastern Pacific. DOD  would reimburse NASA  for Atlas Centaur 
and  launch  services.  LeRC  had  management  responsibility  for  development 
and  operation  of  the  Atlas  Centaur;  KSC  was  responsible  for  checkout  and 

29 1 

ASTROKAUT ICS   A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

4UGUST  1981 

launch .   (NASA  Releases  81-32,  81-93;  NASA  MOR   0-491-202-81-05 
[prelaunch] Aug  4/81;  D B D ,   Aug  7/81,  211) 

August  7:  Th e  Soviet  Union  launched  an  Intercosmos-Bulgaria  3000  satellite 
into an orbit with  906-kilometer  apogee, 825k i lom e t e r  perigee,  81.2 O inclina- 
tion, and  101.9-minute period.  A Tass report  said that  the  satellite would  study 
ionsopheric  plasma  and  high-energy  charged-particle  flux,  magnetic  fields, 
and  upper-atmosphere  glow  in  the  ultraviolet  and  visible  bands  of  spectrum. 
The   Soviet  Union  and  Bulgaria  cooperated  on  the  design  of  the  craft  and 
would  continue  to  work  together  i n  data processing  and  analysis.  (FBIS, Tass 
in  English,  Aug  7/81) 

Augusr  8:  WFC   reported  the  launch  of  a  coordinated  balloon,  plane,  and 
rocket  experiment  to  study  electric  fields  in  thunderstorms.  Five  vehicles 
simultaneously  measured  the  fields  from  troposphere  to  ionosphere  for  a 
number   of  firsts:  first  multiple  flight  of  electric-field  dev ices ,   first 
simultaneous  direct  observations  of  ionosphere  lightning,  and  first  measures 
of  lightning  waveforms  in  the  stratosphere.  (WFC  Release  81-11) 

August  IO:  During  the  early-morning  move  of  space  shuttle  Columbia  from 
i t  KSC hangar to the VAB.  a forklift  “accidentally  banged  into”  the  spacecraft, 
damaging  two  tiles  on  the  left  elevon,  according  to  KSC  spokesman  Rocky 
Raab.  Engineers and technicians were  expected  to  replace the tiles by  nightfall 
so that  raising  Columbia  and  bolting  it  to  its mobile  launcher  could  proceed. 
The  three-times-delayed  rollout  began  at  3:54  a .m  EDT and  took  26  minutes 
to  cover  the  quarter-mile  distance.  ( N Y   Times,  Aug  11/81,  C-3) 

Augus t   18:  NASA  declared  successful  the Landsor  3 project  launched March 
5 ,   1 9 8 ,  still in operation  three years later.  Its multispectral  scanner (MSS) ac- 
quired  more  than  200,000  images  worldwide  and  the  return-beam  vidicon 
(RBV)  acquired  more  than  175,000. Th e  project  completed  two  f u l l   years  of 
data  acquisition  and  processing  for  LACIE,  and  was  continuing  the  same  for 
AgRISTARS.  Some equipment  was  no  longer  operative,  but  MSS  operations 
were  judged  successful,  and  some  foreign  stations  were  still  receiving  RBV 
data  i n   real  time.  (NASA  MOR  F-641-78-03  [postlaunch]  Aug  18/81) 

August  19:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  postponed  to  August  31  Columbia’s 
move  to KSC’s launch  complex  39A,  scheduled  fo r  August  26, but  did  not  say 
what  effect the delay  would have on  the  September  30 launch  date.  A nine-day 
preflight  test series that  began  August  17  would  culminate  i n   simulated liftoffs 
and  descent  from  orbit  to  landing. 
MSFC   later  reported  that  the  launch  date  for  STS-2  would  be   reset  to  Oc- 
tober  9 because  of  “a  number  of  small  problems”  and  a need  to  prevent  crew 
fatigue.  A  loss of  five days  in  the VAB  was  caused  by  delays  i n   interface tests 
and  misalignment of  Shuttle and  external-tank connections.  The thunderstorm 

292 

AUGUST  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

season would  also account for some lost time.  (NASA Releases 81-123, 81-135; 
MSFC  Release  81-107) 

August  25-31:  Press  coverage of  the  Vquger 2 encounter  with  Saturn  came 
from J PL ,   Pasadena,  Calif.  New  NASA  Administrator  James M .   Beggs  told 
reporters  that  the mission was  “one  of  the  really  great  scientific achievements 
of o u r  age.”  Under  questioning,  B e g s  said that he could not  promise any  new 
planetary  missions  in  the   near  future.  Th e  New York  Times said  that  the  en- 
counter  meant  “farewell  to  American  planetary  exploration  for  a t   least  five 
years,”  alluding  to  t h e   expected  encounter  with  Uranus  in  January  1986. 
Th e   1,800-pound  b y u g e r  2 ,  having  arrived  within  Saturn’s  magnetic  field 
early  August  25  after  a  four-year  1.2 billion-mile journey,  was  sending  back 
data  and  pictures  “as  perplexing  as  they  a r e  dazzling,”  the  N e w   York  Times 
said.  The   craft  photographed  four  of  Saturn’s moons  in  greater  detail  than 
before,  sent  data  on  the  thousands  of  strands  in  Saturn’s  rings,  and  dived 
behind  the  planet  for  a  close approach  and  a gravity-assisted push  toward  ar-  
rival  a t   Uranus  in  4 %  years.  So  far,  i t   had  found  no  new  moons  of  Saturn, 
which  had  been  one   of  its  aims. 
When  Voyager 2  reappeared,  J PL  engineers  reported  that  its  camera  plat- 
form was  stuck,  affecting three  scientific sensors as well  as the two  television 
cameras. Chief project  scientist Dr.  Edward  C. Stone said  Vbyuger 2  “basical- 
ly  completed”  all  of  its  observations  before  the  malfunction:  “We  were  for- 
tunate  that  the  troubles  didn’t  happen  a  few  hours  earlier,”  he  told  a  news 
conference. 
Signals needed  1 ho u r  and 27  minutes  to  travel to  Earth.  Controllers  picked 
up  the  signals  again  at  3  a .m .  EDT after  Voyager  had  been  out  of  t m c h  with 
Earth  for 2 hours and 20  minutes;  the cameras were  showing  black  space,  in- 
dicating that  the platform  was pointing away  from Saturn.  Th e  platform  could 
be  rotated  in two dimensions, and controllers countermanded  the original pro- 
gram  so  that  the  swivel  could  operate  in  high  torque  and  expel  or  destroy 
whatever  foreign  object  was  making  the   platform  stick.  A  similar  problem 
with  k y u g e r  I  in  1 9 8  was  solved  by  manipulation  of  the  swivel, after records 
showed  a  tiny piece of  plastic  had  been  left  in  a gearbox  during  construction. 
Fur ther  reports Thursday, August 27,  said that  the platform  (which had  been 
jammed   for  17  hours)  was  working  again  but  not  perfectly.  Project  Director 
Esker K .   Davis  said  that  it was  moving  sluggishly  in  low  gear ;   the  plan  was 
to keep moving  it, but  it took three hours jus t  to send a command and get back 
a  signal  that  the  spacecraft  responded.  Stone  said that  his main  objective was 
to  recover  use of  the platform  for  the voyage  to  Uranus.  Project  scientists had 
turned  the   cameras  off  when  the platform  stuck  and  would  not  turn  them  on 
again  until  the  problem  was  solved. 
Loss of  about 600 pictures of Saturn’s rings and  darkside, as well  as infrared 
and ultraviolet measurements of  clouds and atmosphere, did not mean that  the 
mission  had  failed,  Stone said, calling  it  “a  200 percent  success.”  Thousands 
of  photos  stored on  Voyager’s  tape  rccorders were  still pouring  back  to Ear th ,  

293 

ASTRONAUT lCS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1981 

showing  sights  never  seen  before.  Dr.  Arthur  L .   1-anc’s  telescope  aimed  at  a 
distant  star to catch  i t  blinking  on  and  off  as   l41yugc.r 2 passed  through Saturn’s 
rings  was  so  successful  that  he  said  i t   would  take  years  to  map  the  rings, 
45,000  miles  of  which  were  shown  by  his  telescope. 
Early  on  Friday,  August  28,  flight  directors  restarted  one  of  the  five 
blackcd-out cameras to  photograph  “a  rapidly  receding Saturn”  from  b y u g e r  
2’s  location  already  2  million  miles  beyond  the  planet.  The   platform  had 
responsed  by  rotating  4 0 ”  on  command  i n   exactly  the  proper  time.  NASA 
would  photograph  Saturn‘s outermost  moon  Phoebe  next  week  when  Voyager 
crossed  its  orbit:  Phoebe,  rotating  i n   a  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the  other 
16  moons,  might  be  a  burned-out  comet  nucleus  captured  by  Saturn.(NASA 
M O R  S-802-77-01/02,  July  16/81.  W S J .  Aug  24/81,  15: N Y  T imes ,  Aug  14/81, 
A-13;  Aug 26/81,  A-1;  A u ~  27/81, A-I;  Aug  28/81, B-5;  A u ~  29/81, A-9;  Aug 
30181,  F-1;  A u ~  31/81, B-6;  W Post, Aug  25/81,  .4 -2 ;   Aug  26/81,  A-3;  Aug 
27/81, A-1;  Aug 28/81, A-1,  Aug 29/81, A-3;  A u ~  30181, A-5;  A u ~  31/81, A-5; 
Scierzce,  Scpt  11/81,  1236; D s tv r :   Sept  81,  79) 

August  26:  The   Washington Post said  that  a  USSR   satellite  that  fell  into  the 
sea  off  the  coast  of  China  August  23  might  have  “lost  its  way  to  the  Moon.” 
The   Soviet  foreign  ministry  said  that  Cosmos  4 3 1  was  not  nuclear-powered 
and  posed  no  danger  of  nuclear  contamination:  the  Wushirzgron Post said  that 
the Soviet  Union  seemed eager to allay any  fears of  radioactive debris  like that 
Cosmos  954  strewed  over  Canada’s  “sparsely  inhabited”  Northwest  Ter- 
ritories  i n   January  1978.  The  Soviets  said  that  the  reentered  craft  was  a n   “ex- 
perimental  lunar  cabin.”  This  description  tallied  ,w i th   a  long-held  belief  that 
Cosnios 434 was  relic of  an unsuccessful  manned  1 unar mission planned  i n  the 
1960s by  the  Soviet  Union  to  rival  the  U.S.  Apollo  program,  which  had  put 
12  men  on  the  Moon  by  the  time  i t   ended  i n   1952. 
Between  November  1970  and  August  1971,  the  :Soviet  Union  had  launched 
four  unmanned  satellites  that  performed  complex  maneuvers  i n   Earth  orbit 
simulating those of  a lunar-landing mission. A  two-volume  book  on  thc  Soviet 
space program  published  i n   1979 by  the  American  Astronautical  Society  said 
that  the  satellites  (Cosmos  379,  Cosmos 382 ,  Cos~wos 398 ,  and  Cosmos 434) 
seemed  to be practicing  acceleration  toward  the  Moon ,   braking  into  lunar  or- 
bit,  landing  on  the  Moon,  and  returning  to  Earth.  Th e   Soviet  Union  ncvcr 
disclosed  thc  purpose  of  the  satellites,  but  U.S.  analysts  believed  them  to  be 
flight  tests  of  a  propulsion  unit  for  manned  lunar  spacecraft. As  the  50th  an- 
niversary  of  the  1917 Bolshevik  revolution  neared,  observers  thought  i t   likely 
that  the  Soviet  Union  would  mark  1967  by  putting  a  man  on  the  Moon;  in  
1968;  the  year  before  the  first  U.S. moon  landin,g, Soviet  cosmonauts  were 
saying  that,  when  the  Americans  reached  the  Moon,  Russians  would be  there 
to  greet  them. 
The   Soviet  program  apparently  had  a  series  of  setbacks  that  “cooled  the 
leadership’s  enthusiasm,”  the  Washington Post said.  In  June  1969 the  first  at- 
tempt  to  launch  the G  rocket  (a  giant  new  booster  like  the U.S.  Saturn  5 )  was 

294 

AUGUST   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A i i D   AERONAUT ICS  

sa id  to have ended  i n  a mammoth  explosion  demolishing  the  launch complex. 
It  also apparently  exploded  in the early  stages  of  flight  during  two  other tests, 
i n  the summer of  1971 and on November  24,  1972. (W Post, Aug  30/81, A-25) 

295 

September 

September  1:  Press reports described  the rollout of  spacc shuttle Columbia on 
its eight-tread mobile launching platform from KSC’s VAB  to  launch pad 39A, 
a  3.5-mile  trip  that  took  about  seven  hours. 
New  launch  date  was  October  9,  only  39 days  from  rollout;  however,  Col- 
umbia had  sat on its pad  for  104 days before  its first flight,  and launch director 
George F.  Page  said  that  all  the  usual  tests  should be  completed  in  time.  The  
new  schedule  allowed  for  weather  delays  o r   new  technical  problems.  The  
launch  pad  was  modified  after  last  April’s  ignition  caused  shockwaves  that 
buckled  struts  on  the  spaceship  and  endangered  other  parts;  Columbia  had 
“several  hundred”  of  its  31,000  heat-resistant  tiles  replaced.  It  would  carry  a 
new  fuel  tank-the  only  expendable  part  of  the  Shuttle  assembly-and 
two 
new  solid-fuel  booster  rockets  to  be  retrieved  from  the  ocean  shortly  after 
1 i ftoff. 
KSC  officials  had  closed  two  viewing  sites  for  the  next  launch  because  of 
exhaust  fallout.  Dr.  Albert  Koller,  chief  of  environmental  management  for 
KSC,  said  that  the  fallout  problem  was  a  surprise:  acid  drops  i n   an  exhaust 
cloud  produced  by  STS-1’s boosters  had  spotted  vegetation  up   to  four  miles 
north  of  the   site,  but  apparently  did  not  harm  animals  in  the  area. 
Hydrochloric  acid  drops  from  the  cloud  might  cause  reddening  and  burning 
of  unprotected  skin. 
NASA hoped eventually  to send a shuttle back into space within two or three 
weeks  of  its  previous  mission,  but  Page  said  “we’re  a  long  way  from  that 
ultimate  goal.”  ( N Y  T imes ,   Sept  1/81,  C-3;  W Post,  Sept  1/81, A-4) 

September  7:  ESA  announced  that  Drs.  Claude Nicollier  and Wubbo Ockels, 
two ESA  payload  specialists  in  astronaut  training  at JSC   since July  1980, had 
completed  training  and  were  now  officially  European  mission  specialists. 
Ockels would  rejoin  the  crew  readying  the  first  Spacelab mission  in  Europe, 
a t  MSFC  and  at JSC ;  Nicollier  would  stay at JSC  to continue training  as mis- 
sion specialist for future missions carrying European payloads. Th e  third ESA 
representative,  Dr.  Ulf  Merbold,  had  been  working  with  the  European  ex- 
periments  selected  for  first  Spacelab  flight  and  would  remain  as  European 
payload  specialist. 
Th e  two  U .S .  candidates  for the Spacelab crew,  Drs.  Michael  Lampton  and 
Byron  Lichtenberg,  had  been  in  a  hiatus  from  training  because  of  delays  i n  
the  launch  date.  One   each  of  the  U.S.  and  ESA  candidates  would  be  chosen 
to  fly;  the others would  provide  ground  support.  (MSFC  Release 81-119;  FSA 
Info  20) 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E R O \ A U T I C 5  

SE PTEMBER   1981 

September  14:  GSFC   said  the  two  Dynamic  Explorers  DE-1  and  DE-2   laun- 
ched  August  3  would  soon  be  fully  operational.  Designed  for  simultaneous 
observation of  solar-energy effects on Earth’s environment, the  two craft  failed 
to  achieve planned  orbit  because  of  Delta-stage  misfire  but  should  carry  out 
their  major  scientific  objectives.  (NASA  Release  81-147) 

Seprernber 15:  LaRC  said  that  i t  was conducting, under  contract with McDon- 
nell Douglas Corporation, a test program on widebody commercial DC-IO air- 
craft  to measure  the  effect on  fuel  efficiency  of  winglets,  small  structures  at- 
tached  to  the  tips  of  airplane  wings  perpendicular  to  the  wing  surfaces. 
Winglets  would  reduce  fuel-consuming  drag  by  lessening  the  effect  of  vor- 
tices,  turbulent  a i r   swirls  forming  during  flight  at   tips  of  a l l   aircraft  wings. 
Developed  by  aeronautical  designer  Dr.  Richard  T.  Whitcomb,  recently 
retired  from   LaRC.  the  concept had  been  tested  on  several  types  of  small  air- 
craft  but  not  on  a  plane  as  large  as  the  DC-10.  b‘inglets  were  already  i n   use 
on  the  Gates  Learjet  55  and  Grumman’s  Gulfstream  111.  Wind-tunnel  tests 
showed  a  drop  of  about  3 %  i n   fuel  use,  which  would  mean  an  annual  saving 
per  plane  of  about  250,000 gallons  of  fuel,  now  priced  at  more  than  $1  a 
gallon. 
LaRC  said  that  i t   was  also  working  on  the  prevention  of  stall  and  spin  i n  
light  aircraft  by  using  the  canard,  a  miniature  wing  sprouting  from  an  air- 
craft’s  nose  area ,   first  used  by  the  Wright  brothers  at  the  turn  of  the  century 
but  neglected  since then  because of  patent  and  flight-handling considerations. 
LaRC  found  that  home-built airplane kits  that  used  the  canard to  increase  fuel 
efficiency  also  had  impressive  records  of  stall-spin safety. Tests o f   a model  i n  
LaRC’s  spin  tunnel  showed  that  with  proper  loading  the plane  was  “virtually 
impossible  to  spin .”  Current  tests  would  document  the  plane’s  aerodynamic 
efficiency  without  trying  to  improve  i t .   Although  the  canard  did  reduce  a 
pilot‘s  area  of  vision  in   takeoff  and  landing,  ths-  tunnel  data  should  show 
whether  it  could  be  relocated  without  sacrificing  its  safety  features. 
NASA’s  aircraft  energy-efficiency  program  was  seeking ways  to  reduce  fuel 
consumption  and  improve  safety.  Four  NASA  centers  were  focused  on 
aeronautical  research:  LaRC,  LeRC:  ARC,  anc .   DFRC.  (NASA  Releases 
81-145.  81-155;  LaRC  Releases  81-68,  81-75) 

NASA  officials began  a  “tanking exercise”  of  the Shuttle on  its KSC  launch 
pad  to  see if   newly  installed  water-pressure  systems  would prevent  recurrence 
of  shockwaves  produced  by  booster  exhaust  during  the  April  12  liftoff.  The  
New  York  Times  quoted  officials  as  saying  that  shockwave  reduction  was 
“mandatory”  before  Columbia could head  for space again.  Columbia, already 
erected  on  the  pad  for  its  second  mission,  contained  a  payload  of  five  ex- 
periments  and  a  50-foot  mechanical  arm   put  aboard  in   June  when  the  cargo 
bay  was  “closed  ou t ,”   the  New  York  T ime s   said.  NASA  might  rcmove  a 
package  of  scientific  experiments  rather  than  risk  damaging  i t   during  liftoff. 
( N Y  Times,  Sept  15/81,  C-2) 

298 

S E P T EM B E R   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

-MSFC  said September 8 that  the Shuttle’s external tank  was  “successfully 
filled with  liquid propellants”  in  a cryo-loading test at KSC designed to check 
out ground  and vehicle systems.  The  success was  “a  major milestone”  toward 
the  second  Shuttle  flight,  now  scheduled  for  October  9.  (MSFC  Release 
81-117) 

September 20:  Th e  People’s Republic  of  China (PRC) launched 3 experiments 
in  space  physics  on  a  single  rocket,  making  a  total  of  11  manmade  Earth 
satellites  sent  into  space by  that  country  since  1970.  FBIS  quoted  PRC  press 
service  Xinhua  in  reviewing  the  successful  series  that  began  April  24 ,   1970. 
Previous  reports  had  said  the  Great  March  3  rocket  would  use  a  liquid 
hydrogen  and  oxygen  mixture  “slightly  less  powerful  than  the  European 
Ariane  system,”  in  which  the  People’s  Republic  had  “shown  close  interest.” 
Both  the  rocket and  its payload  were  “wholly  Chinese manufactured.”  (FBIS, 
Xinhua  in English,  Sept 20/81; Hong  Kong AFP   in English,  Sept  14/81; Paris 
A F P   in  English,  Sept  lO/Sl) 

September 22:  LaRC  said that  it was advancing  aviation  technology  that  could 
“revolutionize commuter  flying  i n   the  1990s” by  making  20-  to  60-passenger 
turboprops  sturdier,  faster,  and  able  to  travel  farther  than  current  commuter 
aircraft.  Rising  interest  in  such  aircraft  stemmed  from  high  oil  prices  and 
airline deregulation, creating  “greater  demand  than  supply”  for  small  planes 
that  had  to  be   more  cost-effective  than  large  ones  because  of  their  smaller 
capacity  and  short-haul  operations. 
LaRC  and  NASA’s  o ther   lead  centers  for  aeronautics  (ARC,  DFRC,  and 
LeRC)  were  developing  advanced  aerodynamics,  propulsion,  materials,  and 
control  and  guidance  systems  to  provide  technological  data  considered  too 
high-risk or beyond  the resources of  industry to produce (LaRC Release 81-69; 
NASA  Release  81-131) 

September 22 -25 :   Accidental  spillage of  a caustic oxidizer being pumped  into 
the  shuttle damaged  the  spacecraft  surface,  unglued  nearly  300 of  its  thermal 
tiles and  forced  postponement  of  the October 9  launch  date. Between  two and 
three  gallons  of  nitrogen  tetroxide  spurted  from  a  malfunctioning  connector 
about  1:15 a .m .   and  dissolved  the bonding  agent  that  fastened  the tiles to Col- 
umbia’s  skin.  [See December  141 No   one   was  on   the  launch  pad  except  the 
specially  clothed  technicians,  and  no  injuries  were  reported.  About  67  tiles 
came  loose  in  the  hands  of  technicians  mopping  up  the  spill;  launch  director 
George Page  said the  tiles themselves were not  damaged,  but  the vehicle skin 
would  have  to  be  decontaminated  and  dr ied ,   and  each  tile  would  have  be 
waterproofed  and  retested. 
NASA  warned  that  the  shuttle might  have  to  be  moved  back  into  the  VAB, 
separated  from  its external  tank,  and  moved  again  into  the  orbiter-processing 
facility  to  see  if  any  propellant  had  leaked  inside.  Th e   Washington Post  said 
September 24   that  inspection  of  the  orbiter’s  nose  showed  contamination  of 

299 

.AS  IRONAUT IC S   A X D  .AERONAUTICS 

SE PTEMBER   1981 

the  reactor-control  system  containing  thrusters  to  govern  pitch  and  roll  of  the 
vehicle  during  atmospheric  reentry.  The  oxidizer,  when  i t  encountered  water, 
turned  into  nitric  ac id ,   highly  corrosive  to  copper  wire  and  other  materials. 
Moving  the  ship  back  to  its  hangar  for  repair  would  delay  launch  “in  excess 
of  a  month,”  Page  said. 
September 25 NASA  said  that management  had  decided  to  repair  Columbia 
on  its  launch  pad,  making  a  move  to  the  VAB  unnecessary.  ( W  Post,  Sept 
23/81,  A-17;  Sept  24/81:  A-28;  NASA  Release  81--154) 

Scptctnber  24:  NASA  launched  SBS-B  from  the  Eastern  Space  and  Missile 
Center  (ESMC)  on  a Delta  at  7:09 p.m.  EDT  into ;i transfer  orb i t .   Owned  by 
Satellite B u s i n e s s   S y s t em s ,  I n c .   (a con so r t ium   of  I13M,  Comsat Genera l ,   and  
Aetna  Insurance  Company),  the  Hughes-built  cylinder  was  second  of  four 
commercial  communications  satellites  planned  for  launch  by  NASA at a  fixed 
cost  to  SBS  Inc.  of  $22  million.  Called  SBS   2  in1  orbit,  the  spin-stabilized 
communications  satellite  660  centimeters  high  and  216  centimeters  i n  
diameter  weighed  5 5 5   kilograms  on  station.  It  would  be  the  first  to  offer 
routine commercial  service i n  the K-band,  12-14  GH z .  (NASA Release 81-130; 
NASA MOR  0-492-213-81-02 [prelaunch] Sept  21/81,  [postlaunch] Jan  27/82; 
NASA  D l y   Ac tv   R p t ,   Sept  25/81,  2) 

Sep tember   29 :   NASA  Administrator  James  M .   Reggs  announced  the 
reorganization  of  Headquarters  effective  November  9  “ t o   assure  proper 
delegation  of  authority  to  all  line  managers,  set  forth  a  clear  distinction  bet- 
ween  line and  staff, and  a simplification of  field centers’  reporting  lines.”  The  
change  would  combine  the  Office  of  Space  Science  and   Office  of  Space  and 
Terrestrial  Applications  into  an  Office  of  Space Science and  Applications.  It 
would  set  up  an  Office  of  Management  to  handle  c,ome functions  now  under 
the NASA comptroller  and  some now  under  the Officc o f  Management Opera- 
tions  and  to  support  program  offices  in   managing  research  and  development 
and  institutional  resources. 
Associate  administrators  i n  the program offices  would be NASA‘s major  line 
officers  through  whom  center  directors  would  report  to  Headquarters.  JPL  
and  GSFC  would  report  to  the  associate  administrator  for  Space  Science and 
Applications.  ARC,  LaRC, and  LeRC  would  report  to  associate administrator 
for  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology;  JSC,  KSC,  MSFC,  and  the  National 
Space  Technology  Laboratories  (NSTL) ,   to  the  associatc  administrator  for 
STS.  Remaining  program  offices  would  be  Space  ‘k inspor ta t ion   Operations 
and  Space  Tracking  and  Data  Systems. 
The   administrator’s  staff  would  include  chief  engineer,  comptroller,  pro- 
curement;  equal  opportunity,  external  relations,  general  counsel,  inspector 
general,  legislative  affairs,  associate  deputy  administrator,  and  assistants  to 
the  administrator.  A  reorganization  working  group  led  by  NASA’s  general 
counsel  S .   Neil  Hosenball  would  work  out  functional and  personnel  changes; 
a  reorganization  steering  committee  led  by  D r .   Hans  Mark ,   deputy  ad- 

300 

S E P T EM B E R   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D   A I :RONAU   r m  

ministrator, would review  the plans and  recommend a complete reorganization 
package  to  the  administrator.  (NASA  Release  81-156) 

The  external  t a n k   (ET)  for  the  third  shuttle  flight  (ET-3)  left  the  Michoud 
Assembly  Facility  in  New  Orleans  on  a  NASA  barge  for  KSC.  Unlike  those 
used  in  the  first  two  flights,  this  tank  would  be  light  brown,  the  natural  color 
of  the  insulation  sprayed  on  the  tank’s  cxterior.  Th e  white  paint  on   the  first 
two  tanks  weighed  about  600 pounds.  Since t h e  tank  went  almost  all  the  way 
to  orb i t ,   elimination  of  the  paint  would  add  nearly  600 pounds  payload 
bcsides saving  several  thousand of dollars  in  handling and would  not  affect the 
tank’s  fire-retardant  o r   water-repellent  qualities.  (MSFC   Release  81-122) 

P ruvdu ,   the  official  Communist  Party  newspaper,  marked  the  fourth  an- 
niversary  of  orbital laboratory  Salyut  6 w i th   a  report  of  planned  space activity. 
A  “lull”  was  being  used  for  an  overhaul of  the  ground-control  center  in  the 
Cr imea .   Employees  were on  long-awaited  vacations,  and  a  skeleton  staff  was 
monitoring  Sulyut  6, orbiting  without  a  crew  since  May  26. 
After  orbiting  for  nearly  two  months  of  unspecified  tests,  a  Cosmos  craft 
launched  April  25  had  linked  with  the  Salyut  in  June  to  form  a  34-ton  com- 
plex.  A  flight-test  manager  said  that  the  complex  would  help  in  designing 
future space stations and was being monitored to  sce how  such a heavy  system 
behaved  in  space.  Since  docking  with  the  Salyut  the  Cosmos  had  used  its 
cngines  twice  to  raise  the  orbit  of  the  complex.  (N Y   Ernes  Oct  7/81,  B - l l )  

D t ir ing   September:  William  E  Lilly,  named   NASA   comp tro l ler   i n   1973  a n d  
the  only  person  so  far  to  hold  that  position,  announced  that  he  would  retire 
in October  after 37  years of  service to  the  federal  government,  thc last 21  with 
NASA.  (NASA  Release  81-148;  Sp  anno  Sept  22/81) 
--Isaac  T.  Gillam  IV,  director  of  DFRC  since  June  1978,  would  become 
special  assistant  to  the  NASA  administrator  October  1,  detailed  to  the White 
House  Office  of  Science  and  Technology  Policy  to  participate  in  a  space- 
policy  review.  (NASA  Release 81-151; DFRC Release 81-30; NASA  anno Scpt 
15/81) 
-Abraham  D.  Spinak,  acting  director  of  Wallops  Flight  Facility,  would 
leave  government  service  in December  after  nearly  33 years  with  NASA  and 
NACA,  its  predecessor,  which  he  joined  in  1948.  He  had  actually  retired 
September  1,  1980,  but  stayed  on  to  help  in  the  consolidation  with  GSFC. 
(WFC  Release  81-14) 
-Edwin  C.  Kilgore,  associate  administrator  for  management  operations at 
Headquarters,  would  retire  in  October  after  37  years  of  service  with  NASA 
and  NACA.  After  graduation  from  Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute  in  1944, he 
went  to  work  a t  Langley, joined  Headquarters  in  1970, and  was  nanied  deputy 
associate administrator  for center operationas in  1974. As head  of management 
operations,  he  had  been  in   charge  of  agencywide  institutional  management. 
(NASA  Release  81-139;  LaRC  Release  81-67) 

30 I 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

S E P T EM B E R   1981 

-Ann  P.  Bradley,  deputy  associate  administrator  for  management  opera- 
tions, who had  been  acting associate administrator  ;and acting executive officer 
at  NASA  Headquarters  pending  the  retirement  of  E.C.  Kilgore,  would  return 
to her duties  i n  management operations  with  the  appointment  of  A . B .  Virkler 
Legate  to  the  office  of  the  administrator  as  NASA's executive  officer.  Legate 
had  been  associate  deputy  undersecretary  for  inte:rgovernmental  relations  at 
the Department  of  Labor  since February  1971: hc  had  previously  been  a  con- 
gressional  special  assistant and  executive  secretary of  DOT  from  1969 to  1977. 
He   had  also been  a  congressional  administrative  assistant.  (NASA  Sp l  anno, 
Aug  28/81,  Sept  21/81) 

3 0 2  

October 

October I :   NASA  appointed  Maj.  Gen .  James A .   Abrahamson,  deputy  chief 
of  staff  for  systems  at  Air  Force  Systems  Command  headquarters,  Andrews 
Air  Force Base,  a s  associate administrator  for  the Office of  Space Transporta- 
tion  Systems. Abrahamson,  former  test pilot  and manager  of  the development 
program  for U.S.  Air  Force's F-16 fighter, would succeed John F.  Yardley, who 
left  NASA  in  May  to  become  president  of  McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics 
Corporation. 
In  1979, Abrahamson  was one  of  five on  a  special  panel  selected  by  NASA 
to assess  STS management;  he began his job  at Andrews  in  July  1980. He  had 
been  an  astronaut  in  the  Air  Forces's  Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  (MOL) 
program  from  August  1967 until  the  program  was  canceled  in  June  1969. He 
then  served on  the  staff of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space Council  in  the 
Executive Office of  the President.  A  command pilot with more  than  3,000 fly- 
ing  hours  in j e t   and  conventional  fighter  aircraft,  he  was  promoted  to  major 
general  May  1,  1978. (NASA Release  81-159; NASA  anno Oct 2/81; NY  Ernes, 
Oct  3/81,  15) 

October 2:  Astronomers a t  three major U.S.  observatories  found a vast region 
of  empty  space  so  large  tha t   2,000 galaxies  the  size  of  the  Milky  Way  could 
fit  into  i t .  The  void,  about  400 million  light  years  from   Ea r th s   solar  system, 
seemed  to  be  growing  as  galaxies  near  its  boundaries  gravitated  together. 
A  survey  of  the  large-scale  structure  of  the  universe  by  telescopes  at  Mt. 
Hopkins,  Arizona,  Kitt  Peak,  and  M t .   Palomar  showed  enormous  gaps  in 
three  directions  near  the  constellation  Bootes.  The   cosmological  principle, 
basis of modern  theories  about the universe,  assumed  that distribution  of mat- 
ter  and  motion  in  all  directions  of  space  was  homogeneous;  the  new  finding 
would  challenge  that  principle  (W  Post,  Oct  2/81; N Y   T imes ,  Oct  2/81,  A-1) 

October  6:  NASA  launched  a  90-pound  so lar   mesosphere  explorer  from  
WSMC,  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base,  a t  7:27  a .m .   EDT  on   a  two-stage  Delta 
into  a  polar  orb i t   at  an  altitude  between  535  and  550   kilometers  with 
95-minute period  and  97.4"  inclination.  The  satellite,  carry ing  five  sensors  to 
monitor  atmospheric  constituents  between  19  and  50 miles  up,  would  study 
conversion  of  molecular  oxygen  to  ozone,  a  layer  protecting  Earth  against 
u l t r av i o l e t   r a d i a t i o n   a n d   p o s s i b l y   b e ing   d e p l e t e d   by  r e f r i g e r a n t  
chlorofluorocarbons.  The  University of  Colorado Laboratory  for Atmospheric 
and  Space  Physics  developed  t h e   instruments  and  would  manage  the  mission 
under  contract  to  JPL .  
Riding  piggyback  atop  the  Delta  was  a  smaller  craft  built  by  amateur  radio 

303 

ASTROKAUTICS  A N D  A E RONAU T I C S  

OCTOBER   1981 

operators at  the University  of  Surrey  in   England.  Uosat  (University of  Surrey 
satellite)  was  ninth  i n   a  series  of  Oscar  (orbiting  satellite  carrying  amateur 
radio)  satellites  launched  as  a  second payload  on  U.S.  rockets.  Using  a  voice 
synthesizer,  i t   could  broadcast  ionosphere  data  to  amateur  receivers.  (NASA 
Release  81-106; NASA MOR  S-887-81-01 [prelaunch] Sept  17/81, [postlaunch] 
Oct  16/81; N Y   Times,  Oct  7/81, B-11) 

ARC  announced  that  John  A .   Manke,  famed  test  pilot,  would  head  a  new 
directorate  of  flight  rerearch  after  consolidation  of  ARC  and  DFRC,  effective 
October  1. 
Manke,  who  made  the  first  supersonic  flight  of  a  lifting  body  and  the  first 
landing  of  a  lifting  body  on  a  hard-surface  runway,  had  joined  DFRC  as   a 
research  engineer  i n   1962 and  la ter  became  a  research  pilot,  testing  advanced 
designs  like  the  wingless  craft  that  were  forerunners  of  the  Shuttle.  He  was 
project  pilot  on   the  X-24B  and  also  flew  the  M -2 ,  HL-10,  and  X-24A  lifting 
bodies.  Most  recently  he  had  been  director  of  flight  operations  and  support 
a t  DFRC, where he would  remain  responsible for Ion-site management as well 
as   for  aircraft  operations  at  both  centers.  (ARC  Release  81-32) 

October  7:  Th e   Washington Post said  that  NASA  was  faced  with  cutting  so 
much  money  from   its budgets  for  the  next  three  years  that  i t   was  considering 
abandoning  the Voyager,  now  on  its way  from  Saturn  to  a  flyby  of  Uranus  in  
1986 and  Neptune  in  1989. 
Turning  off  Voyager’s  radios  would  save  $222  million  (the  amount  needed 
to  keep  NASA  scientists  and  engineers  on   the  job   and  to  operate  the  Deep 
Space  Network  antennas  in  California,  Australia,  and  Spain)  over  the  next 
eight  years.  OMB   had  ordered  NASA  to  cut  $3’67 million  from  its  FY82 
budget  and  $1  billion  each  from  FY83  and  FY84.  As  NASA  could  not  take 
money  from  the  Space  Shuttle,  i t   would  have  to  save  money  i n   other  ways. 
It  had  already  bowed  out  of  an  international misision  to  Halley’s  comet  and 
now  must  choose  from  among  three  other  programs:  t h e  Galileo mission  to 
Jupiter  i n   1987, the large Space Telescope  to be orbited  in  1985, or  the  Voyager 
trips  to  Uranus  and  Neptune.  Killing  both  Voyager  and  Galileo  would  save 
about  $520 million.  Th e  only  other  way  for  NASA  to  save a  large  amount  of 
money  would  be an  indefinite delay  in  building a fourth shuttle, the Discovery, 
estimated  to  cost  $1.2 billion  and  due  for  delivery  in   1985.  ( W  Post, Oct 7/81, 
A-4) 

October  8:  NASA  postponed  the  second  Shuttle  launch  to  November  4 
because of  tile damage  caused by  an oxidizer spill September 22. Tile  replace- 
ment was  “proceeding  well,”  and  measures  had  been  taken  to  prevent  further 
spillage. 
Science  magazine  described  the  “minor  problems”  causing  previous 
postponements:  tests  that  took  longer  than  expected  and  various  handling 
mishaps.  The  Shuttle’s  complexity  would  “resist  attempts  to  operate  with 

304 

OCTOBER  1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

aircraft-like  efficiency,"  the  article  said.  NASA  had  already  decided  to  trim 
its  Shuttle  flights by  30% over  the  next  three  years,  from 44 missions  to  28: 
it had less money  to spend on flying  its own satellites and science experiments, 
as  i t   had  to  pay  for  Shuttle modifications  and  construction  of  more  orbiters. 
Th e   delicate  instruments  planned  for  the  second  flight  had  almost  been 
delayed  to  a  later  mission  by  the  discovery  that  pressures  from  the  solid-fuel 
boosters  against  the KSC  module  launch  pad  could  damage  the  experiments: 
the  shock  had been  2.4 pounds  per  square  inch,  not  the  expected 0.6,  enough 
to  buckle  a  strut  supporting  a  fuel  tank  near  the  cabin.  If  the  tank  had  been 
j a r r e d  enough to leak o r  malfunction,  the first-flight crew would not  have been 
ab le   to  orient  the  Shuttle  properly  for  landing.  NASA  engineers  devised  a 
system of  nylon  water  troughs  to disperse the shock and  redesigned  the launch 
platform  to  allow  j e t   watersprays  to  dissipate  the  pressure.  (NASA  Release 
81-160;  W P o s t ,  Oct  9/81,  A-15;  Science,  Oct  9/81,  160) 

October 20:  NASA declared  the mission of  the  stratospheric  aerosol  and  gas 
experiment  (SAGE) launched  February  18,  1979,  successful.  SAGE, designed 
for  a  1-year  life  in  orb i t ,   was  t h e   second  of  two  small  applications-explorer 
missions  built  to  provide  a  global  data  base  on   ozone  and  aerosols  in  the 
atmosphere. 
Like  its  predecessor,  the  heat-capacity  mapping  mission  (HCMM ) ,   the 
SAGE  spacecraft  was  built  by  Boeing.  It  carried  an  instrument  designed  by 
LaRC  that met o r  exceeded  all  design specifications, despite power-subsystem 
problems.  Before  battery  capacity  dropped  in June   1979,  SAGE had  acquired 
96% of  all  poss ib le   events;  since  then ,   about  8 2% .  
SAGE  obtained  the  first  global  measurements  accurate  within  1% ,  more  
than  12,000 between  78 "S and  78 "N,  to  define  mass  aerosol  loading  of  the 
s t r a t o s p h e r e   a n d   i t s   s e a s o n a l   v a r i a t i o n s .   W o r l dw i d e   g r o u n d - t r u t h  
measurements  validated  the accuracy  of  its measurements  from  space of  ver- 
tical  profiles  of  aerosol  extinction  and  of  ozone  and  nitrogen  dioxide 
concentration. 
SAGE also detected  and  tracked  at  least  five volcanic-eruption  plumes  that 
had  penetrated  the  stratosphere,  one   every  six  months:  La  Soufriere  in  May 
1979,  Sierra  Negra  in  November  1979,  M t .   St.  Helens  i n   May  1980,  Ulawun 
in October  1980, and Aloid  in May  1981. The  volcanic data were the first clear 
instance of  gas-to-particle conversion in the stratosphere and of  using  volcanic 
aerosols  to  track  global  circulation.  (NASA  MOR   E-659-79-01  [postlaunch] 
Oct  20/81) 

October  22:  NASA  said  that  the  third  shuttle  flight,  now  scheduled  after 
January  1982, would  carry  the  first  biology  experiment  specifically  designed 
for the Shuttle:  the effect of  gravity  on formation  in plants of  lignin,  the woody 
substance  giving  plants  structural  stability.  Monitoring  growth  in  the  
microgravity  environment  of  space  should  show  how  wood  is  formed.  Th e  
plants  should  grow  upward  in  response  to  the  presence  of  artificial  sunlight, 

305 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT IC S  

OCTOBER   1981 

but  root  development was  unpredictable.  (NASA Release  81-166; ARC  Release 
81-56) 

October  27:  NASA  consideration  o f  a  “mixed  fleet”  to augment  Shuttle mis- 
sions by  using  a n  unmanned  vehicle  developed  froin  recoverable  shuttle com- 
ponents  led  to  issuance  i n   September by  MSFC  of  a  request  for proposals  ask- 
ing  for  definition  of  such  a  vehicle,  to  be  called  !SRB-X.  Boeing  Aerospace 
and  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  were  the  two  contractors  responding.  MSFC 
had  management  responsibility  for  the  SRB-X  study  because  i t   had  been  in  
charge, of  Shuttle propulsion  and was the  lead center for design, development, 
and  testing  of  all  NASA  propulsion  systems.  (MSFC   Release  81-135) 

October  28:  NASA  announced  that  i t   would  s h u t   down  on  December  1  its 
three  26-meter  (85-foot) tracking  antennas operated  by  the  Deep  Space  Net- 
work  at  Canberra  (Australia),  Madrid  (Spain),  arid  Goldstone  (California), 
because  of  reductions  in  the  agency’s budget.  Th e  stations would  operate the 
64-meter  (210-foot) and  34-meter  (112-foot) deep-sp ice  antennas as i n  the past. 
Loss  of  the  26-meter antennas  would  mean  a  30%  reduction  i n   tracking  and 
data-acquisition  and  support  for  NASA’s  planetary  spacecraft:  the  network 
was  currently  supporting  Voyuger  I  and  b y u g e r   2 ,   Helios  1:  the  V i k i n g   I 
lander  on  Mars,  and  P ioneers   6 through  12 .  
Shutting down  the  three  antennas  would  save  about  $7.2  million  per  year, 
beginning  i n  FY83;  termination would  eliminate  110 positions,  51  i n  Spain, 26 
i n   Australia,  and  33 at  Goldstone.  The   stations  i n   Spain  and  Australia  were 
operated by  government  agencies of  those countries, which  would  reduce  staff 
by  rcassignment  and  attrition;  the  Goldstone  station  was  operated  by  Bendix 
Field  Engineering  Corporation,  which  would  also  reduce  staff  by  reassign- 
ment  and attrition.  JPL  managed  the Deep Space Network  for  NASA’s Office 
of  Space  Tracking  and  Data  Systems.  (NASA  Release  81-171) 

306 

November 

November 1-12:  NASA reported  that its $2  million quick-fix  shock-prevention 
water  system was hooked  up November  1 during  a  countdown  “notable for  its 
smoothness,”  the  Washington Post  said.  Designed  hastily  over  the  past  five 
months,  the  shock-absorber  system  would  flush  400,000  gallons  of  water  in 
35  seconds into  the Shuttle’s exhaust.  Food for the journey  was  loaded  aboard 
the  spacecraft,  and  the  next  task  would  be  loading  chemicals  for  the  ship’s 
electric  and  environmental  systems. 
Liftoff  had been  scheduled for 7:30 a .m .  EDT on November 4,  but  officials 
called  off  the countdown at  9:35 a .m . ,  when  rising  oil  pressures  i n  the  Shut- 
tle’s power  generators,  apparently  caused  by  waxy  contaminants.  threatened 
to  impair  control  of  the  hydraulic  system  that  moved  aerodynamic  surfaces, 
such  as  the  elevons,  landing  gear,  and  rudder  and  body  flaps,  and  swiveled 
the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main  rocket engines.  L .  Michael Weeks,  ac- 
ting  associate  a d d n i s t r a t o r   for  STS,  said  that  the  engineers  would  have  to 
analyze  the  trouble,  correct  it,  and  lay  out  a  plan  for  resuming  countdown; 
the  delay  would  be  “approximately  one  week.” 
NASA  was  considering  two  courses  of  action:  changing  the  oil  and  the 
filters  in  the  auxiliary  power  units  o r   replacing  them  with  backup  units. 
Engineers  at  KSC  o r   JSC  were  not  sure  which  course  would  take  longer; 
neither,  however,  would  mean  hauling  Columbia  w i th   its  attached  fuel  tank 
and booster  rockets  back  from  the  launch  pad  into  the  processing  hangar  for 
reworking. 
Th e  launch  team  had  noticed  the  lubrication  problem  while  the countdown 
was  halted  to  grapple  with  other  problems.  Pressure  in   the  liquid-oxygen 
chamber  of  the  external  tank  had  dropped  below  the  limit  for  launch,  and  a 
similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks  feeding  the electricity-producing 
fuel  cells  inside  the  Shuttle.  Flight  controllers  decided  that  they  could  live 
with  the  pressure  drops  and  instructed  the  control  computers  to  ignore  the 
warning signals. Two of  the computers  accepted  the instruction  but  “logic  got 
hung up  in the system”  leading to the third computer, which  stopped the clock 
governing  countdown  a t  T minus  31  seconds. This was the point a t  which  Col- 
umbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over  control of  all  remain- 
ing  steps in  the  countdown,  but-having  detected  a  problem-they 
refused  to 
continue. 
Controllers  a t   the  Cape   and  at  mission  control  in  Houston  called  up  data 
displays  to  locate  the  trouble,  and  Shuttle operations  director  George  F.  Page 
finally  announced  that  there  would  be  no  launch.  Astronauts  Co l .   Joe  H .  
Engle  and  Capt.  Richard  H .   Truly,  who  emerged  from  the  Shuttle  about  an 

307 c-4 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AEROKAUT IC S  

N O V E M B E K   1951 

hour  after  the  launch  was  scrubbed,  seemed  to  takge  the  delay  “ i n   stride.“  the 
New   York  T ime s   said. 
What  persuaded  controllers  to  call  off  the  launch  was  the  finding  that  oil 
pressure  for  two  of  the  units  had  stabilized  at  100  pounds  per  square  inch, 
about 40 over  normal.  Neil  B.  Hutchinson,  a  flight  director  at  JSC,  said  that 
contaminants  i n  the  oil had  previously  clogged  Shuttle  filters, which  resembl- 
ed  the  oil  filter  i n   an  automobile.  However,  replacing  a  filter  along  with  the 
lubricant  i t   was  supposed  to  keep  clean  would  take  far  more  time  than  in   an 
automobile.  If  thc  auxiliary  power  units  now  i n   t h e   Shuttle  were  to  be  used. 
technicians  would  have  to  drain  the  present  oil,  change  filters,  and  flush  the 
system  before  the  flight  could  proceed.  This  had  never  been  done  on  the 
launch  pad;  engineers  would  have  to  go   ahead  wilhout  knowing  hvw   long  i t  
would  take.  NASA  spokesman  Charles  Redmond  iioted  that  General  Motors 
found  out about  such problems  “at  the  proving  grounds,  behind  high  screens: 
while  we’re  doing  i t   i n   public.” 
Either  changing filters and  lubricant  or   completely  replacing  the two power 
units  would  be  time-consuming  because  the  units  deep  inside  the  ship would 
be  difficult  to  reach.  The   power-unit  fuel  hydrazine,  suspected  of  gumming 
up  the  works  by  interacting with  the  lubricating  o i l ,  was highly  toxic,  and  the 
location  of  the  power  units  would  have  to  be  purged  with  nitrogen.  The  
nitrogen,  which  also  could  be  fatal,  would  have  to  be  purged  in  its  turn. 
The next procedure  was  the  flushing and  reservicing of  the auxiliary  power- 
u n i t   (APU )  gearboxes  and  installation  of  new  filters.  Tests  to  see what  would 
happen  if  the  A P U   was  operated  with  a clogged  filter  (using the  oil  and  filter 
removed  from  Columbia)  showed  that  the  filter  would  clear  after  about  10 
minutes  of  operation,  as  the  temperature  increased.  Launch  was  reset  for 
November  12. 
A  second  countdown  to  launch  November  12  was  delayed  2  hours  and  40 
minutes by  trouble i n  the  cockpit electronics.  Engineers discovered November 
11  that a  15-pound device, called multiplexer-demu1i:iplexer  (MUX IDEMUX ) ,  
that  collected  information  from  all  over  the  spacecraft  about  its  condition  to 
display  both  on  video  terminals  for  the  astronauts  and  on  the  ground  for 
analysis by  engineers, was  not  working properly;  i t  was  quickly  replaced  with 
a  substitute  that  did  not  wo rk   as  well  as  the  original.  Officials  sent  for  two 
of  the  instruments  from  the  Challenger  orbiter,  still  unfinished  at  Rockwell’s 
Palmdale  plant,  to  be  flown  to KSC  and  installed  on  Columbia.  One went  into 
Columbia’s  cockpit:  the  other  would  be  carried  as  a  spare.  Countdown  was 
at a built-in  hold  designed  for emergencies such  as   the  one that  had  occurred: 
i t   would  resume  early  November  12  with  the  loading  of  3-million  gallons  of 
supercold  liquid  oxygen  and  hydrogen  fue l   into  the  external  tank,  delaying 
launch  until  at  least  IO  a .m .   The  latest  delays  would  cost  NASA  more  than 
$26 million;  every  day  of  delay,  including  the  eight  in  this  last  series, cost  $3  
million.  The  MUX iDEMUX   delay  cost  an  extra  $2  million  from  handling, 
overtime,  travel  costs,  and  additional  launch  and  landing  tracking  report. 
Launch of  the  second mission  finally occurred  at  1O:lO  a .m .  EST November 

308 

NOVEMBER   1981 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

12.  About  2 %  hours  into  the  mission,  during  the  third  orb i t ,   fuel  cell  one  
showed  a  voltage  drop ;  by  the  sixth  orb i t ,   it  was  so erratic  that the  astronauts 
were told  to  turn  it off and use one of  the other two.  Th e  faulty cell failed when 
one   of  the  lines  feeding  hydrogen  into  i t   caused  a  water  buildup  that  spilled 
onto  an  electrically  charged manifold,  breaking  down  the water  into  a  poten- 
tially  explosive  mixture  of  gaseous  hydrogen  and  oxygen.  Th e   failure  took 
flight  directors  by  surprise,  as   the  cells  had  been  used  in  25  manned  U.S. 
spacecraft  since  1965 and  had  never  before  failed  in  flight.  Hutchinson  noted 
that  “the  good  thing  about  this”  was  that  the  Shuttle could  sustain  a  fuel-cell 
failure and  continue operations.  At  10  p.m.  November  12, one  of  the  standby 
cells  was  producing  7.5  kilowatts  of  electricity,  and  the  other,  8.5,  enough  to 
d o  nearly  everything except  run all  five instruments while  the Shuttle a rm  was 
in operation.  If  the  two good  cells continued  satisfactory,  the flight would  pro- 
ceed  as  scheduled  and  return  November  16  to  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  in 
California;  if  either  showed  signs  of  weakening,  the  crew  would  return 
November  13 or  14.  (WP u s t ,  Nov  2/81, A-3;  Nov  6/81, A-9;  Nov  13/81, A-1; 
N Y   f im e s ,  Nov  5/81,  A-1;  NASA MOR  M-989-81-02 [postlaunch]  Dec  17/81) 

November  13-15:  President  Reagan  became  the  first  incumbent  chief  ex- 
ecutive to visit JSC’s mission-control center during a  flight, when  he  came  on 
the second day  of  STS-2’s  flight  to sit  i n   the capsule  communicator  chair  and 
talk briefly  to the astronauts.  After his conversation,  the president  had  a  short 
talk  with  the  Engle and  Truly  families  and  left  for  a  dinner  in  Houston.  Two 
days  later, November  15, JSC played  host  to Vice  President  Bush  at breakfast 
w i t h   t h e   STS-I  a n d   STS-2  c r e w s   a t   t h e   r e c r e a t i o n   c c n t e r .   T h i s   was  t h e   f i r s t  
back-to-back  visit  to  JSC  of  the  two  highest  U.S.  officials. 
Th e   New  York  Times  said  that  workers  were  already  ahead  of  schedule 
November  13  in  a  3-  to  4-week  cleanup  of  the  launch  compound  at  Cape  
Canaveral.  A  shock-absorber  water-trough  system  worked  “better  than  ex- 
pected,”  said  Merrill  Oakley,  design  engineer  on   the  launch  pad,  cutting 
shockwaves  to  a  fifth  of  the  first  launch’s  intensity.  After  a  washdown  and 
system  checks,  Oakley  said all that  remained  was  replacement  of  some bricks 
that  blew  out  of  a  flame  trench  and  painting. 
Th e  STS-2 crew flew  to Ellington  A ir  Force Base,  in Texas shortly af ter  lan- 
ding  the Columbia  at  Edwards  Air  Force Base  ending  “a  troubled  but  scien- 
tifically  rewarding  54-hour mission,”  the New  York Times said. Welcomed  on  
their  9 :50  p.m.  arrival  in  Texas  by  about  400   JSC  employees,  the  astronauts 
breakfasted  the  next  morning  with  Bush,  JSC  director  Chr is   Kraft,  and  the 
first  shuttle  crewmen  John  W.  Young  and  Robert  L .   Crippen  among  the  23 
guests.  Although Bush  said  “ the  people  here at  the NASA  complex a r e  a  na- 
tional  treasure,”  h e  said  that  he  could  not  promise  any  easing  of  budgzt  con- 
straints  on   the  agency. 
Preparations  were  already  under  way  for  the  third  shuttle  flight,  now 
scheduled  for  March  1982. Damage  to  the  launch  pad  from  the  second  mis- 
sion was  “minimal  and  superficial,”  Oakley  said.  (Public  Papers of  the  Presi- 

309 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  4ERONAUT IC S  

NOVFMH I ‘R  

IY81 

dent; WPo s t ,  Nov  14/81, A-7;  N Y  T i tnes ,  Nov  15/81. 35; Nov  16/81. A-1,  A-19; 
JSC  S p   NRdC  Nov  20181,  1) 

Novembe r   20:  NASA  launched  RCA  Sutconi 4  from  the ESMC on  a Delta  at 
8 :37   p .m .   EST  into  a  transfer  orbit  with  19,356-kilometer  apogee: 
100-kilometer  perigee, and  25.5 O  inclination. The  (objective of  the  commercial 
communications  satellite  was  to  transmit  video  programs  to  cable  television 
(CATV)  systems  throughout  the  United  States.  Th-   500-kilogram  box-shaped 
craft,  fourth  i n   a  series  of  large  24-transponder  communications  satellites, 
managed  by  a  subsidiary  of  RCA,  carried  a  payload-assist  module  (PAM)  to 
put  it  into  geosynchronous  orbit  at  132 “W, joining  three  other  RCA  satellites 
providing  television,  voice,  and  high-speed  data  to  all  50  states  and  Puerto 
Rico.  More  than  4,000  Earth  stations  had  direct  access  to  these  spacecraft. 
GSFC  had  project-management  responsibility  for  the  launch  vehicle;  RCA 
Americom,  which  managed  the  Satcom  program,  including  spacecraft  ac- 
quisition  and  tracking,  telemetry,  and  command  systcms,  would  reimburse 
NASA  $22  million  for  the  launch  and  launch  support.  (NASA  Release  81-172; 
NASA  MOR   0-492-206-81-04  [prelaunch] Nov  18/81, [postlaunch] Jan  27/82) 

NASA  announced  that  i t   had  completed  plans  fo r   the  reorganization  of  its 
Office of  Space Science and  Office of  Space  and  Terrestrial Applications  into 
a  new  Office  of  Space Science  and  Applications  tl:)  take  over  responsibilities 
of  the  former  offices,  except  for  the  technology  utilization  program,  which 
would  go  to  the  govcrnment and  industry  affairs  division of  the Office of  Ex- 
ternal  Relations. 
Andrew J.  Stofan, formerly acting  associate administrator  for  space science, 
would  be  acting  associate  administrator  of  the  new  group;  Samuel W.  Keller, 
formerly  deputy  associate  adminstrator  for  space  and  terrestrial  applications, 
would  be  deputy  associate  administrator.  (NASA  Release  81-182) 

Sc ience   magazine  said  that  Congress  was  in   a  “stir“  because  the  adminis- 
tration  planned  to  let  a  U .S .   company  sell  materi,als  for  an  advanced  com- 
munications satellite to an Arab consortium that  included the Palestine Libera- 
tion  Organization  (PLO ) .  
Ford  Aerospace  would  sell  satellite parts  to  t h e   French  firm  Aerospatiale, 
which  was  under  contract  to  build  three  communications  satellites  for a group 
called  Arabsat,  composed  of  22  governments,  among  them  Libya,  Syr ia ,  
South  Yemen,  and  the PLO.  Libya has been  “an  avowed enemy” of  the United 
States.  The  $135  million  contract  would  cover  satellites  similar  to  but  less 
sophisticated  than  the  one  Ford  Aerospace  was  building  for  global  com- 
munications system  INTELSAT:  Arabsat would offir-r 8,000 simultaneous two- 
way  telephone  conversations and one television  channel. These services would 
cost  less  if  bought  directly  from  INTELSAT,  but  the  Arab  group  apparently 
preferred  to  operate  its  own  system. 
The  matter came up November  3 during hearings  before  the Senatc Foreign 

310 

NOVEMBER   1981 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONA lJT lCS  

Affairs  Committee,  when  Secretary  of  Defense  Caspar  Weinberger  said  that 
he  knew  nothing  about  the  deal;  the  next  day,  Secretary  of  State  Alexander 
Haig  also  said  that  he  knew  nothing  about  it.  Th e  Arms  Export  Control  Act 
required  State Department  approval  of  exports of  high-tech  items,  even  those 
having  no  direct  military  application.  (Sc ience ,  Nov  20/81,  891) 

NASA  reported  that  it would join  a sounding-rocket program  with  Canada's 
National  Research Council  to  study  a  cleft o r  wedge-shaped  opening over  the 
Northwest  Territories  (N.W.T.) in  Earth's  magnetic field.  From  November  25  
to  December  21,  researchers  would  launch  five  rockets carrying  experiments 
into  the  cleft  region  to  record  effects  ranging  from disrupted  communications 
to  pipeline  corrosion  and  long-term weather  patterns.  Ground-station  equip- 
ment  would  be  installed a t   the  launch  site,  Cape  Parry,  N.W.T.,  and  at  Sachs 
Harbor  about  200  kilometers  (124  miles)  north. 
Data  from  the  project,  called  CENTAUR  (cleft  energetics,  transport,  and 
ultraviolet  radiation),  would  define mechanisms  causing  particle  acceleration 
in  the  cleft  and  would  aid  i n   studying  ion  flow,  auroral  arcs,  and  plasma  in- 
stabilities. WFC  would manage launch and tracking and  acquisition of  experi- 
ment  data.  (NASA  Release  81-180; WFC   Release  81-18) 

DFRC   said  that  i t   was  readying  Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia  for  its  return  to 
KSC  on  its Boeing  747  carr ier  plane.  DFRC was  deservicing  the orbiter  after 
its  54-hour  second  flight,  draining  liquid  oxygen  and  hydrogen  fuels,  remov- 
ing  pyrotechnic devices,  and  purging  toxic  chemical and  fuel cells used  in  the 
propulsion  systems.  DFRC   would  attach  a  tailcone to  the   orbiter  covering  its 
three  main  engines  and  two  orbital-maneuvering  engines. 
Th e   ferry  flight  would  take  two  days,  with  a  refueling  and  overnight  stop 
a t   Bergstrom  A ir   Force  Base  near  Austin,  Texas,  or  Dyess  Air  Force  Base 
near  Abilene.  Donald  K .   (Deke)  Slayton,  manager  of  the   orbital  flight  tests, 
would  accompany  Columbia  back  to  KSC.  (NASA  Release  81-181;  ARC 
Release  81-34) 

Th e  Soviet  Union  launched  India's  satellite Bhaskuru  2  into  an  orbit  with 
557-kilometer  apogee,  514-kilorneJer  perigee,  95.2-minute  period,  and  50.7 ' 
inclination.  It  carried  television  and microwave  radiometers  to  study  Earth's 
natural  resources.  Tass  said that  India and USSR  stations were receiving data. 
(FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Nov  20/81) 

November  27:  Newsreview,  published  by  the  Air  Force  Systems  Command ,  
told  of  a  special  "bake  job"  done for NASA  by  Patrick  Air  Force Base,  F l a . ,  
in its Civil Engineering Squadron's fabrication-branch  shop. Ovens there, nor- 
mally  used  to harden ,   soften, or anneal  metals,  were  large enough  to  treat  75 
to  80  thermal  tiles  from  Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia  damaged  by  a  nitrogen 
tetroxide  spill.  Th e   heat  treatment  at  1,100-1,400"F  took  about  16  hours  to 

3 1 1  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBEK   1951 

burn  off contaminant  and  bonding material. Checking  for toxic  vapors  caused 
by  the  heat  disclosed  none.  (AFSC  Newsreview,  Nov  27/81,  8) 

During  November:  Administrator  James  M .   Eleggs  appointed  Philip  E .  
Culbertson  associate  deputy  administrator  with  revised  duties,  serving  as 
senior  staff  adviser  and  directing  formulation  of  NASA  policy,  strategy,  and 
planning  of  a facility  to constitute permanent  U .S .  presence  i n   space.  Culbert- 
son  had  served  for  two  years  as   assistant  for  space  transportation  systems. 
-Robert  F.  Allnutt,  associate  deputy  administrator  since  mid-1978,  would 
assume  new  duties  a s  deputy  general  counsel  for  policy  review,  studying  the 
long-term development of  NASA  and  its  relationship  to  other  federal agencies 
a s   well  a s   contractual  arrangements  w i th   future  users  of  the  Space  Shuttle. 
(NASA  anno,  Nov  18/81; NASA  Release  81-178,  81-179) 
-NASA  named C. Thomas Newman  comptroller to succeed Wiliam  E .  Lil- 
ly,  who  retired  in   October.  Thomas  F.  Campbell  would  replace  Newman  as 
deputy  comptroller.  (NASA  anno  Nov  25/81) 
-Frank 
J.  Malina,  cofounder  of  JPL  and  of  thi:  Aerojet  General  Corpora- 
tion,  died November 9 at his home  i n  Paris. He had  moved  there  to work  with 
the  United  Nations  Educational 
Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization 
(UNESCO)  after  retiring  in  1947 as  an  officer  of  Aeroject  and  JPL .   He  had 
~ 
worked  for  Theodore  von  Karmann  a s   a  researcher  for  Guggenheim 
Aeronautical  Laboratory,  CalTech,  leading  to  creetion  of  the  CalTech  rocket- 
research  project  in  1936  that  later  became  J PL ,   which  made  t h e   first  suc- 
cessful  U.S.  satellites  in   the  1950s. 
-William  Pickering,  who  followed  Malina  as  J PL   director  from  1954  to 
1976, said  that  inventionslhat made present-day  rockets  possible went  back  to 
work  done  at  JPL   under  Malina.  A  leader  i n   developing  jet-assisted  takeoff 
(JATO) rockets  used  i n  World War  I1 and  co-developer of  the WAC  Corporal, 
first  U.S.  successul  stratosphere  rocket,  Malina  had  i n   1942 joined  von  Kar- 
mann  to  form Aerojet  General,  first  U.S.  manufacturer  of  rocket  engines.  He 
left  UNESCO  i n   1953 to  start  a  studio  as  a  graphic  artist,  working  in  a  form 
he  invented  called  “kinetic  art.”  ( L A  f im e s ,   Nov   11/81; LA  Stur  N ew s ,   Nov 
11/81) 

December 

December  1:  NASA  said  that  it  had  picked  Jack  R .   Lousma  and  C.  Gordon 
Fullerton  as  commander and pilot for the third flight of  Shuttle orbiter Colum- 
bia.  Th e   backup  crew  would  be   Thomas  K .   Mattingly  I1  and  Henry  W. 
Hartsfield,  Jr. 
Lousma,  a  colonel  i n   the  U.S.  Marine  Corps ,   was  mission  pilot  on  Skylah 
3,  logging  more   than  1,427 hours  in  space  as  he  and  his  crew  accomplished 
150% of  their  assigned  goals.  Fullerton,  a  colonel  in  the  U.S.  Air  Force, 
piloted  the  Shuttle  Enterprise  on  its  first,  third,  and  fifth  flights  i n   the 
approach-and-landing  tests  in  1977.  The   third  Columbia  flight,  a  seven-day 
and three hour mission of  116 orbits set for March  1982, would  carry a payload 
(OSS-1) developed  by  NASA's  Office of  Space Scinece and  would  further  test 
the  remote  manipulator  arm   for  inserting  future  payloads  into  space.  (NASA 
Release  81-187) 

December  4 :   ESA  handed  over  to  NASA  i n   Bremen  the  first  flight  unit  of 
Spacelab, built for use on the shuttle. Just a year  after delivery of  the engineer- 
ing model, NASA  received  all the systems-first  main components of  standard 
equipment,  platforms,  ground  facilities,  and  spare  parts-to  be  used  on  the 
first Spacelab flight  September  1983. It  would  transfer  to NASA  in May  1982 
experiments  for  the  first  Spacelab  payload. 
An  industrial  consortium  with  E R N 0  as  prime  contractor  had  carried  out 
development  s ince   January   1980.  T h e   con trac t ,   worth  301.3  million 
deutschmarks  (DM)  at  1980 levels,  had  increased  to  380  million  DM   a t   1981 
levels.  NASA would  receive the componcnts  of  a second  Spacelab flight unit, 
ordered  throughout  ESA  to  be   identical  with  the  first,  in  15  batches,  starting 
in  1982.  (ESA  Info  28;  NASA  Release  81-193;  MSFC   Relcase  81-145) 

December  7:  NASA's  Office  of  Space  and  Terrestrial  Applications  (OSTA) 
announced  its  selection  of  9  experimental  and  10  theoretical  teams  to  par- 
ticipate  in  the upper-atmosphere  research  satellite  (UARS)  program designed 
to  provide  data  on  energy  input,  chemical  composition,  and  dynamics  of 
Earth's  stratosphere and  mesosphere.  Interest  in  this  area  had  increased  with 
the realization of  potential damage to the ozone layer  from high-flying aircraft 
and  from  chemicals  in   aerosol  sprays,  refrigeration,  air-conditioning,  and 
foam-blowing operations. 
Th e  experimental  teams would  develop instruments  for direct measurement 
of  upper-atmosphere winds,  solar-ultraviolet  radiation,  energetic-particle  in- 
teraction  with  the  upper  atmosphere,  and  variation  of  chemical  content  with 
altitude.  Theoretical  teams would develop upper-atmosphere  models  to be  u s -  

313 

ASTKC)NALITICS A K D   AERONAUT ICS  

DECE.MBER  1981 

ed  with  new  acquired  data  for  assessing  the  impact  of  man’s  activities  on  the 
delicate  processes  i n   the  stratosphere  and  for  improving  understanding  of’ 
upper-atmosphere  chemistry  and  dynamics.  (NASA  Relcase  81-190) 

December  8 :   MSFC  said  that  the  Spacelab  1  payload  crew  was  in  Japan  for 
a week,  practicing  the use  of  instruments  scheduled  to  f ly  on  the  first mission 
i n   1983. A NASA-sponsored  package,  SEPAC  (space  experiments  with  parti- 
cle  accelerators),  would  study  the  interaction  of  Earth’s  magnetosphere  with 
the  upper  atmosphere.  Professor Tatsuzo Obayashi  of  the University of  Tokyo 
would  be  the  principal  investigator. 
Before  leaving  Japan December  15, the  crew  would  be  trained  on the  actual 
flight  hardware  at  Japan’s  National  Space Development  Agency.  T h e  crew- 
civilian  scientists called  payload  specialists and  two  NASA  mission-specialist 
astronauts-were  D r s .  Byron  Lichtenberg and Micihael Lampton of  the United 
States,  Dr.  Ulf  Merbold  of  West  Germany,  I>r. Wubbo  Ockels  of  the 
Netherlands,  and  NASA  mission  specialists  Drs .   Owen  Garriott  and  Robert 
Parker.  Two  payload  specialists  would  actually  fly  on  the  mission  w i t h   the 
mission  specialists;  the  other  two  would  support  the  mission  on  the  ground. 
(MSFC  Release  81-146) 
said  that  one   of  Japan’s  major  newspapers,  A sah i   Sh ibmun ,   had 
-NASA 
signed  an  agreement  to  f l y   a  “getaway  special”  experiment  on  the  Shuttle, 
possibly  in   late  1982, using  the weightlessness of  space to make pure artificial 
snow crystals directly  from a gaseous substance while  the Shuttle was  i n   orbit. 
A  Japanese  physicist,  the  late  Dr.  Ukichiro  Nakaya,  had  made  the  first  a r -  
tificial  snow-crystal  experiments  in   1936.  The   Shuttle  experiment,  a  first  try 
at  creating  artificial  snow  i n   a  weightless  environment,  would  contribute 
significantly  to  crystallography,  especially  growth  of  semiconductor  crystals 
o r   other  items  from  a  vapor  source.  The   idea,  suggested  by  two  Japanese 
students,  was  choscn  for  17,000 suggestions by  the  newspaper’s readers. 
To  date  NASA  had  accepted  321  getaway  specials-privately 
funded  ex- 
perimental  payloads-for 
flight  on  the  Shuttle  on  a  space-available  basis, 
beginning  with  the  f i f th   mission  in   1982.  (NASA  Release  81-191) 

December  10:  ARC  reported  the  first  NASA-piloted  test  flight  of  its  “flying 
research  facility,” a helicopter-type  aircraft  equipped with  fixed  wings  and jct 
engines,  over  San  Francisco  Bay  at  speeds  of  u p   to  120 knots  (138 mph)  for 
45  minutes.  Warren  Hall  of  ARC  piloted  the  flight;  copilot  was  L t .   Co l .   Bob 
Merrill,  deputy director  of  U .S .   Army  flight  tests at Edwards  Air  Force Base. 
Designed  for studying advanced rotor  systems  i n   actual flight,  the craft had 
the  highly  reliable  type  of  rotor  used  on  presidential  helicopters.  The   wings 
and  engines  provided  the  lift  needed  i n   studying  rotors  too  small  to  support 
the  research  aircraft  alone.  A  second  rotor-systems research  aircraft  (RSRA) 
had  been  flown  at  ARC  i n   the  basic-helicopter  configuration. 
Located  at ARC,  the  two  aircraft  constituted  a  national  facility  for  in-flight 
verification  of  rotor-system  technology;  they  could  bc  flown  as  helicopters o r  

DECEMBER   1981 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

equipped  with  the  fixed  wings  and  auxiliary  jet  engines  to  enhance  test 
the  Sikorsky  Division  of  United 
capability.  Th e   two  craf t ,   built  by 
Technologies  for  LaRC  and  the  Army’s  technology  lab  at  Moffett  Field, 
California, were transferred to ARC  in  1979 for the joint NASA-Army research 
program.  (ARC  Release  81-67;  NASA  Release  81-194) 

MSFC   reported  a  milestone  i n   the  development  of  the  Space  Telescope. 
Perkin-Elmer Corporation,  contractor  for design and production  of  the optical 
asembly,  finished  putting  an  aluminum  coating  3 millionths  of  an  inch  thick 
on  the  94-inch  primary  mirror,  an  1,800-pound  polished  glass  blank. 
Engineers  from  the  firm  and  from MSFC  verified  that  the  coating adhered  to 
the mirror  and  exhibited  the proper  reflectivity.  Th e  telescope  would  use  two 
mirrors  to  focus  light  from  stellar  objects  onto  a  group  of  instruments  at  the 
rear  of  the  telescope assembly. Launched  from  t h e  Shuttle into Earth  orbit  in 
the  mid-l980s,  the  Space  Telescope  should  allow  astronomers  to  see  seven 
times  deeper  into  space  than  is  now  possible  with  ground-based  telescopes. 
(MSFC  Releae  81-148) 

NASA declared the mission of  b y a g e r  1 and  b y a g e r  2 successful. Launch- 
ed September 5 and August  20,  1977, each of  the  spacecraft had  traveled  more 
than 2 . 4  billion kilometers during the past  four years  and had  conducted scien- 
tific  investigations  at  seven  major  bodies  of  the  solar  system. They  had  made 
comparative  studies  of  the  Jupiter  and  Saturn  systems,  including  their 
satellites,  rings,  and  fields  and  particles  environments.  They  had  also 
measured   charac ter is t ics  of  t h e   in terp lane tary   medium  f rom   Earth  to  Sa turn .  
Achievements  included: 
-acquiring  more   than  62,000  images  from  the  outer  solar  system 
-discovering 
rings  around  Jupiter  and  unusual  braiding,  spokes,  ringlets, 
and  shepherding  satellites in  the  rings of  Sa turn ;  new  satellites of  Jupiter  and 
Saturn;’lightning  on  Jupiter;  eight  active  volcanoes  on  Io;  and  new  sources 
of  radio  emissions  in  the  Jupiter  and  Saturn  systems 
-measur ing  
a tmo sph e r i c   com p o s i t io n ,   t em p e r a tu r e ,   p r e s s u r e ,   and  
dynamics, magnetospheres;  and  particle environments  of  Jupiter,  Sa turn ,  and 
Titan.  (NASA  MOR  S-802-77-01/02  [postlaunch]  Dec   lO/Sl) 

December   14:  NASA  issued  a  final  report  on  investigation  of  the  leak  of 
nitrogen  tetroxide  oxidizer  at  KSC  September  22 .   A  four-person  committee 
chaired  by  KSC’s  Wiley  Williams  said  that  the  cause  of  the  leak  was  failure 
of  a  quick-disconnect  fitting  in  which  iron  nitrate  from  the  oxidizer  had  ac- 
cumulated  between  interior  components,  allowing  escape  to  the  outside. 
Between  15  and  20  gallons  of  oxidizer  escaped,  some  diverted  away  from 
the orbiter  surface by  a  catch  system, but  “a  significant quanity”  flowed  over 
the  outside  of  the  orbiter  and  its  thermal-protection  system.  About  370  tiles 

315 

ASTRONA l lT lCS   A N D   A E R O N A U I I C S  

DECEMBER   1981 

had  to  be  removed.  Oxidizer  also got  into  the  forward  module of  the  reaction- 
control  system,  damaging  thermal  blankets  and  electrical  wiring. 
Close  tolerance  i n   the  interior  components,  allowing  the  binding  to  take 
place,  was  a  design  failure  point  unrecognized  before  the  accident.  As  the 
same  fittings  would  be  used  for  the  second  Shuttle  launch,  the  committee 
recommended  taking  several  stcps before  loading  hypergolic  propellant again: 
-adding  more  values  to  the  system  to  permit  isolation  of  the  quick- 
disconnect  fittings 
-modifying 
the catch  system and adding protective aprons to guard  against 
a  large  leak 
-changing  procedures  to  eliminate use  of  the  quick-disconnect  fitting  as  a 
s h u t o f f   valve 
-expanding  emergency  procedures  and  conditiioning  the   servicing  team  to 
expect  similar  failures 
-sealing  possible entry paths  into the  orbiter during loading, o r  purging  i n -  
ternal  compartments  with  inert  gaseous  nitrogen. 
Although  the  committee  limited  its  investigation  to  this  one  incident.  i t  
rccornmended  review  of  its  report  to  identify  other  fluids used  around  the  o r -  
biter  that  could  cause  damage  i f   spilled.  (NASA  Release  81-73) 

Dece tnber   15:  NASA  launched ln te lsu t  5-C F3 from  ESMC  at 6 : 3 5  p .m .   EST 
o n   an   A t l a s -C e n t a u r  
i n t o   a  h igh ly   e l l i p t i c a l   t r a n s f e r   o r b i t   w i th  
35,953-kilometer apogee,  165.8-kilometer  perigee,  and  23.7'  inclination.  Fir- 
ing  o f  the  apogee motor  by  INTELSAT would  put  i t   i n   geostationary  orbit  at 
15 "E for tests by  Telespazio  at Fucino, Italy. It would  later become the primary 
Atlantic  communications  satellite  at  335.SoE, replacing  Intelscif 5  Ff, which 
would  move  to  an  Indian Ocean  location  at 62  "E  1.0  begin  service next  March 
after  launch  o f  another  communications  satellite  as  a  spare. 
The   two-ton  F3,  capable  o f   12,000  simultaneous  telephone  conversations 
plus  two  international  color  television  channels,  was  third  of  the  5  and  SA 
series of  15  communications  satellites planned  by  INTELSAT  to  handle  inter- 
national  communications,  such  as  telephone,  telegrams,  telex,  da ta ,   and 
television.  (NASA  MOR  0-491-203-81-03  [prelaunch]  Dec  1/81, [postlaunch] 
Jan  9 /82 :  N A S A   D l y  Actv  Rp t ,   Dec  16/81; Spcicewurn,  Dec  29/81;  INTELSAT 
Releases  81-271,  81-32-1; AID ,   Dec  22/81,  268) 

December-  20:  ESA  launched  Marecs-A,  first  European  maritime  com- 
munications  satellite,  from  Kourou  i n   French  Guiana  at  l : 2 9  a .m .   GMT   on 
the  fourth  Ariane  booster  into  a  highly  elliptical  orbit  with  35,820-kilometer 
apogee,  220-kilometer  perigee,  632-minute  period,  and  10.5 "  inclination, 
preparatory  to  a  boost  into  geosynchronous  orbit  at  26"W.  The  Ariane  also 
carried  a  technological  capsule  (CAT  4 )   enclosing  an  experiment  called 
Thesee  (Theseus)  that  would  remain  i n   the  original  orb i t .  
The  European  Space Operations  Center  (ESOC) would  test  Morecs  before 
handing  i t  over to INMARSAT, which  would  lease  its communications capaci- 

316 

D E C EM B E R   1981 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

ty  over  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  A  Marecs-B  spacecraft  was  being  readied  for 
launch  i n  April  1982 for TNMARSAT use  over  the Pacific  Ocean.  (ESA  Infos 
29,  31,  32 ,   [81],  1  [82]) 

December 22:  NASA said that  its joint  sounding-rocket project with  Canada’s 
National  Research  Council  [see  November  201  was  successful.  William  A ,  
Brence  of  WFC   said that  preliminary  results were  satisfactory.  Data  from the 
seven  experiments  launched  on   five  large  suborbital  rockets  from  temporary 
facilities  at  a  radar  site  on  the  Arctic  coast  would,  in  combination  with 
ground-based  observations,  enlarge understanding of  the dynamics of  the cleft 
in  Earth’s  magnetic  field.  (WFC  Release  81-20) 

During  December:  NASA  announced  the  appointment  of  Dr.  Walter  B. 
Olstad,  deputy  associate  administrator  for  management  to  direct  all  matters 
such  as   personnel,  supply  and  equipment,  facilities,  computer  support,  and 
the  like.  He   would  succeed  Edwin  C .   Kilgore,  who  retired  October  2 .   C. 
Robert  Nysmith  would  replace  Olstad  in  an  acting  capacity.  Both  appoint- 
ments  were  effective  immediately. 
Th e  Office  of  Management  was  created  in  the  NASA  reorganization  plan 
effective  in Novembe i  to  perform  some of  the  functions  previously  under  the 
Office  of  Management  Operations  and  some  previously  under  the  NASA 
comptroller. 
Olstad  began  his  association  with  the  agency  i n   1954,  working  a t   the 
Langley laboratory  as  a research engineer  in the transonic  tunnel branch,  then 
in  the   reentry phys ics  branch.  He became eh icf  of  LaRC’s space systems d iv i -  
sion  in  July  1975.  H e   went  to  Headquarters  in  1979  as  deputy  associate  ad- 
ministrator  for  OAST.  (NASA  anno  Dec  14/81; NASA  Release  81-195) 

317 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS ,  1982 

January 

January 6: Marshall  Space Flight  Center  (MSFC)  reported  testing the thermal 
performance  of  a  helium  cooling  system  to  be   used  on  the  large  infrared 
telescope experiment planned  for  flight on Spacelab 2 in  1984. For the MSFC-  
managed  experiment  to  work,  the  cooling  system  must  keep  the  infrared 
detectors a t  a  supercold temperature.  The  liquid-helium  coolant  stored'during 
the mission  in  a 250-liter  container  would vaporize  as withdrawn  to  circulate 
through  telescope  channels  and  keep  the  instrument  near  absolute  zero,  col- 
dest possible  temperature,  a t  which  all  molecular  action  stops. One  objective 
of  the   tests  was  to  see  how  long  the  system  could  store  the  cold  l iqu id ;   the 
container  would  be   filled  one   or  two  weeks  before  launch ,   then  undergo  a 
seven-day mission.  Tests  would  continue  until  March .   (MSFC  Release  82-2) 

January   8:  NASA  said  that  it  was  relocating  the  Applications  Technology 
Satellite (ATS) A7S   I  from  its station  at  149 W to a new  position  about 50 far- 
ther  west,  a t   162"E. Maintaining  orb i t  position  in  its present  location required 
maximum use  of  its  thrusters;  moving to  the  new  station would put ATS  1  into 
a  more   stable  position  and  substantially  reduce  the  stationkeeping  power 
requirement. 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC)  had  considered  several  options  to 
conserve  on-board  fuel  supplies,  which  had  been  estimated  adequate  until 
mid-1982.The  new  location  should  prolong  stationkeeping  through  1983 and 
reduce  the  need  for  center  contract  from  biweekly  to  quarterly.  (NASA 
Release  82-4) 

January  15:  NASA  launched  RCA-C  from  the  Eastern  Space  and  Missile 
Cen ter   (ESMC)   a t   8 : 5 5   p .m .   o n   a  Delta  into  a  transfer  o rb i t   with 
36,116-kilometer  apogee,  182-kilometer  perigee,  and  27.5 
inclination,  from 
which  it would  assume  a  geosynchronous  station  at  8 3  W.  Called  Sutcom  4 
in  orb i t ,   the  2,385-pound  craft  with  a  10-year  design  life  carr ied   24  
transponders,  each  ab le   to  hand le   an  FM /co lor   television  transmission. 
(NASA  Release  82-3;  NASA  MOR   0-492-206-82-05   [prelaunch]  Jan  11/82, 
[postlaunch]  May  13/82; NASA wkly SSR ,  Jan  14-20/82; D /SD ,  Jan  19/81, 83) 

MSFC   shipped  the   induced  environment-contamination  monitor  back  to 
Kennedy  Space  Center  (KSC)  after  servicing  it  in  preparation  for  the  third 
Shuttle flight. The  desk-sized  detector consisted of  10 instruments to check the 
environment  in  and  around  the  Shuttle cargo bay  for  contaminants  that  might 
damage or  interfere with  sensitive  equipment.  The  monitor  would play  a dual 
role  on   the  next  mission:  besides  carrying  out  its  normal  functions,  the 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1982 

1,000-pound package would  serve as a load  to exercise the remote-manipulator 
a rm .  All  instruments on  the monitor  operated  successfully in  its first flight on 
the  second  Shuttle  mission;  data  collected  then  were  still  being  analyzed. 
(MSFC  Release  82-7) 
-A  month-long analysis of  the data produced  by  the monitor  on  the  second 
Shuttle  flight  clearly  identified  every  contaminal:ion-producing  activity  (such 
as thrust  firings and water  dumps) .  On  future missions,  the monitor could dif- 
ferentiate contamination  from other  sources.  It  recorded  low  humidity  in, and 
successful  sealing of, the cargo bay  from engine lyproducts  during ascent and 
descent;  few  particles  of  matter  larger  than  five  micrometers,  but  a  number 
of  smaller  particles  well  above  expectations;  a  9 0%   reduction  of  water 
molecules and other early-mission contaminants after about 35 hours  in orb i t ;  
and  a  temporary  cloud  of  particles  from  using  the  attitude-control  system  or  
from  dumping  of  water.  Project  scientist  Edgar  Miller  of  MSFC  said  that, 
when  the  orbiter  flew  with  the  cargo  bay  pointing  ahead,  molecular  readout 
was high  because  orbiter-generated particles  werl:  deflected  back  into the bay; 
action  would  be   taken  to  keep  this  from  happening  while  using  sensitive 
instruments. 
Th e  third  Shuttle  flight,  planned  for  seven-days,  would  test  the  monitor  in 
high  temperatures  from  the  planned  solar orientation  of  the  cargo  bay,  com- 
pared  to the mild  levels produced  by  the Earth or-ientation of  the second flight. 
Th e   remote  manipulator  would  move  the  monitor  to  selected  points  for 
readout  during  the  flight.  (MSFC  Release  82-14;  NASA  Release  82-13) 

January  19: MSFC   said  that  it  had  shipped  the  external  tank  for  the  fourth 
Shuttle mission  from Michoud  Assembly  Facility  on  the  NASA  barge  Orion 
for  a  five-day  trip  to  KSC.  The   fourth  launch  was  set  for  mid-1982.  (MSFC 
Release  82-12) 
-MSFC 
reported  shipment  of  the  monodisperse  latex  reactor,  an  experi- 
ment  “with  major  medical  and  industrial  applications,”  to  KSC  for  flight  on 
the third  Shuttle mission.  Dale Kornfeld  of  MSFC’s space sciences laboratory 
said  that  the  instrument  would  produce  identical-sized  microspheres  of 
polystyrene  latex,  resembling  tiny  beads,  to  measure  the  size  of  intestinal 
pores  for  cancer  research  and  of  pores  in  the  eye  for  glaucoma  research  and 
to act as  a carr ier  of  drugs and radioactive  isotopes for treatment of  cancerous 
tumors.  On   Ear th ,   the  beads  could  be   produced  o n l y   up  to  about  3  microns 
i n   size;  the  low  gravity  of  space  would  permit  them  to  “grow”  up  to  20  
microns while  remaining  identical.  Th e  National  Bureau  of  Standards had  in- 
dicated  interest  in  using  the  beads  to  calibrate  medical  and  scientific  equip- 
ment.  (MSFC  Release  82-9) 

January  20:  Ames Research Center (ARC) released new  findings  about Venus 
from 30 experiments  of  the  Pioneer  Venus missions  and  reported  that  the  or- 
biter  was  still  returning  daily  information.  The  data  were  available  only  now 

3 2 2  

JANUARY  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

because  of  the  complexity  of  the  missions  and  the  large  amounts  of  data 
returned,  combined with  the value of  comparisons w i th   Soviet data on  Venus. 
The   new  data  included  evidence  for  two  major  currently  active  volcanic 
areas  on  Venus;  findings  that  Venus  had  a  thicker  crust  than  Earth  and  was 
a  “one-plate’’ planet  with  little  plate-tectonic  movement;  and  models  of  the 
Venus  cloud  system and greenhouse effect  that were  complete and  consistent. 
The  research also found strong new  evidence of  former Venus  oceans on the 
scale of  Earth‘s.  Data indicated that  the Earth would become  “a  virtual Venus 
if  you  stopped i ts   rotation, removed  the moon ,   and  moved  [it]  slightly closer 
to  the  sun.”  Although Venus’s  atmosphere and  environment  might  have  been 
Earthlike during  the  solar  system’s  early  history,  evidence  of  the  lost  oceans 
remained  only  in  the  ratio  of  deuterium  to  hydrogen  (100  times  as  much 
deuterium relative to hydrogen on Venus  as on Earth).  Earlier, abundant water 
could  have  sustained  life;  the  greenhouse  effect  “wiped  out  most  existing 
phenomena”  on Venus,  replacing  them  with  the current  furnace-like environ- 
ment.  (ARC  Release  82-1;  NASA  Release  82-9) 

January 21: MSFC reported a joint-endeavor agreement signed by  NASA’s  Of- 
fice of  Space Sciences and  GTI  Corporation of  San  Diego  that  might  lead  to 
flight of  a GTI materials-processing device on  four  future Shuttle flights. The  
agreement was  a new  NASA  approach to  government-industry partnerships  in 
developing  future  applications o r   technologies  for  space-flown devices.  The  
agreement would have three phases: design by  GTI of  a low-cost multichamber 
alloy-solidification  furnace  operable  in  low-gravity  space;  development, 
testing,  and   integrating  the   GTI  furnace  in to   the  Shuttle;  and  flight  o n   t h e  
Shuttle. 
GTI’s  interest was  in the manufacturing  in  microgravity of  space alloys that 
would  not  be   immiscible on  Earth,  where  many  theoretical  alloys  were  not 
possible  because  of  the  density  variations  of  the  elements  and  the  effect  of 
gravity  on  the  heavier  elements.  GTI  would  fund  development  and  testing; 
NASA,  the  integration  and  flight.  (MSFC   Release  82-13;  NASA  Release 
82-10) 

Dr.  Wubbo  Ockels of  the  Netherlands  and  Dr.  Ulf  Merbold  of  West  Ger- 
many,  the  Spacelab  payload  specialists  representing  the  European  Space 
Agency  (ESA),  had  arrived  at  MSFC   to  complete  training  for  the  first 
Spacelab flight  set  for  September  1983,  a  seven-day joint  US.-ESA  mission 
to carry  out 70 investigations in  five different disciplines. Of  the  four payload 
specialists in training, one American  and one European would actually go into 
space; the other  two  would  provide  ground  support to  those  in  orbit.  (MSFC 
Release  82-11) 

Marine  Co l .   Jack  Lousma  and  Air  Force  Co l .   C.  Gordon   Fullerton,  the 
astronauts  scheduled  to  f ly   the  third  Shuttle mission,  told  a  news  conference 
in  Houston  that the flight was  now  set for March  22 .  A  major objective of  the 

323 

ASTRONAUTlCS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

J A N U A R Y   1982 

mission  would  be  to  see  how  well  the  Shuttle  sy,stems withstood  the  extreme 
heat  and  cold  of  space.  Sections  of  the  ship  exposed  to  the  Sun  would  ex- 
perience  temperatures  up  to  250°F; sections  in  shadow,  down  to  -250°F. The  
Shuttle  would  also  be  subjected  to  slightly higher  dynamic  pressures  during 
l aun ch   and   l and ing ,   to  ga in   add i t ion a l   know ledge   abou t   its  f l igh t  
characteristics  and  limits.  ( W  Post,  Jan  22/81,  Pi-16) 

During January: NASA named Dr.  Burton  I .  Edelson, a  senior vice president 
of  Comsat  General  Corporation,  as   its  associate  administrator  for  space 
science and applications,  effective February  14. He  would  succeed Andrew J. 
Stofan,  who had been  in an  acting  capacity and  would  remain  as advisor  until 
NASA  appointed  him  to  another management  position.  Edelson,  before  join- 
ing  Comsat,  had  been  an  engineering  officer  in   the  U .S .   Navy  with 
assignments o n  the staff of  the National Aeronautics and Space Council  at  the 
White  House  and  the  Office  of  Naval  Research.  (NASA  anno  Jan  13/82; 
NASA  Release  82-7) 

324 

February 

February  1-5: George  Bush,  U.S.  vice  president,  unveiled  at  KSC  the  flight 
version  of  Spacelab,  a  reusable  scientific-research  facility  designed  to  fly  on  
the  Shuttle. 
At the ceremony, Mr. Bush called the  Spacelab  “an extraordinary  engineer- 
the  largest  cooperative  space  project  ever.”  Noting  that 
rsons,  from   50 European  f irms  and  10 member  nations, 
helped  to build  i t ,  he  added:  “If  today  can  be  considered  Spacelab’s  birthday, 
Let  us   continue  to 
then  there  a re   a  grea t  many  proud  parents  celebrating 
be   partners,”  he   concluded,  “and  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  assure  you 
that  we  intend  to  continue  our   international  cooperative  programs,  jus t   a s  
President  Reagan  recently  reconfirmed  the  commitment  of  the  United  States 
to  a  vigorous  space  program.” 
The  jo in t   venture  of  NASA  and  ESA  was  a  cylindrical  module  built  to  fit 
into  the  Shuttle  cargo  bay,  where  both  astronaut  mission  specialists  and 
civilian  scientists  (payload  specialists)  would  work  in  a  shirtsleeve  environ- 
ment,  with  a  series’of  unpressurized  pallets  to  support  experiments  requiring 
direct  exposure  to  space.  The   first  Spacelab  flight,  planned  for  a  seven-day 
Shuttle mission  in  September  1983, would  carry  out  some 70  investigations  in 
5  different  disciplines. 
About  50 f irms  in ESA’s participating  nations  had  supplied parts  to ERNO, 
pr ime   contractor  in  Bremen,  West  Germany,  for  assembly  and  integration. 
The  program ,   which  cost  ESA  about  $1  billion,  would  provide  NASA,  at  no 
charge,  with  one  engineering  model  and  one   complete  flight  version  of 
Spacelab with  associated  ground-support  equipment  and  some  computer  soft- 
ware.  NASA  was  buying,  for  about  $300  million,  a  second  flight-model 
Spacelab  to be  delivered  in mid-1982. MSFC  would manage  the   first mission 
with  ESA  and  had  been  in  charge  of  U.S.  development  of  flight-hardware 
items,  such  a s   the  transfer  tunnel  and  o ther   operating  equipment.  MSFC  
would manage  the  second  and  third  (NASA-only) missions  alone.  (Ofc of  V P  
anno,  Feb  5 /82 ;  NASA  Release 82-14; MSFC  Release 82-15; ESA  Info 6, Feb 
2 /82 ,   Feb  3 /82)  

Dr.  Stephen  P.  Synnott  of  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL)  announced 
evidence  for  the   existence  of  four  (possibly  a s  many  a s   s ix ,   new  satellites  of 
Saturn  in  data  from  Voyager 2’s Saturn  encounter.  This  brought  the  number 
of  known  Saturnian  satellites  in  between  21  and  23;  the  two  “possible” 
satellites had only one  observation each ,  and their orbits were not yet confirm- 
ed .  In  1979, Synnott,  a member  of the Voyager navigation  team,  had  found two 
new  satellites  of  Jupiter  in  images  studied  after  the  Voyager  encounters. 

325 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

FEBRUARY  1982 

Some of  the  new  “moons”  seemed  to be  influenced by  the gravity  of  larger 
moons  as  well  as   by  Saturn  itself  while  orbiting, between  the  planet  and  its 
larger moons,  they would move faster than  the  large  ones because of  the strong 
pull  of  Saturn’s  gravity. But, while  closing  from behind  on  the  larger  moons, 
the  gravity  of  those  bodies  would  pull  them  into  orbit  outside  the  larger 
moons,  where  Saturn’s  pull  was  weaker,  and  they  would  slow  and  drop  back 
into  inner  orb i t .   Scientists  called  this  type  of  track  “horseshoe  orbits.”  (JPL 
Release  Feb  1/82;  W Post,  Feb  3 /82 ,   A-6) 

February  2:  ESA  announced  that  it  would  develop  a  more   powerful  version 
of  its Ariane launcher  to  “enhance its competitiveness on the space transporta- 
tion  systems  market  over  the  period  1986  to  199’3 by  reducing  the  cost  per 
kilogram  i n   orbit  and  providing  greater  adaptability  to  user   requirements.” 
Ariane 4 would  differ  from Ariane 3 in  enlargement of  the first-stage tanks, 
increasing on-board  propellants  from  140 tons  to  220 tons;  addition of  liquid- 
o r   solid-fuel boosters  i n   various combinations  of  I W O  or  four ;  and  a new  fair- 
ing  fitted  as  necessary  with  a  new  dual-launch  system,  use  of  which  was  cx- 
pected  to  increase  steadily.  Six  versions  of  this  new  Ariane  would  permit 
launch  of  a  wide  range  of  spacecraft  with  masses  between  1,100 and  4 ,300  
kilograms;  maximum  lift  would  be  twice  that  of  the  initial  Ariane  1. 
The  development schedule called  for a demonstration  flight  late in  1985 and 
an  operational  flight  beginning  early  i n   1986.  Cost  was  estimated  as  $241 
million  U.S.  (1981  prices).  ESA  has  given  France’s Centre National  d’Etudes 
Spatiales  (CNES)  technical  direction  and  fina.ncia1  management  of  the 
development  program.  (ESA  Info  5) 

February 3 :  On  the basis of  data  acquired  i n   support of  its mission  objectives, 
NASA  declared  successful  the  Viking  extended  mission  conducted  from  the 
end  of  its  primary  mission  in  1976  until  August  1980. Viking’s  mission  was 
to  explore  the  planet  Mars  using  two  instrumented  orbiters  operating  in  con- 
junction  with  two  instrumented  landers  on  the  surface.  Identical  spacecraft 
launched  in  1975,  each  consisting of  an  orbiter  and  a  lander,  began  operating 
at Mars  in  1976. The  design  life of  the  spacecraft  ‘was 9 0  days  following  orbit 
insertion  or  landing  on  the  Martian  surface; however,  the  Viking  flight  team 
found  “ingenious ways”  to  extend  the operating  lifespans and  obtain  the  max- 
imum  possible  science  data. 
When  the  extended  mission  began  November  15,  1976,  Orbiter  2  operated 
until  July  24 ,   1978  (another  20  months),  when  SI  small  leak  in  its  attitude- 
control  system  depleted  its  gas  supply.  Lander 2 operated  on  the planet’s  sur- 
face  for 41  months,  until  April  12,  1980;  its  t r anm i t t e r   was  turned  off  when 
its batteries could  no  longer hold  a charge. Orbiter  1  lasted  even longer, a total 
of  45   months  after  orbital  insertion,  and  compleLed  is  operations  August  7, 
1980, when  its control gas was  also exhausted. Th e  end  of  Orbiter  1 operation 
was  to  be  the  official  end  of  the  Viking  extended  mission;  however,  Lander 
still 
the  Mutch  Memorial  Station  January  7,  1981-was 
1-designated 

326  

FEBRUARY  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

operating  in  a  continuation  automatic-mission  mode  and  providing  important 
science  da ta .  
Extended-mission  ’objectives  were  “to  obtain  seasonal  variations,  long- 
duration  sampling  for  statistically  important  experiments,  and  to  obtain  data 
not  possible  dur ing   the  primary  mission  due   to  time  constraints  o r   observa- 
tional  limitations.”  Mission results were  “far  in excess of  those expected.”  The  
program   now  consisted  of  Lander   1’s  acquiring  and   storing  imaging, 
meteorology,  and  engineering  data  in  a  seven-plus day  cycle and  transmitting 
to  Ear th  on  command.  Data  should  continue  until  the  end  of  1994, when  the 
radioisotope  thermoelectric  generator  (EyTcr)  could  no  longer  power  the 
transmitters.  (NASA  MOR  S-815-75-01/02  [postlaunch]  Feb  3 /82 ;   NASA 
Release  82-36) 

February 5 :  NASA  announced  a week-long  series  of  Shuttle checks  to  verify 
readiness  for launch.  Pr ime  and  backup  crew  members  would  fly  a mock  lif- 
toff,  return  to  launch  site,  and  descend  from  orb i t   to  a  simulated  landing  on 
the  dry   lake  bed  a t  Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  California.  The   first  99  hours  
would  be   checkout  of  individual  orbiter  systems  (electrical  distribution,  en- 
vironmental  con tro l ,   instrumentation,  flight  control,  and  propulsion),  the  ex- 
ternal  tank  (power,  instrumentation,  range  safety, and  tumble-valve  systems), 
and  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  (hydraulic,  electrical,  instrumentation,  and 
range-safety  systems) a s  well as critical electrical and mechanical connections 
between  Shuttle  elements. 
The   second  part  of  the  tests  would  simulate  portions  of  the  mission,  the 
launch ,   a  return-to-launch-site  abort  with  the  orbiter’s system  in  control,  and 
descent  from  orb i t .   (NASA  Release  82-19) 

February 8: The  Office  of  Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Of- 
fice  o f ’ t h e  President  released  budget  figures  showing  funds  for  all  federal 
research  .and  development  a s   $43  billion  in  FY83,  $4.2  billion  over  FY82. 
NASA’s  portion  of  the  research  and  development  (R&D)  budget  ($6.5 billion 
for  FY83,  $672  million  over  FY82)  would  “assure  timely  transition  of  the 
space   shuttle  to  an  operational  system  [and]  continue  the  highest  priority 
research  and  space  exploration  projects,”  namely  the  Space  Telescope,  the 
gamma-ray observatory,  and  the Galileo mission  to Jupiter.  (NASA anno,  Feb 
8/82) 
-James  M .   Beggs,  NASA’s  administrator,  said  in  a  budget  message  that 
“given  the   tightly  constrained  fiscal  env i ronmen t .  . . I   believe  we  d id  
well.  . . . [Tlhough  there  a re  no new  starts, we a re  continuing with most  of  our  
ongoing  activity  in what we  consider  to  be  a balanced  way.”  (Text, Feb  8/82) 

February 10: The  Washington Post reported  that the U.S. Air Force  would have 
to  build  a  $40  million  windscreen  around  its  Space   Shuttle  launch  pad  at 
Vandenberg Air  Force Base in California to protect  the orbiter while  the exter- 
nal  tank  was  being  attached. 

327 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  19x2 

The  Air  Force  was  building  a  second  launch  complex  i n   California  to  put 
the  Shuttle  into  north-south  or  polar  orbit  that,  combined  with  Earth’s  rota- 
tion,  would  carry  it  over  the  entire  surface  of  the  Earth.  This  would  not  be 
possible  a t  Cape Canaveral  for  reasons  of  safety;  from  Vandenberg,  however, 
the  orbiter’s  route  would  be  over  the  Pacific  ocean. 
Hans  Mark ,   deputy  NASA  administrator,  told  the  House  Committee  on 
Science  and  Technology  that  the  windscreen  would  be  a  huge  three-sided 
sheet of  metal  around  the  launch  pad  to protect  the  orbiter  from  gusts  while 
attaching  the  fuel  tank.  Winds off the  Pacific  at  that  location  averaged  9 mph 
year-round and up to 47 mph  from January  through March ,  more than enough 
to  break  connections  between  Shuttle  and  tank.  At  the  Cape,  mating  took 
place  inside  the  Vehicle Assembly  Building  (VAB) ;   Vandenberg  had  no  such  
building.  (W  Post,  Feb  10182,  A-5) 

February 16: NASA  announced that  Donald K .   (Deke) Slayton, 58,  last of  the 
Mercury  Seven  astronauts  selected  in  1958,  would  leave  after  23  years  with 
the space agency. He  had  retired  from NASA  in Felbruary  1981 but had  worked 
since that time on  a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space 
Shuttle orbital flight tests  at Johnson Space Center  (JSC). He  planned to work 
as   a  consultant  to  Aerospace  Corporation,  El  Segundo,  Ca l if . ,   and  to  Space 
Sciences  Inc.  of  Houston,  Tex. 
Slayton  joined  the  U.S.  Air  Force  i n   1942,  flying  56  combat  missions  in 
Europe  and  7  over  Japan  as   a  B-25  bomber  pilot;  he  was  a  test  pilot  at  Ed- 
wards  Air  Force  Base  when  selected  as   a  Mercury  astronaut.  Grounded  i n  
August  1959 because of  a suspected heart  condition, he was  later approved  for 
flight  and was part  of  the U .S .  crew  in  the Apollo-Soyuz mission of  July  1975. 
(NASA  Release  82-23) 
-The  N e w   York Ernes said  that friends and associates  “wondered  why mat- 
ters  were  not  handled  better”:  NASA  never  responded  to  a  JSC  request  for 
another year’s  extension of  Slayton’s employment.  His  departure  reduced  the 
number of  the astronaut corps to 79.  Several were doctors or scientists without 
piloting  skills;  6  were  women.  “Many,”  the  New   York  Times  added,  ‘Lare 
young  enough  to  be  Slayton’s children.”  There  had  been  108 U.S.  astronauts 
“but  only  one   Original  Seven.”  (IVY Times,  Feb  12/82, A-14;  Feb  28/82,  30; 
W Post,  Feb  18/82, A-21) 

Presidential Science Adviser  Dr. George A .  Keyworth  announced the names 
of  13  U.S.  scientists  and  engineers  to  a  White  Hsouse  Science Council. 
Chairman  of  the  council  was  Solomon J.  Buchsbaum,  executive  vice presi- 
dent,  Bell  Laboratories;  vice chairman was  Edward  Frieman,  vice president, 
Science Applications  Inc.  Other members were Harold M .  Agnew, president, 
General  Atomic  Company;  John  Bardeen,  emeritus  professor,  engineering 
and  physics,  University  of  Illinois;  D.  Allan  Bromley,  professor  of  physics, 
Yale  University  (chairman,  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
S c i en c e ) ;   G eo rg e   A .   Cowan ,   s en i o r   fellow,  Los  A l amo s   Sc ien t if ic  

328 

FEBRUARY  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Laboratory;  Edward  E .   David,  president,  Exxon  Research  and  Engineering 
(former  science adviser  to  President  Nixon);  Donald  S .   Frederickson,  resi- 
dent  fellow,  National  Academy  of  Sciences  (former  director,  National  In- 
stitutes of  Health-NIH);  Paul  E. Gray, president, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology  (M IT ) ;   Robert  0.. Hunter,  president,  Western  Research  Com-  
pany;  Arthur  K .   Kerman,  director,  MIT  Center  for  Theoretical  Physics; 
David  Packard,  chairman,  Hewlett  Packard; Edward  Teller,  Hoover  Institute, 
Stanford  University.  Lt.  Col.  Thomas  H .   Johnson,  special  assistant  to 
Keyworth, said that the council would meet up to six times per year and would 
study  issues with  “significant technical  components”;  it  was  not  meant  to  be 
demographically  representative of  U .S .   science  but  rather  would  consist  of 
“people  with  first-rate  technical  credentials and  excellent judgment.” 
The  New   York  Ernes  noted  that  in  an  interview last summer  Keyworth  said 
that “good judgment  is hard  to f i n d ’  among scientists because “our profession 
is  one  of  the  few  where  arrogance  has  been  condoned  if   not  nurtured.” 
A presidential science advisory committee formed in   1957 was  abolished in  
1977 by  President Nixon,  angry when  some of  its members  took  public  stands 
against  his  policies.  The   new  council,  known  by  its  initials WHSC  (whisk), 
was  meant to be more  modest,  the N e w   York Ernes  said.  It would  have its first 
meeting  in  March.  (OST Policy Release, 2-16-82; N Y   f im e s ,  Feb  18/82, A-12) 

February  19:  A  JSC  release  described  a   space operations center  (SOC)  con- 
cept complete’d by  a   special JSC  study team.  A  manned  center  in   space to  ex- 
ploit  the Shuttle and  allow  incremental growth was  the  “essential next  step in  
exploitation  of  space”; i t  would  become a space-base and marshaling yard  for 
large  and  complex  payloads,  including  an  upper-stage  propulsion  system  in 
low  Earth  orbit.  It  would  serve  as  “garage  space”  for  reusable  cryogenic 
stages  for  easier  access,  lowering  costs  of  geosynchronous  space operations. 
It  could  be   a  manned  base  with  Department  of  Defense  (DOD)  military 
capabilities o r   a   manned  platform  for  science  and  applications  research.  It 
could  provide  a   manufacturing  facility  in  a   weightless  environment. 
The  JSC  design was  for  an  SOC  operating continuously, with  maintenance 
and  resupply,  for  10  years;  parts  would  be  delivered  and  assembled  by  the 
Shuttle orbiter in a  low Earth orb i t  (230 to 280  statute miles). An  8- to  12-man 
center, about 435  feet long  tip  to  tip, would  weigh  about  245,000 pounds.  In- 
itial launch would  put  into orbit  an  energy  section,  a   short  cylinder  carrying 
two booms with  solar arrays, antennas, reaction-control system, and radiators, 
weighing in   total  between  34,000 and 43,000 pounds.  A  second  launch would 
bring a  command module  to be joined  to  the energy section, completing phase 
1; this module would have one doclung and nine berthing ports,  airlocks, com-  
mand  station, guidance and control, data management,  open-loop l i f t  support, 
and  accommodations  for  two  (but  able  to  support  a   crew  of  four,  in   an 
emergency).  Weight  would  be  between  40,000  and  50,000  pounds.  The  next 
launch would bring a   second command  module to  the other end of  the energy 
section. 

3 2 9  

ASTRONALTICS A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY   1982 

Each  of  the  next  two  launches would  bring  a habitat  module  able to  accom- 
modate  a  crew  of  four;  t h e   two  habitats  would  provide  emergency  accom- 
modations  and  life support  for a crew of  eight. Each habitat would  weigh  bet- 
ween  25,000 and  28,000  pounds. 
After  phase  3,  t h e   SOC would  be  ready  for  long-term manned  occupations 
by  eight  to twelve  persons;  the platform  could  now  handle  f u l l   flight  support, 
satellite  servicing,  and  space construction.  (JSC  Release  82-009; AvWk ,   Feb 
15/82) 

February  22:  JPL   reported  the  selection  of  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  for 
negotiations  on  study  of  spacecraft  suitable  for  a  Venus  radar-mapping  mis- 
sion.  Hughes Aircraft,  which  also submitted a proposal,  had  been  selected  in 
November  1981  as  the  radar-instrument  s tudy   contractor  for  the  m iss ion .  
(NASA  Release  82-26) 

Februur?, 26: NASA  launched  Westar 4 ,  first of  a  series  of  second-generation 
24-transponder  domestic  commercial  communications  satellites  built  by 
Space Communications  Company for Western  Union,  from ESMC  on  a Delta 
into  a  suborbital  trajectory.  An  apogee  kick  motor  would  put  it  into  orbit  at 
99OW,  19,300 nautical miles  over  the  equator  to  relay  voice,  data,  video,  and 
facsimile communications  to  an  area  covering the  United  States from  Hawaii 
to  the  Virgin  Islands. 

Westar 4 ,  with  a design  life of  10  years  would jo in  three  other Western  Union 
communications  satellites:  Westar  I  and  Westur  2 ,   launched  in  1974,  and 
Westar 3  launched  in   1979.  I t   was  twice  their  si2.e  and  had  four  times  their 
capacity.  (NASA  Release  82-17;  NASA  MOR   0-492-203-82-06   [prelaunch] 
Feb  25/82,  [postlaunch] May  13/82) 

330 

March 

March  I :   A  robot  craf t ,   kn e r u   13,  fifth  from   the  Soviet  Union  to  land  on  
Venus,  sent  the   first  co lor  pictures  of  that  planet’s  surface  and  scooped  up   a 
soil  sample  for  the  most  detailed  analysis  to  date  of  Venus  chemistry,  Tass 
reported. 
A  module  detached  from  Veneru 13 plunged  through  Venus’s  dense  carbon 
dioxide  atmosphere  to  an  area  called  Phoebe,  south  of  its  equator.  A  kn e ru  
14  identical  lander  was  scheduled  to  arrive  March  5  a t   an  area   east  of  the 
Phoebe  site.  Soviet mission  planners  had  consulted  scientists  and  radar  maps 
from  the  U .S .  Pioneer  Venus  project  in  deciding  where  to  aim  the  Veneras; 
they  promised  to  share  Venera  data  at  future  international  scientific  con-  
ferences.  U .S .   scientists  familiar  with  the  Soviet  plans  said  that  the  Veneras 
were equipped  for  “much  more  sophisticated”  studies of  Venus  soil chemistry 
than previous  probes ;   these were the  h r s t   craft  able to  drill  into  the  crus t ,   ex- 
tract  a  sample,  and  analyze  i t ,   as  the  Vilungs  had  on  Mars. 

Pioneer  Venus  I  had  been  orbiting  Venus  since December  1978, mapping  the 
planet  by  radar.  Pioneer  Venus 2  deployed  five  probes  to  samp le  the  planet’s 
atmosphere,  only  one  of  them  surviving to transmit  an hour  of  data on surface 
temperatures.  Soviet studies of Mars  failed, but  k n e r a  9 and  Veneru 10 in  l!975 
transmitted  the  first  images  from the  Venus  surface,  and   Enera  11  and  Emera 
12  in   1978  collected  data  on  radioactive  soil.  After  separation  and  landing, 
k n e r u  13  had  survived to send  surface data  relayed by  the  mother  ship for  127 
minutes.  @IS,  Moscow,  Tass  in  English,  Mar   1/82,  Mar  2 /82 ;  NY   Times, 
Mar   2 /82 ,   C-1;  W Post,  Ma r   2 /82 ,   A-10) 

NASA  announced  the  crews  for  the  fourth,  f if th ,   and  sixth  Shuttle  flights. 
On  STS-4,  Thomas   K .   Mattingly  would  be  commander,  and  Henry  W. 
Hartsfieid,  pilot.  Scheduled  for  launch  ear ly   in  July,  the  seven  day  STS-4 
would b e  the last of  four orbital  flight  tests to verify  Shuttle hardware and  soft- 
ware.  Mattingly,  47,  orbited  the Moon  10  years  ago  on Apollo  16: Hartsfield, 
48,  was  a  rookie. 
STS-5, a five-day mission planned  for mid-November  to deploy commercial 
communications  satellites,  would  be   the  first  to  use  mission-specialist 
astronauts.  Vance  D.  Brand,  50,  who  was  command-module  pilot  on   1975’s 
Apollo-Soyuz  rendezvous,  would  be  mission  commander.  This  would  be  the 
first  spaceflight  for  Robert  E  Overmyer,  45,  the   pil,ot.  Mission  specialists 
would be  Dr.  Joseph  P.  Allen  and Dr.  William  B.  Lenoir.  Columbia  would  be 
the  spacecraft  for  both  STS-4  and  STS-5. 
STS-6,  planned  for  January  1983, would  be  the  first  flight  of  the  orb i ter  

331 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

MA R CH   1982 

Challenger,  a  two-day  mission  to  deploy  NASA's  Tracking  and  Data  Relay 
Satellite  System  (TDRSS),  one  of  an  eventual  two-.satellite system  providing 
comprehensive  voice  and  data  coverage  between  orbiting  shuttles  and  the 
ground.  Commander  would  be  Paul  J .   Weitz,  49, who was  pilot  on Skylab  I ;  
copilot  would  be  U .S .   Air  Force  Co l .   Karol  J.  Bobko,  44,  anothcr  rookie. 
Donald H .  Peterson  and Dr.  Story Musgrave  would  f l y   as mission  specialists. 
NASA would no longer assign  Shuttle backup crews; its pool  of experienced 
pilots  at  JSC  would  readily  permit  interchange of  crewmen.  (NASA  Release 
82-33;  JSC  Release  82-012;  W  Post,  Mar   2 /82 ,   A-9) 

March  2:  NASA  said  that  i t   would  change  the  Shuttle's  solid-fuel  rocket 
b o o s t e r s ,   r e d u c i n g   w e i g h t   a n d   incrcasing  p a y l o a d   c a p a b i l i t y   a b o u t   6,000 
pounds  (2,720 kilograms)  by  replacing  8 of  the  11  metal  booster  motor-case 
segments  with  4 segments  made  of  composite  filament.  Other  components, 
such as  the metal  forward  and aft domes and  the external-tank attachment area 
of  the  metal  case,  would  remain.  NASA  had  issued  a  request  for  proposals 
to  develop  the  filament-wound case. 
Th e  lightweight case would  be  needed  i n   high-performance  launches  from 
Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base  into  near-polar  orbit,  helping  to  compensate  for 
the  loss  of  l i f t   i n   west  coast  launches  that  could  not  use  Earth's  rotation  to 
boost  their  velocity.  The   lightweight  case  could  also  boost  extra-heavy 
payloads  into orbit  from KSC.  First  use  o f  the  motor  would  be  i n   1985. After 
plan  approval  NASA  would  have  Thiokol  Corporation  make  test  firings 
directed  by  MSFC  of  solid-fuel  rocket  motors  with  filament-wound  casings. 
(NASA  Release  82-32;  MSFC  Release  82-19) 

ARC  reported  changes  i n   the  Shuttle's  thermal  protection  system.  New 
materials  developed  at  ARC,  stronger,  lighter,  and  costing  less  than  the 
original  ones,  would  be  installed  gradually  on  the  four  orbiters over  the  next 
few  years.  Some  new  materials  had  been  installed  on  Columbia;  others  were 
planned  for  Challenger,  which  was  under  construction  for  delivery  this  sum- 
mer,  and for Discovery  and  Atlantis, scheduled for delivery  i n   1983 and  1984. 
Thermal protection  of  the  Shuttle consisted of  tiles  and  other  heat-resistant 
materials  applied  to  the  outside  to  protect  its  aluminum  and  epoxy-graphite 
skin  from  extreme  temperatures  ranging  from-170"F; (-110°C)  in   space  up  to 
3,000 "F  (1,648 "C) during  reentry.  A  growing  knowledge  of  reentry  problcms 
had  brought  changes  in  the  system:  the  original  materials  had  served  beyond 
expectations,  but  research  had  provided  new  answers.  Columbia  now  had  a 
glass-fiber  quilt  over  20  square  feet  o f   its  elevon  cove:  replacing  the  felt 
reusable  insulation  that  was  inadequate to  the  1,500"IF (816°C)  temperature  i n  
that  area. 
This  new  material  would  be  used  on  Challenger,  Discovery,  and  Atlantis. 
Th e   new  orbiters  would  also  use  a  fibrous  refractmy  composite  insulation 
lighter  and  stronger  than  the  current  tiles  that  would  save about  1,000 pounds 

332 

MARCH  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

on  Discovery  and  Atlantis;  the  new  insulation  was  developed  by  ARC  and 
manufactured  by  Lockheed.  (ARC  Release  82-05) 

ARC  noted  that Pioneer 10 had  been  in  space  10 years as  of  March 2 .  Laun- 
ched in  1972, the first spacecraft to fly by  Jupiter had crossed the asteroid belt, 
survived  the  radiation  near Jupiter,  and  operated  almost  flawlessly  on  its way 
out  of  Earth's  solar  system.  It  had  traveled  3.27  billion  miles,  received  more  
than  40  thousand  commands,  and  transmitted  more  than  125 billion  bits  of 
scientific  data.  Now  more   than  halfway  between  orbits  Uranus  and  Neptune, 
2 .5   billion  miles  from  the  Sun ,  Pioneer  was  currently  defining  the  extent  of 
the  so lar   atmosphere,  a  bubble  in  the  interstellar  medium  called  the 
heliosphere. 
By  June   1983,  Pioneer  would  be  at  a  point  outside  all  of  the  planets  of 
Earth's  system,  in  their  current  positions.  Its  transmissions,  traveling  at  the 
speed of  light,  already  needed  3 hours and 42 minutes to  reach  the operations 
center a t  ARC, and this time was increasing  1 minute every  four days.  Nearly 
all  of  its  systems  were  still  performing  well;  its  magnetometer  shut down  in 
1975,  but  experimenters  could  use  correlations  from  five  other  instruments. 
Data  showed  that  the heliosphere  was  far  larger  than  predicted;  Pioneer  was 
seeking  the  boundary  between  the  solar  atmosphere  and  true  interstellar 
space, probably  5 to  10 billion miles from  the Sun .  Experts at  the Deep  Space 
Network  hoped  to  track  Pioneer  as   far  out  as  5  billion  miles. 
Th e  solar wind  had been  expected  to  slow  with  distance  from  t h e  Sun,  but 
this had  not  happened;  almost no  motion  energy was  lost  as  heat.  Turbulence 
in  the   heliosphere  was  c a u s ed   by  so lar   storms,  no t   so la r -w ind   co l l i s ion s .   As 
solar  storms  increased  in  strength,  the  heliosphere  seemed  to  alter  shape, 
more  oval a t  the  Sun's  equator  than  its  roundness  a t   solar minimum.  Pioneer 
10's  sun-sensor  could  no  longer  furnish  position  data  because  of  its  great 
distance  from  the  Sun and  the  resultant decline in  solar brightness.  However, 
mission controllers would use the Pioneer camera (photopolarimeter)  to make 
star maps   that  would  provide  the  rotation  and  attitude data  needed  to  define 
Pioneer's  position.  (ARC  Release  82-04;  NASA  Release  82-34) 

March  4 :  NASA  launched  Intelsat 5-F4 for  the International  Telecommunica- 
tions  Satellite Organization  (INTELSAT)  from  Cape   Canaveral  at  7:23  p.m. 
EST o n  an  Atlas  Centaur  into a  transfer  orbit  with  35,953-kilometer  apogee, 
165.  8-lulometer  perigee,  and  24"  inclination.  INTELSAT  would  fire  an 
apogee motor  to  put  the  communications satellite into a near-geosynchronous 
orbit  for  'testing  before  moving  it  over  the  Indian  Ocean  to  provide  com- 
munications  between  Europe,  the  MIddle  East,  and  the  Far  East. 
Th is   fourth  of  the  Intelsat  5 series built  by  Ford  Aerospace  had  a  capacity 
of  l2 ,OOO   voice  circuits  plus  two  television  channels.  INTELSAT's  global 
system  consisted  of  a  space  segment  ( IO   satellites  in  synchronous  orbit)  and 
a  ground  segment  (295  communications  antennas  at  242  ground  stations  in 
129 countries  and territories).  The  combined  system  provided  more  than  800 

333  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAIJTICS 

MARCH   I Y X ?  

links between  ground  stations, with  about  8,500 imernational  voice circuits  i n  
f u l l - t im e   u s e ,   p l u s  
t e l e g r a p h ,  
t e l e x ,   a nd  
t e l e v i s i o n .  
(NASA  
MOR-491-203-82-04  [prelaunch]  Feb  25/82,  [po,stlaunchJ Mar  25 /82 ;   IN -  
TELSAT  Release  82-4-1) 

March f0: The  Observatory  for  Geophysical  Monitoring  of  Climatic  Change 
at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, on March 3 said that scientists doing a routine weather 
scan  had  discovered  a huge cloud orbiting the Earth  and had  tracked  it for five 
weeks,  but  could not  explain what  it was. Th e  cloucl, about  10 to  12 milcs high 
(just  above  the flight paths  of most commercial j e t s ) ,  had  probably  circled  the 
Earth  four or  five times. Th e  best  guess was  that  i t   iresulted  from an  unnoticed 
volcanic  eruption. 
On  March  10  NASA  said  that  the  “mystery  cloud”  detected  over  Hawaii 
definitely came from a volcanic  eruption. Chemical analysis of  samples show- 
ed  that  it  consisted  entirely  of  sulfuric  acid,  ruling  out  nuclear  explosion  or 
a  meteorite,  either  of  which  would  have  produced  fragments  of  rocky 
material.  The  cloud  had  been  measured  from  the  e:quator to  Germany,  about 
50-f8-N,  with  the  heaviest  concentration  of  particles  found  by  a  Langley 
Research  Center  (LaRC)  research  aircraft  at  20 ”N .  
No  volcanic  source for  the  cloud  had  been  identified.  Scientists from ARC 
were  studying  atmosphere-circulation  patterns  to  see  how  gas  from  an 
equatorial  source  could  spread  over  the  northern  half  of  the  Earth.  Sulfur 
gases injected into the  stratosphere by  volcanic  eruptions  tended  to  remain  for 
months,  as  there  would  be   no  rain  to  remove  them;  changing  gradually  into 
drops  of  sulfuric  ac id ,   the  volcanic  cloud  would  increase  over  time  in  depth 
and density  as more sulfur compounds arrived. Highly  reflective clouds of  the 
acid,  like  those  on Venus,  could  prevent  solar heat  from  reaching  the  ground, 
but  the  current  cloud  apparently  had  not  produced.  any  climate  changes. 
A  NASA  research plane  flying  from Wallops Flig.ht Center  (WFC) to Costa 
Rica carried a remote-sensing laser radar that mapped the  cloud content while 
doing  previously  scheduled  data-gathering  on  locail  volcanoes.  LaRC  would 
continue  taking  radar  data;  also,  an  ARC  U-2  aircraft  would  make  follow-on 
flights beginning March 23.  (ARC Release  82-11; LaRC Release 82-12; NASA 
Release  82-45;  W  Post,  Mar  6 /82 ,   A-4;  N Y   T imes ,  Mar   7/82,  P-24) 

March  17-30: NASA  began  the  countdown  for  the  third  test  flight  of  Space 
Shuttle  orbiter  Columbia  scheduled  for  launch  March  22 ,   although  runways 
at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  in  California  were  too  rainsoaked  to  permit  an 
emergency  landing.  STS-3 would use  a runway at White Sands, N . M . ,  for lan- 
ding.  Marine  Corps   Co l .   Jack  Lousma  and  U.S.  Air  Force  Co l .   C.  Gordon 
Fullerton  had  frequently  practiced  landing j e t  aircraft  at White  Sands,  where 
the  two  gypsum-based  desert  runways were  as  wide  and  almost as   long  as  the 
seven  mile-long  runway  at  Edwards.  They  had  also  practiced  landing  on  a 
three-mile-long  concrete  runway  at KSC,  to  be  used  only  i n   case of  losing an 
engine  during  the  first  four  minutes  of  flight  from  that  location. 

334 

MARCH  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Heavy  rains  all day  March  17  left more  than  an  inch  of  water  on  the  “dry” 
lake  beds  at  Edwards,  where  Columbia  had  landed  after  its  first  two  flights. 
NASA  said  that  i t   was  cheaper  to  move  landing  equipment  to  White  Sands 
than  to postpone the flight un t i l   Edwards dried  out:  each  day  of  delay  in  laun- 
ching  the  Shuttle  cost  the  agency  $3   million.  A  special  landing  team  im- 
mediately began  loading support equipment on a 23-car train that would  carry 
it  the  1,000 miles  from  Edwards  to  White  Sands.  The   equipment  should  be 
in  place  late on  Sunday, March  21,  ready  for  use  should an  emergency occur 
after  liftoff. 
The  upcoming  flight,  third  of  a  series of  four  test  flights before  the  Shuttle 
began carrying payloads into space later in  1982, would  subject the  spacecraft 
to temperature extremes to see how  it endured long exposure to dark and light. 
It would  also include further tests of  the 50-foot robot arm  designed  to  handle 
Shuttle payloads.  Exposure of  the Shuttle tail  would  test  pumping  of  fuel  and 
restarting  rear  engines  under  extremely  high  or  low  temperatures. 
Exposure  of  the  65-foot-long cargo  bay  carrying  more   than  21,000  pounds 
of  instruments  and  experiments  to  the  extreme  heat  encountered  in   space 
would show how  materials carried  into space over the next  10 years would  sur- 
vive.  The  open cargo bay  aimed  at the  Sun would  also seek exposure to  solar 
flares,  for  which  scientists were  still  seeking  explanations. 
Lousma and  Fullerton flew  from JSC  at Houston  to  Patrick Air Force Base, 
F la . ,   near KSC  in  T-38 je t   trainers Saturday, March  20,  and  planned  to  spend 
most  of  Sunday  in   preflight briefings.  KSC  said that  the  countdown had  been 
virtually  trouble-free and  ahead  of  schedule. 
Liftoff from pad  A ,   launch complex  39,  took  place Monday,  March  22,  at 
10:59 a.m.  EST  after an  hour’s delay  caused  by  failure of  a protection circuit 
in  the cdntroller  for  the  heated  nitrogen  purge  of  the  main  engines,  required 
before introduction of  cryogenic fuel. Countdown  stopped for reestablishment 
of  heater  ,con tro l .   Initial  orbit  elements 
were  240-kilometer  apogee  and 
I 
perigee,  89-minute  period,  and  3 8 ”   inclination.  Operations  began  in  the 
fourth hours  of  flight with  the  opening  of  payload  doors,  removal  of  ejection 
suits,  and  activation  of  the  Office  of  Space  Sciences  experiment  package 
(OSS-1).  Later  reports  indicated  that  the crew  suffered from motion  sickness 
after  the  exertion  of  removing  the  space  suits;  incidence of  motion  sickness 
had  been  less on Mercury  and  Gemini when  astronauts had  less area  to  move 
in, and both Soviet and U.S. crews had  taken time on longer flights to  get used 
to  weightlessness  before  active  exertion. 
Scheduled for the second day was deployment of  the robot a rm ;  for the third 
was p r a c t i c e h  grappling payload packages and extending a set of  sensors over 
the  edges of  the  cargo bay  to  measure plasma  (electrically charged gases)  in  
Earth orb i t .  The  fourth and  fifth days would  see further tests of  the a rm ,  more  
thermal testing, and two brief  ignitions of  the maneuvering  rockets to  see how 
they  performed  after  long  periods  of  cold.  The   sixth  day  would  have  more  
thermal tests and  experiments on solar radiation; the seventh day  would be  for 
shutdown  and  landing  preparations. 

335  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  19x2 

A l l   activities planned  for day one were accomplished;  OSS-1 experimenters 
reported  “excellent  data.”  Thermal  attitude  tail-to -sun  prevailed  throughout 
the sleep period. A  survey with  the  remote manipulator  system (RMS) camera 
showed  several  low-temperature  white  tiles  missing  or  damaged  on  the 
nosecone.  A lso ,   three  pieces  of  black  tiles  (about  1  112  tiles)  had  been  found 
700 feet south of  the  launch pad; others had been  found on and near the beach. 
All  had  been  sent  to  JSC  for  identification  and  analysis. 
On  Tuesday,  t h e   first  day  i n   orb i t ,   the  “wrist”  camera  on  the  manipulator 
arm   went  d a rk ,   and  flight  directors  postponed  the  critical  grappling  test  to 
devise  a  way  to  do  the  test  without  i t .   That  camera  served  as   the  crew’s  eyes 
whenever  the  end of  the  arm   took  hold  of  an object  i n   the  cargo bay.  Planned 
u s e  was  to  raise a n  82-pound package and move  i t   around  t h e  bay;  the   instru- 
ment  inside  would  measure  electrical  disturbances  caused  by  the  spacecraft‘ 
and  its  motion  through  the  electronically  charged  ionosphere.  Instead,  the 
crew  extended  the  robot  arm   far  over  the  cargo  b;ay  and  used  the  “elbow” 
camera  to  transmit  “the best  television  ever  seen  of  the earth”  from  150 miles 
U P .  
Th e  crew  turned  on  the monodisperse  latex reactor  [see  January  191 for  14 
hours;  the  solution would  be  stirred  every  30  minutes  for  the  rest  of  the mis- 
sion. Ground control  changed the activity  schedule  to  allow  for crew  rest  and 
troubleshooting;  day  four activities would be  done  on day  three  and vice  ver- 
s a ,  a prelaunch-planned option.  Problems were repoirted with  the environmen- 
tal  control  and  life-support  systems  and  with  the  waste-control  “slinger”; 
NASA  said  it  had  initiated  “backup  procedures.” 
Besides  suffering  from  motion  sickness,  Lousma  had  been  kept  awake  by 
loud  radio  static,  probably  from  a  Soviet  radar  at  lb s t ov   on  the  Black  Sea ,  
said to be   the most powerful  in  the world; it  was  called Woodpecker  by  radio 
ham  operators  because  of  its  noise,  heard  from  Spain  to  parts  of  China. 
STS-3  lost  three  main  radio  links  to  Earth  Friday,  March  2 5 ,   through  the 
Shuttle’s transponders  that locked  on and amplified ground  signals and carried 
nearly  all data on Shuttle condition and  its speed and location.  Two ultra-high- 
frequency (UHF)  radio channels  carried voice  transmission, however, and  the 
astronauts  were  using  the  remaining  transponder,  a  backup  UHF   voice  line, 
and  the  FM-radio  line  to  relay  information  to  Ear th .  
Gene Kranz,  deputy  flight  director  at  JSC,  said  that  the mission  would  go 
full  time  unless  the  high-power  transponder  link  was  lost.  A  premature  end 
to the mission would  require a  landing somewhere ol.her than  a t  White  Sands, 
because  of  bad  weather  with  overcast  slues  and  hi,gh winds  that  blew  dust 
across the  runways  and  created haze thick  enough to obscure the  landing  site. 
Two  days  away  from  the  scheduled  landing,  the  crew  had  completed  all  the 
thermal  tests  on  Columbia:  baking  tail,  nose,  and  top  i n   unimpeded  sunlight 
and  chilling  the  same  parts  in  the  icy  cold  of  space  for  hours.  They  had 
restarted the Shuttle engines hot  and  cold, opened and closed cargo-bay  doors 
under  both  conditions,  and  repeatedly  tested  t h e  mechanical  a rm  under  vary- 
ing  conditions  with  excellent  results. 

336 

MARCH  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

In  the  last  possible  opportunity,  less  than  a  day  before  the  end   of  the  mis- 
s ion ,  the crew pointed  the ir  so lar  telescope  directly  at the  Sun and  got  a  so lar  
flare  (an  event on  the  Sun’s surface they  could  not  have predicted)  “almost  a s  
if  i t   were planned.”  Dr.  Robert Novick  of Columbia  University,  where  the X- 
ray  polarimeter  was  built,  said  that  this  was  the  first  time  that  an  instrument 
in  space  with  this  sensitivity  had  witnessed  a  solar  flare. 
On  Sunday  night,  March  28,  the  crew  went  to  s leep  two  hours  ear l ier  than 
usual  in  preparation  for  landing  Monday.  About  40 minutes  before  the  time 
scheduled  for touchdown,  astronaut John Young  in a Grumman  Gulfstream je t  
tried  a practice  landing  o n  the White  Sands  runway  and  found  visibility  com-  
pletely  obscured.  The  Columbia  crewmen were  about  to  fire rockets  to begin 
descent.  “That’s  the  first  time  I’ve  seen  it  this  bad,”  Young  told  mission  con-  
trol  in  Houston.  “ I   think  we  ought  to  knock  this  thing  off.”  Less  than  15 
minutes  later,  mission  control  ordered  a  day’s  delay.  Th e  two  astronauts  un- 
packed  to  await  word  from  mission  control  on  where  and  when  they  would 
re turn .  
Landing  finally  occurred  a t  9 :04  a .m .  MST  on  Tuesday, March 30, on  a d ry  
lake  bed  at  White  Sands.  Touchdown  point  was  1,092  feet  past  the  runway 
threshold;  rollout  distance  was  13,732  feet.  The   crew  left  the  orbiter  45 
minutes  after  landing,  and  postflight  operations  proceeded  without  incident. 
(NASA  Release  82-29 ;   NASA  MOR  M-989-82-03 ’ [prelaunch]  Ma r   13/82, 
[postlaunch]  May  5 /82 ;   NASA  MOR   E-835-03-82-01,  OSS-1,  [prelaunch] 
Ma r   17/82, [postlaunch]  Sept 20182; Spacewarn SPX-341; NASA D ly  Actv Rp t ,  
Mar   24 ,   25,  29 /82 ;  NY   Times, Mar   18/82,  A-18;  Mar   20,  7; Mar   21,  1;  Mar  
22 ,  A-1; Mar  30, A-1;  W P o s t ,  Mar  19/82, A-7; Mar  21,  A-1;  Mar  22, A-1; Mar 
25,  A-2;  Mar  27,  A-2;  Mar   29,  A-1;  Mar   30,  A-1) 

March 25:  MSFC   reported  Heao  2 ,  second  in  a  ser ies  of  three  high-energy 
astronomy  observatories  launched  i n  the  late  1970s and  the  last  to  reenter,  fell 
from  orb i t   at  I:Z7  a .m .   CST  and  burned  up   in  the   a tmosphere .  John  Stone, 
project  manager a MSFC,  said  that tracking  stations indicated  that  it broke up 
over  the  South  Pacific  eas t  of  Australia.  Heao  1 had  reentered  in  1979; Heao 
3,  in  December  1981. Heao  2  had  not  been  operational  for  almost  a  year,  a s  
it had  expended  its control-gas  supply in Apr i l   1981, so that  i t   could  not main- 
tain  attitude  and  had  to  b e  powered  down. 
Launched  in September  1979 and nicknamed Einstein,  Heao 2 had operated 
for  nearly  2  112  years,  carrying  the   largest  X-ray  telescope  ever  built.  It  had 
made  detailed  imaging  and  spectroscopic  observations of  about 300  known  X- 
ray  sources and  discovered  thousands  of  faint new  ones.  It also made  the  first 
X-ray  photographs  of  supernova  remnants,  pulsars,  galactic  X-ray  sources, 
and diffuse emissions from  galactic clusters.  Scientists  said it would take three 
years  longer  to  analyze  the  data  from  the  Heaos.  (MSFC   Release  82-31) 

During  March:  NASA  said  that  Dr.  John  E  McCarthy,  director  of  Lewis 
Research  Cen ter   (LeRC)  would  return  July  1  to  MIT  as  professor  of 

3 37 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1982 

aeronautics  and  astronautics.  Before  becoming  director  at  LeRC  i n   October 
1978, McCarthy  directed  MIT’s  center  for  space  research.  From  1962 to  1971 
he  was  with  North  American  Rockwell.  (NASA  anno,  Mar  2182;  NASA 
Release  82-35) 
-Daniel 
J.  Fink,  senior  vice  president  at  General  Electric  Company,  was 
named  chairman  of  the  NASA  advisory  council  by  James  M .   Beggs,  ad-  
ministrator.  He   assumed  the  chair  March  11.  As  general  manager  of  General 
Electric’s  space  division,  Fink  had  received  the  Collier  Trophy  for  his  con- 
tributions  to  the  Landsat  program.  (NASA  Release  82-39) 
-Administrator  B e g s  changed the titles of  officials in  charge  of  three pro- 
grams  at  NASA  Headquarters:  Harriett  G .  Jenkins  would  be  assistant  ad- 
ministrator  for  equal  opportunity;  Stuart J .   Evans,  assistant administrator  for 
procurement;  John  F.  Murphy,  assistant  administrator  for  legislative  affairs. 
(NASA  anno  Mar  2 /82)  
-A  Thomas  Young,  director  of  GSFC,  would  1e.ave NASA  March  20   to 
become  vice  president  of  research  and  engineermg  at  Martin  Marietta 
Aerospace.  He  had joined  the Langley  laboratory  in   1961 and in  1975 become 
Viking  mission  director.  H e  was  deputy  director  of  ARC  from February  1979 
until  taking  over  a t   GSFC   in  February  1980.  Acting, director  a t   GSFC  until 
the  appointment  of  a  successor  would  be  Dr.  Leslie  H .   Meredith,  who  had 
been  director  of  applications  there  since  1976.  (NASA  annos  Mar  1/82, Mar 
23/82;  NASA  Release’s  82-31,  82-48) 
-Andrew 
J.  Stofan,  who  was  acting  associate  administrator  for  space 
science a t  NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over  last month, 
would  become  director  of  LeRC,  succeeding  Dr.  John  McCarthy  as  of  July 
1 .   Before  assignment  to  Headquarters  in   1978  a::  deputy  associate  ad- 
ministrator  for  space  science, Stofan was director of  launch vehicles  at LeRC, 
where  he  had  begun  as   a  research  engineer  i n   1985.  (NASA  Release  82-47; 
LeRC  Release  82-14) 

338 

April 

April  2: The  Los Angeles  Times said that Dr. Bruce Murray would  resign later 
in  1982 as director of  JPL .  In  “an  emotional speech” televised to all 5,000 JPL  
employees, Murray  said that  he  was  leaving to  move  on  “to  the next  phase of 
my  own professional career.” He  reminded  his  audience that from the time he 
arrived  at  JPL   he  planned  to  stay  for  only  5   to  10  years.  The   announcement 
came   at  the  start  of  his  seventh  year  a s   director;  he  had  served  since  April 
1,  1976.  The   California  Institute of  Technology  (CalTech),  operator  of  JPL  
under contract to NASA,  had  not chosen a  successor. ( L A  Times, Apr  3/82,  1) 

April  9:  NASA  announced  the  selection  of  Amer ican  Airlines  to  negotiate  a  
contract for a  new  heiicopter-simulation system to be  installed at ARC,  funded 
by  the  U.S.  Army  and  used  by  both  agencies. 
The   $16  million  system,  designed  to  duplicate cockpit  configurations  and 
flight handling of helicopters, would  aid  in  rotorcraft design and allow simula- 
tion  of  experiments,  flight  tests,  and  evaluation  of  improvements  in  basic 
helicopter technology.  Pilots and  engineers could  simulate sight,  sound,  and 
motion  of  helicopter  flight,  using  the  system  either  stationary  or   in  the 
vertical-motion simulator.  (NASA  Release  82-52;  ARC  Release  82-13) 

April  IO :   NASA  launched  the  Indian Department of  Space payload INSAT-l.4 
from ESMC at  1:48 a.m.  EST  on  a  Delta  into an orbit with  35,985-kilometer 
apogee,  166-kilometer perigee, and  28.4’  inclination. An  apogee boost motor 
fired  April  11  and  12 put  Insat  1 into  synchronous  orbit  at  74’E  over  the 
equator.  Attempts  to  release  the  C-band  (uplink) antenna  were  unsuccessful; 
ground  control  deployed  it  by  blasting  it  with  the  reaction-control jets.  The  
S-band  (downlink)  antenna  deployed  without  difficulty,  but  the  solar  sail 
would  not  re lease   a s   planned.  (NASA  Release  82-44;  NASA  MOR  
0-492-214-82-01 [prelaunch] Mar 30/82,  [postlaunch] May  18/82; C Trib, Apr 
12/82, 4) 

April  I#:   Christopher  C.  Kraft,  Jr . ,   director  of  JSC   since  1972,  said  that  he 
would  retire  from  NASA  after  the  fifth  (and  first operational) Shuttle  flight, 
now  scheduled  for  November.  He   had  begun  working  at  the  Langley 
laboratory  of  the  National  Advisory  Committee  for  Aeronautics  (NACA)  in 
1945. 
When  NASA  was  established  in  1958,  he  was  selected  as  an  original 
member  of  the  space  task  group  to  manage  the  Mercury  project:  that  group 
was  the  nucleus  of  NASA’s  manned  spacecraft center, which  became   JSC  in 
1973.  Kraft  was  flight  director  of  all  the  Mercury  missions  and  many  of  the 
Gemini missions; in  1972 he  succeeded Dr.  Robert Gilruth,  who  had  been  the 

339 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

A PR IL   1982 

first director of JSC. Kraft  said  he had  no definite plans  for the  future.  (NASA 
Release  82-62; N Y   T imes ,   Apr  15/82,  B-4;  W Post,  Apr  15/82, D-2) 

NASA  reported  that  its  Kuiper  airborne  obserkatory  (a  Lockheed  C-141 
Starlifter aircraft carrying a 36-inch  infrared  reflector telescope) had  captured 
an  image  of  Columbia’s  reentry  heating  pattern  at  the  end  of  its  third 
spaceflight. 
The   procedure,  known  as   IRIS  (infrared  imagery  of  Shuttle),  was  part  of 
an orbiter experiment program  using  the Shuttle to  collect data of  value  in ad- 
vancing  aerospace technology.  Th e  Kuiper plane,  operated by  ARC,  had  taken 
off  for  observation  without  knowing  whether  the  Shuttle would  land  at White 
Sands  or  KSC ;   an  update  15  minutes  before  landing  ensured  success.  A 
similar  attempt  on  the  first  flight  had  failed.  (NASA  Release  82-56;  ARC 
Release  82-14) 

April  IS: NASA  said  that  it  had  turned  off  the  SAGE  (stratospheric  aerosol 
and  gas  experiment)  after  the  spacecraft’s  battery  failed.  A  joint  project  of 
LaRC  and  GSFC ,   SAGE  was  the  first  to  perform  extensive  vertical 
measurements  of  aerosols  i n   the  stratosphere  and  first  to  detect  volcanic  dust 
i n   that  region,  9  to 4 0  kilometers  (6 to 25  miles) abclve Earth’s  surface.  Laun- 
ched  from WFC   in February  1979 with  a  1-year design  lifetime, it had  tracked 
plumes  from  five volcanic  eruptions,  including M t .  S t .   Helens,  and had  map- 
ped  ozone  in the Earth’s  atmosphere from data taken  during  more than  13,000 
sunrises  and  sunsets.  Its  orbit  was  not  expected  to  decay  until  about  1984, 
when  it  would  burn  up  during  reentry.  (NASA  Release  82-59) 

ESA  said that  it would  begin  a  follow-on  program  with  Spacelab.  Financial 
contributions  from  member  states  for  this  purpose  had  reached  8 0%  of  the 
goal  April  15,  permitting  work  to  start  immediately.  Part of  the  new  program 
would  be  development  of  a  European  retrievable  carr ier   (EURECA)  to  be 
launched  and  retrieved  by  the  Space Shuttle as well  as  a  core  payload  for  the 
first mission consisting of microgravity research emphasizing material and life 
sciences,  with  first  flight  scheduled  for  the  end  of  1986. 
Weighing  about  1,500 kilograms,  EURECA  would  have  a  design  life of  six 
months o r  more  in orbit, providing services for its payload  including electrical 
power  and heat protection.  Its low gravity-disturbance level would  be essential 
to  microgravity  research.  After  deployment,  an  on-board  propulsion  unit 
would  put  i t   in  a  higher  orbit  with  less  drag  on  its  large  solar  arrays.  Once 
in  orb i t ,   its  experiments,  although  highly  automated,  would  be  operated  by 
remote  control  and monitored  from  the  ground.  It  would  reassume  low  orbit 
for  recovery  by  the  Shuttle and  return  to  Earth  for  refurbishment.  (ESA  Info 
12) 

April  16: NASA Administrator James M .   Beggs announced the  reorganization 
of  Space  Shuttle  management.  Ma j .   Gen .   James  A .   Abrahamson,  who  had 

340 

APRIL  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

jo ined  NASA  in  November  1981 on  loan  from  the  U.S.  Air  Force,  would  be 
associate administrator  for  the  Space Transportation System  (STS). H e  would 
take  over  the  office  of  Space  Shuttle  operations  formerly  headed  by  Stanley 
Weiss, named  chief engineer  for NASA  to succeed Walter Williams.  The  com- 
bined  offices of  space  transportation  systems and  space  transportation  opera-  
tions,  effective May  15, would be  responsible for the final  Shuttle development 
flight and the operational  flights that followed and  for procuring  more  shuttles 
and  expendable  launch  vehicles. 
Gerald  D.  Gr iff in ,   formerly  Apollo  flight  director,  was  named  director  of 
JSC to succeed Dr.  Chirstopher  C. Kraft,  who would retire  later  in  1982. Grif- 
f in ,   who  had  also  been  deputy  director  at  KSC  and  Dryden  Flight  Research 
Center  (DFRC) and  had  held  other  positions  at NASA Headquarters,  had  left 
in August  1981 to become  v ice  president of Scott Science and  Technology. He  
would  return  to  NASA  Headquarters  briefly  to  assist  Abrahamson.  (NASA 
anno  Apr   16/82; NASA  Release  82-58;  NY  Times,  Apr   19/82,  A-7) 

April  19:  The   Soviet  news  agency  Tass  reported  that  the  Soviet  Union  had 
launched  space  station  Salyut  7 apparently  to  replace Salyut  6, home  in  space 
for cosmonauts  since September  1977, for a joint  French-Soviet  manned  flight 
this  summer.  Orbital  parameters  were  278-kilometer  apogee,  219-kilometer 
perigee  (between  136 and  172 miles),  89.2  minute  per iod ,   51.5” inclination. 
Agence France-Presse  said  that  a  Soviet-French  team  would  shortly  be   laun- 
ched  in  a  Soyuz-T craft  to  link  up  with  Salyut  Z 
L t .  Col. Jean-Loup Chre t ien ,  France’s “spacecraft”  who had had  “intensive 
training  in  Soviet  facilities”  with  his  backup,  Co l .   Patrick  Baudry,  would  fly 
to  Salyut  7 with  two  Soviet  cosmonauts  about  June  22.  The   report  said  that 
the  French  preferred  the  neutral  word  spacenaut  because  the  Soviets  used 
“cosmonaut”  and the Americans  “astronaut.”  (FBIS, Tass Intl Svc in Russian, 
Apr   19/82;  Paris  A F P   in  English,  Apr   20 /82 ;   W Post,  Apr   20 /82 ,   A-18) 
Th e  N e w   York  Times repor ter   in  Moscow  said  that  the  French-Soviet  m i s -  
sion  would  be   the  first  launch  of  a  noncommunist  in  a  Soviet  spacecraft  and 
the  first  East-West spaceflight  since Apollo-Soyuz  in  1975. Flight  commander 
Vladimir  Dzhanibekov  and  Aleksandr  Ivanchenkov  would  occupy  Salyut  7 a 
few  days earlier.  An  three-man  crew  on  another  spacecraft-two  cosmonauts, 
Leonid  Kizim  and  Vladimir  Solovyev,  and  Jean-Loup  Chretien-would 
jo in  
them.  The   Soviet  Union  had  released  few  details  on   the  mission. 
The  USSR’s  goal  was  said  to  be   deployment  of  a  12-man station  weighing 
more   than  100  tons,  permanently  occupied  by  rotating  crews.  Salyut  6’s 
lifetime had  included  two  “marathon  missions”  of  185 and  175 days;  the  U .S .  
record  was  84  days  during  the  Skylab  program  of  1973  and  1974. Soon  after 
the  last  mission  on  Salyut  6 the  Soviet  Union  had  sent  a  large  craft  (Cosmos 
1267)  to  link  with  it  and  test  “methods  of  assembly  of  orbital  complexes  of 
great  size  and  weight.”  No   one   said  what  would  become  of  the  Salyut- 
Cosmos;  Western observers believed  that  the  assembly,  even with  a combined 
weight  of  36  tons  could  safely burn  up  on  reentry.  The  U .S .  Skylab  that  scat- 

341 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APRIL.  1982 

tered  debris  on  western  Australia  i n   1979  during  its  uncontrolled  plunge  to 
Earth  had  weighed  77.5  tans.  (FBIS  Moscow  Tass  Intl  Svc  in  Russian,  Apr 
19/83; N Y   T imes ,   Apr  21/82,  A-12) 

April  20:  NASA’s  Solar  Max  satellite  had  detected  an  18-month  decrease  in 
solar-energy output  that might  have caused  an  unumally  harsh  winter  in  1981 
and  1982, said JPL .  In  the first direct observation of  cause-and-effect between 
solar  output  and  changes  i n   Earth’s  climate,  a  solar  telescope-Solar  Max’s 
active-cavity  radiometer  irradiance monitor-recorded 
a steady  decrease from 
February  1980 to  August  1981 of  a  tenth  of  1%  i n   total  solar  energy  reaching 
Ear th .  
Systematic increases or  decreases as  small as 0 .5  %  over  a century  had  pro- 
duced  vast  changes  in  Earth’s  climate:  the  ‘‘Maunder minimum”  in  the  17th 
century, when  sunspot  activity  almost  vanished,  had  coincided  with  a period 
known  as  Europe’s  little  ice  age.  A  1%  decrease  could  lower  mean  global 
temperature  by  more   than  1,000  (2”F ) ,  and  less  than  10% decrease  could 
freeze  Earth‘s  entire  surface.  Earth  lifeforms  existed  in  the  bioshell,  an  area 
10 kilometers  (6.2 miles)  on  either  side of  mean  seis  level,  with  temperatures 
fed  by  solar-energy  input  and  interaction  between  atmosphere,  ocean,  and 
land masses.  The  time  needed  to  cool  down  the  atmosphere and  ocean would 
allay  short-term  changes  i n   solar  input.  JPL‘s  Dr.  Richard  C.  Willson  noted 
that  “if  you  turned  off  the  sun  tomorrow,  you  wouldn’t  see  its  full  effects  on 
earth  for  three  years.” 
Solar activity  peaked  about  every  11  years.  Th e  current  cycle peaked  about 
the  time  Solar Max  was  launched  early  in  1980; the decrease might represent 
the general  decline  since  then  but  might  also  indicate a  longer  term  lowering 
of  solar  input.  (Telescope  at  the  High-Altitude Observatory,  Boulder,  Co lo . ,  
had  recorded  images  of  what  seemed  to  be  a  shrinking  sun  that  might  have 
grown  as much  as  a  tenth  of  1% smaller every  100 )‘ears for  the last  four ccn- 
turies.)  Solar Max  had  lost  pointing  capability  in  December  1980,  and  only 
three  of  its  seven  instruments were  still  returning  data.  It  had  been  designed 
for  retrieval  by  the  Shuttle,  and  NASA  was  seeking  authorization  for  a  Solar 
Max  repair  mission.  (NASA  Release  82-57;  W Pa:ir,  Apr  20/82,  A-6) 

During  A p r i l :  Dr.  Noel  W.  Hinners,  director  of  the  Smithsonian’s  National 
Air and Space Museum ,  would become director of  CSFC  June  14, succeeding 
A .  Thomas  Young.  Dr.  Hinners  was  associate administrator  for space  science 
a t   NASA  Headquarters  from  June  1974  to  April  1979,  when  he  took  over  at 
the  museum;  he  had  also been  director  of  lunar  programs  in  NASA’s  Office 
of  Space  Sciences.  He had  joined  NASA  i n   1972  as  deputy  director  and  chief 
scientist  of  Apollo  lunar  exploration.  (NASA  anno  ,4pr  1/82; NASA  Release 
82-49) 
-Col. 
Joe  H .   Engle,  commander  of  STS-2  i n   November  1981,  was  tem- 
porarily  assigned  to the STS office at NASA Headquarters  i n  conjunction with 
recent  organization  changes.  As  deputy  associate  administrator  for  manned 

342 

A PR IL   1982 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

space flight under  Gen .  James A .  Abrahamson,  his  special experience  would 
help  simplify  the  integration  process  for  Shuttle users  and  ensure  maximum 
use  of  its manned  capabilities.  He  would  retain  astronaut  status  and  return  to 
JSC  to  train  for  his  next  flight.  (NASA  Release  82-71) 

343 

May   I :   The   first  Maritime  European  Communications  Satellite,  Marecs  A ,  
launched  December  20,  1981, began  serv ice  a t  midnight.  The   spacecraft  and 
its  payload,  leased  to  the  International  Maritime  Communications  Satellite 
(INMARSAT),  was working  well and already  improving  communications  bet- 
ween  land  and  ships  and  oil  rigs  in  the   Atlantic. 
The  Marecs  program  would  lease  two  satellites  to  INMARSAT:  Marecs  A 
would  cover  the  Atlantic  ocean ;  Marecs  B,  the  Pacific.  Launch  of  Marecs  B 
on  an  Ar iane   L5 had  been  put  off  to  September  1982  to  allow  time  for 
modifications  reducing  the  effects  of  electrostatic  discharge  that  had  caused 
the  Marecs A  command  system to malfunction during  tests  in  February.  (ESA 
Info  15) 

Mu y  2 :   The  N ew   York  Emes  said  that  the   Soviet  Union  had  assembled  s ix ,  
possibly  eight,  intelligence-gathering  satellites  over  the  south  Atlantic  to 
watch Argentine  and British military  movements around  the  Falkland  Islands. 
U.S. sources  said  that  they  assumed  information  from  the  satellites  was being 
relayed to the Argentine government but had  no proof of  this.  A sen ior  official 
at  the  State  Department  said  that  leaders  in  Argentina  had  told  Security  of  
State  Alexander  Haig  that  they  would  not  accept  such  help  from   the  Soviet 
Union.  Th e  United  S t a t e s  had  two   satellites  over t h e  area  and was passing  in-  
formation  from   them  to  the  British. 
The   Soviet  satellites  were  communications  interceptors  Cosmos 1346 and 
1354;  radar-sensing  craf t   Cosmos 1345  and  1351;  and  photoreconnaissance 
craf t   Cosmos 1347 and  1352, and  possibly  1350 and   1353.  ( N Y  Times, May 
3 /82 ,   A-14;  AvWk,  May  3 /82 ,   22 ;   W Post,  Jun  7/82,  A-20) 

Ma y   3:  An   analysis  of  NASA’s  1983 budget  for  research  and  development, 
prepared  for  Sen.  William  Proxmire  (D-Wis.) by  the General  Accounting  Of- 
fice (GAO),  said that more  than 25  % of  it was for military programs.  The  New 
York  Times said  that  the  report  would  lead  to  more   criticism  from   Congress 
that  NASA  was becoming  increasingly  militarized,  a t  the  expense  of  civilian 
science  and  technology. 
Proxmire  said that he  asked  for  the repor t  to  “determine  the  extent to which 
NASA  was  merely  acting  as  an   agent”  for  DOD.  As  nearly  half  the  Shuttle 
flights would  take  military  payloads,  more   than  $1  billion  of  the  $3.5  billion 
requested  for  the  Shuttle  in  FY83 was  considered  military:  $1.1  billion  of  an 
R&D budget  of  $5.33 billion  (20.5 %)  and  $400 million  support  funds  (7.77 %)  
could  therefore be  military related.  NASA’s  total  1983 budget  request  was $6.6 

ASTROKAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1982 

billion;  total  Pentagon  direct  spending  on  space  was  not  known  but  was  pro- 
bably  as  much  as  o r   more   than  NASA’s  annual  budget. 
Proxmire  said  that  he  did  not  object  to  use  of  the. Shuttle  for  military  pur- 
poses,  but  paying  for  DOD  activities  through  the NASA  budget  was  “not  the 
way  to  ensure that  dollars  spent on national  security  are  spent with  maximum 
effect.”  NASA  said  that  it  had  been  tasked  with  developing  the  Shuttle  as  a 
national  endeavor,  and  reimbursement  by  other agencies for use of  the Shuttle 
did  not  change  the  cost  to  the  government.  ( N Y  Times,  May  3 /82 ,   A-15) 

May  14: MSFC  announced  the  choice  of  two  firms,  Hercules  Inc.  and Votaw 
Precision  Tool  Inc.,  to  negotiate  a  contract  for  development  of  a  filament- 
wound  case  for  the  solid-fuel  rocket  motor  used  in   the  Shuttle boosters.  The  
contract  to  produce  the  filament-wound  item  [see:  March  21  would  cover 
design, manufacture,  test, and delivery of  four  flight cases at an estimated cost 
of  $33  million. 
Th e   new  case  segments  would  replace  portions  made  of  steel,  improving 
performance  by  reducing  Shuttle-liftoff  weight  about  66,000 pounds  (29,937 
kilograms).  First  use  would  be  in  late  1985.  (NASA  Release  82-80;  MSFC  
Release  82-52) 

M a y  20: NASA Administrator James M .  B e g s  established a space station task 
force,  directed  by  John  D.  Hodge,  to  be   responsible  for  developing  program 
aspects,  including  mission  analysis,  definition  of  rcquirements,  an  program 
management.  Hodge  would  report  to  Philip  E .   Culbertson,  associate  deputy 
administrator,  and  would  draw  on space-station activities  at  each  program  of- 
fice  and  field  center.  (NASA  anno,  May  20182) 

JPL  said  that  it  had  joined  Australia’s  commonwealth  scientific  and  in- 
dustrial  organization  in  a  first-time  operation  of  five  radiotelescopes  in 
Australia  and  a  sixth  in  South  Africa  as   a  single  instrument  “half  a  world 
wide”  for observing astronomical  radio  sources.  Thse  Very  Long  Baseline In- 
terferometry  (VLBI)  project  could  point  telescope:;  located  great  distances 
apart  at  the  same  object,  achieving  angular  resolution  equivalent  to  a  single 
radiotelescope  several  thousand  miles  in  diameter.  The   two-week  program 
observed about  30  quasars and galaxies.  (JPL Release  993 ;  NASA Release 82 
-99) 

M a y  23 :   At  9 :57   local  time  May  23   the  Soviet  Union  launched  supply  ship 
Progress  13,  which  docked  automatically  with  Sulyut  7 ’ s   service  module  at 
11:57 Moscow  time May  25,  bringing  660 kilograms  of  fuel  and 290  liters of 
water  as  well  as  air,  food,  equipment,  and  mail.  On  May  28,  Tass  described 
the  unloading  and  refueling  procedures.  (FBIS,  Tass  i n   English,  May 
13-28182; N Y   T imes ,  May  19/82, A-4) 

346 

June 

June  4 :  The   Soviet  Union  launched  Cosmos  I374 from  Kapustin  Yar  into  a 
“round  orbit”  at  225-kilogram  altitude  and  50.7 O  inclination.  Press  reports 
said  that  Australian  aircraft  watched  a  seven-ship  Soviet  task  force  retrieve 
from  the  Indian  Ocean  an  object  that  might  be  either  a  nuclear  test  craft  o r  
a  “fairly  small”  shuttle.  United  Press  International  (UPI)  said  an  Australian 
spokesman  claimed  to  know  what  kind  of  craft  was  recovered  but  gave  no 
details because the  information  was  “classified”;  also, U .S .  scientists  said that 
the  spacecraft  had  “an  unusually  low  trajectory.” 
Associated  Press  (AP)  quoted  U.S.  government  sources  “who  asked  to  re- 
main  anonymous”  that  the  Soviet Union  had  launched  and  recovered,  after  1 
114  orbits,  its  first  space-shuttle  type  of  vehicle;  they  did  not  know  whether 
the  craft  was  manned.  A  Reuters  report  said  that  Ma j .   Gen.  Alexey  Leonov, 
who had been one  of  the cosmonauts on the Apollo-Soyuz mission,  hinted  that 
the  shuttle  guess was  right  but  would  give  no  details.  (FBIS,  Tass  Intl  Svc  in 
Russian,  June  4 /82 ;   W Post,  June  9 /82 ,   A-7;  June  10/82,  A-26;  June  11/82, 
A-35;  W  Rimes,  June  11/82,  6; AvWk, June   14/82,  18-19) 

Esther C. Kisk Goddard,  81, widow of  U.S.  rocketry  pioneer  Dr.  Robert  H .  
Goddard,  whom  she married  in  1924, died  in Worcester, Mass .  She  had  been 
secretary  and  photographer  for  his  research;  since his  death  in  1945 she  had 
worked  to make his discoveries  known.  ( N Y  Times, June  7 /82 ,  D-11;  Goddard 
News ,  June  15/82, 3 ;  N t l  S p  C lb  bllton, June  82 ,  3 ;  Worc Sndy  Tlg, June 6 / 8 2 ,  
19B) 

The   Soviet  Union  said  that  Soyuz  T-5 cosmonauts  Anatoliy  Berezovoy  and 
Valentin Lebedev, in their  fourth week aboard Sulyut  7,  had finished unloading 
Progress 13, launched May  23  to  refuel  and replenish  the orbiting  station,  and 
undocked  it to make room for a spacecraft carrying  a French-Soviet crew  later 
in  June.  Progress  13’s propulsion  unit  had  served  twice  to  adjust  the  orb i t  of 
the  Soyuz-Salyut  complex.  Tass  reported  that  ground  control  had  reoriented 
the  Progress  June   6  to  reenter  and  burn   up   over  the  Pacific  Ocean .   (FBIS, 
MscWldSvc in English,  Tass  in  English,  June  4 /82 ;  Tass  Intl  Svc  in  Russian, 
June  6 /82)  

June  8: NASA  launched  Western  Union’s  Westur 5  commercial  communica- 
tions  satellites  from  ESMC   at  8 :23  p.m.  EDT  on  a Delta  into  a  transfer  orb i t  
with  36,469-,kilometer  apogee,  167-kilometer perigee,  and  27.5 O  inclination. 
Firing  of  a  booster  at  5 :20  p.m.  June  11  would  move  it  to  station  at  123”W 
over  the  equator. 

347 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

J U N E   1982 

Westur 5, heaviest  of  the  series  of  satellites owned  and  operated  by  Western 
Union,  weighed  585   pounds  in  synchronous  orb i t ,   was  double  the  size  of 
Westur 1, Westur 2 ,  and Westur 3 ,  and had  about four times their capacity.  Like 
W s ta r  4 it had  24  transponder channels, all  under  lease; a  10-year design life; 
and  4 0%   more  transmitting  power  than  most  domestic  communications 
satellites.  It would  replace  Westur 2  in  service.  (NASA  Release  82-82; NASA 
D ly   Acm  Rp t ,   June  9182;  NASA  MOR  0-492-203-82-05  [postlaunch]  July 
6182;  NASA  Wkly  SSR,  June  10182; NY  Times,  June  10182, D-4) 

June 11: NASA  said  that  a  team  of  astronomers  led  by  Dr.  Michael  Werner 
of ARC had mapped the Orion nebula using  infrared data from NASA’s  Kuiper 
airborne  observatory.  The   nebula,  1,500 light-years  from  Ear th ,   was  one  of 
the  closest  known  regions  in  the  galaxy  where  s tars  were  currently  forming. 
Since  its  discovery  17  years  ago,  infrared  images  had  shown  the  total  power 
output  of  the  group  of  new  stars  invisible  to  the  naked  eye  to  be  more  than 
100,000 times  the  power  output  of  Earth’s  sun .   (NASA  Release  82-88; ARC 
Release  82-86) 

June 14: LeRC  announced  the  start  of  a  seven-year  $45 million  test  program 
to  increase  engine  durability  for  U.S.  jet  fleets. Aimed  at  improving  analysis 
methods and prediction  techniques,  the program  would  be  a pioneering  effort 
in  five areas:  structure analysis,  surface protection,  instrumentation,  combus- 
tion,  and  turbine-heat  transfer.  LeRC  would  award  25  to  30  contracts  for  this 
work,  about  half  the  research  to  be   done  directly  by  LeRC  staff.  (NASA 
Release  82-89;  LeRC  Release  82-33) 

June 21:  NASA  announced  signing  of  agreements  with  Telesat  Canada  for 
launch  of  f ive  Anik  communications  satellites, four on   the Shuttle and one  on 
a Delta.  The  launches would  cost Canada’s domestic satellite communications 
corporation  about  $75  million;  the  spacecraft  would  be  worth  about  $130 
million.  The  third-and  fourth-generation Anik C and Anik D communications 
satellites  would  be  the backbone  of  Canada’s  system  until  the  1990s, carrying 
new  pay-television,  voice,  video,  and  data  links,  private  business  networks, 
and  other  special  services. First  of  the D  series would  be  launched  in  August 
from  KSC;  the  next  Telesat  launch  would  be  an  Anik C,  one  of  two  com- 
munications satellites scheduled  for the Shuttle’s fifth flight and first conimer- 
cia1  mission.  (NASA   Release  82-101) 

June 21-23: NASA  Administrator James M .  Beggs  and  former astronaut  Sen .  
John  Glenn  (D-Ohio)  were  speakers  at  the  18th  National  Joint  Propulsion 
Conference in Cleveland,  sponsored by  the American  Institute of  Aeronautics 
and Astronautics,  Society of  Automotive  Engineers,  and American  Society of 
Mechanical  Engineers.  In  attendance  were  more  than  800  technical  profes- 
sionals  and  key  managers  representing  worldwide  organizations  in  research 

348 

JUNE   1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

and development, manufacture,  and use  of  propulsion  systems for aircraft  and 
space,  surface,  and  marine  vehicles.  G lenn ,   keynote  speaker,  received  an 
award  commemorating  the  20th  anniversary  of  his  orbital  flight.  Represen- 
tatives  of  European  and  Asian  firms  presented  papers,  and  a  group   from   the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  attended. 
Beggs, luncheon speaker, said that foreign competition in high-tech  research 
required  a  new  partnership  between  government  and  industry.  Although 
NASA-industry  cooperation  over  the  past  25 years  was a ma jor  factor  in  U.S. 
world  leadership,  many  foreign  firms had been  able,  with  “far-sighted  plann- 
ing  [and]  government-industry  cooperation,”  to  move  from  idea  to  manufac- 
ture  to  delivery  in  half  the  time  the  United  States  needed. 
The  world  edge once  enjoyed by  the  United  States  in many  high-tech  areas  
has  “been  eroded,”  he  said:  France  was  ahead  in  nuclear  power;  West  Ger- 
many,  in  chemicals;  Japan ,   in  optics  and  metallurgy.  “The   Japanese  have 
managed  to  cap ture  some  70% of  the  American  market  for the  64K random- 
access  memory,  which  can  store  64,000  information  units.”  Th e   Humurd 
Business Review had  even suggested that U.S.  firms  look  abroad-even 
to  Iron 
Curtain  countries-to 
tap  foreign  technology.  What  was  needed,  Beggs  said, 
was  a  more   balanced  cooperation  between  government  and  industry,  geared 
to  investment  in  projects  leading  to  speedy  adoption  of  new  technologies. 
“No   one  ever  ran  a  race   by  standing  still.  And  we  are  in  a  race,  a  dead 
serious  one.  The   stakes  are   high.  They  include  not  only  ou r   own  economic 
security  but  the  ecohomic  security  of  the  Free  World,”  he  concluded.  (LeRC 
Releases  82-30,  82-34) 

June  23:  Three   astronomers  a t   the   University  of  Hawaii,  using  NASA’s  in- 
frared  telescope  facility  on Mauna  Kea  and  data  from   Voyager 2 ,   announced 
the first measurement  of  the  sizes of  four of  the  five known moons  of  Uranus. 
b y u g e r  2 was heading  for Uranus  after  a successful  flyby of  Sa turn  10  months 
ago, and the new calculations would b e  useful  in planning  the scientific studies 
to  be  done   after  arrival.  Uranus  was  so  far  from   Ear th ,   about  3  billion 
kilometers  (2 billion  miles),  that  it was visible only  through  telescopes.  Sizes 
of  the  moons  were  figured  from   the ir   infrared  (heat)  radiation.  NASA  had 
built  the Mauna Kea telescope, most  sensitive in the world for measuring  faint 
infrared  sources,  to provide  support  for  spacecraft  exploring  the  planets;  Dr. 
David  Morr ison   of  the  University  of  Hawaii  team,  also  a  member  of  the 
Voyager  project,  said  that  the   Moon   data  were  exactly  the   sor t   of  suppor t  
NASA  had  in   mind. 
The   moons  of  Uranus,  smaller  than  Earth’s,  were  a l l   a s   large  a s   any  of 
Saturn’s  except  Titan,  the  giant  moon  that  was  the  only  planetary  satellite 
found  to  have  an  atmosphere.  Oberon ,   largest  of  the  Uranus  moons,  had  a 
diameter  of  about  1,690  kilometers  (1,100  miles).  Besides  measuring  the 
Uranus  moons,  the  astronomers  reported  that  Triton,  largest  moon  of  Nep- 
tune,  and the planet Pluto were both  too small  and  too  cold for  any heat  radia- 
tion  to be  detected:  the weakness  of the  sources  led  them  to dec ide  that Triton 

349 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

J U N E   1982 

must  be  smaller  than  Earth’s  Moon.  Triton  and  Pluto,  “based  on  our  current 
knowledge,”  might  be   very  similar;  past  speculation  suggested  that  Pluto 
might  have  been  a  escaped  moon  of  Neptune.  (NASA  Release  82-104) 

WFC   announced  the  launch of  a  Nike Orion  sounding  rocket  at  11:40 a .m .  
to measure magnetosphere  instabilities  induced  by  very  low-frequency  (VLF) 
waves  produced  in  the  troposphere.  Its  measurements  would  coincide with  a 
satellite overpass to  detect particle  precipitation  triggered by  VLF  waves  from 
a  high-intensity  transmitter.  (WFC  Release  82-3) 

June  2 4 :   At  8:30  p.m.  Moscow  time  (4 :30   p .m .   GMT) ,   the  Soviet  Union 
launched Soyuz  T-6 carrying cosmonauts Vladimir  Dzhanibekov  and Alexandr 
Ivanchenkov,  with  French  “spationaut”  Col.  Jean-:Loup Chretien,  to  spend  a 
week  with  cosmonauts  Anatoly  Berezovoy  and  Valentin  Lebedev,  the  Soyuz 
T-5  crew  who  had  been  occupying orbiting  laboratory  Sa lyu t   7 since May  13. 
This was the first time a five-man crew  would occupy  an orbital  station.  Initial 
o r b i t   e l em en t s   w e r e   277-k i lome ter   a pog e e ,   248 -k i lom e t e r   p e r ig e e ,  
89.6-minute  period,  and  51.6 O  inclination. 
Chretien,  who  had  trained  with  his  French  backup  Ma j .   Patrick  Baudry  in 
the Soviet Union  for 21  months,  was the first westerner  to take  part  in a Soviet 
space mission.  (The  last  east-west  venture  was  the  US.-Soviet  Apollo-Soyuz 
linkup  in  July  1975.)  The   mission  had  been  approved  by  French  President 
Valery  Giscard  d’Estaing  in  1979. 
This was  also the first  Soviet  life television  coverage of  a  launch, beginning 
two  hours  before  liftoff  with  taped  views  of  crew  training,  Salyut  assembly, 
Soyuz rollout,  departure of  the crew  by  bus,  interviews with  the crew  orbiting 
i n   the  Salyut,  and  ending  with  a  live broadcast  of  .the liftoff  plus  10  minutes. 
During  the  two-hour  broadcast,  all  three  crew  members gave  speeches prais- 
ing  the  trip  as   symbolic  of  friendship  between  French  and  Soviet  peoples. 
(FBIS,  Moscow  Tass  in  English,  June  24 /82 ,   June: 28182;  Mosc  DomTVSvc 
in  Russian,  June   24182;  N Y   Times,  June  25 /82 ,   A-9;  W  Post,  June  25 /82 ,  
A-22;  Spacewarn  SPX-344,  June  29182) 

June  27: NASA  launched  STS-4,  fourth  test  flight  of  space shuttle Columbia, 
from KSC  at  11 a .m .  carrying Ken Mattingly  as  commander and Henry  Hart- 
sfield  as  pilot.  This  was  the  first  time  that  the  Shuttle  had  lifted  off  on 
schedule, but  the  chase planes  televising  separation did  not  show  the opening 
of  parachutes on  the two  reusable  solid-fuel  booster  rockets, and  there was  no 
sign  on  the  ocean  surface  of  any  of  the  six  mailn chutes  or  either  of  the 
boosters,  which  cost  $24  million  each .   Boosters  from  earlier  launches  were 
towed  to  KSC  for  refit.  After  disassembly  and  cleaning,  the  first  six  motor- 
igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned  to Thioko1”s Utah  plant for rebuilding 
at  !$7  million each ;  this  procedure  had  saved  NASA  $36 million  per  flight  for 
the  first  three  flights. 
The   launch  was  imperiled  the  night  before  by  a  one-hour  hailstorm  with 

350 

JUNE  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

pellets  “ the   size of  golf  balls”  denting  about 400  of  the  black  protective  tiles 
on the Shuttle’s undersides.  Workmen  on  hastily  erected  scaffolds had  applied 
a  hardener  to  strengthen  the  tiles.  Enough  water  soaked  the  tiles  to make  the 
crew  need  to  bake  the  underside  of  the  Shuttle  in  the  sunlight  for  10  hours  to 
dry   it  ou t ,   so that  low  temperatures  on  the   night  s ide  of  the  Earth  would  not 
freeze  and  further  damage  the   tiles.  Mattingly  and  Hartsfield  had  begun  to 
power  up  the  2,000-pound  cargo  put  in  the   payload  bay  by  the  A ir   Force  a s  
well  a s   four  experiments  managed  by  MSFC,  including  the  first  use   of  the 
Shuttle  by  a  commercial  f irm .   Press  reports  called  it  “an  open  secre t”   that 
the  U .S .   A ir   Force  instruments  included  an  extremely  sensitive  infrared 
telescope,  an  ultraviolet  telescope,  and  a  new  space  sextant  designed  to 
navigate  spy  satellites  without  ground  command .  
Hartsfield,  on h is  spaceflight,  suffered  nausea  but was  la ter  ab le  to  eat  din- 
ner.  Instead  of  televising  a  view  of  the  payload  bay  as  o ther   crews  had  done, 
or  using  the  camera  on  the  end  of  the   60-foot  robot  a rm   to  show  the  Ear th  
as they  saw  it from  space,  the crew merely  described  the view,  expressing  sur- 
pr ise  at the amount of detail discernible.  The  seven-day mission would  “wring 
ou t  the wrinkles”  in the Shuttle not dealt with  on the  first three  flights.  NASA 
said  that  it  would  name  a  board  to  review  “in  excruciating  detail”  how  the  
boosters could  sink in  3,500 feet of water although  the drogue  parachutes were 
found  floating  150 miles  downrange.  (NASA  Release  82-87; MSFC   Release 
82-56;  NASA  MOR   M-989-82-04  [prelaunch]  June  18/82;  W  Post,  June 
28 /82 ,   A-1;  June  29 /82 ,   A-2;  Dtln  Gd ,   June  28 /82 ;   Marshall  Star,  June 
30182,  1) 

During  June:  NASA  announced  that  Dr.  Walter  C .  Williams,  chief  engineer 
since  July  1975,  would  retire  in  July.  Dr.  Stanley  I.  Weiss,  associate  ad-  
ministrator  for space  transportation  operations,  would  succeed h im .  Williams 
began  h is  career  with NACA,  NASA’s predecessor,  in  August  1940 and  work- 
ed  dur ing   the  war  to  improve  U.S.  fighter  planes.  H e  was  founding  d irec tor  
of  the  organization  that  became  NASA’s  Dryden  facility.  H e  went  to  Langley 
F ie ld ,   Va.,  in  September  1959 a s   associate  director  of  the   new  NASA  space 
task  group   created  to  carry   ou t   Project  Mercury   and  later  was  d irec tor   of 
operations  for  the  project.  H e   then  became  associate  director  of  NASA’s 
manned  spacecraft  center  in  Houston  that  later  was   JSC.  H e  went  to  NASA 
Headquarters  in  January  1963,  leaving  in  Apr i l   1964 to  work  for  Aerospace 
Corporation’s  vehicle  systems. H e  became NASA’s  first chief engineer  in  1975. 
(NASA  anno,  June  1/82;  NASA  Release  82-86) 
-NASA  announced  the  appointment  of  George  F.  Page  a s  deputy  director 
of  KSC  effective  July  5.  H e  had  directed  Shuttle  operations  there  since  lmS  
and  was  launch  director  for  the  first  three  launches  of  Co lumb ia .  From   1964 
to  1975  he  directed  KSC  operations  planning  for  19  Gemini  and  2 5   Apollo 
spacecraft launches, ending with  the  lunar  landings  and  the  successful Apollo- 

351 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

J U N E   1982 

Soyuz  project.  He   directed  unmanned  launch  operations  from  1975  to  1979, 
with more than  54 major launches  from both  KSC and  the Western Test Range 
(WTR)  at  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base.  (NASA  anno  J u n e   21/82;  NASA 
Release  82-102) 

3 5 2  

J u l y  1:  “A  clever bit of rew ir ing .  . .with the skill of  an automobile th ie f ’  enabl- 
ed the  astronauts  aboard Columbia  (STS-4)  [see  June 271  to bypass  a defective 
circuit  and  tu rn   on  the  power  for  part  of  its  payload  called  the  “getaway 
special .”  The   University  of  Utah  students  sponsoring  the  experiment  had 
given  u p   hope  but  now  planned  to  accomplish  nearly  all  of  their  objectives. 
A  thank-you  message  from  the  students  sa id ,   “One  small  switch  for  NASA, 
a  giant  turn-on  for  us.” 
Engineers  a t   JSC  and  GSFC  had  transmitted  10  possible  corrective 
measures  after  figuring  ou t   that  a  cable  from   a  control  panel  was  faulty;  on 
the  first  try,  everything  began  to  work,  and  the  conclusion  was  that  launch 
vibrations  could  have  loosened  a  connection. 
A more  serious problem  arose  when  the clamshell  doors  of  the payload  bay 
refused  to shut snugly after exposure to the heat and cold of  space had expand- 
ed and  contracted the aluminum  fuselage and  graphite epoxy  doors .  A  similar 
problem  on  the  preceding  flight  was  solved  by  putting  Columbia  into  a  slow 
roll  (the so-called barbecue  mode),  turning  the  surface  toward  and  away  from 
the Sun to equalize  temperatures  around  the  ship.  Columbia had  been  circling 
the   Earth  for  most  of  the   last  two  days  with  its  underside  facing  the  Sun ,   a s  
a  means  of  baking  ou t   moisture  trapped  i n   the  insulating  tiles  from  a  hail 
s torm   the  night  before  liftoff.  Harold  Draughon ,   a  flight  director,  said  that 
data  from   the  flight  showed  that  all  the  tiles  had  baked  dry.  (NASA  MOR 
MR-004,  3 ;  NY   Times, July  1/82,  B-8)  

Ju ly   2:  Larry   Walters  of  Los  Angeles  went  for  a  3-mile-high  r ide   in  an 
a lum inum  lawn  cha ir   borne   aloft  by  45  weather  balloons  and  ballasted  with 
jugs   of  water,  ending  with  h is   unusual  craft  wrapped  around  power  lines  in 
Long  Beach  about  20  miles  from  his  starting  p lace   in  San  Pedro.  During  his 
45-minute  flight  he  reached  an  altitude  of  16,000 feet,  got  so cold  he  became 
numb,  and had  to shoot some  of the  balloons with  a BB gun to make  his flying 
cha ir   descend. 
H e  was  also  sighted  by  pilots  of  Delta  Air  Lines  and  Trans  World  Airlines 
jets.  A  safety  inspector  for  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  said 
that Walters had  broken  “some  part  of  the  Federal  Aviation  Act,  and  a s  soon 
a s  we decide which  part  it  is  some  type  of  charge will  b e  filed.”  Walters later 
sa id ,   “you  couldn’t pay  me  a million  dollars  to  do   it  again.”  (N Y  Times, July 
4 /82 ,   22) 

The  French-Soviet  crew  of  Soyuz T-6 that  had  visited  Salyut  7 and  its Soyuz 
T-5 occupants  for  a week  returned  safely  to Earth  at  6:21 p .m .   Moscow  time, 

353 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

JULY   1982 

landing near Arkalyk  with  cosmonauts Vladimir  Dzhanibekov  and Aleksandr 
Ivanchenkov  and  their  visiting  spacenaut  from France,  Col. Jean-Loup Chre- 
tien,  “in  good  health.”  Tass  said  that  the  research  planned  by  Soviet  and 
French  scientists was  “accomplished  in f u l l . ”   Work  aboard Sulyut  7continued 
with  cosmonauts  Anatoly  Berezovoy  and  Valentin  Lebedev.  (FBIS,  Tass  i n  
English,  July  2 /82)  

J u l y   4:  Crowds  estimated  at  half  a million  watched  Columbia’s  fourth  return 
to Ear th ,  the first to use a concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. Among 
about 30,000 guests  invited  by  NASA  to the occasion were President  and Mrs. 
Reagan.  His  comment  at  the  touchdown  was  “Halppy  Fourth  of  July,  and  you  
know  this  has  got  to  beat  firecrackers.” 
The  fourth  flight,  STS-4, was  classified  as  the:  last  of  four  test  flights  bu t  
carried more than 22,000 pounds of cargo, including a secret military payload. 
Although  security  considerations  kept  it  from  being  photographed  for 
viewers,  the  50-foot mechanical  a rm  designed  to  move  objects  in  and  out  of 
the  cargo  bay  and  capture  objects  in  space  had  been  in  use  on  this  flight  to 
move  an  800-pound  contamination  monitor  around  the  cargo  bay. 
Th e   runway,  about  300  feet  wide  and  15,000  feet  long,  was  about  the  size 
of  the  one  a t  KSC  made  for  routine  Shuttle use  after  the  seventh  flight.  The  
fifth  (and  first  operational)  flight  scheduled  for  November  would  carry  two 
commercial  communications  satellites,  one  for  Canada  and  one   for  Satellite 
Business  Systems;  each  .customer  would  pay  NASA  $21  million  if  the 
spacecraft  reached  orbit  safely.  Shuttle  Program  Manager  Glynn  S.  Lunney 
said  that  NASA  would  do  well  to  achieve  one  launch  per  month  by  the  late 
1980s  and ,   ultimately,  24  to  30  per  year.  (NASA  MOR   M-989-82-04,  July 
19/82; N Y   Ernes,  July  5 /82 ,  A-1,  8 ;  W Post,  July  4 /82 ,   A-1,  A-11;  July  5 /82 ,  
A-1;  July  6/82,  A-9) 

J u l y   19:  With  the  end  of  the  four-flight  orbital test  program  using  the  Shuttle 
Columbia, Maj. Gen .  James A .  Abrahamson, NASA’s associate administrator 
for space transportation  systems,  announced that the STS-4 mission  was a suc- 
cess  “under  conditions more  demanding than  STS-3 conditions.”  H e  said that 
the test-program  flights were  “accomplishments of  international significance” 
and  a  credit  to  the  Shuttle  development  team .   (NASA MOR  M-989-82-04 
[postflight] July  19/82) 

Ju ly   20:  Marine  Col.  Robert  E  Overmyer,  named  as  copilot  with  Vance  D. 
Brand  on the STS-5 flight,  told  a JSC  preflight  press  conference  that  the mis- 
sion  would  carry  four  astronauts,  the  largest  number  to  f l y   on  any  U.S. 
spacecraft;  the other  two would  be  physicists  Joseph  P.  Allen  and  William  B. 
Lenoir,  both  making  their  first  spaceflight.  Overrnyer  said  that  i t   would  take 
four men to  launch the two communications  satellites  set for deployment from 
STS-5  over  the  Pacific  between  Hawaii  and  Chile. 
The  Shuttle’s two  ejection  seats  would  be  repla.ced with  three  nonejectable 

354 

JULY  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

cockpit  seats.  The   fourth  crewman  would  ride  in  a  seat  installed  in  the  mid- 
deck of Columbia’s cabin next to the airlock  leading  to the cargo bay,  designed 
for  use  i n   the  first  Shuttle  space  walk.  The   report  said  that  the   crew  d id   not 
seem  bothered  to  b e   “ the   first  to  fly  the  shuttle  without  being  able  to  eject 
if  the  spaceliner  is  damaged  during  liftoff.”  ( W  Post,  July  21/82,  A-1) 

July 23 :  NASA  said that Landsat 4 ,  launched  July  16, was  “in  excellent condi- 
tion”  and  ready  for  a  week’s  orbit-adjustment  maneuvers.  The  multispectral 
scanner,  one of  its two  sensor  systems,  was  turned  on  July  19; the  first  image 
had  been  processed  at GSFC,  results  indicating  “flawless  operation  of  the  in- 
strument  and  spacecraft  systems.”  Transmission  of  data  from   the  new,  more  
powerful  thematic  mapper  began  July  20 ;   images  of  the  area  around  Detroit 
should  be  available  in  a  week.  (NASA  Release  82-112) 

July  27:  NASA  reported  the   failure  at  9  a .m .   of  a  high-speed  tape  recorder 
on   N imbus   5 collecting’ Antarctic  and  Arctic  radiometer  data  for  the  U.S. 
Navy.  The  loss  of  the  last  recorder  on Nimbus 5 meant  that  future  operations 
would  have  to  be   in  real  time,  subject  to  the  communications  satellites  view 
of  the  Alaska  ground  station.  NASA  had  agreed  to  provide  Nimbus  5  data 
through  FY83,  and  the  Navy  had  reimbursed  NASA  a s   a  source  of  data  for 
polar  sea-ice  calculations.  NASA  would  review  real-time  operation  with  the 
Navy.  (NASA D l y  Actv  Rp t ,   July  30/82) 

July 30: Cosmonauts  Anatoly  Berezovoy and  Valentin  Lebedev  made  a  space 
walk  from  the  orbiting  station  Sulyut  7 to  disassemble  and  partially  replace 
wornout  equipment  on  the  station’s exterior  and  study  opportunities  for doing 
various job s  outside i t .  After  they donned  space  suits,  Lebedev  left the  station 
for  the  “zone”  of  operations,  while  Berezovoy  remained  in  the  open  manhole 
to  film  his  walk  for  television.  They  dismantled  and  passed  into  the  station 
a  micrometeorite-measuring  instrument  and  some  panels  with  optical  and 
various  structural  materials  that  had  been  outside  the   station  since  its  launch 
April  19. They  also tested  the  station after  exposure of  thermomechanical  and 
threaded  connections made  of  different metals that might be  used  in assembl- 
ing  future  craft  in  orb i t .   (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  July  30/82) 

During July:  Press  reports  said  that  astronauts  Margaret  Rhea  Seddon  and  
Robert  I.  Gibson were parents  of  a  baby  boy,  Paul,  born   July  26   in  Houston. 
Seddon,  34, and  Gibson,  35, jo ined  the astronaut program  in January  1978 and 
were  marr ied   in  May  1981.  Also,  Dr.  Sally  K .   Ride,  selected  for  the  seventh 
Space Shuttle mission  a s  first  female  U .S .  astronaut,  announced  he r  marriage 
to  colleague  Steven  Hawley  a t   her   hometown,  Sa l ina ,   Kans.  Hawley,  an 
astronomer,  had  not  yet been  selected  for a mission.  (WPo s t ,  July 27/82,  C-3 ;  
S t .   L  P /Dsp ,   Aug  15/82) 

355 

August 

August  3: NASA  announced  that  ARC  and  LaRC were  cooperating  in  the  ac- 
quisition  of  data on  the giant  stratospheric  cloud  produced  by  the  eruption  of 
E l   Chichon  volcano  in  March   and  Apr i l ,   now  covering  much  of  the   Earth’s 
northern  hemisphere,  to  define  the  cloud’s  effect on  global  weather  patterns. 
The  centers were using  satellites, U-2 aircraft,  and  lidar  (light-intensification 
detection  and  ranging)  for  the  study.  Th e   lidar  equipment,  mounted  in  a 
Lockheed  Electra  a ircraf t ,  would  shoot  laser  pulses  into  the  a tmosphere  and 
monitor  reflections,  “painting”  the  spatial  and  vertical  extent  of  cloud  layers 
above the a ircraf t .  L idar  measurements  in mid-July  confirmed  ear l ier  findings 
of  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration  (NOAA)  that  the 
volcano  had  put  up  to 50 times  (500  times  in  some  areas)  the  normal  amount 
of  aerosols  into  the  upper  atmosphere;  that  the  material  layers  had  spread  to 
different  latitudes,  depending  on  altitude;  and  that  sunlight  reaching  Earth’s 
surface  could  be   reduced  several  percent. 
Th e  c loud ,   a  mixture  of  dust  and  sulfuric  acid,  would  offer  “a  once-in-a- 
lifetime  chance”  to  form  an  information  base  for  prediction  of  dispersion, 
changes  in  temperature,  and  dynamic  and  photochemical  changes,  according 
to  Dr.  M .   Patrick  McCorm ick ,   head  of  LaRC’s  aerosol  research  branch.  Dr. 
Brian  Toon, atmospheric  physicist  at  ARC,  said  that  the  most  likely  effect  of 
the  cloud  would  be   a  gradual  reduction  in  northern  hemisphere  temperature 
over  the  next  two  years.  (NASA  Release  82-115;  ARC  Release  82-31; LaRC 
Release  82-57) 

August  6: GSFC  astronomers  said that  a  new  come t ,   Austin  1982G, brightest 
s ince  1979,  should arr ive  in  view of  skywatchers later  this mon th .  The  come t ,  
the  first one  visible  to  the naked  eye s ince   1976, would  be  six  times  a s  bright 
a s   the  faintest  star.  It  would  pass  closest  to  the   Earth  August  10  and   closest 
to  the  Sun August  24. Long  before  then,  NASA’s  international  ultraviolet  ex- 
p lorer   ( h e )  would be  photographing  it  in  the  ultraviolet  spec trum  to detect  its 
composition.  Astronomers  hoped  to  define  the  content  of  the   comet  to  com- 
pare   it  with  short-period  ones   previously  observed  and  with  Come t   Halley, 
due   to  appear   in  1985-86.  (NASA  Release  82-118) 

August  9:  NASA  announced  that  it  would  try  to  salvage  the   two  solid-fuel 
rocket boosters  that  sank in  the Atlantic  June  27.  Underwater  cameras  carr ied  
by  the Scarab  2 ,  a  remotely  controlled  submersible vehicle operated by  techni- 
cians  from  Ocean  Search ,   Inc . ,   Lanham ,   M d . ,   from  the  deck  of  the  United 
Space  Boosters  recovery  ship U X  Freedom, showed the boosters on the ocean 
floor,  broken  up  by  the  impac t .  Th e  debr is  had  no  built-in  lifting  points,  but 
PRECEDING  PAGE 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1982 

the  Scarab could  attach  recovery  lines  to  the  sunken  objects  for  hydraulic  lift 
by  the  salvage  ships. 
Vessels  used  for  recovery  would  include,  besides  the  Scarab,  the  U7C  
Freedom and  U7C' Liberty  (the designated  booster-recovery  ships). A  remote 
station  on  a  recovery  ship  would  navigate  Scarab,  using  bridge  displays  to 
show  range  and  bearing,  heading,  dep th ,   and  p i t ch ro l l   of  the  submersible. 
Radar  had  located  the  boosters  at  about  3,500 feet,  too  deep  for  humans  i n  
hardshell  diving  suits to  inspect;  Scarab could  operate  in underwater  currents 
u p  to 0.5 knots at 6,000 feet using  three television  cameras and one still camera 
with  six  quartz-diode  floodlights  to  illuminate  the  ocean-floor. 
Th e   solid-fuel  rocket  boosters'  parachutes  failed  to  open  properly  because 
explosivc bolts  on  half  the  parachute  risers  fired  prematurely.  Premature  f i r -  
ing  separated  half  of  the  risers  from  each  main  parachute,  allowing  the 
parachutes  to  stream  instead  of  filling  with  air.  NASA  did  not  know  why  the 
explosive  bolts  fired  prematurely.  ( A v W ,  Aug.  9182,  20 ;   Spacepor t   N e w s ,  
Aug  19/82,  1  & 2 ;   W Post,  Aug  2 /82 ,   3 )  

NASA  said that  it had  selected  eight  companies  to  negotiate  fixed-price con- 
t r a m  of  less  than  $1  million each  for space-station mission  studies. The  com- 
panies  were  Boeing  Aerospace,  General  Dynamics,  Grumman  Aerospace, 
Lockheed,  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace,  McDonneII  Douglas,  Rockwell,  and 
TRW. 
Th e  eight-month  studies  to  be  covered  by  the  contracts  would  identify  and 
analyze  the  scientific,  commercial,  national  security,  and  space  operations 
missions that  could  be  conducted most efficiently  by  a  space station. Contrac- 
tors would  use  the  studies to  develop alternative concepts  for the  station,  with 
specific mission  requirements  and  architectural  opitions  to  be  incorporated  in 
NASA's  Shuttle-tended  permanent  orbiting  facility.  (NASA  Release  82-121; 
MSFC  Release  82-75) 

August  10: NASA  said that Administrator James M .  B e g s  had  signed  i n  Vien- 
na ,   Austria,  a  memorandum  of  understanding  with  Hans-Hilger  Haunschild 
of  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  ministry  for  research  and  technology  to 
cooperate  in  an  astrophysics mission  called  ROSA'T  (Roentgensatellit),  to  be 
launched  in  1987. ROSAT  would  join  Galileo  and  the  active magnetospheric- 
particle  tracer  explorer  missions  as  another  cooperative  project  between 
NASA  and  West  Germany. 
ROSAT would  study  X-ray  emissions  of  nonsolar  celestial  objects,  survey- 
ing  specific  sources  for  extended  periods.  Operating  in  both  a  survey  and  a 
pointed  mode,  ROSAT  would  compile an  X-ray  source catalog.  The   Federal 
Republic  of  Germany  would  provide  the  spacecraft;  NASA,  the  high- 
resolution 
imaging  de tec tor   and   Shu t t le- launch   s e rv i c e s ;   the   United 
Kingdom's  science  and  engineering  research  council  would  provide  an  XUV  
wide-field  camera. NASA and West Germany would  invite proposals  from the 
international  scientific  community  for  investigations.  (NASA  Release  82-119) 

358 

AUGUST  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

August  13: An  ESA  team  of 17  engineers  arrived  at MSFC  to prepare  for  the 
first  Spacelab  launch  on  the  Shuttle,  now  scheduled  for  September.  Prepara- 
tions  would  include  extensive  training  and  simulations  with  the  Spacelab 
payload  specialists,  including  two  Europeans  already  based  at MSFC  and  the 
NASA  payload-operations  engineers  supporting  NASA  experiments  on   the 
mission.  Several months  before  launch,  the NASA/ESA  team  would  begin  to 
support  operations  from  the  payload-operations  control  center  (POCC)   a t  
JSC. 
Th e  ESA  team  had  been  working  for  five  years  on  computer  software  and 
displays,  crew  procedures,  experiment  simulators  to  train  the  crew  and  the 
POCC   team,  and  establishing  a  data  base.  The  team,  representing  6 different 
countries,  would support experiments from  11 European  countries.  The  38 ex- 
periments  on  Spacelab  1 in  five  scientific  disciplines  would  include  25  ESA 
experiments.  (NASA  Release  82-76;  MSFC  Release  82-77) 

ARC  reported  the  effects  of  disruption  of  the  body’s  circadian  (24  hour) 
rhythms  on  test  groups  subjected  to  weightlessness,  rapid  shifts  in  darkness 
and  light,  and  social  isolation,  conditions  similar  to  those  encountered  on 
manned  space  missions.  These   effects  were  important,  said  Dr.  Char les  
Winget,  ARC  physiologist,  because  similar  conditions  on  Ear th   were 
associated  with  boredom,  irritability,  negative  moods,  and  withdrawal;  the 
desynchronosis  could  a lso   cause  fatigue,  insomnia,  anxiety,  gastrointestinal 
and  other  physical  symptoms,  and  resulting  decreased  performance. 
Experimental  subjects  showed abnormal  temperatures  and  brain  waves  dur-  
ing circadian disruption; neither measurement returned to  normal in  less  than 
two  weeks.  Upset  rhythms  caused  problems  with  physical  health,  emotions, 
behavior,  sleep,  altered  responses  to medication,  and  increased  susceptibility 
to colds,  viruses,  and infections.  Daily  rhythms linked to Earth’s light/dark cy- 
c le   appeared  to  be  a  natural  function  of  cell-formation  cycles  i n   the  human 
body, except for cancer  cells, which  did not exhibit  rhythms.  Pulse rate,  blood 
pressure,  heart  rate,  temperature,  kidney  function,  metabolism,  and hormone  
secretions,  all  followed  a  pattern;  drugs   and  alcohol  affected  the  body  dif- 
ferently  at  various  times.  Winget  and  others  had  developed  a  new  field  of 
biology  called chronopharmacology  to study  the effects of drugs  administered 
at  different  times  of  day.  (ARC  Release  82-32;  NASA  Release  82-124) 

August  19-29: The  Soviet Union  launched Soyuz  T-7at 9:12 p.m.  Moscow  time 
August  19  carrying  three cosmonauts to orbital station  Sulyur  7 to jo in  Anatoly 
Berezovoy  and  Valentin Lebedev,  who  had  been  working  there  sirice May  14. 
Commander   of  Soyut  T-7  was  Col.  Leonid  Popov;  flight  engineer  was 
Aleksandr  Serebrov;  and  researcher  was  Svetlana  Savitskaya,  the  second 
woman  to  fly  on  a space mission.  Initial  orbit  parameters  were  280-kilogram 
apogee,  223-kilometer  perigee,  89.5-minute  per iod ,   and  51.6 O  i r  clination. 
On  August  20,  Soyuz  T-7 docked  with  the  Salyut  7-Soyuz  T-5  complex  at 

359 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT lCS  

AUGUST  1982 

10:32 p .m .  Moscow  time.  Th e  five-person crew would  carry  out  a  week-long 
scientific  program,  largely  medicobiological  research,  Tass  reported.  Soviet 
manned  flights  had  included many  studies of  the  effects of  weightlessness  on 
men;  t h e  present  crew  would  check  the  effects  “on  the  female organism”  to 
understand  better  how  humans  adapted  to  life  in  those  conditions. 
An  interim  report  said  that  Sulyut  7 had  “more  comfortable  conditions  for 
life  and  work”  than  Sulyut  6.  On  a  television  broadcast,  rookie  Savitskaya 
said,  “I  think  women  cosmonauts  can  work  in  outer  space  successfully 
a n d .  . . i n  future whole  families  will  work  on  orbital  stations.”  On  August  26 
the  visitors began  preparing  for  their  return  trip,  packing  research  materials, 
like  biological  objects  with  technical  documentation,  and  used  equipment 
such  as exposed  still  and motion-picture  film.  They  returned  to  Earth  at  7 : 0 4  
p .m .   Moscow  time August  27  i n  the  Soyut  T-5 that had  carried Berezovoy  and 
Lebedev  to  Sulyur  Z  On  August  29  the  remaining  crew  redocked  Soyuz  T-7 
with  the  orbiting  Sufyut 7 to  make  room  for  carg,o vehicles  expected  later. 
(FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Aug  19,  20,  25,  26,  27,  29;  NY   T imes ,  Aug  20182, 
A-28;  Aug  21182; AUg  27/82, A-11;  Aug  28/82,  5 ;  AUg  29182,3;  W Post,  Aug 
20182,  A-25) 

August 26:  NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G,  called Anik D-I  in orbit, from 
ESMC  on  a  Delta  at  7:lO  p .m .   EDT.  Transfer-orbit  parameters  were 
36,358-kilometer  apogee,  185-kilometer  perigee,  and  24.5 
inclination.  Fir- 
ing  of  a  booster  motor  at  5:29  p.m.  EDT  Augusl  29  put  Anik  D  into  syn- 
chronous orb i t ,   and  it was maneuvered  to  a  station  104”W above  the  equator. 
Anik D ,  weighing  2,370 pounds  at  liftoff, was the heaviest  payload  launched 
into transfer  orbit by  a Delta  from that  site.  Initial on-station weight  was  1,454 
pounds.  This was a 30th consecutive  success for the: Delta,  a new  record.  The  
24-channel  communications  satellite  would  provide  Canada  with  television, 
data,  and  voice  communications. 
Anik  D  was  Canada’s  tenth  satellite and  fifth  in  .a  series  of  domestic  com- 
mercial  communications  satellites  owned  and  operated  by  Telesat  Canada.  It  
would  be  a  backup  in  orbit  for  three  aging  Anik  A  satellites  (launched  1972, 
1973, and  1975) and Anik B  (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05  [prelaunch] 
Aug  24/82,  [postlaunch]  Jan  17/83;  NASA  Release  82-126;  Spacewarn 
SPX-346,  Aug  31182;  NASA  D Q  Actv  R p t ,   Sept  1/32; SSR ,   Sept  2/82;  A /D ,  
Aug  31/82,  343;  AvWk,  Sept  6 /82 ,   53) 

During  August:  Dr.  Christopher C. Kraft  announced  his  resignation as  direc- 
tor of  JSC.  He  had  retired  from  federal  service  in March  1980 but  had  stayed 
on   at  the  request  of  the  NASA  administrator  to  see   the  Shuttle  program 
through  the  flight-test  phase  that  ended  July  4 .   Kraft  had  begun  working  for 
NASA’s  predecessor  organization,  NACA,  in  1945 and was appointed director 
at JSC in  1972. H e  would  be  succeeded by  Gerald 1). Griffin.  (NASA Release 
82-116) 
-Pravda  announced  the  death  of  Nikolai  Pilyugin,  74,  a  key  figure  in 

360 

AUGUST  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

development  of  the  Soviet  space  program.  An  obituary  signed  by  President 
Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had  headed a  large researc:h institute 
for 20 years, was  an outstanding designer in  the field of  space-rocket engineer- 
ing.  He   was  credited  with  designing  the  control  system  for  Soviet  launch 
vehicles,  space  ships,  and  interplanetary stations.  (FBIS,  Pravda  in  Russian, 
Aug  3/82) 

361 

September 

September 6:  India  declared  its  first  commercial  satellite, INSAT  I ,   “dead” 
because  its  fuel  supply  had  run  out  and  it  failed  to  respond  to  ground  com-  
mands   150 days  after  an April  10  launch.  Built  by  Ford  Aerospace to  Indian 
Space Research  Organization  (ISRO)  specifications and  launched  from  Cape  
Canaveral, INSAT  was  the  first operational spacecraft equipped  for  telecom- 
munications, direct-broadcast television,  and  weather.  Prime  Minister  Indira 
Gandhi’s government had planned to use INSAT to broadcast the Asian Games  
scheduled  for  New  Delhi. 
ISRO  was  reported  “caught  off  guard”  by  the  amount  of  fuel  it  had  used 
to  correct  early  malfunctions.  Soon  after  reaching  orb i t ,   INS.4T’s  C-band 
antenna jammed .   Fuel  was  wasted  trying  to  free  i t ,   a s  well  as  to  deploy  the 
malfunctioning  solar  sail  designed  to  collect  energy  from  the  Sun’s  rays. 
Failure of the sail would have reduced INSAT’s life from 7 to 2  112, years.  Fuel- 
supply  checks  might  have  been  inaccurate. 
Because INSAT was built to ISRO specifications, blame would probably  fall 
on  Satish  Dhawan,  head  of  India’s  space  program,  who  had  argued  for  a 
multifunction  satellite to  bring  radio  and  television  to  thousands  of  remote 
villages and  give India international telecommunications  links.  H e considered 
mass  communications  the  best  hope  for  progress  in  a  country  with  a  36%  
literacy  rate.  India’s  press  hinted  that  the   system  had  tried  for   too  many 
functions. 
A   second  India  communications  satellite  had  been  planned  for  shuttle 
launch  next  July  a s   a  backup  for  INSAT,  and  the  government  would  have  to 
decide  how  to  proceed.  Leasing  two  transponders  on  INTELSAT’s  Indian 
Ocean  satellite as a cost of  $16  million per  year  to partly  cover  the loss of  IN- 
SAT  would  not  offer  India  the  prestige  of  using  its  own  satellite during  the 
games.  ( W  Post,  Sept  8 /82 ,   A-21;  Nature,  Sept  23/82,  293) 

September  9: Space  Services  Inc.  (SSI)  of  America  launched  the  first  U.S. 
privately  funded rocket  from  a small concrete launch pad  at a cattle ranch on 
Matagorda  Island, 45 miles  northeast of Corpus  Christi on  the  south coast of 
Texas,  at  ll:15 a .m .  Washington  time.  Conestoga  I  rose  to  196 miles altitude, 
traveling 326 miles downrange before dropping  into the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  The  
solid-fuel rocket,  with  a motor  purchased  from NASA  for  $3658,000, was  not 
designed  for  recovery.  The   booster  successfully  separated  from  the  upper 
stage  of  the  rocket;  a  shroud  covering  a  mock  payload  that  weighed  1,097 
pounds,  including  40 gallons  of  water,  ejected  at  peak  altitude  a s   a  visual 
marker. 
After  years  of  planning  and  one  explosive  failure  in  1981,  SSI’s  launch 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1982 

would  offer  relatively  inexpensive  space transportation  for  firms  wanting  to 
put  up  private  satellites without  government  help.  SSI  chairman  David  Han- 
nah,  a  Houston  real-estate  man,  said  that  the  launch  of  Conestoga  I  was  a 
“giant  step  forward”  for  his  two-year-old  company;  the  plan  was  to  send  up 
an  orbital  test  flight  within  two  years  and  start  operating  on  a  commercial 
basis  shortly  thereafter. 
Former  astronaut  Deke  Slayton,  who  joined  SSI  after  retirement  from 
NASA  and  was  in  charge  of  the  launch  team,  said  that  everything  worked 
perfectly.  Besides  buying  the  booster  from  NASA,  SSI  also  had  help  from 
subcontractors  with  considerable  government  experience  and  a variety  of  ex- 
NASA personnel.  It was  negotiating  for a permanent  launch  site in Hawaii but 
was  also  looking  into  a  lease  of  the  Atlas  Centaur  launch  site  in  Florida  fo r  
the  sort  of  launches  that  could  send  heavier  spacecraft,  such  as   communica- 
tions  satellites,  into  orb i t .  
As  SSI  officials  toasted  the  successful  launch  with  champagne,  former 
director  of  KSC  Lee Scherer, now  an  SSI consultant,  remarked  “You  can’t do  
this  a t   a  government  launch  site.”  He  said  that  a  high-level  administration 
statement that  SSI was  “ in   the  national  interest”  would  put  the  firm  i n   com- 
petition  for  space business.  ( W  Post,  Sept  10/82, A-1; N Y   Times, Sept  10182, 
A-I) 

FBIS  reported  that  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  successfully  launched 
“another  scientific experiment satellite.” This was the People’s Republic’s  12th 
satellite (the  first was  launched  in  1970) and  was  timed  for  the  opening  of  the 
national  congress  of  the  PRC  Communist  Party.  L.ater  reports  said  that  the 
satellite  had  “landed  with  precision  at  the  predetermined  recovery  site’’ on 
September  14  at  2:OO  p.m.  Beijing  time.  (FBIS, Xinhua  in  EngliShiDom  Svc 
i n   Chinese,  Sept  9 /82 ,  Sept  14/82; Pruvdu  i n   Russian,  Sept  10182; Tass  Intl 
Svc  i n   Russian,  Sept  14/82) 

September  9-20:  Europe’s  first  commercial  space  mission  apparently  failed 
when  Ariane  rocket  L5  vanished  14  minutes  after  its  launch  from  French 
Guiana  September  9  a t   11:12  p.m.  local  time.  It  was  carrying  European 
satellites Marecs-B  and  Sirio-2,  a maritime  telecommunications  satellite and 
a weather satellite, both  lost with  the rocket  i n  the Atlantic north of  Ascension 
Island  when  the motor  stopped  30  seconds early.  This was  the  second  failure 
in five Ariane launch attempts; the two previous  attempts succeeded, although 
they  carried  no   commercial  payloads.  A  success would  have  put  the  Arianes 
into  competition  for  contracts  to  launch  commercial  satellites. 
ESA  began  investigating  the  failure.  First  reports  said that  the problem  was 
in  third-stage  turbopump  parts  in  the  casing  or  the  lubrication  system.  The  
first  and  second  stages operated  correctly,  as did  the  separations  and jettison 
of  the  fairing.  Th e  third  stage  ignited  and  ran  for  275  seconds  when  rotation 
speed  dropped,  reaching  zero  at  325  seconds.  The  drop  in  thrust  and  engine 

364  

SEPTEMBER  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

cut-out  led  to  a  downward  trajectory.  ( W  Post, Sept  10/82,  A-1;  ESA  Info  27, 
29,  30) 

September  10:  NASA  rolled  out  the  first  lightweight  external  tank   for  the 
Space Shuttle at  its Michoud  Assembly  Facility near New  Orleans. The   tank, 
structural backbone of  the  Shuttle launch  assembly, included  an  oxygen  tank, 
a  hydrogen  tank,  and  a  connecting  intertank housing  the  instrumlzntation. 
At  66,824  pounds  the  new  tank  was  more   than  10,000 pounds  lighter  than 
the one used for the first Shuttle flight in  April  1981; the reduced weight would 
add  payload  capability almost  pound  for  pound.  The   new  tank,  loaded  on  a 
NASA  barge  for  shipment  to  KSC,  would  be  prepared  for  the  sixth  shuttle 
mission  scheduled  for  January  1983.  (MSFC  Releases  82-81,  82-83) 

September  15:  NASA  announced  that  MSFC  had  selected  four  of  the  eight 
aerospace  firms  making  space-station  mission  analyses  for  Headquarters  to 
negotiate  contracts exploring early  uses  of  a  space  station. Each  MSFC con- 
tract  would  address  a  specific  area:  Boeing  would  describe  building  large 
structures  in  orb i t ,   such  a s   huge  communications  antennas;  both  Martin 
Marietta  and  TRW  would  study  servicing and  maintenance of  satellites  by  a 
manned  facility  in   space;  and  General  Dynam ics  would  study  operations  of 
a  Orbital  Transfer  Vehicle  (OTV)  serviced  i n   space  by  a  manned  facility  to 
move  payloads  from  lower  to  higher  orbits. 
William R. Marshall, MSFC  director of program development, said that the 
studies  would  posit  a  space  station  in  orbit  by  1990  and  the  kinds  of  ex- 
perimental  operations  to  be  carried ou t  there that  would lead  to  a fully opera- 
tional  station by  the  end  of  the  century.  (NASA  Release  82-134) 

September 16: NASA  reported a happy  ending to a search-and-rescue mission 
that began  in  July  with  the  loss of  a pilot somewhere  in  northern  !British Col- 
umbia.  The  Canadian government conducted an  unsuccessful  search that cost 
$2 million  before  it  ended.  The   father  of  the  missing  pilot  started  to  search 
with  a pilot  and  another passenger and  failed to return  on  September 9.  They 
had  crashed  in   a  valley  3,500  feet  deep  where  the  Rockies  hid  their  rescue 
beacon  from passing planes. The  Canadian rescue center had  no data on  their 
location. 
Canada  had  just  joined  in  the  SARSAT  (search-and-rescue  satellite-aided 
tracking)  program  using  Cospas  1,  a  Soviet  satellite  launched  June  30,  and 
asked  for any  data  it might  gather. Early  September  10  the  satellite 600 miles 
up  detected  an  emergency  locator-transmitter  in  the  area;  a  search  aircraft 
found the crash and  called for a  rescue helicopter. All  three  persons  had  been 
injured but had  survived. Canadian authorities praised the timely rescue of  the 
victims at minimal cost.  (NASA  D ly  Aclv A p t ,  Sept 16/82; W Posr, Sept 30/82, 
A-3) 

365 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1982 

September  20:  NASA  announced  the  selection  o:f  a  West  German  physicist, 
Ulf  Merbold,  and  a  U.S.  biomedical  engineer,  Byron  K .   Lichtenberg,  as   the 
first  nonastronauts  to  fly  on  the  Space  Shuttle.  Th e  two  would  be  part  of  a 
crew  of  six  on  the  ninth  Shuttle mission,  scheduled  for  September  1983,  and 
would  use  the  Spacelab  workshop  installed  for  the  first  time  in  the  Shuttle 
cargo  bay  to  operate  38  scientific  packages  representing  more  than  70  in- 
vestigators  from  Europe,  Japan,  and  the  United  States.  ESA,  which  for  10 
years  had  planned  and built  the  $1  billion joint  US .-European   Spacelab  unit, 
had  agreed  with  NASA  that  one   European  scientist  would  be  on  all  Shuttle 
missions  carrying  a  Spacelab. 
Merbold,  trained  at  Stuttgart University,  compeiied  for his  Shuttle seat with 
Dutch  physicist  Wubbo  Ockels,  trained  at  the  University  of  Groningen. 
Lichtenberg,  with  a  Ph.D.  from  MIT,  competetd  w i th   Michael  Lampton, 
holding  a  doctorate  in physics  from  CalTech. Winners  were  chosen  in  secret 
ballot  by  a  panel  of  36  U.S.  and  European  scientists.  (MSFC  Release 82-86; 
ESA  Info  31;  W Post,  Sept  20182,  A-5) 

September  28: NASA  launched  Intelsat  5E  F-5  at  7:08  p .m .   EDT  from  Cape 
Canaveral  on   an  Atlas  Centaur  into  a  transfer  orbit  with  35,962-kilometer 
apogee,  165.7-kilometer perigee,  and 24 .4  O  inclination.  This craft would  carry 
for  the  first  time  a maritime  communications  package  for  ship and  shore use 
by  INMARSAT.  ’An  apogee  kick  motor  fired  October  1  would  start  it  to 
(NASA   R e l e a s e   82-136 ;   NASA   M O R  
g e o s y n c h r o n o u s   o r b i t .  
M-491-203-82-05  [prelaunch]  Sept  22 /82 ,   [postlaunch]  Oct  26182) 

During  September:  NASA  Headquarters  announced  the  reorganization  of  its 
Office  of  Space  Transportation  Systems  and  Office  of  Space  Transportation 
Operations  into  a  new  Office of  Space Flight.  L .  Michael  Weeks  was  named 
acting  deputy  associate  administrator,  with  assistant  associate  administrators 
for policy, space transportation, and  institutions.  The  new  arrangement would 
stress  integrated Shuttle operations  planning  and  direction;  STS orientation  to 
customers; a manageable  span of  control for the associate administrator; max- 
imum  delegation of  authority  to  subordinate officials and  field  organizations; 
and minimum  disruption  to existing lines of  communication  with  centers  and 
outside  NASA.  (SP  anno,  Sept  1/82) 
J .   Quann  was  appointed  deputy  director  of  GSFC,  effective 
-John 
September  8.  He   had  been  director  of  GSFC’s mission  and  data  operations 
directorate  since  October  1980  and  had  worked  at  Goddard  since  1963. 
(NASA  anno  Sept  1/82; NASA  Release  82-131) 
-NASA  named  Dr.  Frank  B.  McDonald,  chief  of  GSFC’s  laboratory  for 
high-energy  physics  since  1970,  as  NASA  chief  sciantist,  effective  September 
20.  I n   this position  he would  be  the principal  adviser  to  the  administrator  and 
other  senior  officials  on  scientific  aspects  of  NASA  activities.  Beginning  at 
GSFC   in  1959, McDonald  had  been  project  scientist on  nine  NASA  satellite 
programs and principal  investigator  for many  space (experiments. He previous- 

366 

S E P T EM B E R   1982 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUTICS 

ly  taught  physics  at  the  Iowa  State  University  of  Science  and  Technology. 
(NASA  anno,  Sept  9/82;  NASA  Release  82-133) 
-NASA 
reported  that  the  Shuttle orbiter  Enterprise,  not  slated  for  flight, 
was  still  working  for  the  U.S.  space  program,  helping  DFRF  engineers  to 
predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear  and tear.  All pre- 
Shuttle  spacecraft had  been  one-shot  items,  so  that  space  fatigue was  a  new 
problem.  As  each Shuttle was  meant  to  f l y  up  to  100 missions, NASA  needed 
a  reliable way  to  foresee difficulties before  they  developed  into problems  and 
to detect potential weakness without damaging the  structure. A  method  called 
modal  analysis  measuring  structural  response  to  shaker  acceleration  could 
track  changes  from  baseline data.  Piecemeal  testing  of  parts  woulld  not  give 
results valid  for the entire  structure: Enterprise, built  to  the  same  dimensions 
as  the  four  actual orbiters,  was  “uniquely  qualified  for  the job,”  researchers 
said.  (NASA  Release  82-139; DFRF  Release  82-13) 
-MSFC  said  that Lockheed’s contractor facility  had  successfully extended 
and  retracted an  experimental solar-array wing  as  ta l l   as  a  10-story building, 
scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in  1984. Unlike rigid metal structures 
used  on  current  long-life  spacecraft,  the  accordion-like  array  consisting  of 
lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded  diriectly  to  the 
array  like a printed  circuit.  The  wing,  measuring  105 feet  by  13.5 feet,  could 
fold  into a  package  less  than  four  inches  thick  and  expand  in  orbit  to  its  full 
length  on  a  coilable  extension  mast.  It  could  provide  66  watts  per  kilogram 
compared  to  20  watts  in  present  systems.  (MSFC  Release  82-84) 

367 

October 

October I :  NASA  signed an  agreement with  the National  Science Foundation 
(NSF)  that  transferred management  and  operation  of  the  Nation(s1 Scientific 
Balloon Facility (NSBF)  at Palestine, Tex., from NSF  to NASA  as of  October 
1. The   largest and  most  advanced  facility  of  its  type  in  the  worldl,  the  NSBF 
provided  launch  and  services  for  scientific balloons  at  its  location 200   miles 
north  of Houston.  The  site had  good  conditions for launching lighter-than-air 
craft,  and  the  ground  track  after  launch  put  balloons  over  large  portions  of 
the  continental  United  States,  allowing  easy  tracking  and  instrument 
monitoring. 
Balloon vehicles could  carry  payloads  for  research  in  atmospheric physics, 
astronomy, and  astrophysics to  altitudes above the  stratosphere (70,000 feet o r  
higher).  NASA  had  been  the  principal  user  of  the  facility; other  users  were 
NSF  and  private  and  foreign  research  institutions.  GSFC’s  Wallops  Flight 
Facility ’would manage  NSBF  for  NASA.  (G S FUW F F  Release  132-8;  NASA 
Release  82-142) 

October  4 :   The   Washington Post  noted  the  25th  anniversary  of  the  USSR‘s 
launch of  an orbiting satellite, saying that  “no single event  in  history assaulted 
America’s  image  of  itself  a s   did  Sputnik.”  Subsequent  U .S .   space  ventures 
“did nothing  but  tarnish that  image,”  the Army  and  Navy  arguing  over which 
would  launch  the first satellite, while the Soviet Union  orbited dogs,  rats,  and 
mice  and  took  pictures  of  the  dark  side  of  the  Moon .  
The  Navy  got the first opportunity December  6,  1957, with Vanguard on the 
pad  at Cape  Canaveral and  “literally blew  it.”  The  Army was  given four days 
in  January  1958 to  launch  Explorer  from  the  Cape.  When  the  laiunch  finally 
took place after being delayed two days by  unsafe winds,  sea air had  so corrod- 
ed   Army  tracking  radios  in  the  Caribbean  that  the  Cape   never  received  the 
signal  that  the  satellite was  in  orb i t .   In  1961  “the  roof  fell  in”  when  Yuri 
Gagarin  became  the  first man  to  orbit  the  Ear th ,   and  Gherman  ‘Titov  orbited 
17  times.  The   “best  U.S.  orbital  effort  that  year  was  that  of  Ham  the  chim- 
panzee.’’  Not  until  1962 did  John  Glenn  orbit  the  Earth,  and  then  for  only 
three orbits. By  the,end of  that year the Soviet Union had  sent four cosmonauts 
into  space. 
President  John  F.  Kennedy  had  told  Congress  May  25 ,   1961,  that  the  U.S. 
goal  would  be  to  put  a  man  on  the  Moon  and  return  him  safely  “before  the 
end  of  the  decade.”  By  the  time  a  three-man  crew  i n   Apollo  8 orbited  the 
Moon  i n   1968  at  Christmastime,  “the  space  race  was  over.  What  happened 
to  the  Soviets?” 
Former  JSC Director Chris Kraft  said in  an  interview  that  the Soviet Union 
PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILMED 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER  1982 

“abandoned  their  moon  program.  We  took  the  wind  right  out  of  their  sails.” 
Critics  said that  not  all  of  the  effects of  the  space race  were good:  it  “spurred 
U.S.  determination  to improve the quality of  schools and  students, but  whether 
that  succeeded  is  debatable.”  Kennedy  “never  saw  the  flight  of  anything  to 
which  he gave the  initial  impetus”;  President Johnson,  “who did  more  for  the 
Apollo manned program  than  any president,  suffered through  the fatal Apollo 
fire”;  President  Nixon  “basked  in  all  of  the  Apollo  triumphs  only  to  answer 
for  Watergate.” 
One  educator  said  “Sputnik  is  one  reason  Johnny  can’t  read  today.  He’s 
more  interested  in  Pac-Man,  which  you  might  call  a n  outgrowth of  Sputnik.” 
If  Sputnik  led  to  Pac-Man,  the  Washington Post  said,  i t   also  “helped  to  pro- 
duce the high  technology  of  the computer revolution.  . .Today’s state-of-the-art 
computer  processes  5  million  operations  a  second.”  W Post,  Oct  4/82,  A-1) 

October  5 :   NASA  observed  the  100th  anniversary  of  the  birth  i n   Worcester, 
Mass.,  of Dr. Robert Goddard,  “father of modern rocketry.”  President Reagan 
issued a proclamation  calling October 5  “Dr .  Robert H .  Goddard Day,”  noting 
that  during  his  lifetime  Goddard  was  “often  ignored  or  ridiculed  for  his  im-  
agination,  including  the  concept  of  a  rocket  going  to  the moon.”  “Due  to  his 
pioneering  vision  of  space travel and  his  tireless research  efforts  in  developing 
the  world’s  first  liquid-fuel  rocket,  the  United  States  has  achieved  a  preemi- 
nent  position in space,”  the proclamation  said.  “Dr. Goddard was  a trailblazer 
to  the  stars.”  (Text,  procl  Oct  5/82;  Dtln  G d ,  Oct  5/82) 

October  6:  NASA  announced  the  selection  of  four  of  five crew  members  for 
the  first DOD  Shuttle mission,  STS-10, scheduled  for  launch  from  KSC  i n   the 
last  quarter  of  1983. The   commander  would  be  Thomas K .  Mattingly;  pilot, 
Loren  J.  Shriver;  and  mission  specialists,  Ellison  S. Onizuka  and  James  F, 
Buchli.  Th e   fifth  crew  member,  an  Air  Force  man.ned-spaccflight  engineer, 
would  be  named  later.  (NASA  Release  82-146;  MSFC   Release  82-90 ;   N Y  
Times,  Oct  7/82,  A-18) 

The   Washington Post  said  that  STS-5,  the  first  operational  Shuttle mission, 
would  include  simulation  of  a  space  repair  job   to  practice  for  the  salvaging 
of  an orbiting  satellite, Solar Max ,   in April  1984. The  5,000-pound  Solar Max 
cost  $70  million  at  its  launch  in  February  1980 to  study  the  Sun  during  max- 
imum  sunspot activity.  Less than  six months  later,  the devices pointing  its  in- 
strumentation  at  the  Sun  broke down,  and  the  satellite wa  practically  useless. 
Congress allowed $18 million to put  the Shuttle alongside in a 308-mile-high 
orbit  so that  astronauts  could  ground  a  dozen  cables,  cut  seals  holding  them 
to  a panel,  and pry  the entire group from the  panel.  The  greatest expense was 
for  training  the  spacesuited crew  to  use  tools  and  to  handle  the  Solar  Max  as 
it  orbited  at  17,500-miles-per-hour alongside  the  Shuttle.  ( W  Po s f ,  Oct  7/82, 
A-23) 

370 

OCTOBER  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NASA  announced  that the Federal Republic of  Germany was  thlz  first nation 
to  buy  a  dedicated  Spacelab  mission  from  NASA,  at  a  cost  cd  about  $65 
million.  L t .   Gen.  James  Abrahamson,  NASA  associate  administrator  for 
space  transportation  systems,  signed  the  launch  services  agreement  with  the 
chairman  and  vice chairman of  the German  aerospace research establishment 
(DFVLR) .  
The  D-1 Spacelab mission, set to f ly  on the Shuttle in June  1985, would  con- 
sist of  low-gravity experiments primarily  from German  industry  and  research 
groups  in  the  field  of  materials  processing  in  space  and  life  sciences.  The  
Federal  Republic  had  given  about  64% of  the  funding  for  the  billion-dollar 
European  development  of  Spacelab.  (NASA  Release  82-145) 

October  8:  NASA  declared  successful  the  heat-capacity  mapping  mission 
(HCMM)   launched  from  the  WTR  April  26,  1978.  Carrying  a  two-channel 
radiometer to  measure  reflected solar radiation  and  emitter thenna l   radiation 
over a  1-year lifetime, HCMM  acquired more  than 25,000 Earth images during 
its 2  1/2 years in  orbit with a spatial resolution superior to all prekious  thermal 
sensors.  (NASA  MOR  E-651-78-01  [postlaunch]  Oct  8/82) 

JPL   reported  the  discovery  of  the  most  distant  object  in  the  universe:  a 
quasar  named  PKS 2000-330, more  than  12 billion light years  away.  Light ar- 
riving at the Earth from that object started out before the solar system and pro- 
bably  the Milky Way  itself were  formed. Astronomers  from  the  IJnited States, 
Great Britain,  and  Australia began  the  search  10 years  ago, using  JPL‘s  Deep 
Space  Network  antennas  in  Australia  to  pinpoint  radio  sources  that might be 
quasars.  (NASA  Release  82-154;  JPL  anno  Oct  8/82) 

October 19: Astronomers from JPL   and  the University  of  Hawaii on October 
19 reported detection on  two  solar-system bodies-Pluto  and Neptune’s largest 
satellitebTriton-of  frozen methane,  a  substance present on Earth  as a product 
of  living organisms ,and  petroleum.  Although  the  surfaces, mostly  water  ice, 
of  Pluto and  Triton differed  from  those  of  other  bodies  orbiting  the  Sun,  the 
methane  did  not  seem  to  come   from  biological  activity.  (NASA  Release 
82-157;  JPL   anno  Oct  20/82) 

October  20: The   200-inch  telescope at  M t .   Palomar  observatory  and  an  ex- 
tremely  sensitive  electronic  camera  made   the  first  confirmed  sighting  of 
Halley’s  comet beyond the orbit of  Saturn.  Recording  the  reflected light of an 
object  the  night  of  October  15  and  observing  it  again  at  a  predicted  location 
the night of  October  17, G. Edward Danielson  and David C. Jewitt of CalTech 
told  an October 20 press  conference “ i t   was  both  where  we  expected  it  to  be 
and  had  the  correct  brightness:”: 
The   sighting  was  the  farthest  ever  made  of  Halley’s,  named  for  English 
astronomer  Edmond  Halley,  first to  recognize i t   a s  one  traveling through  the 
inner  solar system every  76  years.  He  correctly predicted  its  reappearance  in 

371 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER   1982 

1758 but did  not  live to see it. Its spectacular appearance in  1910 resulted from 
a favorable arrangement of Sun ,  Ear th ,  and comet that would not  occur on this 
visit.  ( W  Post,  Oct  21/82,  D-1) 

October 22: NASA Administrator James M .  B e g s  announced a revised  policy 
on  Shuttle-mission  opportunities  for  payload  specialists,  heretofore  available 
only  to  those buying  half  or  more  of  a  Shuttle mission  of  flying  a unique  ex- 
periment  needing  the  presence  of  a  particular  scientist  or  engineer. 
Starting  in  1984,  NASA  would  no  longer  require  a  minimum  payload. 
Flights  for  payload  specialists would  be  available  on  a  reimbursable  basis  to 
all classes of  customer: foreign and domestic commercial firms,  international 
cooperative  partners,  the  scientific  and  applications  community,  and  DOD. 
The  payload  specialists  would  usually  be  scientists  with  special  skills  who 
would  undergo  a brief  training  for  spaceflight. Th e  expanded policy  reflected 
a  Shuttle-program  goal  of  sending more people  into  space on  a  routine basis. 
(NASA  Release  82-158;  MSFC   Release  8 2 - 9 )  

October 2%  NASA  launched  RCA-E  (RCA-Sutcom 5) from  ESMC  at  9:28 
p .m .   on  a  Delta  into  a  synchronous  transfer  orb i t .   It  would  be  stationed  on 
the  equator  at  143 “W  over  the  Pacific  to  serve  the  continental  United  States, 
Alaska,  and  Hawaii.  First  of  a  series  of  second-generation  domestic  com- 
munications  satellites  made  by  RCA  Astro-Electronics,  it  arrived  at  ESMC 
“slightly  overweight”  and  carried  no  third-stage  telemetry.  Confirmation  of 
third-stage burn  and s p a c e cy f t  separation was delayed  until  it passed over  the 
tracking  station  in  New  Jersey  to  confirm  that  it  was  working  satisfactorily. 
(NASA   D ly   Actv  Rp t ,   Oct  29/82;  NASA  Release  82-155;  NASA  MOR 
M-492-206-82-06  [prelaunch]  Oct  26/82) 

NASA  said that Cospas/SARSAT,  an international search-and-rescue project 
of  the United  States,  the  Soviet  Union,  Canada,  and  France,  had  located  four 
accident  sites and  saved  seven  lives in  its  first month  of  operation. Th e  Soviet 
Union’s Cospas satellite, launched June 30, had  located  two downed planes  in 
Canada during  September,  another  in  September  in  New  Mexico,  and  a  cap- 
sized catamaran  off  the  coast of  New  England  in  October  less than  2 4  hours 
after  receiving  the  first  signal. 
As part of  the program the United  States planned  tcl  launch in February  1983 
a  weather  satellite,  NOAA-F,  carrying  a  search-and-rescue  capability.  GSFC 
managed  SARSAT  activities  for  NASA.  (NASA  Release  82-152) 

October  30:  The   U.S.  Air  Force  launched  two  military  communications 
satellites from Cape Canaveral on  its Space Division’s  first Titan  34D and  in- 
ertial  upper  stage  (IUS).  The   first  Defense  Satellite Communications  System 
into  o r b i t   w i th   p a r am e t e r s   of 
(D S C S )  
s a t e l l i t e s   w e n t  
111 
3 5 ,779 /35 ,901 -k i lom e t e r   a p o g e e ,   35 ,641135 ,839-k i lome ter   p e r i g e e ,  
1440-minute  period,  and  2.5 O  inclination. 

m 

OCTOBER  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   A.ERONAUTICS 

The  Air  Force  Systems Command  said  that  the  launch was  the  culmination 
of  five years  of  development  effort on an experience base of  47 previous  Titan 
I11 launches  from  the  Cape.  The  DSCS  system had  handled  national  security 
communications  s ince   the  late  1960s,  maturing  from   simple  short-lived 
satellites  to  flexible  systems  with  six  times  the  capacity  and  more: than  three 
times  the  on-orbit  life.  (AFSC  Newsreview, Nov  19/82,  1) 

During  October: Leroy  R.  Grumman ,   87,  founder of  the Grumman  aerospace 
f irm   and  designer  of  carrier-based  a irp lanes   with  stubby  teardrop-shaped 
fuselages  used  by  the  U .S .   Navy  in  World  War  11,  died  October  4  in 
Manhasset,  N .Y . ,  after  a long  illness.  He  had  started  his  business  with  a  few 
o ther   persons  in  1929  a s   a  repair  shop  for  amphibious  aircraft  h i l t  by  the 
Loening  brothers’  company;  by  the  end  of  the  war,  Grumman   employed 
20,000,  and  it  was  still  Long  Island’s  largest  employer.  The   company  built 
more  planes  in  a  single month  than  any  o ther  U .S .  firm  (664 ,  in March  1945) 
and   made  98% of  the  Navy’s  bombers. 
In   1966,  when  Grumman   resigned  a s  cha irman  of  the  board ,   the  firm was 
building  the  lunar  module  that carried  Apollo  crews to the Moon .  H is  awards 
included  the Guggenheim Medal  for  Aeronautics  and  the  Presidential  Medal 
of  Mer i t .   ( W  Post,  Oc t   5 /82 ,   C-7; NY  Times,  Oct  5 / 8 2 ,  D-25)  

m 

November 

November 3:  A  formal ceremony  in Washington, D.C., marked  the acceptance 
of  the  Canadian-built  remote-manipulator  system  a s   “ready  for  operational 
use”  on  the  Space  Shuttle.  NASA  Administrator James  M .   B e g s   and  Dr. 
Larkin  Kerwin,  head  of  Canada’s National  Research  Council  (NRC),  signed 
an  agreement  declaring  the  device  (already  successfully  used  on  STS-;I, 
STS-3,  and  STS-4) operational.  Although  NRC  thus  fulfilled  its  obligations 
under a  1975 memorandum of  understanding,  it would  continue to monitor th.e 
a rm   system  on  future  missions.  Next  use  of  the  arm   would  be  on  STS-7 in 
April  1983.  (NASA  Release  82-168) 

DFRF   resumed  its  DAST  (drones  for  aerodynamic  and  structurad  testing) 
flight-test program with  a  successful launch  and  flight of  the DAST  1 vehicle 
from its B-52 carrier. The   15-minute test of  the remotely piloted research vehi- 
cle by  NASA  civilian research pilot Thomas C. McMur try  used  flight-control, 
instrumentation,  and  launch  and  recovery  systems.  This  was  the  first  flight 
since  DAST  lost  a  wing  in  June  1980. 
The  joint  program  of  DFRF   and  LaRC  would  lead  to  flying  transport  arid 
other  aircraft  more   efficiently  with  more   flexible wings  and  allowing  larger 
aircraft  payloads  or  greater  fuel  economy,  or  both.  Rather  than  use  “brute 
force”  stiffening in wings  to  ensure a safe approach to  flutter boundaries  (the 
point  at  which  destructive  flapping  occurred),  DAST  computers  would  in- 
dicate ways  to  suppress  flutter.  (DFRF   Release  82-18) 

November  4 :  MSFC   said  that  it  had  selected  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  to 
negotiate  a  $1-million  contract  for  a  tethered-satellite  system  concept.  A  
tethered-satellite system  would  go  into  orbit  on  the  Space  Shuttle in  the  late 
1980s,  suspended downward  from  the  cargo bay  on   a  60-mile-long: tether  to 
troll the atmosphere for days as a time to gather magnetospheric, atmospheric, 
and  gravitational  data.  It  could  also  be  deployed  upward  to  study  elec- 
trodynamic  and  other  phenomena.  The   area  to  be  studied  was  too  high  for 
airplanes,  too  low  for  satellites  to, cover  for  long,  and  reachable only  for brief 
periods  by  instrument-laden rockets. 
Under  a  letter of  agreement sigced in  1981,  NASA  would join  with  Italy  in  
developing  and  launching  the  system,  building  the  deployment  system  and 
managing  systems  integration  and  mission  operations,  while  Italy  built  the 
satellite itself.  (NASA  Release  82-169; MSFC  Release  82-102) 

November 11: NASA  launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of  Space Shuttle Co lum-  
bia  on  time  at  719  a.m.  EST  from  KSC  with  a  four-man  crew,  largest  ever 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER   1982 

to  take  off  from  Earth  a t  the  same time.  Feeling  none  of  the motion  sickness 
suffered  by  three  of  t h e   first  four  Shuttle crews,  the  astronauts  were  so  busy 
preparing  for  deployment  from  orbit  of  the  first  of  two  communications 
satellites  that  they  had  no  time  for  chitchat  with  mission  con tro l .   Astronaut 
Joseph Allen took  off his shoes and socks  to work. barefooted  inside the Shuttle 
cabin:  “it’s  like  having  four  hands,”  he  explained.  He  and  William  Lenoir 
maneuvered  the  first  of  twin  satellites  (one  U S . ,   the  other  Canadian)  into 
space  a t   3:17  p.m.  EST,  while  Vance  Brand  and  Robert  Overmyer  flew  the 
100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid  smearing  its windows  with  ex- 
haust  from the  satellite engine.  The  astronauts would  use the same procedures 
November  12  to  deploy  the  Canadian  satellite  on  a  similar  flight  path. 
Th e  first commercial  cargo carried by  the  Shul.tle was  a 21-foot-tall  cylinder 
worth  almost $50 million,  owned  by  Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a  firm 
begun a s  a partnership of  Aetna  Life & Casualty,  Comsat General Corporation 
(a  subsidiary  of  Communications  Satellite Corporation-ComSatCorp), 
and 
International  Business  Machines  ( IBM ) .   Boeing,  General  Motors,  and 
General  Electric  were  among  i t s   more  than  300  clients  who  used  SBS 
satellites  to  transmit  coast-to-coast  computer  traffic  and  telephone  calls. 
Transmissions  to  SPS  satellites  were  at  14GHz,  twice  as  high  as  frequencies 
used  by  other  U.S.  communications  satellites  and  were  relayed  at  12GHz  to 
avoid  interference. 
President Reagan  held  a telephone conversation  with  the astronauts at  10:26 
a .m .   November  11,  repeating  his  request  to  an  earlier  crew  to  “pick  me  up 
and  drop  me   off  in  California.”  He   added  that  “if  more   of  us  could  see  [the 
earth]  from  that  angle  we  might  realize  that  there  must  bc  a  way  to  make  it 
as  united  i n   reality here on earth as  it  looks  from outer  space.”  Brand replied, 
“We’re  in  total  agreement  on   that  one.”  (NASA  MOR   M-989-82-05 
[prelaunch] Nov  5 /82 ,   [postlaunch] Dec 7/82;  USA  Today, Nov  12/82,  1A;  W 
Post,  NOV 12/82,  A-1,  D-8) 

Charles (Pete)  Conrad, who commanded Skylab’s first mission and was now 
a  vice  president  for  marketing  at  McDonncll  Douglas,  said  that  pieces  of 
Skylab  that  crashed  in  1979  over  western  Australia  after  five  years  in  orbit 
would  go  on  sale,  with  proceeds  to  NASA,  for  the  support  of  V ik ing   I ,  the 
Mars lander still sending messages  from the surface of  that planet. The  Skylab 
pieces  fitted  into  colorful  posters  were  expected  to  raise  from  $150,000  to 
$500,000.  Conrad  had  been  a  member  of  the  Apo l lo   12  mission  that  landed 
on  the  Moon  as  well  as  commander  of  the  Skylab  mission  in  1973.  ( W  Post, 
NOV 12/82, A-10) 

LeRC  said  that  it  had  developed  a  device  called  MIAMI  (micro-wave  ice- 
accretion  measurement  instrument)  to  warn  airplane  pilots  of  dangerous  ice 
buildup.  This was the only device able to measure actual  ice thickness and rate 
of  accretion,  besides  giving  a  warning.  Un1ik.e  other  such  instruments, 
MIAMI was imbedded  in, instead of  projecting from ,  the surface under  study; 

316 

NOVEMBER  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

projecting probes tended to collect ice and confuse detection of  how  much was 
actually forming  on  the  surface.  The  microprocessor  in  the device could  tell 
the difference between ice and other  substances (oil, d ir t ,  grease,  insects) and 
signal  only  the  formation  of  ice.  (LeRC  Release  82-56) 
LeRC  also  reported  the  completion  of  a  five-year  $39-million program  of 
engine improvements to conserve fuel i n  commercial je t  aircraft through  iden- 
tifying  areas  for  cost-effective  refurbishment  and  of  performance  loss.  The  
specific goal was  to reduce fuel use by  up  to  5 %  for current je t  engines. Much 
of  the cost would be  repaid by  contractors Pratt & Whitney and General Elec- 
tric;  under  the  reimbursement  feature  of  the  program,  repayments  over  a 
10-year  period  would  be  based  on  sales  of  improved  components.  So  far, 
NASA  had  recovered nearly  $1  million  from  the  contractors, with  a  potential 
of  $19  to  $20  million.  (LeRC  Release  82-57) 

November 14-18: Soviet cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and  Valentin  Lebedev 
on  November  14  broke  the  185-day  record  in  space  set  by  two  compatriots, 
Leonid  Popov  and  Valery  Ryumin,  in  October  1980. Berezovoy  and  Lebedev 
were  in   their  186th  day  on  board  the  orbiting Sulyut  7 space  station,  where 
they  would  remain  for  several more  weeks.  The  longest  U S .  spaceflight was 
the 84 days spend on  the Skylab station in   1974 by  astronauts Gerald Carr, Ed- 
ward  Gibson,  and  William  Pogue. 
Sulyut  7 had  been  visited twice by  the other crews:  on  June 24  two  veteran 
cosmonauts  arrived with  French  test  pilot  Jean-Loup Chretien,  the  first non- 
Amer ican   from  the  West  to  travel  in  space;  on  August  19,  a  second  set  of 
visitors  arr ived ,   inc lud ing   Svetlana  Savitskaya,  the   second  womari  to  f ly   i n  
space. 
Cargo  ship Progress  16 had  docked  with  the  combined  Sulyut  7-Soyuz T-7 
November  2 bringing fuel, research materials, supplies for the crew, and mail. 
On  November  18  the  cosmonauts  launched  from  Sulyut  7 s  airlock Zskru  3,  a 
small  communications  satellite created  by  student  designers  at  the  Moscow 
Aviation  Institute  to  make  experiments  in   amateur  radio.  Student  receiving 
stations in Moscow  and Kaluga  would  control Zskru  3 and  receive and process 
incoming  data.  (NY  Ernes, Nov  15/82, B-6;  FBIS,  Tass  in   Englislh,  Nov  2 ,  
9,  16,  18,  22/82) 

November. 15-19:  Press  reports  said  that  problems  November  15  with  new 
million-dollar space suits had  canceled the first space walk  scheduled  in  near- 
l y  nine  years and  would bring  STS-5 to  a  conclusion November  16. The  walk 
was  canceled when  the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit quit and  the device 
maintaining  oxygen  pressure  in  William  Lenoir’s  backpack  behaved  so  er-  
ratically  that  flight directors feared  a breakdown  during any  space walk.  Pro- 
gram  managers said that the walk  could be  done on  a later  flight; Glynn Lun- 
ney  at  JSC  said  that  the  program  was  “still  right  on  track.”  The   inext  thrlee 
flights would  carry  space  suits  for  any  unexpected problems,  such  as  cargo- 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

N O V EM B E R   1982 

bay  doors  that  refused  to  close.  The   next  flight  was  scheduled  for  February 
1983. 
Inspectors  after the November  16  landing  said  that  Columbia came  through 
the  fifth  flight  better  than  previously:  an  inboard  tire  on  the  left  side  was 
shredded  and  flattened  on  landing  by  a  brake januning  against  it,  but  only  4 
of  the  33,000 protective  tiles  were  damaged  o r  came  loose during  reentry.  A 
seven-man  panel  investigating  the  space-suit  failure  said  that  they  hoped  to 
have  answers within  a week.  One possibility  was  that  the  suits were  dropped 
while  in  their  cases or  when  removed  and  stowed  in the  ship.  Engineers were 
baffled  by  the  failure  of  both  suits  at  the  same  time  for  different  reasons. 
Th e  N e w   York  Times  said  that  the  su i ts ,   “most  complex  human  garments 
ever  made,”  differed  from those  u sed   in Apollo moon  landings,  o r   for  Skylab 
i n   1973  and  1974, which  functioned well  but  were  too  stiff  for  easy  handling 
of  tools  needed  by  Shuttle astronauts.  Shuttle missions had  called  for  produc- 
tion, by  United  Technologies’  Hamilton  Standard Division,  of  43  suits and  13 
backpacks  at  a  cost of  about  $2 million each ;  the  suits had  been  tested  by  the 
company  160 times while unmanned  and  70  times while manned,  said a  com- 
pany  spokesman.  ( W  Post,  Nov  16/82, A-1;  Nov  18/82, A-7;  NY  Times, Nov 
16/82, C-3) 

November  16: Space Shuttle  Columbia  began  a  year-long  vacation  as  the  se- 
cond  operational  Shuttle,  Challenger,  began  final  engine  tests  at  KSC  i n  
preparation  for  a  three-day  mission  in  January  1983  with  a  four-man  crew. 
After  its  landing  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  Columbia  was  scheduled  to 
return  to  KSC  for  “six  dozen  minor  modifications”  after  completing  its  first 
commercial  venture,  STS-5.  The   modifications  would  prepare  it  for  the 
December  1983  launch  of  Spacelab,  built  for  NASA  by  ESA.  NASA 
spokesman  said  that  the  first  five  flights  had  proved  that  the  Shuttle  could 
launch  satellites  into  space  with  “remarkable  aocuracy”;  demonstrated  that 
four men  could  do  high-pressure jobs   in  a  cabin  tihe  size of  a pickup  camper; 
and  showed  that  the  Shuttle,  like  an  airplane,  worked  better  the  more   i t   was 
used.  (U SA   Today,  Nov  17/82, 3A) 
-MSFC 
said  that  it  had  sent  NASA’s  first  inertial  upper  stage  (IUS-1)  to 
Cape Canaveral  to  ready  it  for  launch  in Challenger’s payload  bay  in January 
1983.  The   first  of  six  to  be  built  by  Boeing  for  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Systems 
Command,  IUS-I   was  an  unmanned  system  for  pushing  payloads  to  high 
altitudes unreachable by  the Shuttle  in  its  150-mill:  orb i t .  The   two-stage  vehi- 
cle,  17  feet  long  and about 9  feet i n  diameter,  weighed  more  than  16  tons,  had 
more  than  64,000 pounds  of  thrust,  and  could  carry  up  to  5,000  pounds  of 
payload  to  geostationary  orbit  22,300  miles  up. 
At  KSC,  the  IUS  would  be  mated  to  a  tracking  and  data-relay  satellite 
(TDRS),  first  of  four  planned  for   launch  to  replace  present  ground  stations 
and  improve  command  and  telemetry  functions  for  the  growing  number  of 
operational  satellites.  NASA  hoped  to  have  the  four-craft  system  i n   operation 
late  in   1983.  (MSFC  Release  82-103) 

378 

NOVEMBER   1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AE  XONAUTICS 

November  18: Th e  Space and  Earth  Science Advisory  Committee, a  group  of 
more  than 80 scientists, met for the first time in Washington  to discuss i ts  role 
in  advising  NASA  on   science  activities.  Associate  Administrator  Dr.  Burt 
Edelson  told  the committee of  two recent  changes in NASA:  a  reorganization 
that moved  science and applications  into the same  department and the appoint- 
ment of Dr. Frank McDonald as chief  scientist,  a position  that had been vacant 
for  a  long  time.  ( A D ,  Nov  19/82,  107) 

November 22:  NASA  signed an $11.6 million contract with a 22-member Arab 
group of  nations  and organizations  to  launch  a  communications satellite from 
the  Shuttle  in  1984. Administrator  James M .   Beggs  signed  the  agreement  fo r  
NASA;  Dr.  Ali  Al-Mashat,  director  general,  signed  for  the  Arab  satellite 
group.  Arabsat,  a  consortium,  included both  Libya  and  the  Palestine Libera- 
tion  Organization  (PLO);  some  uproar  ensued  on  Capitol  Hill  until  senators 
were  persuaded  that  the deal did  not  imply  U.S.  recognition  of  the  PLO.  Th e  
United  States also had  no  diplomatic  relations with  Libya  and had  a  policy  of 
selling  no  military  goods  to  its  government. 
A  State Department  spokesman  said  that  Arabsat  members  would  “get  no 
more   than  they  already  had  through  the  existing  INTELSAT  satellite  corn- 
munications  system.”  Th e   deal  envisioned  no  transfer  of  technology,  as   the 
satellite would  never  be  handled  by  its  Arabsat  owners.  Saudi Arabia,  which 
would  be  the  center of  operations, would  control  television prograrnming  for 
Arabsat  use. 
NASA Associate Administrator James A .   Abrahamson  said  that  tlhe  Shuttle 
was  a  commercial  service  and  that  its  launches  “should not  be  considered a 
political  activity.”  (NASA  Release  82-173;  W Post,  Nov  23/82,  A-2) 

November 23: Th e  Shuttle imaging  radar  (SIR)  flown on  STS-2 in  November 
1981 had  revealed  previously  unknown  river  channels,  geologic  structures, 
and  possible  Stone  Age  occupation  sites  in  the   eastern  Sahara  desert. 
JPL‘s  Dr.  Charles  Flachi,  principal  investigator  for  S IR ,   reported  that  the  
radar  signal  could  penetrate  the  virtually  featureless  desert  surface  to  show 
subsurface  features  nearly  as   broad  a s   the  Nile  Valley  and  up  to  !jO-million 
years  old.  Drainage  networks  detected  by  radar  and  confirmed  by  ground 
studies would  explain the location of present oases in the  desert.  Th is  new  tool 
could  serve  in  the   search  for  ground  water  in  such  arid  regions. 
Dr. Alexander  Goetz of  J PL  said  that  the  multispectral  infrared  radiometer 
flown o n  the  same  Shuttle mission  had  made the   first detection  from orbit  of 
clay  and  carbonite-bearing  minerals,  an  important  step  in  the  use  of  remote 
sensing  for  geological  mapping.  Th e  device  used  an  area  in  Egypt  of  known 
mineral content as  a baseline  for analysis;  its narrow  spectral  resolution made 
it able to map  mineral content in the area ,  using  specific substances as  a guide 
for exploration  and development, previously possible only through  laboratory 
sampling  techniques. 
Dr.  Henry  C.  Reiche,  J r . ,   of  LaRC  was  the  principal  investigator  for  the 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

NOVEMBER   1982 

MAPS  (measurement  of  atmospheric  pollution  from  satellites)  experiment 
flown  on STS-2, which proved  accurate when  compared to ground  studies.  A 
gas-filter radiometer, part of  the first scientific Shuttle payload, measured car- 
bon  monoxide  ratios  in  the  lower,  upper,  and  middle  troposphere,  data  to  be 
used  i n   1984  for  seasonal  variation  studies. 
Besides  the  desert  features  revealed  by  the  Shuttle  radar,  Flachi  reported 
readings over densely  forested  areas such  as  the U.S. Appalachians,  the moun- 
tains  covered  by  rain  forests  i n   western  Guyana  and  Venezuela,  and  other 
remote  locations  not  covered  by  ground  survey.  Geologic  features  shown  in 
the  radar  images  would  help  identify  causes  of  change:  erosion,  fault  lines, 
or   previously  unknown  fractures  of  the  Earth’s  crus t .   The   devices  recorded 
t h e i r   findings  b e c a u s e   t h e   S h u t t l e   l a c k e d   commu i i ica t ions   capacity.  (NASA  
Releases  82-174,  82-175,  82-176,  82-177;  W  Post,  NOV 26 /82 ,   A-1) 

November  24:   NASA  said  that  the  three  main  engines  that  powered  Space 
Shuttle Columbia  on  its  five missions  would  be  modified  and  retested  to  cer- 
t i f y   them  for  operation  on  the  orbiter  Atlantis.  Rocketdyne  would  disassem- 
ble,  inspect,  and  reassemble  the  engines  before  forwarding  them  to  MSFC’s 
NSTL  for acceptance tests and  certification. They  would be  installed  in Atlan- 
t i 5   for   its  first mission  i n   1985. Columbia would  get  three  new  engines  for  its 
Spacelab  mission  i n   1983.  (MSFC   Release  82-104) 

November 28: Press  reports  said  that  weather  satel!lite Goes West,  monitoring 
the  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  western  United  States,  had  stopped  functioning 
November  25,  leaving  more  than  60”  of  Earth’s  surface  (an  area  responsible 
for most of  the  winter  storms on  the Pacific  coast) with  a  “blind  eye.”  Efforts 
to  revive  i t  were  unsuccessful;  officials  said that  t h e  problem  was  in  the Goes 
radiometer.  Launched  in  1980, the  satellite was designed  for  three-year opera- 
tion;  a  replacement  was  to  be  launched  i n   1983. If  further  efforts  failed,  the 
National  Weather  Service planned  to  reactivate one of  several  older  satellites 
that  had  been  retired  but  were  still  i n   place.  W  P o s t ,   Nov  28/82,  A-8) 

November  29 :   NASA  went  before  the  Federal  Communications Commission 
(FCC)  to  ask  for a market  test of  a  “land  mobile  ss.tellite service”  to  comple- 
ment  cellular  systems  and  other  mobile  arrangements  now  being  planned  o r  
i n   use.  NASA  asked  the  FCC   to  reserve  frequencies,  for  commercial  com- 
panies  offering  to  establish  communications  by  satellite to  rural  America  via 
portable  radiotelephones  that  could  switch  calls  between  vehicles  and  local 
telephone  networks.  Present  “cellular  radio”  systems  were  land-based,  dif- 
ficult  to  install  i n   remote  areas  amid  mountains  and  other  barriers. 
The  FCC   had  denied  a  similar NASA  request  last year  but  would  not  com- 
ment  on  the  new  request.  NASA  said  that  other  nations  were  developing 
mobile  satellite communications  services  on  frequencies  provided  by  the  1979 
World  Administrative  Radio  Conference;  i f   the  FCC   failed  to  provide  the 
United  States with  frequencies,  it  could jeopardize  its  leadership  “in  satellite 

3 80 

NOVEMBER   1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

communications and  in mobile  communications  equipment.”  Th e  application 
said that mobile systems  in the United  States had  been  “available  only  through 
terrestrial  facilities.  . . limited  in  range”  and  restricted  mostly  to  urban  areas. 
A  satellite  system  could  include  up  to  288,000  rural  subscriber:;  by  1990, 
NASA  said.  W Post,  Nov  30182,  C-7) 

November SO:  Former Apo l lo   13  astronaut  Jack  Swigert,  elected November 2 
as  congressman  from  Colorado’s 6th  congressional  district,  was  hospitalized 
in  Denver  after undergoing chemotherapy  for bone-marrow  cancer.  H e  would 
remain  there  “another  few  days,”  a n  aide  said.  ( N Y  Times,  Nov  30 /82 ,  A-17) 

381 

December 

December  2:  NASA  investigators  of  the  failure  of  $2-million  space  suits  on 
STS-5 issued an  interim  report  blaming  two missing parts  and  a  faulty  sensor. 
During  the  mission  on  Shuttle  Columbia,  an  oxygen  device  in  astronaut 
William  Lenoir’s  suit  failed  to  provide  required  pressure,  and  the  fan  in 
astronaut  Joseph  Allen’s  suit  and  portable  life-support  system  would  not 
operate.  JSC program  Operations  Manager  Richard A.  Co lonna ,  who  headed 
the  team,  said  that  two  vital  plastic  parts  the  size of  a  matchstick,  worth  less 
than  a nickel  apiece,  that  several to hold  a pair  of  screws against  a metal  piece 
in  Lenoir’s  suit,  had  been  removed  for  a  test  last  August  and  were  never  put 
back.  Documentation  indicated  that  the  parts  were  in  place,  a.nd  during 
repeated  tests,  technicians  failed  to  spot  their  absence. 
The  team  said  that  the  fan  failed  because  a  tiny  magnetic  sensor  no  bigger 
than a pinhead  apparently  gave way  jus t  after Allen put  on his  space suit.  The  
motor  running  the  fan  and  pumping  water  through  the   suit  used  the   sensors, 
instead  of  the  magnetic  brushes  used  in  most  motors,  because  of  the  danger 
of  a  spark   igniting  the  pure   oxygen  circulating  inside  the  spacesuit. 
Colonna  said that  the  team would  continue  its  investigation.  He   Iexpectetl it 
to  recommend  further  and  more   frequent  testing  and  quality-control  inspec- 
tions  by  the  manufacturer,  Hamilton  Standard,  during  space  suit  lproduction 
and  a t   JSC , and  KSC.  (NASA  Release  82-181;  W Post,  Dec  2 /82 ,   A-1) 

Speaking to an  audience of U.S.  and Brazilian  businessmen  in the governor’s 
palace  a t   Sao   Paulo,  Brazil,  President .Reagan  proposed  that  ‘‘a  Brazilian 
astronaut  train  with  ours  so that Brazil  and  the United  States can one  day  par- 
ticipate  in’a  shuttle  launch  together  a s  partners  in  space.”  George  P.  Shu l tz ,  
U.S.  secretary of  state,  told newsmen  on A ir  Force One  that Brazil’s president 
Joao  Figueiredo,  hearing  of  Reagan’s  proposal,  said  “That’s  wonderful,  and 
I  know  jus t   who  the  first  astronaut  is  going  to  be,  Me.” 
Brazilian  officials  said  that Reagan  had  initiated  a welcome  new  climate  in 
U .S .  relations  with  Brazil  but  said  that  the  closer  ties  were  more   ii  matter  of 
potential  than  reality.  (Text,  Dec   2 /82;   W Post,  Dec  3 /82 ,   A-1) 

December  3 :  NASA  named  Dr.  Peter  J.  Denning  head  of  a  new  Rmearch  In- 
.
 
8
stitute  for  Advanced  Computer  Science  (RIACS)  to  begin  at  AFC   in   June 
1983.  Denning,  chairman  of  computer  sciences  a t   Purdue ,   wciuld  direct 
research  in  computer  science and  engineering with  potential  for use  in NASA 
programs.  Funded  by  NASA  through  the  Universities  Space  Research 
Association  (USRA),  RIACS would be  an academic center  for applications of 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1982 

the  computer  to  solve  scientific  and  engineering  problems.  (NASA  D ly   Ac tv  
R p t ,   Dec  3/82) 

December  9-15: Tass  reported  preparations  for  the  end  of  the  record-setting 
flight in Salyut  7 of  cosmonauts Anatoly  Berezovoy and  Valentin Lebedev,  the 
crew of  Soyuz T-7 launched May  13. The  crew was  stowing in a reentry module 
a number of  containers with  flight documentation,  biological samples, motion 
picture  and  still  films,  and  monocrystals  of  semiconductor  materials.  They 
were  also  mothballing  research  equipment  and  siipport  units  on  the  station. 
On December  10  the crew  returned  to  Earth  at  10:03 p .m .   Moscow  time  in 
the  preset  area  190 kilometers  east  of  Dzhezkazgcm  “not  far  from”  the  space 
center  at  Baykonur.  Beijing’s  Xinhua  press  serv ice   said  that  a  special 
lighthouse  equipped  with  a  strong  beam  was  installed  at  the  site  to  guide 
helicopters  with  ground  crews  to  assist  the  cosmonauts.  Difficulties  with  the 
landing  meant  that  journalists  for  the  first  time  were  not  a t   the  site. 
Berezovoy later reported that  “Judging  from previous crews,  who hardly felt 
the  shock of  landing,  this  landing was quite  severe and was  followed by  a  few 
more  rolls,  apparently  because  we  were  on  a  small incline,  and we  ended  up 
on our  side with  one on top of  the other-Valentin 
[Lebedev] was  on the (?up- 
per)  couch  and  I  was  on  the  lower.  . . .We  spent about  2 0  minutes  in  the  des- 
cent module  while an offroad vehicle was  made  ready  but  then  spent  5 hours 
i n   this  vehicle because  of  poor  conditions.  It  was  not  bad ,   it  was  warm.  We 
changed  our   clothes  for  clean  and  dry  ones,  replacing  spacesuits with  flight 
suits.”  (Interview  recorded  for  Moscow  DomSvc  in  Russian,  December  13) 
Later  press  reports  said  that  the  cosmonauts  had  “a  harrowing  reentry”  in 
a  craft  rolling  across  a  steppe  swept  by  a  blizzard  and  fog.  Although  initial 
USSR  reports  implied  all  had  gone  well,  the  New York  Times  said  that  the 
crew  had  “anxious moments”  when  unexpected  tiad  weather  landed  them  in 
darkness,  near-zero  temperatures,  and  blowing  snow.  One  helicopter  “force- 
landed”  without  injury,  and  another had  to  turn  back.  (N Y  Times, Dec   14/82, 
C -2 ;   W Post,  Dec  1 2 / 8 2 ,  A-31)] 
Tass  carried reports  December  12 of  the first meeting with  the cosmonauts. 
Their  doctors  said  that  “the  cosmonauts  feel  fine  which  is  somewhat  a t  
variance  with  the  real  state  of  their  organisms.”  Good  appetites  indicated 
“energetic  adaptation  to  terrestrial  conditions.  In  24  hours  the  cosmonauts 
gained  about  a  kilogram  in  weight  each.  They  particularly  liked  a  bath  with 
the  air  temperature  of  up  to 709” Berezovoy  said alfterward  “If  we  could  have 
such  a  pleasure  at  the  Salyut  station  I  would  have  worked  for  more  time  i n  
orbit .” 
On  December  16  Ivan  Skiba,  chief  physician  of  the  space  training  center, 
said  that  the cosmonauts had  been  “put on a regime approximating their usual 
lifestyle.”  He   said  that  the  doctors  were  “naturally  worried  over  the  decree 
to  which  the  additional  26   days  spent  by  [Berezcwoy  and  Lebedev]  in  outer 
space over  the  185-day  space  mission  of  [Popov  and  Ryumin]  will  affect  the 
human organism.  These 26  days constituted the  “unknown  path”  both  for  the 

384 

DECEMBER  1982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

cosmonauts and for us  physicians. Now  we  can  say  with  certainty that the  [,ad- 
ditional] time  in  space .   . . has  not  affected  the  cosmonauts’ organi,sms. Their 
cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are retur- 
ning  to preflight figures.”  Skiba recalled  that Boris Yegorov,  “a  representative 
of  the  medical  profession,”  was  among  the  first  cosmonauts  andl  hoped  he 
would  not  be   the  last  medical  man  to  f l y   in  space. 
Cosmonau t  Aleksey  Leonov  told  a  magazine  December   17  Berezovoy  and 
Lebedev  had  “made   an  important  step  in   increasing  the  endurance  of 
weightlessness. . .essential  for  activity  in  large  orbital  stations,  space  plants 
and  factories, and  interplanetary missions.” When  the  two  returned  from  the 
211-day  mission,  they  “were  sunken  physically  and  had  become  thinner  and 
paler.  , . [wanted] regular human  communication  with  friends.  They  eat  with 
a  good  appetite.  . .swim  every  day. . . to   have  some  weightlessness  in  water 
and  make  their  life  easier. They  still  find  i t   a bit  difficult to be  seated  as  the 
muscles  that make  the position  comfortable are out  of  their  elementary  func- 
tion .” 
U .S .   space  officials were  watching  the  cosmonauts’  adaptation  to  gravity 
after 30 weeks  of  weightlessness. A  television broadcast three days  after their 
return  showed  them  moving  unaided  to  the  edge  of  a  whirlpool  where  they 
were  assisted down  a  ladder.  A   commentator noted  they  were  “like  infants” 
and  would  have  to  relearn  how  to  walk.  The   Soviet  Union  had  announced 
plans  for  a  station orbiting for  a year  and  permanently manned,  its  crews  re- 
maining  in  space  indefinitely  to  reduce  ferrying  costs.  Soviet  experts,  like 
former  cosmonaut Konstantin  Feoktistov,  had  talked  of  manned  missions,  to 
destinations such as T i tan ,  a satellite of  Saturn.  (Longest U .S .  flighlt so far was 
the 84-day mission flown by  Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William P o p e  
on   Skylab  in  1973  and  1974.) 
The   Washington 7 imes   said  that  Soviet  planners  were  “seriously  divided 
about what  to  do  next.”  Valery  Ryumin,  who  spent  175  and  then  185 days  on  
Sulyut  6 and  was  now  a  senior  program  chief  at  the  space  center,  talked  of 
grave risks  to  crew  health  on  long-term missions and  said  that  “four  months 
is  about  the  optimal  period.”  Ignoring  reports  that  Berezovoy  and  Lebedev 
were in  fine health,  Ryumin  said that  it would  take  “through medical tests  on  
earth”  to  show how  they  had  fared.  (FBIS, Tass  in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beij- 
ing Xinhua  in  English,  Dec  11/82; NY  Times, Dec   11/82,  12; Dec  14/82, C-2; 
W Post,  Dec   11/82, A-23;  Dec   12/82, A-31;  W  Times,  Dec   15/82,  8A) 

December  18: NASA  successfully completed  a  30 second  flight-readiness fir- 
ing of  the new  higher power  space shuttle main  engines at KSC.  The  test  was 
to verify flight readiness of the three new engines and demonstrate in a launch- 
day  environment the proper  integration of  all elements before  the STS-6 niis- 
sion. The  successful test was  a major  step in preparation for  STS-6, scheduled 
for  launch  in  January  1983.  Pre-  and  post-test  activities  included  personnel 
from  KSC,  JSC,  and  MSFC. 

3 85 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

D E C EM B E R   1982 

This was the  second  time  in history  for  static-firing  the primary  propulsion 
system of  a manned  spacecraft on  the launch  pad .   14  similar test of  Columbia’s 
three main engines occurred Febraury 20,  1981, belore the first Shuttle launch. 
Challenger’s  more  powerful  engines,  each  generating 390,000 pound  of  thrust 
at  sea  level,  had  been  fired  individually  at  NSTL  but  were  fired  for  the  first 
time  today  in  a  flight  configuration. 
The  most  significant problem  was  a  high  level  of  gaseous  hydrogen  in  the 
aft  compartment.  NASA  said  that  so  much  work  remained  in   the  crew  com- 
partment  that Rockwell  employees at KSC were  scheduled to work  in that  area 
over  the  holidays.  (NASA   D l y   Acm  R p t ,   Dec  21/82;  NASA  Release  82-187; 
MSFC  Release  82-111) 

December  21:  NASA  said  that  it  had  added  two  physicians,  Dr.  Norman 
Thagard  and Dr. William  Thornton,  to the  crews o f   STS-7 and  STS-8, respec- 
tively,  to  study  space motion  sickness,  because  other  measures  had  failed  to 
indicate  the  causes  of  the  sickness.  Neither  physician  had  flown  in  space 
before. 
Thagard  would  join  STS-7 commander  Robert  I,.  Crippen,  pilot  Frederick 
H .   Hauck,  and  mission  specialists  John  M .   Fabian  and  Dr.  Sally  K .   Ride. 
Thornton,  the  oldest  astronaut  at  53,  would jo in   :STS-8 commander  Richard 
Truly,  pilot  Daniel  Brandenstein,  and  mission  specialists  Dale  Gardner  and 
Guion  Bluford,  Jr.  A  five-person  crew  would  not  requirc  spacecraft  changes. 
(NASA  Release  82-190; MSFC  Release  82-115;  W Post,  Dec  22 /82 ,   A-3;  N Y  
Times,  Dec  22/82,  B-12) 

December 27:  ARC  said  that  it  had  developed,  with  the aid  of  General  Elec- 
tric,  a  portable  remote-communications  system:  a  terminal  and  a  folding 
antenna  sized  to  fit  inside  two  suitcases and be  carried aboard  an  airplane and 
powered  by  either  an  ordinary  AC  outlet  o r   the  cigarette  lighter  in  an 
automobile.  Working  with  experimental  communications  satellite  A 2 3   3, 
operated  by  NASA  since  1967,  an  operator  anywhere  in  North  or  South 
America  o r  most of  the nearby  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans  could  contact any 
of  several  ground  stations  at  any  time. 
The   system  would  fit  into  two  ordinary  suitcases  that  could  be  carried  as 
luggage  in an automobile  or on  public  transportation;  one  suitcases contained 
t h e  collapsible antenna,  the other an alphanumeric  terminal  to  send o r  receive 
messages.  The  alphanumeric  system would  not disturb voice  communications 
over  the  satellite,  so  that  a  NASA-authorized  user  could  use  it  at  any  time 
without  prior  scheduling.  ATS  3 had  already  served  in  many  emergencies. 
When  M t .   S t .  Helens  erupted  i n   May  1980, an A ir   Force jeep   at  the  disaster 
site maintained  voice  communications  through  A7S   3  and  a  GE   station  near 
Schenectady,  showing  the  need  for  rapidly  deployable  long-distance  systems 
not  dependant  on  land  lines,  often  destroyed  in  emergencies.  Organizations, 
including  the  state of  California  and  the National Association  for  Search  and 

386 

DECEMBER  1982 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

Rescue,  were working  with  NASA  on  further  uses of  the  technology.  (NASA 
Release  82-195;  ARC  Release  82-48) 
During  December:   George  B.  Kistiakowsky,  82 ,   a  developer  of  the  first 
atomic bomb who  later  became  a leading opponent  of  nuclear  weapons,  died 
of  cancer at  his  home  in Cambridge, Mass.  In  1944 he  headed  the  explosives 
division  a t   Los  Alamos  Laboratory  of  the  Manhattan  project,  where  he 
designed  the  arrangement  of  conventional  explosives  needed  to  detonate  the 
atom bomb,  receiving  the Presidential  Medal  of Mer i t   for his  work.  After  he 
saw  the  first  nuclear  bomb  explode  at  Alamogordo  July  16,  1945, h e   said  “ I  
am   sure  that  a t   the  end  of  the  world-in 
the  last  millisecond  of  the  earth’s 
last  human will  see what  we  saw”  ( W Post,  Dec  9 /82 ,   C-17) 
existence-the 
-Jack  Swigert, the former astronaut  elected to Congress by  Colorado’s  6th 
district voters,  who knew  he was  fighting cancer, died December 27  at the age 
of  51  a  week  before  he  was  to  be   sworn  into  office.  He   had  flown  on  the 
aborted Apollo  13  Moon mission  in April  1970, substituting  at  the  last minute 
for Thomas K .   Mattingly who had  been  exposed to  German measles  and  was 
not  immune.  Swigert  left  NASA  in  1973  to  become  executive  director  of  the 
House  committee  on  science  and  technology  and  had  worked  for  two  energy 
f irms   in   Denver  before  resigning  to  run  for  Congress.  (M iH r l d ,  Dec  29 /82 ,  
1 4  

387 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  198.3 

January 

January 3:  President  Reagan approved  a joint  resolution designating  1983 the 
“Bicentennial  of  Air  and  Space  Flight.”  His  proclamation  recalled  the  first 
manned  flight  in  history,  in  a  hot-air  balloon  that  traveled  5 %  miles  after  its 
launch  on  Novemeber  21,  1783,  over  Paris,  France.  H e   said  that  the  com- 
memoration would be   “an  opportunity  to increase public awareness of  our  na- 
tion’s achievements in aviation  and  space flight and to  rededicate ourselves  to 
the  spirit of  excellence which  has  brought  us   so far  so fast.”  (Text,  Jan  3/83) 

January  5-31:  Th e   Pentagon  issued  a  warning  January  5  that  a  nuclear- 
powered  Soviet  reconnaissance  satellite had  “run  into  problems”  and  would 
probably  crash  somewhere  on   Earth  before  the  end  of  January.  The   Soviet 
Union’s Cosmos 1402, like an earlier Cosmos that crashed in northern Canada 
in January  1978 and caused minor radiation contamination, was carrying about 
100  pounds  of  enriched  uranium  to  provide  electrical  power  for  its  radar. 
Th e  Soviet Union confirmed  loss of  its control over  Cosmos 1402, launched 
to  observe  U.S.  naval  operations  from  an   orbit  of  6 4 . 9 ”   inclination  that 
covered  most of North America and all of  China, Africa,  South America,  and 
Australia,  as   well  as  part  of  the   Soviet  Union.  Th e   danger  lay  not  in  the 
possibility  of  an  explosion  but  in  the  radioactivity  of  the  nuclear  fuel core   if 
t h e   craft  should  come   down  i n   a  densely  populated  area. 
The   foreign  press  had  warned  that  Cosmos  1402 had  “separated  into  in- 
dividual fragments on  a command from earth.”  Th e  nuclear power  unit aboard 
it was a matter of concern to all other nations; the  United States had  “express- 
ed  its:concern  to  Moscow”  that  the  object  and  its  100  pounds  of  uranium 
would  crash  on  the  Earth  like  the other.  (FBIS,  Xinhua  in English,  Jan  7 /83 ;  
PravdQ  in  Russian,  Jan  8 /83 ;  Tass  in  English,  Jan  15/83) 
Normally, said  the United  Press,  when a n  ocean-surveillance  satellite such 
as   1402  exhausted  its  4-to-7-month  life  expectancy  it  would  b e   raised  and 
“parked”  at  a  high  orbit  altitude  “for  centuries.”  Th e  Tass  news  agency  said 
January  7  $at  Cosmos  1402  had  been  “divided  into  separate  fragments  by 
commands from  ear th   in order  to isolate  the active part  of  the  reactor,  which 
ensured  its  complete  combustion  in  the  atmosphere  strata.”  Department  of 
Defense  (DOD)   sources said  January  10 that  one  piece  had  burned  up  in  the 
atmosphere,  bu t   two  larger  sections were  still  descending-those  holding  the 
reactor,  biggest  and  heaviest  part  of  the  6,000-pound  satellite.  At  the  current 
rate  of  descent,  the  parts  could  enter  the  atmosphere  in  the  week  beginning 
January  23,  sources  said. 
Tass  reported  January  24  that  “the main part  of  the  satellite  structure”  tiad 
reentered  over  the  Indian Ocean at  1:lO a .m .  Moscow  time:  the  fuel  core  was 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1983 

forecast  to enter between  Fcbruary  3 and  8  [see Feb.  71.  ( N Y  T ime s ,  Jan  6183, 
A-1;  Jan  22/83,  9 ;  Jan  31/83,  A-25;  W Post,  Jan  7/83,  A-21;  Jan  8/83, A-11; 
Jan  11183, A-9;  Jan  20183,  A-2;  Jan  24183.  A-1;  Tass  in   English,  Jan  7183, Jan 
24/83) 

January  7:  NASA  said  it  would  conduct  another  flight-readiness  test  of 
Challenger’s  three  main  engines  late  in  January  because  of  high  gaseous- 
hydrogen  levels  i n   the  aft  compartment  after  the  first  firing  December  18. 
Several  leaks  had  shown  up,  including  a  split  cooling  tube  in  the  #  3  engine 
nozzle.  The  need  for  a  second  test  would  delay  the  STS-6 Challenger  launch 
to  late February.  (NASA Release  83-2; MSFC Release 83-2 ;  AvWk ,   Jan  17/83, 
24) 

Lewis Research  Center’s  (LeRC) basic  organization was  revised  following 
a  recent  strategic  planning  session.  Th e  four  research  and  technology  ( U T )  
directorate  (aeronautics,  energy,  science  and  technology,  and  space)  were 
changed  to  aeronautics,  spaceflight  systems,  space  technology,  and  materials 
and  structures.  An  office of  comptroller  was  established  to  manage  resources 
and budget.  Other directorates  affected  were  administration,  engineering  ser- 
vices,  and  technical  services,  (NASA  anno  Jan  14183; LeRC  Release  83-3) 

January  17:  The  People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  announced  that  it  would 
buy  from the  United  States a Landsat ground station to be hooked  into the U.S. 
system.  A  spokesman  for  the  China  Academy  of  Sciences  said  that  the  new 
station  would  help  analyze  China’s  geological  structure,  locate  mineral 
resources,  and  provide  data  for  land  use,  crop   estimates,  irrigation,  en- 
vironmental monitoring,  alterations in watercourse:<, pest  and disease control, 
and  predicting  natural  disasters. 
Th e  Washington Post  said  that  a  Maryland  company,  Systems and  Applied 
Sciences  Corporation,  had  a  signed  contract  with  the  People’s  Republic  of 
China  to build  the  station  at  a  cost of  up  to  $12 million.  Th e  f irm ,   among  the 
largest  black-owned  enterprises  i n   the  United  States  had  “worked  on  many 
projects”  for NASA,  but  the  PRC  contract would  be  its  first  significant inter- 
national  venture.  PRC  officials would  press  Secretary  of  State George  Shultz 
when  he  visited  in  February  to  approve  the  sale,  as   the  United  States  had 
blocked  technology  transfers  in  the past  because  of  possible military  applica- 
tion.  Both the Carter and the Reagan  administrations had approved  such  a sale 
i n  the past, but  the People’s Republic’s economic problems  had  forced  a delay. 
(FBIS,  Xinhua  i n   English,  Jan  17183;  W Post,  Jan  18/83, A-18;  AvWk ,   Jan 
31183,  21) 

January  19:  The   press  reported  the  death  in  North  Carolina  at  the  age  of 
“about  26”  of Ham ,  the chimpanzee sent on a Mercury capsule into suborbital 
flight January  21,  1961, to  prepare  for  the  flight  of  Alan  B.  Shepard, J r . ,  first 
U.S.  astronaut. 

392 

JANUARY  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Ham ,   named  after  the  Holloman  Aerospace Medical  Center  in  New  Mex- 
ico, retired from  the  space program  in  1963 to  live at  the National  Zoological 
Park  i n   Washington,  D.C.,  and  after  1981  in   the  North  Carolina  Zoological 
Park.  His  tr ip   in   “a  very  primitive  space  capsule on  an  experimental  subor- 
bital  run”  was  attended with  “excitement and  suspense,”  even dread,  because 
no  one  could  predict  whether  he  would  survive  the  shocks  of  the  trip  or 
undergo  emotional  trauma. 
“Ham   rose to the occasion  and took  it all in  stride,” the report  said.  “Never 
mind  that  the capsule,  through  an  error,  had  been  shot 40 miles  higher  than 
planned or that it had  landed 30 miles past the target area where a  fleet awaited 
it or that it had been traveling 5,000 miles an hour,  800 miles faster than plann- 
ed.  . . . During the time radio signals were received the chimp pushed various 
levers and performed  other behavior  tasks  assigned him.”  ( W  Post, Jan  21/83, 
A-16;  Jan  26183,  B-3;  Jan  27/83,  A-22) 

January  21:  NASA  declared  successful  the  mission  of  N imbus   7,  launched 
October 24,  1978,  from Vandernberg Air Force Base into a  polar orbit.  Using 
eight  interdisciplinary research  experiments representing domestic  and  inter- 
national scientific and  government communities, i t  accomplished mission  ob- 
jectives,  including  proof  of  the  feasibility  of  mapping  upper-atmosphere 
characteristics,  of  supplying  space-collected  oceanographic data  to  scientific 
uses,  and  of  extending the  solar-radiation and  Earth-radiation  data  base.  Ob- 
jectives  were  met  or  exceeded with  high-quality  and  high-quantity  data,  iind 
N imbus  7wou ld  continue into its  seventh year  “ in   good health.”  (NASA MlOR 
E-604-78-08  [postlaunch]  Jan  21/83) 

January  25:  NASA  launched  the  Infrared  Astronomical  Satellite  (IRAS)  at 
6:17  p .m .   PST  from  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base  on  a   Delta  into  polar  orbit 
with  883.6-kilometer apogee,  856.6-kilometer perigee,  lOO.l%clination,  and 
102.4-minute  period.  A   jo in t   endeavor  of  NASA,  Netherlands  Aerospace 
Agency,  and  U.K. Science and  Engineering  Research  Council,  IRAS,  was  a  
2,360-pound spacecraft carrying a  22-inch Cassegrain telescope cryogenically 
cooled  by  a   helium  tank  to measure  infrared  radiation  in  four  bands  between 
8  and  119 microns. At  low  temperature the detectors would have the sensitivity 
needed  for  an  all-sky  survey  of  the  “heat  signatures”  of  stars. 
The   $80 million  mission  might  find  up  to  a   million  infrared  sources  not 
previously detected,  filling  “a  significant gap in  the electromagnetic spectrum 
between visible light and  radio waves.  . .about which we  have no o r  very  little 
information,”  according  to  Dr.  Dale  Comp ton ,   telescope manager   at  Ames 
Research  Center  (ARC).  IRAS was  designed  to  cover  about  95%  of  the  sky 
over the next  sixth months  and  produce  the  first comprehensive catalog of  in- 
frared  objects. 
The   United  States  built  the  telescope  and  the  rocket  and  was  managing 
operations  through  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL) ,   The   Netherlands 
built  the  spacecraft  and  three  other  scientific  instruments.  The   United 

393 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONALT IC S  

JANUARY  1983 

Kingdom  would  handle  the  tracking  and  collect  the  data.  (NASA  MOR 
E-885-83-01  [prelaunch]  Jan  3 /83 ;   NASA   wk ly   SSR ,   Jan  27/83;  Spacewarti 
SPX-352; N Y   Times,  Jan  27183,  A-7) 

Discovery  of  another  hydrogen  leak  during  a  second  test-firing  of  Shuttle 
Challenger’s main  engines  would  delay  the  launcli  recently  postponed  to  late 
February  for  at  least  several  more  weeks,  said  Lt.  Gen .   James  A.  Abraham- 
son,  Shuttle program  head,  at Kennedy  Space Center  (KSC ) .  The   leak meant 
delaying  Challenger‘s  five-day  mission  for  a  month  o r  more   if   one  o r   more 
of  the  engines  had  to  be  removed  from  the  Shuttle,  test-fired,  and  replaced. 
The  new  leak was  “on  the same order  of  magnitude”  as the first;  as  the source 
was  neve r   located,  the  leaks  m igh t   be  from   t h e   same  or   d ifferen t   a rea s .   ( W  
Post,  Jan  26/83,  A-5) 

Junuury 31:  James M .   Beggs,  NASA’s administrator,  told  a  press  conference 
on  the  agency  budget  that  President  Reagan  was  committed  “to  a  strong  na- 
tional  space  and  aeronautics  program,”  citing  NASA’s  obligation  to  help 
strengthen  national  security  and  maintain  U .S .   leadership  i n   space.  “This 
budget,  I  believe,  moves  us  forward  toward  those  goals,”  he  said. 
NASA’s  FY84  budget  would  be  just  over  $7.1  billion,  an  increase  of  $267 
million  ( 4% )  over  FY83. Of  $5.7 billion  sought for  research  and development 
(RBrD), 61% (about $3.5 billion)  would  be earmarked  for the Shuttle program 
to  cover  Shuttle procurement  and operation,  upper  stages  for  Shuttle use,  the 
Spacelab,  the  tethered  satellite,  and  other  equipment  and  launch  vehicles. 
B e g s  said  that  the  trend  begun  last  year  was  to  spend  relatively  more  on 
operations  and  less  on  capability  development.  NASA’s  FY84  budget  request 
included  four  initiatives  to  “stretch  the  scope of  our   program  in  science,  ap- 
plications,  and  aeronautics.”  They  were  the  Tethered  Satellite System  (TSS), 
a  cooperative  U.S.-Italian  project  for  conducting  experiments  in  space  up  to 
100  kilometers  from  a  Shuttle orbiter;  the Venus  radar  mapper,  replacing  the 
Venus-orbiting  imaging  radar  (VOIR)  authorized  by  Congress  i n   FY82;  the 
Advanced  Communications  Technology  Satcllic  (ACTS)  to  flight-test  high- 
risk  technology,  using  “a  novel  procurement  approach”  of  cost-sharing  with 
industry;  and  a  numerical  aerodynamic  simulation  (NAS)  capability,  a  large 
computer  system  to  improve  accuracy  and  reliability  in  aircraft  design  while 
reducing  the  need  for  wind-tunnel  and  flight  testing. 
Beggs  said  U.S.  space  policy  called  for  “permanent  space  facilities,”  to  be 
embodied  in  the  Space  Shuttle program;  FY84  money  would  define and  plan 
for such  facilities. We  have no  specific plans to establish a permanent  manned 
spacc  station  in  earth  orbit,”  he  said,  but  NASA  would  continue the  study  of 
user  requirements,  hardware  and  software system:;, science  applications,  and 
designs  to  accommodate  specific  missions.  (Text,  press  conf ,   Jan  31/83) 

During January:   Speaking in the House of  Representatives, Reps.  Don Fuqua 
(D-Fla.)  and  Larry  Winn  (R-Kans.)  noted  the 25th  anniversary  of  thc  start of 

304 

JANUARY  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

the  U.S.  space  program.  When  the  Navy’s  Vanguard  rocket  exploded  on  its 
pad  in December  1957, the Army  “quickly  moved  forward”  to finish develop- 
ing  Explorer  1,  and the Jupiter  C  rocket carried  it  into orb i t  January  31,  1958. 
1  on  October  4 ,   1957,  and  Sputnik  2 
After  two  Soviet  space  firsts-Sputnik 
carrying  the dog Laika into space  on November 3,  1957-the  United Statems had 
entered  the  space  race  that  would  land  two  astronauts  on  the  moon  jus t   over 
11  years  af ter   Exp lorer   1. 
Exp lorer   1  exceeded  all  expectations,  transmitting  data  until  its  batteries 
were  exhausted  May  23,  1958.  Scientists  basing  a  decay  rate  on   data  from 
Sputnik  said  that  Explorer  1  would  not  last  more   than  five  years.  But  on 
March  3,  1970, more  than  12 years  after  launch,  Explorer  1 plunged  back  into 
Earth’s atmosphere  and burned  up.  It had  made the  most  significant discovery 
of  the  International  Geophysical  Year  (the  Van  Allen  radiation  belt  about 
E a r t h ) ,   con t ro l l ed   t h e   t em p e r a tu r e   in   a  s a t e l l i t e ,   and   found   th a t  
micrometeorities  were  not  serious  hazards  to  space  vehicles,  data  valuable  to 
the   Moon  missions. 
Although  “ the  American  story  in  space  is only  25  years  old,”  Winn  added ,  
“we  have made  tremendous  progress  in  that  quar ter  century,  and  it  all  began 
with  Exp lorer   1.”  (CR ,  Jan  31/83,  E204 ;   AFSC  Newsreview,  Feb  11/83,  1) 

The  hydrogen leak that caused postponement  of Challenger’s maiden  launch 
had  been  traced  to one  of  the  three  engines,  according  to  KSC’s Dick  Young. 
A  three-quarter-inch-long  crack  appeared  in  the  combustion  manifold  of  the 
#1  engine, a piece of metal an eighth of an inch thick.  ( WPo s t ,  Jan  30/83, A-2) 

NASA reported  a number  of differences between  Shuttle orb i ters  Columbia 
and  Challenger,  most  of  them  stemming  from  Columbia’s  being  a  vessel  for 
research  and  development,  whereas  Challenger  came   equipped  as  an  opera-  
tional  craf t .  
Control  and  display  panels  on   Columbia  had  sensors  configured  for  data 
collection  and  processing  in  the  flight-test  phase;  those  on   Challenger  had 
fewer of  these and more  support equipment,  such a s  a Ku-band antenna system 
for tracking  future data-relay  satellites. On the  first four flights, Columbia had 
an  ejection-seat  system for  the commander  and pilot  in case  of  accident  in  the 
launch  o r   landing  phase  of  flight-testing.  Challenger  had  no  ejection  system; 
the  space used  for  it on Columbia  would  serve  on  Challenger  to  seat  the  mis- 
sion  specialists. On  its  first  flight  in  February,  Challenger  would  seat  all  four 
of  the  flight  crew  on  the  orbiter’s  flight  deck ;   it  would  be   ab le   to  seat  three 
more   crew  members  in  the  mid-deck  on  later  flights. 
Challenger  would  weigh  abot  2,000  pounds  (907 kilograms)  less  than  Co l-  
umbia  and  could  carry   more   payload  and  additional  crew  on  operaLiona1 
flights.  The   orbiters  differed  in  thermal-protection  systems:  heat-shielding 
tiles on Columbia were being  replaced  with densified tiles to eliminate porosi- 
ty  that made  the original tiles vulnerable to loosening.  All of  Challenger’as tiles 
had  been  densified.  Challenger  also  had  an  advanced  thermal-protection 

395 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

JANUARY   1983 

blanket,  a  silica  material  sandwiched  between  an  upper  and  lower  q u i l t   and 
bonded  directly  to  the  orbiter  skin.  Its  identification  marking  also  differed 
from  Columbia’s,  being  located  so  the name would  be  visible during on-orbit 
operations.  (NASA  Ac tv ,   Jan  83,  4) 

396 

February 

February  1:  NASA  transferred  operation  and  management  of  its  Landsat 
system  to  the   National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration’s  (NOAA) 
National  Environmental  Satellite,  Data,  and  Information  Serv ice   (NESDIS) 
dur ing   ceremonies  a t   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC) .   Beginning  in 
1972  with  the  launch  of  Landsat  1 (Er ts  1,  the  Earth-resources  technology 
satellite),  the  Landsat program was a research  and development  effort  to deter- 
mine  the  usefulness  of  satellite multispectral  data  from  synoptic  views  of  the 
Earth’s  surface for agricultural  and urban  planning,  geologic exploration,  land 
management,  and  snowmelt  and  flood-runoff  analysis. 
Over  the  following  10  years  NASA  had  operated  four  Landsats,  including 
Landsat  4 ,  launched  in  July  1982, and  a  ground  system  at  GSFC.  Landsat  I 
and Landsat  2 were  no  longer  operating;  Landsat  3 would  be   retired  later  in 
1983 because  of  degradation  related  to age.  In  1979 the Reagan administration 
told NASA to transfer  operation  to NOAA  so that the  latter  agency could  work 
toward  eventual  commercialization  of  the  system. 
NASA  had  relinquished  operation  of  Landsat  4  (except  for  the   thematic 
mapper,  which NASA would continue to use),  the control  center a t  GSFC ,  and 
the  multispectral-scanner  data-processing  facility,  also  a t   GSFC,  and  mould 
hand  over  control  of  the  thematic  mapper  early  in  1985.  NOAA  would  also 
take  over  the  Landsat  4  backup  spacecraft  (the  Landsat  D  now  in  final 
checkout  by  General  Electric)  that  would  replace  Landsat  4 ,   probably  in  
mid-1985.  NOAA  would  reimburse  NASA  for  the  use  of  buildings  and 
utilities.  (NASA  Release  83-7) 

February  1-11:  Despite  “intense  efforts”  to  communicate  with  Viking  lander 
1 on  the surface of Mars ,  silent since mid-November,  controllers and scientists 
a t  JPL and a Martin Marietta  group  had  received  no  signals  during  a  schedul- 
ed   downlink  February  11.  S ince   February   1 they  had  sent  commanlds  that 
should have started  the  lander’s on-board  computer  executing  the  steps needed 
to  transmit  to  Earth.  Declining  battery  power  on   the  lander  was  thought  to 
have tripped  a protective  low-voltage switch that  shut down major  subsystems; 
if  the  commands  had  been  followed,  the  lander  would  have  communicated 
February  11. 
JPL  would  go ahead with  efforts  to reestablish  contact,  which  would be  un- 
successful  if  the  lander  had  multiple  problems.  No   telemetry  dala  were 
available  to  diagnose  the  situation.  The   64-meter  Deep  Space  Tracking  Net- 
work  antenna,  near  Canberra ,   had  bombarded  the  lander  on  Mars   with  80- 
to  100-kilowatt signals,  said  George  Gianopulos,  Viking  team  leader  at  JPL .  
Gianopulos  said  that  commands  from  JPL  through  Australia  could  he   up  to 

397 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRtiARY  1983 

4 0 ”  off  the receiving  line  into  the  leader’s  antenna  dish  and  still be  picked  up. 
Getting  into  the  lander  to  reset  the  switch  “is  going  to  be  a  neat  trick,”  he 
added. 
Launched August  20,  1975, and designed  for a 90-day  mission,  V ik ing  1 had 
shown  “incredible  stamina”  i n   t h e  harsh  environment  of  Mars.  Radioisotope 
thermoelectric  generators  ( R E S )  could  provide power  for  years,  but  in  1982 
its four nickel-cadmium batteries began  to  show  their age.  Viking could be  in- 
structed  to  charge  o r   discharge  batteries  to  keep  them  functioning  longer.  A 
command  sent  November  19  to  repeat  this  exercise  apparently  got  into  the 
antenna-pointing subroutine and  switched  the crucial communications antenna 
to point  away  from Earth.  (NASA  D1y  Actv Rp t ,  Fch  16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 
2X fX3 ,   1) 

A  NASA  team  investigating  space-suit  failures  that  occurred  during  STS-5 
issued  a report listing ways to  improve and  simplify contractor  test and inspec- 
tion  procedures.  Regulators and  motors would  undergo more extensive  testing 
on  the  Shuttle orbiter jus t   before  being  stored,  and  space suits would  be   fully 
tested  the  day  before  a  scheduled  space walk.  Th e   First  failure  to  be  detected, 
shutdown  of  a  fan motor  while Joseph  P.  Allen  war; donning  his  suit,  was  the 
fault of  sensors  i n   the motor  electronics.  The other  failure,  that  of  an  oxygen 
regulator  in  William  Lenoir’s  suit,  resulted  from  the  absence  of  two  tiny 
devices  holding  a  regulator  spring  in  place.  (NASA  Release  83-9) 
February  4:  Japan  launched  its  first  “practical  communications  satellite, 
Cs2A ,  at  5 :37  p .m .   local  time  from  its Tanegashima  space center on  a  three- 
stage  rocket  toward  a  stationary  orbit at  36,000  kilometers  over  New  Guinea. 
It would be Japan’s sixth in stationary orbit, although it would be the first used 
for  practical  purposes. 
Cs2A  carried  eight  transponders  with  communications  capacity  equal  to 
4,000 telephone circuits,  to  improve  links between  ithe  mainland  and  outlying 
islands in the Pacific  south of Tokyo.  It would  be used  by  government  agencies 
and  public  transportation  rather  than  by  the  publlic  sector  for  research  to 
develop new  media  such as  television  communications  links,  electronic  mail, 
high-speed datafax, and color television.  (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English,  Feb 
4 /83)  

NASA  announced  crew  selections  for  STS-11  and  STS-12,  both  to  be  com- 
manded  by  veterans  of  earlier  shuttle  missions.  Th e   crew  for  STS-11  in 
January  1984,  led  by  Vance  D.  Brand,  who  commanded  STS-5  i n   November 
1982,  would  include  pilot  Robert  L .   Gibson  and  mission  specialists  Bruce 
McCandless  11, Robert  L .  Stewart,  and  Dr.  Ronald  E .  McNair.  STS-11 would 
be  the  fifth  flight  of  Challenger,  and  its  seven-day  mission  would  launch  an 
Indonesian  communications  satellite. 

The crew  for STS-12, led  by  Henry W.  Hartsfield,  who  commanded  STS-4 
i n   June  1982,  would  include  pilot  Michael  L .   Coats  and  mission  specialists 

398 

FEBRUARY  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

Dr.  Judith A .   Resnik,  Dr.  Steven A .   Hawley, and  Richard  M .  Mullane. Mar- 
shall  Space Flight  Center  (MSFC)  said that  a   sixth  crewman might  be  added 
later under a  new  NASA  policy  permitting major  customers to send a  payload 
specialist  along.  To  be  launched  in  March  1984,  STS -12   would  be  the  lirst 
flight of  a  new orbiter, Discovery; its 5-day mission would include deplqyment 
of  the  third  tracking  and  data-relay  satellite.  (NASA  Release  83-15;  MSFC 
Release  83-6) 

MSFC announced that i t  would begin drop tests i n  cooperation with Dryden 
Flight  Research  Facility  (DFRF )   to  try  out  larger  parachutes  for  Shuttle 
boosters. The  current means  of  slowing booster  descent after  launch  into  the 
ocean for retrieval and  later use consisted of  small pilot  chutes, a  drogue, and 
three  main  chutes  115  feet  in  diameter.  The   new  main  chutes  being  tested 
would  be  13  feet  in  diameter. Use  of  larger chutes would  slow  velocity  at  im- 
pact  from  89  feet per  second  to  about  75  feet  per  second,  reducing  I O ~ I ~ S  on 
(and  amount  of  damage  to)  boosters  that  had  occurred  during  Shuttle flight 
tests,  officials said. 
A   modified  B-52  aircraft  from  DFRF   would  f l y   the  test  article  to  about 
20,000-feet altitude and  release  it.  Both  ground-based  and  airborne  caimeras 
would  record  the mock  booster’s descent to  evaluate design, deployment, and 
parachute  performance.  (MSFC   Release  83-9;  DFRF   Release  83-1) 

NASA  announced its decision to locate a  refurbishment and  assembly facili- 
ty  for  Shuttle  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  elsewhere  than  in   the  Vehicle 
Assembly  Building  (VAS)   at  KSC .   High  production  rates  required  in  the 
1986-and-later timeframe could no t  occur in  the available space; also, the ‘VAB 
did  not  lend  itself  to  efficient  “factory  operation”  for  refurbishment  of‘ the 
solid-fuel  rocket  boosters. 
NASA  had considered alternate locations, such as a  complex on  government 
property  at  KSC  or  Canaveral Air  Force  Station  or  an  off-site  location  near 
KSC.  All  these  sites had  problems,  and  the  search  had  expanded  to  include 
some partially empty industrial facilities  formerly used to build Saturn rockets 
at MSFC.  The  location  chosen  would  be  cost-effective as  well  as the hest  for 
recompeting  the  contract.  (NASA  Release  83-17;  MSFC   Release  83-7) 

February  7:  In   a  White  House   speech  to  persons  from  the  aviation, govern- 
ment,  diplomatic, military,  and  business  areas,  President  Reagan  hailed  200 
years of  manned  flight and  announced a  decision  to  “keep  the  shuttle produc- 
tion  lines intact”  to  “preserve the option of  building  the  fifth  shuttle” and  ad- 
vantage  of  “ the   tremendous  opportunities  that  lie  ahead.”  (Text,  Feb.  7/83) 

Senior  NASA  managers,  headed  by  L t .   Gen .   James  A .   Abrahamson, 
associate administrator for space flight, had met with contractors and  “c1e:ared 
the  way”  for  returning  the  tracking  and  data-relay  satellite to  KSC’s  launch 
pad  in   preparation  for  the  first  launch  of  Challenger,  the  agency  said. 

399 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY   1983 

Results  of  the  second  flight-readiness firing led  to  a decision  not  to conduct 
a third  firing before  launching Challenger early  i n   March.  The  #1  engine had 
been  removed  for  exchange  with  the  flight  spare.  The   spare  would  have  the 
high-pressure  pump from the  #1 engine installed before the change took  place. 
(NASA  Release  83-16) 

Tass  reported  that  the  fuel  core  for  the  nuclcar-powered  Cosmos  1402 
entered  the  atmosphere  over  the  Atlantic  at  1:5b  p .m .   Moscow  time  and 
“burned up  entirely.”  Data  from  “competent Soviet organizations tracking the 
flight”  said  the Sputnik  “totally  ceased  its existence.”  (FBIS, Tass in English, 
Feb  7/83) 

February  18:  A  panel  investigating  the  loss  of  two  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters 
after  the  launch  of  STS-4  said  that  a  switch  in  the. booster  decelerators  was 
at  fault . 
Premature  separation  of  one   of  two  riser  attachrnents on  each  main  chute 
occurred  about  365-seconds after  liftoff,  when  the  frustrums  were  exploded 
away  from  the booster,  instead  of  at  impact  with  the water.  A  switch  designed 
to  release  the chutes when  the boosters  hit  the water  had  freed  the parachutes 
from  the  boosters  before  impact,  probably  because  of  severe  shock  when  the 
explosion  separated  the  frustrum  from  the  boosters. 
Before  STS-5,  NASA  modified  the  decelerating  system  to  fix  both  risers 
firmly  to  each  booster,  to  eliminate  switch  separat.ion,  and  to  prevent  shock 
from  affecting  other  subsystems.  The   booster  deceleration  worked  perfectly 
during  STS-5.  (NASA   Release  83-19) 

February  22:  NASA  announced  the  selection  of  crews  for  STS-13  and 
Spacelab 3,  as  well  as mission  specialists for Spacelab 2 .   Robert  L .  Crippen, 
who  piloted  STS-1  and  was  scheduled  to  command  STS-7,  would  command 
STS-13  i n   April  1984  with  Francis  R .   Scobee  as   pilot.  Mission  specialists 
would be Dr. George D.  Nelson,  Terry  J.  Hart,  and  Dr.  James D.  van  Hoften. 
Robert E  Overrnyer,  who  has  pilot  of  STS-5,  woiild  command  STS-18 (the 
Spacelab  3  mission,  now  scheduled  for  launch  ahead  of  Spacelab  2)  with 
Frederick D.  Gregory  as  pilot.  Mission  specialists would  be Dr .  Don  L .  Lind 
and  physicians  Dr.  Norman  E .   Thagard  and  Dr.  William  E .   Thornton.  Both 
of  the latter would be  on  Shuttle flights before  Spacelab 3: Thagard on  STS-7, 
Thornton  on  STS-8.  Payload  specialists  would  be  selected  later. 
Mission  specialists  for  STS-24  (Spacelab  2)  would  be  Dr.  Anthony  W. 
England  and  Dr.  Karl  G.  Henize.  Spacelab  3  was  originally  to  be  the  first 
operational mission;  Spacelab 2 ,  which  should  have preceded  Spacelab 3, was 
delayed  for  completion  of  an  instrument-pointing  system.  (NASA  Release 
83-22) 

During  February:  Th e   Florida  Historic  Preservation  Society  charged  that 
NASA  had  breached  a  1974  agreement  by  arranging for  demolition of  the  last 

400 

FEBRUARY  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONIiUTICS 

Apollo  launch  tower  at  KSC  and  sale of  the  metal  as  scrap.  NASA  said  that 
i t  had  to  award  a contract for demolition  by  February  18  o r  risk  further  dclay 
in  Shuttle schedules:  the  tower  had  to  be  removed  by  October  so that  NASA 
could begin modifying the mobile launch pad  for use by  the Shuttle beginning 
in  1986. 
NASA  had  postponed  demolition  for  a  week  to  let  the  society  find  a  way 
to  preserve the tower  but  said none of  the  suggestions was practical.  The  mat- 
ter arose when  two  U.S. Air Force engineers at KSC  said that  the tower could 
be  a major  tourist  attraction and  started  a  move  to  save  i t .   NASA  said  that  it 
would cost up  to  $4 million to remove the  tower  and  reassemble it  for display. 
The   agency  had  accepted  a  bid  of  $557,000  to  remove  the  tower,  arid  the 
demolition company would  keep  the  steel, worth  about  !$400,000, as  scrap. A 
coalition of  historic preservation groups  said that  the tower  could  be  removed 
and  rebuilt  for  $1  million  (admittedly  only  an  estimate).  NASA  had  offered 
free  storage  and  a  site for  reconstructing it  if  the  coalition would  pay  :i con- 
tractor  to  dismantle and  move  i t .   (NASA Release  83-25;  W Post,  Feb  17/83, 
A-17) 

NASA said that its IRAS launched January 25 had revealed infrared scmrces 
in  the Large Magellanic Cloud  not visible to optical telescopes on Ear th .   The  
Large  Magellanic  Cloud  was  the galaxy  closest  to  Ear th ,   about  155,oOcl  light 
years  away.  IRAS produced  an  image  from  the  nebula,  called 30 Doradus,  of 
a cloud  called Tarantula by  astronomers,  from  its  long  separate filaments giv- 
ing  it a spider-like appearance. Astronomers suggested that the nebula  (ii giant 
H  I1 region,  consisting of hydrogen clouds ionized by  the  ultraviolet radiation 
from  a  very  hot  star) might  contain  a  monster  star  thousands  of  time, c ,   more  
massive  than  Earth’s  Sun.  (NASA  Release  83-21) 

40 1 

March 

March  1:  NASA  technicians  a t  Cape  Canaveral  removed  two  of  Challenger’s 
main  engines  for  repairs;  a  third  engine,  on  its  way  from  Mississippi,  would 
undergo  similar  maintenance.  L t .   Gen.  James  A .  Abrahamson,  associate  ad-  
ministrator  for  space  transportation  systems,  told  a  House  subcommit tee  on 
science  and  technology  that  discovery  of  the  flaws while  the   Shuttle was  still 
on  the ground showed the agency’s conservative approach to safety. He  blamed 
tight  budgets  in  the  past  for  a  lack  of  spare  parts.  Delay  from   the  original 
January  20  launch  da te   had  already  cost  NASA  about  $1.5  million;  costs 
would  increase  la ter   when  crews  would  have  to  work  overtime  to  me€ t  pro- 
gram   commitments. 
Challenger’s #l engine  was  removed February  4 when  a  crack  in  a  coolant 
l ine   allowed  inflammable  gas  to  leak  into  the  af t   compar tmen t .   Then ,   the 
replacement  engine  was  found  to  have  an  oxygen  leak  in  its  heat  exchanger, 
a  system  to  pressurize  the  external  fuel  tank.  An  inspection  of  the  #3  engine 
revealed  the  same  flaw. 
As Challenger’s engines were  intended  to handle heavier  payloads  than  (301- 
umbia’s,  a design  change had  added  a metal  sleeve over  the  fuel-supply  tubes 
to  absorb  greater  vibrations.  Soldering  apparently  overheated  and  embrittled 
the  underlying  metal  tubing. Welding  new  tubing  would make  the  configura- 
tion  l ike   the  o ld   Columbia  engines,  and  Challenger would  no t   be   ablc to  run 
a t   full  thrus t .   (NASA DIy Actv  Rp t ,   Mar   2 /83 ;  NY   Times, Ma r   2 / 8 3 ,  A-1;  W 
Post,  Mar   2/83,  A-5) 

March  5 :   NASA  said  tha t   i t   would  have  to  revise  the   schedu le   for 
Challenger’s  first  launch  because  delays  had  pushed  the  da te  past  the  vernal 
equinox  and  would  put  the  Shuttle’s  communications  satellite  payload  in 
Earth’s  shadow  for  an  undesirably  long  time.  Liftoff  would  be   reset  for  1:30 
p.m.  EST,  regardless  of  the date,  shortening  the  launch window  from  4 hours 
to   18 minutes,  because   of  the  need  for  daylight  conditions  at  an  emergency- 
landing  runway  in  Dakar, Senegal. 
Spring would  start March  2 0  a t   11:39 p .m .   EST.  With  the  sun  directly  over 
the  equator,  the   time  in  darkness   between  transferring  the  communications 
satellite  from  the  Shuttle’s low  Earth  orb i t  to  stationary  orb i t  a t  22 ,300  miles 
altitude would have resulted  in too much heat loss. All  five Columbia missions 
were  launched  in  the  morning,  the  ear l ier   the better  according  to  NASA,  so 
that  the  crews  had  more  dayiight  to  work  in.  ( N Y  Times, Mar   6/83,  M;I 

March  7-19:  A KSC  spokesman  said that another problem could delay further 
the   f irs t   flight  of  Challenger:  contamination  of  the  giant  tracking  and  data- 
PRECED ING   PAGE   BLANK  NOT  ;F!ILMED 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1983 

relay  satellite  (TDRS)  to  be  carried  on  that  flight.  A  storm  February  28  with 
winds  from  60  to  70  mph  had  carried  “sand,  salt,  silica  particles,  and  paint 
chips”  into  the  room  at  the  launch  pad  where  the  payload  was  kept  and onto 
t h e  satellite. NASA  said  earlier  that  the TDRS  was  not  seriously  damaged by 
“particulate  matter”  found  on  i t ;  however,  the  contaminants were  undergoing 
laboratory  tests,  and  the  sensitive  Earth-scanner  and  tracking  instruments 
were  being  closely  examined.  Launch  would  again  be  delayed,  probably  to 
April  7. 
Spokesman James Kukowski  said  that  NASA  could  fly  the  2%- ton  satellite 
as   is;  try  to  clean  it  inside  the  Challenger  cargo  bay  (where  it  was  installed 
February  25) ;   remove  and  clean  it  at  the  launch  pad;  return  it  to  a  KSC 
payload  assembly  building;  or   send  i t   back  to  TRW’s  plant  i n   California. 
Delays were costing up to $3  million a day  in overtime.  ( N Y  Times, Mar  8/83, 
C-8;  Mar   11/83, A-14;  Mar   19/83,  14;  W Post,  Ma r   9/83,  A-17;  Mar   11/83, 
A-18;  Mar  19/83, A-10) 

March 9:  NASA  said that i t  had joined  with  the Department of  Energy  (DOE) 
and  the  DOD   i n   a  program  to  advance  technology  of  nuclear-reactor  power 
systems  for use in future civilian and military space missions. The  SP-100 pro- 
gram would  assess promising concepts with  the  aim of  beginning engineering 
and  ground  testing  within  a  few  years.  Research  would  proceed  on  ther- 
moelectric  and other power-conversion  systems;  high-temperature  metals and 
materials;  radiators  for  dissipating waste  heat  in   space; and high-temperature 
nuclear  fuels.  A  project  office  at J P L  would  provide day-to-day  management 
of  SP-100.  (NASA  Releaw  83-30) 

LeRC  issued a  request  for proposals  to  design,  build,  and  launch  an ACTS 
system, including flight  spacecraft, ground  system,  and operations.  Launched 
by  the Space Shuttle in  1988, ACTS  would  serve foir  two  years  in communica- 
tions  experiments.  (NASA  Release  83-28;  LeRC  :Release  83-14) 

Tass announced the docking of  Cosmos 1443, probably  an advanced version 
of  earlier  Salyut craft,  with  Salyut  7 that  had  been  orbiting  since April  1982. 
Cosmos 1443, launched  unmanned  from  Baykonur  March  2 ,   weighed  about 
20  tons  and  was  larger  than  the  Soyuz  or   Progress  spacecraft.  The   21-ton 
Sa lyu t   7 was  about  the  size of  a  small house  trailer., said the N e w   York Times. 
The  linkup was  thought to demonstrate  the Soviet  1Jnion’s ability  to  assemble 
larger  space  stations.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Mar  10,  11/83; N Y   f im e s ,  Mar  
11/83,  A-12;  W Post,  Mar  11/83,  A-24) 

March  12:  Launched  January  25,  I U S  had  already  discovered  up  to 20  dis- 
tant galaxies too  small to  see previously.  Dr. James Houck of  Cornell Univer- 
sity, one of  18 astronomers  on the three-nation  IRA!;  science team,  said at JPL  
that only 20  small galaxies outside the Milky Way  were measured before  IRAS  
went  into orb i t .   “In  12  hours of  operation with  this  satellite,  we  doubled  that 

404  

MARCH 1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERON/\UTICS 

number."  In  a   single minute,  the  22.4-inch  IRAS  telescope  found  out  more 
about the Large Magellanic Cloud,  galaxy closest to  the Milky Way,  than ever 
discovered by  Earth  telescopes. 
The   IRAS  telescope,  cooled  by  liquid  helium  to  2 . 5 "   above  absolute zero 
to  offset any  stray  heat  that  might  confuse  its  imaging,  was  so  sensitive that 
it could detect an object with  temperatures far below  that of  freezing on Earth. 
Optical  telescopes, by  contrast,  could  see only  objects with  temperatures hot 
enough  to make  them  shine  (above  10,OOO"F). The   telescope was  built  in  the 
United  States, the spacecraft in the Netherlands; Great Britain was  tracking it. 
The   biggest  surprise,  said  Houck,  was  that  the  $80  million  satellite  'was 
"working  better  than  we  had  hoped,"  seeing  cooler  objects  i n   greater  detail 
than  astronomers  thought  possible.  Over  i t s   12-month  lifetime,  IRAS  could 
survey 9 5%  of  the  sky  in   the  infrared,  never  attempted  from  the  ground.  In- 
frared  lightwaves were  longer  than  those  in   the  visible  spectrum but  shorter 
than  radiowaves. The  projected  lifetime would  probably  be  extended by  50% 
because  of  the  slow  rate  of  helium  use  so  far.  (W  Pos t ,   Mar  12/83,  A-113) 

March  17:  MSFC  test-fired  a   high-performance  development  motor  for  a  
Shuttle  solid-fuel  rocket  booster,  redesigned  for  more   thrust  at  liftolf  and 
higher payload  capability. Successful completion of  the test would  qualify  the 
motor  for flight. First use would be on the eighth Shuttle mission, set for. sum- 
mer   1983.  (MSFC   Release  83-12) 

March 22:  NASA  announced the establishment of  a  Research Institute for  Ad- 
vanced  Computer  Science at  ARC,  to  begin  operations  i n   June.  Funded  by 
NASA  through the Universities Space Research Associations (USRA),  lhe  in- 
stitute would  be   a   place  for  the  academic  commun i ty   to  work  in  computer 
science, applied math,  and computer applications to  solution of  scientific and 
engineering problems. Director of  the institute would  be Dr.  Peter J.  Denning, 
head  of  the  computer  sciences  department  at  Purdue  University.  (NASA 
Release  83-38) 

March 23:  The  Nimbus  5 Earth-observation satellite would end  operations as 
of  April  1,  said 'Dr.  S.G. Tilford  of  NASA's  environmental observation divi- 
sion. Launched  in  1972, Nimbus  5 would probably  reenter after the year 2000. 
Its last-on-board tape recorder stopped in November  1982. The  U .S .  Navy,  the 
only  user  of  its  data,  would  get  this  information  from  Nimbus  Z  (NASA 
Release  83-40) 

MSFC   said that NASA  transferred the Astro program  (Spacelab astronomy 
missions beginning  in  1986) to  it  from GSFC.  Leon B.  Allen, Astro manager, 
said that the move followed reallocation of  internal resources at GSFC. IMSFC 
was  the logical place for the program because of  experience in managing  shut- 
tle  missions.  (MSFC  Release  83-14) 

405 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1983 

March 28:  NASA  launched NOAA-E  for NOAA  from  the Western  Space and 
Missile  Center  (WSMC)  on  an  Atlas  vehicle  at  7:52  a .m .  EST  into  an  orbit 
with  829-kilometer  apogee,  806-kilometer  perigee,  101.2-minute period.  and 
98.8” inclination.  Called NOM   8 in orb i t ,   it carried  search and rescue  (SAR) 
equipment  to  locate  signals  from  emergency  beacons  on  planes  and  ships. 
An  hour  later, when  the  satellite came over  Vandenberg  Air  Force Base  for 
the first time,  malfunction of  a control device was rotating  the spacecraft  “like 
the  propeller  on  a plane,”  said  a  NASA  spokesman.  As  it  solar  panels  could 
not  fix on the Sun ,  the spacecraft was losing  the power  needed  to make correc- 
tions  and  was  put  into  a  safety  mode  to  prevent  fiirther  discharge  of  battery 
power.  A  similar  problem  occured  in  1978 with  TIROS-N   and  was  corrected 
in   two  weeks.  (NASA MOR  E-615-83-04 [p re launch ]  Ma r   2 3 / 8 3 ;  N Y   T imes ,  
Mar   29/83,  A-14;  W  Times, Mar  29/83,  3 ;  A ID ,  Mar  30183,  171; P  I n q ,   Mar  
30183,  10; Spacewarn  SPX-354,  Apr  26/83) 

A  report  from  the  House  Appropriations  Committee  said  that  the  Space 
Telescope,  called  by  NASA  Administrator James M .  Beggs  “the most  impor- 
t a n t  scientific instrument”  ever to be  flown, would  cost  $200 million more and 
reach  orbit  a  year  later  than  expected  because  of  difficulties  i n  development. 
The report blamed  delays  and cost overruns on  NASA  for understaffing  the 
program by  5 0%  i n   its early  development,  and  on  Perkin-Elmer  Corporation, 
one  of  two major  contractors, for failing  to  “properly plan  for a project  of  the 
technical  and  manufacturing  difficulty  of  the  Space  Telescope.”  Besides  the 
glitches  in  tracking  and  alignment devices,  possibly  unremovable  dust  on  the 
primary  telescope mirror after  15 months in a Perkin-Elmer  “clean  room”  had 
lowered  its  reflecting  power  by  20   to  3 0 % .  ( W  Post,  Mar  28/83,  A-8) 

March 29 :   An  international  team  of  scientists studying the  upper  tropical  at- 
mosphere  completed  a month of  rocket  launches  in Peru.  Project Condor was 
an  equatorial-atmosphere  rocket  and  radar  mission  by  universities  and  agen- 
cies  of  the  United  States,  Peru,  and  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany.  The 
equatorial je t   stream spawned  the largest electrical  currents and  fields outside 
the auroral  zone.  Also, high- and low-density  plasma mixing in  the post-sunset 
ionosphere  created  greater  disturbances  than  magnetospheric  substorms. 
Project  Condor: part  of  NASA’s  sounding-rocket program,  was managed  by 
GSFC’s Wallops  Flight  Facility.  Condor would  map  electrical  conditions  and 
wind-  and  radio-wave  patterns  i n   the  tropic  upper  atmosphere;  applications 
would  include,  for  instance,  satellite  ranging  systems  used  to  locate  ships  at 
sea  that  could  be  affected  by  ionosphere  conditions.  (GSFC  Releases  83-4 ,  
83-7) 

406 

April 

April  1-14:  Countdown  for  the  April  4  launch  of  STS-6,  first flight of  shuttle 
orbiter Challenger, began  when  inspection of  its payload-TDRS-showed 
“a 
much  lower level of contamination than originally thought.” Robert E .  Smylie, 
associate administrator for space trackmg and data systems, said that the cargo 
bay  and  critical  parts  of  the  TDRS  solar  array  had  been  cleaned  and  that 
TDRS  would  be  put  back  into  the  cargo  bay. 
Press  reports  noted  that  the  75-ton Challenger,  a  slimmed-down  version  of 
Columbia,  could  l if t   more   and  was  nearly  2 ,500   pounds  lighter  than  its 
predecessor. Made  of  lighter materials, i t  had  no  crew-ejection seats. Crew  of 
the  five-day  $26-million mission  would  be  Paul  Weitz,  the  only  spact:flight 
veteran; Karol  Bobko;  and  Donald  Peterson and  Story Musgrave, who  on  the 
fourth  day  of  the  mission  would  perform  the  first  Shuttle  space  walk. 
Launch  April  4  at  1:30  p .m .   EST  f iom   KSC  exhibited  “no  sign  of  the 
engine trouble  that  forced  four  of  its  five  launch  postponements,”  said press 
reports.  Challenger  was  in  orbit  10  minutes  after  liftoff. 
About  11:30 p.m.  the crew  launched TDRS  from  the cargo bay  by  firing six 
explosive bolts  that  hurled  it  a  mile  o r   so  from  Challenger.  About  one  hour 
later,  from  a  distance of  about  32  miles,  the  crew  fired  a  huge  rocket  engine 
attached  to  TDRS  to  start  boosting  it  to  a  permanent  position  22,400 miles 
above the  equator.  TDRS-A would  be  first of  three communications  satellites 
to  be  stationed  in   a global network  that would  quadruple the  area from  which 
U.S. spacecraft could communicate with  Ear th ,   as well  as  the amoun t  of  time 
available for  such communication,  and  would  begin  to  eliminate the  need  for 
global  ground  stations. 
About  6  a .m .   EST April  5 ground  control  lost  touch  with  TDRS.during  a 
104-second firing to  nudge it  into higher orb i t .  This was  the  second use of  the 
rocket  system  called  inerfial upper  stage  (IUS),  built  by  Boeing  for  the  U.S. 
Air Force.  The  second  state ignited but burned  only about 70  seconds; TDRS 
and  its  rocket were  out  of  contact for  3 hours.  The  STS-6 crew was  asleep at 
the  time.  At  9 a .m .   EST,  mission  control  suddenly  reacquired  signals  from 
TDRS ,  and  project  officials reported  that  i t   had  separated  from  the  IUS  and 
stabilized itself. All  satellite sytems appeared to be  working normally. NASA 
said that  it had  appointed a panel  to look into anomaly, which was  blamed  on 
misfire-of an  on-board  rocket.  The  misfire  put  TDRS   into  an  eccentric:  orbit 
at  an  angle to  the  equator,  instead  of  almost directly  over  it.  Flight directors 
said  that  they  could  correct  the  TDRS  orbit  by  period  firings  of  omboard  
hydrazine. 
Just  before  the  space  walk  April  7,  President  Reagan  congratulatcd  the 
STS-6  crew  on  being  “ahead  of  schedule,”  adding  “I  can’t  say  I  envy  you.” 

407 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1983 

A  reporter  who  asked  the  president  why  was  told  “May  be  a  little 
claustrophobia.” 
Musgrave  and  Peterson  exited  through  an  airlo’zk jus t   after  4  p .m .   EST, 
fastened  themselves to  50-foot  safety  wires,  and  mcved  about  the 65-foot-long 
cargo  bay  to  test  new  space  suits,  handholds  and  footholds,  tools,  and  ropes 
to  be  used  in  retrieval  and  repair  of  orbiting  spacecraft.  While  Weitz  and 
Bobko watched  from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger 
for  3  hours  and  52  minutes,  doing  the  first  U.S.  space  walk  since  February 
1974, when  Edward Gibson  and Gerald  Carr   left  Slcylab to  retrieve  film  from 
an  exterior  camera.  A  space  walk  scheduled  last  November  from  the  Shuttle 
Columbia  had  been  canceled  when  both  space  suits  exhibited  mechanical 
failures. 
On  April  8  from  JSC mission  control, Vice  President  George Bush  told  the 
crew that their mssion was a  “significant contribution.”  The  crew had  suffered 
some  space  sickness  but  felt  “pretty  chipper,”  according  to  the  capsule  com- 
municator.  When  the  astronauts  appeared  on  television  during  Bush’s  visit, 
Musgrave was  performing  rolls  in  the weightless  environment,  and Weitz  cx- 
plained  that  he  was  “trying  to  see  i f   he  can  make  himself  sick  again.” 
Challenger,  with  Weitz  at  the  controls,  landed  ai- Edwards  Air  Force  Base 
April  9 at  1:53 p .m .   EST.  L t .   Gen .   James  A.  Abrahamson,  NASA  associate 
administrator  for space flight,  said that  the crew  and  the vehicle  were “in great 
shape.”  Besides  launching  TDRS,  the  mission  exposed  seeds  to  effects  of 
weightlessness  and  cosmic  radiation.  It  also  carried  a  snowflake  machine 
from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Sh imbun  to produce symmetrical crystals, 
such  as  those  needed  in  computers;  a  device  to  separate  rat  and  egg  proteins 
in weightlessness,  aimed  at  ultrapure medicines;  a device  to  produce uniform 
microscopic  latex  beads  to  test  supersensitive measuring  instruments;  and  an 
Air  Force  Academy  canister  containing  a  tiny  oven  to  solder  metals  i n  
Weightlessness. 
STS-7, tentatively  set  for June 9, was  to  land  Challenger  a t  KSC  only  a  few 
miles  from  its  launch  point.  STS-8  was  supposed  to  take  TDRS-B  into  orbit 
as  part  of  a  communications  link  needed  for   the  European  Space  Agency’s 
(ESA)  Spacelab mission  due  to  fly  on  STS-9; Spacelab would  carry  about 4 0  
scientific experiments  requiring  constant communications  with Earth  through 
the  two  TDRS  communications  satellites. 
However,  Abrahamson  said  that  NASA  “will  not  fly  a  second  satellite  on 
the eighth  shuttle  flight until  we  understand  what  went  wrong  on  this  flight.” 
He   said  that  a  U.S.  Air  Force  camera  in  New  Mexico  had  recorded,  from  a 
distance of  about  20,000  miles,  what  happened  to put  the  $100 million TDRS  
into  a  wrong  orb i t .   (NASA  MOR  T-313-83-01  [prelaunch]  Jan  14/83,  Mar 
25/83;  NASA  Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC   Release  83-21; text,  Pres.  Doc . ,  
Apr  4 ,   7/83; N Y   Times, Apr   6/83,  A-1;  Apr  7/83,  D-7;  Apr  8/83, A-1;  Apr 
9183,  8 ;  Apr  10183,  1;  WPo s t ,  Mar  31/83, A-15;  Apr 5/83, A-1;  Apr 6/83, A-1; 
Apr  8/83, A-1;  Apr  10183,  A-1;  W  Times,  Apr  5/83,  2A) 

408 

APRIL  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUT ICs 

Apr i l  4:  For the first time in  the U.S. space program, one satellite used  signals 
from  another  satellite to  navigate. The  Air  Force System Command   said  that 
Landsat  D   (Landsa t  4),  a NASA  remote-sensing  craft built  by  General  IElec- 
tric,  was  getting  signals  from  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Space  Division's  NavStar 
global-positioning system  (GPS)  satellite to  compute  position,  velocity..  and 
time. Landsat 4 ,  first satellite to carry a GPS receiver, could record its precise 
position  as  it  acquired  Earth-imaging  data.  The   receiver  also  eliminated 
transmission  of  navigation  signals  between  space  and  Earth;  direct  signal 
reception  ensured  efficient  and  economic  spacecraft  operation.  (AESC 
Newsreview,  Apr  4/83,  5 )  

Apr i l   11:  NASA  launched  RCA-F  at  5 :39  p.m.  EDT  from  the  Eastern  Space 
and  M iss i le   Cen te r   (ESMC )   on  a  Delta  in to   a  transfer  orb i t   with 
36,266-kilometer  apogee,  169-kilometer perigee,  634.2-minute  p e r iod ,   and 
24 "  inclination, before  reaching geosynchronous orb i t  at  139 W where  for  10 
years  it would  provide commercial and  official voice,  digital, and video com-  
munications  between  Alaska  and  the  continental United  States. 
Called  Sutcom  1R  in  orbit,  the  3-axis  stabilized  craft  weighed  nearly  600 
kilograms  (1,320  pounds)  and  carried  24  solid-state transponders.  It  would 
replace the  first of  RCA's  domestic communications satellites, RCA  Satcom  1 
launched  December   12, 1975,  which  had  served  for  seven  years.  Satcum  IR  
joined  five  previous  RCA  communications  satellites  to  provide  television, 
voice, and high-speed data transmission to all 50 states and Puerto Rico.  More 
than  4,000 Earth  stations had  direct access to  these spacecraft.  (NASA  IMOR 
M-492-206-83-07  [prelaunch] Mar   31/83;  NASA  Release  83-44;  SPX-354; 
NASA  wkly  SSR,  Apr  14/83) 

NASA  said  that  President  Reagan  asked  his  Senior  Interagency  Group   for 
Space,  chaired  by  William  P.  C lark ,   assistant  to  the  president  for  national 
security affairs, to establish a basis  for an administration decision on whiether 
to  proceed  with  NASA  development  of  a  permanently  based  manned  space 
station.  (NASA  Release  83-51;  MSFC  Release  83-24) 

After  months  of  unsuccessful  effort  to  communicate  with  Viking  lander  1 
(the Mutch Memor ia l  Station on the surface of Mars) ,  engineers at JPL  clecid- 
ed  that  they  probably  could  not  reestablish  contact. 
Launched  in  August  1975,  the  lander  reached  Mars   July  20,  1976,  and  was 
joined  by  lander 2 September 3 of  that year  for the most thorough examination 
of  another- planet ever undertaken. When  contact was  lost  in  November  1982, 
engineers  vainly  transmitted  command   series  based  on  studies  of  possible 
failure modes.  However,  lander  l's  internal program  could  initiate signals to 
Earth  without  being  commanded ;   if  the  lander  were  still  operating,  it  might 
transmit  in  May. 
Lander  1 was  renamed  the Mu tch  Memor ia l  Station to  honor  Dr.  Thornas 
A .   Mutch,  former  leader  of  the  Viking  imaging  team,  who  disappeared  in 

409 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AEKONAUTICS 

APRIL  1983 

September  1980  during  a  climbing  trip  i n   the  Himalayas.  (NASA  Release 
83-471 

April  14:  Efforts to push  the $100-million TDRS  ccimmunications  satellite in- 
to  its  proper  orbit  were  suspended  when  NASA  engineers  found  that  two  of 
its  maneuvering  rockets  were  damaged  and  would  not  work.  Firing  the  16 
small  thrusters  on  the  satellite was  the  obvious  way  to  correct  the  orb i t ,   but 
Ron  Browning,  TDRS  project  manager,  said  that  engineers  from  NASA  and 
TRW Inc . ,  manufacturer of  TDRS, would  take four  to  six weeks  to figure how 
to  operate  it  with  “less  than  a  fully  optimal  control  system.”  ( W  Post,  Apr 
14/83, A-3) 

April  16:  A  Solar  System  Exploratory  Committee,  representing  the  science 
community  and NASA,  concluded a two-year  study by  recommending  that the 
agency  undertake  “moderately  priced  missions”  tcl  Mars,  Venus,  Titan,  and 
a comet before  the end of  the century. NASA had  sent 32  unmanned spacecraft 
to  other  worlds  in  the  1960s and  11  i n   the  1970s;  ,only 2  in  this  decade. 
Proposals were a Venus radar-mapper  i n   1988, a Mars orbiter  i n   1990, flyby 
of  an  asteroid  and  rendezvous  with  a  comet  i n   the  mid-l990s,  and  a probe  of 
Saturn’s moon  Titan  between  1988 and  1992. Other missions of  interest to  the 
group would be  sampling Mars and  comets; robot  rovers  on Mars ;  and probes 
to  Neptune,  Uranus,  and  Sa tu rn .   ( W  Post,  Apr  17/83;  A-9;  N Y   Ernes,  Apr 
17/83,  22) 

April  17:  India,  for  the  third  time  since  1980, launched  a  satellite  into  orbit 
from  its  own  soil.  Prime Minister  Indira  Gandhi  watched  liftoff  of  the  17-ton 
four-stage  rocket  carrying the 91-lb Rohini  satellite t’rom Sriharikota  island  off 
India’s east  coast. Th e  launch,  part  of  a  series aimed  at  perfecting  the  launch 
vehicle,  would  be  followed  in  the  next  10  years  by  higher  investment  in  the 
national  space  research  program,  Gandhi  said.  (LV  Post,  Apr  18/83,  A-17; 
FBIS,  Apr  20t83;  NASA   D ly   Actv  R p t ,  Apr  25/83:1 

April  18:  NASA  announced  a  deal  with  Orbital  Systems  Corporation,  a 
private  company,  to  develop  and  market  a  $20-mill ion  propulsion  system  for 
launching  satellites  from  the  Space  Shuttle.  ( N Y  Kme s ,   April  19/83, D-1) 

4  GSFC  said  that  signals  radioed  to  the  NOAA-E  environment  satellite had 
stabilized  it, apparently  solving the attitude-control problems  it had developed 
after  launch  March  28  from  Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base.  A  team  of  experts 
from  government  and  industry  drew  up  instructions  for  the  corrections  that 
resulted  i n   complete  recovery,  according  to  Gerald W.  Longanecker,  project 
manager. Th e  satellite carried  six  environmental-monitoring  devices and  one 
search-and-rescue  satellite-aided  tracking  (SARSA’T)  experiment,  the  latter 
for use  in  locating and  rescuing victims of  plane crashes and  ships  in  distress. 
Launched on a U.S.  Air  Force Atlas E ,  NOAA-E  went  into near-perfect  or-  

410 

APRIL  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAL TICS 

bit but was  found to be  in the wrong attitude after reaching  a 450-nautical-mile 
altitude;  it was  in  a  spin  every  17  minutes  instead  of  pointing  its  sensors  and 
antennas toward Ear th .  The  correcting  signals  stopped  the  tumble and allowed 
the  control  system  to  acqu ire  Earth lock.  (NASA  Release  83-61) 

April  19-22:  The  Soviet Union  launched  from  Baykonur  three  cosmonauts  at 
5:11 p .m .  Moscow  time in Soyuz  T-8 on a mission  to dock with orbital complex 
Salyut  7-Cosmos 1443. Commander  of  the  mission  was  Soviet  a ir   force  L t .  
Co l .  Vladimir Titov a s  commander, Gennady  Strekalov as flight engineer, and 
Aleksandr  Serebrov  (who  was  on  a  week-long  mission  in  August  1982)  a s  
researcher. 
Tass  later  said  that  “deviations  from   the  planned  rendezvous  program” 
canceled  plans  to  dock with  the  orbital  station,  and  the  crew  made  a  soft lan- 
ding  near  the  city  of  Arkalyk  April  22  at  5 :29   p .m .   Moscow  time.  Radio 
Moscow  had  said  this  would be  the  first time  a piloted  craft docked with  such 
a  huge  space  complex.  Although  North  American  Air  Defense  Command 
(NORAD)  radar  showed  the  Soyuz  and  Salyut  in  close  orbits,  the  Kettering 
satellite-monitoring  group  in  England  said  that  the  mission  did  not  proceed 
as   expected  and  that  communications  between  the  cosmonauts  and  ground 
control  were  “very  terse.”  This  was  the  f irst   failure  of  a  Soyuz-T,  a  type  in 
use  for  three   years.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Apr   20183,  Apr  22 /83 ;   Beijing 
Xinhua in English,  Apr 22/83; W P o s t ,  Apr   19/83, A-20;  Apr  22/83, A-1;  Apr 
23/83,  A-1) 

April  25:   Scientists  a t  ARC  said  that  Pioneer  10 would  be   nearly  2.8  billion 
miles  beyond the Sun a t  2 p .m .  PDT, when   i t  passed  the  orbit of  Pluto,  travel- 
ing  30,000 mph on  its way  outside the  so lar  system.  The  first manmade object 
to  reach  such  a  distance,  Pioneer  10 might  go   on   for  millions  of  years  and 
carry   Earth  greetings  to  another  galaxy.  Launched  March  2 ,   1972,  the  craf t  
had  functioned  “almost  with  flaw,”  said  project  manager  Richard  Fimmel. 
Because of  its  elliptical  orb i t ,   Pluto-usually 
the  outermost  planet-at 
this 
time  was  nearer  than  Neptune  to  the  Sun  and  would  travel  inside  Neptune’s 
orb i t   for  the  next  17  years.  Pioneer  10 would  cross  Neptune’s  orb i t   June  13, 
effectively leaving the  solar  system behind.  Radio  signals moving  at the  speed 
of  light  needed  more  than  four  hours  to cross the  distance between  Earth  and 
spacecraft;  even  after  a  decade  in  space,  Pioneer  10 was  transmitting  data  of 
great  value  to  scientists.  Since  the  date of  its  launch  with  a predicted  lifetime 
of  21  months,  long  enough  for  a  Jupiter  encounter,  Pioneer  10  signals  over 
vastly  increasing  distances had  remained  detectable because  of  improvements 
in  antenna  sensitivity.  NASA  said  that  it  hoped  to  track  the  craft  for  another 
eight years,  to a distance of  5 billion miles, 2 .2  billion miles beyond  its present 
location.  (NASA  Release  83-57;  ARC  Releases  83-13,  83-14;  W  Post,  Apr  
25/83,  A-23) 

41  I 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1983 

In  an  exercise  called  Balloon  Intercomparison  Campaign,  NASA  launched 
four  giant  balloons  from  the  National  Scientific  Balloon  Facility  (NSBF)  at 
Palestine,  Tex.,  to  a  40-kilometer  (25-mile)  altitude  in  the  largest  study  ever 
of  ozone  depletion  in  the  stratosphere  and  global  a ir   pollution  from  natural 
events like E l  Chichon’s eruption  in April  1982. Each  800-foot-high,  450-foot- 
wide  balloon  could  carry  two  tons  of  scientific  devices.  Investigators  were 
from  Canada ,   Europe,  Japan ,   and  the  United  :States.  (JPL   Release  1019; 
NASA  Release  83-62;  LA  Her-Exam,  April  24IB3,  2) 

April  28:   NASA  launched  GOES-F   from  ESMC   at  6 : 2 6   p .m .   EDT  on  a 
three-stage  Delta  into  a  transfer  orb i t   with  48.400-kilometer  apogee, 
33,483-kilometer perigee,  1707.4-minute period,  and  0 . 5  
inclination,  before 
moving it into geosynchronous station at  135 “w over the  Pacific to acquire en- 
vironmental  data  a s   “Goes  West.”  The   launch  was  the  34th  consecutive  suc- 
cess for a Delta.  (NASA MOR E-612-83-04 [prelaunch] Apr  28 /83 ;  NASA D ly  
Actv  Rp t ,   Apr   29 /83 ;   Spacewarn ,   SPX-355) 

Press  reports  described  NASA  plans  to  raise  the orb i t  of  TDRS  to  the  pro- 
per 22 ,300  miles altitude by  as many as  12 separate firings of  different engines 
over  a  two-week  period.  Robert  Aller,  TDRS  program  manager,  said  that 
TDRS   was  essential  to  U.S.  military  and  civilian  satellites  for  the  next  20  
years.  “Without  i t ,   we  can’t  use  the  space  shuttle  [or]   Spacelab  the  way  we 
want  to,  and  we  can’t  h se   some  very  expensive  projects  like  Landsat  o r   the 
space  telescope  at  all.”  The   $1  billion  telescope,  called  the  most  ambitious 
scientific instrument  ever built,  would  be  useless  without  TDRS’s high-speed 
communications  relays. 
TDRS was about  10,000 miles  below  the  lowest point  at which  it  should ap-  
proach  Ear th .   The   proper  orb i t   would  be  geosynchronous  at  22 ,335   miles 
altitude,  where  its  speed  would  match  Earth’s  spin  a t   the  equator.  TDRS  
should  reach  that  point  by  June:  if  no t ,   NASA  would  face  “a  long  trudge  up 
Capitol  Hill  to  explain  the  impact  of  the  loss.”  ( N Y  Ernes,  Apr  25/83,  B-12; 
W Post,  Apr   28/83,  A-17) 

M a y  2:  Engineers at  GSFC  sent  commands  to  fire 6  of  the  24  small control 
thrusters on the TDRS  that was  launched from Challenger in April into a faul- 
ty  orb i t .  Scheduled to last one hour,  the firing ended after 41% minutes, when 
one thruster overheated. Engineers said that  they  could prevent  overheating in  
future  maneuvers.  The   firings would  continue  daily  for  two  to  three  weeks. 
(NY   T imes ,  May  3/83,  C5;  W Post, May  3/83,  A-11) 

M a y   4:  MSFC  reported  successful  simulation  of  Solar  Maximum  Mission 
(SMM)   spacecraft-repair  procedures  in  its  huge  neutral-buoyancy  tank  as 
rehearsal  for  the  actual  task  set  for  1984 during  the  13th  shuttle mission. 
Solar  Max ,   launched  February  14,  1980, worked  for  10  months  un t i l   fuses 
blew  on  three of  its  four  attitude-control momentum wheels.  The   repair  mis- 
sion  would  replace  its  500-pound  attitude-control subsystem  and  part  of  the 
coronagraph-polarimeter. Three  of  its  seven  instruments  continued  to  work 
despite the  malfunction. 
Dr.  George  Nelson,  lead  astronaut for  the  repair,  and  STS-13  pilot  Francis 
Scobee  wore  space suits during  the  underwater  simulation to  experience the 
physical  difficulty of  working  in  the  space environment. Dr.  Nelson  and  Dr. 
James  D.  van  Hoften  would  make  the  actual  repairs. 
Dr.  Ernie  Hildner,  coinvestigator  on  the  polarimeter  and  MSFC’s  solar 
physics branch  chief,  said that  watching  the  simulation made  him  “more   op- 
timistic about  the  success  of  the  endeavor.”  (MSFC  Release  83-30) 

M a y   6-27:  Challenger’s second  flight  in  August  would  probably  not  include 
the  second  TDRS,  said NASA’s  Robert Aller,  as  the  agency  still had  no  idea 
why  the  first tumbled  out  of  control  after  launch  April  5.  STS-8 would  carry 
only  a  small  communications  satellite  for  the  government  of  India;  as  a 
substitute for the $100-million TDRS, NASA would fly the  “payload  flight test 
article,”  an  8,500-pound  package  designed  to  test  the  robot  arm’s  ability  to 
retrieve  and  deploy  satellites. 
Postponement of  TDRS-B  would  keep  the  $1 billion Spacelab built by  ESA 
and scheduled to f ly  in September on STS-9 from carrying out its full mission, 
as  i t s   40  instruments  were  designed  to  work  a t   such  high  speeds  that  they 
needed  at least two  tracking satellites to  operate properly. However,  ESA  and 
NASA  agreed  to  launch  Spacelab on  schedule and  get  a  60% to  70% return 
from  its  experiments.  Even  this, Aller  said,  would  depend on  NASA’s  ability 
to  move  TDRS-A  into  a  synchronous  orb i t .   Two  test  firings  had  raised  its 
perigee  350 miles,  and  Aller  expressed  “confidence we  will  have  [TDRS]  in 
geosynchronous orbit  sometime  in  June.” 

413 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1983 

Press  reports  said  that  firings  May  10  and  11  raised  the  perigee  more   than 
800 miles,  still  7,000 miles  short;  it  would  take  iinother  three  weeks  of  daily 
firings  to  achieve  synchronous orbit.  On May  27  NASA  said  that  it  removed 
TDRS-B  from  the  cargo manifest  for  STS-8  and  substituted  the  test  article. 
By  that  time  it  had  moved  TDRS-A  within  3,674  miles  (5,915  kilometers)  of 
proper  perigee.  ( W  Post, May  7/83, A-3,  May  11/83, A-9;  May  12/83; NASA 
Release  83-86;  MSFC   Release  83-38) 

May  16:  President Reagan  issued  a directive for the government to rent  launch 
pads  and  sell  rocket  parts  and  plans  to  private  fiirms  as  “a  domestic  backup 
for  the  shuttle  at  essentially  no  cost  to  the  U.S.  government.  . . . th e  private 
sector  wou ld   assume all  costs of  [expendable launch  vehicle]  production  now 
borne by  the U .S .  government.” U.S. government facilities and equipment that 
would  otherwise be  underutilized  or  no  longer  required  would  find  a market. 
Th e  government  began  10  years  ago  to  phase  out  expendable  rockets  like 
Delta,  Atlas,  and  Titan  in  favor  of  reusable  Space  Shuttles.  Contracts  with 
rocket  firms  were  ending,  and  launch  pads  at  the  Cape   were  closing  down. 
Gilbert  Rye  of  the National  Security  Council  said  that  the  costs of  keeping 
the  U.S.  facilities  open  and  operating  would  be  borne  by  the  private  com- 
panies.  The   president’s  directive  would  allow  the  firms  to  buy  parts  and 
government-owned  plans  for  the  rockets  at  cos1  and  to  pay  for  the  use  of 
launch  pads,  equipment,  and  engineers.  (Text,  PresDoc,  May  16/83; W Post, 
May  17/83, A-I) 

May   18:  Pioneer  9,  orbiting  the Sun  since its November  1968 launch,  return- 
ed  its  last  signals  to  Ear th .   The   148-pound  TRW-built  craft  and  its  sisters, 
Pioneer  6, Pioneer  7,  and  Pioneer  8, were  among  the  earliest  interplanetary 
probes,  and  the  other  three  were  still  functioning.  Designed  to  transmit  data 
for  only  six  months,  Pioneer  9 had  continued  to   do   so  until  May  18,  1983. 
ARC  engineers  tried  vainly  to  revive  i t .   (NASA  Release  87-23;  W Post,  Mar 
5 /87 ,  A-9) 

May   19:  NASA  launched  Intelsat  5 - F  at  6:26 p .m .   EDT  from  ESMC   on  an 
Atlas  Centaur  into a  transfer  orbit.  Thiq  was  the  100th launch  for  LeRC.  Th e  
4,400-pound  Ford  Aerospace-built  communications  satellite  carried  12,000 
voice  and  two  color  television  channels  and  was  the  first  to  have  a maritime 
communications  link  for  ship-to-shore  communications.  (NASA  Release 
83-77;  LeRC  Release  83-25:  NASA   Dly  Actv  Rp t ,   May  20183;  D/SD,  May 
17/83,  95) 
NASA  declared  the  May  19  launch  of  lntelsat  .T-F successful,  as  the  Atlas 
Centaur  had  put  the  satellite  into  the  desired  transfer  orb i t .   After  an  apogee 
kick  motor  fired  May  22  put  it  i n   near-geosynchronous  orbit  for  initial  posi- 
tioning  and  preliminary  tests,  the Intelsat would  be moved  on  station over  the 
Atlantic  Ocean.  (NASA  MOR  M-491-203-86-06  [postlaunch]  June  13/83) 

MAY  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

M a y   22:  Final  attempts  to  contact  the  Viking  1 lander  on   Mars   failed,  and 
JPL  spokesman said that they would try  no more  “unless NASA Headquarters 
changes  its mind.”  The  craft outlived  its 90-day guarantee by  years;  it was  sur- 
vivor  of  a  pa ir   of  two-part  spaceships,  each  including  an  orbiter  that  circled 
Mars   while  its  robot  laboratory  sampled  and  photographed  the  planet’s  sur-  
face.  Viking  2’s  lander  and  Viking  1’s  orbiter  went  mute  in  April  1980. The  
$500-million  project  returned  data  on  Mars,  including  pictures  of  rust-red 
rocks  and  boulders,  dust  storms,  and  periodic  layers  of  fros t ;   recorded 
temperatures  ranged  from  124E24”OF below  zero.  (N Y   T imes ,   May  23/83, 
A-17;  W Post,  May  23/83,  A-8) 

M a y  26:  NASA  launched ESA’s  X-ray observatory,  Exosat,  from Vandenberg 
Air Force Base at 3:18 p.m.  GMT  on a Delta.  Designed  to study cosmic X-ray 
sources  from  0.04  to  80 Kev,  the  craft  carried  four  instruments:  two  imag ing  
telescopes,  a  large-area  proportional  counter  array,  and  a  gas-scintillation 
s p e c t r om e t e r .   I t   r e a ch e d   a  p l a n n e d   h igh ly   e l l i p t i c a l   o r b i t   w i th  
192,000-kilometer  apogee,  340-kilometer  perigee,  and  72 .5  O  inclination. 
ESA’s operations control  center  (ESOC) took over shortly after liftoff.  (NASA 
MOR  M-492-304-83-01  [prelaunch]  May  20/83;  ESA  Infos  18, 20) 

M a y   27:  NASA  reached  agreement  with  the  National  Trust  for  Historic 
Preservation  and  five co-plaintiffs  in  a U .S .  district  cour t   suit  to preserve  the 
last  of  the  Apollo-program  rocket  gantries  at  KSC.  NASA  said  that  it  would 
disassemble  the gantry  into 20-foot  sections  and  store  them  until  a p lace  was 
found  to  display  the   tower  and  money  could  be   raised  to  reassemble  i t .  
Michael  Ainslie,  president  of  the  National  Trust,  said  that  the  agreement 
recognized  “ the   growing  national  imperative  for  the  preservation  of  our 
physical  history,  even  if  that  history  was  built  less  than  20 years  ago.”  NASA 
said  that  it  would  cost  $1.8  million  to  take  the  tower  apart  and  $8 million  to 
reassemble  it.  (W  Post,  May  28/83,  A-11) 

During  May :   Dr.  Jack  Kerrebrock,  associate  administrator  for  aeronautics 
and  space technology  a t  Headquarters,  announced  that  he would  return  to  the 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT) July  1 to resume  the  position  as 
head  of  MIT’s depar tmen t  of  aeronautics  and  astronautics  that  he  held  before 
coming  to  NASA  in  July  1981.  Dr.  Raymond  S .   Colladay  would  act  a s  
associate  administrator  until  the  position  was  filled  (Hq  anno   May  27/83) 
-Robert  C.  Goe tz ,   director  of  structures  at  Langley  Research  Center 
(LaRC),  would become deputy director  of  Johnson Space Center  (JSC), effec- 
tive July  1 ,   replacing Clifford  E .  Charlesworth who would become JSC d irec-  
tor  of  space  operations.  (LaRC  Release  83-32) 

c‘  -5 

415  

June 

June  2-7:  The   Soviet  Union  launched  from  Baykonur  two  interplanetary 
spacecraft,  Veneru I5 on  June  2 on  Veneru 16 on  June  7. Th e  spacecrafts  first 
went  into  “an  intermediate  orb i t  of  an  artificial  ear th   satellite”;  then,  an  on-  
board  engine  sent  them  toward  Venus,  where  they  were  scheduled  to  arr ive  
in  October. 
Veneru  15  had  no  descent  module,  indicating  that  “a  landing  is  not  being 
planned”  and  that  the   spacecraft  would  conduct  atmospheric  and  surface 
research  from orb i t .  Tass said that  Veneru 16, “by  its design and mission,”  was 
“analogous  to”  Veneru 15. Tass also mentioned  the lapse of more  than 20 years 
since  the  Soviet  Union  began  its  interplanetary  program  with  the   launch  in 
February  1961  of  Eneru 1, which  reached  a  heliocentric  orb i t .   First  probe  to 
land  on  Venus  was  I/eneru 3,  in  March  1966;  Veneru 4  landed  gradually  and 
sent data  on  the planet’s atmosphere  for 93  minutes.  Eneru  13  and  Veneru 14 
soft-landed  in  March  ,1982  and  returned  photographs  of  the   landing  site. 
(FBIS,  MoscDomTvSvc  in  Russian,  Tass  in  English,  June  2&7/83) 

June 10: A NASA  board  said that slippage of  a mechanical adjustment caused 
a  December  1982  accident  a t   ARC  dur ing   tests  of  the  world’s  largest  and 
newest wind  tunnel.  The  collapse of a structure  smoothing airflow through the 
tunnel  pulled  debr is   through  the  power  section  and  damaged  the  fan  blades 
beyond  repair.  Th e  damage  cos t  more than  $10  million  and  would  delay  com- 
pletion  by  a  year  or more.  No   persons  were  injured.  (NASA  Release  83-96) 

June  12: The  prototype  Shuttle  En terpr ise ,   returning  from   an  overseas  tour 
that  included  the  Paris  a ir   show,  flew  over Washington,  D .C . ,  and  Baltimore, 
M d . ,   ear ly   in   the  morning  before  landing  a t   Dulles  a irpor t   in  Virginia  for 
public  viewing  a t   a  distance.  “Hundreds   of  thousands,”  according  to  the 
Washington Post,  came   to  see   the   Shuttle,  “despite  soaring  temperatures.” 
En terpr ise   and  its  Boeing  747  transport  j e t   left  for  California  the  next  day. 
(NASA‘Releases 83-89,  83-93; W P o s t ,  June   13/83, B-1;  USA Today, June   13, 
7A;  W  Ernes,  June   13/83,  lA) 

June  13: Press  reports  said  that  the  10th  Shuttle  mission  originally  se t   for 
November,  first  to  have  a  secret  mission  and  first  to  be   flown  solely  for  the 
U.S.  Air  Force,  was delayed  “indefinitely”  a t  the  request of  the Air  Force and 
that  NASA  officials  had  “no   idea”  when  it  would  be   rescheduled.  The   Air 
Force  confirmed  the  delay  but  would  not  discuss  the  reasons.  NASA  and  the 
Air  Force  had  an  agreement  allowing  the  serv ice   to  preempt  any  scheduled 
Shuttle  mission. 
PRECED ING   PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILMED 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

JUNE   1983 

Unidentified  sources  said  that  the  reason  was  the  Boeing-built  upper  stage 
that  failed when the TDRS  was  launched from the Shuttle  i n  April.  Postpone- 
ment  indicated  that  the  payload  scheduled  for  the  Air  Force would  have  used 
the  type  of  upper  stage  that  malfunctioned.  A  special  board  convened  to  in- 
vestigate  the  matter  had  not  issued  a  report.  (N Y  :Times, June  14/83, C-3;  W 
Post,  June  14/83,  A-7) 

At  8 a .m .   EDT June  13, unmanned  U.S.  spacecraft Pioneer  10 crossed  the 
orbit of Neptune on the way  out of  the solar system. The  570-pound  robot craft 
2.81 billion  miles  from  the  Sun and traveling  30,558 mph  at  the  time.  (NASA 
Releases  83-39,  83-91;  ARC  Releases  83-11,  83-18;  W Post,  June  12/83, A-1; 
June  14/83, A-1;  NY   Ernes,  June  14183, A-1) 

June  16:  Associated  P r e s s   (AP) said that ESA  launched Ariane 6 at 7 : 5 9  a .m .  
EDT  from  Kourou,  French  Guiana,  carrying  two  communications  satellites: 
the  first  ESA  telecommunications  craft,  the  Br i tkh   Aerospace-designed  Ecs 
1, and a smaller West German satellite to  retransmit amateur radio broadcasts. 
This  sixth  attempt  to  get  the  three-stage  Ariane  off  the  ground  was 
considered  a  “crucial  boost”  to  Europe’s  space program  as  a way  to break  th 
superpower  monopoly  on  space.  Ariane  faced  competition  from  the  U.S. 
Space Shuttle and from private  companies planning to buy  conventional  Thor, 
Atlas,  and  Titan  vehicles  from  the  U.S.  government.  ESA  was  counting  on 
enough business  for  everyone, but  admitted  that  Ariane would  have had  trou- 
ble getting  any  if  this sixth faunch  had  failed.  (ESA Info 21;  WPo s t  (AP) ,  June 
17/83,  A-2) 

June  18-26:  STS-7, carrying the  first  U.S.  woman  astronaut,  took  off  June   18 
at 7:33 a .m .  EDT from KSC   launch pad  39A  for a  six-day mission  that  would 
deploy  two  foreign  communications  satellites and  practice  freeing and  retriev- 
ing  a  pallet  containing  11  experiments  from  the  West  German  government. 
Crew  members  were  Navy  Capts.  Robert  L .   Clrippen,  commander,  and 
Frederick H .  Hauck,  pilot,  plus  mission  specialist!; Dr.  Norman  E .  Thagard, 
a civilian physician;  U.S. Air Force Co l .  John M .  Fabian; and Dr.  Sally Ride, 
a  civilian  with  a  Ph.D.  i n   physics. 
Mission control  stated that the group of  five was  “the  largest human payload 
in  the  history  of  the  space  age.”  The   Soviet  Union  had  maintained  crews of 
five on  its Salyut  space  station  but  had  never  carried  that  number  on  a  single 
launch. 
First deployment of  a payload  was a t  5:02 p .m .  EDT when  the crew  launch- 
ed  from  the  cargo  bay  a  seven-ton  communications  satellite,  An ik   C2,  for 
Telesat  (Canada’s  governmental  telecommunications  organization).  At  9 :  36  
a .m .  EDT the next day  the crew  launched a $40 million Pulupa B communica- 
tions satellites for the government  of  Indonesia.  Two previous Palapas  launch- 
ed  by  the  United  States  were  providing  communications  to  Indonesia, 
Thailand,  Singapore, Malaysia,  and  the  Philippine:;. Palupu B ,   twice  the  size 

4 1 8  

JUNE   1983 

ASTRONAUT lCS  AND   AERONAUT lCS  

of  the earlier communications satellite could  increase television and telephone 
traffic  in   the  area by  10% to  15% a  year.  The   147 million  Indonesians living 
on  islands  extending  more   than  3,200 miles  east  to  west  had  only  560,000 
telephones:  Pulapa  B  could  provide  service  for  as  many  as  a  million  new 
telephones  in  the  next  10  years. 
After  the  second  communications  satellite was  launched,  the  four  rookie 
astronauts  (Ride,  Fabian,  Hauck,  and  Thagard)  appeared  on  the  television 
screen assembled in  the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white let- 
ters  reading  “TFNG :   We  Deliver.”  TFNG   stood  for  “thirty-five  new  guys,” 
the   astronaut  class,  recruited  in  1978,  to  which  all  four  belonged.  Crippen 
stayed out  of  camera  range,  but  mission  control  said  “That’s  all  right,  Crip. 
We  can  tell  you’re  a  steely-eyed veteran  from  here.” 
On  June  19  mission  control said that  the  families of  the  four  fathers aboard 
Challenger had  gathered  “to wish  you  a  happy  Father’s Day.”  The  four  male 
astronauts had  a total of  10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and 
Fabian,  2  each. 
Ma jor   activities  for  the  next  three  days  would  be  the  release  of  the 
mechanical  arm   and  rehearsal  for  deployment  and  retrieval of  the West  Ger- 
man pallet. Ride and  Fabian would  drop the  15-foot, 5,000-pound package off 
the  Shuttle and  try  to  pick  it  up  again.  (This would  be  a  first  for  an  exercise 
that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June  22 the team  released 
and  retrieved  the  package  five  times,  as  television  cameras  on  Shuttle  and 
package sent  spectacular shots of  the procedure with  a backdrop of  Earth  and 
black  space. When  the  exercise concluded  and  the  arm   and  the payload  were 
back  in  the  cargo bay,  Crippen reminded mission  control that some  crews had 
announced  “We deliver”  (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when  they  laun- 
ched  two  communications satellites  from  the  shuttle last November):  “Well, 
for  flight  7,  we  pick  up  and  deliver.” 
The  USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova,  first woman  to make  a flight in  space 20 
years  ago,  wired  congratulations  to  Sally  Ride.  The   telegram  expressed 
pleasure “to know that a third representative of  this planet’s women, now  from 
the  United  States of  America,  is   in   outer  space  today.”  Last  year  the  Soviet 
Union  sent  a  second  woman,  Svetlana  Savitskaya, into  space. 
Among more   than  20  experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay  and  mid-deck 
was  the  colony  of  150 carpenter  ants  sent  into  space by  high-school  students 
from Camden ,  N.J.,  to record  their reactions to weightlessness. The  ants were 
considered  good  space  subjects, being  hardy  and  naturally  social  creatures. 
Marginal weather  at KSC  raised a question whether Challenger would  land 
near  its  launch  point,  as  planned.  Landing  on  the  Florida  runway  was  a  way 
to  reduce time  in  preparing Challenger  for  its  next  flight. STS-7 could  be  ex- 
tended,  or  landing could  be  shifted to Edwards  Air  Force Base  in  California; 
a  shift  to  California  would  mean  an  eight-day  delay  in  bringing  Challenger 
back  to  KSC  for  a  mid-August mission,  adding  pressure  to  the  timetable for 
launching Spacelab between  the end of September and mid-October.  The next 
chance for a Florida runway  landing would be  early in  1985; the two  interven- 

419 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1983 

ing  missions  would  be   a  night  launch  and  landing  and  the  heavyweight 
touchdown  of  the  Shuttle  carrying  Spacelab.  Alslo  of  concern  was  the  effect 
of  rainstorms  on  the Shuttle tile covering:  planes carry ing  s tr ips  of  the  insula- 
tion  had  been  flown  through  rainstorms  with  a  uniform  result  of  “significant 
erosion  of  the  tile  surfaces.” 
Mission  control  offered  three  landing  times,  6 :53  a .m .   and  8:29  a .m .   EDT 
at  KSC  and  9 :56  a .m .   EDT  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base.  The   crew  appeared 
on  television  “stowing  the  cabin”  in  preparation  for  landing.  A  sign  “The  
Doctor  Is In”   was held  up a s  Thagard  showed viewers  the  experiments he was 
conducting  to  find  clues  for  the  cause  of  space  si’ckness. STS-7 had  been  the 
first  shuttle  mission  to  have  no  space-sick  astronauts. 
The   Challenger  landed  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  June   24  at  9 :57   EDT 
after a  steady  downpour  began  at  KSC.  In  a  congratulatory  telephone  call  to 
the astronauts,  President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling  of  the mechanical 
arm  and  said  “You  were  there  because  you  were  the best  person  for  the job.” 
Ride  said  that  the  flight  was  “ the  most  fun  I’ll  ever  have  in  my  life.”  When 
the  astronauts  attended  a  brief  homecoming  ceremony  at  Johnson  Space 
Center  June  24 ,   Ride  refused  to  accept  a  bouquet  of  flowers  from  a  NASA 
official;  she  had  said  before  the  mission  that  she  wanted  to  be  treated  no  dif- 
ferently  from  her  four  male  crewmates.  Wives  of  the  male  astronauts  each 
received  a  red  rose;  Ride’s  husband,  astronaut  Dr.  Steven  Hawley,  did  not. 
(NASA MOR  E-420-07-83-04  [prelaunch] June 9 ;  NASA  MOR  M-989-83-07 
[prelaunch]  June  13/83; NY   Ernes,  June  20183,  A-1;  June  23/83,  A-1;  June 
25/83,  16; June  26/83,  4-8;  W Post,  June  17/83, A-2;  June  20183,  A-1;  June 
21/83,  A-6;  June  22/83,  A-3;  June  23/83,  A-1;  June  24/83,  A-3,  C-4;  June 
25/83,  A-I;  June  26/83,  A-2) 

June   27:  NASA  launched  HiLat  (U.S. Air  Force  satellite  P83-1)  from  WSMC 
on  a  Scout  at  11:37  a .m .   EDT  into  an  orb i t   with  834-kilometer  apogee, 
765-kilometer  per igee ,   100.9-minute  pe r iod ,   and   82  O 
inc l ina t ion .   The  
248-pound  HiLat  would  obtain  data  on  propagaticin  effects  on  plasma  distor- 
tion on  radar  and  other  communications  and baseline data  for  interpreting  the 
distortions.  (NASA D ly  Actv Rp t ,  June  29/83;  NASA  MOR M-490-604-83-01 
[prelaunch]  June  22/83) 

U.S.  balloonists  Maxie  Anderson,  first  to  make  a  balloon  crossing  of  the 
Atlantic,  and Don Ida were killed when they crashed in a  forest in Bavaria dur- 
ing  the  Gordon  Bennett  race  for  distance  from  Wr is .   Police  saw  the  basket 
of  the  balloon  detach  and  fall  into  the  forest;  a  West  German  search-and- 
rescue  unit  said  that  the  ballon  struck  a  high-tension  wire  that  separated  i t  
from  the  gondola.  Police  found  both  occupants  dead  at  the  scene. 
Anderson,  with  Ben  Abruzzo  and  Larry   Newman,  landed  Double  Eagle  I1 
in France August  17,  1978, after a transatlantic  flight. H e  and his son Kris hand 
flown  across  North  America  from  San  Francisco  to  Quebec,  landing  the 
balloon  at  Kitty  Hawk  May  12,  1980,  far  from  i t ;   North  Carolina  goal.  He 

420 

JUNE   1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

and  Don  Ida  had  attempted  a  45-day  around-the-world  flight  in  the  balloon 
Jules  Verne last November  but  encountered  mechanical  trouble  in  Ind ia .   (N Y  
Ernes,  June  28/83,  B-8) 

June 27-30:  Th e  Soviet Union  launched  Soyuz T-9 at  1:12  p.m.  Moscow  time 
June  27  to  link  with  orbiting  complex  Salyut  7-Cosmos 1443.  Crew  members 
were  Co l .   Vladimir  Lyakhov,  pilot,  and  flight  engineer  Aleksandr  Aleksan- 
drov,  Soyuz  T-9 docked  with  the  complex  at 2 :46  p .m .   Moscow  time  June  28, 
and  the  cosmonauts  entered  the  station  to  begin  “prac t ic ing .  . .control  of 
large-size manned  complexes.”  On  reactivating  life-support  and  communica- 
tions  systems,  the   crew  began  unloading  the  automatic  cargo  craf t   that  had 
brought  about  three  tons  of  supplies.  (FBIS, Tass  in  English,  June  27,  28,  29, 
30) 

June 28 :   NASA  launched  Galaxy 1, first  of  a  series  of  three  wholly  owned 
Hughes  communications  satellites,  a t  7:08  p .m .  EDT  from  ESMC  on  a  Delta 
into a  transfer orb i t  before  stationing  it at  135 9’4 to  serve the  cab le  television 
industry.  Hughes  had  sold  its  24   operating  transponders  on  a  noncommon- 
ca r r ie r   basis  to  ensure   purchasers  a  stable  source  of  programming.  NASA 
would  launch  the  o ther   Galaxies  in  September  1983 and  June  1984.  (NASA 
MOR   M-492-215-83-01  [prelaunch]  June   27/83;  NASA   D ly   Actv  Rpt, June 
29/83) 

June 29: NASA  said  that  TDRS-I  had  achieved  geosynchronous  orb i t   at 
67”W  at  12:31 p .m .   E m .  By 7:41 p .m .  EDT,  the communications satellite was 
stabilized  in  a  normal  Earth-oriented  mode,  with  momentum  wheels  and 
Earth  sensors controlling  it  for the  first  time.  Th e  White Sands ground  station 
was  activating  the  payload. 
The  press  said that NASA’s  $100 million  rescue mission  had  put TDRS  into 
proper  stationary  orb i t   on  the  equator  over  Brazil,  two  months  after  the 
5,000-pound  communications  satellite  went  off  course   when  a  second-stage 
thruster  misfired  after  launch  from   the  Challenger  in  April.  Th e  39th  firing 
of  thruster  je ts   moved  TDRS  into  an  orb i t   parallel  to  Earth‘s  rotation  and  a t  
the  same   speed ,   keeping  it  in  the  same   position  above  Earth.  Saving  the 
satellite meant that Spacelab, due  to fly in September on  STS-9, could proceed 
a s   planned.  Also,  the  Lundsat now  in  orb i t   could  send  its  images  to  Earth 
through  TDRS,  and  all  fu ture  Shuttle  flights  could  keep  in  touch  with  Earth 
85  %  of  the  t ime   instead  of  the  present  20 % . 
An  adjacent  story  in  the   Washington Post said  that  the  House  had  approved 
and  sent  to  President  Reagan  for  signature  a  compromise  bill  authorizing 
NASA  to  spend  $7.3  billion  in  FY84,  slightly  more   than  the  president’s  re- 
ques t ,   but  approval  was  expected.  (NASA  D ly   Actv  R p t ,   July  1/83;  W Post, 
June  30183,  A-3) 

42  1 

July  I :   Tass  reported  that  the  two  cosmonauts  aboard  Salyut  7 had  opened 
doors  to  a  large  attached  module,  Cosmos 1443, and  were  working  in  essen- 
tially  a  three-part  assembly  consisting  of  a  Salyut,  a  Cosmos,  and  the  Soyuz 
T-9 in  which  they  arrived  a t   the  space  station  June   28. 
When  the  Cosmos   docked  automatically  March  10  with  the  Salyut,  U.S. 
space  experts  said  that  it  would  double  the   size  of  the  21-ton  Salyut  and  had 
carr ied  3 tons  of  cargo,  such  a s  scientific  gear,  experiments,  and  life-support 
materials.  Cosmos had  sets of  small  thrusters generally used  to change the or-  
bit  of  the  entire  complex,  which  weighed  in  total  about  50 tons.  Th e  Cosmos 
itself,  43  feet  long  and  13  feet  in  diameter  with  solar-cell  panels  to  generate 
electricity,  consisted of  an  orbital module  and  a descent  module.  The  descent 
module  could  return  to  Earth  unmanned  and  land  by  parachute  carry ing  ex- 
perimental data and materials no longer needed on  the Salyut,  giving  the  same  
sor t   of  round-trip  supply  serv ice   instead  for  the  U .S .   Shuttle  without  being 
reusable. 
Tass  said  that  the  cosmonauts,  Vladimir  Lyakhov  and  Aleksandr  Aleksan- 
drov, were unloading  Cosmos 1443  and  reactivating  systems on  Salyut  7,  put- 
ting  film  into cameras  and turning on observation instruments,  such as an East 
German  mass  spectrometer,  which  would  photograph  and  measure  “vast 
tracts  of  Soviet  territory  in  middle  and  southern  latitudes.”  (FBIS,  Tass  in 
English,  July  1/83; NY  Ernes,  July  1/83, A-1) 

A  team  of  engineers  from  NASA  and  industry  celebrated  at  GSFC  their 
success,  after  58  days  of  maneuvers,  in  putting  the  tracking  and   data-relay 
satellite  into  geosynchronous  orb i t .   Using  tiny  one-pound  thrusters  with 
nozzles  about  the  size of  a  thimble,  the  team  boosted  the  5,000-pound  TDRS  
more   than  8,600 miles  further  into  space,  a  feat  never  before  attempted.  The  
TDRS  was launched  from  the Shuttle Challenger  during  its  first mission April 
4;  after a successful  deployment  from  the Shuttle,  some difficulty  in  the  iner-  
tial  upper  stage  (IUS) rocket  threw  TDRS   into  a  tumble  from  which  ground 
control  rescued  i t ,   stabilizing  it  far  shor t  of  the   altitude  needed  for  geosyn- 
chronous  orb i t .  
A jo in t  board  representing  NASA  and  the U.S.  Air  Force  said later  that  the 
problem  was loss of  o i l  pressure  in  an  engine  sea l ,  probably  caused by  excess 
engine  heat.  The   board  had  viewed  photographs  taken  by  U.S.  Air  Force 
camera  over New  Mexico  and had conducted  “extensive  tests.”  Because of  the 
importance  of  TDRS  operation  to  space communications,  NASA  and  the  Air 
Force  had  rescheduled  two  shuttle missions  that  were  to  use  the  IUS.  (NASA 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

J U L Y   1983 

Releases  83-104,  83-114,  83-116;  MSFC   Releases  83-49,  83-50;  W Post,  July 
13/83, A-1;  July  28/83,  A-4) 
-NASA 
announced  that  Charles  D.  Walker,  an  engineer  at  McDonnell 
Douglas,  would  be  the  first payload  specialist representing  a project designed 
for  commercial  purposes.  He  would  fly  on  the  12th  Shuttle  mission  set  for 
M a r ch   1984 ,   opera t ing   a  ma ter ia ls-process ing   dev ice   deve loped   by 
McDonnell-Douglas  to separate large amounts of tdological materials  in  space 
for  new  pharmaceutical  uses.  As  chief  engineer  responsible  for  spaceflight 
tests and evaluation, Walker had worked  with project  support a t  KSC and JSC, 
training  NASA  astronauts  who  operated  the  device  for  electrophoresis 
research  on  earlier  Shuttle missions.  (NASA  Release  83-105) 

J u l y   5:  A  colony  of  carpenter  ants  flown  on  the  shuttle  Challenger  in  June 
had  apparently  not  survived  the  trip.  Press  repons   said  that  no  signs  of  life 
were seen through  the clear plastic top of  the casing housing  the  151 ants. The  
sponsors,  students  from  two  New  Jersey  high  schools  who  flew  to  Cape 
Canaveral  with  a  teacher  to  recover  the  experiment,  checked  heat  and  light 
supply to the canister, as well as  the cameras-one  making  periodic  exposures 
and  the  other  recording  on  television  tape-that  monitored  the  ants  i n   flight. 
Everything  worked.  RCA  Corporation  had  suppolrted  the  experiment  with  a 
$10,000 grant. 
Press  reports  noted  that  the  ants  had  been  inside  Challenger’s  cargo  bay 
almost  two  months  before  launch  and  might  have  died  before  the  flight; 
however,  two  control  colonies  in  New  Jersey  had  survived  under  the  same 
conditions.  Th e  canister  would  be  opened  in  New  Jersey  in  the  presence  of 
two  biology  professors  from  Temple  University  who  were  advisers  to  the 
students.  ( W  Post,  July  7/83,  A-2) 

J u l y   15-17:  Reports  from  Tass on the  flight  of  the  Sulyut  7-Soyuz  T-PCosmos 
1443  complex  included  “an  unpleasant  surprise”  when  a  micrometeorite 
struck  one of  the  windows  with  quite a  loud  crack ,   leaving  a  four-millimeter 
at  diameter  crater  on  the  pane.  “Luckily,”  the  report  added,  “the  windows 
have double panes, each  14mm thick. That is why  nothing  terrible has happen- 
ed.”  Earth  was  passing  through  a  meteorite  shower,  and  Valery  Ryumin  had 
noted  during  his  space  walk  that  the  skin  of  Sulyut  6 had  been  riddled  with 
small  craters. 
Th e   incident  had  “amazingly  coincided”  with  a  preplanned  exercise  in 
“urgent  escape  from  the  station.”  Journalists  “could  not  help  asking”  how 
long it would  take for  the crew  to abandon  station.  ]Deputy flight director  Vic- 
tor  Blagov  said  that  the  “minimum  required  time  is  15 minutes,  but  we  con- 
sider  9 0  minutes-that 
is,  one  orbit-to  be  standard  time”  during  which  the 
crew  could  take all  steps needed  for  an  emergency  mothballing  of  the  station 
and  enter  the  return  module.  Th e   cosmonauts  could  “spend  several  days 
[there] in absolute safety,”  Blagov  added, but  if  necessary  they  could  “splash 
down  in  the reentry  vehicle  in  the ocean,  o r  touch  down  in one of  the  reserve 

424  

JULY  1983 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS 

landing  ranges  in  the USA,  France,  and  other  countries. There  is an  interna- 
tional  convention  on  that  score.”  (FBIS,  Tass  in   English,  July  15,  22 ,   27/83) 

July  18:  NASA  Administrator  James  M .   Beggs  told  a  symposium  of  several 
hundred  government,  industry,  military,  and  foreign  space-station planners 
that  President Reagan  would  approve a manned  U.S.  space station within  the 
next  12 months.  Dr.  George  A .   Keyworth,  presidential  science  adviser,  had 
dropped  opposition to  the  space  station and  asked  NASA  to  come  up  with  a 
“grand  vision.”  NASA  hoped  to  get  from  the  administration  and  Congress 
“seed  money”  of  about  $200 million  for the  fiscal year  beginning  October  1, 
1984; B e g s  said that  it would  cost $6 to $8 billion  to  get a permanent  station 
with  four to  six persons aboard  into orbit by  1991. The  station would  enhance 
U.S.  economic  well-being  by  providing  new  areas  for  research.  (N Y  Ernes, 
July  19/83,  C-3;  C  Trib, July  18/83,  1) 

Ju ly   28:  NASA  launched  Telestur  3A  for  the  Amer ican   Telephone  and 
Telegraph Corporation  (AT&T)  from  the  Eastern  Space and  Missile Range  at 
6 :49  p.m.  EDT on  a Delta  in to  a  transfer orbit with  37,516-kilometer apogee, 
185-kilometer perigee, 23 O  inclination, and 664-minute period,  preparatory to 
moving  it  to  geosynchronous  station at 9 6 W  over  the  Pacific ju s t  west  of  the 
Galapagos. 
Telestur 3A  was  the  first of  a  new  series of  three  domestic communications 
satellites  offering AT&T  long-lines customers television, phone,  and  data  ser- 
vice  over  the  continental United  States, Alaska,  Hawaii,  and  Puerto  Rico;  it 
had 24 transponders and   6 spares,  each  ab le  to  relay  a  color-television signal 
at  60 million bits  per  second  o r  up  to  3,900 two-way  phone  calls.  (Telestur I 
launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay  could offer on- 
ly  600  one-way  voice channels o r  one  television channe l .)  Launch  of  Telestur 
3A  was  declared  successful  December   16.  (NASA  Release  83-110;  NASA 
MOR  M-492-216-83-01  [postlaunch] Dec   16/83;  Spacewurn  SPX-358,  Aug 
30/83,  2) 

During Ju ly:   NASA  appointed Dr.  Milton A .   Silveira, assistant to  the deputy 
administrator, to  succeed  Dr.  Stanley I .  Weiss  as  chief  engineer. Weiss,  who 
came   to  NASA  in  1980  as  associate  administrator  for  space  transportation 
operations  a t   Headquarters,  was  leaving  to  become   vice  president  for 
engineering  at  Lockheed  Corporation,  where  he  had  worked  from  1957  to 
1978. 
Silveira  began  at  Langley  with  the  National  Advisory  Comm i t tee   for 
Aeronautics (NACA) in  1951 and worked in  the Mercury, Gemini,  and Apollo 
programs.  He  was  deputy  project manager  at JSC   for  the  shuttle orbiter pro- 
gram   before  coming  to  Headquarters  in  1981.  (Anno,  July  1/83) 
NASA  also  appointed  John  W.  Boyd  associate  administrator  for  manage- 
ment  at  Headquarters  effective September 4 .  He   had  begun  at  ARC  in   1947 

425 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1983 

and  served  there  until  appointed  deputy  director  of  DFRC  in  1979,  returning 
to  ARC  i n   1980   as  associate  director.  (Anno,  July  1 /83 )  

Dr.  Homer   E.  Newell,  J r . ,   associate  administrator  of  NASA  when  he 
retired  i n   1973, died July  18 at his  home at the age of  68. Before joining NASA 
shortly  after  its  formation  in  1958,  he  had  been  acting  superintendent  of  the 
Naval Research Laboratory’s atmosphere and astrophysics division, and coor- 
dinator of  the science program  for the Navy’s Project Vanguard.  The  N e w   York 
Times said that  Newell  was  “primarily  responsible  for organizing early  [U.S.] 
scientific efforts in space”  and  “firmly  championed  the view  that  scientific ex- 
ploration of  space should be under civilian rather than  military  auspices.”  ( N Y  
T imes ,  J u l y   20 /83 ,   B-8;   W Po s t ,   J u l y   20183 ,   C - 8 )  

426  

August 

August  5 :   Japan  launched  a  second  operational  communications  satellite, 
Cs-2B  (code-named Sukuru 2 8 ) ,  at 8 :20  p .m .  GMT from Tanegashima Island 
toward  a  stationary  orbit  above  northwestern  New  Guinea.  This  seventh 
satellite launched by  Japan  was only  the  second  “for  practical purposes”;  the 
first  was  Sukuru  2A   launched  in   March   as  communications  link  between 
Japan’s mainland  and outlying  Pacific  islands. Each  communications satellite 
had  capacity  equal  to  4,000 phone circuits, and  the two  were  designed  for use 
in  a  major  emergency  like  an  earthquake.  (FBIS,  Tokyo  Kyodo  in  English, 
Aug  6 /83)  

August 9:  JPL  said that NASA’s  IRAS launched in January had  found a forma- 
tion  of  large  particles  orbiting  Vega,  one  of  the  brightest  stars  seen  from 
Ear th ,   in  what  might  be  a  solar  system  like  Earth’s  in   a  different  stage  of 
development. This was  the  first evidence of  large solid objects orbiting a  star 
other  than  the  Sun. 
IRAS scientists Dr. H .H .  Aumann  of  JPL and  Dr.  Fred  Gillett of  Kitt Peak 
National  Observatory,  working  at  the  Rutherford-Appleton  Laboratory  in  
Chilton,  England,  had  decided  to  use  Vega  (commonly  serving  astronomers 
as  a  standard  for measuring  other  stars’  brightness  and  spectra)  as  a  source 
for  calibrating IRAS .   “To  their  surpr ise ,”   Science  magazine  said  that  Vega’s 
image  in  the  20-,  60-,  and  100-micrometer channels was  much  brighter  than 
the  infrared  images  of  similar  stars  o r   than  expected  from  an  A-type  star. 
The  heat-sensitive telescope on  IRAS was  measuring  infrared  radiation  ex- 
tending out as far a s  80 astronomical units  (about 7.4 billion miles) from Vega, 
reporting  the  temperature  of  the  bodies  in  orbit  around  the  star  at  about 
-3OO0F,  far above the norm  of  “cold black  space”  and  about  that of  the inner 
rings  of  Saturn.  The  JPL   announcement  said  that  the  material  orbiting Vega 
could  compare  in  mass  “to  all  the  nine  planets  and  other  matter”  in  Earth’s 
solar system, not  including the Sun.  Scientists had  long speculated  that Earth 
and its companion planets were not the only  system of that type in  the cosmos, 
but they  had  never  had  evidence to  prove  i t ,  The  IRAS discovery was  a bonus 
of  the decision to  use  Vega  as  a  ship’s  navigator might  use  the  North  Star  as 
a guide across the ocean.  (JPL Release Aug  9/83;  NASA  Release 83-120;  NY  
Ernes,  Aug  10183,  A-1;  W  Post,  Aug  10183,  A-1;  Aug  11/83,  A-2,  A-22; 
Science,  Aug  26/83,  846) 

August  Z2:  NASA  signed  with  the  California  Institute  of  Technology 
(CalTech)  an  extension  of  its  contract  for  performance  of  research  and 
development  at  JPL .   The   contractual  relationship  had  been  i n   effect  since 

427 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT lC S  

AUGU ST   1983 

1962;  JPL   studies  for  NASA’s  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications 
(OSSA)  had  been  principally  in  space  science  anti  unmanned  exploration  of 
the  Moon  and  planets.  Extension  from  October  1,  1983,  through  September 
30,  1988,  would  cover  space  exploration  and  Elarth  observation.  (NASA 
Release  83-122) 

August  15:  MSFC  said  that  it  had  installed  the  reusable  orbital-research 
Spacelab  in  the  cargo  bay  of  the  Shuttle  Columbia  at  KSC.  Designed, 
developed,  and  funded  by  ESA,  Spacelab  had  undergone  tests  for  three 
months  in a cargo-integration test equipment  (CITE) stand  at KSC.  Columbia 
would  carry  Spacelab  and  a  four-member  crew  inlo  orbit  October  2 8  to  per- 
form  more  t h a n   70  i n d i v i d u a l   i n v e s t i g a t i o n s   in   f i v e   r e s e a r c h   a r e a s   d u r i n g   a 
nine-day  mission.  (MSFC  Release  83-59;  ESA  Info  36) 

In  “a  frank  portrayal  of  the  difficulties of  life  in   o rb i t .  . .extremely  rare  i n  
the Soviet media,”  the daily  newspaper Pruvda  printed  extracts from the diary 
of  a  cosmonaut  who  spent  a  record  211  days  i n   space  between  May  and 
December  1982,  the  Washington Post reported. 
Flight  engineer Valentin  Lebedev,  flying  on  Salyut 7 with  L t .   Co l .   Anatoly 
Berezovoy,  found  the  seven-month  mission  an  intense  strain  relieved  only  by 
the  fascination  of  Earth  spinning  by  below  the  station.  Halfway  through  the 
mission,  fatigue  had  made  the  two  so  nervous  and  sensitive  that  effort  was 
needed  to  avoid  losing  their  tempers.  Arrival  of  two  visiting  space crews was 
viewed with  apprehension because  the original crew  feared  they  might  disrupt 
the working  relationship  they  had  established; one  (entry said  “They  won’t get 
any  of  our  food. We  think  they  will have  to  bring  their  own.”  Once on board, 
the  visitors  apparently  offered  welcome  compan:y.  The   Soviet  Union  had 
presented the cosmonauts as heroic,  almost superhuman  figures, Reuters  news 
agency  said,  and  television  had  invariably  shown  them  smiling.  (W  Pusr, 
AUg  16/83, A-18) 

August  19-25:  Th e  People’s  Republic of  China  launched RPC 13 August  19, 
according to the People’s Daily  quoted by  Reuters,  .which gave no other infor- 
mation  on  it.  Th e  People’s  Republic  had  retrieved  the  spacecraft  from  orbit 
August  25  and  said  that  all  systems  had  worked  normally.  (Spacavurn  
SPX-358,  Aug  30183;  W  Post,  AUg  26183,  A-20) 

August  22:  ARC  scientists said that  exercise, c oupkd  with a low-calorie  d ie t ,  
might  counteract effects of  weightlessness on   the  levels of  insulin  and glucose 
in  the  blood  of  space  travelers.  Plasma  and  glucose  had  increased  during 
simulated  weightlessness,  returning  to  normal  after  exercise. 
Simulations  of  weightlessness  for one  o r   two  weeks  of  prolonged  bed  rest 
had  approximated  the  physiological  responses  occurring  in  space;  resting 
without  exercise  had  decreased  the  ability  to  use  glucose,  and  average  levels 
of  blood  sugar  rose  more  than  10%  above  normal,  a  condition  like  a 

4 2 8  

AUGUST  :983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

prediabetic. state.  Also,  a more  than  200%   rise  in  blood  insulin  occurring  in  
the test  subjects seemed to  result from normal production of  the hormone  and 
less use  of  it.  Tests  showed  that,  even  with  ample  circulation of  insulin,  the 
body  was  less  able  to  control glucose  storage.  Exercise and  low-calorie diets 
would  be  used  to  solve the  problem  in  test  subjects. (NASA  Release  83-130; 
ARC  Release  83-37) 

August  26:  NASA  said  that  IRAS  had  completed  its  primary  mission 
objective at  l2 :30   p.m.  EDT  by  conducting  an  all-sky  survey  and  giving  an 
opportunity  for  double  confirmation  of  sources.  Survey  data  had  a  few 
“holes”  because of  Sun-Earth-Moon observation constraints and  an  anomaly 
that occurred early in June. NASA  had begun  another survey to fill in the gaps 
and  confirm  earlier  observations;  end-of-life would  come   early  in  January. 
(NASA  D ly   Actv  Rp t ,   Sept.  1/83) 

August  30-31:  NASA  STS-8  at  2 :32 :02   EDT  August  30  from  KSC  after  a 
17-minute  hold  because  of  thunderstorms  passing  through.  “Tropical  dis- 
turbance”  Barry  had  moved  ashore  August  26  about  40  miles  south  of  the 
Cape  and  could  have  turned  into a  hurricane,  but  it  bypassed  the  launch-pad 
a r e a .   Th i s   th i rd   f l igh t   of  Shu t t l e   C h a l l e ng e r   was  comm and ed   by 
Navy  Capt.  Richard H .   Truly,  who  was  copilot of  the  second  Shuttle mission 
two  years  ago;  pilot  for  STS-8 was  Navy  Cdr.  Daniel  C.  Brandenstein. Mis- 
sion  specialists  were  Navy  L t .   Cdr.  Dale  A .   Gardner;  civilian  physician 
William E. Thornton,  oldest American in  space; and  U .S .  Air Force Lt.  Col. 
Guion  S .   Bluford  II, first  black  American  in   space. 
This  was  also  the  first  night  Shuttle launch.  NASA  was  testing  its  ability 
to  launch  at  night  from  KSC,  where  weather  was  often  more   favorable than 
in  the  daytime.  The  DOD  wanted  a  demonstration of  night  launch  in  case  of 
needing the Shuttle for a military.mission on short notice. And Challenger was 
carrying  into  orbit  a  $43  million  India  satellite to  forecast  weather  and  relay 
radio,  television, and phone calls that required a night launch for proper  loca- 
tion.  NASA’s  first  manned  night  launch  had  been  December   7,  1972,  when 
Apollo 17 lifted off at KSC  on its way  to the Moon ;   that  launch had  been  visi- 
ble  to  people  in  the  Great  Smoky  Mountains  more   than  500  miles  away. 
NASA  also  planned  to  land  STS-8  at  night,  another  f irs t ,   for  the  same  
reasons  it  launched  at  night.  Landing  would  be  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base 
in  the Mojave desert of  California instead of  KSC,  because of  the  longer run- 
way  and  the  greater  probability  of  good  weather  there  in  m idsummer .  This 
would be . the  first time the public would  not be  allowed at the landing; NASA 
did  not  want  “hundreds  or  even  thousands  of  moving  automobiles  with 
headlights”  to  confuse Shuttle pilots descending  out  of  total  darkness  toward 
the  concrete  runway. 
About three hours after reaching orbit,  the crew began communicating with 
mission  control through  the properly  relocated  $100 million  TDRS  launched 
from STS-6 in April,  instead of  using ground stations out of  reach during most 

429 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1983 

of  their orb i t .  The  first major  task  of  the  STS-8 mission would be deployment 
of  INSAT-B,  and the  crew  spent most of  August  30  checking  the performance 
of  the  50-foot  mechanical  arm   in  the  Shuttle’s cargo  bay  that  had  entitled  “a 
slightly  arthritic  reaction”  i n   its  elbow.  The   a rm  would  grapple  and  move  a 
heavy  dummy-spacecraft package  later  in  the  mission  in  rehearsal  for  future 
release  or   retrieval  of  satellites. 
INSAT-B was  launched  over  the  Indian  Ocean August  31  at  7:49 GMT  and 
successfully  put  into  transfer  orb i t ,   according  to  the  Indian  Space  Research 
Organization, which said that all on-board systems were worlung  well  and tha t  
the  solar panel  was  partly  deployed.  (NASA D ly  Actv Rp t ,  Aug  30183;  FBIS, 
Delhi  DomSvc i n  English, Aug  31/83; NY  Times, Aug  3183,  A-10;  Aug  31183, 
A-1;  W Pos t ,   Aug  25/83,  A-8;  Aug  26/83,  A-10;  Allg  30 /83 ,  A-1;  Aug  31/83, 
A-8;  USA  Today, Aug  30183,  1A, 3A;  W Times, Aug  30183,  12A; Aug  30183, 
1A;  Intervia,  Aug  83,  817) 

During August:  NASA  said  that  it would  cease  i n   September to operate Nim- 
bus 6, launched June  12,  197.5,  for  tracking balloons  floating around  the Earth 
to gather data on winds  i n   the  tropical  and mid-latitudes.  This system  was  the 
forerunner  in  one-way  platform-to-satellite  data  collection  that  had  provided 
worldwide ocean  temperatures  from buoys,  tracked  animal migration  on   land 
and  sea,  and  kept  i n   contact  with  numerous  adventures,  such  as  the  crew  of 
the Eagle I balloon rescued after  i t   crashed  in  t h e  Atlantic  and a Japanese who 
crossed  the  North  Pole  by  dogsled  from  Canada. 
Nimbus  6  had  lost  attitude-control  capability  in  October  1982  when  two 
momentum  wheels  failed  with  an  accompanying  severe  power  reduction.  It 
would  remain  in  polar  orbit  at  600 miles  altitude,  r,eentering the  atmosphere 
some  time  after  the  year  2500,  NASA  said.  (NASA  Release  83-126) 

Tass  reported  that  the  cosmonauts  on  the  Salyut  7-SO)lUz  T-9-Cosmo 1443 
complex were working  on  a  “new and unusual  mission”  to determine the ways 
i n  which  man  affects Earth’s  environment. Th e  Soviet  Union  had  established 
about  10  biospheres  i n   its  territory,  and  space  phot’agraphy  would  allow  ex- 
perts  to  assess  the  state  of  the  flora  and  fauna  there.  The   Soviets  were  em- 
phasizing  environmental  issues,  as  provided  in  the  USSR  constitution,  and 
space  surveys  were  helping  to  detect  sources  of  environmental  pollution  and 
mapping  ways  to  improve  land  reclamation  o r   bring  water  to  desert  areas. 
The   crew  had  loaded  Cosmos  1443 with  half  a  ton  of  excess  material  for 
the  return  to  Ear th ,   including  photographic  films  and  some  instruments  (in- 
cluding  a  nonworking  a ir   regenerator  and  a  defunct  memory  unit  of  the 
autonomous  navigation  system)  that  would  be  examined  for  effects  of  space. 
Cosmos 1443 undocked  August  14  at 6 :04  p.m.  Moscow  time and  soft-landed 
August  23  with  350 kilograms of  cargo. Another  cargo ship, Prugress  17, was 
launched August  17  at 4:08 p .m .  Moscow  time and  clocked August  19  at  5:47 
p.m.  Moscow  time.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Aug  1-23/83) 

430 

S e p t m  ber 

September  1-6:  Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission  followed 
up  its  successful  nighttime  liftoff  and  nighttime  launch  of  India’s  INSAT-B, 
deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay  at 3:49 a .m .   EDT by  mission  specialist 
Air Force L t .   Co l .  Guion  S .  Bluford, Jr.  This was  the  sixth  successful launch 
of  a  communications  satellite from  a  shuttle cargo  bay  in  orb i t .   Navy  Capt. 
Richard  H. Truly and  Navy  Lt .   Cdr.  Dale A .  Gardner  spent most  of  the mis- 
sion’s  third  day  using  the  50-foot mechanical  arm   to  lift  and  move  around  a 
19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum  dumbbell-shaped weight  “the  size of 
a  truck,”  practicing  for  retrieval  next  April  of  a  dummy  satellite  platform 
before  trying  to  catch  and  repair  the  crippled  20,000-pound  Solar  Max 
satellite. 
The   next  two  days  would  see  tests  of  the  TDRS,  now  properly  located  to 
transmit communications during next April’s  Spacelab mission for most of  the 
Shuttle orbit  rather  than  the  present  20% .  
The  odd  workday  beginning at  night  and  launching INSAT  in  the dark  had 
the crew  retiring  about  2  p.m.  EDT,  starting tasks in  the  late evening, and  en- 
ding  in  the  early  afternoon.  The   computer  at  White  Sands  began  refusing  to 
acknowledge commands o r  to correctly position  the  three TDRS-use  antennas 
at White Sands, o n  board  the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers en- 
countered  a  three-hour  silence from  TDRS,  but  other  communications  links 
showed no  problem with  Challenger, and  the crew was  not awakened. Harold 
Draughon,  flight  director  at  JSC,  said  that  90% of  the  trouble  lay  in  the  in- 
structions given the White  Sands computers and  that  he expected Spacelab to 
fly  on   time. 
The   crew<a lso  underwent  tests  by  Dr.  William  Thornton  on  the  causes  of 
space  sickness.  In  an  unusual  news  conference  between  mission  control  in 
Houston  and  the  crew  in  orb i t ,   Thornton  said  that  he  had  “learned  more   in 
the  first hour  and  a  half  on  orbit  here  than  I had  by  all  literature  research  I 
had  done and all of  the active work  in  the past  year.”  His  crewmates had  suf- 
fered symptoms like nausea,  drowsiness, and  “ jus t  plain giddiness,”  although 
he  refused  to  give details. However,  he  expressed confidence that  the medical 
problem  could  be   solved  through  physiological  studies  aboard  the  Shuttle 
flights and  would  become  a  thing of  the past  “as  in  the early days the weight 
losses  that  were  of  great  concern  turned  out  to  be  a  simple  thing.” 
The   mission  also  accomplished  a  successful  first-time  separation  in  
weightlessness  by  mission  specialists Bluford  and  Gardner  of  live  pancreas 
cells,  in  a  pharmaceutical  process  that  could  be  a  step  toward  conquering 
diabetes. The   “ a s t r o r a t s ’ k i x   specimen  flown on STS-8 to try  out  an  “animal 
housing  module”  that  would  carry  laboratory  animals  into  orbit  for  various 

43 1 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

SE PTEMBER   1983 

tests-were 
returning  healthy  and  “feisty“;  veterinarians  at DFRF  later  found 
them  dehydrated, as potatoes had  been  their  source of  water  during flight.  The 
rats  were  flown  to ARC, where tests  showed a postllight drop in blood volume 
like  that  of  astronauts. 
STS-8 concluded  its  series of  firsts  September 5  with  a  first-time  night  lan- 
ding at 3 :40  a .m .  EDT on an  Edwards Air  Force Base  runway,  touching  down 
300  feet  from  the  aiming  point  with  no  on-board  power  or  lights  to  assist. 
“That’s  as  good  as   we  see   in  t h e   daytime,”  said  Lt.  Gen .   James  A .  
Abrahamson,  NASA  associate administrator  for  space flight.  “Based on what 
we’ve  seen  here  tonight,  I  think  night  landings  will  become  routine,”  Truly 
told  a welcoming  ceremony. NASA  had  turned  o n   the  world’s most  powerful 
searchlights, beams of  4.8 billion  candlepower,  visible  for  100 miles  in   every 
direction,  to  guide  Challenger  down. 
Th e  largest  and  most  enthusiastic  crowd  of  invited  guests  ever  gathered  at 
the  end  of  a  Shuttle mission  gave  the  crew  a  stan’ding ovation;  Bluford  said 
he  was  “really  humbled  tonight  to  see  so many  people  out  here  at  4   o’clock 
in morning  to welcome  us  back.”  Thornton,  the  oldest  person  at  54  to  fly  in 
space,  was  visibly  moved  by  the  welcome  and  said  “I know  of  no point  i n  my 
life  that  will  ever  reach  this.”  President  Reagan’s plan  to  visit  KSC  on  Labor 
Day  September  5  to  greet  the  crew  in  person  was  canceled;  he  returned  to 
Washington  cutting  short  a  vacation,  when  a  Korean  airliner  was  reportedly 
shot  down.  However,  Vice  President  George  Bush  was  to  come  in  his  place 
and  attend  a  picnic  for  15,000 employees,  government  and  contractor. 
Challenger  was  in  better  shape  than  any  of  the  Shuttles  used  on  the  seven 
previous  flights,  said  Herman K .  Widlick, KC  ground  operations  manager,  at 
Edwards to plan  for the fastest turnaround  so far. Despite a four-hour exposure 
to  pelting  rains  before  liftoff,  six  days  in orb i t ,   and  landing  i n   the  dark  on  a 
concrete runway,  Challenger  showed less damage on the  fuselage  or underbel- 
ly.  Tires  and  brakes  also  came  through  the  night  landing  in  good  shape; 
however,  the  space  toilet  experienced  the eighth  straight breakdown  in  flight. 
Lt.  Gen .   Abrahamson  said  that  he  was  “not  at  all  pleased  with  the  waste 
management system”  and would  set up a task-force  (equivalent to deal  with  the 
problem.  (NASA D ly   Actv Rp t ,  Sept  9 /83 ;  NY   Times, Sept  2/83,  D-20;  Sept 
4/83,  1 , 3 6 ;  Sept 5 / 8 3 , 9 ;  Sept 7/83, A-18,  A-22;  WiDost, Sept 2 /83 ;  Sept 3/83, 
A-3;  Sept  5/83,  A-3;  Sept  6/83,  A-3;  Sept  7183,  14-4;  W  Times,  Sept  1/83, 
2A ;   Sept  2/83,  2A ;   Sept  5/83,  3A;  Sept  6183,  1A;  Time,  Sept  12/83,  42)  

September  4-19:  ZNSAT  I B ,   the  India  communications  satellite  successfully 
launched  from  STS-8 August  31,  had  solar-array problems,  said Indian  Space 
Research  Organization  (ISRO)  scientists  who  worked  with  engineers  from 
Ford  Aerospace,  the manufacturer,  to  extend  the  panels  on  both  sides  of  the 
spacecraft. 
Press  reports  later  said  that  the  ISRO center  in Bangalore had  been  able to 
put  the entire solar panel  in operation  after tilting  it  toward  t h e  Sun. But ISRO 
also  announced  September  9   that  “an  unidentified  object”  struck  INSAT  1B 

432 

SEPTEMBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

only  seconds  after  its  release  from  Challenger;  an  object  about  eight  inches 
across  that  came   from  outside  the  Shuttle  h i t   the  satellite 23   seconds  after 
separation.  Study  of  a  videotape  shot  during  INSAT  development  ruled  out 
origin  of  the  object  in  Challenger’s cargo  bay.  Experts  said  that  this  was  the 
first spacecraft to be hit  i n  space by  a stray  object.  INSAT reached  the correct 
geostationary orbit  19 days after launch  and was  to  be  operational by  October 
15; the first transmission test,  sending and receiving a picture by  a master con- 
trol  facility  at  Hassan,  was  successful  and  INSAT  1B  was  “fully  responding 
to  ground  commands.” 
India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1 ,  built and launch- 
ed  by  the  United  States to  India  specifications, was  declared  officially  dead 
a year  ago when  i t   failed to  respond  to  ground commands  and  ran  out of  fuel 
150 days after launch.  (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept  8,  10,  11,  14, 15/83; W P o s t ,  
Sept  6/83,  A-3;  Sept  10/83,  A-22;  Sept  12/83,  A-21;  Sept  20183,  A-6;  W 
Ernes,  Sept  12/83,  6A) 

September  7:  Three  new  companies  entering  the  “race  to  commercialize 
space”  would  launch  Space  America,  a  venture  to  provide  remote-sensing 
satellite data  services by  1986,  the  Washington Post  reported.  The  companies 
were two  in  Washington, D.C.-American  Science & Technology  and AEROS 
Data  Corporation-and  Space   Services  Inc.  (SSI)  of  Houston,  which 
developed  the  first  U.S.  privately  funded  and  operated  launch  vehicle.  SSI 
would  be  managing  partner.  All  three  companies were  less  than  three  years 
o ld , .  privately  owned,  and  “actively  seeking  capital,”  according  to  Donald 
“Deke”  Slayton,  former as tronau t  and  president of  SSI.  The group  hoped  to 
put into polar orbit a privately owned satellite built by  Honeywell Inc. and Ball 
Aerospace  Systems  with  sensors  to  collect  data  on  Earth  resources  such  as 
agriculture,  mineral  deposits,  and  water.  (W  Pos t ,   Sept  8/83,  D-1) 

September 8:  NASA  launched RCA-G,  third  in a series of  high-traffic  capaci- 
ty  communications satellites, for  RCA  Amer icom  from  ESMC   on  a  Delta  at 
6 : 5 2   p .m .   EDT  in to   a  transfer  o rb i t   with  35,758-kilometer  apogee ,  
176-kilometer perigee,  104-minute period,  and 24 O  inclination, preparatory  to 
assuming station over the equator at 72 “w. RCA-G would join  four other com-  
munications  satellites  in   orbit  (RCA-C  through  RCA-F)  to  provide  a  five- 
satellite RCA  network  providing  coverage  to  all  50   states. More   than  4,000 
ground stations had direct access to  these communications satellites, which all 
carried  28  completely  solid-state C-band  amplifiers  in  a  configuration  that 
gave  24  operating  channels  for  television,  voice,  and  high-speed  data 
transm iss ion .   (NASA  MOR   M-492-206-83-08   [prelaunch]  Sept  8/83, 
[postlaunch] July  26/84) 

September  21:  NASA  said  that  it  had  signed  a  contract  with  Fairchild  In- 
dustries  for  design  and  development  of  an  unmanned  space  platform  called 
Leasecraft,  to be  deployed from  the  Shuttle to  serve commercial  and  govern- 

433 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1983 

ment  users.  James  M .   B e g s ,   NASA  administrator,  said  that  the  move  was 
consistent  with  administration  plans  to  promote  space  exploitation  by  com- 
mercial  firms.  Fairchild  said  that  the  platform,  which  would  measure  15  by 
15 by  9.5 feet and carry  power  and command  and data-handling modules with 
other  equipment  needed  by  various  payloads,  would  cost  more  than  $200 
million.  Payloads  would  include  materials-processing  and  remote-sensing 
equipment  and  scientific  experiments.  (NASA  Release  83-143) 

September 22:  NASA  launched  Galaxy-B  for  Hughes Communications from 
ESMC on a Delta a t  6:16 p .m .  into a transfer  orbit before  moving  it  on  station 
at  7 4 V  over  the  equator.  Second  of  3  for  Hughes  to  relay  television,  voice, 
data,  and FAX  for  U .S .  business  customers,  the cra.ft carried  24  transponders 
and 6 spares,  12  of  these already  sold  to MCI and another to be used  by  IBM. 
Th e  Galaxy craft were designed to take full advantage of  the concept of  private 
ownersh ip .   (NASA  MOR   M-492-215-83-02  [ p r e l aun ch ]   S ep t   20 /83 ,  
[postlaunch]  July  26/84) 

September 23:   NASA began  moving  the TDRS to  iits  permanent  location over 
the Atlantic Ocean, from 67  W to 41 W,  said Charles M .  Hunter, deputy TDRS  
project  manager  at  GSFC.  Using  s ix   tiny  thrusters,  the  move  began  with  a 
19-minute b um  at 8 :57  p.m'.  EDT,  with  a second  burn  for  17 minutes  at  8 :57  
a .m .  September  24 .   The  craft would  move  to  its permanent  station  at  the  rate 
of  1.2" per  day, drifting  until  October  16, when  the  first  of  two  burns  to  stop 
the drift would  occur.  Another burn on  October  17  jhould  put TDRS  over  the 
Atlantic  jus t  east of  Brazil,  Hunter  said. The fuel  to  be  used,  about  8 pounds, 
would  not  affect  operations  over  the  planned  10-year  life  of  TDRS.  (NASA 
Release  83-145) 

During  September:  NASA  announced  that  Richard  H .   Truly,  commander  of 
STS-8,  was  named  the  first  commander  of  the  Naval  Space Command  to  be 
set  up  October  1 at  Dahlgren,  Va.  Selected  as   a  NASA  astronaut  in  August 
1969,  Truly  had  been  on  one  of  the  crews  for  Shuirtle  approach-and-landing 
test  flights  in  1977.  His  spacecraft  was  as  pilot  of  !iTS-2  in  November  1981. 
(NASA  Release  83-133) 

NASA  said that astronaut Jack R .   Lousma would leave the agency and retire 
from  the  Marine  Corps  October  1.  A  NASA  astronaut  since  April  1966, he 
was pilot  on Skylub 3 in  1973 and  commanded  shuttle orbiter Columbia  on  its 
third  test  flight  in  March  1982.  (NASA  Release  83-151;  W Posr,  Sept  30/83, 
A-4) 

Cosmonauts  Vladimir  Lyakhov  and  Aleksandr  Aleksandrov  on  the  Sulyur 
7-Soyuz  T-PProgress 17  complex  continued  geophysical  observations  using 
photography  and  spectrometry  from  orb i t .   They  loaded  used  equipment  on  
Progress  17  and  undocked  it  September  17  a t   3:44 p.m.  Moscow  time;  Tass 

431  

SEPTEMBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

reported that  it   “ceased to exist”  in  the  atmosphere the next day. The  Cosmos 
1443 module  sent  into  the  atmosphere  August  14  also  burned  up  September 
18.  On  September 29  the  crew  marked  three months  in  the  complex.  (FBIS, 
Tass  in  English,  Sept 2 ,   13,  17-18,  23,  29-30/83) 

435 

October  1:  President  Reagan  issued  a   proclamation  calling  on  the  nation  to 
observe  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration’s 25th  anniver- 
sary  with  “appropriate  ceremonies  and  activities.”  Reviewing  the  agency’s 
history  and  accomplishments,  including  preeminence  of  U.S.  civil  and 
military  aviation,  the  Apollo  program,  planetary  exploration,  and  the  Space 
Shuttle,  the  message  stated  “The   future  looks  bright,  and  NASA  will  be   an 
important  part  of  it.”  (Text,  pres.  doc . ,   Oct  1/83) 

October  3 :   The  New  York  Ernes  carried  a   report  by  “American  intelligence 
sources”  that  three  Soviet cosmonauts  escaped death  but might have  been  in- 
jured   when  a   USSR  launch  vehicle  exploded  or  caught  fire  September 27  at 
a  site in Asia. The  crew was saved when  an escape rocket on top of  the capsule 
pulled  the  spacecraft away  from  the booster.  The   incident,  first of  its  kind  in 
manned  space  programs,  occurred  a s   the  liquid-fuel  rocket  was  about  to 
launch  the  crew  to  the  orbiting Sulyut  7 space  station.  (NY Ernes, Oct  3/83, 
B-13) 

October  4:   The   Washington Post  said  that  an  experiment  on  the  next  U.S. 
Shuttle flight was canceled because of  the shooting down last month of  a  South 
Korean  airliner  by  the  Soviet  Un ion .   The  experiment would  have  made  the 
first mapping photographs  from orbit of  the entire area of Afghanistan, whose 
government  the  Soviet  Union  supports. 
Cancellation was  a   joint  decision  of  NASA  and  ESA ,   which  built  the  $1 
billion  Spacelab  scheduled  to  make  its  first  flight  October  28  in  the  Shuttle 
Columbia’s cargo bay.  This mission  would  take  the  Shuttle farther  north  and 
south than  any  previous manned  U.S.  flight, going 5 5 ”  from  the  equator over 
the end‘of Argentina  as well as the Hudson  Bay  region of Canada  and @e  up- 
per areas of  Scotland. Columbia and  Spacelab would also f ly  over most of  the 
Soviet  Union  (including  Moscow  for  the  first  time)  but  would  take  no 
photographs  of  the  Soviet Union.  ( W  Post, Oct  4 /83 ,   A-2) 

October  7:  NASA  said  that  prelaunch  processing  for  STS-9  would  include 
removal  of  the  OV-102  waste-management  system  and  replacement  with  the 
system  from  OV-099.  The   job   would  take  place  after  the  completion  of  a  
launch-confidence test  that  included  a  wet-countdown demonstration, hot-fire 
testing  of  propellant  units,  and  operation  of  the  fuel-cell  power  systems. 
(NASA D ly   Actv  Rp t ,   Oct  7/83) 

PRECED ING   PAGE  BLANK  NOT  F ILMED  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  A E RONAU T I C S  

OCTOBER  1983 

October IO:  Tass said that  Venera 15, launched J u n e  2 ,  had  reached Venus Oc- 
tober  10 and  fired  its engine to  assume an elongated elliptical orbit around the 
planet  with  a  24-hour  period  of  revolution.  Venera  16,  still  on  its  way,  was 
scheduled  to  arrive  about  October  14.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Oct  10/83) 

October  10-27:  FBIS  carried  a  report  from  Paris  quoting  “a  source  close  to 
Soviet  space  circles”  that  three  Soviet  cosmonaul.s,  one   a  woman,  were  in- 
jured when  a rocket blew up  at Baykonur  two weeks ago. The  crew was ejected 
from  the  launcher  by  a  secondary  rocket,  the  source  said.  (FBIS,  Paris  A F  
in  English,  Oct  10183) 
Th e  New   York  Times said that  Soviet  officials had  “privately  admitted”  that 
one  of  th e i r   rocke t s   exp lod ed  o n  t h e   l aun ch   pad   a s  th r e e   co smon au t s   p r ep a r e d  
to jo in   the  crew  on  orbiting  space station  Sulyut  Z  However,  “ i n   the  absence 
of any public accounting of the incident,” questions remained as  to the damage 
done   to  the  Soviet  Union’s  space program  or   its  effect  on  the mission  of  the 
crew  now  in  their  fourth  month  aboard  Salyut  Z 
Th e  private  sources said that  the  160-foot A-2  rocket began  to  topple  on  the 
launch pad before  its  liquid  oxygen and kerosene  fuel  exploded.  The accounts 
were contradictory,  some saying  that  a woman  was  i n   the crew  and  others that 
the crew was either  injured o r  merely  shaken up by  the experience. The explo- 
sion  could  amount  to  a  major  setback,  in  view  of  a  Soyuz  crew’s  failure  to 
dock  with  the  Salyut  last April  at  the  end  of  a  “harrowing  17-hour  struggle.” 
The  Washington Post said that  the  crew  sustained “unspecified  injuries”  and 
that  the  event  was  important  because  the  visitors  to  the  Salyut  would  have 
returned  to  Earth  in  the  capsule  that  took  occupants  Aleksandr  Aleksandrov 
and  Vladimir  Lyakhov  to  the  station  June  28,  1ea.ving  their  module  for  the 
“permanent crew”  to use  on  their  return.  No  immediate concern was exprcss- 
ed  about  the  latter,  as  the  original  capsule  was  still  usable. 
A  later  report  noted  that  Aleksandrov  and  Lyakhov  had  been  endangered 
September  9  by  a  leak  of  nitrogen  tetroxide  propellant  into  space;  the 
cosmonauts had put  on their space suits i n  case the ioxic gas entered  the cabin. 
They  were  allowed  to  remain  in  orbit  after  they  found  no  traces  of  the  gas. 
But  the  leak had  left  16 of  the  station’s 32 control jets unusable,  and  less  than 
1,000 pounds  of  the gas  in  its  single operating  tank,  meaning  that  a  new  crew 
could  not  operate  the  station  in  a  normal  mode.  A  new  crew  could  f l y   a  dif- 
ferent type  of  space  tug  to one of  the docking ports,  however,  and  use  its con- 
trol  jets  to  maneuver  the  station. 
Th e  New   York  Times reported  October  18  that  a  Soviet official  with  direct 
contact  to  senior mission  control  that  said  two  experienced  cosmonauts  were 
recuperating  from  effects  of  acceleration  when  emergency  rockets  blew  their 
capsule  clear  of  the  exploding  A-2  launch  vehicle  and  that  the  crew  did  not 
include  a  woman. 
Th e  Washington Post  said  October  20   that  the  two  cosmonauts  on  Su lyu t   7 
were  “in  no danger,”  according  to  Eugeny  Tabakaev of  the  Soviet  academy  of 
sciences;  the  statement  followed  a  British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (BBC) 

4 3 8  

OCrOBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

report  that  the  station  was  crippled  because  of  a  propellant  leak.  British 
teacher  Geoffrey  Perry,  a  regular  listener  to  Soviet  radio  transmissions,  told 
AP  that  he  had  detected  no  signs  of  stress  and  that  the  cosmonauts  “sound 
fine.”  James  Oberg,  U.S.  specialist on  Soviet  space  programs,  said  that  the 
Sulyut  7 c r ew   could  get back  to  Earth  in   the Soyuz that  took  them  into space, 
but the Soviet Union had not used the Soyuz craft after  115  to  120 days in  space 
because batteries  and  other  systems  could  deteriorate  over  time.  Oberg  said 
that  Lyakhov  and  Aleksandrov  were  to  have  returned  late  in  September after 
another  crew  arrived  but  were  delayed  by  the  launch-pad  explosion. 
The   Soviet Union  launched  a  supply  ship, Progress  18, from  Baykonur  at 
4:59  a.m.  EDT  October  20  to  rendezvous  with  Sulyut  7,  claiming  that  the 
cosmonauts there were  “living normally.”  Lyakhov and Aleksandrov appeared 
on  Moscow  television  October  16  and  appeared  to  be  “in  high  spirits.” 
However,  their  flight had  reached  its  116th  day  October 21,  and  the  previous 
record  for  a  stay  in  space  was  the  114  days  set  last  year  i n   the  course  of  a 
211-day  endurance flight. It would  take  10 days to  2 weeks  for the cosmonauts 
to  unload  Progress  18, which  would  be   burned  on  reentry. 
Nature magazine,  published  in  Great Britain,  said  that  the  crisis was  exag- 
gerated  and  concern  for  the  crew  came   not  from  Soviet engineers  but  from 
physicians,  who  had  seen  significant declines  in  activity and  efficiency after 
four  months  in  space.  Nature  described  as  “fanciful”  a  suggestion  that  the 
Soviet  Union  wanted  to  keep  the  cosmonauts  in  orbit  until  they  could  be 
rescued  by  the  U.S.  Shuttle  o n 4 s  November  flight.  (FBIS,  Paris  AFP   in  
English, Oct  10/83; Tass  in  English, Oct  14, 20,  21,  22 ,   28/83; NY  Times, Oct 
12/83, A-7;  Oct  18/83,  C - 2 ;   W Post,  Oct  12/83, A-19;  Oct  14/83, A-10;  Oct 
20183,  A-39;  Oct  21/83,  A-7;  Na ture ,  Oct  2l/83,  756) 

Oc tober   13:  LeRC  said  that  Dr.  Henry   G.  Kosmahl,  an  electron  physicist 
employed  there,  had  developed  an  amplifying  system  that  could  double  the 
number  of  channels  on  a  communications  satellite.  The   system,  called  a 
dynamic velocity taper, was  a  “relatively minor  technical modification” of  an 
existing  device. 
Most  nations  had  been  seeking  additional  output  from  communications 
satellites for voice, picture,  and data transmission.  However,  communications 
satellites could be  spaced around  the globe no  closer than  2 O  part;  otherwise, 
the  signals  from  one   would  interfere  with  those  adjoining.  The   number   of 
possible  communications  satellites  in  orbit  was  therefore  limited,  and  all 
available  slots would  be  full  by  the  year  2000. 
Kosmahl’s  idea  would  make  each  communications  satellite able  to  handle 
more   traffic  without  affecting  quality  of  the  signals or   increasing  the  power 
supply. He   had  applied  for a  patent on  the device, which  would  be  owned  by 
NASA  but  available  to  industry.  (LeRC   Release  83-62) 

The  Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that  i t  would build 
an  adjunct  facility  at  Dulles  International  Airport  to  house  an  expanding 

439 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER   1983 

collection  of  aircraft,  including  the  Shuttle Enterprise.  Estimated  to  cost  $40 
million,  the facility would  replace the restoration  site now  at Silver Hill, M d . ,  
but would  not  be  completed  for  another 7  to  15  years.  Possibilities  for Dulles 
included  a  group  of  four  buildings  to  accommodate  a  Boeing  707,  a  Boeing 
B17  bomber,  Boeing  727,  a  Boeing  747,  and  others;  the  design  and  funding 
were  not  yet  settled. 
Th e  collection  had  outgrown  the Mall  area,  saial Walter  Boyne,  director  of 
the museum:  “We a r e  going  to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,”  which 
it would be physically  impossible to move to  the Ma l l  area.  “They are  so com- 
plex,  you  can’t simply  take a  wing  off  and  move  them.”  The  present  museum 
now  has  10  million  visitors  a  year,  and  Boyne  said  that  people  would  be  as 
interested  in  the  Shuttle  100  years  from  now   as  they  were  in   the  Wright 
Brothers’  plane  today.  ( W Post,  Oct  13/83,  D-1) 

October  13-17:  Press  reports  said  that  NASA  might  have  to  delay  the  first 
flight of  Spacelab on the Shuttle Columbia until  the end of November,  because 
a  protective liner  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  solid-fuel  rocket-engine exhaust 
nozzles  might  be  part  of  what  one  official  called  “a  bad  batch.” 
A  three-inch  layer  of  the  carbon-epoxy material was  intended to protect  the 
metal  nozzles  from  flaming exhaust  by  charring,  tci  dissipate heat;  about half 
the  layer  would  normally  burn  away  during  the  two-minute  firing  of  the 
booster.  On  the  last  mission,  one   nozzle’s  lining  came  within  0.2  inches  of 
burning  away  completely.  Damage  to  a  metal  nozzle  could  send  the  Shuttle 
off course; had  the f lame  burned  through part of  the engine in flight,  “it  could 
have  caused  a  catastrophe,”  said  the  Washington Post.  A  test  firing  October 
11  at Thiokol’s  Utah plant,  where the  rockets  were  built,  showed that  the  liner 
had  begun  to  “delaminate,”  which  would  make  the  Shuttle  aerodynamically 
unstable  after  two  minutes  of  flight. 
If  NASA  decided  to  replace  one  of  Columbia’s  motors,  it  would  have  to 
move the  entire vehicle off  the pad.  L t .  Gen.  James A .  Abrahamson,  head  of 
the  Shuttle  program,  said  that  chances of  staying  on  schedule  for  a  Spacelab 
launch  between  October  28   and  November  5  were  “diminishing  rapidly”; 
however,  he would  not  set  a  launch  date  “with  this  type  of  uncertainty.”  Th e  
next  possible  launch  date  after  November  5  would  be  November  27: 
astronomy  experiments  to  be  carried  on  Spacelab  had  to  orbited  while  the 
moon  was  dark .  
[Students a t  Camden ,   N .J . ,   high  schools  said  that  the  carpenter  ants  flown 
on Challenger  in  June  had  died  from  lack of  moisture  before  leaving  Earth.] 
Th e  New   York  Times  said  that  NASA  might  have  to  delay  the  next  Shuttle 
mission  for on e  to  four months,  possibly  to  next  February  6 ,  because  of  con- 
cern  about reliability of  the nozzles  in the Shuttle boosters.  Positions of  stellar 
targets  would  again  be  favorable  for  Spacelab observations  by  next  February. 
ESA  and  scientists  from  the  United  States and  Europe were  asked  to  suggest 
rescheduling  that  would  have  the  least  impact  on   their  experiments. 

440 

OCrOBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

A   later  report  said  that  engineers  who  examined  one   of  the  engines 
recovered  from  the Atlantic  after  the mission  in  August  found  that  the  three- 
inch  coating  inside  the  rocket  nozzle  had  burned  down  to  0.2  inches. 
Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of  that  flight, told  CBS News  that the 
lowest part  of  the  engine would  have  burned  through  if  the engines had  fired 
2.7  seconds more, which would have  “spelled curtains for the crew.”  A  NASA 
official  said  that  was  conjecture,  though  the  agency  admitted  that  a  burn- 
through  might  have  occurred  after  20  more   seconds. 
NASA  decided October  14  to  postpone  the  first  flight  of  Spacelab  for  “at 
least a mon th”  but would announce a new  launch date. Gen. Abrahamson  said 
October  16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision 
would  be made  jointly by  NASA  and  ESA.  He  said that NASA  engineers still 
did  not  know  what  caused  the  near-failure of  the  engine on  the  eighth shuttle 
flight  in  August.  Two  test  firings  in  the  last  10  days  had  produced  confusing 
results:  one  engine  lining  had  almost  burned  through,  the  other  less  than 
halfway, as it was  meant to do. NASA  had  changed the manufacturing  process 
not  long  ago,  he  noted, and  the change might have trapped gases  in  the lining 
instead  of  baking  them  out. 
With  Columbia  waiting  for  Spacelab,  the  next  Shuttle  flight  would  take 
place  in  January  as  planned.  Challenger  would  deploy  two  communications 
satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in  space a self- 
propelled  manned  maneuvering  unit  that  could  go  500  to  600 feet  from  the 
Shuttle.  (W  Posr,  Oct  13/83,  A-15;  Oct  14/83,  A-10;  Oct  15/83,  A-20;  Oct 
17/83,  A-3;  NY  T imes ,   Oct  13/83,  A-16) 

October 16-17:  Engineers from NASA,  TRW  Inc . ,  and  Spacecom  successful- 
ly  carried  out  two maneuvers to  put TDRS  1  at  its permanent  station a t  41W. 
The   communications  satellite,  launched  from  the  shuttle  in  April,  was  now 
over  the  Atlantic  Ocean   at  the  equator  just  off  the  north  coast  of  Brazil. 
(NASA  Release  83-156) 

October 19:  ESA  launched Ariane  8  from  Kourou,  French  Guiana,  at  l2 :45  
a .m .  GMT  from Zntelsat 5 - F 7 a s  Payload, which  it deployed at  1:OO  a.m:  into 
an  orb i t   with  36,158-kilometer apogee,  183-kilometer perigee,  and  8.5”  in- 
clination.  Representatives  from  ESA  and  France’s  Centre  National  d’Etudes 
Spatiales (CNES)  were delighted with  a  new  success for  the  European  space 
industry.  (FBIS,  Paris  AFP,  Oct  ~19/83) 

The  NY   Zimes  said  that  ‘komputer  enthusiasts”  had  invaded NASA’s  elec- 
tronic mail  system,  left  cartoon  images  and  “Kilroy  was  here”  messages  for 
agency employees, and played pranks on  others. A  NASA  official said that the 
in truders   had  destroyed  some   information  but  had  not  “significantly 
disrupted”  the  electronic mail  service.  NASA  first  noticed  the  intrusions  in 
mid-July,  and   they  con t inued   in to   m id -Sep tembe r .   Be s ide s   read ing  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1983 

unclassified NASA messages,  the intruders had  destroyed  some messages and 
created  personal  passwords  and  new  files  for  themselves  and  their  computer 
friends. Some  NASA employees who used Telemail  had been  inconvenienced, 
but  the  system  had  never  been  halted. 
The   Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI)  said  that  it  was  investigating  a 
number  of  youths  in  connection  with  the  intrusions.  To  make  Telemail  easy 
to  use,  NASA  had  told  employees  to  use  their  firmst  initial  and  last  names  as 
part  of  an  entry  code;  employee names were available  from  agency  telephone 
directories  sold  by  the  Government  Printing  Office  (GPO).  The   Office  of 
Management and Budget  (OMB) told  a House subcommittee that  it was trying 
to increase security  for federal computers, and an FBI official  asked Congress 
for a  law  prohibiting  unauthorized  entry  into a  computer. Without  such a law, 
federal authorities  were treating  the  cases as wire  lraud ,   like use of  telephone 
lines  to  obtain  service  without  paying.  ( N Y   Timer:,  Oct  19/83, A-16) 
Another report said that  the FBI  had  seized computers  and other equipment 
from  15 computer enthusiasts around the United  States, mostly  teenagers. The  
bureau  said that  there was  “extensive”  penetration  into commercial and DOD  
computers  and  that  intruders  had  tampered  with  the  files  of  some   corpora- 
tions.  ( N Y  Ernes,  Oct  17/83,  A-12) 

During  October:  Kurt  Debus,  who  helped  develop Germany’s  World  War  I1 
V-2  rocket  and  worked  on  the Redstone ballistic missile  for  the U.S.  Army  in 
the  1950s, died  after  a  heart  attack  at  his  home  near  Cocoa,  F l a . ,   at  the  age 
of  74. 
He  had  joined Wernher  von  Braun’s  rocket  team  on  the  Baltic  coast during 
the war  and came to the United  States  afterwards. Von  Braun  said of h im :   “We 
develop  the rockets and  it’s up  to  Debus  to  see they  do  what  they’re supposed 
to  do.”  In  1952, Debus  became  director  of  what  would  later  be NASA’s  Ken- 
nedy  Space Center;  his  last official  act before  retirement  was  to  break  ground 
for a KSC  landing strip  for Shuttles  returning  from  orb i t .   (WP o s t ,  Oct  11/83, 
B-6) 

MFSC  said  that  the  Space  Telescope,  NASAls  future  optical  orbiting 
astronomical  observatory,  had  been  named  the  Edwin  P.  Hubble  Space 
Telescope  to  honor  a  foremost  U.S.  astronomer  who  had  died  in  1953. 
Scientists had  differed on the extent  and dimensions of  the universe:  Earth’s 
solar  system  was  considered  part  of  a  larger  system  of  all  stars  visible  to  the 
naked  eye.  It  was  not  known  whether  faint  spiral  nebulae  were  part  of  the 
Milky  Way  o r   distant  universes,  each  composed  of  myriad  stars. 
Hubble, working with  the  100-inch telescope at M t .  Wilson,  Ca l if . ,   looked 
at  individual  stars in  the Andromeda  nebula  and by  the  end of  1924 was  able 
to  show  that  Andromeda  was  many  times  farther  away  than  any  star  i n   the 
Milky Way  system.  He  later showed that  the universe was expanding (evidence 
of  the Big Bang  theory),  that  external galaxies were  moving  away  from ear th ,  
and  that  the more remote  the  galaxy  the  faster  it  was moving.  This was  called 

442 

OCTOBER  1983 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT lC S  

Hubble’s Law;  the coefficient relating distance and  velocity  of  the galaxy  was 
called  Hubble’s  Constant. 
Th e   newly  named  Space  Telescope  was  scheduled  for  launch  from  the 
Space  Shuttle  in   1986.  (MSFC   Release  83-70) 

4 4 3  

November 

November 18:  Th e  European Space Operations Center (ESOC), a t  the request 
of  the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), completed 
a  switching operation  on  board  ESA's  operational  Maritime  European  Com-  
munications  Satellite Murecs-A that  increased  the  satellite's  capacity  from 30 
simultaneous  voice  telephone  channels to 46.  ESOC completed  the transfer  in 
less  than  10  minutes;  thus,  avoiding  the  need  to  transfer  communications  to 
the  spare satellite and back  again. Th e  satellite provided  the  total of  the Atlan- 
tic  Ocean  region  shore-to-ship  and  ship-to-shore  satellite  communications. 
Murecs-A  was  providing  to  INMARSAT  its  full  capacity,  one   in  excess  of 
the  contractual  requirement  of  40  voice  telephone  channels.  Th e   increased 
capacity  seemed  to  bode  well  for  Murecs-A  to  fulfill  its  design  lifetime  of 
seven  years.  (ESA  Release,  Nov  28/83) 

November  22 :   The   Infrared  Astronomical  Satellite  (IRAS),  launched  o n  
January  25 ,   1983, as  a joint project  of  the United  States, the Netherlands, and 
the  United  Kingdom,  depleted  its  supply  of  helium  a t   1:30 a .m .   GMT.  Th e  
superfluid  helium  refrigerant  cooled  the  telescope,  which would  cease opera- 
tions  in  about  a  week,  mission  officials  said.  Throughout  the  mission,  the 
telescope's  focal  plane  was  cooled  to  a  temperature  of  about  2.5"  above  ab- 
solute  zero  (-455"F),  making  the  instrument  the  coldest  manmade  object 
ever  flown  in   Earth  orbit. 
Th e  telescope  surveyed  more  than 95 %  of  the sky, pinpointing the locations 
and   intensities of  more   than  200,000 infrared  objects.  During  its  300 days  of 
observations,  IRAS  carried  out  the  first  complete  survey  of  the  infrared  sky 
and made many  discoveries,  including the  detection of  a  ring of  solid material 
around the  star Vega  and  seven  comets and bands of  dust around  the Sun bet- 
ween  the orbits of  Mars  and Jupiter.  Mo r e  than  200  billion  bits  of  data  came 
from  I U S ,  and  results  announced  to date represented  only  a hurried  look at 
a very small proportion of  this data.  It was  evident, however,  that  IRAS would 
have  a major  impact on many  areas of  astronomy  and that  astronomers would 
be   making  new  discoveries  from   its  data  for  years  to  come. 
On November 9, NASA  announced  two  IRAS  findings:  a new  object  in  the 
solar system-possibly  an  asteroid or a dead  comet-that  passed  closer  to  the 
Sun than any planet o r  known asteroid and three giant rings of dust that circled 
par t   of  the  solar  system.  Th e  unknown  object,  temporarily  designated  minor 
planet  1983TB, appeared  to  be   less  than  2  kilometers  (1.2  miles)  in  diameter 
and about 30 million kilometers  (19 million miles) from Earth.  1983TB passed 
within  15  million  kilometers  (9  million  miles)  of  the  Sun ,   closer  than  any 
planet o r  known  asteroid  and  10 times  closer than  Earth.  And  its orbit almost 
Pf%XEDII\%G PAGE  BLANK  MOT  FILMED 
#fdTpJrtfl?4ht t Y   W L W R  

445 

Y 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER   1983 

exactly  matched that of  the Geminid  stream of meteoroids, which were visible 
as  a  shower  of  meteors  (shooting stars) in December  1982. Astronomers were 
planning additional observations with  photometers and  spectrometers  in  an  ef- 
fort  to  clear  up  the  mystery  of  the  identify  of  19t13TB.  The   three  dust  rings 
were  100 million miles  wide and were  circling the asteroid belt  between  Mars 
and  Jupiter  200 to  300 million  miles  from  the  Sun .  The  dust  bands  appeared 
to  defy  the  laws  of  physics  by  encircling  the  asteroid  belt  in  three  extremely 
stable and  symmetrical  rings.  Particles making  up  the dust bands  “this  small 
can  only  survive  in  stable orbits  for  a  few  ten-thousands  of  years  before  they 
a r e  pulled  apart by  the sun,”  said Dr. Frank Low of  the University of Arizona. 
“There  must  be  something  that  replenishes  the  rings  because  three  stable 
bands  that  large  cannot  exist  any  other  way.” 
In  addition,  NASA  announced  that  same  day  that  astronomers  studying 
IRAS  data  at  the  University  of  Groningen,  the  N’etherlands, had  discovered 
three  giant  dust  shells  that  were  asymmetrically  placed  around  the  star 
Betelgeuse.  It was already known  that  the red  supergiant star lost material,  but 
IRAS data  showed evidence of  the presence of  dust  shells  that  extended more 
than  four  light  years  from  the  star.  At  that  distance,  the  material  must  have 
left  the  star  100,000  years  earlier.  The   IRAS  observations  thus  allowed 
astronomers  to  study  the  earliest  stages  in   the  episode  of  mass  loss.  (NASA 
Release  83-162,  83-171,  83-172,  83-181;  W Post,  Nov  10183,  A-1) 

November 23:  Soviet  cosmonauts Vladimir  Lyakhov  and Aleksandr Aleksan- 
drov  returned  to  EartH  aboard  the  Soyuz  T-9 descant  module  after  a  150-day 
flight on board the Sulyut-7-Soyuz orbital  space station. Th e  two  landed  at 3:OO 
p.m.  EST  (in  the middle  of  the  night  in  the  Soviet  Union),  16  kilometers  east 
of  Dzhezkazgan  in  that  country.  U.S.  intelligence  sources  said  that  the  two 
were expected to  return  i n   September, when  an  exchange  crew  of  cosmonauts 
was due to visit  them.  However,  they were forced  to  stay  in orbit an additional 
six  weeks  when  an  explosion  at  the  launch  pad  almost  killed  the  two  other 
crewmen. And  at about  the  same time that  the  launch pad  accident  forced  the 
extension  of  their  flight,  the  two  cosmonauts  had  to  deal  with  a  fuel  leak 
aboard  the  Sulyut  that  left  the  space  station  with  less  than  half  of  its  normal 
navigating  propellant.  Th e  two men had  to  live in space suits, because the  fuel 
that  leaked  was  nitrogen  tetroxide,  which  was  so  toxic  it  might  have  killed 
them  i f   it  penetrated  the  cabin  of  the  space  station. 
Western  space  observers  had  noted  that  the  six-week  extension  i n   space 
might  cripple the Soyuz T-9 spacecraft because  it had  been  in orbit longer than 
115  days  and this  length of  time could  possibly  cause  its nonrechargeable  bat- 
teries  to  burn  ou t ,   allowing  the  corrosive  nitrogen  textroxide  fuel  the  Soyuz 
used  to  navigate  to  eat  through  engine  valves  and jeopardize  the  flight home. 
Western  space  experts  were  also  interested 
in  the  night  landing.  The  
cosmonauts, earliest  day  landing  would  have been  December  15,  which might 
have  been  too  long  for  them  to  trust  the  Soyuz  T - ! )  to  return  safely. 
Th e  official  Soviet  news  agency  Tass  said  that,  during  the  flight,  the  crew 

446 

NOVEMBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

carr ied   out  a  large  volume  of  scientific-technical  and  medicobiological 
research  and  experiments  and  gathered  data  on  the  Earth‘s  natural  resources, 
its  atmosphere,  seasonal  changes,  and  the  biological  productivity  of  the 
world’s oceans.  New  research  was  carried  ou t  under  the  program  of  material 
studies in  space.  An Elektrotropgraf  instrument on  board  the  station provided 
data  on  the  state of  construction  materials  following  exposure  to  open  space. 
Tass also noted  that an  important part of  the crew’s flight program  was to carry  
ou t   complex  assembly  work  on  the  external  surface  of  the  Salyut  7 station. 
During  two  space  walks  of  5  hours  and  45  minutes,  the  two  cosmonauts  in- 
stalled  additional  so lar  batteries  on  the  station,  in  addition  to  o ther  construc- 
tion  tasks.  Over  the  course  of  the  flight,  there  were  regular  medical  checkups 
of  the  crew,  which  confirmed  the  possibility  of  man’s  active  functioning  in 
weightlessness.  (FBIS  Moscow  Pruvda  in  Russian,  Nov  25 /83 ;   NY   T imes ,  
NOV 3/83,  A-8;  W Post,  NOV 12/83, A-2,  NOV 24/83,  A-12) 

November 28:  NASA launched  a t  11:OO a .m .  EST the Space Shuttle Columbia 
(STS-9) from  KSC.  Columbia  carried  the  largest  space  crew  ever, which  con- 
sisted  of  John  Young,  commander ;  Brewster  Shaw,  pilot;  Dr.  Robert  Parker 
and  Dr.  Owen  Garr io t t ,   mission  specialists;  and  Dr.  Byron  Lichtenberg  and 
West  Germany’s  Dr.  Ulf  Merbo ld ,   payload  specialists.  The   crew  would 
operate  in two shifts  to permit  24-hour  operation of  experiments.  The  mission 
was  originally  scheduled  to  get  under  way  September  30  but  was  delayed  to 
October  28  to  give  engineers  additional  time  to  check  ou t  a  communications 
satellite  needed  to  relay  data  to  Earth  from   Spacelab,  carried  on  Columbia. 
The  flight  w a s   postponed  again  when   an   examination  of  the  booster  rockets 
used  for  the  Space  Shuttle mission  in  August  revealed  ser ious  erosion  of  the 
insulation  lining  one   of  the   rocket  nozzles.  The   rocket  was  replaced. 
Columbia  carried  Spacelab,  designed  and  built  by  ESA,  which  marked 
Europe’s  first  ma jor   entry  into  a  manned  space  program.  O ther   firsts 
associated with  the  flight was that  it carr ied  the heaviest  payload  on  a  Shuttle, 
the  33,584-pound  Spacelab  and   pallet,  and  that  it  would  include  more   ex- 
periments  and  spacecraft  maneuvers  than  did  any  previous  flight. 
Immediately  after liftoff,  Columbia  rolled  over  and turned  northward  to put 
itself  into  an  orbital  path  that  would  range  from  a s   far  north  a s  Scotland  and 
Leningrad  to  as  far  south  a s  Tierra  de l  Fuego  a t  the  tip  of  South  Amer ica   in 
order   to  take  pictures  of  Europe.  Th e  orb i t   would  also  take  Columbia  over 
Moscow and many militarily  sensitive areas  of  the Soviet Un ion ,  the  first time 
a U.S. manned  spacecraft had  flown over the Soviet Union  in daylight.  No pic- 
tures  or  o ther   sensing  would  be  taken  of  the  ground  while  Columbia  passed 
over  the  Soviet  Union. 
The  $1-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long  laboratory  was  sealed  and  pressuriz- 
ed  so  that  the  scientistslastronauts  could  work  in  shirtsleeves  as  they  carr ied  
out  more   than  70  experiments  on   38   sets  of  equipment.  Operating  Spacelab 
we re   Me rbo ld   and   L ich tenberg ,   a  new  b reed   of  astronaut-payload 
specialists-who  were  not  career  astronauts  but  scientists  trained  to  operate 

447 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER  1983 

the  science  instruments  on  the  mission.  Wired  with  sensors,  the  scientists 
were  guinea  pigs  i n   a  number  of  experiments  designed  to  explore  how  the 
body  adapted  to  space  and  how  it  performed  in  the absence of  gravity. Blood 
samples were  taken  three  times  so that  scientists could  study  how  the  ratio of 
red  to  white  blood  cells  changed  once  the  body  was  weightless.  Several  ex- 
periments were conducted  to measure eye movements;  in another experiment, 
Garriott  was  given  mild  electric  shocks  to  see  how  the  muscles  in  his  body 
responded  to  a  sudden jolt  that  was  the  bodily  equivalent of  a  sudden move- 
ment  in  weightlessness  (doctors  believed  that  one  of  the  causes  of  space 
sickness  might  be  abrupt  movements  that  disoriented  the  inner  ear).  In 
another experiment,  the crew  in  shifts pushed  two balls  identical in  shape and 
size,  although  of  different  weights,  to  determine how  quickly  humans  would 
distinguish  weight  from  size  in  weightlessness. 
Other  Spacelab  studies  were  concerned  with  the  growth  i n   space  of 
sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes.  Exotic metal mixes 
were melted,  and crystals were  grown in three  Spacelab furnaces.  There were 
experiments  intended to determine the practicality of  orbiting  factories to pro- 
duce  products  not  possible  in  the  gravity  of  Earth. 
During  the  flight,  two antennas  failed on  the TDRS-I  that  was  used  to  relay 
data from Spacelab to Earth.  The  failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold 
had  to  share the voice  link to Mission Control Cenirer i n  Houston with the four 
astronauts  in Columbia’s  cockpit, and  it meant  that  the two  scientists got  their 
instructions  from  the  ground  via  a  teleprinter  aboard  Spacelab.  Columbia 
landed  December  8  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  Calif.  (NASA  MOR 
M-977-09-83-01  [prelaunch],  Oct  83 ;   NASA  Releases  83-163,  83-176; NASA  
D ly   Actv  R e p t ,   Nov  29 /83 ;   W Post,  Nov  22/83,  ,443, Nov  28/83,  A-1,  Nov 
29183, A-1,  Nov  30/83, A-I;  USA  Today, Nov   29/83,  1A;  W Times, Nov  22/83, 
C-1;  B  S u n ,   Nov  29/83,  A-1) 

November  29:  NASA  Administrator  James M .  Beggs  announced  that  NASA 
and  Canada’s  Department  of  Communications  signed  an  arrangement  to 
cooperate  in  the definition of  a  space program  thai. could  lead  to  the  develop- 
ment  of  commercial  satellite  service  to  meet  mobile  communications  needs 
in  both  countries.  The   arrangement  would  provide  a  framework  for  the 
Department  of  Communications and  NASA  to work  with  telecommunications 
carriers  in  both  countries  to  initiate  mobile  satellite  service.  This  approach 
could  lead quickly  to a  commercial  satellite system  that  simultaneously allow- 
ed  for  the  development of  advanced  research  and  (development to  support  se- 
cond  generation  systems. 
In  the  event  that  the program  definition  activities were  successful,  the  next 
step  would  be  to  agree  to  cooperate  in  the  implemention  and  postlaunch 
phases of  the program.  Under  that  arrangement, NASA  would  invite U.S.  car- 
riers to participate i n  a joint endeavor  arrangement  through  a Notice of Oppor- 
tunity,  under  which  the  carrier  would  be  responsible  for  the  development  of 

4 4 8  

NOVEMBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

commercial  markets  and ,   with  Telesat  Canada ,   the  specification,  procure- 
men t ,   and  operation  of  the  system. 
Succesful  completion  of  this  program  would  result  in  initiation  of  new  ser- 
vices  and  industries  in  both  countries  to  provide  two-way  radio,  radio 
telephone,  and  low-speed  message  and  data  services  to  mobile  terminals 
operating  in  rural  and  nonmetropolitan  areas.  Potential  users  would  include 
radio  common  carr iers ,   telephone  companies,  resource  industries,  trucking 
companies,  federal  and  state  governments,  and  emergency  and  law  enforce- 
ment  agencies.  (NASA  Release  83-186) 

During November:  NASA  announced that  it had  set up a t  JSC  the Biomedical 
Research  Institute,  which  would function a s  part  of  the Space  Adaptation  Pro-  
jec t  within  the Space Transportation Systems Program  Office,  to  focus efforts 
on  solving  some  of  the problems  space crews had  in  adjusting  to a  weightless 
environment.  The  Space  Adaptation  Syndrome was the name  that  NASA  gave 
to  a wide  range  of  physical  problems  that  astronauts  sometimes  experienced, 
including  nausea,  vomiting,  and  general  malaise.  Approximately  45 %  of 
astronauts  who  had  flown  had  experienced  some  of  those  symptons.  Flight 
data on the problems  had been  collected  over 22   years of  manned  spaceflight, 
particularly  dur ing  the extended Skylab missions.  Experiments were perform- 
ed  on Space Shuttle flights with physician  astronauts Dr.  Norman  Thagard on 
STS-7  and  Dr.  William  Thorn ton ,   the  principal  investigator  and  designer  of 
much  of  the  experimental  hardware  and  research  on  STS-8.  In  an  attempt  to 
speed  up  the  process  of  finding  countermeasures  and  perhaps  predict  who 
might  be   mo re  suscep t ib le  to  th e  condition,  NASA  created  the   research  pro- 
jec t   and  established  the  institute.  Elena  Huffstetler  was  named  project 
manager,  and  Dr.  Sam  Pool,  chief  of medical  sciences at Johnson ,  was d irec-  
tor. At  NASA Headquarters,  the  Space  Medicine  Branch,  Life Sciences Divi- 
s ion ,   Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applications,  would  be   responsible  for 
managing  the  program  of  both  clinical  and  applied  research  in  this  area .  
(NASA  Release  83-167) 

-NASA 
announced  that  Robert  0.  Aller  was  appointed  associate  ad -  
ministrator  for  space  tracking  and  data  systems.  Aller,  then  director  of  the  
Tracking  and  Data  Satellite  System  Division,  succeeded  Robert  E .   Smylie, 
who  left  NASA  October  28   to  become  vice  president  for  government  com- 
munications  services  at  the  RCA  American  Communications  Company  in 
Princeton,  N.J.  Aller  came  to NASA  in August  1964 from  the Philco Corpora-  
tion  in Houston.  Pr ior  to joining  Philco,  he   served  for  10 years  in  the  United 
States  A ir   Force.  H e   had  held  numerous  positions  in  NASA  during  the 
Gemini,  Apollo,  Skylab,  Apollo  Soyuz  Test  Project  (ASTP) ,   and  Space  
Transportation  System  (STS) programs.  In  September  1977 he  was  appointed 
deputy director  of  expendable launch  vehicles  and  in  1979 to his  curren t  posi- 
tion,  where  he  was  responsible  for  the  planning,  direction,  execution,  and 

449 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER   1983 

evaluation  of  the  TDRS  Program.  Aller  had  twice  been  awarded  the  NASA 
Exceptional  Service Medal  for his  work  in  the Apollo  and  Skylab programs, 
and he  also received  the NASA  Outstanding Leadership Medal while working 
on  the  Apollo/Soyuz  test  project.  (NASA  anno,  Nov  3/83) 

450 

December 

December  1:  NASA  announced  that  its  scientists  studying  motion  sickness 
were  focusing on  a chemical  substance in the  fluid core  of  the brain  that might 
cause  vomiting.  The   fact  that  there  might  be  a  chemical  link  in  motion 
sickness was discovered through  NASA’s  research into the causes of  space mo- 
tion  sickness.  The   research  was  being  conducted  at  ARC  in  the  Biomedical 
Research  Division  and  at  the  new  Biomedical  Institute  a t   JSC.  Studies  by 
Ames scientist Dr. Nancy Daunton and two colleagues  a t  Wright State Univer- 
sity  in  Dayton,  Ohio,  showed  that  blocking  the  flow of  cerebrospinal  fluid  in 
the  brain  stopped  motion-induced  vomiting  and  that  an  incomplete  block  did 
not  suppress vomiting.  The  scientists were  attempting  to  isolate the  responsi- 
ble  chemical  from  cerebrospinal  fluid. 
When  a  person  received  sensory  cues  for  motion,  the  brain  responds  with 
its norma l ,  programmed  responses to control eye, head ,  and body movements. 
But when the  responses  do  not yield  the expected results-especially  when  the 
visual  image  does  not  stabilize  and  posture  control  is  not  easily  maintainecl- 
humans  and  animals  often  experience  motion  sickness.  (NASA  Release 
83-191) 

December  8:  The  Space  Shuttle  Columbia  (STS-9) landed  a t  3 :47  p .m .   PST 
at Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  Ca l if . ,   after  10  days in space and  167  orbits-the 
longest  Space Shuttle mission  ever. The  landing  followed a delay necessitating 
22 more   orbits  than  planned  when  Columbia’s  computers  failed  3  hours  and 
49  minutes  pr ior   to  the  planned  reentry  burn.  Six  hours  after  the   two  com- 
puters  went  off  line,  Columbia  also  lost one  of  its  three  inertial  measurement 
units  that  provided  orbiter  orientation  information.  The   orbiter  carr ied   five 
IBM general purpose  computers and three  inertial measurement units.  Today’s 
reentry  was flown with one  of  each  inoperative. A reentry  could be  flown with 
only  a  single computer  and  single measurement  unit.  Mission  pilots  John W. 
Young  and  Brewster  H .   Shaw, Jr . ,   said  a t  the  time  that  they  believed  that  the 
triggering  of  an  upward  firing  870-pound  nose   reaction  control  j e t ,   which 
caused  an  unusually  strong  impact  to  the  orbiter,  was  the  likely  cause  of  the 
computer  failures.  However,  telemetry  analysis  showed  that  the  thruster 
activity  was  coincidental  to  the  computer  malfunction.  Instead,  NASA  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  it was  a  transient  hardware  internal prob lem .  About  40 
minutes  after  the  problems  occurred ,   the  crew  restored  the  second  computer 
to  operation. 
On   December  5,  President  Reagan  and  West  German  Chancellor  Helmut 
Kohl,  in  Athens  at  the  time,  held  a  conference  call  with  the  five  U.S.  crew 
members  and  one  German  payload  specialist  on  Co lumb ia .   The   LJ.S. 

45 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

D E C EM B E R   1983 

Information Agency  (USIA) used  five satellites and thousands of  miles of  land 
lines around  the world  to bounce  the  signals among Athens, Washington,  and 
JSC to provide live  television  coverage  of  the call  to  seven European  cities and 
the  Cable  News  Network  (CNN) .  
Aside  from  the  computer  problems,  the  ninth  ,Space Shuttle  mission  was 
almost  flawless  and  was  distinguished  by  sclme  significant  scientific 
discoveries. One discovery  involved  the workings  of  the  inner  ear, disproving 
a  77-year-old  hypothesis  that  had  won  the  1914  Nobel  Prize  in  medicine  for 
Swedish  professor,  Robert  Barany.  Barany  had  said that  nystagmus,  a  flicker- 
ing  of  a person’s  eyes  when  cold  air  is  blown  into one of  his  ears  and  hot  air 
into  the other,  was  caused  by  convection,  the  motion  of  fluids  under  uneven 
heating.  Bu t  in  space,  the  lack  of  gravity  meant  t h a t   convection  did  not  occur .  
Nevertheless,  the  astronauts  aboard  Columbia  showed  the  characteristic  eye 
movements. 
Th e   six-man  crew  completed  work  on  all  but  one  of  the  70  scheduled  ex- 
periments;  only a microwave sensing  device misfired.  Scientists from  14 coun- 
tries  designed  the  experiments,  and  the  experiments  did  not  end  with 
touchdown.  The   four  scientists were  in  quarantine,  where  they  would  be  re- 
quired  to  remain motionless  so that  scientists could  observe  how  their  bodies 
acclimated  to  gravity.  (ESA  Release,  Dec  9 /83 ;   WH   annon,  Dec  5 /83 ;   W 
Ernes,  Dec  6/83,  3A;  W Post, Dec 6/83, A-3,  Dec  8/83, A-3,  Dec  9/83,  A-1; 
N Y   f im e s ,  Dec  9/83,  A-1;  P  Znq,  Deci83,  A-1;  A v W k ,  Dec  12/83, 23) 

December  12:  Professor Konstantin  Feoktistov,  a  senior Soviet  space official, 
told a news conference that  “work was being  done” on the Soviet  space shuttle 
project, which he  described  as being  “more  complex”  and  more  “expensive” 
than  Moscow’s current  orbiting manned-station pro’gram, the  Washington Post 
reported.  Also  at  t h e   news  conference  were  cosmonauts  Vladimir  Lyakhov 
and Aleksandr Aleksandrov,  who  had j u s t  returned  from their  record-long  stay 
aboard  Sulyut-7  The   two  confirmed  a  series  of  re’cent mishaps  in  the  Soviet 
space  program,  including  a  fuel  leak  in  their  Sulyut  7 orbiting  station  and  a 
launch  pad  explosion  of  a  booster  rocket  September  26  that  was  to  have 
brought  a  fresh  crew  to  relieve  them.  Because  (of  the  explosion,  the  two 
cosmonauts said  that their mission was extended  by  50 days. General Vladimir 
Shatalov,  space  training  chief,  told  the  news  conference  that  there  was  a  leak 
of  toxic  propellant  on  the  Salyur  7 spacc  station  but  denied  reports  that  the 
craft  was  so  crippled  by  this  as  to  endanger  the  crew’s  lives.  “There  was  a 
problem  with  one of  the  subsystems  and  there was  a  leak  of  a  certain  amount 
of  fuel,’’ he  said.  “That  part  of  the  station was  switched  off  and  it  continues 
to  be  viable  today.”  That  subsystem  was  used  for  space. maneuvering,  the 
general  added,  noting  that  backup  systems  were  sufficient  to  deal  with  the 
problem. 
Another  senior  Soviet  space  official  said  privately  that  the  Soviets  were 
working  on a  space shuttle and  that  in  “general ternis we  are considering both 

452 

DECEMBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

types  of  orbital  vehicles-single-use  and  multiple-use,’’  the  Washington Post 
said.  ( W  Post,  Dec   13/83, A-10) 

December   14:  Three   U.S.  biomedical  experiments  were  flying  aboard  a 
Soviet  spacecraft,  Cosmos  1514, launched  today.  In  an  announcement  follow- 
ing  the   launch ,  Moscow  said  only  that  “scientific  experimental  systems  with 
various  biological  objects”  were  aboard  and made no reference  to  foreign  col- 
laboration.  However,  NASA  Administrator  James  M .   Beggs  disclosed  that 
NASA had  provided  three  pieces  of  medical  equipment that  the Soviets incor- 
porated  in  the  scientific  payload  of  Cosmos  1514. Later,  NASA  said  that  the 
experiments  had  to  do  with  blood  system  and  biorhythm  studies  in  monkeys 
and  fetal  development  studies  in  rats.  Beggs  said  that  talks  that paved  the  way 
for  the  Cosmos  1514  experiments  were  held  “about  five  years  ago.” 
Cosmos 1.514  was  recovered  on December  19,  1983, and  in  May  1984 TASS 
reported  that  the  rats  on  the  flight  were  developing  normally  and  that  Soviet 
scientists  believed  the  weightlessness  did  not  affect  the  normal  development 
of  embryos.  (GSFC  SSR;  FBIS,  USSR,  May  9 /84 ;   W  Post, Dec  17/83, A-15) 

December  15:  Jane’s  A l l   The  World’s Aircraft,  released  today,  said  that  the 
Soviet Union  was developing the world’s largest j e t  airplane,  the Antonov 400, 
the  Washington Post  reported.  Jane’s  said  that  the  plane  had  the  ability  to 
transport  SS20 nuclear  missiles  and  that  new  supersonic  Soviet  fighters  car-  
ried  advanced  electronics  and weapons  that enab le  them to  shoot down  cru ise  
missiles and  engage Western  fighter je ts   on  an  equal  footing. June’s a lso  said 
that  the AN400, known  as  the Condor, was  specifically  designed  for  the rapid 
deployment of  S S ~ O S ,  tanks,  and o ther  heavy  equipment  and  that  it was  about 
5 %  larger  than  the  U.S.  C5A  Galaxy.  ( W  Post,  Dec   16/83,  A-37) 

December  19:  West  German   physicist  Ulf  Merbo ld ,   the  first  European  to 
share  flight  with  U.S.  astronauts,  said  at  a  news  conference  that  he  believed 
that more  Europeans  should be  assigned  to  future  Space  Shuttle flights.  “The  
return  to  Europe   should  be   better  than  it  was  for  this  particular  flight 
[STS-9],” which  had a crew  of  six.  “The  politicians in Europe  will not be ab le  
to  sell  European  participation  in  the  future  because  there’s  not  enough 
balance.  I think things  should b e  changed.”  He  continued,  “The  memorandum 
of  understanding  signed  by  the  Europeans  and  Americans  called  for  jo in t  
space  flights  by  Europeans  and  Americans,  not  one   European  and  many 
Americans.  I  think  the  Americans  have  to  rethink  this  agreement  to  make  it 
fairer.”  (W  Post,  Dec   20183,  A-4) 

December  21:  An Office of  Technology Assessment  study  released  today  said 
that  the Soviet Union  was nearing construction  of  a permanent  space base  that 
would  serve  as  an  eventual  springboard  for  Soviet  settlements  on  Mars  and 
the Moon .   “The  Soviet space station program  is the  cornerstone  of  an official 
policy  which  looks  not  only  toward  a  permanent  Soviet  human  presence  in 

453 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

DECEMBER   1983 

low-Earth  orbit  but  also  toward  permanent  Soviet  settlement  of  their  people 
on  the  Moon  and  Mars,’’  the  report  said.  “The   Soviets  take  quite  seriously 
the possibility  that  large  numbers  of  their  citizens will  one day  live i n   space.” 
The  report pointed  out that  the United  States was still debating NASA’s  request 
for  as  much  as  $200 million  i n   FY85  to  begin  development of  a  U.S.  space 
station.  However,  the  Soviets  had  committed  to  a  permanent  space  base. 
Th e  report  pointed  out  that,  while  the  United  States  “seems  to  have  gained 
a  substantial  lead  over  the  Soviet  Union”  i n   space  science  and  comniunica- 
tions,  the  picture  in human  spaceflight  was  “less clear.”  Th e  report  noted  that 
Soviets  had  flown  six  models  of  the  Salyut  space  station  i n   the  last  12  years; 
their  cosmonauts  had  flown  more  than  three time:; as many  hours  in   space as 
U .S .   astronauts  and  had  accumulated  extensive  experience  “in  flight  opera- 
tion,  experimentation,  and  earth  observation  on  trips  that  last  for  months.” 
However,  U.S.  space experts  had  long  criticized  the  Soviets  for  sticking  w i th  
what  they  believed  was  essentially outdated  technology  i n  the Salyut. It  could 
not  f l y   back  to  Ear th ,   deploy  other  satellites, or  carry  as many  people  as   the 
Space Shuttle. But  the report  pointed  out  that  “Sa.lyut may  be  the  penultimate 
step  leading  to  a permanent,  large-scale presence  i n   space.”  As  evidence  that 
the  Salyut  represented  only  a  stepping  stone  to  1s:rger ventures  in  space,  the 
report  said  that  there  is  “unclassified  photographic  evidence”  that  the Soviets 
were  developing  a  small  space  plane  and  a  larger  “heavy-lift’’  shuttle  that 
would  carry  “more   massive  payloads  into  low-earth  orbit”  than  the  U.S. 
Space Shuttle could  lift.  (W P o s t ,  Dec  22183 ,  A-1;  Sa lyu t ,  Soviet Steps  Toward 
Permanent  H u m n   Presence  in   Space ,   A  Technical  Memorandum,  OTA, 
Washington,  D.C.,  Dec  83) 

December 22 :   The  International  Sun-Earth  Explorer  (ISEE) ,  a  spacecraft  in -  
tended  to  be  the  first  man-made  machine  to  encounter  a  come t ,   came  within 
72  miles of  the Moon’s  surface  in  a maneuver  designed to  carry  it  through  the 
t a i l   of  the  comet  Giacobini-Zinner  i n   September  1984.  Engineers  at  GSFC 
stored  the  five-year-old  spacecraft  on  a  horseshoe-shaped  path  behind  the 
Moon ,   then  down  over  the  Sea  of  Smyth  on  the  visible  side  of  the  Moon, 
where  it  picked  u p   speed  and  sped  out  oward  deep  space.  Goddard’s 
worldwide  tracking  network  lost  contact  with  the  spacecraft  when  i t   flew 
behind  the  Moon,  then  regained  contact  when  it  flew  across  t h e   Moon  i n   a 
flyby  as close as any  unmanned  spacecraft had  ever made to another heavenly 
body  without  going  into orbit around  i t .   The  close approach  to  the Moon was 
intended  to  provide  a  slingshot  effect  from  the  brush  with  lunar  gravity  that 
accelerated  the  spacecraft  from  2,900 to  5,145  miles  per  hour. 
The  flight  through  the  comet’s  tail  was  to  take  place on  September  11,  1985, 
when  Giacobini-Zinner  was 4 4  million miles  from  Earth.  It was  planned  that 
the  spacecraft  would  f l y   through  the  comet’s  tail  for  about  30  minutes  at  a 
distance  of  about  12,000 miles  fro’m its  head. 
On  passing  the Moon,  the ISEE-3  spacecraft was  renamed  the  International 

454 

DECEMBER  1983 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Cometary  Explorer to emphasize  its new  mission.  (NASA  Dly Actv Rep t ,  I>ec 
28/83;  W Post,  Dec  23/83,  A-4) 

December  23:  NASA  published  in the  Federal Register  a proposal  on  how  it 
would  select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as   1985. 
NASA  emphasized  in  the  proposal  that  it  was  not  accepting  applications.  It 
had  already  received  more   than  2,000 written  requests  for  rides  since  the 
1960s,  and  it  had  received  so  many  telephone  calls  about  riding  the  Space 
Shuttle that  it had to  attach a  recorded message to  its telephone line to  request 
that potential astronauts  have patience.  All  requests that  had  been  received  by 
NASA  would  be   disregarded,  said  NASA’s  Sara  Keegan. 
Th e   proposed  selection  plan  would  use  a  multitiered  process  to  choose 
Shuttle passengers.  All  requests would be screened by  an outside  review  panel 
appointed  separately  by  NASA  for  each  flight and  then  reviewed  by  a  panel 
of seven top space agency officials before  NASA’s administrator made the final 
selection. 
Several months  before  liftoff  of  a  flight,  the  agency  would  announce when 
it would  accept  applications  and disclose  specific requirements  for  the  flight. 
Such  requirements  could  change  according  to  the  Space  Shuttle’s  mission. 
There   were,  however,  broad  requirements  for  all  passengers.  Citizen 
observers/participants  would  have  to  be  in  good  health  and  condition,  pass  a 
detailed  background  investigation,  and  be  willing  to  undergo  rigorous  train- 
ing.  NASA was accepting comments from the public  on its proposed  selection 
process  until  mid-February.  (NASA  Release  83-190;  Federal  Register,  Dee  
23 /83 ,   Vol. 4 8  No.  248 ,   pages  56770-71.  Published  in  final  form  in  FederuI 
Register, Apr  25/84,  Vol. 4 9  No .   81; NY  Times, Dec  16/83, A-11;  W P o s t ,  Dec 
23/83,  A-3) 

During  December:   Th e  large  number  of  malfunctions  that  struck  the  Space 
Shuttle Columbia in  its  final hours of  flight during  STS-9 forced engineers  to 
inaugurate  the  most  extensive  trouble-shooting  operations  since  the  Space 
Shuttles began  flying  in  April  1981. They were not  sure how  long  the under- 
taking  would  last,  what  they  might  find,  o r   what  effect  their  findings  could 
have o n  future flight schedules.  NASA officials did not rule out the possibility 
that  the Columbia’s  troubles could cause a delay  in the next  Space Shuttle mis- 
sion  scheduled  for  January  30,  1984. 
Th e  malfunctions  included  two  computer  failures,  a  navigation  instrument 
shutdown, and an  explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early  Space Shuttle 
flights had had  troubles with  computers and the heat-shielding  tiles,  but  these 
were  straight forward physical  defects  that were easily  identified.  The  current 
problems were more perplexing and came when  the Space Shuttle was assum- 
ed   to  be  a  fully  tested,  operational  vehicle.  NASA  engineers  and  other 
aerospace  observers  had  suggested  that  the  Columbia’s  problems  stemmed 
from  a  phenomenon  not  uncommon  in  any  new,  complex  technology:  that  is 
after  the  initial  text  phase,  when  extreme  care  and  attention  were  given  to 

455  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

D E C EM B E R   1983 

every  step in a project,  i t  was human nature to  relax a bit, and i t  was  the nature 
of  machines  to  misbehave  occasionally  i n   unexpected  ways. 
International  Business  Machines  (IBM),  contractor  for  the  computers, 
would  examine the  faulty computers; NASA  eng in ’ x r s  would  closely  examine 
d a t a   i n   s e a r c h   of  c l u e s   to   t h e   c a u s e   of  t h e   two   m a l f u n c t i o n s ,  
which  did  not  seem  to  be  related  to  any  fundamental  design  flaw  but 
could  have  been  caused  by 
loose  circuitry  resulting  from  vibrations. 
NASA   would  ship  the  inertial  measurement  unit  to  its  manufacturer, 
the  Singer  Kearfott  Company  in  L i t t le   Falls,  N . J . ,   for  examination. 
( N Y   Times, Dec  15/83,  A-1) 

-JPL  announced  that  the  I U S  had  found  a  ring  of  planets  being  born 
around Fomalhaut,  one of  the  most studied  stars i n   the southern  skies. Earlier 
in  the year,  the  telescope  had  discovered  a  primitive  solar  system  around  the 
star  Vega.  The   discovery  that  Vega  and  Fomalhaut  appeared  to  have  solar 
systems was  the  first evidence  supporting  the theory  that  Earth’s  solar system 
was  not  the  only  such  in existence. Vega  and  Fomalhaut might  be  undergoing 
the  same kind  of  evolution  that Earth’s  solar system went  through  three to four 
billion  years  ago.  “The   discovery  provides  the  second  direct  evidence  that 
solid  objects of  substantial  size exist  around  a  star  that  is  not  our   sun,”  said 
Dr.  Gerry Neugebtiuer,  IRAS program  scientist at JPL .   “These  objects could 
be  a  solar  system  i n   a  different  stage  of  development  and  evolution  than  ou r  
own  or  the  one  that  we  found  to  be  circling  Ve,ga,”  he  added.  The   IRAS 
detected  the  two  extraterrestrial  solar  systems  by  measuring  the  temperature 
of  the bodies  circling  the  two  stars.  It  found  them  much  cooler  than  the  stars 
but  far too warm and far too  large  to be  rings  of  interstellar dust.  (JPL Releasc, 
Dec  16/83;  W  Post,  Dec  17/83, A-3) 

-Lt.  Gen.  Charles  H .   Terhune.  J r . ,   retired  December  31  as  deputy  direc- 
tor,  JPL .   Following  retirement  from   the Air  Force  in  1969, he joined  JPL  as  
deputy director, functioning as  general manager responsible  for the day-to-day 
management of  the  laboratory’s resources  and  the  direction  and  coordination 
of  its technical. administrative,  and  service activitics. General Terhune receiv- 
ed  the  NASA   Distinguished  Service  Medal  i n   October  1982.  He   will  be 
replaced  as  deputy  director  by  Robert  J.  Parks.  JF’L  associate  director.  (JPL 
Release,  Dec  12/83) 

456  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS,  1984 

January 

January 6: The   Washington Post reported  that  Air  Force  Lt.  Gen .   James  A .  
Abrahamson,  NASA associate administrator,  said that coded  software instruc- 
tion  cards   on   both  computers  on  the  Space   Shuttle  Columbia’s  last  voyage 
(STS-9)  were  contaminated,  delaying  Columbia’s  landing  at  Edwards  A ir  
Force  Base  in  California  by  eight  hours.  The   instruction  cards  were  shaken 
from  their  printed  circuits  when  the  Shuttle pitched  up  and  down jus t   before 
reentry;  however the  up-and-down  maneuvers  would not ordinarily  loosen  the 
software  cards  unless  there  was  something  wrong  with  them .  
Abrahamson  said that postflight  analysis of  the cards a t  IBM’s Owego, N .Y . ,  
plant,  where  the  computers  were  built,  showed  that  one  card  was  con-  
taminated  with  solder  and  the  o ther  had  a  carbon  ch ip  coated  with  gold  that 
should not have been  there.  Abrahamson pointed  out that  “ the  most disturbing 
th ing .   . . i s  that  both  computers were contaminated.  I do  not  like  the  idea  that 
we  flew  10  days  in  space  with  contaminated  computer  parts.” 
The   six-man  crew,  commanded  by  astronaut  John  W.  Young,  was  ab le   to 
land  the  Shuttle  and  its  $1  billion  European  Spacelab  safely  by  relying  for 
navigation  on  three  standby  computers.  ( W  Post,  Jan  6/84, A-8) 

January  16:  NASA  reported  on  scientific  data  of  the Viking  Lander  Monitor 
Mission  (VLMM)   in  the  areas  of  meteorology,  radio  science,  and  imaging. 
Th e   Viking  program  had  explored  Mars,  using  two  instrumented  orb i ters  
operating  in  conjunction  with  two  instrumented  landers  on  the  planet’s  sur- 
face.  Two  identical  spacecraft,  each  consisting  of  a  lander  and  orbiter,  were 
launched  in  1975 and  began  operating  a t  Mars   in  1976. A  frugal  VLMM  was 
conducted  from  the end of the extended mission  in  1980 until  June  1983. Based 
on   the  data  acquired  in  support  of  the  mission  objectives,  NASA judged  the 
VLMM  successful. Analyses  of  the  data  from  the mission would  continue  for 
some  years,  supported  by  the  Mars   Data  Analysis  Program  of  the  So lar  
System  Exploration  Division.  (NASA  MOR  S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch]  Jan 
16/84) 

January 2 3 :   Japan  launched  today  the  BS-2A  (Broadcasting  Satellite)  from  
Tanegashima.  The  apogee kick mo tor   (AKM)  firing occurred  successfully  on  
January  26 a t   l2:14 a .m .   EST.  Under   NASA’s  Space  Tracking  and  Data  Net- 
work  (STDN)  support  for  Japan,  the   STDN   would  provide  continuous 
coverage  for  30 hours  after  AKM  firing  and  contingency  support  for  ano ther  
30 days.  STDN  support to BS-2A had  been  nominal  to date.  Launch and early 
orb i t  support was provided  by  the STDN  on a cost-reimbursable  basis.  (NASA 
D ly   Act Rep t ,   Jan  30/84; GSFC   SSR) 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

JANUARY   1984 

January  25:   President  Reagan,  i n   his  State  of  the  Union  address,  endorsed 
the  development  of  the  U.S.’s  first  permanently  manned  space  station.  “Wc 
can  follow  our   dreams  to  distant  stars,  living  and  working  in  space  for 
peaceful,  economic  and  scientific  gain.  Tonight., I  am  directing  NASA  to 
develop  a  permanently  manned  space  station  and  to  do  i t   within  a  decade,” 
he said.  “A  space station will permit quantum leap!; in our  research  in science, 
communications  and  in  metals  and  l ifesav ing   medicines  which  can  be 
manufactured  only  i n   space.  We  want  our   friends  to  help  u s   meet  these 
challenges and  share  in  their benefits.  . . .Just as  the oceans opened up  a new 
world  for  clipper  ships  and  Yankee  traders,  space  holds  enormous  potential 
for  commerce  today,”  he  said. 
NASA prescntcd  the agency’s plans to t h e  p re s iden t  o n  the day  tha t   h e  spokc 
to  astronauts  i n  the  Spacelab orbiting  in  the  Space Shuttle i n  December  1983. 
NASA Administrator James N .  Beggs had sought the space station as  a science 
laboratory,  astronomical  observatory,  space  manufacturing  center,  servicing 
facility  for  spacecraft,  and  an  assembly  site  for  larger  orbiting  structures. 
Defense Secretary Caspar  W.  Weinberger  and  Central  Intelligence Agency 
(CIA) Director William  J.  Casey  had  opposed any rnajor  commitment to  space 
station funding because  they  feared  it could  draw  money  from their own  space 
programs, government officials said. The  officials added  that  military  and  in- 
telligence agencies were concerned  that they would have to  share the space sta- 
tion  with  civilian  agencies  such  as  NASA  and  sometimes  with  astronauts  of 
other  countries. 
NASA  also  had  found  little  enthusiasm  when  i t   turned  for  support  from 
other agencies. When  the  National Academy  of  Sciences  space science board 
was  asked  whether  basic  research  in   science  would  “require  or  be  enhanced 
by  the space station,” Thomas M .  Donahue,  chairman of  the space board ,   said 
the answer was  no.  “I don’t  think you  could  ever  really justify  $20  billion  for 
a  space  station,”  he  said. 
At  this  early  stage,  there  was  no  design  for  the  ,space station,  but  officials 
of  NASA  had  previously  sketched the broad  out1inc:s  of  the most  likely  initial 
design. (Weekly Compilation of  the Papers of Ronald Reagan,  Jan  25184,  87ff; 
N Y   Ernes,  Jan  26 /84 ,   A-1;  W  Pos;,  Jan  18/84,  A--l, Jan  29/84,  A-4) 

January  27:  Johnson  Space  Center  (JSC)  spokesman  Davc  Alter  said  today 
that NASA  h a d   imposed  a $131,250 penalty  on  contractor  Hamilton  Standard, 
Windsor  Locks,  Conn . ,  for  failure of  two  space  suits  that  i t   had  built  for  use 
on  the  fifth  Space Shuttle mission  i n  November  1982. Hamilton  Standard was 
to  be  paid  a  $175,000  fee  over  costs  for  service  from  October  1982  through 
March  1983.  However:  the  failures  had  prevented  :space walks  by  astronauts 
Joe Allen  and Bill  Lenoir  on November  11-12,  1982. After a lengthy  investiga- 
tion,  NASA  blamed  the  contractor  for  the  failure of  a  fan  i n  Allen’s  life  sup- 
port backpack  and an  oxygen pressure  regulator on  Lenoir’s suit.  (WPu s t ,  Jan 
28184,  A-7) 

460 

JANUARY  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

January  30:  Th e   People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  announced  that  it  had 
launched on  January 29  a space satellite that achieved  “important  results,”  and 
the N e w   York  Times  reported  that Western  experts  speculated  that  the  launch 
could  be   the  debut  of  a  more   powerful  Chinese  rocket  and  the  nation’s  first 
communications  satellite.  They  added  that  the  launching  could  mean  that 
China had jo ined  the  United  States, the Soviet Union,  and the  European  Space 
Agency  (ESA)  in  its  capability  to  loft  satellites  into  geostationary  orb i ts  
22 ,300  miles  above  the  Ear th ,   the  orb i t   favored  for  commercial  and  military 
communications  satellites.  There  were no details of  the  satellite launched;  on-  
ly  “Close  observation  is being  undertaken  of  the  satellite’s operations,”  from  
China’s  official  Xinhua  new  agency. 
There  had  been  reports  as early  a s   1980 that  China was developing  a  three- 
stage  rocket  for  boosting  heavy  payloads.  (N Y   Times, Jan  31/84,  C-8) 

During  January:  The   Washington Post  reported,  according  to  declassified 
documents,  that  the  $100  million  Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite  (TDRS) 
that  the U.S.  Air  Force  found unusable  in April  1983 had  lost  its bearings  and 
was  unable  to  de term ine   its  position.  After  being  launched  from   the  Space 
Shuttle,  the  inertial  upper  stage  (IUS)  rocket  veered  so  far  from  course   that 
the  TDRS   ended  up   in  an  orb i t  almost  10,000 miles  closer  to  Earth  than  was 
intended.  It  took  NASA  and  its  contractors  three  months  to  get  the  satellite 
into  geosynchronous  orb i t   above  the  equator. 
According  to  the  declassified  documents,  instructions  to  the  gyroscope  in 
the  IUS   were  in  error ,   causing  the  guidance  computer  to  ignore  them  jus t  
before the rocket misfired. The A ir  Force said that the software error had been 
correc ted .  
At  the   same   time,  the  guidance  computer’s  memory  became  confused ,  
rendering  it unable  to distinguish  between  right  and wrong  information  about 
its  location  in  space.  Engineers  said  that  they  still  did  not  know  what  caused 
this  failure. 
Because  of  the  changes  that  had  to  b e   made   in  the  IUS  rocket,  the   flight 
of  a  secre t  Department  of  Defense  (DOD)   satellite  aboard  the   Space  Shuttle 
Challenger  would  be  delayed  from July  I  until  the  end  of  1984, sources  sa id .  
(W  Post,  Jan  31/83,  A-2) 

-NASA  announced  that  John  J.  Mar t in  was  named  associate administrator 
for  aeronautics  and  space  technology.  Previously,  Mar t in  had  served  a s   vice 
president  and  general  manager  at Bendix  Advanced Technology  Center,  Co l-  
umbia,  Md . ;   at  the  Institute  for  Defense  Analyses;  on   the  staff  of  the  presi- 
dent’s science adviser  a t  the White House ;  a s  associate deputy  to  the director 
of  central  intelligence  for  the  intelligence  community;  as  principal  deputy 
assistant secretary of the Air  Force;  and  as assistant secretary of  the  Air  Force 
for  research,  development,  and  logistics.  A  graduate  of  the  University  of 
Notre  Dame  and  commissioned  by  the  U.S.  Navy,  Martin  is  the  author  of 

46 I 

ASTRONAUTlCS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1984 

numerous technical papers and  reviews and a book  on  “Atmospheric  Reentry,” 
published  in  1966.  (NASA  anno,  Jan  30184) 
-NASA  announced  that  C .A .   “ S y ”   Syvertson  would  retire  on  January  13 
as  director  of  Ames  Research  Center  (ARC).  Syvertson  had  a  major  part  in  
the  first U.S.  research in supersonic and  hypersonic  flight, both  in   finding new 
aerodynamic  theory  and  in  development  of  hyptxsonic  wind  tunnels.  He 
designed  the  first  lifting  body  (a  vehicle  for  flight  from  orbit  to  airfield  lan- 
ding and the precursor  to  the Shuttle) and did  planning  for major  NASA mis- 
sions  i n   both  aeronautics  and  space.  During  his  tenure,  ARC  merged  with 
NASA’s  Dryden  Flight  Research  Center  (DFRC)  and  continued  advances  i n  
aircraft  research. 
Syvertson  received  the  Lawrence  Sperry  Award  for  “fundamental  under- 
standing of  hypersonic air flow and  its application to efficient  aircraft design.” 
He  received  the  NASA  Exceptional  Service  Medal  in  1971  for  work  as  ex- 
ecutive  director  of  the  joint  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)-NASA 
Civil  Aviation  Research and Development  (CARD) policy  study,  which  made 
a  series  of  recommendations  for  future  civil  aviation  policy.  He   was  named 
a fellow of  the American  Institute of  Aeronautics  and Astronautics in  1976 and 
of  the American Astronautical  Society in  1978  and was elected to the National 
Academy  of  Engineering  in  1981.  (NASA  Release  84-01) 

Dr.  William  E  Ballhaus,  J r . ,   director  of  astronaiitics  at  ARC,  was  named 
director  of  the  center,  succeeding  C. A .   Syvertson.  who  retired  January  13. 
Ballhaus  is  a  nationally  known  expert  in  computational  fluid  dynamics-use 
of  supercomputers  to stimulate air  flow  around  flight vehicles. As ARC direc- 
tor  of  astronautics,  Ballhaus  had  been  responsible  for  interplanetary 
spaceflight  projects,  operation  of  a number  of  airborne  observatories  used  in 
astronomy  and  Earth  resources  research,  development  of  supercomputer 
systems,  research 
i n   computational  fluid  dynamics  and  computational 
chemistry,  space  science,  thermophysics,  and  materials  science.  Ballhaus 
came to ARC  in  1971, after receiving his doctorate at the University  of  Califor- 
nia  at  Berkeley  (UCB).  He   joined  what  is  now  the  Army  Aeromechanics 
Laboratory  at  ARC  and  was  assigned  to  the  Computational  Fluid  Dynamics 
Branch.  H e  has  lectured  throughout  the  United  States, Europe,  and  Asia  and 
has  published  more   than  35  technical  papers.  (NASA  Release  84-5) 

-Jack  Lousma ,   commander  of  the  Space  Shuttle  Columbia  on  its  third 
flight,  announced  a t  the  state capitol  in Lansing, M i ch . ,  h i s  campaign  for the 
U.S.  Senate.  He   will  seek  the  Republican  nomination  to  run  against 
Democratic  Senator  Carl  Levin.  “Twenty-five  year:,  ago,  I  made  a  commit- 
ment  to  serve my  country-a  commitment  that  has  led  me  from  Michigan  to 
the  Mar ine   Corps  to  missions  in  space,”  he  said.  “That  same  commitment 
brings  me  home  today.”  He   spent  59  days  i n   orbit  as  part  of  Skylab’s  second 
manned mission in  1973 and was commander of  the Shuttle Columbia i n   1982. 
(W  Post,  Jan  26/84,  C-2) 

462 

February 

February 2:  NASA  announced  the  crew  assignments  for Space Shuttle flights 
51-D,  scheduled  for  launch  in  February  1985, and  61-D,  set  for  January  1986. 
Brewster  H .   Shaw,  Jr.,  would  command  51-D.  Shaw  was  pilot  of  the  orb i ter  
Columbia  on   STS-9,  the  first  Spacelab  mission  flown  in  November  and 
December  1983.  His  crew  would  consist  of  Bryan  D.  O’Connor  a s  pilot  and 
mission  specialists  Mary  Cleave,  Sherwood  C.  Spring,  and  Jerry   L.  Ross. 
Mission 51-D would b e  the 21st  Space Shuttle flight and  the 9th  for  the orbiter 
Challenger.  The  principal objectives of  the  six-day flight would be deployment 
of  a  SYNCOM  communications  satellite  and  retrieval  of  the  free-flying  Long 
Duration  Exposure  Facility. 
John  M .   Fabian,  an  Air  Force  pilot  with  more  than  3,500  hours  of  flying 
time,  would  fly  as one  of  the  pilots  on  61-D.  He   flew  a s  mission  specialist  on 
STS-7  in  July  1983  and  was  scheduled  for  51-A  in  October  a s   a  mission 
specialist.  Flight  61-D  mission  specialists  would  be  James  P.  Bagian,  M .D . ,  
and  Rhea  Seddon ,   M .D . ,   who  is  also  scheduled  to  fly  on   mission  41-F  in 
August.  Mission  61-D  would  be  the  fourth  Spacelab  flight,  focusing  on  ex- 
periments  in life  sciences during  its seven days  in  space.  It would be  the  ninth 
flight of  the orb i ter  Columbia.  A commander  and another pilot  for 61-D would 
be   named  at  a  later  date.  (NASA  Release  84-11) 

J.  Johns ton ,   Canad ian   M in is ter   of  State  for  Sc ience   and 
-Donald 
Technology,  announced  that  a  Canadian  would  fly  a s  a  payload  specialist  on 
Space  Shuttle  mission  51-A,  set  for  launch  in  October,  in  addition  to  two 
ear l ier  Canadians already  scheduled  for Shuttle flights.  NASA offered Canada 
the  opportunity  to  fly  a payload  specialist in  keeping with  President  Reagan’s 
initiative  to  increase  international  cooperation.  Shuttle  flight  51-A  would  be  
a  six-day  flight,  carrying  Telesat  Canada’s ANIK  C-1  satellite and  a Getaway 
Special  experiment  designed  by  two  Canadian  high  school  students.  The  
Canadian  crew member  and  backup  for the  October  flight would  be  announc- 
ed  in  March .   (NASA  Release  84-12) 

February  3-10:  NASA  launched  a t   8:OO  a .m .   EST  from   Kennedy  Space 
Center  (KSC)  the  Space   Shuttle  Challenger  on  mission  51-D,  what  space  
observers   ca l led   the   mos t   dangerous   Space   Shu t t le   m iss ion   to  date. 
Commander  of  the  flight was Vance D.  Brand,  52, a  former  Mar ine  pilot  and 
veteran of  two  spaceflights,  and  the pilot  was Navy  Cmdr.  Robert  L .  G ibson ,  
37,  who  flew combat missions  in Vietnam.  The  mission  specialists  were Navy 
Cap t .   Bruce  McCandless,  46 ;   L t .   Co l .   Robert  L .  Stewart,  41,  the  first Army 
officer  to  make  a  spaceflight;  and  Dr.  Ronald  McNair,  a  physicist. 

463  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

FEBRUARY   1984 

Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI ,  Western  Union’s 
$30 million satellite, out of  the cargo bay  to jo in  two identical  satellites already 
serving North  America.  However, NASA  officials  said  that  t h e  satellite could 
not  be  contacted by  radio  and was considered  lost  in space. Officials  said that 
the satellite’s on-board  rocket engine, which  was to propel  it  into higher  orbit, 
either  misfired  or   never  fired.  Radars  operated  by  the  North  American 
Aerospace Defense  Command  (NAADC) later  fourid  the  satellite in an erratic 
orbit  above  and  behind  Challenger.  The   radars  found  two  large  pieces  i n   an 
orbit more  than  800  miles  high  at  its  peak  and jus t   over  200 miles  high  at  its 
lowest  point  above  Earth. 
On  February  5 ,   a  large  balloon  that  the  astronauts  were  to  chase  through 
space exploded just  after it had  begun  to  inflate. Pla.ns called for the astronauts 
to  back  up   to  120  miles  away  from  the  balloon,  then  move  in  over  the  next 
eight  hours  to  contact  it.  Instead,  the  crew  spent 90 minutes  tracking  pieces 
of  the balloon  and never  got  farther  than  20  o r  30 miles  from  the debris.  Th e  
astronauts  tracked  the  balloon’s  largest  piece  with  radar  for  almost  20  miles 
and  used  special  binoculars  and  an  optical  sextant  to  follow  the  same  piece 
more  than  20 miles by  watching  sunlight  reflected  off  the  balloon’s  aluminum 
surface. 
The   Indonesian  satellite  Palapa-B2, launched  February  6,  went  into  a 
useless orb i t ,  believed  to  be caused by  the same technical  problem  that Westar 
VI  suffered. Th e  NAADC  located  Pulupu-B2 about  seven hours after  i t s  ejec- 
tion  from  the Challenger’s cargo bay,  but  i t   was  in   an orbit  so low  that  it  “can- 
not  perform  its mission,”  said  Richard Brandes  of  Hughes Aircraft  Company, 
builder of  the  satellite.  He  added  that both  satellites’ rocket motors apparently 
shut  down  15  seconds  ear ly ;   they  were  intended  to  burn  for  80  seconds. 
On  February  7,  astronauts  Bruce  McCandless  and  Robert  Stewart  left 
Challenger  and  flew  unrestrained  for  the  first  time., adding  another milepost 
to  man’s  conquest  of  space.  They  unhooked  their  lifelines  and  rosc  up  more 
than  100  yards  away  from  the  Space  Shuttle.  Propelled  by  $10  million  jet- 
powered  backpacks,  they  traveled  at 4 .8  miles a  second,  although they  had  no 
sensation  of  speed.  The   two  reentered  Challenger  after  5  hours  and  5 5  
minutes.  Th e  exercise was  a  rehearsal  for  the  next  !shuttle flight,  when  other 
astronauts  would  try  to  retrieve  an  ailing  satellite,  tiring  it  into  the  cargo  bay 
for  repair,  and  release  it  to  orbit  again.  On  February  9 the  two  took  a  second 
walk  i n   space,  which  lasted  6  hours  and  17  minutes. 
Th e  Space  Shuttle  made  its  first  landing  a t   KSC  on  February  11,  when  i t  
touched  down  at  7:16 a .m .  EST.  The  Florida  landing  had  been  a  Shuttle pro- 
gram  goal  because  it  would  save  money  and  time  by  eliminating  sending 
maintenance  crews  to  California  to  prepare  the  vehicle  for  a  return  flight  to 
Florida  on  the  back  of  a  Boeing  747.  It  was  the  first  Florida  landing  i n   two 
attempts and  the  first of  six planned  for  the  year.  Challenger was  in  relatively 
good  shape  following  the  landing,  although  its windshield,  fuselage,  and  lan- 
ding  gear  were  damaged.  The   windows  were  hazed  and  pitted;  and  31  of  its 
33,000 protective  tiles,  two  brake  assemblies,  and  a l l   four  tires  on  the  main 

464  

FEBRUARY  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

landing  wheels  would  have  to  replaced.  Repairs  should  not  slow  the prepara- 
tion  of  Challenger  for  its  next  flight  in  Apr i l .   (NASA  MOR   M-989-41-B 
[prelaunch]  Jan 30184; NASA  D ly  Actv Rep t ,  Feb 6 /84 ;  WP o s t ,  Feb 2 /84 ,  A-2, 
Feb 4 /84 ,  A-1,  Feb 5 /84 ,  A-1,  Feb  5 /84 ,  A-1,  Feb  8 /84 ,  A-1,  Feb  9 /84 ,  A-12, 
Feb  11/84, A-2,  Feb  12/84, A-1,  Feb  13/84, A-3;  W Times, Feb  6 /84 ,  2A ,  Feb 
7 /84 ,   lA ,   Feb  8 /84 ,   1A;  USA   Today,  Feb  6 /84 ,   A-1) 

February  8:  Because of  the failure of  two  telecommunications  satellites  laun- 
ched  by  the  Space  Shuttle,  the  insurance  industry  would  receive  more  than 
$200  million  in  claims,  and  premiums  would  skyrocket  when  underwriters 
resumed  writing  satellite  risk policies,  the Washington Post  reported.  Analysts 
said that it was too early to determine what impact the satellites’ failures would 
have  on  their  manufacturer,  Hughes  Aircraft  Company,  o r   McDonnell 
Douglas  Corpora t ion ,  which  built  the  rocket  motors  that  apparently  failed  on 
the  two  satellites. 
Western Union,  owner of  one satellite,  was  insured  for  $105 million  to cover 
the  cost  of  the  satellite  and  potential  revenue;  Indonesia,  owner  of  the  o ther  
satellite,  had  $75  million  in  insurance  to  cover  the  cost  of  building  and  laun- 
ching  the  payload.  Robert  J.  Tirone,  vice  president  of  the  large  insurance 
broker  Alexander  & Alexander,  said  that  underwriters  would  likely  hold  off 
issuing  any  new  policies  until  they  found  ou t  what  went  wrong  with  the  two 
satellites.  “Something  went  wrong,”  he  said,  “and  it  went  wrong  twice.” 
A  spokesman  for  McDonnell  Douglas  said  that  the  company  was  puzzled 
by  the  apparent  failure  of  the  rockets  that were  supposed  to  lift  both  satellites 
into  stationary  orbits  abou t   22 ,3 00  miles  from  Ear th .   The   rockets,  payload 
assist  modules  (PAM),  had  been  successfully  used  i n   16  previous  commercial 
from   the  Space  Shuttle  and  11  by  missiles. 
satellite  launches-5 
At  the  end  of  1983,  the   insurance  industry  had  collected  $205  million  in 
premiums  and  paid  $210  million  in  claims.  As  a  result  of  the  two  recent 
failures,  claims  would  r ise   to  about  $420 million.  An  insurance  broker,  who 
asked  not  to  be   identified,  said  that  he  expected  premiums  to  quadrup le  as  a 
result  of  the   loss  of  the  two  satellites.  ( W  Post,  Feb   8 /84 ,   D-2) 

-The  Soviet  Union  launched  today  a  three-man  crew  on  board  the  Soyuz 
TI0 spacecraft,  which  successfully  docked  with  the  Salyur  7 space  station on 
February  9.  The   crew  consisted  on   Col.  Leonid  Kizim  (commander) ,  
Vladimir  Solovyev (flight  engineer),  and Oleg Atkov (cosmonaut-researcher). 
It appeared  that only Kizim  had previous  space  experience,  having command- 
ed  the  Soyuz  T-3 in  1980 in  the  first  three-man  mission  to  test  and  dock  the  
upgraded  Soyuz-T  and  the  Salyut  6. 
Because  of  the  greater  amount  of  instrumentation  and  power  then  in  place, 
TASS  noted  that  the  current  mission  “will  have  broader  possibilities  for 
research  than  any  of  the  previous  ones.”  Scientific,  technical,  medical,  and 
biological  studies  were  on  the  schedule  of  the  curren t   mission,  and  the 
cosmonauts  were  reactivating  life  suppor t ,   power  supply,  and  heat  control 

465 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY   1984 

systems and were  inspecting on-board equipment as part  of  their  “demothball- 
ing”  process  [See  Oct  2/84  for  return  of  crew].  (NASA  D ly   Acm  Rep t ,   Feb 
14/84; FBIS,  USSR  Feb  9 /84 ,   U1) 

February  9 :   Pilot  Brooke  Knapp  landed  a  Gu lk tream   111  business  jet  at 
Washington  (D.C.) National Airport today and claimed a new  speed record  for 
an  around-the-world  flight  by  any  type  of  aircraft.  H e r   unofficial  average 
speed  was  512  miles  per  hour.  Knapp  had  or ig ind ly   intended  to  break  the 
record  for a heavy  class of  business je t ,   but  she bested  by  nine miles per  hour 
the  old  record  for  all  types  of  planes,  set by  an  Pan  American World Airways 
747 i n   1976. Knapp was president of  a California executive  charter and aircraft 
managemen t   serv ice .  
T h e  flight raised  about $500,000 i n  gifts and pledges  for the United  Nations 
Children’s Fund  (UNICEF)  and carried children’s  letters and art from country 
to  country. At  the Novosibirsk  Airport  in  the  Soviet  Union,  children  carrying 
their  paintings  greeted  Knapp.  The  elaborate welcoming  ceremony  lost  time 
for  the  crew,  but  they  believed  they  could  not  ignore  i t .  
After  refueling  stops  in  London,  Moscow,  Novosibirsk,  Peking,  Tokyo, 
Honolulu,  and  Los  Angeles,  Knapp  landed  the  twin-engined j e t   at  National 
at 9:E a . m . ,  45 hours, 32  minutes, and 53  seconds ,after taking  off. The plane 
flew  about  20,300  miles.  ( W  Post,  Feb  10184,  C-1) 

February 10:  Inflight refueling  tests on the NASA 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft 
had been suspended  following  a series of preliminary  flights intended to check 
potential  buffeting  and turbulence levels on  the specially  equipped widebodied 
j e t ,   NASA  reported.  Th e  aircraft  carrier  with  its  orbiter  cargo  was  required 
to  travel  at  low  altitude  and  to  avoid  bad  weather,  so  i t   could  not  travel  long 
distances without  frequent  stops. Therefore,  NASA  had  hoped  to  develop air- 
borne  refueling  techniques that  would  reduce the number  of  landings required 
to  travel  coast  to  coast  or  to  international  location:;. 
Th e   preliminary  tests  had  the  747  without  the  orbiter  flying  behind  two 
a  KC-135  and  then  a  KC-10.  Heavy  turbu lence  
tanker  aircraft-first 
encountered  in  the  vortices  of  the  tanker  aircraft  had  produced  minor  cracks 
in  the  tail of  the 747.  Although  the cracks were of  no  serious concern ,  NASA 
had  decided  to  suspend  the  flight  tests  and  to  investigate  an  alternative  refuel- 
ing technique  that  allowed  the  747 carrier  to  f l y   in  front of  the tanker  aircraft. 
If  the alternative approach  proved  feasible, it  could  likely  be  adopted  with  lit- 
tle  or   no  additional  flight  testing  with  the  carrier  aircraft.  (JSC  Release 
84-007) 

February 14:  The   Washington Post  reported  that  a  scxret  military  payload  set 
for launch July  14 on the  Space Shuttle had been  canceled and  that  the mission 
would  be  scrubbed  without  i t ,   according  to  Air  Force  and NASA  officials. A 
Pentagon  spokesman declined  to  identify  the payload  or say when  it would  be  
flown.  Glynn  Lunney,  Shuttle  program  manager,  said  “if  they  remove  the 

466 

FEBRUARY  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

payload, we won’t  fly.”  The  canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Matting- 
ly,  Loren  Shriver, Ellison Onizuka,  and James  Buchli  without  a  flight  for  the 
second  time;  they  were  to  have  flown  the  Shuttle  in  the  fall  of  1983 on   a 
military  mission  canceled  because  of  rocket  problems.  ( W  Post,  Feb  14/84, 
A-7) 

February  15:  NASA  Administrator  James  M .   B e g s   announced  today  that 
JSC  was  named  “lead  center”  for  the  agency’s  Space  Station  Program.  In  a 
letter  to  center  director  Gerald  D.  Griffin,  B e g s  said that  he  was  requesting 
the  center  to  form  a  program  office  to  execute  five  basic  program  respon- 
sibilities:  systems engineering  and  integration,  business  management,  opera- 
tions  integration,  customer  integration,  and  support  of  NASA  Headquarters 
Space  Station  Program  Office. 
B e g s   noted  that  he  planned  to  form  a  new  organization  at  NASA  Head- 
quarters  to  direct  the  Space  Station  Program  and  that  he  would  make 
assignments  to  other  centers  under  overall project  management  of  JSC. 
Terry White,  a NASA  spokesman  in  Houston,  said that  space  station work 
would probably  not  require  a large increase  in personnel there because  people 
working on  the  Space  Shuttle program  would  shift over  to  the  Space Station, 
the  N ew   York  Times  reported. 

February 29:  NASA  announced  the  establishment  of  seven  intercenter  teams 
to  conduct  advanced development activities  for high potential  technologies to 
be  used  in  Space  Station  design  and  development.  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center  (MSFC)  would  lead  three  of  th e   intercenter  teams;  JSC,  three  of the 
teams;  and  a  lead  center  for  the  seventh  team  would  be  assigned  later. 
The  teams would  identify emerging technologies for advanced development 
for  Space  Station  design  and  establish  test  beds  into  which  prototype 
technology  hardware   cou ld   be  in teg ra ted ,   te s ted ,   demon s t ra ted ,   and  
evaluated.  MSFC   would  be  the  lead  center  for  the  Attitude  Control  and 
Stabilization System,  the Auxiliary Propulsion  System,  and Space Operations 
Mechanisms.  JSC would  be  the  lead  center  in  the Data  Management  System, 
Environmental  Control  and  Life  Support  System,  and  the  Therma l  Manage- 
ment  System.  The  Electronic  Power  System  would  have  a  leader  designated 
later.  Assisting  on   various  assignments  would  be   the   Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory  ( JPL ) ,  Langley  Research  Center  (LaRC),  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center  (GSFC ) ,   KSC,  ARC,  National  Space  Technology  Laboratories 
(NSTL) ,   and  Lewis  Research  Center  (LeRC).  (NASA  Release  84-31). 

During  February:  The   mission  of  ESA’s  first  preoperational  remote-sensing 
satellite, ERS-1,  would be mainly  to monitor  ice and  coastal and  ocean zones, 
the  agency  announced.  Among  the  instruments  in  the  ERS-1 payload  would 
be  an  active microwave instrumentation  package operating  in  the  C-band  and 
combining  the  functions  of  a  synthetic  aperture  radar,  a  wave  scatterometer, 
and wind  scatterometer  for the purpose  of  measuring wind  fields and the wave 

461 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY   1984 

image  spectrum  and  taking  all-weather  high-resolution  images  of  coastal 
zones, open oceans,  ice areas,  and  (on an experimental basis)  land.  Germany, 
the  Netherlands,  France,  and  Canada,  each  built  a  C-bank  scatterometer  for 
comparison  of  data  in  order   to  evaluate  the  optimal  technical  characteristics 
of  the  C-band  scatterometers  on  board  ERS-I  and  to  check  the mathematical 
models  used  for  data  processing. 
This experimental  campaign  organized by  ESA  would  operate  in  the North 
Sea,  in  conjunction  with  a  German  scientific  platform  supplying  “sea  truth” 
da ta ,   and  about  40  kilometers  off  the  Brittany  coast,  in  conjunction  with  a 
French  oceanographic  vessel  supplied  by  the  Centre  National  d’Exploitation 
des Oceans  (National Center for Ocean Exploitation).  This would  allow  com- 
parison  of  the  data  acquired  by  the  various  scatterometers  and data  acquired 
by  conventional means  on  board  the  platform  and  the  oceanographic  vessel. 
(ESA  Release,  Feb  6/84) 

March 

March 6:  Charles Yost,  a member of  NASA’s  Space Station task  force, speak- 
ing  at  the  Shuttle/Space  Station  business  oppor tun i t ies   conference  in 
Washington,  said  “There’s  been  an  overhyping  of  the  commercialization  of 
space  idea.”  He   added  that  it would  take years before  investments in many  of 
the  space-based  opportunities  being  explored  showed  a  significant  return. 
However,  he  pointed  ou t ,   “industry  must  be  willing  to  risk  its  money  up 
front,”  and  said  that  nine  companies had  applied  for  a jo in t   endeavor agree- 
ment  with  the  space  agency.  A t   the  time,  only  four  companies  had  actually 
signed  with  NASA  to  use  the  Space  Shuttle  for  business  ventures. 
Space industry analysts  said  that  it  would  cost  “a  minimum of  few  million 
dollars”  to  begin  exploiting  the  commercial  potential  of  space.  Though 
satellite communication had  proved  profitable, most  space-based efforts faced 
an uncertain future. A  Reagan  administration recommendation  to  turn  the na- 
tion’s  Landsat  remote-sensing and weather satellite systems over to private  in- 
dustry had met resistance in Congress, and some analysts believed there might 
not  be   a  market  for  remote-sensing  data.  Many  attendees  at  the  conference 
questioned whether  any company would  make money  in   space manufacturing 
before  1990.  ( W  Post,  Mar   7/84,  D-16) 

March  7:  NASA  Administrator  James  M .   B e g s   and  Professor  Ernest0 
Quagliarello, president of  the Italian National Research Council (CNR) ,   sign- 
ed  today  in  Rome  two  memoranda  of  understanding; the  separate agreements 
established  the  development  of  the  Tethered  Satellite System  (TSS)  and  the 
development  and  launch  of  Laser  Geodynam ics  Satellite-2 (Lageos-2). 
The  TSS would  be  a data-gathering  satellite that would be  carried  into orbit 
by  the Space Shuttle and  released  from payload  bay  on a  tether.  It would  pro- 
vide  an  important  new  reusable,  multidisciplinary  facility  for  conducting 
space  experiments in  Earth  orbit  and  open  the  way  to  several  areas  of  long- 
term  scientific experimentation not otherwise possible. NASA  would  develop 
the  TSS  deploy,  perform  the  system-level  engineering  and  integration,  and 
launch  TSS  on   the  shuttle. CNR  would  develop the  two-module  (science and 
service) TSS  satellite and  provide  system-level support to NASA  for technical 
aspects  of  the  satellite. 
Eleven  countries were  conducting  laser  ranging  activities with  the  passive 
Laser  Geodynamics  Satellite-1 (Lageos-I) launched  by  NASA  in  1976.  The  
agreement  signed  today  outlined  the  terms  for the  development of  Lugeos-2, 
which  would  significantly enhance study and  understanding  of  the  solid earth 
and  its  dynamic  processes.  Lageos-2 would  be  identical  in  configuration  to 
Lageos-I  and  would  be  placed  in  an  orbit  of  similar  altitude but  w i th   a  dif- 

469 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   A E RONAU T I C S  

MARCH   1984 

ferent  inclination  (51-53  O  prograde  instead  of  70"  retrograde).  Lageos-2 
would contribute to  the study  of  plate  tectonics  and thc accumulation of  crustal 
strain  in  areas  of  high  seismicity  through  very  accurate  measurements  of 
baseline  changes  resulting  from  crustal  motion.  Th e  two  satellites,  in  essen- 
tially opposite orbits, would  improve  the precision of  current laser-determined 
baselines  by  a  factor  of  two  and would  make  possible achievements of  a preci- 
sion  of  one  centimeter  for  baselines  of  several  thousand  kilometers.  CNR 
would  be   responsible  for  the  fabrication of  the Lageos-2  satellite,  integration 
of  the  apogee  stage  and  the  Italian  research  interim  stage,  and  delivery  to 
NASA.  NASA  would  provide  existing  ground  support  equipment,  hardware. 
and  software  remaining  from  the  Lageos-1  mission,  technical  consultation, 
and  launch  o n   the  Space  Shuttle  as  a  payload  of  opportunity  with  a  planned 
launch  in  1987.  (NASA  Release  84-34) 

Ma rch   11:  NASA  announced  that  the  f i f t h   group  of  applicants  to  be 
interviewed  for  possible  selection  as  Space  Shuttle  astronaut  candidates,  in- 
cluding  15 mission specialists and  7 pilot  applicant:;, reported  to JSC  today  for  
a  week  of  interviews  and  medical  evaluations.  A  total  of  4 ,934   men  and 
women  had  applied  for  the  approximately  12  posiitions  open .  
The   selected  candidates  would  begin  i n   July  1984  a  year  of  training  and 
evaluation  at  JSC  and  be  selected  as  astronauts  after  satisfactory  completion 
of  the  evaluation  period. 
Th e  selected  candidates were:  David T. Allen,  Pln.D., employed  by  Univer- 
sity  of  California  at  Los  Angeles  (UCLA) ;   Ma j .   Larry  D.  Autry,  U.S.  Air 
Force;  L t .  Commander Dennis N .   Bostich,  U.S.  Navy; Capt.  Joseph  A.  Car- 
retto,  U.S.  Air  Force;  L t .   Commander  Keith  I:.  Crawford,  U.S.  Navy; 
William  M .  Decampli,  M .  D.,  Ph. D . ,  employed  by  Stanford  Medical  Center, 
Stanford,  Calif.,  Jan  D.  Dozier,  employed  at  MSFC ;   Lt.  Co l .   William  A .  
Flanagan,  U.S.  Air  Force;  Wendy  S .  Hale,  Ph .D . :   stationed  at  Edwards  Air 
Force  Base,  Ca l if . ;   Rosario  M .   Izquierdo,  employed  by  National  Security 
Agency  (NSA);  L t .   Fred  D.  Knox,  J r . ,   U.S.  Navy;  G .   David  Low,  employed 
by  JPL ;   L t .   Commander Michael  J.  McCulley,  U.S.  Navy; Kenneth  J.  Myers, 
M .D . ,  employed  by  the  Mayo  Clinic,  Rochester,  M : i nn . ;   William  S. O'Keefe, 
employed  by  Ford  Motor  Company,  Dearborn,  .Mich.;  Donald  R.  Pettit, 
Ph .D . ,   employed  by  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory;  L t .   Commander 
William  F.  Readdy,  U .S .  Navy;  L t .   Commander Gregory J. Rose,  U .S .  Navy; 
Lonnie Sharpe, J r . ,  Ph.D.,  employed  by  North Carolina A&T State University, 
Greensboro,  N .C . ;  Kathryn  C .   Thornton,  Ph .D . ,  ernployed  by  the  U.S.  Army 
Foreign  Science and Technology  Center, Charlottesville,  Va. ; C.  Lacy  Veach, 
employed  by  JSC ;  and  Lt.  c omm and e r  James B.  Waddell,  U.S.  Navy.  (NASA 
Release  84-018) 

Ma rch   16:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  selected  McDonnell  Douglas 
Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach . ,  C a l i f . ,  and TRW,  Inc.,  Space and 
Technology  Group,  Redondo Beach,  Ca l if . ,   for  negotiations  that  would  lead 

470 

MARCH  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

to  two  parallel  Space  Station  study  contracts,  each  contract  for  a  f irm   fixed 
price of  approximately  $2  million,  covering a performance period  of  approx- 
imately  27  months,  beginning  in March.  Contracts would  be   for  the  develop- 
ment of  functional,  performance,  and  technology  requirements;  the definition 
of  system  architecture for the  Space Station data  system; and  the  relationship 
of  that  system  to  the  overall  NASA  end-to-end  flight  and  ground  information 
system. 
Th e   studies  would  define  the  role  of  the  Space Station data  system  and  its 
relationship, and interfaces to the  Space Station information  systems elements. 
They would  also define the  data system to determine the environment  in which 
both  the   user  and  facility  subsystems  interface  and  operate;  address  all 
avionics  and  other  electrically  automated  Space Station  functions;  develop a 
clear  understanding  of  system  functional,  operational,  and  interface  re- 
quirements;  identify  major  cost  items  to  enable  effective  management  deci- 
sions  and  development  control;  and  define  a  program  plan. 
NASA's  JSC  would  negotiate  and  administer  the  TRW  contract;  NASA's 
GSFC,  the  McDonnell  Douglas  contract.  (NASA  Release  84-36) 

March 19:  Th e  Soviet  Union was developing  a large laser-equipped  prototype 
military  spacecraft  for  launch on  its heavy  Saturn-5-class  booster,  which was 
also  competing  development,  Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology  reported. 
Soviet  scientists  were  designing  the   spacecraft  to  attack  U.S.  satellites  and 
would  launch  it  on  the  booster  within  the  next  two  years.  Th e  new  booster's 
primary mission was to place the 300,000- to 400,000-pound  Soviet  space sta- 
t ion   elements  in  orbit, but  the U .S .  DOD  had been   concerned  for  some time 
tha t   i t  also could be used  for the type of heavy, unmanned, prototype directed- 
energy  weapon  known  to  be   under  development.  (Avwk ,  Mar   19/84,  13) 

March  27:  Secretary  of  Defense  Caspa'r  W.  Weinberger  today  named  Air 
Force  L t .   Gen .   James  A .   Abrahamson,  NASA's  associate  director  for  space 
flight,  to  be  manager  of  what  the  Reagan  administration  called  the  strategic 
defense  initiative,  a  program  to  explore  the  feasibility  of  building  a  space- 
based  defense  against  nuclear  ballistic  missiles.  President  Reagan  had  sug- 
gested  the  program  the  previous  year. 
Abrahamson's  job  would  be   to  direct  and  coordinate  several  research  pro- 
grams  that had been  under way  for  some t ime  at DOD  and  in the Department 
of  Energy  (DOE). These  included research  on several kinds of  laser and parti- 
c le  beam  weapons,  work  on   large  mirrors  needed  for  some   lasers,  advances 
in  high-speed  data  processing,  and  methods  of  generating  large  amounts  of 
electrical  power  i n   space. 
Abrahamson  had been  at NASA  since November  1981 and  had  directed  not 
only  the Space Shuttle operation but  also commercial  sales of  Shuttle services 
and  relations  with  Congress and  the  space  industry.  He  would  begin  his  new 
duties  o n  April  15  after  the  nation's  11th  Space  Shuttle  flight,  scheduled  for 
launch  on  April  6.  (N Y  Times,  Mar   28 /84 ,   A-19) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUT ICS  

MA R CH   1984 

-NASA  announced that Jesse W. Moore would become acting  associate ad- 
ministrator  for  spaceflight  on  April  15,  succeeding  Lt.  Gen.  James  A .  
Abrahamson,  who  would  become  director  of  strategic  defense  at  DOD. 
Moore,  who  had  been  Abrahamson’s  deputy,  had  come  to  NASA  Hcad- 
quarters in  1978 as  the deputy  director  of  the  Solar Terrestrial  Division  in  the 
Office of  Space Science. He  was director of  the Spacelab Flight Division until 
December  1981,  when  he  assumed  the  positicn  of  director,  Earth  and 
Planetary  Exploration  Division  in  the  Office  of  Space  Science  and  Applica- 
tions.  In  February  1983 he  was  appointed  to  the  position  of  deputy  associate 
administrator  for  spaceflight.  (NASA  Release  84-40) 
- U S .   Ambassador  to  Portugal  Allen  Holmes  and  Portuguese  Foreign 
Minister Jaime Gama  signed today  i n  Lisbon  an  accord  that would provide for 
a  satellite  traclung  station  i n   Portugal.  Under  the  accord,  the   United  States 
would provide Portugal  with  $60 million annually,  of which  $20 million would 
be  for military aid  and  $40 million for economic ail3.  The  United  States would 
use  the  station  to  track  flying  military  targets;  U.S.  plans  called  for  five 
satellite  tracking  stations  in  the  world,  and  stations  in  New  Mexico,  Hawaii, 
and  South  Korea  were  completed.  (FBIS,  Beijing  Xinhua  in  English,  Mar 
28/84) 

During March:   In  an interview following  his around-the-world trip  to  sell  the 
U.S.  Space Station idea  to  U.S.  allies,  NASA  Administrator James  M .  Beggs 
said,  “ I  thought the trip went  well,  I thought it went  extremely well.” He  add- 
ed  that he had  proposed  that  as much  as one-fourth  of  the proposed  $8  billion 
cost  of  the  Space  Station  be  borne  by  western  Europe,  Japan ,   and  Canada. 
“They  didn’t  exactly  stand  up  and  cheer  when  I  ,;aid  I’d  like  them  to  think 
about  contributing  a  couple  of  billion  dollars,  but  they  didn’t  blink  at  the 
numbers  either,”  he  said. 
Beggs  said  that  the  countries  had  about  a  year  to  decide  if  they  wanted  to 
join  i n   a  partnership  with  the  United  States,  sincl-, NASA  planned  to  begin 
awarding  contracts  for  the  Space  Station’s final design  in  the  spring  of  1985. 
He  noted  that  all  of  the countries had  laid  down  conditions  under  which  they 
would  agree  to  participate:  the  station  must  provide  technological  challenges 
to their  industries; they  must  have  what Beggs  called  a  “clearly  defined  role” 
i n   the direction  of  Space Station operations  and  selection of  flight crews;  they 
must have access to  the  entire station; and their  industries must have the  same 
access  that  U .S .   industry  had.  ( W P o s t ,  Mar  27/84,  A-2) 

412 

April 

April  3:  NASA  announced  that  it  awarded  to  the  University  Corpora t ion  for 
Atmospheric  Research,  Boulder,  Co lo . ,   a  cost-plus-fixed-fee  contract  of 
$7,076,741  for  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  National  Scientific  Balloon 
Facility  (NSBF)  in  Palestine,  Tex.  The  contractor  would  provide  the  person- 
ne l ,   materials,  supplies,  and  serv ices  to  manage,  operate,  and  maintain  the 
NSBF,  including  flight  program   opera t ion ,   engineering  activities,  and 
research  and developmnet.  The  NSBF would annually  conduct 60  to 70 scien- 
tific  balloon  flights. 
GSFC’s Wallops Island,  Va.,  facility would administer  the con trac t .  (GSFC 
Release  84-4) 

April  3-11:  Th e   Soviet  Union  launched  today,  aboard  the  Soyuz  T-ll,  two 
Soviet cosmonauts,  Co l .   Yuri Malyshev  and  Gennady  Strekalov,  and  the   first 
Indian  cosmonaut,  Rakesh  Sharma ,   a  35-year-old  A ir   Force  pilot,  for  an 
eight-day visit to the Sulyut-7space station  to jo in  three o ther  cosmonauts  who 
had  been  living  there  s ince  February  8.  The  jo in t   flight  was the   11th  in  the  In- 
tercosmos  series  that  had  taken  non-Soviet  cosmonauts  into  space  along  with 
Soviet  counterparts. 
On  this  flight,  Sharma   would  conduct  medical  experiments  in  which  he  
would  practice yoga  a s  a  possible  mcans  of  coping  w i th   space  sickness.  Ex- 
periments  would  also  include  detailed  space  surveys  of  the   Indian  subconti- 
nent.  The  Soviet Union  and  India  televised  the  launch ,  and Tass quoted Pr ime  
Minister  Indira  Gandhi  as  saying  that  t h e  jo in t   mission  gave  a  “new  dimen- 
sion”  to  friendship  between  India  and  the  Soviet  Union. 
Th e  three  returned  to  Ear th  Apr i l   11  in  a  perfect  parachute  landing  of  their 
Soyuz  TI0 space  capsule  near  the  town  of  Arkalyk,  1,500 miles  southeast  of 
Moscow.  Tass  reported  that  the  cosmonauts  were  “feeling  fine.”  The   repor t  
continued,  “New  information  on  peculiarities  of  the  human  organism’s  adap- 
tation  to space flight conditions was obtained.”  Beyond stressing Soviet-Indian 
cooperation  and  friendship,  the  flight  a lso  demonstrated  the  peaceful  uses  of 
ou ter   space,  Soviet  officials  commented.  (FBIS,  USSR,  Apr   4 /84 ,   U1-4; 
FBIS,  USSR,  Apr   11/84,  U1-3;  NY   Times,  Apr   4/86,  A-16;  W  Post,  Apr  
12/84,  A-33) 

April  4 :   The   Washington Post  reported  the  death  of  April  4  of  Oleg Antonov, 
78,  one   of  the  Soviet  Union’s  leading  aircraft  designers.  Antonov,  whose 
obituary  was  signed  by  Communist  Party  leader  Konstantin  Chernenko  and 
o ther   dignitaries,  became  the  head  of  that  country’s  aircraft  design  office  in 
1946.  One   of  his  first  creations  was  the  AN-2   transport  and  agdcu l tura l  
biplane,  which  soon  became  the  national  airline’s  (Aeroflot)  workhorse  and 

41 3 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1984 

still was  i n   use.  Under  his  leadership,  the office also designed a  range  of  An- 
tonov  aircraft,  including  passenger  planes  and  the  long-range AN-22  heavy- 
transport  aircraft.  ( W  Post,  Apr  6184,  B-6) 

April  6-13:  NASA  launched at 8:58 a .m .  EST today  from Cape Canaveral the 
Space Shuttle Challenger  (STS-41C) carrying Cap t .  Robert L.  Crippen,  com- 
mander;  Frances  R .   Scobee, pilot;  and  mission  specialists Terry  J.  Har t ,   Dr. 
James  D.  Van  Hoften,  and  Dr.  George  D.  Nelson.  Challenger  flew  to  an 
altitude of  nearly  300 miles,  the  highest  any  Shuttle crew  had  flown,  because 
the astronauts had  to match  the orbit of,  rendezvous with,  and repair  the burn- 
ed  out  Solar Maximum Observatory  satellite that  had  been  out  of  service  for 
a lmos t   fou r   years. 
At  12:20 p .m .   EST  on  April  7  the  astronauts  deployed  the  Long  Duration 
Exposure  Facility  (LDEF) ,   a  30-foot-long  cylinder  carrying  57  varieties  of 
space-age  materials.  Following  retrieval  by  other  astronauts  next  February, 
scientists would  examine  the  cargo  to  determine how  it  stoop  up  to  the  heat, 
cold,  and  cosmic  rays  of  space.  Th e   Space  Shuttle’s SO-foot-long  robot  arm  
pushed  the  cylinder  out  of  Challenger’s  cargo  bay. 
The   initial  attempt  on  April  8  to  retrieve  the  ol-biting Solar  Max  satellite 
failed  when  astronaut  George  (Pinky)  Nelson,  propelled  by  a  jet-powered 
backpack, tried  unsuccessfully to  attach  himself to  the  crippled,  slowly  spinn- 
ing  observatory.  He   bounced  away  from  the  satellite each  time,  causing  it  to 
spin  faster  with  each  bounce.  After  running  low  on  fuel,  Nelson  returned  to 
Challenger.  However,  on  April  9  radio  commands  from  ground  controllers at 
GFSC   stabilized  the  satellite jus t   before  its  batteries  went  dead .   On April  10 
Crippen  inched  Challenger’s robot  arm  up  to  one  end  of  the 21-foot-tall  Solar 
Max ,   and  then  Hart  caught  the  slow-spinning  satellite  on  the  first  try.  They 
then  moved  it  into  flight  support  system,  a  berthing  area  in  the  back  of  the 
Space Shuttle’s cargo bay.  Th e  following  day, Ne1so.n and Van  Hoften, wearing 
space suits,  stepped out  into the cargo bay  and replaced  a 500-pound  fuse box 
and  fixed  a  smaller  electronics  box  supplying  power  to  one  of  seven  in- 
struments.  Th e  work  was  completed  i n   slightly  less  than  the alloted  six hours. 
Th e  astronauts  redeployed  the  observatory  on  April  12. The   Wushingron Post 
reported  that, because  the  repair job  was  done so well,  the observatory  would 
d o  better  in   its restored  statc than  in the  10 months it. had  worked  before break- 
ing  down  almost  four  years  previously. 
Challenger  landed  at  5 :38  a .m .   local  time April  13 at California’s  Edwards 
Air  Force  Base  instead  of  the  preferred  site  at  KSC ,   due  to  poor  weather  i n  
Florida.  NASA officials pronounced  the  Space Shuttle to  be  in  excellent  con- 
dition.  “Compared to  10  previous recoveries,  the condition of  the ship is much 
better,”  Fritz  Widick,  operations  manager  for  the  recovery,  commented  at  a 
news  conference.  “During  the  flight  there  were  only  something  like  12  pro- 
blems  recorded  i n  the  ship, which  is  remarkable.”  (NASA MOR M-989-41-C, 
Mar   19/84; WPo s t ,  Apr 8 /84 ,  A-3,  Apr 6 /84 ,  A-2 ,   .Apr 9 / 84 ,  A-I,  Apr  10184, 
A-1,  Apr  11/84, A-1  Apr  12/84, A-1,  Apr  13/84, A-2:  N Y  Ernes, Apr  15/84,23) 

414  

APRIL  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

April 6 :   Engineers at NASA’s  GSFC  completed  checkout and activation  of  the 
Landsat-5  Earth  resources  satellite,  launched  from  the Vandenberg Air  Force 
Base  complex  in  California  on   March  1,  and  turned  over  today  operational 
control  of  the  spacecraft  to  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Ad- 
ministration  (NOAA).  The   1,950-kilogram  (4,300-pound)  spacecraft  was 
placed  in  a  705-kilometer  (438-statute  miles)  near-polar  o rb i t .   NASA 
engineers  had  checked  ou t   all  computer,  communications,  telemetry,  and 
o ther  spacecraft systems and declared  the spacecraft ready  for operational use. 
With  Lundsat-4  still  functioning,  data  acquisition  over  the  same   ground 
swath  was  possible  on   an  eight-day  repeat  cycle. NASA  planned  to  turn  over 
to NOAA  operational  responsibility  for Thematic  Mapper  operation  and  data 
processing  in January  1985. (NASA Release 84-49; NASA D ly  Actv Rep t ,   Apr 
9/84) 

-NASA  announced  that  it  had  established  an  interim  Space   Station  Pro- 
gram  office  a s   a  result  of  President  Reagan’s  January  25 ,   1984,  directive  to 
NASA  to  develop  a  permanently  manned  Space  Station  and  to  do   it  within  a 
decade.  Philip E .  Culbertson,  in  addition  to  his duties  as associate deputy  ad- 
ministrator, would assume the role of acting director of  the interim office,  with 
John  D.  Hodge  (former  director  of  the  Space  Station  task  force)  a s   acting 
deputy. 
The   interim  office  superseded  the  former  Space  Station  task  force  and 
would be  responsible  for direction  of  the  Space Station Program  and  for plan- 
ning  the  organizational  structure  of  a permanent  Program  Office.  (NASA an-  
no,  Apr   6 /84)  

April 8:  The  PRC  New  China  News Agency  announced  that  China  had  laun- 
ched  on  Apr i l   8  its  first  permanently  orbiting  communications  satellite,  the 
Washington Post  reported.  The  geosynchronous  satellite  was  positioned  over 
the  Moluccan  Sea  near  Indonesia.  The  news  agency  reported  that  all meters 
and  instruments  were working  normally  as the  satellite began  experiments on 
telephone  communications  and  radio  and  television  transmissions. 
Foreign experts  said that the  launch was a ma jor  achievement that could  im- 
prove  communications  in  all  facets  of  Ch inese   life,  including  the  far-flung 
military.  I t  also had  vast  implications  for China’s fledgling  nuclear  force.  The  
rocketry  required  to propel  the  satellite into orbit-a 
three-stage  launcher with 
a  refined  guidance  system-far  exceeded  the   firing  capability  of  the  nation’s 
best  intercontinental  ballistic  missiles  (ICBMs). 
Ch ina   also  had  pending  contracts  with  the  United  States  to  launch  three 
larger communications  satellites with the Space  Shuttle, but no dates were  set. 
( W  Post,  Apr   19/84,  A-31) 

April 9:  NASA named Neil B.  Hutchinson manager and John W.  Aaron  depu- 
ty  manager  of  the  Space  Station  Program  Office  at  JSC  in  Hous ton ,   Tex. 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A PR IL   1984 

Hutchinson  was  serving  in  a  staff  assignment  to  the  Johnson  director  since 
his  return  in  January  1984  from  a  one-year  assignment  at  NASA  Head- 
quarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office i n  the Office 
of  Space  Flight. 
Aaron  had  been  chief  of  the Spacecraft Software  Division at JSC since  1981. 
He also had  served  as avionics  flight  software prqject  manager  for  the Shuttle 
approach  and  landing  test  and  orbital  flight  test  programs.  (NASA   Release 
84-50) 

April  13:  NASA  announced  that  LeRC  awarded  a  $161  million  contract  to 
General Dynamics Corporation,  Convair Division, San Diego, Ca l if . ,   for two 
Shuttle/Centaur  G  veh ic les   for  t h e   DOD.  A  previous  contract  inc luded   two 
NASA-unique  Shuttle Centaur G-Pr ime  vehicles  for  the Galileo (Jupiter) mis- 
sion  and  the  International  Solar/Polar  Mission  (ISPM) ,   scheduled  for  launch 
in  1986. Th e   two  contracts  together  totaled  $414  million. 
Centaur was  a high-energy  upper-stage booster  expected  to  add  substantial- 
l y  to the Space Shuttle’s ability to deliver heavier  payloads  from  low-Earth  or- 
bit  to  geosynchronous  orbit  or   interplanetary  trajectories.  (NASA  Release 
84-44) 
April  2 5 ;   NASA  announced  that  it  and  its  Italian  counterpart,  the  National 
Space Plan  office of  the  Italian  National  Research  Council  ( P SNKNR ) ,  had 
asked  scientists  from  around  the  world  to  submit  their  ideas  for  experiments 
to  be  performed  on  a joint  U.S.-Italian  program  known  as   the  TSS-Satellite 
that  later  in  the  decade  could  be  reeled  into  and  out  of  the  Space  Shuttle’s 
cargo bay  on a miles-long  tether.  NASA  and PSNlCNR would  evaluate  scien- 
tists’  proposals  and  decide  what  experiments  would  be   performed  on  the 
system.  NASA  planned  to  carry  the  system  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle  by 
sometime  in  1987. 
On  its  first  flight  the  satellite,  once  the  Shuttle  was  i n   orbit,  would  be 
deployed  upward  about 4 0  feet by  an extendable boom.  Th e  satellite would  be 
checked  out while  at  the  top  of  the boom  and  then  released. As  i t   moved  up- 
ward  away  from  the  Shuttle,  the  reel  would  unwind  until  the  satellite was  at 
its  proper  distance  for  conducting  electrodynamic  experiments. 
As the  Shuttle passed  through  the  space plasma,  the  satellite, with  its  con- 
ducting  tether,  could  become  a  generator,  much.  as  a  copper  coil  moving 
within  a  magnet  on  Earth  can  produce  a  flow  of  electricity.  By  drawing  off 
the  energy  from  the  conducting  tether  and  releasing  it  into  space,  scientists 
would be  able to  study  magnetic lines of  flux that  surround  the Earth.  (NASA 
Release  84-54) 

During  April:  Science  reported  that  t h e   first  commercial  product  manufac- 
tured  i n  space,  15 grams of  10-micrometer polystyrene  spheres that  were  pro- 
duced on the STS-6 mission, would  soon be  transferred  from NASA  to t h e  Na- 
tional  Bureau  of  Standards  (NBS)  for  sale  to  the  public.  The   spheres  could 

476 

APRIL  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

be  used  for  calibration  of  microscopes,  laser  light  scattering  equipment,  and 
particle  sizing equipment.  The   spheres  a lso  had  potential  uses  in  biomedical 
sciences,  particularly  for  sizing of  pores  and  membranes.  The  spheres  fit  the 
two  key  criteria  for  space  manufacturing:  they  could  not  be  made  on   Ear th ,  
and  they  were  very  expensive. 
NBS  would  divide  the  15  grams  of  spheres  into  1,000  samples,  each  of 
which  would  sell  for  about  $350.  Total  value  of  the  spheres  would  thus  be  
about  $23,000.  (Science, Apr   84,  265) 

411 

May  4:   NASA  Administrator  James M .  Beggs  said  that  engineers  had  deter- 
mined  the  problem  with  two  types  of  rocket  motors  that  had  caused  the  loss 
of  two  $75  million  satellites  and  the  near-loss  of  a  third  and  had  led  to 
postponements  of  two  Space  Shuttle  flights,  the  Washington Post  repor ted .  A 
report  from  McDonnell-Douglas  said  that  a  team  had  found  a  way  to  deter- 
mine  which  rocket  nozzle  would  fail  in  space  and  which  would  work.  Such 
a procedure  might have saved the two communications  satellites  that gone into 
useless  orbits. However, t h e  solution had come  too late to put a Canadian com- 
munications  satellite  on  the  next  Space  Shuttle  flight  scheduled  for  June   19. 
( W  Pos t ,   May  4/84, A-2) 

-In  a  continuing  series  of  reports  on  orbiting  cosmonauts  Leonid  Kizim, 
Vladimir  Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov,  who had been  in  space for 85 days aboard 
the  Salyut-7  Tass  said  that  the  crew  had  completed  planned  operations  with 
the  cargo  craft Progess-20,  storing  supplies  and  pumping  drinking  water  into 
the  station’s  tanks. 
Kizim  and  Solovyev  then  made  their  fourth  walk  in  open   space.  The   two 
removed  a  heat-resistant  coating  that  had  been  installed  during  a  previous 
space walk,  assembled a  second  conduit,  and  checked  i t  for airtightness.  The  
two  then  reinstalled  the  heat-resistant  coating,  put  tools  into  a  container,  and 
returned  to  the  station.  Their  walk  lasted  2  hours  and  45  minutes,  bringing 
their  total  time  in  open  space  to  14  hours  and  45  minutes  dur ing  4 walks  in 
12 days.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  May  4/84) 

May  16:  NASA announced  that approximately 200 people  representing  every 
NASA  installation  and   the  JPL  were  selected  to  augment  the  staff  of  JSC  to 
help plan the next phase of  NASA’s  Space Station Program .  This team had two 
ma jor   objectives:  issue  a  request  for  proposals  to  industry  for  the  definition 
of  the  specific elements of  the Space  Station and  define a  reference  configura- 
tion  or  configurations  to  accompany  the   request  for  proposals. 
“The   purpose  of  the  reference  configuration  is  to  provide  a  framework  to 
help  industry  understand  how  the  various  elements  of  the  Space  Station  a re  
related,”  said Dr.  Ralph  Muraca ,   deputy  head  of  LaRC,  designated  a  “center 
of  excellence”  to  help  plan  this  next  phase  of  the  program .   “In  addition,  it 
will  help  individual  companies  determine  which  of  the  elements  o r   work 
packages  they  would  be   interested  in  competing  for.” 
The  group’s guidelines were  to  develop  a  configuration  that would meet  all 
the  requirements  associated with  the  final  configuration  of  the  Space  Station, 
expected  to  be  operational  in  the  1999-2000  time  frame,  and  then  scale  that 

ASTRONAUT ICS   .AND  AEKONAUTICS 

MAY  1984 

back  to  an  $8  billion  configuration  that  would  provide  maximum  mission 
capability  in  1991.  (LaRC  Release  84-35) 

M a y  18:  At  a ceremony  today  in Washington, D.C.,  NASA  transferred owner- 
ship of  Viking  Lander  1, which  was  on  the  planet  Mars ,   to  the  Smithsonian 
Institution’s National  Air  and  Space Museum.  It was  the  first  time a museum 
would  own  an  object  located  on   another  planet.  The   transfer  also  included 
loan  of  the  official  Viking  Lander  plaque,  which  renamed  the  lander  the 
Thomas  A .   Mutch  Memorial  Station  in memory  of  the Viking  landing  imag- 
ing team  leader  and NASA  associate administrator  for  space  science who had 
died  in  a  climbing  accident  i n   t h e  Himalayas  in  1080. NASA  retained  rec la i-  
mant  rights  to  the  lander  for  scientific  purposes.  (NASA  Release  84-58; N Y  
Times,  May  3184,  A-19) 

M a y  22:  An Arianespace Ariane I  rocket  lifted off  a t  9 :33   a .m .  EDT to  orbit 
a U.S.  communications  satellite 22 ,300  miles above  the equator  in  the world’s 
first  strictly  commercial  space  venture.  Virginia-based  GTE  Spacenet  Cor- 
poration  built  the  satellite,  which  was  intended  to  relay  thousands  of 
simultaneous  television,  telephone,  and  data  trammission  channels  to  U.S. 
domestic  subscribers  over  the  next  10  years.  Th e   corporation  would  launch 
other  satellites  later  in  the  year  and  early  i n   1985. 
ESA  had  contracts  for  28  launches worth  more  than  $800 million,  p lus  op-  
tions  for another  19. More than  4 0%  of  the orders #came from outside Europe. 
( W  Post,  May  22184,  A-24) 
During  May:  NASA and  Deere C?  Company, Moliine, Ill.,  signed a memoran- 
dum  of  understanding  to  cooperate  on  the  design  of  metallurgical  tests  to  be 
conducted  aboard  a  future  Space  Shuttle  flight.  In  1981,  Deere  became  the 
first  private  company  to  sign  a  Technical  Exchan::e  Agreement  with  NASA 
that  permitted  the  company  to  perform  cast  iron  solidification experiments  on 
board  conventional  suborbital  NASA  aircraft,  which  simulated microgravity 
for  3 0  to  60   seconds. 
Deere  was  already  working  on  the  design  of  additional  metallurgical  tests, 
where engineers  used  data  from  the  low-gravity  tests conducted earlier.  Based 
on  this work, Deere and NASA  engineers conclude’d that further experimenta- 
tion  would  be  productive.  The  Space  Shuttle  tests  would  permit  experiments 
in  space for  longer  periods,  which  could  yield  new  information  to  aid  i n   the 
search  for  stronger  irons.  These  tests  could  also  provide  new  data  about  the 
process  for forming iron molecules,  leading to  improved  foundry  efficiencies. 
(NASA  Release  84-56) 

-NASA  announced that  astronaut  Terry  Har t ,   who had  operated  the  Space 
Shuttle’s mechanical  arm   to  retrieve  the  Solar Marimum  Satellite  during  the 
April  6-13,  1984,  Space  Shuttle  flight,  would  leave  NASA  effective  June  15 
to work  in an engineering management position  for the newly  formed Military 
and  Government  Systems  Division  of  Bell  Laboratories  in  Whippany,  N.J. 

480 

MAY 1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

The   division  would  produce  large  digital  communications  networks  for 
government  applications.  Har t   was  also  a  member  of  the  astronaut  support 
crews  for  Shuttle  missions  1, 2 ,  3,  and  7,  serving  as  capsule  communicators 
in  mission  control  for  those  flights.  (NASA  Release  84-59) 

-Officials  a t  the  U.S.  Department  of  State  blocked  an  offer  by  the  Soviet 
Union  to  use   its  rockets  to  launch  Western  satellites,  the  Christian Science 
Monitor reported.  The  Soviets had  offered  to  “sell”  their  rockets  to ZNMM- 
SAT,  the   International  Maritime  Satellite  Organization  based  in  London ,   for 
launching a new  generation  of  satellites  in  the  1980s. INMARSAT was  running 
a  network  of  communications  satellites  that  routed  telephone  calls  and  data 
among  some  2,300 ships  and  their  shore  bases.  However,  it  had  not  decided 
on   the  companies  that  would  supply  the  new  satellites,  which  could  number 
up  to nine and cost up to $500 million.  Under  the  Soviet Union  plan,  satellites 
would  have  to  travel  to  the   Soviet  rocket  site  pr ior   to  launch  into  space,  and 
the  satellites would undoubtedly  contain a large proportion  of  U.S.  parts.  Such 
a  transfer  would  be   prohibited  under  the  technology  control  regulations  that 
sought  to  stop  the  channeling  to  unfriendly  countries  of  hardware  that  could 
b e   used  in  weaponry.  The   State  Department  said  that  “under  no  cir- 
cumstances”  would  it  permit  the  transfer  to  the  Soviet  Union  of  American- 
made  satellite  components.  Only  two  organizations  had  submitted  tenders  to 
INMARSAT to build  the  satellites:  a joint  venture  of  Hughes Aircraft  Corpora-  
tion  and  British  Aerospace  and  a  consortium  of  Marconi  of  the  United 
Kingdom,  Aerospatiale  of  France,  and  Ford  Aerospace  of  the  United  States. 
The  Soviet  Union  had  said  that  it  would  make  available its  Proton  rockets 
for a fee of  about $23 million  a launch.  That was roughly  half  the  comparable 
charge  for  a  satellite  launch  by  either  the  Space  Shuttle  o r   the  Ar iane  rocket 
sold  by  Arianespace,  a  semipublic  company  dominated  by  French  interests. 
U.S.  officials  feared  shipment  to  the  Soviet  Union’s  main  launch  site  at 
Baykonur  in  Cen tra l  Asia  of  hardware  containing  electronic  components  that 
could  be   useful  to  the   Soviet’s military  buildup.  ( C S M ,  May  3 /84 ,   1) 

announced  that  Dr.  Hans  M .   Ma rk ,   deputy  administrator  of 
-NASA 
NASA  since  July  1981,  would  become  chancellor  of  the  University  of  Texas 
System,  effective  September  1,  1984.  In  announcing  the appointment,  Texas 
Board  Chairman  Jon   Newton  said  of  Mark :   “With  his  Air  Force  and  NASA 
background,  he  has demonstrated  the management  ability  to administer  effec- 
tively a  complex  organizational  en terpr ise  such a s  the  U.T.  System,  which  in- 
volves  119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and  staff, and an operational  budget  for 
FY84-85  of  $1.8  billion.” 
Mark  was born  in Mannheim,  Germany,  and  in February  1969, after  receiv- 
ing  his  doctorate  in  physics  from  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
(MIT)  in  1954, became director  of NASA’s ARC. H e  had  also served  a s  a con- 
sultant  to  government,  industry,  and  business,  including  the  Institute  for 

481 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1984 

Defense  Analyses  and  the  President’s  Advisor:y  Group  on  Science  and 
Technology.  (NASA  Release  84-65) 

-Martin  A .   Knutson  was  named  director  of  Flight  Operations  and  Ames 
Dryden Site manager  for ARC.  In  this position,  Knutson  would be responsible 
for  the operation  of more than  40 highly  specialized research  and support  air- 
craft  at ARC  and  its Ames  Dryden  Flight  Research  Center.  He  also would  be 
responsible  for  site management  of  the Mojave  Desert  facility  that  conducted 
NASA’s  high-speed flight research  and served as one  of  the prime landing sites 
for  Space  Shuttle  missions.  Knutson  joined  NASA  in  1971  as  the  ARC’S 
manager  of  the  Airborne  Instrumentation  Research  Project.  He   was  in-  
strumental  in  creating  the  project  and  in  acquiring  its  U-2   aircraft  and  was  a 
pilot  with  over  6,000 hours  of  flight  time.  (ARC   Release  84-11) 

482 

June 

June 5: NASA  announced  the  selection  of  four  career   scientists  to  f l y   as 
payload  specialists  on   the  next  two  missions  of  Spacelab,  a  reusable  Space  
Shuttle-based  research  facility.  Dr.  Lodewijk  van  den  Berg  of  EG&G 
Corpora t ion ,   Goleta,  Ca l if . ,   and  Dr.  Taylor  G.  Wang  of  JPL  were  named 
flight payload specialists  for Spacelab 3,  scheduled  for launch  in January  1985. 
Dr.  Mary  Helen  Johnston  of  MSFC  and  Dr.  Eugene  H .   Trinh  of  JPL  would 
serve  as  alternates  for  Spacelab  3. 
Dr.  Loren W.  Acton of  Lockheed Palo Alto Research  Laboratory,  Palo Alto, 
Ca l if . ,   and  Dr.  John-David  Bartoe  of  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory, 
Washington,  D.C.,  were named  flight payload  scientists for Spacelab 2 ,  which 
was  slated  for  launch  in  April  1985. Alternates  named  were  Dr.  Dianne  K .  
P r i m  of  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory  and  Dr.  George W.  Simon  of  the Air 
Force  Geophysics  Laboratory. 
Spacelab  3  would  be  the  first  operational  mission  of  the  research  facility 
with mission emphasis on  materials processing in space. Spacelab 3 would use 
the  long  version  of  the  laboratory  module,  in which  the  scientists  would work 
on a special cargd bay  instrument  support structure.  Spacelab 2 ,  which  follow- 
ed Spacelab  3 due   to  experiment  development  delays,  included  experiments 
in  solar  physics,  plasma  physics,  infrared  astronomy,  high-energy  physics,  at- 
mospheric  physics,  and  life  sciences  and  technology  (NASA  Release  84-74) 

June 7: Th e  research  satellite  orbiting  Venus,  Pioneer  Venus  Orbiter,  briefly 
tilted  to  watch  passing  comet  Encke  and  sent  back  information  showing  that 
the   comet  was  losing  water  a t   a  rate  three  times  higher  than  ear l ier   calcula- 
tions  predicted,  scientists  at  Ames   Research  Laboratory  reported.  The   sur- 
prising  finding  “could  be  due   to  the  particular  arrangement  of  ice  and  dust 
which compr ise  the comet o r  to crumbling of  steep-sloped  hills and mesas that 
may  cover  the  surface  of  the  1.2-mile  diameter  of  the  comet  nucleus,”  said 
NASA  spokesman  Peter  Waller.  He   added  that  the  finding  might  shed  some 
light  o n   the   exact  nature  and  makeup  of  comets. 
Comets  were  “dirty  cosmic  snowballs”  of  dus t ,   rocky  materials,  and   ice, 
Waller said.  “Whether  the ice and  dust a re  layered,  mixed  together  in  chunks, 
o r   form  hills  and  valleys  remains  a  mystery.” 
Observations of  the  comet were made  with an ultraviolet  spectrometer,  one  
of  many  scientific  instruments  aboard  the  orbiter,  which  detected  light  i n   the 
ultraviolet  region  of  the  spectrum.  “Because most  atoms emit ultraviolet  light 
when  they’re bathed  in  sunlight, measuring the wavelength and intensity  of  the 
emitted  light  can  give  scientists  an   idea  of  what  elements  are   in  a  sample  as  
well a s  how  much of an element o r  compound is present,”  said Dr.  Ian  Stewart 

483 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS 

J U N E   1984 

of  the  University  of  Colorado.  His  team  at  the  university  built  the  spec- 
trometer  and  calculated  t h e   comet’s  rate  of  water  loss. 
Johann  Encke,  a  German  astronomer  who  calculated  the  comet’s  orbit  in 
1818,  noted  that  the  comet  was  behaving  abnormally,  with  the  time  i t   took  to 
travel once around the Sun getting  shorter i n  apparent contradiction  to the  laws 
of  classical  physics.  Scientists  now  explained  the  phenomenon  with  the  fact 
that  comets  spun  slowly,  like  frozen  tops.  “The   ice  vaporizes,  particularly 
when  the comet  is  near  the  Sun and  may  cause a j13t  reaction  that  can  change 
the  comet’s  orbital  path,”  Stewart  said.  (ARC Release  84-27; N Y   Times, June 
10184,  25) 

June  8:  Addressing  a  conference  on  “Space,  Ou r   Next  Frontier,”  sponsored 
by  the Dallas-based  think tank  National Center for  Policy Analysis,  retired  L t .  
Col.  Thomas  H .   Krebs,  former  chief  of  the  Defknse  Intelligence  Agency’s 
(DIA)  space  systems  branch,  said  that  the  Soviet  Union  had  obtained 
blueprints  for the Space Shuttle and would  within  a year  or  two  launch  an  or- 
biter  that was  an  “identical  copy.”  He   said that  U.S.  military  experts were  not 
sure how  the Soviets obtained the plans but were certain that the Soviet vehicle 
was  made within  U.S.  blueprints.  He  indicated that  it  was  likely  that  they  had 
bought  a  copy  of  the  Space  Shuttle  plans.  “We’ve  seen  the  [Soviet]  orbiter, 
and  it’s  identical  to  ours,”  Krebs  pointed  ou t .   “ I  ciin’t  tell  how  far  along  they 
are ,   but  in  a  year  or   two  you  can  expect  to  see  one   launched. 
Krebs  said  that  the  Soviets  improved  on  the  U.S.  design  by  adding  engines 
to  the  bottom  of  the  external  fuel  tank,  thereby  increasing  t h e   tonnage  the 
Shuttle  could  carry  into  orb i t .   “The   space  s hu t tk   was  totally  unclassified. 
Anyone  could  buy  a  set of  plans.  However,  no  one has  been  able  to  find  the 
requisition,”  he  said. 
In  Washington,  DIA  sources  speaking  off  t h e   record  said  that  they  knew 
nothing  specifically  about  the  Soviets  obtaining  Shuttle  blueprints.  ( W  Post, 
June  8/84,  A-4) 

June 9-11:  Investigations  were continuing into why a $30 million international 
communications  satellite, Zntelsat  5 ,  tumbled  out  of  control  after  launch  June 
9 by  a new  model  Atlas-Centaur  rocket.  NASA  launch  director  Skip Mackey 
said  that  attention focused on a thruster j e t ,   1 of  14  small jets  intended to keep 
the  upper  stage  of  the  Atlas-Centaur  rocket  flying  straight.  Mackey  said  that 
a  fuel  filter  in  one  of  the je ts   may  have  become  clogged,  causing  the  upper 
stage and  the attached  satellite to  spin out of  control  2 3  minutes  after  launch. 
Th e  rocket  and  satellite were  in  a  looping  orbit  ranging  from  93 to  750 miles 
high,  circling  the  Earth  every  90 minutes. 
It  had  been  the  62nd  launch  of  an  Atlas  Centaur  rocket,  but  it  was  the  first 
of  the new  lengthened model.  The  International  Telecommunications Satellite 
Organization  (INTELSAT) had  paid  NASA  $60  million  to  launch  the satellite, 
which  had  12,000 voice  channels  and  2  color  television  channels  and  was  to 
have  joined  15  other  satellites  serving  t h e   108-nation  organization.  (NASA 

484 

JUNE   1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Release  84-62;  W Post,  June  10/84, A-13,  June  11/84,  A-4;  W  Ernes,  June 
11/84, 4A)  

June  11:  NASA  announced that  it  had  selected a  team  of  scientists to  observe 
Halley’s  comet  in  1986 using  a   Space  Shuttle-based astronomy  observatory 
called  Astro.  The   scientists  were  Dr.  Michael  A’Hearn,  University  of 
Maryland, College Park, Md . ;  Drs. John Brandt, Bertram Donn ,  and Malcom 
Neidner,  GSFC ;   Dr.  Barry  Lutz,  Lowell  Observatory,  Flagstaff,  Ar iz . ;   Dr. 
Chet Opal,  University of  Texas,  Austin;  Dr.  C.  Robert O’Dell, Rice Universi- 
ty,  Houston;  and Dr.  Susan Wyckoff, Arizona  State University, Tempe. These 
reseachers,  together with  a   scientist representing  each  of  the  three ultraviolet 
telescope teams,  comprised  the  Astro  Halley  Science Team  that  would  plan 
the  overall  program  for  observing  the  comet. 
Astro  consisted  of  three  specially  designed  ultraviolet  telescopes  and  two 
wide-field cameras  that  would  be  carried  as  a   Spacelab payload  in  the  Space 
Shuttle cargo  bay. 
The  observatory was  scheduled  for assembly and  integration into the Space 
Shuttle at  KSC  during  1985 for  launch  in   early March  1986. The   first  seven- 
day  Astro mission  was  scheduled  at  a  time when  several comet probes  would 
intercept Halley,  and  it  was  intended  to  return  important  scientific data  and 
photography of  the comet. ESA, Japan, and  the Soviet Union had each design- 
ed probes that would f l y  by  the comet and through its tail  in  early March   1986. 
(NASA  Release  84-72) 

June  12:  NASA  scientist  Dr.  Hartmut  H .   Aumann  said  that  the  annual 
meeting  of  the  American  Astronomical  Society  that  satellite observation  in  
space  had  produced  evidence  of  rings  around  nearby  stars  that  might  be   the 
birth  sites of  new  planets.  Aumann,  of  JPL ,   said  that  indications of  orbiting 
material around more   than 40  stars within  75  light years  of  Earth  came  from 
observations made by  the  IRAS launched  in  1983. Scientists had  said  that  the 
existence of  other  planetary  systems would  increase chances  that  life  similar 
to  that  on  Earth  had  evolved  elsewhere  in  the  universe.  Only  in  our  solar 
system  had  scientists confirmed  the  existence of  planets. 
Scientist discovered  the  material  circling  the  stars  by  measuring  infrared 
light  energy.  The   stars produced  more   of  it  than  could  be  accounted  for  by 
their  number.  Scientists would  try  to  obtain  a   telescope  image  of  the  rings 
around  the closer  stars for  further verification of  the  theory,  Aumann  said.  If 
existence  of  the  orbiting  material  was  confirmed,  i t   would  take  about  500 
million  years  for  the  material  to  develop  into  planets. 
In  a  background  report,  NASA  said  that  the  discovery  suggested that  stars 
orbited  by  solid  materials  might  be  almost  commonp lace  in  the  Milky  Way 
galaxy.  (USA  Today, June  13/84, 4D ;   W Post,  June  13/84, A-15) 

June  17:  Hundreds  of  spectators  gathered  to  watch  giant  balloons  float 
overhead  in  honor  of  the  first  American  to  build  a   full-scale hot-air  balloon 

485 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

J U N E   1984 

and  fly the tethered balloon June  16,  1784, 70  feet  over  a  field  in  Bladensburg, 
M d .  Peter  Carnes  had  been  a  Bladensburg  innkeeiper,  lawyer,  and  adventurer 
and  had  built  the  hot-air  balloon,  t h e  first  of  its  kind  i n   this  country.  Carnes 
had  had  no  interest  or   knowledge  of ballooning  u n t i l   he  read  newspaper  ac- 
counts  of  the  first  flights  i n   France  in  1783.  Having  never  seen  a  balloon, 
Carnes  fashioned  his  35  feet  in  diameter  based  on  sketchy  newspaper  stories. 
One  week  after  his  unmanned  balloon  flight,  Carnes  took  his  balloon  to 
Baltimore,  where  13-year-old  Edward  Warren  volunteered  to  ride  in  the 
tethered  craft,  making  him  the  first  American  to  ascend  in  a  hot-air  balloon. 
Shortly  thereafter,  a t   the  Philadelphia  Cormnons,  spectators  watched 
234-pound  Carnes  ascended  about  10  to  20   feet  i n   the  balloon,  when  a  wind 
s h i f t   p u s h e d   h i m   i n t o   a   w a l l ,   b r e a k i n g   t h e   c h a i n : ,   a n d   d r o p p i n g   h i m   t o   the 
ground. 
Tom  Crouch, curator of  aeronautics at the National Air and  Space Museum ,  
said  that  the balloon  construction  “was considered  a  great  scientific  achieve- 
ment.  It  is  difficult  to  realize  what  an  achievement  flying  that  balloon  really 
was.  His  flight  was  a  demonstration  of  the  fact  that  while  this  nation  was 
young,  it  was  a  nation  with  great  hope  for  the  future.”  ( W  Posr,  June  17/84, 
B-1;  B  Sun ,   June  25 /84   D-1) 
June   28:  NASA  announced  that  three  of  its  cent’zrs would  participate  with 
JSC,  named  earlier  i n   the  year  to  be  t h e   lead  center,  i n   definition  and 
preliminary  design  studies  of  the  Space  Station. 
MSFC  would  be  responsible  for definition of  the pressurized  Space Station 
modules  that  wou ld   be  built  and  equipped  with  aippropriate  systems  for  use 
as  laboratories,  the  ward  room  and  galley,  and  logistic  transports.  Develop- 
ment  of  this  single  “common”  module  design,  with  provisions  for  data 
distribution, power,  environmental control,  thermal  control,  and communica- 
tions  systems  to  be  used  in  all  pressurized  areas  i n   the  station would  provide 
significant  savings  i n   the  overall  program. 
LeRC would be responsible  for the definition of  the electrical power  genera- 
tion  and  conditioning  and  storage  systems.  Although  most  Space  Station 
studies  had  focused  on  large  solar  arrays  as   the  probable  power  generation 
system,  Lewis  would  also  examine  and  evaluate  a  number  of  alternative 
systems. 
GSFC would be responsible  for definition of  the automated free-flying plat- 
forms  that  would  be  part  of  the  overall  Space  S t a t im  program  and  for  provi- 
sions  to  service,  maintain,  and  repair  these  platforms,  as   well  as   other  free- 
flying  spacecraft.  Goddard  would  also  define  the  ~xov i s ion s  for  instruments 
and payloads  to be  attached externally to  the pressurized  sections of  the Space 
Station  and  the  pressurized  modules  as  a  laboratory. 
In  addition  to  its  lead  contractor  role,  JSC  would  be  responsible  for  the 
definition  of  the  structural  framework  to  which  the  various  elements  of  the 
Space  Station  would  be  attached  and  for  the  integration  and  installation  of 
systems  into  this  structure.  The   center would  oversee the  interfaces  between 
the  Space  Station and  the  Space  Shuttle  and  be  responsible  for  mechanisms 

486 

JUNE   1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

such a s  the  remote manipulator  systems.  JSC  would  also manage the  attitude 
control,  thermal control,  communications, and data management  systems  and 
the  equipping  of  a common module  for  crew  use  as  a  ward  room  and  galley. 
Other NASA centers would  support the definition and design activities,  par- 
ticularly  in  technology  areas.  KSC  would  be   responsible  for  preflight  and 
launch  operations  and  be  involved  in  logistic  support  activities.  (NASA 
Release  84-85) 

June  23-27:  NASA  began  on  June  23  the  countdown  at  Cape  Canaveral  for 
the  maiden  flight  of  the  Space  Shuttle  Discovery.  This  twelfth  flight  would 
carry  Henry Hartsfield,  commander,  who was pilot on  STS-4; Michael Coats, 
pilot; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; 
and  payload  specialist  Charles  Walker  of  McDonnell  Douglas,  the  first 
payload  specialist  for  private  industry.  Originally  scheduled  for  launch  on 
June  22 ,   NASA  had  delayed  liftoff  when  workers  inspecting  the  orbiter’s 
rocket  motors  following  a  test  firing  found  that  a  heat  shield  inside  a  high- 
pressure pump in engine No.  1 had  “debonded”  and pulled away  slightly from 
the wall  of  a  chamber  that  contained  superheated  gases  during  launch.  Th is  
necessitated  replacement  of  on e   of  the  main  engines,  a  three-day  job   that 
would  delay  launch  until  at  least  June  25. 
Th e  flight of  Discovery  was  delayed  on  June 25  for  at  least  24 hours  when 
its  backup  navigating  computer  failed  less  than  30  minutes  before  takeoff. 
Though  it was  not  operational  in  space,  the  fifth  backup  computer  was  used 
during  ascent  to  “watchdog”  the  other  computers during  the  critical  first  10 
minutes  of  flight. 
Four  seconds  from  launch  on   June   26,  the  flight  of  Discovery  was 
automatically  aborted by  a  computer due  to malfunctioning  of  a  fuel  valve  on  
the  rear  starboard  engine,  causing  the  engine  to  catch  fire.  Th e  f ire  was  ex- 
tinguished after  three attempts with heavy  sprays of water.  NASA placed  Hart- 
sfield  and  his  five-member  crew on  leave  for  two  days after  experiencing  this 
first  launch  abor t   in  12 Space  Shuttle  missions  and  only  the  second  launch 
abort  in  American  manned  spaceflight  history.  Thomas  E.  Utsman,  Shuttle 
operations manager  a t  KSC,  said  that  he  had  no  idea when  the maiden  flight 
of  Discovery  could  be   rescheduled.  It  depended,  he  said,  on   how  much 
damage  had  been  done   to  the  malfunctioning  engine  that  caught  fire  and  to 
the  Space  Shuttle’s  protective  tiles  from  the  high-speed  water  jets  that  ex- 
tinguished  the  fire  on   the   aft  part  of  the  fuselage.  Utsman  said  that  the  fire 
may  have burned  through  the heat  shield  on  the  engine nozzle,  meaning  that 
the  entire  engine  would  have  to  be   replaced. 
NASA  announced  on  June  27  that  Discovery’s  maiden  flight  would  not  be 
attempted for a t  least two weeks  in order  to verify  all three main engines. John 
Talone at KSC said,  “I  don’t think we’re talking about m i d J u l y  before  we can 
get to the point of  launching again.”  Talone said that  the only  serious question 
remaining  about  the  aborted  launch  was  why  the  valve  stayed  closed  when 
commanded to  start the liftoff firing  sequence. When the valve  failed to open ,  

487 

ASTRONAUTICS  AKD   AERONAUTICS 

JUNE   1984 

a  backup  actuator  automatically  started  the  openmg  sequence,  and  the  valve 
opened  soon  enough  for  the  engine  to  build  fu l l   power,  although  i t   did  not. 
He   said  that  Discovery  probably  would  have  reached  orb i t ,   but mission  rules 
said that  a Space Shuttle could  not  l i f t  off without  redundant  valve,  and when 
the Shuttle’s main computer  sensed that one  actuator  system was ou t ,   the com- 
puter  ordered  engine  cutoff.  Photographic  inspection  of  Discovery  showed 
remarkably  little  damage  from  fire  that  broke  out  below  the  main  engine 
nozzles after  engine shutdown. The  only  structural damage to the Space Shut- 
tle’  airframe  was  the  speed  brake  just  below  the  tail  and  half  of  the  brake’s 
protective  enamel  was  scorched  off.  ( W  Post,  June  23/84,  A-3,  June  25184, 
A-7,  June  26/84,  A-1,  June   27/84,  A-3) 

During  June:  ARC  Director  William  E  Ballhaus  announced  that  center  air- 
craft  and  their  operation  would  be  transferred  to  the Ames  Flight  Operations 
Directorate. Martin A .  Knutson,  director of  flight operations and site manager 
of  the  Ames  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility,  would  be  responsible  for  all 
flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett  Field location in northern California and 
at  the  Ames  Dryden  Facility  in   southern  California.  Th e   Flight  Operations 
Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facili- 
ty  at Edwards Air Force Base? Calif.  Factors  i n   the management change were 
continued  safety of  flight  and  continuity  of  aircraft  operations  to  be   assured 
with  all  flight  operations  reporting  through  a  single  management  chain.  And 
the  change  served  to  integrate  more  fully  the  Arn1-s  Dryden  Facility  into  the 
day-to-day operations  of  the parent Ames  Center.  ‘The  Ames Research  Center 
and the  former Dryden  Flight Research  Center, now  Ames Dryden, were con- 
solidated  i n   1981, a move that  enhanced  the capabilities  of  both  organizations. 
Ames  officials said that  the  latest move was  a continuing part  of  the overall 
Ames-Dryden  consolidation  and  would  centralizl:  all  flight  operations  ac- 
tivities  in terms of  operations procedures,  safety, arid management philosophy. 
There  were  no  plans  to  move  any  aircraft  or  personnel  involved  from  either 
location.  (ARC  Release  84-15) 

488 

July 

J u l y   3-11:  Workers  replaced  one   of  the  Space  Shuttle  Discovery’s  three 
engines  as  NASA  reported  that  loose  insulation  on   a  super-cooled  fuel  line 
may  have  been  a  factor  in  the  aborted  liftoff  of  the  Space   Shuttle’s maiden 
flight.  Officials  said  that  the  faulty  insulation’s  inability  to  insulate  nitrogen 
gas  from  the  cold may  have turned the  gas  to  liquid,  and  the  liquid  may  have 
dripped  on  an  engine  valve,  blocking  it  from  opening. 
Later,  NASA  announced  that  it was  considering  a plan  to  continue  the  12th 
and  13th Space  Shuttle missions  as a way  to  avoid expensive delays  that  could 
push  at  least  one   mission  scheduled  for  1984  into  1985.  The   problem  with 
combining  missions  was  the  inability  to  combine  crews.  Five  crew  members 
from  the aborted  flight or  from  the August  flight would have to  step down  and 
wait  for  another  turn .   T h e   possibility  of  combining  missions  arose   when 
technicians a t  NASA’s  engine test  facility at Bay  S t .  Louis, M iss . ,   were unable 
to  duplicate  the  failure  of  Discovery’s  starboard  engine  that  had  aborted  the 
flight.  “No  matter  what  we  d id ,   we  were  unable  to  duplicate  the  failure,“  a 
NASA source  said.  “And  until we understand  what went wrong,  we don’t want 
to  fly.” 
The  failure  of  a  rocket  nozzle  on  a  communications  satellite  dur ing   a  test 
in  S t .   Louis  then  further  complicated  NASA’s  rescheduling  decision.  A  final 
decision  awaited  analysis  on   the  test  of a  S ta r4 8   solid-fuel  rocket  nozzle  at 
the Astronautics  Division  of  McDonnell  Douglas  Corpora t ion   in  S t .   Louis. 
Star-48  rockets  were  on  two  communications  satellites  that  would  be   part  of 
the   cargo  on   a  combined  mission. 
On  July  12 NASA  announced  that  the  next  Space  Shuttle  flight  would  con- 
sist of  payloads  from  flights 41-D  and 41-F  and  would  be  launched  from  KSC 
no  ear l ier   than  August  24.  Th e  mission  aboard  the  orb i ter   Discovery  would 
retain  the designation 41-D.  The  cargo would  remain  essentially  the  same ,  ex- 
cept  that  the   large  format  camera   and  spar tan   would  be   replaced  with  the 
Satellite  Business  Systems  (SBS)  and  Telstar  payloads  then  scheduled  for 
launch  in  the  same  time  frame.  The  crew  for  mission  41-D  would  be   the  six- 
member  team  of  Commander  Henry  Hartsfield;  pilot  Michael  Coats;  mission 
specialists  Judith  Resnik,  Steven Hawley,  and  Richard  Mullane;  and  payload 
specialist  Char les  Walker.  Th e   crew  of  41-F  would  be   scheduled  for  a  later 
flight.  (NASA Release  84-95;  W Post, July  3 /84 ,  A-12,  July  10/84, A-5,  July 
11/84,  A-6) 

Ju l y   5 :   NASA  announced  that  MSFC  had  awarded  contracts  to  Mar t in  
Marietta Aerospace Company Denver,  and Boeing Aerospace Company,  Seat- 
tle,  to  study  a  space vehicle  to move payloads  from  low  Ear th  orbits  to higher 

489 

ASTRONAUTICS  AKD   AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1984 

orbits. Th e  “parallel”  studies,  concurrent but  independent studies in the  same 
area  of  concentration,  for  an  Orbital  Transfer  Vehicle  (OTV)  would  run  for 
15 months at about $1  million each. The  companieli would  conduct conceptual 
studies  to  examine  the  possibilities  of  both  space-based  and  ground-based 
transfer  vehicles.  Th e  space-based  version  would  be  maintained  and  refueled 
at  the Space Station;  the ground-based  vehicle would  be carried  into  space by 
the  Space  Shuttle  for  deployment. 
The  transfer  vehicle,  as   it  was  conceived  by  Marshall  engineers,  would  be 
an unmanned upper-stage in the beginning. The  ult m a t e  goal,  however, would 
be  to develop a  manned  vehicle  capable of  ferrying  a  crew  capsule  to geosyn- 
chronous  orb i t .  The  vehicle  would  then  return  the  crew  and  capsule  for o ther  
missions.  (NASA   Release  84-90) 

J u l y   16:  ESA’s  Director,  R. Bonnet,  and  Director  ,General of  Arianespace C. 
Bigot  signed  a  contract  for  the  launch  of  ESA’s  scientific  spacecraft  Giotto, 
which  was  designed  for  observations  of  Halley’s  comet,  aboard  an  Ariane  1 
launcher.  They  scheduled  the  launch  for  the  first  day  of  the July  1985 launch 
window. 
Giotto  would  go  into  a  heliocentric  transfer  trajectory  that  would  be  very 
close to  the ecliptic plane  (the plane  in which  the  planets orbit  the Sun). Dur-  
ing  its  flight,  which  would  last eight  months,  Giotto would  be  under  the com- 
mand  of  the  European  Space  Operations  Centre  in  Darmstadt,  Germany. 
Ground-based  telescopes would  track Giotto, and course corrections would be 
made with  the on-board propulsion  system to ensure that  the  spacecraft passed 
as close as possible to the comet  nucleus during  the  encounter phase,  planned 
to  last  four  hours.  It was  expected  that  the most  im,portant data  from  the mis- 
sion would  come  from  10  scientific experiments on board  Giotto within  a  few 
minutes  before  and  after  Giotto’s  closest  approach  to  the  comet’s  nucleus.  It 
would be during that  period  that the spacecraft’s camera would photograph the 
comet’s  nucleus  in  color,  resolving  surface  structure down  to  50 meters  (150 
feet).  (ESA  Release,  July  16/84) 
-NASA  and NOAA  announced  that the N O M - 8  environmental monitoring 
satellite appeared  to  have  lost  i t   latitude  control  system  and  was  tumbling  in 
orbit  unable  to  relay  its  signal  effectively  to  Earth.  Launched  board  an  Atlas 
E  launch  vehicle  i n   1983, the  1,700-kilometer  (3,775-pound)  satellite had  six 
environmental monitoring  instruments  and  a  search-and-rescue payload,  pro- 
vided  by  Canada and  France  under  an  international cooperative  space project 
with  NASA  known  as   SARSAT  (search-and-rescue  satellite-aided  tracking). 
Much of  the environmental monitoring  lost  by  NOM - 8  could  be conducted 
by  NOAA-6,  launched  i n   1979.  And  although  the  S.4RSAT  capability,  which 
permitted  the  satellite  to  relay  emergency  signals  from  downed  aircraft  and 
ships  i n   distress,  was  out  of  service,  the  SARSAT  project  would  continue 
operations  through  use  of  three  Soviet  COSPAS  search-and-rescue  satellites 
i n   orbit. 
N O M - 8  first  showed  signs of  problems  on  June  12, when  it  experienced  a 

490 

JULY  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAU I ICS  

“clock  interrupt”  that  caused  the  spacecraft’s  gyros   to  desynchronize.  Con-  
tinued  clock  disturbances  interfered  with  the  meteorological  instruments, 
preventing  scientists  and  engineers  from   obtaining  good  data. 
The   satellite was  the  first  in  a  series  of  three  Advanced  TIROS-N  (ATN). 
NASA  planned  the  next  launch  of  a  TIROS-N,  NOAA-F,  for  October  1984. 
(NASA  Release  84-93;  N Y   T ime s ,  July  14/84,  46 )  

Ju ly   19:  MSFC   announced  that  it  had  awarded  Ford  Aerospace  and  Com-  
munications  Corpora t ion   of  Pa10  Alto,  Ca l if . ,   and  Lockheed  Missiles  and 
Space  Company  of  Sunnyvale,  Ca l if . ,   contracts  for  the  conceptual  study  of 
geostationary  platforms.  Under  the  contracts,  the  two  f irms   would  envision 
platforms  of  the  1990s and  report  their  findings  to  the  MSFC.  The  platforms 
would  revolve about  the  equator  at  the geostationary  altitude of  22 ,300  miles, 
where  they  would  be   in  synchronization  with  the  Earth’s  rotation. 
Each  contract  was  for  approximately  $550 and  would  ruL  for  21  months. 
(MSFC   Release  84-64) 

Ju ly  24 :   NASA  announced  that  it  had  selected  LTV  Aerospace  and  Defense 
Company,  Dallas,  Tex. ; Martin  Marietta  Denver  Aerospace,  Denver,  Colo. ; 
and  TRW  Inc . ,   Redondo  Beach,  Ca l if . ,   for  negotations  leading  to  contracts 
for  system  definition  studies  of  an  Orbital  Maneuvering  Vehicle  (OMV)  to 
ferry  satellites  about  in  space.  MSFC would  manage  the  fixed-price  contracts 
of  approximately  $5  million  each.  NASA  anticipated  that  one   of  the  three 
companies  would  likely construct  the platform  upon  approval  to proceed  with 
the project. 
The  vehicle would supplement  the Space  Transportation System (STS), hav- 
ing  the  ability  to  retrieve  satellites  from   high  orb i ts   and  bring  them  to  the  
Space   Shuttle  for  maintenance  and  repair.  The   OMV   would  then  p lace   the 
repaired  satellites  in  the ir   operational  orbits.  The  OMV  would  also  serve  a s  
a means  of  reboosting  satellites  as their  orb i ts  decayed,  thereby  avoiding cost- 
ly,  dedicated  Space  Shuttle  missions. 
As envisioned,  the  OMV  would be  a remotely  piloted,  unmanned  spacecraft 
approximately  3  meters  (15  feet)  in  diameter  and  about  1  meter  (3  feet)  in 
length.  (NASA  Release  84-102) 

Ju ly   25:  Svetlana  Savitskaya,  a  Soviet  cosmonau t ,   today  became  the  first 
woman  to  walk  in  space.  Savitskaya,  36   years  o ld ,   performed  welding  and 
soldering  operations  in  the  course  of  he r  walk  in  space,  which  lasted  3  hours 
and  35  minutes.  She was  also  the  first  woman  to  make  two  spaceflights,  her  
first  being  in  August  1982 aboard  the  Soyuz  T-7, which  like  the  curren t   flight 
linked  with  the  Sulyut  7 space   station  for  a  brief  per iod .  
Savitskaya went  into  space  July  18  along  with  Vladimir  Dzhanibekov  and 
Igor  Volk  aboard  Soyuz  TI2 and  linked  with  the Sulyut-7 space  station,  where 
three o ther  cosmonauts had  been  in orbit  for more  than  five months.  Tass said 
that  the main  goal  of  the  space walk  was  to  test  a  new  general-purpose  hand- 

4 9  1 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AN I )   AERONAUT ICS  

JULY   1984 

operated  tool  designed  “to  carry  out  complex  technological  operations.” 
Dzhanibekov  accompanied  her  on  the  space  walk. 
Savitskaya,  along  with  Dzhanibekov  and  Volk,  returned  to  Earth  July  29 
aboard  Soyuz  T12.  They  landed  i n   an  area  140  kilometers  southeast  of 
Dzhezkazgan.  Th e   three  were  reported  to  be  feeling  fine  after  landing.  Re- 
maining aboard Sulyut  7 were  cosmonauts  Leonid Kisim, Vladimir Solovyev, 
and  Oleg  Atkov. 
Savistskaya  was  bo rn   i n   Moscow   and   gradua ted   f rom   th e   S e rgo  
Ordzhonikidze  Aviation  Institute i n   Moscow.  She had  worked  as  an  instructor 
pilot  and ,   since  1976,  had  been  a  test  pilot  on  20  types  of  aircraft,  Tass 
reported.  (FBIS,  Tass  in   English,  July  17/84;  FBTS,  Tass  i n   English,  July 
29 /84 ;   N Y   T imes ,  J u l y   26184,  A-24;  W Pos t ,   J u l y   26/84,  A-31) 

J u l y   29:  NOAA’s  GOES-5  satellite  failed  at  8:39  p .m .   today,  blanking  out 
weather pictures  for parts of  the eastern  United  States and the Altantic  Ocean ,  
just  at  the  time of  the  year  when  hurricanes  and  severe  storms were  likely  to 
form  there.  NOAA  had  not  planned  replacement  of  the  satellite  for  another 
two years,  but  would  move  the  satellite covering the western  half  of  the  coun- 
try  and the Pacific  eastward as a stopgap measure during the hurricane season. 
It  would  station  the  operational  satellite midway  over  the  continental  United 
States, leaving  Hawaii, Alaska,  and  the western  Pacific  uncovered  to  the west, 
and  half  the  Atlantic  uncovered  to  the  east. 
The   $100 million  satellite,  like  its  four  predecessors,  failed  prematurely.  It 
was  intended  to  operate  for  five  years  but  lasted  only  three.  In   testimony 
before  a  Senate  subcommittee,  NOAA’s  John  McEllroy  said  that  government 
experts and  the  system  contractor,  Hughes  Aerospace,  had  calculated  that  the 
satellite  expected  a  five-year  lifetime,  but  that  had  proved  optimistic,  chiefly 
because  one  mechanical  system,  and  in  particular  one  specially  made  light 
bulb,  kept  having  problems.  Another  official  at NClAA  said  that  the  failure of 
the  custom-made  light  bulb,  which  caused  five  of  the  six  U.S.  weather 
satellites  to  go  blind  prematurely,  would  cost  Hughes  millions  of  dollars  i n  
penalties.  Because  Hughes’s  contract  was  linked  to  performance,  it  stood  to 
lose as much  as $ 3  million for the recent  failure plus: losses for earlier  failures. 
( W  Post,  July  31/84,  A-1,  Aug  3 /84 ,  A-3;  W  Times, Aug  3 / 84 ,  4A) 

Ju ly  31:  Th e  Washington Posr  reported  that,  i n   testimony  to  a House subcom- 
mitte  on  space  science  and  applications,  NASA  Administrator  James  M .  
Beggs  said  that  h e   feared  that  an  Air  Force  plan  to  make more   use  of  large, 
unmanned  rockets  to  launch  Pentagon  satellites  would  undermine  NASA’s 
plans  for  the  Space Shuttle program.  “The  Air  Force  has  said  they  plan  two 
flights a year  starting in  1988 using  expendable launch vehicles as an alternate 
to t h e  shuttle,  and if  they  stick to that  it will have no real  impact  on us,”  Beggs 
said.  “But  if  they  increase that  rate  to  four o r  five flights a year,  as  some peo- 
ple  suggest  they  might,  it  will  have  severe  impact  on  us,”  he  pointed  ou t .  
Beggs went  on  to  say  that  the Air  Force had  asked  General  Dynamics  Cor- 

492 

JULY  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

poration  and  Martin Marietta Corporation  to  submit plans  for  increasing the 
lifting  power  of  their  Atlas-Centaur  and  Titan  34D booster  rockets  to  launch 
into  space large satellites that  currently  could  be  carried  only  by  the  Shuttle. 
He  pointed  out  that  NASA  stood  to  lose  much  of  the  business  of  one  of  its 
main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air  Force, having 
an alternate way  of  putting its satellite in orbit was  an  improvement in  security. 
“All. . . tha t  means  is  they’ll  have  another  launch  pad  right  on  the  ocean,”  he 
said. 
B e g s   indicated  that  he  was  worried  that  the  Air  Force  would  acquire  an 
alternate launch  vehicle to use more  frequently  to make  it  cost effective. And 
he  expressed  concern  that  the  winner  of  the  Air  Force  contract  to  build  the 
larger  rocket  would  try  to  take  commercial  business  away  from  the  Space 
Shuttle.  “Our   commercial  business  has  already  begun  to  fall  off  a  little 
because  our  commercial  customers  tended  to  overbook  when  we  started  to 
fly,”  Beggs  said.  “Our  traffic model  for  1985  is  already  down  about  10  per- 
cent.”  ( W  Post,  Aug  1/84, A-20) 

During  Ju ly:   NASA  announced  the  appointment  of  C .  Robert  Nysmith  as 
associate administrator of  management,  effective  August  26,  1984. He  would 
succeed  John  Boyd,  who would  return  to  ARC  to  become  associate director. 
Nysmith had  served as assistant associate administrator for management  since 
January  1984.  Before  that,  he  was  assistant  associate  administrator  for 
management  support  in  the  Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology. 
(NASA  Release  84-107) 

-NASA  announced  the  appointment  of  Jesse  W.  Moore   to  associate  ad- 
ministrator for  space flight, effective August  1,  1984. Moore  had  been  serving 
as  the  acting associate administrator for  space flight since April  15, 1984. He  
was  appointed  deputy  associate  administrator  for  space  flight  in  February 
1983. Moore   came   to  NASA  Headquarters  in   1978  as  deputy  director  of  the 
Solar Terrestrial Division  in the Office of  Space Science. In  June  1979 he  was 
appointed  director  of  the  Space Flight  Division.  He   assumed  the  position of 
director, Earth  and  Planetary Exploration Division,  in  December   1981. Prior 
to  these  assignments  he  was  employed  at  JPL .   (NASA  Release  84-105) 

-Effective  August  1,  1984,  the  Interim  Space  Station  Program  Office 
would  become  the  permanent  Office of  Space  Station  (Code  S ) ,   NASA  an- 
nounced. Philip E. Culbertson would  be  the associate administrator for  space 
station  and  John  D.  Hodge  would  be  the  deputy  associate  administrator  for 
space station. The  Office of  Space Station was  responsible for developing the 
Space  Station  and  conducting  advanced  development  and  technology  ac- 
tivities,  advanced planning,  and other activities required to carry out President 
Reagan’s  direction to  NASA  to  develop a  permanently  manned  Space Station 
within  a  decade.  (NASA  anno  July  27/84;  NASA  Release  84-104) 

493 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

JULY   1984 

reported  that  Transpace  Carriers  Inc.  (TCI)  was  challenging  i n  
-inteniu 
the  United  States  the pricing  policies  of  the  European multinational  company 
Arianespace.  TCI, a  Washington-based  firm,  had  earlier  received  the  go- 
ahead  to  take over  the  Delta  launcher  following  completion  of  existing NASA 
contracts  and  subject  to  the  provision  that  TCI  secured  three  new  customers 
before  October  1,  1984. 
TCI lodged  a  complaint  with  the  U.S.  Trade  R.epresentative,  alleging  that 
Arianespace  was  practicing  “predatory”  pricing  by  offering  users  from non- 
ESA  member  countries  (notably  U.S.  commercial  satellite  operators)  rates 
that  were  up  to  33 percent  below  launch  fees quoted  for  European  satellites. 
So far,  both  the  Space Shuttle and  Ariane were generally  agreed  to  have been 
operating  at  unprofitable  “introductory”  prices;  NASA  had  put  Delta-class 
satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15  million,  including the PAM-D 
upper   stage.  General  Telephone  &  E lec tron ics   (GTE)  reported  paid 
Arianespace  “under  $ 2 5   million”  for  the  Spacenet  1 launch. 
Th e  complaint  raised  by  TCI applied only  to contracts  for launch after  1985, 
the earliest  date  it  could  begin  operations.  TCI  President  Tony  L .  Savoca said 
that  his  company  would  charge  between  $26  and  $32  million,  according  to 
launch requirements. He  claimed that he had  heard  of Arianespace  bids as low 
as  $ 2 2   million  for  the  same  time  period  and  added  that  Arianespace  “should 
be  charging”  around  $64 million  for  a  dual  (SYLDA)  launch  on  Ariane  111. 
(Znterviu,  July  7 /84 ,   6 4 3 )  

-George  M .  Low, president  of  Rensselaer  Polytzchnic  Institute and  a driv- 
ing  force  in  the  Apollo  moon  landing  program,  died  July  17  of  cancer.  The 
White  House  announced  that  he  would  be  awarded  the  President’s Medal  of 
Freedom  for  his  contributions  to  education  and  the  nation’s  space  program. 
In  his 27  years  with NASA  and  its predecessor,  the National  Advisory  Com- 
mittee  for  Aeronautics  (NACA), Low  served  as  an  engineer  and  manager  in 
the  Mercury  and  Gemini  programs  and  was  put  in  charge  of  redesigning  the 
Apollo  spacecraft  after  a  fire on  the  launching pad  killed  three  astronauts  in 
1967.  Later  h e   became  deputy  administrator  of  NASA  and  acting  ad- 
ministrator  i n   the  early  1970s  when  he  negotiated  the  initial  agreements 
leading to  t h e  joint  American-Soviet mission  i n   August  lY.5. ( N Y  Times, July 
18/84,  E-8) 

494 

August 

August 8-26:  Soviet cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg 
Atkov  completed on August  26  their 200th  day  of  work  on  the Salyut  7 space 
station.  During  the  day’s  activities,  there  was  an  assessment  of  the  reaction 
of  the  cardiovascular  system of  the  cosmonauts  to  the  initiation of  hydrostatic 
pressure  created  by  means  of  the  vacuum  suit  “Chibis,”  and  the  crew  used 
hand-held  cameras  and  spectrometers to  study  the  natural  resources  and  en- 
vironment  of  Soviet  territory. 
Also on  that day  the Progess  23  cargo craft,  launched  August  14, undocked 
with  the Space Station, following unloading of  the cargo craft’s contents. Pro- 
gress   2 3   was  launched  on  August  14. 
On  August  8,  Kizim  and  Solovyev  made  their  sixth  space  walk.  The  
cosmonauts removed  part  of  the heat  insulation cover  on  the back  of  the  ser-  
vice  module  and  shut  off  a  pipe  in  the  fuel  line  with  a  special  device.  This 
extravehicular  activity  lasted  5  hours  and  was  the  first  time  that  cosmonauts 
had made  six space walks,  for a total of  22 hours and 50 minutes, in  the course 
of  one   trip.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Aug  9 /84 ,   Aug  14/84, Aug  16/84, Aug 
20 /84 ,   Aug  24 /84)  

August  4:  Arianespace launched at  10:32 a .m .   local time  the  satellites ECS-2 
and  Tekcom  I  aboard an  Ariane vehicle  from Kourou,  French Gu iana .   The 
first  data  received  from  both  satellites  showed  satisfactory  behavior.  They 
were  injected  into  an  orbit  with  provisional  parameters  of  199.02-kilometer 
perigee,  36,091.00-kilometer  apogee,  and  6.98 O  inclination. 
This  10th  Ariane  launch  was  the  first  flight  of  an  Ariane  3  version  of  the 
vehicle, whose main characteristics were a higher thrust of  the Viking first and 
second  stage,  a  stretched  third  stage;  greater  ‘liquid  oxygen  and  liquid 
hydrogen tank capacities, leading to an increased flight time by  approximately 
30% ;  and  the  addition  to  the  first  stage of  two  strap-on  rocket  boosters. 
Ariane  3  could  carry  2 ,580   kilograms  into  geostationary  transfer  orb i t .  
(ESA  Release Aug  4/84) 

August  10:  NASA  announced that  i t  had  awarded an  industry team  headed  by 
RCA’s  Astro-Electronics Division,  Princeton,  N.J.,  a  $260.3 million contract 
for  design;  development,  and  fabrication of  the  Advanced  Communications 
Technology Satellite ( A C E ) .  Other major participants in  the team were TRW 
Electronics  Systems  Group,  Space  Communications  Division,  Redondo 
Beach ,   Ca l if .  ;  Commun ica t ions   Satellite  Co rpo ra t ion   (ComSa tCo rp ) ,  
Washington, D.C. ; Motorola Inc . ,  Government Electronics Group, Scottsdale, 

495 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1984 

Ariz. ; Hughes  Aircraft  Company’s  Electron  Dyinamics  Division,  Torrance, 
Calif. ; and  Electromagnetic  Sciences  Inc.,  Norcross,  Ga .  
One  of  the  primary  goals  of  the  ACTS  program  was  to  develop  advanced 
satellite communications  technologies,  including  satellite  switching  and  pro- 
cessing  techniques  and  multibeam  satellite  antennas.  using  t h e   20-  and 
30-gigahertz  bands.  These  technologies  would  be   needed  for  the  increased 
satellite  capacity  for  the  mid-1990s. 
The   ACTS  program  results  would  make  available  to  corporations,  univer- 
sities,  and  government  agencies  the  ACTS  spacecraft  and  ground  systems 
capabilities  for  experimentation.  Organizations  that  met  specified  re- 
quirements  for  space  communications  research  would  participate  in  such  ex- 
p e r i m e n t s   d u r i n g   the   f l igh t   ph a s e   of  the   p r o g r am .   N A S A   h a d   r e c e i v e d   o v e r  
3 0  expressions  of  interest  in  experimental  use  of  the  new  satellite  system. 
NASA  had  scheduled ACTS for launch  by  the Space Shuttle in  1989. (NASA 
Release  84-113;  LeRC  Release  84-54) 

August  13:  NASA  signed  an  agreement  with  two  insurance  organizations, 
Merrett  Syndicates Ltd.  and International Underwriters  (Intec), to retrieve the 
Pulupa  B-2  spacecraft  February  6,  1984,  for  the  government  of  Indonesia. 
However,  it  did  not  achieve  the  proper  transfer  orbit  when  the  perigee  kick 
motor  failed. 
The   agreement  called  for  NASA  to  retrieve  the  satellite  on  Space  Shuttle 
mission  51-A,  currently  scheduled  for  launch  November  2 ,   1984.  Th e  
insurance  underwriters  would  pay  NASA  for  costs,  not  to  exceed  to  $4.8 
million,  incurred  i n   preparing  for  and  executing  the  retrieval. 
In  the  near  future  the  parties  would  sign  a  standard  Space  Shuttle  launch 
services agreement, which would  contain details of  t h e  rescuc plan  and a com-  
mitment to relaunch  the satellite in July  1985, should the underwriters  request 
it.  (NASA  Release  84-116) 

Augus t   15:  President  Reagan  approved  today  National  Space  Strategy 
intended  to  implement  the National Space Policy,  which was  supplemented by 
the  President’s  1984  state  of  the  union  address.  Concerning  the  STS,  the 
Strategy  pointed  out  that  the  STS  was  a  critical  factor  in  maintaining  U.S. 
space leadership,  and ,   therefore,  it was NASA’s  first priority  to  make the STS 
fully  operational  and  cost  effective  in  providing  routine  access  to  space.  The  
Strategy  further  noted  that  the  STS  was  to  be  fully  operational  by  1988. 
Regarding  the civil  space program,  the Strategy indicated that NASA  should 
develop  a  permanently  manned  Space  Station  within  a  decade  and  that  the 
United  States should  seek agreements  with  friends  and  allies  to  participate  in  
the  development  and  use  of  the  Space  Station. 
In the area of  commercial  space programs,  the Strategy called  for the United 
States  to  encourage  and  facilitate  commercial  expendable  launch  vehicle 
operations  and  minimize  government  regulation  of  these  operations. 

496 

AUGUST  1984 

ASTKONAUT ICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

Concerning  national  security  space  programs,  it  was mandated  that  the  na- 
tional  security  sector  must  pursue  an   improved  assured  launch  capability  to 
satisfy two specific requ i remen t s2 ‘ the  need for launch system complementary 
to  the  STS to  hedge  against  unforeseen  technical  and  operational  problems, 
and  the  need  for  a  launch  system  suited  for  operations  and  cr is is  situations.” 
The  Strategy  fur ther  stated that  to  fulfill  this requirement,  the  national  securi- 
ty  sector  should  pursue  the  use   of  a  limited  number  of  expendable  launch 
vehicles  to  complement  the  STS.  (National Space  Strategy,  WH   Fact  Shee t ,  
App  F-4 ,   Aug  15/84,  137) 

August  16:  NASA  launched  the   Active  Magnetospheric  Particle  Tracer  Ex- 
plorers  (AMPTE)   aboard  a  three-stage  Delta  3294   launch  vehicle  from  the 
Cape  Canaveral  Air  Force  Station.  AMPTE   consisted  of  three   satellites  pro- 
vided  by  the  United  States,  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  (FRG) ,   and  the 
United  Kingdom.  The  program  was  designed  to  supply  knowledge  about  the 
transfer  of  mass  from   the  solar  wind  to  the  magnetosphere  and  its  further 
transpor t   and  energization  within  the  magnetosphere. 
Initial  chemical  releases  in   September  by  the  FRG’s  Ion  Release  Module 
(IRM) would be  swept toward Earth’s magnetosphere by  the so lar  wind. When 
the  released  ions  reached  the magnetosphere,  it was  expected  that  ions would 
spread  out  along  this  boundary  region  in  all  directions,  but  some  of  the  ions 
would  pierce  the  magnetosphere,  a s  do  some  of  the  charged  particles  of  the 
solar  wind.  These  rare   ions would  act  like  a  “dye”  in  the  plasma  of  charged 
particles. 
The m anu ev e r ab l e   Un i ted   K i n g d om   subsatellite,  located  in  c lose  proximity 
to  the  IRM ,   and  the  IRM  would  acqu ire  data  from   outside  the  boundary  to 
the magnetosphere  while  the  Charge  Composition  Explorer,  provided  by  the 
United  States,  would  study  the  activity  from   within  the   magnetosphere. 
A  second  ser ies  of  chemical  releases in December  would  crea te  an artificial 
comet  forming  ins ide  the bow-shock  region  but outside of the magnetosphere, 
directly  in  the   orbital  path  of  Ear th .   The   third  series  of  chemical  releases 
would  occur   in   1985 behind  Earth  in  the  magnetotail. 
Th e   three  spacecraft  would  send  data  to  ground  stations  a t   NASA’s  Deep  
Space  Network  a t   JPL ,   the  German   Space  Operations  Cen ter   at  Oberphaf- 
fenhofen,  and  the  Rutherford  Appleton  Laboratory  in  Ch i l ton ,   England. 
(NASA MOR  E-846-84-01,  Aug 2184; NASA  Release  84-109; N Y  Times, Aug 
7/84,  C-2) 

August  17:  NASA  announced  that  it had  selected  United  Space  Boosters  Inc. 
(USBI),  Huntsville,  A la . ,   to  receive  a  $274  million  cost-plus-incentive-fee 
contract to manufacture,  assemble,  and refurbish  solid-fuel  rocket boosters  for 
the   Space  Shuttle.  The  approximately  five-year  contract  would  require  USBI 
to  manufacture,  assemble,  check  ou t ,   and  deliver  84   flight  sets  of  solid-fuel 
rocket  boosters  and  to  refurbish  them  when  returned  to  Earth  after  each  
launch.  The  con trac t ,  to  be  managed  by  MSFC,  also  launched  two  unpriced 

491 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AEROKAUT IC S  

AUGUST  1984 

options,  each  for  the  delivery  of  60  flight  sets,  covering  a  total  additional 
period  of  performance  of  about  five  years. 
Under  a  separate  contract,  USBI  would  build  a  new  facility  at  KSC  for 
booster  assembly  and  refurbishment,  at  a  cost  of  $21  million.  In  the  past, 
refurbishment  had  taken  place  at  Kennedy’s  Vehicle  Assembly  Building 
(VAB),  which  was  used  to  assemble  the  entire  configuration  of  orbiter, 
boosters,  and  external  tank.  (NASA  Release  84-118;  MSFC  Release  84-75) 

August  23:  Th e  Far  Eastern  Economic  Review was  quoted  as  saying  that  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  had  asked  the  United  States  to  allow  a  Chinese 
astronaut  to be  included in the Space Shuttle program.  The  Hong Kong-based 
weekly magazine also said tha t  Beijing  had  asked t h e  United  States to consider 
providing a launcher for a Chinese manned space vehicle. I t  was reported  that 
the Reagan  administration was giving both  requests  “sympathetic”  considera- 
tion  (FBlS,  Hong  Kong  AFP  in  English,  Aug  23 /84)  

August  26:  Spacelab  3  investigators,  engineers,  support  personnel,  and 
science  crew  members  completed  the  first  integrated  Spacelab  3  mission 
simulation  at  MSFC.  Mission  participants  would  take  part  in  several  such 
simulations  in  preparation  for  the  scheduled  January  1985  mission.  The  
payload  and  mission  specialists  were  located  at  the Marshall  Center  Payload 
Crew  Training Complex  for  the  simulation. They  ‘communicated and  worked 
with  mission  management  and  science  team  members  i n   a  simulated  Payload 
Operations  Control  Center  (POCC)  at  the  Huntsville  Operations  Support 
Center  (HOSC) .  
Spacelab  3 mission  manager  Joe   Cremin  said  that  the  primary  purpose  of 
the  simulation  “was  to  train  the  principal  investigator  operation  teams  i n   the 
Payload  Operations  Control  Center  procedures  with  the  Marshall  Center 
POCC  cadre.” The  simulation also provided  the participants with  communica- 
tions  experience  in  an  operational  environment. 
An  additional  simulation  would  take  place  a t   Marshall  in  September,  and 
i n  November the Marshall  team  would begin  operations and  simulations at the 
POCC   a t   JSC.  “Even  then ,   the  flight  crew  will  Ibe  at  Marshall  to  use   the 
Payload  Crew  Training  Complex  and  the  HOSC  will  be  active  in  providing 
support  for  the  simulation,”  Cremin  said.  (MSFC  Release  84-70) 

August  27:  Speaking  to  262   winners  of  the  Secondary  School  Recognition 
Program and their  teachers,  President  Reagan  said that he had directed  NASA  
to carry  an elementary- o r  secondary-school teacher  in orbit aboard the Space 
Shuttle as   the  nation’s  first  space  passenger.  “When  the  shuttle  lifts  off,  all 
of  America  will  be  reminded  of  the  crucial  role  teachers  and  education  play 
in  the   life  of  our   nation,”  Reagan  said  i n   the  annoiincement.  This  would  be 
the  first  spaceflight  of  an  American  who was  neither  a  scientist nor  a  trained 
astronaut.  Th e   only  physical  limitations  were  that  the  candidate  be  free  of 

498 

AUGUST  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

debilitating  disease,  have  good  eyesight,  and  not  have  hearing  loss  o r   high 
blood  pressure.  No   age  limit  was  specified. 
NASA had  thought about the possibility  of  flying private  citizens aboard  the 
Space  Shuttle more   than  a  decade  ago.  The   idea  was  a  natural  outgrowth  of 
its  legislative  mandate  that  called  for  “ the  widest  practicable  and  appropriate 
dissemination  of  information  concerning  NASA’s  activities  and  the  results 
thereof.  . , .” 
NASA  officials  told  reporters  that  they  would  begin  a  search  for  the  most 
qualified  teacher candidate and described  a program  in which  each of  the  fifty 
states,  the  District  of  Columbia,  h e r t o  Rico,  and  Guam   would  submit  the 
names  of  two  teachers.  A  peer-review  panel  would  help  pare   the  applicants 
to  10,  to  5,  and  finally  to  a  pr ime   and  backup  candidate. 
“When  we  decide  on   our   final  two  candidates,  we  will  give  them  eight 
weeks of preflight  training  a t  Houston’s Johnson Space  Center  right along with 
the astronaut  crew  they  fly with,”  said NASA Administrator  James M .  Beggs. 
“When  the  candidate’s  flight  is  over,  we  will  insist  that  he  o r   she  give  a  year 
of  the ir  time  to NASA,  visiting  schools,  talking  to workshops,  lecturing,  and 
appearing  on   television  and  radio,”  he  said. 
Beggs  said  that  it  was  impossible  to  predict  how  many  civilians  would  be  
ab le  to fly on Space Shuttle, noting  that  it depended on how  many Space  Shut- 
tle  flights  NASA  could  schedule.  (NASA  Release  84-122; NASA  anno   Aug 
2 l l84 ;   W Pos t ,   Aug  28/84,  A-1) 

August  30:  The   N ew   York  Times  reported  that  space  industry  experts  and 
government  intelligence  officials  had  said  that  U .S .   A i r   Force  satellite 
photographs  of  launching pads   in  central  Asia  showed  that  the  Soviet  Union 
was  developing  a booster  rocket  for  a  Soviet version  of  the  Space  Shuttle and 
a  new  family  of big  rockets  similar  to  those  used  by  the  United  States  for  the  
Apollo  Moon  program.  A  special  feature  of  the  new  rockets  was  that  they 
would use  liquid  hydrogen,  a  cryogenic  (supercooled)  type of  fuel  technology 
that  had  eluded  Soviet  space  experts  but  had  been  mastered  in  the   United 
States  nearby  20  years  ago. 
The   Pentagon  had  originally  described  the  Soviet  development  of  new 
booster  rockets  and a  Space Shuttle in April.  The  new  disclosures  gave added 
detail  of  the  Soviet  program ,   including  checkouts  on  the   launching  pad  and 
the  development  of  cryogenic  fuels. 
“It’s  a ma jor  step to go to  liquid  hydrogen,”  said James E .  Oberg,  an expert 
on  Soviet  space  technology.”  They’ve  been,  using  the  same   boosters  for  20 
years.  Now  they  appear   to  be   trying  to  build  a  new  family.” 
The  Pentagon’s  “Soviet  Military  Power  1984” had  originally  suggested  the 
existence of  a new  family  of  Soviet booster  rockets.  Th e  publication  asserted 
that  the  biggest of  the new  Soviet rockets  could  lift payloads  of  up  to  150 tons 
into  low  orbits  around  the  Ear th ,   about  seven  times  more   than  the  largest 
operational  Soviet booster  and  five times  more  than  the  biggest  U.S.  booster, 
the  Space  Shuttle.  The  publication  also  said  the  Soviet  Union’s  space  shuttle 

499 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1984 

differed  from  the  U.S.  Shuttle only  in  the  respect  that  the main  engines  were 
not  on  the  orbiter.  In  addition,  the  publication  published  pictures  of  a  small 
Soviet  space  plane  that  had  undergone  flight  tests.  (NY   Times, Aug  30184, 
B-13) 

-NASA 
launched a t  8:41 a .m .  from KSC  the Space Shuttle Discovery  (STS 
41-D) on its maiden voyage after three earlier poslponements,  another one-day 
postponement  due  to  computer  problems,  and  a  last-minute  delay  to  avoid 
possible collision with a private line. Discovery  carried for mission 41-D  a six- 
member  crew  of  commander  Henry  Hartsfield;  pilot  Michael  Coats;  mission 
specialists Judith  Resnick,  Steven Hawley,  and Richard Mullane; and payload 
specialist Charles Walker,  a McDonnell  Douglas  engineer.  It  also carried  the 
heaviest  cargo  f lown   in  orbit  aboard  a  Space  Shuttle. 
About  eight hours  after  liftoff,  three  of  the  crew members  deployed  a  U.S. 
communications  satellite,  SBS-4 ,   which  was  owned  by  Satellite  Business 
Systems, McLean ,   Va.,  and  was  designed  to  relay  data,  including  telephone 
and  television  transmissions.  About  4 5  minutes  later  its  on-board  engine  ig- 
nited  flawlessly  to  send  i t   to  a  position  22,400  d e s  above  the  equator  just 
west  of  South America.  The  s u c c e s sh l  launch helped  dispel  doubts about  the 
solid-fuel  rocket  motor  technology  when  two  satellites  last  February  did  not 
reach  orbit. 
Also  planned  for  launch  from  the  Space  Shuttle were  the  Leusut-2,  owned 
by  Hughes  Communications Services, In c . ,  and  leased by  the  U.S. Navy,  and 
the  Telestur 3-C of AT&T.  On  board  would  be  NASA’s  Office of  Astronautics 
and  Space Technology  OASTOl,  a  collapsible  solar array,  and  the Continuous 
Flow  Electrophoresis  System  (CFES)   of  McDonnell  Douglas. 
On  the  same  day  as   the  liftoff,  President  Reagan  visited  GSFC   and 
addressed  several  hundred  of  Goddard’s  employees.  In  his  remarks,  Reagan 
said  that  “there  is  nothing  that  the  United  Stales  of  America  cannot  ac- 
complish.  If  the doubting  Thomases would just  stand  aside  and get out of  our  
way.”  He   went  on  to  speak  of  the  creation  of  nl:w 
jobs,  technologies,  and 
medical  breakthroughs  as  a  result of  the  rigors  of  t h e   space program.  (NASA 
Release 84-112; NASA  Press Kit June 8 4 ,  August  84 ;   W Post, Aug  31/84, A-1; 
W  Times, Aug  31/84,  3A) 

August  31:  NASA  announced  the  start  of  the  Extreme  Ultraviolet  Explorer 
(EUVE ) ,  a new  astronomy  satellite project  that  would  be  launched  into  Earth 
orbit  from the Space Shuttle i n   1988. Th e  purpose of  the explorer was to make 
the  first  all-sky  map  in  the  extreme  ultraviolet  (EUV)  band  of  the  elec- 
tromagnetic  spectrum,  a  band  between  ultraviolet  and  X-ray  light. 
The   EUVE ,   managed  by  J PL ,   with  scientific  instruments  supplied  by  the 
University of California, Berkeley,  was a true e x p b r e r  in that  it would conduct 
the  first  in-depth  investigation  of  that  critical  bband  and  was  expected  to 
discover stars and other  celestial  objects with  unexpected  characteristics.  The  
EUVE  would orbit Earth at an attitude of  340 statute miles and from that point 

500 

AUGUST   1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

above the  atmosphere would b e  able to  scan the  sky  for emissions  of  extreme 
ultraviolet  radiation.  EUVE   would  use  four  40-centimeter  (15.7-inch) 
ultraviolet  telescopes to conduct the all-sky  survey  and a  spectrometer  to carry 
out  detailed  observations  of  the  new  sources  and  stars  expected  to  be 
discovered. 
J PL   was  responsible  for  overall  EUVE   project  responsibility.  Th e   UCB 
would  supply  the  1,100-pound  science  payload,  consisting  of  the  extreme 
ultraviolet  telescopes  and  the  spectrometer;  and  the  university’s  Space 
Sciences Laboratory would  design and  fabricate the payload.  JPL  would  con- 
trol  flight operations,  and the  science operations  center would  be  at  the Space 
Sciences  Laboratory  at  Berkeley.  (NASA  Release  84-125) 

50 I 

September 

September  3 -5 :   NASA  officials  were  concerned  that  the   buildup  of  two  ice  
blocks,  one  about 30 by  18  inches and weighing between  8 and 20  pounds  and 
ano ther   about  10  pounds,  that  covered  an  excess  water-dump  nozzle,  might 
break  off  the Space  Shuttle Discovery  o n  mission 41-D (a combination of  niis- 
sions 41-D and 41-F) during its return  to Ear th ,  causing damage to the orbiter’s 
protective  tiles.  Th e  agency  said  that  they  had  three  options  for  removing  the 
ice,  the  last of  which,  a  space walk,  could  delay reentry  by  at  least a day. The  
crew  continued  their  efforts  to  melt  or   shake  loose  the  ice,  and  Discovery’s 
cab in  pressure  was lowered  as a preliminary  step in  case a  space walk was  re- 
qu ired ,   although  NASA  officials  said  that  a  space  walk  was  the  last  option. 
Discovery  was  oriented  with  the  port  side  in  direct  sunlight,  so  when  the 
crew  awoke the  next morning  they  found about half  of  the  large  ice block  had 
melted.  Then ,   astronaut  Henry  W.  Hartsfield,  J r . ,   switched  on  heaters  in   the 
pipes  leading  to the  nozzle and  fired  the orbiter’s thrusters  to  see  if  the vibra- 
tions  would  shake  the  ice  free.  Next,  Hartsfield,  assisted  by  Judith  Resnik, 
took  the controls  of  the mechanical  arm  and  following procedures  outlined by 
Sally  K .   Ride  on   the   ground  knocked  off  with  little  difficulty  all  but  about 
5  inches  of  the  ice   chunk.  The   remaining  ice  apparently  then  melted  in  the 
warmth  of  the  sunlight. 
Discovery  landed  September 5  at  Edwards  A ir   Force Base,  completing  its 
six-day maiden  flight.  Dur ing  the flight,  crew  deployed three  communications 
satellites,  LEASAT-I  (SMVCOM-I), Telestar-3, and SBS-D  in the first three days 
of  the  flight; extended  an  experimental  solar-powered  array  in a test  for fu ture  
Space  Station  construction;  and  processed  a  sample  of  a  hormone   that  could 
lead to a commercial  pharamaceutical  product.  L t .  Col. Richard M .  Mullane, 
one   of  the  astronauts  on  board ,   said  that  Discovery  “performed  superbly,” 
while  NASA  officials  pointed  ou t   that  all  the  mission’s  objectives  were  ac- 
complished.  (W  Post,  Sept 4 /84 ,  A-6;  NY   Ernes, Sept  3/84,  A-1,  Sep t  4 /84 ,  
A-1,  Sep t   5 /84 ,   A-1;  W  Times,  Sept  5 /84 ,  4A) 

September 5 :   Soviet cosmonauts Leonid K iz im ,  Vladimir  Solovyev, and Oleg 
Atkov  aboard  Salyut  7  equaled  the  record  of  211  days  in  space,  set  by 
cosmonauts  Anatoliy  Berezovoy  and  Valentin  Lebedev  in  December  1982. 
The   increasingly  long  flights,  coupled  with  Western  intelligence  reports  that 
the Soviets were experimenting with  rockets  capable  of  lifting  heavy payloads 
into orb i t ,   indicated  that  the country  was moving toward  a goal of  establishing 
a permanen t ,  manned  space  station.  Soviet reports  said that the flight of Sa lyu t  
7 was  proceeding  normally  and  that  there  was  no  indication  how  long  the 
flight  would  las t .  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

SEPTEMBER  1984 

During  the flight  the cosmonauts had  spent 22 hours and 50 minutes outside 
the  craft  in  6  space walks,  breaking  the  U.S.  record  for  a  single mission  by 
29  minutes.  The   three  have  been  visited  by  six  other  cosmonauts,  including 
an Indian and the first woman  to walk  in  space, Svetlana  Savitskaya,  who  dur- 
ing  her  space walk  used  a  welding  machine  that  space analysts  said  could  be 
used  for  building  large  Space  Stations. 
The   three  cosmonauts  had  focused  on  the  psychology  of  long  periods  in 
space as well  as  carried out  important  repairs outside the craf t ,  demonstrating 
the  crew’s  ability  to  maintain  their  spacecraft  in  an  extended  flight. 
In  a  televised  ceremony,  Soviet  leader  Konstantin  U.  Chernenko  honored 
the  cosmonauts  taking  part  i n   the  flight  and  spoke  of  the  great  advances  i n  
knowledge and  equipment  s ince  the  f i r s t  manned   spaceflight by  Yuri  Gagarin, 
2 3  years  previously.  “In  the  successes of  cosmonautics  we  see  a  blend  of  the 
daring  thinking  of  scientists,  the  remarkable  skills  of  engineers,  technicians 
and workers,  and  the great  courage  of  cosmonauts,”  he  said.  (FBIS, Moscow 
Tass Intl Svc in Russian, Sept 6 /84 ;  FBIS, Moscow  Tass in Engligh,  Sept 7/84; 
N Y   Times,  Sept  6 /84 ,   B-10) 

September  9:  A  working  meeting,  in  Paris,  of  astronaut?  from  the  Soviet 
Union,  the  United  States,  and  France  concluded  after  participants  expressed 
concern  for  mankind’s  future  and  the  need  for  cooperation,  and  they  em- 
phasized  their desire to use their  unique experience to promote space explora- 
tion  and  the  use  of  space  technology  for  the  good  of  all  people.  Participating 
i n   the  meeting  were  Soviet  cosmonauts  A .A .   Leonov  (Voskhod-2 and  Soyuz 
Apo l lo ) ,  O.G. Makarov  (Soyuz  12 ,  Soyuz 27,  Soyu  F 3 ) ,  and Yu.V.  Romanenko 
(Soyuz  26,  Suyuz  38); U.S.  astronauts  R .   Schweickart (Apo l lu  9 ) ,  E .  Mitchell 
(Apo l lo  14, and  D.  Eisele  (Apo l lo   7 ) ;  and  French  astronaut  J .L .   Chretien. 
Th e  participants  agreed  to  set up  an organization  of  those who had  traveled 
in space, with  the aim of studying the potential  and promoting  the constructive 
use  of  space  to  improve living  conditions on  Earth., formulating positive  pro- 
spects  for  future  generations,  and  promoting  the  emb l i shm en t  of  broad  con- 
tacts  among  people  who  had  been  in  space  to  identify  opportunities  for 
cooperation  and  issues  of  common  concern.  (FBI:;,  Moscow  TRUD  i n   Rus- 
sian,  Sept  12/84; FBIS  Moscow  Tass  in  English,  Sept  11/84) 

September  10:  NASA  and ESA  changed  the  name of   their  International  Solar 
Polar  Mission  to  “Ulysses.”  They  made  the  change,  proposed  by  ESA  and 
concurred  in  by  NASA,  not  only  in  reference  to  Homer’s  mythological  hero 
but  also for  the Italian  poet  Dante’s description  (in  the  26th Canto of  his  “In- 
ferno”)  of  Ulysses’s  urge  to  explore  “an  uninhabited  world  behind  the  Sun.” 
The  reference  from the  “Inferno”  was appropriate  because  the mission would 
permit measurements  to be  made for the first time away from the ecliptic plane 
and  over  the  poles  of  the  Sun-the  mission’s  trajectory  taking  the  spacecraft 
into the uncharted  third dimension of  the heliosphere.  (NASA Release  84-127) 

504 

SEPTEMBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

September  14:  NASA  issued  a  Requet  for  Proposal  (RFP)   for  definition  and 
preliminary  design  of  a  permanently  manned  Space Station to  be  operational 
in  low-Earth  orbit  early  in  the  1990s.  Proposals  were  due  by  November  15. 
The   Space  Station  would  support  scientific  and  commercial  endeavors  in 
space ,   s t imu la te   new  techno log ie s ,   enhance   space -ba sed   ope ra t iona l  
capabilities,  and  maintain  U .S .   leadership  in  space. 
The   RFP   contained  four  “work   packages”  covering  definition  and 
preliminary  design  (Phase B)  of  Space Station elements. NASA  planned  to  let 
competing  contracts  for  each  of  the  work  packages  and  scheduled  April  I ,  
1985,  as  the  effective date  of  the  contracts.  (NASA  Release  84-130) 

September  16:  U.S.  balloonist  Joe  W.  Kittinger  crash-landed  his  10-story 
balloon on  a mountain  in  Savona, Italy, after completing  the  first solo balloon 
flight  across  the  Atlantic.  Kittinger  also  made  the  flight  in  four  days,  setting 
a  speed-for-distance record.  Six other  people had  tried  the  solor ocean  cross- 
ing, but all failed, and two died in the attempt. A  three-man  US. crew of  Max- 
ie  Anderson,  Ben  Abruzzo,  and  Larry  Newman  was  the  first  to  cross  the 
Atlantic by balloon  in  1978.  Kittinger said, before beginning his flight, that his 
next goal would  be  a  solo  crossing  of  the  Pacific.  ( W Times, Sept  19/84,  lA, 

September  21:  NASA  launched  at  6:18  p.m.  EDT  the  Hughes  Communica- 
tions,  Inc.,  Galaxy-C  communications  satellite  from  the  Eastern  Space  and 
Missile  Center  (ESMC)   by  Delta  3920  vehicle.  The   satellite  would  relay 
business  commun ica t ions   throughout  the  United  States.  It  was  the  third  in  a 
series,  with  G a l q - A  dedicated to cable television programming  and & l a y -  
B  (along  with  Ga laxy -c )   relaying  video,  voice,  data,  and  facsimile  com- 
munications  for  large  corporations,  long-haul  carriers,  and  broadcasters. 
(NASA  MOR  No.  M-492-215-84-03  [prelaunch],  Sept.  19/84,  [postlaunch], 
Oct  15/84; NASA  Release  84-128) 

September 24 :   At  the request of Switzerland and the Federal Republic of  Ger- 
many,  ESA  reactivated the  GOES-2 spacecraft.  The  two countries wanted  use 
of  the satellite to obtain data over a complete  11-year solar cycle and to  support 
the  Active  Magnetospheric  Particle  Tracer  Experiment  (AMPTE)   project. 
GOES-2 ,  launched  in  June  1978,  completed  its  planned  scientific  mission  in 
July  1980.  It  resumed  operations  in  1981,  continuing  these  until  the  end  of 
1983. In January  1984, GOES-2 was moved  from  the densely  occupied geosta- 
tionary  orbit  into a higher  and  slightly asynchronous  orb i t ,  where  it was  drif- 
ting  at  a  rate  of  about  3.5” in  longitude  per  day  and  becoming  visible  to  the 
European  Space  Operations  Center  station  at  Michelstadt,  Germany,  for  4  
weeks  every  3 %  months.  (ESA  Release,  Sept  24/84) 

September  20:  The   second  and  last of  two  lithium  releases  from  the  Federal 
Republic  of  Germany’s  IRM  was  completed,  part  of  the  world’s  first  active 

so5 

ASTRONAUT lCS   A K D   AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1984 

probe reaching beyond  the  Earth’s magnetosphere.  Data  from  the  first  release 
on  September  11  was  being  analyzed  to  determin’c if  the  U.S.  satellite  inside 
the  Earth’s  magnetosphere  had  detected  the  lithium  released  outside.  NASA 
launched  on August  16  the AMPTE   satellites in a  stack  aboard  a Delta  rocket 
from  Cape  Canaveral  Air  Force  Station.  (NASA  Release  84-140) 

During  September:  NASA  Administrator  James  M .   Beggs  announced  the 
establishment  of  the  new  position  of  assistant  administrator  for  commercial 
programs,  reporting directly to him,  to provide a focus  for and facilitate efforts 
within  NASA  to  expand  U.S.  private-sector  investment  and  involvement  in 
civil  space-related  activities.  Isaac  T.  Gillam  IV,  formerly  assistant associate 
adm in i s t ra to r ,   Office  of  Space  Flight,  would  assume  the   new  position  w i th  
L.J.  (Bud) Evans J r . ,   formerly  assistant to  the  deputy  associate  administrator 
for  commercialization,  to  serve  as  his  deputy.  In  announcing  the  position, 
B e g s  said,  “In support of  the President’s policy  or1 commercial uses of  space, 
the  commercial  programs  office  will  be   responsible  for  providing  manage- 
ment  direction  within  the  agency  for  our   efforts  to  establish  new  links  with 
the  private  sector  to  stimulate  the  development  of  business  in  space.  It  will 
also  be  responsible  for  maintaining  existing  relationships  with  industry 
through  the  functions  of  industry  affairs,  technology  utilization,  and  shuttle 
marketing.”  (NASA  Release  84-129) 

-USA   Today  reported  that  2 ,500   teachers  had  represented  to  NASA  with 
requests  to  be  the  first  observer  to  ride  the  Space  Shuttle  in  1985  or  
1986-even 
though  the  agency  was  not  yet  taking  applications.  NASA  would 
announce  its  application  process  shortly.  Dale  Boatright,  a  Chicago  teacher, 
was  told  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Education  that  his  request  was  the  first 
received,  nearly  a  month  before.  NASA  was  notififing the  teachers  that  they 
would  receive  a  formal  application  when  plans  wtxe  set.  (U S A  Today,  Sept 
24 /84 ,   1A) 

-NASA  had  embarked  on a new  research  program  to  show  that  a transport 
airplane’s metal  skin  and  supporting  structure coulcl be  replaced with  metallic 
composite  material  to  save  weight  and  manufacturing  costs  and  thereby  in- 
crease  fuel  efficiency. Work  in  the  program  represented  the  first  application 
of composite materials in the construction of primary wing  and fuselage struc- 
tures  for transport-class aircraft.  NASA’s  long-range goal  was  to provide  com- 
mercial  air transport manufacturers with  the technology  to produce composite 
structures  and  apply  them  on  new  aircraft,  or   on  derivatives  of  current  air- 
craft,  in  substantial amounts by  the  early  1990s. Researchers  at  LaRC, where 
the new  composites programs  was managed, expected  by  the mid-1990s to  see 
about  75 %  of  the  airframe  structure of  a  transport  to  be  made of  composites. 
(LRC  Release  84-69) 

506 

SE PTEMBER   1984 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

-Dr.  Jerome  C.  Hunsaker,  an  aviation pioneer  who  founded  the  first col- 
lege course in aeronautical engineering at MIT  and  later designed the first air- 
craft  to  fly  the Atlantic Ocean,  died  September 8  after a brief  illness. He  was 
98  years  old.  He   had  established  himself  as  one  of  the  leading  theorists  of 
flight and aircraft design in  a career in aviation engineering and a ir  technology 
that spanned six decades. In addition to designing the flying boat NC-4, which 
flew  from  Newfoundland  to  Portugal  and  England  in  the  first  trans-Atlantic 
flight  in  May  1919,  Hunsaker  supervised the  design  of  the  dirigible  Shenan- 
doah,  the first large rigid  airship made  in  the United  States that made  its  first 
flight  in  1923.  ( N Y  T imes ,  Sept  12/84, B-6) 

507 

October 

October 2:  Cosmonauts  Leonid  Kizim,  Vladimir  Solovyev,  and  Oleg  Atkov 
returned  safely  to  Earth  after  237  days  in  space.  Soviet  television  broadcast 
the  return,  showing  a  parachute  bearing  the  crew  coming  down  about  500  
miles  northeast  of  Tashkent  in  Kazakhstan  a t   1:57  p .m .   Moscow  time.  The  
three  crew  members   had  lived  on   the  Salyut  7 orbiting  space  station  since 
February  9.  In  television  interviews,  the  cosmonauts  said  that  they  were  glad 
to be  back with  friends  on the  “warm  earth,”  although  one  commented he was 
sad  to  leave  the  empty  space  station  beh ind .  
The  Soviet media  had  indicated  recently  that  the  crew  was  growing  weary 
and to  save energy had  their working day cut by  one  hour.  However, a medical 
checkup  given  the  day  after  the ir   return  found  the  three  to be  in  good  health. 
In  an   interview  in  the  newspaper  Socialist  Industry,  a medical  specialist  said 
that  recent  endurance  flights  showed  humans  could  live  in  space  a  year  o r  
more. 
Th e  cosmonauts  spent their  last days on  board  transferring material  to  their 
Soyuz T l l  spacecraft  and mothballing  scientific equipment  on the  Salyut.  The  
space  station,  launched  in  April  1982,  would  continue  in  orb i t .  
Th e   Pres id ium   of  the  Supreme  Soviet  awarded  medals  to  the  three 
cosmonauts;  and  K iz im ,   who  headed  a  crew  that  linked  up   with  an  ear l ier  
space  station  in  1980, would  be   honored  w i th   a bronze  bust,  the  Washington 
Post  reported  that  Tass  said.  ( W  Post,  Oct  3 /84 ,   A-23;  FBIS,  Moscow  Tass 
in Eng l ish ,  Oc t   1/84, Oc t  2 /84 ;  FBIS Moscow  DomSvc  in  Russian,  Oct  3 /84)  

October  3 :   Th e   NASA  Army  Rotor  Systems  Research  Aircraft  (RSRA) ,   a 
he l icop teda irp lane  testbed  in  a  fixed-wing  mode,  returned  to  Ames-Moffett 
Flight  Research  Facility  following  the  flight  testing  of  a  new  helicopter  rotor 
system  in  a  flight  environment.  Th e   purpose   of  the  flight  tests  was  to 
demonstrate  the  fixed-wing  capability  of  the  research  helicopter/airplane 
hybrid  and  to  expand  its  flight  envelope  in  that  configuration.  The  evaluation 
included  taxi  tests,  acoustic  tests,  control  power/stability  tests,  and  rotor  hub 
drag   investigation  a s   well  a s   takeoff  and  landing  technique  investigation  and 
envelope  development.  A  total  of  13  flights  expanded  the  RSRAs  fixed-wing 
envelope  capability  to  262 knots  (about  300  miles  per   hour)   and  its  altitude 
to  10,000 feet.  (ARC  Release  84-23) 

October 5-13:  NASA launched on  October 5 at 7:03  a .m .  EDT  from KSC the 
Space  Shuttle Challenger  on STS mission  41-G,  the  sixth  flight of  Challenger, 
with  a  crew  consisting  of  Commander   Robert  L .   Cr ippen ;   pilot  Jon   A .  
McBride;  mission  specialists  Sally  K .   Ride,  Kathryn  D.  Sullivan,  and  David 
PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILMEB 
- t N ‘ t * 4 T t O N W  

509 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER   1984 

C .   L e e s tm a ;   p ay lo ad   sp e c i a l i s t s   M a r c   G a r n e a u ,   a  C a n a d i a n ;   and  
oceanographer Paul  D.  Scully-Power.  It was  the most  crew members to  fly  o n  
a  Space  Shuttle  mission. 
During  the first day of  flight,  crew  members  dejployed NASA‘s  Earth Radia- 
tion  Budget  Satellite (ERBS ) ;  however, the two  solar panels  that  supplied elec- 
tricity  to the 5,000-pound  satellite refused  to unfo1.d. Ride corrected  the ERBS 
problem  by  using  the  Space Shuttle’s mechanical  arm   to  place  the  satellite’s 
solar panels  in  the  sunlight  to  thaw  the  hinges.  It  took  almost  three  hours  to 
get the panels  warm  enough  to  respond  to  commands  to  unlock.  The  satellite 
was placed  in orbit off  the west  coast of  Mexico,  instead  of  south of  Bermuda. 
While  trying  to  determine  the  source  of  the  ERBS  problem,  Kathryn 
Sullivan deployed  the  Shuttle  Imaging  Radar-B  (SZR-B), a  35-by-7-foot radar 
camera, which had difficulty  stabilizing when only one of  i t  two  “leaves”  was 
erected. Th e  radar  antenna would  send out  thousands  of  pulses  every  second, 
and the  large number  of  echoes  the  radar  antenna  received  allowed  it  to  draw 
a  photograph-like  image  of  the  part  of  Earth  that  its  beams  struck. 
During  the  flight,  a  storm  of  cosmic  rays  apparently  caused  by  sunspots 
knocked  out  for  about  13  hours  NASA’s  TDRS,  >which affected  the  imaging 
radar  system.  Among  the parts of  the world  that  th.e radar had planned  to map 
but  would  probably  lose were the entire Amazon  River basin,  the  islands that 
made up  Indonesia,’and  the  seas off  the  Cape  of  (Good Hope.  Th e  radar  was 
also to  track  the progress  of  tropical  storm  Josephine,  southeast of  Florida  in 
the  Atlantic  Ocean,  which  would  force  Challenger’s  landing  from  Cape 
Canaveral  to  Edwards  Air  Force  Base. 
An  ice buildup  on  the  exterior  of  the Space Shuttle’s water  vents  forced  the 
crew  to  alter  slightly the use of  the  ship’s water  facilities. Th e  buildup,  caused 
by  a slight malfunction of  the backup cooling systems, posed only an  inconve- 
nience  as  the  astronauts  had  to  heat  up  the water  vents  to  melt  away  the  small 
accumulations  of  ice,  raising  the  temperature  inside  the  cabin  to  as   high  as 
90 4  C r ipp en   co r r e c t ed   the   craft’s  a ir-cond i t ion ing   sys tem ,   and   th e  
temperature  inside  Challenger  neared  its  norm  of  about  75 9 
On October  11,  Sullivan  became  the first Americ:an woman  to walk  in space 
when  for 3  1/2 hours she performed  tasks requiring  a kind  of  patience,  dexteri- 
ty,  stamina,  and strength originally believed  in  the !;pace program  to be unique 
to men.  Sh e  stepped into  space  at  11:44 a .m .   EDT along  with  Leestma.  With 
each held  by  a  single tether,  they  worked  in daylight  and darkness to  rehearse 
a  critical  fuel  transfer,  stow  a  troublesome  antenna,  and  photograph  their  ef- 
forts  for  ground  engineers. 
Challenger  landed  at  12:D p .m .   EDT a t  KSC  in  the  second of  four attempts 
to  land  there  instead  of  at California’s  Edwards Air Base and  the  first  in  three 
missions  that  Crippen  was  not  waved  off  a  Florida  landing  by  bad  weather. 
Dr.  Shelby Tilford, NASA  director  of  space science,  said  that  the mission  was 
successful  despite  disappointments  with  the  imaging  radar.  Tilford  said  that 
all  other Challenger  experiments worked  perfectly.  The  space-borne  mapping 
camera,  carried on  a Space Shuttle flight  for  the first time,  took 2,300 frames 

510  

OCTOBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

of  film  in  mapping  parts  of  every  continent.  Challenger apparently  returned 
to  Earth  in  good  condition,  except  for  minor  damage  to  the  two  rear  engine 
parts  suffered during  ascent.  (NASA MOR  E-420-41-G-09  [prelaunch],  Sept 
28/84,  [postlaunch], Oct 5 /84 ;  NASA  Release 84-132; NASA  Fact Sheet, Sept 
84;  NASA  Press  Kit,  Oct  84;  W  Times, Oct  9 /84 ,   2A ,   Oct  10/84, 5A,  a c t  
12/84, 3A;  W P o s t ,  Oct 5 /84 ,  A-2,  Oct 9 /84 ,  A-4,  Oct  11/84, A-17,  Oct  12/84, 
A-6,  Oct  13/84, A-3,  Oct  14/84, A-5;  NY   Ernes, Oct  11/84,  A-18) 

October  10:  NASA  announced  that  Dr.  Richard  J.  Terrile  of  JPL   and  Dr. 
Bradford  A.  Smith  of  the  University  of  Arizona,  using  a  special  electronic 
camera  system  at  the  Carnegie  Institution’s  Las  Campanas   Observatory  in 
Chile,  clearly  photographed  the  rings  of  Uranus,  showing  them  to  be  made 
of  particles  that  were  possibly  the  darkest  found  in  the  solar  system.  The  
camera used  a charge-coupled device to  record  the image.  Photographing  the 
rings  was  difficult because  they  were  darker  than  charcoal  and  very  close  to 
the much brighter Uranus.  Special computer processing was  performed on the 
images  in  order  to  make  the  rings  visible.  This  processing  created  the  false 
three-dimensional  look  of  the  images. 
Analysis of  the photographs  showed  that the rings  reflected back  only  about 
2 %  of  the sunlight falling on them, making  them possibly  the darkest material 
found  in  the  solar  system. This  raised  the  question as  to  what  the  rings  were 
made  of, and  two possibilities were  suggested. Evidence from meteorites and 
astronomical observations of  asteroids suggested that  da rk   organic  materials 
were prevalent in the outer solar system and could comprise the rings. Another 
possibility was  that the  rings were made of  frozen methane, another  common 
material in  the outer solar system. Studies of  the rings were important because 
they  would contribute to preparations for the Voyager 2 encounter with Uranus 
in  January  1986,  the  first  opportunity  to  view  the  rings  close  up.  (NASA 
Release  84-145) 

October  13:  President Reagan  established a National Comm iss ion  on  Space, 
to  be  composed  of  15  members  appointed  o r  designated by  the president;  not 
more  than  9  advisory,  nonvoting  members  representing  federal departments 
and  agencies;  2  advisory,  nonvoting  members  appointed  by the  president  of 
the Senate ,from among the members  of  the Senate; and 2 advisory, nonvoting 
members  appointed  by  the  Speaker  of  the  House   of  Representatives  from 
among mnembers  of  that body. The  commission was directed to study existing 
and  proposed U.S.  space activities;  formulate an  agenda  for  the  U.S.  civilian 
space  program;  and  identify  long-range  goals,  opportunties,  and  policy  op- 
tions for civilian space activity for the next 20 years.  It was  to  submit  its plan 
and  any  recommendations  for proposed  legislation to  the president  and  Con- 
gress  within  12 months.  (WH  anno,  Oct  13/84) 

October IS: NASA  announced that astronomers Dr. Bradford A.  Smith of  the 
University  of  Arizona,  Tucson,  and  Dr.  Richard  J.  Terrile  of  JPL   had 

A STRONAUT IC S  AN I 1  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER   1984 

photographed  a vast  swarm of  solid particles,  called a circumstellar  disk,  sur- 
rounding Beta Pictoris, a star 50 light years  from Earth. Th e  disk was the first 
of  its  kind  to be  seen  clearly  i n   astronomical  photographs  and  could  indicate 
a  possible  solar  system  around  Beta  Pictoris.  'Io  make  the  observations,  the 
astronomers  used  a  100-inch telescope at  the Lar; Campanas Observatory near 
La  Serena,  Chile,  operated  by  the  Carnegie  Institution  of  Washington,  D.C. 
A charged-coupled device electronic camera and  a coronagraph were  attached 
to  the  telescope. 
The   two  astronomers  had  turned  attention  to  Beta  Pictoris  because  of  an 
IRAS  science  team's  reports  earlier  in  the  year  that  stated  that  the  star,  and 
three others similiar to  it, showed abnormal  amounts of  infrared radiation, im- 
plying  t h e   existence  of  solid  material  orbiting  {.he s tars .  
Scientists believed  that  the  circumstellar disk was made up of  countless par- 
ticles,  ranging  in  size  f r om   tiny  grains  less  than  a  thousandth  of  an  inch  (10 
microns)  i n  diameter to  the nuclei  of  comets a few miles across.  the most  like- 
ly  composition  included  ice,  silicates,  and  carbonaceous  (organic)  com- 
pounds,  the  same  materials  from  which  the  Earth  and  other  planets  of  the 
solar  system  were  believed  to  have  formEd. 
Questions  to  be   answered  were  whether  Beta  Pictoris  had  existed  long 
enough  for  planets  to  have  formed  and  whether  large  planetary  bodies would 
necessarily  form ,   even  when  the  required  materials  were  present.  (NASA 
Release  84-146) 

October 17:  NASA  announced  that  Robert L .   Crippen,  commander of  Space 
Shuttle  mission  41-G  earlier  in  the  month,  was  named  deputy  director  of 
Flight Crew Operations a t  JSC, Houston.  He  would  serve as  deputy to George 
W.S.  Abbey  and  remain  an  active  astronaut. 
Crippen  was  pilot  on  STS-1,  the  first  Space Shuttle  flight,  and  commanded 
STS-7  and  41-C,  the  Solar  Maximum  satellite  rescue  mission.  He  joined 
NASA  in  September  1969  after  three-year  assignment  with  the  Air  Force's 
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  program.  (JSC  Release  84-050) 

October 21:  The   first  Space  Shuttle external  fuel  tank  for  use  at  Vandenberg 
Air  Force Base, California,  arrived  there  after  a  5,000-mile  journey,  marking 
a major milestone in activation  of  the West Coast space launch complex. Plans 
called  for  the  initial  launch  from  the  new  complex  in  October  1985. 
Most of  the major  faciliteis at Space Launch Complex-Six were completed, 
including the facility  for storage and preparation of the external tank. The  U.S. 
Army  Corps   of  Engineers  had  been  responsible  since  lW9  for  building  and 
facility  construction  at  the  launch  site, while  Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  had 
responsibility  for  design,  procurement,  installation,  and  checkout  of  Space 
Shuttle  ground  support  systems.  Space  Shuttle  missions  from  Vandenberg 
would  carry  both  DOD  and  NASA  payloads. 
At  the  facility, the  tank  would  undergo  a  thorough  four-week  inspection by 
the Air  Force  and  its  Shuttle processing  contractors.  Early  in  1985,  it  would 

512 

OCIOBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

be  mated  with  two  inert  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters  and  the  Shuttle  orbiter 
Enterprise for testing and compatibility between the Space Shuttle and ground 
facilities. 
Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  manufactured  the  tank at  MSFC’s  Michoud 
Assembly  Facility.  (MSFC  Release  84-85) 

October 25:  MSFC  announced  that Mor ton  Thiokol’s Wasatch  Division  near 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  had  successfully  static-fired  a  new,  lightweight  version 
of  the  Space  Shuttle’s  solid-fuel rocket  booster  at  its  northern  Utah  facility. 
Preliminary  results  from  the  two-minute  firing  indicated  that  all  objectives 
were met and that the system operated as expected. The  case of  the new motor 
was  made  from a composite material of  plastic reinforced with graphite fibers 
wound  into  a  cylinder.  Each  of  these  filament-wound  cases  weighed  about 
30,000 pounds  less than the current steel case that made up most  of  the length 
of  the Space Shuttle’s  solid-fuel focket booster.  Use  of  the lighter cases could 
increase  the  Space  Shuttle payload  carrying  capacity  about  4,600  pounds. 
Two  more   of  the  filament-wound  booster  motors  would  be  test  fired  by 
Mo tron  Thiokol  in  the spring and  summer of  1985. Also  in  the spring of  1985, 
flight motor  segments containing  filament-wound  cylinders would  be  shipped 
to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by  NASA  and  the U.S. Air 
Force  in  the  first Space Shuttle launch  from Vandenberg planned  for October 
1985. 
The   test  was  conducted  under  the  direction  of  MSFC,  Huntsville,  Ala. 
(MSFC   Release  84-86;  Marshall  Star,  Oct  31/84,  1) 

During Oc tober:   The  astronauts of  western Europe  formed an Association of 
European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had  flown 
o r  been  selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to jo in .   The  group 
would  hold  its  first meeting  on  October 5  and  6.  The  purpose  of  the associa- 
tion  was  to  encourage get-togethers for  the  exchange of  views  on   training  ex- 
periences  and  the  projects  concerned.  The   AEA  had  seven  members:  three 
ESA  astronauts,  Claude  Nicollier,  Ulf  Merbold,  and  Wubbo  Ockels;  two 
French  astronauts, Patrick Baudry  and Jean-Loup Chretien;  and  two  German  
astronauts,  Reinhard  Furrer  and  Ernst  Messerschmid.  During  meetings  they 
planned  to  exchange  experiences,  compare  USSR,  U .S . ,  and  European  ap- 
proaches,  and  discuss  future  plans  for  Europe  in  manned  spaceflight.  (ESA 
Release,  Sept  24/84) 

-Dan  Germany,  crew  systems manager  a t   JSC,  observed  that,  after  five 
years  and $12  million, the Space Shuttle toilet  still did not  work,  with  failures 
on  10 out of  11  missions.  “It’s  very  disappointing,”  he  said.  On  one  mission, 
Robert  Gibson  had  to use  a crowbar to  free the  toilet  mechanism;  Sally Ride 
and  Fred Hauck  employed a camera bracket. NASA  would  test  a new  solution 
in August  1985 in which  a bag  would  fit  inside the commode  and be  removed 
after  every  flight.  This  reminded  observers that  NASA  once  spent $1  million 

5 1 3  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER 1984 

to  develop  a  pen  to  use  i n   weightlessness.  An  engineer  asked  later,  “Why 
didn’t  you  use  a  lead  pencil?”  (SF ,  SeptlOct  84) 

-A  commemorative  envelope  sold  in  the  gift  shop at JSC  gave details  and 
drawings of  a  U.S.  Navy  space  program  so  secret  that  its  name  could  not  be 
used  on  the  telephone,  the  Washington Post  reported  Aviation  Week  &  Space 
Technology magazine  as  saying.  The  publication1 said that  the  envelopes, call- 
ed  postal  cover,  carried  the  words  “Project  Whitecloud,”  accurate  drawings 
of  a mother  satellite, and  drawings of  three  smaller  spacecraft. The  envelopes 
said  that  the  satellite disperses  the  smaller  craft  to  cover  more   ocean  surface 
and  that  it  used  radar-frequency antennae  to  detect  shipboard  radar  and  com- 
munications  signals.  Th e   Navy  had  no  immediate  comment.  ( W  Pos t ,   Oct 
23 /84 ,   A-15) It  was  later  revealed  that  the  information  had  been  taken  from  
the  May  1976  issue  of  Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology. 

5 I4 

November 

November 2 :   NASA  announced that larger main parachutes, designed to  slow 
the  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters’  final  rate  of  descent  prior  to  impact  into  the 
ocean,  would  be  part  of  the mission  51-A  Space  Shuttle flight  scheduled  for 
launch  November  7  from  KSC.  The   new  parachutes  would  be  136 feet  in 
diameter  compared  to  previously  used  chutes  of  115  feet  in  diameter.  The  
larger  chutes would  reduce  the velocity  of  the  boosters  at  water  impact  from 
88  feet per  second,  o r   60  miles  per  hour,  to  75  feet  per  second,  or  51  miles 
per  hour.  The   reduced  velocity  would  relieve  the  structural  loads  on  the 
boosters a t  impact by  about 25 % ; thus reducing the amount  of  impact damage  
sustained  by  the  boosters.  Following  launch  and  separation  from  the  Space 
Shuttle,  the  boosters  were  recovered  from  the  ocean,  refurbished,  and  used 
on  a  later  flight. 
According  to  Keith  Henson,  booster  recovery  subsystem  manager  in   the 
Shuttle Projects Office at MSFC,  the larger chutes were  tested during mission 
41-D  in  August  on  the  Space Shuttle’s  right  booster.  Beginning with  mission 
51-B,  scheduled for January  1985, all future steel case boosters would have the 
larger chutes. Smaller main  chutes would continue to  be  used  on  some  Space 
Shuttle missions,  including  the  51-C  mission  in   December   and  on  missions 
where lighter-weight filament-wound booster motor  segments were used.  First 
use  of  those  segments  was  planned  for  October  1985. Mar t in   Marietta  Cor- 
poration, Denver, Colo.,  under the direction of  MSFC, designed  the booster’s 
deceleration  system.  Pioneer  Parachute  Company,  Manchester,  Conn . ,   pro- 
vided  the  parachutes.  (MSFC  Release  64-90) 

November 5 :   NASA  announced  the  delay  of  the  51-C  Space  Shuttle mission 
originally scheduled  for  launch  from KSC  on December  8,  1984. The  agency 
had  decided  to  replace up  2,800  thermal  protection  tiles  on  the  underside  of 
the  orbiter  Challenger  due   to  the  degradation  of  the  bonding  material. 
When Challenger returned from  space on  its last mission,  a black  tile from 
the left wing chine area just behind and below the crew door area was missing. 
About  100  tiles  were  removed  from  Challenger,  and  it  was  found  that  the 
adhesive  substance  known  as  “screed,”  used  to  smooth  irregularities  in  the 
surface  of  the  orbiter,  had  softened.  Screed  was  applied  directly  over  the 
a lum inum  skin of  the orbiter. All other areas were covered with  a primer  call- 
ed  red  RTV-560  (room  temperature  vulcanizing),  which  was  used  as  an 
adhesive  for  bonding  the  strain  isolation pads  (SIP) to  the  body  and  the  tile 
to the SIP. The  51-C mission was  the first completely dedicated DOD mission. 
The   51-A  mission  continued  on  schedule  for  launch  November  7.  (MSFC  
Release  84-91) 

5 1 5  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER   1984 

November 8-16:  NASA launched on November 8 from KSC  the Space Shuttle 
Discovery  on  STS mission  51-A  with  a  five-member  crew  consisting  of  com- 
mander  Frederick H .  Hauck;  pilot  David  M .  Walker;  and mission  specialists 
Anna  L .   Fisher,  Dale  A.  Gardner,  and  Joseph  P.  Allen. 
During  the  flight,  the  crew  recovered  the  satellites Pulupu  B2  and  Westur 
VZ, which  had  not  operated  properly  following  tlheir earlier  deployment  from 
the  Space  Shuttle.  The   Pulupu  B2  recovery  was  the  first  retrieval  ever  of  a 
satellite  from  space,  although  astronauts  previously  had  caught  and  repaired 
the  Solar  Maximum  satellite.  Astronauts  Allen  and  Gardner  had  to  move 
Pulupa  B2  into  the  Discovery’s  cargo  bay  themselves  when  an  unforeseen 
obstacle  prevented  use  of  the  spacecraft’s  mechanical  arm .   This  resulted  in 
some  damage to  the   power-generating solar  cells  surrounding  the  seven-foot- 
wide  satellite, but  the damage was  not  expected  to  interfere with  a  successful 
relaunching  of  the  satellite.  Later  i n   the  flight  the  same  two  astronauts  took 
5  hours and 42 minutes  to  retrieve  Westur V I ,  a 2,300-pound  communications 
satellite, and bolt  it down next  to Pulupu B2-possibly 
the shortest $35 million 
salvage  operation  ever  undertaken,  the  Wushingmn Post  reported.  Insurance 
companies had  to  pay  the  owners of  the  two  satellites,  the  government of  In- 
donesia  (Pulupu B2),  and  Western  Union  Telegraph  Company  (Westar  V I )  
$180 million.  Th e  insurance brokers paid  NASA !$5 .5  million for the satellites’ 
retrieval  and  Hughes  Aircraft  Company  $ 5   million  for  technical  help  in  the 
retrieval  operation.  Stephen Merre t t ,   chairman  of  Merrett  Syndicates,  an  af- 
filiate  of  Lloyds  of  London,  that  helped  underwrite  the  insurance  on  the 
satellites,  said  “I’m  proud  to  be   a  part  of  the  crowd  that  put  this  mission 
together  in jus t   six  months.”  He  added,  “We  expect  Palapa  to  be  resold  for 
between $30  and  $40 million and Westar  for $30  million, and we  expect those 
sales to be concluded very  soon.” Merrett declined  to  identify  potential buyers 
of  the  two  satellites. 
In  interviews  later,  Allen  and  Gardner  noted  that  the  task  of  retrieving  the 
satellites was  easier than  dealing with  small  items such as  tools  and  the  tether 
wires  that  tied  them  to  the  Space Shuttle’s cargo  bay.  “As  objects  get  smaller 
in  space,  they  become more  difficult  to  handle.  It’s  really  extraordinary  how 
much  easier  i t   is  to  move  massive  objects  like  satellites.”  Allen  pointed  out 
that  the  only  trouble  they  had  in  retrieving  the  satellites  resulted  from  their 
tendency  to gr ip  the  satellites  too  hard  and move  i:hem  too quickly  i n   an  effort 
to  get  them  back  and  secured  in  the  cargo  bay  in  a  limited  amount  of  time. 
“Once  you  get  over  that  difficult  spot  where  you  think  you  have  to  have  the 
satellite  in  a  death  grip,  things  are   a  lot  easier,”  he  said. 
In  addition  to  the  salvage missions,  the  crew  during  the  flight  deployed  the 
Canadian  E lesu t-H   and  Hughes  Syncom-ZVl  cornmunications  satellites.  The  
Radiation  Monitor  Experiment  and  the  Aggregation  of  Red  Blood  Cells  ex- 
periments  were  carried  out  in  the  orbiter’s  midcleck. 
Discovery  landed November  16 at 7 a .m .  local  time at KSC.  “Two  landings 
in  a  row  at  Kennedy,  and  this  time  with  a  cargo  bay  as  full  as  it  was  when 

5 1 6  

NOVEMBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS  

it  took  off:’  said  Jesse  W.  Moore,  NASA  associate administrator  for  space 
flight.  “It’s hard  to believe those two  satellites  are sitting out there on  the run- 
way  after  being  in  space  for  more   than  eight  months.”  (NASA  MOR 
E-420-51-A-11  [prelaunch] Nov  8/84;  NASA  Release  84-144;  MSFC  Release 
84-90;  JSC  Release  84-051;  W Post,  Nov  13/84,  A-11  and  D-1,  Nov  14/84, 
A-1,  Nov  17/84,  A-10,  Nov  18/84, A-19,  Nov  28/84,  A-18;  N Y   Ernes, Nov 
18/84,  3A;  H Chron, Nov  11/84,  24) 

November 8:  In  conjunction with  the Council of  Chief  State School Officers, 
NASA  released  the  Announcement  of  Opportunity  (AO),  specifying  the 
eligibility and  requirements for  selection of  a  teacher  in  NASA’s  Space Flight 
Participation  Program.  Through  the  program,  NASA  would  extend  Space 
Shuttle flight opportunities to a wide segment of private citizens with  the pur- 
pose  of  communicating  the  experience  of  spaceflight  to  the  public  through 
educational  and  information  programs.  NASA  intended  eventually  to  f l y  
various  categories of  space  flight  participants  two  to  three  times  per  year. 
The  A 0  was  open  to  elementary and  secondary  level  teachers in  all public, 
private,  and  parochial  schools  in  the  United  States  and  U .S .   territories;  in 
DOD overseas dependents’ schools; in  Department of  State overseas schools; 
and  in  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs.  Teachers applying  for  the  flight  oppor- 
tunity  would  submit  an  application  to  illustrate  their  qualifications  and  ex- 
cellence a s  an educator and  demonstrate how  they  would  share the experience 
with  the  public. Review  panels  would  select two  teachers’ nominees  for  each 
of  the  states  and  organizations identified  above  for  forwarding  to  a  National 
Review Panel. This panel would select 10  teachers as  semifinalists, who  would 
go  to  JSC  for  thorough  medical  examinations,  in-depth  briefings,  and  inter- 
views. NASA  would  receive the names  of  five finalists  and  select the primary 
and  backup  candidates to  undergo  training  for  spaceflight. NASA‘s  goal was 
to  f ly   the  first  teacher  on   a  mission  in  early  1986.  (NASA  Release  84-155) 

November  10:  Arianespace  launched  at  1:14  a .m .   GMT  Ariane  VII  varying 
Spacenet  2,  for  the  GTE’s  Spacenet,  and  the  second  ESA  European  Space 
Agency  maritime  communications  satellite,  Marecs  B -2 .   Marecs  B-2  was 
placed  in  geostationary  transfer  orbit  with  a  perigee  of  199.9 kiometers  and 
an apogee of  36,022 kilometers. Following firing on November  11  of  its apogee 
boost motor, Marecs B-2 was  injected into a near circular orbit at  135.5 “E with 
a  perigee  of  35,600 kilometers,  apogee of  35,900 kilometers,  and  inclination 
of  3.190”E. 
t u i a n e  VI1 was  the  second  flight of  the more  powerful version of  the Euro- 
pean  launcer, Ariane  3,  developed by  ESA .  Ariane  3  was  49 meters high  and 
weighed  about  237  tons  at  liftoof.  It  had  three  stages,  the  first povided  with 
two  strap-on  boosters  that  ignited  just  after  liftoff.  Ariane  3  could  place 
payload  of  up  to  2,580  kilograms  into  geostationary  transfer  orb i t .   (ESA 
Release  Nov  12/84) 

517 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

NOVEMBER   1984 

November  13:  Th e  congressional  Office of  Technology  Assessment  released 
a  report,  “Civilian  Space  Stations and  the  U.S.  F;uture  i n   Space,”  which  said 
that  the kind  of  Space  Station  that  NASA  was  planning  could  not  be justified 
on  scientific,  economic,  o r   military  grounds.  It  went  on   to  say  that  not  just 
Congress,  but  the  entire  nation,  ought  to  consider  what  the  country  wanted 
to  do  in  the  second  quarter-century of  the  space em .  The  Space Station envi- 
sioned  by  NASA,  the  report  said,  “is  only  one  alternative  i n   a wide  range  of 
options.” 
Thomas  E  Rogers,  director  of  the  two-year  study,  said  that  the  time  had 
come  for  the  general  public  to  play  a  greater  role  in  space  program  goals. 
“We’ve been  spending $7.5  billion  a year, every  year; we  can  do  anything want 
to  do,”  he  said.  “It’s  great,  it‘s exciting,  but  we’re  missing  large  numbers  of 
important  activities  by  allowing  all  this  to  go on  under  technological  drive- 
not policy  drive,  economic drive,  social drive, the way  everything else is done 
in  this  country  at  that  level  of  public  expendihwe.” 
Th e  report characterized  the nation’s goals  i n  space as  shortsighted and  nar- 
row,  reflecting the views  only  of  the  science and  technology communities  and 
not  of  the  general  public,  which  foots  the  bills.  l h e  study  also  said,  “There 
is  no  compelling,  objective,  external  case”  for  building  a  Space  Station  “to 
be   used  to  support over  100 conceptual  uses,  few  of  which  have been  sharply 
defined  or  gained  wide  acceptance  as  important  objectives  of  the  space  pro- 
gram.” 
Th e  report concluded by  spelling out the  “kinds”  of goals the nation  should 
set:  increase  the  efficiency  of  space  activities  and  reduce  their  costs;  involve 
the  public;  reap  scientific,  economic,  social,  and  political  benefits;  increase 
international  coopera t ion ;   and  “spread  life,  in  a  responsible  fashion, 
throughout  the  solar  system.”  (Civilian Space  Sturions and  the  U S .  Future  in 
Space ,   (D.C.:  OTA,  1984;  W Pos t ,   Nov  14/84, A.-4;  N Y   Times,  Nov  14184, 
B-20) 

November  17:  NASA  technicians  today  began  p;reparing  the  Space  Shuttle 
Discovery  for  a  top-secret  DOD   flight  in  January  1985. Discovery  was  towed 
into  a  processing  hangar  just  a  few  hours  after  the  ship  and  its  crew  had 
recovered  two  satellites from useless  orbits.  Jesse Moore, director  of  the  Shut- 
tle program,  reported  that  Discovery  “looks  like she’s in excellent  shape,”  and 
there  should  be   little  trouble  getting  i t   ready  for  [:he next  mission  scheduled 
to  start  January  21  or  22 ,   1985. 
Th e   Space  Shuttle  Challenger  was  originally  scheduled  to  f l y   the  secret 
DOD   payload  on  December  8,  but  that  spacecrafi: was  undergoing  extensive 
repairs  to  thermal  tiles  damaged  in  its  last mission  in  October and  would  not 
be  ready  for  several  weeks.  Because of  the  high  priority  the  Pentagon  placed 
on  the  mission,  it  was  decided  to  shift Discovery  to  the  assignment,  and  the 
Spacelab flight  that Discovery  originally had  been  scheduled  to f l y   in January 
was  being  delayed. 
Moore  said  that  the  retrieved  satellites, Pulupu J32  and  Westur  V I ,  would  be 

5 1 8  

NOVEMBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

removed  from Discovery’s cargo bay  and  taken  to  a nearby  facility  for  servic- 
ing.  Later  in  the  month  they  would  be  flown  to  Hughes  Aircraft  Company 
plant  in  El  Segundo,  Ca l if . ,   for  refurbishing.  (NY  Em e s ,   Nov  18/83, A-3) 

November 28:  The  White House  approved a policy  that would free the Federal 
Communications Comm iss ion  (FCC)  to begin processing several applications 
from  companies  hoping  to  provide  satellite  telecommunications  services, 
thereby  breaking  INTELSAT’s 20-year monopoly  on  such  service.  President 
Reagan  signed  a  “finding”  that  it  was  in  the  national  interest  to  have  alter- 
natives to INTELSAT. The  announcement came  after the State and Commerce  
departments  had  fought  for  months  over  who  would  define the  new  interna- 
tional telecommunications policies.  And,  of  course,  INTELSAT  and  i ts   U .S .  
representative, ComSa tCorp ,  tried  to  block  entry  of  private  competitors  into 
the  international market. 
David Markey,  assistant secretary of  commerce  for telecommunications and 
information policy,  said  that  the new  policy  would  not permit  private  satellite 
networks  to  mount  full-fledged  competition  against  INTELSAT.  “It  will  be 
clear  that  [such  networks]  should  be  restricted  to  non-public  switched  voice 
services,”  he  added.  ( W  Post,  Nov  28/84,  C-1) 

During November:  Upon  the departure at the end of  November of  Dr. Donald 
P.  Hearth  from  NASA,  Richard  H .   Petersen  will  move  from  deputy  director 
to  director  of  LaRC.  Hearth  had  been  center  director  at  Langley  since 
September  1975.  He joined  NASA  in   1962  and  had  held  various  agency  posi- 
tions,  inlcuding  deputy  director  of  Planetary  Programs  at  NASA  Head- 
quarters.  Petersen  had  served  as  deputy  center  director  at  LaRC  since  July 
1980. He  began  his career at ARC  in  1957 and was  chief of  the Aerodynamics 
Division  there  from  1975  until  he  joined  Langley.  (NASA  Release  84-163) 

-USA  Today  reported  that  Miss  Baker,  the  squirrel  monkey  that  joined 
another  monkey,  Able,  in  the  U.S.’s  first  spaceflight  May  28,  1959,  died 
November  27  of  kidney  failure.  She  was  buried  in  the  Space  and  Rocket 
Center  in  Huntsville, Ala.  (USA  Today, Nov  31/84,  3A) 

519 

December 

December I :   A  four-engine Boeing jetliner  in a radio-controlled test of an air- 
craft fuel mixture called  “antimisting kerosene”  crashed on Rogers Dry Lake, 
California.  A  huge  fireball  engulfed  three-fourths  of  the  plane  immediately 
after  it  crashed.  The  fireball lasted about  six  seconds and  was  followed by  an 
outpouring  of  black  smoke  that  often  accompanies  landing  crashes.  Flames 
from what  officials called a  “secondary  fire” were visible through  the smoke. 
The   Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  and  NASA  sponsored  the  $11.8 
million  crash  primiarly  to  test  the  new  fuel  mixture,  which  was  designed  to 
prevent an  explosive burst  of  flames in  case of  an  accident.  Safety specialists 
emphasized  that  it  would  take  a  long  time  to  reconstruct  precisely  the  se- 
quence of  events  that  left  the Boeing 720  a much  more  devastated wreck  than 
had been expected. An  initial examination of  the plane showed that the interior 
had  been  totally  gutted  by  the  fire  that  the  crash  produced.  Despite  the  out- 
come,  government and  industry  officials appeared willing  to  continue efforts 
to  produce  a  practical way  to minimize  the  fire  risk  from  fuel  spilled  in  ac- 
cidents.  (WPo s t ,  Dec  21734, A-I;  NY  Times, Dec  3/84, A-21;  Time, Dec  10184, 
32;  W l im e s ,  Dec   3 /84 ,   3A) 

December  12:  NASA  launched  from the Vandenberg Air  Force Base,  Ca l if . ,  
aboard  an  Air  Force Atlas  launch  vehicle NOM - 9 ,  a  3,775-pound Advanced 
Tiros-N  spacecraft  that  also  carried  search-and-rescue  equipment.  The  
satellite was placed  in a 540-statute-mile, circular, near-polar orbit with  an in- 
clination  of  98.86”  to  the  equator.  Total  orbital  period  was  102.12  minutes, 
with  an  average  of  R minutes  in  sunlight  and  30  minutes  in  the  Earth‘s 
shadow. Because the Earth  rotated 25.59  beneath the orbiting spacecraft dur- 
ing each orbit,  the satellite would observe a different portion of  Earth’s surface 
with  sufficient  overlap  from  orbit  to  orbit.  NOAA  satellites  collected 
meteorological readings  and  transmitted  the data directly  to  users  around  the 
world  for  local  weather  analysis  and  forecasting.  Information  from  the 
satellites ‘was also used  for hurricane tracking and warnings, agriculture, com-  
mercial  fishing,  forestry,  maritime,  and  other  industries.  NUAA-9  was  the 
latest in a  series of  RCA-built TIROS weather  satellites  dating back  nearly  25 
years  to  TIROS-1,  launched  on  April  1,  1960.  It  was  the  6th  in  the  current 
series  of  11  satellites developed  to  give  scientists  the  most  comprehensive 
meteorological and  environmental  information  since  the  start  of  the  nation’s 
space  program.  The   satellite  cost  $43.5  million;  launch  vehicle  costs  were 
$11.4  million. 
NOM - 9  also carried  the  second  set of  Earth  Radiation Budget  Experiment 
instruments,  an  atmospheric  experiment  that  would  increase  knowledge  of 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

DECEMBER   1984 

Earth’s climate  and  weather  systems,  particularly  how  climiate  was  affected 
by  radiation  from  the Sun .   (NASA MOR  E-615-8.4-05 [prelaunch], Nov  5 / 84 ,  
NASA  Mission  Summary,  Nov  8 /84 ;   NASA  Release  84-150;  LaRC  Release 
84-89) 

December   13:  Grumman  test  pilot  Chuck  Sewell  flew  for  its  first  flight  the 
experimental X29 forward swept-wing j e t  over,Edwards  Air Force Base, Calif. 
H e  kept  the  landing  gear   extended  and  held  the  plane  to  270  miles  per  hour 
for the flight, which was intended to determine th83t everything worked  proper- 
ly,  not  to see  how  fast o r  high  the plane could  fly.  The  flight  lasted  58 minutes 
and remained  confined to an area around Edward:; at an altitude of  15,000 feet. 
The  X29,  which  had  the  nose  of  an  F5  fighter,  would  never  fly  as a  fighter 
in  its  own  right  but  was  supposed  to  help  the  United  States  design  fighter 
planes  of  the  future. Not  until  space age materials  like  graphite became  prac- 
tical  for  aircraft  construction  could  wings  be  built  light  enough  and  strong 
enough  to  reach  into  the oncoming  flow  of  air  as the plane  sped  along.  It was 
hoped that  the forward sweep would give the X29  and  it successors advantages 
i n   maneuvering  for  the  kill  in  a  dogfight.  ( W  Pos t ,   Deci84,  A-9) 

December  15-21:  Th e   Soviet  Union  launched  the  automatic  interplanetary 
station  Vega-1 as  part  of  a  program  for  the  exploration  of  outer  space  and 
planets  of  the  solar  system. Th e  multipurpose  flight  provided  for  exploration 
of  Venus  and  Halley’s  comet.  Th e   first  portion  of  the  flight  of  k g a - 1  would 
continue  the  study  of  the  atmosphere,  cloud  layer,  and  surface  of  Venus  by 
means  of  a  descent  module  that  would  carry  out  new  experiments  with  an 
aerostat  probe.  Scientists  and  technicians  from  ,4ustria,  Bulgaria,  Hungary, 
the  German  Democratic  Republic,  Poland,  France,  the  Federal  Republic  of 
Germany,  and  Czechoslovakia joined  Soviet  scientists,  designers,  engineers, 
and  technicians  to  create  the package of  research  equipment and apparatuses. 
Th e  station  was  due to  reach  the  vicinity  of  Venu.s in mid-June  1985 and  pass 
near  Halley’s  comet  in  March  1986. 
The  Soviet Union launched December 21  Gga-:?, which  should, like  Kga-1, 
reach  the area of  Venus  in the middle of  June  1985 and travel close to Halley’s 
comet  in  March  1986.  The   Vega-2  station  should  drop  landing  craft  and 
balloons  into  the  Venusian  dtrnosphere.  (FBIS,  Tass  in  English,  Dec  15/84; 
FBIS,  Moscow  DomSvc  in  Russian,  Dec  21/84) 

December  18:  NASA  announced  that  Administrator  James  M .   Beggs  and 
U.R. Rao, chairman of  the Indian Space Reseach  Organization (ISRO),  signed 
a  launch  services  agreement  covering  the  reimbursable  launch  of  the  Indian 
National  Satellite, INSAT  lC ,  scheduled  for mid-I986  aboard  the Space Shut- 
tle.  INSAT  1C  was  a  multipurpose  satellite  that  would  provide  communica- 
tions  and  meteorological  service  to  India.  An  ISRO  sc ien t ideng ineer   would 
serve  as  a  payload  specialist  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle during  the  INSAT  1C 
mission.  Discussions  were  also  held  concerning  experiments  the  Indian 

5 2 2  

DECEMBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

payload  specialist would perform during the mission  and concerning potential 
cooperation between  NASA  and  ISRO  in   the areas  of  space applications and 
space  science.  (NASA  Release  84-175) 

December  19:  The  Soviet Union  launched a scale model  of  what U.S.  experts 
called  a small,  reusable, winged  spaceplane. It orbited the Earth  once, glided 
back into the atmosphere, and splashed down  in  the Black Sea .  The  apparently 
successful unmanned  flight,  the fourth in  a new  shuttle program,  was  seen .as  
further  evidence of  the  growing  competition among  superpower  countries  to 
develop advanced instruments for using  space for military  as well  as peaceful 
operations.  U.S.  intelligence  analysts  speculated  that  the  Soviet spaceplanes, 
when  fully  developed  and  flown  by  pilots,  could  be  used  to  deliver  small 
payloads o r  to  inspect or attack other  satellites in low-Earth orb i t .  The  Soviet 
Union  was  also  reported  to  be  d o s e  to  conducting  the  first  tests  of  a  larger, 
manned  space  vehicle  comparable  to  the  U.S.  Space  Shuttle. 
In  what  had  become  a  characteristic of  the  space  race  between  the  Soviet 
Union and United States, one nation, the Soviet Union  in  this case, was trying 
to  catch  up  with  the  other  in  developing the  large  shuttle but  was  also  trying 
to  move  ahead  with  another  technology,  the  small  spaceplane.  And  equally 
characteristic, this had  apparently prompted  the other, in  this  case  the United 
States, to step up  its efforts to design a spaceplane of  its own.  (NY  Times, Dec 
19/84, A-1) 

December  20:  Scientists at  the  University  of  Chicago  announced  that  a  U.S. 
experiment  to  analyze the  dust of Halley’s  comet was  riding aboard the  Soviet 
Union’s  &a-1 
spacecraft.  It  was  the  first  known  Soviet-U.S.  cooperative 
space  venture  since the  docking  of  the manned  ApoIlo  and  Soyuz  spacecraft 
in  1975.  The  cosmic dust analyzer-and  a twin that would be  launched  aboard 
Ggu-2-were  built by  university  scientists under the leadership of  John  Simp- 
son,  one  of  the  preeminent  astrophysicists i n   the  United  States,  who  had 
designed experiments for more  than  30 space missions over the past 25 years. 
The   jo in t   project  was  born  at  an international  symposium  in  Holland  in 
September 1983, where Simpson outlined vastly  improved comet dust measur- 
ing methods.  Aboutza  month  later,  he  said,  the  Soviets surprised  h im   by’ in-  
viting  him  to  put  the  analyzer  aboard  their  Vega.  Simpson  received  Reagan 
administration  approval  and  about  $300,000  in  NASA  funds,  which  touched 
off  a  frantic  search  for  components.  “We  scoured  the  U .S .  and  within  two 
weeks  got  all  the  pieces,”  Simpson  said. 
Plugging U. S .  electronics into a Soviet spacecraft required unusual coopera- 
tion. Moscow  shared telemetry coding data,  and Simpson was  able to conduct 
high-speed  computer analysis of  Soviet rocket  launch  characteristics to  aid  in  
designing  the  dust  analyzer  so  it  could  survive blastoff and  flight.  “On  May 
7,  we  walked into the Soviet space lab with working instruments,”  which were 
then  bolted  aboard  the  Soviet spacecraft by  U.S.  scientists, he  said.  Simpson 
said  that  he  had  received  computer  tapes  from  the  instrument  during  Soviet 

523 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AEKONAUT ICS  

D E C EM B E R   1984 

tests of  t h e  device while it awaited  launch from the Baykonur  cosmodrome and 
added  that  the  Soviets  had  invited  him  to  br  on  hand  in  Moscow  when  the 
comet  encounter  would  begin  i n   March  1986.  ( W  Post,  Dec  21/84,  A-1;  NY  
Ernes,  Dec  21/84,  A-1) 

December  21:  NASA  announced  that  a  six-member  team  from  GSFC   was 
helping  to  establish  the  first  satellite  data  link  to  the  South  Pole  that  would 
make possible  real-time collection of  scientific  data  from the  pole, which was 
not  possible  in  the past.  Th e  effort  was  in  support of  a jo in t  program  with  the 
National Science Foundation;  the Applied  Research  Laboratory  of  the Univer- 
sity of  Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of  other government, private, and 
educa t ion   institutions.  To  es tab l ish   a  rea l- t ime   conmun ica t ions   link  by  any 
means  other  than  by  satellite would  cost  as  much  ,as $35  million  compared 
with  approximately  $250,000 via  satellite.  “The  project  could  revolutionize 
communications  in  the  region,”  said  Goddard  engineer  Michael  Comberiate. 
“Currently,  scientific  data  collected  from  the  Pole  during  the  winter  months 
must be stored and shipped out by  aircraft during Astral  Summer”  (November 
1-February  1). Th e   link  would  use  existing  polar-orbiting  satellites  to  relay 
data  from  the  pole  to  McMurdo  Sound,  which  would  retransmit  the  data  to 
a  geostationary  satellite  that,  in  turn,  would  transmit  the  information  to  the 
continental  United  States.  This  routing  was  necessary  because  signals  from 
the  transmitter  at  the  Pole  (90’s  latitude)  were  too  far  below  the  horizon  to 
be  acquired  by  a geostationary  satellite. The McMurdo  station,  however,  was 
located  on  the  edge  of  the  Antarctic  (77” s )  and  was  barely  i n   view  of  the 
geostationary  satellite. The  link  with  polar  orbiting  l ~ n d s u t  4  and Landsat  5 ,  
with  Dynamics  Explorer  1  (DE - I ) ,  and  with  Nimbus  7 would  allow  reliable 
transmission  of  routine,  high-volume  data  from  scientific  investigations  being 
conducted at the Pole  by  20 different institutions.  (NASA Release, Dec 21/84) 

-A  Titan  34-D  rocket  with  a top-secret  payload  was  launched  at 7 :02  p .m .  
local  time  from  the  Cape  Canaveral Air  Force  Station  i n   what  might  be  the 
final  military  space mission  of  t h e  year.  An  Air  Force  statement did  not  in- 
dicate  whether  the  payload  reached  the  planned  orbit.  The   next  announced 
DOD  launching was  scheduled  for  January  23,  1985, when  the  Space Shuttle 
would  carry  an  intelligence satellite into  orbit.  ( N Y  l’irnes,  Dec  23/84,  A-14) 

During  December:  NASA  announced  that  a  publicacion  of  infrared  celestial 
objects,  presented  in  a  series of  catalogs  and  maps  of  9 6%  of  the  entire  sky, 
was  completed  by  the  international  science  team  of  the  IRAS.  This  was  a 
milestone  i n   the  history  of  astronomy  and  would  provide  a  wealth  of  new  i n -  
formation about  the  universe  in   a wavelength  region  that  was  nearly  impossi- 
ble  to  study  from  the  Earth’s  surface. 

Th e  IRAS catalogs  printed  nearly a quarter-million  infrared  sources-stars, 
galaxies,  and  newly  forming  stars-in  addition  to  entirely  new  classes  of  ob- 

524 

DECEMBER  1984 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

jects.  The   catalogs  and  sky  maps  would  be   used  for decades by  astronomers 
investigating the  nature of  celestial objects that  emitted much  of  their energy 
in   infrared wavelengths  as  well  as  by  astronomers  seeking  to  understand  ob- 
jects at other wavelength regions of  the electromagnetic spectrum. The  catalog 
contained  roughly  130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations 
within  the  infrared  cirrus,  and  40,000  objects of  all  types  within  the plane of 
the  Milky  Way  galaxy.  The   catalogs  were  presented  in  several  formats,  in- 
cluding a  five-volume book  containing 5,000 pages of  computer printout infor- 
mation on  the location and  infrared characteristics of  245,839 individual point 
sources  found  by 
the  telescopes.  The   catalogs  were  also  available  on 
microfiche  (24  cards)  and  magnetic  tape  comprising  60  megabytes  of  data. 
IRAS was  a  joint  project of  the  space agencies of  the United  States, United 
Kingdom,  and  the  Netherlands.  The   telescope  satellite  was  launched  by 
January 25,  1983, and conducted a   10-month all-sky  survey of  infrared objects 
from  Earth  orbit  until  its  supply  of  liquid  helium  coolant  was  depleted 
November  23,  1984.  (NASA  Release  84-169) 

-Paul  E  Holloway  would  become  deputy  director  of  LaRC,  effective 
February  3,  1985,  succeeding Richard H .  Petersen. Holloway  had  been direc- 
tor  for  space  at  LaRC  since May  1975 and  had joined  NASA  in  June  1960 as 
an  aerospace  research  engineer.  Since  that  time  he  had  held  various  agency 
positions,  including  acting  deputy  associate  administrator  of  the  Office  of 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  a t   NASA  Headquarters  and  chief  of  the 
Space  Systems  Division  at  Langley.  He   received  the  NASA  Outstanding 
Leadership Medal in  1980 and  the NASA  Exceptional Service Medal  in   1981. 
(NASA  anno,  Dec   10/84; LaRC  Release  84-114) 
-Krafft  A .   Ehricke,  67,  father  of  the  space-launched  Centaur  in-  
terplanetary vehicle and  a  leading space scientist for more  than 40  years, died 
December   11  in  La   Jolla,  Calif.  Born  in  Berlin,  Ehricke  was  brought  to  the 
United States with  other members  of  the German  V-2  rocket  team  after World 
War  I1 to launch the U.S.  space program.  Ehricke worked briefly  for Bell Air- 
craft  Company  in  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  after  the  war  and  later  for  Consolidated 
Vultee  Corporation,  which  had  a   contract  with  the  Air  Force  to  develop  the 
Atlas  intercontinental  ballistic  missile.  Vultee  eventually  became   part  of 
General Dynamics. The  Atlas project produced  the United State’s first ICMB, 
and  versions  of  it  were  still  flying  as  space boosters.  ( W  Times, Dec   13/84, 
8C ;   W Post,  Dec   13/84, D-7;  NY   Times,  Dec   13/84,  D-30) 

-Vladimir  N .   Chelomei,  70,  a   rocketry  expert  who  designed  the  Soviet 
Union’s  first je t  engine, died December  8  in Moscow.  Tass,  which  carried  the 
news  of  his  death,  did  not  report  the  cause.  His  work  was  closely  connected 
with  the  Soviet space program  and  aircraft  design,  and  he  is  credited by  The  
Great  Soviet Encyclopedia with the  1942 design of  the Soviet’s first je t  engine. 
He  had headed a  major scientific research, design, and  development organiza- 
tion  for  29  years.  ( W  Posr,  Dec  13/84, D-7) 

525 

Appendix  A 
SATELLITES,  SPACE  PROBES,  AND MANNED  SPACE 
FLIGHT,  l979-1984 

World  space  activity  in  the  years  1979 through  1984 included  106 launches 
in  1979,  105 launches  in  1980, 151 launches  in  1981,  141 launches  in  1982,  144 
launches  in   1983,  and  147  launches  in  1984. 
Of  the   106  launches  (with  123 payloads)  attemped  in  1979,  86   (with  101 
payloads)  were  for  Soviet  programs;  15  (with  17  payloads),  one  successful, 
were  for  U.S.  programs;  2  were  for  Japanese;  1  each  was  from  European 
Space Agency  (ESA)  (launched  on  an Ariane),  India  (launched by  the  Soviet 
Union),  and  the   United  Kingdom  (launched  by  NASA).  Of  83  USSR  laun- 
ches,  79 (with 97 payloads)  were unmanned,  and 4 were manned  (3  Soyuz and 
1 Soyuz-T). Of  the 97 unmanned  payloads,  79  were  in  the  Cosmos  series  and 
18  were  of  o ther  types  (5  Molniya,  3  Ekran ,   3  Progress  supply,  1 Raduga,  2 
Horizont  communications  satellites,  and  2  Intercosmos  and  3  Meteor  scien- 
tific  satellites).  Of  the  14  successful  U.S.  launches,  7  (with  9 payloads)  were 
Department  of  Defense  (DoD) ,  and  7,  NASA.  Japan  had  1 launch ,   and  ESA 
launched  its  Ar iane   carrying  a  test  vehicle  called  CAT  (capsule  Ar iane  
technologique)  to  monitor  performance. 
Of  the  105  launches  (with  127 payloads)  attempted  in  1980,  89   (with  110 
payloads)  were  for  Soviet  programs;  13  (with  14  payloads)  were  from  the 
United  States;  2  were  from  Japan;  and  1 was  from  India.  Of  89  USSR  laun- 
ches,  79  (with  100 payloads)  did  not  have  crews  and  10  had  crews  (4  Soyuz, 
2  Soyuz-T, and 4  Progress  supply  ships).  Of  the  100 unmanned  payloads,  89 
were  in  the  Cosmos  series  and  11  were  of  o ther   types  (4 Molniya,  1  Ekran ,  
1 Hor izon t ,   2  Raduga  communications  satellites,  1  Prognoz,  and  2  Meteor 
scientific  satellites).  Of  the  13  U.S.  launches,  6  (with  7  payloads)  were  by 
DOD, and NASA had 7 launches,  including  2 for DOD. Japan had  3 launches, 
and  India  had  1  launch. 
Of  the   151  launches  (with  168 payloads)  attempted  in  1981,  120 (with  143 
payloads),  4  unsuccessful,  were  for  Soviet  programs;  19  (with  18  payloads), 
2  unsuccessful,  were  for  U.S. programs;  3 were  for  Japanese;  3 for  the  ESA 
(launched  on   an  Ariane);  3  were  by  $e  People's  Republic  of  China;  and  1, 
unsuccessful,  was by  India.  Of USSR launches,  120 (with  141 payloads)  were 
unmanned,  and 3  were manned  (Soyuz T -4 ,39 ,  and 40) .  Of the  122 unmanned 
payloads,  94   were  in  the  Cosmos  series  and  28  were  of  other  types  (8 
Molniya,  1 Ekran ,   3  Raduga,  1  Progress,  2  Intercosmos,  2  Meteor,  2  Iskra ,  
1  Aureole,  2  Venera,  and  6  Radio).  Of  the  19  U.S.  launches,  15  (with  18 
payloads)  were  successful  unmanned  launches;  2 ,   unsuccessful  unmanned 
NASA  launches;  and  2 ,   manned  launches.  Japan  launched  3  unmanned 
satellites,  each  with  1  payload;  India  tried  unsuccessfully  to  launch  one  

PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT  FILMED 

527 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

payload;  the  ESA  had  three  launches  with  three  payloads,  1  for  India.  The 
People’s  Republic  of  China  had  1  launch  with  three  payloads. 
Of  the  141  launches  (with  152  payloads)  attempted  i n   1982,  119  (with  128 
payloads),  2  unsuccessful,  were  for  Soviet  programs;  18  (with  22  payloads) 
were  for U.S. programs;  1 was by  the Japanese;  1 was  by  the People’s Republic 
of  Ch ina .   Of  USSR  launches,  114  (with  128 payloads)  were  unmanned,  and 
3 were manned  (Soyuz T-5, T-6,  and  T-7). Of  the  unmanned  payloads, 96 were 
in the Cosmos series and  18 were of  other types  (1  Salyut, 5 Molniya,  2  Hori- 
zont,  2  Ekran,  1 Raduga, 4  Progress,  2 Meteor,  1 Iskra). O f  the  18  U.S.  laun- 
ches,  15  (with  18  payloads)  were  successful  unmanned  launches;  3  were 
manned  launches.  Japan  launched  1  unmanned  satellite;  and  the  People’s 
Repub l ic   of  C h i n a   had  1  l a u n c h   (w i th   1  payload). 
Of  the  144  launches  (with  161  payloads)  attempted  in  1983,  115  (with  125 
payloads)  were  for  Soviet  programs; 2 2   (with  33 payloads)  were for U.S.  pro- 
grams;  3  were  by  the  Japanese;  1 was  by  the  People’s  Republic  of  China;  1 
was  by  India;  1 (with  2  payloads) was  by  ESA;  and  1  was by  ITSO.  Of  USSR 
launches,  114  (with  125 payloads) were unmanned, and 3 were manned  (Soyuz 
T-5,  T-6,  and  T-7).  Of  the  unmanned  payloads, 94 were  in  t h e  Cosmos  scries, 
and  20   were  of  other  types  (7  Molniya,  2  Ekran,  2  Raduga,  2  Progress,  1 
Meteor, 2 Horizont,  1 Prognoz, 2  Venera,  and  1 Astron). Of the 22 U.S.  laun- 
ches,  18  (with  28  payloads)  were  successful  unmanned  launches,  and 4  were 
manned  launches.  Japan  launched  3  unmanned  satellites;  the  People’s 
Republic  of  Ch ina ,   1 launch (with  1 payload); India,  1  launch; ESA,  1 launch; 
and  ITSO  (Intelsat),  1  launch. 
Of  the  147  launches  (with  152  payloads)  attempted  in  1984,  115  (with  115 
payloads)  were  for  Soviet  programs;  18  (with  21  payloads)  were  for  U.S.  pro- 
grams;  3  were  by  the  Japanese;  3  were  by  the  People’s  Republic  of  China;  3 
(with  4  payloads)  were  by  ESA.  Of  USSR   launches,  112  (with  112  payloads) 
were  unmanned,  and  3  were  manned  (Soyuz  T-10,  T-11,  and  T-12).  Of  the  un- 
manned  payloads,  94 were  in  the  Cosmos  series,  and  18  were  of  other  types 
(4  Molniya,  2  Ekran,  2  Raduga,  5  Progress,  1  Meteor,  2  Horizont,  and  2 
Vega).  Of  the  23  U .S .   launches,  18  (with  22  payloads)  were  successful  u n -  
manned  launches,  and  5 were manned  launches. Japan  launched  3  unmanned 
satellites;  the  People’s  Republic  of  Ch ina ,   3  launches;  and  ESA,  3  launches. 
Data  from  the  accompanying  tables  came  from  the  United  States National 
registry  of  spaceflights;  the  Satellite  Situation  Reports  issued  by  Goddard 
Space Flight Cen ter ;  press  releases of NASA,  DOD, National  Oceanic and At- 
mospheric  Administration,  and  other  U .S .   government  agencies;  and  press 
releases  from the Communications Satellite Corporation. Data on Soviet  laun- 
ches  came  from  statements  i n   the  USSR  press  service,  international  news 
service reports,  and  announcements  and briefings  by  Soviet  officials.  Data  on 
satellites of  other nations came from announcements by  their governments  and 
by  international  news  services. 

528 

SATELLITES,  SPACE PROBES,  AND MANNED SPACE  ELIGH lS ,   f l m  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

APPENDIX A 

530 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

r- N 
5 
N rt 

m m 
N 

.. 
c 

N N \o 

i? 

N m 
m 

53 1 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

532  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

c! - 
m 

N m m 

'CI 
m m 

9 
E 

9 
-3 r' 

- 
N d 

5 3 3  

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A  

9 

8 
5 

s 
r- 

3 IT 

0 so IT 

a 
5 

9 
f 

c 

8 
n 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

E 
9 
m s 
3 

3 
;4 
s 
m 

m 
13 

m z 

2 
m 

t 
8 
s 
m 

m 
'" 

m d 
N 

535 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AEROKAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   A 

- 
? 
P 
h 

P! - 
m 

0 
'c. 5 

P- 
r ,  T 

y: 
3 

r- 
P l  3 
9 

s 

PI 

- 
5 r. 
F, r. 
8 
t. 
i(: c. 

0 
w. '0 

9 

f 
- - 
L G < 

536  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

d 

. "  5 
3 e L 

:: 
m 
ic m 

'4 2 

'0 m m 

m 
N B 

'0 m m 

": - 
W 

9 s 

W 0 N 

m m N 

L? 
ffi ffi 

m 0' 

4: 
N 

5 3 7  

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

538 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

s 
c 3 

0 

!4 
W 
a 
B 
c 

k 
W 
5 a 
L 

c 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

L ... -. 

P 
0 

2 
s 

, -  
P I  

540 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

8 
0' 

2 
m 

'I) d m 

3 
v) 

x 

h 
d 
m d 

a - 
m N 
3 

r- '0 

,-. 
'0 N 
x 
3 

s 
N 
- 
N N 

3 
vl 

m m In 

r- 
do 
d 

m 
8 

m 
p' 

* 
N m 

2 
c 

p! 
n VI 

w 
In 

5 4 1  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

x 
c. ic 

a 
- 

- 
- 
-a 

f 
N 

3 
3 

5 
'c. 
c. 

542 

APPEND IX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

9 

c N 

8 
m 

VI m 
r- 

m 
P m 

N 
iD  N 

P 
P 

z 
d 

2 
N 

p: 
0 - 
:: 
a L 
L 

c . -  

543  

x 
m 

0 
N 

N m 
C I  

- 
0; 
W 

2 
N 

m 
c.' N 

W 
m 
P 
a u 
I 
L 

t. - 
i 
4' 

- 
< 
N 
.y) 

m N 
dE 
4' 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AEROKAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   A 

5 
-Y c 

% f 

8 f 

3 ? I  P 

9 
3 
P 

N vi P 

N m f 

544 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

N 

9 
P 

9 
P 

9 
N c 

m (A P 

0 P d 

0 P s 

m 
N m 

N 2 

2 
m d 

m - 
8 

o! 
N c 

- w 

m 
m c- 

545  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AEROKAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A  

2 

3' 
N 
P 

-! - 
oc 

546 

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

9 

2 
W 

s 
vi 

0 
m 

P 
'L) 

r. 
vi 0 

2 
m 

9 
N 

r? 
.D m 
d 

2 
m 

8 
m 

r. E 

9 
d OI 

P 

- 
8 

2 
> 

N 
8 
> 

r- 
N 
b z 

m 
d i; 

547 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AEROXAUT ICS  

548  

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE  FLIGHTS,  l980 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APPEIVDIX  A 

3: 
P I  m 

Lci 
N P 

c r- 
10 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

5 5  I 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A 

0 

9 
f 

Lc, P 
J 

\o P 2 

c: x 

3 
J 

0 r- 
9 

9 
-7 P 

\o d 
w - 

5 5 2  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

9 x 

cn a 
d 

? x 
r- 

vi m d 

m w m 
3 

0 P s 

r: x 

Do 
vl m 
- 
m 
vi 

8 

? 
m 
c: 
m 
d 

x 
m 
vi m 
is 
vi m 

N 
-E 
La 

s 
-8 
L 

$: 
n 
d 

0 
N 
d 
2 

5 5 3  

ASTKONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

c? c: 
0 

In 
N o\ 

m 
m 0 

554 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

09 
3 

'? x 

W r. * 

- 
u! 
'A 

m 
m m 

t 

E 

oq 
3 

09 5 

3 
OI 

H 
3 
3 a 

H E? 
g 

- 

m 

2 
m 

v) Y 

v) 'A m 

5 5 5  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPEKDIX  A 

PI 
v) m 

01 

5 5 6  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

N N 

2 
P x 
m 

z 
m 

P 
iD 
2 
m 

d m 

z 
m 

-.. 
m N 
E 

2 
W 

m m N 
w 

m 
!2 

0 
N 

2 
0 

m m m 

A 
m 

3 
x 

P 

3 
x 

5 
x 

P 

ASTROKAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

N cc 
0. 

9 
ct P 

w - 
vi 

c, 
- 
n 

5 5 8  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

9 
m 

p! 
W m d 

'I) W P 
VI m 

0 
m 
'I) m 

z 
P 
2 

2 
-3 

- 
m 
n 

L 9 0' 
c 

9 

z 
'c1 

N 
P 
I- m 

c 
0 

5 3 
2 
3 
c 
.- 
a 
I .- 8 a 

- a 

VI N N 
- 
m r? 

L 9 
0 
L 

559  

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

2 

c. 
Ln W 

9 

9 

h 

c, 
X r- 

m 
P P 

m 
'0 c. 
P m 

w P 
2 

Tc, r. 
P 

N r. f 

560 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

9 P 

9 P 

m W 
2 

- 8 

P 
3 

? P 

N P d 

z 
r- 

m 
N N 

.... 
P z 

m N 
'0 

561 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

5 6 2  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

" .- e - 5 
a, 
5 e 
D 
!a 

'9 
00 OI 

d 
P 
v) 2 
f 
a 

'? 
N m 

2 
N 
w 

2 
3 
m. 
I 

'9 
F2 

t 
N W 

2 
N 

8 
N 

9 

9 
2 

m 
vi N 

m r- N 

7 
m 

W m yi 

H 
8 
cr: C 8 

09 c 

r- 
2 

VI M 

2 
N 

N 
M 

563  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

0 5 

v3 

? 
r- '0 

9 x 

j. * 
2 

2 
0 
3 

8 
8 
- 
i 
0 
3 0 

5 6 4  

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

a 

f 
> 
8 2 

2 
m 

z 
m 

'" 

'2  
00 
3 
3 
x 
4 
0 
n e 
P, 

'? 
P 

e 
I? 
N 

W 
D' 
W ci 

N 

m 
% 

z 
m 

L P 

"! 4 
d 

r- P P 
vl m 

6 
4 P 

9 
0 

@ 
e 

P m N 

-? 
01 
m 

e 
P v, 

'? 
8 

a m m 

2 
e 

565 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

A P PEND IX   A 

N - 
53 

r.  N 
4 z 

566 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

m N a 
n 

09 
N P 

2 m 

c 
N N 

8 
0 

s 
r- 

g: 
13 

9 
d P 

d - 
I? 

N 3 

N m 
'? 

N iD 9 

a 
CI 

d a 

8 
CI 

567 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APPEND IX   A 

568 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONACTICS  A N D   AEROWAUTICS 

9 x 

N d 

N \o f 

m 
P 01 

4 

Ol s 
d 

8 
P 
v) m 

N 
N 00 
In m 

v) N 

v) N 

569 

ASTRONAUT I C s   A N D  AEROh  ALrTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

rn 
c., m 

9 
m ?j 

31 3 

x ,  
31 m 

r .  'D 
- x 

P 
*, W 

W r .  s. 

5 1 2  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

p! 
d 
W 

P 
m 

r: s 

9 P 

3. 
W 
hl 

9 L2 

g 

2 
d 
m m 

W m 
N 

2 
0 

m 
P e 

d 
cc 

'ci W N 

- 
N c N 
m 

z 
E 

Y 
.- 

m 
5 

0 

d N 

I'. N 

N 

W 

- 
c 

N 

513 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

g 

P E 

'ci \D N 

"0 
Ij 
L 

2 
- ? 
13 

574  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

c 
0 

t 
P - 

m 
m 
I? 

d - 
'4 

P 2 

W 6 

P 
9 

3 
9 

U 

575  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

c: x 

0 c 
3 

2 
c 

A 
'f 

'A P 2 

9 * P 

m W 2 

576 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

- 
'9 
(A 

m 
m m 

m 
2 

- 
a 

W 
(A m 

x 

- 
N 
0 
m 

t Q 

9 
C I  

9 
3 

N * 
m 

8 3 
L 3 a 

L: 2 f 

: 
2 
z" 

2 
2 
f 

F I! z" 

2 2 z" 

577 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   .4 

; 
P 

5: 
PI P 

0' 
01 m 

'0 
N 

q 
D m 

N % 

d N 

- 
(c, 

578 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

x 
0 

‘A 8 

B 
Q 
2 
B 
k 

8 
!4 
P a 
L 

5 7 9  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

P 
p 
I 

9 
x 
5 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

8 

'? s 

; 

r! 
m 

x 
r- 

R 
L c  

Y 
e 

581  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

"J a c - 
u" 

5 8 2  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

- 
0 

09 m 
r- 

LI 9 

r- c1 m 

a - 
m N 
e, 

0 2 a 
.- 2 
8 e 
C 
+ 
c 
n 

'? 
N m 

W 
VI N 

? 
9 w m 

c! 
N m 

583 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPEKD IX   A 

13 
c 0. 

2 
cc 

5 8 4  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

2 
m 

W m 
N 
E 

: 
N P 

N 
a N 

N 0' 
m (1 

$ 

4 
Ki CY 

4 

m 

9 

5 8 5  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T l C S  

A P P E N D I X   A 

e 
d r- 

0 
d c 

9 

N \D f 

N iD P 

d PI P 

PI W d 

9 
d P 

0 5 

N 
f 

e- 
2 
E 
L: c VI 
C 
. -  a 2 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

9 
U P 

9 A 

9 
d P 

: 
P 

m m P 
vl m - 
? 
vr 0 

z 
m 

L 

m 

587  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

588 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

n 2 
L e 

0' 
2 

2 
0 

2 

'A 
t-. 01 

9 
m 
\D 

c 
ci 
% 

2 
W 

P 
2 

b. 
P 

f? 
N 
m 

m 8 

9 
t-. m 

m 
2 

N 
U N 

'A N 'A 

589  

S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

A P PEND IX   A  

590 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

.- 
0 
z 
n 

e 
". 

+ m 
N 

i? 
N 

z 

2 1 

vl m 
r. 
4 

09 
vl W 

N. 
8 

E 
d 

9 
m m 

2 
m 

3 

P v l  
vl 

m 
m 
d 
- 
E 

B 
ci N 

-? N 

I 
P 
y1 

59 1 

9 

N 
0' 

- 
N - 
B 
VI 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPEND IX   A 

m 5 

592 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

e 
9 
a 

N m N 

m s 

m r. 
r- 

m 
Ln c 
m m 

2 
W 

c! 
E 
h 

- 
m 
vl 
m m 

m 2 

N 4 

593 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

c 
u o  
j r i  
C I
 

s 
d 
Z 

N s 
z 

594 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

=? s 

m m 
-r 
- 
N V I  

s 
P 

U - 
R 

N Ti 
'0 

4 x 

d - 
8 

R 
U - 

t.  8 - 

8 
d 

N N 
'D 

4 x 

8 
d 

595 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

s 
f 

596 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

h 

x 

N 
I- P 
vi m 

H 
vi m 

2 
m 

m s! 

9 
m m 

8 
I? 

vi 'CI 
'0 

9 
m 
m 

9 
m m 

2 
m 

m 
2 P 

P B 

591 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   A  

2 

"! 
m W 

598 

SATELLlTES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE  FLIGHTS,  l982 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  .A 

.. 

600 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

4 

m x 
I? 
P 

s 

60 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

A P PEND IX   A 

602  

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

m 
c r-. 
Lo m 
E 
m m 

M 
N 

m 
N 
0 

3 
N 

2 N 

d 
\D 

5 
a 

W 
f 

c E 
E 

N N 
c 
E 
E 

-f PI 
E 
2z 
E 

603 

A STRONAUT IC S  AN I )   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

V !  
CI 00 

x 
3 

c 
7 P 

53 's 7 

604 

APPENDIX  A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

2 

N W VI 
In m 

- - 
N 

W " m 

P 
m 

" 
2 

m 
x 

605 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

606 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

9 x 

9 x 

9 x 

9 x 

9 x 

- 
m d 

m P f 

607 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   A 

608 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

t 
a 

.- 
vi 0' 

t 
P 

- - 
N 

2 
m 

w s m 
* 
vi r. 

w 

01 
W N 

W 
P N 

r! 
% 

I-. 
0' 

vi t'. N 

W % 

609 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPEN I I IX   A 

4 
u3 

F! 
N P 

610 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

611 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

r. 
iD 
P I  

'c. 
X PI 

612 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

4 F 

613 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AN I )   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A  

G 4 

P! Y - 

m v. 
9 

G 4 

X ic z 

- cc 
J 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

d B 

m P R 

615 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

0 
0 

m e 
vi m 
k 
'ci m 

- 
r i  
W 

E 
m r? 

4 
\D 

2 

616 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

s 
3 

2 
N 

0 
N N 

E 
2 

f 
2 

z 
W 
3 

P 
W m 

m 
N 
N 

617 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPEND IX   A 

m 
n 
in 

N 
PI 

I 

in 

* N 
- 
3 
in 

- 
m 
N 
n 
in 

4 

APPEND IX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

0' 

'CI 3 
0' 

m 3 
B 

- 
m N 

619 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A 

- - 

F 
r. 'c. 
c 
: 
b-. 
ci 

r? 
N 
n 

E 

* 
9 

620 

c- 7 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

6 2  1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

0 5 

2 

? 

6 2 2  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

p! 
65 

E m 

P 
0 

z: 
'" 

m 
3 

623 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

L P 

0 vi P 

PI m 
3 

c 0. 
d 

\o \o d 

f 
'z, \o 

r. 'CI E 
a r: 
VI 
c 
C 
a .- 
I .-  
L x 
0" 

626  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUT[CS 

P f - 

Y d - 

m N f 

M W 
a 
W 

% m 

E: 
m 

In 
P 

m m 
N 

621 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

A P PEND IX   A 

6 2 8  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

1 
2 

2 
P 

- 
f 
P 

- 
9 
% 

N 
c1 m 
9 

H 
vi 
m 

P 
0 VI 
s 
m 
w 

vi 
N N 

2 
\o 
- 
0; m 

N N 
N 
- 
z 

c u 
3 

5 
5 

629 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

F t! 3 

c 
? 1 

630 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

m 
0 

9 
.z W m 

- 
d 
'5 
4 

In 
4 
n 

63 I 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   A 

v, 

m m N 

; 
3 

'9 

v. x c 

m 
a 
53 

=: 
d c 
s 
G. 

15 v 
15 

at 
'c. 
a 

? 
$ 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

N 
N 

W 
N r- 
vi m 

z 
m 

2 
m 

0 d 

'D 0 

W 

633 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

8 

z 
m 

a 8 

a 
-3 N 

0 
m 
CI 

N 

P 
P N 

P 01 
N 
- 
a 
9 

634 

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

T 
3 
P 

% 
f 
ii 
r m 

2 
r- 

P VI m 

P 
d 

63 5 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

- 
m 3 

'c, (? 

616 

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

8 N 

m 
% 

0 N 

Tc. N 

637 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A 

Lo N rn 

r. c, r? 

2 
r- 

Lo m m 

yi 13 - 
: 

638  

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

9 z 

9 z 
2 
e 

E: 
9 

e 
\o r? 

2 
P 
2 
e 

P N d 

S f 

x - 
vl 

639 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D  AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

m 
M 

s 
m 

z 

'A 
P N 

E 
m 

r.  m 
Lo 

a z 

0 E 2 
.- 
E 
0 
E m  

01 
N r- 
s 
m 

m 4 

Y 
3 

9 P 
x 
m 

N 
'A 0 

I? 
d 

641 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

P 
oil 
4' 

0. 
2 
ob 

643 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

644 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

P 

m 

6 4 5  

ASTRONAUTlCS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

L.7 e a 
c .- 

0' 
N m 

In e 
0 

d 

d 
I? 

P 
N r, 

10 m P 

\o 

x 
I a 
m 

- 
'ci 
8 

- 
N 
8 

646 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

2 
m 

W 
00 m 

3 
N 

d 
8 

0' 
8 

8 
I 

647 

ASTRONAUT lCS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   A  

648 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

t 
% 

N x 

- 
r- 
W 

2 
m 

m 
m 

'A N m 

'? 
0 
- 
w 
P m 

8 
I-. 
'A m 

m 
m 
r- 
VI m 

? P 

2 
m 

'A vi m 

m 8 

F: 
N m 

F: 

P 
N 

m 
v) N 

m 

d 

649 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   A E RONAU T I C S  

A P PEND IX   A  

6SO 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

? 
vi P W 

:: 
P W 

65 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

9 
d P 

s 
d 

0 
d P 

0 
d 
r- 

9 z 

u? 
N f 

9 
5 

G In 
P 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

9 
P 

9 
F 

4 8 

9 
0 10 

- 
r-: 
\o 

P '0 

10 
10 m 

x 

P P 
P 
In m 
- 
z 
10 m 

". 
P 

W * m 

't 
d 

z 
r- 

4 
m 

8 
L. - 
a 

655 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AEROKAUTICS 

A P PEND IX   A  

656  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

: 
N 
09 w 

'0 
N 

x 
m 

P 
OI 

:: 
10 

'? 
10 N 

? 8 

r. 
P N 

Y I  .- 
I 8 
E 
Gi 

c! 8 2  
B 
8 
U 

vi 
r 
d 

10 
r 
9 

657 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APPEND IX   A 

% 
N 

m 
P ^I 

w 
- - 
m 

m P 
P 

r.  0 
m 

658  

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

r! 
r- W 

2 
a 

01 
'0 

m 
8 

2 a 
g 

m 
r- W 

3 

- 

2 m 
4 
z 
r- 
2 

'0 
m 
vi m 

x 
- 
d 
4 

F 
r- 
vi 
m 

? 
vi 
vi rn 

x 3 

2 
W 
; . 
z 

9 P 

m x 

4 
d 

m 
N 

- 
E E 
c 

659 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A 

r. 
0 

d 
c. 'ij 

m 
N r. 

660 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

- 
'4 
m 

2 

% 
'9 

'4 
0 

m m P 
'ci m 

m 
m P 
Ici m 

9 a 

2 
N 

4, 0 

m 
N 
m 
m m 

m % 

m m . d 

'? 
m N 

P P d 

8 
* 

P 

66 I 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A  

2 
51 

t.  N 

- 
i c 
Q 

662 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Q1 8 

W z 

0 
0 

P 
N 

N N m 

663 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A  

664 

APPEND IX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS AND   AERONAUTICS 

9 P 

p' W d 

9 P 

N N f 

(CI p' d 

2 
P 

m W d 
- 
a d 

0 
:: 
a L P 
c 

9 
P 

a 
s 
V I

'

 

s 
9 

u % 
3 a 
c 

x 
9 

- 
d 
vl 

vl 
r- 
d 

P P 
P 
L. 
0 
c 

vl m 
9 

VI r. f 

u 
g 
9 
L 
0 
c 

665 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A 

c 
r- n: 

- 
F! E 
N m r, - 

N r- 
d 

0 
w, Lc 

1 
m 
m 

a N a 

- 
3 

hl c 

1 
c4 OI 

d 
U 

P 
2 

- 
P c 
t- 

m m m 
m 
c. 

8 
E 

1c, P E 

m - 
8 
P 
- 
x 
h 

666 

4 
i. 
4 

- 
J C 
-, 

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

x 

s 
p! 

8 
P 

z 
W 

t 
%! 

4 
N 
P 

r- 8 

2 
N 

2 
d 

m m m 
R 

N 
P N 

w 

=: 
m 

;s 

667 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

II, m 

668 

APPENDIX .  A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

m r- N 

669 

- 
OI N 
e, 
C 

W N 
ai 
3 
1 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

670 

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

W 9 
I 

ri 
W m d 

m 
m 
P 
w l  m 

W 
m 
P 
4 

? 
0 

x 
m 
* m 

W 
: 
N m 

8 

z2 
P 
'I) m 
a 
N 
m 
'I) 

q 
F 

--! 
N 
m 

s 
m 

'0 
* 

9 
B 

'? 
8 

r- Q 

3 

g: d 

* 
J z 

W 
9 < 

P 
2 
d 

m 
3 
M 

67 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  A 

J d 
$. 

612 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

N 

2 W 

- 
2 

r- N m 
m F. 

2 
m 

r- W 
r' 
m m 
B 
m m 

? a 
: 
. o  r- 

2 
m 

m 
N 
m 
a 
m 

m W N 

2 
N 

d 
m 

m 2 

d N 
ob 2 

In 
N 
Y 
i 

m N 
$ 
4 

673  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPEND IX   A 

614 

APPENDIX  A  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Y 
.- 
a Y a 
' 2  b 
s 
3 
x 
2 
n e a 

2 
6 

9 
P 

9 5 

9 

f 
N 

8 H 
b. 0 
0 
L 

P 
e 
I 
v) 

W 
v) B 

N 
Ji 

675 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

A P PEND IX   A 

n x 

m 
0 3 

c 
r- 
0. 

m N w 

616 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

'9 - 
m 

9 m 
r- 

D 
W 

r- 
p' W 
m m 

61 I 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX   A 

m - 

2 
c? P 

APPENDIX   A 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

9 
m 

2 
m I! 

m r- t- 
LA m 
8 
VI m 

2 

? a N 
d - 
t- LA 
LA m 

N a 
LA m 

x 
m 

m 

m 5 

> 
2 

> 
z" 

> 
9 

679 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

APPEND IX   A 

APPENDIX   A  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

68 1 

Appendix  B 
MAJOR  NASA  LAUNCHES,  1979-1984 

The  following  table  lists payloads launched  in  1979  through  1984 by  NASA 
o r   under  NASA  direction  on  vehicles  larger  than  sounding  rockets. 
During  1979, NASA  launched  8  spacecraft  (with  8 payloads),  only  3  for  its 
own programs:  the stratospheric  gas and aerosol experiment  (SAGE) ,  the third 
high-energy  astronomy  observatory Heao  3 ,  and Magsut.  The   5  launches  for 
others in  1979 included 2 for DOD,  SCATHA for the U.S.  Air Force and FltSat- 
Com 2  for  the  Navy;  Ariel  6 for  the  United  Kingdom;  Westur 3 for Western 
Union;  and  RCA  Satcom  for  RCA;  the  last  mentioned  was  the  only  failure. 
During  1980,  NASA  launched  7  spacecraft,  only  1 for  its  own  programs, 
the  solar-maximum mission  (SMM ) .  The  other 6 were FltSatComs 3and 4 for 
DOD ;  2 for NOAA, NOAA-B  (which proved  inoperable when  its booster  sent 
i t  to the wrong altitude) and Goes  4 ;  Sbs  I  for  Satellite Business Systems; and 
Zntelsat  5  for  INTELSAT. 
During  1981  NASA  launched  13  spacecraft  with  15  payloads,  including  4 
for  its own  programs,  the  manned  STS-1 and  STS-2  launches  and  unmanned 
Dynamics Explorer 1 and 2 (a dual payload launch) and Solar Mesosphere Ex-  
p lorer  and  UOSAT (also a dual payload launch). NASA  launched Comstar 0 - 4  
for  Comsat General  Corp.;  NOVA  1  for  the  U.S. Navy;  Goes  5  and  NOAA  7 
for NOAA;  lntelsut  5B-FI  and Intelsut 5 f - 3  for  INTELSAT; FltSatCom 5  for 
DOD;  SBS  2  for  Satellite  Business  Systems;  and  RCA  Satcorn  3 R   for RCA. 
During  1982 NASA  launched  12 spacecraft  with  13  payloads,  including  4 
for  its  own  programs,  the  manned  STS-3,  STS-4,  and  STS-5  and  unmanned 
Landsat  4 .  NASA  launched RCA  Sutcom  4  and 5 f o r  RCA,  Westar 4 and 5 for 
Western Union  Telegraph Company,  Zntelsat 5 F 4  and  Zntelsat  5 F 5  for  IN- 
TELSAT, Znsat  IA  for the Indian Department  of  Space, Anik D-I  and Anik C - 3  
(from  STS-5) for  Telesat  Canada,  and  SBS  3  (from  STS-5)  for  Satellite 
Business  Systems. 
During  1983  NASA  launched  15  spacecraft  with  19  payloads,  including  7 
for  its  own  programs,  the manned  STS-6,  STS-7,  and   STS-8 and  the  Infrared 
Astronomical  Satellite  ( I U S ,  a joint  program  with  the  United  Kingdom  and 
the  Netherlands),  ZVRS  I, NOAA  8 (a  search  and  rescue  satellite),  and  EX- 
OSAT  NASA  launched RCA  Satcorn 6 and  7 for RCA,  Goes  6 for NOAA,  In- 
telsat 5 F 6  for INTELSAT, Anik  C-2 (from STS 7) for Telesat Canada, Palapa 
B-I  (from  S T S   7) for  Indonesia,  Spas  OZ (from  STS 7)  for MBB  of  Mun ich ,  
West  Germany, HILAT  for the U.S.  Air  Force,  Galaxy I and 2 for the  Hughes 
Aircraft  Co.,  Telestar 3A  for  AT&T,  Znsat  1B  (from  STS  8)  for  India. 
During  1984  NASA  launched  11  spacecraft  with  24   payloads  (3   unsuc- 
cessful),  including  10  for  its  own  programs,  the  manned  STS-41B,  STS41C, 
STS41D,  STS41G ,   and  STS-51A  and  ZRT  (from  STS41B,  a  balloon  that 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   B 

exploded  during inflation), Lundsat 5 ,  L o n g  Durotion Exposure Facility  (from 
STS41C) ,   Charge  Composition Explorer  (from STS-41C as  part  of  AMPTE) ,  
and Earth Radiation Budget  Satellite  (from STS-41G). NASA  launched Westar 
6 (from STS41B  for Western  Union,  unsuccessful), Palapa  B2  (from STS41B 
for  Indonesia,  unsuccessful),  UO S A T 2  (a  piggyback  on  Landsat  5  for  U.K. 
amateur  radio  operators),  Intelsat  5 F-9  for  INTELSAT,  Ion  Release Module 
(built  by  West  Germany  as  part  of  AMPTE) ,   AMPTE   3  (third  AMPTE  
satellite  built  by  U .K .) ,   Syncom  4-2  for  U.S.  Navy,  E f e s t u r  3C for  AT&T, 
Galaxy  3  for  Hughes,  NOVA  3  for  the  U.S.  Navy,  A n i k   0 2  (from  STS-51A) 
for Telesat Canada,  Syncom Z l r l   (from STS-51A) lo r  the U.S.  Navy, NATO 3 0  
for  the  U.S.  Air  Force,  and  N OM   9  for  NOAA 
Fu r the r   in fo rma t ion   on   these  launches  appears   i n   Appendix  A  and  in  the 
indexed  entries  in  the  text. 

684 

1979-1984 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APPENDIX  B 

m v

l

 

L? 

;)i 

APPENDIX   B 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

m

3

 

m 

W v )  

v) 

m 

m 

2 

v) 

3 

VI 

m 

v) 

m 

2 
> B 

687 

A S I 'RONAU l IC S   A N D   AERONA UTICS 

A P P E N D I X   B 

m 

m 

:A 

Lo 

'Z 

in 

m 

w 

r, - 
x 
1 

ci 
N 
1
x 

m N 
1
x 

  - 
m N 
.J 
3 

688 

APPENDIX B 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

m 

in 

m 

m 

689 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  B 

v1 

vi 

690 

APPENDIX   B 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

WY 

v) 

v1 

v1 

3 

VI 

v) 

v1 

v) 

VI 

v) 

v) 

vl 

N 
N 

69 1 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

A P PEND IX   B 

692 

APPENDIX  B 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

wl 

v) 

wl 

v) 

v) 

v) 

v, 

wl 

v) 

VI 

3 

b7 

v) 

wl 

693 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  B 

v) 

v, 

v, 

v ) v ,

 

v, 

m 

v, 

v

, m  

694 

APPENDIX  B 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

C n m m V I

 

m v

l m m  

vl 

m 

3 

3

3

2 

3

3

 

 

4 $7 
6 2  f 

695 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AEROKAUT ICS  

A P P END IX   B 

696 

APPEND IX   B 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

691 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  B 

698 

Appendix  C 
ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES 

Listed  here  a r e  the  abbreviations  used  for  citing  sources  in  the  text.  Not  all 
the  sources  are   listed,  only  those  that  a re   abbreviated. 
AAAS 

A&A 

.4BC 
AEC  Release 
A /D  
Aero Mag 
AFHF  Newsletter 
AFJ 
AFSC  Newsreview 
AFSC  Release 
AIA  Release 

AIA/PG&E/ARC 

AIAA  Facts 

AIAA  Release 

AIP  Neivsletter 
A P  
ARC  anno 
ARC  Astrogram 
ARC  Release 
Astro jou rn  

Atlanta  JC  
Avwk 
B  News 
B  Sun 
Bull  k o m  Sci 

Bus  Wk 

American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science’s AAAS  Bulletin 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics’  magazine,  Astronautics  h 
Aeronautics 
American  Broadcasting  Company 
Atomic  Energy  Commission 
Aerospace Daily  newsletter 
Air  Force  Association’s A ir   Force  Magazine 
A ir   Force  Historical  Foundation  Newsletter 
Armed  Forces  Journal  magazine 
Air  Force   Systems  Command’s  Newsreview 
Air  Force   Systems  Command  news  release 
Aerospace  Industries  Association  of  America 
news  release 
American  Institute  and  Architects,  Pacific  Gas  & 
Electric,  and  NASA’s  Ames  Research  Center 
Announcement 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics’  Facts 
American  Institute  o f  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics  news  release 
American  Institute  of  Physics’ Newsletter 
Associated  Press  news  serv ice  
NASA  Ames  Research  Center  announcement 
NASA  Ames  Research  Center’s  Astrogram 
NASA  Ames  Research  Center  news  release 
American  Astronomical  Society’s Astrophysical 
Journal 
Atlanta  Journal  Constitution newspaper 
Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology magazine 
Birmingham News  newspaper 
Baltimore  Sun  newspaper 
Education  Foundation  for  Nuclear  Science’s 
Bulletin  of  the  Atomic  Scientists 
Business  Week  magazine 

699 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  C 

C  Daily  News 
C  Trib 
Can  Press 
CBS 
C&E News 
C1  PD 
C1  Press 
Columbia  J  Rev 
ComSatCorp  Release 

ComSat  Gnl  Release 
CQ 
CR 
CSM cms 
D /SBD  
D /SD  
D  News 
D  Post 
DASA  Release 
Df  DlY 
DFRC  Release 

DJ 
DOC   P I 0  

DOC   Release 
DOD   Release 
Dscvr 
DOT  Release 
Dtln  Gd 

EO P  Release 
ESA  anno 
ESA  Info  Bltn 
ESA  Release 

E SAKNE S   Release 
ESA  Info 
FAA  Release 
FBIS-SOV 

FRC  Release 
FRC  X-Press 

700 

Chicago Daily  News  newspaper 
Chicago  Tribune  newspaper 
Canadian  Press  news  release 
Columbia  Broadcasting  System 
Chemical  &  Engineering  N ew s   Magazine 
Cleveland  Plain  Dealer  newspaper 
Cleveland  Press  newspaper 
Columbia  Journalism  Review  magazine 
Communications  Satellil.te Corporation  news 
release 
ComSat  General  news  ]*elease 
Congressional  Quarterly 
Congressional Record 
Chr is f ian  Science  Monitor  newspaper 
Chicago  Tribune  News  Service 
Defense/Space  Business  Daily  newspaper 
Defense  Space  Daily  newsletter 
Detroit  News  newspaper 
Denver  Post  newspaper 
Defense  Atomic  Support  Agency  news  release 
Defense  Daily  newsletter 
Dryden  Flight  Research  Center  news  release. 
Prior  to  8  January  1976,  Flight  Research 
Center 
Dow  Jones  news  service 
Department  of  Commerce  Public  Information 
Office 
Department  of  Commerce  news  release 
Department  of  Defense  news  release 
Discover  magazine 
Department  of  Transportation  news  release 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Dateline 
Goddard 
Executive  Office  of  the  President  news  release 
European  Space  Agency  announcement 
European  Space  Agency  Information  Bulletin 
European  Space  Agency  news  release,  used 
dated  (not  numbered) 

European  Space  Agency  Information 
Federal  Aviation  Administration  news  release 
Foreign  Broadcast  Information  Service,  Soviet 
number 
See  DFRC 
NASA  Flight  Research  Center’s  X-Press 

APPENDIX   C 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Goddard News 

GSFC  Release 

GSFC   SSR 

GSFC /WFF   Release 

GT&E  Release 
House  anno 
H  C o r n  Sci 

H  Rept  Release 
H  Chron 
H  Post 
Htsvl  Tms 
INTELSAT Release 

Zntervia 
JA 
JPL   anno 
JPL   Lab-Oratory 
JPL   Release 
JPL   Universe 
JPRS 

JSC  Release 

JSC  Roundup 

JSR 

KC  Star 
KSC  Release 

LA   Her-Ekam 
LA   Star News 
LA Times 
Langley  Researcher 

LaRC  anno 
LaRC  Release 
LATNS 

NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s  Goddard 
News 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  news 
release 
NASA  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center’s Satellite 
Situation Report 
NASA  ‘Goddard Space  Flight  Center’s Wallops 
Flight  Facility  Release 
General  Telephone & Electronics  news  release 
U.S.  House  of  Representatives  announcement 
U.S.  House  Committee  on  Science  and 
Technology 
U.S.  House  of  Representatives  news  release 
Houston  Chronicle  newspaper 
Houston  Post  newspaper 
Huntsville  Times newspaper 
International  Telecommunications  Satellite 
Organization  news  release 
Intervia magazine 
Journal  of  Aircraft magazine 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  announcement 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  news  release 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory’s  Universe 
Department  of  Commerce Joint  Publications 
Research  Service 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space  Center  news 
release 
NASA  Lyndon  B.  Johnson  Space  Center’s Space 
News  Roundup 
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautic’s  Journal  of Spacecrafr and 
Rockets  magazine 
Kansas  City  Star  newspaper 
NASA  John  E  Kennedy  Space  Center  news 
release 
Los  Angeles  Herald-Examiner newspaper 
Los  Angeles  Star  News  newspaper 
Los  Angeles  Times newspaper 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center’s Langley 
Researcher 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center  announcement 
NASA  Langley  Research  Center  news  release 
Los  Angeles  Times  News  Service 

70 I 

ASTRONAUTICS  A Y D  AERONAUTICS 

APPEND IX   C 

Library  of  Congress  Science  and  Technology 
Division’s  Alerts 
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  news  release 
NASA  Lewis  Research  Center’s  Lewis News 
Miami  Herald  newspaper 
Miami  News  newspaper 
Minneapolis  Tribune  newspaper 
NASA  George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center’s Marshall  Si’ur 
Milwaukee  Journal  newspaper 
See  NASA  Monthly  Status  Report 
NA SA   George  C.  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center 
news  release 
New  Haven  Register  newspaper 
Newark  News  newspaper 
Northern  Virginia  Sun  newspaper 
National  Aeronautic  Association’s  newsletter 
National  Aeronautic  Association’s  News 
National  Aeronautic  Association’s  World  and 
U S .  A .   National  World Aviation-Space  Records 
National  Aeronautic  Association  news  release 
National  Aviation  Club  news  release 
National  Academy  of  Engineering  news  release 
North  American  Newspaper  Alliance 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  news  release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National 
Research  Council  news  release 
National  Academy  of  Sciences-National 
Research  Council-National  Academy  of 
Engineering’s News  Report 
NASA  Activities 
NASA  Activities  Report 
NASA  announcement 
NRSA  Daily  Activities Report 
NASA  Headquarters  “General  Management 
Review  Report” 
NASA  History  Office 
NASA  Headquarters  Management  Support  Of- 
fice  release 
NASA  Headquarters  Weekly Bulletin 
NASA  Office  of  International  Affairs 
NASA  Office  of  Legislative  Affairs 
NASA  Monthly  Status  Report 

LC/S&T 

LeRC  Release 
Lewis  News 
MiHrld 
M  News  
M  Trib 
Marshall  Star 

MJ 
MSR 
MSFC   Relcase 

N  Hav   Reg 
N  News 
N  ?b  Sun 
NAA  nsltr 
NAA  News 
NAA  Record  Book 

NAA  Release 
NAC  Release 
NAE  Release 
NANA 
NAS  Release 
NAS-NRC  Release 

NAS-NRC-NAE-Nws 
RPt 

NASA  Actv 
NASA   Actv  Rpt 
NASA  anno 
NASA D ly   Actv  Rept 
NASA  GMR 

NASA  Hist  Off 
NASA  Hq  Mgmt 
Suppt  Office 
NASA  Hq  WB  
NASA  Int  Aff 
NASA  Leg  Off 
NASA  MSR  

702  

APPENDIX   C 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAL’TICS 

NASA  MOR 

NASA  prog  off 

NASA  Release 
NASA  Rpt  SRL  
NASA  sp l   anno  
NASA  wkly  SSR 
Natl  Obs 
Nature 
NBC 
NGS   Release 
NMI  
NN 
NOAA  Release 

NRC  News  Rpt 
NRL  Release 
NSC  Release 
NSC  .N&s 
NSC  Letter 
NSF  Highlights 

NSF   Release 
NSTL  Release 

Ntl  Sp  C lb   bllton 
Nswk 
NY  News 
NY  Times 
NYTNS  
0 Sen  Star 
Oakland  Trib 
Omaha  W H  
ONRR e v   . 
OST   Policy  Release 
P  Bull 

P  Inq 
PA0  
PD  

P I 0  

NASA  Headquarters  Mission  Operations  Report, 
preliminary  launch  and  postlaunch  report 
series  (information  may  be  revised  and  refined 
before  publication) 
NASA  program  office  (for  the  program 
reported) 
NASA  Headquarters  news  release 
NASA  report  of  sounding  rocket  launching 
NASA  special  announcement 
NASA  Satellite  Situation  Report 
National  Observer  magazine 
Nature  Physical  Science  magazine 
National  Broadcasting  Company 
National  Geographic  Society  news  release 
NASA  Management  Instruction 
NASA  Notice 
National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administra- 
tion  news  release 
National  Research  Council’s  New s   Report 
Naval  Research  Laboratory  news  release 
National  Space  Club  news  release 
National  Space  Club’s News 
National  Space  Club’s  Letter 
National  Science  Foundation’s  Science  Resources 
Studies  H igh l igh t s  
National  Science  Foundation  new  release 
NASA  National  Space  Technology  Laboratories 
news  release 
National  Space  Club’s  Bulletin 
Newsweek  magazine 
New  York Da i ly   News  newspaper 
New  York  Times  newspaper 
New  York  Times  News  Serv ice  
Orlando  Sentinel  Star  newspaper 
Oakland  Tribune  newspaper 
Omaha  World-Herald newspaper 
Navy’s  Office  of  Naval  Research’s  Reviews 
Office  of  Science  and  Technology  Policy  Release 
Philadelphia  Evening  and  Sunday  Bulletin 
newspaper 
Philadelphia  Inquirer  newspaper 
Public  Affairs  Office 
National  Archives  and  Records  Service’s  Weekly 
Compilation  of  Presidential  Documents 
Public  Information  Office 

703 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX  C 

PMR  Missile 
PMR  Release 
Rockwell  Release 
SA0   Release 

Sen  Cte  Comm 

Science 
Sci  Amer 
Sci  &  Govt  Rpt 

SciServ 
SD  
SD   Union 
SET  Manpower 
Comments 
S F  

SF   Chron 
SF Enam 
Sov  Aero 
Sov  Rpt 

SP 
Spaceport  News 

Spacewarn 

S P  anno 
SR  list 
SSN  

SSR 
St.  Louis  G-D 
St.  L  PIDsp 
T-Picayune 
Tech Rev 

E m e  
Today 
testimony 
text 
transcript 

UA  rept 

704 

USN  Pacific  Missile  Range’s Missile 
USN   Pacific  Missile  Range  news  release 
Rockwell  International  news  release 
Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory  news 
release 
Senate  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  and 
Transportation  report 
Science  magazine 
Scientific  American  magazine 
Science  &  Government Report,  independent 
bulletin  of  science  policy 
Science  Service  News  service 
Science  Digest  magazine 
San  Diego  Union newspaper 
Scientific Manpower  Commission’s Scientific, 
Engineering,  Technical  Manpower  Comments 
British  Interplanetary  !jociety’s Spaceflight 
magazine 
Sun  Francisco  Chronicle newspaper 
Sun  Francisco  Examiner  newspaper 
Soviet  Aerospace  newsletter 
Center  for  Foreign  Technology’s  Soviet  Report 
(translation) 
Space  Propulsion  newsletter 
NASA  John   F.  Kenned:y  Space  Center’s 
Spaceport  New s  
IUWDS  World  Data  Center  A  for  Rockets  and 
Satellite’s Spacewarn  Bulletin 
Sept.  1,  1982, and  During  Sept. 
NASA  compendium  of  sounding  rocket  launches 
Soviet  Sciences  in  the New s ,   publications  of 
Electro-Optical  Systems,  Inc. 
See NASA  wkly  SSR 
St.  Louis  Globe-Democrat  newspaper 
St.  Louis  Post-Dispatch.,  newspaper 
News  Orleans  Times-Picuyune  newspaper 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology’s 
Technology  Review 
7ime magazine 
Today  newspaper 
Congressional  testimony,  prepared  statement 
Prepared  report  o r   speech  text 
Official  transcript  of  news  conference  or  con- 
gressional  hearing 
United  Airlines  report 

APPENDIX   C 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

UN   Reg 
UP1 
USA  Today 
USGS  Release 
USPS w Post 
W  Star 
W   l im e s  
W FC   Release 
WH   anno  
WH   Release 
WhH s   remarks 
WJT 
Worc  Sndy  T ig  
WSJ 

United  Nations  Public  Registry  of  Space  Flight 
United  Press  International  news  serv ice  
USA  Today  newspaper 
U.S.  Geological  Survey  news  release 
U.S.  Postal  Serv ice  news  release 
Washington Post  newspaper 
Washington Star  newspaper 
Washington  Times  newspaper 
NASA  Wallops  Flight  Center  news  release 
White  House  announcement 
White  House  news  release 
Wh i te  House  remarks 
World  Journal  Tribune  newspaper 
Worcester  (Mass)  Sunday  Telegraph 
Wall  Street  Journal  newspaper 

705 

Index 

A-I  (test  stand),  154 
A-2  (test stand),  154 
Aaron,  John  W . ,   475 
Abbey, George W. S . ,  5 12 
Abingdon, Eng.,  16 
aborted  flights, 80 ,   137,  141, 489 
simulated,  38,  119,  132,  142 
Abrahamson,  James  A . ,   303,  340-342, 371,  379,  394,  399, 403 ,  4 0 8 , 4 3 2  440,  441,  459,  471, 
472 
Abruzzo,  Ben, 420 ,   505 
accidents,  space-related,  283,  292,  299,  378,  391, 417 ,  420, 424 ,  432 484 
Acton,  Loren  W.,  I6  
acoustic  levitation,  230 
Active Magnetospheric  Particle  Tracer  Explorer  (AMPTE),  497 ,   505 ,  506 
Adams,  Brock,  24 
Adams,  J .B . ,   120 
Advanced  Communications  Technology Satellite  (ACTS), 394,  4 0 4 , 4 9 5 ,  496 
Advanced Technology  Display  House,  117 
Aero  C lub ,  202 
aerodynamics,  71,  132,  137,  141, 209,  298,  299,  307 
numerical  aerodynamic  simulator  (NAS),  198, 250.  394 
Aeroflot,  I  17 ,  475 
Aerojet  General Corporation,  215 ,   312  
Aerojet  Liquid  Rocket  Company,  127, 214 
aeronautical  experiments, 255 ,  285,  290,  298,  299 
AEROS  Data  Corporation, 433 
aerosol  climate  effects  (ACE),  184 
aerosols, 208,  305,  313,  340,  357 
Aerospace  Corporation,  143,  195, 221,  328,  351 
Aerospatiale,  64, 310, 481 
Aetna  Life & Casualty  Insurance  Company,  229,  300,  376 
Afghanistan,  104,  117,  142 
Agency  for  International  Development  (AID),  6 ,   112 
Aggregation  of  Red  Blood  Cells,  516 
Agnew,  Harold  M . ,   328 
agricultural  resources  inventory  survey  through  aerospace  remote  sensing (AgRISTARS),  1  12, 
25 1,  260,  292 
A’Hearn, Michael,  483 
Ainslie,  Michael,  413 
Air  and  Space Museum.  See National  Air and  Space Museum. 
Air Force,  US . ,  5 ,  8 ,  2 8 , 4 4 , 4 5 ,   53 ,  79 ,   91 ,   92,  105,  125-127, 132  134,  142, 157,  194,  197, 
198, 205,  215,  238,  249,  250,  259,  266,  269 284,  287,  288,  303,  327,  328,  341 ,  351 ,  
370,  3 7 2 , 4 0 7 , 4 1 7 , 4 1 8 , 4 4 9  461 ,  492 ,  393 ,  499 
Academy,  408 
Avionics  Laboratory,  91 
budget,  141 

PRECEDING PAGE  BLANK 

fWMED  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONACT ICS  

INDEX  

communications,  25 
Defense  Satellite  Communications,  104 
engineers,  401 
Flight  Dynamics Laboratory.  71 ,   88  
Geophysics  Laboratory.  10, 16, 233,  483  
Manned  Orbiting  Laboratory  Program,  512  
research,  73 
Reservc,  203 
Space Division,  262 ,  291 ,  409  
Air  Force  Systems Command  (AFSC), 71.  73 ,  9 2 ,  98 .   125 ,   146 ,  287,  303 31 1 ,   373 ,   378 ,  409 
Ballistic  Missile  Office  (BMO),  73 
Space  Service Division  (SSD) ,  73 
a irbus ,   123  
A-300  (FrenchiGerman),  I23 
aircraft,  71 ,  7 9 ,  96 ,   117,  132,  142, 243 ,   292,  349 ,   375 ,  500 
A-9A,  189 
A-IO.  134 
A D - I  , 95 
AN-2,  473  
AN-22,  474 
Antonov  400   (AN 400 ,  Condor), 453  
AV-XB:  IS4 
B - I ,  44 ,   I56 
8 - 5 2 ,  44 ,   71 ,   179, 375 ,  399 
8 - 5 7 8 ,   280 
Boeing  B 17 bomber,  440 
Boeing  707 ,   64 ,   440  
Boeing  720 ,   522  
Bocing  727 ,   183 ,  440  
Boeing  737:  183 
Boeing  747 ,   13- 16, 22 ,   79 ,   169, 267,  3 I  1 . 4  17 ,  440 .  464 ,  466  
Boeing  757 ,   I04  
C - j A ,  197,  198 
C-8  Buffalo,  189 
C -8A   Bu f fa lo ,   249 
C-141  Starlifter,  340 
civilianlcornmercial. 53 ,  76 ,   93 ,   133, 298 
DC-9 ,  64 .   183 
DC-IO,  35 ,   108,  109,  175,  176, 298 
efficiency,  2 I 
Electra,  357 
experimental, 99 
F-5,  523  
F-15,  91 ,   92 
F-16,  91 ,   92  
F-18,  171 
F-86,  203 
F-106,  194 
F-I06B ,   194 
F B - I l l ,   157 
Gulfstream  111,  298 ,   337 ,  466  
hypersonic,  I32  

708 

INDEX  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

11-18 (Soviet),  126 
jet,  165,  182,  189,  193, 314,  334,  3 4 8 , 3 7 7  
JT8D ,   183 
KC-IO,  466 
KC-135,  45 ,  466 
L-1011,  169 
Learjet  55, 298 
military,  53 ,  76 ,   194, 203,  351 
NASA  747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft,  466 
Orion  P-3,  184 
research,  48,  95,  242,  249,  290,  314 
solar-powered, 239 
supersonic,  141 
survey,  239 
T-38, 54,  256,  335 
turbine,  21 
U-2,  184, 240,  334,  357 
widebody je ts ,   25,  123,  169, 298 
X-15,  132,  133 
X-29,  523 
XV-15,  48,  193 
XV-ISA,  193 
aircraft-to-satellite  data  relay  (ASDAR),  25 
Airline  Passengers  Association,  35 
Airline Pilots Association  (APA),  109, 249 
airports, 84 ,   1 6 9 , 2 5 9  
advisory  activities,  170 
Curtiss  Field,  222 
Dulles International,  117 ,  439, 440 
Kennedy  International,  117 
Lambert  Field,  67 
LeBourget,  222 
Logan  International,  64,.65 
Naha,  259 
Novosibirsk,  466 
O’Hare, 65 
Washington  (D .C . )  National,  466 
AiResearch  Manufacturing Company,  I15 
Akron, Ohio,  96 
Aksyonov,  Vladimir V.,  18, 166,  169,  178, 234 
Alascom,  In c . ,  221 
Alaska,  221,  254 
Albuquerque,  N . M . ,  144,  153 
Aldrin,  Edwin  E . ,   Jr.,  44 ,   274 
Aleksandrov,  Aleksandr,  4 2 1 , 4 2 3 , 4 3 4 , 4 3 8 , 4 3 9 ,  446 ,  452 
Alexander & Alexander  (insurance brokerage), 465 
Algeria,  220 
Algol  1 I  I A  Scout  (rocket motor),  127 
Allen,  Bryan,  35 ,   128,  155 
Allen,  David  T . ,  472 
Allen,  Joseph  P., 331,  376,  377,  383,  398, 460 ,   516 
Allen,  Leon  B . ,   405 

709 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

INDEX  

Allen,  Lew, J r . ,  92 ,   104,  105 
Allen  Hills  area.  131 
Aller, Robert  O . ,  312, 412 ,   413 ,   449 
Allnutt,  Robert  F.,  312 
alloys,  323 
A I -Mzha t ,   Ali,  379 
Alpha.  24 
Alter,  Dave,  460 
altitude  control,  273 
Amalthea  (Jupiter  moon),  150 
Amencan  .4irlines.  64, 65.  109,  175, 339 
American  Association  for  the  Advancement  o f  Sciencc,  104, 328 
American  Association  of Engineering  Societies,  214 
American Astronomical  Society,  106 ,   174, 462.  485 
American Broadcasting  Corporation  (ABC) ,  66  
American  Communications,  In c . ,  238 
American Geophysical  Union,  28,  29,  92 
American  Institute of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics  (AIAA).  l:!5,  251  348, 462 
American Institute  of  Architects  (AIA),  117.  208 
American Monument  Association,  120 
American Newspaper  Publishers  Association  (ANPA).  146 
American  Satellite Corporatioy  (AmSatCorp). 46 .   129 
American  Science and  Technology,  433 
American  Society o f  Mechanical  Engineers.  348 
American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company  (AT&T), 46.  121,  122,  129  135,  143,  228, 237, 
238, 425 
Ames  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility  (ADFRF) .  482,  488 
Ames  Flight Operations Directorate,  488 
Ames  Industrial  Company,  96  
Ames Research  Center  (ARC), 56 ,   59 .  61 ,   62 .   78.  88 ,  95.  189. 208.  219  232,  235 ,   239,  240 ,  
299,  314 ,   322 ,  332 ,  334 ,   340 ,  348 ,   357.  359 .   383  386.  393, 405,  41 I ,
  417,  425.  428, 
432.  451,  462,  467.  488,  493,  509 
Airborne  Instrumentation  Research  Project, 482 
Biomedical  Research  Division,  451 
consolidation  with  Dryden  Flight  Research  Center.  270,  290,  304 
facilities.  117,  315 
human  research.  137,  138,  194 
people,  55 ,   124, 269 
programs,  22,  25,  48 ,   123,  130,  137,  142.  184,  198. 230,  24.1, 249 ,  267,  333 
Space Missions  Branch.  123 
testing,  193 
Ames Research  Laboratory, 483 
Anchorage,  Alaska,  182, 221 
Anders,  William  A . ,   274 
Anderson.  Jack,  157 
Anderson.  Kris,  153, 420 
Anderson.  Maxie,  6 8 ,   153,  192, 420 ,   505 
Anderson,  Pattie,  192 
Andover,  Me.  182 
Andrews  Air  Force  Rase,, 287,  303 
Andromeda  (nebula),  442 
Andrus,  Cecil  D . ,  201 

710 

INDEX  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONA I JT ICS  

Angelo,  Wendy  A , ,  273 
Anik  (communications satellite) 
Anik A ,  360 
Anik  C,  348 
Anik  C - I ,  463 
Anik  C-2. 418 
Anik  D ,  348,  360 
Anik  D - I ,  360 
animals, 62 ,   105,  160,  168, 369 
Able  (squirrel  monkey),  519 
“astrorats,”  431 ,  432 ,  453 
Diane  (turtle),  193,  194 
experiments  and  studies,  75 ,   180, 244,  273,  453 
Fat Albert  (alligator),  185,  186 
Ham   (chimpanzee),  392,  393 
Laika  (Soviet  dog),  395 
Miss Baker  (squirrel  monkey),  519 
Miss Sam  (rhesus  monkey),  180 
Sam  (rhesus  monkey),  180 
weightlessness,  87 ,   268 
Annexstad,  John,  131 
Antarctic,  121,  131, 524  
antennas, 8 ,  5 8 , 6 3 , 9 5 ,   96,  128,  140,  180, 225,  2 2 8 , 2 3 5 ,  241,  261  290,  304,  306,  329,  339, 
363,  395,  397,  41 1,  43 I ,  448 
communications, 229,  333,  365,  398 
ground-based,  240 
imaging-radar,  65 
space-based,  253 
torus,  I82  
antisatellite  weapons  (ASAT),  105, 142, 218 
Antonov,  Oleg,  473 
apogee kick motor  (AKM), 459 
A p o M   14,  31 ,  57,  112,  125,  131,  196, 234,  240,  267,  274 ,341 ,   342 370,  3 7 3 , 4 3 7 , 4 9 4  
Apo l lo  4 ,  125 
Apo l lo  8, 125, 274,  369 
Apo l lo  9 ,  44 ,   48 
Apo l lo  1 1 ,  4 4 , 4 5 ,   57,  106, 133 ,274  
Apo l lo  1 2 ,   44, 284,  376 
Apo l lo  13 ,   30 
Apo l lo  15. 44 
Apo l lo  16, 331 
Apo l lo   17, 44 
APoIIo-SO~UZ, 39 ,   88 ,  284,  328,  331,  341,  347,  350-352 
launch-tower  demolition,  400 ,  401 ,  415 
Apple  (payload experiment),  260,  283 
applications  explorer  mission  (AEM).  68 
AEM-C,  68 
Applications  Technology  Satellite  (ATS),  38,  5 I ,  321 
ATS  I ,  321 
ATS 3 
ATS-6 ,   38,  39 ,   51 
Applied  Research  Laboratory,  525 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

I N D E X  

Applied  Solar Engergy Corporation.  15 I 
Arabsat  (communications  satellite),  139.  310.  379 
Arctic,  7 
Arecibo  observatory.  24 ,   1 I  I 
Argentina,  I  I O ,   209 
Ariane,  8 ,  2 8 ,  39 ,  4 6 ,  64. 87 ,  97 ,   107.  128,  145,  159,  172,  179, 239 260 ,   275,  276,  283 ,   299, 
316,  326 ,  364 ,  418 ,  494 ,   495 
Ariane  I ,  326, 480 
Ariane  3 .   326 ,  495 
Ariane  4 ,  326 
Ariane 5 ,  46  
Ariane  7 .  517 
Ariane  8 .  441 
Ariane  LO1 , 98 
Ariane  L02,  158,  172-174 ,  188, 217,  253 
Ariane  LO3,  260 
Ariane  L04 ,   77 
Ariane L5 ,   345 
Ananespace,  112, 480.  4 8 1 . 4 9 0 ,  494 ,  495 ,   517 
.Arizona State  University,  485  
Arkalyk,  41 1 
Arms  Export  Control Act.  3 I  1 
Armstrong.  Neil  A , ,  36 ,  44 .   99 ,   132 ,  274 
Army,  U.S., 5 ,  1 9 , 4 8 ,  193, 219 ,  315 ,   339,  369.  395 
Aeromechanics  L a b r a t o y ,   462 
Corps of  Engineers,  9 8 ,  512 
Research  & Technology  Laboratones.  48 
Rotor  Systems Research  Aircraft  (RSRA). 509 
Tilt  Rotor  Rcsearch  Aircraft,  219 
Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency  (ABMA),  174 
Developnient  Operations  Division.  174 
A rno ld   Engineering Development  Center,  146 
Ascension  Island,  8 3 ,  87 ,   280,  364 
Asian  Games ,  363 
Associated  Press  (AP), 43 ,   146 
Associated  Universities,  Inc.  (AU I ) ,   86 
Association  of  European  Astronauts  (AEA), 513 
Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN),  22,  241 
Association  of  Universities  for Research  in  Astronomy  (AURA), 86 ,  250 
asteroids.  21 1 ,   445 ,   446  
Astrain, Santiago,  261 
Astro  program,  405,  485 
Astro  Halley  Science Team, 485 
Astrobee  D (rocket),  118 
astronauts,  303  44 ,   45 ,  94 ,   133.  265.  266 ,  268 ,   274 ,   290,  308 .   323  328 ,  4 1 9 , 4 4 9 ,  510 
Apollo,  131 
black,  161.  429 
civilian,  161, 498 ,   499  
Hispanic,  161 
Mercury,  113,  120 
Mercury  Seven, 328 
in  orbit, 255 

712  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

reaction  to  weightlessness, 268 
selection  of,  3 ,  21,  5 1 ,   132,  152,  161, 284,  331,  3 7 0 , 4 1 9 , 4 7 0 , 4 9 8 , 4 9 9 , 5 0 6 ,  517 
TFNG  (thirty-five new  guys), 419 
training,  105, 179,  196, 297,  359 
Voyager,  133 
women,  161 
astronomers,  155 ,   191, 227,  271,  303,  348,  357,  3 7 1 , 4 0 1 , 4 4 5 , 4 4 6 , 5 2 6  
astronomy,  151, 161, 227,  271,  346,  369, 405, 440 ,  445 ,  483 
astrophysics,  161, 222,  271,  358,  369 
Atkinson, Richard, 219 
Atkov,  Oleg, 465,  4 7 9 , 4 9 2 , 4 9 5 ,  503 ,  509 
Atlanta University,  23 1 
Atlantic  [orbiter 104), 7  
Atlantic  Ocean, 5 ,  7 ,  41,  43 ,   83 ,   108, 231 ,240 ,   254 ,259 ,   316,  345 4 2 0 , 4 3 4 , 4 9 2  
Atlantis (orbiter), 7 ,  332,  333,  380 
Atlas,  87 ,   262,  280,  414 ,  418,  522 
Atlas E,  410,  490 
Atlas  F,  129,  153,  160, 206,  284 
Atlas Centaur,  5 ,  2 5 . 6 5 ,   84 ,   106,  179, 206,  209,  221,  238,  240,  255 275,  291,  316,  333,  3 6 4 ,  
3 6 6 , 4 1 4 , 4 8 4 , 4 9 3  
Atmosphere Explorer  5 ,  280 
Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory,  118 
Atmospheric  Sciences Laboratory  (Army),  I O  
atmospheric studies,  I O ,   2 4 , 2 8 , 3 8 , 4 6 ,  5 2 , 5 3 , 6 5 ,  86 ,   131,  151,  174 191 ,  195, 225 ,  252, 
263,  280,  282,  284,  293,  303,  331,  334,  337,  342  357,  375,  406,  417 
disturbances,  119, 225,  279,  280 
solar,  333 
soundings,  2  13 
Titan,  232 
upper-atmosphere,  292,  314  
Venus,  232,  235,  323 
attitudecontrol,  5 1 ,  84 ,   113,  150,  172,  180, 271,  279,  322,  326,  4 1 0 4 1 3  
Austin  1 9 8 2 6  (comet), 357 
Australia,  16, 2 5 , 4 2 , 4 3 ,  55, 5 6 . 6 4 ,   75,  1 I O ,   124,  146,  169, 209 232,  304,  342 
Austria, 7 8 , 2 2 8 ,  523 
Auter, Henry E ,  203 
Automation  Industries, In c . ,   141 
Auhy ,   Larry D . ,   470 
auxiliary  power-unit  (APU), 308 
AVCO  Corporation, 78 
Aviation  Hall  of  Fame,  189 
Aviation  Power  Supply Company, 47 
avionics systems,  132,  149 
awards  andmeda l s ,   6 3 ,  7 1 , 8 1 ,   124, 509 
Bendix Trophy,  203 
Collier Trophy,  21 ,   125, 130,  146,  1 5 5 , 2 7 7 ,  338 
Distinguished  Service Medal,  81 ,   124,  125, 274,  456 
Excalibur,  88 
Exceptional  Scientific Achievement Medal,  81 ,   125 
Exceptional  Service Medal,  81 ,   112, 125,  1 8 7 , 4 5 0 , 4 6 2 , 5 2 6  
Goddard Trophy,  133 
Guggenheim Medal  for Aeronautics, 373 

713 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

Kremer  prize,  35 
Lawrence Sp e ny  Award,  462 
National  Business  Aircraft  Association  Award.  I25 
National  Medal  of  Science.  125 
Nobel  Peace  Prize,  175. 452 
Order  of  Ix n in ,  I1 
Order of  the Gold  Star, 71 
Outstanding  Lcadership  Medal,  450,  526 
“Pilot  Cosmonaut  of  the  USSR ,”   71 
Presidential Citizens  Medal,  175, 287 
Presidential Medal of  Freedom.  494 
Presidential  Medal  of  Merit,  373,  387 
Royal  Aeronautical  Society Trophy, 288 
Space Medal  of  Honor,  274 
Sylvanus Albert  Reed  Award,  I25 
Wright  Brothers  Memorial Trophy,  125,  146 
Ayume  ( E c s .  Iris),  9 ,   122,  188, 418 
Ayume  2  (E c s  2), 122,  170, 495 
backpack,  167,  192, 378 
je t ,   65 ,  73 
life-support.  168 
backup  procedures,  336  
Bagian,  James  P.,  161, 463 
Baja, Calif.,  232 
Baker,  Maurice, 98  
Ball  Aerospace  Division.  174, 232 ,  433 
Ballhaus, William E .  I r . ,  462 ,  488 
Balloon  Intercomparison  Campaign, 4 I 2  
balloons,  4 ,  23,  38 ,  66 ,  67 ,   152, 153.  192,  194.  195, -733, 292.  353 391, 412.  420,  421,  430. 
464.  473 ,   485 ,  486 ,   505 
scientific,  369 
Baltic  Sea,  I O  
Baltimore,  Md.,  86 
Banana  River,  160,  I68 
Bangalore,  India.  23 I 
Bangladesh,  228 
Barany, Robert,  452 
Bardeen,  John,  328 
Barrios  and  Associates,  154 
Barsukov, Valery,  146 
Bartoe,  John-David  F . ,   16.  152, 483 
batteries:  340,  397.  398, 406 ,   439 ,  474 
capacity, 305 
lightweight,  281 
problems,  340 
Baudry,  Patrick,  341,  350,  513 
Bauer, Siegfried,  184 
Bay  of  Bengal,  54 .   I83 
Bay  St.  Louis,  Miss.,  3 ,   119 
Baykonur,  I O ,   147. 233 ,   261,  273.  384,  404.  41  I .   438 ,   439 
BDM  Corporation.  137 
Bean,  A lan   L . .  284 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Beggs, James Montgomery,  269,  285 ,   2 8 7 , 2 9 0 ,   293 ,   300 ,  3 1 2 , 3 2 7 ,   338  340 ,   345 ,   348 ,   349 ,  
358 ,   372 ,   375 ,  379 ,   3 9 4 , 4 0 6 , 4 2 5 , 4 3 4 , 4 4 8 , 4 6 0  467 ,   4 6 9 , 4 7 2 , 4 7 9 , 4 9 2 , 4 9 3 , 4 9 9 ,  
506 ,   523  
Beijing,  27,  104 ,   110 ,   127 ,   1 5 6 , 4 9 8  
Belgium,  56 ,   203 ,   228 
Bell Aerosystems  Company,  188 ,  238 
Bell  Helicopter  Textron, 48 ,   193, 219 
Bell  Laboratories, 328 ,  480 
Military  and Government  Systems  Division,  480 
Bellonte, Maurice,  222 
Beltsville,  Md.,  221 
Bendix  Advanced Technology  Center,  461 
Bendix  Field Engineering  Corporation,  306 ,  461 
Berezovoy,  Anatoliy,  347 ,   350 ,  3 5 5 , 3 5 9 ,   360 ,   377 ,  384 ,   385 ,  4 2 8 , 5 0 3  
Bergman,  Jules,  45 ,   271 
Bergstrom  Air  Force Base,  31 1 
Berkeley, Calif.,  3 ,   105 
Beta  Pictoris  (star),  24 ,  512 
Betelguese  (star),  446  
Bhaskara ,   34 ,   31 1 
Bhaskara  2 ,   31 1 
“Bicentennial of  Air  and  Space  Flight,”  391 
“B ig   Bang”  theory,  225 ,   226 ,  442  
Bignier,  Michael,  283 
Bigot,  C . , ,  490  
biofeedback,  273 
Bird, Peter,  232 
Birmingham,  Eng.,  16  
Bittner,  Peter  C.,  281  
Black  Brant  (rocket),  118 
black  holes,  5 ,  252 ,  279 
Cyg  X -1 ,  252 
Black  Sea ,   I O ,   123 
Blagov, Victor, 424 
Blaha,  John  E . ,   161 
Blamont,  Jacques,  24,  210 
Bleriot,  Louis,  130 
Block  5D ,   34 
Block Island,  R . I . ,   37 
Blue Ridge  Electric  Cooperative  System, 209 
Bluford,  Guion, J r . ,   386 ,  429 ,   431 ,   432 
Blunt  Probe, 195 
Boatright,  Dale, 506  
Bobko,  Karol J.,  3 3 2 , 4 0 7 , 4 0 8  
Boeing Aerospace  Company, 65 ,   104 ,  115 ,   141,  156 ,   159 ,   165 ,   189 ,   197 209 ,   249,  255 ,  305 ,  
306 ,   358 ,   365 ,   376 ,   3 7 8 , 4 0 7 , 4 1 8 , 4 8 9 , 4 2 1  
Commercial  Aircraft Company,  104 
Military  Aircraft Company,  104 
Bogota,  173 ,   179 
Bohemic,  N .Y . ,   96  
Bolden,  Charles F., J r . ,   161 
Boldt, Elihu,  106 

715 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

INDEX  

Bond,  Langhome,  35,  36,  109 
Bonnet,  R . ,  490  
Bonneville  Power  Sys tcm ,  209 
boosters,  8,  34,  35,  38,  127,  168,  21 1 ,   215,  219,  255,  262,  275,  294  291,  305,  326,  360 ,  363. 
364,  397,  398,  406,  439,  474 
reusable,  27 I 
Bootes  (constellation),  303 
Borman,  Frank,  274 
Bostich,  Dennis N . ,  470 
Boston  University,  288 
Boulder,  Co lo . ,  66,  105.  123.  185 
Bova,  Ben.  121 
Boyd,  John  W..  88, 222.  425,  493 
Boyne,  Walter,  440 
Bradfield  (comet),  108 
Bradley,  Ann  P..  302 
Brand,  Vance  D . ,  331 ,  316,  3 9 7 , 4 6 3  
Brandenstein,  Daniel C . ,  388,  429,  441 
Brandcs,  Richard, 464  
Brandt,  John, 485 
Braun,  F.,  120 
Brazil.  56.  64.  87,  110,  169,  209,  385 
Bremen.  Germany,  41,  325 
Brence, William  A , ,  317 
Breton,  George.  106 
Brevard  County,  Fla.,  160 
Brezhnev,  Leonid,  71,  150, 361 
Bridges,  Roy  D . ,  Jr..  161 
Brighton,  England, 4 4  
British  Aerospace Dynamics  Corporation,  77,  9 1 ,   146, 418 ,  481 
British Air  Force  Auxiliary,  203 
British  Broadcasting  Corporation  (BBC), 438 
British  Interplanetary  Society.  146.  201 
Bromley,  Allan,  328 
Brown,  Harold,  104,  105,  116,  142 
Brown,  Janicc,  1Y2,  236 
Brown  University,  30 
Browning,  Ron,  410 
Brownsville,  Tex.,  193 
Brueckner,  Guenter  E . ,   151,  152 
BTM  (Belgium  company) ,  91  
Buchli,  James  E ,  370,  467 
Buchsbaum,  Solomon  I . ,   328 
Budapest,  159 
Buhl,  David,  281 
Bulgaria,  39,  75,  257,  273,  292,  523 
cosmonauts,  4 0  
Burbank,  Calif., 47 
Burch,  Randy,  66  
Burr,  Peter,  I 1 6  
Burroughs  Corporation,  198 
Buflon.  l o h n  L . ,  35,  36 

716 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Busse,  Jon,  184 
Bush, George,  309,  325,  408,  432 
C-band  (radar system),  141 
Cable News  Network  (CNN),  127,  128, 452 
California,  4 8 ,   54,  110,  240,  241,  267,  304,  328 
Department  of  Forestry,  239 
California Institute  of  Technology  (CalTech), 29 ,   61 ,  76 ,   106, 262  288,  3 1 2 , 3 3 9 ,  366,  371, 
427 
1 
Callisto  (Jupiter  satellite),  13, 42 ,   174 
Calio,  Anthony  J . ,   109 
Calvin, Melvin,  145 
Camacho,  Carlos, 215 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  16 ,   149, 241 
Campbell, Thomas  E ,  3  12 
Canada, 3 . 4 ,  5 2 , 5 6 ,  7 5 , 9 3 ,   110,  123,  154,  169, 209,  228,  254,  281  375,  416 ,   516 
CTS satellite, 5 2 ,  479 
Department  of  Communications, 63,  448 
National  Research  Council  (NRC),  10,  140,  152, 31 1 ,  317, 375 
search  and rescue,  167 
Canadian Astronautics, L td . ,   167 
Canadian  Commercial  Corporation,  140 
Canberra, Australia,  5 5 ,  280,  306,  397 
Canoga Park,  Ca l if . ,   181 
Cap Gris Nez,  France,  35,  155 
Cape Canaveral,  25 ,   31 ,   3 4 , 6 0 ,  81, 93 ,   96,  106,  119,  120,  165, 226 238,  253,  267,  275 ,  280, 
307,  309,  328,  333,  366,  369,  372,  3 7 8 , 4 0 3  4 1 4 , 4 2 4 , 4 2 9 ,  4 8 7 , 4 9 7 ,  506 ,  510 
Air  Force  Station, 8 ,  47 ,   65 ,   73 ,   168, 261,  399, 497 ,   525 
CapePerry,  N.W.T.,  311 
capsule communicator (CAPCOM), 21,  309 
carbon  dioxide,  33  1 
carbon  epoxy material,  440 
carbon monoxide,  380 
Carden,  Huey D . ,   186 
cargo-bay  doors,  336 
cargo-integration  test  equipment (CITE),  428 
Carlin, John,  67  
Carnegie  Institution,  5 1 1 
Las Campanas  Observatory, 5 1 I ,   5  12 
Carnes,  Peter,  486 
Carpenter,  M.  Scott,  120, 274 
Carr,  Gerald, 216,  377,  385,  408 
Cam,  Robert,  157 
Carretto,  Joseph  A , ,  , 470 
Carter,  Jimmy,  7 , 9 ,  2 7 , 4 4 , 4 5 , 6 8 ,  83 ,   8 6 , 9 3 ,   104, 109,  111,  128  133,  139,  140,  142 ,  185 ,  
214,  225,  392 
Casey, William  J.,  460 
Cash,  Webster,  105 
Cassady, William,  131 
Castor  IV  (motors),  181 
CCS-3  (PRC missile),  127 
Centaur,  250, 2 6 0 , 2 7 6 ,  279 ,   280,  31 1 
Centaur  G .   476 

717 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

I N D E X  

Centaur G-Prime,  476 
Central  Intelligence  Agency  (CIA) ,  1 I  1 ,  460 
Ccntre National  d‘Etudes Spatiales  (CNES),  15, 46 ,   63 ,  64 ,   172, 283  326, 441 
Centre National  d’Exploitation  des  Oceans,  468 
Cepheus  (constallation),  I  16 
Ceman ,   Eugene,  13 1 
CESAR  (consortium), 203 
Challenger  (orbiter),  7 ,  236,  239,  308,  332 ,  378,  386,  392,  394 ,  395 398 ,   3 9 9 , 4 0 3 ,  404 ,  407. 
4 0 8 , 4 1 3 , 4 1 9 - 4 2 1 , 4 2 3 , 4 2 4 , 4 2 9 , 4 3 1 , 4 3 2 4 4 1 , 4 7 4 , 5 ; 0 9 - 5 1 1  
delays,  403,  461 
Chang,  Franklin  R . ,   I61 
Charge Composition  Explorer,  497 
Charles,  Philip,  105 
Charlesworth, Clifford  E . .  5 7 ,  415 
Charyk,  Joseph  V.,  27.  5 2 ,  210.  215, 217 
Cheloniei,  Vladimir,  526  
chemical  elements  and  studies,  174,  196, 198, 21 I ,   233,  313,  314 ,  330  331 ,   334 ,  349 ,  450 
Cherncnko,  Konstantin  U.. 473 ,   504 
Cheyenne  Mountain,  125 
Chicago,  I l l . ,   16. 62 ,  8 6 ,   144,  175 
Chilton,  England,  427 
Chin, Gordon,  281 
China  Lake.  Ca l if . ,  233 
chlorofluorocarbons.  303 
Chretien,  Jean-Loup,  341 ,   350 ,   377.  504,  513  
chronopharmacology,  359 
circuits,  defective,  353 
civilian  and  commercial  programs,  7 ,  9 , 4 6 ,  5 l , 6 1 ,  8 3 ,   133.  165 ,   192 262 ,   271.  280 ,   325 ,  
345 ,   35 I ,   364 ,  4 12 ,  4 18 ,  424 ,  434 ,   461,  480 ,   498  499.  5 0 5  
laser  applications,  282 
Clark,  William  P.,  409 
Clark  Air  Force  Base,  98 
Clarkshurg,  Md . ,   261 
Cleave,  Mary  L . ?  161, 463 
Cline, Thomas L . ,  162 
cloud  formations, 205 ,   225.  235,  238 ,   263 ,   275,  293 ,   323 ,  334 
Coast Guard,  U . S . ,   5 ,  4 7 ,   150:  167 ,  289 
Coa ts ,  Michael  L . ,  398, 487 ,   489 ,  500 
Cochran,  Jacqueline,  203 
Cofer,  Wesley  R . ,  J r . ,  210 
Colladay,  Raymond  S . ,  415 
Collier,  Robert  J . ,   1 5 5  
Collins,  Michael, 44 ,   106 ,  274 
Colombo,  Giuseppe,  2 I O  
Colonna,  Richard  A . ,  383 
Colorado,  125 
Colorado Spr ings ,  Colo.,  209 
Columbia  (OV-102j.7,  13-16, 23 ,   27.  38 ,  39 ,   53 ,   70:  76 ,   80 ,  84 ,  87 ,  94 96, 97 ,   107 ,   149 ,   154 ,  
155,  157 ,   167.  171.  181, 202 ,   226 ,  231 ,   237 242-244,  253-255. 259 ,  265-267, 269-271, 
277,  287 ,   289,  297-300 307-309, 313.  332 ,   334,  335,  350 ,   351, 376 ,   378,  OXO ,   383 ,   386. 
395 407 ,   408,  428 ,   44 I .   448,  45 I .   455,  459 
See  also  Space Shuttle 

718  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Columbia  (explorer ship--] 792), 7  
Columbia Broadcasting  System  (CBS) ,  93 
Columbia University,  89 ,   214,  337 
Columbine 11,  192 
Comberiate, Michael,  525 
comets,  21 1,  294,  357,  3 7 2 , 4 5 4 , 4 8 3 , 4 8 4 , 5 1 2 ,  525 
command  systems(?), 3  I O  
Committee to  Save the  Hughes Flying  Boat,  173 
communications, 4 ,   8 ,   18, 2 2 , 2 5 ,  27,  28 ,   39 , .44 ,   5 1 ,  62 ,  80 ,   83 ,  93  95 ,   135,  139,  150, 151, 
177, 209,  243,  250,  275,  345,  380,  381, 404 
business, 505 
commercial, 43,  46 ,  238 
data, 348,  360,  409 ,  425,  4 34 ,439 ,   448,  480, 500  
digital, 409 
global,  143, 216,  3 1 0 , 4 0 7 , 4 1 8  
links,  2 8 , 2 9 ,   3 9 , 2 1 3 , 4 0 8 ,  525 
military,  106,  142 
national  security, 373 
problems,  72 
radio,  123 
remote,  386 
ship-to-shore, 414,  445 
telephone, 425 ,  480 ,  500 
television,  163, 360,  425 ,  434 ,  4 3 9 , 4 8 0 ,  484,  500 
video,  348,  409 
voice, 348,  360,  409 ,  434 ,  439 ,  484 
with  crews,  10,  18 
See also satellites, television 
C omm u n i c a t i o n s   Sa t e l l i t e   Corporation  (ComSatCorp), 3 ,  27 ,   28 ,  44 ,  52  106,  143-145,  173, 
177,  182, 209,  210,  215-217, 225,  238,  376, 495  519 
Cornsat I ,  13,  135 
Comsat Laboratories,  143, 216 
World  Systems Division, 2  (0  
competition with  other nations,  120,  159, 349 
competition with  the  Soviet Union,  104,  105,  120,  142, 201 ,  216,  294 369,  3 7 0 , 4 5 4 ,  484 ,   524 
Complex  14,  120 
Compton,  Dale,  393 
Comp ton  telescope,  261 
Computational Fluid  Dynamics  Branch, 462 
computer developments,  96,  256,  265,  325,  359,  376,  384,  441,  451,  455 459,  487,  500,  523 
flight simulator, 256 
on-board, 239,  307,  3 9 7 , 4 3 0  
system intruders, 441,  442 
Computer Science Corporation,  107,  125 
Comsat General Corporation, 44,  128,  143,  1 4 5 , 2 0 6 , 2 1 6 ,  221,  238 ,255 ,   300,  324,  376 
Comstar, 46,  123,  128, 255 
Coms tar  C ,  5 
Comstar-D (Cornsfar 4 ) ,  255 
Coms tar  DZ, 128 
Concorde,  440 
Congress,  U . S . ,  95 ,   124,  144, 345,  389,  394,  4 4 2 , 4 6 9 ,  471 
budget,  6 , 2 4 ,   33,  109,  133,  141,  176, 285 ,421 ,   425 

719 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

I N D E X  

Congressional  observers,  133 
House  Appropriations  Committee.  406 
House Armed  Services Committee,  134.  157 
House Committee  on  Science and  Technology, 43.  4 5 . 5 7 ,   I  I O ,   166,  171,  185,  213.  328 
House of  Representatives,  33,  35,  76,  1 1  I ,   133, 285,  394.  403,  421.  442,  492 .   51  1 
House Select Committee.  43 
House-Senate Joint  l%onomic  Committee,  197 
Senate,  7 ,   33,  62,  1 1  I, 142,  146.  187, 202,  244.  285,  288,  492 
Senate Armed  Services Committee,  92  
Senate Cnnimittee on Commerce,  Science and  Transportation,  45,  116 
Senate Foreign  Affairs Committee, 3 I O .   3 1 1 
Conde, Mamady  Lamine.  I 8 2  
Conestoga  I ,   363,  364  
Conrad, Charles  (Pete), Jr.i,  189,  284,  376 
Continental  Airlines,  189 
Continental  Telephone  Corporation,  238 
Control Data Corporation,  198 
Convair,  30 
Cooper,  L .  Gordon,  120,  274 
Cooper,  Robert  S . .  30, 88 
coopcration  with  other nations,  16,  25,  27,  33.  41,  5 4 ,  56,  63.  67,  73  75,  93 ,   104,  107,  154, 
201,  226,  236,  251,  256,  281,  323,  325,  341  350,  359,  366,  372,  375,  379,  383 ,   394 ,  
405 ,   412,  4 1 8 , 4 3 7 , 4 4 5 ,   453 463 ,   412.  476,  526 
See  also European  Space Agency 
cooperation  with  the  People's  Republic  of  China,  I I O ,   200,  392.  463 498 
cooperation  with  the  Soviet  Union,  22,  39.  62,  77 ,   107,  200,  201,  268  284,  341.  349,  350, 
372,  463,  481,  494,  504 
Copcmicus.  See  Orbiting Astronomical  Observatory 
Cormeilles-en-Vexin,  287 
Cornell  University,  45,  195,  404 
Corning Glass Works,  282 
Corpus  Christi, Tex . ,  289,  363 
Cos B ,   I  I O ,   203 
COSMAC  (microprocessor).  195 
cosmic  ray  activities,  51,  65,  107.  153, 217,  415.  510 
cosmonautics.  7 4  
cosmonauts,  1 1 .   7 2 . 9 8 ,   147,  148,  158.  159,  163,  164.  166,  169.  178  185, 234,  261,  268, 
273,  280,  294,  340,  347.  354 ,   369,  41 I ,  424,  428 504,  509 
diet,  222 
exercises,  31,  58,  223 
experiments,  39,  47 ,   58.  163,  177,  189 
problems,  58.  428,  438,  439,  446 
reaction  to  weightlessness,  19.  147.  268 
record-breaking  flights.  58,  147,  148.  177.  203.  204,  208,  211'-216, 273,  377 ,   384,  509 
repair  and  maintenance,  239 
Cosmos,  62 ,   268,  301 ,  423 
C o sm o s  379  
C o sm o s  382 
C o sm o s  398  
C o sm o s  434 
C o sm o s  54Y,  210  
C o sm o s  869 ,  98  

720 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

Cosmos 954,  145 
Cosmos 1001, 98 
Cosmos 1024, 61 
Cosmos 1074, 98 
Cosmos  1109, 61 
Cosmos 1124, 61 
Cosmos  1129, 75,  87 ,   267,  268 
Cosmos 1171, 142 
Cosmos 1 174,  142 
Cosmos 1176, 145 ,  149 
Cosmos 1267, 281 
Cosmos 1345, 345 
Cosmos 1346, 345 
Cosmos 1347, 345 
Cosmos 1351, 345 
Cosmos 1352, 345 
C o sm s  1354, 345 
Cosmos 1374, 347 
Cosmos 1402, 3 9 1 , 4 0 0  
Cosmos 1443, 404 ,   4 1 1 , 4 2 1 , 4 2 3 ,  424 ,  4 3 0 , 4 3 5  
Cosmos  1514. 453  
Cospas (Soviet  search-and-rescue  satellite), 372 ,  490  
Cospas I ,  365 
CospadSARSAT, 372  
Costa  Rica,  334 
Coste, Dieudonne,  222 
countdown,  307 ,   308 ,   335  
Cowan, George A , ,  328 
Cowings, Patricia,  162,  163 
Crawford, Keith E. i 4 7 0  
Cremin,  Joe, 498 
Crippen,  Robert L . ,   16 ,  94 ,   107 ,  255 ,   256,  265 ,   266 ,  269 ,  2 7 0 , 2 7 4   309, 3 8 6 , 4 0 0 , 4 1 8 ,  4 1 9 ,  
474 ,   509, 510, 512 
Cronkite, Walter, 93 
crop growth predictions,  251 
Crossfield, Scott,  132 
Crouch,  Tom, 486  
cryogenic devices,  77 ,   146 ,  329 ,   335 
crystallography,  314 
CS-B. (Japanese communications satellite),  122 
CSSX-4 (rocket), 85  
Cuba,  273 
cosmonauts,  208 ,   213 
Culbertson,  Philip  E . ,   312 ,   346 ,  475 ,   493  
Curtiss,  Glenn,  277 
Cygnus, Great Rift of  (the Northern Cross),  105, 106 
cylinders,  329 
Czechoslovakia,  1 1 ,  66 ,   75,  273 ,  523  
cosmonauts,  1 1  
Daedalus  (multispectral scanner), 240 
Dahlgren, Va.,  434 
Dakar,  Senegal, 403 

72 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

INDEX  

Dallas,  Tex . ,   127 
Danbury.  Conn . ,  229 ,   282 
Danielson,  C .  Edward,  76.  371 
Dartmouth  College,  208 
data,  215,  227 ,   317 
collection,  91 ,  292,  322 
Earth  resources,  4 ,  94 ,   104 
energy,  313 
micrometeoroid.  75 
ozone,  75 
processing,  292 
transmission,  3 16 
volcanic,  305 
Daunton,  Nancy,  45 1 
David,  Edward  E . ,  329 
DaVinci  TransAmerica,  66, 67 ,  68 
Davis,  Esker K . ,  263 ,   293 
Dayton,  Ohio,  189 
Dearing,  Ron.  173 
Debus,  Kurt,  442 
Decampli,  William  M . ,  470 
Deep Space Network,  55.  304 ,   306.  371 ,  397 ,  497 
Deem  & Company.  480 
Defense  Advanced  Research  Projccts Agcncy  (DARPA), 210 ,  2 14 
Defense  Mapping  Agency  (U .S . ) ,   64 
defense meteorological  satellite  (DMSP).  34 
Defense  Nuclear  Agency  (U .S . ) ,   5 
Dcfense  Satellite  Communications  System  (DSCS) ,  372,  373 
Dcimoc  (Mars satellite),  I17  
Delta,  8 ,   18.  53 ,   110,  116 ,   118,  119,  144.  157 ,  158,  181. 206: 221  229,  232,  291.  298 ,   303 ,  
310,  317 ,   347 ,   348,  353,  3 7 2 , 4 0 9 , 4 1 2 ,  414  415,  421,  4Z15,  4 3 4 , 4 9 4 ,  506  
Delta  3294,  497 
Delta  3920,  505 
Deniing,  Drake,,  281 
Deng Xiaoping,  27 ,   104 
Denmark,  15, 9 8 ,  203,  228 
Denning,  Peter  J . ,   383 ,  405 
Denoyer,  John,  77 
Denver,  Colo.,  227 ,   280 
Department  of  Agriculture,  U . S . ,   6 ,   112 
Department  ofCommerce,  C .S .   (DOC) ,  5 ,  6 ,  86 ,  93 ,   112 ,   144,  193, 201  205, 206 ,   254,  519 
Maritime  Administration,  47  
Department  of  Defense,  U .S .   (DOD ,   5 ,   15 ,  28 ,   30 ,  34 ,  44 ,   53 ,  '70,  83 8 7 ,  92 ,  93 ,  9 8 ,   104. 
110,  125,  127,  129,  133 ,   142,  157,  165,  166 171,  179,  184, 206,  262.  266 ,  274 ,  291. 
329,  345,  370 ,   3 9 1 , 4 0 4 . 4 2 9   461.  471.  512,  518 ,   525 
budget,  116,  134,  135,  139 ,  346 
Defense  Intelligence  Agency  (DIA), 484 
"Soviet  Military  Power  1984,"  499 
Department  of  Education,  506  
Department  of  Energy.  U . S .   (DOE) ,  5 ,  37 ,  85 ,  93 ,   115,  188, 209,  229  404,  471 
Department  of  Housing and  Urban  Development,  U . S .   (HUD).  1  17 
Department  of  the  Interior,  U .S .  5 .   6.  112.  201.  215 

7 2 2  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUIICS 

Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs,  517 
Departmcnt of  Justice, U . S . ,  129 
Department of  Labor,  U . S . ,   302 
Depar tmen tofS ta te ,   US.. 5 ,  27 ,   111 ,  117 ,   150,  182 ,  311 ,  3.15, 481 517 ,   519 
Department of  Transportation, U .S .   (DOT),  5 ,  24.  93 ,   269,  302,  462 
design,  72 ,   77 ,   154 ,   187 ,  290,  298 ,   305 ,   339 ,  3 6 7 , 4 8 6 ,   505 ,  523 
aircraft,  298 
engineering,  280 
problems,  175 
spacecraft,  152 
deuterium,  222,  323 
Dhawan,  Satish,  183 ,  231 ,   363 
Didcot,  U . K . ,   120 
Dione (Saturn moon),  228 ,   263 
Discovery  (orbiter  103), 7 ,  304 ,  332 ,  333 ,   399 ,  487 ,  488 ,  500, 503 516 ,   518 ,   519  
Dodd,  Lamar,  202 
Donahue, Thomas M., 460 
Donegan,  James J.',  112 
Donn,  Bertram,  485 
Doradus (cloud), 401 
Dorking,  England,  16  
Dornberger, Walter  R . ,   188 
Dornier  System,  73 ,   134,  160 
Doffs, Robert,  274 
Double Eagle 11 .67 ,  68 ,   153 ,  192 ,  420 
Douglas Aircraft Company,  146 
Daw  Chemical,  251 
Dozier,  Jan  D . ,   470  
drag  reduction,  33  
drainage  systems,  381 
Draper,  Charles  Stark,  149 
Draper  Laboratory,  149 
Draughon,  Harold,  353 ,   431 
Drexel  University, 208 
drones  for  aerodynamic and  structural  testing  (DAST), 170, 375 
DAST  1 ,   375 
Dryden Flight Research  Center (DF'RC),  13,  14 ,  54 ,   95 ,   170 ,  202 ,   249 267 ,   299 ,   311,  341 ,  
462 ,   488 
consolidation  with  Ames Research  Center, 270 ,  290 ,   304 
contracts,  71 
people,  30 ,   57 ,   88 ,   242 ,   301 
programs,  81 ,   193 ,   194 
testing,  45 ,   79 ,   128 ,   130 ,   137 ,  169 
Dryden Flight Research  Facility  (DFRF), 367 ,  375 ,   399 ,  432 
Duberg,  John  E . ,  125 
Dublin,  Ireland,  120 
Duke,  Charles,  44 
Dunbar, Bonnie J.,  161 
DuPont,  287  
Dynamic Engineering,  Inc . ,   215 
dynamic velocity  taper, 439 
Dynamics Explorer A  (DE - I ) ,  291 ,  298,  525  

1 2 3  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

Dynamics Explorer  B  (DE-2), 291.  298 
Dyson,  Freeman.  210  
Dzhanibekov,  Vladimir,  261,  276,  341.  350.  491,  492 
Dzhezkazgan,  177,  178,  190,  215,  384 
Eagle  I  (balloon).  430 
Early  Bird.  See  International  Telecommunications  Satellite Organization 
early-warning  radar  devices,  172 
Earth,  91.  215,  227 
data,  13,  27,  38,  68,  96  
environment  monitoring,  196,  298 
magnetic  hcld,  77,  291 
observation  satellite,  34,  151 ,   161,  226 
orbiting  missions,  14,  5 1 ,   173, 215,  237.  284,  290,  299,  315 
resources,  4 ,   37,  57,  66,  92,  94,  104,  107,  108,  129,  130,  138-140,  142,  196,  239,  251,  311 
surface, 38,  241 
Earth-based  observations,  157 
Earth-imaging devices.  172 
Earth  Radiation-Budget  Satellite  (ERBS),  232,  5 10,  522 
Earth  resources  technology  satellite  (E n s   I  J,  375 
carthquakcs,  64,  92,  241,  427 
East  Gcrmany.  SCC German  Democratic  Kepublic 
Eastern Space  and  Missile  Center (ESMC).  73,  118,  144,  207 ,  229,  238  275,  300,  310,  316, 
321,  339,  347,  360,  409,  4 1 2 , 4 1 4 , 4 2 1 ,   425 ,433   434,  !io5 
Eastern Test  Range  (ETR), 5 ,   84,  221 
E c s .  See Ayarne; European  Communications  Sa te l l~ te  
Ecuador,  46  
Edelson,  Burton  I . ,  324,  338 ,   379 
educational  programs,  38,  39,  196,  405,  498,  506,  517 
Announcement  of  Opportunity  (AO), 5 17 
carpenter ant  experiment,  419,  424,  440  
Secondary School  Recognition  Program,  498 
Space Flight  Participation  Program,  5 17 
student  participation,  153,  154,  191,  192,  195,  196,  273,  314,  353,  377 ,419 ,   424.  440,  463 
Edwards,  Calif.,  290 
Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  14, 71,  193,  256,  266,  280.  309,  314,  327:  328  334,  335,  378,  408. 
419,  420,  429,  431;  448,  451,  459,  4 7 4 , 4 8 8 ,   503  510 
EG&G Corporation, 483 
Eglin Air  Force  Base,  134,  238 
Egypt,  64 
Ehricke,  Krafft,  526  
Einstein  observatory.  See  high-energy  astronomy  observatory 
Eisele,  D . ,  504 
Eisenhower,  Dwight  D . ,   175 
ejection  sea ts ,  354,  395,  407.  438 
nonejectable  seats, 354.  355 
El  Chicon  (volcano), 357,  412 
electrical  and  electronic systems.  266,  307.  308 ,  336 
electrodynamics,  375 
electromagnetic  radiation,  154, 526  
Electromagnetic  Sciences,  Inc . ,   496  
electromagnetic  waves,  249 
electronic  mail,  441 

724  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

electrophoresis research,  424 
electrostatic discharge,  345 
Elektrotropgraf,  447 
Elephant moraines,  131 
elevons, 266 ,   292,  307  
Elkins,  W.  Va.,  217 
Ellington Air  Force Base,  309  
emergency conditions  and  provisions, 330 ,   335 ,  386 ,  395 ,  403 ,  438 
Empresa Hondurena de Telecomunicaciones (HONDUTEL),  150 
Enceladus  (Saturn  satellite), 263 
Encke,  Johann, 484  
Encke  (comet), 483 ,   484 
energy,  1 4 , 2 2 9 ,   2 3 0 , 2 4 3 ,   2 5 9 , 2 8 2 ,   313 ,   329 ,  363 
Energy Research Corporation,  229 
Engelmann, Rudolph J.,  66 ,   67 
engineering,  193 ,  196,  280,  308, 327  
test  satellite, 254 
engines,  23 ,   26,  27 ,   34 ,   35 ,   3 8 , 4 1 ,  47 ,   74 ,   80, 8 5 ,  88 ,  9 2 , 9 7 ,  104  119 ,  123 ,   137 ,   142 ,  143 ,  
154 ,   162 ,   171-173 ,  180 ,  183 ,   189 ,  217 ,  235 251 ,   314 ,  335 ,  360 ,   380 ,  386 
advanced turbine, 2  1,  22 
fanjet,  21 
F100, 91 ,   92 
F IO IX ,   92  
LE5,  262 
nozzles,  36 ,   84 ,   8 6 ,   105, 149 ,  251 ,  307 
Pegasus,  154 
problems,  3 ,   159 ,   1 8 8 , 4 0 3 , 4 8 7  
RL10-3-3A ,  279 
rocket,  53, 57,  76,  279,  307,464 
seals,  42 
test,  124,  132,  140,  181,  348 
turbine,  37 
turbofan,  78 
valves,  149 
YF-102,  249 
England,  Anthony W.,  400  
England.  See United Kingdom 
Engle,  Joe, 9 4 , 9 7 ,   107, 132 ,  242 ,   307 ,  342 
English Channel,  35 ,  81, 96 ,   128 ,  130 ,  137 ,  155 ,  287 
Enterprise, 4 , 7 ,  22 ,   23 ,   53 ,   2 0 2 , 2 3 7 , 3 1 3 ,  3 6 7 , 4 1 7 , 4 4 0 ,  513  
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 57 ,  93 ,   249 
Environmental Quality Projects Office (EQPO),  142 
Environmental Research & Technologies,  Inc . ,   143 
environmental  studies,  138 ,   143 ,  171 ,   185, 214 ,  297 ,   307 ,  321 ,  336  430 ,  490  
gypsy-moth  infestation, 216 ,   217 
near-space,  280 
Venus, 323 
Erb ,   Bryan,  251 
Eridan  (sounding  rocket), 87  
E R N 0  (West  Germancompany),  41 ,   1 1 2 , 2 2 1 ,  313 ,  325 
Espenak,  Fred,  281 
Esperance,  54  

725 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

Eskite,  Wilbur  H . .   J r . ,   9 ,   144 
d'Estaing,  Valery  Giscard.  350 
Estess,  Roy  S . .  
E tam ,  W.  Va.,  182 
Ets 4  (Kiku  3), 254.  See also Japan 
Europa,  42 ,   174 
European  Communications  Satellite  (ECS).  22,  I88 
European  Organization  for Nuclear  Research  (CERN),  120 
European  retncvable  carrier,  340 
European  Space Agency  (ESA ) .  4 ,   8 ,   15, 39 ,  48 ,   51 ,  64 .   76 ,  78 ,  79 ,  85 97 ,   108,  1 I O .   120, 
130.  160.  179, 226.  228.  233,  234 ,  239 ,   256.  271  283.  '289, 313,  316.  323,  325 ,   326. 
340.  359 ,   364.  378,  408.  428,  437  4 4 1 , 4 4 5 ,  4 4 8 , 4 6 1 ,  4 6 7 , 4 6 8 ,  485,  504 ,  505 ,  513 .  
517 
budget,  134 
contracts.  41 ,   48 ,  91 ,   112,  134,  161 
E R S - I .   467 
experiments,  4 
Large  Salellite,  91 
LSat,  145 
people.  17 ,  98 ,   154 ,   179 
problcms,  159 ,  253 
programs,  128.  I 8 1  
testing,  28,  87.  107,  174 
tracking  station,  77 
training, 236,  297 
X-ray  observatory  (Exosat),  188, 415 
See also  Spacelab 
European  Space Operations Center (ESOC) .  316, 445 ,  490.  50.5 
European  Space Research  Organization  (ESRO), 203 
Europcan  Space Tcchnology  Center (ESTEC). 3 
responsibility,  17 
Evans,  L.J.  (Bud), Jr.,  506 
Evans ,   Ron.  44 
Evans,  Stuart J . ,   338 
exobiology  system,  145 
Explorer,  369 
Explorer  I, 395 
explosions and  fires,  I I  I ,   152,  167 ,  168,  175.  181-183, 187, 2119,  240  283,  295 ,  370 ,  
437-439, 446 ,   4 5 2 , 4 5 5 , 4 6 4 ,  487, 488 ,   522 
external  propellant  tank,  53 ,   74 .   88 ,   119,  127,  132.  146:  165,  176 214>  230.  231 ,  235-237, 
241,  243 ,   253,  255 ,   265,  276.  292.  299.  301  307 ,  308 ,   322,  327,  332 ,   365, 403 
extragalactic  activities,  271 
Extreme  Ultraviolet  Explorer  (EUVE), 500 ,   501 
Fabian, John  M . ,  386, 418,  419,  463 
facilities,  9 8 ,   1 I O ,   117 ,  285 
facsimile  transmissions  (FAX),  215,  225,  228,  229 ,  434 
Fairchild  Industries,  104,  134, 238 ,   240, 433 
Falkland  Islands,  345 
Fanti,  Piero,  222 
Farkas,  Bertalan,  158,  164,  166,  177 
Federal  Airport  Act,  146 
Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA).  35 ,  36 ,  37 ,  53 ,  62 ,  67 ,  75 ,  79  108,  169.  175 ,   182, 

726 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

183,  186,  244,  249,  288 ,   289,  353,  522 
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation (FBI),  442 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 46,  52,  96,  106, 129,  135  143,  145,  177;182, 
210,  216,  217,  237,  380 ,   519  
Federation Aeronautique International  (FAI), 1 1 ,  277 
Feldman, Dennis,  183 
Feoktistov, Konstantin, 72,  97,  148,  177,  280,  385,  452  
Fermilab National  Accelerator Laboratory, 86,  191 
Figueiredo, Joao,  383 
Fiji,  156  
filament-wound case,  332,  346 ,   513 
filters,  308  
Rmmel,  Richard,  41  1 
Rnk ,   Daniel  J . ,   338 
Rnlayson,  Ray,  43 
Firefly,  47  
Fisher, Anna  L . ,   161,  516  
Fisher, William E ,  161 
Fishman, Gerald,  217 
R t ts ,   Jeny,  276  
Flachi,  Char les , ,   379 ,   380  
flame-resistant materials,  240,  301  
Flanagan,  William  A . ,   470  
flaps,  body  and  rudder, 307 
Fleet  Satellite Communications,  106  
Fleming,  Rex,  5 
flight  simulators,  117 
flight-readiness f i r ing s ,   392 ,   394,  400  
Florida,  118,  128 ,   2 3 8 ,  266 ,  267 
Florida  Historic  Preservation  Society, 400  
FltSatCom,  87  
FltSatCom  I ,  25 
FltSufCom 2  (FltSatCom B),  25,  84  
FltSatCom 5  (FltSatCom E), 291  
FltSatCom D ,   221  
Fokker,  Anthony H .G . ,   189  
Fokker Aircraft Company (German firm), 53,  189  
Folkestone, 35 
Ford.  Gerald,  244 
Ford  Aerospace and  Communications Corporation,  160,  209 ,238 ,   310 ,   333 414 ,432 ,   481,  491  
Foreign Broadcast  Information Service  (FBIS),  9,  17,  31,  3 9 , 4 7 , 4 9   58 ,   105,  127,  259  
Fomalhaut  (star), 456  
Ft.  Bliss,  Tex.,  187 
Ft.  Davis,  Tex . ,  241  
Ft.  Worth,  Tex.,  193 
forward-looking infrared  sensor  (FLIR), 91 
France,  15, 54,  5 6 , 6 4 , 7 5 , 9 3 ,   107,  124,  130,  144 ,   145,  154,  159,  169  201,  203 ,   227 ,  228 ,  
238,  256,  283 ,   349 ,  504,  523 
Council  of  Ministers,  46  
search and  rescue,  167 
Franklin  Institute,  96  
Frederickson, Donald  S . , 329 

1 2 1  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

French  Guiana,  172, 364,  418 
Frieman.  Edward,  328 
Frosch: R o b e n A . , 4 , 6 ,   13.  17,  22, 27 ,   30 ,  6 4 ,  74 ,   8 1 ,  83 ,   8 8 ,   109  110,  1 1 1 ,   128,  1 3 1 ,  1 3 3 ,  
134,  153,  187,  208,  214 ,   218,  219,  225.  231  242,  244.  249 ,   250,  269,  287 
Frost,  Kenneth  J. 
I  16 
~ 
Frutkin,  Arnold  W . .  9 ,  39 .   57 
Fucino,  I ta ly ,   240 ,   3 16 
fue ls ,   214,  229,  287 ,  3 6 3 , 4 3 8 , 4 8 7  
efficiency, 298 ,   375 
on-board  supply, 32 I 
tanks,  267,  298,  305,  307 
valves,  487-489 
See  also propellants 
fuselage,  266 ,   274.  353 ,   373 
Fullerton,  C .  Gordon,  313,  323 ,   334.  335 
Fuqua,  Don,  43 ,   57 ,   128,  166 ,   185, 213,  394 
Furrer, Reinhard,  5 13 
Gagarin, Yuri,  261 ,   369 ,   504 
Galapagos  Islands,  46 
galactic  clusters, 337,  346,  348,  404 
exploding  galaxies, 279 
Galaxy, 421,  434 
G a l r t q   I ,  421 
Ga lary  A ,  505 
Ga1ux.v B ,  434 ,   505 
G a l q v  C .  505 
Galileo,  6 ,  42 ,  76 ,   128, 222,  230,  233.  260 ,  276.  280.  304 ,  327.  358 476 
Galileo 11 ,   25 
Galveston,  Tex.,  194 
Gama, Jaime, 472 
gamma-ray  activities.  65,  107.  I   IO,  124.  153,  154,  162, 203 ,   217,  235 255,  259-261 
gamma radiation.  3 I 
Gamma-Ray  Observatory,  260 
Ganapathy,  R . ,   203 
Gandhi.  Indira,  183, 363, 410 ,  472 
Ganymede  (Jupiter  satellite).  13 ,  42 ,   174, 263 
Gardner,  Dale A . ,  386 ,  429,  431 ,   516 
Gardner,  Guy  S . ,  161 
Gannire, Gordon,  106 
Garneau,  Marc,  510  
Garrett  AiResearch,  78 
Garriott, Owen,  157, 314.  447,  448 
gaseous  iodide,  243 
Gaspe  peninsula,  152 
Gates  Learjet, 298 
Gay,  Charles  D . ,  283 
gearboxes,  308 
Gemini,  3 1 ,  57 ,   112 ,   125,  196, 215,  274 ,   335,  339.  351 ,  494 
Geminid  (stream  of  meteoroids),  446 
General  Accounting  Office  (GAO),  120 ,   17 I ,   345 
Gcneral  Atomic  Company,  328 
General  Atomic  Laboratory, 2 I O  

728 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

General Dynamics Corporation,  269 ,   279 ,   287 ,   358 ,   365 ,  476 ,   4 9 2 , 4 9 3  
Convair,  37 ,   175 ,  2 1 9 , 4 7 6  
General  Electric,  65 ,  81,  92 ,   1 1 5 ,   118, 124,  139 ,  209 ,   338 ,  376 ,  377  386 ,  409 
Space Division,  85 ,   179 
General Motors,  229 ,   308 ,   376 
General  Services Administration (GSA),  129 
General  Telephone & Electronics  (GTE), 238 
GTE  Satellite Corporation,  46 
GTE  Spacenet Corporation, 480 ,   517 
generators,  115 
Geneva,  Italy,  120 ,  210 
Genoa,  Italy, 
geodesy, 241 
geological  applications program  (GAP), 250 ,   259 
geomagnetic  storms,  184 
George C .  Marshall  Space Flight  Center. See Marshall Space Flight Center 
geosciences,  150 ,   156 
geospace  system,  94  
Geostationary  Operational  Environmental  Satellites (GOES),  181, 199 205 
GOES-A  (Goes  f), 205 
GOES-B  (Goes 2),  205 ,   254 ,  505 
GOES-C  (Goes 3). 98 ,   205,  254 
GOES-D  (Goes 4 ) ,  199 ,  205,  254 ,   275 
GOES  E  (Goes 3, 205 ,   2 7 5 , 4 9 2  
GOES  F,  205 ,   412 
Goes East,  236 ,  275 
Goes West,  236 ,   254 ,   380 ,  412 
German  Democratic Republic  (GDR; East Germany), 75 ,   124 ,  2 7 3 , 4 2 3 ,   523  
cosmonauts,  1 1  
Germantown, Md . ,   104 
Germany, Dan,  513 
Germany, Federal  Republic of  (FRG; West Germany), 3 ,   15, 56 ,   64 ,  93  107,  112 ,  130, 145 ,  
156 ,   160 ,   1 6 2 , 2 0 3 ,  228 ,   2 3 8 , 2 4 1 , 2 7 1 , 2 8 0 ,   283  349 ,   358 ,   3 7 1 , 4 0 6 , 4 1 8 ,  4 2 0 , 4 9 7 ,  
505 ,   523  
Ion Release Module (IRM), 497 
Space Operations Center, 497 
Getaway Special experiment,  463  
Giacobini-Zimmer (comet),  454 
Gianopulos,  George,  397 
Gibson,  Edward  G . ,  216 ,   221 ,   377 ,   387 ,  408 
Gibson,  Robert L . ,   355 ,   398 ,  463 ,   513 
Gibson,  Roy,  17, 76 ,   98 ,   120 
Gillett,  Fred,  427 
Gillette, Aaron K . ,   273 
Gillam  IV,  Isaac T.,  242 ,   301 ,   506 
Gilruth,  RobeIt,  339  
Giotto  (mission),  181 ,  182 ,  490  
Glaser,  Harold,  63 ,   1 1 5 ,   116  
glass,  ultra-low-expansion,  282 
G k M ,  John  H . ,  Jr . ,   120 ,  121 ,  133 ,  274,  348 ,  349 ,   369  
glider, hypersonic,  46  
Global  Atmospheric Research  Program  (GARP), 4 ,   153 

129 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AEROKAUT ICS  

INDEX  

global  positioning  system  (GPS), 409 
Global Weather  Experiment  (GWE),  4 ,   5 ,  25 
goals,  200 
Goddard,  Esther  C .  Kisk,  347 
Goddard,  Robert  H . .   133.  347,  370 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC),  8 ,  27.  5 1 ,  S6.  86 ,   103,  144,  160  184,  199, 233,  240. 
241 ,   250 ,   252,  288,  321,  340 ,   353 ,   355,  357,  366  369,  372 ,   3 9 7 , 4 0 5 ,  410.  422.  434 .  
454:  467 ,   471 ,   473-475. 486.  500 525 
consolidation  with  Wallops  Flights  Center,  270,  290 ,   301 
contracts,  110.  167, 284 
Laboratory  for Astronomy  and  Solar Physics,  167 
missions,  9 4 ,  298 
Operations  Support  Computing Division,  1  12 
people, 29,  30 .   77 .   84.  88 ,   106.  116.  145 ,   155.  172, 222 ,   231.  281.  413 
programs,  119 ,   124 ,  142 ,   162! 179 ,   185, 282 ,   310 
Goe tz ,   Alexander,  381 
Goe tz ,  Robert  C . ,  41 5 
Goldschmidt,  Neil  E . ,   62 ,   109,  175 
Goldstein,  Irving.  1+73 
Goldstone. Calif., 92 
Goody,  Richard.  210 
Goodyear  Aerospace  Corporation,  96  
Goonhilly,  England,  261 
Gorbatko,  Viktor,  185,  189, 203,  204 
Gordon,  Richard  F.  (Dick). 44 ,   284 
Gordon  Bennett  race,  420 
Gossamer  Albatross,  35 ,  96 ,   128,  130,  137.  155, 287 
Gossamer Albatross  2 ,  81 ,   155 
Gossamer  Condor,  35 ,   130,  155, 287 
Gossamer  Penguin,  192,  193 
Government  Printing Office  (GPO). 442 
Grabe.  Ronald  J . ,   16 1 
Grand  Canyon, 
gravitational  forces  and  data,  77 ,  268,  340,  375.  385 ,  452 ,  480  
Gray,  Paul  E . ,  329 
Gray,  Robert,  7 ,   17 I  
G r a z ,  Austria,  120 
Great  Britain.  S e e   United  Kingdom 
Great  March  3 rocket  (or Mach?), 
Grechko,  Georgiy M . ,  58 ,   163 
Greece,  64 
Green Bank, W.Va.,  241 
Greenbelt,  Md . ,  290 
greenhouse effect,  323 
Greenland,  169 
Gregory, Frederick  D . ,  400  
Griffin,  Gerald  D . ,   188, 341 ,   360, 467 
Grindlay,  Jonathan,  29 
Grissom,  Virgil  1.  (Gus), 274 
Groenigen University,  3 
Cruene,  Hans ,   81 
Grumman,  Leroy  R . ,  373 

730 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUT ICS  

Grumman  Aerospace,  30 ,   173 ,  249 ,  298 ,   358 
GT1 Corporation, 323  
Guam ,   177 
Guastaferro, Angelo,  76 ,   218,  222 
Guggenheim  Aeronautical  Laboratory, 3  12 
Guinea,  182 
Gulf of  Mexico,  16,  193 ,  209 ,   236,  238 ,   291 
Gulfport,  Miss.,  193  
Gurnett, Donald,  279 
Gurragcha, Jugderdemidyn, 261 ,   276 
Guyana,  158,  159 
gyroscopes,  213,  214 
habitat  modules,  330 
Hackes,  Peter,  155 
Haig, Alexander,  31 I ,   345 
Haise,  Fred W.,  Jr.,  30 
Hale, Wendy S . ,  470 
Hale  Observatory, 86 
Hall,  Bruce,  271 
Hall,  Charles,  59 ,   61 ,   124 
Hall,  Warren,  314 
Halley,  Edmond,  371 
Halley  (comet),  1 4 ,  8 5 ,   181 ,   182 ,  256 ,  304 ,  357 ,   371 ,  485 ,   523 ,  524 
Hamburg,  Germany,  120 
Hamilton  Standard. See United  Technologies  Corporation 
Hampton,  Va.,  30 
Hampton  Technical  Center,  I27  
Hannah, David,  289,  364 
Hardy,  George,  35 
Harris,  Hugh,  267 
Harris,  Pritchett  A . ,  273 
Harris Corporation,  173  
Hart,  Terry J . ,  400 ,   474 ,   480 ,   481 
Hartebeesthoek,  208 
Hartsfield,  Henry W . ,  Jr.,  313 ,  331 ,  350 ,  351 ,  3 9 8 , 4 8 7 ,   5 0 0 , 5 0 3  
Harvard-Smithsonian  Center  for Astrophysics,  29 
Hasselrnann,  Klaus, 210 
Hauck,  Frederick  H . ,   3 8 6 , 4 1 8 , 4 1 9 ,  5 1 3 , 5 1 6  
Hauersperger,  Karla  R . ,  273 
Haunschild,  Hans-Hilger,  27 1 
Hawaii,  177,  1 8 3 , 2 0 9 ,  254 ,   266 
Hawaiian Airlines,  183 
Hawley,  Steven  A . ,   355 ,   399 ,  4 2 0 , 4 8 7 ,   489 ,   500  
Haystack  observatory,  241 
Heacock,  Ray,  42 ,   218,  220  
health  programs  and  studies, 38 ,  44, 85 ,   109 ,  121 ,   137,  138 ,   147 ,  148 162 ,   163 ,  244 ,   249 ,  
251 ,   252 ,   268 ,   359 ,  3 8 4 - 3 8 6 , 4 2 8 , 4 2 9 , 4 4 9 , 4 9 5  
cancer research,  322 
glaucoma  research,  322 
Hearth,  Donald  P . ,   51 9  
heat-capacity  mapping  mission  (HCMM),  305 ,  371 
Heckman,  Gary,  123 

73 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

Heldenfels,  Richard R . ,  93.  125 
helicopters,  48.  314,  339,  384 
Helios,  280 
Helios  I ,  306 
Helios  2 ,   162 
heliosphere,  333 
helium,  liquid,  321,  393, 405 ,  445 
Henize,  Karl G . ,  400 
Henry,  Richard,  262 
Henaon, Keith,  515 
Hercules  Inc . ,   346 
Hermann,  Robert  J . ,   9 I ,   92 
H e m e s  (French  project),  46 
Hewlett  Packard,  329 
High-Altitude Observatory,  342 
high-energy  astronomy observatory  (Heao): 5 .  6 ,  65 .   271.  280,  337 
Heao  I ,  5 ,  65 ,   105,  106,  107.  110.  116. 271.  337 
H e a o 2  (Einstein),  29, 65 ,  9 4 ,   106. 116 ,   174. 213.  271.  337 
Heao  3 .  6 5 ,   107.  153, 279 
highly  maneuverable aircraft  technology  (HiMAT),  71,  170, 21’2 
HiLat,  420 
Hildner,  Ernie,  413 
Hilmers,  David  C . ,   161 
Himalayas,  54 
Hinncrs,  Noel  W . .   14, 45,  342 
Hinotori  (Firebird),  255 
Hipparcos  (satellite),  128 
Hodge,  John  D . ,  346 ,  475,  493 
Holloman Aerospace  Medical  Center.  393 
Holloway,  Paul  F.,  526 
Holmes.  Allen,  472 
Honduras,  150 
Honest  John-Orion  (rocket),  191 
Honeywell  In c . ,  433 
Hoover  Institute,  329 
Horsford,  Cyril,  201 
Hosenball,  S .  Neil.  131, 300 
Hotz,  Robert,  47 
Houck,  James,  4 0 4 , 4 0 5  
House  of  Representatives,  U S .  See Congress.  U.S. 
Houston,  Tex.,  4 ,   30, 88 ,  266,  267 
Howell,  Jack  D . ,   I09 
Hubble,  Edwin  P., 442 
Edwin  P.  Hubble  Space Telescope. 442 
Hubble’s  Constant,  4 4 3  
Hubble’s Law, 443 
Hudson,  Gary C . ,  289 
Huffstetler,  Elena,  449 
Hughes,  Howard  R . .   Jr.,  158,  173,  176. 202 
Hughes  Aerospace.  492 
Hughes  Aircraft Company.  2 8 , 4 6 .   53 ,   135,  139.  158,  166, 201,  221,  229 230,  255,  275,  300 ,  
330,  420,  464,  4 65 ,481 ,   496,  516 ,  519 

732  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTlCS 

Hughes  Airwest,  176 
Space and  Communications Group,  95 ,  238 ,  434 
Hughes  Communications  Services,  Inc . ,   500, 505 
Hull,  Quebec,  140 
Humes,  Donald  H . ,   60 
Hungary,  39 ,   75 ,   273 
cosmonauts,  158 ,   164,  166 ,   177, 213 
Hunsaker,  Jerome  C . ,  507 
Hunter, Charles M . ,   434 
Hunter,  Robert  O.,  329 
Huntsville,  Ala.,  4 ,   5 5 ,  187 ,  280 
Huntsville  Operations  Support Center  (HOSC), 498 
Hurd,  Peter,  202 
Hurricane  Frederick,  236 
Hutchinson, Neil  B . ,   107, 308,  3 0 9 , 4 7 5 , 4 7 6  
Hyde,  Fred,  6 6  
hydraulics  systems,  266,  307 
hydrazine,  308 
hydroelectric  power  projects, 282 
hydrogen,  323 ,   365 
clouds,  401 
gaseous,  309,  386 ,   392 
leak,  392,  395 
liquid,  3 8 , 4 1 ,  79, 8 1 ,  85 ,  86 ,   146 ,   165, 220,  2 3 6 , 2 5 3 ,  262,  308 
hypersonic  operations, 4 6 ,  462 
ice  buildup,  146, 376 ,   377, 503 
Ida,  Don,  192 ,  420 ,   421 
Iles du  Salut,  172 
Ilyushin  86  (I1 8 6 ) ,  123 
11-18, 
image-sensing  autoprocessor,  9 I 
imaging  facilities,  65, 9 1 ,  358 
imaging  radar  antenna,  6 5 ,  409 
India,  5 4 , 5 6 ,   75 ,   107 ,  110 ,   154, 209 ,  232 ,  283 ,   311 
Department  of  Space,  231 ,   232,  339  
India  national  satellite  (INSAT), 430,  432,  523  
Insa t-I ,   363 ,  433  
Insa t-IA ,   220 ,   232 ,  339 
Insa t-IB ,   220 ,   2 32 ,4 30 -43 2  
Insa t-IC ,   523  
Indian  Space Research  Organization  (ISRO),  34 ,   183 ,  3 6 3 , 4 3 0 , 4 3 2 ,  523 ,   524 
Rohini  satellite, 410  
Indian Ocean, 4 2 , 4 3 ,  5 5 , 9 5 ,   119, 140 ,   182, 231,  259 ,   2 6 5 , 2 6 6 ,  316  333,  347 ,   391, 430  
Indonesia,  22,  158,  220 ,  241 ,   398,  465 
inertial  upper  stage  (IUS),  250 ,   276,  372 ,   3 8 0 , 4 0 7 , 4 2 3 ,  461 
infrared  activities,  1 5 4 , 2 3 9 , 2 4 0 , 2 8 1 , 3 4 8 , 3 4 9 ,   351 ,  401,  405,  525  
instruments, 26,  29 ,   156 ,  340 
lasers,  281 
problems,  26 ,   293 
Infrared Astronomical  Satellite  (IRAS),  3 9 3 , 4 0 1 , 4 0 4 , 4 0 5 , 4 2 7 ,   429 445,  446,  4 5 6 , 4 8 5 ,   512 ,  
525 ,   526  
infrarrd  imagery  of  Shuttle  (IRIS),  340  

733 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AEROKAUTICS 

INDEX  

  4 5 6  459  

Institute  for Defense  Analyses,  461 
Institute  of  Geochemistry,  I46 
instmmcnt  pointing  system  (IPS), 
insulation,  332 ,   333 
interceptor  vehicle,  2 I 8  
Intercosmos (program),  I I ,   166:  177.  189 ,  208,  257,  273,  29:! 
intercontinental  continental  ballistic  missile  (ICBM), 85 ,   127, 475 
interest  i n   space  program.  47.  1 2 1 , 4 3 2 ,  440 ,  496 ,   518 
waning,  44 .   45 
Interim  Eurcpean  Telecommunications Satellite  (Eutelsat).  48 ,   220 
International  Association  of  Machinists.  255 
International  Astronomical  Union  ( I A U ) .   159 
International  Business  Machines  ( IBM ) ,   229.  300 ,  3 7 6 ,   4 3 4 .   4 5  I ,
International  Cometary  Explorer, 
International  Council  of  Scientific  Unions,  4 
International  Geophysical  Year  (ICY), 39.  395 
International  Harvester,  240 
International  lnstitutc  of  Communications  (IIC),  209 
International  Institute  of  Space Law,  201 
International  Maritime  Satellite Organization  ( INMARSAT ) ,  44 ,   48 ,   144 210,  231.  233,  259. 
316 ,   317 ,   345 ,   3 6 6 , 1 4 5 ,  481 
International  Solar Maximum  Year.  186,  237 
International  Solar-Polar Mission  (ISPM) ,  73 ,   256, 476 ,   504 
International  Sun-Earth Explorer  (ISEE) ,  63 ,  454 
l s e e   I ,  63  
/ s e e  2 ,  63  
/see  3  (International  Cometary  Explorer), 63 ,   162, 454.  455 
Inlernational  Telecomrnunications  Satellite Organza t ion   (INTEI-SAT),  3 22 ,  28,  41 ,   124.  130, 
139,  140.  144,  150 ,   173.  179,  182 ,  206.  207 209 ,  210 ,   215 ,  220 ,   222,  225.  231.  238. 
240,  242,  259 ,   261, 276.  310 316,  333,  363,  381 .484 ,   519 
ln te lsa t   I  (Early Bird), 43 ,   106 
Inrelsat  3, 43 ,   95 
lnrelsat 3  F 3 .   95 
Jntelsnt  5 .  484 
Inrelsar  5  F ,   414 
ln tr lsu t   5  F I ,  316 
In te l~cr t  5  F 4 ,   333 
lnielsar  5  F 7   (Payload), 44 1 
In te l sa t  5 A  F 2 ,  238 ,   240 
lntelsat  5C F.3, 316 
Intelsat  I V - A ,  140, 276 
Intelsat  V,  8 ,  41 ,   179,  188,  207.  209 ,243 .   259,  261,  275,  331 
lntelsat  V -A ,   179, 242,  276 
Intelsat V I .   179 ,  207 ,  276 
International  Telephone  and  Telegraph  (In), 125.  217 
Worldcorn,  2 17 
international  ultraviolet explorer  ( I u e ) ,  55 .   108,  154.  155, 227 ,   357 
interplanetary  spacecraft,  4 17 
Intersputnik,  220 
Io  (Jupiter’s  moon), 29 ,   42 ,   150,  174 
ionosphere,  I O ,   174,  194,  195 ,  292,  336  Iowa City,  Iowa,  16 
Iowa State  University  of  Science and  Technology, 

734 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

Ireland, 228 
lskra  3 ,  377 
isotopic  studies,  211 
Isparitel apparatus,  189 ,  204 
Issel, Michelle A , ,  273 
Italy,  1 5 , 5 6 ,  93 ,   107.  110, 203,  209 ,   228,  238,  375 
National Research Council  (CNR),  4 6 9 , 4 7 0 ,   476 
National Space Plan Office, 476 
Ivanchenkov, Aleksandr,  58 ,   341 ,  350 
Ivanov,  Georgy, 40  
Izquierdo, Rosario M., 470 
Jacobson, David H . ,   208 
Jagoda, Barry, 44 
Jakarta,  241 
Jamesburg,  Calif,  182 
Janus  (moon),  60  
Japan, 54 ,   56 ,   68 ,   75 ,   76 ,   8 5 ,  93 ,   107,  110,  120 ,   122 ,  124 ,  154 ,  177 201 ,   209 ,   220 ,  238 ,   251 ,  
255 ,   259 ,  349 ,   427,  485 
Asahi  Shimbun  (newspaper), 408 
B sZA ,  459  
Cs2A  (Sakura  2A),  398 
Cs2B  (Sakura 2B):  427 
engineering test  satelliteJETS),  254 
GMS - 2  metesat system,  220 
H-1 rocket,  262 
LE5 engine,  262 
N- l   vehicle,  255 
N-2  vehicle,  254 
National  Space  Development Agency, 9 ,   122, 254 ,  262 ,   314 
Science and  Technology  Agency,  122 
Space Development  Council,  170 
tracking  station,  77 
Jeffs,  George, 45  
Jen  Xin-min,  4 ,   27 
Jenkins,  Harriet G . ,   338 
je t   lag,  244 
Jet  Propulsion Laboratory (JPL),  13 ,  8 5 , 9 2 ,  225 ,  241 ,   293 ,  325 ,  330  3 4 2 , 3 4 6 ,   3 7 1 , 3 9 3 , 3 9 7 ,  
4 0 4 , 4 0 9 , 4 1 5 , 4 2 7 , 4 2 8 , 4 5 6 , 4 6 7 , 4 7 9 , 4 8 3   485 ,  497 ,   5 1  1 
contractors,  5 I 
contracts,  95 
missions,  42 ,   96 ,   279 ,   306 
people,  14, 26 ,   117 ,  150,  193, 2 0 6 , 2 1 0 , 2 2 8 ,   263 ,293 ,   312 
responsibility,  17,  115  
Jewitt, David C . ,  76 ,   371 
Jilin  (PRC province),  127 
Johannes,  Robert  P., 88 
Johannesburg,  2,08 
Johns Hopkins University, 86 ,   118,  191, 250 
Homewood  campus,  250 
Johnson,  Lyndon B . ,   370 
Johnson,  Thomas H . ,  329 
Johnson & Johnson,  25 1 

73s 

ASTRONALTLCS  AND   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX 

Johnson  Space Center  (JSC) .  4 .   15, 2 1 .   65 ,  8 8 ,   112,  143,  145 ,   156, 270  307,  309 ,   328,  329 ,  
335,  336.  341 ,   343,  348.  351,  353,  359.  360.  377 383 ,  3 8 5 , 4 0 8 , 4 1 5 ,  4 2 0 , 4 2 4 ,  425 ,  
43  1 ,   449,  45 I ,  452,  460 ,   467,  47 I  475 ,   47.  486 .   487,  499 ,   5 12-514.  5 I7 
Biomedical  Research  Institute,  449,  451 
contracts,  9 ,41 :   104,  108,  140.  149,  151,  I54  
costs.  104 
missions,  107 ,   132 ,  281 
people,  7 ,  9 .  30 ,   39 .  57 ,  70 .   155, 297 
programs,  139 ,   142 
responsibility,  17 
Spacecraft  Software Division,  476 
testing.  9 4 ,   152,  168 
training,  51 
White  Sands Tcst  Facility.  292 
Johnston,  Donald  J . ,  463 
Johnston,  Ma ry  Helen,  483 
Jones,  J .M . ,   55 
Josephine  (tropical  storm) 
Jupiter  (orbiter),  6 ,   187, 233 
Jupiter  C ,   395 
Jupiter  (planet),  13,  17, 29 ,  38.  41.  4 2 , 4 3 , 4 9 ,   51 ,  5 6 . 5 9 ,   76 ,   123  128 ,   133,  150,  157 ,   174 ,  
206,  220 ,   230.  235,  243.  260,  263,  277 ,  279  280,  315,  :325, 327 ,   333 .445  
Kadena  Air  Force  Base,  259 
Kagoshima,  255 
Kalgoorlie,  43 
Kaluga,  377 
Kapryan.  Walter  J . ,   31 
Kapustin  Yar  cosmodrome,  34 ,   347 
Kazakhstan,  166,  239,  276 
Keating,  David,  198 
Keegan,  Sara,  455 
Keller,  Samuel W.!  310 
Kennedy,  John  E ,   188, 369 ,   370 
Kennedy  Space Center  (KSC) .  9 ,   13-16 ,  23,  27: 49 ,  53 .   5 4 , 7 0 .  8 4 , 9 4   112,  149.  157,  180. 
196 ,  21 I ,  243 ,   254.  262.  267,  269.  271.  281.  283  289,  307 ,   308,  315,  321 ,  322 ,   335 ,  
340 ,   350-352, 364 ,  365 ,   370,  375  385,  386,  394,  399, 407 ,  408 ,   415 ,419 .   4 2 0 , 4 2 4 :  
429,  432,  442.  4 4 8 4 6 3 ,  464 ,467 .   474,  487,  489.  509 ,  510.  515 ,   516 
aft-compartment  accident.  283 
contracts.  9 
facilities,  80,  155, 181,  231,  241 ,   244.  265,  297.  298.  305,  334 ,  401,  418,  428 ,   485 ,  498 .  
500 
missions,  119,  132, 252,  291 
people,  31.  57.  81 ,   188, 254 
programs,  39.  144. 234 
rescue  training,  185 ,   186 
services,  80 
testing.  242 ,   299 ,   378 
Kentron  International,  In c . ,   127 
Kenya,  118 
Kerman,  Arthur  K . ,   329 
kerosene,  438 
Kembrock,  Jack  L . ,  22 I ,   288 

736 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Kenvin,  Larkin,  375 
Kettering  satellite-monitoring  group,  41 1 
Kevlar-fiber struts:  287 
Keyworth, George A . ,   328 ,   329 ,  425 
KH-I I  (reconnaissance  vehicle),  15 
Kilgore,  Edwin  C . ,  301 ,   302 ,   317 
Kings Canyon  National  Park,  239 
Kissin,  Ken,  184 
Kistiakowsky, George B . ,   389  
Kitt  Peak  National  Observatory, 282 ,   303 ,  425 
Kittinger,  Joe W . ,  503  
Kitty  Hawk  (transcontinental  balloon),  152, 153 
Kitty Hawk, N .C . ,   153 
Kizim,  Leonid,  233 ,   239,  341 ,  465,  4 7 9 , 4 9 2 ,  4 9 5 , 5 0 3 ,  509  
Kleinknecht,  Kenneth  S . ,  39  
Klineberg,  John  M . ,   57  
Klutznick,  Philip  M . ,  201 
Knapp,  Brooke,  466  
Knox,  Frcd  D . ,  Jr.,  470 
Knutson,  Martin  A , ,  488 
Kochendorfer,  Fred  D . ,   55 
Kodiak, Alaska,  167 
Kohl,  Helmut,  4.51 
Koller, Albert,  207 
Komfeld,  Dale,  3 17 
Kosmahl, Henry G . ,  439 
Kostiuk,  Theodore,  281 
Kourou, French Guiana,  3 9 , 6 4 ,   87 ,   182 ,  260,  283 ,  3 1 6 , 4 1 8 , 4 4 1 ,  49.5 
Kovalenok,  Vladimir,  18, 58 ,  260 ,   261 ,  273 ,   276 
Kozu, N . ,   76 
Kraft, Christopher C . ,  Jr.,  65,  165,  168, 309,  339-341, 360 ,   369 
Kramer,  James J . ,  7 1 ,   22 I ,   288 
Kranz,  Eugene  I:.,  266 ,   336 
Krebs, Thomas  H . ,  484 
Kremer,  Henry,  35 
Kristall  (equipment), 19 ,  3 1 ,  49 ,   204 
Kroll, Gustav  A . ,   187 
Kubasov, Valery.  158,  164,  177 
Kuettner,  Joachim,  25 
Kuiper airborne  observatory, 340 ,  348 
Kukowski,  James,  404 
Kurth,  William,  279 
Kusske,  Amy  M., 273 
La  Sou f i e r e  (volcano),  26 
Lacrosse ,  WISC., 192 
Lake  Placid,  N.Y.,  117 ,   124 
Lambert  Field  (S t .   Louis), 
Lampton,  Michael  L . ,  3 ,   156, 297,  314  
Lancaster,  Calif.  14 
lander,  52 ,  55, 331 
Lander  1 (Mutch Memorial  Station),  326,  327,  3 9 7 , 4 0 9 ,  480 
Lander  2 ,   326,  409 

73 7 

ASTRONAL 'TICS  A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

I N D E X  

landing gears.  189, 266 
landing  preparations.  335 
Landsat,  4 ,   86 ,   104,  108,  I  I O ,   138,  140.  171.  172, 201,  206.  208,  209 ,  2 1 6 , 2 2 7 ,  338 ,  355 .  
392,  397, 412 ,   421 ,  469 
Landsur  I ,  8 4 ,   108 ,  397 
Landsar 2. 27 .   84 ,   108,  172, 397 
L u n d s a 3 .  27,  84.  108, 139 ,   140,  172, 292,  397, 525 
Landsat 4  (Landsat  D).  139.  140. 201.  397. 409 ,  475 
Landsat  5 ,  475,  525 
Lane,  Arthur  L . ,  
Langel,  Robert  A . .  77 ,   169 
Langley Memorial  Aeronautical  Laboratory  (NACA), 31 ,   124.  125 
Langley Research Center  (LaRC),  13. X8,  93.  128 ,   142. 249.  1190,  299 3 0 5 .  3 3 4 ,   340,  351, 
3 5 7 ,  375, 404 ,   415 ,   467 ,   506,  526 
contracts,  107,  117, 215, 227 
crash  test,  37 
design  study,  137 
experiments, 26 ,   85 ,   194 
people.  45 ,   57 ,   88 ,  125.  184. 208,  3 1 7 , 4 2 5  
programs.  81 .   127 ,   180.  186.  211,  243 ,   298 
Space  Systems  Division,  526 
testing,  128 
Lanham,  Md..  357 
Large-Area  Crop-lnvcntory  Experiment  (LACIE), 25 1 .   292 
Large  Magellanic  Cloud,  162, 401,  405 
Large  Spacc Tclescope.  See Space Telescope 
LaKocque, Gene,  218 
Las  Vegas, Nev., 44  
laser developments  and  systems, 56, 64, 77 ,   142, 281,  282 ,   471 
propulsion  $tudy, 210,  243 
radar  soundings.  207 
Laser Geodynamics  Satellite  (Lageos), 56 
Lageos- I ,  469 ,   470 
Lageos-2, 469 ,   470 
latex  reactor,  322 ,   336 
Launch  Complex  3 6 ,  221 
Launch  Complex  39.  23 ,  214,  242>  243 ,  267 ,  292 ,   3 3 5  
launch  pad  rental,  414 
launches,  119,  176,  199, 292 
schedules, 91 ,  9 4 ,   155.  291 ,   308 
scientific,  80 
simulated,  107 
technical,  80 
launch  vehicles,  5 ,   1  10,  127.  132 ,   160,  179.  181 ,  188. 279,  3 1 0 , 4 3 7  522 
expendable,  74 ,   118 ,   144,  188 ,   206 ,  418.  496 
mobile  platform,  I19  
Law  of the  Sea conference.  201 
Le Havre,  64 
Leasat  1 (SYNCOM-I) ,  503 
Lemur  2 .  500  
Leasecraft.  433 
Lebedev, Valentin,  148>  347,  355 ,  359.  360 .  377:  384,  385 ,  428.  503 

738 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Lederberg,  Joshua,  145 
Lee, Chester M . ,   180 
Lee,  J .H . ,   243 
Lee,  Thomas J.  (Jack), 234 
Leestma,  David  C . ,  161. 509 ,   510 
legal aspects,  442 ,   460 ,   465 
procedures  in  space,  131 ,  201 ,  202 
Legate, A .B  . Virkler, 302 
Lenoir, William  B . ,  331 ,   376 ,   377 ,  385 ,  398 ,  460 
Leonov, Alexey A . ,  347 ,  3 8 5 , 5 0 4  
Levin,  Carl, 462 
Levy,  Eugene, 21 1 
Lewis,  Chuck,  107 
Lewis Research Center  (LeRC), 21 ,   8 3 ,  8 8 ,  299,  337 ,   348 ,  376 ,  377 ,   392 4 1 4 , 4 3 9 ,  467 ,  486  
contracts,  115 ,   166 ,  229 ,   279 ,  476 
grants,  231 
missions 
people 
programs,  209.  291 
testing,  78 
Library of  Congress,  44 ,   46 
Science  and  Technology Division, 46  
Libya,  379 
Lichtenberg, Byron  K . ,   3-4,  156 ,  297,  314 ,  366 ,  447 ,   448 
lidar  (1ight-intena;i~cation detection  and  ranging), 249 ,  357 
life  science  studies,  151 ,  271,  340 ,  371 
life-support systems,  143, 336 ,  383 
lifting bodies,  304 ,   462 
H L I O ,   304 
M-2 ,   304 
X-24A,  304 
X-24B ,   304 
liftoff,  335 
lighter-than-air craft,  150 ,  369  
Lilly, William E , 30 1,  3  12 
Lind,  Don  L . ,  400  
Lindstrom,  Robert E . ,  119 
Ling Temco Vought,  127 
lithium,  506  
Little Joe (booster),  180 
Littlefield, Robert C . ,   31 
Lloyds  of  London, 9 4 , 5  16 
locator beacon,  233 
Lockheed Corporation,  15,  16, ,141,  169 ,  197 ,  249 ,   333 ,  340 ,  425 
Lockheed Missiles  and  Space Company,  179 ,  282 , .357 ,  358 ,  3 6 7 , 4 9 1  
Lockheed Palo Alto  Research  Laboratory, 483 
Lockheed-Georgia Company,  197 ,  231 
Loening Brothers  company,  373 
Loewenthal, Stuart H . ,  52 
London,  209 
Long Beach,  Ca l if . ,  Port  of,  158 ,  202,  353 
Long Duration  Exposure Facility  (LDEF), 463 ,   474  

73Y 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Longanecker.  Gerald W . ,  4 10 
Longuet-Higgins,  Michael,  210 
Lop Nor  (nuclear-arms  test  area),  156 
Los  Alamos  Scientific Laboratory,  1 1 1 ,  118. 328 ,   329,  389 
Los  Angeles,  77 
Louisiana  Pacific,  66 
Lounge,  John  M . ,   161 
Lousma, Jack  R . ,  313,  323,  334,  335 ,  434,  462 
Lovelace,  Alan  M . ,  1 3 , 6 8 ,  88 ,   109, 244,  259,  260.  271 ,   275.  287 
Lovell,  James  A , ,  Jr..  274 
Low,  Frank,  446 
Low.  G .  David,  470  
Low, George  M . .   1 7 5 ,  494 
Lowell  Observatory, 6 ,  485 
LTV  Aerospace  and  Defense Company,  491 
lubrication  systems,  364 
Lucas,  William  R . ,  234 
Luna   1 6 ,  147 
lunar activities,  121 ,   146, 349:  350.  369 ,   373, 4 2 8 , 4 5 3 ,  499 
landing,  36 ,   188. 216 ,   234,  294,  376,  395 
mining,  187,  197 
missions,  64 ,   167, 342,  373 
“moon   treaty,”  201 
- 
Moon  walk,  3 6 , 4 3 ,  44 ,   57 ,   132.  189 
resources,  202 
samp les ,   131 ,   146 
Lunar  and  Planetary  Institute,  156 
Lundberg, Olof,  233 
Lunney,  Glynn  S . ,  8 8 ,  3 7 7 , 4 6 6  
Lu tz ,   Barry,  485 
Luxsat,  145 
Lyakhov,  Vladimir,  1 1 ,   1 7 ,   18.  31 ,  49 .   58.  7 1 ,  421 ,  423 ,   434,  438.  439  446,  452 
Lycoming  YF-102  (engine).  249 
McBnde,  Jon  A , ,  509  
McCall,  Roben  T., 202 
McCandless,  Bruce,  62 ,398 .   441 ,   463.  464 
McCarthy,  John  F.,  337 ,   338 
McCormick, M.  Patrick,  357 
MacCready,  Paul.  3 5 ,  96 .   130 ,   155,  192, 236.  239.  287 
McCrary, Ma ry ,   35 
McCulley,  Michael  J . ,   470 
McDivitt,  James,  44  
McDonald,  Frank  B . ,  366 ,   381 
McDonnell  Douglas  Astronautics Corporation,  36 ,  5 3 . 6 5 ,   108,  109,  141  144,  150. 229 ,   249. 
283 ,   298 ,   303, 358,  3 7 6 , 4 2 4 ,  465,  470.  471.  479  487 ,   500 
Astronautics  Division,  489 
Continuous Flow  Electrophoresis  System  (CFES), 500 
Technical  Services Company,  199 
McElroy,  John,  492 
Mackey,  Skip, 484 
McLean, Va.,  6 6 ,   137 
McLucas,  John  L . ,  210 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

McMahon,  Franklin,  202 
McMath  solar  telescope, 282 
McMurdo Sound,  525 
McMurtry,  Thomas C . , 9 5 ,  375 
McNair, Ronald  E . ,  398 ,  463 
Madras,  54 
Madrid,  61 ,   62 ,   108, 227 ,  251 ,   306 
Madura, Dave  D . ,   273 
magnetic  control,  172 
magnetic  field satellite (Magsat), 56 ,   68 ,  77 ,   87 ,   169 ,  218 
magnetic  f ie lds ,  5 1 ,  68 ,   87 ,   1 5 7 , 2 1 8 ,  236,  291-293,  31 I 
magnetic  poles,  169 
magnetic  sensor, 385 
magnetometer,  333  
magnetosphere,  13,  17, 63 ,   174,  195 ,  279 ,   314 ,  350 ,  358 ,   375 ,  4 0 6 , 4 9 7   SO6 
Mahon, Joseph B . ,  5 ,  206 
main  propulsion  test  (MFT), 251 
Makarov, Oleg G . ,  233 ,   239,  504 
Malakhit,  147 
Malaysia,  22 ,   241 
Malina,  Frank J.,  3 12 
Maiyshev,  Yuri V . ,  166 ,  169 ,   177 ,   178 ,  2 3 4 , 4 7 3  
Man Will Never  Fly  Society, 
Manassas,  Va.,  170 
Mandelshtam, S . L . ,  66  
Mangoendiprodjo, Willy  Moenandir, 22 
Manhasset,  N . Y . ,  373  
Manhattan project, 
Manila,  Philippines,  98 
Manke,  John  A . ,  128 ,  304 
Manned Maneuvering Unit  (MMU),  6 2 , 7 3  
self-propelled. 441 
Manned Orbiting  Laboratory  (MOL), 98 ,   303 
Manned  Space Flight,  Office of  (NASA), 
Manston,  England,  287 
Marana,  A r iz . ,   239 
Marconi Space  and  Defence Systems  (U .K . ) ,   91 ,  481 
Marianas  Islands,  177 ,  215 
Marine Corps, U.S., 249 ,   313 ,  434 
Mariner  9 ,  1 17 
Marisat, 44 
maritime communications subsystems  (MCS), 259 
Maritime European Communications Satellite (Marecs), 48 ,   77 ,  233 ,   345 445  
Marecs-A ,  48 ,   231,  316 ,  3 4 5 , 4 4 5  
Marecs-B ,   48 ,   188 ,  231 ,   316 ,   345 ,   364 ,  517  
Ma r e c s -C ,  48 ,  
maritime  services,  233 ,   345 
communications,  231,  259,  364 ,   366 ,  445 ,   517 
global,  210  
payloads,  231 
Mark, Hans M . ,  73 ,   125 ,269 ,   288,  300 ,  328 ,  481 
Markey, David,  519 

74 1 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AEROKAUTICS 

INDEX  

Mars ,  24.  3 0 , 4 2 >  43 ,   5 2 ,  61,  117,  1 2 1 ,   180 ,   186, 280-282,  306,  326 376.  397 ,   398, 409 ,  410 ,  
415,  445,  453,  459 ,   480 
atmosphere,  52 ,   53 
Mars Data  Analysis  Program,  459 
Marseilles.  236 
Marshall,  George C . ,   175 
Marshall:  William  R . ,  365 
Marshall  Space Flight Center (MSFC). 3 .  4 ,   I I ,   14,  16 ,  23.  7 0 ,  78 ,   86 8 8 ,   112,  137 ,   140, 234 ,  
271 ,   289,  322 ,   323,  325 ,   346,  365 ,   366.  375 378,  385 ,   ,405, 413,  428.  442.  467,  486. 
490 ,   497 ,   498 ,   515 
contracts,  37 ,   137,  151,  173,  174,  176,  214,  283,  346,  489,  491 
Materials  and  Processes Laboratory, 36 ,   219 
missions,  13 2 .  292 
Payload  Crew  Training  Complcx,  498 
people,  7 ,   16, 26,  31 ,   3 6 , 4 1 ,  54 ,  5 7 ,  297 
programs,  37 ,  54 .   103,  119 ,  127,  129,  130.  160,  187 ,   191.  192, 282 
Shuttle  Projects  Office,  515 
Structures  and  Propulsion  Laboratory,  I87 
tests,  1 1 ,   22 ,   34 ,  38.  54 ,  79.  124,  154.  161, 230.  242,  321 
training,  3 
Martin,  J im ,   193 
Martin,  John  J . .   461 
Martin  Marietta  Aerospace  Corporation,  3 8 :  6 2 , 6 5 ,  73 .   95 .   108 ,   127  176.  214 ,   215 ,   227 ,   235 ,  
306,  330 ,   338,  358,  365 ,  375 ,   397,  489,  491  4 9 3 , 5 1 2 ,   513 ,   515 
Maryland,  135 
Massachusetts,  241 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT) ,  4 ,  30 ,   145,  156,  157,  191  192,  196, 241 ,   288 ,  
329,  338,  366. 415.  481 
Ccntcr for n leore t ica l   Physics,  329 
Lincoln  Laboratory,  30 
Masursky,  Harold,  2 8 ,   159 
Matagorda  Island, 289 ,   363 
material  science  studies,  151, 271,  323:  340,  371 ,  434 
Mattingly, Thomas K .   (Ken) 11.  313 ,   331 ,   350,  351 ,   370 ,  389 ,  467 
Mauna Kea,  Hawaii,  349 
Mauna  Loa,  Hawaii,  334 
Maunder Minimum,  342 
Mauro.  Larry,  99  
Mayfield  Robert  A . .   143.  I68 
MCI,  434 
measurement  of  atmospheric pollution  from  satellites  (,MAPS), 3.3 I 
measuring  devices and  techniques,  4 ,  38 ,  73.  75 ,  77 ,   78 ,  87 ,  9 4 ,  194  197, 235.  241 
atmospheric,  280 
micrometeorite,  355 
surface,  I O  
medicine,  22,  64, 85 ,  452 
biomedical  research,  194, 360,  447 
pharmaceutical  research,  424 ,   43 1 
rehabilitation  therapy,  44 
space,  151,  190 
See  also health  programs  and  studies 
Mendez,  Armando Tamayo,  208 

742 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Merbold,  Ulf,  3 ,   156, 297 ,   314,  323,  366 ,  447,  448 ,  453 ,   513  
Mercury  (planet),  197, 232 ,   263 
Mercury,  113 ,  274 ,   335 ,   339 ,   494 
Mercury  Redstone  1 ,  3 1 ,  
Project Mercury,  112 ,  351 
Meredith,  Leslie  H . ,  338 
Merrett,  Stephen,  516 
Merrett  Syndicates  Ltd.,  496 ,   516 
Merrill,  Bob ,   314 
Merritt  Island,  160 
mesosphere,  250 ,   303,  313 
Messenchm id ,  Einst,  5 13 
Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom (MBB),  203 ,   28 I 
metallurgy,  349 ,   480 
meteoroids,  21 I 
meteorology, 3 7 ,  67,  93 ,   121,  131,  138,  142,  167 ,   193,  198, 254 ,  280 288,  327 ,  4 2 4 , 4 4 5 ,   491 
Meteosat  1 ,  91 
Meieosat  2 ,  9 1 ,   1260, 283 
methane,  371 
Mctzger,  Albert,  174 
Mexico,  124 
Michoud  Assembly  Facility,  31, 38 ,   513  
micrometeorites,  7 5 ,   395 
Military  Operations  Research Society, 92 
military  programs,  7 ,  3 4 ,  7 1 ,   104,  1 0 6 , 2 6 2 ,  280 ,   28 I ,   3 4 5 , 4  1 2 , 4 4 8  4 6  I ,  492 
funding,  7 
laser  applications, 282 
Milky  Way,  106 ,   154,  162, 203,  303,  404,  405,  442,  485,  526 
Miller,  Edgar,  322 
Mimas (Saturn  moon), 228 ,  263 
mineral  exploration,  138 
Minneapolis,  M inn . ,   10 
Minos,  4 6  
mirror, primary.  282,  315 
missiles, 
ballistic,  5 4 ,  61 
cruise,  21 
nuclear,  453 
Mission  Control Center,  Houston,  448 
mission  specialists,  157,  161,  179.  199,  236, 297 ,   325 ,   3 3 1 , 3 3 2 ,  370  386,  3 9 8 , 4 0 0 ,  431 ,   463  
Mississippi,  130, 226 
Missouri,  158 
Mitchell,  E . ,  504  
Moffett  Field, Ca l if . ,  315 ,  488 
Mohave Desert,  266 
Mongolian  People’s Republic,  257,  261 ,   273 
monitoring  systems,  2 10 
Earth-resources,  139 
environmental,  143 
land  surfaces,  15 
ocean  surfaces,  1 5 ,  8 6  
Monroney, A .S . ,   Mike  (“Mr .   Aviation”),  146 

743 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AEROh’hUTICS 

INDEX  

monsoon  experiment  (MONEX),  25 
Montes,  Roberto Nuncz.  150 
Montreal  (Quebec),  4 
Moore,  Jesse W . , .   472 ,   493,  517.  518 
Morel,  Pierre,  283 
Morrison,  David,  349 
Morrison,  Dennis,  252 
Morrison,  Philip.  145 
Morrison-Knudsen.  In c . ,  98 
Moscow,  7 7 ,  204,  2 7 7  
Moscow  O lymp ics ,   169 
MOSCOW lnstitutc  of  Medico-Biological Problems,  22 ,   75 ,  87 
Moscow  Aviation  Institute,  377 
Moscow  University.  77 
Moser,  Tom,  155 
motion  sickness,  335 ,   336 ,  376 ,   3x6.  408,  420.  451 
Motorola  In c . ,  495 
Mt.  Hopkins,  Ar iz . ,   303 
Mt.  Palomar,  303 ,   371 
Mt.  Saint  Helens  (volcano),  158,  183,  184, 207.  208,  340,  388 
MI. Wilson,  442 
Mountain View,  Calif.,  290 
MPS-19  (radar  system),  141 
Mullane,  Richard  M . ,  399,  487!  489 ,  SM. 503  
multiplexer-demultiplexer  (MUXIDEMUX),  308 
multispectral  infrared  radiometer,  38 I 
MultiVisions, L td . ,   182 
Mumma, Michael  J . ,   281 
Muraca,  Ralph,  479 
Murphy.  John  E .  338 
Murray,  Bruce  C . .  210.  339 
Musgrave,  Stow,  152,  3 3 2 , 4 0 7 ,  408 
Mutch.  Thomas  A . ,  3 0>  55 ,  63 .   94 .   106,  1 1 5 .   153. 409.  480 
Mutch Memorial  Station.  See  Lander  1 
Myers,  Kenneth  I . ,  470 
Nakaya,  Ukichiro,  3 14 
Nasvytis,  Algirdis  L .   ( o r  Nasyvtis?), 52 
Nasvyris multiroller  traction  drive.  52  
Natal,  Brazil,  146 
National  Academy  of  Engineering,  462 
National  Academy of  Sciences,  39.  109, 219 ,   329. 460 
National  Advisory  Committee for  Aeronautics  (NACA), 30 ,  31 ,  39 ,   124  180.  288:  339 ,   351, 
4 2 5 , 4 9 4  
Lewis  laboratory, 288 
National  Aeronautic  Association  (NAA) ,  1  I ,   2 1 .   125.  130,  146, 202.  222  277 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space Agency  (NASA), 43 ,   75 ,   132 ,  213.  201  383.  398 ,   399, 407 ,  
409  
Advisory  Council,  231 ,   288 
Astronaut  Office:  5 1 
budget,  6 ,  57 ,   8 3 ,   109,  110,  116, 120 ,   128,  130,  133.  139, 249.  250 ,   259 ,  260 ,   304 ,  345 ,  
394 ,   403,  425 ,  454 
Chariots of  Apo l lo .   45 

744  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Civil Aviation Research  and Development  (CARD). 462 
contracts,  41 ,   ’14,  8 5 ,  96 ,   112,  115 ,   127,  134,  141,  144,  150,  156,  160,  161,  168,  179,  181, 
189,  199, 209,  214,  230,  339,  358,  365,  3 7 9 , 4 0 1 , 4 9 4 , 4 9 7  
cos ts ,  4 5 , 7 6 ,   8 0 ,  83 ,   8 4 , 9 4 ,   127,  133,  135,  145,  199 ,274 ,  275.  3 0 7 , 4 0 6 , 4 7 2 ,   496 
delays,  53 ,   76.  165, 265 
Earth  and  Planetiuy Exploration Division  of  OSSA,  472,  493 
experiments,  4. 
funding,  8 ,   10, 44:  88 
Headquarters,  124,  142,  180,  188. 222, 231,  234,  302,  341,  342,  351, 415,  4 6 7 , 4 9 3  
launches,  6 ,  238,  2 55 ,2 69 ,   276,  333,  421,  505 
lawsuit,  165, 415 
Life Sciences Division,  449 
management,  176, 244,  301 
Mission Control Center  (Houston) 
missions,  5 ,  17 ,  6 5 , 6 8 ,   76,  87 
Office of  Advanced Research and  Technology  (OART), 269 
Office of  Aenwautics and  Space Technology  (OAST),  71 ,   24,  287,  317,  493,  500, 526 
Office of  Applications,  49 
Office of  DOD Affairs,  188 
Office of  External Relations, 310 
Office of  Governmen thdus try   Affairs,  188 
Office of  International Affairs,  39,  188 
Office of  Management, 30b,  3  17 
Office of  Management Operations,  300,  317 
Office of  Manned  Space Flight,  14 
Office of  Public  Affairs,  188 
Office of  Space,  103 
Office of  Space and  Tems tr ia l   Applications (OSTA), 142, 300,  310,  313 
Office of  Space Flight, 366, 476 ,  506 
Office of  Space Science  (OSS), 30,  51,  63 ,   103,  184, 222,  231,  300,  310,  313,  323,  335, 
3 4 2 , 4 7 2 , 4 9 3  
Office of  Space Science and  Applications (OSSA),  30 ,   57,  21 ,   300,  428,  449,  472 
Office of  Space  Station,  493 
Office of  Space Tracking and  Data Systems,  306 
Office of Space Transportation System Operations,  74 ,   206,  366 
Office of  Technology  Assessment, 453 
Office of  University Affairs,  188 
people, 6 ,   14 ,  29,  30 ,   5 6 . 5 7 ,   71 ,   81 ,   88 ,   1 8 5 , 4 1 0  
Program Office (planned), 475 
“Program  Plan,  Fiscal Years  1981 through  1985,”  199 
program management,  110 
programs,  47 ,   81,  83 ,   145,  153,  158, 202 
reorganization,  270,  290,  300,  301,  317,  340,  3 6 6 , 4 6 2  
Solar Terrestrial Division of  O S S ,  4 7 2 , 4 9 3  
Space Medicine Branch,  449 
Space  Station Program,  467 
Space Station Program Office (interim), 467,  493 
Space Tracking and  Data  Systems,  300 
Space Transportation Operations,  300 
Spacelab Flight  Division  of  OSSA,  472,  493 
Technical Exchange Agreement,  480 
“Technologies  for  the Handicapped and  Agcd,”  44 

745 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

testing,  169, 242 
25th  anniversary. 437 
See  also  Space Transportation  Sys tems ,  Office  of 
National  Air and  Space Museum,  14, 35 ,  45.  56 ,   106, 222 ,   2?6,  287 ,   342 439.  440 ,   480 ,  486  
National  Association  for Search  and  Rescue,  388.  389 
National  Broadcasting  Corporation  (NBC), 66 ,   155 
National  Bureau  of  Standards,  93 .   322. 476 .   477 
National  Business Aircraft Association,  I25 
National  Center  for Atmospheric Research,  5 ,  288 
National  Center for Policy  Analysis,  484 
national  defense,  92 
National  Earth  Satellite  Service  (NESS)  (formerly National  Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  and  National  Environmental  Satellite Service, 205 ,  206,  397 
National  Institutes  of  Hea l th   ( N I H ) ,   329 
National  Joint  Propulsion  Conference,  348 
National  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  (NOAA), 5 ,  9 ,  25 ,  27  38 ,  64 ,  66 ,  67 ,  8 6 ,  
93 ,   110,  138 ,  144 ,   153,  160,  179, 193,  199. 205  207,  213.  254.  284,  357 ,   397 ,  4 0 6 . 4 7 5 ,  
492 ,   522 
Marine  Rshcr ics  Service  (NMFS),  194 
National  Severe  S torms  Laboratory.  194 
NOAA-A  ( N o ~ u  6 ) ,  38 ,   153, 284 
NOAA-B.  153.  159 ,  207 
NOAA-C,  160.  284 
NOAA-E  ( N O U O  8), 167. 406 ,   410 ,  490 
NOAA-F.  167, 232 ,   372 ,  491 
NOAA-G,  167.  232 
N OM - 7 ,  284 
National  Oceanic  Satellite  System  (NOSS),  I  I O .   179. 250>  259 
Nalional  Operational  Environmental  Satellite System  (NOESS) ,   I53 
National  Organization  for Women  (NOW),  159 
National  Park  Service,  239 
National  Research  Council  (NRC) (U.S.), 109:  175 ,  288 
National  Research  Laboratory  (NRL) ,  129,  134 
National  Science Foundation  (NSF), 5 ,  57 ;  64, 121.  131 ,  369 ,  5125 
National  Science Teachers  Association  (NSTA), 153. 273 
National  Scientific  Balloon  Facility  (NSHF)  (Texas).  23.  217 ,   369. 412  473 
National  Space  Club:  133 
National  Space Technology  Laboratories  (NSTL],  26,  38. 41 ,  EO .   8 4 . 9 7   119:  130,  132.  137. 
140,  142,  149,  161,  180,  181, 203,  235,  241 ,   382  467 
National  Taxpayers  Union.  198 
National  Telecommunications and  Information  Administration,  27 
National  Transportation  Safety  Board,  109 
National  Trust  for Historic  Preservation, 41.5 
National  Weather  Service, 382 
National  Wildlife Refuge,  160 
natural  resources,  17 I 
Naugle,  John  E . ,  29,  3 0 ,  231 
Naval  Electronics  System  Command,  291 
Naval  Research  Laboratory, 426 ,   483 
Naval  Space Command, 424 
Naval Weapons  Center.  233 
navigation,  automatic.  279 

746 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Navstar  satellite  (USAF), 83,  133, 409 
Navy,  U . S . ,  5 , 4 4 ,  125 ,   132,  150, 151 ,   171 ,   189, 249 ,  273 ,   274 ,  324 373 ,  426,  461 ,   500, 514 
near-sensing  programs,  208 
nebula, 401 ,   44 2  
Neidner,  Malcolm,  485 
Nelson,  George D.  (Pinky),  400 ,   4 1 3 , 4 7 4  
Nelson,  Todd E . ,   273 
Neptune  (planet),  6 ,  7 ,  304 ,  371 ,  410, 411 ,  418 
Ness,  Norman  F.,  29  
Netherlands, 3 ,   15:  25 ,  5 6 ,  64, 156 ,   179, 228, 446  
Aerospace  Agency,  393 
Neugebauer,  Gerry   456  
Neupert,  Werner,  184 
neutral-bouyancy  simulator,  192 
neutrinos,  225 ,   226 
New  China  News  Agency 
New  Delhi,  363 
New  England,  2 17 
New  Guinea,  122 
New  Jersey,  130 
New  Mexico,  118 ,  230 
New  Orleans,  La . ,   3 1 ,   5 3  
New  York,  N .Y . ,   117 
New  York  Society of  Illustrators, 202 
Newell, Homer  E . ,  Jr . ,  , 426  
Newman,  C .  Thomas,  109 ,  312 
Newman,  Lany, 42 0 ,505  
Newport,  Werner,  184 
Newport  News ,   Va., 215 
Newton,  Jon,  481 
NGC  6946, 227 
Niamey,  140 
Nicks, Oran W . ,   125 
Nicollier,  Claude,  3 ,   156, 179, 297 ,   513 
Niell,  Arthur  E . ,   9 2  
Niger,  140  
night  landings, 432,  446  
Nike-Orion  (rocket),  75 ,   195 ,  350 
Nikon  Inc.,  66  
Nimbus 
N imbus  5 ,  35.5,  405 
N imbus  6 ,  237 ,   233,  430 
Nimbus  7 ,  I O ,   193,  393 ,   525  
1979 J1   (satellite),  150 
1979 52  (satellite),  150 
1983TB  (unknown  object),  445 ,  446 
nitrogen,  41, 3 3 5 , 4 8 9  
tetroxide,  283 ,   299 ,   305 ,   311,  3 1 5 , 4 3 8 ,  446 
Nixon,  Richard  M . ,  329 ,   370 
Nola,  Frank  J . ,  63 ,   88  
Nordsat,  145 
Norfolk  General  Hospital,  85 

747 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUTICS  

INDEX  

Norman,  Ok la . ,   I94 
North,  Ed,  153 
North  American  Aerospace  Defense Command  (NAADC), 464 
North American  Air Defense Command  (NORAD).  23 ,   37 ,  42, 75 ,   125.  169 209,  280.  41 1 
North  American  Rockwell. 338 
North  Carolina,  209 
North  Star. 427 
Northwest Airlines,  288 
Northwest Terntories (N.W.T.), Canada, 31 1 
Noway,  169,  191.  228 
Norwegian  Sea,  169 
Nova  I ,   273 
Novick,  Robert,  337 
nuclear  arms  t e h t   a rea ,   156 
nuclear  cmulsion  studies, 30 
nuclear  power,  149 ,  349, 404  
nuclear  reactor, 404 
nuclear  warhead,  I56 
numerical  aerodynamic  simulator  (NAS), 394 
Nysmith, C .  Robert, 317 ,  493 
nystagmus  (eye condition),  452 
Oakley, Merrill.  309 
OAO  Corporation,  30 ,   221 
Oaziz,  147 
Obayashi,  Tatsuzo, 3 14 
Oberg,  James  E . ,  439.  499  
Oberon  (Uranus  moon),  349 Oberphaffenhofen 
Observatory  for Geophysical  Monitoring  of  Climatic  Change,  !;34 
ocean  color experiment.  65 ,  66  
ocean  data,  166,  179, 275 ,   284,  342 
Ocean  of  Storms,  284 
Ocean  Search,  Inc . .  
oceanographic data,  393 ,  468 
Ockels,  Wubbo,  3 ,   156,  179, 297 ,   314 ,   323 
O’Connor.  Brian  D . ,   161, 470 
O’Dell, C .  Robert, 4x5 
Od lum ,  Floyd,  203 
O’Hara, Tom,  202 
Ohio Statc  University, 30 ,   139 
Ohira, Masayoshi.  6 8  
O’Keefe, John   A . ,   167. 470 
0 ’ Keefe,  Wil I  iam  S . 
Okinawa  Island,  259 
Oklahoma, 269,  280 
Olstad,  Walter B . ,  57 ,   221 ,   31 7 
O’Neill,  Gerard  K . ,  289 
Onizuka,  Ellison  S . ,  370 ,  467 
Ontario,  I O  
Opal,  Chet,  485 
Operation  Paperclip,  187 
optical  fabrication,  282 
optical  landing  aid,  76 

748 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

optics,  349 
Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV),  491 
Orbital  Systems Corporation, 410 
Orbital Transfer Vehicle  (OTV),  365 
orbiter, 4 ,   7 , 9 ,   10,  1 1 ,   13, 38,  74,  76 ,   88,  146,  159,  197.  269,  311  322,  326 
changes,  41 
engines,  146 
lunar,  57 
Orbiter  1 ,   326 
Orbiter  2 ,   326 
OV-2, 269 
OV-99, 7 ,  9 ,   437 
OV-102, 7 ,  9,  269, 437 
OV-103, 7 ,  9 
OV-104, 7 ,  9 
permanent,  350,  358 
reusable,  14 ,  289 
Orbiting Astronomical Observatory  (OAO), 252 
Oao 3  (Copernicus),  222,  252 
orbiting  satellite carrying  amateur radio (OSCAR),  304 
orbits,  328,  369 
deorbiting,  7 ,  40 
Earth missions,  280 
eccentric,  407 
elliptical,  410,  415,  438 
fixed,  150 
gcostationary, 8 ,  34 ,   37,  51 ,  261, 284, 433 ,  461 ,  494 
geostationary  transfer,  5 I7  
geosynchronous,  34,  157,  182, 205,  206,  229,  232,  241,  280,  289,  310, 321,  329,  409,  412, 
413,  421,  4 2 3 , 4 7 6  
geosynchronous  transfer, 255 
heliocentric,  417 
horseshoe,  326 
near-geosynchronous,  238,  333 
near-polar,  225,  332 
polar,  284,  393 
polar-transfer,  273 
“round ,”   347 
stationary, 122, 427 
Sun-synchronous,  34 
synchronous,  5 ,  37,  5 3 ,  268,  333,  339,  348,  360, 4 1 3 , 4 1 4  
synchronous  transfer,  207,  221,  372 
transfer,  79 ,   8 4 , 2 3 2 , 3 3 3 , 3 4 7 ,   360,  366 ,409 ,   412,  425,  4 3 0 , 4 3 4  
orbit-maneuvering  system (OMS),  265 
OMS- 1,  265 
OMS-2 ,   265 
Oregon Graduale Center, 208 
origins of  plasmas  in  Earth’s neighborhood  (OPEN), 94 
Orion  (barge),  322 
Orion  (nebula), 348 
Orion  (rocket),  75 
Ormsby,  Robert  B . ,  Jr . ,   197,  198 

149 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUnCS  

INDEX  

Osgood,  Charles.  9 3  
Oshkosh, Wisc.,  99  
O S S - I ,   184, 313,  336 
OSTA  I ,   6 5 ,  66 
O’Toole, Thomas,  37 
Ors  (satellite),  120 
Ottawa,  154 
Overmyer, Robert  F.,  33 I ,   376, 400 
oxygen, 365 
gaseous.  309 
liquid  (LOX), 38.  53.  8 5 ,  86 ,   124.  146 ,  220,  221 ,   235,  242 ,   251,  253,  262,  307 ,   308, 438 ,  
495 
leak, 403 ,   460  
pressure,  377 ,   385 
ozone,  75 ,  208 ,   249 ,   288,  305,  313 
Pacific Gas  and  Electric Company  (PG&E),  117, 208 
Pacific Ocean, 5 ,  2 3 . 4 0 ,   43.  64, 148 ,   177.  231,  254 ,  266.  31 6 . 4 9 2  
Packard,  David,  329 
Pad  A ,  24 
Page, George  F.,  31 ,   244,  262 ,   297 ,   299,  307,  351 
Page America.  I77 
Paine, Thomas  A , .   185 
Painter,  Wen,  280 
Palapa.  22,  220 
Palapa A - 1 ,  22 
Palapu A - 2 ,  22 
Palapa B system, 22,  418 
Palapa  B - I .   241 
Palapa  B-2.  241 ,  464,  496 ,   516 ,  518 
Palestine, Tex.,  217.  369 
Palestine  Liberation  Organization  (PLO), 310,  381 
Palmdale,  Calif..  14, 54 ,   165 
Palo Alto,  Calif., 4 ,   16 
Palomar,  86 
Pan  American  World  Airways. 466 
Pang,  Kevin  D . ,   1 17 
parachutes,  233.  351.  3 5 8 .  3 9 9 , 4 7 3 .  515 
Paris.  France,  153 
Paris.  Paul  C . ,   198 
Parker,  Robert,  157 .  314 ,  447,  448 
Parks,  Robert  J . .   14 ,  456 
Pasadena,  Calif.,  16. 241,  293 
Patrick  Air  Force  Base,  Fla..  73 .   3 11.  335 
Civil  Engineering  Squadron.  3 I 1  
payload  specialists. 3 ,   16, 156.  236.  297.  323.  359 ,  372,  3 9 9 , 4 2 4  4 4 8 , 4 5 1 ,  463 ,   510 
payload-assist  module  (PAM), 465 
Payload-Operations  Control  Center  (POCC), 35%. 498 
payloads,  15 ,  23,  34:  5 4 ,  57 ,  6 2 , 6 5 >  7 3 , 7 7 ,   78, 80 ,  88. 91 .   118,  124  127,  150,  184,  191, 
1 9 5 , 2 1 5 ,  229,  266,  271,  273,  274,  281, 301,  310 313,  314 ,   329,  332 ,  335 ,  340 ,  345. 
351,  360,  363.  365,  369 ,   372 ,401   4 1 3 , 4 3 4 , 4 4 8 ,   476,  485.  4 8 9 , 4 9 9 .  5 1 2 .  524 
commercial,  376 
cost,  151 ,   160 

750 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

experiments,  298 
free-flying,  74  
“getaway  specials”  (GAS), 353 
maritime communications,  23 1 
passenger,  260 
reservations,  103 
retrieval,  140 ,   195 ,  230 ,   281 
scientific,  283 ,   380 ,  453 
search-and-rescue, 490 
transfer  of,  243 
Payne, Randolph,  173 
peaceful uses of  space technology, 4 ,   154 
Pearl, John  C . ,  29 
Peenemunde,  188 
Pegasus,  154 
Pegasus I ,  75 
Pegasus 2 ,  75 ,   83 
Pegasus 3, 75 
Pennsylvania,  217 
Pennsylvania Department of  Environmental Resources,  2  16 
Pennsylvania State University,  118 ,   195 
People’s Republic of  China  (PRC), 4 ,  11,  2 7 , 4 2 , 5 2 ,  54 ,  74 ,   85 ,   104  127 ,  145 ,   156 ,  209 ,   228 ,  
299,  349 ,   364 ,   392 ,  428 ,   4 6 1 , 4 9 8  
Academy of  Sciences,  110, 392 
Academy of  Space Technology, 4 ,   27 
cooperation with  the  Unitcd States,  4  
RPC   13 ,  428 
training of  astronauts,  105 
Pcrcheron  project,  289,  291 
Perkin-Elmer Corporation,  282,  315 ,  406 
Perry,  GeofTrey, 439 
Perry,  William J . ,   33 
Peru, 64 ,   228 ,   406 
Petersen,  Richard  H . ,   5 19, 526  
Peterson, Donald  H . ,  332 ,  407 ,   408 
Peterson Air  Force Base,  125 
Petrone, Rocco A , ,   185 
Petrov,  Boris,  190 
Pettit,  Donald R . ,  470  
Pham  Tuan,  185 ,   189,  190 ,  203 ,  204 
phenomena induced  by  charged-particle beams (PICPAB), 236 
Philadelphia,  4  
Philco Corporation,  449 
Philippines,  22 ,  241 
Philips  (Netherlands company),  91 
Phobos (Mars satellite),  117 
Phoebe (Saturn moon),  263 ,   331 
Phoenix,  Ar iz . ,   236 
photography,  166 ,   177 ,  199 ,  206,  220 ,  226 ,  228 ,   236 ,  266,  267 ,   293  294 ,  336 ,   357 ,  430  
ultraviolet, 232 
X-ray,  337 
photometers,  446  

75 I 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

photons:  282 
photopolarimeter,  333 
phototypesetting  technology,  206:  207 
physiological  studies,  268 
Pickering, William,  312 
Pilotless  Aircraft  Research  Station,  180 
pilotless  research  vehicle,  71 
Pilyugin,  Nikolai,  360 ,   361 
Pioneer,  24,  55 ,  5 6 ,  60 ,  61 ,   62 ,   78 ,   123,  159 ,  235 ,   243,  280 ,   333 
P ionee r  6 .  243 ,   306,  414 
Pioneer  7,  243 ,   306,  414 
P ionee r  8, 243 ,   306,  414 
P i o n e e r   9,  243 ,   3 0 6 ,  414 
P ionee r   I O .   43 ,   56 ,   123.  306,  333 ,  41 I ,  418 
P ionee r  11. 3 8 , 4 9 ,  5 5 ,  56, 59, 60, 6 1 . 6 2 ,   78 ,   220,  263,  306 
P ionee r  1 2 ,  306 
Pioneer Saturn,  5 5 ,   123 
Pioneer-Venus,  16, 24 ,   26,  28.  124,  162, 225, 232 ,   235,  322 ,   331. 483 
P ionee r  Venus  I .   28 ,   33 I 
P ionee r  Venus 2 .  28 ,   331 
Pioneer  Parachute  Company,  5 15  
Piper,  William  T . ,   189 
Piper  Aircraft Corporation,  I89  
Pisa, Italy,  120 
plasma-wave  phenomena  and  instruments.  279, 4 0 6 , 1 7 6 , 4 8 3 ,  497 
Plum  Brook  (test  area),  209 
Pluto (planet),  6 ,  7 ,  43 ,   349 ,   350,  371, 41 I 
POGO  (satellites),  7 7 ,  25 I 
pogo-correction  device,  107,  132 
Pogue,  William,  216 ,   377,  385 
Poland,  11 ,  66 .   75 ,   273,  523 
cosmonauts,  1  I 
polarimeter,  337 
political  aspects,  133, 379,  392 
pollutants  and  contaminants,  21 1 ,   321,  391 ,  407,  459 
Polynom  apparatus,  17 
Pond,  Clayton,  202 
Ponnamperuma,  Cyn l .   I 2  I 
Pool,  Sam ,  447 
Popov,  Leonid,  147,  159,  163,  164,  166,  169, 177,  178,  185,  1!:9,  203  208,  213-216>  222, 
234,  273,  276 ,   359 ,   377,  384 
Port  Arthur,  Tcx.,  194 
Poseidon  (barge),  16 
Potate,  John  S . ,  234 
Powell,  Luther  E . ,   74 
power  consumption  systems,  88 ,   150 
power  factor controller,  63  
power  transmission  system,  52 
power  units, 308 
Powers,  John  A .  (Shorty),  I13 
Pratt  & Whitney.  See  United  Technologies  Corporation 
Presque  Isle.  Me . ,   153 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Press,  Frank, 4 ,  7 ,  86 ,   112 ,  219 
Princeton University, 30 ,   8 6 ,   191 
Institute  for Advanced  Study, 210 
h n z ,  Dianne K . ,   16 ,   152 ,  483 
Prognoz  7.  162 
Progress 
Progress  2 ,   18 
Progress  5 ,  18, 3  1 
Progress  6 ,  31 ,   39 ,  40  
Progress  7,  49 
Progress  8,  147,  148 
P r o g r e s s 9 ,   148 ,   163 
Progress  10 ,  178 ,   185 ,   189 
Progress  1 I ,  2  I 3  
Progress  1 2 ,  260 , .261  
Progress  13 ,  346 ,   347  
Progress  16, 377 
Progress  17, 430 ,   434  
Progress  18 .  430  
Progress  20, 479  
Progress  23, 495 
program operating  plan  (POP), 69 
Project  Condor, 406  
Project  Orion,  210 
Project Whitecloud, 5 14 
Promontoly Point, Utah,  34 
propulsion  systems,  84 ,   85 ,   113 ,   132,  161 ,  181 ,  2 2 0 , 2 3 6 ,   237 ,  251  269 ,   289 ,  297 ,   299 ,   329 ,  
337 ,   347 ,   349 ,   363 ,   3 8 6 , 4 3 7 ,  490 
f l igh t   test,  294 
l iqu id ,   47 ,   110 ,  127 ,   167 ,   1 8 1 ,   183 ,  214 ,   262,  326  
on-board,  280,  340 
protons,  2 2 5 , 4 8 1  
proton-electron  flux,  284 
Proxmire, William,  197 ,   198 ,  345 ,   346 
h n a r i u ,   Durnitru, 273 ,   276 
F’tacek,  Stephen,  287 
Puddy,  Don,  1 0 7 , 2 5 6 , 2 6 6  
P u e r toR i co ,24 ,   111 ,   1 3 5 , 2 0 9  
pulsars,  279,  337  
Purcell, Joseph,  11 6  
Purdue  University,  139 ,  405 
Laboratory  for Applications of  Remote  Sensing,  139 
Purgold, Gerald C . ,  210 ,   21 I 
pylons,  279 ,   337 
pyrotechnic shock test,  171 
Quagliarello, Ernesto, 469 
Quann, John  J.,  366  
quasars,  222 ,   240 ,   241 ,   279,  346 ,   371 
PKS2000-330,  371 
Queen Mary,  1 5 8 , 2 0 2  
Queen Maud  Land,  13 I 
quiet  clean  general-aviation turbofan  (QCGAT), 78 

753 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

INDEX  

quiet  short-haul  research  aircraft  (QSRA),  189,  193, 249, 291) 
Quistgaard,  Erik,  98 ,  233 
radar,  24,  28 ,   330 ,   358 ,   379,  391, 4 0 6 , 4 6 4  
C-band  system,  I41 
mapping,  410  
radar-sensing  craft,  345 
radiation,  13,  154, 333,  501 
belts,  171,  395 
contamination,  39  I 
infrared,  393,  512 
solar,  393  
Radiation  Monitor  Experiment,  5  16 
radiators, 329 
radios 
cellular,  380, 381 
tracking,  369 
radio communications,  123,  184,  193, 291 ,   377 
Radio  Corporation of America  (RCA) ,  93 ,  94 ,  96 ,   121.  122,  127.  128  135, 206 ,  310 ,  424.  421 
American  Communications Company,  449 
Astro-Electronics.  179 ,  284 ,  495 
RCA  Americom,  310 ,  433  
RCA-C,  321 
RCA-D,  433 
RCA-E,  433 
RCA-F,  433 
RCA-G,  433 
Radio  Luxembourg,  145 
radio  static.  336 
Radio Technical Commission  for Aeronautics,  186 
radio  waves,  154 
radioactivity.  134,  331,  391 
isotopes.  322 
radioastronorny,  240 ,   2’41 
radioisotope photoelectric  generator,  134 
radioisotope  thermoelectric  generators  (RTG), 230,  327.  398 
rad iome rq   140.  199.  208.  232 ,  284.  342 ,   355,  381,  382 
radiotelephones.  382 
radiotelescope.  58 ,   346 
Ragent,  Boris,  24 
Ramaty,  Reuven,  162 
Rand  Corporation,  198 
Ranow,  Wayne  C . ,  267 
Ransome  Airlines,  249 
Rauschenburg, Robert,  202 
reactor-control  system,  300,  329,  339 
470 
Readdy, William  F. 
Reagan,  Ronald  W . ,   244,  249 ,   256,  269,  274.  275,  309,  325,  370,  376 383,  391,  392.  394 ,  
~ 
397.  3 7 9 , 4 0 7 , 4 0 9 , 4 1 4 ,   420,  421.  4 2 5 , 4 3 2 ,  437  451 ,460 ,  463 ,  4 6 9 , 4 7 5 , 4 9 3 ,  496, 
498.  500, 511 .   519 ,   524 
receiver-processors,  63 
Recking  Peak moraines,  13 I 
recommaissance vehicles,  15,  142 

754 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

recovey,  363 .   See  also satellite, retrieval; Space Shuttle,  retrieval 
Redmond,  Charles,  308 
Redondo  Beach,  Calif,  4,  51 
Redstone,  187 
Redstone  Army  Air Held,  22 
Redstone  Arsenal,  2  1 7  
reentry, 23 ,   75,  83,  113 ,  169 ,  245 ,   265 ,   268 ,  270,  271,  280,  289 ,  294 391 ,   400 300 ,  332 ,   340 ,  
341 ,   347 
problems, 55, 266 
See  also  Skylab 
Reiber, Duke,  43  
Reiche,  Henry  C . ,  J r . ,   381 
remote  control,  340 
remote-manipulator  system  (RMS), 281 ,   289,  322 ,  336 
mechanical  arm,  1 5 1 ,   152 ,  298,  309 ,  313 ,   335 ,   3 3 6 , 4 1 3 ,  419 ,  4 2 0 , 4 3 0 , 4 7 4 , 4 8 0 ,  503 ,  
5 10 
remote-sensing  programs,  9,  15, 86,  108 ,   140,  142 ,   144,  154 ,  171, 208 21 1 ,  251 ,   334 ,  409 ,  
4 3 4 , 4 6 7 , 4 6 9  
Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  175 ,  494 
repair,  103 ,   108 ,  256,  330 ,  342 ,   370 ,  4 0 8 , 4 1 3 , 4 6 4 ,  491 
See also Space  Shuttle 
Republic  Airlines,  176 
research  and  devekipment  (R&D),  77 ,   83 ,   95 ,   109 ,  110,  132 ,   137,  138  141,  144 ,   193 ,  215 ,   16 ,  
259 ,   285,  304 ,  327 ,  345 ,   348 ,  354 ,  358 ,  369 375 ,  392 ,  3 9 3 , 3 9 7 ,  496 ,   506 
airway  systems,  24 
atmospheric,  1 12,  118 
biomedical,  453 
clinical,  449 
energy, 229,  230 
microgravity, 340 
oceanic,  129 
research  vehicles,  179 ,   189 
Research  Institute  for Advanced Computer  Science,  383 ,  405 
Research  on Atmospheric  Volcanic Emission  (RAVE), 208 
Resnick,  Judith  A . ,   152 ,  3 9 9 , 4 8 7 , 4 8 9 ,  500, 503 
Reston,  Va.,  1 12 
retrieval, 4 0 8 , 4 1 3 , 4 1 9 , 4 6 4 , 4 7 4 , 4 8 0 , 4 9 1 , 4 9 6 ,   515 ,  516  
See also Space Shuttle 
return-beam  vidicon  (RBV),  291 
Reuters,  39 ,   127 ,  2 1 5 , 4 2 8  
Reynolds Aluminum  Company,  53  
Reynolds numbers,  137 
Rhea  (Saturn  moon),  62 ,   228 ,   263 
Rhode  Island,  209 
Rice University, 485  
Richards,  Richard  N . ,   161 
Ride,  Sally K., 152 ,  355 ,   3 8 6 , 4 1 8 - 4 2 0 , 5 0 3 ,   509 ,  513 
rings,  2 6 3 , 3 1 5  
Jupiter,  42 ,   76 
Saturn, 56 ,   59 ,  60 ,  62 ,   78 ,   167, 226 ,   293 
Uranus,  5 1 1 
Ritter,  James C . ,   134 

1 5 5  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

I N D E X  

Roanoke,  Va.,  2 17 
robotics,  196, 219 ,   331.  335 
Rockefeller University,  145 
rocket  motors,  289 
problems.  76 
solid-fuel,  7 4 ,   127 
See  a lso  solid-fuel  rocket  boosters 
rockets,  46.  54 ,   7 4 ,  7 5 . 7 7 ,   85 ,  8 7 ,   118,  159,  184 ,  188,  194 ,   195.  225 238 ,   239.  255 ,   279 ,  
292,  304,  317,  337,  363 ,   393,  3 9 8 , 4 0 6 ,  438,  465 4 8 1 , 4 9 9  
A-2,  438 
applications,  230 
casings.  242 
G  rocket  (Soviet),  294,  295 
geophisical,  66 
H - I ,   262 
manuevering.  335 
MU-35,  255 
nozzles,  44 0 ,  441 ,  447 ,  489 
on-board  maneuvering.  266 
research,  179, 312 
reusable,  289 
sale of  parts,  414,  481 
SLV-3,  183 
sounding,  118 ,   191, 350 
Star-48, 489 
V-2,  81 
Rockwell  International  Corporation,  9 .   14, 27.  3 8 , 4 I ,  45.  54 ,  70,  76  84 ,  8 6 ,  91 ,   103.  I  I O .  
122,  130,  132,  140,  157,  159,  179, 209,  2 2 0 2 8 3 .  358 
Autonetics  Strategic Systems Division,  91 
Energy  Systems Group,  209 
North  American  Aircraft  Division.  7 I 
Palmdale  plant,  308 
Rocketdyne  Division,  80 ,   105,  1  I O .   380 
Space  Systems Group,  83 
Rodnik,  163 
Rogers, Thomas F., 5 I 8  
Rohini  I ,   183 
Rolls  Royce  of England,  154 
Romanenko,  Y u r i   V..  5 8 ,   163 ,  208 ,   504 
Romania,  75 ,  257,  273 ,  276 
room  temperature  vulcanizing  (RTV),  515 
Rosat  (Roentgensatellit),  271,  358 
Rose, Gregory  J . ,   470 
Rosen,  Stanley G . ,  104 
Ross,  Jerry  L . ,   161,  463 
Rota,  251 
rotor-systems  research  aircraft  (RSRA), 3 14, 3 I5  
Rukavkhnikov,  Nikolay.  40  
Rutherford  Appleton  Laboratory 
Ryumin, Valery,  I I ,   17,  18 ,  31:  4 9 . 5 8 >  71 ,   147.  148 ,   159,  163,  164  166:  169,  177 ,   185,  189, 
2 0 3 , 2 0 8 ,  213-216. 222 ,   234 ,   273,  377,  384 385 ,  424  
Sachs Harbor,  3 I  I 

156 

WDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Saclay, France,  120 
Sacramento ,Peak, N . M . ,  16 
safety,  10, 24,  37 ,   155,  167,  175, 244,  259,  262,  298,  330, 403 
Sagan,  Carl, 45 
St.  Louis, Mo . ,  47 ,   287 
St.  Louis Port  Authority, 47 
St.  Regis Paper Company,  138,  139 
Southern Timberland  Division,  138 
St.  Vincent,  26 
Saipan,  177, 215,  225 
Salt Lake City, Utah,  44 
Salyut, 3 5 0 , 4 0 4 , 4 1  I ,  423 ,  454 
S a l y u t 6 ,   I O ,   11 ,   17,  18 ,  31,  3 9 , 4 7 , 4 9 ,  5 8 , 7 1 ,  7 2 , 9 7 ,  113,  134,  1 4 7 , 1 4 8 ,  159,  163,  164, 
166,  169,  177,  178,  185,  189,  190, 203,  208 ,213 -216 ,   222,  234,  239,  257,  260 ,   273, 
276,  281,  301,  341,  385, 424,  465 
Sa lyu t   7,  341,  345,  347,  350,  353,  359,  360,  377,  384,  404,  4 1 1 , 4 2 1 , 4 2 3 , 4 2 4 ,  4 2 8 , 4 3 0 ,  
434 ,   4 3 8 , 4 3 9 , 4 4 6 , 4 5 2 , 4 5 4 , 4 6 5 , 4 7 3 , 4 7 9 , 4 9 1 , 4 9 2 ,   495 ,503 ,   509 
Salyut-Cosmos, 341 
San Diego,  Calif., 6 2 ,  210,  240,  323 
San Francisco, Calif., 46 ,   92 ,   104,  106,  153,  167, 240 
San  Marco  platform,  23 ,   118 
San Pedro,  Calif.,  353 
Sandler,  Harold,  138 
Sandusky, Ohio,  209 
Santa Susana, Ca l if . ,   I10 
Satcom program,  135, 221 
Satcorn 1 ,  127,  128 
Satcom 3  (RCA), 9 3 . 9 4 . 9 6 ,   122,  123, 128 
Satcorn 4 ,  310,  321 
Satellite Business Systems (SBS),  3 0 , 4 6 ,   129, 221,  229,  238 ,   300, 376 489 ,  500 
SBS-A  (SbS I ) ,  229 
SBS-B  (Sbs Z),  300 
SBS-D  (Sbs  4 ) ,  5 0 0 ,  503 
satellites,  15 ,   22,  26,  6 8 ,  8 6 , 9 3 , 9 4 ,   139, 325,  375 
artificial, 52  
broadcasting,  459 
commercial, 8 , 4 3 ,  166, 238,  240,  310,  331,  347,  348,  354,  363 
communications, 8 , 9 ,  25-28,  3 9 , 4 1 , 4 3 , 4 8 ,  5 1 , 7 7 ,  79 ,   80 ,   83 ,  95,  118, 122,  129,  135, 
139,  145,  146,  166,  170, 206,  215,  220,  222,  229,  232,  237,  239,  240,  255 ,261 ,   310, 
330,  333,  347,  348,  354,  355,  372,  376,  3 9 8 , 4 1 3 ,  4 1 9 , 4 2 1 , 4 2 5 , 4 2 7 , 4 3 1 , 4 4 1 , 4 4 8 ,  
48 1 
data-relay,  116,  157, 395,  399 
early-warning,  61 
Egrth-observation,  34 
environmental, ,207 ,  213 
geostationary,  255 
geosynchronous, 475 
global  communications,  173,  179, 217,  220,  316 
infrared  astronomy, 6  
intelligence-gathering,  345 
magnetic  field,  56 
maritime communications, 231,  259,  316,  345,  364 

757 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

meteorological.  3 4 ,   199.  254,  255.  260,  283 
military,  106, 372 
navigational,  273.  274 
ocean  surveillance.  128,  391 
orbiting,  282,  369 
POGO,  77 
PRC  "spy  i n   the  sky,"  74 
reconnaissance,  73 .   218,  391 
remote-sensing.  4.  77 
research.  250 ,  260 
retrieval,  152, 297 ,   306 
scientific,  206,  255 ,   271 
small  astronomy, 23 
SPOT,  15  
surveillance,  165 
telecommunications,  465 
tethcred,  394 
tracking,  116 ,   122,  157, 395 ,   399, 472 
weather,  I O ,   80.  8 6 ,  206.  284.  288,  380 ,  522 
X-ray,  271 
See  a lso   communications; television 
Saturn  (planet), 13. 49 ,   56 ,  59 ,  60 ,  62 ,  78,  95 ,  96 ,   124,  157,  167  196, 206 ,   211 ,  218, 227 ,  
228 ,   232,  235,  249 ,   262-264, 279,  293,  304  3 1 5 .   325 ,  399 .  410 ,  427 
Saturn,  110,  187.  226 
Saturn  V ,   45 ,   203 
Saturn  5 ,  57 .   294 
Saudi  Arabia,  25 
Savage, J. C . ,   92 
Savinykh, Viktor.  260,  261 ,   273 ,   276 
Savitskaya, Svetlana,  359 ,   360,  377, 419 ,  491 ,  492 ,   504 
Savoca, Tony  L . .  494 
Scandanavia,  25 ,   145 
scanners,  27,  139 ,   140 
linear  array,  240 
multispectral  (M S S ) ,   172, 240,  292 ,  355,  397 
Scarab  2 ,   351  
Scarf,  Frederick L . ,   279 
scatterorneters 
C-band, 468 
wave,  4 61  
wind,  467 
Scherer,  Lee  R . ,  5 7 ,  81,  364 
Schirra,  Walter M . ,   120 ,  274 
Schmitt, Harrison,  166,  187 
Sehneider,  William  C . ,  125 
Schnever,  Bernard  A , .   I89  
Schubert,  lohannes,  281 
Schweikart,  Russell  L .   (Ru s ty ) ,  48 ,   49 ,  504 
Science  and  Industry  Museum,  6 3  
Science Applications  Inc..  328 
Science  Research  Council  (SRC),  108 
scientific  research  facility,  resusable,  325 

758 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

scientific studies and experiments,  4 ,   16,  18, 22 ,   26 ,   30 ,   31, 36 ,   38 42 ,   4 7 . 4 8 ,   52 ,  56 ,   80 ,   84 ,  
8 7 ,  93 ,   120 ,   121 ,  128 ,   144,  204,  250 252,  273 ,   281,  283,  289 ,   291 ,   293 ,  298 ,   315 ,   333 ,  
434 ,  4 4 7 , 4 4 8 ,  490  505 
animals,  75 ,   244 
biology, 305 
disappointments,  54  
forestry, 217 
instruments,  77 ,   161 ,  225,  322 ,  393  
laser applications,  282 
plants,  87 ,   145 ,   163 ,  305 ,  306 
Spacelab,  151  
scientists,  108 ,   155, 162,  179 ,  184 ,  256 ,   268 
European,  179 ,  256 
Scobee, Francis R . ,  400 ,   412 ,   474 
Scorpius  (constellaton), 5 
Scott  Air  Force Base,  167 
Scott  Science  and  Technology, 341 
Scout,  I O ,   33 ,   68 ,   1 2 7 , 2 0 6 , 2 7 3 ,  274 
Scully-Power, Paul  D . ,  510 
Sea of  Smyth,  454 
Seabrook, Tex.,  161 
search-and-mcue   (SAR) missions and  systems,  63 ,   167 ,  185 ,  259 ,   365 4 0 6 , 4 2 0 , 5 2 2  
search-and-rescue  satellite-aided tracking  (SARSAT),  365 ,   372 ,  410 ,   490  
search  for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), 210 
Seattle, Wash.,  144 
Seddon, Margaret Rhea,  355 ,  463 
Seiff,  Alvin,  28 
Selenia  (Italian company),  91 
Senate,  U . S .  See Congress, U . S .  
Senior  Interagency Group for Space, 409 
Serebrov, Aleksandr, 41 I 
Sergo  Ordzhonikidze  Aviation  Institute, 492  
servomotors,  172 
7-Up  Company, 67 
Severe Storm Forecast Center,  213 
Sewell, Chuck,  523 
Shafer, Robert J . ,   109 
Shanghai,  105 
Sharma,  Rakesh,  473 
Sharpe, Lonnie,  Jr.,  470 
Shatalov, Vladimir,  11 ,  233 ,  452 
Shaw,  Brewster H . ,  J c ,  447 ,  451 ,   463 
Shenandoah (dirigible), 506 
Shepard, Alan B . ,   180 ,  274,  392 
Shick, William H . , ,  237 
Shilstone, Arthur,  202 
‘ T h e  Crawler:  Rollout of  the  Enterprise,”  202 
shock absorber  system,  307 ,   309 
Shoemaker, Gene,  210 
Shramo,  Daniel  J . ,   8 3  
Shriver, Loren  J . ,   370 ,  467 
Shultz, George P.,  383 ,   392 

159 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

INDEX  

shutdown,  335 
Shuttle Avionics  Integration  Laboratory  (SAIL),  132 
Shuttle  Imaging  Radar  (SIR) ,  379 ,  510  
shuttle-pallet  satellite  (SPAS), 281 
SPAS-01,  281 
Siebel,  Mathias  P.,  3 1 
Sierra  Nevada,  239 
Sievers, G .  Kenneth,  78 
Silvcira,  Milton  A , ,  425  
Simon, George  W.,  16 ,  483 
Simons.  Vera,  6 6 ,   68  
Simpson,  John,  60 ,  524  
Singapore,  22,  25,  98,  241 
Singer Kearfott Company,  456 
S ino  2 ,   188 
s ir io-2 ,   364  
S ix ,  Robert  F.,  189 
Sjoberg,  Sigurd A . ,  30 ,   57  
Skiba.  Ivan,  384 
Sky-Tel,  176 
Sky lab ,  7 ,  9 .   33 ,  48 ,   5 5 ,  75 .   133 ,   153, 274 ,   376,  377,  385 ,  4 0 8 , 4 3 4  
launches,  8 1 ,  284 
people,  125 
radioactivity, 43  
reentry.  33.  3 7 ,  5 5 :   57  
Sky lub   1 ,  332 
Skylab 3 ,  313 ,   434 
Skylab 4 ,   216,  221 
Skylark  12, 
Slayton,  Donald  K .   (Deke) ,  14,  15, 54.  256,  274.  31 I ,   328,  3854,433 
small  astronomy  satellite  ( S A S ) ,   23,  1 I O  
Sus  2 ,   I10 
Sus  3 ,  23 
Smith,  Bradford  A . ,   218,  220,  226,  227 ,   263, 51 1 
Sm i th ,  David,  56 
Smith,  Delbert  D . ,   209 
Smith,  Michael  J . ,   161 
Smith,  Richard  G . ,  43 ,  57 ,   244 ,   255 
Smithsonian  Institute,  106,  158, 202 
See also Naiional  Air and  Space Museum 
Sms   I ,  205 ,   254 
Sms 2 ,  205 ,  254 
Smylie, Robert  E . ,   145, 407,  449 
Sochi,  123 
Societe Europeenne de Propulsion  (SEP), 172 
Soderblom,  Laurence  A , ,  29,  42  
solar, 
activity,  119.  123 ,   152,  184, 342 
m a y s ,   172, 329,  340.  367,  407.  432,  500 
batteries,  239 ,   447 
cells,  151 ,   236 ,   239 ,   243 ,   367 
cosmic  rays,  243 

lNDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

cycle,  I15 
data,  13 ,  157 ,  243 
disk,  152 
eclipse,  10 
energy,  14 ,  85 ,   115,  117 ,   162 ,  230 ,   291 ,   298,  342 
flares,  184-186,  236,  237,  255.  337 
gravity,  235 
heat,  334 
magnetic  field, 243 
minimum,  333  
panels,  7 ,  85,  172 ,  1 8 0 , 4 0 6  
physics,  151 ,   161 
power,  74 ,   96 ,   115, 193 ,  239 
radiation,  6 6 ,   121 ,  237 ,   335 ,  371 
sail,  363  
storms,  243 ,   444 
weather  stations,  123, 243 
wind,  6 3 ,   146 ,  235 ,  243 ,   263 ,  264 ,  497 
Solar Challenger,  236 ,   239 ,  287 
Solar Maximum  Mission  (SMM),  115 ,   116,  119 ,   122,  185 ,  236 ,  237 ,  413 
Solar Max,  185,  186 ,   192 ,  255 ,   342 ,  3 7 0 , 4 1 3 , 4 3 1 , 4 7 4 , 4 8 0 ,  512 ,   516  
Solar Maximum  Observatory, 474 
solar-polar mission, 6 ,   17, 51, 73 ,   134 ,  259 ,  280 
Solar Riser, 99  
Solid Rocket Booster and  External Tank  Division  (SRB/ET), 276 
Solar System Exploration  Program,  459 
Mars Data Analysis Program,  459 
Solar Systems Exploratory Committee, 410 
solar-electric propulsion  system  (SEPS),  276 
solar-ultraviolet spectral  irradiance monitor  (SUSIM), 15  1 ,   152 
solid-fuel rocket  boosters  (SRBs),  53 ,   54 ,   88 ,   97 ,   112 ,   119 ,   132,  165  168 ,   169 ,  230 ,   231 ,  235 ,  
237 ,   242 ,   243 ,   265,  276 ,   297 ,  305, 326 ,  327  332 ,  346 ,   350 ,   357 ,   358 ,   363 ,  399 ,   400 ,  
405 ,   440 ,   497 ,   500, 515 
reusable,  350 
SRB-X,  306  
Solovieff, Nicholas,  202 
Solovyev,  Vladimir, 3 4 1 , 4 6 5 , 4 7 9 , 4 9 2 , 4 9 5 ,  5 0 3 , 5 0 9  
South Africa,  Union of,  208 
Southern Pacific Communications Company (SPC),  135 ,  238 
Soviet Union,  6 6 ,   120 ,   129 ,  156 ,  208, 256 ,   3 2 3 , 4 3 7 , 4 6 1 , 4 8 5 , 4 9 9  
academy of  sciences,  438 
airbus,  123 
awards, 71  
Committee for Inventions  and Discoveries,  146 
cos ts ,  257 ,   268 
experiments,  62 ,  430  
goals, 341 
installation,  I O  
launches,  22 ,   3 4 , 4 9 ,  66,  9 6 , 9 8 ,   149 ,  158 ,   177 ,   185,  190 ,  233 ,  239 ,   2 6 0 , 2 7 3 ,   292 ,   311 :  
347 ,  359 ,   372 ,  4 2 1 , 4 6 5 ,  523 ,   524 
military  programs,  181, 371 
Olympic contenders,  1 17 

761 

.ASTRONAUTICS   AND   AERONAUT ICS  

INDEX  

orbiting  space  station, 203 
P r a vda ,   256 ,   281 
problems,  257 
research,  177,  194, 280 ,   281 
rockets,  46 ,   209 
scientists, 75 ,   77 ,   146, 268 
search-and-rescue,  167,  372,  490 
shuttle  considerations,  280 ,   281 
television,  215 
tests,  142, 218 
training,  I  I 
sounders,  199 
sounding  rocket  program,  I O  
Soyuz ,  9 6 ,   185. 214.  222.  239 ,  404,  438 ,   439,  416 
Sovu i   5 ,  214 
Soyuz 8, 2 14 
S o ~ u z  10, 40.  214 
Soyuz  11 ,  233,  239 
Soyuz  1 2 ,  233 
Soyuz  1 6 .  40  
Soyuz 25 ,   1 I ,   260 
S o ~ u i 2 6 ,  18, 58.  163 
S u w z  2 7 ,  233 
Soyuz 29 .   10,  18, 31 ,   39 ,  5 8 .  260 
Soyuz32 ,   10,  1 1 ,   17,  1 8 , 3 1 ,  3 9 , 4 0 ,  58 ,   189, 213 
Susuz 33, 40  
Suvuz  34 ,  40, 58 
Soyuz35 ,   139,  147.  148,  163 ,  164,  166,  177, 213 
S u y u z 3 6 ,   158,  164,  166,  177.  189,  190, 204, 234 
Suvuz 3 7 ,   185,  189 ,   190 ,  203 ,   215 
Soyui 38, 208 
Sovuz 39, 261,  276 
Soyuz  40,  273 ,   276 
Suyu z   T ,  9 6 ,  9 7 ,  9 8 ,   113,  134, 222 ,  234 ,   276, 41 1 ,   465 
Soyuz  7 - 1 ,  I66 
SOW Z  T -2 ,   166,  169,  177,  178,  234 
Soyuz   T-3, 233 ,   234 ,   239, 465 
Soyuz   T -4 ,  260 ,   261 ,   216 
S O ~ U Z  T - 5 ,  347 ,   350 ,   353 ,   359,  360 
S ~ U Z  T-6,  3.50,  353  
SUJUZ T-7, 359 ,   377 ,   384 ,  491 
Suyuz T-8, 41 I 
SOYUZ T -9 ,  421.  423.  424.  430 ,   434,  446 
S O ~ U Z  T-IO. 4 65 ,  413  
Soyuz  T -11 ,  509  
SO>WZ T -12 ,  491 ,   492 
Space Adaptation  Syndrome, 449 
Space  Aerospace.  I52  
Space  America,  433 
Space  and Earth  Science Advisory  Committee,  381 
Space  and  Missile Systems Organization  (SAMSO) (U SA F ) ,  8 ,  73 ,  79 
Space and  Rocket  Center,  5 19 

162 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

Space Defense Center,  23 
Space  Environment Services Center,  123 
Space  Industrialization Act,  166 
space operations center  (SOC), 329,  330 
“Space,  Our Next  Frontier”  (conference), 484 
space platform,  unmanned, 4 3 3 , 4 3 4 , 4 9 1  
Space  Sciences  Inc . ,   328 
Space  Services,  Inc.  (SSI),  433  
Space  Shuttle, 3 , 4 ,  6 ,  8 ,   13 ,  16 ,  38 ,  79 ,   88 ,   107,  112,  118 ,   131.  150,  1 5 1 ,   154,  16 8 ,  176, 
188 ,  200,  214,  220,  237,  250,  253,  270,  283,  327,  328,  365,  404 ,   4 1 0 , 4 4 0 . 4 4 9 . 4 9 0 ,  
4 9 3 , 4 9 4 , 4 9 6  
assembly,  23  
budget  an d c o s t s ,   68 ,  6 9 ,  83 ,   1 1 1 ,   122,  123,  133,  134 ,  304 
c am e r  aircraft,  466 
civilian  reservations,  103, 366 
crew, 5 1 ,   305 
delays,  155, 165, 289,  292.  304,  335,  4 1 7 , 4 4 0 , 4 7 9 ,  515 
engines,  80 ,  97 ,   1 1 1 ,   119,  137 ,   141-143,  162,  167, 226,  237 
facilities,  34 
first mission  (Columbia), 5 3 ,  149 ,  256 ,269 ,   2 7 0 , 2 7 4 ,   275,  277,  287,  512 
flight 41-D ,  489 ,   503 
flight 41-F, 489  
flight S I -A ,  463 ,   515 
flight 51-C, 515 
flight 51-D ,  463  
ffight  61-D ,  463  
fourth  mission  (Discovery), 304 ,   322,  351 
funding,  33 ,   69 
launch,  73,  74,  87,  160,  171,  174,  176,  182,  187,  225,  232 ,   262 
management, 68-7 1 ,   83  
national  defense, 92 
night  landings,  432 
nonastmnauts,  366 
orbiters,  7 ,   9 ,   137,  159 ,  205 
organization,  70 
passengers,  180 ,  455 
people, 21 ,   1 3 1 , 4 5 3 ,  470 ,   498 
planetary,  349 
planning  problems,  69 
problems,  3 ,   141 ,  274 
production,  83 
reentry, 267 
repair,  103 ,   108 ,  256,  342 
retrieval,  105, 115 ,   124 ,  211,  256,  342 
reusable, 46 ,   103,  159 ,  181 ,  219,  274 ,  414 
safely,  256 
scheduling, 70, 84 ,  87 ,   187,  1 96 , ’260 ,262 ,  271 
second mission  (STS-2). 271 ,   274,  304 ,  305 ,   308,  309 ,  322 
subcontractors,  69 
technical problems,  70 
telecommunications,  276 
tests,  1 1 ,  27,  157,  171 ,  176 ,  203.  241 ,   242,  251.  256 ,  480 

763 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

IYDEX 

third  mission  (ET-3). 301 ,  305.  309.  3 2 2 >  323 
training  exercise.  I85 
space  sickness,  428 ,  429 .  431 ,  449 ,  473 
Space Station.  orbiting,  203.  246, 4 0 9 , 4 6 0 , 4 7 2 ,   475 .   479,  4 8 6 , 4 9 0  493,  495 ,  496,  503.505 
design,  467 
urganization.  467,  471 
study  contracts,  471 
task  force.  469 ,   475 
space  su i ts ,  58.  6 2 ,   143.  168.  192.  199. 269,  290.  335,  355,  370,  408 438 ,  495 
"Ch ib is ,"   495 
problems.  167. 377,  380.  383.  398. 408 ,  460 
Space .Fask  Group  (STG) .  1  I 2  
Space  Technology  Laboratories.  27 
Space Telescope  (ST) ,  6.  5 5 ,  86,  160,  191,  250.  304.  315.  327.  406 442,  443 
Space Transportation  Systems Acquisition,  Office  of,  7 5 ,  81 
Space Transportation  Systems  (STS), Office of, 5 .  39 ,  57.  7 5 ,  88 ,   I18   150,  179, 184.  188.  199. 
242.  25 I .   276.  303,  342,  366,  376, 49 I ,  496  497,  5 16 
Expendable  Equipment  Division,  276 
management,  303 
Space Adaptation  Project.  449 
S T S - I ,  251,  265.  297.  309 ,  342 
STS -2 ,  2 7 1 ,   274.  292.  309.  375,  379,  380 
STS-3.  375 
STS-4. 331.  350.  353,  375,  398, 400.  487 
STS-5.  281.  331,  370,  375,  377,  380.  385.  398, 400 
STS-6,  33 I .   407 
STS-7, 375. 400.  408 ,  418-420, 449 
STS-8. 400 ,  408.  413,  414 ,  430 -432 .449  
STS-9. 4 0 8 . 4 4 8 .  451 .455 .   463 
STS-IO ,  370 
STS-I I ,  398 
STS-12.  398 
STS-13.  400.  413  
s - m i x .  400 
STS-41C. 474 
STS-41D,  500 
Upper  Stage Division,  276 
See  also Columbia; Space Shuttle 
space  treaty,  201.  202 
space walk.  168. 205.  355.  377,  398.  407,  408,  460 ,  491.  495 .  503.  504 
space  weapons,  142 
spacecraft  charging  at  high  altitudes  (SCATHA). 8 .  79 
Spaceflight Tracking  and  Data  Network  (STDN). 2 I  1 .   2 5 5 .   459 
Spacelab.  3 .  6 ,   15,  74 .   77 ,   118,  130.  151.  179.  188. 200.  226.  234  260.  271,  289.  290.  3  13. 
325,  340.  366,  380,  408.  412,  413.  421 .   428431 ,   437,  447,  459,  463.  485.  518 
D - I .   271 
D-4.  271 
delay,  440,  441 ,   447 
experiments,  163. 297,  448 
instrument-pointing  system,  160 
  4 ,   156,  179. 314, 400 
Spacelab  I ,
Spacelab  2 ,   1 1 2 ,  321 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

Spacelab 3 ,  400 ,   498 
See also European  Space Agency 
spacenauts,  341 ,   354 
s p a c e -pm e s s in g  applications  rockets  (SPAR), 77 ,   230 
SPAR  6 ,   78  
SPAR  8,  230 
Spain,  155 ,   203 ,   228 ,   251 ,   304 
Spectrolab,  15 I 
spectrometer, 415 ,   446 ,   483 
Speny   Support Services,  116 
Spinak,  Abraham D . ,  39 ,   301 
spinning  solid  upper  stage  (SSUS),  232 ,   276 
Splav furnace, 39 ,  204 
SPOT satellite,  15 
SP-I00  program,  404 
Spring,  Sherwood C . ,  161, 463  
Springer, Robert C . ,   161 
Spruce Goose,  158,  173 ,  202 
Sputnik,  112 ,  369 ,   3 9 5 , 4 0 0  
SRI International,  I96  
Sriharikota  Island  (India),  54 ,   183 ,  410 
S S - 5   Skean vehicle,  34 
Stanford Universiq,  196, 288,  329 
STAR  (German industrial consortium). 73 
Stecker, Floyd W . ,  225 
Stella experiment,  120 
Stewart, Frank, 26 ,   36 ,  79 
Stewart, Ian,  483 
Stewart, Roben  L . ,  398, 4 6 3 ,  4 6 4  
Stitt,  James E . ,  125 
Stofan, Andrew  J.,  218, 310,  338 
Stone,  Fdward  C . ,   29 ,   218 ,   262 ,   277,  293  
Stone.  John,  337 
strain  isolation pads  (SIP), 5 15 
Strategic Air  Command, 291 
stratospheric  studies,  26 ,   75 ,   157 ,  158, 183 ,  184 ,  195 ,  208 ,  250, 292  305 ,   313 ,  334 ,   340 ,   357 ,  
369 
stratosphenc  aerosol and  gas expenment  (SAGE),  I O ,   26 ,   158, 184, 208  305 ,  340 
Strekalov, Gennady, 239 ,   41 1 ,   473 
Stnckland,  Pete,  193 
Structural  Information  Enhancement Program  (SIEP),  198 
Stuttgart,  3 
subsonic  operations,  141 
su lfur  gases,  334 
Sullivan, Kathryn D  . 509 ,   5 10 
Summa Corporation,  158,  173 ,   176 ,  202 
Sun ,   115,  116 ,   119 ,   132 ,   152,  185 ,  197 ,  243 
exposure to,  324 
formation,  106 
relationship  to  planets,  6  
structure,  17 
studies,  51 

765 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D   AERO hAUT lC S  

INDEX  

sunspot  activity.  342 
Sun-Earth explorer.  162 
Super  Arcas  (rocket), 75 ,   118 .   I95 
Super Loki  (rocket). 75.  I84 
supernova  activities,  106.  162, 227,  271.  337 
N-49,  162 
supersonic operations,  I4 I 
Suryadi, Drs,  241 
Sweden,  15, 1 I O ,   209,  228 
Sw i g en ,   Jack,  38 I ,  387 
Switzerland.  3 ,   156,  228 
SYNCOM  (satellite).  463 
Synnott,  Stephen  P., 150,  206 ,  325 
syn the t ic -ape r tu re   radar  ( S A R ) .  225 .   467 
Systems and  Applied  Sciences Corporation,  392 
Syvenson,  C . A . ,  124, 222 ,  462 
Tabakaev,  Eugeny,  43X 
Tallahassee. Fla..  144 
Tallone.  Tip,  267 
Talonc,  John, 487 
Tanegashinia  Space Center,  9 ,   122.  254.  398 ,  427.  459 
Tarantula  (cloud). 401 
Tashkent:  123 
‘lass  (Soviet  n e w s   agency).  17 ,  31. 43 
Taylor,  Eldon  D . ,  57  
Taylor.  Fred W . .   26 
technical  services,  210 
problems.  176, 2 2 1 ,   255.  297 
rewurces .   253 
technicians.  267 
technological  studies and  developments.  3 .   18. 64 .  80. 8 3 ,   137.. 138  1 5 1 ,   165, 259,  299.  310. 
340 ,   345 .   358 
advanced  technolory  house.  208 
problems.  28 I 
tektites.  167 
Tclecom  I A ,   188 
telecommunications.  3.  8.  22 ,   28.  41 ,  48.  91,  I  I X ,   261.  276.  363 .  465 
global.  210,  363 ,   484 
maritime,  233 
Teledyne  Industries,  25 I ,   279 
telegraph.  334 
Telemail,  442 
telemetry.  5 1 ,   158, 191.  217.  310.  372 ,  378. 451.  524 
222 
Telepazio  (Italian  c o . ) ,  91 
telephone,  93.  143.  145>  173.  215.  216.  220.  2 2 5 ,  228,  231 .   24.3.  259  276.  310 ,   316,  376 ,  419  
~ 
air-to-ground  services,  176,  177,  216 
Telesat  (Canada),  158, 348 ,   360.  418.  449.  463 
Telesrrr-H, 5 14 
telescopes,  86 ,   166.  228 ,   252,  261,  279.  303 ,   315,  371,  393. 405.  427  442 .  44.5. 490 
Casscgrain,  393 
Earth,  405 
imaging,  415 

766 

INDEX  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUT ICS  

infrared,  340,  349 ,   351 
m ino r s ,   406  
optical,  237,  282 
radio,  237 
solar,  282,  337 ,   342 
space,  103,  191, 250 ,   282 
ultraviolet,  351 ,   501 
X-ray,  65 ,   116 ,   174,  213 ,   222 ,   271,  337 
Telestar 3 .  503  
Telestar 3 A ,  425 
Telestar 3C ,  500 
Telstar,  489 
television  transmission,  41 ,  52 ,   9 3 , 9 4 ,   108,  122.324,  128.  143,  145  163,  205,  215 ,   225 ,   232 ,  
2 5 9 , 2 6 5 , 2 7 6 ,  293 ,   310 ,  316 ,  334 ,   350,  358  3 6 3 , 4 1 4 , 4 1 9 , 4 3 4  
cable,  237 ,  505 
pay,  348 
subscription,  216 
See also  communications 
telex,  215,  225,  231,  31 6 ,334  
Tempe1 I1  (comet), 14, 85 ,   182 
Temple  University, 424 
Tennessee  Rivcr,  16 
Tennessee  Valley  Authority  (TVA),  137, 230 
Tereshkova, Valentina,  419 
Terhune, Charles H . ,  J r . ,   456 
Terrile, Richard  J.,  5 I  1 
Terzan  2 ,   29 
testing,  7 ,   13 ,   1 4 . 4 5 ,   8 1 ,  8 4 ,  94 ,  96.  129,  132,  133,  142,  143, 1 4 9 2 4 2 ,  244 ,   289 ,  292,  380 ,  
392 
approach-and-landing,  3 1 ,  5 4 ,  313  
crash,  3 7  
endurance,  27 
engines,  78 ,   124 ,  140 ,   154, 235 
flight tests,  74 ,  7 6 ,   119 ,   128,  134,  137 ,   169,  172, 239,  259, 280 ,   294 ,   314,  331 ,   334.  335 ,  
339 ,  350 ,   3 5 4 , 3 7 5 ,  394  
ignition,  26 
main  propulsion  system,  36 
missile,  127 
test  firings, 3, 38 ,   7 9 ,  80, 8 4 ,   119,  137 ,   161,  162,  1 6 7 , 2 2 6 , 2 4 4 ,  332 ,   385 ,   386 ,  440 ,   441 
thermal,  335 
tiles,  15,  146 
volunteers,  137,  138 
wind  tunnel,  79;394 
wings 
Tethered Satellite  System  (TSS),  3 9 4 , 4 6 9  
Tethys, 227 ,  228,  263 
Teton mountains, Wyo . ,  67 
Texas,  64 
Texas A&M   University,  I25 
Thagard,  Norman,  152, 3 8 6 , 4 0 0 , 4 1 8 - 4 2 0 , 4 4 9  
Thailand,  22 ,   209,  241 
thematic  rnappcrs,  139,  140, 201,  355,  397, 475 

767 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D   AERONAUT ICS  

IKDEX  

thermal  expansion,  282 
thermal  protection  system  (TPS),  137 ,   157.  159, 315 ,  332 ,  3.36, 395. 
See  also tiles,  protective 
thcrnial  radiation.  371 
Thesee [Theseus), 3 16 
Thiokol  Corporation,  I I ,   3 4 ,   1 1 2 .   18 1 ,  3 3 2 , 4 4 0  
Wdsatch  Division  (Utah).  1  I ,   112, 513  
Thome,  Pitt,  77 
Thomas.  D .  Scott,  273 
Thomas, John  W . ,   234 
Thompson,  Herman,  I8 I 
Thompson,  J .R . ,  38 
Thompson,  Robert.  I65 
Thor,  34.  4 I 8  
Thor  MB-3.  110 
Thornton,  Kathryn  C . ,  470  
Thornton,  William  E . :  386.. 400: 429 .   431 ,  432.  449 
Tiamat,  179 
tilec,  protective.  14 ,  2 3 . 6 5 .   74 ,   84 ,   1  I  I ,   146:  155.  165,  171,  172 245.  265-267.  7-70, 274 ,  
292 ,   31 I .   332.  336 ,  351 .  395,  4 2 0 , 4 5 5 , 4 8 7  503, 515 
problems.  14.  15, 7 6 ,   I  1 1 :   122, 297.  299.  304.  353 
Tilford,  Shelby  ti., 405 ,   510 
Tillarnook,  Oreg. 
66  
Timko,  Robert,  194 
~ 
Tinker  Air  Force  Base.  269 
Tirone.  Robert  J . ,  465 
TIROS  (satellite), 153.  199.  522  
TIROS- I ,   522 
TIROS-N ,  406.  491 
Titan  (Saturn  satellite), 60 .   61 .   62 ,   78 .   196. 21  1 .   232 .  263.  31.5. 410 414 
Titan,  127 ,  166 ,  214:  215,  349 .  418 
Titan  2 .   215 
Titan  3 ,  215.  373 
Titan  3B -Agena ,   28 
Titan  3 C ,  34 ,   7-? 
Titan  3D .   15 
Titan  34D ,  493 .   525 
Titov, G h em a n .  369  
Titov,  Vladimir,  4 I  1 
Tornbaugh.  Clyde,  6 
Toon,  Brian.  357 
Toronto  (Ontario), 4 ,   173 
Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite  System  (TDRSS),  10. 250 ,   332.  380 403 ,  404 ,  407 .   410 ,  
412 ,  418 ,  421 .   429 ,   431 ,   434.  441,  449 ,  450 ,  461  510 
TDRS-A  (TDRS - I ) ,   157, 407 ,  413 ,  448 
TDRS -B ,  408 ,   413  
Tracking  and  Impact  Predictions  (TIPS), 23 
tracking  facilities,  116,  122 ,   141.  145.  166, 310 
training,  3 .   I 1  
non-NASA  scientists.  3 
Trans World  Airlines, 353 
Transit  (satellite), 273.  274 

7 6 8  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

transmitters,  high-intensity,  350 
Transpace  Carriers  Inc .   (TCI), 494 
transponders,  63 ,   98 ,   128,  135,  182, 310,  330, 36 ,   348,  363 ,  398, 409 425 
Trinh,  Eugene  H . ,   483 
Triton,  349,  350,  371 
troposphere,  195, 208,  288,  292,  350,  380 
Truly,  Richard,  94,  97 ,   107, 242,  307,  3 8 6 , 4 2 9 , 4 3 1 ,  434 
TRW  Systems,  In c . ,   10, 43,  78 ,   95 ,   124,  134,  150, 243,  279,  291,  358 410,  4 4 1 , 4 7 1 , 4 9 5  
Defense and  Space  Systems Group,  166, 221 
Space  and  Techndogy  Group, 470 
Space  Systems Division, 51 
Tsiolkovsky,  Konstantine,  147 
Tucson,  Ariz.,  236 
turbines,  115  
turbopumps,  149, 251,  364 
Turner, Ted,  93 ,   127,  128 
TVSat  (German  broadcasting  system),  220 
Tyuratam,  166 
ultraviolet  differential  absorption  lidar  (UV-DIAL),  249 
ultraviolet  studies and  findings, 42,  5 5 ,  118,  154,  155,  191. 222,  225 232,  236,  249,  252,  292. 
293,  303,  351, 357,  483,  500 ,  501 
Union  of  South Africa,  1 1  1 
Union  of  Soviet Socialist  Republics  (USSR). See Soviet Union 
United  Airlines,  99,  176, 249 
United  Kingdom  (Great  Britain),  15, 33,  56 ,  64,  93 ,   107,  124,  144,  154 203,  211.  228,  238, 
241,  3 7 1 , 4 9 7  
Britannia  I I ,   233 
costs,  33 ,   130 
Post  Office,  173 
postal  service,  173 
Royal Aeronautical  Society,  35,  288 
Royal  Air Force,  287 
Royal  Aircraft  Establishment,  33 
Royal  Navy,  232 
Science  Research  Council,  52 
Science and  Engineering Research  Council,  393 
U K 6 ,  33 
United  Nations,  149,  154, 2 01 ,2 02 ,   210,  214,  228 
General  Assembly,  201,  210, 228 
United  Nations  Children’s Fund,  466 
United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization  (UNESCO),  312 
United  Press International  (UPI), 4 3 ,   123,  146, 242,  261,  347 
United  States,  519 
Advisory  Group  on  Science and  Technology  (President’s), 48 1 
Armed  Services  Committee, 
.budget, 7 ,  33 ,   128,  134,  139,  171,  182,  199, 256,  327,  425 
cos ts ,  9 ,  93 ,   119,  141,  144,  171 
Management  and  Budget,  Office of  (OMB),  128,  138, 225,  256,  304, 442 
National  Archives,  152 
National  Commission  on  Space, 5 1  1 
National  Security Council, 27 ,  414 
National  Space  Policy,  496 

769 

ASTRONAU I ICS   A N D   AERONAUTICS 

I N D E X  

National  Space Strategy, 496 ,  497  
Naval  Research,  Oflice of,  324 
Technology  Assessment. Office of.  198, 518 
White  House  communications  centers.  25,  128 
White  House  National  Aeronautics  and  Space Council,  303.  324  
White  House  Office of  Science and  Technology  Policy,  7 ,  27 ,  6 8 ,  93 .   219,  301 ,   327 
White  House  Science Council  (WHSC) ,   328 
U.S.  Court  of  Appeals,  129 
U .S .   Forest  Service, 
U . S .  Geological  Survey.  27 ,  28.  29 ,  42 .   64 ,  6 8 .  77.  92 ,  240  
U .S .   Information  Agency  (USIA) .  452 
U .S .  National  Hot Air  Balloon  Championships.  192 
U .S .   Naval  Observatory, 7 
U . S .  Naval  Kesearch  Laboratory  (NKL).  16 ,   116, 151 
U .S .  Telephone  & Telegraph,  I18  
USNS A rno ld  
Unired  Tiv-hnologirs Corporatioil  ( U T C ) ,  1 4 3 .  2 1 1 ,  279, 315 
Hamilton  S tundu rd   D iv is ion .   143 .   168. 378 .  3 x 3 .  160 
Prarr  &  Whitncy Divlrion, 9 1 ,  9 2 ,   1 5 4 .  165 ,   183 ,  377 
Sikorsk\: D iv is ion ,   31.5 
Un i ted  Spare Roos ters ,   I n c .  ( U S B I J ,  168, 2 1 1 ,  357 .  497  
U I C  k - reedo in .   168. 21 I .
  242,  357 .   358 
UTCL iber t! .   168,  21  I ,   242 ,   358 
Universities  Space Research  .4ssociation  (USRA) ,  156. 383 ,  405 
University College  London,  155 
University  Corporation  for Atmospheric Research.  473 
University  of  Alaska,  208 
University of  Arizona.  8 6 ,   191, 208.  211.  446 .   51 I 
University  of  Berne,  227 
University  of  California  at  Berkeley  (UCB). 3.  105 ,   145,  156 ,  288  500 ,  501 
Space  Sciences Laboratory.  501 
University of  California  at  San  Diego  (UCSD).  191 
University of  Chicago,  60 ,  524  
University  of  Cincinnati.  36  
University  of  Colorado,  105,  191 
Laboratory  for Atmospheric  and  Space Physics,  105 ,  303 
University  of  Groningen.  366 ,  446 
University  of  Hawaii,  349 ,   371 
University of  Illinois, 328 
University of  Iowa.  30 ,   5 9 ,  279 
University of  Maryland,  1 2 1 ,   174 ,  208,  281 
University of  Minnesota,  30 
University  of  New  Mexico.  8 6 ,   191 
University of  Notre  Dame, 461 
University  of  Paris,  24 
University of  Pittsburgh,  131 
University of  Rome,  I19  
University of  Santa Clara.  196 
University  of  Surrey,  304  
University of  Texa5,  481 ,  525  
University  of  Tokyo,  255.  314 
Institute of  Space and  Aeronautical  Science, 255 

770  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND   AERONAUTICS 

University of  Utah,  353 
University  of  Wisconsin,  199 
University Research  Association  (URA ) ,  86 
uosu t ,  304 
Upper  Volta,  228 
upper-atmosphere  research  satellite  (UARS), 250,  313,  314 
Uranus  (planet),  13, 43 ,   249,  264,  293,  304,  349, 410 ,  51 I 
Uruguay,  228 
U S .  Air,  249 
U S N S  A rno ld ,   265 
Utah,  11 ,  112,  119 
Utopia  Planitia,  52 
Utsman,  Thomas E . ,  487 
V-2  rockets,  81 
vacuum  chamber,  282 
Vallis  Marineris,  24 
Van  Allen,  James,  5 9 ,  60 
Van Allen  radiation  belt,  395 
van  den Berg,  Lodewijk, 483 
Vandenberg  A ir  Force Base, Calif.,  IS, 28,  34,  6 8 , 7 3 ,   98 ,   129,  141  144 ,  262,  284,  303,  327, 
332,  352,  3 9 3 , 4 0 6 , 4 1 0 , 4 1 5 ,  475,  512 ,  513 522 
Space  Shuttle  Facility,  98 
Van  Hoften,  James D . ,  400,  413 ,  474 
Van Hove,  L . ,   120 
Vanguard,  369,  395 
Project  Vanguard,  426 
VanHoosier,  Michael  E . ,  
van  Rensselaer,  Frank,  276 
Vazon,  147 
Veach,  C .   Lacy,  470 
Vega  (star), 4 2 7 , 4 4 5 , 4 5 6  
V ega - I ,  523 ,  524 
Vega -2 ,  523,  524 
Vehicle  Assembly Building  (VAB),  23 ,  53,  88, 231,  237,  241-244, 289  2 9 2 , 2 9 7 , 2 9 9 ,   300, 
328,  3 9 9 , 4 9 8  
Vela (satellite),  11 1 ,   162 
Velikovsky,  Immanuel,  89 
Worlds in  Co l l i s ion ,  89 
Venera  (USSR  spacecraft),  24 ,   331 
Veneru I ,  417 
Veneru 3 ,  417 
Venera 4 ,  4  17 
Veneru 9,  331 
V e n e r u ' l 0 ,  331 
Venera I l ,  162 
Venera 12 ,   162 
Veneru 13, 162, 417 
Veneru 14 ,  331,  417 
Veneru 15 ,  4 1 7 , 4 3 8  
Veneru 16, 417,  438 
Venezuela,  124 
Vento,  Bruce,  17 1 

77 I 

ASTRONALiTlCS  A K D   AERONAUT ICS  

I N D E X  

Venus,  26.  61,  95,  159.  225,  235,  256,  2x0.  322,  330.  331,  ,410. 417 483,  5 2 3  
Venus-orbiting  imaging  radar  (VOIR), 95.  225.  250.  259.  260.  394 
Vernikos-Danielis,  Joan.  194 
Vernon,  France,  172 
vertical-motion  simulator.  339 
verticalisidewise  takeoff  and  landing  (V /STOL) ,  260 
Vertikal  8 ,  6 6  
Very  Long  Baseline  Interferornetry (VLBI),  240.  241.  346 
VFWERNO ,   226 
vibrations,  268,  353:  456 
Victor,  Robert.  235 
Vietnam,  190,  228,  273 
cosmonauts,  185.  189.  190,  203,  204.  213 
Viking,  16, 30 ,  55 ,   1 2 1 ,   133,  186, 280.  326 .   331,  397,  409,  459,  480  
V i k i n g   I ,  180,  193.  306,  376.  398.  415 
V ik i r tg  2,  52.  415 
Viking  Lander  Monitor Mission  (VLMM), 459 
V i k i n g  Orbiier 2.  1 I 7  
Villafranca  tracking  station  (Vilspa).  108.  1 5 5 .   227 
Virgin  Islands,  135 
Virginia,  I  I 7  
Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute.  301 
visible-infrared  radionictric  atmospheric sounder  (VAS). 275 
visible-infrared  spin-scan  radiometer  (VISSR),  199.  205,  207.  :!75 
Vitro,  14 
volcanic activity.  26.  29,  42.  158,  183.  184.  207.  208.  305.  340.  357  3 8 8  
Volk,  Igor.  491,  492 
von  Braun.  Wernher,  8 1 ,   133,  175,  187,  188. 442 
von  Kannann.  Theodore,  3 12 
Vostok.  268 
Vosrok  I .  280 
Votaw  Precision Tool  Inc . .   346 
Vought.  In c . ,   106,  127.  142 
Voyager,  13,  14,  29:  60,  76,  150.  157.  206.  21 I .   220,  277,  304 ,   325 
prob lems ,   293 
Vuyager I .   13,  16,  29.  38,  42.  49,  76,  95 .  96,  150. 206,  21 I ,   218,  220.  226-228.  232.  262. 
280,  293.  306,  315 
VujuRer 2 .  29,  38,  41.  42,  49 ,   52.  76 .   150.  206.  249,  264,  259,  293,  306.  315,  325.  349, 
51  I 
W&J Construction Company, 2 I 4  
Waddell,  James  B . ,  470  
Wake  Island,  266 
wake  vortex,  169 
Waldheim,  Kurt,  208 
Walker,  Charles D . , ,  424,  487 .   500 
Walker,  David  M . ,  5 I 6  
Walled  Lake.  M ich . ,  21 
Waller,  Peter,  483 
Wallops  Flight  Center (WFC),  I O ,   119.  179,  180,  290.  311,  334.  340,  350 
consolidation  with  Goddard  Space Flight  Center.  270,  290 
contacts.  141 
instruments.  measuring.  194,  195 

772  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AERONAUTICS 

missions,  26,  33 ,   184 ,   191 
people,  39 ,  208 
test  program,  8 4 ,   170 
Wallops Flight  Facility,  301 ,   369, 406 ,  473  
Wallops  Island,  179,  180 ,  280 
Walters,  L a y ,  353  
Warren,  Edward,  486 
Wdsatch.  See Thiokol 
Washington, D .C . ,   16,  17, 3 7 ,   106, 144, 155 ,  226 
Washington Hilton,  155 
Washington  University  (St. Louis),  198 
waste and  d e bn s ,  209 ,   210 ,   265 ,   294 ,   342,  354 
control,  336 
damage  from,  417 
in  space,  143.  283 
nuclear,  104,  156 
possible  effects,  203 
radioactive,  I  I  1,  149 
water  repellants,  30 I 
water  resources,  138,  323  
water-immersion  facility (WIF), 
Watkins,  Kermit,  193 
weather,  26 ,  52 ,  5 4 ,  8 0 ,  86,  112,  118 ,   167 ,   184,  192, 205,  2 3 2 , 2 3 3  29 I ,   334 ,   342 ,   363.  380, 
404 ,   419 ,   420,  429,  430,  474,  492,  421 ,   523 
climate,  192 
delays, 35 ,  87, 292,  293,  297,  335,  337 ,   350 
global  patterns,  357 
hurricanes,  236 ,  429 ,   492 
impact  of,  1 3 9 ,   194,  3 3 5  
Josephine (tropical  storm), 5 10 
problems,  14 ,  255 ,   269 ,   328 ,  350 
solar stations,  123 
solar storm,  59 ,   60  
storm  information  system, 213 ,   292 
studies and  experiments, 4 ,  5 ,   10, 25 ,   140 ,   199 
temperatures,  extremes  and  effects, 273 ,   322 ,  324 ,   331 ,   332 ,  335 ,   351 ,   353 ,  357 ,  384;  405, 
445, 456 ,   474  
tests,  132 
visibility, 337 
weatherfax charts,  255 
Weaver, W. R . , 243 
Webb,  James,  44  
Weber,  Daniel  J., 273 
Weeks,  L .  Michael,  8 1 , 2 7 6 , 3 6 6  
weightlessness,  8 7 ,   120 ,   152, 314 ,   329 ,   335,  336, 408 ,   4 2 8 , 4 5 3  
adaptation  to,  17,  190 
effec tsof ,   133 ,   137 ,   147,  162,  163,  1943, 222 ,   359 ,   360 
effects on  physiological  processes,  267 ,   268 ,   359 ,   3 8 5 , 4 2 8 - 4 3 2 , 4 4 8 ,  4 5 3 , 4 7 3  
experiments,  7 7 ,   87 ,   189, 273 ,   408,  419 
plant  growth,  4 7 ,  4 8 ,   87 
problems,  18,  19 
Weinberger,  Caspar  W.,  31 I ,   460,  471 

113 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D   AEROKAUT ICS  

I N D E X  

Weiss,  Stanlcy  I . .   188. 241,  281,  351.  425 
Weitz,  Paul  J . ,  332 ,  407 ,   408 
Werner,  Michael,  348 
West Germany.  See Germany, Federal  Rcpublic  of 
Westar,  135 
Werrar  I ,  46 ,   330.  348 
Wesrur 2 ,  46 ,   330,  348 
W e s f a r 3  (WESTAR-C),  46 ,  47 ,  5 3 ,  79 .   330.  348 
Wesrar 4 .  47 ,   330,  348 
Westar 5 .  347 ,   348 
Westar  V I ,   464,  516,  518 
Western  Research  Company.  329 
Western  Space and Missile Center  (WSMC). Calif.,  73 .  98 ,   l5 ! J ,   2 7 3 ,   284  2 9 1 .   3 0 3 ,  406. 420  
Western  Test  Range  (WTK),  38.  7 3 ,  77 .   8 7 ,  274.  352,  371 
Western  Union  Telegraph  Company,  10, 36 ,  53 .   79.  118.  129 ,   135, 238  330 ,  348 ,  464 ,  465 ,  
516 
Space Communications  Corporation,  238 
Westford, Mass.,  241 
Westinghouse.  209 
Whitcornb,  Richard  T.. 4 5 ,   I24 
White, Terry, 467 
White  Sands ,  N . M . ,  334 ,   337 
White  Sands  Missile Range,  77 ,  230,  233 
White  Sands Test  Facility.  168, 421 ,   431 
Whitecloud  (code  name) ,   129 
Widick, Fritz,  474 
Widlick,  Herman  K . .   432 
Wild,  P.,  227 
Williams,  Kcnncth,  I50 
Williams,  Sam  B . ,   21 
Williams,  Walter  C . ,  5 3 ,  35 I 
Williams,  Wiley,  315 
Williams  Research  Corporation.  2 1  
Williamson,  John,  93  
Willson,  Richard  C . ,  342 
Wilson,  Roben,  155 
wind-shear  phenomena.  280 
wind  tunnels,  7 4 ,   125.  146,  195, 215 ,   219.  298,  417.  462 
windscreens.  287 ,   327.  328 
Winget,  Charles,  359 
winglets,  45.  7 1 ,  298 
wings,  weight  of,  197 
wingtips,  45 ,   4 8 ,  79 
Winkfield  (tracking  station),  21 1 
Winn.  Larry,  185, 394 
Wolfe,  John,  55.  56 ,  59  
Wolfe. Tom,  45 
women,  159, 203 ,   355 ,   360, 419.  420 ,   438,  491:  504 ,  510 
Women’s Air-Force  Service  Pilots  (WASPS), 203 
Wood,  W . ,   179 
Woods  Hole Oceanographic  Institution,  2 14 
Worcester  Polytechnic  Institute,  I24 

774 

INDEX  

ASTRONAUTlCS  AND   AERONAUT ICS  

Worden,  AI,  44 
World  Administrative  Radio Conference,  1979, 380 
World  Meteorological  Organization, 4 ,   75 
World  Weather  Watch,  4  
Wrather Corporation,  202 
Wright  State University,  451 
Wright-Patterson  Air Force  Base, 287 
Wyckoff,  Susan,  485 
Wyeth,  James,  202 
Wyoming,  153,  184 
Xinhua  (PRC press  agency),  156 
Xinjiang  (PRC  region),  127 
X-ray,  106,  154,  174,  191, 213,  255,  271,  337 
data,  23,  94 ,   105 
emissions,  116, 222 
equipment,  29,  105 
experiments,  33  
films,  129,  130 
observatory,  4  I5 
sources,  5 ,   107,  116, 358 
XUV  camera,  358 
Yamato  mountains,  131 
Yardley, John  E ,  3 ,  5 , 7 5 ,  81 ,  8 4 ,   122, 303 
Yegorov, Anatoly,  147 
Yegorov,  Boris,  385 
Yeliseyev, Aleksey  S . ,  72 ,   214 
Yost,  Charles,  469 
Young, A .   Thomas,  88 ,   222, 338 
Young,  John W . ,   16 ,  94 ,   1 0 7 , 2 4 4 , 2 5 5 ,  256,  265,  266,  269, 2 7 0 , 2 8 4  337,  342,  395,  447 ,  
451 ,  459 
Yugoslavia,  124 
zero-gravity,  273 
Zipoy,  David,  281 

115 

The NASA  History  Series 

HISTORIES 
Anderson,  Frank  W.,  Jr . ,   Orders  of  Magnitude:  A  History  of  NACA  and  h'ASA, 
1915-1980  (NASA  SP-4403, 2d  ed . ,   1981). 
Benson,  Charles  D.,  and  William Barnaby  Faherty, Moonport:  A  History  of  Apollo 
Launch  Facilities  and  Operations  (NASA  SP-4204,  1978). 
Bilstein,  Roger  E . ,   Stages  to   Saturn: A  Technological History  of  the  ApollolSaturn 
Launch  Vehicles (NASA  SP-4206,  1980). 
Boone,  W.  Fred,  NASA  O f i c e   of  Defense  Affairs:  The  First  Five  Years  (NASA 
HHR-32,  1970,  multilith). 
Brooks,  Courtney G . ,  James M .  Grimwood, and  Lloyd  S .   Swenson, Jr . ,   Chariots,for 
Apollo:  A  History  of  Manned  Lunar  Spacecraft  (NASA  SP-4205,  1979). 
Byers, Bruce K . ,  Destination Moon: A  History of  the Lunar  Orbiter Program  (NASA 
TM  X-3487,  1977, multilith). 
Compton, W.  David, and  Charles D.  Benson, Living  and  Warking in Space: A  History 
of  Skylab  (NASA  SP-4208,  1983). 
Corliss,  William  R . ,   NASA  Sounding  Rockets,  1958-1968:  A  Historical  Summary 
(NASA  SP-4401,  1971). 
Ezell,  Edward Clinton, and  Linda Neumann Ezell,  On Mars:  Exploration of th e  Red 
Planet,  1958-1978  (NASA  SP-4212,  1984). 
Ezell,  Edward Clinton,  and  Linda Neuman  Ezell,  The Partnerships: A  History of  the 
Apollo-Soyut  Test  Project  (NASA  SP-4029,  1978). 
Green,  Constance M cL . ,  and Milton Lomask,  I/anguard: A  History (NASA SP-4202, 
190; also  Washington:  Smithsonian  Institution  Press,  1971). 
Hacker,  Barton C . ,   and  James  W.  Grimwood,  On the Shoulders of Titans: A  History 
of  Project  Gemini  (NASA  SP-4203,  1977). 
Hansen,  James  R . ,   Engineer  In  Charge:  A  History  of  the  Langley  Aeronautical 
Lahomtory,  1917-1958  (NASA  SP-4305,  1987) 
Hall,  R.  Cargill, Lunar  Impact: A  History  of Project Ranger (NASA  SP-4210,  1977). 
Hallion,  Richard  P.,  On  the Frontier:  Flight  Research at  Dryden,  1946-1981  (NASA 
SP-4303,  1984). 
Hartman,  Edwin  P.,  Adventures  in  Research: A  History  of  Ames  Research  Center, 
1940-1965  (NASA  SP-4302,  1970). 
Levine,  Arnold,  Managing  NASA  in  the Apollo Era  (NASA  SP-4102,  1982). 
Muenger, Elizabeth A , ,  Searching the Horizon: A  History  of  Ames Research  Center, 
1940-1976  (NASA  SP-4304,  1985). 
Newell,  Homer  E . ,   Beyond  the  Atmosphere:  Early  Years  of Space  Science  (NASA 
SP-4211,  1980). 
Pitt,  John  A . ,   The Human  Factor: Biomedicine  in  the Manned  Space Program,  1980 
(NASA  SP-4213,  1985). 
Roland,  Alex.,  Model  Research:  The National  Advisory  Committee f o r  Aeronautics, 
1915-1958  (NASA  SP-4103,  1985). 
Roland,  Alex.,  A  Spacefaring  People:  Perspective  on  Early  Spaceflight  (NASA 
SP-4405,  1985). 
Rosenthal,  Alfred,  Venture into  Space:  Early  Years of  Goddard Space  Flight  Center 
(NASA  SP-4103,  1985). 

PRECEDING  PAGE  BLANK  NOT FULMED 

A STRONAUT IC S  A N D   AERONAUT IC S  

THE   NASA  HISTORY  SER IE S  

Rosholt,  Robert  L . ,  An  Administrative  H i s t o y   of  NASA,  1958-1963  (NASA  SP-4101, 
1966). 
Sloop, John  L . ,  Liquid Hydrogen  a s   a  Propulsion  Fuel,  1945-1959  (NASA  SP-4404, 
1978) 
Swenson,  Lloyd  S . ,  J r . ,   James  M .   Grimwood  and  Charles  C.  Alexander,  This New 
Ocean: A  Histo?  of  Project  Mercuty  (NASA  SP-4201,  1966). 

REFERENCE WORK 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Report  of  the  President,  annual  volumes  for  195-1986, 
The Apollo Spacecra j:  A  Chronology (NASA  SP-4009, vol.  1,  1969; vol.  2 ,   1973; vol. 
3 ,   3976;  v o l .   4 ,   1978). 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics:  A  Chronology of  Science,  Technology, und  Policy,  an-  
nual  volumes  with  a n   earlier  summary  volume,  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics, 
1915-1960. 
Dickson,  Katherine  M .   ed . ,   H is tory   of  Aeronautics  and   Astronautics:  A  Preliminury 
Bibliogmphy  (NASA  HHR-29,  1968, multilith). 
Ezell,  Linda  Neuman,  NASA   Historical  Data  Book,  vol.  I1  Programs  and  Projects 
1958-1968  and  vol.  111 Progrums  and Projects  19694978 (NASA  SP-4012,  1988). 
Hall,  R .   Cargill,  Project  Ranger:  A  Chronology  (JPLIHR-2,  1971,  multilith). 
Hall  R .  Cargill,  e d .  Essays  on  the  Hi5tot-y of  Rocketry  u n d   Astronautics:  Proceedings 
of  the  Third  through  the  Sixth  Hisiory  Symposia  of  the  International  Academy  of 
Astronautics  (NASA   CP-2014, 2  vols.,  1977). 
Looney,  John  J . ,   ed . ,   Bibliogruphy  of  Space  Books  and  Articles from   Non-Aerospace 
Journals,  1957-1977  (NASA  HHR-51,  1979, multilith). 
Roland, Alex  E ,  A  Guide to Reseach  in NRCA History (NASA HHR-50, 6th e d . .   1982, 
available  from  NASA  History  Office). 
Skylab:  A  Chronology  (NASA SP-4011,  1977). 
k n  Nimmen,  Jane, and  Leonurd  C.  Bruno,  with Robert  L.  Rosholt,  NASA Historical 
Data  Book ,   1958-1968,  vol  I ,   NASA  Resources  (NASA  SP-4012,  1976). 
Wells,  Helen  T . ,   Susan H .   Whiteley,  and  Carr ie   E .   Karegeannes,  Origins  of  NASA 
Names  (NASA  SP-4402,  1976). 

Recent volumes  are available from Superintendent of Documents, Government  Prin- 
ting  Office, Washington,  DC 20402;  early  volumes  from National  Technical Informa- 
tion  Service,  Springfield,  VA  22161. 

778 

IJ.S.  CXWERDPm   PRINTING. DFF ICE   : 1990   - 265-950 

Report Documentation Page 

NASA  SP-4024 

Astronautics &  Aeronautics,  1979-1984:  A  Chronology 

9.  Performing Organization Name and  Address 
NASA History  Office 
NASA Headquarters 
Washington,  DC  20546 

12.  Sponsoring Agency  Name  and Address 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space Administration 
Washington,  DC  20546-0001 

15.  Supplementary  Notes 

I 

11.  Contract  or  Grant  No. 

13.  Type  of  Report and  Period Covered 

series provides  a c 

the period  covered. 

f  all  significant events  and  devel- 

17.  Key Words  (Suggested by Authork))  
Astronautics,  aeronautics, NASA  History 

18.  Distribution Statement 
Unclassified  - Unlimited 
Subject  category  1,  1 2  

19.  Security  Classif.  [of this  report) 
Unclassified 

20.  Security  Classif.  (of  this  page) 
Unclassified 

21.  No. of  pages 
approx.  600 

22.  Price 

