SP-4027 

ASTRONAUTICS AND 
AERONAUTICS, 1986-1990 
A Chronology 

by Ihor Y.  Gawdiak, Ram6n J. Mir6, and Sam Stueland 

THE NASA HISTORY SERIES 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
NASA History Office 
Office of  Policy and Plans 
Washington, DC 

1997 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Gawdiak, Ihor,  1935- 
Astronautics  and  aeronautics,  1986-1990  : a  chronology  I by  Ihor  Y. 
Gawdiak, Ramon J .   Mir6, and Sam Strueland. 
p.  cm. - (NASA history  series) 
Includes index. 
1. Astronautics-Chronology. 
2. Aeronautics-Chronology. 
I. Mir6, Ram6n, 1968-  . 11.  Strueland, Sam, 1955-  . 111. Title. 
IV.  Series. 
TL788.5.G38  1997 
629.1  ' 0 9 4 ~ 2 1  

97-202 15 
CIP 

For sale by the US .  Government printing office 
Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC  20402-9328 
ISBN  0 - 1 6 - 0 4 9 1 3 4 - 7  

Preface 

This chronology of  events in  aeronautics, aviation,  space science, and  space 
exploration was prepared by  the Federal Research Division of  the Library of 
Congress  for  the  History  Division  of  the  National Aeronautics  and  Space 
Administration (NASA).  It  covers  the  years  1986-1990  and  continues  the 
series of  annual chronologies published by NASA. 

The  present  volume  returns  to  the  format  used  in  the  Astronautics  and 
Aeronautics, 1979-1984: A  Chronology volume. It also integrates in a single 
table the information presented in two or three previous publications. 

Ihor Y.  Gawdiak 
Ram6n J. Mir6 
Sam Stueland 
May  1997 

... 
111 

Contents 

... 
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
III 
Astronautics and Aeronautics.  1986 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3 
Astronautics and Aeronautics.  1987 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9 3  
Astronautics and Aeronautics.  1988 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   147 
Astronautics and Aeronautics. 1989 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
203 
Astronautics and Aeronautics.  1990 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   243 

Appendix A 
Satellites. Space Probes. and Human Space Flights  . . . . . . . . . . . .  293 

Appendix B 
Abbreviations of  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   333 
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   337 
The NASA History Series  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   363 
About the Compilers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

??? 

V 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTICS ,  1986 

January 

January 2 :  A Reuters report said that Arabsat-1, the Arab world’s f i s t  com- 
munication satellite, built  for  the Arab League  by  a  French-led consortium 
and launched in February 1985 by  a European Aryan rocket, failed to operate 
in orbit because of  technical errors. The report also noted that Iraqi Director 
General Ali Mashat, the man in charge of  the project, was fired last month by 
a committee of  six Arab League communications ministers. (C Trib, Jan 2/86) 

Having examined NASA’s  1986 schedule of  launches, missions into space, 
and other  space science events, U.S. media predicted that  1986 would  “open 
an  extensive new  chapter  in  space  exploration,” and  would  rival  the  era  of 
space exploration “that began with Galileo’s first peak through a telescope 400 
years  ago.”  Predicting  1986  to  be  “a  banner  year,”  the  Christian Science 
Monitor pictured an expanding role for the United States in space exploration 
because the year promised to put NASA on the cutting edge. Although the Los 
Angeles Times predicted “a year of  spectaculars,’’ it warned that no new  starts 
for planetary missions beyond  1986 were on the horizon. The Times also noted 
that the projected $8 billion orbiting Space Station would likely take a big bite 
out  of  NASA  funds and  that  increased military  applications  equated  to  less 
sharing of  knowledge with the public. ( C SM ,  Jan 2/86; LA  Times, Jan 218) 

January 3: The steering problem that halted the Shuttle Columbia’s launch in 
December of  1985 was  traced to a  tiny electrical component that  led ground 
computers astray. (W  Times, Jan 3/86; NY   Times, Jan 3/86) 

The  Federal Aviation Administration has  become  increasingly concerned 
with the problem of  inadequate airline maintenance. Because they maintain a 
17-hour-per-day schedule and are involved in repeated takeoffs and landings, 
commercial  jetliners  are  prone  to  numerous  mechanical  breakdowns. 
Although “modern jets  are designed to fly despite even serious defects” and 
although U.S. carriers employ an army of  airline mechanics repairing planes 
in between scheduled flights, several U.S. carriers were fined by  the Federal 
Aviation  Administration  last  summer  for  a  “series  of  maintenance-related 
transgressions.” The National Transportation Safety Board  was  considering 
whether a crash of a Midwest Express Airline jet in September 1985, in which 
31  people  were  killed,  was  caused  by  poor  maintenance.  Some  air-safety 
experts expressed fear that airline companies had become too cost conscious 
about safety; still, maintenance error ranked  third behind pilot error and bad 
weather as a cause of  fatal airline crashes. (WSJ ,  Jan 3/86) 

3 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1986 

January  6 :  NASA  renamed  two  planetary  missions  scheduled for  flight  in 
1988 and  1990. The mission to map  the planet Venus, previously known as 
Venus Radar Mapper and scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in April 
1988 and arrival at Venus in July 1989, was renamed Magellan. The Magellan 
spacecraft, attached to a Centaur-G upper stage, would map the entire surface 
of  the planet Venus  for the first time, using a  synthetic-aperture radar instru- 
ment.  The  spacecraft would  orbit  the  planet  about  once  every  three  hours, 
coming as close as 250 kilometers from the surface. 

The  mission  to  map  the  planet  Mars,  previously  known  as  the  Mars 
Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter  and  scheduled for  launch  from  the  Space 
Shuttle in August 1990 and arrival at Mars in August 1999, was renamed Mars 
Observer. The Observer spacecraft, adapted from an existing production-line 
type of  Earth-orbital spacecraft to reduce costs, would map the planet Mars to 
determine the global elemental and mineralogical character of  its surface and 
to  investigate the Martian climate, both  present and past. The Magellan and 
Mars Observer projects were managed  by  the  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory in 
Pasadena, California, for NASA‘s Office of  Space Science and Applications. 
(NASA Release 86-1) 

NASA announced that  the  launch of  the Hubble Space Telescope and the 
launch of  the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the 
new  schedule, the Space Telescope would be  launched on October 27,  1986, 
and  the  Earth  Observation Mission would  lift  off  on August  18,  1986. The 
change  was  made  to  provide  additional  time  for  delivery  of  the  Space 
Telescope from the West  Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space 
Telescope would  be  deployed into  orbit  from  Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was 
expected to  see 7 times farther and  10 times more clearly than  any telescope 
on Earth. (NASA Release 86-2) 

USA   Today  reported  that  40-year-old  Karen  Kofoed,  a  reporter  for  the 
Camden Courier-Post, was  the  first journalist  to  apply  to be  part  of  a  crew 
aboard  a  Space  Shuttle  into  space. As  of  January  6,  only  20  of  the  4000 
reporters  who  requested  applications  had  submitted  the  completed  forms, 
which were due by January 15. The contest for the first journalist in space was 
administered for NASA by the Association of  Schools of Journalism and Mass 
Communications at the University of  South Carolina. (USA  Today, Jan 6/86) 

A number of American space scientists expressed disappointment because 
no U.S.  spacecraft would fly by Halley’s Comet as it swings by Earth for the 
first time  since  1910 and  for  the  thirtieth time  since 240 B.C.  The  scientists 
ascribed U.S.  failure to have a mission to the comet to a “combination of over 
expectations, missed signals, poor planning, a streak of  bad luck, and politics 
and infighting in the science community.” 

4 

JANUARY 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

In  the  meantime,  the  European  Space Agency’s  spacecraft  Giotto,  the 
Soviet Union’s twin Vega spacecraft, and two Japanese spacecraft would each 
probe Halley’s  Comet. Particularly galling to American  space scientists was 
the knowledge that none of these spacecraft could carry out their mission with- 
out U.S.  help, as each was guided by  the U.S. Deep Space Network to reach 
the comet. The most sophisticated mission would be by the spacecraft Giotto. 
After a 60,000 mile voyage through Halley’s “dusty tail,” it would pass “with- 
in 300 miles of the coma, which with the nucleus forms the comet’s head.” The 
twin  Soviet spacecraft were  launched in December  1984 into a  Venus  orbit, 
from which they landed probes on the planet and used that planet’s gravity to 
fly toward Halley’s comet. One craft was  expected to  stay about 6,000 miles 
from the nucleus, while the other would move closer. Japan’s spacecraft would 
come only within  120,000 miles of Halley’s comet. (W Post, Jan 6/86) 

For the third time in  19 days, launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia was 
again  scrubbed. This  time  a malfunction with Columbia’s computer control 
failed  to  close  an oxygen  valve.  Engineers were  successful  in  closing  the 
valve  under  manual control, but  the  additional time  it  was  open resulted  in 
1,500 gallons to  3,000 gallons of  oxygen entering the  fuel  lines to  the main 
engine, lowering temperatures to  an unacceptable level. With  15 flights slat- 
ed for  1886, another attempt was immediately planned for January 7. 

The chief goal of  the mission was  to carry a $50 million communications 
satellite, Satcom, for RCA. When an RCA engineer announced that 8:47 p.m. 
was  the cut off  point  for  a  launch that would later deliver the  satellite at an 
optimum time,  the mission was  canceled. Scheduled to  ride  into  space with 
NASA’s  astronauts  and  engineers  was  Florida’s  Democratic  Congressman 
Bill Nelson, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and appli- 
cations that oversees NASA’s budget. (W Times, Jan 7/86; W Post, Jan 7/86; 
P  Inq ,  Jan 7/86; C Trib, Jan 7/86; W Times, Jan 7/86; B  Sun ,  Jan 7/86) 

January  7:  The  scheduled launch of  the  Space Shuttle Columbia was  again 
scrubbed-this 
time because of  inclement weather at landing sights in Spain 
and  the  Sahara Desert. The weather situations in  these distant areas were of 
concern to engineers at the Kennedy Space Center because the sites provided 
emergency landing in the event of  an engine failure during the first few min- 
utes of  flight. This fifth delay, four in three weeks, raised questions concern- 
ing  the NASA’s  ability  to  launch  15 scheduled Shuttle flights  during  1986. 
(W Pos t ,  Jan 8/86; W Times, Jan 8/86; USA  Today, Jan 8/86; P  Inq ,  Jan 8/86) 

*  The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which oper- 
ates  the  Nation’s  weather  satellites, announced that  its  polar  orbiting satellite, 
NOAA-8,  was  apparently lost. N O M  was  informed by  the Air  Force  that  its 
tracking instruments detected “what appeared to be pieces of  the satellite” in the 
vicinity of NOAA-8 orbit. (NY Times, Jan 7/86) 

5 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1986 

Dr.  William  R.  Graham,  who  was  appointed  Acting  Administrator  of 
NASA on January 3,  1986, stated in his first interview that he was the “acting 
administrator in every sense of  the word“ and that he felt very comfortable in 
his new position. He apparently made that statement to put to rest suggestions 
that the Agency would really be run by NASA Associate Administrator Philip 
E. Culberston while Graham learned the ropes.  Graham was promoted to his 
new position, from the post of Deputy Administrator of  NASA, when NASA 
Administrator James E. Beggs took a leave of  absence to prepare his defense 
for a trial. Beggs had been charged with defrauding the Federal Government 
when he  served as a top executive of General Dynamics Corporation. 

NASA’s acting administrator received his master’s and doctoral degrees in 
engineering from Stanford University. He began his professional career at the 
Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico and then moved to  the Rand 
Corporation in California. In 197 1, he founded R&D Associates-a 
think tank 
in  Marina  Del  Rey,  California.  He  was  a  consultant  to  the  Secretwy  of 
Defense and had  served on  an  advisory committee on undersea warfare and 
human  assisted strategic Air  Force  systems and  on  nuclear weapons panels. 
Prior  to  his  appointment as  Deputy  Administrator of  NASA  in  November 
1985, Graham headed, for three years, President Reagan’s advisory commit- 
tee on arms control and disarmament. 

The then 48-year-old native Texan expressed great optimism in his assess- 
ment of  the future of NASA and of  space exploration in general. He said that 
“the Agency  in  the coming decade would  broaden mankind’s understanding 
of  Earth’s environment, expand the reach of manned exploration, and extend 
scientific vision to  the  far edges  of  the  universe.” Stating that  space explo- 
ration  was  limited  only  by  “imagination,” Graham  promised  to  vigorously 
pursue President Reagan’s mandate to make space more accessible to the ordi- 
nary citizen and free enterprise. (W Times, Jan 6/86; 7/86) 

January  8 :   For  the  sixth  time,  launching  of  the  Shuttle  Challenger  was 
scrubbed, this  time because of  a stuck fuel valve in one of  the main engines. 
( C S M ,  Jan 9/86; W Times, Jan 9/86; NY   Times, Jan 9/86; P  Inq ,  Jan 9/86) 

January  9: NASA  reported  that  scientists observed Halley ’ s  comet  from  a 
University  of  Arizona 
telescope  aboard  NASA’s  Kuiper  Airborne 
Observatory, a modified C-141 aircraft operated by NASA’s  Ames Research 
Center in Mountain View,  California. It was  the  first  direct confirmation of 
water in a comet, and the discovery lent new  support to astronomers’ widely 
held  theory  that  comets  are “dirty  snowballs” composed primarily of  frozen 
water.  The  theory  was  conceived  by  Dr.  Michael  Mumma,  head  of  the 
Planetary  Systems  Branch,  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Greenbelt, 
Maryland, who,  together with Dr.  Harold Weaver, an associate research sci- 

6 

JANUARY 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AWD AERONAUTICS 

entist at  the Center for Astrophysical Sciences at Johns Hopkins University, 
developed a  theoretical model  leading to this discovery. (NASA Release 86- 
4;  W Pos t ,  Jan  10186; B  Sun ,  Jan  10186; NY  Times, Jan  10186) 

January 10 :  The cause of  the faulty engine valve that was responsible for Shuttle 
Columbia’s  sixth delay was discovered to be a 5-inch thermometer that was bro- 
ken  during fuel  loading. After  engineers removed  the  thermometer, they  were 
hopeful for a launch later in the day, but feared that overcast weather might cause 
yet another delay.  (W Times, Jan  10186; W Post, Jan  10186; B Sun, Jan  10186) 

January 12 :  Columbia, flight STS 61-C, was successfully launched from Cape 
Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of  seven postponements. The 
crew  completed  their mission  of  launching RCA’s  $50 million  satellite  into 
orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. 

Ironically, after a 25-day delay in getting off  the ground, the Space Shuttle 
was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather 
might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA want- 
ed extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission 
of observing Halley’s Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would 
leave  little  room  for delays  of  this  launch. Most  of  Columbia’s experiments 
were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley’s comet failed 
to  work  because  a  light  intensifier had  been  inadvertently left  on  during  the 
ship’s seven launch delays. It was not until January  18, after a two-day delay 
because of  poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in 
California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center 
in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, 
an estimated five days were  scheduled to be  cut from  its preparation time  so 
that  the critical date for observing Halley’s Comet  could be met.  (NY  Times, 
Jan  13/86; Jan  14/86; Jan  15/86; Jan 24/86;  USA  Today, Jan  13/86; Jan  15/86; 
W Times, Jan  13/86; C SM ,  Jan  13/86; Jan 21/86; P Znq, Jan  13/86; B  Sun ,  Jan 
13/86; W Post, Jan  13/86; Jan  15/86; Jan  16/86; C Trib, Jan  13/86) 

January 14: NASA and SPACEHAB signed a memorandum of understanding 
(MOU) to establish cooperation for the  latter’s efforts to develop and market 
payload bay habitable modules, truncated metal cylinders that would be addi- 
tions  to  the  orbiter’s  crew  department  and  connected  by  tunnel  adapters. 
These  modules,  designed  to  increase  the  pressurized  volume  of  the  Space 
Shuttle, would serve as additional living and work space for the astronauts by 
providing an additional 1,000 cubic feet. 

Another MOU, signed by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), 
was intended to give NASA access to Synthetic Aperture Radar data from the 
first European Remote Sensing Satellite for Government research purposes at 

7 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1986 

the Fairbanks, Alaska, station that NASA was developing in connection with its 
Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS). The data 
received from the ERS-1 satellite, engineers hoped, would enhance NASA-sup- 
ported  polar  ice  research,  NROSS,  the  Topography  Experiment  for  Ocean 
Circulation  and  Shuttle  Imaging  Radar-C.  NASA  was  then  to  exchange  its 
Scatterometer and  radar  imagery for other ERS-1 data of  interest. The ERS-1 
was scheduled for launch in 1989. (NASARelease 86-6; 86-7; B Sun ,  Jan 17/86) 

January  16: The Voyager  2 Spacecraft discovered six new  moons orbiting the 
planet Uranus, ranging in diameter from 20 to 30 miles. The moons were named 
1986U1 in  succession to  1986U6, denoting the  year  in which they  were  dis- 
covered, the planet they orbit and the order in which they were discovered. The 
first  of  these  moons  was  found  on  January  8,  1986.  (NASA Release  86-8; 
W Post, Jan 9/86; C SM ,  Jan 9/86; N y  Times, Jan 9/86; P Inq, Jan 17/86; B  Sun )  

*  Lasers  on  board  weather  satellites  (LIDAR),  said  Wayne  Baker  of  the 
Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory, promised more accurate forecast- 
ing. In the past, satellite data offered only marginal improvements over tradi- 
tional methods arid  even deteriorations for  some predictions. With the  addi- 
tion of  a  laser, however,  scientists would  have  access to  wind  measurement 
throughout the  atmosphere, keys  to  following the  weather  that  were  before 
limited to ground stations and weather balloons. (CSM ,  Jan  16/86) 

January 21 :  The first Soviet Space Shuttle, expected to be  launched in  1986, 
would likely look very similar to U.S.  orbiters, said scientists. Photographs of 
a  scale  model  Soviet  space plane  that  splashed down  in  the  Indian  Ocean 
revealed a miniature American Shuttle. Plans for the plane were easy for sci- 
entists to obtain as  the program was never top secret and  sources noted  that 
the Soviets had often copied Western aircraft in  the past. 

On a similar note, a report concerning the secretive launch from, presum- 
ably, the Soviet Union in the  summer of  1985 concluded that  an antisatellite 
weapon had gone up. Radar tracked debris that had  orbited the Earth before 
burning up in the atmosphere, and researchers quickly deduced that the metal- 
lic scrap had come from a satellite on which the weapon was tested. The ille- 
gal  launches  were  the  first  such  unannounced  flights  by  the  Soviet  Union 
since testing of  orbital thermonuclear weapons.  (W  Times, Jan  21/86;  W S J ,  
Jan 21/86) 

January 23: Voyager 2 gathered a variety of  technical information and  sent back 
photographs of  the planet Uranus, giving scientists their greatest knowledge yet 
of  the distant planet. Among the discoveries were additional moons (bringing the 
total to  14), wind and clouds in the atmosphere, a brown, smog-like haze (proba- 
bly  caused  by  methane  gas),  and  the  existence  of  a  magnetic  field.  (NASA 

8 

DATE 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Release  85-165;  CSM ,   Jan  22/86;  Jan  23/86;  Jan  24/86;  P  Inq,  Jan  22/86; 
Jan  23/86;  Jan  24/86;  W  Post,  Jan  23/86;  Jan  24/86;  USA  Today, Jan  22/86; 
NY  Times, Jan 23/86;  Jan 24/86; B Sun, Jan 24/86; C Trib, Jan 24/86) 

January 26: For the second time in two days, launch of  the Shuttle Challenger 
at  Cape  Canaveral,  Florida,  was  postponed  because  of  bad  weather. 
Meanwhile,  NASA  began  conducting  tests  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base  in 
California to  determine  the  effect  of  rain  on  insulating  tiles  and  readied  a 
sophisticated instrument landing system, hoping to minimize the weather fac- 
tor in launches and landings for future orbiter flights at Kennedy Space Center 
in  Florida.  (W  Times,  Jan  27/86;  USA  Today, Jan  27/86;  P  Inq,  Jan  27/86; 
C Trib, Jan 27/86; B  Sun ,  Jan 27/86) 

January 28: Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight 
STS  51-L, exploded at  about  10 miles above the Earth, killing all  seven crew 
members. It was the worst accident in the history of  space exploration and the 
first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of 
the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle’s 
main  fuel  tank, causing engineers to  speculate that hydrogen from a  ruptured 
tank ignited upon contact with air heated by  the rocket motors or directly by the 
motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the 
Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tend- 
ed spaceflight was  halted until  a thorough investigation was completed, stunt- 
ing the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of  sci- 
entific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY   Times, 
Jan 29/86; B  Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq ,  Jan 29/86;  C Trib, Jan 29/86) 

9 

February 

February 2 :  Initial investigation, and  tape  review  of  the  Challenger accident, 
pointed to the right solid fuel rocket booster and showed a leak near one of its 
seams. An apparent rupture between two sections of  the rocket emitted flames 
that soon found their way to the external fuel tank, igniting the volatile contents. 

Meanwhile, salvage operations recovered two large objects believed to be 
part of  the Shuttle from the ocean floor, but most of  the craft was  still unac- 
counted  for.  NASA planned  to  bring  in  a  recovery vessel  equipped with  a 
remote-controlled robot  and  cameras. (WSJ ,  Feb  3/86; NY T imes ,  Feb  3/86; 
W Post, Feb 3/86) 

February 3: President Ronald Reagan issued an executive order through his 
press  secretary that  established a  commission to  investigate the  Challenger 
accident. According to the order, the ad hoc commission would review the cir- 
cumstances surrounding the  accident, develop recommendations for  correc- 
tive or other action based on the findings, and submit a final report to the pres- 
ident  and  to  the  NASA Administrator.  (The White  House Executive Order 
Establishing  the  Presidential  Commission  on  the  Space  Shuttle Challenger 
Accident, Feb 3/86) 

February 5: Further investigation into the Challenger accident opened a num- 
ber  of  theories into  the  booster rocket’s  failure. One pointed  to  bad  fuel seg- 
ments, perhaps caused by  cold  temperatures. “Propellants can crack the  way 
you  crack a cookie. When they crack.. .it allows you new sites where gases can 
be generated,” opined Herman  Krier  from the  University of  Illinois. Another 
theory  suggested that  improper handling had  produced hairline  cracks while 
fuel  segments were  cast  or  during  launch preparation, or  that  installation of 
badly joined  seams between the fuel segments caused uneven burning. It was 
noted that workers ignored standard operating procedures. A third theory looked 
into the possibility that a solid-rocket booster nozzle had burned through, as had 
nearly happened on a previous flight. Still another theory cited cold weather or 
vibrations resulting from launch as  a  possible culprit for a  failure  in  the  sus- 
pected seam that joined two fuel segments. Other theories speculated that the 
external tank experienced overheating, leading to expansion of  its contents and 
rupture  of  the  tank,  or  even  direct  bum-through  from  the  5,900 degrees  of 
exhaust leaving the rocket booster or that there might have been a pre-existing 
hole in the tank. However the hydrogen came to leak, it was ignited by the heat- 
ed air  surrounding it or by  the thin flame from the solid rocket. 

11 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1986 

NASA  Engineers  thought,  in  that  point  in  the  investigation,  that  cold 
weather had  no  adverse affect on  either the  solid fuel or  the  seals, but  were 
concerned with  the  possibility  of  leakage  between  segments of  the  rocket 
motors  because  deterioration  of  these  seals  had  been  noted  on  previous 
flights. Back  up  seals, they  added, performed adequately. ( P  Znq,  Feb  5/86; 
Feb  10186; W Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86;  C SM ,  Feb 5/86;  C Trib, 
Feb  5/86;  Feb  6/86;  Feb  7/86;  NY  Times,  Feb  5/86;  Feb  7/86;  Feb  9/86; 
B  Sun, Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; W S J ,  Feb 6/86) 

The  President’s  Space  Shuttle  Commission  gathered  in  private  before 
beginning  its  formal  investigation  into  the  disaster.  Headed  by  former 
Secretary of State William P.  Rogers, the Commission planned to weigh all of 
the evidence and make a recommendation, with assistance from NASA, after 
120 days. (USA  Today, Feb 5/86) 

February 6:  The President’s Commission began probing into the Space Shuttle 
Challenger accident as it took statements from NASA officials Dr. William R. 
Graham, Acting Administrator; Jesse Moore, Associate Administrator; Arnold 
D. Aldrich, Space Shuttle Manager; Judson A.  Lovingood, Deputy Manager; 
and Robert B.  Sieck, Director, Shuttle Operations. As several possible reasons 
into  the  cause of  the  accident were  explored, Moore  emphasized that  space 
flight would always be dangerous. (NY Times, Feb 7/86) 

February  7: The White House accelerated its search for a permanent head of 
NASA to  replace James M.  Beggs,  indicted in  December on  fraud  charges 
unrelated to the agency. Beggs was on an unpaid  leave of  absence during the 
time  of  the  Challenger accident; Deputy Administrator William R.  Graham 
was Acting Administrator. Beggs was  later acquitted of  all wrong doing and 
the  Justice Department apologized for  the  erroneous charges. (W Post,  Feb 
7/86; Bu s  W k ,  Feb  17/86) 

February 10 :  NASA reported that the United States and the United Kingdom 
had  recently  agreed  to  cooperate  in  the  development of  technology  for  an 
advanced  short  takeoff  and  vertical  landing  (ASTOVL)  aircraft.  The 
ASTOVL aircraft would have the advantages of an advanced supersonic fight- 
er aircraft, but with the added capability of  landing vertically. The cooperative 
research program would investigate four propulsion concepts: vectored thrust, 
ejector augmenter, tandem fan, and remote augmented lift system. The mem- 
orandum of  understanding was  signed by William R. Graham, NASA Acting 
Administrator,  and  Donald  A.  Hicks,  Under  Secretary  for  Research  and 
Engineering, Department of Defense, for the United States, and by  Sir David 
Perry, Chief  of  Defense Equipment Collaboration, for  the United Kingdom. 
(NASA Release 86-10) 

12 

FEBRUARY  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NASA  announced that  it had  postponed three  launches: the Ulysses mis- 
sion to investigate the poles of  the sun; the G a l i eo  mission to orbit Jupiter and 
send a probe into the planet;  and the Astro-1 mission, an ultraviolet astrono- 
my  laboratory mounted  in  the  Shuttle’s  payload  bay  that  was  to  examine 
quasars,  “hot”  stars, galaxy  centers,  and  Halley’s  Comet. The  Ulysses  and 
Galileo missions were  scheduled for  launch from a  Shuttle in May, but  both 
launches were  dependent on  certain  relative positions of  Jupiter  and  Earth, 
occurring only once every  13 months. The Astro-1 had to be launched in the 
March-April  timeframe in  order  to  observe Halley’s  Comet,  and  with  that 
opportunity gone no new  date was requested. The delays were caused by  the 
January Space Shuttle accident. (NASA Release 86-11; NY T imes ,  Feb  11/86) 

Advisors at NASA determined that future dependance on the Shuttle for all 
space operations would be contradictory to a reliable space transportation pro- 
gram. After several days of  interviews, a  13-member panel, comprised of  avi- 
ation  and  aerospace  veterans,  concluded  that  expendable  launch  vehicles 
should have greater consideration because the Shuttle was a research vehicle. 
(W Pos t ,  Feb  11/86) 

The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty 
O-rings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals 
could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result 
of  cold weather) had  occurred in  6  of  171 seals  on  previous  flights. Morton 
Thiokol, the  firm responsible  for manufacturing the O-rings,  had  raised  con- 
cerns about launching the  Shuttle in  cold weather, but NASA engineers con- 
cluded that the backup ring would function if  the primary seal failed. Released 
NASA  documents  also  showed  concern  expressed by  engineers, who,  three 
years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments 
of  the solid rocket booster could fail and result in “loss of mission, vehicle, and 
crew.” One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated 
the chances for an accident involving the boosters as  1 in 35. 

NASA’s  safety  advisory  board  stated  in  their  1985  annual  report  that  18 
Shuttle flights per  year were “very  optimistic” because these  launches were 
anything but routine. However, “the requirement to launch has not been a pre- 
requisite,”  said  acting  NASA Administrator Dr.  William  R.  Graham,  “The 
prerequisite  has  been  safety.”  (Official Transcript  Proceedings Before  the 
Presidential Commission on  Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb  1 1/86; 
P Znq, Feb  12/86; Feb  13/86; B Sun, Feb  12/86; Feb  13/86; C SM ,  Feb  12/86; 
Feb  13/86;  C  Trib,  Feb  12/86;  Feb  14/86;  Feb  13/86;  WS J ,  Feb  12/86; 
USA Today, Feb  12/86; Feb  13/86; IVY  T imes ,  Feb  13/86; W Pos t ,  Feb  13/86) 

February  12:   Dr.  William  R.  Graham,  NASA’s  Acting  Administrator, 
affirmed plans  to continue NASA’s Teacher in  Space Program, administered 

13 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRAURY 1986 

by NASA’s Educational Affairs Division under the direction of Robert Brown. 
The reason given: NASA’s  continuing goals were to “increase the prestige of 
the teaching profession, to increase the awareness in the education communi- 
ty of  the impact of  technology and science on this country’s future, and to use 
space as a catalyst to enhance all subject areas and grade levels of  our educa- 
tion systems.” (NASA Release 86-12; USA  Today, Feb 14/86; Ny Times, Feb 
14/86; W Post, Feb  14/86) 

February  13: NASA released  footage of  the  Challenger just  seconds after 
ignition, showing a puff  of  black  smoke coming from the  right  solid rocket 
booster near  a joint between two segments. The tape lent more weight to the 
theory that the accident had resulted from a faulty seal in the motor. (W  Post, 
Feb 14/86; WSJ ,  Feb 14/86; W Times, Feb 14/86; NY  Times, Feb 14/86; B  Sun ,  
Feb  14/86; USA  Today, Feb  14/86) 

February 17 :  Forty miles off  the Florida coast and at a depth of  1,200 feet, a 
four-man submarine recovered debris and took photographs of what engineers 
hoped was Challenger’s right booster rocket. As the investigation moved fur- 
ther  ahead,  the  Presidential  Commission  looking  into  the  accident  asked 
NASA to remove Erom  its own investigation any officials involved in the deci- 
sion to  launch the Shuttle. ( B  Sun ,  Feb  18/86; NY  Times, Feb  18/86; W Po s t ,  
Feb  18/86; P Inq, Feb  18/86; W Times, Feb  17/86) 

NASA Requested $45 million for fiscal year 1987 to accelerate research for its 
next  generation  spacecraft,  a  hypersonic  transatmospheric vehicle,  or  “space 
plane”, capable of Mach 25 (about 17,000 mph). Able to fly into orbit, reenter the 
atmosphere and  achieve  orbit again while being completely reusable,  the  craft 
would have both commercial and military applications. (W Times, Feb 17/86) 

February  19: Boeing Aerospace was  selected to  supply NASA with Shuttle 
upper  stages  to  place  two  Tracking and  Data  Relay  Satellites into  geosyn- 
chronous Earth orbits. Engineering support and integration of the upper stages 
with the satellites were also to be provided. The contract was expected to run 
from March  1986 through April 1990 at a price of  approximately $93 million. 
(NASA Release 86- 14) 

The Presidential Commission’s investigation of  the Challenger accident, said 
the Chicago Tribune, had nearly concluded that cold weather led to reduced elas- 
ticity of  the rubber seal in the rocket booster and  the subsequent leak of  gasses. 
Engineers from Morton Thiokol, the rocket booster manufacturer, objected to the 
cold weather launch, but officials higher up in that company gave NASA the go- 
ahead. (Ny Times, Feb 20186; G Trib, Feb 20186; W Post, Feb 20186) 

14 

FEBRUARY 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

February 20: Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, commander of the Naval Space 
Command  and  former  NASA  astronaut,  was  appointed Associate Adrnin- 
istrator for Space Flight. The new position called for Truly to head  the Space 
Shuttle program and to direct NASA’s Design and Data Analysis Task Force, 
which reviewed the Shuttle Challenger’s January accident. He succeeded Jesse 
W.  Moore  in  both  of  these  roles.  (NASA Release  86-15; WS J ,  Feb  20186; 
Ny Times, Feb 20186; W Times, Feb 21/86; B  Sun ,  Feb 21/86) 

*  The  Soviet Union  launched what  it  said was  a  “third generation” Space 
Station named Mir, the Russian word for peace. The Mir was larger than their 
Salyut-7 Space Station and had six docking ports for habitable modules. With 
the  addition of  Salyut laboratories, Russia would  have  an  orbiting complex 
large enough for permanent crew habitation. ( B  Sun ,  Feb 21/86; W Times, Feb 
21/86; W Times, Mar 4/86; C SM ,  Mar 7/86) 

February 22:  Thomas L. Moser, Director for Engineering at NASA’s  Johnson 
Space Center, was appointed as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight 
to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. (NASA Release 86-16) 

February 24 :  A NASA study found that the part of  the booster rocket that was 
suspect in the Challenger accident had reached a temperature of only about 29 
degrees Fahrenheit at the time of  liftoff, 9 degrees cooler than  the  surround- 
ing  air.  Both  NASA  and  Morton  Thiokol  engineers,  the  study  noted,  had 
knowledge of  the ring’s  susceptibility to  damage  in  50-degree temperatures. 
A member of  the  President’s Commission  pointed  out  that  NASA officials 
should have been aware of  this as earlier temperatures were in the 20s and the 
O-rings  would not heat up quickly. (W Post, Feb 24/86) 

February 25: James M. Beggs resigned as NASA’s Administrator. Candidates 
President  Ronald  Reagan  was  considering  for  the  job  included  James  C. 
Fletcher, Thomas 0. Paine, James A. Abrahamson, Frank Borman, Harrison 
Schmitt, and Lew Allen. (hT Times, Feb 25186; WSJ ,  Feb 26/86) 

Engineers  from  Morton  Thiokol  gave  testimony  before  the  President’s 
Commission that  the  decision to  launch the  ill-fated Shuttle was  a manage- 
ment initiative, and they  suggest that those people had  ignored O-ring  safety 
data. The engineers testified that their decision-making process was reversed 
as the burden of  proof  shifted and was now on them  to  show that the launch 
would  be  unsafe.  Contrary  to  what  a  number  of  engineers  stated  to  the 
Cdhmnission, one management official testified that there was no undue pres- 
sure from NASA to go ahead with the launch and that management’s decision 
was based  solely on available data. ( B  Sun ,  Feb 26/86; NY   Times, Feb 26/86; 
W Post, Feb 26/86; W Times, Feb 26/86) 

15 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1986 

NASA’s  acting  administrator Dr. William  R.  Graham  announced that  he 
would not hesitate to make substantial changes wherever they might be war- 
ranted in the organization. Graham said, “That goes not only for the  [launch] 
decision-making process, but  also for engineering, design, vehicle certifica- 
tion and qualification.” (W Times, Feb 26/86) 

February 26: As further testimony was heard by  the President’s Commission, 
NASA manager Larry Mulloy stated that objections made by Morton Thiokol 
engineers to halt liftoff seemed illogical, but added that had he known that all 
of the company’s engineers held the opinion, he might have changed his mind. 
Other testimony given by  NASA officials conceded that  they  argued against 
the  idea of  cold weather being detrimental to  a  launch, but had  little data to 
demonstrate this, and insisted that this opposition in no way pressured Morton 
Thiokol  management  to  reverse  the  recommendation  of  its  engineers. 
(Official  Transcript  Proceedings  Before  the  Presidential  Commission  On 
Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 26/86; NY   Times, Feb 27/86; C Trib, 
Feb  27/86;  LA   Times,  Feb  27/86;  W  Post,  Feb  27/86;  P  Inq,  Feb  27/86; 
W Times, Feb 27/86; W S J ,  Feb 27/86) 

*  The  Challenger accident forced  NASA  to  reconsider expendable launch 
vehicles as  a means  for putting  satellites into  space. Believed  to  have  been 
rendered obsolete by  the Shuttle, these rockets were once again deemed nec- 
essary for meeting the growing schedule of  launches. The change of  position 
notwithstanding, NASA  and  the  Department of  Defense  appeared  ready  to 
request another orbiter. ( B  Sun ,  Feb 27/68) 

February 27:  The United  States Space Foundation outlined plans  to provide 
a  focal point  that  would  raise  funds  for  a  replacement of  the  Space Shuttle 
Challenger. The Challenger 7 Fund reached  out to individuals and organiza- 
tions  for  contributions  while  hoping  that  Congress  would  authorize  the 
replacement. (NASA Release 86-18) 

Top  officials  at  Rockwell  International, builder  of  NASA’s  orbiters  and 
closely tied  to  the  Shuttle program, testified that  they believed cold weather 
had made launch of  the Challenger unsafe. The President’s panel  concluded 
that NASA’s launch decision process was flawed because criteria for approval 
should not  have been changed at  the  last minute. The New  York Times con- 
cluded,  “The  picture  emerging from  the  inquiry  into  the  loss  of  the  Space 
Shuttle is  one  of  chronic  failure  in  the  space  agency  and  its  contractors to 
communicate life-and-death  problems up  the  chain of  command.”  (W Post, 
Feb 28/86; NY   Times, Feb 28/86; C Trib, Feb 28/86; WS J ,  Feb 28/86) 

February 28: The Inter-Agency Consultative Group (IACG) on Halley’s Comet 
encounter was  scheduled to meet March 4-9 
in Moscow and March  12-14  in 

16 

FEBRUARY 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Darmstadt, Federal Republic of  Germany. Formed in  1981, the  IACG com- 
prised  representatives from NASA,  the European Space Agency  (ESA), the 
Soviet  Union’s  Intercosmos  Council,  Japan’s  Institute  for  Space  and 
Astronautical Studies (ISAS), and the International Halley Watch. 

ESA’s  Giotto, the  Intercosmos Council’s VEGA  1  and  2,  and  the  ISAS 
Suisei (Comet) and  Sakigake (Pioneer)  spacecraft were launched in  the pre- 
vious  15  months  to  observe  the  Comet’s passage  around the  Sun. NASA’s 
Launching of  a  Spartan UV  telescope and an Astro U V  telescope to observe 
the  Comet  from Earth  orbit was  terminated because of  the Challenger acci- 
dent.  Bu t   NASA’s  Pioneer-Venus  spacecraft  (launched  in  May  1978)  had 
already completed five of  its seven planned weeks of  viewing the Comet, and 
the  International Cometary Explorer  spacecraft  (launched in August  1978) 
was  scheduled to monitor Halley’s solar wind upstream.  (NASA Release 86- 
19; P Inq, Feb 28/86; N y  Times, Mar 4/86) 

17 

March 

March I :  James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, 
nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engi- 
neer,  was  named  vice  chairman of  the  NASA  task  force  inquiring into  the 
Challenger  accident.  His  appointment was  in  support  of  the  Commission 
assigned  by  President  Ronald  Reagan  to  perform  the  investigation  of  the 
Challenger accident. (NASA Release 86-20) 

March 3 :  NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implica- 
tions of  the Challenger accident on the  space program. Because the Ulysses 
and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle 
Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur 
upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with 
the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. 

These  decisions  were  made  by  the  Acting  NASA  Administrator,  Dr. 
William R. Graham, on the recommendation of  the Headquarters Replanning 
Task Force,  headed  by  Dr.  Raymond  S .  Colladay,  set  up  to  study  program 
alternatives in the wake of the accident.  Other matters considered by  the task 
force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the 
Challenger as well  as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and 
its support structure attached to  a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) 
lost  with  the  Shuttle;  (2)  new  launch  schedules  for  the  remaining  three 
Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base;  (4)  the 
role  of  expendable launch vehicles for  commercial use;  (5) the  retention of 
ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit 
to  link  spacecraft to  earth because of  the  accident;  (6)  and  identification of 
monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. 

In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the 
Space Shuttle were  being  forced  to  examine  other  alternatives. With  launch 
schedules certain  to  fall  far  behind  and  military  and  scientific communities 
getting  first  priority,  commercial  interests  would  have  to  either  put  their 
projects on the back burner or use NASA's  rival, the European Space Agency's 
Arianespace  company,  for  more  expensive  launches.  With  NASA's 
announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 12-18  months, 
Shu t t ld inked   businesses were  searching  for  other  options  as  well.  (NASA 
Release 86-22; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B  Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86) 

19 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH 1986 

A  lightweight transmitter for  sending messages  to  weather  satellites was 
placed on polar bears and caribou in the spring of  1985, and had so far func- 
tioned  very  well,  said  biologist  Steven Amstrup.  Because  of  the  satellite’s 
ability to track these animals, biologists could determine whether the animals 
were walking, running, sleeping, or foraging for food. (B Sun, Mar 3/86) 

*  A device conceived by Donald Young  of  NASA’s Ames Research Center, 
Mountain View, California, for aiding scientists in treating bone loss resulting 
from extended  space flights,  spawned hope  among  the medical community. 
The vibrating analyzer is placed in the center of  a limb and the ratio of  force 
applied to  the bone  and  the bone’s displacement indicate the  stiffness of  the 
bone. The device, it was thought, would offer earlier detection of osteoporo- 
sis and take guess work out of  cast removal. (WSJ ,  Mar 3/86) 

March 4 :  NASA’s  chief engineer said that cutbacks in the safety program over 
the previous three years had put the Agency “in a dangerous situation.” Loss of 
personnel and  transfer of  safety  responsibility to  field offices and  contractors 
contributed  to  NASA’s  inability  to  catch  the  seal problem. He  reasoned  that 
“there are only so many problems [one person] can look at, and  in my  opinion 
the  solid rocket booster was  a  relatively easy thing  to  do. But  it really wasn’t 
getting the amount of  attention from here it should have.” (W Times, Mar 5/86) 

March 5:  NASA and the Nuclear Safety Review Panel differed in  their esti- 
mates of  the reliability of booster rockets before the January 28 accident. The 
interagency panel’s estimate of  failure was  1 in  1,000 launches as compared 
to NASA’s  1 in  100,000 firings. The panel was created because  19 missions 
carrying potentially hazardous plutonium power sources (were an accident to 
occur within the Earth’s atmosphere) involved the Shuttle. Two other nuclear 
powered satellites were scheduled for launches from the Shuttle later in  1986. 
(WS J ,  Mar 5/86; C Trib, Mar 6/86) 

Aerojet  Solid  Propulsion  Company,  an  unsuccessful  bidder  on  Shuttle 
boosters, released documents it had sent to NASA some 13 years earlier stat- 
ing that the multi-segment booster that relied on O-ring  seals were “burdened 
with  design features that can detract from safe, efficient, and reliable opera- 
tion.” According to officials involved in the decision to choose the Utah based 
Thiokol design, the least expensive bid; the fact that Senator Frank Moss, then 
chairman of  the committee that  controlled NASA’s budget  came from Utah; 
and  that  then NASA Administrator Dr.  James Fletcher was  former president 
of  the University of Utah were all salient factors. NASA calculations, howev- 
er, also pointed out  that Thiokol needed minimal up  front Government cash 
and deferred major costs to the latest possible date, and that Aerojet required 
a good deal more money to get started. All three factors were important to the 
early days of the program’s budget constraints. (B Sun, Mar 5/86) 

20 

MARCH  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

March 6:  Several of  the more than 30 U.S.  scientists serving as coinvestiga- 
tors  on  the  European  Space Agency’s Giotto mission were members  of  the 
television team  scheduled to  analyze and  televise images of  Halley’s Comet 
from the spacecraft on March 13. Launched in July  1985, the Giotto was one 
of  five  spacecraft (others were  the Soviet Union’s Vega  1 and 2  and Japan’s 
Suisei and Sakigake) headed for an encounter with the comet. In  position 300 
miles from Comet Halley’s nucleus, the Giotto promised to obtain the highest 
resolution imaging. (NASA Release 86-23) 

Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, 
announced assignments to  the  NASA 51-L Data  and  Design Analysis Task 
Force. The task force was to collect and analyze information to support a thor- 
ough review  of  all  aspects and  potential causes  of  the  Challenger accident. 
(NASA Release 86-24) 

0  NASA announced that  U.S.  scientists would  have the  opportunity to par- 
ticipate with the Institute of  Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) of Japan 
in the High Energy Solar Physics program. The goal of the mission was to bet- 
ter understand high energy phenomena on  the Sun through x-ray and gamma 
ray observation instruments carried on a spacecraft. (NASA Release 86-25) 

NASA officials provided investigators with  new  evidence challenging the 
theory that the Challenger accident was triggered by  failed rocket seals caused 
by  cold weather. They  presented  pre-launch photographs showing a  flaw  in 
the suspected O-ring on the right side booster, a possible correlation to the fact 
that workers assembling the booster were hampered with a misshaped rocket 
segment.  New  tests  on  the  O-rings  conducted  at  Morton  Thiokol’s  plant 
demonstrated that  they  sealed properly to  temperatures at  10 degrees below 
zero.  A l so ,   the  Challenger, according to  meteorologist Irving P.  Krick,  sus- 
tained  wind  shear  of  125  to  150 miles per  hour  just  prior  to  the  accident, 
which would have been similar to “flying into a tornado.” (W Po s t ,  Mar 7/86) 

The Soviet Union’s Vega I spacecraft sent back pictures of  Halley’s Comet 
as it passed within 5,500 miles of  its nucleus. The photographs, displayed on 
screens at a  Soviet Space Center, were viewed by  scientists from around the 
world and brought the scientific community together behind the Iron Curtain. 
A host of new data such as the possibility that the Comet contains two nuclei, 
that the core is three or four miles across, and evidence bolstering the idea that 
the Comet is leftover debris from the solar system’s creation some 4.6 billion 
years  ago  was  revealed.  The  presentation  also  gave  American  scientists a 
chance to study Halley’s Comet; the United States launched no spacecraft for 
that purpose. The Soviet’s second probe, Vega 11, passed 5,125 miles from the 
comet’s core on March 9. (FBZS ,  Tass (Eng trans), Mar 7/86; NY Times, Mar 
7/86; W Post, Mar 7/86; W T imes ,  Mar 7/86; B  Sun, Mar 7/86; C Trib, Mar 
7/86; Mar  10176; C S M ,  Mar 7/86; March  10/86) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1986 

March  8: The  Japanese  spacecraft,  Suisei,  passed  within  94,000  miles  of 
Comet Halley’s nucleus on this date. Although the pass was  far more distant 
than  passes  by  the  Soviet’s  two  Vega  spacecraft,  or  the  European  Space 
Agency’s Giotto, Japanese  scientists were  immensely pleased with  the data. 
(NY  Times, Mar  17/86) 

March 9 :  NASA announced that it had  located both the Shuttle’s crew com- 
partment and the remains of  some crew members, in  100 feet of  water, about 
25 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida. Sonar first detected the object 
on the night of  March 7 and subsequent dives confirmed it to be the module. 
About 10 percent of  the wreckage had been recovered to this date, but the sus- 
pected right solid rocket booster still lay on the ocean’s floor. Although little 
insight into the cause of  the accident was expected, recovery of  the data tapes, 
officials speculated, could  shed  some  light.  (USA  Today, Mar  10/86; P  Znq, 
Mar  10/86; B  Sun, Mar  10/86; NY Times, Mar  10/86; W Pos t ,  Mar  10/86; 
W Times, Mar 10/86) 

March 11 : Dr. William R. Graham told a congressional committee that the sus- 
pected O-rings  in  the Challenger accident should be  modified or  redesigned. 
The manufacturer of  the rocket boosters had  submitted 43 possible modifica- 
tions to NASA since February, and  changes to  the  fleet, said Graham, would 
cost about $350 million. This was the first time any official from NASA had 
indicated a need for improving the seals since the January 28 accident. 

The acting administrator also noted that recovery from the accident could 
cost the Nation $3.2 billion  and  replacing the Challenger would run  another 
$2.8 billion. Not replacing the  Shuttle, he warned, would restrict the fleet to 
military use and service flights. (Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Space 
Science Applications, Mar  11/90; P  lnq, Mar  12/86;  W  Post,  Mar  12/86; 
USA  Toduy, Mar  12/86; W Times, Mar 12/86) 

March  12 :   Bernard  M.  Oliver,  Chief  of  the  Search  for  Extraterrestrial 
Intelligence (SETI) program at NASA’s Ames Research Center in Mountain 
View,  California,  received  the  National  Medal  of  Science  from  President 
Ronald Reagan. The  award recognized his  accomplishments while  working 
for Bell Telephone Laboratories, where he helped establish standards for tele- 
vision  transmission,  worked  on  automatic  radar  tracking,  and  advocated 
pulse-code modulation for the telephone system; and his accomplishments at 
Hewlett-Packard, where he developed the first hand-held calculator with sci- 
entific functions and SETI, a  program designed to  search the  stars for radio 
signals. (NASA Release 86-27) 

The Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would cost $5 billion to 
both replace the Challenger Shuttle and build more expendable launch vehicles 

LL 

MARCH  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

for carrying payloads into space, NASA had planned to make all of  its satellite 
launches from an orbiter, but changed its position after the Challenger accident. 
The shift was welcome news to the rocket industry, even though the companies 
would need two years to get ready for launch inasmuch as the rocket program, 
with no crew assistance, had been all but replaced in the United States by  the 
Shuttle program. (NY  Times, Mar  13/86; W Post, Mar  13/86) 

NASA and Morton Thiokol found new  evidence suggesting that  the putty 
used  in joints  of  the  solid rockets to protect the O-rings  could have stiffened 
from the cold and prevented the O-ring from sealing. They also noted that the 
putty could have cracked and exposed the O-ring to hot gases. Adequate data 
measuring the effect of  cold on the putty  did not exist. Dr. William Graham 
notified the Presidential Commission of  these findings. (WS J ,  Mar  13/86) 

Salvage crews reported that they might have located a key part of  the booster 
rocket, suspected in the January 28 accident, 32 miles offshore at a depth of 650 
feet. Embedded f d y  into the ocean’s floor, the estimated 400-500 pound debris 
located  near  other  wreckage was  positively  identified  as parts  from  the  right 
booster rocket. As  engineers examined their most recent discovery, other teams 
recovered still more of the crew’s cabin as well as additional remains and person- 
al affects. (W Times, Mar  13/86; NY  Times, Mar  13/86; B Sun, Mar  13/86) 

*  The  former  Soviet  Union  launched  two  veteran  cosmonauts  into  orbit, 
scheduled to arrive at the Mir Space Station after two days. The launch, con- 
trary  to  former  Soviet  practice,  was  both  announced  and  televised.  The 
launch, said James Oberg, author of several books about the Soviet space pro- 
gram, was  done “with great propaganda benefit.” In  an effort to demonstrate 
their achievements, he  stated further, “They have a greater self-confidence in 
their program [and] it helps concentrate world attention on the benign part of 
their  space program.” U.S.  experts acknowledged that  Soviet Space Station 
technology was years ahead of us and that the mission might well begin man’s 
permanent occupation of  space. (FBZS, Tass  (Eng trans), Mar  12/86; B  Su n ,  
Mar  14/86; P  Inq, Mar  14/86; W Times, Mar  14/86; NY  Times, Mar  14/86; 
W Pos t ,  Mar  14/86; C Trib, Mar  14/86) 

The European Space Agency’s spacecraft Giotto encountered Halley’s  Comet 
as it passed within 335 miles of  the body’s nucleus. The craft transmitted pictures 
of  the comet every four seconds up until two seconds and 930 miles away, when 
its camera was damaged by dust particles traveling 50 times the speed of  a bullet. 
These were the closest pictures by far taken of the Comet. Multinational scientists 
at the West German control center were jubilant about data gathered by  sophisti- 
cated  instruments.  The  mission  was  the  most  spectacular  taken  on  by  the 
European Space Agency, and the international cooperation among scientists was 
lauded by  the media.  ( B  Sun ,  Mar  14/86; NY  Times, Mar  14/86; W Post, Mar 
14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86) 

23 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1986 

March  14:  Dr.  Albert  Boggess  was  awarded  the  Herschel  Medal,  by  the 
Council of  the  Royal Astronomical  Society of  the  United Kingdom,  for  his 
contribution to  the success of the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IW). The 
IUE  satellite  was  designated  to  study  Comet  Halley’s  evolution  as  it 
approached and receded from the Sun. Boggess was named co-recipient of  the 
award with University of London Professor R. Wilson. (NASA Release 86-28) 

March 16: This date marked the 60th anniversary of liquid-fueled rocket flight. 
In  1926, Dr. Robert H.  Goddard assembled and launched a gasoline propelled 
rocket from his aunt’s farm in Worcester, Massachusetts. In commemoration of 
the event, NASA planned to launch a full-scale replica of  the rocket from the 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 86-26) 

A 3,500-pound piece of  debris that was  determined to be a  rocket booster, 
but not identified as from the left or right side, was recovered 28 miles north- 
east of  Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 400  feet of  water. The massive operation 
was  resumed after a  two-day halt from storms and rough seas. Other salvage 
teams also continued their efforts to recover the rest of the crew’s compartment 
and remains. (W Post, Mar  17/86; P  Znq, Mar  17/86; NY Times, Mar  18/86) 

March  18:  NASA’s  orbiting  telescope,  International Ultraviolet  Explorer, 
observed Halley ’s Comet as  it encountered European (Giotto), Soviet (Vega 
2),  and  Japanese  (Suisei)  spacecraft. The  September  1985  to  March  1986 
observations of  the Comet were made with hopes of granting scientists a bet- 
ter  understanding into  its  long-term  behavior. The  telescope measured  the 
Comet’s water  ejection rate,  and  its  carbon,  sulfur, and  oxygen  content,  as 
well as its variation of  visual brightness. The advantage of  observations from 
a telescope as opposed to those from a spacecraft, said IUE telescope opera- 
tions  manager  George  Sonneborn,  was  the  much  wider  angle  of  view  it 
offered. (NASA Release 86-29) 

NASA  and  the  Science  and  Technology Agency  of  Japan  announced  an 
agreement reached on the hardware that Japan will carry into Phase B Space 
Station definition  and  preliminary design. According  to  the  agreement, the 
preliminary design activities were to include: (1) a pressurized module to pro- 
vide shirtsleeve work space for station crews; (2) an exposed work deck;  (3) 
a scientific/equipment airlock; (4) a local remote manipulator arm; ( 5 )  and an 
experiment logistics model. The multipurpose laboratory called  for  accom- 
modation of  general scientific and technology development research, includ- 
ing microgravity research, as well as control panels for  operating the  Space 
Station’s  mobil  remote  manipulator  system  and  attached  payloads. 
(NASA Release 86-3 1) 

24 

MARCH 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NASA released a list containing 748 critical parts of  the Space Shuttle that 
could lead to disaster if  they did not function properly. AU  of  these components 
lacked a backup system and were therefore placed in the “Criticality 1” catego- 
ry.  Unlike the fuselage or heat-shielding tiles, for example, 617 of  the critical 
parts could be covered by backup equipment, but engineers waived the measure 
as  they  felt  confident  that  failure  of  them  was  unlikely. Arnold  D.  Aldrich, 
Manager, National  Space Transportation System, said, “We  are reviewing in 
detail all the items on the Critical Items list.” (Nat Sp Trans Sys: Critical Items 
List; W Po s t ,  Mar  18/86; W Times, Mar  18/86; B  Sun, Mar 18/86) 

March 18: James R. Thompson, vice-chairman of  the NASA task force inves- 
tigating the Challenger accident, announced that the cause of the disaster would 
be pinpointed within a month. Although the right booster rocket, which would 
be  a tremendous help, was still unrecovered, and tapes from the crew compart- 
ment shed no light, Thompson noted that photographic evidence and other data 
already available would eventually yield the  answer. He also stated that April 
18 was  the  deadline  given  by  President  Ronald  Reagan’s  panel  for  overall 
investigation, with whom, he added, NASA investigators were working harmo- 
niously.  (USA  Today, Mar  19/86; W Post, Mar  19/86; NY  Times, Mar  19/86; 
P Inq, Mar  19/86; C Trib, Mar 20/86) 

March 19: East Coast winter storms in  the form of  cyclones were studied by 
scientists from NASA’s  Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. 
Concentrating their  efforts  on  costal  regions  of  North  and  South  Carolina, 
where these  storms develop and move northward, NASA scientists analyzed 
the upper atmosphere conditions using moisture and wind sounding balloons 
and the Nimbus 7 satellite to collect data. 

Another criterion for  understanding these  storms was  the  analysis of  the 
transfer of moisture from the ocean into the atmosphere. NASA flew its four- 
engine Electra aircraft, outfitted with  a combined laser/telescope (Lidar), to 
detect  salt  spray  and  aerosols as  it  fired  a  lazar beam  that  allowed the  tele- 
scope to measure rising moisture and convection patterns. NASA’s ER-2 air- 
craft was used  in higher altitudes for the  same purpose; it carried microwave 
radio-meters  able  to  detect  water  vapor  and  cloud  liquid  water  content. 
(NASA Release 86-30) 

NASA scheduled five expendable laclnches in  1986 from Cape Canaveral, 
Florida,  employing  Delta  rockets,  used  in  joint  management  with  the 
McDonnell Douglas launch team, and Atlas Centaur rockets, jointly managed 
launches with General Dynamics Convair. Of  the five satellites, two were for 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The Geosynchronous 
Operational Environmental Satellites were designed for weather forecasting 
and collecting data on various environmental effects. The other three were for 

25 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1986 

the  Department  of  Defense.  Two  Fleet  Satellite  Communication  satellites 
would  provide  secure  communications  between  land-based  facilities  and 
ships, submarines, and aircraft, and one other was for support of  the Strategic 
Defense Initiative. (NASA Release 86-32) 

20:  The  U.S.  Government  considered  plans  for  replacing  the 
M Q ~ c ~  
Challenger by allowing private investors to raise the money and lease the new 
Shuttle  to  NASA,  stretching out  payments  for  perhaps  15 years.  The  plan 
called for NASA to  order a  replacement shuttle from Rockwell, but Willard 
Rockwell’s new  firm, Astrotech, would buy  it. Furthermore, investors would 
be  reimbursed by  NASA for  any  accident loss,  and Astrotech would market 
the launches to commercial customers. (WSJ, Mar 20186; W Pos t;  Mar 30186; 
B  Sun, Apr  1/86) 

Debris brought to shore on March 19 was determined to be part of  the right 
booster  rocket  from  the  Challenger  accident. The  white  outer  skin  of  the 
pieces were discolored from excessive heat, and the suspected O-ring, officials 
said, may lie inside of one 4-foot-by-5-foot piece of wreckage. (W Times, Mar 
21/86; USA  Today ,  Mar 21/86) 

March   21  : Canadian  Prime  Minister  Brian  Mulroney  announced Canada’s 
decision  to  proceed  with  Space  Station participation when  he  visited  with 
President Ronald Reagan. Canada agreed to perform preliminary design of  a 
Mobile Servicing Center during Phase B of  the Space Station definition and 
preliminary design study that would  consist of  a base  structure with accom- 
modations for payloads, orbital replacement units, utilities and  thermal con- 
trol. It would function as a multipurpose structure equipped with manipulator 
arms that would be used to help assemble and maintain the Space Station, as 
well  as  help  keep  instruments  and  experiments mounted  on  the  Station’s 
framework. (NASA Release 86-33) 

NASA  officials concluded,  and  reported  to  the  President’s Commission, 
that the O-rings in Challenger’s right solid-rocket motor were indeed the cause 
of the January 28 accident. They were still unable to cite a reason for failure 
of the seals, but hoped that tests over the next 10 days would give some clue. 
NASA also noted that  the putty used  to protect these seals might  shed some 
light. (W S J ,  Mar 24/86; C SM ,  Mar 24/86) 

March  24 :  NASA planned to  shift  its  original plan of  carrying a mixture of 
scientific, military, and commercial payloads and give greater emphasis to the 
military when Shuttle flights resumed. The military, they added, always had 
top priority and five to seven of  the flights slated for next year were devoted 
to them. (Ny Times, Mar 24/86) 

26 

MARCH  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

*  A  Presidential panel  report  was  to  be  released April  11 ,   but  details  that 
aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on 
Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. 
The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by  1994, 
called  for establishing a  lunar base  after the  year  2000 for mining and pro- 
duction of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially useful asteroids, and 
a “network of  spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian 
colony  by  the  year  2027.”  (W   Post,  Mar  24/86;  N y  T imes ,  Mar  25/86; 
C SM ,  May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86) 

March 25: NASA’s  Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, select- 
ed the RCA Corporation and Orbital Sciences for negotiations leading to the 
award of  contracts to build a  spacecraft and upper stage booster for the Mars 
Observer Mission scheduled for  launch in August  1990. The first in  a  series 
of proposed planetary observer programs, the Mars Observer would study the 
climate,  atmosphere,  and  surface, using  eight  science instruments while  in 
orbit around  the planet a  full Martian year, 687 Earth days. (NASA Release 
86-34; WS J ,  Mar 26/86) 

Speaking  to  NASA  employees,  Shuttle  Director  Richard  H.  Truly 
announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an 
intense safety program to include reassessment of  Shuttle management struc- 
ture, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for abort- 
ing  Shuttle  flights,  and  recertification of  all  critical Shuttle parts.  He  noted 
that “the business of  flying in space is a bold business,” and added, “We can- 
not print enough money to make it totally risk-free. But we certainly are going 
to correct any mistakes we have made. . .and we’re going to get going ahead 
just as soon as we can.” 

When  the Shuttle Program resumes, he  continued, the first Shuttle would 
be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a 
familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards 
Air Force Base, in  California. (USA  Today, Mar  26/68;  W  Post, Mar 26/86; 
WS J ,  Mar 26/86; N y  T imes ,  Mar 26/86; W  Times, Mar 26/86) 

March 26: An official from the Pentagon warned members of Congress that a 
one-year delay in the Shuttle launches would create a backlog of  10 military 
missions  and  a  2-year  delay  would  raise  that  number  to  21.  He  and  others 
viewed this as a “national emergency.” The Air Force Undersecretary further 
pointed  out  a  need  for  a  replacement Shuttle and  10  additional expendable 
launch  vehicles.  Congressional  committees,  however,  had  not  yet  decided 
how  the  cost,  if  approved, would  be  shared  by  the Air  Force  and  NASA. 
( B  Sun, Mar 27/86; W  T imes ,  Mar 27/86) 

21 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1986 

March  28:  James  E.  Kingsbury,  director  of  the  Science  and  Engineering 
Directorate at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, 
was named  to manage an ad  hoc  group formed to  requalify the motor of  the 
Space  Shuttle's  solid  rocket  booster  for  flight.  The  booster  rockets,  said 
NASA, could be ready in one year. Kingsbury said that all of  the current hard- 
ware  could be modified and re-used,  a  comment that surprised outside engi- 
neers.  (NASA Release  86-36;  W  Post,  Mar  28/86;  NY  T imes ,  Mar  28/86; 
NY  T imes ,  Mar 30/86) 

28 

April 

April  I :  A student photography experiment, “CAN DO,” from the Charleston 
County School District, South Carolina, scheduled to fly on the Space Shuttle 
Columbia March  6  was  rescheduled for April 5-24.  The goal  of  the  experi- 
ment was to observe Comet Halley from NASA’s high-flying Kuiper Airborne 
Observatory aircraft, a converted C-141. The aircraft was  scheduled for sev- 
eral high-altitude flights over New Zealand, a part of the southern hemisphere 
where the Comet would be most visible. 

Students from other schools, both in the United States and abroad, were to 
participate in the program by  photographing the Comet from the  ground and 
comparing  their  pictures  with  those  taken  in  flight.  The  pictures  taken  at 
ground level would assist professional astronomers because most large obser- 
vatory telescopes are not designed to  view large objects, and resolving the fine 
detail in Comet Halley’s tail could be enhanced with the much wider overall 
view from a standard camera lens. (NASA Release 86-35) 

*  A section of  debris recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in March was found 
to  be  the  part  of  the  right  booster  rocket  suspected  as  the  cause  of  the 
Challenger accident. Although the piece was a section opposite the flame seen 
coming from a joint  in  the rocket, it contained part of  the joint. Recovery of 
the section could both aid investigators and assist engineers in their redesign. 
( B  Sun, Apr 2/86; W Post, Apr 2/86; NY Times, Apr 2/86) 

April  2:  In  a  data  gathering  activity  in   support of  the  Challenger accident 
investigation, destacking of  solid  rocket  motors  to  gather  information and 
assess the pre-flight conditions in and around the  field joints was  scheduled 
for early April. Inspections would focus on the field joint O-rings, putty used 
in  the joints,  rocket  motor case  ovality  or  “roundness,” with  any  assembly 
damage, clevis gap-opening resulting from  stacking, and  the  degree of  pro- 
pellant  slumping that occurred as  a  result of  vertical stacking. Any  relevant 
data from the destacking inspections that might be useful to the investigation 
was to be assembled by  the NASA 51-L Data and Design Analysis Task Force 
and provided to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger 
Accident. (NASA Release 86-37) 

*  NASA and  the Astronauts Memorial Foundation, Inc.  announced plans  to 
build a memorial at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, dedicated to astro- 
nauts who lost their lives while flying, training, or awaiting assignment to fly 
for  the  space  agency. The  memorial  would  honor  the  1986 Space  Shuttle 

29 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1986 

Challenger  crew-Francis  Scobee,  Michael  Smith,  Judith  Resnik,  Ronald 
McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Christa McAuliffe, and  Gregory Jarvis;  the  1967 
Apollo  crew-Virgil  Grissom,  Edward  H.  White  11,  and  Roger  Chaffee; 
Charles Bassett and Elliott See, killed  in  1966, Theodore Freeman killed  in 
1964, and Clifton Williams killed in  1967-all  killed  in T-38 trainer aircraft 
accidents;  and  Edward  Givens,  killed  in  1967  in  an  automobile  accident. 
(NASA Release 86-38) 

April  3 :  The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident 
recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes 
included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission con- 
cluded that  such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28  acci- 
dent; and  an  independent safety board  with power  to postpone  any flight  in 
which  potential  hazards  were  recognized.  Other  problems  pointed  out  by 
astronauts and  NASA officials who  testified were  a  faulty  brake  design,  a 
rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treach- 
erous  with  Florida’s  unpredictable  weather,  a  lack  of  spare  parts,  and 
deficiencies in  spacecraft simulators. 

NASA manager Arnold Aldrich  also  testified before  the  Commission and 
said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was  referring to com- 
munication problems that  kept  him uninformed about  numerous matters, the 
most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rock- 
et boosters. (W  Post, Apr 4/85; Ny Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA  Today, Apr 
4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WS J ,  Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; G Trib, Apr 4/86) 

The Wall Street Journal  reported that  a Reagan administration interagency 
group would soon recommend that NASA discontinue commercial and foreign 
launches. NASA objected to the idea because of  the  likely permanent loss of 
the  business  to  foreign competitors. The group also recommended a  replace- 
ment  for  the  Shuttle Challenger and  a  greater  supply  of  expendable launch 
vehicles, but did not suggest how these costs could be met.  (W S J ,  Apr 3/86) 

April 4 :   Space Shuttle Columbia was  scheduled to be  ferried atop a modified 
Boeing 747 and  transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where 
it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel 
that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the f i s t  
West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to 
the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank 
for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of  cryogenic propellants in 
a “wet” countdown demonstration test.  Prior to  the move, processing at KSC 
would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital 
maneuvering  system  pods,  in  parallel  with  structural  inspections,  approved 
modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 86-40) 

30 

APRIL  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

April 7: NASA and the Pentagon announced the award of $500 million in con- 
tracts to seven different defense contractors for research into the development 
of  the aerospace plane, seen by  many as a successor to the Shuttle. The craft 
was envisioned as one that could take  off  and land like an airplane, but have 
the added capability of  achieving orbit where it could then travel at 25 times 
the speed of sound. (WS J ,  Apr 8/86; USA  Today, Apr 8/86; W Post, Apr 8/86) 

*  The  Soviet Union  invited foreign correspondents into  its mission control 
center for a conference concerning orbiting cosmonauts and a  live television 
interview with  them. The  Soviet Union  set  still  another precedent when  it 
allowed coverage of  its space program by  a large group of  foreign press. The 
invitation followed a pattern of  a more open Russian space agency, the tele- 
vising of  the recent liftoff of  the cosmonauts on March  13, and the opening of 
the Soviet Space Research Institute to  foreign visitors when  the Vega  space- 
craft  approached Halley’s Comet were  also first  time  events.  (W Post, Apr 
8/86; W Times, Apr 8/86) 

April 8:  James R. Thompson, vice chairman of  the NASA task force investigat- 
ing the Challenger accident, said that NASA officials could be “walking on the 
edge of a cliff“ if they did not correct flaws in the solid rocket booster. Previous 
problems, he noted, simply were not taken seriously enough; he then added that 
NASA could say conclusively that the right solid rocket booster had caused the 
Shuttle accident. The task force, said Thompson, focused on four factors of  the 
joint in the booster rocket: the tendency of  the joints to rotate during liftoff; the 
impact of  sub-freezing temperatures on the O-rings; defects in the putty used to 
protect  them;  and  slight  damage  to  the  O-rings  during  assembly.  James 
Kingsbury,  director  of  Science  and  Engineering Directorate  disagreed  with 
Thompson’s findings because the  rockets had performed well  on  24 previous 
flights. (USA  Today, Apr 9/86; W Post, Apr 9/86; P Inq, Apr 9/86) 

April 9: NASA’s Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station, estab- 
lished in March  1984 and chaired by  Stanford University Professor Peter M. 
Banks, released  its  second major  report  for planning the  scientific utility  of 
the Space Station. The report pointed out that space-based scientific progress 
had been slower than planned because of  short time in orbit, rigid time lines, 
long  periods  between  flights,  and  that  the  Space  Station  had  the  obvious 
potential of overcoming these difficulties, 

The two major conclusions reached noted that Space Station facilities must be 
operated with the goal of producing outstanding scientific results; and that the 
station would be judged with respect to  cost and research capability and the 
need for well-equipped, permanently habitable laboratories able to  support a 
broad range of fundamental research in space. 

31 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APF3L  1986 

The task force recommended that  the Space Station emulate the adaptive 
science methodology used  in  terrestrial laboratories, introduce “telescience” 
(the ability to conduct research remotely), review safety standards to achieve 
a  reasonable state of personal and  system security, work with  a crew  size of 
10, and  develop  “space mail”  for  delivering small  samples of  materials  to 
ground  laboratories. Other  recommendations: (1) Attached payloads  are  an 
important part of  the core Space Station, and NASA needs a more productive 
plan for converting observation experiments developed for Spacelab to Space 
Station; (2) free-flying platforms are essential for conducting many important 
scientific endeavors for  the Space Station era  (i.e.,  several platforms operat- 
ing in different orbits); (3) NASA should enhance biological research activi- 
ties  in  the  pre-initial  orbit  configuration period  using  Spacelabs  and  other 
attached payloads on the Space Shuttle to gain experience for conducting bio- 
logical science research programs; (4) development of  a human-tended mode 
of  scientific activity aboard a Space Station would be of little value and a need 
exists  for  a  truly  long-tern, human  capability; ( 5 )  it  is  essential that NASA 
look ahead to the activities that  are anticipated over the 25-30  year life span 
of the core facility and its associated elements; (6) the Space Station will facil- 
itate development of  a new type of  research termed “science in space”; (7) the 
science operations of  the Space Station should be  separated from the opera- 
tional management of  the overall facilities; and  (8) NASA must be prepared 
to change many of  its nationally oriented selection, funding, and management 
procedures  because  of  the  important  hardware  and  scientific  contributions 
that  will  be  made  by  international  partners.  (Written  Statement  to  the 
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Committee on Science and 
Technology from Peter M. Banks, Apr 9/90; NASA Release 86-43) 

Evidence revealed the Challenger crew cabin did not explode with the mid- 
air accident, but remained intact until it struck the water. The cabin, said engi- 
neers, was seven times stronger than other parts of  the Shuttle because it had 
to  maintain  an  Earth-like atmosphere while  in  space. All  seven  astronauts, 
however, were probably killed  instantly by  shock from the  initial blast, sud- 
den depressurization of  the cabin, or the tumbling nine-mile descent. (W Post, 
Apr  10186; N y  Times, Apr  10186;  W  Times,  Apr  10186;  C SM ,  Apr  10186; 
USA  Today, Apr  10186; C Trib, Apr  10186) 

April  14: The United States planned to resume its efforts to put nuclear reac- 
tors into space. The move would renew  a program abandoned  10 years prior 
to  this  date,  but  now  deemed  necessary  for  President  Ronald  Reagan’s 
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), “Star Wars.”  Even without SDI,  said Air 
Force  officials, reactors would  be  needed  for  the  next  generation of  space- 
based weapons; NASA could use such reactors to power Space Stations, lunar 
bases, interplanetary explorers, and satellite traffic control. The United States 
has  mainly  relied  on  solar  energy  for  its  space  activities,  but  SDI  would 

32 

APRIL 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

require more power than the panels could give. The Soviet Union never aban- 
doned its  plan  for  space reactors  and  sent up  20  nuclear-powered  satellites, 
one of  which  crashed and  spread radioactive debris over northwest Canada. 
(W Post, Apr  14/86) 

*  NASA officials announced that the redesign of  booster rocket seals would 
render them fail-safe. The new design would not use putty to protect the seals 
from heat; would  include an outside cover to protect the  seals from rain and 
ice, with a possible heating element built in, use a clip to prevent rotation; and 
provide a backup seal for each joint of  the booster. ( P  Znq, Apr  14/86) 

*  Rocket debris recovered on April 13 ,40  miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, 
Florida, in 560 feet of  water was  determined by  the President’s Commission 
to be the part of  the right booster thought to be responsible for the Challenger 
accident. In  the  area where photographs had  shown a plume of  flame was  a 
one-foot by  two-foot hole, lending concrete evidence to the theory that the o- 
ring and/or the putty  used  to protect i t  had  failed to do its job of  sealing two 
of  the  rocket’s  four  segments.  (C  Trib,  Apr  15/86;  W  Post,  Apr  15/86; 
W Times, Apr  15/86; N y  Times, Apr  15/86; B  Sun ,  Apr  15/86) 

April  17: A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee’s subcom- 
mittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA bud- 
get request. The authorization bill  still needed review by  the full Committee 
before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, 
but  supporters in Congress hoped  that NASA would request a  supplemental 
$500 million as first payment for “Challenger 11.” The physics and astronomy 
portion  of  NASA’s  budget,  including  $27.9  million  for  the  Hubble  Space 
Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. ( B  Sun ,  Apr  18/86) 

April 18: An  advanced reconnaissance satellite, believed to be a KH-11 photo- 
graphic reconnaissance satellite, was lost as the Titan rocket carrying it explod- 
ed seconds after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. With only 
one HK- 11 in orbit, officials were  concerned that verification of  arms control 
treaties would be hampered and  that  it would be more difficult for the Soviet 
Union and the United States to  sign the  treaties. Older satellites dropped film 
after photographing, but  the  KH-11  beamed  pictures  to  ground  stations  and 
could maneuver about while in orbit. An HK-11 was lost in August  1985 when 
another Titan rocket failed. Assistant Secretary of Defense Donald Latham, esti- 
mated that it would be six or seven months before the Department of Defense 
could  launch  another satellite. Outside experts believed  that  the  government 
might approve an emergency Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air  Force Base 
because the only other reconnaissance satellite remaining on the ground was an 
HK-12, believed too big for an expendable rocket. (NY Times, Apr 20186; Apr 
22/86; C SM ,  Apr 21/86; USA  Today, Apr 21/86; W Post, Apr 22/86) 

33 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1986 

April  19: Recovery operations for  the  Space Shuttle Challenger crew  cabin 
were completed. Scattered debris and the remains of  all seven crew members 
were located in  an effort that was hampered by  heavy  seas, high winds, and 
reduced  underwater  visibility.  Final  forensic  work  and  future  planning  in 
accordance with  family  requests were  expected  to  finish  shortly  thereafter. 
(NASA Release 86-46; C Trib, Apr 21/86; Ny Times, Apr 21/86) 

April  21: Astronaut Robert E Overmyer announced that he planned to leave 
NASA,  on June  1, and  retire  from  the Marine Corps. His  past  accomplish- 
ments include piloting the November  1982 Columbia mission and serving as 
commander of  the April  1985 Challenger flight.  Colonel  Overmyer joined 
NASA in September 1969. (NASA Release 86-48) 

April  25:  NASA announced that 25  industry/university consortiums submit- 
ted proposals for high technology research in the microgravity environment of 
space. Proposed areas included semiconductor crystal growth, remote  sens- 
ing, communication technology, biotechnology, and space services. The pro- 
posals all have commercial potential or could contribute to possible commer- 
cial ventures. (NASA Release 86-49) 

*  NASA scheduled two scientific experiment rocket launchings for early May, 
a Black Brant X and a Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk, to create artificial clouds along 
the East Coast that would be visible from Canada to Florida and as far west as 
Ohio. The objective of  the experiment was to investigate Nobel prize winner 
Dr. Hannes Alfven's proposed Critical Velocity Effect Theory, which has been 
used  to  explain details in  the  early  formation of  the  solar  system. In  1954, 
Alfven proposed that if  an element in a nearly neutral plasma became ionized 
when it attained a  flow velocity  that matched its  ionization potential, several 
facets of  the structure of  the  solar system could be explained, including differ- 
ing  chemical compositions  of  the  planets  and  the  regularity  of  their  orbits. 
Although Alfven's critical velocity effect has been studied in the laboratory, the 
phenomena required investigation in a space plasma. 

The experiment was  scheduled for dawn, when  the Earth's  surface would 
still be dark but  when there would be  sunlight at the experiment's altitude so 
ionized  cloud  chemicals could  be  visible to  the  naked  eye. The  three-stage, 
solid-propellant rockets would release barium and strontium at the apogee alti- 
tude of  267 miles. When the releases occurred, ground observers could see, if 
the experiment was successful, a cloud split into two well-delineated jets of gas 
in the f i s t  few minutes. The experimmts were part of NASA's  sounding rock- 
et program, which included launching approximately 40 to 45 sounding rock- 
ets a year from various worldwide locations. (NASA Release 86-51) 

34 

APRIL 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NASA disclaimed an April 23-24  two-part article in  the New York  Times 
that accused the organization of ignoring audits and safety standards, with par- 
ticular emphasis on the Space Shuttle program. According to NASA, some of 
the examples mentioned in the article “are related to activities of  several years 
ago and have since been corrected or are being corrected.” Moreover, “NASA 
has always considered audits to be a necessary management tool to be used in 
conjunction with other management processes.. .during the existence of NASA 
prior  to  and  since the  Inspector General Act, management has  used  its  own 
internal audits to  uncover  and correct deficiencies and  to  strengthen internal 
controls.” In  addition, NASA  has  been  responsive  to  external  audit  reports 
through  tighter management. “Indeed,” said NASA, “$749.3  million  in  sav- 
ings,  cost  avoidances,  and  cost  recoveries  were  realized  from  1978-1985 
because  of  internal and  external audits.” NASA also noted  that many  of  the 
audit reports  dealt with  research  and  development projects  into  which  new 
technologies had to be figured, making for an uncertain budget environment. 

Other  allegations:  Various  violations  of  law  and  Federal  codes  have 
occurred within NASA,  the Agency  predicted that  Shuttle cargo would  cost 
around $100 per  pound but  actual cost was  closer to  $5264 per  pound;  the 
Shuttle was not equipped with the amount of  hardware for  test purposes that 
was  available to the Apollo program; in financing a Government guaranteed 
loan  for  the  Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite System program  (TDRSS), 
NASA wasted $1 billion; NASA lost $2.4 million of  equipment in  1983. 

In  defense, NASA noted  that  the  original estimate for  Shuttle cargo was 
$160 per pound  and the most  recent was  $615 per pound-besides,  cost per 
pound was only a partial indicator of the Shuttle’s utility; the Shuttle program 
did  not  parallel  the Apollo  program  in  regard  to  safety  test  hardware, but 
introduced longer periods of  testing, not  substandard safety precautions; the 
$1  billion said to have been wasted in the TDRSS program was in fact attrib- 
utable primarily to significant interest cost increases; the lost equipment was 
a  1950’s state-of-the-art computer that  by  1983 was  so obsolete that no  one 
else would  take it-hence 
the machine was dismantled and disposed of;  ties 
to graft at NASA have to do with individual misconduct, such as that by Lewis 
Research Center and Marshall Space Flight Center officials, who were prose- 
cuted in Federal court, indicating that the internal NASA investigation process 
was working well.  (NASA Release 86-52) 

A statement by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly noted that the remains of 
the crew of  the Space Shuttle Challenger were soon to be transferred, but no 
positive determination of  the cause  of  the  accident had  yet been made. The 
three approaches pursued were the examination of  remains, direct examina- 
tion  of  the  wreckage,  and  analysis  of  photography  and  radar  to  determine 
forces  imposed on  the  vehicle. An  examination of  the  remains revealed no 

35 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1986 

new information, and the wreckage examination was hampered by  the amount 
of  damage done at water  impact. Photo and  radar analysis, he hoped,  would 
lead  to  a  determination  of  the  magnitude  and  the  direction  of  the  forces 
imposed on the cabin during and after breakup. (NASA Release 86-53) 

April 29 :  NASA announced the termination of  a contract with TRW to design 
a baseline hybrid power system for the Phase B Space Station electrical power 
system. TRW expressed their wish not  to pursue the project, but  remained a 
major contributor to three other work packages. (NASA Release 86-55) 

Unpublished test results done for the Presidential Commission studying the 
Challenger  accident  showed  that  cold  weather  on  the  morning  of  the 
Challenger launch made failure inevitable. Other findings by  the commission 
concluded that  a  second joint  on  the right-hand booster rocket  ruptured sec- 
onds after the Challenger breakup, suggesting that the joint was unduly frag- 
ile; reusable booster rockets ballooned about two-hundredths of  an inch after 
each previous flight, and  segments of  the ill-fated rocket did not match well; 
a breach of  the bottom  of  the external tank  led to  a  structural failure but  the 
nose cone of  the booster rocket crashing into the fuel tank was not responsi- 
ble for the final breakup; and the Shuttle did not explode, but rather a hydro- 
gen-oxygen flash fire caused it simply to fall apart. (NY Times, Apr  30186) 

April  30:  By  a  vote  of  15-1,  a  Senate  panel  approved  President  Ronald 
Reagan’s nomination of  Dr.  James C. Fletcher to head NASA. The lone neg- 
ative vote  came from Albert Gore, who expressed concerns about Fletcher’s 
judgment  because  he  had  drastically underestimated the  price  of  a  Shuttle 
fleet in the  1970s. ( B  Sun ,  May  1/86; W Times, May  1/86; W Post, May  1/86; 
NY Times, May  1/86) 

36 

May   1 :  Launching of  a  Delta  rocket  carrying a  weather  satellite was  post- 
poned because of  a  quarter cup of  leaking rocket fuel. The  delay, said  offi- 
cials, would be  from  1 to  10 days, depending on the  extent of  the problem. 
This was to be  the f i s t  NASA launch since the Shuttle accident. (NY  Times, 
May 2/86; W Post, May 2/86; P  Inq, May 2/86; B  Sun ,  May 2/86) 

May  3 :  Another NASA launch ended in failure as a $30 million Delta rocket 
carrying a  $55.7 million weather satellite was  destroyed shortly after  liftoff 
from Cape Canaveral, Florida. An  order to  destruct by  remote control came 
when the rocket's main engine failed and i t  tumbled off  course. This was the 
first mishap for the Delta rocket, praised as NASA's  most dependable launch 
vehicle, in nine years and 43 consecutive launches. The four most used vehi- 
cles for launching satellites (the Delta, Titan 3D and Atlas Centaur rockets and 
the Space Shuttle) were all put on hold, grounding the agency for an undeter- 
mined amount of  time. A short circuit was  the leading suspect the Delta loss. 
(W Times, May  5/86;  May  6/86;  W Post,  May  5/86;  May  6/86;  WSJ ,  May 
5/86; May 6/86; NY  Times, May 5/86; May  6/86) 

May  6: Soviet cosmonauts made a historic trip between Space Stations as they 
traveled  1,800 miles  in  their  S o p s  T-15  transport module  from  the  recently 
launched Mir to the Salyut-7 station. The mission was broadcast on state televi- 
sion. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), May 6/86; B Sun, May 7/86; NY Times, May 8/86) 

May  9 :  Shuttle Director Richard H.  Truly announced that  John W.  Thomas, 
Spacelab  Program  Officer  Manager  at  the  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center, 
Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid 
Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May  12, 
1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several 
deficiencies  in  the  design  of  the  solid  rocket  motor  joint.  An  independent 
group of  senior experts would also be involved in all phases of  the program; 
they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the find- 
ings  and  recommendations  of  the  Presidential  Commission  on  the  Space 
Shuttle Challenger Accident.  (NASA Release 86-58) 

May  12: Dr.  James C. Fletcher became NASA's  administrator for the  second 
time. His first term in this position ran from April 1971 to May  1977. During 
the interim, he held the WilliamKWhitfordProfessorship of Energy Resources 
and Technology at the University of Pittsburgh and headed his own consult- 
ing  firm. Past  achievements include positions as research physicist with the 

31 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1986 

United  States  Navy  Bureau  of  Ordinance,  research  associate  at  Harvard 
University, instructor at Princeton University, positions in  the private  sector 
with  Hughes Aircraft  Company, Ramo-Wooldridge  Corporation and  Space 
Electronics Corporation, and president of Space General Corporation. He also 
developed patents in sonar devices and missile guidance systems and has been 
associated with the President’s Science Advisory Committee. 

After being sworn in, Fletcher announced that Space Shuttle flight would 
not resume for another 12 to 18 months and promised to fully review NASA’s 
quality control program and decision-making process. He  also noted that the 
70  percent  reduction  in  quality  control  staff  for  which NASA was  recently 
criticized  was  “misleading”  because  “in-house”  work  such  as  the  Moon- 
launched  Saturn  rockets  were  no  longer  a  responsibility.  A  full  Senate 
approved  his  nomination  on  May  6.  (NASA Release  86-60; B  Sun ,  May 
13/86; W Post, May  13/86; WS J ,  May  13/86; NY  Times, May  13/86) 

Air  Force  Secretary  Edward  Aldridge  restated  at  a  conference  of  the 
Aviation Space Writers  that  the USAF would  like  to purchase a  new  rocket 
that could lift medium weight  satellites. The rockets, which the  service calls 
“medium  lift  vehicles,”  were  needed  to  launch  12 NAVSTAR  navigation 
satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an 
interest in  larger rockets, “complementary expendable launch vehicles,” (an 
updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon’s heaviest satellites into orbit. 
( B  Sun ,  May  14/86; NY   Times, May  13/86; May 20186) 

M a y  13: NASA considered both a crew-tended station and one that would be 
permanently tended. The Phase B  study period  for the  Space Station identi- 
fied  and  evaluated  alternative  systems,  components  and  philosophies  that 
would result in  a configuration responsive to the needs of  potential users, be 
cost-effective to  operate and maintain, and  flexible in  terms of  growth, size, 
and capabilities. A crew-tended station could have people aboard only when a 
Shuttle orbiter docked to it; the orbiter would provide the habitable facilities. 

While  Congress directed NASA to  examine an  option “which phases  in 
permanent crew features of  the Station,” NASA pointed out that the “phased 
approach would  force  postponement of  experiments  important to  advance- 
ment of manned spaceflight and would  increase the  total cost of  developing 
the  permanently manned  Space Station.”  NASA went  on  to  argue that  the 
savings achieved by the phased approach would be offset by the cost of oper- 
ating the Station in  a crew-tended mode for several years and by  the cost of 
maintaining  the  industrial  base  during  the  delay  period  before  resuming 
assembly of the permanently tended station. Savings of the crew-tended phase 
were estimated at $284 million in  1984 dollars and total cost prior to perma- 
nently crew-tended capability at $1 billion.  (NASA Release 86-59) 

38 

MAY  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

*  NASA  Administrator  Dr. James  C.  Fletcher  appeared  before  a  House 
Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an indepen- 
dent panel to review NASA’s management practices, especially the decision- 
making process on the morning of  the January 28 Challenger accident. The 
review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that 
Shuttle flights would likely resume by July  1987, with an optimum of  seven 
launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his 
“highest priority.” 

Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told mem- 
bers of  Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would  investigate 
the  transfer  of  two  Morton  Thiokol  engineers, Allan  McDonald  and  Roger 
Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently objected to the Challenger launch on the 
morning  prior  to  its  deadly  flight  and  later  detailed  their  scenarios  before 
Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow 
be  involved  with  the  reassignments.  The  subcommittee  advised  NASA  to 
reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened 
to severely reduce NASA’s budget for new space programs if  the agency did not 
undergo  some  drastic  changes.  (Department  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development  -  Independent Agencies Appropriations for  1987, May  13/86; 
W Times, May  14/86;  W Post, May  14/86; WSJ ,  May  14/86; Ny Times, May 
14/86; P  Inq, May  14/86; C Trib, May  14/86; B Sun ,  May  14/86) 

May  14: After more than a year of  study by NASA centers and contract teams, 
Dr.  James C. Fletcher announced a baseline configuration for the permanent- 
ly  crew-tended Space Station that  would  guide preliminary  design activities 
for the remaining eight months of  the Phase B studies. The contract called for 
development of  the  Space Station  to  begin  in  October  1986, ending with  a 
permanently  tended  habitable  station  in  1994. A  total  of  14 Space  Shuttle 
flights were thought to be required for assembly. 

Major features of  the design included two vertical keels 361 feet long and 
connected  by  upper  and  lower  horizontal booms  146 feet  long  (the  Space 
Station measured 503 feet  at  its widest point); two 44.5-foot long,  13.8-foot 
interior diameter U.S.  supplied modules, with external interconnects for lab- 
oratory  functions and crew quarters for eight members and two smaller logis- 
tics modules to alternate between the ground and the station; modules located 
near the  station’s center of gravity to provide the  best possible microgravity 
environment for  experiments, with  raft  patterns having  four  nodes  and  two 
tunnels to serve as module interconnects; internal module pressure of  14.7 per 
square inch and 80/20 nitrogen/oxygen mixture ratio to approximate sea level 
Earth atmospheric conditions, with a  closed loop environmental control and 
life  support system where oxygen and water could be  recycled  and nitrogen 
and food could be resupplied; hybrid solar power system with 75 kilowatts of 

39 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MAY 1986 

power, where 25 kilowatts would be provided by  photovoltaic system and  the 
remaining 50 by  the solar dynamics system; five locations on the structure for 
placing attached payloads and a facility for servicing free flying spacecraft and 
platforms with  a  telerobotic  senricer; polar  platform  with  useful  payload  on 
single Shuttle  launch  and  a  co-orbiting platform  to  support astrophysics and 
materials processing; gaseous hydrogedoxygen propulsion system for altitude 
control (assembly would be at 220 nautical miles and operational altitude at 250 
nautical miles minimum); metric as standard unit of measurement; and inclusion 
of  international elements into the overall design, including the Canadian Mobile 
Servicing Center  and  hardware provided  by  Japan  and  the  European  Space 
Agency. (NASA Release 86-61; NYTimes, May  15/86; W Times, May  15/86) 

Ma y  15: NASA and Boeing Aerospace Company entered into an  agreement 
concerning materials processing experiments. Crystals of  a  size and  quality 
impossible to create on Earth would be attempted aboard three Space Shuttle 
flights. Working with  the University of Alabama, Boeing agreed to  fund  the 
experiments,  including  a  chemical  vapor  transport  crystal  growth  furnace 
installed in  the  galley  area. These  crystals were  expected to  be  of  the  type 
valuable  in  the  commercial production  of  semiconductor and  electro-optic 
devices.  T h e  experiments  would  underscore  NASA’s  commitment  to  the 
development of  commercial endeavors in space, and would continue with the 
Space Station. (NASA Release 86-62) 

Space agency officials announced that it would cost $625 million to get the 
remaining Shuttle fleet off  the  ground. The money would  go  to  salvage and 
investigation costs  ($43 million),  spare  parts  ($46  million),  and  corrective 
actions ($537 million). The corrective actions included redesign of  the solid- 
fuel rocket booster, changes in the main engine, and changes in steering, brak- 
ing  and  other  systems,  but  not  escape  options  for  the  crew.  The  Senate 
Appropriations Committee trimmed  the  request  to  $526 million because,  it 
was reasoned, the  agency could not  spend all  of  its money before the fiscal 
year ended on September 30. 

Other officials from NASA met with President Ronald Reagan to  discuss 
the  Nation’s  launch  capability  and  requested  $2.8  billion  to  replace  the 
Challenger. The request, which was part of  a $5 billion to $8 billion total that 
included expendable launch vehicles, violated the deficit reduction Gramm- 
Rudman law.  Chief  of  Staff Donald Reagan questioned the  need  for  a  new 
Shuttle  that  might  be  outdated within  10 years.  President Reagan  queried, 
“Should we be buying the technology of  the ‘70s for use in the  O OS?" In grap- 
pling with the NASA budget, the President considered a recommendation to 
bar  all  commercial and  foreign  launches from  the  Shuttle.  (W  Times, May 
16/86; W Post, May  16/86; WSJ ,  May  16/86) 

MAY  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Ma y   18: An  Energy  Department  analysis  released  to  Representative Edward 
Markey stated that radioactive releases resulting from a  Space Shuttle accident 
carrying a plutonium-powered satellite could cause 367 cancer cases and  conta- 
minate 367 square miles of land. The former estimate hinged on people staying in 
the launch site area for more than a year. (WPo s t ,  May  19/86; C Trib, May  19/86) 

M a y  20:  Two papers delivered by Dr. Allan Harris and Dr. Eugene Shoemaker 
to  the American Geophysical Union  in Baltimore dealt with  the possibilities 
and consequences of  a comet, asteroid, or large meteoroid striking the Earth. 
Chances of  the  first  two  bodies  striking us  in  the  next  100 years, the paper 
determined, were only 1 in 1000. An encounter with the third, however, would 
be more likely  (this occurs about once every two decades) and  although the 
meteoroid would explode in the atmosphere, less advanced nations might mis- 
take the explosion for a nuclear attack. Asteroids and  comets are  still moni- 
tored, notwithstanding the low odds of  a collision. Asteroids lend themselves 
to  search methods because they follow an Earth-like orbit, but the latter have 
an elliptical orbit difficult to track. 

Also presented to the Baltimore meeting were the results of the findings of 
a joint U.S./Brazilian  atmospheric study conducted in July and August  1985 
by  NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais. Analysis of  the 
study concluded that gases from the rain forests in the Amazon Basin in Brazil 
set off  a chain of chemical reactions that eventually impact global air quality 
and the Earth’s radiation budget. Trace gases in the troposphere resulting from 
biological activity  in  forest  soil  and  vegetation  were measured  with  instru- 
ments aboard NASA’s Electra aircraft. (NASA Release 86-63; 86-64) 

*  The  Pentagon  considered waiting  until  1991 before  a  Shuttle would  be 
launched for  the  first  time  from Vandenberg Air  Force  Base  in  California. 
Temporarily closing the $2.8 billion facility would  save $400 million a  year 
in maintenance. The major advantage, however, given the increased number 
of  launches per year, is that using only Cape Canaveral in Florida would save 
time  because moving  a  Shuttle between  the  two  coasts  is  time  consuming. 
Only  launches from Vandenberg, however,  could  safely put  the Air Force’s 
highly classified satellites into polar orbit. (NY Times, May 21/86) 

*  Representative Edward P.  Bolland, chairman of  the House Appropriations 
Subcommittee, advised NASA that  it needed to make some difficult choices 
in its big-ticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. 
James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space 
Station,  to  which  he  responded  that  the  two  projects  were  inseparable. 
Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because anoth- 
er  accident would  leave  the Nation  with  only  two,  crippling the  space pro- 
gram. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of 
the Space Station. ( B  Sun, May 21/86) 

41 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1986 

May   21 :   Ground  testing  of  auxiliary  thrusters  designed  to  allow  the  Space 
Station to maintain a proper orbit and altitude demonstrated that the  thrusters 
can operate for  long periods of  time with no hardware degradation. Fueled by 
water broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, the thrusters ran for as long as 
22,000 seconds, and, with a target of 10 years of Space Station life, the goal was 
for them to run 40,000 to 60,000 seconds. Bell Aerospace Textron and Aerojet 
Techsystem Corporation conducted the tests for NASA. (NASA Release 86-65) 

May  2 2 :  Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher said at  a Board  of  Governors 
meeting that  he  expected President Ronald Reagan’s approval for  a replace- 
ment Shuttle. He reiterated what he told the President earlier and averred, “We 
need  a  fourth  orbiter right  away,  as  soon  as  we  can build  it.”  Fletcher  also 
warned  that  if  it were not  built  and  if  we  do  not  begin  operating the  Space 
Station by  1994, “that could be  very dire, indeed, for  the future of American 
science and  technology  and  the American economy.”  (Remarks prepared for 
Delivery: Aerospace Industries Association of America, Board  of  Governors 
Meeting, Williamsburg, Virginia, May  22/86;  P  Znq,  May  23/86;  W   Times, 
May 23/86; B  Sun, May 23/86) 

May  27: Dr.  James C. Fletcher said that a redesigned space vehicle (the aero- 
space plane) would  take  10 years longer to build than  a  replacement for the 
Challenger. He also relayed the  information that 44 potentially flawed parts, 
not including the O-rings, were discovered in the shuttle and would have to be 
attended to  before  it  could  again  fly.  (MY  Times, May  28/86;  W  Post, May 
28/86; W S J ,  May  238186) 

May  2 9 :  NASA announced that TRW, Inc. was awarded a contract to replace 
the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost in the Challenger accident. 
Plans called for a replacement spacecraft and follow-on satellites to keep the 
TDRS system operational through the end of  the century. As of  this date, one 
TDRS  was  in  geosynchronous  orbit  near  Brazil  over  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 
(NASA Release 86-70; WSJ ,  May 30186) 

May  31  : Another setback for Western launch capability occurred as an Ariane 
rocket was  destroyed by  ground  controllers 4 minutes  and  36  seconds after 
liftoff in French Guiana, when its third stage failed to ignite. Also lost was an 
Intelsat V  communications satellite; i t  was  the third time failure in  the rock- 
ets  had  occurred  for  that  reason. Arianespace,  a  French  company that  sold 
space on  the rocket, was  in  fierce competition with NASA for multimillion- 
dollar commercial contracts, but ceded its monopoly when forced to postpone 
future flights while the accident was being investigated. With  the grounding 
of  the U.S. space program, western nations were left with the Ariane rocket as 
the  only  means  to  place  commercial  satellites into  space.  (LA  Herald,  Jun 
1/86; CSM ,  Jun  16/86) 

42 

June 

June 2 :  Researchers at the Construction Technology Laboratory found that con- 
crete made from lunar soil, which contains no organic substances, was five per- 
cent stronger than high-strength Earth concrete. Because NASA planners antic- 
ipated a return to  the Moon  in the 21st century to establish a permanent lunar 
base, the concept of lunar building materials was a valuable asset when the cost 
of  otherwise transporting them was considered. (NASA Release 86-68) 

*  Satellite  remote  sensing  technology, NASA-developed software  for  pro- 
cessing  satellite imagery, was  used  by  scientists and  medical researchers at 
NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories in conjunction with nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) for enhancement of disease diagnosis. NMR, sen- 
sitive to soft tissue and superior to x-rays and CAT Scans, is a technology that 
has been around since the  1940s, but previously had not been used  as a diag- 
nostic tool.  (NASA Release 86-69) 

The  Presidential  Commission  investigating  the  Challenger  accident 
released  its  report,  two  hundred pages, plus  appendices, that  recommended 
reorganization of  NASA's management structure. Other changes cited by  the 
Commission  included more rigid quality control, reorganization of  the  lines 
of  communication in  the NASA chain of  command, a  larger role for NASA 
astronauts in Shuttle matters, and a Shuttle escape system. By  the time these 
conclusions were announced, the report had  been  sent to  the  printers; 'it was 
scheduled to be on President Ronald Reagan's  desk by June 9. (Report of  the 
Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident; W Post, 
Jun  3/86;  Jun  10186; B  Sun ,  Jun  3/86;  Jun  10186; NY  Times, Jun  4/86;  Jun 
10186; W S J ,  Jun 4186;  Jun  10186) 

June  3:  NASA announced the seven winners of the sixth annual Space Science 
Student  Involvement  Program  (SSIP)  and  the  winner  of  the  SSIP Student 
Newspaper Competition. SSIP,  a  joint  venture  of  NASA  and  the  National 
Science Teachers Association, and  the  corresponding newspaper competition 
were both aimed at the secondary school level. (NASA Release 86-71) 

Preliminary investigation into the Titan rocket lost on April  18 found that the 
insulation between its solid-fuel and  the outer casing of  the solid rocket booster 
might have peeled, allowing flames to bum through its casing. Although made by 
United Technologies, the design was identical to  that used  in the boosters made 
by Morton Thiokol for the Space Shuttles and raised the question as to whether 
solid-fuel booster rockets-in 
lieu of  liquid-propellant rockets were suitable for 
human space flight. (NY Times, June 4/86) 

43 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1986 

June  4 :   NASA  located  a  video  tape  concerning  the  Shuttle  mission  51-E 
Flight Readiness Review (FRR) that  contained two-and-one-half minutes of 
discussion on previous O-ring erosion. Because there was  no requirement to 
record  audio  o r   video of  FRR’s, no  cataloging of  the  tape  was  made.  The 
Presidential Commission was provided with the tape but informed NASA that 
no new  information was on it.  (NASA 86-77) 

June 5 :  Two near-Earth asteroids, composed of nickel and iron and could pro- 
vide future space mining, were discovered shortly before this date by  NASA’s 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. About one mile in diameter, each, one asteroid is 
inside and one is outside of Earth’s orbit. (NASA Release 86-73) 

Two hundred fifty-eight members of  Congress signed a letter addressed to 
NASA urging  them  to  find  a  second  supplier for  its  Space  Shuttle booster 
rockets. Congress, described as further tightening the rein on NASA, believed 
that competition for the sole provider, Morton Thiokol, would equate to  sav- 
ings. Aerojet General said  it was  ready  to  build  a  seamless booster, a  safer 
design.  Congress  also  wanted  NASA  to  eliminate  some  of  the  rules  that 
favored Thiokol, such as requiring any second manufacturer to purchase noz- 
zles for the rocket from them. (W Times, Jun 6/86; WS J ,  Jun 6/86; P  Znq, Jun 
6/86; B  Sun ,  Jun 6/86) 

Investigation into the Delta rocket crash May 3  indicated that  the accident 
could have been a result of  a faulty hardware-assembly program in the engine 
compartment. A short circuit was most likely the cause, said Lawrence Ross, 
Chairman  of  the  Delta  review  board,  but  sabotage  was  not  ruled  out. 
( B  Sun ,  Jun 6/86) 

June 9:  Following the release of  the Presidential Commission’s report, NASA 
Administrator Dr.  James C .  Fletcher announced that he would adopt most of 
the recommendations. He  stated, “The whole agency needs a major reexami- 
nation.” He further said that he still expected the Shuttle fleet to resume oper- 
ation by  July  1987, that  the President will opt for a replacement Shuttle, and 
that he remained committed to the Teacher in Space Program. Congress, how- 
ever,  pointed  out  that  fiscal  restraints would  render  it  nearly  impossible to 
make all the Committee’s suggested repairs while building a new orbiter and 
pursuing  the  Space  Station  and  the  aerospace  plane.  (NASA  Release: 
Statement of Dr.  James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, Jun  9/86; W Post, 
.Tun 10/86; NY  Times, Jun  10/86) 

June  10 :  Hearings  before  the  House  of  Representatives  investigating  the 
Challenger accident began on this date. Testimonies were given by William P. 
Rogers, Dr.  James C.  Fletcher, various NASA personnel, various personnel 
from  Morton  Thiokol,  Inc.,  and  various  personnel  from  the  military  and 

44 

JUNE 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

industry. The hearings were to take place June 1 0 , 11 ,1 2 ,1 7 , 18 ,  and 25,1986 
and July 15, 16 ,23 ,  and 24, 1986. (Investigation into the Challenger Accident: 
Hearings  before  the  Committee  on  Science  and  Technology  House  of 
Representatives, 1986) 

June  11: NASA installed a super computer known as the Cray X -MP  for use 
in  key  NASA  research projects  and  for  sharing with  other  NASA Centers, 
industries, and universities. The computer made possible the analysis of  prob- 
lems previously thought impossible to  solve. A solution that might  take one 
hour on the Cray X-MP, for example, would take 200 hours on a popular busi- 
ness mainframe computer. NASA noted that the research underway at Lewis’s 
Structural Mechanics Branch  would  have  been  prohibitively expensive and 
time consuming without the super computer. (NASA Release 86-74) 

*  NASA officials said that resuming Space Shuttle flight by July 1987 would be 
impossible if all of  the conclusions reached by  the Presidential Commission were 
followed. The report called for correction of  the Shuttle’s braking system, devel- 
opment of  an escape system, and review of  more than 700 critical components; 
however, the  biggest obstacle lay  in  the redesigning and  testing of  the  booster 
rockets. The Commission recommended a costly and time consuming full-scale, 
vertical  test  for  the  new  rockets. NASA had  relied  on  a  less  expensive, scaled 
down, horizontal test for new  designs in the past and made no commitment for 
following this advice. The added preparation time would most adversely affect the 
Air Force, who earlier had warned that even a 1-year delay would produce a back- 
log  of  40  payloads  by  1992; some of  their  satellites could  not  fit  aboard  any 
untended  launch vehicle  then  in  use.  Some former commercial customers had 
negotiated flights with the French Ariane rocket program, but because they were 
also grounded, China and Japan were being  sought for launches. 

President Ronald  Reagan,  in  the  meantime, had  called  for  a  replacement 
orbiter, but had not yet revealed how it would be funded. (hT Times, Jun  12/86) 

Astronaut Owen K.  Garriott planned to leave both NASA and g o v e m e n t  
service during  the  current week.  His  past  achievements include  a  2-month 
stay  in  space aboard Skylab and  the  10-day Spacelab  1 mission aboard  the 
Space Shuttle Columbia. (NASA Release 86-75) 

June  12: Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to 
go ahead with President Ronald Reagan’s call for another Space Shuttle. The 
President’s remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. 

Meanwhile, members  of  the  House  committee,  delving  further  into  the 
Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards 
to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was 

45 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1986 

in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that 
information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but 
by  officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June  13/86; WS J ,  June  13/86) 

The Soviet Union said that it was prepared to fill the void left by the United 
States and Europe for commercial space launches. Moscow revealed this fact 
in  an  announcement that  also  called  for  a World  Space Organization. The 
Organization would oversee joint space projects that the Soviets hoped would 
unfold in the future. (C Trib, Jun  13/86; C SM ,  Jun  16/86) 

June 13: In a move that would greatly reduce the chances for resuming Shuttle 
flights by July  1987, President Ronald Reagan urged NASAAdministrator Dr. 
James C. Fletcher to comply with all of  the recommendations put forth by the 
Challenger commission. President Reagan also ordered Fletcher to report back 
to  him  after  30  days  with  details  on  how  and  when  the  findings would  be 
implemented. Also, the two reportedly discussed approval of Federal funds for 
a replacement orbiter and the President’s final decision was expected to follow 
after a few days. (Letter from President Reagan to James Fletcher, Jun  13/86; 
W Post, Jun  14/86; WS J ,  Jun  16/86; W Times, Jun  16/86) 

June  15: The  Peoples Republic  of  China moved  to  fill  the  void  left  by  the 
United  States  and  Europe  for  commercial  space  launchings  as  it  negotiated 
with two U.S. firms. Hughes Aircraft Company expressed an interest in work- 
ing with China to establish a  launch base in  the Hawaiian  islands. Peking, at 
the  same time, announced an  agreement it had made with  the U.S. company 
Teresat, Inc., for putting two of  their satellites into orbit in  1987 and  1989 at a 
price ranging from $20 million to $25 million, about  15 percent less than what 
Ariane  and  the  Space Shuttle charged. Teresat, however, would  first  need  to 
locate an insurer for launches and secure approval from the State Department. 
China claimed its program was capable of  10 to  12 launches per year. (W Pos t ,  
Jun  16/86; C SM ,  Jun  16/86; WS J ,  Jun  17/86; C Trib, Jun  17/86) 

June 17: Astronaut James Van Hoften announced his resignation from NASA to 
enter private industry. His past achievements include two Space Shuttle flights 
and the position of Assistant Professor of Civil Engineering at the University of 
Houston. He was the fifth astronaut to leave NASA since the January 28 acci- 
dent. (NASA Release 86-78; USA Today, Jun  18/86; LA  Times, Jul29/86) 

The $3 billion launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California was 
deemed unsafe according to a Senate report released on this date. The salient 
feature cited was the closed exhaust ducts that could fill with hydrogen gas in 
the event that a Shuttle’s main engines were shut down to abort liftoff or at the 
end of a flight-readiness test-firing. The report also noted that fog, high winds, 
and cool temperatures were common to the area and that the proximity of the 

46 

JUNE  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

launch pad  to  the  control  center put  support personnel at  risk.  Because  the 
Department of Defense required the California site to  achieve polar orbit for 
reconnaissance satellites, it was recommended that they adopt the “new” Titan 
missiles.  (W Times, Jun  18/86; LA  Times, Jun  18/86; Jul9/86) 

June 18: Allan McDonald, in charge of the booster rocket redesign task force, told 
members of Congress that the new booster joints would  fall into the “criticality- 
1R ’  category, meaning that they would have a backup. No specific design had yet 
been chosen, and the engineer stated, “We’re looking at some designs with O-rings 
and  some without. We’re  looking at various  seating concepts.” McDonald was 
taken off  Morton Thiokol’s solid rocket team after testifying before the Rogers 
Commission concerning his objection to launching the Challenger in cold weath- 
er, but  was  reassigned  to  head  the  task  force after complaints from Congress. 
(USA Today, Jun  19/86; W T i i e s ,  Jun  19/86; NY Times, Jun  19/86) 

June  19:  Lawrence  F.  Herbolsheimer  was  appointed  Deputy  Assistant 
Administrator for  the  Office  of  Commercial Programs, where  he  would  be 
responsible for advancing the interests and participation of  the private sector 
in  the U.S. Space Program. He previously had co-founded businesses in  the 
private sector and had  served at the White House. (NASA Release 86-79) 

*  NASA  announced  that  it  would  terminate  further  development  of  the 
$1  billion  Centaur  Upper  Stage  for  launching  other  spacecraft on  board  a 
Space Shuttle. The Shuttle 51-L accident  prompted major safety reviews and 
safety criteria, which  the Centaur, even after modifications, could not meet. 
Under Richard H. Truly’s direction, NASA initiated efforts to examine alter- 
natives for  those national security missions that had planned to use Centaur. 
Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions were dependant on such a launch, 
other options for  launching them from  the  Shuttle with  a Titan  rocket were 
being considered.  (NASA Release  86-80, W  Times, Jun  20186;  W Post, Jun 
20186; W S J ,  Jun 20186; IVY Times, Jun 20186; C SM ,  Jun 23/86) 

June  24 :   Following  a  speech  in   Washington, Air  Force  Secretary Edward 
Aldridge told reporters that the Space Shuttle would not  fly again until early 
1988. The Air Force, he said, would use the expendable launch vehicles being 
developed as often as possible and that NASA’s goal was to have military and 
non-military payloads on a 50-50 schedule. For reasons of  security, Aldridge 
had hoped President Ronald Reagan would authorize funds for a new orbiter, 
but  sources revealed that  the President would hold  back  any  decisions con- 
cerning the space program until after NASA began implementing some of the 
recommendations  from  the  Rogers  Commission.  (W  Pos t ,   Jun  24/86; 
W Times, Jun 24/86; IVY Times, Jun 24/86) 

47 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1986 

June  25 :  TRW,  Inc.  was  selected by  NASA for  negotiations leading  to  the 
award  of  a  contract  for  design  and  delivery  of  the  Orbital  Maneuvering 
Vehicle (OMV), a reusable, remotely operated propulsion vehicle for hauling 
satellites from one orbit to another. The OMV’s primary uses would be space- 
craft delivery, retrieval, boost, deboost, and  close proximity visual observa- 
tion beyond  the operating range of  a  Space Shuttle. The OMV,  “space tug,” 
was  also  to  be  made  to  adapt  for  use  in  Space  Station  activities.  (NASA 
Release 86-81; WS J ,  Jun 26/86; LA  Times, Jun 27/86) 

The fust flight of  an aircraft with both a digital jet engine control system and 
a mated digital flight control system took place at NASA’s Ames-Dryden Flight 
Research Facility with  a  modified F-15.  The  integration of  engine  and  flight 
control  (Highly  Integrated Digital  Electronic  Control)  between  the  system’s 
computers could increase performance 2 to  10 percent. (NASA Release 86-82) 

June 26: NASA officials c o n f i i e d  that the Agency had considered reproduction 
of  the Delta rocket and was ordering at least one from McDonnell Douglas for 
launching an Indonesian communications satellite early in  1987. Officials at the 
corporation assured NASA that  the grounded Delta rocket  could be  ready  for 
launch in a few months because problems were worked out and the production 
line for the rocket was partially restarted. (W Post, Jun 27/86; WS J ,  Jun 27/86) 

Three  government  agencies-the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration  (NOAA),  the  National  Science  Foundation  (NSF),  and  the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)-proposed 
a long-term 
plan  for the study of  human effect on the Earth’s environment. The project envi- 
sioned cooperation from other scientifically advanced nations and would use the 
disciplines  of  geology, meteorology,  oceanography, forestry,  agriculture,  and 
computer and  satellite technologies to  study the Earth as  an  integrated system. 
NSF director, Erich Bloch, noted that “for the  first time  in  history we  have the 
capability to observe the entire Earth from the outer reaches of  its atmosphere to 
its molten inner core.” NASA’s Earth System Sciences Committee predicted that 
the program, enlisting satellites from countries around the globe, would be in full 
swing by  the middle 1990s. ( B  Sun, Jun 27/86; C SM ,  Jun 30/86) 

For  the  f i s t  time  since the  January  28  accident, the  Space Shuttle’s main 
engine underwent a  1-1/2 second test  for  ignition. It was  an  uneventful, suc- 
cessful run, and NASA officials offered it as a signal that the program was gear- 
ing up for a targeted July  1987 mission. ( B  Sun, Jun 27/86; C Trib, Jun 27/86) 

June 30: Dr.  James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced that Andrew 
J. Stofan had been  appointed Associate Administrator for  the Space Station. 
He  also  announced a  number  of  organizational and  management structural 
changes  for  the  program  and  transfer  of  its  supervision from  the  Johnson 

48 

JUNE  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Space Center, Houston, Texas, to Washington, D.C. The changes followed rec- 
ommendations from a committee headed by  former Apollo Program Manager 
Samuel  C.  Phillips  that  were  consistent  with  findings  from  the  Rogers 
Commission, which  investigated the  Challenger accident.  Phillips  examined 
the Space Station program from both a technical and management perspective 
and  Dr.  Fletcher,  in  turn, made  changes  that  assured  the  flow  of  important 
information to proper decision-making levels. Another result was  the procure- 
ment  of  a  versatile  computer-based information network  to  link  NASA  and 
contractor facilities  and  to provide  engineering services. (NASA Release  86- 
84; W Post, Jul  1/86; Ny Times, Jul  1/86; W Times, Jul 1/86; C Trib, Jul2/86) 

49 

Ju ly  

Ju ly   1 : A1  Louviere, who headed a  team  of  engineers at  the  Johnson Space 
Center, Houston, Texas, recommended  to  Shuttle Program Director Arnold 
Aldrich that  an escape system be built  into orbiters. Equipped with pressure 
suits and  an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of  the aircraft while it 
was in gliding flight below  100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, 
Louviere  stressed  the  fact  that  no  escape  system  could  have  saved  the 
Challenger crew. ( P  Znq, Jul2186) 

Ju l y   2:  The  Delta  178 rocket  accident that  occurred on  May  3,  1986, was 
caused  by  mechanical damage  to  wiring  caused  by  vibration  during  flight. 
The  rocket’s  first  failure-after 
43   flights  since  1977-was 
attributed to  a 
design  change,  a  shift  from  polyvinylchloride  (PVC)  insulated  wiring  to 
Teflon  insulated. Unlike  PVC,  which  is  over-wrapped  for  greater  abrasion 
protection, Teflon  wiring  bundles  are  over-wrapped in  only  a  very  limited 
number of  locations; the abrasion resistance of mechanical damping was not 
adequately considered when making the change. The investigating board rec- 
ommended  a  review  of  the  booster  electrical  control  system  and  possible 
design changes, verification of  the quality of all connectors, and a reemphasis 
on highly attentive, quality workmanship. 

Another  study released  concerned the Titan  34-D mishap of  April  18; it 
determined the  cause of  the  accident to  be  insulation inside one  of  the  two 
solid rockets being pulled  away  and  allowing “burn through”. Neither acci- 
dent was deemed the result of  any major design flaw and, subsequent to minor 
modifications, the United States planned to resume untended rocket launches. 

The  investigating board  also  observed potential problems resulting from 
high-humidity conditions for vehicles stored at the Kennedy Space Center, to 
instrument  limitations,  and  lack  of  protection  from  contamination  of  the 
Rocketdyne engine  relay  box.  These problems  were not  directly connected 
with the Delta  178 rocket accident or the Titan 34-D mishap.  (NASA Release 
86-85; W Post, Jul3/86;  W S J ,  Jul3/86; NY Times, Jul3/86; B  Sun; Jul 3/86) 

July 3 :  NASA issued a request for proposals to various contractors for a satellite 
for use in a joint venture with the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes 
Spatiales, in the Topex/poseidon oceanographic mission. The satellite would map 
the circulation of the world’s oceans by using a precise radar altimeter to measure 
height variations on the sea surface. Contingent upon  congressional approval of 
funds, a launch of the satellite in late 1991 was planned. (NASA Release 86-86) 

5 1  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY 1986 

July  7: A  full-scale Spacehab module mockup intended to  double  the pres- 
surized volume of the Space Shuttle mid-deck was delivered to NASA's Ames 
Research Center by Spacehab, Inc. The mockup was intended as a test bed for 
artificial  intelligence, robotics  systems,  and  human  performance. Spacehab 
planned to build three of  the modules over the next three years. 

Another corporation, Sverdrup Technology, was chosen for  a  $45 million 
support services contract in which they would provide test complex services 
for Space Shuttle main engines and engineering and laboratory and data work 
for NASA and  18 other Government agencies. NASA also planned a program 
that would develop software tools for writing computer programs in ADA, a 
language used  by  the Department of Defense for mission-critical computers. 
The project was expected to run for three o r  four years and cost $200 million. 
(De f  News, Jul7/86) 

July  8: In  a  response to  the  Presidential Commission on  the  Space  Shuttle 
Challenger Accident, Dr.  James C.  Fletcher announced the  establishment of 
the Office of  Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance and  the  appointment 
of George A. Rodney, from Martin Marietta Corporation, to head the office as 
Associate Administrator. Objectives of  the  office were  to  ensure  a  program 
that  monitored  equipment  status  and  designed  validation  problem  analysis 
and  system  acceptability  in  Agencywide  plans  and  programs.  Rodney's 
responsibilities were to have oversight of  safety, reliability, and quality assur- 
ance functions related to all NASA activities. (NASA Release 86-87; W Post, 
Jul9/86;  W Times, Jul9186; B  Sun, July 9/86; P Inq, Jul6l86) 

July  10: With  a  request  for  proposals  issued  to  approximately 250  f i s ,  
NASA  planned  to  implement  a  Technical  and  Management  Information 
System (TMIS) to  support overall functions of  the  Space Station, including 
design, development, and operation. The TMIS would link the various NASA 
centers  involved with  the  program  and  would  automate the  generation and 
interchange of  documents, correspondence, schedules, engineering data and 
drawing,  budget  data,  and  other  management  information.  Carried  out  in 
implements, the first would be operational less than one year after the contract 
award date. (NASA Release 86-88) 

Richard G. Smith, Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, announced 
his retirement. He plans to join the private sector with General Space Corporation. 
His achievements span 35 years in the space program and  include work with the 
rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal,  management of  the 
Saturn Rocket program at Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Director of  the 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Space 
Transportation Systems  at  NASA Headquarters, Director  of  the  Skylab Task 
Force, and he  is  the recipient of  awards for his contributions to Apollo, Skylab, 
and Space Shuttle programs. 

52  

JULY 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Smith had earlier warned that investigation into the challenger accident would 
result in  a mass exodus from NASA and later added that the investigation dam- 
aged the reputations of many officials. (NASA Release 86-89; W Times, Jull1/86; 
W Post, Jul 11/86; Ny Times, Jul  11/86; LA  Times, Jul 11/86) 

July 14 :  NASA planned for a display of current and future technologies at the 
34th  Annual  EAA  International  Fly-In  Convention  and  Sport  Aviation 
Exhibition, with  an  exhibit entitled “21st Century Aviation,” August  1-8  in 
Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Featured would be hypersonic cruise vehicles and high 
altitude aircraft that  could fly from the U.S.  West  Coast to Tokyo five times 
faster than subsonic flyers and have the capability of  taking payloads and pas- 
sengers to Earth orbit. In  addition, NASA also planned advanced cockpit dis- 
plays in which aircraft controls reacted to voice commands, and presentations 
of  a supercomputer capable of one billion computations per second, rotocraft 
research  and  potential  applications,  aeronautical  art,  and  the  Search  and 
Rescue Satellite (SARSAT) system. The latter display was  intended to  show 
how  using  a  satellite  saves  time  in  rescuing  air  and  maritime  casualties. 
(NASA Release 86-90) 

In  response to  a recent order, NASA Administrator Dr.  James C.  Fletcher 
handed President Ronald Reagan a 50-page report that  outlined the  agency’s 
plans for implementing the Rogers Commission’s recommendations. Among 
the  items detailed were  booster redesign, changes in  NASA’s  management, 
review of  “critical items” whose failure would lead to vehicle loss, establish- 
ment  of  a  safety  organization,  improved  communications,  landing  safety, 
launch  abort  and  crew  escape,  flight  rate,  and  maintenance  safeguards. 
Fletcher also submitted a companion letter urging the President to  authorize 
funds for replacement of  the Challenger. Because of the requirements for get- 
ting the Shuttle flying again, NASA confirmed the aircraft would be ground- 
ed until  at  least early  1988. (Actions to Implement the Recommendations of 
the  Presidential Commission on  the  Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Jul 
14/86; NY   Times, Jul 15/86; W Pos t ,  Jul 15/86; B  Sun, Jul 15/86; W Times, Jul 
15/86; P  Inq, Jul  15/86; C Trib, Jul  15/86) 

Ju ly  16: Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, 
Huntsville, Alabama,  in  charge  of  the  solid  rocket  motors  that  were  held 
responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more 
than  30 years  of  Government service. He  was  among  those  who  opted  for 
liftoff of  the  ill-fated Shuttle and was  repeatedly faulted for  this judgement 
by  William P.  Rogers,  chairman  of  the  commission  investigating  the  acci- 
dent. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, follow- 
ing William R.  Lucas  and George B. Hardy.  (W Pos t ,  Jul  17/86; P  Znq, Jul 
17/86; B  Sun, Jul  17/86) 

53 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY 1986 

Ju ly   17:  NASA  got  back  tapes  from  IBM  that  were  recovered  from  the 
Atlantic Ocean six weeks  after the  Space Shuttle accident and  revealed that 
the Challenger crew had  no knowledge of  events leading to the catastrophe. 
IBM engineers, who were  simultaneously researching tape restoration, were 
called upon and after isolating the computer zeros and ones, NASA engineers 
began the job  of translating the data into a facsimile of human voice.  (W Post, 
Jul  18/86; NY   Times, Jul  18/86; B  Sun ,  Jul  18/86) 

Ju ly  18:  Shuttle director Richard H. Truly  announced NASA’s  interest in  an 
improved,  second-generation  solid  rocket  motor  design  for  study  by  the 
National Space Transportation System program manager. Among the request- 
ed changes were asbestos-free insulation, alternate case and propellant design, 
and  modified  burn  rate  for  improved  performance. Outside  geometry  and 
interfaces with other Space Shuttle elements would not be affected. He added, 
however,  that  the  tentative  schedule  for  launching  a  Shuttle  in  early  1988 
would  not  be  contingent upon  this  newly  designed booster  rocket.  (NASA 
Release 86-94; NY Times, Jul21/86) 

July  21:   Conrail, created by  Congress from  six  bankrupt northeastern rail- 
roads,  argued  against  a  measure  proposed  by  Senator  John  Danforth  that 
would  take  $450 million from  the  Govenunent-owned railroad  and  transfer 
the funds to NASA. If passed, the plan would help compensate for the House 
and  Senate Armed Services Committee’s move to cut $566 million from the 
Air  Force  budget  that  was  earmarked  for  NASA  and  military  use  of  the 
Shuttle. (W Post, Jul22/86) 

July 22:  Testing of recently installed weather protection structures was sched- 
uled for August 19 at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida with Space Shuttle 
Atlantis. The $3.3 million system of sliding and folding doors and seals would 
cover previously exposed, lower portions of the orbiter and greatly reduce risk 
to  the  heat  protection  tiles,  subject  to  damage  from  heavy  rains,  hail,  and 
wind-blown debris.  (NASA Release 86-95) 

Thomas Paine, Laurel Wilkening, George Field, Jack Kerrebrock, Kathryn 
Sullivan, and Carl Sagan testified before Congress concerning Paine’s report, 
“Pioneering the Space Frontier.”  (Hearing before the Committee on Science 
and Technology, July 22/86) 

Ju ly   23:   The  National  Scientific  Balloon  Facility  found  a  promising  new 
material  in  a  flight  test  series  of  high  altitude balloons. The  balloon  film, 
developed  by  Raven  Industries,  was  0.0008  inches  thick;  two  successful 
flights  carried  one  3,000-pound payload  to  an  altitude  of  130,000 feet  and 
another 4,300-pound payload to  120,000 feet. At that time, the NASA balloon 
program  provided  support for  approximately 50 flights-per-year for  studies 

54 

1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

primarily  in  high  energy  astrophysics,  astronomy,  and  upper  atmospheric 
research. Because of  its weight-carrying capacity and flight duration, the bal- 
loon  was  also  important in  infrared  astronomy research  and  in  cosmic and 
gamma ray  investigations. (NASA Release 86-96) 

NASA announced another test of a Space Shuttle engine to take place later 
in  that  week. The purpose was  to  collect  additional data  to be  added  to  the 
previous  test  of  the  same  engine,  that  ran  for  250  seconds, at  the  National 
Space Technology Laboratory. (NASA Release 86-97) 

NASA  officials  announced  that  the  launch  of  an  Atlas-Centaur  rocket 
scheduled to  carry a Navy  communications satellite into orbit on August 28 
was postponed indefinitely. The flight was  originally set for May 22, but  the 
Delta rocket accident canceled that liftoff. The Atlas was  the only remaining 
U.S. rocket  system that  had  not  been grounded;  the  delay resulted from the 
discovery by engineers of  problems with some of  the rocket’s electrical parts. 
(W Post, Jul24186) 

Ju l y  24: Dr.  James C. Fletcher released to members of  Congress a  statement 
indicating  that  employment  at  the  Johnson  Space  Center  (JSC),  Houston, 
Texas, would increase from 12,600 to  14,000 employees during Space Station 
development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on addi- 
tional Space Station tasks. “Another way  to  look at this,” he warned “is that 
without the  Space Station program, JSC’s  employment level  likely will  not 
grow significantly over the next few years.” 

The  projected  increase notwithstanding, officials at  the  JSC  were  con- 
cerned with their status because of  the recent decision to move the habitation 
module’s  development  to  the  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  Huntsville 
Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordi- 
nating the habitation module and the module structure and that “the Johnson 
Space Center’s role  as NASA’s  preeminent center of  excellence in manned 
spacecraft systems  is  not  changing.”  (NASA Release  86-98; NY Times,  Jul 
26/86; W Post, Jul26186) 

Ju ly   25 :  Because of  NASA‘s  expertise in microelectronics and  other minia- 
turized instruments, its technology was  studied for use  in controlling hydro- 
cephalus, an  impairment characterized by  an  accumulation of  fluids  in  the 
brain that  can  lead to mental disorders. The microprocessor-controlled cere- 
brospinal fluid outflow regulating system would replace an  implanted shunt 
that diverts fluid from the brain to other parts of  the body. Because the shunt 
is not  always successful and  often needs repair, this  new  technology, which 
can be reprogrammed to meet changing needs, offered hope for improvement 
and stability. (NASA Release 86-99) 

55 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1986 

Ju ly  28:  Following a review of the wreckage and all other available data from 
the Challenger flight, copies of  the  final report on the  investigation into  the 
cause  of  death  of  the  crew  were  released. Although NASA  was  unable  to 
arrive  at  a  positive  determination, it  seemed  possible,  after  examining  the 
transcripts from  internal communication, that  the  crew was  unaware of  the 
events immediately preceding the breakup of  the orbiter. 

Release of  the Challenger tapes to the news media, however, revealed that 
some members  of  the  crew  may  have  been  aware of  the  accident.  Seconds 
before the crash, pilot Michael Smith uttered  the phrase “Oh-oh’’ and subse- 
quent to  that  other evidence revealed  that  a  few  astronauts attempted to  use 
emergency air  supply. The  exact  cause of  death  was  never determined, but 
sources agreed that it was doubtful that the initial blast was sufficient to cause 
death or injury and whether any of  the crew were able to maintain conscious- 
ness  until  the  cabin  struck  the  ocean’s  surface  could  not  be  determined. 
(NASA Release 86-100; W  Post, Jul29/86; W  Times, Jul29/86; N Y   Times, Jul 
29/86; WS J ,  Aug 5/86) 

Ju l y   29:  Administration  sources  said  that  President  Ronald  Reagan  might 
delay  funding for  a  new  orbiter until  1987. Because budget restraints made 
any commitment to a replacement impossible, many advisors were in favor of 
producing  expendable  launch  vehicles  for  private  satellites.  (W  Post,  Jul 
30186; P Inq, Jul30/86; WSJ, Jul 3 1/86) 

July 31: NASA announced four teams to establish centers for the Commercial 
Development of Space. The centers, joint undertakings of  academic, industry, 
and government teams, were (1) University of Wisconsin, Space Automation 
and Robotics and  Dr.  John Ballinger;  (2)  Ohio State University, Real Time 
Satellite Mapping  and  Ivan  Mueller;  (3)  University of  Houston, Molecular 
Beam  Epitaxy  and  C.W.  Chu;  and  (4)  Clarkson  University,  Commercial 
Crystal  Growth  in  Space  and  William  Wilcox.  Criteria  for  selection were 
based  on  new  and  unique research  leading to  commercial activity, manage- 
ment  teams  capable  of  directing  commercial  research,  and  available  non- 
NASA resources to help operate the center. (NASA Release 86-102) 

Dr.  James C.  Fletcher acknowledged that NASA did not sufficiently consult 
Congress on decisions pertaining to Space Station management prior to the June 
30 announcement and  said he would postpone plans for moving Space Station 
management  from  Houston  to  the  Washington,  D.C.  headquarters. Because 
“considerable misunderstanding and misinterpretation of  the intent of  the deci- 
sion on the Space Station work package realignment has resulted,” said Fletcher 
“I  intend to conduct a thorough review  of  all aspects of  Space Station design, 
work package assignments and functions, and conduct extensive conversations 
with members of Congress.” (NASA Release 86-103; USA  Today, Aug  1/86) 

56 

JULY  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

White  House  officials announced that  top  members of  President Ronald 
Reagan’s  cabinet were  in  favor  of  halting  commercial launches  aboard the 
Space Shuttle, a move that would cost NASA $850 million in revenue. White 
House spokesman Larry Speaks argued that eliminating the  launches would 
stimulate the private aerospace industry, reluctant to  compete with NASA in 
the past, to  quickly fill  the  void. Another reason for  the reduced number of 
launches, he noted, was the increasing backlog of  scientific and military pay- 
loads. Focus on those two types of missions exclusively would ease the imme- 
diate need for a fourth shuttle. 

At the same time, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge said that he intend- 
ed  to ask Congress for $2.6 billion in order to  acquire a  fleet of  rockets that 
would reduce both the backlog of  21 payloads and the Pentagon’s dependance 
on  the  Space  Shuttle. He  added  that  no  Space  Shuttles would  be  launched 
from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base until  1992, a saving to tax pay- 
ers  of  $1 billion.  (W Times, Aug  1/86; WSJ ,  Aug  1/86; W Post,  Aug  1/86; 
B  Sun, Aug  1/86; NY  Times, Aug  1/86; WSJ ,  Aug 5/86) 

57 

August 

August  I :  The Lunar and Planetary Laboratory at the University of Arizona 
and  NASA’s  Johnson  Space  Center  in  Houston,  Texas,  planned  a  Planet 
Mercury Conference for early August. More than  10 years had  elapsed since 
the last conference and a significant amount of  data had developed during the 
interim. Scheduled topics included Mercury’s role in helping scientists under- 
stand the origin of  planets, Mercury as an end-member planet, ground-based 
and  Earth-orbital observations of  Mercury, and possible spacecraft missions 
to the planet. (NASA Release) 

In  Space Station Phase B  Program Level Agreement, NASA and  the ESA 
announced agreement on hardware elements for a preliminary design of  a per- 
manently attached pressurized laboratory module and a polar orbiting platform, 
the latter for conducting Earth observations. Under the agreement, ESA would 
conduct research on a preliminary design of a man-tended free-flyer (pressurized 
module and resource module) for international utilization, primarily in the fields 
of  material and life sciences and fluid physics, that would require both  a long- 
duration and undisturbed microgravity environment. (NASA Release 86- 104) 

August 5 :  Preliminary data from NASA’s Earth Radiation Budget Experiment 
(ERBE), a  three-satellite project that  began  in  October  1984, indicated that 
clouds reflect more heat than  they  retain and appear to cool Earth’s climate, 
possibly offsetting the “greenhouse effect”. Incomplete coverage and sporadic 
observations have  limited decades of  study on  global heat  flows done with 
sounding rockets,  balloons, and  satellites. In  a  broader  attempt,  the  ERBE 
instruments measured  the  average monthly  heat  budget  on  regional,  zonal, 
and global scales; tracked the seasonal movement of heat from the tropics to 
the poles; and  determined the  average daily variation in  heat  on  a  620-mile 
regional monthly scale. An  ERBE package contained two  radiometer instru- 
ments. One, a scanner, was used for narrow field-of-view scanning with short- 
wave measurements of reflected solar energy and long-wave measurements of 
Earth-emitted energy. The other, a  non-scanner, was  used for wide  field-of- 
view of the entire disc of the Earth, a  10-degree region of Earth, and the total 
output of  the sun’s radiant energy. (NASA Release 86-105) 

*  NASA announced that James R. Thompson would be appointed Director of 
the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, in  late September. 
He  had  been  Deputy Director of  the  Princeton Plasma Physics  Laboratory 
since 1983 and previous to that had spent 23 years at Marshall, where he man- 
aged development of the Space Shuttle’s main engines, worked in the Skylab 

59  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1986 

Program, and was Associate Director of  Engineering for the Center. He was 
also NASA’s  manager  for  the  Challenger investigation (NASA Release 86- 
106; N y  T imes ,  Aug 6/86) 

Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a Senate subcommittee and testified 
that the $7.7 billion budget for NASA was  “barely adequate” and could fur- 
ther delay Shuttle flights while possibly stripping the private sector of  some 
25,000  jobs.  He  also  said  that  the  currently  designed  Space  Station  was 
intended to be built using four Shuttles. With only three Shuttles, the Station 
would need to go back to the drawing board. The Senate appeared to be look- 
ing at a civilian sponsored space program for commercial launches as a way 
to reduce costs. (W Pos t ,  Aug 6 /86 ;  B  Sun ,  Aug 6/86) 

*  Documents released by  the Rogers Commission investigating the Challenger 
accident  revealed  that  the  Space  Shuttle Columbia had  narrowly  avoided  a 
severe mishap  on  January  6  when  it  came within 31  seconds of  launch after 
18,000 pounds of  liquid oxygen had been  inadvertently drained from its exter- 
nal tank. The mistake would have  left  the  ship without enough fuel to obtain 
orbit; the error was blamed on fatigue among the ground crew, who were pur- 
suing a rigid schedule. (M  Times, Aug 6/86; W Post, Aug 6/86; W Times, Aug 
6/86; B  Sun ,  Aug 6/86) 

August  7:  NASA and  the  Space Telescope Science Institute announced that 
U.S. amateur astronomers would be  given a small amount of  observing time 
with  the  Hubble  Space Telescope (HST). Amateur  astronomers have made 
significant contributions to  astronomy, and, at  this point, there are at  least a 
quarter  million  of  these  astronomers. With  a  94-112-inch mirror,  the  HST 
would be the largest astronomical telescope ever placed in space; it serves as 
an  example  of  international cooperation between NASA  and  the  European 
Space Agency. (NASA Release 86-108) 

In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would 
allow NASA to honor only  some of  its higher priority contracts for commer- 
cial  and  foreign satellite launches from the  Space Shuttle. Regarding  a  new 
orbiter, Chief of  Staff Donald Regan has reversed his  stance and now  favors 
the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he  stated, because he believed that 
NASA would not just  correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up 
to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reim- 
burse  NASA with  $56.3 million  for military  launches, a  move protested  by 
Senator Sam N u ,  who claimed that the money would come at the expense of 
intelligence activities. (M  T imes ,  Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86) 

August 11: As of this date, two companies (Boeing Aerospace Operations and 
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company) had submitted proposals for the 

60 

AUGUST 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Payload Ground Operations Contract, a  three-year cost-plus-award-fee con- 
tract with optional extensions of up to 15 years. The selected contractor would 
be responsible for preparing all payload for launch aboard Space Shuttles and 
expendable  launch  vehicles,  as  well  as  operations, maintenance, and  engi- 
neering  of  the  related  processing  facilities. The  contract would  consolidate 
work  that  was  performed  under  separate, on-site  contracts  involving  about 
900  people.  Space  Station components requiring  launch  from  the  Kennedy 
Space Center and preparation of  NASA payloads at  the Vandenberg Launch 
Site in California were to be included. (NASA Release 86-109) 

August 12: NASA chose a new design for its solid rocket motors, a major step 
for returning the Shuttle fleet to flight. Each joint would be sealed by three o- 
rings constructed from a more resilient material than that used originally, and 
would  seal  at  all  times,  not  just  from  pressure  produced  by  expanding gas 
inside the rocket. Other changes included a metal clip meant to force the joint 
to  remain  sealed,  interlocking insulation to  prevent hot  gases  from directly 
contacting the O-rings, and a bolt assembly between the rocket nozzle and the 
engine for providing an additional seal at the nozzle joint.  Hundreds of  tests 
for the new design were scheduled for the coming fall. (NY Times, Aug  12/86; 
Aug  13/86; W Times, Aug  12/86; W Post, Aug  13/86; C Trib, Aug  13/86) 

August  13: Pratt & Whitney was  selected by  NASA for negotiations leading 
to a contract award for the design, development, test, flight certification, and 
production  verification of  alternate high-pressure fuel  and  oxidizer  turbop- 
umps. With  a  proposed  cost  of  about  $182 million  and  a  period  of  perfor- 
mance of  five to  six years, the turbopumps were intended to be  interchange- 
able with the Space Shuttle’s main engine turbopumps, provide extended life 
capability, and enhance safety margins. (NASA Release 86-1 12) 

August  14: Members of  a House Space Subcommittee endorsed NASA‘s  $7.7 
billion budget  and  authorized  funds  for  a  new  shuttle and  President Ronald 
Reagan ordered that a replacement orbiter be built. The craft would take about 
seven years to construct, according to administration officials. The money for 
the project, earmarked to come from other space programs, would be allotted 
annually. The first payment was to be $200 million, and the rate of progress for 
building it depended on future financing. The President also restated his hopes 
for private industry to develop a capacity for launching commercial satellites. 
(W Times, Aug  14/86; Aug  15/86; B  Sun. Aug  14/86; Aug  15/86; NY   Times, 
Aug  15/86; C Trib, Aug  15/86; W Post, Aug  15/86; C SM ,  Aug  18/86) 

August  15:  In  a  statement  released  by  the  White  House  Press  Secretary, 
President Ronald Reagan  announced “two  steps  that will  ensure America’s 
leadership in space exploration and utilization.” His first target was the build- 
ing of a fourth Space Shuttle beginning in fiscal year 1987, deemed necessary 

61 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1986 

for  accomplishments  in  space  (especially  the  Space  Station).  He  also 
announced that NASA would ease out of  the business of  launching commer- 
cial  satellites  by  allowing  the  private  sector  to  assume  the  responsibility, 
which, he  said, would  eventually be  done  “better  and  cheaper.” NASA, he 
stressed, should focus solely on the exploration of  space. (The White House, 
Office of  the Press Secretary, Statement by  the President, Aug  15/86) 

August 18: A Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope for studying gamma ray sources 
in  the  universe  was  the  basis  for  a  $93,000  contract  awarded  to  Martin 
Marietta.  By  housing  the  telescope inside of  a  Space Shuttle external liquid 
hydrogen tank, which  is  normally  discarded just  before the  Shuttle achieves 
orbit, Martin Marietta deemed it possible that  the unit could also be  set  into 
orbit. Telescope components would be carried in the cargo bay  and assembled 
inside the emptied tank by  astronauts, who could enter via an existing 36-inch 
aft manhole port  or  through  tank modifications. The  satellite could  then  be 
pressurized to provide the needed environment for gamma ray detection tech- 
nique;  the  rays would be  converted to positrons and electrons that  travel  the 
length  of  the  telescope emitting light.  Gamma ray  astronomy is  essential to 
understanding the evolution of  stars and the universe and the physical process- 
es occurring in pulsars, quasars, and black holes.  (NASA Release 86-1 11) 

*  Astronaut Sally K. Ride was named Special Assistant to the Administrator for 
strategic planning, where she would be responsible for reviewing NASA‘s  goals 
and objectives for near-to-long-term planning. Ride was a mission specialist on 
two Space Shuttle flights and a member of  the Presidential Commission on the 
Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86-1 14) 

*  Elizabeth Dole predicted that U.S.  rocket companies would begin launching 
private satellites by  1989 and capture 50 percent of the international market. Her 
announcement came after President Ronald Reagan’s confirmation that NASA 
would no  longer handle the  business. Representatives from General Dynamics 
Corporation and Transpace Carriers, Inc. expressed hope that they would  soon 
announce launch contracts. Some satellite officials, however, were less enthusi- 
astic because NASA had  the  go-ahead to  launch at  least  some of  the 44 com- 
mercial satellites, leaving the agency with limited but palpable competition. In a 
related matter, NASA Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher said that a large por- 
tion of  future flights would be devoted to scientific missions and that he expect- 
ed  a  commercial launching industry to  supplement the  Shuttle.  (W Post, Aug 
19/86; W Times, Aug  19/86; IVY  Times, Aug  19/86; CSM ,  Aug 26/86) 

August  19: The X-Wing Rotor Systems Research Aircraft, which combines the 
hover  characteristics and  vertical  lift of  conventional helicopters and  the  high 
cruise speed of fixed-wing aircraft, was formally viewed. Engineers and develop- 
ers did not foresee the aircraft as a replacement for either fixed or rotary winged 
aircraft, but one that would serve unique purposes. (NASARelease 86-113) 

62  

AUGUST 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

*  Martin Marietta announced plans  to  enter  the  private  launching business 
with  its Titan class rockets. The Titan was  the largest of  all U .S .  expendable 
rockets, and spokesman Jack Boyd said that he hoped to market the launch for 
dual payloads. The corporation had previously  submitted a  formal request to 
the  Air  Force  for  use  of  its  launch  facilities  at  Cape  Canaveral,  Florida. 
(W Pos t ,  Aug 20186; LA  Times, Aug 20186) 

August  20:  NASA  announced  that  it  would  cease  implementation  of  work 
package realignment for a period of  up to 90 days while two teams composed 
of NASA personnel, Phase B contractors, and representatives from user groups 
and  international partners  reviewed Space Station design  and  work  package 
assignments and functions. The task force, headed by W.  Ray Hook, Manager, 
Space Station Office, would critically examine all aspects of  the current Space 
Station baseline configuration in terms of  the amount of  extravehicular activi- 
ty required for assembly and maintenance, launch capacity of  the Shuttle fleet, 
assembly  sequence of  the baseline configuration, resultant impact to  the  uti- 
lization of  the  station, potential  impact on  international partners, and  overall 
technical performance and  integrity  of  the  Station. The Executive Technical 
Committee,  headed  by  NASA  Associate  Administrator  Andrew  J.  Stofan, 
would approve the assumptions, engineering, and technical constraints identi- 
fied by  the task force and oversee their activities. (NASA Release 86-116) 

*  NASA announced that Lieutenant General Forrest S .  McCartney, on assign- 
ment from  the Air  Force, would  take  over  as Director of  the Kennedy Space 
Center in Florida, beginning October 1. McCartney succeeded Richard Smith, 
who retired on July 3 1. The press opined that the move would give the military 
greater control of  the  space program. McCartney’s past Air Force assignments 
include positions as satellite controller, as project officer in the Titan 3 program, 
in the Directorate of Space at USAF Headquarters, as monitor for satellite com- 
munications programs, and director of  range engineering at USAF Eastern Test 
Range. (NASA Release 86-117; W Post, Aug 21/86; NY Times, Aug 21/86) 

August 25: For the fourteenth time since August 1985, the launch of  a weather 
satellite that the Air Force had hoped to put into orbit was again postponed, this 
time because of  a leak of  liquid oxygen. Past delays were caused by  technical 
problems with  the Atlas-E booster rocket and its payload and  scheduling con- 
flicts. The satellite was next intended to be launched from Vandenberg Air Force 
Base in California on August 30. (LA Times, Aug 26/86; NY Times, Aug 26/86) 

August 27: A NASA Aries  sounding rocket was  destroyed by  a range  safety 
officer at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, 50 seconds after liftoff at 
an altitude of  77,000 feet, when  a problem in  the  vehicle’s guidance system 
was  discovered. The rocket carried a  2,300 pound  x-ray  telescope, designed 
to  study  distant  stellar  objects  emitting  soft  x-rays,  jointly  developed  by 

63  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1986 

Dr. Gordon Garmire of Pennsylvania State University and Drs. R. Novick and 
William  Hain-Min  Ku  of  Columbia  University.  (NASA  Release  86-119; 
W Pos t ,  Aug 28/86) 

The  Official Flight Kit  and  Personal Preference Kits that were recovered 
during the mission 5 1-L (Challenger) salvage operation were returned to  the 
institutions, organizations, and  families of  the  crew  they  were flown  for.  In 
addition, NASA planned to present to each state and territory one 5 1-L crew 
patch, one U.S.  flag, and the respective state or territory flag with the request 
that these items, which were flown, be displayed appropriately in memorial to 
the crew. (NASA Release 86-120; B Sun ,  Aug 28/86) 

The  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics and  Astronautics announced  that 
NASA’s budget should be doubled to ensure that the United States retains its 
lead in space programs. The Institute described the budget as “no growth” and 
said that  it would  “insure that  the U.S.  becomes and  remains  a  second-class 
power  in  space.” The  report  called  attention to  advancements made  by  the 
Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Japan, and also recommended attempting 
to  develop  a  greater  student  interest  in  space  science.  ( B  Sun,  Aug  28/86; 
W Times, Aug 28/86; C S M ,  Aug 28/86; P Inq, Aug 28/86) 

August  28:  The  U.S.  Marine  Corps  salvage  operation  for  the  51-L  Space 
Shuttle accident, which  involved the Freedom Star, the Liberty  Star, and the 
Independence vessels, came to  an end after a  seven-month effort. It was  the 
largest ocean recovery operation in history and at its peak  involved 22 ships 
and 6,000 personnel, as well as numerous aircraft. The search yielded 45 per- 
cent of the Challenger, 50 percent of  the external tank and solid rocket boost- 
ers, 95 percent of  the  Spartan-Halley spacecraft, 35  percent of  the Tracking 
and Data Relay Satellite, and 90 percent of  the Inertial Upper Stage. (NASA 
Release 86-121; C Trib, Aug 29/86; B  Sun, Aug 29/86; W Times, Aug 29/86; 
W Pos t ,  Aug 31/86) 

The Air Force was forced to destroy an unarmed Minuteman 3 ICBM over 
the  Pacific  Ocean  after  an  undisclosed  problem  developed during  its  30- 
minute  test  flight.  Since  February  1995,  ten  successful  minuteman  test 
launches had been done when another rocket had to be destroyed. (Ny Times, 
Aug 29/85; P Inq, Aug 29/86) 

August 29:  The UNISTICK control system, used in NASA’s lunar rover vehicle 
during the Apollo moon  landings, was  utilized as a  hand-operated device for 
steering, acceleration, and brake control in vehicles for handicapped drivers. The 
joystick type  system was  developed by  the  Johnson Engineering Corporation, 
which had made plans for commercial production. (NASA Release 86-123) 

64 

AUGUST 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

August  31:  The  Peoples Republic  of  China  announced that  it  was  nearing 
human  space  flight  and  was  in  the  process  of  choosing  astronauts  for  its 
planned Space Shuttle. It had built and was using an extensive training center 
and had solved many of  the problems space has to offer, such as maintaining 
life  support. No  date was  given as to when  a  craft would  be  built.  (W Pos t ,  
Sep 1/86; W Times, Sep 1/86) 

NASA said it had canceled 18 Space Shuttle missions over. a 5-year period 
for  Spacelab because of  the Challenger accident. The  agency  further stated 
that it planned to release a list of  other scrubbed missions. (W Pos t ,  Sep 1/86) 

65 

September 

September 3 :  NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that the Nation 
was in need on a fifth orbiter, the funding for which would need to come from 
private  financing. The  claim  by  NASA's  advisory council  that  the  United 
States was  approaching second-class status in  space, he  acknowledged, was 
"on  track".  Fletcher made a formal request on September 9, the same day that 
President  Ronald  Reagan  petitioned  Congress  for  the  initial  $272  million 
needed  to begin work on  a fourth Shuttle. (USA  Today, Sep 4/86; NY Times, 
Sep 9/86; B  Sun ,  Sep 10186) 

Because of  the Challenger accident and the absence of  any  Shuttle activi- 
ty,  NASA was  expected to  announce layoffs at  its Kennedy Space Center in 
Florida, where  800 to  1,000 employees would  lose  their jobs.  For  the  same 
reason, Martin Marietta said that 700 to  800 of  its workers would be laid off, 
by  October 3, from its  plant  that produced  Shuttle fuel  tanks.  (W Po s t ,   Sep 
4/86; NY  Times, Sep 5/86) 

September  4 :  Martin Marietta Corporation announced  that  it  had  signed an 
agreement  to  launch  a  communications satellite  for  Federal  Express  from 
Cape Canaveral, Florida, in  1989. Because the Titan 3 rocket to be used could 
deliver  payloads  up  to  32,000  pounds,  the  corporation  was  searching  for 
another  customer  to  join  the  launch.  Reagan  administration officials were 
quick  to  point  to  the  agreement as  the  birth  of  the  private  rocket  industry. 
(W Pos t ,  Sep 5/86; P  Inq, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 5/86) 

September  5 :   NASA  and  the  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics  planned  a  symposium  on   Quality  and  Productivity  for 
December. The event would focus on strategies for revitalizing organizations 
and  provide  a  forum  for  discussing  issues  involved  in  increasing national 
quality and productivity. The symposium would bring  together over 900 key 
executives from industry, government, and academia. (NASA anno) 

*  NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a 
Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads 
for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down 
and  intercept  the  other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manu- 
facturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to 
the  company's  entry  into  commercial launches. NASA had  two more  Delta 
rockets  in  its  inventory,  one  committed  to  a  U.S.  Government  weather 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1986 

satellite identical to the one lost in May  and the other to an Indonesian weather 
satellite. (NASA Release 86-32; WS J ,  Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; Ny Times, Sep 
6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86] 

NASA  extended  a  $1.32  billion  contract  to  Lockheed  Space Operations 
Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The 
contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by 
the  Challenger  accident;  the  changes  would  be  handled  through  contract 
amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five 
different firms  for  the  study  of  designs  for  second  generation  solid  rocket 
boosters. The companies were required only to  submit concepts for a newly 
designed rocket. (LA  Times, Sep 6/86; W S J ,  Sep 8/86) 

0  NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by  Space Services, 
Inc.,  a  new  rocket  company,  to  launch  its  Conestoga rocket. The  company 
planned to put  cremated remains of  10,000 people on  a  satellite that  was  to 
orbit the Earth. ( P  Znq, Sep 9/86) 

September  8:  Boeing Aerospace Company was  selected for  a one-year con- 
tract with  two one-year options, valued at  $1 million annually, to encourage 
U.S. firms, with private investment, to join  with NASA to explore the appli- 
cation and utilization of  new and innovative technologies for the mutual ben- 
efit of both parties. Issac T. Gillam, NASAAssistant Administrator, Office of 
Commercial  Programs,  noted,  “Use  of  the  microgravity  environment  of 
spaceflight for research leading to commercial development, production, and 
application  of  technologies and  materials needed  on  Earth  is  a  key  to  the 
Nation’s  future  in  the  world  economic market.”  Boeing,  familiar  with  the 
needs and procedures of  both the firm and NASA, would provide the techni- 
cal and business services necessary to help commercial users prepare propos- 
als to NASA and act as an intermediary. (NASA Release 86-127) 

September 9 :  The first conference on control/structures interaction technolo- 
gy  for  large, flexible spacecraft, sponsored by NASA and the Department of 
Defense, was  scheduled for November  18-20,1986.  (NASA anno) 

NASA announced the formation of  an operations task force for the Space 
Station, co-chaired by  Carl B.  Shelly and Dr. Peter T. Lyman. The task force 
was to explore alternative approaches to operating and managing a deployed 
Space Station that had to integrate a diverse set of U.S. and International hard- 
ware  elements  to  accommodate a  wide  range  of  tended  and  untended  user 
activities and  to  recommend an  effective concept  for  operating the  system. 
(NASA Release 86-129) 

68 

SEPTEMBER 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS ANI) AERONAUTICS 

September  10: Astronaut  Frederick  H.  Hauck,  former  Navy  Captain,  was 
appointed Acting  Associate Administrator  for  External  Relations.  He  was 
commander of  STS-5 1A and pilot for STS-7, as well  as a member of  the sup- 
port crew  for STS-1 and re-entry  capsule communicator on the support crew 
for STS-2. In  mid-October, Kenneth S. Pedersen would  become  the  Deputy 
Associate Administrator, upon his return  from Georgetown University. Since 
1979,  he  had  been  Director,  International  Affairs  Division  and  Assistant 
Associate Administrator for External Affairs. Hauck's  duties included policy 
level  management  and  direction  and  coordination of  the  Agency's  relation- 
ships with public and private organizations. (NASA Release 86-130) 

September  11 : COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue system, 
was  scheduled  to  monitor  the  around-the-world, non-stop  and  unrefueled 
flight of  the Rutan Voyager airplane. The SARSAT system uses four satellites, 
three from the Soviet Union and one from the United States, to locate downed 
aircraft  and  ships at  sea by  picking  up  their  emergency signals.  The Rutan 
Voyager aircraft, designed by  aeronautical engineer Burt Rutan and piloted by 
his  brother Dick  and  Jeana Yeager,  carried  a  l-1/2-pound prototype beacon 
that could transmit on a 406 Mhz  frequency for location determination and a 
121.5 Mhz  frequency on  which  rescue workers could hone  in.  The  signals 
could also be recorded by  a satellite if the aircraft was not in immediate range 
of  a ground station.  Since the  initiation  of  the  program  in  September 1982, 
606 lives had been saved, by  September 1986, in 25 1 emergencies worldwide. 
(NASA Release 86-132) 

September  15: Fairchild  Space  Company  proposed  a  lightweight refueling 
device to be  attached to  the  Space Shuttle's bay  that  could service satellites 
with  the  fuel required for keeping them  in orbit. The refueling device would 
extend the maximum life span for a satellite about 15 years. Fairchild was  in 
a race with Rockwell International and Martin Marietta for the lightest weight 
and best  functioning design; submission of  the designs to NASA was to be no 
later than November 7. (W Post, Sep 15/86) 

September  16:  NASA's  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL),  in  Pasadena, 
California,  studied a program that  would  send a nuclear-powered spacecraft 
hurling into deep  space uaveling 225,000 miles per  hour.  The mission, said 
JPL Director Lew Allen, could be  launched by  2005. The craft was expected 
to  travel  1,000 astronomical  units-1,000 
times  the  distance between  the 
Earth  and  Sun-sending  back  data for more  than  50 years.  The Voyagers  1 
and 2 spacecraft were expected to eventually reach deep space, but  their slow 
rates  of  speed, about  36,000 miles  per  hour,  would  put  any  data  gathering 
activity too far in the  future.  (LA Times, Sep 16/86) 

69 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1986 

The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a plan  for a new  orbiter 
that diverted $2.9 billion  in defense funds for a reserve to be used by  NASA. 
The proposal asked  the Navy  to reduce production of  the F/A18  fighter  and 
delay construction of  a Trident submarine, the Air Force to delay construction 
of  the C17 transport plane, the Army to buy fewer M1 tanks, and defense con- 
tractors  to  shoulder  the  burden  of  the  cost  of  tools  in  its  manufacturing. 
Although  the  plan  called  for NASA  to  oversee construction, the  Air  Force 
would  launch  and  operate the new  Shuttle.  (W Po s t ,   Sep  11/86; Sep  12/86; 
WS J ,  Sep 11/86; LA Times, Sep 17/86) 

September  17:  NASA  had  another  successful  launch;  a  25-year-old  rebuilt 
Atlas-E rocket, a one-time ICBM, carried a National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration  weather satellite,  NOAA-10,  into  orbit  from Vandenberg  Air 
Force  Base  in  California. NOAA  Director  Larry Heacock  said  that  the  polar 
orbiting  satellite would  render  “half  of  our  satellite program  restored  to  full 
working  capability.”  (Public Affairs Plan  For  NOAA-G  Launch; C  Trib, Sep 
18/86; W Post, Sep 18/86; W Times, Sep 18/86; NY Times, Sep 18/86) 

September 22 :  Six days  after launch and 24 hours after being put into opera- 
tion,  the  Search  and  Rescue  Satellite  Aided  Tracking  satellite  (SARSAT) 
picked up  its f i s t  distress signal from 4 downed Canadians in a remote area of 
Ontario. Rescue workers were easily able to locate the downed Cessna, and all 
four Canadians were taken to safety. Canada, France, the United States, and the 
former Soviet Union  all  shared in  the  search and  rescue program known  as 
COSPAS/SARSAT aboard the NOAA-10 satellite. (NASA Release 86-144) 

September  25: NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space 
Station that Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher predicted would be  finished 
by  1994. The new  design cut the amount of  space walks during construction 
in  half,  increased  the  amount  of  living  and  laboratory  space,  and  kept  all 
human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, 
Texas.  The  Space Station, according to  plans  for  assembly,  would  need  17 
Space Shuttle flights between  1993 and  1994. 

In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a June 4 recom- 
mendation, that  would  require NASA  to  seek  additional  manufacturers for 
solid  rocket boosters. The House  also voted to  authorize spending whatever 
money would be needed to begin construction of  a new  orbiter in fiscal year 
1987. (P Inq, Sep 26/86; WSJ, Sep 26/86; W Post, Sep 26/86; W Times, Sep 
26/86; NY Times, Sep 26/86) 

September 26 :  NASA‘s  Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, awarded 
a $6.6 million, four-year contract to General Electric for definition, modifica- 
tion, and test  of  propulsion systems for  supersonic short  takeoff  and vertical 

70 

SEPTEMBER 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

landing technology development. In  support of  next century military aircraft, 
design and modification of  a GE F-110 engine would focus on a  fan air 601- 
lection and valving system by taking compressed air from the engine and redi- 
recting it to vertical lift producing devices. (NASA Release 86-136) 

September  29:   Westinghouse  Electric  Corporation  and  Space  Industries 
Company announced their partnership to build a  $250 million, permanently 
orbiting space facility for scientists to perform research. The  14.5-foot-diam- 
eter  35-foot-long  cylinder  would  provide  a  “shirt  sleeve”  workplace  that 
would benefit a host of  industries. ( P  Inq, Sep 30/86) 

September 30:  NASA released transcriptions of  the pre-launch intercom tape 
of  the 51-L, Space Shuttle Challenger, for public consumption. The tape was 
about  an hour  long,  beginning when  the  crew  first entered  the  craft  to  two 
minutes and five seconds before lift-off. It contained nothing that was relevant 
to the accident and was not provided to the Presidential Commission in  sup- 
port  of  the  investigation. Because  the  intercom  channel provides  a  private 
mechanism for exchanging spontaneous comments and recording information 
of  a  personal  nature,  NASA  had  not  released  these  transcripts  previously. 
Because of  media  inquiries, however, the  pre-launch  tape  was  transcribed. 
(NASA Release 86-135; 86-137; 51-L Transcript Folder; NY  Times, Oct  1/86) 

October 

October I: The European Space Agency announced that it planned to fly four 
missions  relating  to  the  Space  Station  project.  The  maiden  flight  for  the 
Spaceplane Hermes, said Director General Dr. Reimer Lust, would be launched 
between 1996 and  1998, by  a new Ariane 5 rocket. (NY  Times, Oct 6/86) 

October  2:  NASA  announced  that  Aaron  Cohen  would  be  appointed  as 
Director of  the  Johnson Space Center  (JSC), Houston, Texas, and  that Jesse 
W.  Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that posi- 
tion  to  be  Special Assistant  to  the  General Manager, NASA Headquarters. 
Since 1962 Cohen had  served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then  in the 
Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of  the Engineering and Development 
Directorate, and  then  as overall Director of  Research and Engineering at the 
JSC. Moore came to NASA in  1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial 
Division,  Office  of  Space  Science. From  there  he  was  appointed Director 
of  the  Space  Flight  Division;  Director,  Earth  and  Planetary  Exploration 
Division;  and  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  and  acting  Associate 
Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86-138; NY Times, Oct 3/86) 

A decision was reached by  NASA to test the new booster rocket design for 
the  Shuttle fleet  by  firing  the  rockets  horizontally, and  not  vertically  as  the 
Rogers Commission had suggested. A NASA spokesman called this method of 
testing “the most demanding” and the one that “best satisfies the Commission’s 
intent.” (NY  Times, Oct 3/86; W Post, Oct 3/86; P  Inq, Oct 3/86) 

*  The  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  Successfully  tested  a  new  space  radio- 
astronomy technique, Very  Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI), that com- 
bined data from radio telescopes on the ground with data from an antenna on 
NASA’s  Tracking and  Data Relay  Satellite System. The  result  was  a  better 
resolution of  three quasars (among the most distant objects known and desig- 
nated  1730-130,  1741-038,  and  1510-089)  than  what  ground-based  radio 
studies at the same wavelength could provide. It was the first time an orbiting 
satellite had been used as a radio telescope. (NASA Release 86-140; W Post, 
Oct 3/86; LA  Times, Oct 3/86) 

October 3: NASA opted to use  the deactivated Minuteman facilities at Cape 
Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for long-term storage of debris recovered 
from the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Large concrete covers were to be 
placed  over  the  tubes  for  a  weather  tight  seal, concluding NASA’s  primary 
activities  related  to  the  analysis  and  disposition  of  recovered  hardware. 
(NASA Release 86-141) 

13 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER 1986 

NASA announced a seven-year  schedule of  tasks for the Shuttle fleet, and 
that  Shuttles  would  resume  flying  in  early  1988.  The  schedule  reflected 
President  Ronald  Reagan’s  directive  to  phase  out  commercial and  foreign 
launches, inasmuch as 24 of  the 44 contracts had been voided. This left only 
12 percent of the Shuttle missions devoted to commercial and foreign launch- 
es. An increase to 41 percent of  the payloads, as opposed to 31 percent, would 
be given to Department of Defense missions. The remaining 47 percent of the 
schedule was  reserved  for  the  space agency’s own missions,  33  percent for 
scientific studies and other needs, and  14 percent  for  the Space Station. The 
first year, said NASA, would  see only five flights; that number would, it was 
hoped,  increase to  16 flights per  year by  the  1990s. (W S J ,  Oct 6/86; W Pos t ,  
Oct 4/86; P Inq, Oct 4/86; B  Sun ,  Oct 4/86; Ny Ernes, Oct 4/86) 

October 7:  A House Science and Technology Committee issued a report stat- 
ing that Congress and the White House shared the blame for the launch sched- 
ule pressure that led to the January 28 Challenger accident. The report agreed 
with many of the findings laid out by the Rogers Commission, but differed by 
stating  that  the  accident  was  not  a  result  of  poor  communication  through 
NASA management, but “poor technical decision-making [by them] over sev- 
eral years.” The report concluded that NASA’s management lacked the exper- 
tise needed  to  operate the  Space Shuttle and warned  the Agency  not to  suc- 
cumb to  similar pressure concerning future flights. 

The  National Research  Council,  in  an  independent  study  requested  by 
Congress, urged NASA on October 9  to  limit its Shuttle flights in  the  1990s 
to  11 or  13, not the  16 annual flights proposed  by  NASA Administrator Dr. 
James C.  Fletcher.  (Investigation of  the  Challenger Accident:  Report  of  the 
Committee on Science and Technology, House of Representatives, Oct 29/68; 
W Post, Oct 8/86; Oct 10/86; W Times, Oct 8/86; NY Times, Oct 8/86) 

October  9 :  NASA and  the Federal Aviation Administration  signed  a memo- 
randum  of  agreement  for  a  five-year,  $24  million  research  project  to  study 
wind  shear detection and avoidance that would cover technology assessment, 
present  position  sensor  integration, hazard  characterization, pilot  factors  in 
wind  shear, and effects of  heavy rain. For pilot training, an environment was 
created that could mirror wind shear in a flight situation, thus providing a safe 
simulation for training. 

Microburst is the most dangerous type of wind shear for study. It is a small, 
intense down-draft, often accompanied by  heavy rain, which, upon striking the 
ground, spreads out into a circular vortex radiating an all directions and leaving 
little time for reaction by a pilot. Between  1965 and 1985, there were at least 26 
accidents and 3  incidents involving 626 fatalities and 235 injuries where wind 
shear was a direct cause or contributing factor. (NASA Release 86-143) 

14 

OCTOBER  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

October 12 :  NASA scientists were searching for ways to clean up the orbiting 
debris  left  from  nuclear powered  satellites  and  wreckage from  anti-satellite 
weapons testing. Considering the high speed of  orbiting craft, scientists report- 
ed  that  even  a  fleck  of  paint  could  be  dangerous, the  probable  culprit  that 
caused a cracked windshield in the seventh U.S.  Shuttle flight. Because slight- 
ly larger objects could result in catastrophic damage, the planned Space Station 
sacrificed some valuable weight to armor crew quarters. (W Times, Oct  13/86) 

October 13: A panel of  scientists and engineers, established at  the  behest of 
the  Rogers  Commission, endorsed NASA's  redesign  of  the  Shuttle's  solid 
rocket, but urged the Agency to increase its test schedule and to consider alter- 
native designs. NASA's  efforts had been limited by  confiiing any redesign to 
plans  that  incorporated  the  rocket  segments  already  ordered  before  the 
Challenger accident. Because the chosen design could prove  inadequate and 
because NASA would begin investigating second generation booster rockets, 
all  alternative  design  changes,  the  panel  concluded, were  in  need  of  study. 
(P  Znq, Oct  14/86; W Post, Oct  14/86; NY Times, Oct  14/86) 

October  14: NASA  announced  that  it  would  allow  private  contracts  for 
McDonnell Douglas,  builders  of  the  Delta  rocket,  and  General  Dynamics 
Corporation, builders  of  the Atlas Centaur, to market their products. The two 
companies were  also  granted  the  use  of  NASA  launch  facilities, with  the 
agreement to reimburse for any  costs  incurred. Talks with Transpace, a com- 
petitor  who had  hoped  to market the Delta  rocket, were ended. (W Post, Oct 
15/86; W Times, Oct  15/86; W S J ,  Oct  15/86) 

October 15: A balloon launched from the National Scientific Balloon Facility 
carried a telescope camera 22 miles up to  study gamma rays from stars, black 
holes, and other sources. It was considered the highest resolution telescope for 
that purpose. (W Times, Oct  16/86) 

October 16: NASA planned to proceed with construction of  a second horizon- 
tal test  stand for redesign and recertification of  the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket 
Motor (SRM) at the Morton Thiokol, Inc., Wasatch facility in Utah. The newer 
test stand would more closely simulate the stresses on the SRM during an actu- 
al  launch and ascent. (NASA Release 86-146; W Times, Oct  17/86) 

Communications Satellite Corporation announced that  it had  found a way 
to  double  the  life  of  an  orbiting  satellite  by  reducing  fuel  consumption. 
Satellites in a geosynchronous orbit appear stationary  over the Earth,  allow- 
ing  ground  stations to  communicate. Because of  gravitational  forces,  most 
coming from the moon, satellites tend to drift north or south to a degree where 
communication can be  lost. To  compensate for the  drift, rockets are  fired  to 
bring  a  satellite back  to  its  original  orbit.  Most  of  a  satellite's  fuel is  spent 

15 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER 1986 

firing its rockets. The new approach, elements of which are used by  the mili- 
tary, allows the  satellite to drift and be  tilted by  its rockets so that the anten- 
na’s “footprint” can be located. Ground stations receiving messages needed to 
undergo some modifications as well, however. (W Post, Oct  17/86; WSJ ,  Oct 
17/86; NY  Times, Oct  17/86) 

October 17: Using data collected between June  1978 and summer 1986, from 
NASA’s  costal zone color scanner on board the Nimbus-7  satellite, scientists 
from many  international institutions completed a  computer-generated color 
image that shows the distribution of microscopic plant life, phytoplankton, in 
surface waters over  the North Atlantic Ocean. This  image was  generated by 
measuring sunlight reflected from the sea surface at five wavelengths to deter- 
mine  ocean  color. The  most  striking feature  of  the  study for  understanding 
man’s role in carbon dioxide and other important cycles is the “spring bloom,” 
high phytoplankton concentration extending across the Atlantic and  into  the 
North Sea. (NASA Release 86-147) 

October 19: NASA released studies done by  Donald Heath, a scientist at the 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Greenbelt, Maryland,  which  reveal  that  the 
Earth’s ozone layer is thinning at a much higher rate than previously thought, 
about three  percent between  1978 and  1984. This  data was  gleaned from  a 
satellite orbiting 570 miles above the Earth. (C Trib, Oct 20/86; B  Sun, Oct 
20/86) 

October 20: Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he 
succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of  the 
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appoint- 
ment, Dr.  Myers  had  served as  an  at-large member  to  the NASA Advisory 
Council  and  before  that  as  president  and  chief  operating  officer  for  Jacobs 
Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary 
for the U .S .  Department of  Energy, vice-president of  Rockwell International, 
president  of  North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for  Manned 
Space  Flight,  NASA,  and  vice-president/program  manager  for  both 
the Apollo Command/Service Module  Program  and  the  Space  Shuttle Pro- 
gram at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86-149) 

October  21:  Several  senior  staff  changes  were made  at  the  Johnson  Space 
Center, Houston, Texas,  to  include:  Robert  C .  Goetz,  from  Deputy  Center 
Director  to  Technical  Assistant  to  the  Center  Director;  Clifford  E. 
Charlesworth, from Director of  Space Operations to  Special Assistant to  the 
Director;  Henry  0. Pohl,  from  Division Chief  to  Director  of  Engineering; 
William  R.  Kelly,  from  Director  of  Center  Support  to  Director, 
Administration;  Dr.  Wayne  R.  Young  was  named  Deputy  Director  for 
Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of  the Astronaut Office to 
Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86-151) 

16 

OCTOBER  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

*  Thomas L. Moser was named Director of the Space Station Program Office 
in Washington, D.C., a position created to conduct a long-range assessment of 
overall NASA capabilities  and  requirements.  Moser  began  his  career  with 
NASA  in  1963 as  a  mechanical  systems design  and  analysis engineer, and 
served  further  as  a  structural subsystem manager  for  the Apollo command 
module; project manager for the Shuttle Structures and Mechanics Division; 
head  of  structural design  and manager for  the  orbiter  structure and  thermal 
protection system; technical assistant to  the director and deputy manager for 
the  Orbiter  Project  Office;  Director  of  Engineering  at  the  Johnson  Space 
Center, Houston, Texas; and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight 
at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 86-152) 

October 22:  The Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, announced 
plans to build, and open by  1989, a $40 million visitor's  center near its com- 
plex. The center would  include a  large geodesic dome, two  high-tech movie 
theaters, a  simulated lunar landscape, a Mission Control Center simulation, 
and an exhibit hall featuring past achievements. (LA  Times, Oct 23/86) 

October 23 :  Joseph E Sutter was appointed chairman of  the NASAAerospace 
Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, 
in  1986, had a 41-year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, 
received numerous awards for development of jet-powered airliners, and was 
nominated  to  receive  the  Wright  Memorial  Trophy,  to  be  presented  in 
Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission 
on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86-154) 

October 27: NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new boost- 
er  rockets, and  beginning in  early  1987, four  full-scale  tests were  planned. 
John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight 
Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and 
that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86) 

October 28: In conjunction with its 1986 Small Business Innovation Research 
Program, NASA announced the selection of  172 research proposals from  144 
small firms for Phase  I Award Negotiations.  Selected from  1628 proposals, 
about one-half of the six-month, fixed-price contract efforts would be eligible 
for  Phase  11  follow-on  contracts  of  up  to  two  years.  This  program  was 
designed  to   stimulate  technological  innovation  in  the  private  sector  and 
strengthen small business participation. (NASA Release 86- 155) 

October 30: A study by  NASA  scientist Linwood B.  Callis concluded that the 
recently discovered thinning ozone layer might have been a result of  increased 
sunspot activity. Other scientists, however, were hesitant to accept the theory and 
remained steadfast in their belief that manmade chemicals were responsible for 
the depletion. (LA  Times, Oct 30/86; C Trib, Oct 31/86) 

77 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1986 

October 31 :   Parallel contracts for  the Advanced Stirling Conversion System 
were  awarded  by  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  to 
Mechanical Technical, Inc.  and Stirling Technology Company, for $253,385 
and $246,576, respectively. Research was to be funded by the Department of 
Energy, as ground application took precedence over any potential space uses. 
The  system would  include  a  free-piston Stirling engine, a  liquid-metal heat 
pipe  receiver, and  a  means  to  provide  power  to  a  utility  grid. The  external 
combustion engine has  only  two moving parts  and works by  heating air, o r  
another gas,  in  a  cylinder, with  a power  source at one end,  such  as focused 
solar energy, which expands the gas and moves the piston. Electric power to 
the utility grid would be transferred from the engine directly, via a linear alter- 
nator, or  indirectly with hydraulic output to a ground-based fluid pump cou- 
pled to a generator. (NASA Release 86-156) 

NASA  announced  plans  for  extending  operations  to  five  of  its  ground 
tracking  stations  located  at  Ascension  Island  in  the  southeast  Atlantic, 
Santiago  (Chili),  Guam,  Hawaii,  and   western  Australia.  Closing  dates  for 
these stations was moved up and was conditional on the February 1988 launch 
by  the Space Shuttle of  a  second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS); 
a TDRS  was  destroyed during  the  Challenger accident. Two TDRS's  could 
provide 85  percent coverage of  an orbiting spacecraft, compared with  the 50  
percent coverage provided by  ground stations. (NASA Release 86- 157) 

78  

November 

November  3: Several engineers at NASA recently questioned the proposal to 
add 100 bolts to a critical joint between the exhaust nozzle and the solid fuel 
segments in  the Shuttle booster rockets. The purpose of  the  fasteners was  to 
prevent  further  leakage of  hot  gases. Many  engineers, however,  saw  these 
holes as another way  for the gasses to escape because they were to be placed 
between inner and outer O-rings.  ( B  Sun, Nov  3/86; W Times, Nov 3/86) 

November  4 :  NASA officials announced that James Kingsbury,  engineering 
chief  at Marshall Space Flight  Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would  retire at 
the  end  of  November.  He  was  one  of  the  high  ranking  officials who  had 
worked on Challenger’s fatal rocket boosters. (USA  Today, Nov 5/86) 

November  5 :  In a part of NASA’s  strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely 
to flight, Dale D.  Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new manage- 
ment  and  operations structure for  the National Space Transportation System 
(NSTS  or  Space Shuttle program). The  changes were  aimed  at  establishing 
clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making 
processes. The management change, which also moved control of  the opera- 
tion  to Washington, D.C., was directed by  Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly 
and  followed  recommendations  made  by  the  House  of  Representatives 
Committee on Science and Technology and  the Presidential Commission on 
the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. 

As part of the restructuring, Amold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in  1959, 
was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were 
named his deputies. Truly stated that “the formation of  this program manage- 
ment organization is one of  the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last 
several months to  strengthen the Shuttle program and return  to flight status.” 
(NASA Release 86-159; W Post, Nov 6/86; IVY  Times, Nov 6/86) 

The United States and the European Space Agency were pursuing an agree- 
ment aimed at preventing Japan from dominating small satellite launches in 
the  same way  it  had  taken  over  the  small  car  industry.  The United  States 
hoped to reach assent with  the European Space Agency  concerning employ- 
ment  schedules,  insurance  standards  and  rates,  Government  subsidies  for 
research  and  development,  and  the  leasing  costs  of  Government-owned 
launch facilities to private f i i s .  (W Times, Nov 6/86) 

79 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTTCS 

NOVEMBER  1986 

November 7 :  NASA's  Ames Research Center dedicated the $2.3 million, 21,336- 
square-foot Fluid Mechanics Laboratory,  a  new  research  facility designed  to 
stimulate basic knowledge of  aerodynamic flows. The Laboratory could support 
multiple, simultaneous small-scale wind tunnel research while having full access 
to supercomputer resources. The laboratory would concentrate on vortex flows, 
a major factor in maneuverability and reduced drag by  aerodynamic means, for 
applications  ranging  from  developing  fuel-efficient  aircraft  to  low-speed 
research on the National Aero-Space Plane. (NASA Release 86-158) 

November  8 :  United  Technologies Corporation proposed  implementing the 
launch propulsion and guidance system used in NASA's  Space Shuttle for an 
untended  space  vehicle.  The  guidance  system,  they  averred,  would  allow 
untended rockets to deliver much heavier payloads at a cheaper cost than the 
Shuttle. Operation, they claimed, would begin about three years after NASA 
approved the plan.  (AP ,  Nov 8/86) 

November 10: Negotiators concluded an agreement between the United States 
and the Soviet Union for cooperation in scientific exploration, primarily focus- 
ing  on Mars  research, said officials from NASA. The  agreement,  said  other 
sources, made no commitment to a specific joint mission and could be signed 
at the upcoming summit meeting. (LA Times, Nov  11/86; C SM ,  Nov  11/86) 

NASAAdministrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the 
$10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year  1987, a 40 percent increase from fis- 
cal  year  1986. FIetcher,  according  to  NASA  officials, planned  to  meet  with 
President Rdnald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of 
years  of  underfunding. The  increased  funds  could  support  the  Civil  Space 
Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global 
Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military 
aeronautics research program;  and  the X-ray Astrophysics Facility, advanced 
technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 bil- 
lion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov  10,436) 

Technology developed by NASA for delivering a culture medium into the 
Martian soil was modified and implanted into a diabetic patient to serve as an 
insulin pump. Although other  insulin pump  implants have  been  used  in  the 
past,  the  space-age pump not  only  had  a  longer  life, but  also was program- 
mable after being implanted. (C  Tr ib ,  Nov 20/89) 

November I1 : A week-long exercise to upgrade the Search and Rescue Satellite 
System got underway at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
expanding coverage to the Southern Hemisphere. (LA Times, Nov  12/86) 

80 

NOVEMBER  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

November  13:  Martin Marietta,  in  competition for  a  contract  to  build  the 
Space  Station,  unveiled  a  full-scale model  depicting  its  plans  at  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center, Huntsville, Alabama.  The  intended  crew  module  has 
eight  sleeping  quarters, each  with  a  video  recorder  and  a  computer giving 
crew members direct access to home and the Space Station’s main computer. 
(C Trib, Nov  14/86) 

0  A $13 million Air Force satellite that had  served as a museum piece  at the 
Smithsonian Institution was  renamed  Polar BEAR  and  lifted into polar orbit 
aboard a Scout rocket, NASA’s smallest booster. The satellite’s mission was to 
photograph the Northern Lights and  sample electrical particles and  the mag- 
netic field in order to design better communications. (NY Times, Nov  15/86) 

The  third  stage  of  a  French  Ariane  rocket  that  had  been  launched  nine 
months earlier blew  up  on this date. U.S. officials asked Arianespace to look 
into the matter  in order to prevent a recurrence because orbiting debris posed 
an increased danger to other satellites. (W Times, Dec 2/86; W Po s t ,  Dec 2/86) 

November  14: President Ronald Reagan vetoed a NASA authorization bill on 
the grounds that  the bill’s attempt to create a National Space Council (NSC) 
interfered  with  Presidential  decision-making power.  Establishment  of  the 
NSC, he  said, would duplicate other interagencies while creating “unaccept- 
able interference with my discretion and flexibility.” The move did not affect 
NASA’s  budget.  (Memorandum Withholding Approval of  H.R.  5495,  Nov 
14/86; P  Inq, Nov  15/86; NY Times, Nov  15/86) 

November  18: For  the  first  time  since  the  Challenger  accident,  astronauts 
boarded  a  Space  Shuttle;  they  took  part  in  a  mock  countdown  at  Cape 
Canaveral, Florida,  on  the Atlantis.  Computers halted  the  drill  25  seconds 
short  of  simulated  engine  firing,  but  officials  deemed  the  test  successful. 
(W Post, Nov  19/86; NY Times, Nov  19/86) 

November  21 :   Leaders from the  11-member-nation European Space Agency 
(ESA) met with NASA officials to discuss their $2 billion contribution to the 
Space Station project and to seek a greater management role and benefits from 
it.  One European official noted,  “NASA must  realize  that  ESA is  a mature 
space  agency  that  can  manage  manned  space  flight  alone  if  necessary.” 
Although the  statement appeared to be a threat to withdraw, Richard Barnes, 
NASA Director of  International Affairs,  saw no  intent on  the part of  Europe 
to pull out. Leaders from both sides, however, agreed to a joint statement say- 
ing, “While recognizing that differences currently exist, Professor Luest and 
Dr.  Fletcher jointly  concluded that  these differences are not  irreconcilable.” 
(Ny Times, Nov 22/86; AvWk, Nov 24/86) 

81 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER  1986 

November 24: The results of  a  study conducted by  Geologists Dr.  Matthew 
Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert 
had  shifted  about  25  degrees  clockwise because  of  periodic,  violent earth- 
quakes some  16 to 20 million years  ago. Golombek reported that  “results of 
magnetic  studies of  volcanic  rocks  taken  from  19  sites  suggested  that  the 
movement was caused by shear (the Earth’s tectonic plates sliding past or over 
one  another)  from  the  Pacific  Plate  sliding  along  the  fault  past  the  North 
American  Plate.”  Magnetic  minerals  had  once  lined  up  parallel  with  the 
Earth’s magnetic field to the North, but the  study found minerals now point- 
ing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had 
rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86-160; LA Times, Nov  30/86) 

November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a  launch vehi- 
cle  that  fits  in  the  cargo bay  of  the  Space Shuttle, to  carry three probes  for 
planetary  missions. Despite earlier plans  for  alternative launch vehicles fol- 
lowing cancellation of  the  ShuttleKentaur Upper  Stage and  the  Challenger 
accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The 
probes  scheduled for  launch  in  1989 and  1990 included the Galileo,  a joint 
mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic 
fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus 
using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency 
designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first mis- 
sions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. 

The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific mis- 
sions.  They  were  to  have  launched  the  General  Dynamics  hydrogen-fueled 
Centaur  rockets,  but  the  highly  volatile boosters,  thought  possibly  unsafe  for 
human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of  its 
less  powerful  rocket,  the  Galileo needed  to  slingshot Venus  in  order  to  reach 
Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission 
was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86-161; NY Times, Nov 27/86) 

November 28: NASA’s  Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, 
awarded an $8.9 million five-year contract to Calspan Corporation for opera- 
tion  of  the  Marshall  Problem  Assessment  Center  and  the  Safety  Issue 
Assessment  Center.  Under  the  contract,  Calspan  would  receive  problem 
reports  and  safety  issues  from  the  contractors of  Marshall’s numerous pro- 
jects,  check the accuracy and completeness of  the reports, track the closeout 
of  proposed corrective actions, perform trend analysis and  special study into 
causes of problems and safety issues, and  appraise Marshall management on 
a daily basis.  (NASA Release 86-163) 

*  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center, Huntsville, Alabama,  announced  four  key 
appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet 

82 

NOVEMBER 1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

the  goal  of  getting  the  Space Shuttle back  to  full  operation. Dr.  Judson A. 
Lovingood  was  named  Associate  Director  for  Propulsion  Systems,  with 
responsibility  for  propulsion  projects  for  the  Space  Shuttle  Main  Engine, 
Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper 
stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with 
responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble 
Space  Telescope,  Advanced  X-Ray  Astrophysics  Facility,  and  Marshall 
Center-assigned  payloads  and  Spacelab  payload  integration.  John  P. 
McCartney was  named  Director, Propulsion Laboratory to  oversee research 
and development, engineering, and technical direction of  propulsion systems 
design,  and  analysis  related  to  launch  and  space  vehicles.  Dr.  George  E 
McDonough was named Director, Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with 
responsibility for research and development in  structural design and  analysis 
of  launch  and  space vehicles,  analysis dynamics behavior,  specification of 
dynamics-related design  criteria,  and  analysis of  atmospheric and  environ- 
mental processes. (NASA Release 86-164) 

A Tracking and Data Relay Satellite lost transmitting capability on an  S-  
band single-access antenna, SA-1, which provided voice and data links to low 
Earth-orbiting satellites, including the Shuttle. Services were switched to the 
remaining  antenna, SA-2,  and  little  or  no  data  loss  to  customers  occurred. 
(NASA Release 86-175) 

November 30: Astronaut Joe H. Engle retired from the United States Air Force 
as  a  colonel  and  resigned from NASA. After coming to NASA  in  1966, he 
commanded  Columbia  and  Discovery  flights  and  was  named  Deputy 
Associate  Administrator,  in  March  1982,  for  the  Office  of  Space  Flight. 
(NASA Release 86- 166; W Pos t ,  Dec 3/86) 

83 

December 

December 2: The Soviet Union recently had their version of  the Space Shuttle 
on a launch pad for tests. Photos of the incident were taken by a U.S.  satellite, 
and Government officials predicted that the country would begin human space 
flight in  1988. ( B  Sun, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86) 

Western European officials announced that the grounded Ariane rocket would 
not be ready to fly in February as was earlier hoped, adding to the strains fed by 
the West’s inability to launch. Modifications were recently approved for the rock- 
et’s faulty third stage; no new  flight date was given. (NY Times, Dec 3/86) 

December  3: McDonnell Douglas Astronautics was  selected for  negotiations 
leading to  the  award of  a  three-year contract, with  another three-year option, 
and a six-year price tag of $327 million, to perform Payload Ground Operations 
for Kennedy Space Center activities, both  in Florida and elsewhere inside and 
outside the United States. The work was being done by  five different contrac- 
tors, and NASA hoped to  obtain a  single, long-term contract. Responsibilities 
included  payload/cargo processing  and  integration,  Spacelab  operations  and 
integration,  support  to  experimental  integration activities, payload/cargo de- 
integration, NASANandenberg payload  operations, payload related  facilities, 
systems and  ground equipment operations, maintenance and  sustaining engi- 
neering, customer accommodation and launch-site support functions, and pay- 
load related support operations and services. (NASA Release 86-167) 

NASA participated in a study of controlled California forest fires in the San 
Gabriel mountains. The data  focused on the  global effects of  fire  on atmos- 
pheric  quality,  air  and  water  pollution,  erosion,  soil  depletion,  and  species 
extinction, a s  well as how  a fire could be handled more effectively. Scientists 
hoped to learn more about the effects of  fire on different biogenic gases, such 
as nitrogen oxide and methane hydrocarbons, and how changes in these gases 
affect  the  atmosphere, the  climate,  and  the  biosphere.  For  its  aerial  study, 
NASA flew a U-2  aircraft at 60,000 feet. A similar study on  the effects of  a 
nuclear winter was scheduled. (NASA Release 86-134; W Post, Dec 4/86) 

December  4 :  Remote  sensing via  satellite, combined with  a  computer tech- 
nology that could provide a  simulation of  the properties and processes in the 
soil, related Dr.  Elissa Levine, would  allow short-term prediction of  changes 
that occur in soils over a period of  time and the ability of  the  soil to support 
different types  of  plant  life. Advancing her  theory  at  an annual meeting  in 
New Orleans, Levine noted, “We can obtain critical environmental data which 

85 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1986 

will  help  us  understand  how  changes  brought  about  by  both  nature  and 
humankind will affect the total ecosystem over time.”  (NASARelease 86-170) 

The sixth FLTSATCOM communications satellite, F-7, was launched by an 
Atlas-Centaur rocket fired from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Department of 
Defense  added  this  satellite  to  their  communications network among naval 
aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, 
and  Presidential command networks. With  this  addition,  the  network  could 
provide 23 high frequency communication channels and one super high fre- 
quency  channel with  an  experimental Extra  High  Frequency package. The 
rocket had been grounded since May because of  previous NASA rocket fail- 
ures,  beginning  in  January  with  the  Challenger explosion, and  had  experi- 
enced eight delays before becoming NASA’s  third successful major flight of 
the year. (NASA Release 86- 165; W Post, Dec 5/86) 

A joint venture of Hughes Aircraft and RCA, the Earth Observation Satellite 
Company said that  the Reagan administration was withholding funds for  the 
Landsat program it managed. The $65 million not released was earmarked for 
new satellites, receiving stations, and support operations. The Landsat satellite 
was  launched in  1972 as  a  data  gathering operation for  the  government and 
public, but its monopoly for providing detailed services to companies and pri- 
vate individuals was broken by  the French satellite, SPOT. Elimination of  the 
program, warned a representative from the company, “would destroy the first 
U.S. attempt to commercialize space.” (W  Post, Dec 5/86) 

December  7:  NASA Administrator Dr. James C .  Fletcher, responding to nego- 
tiations with the White House budget office earlier in the week, warned that 
the planned $8 billion Space Station and a new  replacement Shuttle were in 
jeopardy of not meeting scheduled completions. He stated that the 35 percent 
increased budget for fiscal year  1987 was earmarked only for costs resulting 
from the Challenger crash and could not be benchmarked for future budgets. 
The strict budget, he added, could afford no new projects. 

In a  separate statement, Fletcher agreed to remove himself from any future 
Shuttle  booster rocket  contracts.  Senators called  for  an  investigation of  the 
contract awarded to Morton Thiokol in 1973, a decision in which Fletcher had 
considerable influence. (W Times, Dec 8/86; NY Times, Dec 8/86) 

December   8: NASA looked  ahead  to  the  launching of  four new  generation 
space observatories that promised a new era for astronomy. The Gamma Ray 
Observatory, providing a greater wavelength range, could determine if  arriv- 
ing gamma radiation originated in quasars and pulsars or from other sources. 
The  Advanced  X-Ray  Astrophysics  Facility  would  study  highly  energetic 
environments found  in  nearly  every  object  in  the  universe,  including stars, 

86 

DECEMBER  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

planets, neutron  stars, black holes, quasars, and cores of  active galaxies. The 
Space Infrared Telescope Facility could span the infrared part of the spectrum 
with  a  1000-fold  increase  in  sensitivity,  enabling  it  to  search  for  planets 
around stars. The Hubble Space Telescope, penetrating the universe in visible 
and ultraviolet light, was predicted to expand the observable universe by hun- 
dreds of  times,  see objects with ten times the clarity of  ground observatories, 
and detect objects 1,000 times dimmer than those observed by previous space- 
-  NASA’s  Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, developed an air- 
craft. (NASA Release 86-168) 
borne sensing device, an infrared radiometer, for measuring ocean surface tem- 
peratures  and  charting  temperature  and  wind  maps.  Tested  over  southern 
California’s ocean  aboard  the  Goodyear blimp  Columbia,  the  new  instrument 
was  unique in that  it could distinguish water temperature from the temperature 
of the air immediately above it. Researchers expected that the device could great- 
ly enhance satellite capability to monitor ocean weather. (NASARelease 86-169) 

0  Because  the  ocean surface mirrors  the  ocean floor  as  gravity pulls  water 
down  into depressions and forces it  up  around the mountains  (looking north 
from Puerto Rico, for example,  the ocean  surface drops nearly  60 feet), sci- 
entists at  the Goddard  Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,  employed 
satellites  to  map  the  ocean’s  floor.  Data  taken  from  altimeters  on  the 
Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and the Sea Satellite were used to 
generate a computer image of  the ocean surface, reflecting  the Earth’s struc- 
ture  underneath  the  water.  The  data,  said  Dr.  James  Marsh,  also  increased 
knowledge of  circulation and current systems. (NASA Release 86-172) 

December 9:  Forty-nine research proposals from 45  small, high technology 
U.S. firms, totaling about $23 million, were selected for immediate negotia- 
tion  of  Phase  I1  contract  awards. These  proposals were  chosen  from  100 
submitted to  the  Small Business Innovation Research program, a  program 
designed to  strengthen  the  role  of  small business participation  in  Federal 
research  and  development and  contribute to  the  growth  and  strength of  the 
private sector. (NASA Release 86-174) 

NASA signed an agreement with the M i e s o t a  Mining and Manufacturing 
Company  (3M) allowing the company to fly 62 materials processing experi- 
ments aboard future Shuttle flights. The microgravity experiments in organic 
and polymer science were  to  be  conducted  on  a  space-available  basis,  and 
NASA would have use  of  3M’s experiment equipment for  scientific investi- 
gations. (UP I ,  Dec 9/86) 

December  12: NASA scientists halted design of  additional shielding for two 
nuclear powered satellites. The shield, they ascertained, would help only dur- 

81 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1986 

ing  the  first  two minutes of  launch  and would  actually become  a  detriment 
after  that.  The  Interagency  Nuclear  Safety  Review  Panel  would  not  give 
launch approval for the scientific missions until 1999, but NASA officials saw 
a good chance for approval of  launching the radioisotope thermoelectric gen- 
erator powered satellites from the Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Dec  15/86) 

December  16: NASA's  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research Facility  in  Edwards, 
California, modified an F- 15 jet engine to increase its thrust by  10 percent and 
fuel savings by  5 to 7 percent. The modification grew out of  NASA's Highly 
Integrated  Digital  Electronic  Control  program  (HIDEC),  which  lessened 
unneeded  engine  stall  margins  (the  amount  that  engine  operating  pressure 
must be reduced to avoid staIl). The typical 25 percent stall margin allows for 
a contingency of  any of  the worst flight conditions and robs  15 percent of  an 
engine's usable power. The HIDEC created engine and flight control systems 
that communicate with each other; thus the engine adjusts itself according to 
actual flight, not assumed constants. (NASA Release 86-176) 

General Samuel Phillips presented  the  Report of  the NASA Management 
Study Group, for which he was Project Director, to Administrator Dr. James C. 
Fletcher. The report conducted an assessment of NASA practices in long-range 
and strategic planning, managing NASA programs, human resources and pro- 
curement, maintaining budget, financial and program control, and dealing with 
external affairs. The report went on to assess the effectiveness of NASA's  orga- 
nization and to make recommendations to improve agency practices and orga- 
nization. (Report of  the NASA Management Study Group, Dec  16/86) 

December  18: Senator Albert Gore made public his order for a congressional 
investigation into  whether NASA Administrator Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  had 
violated  conflict-of-interest  rules  when  he  awarded  Morton  Thiokol  the 
Shuttle booster contract in  1973. Dr.  Fletcher denied the charges, but  said he 
would  seriously consider removing himself  from  future booster rocket  con- 
tract decisions. (NY Times, Dec  19/86) 

December  19:  The  Pentagon, which  had  previously voiced objection to  the 
Space Station, asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and 
foreign participants because the Department of Defense (DoD) hoped to use 
the  orbiting  laboratory  for  some  of  its  Strategic Defense  Initiative experi- 
ments. The DoD envisioned only a very limited need for the facility, but other 
countries would no doubt vehemently object because the project was intend- 
ed only for peaceful purposes. (WSJ, Dec 22/86; N y  Times, Dec 20/86) 

December 23: Analysis conducted by the Office of Space Station in the areas 
of  Space Station management, use  of  expendable launch vehicles, and  cost 
impacts  resulting  from  design  changes  was  accepted  by  NASA.  Changes 

88 

DECEMBER  1986 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

included replacing the nodes and tunnels that connected pressurized modules 
with  larger resource nodes, revising the  assembly  sequence to provide early 
scientific return and reduce extravehicular activity, achieving an initial power 
level  of  37.5  kilowatts,  achieving permanent human capability, and  placing 
fixed  servicing  capabilities  closer  to  the  modules.  Realignment  of  certain 
work package responsibilities was also recommended; the total cost increase 
would be around $49 million. (NASA Release 86-180; 86-181) 

December 27: NASA ruled out  a  recommendation to  supplement its  Shuttle 
flights  with  untended  launch  vehicles  for  building  the  Space  Station. The 
combination would  accelerate  assembly  by  up  to  nine  months,  said  Space 
Station manager John Dunning, but  the time savings would be offset by  a  10 
to 40  percent  increase in  potentially dangerous space walks. Using  expend- 
able launch vehicles, he went on, would  also require an orbital maneuvering 
rocket to keep the parts  in place.  (AJY T imes ,  Dec 28/86) 

December  31: Astronaut  Paul  J.  Weitz  was  named  deputy  director  of  the 
Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include par- 
ticipation in  the first astronaut visit  to  the  Skylab, serving as commander of 
the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC 
Director.  (NASA Release 86-183) 

NASA extended a one-year, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. 
for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension 
called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the 
Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86-184) 

The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer 
Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to  a  10-year, $99 million con- 
tract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the person- 
nel,  equipment,  and  supplies  necessary  to  carry  out  duties  at  the  Slidell 
Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86- 185) 

During  1986: The  Space Shuttle Challenger accident and  the  subsequent 
investigation and  recovery activities headed  the  list of  prominent events for 
NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of  note: Voyager 
2  encountered the planet Uranus  in  January, continued with  its journey  and 
was  expected to  reach Neptune  by  1989. A new  baseline configuration was 
drafted for the Space Station-a  major milestone for development. NASA and 
the Department of  Defense initiated a joint Aero-Space Plane  research pro- 
gram concerning vehicles capable of  horizontal takeoff  and  landing, single- 
stage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the 
atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with 
the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard 

89 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1986 

the  Space Shuttle, and  Dr.  James  C .  Fletcher,  for  the  second time,  became 
Administrator of  NASA. 

Two  books  concerning NASA endeavors were published in  1986. Joseph 
P.  Allen’s Entering Space deals with an astronaut’s journey into the last fron- 
tier,  and William  E.  Burrows’ Deep   Black  looks  into  space  espionage  and 
national  security. (NASA Release 86- 177) 

90 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND AERONAUT ICS ,  1987 

January 

January  5: Jet  Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced 
that Richard P.  Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL‘s new support office 
in Washington, D.C.,  for NASA’s  Space Station Program. Laesar, who until 
his new  appointment had been  the manager of  the Voyager mission to outer 
planets,  would  also  serve  as  Director  of  the  Office  of  Requisitions  and 
Assessments for the Space Station. 

Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of  the Voyager mission. 
He  formerly was manager of JPL‘s  Systems Division. (Star-News, Jan 5/87) 

January 6: NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) 
satellite would  be  launched  on  a  Delta  expendable launch vehicle  in  early 
1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The 
change in  schedule was  caused by  the backlog of  science payloads awaiting 
launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of  the Challenger accident. Designed 
to  study the  “Big Bang”, COBE would be  launched into a  560-statute-mile, 
sun-synchronous  orbit  from  Vandenburg  Air  Force  Base  in  California. 
Because of  the  switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in  
weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet 
in  diameter.  Scaling down  the  spacecraft would  also require  that COBE be 
redesigned. (NASA Release 87-1) 

President Ronald Reagan’s proposed fiscal year  1987 budget called for  a 
12.7 percent  increase  in  NASA  funding.  The  intent  of  the  increase  in  the 
NASA budget was  to resume the  Space Shuttle flights, which had been  sus- 
pended  after  the  Challenger disaster. The President’s budget  also called for 
nearly  $767 million  for  work  on  the  crew-tended Space  Shuttle. No  funds 
were included for the untended rockets program, despite recommendations by 
several expert  panels  that NASA was  overdependent on  the  Space  Shuttle. 
(NY Times, Jan 6/87) 

January  9:  NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of  the first 
U.S.  space  flight  since  the  Challenger  accident.  Frederick  H.  Hauck  was 
selected  to  command  the  crew,  which  would  include  Air  Force  Colonel 
Richard 0. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George 
D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C.  Hilmers. For the  first time,  the crew 
would be  astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, 
named  acting  Associate  Administrator  of  NASA  Headquarters  O f i c e   of 

93 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1987 

External Affairs  in August  1986, led  the  successful  1984 Shuttle  recovery 
mission  that  returned  two  broken  communications  satellites  to  Earth. 
(Star-News, Jan  10/87) 

January  12 :   Representative Edward Boland  (Democrat-Massachusetts) and 
Senator  Jake  Gam  (Republican-Utah),  who  hold  leadership  positions  on 
House and Senate appropriations panels with NASA oversight, recommended 
that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two mem- 
bers of  Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled 
for  launch  sometime in  1989-90, to  a Titan 4  launch  in  1991. This  change 
would  permit  U .S .   planetary  satellites  Galileo,  Magellan,  and  the  Mars 
Observer to be launched in the 1989-90 period. NASA officials agreed to give 
serious consideration to  the change, but expressed fear that  another delay in 
the  Ulysses  launch,  originally  scheduled for  1983, might  damage NASA's 
relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan  12/87) 

January 14 :  A National Research Council panel, set up to monitor the Shuttle 
redesign, informed Administrator James C. Fletcher that NASA would not be 
able to make safety changes in time to meet the February 1988 target date for 
the  resumption  of  Shuttle  flights.  The  panel,  headed  by  retired Air  Force 
General Alton D. Slay, praised NASA's top-to-bottom review of  hundreds of 
items and procedures that could cause another disaster. It added, however, that 
several analyses of  possible equipment failure and  of  items considered criti- 
cal to safety would not be completed until the summer of  1987. The panel rec- 
ommended that NASA rank the most critical safety items, based on the like- 
lihood of  their failure, and that it closely link the engineering changes and the 
hazard analyses. (NY  Times, Jan  15/87; W Pos t ,  Jan  16/87; U P I ,  Jan  16/87) 

January  15: Dr.  Lew Allen, Director of  NASA's  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory 
(JPL),  announced that  construction of  JPL ' s   new  Microdevices Laboratory 
would  start  January  21,  1987. On  the  same  day,  NASA Administrator Dr. 
James  C.  Fletcher  and  Dr.  Marvin  Goldberger, President  of  the  California 
Institute of Technology, signed a memorandum of  understanding for a Center 
for Space Microelectronics Technology to be established at JPL. The Center 
would  be  the  successor  to  the  Advanced  Microelectronics Program  estab- 
lished at JPL in 1983 and headed by Dr. Carl Kukkonen. The Center for Space 
Microelectronics Technology  will  be  governed  by  a  Board  of  Governors 
chaired by  Dr.  Lew Allen.  Dr.  Carl  Kukkonen was  named  Center Director. 
(NASA Release 87-3; Star-News, Jan 20187; The Foothill Leader, Jan 21/87) 

January 16: NASA announced plans to launch two around-the-world balloon 
flights to examine newly  discovered high energy x-ray microflares and  flare 
plasmas being emitted by  the  Sun. The helium-filled, 28 rnillion-cubic-foot- 
volume balloons are expected to be  launched from Alice Springs, Australia, 

94 

JANUARY 1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

during  January  and  February  1987. Taller  than  the Washington Monument, 
and  carrying payloads weighing 3,000 pounds, the balloons are expected to 
reach an altitude of  130,000 feet. They would circle the Earth in  12 to  18 days 
and return to their launch site. (NASA Release 87-4) 

January 20: NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Rear Admiral 
Richard H. Truly, announced that more than 400 modifications were planned 
for  the Space Shuttle program. Speaking at a news  conference called to dis- 
cuss  NASA’s  recovery  from  the  effects  of  the  Challenger  accident, which 
killed all seven Shuttle crew members, Truly emphasized the Agency’s com- 
mitment to “a true enhancement to safety.” Included among the safety modi- 
fications listed were better brakes, more efficient engines, and eventually an 
escape  system  for  the  Shuttle  crew.  However,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the 
escape system probably would not be ready for the next planned Shuttle flight 
in February 1988. (UP I ,  Jan 20187; LA  Times, Jan 21/87; NY  Times, Jan 21/87; 
P  Znq, Jan 21/87; W Post, Jan 21/87) 
January 21: The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the 
McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled 
on  the  existing rockets  used  by  NASA,  the  Delta  2  medium  rocket  boosters 
would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UP I ,  
Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY  Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87) 

January 22:  A number of  senators expressed reservations that Morton Thiokol, 
Inc. remained the sole maker of  NASA’s  Shuttle booster rocket. Members of  the 
Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space complained during the 
hearing that, despite the fact that Congress had instructed NASA to employ other 
industries to  redesign  Shuttle rockets,  the  Agency  appeared  locked  into  using 
rockets designed by Morton Thiokol, Inc. (M  Times, Jan 23/87; WSJ ,  Jan 23/87) 

January 28: The first anniversary of  the Challenger disaster was remembered 
by the Nation with a series of memorial services and ceremonies. Speaking at 
a  Challenger  accident commemoration, NASA Administrator Dr.  James  C. 
Fletcher stated that the terrible tragedy only reaffirmed NASA’s  “commitment 
to move  the Nation  forward into a new  era of  space flight, one more  stable, 
more reliable and safer than before.” The Challenger crew, he added, “would 
be pleased to know  that the NASA family and  the Nation are carrying on  in 
that spirit.” President Ronald Reagan, in a satellite message to NASA Centers, 
also  saluted the  seven “magnificent” Challenger astronauts. (NY Times, Jan 
29/87; W Post, Jan 29/87; W Times, Jan 29/87) 

January 29: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, 
the Inspector of  the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permit- 
ting  the United  States  the use  of  Morocco’s Ben  Guerir Air Force Base  for 

95 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAU’IlCS 

JANUARY 1987 

emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such 
an emergency in February  1988. (NASA Release  87-6) 

NASA announced  that its numerical  aerodynamic simulation  (NAS) com- 
puter system would become operational in early March. Considered the most 
powerful computing system in the world, the NAS would help ensure contin- 
ued  national  preeminence in aeronautical research. According to NASA,  the 
research programs  in  which NAS would play  a crucial role include work on 
the  National  Aero-Space  Plane  Program  and  a  jo in t   Department  of 
DefensemASA program  in  aerospace  vehicle technologies  and  capabilities, 
including  horizontal  takeoff  and  landing.  Development  of  new  technology 
and  validation  program  in  this  field might make  possible  a wide variety  of 
operational aerospace  vehicles, ranging  from  space launch  vehicles  to  long- 
range  air defense interceptors and hypersonic transports. 

NASA emphasized  that  NAS  is  not  a  set  of  computer  hardware,  but  an 
evolving capability. It is to be an array of  250 off-site scientists and engineers 
at  27  locations,  accessing  the  system  via  satellite or  high  speed  terrestrial 
lines. It is to  be  driven by  the Cray 2 supercomputer, which has an enormous 
256-million-word  internal memory,  16 times  larger  than  those  of  previous 
computers. (NASA Release 87-7) 

*  China signed  a contract with  Teresat, Inc. of  New York  to  launch  its first 
satellite for  an American fm. The contract called  for  a Teresat Westar-VIS 
satellite to  be  launched  into  orbit  aboard  a  Chinese-made rocket  in  the  first 
half  of  1988. (LA  Times, Jan 29/87). 

During  January:  The American journal Aviation Week &  Space  Technology 
reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by 
Soviet  authorities. The  magazine  claimed  that  on  January  29  the  Soviets 
deliberately destroyed  a Cosmos  1,8 13 military reconnaissance  satellite they 
had  launched on  January  15,  1987. When  the  satellite malfunctioned  upon 
reentry, its self-destruction system was  activated to prevent it from striking a 
populated  area or from falling into western hands. 

Also  according to this source, a Soviet SL- 12 Proton booster rocket failed 
during launching on January 30,  1987. Its fourth and  uppermost stage failed 
to  ignite and the debris from the  rocket  and  communications satellite it  car- 
ried fell out of  orbit a day later. (C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87) 

96 

February 

February 3: NASA issued a request for proposal to U.S.  industry for a program 
support  contractor  to  assist  the  NASA  Space  Station  Program  Office,  in 
Washington, D.C.,  with development of the Space Station. (NASA Release 87-8) 

NASA officials declared that Space Station deployment, scheduled for 1994, 
could be delayed up  to  two years or  the Station could be  scaled down. NASA 
Administrator James  C. Fletcher  said  that  the  cost of  the  Space Station, once 
estimated at $8 billion, was  now  estimated at  between  $13 and  $14.5 billion. 
Fletcher, who  said that  the United States was  lagging behind the Soviet Union 
in human  space flight, predicted  that  a U.S.  crew-tended Space Station would 
help the country catch up to the Soviets. Testifying before the Senate Commerce 
Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Dr. Fletcher stressed that the 
Space Station program  retained  high  priority  with  the Reagan  administration. 
(LA Times, Feb 4/87; USA Today, Feb 4/87; NY  Times, Feb 518) 

February  4:  NASA's  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  (JPL)  selected  the  Bendix 
Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a 
contract for  continuation of  maintenance  and  operations of  the NASA Deep 
Space Network  (DSN). The DSN provides  tracking  and  data acquisition for 
planetary  space flight  missions  and  for  NASA's  crew-tended  and  untended 
space programs. The five-year contract, with  an option €or an additional five 
years, was expected to begin April 2,  1987. (NASA Release 87-9) 

February  5 :   Jesse  W.  Moore  resigned  from  NASA,  effective February  8 ,  
1987. Moore joined  NASA  in  1966.  Among  the  varied  positions  he  held 
included  Deputy  Director  of  the  Solar Terrestrial Division,  Office  of  Space 
Science  (1978-1979);  Director  of  Space  Flight  Division  (1979-1981); 
Director of  the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (1981-1983);  Acting 
Associate  Administrator  of  Space  Flight  (April  1984-August  1984);  and 
Associate  Administrator  of  Space Flight  (August  1984-January  1986). He 
was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in 
January  1986, and  in  October 1986 he  moved  to Headquarters as  a  Special 
Assistant  to  the  Associate  Administrator  for  Policy  and  Planning.  (NASA 
Release 87-10; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Pos t ,  Feb 6/87) 

NASA announced  the  realignment  of  external communications  functions 
within  the  Office  of  External  Relations  and  the  new  Office  of 
Communications. Both would  be  headed  by  an  associate administrator. The 

91 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1987 

realignment was  in  response  to  a  NASA management  study  conducted by 
General Samuel C.  Phillips. (NASA Release 87-1 1) 

February 6 :  Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehi- 
cle,  Soyuz TM-2,  toward  a  rendezvous with  the  orbiting Mir  space  station. 
This was the f i s t  crew-tended Soviet space launch since July  1986 and only 
the  second launch in  the Russian human space program to  be  shown live on 
Soviet television. Western experts  speculated that  the  two  astronauts would 
aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri 
Romanenko and  flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin 
link up operations with the Mir  space station on February 7.  (AT T imes ,  Feb 
6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C  Trib, Feb 7/87) 

February 8: The Chr is t ian  Science Monitor cited Soviet news agency TASS 
as reporting that the two Soviet cosmonauts aboard Soyuz TM-2 had success- 
fully linked up with the Soviet space station Mir.  (CSM ,  Feb 9/87) 

February 11 : The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in  18 months, suc- 
cessfully  launched  a  Titan  3B  rocket  from  Vandenberg Air  Force  Base  in 
California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the 
Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as “the first 
major  step”  in  the  recovery  of  the  American  space  program  after  the 
Challenger accident in  January  1986. (LA  T imes ,  Feb  13/87; Ny T imes ,  Feb 
13/87; W Pos t ,  Feb  13/87) 

February  12:  The  United  States  and  potential  foreign  partners  agreed  to 
resume negotiations aimed at building a  Space Station in  the  1990s. After a 
two-day  meeting  between  representatives from  the  United  States, Canada, 
Japan, and the 11-nation European Space Agency, agreement was reached that 
the project would remain a civilian endeavor. NASA negotiators emphasized, 
however, that they saw no conflict between the “peaceful purposes” of  Space 
Station  and  potential  use  by  the  Pentagon  for  “nonaggressive” activities. 
(M  T imes ,  Feb  13/87; USA Today, Feb  13/87) 

February   17:  NASA  and  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration  (NOAA)  announced  that  a  Geostationary  Operational 
Environmental  Satellite  (GOES-H)  would  be  launched  sometime  after 
February 23,1987. The satellite would provide cloud cover images and atmos- 
pheric temperature profiles, collect space environment data, and conduct an 
experiment  for  detecting  emergency distress  signals on  the  ground  from  a 
geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 87- 14) 

February 19: Astronomer Carl  Sagan told  the  Senate Commerce committee 
that  a U.S. Mars mission would be  the best cure for USA’s  “sagging” space 

98 

FEBRUARY  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

program.  According  to  Sagan,  some  20,000 U.S.  scientists have  written  to 
Congress urging  a  Mars  mission. He  recommended that  NASA  consider  a 
possible joint mission with the Soviet Union, which had stepped up efforts to 
land on Mars. (NY Times, Feb 20187; U SA  Today, Feb 20187) 

February 20: Robert Love11 and Fred Flatow, NASA search and rescue mis- 
sion managers, were  awarded the Yuri Gagarin medal by  a  space delegation 
from the  Soviet Union. The  awards were  in  recognition of  their outstanding 
contribution  to  COSPAS/SARSAT, an  international search  and  rescue  pro- 
gram that uses satellites to locate people in distress. (NASA Release 87-17) 

February 24 :  Dr. Leonard A.  Fisk, Vice President for Research and Financial 
Affairs  at  the  University  of  New  Hampshire, was  named  NASA Associate 
Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective April 6, 1987. He 
replaced Dr. Burton I. Edelson. (NASA Release 87- 18) 

NASA  announced  that  Morton  Thiokol,  Inc.,  the  builder  of  the  booster 
rocket that caused the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, voluntarily accept- 
ed a $10 million reduction in fees and agreed to take no profit from $409 mil- 
lion worth of work required to fix future rockets. The company also agreed to 
replace the rockets lost in the accident. The agreement between Thiokol and 
NASA negated any  lawsuits growing out  of  the  January  28,  1986, accident 
that  destroyed the  Shuttle and killed  the  crew of  seven.  (C Trib, Feb 25/87; 
W Post, Feb 25/87; B  Sun, Feb 25/87; W S J ,  Feb 25/87) 

February 25: A Soviet space vehicle, Progress-27, launched in January 1987 
to  bring  supplies  to  the  Mir  space  station, disintegrated as  it  reentered  the 
Earth’s upper atmosphere. ( P  Znq, Feb 27/87) 

February  26:  NASA  launched  a  GOES-7 weather  satellite  aboard  a  Delta 
rocket. The satellite was first placed into an elliptical orbit. Ground command 
was expected to arrest the satellite in a stationary orbit 22,400 miles above the 
Atlantic Ocean by firing a booster rocket. GOES-7 joined the already orbiting 
GOES-6 weather satellite to provide weather  information and patterns in  an 
area stretching from the eastern Atlantic to the mid-Pacific Ocean. ( B  Sun ,  Feb 
27/87; P  Inq, Feb 27/87; W Times, Feb 27/87) 

February  27: NASA reported that  an  18-inch telescope, aboard a nine-year- 
old orbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (NE) satellite, was monitoring 
the intense emissions of ultraviolet radiation from recently discovered super- 
nova  in  the  Large Magellanic Cloud,  a  neighbor galaxy of  our  own Milky 
Way.  (NASA Release 87-20) 

99 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1987 

During  February:  NASA's  latest  space  technology  led  to  new  discoveries 
about  ancient  civilizations.  Using  Earth  Observation  Satellite  and  Earth 
Resources Observation Systems imagery and the Landsat 5 satellite, which has 
an advanced multispectral sensor Thematic Mapper, NASA's Ames Research 
Center scientists made first attempts to study Maya civilization settlement pat- 
terns, environmental settings, and natural resource use. (NASA Release 87-15) 

100 

March 

March  1 : NASA and  the ESA announced solicitation of  scientific investiga- 
tion  from  the  United  States,  European  Space Agency  member  states,  and 
Canada,  for  two  missions.  The  four  spacecraft CLUSTER  mission  would 
study  basic  plasma processes  in  the  Earth's  magnetosphere.  The  Solar  and 
Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission consisted of a spacecraft studying 
solar processes and solar-terrestrial relationships. (NASA Release 87-22) 

March  4 :  NASA declared the Pioneer 9 spacecraft officially dead  after a  final 
attempt to contact it failed. The last signal was received on May  18,1983. Pioneer 
9 had orbited the Sun for 18 years.  (NASA Release 87-23; W Times, Mar 5/87) 

March 5 :  Willis H.  Shapley was selected for NASA's newly established posi- 
tion  of  Associate  Deputy Administrator (Policy), effective March  9 ,   1987. 
Shapley held the third ranking position, created in response to the reorganiza- 
tion recommended by  the NASA Management Study Group. 

Shapley began Government service in  1942 with the Bureau of the Budget, 
Executive  Office  of  the  President,  where  he  specialized  in  research  and 
development, national defense, and  space programs. From  1965 to  1975, he 
was NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator. In July  1975 he was the senior 
NASA representative in the Soviet Union during the joint US-USSR  Apollo- 
Soyuz  space  mission.  Shapley  retired  from  NASA  in  1975  to  become  a 
consultant  to  a  number  of  private  institutions  and  Government  agencies, 
including NASA.  (NASA Release 87-24) 

NASA announced that  beginning March  14,  1987, the  Pioneer  12 space- 
craft, orbiting Planet Venus, would study the newly discovered Comet Wilson. 
The  Comet  was  to  be  tracked  by  controllers  at  NASA's  Ames  Research 
Center, Mountain View, California, from March 14-21,  and again from March 
3 1 to April 30. (NASA Release 87-25) 

March  6 :  James  Elliott,  a  spokesman  for  NASA's  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 
20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying 
an  upper-atmosphere plasma  experiment,  detonated when  its  second  stage 
malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87) 

101 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1981 

March  9:  NASA  announced  that  its  Numerical Aerodynamic  Simulation 
(NAS) supercomputer system, the world’s most advanced,  had become fully 
operational. The NAS  system will make possible a wide range of  aerospace 
vehicle  technologies and  capabilities and  will  ensure  the  Nation’s  preemi- 
nence  in  aeronautical research. By  the  end  of  1987, the  operational system 
was expected to be capable of  a billion calculations per second, and within a 
decade  its  capability  should  reach  10  billion  calculations per  second. The 
90,000-square-foot NAS building, located at NASA’s Ames Research Center, 
Mountain View, California, and containing a  15,000-square-foot central com- 
puter room was equipped with an array of  systems for  the optimal function- 
ing  of  the  computers.  (NASA Release  87-21; NY Times, Mar  10/87; CSM ,  
Mar  10/87; S F   Chron, Mar  10187) 

*  NASAAdministrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain 
and  strengthen  the  existing  Space  Shuttle  processing  arrangement  at  the 
Kennedy  Space  Center,  in  Florida,  with  Lockheed  Space  Operations 
Company, Titusville, Florida. The  decision was  recommended  by  a  senior 
review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. 
The group was  chaired by  Roy  S .  Estess, Deputy Director, National  Space 
Technology  Laboratories,  Mississippi,  and  included  representatives  from 
NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 87-26) 

Aviation  Week  &  Space  Technology  reported  that  the  Space Goals Task 
Force of  the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew- tended mission 
to  Mars.  The  task  force,  headed  by  former  Apollo  11  astronaut  Michael 
Collins, stressed that  the  development and  operation of  a U.S./international 
Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of  Mars and beyond. It also 
stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and 
develop expendable launch vehicles. 

The  task  force  listed  the  following major  steps required for  a  successful 
Mars mission:  an  aggressive exploration of  Mars  to  support a  longer-term, 
crew-tended mission  to  Mars,  buildup  of  the  technological base  needed  to 
support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the pro- 
ject, and an assessment of  whether another crewed mission to the Moon was 
needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk ,  Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar  18/87) 

March  I O :   NASA announced formation of  a  group of  scientists to  examine 
potential Space Station activities, with  the aim of  reducing the time between 
experiment  concept  development  and  publishable  results.  Chaired  by  Dr. 
David C. Black, NASA Headquarters Space Station chief  scientist, the group 
was made up of  scientists and researchers from NASA, the National Science 
Foundation,  the  National  Institutes  of  Health,  universities,  and  the  private 
sector. (NASA Release 87-27) 

102 

MARCH  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

March  11:  NASA  selected  General  Electric  Company,  Space  Systems 
Division,  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and  Harris Corporation, Government 
Communication Systems Division, Melbourne, Florida, to negotiate contracts 
for  Phase  I  system  design  studies  of  the  second Tracking  and  Data  Relay 
Satellite System (TDRSS) ground terminal.  (NASA Release 87-29) 

March  12: The NASAAdvisory Council recommended that the space agency 
acquire a diversified fleet of  expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) to preserve the 
Space Shuttle for missions requiring unique capabilities. (NASA Release 87-30) 

A  spokesman at  the  NASA  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  said  that  NASA’s 
Deep  Space  Network  station  near  Canberra,  Australia,  configured  with 
Australia’s Parkes Radio Observatory, was  observing radio wave  emissions 
from Supernova 1987a, first detected by  astronomers in the large Magellanic 
cloud on February 24,  1987. (NASA Release 87-31) 

March  13: NASA announced that  its  fiscal year  1988 budget request did not 
include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under 
pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 
million for the launching of  the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. 
The Agency  said it planned to  launch the  spacecraft in  1992 from  the  Space 
Shuttle. (NASA Release 87-32; LA Times, Mar  14/87; NY   Times, Mar  15/87) 

*  NASA  scientists successfully  ordered the  Voyager  2  space probe, which 
was  some 2 billion miles  away  from Earth, to  f i e  its  thrusters changing the 
spacecraft’s course for its 1989 encounter with the planet Neptune. The course 
was altered so that Voyager  2, launched on August 20,  1977, would avoid the 
debris that might be orbiting the planet. The spacecraft was expected to arrive 
on August 24,  1989, within 3,100 miles of  cloud tops above Neptune’s north 
pole and was expected to pass within 25,000 miles of Neptune’s moon Triton. 
( B  Sun ,  Mar 14/87; P  Znq, Mar  15/87) 

March 14: Pioneer 12, which had been orbiting the planet Venus, was direct- 
ed,  by  controllers  at  NASA’s  Ames  Research  Center,  Mountain  View, 
California, to begin tracking the newly discovered Comet Wilson. This would 
be  the  fourth  time  that  Pioneer  2,  orbiting  Venus  since  1986, interrupted 
observations of  the planet to  study a  comet passing Venus on  its way  to  the 
Sun. (LA Times, Mar  15/87) 

March  17:  NASA  began  a  three-day  ground  system  test  of  the  scientific 
instruments to be carried on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). The five sci- 
entific instruments to be carried aboard the HST were the wide-field and plan- 
etary camera, the high resolution spectrograph, the faint object spectrograph, 
the high speed photometer, and a faint object camera. (NASA Release 87-35) 

103 

ASTRONAUTICS AM) AERONAUTICS 

MARCH 1987 

NASA announced that it was  studying four major initiatives to help deter- 
mine the next major goal in space. The initiatives emerged from proposals by 
NASA’s  Strategic Planning Group  and  by  a  group headed by  astronaut Dr. 
Sally Ride. The four initiatives were a considerably expanded study of  Earth 
systems, an enhanced program of  solar system exploration, establishment of 
a permanent scientific base on the moon, and human exploration of Mars pre- 
ceded  by  untended  missions.  At  the  same  time,  the  independent  NASA 
Advisory Council recommended that exploration of Mars be the Nation’s pri- 
mary goal in space. (NASA Release 87-36) 

March 18: NASA announced that it would begin, in late March, a new aircraft 
flight research program at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, in Edwards, 
California. The  aim  of  the program was  the  study of  super maneuverability 
and prevention of dangerous spins and related crashes. (NASA Release 87-37) 

NASA announced that  scientists and  researchers from  the  Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory, Pasadena, California, would conduct, on March 23-26,  the first in 
a series of tests related to development of the mobile satellite communications 
system. The  test  in  Erie,  Colorado, would  be  part  of  the  Mobile  Satellite 
Experiment program. (NASA Release 87-38) 

March  19:  NASA  selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Silver  Spring, 
Maryland, to negotiate a contract for  systems, engineering, and support ser- 
vices.  The  services  provided  by  the  contract  would  be  in  support  of  the 
Mission  Operations  and  Data  Systems  Directorate, Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 87-39) 

March  20:  NASA  announced  that  it  would  launch  a  seventh Department  of 
Defense Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft from the Cape Canaveral Air 
Force Station, in Florida, no earlier than March 26,1987. (NASARelease 87-40) 

NASA launched a Palapa-B2P, an Indonesian communications satellite, on 
a Delta  182 from Launch Complex  17B, Eastern Space and Missile Center, 
Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida. The satellite, intended to serve 
Indonesia’s  13,677 islands, was  placed  into  an  elliptical orbit ranging from 
about  115 miles  to  23,000 miles  above the Earth. The Palapa-B2P satellite, 
built by  Hughes Aircraft Company, was to  be used  as a backup for  a  failing 
relay station already in orbit. (NY  Times, Mar 21/87; B Sun, Mar 21/87; P Inq, 
Mar 21/87; Ny Times, Mar 22/87) 

March  23:  NASA  Administrator Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  and  Chairman  of 
France’s  Centre National  d’Etudes Spatiales Jacques-Louis  Lions  signed  a 
memorandum  of  understanding  for  a  joint  satellite oceanographic mission. 
The mission, called TOPEXPOSEIDON, which would chart ocean topogra- 

104 

MARCH 1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

phy and observe ocean circulation on a global scale, was scheduled for a late 
199 1 launch. The TOPEXJF’OSEIDON  mission would be part of  the intema- 
tional World Climate Research Program. (NASA Release 87-41) 

March 26: NASA selected Lockheed Engineering and Management Services 
Company  to  negotiate  an  engineering  support  contract  for  Johnson  Space 
Center, Houston, Texas. The contract would  consolidate work currently per- 
formed  by  Lockheed,  McDonnell  Douglas  Corporation,  and  Northrop 
Services, Inc. (NASA Release 87-42; W S J ,  Mar 27/87; H  Chron ,  Mar 27/87) 

An Atlas-Centaur rocket, launched during a driving thunderstorm from Cape 
Canaveral, Florida, veered out of control 52 seconds after liftoff and was blown 
up  by  NASA safety officials. The launch was NASA’s  third major mission in 
1987. Investigators trying to determine the cause of  the accident said that data 
radioed to  the  ground from  the  rocket  seconds before  it  careened off-course, 
which indicated a major electrical disturbance aboard. Investigators speculated 
that  lightning, prevalent in  the  area at  the  time, may  have caused  the  failure. 
(W Post, Mar 27/87; W Post, Mar 3 1/87; W Times, Mar 3 1/87) 

March 27:  NASA announced that  Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, 
and  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California, were  studying con- 
cepts for designing and building a  robot space vehicle for Mars exploration 
and  sample-return mission.  If  approved, the  robotic  space  vehicle  mission 
would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mis- 
sion would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 87-44) 

*  Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space 
Flight,  announced  the  composition  of  the  Atlas  Centaur  67  Investigation 
Board.  The  Board,  chaired  by  Jon  R.  Busse,  Director,  Office  of  Flight 
Assurance, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would inves- 
tigate  the  loss  of  the Atlas  Centaur 67 mission on March  26,  1987 and  rec- 
ommend  corrective  action. The  mission  vehicle  was  destroyed  51  seconds 
after an apparently normal liftoff. (NASA Release 87-45) 

March 31 : The Soviet Union  launched a 20-ton, self-contained astrophysical 
observatory whose mission was  to dock with the orbiting Mir Space Station. 
Viktor Blagov, the  deputy mission director, said  that  the  observatory would 
“open a new chapter” in human space flight and would become a key build- 
ing block of  a permanently habitable scientific space complex. When docked 
with  the  Mir  Space  Station,  the  19-foot-long observatory, with  a  13.6 foot 
diameter, would double the working space available and would create a  sort 
of a “high rise” structure in  space. ( P  Inq ,  Apr  1/87; W Times, Apr  1/87) 

105 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1981 

During  March: India failed  to  launch an  augmented satellite  launch vehicle, 
developed by  the Indian  Space Research Organization, when the vehicle mal- 
functioned and fell into the Indian Ocean. The launch from Sriharikota, India, 
was the f i s t  of  four such planned launches, and was  to have placed a stretched 
Rohini series scientific satellite into a low-Earth orbit. (AvWk, Mar 30/87) 

106 

April 

April  I  : NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian 
scientists for  a joint  US.-Italian  Tethered Satellite System (TSS-1) project. 
The TSS-1, a deplorable subsatellite to be “tethered” to the Space Shuttle via 
a  retractable cable, was  expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of  1990. 
(NASA Release 87-46) 

NASA  Administrator Dr.  James  C .   Fletcher  announced  NASA  plan- 
ned  to  develop  an  advanced  solid  rocket  motor  for  the  Space  Shuttle 
(NASA Release 87-47) 

April  3: NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory  (JPL) Director Dr. 
Lew  Allen  selected  a Virginia  site  for  a  Space Station Program  office. The 
110,000 square feet of leased space in Reston, Virginia, would house NASA’s 
Space  Station  Program  director  and  some  400  JPL  and  NASA  personnel. 
Initial occupancy was planned for summer  1987. (NASA Release 87-49) 

*  NASA  announced that  it was proceeding  toward  design  and  development 
of  a Space Station that would establish a permanent U.S.  human presence  in 
space by  the mid-1990’s. It would  seek proposals from industry for a phased 
development  of  the  Space  Station,  including  estimates  for  an  enhanced- 
capability Space Station configuration. 

NASA reported  that the first phase of  the Space Station development, the 
revised  baseline configuration, which would  provide  an initial, permanently 
habitable research capability by  1996, had  been approved by  the President. It 
would  include  a  laboratory  and  habitation  modules,  four  resource nodes,  a 
polar orbiting platform, and experiment provisions outside of  the pressurized 
modules. (NASA Release 87-50; LA Times, Apr 4/87) 

NASA Administrator  Dr.  James C .  Fletcher  and European Space Agency 
(ESA)  Director  General  Reimar  Luest  announced  that  the  Space  Shuttle 
would be used  for the launch of  the joint NASAESA  Ulysses mission to the 
Sun in  October 1990. At the same time, they  announced that the launch, also 
from the Space Shuttle, of  the Galileo mission to Jupiter had been moved up 
to  October/November 1989.  Since  the  distance  to  the  Sun  is   considerably 
shorter than to Jupiter, the Ulysses  spacecraft would begin to transmit data in 
1994, a year earlier than  the Galileo spacecraft. (NASA Release 87-5 1) 

107 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1987 

April  6 :   NASA  selected  Boeing  Computer  Services  Company,  Seattle, 
Washington, for negotiating a technical and management information system 
contract in support of  the Space Station program.  (NASA Release 87-52) 

April  9:  NASA’s  Office of  Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters 
in Washington, D.C.,  selected 29  life  sciences investigators for  space flight 
study. According  to  Dr. Arnauld  E.  Nicogossian, Director  of  NASA’s  Life 
Sciences Division, the  first phase of  the study, the definition phase, which is 
expected to begin in the early fall of  1987 and last less than a year, would be 
followed  by  selection  of  investigators  for  actual  flights  aboard  the  Space 
Shuttle. Chosen  investigators could participate in  future Space Shuttle mis- 
sions anytime between  1991 and  1994, or even later. (NASA Release 87-54) 

Despite the efforts of  Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander 
Laveikin, who had  tended the  space station since February 7,  1987, the first 
attempts to  dock the Soviet Union’s Kvant space module with the  space sta- 
tion Mir failed. The Kvant, a  self-contained astronomical observatory, was to 
be  the  first  experimental module  to  link  with  Mir.  (NY Times, Apr  10/87; 
W Times, Apr 9/87) 

April  10:  NASA  signed  an  agreement  with  the  General  Dynamics  Space 
Systems Division, San  Diego, California, granting  authority to  use  NASA- 
controlled facilities and  capabilities for commercial manufacture and  launch 
of  the  Atlas/Centaur  vehicle.  This  was  the  first  instance  of  the  U.S. 
Government  transferring  commercial  operations  of  an  expendable  launch 
vehicle to the private sector. The agreement reflected NASA’s endorsement of 
U.S. policy calling for the development of  private sector launch capabilities. 
(NASA Release 87-55) 

April  13: Soviet cosmonauts Yuri  Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin left 
their  space  station and  successfully tightened the  seal between  the  research 
module Kvant and the  space station. Kvant had  failed to dock on two previ- 
ous tries. (NY Times, Apr  13/87) 

April 15: John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was 
appointed as  Special Assistant to  the  Director for  Engineering, Operations, 
and  Safety at  the  Johnson Space Center  (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young  was 
expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on 
issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC 
Director Aaron Cohen, “John Young’s acceptance of  this  new  responsibility 
will  strengthen the  link between operational and engineering elements at the 
Johnson Space Center.” (NASA Release 87-58) 

108 

APRIL  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The United States and the Soviet Union signed an accord on cooperation in 
space exploration. The  accord culminated a  three- day  visit  to  Moscow by 
Secretary  of  State  George  P,  Shultz.  The  accord  formalized  the  ongoing 
exchange  of  information  between  NASA  and  the  Soviet  Academy  of 
Sciences. It provided for no dramatic joint  venture  in  space. Rather it called 
for coordination of projects in solar-system exploration, space astronomy and 
astrophysics, earth  sciences, solar-terrestrial physics  and  space biology,  and 
medicine. (hT Times, Apr  16/87; P Inq, Apr  16/87) 

April 20: NASA announced plans for three balloon flights to study ray radiation 
produced by  Supernova  1987a. The  Goddard  Space Flight Center's  Wallops 
Flight Facility at Wallops Island, Virginia, which manages NASA's balloon pro- 
gram, would provide launch services and  helium. The first launch, from Alice 
Springs, Australia, was to take place no earlier than May  7, 1987, and the third 
balloon was  to be launched within a month's time. (NASA Release 87-60) 

April 22: An international panel of  scientists selected three experiments sub- 
mitted by NASA's  Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for the 
Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission  to  be  launched  in  early  1990's. 
The cometary ice and dust experiment (CIDEX) was designed to capture and 
analyze dust,  ices,  and  gases  evolved from  the  comet  as  the  coma  and  tail 
develop  during  its  pass  around  the  sun.  The  thermal  infrared  radiometer 
experiment (TIREX) would measure the thermal emission and the  scattering 
of  solar radiation from the comet. The third  experiment would  consist of  an 
interdisciplinary scientist for exobiology, the study of  chemical processes and 
physical events leading to emergence of  life in the universe. The CIDEX mis- 
sion  was  managed  by  NASA's  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena, 
California. (NASA Release 87-63) 

April  24 :  NASA reported that  two techniques were being used to monitor the 
Supernova SN 1987a. In the first case, the Supernova was observed by NASA's 
Deep Space Network (DSN) located at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and connected by 
microwave with Australia's CSIRO Parkes Radio Telescope 200 miles away. 

Dr.  Robert Preston of  NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which operates 
the DSN for NASA, said that the second technique, called Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry,  consisted  of  an  even  wider  network  of  four  antennas: 
Tidbinbilla, Parkes, a  Landsat ground  station in  central Australia; and  a 26- 
meter dish at Hobart on Tasmania, an island southeast of Australia. 

The  supernova, an  exploding star whose emissions were just  arriving on 
Earth  at  the  time  of  this  report,  was  detected  in  the  neighboring  Large 
Magellanic Cloud  galaxy. It  was  about  163,000 light years  from  the  Earth. 
Supernova 1987a was the first such detectable star explosion close to our own 
galaxy since 1604. (NASA Release 87-64) 

109 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL  1981 

NASA issued Requests for Proposals to U.S.  industry for a detailed design 
and  constmction of  a permanently habitable Space Station. The  two  options 
proposals were due by  July 21,  1987. Option one was  for a phased program 
calling  for  a  permanently tended  Space  Station  to  be  operational by  1996. 
Option  two  was  the  enhanced-capability  Space  Station  configuration. 
(NASA Release 87-65; LA  Times, Apr 25/87; Ny Times, Apr 25/87) 

Apr i l  27:  NASA announced that its scientists had joined with scientists from 
the Brazilian Institute for Space Research and  from U.S.  and Brazilian uni- 
versities and institutes to conduct a 45-day study of  tropospheric (part of  the 
atmosphere closest to Earth)  chemistry in  the  atmosphere over the Amazon 
River Basin  tropical rain  forest during the wet  season. NASA's  program of 
global tropospheric experiments to study the chemistry of Earth's atmosphere 
and its interaction with  land and oceans began in the  1980's. NASA used the 
Space  Shuttle in  1981 and  1984 to  measure tropospheric carbon monoxide 
with  a  gas  filter  radiometer.  In  July  and  August  1985, NASA's  Amazon 
boundary layer experiment (ABLE) documented the importance of biosphere- 
atmosphere interactions in determining chemical processes in the troposphere 
over undisturbed rain forests. The  second ABLE experiment, begun in mid- 
April  1987, was to study how tropical forests affect the gas exchange, chem- 
istry, and budgets of  several key gases in the troposphere. 

A NASA Electra aircraft, stationed in Manasus, Brazil, in the center of the 
Amazon River Basin, was expected to measure  atmospheric trace gases and 
aerosols during a series of  flights. The results from the experiments aboard the 
Electra  aircraft  and  from  several  investigations carried  out  at  ground  sites 
would be evaluated by  the team of  scientists late in  1987. 

NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications in Washington, D.C., was 
responsible  for  the  tropospheric  chemistry program.  Langley's  Atmospheric 
Sciences Division, with  logistical  support from  the  Bionetics Corporation in 
Hampton, Virginia, managed the ABLE project.(Nasa Release 87-66) 

NASA announced that within hours of  its discovery on February 24,1987, 
NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earth-orbiting 
International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and  the  Solar Max Mission  (SMM) 
spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring 
the  supernova with  a network of  ground antennas. The major supernova sci- 
ence program mounted by  NASA and  the intense, worldwide scientific inter- 
est  in  the  supernova resulted  from  the  fact  that  the  discovery of  Supernova 
1987a provided  scientists the  opportunity to  study not  only  the  death  of  the 
star, but  also the resutant rebirth of  matter. The explosion, shock waves, and 
tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evi- 
dence of  the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. 

110 

APRIL  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so 
bright since the  1604 sup 
a, when the telescope had not yet been discov- 
ered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to  study the  super- 
nova  in  all radiation wavelengths  from nearly  the moment of  its explosion. 
Scientists expected that  the  array of  instruments and the variety of  NASA's 
methods  of  monitoring  the  supernova would  not  only  yield  a  new  under- 
standing of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would 
provide a better understanding of  the creation of matter. 

The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 2-112 
years. It would consist of  multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon 
and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A spe- 
cial computer communications network would  allow scientists from NASA, 
American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organiza- 
tions to analyze the great amount of  data generated by  the program. 

In  addition  to  the  IUE  and  SMM  spacecraft, managed  and  operated by 
NASA's  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  in  Greenbelt, Maryland, a  Japanese 
Ginga (Astro-C) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE 
satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the over- 
all  brightness of  the  supernova. It  also was  expected to  help  define exactly 
which  star  in  the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the  supernova. 
The  SMM  satellite,  a  sun-observing instrument, was  used  to  monitor  the 
expected  gamma  ray  emissions  from  the  supernova. The  Japanese  Ginga 
(Astro-C) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for x-ray emissions. 

NASA's  Gerard P.  Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C-141 jet trans- 
port  stationed in New  Zealand, was  also used  in  supernova observations to 
measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of  flights 
through the  spring of  1989, using  new  and  increasingly more  sophisticated 
instruments. (NASA Release 87-67) 

April  31 :  Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new 
organization, the  Martin Marietta Commercial Titan  Systems,  to  sell  com- 
mercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, 
former head of  Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would 
sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3  rocket to owners of  commer- 
cial satellites. (W Pos t ,  May 4/87) 

During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allow- 
ing  for  the  first  Israeli  space  experiment  on  a  future  Space  Shuttle  flight. 
(NASA Release 87-57; Science, vol. 236, May  1/87) 

1 1 1  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1987 

’Ityo top U.S.  scientists, serving in  advisory positions to NASA, resigned 
following their criticism of NASA policy  and the space station. On April  10, 
1987, Thomas  Donahue,  Chairman  of  the  Space  Science Board,  National 
Academy  of  Sciences, resigned  after  sending  a  letter  to  some members  of 
Congress  calling  for  NASA  to  place  higher  priority  on  expendable launch 
vehicles for  space science missions than  on an as yet  “poorly defined space 
station.” Donahue was  reinstated on April  15, 1987, after resolving his  dis- 
agreement with Frank Press, head of  the National Academy of  Sciences. 

The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of  NASA’s Task 
Force on the Scientific Uses of  the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 
1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that  the  schedule 
for operations should be accelerated and a heavy-lift launch vehicle should be 
used.  (AvWk, Apr 20187) 

112 

May   6 :  NASA Assistant Administrator for  Commercial Programs  Isaac  T. 
Gillam named 28 teams that have submitted proposals to establish Centers for 
the Commercial Development of  Space. The objective of  the Centers would 
be  to  stimulate  research  in  the  microgravity  environment  of  space.  This 
research was  expected  to  lead  the  development of  new  products  that  have 
commercial value. The proposed research fields include space power,  space 
propulsion, remote sensing, communication technology, and bioscience. The 
overwhelming majority  of  the  proposals  came  from American universities. 
(NASA Release 87-69) 

May   7 :  NASA  announced  that  it,  together  with  the  Universities  Space 
Research  Association,  in  Columbia,  Maryland,  and  the  University  of 
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence 
in  Space Data  and  Information Sciences  at  NASA's  Goddard Space Flight 
Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new  research 
facility would  serve  as  the  nerve  center  for  a  network  of  researchers from 
leading  universities  and  from  industry  computer  science  departments. The 
emphasis would be on research in  areas of  potential long-term application to 
NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87-70) 

May 8: NASA announced that it had  established a team to review launch deci- 
sion processes used for NASA expendable launch vehicles and the Space Shuttle. 
The purpose of  the review,  which was  to be completed by  July 3,  1987, was to 
ensure consistent approaches and risk evaluations for all NASA launches. Joseph 
B.  Mahon,  Deputy  Associate Administrator for  Space  Flight,  and  Robert  L. 
Crippen,  Deputy  Director  of  the  National  Space  Transportation  System 
Operations, were selected as cochairmen of  the team. (NASA Release 87-71) 

May   10 :  Former astronaut Donald  K.  Slayton, President of  Space Services, 
said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satel- 
lites  into  orbit. According to  Slayton, the  first  of  five precision navigation- 
location Star Find  satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island 
in Virginia in  1988. Space Services would use  its Conestoga I1 rocket system 
to  launch  the  300-pound  satellite  into  a  geostationary  orbit  22,000  miles 
above the Earth. (W Post, May  11/87; W Times, May  11/87) 

May   11:   NASA released  the  findings  of  the Accident Investigation Board, 
which had  looked into  loss of  the Atladcentaur-67  on March  26,1987. In  a 

113 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTTCS 

MAY 1987 

report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for 
Space Flight, Jon R.  Busse, Chairman of  the Accident Investigation Board, 
blamed  the  accident on  an  electrical transient,  caused by  a  single-triggered 
lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that  the  launch was made  “in 
violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards.” 
The  Board made  recommendations concerning weather  criteria, the  launch 
decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 87-72) 

M a y  15: The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful 
than the American Space Shuttle. According to  the Soviet Tass News Agency, 
the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central 
Asia, fired correctly but  a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the 
Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a “two- 
stage multipurpose launch vehicle” capable of putting into orbit more than 100 
tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could 
cany. (LA Times, May  17/87; C Trib, May  18/87; W Times, May  18/87) 

In an effort to reduce reliance on the U.S. Space Shuttle, NASA would rely 
more  heavily  on  untended  rockets,  declared Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher,  NASA 
Administrator. He  said that  the  primary  goal was  to “accelerate the deploy- 
ment  of  the  Nation’s  backlog  of  space-science missions.” NASA hoped  to 
launch  as  many  as  five  satellites and  space probes by  untended rockets by 
1992. (WS J ,  May  18/87) 

May  19: Officials from NASA and the Lockheed-Georgia Company, Marietta, 
Georgia, announced that flight testing had begun on a new, highly fuel-efficient, 
“propfan” engine. Aircraft equipped with the propfan propulsion system, which 
was developed as a result of  a $56-million NASA sponsored research program, 
was  expected to be  15-30  percent more fuel efficient than the most  advanced 
turbofan-powered aircraft flying in the  1990’s. (NASA Release 87-73) 

The Soviet Union launched another cargo ship with  supplies for  the space 
station Mir. According to Tass,  the cargo  ship Progress 30, the  third  supply 
ship  launched  since  cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko  and  Alexander  Laveikin 
had  occupied the  space station in  February  1987, was  functioning normally 
after the launch. (LA  Times, May 20187) 

M a y  20 :  NASA announced that the first post-Challenger Space Shuttle launch 
had again been rescheduled, this tirne for June 1988. The four-month delay was 
caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquid-fuel main engines and 
because of  needed redesigning and testing of  the Shuttle’s rocket boosters. 

The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew-tended flights 
planned for  1988 and  1989. NASA said that  three Space Shuttles, instead of 

114 

MAY  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

the five originally planned, would be flown in  1988 and seven, instead of  the 
ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launch- 
es,  NASA  believed,  would  further  slow  U.S.  efforts  to  regain  primacy  in 
space  exploration  and  utilization.  (LA  Times, May  21/87;  NY  Times, May 
21/87; B  Sun ,  May  21/87; W Post, May 21/87) 

M a y  26:  NASA announced that  astronaut Dr.  Sally K.  Ride would  leave the 
agency  in  Fall  1987. Dr.  Ride,  the  first American  woman  to  fly  in  space, 
would  assume  the  position  of  Science  Fellow  at  the  Stanford  University 
Center for International Security and Arms Control in Palo Alto, California. 
(NASA Release  87-84; B  Sun, May  27/87; NY   Times, May  27/87; W Post, 
May  27/87; W Times, May 27/87) 

M a y  27:  The first full-scale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since 
the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by  all who watched 
it.  The  firing of  the  l26-foot  Shuttle booster  in Utah's  Wasatch Mountains, 
witnessed by  300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the compa- 
ny  that designed the booster rocket, was  the first of  six full-scale tests. Also 
present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle 
in June 1988. ( B  Sun ,  May  28/87; NY   Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87) 

Ma y  28:  NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system stud- 
ies and design concepts of  liquid-fueled rocket boosters. The request for propos- 
als resurrects the original concept for liquid-fueled rockets for the Space Shuttle 
that NASA  had  rejected. The request for  studies was part of NASA's  efforts to 
find  an  alternative  to  the  hard-to-control  solid-fuel  boosters.  Four  NASA 
Centers-Marshall 
Space Flight  Center, Huntsville, Alabama;  Johnson  Space 
Center,  Houston, Texas;  Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and 
Langley Research Center, Hampton, Viiginia-would  be involved in this project. 
(NASA Release 87-85; H  Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87) 

M a y  29:  NASA Administrator Dr.  James C.  Fletcher announced the promo- 
tion  of  Dr.  John M.  Klineberg, Deputy Director of  Lewis Research Center, 
Cleveland, Ohio, since July  1979, to Director of  the Center, effective imme- 
diately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis  from NASA Headquarters, where he had 
served  as  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Technology. An  internationally recognized  expert  in  the  field  of  transonic 
flow, he  first joined NASA in  1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain 
View, California. (NASA Release 87-86) 

115 

June 

June  I :  NASA announced the creation of  an Office of Exploration, responsible 
for coordinating the Agency’s missions to “expand the human presence beyond 
the Earth.” Dr.  Sally K. Ride, who had been in charge of  a NASA study group 
to determine U.S. goals in space, was named the Acting Assistant Administrator 
until mid-August 1987. (NASA Release 87-87; H  Post, June 2/87) 

June  3 :  An Information Science Division was  established at NASA’s Ames 
Research Center, Mountain View, California, to conduct research in artificial 
intelligence for applications to  space exploration. It was expected that  artifi- 
cial intelligence would be  used  to develop automated systems for all phases 
of space missions, from launch to mission control and for onboard operations. 
Artificial intelligence technology would  also be  used  to  advance spacecraft 
performance and safety, and would free astronauts from routine chores. 

Research in artificial intelligence and the development of  automated system 
would be a joint effort between the Information Science Division, other NASA 
Centers, private industry, and academic institutions. (NASA Release 87-89) 

NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, 
had  invited industry to  develop advanced solid rocket motor designs. The pre- 
liminary  designs called  for  both  a  segmented motor  design and  a  monolithic 
motor design. Requests for these designs, called Phase B studies, followed com- 
pletion of “Phase A” conceptual studies of  alternative solid rocket motor designs. 
Those designs were done by  five aerospace firms. (NASA Release 87-90) 

June 5: NASA announced that 5 civilians and 10 military officers were select- 
ed  as new  astronaut candidates for  the Space Shuttle program. Of  the  15, 7 
were chosen as pilot  astronaut candidates and  8 as mission specialist candi- 
dates.  The  elite  group  also  included  the  first  Black  woman,  Dr.  Mae  C. 
Jemison, to be chosen for the program. (NASA Release 87-93; N y  Times, June 
6/87; LA  Times, June 6/87; H  Chron, June 6/87) 

June  8: According  to  a  news  release  from  NASA’s  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Center,  Greenbelt,  Maryland,  NASA  would  manage  a  major  international 
experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, 
part  of  the  International Satellite Land  Surface Climatology Project, would 
employ over  100 scientists from more than 25  institutions to  study the inter- 
action  between  the  land  system  and  climate system. Over  25  ground  mea- 

117 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

.TUNE  1987 

surement  stations would  be  set  up  on  the  Konza  Prairie  in  Kansas  for  the 
experiment. Six research planes and five Earth-orbiting satellites would  also 
be used.  (NASA Release 87-95) 

June 10: NASA announced that lightning had destroyed an Orion rocket sched- 
uled for launch. The intense storm at the Wallops Flight Center, Wallops Island, 
Virginia, also destroyed the scientific experiment payload. (NASA Release 87- 
97; NY Times, June  11/87; W Post, June 11/87; H  Chron, June  11/87) 

June 1 2 :  In a major organizational shift, NASA announced the adoption of new 
post-Challenger era commercial activity policies. The released decision memo- 
randa, covering the new policies, were signed by Deputy Administrator Dale D. 
Myers. The new  policies resulted from the report of  the Commercialization of 
Space Review Task Force and covered such general activities as joint endeavor 
agreements, microgravity research,  secondary payloads on  the  Space Shuttle, 
expendable launch vehicles, and commercial activities. 

According to the new policies, the Office of  Commercial Programs would 
henceforth determine, in  coordination with  concerned Headquarters offices, 
whether  NASA  should  participate  in  any  proposed  joint  program. 
Responsibility  for  programs  utilizing  the  microgravity  environment  was 
transferred  from  the  Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology  to  the 
Office of  Space Science and Applications. Secondary payload space would be 
carefully  allocated  by  the  Deputy  Administrator  and  implemented  by  the 
Office of  Space Flight to accomplish specific NASA objectives. To encourage 
and  facilitate  as  much  as  possible  the  private  domestic  access  to  space, 
NASA's  Office of  Space Flight would contract private industry for launch of 
Expendable Launch  Vehicles.  Finally,  the  Office  of  Commercial Programs 
would, to the fullest extent possible, facilitate the utilization of  space for com- 
mercial  purposes.  (NASA  Decision  Memorandum  on  Commercialization 
Policy,  June  12/87;  NASA  Decision  Memorandum  on  Responsibility  for 
Programs  Utilizing  the  Microgravity  Environment,  June  12/87;  NASA 
Decision  Memorandum  on  Secondary  STS  Payloads,  June  12/87;  NASA 
Decision Memorandum on Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV's) Policy, June 
12/87;  NASA  Decision  Memorandum  on  Commercialization Policy,  June 
12/87; LA Times, June  13/87) 

June 17: NASA announced reopening, after major modifications, the wind tun- 
nel at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Constructed in  1944, 
the  40-by-80-foot wind  tunnel was  used  for  full-scale testing of  civilian and 
military aircraft. Modifications to  the  tunnel  included increasing power from 
six 6,000-horsepower  electric  motors  generating  airspeeds  of  up  to 
230 mph to six 22,500-horsepower motors generating top airspeeds of 345 mph. 

118 

JUNE  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The modified 40-by-80-foot wind tunnel represented the first phase of  the 
creation of  the National Full-scale Aerodynamics Complex, which  included 
the Outdoor Aerodynamics Research Facility, at the Ames  Research Center, 
Mountain View,  California. The  second  phase,  including the  new  “straight 
through” leg  with  its  80-by-120-foot test  section, was  expected to  be  com- 
pleted in late  1987. (NASA Release 87-98) 

NASA  announced two  new  management  appointments effective June 22, 
1987. Dr. Noel W.  Hinners, Director of NASA’s  Goddard Space Flight Center, 
Greenbelt, Maryland, was  appointed to the  newly created position  of  NASA 
Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on rec- 
ommendations of  the NASA Management Study Group to  provide  focus  on 
institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. 
to replace Dr. H m e r s  as Director of Goddard. 

Dr.  Hinners joined  NASA  in  1972 as  director of  Lunar Programs, in  the 
Office of  Space Science. From 1974 until  1979 he served as NASAAssociate 
Administrator  for  Space  Science.  From  1979  to  1982,  Dr.  Hinners  was 
Director of  the  Smithsonian Institute’s National Air  and  Space Museum. In 
1982, he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. 

Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was 
transferred with  his  branch  and  the Vanguard Project to NASA in  1958 and 
became chief  of  the  space science division. He became Assistant Director in 
1959 and Deputy Director in  1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications 
at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of 
the  Environmental Science  Service Administration (ESSA), Department  of 
Commerce. He  became the Associate Administrator of  ESSA, when  ESSA 
became part of  NASA in  1970. (NASA Release 87-99) 

0  Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for  Space 
Flight, announced that the next  Space Shuttle orbiter  would  be  assembled in 
Palmdale,  California.  He  gave  costs  and  schedule  factors  as  the  rea- 
sons  why  this  site  was  chosen  over  Cdifonia’s Vandenberg AirForce Base 
(NASA Release 87-100; H  Chron, June 18/87) 

June  22:  NASA announced that on June  15, 1987, Dr. John-David E Bartoe 
began a 2-year appointment as Chief Scientist of  the Space Station program, 
advising the Associate Administrator on  program plans,  policies,  and  user- 
related  requirements. Prior  to  this  appointment, Dr.  Bartoe  served with  the 
Naval Research  Laboratory  (NRL)  in  a  variety  of  positions, most  recently 
as  Head  of  the  Solar  Spectroscopy  section,  Space  Science  Division.  He 
expected to return to the NRL at  the end of  the Chief  Scientist appointment. 
(NASA Release 87-103) 

119 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE 1987 

June  29:  NASA  announced  selection  of  the  Astronautics  Division  of  the 
Lockheed  Missiles  and  Space  Company,  in  Sunnyvale,  California,  for  the 
design, development and implementation of the Software Support Environment 
(SSE) for the Space Station. The SSE contract was to be managed by  the Space 
Station Program Office in  Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 87-107) 

June  30: A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by  NASA Administrator 
Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the f i s t  post-Challenger Space Shuttle would 
have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to 
eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch 
was  one of  many significant changes made  in  the  Shuttle Discovery, sched- 
uled  for  launch in  June  1988. Twenty-one major  changes were made  in  the 
Shuttle’s main engines alone, in order to  increase  operating life, safety, and 
reliability. These  and  other changes listed  in  the NASA report to  the White 
House reflected recommendations made by  the Rogers Commission, follow- 
ing  their  investigation  of  the  Challenger  accident.  (C  Trib,  July  2/87; 
LA Times, July  1/87; NY  Times, July  1/87) 

During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rock- 
ets over the next five years to launch communications satellites. According to 
a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start 
production of  the Atlas-Centaur rocket. General Dynamics became  the  third 
U.S.  company,  together  with  McDonnell Douglas  Corporation and  Martin 
Marietta  Corporation, to  attempt  to  move  into  launch  vehicles  production 
after the Challenger accident. (W S J ,  June  16/87) 

120 

Ju ly  

Ju ly   2:  NASA  granted  the  Space  Station  Program  Support  Division,  of 
Grumman Aerospace Corporation in Bethpage, New York, a contract to pro- 
vide  systems engineering and integration for the Space Station. The contract 
also called for Grumman to provide a broad base of  management support to 
the  Space Station Program Office in  the  areas of  program control and man- 
agement; information systems; operations; program requirements and assess- 
ment;  and  safety, reliability, and  quality  assurance. (NASA Release 87-110; 
W S J ,  July 3/87; B  Sun ,  July 3/87) 

Ju ly   13: NASA’s  last  Atlas-Centaur rocket  was  extensively  damaged  in  a 
launch pad accident. A $4-million fuel tank was destroyed when it was hit by 
a work platform. Four General Dynamics Space Division workers were treat- 
ed for minor injuries. The  launch of  a military satellite, scheduled for liftoff 
aboard the Atlas-Centaur rocket in the fall of  1987, was grounded indefinite- 
ly. (LA  Times, July  14/87) 

Ju ly  15: NASA announced that  it would showcase exhibits and models of  its 
advanced fuel-saving propeller  system called “propfan” at  the  35th Annual 
Experiment Aircraft Association International Fly-In  Convention and  Sport 
Aviation  Exhibition,  July  3 l-August  7,  in  Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Propfan 
engines have  revolutionary propellers with  thin,  highly  swept blades. They 
burn 30 percent less fuel than advanced turbofan engines under the same con- 
ditions. NASA  also was  expected to  exhibit its  “Cockpit of  the  Future,” in 
which pilots would use color-coded graphic displays and computers to moni- 
tor  flight path  and  speed, wind  and  weather  conditions, time-critical alerts, 
and traffic conditions and obstacles. Other displays would feature innovations 
in  wing  design;  new  composite materials to  make  lighter  aircraft; new  de- 
icing  techniques  and  other  safety  improvements; a  video  presentation  of 
NASA’s Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS)  supercomputer system; 
and  models  of  Langley’s National Transonic  Facility,  the  largest  cryogenic 
wind  tunnel  in  the  world,  and  the Ames Vertical Motion Simulator used  to 
investigate landing, takeoff and other handling qualities, and to develop con- 
trols for short takeoff and vertical-landing aircraft. (NASA Release 87-1 11) 

0  NASA named  a  board  to  investigate the  July  13,  1987, Atlas Centaur 68 
accident which resulted in  extensive damage to the vehicle. James B. Odom, 
Director  of  the  Science  and  Engineering  irectorate, Marshall  Space n i g h t  
Center,  Huntsville, Alabama,  was  appointed  Chairman  of  the  Board.  The 

121 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1987 

Board was expected to report the results of  its investigation to Rear Admiral 
Richard H.  Truly, Associate Administrator for  Space Flight,  by August  14, 
1987. (NASA Release 87-112; LA  T imes ,  July  14/87; NY T imes ,  July  14/87) 

Ju ly  16: NASA announced that  it had  chosen the  final design for  the Space 
Shuttle’s new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem 
of  Challenger’s leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals 
failed to close  properly  because of  cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of 
the  rockets  design  team  at  the Marshall Space Flight  Center  in  Huntsville, 
Alabama,  stated  that  henceforth  the  O-ring  seals  would  be  heated  in  cold 
weather  rather  than  constructed of  new  materials. He  also said  that  the new 
design would contain three O-ring  seals instead of  two. Thomas emphasized 
that  up  to  eight  more  test  firings  of  the  Space  Shuttle’s solid  rocket motor 
were  planned  before  flights  resume.  (NY Times,  July  17/87; W  Post,  July 
17/87; W T imes ,  July  17/87) 

July  21 :   Pilots  from  NASA,  the  U.S.  Air  Force,  the  U S .   Navy,  and  the 
Grumman Aerospace Corporation completed the  first phase of  experimental 
flying of  the  forward-swept-wing X-29  aircraft. During the  tests, the  X-29, 
with its three-surface pitch control system, reached an altitude of  50,200 feet 
and speeds of  about  1.5 times the speed of  sound. 

After a total of  104 flights, the pilots began the  second phase of  the  flight 
research  program  at  NASA’s  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility  in 
Edwards, California. During this phase, further flights would test the forward 
swept wing structure divergence tendencies and the overall aerodynamic per- 
formance of  the wings and  canards. Researchers would  also  investigate the 
aircraft’s control system and handling qualities, as well as maneuvering char- 
acteristics applicable to military use.  (NASA Release 87-1 13) 

July 22:  The Soviet Union launched into orbit a Soyuz TM-3 with two Soviet 
cosmonauts  and  a  Syrian  space  traveler  aboard.  The  liftoff  from  Baikonur 
Cosmodrome, in Soviet Kazakhstan, was the Soviet Union’s third crew-tend- 
ed  space launch since the U.S.  Space Shuttle explosion on January 28,  1986. 
The Soyuz TM-3, piloted by Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Alexandrov, 
was  scheduled to  dock  with  the  Soviet Mir  space  station  after  two  days  of 
orbiting  around  the  Earth.  The  Syrian  space  traveler,  Lieutenant  Colonel 
Mohammed Faris, was the second Arzb in space. The first was the Saudi Prince 
Sultan bin  Salman, a nephew of  Saudi Arabia’s King Fahd. Prince Sultan bin 
Salman was  a payload  specialist aboard the U.S.  Shuttle Discovery in  1985. 
( H  Chron, July 22/87) 

July 28: NASA selected seven new Centers for the Commercial Development of 
Space (CCDS). The Centers would conduct research leading to the development 

122 

JULY  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

of new technologies that co  
bined  industry  and  universit 
Tennessee  Space  Institut 
Tullahoma,  Tennessee;  Auburn  Un iv e r s i tyX e n t e r   for  the  Commercial 
Development of  Space  Power, Auburn, Alabama;  Environmental Research 
Institute  of  Michigan-Center 
for  the  Commercial  Development  of 
Autonomous  and  Man-Controlled Robotic  Sensing  System  in  Space, AM 
for  Secretion 
Arbor,  Michigan;  Pennsylvania  State  University-Center 
Research, University Park, Pennsylvania; University of Colorado-Center 
for 
Bioserve  Space  Technologies,  Boulder,  Colorado;  Case  Western  Reserve 
University-Center  on Materials for Space Structures, Cleveland, Ohio; and 
Texas A&M Research Foundation-Center 
for Commercial Development of 
Space Power, College Station, Texas. (NASA Release 87-1 15) 

NASA announced an international joint effort to investigate ozone depletion 
over the Antarctic. NASA was to be joined in this effort by  other Federal sci- 
ence  agencies;  the  Chemical  Manufacturers  Association;  scientists  from 
Harvard  University,  the  University  of  Denver,  and  the  University  of 
Washington; and  the governments of  Argentina, Chile, France, Great Britain, 
and New Zealand. A specially equipped ER-2 plane and a modified DC-8 air- 
liner were to make a number of flights through the ozone hole between  August 
17 and  September 29,  1987, to  see whether man-made chemicals, nature, or 
both  are destroying the  ozone. The findings will be  examined by  an interna- 
tional  panel  of  policy  makers  meeting  in  Montreal,  Canada,  in  September 
1987. (NY Times, July 30187; W Post, July 29/87; W Times, July 29/87) 

Ju ly  29:  Top astronaut John W.  Young told the Orlando Sentinel that he had 
been forced to resign as chief of NASA's  astronaut office. Young claimed that 
his reassignment to a new post, as special assistant to the director for Shuttle 
engineering and safety, stemmed from his frequent criticism of NASA safety 
policies after the Challenger disaster. (LA  Times, July 30187) 

Ju l y   30:  Astronaut  John  A.  McBride  was  named  acting  Assistant 
Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He 
would  replace  John  F.  Murphy, who  was  appointed Chief  of  the  Office of 
External  Affairs  at  NASA's  Ames  Research  Center,  in  Mountain  View, 
California. (NASA Release 87-1 16) 

July 31 : Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, 
announced NASA had  completed  negotiations with  Rockwell  International to 
build a replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. The new orbiter would contain existing 
structural spares, but would also feature the latest technology evolving from the 
current rem-to-flight  activities. The new  Space Shuttle orbiter was expected to 
be ready for use within 45 months. (NASA Release 87-117) 

123 

ASTRONAII??CS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1987 

NASA  said  it  had  completed  negotiations  with  Rockwell  International 
Corporation  for  a new  Space Shuttle. The new  space vehicle,  to  replace the 
Challenger  lost  in  the  1986 accident, was  expected to  be  delivered  in April 
1991. The cost of the new Space Shuttle was estimated at $1.3 billion. (C Trib, 
Aug 2/87; H Post, Aug  1/87; LA  Times, Aug  1/87; B  Sun, Aug  1/87) 

124 

August 

August 3: Five NASA and U.S. Air Force pilots completed the first phase of 
research flying of the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration F- 1 11 aircraft 
at  NASA's  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility  in  Edwards, California. 
During the first phase of  research flying, the aircraft's wing was modified so 
that  it  could  fly  with  optimum  wing  curvature  at  subsonic,  transonic,  and 
supersonic speeds. The MAW  system was  operated only  manually, and  the 
pilot  selected  the  aircraft's  wing  curvature.  The  aircraft,  with  its  distinct 
Mission Adaptive Wing  (MAW), entered the second phase of research flying 
where the computers were modified so the wing curvature could adjust auto- 
matically. (NASA Release 87-118; Def News, Aug 24/87) 

August 5 :  NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untend- 
ed  rocket to  carry heavy materials for use  in  Space Station construction. The 
proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of  carrying more than three 
times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type 
of  solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, 
whose estimated costs were put  at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in  1993. ( H  
Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/81; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87) 

August  7: Five  aerospace firms were  awarded contracts by  NASA's  Marshall 
Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama,  to  develop preliminary  advanced 
solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the 
awards  were  Aerojet  Solid  Propulsion  Company,  Sacramento,  California; 
Atlantic  Research  Corporation  of  Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace 
Company's Aerospace division of  Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., 
Brigham City, Utah, and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San 
Jose,  California.  The  results  of  the  preliminary  studies  would  determine 
whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of  an 
advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASARelease 87-120) 

August  IO :   NASA announced that Dr.  Noel Hinners would  replace Dr.  Frank 
McDonald as Chief  Scientist, effective August 24,  1987. At the same time, Dr. 
Hinners would retain his position as NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator 
(Institutions). NASA  also  announced  Dr.  Frank  McDonald  would  return  to 
the  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  as  Associate  DirectorfChief  Scientist. 
(NASA Release 87-121) 

125 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1987 

*  The  10-ton Soviet satellite Cosmos-1871 plunged harmlessly into the Pacific 
Ocean  west  of  Hawaii.  Soviet  news  agency  Tass  reported  that  the  satellite, 
launched into a polar orbit on August  1,  1987, carried scientific equipment for 
space exploration. (B  Sun ,  Aug  11/87; W Post, Aug  11/87; W Times, Aug  10187) 

The Transportation Department announced that  it has  granted approval for 
Martin  Marietta  Corporation  to  launch  private  communications  satellites. 
Within hours of  the  announcement, Martin Marietta signed an agreement with 
the  International  Telecommunications Satellite Organization  to  launch  two 
Intelsat-6 satellites into orbit on Martin Marietta’s Titan 3  rockets. Launchings 
were scheduled for  1989 and  1990. The agreement between two private com- 
panies to launch private communications satellites was  the fiist instance of  the 
implementation of the Reagan administration’s space commercialization policy. 
( B  Sun, Aug  11/87; W Times, Aug  11/87) 

American and Soviet scientists agreed to joint effort in a wide range of space 
research. Their first joint  project called for a  launch of  a Soviet “space zoo” 
satellite  containing  monkeys,  rats,  fish,  and  other  living  organisms.  The 
14-day flight of this satellite was to provide Soviet and American scientists an 
opportunity to study the impact of weightlessness on the vital functions of ani- 
mals. Some 26 other experiments were approved by  working groups from the 
United States and the Soviet Union meeting for a week-long scientific confer- 
ence in Moscow. The joint project was the first to be conducted under the terms 
of a five-year space cooperation agreement signed on April 15,1987, by Soviet 
Foreign Minister Eduard A.  Shevardnadze and U.S. Secretary of  State George 
P.  Shultz. (C Trib, Aug  11/87; LA  Times, Aug  11/87; P Inq, Aug  11/87) 

August  17 :  NASA released a  long  awaited report of  a  task force, headed by 
Dr.  Sally K. Ride, set up to assess NASA’s future space policy in the wake of 
the Challenger disaster. The 63-page report, delivered to NASA Administrator 
Dr. James C. Fletcher the preceding week, urged that the United States build 
a permanent outpost on the Moon as the fiist step toward the ultimate goal of 
“exploring, prospecting, and  settling Mars.” Ride emphasized, however, that 
while settling Mars should be  “our eventual goal,” it should not be “our next 
goal.” She recommended a  strategy of  “natural progression which leads step 
by  step, in orderly, unhurried way, inexorably toward Mars.” ( L A  Times, Aug 
18/87;  NY   Times, Aug  18/87; W Pos t ,  Aug  18/87; W Times, Aug  18/87) 

Flight  controllers  at  NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena, 
California, reported that the untended spacecraft Voyager 2 was on course for 
a rendezvous in two years with the planet Neptune. Launched on August 20, 
1977, Voyager 2, travelling at a speed of  41,600 miles-per-hour, was 642 mil- 
lion miles away from its target. It was expected to come within 3,000 miles of 
Neptune on August 24,1989.  (NY  Times, Aug  18/87) 

126 

AUGUST 1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

August 18: NASA announced that Morton Thiokol Space Division, a NASA 
contractor,  would  test  fire  the  first  redesigned  Space  Shuttle  solid  rocket 
motor on August 27,  1987. The  126-foot-long, 1.2-million-pound  develop- 
ment  motor  (DM-8)  would  be  fitted  with  250  instruments  to  measure 
acceleration, pressure,  deflection,  thrust,  strain,  temperature, and  electrical 
properties. (NASA Release 87-125) 

August  19: NASA Administrator Dr.  James C.  Fletcher announced that Isaac 
T.  Gillam, NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, would 
retire effective September 1 ,1987 ,  and that Lawrence Herbolsheimer, Deputy 
Assistant Administrator in the Office of  Commercial Programs, would serve 
as the Acting Assistant Administrator. 

Gillam had served in a number of positions at NASA. In June 1978 he was 
appointed director  of  NASA’s  Dryden Flight  Research Center  in  Edwards, 
California. Prior  to  that  appointment, he  was Dryden’s Deputy Director and 
Director  of  Shuttle  Operations.  He  subsequently  served  at  NASA 
Headquarters as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator and then moved 
on to head the Office of  Commercial Programs. (NASA Release 87-126) 

August  26:  A  solid  rocket motor  intended  for  use  in  NASA’s  Delta  launch 
vehicle failed during a  test  at  the Redstone Arsenal  in Huntsville, Alabama. 
The Castor IVA booster rocket escaped from the test stand five seconds into 
the test. A review team was established to determine the cause of  the failure 
and to assess the impact on the Delta flight program. (NASA Release 87-128) 

August  27: NASA  and  the  Department of  Defense announced that  the  con- 
ceptual design phase of the National Aero-Space Plane Program was finished. 
The program would now move to  the  subsystem fabrication and  test portion 
of  the  program.  This  phase  of  the  engine  technology  development would 
demonstrate the ability of  airbreathing engines to power a horizontal takeoff 
and  landing vehicle. It  would  demonstrate that  the X-30  flight vehicle was 
capable of  sustained hypersonic flight or direct, single stage, ascent into orbit. 
The development of  this  technology would  create an entirely new  family of 
operational aerospace vehicles. (NASA Release 87- 129) 

NASA Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher issued a  statement in response 
to Senator William Proxmire’s request in Congress to abolish the Space Station 
program.  Dr.  Fletcher pointed  out  that  the  Space Station proposal  has  been 
repeatedly  debated  in  Congress and  each  time  has  received  bipartisan  con- 
gressional support. He  stressed that by  abolishing the Space Shuttle program, 
the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also 
emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new  scientific and technologi- 
cal  advances and would “provide infrastructure for  future exploration of  the 

127 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1987 

solar system by manned  spacecraft.” (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in 
Response  to  Senator Proxmire’s  Statement Asking  for  Abolishment of  the 
Space Station, August 27,  1987) 

August  30:  NASA  successfully  test  fiied  a  redesigned  shuttle  booster  in 
Utah’s Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, 
cautioned, however,  that  the  complete  success of  the  firing cannot be  fully 
determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed 
it.  They  added that,  at  any  rate,  this  was  just  the  first  step  and  much  work 
remained if  the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June  1988. The  14-story 
test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as “DM-8”, was loaded 
with  1.1 million pounds  of  propellent.  ( B  Sun,  Aug  31/87; NY Times, Aug 
31/87; W S J ,  Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) 

During August:  Data  collected by  the Giotto  spacecraft, which  flew by  the 
Halley  comet  in  March  1986,  suggested  that  tiny  chains  of  formaldehyde 
chemicals, contained in  the comet’s gassy halo, may  be  older than  the  solar 
system. (LA  Times, Aug 9/87) 

NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 
2.6  million  contract  to  the  city’s Wyle  Laboratories’ Scientific Services & 
Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing fur- 
nace.  The  furnace,  for  processing  metals  and  alloys  in  space,  was  to  be 
carried  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle  where  astronauts  would  carry  out  their 
experiments. (D e fN ew s ,  Aug  10187) 

128 

September 

September  I :  United States and Australia signed a  10-year agreement permit- 
ting NASA  to  launch  scientific sounding rockets  from Woomera, Australia. 
The first project under the new agreement would consist of  five or six launch- 
es of  Black Brant IX’s and Nike-Black Brant V’s  to  study Supernova 1987a 
during NovemberDecernber  1987. (NASA Release 87-132) 

September 2 :  NASA announced that the three Space Shuttle main engines are 
undergoing acceptance testing at its National Space Technology Laboratories 
in Mississippi. The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International performed 
the  tests.  The  engines  tested  were  to  be  used  in  the  next  Shuttle mission, 
STS-26, scheduled for launch in June  1988. The tests were to be completed in 
December 1987. (NASA Release 87-130; C SM ,  Sept 5/87) 

September 4: McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company of Houston, Texas, 
was  awarded NASA’s applications and  analysis support contract for Johnson 
Space Center’s  (JSC) Mission  Support Directorate, in  Houston, Texas. The 
JSC Mission Support Directorate is  responsible for  space mission planning. 
The new contract consolidated five different existing support contracts cover- 
ing  a  wide  range  of  computer  software development and  software perfor- 
mance analysis. (NASA Release 87-131; The Citizen, Sept 6/87) 

September 14: NASA agreed with most of  the findings and recommendations 
listed  in  the  report  by  the National Research Council Committee on  Space 
Station.  Agency  officials  disagreed,  however,  with  the  findings  that  the 
deployment  of  the  Space  Station  with  the  current  Space  Transportation 
System was risky. NASA also found the Committee’s cost estimate for back- 
up hardware and test program enhancements to be  too high.  (NASA Release 
87-135; NY  Times, Sept 15/87; LA Times, Sept 15/87; H  Post, Sept 15/87) 

Officials at  Goddard Space Flight  Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported 
that NASA scientific satellites, the International Sun-Earth Explorers ISEE- 1 
and  ISEE-2, were expected to reenter Earth’s atmosphere two minutes apart 
on  September 26,1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned 
in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a sin- 
gle Delta rocket on October 22,  1977, for nearly  10 years studied fluctuations 
in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, 
gamma  ray  bursts,  and  the  solar  wind  in  the  near-Earth  environment. 
(NASA Release 87- 137) 

129 

ASTRONAUTICS AM) AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1987 

September  15:  Two  firms,  General  Dynamics,  San  Diego,  California,  and 
Martin Marietta, New  Orleans, Louisiana, were chosen by  NASA for  liquid- 
fueled rocket booster design studies. The liquid-fueled rocket boosters could be 
used on the Space Shuttle and future launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87-138; 
H Chron, Sept 17/87) 

NASA selected five crew members for STS-27, a Department of  Defense 
Space  Shuttle  mission.  The  five  crew  members,  scheduled  for  launch  on 
Atlantis  in  early  fall  1988,  included  Robert  L.  Gibson  (Cdr.,  USN), 
Commander; Guy S .  Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), Pilot; and Mission Specialists 
Richard  M.  Mullane  (Col.,  USAF),  Jerry  L.  Ross  (Lt.  Col.,  USAF),  and 
William M.  Shepherd, (Cdr., USN).  (NASA Release 87-139; LA Times, Sept 
16/87; U SA  Today, Sept 16/87) 

A 15-story high Ariane 3 rocket, carrying two communications satellites, was 
launched  into  an  Earth  orbit  from  Kourou,  French  Guiana.  The  successful 
launch marked the reentry of Western Europe into the commercial utilization of 
space after a  16-month hiatus. (L4 Times, Sept 16/87; NY   Times, Sept 16/87) 

September  17: Dr.  Robert Watson, NASA  Chief  Scientist for  the Airborne 
Antarctic Ozone project, reported that, midpoint of  the project, both  aircraft 
involved were  performing  very  well  and  that  mission  scientists were  very 
pleased  with  the  quality  of  data  being  returned  by  the  instruments. The 
Antarctic Ozone Project employed two NASA aircraft, a modified flying lab- 
oratory DC-8,  and  an  advanced high-altitude ER-2.  The  goal of  the  project 
was  to  study  the  cause  and  nature  of  the  ozone  layer  depletion.  (Untitled 
release from NASA Headquarters, Sept 17, 1987; NY  Times, Sept 22/87) 

September 18: The Boeing Commercial Airplane Company was  selected by 
NASA's  Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, for major aeronautical 
flight experiments. NASA tasked Boeing with providing data on the aerody- 
namic and operational effectiveness of  a hybrid system to achieve laminar air 
flow  control  at  flight  conditions, particularly at  high  subsonic speeds.  The 
tests  were  to  be  conducted on  both  commercial and  military  transport  air- 
planes. (NASA Release 87-140; Def News ,  Oct  12/87) 

September 25: NASA announced that researchers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
in Pasadena, California, had successfully tested a passenger vehicle satellite anten- 
na.  The  newly  developed  antenna,  designed  to  be  mounted  on  the  roof  of  a 
passenger vehicle, was expected to play an important role in NASA's mobile satel- 
lite experiment program.  This  program and other technologies were  expected to 
lead eventually toward a mobile satellite communications system. The first success 
in  the  program  was  achieved when  researchers, using  an antenna on  moving 
passenger vehicle, were able to track an in-orbit satellite. (NASA Release 87-143) 

130 

SEPTEMBER 1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

*  General Dynamic Corporation announced it had been awarded a contract to 
launch  between  one  and  three  European  satellites  by  the  European 
Telecommunications Satellite  Organization  (EUTELSAT).  The  26-nation 
European consortium selected General Dynamic's Atlas-Centaur rockets for 
the  launching of  its satellites because of  their cost and reliability. The agree- 
ment called for a launch of a EUTELSAT-2 communications satellite in early 
1990 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with options for two additional launches. 
(LA  Times, Sept 26/87) 

September 29:  NASA announced that secondary payloads for the next Space 
Shuttle mission would  include five  microgravity experiments, life  sciences, 
atmospheric science and infrared communications experiments, as well as two 
student experiments. (NASA Release 87-144) 

*  More  than  50  NASA-sponsored  scientists  were  involved  in  27  U.S./ 
U.S.S.R. joint  experiments aboard a Soviet Union Cosmos 1887 launched on 
this date. This mission represented the latest of the  16 agreed-upon collabora- 
tive projects under the U.S./U.S.S.R. Space Agreement signed in April  1987. 
(NASA Release 87-146; 0 Sen Star, Sept 29/87) 

September  30:  NASA Deputy Administrator Dale D. Myers  announced  that 
James T.  Rose had  been  selected as Assistant Administrator for Commercial 
Programs, effective October 5,  1987. He  would  be  responsible for NASA's 
commercial programs, the use of  space by  the U.S. private sector, the use of 
NASA  technology  by  private  industry,  and  NASA's  support  of  innovative 
research by  small business firms. 

James  T.  Rose  joined  NASA  in  1957  as  a  research  engineer  for  the 
Vanguard  Program  experiments. In  1962, he  became  head  of  the  Manned 
Spacecraft Center's  Mission  Planning  Office  for  the  Gemini  flights. From 
1964 to  1974, Rose held a  series of  key positions at the McDonnell Douglas 
Astronautics Company. He  returned  to  NASA  in  1974  as  Director,  Space 
Shuttle Engineering, in the Office of  Space Flight. From 1976 to 1986, he was 
Director  of  McDonnell Douglas'  Space  Manufacturing Initiatives.  In  June 
1987, he again returned to NASA to become the Director of  Space in NASA's 
Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space  Technology.  (NASA  Release  87-145; 
Huntsville Times, Oct  1/87) 

September 31 : Martin Marietta Corporation announced that  its Denver-based 
Space Systems group was one of the companies awarded two NASA contracts 
to  study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the 
techniques of a robotic rover to traverse the Martian surface was awarded by 
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a  similar contract to  the 
FMC Corporation of  Santa Clara, California. 

131 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEJTEMBER 1987 

The second contract was  awarded by  NASA's  Johnson Space Center  (JSC), 
Houston,  Texas.  It  called  on Martin  Marietta  to  study  braking  methods  that 
would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the 
surface of  the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of  Sunnyvale, 
California, was the other company awarded this study contract by  the JSC. 

Martin Marietta was  the company that designed, built, and tested the twin 
Viking  spacecraft  that  landed  on  the  surface  of  Mars  in  1976 and  1977. 
(AvWk, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct  1/87) 

132 

October 

October  1 : A NASA report,  titled  “Space  Science Operations Management 
Concepts Study,” was  submitted to the House Committee on Science, Space, 
and Technology. The report, prepared by  a 60-member study team of person- 
nel from NASA Headquarters, field centers, other Federal agencies, and uni- 
versity  officials,  examined  options  for  the  management  of  Space  Station 
science. (NASA Note to Editors, Oct  1/1987) 

October 2 :  NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed a pricing agreement, estab- 
lishing reimbursement policies for Department of  Defense  (DoD) flights on 
the  Space  Shuttle  and  NASA  flights  on  DoD-procured expendable  launch 
vehicles. (NASA Release 87-147) 

October 3: Soviet and Japanese scientists c o n f i i e d  the first positive detec- 
tion of x-rays from an exploding supernova. Soviet scientists, using x-ray tele- 
scopes aboard the  Soviet astrophysics module Kvant, made the detection on 
August  10, 1987. Japanese scientists, using  smaller x-ray instruments aboard 
their Ginga satellite, first observed the x-rays from the supernova on August 
15, 1987. (W Post, Oct 4/87) 

October 5: NASA awarded a contract to the Computer Sciences Corporation, 
El  Segundo,  California,  for  operations  support  to  the  Mission  Support 
Directorate of  Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. Under the con- 
tract, Computer Sciences Corporation would provide maintenance, operations, 
and sustaining engineering of  institutional ADP facilities, networks and work 
stations, and user  support. About 30 percent of  the work would be performed 
by  two Computer Sciences Corporation subcontractors, International Business 
Machines Corporation and Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation, 
a unit of  Ford Motor Company. (NASA Release 87-148; WSJ ,  Oct 7/87) 

October 6: NASA and West Germany signed a cooperative Earth observation 
agreement. Under  the  agreement, West  Germany,  together with  Italy, was  to 
provide an X-band synthetic aperture radar (X-SAR) to fly with the space-borne 
imaging  radar-c  (SIR-C)  on  the  Space  Shuttle.  The  SIR-C  will  allow  the 
Shuttle-borne imaging radar mission to view a site from different angles and at 
different radar frequencies. An advanced X-SAR was expected to combine later 
with  the NASA Earth Observation System to  fly on  a NASA polar platform, 
providing a third frequency to the combined mission. (NASA Release 87-149) 

133 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER 1987 

October 7: NASA and the Pentagon awarded contracts to McDonnell Douglas 
Corporation, General Dynamics Corporation, and Rockwell International for 
developing the  airframe of  an  aircraft  capable  of  working both  as  a  space 
vehicle  and  a  hypersonic airplane. After  completion of  the  designs by  the 
three companies, one is  to be  chosen in  1990 to build  two  research aircraft. 
( B  Sun ,  Oct 8/87; H Post, Oct 8 /87 )  

October  8: Because of  complications encountered in  the  nozzle  fabrication 
process, NASA moved the  test  of  the  flight configuration of  the  redesigned 
Space Shuttle solid rocket motor  (SRM)  to  middle or  late  December  1987. 
(NASA Release 87-151) 

October  12: A  Soviet  space capsule  landed in  eastern Siberia, thousands of 
miles from its designated landing site in Central Asia. The capsule, a biosatel- 
lite  Cosmos  1887, which  carried  two  monkeys, rats,  amphibians, fish,  and 
insects, was launched into orbit September 29,  1987. The planned 2-week fly 
in  space, of  the capsule, was  almost aborted when one of  the monkeys freed 
his  left  hand  on  the  fifth day  of  the mission. ( B  Sun, Oct  13/87; Ny Times, 
Oct  13/87; P Znq, Oct  13/87) 

October  19: General Dynamics Space system Division was  awarded a  con- 
tract by NASA and the Department of Commerce for expendable launch vehi- 
cle transportation services for meteorological spacecraft GOES (geostationary 
operational environmental satellites). The GOES  spacecraft provided nearly 
continuous, high-resolution visual and  infrared imaging of  weather  systems 
over large areas of  the Earth. (NASA Release 87- 156) 

October  22:  NASA announced that  in  the  next  three years  it  would  reduce 
Shuttle use by  launching only 19 space flights. During the same time, it would 
launch  49  satellites  on  untended  rockets. About  30  non-military payloads 
originally planned to be  carried into  orbit  by  the  Shuttle through  1995, will 
now be carried on untended rockets. 

NASA said that  it would launch five science missions in  1989, some with 
international  cooperation.  Four  of  these  missions-the  Magellan,  to  map 
Venus; the Hubble Space Telescope, in cooperation with the European Space 
Agency; and the ASTRO-1 ultraviolet observatory and Galileo, in cooperation 
with Germany to make  a  comprehensive survey of  Jupiter and its moons- 
would  fly on  the  Shuttle. A fifth mission, the  Cosmic Background Explorer 
(COBE) to  investigate cosmic background noise, was  to  launch on  a  Delta. 
Another scheduled Shuttle launch was  the cooperative ESADIASA Ulysses 
mission to observe the polar region of  the Sun. 

134 

OCTOBER 1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

From  1990  through  1995, NASA  expected  to  accelerate deployment  of 
other space science missions by fully utilizing expendable launch vehicles. For 
example, NASA anticipated Delta launches of a Roentgen Satellite in February 
1990 and  the  Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer  in August  1991. (NASA Release 
87-158; LA  Times, Oct 23/87; NY  Times, Oct 23/87; W Times, Oct 23/87) 

*  Martin  Marietta  Manned  Space  Systems,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana; 
Rockwell  International  Space  Transportation  Systems  Division,  Downey, 
California; and United Technologies Corporation, USBI Booster Production 
Company, Inc., Huntsville, Alabama; were  selected for contracts to  perform 
definition studies for a proposed untended  launch vehicle. The new  vehicle, 
called Shuttle-C, would  supplement the  orbiter with  an untended  cargo ele- 
ment. (NASA Release 87-159) 

October  26:  A  military  satellite was  lifted  into  orbit  by  a  Titan  34D,  the 
Nation’s  largest  untended  booster  rocket.  The  launch  from  California’s 
Vandenberg Air  Force Base  was  the  first  successful launch of  a  Titan  34D 
rocket  since  February  1985.  (C  Trib,  Oct  28/87;  LA  Times,  Oct  27/87; 
W Times, Oct 28/87) 

October  28:  William  V.  Boynton,  an  Arizona  University  scientist charged 
with  developing a comet penetrator-lander for NASA, announced that  a pro- 
totype prober was  successfully tested  at  the  Sandia National  Laboratory in 
Albuquerque, New Mexico. The comet penetrator, an integral part of NASA’s 
Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, is an instrument-bearing missile 
designed  to  pierce  a  comet’s  surface  to  a  depth  of  3  feet  or  more. 
(NASA Release 87-161) 

October 30: NASA’s  Office of  Aeronautics and  Space Technology selected 
five proposals for the development of  space flight technology experiments as 
part of  its Industry/University In-Space Technology program. (NASA Release 
87-164) 

President  Ronald  Reagan  signed  into  law  a  $9.6  billion  authorization 
bill  that  provided  NASA  full  funding  to  begin  work  on  the  Space  Station. 
(W Post, Oct 31/87) 

135 

November 

November  2 :  Officials at NASA’s  Ames Research Center in Mountain View, 
California,  reported  that  NASA’s  C-141  Gerard  P.  Kuiper  Airborne 
Observatory would leave on October 3 1, 1987, for New Zealand on a month- 
long mission to  study the  supernova SN-1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper 
would  make  eight  research flights  to  study  the  supernova, located  170,000 
light years away. Supernova SN-1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since 
the  invention  of  a  telescope  some 400  years  ago.  (NASA Release  87-162; 
AvWk, Nov.  9/87) 

November 3 :  NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James 
T.  Rose  announced  new  program  initiatives to  encourage and  expand com- 
mercial space activity. Rose told  some 270 executives from across the coun- 
try, meeting for a  three-day  workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that  the new 
programs  will  build  on  earlier  NASA  commercial  development  policies. 
According to  Rose,  the  agency  already had  awarded $50,000 grants to  206 
small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of  the program initia- 
tives announced by  Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commer- 
cial  secondary payloads  aboard the  Space  Shuttle.  (NASA Release  871165; 
NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87) 

November 6: Appearing before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council, NASA 
Administrator Dr.  James C .  Fletcher said that building the Space Station was 
critical to the United States regaining initiative in space. “It is no longer a ques- 
tion of  whether we  should have long-term goals in space,” Fletcher said. “The 
question is can we afford not to lead.” (LA Times, Nov 7/87) 

November  9:  NASA  announced  that  the  allowable end-of-mission  landing 
weight for Space Shuttle orbiters would be increased from 2 11,000 to 230,000 
pounds. The increase means that roughly 19,000 pounds more payload can be 
carried aloft. The new capability was made possible by  structural analysis and 
additional  review  of  forces  encountered  by  the  orbiter  during  maneuvers 
shortly before landing. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Rear 
Admiral Richard H. Truly  said  that  this new  capability would  add consider- 
able  flexibility  and  efficiency  to  NASA’s  Space  Transportation  System. 
(NASA Release 87-168; AvWk, Nov 9/87; W Pos t ,  Nov  10187) 

After  a  lengthy  debate,  the  European Space Agency  decided  to  fund  an 
independent space program that would give it “full autonomy in space.” Only 

137 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER 1987 

Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the  space exploration pro- 
gram, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the 
Hague  of  ministers  from  the  13 member  states,  with  France  and  Germany 
being the primary proponents of  the new policy in space exploration. 

The  long-range  plan  adapted  by  the  ministers  included  a  $3.7  billion 
“Columbus” project calling for a crew-tended space module to be connected 
to the proposed U.S.-international Space Station; a free-flying human-tended 
Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earth-observation platform. The plan also 
called  for  about  $4.4  billion  for  the  “Hermes” miniature  Space  Shuttle,  a 
reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of  three, and $3.5 bil- 
lion for the “Ariane” 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into 
space. ( L A  Times, Nov  10/87; NY  Times, Nov  10/87; W Pos t ,  Nov  13/87) 

November 12: NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would 
be  tested  in  November  at  the  Naval  Weapons  Center  in  China  Lake, 
California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is to make a decision 
early  in  1988 on  which-if 
the  two  systems would  be  installed 
either-of 
aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. 

One of  the escape systems involved the installation of  two-foot-long trac- 
tor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other 
system consisted of  a  telescoping slide pole  that  would  extend through the 
hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. 
The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. 

Neither  system  would  be  of  use  in  a  Challenger-type  explosion  that 
occurred without warning. But  either could function in  the  event of  a  main 
engine failure  aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the 
Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off  the spacecraft in an 
emergency. (NASA Release 87-170; H  Chron, Nov  13/87; H Pos t ,  Nov 13/87; 
NY   Times, Nov  14/87) 

November 13: The X-Wing, a NASA experimental aircraft, made its first brief 
venture into the air, lifting 25 feet off  the runway for  about  16 seconds. The 
X-Wing concept uses a four-bladed rotor system for vertical takeoff and land- 
ing.  The  first major  test  flight  was  expected to  follow  in  about two  weeks. 
(NASA Release 87-172; Antelope Valley Press, Nov  19/87) 

November  15: The  Pentagon  released a  Defense  Intelligence Agency  study 
which claimed that the Soviet Union had  spent $80 billion on military space 
programs during the last decade. As  a result, the  Soviet Union was  dramati- 
cally expanding its  ability  to  boost  payloads  into  space. The  study  said  the 
Soviet Union operated about 50 types of  space systems for military and civil- 

138 

NOVEMBER 1987 

AS'IRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

1987 
ted St 

November 23: The National Research Council recommended, in its fifth inter- 
im  report  to  NASA,  additional  testing  of  NASA's  new  solid  rocket motor 
before resuming  Shuttle launches, r 
that the scheduled June 1988 
aintained,  however,  that  the 
launch  could  be  postponed.  The 
planned June 1988 launch date could still be met by concentrating on the more 
extensive  tests  and  deferring  some  less  critical  ones.  ( B  Sun,  Nov  24/87; 
NY  Times, Nov 24/87; W Pos t ,  Nov 24/87) 

November  24 :  NASA released  a  report,  requested  by  the U.S. Congress, on 
the extended-duration Space Shuttle orbiter. The report examined key aspects 
of  a program that would allow the Space Shuttle to perform Earth-orbital mis- 
sions for  as  long as  16 days. An  extended-duration  orbiter,  according to  the 
report,  would  be  of  great  benefit  for  space science and  technology. It  also 
could prove useful in developing experiments and crew procedures  in prepa- 
ration  for the Space Station era. (NASA Release 87-174) 

November  28: The Air  Force placed  a military  satellite,  launched  aboard  a 
Titan  34D rocket,  into  orbit  23,000 miles  above  the  Earth.  According  to  a 
spokesman  from  the  Federation of  American  Scientists, the  satellite was  a 
DSP-SR,  one  of  a  series  of  Defense  Support  Program  satellites providing 
early  warning  of  a  hostile  missile  attack.  (NY   Times,  Nov  30/87;  P  Znq, 
Nov  30/87; W Pos t ,  Nov  30187; W Times, Nov 30/87) 

During  November:  Martin Marietta  signed  an  agreement  with  the  British 
Ministry  of  Defense  to  launch a  British  Skynet 4  satellite aboard  its  T i m  
rocket  in  1989. The agreement was yet another step in  the U.S. effort to shift 
the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. 
(W Post, Nov 9/87) 

A  General  Accounting  Office  report  found  no  evidence  that  NASA 
Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had  vio- 
lated  conflict-of-interest  regulations  in  1973,  when  they  chose  Morton 
Thiokol, fnc.  to produce the  solid-fuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. 
The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was request- 
ed  last  December  by  Senator  Albert  Gore  Jr.,  Democrat  of  Tennessee. 
(NY  Times, Nov  5/87; W Pos t ,  Nov  5 /87 )  

NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, select- 
ed  Grumman  Space  Systems;  Bethpage,  New  York,  and  Martin  Marietta 
Astronautics  Group;  Denver,  Colorado,  as  contractors  for  definition  and 

139 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOtlEMBER  1987 

preliminary designs  studies  of  the  Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer 
(FTS). The FTS  is a space robot that will assist crews in  the assembly, main- 
tenance,  and  serving  of  the  Space  Station  and  visiting  spacecraft. 
(NASA Release 87-176; P Znq, Nov 27/87) 

A team  of  British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much 
fuaher away from Earth  than any previously known. The discovery of  the  two 
celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits 
of  the observable universe are still unknown. The new  findings were largely  a 
result of  improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by  the lat- 
est telescopes. (LA  Times, Dec 7/87; Ny Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87) 

140 

December 

December 2:  NASA announced that the long-delayed mission to Jupiter, orig- 
inally  scheduled for  1982, would  be  launched  in   1989.  The  5,870-pound 
untended Galileo spacecraft was  to be  launched from  the  Shuttle Discovery. 
After the  Challenger  accident, NASA decided  to  use  less  powerful  rockets 
than  the  originally planned  Centaur rockets, which  are  fueled with  volative 
hydrogen.  The  substitution required  an “audacious”  rerouting of  the  space- 
craft  in  order  to  use  the  gravitational  force  of  Venus  and  Earth  to  propel 
Galileo toward Jupiter. 

The Galileo mission was  expected  to reach  Jupiter  in   1995. Upon reaching 
Jupiter, the spacecraft was to release a 737-pound probe that would penetrate the 
atmosphere of  the giant gaseous planet. In  addition, the spacecraft was to spend 
two  years  orbiting  Jupiter  and  making  flybys  of  its  four  largest  moons. 
(CSM ,  Dec 3/87; LA  Times, Dec 3/87; USA Today, Dec 3/87; W Post, Dec 3/87) 

December  10:  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  and  Canadian 
Science Minister Frank Oberle approved the agreement on Canadian partici- 
pation in the U.S. Space Station program. The terms of  the preliminary agree- 
ment  were  spelled  out  in  a  memorandum  of  understanding  worked  out  by 
negotiators  from NASA and  the Canadian Ministry of  State for Science and 
Technology. The agreement called for cooperation between the two nations in 
the detailed design, development, operation, and use of  the Space Station. The 
agreement would  then be  submitted  for  approval  to  the  governments  of  the 
two countries. (NASA Release 87-182; NY Times, Dec  12/87) 

December 11: The world’s two largest wind tunnels became fully operational 
at NASA’s Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The two tun- 
nels,  the  upgraded 40-by-80  foot wind  tunnel and the new,  open circuit, 80- 
by-120 foot wind tunnel, are housed in the National Full-scale Aerodynamics 
Complex. Both  tunnels  are  used  for  full-scale  and  large-scale  testing  of 
advanced aircraft. They offer new  capability for testing of  rotorcraft and ver- 
tical  and  short-takeoff  and  landing aircraft  (V/STOL).  (NASA Release  87- 
180; P Znq, Dec  12/87) 

December  12 :   A  Soviet  rocket  burned like  a  huge  f i ib a l l  as it  reentered  the 
Earth’s  atmosphere, lighting  up  the  skies  over  a  broad  area  of  the  West  and 
Midwest. The rocket was used  in the launching of  Soviet communications satel- 
lite Raduga 21 on December 10, 1987. (C Trib, Dec 14/87; LA  Times, Dec 14/87) 

141 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1987 

December  16: NASA  scientists announced  that  they  have  direct  proof  that 
exploding stars produce most  of  the  90-odd  chemical  elements heavier  than 
hydrogen and helium. These elements are part of the composition of planets and 
moons in the  solar system and  also are found in plants and  animals on Earth. 
The findings came from observations and analysis of  the gamma-ray emissions 
from radioactive cobalt produced in the Supernova 1987a explosion. The obser- 
vations were  conducted by  the  Solar Maximum Mission  satellite, which  had 
been studying the Supernova since August 1987, and two balloon-borne exper- 
iments flown in October and November from Alice Springs, Australia, as part 
of  NASA’s  Fall  Supernova Observations Campaign.  (NASA Release 87-185; 
H Post, Dec 20187; NY  Times, Dec 17/87; P Inq, Dec 20187; W Post, Dec 17/87) 

A  spokesman  for  Pentagon’s  Strategic  Defense  Initiative  Organization 
(SDIO) stated that research and an experiment conducted by SDIO demonstrat- 
ed for the first time that lasers and other high-powered electrical devices can be 
operated in space without heavy insulation to prevent short circuits. The exper- 
iment involved the launching of  a 60-foot rocket from Wallops Island, Virginia, 
on December 13, 1987. Extending from the nose cone of  the rocket were two 
probes about 39 inches apart. These probes were alternatively charged with high 
amounts of  electrical power, up to 44,000 volts. Although there was no insula- 
tion between  them, no  arcing of  the electrical charge between  the  two probes 
occurred, as it would commonly occur on Earth. The experiment confirmed that 
space is a good insulator in and of  itself. (NY  Times, Dec  17/87) 

December 18: NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet coun- 
terparts December 7-13  to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union 
planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked 
the  United  States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from 
another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in  1994. ( C S M ,  Dec 21/87; 
H  Post, Dec 20187; NY  Times, Dec  19/87) 

December 19 :  An  apparent technical problem forced the cancellation of  the 
test  firing of  the  redesigned  126-foot-long, 1 .2-million-pound Space Shuttle 
solid rocket motor, Development Motor-9 (DM-9), to be used in the first post- 
Challenger  flight.  The  failed  test  took  place  at  Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch 
Facility near Brigham  City, Utah.  The  test was  canceled one  second before 
ignition. This was the second of  at least five full-scale tests planned to check 
the  operation  of  the  booster’s  redesigned  O-ring  joints.  The  first  full- 
duration  test  firing  of  a  redesigned motor  took  place  on August  30,  1987. 
(NASA Release 87-183; P Znq, Dec 20187;  W Post, Dec 20187) 

December  21 :   The  Soviet  Union  launched  a  Soyuz  TM-4  from  Baikonur 
Space Center in Soviet Central Asia. The spacecraft, scheduled to dock with 
the  Soviet  space  station Mir  on  December  23,  1987, carried  three  Soviet 

142 

DECEMBER  1987 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

cosmonauts:  mission  commander  Vladimir  Titov,  flight  engineer  Musakhi 
Manarov,  and  research  scientist Anatoly Levchenko.  They  were  expected  to 
work  together  with  the  crew  already  aboard  Mir  for  about  a  week,  then 
Levchenko would return to Earth with YUri Romanenko, who had been  in the 
space station for 322 days. The new crew aboard Mir was expected to remain for 
a  year,  breaking Romanenko’s record.  ( B  Sun, Dec  22/87, Dec  29/87;  C S M ,  
Dec 30/87; LA  Times, Dec 26/87; NY  Times, Dec 22/87, Dec 27/87, Dec 29/87; 
P Inq, Dec 22/87, Dec 25/87, Dec 30187; W Post, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87) 

* 

December 23: NASA  awarded contracts to  the  four  aerospace firms  it  had 
selected on December 1, 1987, to design, develop, test, evaluate, and deliver 
the  components  and  systems  comprising  the  proposed  crew-tended  Space 
Station, planned  for  orbit  in  the  mid-1990s.  The  contracts  issued  covered 
Phase I,  the already approved elements of  the Space Station program. Phase 
I1 would  cover  any potentially needed enhancements of  the  Space Station’s 
capabilities. The four companies selected, each to perform a unique but inter- 
dependent portion  of  the  total  program, were  Boeing Aerospace Company, 
Huntsville, Alabama; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, with loca- 
tions  in Huntington Beach, California and Houston, Texas; General Electric 
Company, Astro-Space Division, with locations in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania 
and  East  Windsor,  New  Jersey;  and  Rocketdyne  Division,  Rockwell 
International,  Canoga  Park,  California.  (NASA  Release  87- 177;  NASA 
Release 87-187; C  Trib, Dec 2/87; LA  Times, Dec 2/87; NY   Times, Dec 2/87; 
WS J ,  Dec 2/87; W  Pos t ,  Dec 2/87) 

*  NASA  announced  the  retirement  of  Philip  E.  Culbertson,  Associate 
Administrator for Policy and Planning. Culbertson planned to leave NASA in 
mid-January  to  become  President  of  the  Lew  Evans  Foundation.  (NASA 
Release 87- 188) 

NASA announced that White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico, was des- 
ignated an  alternate end-of-mission landing  site for  Space Shuttle missions 
STS-26 through STS-28. The new  site was  to  be  used  for  a  Shuttle landing 
when conditions at Edwards Air Force Base in California precluded landing. 
(NASA Release 87-  189) 

Carver Kennedy, Vice President for Space Services at Morton Thiokol, Inc., 
said  that  engineers  successfully  test-fired  the  company’s  redesigned  Space 
Shuttle booster rocket, planned for use when NASA resumed Shuttle flights in 
June  1988. (WSJ ,  Dec 24/87; W Post, Dec 24/87; W Times, Dec 24/87) 

December  29:  NASA  announced  that  a  more  detailed  examination of  the 
results of  the December 23 cold weather t e s t - f i g  of  the redesigned booster 
rocket revealed that  an outer ring which  anchors the  booster’s  nozzle  came 

143 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1987 

apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two 
minutes of  flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2 ,1987  launch 
of  the  Space  Shuttle. NASA  officials  said  they  were  confident  the  launch 
would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the boost- 
er  rocket,  the  redesigned  field  joints,  functioned perfectly  during  the  test. 
( B   Sun ,   Dec  30187;  NY   Times,  Dec  30187;  W S J ,  Dec  30187;  W  Pos t ,  
Dec 30187; W Times, Dec 30187) 

A  Soyuz  TM-3,  carrying  Colonel  Yuri  V.  Romanenko  and  two  fellow 
Soviet cosmonauts, Aleksander P. Aleksandrov and Anatoly Levchenko, para- 
chuted  to  Earth  about  50  miles  from  the  town  of  Arkalyk  in  Soviet 
Kazakhstan.  The  three  returned  from  the  Soviet  space  station Mir,  where 
Romanenko had set a new record of 326 days in orbit. (NY  Times, Dec 30187) 

The motor section of  an MX missile containing nearly  100,000 pounds of 
rocket propellent exploded at a Morton Thiokol, Inc. plant killing five work- 
ers. The explosion at the company’s Wasatch Operations plant, 25 miles west 
of Brigham City, Utah, was the  fourth major  accident at the plant. The cause 
of  the  explosion was  not  immediately known. Morton Thiokol also was  the 
manufacturer of  the  Space  Shuttle’s booster rocket.  (NY Times, Dec  30187, 
31/87; P Znq, Dec 30187; W Pos t ,  Dec 30187) 

December 30: Two teams of NASA specialists began an inquiry as to why the 
test-firing of the reconstructed Shuttle booster rocket on December 23 failed. 
The same day, Congressman Manuel Lujan, Jr.  of New Mexico urged NASA 
to  find  a  second company, in  addition to Morton Thiokol, Inc.,  to build  the 
booster rocket. ( B  Sun, Dec 3 1/87; H Pos t ,  Dec 3 1/87; USA  Today, Dec 3 1/87; 
W Pos t ,  Dec 31/87; W Times, Dec 31/87) 

The  Soviet newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya  reported  that  two  Soviet cos- 
monauts grew taller while in  space. According to  the paper, cosmonaut Yuri 
Romanenko grew four-tenths of  an inch taller during his record ten and a half 
months  in  space,  and  his  crewmate Alexander Alexandrov  grew  six-tenths 
of  an  inch.  The  gain  in  height  was  because  of  lack  of  gravity  in  space. 
(NY Times, Dec 31/87) 

During  December:  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  reviewed 
Agency  activities during  1987 and  declared  that  “NASA is  on  the  road  to 
recovery.” He believed, “the United  States can maintain a  leadership role  in 
space,.but  only  if  the  Nation  stays  truly  committed to  the  space program.” 
(NASA Release 87-184) 

Industry officials said that the U.S.  aerospace industry recorded the most 
profitable year in its history in  1987. ( P  Znq, Dec  17/87) 

144 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS ,   1988 

January 

January 4 :  NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractor for a long- 
duration,  human-tended  scientific  satellite  called  the  Advanced  X-Ray 
Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The  third  of  NASA’s  four proposed orbiting 
“great observatories”, AXAF would  study  high-energy emissions associated 
with quasars, spinning neutron stars, and black holes, providing valuable infor- 
mation about these phenomena and serving as an important new  tool for basic 
research  in  plasma  physics.  AXAF  would  also  provide  data  on  the  various 
forms of “dark matter” in the universe, which may help determine whether the 
universe  is  an open or closed loop. AXAF could be  scheduled for  launch as 
early as  1995. The orbiting observatory would be  14 feet in diameter, 45 feet 
long, and would weigh 12-15  tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 
miles above the Earth, and would  operate for about  15 years. Maintenance of 
AXAF would be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or the U.S. 
Space Station. (NASA Release 88-1) 

January  4 :  Engineers at Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch facility in Utah conclud- 
ed  that  a  design  flaw  had  led  to  the  failure  of  a  previously untested  Space 
Shuttle booster part during a  full-scale test  firing December 23. NASA offi- 
cials  delayed the  flight  schedule after  they  discovered that  a  portion  of  the 
booster’s nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had  fallen apart during 
testing, a month earlier. 

Engineers finished  taking  the  booster  motor  apart  and  recovered  all  six 
missing pieces  of  the  failed nozzle part.  Known  as  the  outer  boot  ring,  the 
failed  part  anchored  the  booster’s nozzle  to  a  flexible  rubbery  “boot”  that 
allowed the nozzle to  swivel. One purpose of  the boot ring was to shield the 
metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense 
heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster’s nozzle was delib- 
erately moved  to  the maximum  seven degrees-some 
three degrees beyond 
what would be  required during  a  normal Shuttle flight. NASA was  looking 
into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring 
to come apart or delaminate. 

A group of  officials at  the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, devel- 
opers of  the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the 
nozzle,  studied whether  the  maneuver  should  be  repeated  in  future  tests  of 
whatever design is adopted, or whether a  less  severe maneuver would be an 
adequate test  under  the  more  stringent, post-Challenger standards. The  test 

147 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1988 

failure would probably  force a  delay of  6 to  10 weeks  in  the  resumption of 
Space Shuttle flights, delaying the  STS-26 flight of  Discovery  to no  earlier 
than August 1988. (NASA Release 87-190; UP I ,  Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; 
hT Times, Jan 6/88) 

January   11:  Speaking  at  the  American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and 
Astronautics  supported Aerospace  Sciences Conference, Ross  M.  Jones,  an 
engineer at NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California, pre- 
sented  a proposal to  launch very  small, low-cost scientific probes  to  various 
destinations  in  the  solar  system  by  using  Earth-orbiting  electromagnetic 
launchers or railguns.  Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong elec- 
tromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were 
being developed by  the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. 
(NASA Release  88-4; M News,  Jan  11/88; W  Times, Jan  11/88; LA   Times, 
Jan  11/88; LA Star News, Jan  12/88) 

January  13: President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congress creating a 
joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program for the development 
of  the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS was  intended to  provide a 
launch  system  that  would  meet  long-term national  launch  needs;  would  be 
flexible, robust, reliable, and responsive; and would drastically cut costs in all 
elements of the space launch system. The management plan created a joint pro- 
gram office headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputy pro- 
gram manager. DoD would manage  the  systems engineering and  integration, 
vehicle, logistics, and  payload  module. NASA would manage  liquid engine 
systems  and  focused  technology  efforts.  DoD  would  accept  full  funding 
responsibility  for  the  program,  with  any  unique  civil  requirements  not 
addressed by the ALS baseline being funded by NASA. (NASA Release 88-5) 

January  15: NASA  announced  that  Dr.  Raymond  S .   Colladay, Associate 
Administrator for  the  Office  of  Aeronautics and  Space Technology, would 
leave  the Agency  to  serve  as  Director of  the  Defense Advanced  Research 
Projects Agency, effective February  1, 1988. (NASA Release 88-6) 

January 22:  EG&G  Florida, Inc.  was  awarded  a  $635,529 contract to  make 
modifications to  the  Space Shuttle Landing Facility  (SLF). This work  would 
include grinding a  3,500-foot section at each end of  the runway to  smooth the 
surface  texture,  removing  cross  grooves  and  adding  longitudinal “corduroy 
grooving.” Additionally, existing landing zone light fEtures were to be modified 
and markings on the entire runway and overruns repainted. These modifications 
were  intended to enhance landing safety by  reducing Space Shuttle orbiter tire 
wear during landing operations. The SLF is  15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide, 
with a 1,000-foot paved safety overrun at each end. Work was scheduled to begin 
January 26 and be completed by mid-March 1988. (NASA Release 88-10) 

148 

JANUARY 1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

January 26: An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger 
blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold 
weather was  named  a  winner  of  the  Scientific Freedom  and Responsibility 
Award.  Roger M.  Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.-the 
manufacturer  of  the  Space  Shuttle  solid  rocket  motor  blamed  for  the 
Challenger accident  that  killed  seven  crew  members-was 
honored  by  the 
American Association for the Advancement of  Science (AAAS) for attempt- 
ing  to  halt  the  launch  and  for  his  attempts  to  have  the  flawed  rocket 
redesigned. The AAAS,  in  an announcement, cited Boisjoly “for his  exem- 
plary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engi- 
neer by  alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger 
Space Shuttle and  for  steadfastly recommending against the  tragic  launch.” 
Boisjoly was  to receive the AAAS  award during February  14 ceremonies in 
Boston. (LA  Star News ,  Jan 27/88) 

January  26:  This  date  marked  a  decade  of  continuous  operation  of  the 
International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE is credited with some of the 
most  important  advances in  modem  astronomy, including the  discovery of 
galactic halos, monitoring volcanic activities on Io, beaming the first images 
ever recorded of Halley’s comet from space, and monitoring the intense emis- 
sions  of  ultraviolet  radiation  from  Supernova  1987A. The  IUE  was  a  joint 
effort of  NASA, the European Space Agency  (ESA), and the British Science 
and  Engineering Research Council  (SERC).  Goddard  scientists, engineers, 
and technicians designed, integrated, and tested the IUE. An  ESA team built 
the  solar array and the ground facilities near Madrid. SERC, in collaboration 
with the University College, London, provided four TV camera detectors for 
transforming the spectral displays into video signals. (NASA Release 88-9) 

January 27: NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of  the 
next Space Shuttle mission, STS-26. This new launch target was selected fol- 
lowing a major program assessment, subsequent to  the most recent full-scale 
firing of  the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which 
revealed a  design  defect  in  the  outer  boot  ring  of  the  SRM case-to-nozzle 
joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs 
that would  boost  the  orbiter Discovery on  STS-26 would use  an alternative 
outer  boot  ring  configuration  tested  successfully during  the  Development 
Motor-8 firing in August  1987. 

Rollout  of  Discovery  to  Kennedy  Space  Center  Launch  Pad  39B  was 
scheduled  for  May  13,  and  a  flight  readiness  firing  of  Discovery’s  main 
engines  and  liquid  propulsion  system  was  to  take  place  on  June  13 
(NASA Release 88-11; N y  Times, Jan 28/88; W Pos t ,  Jan 28/88; USA  Today, 
Jan 28/88; LA  Times, Jan 28/88; P  Inq ,  Jan 28/88) 

149 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1988 

January 27: The Washington Post reported that the Martin Marietta Corporation 
agreed to launch communications satellites for the General Electric Corporation 
(G.E.) on untended Titan rockets during the next several years. According to the 
news  account,  the  agreement  to  launch  15 satellites would  establish  Martin 
Marietta as the dominant company, developed in the two years since the January 
28,  1986, explosion of  the  Challenger, in  the  domestic  rocket  business. The 
ageeement  was  expected  to  bring  in  revenues  between  $750  million  and 
$1 billion  for Martin Marietta through the early part of  the  next  decade, one 
senior company official told the Post. Analysts told the newspaper that the G.E. 
agreement would make Martin Marietta dominant over two U.S. rivals  in  the 
commercial  satellite  launching  business-McDonneLl  Douglas  Corporation, 
manufacturer of  the  Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, manu- 
facturer of  the Atlas Centaur rocket. (UPZ, Jan 27/88.) 

January 27: A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of  an alarming increase in 
the  amount of  space debris in  low-Earth orbit since the first orbital launch in 
1957. The report, prepared by  Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of  a U.N. panel on 
“Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities  in  Space,” declared that 
“action  on  an  international scale is  obviously needed  to  deal with  the  global 
issue of  space debris.” Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and 
Geophysics of  the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space col- 
lisions until now had been caused by  debris from “normal” activities in space. 
However, as  a  result  of  the  first U.S.  anti-satellite weapon  tests,  part  of  the 
Strategic Defense Initiative program, “there are already signs of  ‘willful’ frag- 
mentation and production of  space debris,” he  said. 

Bauer said that in the 30 years of  the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik 
of  October 4,  1957, about  18,000 man-made objects  had  been  projected  into 
space. About 7,000 of  them, larger than 8 inches-the  visibility limit of  radar- 
remain in “near-Earth space.” Of  these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 per- 
cent are burned-out rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 
percent  are  “active” satellites. Some 50  objects  “appear to  contain radioactive 
material.” Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in 
size from 4 to  8 inches and  about 50,000  in  the  range of  112 inch to 4 inches. 
Below  that, there  are “millions to  billions of  metal and paint  chips in  the  mil- 
limeter and  submillimeter range” which pose greater danger than would  appear 
from their size. Bauer claimed that a half-millimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 
miles per hour “could easily penetrate a  space suit and even kill  an astronaut.” 
Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, “exact- 
ly where most of  the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations operate.” 

Bauer said that at this point “the possibility of  a collision with space debris 
is still very  small, but  is not completely negligible, particularly compared to 
the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites.” Bauer list- 

150 

JANUARY 1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

ed several examples of damage to satellites caused by m 
(UP I ,  Jan 27/88) 

January 28: NASAAdministrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher and Hiroyuki Osawa, 
President  of  the  National Space Development Agency  of  Japan  (NASDA), 
recently  signed  an  agreement  to  allow NASA to  directly  receive data  from 
Japan’s  Earth  Resources  Satellite  (ERS-1).  The  agreement  would  allow 
NASA to have access to real-time data from Japan’s ERS- 1 synthetic aperture 
radar and optical sensor.  NASA would receive the data at a ground station at 
the University  of Alaska, Fairbanks. Data  from  the ground  station would  be 
provided  to  NASDA.  Japan’s  ERS-1  was  scheduled  to  be  launched  by 
NASDA on the H-1 launch vehicle in early  1992. (NASA Release 88-12) 

*  NASA  commemorated  the  second  anniversary  of  the  Space  Shuttle 
Challenger accident.  At  the Kennedy Space Center  (KSC), Florida, workers 
preparing  to  resume  Shuttle  flights  paused  to  pay  silent  tribute  to  the 
Challenger  crew  by  halting  all  activity  at  11:38  a.m.,  the  time  of  the 
Challenger  liftoff  from launch Pad  39-B on January 28,  1986.  Flags around 
KSC and a t  NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half  staff 
while workers  stood  silent for 73 seconds, the length of  the fatal Challenger 
flight.  Just before  the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S .  McCartney  spoke 
to  workers  over a  television  circuit and  loudspeakers  saying:  “As  we  make 
preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to 
remember  the  men  and  women  of  the  Challenger  crew.”  (UP I ,  Jan  28/88; 
LA  Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88) 

January 29: It was announced in a recent NASA press briefing that there had 
been  a  total  of  230  reported  “close  calls”  since  the  Challenger  accident. A 
“close call” was  defined by NASA as an incident  in which there is no injury, 
no damage, and no impact on schedule, but which possesses the potential for 
a more serious mishap.  (NASA Release 1-29-88) 

Scientists  at  NASA’s  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC),  Greenbelt, 
Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the 
effect of  small comets entering the Earth’s atmosphere. Following two abort- 
ed attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by  Comets  (ERIC) exper- 
iment  payload  was  launched  from  GSFC’s  Wallops  Flight  Test  Facility, 
Wallops  Island, Viginia,  by  a  two-stage  suborbital Terrier-Black Brant  VC 
rocket. At  the  186-mile (300 kilometer) apogee of  suborbital trajectory, the 
payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into 
the upper  atmosphere, simulating the release of  gases that would result  from 
the impact of  a small comet with the Earth‘s atmosphere. The gas release was 
synchronized with  the  passage  of  NASA’s Dynamic Explorer (DE)  satellite 
over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops 

151 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY  1988 

in  ultraviolet  (W) light  in  order  to  detect  ionospheric depletion resulting 
from the release of  the gases. The purpose of  the experiment was  to test  the 
hypothesis that  the phenomenon of  ionospheric depletion-a 
sudden appear- 
ance  of  small  holes  in  the  Ea r th s  ionosphere-is 
caused  by  the  impact  of 
small,  undetected  comets.  The  principal  investigator  for  the  project,  Dr. 
Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on pre- 
liminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere “seemed to last longer than we 
had  anticipated.” (GSFC Release 88-5; UPZ, Jan 29/88) 

January  30 :   This  date  marked  the  thirtieth  anniversary  of  the  launch  of 
Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of 
the  3 1-pound  satellite  aboard  a  modified  Army  Jupiter-C  booster  marked 
America‘s entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch 
of  two  Sputnik satellites.  In  addition, Explorer  1 discovered the Van  Allen 
radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPZ, Jan 30/88) 

152 

February 

February 2: A DMSP F-9 meteorological observation satellite was  successful- 
ly launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an Atlas-E rocket from Vandenberg Air  Force 
Base  Space Launch  Complex-3  in  California. The  1,650-pound Department 
of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a near-polar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; 
Aeronautics and Space Report of  the President: 1988, 17 1) 

February 3 :  An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnell Douglas 
Corporation debuted in a one-hour flight from the Douglas Aircraft Facility in 
Long Beach, California.  The  aircraft, with  one unducted fan  (UDF)  engine 
and one ordinary jet engine, was a forerunner of  the planned MD-91 and MD- 
92 passenger jets that McDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. 
The UDF engine, developed by  GE, had demonstrated significant reductions 
in fuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas’ MD- 
91 and MD-92  airliners were being developed to meet the expected demand 
among airlines for  alternative, fuel-efficient aircraft during  the  latter  1990s. 
“This is  as big  a jump  in  technology  as  going from propellers to jets,”  said 
Walt Orlowski, program manager for the experimental aircraft. “We are at the 
forefront of  aviation technology.” (LA  Times, Feb 3/88) 

February  6: A  Trident  1 missile  exploded  18  seconds  after  a  training  test 
launch from the nuclear submarine Simdn Bolivar. A brief statement issued by 
the  Navy  said  the  first  stage  fired  as  planned  but  suffered  a  malfunction 
shortly after breaching the ocean surface 50 miles off Cape Canaveral, Florida, 
in  the Atlantic Ocean. This was  the third  failure for the Trident series of  sub- 
marine-launched ballistic missiles since August. The Navy planned to conduct 
an investigation of the test failure. (W Post, Feb 7/88; W Times, Feb 8/88) 

February  8: A NASA Delta  181 launch vehicle  carrying  a  major  Strategic 
Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07  p.m. EST 
from Cape Canaveral Air  Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, 
the heaviest ever carried by  a Delta rocket, consisted of  a main orbiting sen- 
sor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during 
the first 4 hours of the 12-hour experiment. The goal of  the $250 million exer- 
cise was  to  test the ability of  an orbiting sensor platform to detect and  track 
the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) 
in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solid-fuel rockets whose exhaust 
plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of  Soviet ICBMs, where- 
as  other  test  objects  simulated  real  and  “dummy”  Soviet  warhead  reentry 

153 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1988 

vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and  subsatellites were moni- 
tored by  over  100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the ground-based 
component of  an  antimissile defense  system.  In  addition,  the  exercise  also 
included the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a @foot  sounding rock- 
e t   launched  from  Kauai,  Hawaii.  The  experiment  was  declared  a  success 
despite the  failure of  an  infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally sched- 
uled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve mal- 
function on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the  12-hour exer- 
cise wouId be transmitted to Earth over a  10-day period. (SSR 1988 008A-D; 
UP I ,  Feb 9/88; M  Times, Feb  9/88;  W Post, Feb 9/88;  W  Times, Feb 9/88; 
USA  Today, Feb 9/88) 

NASA announced that Andrew  J .   Stofan, Associate Administrator for  the 
Space Station, would retire from the Agency on April  1.  Stofan’s career with 
NASA spanned nearly  30 years. He had  directed the  Space Station program 
since  June  1986. During  his  tenure,  the  program  underwent  a  major  cost 
review which culminated in  an Administration-approved plan to  develop the 
Space  Station  in  two  phases.  Stofan  also  oversaw  the  establishment of  the 
Space Station program office in Reston, Virginia.(NASA Release 88-16) 

February  11 : The White House officially unveiled a  comprehensive “Space 
Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century,” intend- 
ed  to  assure U.S. space leadership into  the  21st  century. The  release of  the 
space policy had  been delayed for  several days because of  a dispute among 
NASA, the President’s Economic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects 
of  the commercial space initiative.  The most controversial component of  the 
initiative  was  the  proposed  Industrial  Space  Facility  (ISF),  an  orbiting, 
Shuttle-tended materials processing laboratory that would be jointly used by 
NASA and by private companies. The ISF was being promoted by  some mem- 
bers of Congress and the Economic Policy Council as an interim step toward 
the permanently crew-tended Space Station. NASA Administrator Dr.  James 
C. Fletcher submitted a “minority report” to the president opposing the poli- 
cy Council’s recommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the 
ISF from Space Industries, Inc.,  a  commercial space venture.  In  response to 
the Administrator’s concerns, the commercial space policy statement recom- 
mended  competitive bidding  to  build  the  ISF  and  a  reconfiguration of  the 
facility as a crew-tended laboratory. 

A draft of the 39-page commercial space initiative included a report by  the 
National Security Council on national security implications of commercializ- 
ing  space, and  legislative and  administrative proposals by  President Ronald 
Reagan’s Economic Policy Council on how to promote commercialization of 
space. Among  other  key  proposals were  the  promotion of  a  private  launch 
vehicle industry and the establishment of  limits on the amount of  third-party 
liability insurance coverage commercial space projects would have to carry. 

154 

FEBRUARY  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

President Reagan  also  announced a program to develop the  technologies 
needed to conduct human-assisted exploration of  the solar system, including 
a  mission  to  Mars.  The  program,  labeled  Project  Pathfinder,  would  allot 
NASA $100 million in fiscal year  1989 to begin developing technologies for 
tended missions to  the Moon  and Mars.  (Presidential Directive  on National 
Space Policy: Fact  Sheet, Feb  11/88; WH Release, Feb  11/88; NY Times, Jan 
24/88; W Times, Jan 27/88; AvWk, Feb 1/88) 

February 15: NASA successfully launched the first of  three suborbital rocket 
experiments  to  study  Supernova  1987A. The  rocket,  launched  from  the 
Woomera, Australia Range, carried an x-ray  spectrometer that observed x-ray 
emissions  in  the  0.3-7  keV  band.  Two  additional rocket  experiments were 
scheduled  for  launch  during  a  window  lasting  until  March  20.  An  earlier 
series of  sounding rocket observations of  Supernova 1987A were conducted 
from Woomera during November and December 1987. Both campaigns used 
Black Brant IX two-stage, solid-fuel rockets.  (LRC Release 88-7) 

February 24: A segment of  a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was test fired 
at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a test of  the solid rocket motor 
nozzle joint.  The  overall  test  objective was  to  evaluate performance of  the 
redesigned solid rocket motor case-to-nozzle joint that had an insulation adhe- 
sive  defect  and  damaged O-ring  in  order  to  determine  the  fail-safe perfor- 
mance of  the  redesigned joint.  The redesigned case-to-nozzle joint  included 
100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded  insulation surfaces, and  an  added 
"wiper"  O-ring  designed to keep the adhesive on the insulation surfaces dur- 
ing  assembly.  The  test  was  part  of  the  Shuttle  motor  redesign  program. 
(NASA Release 88-23) 

NASA announced that i t  would  lease to  the U S .  Government unassigned 
space aboard a commercially developed space facility. The leasing agreement 
would apply for five years beginning at  the end of  fiscal year  1993. At  least 
30 percent of  the facility would be available for commercial use. 

The facility would be deployed, checked out, and serviced periodically on 
orbit  by  Space  Shuttle  crews.  It  would  provide  a  crew-tended, shirtsleeve 
workspace  and  would  also  be  able  to  operate  in  an  untended,  free-flying 
mode,  providing  a  microgravity  environment  for  periods  of  four  to  six 
months.  NASA  would  initiate  an  open  competition  to  be  managed  by  the 
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 88-25) 

February 26: NASA announced the appointment of Manuel (Manny) Peralta 
as Associate Administrator for Management, effective February 28.  He  had 
been  acting  in  this  post  since April  28,  1987, replacing June Gibbs Brown, 
nominated by  the President to become Inspector General for the Department 

155 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1988 

of  Defense.  Prior  to  joining  NASA,  Peralta  had  over  30  years  of  industry 
experience in business, engineering, and project management, most recently 
as  a  senior executive with Exxon,  responsible for  implementation of  world- 
wide capital projects and  the European Engineering Office. (NASA Release 
87-26 and Key Personnel Change Announcement, Feb 25/88) 

February 29: NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747-100 jetliner to 
serve as  a  second  Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft  (SCA)  for  the  space  trans- 
portation system.  A letter contract was  signed with Boeing Military @lane 
Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for 
NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and 
eliminate a potential single-point failure in the space transportation system. 

The 231-foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehi- 
cles  from  landing sites to  orbiter processing facilities at  the Kennedy Space 
Center, Florida. The 747-100, which  is nearly  identical to the original SCA, 
was  selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and  operation. 
(NASA Release 88-28; JSC Release 88-005) 

During February: Aviation Week Space  Technology  reported  that  the  Soviet 
Union  was  assessing a major  expansion of  its  untended Mars balloon/rover 
mission planned for  1994. Soviet officials were evaluating the possibility of 
significantly increasing the payload capability of  its dual Mars orbiterflander 
spacecraft by using aerobraking instead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian 
orbit. Aerobraking would enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed 
to decelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit, thereby making 
available an additional 3,300 pounds of  payload capacity. 

An  approved aerobraking maneuver would  give  the  Soviets several new 
features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a  1 10-pound subsatellite that 
would be released into Martian orbit to provide Mars gravity data; 10 “mete- 
orbeacons” dropped  on  the  surface  that  would  return  data  on  temperature, 
pressure, and wind  velocity; two  penetrators that would  dive as  deep  as  16 
feet into Mars’ surface to return data on chemical composition, soil tempera- 
ture, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiter imaging system; and 
two  Earth-return  vehicles, which  would  serve  as  test  vehicles  for  a  future 
automated soil sample return mission.  (AvWk ,  Feb 29/88) 

Using  NASA’s  new  supercomputer  at  the  Numerical  Aerodynamics 
Simulation  Facility,  Dr.  Kozo  Fujii,  a  research  fellow  at  NASA’s  Ames 
Research Center, Mountain  View,  California, developed a  computer model 
that simulates the air-flow field physics associated with vortex breakdown and 
provides new  insights  into its causes. Vortex breakdown is a complex phenome- 
non  that  can  cause  loss  of  lift  and  control  for  high-performance  aircraft. 

156 

FEBRUARY 1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Understanding  and  eventually  controlling  vortex  breakdown  would  improve 
maneuverability and safety for high-performance aircraft. (NASA Release 88-13) 

157 

March 

March I : NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordi- 
nated by  NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using 
satellites to  study how  the Earths  tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea 
and  Central  and  South America.  The  experiment,  spanning  several  years, 
would  allow  researchers  to  chart  the  motions  of  dozens of  land  sites  in  16 
countries  using  signals  from  orbiting  navigation  satellites. Research  teams 
carreied electronic receivers designed to pick  up  signals from  seven NAVS- 
TAR  satellites operated  by  the  U.S.  Department of  Defense,  as  part  of  the 
Global Positioning System (GPS) program.  By  locating receiver equipment 
at established survey markers in  South America and  the Caribbean, and col- 
lecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers 
calculated the  location of  receiving  sites on  the  ground  and  are planned  to 
compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. 

The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of  the southern 
Caribbean  Sea;  the  Cocos  plate,  in  the  Pacific  Ocean  off  the  west  coast  of 
Central America; the Nazca plate, off  the west coast of  South America; and the 
South American plate, upon which lies most of  the South American continent. 
The  research  was  funded  by  NASA’s  Office  of  Space  Science  and 
Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 88-30) 

March 3 :  NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before the House 
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on the agency’% proposed 1989 
budget. He  stressed that  1989 would  be a  crucial year  for NASA,  a  year  that 
would “make or break” the Nation’s space program. The proposed budget includ- 
ed funds to  increase the  rate of  Shuttle flights in  1989 in order to  “fly off’ the 
backlog of  vital defense and  science missions. A build up  of  funding for Space 
Station hardware development was  also requested. Dr. Fletcher testified that the 
requested additional funds for the Space Station were the minimum necessary to 
avoid the  disbandment of  development teams  and the indefinite deferral or can- 
cellation of  that program. He also warned that  if  funds for advanced technology 
were  not  approved, the  necessary technological foundation for  future achieve- 
ments would not be built, and the goal of  long-term U.S. space leadership would 
“become an idle dream.”  (1989 NASA Authorization Hearings Before the House 
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 88- 
31; AP, Mar 22/88; W Times, Mar 23/88; LATimes, Mar 23/88) 

159 

A S T R o N A u n c s  AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH 1988 

*  NASA Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom 
was  the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, 
Washington, D.C. He replaced Andrew  J.  Stofan, who recently announced he 
was  leaving  the  Agency  on  April  1.  Odom  joined  the  U.S. Army's  rocket 
research and  development team  at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in  1956, as a 
systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in  1959, 
where he held various engineering and technical management positions, includ- 
ing that of Chief of  the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second 
stage  of  the  Saturn V  launch  3  vehicle.  He  was  appointed Manager  of  the 
External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in  1972 and became 
Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 
1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom 
is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 88-32) 

March 7:  In response to a civil suit brought under the Freedom of Information 
Act  by  the Associated Press  and  six  other  news  organizations, the  Justice 
Department disclosed documentation showing that  the  Federal Government 
and Morton Thiokol paid $7,735,000 in cash and annuities to settle all claims 
with  the  families of  four of  the  crew members who died  in  the explosion of 
the Shuttle Challenger. Thiokol, maker of the faulty booster rocket blamed for 
the January 28,  1986, explosion, paid $4,641,000. The Government's share of 
the  settlement was $3,094,000.  The  settlements were reached on December 
29,  1986, with  the  immediate  survivors  of  the  spacecraft  crew  members, 
Francis R.  Scobee, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory  B.  Jarvis,  and  Sharon Christa 
McAuliffe. Settlements had been reached among Thiokol and two other fam- 
of  Judith Resnik and Ronald E. McNair-with 
ilies-those 
no  Government 
contribution. A claim by  the widow of Michael J .   Smith against Thiokol was 
still pending in Federal court. The Federal Government maintained that it can- 
not be held  liable for the deaths of  civilian and military government erriploy- 
ees who die on duty. (U P I ,  Mar 8/88; NY Times, Mar 8/88; W Pos t ,  Mar 8/88; 
W S J ,  Mar  8/88;  USA  Today, Mar  8/88; LA  Times, Mar  8/88; W  Times, Mar 
8/88; C Trib, Mar 8/88; P Znq, Mar 8/88; AP, Mar  13/88) 

March 8: NASA announced that preparations were under way  to bring on line 
two new Space Shuttle abort-landing sites in northwestern Africa. These sites 
would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic 
abort during  the  launch of  STS-26 and  subsequent missions. The  new  sites 
would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and 
Banjul, The Gambia. 

With  the  addition  of  these  new  sites,  and  the  continued use  of  sites  at 
Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of  transat- 
lantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would 
be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of 

160 

MARCH 1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

STS-26. Robert Fleming, program manager for  the contingency landing site 
program at Kennedy Space Center, said, “These sites must be operational and 
all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to 
use them. But they will be ready.”  (NASA Release 88-34) 

March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving 
system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of 
Alaska  and  its  surrounding seas.  The overall  system,  including a  10-meter 
receiving antenna called  the Alaska  S A R  Facility, was  to  be  located  at  the 
University  of  Alaska,  Fairbanks  (UAF),  managed  by  the  university 
Geophysical  Institute,  and  implemented  by  NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion 
Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satel- 
lites  carrying  synthetic aperture radar  (SAR), which  penetrates thick  cloud 
cover and produces data for high resolution images. 

The  facility was  scheduled to  be  fully  operational in  time  for  the April 
1990 launch of  the  ESA satellite E-ERS  1. The  facility was  to  receive data 
from  Japan’s J-ERS  1  satellite and  the  Canadian-led multinational Radarsat 
satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of  investigators, cochaired by 
project  scientists from JPL and  the University of  Alaska, to  assist in  facility 
development. (NASA Release 88-35) 

*  NASA  announced  that  George W.S.  Abbey  was  to  be  the  new  Deputy 
Associate Administrator for the Office of  Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, 
effective  immediately.  Abbey  had  been  Special Assistant  to  the  Director, 
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November  1987.  He began his 
NASA  career  in  1967 as Technical Assistant to  the  Manager of  the Apollo 
Spacecraft Program.  He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 
1969, Director of  Flight Operations in  1976, and Director of  the Flight Crew 
Operations Directorate in  1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and ser- 
vice awards. (NASA Release 88-36) 

March 11: A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 3 launch vehicle was suc- 
cessfully launched from Kourou  Launch  Center  in  French Guiana carrying 
two communications satellite payloads, including a U.S. satellite. The launch- 
ing  had  been  scheduled for  December but  was  delayed  for  extra  tests  after 
abnormalities were  detected  in  the  oxygen  and  liquid hydrogen  third-stage 
engine.  Twenty  minutes  after  launch,  the  Ariane  3  released  the  French 
Telecom  1C and GTE s  Spacenet III Geostar RO1  communications satellites 
for auto-boost into geostationary orbit, 22,554 miles above the Equator. The 
spacenet satellite was expected to begin  its boost toward  geostationary orbit 
at 87 degrees west longitude on Wednesday. (FBIS-WEU-88-049, Mar 14/88; 
SSR  1988 018A-D; N y  T imes ,  Mar  13/88;  W Post,  Mar 12/88; LA  Times, 
Mar  12/88; C Trib, Mar  13/88) 

161 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCCH  1988 

March  12:  NASA's  C-141 Gerard P.  Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) 
departed  NASA's  Ames  Research  Center,  Mountain  View,  California,  for 
Guam to  study the  Sun's atmosphere during the  total  solar eclipse of March 
17-18.  A team of  seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through 
the shadow of  the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean.  The scientists 
were  interested  in  the  few  seconds  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  solar 
eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by  the Moon and 
when  the  edge  of  the  solar  disk  would  begin  to  reappear  from  behind  the 
Moon. The  Kuiper would  intercept  the  path  of  the  eclipse  about  600 miles 
northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C-141 jet transport air- 
craft, is fitted with a 36-inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 
feet. Measurements of  the solar atmosphere would be made at the far-infrared 
wavelengths of  30 , 50 ,  100 ,200 ,400 ,  and 800 micrometers, representing the 
first attempt to simultaneously record these wavelengths from the Sun on such 
a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 88-37; ARC Release 88-08> 

March  15: A  report  released  by  an  international panel  of  over  100 scientists 
assembled by NASA showed that the depletion of  the Earth's ozone layer over the 
Northern  Hemisphere  had  increased  at  a  much  faster  rate  than previously 
believed. The report, prepared  over  17 months,  provided  definitive evidence 
showing that the ozone layer, which shields life on Earth from harmful ultravio- 
let radiation, had  been depleted by  an average of  about 2 .3  percent, since  1969 
over most of  the United States, and by  as much as 5 percent over the South Pole. 
The observed ozone loss was at least twice as large as scientists had predicted and 
was attributed primarily to the continued release of  chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). 

The  NASA  study group reexamined years  of  ground-based and satellite 
observations of  the  atmosphere in order to remove the normal biennial fluc- 
tuations of  many  atmospheric characteristics and  the  effects of  the  11-year 
solar cycle. The  ground-based observations were  limited to mid-latitudes in 
the Northern Hemisphere because  there were  few  stations elsewhere in  the 
world.  This was the first effort by scientists to separate the effects of  solar and 
biennial fluctuations from the monthly data at different latitudes. The release 
of the study results followed  ratification by the U.S. Congress of the Montreal 
Protocol, an agreement endorsed by 46  countries, which calls for a 50 percent 
reduction in  emissions of  CFCs by  the end of  the century.  (UPZ, Mar  15/88; 
NY Times, Mar  16/88; W Pos t ,  Mar  16/88; W Times, Mar  16/88; USA  Today, 
Mar  16/88; WS J ,  Mar  16/88; C SM ,  Mar  16/88; B  Su n ,  Mar  16/88; P Inq, Mar 
16/88; C Trib, Mar  16/88; L A  Times, Mar 21/88) 

March 15: NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting current planning 
for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehi- 
cles through fiscal year  1993. Two interplanetary missions were planned for 
launch in 1989: Magellan, a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative 

162 

MARCH  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

project  with  Germany  to  survey  Jupiter  and  its  moons.  The  Hubble  Space 
Telescope also maintained the  flight assignment date of  June  1989. Astro-1,  a 
Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in the ultraviolet spectrum, was 
being reconfigured to enhance the study of  Supernova 1987a and was slated to 
fly  on  STS-35  in  November  1989. Two  additional Spacelab missions  were 
assigned  flights  for  September  1990-a 
Spacelab Life  Sciences mission  in 
March  and  the  first  Atmospheric  Laboratory  for  Applications  and  Science 
(ATLAS-1) mission.  The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in the 
projected schedule for a March  1990 launch, and the Ulysses mission to  study 
the Sun and its environment remained at the projected October 1990 launch date. 

Another  important addition to  the manifest was  a  mission to  retrieve  the 
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) in July 1989. The manifest was also 
designed to  support the commercial space initiative included in  the National 
Space Policy. In addition to the Shuttle launches, 35  launch vehicle launches 
were planned through fiscal year  1993. (Payload Flight A s s ignmen t s -NASA  
Mixed Fleet, Mar/88; NASA Release 88-38) 

March 16: Congress ordered a temporary halt to NASA's efforts to lease a com- 
mercial crew-tended space laboratory, citing  several irregularities in NASA's 
handling of the procurement process and questioning the space agency's abrupt 
reversal of  its prior opposition to the facility. The chairmen of  the House appro- 
priations  subcommittee for  NASA,  Representative Edward  Boland,  and  the 
Chairman of  the House authorization subcommittee for NASA, Representative 
Bill Nelson, agreed to freeze funding for the facility until these issues could be 
addressed.  Several  ranking  members  of  the  House  and  Senate had  written 
NASA to complain that the Agency was moving ahead with a contract without 
congressional authorization. ( H  Pos t ,  Mar 24/88; AvWk, Mar 28/88) 

*  Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah  state officials for six safety viola- 
tions  in  connection with  a  December 29,  1987, f i e  that killed  five workers 
and  destroyed  a  missile  casting  building  at  Thiokol's Wasatch  facility near 
Salt Lake  City.  The  Utah  Occupational and  Safety  Health  Division  sought 
fines of  $3 1,700 against Thiokol, citing violations of  safety rules  related  to 
protection of  workers,  deviations from  approved procedures, and  failure  to 
take precautions against static electricity buildup in a  rocket-casting facility. 
An  Air  Force  investigation  into  the  immediate  cause  of  the  fire,  which 
occurred during the casting of  solid rocket propellant into the metal casing of 
an MX missile segment, was pending. (UP I ,  Mar  16/88; W Pos t ,  Mar  17/88; 
NY  Times, Mar  17/88; WS J ,  Mar  17/88; W  Times, Mar  17/88) 

March 16: NASA began flight tests of a new design of low-noise, energy effi- 
cient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed 
Corporation as part of  the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to 

163 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1988 

determine whether large, unducted propellers with  a radically swept design are a 
feasible alternative to higher-cost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. 

Researchers estimated that  a  thoroughly reworked version of  the old pro- 
peller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, com- 
pared with the most advanced turbofan-powered aircraft flying in  the  1990s, 
and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 88-40) 

The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to 
place  aboard  a  spacecraft, destined  for  the Martian moon Phobos,  a  plaque 
commemorating discovery of  the Moon and  its sister moon Deimos in  1877 
by  Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The 
Soviet  Phobos  mission,  due  for  launch  in  July  1988, involved  two  Soviet 
spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed 
in  elliptical  orbits  around  the  planet.  Both  would  approach  Phobos  in 
sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 88-41) 

March 18: NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateral memo- 
randum of  understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design, development, 
operation, and  use of  the permanently crew-tended civil international Space 
Station complex. Under the terms of  the new MOU, ESA would provide the 
Columbus laboratory module to the international Space Station complex. This 
permanently attached, pressurized module would  support approximately 40 
single equipped racks for payloads and  storage. ESA would  also provide an 
untended, free-flying polar platform for Earth observation experiments, com- 
plementing the polar platform under development by  the United States. As  a 
third element, ESA would provide a man-tended free flyer (MTFF) designed 
to accommodate long-duration microgravity applications in the fields of  fluid 
physics, life, and material sciences. (NASA Release 88-44) 

March 22:  NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the Earth 
as  a  single  ecological  system,  the  Los Angeles  Times reported.  Called  the 
Earth Observing System, the U.S.  portion of  the multinational project would 
cost well  above $2 billion and would use  a wide range of  orbiting laborato- 
ries,  including  free  flying  platforms  and  facilities  aboard  the  international 
space  station. The heart of  the program would  include four platforms-two 
from the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japan-that  would be 
launched into polar orbit around the Earth by  the participating countries. The 
program, which was  still in the planning stage, was described by NASA sci- 
ence division spokesman Charles Redmond as “a critical element in NASA’s 
strategic plan.”  (LA Times, Mar 23 1‘88) 

March  25: The  San Marco D/L  spacecraft was  successfully launched on  a 
U.S.  Scout launch vehicle from  the  San Marco Equatorial Range  in Kenya. 

164 

MARCH 1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The launch, originally planned for March 18, had been delayed to permit replace- 
ment of a yaw rate gyro in the Scout. Five scientific instruments-three 
from the 
United States, one from the Federal Republic of Germany, and one from Italy- 
were  carried on  the  spacecraft to  study Earth‘s  lower  atmosphere. (SSR  1988 
026B; NASA DAR, Mar 3/88; NASA Release Mar 2/88;  LRC Release 88-8,88- 
8 4  

March 30: NASA and  the Council of Chief  State School Officers (CCSSO) 
invited America’s  students to  participate in  a  national competition to  name 
NA SA 3  replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA  specified that  the  name 
chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should cap- 
ture the spirit of America’s mission in space. In honor of  the seven crew mem- 
bers lost in the Challenger accident, the name “Challenger” has been retired. 

House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March  10, 1986, by  Congressman 
Tom Lewis (R-Florida), called for the name of  the  replacement orbiter to  be 
selected  from  suggestions  submitted  by  students.  On  October  30,  1987, 
Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to  select a  name  for  the  new 
orbiter  “from  among  suggestions submitted by  students  in  elementary and 
secondary schools.” The new orbiter, designated OV- 105, under construction 
by  Rockwell  International  in  California, was  scheduled  for  completion  in 
April  1991. (NASA Release 88-46). 
During March: The Air Force  and  NASA debated possible new  destruct 
guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and  crew would have  to 
be blown up  to prevent greater loss of  life on the  ground. In the wake of  the 
Challenger  accident,  the  debate  over  new  Shuttle  range  safety  guidelines 
focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of 
a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and “fly 
it  out” before a  destruct order would have  to  be  issued. As  a  result, the Air 
Force  suggested barring  all  non-essential personnel-VIPs, 
journalists  and 
spectators-from 
the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. “It’s 
the kind of  thing  [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and 
pretend like it didn’t have to exist, that there was never going to be any prob- 
lem,”  said  veteran Robert  “Hoot” Gibson, Commander of  the  second post- 
Challenger Shuttle flight. (UPZ, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88) 

165 

April 

April 2 :  NASA announced that it would remove and inspect the liquid oxygen 
turbopumps aboard the Shuttle Discovery, a move that was expected to delay 
Discovery's launch beyond the scheduled date of August 4. The pumps will be 
inspected to ensure that critical bolts in the devices are properly tightened and 
have not been  stripped. Delays resulting from the inspection are expected to 
push back Discovery's launch date until late August. (UP I ,  Apr 2/88; W Post, 
Apr 3/88;  USA  Today, Apr 4/88; P Inq ,  Apr 4/88) 

April  5:  NASA and  the ESA announced the  selection of  scientific investiga- 
tions  to  be  conducted on two  spacecraft as part  of  a joint NASA-ESA solar 
terrestrial research program. More than  130 U.S. scientists were scheduled to 
participate in  the  Solar  and  Heliospheric Observatory  (SOHO)  and  Cluster 
missions.  Two spacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instruments 
supplied by both ESA and NASA. The Cluster mission, involving a set of  four 
satellites,  was  planned  for  launch  on  an  ESA  Ariane  launch  vehicle  in 
December 1995. The Cluster would investigate the space plasma three-dimen- 
sional microphysics phenomena in Earths magnetic field environment, using 
four identical spacecraft in polar orbits. SOHO, planned for launch by NASA 
on the Shuttle or on  an expendable launch vehicle in March  1995, would be 
placed  at  the  Earth-Sun  La  Grangian  point  and  investigate  the  physical 
processes that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to the solar wind. 

The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of the International Solar 
Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a major international program in solar and 
space physics  organized in  1985 by  NASA,  the  Japanese Institute  for Space 
and Astronautical Science (ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 88-48) 

April  7: NASA selected a  telescoping pole  as the egress method for the Space 
Shuttle's new  crew escape system. The escape system, to be carried on all future 
Shuttle flights, would provide crew escape capability from the orbiter during con- 
trolled, gliding flight following failures or difficulties during ascent or entry where 
landing  at  a  suitable landing  field could  not  be  achieved.  Tests  conducted  in 
February and March, using a fixed pole extending through a hatch-like opening in 
a C-141 aircraft, demonstrated that the pole would provide adequate orbiter clear- 
ance in an emergency egress situation. The telescoping pole system had been cho- 
sen over an alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 88-50; 
JSC  Release  88-014; AP, Apr  8/88;  Ny Times, Apr  8/88;  W  Post,  Apr  8/88; 
USA Today, Apr  8/88; LA Times, C  Trib, Apr 9/88; Apr  8/88;  P Inq, Apr  8/88; 
H Post, Apr 8/88; H  Chron, Apr 8/88) 

161 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1988 

April  11: Astronomers at the University of  Hawaii at Manoa  announced the 
discovery of the oldest and most distant galaxy ever seen. The galaxy, called 
0902+34, was estimated to be  10 times the size of the Milky Way  and  12 bil- 
lion  light  years  from  Earth.  Measurements  indicated  that  the  galaxy  was 
formed much  earlier  in  the  history of  the universe than  had  been  generally 
thought possible, requiring a revision of accepted theories on the distribution 
of matter in the early universe and the formation of  galaxies. The galaxy was 
discovered  by  Dr.  Simon  J.  Lilly,  a  staff  astronomer  at  the  University  of 
Hawaii at Manoa. (NY Times, Apr  12/88; W Post, Apr  12/88; W Times, Apr 
12/88; P  Znq, Apr  12/88) 

April  14: NASA Administrator Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  stated  that  the  Moon, 
rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./u.S.S.R. 
human-assisted missions.  “Going to  the  Moon  together  would  give  the  two 
leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for 
further  cooperation, which  could,  one  day,  lead  to  a  cooperative mission  to 
Mars,” he  said.  Speaking before  the National Space Symposium in  Colorado 
Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical 
readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an  initial cooperative 
crew-tended mission. 

Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as “perhaps the most critical year in the histo- 
ry  of  the U.S. civil space program,” and he refuted the notion that American 
space leadership was lost. 

Dr.  Fletcher said  the Administration’s fiscal year  1989 budget request for 
NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts 
from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S.  Space 
Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr  14/88; NASA Release 88-52) 

April  18: NASA submitted to  the Congress its  acquisition plan  for the  Space 
Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor  (ASRM). The plan  contained NASA’s 
strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle 
system.  NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive 
improvements  in  flight  safety,  reliability, and  performance over  the  current 
SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol, Inc. 

The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the 
segmented boosters currently in use  in  the Shuttle program.  The new  boosters 
would  have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than 
the current SRMs, providing for a  12,OOO-pound increase in the Shuttle‘s payload 
capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the 
Space Shuttle’s main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, 
thereby reducing OT  eliminating about 175 “criticality l / l r ”  failure modes for the 
Shuttle system. 

168 

APRIL 1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

An  important aspect of  NASA’s ASRM  acquisition plan was  the proposal 
that the boosters be developed in a new Government-owned contractor operat- 
ed (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In 
response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, 
led by  Senator Jake Gam, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility 
of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to 
develop the ASRM was  estimated at just  under  $1 billion, including modern 
tooling and  equipment, plus  $200-$300  million for  construction of  facilities. 
Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be  flight certi- 
fied by  1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM 
at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 88-54; UP I ,  Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 
19/88;  USA  Today, Apr  19/88; W  Times, Apr  19/88; NY Times, Apr  20188; 
W Post, Apr 20188; WSJ ,  Apr  20188;  ) 

April  20:  The  third  full-duration  test  firing  of  NASA’s  redesigned  Space 
Shuttle  solid  rocket  motor  was  carried  out  at  Morton  Thiokol’s Wasatch 
Facility  near  Brigham  City,  Utah.  The  l26-foot  long,  1.2  million-pound 
motor, designated Qualification Motor-6 (QM-6), underwent a  full-duration 
horizontal test firing of  two minutes. The  test, tentatively labeled a  success, 
was  the  third  of  five  test  firings  to  be  carried  out  prior  to  the  scheduled 
resumption of  Shuttle flights in August  1988. (NASA Release 88-51; MSFC 
Releases 88-43, 88-44; AP, Apr 20188; UP I ,  Apr 20188; NY  Times, Apr 21/88; 
W Post, Apr 21/88;  USA  Today, Apr  21/88; W Times, Apr 21/88) 

April  21:  The  Canadian  government  announced  that  it  would  become  an 
active partner in  the international Space Station Program and would provide 
equipment worth $1.2 billion to the project. Canada’s main equipment contri- 
bution to the Space Station would be a roving space robot that would serve as 
the “arms and legs” of the Station. The robot, which would be comparable to 
but  more  advanced  than  the  “Canadarm”  currently  carried  on  U.S.  Space 
Shuttles, would be  a critical tool  in  Station construction and docking activi- 
ties. In return for Canada‘s contribution, Canadian astronauts would be enti- 
tled to six-month tours of  duty on the Station every two years. Canadian space 
officials announced plans to expand their astronaut corps in anticipation of  the 
Canadian presence on the Space Station. (Tor Star, Apr  22/88) 

April  2 5 :   Two  U.S.  Navy  navigation  satellites  were  launched  from 
Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into  a  600-mile circular polar orbit 
aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of  the U.S. 
Navy’s  long-established,  continuous  all-weather  global  navigation  system. 
Made  available  to  non-Navy  users  in  1967, the  spacecraft had  since  been 
adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of off- 
shore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provid- 
ed position information within one-tenth of  a  nautical mile  anywhere in  the 

169 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1988 

world. This marked Scout's  100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the 
Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on March 25 from the San Marco 
Range platform in the Indian Ocean. (SSR 1988 033A-G, NASA Release 88-55) 

April  28: The fifth  and  final  short-duration solid rocket motor Nozzle  Joint 
Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carried out. The overall objec- 
tive of  the test, part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program, 
was  to  evaluate  the  fail-safe performance  of  the  redesigned  case-to-nozzle 
joint with verified defects. (NASA Release 88-56) 

170 

May 4 :  A series of  powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & 
Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant 
employees and  injuring over  350 people.  The plant was  a major  supplier of 
the  ammonium perchlorate  oxidizer  used  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle’s solid 
rocket motors  and  other military and  civilian boosters. The  explosions pro- 
duced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 foot-wide crater 
at the facility site.  Seismographs at NASA’s  Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 
miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 
and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of  the explosions was investigated. 

The destruction of  the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and con- 
tractor Morton Thiokol over  the  availability of  solid fuel oxidizer beyond  the 
next four Space Shuttle fights. Aprolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering’s 
production activities would also threaten the military’s missile production sched- 
ule.  (UP I ,  May  5/88; AP, May  5/88; NY   Times, May  5/88;  W Post, May  5/88; 
WSJ ,  May 5/88; U SA  Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B  Sun ,  May  5/88) 

May  5:  NASA Administrator Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  voiced  alarm  over  the 
House of  Representative’s resolution for f h d i n g  of  NASA’s  fiscal year  1989 
budget.  Speaking in Washington before a symposium on “Science Education: 
A Challenge for Excellence in America’s Future,” Dr. Fletcher issued his tough- 
est warning yet about the consequences of  reducing the NASA funding levels 
proposed by the Administration. the Administrator warned that “the civil space 
program will be  stopped in its tracks” if  the House funding figure of  $10.2 bil- 
l i o n - c u t  by  over  $1  billion  from  the  Administration proposal-were 
to  be 
passed. More specifically, Dr. Fletcher predicted the reduced budget would kill 
the  Space Station program and  lead  to  the  abrogation of  several international 
commitments in space science and applications. (NASA Release 88-60). 

May  12: The Associated Press and United Press International news agencies 
reported that U.S.  surveillance satellites had detected the explosion of a Soviet 
solid propellant plant  500 miles  southwest of  Moscow  in  the  Ukraine.  The 
Soviet Union confirmed that an explosion had occurred-killing 
three people 
and  seriously  injuring  five  others-but 
denied  that  rocket  propellants  had 
been involved in  the blast. U.S.  intelligence officials claimed that  the explo- 
sion destroyed several buildings at the plant and put a halt to all solid propel- 
lant manufacturing activities at the facility, which was the only source of solid 
propellant for the SS24 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). Two weeks 

171 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1988 

prior,  a  powerful  series  of  explosions  destroyed a  solid  propellant plant  in 
Nevada,  killing  two  plant  employees  and  injuring  hundreds  of  others. 
Pentagon officials estimated it would take  at  least six months for  the  Soviet 
facility  to  resume  production  of  ICBM  propellants.  (AP, May  18/88;  UPZ, 
May  18/88; W Pos t ,  May  18/88; W S J ,  May  18/88; U SA  Today, May  18/88; 
W Times, May  18/88) 

May  13:  NASA's Lewis Research Center and  the NASAbndustry Advanced 
Turboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at  the  annual 
Robert J .   Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the National Aviation Club. Lewis 
and  the NASAbndustry Advanced Turboprop Team were honored for devel- 
oping  technology  and  testing  advanced  turboprop propulsion  systems  that 
offered  dramatic reductions  in  fuel  usage  and  operating costs  for  subsonic 
transport aircraft. (NASA Release 88-59) 

May  14:  An  untended Soviet spacecraft carrying fuel, food, equipment, and 
mail, docked with  the Mir  space station. Two  Soviet cosmonauts, on  a long 
duration  mission,  tended  Mir.  The  cosmonauts, Vladimir  Titov  and  Musa 
Manarov, arrived at the space station in December and were expected to stay 
in space for about a year, breaking the 325-day  endurance record set the pre- 
vious year by Yuri Romanenko. (FBIS-Sov-88-108, Jun 6/88; SSR  1988 038A;  
AP, May  14/88) 

May  17: A European Space Agency  (ESA) Ariane 2 launch vehicle was  suc- 
cessfully  launched  at  7 5 8  p.m.  EDT  from  the  Kourou  Launch  Center  in 
French  Guiana.  The  162-foot, three-stage  rocket  successfully  carried  into 
orbit the 2,619-pound Intelsat 5  commercial communications satellite which 
would eventually propel itself into a 22,300-mile geosynchronous orbit. This 
was  the 22nd launch of  the Ariane series and  the  second Ariane 2  launch in 
1988. A total of  eight Ariane 2 launches were scheduled for  1988. (SSR  1988 
040A; AP, May  18/88; UP I ,  May  18/88) 

May  19 :   Science  magazine  published  findings  from  a  recent  Earth-based 
radar mapping of  the planet Venus, conducted by  Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
(JPL)  scientists.  Newly  processed  radar  pictures  of  the  surface  of  Venus 
showed what may be  geologically  recent  volcanic  activity  and  impact cra- 
tering,  including  possible  volcanic  mountains  and  broad  lava  flows  and 
fields  like  those  which  make  up  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  The  JPL  radar 
images, with  a  resolution  of  less  than  a mile, were  the  latest  in  a  series  of 
Earth-based  radar  scans  of  Venus  conducted  at  the  Goldstone,  California, 
complex  of  NASA's  Deep  Space Network.  The Magellan  spacecraft  was 
expected  to  make  more  detailed  radar  observations  of  Venus  in  1990. 
(NASA Release 88-65; G Tr ib ,  May 21/88) 

172 

WAY  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Ma y  21:  In  an  interview with  the  Washington Post,  Soviet  leader Mikhail 
Gorbachev announced he  would  ask President Ronald Reagan  to  approve a 
joint  Soviet-U.S. untended flight to Mars during the upcoming summit meet- 
ing in Moscow. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said Gorbachev‘s pro- 
posal  for  a Mars mission was  recommended by  Roald 2. Sagdeev, a  Soviet 
space expert, as a  symbol of  superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific 
and technological undertaking. “This is a field for cooperation that would be 
worthy  of  the  Soviet  and  American  people,” Gorbachev  said.  “And  I  will 
make  that  proposal  to  President Reagan.”  (W  Post,  May  22/88;  UP I ,  May 
22/88; LA Times, May 22/88; B  Sun, May 23; C Trib, May 23/88) 

May  23:  NASA  and  the  Department  of  Commerce  awarded  the  first  U.S. 
Government contract for commercial launch transportation services to  a  private 
f m .  The two agencies contracted General Dynamics Space Systems Division, San 
Diego, California, to provide expendable launch vehicle transportation services for 
the  Department’s  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). This contract marked 
the first time a contractor assumed systems performance responsibility for overall 
program and  subcontractor management, vehicle design, production, testing and 
vehicle-to-payload integration, mission integration, launch services, system effec- 
tiveness, overall launch vehicle performance, and mission success. 

In  a related matter, NASA’s  Kennedy Space Center recently entered into an 
agreement  with  General  Dynamics  that  allowed  the  company  to  use  NASA 
Launch Complex 36 and associated facilities for commercial launch operations of 
the  Atlasfcentaur rocket.  (NASA Release  88-66;  UPI, May  23/88; AP,  May 
24/88; B Sun, May 24/88; NY  Times, May 25/88; C Trib, May 26/88) 

Negotiators from NASA and  the government of  Japan reached agreement in 
substance on the  text of  a memorandum of  understanding (MOU) for coopera- 
tion in the detailed design, development, operation, and utilization of the perma- 
nently crew-tended civil Space Station. The Japanese Science and Technology 
Agency would serve as NASA’s  counterpart in implementing this MOU. 

Under  the  terms  of  the  new  MOU,  Japan  would  provide  the  Japanese 
Experiment Module (EM)-a 
permanently attached, pressurized laboratory 
module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics 
module.  The pressurized portion  of  the  E M  would  provide  a  shirt-sleeve 
environment for the  Space Station crew  to perform research activities.  The 
E M S  exposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earth obser- 
vation, communications, advanced technology development and other activi- 
ties  requiring  direct  exposure  to  space.  The  experiment  logistics  module, 
which would provide transportation and  storage of  logistics items, would be 
transported to the Station by  the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88-70) 

173 

June 

June 6: Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5 billion con- 
tract  to  build  the  proposed  Space  Shuttle  Advanced  Solid  Rocket  Motor 
(ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they would concentrate on building the 
current generation of  redesigned solid rocket motors, currently undergoing Fmal 
testing prior to the resumption of  Space Shuttle flights in  September. (UPZ, Jun 
6/88; AP, Jun 6/88; NY Times, Jun 7/88; WSJ ,  Jun 7/88; LA  Times, Jun 7 / 8 8 )  

June  7: A  Soviet Proton  launch vehicle,  carrying a  Soyuz TM-5  spacecraft 
with a  three-man  Soviet-Bulgarian crew, took  off  from the Baikonur launch 
facility. The  Soyuz TM-5 crew was  to join  a  two-man crew  aboard the Mir 
space station.  The  launch, which occurred at  10:04 a.m. EDT, was  the  first 
Soviet crew-tended launch in  1988. The Mir visit was to be a  10-day mission 
in which  the visiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard 
the station. The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after the departure 
of  their  colleagues  and  continue  a  year-long  endurance  mission  that  was 
expected to break the record established by Yuri Romanenko in  1987. (FBIS- 
SOV-88-1 10, Jun 8/88; SSR  1988 048B ;  NY Times, Jun 8 /88 ;  B Sun, Jun 8/88) 

June  8 :   Negotiations  were  completed  among  the  United  States,  Canada, 
Europe,  and  Japan  on  the  framework  for  international  cooperation  in  the 
Space Station program. 

Under the agreements, the United  States would provide the overall Space 
Station framework  operating subsystems, including life support and 75 kilo- 
watts of power; laboratory and habitat modules; and a free-flying platform that 
would be placed in polar orbit for Earth observation. Canada would provide a 
Mobile Servicing System, which would be used in conjunction with the assem- 
bly,  maintenance, and  servicing of  Space Station elements. Japan would pro- 
vide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanently attached pressurized lab- 
oratory module, which would  include an exposed facility  and  an experiment 
logistics module. The European Space Agency  would provide a  pressurized 
laboratory module, which would be permanently attached to the crew-tended 
base;  a  free-flying polar platform  to work  together with  the U.S.  polar plat- 
form; and an astronaut-tended free flyer to be serviced at the crew-tended base. 

The United States anticipated spending approximately $16 billion (fiscal year 
1989 dollars) to develop Space Station hardware. The total foreign commitment 
to the Space Station was in excess of $7 billion. Furthermore, the partners would 

175 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1988 

cover more  than 25  percent of  the  Space Station's  expected annual operating 
costs  throughout the  20-30  year  life of  the  program.  Signature of  the  agree- 
ments was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 88-74) 

June 9:  The first direct observation of  an atmosphere on Pluto was made by 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT)  astronomers  flying  aboard 
NASA ARC'S Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A  team  of  astronomers 
from  MIT,  including Edward  Dunham, James  Elliot, Amanda  Bosh,  Steve 
Slivan, and Leslie Young, made  the observation during a temporary occulta- 
tion of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 
meters)  altitude,  approximately  500  miles  south  of  Pago  Pago, American 
Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean.  Information about the temperature, 
pressure, and extent of  the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation 
data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's  36 inch (92 
cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring 
shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 88-40) 

June 13: This date marked five years since the Pioneer 10 spacecraft had left the 
solar  system on  its  trajectory toward  interstellar space. Pioneer  10 - the   most 
distant human-made object in  existence-was  now 4,175,500,000 miles from 
the Sun, almost 45 times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Radio signals, 
moving at the speed of  light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes to travel from Earth 
to spacecraft and back, the longest time of  any radio communication in history. 

The  spacecraft, launched in  1972, continued to operate extremely well as 
it collected and transmitted data back to Earth. Its primary mission, original- 
ly  scheduled for 21 months, was  to  assess the  feasibility of  passage through 
the Asteroid Belt and provide the first close-up examination of  Jupiter and its 
moons. Pioneer  10 accomplished all of  its original goals by  December 1973. 
At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended. Scientists reprogrammed 
the probe to  explore the Sun's atmosphere and  to  look for a tenth planet and 
gravity waves in the far outer solar system and beyond. 

Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expected to allow 
commlmications with  Pioneer  10 to  continue until  the  range  approached six 
billion  miles,  more  than  twice  the  pre-launch  estimates.  Project  Manager 
Richard 0. Fimmel expected that  NASA would be  able to  track  Pioneer  10 
until the power source limited communications, which was expected to occur 
toward the end of the  1990s. 

Both  Pioneer  10  and  its  sister  spacecraft, Pioneer  11,  carried  an  easily 
interpreted graphic message in the event that they encountered any intelligent 
life forms on their journey. Scientists believed Pioneer 10 and  11 would trav- 
el among the  stars virtually forever because the vacuum of  interstellar space 

116 

JUNE  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

is  so empty that the risk of  any type  of  collision would be negligible. (ARC 
Release 88-36) 

June 14: The  fourth  full-duration test  firing  of  NASA's  redesigned  Space 
Shuttle  solid  rocket  motor  was  conducted  at  Morton  Thiokol's  Space 
Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah.  The test was part of  the Shuttle 
motor redesign program. The  126-foot-long, 1.2-million-pound motor, desig- 
nated Qualification Motor-7 (QM-7), underwent a full-duration, horizontal test 
firing of  two  minutes.  After  a  preliminary examination of  the  fired motor, 
NASA and Morton Thiokol officials declared the test an apparent success. The 
exercise involved  the  first  use  of  a  new  test  stand  at  Morton Thiokol.  One 
remaining full-duration test, Production Verification Motor- 1 (PVM- 1), would 
be  conducted  in  July,  prior  to  the  next  Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 
88-7; NY Times, Jun  15/88) 

June 16: An advanced Navy navigation satellite, NOVA-11, was launched into 
polar orbit on a NASA Scout launch vehicle from Western Space and Missile 
Center  (WSMC), California. This  was  the  111th flight  of  the  73-foot long, 
four-stage, solid propellant Scout launch vehicles. (SSR  1988 052C; NASA 
Release 88-75) 

June 26: This  date marked  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  launch  of  NASA's 
Seasat  Satellite, which  ushered  in  a  new  era  in  space research focusing on 
unsolved questions of  the world's  oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 
1978, on an Atlas-Agena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, 
Seasat carried a payload of  five scientific instruments unlike any package car- 
ried on previous remote-sensing satellites. 

Among  the  experimental instruments  Seasat pioneered  were  a  synthetic 
aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of  ocean and  land  sur- 
faces; a radar scatterometer to measure near-surface wind speed and direction; 
a radar altimeter to measure the height of  the ocean surface and waves; and a 
scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, 
wind speeds, and sea ice cover.  The satellite also carried a passive visual and 
infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four experiments. 

Seasat demonstrated how  space  sensors could be  used  in  oceanography, 
serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could pro- 
vide  answers to  some of  the world's  most  baffling  and  threatening weather 
phenomena. (NASA Release 88-84) 

June 28: Rear Admiral Richard H.  Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for 
Space  Flight,  updated  the  target  for  the  upcoming  Space  Shuttle launch  to 
early  September and  indicated that he  was  very  pleased with  the  progress of 

111 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

J U N E  1988 

preparations for STS-26. The new launch target was selected following a major 
review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly’s subsequent report 
to NASA Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher. Truly said, “Hard work by a lot 
of  people is paying off  and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely.” 

Discovery was  scheduled to  be  rolled  out  to  the Kennedy Space  Center 
Launch  Pad  39B  the  first  week  of  July. A  flight  readiness  firing  (FRF) of 
Discovery’s main engines and  liquid propulsion system was targeted for late 
July.  The  final  full-scale, full-duration test  firing  of  the  redesigned Shuttle 
solid  rocket  motor  (SRM)  prior  to  STS-26 was  also  planned  for  late  July. 
(NASA Release 88-85) 

June  30:  The  NASA  Administrator  appointed  Ivan  Bekey  to  be  Special 
Assistant  for  System  Engineering  and  Planning  Integration,  Office  of 
Exploration. Bekey would be responsible for overall systems engineering for 
Office of Exploration studies and formulation of top level architecture.  In the 
previous year,  he  served as Director of  Program Planning for  the  Office  of 
Policy  and  Planning.  For  the  preceding  six  years,  he  was  the  Director  of 
Advanced Programs, Office of Space Flight. He was  also NASA coordinator 
for  the  National  Commission  on  Space.  Bekey  joined  NASA  in  1978. 
(NASA Special Announcement on 06-60-88) 

178 

Ju ly  I :  NASA officially transferred custody of  Launch Complex 17 and East 
Coast Delta launch operations to the U.S.  Air Force. Since  1960, NASA had 
conducted  143 Delta  launches from  the  two-pad  Complex, located at  Cape 
Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Under Air Force stewardship, Complex 
17 would continue to be used to launch Delta medium class vehicles. The Air 
Force had  procured 20  new  Delta  11s  for  Department of  Defense payloads. 
The  first  launch was  scheduled for  later  in  1988. In  addition, at  least  eight 
commercial Delta 11s would be launched by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics 
Company, Huntington, Beach,  California, from  Complex  17 between  1989 
and  1992. (NASA Release 88-99) 

July  I : NASA’s  Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, inau- 
gurated its Mark I11  Hypercube parallel  supercomputer, the  result of  a  five- 
year  research  and  development  effort  at  the  JPL  Center  for  Space 
Microelectronics  Technology  and  the  California  Institute  of  Technology 
(Caltech). The Mark  I11  spearheaded the  arrival of  massively parallel super- 
computing. Its first module, placed on-line at the Caltech computer network, 
contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peak  speed of 
about 5 12 million floating point operations per  second. Three more 32-node 
modules would  be  added  during  the  next  nine months  to  form  a  128-node 
hypercube with a peak speed of  2 billion floating point operations per second. 

The  Mark  I1  Hypercube was  being  used  for  scientific, engineering, and 
defense  research  applications,  including  analysis  of  NASA  multispectral 
space imaging data; analysis of NASA synthetic aperture radar images taken 
from  the  Space  Shuttle;  and  simulation  of  the  Strategic  Defense  System. 
(NASA Release 88-88) 

July 4 :  The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was  rolled out 
of  the Kennedy  Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB)  to  Launch 
Pad  39-B  in  preparation for mission STS-26, scheduled for  late September. 
(UP I ,  Jul  4/88;  NY  Times,  Jul  5/88; W  Post,  Jul  5/88; WSJ,  Jul  5/88;  W 
Times, Jul5/88; P Inq, Jul5/88) 

Ju ly  5 :  An ad  hoc committee, assembled to review safety risk management in 
the  National  Space  Transportation  System  program,  completed  its  report, 
finding  that  there  had  been  “a  positive  change  in  attitudes” by  NASA  and 
NASA contractors towards safety. The six-member committee, composed of 

179 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY 1988 

both Government and independent safety experts, found no significant system 
safety  issues  that  would  adversely  impact  the  STS-26  launch.  (NASA 
Release: 88-89) 

July  7: The  Soviet Union  successfully launched the Phobos  1 spacecraft to 
Mars aboard a 198-foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facil- 
ity.  Phobos 1 and Phobos 2, scheduled for launch the following week, would 
carry  100-pound  landers designed to  analyze Phobos, the  larger of  the  two 
moons  of  Mars.  The  17-mile-long, potato-shaped Phobos  and  its  smaller 
moon Deimos were thought to be asteroids captured by  the gravitational field 
of  Mars.  Tracking  support  for  the  Soviet missions would  be  provided  by 
NASA's Deep  Space Network  (DSN), whose primary  mission  would  be  to 
provide essential tracking data to permit landings on Phobos. The DSN would 
then shift to enabling a key scientific goal of the mission, to track Phobos very 
precisely. The  13,000-pound Phobos spacecraft would  carry more  than  two 
dozen robotic instruments on  their 200-day journey  to Mars. (FBIS-Sov-88- 
131,  Jul  8/88;  SSR  1988  058A;  NASA  Release  88-87;  UPZ,  Jul  8/88; 
NY   Times, Jul 8 / 8 8 ;  W Po s t ,  Jul 8 / 8 8 ; )  

July  12: The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 2  spacecraft to 
Mars aboard a  198-foot Proton launch vehicle from the Baikonur launch facil- 
ity. The Phobos 2 launch occurred less than a week after the launch of  its com- 
panion spacecraft, Phobos 1. (FBIS-Sov-88-134, Jul  13/88; SSR  1988 059A, 
W Post, Jul  13/88; W Times, Jul  13/88; LA Times, Jul  13/88; P Znnq,  Jul  13/88; 
C Tr ib ,  Jul  13/88) 

NASA announced that  a  scientist at the Ames Research Center, Mountain 
View, California, had developed a new, ground breaking computational model 
that could accurately simulate the complex, fluctuating airflow within aircraft 
engine turbines and compressors.  The new  computational model, developed 
by NASA scientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significant sav- 
ings  for  the  aircraft engine  industry  once  it  became  ready  for  commercial 
applications.  The model performed one of  the most complex computer simu- 
lations ever undertaken and provided the most accurate calculation to date of 
air  flow  within  turbines. Engine  concepts  and  designs had  been  tested  pri- 
marily  by  experimental methods, most  often by  building prototype engines 
and subjecting them to a battery of tests.  Advanced computer techniques were 
far  less  expensive  and  much  faster.  Current  computational work  was  per- 
formed  on  a  Cray-2  supercomputer  at  the  new  Ames  Numerical 
Aerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 88-94; ARC Release 88- 
50; SF  Chron, Jul  13/88; Bus Week, Jul25/88) 

Ju ly   13:  In  a  setback for  the  Space Station program, the  Senate approved a 
$10.1 billion  appropriation for  fiscal year  1989-$1.4  billion less  than  was 

180 

JULY  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided 
only  $200 million  of  the  estimated $767.4 million NASA said  it  needed to 
continue basic work on the Space Station program.  An  earlier House appro- 
priations bill  approved  $902 million  of  the  $967 million  requested  for  the 
Station.  Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version 
of  the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if  it lacked sufficient funding to 
continue  the  Space  Station  program.  (UPZ,  Jul  13/88;  WS J ,   Jul  14/88; 
W  Times, Jul  14/88; USA  Today, Jul  14/88; LA  Times, Jul  14/88) 

An  Indian-built  rocket  carrying  a  weather  satellite  malfunctioned  and 
plunged  into  the  Indian  Ocean  shortly  after  it  was  launched  from  India’s 
Sriharikota Island  launch facility. The  five-stage, 80-foot rocket Augmented 
Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid 
fueled  first  stage  boosters.  This  was  the  second  failure  of  the  new  rocket, 
which  suffered  a  catastrophic malfunction  during  its  first  launch  attempt  in 
March  1987.  The launch failure was  interpreted by  space experts as  a major 
setback for India’s civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. 
(IVY Times, Jul  14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Znq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 

July 13: The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA gener- 
al counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27,1985. 
He  began  his  career  at NASA  in  September  1982, as  Chief  Counsel of  the 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88-98) 

July  15: The launch of  the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a 
result of  the discovery of  a  fuel leak in  a fuel line inside one of  the Shuttle’s 
orbital maneuvering system  (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that 
the small leak, which was detected during a test of  the OMS fuel tanks, would 
have to be fixed prior to the launch of  Discovery. The repair might delay the 
Shuttle  launch  by  up  to  two  months,  depending on  whether  the  spacecraft 
could be  serviced at  the  launch pad  or would have  to  be  rolled back  to  the 
vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the 
leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of  the Shuttle main engines on 
July  28.  (IVY  Times,  Jul  18/88;  W   Post,  Jul  18/88;  W   Times,  Jul  18/88; 
USA  Today, Jul  18/88; P  Inq ,  Jul  18/88) 

July 18: President Ronald Reagan christened the planned international Space 
Station “Freedom,” to symbolize the values shared by  the U.S.  and its allies. 
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the name “Freedom” was rec- 
ommended by  NASA officials and representatives of  Canada, Japan, and the 
European Space Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul  18/88; UPZ, 
Jul  18/88; W  Post, Jul  18/88; W  Times, Jul  18/88) 

181 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY 1988 

Ju ly   20:  NASA  announced  it  would  test-throughout 
new 
the  month-a 
deep-space communications system with its Voyager 2 spacecraft, in prepara- 
tion for the Voyager 2 fly-by of Neptune in August  1989. As part of the new 
system, NASA added the 27  telescopes from the National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory’s (NRAO) Very Large Array (VLA) facility to the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory‘s  deep  space  network  (DSN).  This  action  more  than  doubled 
DSN s  ability to capture the Voyager signal, which became extremely faint as 
it  approached the  vicinity of  Neptune.  Under  an  agreement between NASA 
and  the  National  Science Foundation, NRAO  sponsors, engineers  installed 
new receivers and microwave horns, tuned to the Voyager X-Band radio fre- 
quency, on all the 82-foot dish antennas at the VLA. Special signal-process- 
ing  and  communication equipment  was  added  so  that  the  VLA  would  be 
linked by  satellite to  the  DSN’s Deep  Space Communication‘s Complex at 
Goldstone, California. (NASA Release 88- 102) 

July 21 : An ESA Ariane 3 rocket carrying two communications satellites was 
successfully launched from the Korou Launch Center in French Guiana. The 
Ariane 3, launched at 7: 12 p.m. EDT, carried two satellites belonging to India, 
and  the  European Telecommunications Satellite  (Eutelsat), into  polar  orbit. 
(UP I ,  Jul22188; W Times, Jul22188) 

July  26: NASA announced selection of  the Government sites to  be  used  as 
production  and  testing  facilities  for  the  Agency‘s  planned  Space  Shuttle 
Advanced  Solid  Rocket  Motor  (ASRM).  The  Tennessee Valley  Authority 
property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as 
the  location of  the ASRM production facility, while NASA‘s  Stennis Space 
Center  near  Bay  St.  Louis,  Mississippi,  was  selected  for  ASRM  testing. 
Maximum  utilization  also  would  be  made  of  available  manufacturing and 
computer  capability  at  the  Michoud  Assembly  Facility  and  the  Slidell 
Computer Complex, both  located  in  southeast Louisiana,  to  minimize  total 
program  costs.  The  planned  ASRM,  which  would  replace  the  current 
Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in  the mid-l990s,  would  incorporate sub- 
stantive design changes to  improve reliability and safety margins, as well as 
provide  a  significant  added  performance  capability  to  the  Space  Shuttle. 
(NASA Release 88-104; MSFC Release 88-102; UP I ,  Jul27/88; W Pos t ,  Jul 
27/88;  USA  Today, Jul27188) 

During  Ju ly:  A  team  of  NASA  scientists  from  the  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of 
Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of  a new high-temperature 
superconductor. According to  a paper  published in Applied  Physics  Letters, 
the  scientists  demonstrated  that  “samples  of  yttrium-barium-copper oxide, 
when  mixed  with  silver  oxide,  heat  treated,  and  exposed  to  -320  degrees 
Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field 

182 

JULY  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

trapped  in  the  sample.”  Because  superconducting material excludes  a mag- 
netic field, by  floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials 
are  firmly  attracted to  each  other, but  never touch. According to  Palmer N. 
Peters, of Marshall’s Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of  the  scien- 
tific  team,  the  implications of  high  temperature  superconductors for  space 
technology are numerous. “In space, with the elimination of  the weight asso- 
ciated with gravity, it  should be possible to develop low-vibration, low-fric- 
tion couplings and bearings,” Peters said. “The importance of  the discovery is 
that  this  new  material not  only  has  stronger  suspension forces  but  exhibits 
other  unusual  magnetic  properties:  it  has  demonstrated  a  lower  electrical 
resistance at normal temperatures, is  easier to  solder, and  is  less brittle than 
other high temperature superconducting materials.” (MSFC Release 88-  104) 

183 

August 

August  1 :  A  Wet  Countdown  Demonstration Test  (WCDT)  of  the  Space 
Shuttle  Discovery's  External  Tank  (ET)  was  conducted  following  several 
unplanned holds as a result of  problems with ground support equipment. The 
WCDDT,  carried  out  with  Discovery deployed  for  launch  at  the  Kennedy 
Space Center's Launch Complex 39-B, consisted of  loading the ET with  liq- 
uid  Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen in mock preparation for  a  Shuttle launch. 
(NASA  STS-26 Press K i t )  

August 2:  NASA launched the first of three untended balloons that would search 
for cosmic rays, including those that could provide evidence of  galaxies made 
of antimatter. The balloon flights were to be conducted throughout August from 
a  launching site at Prince Albert Saskatchewan mort, Canada, as part of  the 
NASA Balloon Program.  Each of  the balloons would carry one of  three cosmic 
ray experiments: an extragalactic matter experiment that would search for heavy 
antinuclei; a scintillating optic fiber experiment; and a high energy spectrome- 
ter telescope. (NASA Release 88- 106; GSFC-WFF Release 88-25) 

August 3 :  NASA held dedication ceremonies for the newly  renamed John C. 
Stennis  Space  Center-formerly 
the  National  Space  Technology 
Laboratories-in  Hancock County, Mississippi. The  Center  was  named  for 
Mississippi's retiring senator by  an Executive order signed May 20,  1988, by 
President Ronald Reagan. (NASA Release 88-93) 

August  4 :   NASA  appointed  Gary  L.  Tesch  to  be  NASA  Deputy  General 
Counsel. Tesch  had  been  serving as Associate General Counsel  (contracts) 
prior to this appointment. (NASA Release 88-109) 

August  8:  Astronomers  at  NASA's  Space  Telescope  Science  Institute, 
Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of  California at Berkeley uncovered 
the  most  distant  galaxy  yet  seen.  Called  4C41.17,  the  newly  discovered 
galaxy is located at an estimated distance of  15 billion light years-more 
than 
90 percent of  the distance to the visible limits of  the universe. The discovery 
was made by  a team of American and European astronomers, using the Very 
Large Array (VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and 
was  confirmed a  galaxy  using  the  2.1  meter  optical  telescope  at  Kitt  Peak 
National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17 was expected to 
help forge a better understanding of how galaxies have evolved since the time 
of  the Big Bang. This research was supported by NASA, the European Space 

185 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1988 

Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope 
project,  and  the  Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release  88- 11 1; 
P Inq ,  Aug 9/88; B  Sun, Aug 9/88) 

August  I O :   After  an  aborted  first  attempt  on August  4,  a  22-second  flight 
readiness  firing  (FRF) of  the  Space  Shuttle Discovery's main  engines  was 
conducted on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 
39-B.  The  first  FRF  attempt had  been  halted  inside the  T-10  second mark 
because  of  a  sluggish fuel  bleed  valve  on  the  number  2  main  engine. The 
faulty valve was replaced prior to the FRF.  ( A P ,  Aug  10/88; UP I ,  Aug  10188; 
NY  T imes ,  Aug  11/88; W Post, Aug 11/88; WSJ ,  Aug  11/88; C SM ,  Aug  11/88; 
W T imes ,  Aug  11/88; B  Sun ,  Aug  11/88; P Inq ,  Aug  11/88) 

August  I 1  : A Space Systems Development Agreement was  signed by  NASA 
and Spacehab, Inc.,  a private firm that was  developing a  Shuttle-based pres- 
surized  module  for  commercial  applications. According  to  the  agreement, 
NASA agreed to provide Shuttle payload bay  space for Spacehab's middeck 
augmentation module  on  six  Shuttle  flights  beginning  in  1991.  Spacehab 
would pay $28.2 million (adjusted for inflation) for standard services for each 
flight.  The  Spacehab  module,  to  be  constructed  by  McDonnell  Douglas 
Astronautics  Company,  Huntsville, Alabama,  would  be  a  metal  truncated 
cylinder measuring 10 feet in length by  13 feet in diameter, designed to fit in 
the  Shuttle's  cargo  bay.  Shuttle  crew  members  would  access  the  module 
through a tunnel from the Shuttle's middeck. The company would make avail- 
able to customers a variety  of  locker and rack accommodations, with associ- 
ated support and integration services.  Spacehab was specifically identified in 
the President's Commercial Space Initiative, announced in February, in which 
the Reagan administration committed to make  the  best  efforts to  launch the 
commercial module in the early  1990s.(NASA Release 88-114) 

August  18: The fifth and final test of NASA's  redesigned Space Shuttle solid 
rocket motor, prior to resumption of  Shuttle flights, was conducted at Morton 
Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham  City, Utah. The  126-foot- 
long,  1.2 million-pound motor,  designated Production Verification Motor- 1 
(PVM-l), underwent a full duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The 
motor was  extensively flawed to  demonstrate the  fail-safe characteristics of 
the  redesign.  (NASA  Release  88-113;  AP,  Aug  18/88;  UP I ,  Aug  18/88; 
h?Y T imes ,  Aug  19/88; W Pos t ,  Aug  19/88; WSJ ,  Aug  19/88; USA  Today, Aug 
19/88; W T imes ,  Aug  19/88; B  Sun ,  Aug  19/88 ) 

*  NASA announced that TRW,  Inc. had  been selected for final negotiations 
leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of 
the  space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility 
would be  the third in NASA's series of  space-based great observatories, fol- 

186 

AUGUST  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

lowing the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit 
in the mid-1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope 
Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophys- 
ical phenomena  over different wavelengths of  the  spectrum. The objective of 
this  project would be to develop a high-quality, x-ray  telescope to be  used by 
the international scientific community, in  conjunction with NASA, for an oper- 
ational period of  15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximate- 
ly $508 million. (NASARelease 88-118; MSFC Release 88-131) 

August  25:  NASA  launched  two  U.S.  Navy  navigational  satellites  aboard  a 
Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satel- 
lites, each weighing  141 pounds, were placed into a 600-nautical-mile circular 
polar orbit. The Oscars were  part of  the Navy's  all-weather, global navigation 
system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout-4 (SOOS-4) mission marked  the fourth 
and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR  1988 074A-G; NASA Release 88-116) 

August 29:  A Soviet Proton launch vehicle carrying a Soyuz TM-6 spacecraft, 
with  three  cosmonauts  on  board,  was  successfully  launched  from  the 
Baikonur  Cosmodrome.  The  three-man  Soyuz  crew,  which  included  an 
Afghan and a Soviet physician, was scheduled to join a two-man crew aboard 
the  Mir  space  station  on  the  week-long  mission.  The  physician,  Valery 
Polyakov, was  to  remain  aboard  Mir  after  the departure of  his  Soyuz crew- 
mates  and continue monitoring  the health  of  the Mir cosmonauts, who were 
in the eighth month of  a record-breaking year-long endurance mission. (FBIS- 
Sov-88-168, Aug  30/88;  SSR  1988  075A;  UP I ,  Aug  30188;  W  Post, Aug 
30188; C SM ,  Aug 30188; P Inq, Aug  30/88) 

August  30:  NASA  issued  the  newest  update  of  its  mixed-fleet  manifest, 
reflecting current planning  for  primary  payloads  for  Space Shuttle missions 
and expendable launch vehicles  (launch  vehicles)  through  fiscal year  1993. 
The manifest  reflected  changes made  to accommodate a  slower than expect- 
ed resumption of Shuttle flights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve 
the  launch windows  for  three  major  planetary  missions.  Among  the  major 
changes made was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch from 
June  1989 to  February  1990 and  the  transferral of  a Department of  Defense 
Shuttle  mission  to  an  expendable  launch  vehicle.  (Payload  Flight 
Assignments-NASA Mixed Fleet, Aug  1988; NASA Release 88-120) 

During August: A Cray Y-MP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived 
at NASA's  Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent 
acceptance' tests  in  the  Numerical Aerodynamic  Simulation (NAS) Facility. 
The  NAS  was  established  as a  national  facility  available  to  leading  U.S. 
research  institutions  through  a  national  network.  It  had  long-term  support 
from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress 

187 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1988 

in US. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and 
chemistry. 

Supercomputer  systems  were  complementing  and  extending  aerospace 
research being done in wind tunnels and high-velocity (4,000 to  15,000 mph) 
shock  tunnels. The  new  Y-MP  central  processor  would  not  only  solve  old 
problems  four  times  as  fast  as  existing  systems, but  also would  be  used  to 
investigate flow phenomena that could not be  investigated currently by  wind 
tunnels or computers. Another important application of  the NAS  supercom- 
puter system would be the modeling of  airflows for hypersonic vehicles such 
as the National Aero-Space Plane and the Space Shuttle. 

Ames was  the  first customer to  take delivery of  this new  supercomputer, 
expected to be fully operational by  January 1989. (ARC Release 88-80) 

188 

September 

September  I :  The  fifth  firing in  a  series of  Transient Pressure Test Articles 
(TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight 
Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA  1.3, was part of  the 
Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program.  For this test, flaws were 
intentionally cut  into  both  the  test  article’s  field  joints,  the  case-to-nozzle 
joint,  and other components of  the  redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the 
motor recovered data to verify  the  structural performance, thermal response, 
and  sealing  capability  of  the  redesigned  field  and  case-to-nozzle  joints. 
(MSFC Release on 08/30/88) 

September  2 : A  classified  Department  of  Defense  payload  was  launched 
aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral 
Air  Force  Station.  Sources  quoted  by  the Associated Press  said  the  rocket 
failed  to  carry  its  payload  into  the  correct  orbit.  The  payload  was  widely 
believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077A-C; U P I ,  Sep 
2/88; Reuter, Sep 2 /8 8 )  

September 5:  A  classified Department of  Defense payload was  successfully 
launched  aboard a Titan 2  launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, 
California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a clus- 
ter of Navy recon- naissance satellites known as “White Cloud.” The Titan 2 
launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military 
reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR  1988 078A-B; NY Times, Sep 
6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; C SM ,  Sep 6/88) 

September 6 :  China successfully launched its first experimental weather satel- 
lite, the Wind and Cloud No.  1. The satellite was launched by  a Long March 4 
launch vehicle from the Taiyuan launch facility in north-central China. (FBIS- 
CHI-88-90, Sep 16/88; SSR 1988 080A-B; AP, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 8/88) 

September  7: After  a  tense  24-hour  delay  of  deorbit  bum,  a  Soviet  Soyuz 
TM-5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia. 
The Soyuz TM-5, returning to Earth from a week-long visit to the Mir space 
station, experienced premature shutdowns of  its reentry motor during the first 
two deorbit bum attempts. The first shutdown had been caused by  a malfunc- 
tion  in  the  automatic guidance  system, whereas the  second  failure resulted 
from improper resetting of  the flight computer. The problem was considered 
by  some U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because the Soyuz 

189 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1988 

was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left and a limited amount 
of fuel with which to  attempt a third deorbit bum. The mission had been noted 
for the participation of an Afghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space 
station of  a  physician  crew member.  (FBIS-SOV-88-175,  Sep 9/88; AP,  Sep 
7/88; NY Times, Sep 7/88;  W  Po s t ,  Sep 7/88;  WS J ,  Sep 7/88;  W  Times, Sep 
7/88; B  Sun, Sep 7/88) 

NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, 
announced  the  signing of  an  agreement providing  for  use  of  facilities  at  the 
Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space 
Flight  Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,  in  support of  commercial launches. The 
umbrella  agreement  would  enable  McDonnell  Douglas  to  gain  access  to 
NASA-managed launch support facilities when conducting commercial launch- 
es of  the Delta rocket, expected to begin in  1989. (NASA Release 88-124) 

September 8 :  An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying two U.S. communica- 
tions satellites was launched from the Korou launch facility in French Guiana. 
The  Ariane  3  was  carrying  the  1.3-ton  G-STAR  111  and  1.2-ton  SBS  5 
telecommunications satellites, both designed for television, telephone, and dig- 
ital  data  transmission. Upon  reaching  low-Earth orbit,  the G-STAR  satellite 
failed to boost itself into its planned 23,000-mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBIS- 
Lat-8-175,  Sep  9/88;  SSR  1998  081C-D;  AP ,   Sep  7/88;  Reuter, Sep  7/88; 
W  Pos t ,  Sep 9/88; NY Times, Sep 15/88; WS J ,  Sep 15/88; W  Pos t ,  Sep 15/88) 

A guidance system malfunction caused the Soviet Mars observer spacecraft 
Phobos  1 to  wobble  out  of  control on  its way  toward  Mars.  The  spacecraft 
stopped  responding  to  commands  from  Soviet  ground  controllers  and  was 
rapidly losing power as it was unable to properly orient its solar panels toward 
the Sun.  Phobos 2 continued to function normally. (UP I ,  Sep 9/88; N y  Times, 
Sep 9/88; W  Times, Sep 9/88) 

September  10: An untended Soviet Progress-38 supply spacecraft, bound for the 
Mir  space  station, was  launched from  the  Baikonur  launch facility.  The Tass 
News Agency reported the Progress-38 ferried “expendable materials and various 
loads” for use by the Mir three-man crew. (SSR  1988 083A, C Trib, Sep 11/88) 

September  12:  NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range  safety, mutually 
determined that  the number of  persons permitted access to  the Kennedy  Space 
Center, Florida, for the launch of  the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS-26, would be 
greatly reduced for safety reasons.  Studies of  the January  1986 Challenger acci- 
dent,  and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the 
danger to persons on the ground, if  an accident occurred, was much greater than 
previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from 
the  vehicle  as  a  result  of  an  accident  would  follow  an  unknown  ballistic 

190 

SEPTEMBER  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

tumble on  course  a s  previously thou 
ddition, 
and  the 
oosters  fragmented  into  thousands o 
explosive properties  of  unburned  solid  motor  propellant were  greater  than 
originally determined  in  laboratory tests.  Because of  this  new  information, 
NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to min- 
imize the population at the close-in viewing areas. (NASA Release 88-125) 

September 16: NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS-26, the 
next  Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of  the  launch date followed an 
updated assessment of  the projected impact of  Hurricane Gilbert on mission 
control and  training  facilities at  the  Johnson  Space Center  (JSC), Houston, 
Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H.  Truly, 
NASA Associate Administrator for  Space Flight, said, “NASA’s decision to 
set this  launch date is based  on over two years of  persistence and dedication 
by  NASA and  contractor personnel, culminating in  the  STS-26 flight readi- 
ness review held  at the Kennedy Space Center on September 13 and  14. I’m 
delighted to have reached this point  and my  hat  is  off  to  all members of  the 
Shuttle  team  whose  tireless  efforts  have  brought  us  here  to  the  brink  of 
America’s return to manned spaceflight.” (NASA Release 88- 127) 

September  19:  Israel launched its first orbital satellite aboard an Israeli-built 
rocket.  The  Horizon  I  experimental  satellite was  launched  from  an  Israeli 
launch  facility  in  the  Negev  desert  aboard what  U.S. experts believed was 
either a Jericho I1 or a Comet launch vehicle. The Horizon I was expected to 
have  an operational  lifetime  of  one  month  in  low-Earth  orbit.  (SSR  1988 
087A-B; NY Times, Sep 20188; W Po s t ,  Sep 20188; W Times, Sep 20188; C SM ,  
Sep 20188; B  Sun, Sep 20188; LA Times, Sep 20/88) 

September  24 :   The  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration‘s 
NOAA-11, meteorological weather satellite was  launched aboard a U.S. Air 
Force  Atlas-E  launch  vehicle  from  Launch  Complex  3  at  Vandenberg Air 
Force Base, California. NOAA- 11, and  its  companion spacecraft, NOAA-9 
and NOAA-10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the 
NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice 
monitoring;  various  atmospheric  studies;  and  for  agricultural,  commercial 
fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA-11 was placed in 
a 540-mile Sun-synchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth 
approximately every  102 minutes, observe a different portion of  the Earth‘s 
surface on each orbit, and view the Earth’s entire surface and cloud cover once 
every 12 hours. (NASA Release 88-126; Aeronautics and Space Report o f the  
President: 1988;  SSR 1988 089A-C) 

September 29-October  3 :  U.S. crew-assisted space flight resumed after a hia- 
tus  of  over  two  years  with  the  successful  launch  of  the  Space  Shuttle 

191 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER 1988 

Discovery on mission STS-26 from Kennedy  Space Center Launch Complex 
39-B in florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in 
January 1986, STS-26 followed a prolonged period of review and reassessment 
of  the entire Shuttle program and redesign of  the Shuttle’s solid rocket motors 
(SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS-25.  STS-26 had 
as  its  primary  payload  the  Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite-C (TDRS-C), 
which  would  significantly expand  communications  and  data  links  between 
Earth  and  the  orbiting  Shuttles.  In  addition,  Discovery  carried  the  Orbiter 
Experiments  Program  Autonomous  Supporting  Instrumentation  System 
(OASIS), which  would  record  environmental data  in  the  orbiter payload bay 
during STS flight phases, as well  as  11 secondary payloads. The STS-26 mis- 
sion lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, 
California, on October 3. The five-man crew for STS-26 included Navy Captain 
Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard 0. Covey (Pilot), 
and Mission Specialists John M.  Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. 
Hilmers,  and  George D.  Nelson.  (NASA STS-26 Press  Kit,  SSR  1988 091A, 
UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88;  Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY  Times, Sep 30188; W 
Post, Sep 30188; W Times, Sep 30188; USA  Today, Sep 30188) 

192 

ctober 

October I : NASA marked its thirtieth anniversary with ceremonies at the Centers. 
(Aeronautics and  Space Report of  the President: 1988) 

October 17: A localized electrical fiie occurred onboard the Magellan spacecraft 
during a power systems check at the Kennedy Space Center's  (KSC) Spacecraft 
Encapsulation Facility  (SAEF-2). The  fire, which  occurred while  a  technician 
worked within the spacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with 
only minor  damage to  Magellan. The KSC  fiie department also responded  but 
was not required to enter the SAEF-2 clean room environment. The incident was 
being investigated by  NASA. (NASA Releases 88-141 and 88-153). 

October 19: Dr. Noel W.  Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator 
by  NASA Administrator Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher.  Hinners  had  been  serving  as 
Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of 
Lunar Programs, Office of  Space Science. From  1974 to  1979, he  was  NASA 
Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of  the National Air 
and  Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior  to  his  1982 appointment  as 
Director  of  the  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Greenbelt,  Maryland.  (NASA 
Release 88-138) 

0  NASA  Administrator  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  received  the  International 
Technology Institute's  (ITI) William F.  Rockwell, Jr. Medal  at  the  International 
Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet,  in Pittsburgh. The 
Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of  three individuals from dif- 
ferent  continents, recognizes contributions toward  the  generation, transfer,  and 
application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88-139) 

October 20: Two of  the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir  space  station  took  a 
four-hour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an x-ray telescope attached 
to  the  station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov  and  Musa Manarov, on  a  year-long 
endurance mission aboard M r ,  wore a new  spacesuit design intended to increase 
flexibility. (C n ib ,  Oct 21/88) 

October 25: NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch of  the Hubble 
Space Telescope from February  1990 to an earlier date of  December 1989. The 
earlier date was  made  possible  following reassessment  of  a  variety  of  factors, 
including payload requirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during the 
period. (NASA Release 88-143) 

193 

November 

November  1 : NASA's  Goddard  Space Flight  Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, 
issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of  a prime con- 
tract  for  the  design,  development, testing  and  fabrication of  Space  Station 
Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot 
with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, 
and  servicing of  the  Freedom  station  and  visiting  spacecraft. Mandated  by 
Congress, the  FTS program would  consist of  a developmental flight test  on 
the Space Shuttle in  1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the pro- 
totype  robot  on  the  Space  Shuttle  in  1993. The  FTS  was  scheduled to  be 
launched  on  the  second  Space  Station  Freedom  assembly  flight. 
(NASA Release 88-150) 

NASA's  Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and the Department of 
Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago, Illinois, signed an agreement 
to begin joint  research in the development of  high-temperature superconduc- 
tivity (HTS) materials and  technology.  The objective of  this major research 
effort would be  to  exploit recent rapid advances in HTS  technology for  sig- 
nificant space and aeronautical applications. Research and technology devel- 
opment would be undertaken in  those areas where HTS could be an enabling 
technology or substantially improve existing systems. 

Initially,  research  would  concentrate  on  advanced  studies  and  critical 
exploratory experiments to  identify the most promising applications for fur- 
ther development. Among the first candidate applications would be supercon- 
ducting  magnetic  energy  storage,  space  electromagnetic  propulsion, 
microwave power  transmission, aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch 
systems. (NASA Release 88-149) 

November 2 :  The Space Shuttle Atlantis was rolled out to Launch Pad 39B for 
a  scheduled launch in  late November of  STS-27, a classified Department of 
Defense mission.  (NASA Release 88-17 1) 

November  6 :  A classified Department of  Defense payload was  successfully 
launched  into  orbit  aboard  a  Titan  34D  launch  vehicle.  (Aeronautics and 
Space Report of  the President: 1988) 

November  10 :   NASA  announced  that  it  had  negotiated  a  contract  with 
Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate 

195 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER 1988 

Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), 
Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell’s orbiter logistics operations 
in  Downey,  California,  would  be  transferred  to  existing  Launch  Support 
Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell’s component 
overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle 
equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, 
Florida. The move  would  complete  a  consolidation begun  in  1985. (NASA 
Release 88-156) 

November  11: Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, 
California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire its hydrazine thrusters for 
3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steer the craft toward a fly-by of Neptune 
on August 28,  1989. The Voyager 2 trajectory would bring  it to within 3,000 
miles  of  Neptune’s  cloudtops.  (Voyager  2  Neptune  Encounter  Press  K i t ;  
LA Times, Nov  14/88) 

November  1 4 :   NASA Administrator  Dr.  James  C.  Fletcher  appointed Dr. 
Franklin  D.  Martin  Assistant Administrator  for  the  Office  of  Exploration. 
Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space 
Station office  since September  1986. From  1983 through  1986, Martin  was 
Director  of  Sciences and  of  Space and Earth  Sciences at  NASA’s  Goddard 
Space  Flight  Center,  Greenbelt,  Maryland.  From  1974  through  1983,  he 
served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of 
the advanced programs in  astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and  lunar divisions. 
(NASA Release 88-158) 

November  15: After several delays, the Soviet Union  successfully completed 
an  automated  orbital  flight  test  of  the  Space  Shuttle Buran.  The  untended 
Soviet orbiter-which 
is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimen- 
sions to  the U.S.  orbiters-was 
launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in 
Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198-foot Energia rocket with two strap- 
on boosters in a configuration similar to that of  the U.S.  Space Shuttle. Unlike 
the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, 
but  relies  almost  entirely  on  the  Energia’s  engines  for  ascent  to  orbit. 
According  to  Soviet  sources,  the  Soviet  shuttle  can  be  equipped  with  jet 
capability the U.S.  Shuttles lack. After complet- 
engines to assist landing-a 
ing  two  orbits,  Buran  landed  successfully  on  a  2.7-mile  runway  at  the 
Baikonur  facility, ending  the  3-112  hour  mission.  The  Tass  News  Agency 
hailed the Buran mission a s  a “major success” and as a prelude to crew-tend- 
ed Shuttle flights. In  Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher 
congratulated the  Soviet Union.  (FBIS-SOV-88-222, Nov  17/88; SSR  1988 
100A, AP, Nov  15/88; UPI ,  Nov  15/88; Ny Times, Nov  16/88; W S J ,  Nov 
16/88; W Pos t ,  Nov  16/88; LA  Times, Nov  15/88; W Times, Nov  16/88; B  Sun, 
Nov  16/88; P Znq, Nov  16/88; C Tr ib ,  Nov  15/88) 

196 

NOVEMBER  1988 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

In a major setback for the U.S. radio astronomy program, the National Radio 
Astronomy  Observatory’s  -0) 
300-foot  radiotelescope  in  Greenbank, 
West  Virginia,  unexpectedly  collapsed,  completely  destroying  the  metallic 
antenna dish. The  instrument, built  in  1962, was  one  of  the  most  powerful 
radiotelescopes in  the  world  and had  been  responsible for  several important 
discoveries, e.g. pulsars. The cause of  the collapse was not known, but was not 
believed  to  be  related  to  wind  or  other  atmospheric conditions. The NRAO 
Assistant Director George Seielsand noted  that  the  telescope structure, origi- 
nally designed for a dish diameter of  140-feet, had been expanded to a diame- 
ter of  300 feet without a corresponding increase in material strength. No deci- 
sion  was  announced  on  whether  funds would  be  sought  for  a  replacement 
radiotelescope. (iW Times, Nov 17/88; W Post, Nov  17/88; B  Sun, Nov  17/88) 

November  2 1 :   NASA  Administrator  Dr.  Fletcher  appointed  Kenneth  S .  
Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective imme- 
diately.  Pedersen would  be  responsible  for  congressional, intergovernmental, 
international, and  industry  relations, educational activities  and  relations  with 
educational institutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88-160) 

November 23 :  NASA announced the selection of General Electric, Astro-Space 
Division, Princeton, New Jersey, for negotiations leading to the award of  a cost- 
plus-award-fee  contract  for  design,  fabrication,  instrument  integration,  and 
launch  operation  support of  the  Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind  and 
Polar missions.  The two GGS laboratories, with their complement of  scientific 
instruments, were  to  examine  the  flow  of  energy  from  the  Sun  through  the 
Earths geospace environment. This project was to be part of  the overall scien- 
tific investigations within the International Solar-Terrestrial Physics Program. 

The  contract  would  provide  for  delivery  of  the  Wind  laboratory  to  Cape 
Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for launch readiness on December 30,1992, 
and delivery of  the Polar laboratory to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for 
launch readiness on June 30,1993.  Each laboratory would be launched on a gov- 
ernment-furnished expendable launch vehicle. (NASA News, Nov  23/88) 

November 26: A Soyuz TM-7 spacecraft, carrying a joint Soviet-French crew, 
was  successfully launched  from  the  Baikonur Cosmodrome in  Kazakhstan, 
for a month-long tour in the Mir space station. With French President FranGois 
Mitterand in attendance, the three-man crew, which included French astronaut 
Jean-Loup  Chretien,  lifted  off  from  Baikonur on  the  second French-Soviet 
crew-tended mission.  Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in 
July  1983.  The  three-man Soyuz  crew planned  to  join  the  two-man  crew, 
aboard  Mir  since  January,  to  perform  a  series  of  scientific  experiments. 
Additionally, Chretien was  scheduled to become the  first West  European to 
perform  a  spacewalk.  (FBIS-Sov-88-228;  SSR  1988  104A; NY   Times, Nov 
27/88; W Po s t ,  Nov 27/88; C S M ,  Nov 28/88) 

197 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER 1988 

*  After  23  years  in  solar  orbit,  Pioneer 6,  the  oldest  operating  spacecraft, 
returned  to  the  vicinity  of  its  launch.  The  craft passed  within  1.16 million 
m$es  of  the Earth, roughly  five times the distance between the Earth and  its 
Moon.  This  distance was  the  closest  Pioneer  6 had  ever  approached  Earth 
since launch from  the Kennedy  Space Center  (KSC), Florida in  1965. With 
only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's  gravitational pull was strong 
enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit 
for Pioneer 6 by  six days (from 3 11 to 3 17 days) and 6 million miles. 

The  spacecraft was  designed to  study  the  Sun's  atmosphere,  the  helios- 
phere.  After 23 years, two of  Pioneer 6's  original instruments were still trans- 
mitting  information  on  the  turbulence  of  the  solar  wind  to  scientists  at 
NASA's  Ames  Research Center,  Mountain  View,  California.  Three  sister 
probes  followed Pioneer  6  into  solar orbit. During  the period  from  1966 to 
1970,  Pioneers  7,  8,  and  9  were  launched  into  coordinated  orbits.  With 
Pioneer 6,  this  spacecraft team  formed  a  network  of  solar weather  stations 
monitoring the heliosphere,  triangulating information back to Earth from  the 
far  side of  the  Sun, and  increasing understanding  of  solar effects  on  Ear ths  
magnetic field. (SSR  1965 105A; ARC Release 88-81) 

November 30: Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy Associate Administrator 
for  Space Station by  the head  of  the  Space Station Office, James B. Odom. 
Moser had been  serving as Director of  the Space Station Freedom program in 
Reston, Virginia, since October  1986. (NASA Release 88-163) 

During November: NASA launched two heavy-lift balloons from Australia in 
November  to  continue  scientific studies of  Supernova 1987a. A 28.4 million 
cubic foot balloon  was  scheduled to  carry  a  scientific experiment, weighing 
1,100 pounds,  to  measure gamma-ray  and  hard  x-ray emissions. A  second, 
29.47  million  cubic  foot  balloon  also  was  scheduled  to  cany   a  scientific 
experiment, weighing  3,700  pounds,  that  would  measure  gamma-ray  emis- 
sions, but over a different energy band. These scientific missions were part of 
the overall NASA Balloon Program managed  by  the Wallops Flight Facility, 
Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 88-154; MSFC Release 88-160) 

NASA deployed the C-141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO),  to  observe 
Supernova  1987a. KAO  completed a five-week deployment to New Zealand to 
conduct high altitude observations of charged particle and heavy metals emissions 
produced in the explosion of  the giant blue star, first detected in February 1987. 
The November 1988 mission found nickel, argon, and iron exploding outward at 
868 miles  per  second.  Previous Kuiper observations of  the  expanding ejected 
cloud had greatly contributed to understanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO 
Supernova  1987a  research  was  being  conducted by  the Astrophysics Branch, 
Space  Science Division, Ames  Research  Center, Mountain  View,  California. 
(NASA Release 88-168; ARC Release 88-89). 

198 

December 

December 2-6:  The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from  Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS-27, a dedicated Department of Defense 
(DoD) mission.  After a 24-hour launch delay because of  strong winds at KSC, 
Atlantis lifted off  on a four-day mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD 
payload, reported by  various media  sources as being  a Lacrosse radar  recon- 
naissance  satellite.  Crew  members  for  STS-27  were  Robert  L.  Gibson, 
Commander; Guy S .  Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and 
William M.  Shepherd, Mission Specialists.  Atlantis landed on December 6 at 
Edwards Air  Force Base,  California.  (NASA Release  88-171; AP, Dec  2/88; 
UP I ,  Dec  2/88;  NY  Times,  Dec  7/88;  W  Post,  Dec  7/88;  W S J ,  Dec  7/88; 
W Times, Dec 7/88; B  Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88) 

December 5 :  The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked  10 years of orbital 
observations  of  the  cloud-draped  planet.  Ceremonies  were  held  at  NASA's 
Ames  Research Center,  Mountain  View,  California,  to  celebrate  Pioneer's 
accomplishments.  December 9 would also mark  10 years since a companion 
spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had  entered the atmosphere of Venus along with 
four hard-impact  probes  it had  released.  Observations by  Pioneer  revealed  a 
great deal  about the  atmospheric  content of  Venus,  plate  tectonics, volcanic 
activity,  and  the  magnetic  field.  Pioneer  had  also  observed  five  comets, 
including Halley.  Pioneer, whose  orbit was  deteriorating, was  scheduled  to 
cease operating  in August  1992 and  be  destroyed  upon  entering  the  lower 
atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88-165) 

December 8: NASA and the Missiles Division of LTV Missiles and Electronic 
Group, Dallas, Texas, announced the signing of an agreement that would grant 
the  firm  exclusive  rights  to  commercially  produce  and  market  the  Scout 
launch vehicle. NASA considered the negotiation of  the agreement as anoth- 
er important advance in establishing a strong U.S. commercial launch vehicle 
industry  through  the  privatization  of  Government  expendable rocket  pro- 
grams. (NASA Release 88-167) 

December  11 : The European Space Agency  (ESA) successfully  launched its 
first Ariane  4  booster  from the Korou  launch  center  in  French Guiana. The 
Ariane  4,  the  latest  and  most  powerful  ESA-built  booster,  carried  two 
European telecommunications satellites.  The launch had been delayed by  24 
hours because  of  a  faulty  sensor on  the  rocket's  third  stage.  (FBIS-Weu-88- 
238 ,  Dec  11/88; SSR  1988 109C-D; NY Times, Dec  12/88) 

199 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1988 

December  21:  Two  Soviet  cosmonauts  and  a  French  astronaut returned  to 
Earth aboard a Soyuz TM-6 capsule, following the completion by  the Soviets 
of  a  record breaking year-long endurance mission aboard the Mir  space sta- 
tion.  Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, launched into space on 
December 21,  1987, and  French  astronaut Jean-Loup Chretien, successfully 
landed  their  capsule  in  Kazakhstan.  Titov  and  Manarov  were  to  undergo 
extensive medical tests to determine the effects of  prolonged weightlessness. 
(FBIS-Sov-88-245, Dec  21/88;  Ny Times,  Dec  22/88;  W  Post,  Dec  22/88; 
WS J ,  Dec 22/88; C SM ,  Dec 22/88; B  Sun, Dec 22/88; P Znq, Dec 22/88) 

December  29:  E.  Ray  Tanner was  appointed Director of  the  Space  Station 
Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tanner had been serving 
as  Manager  of  the  Space  Station  Projects  Office,  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August  1988. Prior to that he was Deputy 
Director  for  Space  Systems  in  the  Science  and  Engineering  Directorate. 
(NASA Release 88-175; MSFC Release 88-178) 

Margaret  G.  Finarelli  was  appointed  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for 
External Relations, effective December 12. Finarelli had been serving as Director 
of  the Policy Division in the Office of  Space Station. (NASA Release 88-164) 

200 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,   1989 

January 

January 3 :  A NASA ER-2 high altitude aircraft flew the first of a dozen scientif- 
ic missions over the arctic circle to document the depletion of the Earth‘s atmos- 
pheric  ozone  layer  around  the  North  Pole.  The project,  a joint  U.S.-European 
effort, involved over 150 scientists engaged in research on ozone depletion caused 
by  chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and  other man-made  chemicals. (AP, Jan  3/89; 
USA  To*, 
Jan 4/89) 

January  5 :   Dr.  C .   Howard  Robins,  Jr.  was  named  NASA  Associate 
Administrator for Management, effective January 9. His primary responsibil- 
ity  was  to  help  strengthen NASA’s  core  organizational  and  infrastructural 
capabilities. Robins, a 30-year NASA veteran, would replace Manuel Peralta, 
who  left  NASA  to  become  president  of  the  American  National  Standards 
Institute. (NASA Release 89-1, Jan 5/89; W Times, Jan  11/89) 

January  I I :  A group of  U.S. and Canadian astronomers announced that they 
had discovered evidence of  vigorous activity in a white-dwarf star previously 
thought to be a stellar “corpse”. This new and unexpected behavior may offer 
astronomers new  insight  into how  stars are born,  evolve, and ultimately die. 
The white-dwarf  star, catalogued  as 0950+139, lies at  the center of  the  faint 
nebula called EGB-6 and  is  located about  1500 light years  from Earth  in the 
direction  of  the  constellation Leo. The findings were presented  at  the  173rd 
meeting  of  the  American  Astronomical  Society  in  Boston,  Massachusetts. 
(NASA Release 89-3, Jan  11/89) 

NASA  issued  a  request  for proposals  to  design and  build  a  ground-based 
radar that would quantify and characterize debris orbiting between  180 to 360 
miles above Earth. The radar would have the capability of  detecting debris as 
small as one centimeter  in diameter, contrasted with  the  10-centimeter capa- 
bility  of  current radar  systems. The data gathered by  the orbital debris radar 
would  be  used  in  designing  the  permanently  crew-tended  Space  Station 
Freedom, which would be built to withstand as much orbital debris damage as 
possible.  (NASA Release  89-8,  Jan  19/89;  W  Times,  Jan  23/89; NY Times, 
Jan 24/89; P  Znq, Jan 29/89) 

January  20:  Morton Thiokol conducted  a  full-scale  test  firing  of  a  Space 
Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM), Qualification Motor 8 (QM-8), under con- 
ditions simulating a  cold-weather  launch. The QM-8 was  the  sixth and final 
test of  the redesigned  Space Shuttle SRMs. A major objective of  the test was 

203 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1989 

to determine the performance of the SRM’s redesigned field joints under cold 
weather conditions. (LA Times, Jan 21/89, P Inq, Jan 21/89) 

January  21 : The  National  Weather  Service’s  Geostationary  Operational 
Environmental Satellite-6 (GOES-6) ceased to function, creating a temporary 
gap  in  U.S.  satellite weather coverage. The 6-year-old GOES-6, which  had 
surpassed its  expected operational lifetime by  a year, was  to be  temporarily 
replaced by a similar satellite already in orbit. The GOES-7 satellite was to be 
shifted eastward to cover the entire United States until  a permanent replace- 
ment, GOES-I, was  launched in  1990. (UP I ,  Jan  23/89; W Pos t ,  Jan 23/89; 
W T imes ,  Jan 23/89; N y  Times, Jan 24/89) 

January 27: A European Space Agency Ariane 2 launch vehicle was  success- 
fully launched from the Kourou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 2 
carried a  two-ton Intelsat-V telecommunications satellite. (SSR  1989 006A-B; 
W Times, Jan 27/89) 

January 29: The Soviet Union‘s Phobos 2 Mars observer spacecraft entered 
into Martian orbit after firing its braking engine. In addition to various instru- 
ments for remote observation of Mars, Phobos 2 carried a lander module to be 
deposited on Mar’s moon Phobos in early April. Phobos 1 became inoperative 
in August  1988 after a  flight  command error disoriented the  spacecraft and 
misdirected its solar power arrays. The schedule for Photos 2 was moved for- 
ward by  several days because of  electrical problems that might endanger the 
mission.  (FBIS-SOV-89-018, Jan  30189;  NY  Times,  Jan  30189;  LA   T imes ,  
Jan 30188; P  Inq ,  Jan 30189) 

During January: Using data from the orbiting Infrared Astronomical Satellite 
(IFUS), astronomers at the University of  Michigan at Ann Arbor  discovered 
several  dim  galaxies  in  an  area  of  the  universe  previously  believed  to  be 
devoid of  large celestial objects. The discovery of  seven dim galaxies in the 
“Bootes Void”  challenges accepted theories of  the  structure of  the  universe, 
which is believed to consist of  filaments or “bubbles” of  matter surrounding 
less  dense  areas of  relatively empty  space. The Michigan astronomers said 
they planned  to  continue studying IRAS’s  infrared data  in  hopes of  finding 
more dim galaxies. (W Pos t ,  Jan  16/89) 

204 

February 

February  8:  Astronomers  from  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley 
announced the  possible discovery of  a  newborn pulsar  at  the  heart of  stellar 
debris from Supernova 1987a. Apulsar is an extremely dense sphere of neutrons 
less  than  a  few miles  in  diameter but  with  a magnetic field  trillions of  times 
more  powerful than  the  Earths.  The  object  at  the  heart  of  Supernova  1987a 
appeared to be spinning at a rate of 2,000 rotations per second. The observations 
were made by  an  international team  of  scientists working at  the Cerro Tololo 
Inter-American observatory in Chile. The frequency of  the light emitted by  the 
object was  found to  vary  in  a  regular pattern, suggesting that  it was  part  of  a 
binary system, with a smaller object rotating around a larger twin. The discov- 
ery  was  announced  in  a  circular  sent  to  members  of  the  International 
Astronomical Union. (UPZ, Feb 8/89; NY   Times, Feb 9/89; B Sun, Feb 10/89) 

February  IO: The  Soviet Union  launched a  cluster of  six  Cosmos  satellites 
aboard a Cyclone launch vehicle, including an Antarctic observer spacecraft 
that  was  placed  into  near-polar  orbit,  the  Tass News Agency  reported.  The 
Cosmos  2000  satellite  was  described  as  a  photo-reconnaissance research 
satellite  that  would  photograph  unexplored  regions  of  central  Antarctica. 
(SSR  1989A-G; U P I ,  Feb  11/89) 

February 14: The Air Force successfully launched the first of  its new Delta 2 
launch vehicles, carrying a $65  million NAVSTAR satellite into a preliminary 
elliptical  orbit. The  NAVSTAR,  the  first  operational satellite of  the  Global 
Positioning System  (GPS), subsequently boosted  itself  into  an  11,000 mile 
circular orbit. The 21-satellite GPS network was expected to provide very pre- 
cise positioning data for U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
troops and vehicles throughout the world. The satellites would also broadcast 
precise positioning data to civilian users.  (SSR  1989 013A; U P I ,  Feb  14/89; 
W Pos t ,  Feb  15/89; NY  Times, Feb  15/89; LA  Times, Feb  15/89; W  Times, 
Feb  15/89; USA  Today, Feb  15/89; P Znq, Feb  15/89; W Times, Feb  17/89) 

The  U.S. Government released  results  of  a  six-month  interagency  study on 
orbital debris. The study, cochaired by NASA and the Department of Defense, 
cited satellite and rocket body fragmentation as the principal source of  orbital 
debris and concluded that, left unchecked, the growth of debris could threaten 
the  safe and reliable operation of  crew-tended and untended spacecraft in  the 
next century. (NASA Release 89-20, Feb  17/89) 

205 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1989 

February 21 :  In civil proceedings against Rockwell International Corporation in 
a Los Angeles Federal court, prosecutors recommended that a $5 million fine be 
levied against the company, after pleading guilty to overbilling the Government 
on a satellite navigation contract. Rockwell had entered a conditional guilty plea 
for overbilling the Air Force by nearly $450,000 on contracts for the $1.2 billion 
NAVSTAR satellite system. (UP I ,  Feb 21/89; LA Times, Feb 22/89) 

*  The Tass News Agency  reported  that  the  Soviet Phobos 2 spacecraft had 
begun  to  transmit  high  quality  closeup  images  of  the  Mars  moon  Phobos. 
Phobos 2 was expected to dispatch two  small robot landers to the  surface of 
Phobos. (FBIS-Sov-89-034; LA  Times, Feb 23/89; W Post, Feb 27/89) 

February  27:  Morton Thiokol announced that  it would  divide its operations 
into  two  companies:  Morton  International,  Inc.  and  Thiokol  Corporation. 
Morton International would  include the company’s salt,  specialty chemicals, 
and automotive airbag operations, whereas Thiokol would include aerospace 
operations. According to Chief Executive Officer Charles Locke, the decision 
to  split the  operating units was made “so that  each can  adopt  strategies and 
pursue  objectives  appropriate to  its  specific businesses.’’ The  restructuring 
was  expected to be  completed by  July  1, pending  stockholder approval and 
Internal  Revenue  Service  (IRS)  certification  of  the  spinoff  as  tax-free. 
(WS J ,  Feb 28/89; W Post, Feb 28/89; USA  Today, Feb 28/89) 

206 

March 6: After several delays, an ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle was successfully 
launched from the Kourou launch center in French Guiana. The  195-foot Ariane 
4  carried  Japan's  first  commercial  communications  satellite  and  a  European 
weather  station into low Earth  orbits, from where the two  satellites would  later 
boost  themselves  into  22,300-mile  geosynchronous orbits.  This  was  the  third 
launch of  the new Ariane 4  launch vehicle, one of  the most  powerful boosters 
available for commercial satellite launches. (SSR  1989 020A-D; UPI ,  Mar 6/89) 

March 13-19:  The Space Shuttle Discovery was  successfully launched from 
the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on mission  STS-29, the main objective to 
deploy the final Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-4). Discovery car- 
ried a crew of  five on a 5-day mission. Six hours into the mission, the 2.5 ton 
$100 million TDRS-4 was  successfully deployed  into low-Earth orbit where 
it  subsequently  boosted  itself  into  a  22,300  mile  geosynchronous  orbit. 
Discovery  also carried biological  experiments that  to  conduct  studies of  the 
embryonic development of  chickens and bone healing in rats in a micrograv- 
ity environment. The STS-28 crew would also photograph and film environ- 
mentally  damaged  areas  throughout  the  world  for  later  scientific  analysis. 
Discovery's launch had been  delayed a month because of  cracks found  in the 
main  engine turbopumps.  Replacement  occurred  on  the  launch  pad.  During 
the mission, a hydrogen tank  supplying the Shuttle's fuel cells was  temporar- 
ily  shut  down  because  of  erratic  pressure  readings.  The  problem,  which 
caused  a  temporary electricity shortage  aboard  the Shuttle, was  resolved  the 
following  day,  allowing Discovery  to  stay  in  orbit  for five  days  as planned. 
Discovery  successfully  landed  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  California,  on 
March  19.  (NASA  MORIFlight  Operation  Report, M-989-88-29;  SSR  1989 
021A;  AP,  Mar  13-19/89;  UP I ,  Mar  13-19/89;  N y  Times, Mar  14-20189; 
W S J ,  Mar  14-20189;  W  Post,  Mar  14-20189;  W  Times,  Mar  14-20189; 
U SA  Today, Mar  14-20189;  P Znq, Mar  14-20189;  B  Sun, Mar  14-20189) 

March 14 :  NASAAdministrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and the Ambassador of 
Japan to the United States H.E. Nobuo Matsunaga  signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding between NASA  and the  government of  Japan  on cooperation 
in  the  detailed design, development, operation, and  utilization of  the  Space 
Station  Freedom.  The  agreement  was  signed  at  NASA  Headquarters, 
Washington, D.C.  Under the  agreement, Japan would  provide  the  Japanese 
Experiment Module (JEM) to  the Freedom program. The E M ,  to be perma- 
nently  attached  to  the  Space  Station  base,  would  consist  of  a  pressurized 

207 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1989 

laboratory module, at least two experiment logistics modules, and an exposed 
facility. (NASA Release 89-32, Mar  14/89) 

March 21 : NASA Administrator Dr.  James C. Fletcher announced his resig- 
nation, effective April 8.  Dr. Fletcher had  served as NASA Administrator for 
a total of nine years, from April 1971 to May  1977, and again since May  1986, 
following  the  Challenger  accident. Dr.  Fletcher, who  reluctantly  agreed  to 
return  to  the Agency  at  the  request of  President Ronald Reagan, supervised 
the adoption of  a new management system that put greater emphasis on qual- 
ity  control  and  safety for  the  Shuttle program. During his  second term,  Dr. 
Fletcher had oversight of the redesign of the Space Shuttle solid rocket boost- 
ers  and  successfully lobbied Congress for  continuation of  the  Space Station 
program. In his resignation announcement, Dr.  Fletcher said he now felt that 
he  could  “safely place  the  leadership of  NASA in  another‘s hands.”  NASA 
Deputy Administrator Dale Myers served as Acting Administrator until a suc- 
cessor  was  named  by  President George Bush.  (NASA Release  89-36, Mar 
21/89;  AP,  Mar  21/89;  UP I ,  Mar  21/89; NY   Times, Mar  22/89;  WS J ,  Mar 
22/89;  USA  Today, Mar 22/89; B  Sun, Mar 22/89; LA Times, Mar 22/89) 

0  In its first underwater test firing, a Trident I1 missile exploded in flight four 
seconds  after  breaching  the  ocean  surface  near  Cape  Canaveral,  Florida. 
Shortly after being  fired from  the  submarine USS  Tennessee, the Trident  I1 
veered off  course  and  self destructed. Neither the  submarine nor  its support 
ships were  damaged. (NY Times, Mar  22/89;  W Pos t ,  Mar  22/89;  W Times, 
Mar 22/89; LA  Times, Mar 22/89) 

March  23:  Three-time  spaceflight veteran Navy  Captain Frederick Hauck, 
Commander of the first post-Challenger Shuttle mission, announced he would 
leave  NASA  on  April  3  to  join  the  Pentagon  staff  of  the  Chief  of  Naval 
Operations. (NASA Release 89-39, Mar 23/89) 

March 24: In a major test of  the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a Delta Star 
SDI test  satellite was  successfully launched aboard a Delta launch vehicle at 
4 5  1 p.m. from Cape Canaveral Air  Force Station, Florida. The three-ton satel- 
lite  would  be  used  to  test  remote  sensing  equipment  used  to  detect  rocket 
launches and laser beam emissions from Earth in conditions that would simu- 
late the initial stages of  a nuclear conflict. The three-ton satellite carried a laser 
.  radar,  seven video  imaging cameras, and  an  infrared  imager. The Delta  Star 
was  expected to carry out tests throughout the next  six to nine months. (SSR 
1989 026A, NY  Times, Mar 25/89; W Post, Mar 25/89; C Trib, Mar 25/89) 

March 27: Challenging earlier reports that a mysterious object at the heart of 
the  remnants of  Supernova  1987A is  a  rapidly  spinning pulsar,  scientists at 
Columbia University announced that  the observed object was more likely to 

208 

MARCH  1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

likely  to  emanate  from  a  less  dense  neutron  star  that  is  vibrating  at  the 
observed frequency. The Columbia astronomers argued th 
ory  not  only explained the  recent  observations but  also 
previous hypotheses on how neutron stars develop. (W Pos t ,  Mar 27/89) 

March  28:  In  a  severe setback for  the  Soviet Union‘s planetary exploration 
program, Soviet ground controllers lost stable radio  contact with the untend- 
ed  Phobos 2 Mars probe, the Tass news  agency  reported. Phobos 2  stopped 
responding to ground control commands shortly after the craft was ordered to 
perform a delicate maneuver around the Mars moon  Phobos. The maneuver 
was  an  initial step toward  landing a  probe on  the Martian moon. During  its 
transit  toward Mars,  Phobos  2  had  experienced a  failure  of  its  main  radio 
transmitter, forcing ground controllers to rely  on a  low-power backup trans- 
mitter  for  all  communications with  the  spacecraft. A  companion spacecraft, 
Phobos 1, was also lost in September as a result of  a ground control command 
error. The loss of  communications with  Phobos 2  was described by  Western 
experts as  having occurred at  the  “worst possible time”  because few  of  the 
main  mission  objectives  had  yet  been  fulfilled.  (FBIS-Sov-89-059, Mar 
29/89; UP I ,  Mar 28/89; AP, Mar  29/89; NY  Times, Mar 29/89; W Pos t ,  Mar 
29/89; W Times, Mar 29/89; P Inq ,  Mar 29/89) 

March 29 :  The first commercial launch of  a  licensed private rocket was suc- 
cessfully carried out at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. A two-stage 
Starfire suborbital rocket built  by  Space  Services, Inc.  carried  a  canister of 
experiments on a  198-mile ballistic trajectory. The experiment canister, which 
carried several microgravity materials processing experiments, was retrieved 
intact at the conclusion of  the  15-minute suborbital flight. Space Systems, Inc. 
had  previously  launched  a  test  rocket  carrying a  dummy  payload  in  1982. 
(NY  Times, Mar  30189; W Pos t ,  Mar  30189;  WS J ,  Mar  30189; W Times, Mar 
30189; B  Su n ,  Mar 30189; P Inq ,  Mar 30189; C Trib, Mar 30189) 

March  29 :  NASA  scientists reported  that  a  group of  eight  newly  fertilized 
chicken embryos carried aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS- 
th, raising questions about the via- 
28 had failed to hatch upon re 
. A group of  16 eggs fertilized nine 
bility of animal reproduction in zero g 
days before  launch were  all  successfully hatched.  Of  a  third  group of  eight 
eggs  scheduled  to  hatch  Saturday,  only  a  few  embryos  remained  viable. 
Discovery  astronaut James  Bagian  speculated that  the  results may  indicate 
that gravity plays a previously unknown critical role during the process of cell 

209 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1989 

differentiation. Bagian  suggested that,  should the  experiment demonstrate a 
relationship  between  gravity  and  embryogenesis,  the  results  would  have 
“great  implications”  for  future  long-duration  space  missions.  ( U P I ,  Mar 
29/89; W Post, Mar 30189; P  Inq, Mar 30189; NY Times, Mar 31/89) 

March 30: NASAAdministrator Dr. James C .  Fletcher named Dr. Robert Rosen 
as  Acting Associate Administrator for  the  Office  of  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Technology (OAST), effective April 2 .  Rosen had  served as Deputy Associate 
Administrator, OAST, since March  1986. (NASA Release 89-41, Mar 30189) 

210 

April 

April 2:  An ESAAriane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the 
Kourou  launch facility in French Guiana. The Ariane 2  carried the TELE-X 
Nordic  communications  satellite  into  a  preliminary  elliptical  orbit,  from 
where it subsequently boosted itself into a 22,300-mile geosynchronous orbit. 
(FBIS-MU-89-062,  Apr 3/89; SSR 1989 027A-B; U P I ,  Apr  1/89) 

April  I1 : The  National Research Council (NRC) recommended  that NASA 
abandon plans  to participate in development of  a commercial orbiting space 
laboratory that had  been  promoted by  the  Reagan  administration and  some 
members  of  Congress.  In  recommending  against  the  development  of  the 
Industrial Space Facility,  the NRC  argued that  experiments foreseen for  the 
space laboratory could be performed aboard the Space Shuttle and on Shuttle- 
based  facilities during the period leading to the completion of  Space Station 
Freedom. (NY Times, Apr  12/89; W  Post, Apr  12/89) 

April  12: The Soviet Union  announced that  it would  suspend occupation of 
the Mir Space Station for at  least three months following the return to Earth 
of its current crew in  late April. The reason given by  the Soviets for the aban- 
donment of  the station, which had been continuously occupied since February 
1987, was a delay in the manufacture of  additional pressurized modules to be 
attached to the facility. Western experts were interpreting the temporary shut- 
down of  the station as a possible cost-cutting measure and another setback to 
the Soviet space program following the loss of its twin Mars probes during the 
last  several months. Aviation Week & Space  Technology magazine was  also 
reporting that degradation of  the  station's solar power  arrays was causing an 
electrical  shortage.  (M   Times,  Apr  13/89;  W   Pos t ,   Apr  13/89,  15/89; 
LA Times, Apr  12/89; UP I ,  Apr  14/89; W Times, Apr  14/89; P Inq, Apr  19/89) 

April  13:  President  George  Bush  announced  the  selection  of  Rear  Admiral 
Richard H. Truly,  a former astronaut and head  of  the Space Shuttle program, to 
succeed Dr.  James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator. The White House also 
announced that  J.R.  Thompson, Director  of  the  Marshall Space Flight  Center 
(MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, would be appointed NASA Deputy Administrator. 
Truly, a veteran of two Shuttle flights, was named to head the Shuttle program by 
Administrator Fletcher following the 1986 Challenger accident. Truly was credit- 
ed with helping to restore safety and reliability to Shuttle-related activities. (FBIS- 
Sov-89-070, Apr  13/89; AP, Apr  12/89; UP I ,  Apr  12/89; 2alY  Times, Apr  13/89; 
W Post, Apr 13/89; WSJ ,  Apr  13/89; USA Today, Apr 13/89; W Times, Apr  13/89) 

21 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1989 

Dale D.  Myers,  the  acting NASA Administrator, announced his  plans  to 
resign  effective  May  13.  Myers  had  served  as  the  NASA  Deputy 
Administrator from  October  6,  1986, when  he  was  recruited  to  return  to 
NASA by  President Ronald  Reagan. During  his  tenure, Myers  was  instru- 
mental  in  guiding  NASA  through  the  period  of  recovery  following  the 
Challenger accident of  January 28,  1986. (NASA Release 89-49, Apr  13/89) 

April 16: The Soviet weekly magazine Ogonyok revealed additional details on 
the circumstances surrounding a mysterious launch pad explosion of  a Soviet 
rocket in  1960 that killed dozens of workers and the commander of  the Soviet 
Union's rocket forces. Ogonyok attributed the accident, which took place at a 
secret launch facility at Tura-Tam, near  the Aral Sea,  to  a  flouting of  safety 
rules during a crash program to catch up with the United States in the devel- 
opment of  Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs). The head of  the Soviet 
Rocket Forces, Chief Artillery Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, was killed along 
with dozens of workers and soldiers who were situated near the pad when the 
rocket  exploded.  (AP, Apr  17/89; B  Su n ,  Apr  17/89; W  Times, Apr  17/89; 
C Trib, Apr  17/89) 

April  19: Scientists at NASA's solar  system exploration division announced 
that  the Earth had  experienced a  "close call" in March with  a newly  discov- 
ered  half-mile-wide  asteroid.  The  asteroid,  named  1989FC, passed  within 
500,000 miles of Earth-about 
twice the distance to the Moon-on  March 23. 
The asteroid was discovered by Henry Holt, an amateur astronomer working 
on  a  NASA  asteroid hunting project.  NASA  scientists estimated that  if  the 
asteroid were ever to collide with the Earth, the collision would release ener- 
gy equivalent to 20,000 times that of  the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima 
and would leave a crater 10 miles wide and up to a mile deep. (NASA Release 
89-52, Apr  19/89; UPI,  Apr  19/89; AP, Apr  20189;  NY  Times, Apr  20189; 
USA Today, Apr 20189; LA Times, Apr  20189; B  Sun, Apr 20189) 

April  19: NASA rolled  out  a  full-scale mockup of  the proposed Shuttle-C, a 
new heavy lift launch vehicle based on Space Shuttle technology. The 115-foot 
mockup,  constructed  in  a  Hangar  at  the  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center, 
Huntsville, Alabama, was put on display in an effort to gain support for fund- 
ing of  the $1.5 billion Shuttle-C development program in the fiscal year  1991 
Federal budget. The Shuttle-C would be an untended launch vehicle that would 
fly "piggyback" on the standard Shuttle SRM and external tank assembly and 
would  have  a  greater  payload  capacity than  the  current  Shuttles.  Shuttle-C 
could substitute for the crew-tended Shuttles in  the  launching of  components 
for Space Station Freedom. (AP, Apr  18/89; LA Times, Apr  19;/89) 

April 20: President George Bush reestablished the National Space Council, an 
executive space policy  advisory group  to  be  chaired by  the Vice  President. 

212 

APRIL  1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The Space Council was  originally created by President John F. Kennedy and 
disbanded in  1973 by  President Richard Nixon.  President Bush  restored the 
Space Council as  an official forum for  setting long-range policy  for United 
States civil, military, and commercial space efforts. (WH Release, Apr 20189; 
UP I ,  May  12/89) 

0  NASA  announced  that  Martin  Marietta  Corporation  of  Bethesda, 
Maryland, had won a $297 million contract to develop the Flight Telerobotic 
Servicer  (FTS),  a  space  robot  that  would  help  construct  and  maintain  the 
Space Station Freedom. Development of  the robot was expected to  take nine 
years and would include flight testing of a prototype aboard the Space Shuttle. 
Once deployed during an early Space Station construction mission, the mobile 
robot  would  be  controlled  remotely  by  astronauts from  within  the  station, 
thereby minimizing the amount of  “spacewalk” activity that astronauts would 
need to perform. (W Times, Apr 21/89; B  Sun ,  Apr 21/89) 

April  22 :   NASA  announced  that  it  had  awarded  a  $1.1  billion  contract  to 
Lockheed  Corporation  of  Calabasas,  California  and  GenCorp,  Inc.  of 
Fairlawn,  Ohio,  for  the  development  of  the  Space  Shuttle  advanced  solid 
rocket motor  (ASRM). The ASRM, which would replace the current Shuttle 
SRMs built by Morton Thiokol, would be a next-generation solid fuel propul- 
sion  system that would  use  an  elongated single rocket casing instead of  the 
current segmented case design. According to NASA,  the new  design would 
improve  Shuttle  safety  and  performance,  allowing  an  additional  12,000- 
pound  payload capacity aboard the  orbiters.  Lockheed and  GenCorp would 
eventually replace Morton Thiokol as prime contractors for Shuttle solid rock- 
et propulsion. A faulty field joint on one of Thiokol’s segmented boosters was 
blamed  for  the  catastrophic  explosion  of  the  Space  Shuttle  Challenger  in 
1986. Under the terms of the seven-year contract, Lockheeds Missile System 
division  and  GenCorp‘s Aerojet  Space  Booster  Company  would  design, 
develop, and  test  the new  generation of  motors, and produce enough for  six 
Shuttle flights beginning as  early as  1994. The contract also had  an  option, 
valued  at  approximately $1  billion,  for NASA  to  purchase ASRMs  for  40 
additional Shuttle  flights  and  eight  test  firings.  (NASA Release  89-57, Apr 
21189;  U P I ,  Apr 22/89; NY   Times, Apr 22/89;  W Post, Apr 22/89; LA  Times, 
Apr 22/89; W S J ,  Apr 24/89) 

April 24 :  Six top-level NASA managers announced their resignations in order 
to  avoid new  conflict-of-interest restrictions on contract related work by  for- 
mer Federal employees. The new restrictions, effective May  16, 1989, would 
bar  officials who  have  worked  on  procurement from  assuming  any  private 
sector jobs involving the contracts for two years. Some of  the resigning man- 
agers cited the failure of Congress to pass a pay raise for senior executive ser- 
vice  (SES) personnel as  a  reason  for  leaving.  The  six  NASA officials who  

213 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONALITICS 

APRIL 1989 

announced  their  resignations  were  Noel  Hinners,  Associate  Deputy 
Administrator;  James  Odom,  Director  of  the  Space  Station  program;  Jon 
McBride,  an  astronaut  and  chief  of  congressional relations;  John  Thomas, 
head  of  solid  rocket  booster  redesign  at  the  Marshall  Space Flight  Center 
(MSFC);  Bill  Sneed,  MSFC  policy  chief;  and  James  Downey,  irector  of 
MSFC s  payload  project  office.  (NASA Releases  89-60,  89-61,  89-62, Apr 
24/89; AP, Apr 24/89; UP I ,  Apr 24/89; W S J ,  Apr 25/89; W Po s t ,  Apr 25/89; 
W Times, Apr 25/89) 

April  25: The Department of Defense (DoD) announced it would phase out its 
participation in the National Aerospace Plane program, reducing funding for 
the project by  $200 million in  fiscal year  1990 and obligating its  remaining 
$100 million contribution to NASA. The National Aerospace Plane was pro- 
posed by President Reagan as a hypersonic vehicle that would be capable of 
taking  off  from  conventional runways  and  subsequently boosting itself  into 
low-Earth orbit. Total project development costs were estimated at $3.5  bil- 
lion, of  which 80 percent would come from the DoD and 20 percent would be 
provided by  NASA. DoD  and  NASA had  already  invested $850 million  to 
develop an X-30 experimental prototype vehicle. (UP I ,  Apr 25/89) 

April  27:  Three Soviet cosmonauts who had  been  occupying the Mir  Space 
Station returned to Earth aboard a Soyuz TM-7 capsule. The three cosmonauts 
landed safely in Soviet Central Asia near the city of Dzheskazgan. The depar- 
ture of  the Mir crew marked the first time that the station has been left untend- 
ed  since crew rotations began  in February  1987. Soviet space program offi- 
cials announced that  two new  experiment modules would be  attached to  the 
station in anticipation of the arrival in August of the next crew. (FBIS-Sov-89- 
080, Apr 27/89; U P I ,  Apr 27/89; P  Inq ,  Apr 28/89; B  Sun ,  Apr 28/89) 

April  28: A launch attempt of  the Space Shuttle Atlantis was scrubbed 3 1 sec- 
onds before scheduled liftoff because of a power surge on a pump that recircu- 
lates liquid hydrogen fuel for one of  the Shuttle main engines. Shuttle techni- 
cians were working to replace the pump and a leaky fuel line that was  discov- 
ered after the scrub. A new launch attempt was expected to be made as early as 
Thursday. (U P I ,  Apr  29-30189;  AP, Apr  30189; W Post, May  1/89; NY Times, 
May  1/89; USA Today, May  1/89; B Sun, May  1/89; P Inq ,  May  1/89) 

214  

May  4-8:   The  Space  Shuttle Atlantis was  successfully launched  from  the 
Kennedy Space Center, Florida, on mission  STS-30, whose  main  objective 
was to deploy the $550 million Magellan Venus radar mapper. Magellan, the 
first  United  States  interplanetary mission  to  be  launched  in  11  years,  was 
deployed from the cargo bay  of Atlantis 6 hours after launch and was subse- 
quently propelled  toward  the  Sun  and  Venus  by  a  solid  fuel  inertial upper 
stage (IUS). Following the IUS  firing, ground controllers confirmed that the 
spacecraft was operating normally and was on a proper course toward Venus. 
Upon  arriving  at  Venus  in August  1990, the  7,700-pound Magellan  would 
enter Venusian  orbit  for  several months  of  extensive radar mapping of  the 
planet’s cloud shrouded surface. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, 
California,  on  May  8 .   (NASA  MOR,  C-600-89-30,  E-199-89-30; NASA 
PFOR, M-989-89-30; SSR  1989 033A-B; UP I ,  May  5/89; Ny Times, May 
5/89;W Post, May  5/89; W S J ,  May  5/89; P  Znq, May 5/89; B  Sun ,  May  5/89; 
W Times, May 5/89; USA Today, May  5/89) 

May 9: The Department of Defense announced that it would terminate funding 
for development of  the V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft beginning in Ey  1990. 
The V-22 Osprey had been under development by Boeing Helicopters and Bell 
Helicopter Textron, Inc. for the U.S.  Marine Corps. ( P  Znq, May  10189) 

May  10: An Air  Force Titan  34D  launch vehicle was  successfully launched 
from  Cape  Canaveral Air  Force  Station, Florida,  carrying a  secret military 
payload into orbit. The  l6-story, $65 million Titan was believed to be carry- 
ing  a  pair  of  Defense  Satellite Communications System  (DSCS)  satellites. 
(SSR  1989 035A-C; W Times, May  11/89; C Trib, May  11/89; B  Sun ,  May 
11/89; P  Znq, May  11/89) 

May  10 :  President George Bush  chose  the  name  “Endeavour” for  the  new 
Space Shuttle orbiter being built  to replace the orbiter Challenger. The name 
“Endeavour” resulted from a nationwide orbiter-naming competition support- 
ed  by  educational projects created by  student teams  in  elementary and  sec- 
ondary  schools. Endeavour  was  the  name  of  the  first  ship  commanded  by 
James Cook, a British explorer, navigator, and astronomer. Cook commanded 
the Endeavour on its maiden voyage to the South Pacific on an astronomical 
and  mapping mission.  The  new  orbiter, designated OV-105, was  scheduled 
to  be  completed  in  1991  and  to  fly  its  maiden  voyage  in  March  1992. 
(NASA Release 89-70, May  10189) 

215 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1989 

May  11: An unarmed Air  Force Midgetman missile went off  course and was 
destroyed  shortly after  launch from Vandenberg Air  Force  Base.  The missile 
began to tumble 70 seconds into the flight during its second stage burn, causing 
the range  safety officer to transmit a self-destruct command. The Midgetman, 
which  was  undergoing its  first  flight  test, had  been  programmed to  deliver  a 
dummy warhead 4,600 miles over the Pacific Ocean to the Kwajalen Atoll test 
range.  Despite  the  failure,  the  test  was  declared a  partial  success by  the Air 
Force.  (NY Times, May  12/89;  WSJ ,  May  12/89;  U S A  Today, May  12/89; 
W Times, May  12/89) 

May   12: Thomas  L.  Moser,  acting Associate Administrator  for  the  Space 
Station Freedom  program, announced he  was  leaving NASA effective May 
13. Moser, appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for  the  Freedom pro- 
gram  in  December, had  been  serving  as  the  acting Associate Administrator 
since April 30. (NASA Release 89-72, May  12/89) 

May 15: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that a NASA T- 
38 jet  trainer  aircraft being  flown by  a  Space  Shuttle astronaut had  experi- 
enced  a  near  collision  with  a  Pan  American  World  Airways  widebody  jet 
about 30 miles West  of Washington, DC. The pilots of  the Airbus A-310 jet- 
liner reported the two planes had come within 500 feet of  each other while on 
perpendicular flight paths. The T-38 was  flown by  Navy  Captain David M. 
Walker, Commander of  the  recently completed Space Shuttle mission STS- 
28.  The  near  collision  occurred  when  Walker’s  aircraft  strayed  below  its 
assigned flight elevation. (AP, May  17/89; UPl, May  17/89; NY   Times, May 
17/89; W Post, May  17/89; B  Sun, May  17/89) 

May  16: Acting  NASA  Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly  announced  the 
appointment of Samuel W.  Keller as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, 
the  third-ranking position in  the Agency. Keller had  been  Deputy Associate 
Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications  since  December  1977. 
(NASA Release 89-75, May  16/89; LA  Times, May  17/89) 

May  18: Acting  NASA  Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly  announced  the 
appointment  of  former  Space  Shuttle  astronaut  William  B.  Lenoir  as 
Associate Administrator for Space Station. Lenoir replaced James B. Odom, 
who was retiring. Truly also announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs as 
Director, Space  Station Freedom.  (NASA Release  88-77, May  18/89;  UPZ, 
May  18/89; AP, May  19/89; IVY Times, May  19/89; W Post, May  19/89; WSJ ,  
May  19/89; L A  Times, May  19/89; W Times, May 23/89) 

May 2 4 :  The Soviet Union successfully launched a COSMOS 2021 satellite. 
(AP ,  May 28/89;  UPI, May 28/89) 

216 

MAY  1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

M a y  31: The Soviet Union successfully launched a Proton launch vehicle car- 
rying  three  satellites from  the  Baikonur launch  facility in  Kazakhstan. The 
Proton was  carrying the Cosmos 2,022, 2,023 and 2,024 satellites. The Tass 
News Agency  reported  that  the  third  stage of  the  booster  failed  to  bum  up 
completely in the atmosphere and that unburned fragments may have fallen to 
Earth in the U.S.-Canadian border region near International Falls, Minnesota. 
(SSR  1989 039A-H; UP I ,  June 2/89; AP, June 2/89; LA Times, June 3/89) 

During M a y :  Astronomers at Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, pub- 
lished results of  a study which c o n f i i e d  that Pluto is a planet and not an aster- 
oid or a wayward natural satellite. William McKinnon, Associate Professor of 
Planetary  Science  at  Washington  University,  asserted  that  his  analysis  of 
telescopic data and computer models showed that Pluto was formed indepen- 
dently in the outer solar system as a planet. (LA  Times, May 29/89) 

217 

June 

June 1 : At the request of the National Space Council, President George Bush 
restored  funding  for  continued operation of  two  Landsat  satellites  and  the 
launching of  a  third. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
had earlier decided to deactivate the Landsats because of a shortfall of $5 mil- 
lion in fiscal year 1989 funding for the program. (WSJ ,  Jun 2/89) 

June 5: An ESA Ariane 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from the 
Kourou launch facility in French Guiana, carrying two communications satel- 
lites.  The  192-foot Ariane  4  was  carrying  a  Superbird-A communications 
satellite owned by  Japan  and  a West  German DFS  Kopernikus-1 television 
relay  satellite. This was  the  27th  successful launch by Arianespace and  the 
fourth successful launch of  the new Ariane 4  launch vehicle. (FBIS-Weu-89- 
107; SSR 1989 041A-D; UP I ,  Jun 5/89; P  Inq ,  Jun 6/89) 

June 8: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of  the first hypersonic flight of 
the  X-15  experimental rocket  plane.  North  American Aviation  pilot  A.  Scott 
Crossfield was  at the controls for the first flight. The X-15 research aircraft flew 
a total of  199 flights in what is widely regarded as one of the most successful aero- 
nautical research programs ever conducted. (NASA Release 89-82, May 30189) 

June 9: Three-time space flight veteran George “Pinky” Nelson announced he 
would leave NASA on June 30 to accept academic and administrative positions 
at the University of Washington, Seattle. (NASA Release 89-89, Jun 9/89) 

June  10 :  After  five  cancelled launch  attempts, an Air Force Delta  2  launch 
vehicle was  successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in 
Florida,  carrying a  NAVSTAR  navigation satellite. The NAVSTAR  was  the 
second of  a  planned network of  satellites known  as  the  Global Positioning 
System, which  would  allow military  units  to  determine their  position  any- 
where on Earth within 50 feet. (SSR  1989 043D, 044A; W  Times, Jun  12/89) 

June 14: An Air Force Titan 4 launch vehicle was successfully launched from 
Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying a classified military satel- 
lite. This was  the  first launch of  the Titan 4,  a  new  generation of  heavy  lift 
launch vehicles  dedicated mainly  to  Department of  Defense missions.  The 
$220 million Titan  4  was  believed  to  be  carrying  a  $180  million  advanced 
early warning satellite. (SSR  1989 046A -E  Ny T imes ,  Jun  15/89; WS J ,  Jun 
15/89;  W   Pos t ,   Jun  15/89;  USA   Today,  Jun  15/89;  C  Trib, Jun  15/89; 
LA T imes ,  Jun  15/89; W  T imes ,  Jun  15/89) 

219 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1989 

A  team  of  astronomers  reported  that  they  had  discovered  evidence  of 
“brown dwarfs”, large celestial objects that  are intermediate in  size between 
planets  and  stars.  The  findings,  presented  at  a  meeting  of  the  American 
Astronomical Society, showed evidence of  at  least nine brown dwarfs orbit- 
ing stars in the constellation Taurus. The observed objects were believed to be 
from 5 to 20 times the size of  Jupiter. Evidence of brown dwarfs was expect- 
ed to help account for some of  the “missing” dark matter believed to exist in 
the universe. (W Post, Jun  15/89; P  Inq ,  Jun 25/89) 

June  17:  Space Shuttle astronaut David  S .  Griggs was killed while off  duty 
when  a  single  engine propeller  plane  he  was  flying  crashed near  a  private 
airstrip  in Arkansas. Griggs had  been  performing aerobatic maneuvers in  a 
vintage ST-6 training plane when the craft struck the ground, killing the astro- 
naut instantly. Griggs was  a mission specialist aboard an April 1985 flight of 
the Space Shuttle Discovery and had been designated pilot for Discovery mis- 
sion STS-33 in November. (AP, Jun 18/89; W Post, Jun  18/89; UP I ,  Jun 19/89; 
NY   Times, Jun  19/89; P  Inq ,  Jun  19/89) 

June  19 :   Scientists  at  NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena, 
California, announced that the Voyager 2 space probe had discovered a giant 
weather system on Neptune approximately 6,200 miles wide and comparable 
to Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. Voyager 2 made the discovery while at a distance 
of  58.98 million miles from Neptune, currently the most distant planet from 
the  sun. Voyager  2  was  scheduled to  perform  an  extremely  close  flyby  of 
Neptune on August 24, when it would approach to within 3,000 miles of  the 
planet’s cloud  tops.  This  would  be  the  fourth  and  final  planetary  flyby  by 
Voyager 2, which was launched in 1977 and had flown by Jupiter, Saturn, and 
Uranus.  (Voyager  Bulletin:  Mission  Status  Report  No .   91 ,   Aug  17/89; 
AP, June  16/89; W Post, Jun 21/89) 

The first major private-sector launch of  a  satellite was delayed by  several 
months as a result of  a launch pad accident that damaged the satellite. A com- 
munications satellite owned by  the  government of  India was  seriously dam- 
aged when it was accidentally struck by  a lift hook connected to a crane. The 
satellite was  being  prepared for  launch  at  a  McDonnell Douglas facility  at 
Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Jun 27/89; 0 Sent Star, Jun 21/89) 

June  23: A Space Shuttle main  engine  shut down prematurely and  suffered 
severe damage during a full-duration test f
at the Stennis Space Center in 
 
g
~
Mississippi.  NASA  engineers  said  that  a  high  speed  liquid  oxygen  pump 
“came apart” during  the  test  firing,  causing a  fire  and  structural damage  to 
Rocketdyne engine No. 0212. This was the first serious malfunction of a main 
engine  since  1985.  (MSFC  Release  89-125,  Jun  26/89;  UP I ,  Jun  23/89; 
NY Times, Jun 28/89; W Times, Jun 28/89) 

220 

JUNE 1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

June 26: Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced 
that Earth-based radar observations of  Saturn's moon Titan had shown that it 
is not  entirely covered by  an  ocean of  liquid ethane. Radar echoes bounced 
from Titan between June 3 and 6 showed the planet to have some dry land sur- 
faces.  Previous observations by  the  Voyager  2  space probe  had  shown that 
Titan had large oceans of  liquid ethane and methane. (W Times, Jun 27/89) 

June  27: NASA director of  the Space Station Freedom Program Office, Ray 
Tanner, announced his  resignation from  the  space agency, citing new  ethics 
rules  on  contract  work  by  former  Federal employees  as  the  reason  for  his 
departure. Tanner was  a 30-year NASA veteran. (Wash Tech, Ju1189) 

June 28: The Japanese Science and Technology Agency announced a  IO-year 
plan  to  develop  an  untended  space plane  and  a  series  of  robots  capable  of 
assembling and repairing satellites in space. The Agency also said that Japan 
would begin preliminary research into a crew-tended space shuttle. (UP I ,  Jun 
28/89; W Times, Jun 30189) 

June  29 :  Great Britain and  the  Soviet Union  signed an agreement to  send a 
British astronaut to the Mir Space Station aboard a Soviet crew rotation flight 
in  1991. (USA  Today, Jun 30189; W Times, Jun 30189; LA Times, Jun  30189) 

June 30: The National Space Council, chaired by Vice-president Dan Quayle, 
recommended to President George Bush that  the National Aero-Space Plane 
program be maintained but  that  its activities be  scaled down and  focused on 
pure research. The new  plan would cut spending for the program from $427 
million to  $254 million in  fiscal year  1990, with  funding being  split evenly 
between  the  Department of  Defense and  NASA.  (AP, Jul  1/89; W Pos t ,  Jul 
1/89; NY  Times, Jul2189; C SM ,  Jul  10189) 

22 1 

Ju ly  

July  5: Planetary  scientists at NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory  (JPL) con- 
f m e d  that  the Voyager  2  space probe had  discovered a  third moon  orbiting 
Neptune.  The  moon,  temporarily  designated  1989 N1,  was  estimated  to  be 
between 125 and 400 miles in diameter and to be in a near-circular orbit 57,600 
miles above Neptune’s equator. Additionally, JPL announced that a pair of  dark 
atmospheric bands had been discovered around Neptune’s south pole. The sci- 
entists compared the 2,700 mile-wide belts to jet  streams on Earth and  to  the 
belts  seen  around  Jupiter,  Saturn, and  Uranus. The  photograph  showing  the 
south pole bands also revealed evidence of comparable bands around Neptune’s 
north pole. Voyager 2 was scheduled to fly to within 3,000 miles of Neptune on 
August 24.  (NASA Release  89-110, Jul  7/89; JPL  Voyager Status Report, Jul 
7/89; AP, Jul5/89; W Post, Jul6/89; UPI, Jul7/89; IVY  Ernes, Jul8/89; W Post, 
Jul8/89; LA  Times, Jul8/89; C Trib, Jul8/89; P Inq, Jul8/89) 

July  6: NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of 
Thomas J.  Lee  as Director of  the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, 
Alabama,  effective  immediately.  Lee  succeeded  James  R.  Thompson  Jr., 
selected  by  President  George  Bush  to  be  NASA  Deputy  Administrator. 
(NASA Release 89-108, Jul6/89) 

July  7: The  director of  NASA’s  Ames  Research  Center  (ARC), William  E 
Ballhaus Jr., resigned, citing “inadequate compensation for senior Federal exec- 
utives and vague new post-government employment regulations” as reasons for 
his departure. Ballhaus had  been  a NASA engineer and manager for  18 years 
and was  serving his second term as ARC director. (NASA Release 89-1 11, Jul 
7/89; AP, Jul7/89) 

July 10: The United States and West Germany signed an agreement to send two 
German astronauts and German scientific payloads on a future Space Shuttle 
mission. The German astronauts would  fly  aboard a  1992 Spacelab mission 
that  would  test  materials  processing  techniques. Two  Germans and  a  Dutch 
astronaut flew aboard a Shuttle Spacelab mission in November  1985. (NASA 
Release 89-113, Jul  10189; AP, Nov  10189; UP I ,  Nov  10/89; P Inq, Jul  12/89) 

July 12:  An ESA Ariane 3  launch vehicle carrying an experimental communica- 
tions  satellite was  successfully  launched  from  the  Kourou  launch  facility  in 
French Guiana. The 161-foot Ariane 3 placed the European Olympus 1 satellite in 
a preliminaxy orbit from which it would boost itself into a 22,300-mile geosyn- 
chronous orbit over the equator.  (SSR 1989 053A-C; UPI, Jul 12/89) 

223 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1989 

Robert 0. Aller, NASA’s Director of  Space Operations, resigned to avoid 
falling under a new  Government ethics regulation that restricts post-Federal 
employment on  Government-related contracts. Aller  became  the  ninth  high 
level NASA official to resign in recent weeks and the third to cite publicly the 
new  regulation  as  the  cause  for  his  departure.  (AP, Jul  12/89; C  Trib,  Jul 
12/89; W Times, J u l  13/89; B  Sun, Jul  13/89) 

July  16: Apollo  11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin  Jr.,  and 
Michael  Collins  participated  in  the  first  of  several  planned  ceremonies  at 
NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of  the  first crew- 
assisted lunar landing on July 20,  1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gath- 
ered  at  the  Kennedy  Space Center  (KSC), Florida,  with  a  crowd  of  6,000 
NASA employees and  their families to commemorate the  launching of  their 
Saturn V rocket from KSC on July  16, 1969. The ceremony included a play- 
back of  the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by 
the  former  astronauts. Following the  ceremony, the  astronauts rode  in  a  20- 
mile  motorcade  to  Cocoa  Beach,  where  they  attended a  luncheon  in  their 
honor.  (UP I ,  Jul  16/89; U SA  Today, Jul  17/89; B  Sun ,  Jul  17/89) 

NASA announced the  selection of  three  contractors  to  research possible 
propulsion systems for the proposed Advance Launch System (ALS). NASA’s 
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Aerojet General 
Corporation, Sacramento, California; Pratt  and Whitney Division  of  United 
Technologies  Corporation,  West  Palm  Beach,  Florida;  and  Rocketdyne 
Division of Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California, to research ALS 
designs. The systems definition contract totaled $20 million. The ALS would 
be  a  next-generation launch  system  capable of  transporting  150,000-pound 
payloads into low Earth orbit. (De f lvew s ,  Jul  17/89) 

July 20:  This date marked the twentieth anniversary of  the first crew-assisted 
landing on  the Moon by Apollo  11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin 
E.  Aldrin.  Armstrong, Aldrin,  and  their  crewmate,  Michael  Collins,  com- 
memorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at  the National Air  and Space 
Museum, Washington, D.C.,  and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. 
During  the Washington  ceremony,  attended by  President George Bush  and 
Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a  long range program of 
human-assisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on 
the  Moon  and  a  crew  expedition  to  Mars,  but  did  not  establish  a  specific 
timetable. The President cited  Space Station Freedom as  an  important step- 
ping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National 
Air  and  Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the  first  astronaut to  step  on  the 
lunar  surface, s a id   “The Apollo program enjoyed a  certain nobility of  pur- 
pose-a 
program not  to conquer enemies, but  to  conquer ignorance. A pro- 
gram not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to 

224 

JULY 1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon.” (UP I ,  Jul 
20189; Ny  Times, Jul21/89;  W Post, Jul  21/89;  WSJ ,  Jul  21/89; USA Today, 
Jul21/89; W Times, Jul21/89; P Inq, Jul21/89; B  Sun, Jul21/89) 

225 

August 

August  2 :  A  report  by  the  Office  of  Technology Assessment  (OTA)  entitled 
“Round Trip  to Orbit: Human Space n i g h t  Alternatives” recommended con- 
struction of  a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter or a Shuttle-derived launch vehicle in 
preparation for  the  Space Station assembly missions of  the  late  1990s. Citing 
estimates of Space Shuttle reliability of 97 to 99 percent, OTA warned that there 
was  an 88 percent likelihood that another Shuttle orbiter would be  lost before 
Space Station construction is completed. The OTA report stated: “Buying more 
orbiters would  increase the  resiliency of  the  Space Shuttle system ...[ and]  its 
ability to  recover rapidly  from  loss of  another orbiter or  any  other event that 
delays  launches. The Shuttle orbiter fleet  is  likely to  continue to  suffer occa- 
sional attrition.” (AP, Aug  2/89; UP I ,  Aug 2/89; W Post, Aug 3/89) 

August  3:  Planetary  scientists  at  NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  in 
California announced the  discovery  of  three  additional moons  of  Neptune, 
bringing the total number of Neptune’s known moons to six. The moons, des- 
ignated  1989 N2,  1989 N3, and  1989 N4, ranged between 60 and  125 miles 
in diameter and were found to be  in normal equatorial orbits in  the direction 
of  the planet’s rotation. Prior to Voyager’s observations, only two moons of 
Neptune  had  been  observed.  (NASA Release  89-128, Aug  3/89;  NY Times, 
Aug 4/89; W Pos t ,  Aug 4/89; LA  Times, Aug 4/89; 

August 8-13:  The Space Shuttle Columbia was successfully launched from the 
Kennedy  Space Center  in  Florida, on  mission  STS-28 to  deploy a  classified 
Department  of  Defense  payload. This  was  the  first  launch  of  the  Columbia 
orbiter in  the  three  and  a  half  years  since the  explosion of  the  Space Shuttle 
Challenger. Various  media  sources  reported  that  Columbia had  deployed  an 
advanced  military  reconnaissance  satellite  and  performed  tests  of  Strategic 
Defense  Initiative  (SDI)  hardware.  Columbia  landed  at  Edwards Air  Force 
Base, California, on  Sunday, August  13. (SSR  1989 061A; NASA PFOR, M- 
989-89-28;  NASA  MOR,  E-199-89-28;  UP I ,   Aug  8/89;  AP,  Aug  8/89; 
NY Times, Aug 9/89; W Post, Aug 9/89; W Times, Aug 9/89; USA  Today, Aug 
9/89; LA  Times, Aug 9/89; C Trib, Aug 9/89; P Inq, Aug 9/89; B  Sun, Aug 9/89) 

August 8: An  ESA Ariane 4  launch vehicle carrying a communications satel- 
lite  and  an  orbital  observatory was  successfully launched from  the  Kourou 
space center in French Guiana. The payload consisted of  a West German TV- 
SAT-2  communications  satellite  and  the  Hipparcos  orbiting  star  mapper. 
(SSR  1989 062A-D; L A  Times, Aug 9/89) 

221 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1989 

An  attempted launch of  a  Japanese H-1  launch vehicle was  aborted after 
one of the rocket’s main engines failed to ignite. (FBIS-Eas-89-15 1, Aug 8/89; 
W S J ,  Aug 9/89; C Trib, Aug 9/89) 

August  11 : Planetary  scientists  at  NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory, 
Pasadena,  California  announced  the  discovery  of  “ring  arcs”  orbiting 
Neptune.  NASA  scientists noted  that,  unlike  the  rings  surrounding Saturn, 
Jupiter, and Uranus, Neptune‘s rings  did not  appear  to  completely surround 
the  planet.  (NASA  Release  89-132,  Aug  11/89;  Ny Times,  Aug  12/89; 
W Po s t ,  Aug  12/89; P  Inq, Aug  12/89; C Trib, Aug  12/89; B  Sun, Aug  12/89; 
WS J ,  Aug  14/89) 

August  18: An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle carrying a NAVSTAR  satellite 
was  successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. 
The  l26-foot Delta 2 placed  the NAVSTAR  navigation satellite in  a p r e l i i -  
nary  orbit, from where it would boost  itself  into a  12,000-mile circular orbit. 
The NAVSTAR was the third of an eventual network of 21 satellites that would 
comprise the Global Positioning System, a highly  accurate navigation system 
for military and commercial users.  (SSR  1989 064A-C; AP, Aug  18/89; UP I ,  
Aug  18/89; W  Po s t ,  Aug  19/89; LA Times, Aug  19/89; W  Times, Aug 21/89) 

August  22 :  While heading toward a close approach of  Neptune, the Voyager 
2 space probe discovered the first complete ring around the planet. Scientists 
at  NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, had  previously 
observed  several  ring  arcs.  The  discovery  of  the  complete  ring  around 
Neptune had been expected based on observations of  rings on the other three 
large  outer  planets  during  previous  Voyager  planetary  encounters.  (NASA 
Release 89-132, Aug  11/89; N y  Times, Aug 23/89; W  Po s t ,  Aug 23/89; WS J ,  
Aug 23/89; B  Sun ,  Aug 23/89;  U P I ,  Aug 23/89) 

August  25:  After  travelling 4.4  billion miles  over twelve years,  the Voyager  2 
space  probe  completed  its  fourth  and  final  planetary  encounter  by  passing 
Neptune at a distance of  3,042 miles. During the Neptune encounter, Voyager 2 
discovered six new moons of Neptune, a set of faint rings around the planet, auro- 
ral activity on Neptune and Triton, and a  surprisingly dynamic atmosphere con- 
taining large storm systems. Additionally, Voyager 2 obtained closeup images of 
Neptune’s two  largest moons, Triton and Nereid. Voyager 2 and  its sister space- 
craft, Voyager  1, were launched in  1977 for planned encounters with Jupiter and 
Saturn. After its Saturn encounter, Voyager  1 was steered away from the plane of 
the  solar  system  toward  interstellar space,  while  the  Voyager  2  mission  was 
expanded to take advantage of  a rare alignment of  the large outer planets, which 
made possible a “grand tour” of the outer solar system. With its power supply and 
all major mechanical systems still operative, Voyager  2  encountered Uranus  in 
1986, discovering rings and several new moons around the planet. 

228 

AUGUST 1989 

ASTRONACTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Advances  in  radio receiving  technology  allowed continued communication 
with Voyager 2 despite the spacecraft’s extremely faint signal. At the conclusion 
of  the Voyager 2 encounter with Neptune, the craft would  steer clear of  the plane 
of the solar system and continue traveling into interstellar space. In anticipation of 
a possible retrieval of  the craft by  intelligent extraterrestrial beings, both Voyager 
spacecraft carried plaques bearing hieroglyphic messages that indicated their ori- 
gins on Earth and contained images of  a human male and female in a gesture of 
greeting. The spacecraft also carried a gold-plated phonographic record of sounds 
from Earth, including greetings  in  all of  the  world’s  major  languages and  the 
sounds of  several animal species. (NASA Headline News, Aug  28/89; Voyager 
BulletinlMission  Status  Report  No .   96, Oct  4/89;  NASA Voyager  2  Neptune 
Encounter Press Kit, AugJ89; UPI ,  Aug 25/89; NY Times, Aug 25/89; W  Post, Aug 
25/89; WSJ ,  Aug 25/89;  USA Today, Aug 25/89; W  Times, Aug 25/89; P Inq, Aug 
25/89; C SM ,  Aug 25/89; B Sun, Aug 25/89) 

August 28: Astronomers at Cornell University announced the discovery of  an 
apparent galaxy in the making, challenging conventional theory that galaxies 
formed only during the early history of the universe. The galaxy observed by 
Cornell astronomer Martha Haynes and Ricardo Giovanelli appeared to con- 
tain no fully developed stars and to consist of only protostellar material, main- 
ly  hydrogen. The  observed galaxy, named UGC-7394, was  65   million light 
years distant. (UP I ,  Aug 29/89; W S J ,  Aug 29/89; W  Times, Aug 29/89; B Sun ,  
Aug 29/89; C Trib, Aug 29/89) 

August  29: The  Italian  space agency announced that  its  star mapper  satellite, 
Hipparcos  1, failed  to  boost  itself  into  the  proper  orbit.  Hipparcos  1 was 
launched aboard an Ariane 4  launch vehicle on August 8. The satellite’s design- 
ers said that they would seek funds from the European Space Agency to build 
and launch a replacement satellite. (SSR 1989 062 A-D, NY Times, Aug 30189) 

229 

September 

September 4 :  The last Titan 34D launch vehicle in  the Air Force’s inventory 
was  successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force station in Florida, 
carrying  a  classified  Department  of  Defense  payload.  This  was  the  final 
launch of the Titan 3 series launch vehicles, which were being replaced by the 
more powerful Titan 4.  (SSR  1989 069 A-D;  UP I ,  Sep 4/89;  NY   Times, Sep 
5/89; W  Post,  Sep 5/89;  USA  Today, Sep 5/89;  C  Trib, Sep 5/89; L A  Times, 
Sep 5/89; W  Times, Sep 5/89) 

September 5 :  After an aborted attempt in August, an H-1 launch vehicle car- 
rying  a  GMS-4  weather  satellite  was  successfully  launched  by  Japan’s 
National  Space  Development  Agency.  (FBIS-Eas-89-173,  Sep  8/89;  SSR 
1989 070 A-C;  W S J ,  Sep 7/89) 

September 6: Two Soviet astronauts were successfully launched aboard a Soyuz 
TM-8 capsule  for a  rendezvous with  the Mir  Space Station. The  Soyuz TM-8 
capsule was  launched aboard a Proton launch vehicle emblazoned with  several 
commercial  advertisements.  Cosmonauts  Alexander  S .   Viktorenko  and 
Alexander A. Serebrov were scheduled to reoccupy the Mir station during a six- 
month tour and supervise the attachment of two new modules to the facility. Mir 
had  been  left  unoccupied  since April  27  because  of  funding  constraints  and 
delays in manufacturing of  the new modules. (FBIS-Sov-89-171, Sep 6/89; SSR 
1989 071A; W  Post, Sep 6/89; WSJ ,  Sep 6/89; C Trib, Sep 6/89; P  Inq, Sep 6/89) 

September  7: NASA  announced it had  awarded Ford Aerospace a  $500 mil- 
lion  contract to  modernize  its Mission Control Center at  the  Johnson  Space 
Center,  Houston,  Texas,  and  build  a  new  control  center  for  future  Space 
Station operations.  (NASA Release, Sep 7/89; Reuters, Sep 7/89; NY   Times, 
Sep 7/89;  W  Post, Sep 7/89) 

September 8: Two Soviet cosmonauts successfully docked with the Mir Space 
Station and began  activating the  facility’s systems after a  four-month hiatus. 
(FBIS-Sov-89-173, Sep 8/89; SSR  1989 071A, AP, Sep 8/89;  UP I ,  Sep 8/89) 

September 12: Antinuclear activists in Florida protested the launch aboard the 
Space Shuttle Atlantis  next  month  of  the Galileo space probe,  which would 
carry  two plutonium-fueled  radioisotope  thermoelectric generators. The pro- 
testers  claimed  an  accident  aboard  the  Atlantis  similar  to  the  Challenger 
explosion could  contaminate large parts  of  Florida and  lead  to  hundreds  of 

231 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEPfEMBER  1989 

cancer-related  deaths.  NASA  and  the  White  House  maintained  that  the 
chances of  a plutonium leak in  the event of  an accident was negligible. Galileo 
was  scheduled to reach Jupiter in late  1995. (AP, Sep 12/89; UP I ,  Sep 12/89; 
USA  Today, Sep 13/89) 

September 24:   The  Space Shuttle Columbia  was  accidentally  sprayed  with 
water when  an  automatic  sprinkler system went  off  unexpectedly  inside the 
Kennedy  Space Center  (KSC) Orbiter Processing  Facility No.  2.  KSC engi- 
neers  examined the  orbiter  for  damage  and planned  an  investigation  of  the 
incident. (UP I ,  Sep 24/89;  W Times, Sep 25/89;  USA  Today, Sep 25/89) 

September 25: A NASA Atlas-Centaur vehicle carrying  a Navy  communica- 
tions  satellite  was  successfully  launched  from  Cape  Canaveral  Air  Force 
Station, Florida. This was the last orbital launch of  a launch vehicle by NASA, 
since responsibility for all future orbital launches was  transferred to the private 
sector and  the  branches  of  the Defense Department. Since inception in  1958, 
NASA had launched over 400 untended orbital rockets. The Atlas-Centaur car- 
ried a Navy Fleet Satellite Communications F-8 (FLTSATCOM F-8) relay  sta- 
tion into a preliminaq  orbit on  its way  toward  geosynchronous orbit.  (NASA 
Release 89-145, Sep 18/89; NASA Release, Sep 25/89; NASA: Atladcentaur- 
68 FLTSATCOM F-8  Launch Press Kit, Sepl89; AP, Sep 25/89; UP I ,  Sep 25/89; 
USA   Today,  Sep  25/89;  NY  T imes ,   Sep  26/89;  W S J ,   Sep  26/89; 
LA  Times, Sep 26/89; P Inq, Sep 26/89; B Sun, Sep 26/89; W Times, Sep 26/89) 

September 27:  NASA announced it had granted a $1.3 billion extension of  the 
contract to  Lockheed  Corporation, Calabasas, California, to  continue  Space 
Shuttle  processing  operations  for  three  more  years.  (NASA  Release,  Sep 
27/89; AP, Sep 26/89; W Pos t ,  Sep 27/89) 

0  During a visit by  Soviet journalists to the Plesetsk Space Center, the Soviet 
government revealed that a launch pad explosion of  a Vostok rocket had killed 
50 people in  1980. The Soviet government also revealed  that a Cosmos rock- 
et had  also exploded on the launch pad  in  1973, killing nine  technicians  and 
soldiers. (FBIS-Sov-89-185, Sep 26/89; IVY  Times, Sep 28/89;  W Times, Sep 
28/89; P Inq, Sep 28/89) 

September  28:  A  coalition  of  three  antinuclear  groups  filed  suit  in  the 
Washington, D.C.  Federal District Court to  stop  the  launch  of  the  nuclear- 
powered  Galileo  space  probe  aboard  the  Space Shuttle Atlantis.  The  three 
groups  contended that  NASA  and  the  Department  of  Energy  had  illegally 
delayed  release  of  health  and safety risk  assessments  of  a potential accident 
involving  Galileo's  plutonium-fueled  radioisotope  thermal  generators.  The 
groups filing suit were the Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, the Christic 
Institute,  and  the  Foundation on  Economic Trends.  NASA and  the  Energy 

232 

SEPTEMBER  1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Department denied the charges, and  the  space agency continued to carry on 
with preparations for  the planned launch of  Atlantis-Galileo on  October  12. 
The suit was subsequently dismissed by the court during its preliminary hear- 
ing.  (LA  Times,  Sep  28/89;  N y  Times,  Sep  29/89;  W  Post,  Sep  29/89; 
W Times, Sep 29/89; B Sun, Sep 29/89;  UP I ,  Sep 29/89) 

September 29: NASA named 18 astronauts to fly on future Space Shuttle mis- 
sions, including the  first African-American woman  and  the  first member of 
the  Coast  Guard  to  fly  aboard  the  Shuttle. Dr.  Mae  Jemison,  a  physician, 
would  become the  first African-American  woman  to  fly  in  space. She was 
scheduled  for  the  June  17,  1991,  Spacelab  mission  aboard  Discovery. 
(AP, Sep 9/89;  UP I ,  Sep 29/89; USA  Today, Oct 4/89;  W Times, Oct 2/89) 

During September: The  Soviet news  magazine Izvestia  published  an  article 
confirming  that  the  Soviet  Union  had  established  a  secret  program  in   the 
1960s  to  beat  the  United  States  in  landing  astronauts  on  the  Moon.  The 
Izvestia article claimed that the Soviet Union had secretly conducted a crew- 
assisted lunar landing program from  1961 to  1969 comparable to  the Apollo 
program and had developed a booster-known 
as the N l - comp a r a b l e   to the 
United States Saturn V.  The Soviet lunar program was eventually abandoned 
after  three  attempts  to  launch the  N1  failed; the  United  States  successfully 
landed  astronauts  on  the  Moon  in  1969.  (FBIS-Sov-89-210, Nov  1/89; 
H  Chron, Sep 17/89) 

233 

October 

October  2 :   Planetary  scientists  a t   NASA’s  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory, 
Pasadena, California, announced that Voyager 2 photographs taken during the 
August encounter with Neptune had revealed the presence of an active volcano 
or geyser on Neptune’s moon, Triton. The photographs revealed a dark plume 
nearly  5  miles  high  and  90  miles  in  length  emanating  from  the  surface  of 
Triton. Triton became only the third object in  the solar system known to have 
active eruptions from  its surface.  (NASA Release  89-156, Oct 2/89;  Voyager 
BulletinlMission Status Report No. 95, Oct 2/89; AP, Oct 3/89; UP I ,  Oct 3/89; 
NY  Times, Oct 3/89; USA Today, Oct 3/89; P Inq ,  Oct 3/89; C Trib, Oct 3/89) 

October 5:  The first attempt to  launch a fully private funded rocket ended in 
failure when the 58-foot-tall “Koopman Express” sounding rocket caught fire 
while still on the  launch pad. The rocket was  to  have  flown on a  15-minute 
suborbital flight from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, during which it 
would  have  released  a  cloud  of  inert gas  to  test  sensors  on  a military  Delta 
Star satellite. The rocket was  also scheduled to deploy an engineering model 
of  a  Parashield  during reentry  into  the  atmosphere.  (NY   Times,  Oct  6/89; 
W Post, Oct 6/89; USA  Today, Oct 6/89; W Times, Oct 6/89; B  Sun, Oct 6/89) 

October  18-23:  The Space Shuttle Atlantis was  successfully  launched  from 
Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS-34 to deploy the $1.4 
billion Galileo Jupiter space probe. The Atlantis  launch had been delayed by 
a week  because  of  problems  with  a  computer, a main engine master  control 
device,  and,  finally,  rain.  Shortly after  reaching orbit, Atlantis  released  the 
Galileo probe and the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) from the cargo bay. The IUS 
subsequently fired Galileo on a trajectory  toward Venus,  in preparation  for a 
gravity  assist  maneuver  that  would  swing  the  spacecraft  back  toward  Earth 
twice  and  onward  to  Jupiter.  Galileo  was  scheduled  to  reach  Jupiter  in 
December  1995, whereupon it would begin orbiting the planet for 22 months 
of  observations  of  the  Jovian  system. Approximately  five  months  before 
reaching Jupiter, Galileo would release a 34-inch unpowered descent module 
that  would  enter  the Jovian upper  atmosphere  and  descend  several hundred 
miles before being destroyed by  extreme atmospheric pressure. The Atlantis- 
Galileo mission  had  sparked  protests  and  a  law  suit  by  anti-nuclear  groups 
concerned  over  the  danger of  possible  radioactive  contamination  from  the 
probe’s  radioisotope  thermal  generators  in  the  event of  a  catastrophic acci- 
dent. In anticipation of possible efforts to disrupt the launch, NASA increased 
security measures at KSC. In addition to  launching Galileo, the STS-34 crew 

235 

ASTRONAUTICS AM ) AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1989 

would  conduct  observations  of  the  Ear ths   ozone  layer  and  perform  several 
onboard medical, biological and materials processing experiments. The crew 
included Navy Captain Donald E. Williams (Commander), Navy Commander 
Michael  J .   McCulley  (Pilot),  and  Mission  Specialists  Shannon  Lucid, 
Franklin Chang-Dfaz, and Ellen S .  Baker. The mission ended successfully on 
October 23  with  Atlantis  landing  at  Edwards  Air  Force  Base,  California. 
(NASA MOR  E-829-34-89-01;  NASA  PFOR  M-989-89-34;  NASA  STS-34 
Press K i t ,  Oct/89; NASA Facts: STS-34; GalileoKSC Release 79-89, Sep/89; 
SSR  1989 084 A-D;  UP I ,  Oct  19/89; AP, Oct  19/89; NY Times, Oct  19/89; 
W Post, Oct 19/89; USA  Today, Oct 19/89; W S J ,  Oct 19/89; P Znq, Oct 19/89; 
W Times, Oct  19/89; B  Sun ,  Oct  19/89) 

October 19: Soviet and western planetary scientists announced results from the 
Phobos 2 mission to Mars and the moon Phobos. Despite the premature loss of 
spacecraft transmissions because  of  a computer error,  scientists revealed  that 
valuable data had been obtained from the two-month period preceding the loss 
of  communications. The new  findings showed that Mars has no magnetic field 
of  its  own  and that  incoming solar particles  impact directly with  the planet's 
ionosphere. Researchers hypothesized  that  the direct  interaction between  the 
solar wind  and  Mars'  upper  atmosphere may  have  been  responsible  for  the 
depletion  of  the  planet's  original  atmosphere,  as  ionospheric  particles  were 
gradually electrified  by  the  incoming  solar  particles.  The  observations  sug- 
gested that Mars may have had an atmosphere comparable to Earth's during the 
first billion years after planet formation, and that conditions for the appearance 
of  life may have prevailed during that  time. (NY Times, Oct 19/89) 

October 21  : An Air  Force Delta  2  launch vehicle was  successfully  launched 
from  Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, carrying the  fourth NAVS- 
TAR  navigation  satellite. The NAVSTAR  would become  part  of  an eventual 
21-satellite Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation network. (SSR  1989 
085 A-C; NY  Times, Oct 22/89; W Times, Oct 23/89) 

236 

November 

November  7: The European Space Agency  announced the Hipparchos 1 star 
mapper  satellite  had  been  reprogrammed  to  function  in  its  current  orbit. 
Hipparchos became  stranded in  a  lower  than  expected orbit  after  its  orbital 
booster rocket failed to ignite in August. ( P  Inq ,  Nov  8/89) 

November  9 :  While on the way to a gravity assist flyby of Venus, the Galileo 
Jupiter  space  probe  made  the  first  course  corrections  by  briefly  firing  its 
thrusters. This was  the  first of  about  30  course corrections to  be  undertaken 
by  Galileo  during  its  five-year  trip  to  Jupiter.  (NASA STS-34  Press  K i t ,  
Oct/89; NASA  Facts: STS-34  Galileo-KSC  Release 79-89, Sep 89; W Times, 
Nov  10/89; P  Inq ,  Nov  10/89; UP I ,  Nov  14/89) 

November 16: Astronomers at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
announced the discovery of  the largest structure seen so far in  the universe. The 
scientists claimed to have discovered a sheet of  galaxies 500 million light-years 
long, 200 million light years wide, and about 15 million light years thick, which 
they are calling the “Great Wall”. The Great Wall, which is invisible to the naked 
eye, was estimated to be 200 million to 300 million light-years away from Earth 
and was expected to reveal new  insights on the distribution of matter in the uni- 
verse. (UP I ,  Nov  17/89; P  Znq, Nov  17/89; B  Sun, Nov  17/89) 

0  The Colorado-based Energetics Satellite Corporation announced that it had 
completed  an  agreement  with  the  Soviet  Union’s  civilian  space  agency, 
Glavkosmos, to launch two U.S.-built commercial satellites on Soviet boost- 
ers. The contract provided for the launching of  two geosynchronous satellites 
at a cost of  $6.5 million each, with an option to add six more satellite launch- 
es in the future. The total potential value of  the agreement was $54 million for 
the eight-satellite launch option. (W Post, Nov  16/89; NY  Times, Nov  17/89) 

November 18: A NASA Delta launch vehicle was successfully launched on this 
date  from Vandenberg Air  Force  Base, California, carrying  the  $160 million 
Cosmic  Background Explorer  (COBE)  satellite  into  a  570-mile polar  orbit. 
Three  instruments aboard COBE would  record  the  background radiation  left 
over from the “Big Bang” in unprecedented detail, allowing refinement of the- 
ories on the formation of galaxies and galactic clusters in the early universe. The 
Delta  was  the  last  launch  vehicle  in  NASA’s  inventory. Hereafter  all future 
NASA  untended  launches would  occur  on  commercial or  military  boosters. 
(NASA Release N89-74; NASA Cosmic Background Explorer  (COBE )  Press 

237 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER  1989 

Kit  Release  89-172;  SSR  1989  A-D;  AP, Nov  18/89;  UP I ,   Nov  18/89; 
LA  Times, Nov  18/89; P  Inq, Nov  19/89; C Trib, Nov  19/89; C SM ,  Nov 20189) 

November  19:  A  team  of  astronomers  from  the  California  Institute  of 
Technology  (Caltech) and  Princeton  University  announced  the  discovery  of 
the oldest and most distant object yet observed in the universe. The object was 
reported to be a quasar at a distance of  10 to  15 billion light-years from Earth, 
which may have formed when the universe was only about a billion years old. 
The discovery challenged conventional theories on the timetable for the for- 
mation  of  galaxies  and galactic-sized  bodies  in  the early  universe.  Previous 
observations had placed the age of most quasars at about 3 billion years after 
the  Big  Bang.  The new  observations  were  expected  to  produce  major  =vi- 
sions  in  theories  of  how  matter  coalesced  during  the  early  universe. 
(NY Times, Nov  20189;  W Post, Nov 20189; W Times, Nov  20189;  P  Inq, Nov 
20189; B  Sun, Nov 20189) 

November 22-27:  The Space Shuttle Discovery was  successfully launched at 
night from Kennedy Space Center  in Florida, on mission STS-33. Discovery 
carried a classified Department of Defense payload believed to be a $300 mil- 
lion surveillance satellite. The satellite was deployed from the Shuttle’s cargo 
bay  on November 23, and was  scheduled  to boost  itself  into a geostationary 
orbit.  Several experiments of  Strategic Defense  Initiative  (SDI)  technology 
were  also  expected  to  be  performed.  Crew  members  for  STS-33 were  Air 
Force  Colonel  Frederick  Gregory  (Commander),  Air  Force  Colonel  John 
Blaha (Pilot), and Mission Specialists Navy Captain Manley L.  Carter Jr.,  F. 
Story Musgrave, and Kathryn C. Thornton. Discovery landed at Edwards Air 
Force Base, California on  November 27.  (NASA Release 89-75, Nov  15/89; 
SSR  1989 090 A;  AP ,  Nov  23/89;  U P I ,  Nov  23/89; NY   Times, Nov  23/89; 
W Post, Nov 23/89; WS J ,  Nov  23/89; W Times, Nov 23/89; P  Inq, Nov  23/89) 

November  26:  The Soviet Union  successfully  launched  an  untended  Proton 
launch  vehicle  carrying  an  attachment module  bound  for  the  Mir  Space 
Station from the Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan. The pressurized mod- 
ule, known as the Kvant-2, contained additional crew  living space as well  as 
experiments and  a  “space  motorcycle” intended  for  use  in  extravehicular 
spacewalks. (FBIS-Sov-89-226, Nov 27/89; SSR 1989 093 A; NY Times, Nov 
27/89;  C Trib, Nov 27/89) 

238 

December 

December  2 :  The Solar Maximum (Solar Max)  satellite tumbled out of  orbit 
and reentered the Earth's atmosphere, spreading small amounts of debris over 
the  Indian Ocean. The  satellite had  been launched in February  1980 to  con- 
duct  gamma  ray  and  ultraviolet observations of  the  Sun, the  Earth's  atmos- 
phere, and deep space objects. In April  1984, Solar Max was retrieved by the 
Space Shuttle Challenger (Mission 41 -C)  for  in-orbit repairs  and  redeploy- 
ment. Solar Max's orbit had been deteriorating faster than  expected over the 
past several months because of unusually high solar activity, which caused the 
Earth's atmosphere to expand and  increase the  amount of  aerodynamic drag 
experienced by  the satellite. (SSR  1980 014 A; AP, Dec 2/89; UPI, Dec 2/89; 
NY Times, Dec 3/89; W Post, Dec 3/89; P Inq, Dec 3/89; B  Su n ,  Dec 318) 

December 5 :  Iraq launched a  three-stage rocket capable of  putting a satellite 
into space on a suborbital trajectory from the A1 Anbar base in northern Iraq. 
The launch of the Iraqi rocket was confirmed by  the U.S. and Israeli govern- 
ments. (FBIS-Nes-89-235, Dec 8/89; UPI, Dec 9/89; NY Times, Dec 9/89) 

Planetary  scientists  working  with  data  from  a  Voyager  2  encounter  with 
Neptune announced that the spacecraft had recorded wind speeds on the planet 
of  up to  1,500 miles per hour. These wind speeds exceeded those observed on 
Saturn and  were  believed to be  the  highest  in  the  solar system. The scientists 
also  reported  the  discovery  of  at  least  two  additional  volcanic  plumes  on 
Neptune's moon, Triton. (AP, Dec 6/89; C Trib, Dec 6/89; NY Times, Dec 7/89) 

December 11 : An Air Force Delta 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched 
from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR nav- 
igation satellite. The NAVSTAR would be the fifth in an eventual network of 
21  military  and  commercial  satellites  that  would  comprise  the  Global 
Positioning  System.  (SSR  1989 097  A-C;  AP, Dec  11/89; NY   Times,  Dec 
12/89; USA Today, Dec  12/89; W Times, Dec  12/89; C Trib, Dec  12/89) 

NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Dale L. Compton to be Director 
of  the  NASA  Ames  Research  Center,  Moffett  Field,  California,  effective 
December 20.  Compton, who  succeeded William E Ballhaus, had  been Acting 
Director since Ballhaus resigned on July 15. (NASARelease 89-182, Dec  11/89) 

December   13:  Astronomers  from 
the  National  Optical  Astronomy 
Observatories,  Tucson,  Arizona,  announced  the  discovery  of  the  furthest 

239 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1989 

known  star  in  the  Milky  Way  Galaxy.  The  star,  which  is  believed  to  be 
160,000  light  years  from  Earth,  was  accidentally  discovered  while  the 
astronomers were conducting a  survey of  the Virgo cluster of  galaxies. The 
discovery was  expected to  help  determine the  mass  of  the Milky Way  and 
other similar galaxies. (NY  Times, Dec  14/89; B  Sun ,  Dec  14/89) 

December  17:  Engineers  from  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
returned from a visit to the Soviet Union with photographs of  a crew-assisted 
lunar  landing vehicle  that  was  to  be  used  to  land Soviet cosmonauts on  the 
Moon  in  1968. The Westerners were  given  the  first  concrete evidence of  a 
Soviet lunar landing program when  they were shown components of  a  lunar 
lander  at  the  Moscow  Aviation  Institute  and  were  allowed  to  take  pho- 
tographs. Soviet officials confirmed that a race to land astronauts on the Moon 
had  indeed occurred during the  1960s but  that  the  Soviets had  fallen behind 
the United  States as a result of  several launch failures of  their N1  rocket. At 
the  time of  the  successful lunar mission of Apollo  11, the  Soviet Union had 
denied  having  a  crew-tended  lunar  landing  program.  (UP I ,  Dec  18/89; 
NY  Times, Dec  18/89; U SA  Today, Dec  18/89; W Pos t ,  Dec  18/89; W Times, 
Dec  18/89; P Inq ,  Dec  18/89; C Trib, Dec  18/89; B  Sun; Dec  18/89) 

December  20: An untended  Soviet Progress M-2 module bound for  the Mir 
Space Station was  successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in 
Central Asia.  In  addition  to  ferrying  supplies to  the  Mir  crew,  the  Progress 
also carried a U.S.  experiment designed to test crystal growth in weightless- 
ness.  (FBIS-Sov-89-243, Dec  20/89;  SSR  1989 099 A;  W Pos t ,  Dec  21/89; 
W S J ,  Dec 21/89; P In q ,  Dec 21/89; W Times, Dec 21/89; C SM ,  Dec 22/89) 

240 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS ,  1990 

January 

January  I :  The  Johnson  Space Center  in  Houston, Texas,  awarded Rockwell 
International Corporation a five-year extension on the  contract for systems inte- 
gration. The $1.36 billion contract extensions were for flight and ground systems 
engineering maintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of the hard- 
ware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle mission support from countdown 
to landing. (NASA Release C90-A, C90-B; WSJ ,  Jan 12/90) 

January 3: Technical assistant Edwin Sherry, from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
in Pasadena, California, explained a minor problem that the Spacecraft Magellan 
had developed three days earlier and a little more than halfway into its journey to 
map Venus. A computer chip failure, caused either by  electrical corrosion or an 
electrically charged particle  spewed out by  the  sun, necessitated frequent com- 
mands from ground crews to keep Magellan moving in the right direction. The 
craft’s  guidance system normally focused on two  stars to ascertain and adjust its 
heading. Sherry explained that some difficulties with the vast array of electronics 
during flight were  expected  and  that  the  mission was  in  no  danger.  Scientists 
hoped to send a new program aloft that would allow the ship’s computer to bypass 
the damaged chip. (AP, Jan 4/90) 

NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal 
concerning  design,  management,  building  and  testing  of  the  Advanced 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled 
for delivery in  1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. 
By  2001,  “A  four-satellite  constellation  of  ATDRSS  is  expected  to  be  in 
orbit,”  said  Thomas  Underwood, Assistant  Chief  for  the  TDRS  system  at 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS  promised 
to offer a much higher communication rate needed for Space Station Freedom 
missions. (NASA Release 90-2; C90-x) 

January  5 :  NASA Administrator Richard Truly named  Thomas E.  Utsman  as 
Deputy  Associate Administrator  for  Space  Flight.  He  was  to  assist  William 
Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of  space flight programs. 
Utsman began at NASA in  1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo pro- 
gram and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate’s Project 
Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of  Project Management, 
Associate Director of  Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of 
Technical  Support,  Director  of  Shuttle  Operations,  and  Director  of  Shuttle 
Management and Operations. 

243 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1990 

Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of  the Kennedy Space 
Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined NASA in  1962 and served as 
lead engineer for pre-launch testing and communications for the Apollo program. 
He worked on the initial Shuttle program and  served as lead flight engineer, as 
chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as 
Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 90-3) 

January 8: NASA and Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed 
to  launch Japan’s  Geotail spacecraft on  a Delta II rocket  from Kennedy Space 
Center, in Florida, in  1992. The craft was  to  study the stored energy in  the geo- 
magnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth’s 
night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release 90-4) 

January 9: NASA launched the first of  10 expected Shuttle flights in 1990 (flight 
STS-32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with  a  10-day mission to  orbit a Navy 
communications satellite and to retrieve another. The liftoff, originally scheduled 
for December 18, had been delayed three times because of problems with the ren- 
ovated  launch  pad  and  once  because  of  low  clouds.  The  Navy  satellite was 
deployed January 10. On January 12, the spacecraft closed in on and retrieved the 
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), an  11-ton satellite, into the cargo bay, 
using a 50-foot robotic arm. 

The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April 1984 to provide 
vital information on the design of  spacecraft and NASA’s  Space Station, as well 
as other experiments. The orbiting laboratory was  scheduled to be  recovered 10 
months  after  its deployment, but  the  nearly  five-year postponement caused by 
scheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in a decaying orbit that 
was expected to reach Earth’s atmosphere by March of  1990. The 57 experiments 
aboard the  30-foot-long cylindrical satellite included an array of  potential space 
building materials being  tested  for reactions  to  radiation, extreme  temperature 
changes, and collisions with space matter. Also  tested for prolonged space expo- 
sure were optical fibers, pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experi- 
ment  involving tomato  seeds. Interstellar gases and  cosmic radiation were also 
trapped in  an attempt to find clues into the formation of  the N z l l k y  Way  and  the 
evolution of  heavier elements. For the remainder of  the mission, astronauts car- 
ried out other scientific and engineering work. 

Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning on January 20 
at Edwards Air Force Base in California after a  landing postponed for a day 
because  of  fog.  The  flight  set  a  precedent  both  because  of  duration-11 
days-and  because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result 
of  the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor 
problems  involving  a  leaky  dehumidifier, a  smoke  detector  that  went  off 
unexplainably, a malfunction in one of  the three Inertial Measurement Units 

244 

JANUARY  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

(critical for reentry, but  the Shuttle can land with  only one functioning unit), 
and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that 
fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the  Shuttle cargo bay 
and  was  scheduled to  be  flown  to Kennedy  Space Center  in  Florida  atop  a 
modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. 

During re-entry,  two  NASA experiments measured  the  aerodynamic and 
thermodynamic  characteristics  of  the  orbiter.  One  of  the  experiments,  a 
Shuttle  Infrared  Leeside  Temperature  Sensing  experiment,  involved  an 
infrared  camera  used  to  collect  imagery  from  the  left  wing,  an  area  that 
reached  1,100 degrees Fahrenheit,  a  higher  than  usual  temperature, on  the 
STS-28 flight. The  second experiment  involved the  Shuttle Entry Air  Data 
System, housed in Columbia’s nose cap to gather “air data” to determine the 
orbiter’s aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan  10/90; Jan  11/90; 
Jan  13/90; Jan  21/90;  W  Post,  Jan  10/90; Jan  11/90; Jan  13/90; Jan  21/90; 
C Trib, Jan  13/90; C SM ,  Jan  16/90; NASA Release 90-8) 

January  10: Vice  President Dan Quayle, leader  of  the  White House National 
Space Council, told scientists at the  175th meeting of the American Astronomical 
Society that “the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by” because our 
space programs consume too much time and money. His eight-page speech was 
not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space 
flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, view crew-assisted flights 
as a drain owtheir own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tend- 
ed and  untended space exploration and  called upon  allied nations, most specxi- 
cally Japan, and the business sector to share costs. 

The Vice President also asked the NASA to look “across the traditional divi- 
sions  among  civil, commercial, and  national  security  activities,” which  some 
NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a 
bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle’s comment concerning 
lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy 
at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASAplans for crew-assist- 
ed flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 
billion  annually  over  25  years  while  guaranteeing  job  security  for  NASA. 
( P  Znq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NYTimes, Jan 11/90, W Times, Jan 11/90) 

January 13: NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society pre- 
liminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, 
launched on November 18,1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the 
Far  Infrared  Absolute  Spectrophotometer,  the  Differential  Microwave 
Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment supported the Big 
Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of ener- 
g y  had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft 

245 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1990 

performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase 
over the spacecraft’s estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 
90-5; P Znq, Jan 15/90) 

January 15: The White House began looking at other ideas for astronaut expedi- 
tions to the Moon and Mars besides those presented by NASA. The unprecedent- 
ed move stemmed from NASA’s  cost  and  time  estimate, $400 billion over  30 
years for the project. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met in the 
previous week,  and  the National Research Council planned  to  review  its  own 
efforts to  seek innovative ideas  later  in  the  week. NASA joined  the  search for 
sources of  outside ideas as well. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for 
Aeronautics, called the move ‘‘highly appropriate” and added, “A lot of our ideas 
are good, but we certainly haven’t covered the waterfront.” (NYTtmes, Jan 15/90) 

January  17: NASA selected 23 new  astronaut candidates from a list of  1,945 
qualified applicants for one year of  training and evaluation that was to begin 
in July  1990. Of  11 civilians and 12 military officers, 7 were selected as pilots 
and the other 16 as mission specialists. (NASA Release 90-7) 

January 19: NASA announced the selection of  two payload specialists for the 
International  Microgravity  Laboratory  mission  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle 
Columbia, scheduled for launch in December 1990. Dr. Roberta Bondar of the 
Canadian Space Agency and Dr.  Ulf Merbold of  the European Space Agency 
were  to  conduct  the  first  of  several  microgravity  investigations using  the 
Spacelab Module. (NASA Release 90-9) 

January  21:  The  European Space Agency  successfully  sent  up  an Ariane 4 
rocket from its launch site in French Guiana and its payload, a SPOT 2 obser- 
vation satellite and six smaller satellites, that included four tiny U.S. spacecraft 
for education and science. It was the first 1990 launch for ESA, the thirty-first 
since 1979. All seven satellites were successfully deployed. (UPZ, Jan 22/90) 

January  24:  Four  major  U.S.  defense  contractors-General  Dynamics 
Corporation, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, United Technologies Corporation, 
and Rockwell International Corporation-announced 
they would jointly develop 
the X-30 National Aerospace Plane. Until September 1989, industry had roughly 
matched Government investment in  the  project, $806.3 million since inception 
during the Reagan administration. “Fiscal realities,”  said the Wall Street Journal, 
“spur the call for teamwork”. (W Post, Jan 24/90;  WSJ ,  Jan 24/90) 

Japan launched a lunar probe from Uchinoura, on their  southern coast, mak- 
ing it the third nation, after the United States and the Soviet Union, able to send 
up a moon probe. The flight schedule was to go into elliptical orbit around the 
E a ah  until  it  came within  10,000 miles of  the  Moon,  launch  an  instrument 

246 

JANUARY 1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

package  to  orbit  the moon,  and send back  data concerning temperatures and 
electrical fields. (WS J ,  Jan 25/90; W  Post, Jan 25/90; Ny Times, Jan 25/90) 

Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of 
a  Satellite Servicer System flight  demonstrator to  show  the ability  to maintain 
satellites in polar  and high  inclination orbits. The on-orbit flight demonstration 
would  exercise  rendezvous  and  docking,  as  well  as orbital  replacement  unit 
exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 90- 12) 

January 25: The projected cost for NASA’s  Earth Observing System @OS) had 
soared from an estimated $12 billion to $30 billion dollars, Administration sources 
announced.  It  was  the  largest  and  most  expensive  project  yet  undertaken  by 
NASA. President George Bush had  asked the National Academy of  Sciences to 
review the matter and recommend cost reductions. 

Lauded by environmental scientists and termed by former astronaut Sally Ride 
as a “mission to planet Earth,” the plan called for putting platforms, launched by 
Titan 4  rockets from Vandenberg Air  Force Base  in California, into polar  orbit. 
Each platform would carry 10 sophisticated scientific instruments that could send 
10 trillion bytes of  data daily. The f i t  EOS platform, said NASA, would not be 
in orbit until  1998. (LA  Times, Jan 26/90) 

January 26: NASA granted a  small Alexandria fm, Global Outpost, rights  to 
find ways of using empty Space Shuttle fuel tanks, used to carry 500,000 gallons 
of  liquid hydrogen and oxygen for Space Shuttle launch and initial insertion into 
orbit, as a platform for military, civilian, and commercial experiments. The agree- 
ment followed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and aca- 
demic uses for expended tanks. (W  Times, Jan 29/90; NASA Release 90-14) 

January 28: President George Bush prepared  to  send a  1991 budget  spending 
plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase for NASA, bringing its fis- 
cal year  1991 budget to $15.12 billion. The increased funds were earmarked for 
the Space Station, a  satellite program  to monitor Earth’s environment (EOS), 
and another for sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars.  (WSJ ,  Jan 29/90) 

January  29:  NASA  announced  a  recently  revised  1990 schedule for  Space 
Shuttle launches that called  for 9  flights instead of  the previously announced 
10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged on a three-week delay to launch the 
Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of  an 
unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle’s solid rocket booster. This delay 
threatened the high-priority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mis- 
sion had to be sent up within an 18-day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter 
and head back  toward the sun, where  it would  achieve polar orbit around the 
star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1990 

Jan 9:  Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. 

Feb 22:  Atlantis; classified military satellite. 

*  Apr  18:  Discovery; the Hubble Telescope. 

May 9:  Columbia; “astro” astronomy telescopes. 

Jul9:  Atlantis; classified military cargo. 

Aug 29:  Columbia; a Spacelab life sciences module. 

Oct 5:  Discovery; the Ulysses probe. 

*  Nov  1 : Atlantis; Gamma Ray Observatory. 

Dec 12:  Columbia; a materials science laboratory. 

A military mission carrying a variety of infrared sensors for the Strategic 
Defense  Initiative  was  reassigned  for  1992. NASA  planned  for  64  Space 
Shuttle  flights  and  30  expendable  launch  vehicle  missions  through 
September  1995. (UP I ,  Jan 29/90; W Times, Jan 30190; NY T imes ,  Feb 4/90; 
NASA Release 90- 15) 

January 30: The Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico issued a report 
concerning an electric gun, the coil gun, that could thrust payloads into orbit. 
Hoping  one  day  that  the  device would  launch  small  satellites, Bill Cowan, 
director of the project,  predicted that objects could be hurled into space at 2.8 
miles per  second at one percent of  the cost of  conventional rockets. The gun 
accelerates projectiles by  pulling them  through successive, interacting mag- 
netic  fields  created  by  electric  currents  passing  through  coils  of  wire. 
According to Cowan, obstacles such as damage to the payloads and launchers 
themselves and the heat generated by projectiles rapidly propelled through the 
atmosphere would eventually be overcome. (NY Times, Jan 30190) 

Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility in early January 
said, in a press briefing, that the satellite was  in worse shape than  engineers had 
expected after its nearly 6-year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used  for 
the planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny.  (W Times, Jan 3 1/90) 

January  31:  Columbia’s flight in  early  January, NASA announced, was  made 
with a flawed backup O-ring  inspectors had  overlooked. A disaster similar to the 
Challenger accident four years ago could have occurred if  the primary seal had 
failed. Inspectors also missed inferior welds on a critical pump that supplied one 

248 

MARCH  1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

of  the Atlantis main engines with fuel. The problem was  corrected while  on 
the launch pad in preparation for the upcoming February 22 launch. (Or1 Sen, 
Feb  1/90; F la  Today, Feb  1/90) 

During January: NASA completed a facility to house the second ground station 
for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) system. Located at White Sands, 
New Mexico, near the existing terminal, the station was predicted to be fully oper- 
ational by 1993. The equipment that the new terminal would house was to be tech- 
nically superior to the communications network in  the original building, but  the 
two were to work together in a combination meant to reduce the likelihood for any 
loss of contact with the two TDRS satellites in orbit. (CSM ,  Jan 30/90) 

*  NASA signed an  agreement with  the Maryland Department of  Economic 
and  Employment Development for  technology  sharing designed to  increase 
commercial exploitation of  space  technology. The  agreement, like  the  ones 
reached earlier with Virginia and West  Virginia, would mainly  involve sup- 
plying NASA research reports, sponsoring seminars and lectures, and making 
NASA laboratories available to the private sector. (W Post, Jan 5/90) 

249 

February 

February  1 :  NASA  announced  the  appointments of  Peter  G.  Smith  to  the 
position  of  Director,  International  Relations  Division,  and  David  L. 
Stottlemyer to  the  position  of  Director, Industry Relations Division. Smith, 
who would direct NASA's  internal relations, worked with the Department of 
State  before  coming  to  NASA  in  1979,  where  he  was  Chief  of  the 
International  Program  for  Policy  and  Deputy  Director  of  International 
Relations. Stottlemyer previously held a number of positions with the Foreign 
Service and the United Nations. (NASA Release 90-20) 

February  4 :  On  this  date, China put  its  fifth relay  satellite  into  space on  a 
Long March 3 rocket sent up  from the Xichang center in western China and 
announced that it was ready to launch foreign satellites. China had scheduled 
launches for Hong  Kong  and Australian companies who wanted  to  send  up 
three American-built satellites beginning in April  of  1990. (Beijing Xinhua 
domestic service in Chinese, Feb 20/90; W Times, Feb 5/90) 
February 5: NASA selected 28 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II con- 
tract awards in  their Small Business Innovation Research program. The awards 
were worth $13 million and part of  an ongoing effort to  stimulate technological 
innovation, increase the  use  of  the  small business sector, and  increase the com- 
mercialization of  federally funded research. (NASA Release 90-21) 

February 6: NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, 
Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent bud- 
get  increase  that  President George Bush  had  proposed  for  the  agency. Truly 
warned  that  any  attempt to  slash  the  budget  would  render  the  Space Station 
defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate 
of  $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in  design. Also discussed was the 
status of  the  planned  Shuttle-C, an  crew-assisted heavy-lift cargo rocket  that 
representatives claimed could be built by  private industry. It was doubtful that 
the  rocket  could  be  ready  in  time  to  aid  construction  of  the  Space Station. 
William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said  the  new  rocket was  not 
necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. 

In  a  related matter, Truly  released  to  the White House  and  Congress his 
plan to increase NASA's  budget by  60 percent over the next three years:  $15 
billion in  1991, $17.6 billion in  1992, $19.3 billion in  1993. The increases, he 
said,  were  needed  for  the  Space  Station  Freedom,  the  Earth  Observing 

25 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1990 

System, and  crew-assisted Moon  and Mars  explorations. (Hearings before  the 
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6 ,8 ,21 ,27 /90 ;  Sp News, 
Feb  15-11/90;  H  Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI ,  Feb 6/90) 

February I O :  The Galileo spacecraft launched from the Space Shuttle Atlantis 
on  October  18,  1989, looped  10,000 miles  above  the  planet  Venus  in  what 
NASA engineers termed a “gravity assisted maneuver” that increased its speed 
by almost 5,000 mph for its trek to Jupiter. After taking 16 pictures of Venusian 
cloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craft was scheduled 
to take more pictures of  the planet during its return journey. The second set of 
photographs,  which  were  to  be  coupled  with  sensors, were  to  detect  dust, 
infrared  and  visible  light,  and electrically  charged particles.  Scientists deter- 
mined that the spacecraft would be within range of  the Earth and able to send 
back data, in October, using its small antenna. It was expected to reach Jupiter 
in December 1995. ( P  Inq ,  Feb 12/90; B Sun ,  Feb  11/90; NY Times, Feb 11/90) 

February 13: Scientists, after taking their first long look at the Long Duration 
Exposure Facility  recovered by  Space Shuttle Columbia in  January, said the 
varied surfaces of  the  satellite showed  signs of  pits,  scars, and discoloration 
in  some  areas  while  being  strangely  unscathed  in  others.  The  surfaces 
revealed no “showstoppers” however. The satellite was  an experiment meant 
to test materials for use in building  spacecraft and the Space Station. (W Pos t ,  
Feb  13/86; NASA Release 90-23) 

The  12-year-old Voyager  1, into deep space and some 3.7  billion miles  from 
Earth on this date, began taking 64 pictures of our solar system for a kind of  “fam- 
ily portrait.” NASA considered having the pictures, which were too large for pub- 
lication,  displayed in  a  100-foot exhibit produced  by  Los Angeles  artist David 
Hochey .  (USA  Today, Feb  14/86, AP, Feb  14/86) 

Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selec- 
tion of  Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiations leading to  a  $172 mil- 
lion  contract  for  payload  mission  integration.  Under  the  contract,  the 
company  would  provide management,  personnel, equipment, services, sup- 
plies, facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions. Spacelab, carried 
in  the  Shuttle’s  cargo  bay,  converted  the  Shuttle  into  a  versatile  on-orbit 
research center. (NASA Release C90-f) 

February  14 :  A  Delta  rocket  carried  two  satellites  into  space  from  Cape 
Canaveral, Florida, to test laser technology planned for the Strategic Defense 
Initiative program. One satellite, the Relay Mirror Experiment, was  to reflect 
a beam fired from a mountain  top  in Hawaii back to another nearby point on 
Earth  using  a  mirror.  The  other  satellite,  the  Low  Power  Atmospheric 
Compensation, was to correct laser strike distortions caused by dust, moisture, 

252 

FEBRUARY 1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAGTICS 

and gases. The media generally opined that  success of  the experiment might 
induce Congress not to slash the $4.5 billion that President George Bush had 
requested for further research into the project in budget year 1991. (W Times, 
Feb  15/90; Ny  Times, Feb  15/90) 

February 18: For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the 
Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classi- 
fied  satellite launch  that,  said sources, was  to  take reconnaissance photographs 
and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12-day visit reflected 
a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the 
mission said, “We have no special secrets.. .I think you are wasting your money.” 
(W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20190) 

February  19: Soviet cosmonauts ended a 22-week mission when their Soyus 
TM-8 capsule touched down on the Kazakhstan Steppe, southeast of Moscow. 
The fifth mission involving a crew living aboard the 20-ton Mir Space Station 
included dozens of  scientific experiments and testing of a “space motorcycle,” 
a one-man vehicle designed for servicing satellites. (FBIS Moscow, Tass (Eng 
trans) Feb  19/90; NY   Times, Feb 20190; P Znq, Feb 20190) 

February  20:  NASA  signed  an  agreement  to  support  the  University 
Corporation for Atmospheric Research  (UCAR)  study  of  the  feasibility of 
using the Shuttle’s external tanks as research, storage, o r  manufacturing facil- 
ities.  Space Shuttle fuel  tanks were  used  to  carry  500,000 gallons of  liquid 
hydrogen and  oxygen  for  launch  and  initial insertion into  orbit. The  agree- 
ment followed a June  1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and 
academic uses for expended tanks.  (NASA Release 90-26) 

*  A German  scientific satellite, ROSAT,  scheduled  for  NASA  launch  on  a 
Delta I1 rocket, in  early  summer, arrived at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on  this 
date  from  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  aboard  a  747  cargo plane.  The 
spacecraft was to perform “all sky” surveys with two x-ray imaging telescopes, 
after which it would focus on detailed x-ray sources. (NASA Release 90-27) 

February  21 : Launching of  the  Shuttle Atlantis and deployment of  a classi- 
fied  payload  mission  on  February  22  were  canceled  because  the  mission 
Commander had  a  sore throat and  headache, coupled with  the prediction of 
wind and rain over Cape Canaveral, Florida. This was the first time a NASA 
mission had  been  scrubbed because of  crew  illness.  (IVY  Times, Feb  22/90; 
Feb 23/90; W Po s t ,  Feb 22/90) 

Space Shuttle mission specialist Colonel Richard M. Mullane announced his 
retirement from NASA, effective July  1, 1990. He  flew two  Shuttle flights in 
1984 and  1988 and was  scheduled to fly aboard the Atlantis later in February. 
(NASA Release 90-28) 

253 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1990 

February  22: An Ariane rocket carrying two American-built Japanese satel- 
lites  exploded  over  the  Atlantic  Ocean  shortly  after  liftoff  from  French 
Guiana; a fire in the rocket’s propulsion system was suspected to be the cause 
of  the explosion. Ariane had a record of  17 successful flights previous to this 
accident; it held more  than  50 percent of  the  international market  for  com- 
mercial  launches.  (The European  Space Agency  later  admitted  that  a  cloth 
inadvertently left in the rocket had caused the failure by blocking water sup- 
plies to one of  its first stage engines.) (FBIS Paris AFP in English, Apr  13/90; 
W Times, Feb 23/90; NY  Times, Feb 23/90) 

February 23: Pioneer 11, launched  April 5, 1973, was 2.8  billion miles from 
Earth,  passing  the  planet Neptune  (Neptune and  Pluto  exchange  outermost 
planet status because of  Pluto’s eccentric orbit) to become the  fourth space- 
craft that  had  left  the  solar system. Its main mission was  to  glean data from 
Saturn and Jupiter, but scientists hoped that Pioneer 11 would send back infor- 
mation concerning solar winds until  1995. (C  Trib, Feb 25/90; NY   Times, Feb 
25/90; NASA Release 90-29) 

February  26:  Space Shuttle pilot Donald E. Williams announced his  retire- 
ment from NASA and  the Navy, beginning March  1. He piloted two Shuttle 
missions, in April 1985 and October 1989, was Chief of  the Astronaut Office 
Mission  Support  Branch,  and  Deputy  Manager  of  Operations  Integration. 
(NASA Release 90-3 1) 

February 27: NASA issued a request for proposals to the commercial launch 
industry for launch of  up to  10 small Explorer-class spacecraft between 1993 
and  1998. The request called for furnishing the launch vehicle, facilities, per- 
sonnel, and services necessary for the required orbit. (NASAAnno) 

February  28:  After  five  delays  because  of  the  Shuttle Commander’s head 
cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS-36) lift- 
ed  off  under  dark  skies from  Cape Canaveral, Florida,  to  deliver  a  37,300- 
pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an 
additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly 
reiterated NASA’s  policy  that  meeting  launch  schedules was  secondary  to 
safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military pay- 
load  the  following day  at  an  orbit  inclined 6 2  degrees north of  the  equator, 
allowing it to fly over every major populated and  industrialized center in  the 
Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A 
polar  orbit  was  considered  ideal  for  a  recon-  naissance  satellite,  but  the 
Shuttle base  at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where  such an 
orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the 
larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. 

254 

FEBRUARY 1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AEiRONAUTICS 

Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. 
No  problems  were  reported  during  the  brief  4-112  day  mission,  the  Space 
Shuttle’s 34th mission and  the  6th mission dedicated solely to  the military. 
(W Post, Mar  1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90;  Feb 28/90; NY Times, March  1/90; 
Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Znq, Mar 5/90) 

*  NASA  Administrator  Richard  Truly  announced  the  completion  of  the 
merger of  the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and the Office of 
Exploration;  the  two  offices  were  merged  into  the  Office  of  Aeronautics, 
Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D. Aldrich was named to head  the new 
NASA office, which was intended to combine the analysis of exploration mis- 
sion alternatives with innovative technologies, two closely related efforts that 
Truly felt should proceed under a strong central management. 

Truly  also  announced  the  establishment  of  the  Office  of  Legislative 
Affairs, effective March  18,  1990. Headed  by  Martin  P.  Kress,  this  NASA 
office would  be  responsible  for  legislative matters  and  the  coordination of 
budgetary and policy matters with Congress. (NASA Release 90-32; 90-33) 

During February: Daniel Brandenstein, NASA’s chief astronaut, returned from 
a tour of  Soviet space facilities and said the original untended Russian shuttle, 
maiden  voyage  in  1988, would  never  fly  again.  He  also  reported  that  the 
Soviets planned to launch a second untended space shuttle in  1991 and auto- 
matically dock it with Mir. The station’s crew planned to run some tests. Again 
untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPZ, Feb 21/90) 

*  A Chicago  Tribune article reported on  the progress of  commercial space 
launch  ventures  that  were  born  out  of  the  Challenger  disaster  in  1986. 
McDonnell Douglas and Martin Marietta made their first successful launches 
of  satellites  in  1989,  and  Orbital  Sciences  and  General  Dynamics  were 
expected to follow this year. Hundreds of millions of dollars were invested by 
the corporations, and a backlog of  missions was seen until  1995 when Japan, 
Russia,  and China were  predicted to  compete with U.S. and European  sys- 
tems. The threat of  so much competition was unnerving for the industry, but 
the promise of  U.S. military contracts offered enough compensation for  the 
continuation of  their projects.  (C Trib, Feb  19/90) 

The Los Alamos National Laboratory urged NASA and the National Space 
Council to fund a multibillion dollar nuclear propulsion project that the group 
believed would reduce the Mars journey by half of  the expected time. The pro- 
posed system would draw on a  1970s technology, Rover and Nerva programs, 
that circulated liquid hydrogen through a solid reactor core, thereby heating the 
hydrogen and creating thrust. The reactor engine could operate only in a vacu- 
um, so testing it on Earth would prove difficult. The program, reported Space 
News, would likely receive substantial money. (Sp News, Feb  19-25/90) 

255 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 1990 

In  an  unreleased  report,  NASA  determined  that  the  proposed  untended 
Shuttle-C would prove too costly for use  in building the  Space Station. The 
original plan called for  18 Shuttle flights at a cost of $1.5 billion  to erect the 
$25 billion station. Although using the Shuttle-C would reduce the number of 
required flights to  10 because of  its more than doubled cargo space, the price 
tag would jump  to $3.7 billion, not  including the $2 billion needed to devel- 
op the vehicle. ( S p  New s ,  Feb 24-Mar  4/90) 

Three SR-71 Blackbird aircraft, reconnaissance planes being retired by the 
Air Force, were Scheduled to arrive in February at Edwards Air Force Base in 
California, for “flyable storage.” NASA hoped to use the high-speed aircraft, 
capable of Mach 3 at 80,000 feet, for tests relating to the Space Plane later in 
the year. (Daily New s ,  Jan 30190; NASA Release 90-24) 

NASA reported on the completed computerized medical reference system, 
a  project engendered by  computer and medical experts  at  the University of 
Florida and  the Kennedy Space Center in Florida in  1979 and known  as the 
Clinical Practice Library of Medicine (CPLM). The system contains nearly all 
of  the text and graphics of  seven commonly used medical reference books that 
are considered essential for practicing medicine. Being lightweight as well as 
offering high  speed  access to  references, the  CPLM has  great potential for 
both space travel and Earth uses  alike. (NASA Release: 90-30a) 

256 

March 

March I : Telescopes for NASA's  Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft were 
delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center for integration into a payload mod- 
ule scheduled for launch in August 1991. The science payload was designed, built, 
and tested at the University of  California, Berkeley,  to focus on the study of  an 
unexplored portion of  the electromagnetic spectrum called the extreme ultravio- 
let, between the x-ray  and ultraviolet wavelengths. (NASA Release 90-34) 

March 2 :  The National Research Council reported that NASA plans for accom- 
plishing President George Bush's  mandate, crew-assisted missions to the Moon 
and  Mars, should be  viewed  only  as  a  springboard to  further research. Among 
their recommendations were  greater research  into  nuclear power  for  habitable 
bases and space flight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greater empha- 
sis  on  planning  the  Space Station Freedom  for  essential research  concerning 
weightlessness and habitable bases.  Updating Space Shuttle technology to better 
comply with  the needs of  building the Space Station was recommended as well; 
it was noted that the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000 without 
these changes. (W Post, Mar 3/90; NY Times, Mar 5/90; Sp  News, Mar  12-18/90) 

March 5:  Japan successfully tested its pew  H-2 rocket, which promised to lift 
large, sophisticated satellites. The rocket using an LE-7 engine, similar to the 
high-technology propulsion system used by  the Space Shuttle, was  slated for 
service in March  1992. (AP ,  Mar 6/90) 

March 6: Rockwell Space Operations was  selected by NASA for a $814 million, 
10-year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for 
mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight 
programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. ( H  Post, Mar 7/90) 

Victor  L.  Peterson  was  named  Deputy  Director  of  the  Ames  Research 
Center in California. Since joining NASA in  1956, Petersen held several posi- 
tions at the center. (NASA Release 90-36) 

March 13: A House subcommittee approved a plan  that  authorized $1.1 bil- 
lion  to  build  the  Shuttle-C. Representative Bill Nelson was  chairman of  the 
committee and a supporter of the crewless Shuttle. The Shuttle-C would carry 
100,000 pounds of  cargo into  space;  an  orbiter would  have  only  a  50,000- 
pound capacity. ( S p  News ,  Mar 19-25/90) 

251 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1990 

March  14 :  A  satellite  launched  by  Martin Marietta  from  Cape  Canaveral, 
Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of a wiring problem that did not 
allow  separation from  the Titan  3  rocket’s  second stage. Ground engineers 
successfully took the craft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would 
not  be  as  likely  to  reenter  the  atmosphere.  One  plan  offered  by  Orbital 
Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket to the satellite via the 
Space  Shuttle  so  it  could  obtain  the  necessary  23,000  mile  orbit.  Martin 
Marietta, which had only two remaining contracts, believed i t  was in jeopardy 
of  not getting any more contracts because of  the incident. (WSJ, Mar  15/90; 
W Post, Mar  17/90; M  Times, Mar 16/90) 

March 15: NASA’s Langley Research Center selected Ball Corporation for a 
$90 million contract to develop an  atmospheric instrument for  the proposed 
Earth  Observing System. The  instrument, Spectroscopy of  the Atmosphere 
Using Far Infrared Emission, would be designed to study middle-atmosphere 
ozone distribution. (NASA Release, C90-i) 

March  18: The  military  reconnaissance  satellite  launched  from Atlantis  in 
February  malfunctioned  and  was  slowly  spinning  from  orbit,  said  White 
House intelligence officials. The  satellite, “vital for  START  (Strategic Arms 
Reduction Treaty) verification,” was expected to reach Earth’s atmosphere in 
April. (W Times, Mar  19/90; W Post, Mar  19/90) 

March 23 :  Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that a Space Shuttle 
rescue  of  the  errant  satellite  sent  up  earlier  this  month  by  Martin  Marietta 
appeared  possible. He  could  not  say  Whether  the  Intelsat  communications 
satellite would be lifted into a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back 
to Earth, but noted that either approach would require about one year for plan- 
ning.  (W Post, March 24/90) 

March 25: A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVS- 
TAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was 
the  eighth  launch  of  the  Air  Force’s  Delta  2  rocket,  designed  for  heavier 
payloads than  the  original Delta.  It  was  number 7  of  a  planned 21  satellite 
constellations that  were to help  ground  units, ships, and  aircraft locate their 
precise positions. (UP I ,  Mar 26/90) 

March 29: NASA released a call for proposals to lease a commercially devel- 
oped  and  owned  space  module,  the  Commercial  Middeck  Augmentation 
Module, which would  ride  in  the payload bay  of  the  Space Shuttle and  add 
about 50 lockers to the orbiter’s capacity. The need for greater capacity result- 
ed  from  NASA’s  Commercial Development of  Space  Program, which  was 
designed  to  enlarge  research  opportunities  for  private  use  by  conducting 
experiments in  materials processing, protein crystal  growth, biotechnology, 

258  

MARCH  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 90-46; S p  News ,  Mar  12-18/90) 

During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed that designs for 
the planned Space Station Freedom needed sigmfkant changes that would drive 
up the initial cost. The study found an elaborate program of preventative main- 
tenance  that  would  require  about  2,200 hours  each  year  for  space walks  by 
astronauts and begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutions 
included use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designed spacesuits to 
ease space walks, and a redesign of  Space Station parts that would make them 
easier to repair.  (NY  Times, Mar  19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90) 

NASA's  1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars, wamed Congress. The 
Space Station, planned  explorations  of  the  Moon  and  Mars,  and  the  Orbital 
Maneuvering  Vehicle  were  slated  to  be  trimmed.  Money  for  the  Earth 
Observation System was earmarked for an increase. ( S p  News, Mar 26-Apr  1/90) 

0  The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototype for the Planetary 
Rover  Navigation  Test  Bed  Vehicle,  a  self-navigating vehicle,  about  the 
size  of  a  small  car,  for  use  in  planned  outposts  on  the  Moon  and  Mars. 
(Daily New s ,  Mar  13/90) 

Orbital  Communications  Corporation  requested  Federal  approval  for 
deploying a  global  satellite system for data  transmission, 20  small satellites 
that would mostly be used for emergency services. Orbital planned to deploy 
them, beginning in April with  its Pegasus rocket, launched from a B-52 air- 
craft. (W Times, Mar 6/90; NASA Release N90-18) 

0  NASA  successfully tested its self-repairing flight control system on an F-15 
aircraft at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in 
California. The  system  detected  damaged  flight  control  components,  such  as 
ailerons, rudders, and elevators, and adjusted undamaged flight surfaces to com- 
pensate so the pilot could maintain good aircraft response. (NASA Release 90-43) 

A one-year analysis of  the results from a study of  the ozone above the Arctic 
performed  in  the  winter  of  1988-1989  by  Airborne  Arctic  Stratospheric 
Expedition reported a possible 17 percent loss in March. The finding was a rever- 
conclusion that said no ozone depletion similar to that found in 
sal of  the on@ 
the Antarctic was present. (NASA Release 90-41) 

259 

April 

April  2 :  President George Bush announced his plans for a cooperative effort 
with the  Soviet Union  in  the human-assisted exploration of  space, including 
voyages to the Moon and Mars. 

On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreign-made satellites 
by  lifting its ban on government agencies and businesses that  required them 
to  buy  only  Japanese  spacecraft. The  Japanese law  was  created  in  order  to 
help  Japan’s  fledgling  space  industry.  (NY Times,  Apr  3/90;  Apr  4/90; 
W Times, Apr 4/90; WSJ ,  Apr 4/90) 

NASA  and  Rockwell  International  Corporation  signed  an agreement  in 
which Rockwell would produce a cryogenic pallet aimed at extending orbiter 
flights from an average of  8 days  to  16 days. The extended duration orbiter 
program involved a pallet holding spherical tanks of  liquid hydrogen, liquid 
oxygen, valve panels, and avionics boxes for feeding additional cryogenic flu- 
ids to the orbiter’s electricity-generating fuel cells. (NASA Release 90-47) 

April  6: Orbital Sciences Corporation successfully launched its Pegasus rock- 
et from a NASA B-52 aircraft to boost  a 422-pound payload into polar orbit 
over the Pacific Ocean. The experimental rocket deployed a NASA scientific 
satellite  and  a  Navy  communications satellite,  opening  a  new  avenue  for 
launching  small payloads.  The  elimination of  a  costly  ground booster,  said 
company president David Thompson, provided  a means by  which  payloads 
could  be  delivered  inexpensively.  (W  Post,  Apr  6/90;  WS J ,   Apr  6/90; 
Ny Times, Apr 6/90; LA Times, Apr 6/90] 

April  7:  China launched a communications satellite, AsiaSat 1, from Sichuan 
Province for  an Australian firm  and became the  First  third-world country to 
enter the commercial satellite launching business. China promised  to  follow 
fair pricing practices after President George Bush lifted a sanction, brought on 
the country for human rights violations, that barred them from launching the 
U.S.-built satellite. The launch still drastically undercut U.S. and Ariane fees. 
(FBIS China, China Da i ly ,  Apr 7/90; C SM ,  Apr 9/90; W Post, Apr 8/90) 

April  9:  NASA  Administrator Richard Truly  named  Lawrence  J.  Ross  as 
Director  of  the  Lewis  Research  Center  (LeRc),  Cleveland,  Ohio. 
Administrator  Truly  announced  the  planned  retirement  of  Dr.  John  W. 
Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director 

26 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL 1990 

of  the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed 
Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held 
several  managerial  positions  in  the  private  sector.  Lawerence  Ross,  who 
joined NASA in  1963, has served mostly  in an executive capacity, as Deputy 
Director of  LeRC, as a design and  test engineer, and has been given several 
special  assignments.  Klineberg  joined  NASA  in  1970. After  conducting 
research  at  the  Ames  Research  Center,  near  San  Francisco,  California,  he 
became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and  Space Technology 
and, later, Director of  LeRc. Townsend began  government service in  1947 and 
held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 90-49; 90-50; 90-5 1; 90-55) 

April  10: Boeing Space Operations, Inc. was awarded a $35.9 million cost-plus- 
award-fee contract for program assurance engineering support at Ames Research 
Center  in  California. Under  the contract, Boeing would  provide reliability and 
quality assurance, system safety engineering, test engineering, management, insti- 
tutional safety, and health and environmental services. (NASA Release C90-0) 

April  11:  NASA  unveiled  its  latest  research  laboratory  at  Ames  Research 
Center  in  California.  The  Human  Performance  Research  Laboratory  was 
designed for study of  prolonged space travel. Ground was also broken at the 
dedication for  the  new  $8.6 million Automated  Sciences Research Facility, 
designed to provide research and technology development in automation and 
artificial intelligence. (NASA Release 90-53) 

April  16: A panel of  experts convened by  the National Academy of  Sciences 
opined against a  U.S.N.S.S.R.  joint  mission to Mars. The reason  they  cited 
was  the  lack of  any  experience in  cooperation between  the  two  and  instead 
suggested  a  “graceful  path  of  coordinated  but  independent  explorations.” 
(NY Times, Apr  17/90) 

April  19: NASA scientists Michael J. Ra the r  and Robert T. Watson warned 
that current levels of  ozone depletion could cause public health problems and 
threaten plant life regardless of what steps were taken to reduce it. Their study 
predicted that the salient depletion over the Arctic could drift southward, sim- 
ilar  to  the  damaged ozone over Antarctica that  periodically drifts over New 
Zealand and Australia. (P Inq ,  Apr 20/90) 

April  24 :  Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS-3 1, was  successfully launched 
from  Cape  Canaveral, Florida, with  the  $1.5 billion,  25,000-pound Hubble 
Space Telescope in  its cargo bay.  Seven years of  delays, the latest occurring 
last April  10, when  a  power  failure  in  the  orbiter caused  the  mission  to  be 
scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 38 I-mile orbit, the high- 
est  altitude yet  obtained by  a  Shuttle. On April  25  the Hubble  telescope- 
which had an expected 15-year duration-was  deployed; the telescope was to 

262 

APRIL 1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

probe  the universe with  10 times  the  clarity ever before achieved. Discovery 
landed  at  Edwards Air  Force  Base  in  California,  on April  29,  with  a  test  of 
stronger, carbon brakes that would  allow future landings at  the Kennedy Space 
Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA’s  Shuttle launches. 

Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately 
after it had been deployed because of  an antenna entangled in a power cable. 
The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satel- 
lite. The low, 381-mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. 
The six- to eight-week chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the 
telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in 
on  and  only  partially  resolved  the  next  day.  ( B  Sun, Apr  25/90;  Apr  26/90; 
W  Post, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30190; May  1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 
26/90; Apr 30190; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P lnq ,  Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90) 

During April: NASA began  acting on  some of  the recommendations from its 
principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the 
approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail anoth- 
er Shuttle loss. Among the panel’s main engineering concerns were the Shuttle 
main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, long- 
term orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator 
William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a “devil’s advocate” and 
noted  that  conclusions  drawn  by  them  were  intentionally  exaggerated. 
(AvWk, Apr 23/90; C SM ,  May 8/90) 

NASA  tested  two  of  its  experimental aircraft at  the Ames-Dryden Flight 
Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. One of the aircraft, 
an  F-l6XL,  used  an  experimental  wing  surface  for  improving  airflow  at 
supersonic speeds. The second aircraft, an X-29, demonstrated an increase for 
high-angle-of-attack, the  angle of  an  aircraft relative to its  actual flight path. 
(NASA Release 90-52; 90-59) 

*  Two NASA sounding rockets were scheduled for launch from the White Sands 
Missile Range in New Mexico to observe Cornet Austin. The two-stage, subor- 
bital Black Brant IX rockets were set to carry a faint object telescope and a spec- 
trograph (for observation in the far ultraviolet spectral range) for Johns Hopkins 
University  and  a  far  ultraviolet  spectrometer for  the  University  of  Colorado. 
(NASA Release 90-57) 

263 

May  1 : NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, awarded 
Jackson and Tu11 of Washington, D.C.  a  $19 million contract to  support the 
Applied Engineering Division  in  automation and  robotics  and  thermal  and 
data systems. The firm was selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business 
Act;  the  potential for  the  contract over a  five-year period was  $63 million. 
(NASA Release C90-q) 

Ma y  2 :  NASA named William W.L.  Taylor of TRW Corporation as the Chief 
Scientist  for  the  Space  Station  Freedom  Program.  Taylor,  who  was  with 
NASA until  1978 when he joined TRW,  was  the third person chosen for  the 
two-year assignment and the first from industry. (NASA Release 90-61) 

Ma y  3 :  NASA was scheduled to launch two Multiple Access Communications 
Satellites (MACSATs) later in May  aboard a Navy-owned Scout rocket. The 
MACSATs  were  designed  for  a  global  store-and-forward message  relay. 
(NASA Release 90-64) 

May  4 :  Engineers at NASA ran tests of the Hubble Space Telescope to deter- 
mine if  vibrations were interfering with precise pointing at specific stars. The 
problem had  been  discovered two  days  earlier when  sensors locked on  to  a 
“guide star” to  orient the  spacecraft. Engineers noticed a  slight wobble, one 
six-hundredth of a degree up and down every minute, that interfered with both 
fine pointing mechanisms and star observations. (NY  Times, May 5/90) 

Ma y  8: The Hubble Telescope failed a test on this date as scientists attempted 
to  direct  it  toward  stars emanating a  common brightness; the  telescope was 
able to find none. It was later discovered that the problem originated from an 
error in the telescopes computer guidance system, and a new program with an 
updated star chart was sent up. (NY  Times, May  10190; W Post, May  10190) 

May 14: Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy for the American 
Institute of  Aeronautics and Astronautics, recommended that weapons designed 
for the Strategic Defense Initiative be developed to locate and destroy any aster- 
oids that  threaten Earth, views  endorsed by  Vice  President Dan  Quayle. Grey 
noted that  1,500 asteroids cross the Earth’s  orbit every year, that the location of 
only 100 of them is known, and that the impact of even a relatively small asteroid 
could have a devastating effect. (P  Inq, May  15/90; C Trib, May  17/90) 

265 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1990 

*  Lockheed  Corporation  received  a  $971  million  contract  from  NASA  to 
oversee design and development of a new generation of rocket motors for the 
Space Shuttle. Twenty more powerful solid rocket motors were to begin lift- 
ing  the  Shuttle  in  1995, according to  the  contract,  and  sources said  that  if 
NASA exercised  the  option  to  order  88 more,  the  contract would be  worth 
$1.39 billion. (WSJ ,  May  15/90; NASA Release 90-68) 

May  15: NASA said that it would rescue the uninsured communications satel- 
lite that Martin Marietta Corporation boosted into a useless orbit last March 14. 
The cost was set at $1 million to either retrieve it or attach rockets, that would 
send it into a higher orbit, in  1991 or  1992. Intelsat said that it would consider 
the cost at its next board of  governors meeting. (W Times, May  16/90) 

May   20:  Ground  controllers  adjusted  commands  on  the  Hubble  Space 
Telescope  for  focusing  on  stars. Although  other  problems  existed-wobble 
from solar panels on the telescope and vibration as it went through space-the 
first pictures were taken and sent to Earth on this day. (AT Times, May  21/90; 
W Times, May 21/90; W Post, May 21/90) 

May  2 4 :  The Department of  Defense and NASA announced the appointment 
of  contractors  to  continue  research  and  development  on  the  National 
Aerospace  Plane.  General  Dynamics,  McDonnell  Douglas,  United  Tech- 
nologies  (Pratt  &  Whitney),  and  Rockwell  International  planned  to 
jointly pursue hypersonic technologies. (NASA Release 90-7 1) 

May  31 : The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launch pad at Cape 
Canaveral, Florida, and  claimed the  lives of  three astronauts on January 27, 
1967, remains  at  Langley  Research  Center  in  Virginia,  where  it  has  been 
stored since shortly after the accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed 
with  the  ill-fated  Space  Shuttle Challenger in  an  abandoned missile  silo  at 
Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 90-76) 

266 

June 

June  I :  NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West German observatory 
into  a  360-mile-high orbit  from  Cape Canaveral,  Florida.  The  observatory 
consisted of  an x-ray telescope and a wide-field camera for detecting extreme 
ultraviolet  light;  scientists  hoped  the  observatory  would  yield  information 
about  forces  associated  with  the  center  of  our  galaxy,  intergalactic  gases, 
quasars, black  holes, hot  stars, and  objects  on the edge of  the  universe. The 
observatory was dubbed Rosat, after the German Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen 
who discovered x-rays in 1895, and promised to be  100 times more sensitive 
than even the Einstein x-ray Observatory launched in  1978. It was  originally 
scheduled  for  launch  aboard  a  Space Shuttle in  1987. (LA  Times, Jun  2/90; 
NY Times, Jun 2/90; B  Sun, Jun 2/90; P Inq, Jun 2/90) 

June  5 :  A  letter  from  Lennard A.  Fisk  to  Jacques Breton of  the  French  space 
agency, the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, revealed NASA’s  defunct plans 
for a U.S.-French  experiment that was to fly aboard a 1994 Soviet mission to mea- 
sure the mineral  content of  Mars. The  constraints recently  imposed on the  two 
countries was the reason given for cancellation of  the project. (W Post, Jun 18/90) 

June 6:  A fuel leak that postponed Space Shuttle Columbia’s May 30 launch was 
located, and engineers decided the orbiter would have to return to the hanger for 
repairs. NASA  officials were  not  sure  when  the  craft  would  be  launched but 
announced that only eight of  the nine planned flights for the year would be flown. 
(NY Times, Jun 7/90; W Times, Jun 8/90) 

June  7 :  NASA  canceled a  contract  with  TRW  Corporation  for  the  Orbital 
Maneuvering Vehicle, also known as the Space Tug, a spacecraft intended to 
lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and a proposed X-ray 
telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for the cancellation was recent 
budget pressure facing NASA.  (WSJ, Jun 8/90; W Times, Jun 8/90; Sp  News ,  
Jun  11-17/90;  NASA Release 90-78) 

0  NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director 
at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and 
was the veteran of  three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 90-77) 

June  8 :  The Air  Force  launched a  Titan  4  rocket  from  Cape Canaveral in 
Florida and put  a classified payload  into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by 
Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the 

267 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1990 

military’s principal means of  reaching space. This was the second successful 
launch of  the rocket, although the maiden voyage in  1989 almost resulted in 
a catastrophe because of  a malfunctioning engine nozzle.  (W Post, Jun 9/90; 
N y  Times, Jun 9/90) 

June  13: NASA said it had received the go ahead from Intelsat to rescue the 
Intelsat 6  satellite put  into a  low-orbit three months earlier. Plans called for 
lifting the satellite into a higher orbit sometime in  1992; sources said that the 
mission would probably be carried out during the  inaugural flight of  Shuttle 
Endeavor. ( B  Sun, Jun  14/90; W Times, Jun  14/90) 

June  14:  NASA  engineers  revealed  that  problems  with  the  Hubble  Space 
Telescope were even more difficult to correct than  first expected. The most vex- 
ing problem was a 20-minute vibration from the solar panels every 90 minutes as 
the craft passed from night to day. The onboard computer’s attempt to compen- 
sate for the vibration only made the problem worse. Another problem was the tele- 
scope’s frequent inability to lock onto the stars that it was commanded to seek. In 
addition, the reaction of  the spacecraft to radiation over the South Atlantic, where 
the Van Allen belt dips closer than usual to the Earth, was more acute than expect- 
ed; numerous data were lost and false computer signals were given. It was hoped 
that  all three  problems  could  be  remedied via modifications to  the  telescope’s 
computer. (AT Times, Jun  15/90; P Znq, Jun  15/90; B  Sun, Jun  15/90) 
NASA’s  Office of Commercial Programs  sponsored plans to develop a system 
for  launching and  recovering commercial spacebome experiments. Assisted by 
numerous  universities,  the  Commercial  Experiment  Transporter  would  be 
launched on an expendable rocket and contain both a recovery system and a ser- 
vice module. The two would  then  separate so  that  the  experiments aboard the 
recovery system could land in the United States while those not requiring recov- 
ery could remain in orbit. (NASA Release 90-83) 

June  21:  Contel Federal  Systems  transferred  title  of  the  Tracking and  Data 
Relay Satellite System to NASA, effective July  1, 1990. Contel transferred the 
system 42 months earlier than called for, saving the Government $16 million. 
(NASA Release 90-86) 

The Ames Research Center in California awarded a five-year, $32.8 million 
contract  to  Silicon  Graphics  for  a  work  station  to  be  used  in  the  Ames 
Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation Processing System Network. The work 
station would allow users to analyze and visualize their work in computation- 
al  fluid  dynamics  and  other  large-scale scientific  simulation  and  modeling 
applications. (NASA Release C90-w) 

268 

JUNE  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

June  23: Martin Marietta Corporation successfully launched  a Titan  3  rocket 
from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on  this date that  carried a  replacement satellite 
into orbit for the Intelsat 6 stranded in March. The new communications satellite 
was to join  14 others in September and would transmit 3 television channels and 
120,000 telephone calls simultaneously. ( P  Znq, Jun 24/90; W  Post, Jun 24/90) 

June 27: NASA said that the Hubble Space Telescope, which had been  plagued 
with problems, was  discovered to have a flawed mirror, causing the $1.5 billion 
instrument to be “near sighted.” The mirrors, which were ground into the wrong 
shape, rendered  useless  the  telescope’s most  important scientific instrument, a 
widefield planetary camera designed to  explore the  farthest reaches of  the  uni- 
verse. Engineers said that instruments scheduled to be attached to the telescope in 
1993, 1996, and  1997 could compensate for the flaw and added that these flight 
schedules might be advanced. Tests were not done on the effectiveness af the mir- 
rors before the telescope was launched because engineers felt that the checks were 
cost prohibitive. (P  Znq, Jun 28/90; NY   Times, June 28/90;  W  Post, Jun 28/90) 

June  28: Ames  Research  Center  in  California  awarded  a  cost-plus-award-fee 
$210.8 million contract for software support. Under the contract Sterling Federal 
Systems, Inc. would provide computational support for problem applications and 
systems programming, systems design  and  engineering, software management 
and maintenance, and modification of existing software. (NASA Release C90-y) 

June  29: A hydrogen leak  similar to  the  one  that  scrubbed Columbia’s mis- 
sion late in May was discovered in the Space Shuttle Atlantis as it was being 
readied on the launch pad. Engineers determined that Atlantis would need to 
return to the hanger where it could be separated from its external fuel tank for 
repairs. Officials said that the flight, originally scheduled for mid-July, would 
be delayed at least several weeks and noted that the entire fleet was grounded 
until  the  problem  could  be  ascertained. Finding  the  cause  of  the  leak  had 
proven difficult. If the final analysis pointed to a design flaw, grounding might 
have been  stretched to months or even years. (NASA Release 90-89; W  Post, 
Jun 30190; NY  Times, Jun  30190; WS J ,  July 2/90; C SM ,  Jul 2/90) 

During June:  NASA  awarded  a  $1.3  million  contract  to  Martin  Marietta 
Corporation to study design concepts for a space based “service station.” The sys- 
tem would  service satellites beyond the range of  the Space Shuttle, provide them 
with fuel as well as replace certain components. (W Times, Jun 7/90) 
The Air Force and NASA entered their final stage of  a $250 million, ten-year 
experiment for the X-29 program, scheduled to be completed in March 1991. The 
test  plane  was  designed  to  be  30 percent  unstable and  was  dependent upon  a 
sophisticated flight control system to produce and maintain stability. Glenn Spacht 
of Grumman Corporation, developer of  the X-29 and producer of the F- 14, said, 

269 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JUNE  1990 

‘When applied to  the F-14, the plane will get better handling qualities, surviv- 
ability, maneuverability, and  antispin characteristics. . . .The F-14 can certainly 
reap the benefits of  the X-29.”  (De fNew s ,  Jun 25/90) 

Scientists  and  engineers  at  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena, 
California began  extensive tests  on  its  recently  developed untended  planetary 
rover. An unproven technology was needed for a vehicle on a distant planet con- 
trolled by  ground crews on Earth  inasmuch as round-trip communication would 
be  anywhere from 8 minutes  to  40 minutes. Computer Aided Remote Driving 
allowed vehicle planning and identification of a  10s-of-meters-long-obstacle-free 
path, with a  three-dimensional display from stereo cameras aboard the vehicle. 
Semi-Autonomous Navigation  allowed  an  operator  to  determine  a  nominal 
extended route tens of kilometers long. (NASA Release 90-85) 

270 

Ju ly  2 :  NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, award- 
ed  a  $42.6 million  contract  to  Rockwell  International for  continued  Space 
Shuttle systems engineering and  integration services. The contract called for 
Shuttle  launch  and  flight  support,  test  verification,  operations  integration, 
flight evaluation, engineering analysis, and  data  systems operations, as well 
as special studies. (NASA Release C90-z) 

July 3 :  NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a five-year agreement in 
support of  the f m ’ s  Pegasus and Taurus  launch vehicle programs. As  part of  a 
continuing  effort  to  foster  a  strong  U.S.  commercial  launch  industry, Orbital 
Sciences was given access to agency launch support property and services. Prior 
to  this  agreement,  similar  agreements  were  made  with  General  Dynamics, 
McDonnell Douglas, Martin Marietta, and the LTV Corporation. (NASA Release 
90-92) 

Ju ly  5: The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of  Investigation 
created by  NASA met for the  first time in Washington, D.C.,  to hear presen- 
tations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the 
Hughes Danbury  Optical  Systems, makers  of  the  precision mirrors  for  the 
telescope.  Members  of  the  Board  included  Lennard  A.  Fisk,  Associate 
Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion 
of  the meeting, Dr. Allen  said, “The board now has  a good base of  informa- 
tion from which to proceed with  its investigation.” (NASA Anno) 

Ju ly  8: President George Bush said he would allow U.S. commercial satellites 
to be launched by  Soviet rockets. The rockets would be fired from a project- 
ed  site  in  Australia,  an  advantageous  position  for  orbits,  located  just  12 
degrees south of  the equator. (FBIS Sov, Jul9/90; NY Times, Jul9/90) 

Ju ly  9 :  Two  Space Shuttle crew commanders were  grounded by NASA  for 
disciplinary reasons. Robert L.  Gibson was  grounded for  one  year  after he 
flew a stunt plane, in a July 7 Texas air show, that collided with another plane 
and  killed  the  second  pilot.  David  M.  Walker  was  grounded  for  60  days 
because the T-38 jet aircraft he piloted in May  1989 nearly collided with a Pan 
Am  Airbus 3 10 over Dulles Airport, according to the second pilot. ( P  Znq, Jul 
10190; W Times, Jul  10190; N y  Times, Jul  10190; NASA Release 90-96) 

27 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY 1990 

July 10: NASA’s Chief Scientist William Lenoir told a Senate committee that 
the Agency  should  have  performed  tests  on  the  Hubble  Space Telescope’s 
mirrors. He  said  that  the  problem  could  have  been  caught by  simpler, less 
costly  tests  than  the  “end-to-end”  test,  rejected  because  of  its  high  cost. 
(Hearing before  the  Subcommittee on  Science, Technology  and  Space,  Jul 
10/90; B  Sun ,  Jul  11/90; W Po s t ,  Jul  11/90; NY Times, Jul  11/90) 

July 13: Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle’s fuel line that they 
determined could easily be  fixed and  stated that  flights would resume soon. 
The problems, said William Lenoir, NASA’s  flight director, did not appear to 
be a result of  any design flaw; he added that eight of  the nine scheduled mis- 
sions would likely be flown this year. 

In the meantime, investigators from a six-member board of  investigation cre- 
ated by NASA July 2 were seeking to find what had gone wrong with the Hubble 
Space Telescope. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the 
board, promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint the problem 
and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would be “very embarrassing to 
someone or some group.” (W Post, Jul 14/90; NY  Times, Jul 14/90) 

July  15: Recent grounding of  the  Space Shuttle fleet and problems with  the 
Hubble  Space Telescope  had  prompted President George  Bush  to  consider 
appointing a panel composed of  a group of  experts outside of  Government to 
review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, 
however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and 
that  no  plans  for  changing  its  management  had  been  formulated.  Vice 
President Dan  Quayle met  with  NASA Administrator Richard  R.  Truly  on 
July  and  directed him  to  appoint the  independent task  force.  (NY  Times, Jul 
16/86; Jul  17/90; B  Sun ,  Jul  16/86; Jul  17/90; NASAAnno) 

Ju ly   17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary f ix  
of  the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install 
an optically corrected main  camera. A brainstorming session included some 
“far fetched” ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. 

Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights 
might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that 
if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would 
be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the October 5 
liftoff  of Discovery.  ( B  Sun, Jul 18/90; W Post, JuI  18/90; NY ZTmes, Jul  18/90) 

Ju ly  20: A report released by NASA, concerning plans for  the Space Station 
Freedom, said that 3,700 hours of maintenance would be required annually to 
keep  it running. The final figure  from the  six-month study was  up  from the 

212 

SEFIEMJ3ER  1989 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

2,200 hours that  a  preliminary version had  given in March and dwarfed the 
original goal of  130 hours. The most  alarming statistic was  that  6,200 hours 
of  maintenance would be needed before  the  station could even be habitable. 
“The significance is that there’s no one up there to do this,” said Dr. William 
J. Fisher, an astronaut who headed the  12-member panel that did the estimate. 
(IVY Times, Jul21/90; W Pos t ,  Jul21/90; W S J ,  Jul23/90) 

July  24:  A  NASA  official  announced  that  Mark  Showalter,  at  the  Ames 
Research Center in California, had discovered another moon orbiting Jupiter. 
He found it while doing analysis of images taken in  1980-1981  by Voyager 2. 
The smallest of the planet’s known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. ( B  Sun ,  Jul 
25/90; W  Post, Jul25/90; NASA Release 90-103) 

An Ariane rocket carrying both a French and a German TV satellite was  suc- 
cessfully launched from French Guiana. The rocket was identical to the one that 
exploded shortly after liftoff last February 22. (W Post, Jul25190; WSJ ,  Jul25190) 

July  25: The  hydrogen  leak  that  was  detected in  the  Space  Shuttle Atlantis 
reappeared, and engineers determined that the Shuttle would have to be taken 
off  the launch pad  and rolled back  to the hanger for a closer look. Columbia, 
undergoing repairs for  a similar leak, was  expected to be  on  the  launch pad 
early  in August. The Atlantis liftoff with  its classified military payload were 
rescheduled for November, bumping another launch into  1991 and  reducing 
the projected number of  flights in  1990 to seven. ( P  Znq, Jul26/90; NY Times, 
Jul26190; W Times, Jul26/90) 

After three delays, NASA and General Dynamics Corporation launched a 
Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $189 million satel- 
lite to study the Earth’s magnetic and electrical fields. The Combined Release 
and  Radiation Effects  Satellite  (CRRES),  a  joint  effort  by  NASA  and  the 
Department of Defense, carried 24 canisters containing chemicals that were to 
be released in fall  1990 and become ionized by  the sun’s rays. Visible clouds 
would  then  spread along magnetic field lines, allowing scientists to  see how 
electrical  fields  interact  with  normally  invisible  charged  particles.  The 
CRRES releases were to be augmented by  chemicals released from 10 sound- 
ing rockets launched from Puerto Rico and  the Marshall Islands. ( P  Znq, Jul 
26/90; NY Times, Jul26190; NASA Release 90-97; 90-98) 

The  United  States  and  the  Soviet Union  signed  an  agreement  in  which 
NASA’s  Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) would fly on a Soviet 
Meteor-3  spacecraft sometime in  1991. A TOMS  instrument had  monitored 
ozone concentrations from a Nimbus-7 satellite since  1978, focusing on  the 
southern hemisphere and the development of  the Antarctic ozone hole. This 
satellite, however, had  already performed well beyond  its designed lifetime, 

213 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1990 

and  the  TOMSMeteor-3  mission  was  slated  to  replace  it.  Another  TOMS 
satellite was  scheduled to be  aboard a U.S.  spacecraft in  1993; two or  three 
years subsequent to that mission another TOMS was scheduled for a Japanese 
ADEOS satellite. (NASA Release 90- 105) 

July  26: NASA  and  Japan’s Ministry  of  State  for  Science and  Technology 
agreed  on  new  areas  of  space  cooperation  during  a  meeting  in  Tokyo. 
NASA/Japan projects agreed upon were observation of  the ozone layer from 
satellites, space  environment monitoring  (real-time solar wind  data),  Space 
Station solar terrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom, 
and  space microgravity experiments  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle. Other  areas 
discussed were  the  ongoing  cooperation for  building  and  utilization  of  the 
Space Station and joint projects in x-ray and  infrared astronomy, cosmic ray 
research, the study of ocean dynamics, measurement of  cloud height by  satel- 
lite  stereograph, reception of  Japan’s first marine  observation satellite data, 
and satellite measurements of  tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90- 106) 

July 31 : State officials said that the Soviet Union had requested use of facilities at 
Cape Canaveral, Florida,  to  launch their Proton  rockets. The request followed 
their stated intentions of joining the commercial space race. University of Houston 
professor Peter Bishop explained that a launch pad closer to the equator meant less 
fuel would be needed for achieving proper orbit. ( B  Sun, Aug  1/86) 

During  July:  NASA  and  U.S.  university  scientists and  Canadian  researchers 
joined in a study of pollution at high northern latitudes resulting from the release 
of methane, an important greenhouse gas, from tundra, forests, and marshes. Both 
ground and  air measurements were taken; NASA’s  main sampling platform was 
a Lockheed Electra aircraft. Research began July 5 and was scheduled to conclude 
on August 20,  1990. (NASA Release 90-102) 

The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford 
Telecom  for negotiations leading to a  five-year, $30 million contract to provide 
systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite 
and  the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation 
received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space 
launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90-aa) 

Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, devised 
a way to salvage the Japanese lunar mission that successfully orbited a probe 
around the Moon but  did not  send data back  because of  a  failed transmitter. 
The mother ship that launched the probe was in an elliptical orbit around the 
Earth and could achieve lunar orbit by taking advantage of  the “fuzzy bound- 
ary”. The  “fuzzy  boundary” is  an  area  about  one million miles  from Earth 
where gravitational forces emanating from our planet and the Sun cancel each 

214 

JULY  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUnCS 

other out. The limited supply of fuel canied by  the spacecraft was not sufficient 
to  allow  it to  reach  a lunar orbit by  conventional means.  Success with  the plan, 
they  determined, would mean  an  enormous fuel  savings should  lunar  bases  be 
built in the future. (LA Times, July  16/90) 

215 

August 

August 2: The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, 
which  successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satel- 
lite was  the eighth in a planned series of  21 that promised to give military units 
their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90) 

0  Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President 
Dan  Quayle and  the National Space Council was  set up  to  examine how  to 
manage future efforts in  space. The committee, made up  of  two  former con- 
gressmen,  a  former  astronaut,  and  several  top  industry  executives, was  to 
report to  the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that 
he had urged  the committee’s creation because of  problems with  the Hubble 
Space Telescope, grounding of  the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the pro- 
posed Space Station. (NY  Times, Aug  3/90) 

August 8:  Government officials said that the mirrors attached to the Nation’s 
next  generation  of  weather  satellites  used  to  reflect  images  from  Earth’s 
atmosphere into internal sensors would warp from the Sun’s heat, according 
to recent tests. NASA  formed a team of nine experts from Ford and ITT, mak- 
ers of  the  spacecraft, to correct the problem  in time to meet the  1992 launch 
date. A single Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite was in orbit 
at the time. Officials were worried that, if  it failed, the Nation would have to 
rely on planes, radar units, and other satellites that were not capable of  giving 
the  comprehensive overview needed,  for  example, to  follow  storms. There 
were  normally two  satellites of  this  type  in  orbit, but  one was  destroyed in 
1986 when  a  Delta  rocket  malfunctioned. Solutions  for  the  GOES-NEXT 
flawed mirrors ranged from repairing them, which would  cause a  six-month 
delay,  to  re-manufacturing,  and  causing  a  delay  of  more  than  one  year. 
(NY Times, Aug 8/90; W Post, Aug 9/90; W Times, Aug 9/90) 

August 10 :  The $744 million Magellan spacecraft launched in May  1989 reached 
Venus and achieved polar orbit for a mission to map the entire planet. The radar- 
produced images promised to be  10 times more detailed than those from previ- 
ous expeditions that had mapped only  sections of  Venus. Information from the 
mission could also provide a better understanding of predicted global warming, 
or the greenhouse effect, said NASA scientist Gentry Lee. (NY Times, Aug  11/90; 
W Post, Aug  11/90; LA  Times, Aug  11/90; C Trib, Aug  11/90) 

211 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST 1990 

August 13: Surprised NASA scientists released a photograph taken August 3 by 
the Hubble Space Telescope that provided unexpected detail of a young star sys- 
tem  known  as 30 Doradus, 160,000 light years from Earth. After scientists cor- 
rected  the  flawed  mirror  problem  with  computer enhancement,  the  telescope 
revealed 60 of  what were yet  the  youngest and heaviest stars known.  The “star 
nursery,” was once thought to have only one large star; the most advanced tele- 
scope prior to  the Hubble telescope had  raised that number to 27. (W Post, Aug 
14/90; W Times, Aug  14/90; P Inq, Aug 14/90; NASA Release 90-111) 

August  16: Charles Pellerin, director of  astrophysics for  NASA,  announced 
that problems with  the Hubble Space Telescope mirrors could easily be  fixed 
in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for mid-1993. The mission would require 
replacing the telescope’s widefield planetary camera with one designed to cor- 
rect the flawed mirrors. (P  Inq, Aug  17/90; W T imes ,  Aug  17/90) 

August 17: NASA scientists regained contact with Magellan after a  14-hour loss. 
The spacecraft went into a safe mode, in which it shut down many of  its systems 
and  pointed  its  solar panels  toward  the  Sun because  of  navigation problems  it 
falsely interpreted. The ship’s computer memory was sent back to Earth so scien- 
tists could determine the problem in Magellan’s program. Scientists were pleased, 
however, with the  first set of pictures taken during Magellan’s test  run over the 
planet. They, however, cautioned that Magellan’s mission to begin regular map- 
ping by August 29 would  likely be  delayed. (W Times, Aug  20190; P Inq ,  Aug 
19/90; W Post, Aug 18/90; M Times, Aug  18/90; LA  Times, Aug  18/90) 

August  18: A  Delta  rocket  carried  a  British  television  broadcasting  satellite, 
Marcopolo 2, and put  it into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The only prob- 
lem for the ninth U.S. commercial launch of  a payload into orbit was  a two-hour 
delay caused by  thunderstorms in the area. (AP, Aug  18/90) 

August 20: NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly announced the establishment 
of  a Space Commerce Steering Group, composed of NASA officials, that would 
provide an overview of  commercial space technology applications. The goal  of 
the  Group  was  to  provide  coordination  of  potential  commercial  capabilities; 
NASA’s Office of Commercial Programs would remain the primary action agent. 
Truly maintained that NASA “must ensure that  [its] technology is transferred to 
the private sector.  The taxpayer’s investment in NASA is  an  investment in  the 
international competitiveness of U.S. industry.”  (NASA Release 90-1 12) 

August  21:   Scientists at NASA said that the Magellan spacecraft seemed to 
be working. Engineers had received all of  the data from the craft’s computer 
memory and were in the process of loading new programming. Officials said 
the  navigation problem might  have  been  caused by  a  series of  rare  events; 
they hoped i t  would be fu l ly  operational soon. (M  T imes ,  Aug 22/90; W Pos t ,  
Aug 22/90; W Pos t ,  Aug 22/90) 

278 

AUGUST 1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

A report from a panel convened by the National Research Council and released 
to the white House recommended smaller and  simpler satellites to monitor the 
Earth’s climate, as opposed to the $30 billion, six large satellites being planned by 
NASA. The expense of the Earth Observing System (EOS) could take funds away 
from  other  important  studies and  future budgets.  It  could  result  in  a  delay  in 
launching the EOS  spacecraft, the report warned. Noting that  at least one large 
platform  was  necessary  for  a  number  of  scientific  instruments  to  be  grouped 
together, the panel recommended that three of  the large satellites be replaced by 
smaller ones. (M  Times, Aug 22/90; W Post, Aug 22/90) 

August 27:  NASA responded to  a  request  issued August  7  by  the  Office of 
Management and Budget  asking for  various Federal agencies to  outline the 
effects  of  a  $100  billion  cut  in  the  1991 budget.  The  report  submitted by 
NASA warned of  a halt  in  Space Shuttle flights, suspended development of 
the  Space  Station,  and  delayed  launch  of  the  Mars  Observer  spacecraft. 
Although not  expected,  cuts  across-the-board were  a  possible  result  of  the 
Gramm-Rudman deficit control law. ( S p  News ,  Sep 9-1 3/90) 

August 29: The f i s t  scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope c o n f i i e d  
that  it would reveal a more detailed view  of  the heavens than any  ground tele- 
scope, in  spite of  its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view 
yet  of  a  supernova discovered in  1987 and  of  densely packed  stars in  a distant 
galaxy that could be the result of  a black hole. 

Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was 
operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been off-and- 
on. The navigation problem had been narrowed down but not pinpointed, and 
the  mapping  survey  of  Venus  would  be  delayed  two  or  three  weeks. 
(M  Times, Aug 30190; W Times, Aug 30190; NASA Release 90- 1 17; 90- 1 18) 

During  August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and  astro- 
naut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had  served with 
NASA for almost 30  years, managing and  directing untended  launch vehicles, 
Shuttle  carrier  systems,  and  spacelab  operations.  Captain  McCulley,  who 
planned  to  retire  from  the  Navy,  was  to  join  Lockheed  Space  Operations 
Company and be involved with day-to-day processing of  Space Shuttle vehicles. 
(NASARelease 90-116; 90-119) 

NASA announced the selection of Margaret G .  Fmarelli as Acting Associate 
Administrator for External Relations, and the names of  microgravity mission 
payload  specialist  candidates.  Finarelli,  who  had  been  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  since December  1988, would  temporarily  replace Kenneth  S. 
Pedersen, who  had  taken  a  one-year  teaching  assignment with  Georgetown 
University  in  Washington, D.C.  Candidates  for  payload  specialists for  the 

219 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST  1990 

March 1992 STS-53 Space Shuttle mission were Lawrence J. DeLucas, Joseph 
Prahl, Albert Sacco, and Eugene H. Trinh. (NASA Release 90-107; 90-108) 

A Government industry board  selected the gas generator power cycle engine, 
similar to the J-2 engine used on the Saturn moon rockets, for the  rocket engine 
to be designed and built to power  the N A SW S A F  Advanced Launch System. 
Chosen over the closed expander power cycle, the engine would power next cen- 
tury launch vehicles, capable of  delivering a wide range of  payloads into Earth 
-  In a flight test that concluded in August, NASA, the Air Force, and Boeing 
orbit at a reduced cost.  (NASA Release 90-113) 
Commercial Airline  Group  announced  better-than-expected  findings  taken 
from the  results  of  modifying a  22-foot  section of  a  Boeing 757  wing. The 
design reduced drag in what could equate to  10 percent if  the entire span of 
both wings had been modified.  A one-percent reduction would have amount- 
ed to a $100 million annual savings in fuel costs for the U.S. airline industry. 
(NASA Release 90-115) 

280 

September 

September 5 :  Liftoff of the Space Shuttle Columbia was scrubbed for the third 
time, after a fuel leak was discovered. It was reportedly not  in the same area 
as  the  leak  that  halted  the  mission  last  May.  The  second  delay  for  liftoff 
occurred during the last week of August because of  communication problems 
with the x-ray telescope in Columbia’s cargo bay.  NASA engineers believed 
the problem lay in the fuel pumps feeding the Shuttle’s three main engines and 
began replacing them the next day. Agency officials said that the flight would 
be delayed at least  11 days. (W Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 1/90; W Po s t ,  Sep 6/90; 
Sep 7/90; NY Times, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90) 

September 7 :  A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in 
California during tests, killing one worker and  injuring nine  others. The Air 
Force  was  further  developing  the  rocket,  which  experts  called  problem 
plagued, hoping to replace the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. 
( C  Trib, Sep 8/90; LA Times, Sep 9/90) 

September  13:  NASA  Administrator  Richard  Truly  told  a  panel  created  by 
President George Bush that the Agency was facing serious problems, but not what 
most  people  believed  them  to  be.  The  two  obstacles  standing  in  front  of  the 
Agency, he said, were “Governmentwide practices” that encumbered connections 
between programs and  resources and  the public’s misunderstanding of  the pro- 
posed  Space Station Freedom. The Space Station’s design flaws, he  added, were 
either solved or close to a solution, “yet public understanding is to the contrary.” 

In a related matter, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA planned to 
spend $1.9 billion over the next five years on its seven centers of  excellence in 
the area of  high-performance computing. The Centers would focus on training 
college- and graduate-level students, thereby educating the next generation of 
scientists in the field. Truly, who spoke at a conference on supercomputing in 
September noted,  “NASA needs  high-performance computing. Some of  our 
missions depend on it.”  (W Pos t ,  Sep 14/90; Fed  CoWk, Sep 10190) 

September 15: Magellan officially began its mission of mapping Venus on this 
date when it used radar to photograph the planet for the first time since radio 
contact  was  lost August  16.  Computerized commands  were  radioed  to  the 
spacecraft, and confirmation that it had begun its 243-day chore was returned 
13 minutes later. Pictures revealing mountains, valleys, and a unique looking 
meteor crater were  received by  scientists two  days  later.  ( P  Znq,  Sep  16/90; 
Sep 18/90; W Po s t ,  Sep 25/90) 

28 I 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER 1990 

September 17: Liftoff of Columbia was again scrubbed because of another hydro- 
gen  leak.  This  time  the  suspect was  gritty  sandpaper  residues  from  a  mobile 
launch platform restordon. A postponement period for the launch was indefinite, 
but  officials said  that  it  would  be  delayed until  after  the  October 5 Discoveq 
flight. (W Times, Sep 18/90; W Pos t ,  Sep 18/90; NY Times, Sep 18/90) 

September 18: The House voted to slash the Strategic Defense Initiative $4.7 
billion request to $2.3 billion. Representative Jon Kyl  argued that the United 
Stated needed “Star Wars” to avoid “being held hostage by some tinhom dic- 
tator.” Representative Ronald Dellums retorted  that only $143 million of  the 
program’s  budget  was  dedicated  to  destroying  short-range missiles,  those 
developed by Third World Nations.  (P  Znq, Sep 19/90) 

September  19: The House Science, Space,  and Technology Committee rec- 
ommended an increase of NASA’s budget from $12.3 billion to $17 billion for 
the next year, including the $2.9 billion earmarked for continued development 
of  the Space Station. Committee members acknowledged that the final spend- 
ing plan  would probably  be  lower but  wanted  to  show  their  support  despite 
NASA’s  recent problems.  ( P  Zaq,  Sep 20190) 

September  20:  NASA  took  the  Space Shuttle Columbia off  its  schedule for 
1990 launches,  operating  under  the assumption  that  the orbiter was  prone  to 
fuel leaks. Stili unable to pinpoint the exact location of the last hydrogen leak, 
NASA hoped that the craft would be able to fly in early  1991. A team of  nine 
engineers was  working  on  the problem.  (NY Times, Sep 21/90; W Po s t ,  Sep 
20190;  C Tr ib ,  Sep 20190; NASA Release 90-127) 

September  27:  The Federal Aviation Administration  signed  a memoranda  of 
understanding with NASA to jointly research problems in aviation. Areas to be 
investigated were environmental compatibility, human factors, severe weather, 
integration  of  cockpit  and  air  traffic  operations,  airworthiness,  and  noise. 
(NASA Release 90-131) 

September  28:  The House  passed a  $44 billion,  three-year  spending  autho- 
rization  bill  for  NASA  that  included establishment of  a  Moon  base  and  a 
crew-assisted  expedition to  Mars.  The  bill  was  to  next  go  to  a  conference 
committee to work out differences with the Senate. (LA Times, Sep 29/90) 

During  September: Astronaut  Bruce  McCandless  retired  from  NASA  and  as 
Captain  from  the U.S.  Navy.  He  helped  develop  the  space  agency’s  Manned 
Maneuvering Unit,  a  jet-powered  backpack  he  was  the  first to  wear  during  a 
Space Shuttle Challenger mission in February 1984. (W Times, Sep 12/90) 

282 

SEPTEMBER 1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The  Langley  Research  Center  in  Virginia  selected  Mason  and  Hanger 
Services, Inc. for negotiation of  a five-year, $97.9 million contract to support 
all aspects of  supply, transportation and equipment management; general and 
specialized administrative services; different aspects of  the security program; 
and support of  the scientific and technical information program. 

The Television Development Division of NASA Headquarters awarded the 
Imaging Systems Laboratory of Florida Atlantic University a one- to five-year 
contract with a potential value of  $3 million for research and development in 
advanced video systems for space and terrestrial applications. (NASA Release 
C90-CC; 90- 13 1A) 

A joint NASA/U.S. Geological Survey team of American scientists planned to 
work with  a Soviet Science team  to study volcanoes along Russia’s Kamchatka 
Peninsula, part of the Pacific’s “Ring of Fire”. The study would mark the first time 
Western scientists had been allowed in the region. (NASA Release 90-124) 

The  Air  Force  decided  in  September  to  convert  the  Space  Launch 
Complex-6  at  Vandenberg Air  Force  Base  in  California  for  Space  Shuttle 
liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle 
since the Challenger accident in  1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) 

283 

October 

October I :  The High Resolution Imager, an  instrument for the study of  cosmic 
x-rays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first 
light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between 
the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited sev- 
eral  international  scientists. The  pictures  sent back  represented  a  neutron  star 
3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years 
ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of  galaxies known as Abell2156. 
(NASA Release 90- 133) 

October 3: The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA’s  1991 budget.  The bill 
drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the 
planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron 
out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President 
George Bush. (WSJ, Oct 4/90) 

October 4 :  NASA scientists reported that despite its flaws, the Hubble Space 
Telescope was  sending  back  some  clear  pictures,  better  than  any  a  ground 
telescope could produce. The latest photographs of  Jupiter and Pluto were bet- 
ter than  any ever taken, but until the telescope’s “near sightedness” was cor- 
rected images of  distant, faint objects would continue to be unclear. (W Pos t ,  
Oct 5/90; NY Times, Oct 5/90) 

The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that their most advanced rock- 
et, a %nit  booster, had  blown  up seconds after liftoff and destroyed much of  the 
launch pad  in the Kazakhstan Republic. The payload, said Western analysts, was 
likely a recon- naissance satellite. The rocket had  earlier been promoted for sale 
in the West  and had  been used to fly some versions of  the Soviet Space Shuttle. 
(W  Post, Oct 12/90) 

October  6 :  Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS-41, was  launched  from Cape 
Canaveral, Florida after a  five-month dry spell;  the  fleet was  grounded during 
much of  this  period because of  hydrogen leaks. Ulysses, the  craft’s  814-pound 
nuclear  powered  payload,  was  released  later  that  afternoon, and  a  three-stage 
solid-fuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to  Jupiter. Ulysses was  to  sling 
shot Jupiter in order to  achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the sun 
in  May  1994. In  order to  escape an Earth orbit,  the  $750 million joint mission 
between  NASA  and  the  European  Space Agency  reached  34,130 mph-the 
greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. 

284 

OCTOBER  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The  scientific mission  also  included a  controlled fire  to  see how  flames 
behave in weightlessness and release of  the craft’s %foot  robotic arm, which 
had  a  special  material  attached  to  estimate  effects  of  deterioration on  the 
Intelsat  satellite,  launched  earlier  this  year  into  a  low  and  useless  orbit. 
Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, end- 
ing  a  four-day, practically flawless mission.  (W Post,  Oct  7/90; Oct  11/90; 
NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct  11/90) 

October 11: The Office of Technology Assessment warned that Space debris 
could  make  space  activity  too  risky  in  20  to  30  years  if  the  most  traveled 
orbits continue to be littered. With the average collision velocity in low-Earth 
orbit 6.2 miles per  second, an object having  1/35th the weight  of  an aspirin 
tablet has  the  impact of  a  .30-caliber bullet, they  said. The Air Force tracks 
such debris to  advise NASA before  Shuttle missions, but  no  course change 
has ever been deemed necessary. (W Post, Oct  12/90; C Trib, Oct  14/90) 

*  NASA scientists warned that examination of  data from the ozone hole over 
the  South  Pole  showed  record  depletion.  They  added  that  ozone  levels 
throughout the Southern Hemisphere were as low  as  they had ever been. The 
ozone  hole  has  been  monitored  since  1979 with  the  Total  Ozone  Mapping 
Spectrometer, an instrument on the Goddard-Managed NIMBUS-7 spacecraft. 
(C Trib, Oct  12/90; NASA Release 90-137) 

October 16:  The Senate, in a rush to  agree on the  1991 spending plan, com- 
promised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA’s Space Station. Said Senator 
Barbara Mikulski, “The space program has been  increased by  13 percent so 
it’s not  as if  we gouged them.” (W Post, Oct  17/90; AvWk, Oct 22/90) 

October  17:  NASA  released  a  photograph  from  the  Cosmic  Background 
Explorer  (COBE) of  the  vast  dust  clouds  that  fill  the  Milky  Way  galaxy. 
Launched almost one  year  previously,  the  COBE was  to  study  background 
radiation from the  Big  Bang believed to have created the universe.  It  found 
that  the  fireball  was  unexpectedly  smooth,  belying  numerous  theories. 
(W Post, Oct  18/90; NY  Times, Oct 23/90; NASA Release 90-140) 

October  25:   NASA announced  the  selection of  280  research proposals for 
immediate  negotiation  of  Phase  I  contracts  in  their  1990  Small  Business 
Innovation Research program (SBIR). SBIR had aimed at stimulating techno- 
logical innovation in  small business for the past eight years; the Phase I con- 
tracts normally would not exceed $50,000. (NASA Release 90-144) 

October 26:  NASA considered a  proposal  for  a major repair of  the Hubble 
Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of  full observation abili- 
ties.  In addition to replacing the telescope’s main camera in  1993, as already 

285 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1990 

planned, astronauts would  also replace another device with corrective optics for 
light  that  reached  other  important  scientific instruments. The  plan  called  for 
repairing or replacing the craft‘s solar panels as well, because their vibrations had 
interfered with many  sensitive observations. (AT Times, Oct 27/90) 

October 30: NASA declared its Shuttle fleet “leak free” as Columbia passed 
a  fueling test  after two defective seals had  been  replaced and  nuts and  con- 
nectors in the engine compartment had been tightened. Space Shuttle Atlantis 
had passed its fuel test a week earlier and was scheduled for liftoff November 
9.  (NY T imes ,  Oct 3 1/90; W Post, Oct 3 1/90; NASA Release N90-86) 

*  A Delta rocket was  launched from  Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully 
carrying  an  International Maritime  Satellite  Organization communications 
satellite  into  orbit. The  satellite  was  intended  to  expand  international tele- 
phone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. 
(W Post, Oct 31/90) 

During October: Photographs sent back  from the Magellan spacecraft since 
September  15  were  10  times  sharper  than  any  seen  before.  The  images 
“revealed a  whole  new  planet”  and  “almost everywhere you  look  on Venus 
you see volcanic features,” said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in 
California. ( C SM ,  Oct 25/90) 

United States and Soviet space and aeronautics officials planned three sepa- 
rate  meetings  for October  to  visit  U.S.S.R.  space  facilities. A  U.S./u.S.S.R. 
Solar System Exploration Joint Working Group meeting was  also planned for 
October in Virginia, where the  group would visit NASA’s  aeronautics centers. 
(NASA Release 90-138) 

*  NASA selected ST Systems Corporation for negotiation to a five-year, $37 mil- 
lion contract for  operation and  analysis  support  for Goddard’s National Space 
Science Data Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. NASA  also awarded CBI Services, 
Inc. a $28.2 million contract for work on Ames Research Center’s 12-foot pres- 
sure wind tunnel. (NASA Release C90-dd; C 90-ee) 

*  NASA  announced  in  October  that  its  expertise  in  structural mechanics, 
design optimization, and computer codes was finding application in orthope- 
dic  science  in  the  custom  design  of  prosthetic  joint  implants.  Similar 
development of  a  computer code,  said experts, would  allow  implants a  life 
span  increase  from  an  average of  7  years  to  20  years  while  providing  less 
discomfort to the patient.  (NASA Release 90-142) 

286 

November 

November 4: NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope for 
the first time had observed a faint object, a quasar billions of  light years from 
Earth.  Officials  hoped  that  study  of  the  image,  known  to  astronomers as 
UM675, would give clues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe 
was born. (W Times, Nov 5/90) 

November  5 :   Arnold  Aldrich,  Associate  Administrator  for  Aeronautics, 
Exploration and Technology,  announced an organizational change at  the Ames- 
Dryden Flight Research Center, Mountain View, California, designed to reinforce 
and  strengthen national  flight  research  capabilities at  the Ames-Dryden Right 
Research Facility (DFRF), Edwards, California. Kenneth J. Szalai was chosen as 
the Ames Deputy Director, effective December 3, 1990. He was, however, locat- 
ed  at Dryden and directed research and  operations. Szalai previously served as 
Chief  of  the Research Engineering Division at Dryden. (NASA Release 90-149) 

November 7: NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design 
of  their  Space Station, a  response  to  budget  cuts passed  by  Congress  and  a 
directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next five 
years. William Lenoir, NASA’s  associate administrator for  space  flight, said 
that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely 
visited by  astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be 
stripped of  equipment for  studying Earth and  to make  astronomical observa- 
tions, but  for servicing spacecraft on  their way  to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ ,  
Nov  8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov  12/90; W Pos t ,  Nov 8/90; NY  Times, Non 9/90) 

November 12: A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 
classified payload outside experts believed was a $180 million advanced missile 
warning satellite. It was the third launch of the Titan 4 and followed a two-month 
delay caused by undisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, would 
likely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied a nearby launch 
pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a classified cargo aboard thought to 
be  for the same purpose. (W Post, Nov  13/90; W Times, Nov  13/90) 

November  13: The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis 
October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could come closer to Earth and use 
our planet’s gravity to  slingshot in December toward the sun for a  1995 ren- 
dezvous with  Jupiter. The  fly-by would  mark  the  first  time  Earth had  been 
approached by a spacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth’s orbit. The 

287 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER 1990 

craft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshot the sun and 
study  our  planet  again on  the  return  trip  in  1992, and  then  study  Jupiter’s 
atmosphere for two more years after reaching the planet. The loop around the 
solar system was necessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too 
weak to propel Galileo directly on its two-year trip to Jupiter. (F lu  Today, Nov 
14/90; P  Inq, Nov  14/90) 

NASA selected investigators and  science teams from  11 U.S.  universities, 3 
NASA centers, 3 other U.S.  laboratories, and  13 foreign countries for the Saturn 
orbiter portion of  the Cassini mission scheduled for launch in  1996. The mission 
would  include 62 investigations for analysis of  Saturn’s atmosphere, its ring par- 
ticles, and moons within them. The orbiter would  also send a probe to  Saturn’s 
moon, Titan, and later map it.  (NA§A Release 90-150) 

November 15: Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS-38, was launched from Cape 
Canaveral, Florida with  a classified satellite, probably to be used  for recon- 
naissance in  the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle 
would be  assigned a  secret and  sole military payload because the  Pentagon 
planned  to  use  untended  rockets  for  classified missions  in  the  future.  The 
satellite was deployed the following day. 

Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a contin- 
uation  of  high winds  and  rains had  prevented landing at Edwards Air  Force 
Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the seven-mile run- 
way at Edwards, as opposed to the three-mile strip at Kennedy Space Center 
in  Florida, which  had  not  been  used  since  1985. Astronauts, however,  said 
they  felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was  only the  sixth 
time the orbiter had  used  the runway  and  the  first time  since the  Challenger 
accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but 
the  payloads  would  be  unclassified.  (NY   Times,  Nov  16/90;  Nov  21/90; 
W Post, Nov  16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA Anno) 

November 26: The Air  Force launched a Delta 2  rocket from Cape Canaveral, 
Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite 
into orbit. The navigation satellite was  10th in a series of 21 that the United States 
hoped to have in orbit by  1992. (W Post, Nov  27/90; USA To+,  Nov 27/90) 
0  NASA  announced  the  selection of  84  proposals  for  Phase  II contracts  in 
NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate tech- 
nological  innovation from  small business, the  contracts were  allowed to  reach 
$500,000 over a two-year period. (NASA Release 90-152) 

November 27:  The six-member Hubble Optical Systems Board of  Investigation, 
formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 

288 

NOVEMBER  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a five-month study. 
The report stated that both NASA and the Perkin-Elmer Corporation, then known 
as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that 
prevented  the  Hubble  Space Telescope from  distinguishing very  faint  objects. 
Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflict- 
ed with  certified procedures for  testing  the mirror with  newly  designed equip- 
ment. Upper management at Perkin-Elmer and at NASA, the report went on, were 
left unaware of  potential problems the mirror might have had  in  1981. Dr. Allen 
and Leonard Fisk, NASA’s Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management oper- 
ated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in  1990. 
(W Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) 

During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their 
f i s t  “Technology 2000” conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing 
of  space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an  implant device 
for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the 
“Video Harp’’;  a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such 
as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound 
called the “Convolvotron”; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; 
and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with step-by-step instructions to a student. High- 
tech  gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a space-age washer 
and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. (USA  Today, Nov 29/90) 

0  NASA’s  Langley Research Center at Langley Field, Hampton, Virginia,  and 
Honeywell’s Space System Group, successfully concluded a joint flight research 
project  that  involved  study  of  Global  Positioning System  (GPS)  satellites  for 
improved automated  landing  in  spacecraft and  aircraft. Fifteen  GPS  satellites 
were in orbit at the time of the test, and the group hoped to add nine more by  1993. 

Meanwhile,  NASA  and  the  Technical  and  Administrative  Services 
Corporation signed a two-year agreement for the exchange of information associ- 
ated with  closed environment systems related to  food production both on Earth 
and in space. The hydroponic technology sharing involved no exchange of funds. 
(NASA Release 90-155,90-148) 

NASA convened with the Space Activities Commission of Japan in November 
for the  fourth annual meeting of  the NASNSAC  Cooperative Space Activities 
Planning Group in Arlington, Virginia. Discussions focused on a number of  col- 
laborative projects in the fields of  astrophysics, solar system science, micrograv- 
ity science, life science, and Earth observation. (NASA Release 90-156) 

Physicians  at  the  Johnson  Space  Center,  Houston,  Texas,  announced  in 
November  that  they  had  instituted  a  new  treatment,  promethazine, for  space 
motion sickness. Since NASA’s  return to flight in September 1988, the medica- 
tion had helped decrease the malady. (NASA Release 90-155) 

289 

December 

December 2: Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS-35) was  launched from Cape 
Canaveral, Florida,  carrying the  $150 million  Astro-1  for  a  10-day astronomy 
mission. The payload consisted of one x-ray  telescope and three ultraviolet tele- 
scopes that would  supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. 
The project originally had  been  scheduled for a May  30 liftoff, but  subsequent 
hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro-1 crew had the longest wait 
for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley’s Comet 
in  1986, but  the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The x-ray 
telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from 
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama. 

Columbia  landed at Edwards Air  Force  Base  in  California on December 
11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro-1 mission 
did  not  achieve all  of  its  objectives  because  of  a  failed  computer  that  over- 
heated  from  lint  in  the cooling system. Because astronomers on board  were 
forced to  aim the telescopes manually  at predetermined  objects, only  135 of 
the  slated  250  targets  were  observed.  (NY Times, Dec  3/90;  Dec  7/90;  Dec 
12/90; W Post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec  12/90) 

*  A Soviet rocket  carrying  a TM-11 space  capsule was  launched into orbit 
from Kazakhstan Republic in Central Asia on this date. Accompanying the two 
cosmonauts on board was  a Japanese television reporter, making him the first 
journalist in space. Japan’s biggest private television company, TBS, as well as 
other  Japanese  companies,  had  their  slogans  emblazoned  on  the  rocket 
( B  Sun, Dec 3/90; LA  Times, Dec 3/90) 

December 4:  The Ulysses spacecraft launched from Space Shuttle Discovery 
and developed a problem on its trip to rendezvous with Jupiter in  1992, from 
which it would slingshot to achieve polar orbit around the sun. It was believed 
that the difficulty came from a 24-1!2-foot  antenna boom meant to study radio 
signals  in  space and waves  in the  solar winds. Scientists ascertained that  the 
boom was bent, perhaps from the sun’s rays, and was causing the craft to wob- 
ble. Because of  the wobble, the main dish-shaped antenna would not be able 
to focus on Earth and relay  data gleaned from the star. Scientists were confi- 
dent that the problem would be solved before the craft’s  1994 mission began. 
(C  Trib, Dec  15/90; NY T imes ,  Dec  16/90) 

290 

DECEMBER  1990 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

December  8 :  The Galileo spacecraft came to within 590 miles of  Earth  and 
received  a  push  from  Earth’s gravity  that  increased its  speed  from  67,000 
m.p.h.  to  78,000 m.p.h. This was  the  first  of  two  gravity  assisted passes by 
Earth that were planned for the craft, enabling it to reach Jupiter in December 
1995. It collected numerous data from Earth, as it would again on its second 
pass. ( C SM ,  Dec  10/90; NY Times, Dec 9/90) 

December  10: A White House commission, formed in July as a result of  the 
Hubble  Space Telescope problem  and  temporary  grounding of  the  Shuttle 
fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12-member panel 
emphasized a new system of  crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA 
missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommend- 
ed  a  greater pursuance of  scientific study  and  less  emphasis on  the  accom- 
plishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crew-assisted space 
flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of  the Space Shuttle; 
redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on 
life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. 

William Lenoir, head of NASA’s  space flight program, said that a heavy-lift 
rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also 
said that new  Space Station designs were underway, but would  be  similar to the 
original ones.  (WSJ, Dec 7/90;  Dec  11/90; NY Times, Dec  11/90; W Post, Dec 
11/90; H  Post, Dec 14/90; NASARelease 90-161) 

December  20:  The  selection of  12 research projects, under the  auspices of  the 
Earth Observations Commercialization Applications Program, for developing pri- 
vate sector applications of  space-based and airborne remote sensing technologies, 
were selected by NASA. The 12 projects would  lead to  1-year funding contracts 
and would identify and research new commercial products and services that might 
be developed from existing technology.  (NASA Release 90-164) 

December  26:  NASA  announced  its  Integrated  System  Preliminary  Design 
Review for Space Station Freedom was completed. Preliminary figures for June 
1990 showed Freedom’s weight to be  143,000 pounds lighter than the allocated 
limit of  512,OOO’pounds and  that  the housekeeping power limit of  45 kilowatts 
was exceeded by  15 kilowatts. A summer-long resources scrub reduced weight 
estimates by  130,000 pounds and  housekeeping power by  13 kilowatts. “What 
this means,” said Deputy Manager Marc Bensimon, “is that the design is malm- 
ing and converging.” (NASA Release 90- 165) 

During  December:   NASA  awarded  contracts  to  Centennial  Contractors, 
SPACEHAB, and Dyncorp. Centennial was given a one-year, $5 million con- 
tract  for  various minor  constructions, modifications, and  rehabilitation pro- 
jects  at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, SPACEHAB 

29 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER 1990 

received a  five-year, $1 84,236,000 contract for providing commercial mid- 
deck augmentation module  services: physical and  operational integration of 
the module and the experiments; power, cooling, data management; and crew 
training in six Space Shuttle flights at six-month intervals. Dyncorp procured 
a $30 million contract for technical services that included operation and main- 
tenance of  radar,  telecommunications, and  optical services. (NASA Release 
C90-gg; 90-157; W Times, Dec 4/90) 

*  Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the Marine Corps. He was 
both  an  astronaut  and  a  mission  specialist  and  planned  to  work  for  Boeing 
Aerospace. (NASA Release 90- 159) 

During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements and  several dis- 
appointments. The  Hubble  Space  Telescope was  successfully  deployed  from 
Space Shuttle Discovery in April but was discovered to have a spherical aberra- 
tion  that  prevented  the  most  distant  observations  for  which  it  was  designed. 
However,  it  began  unprecedented scientific work  in  spectroscopy, photometry, 
astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible from the ground. The 
telescope  also  sent back  impressive photographs from Orion’s  nebula  and  the 
giant Saturn storm by using computer image processing. 

The  Magellan  spacecraft began  detailed mapping  of  Venus  in  August,  the 
European Space Agency’s Ulysses spacecraft was launched in October by  Space 
Shuttle Discovery to  study the poles of  the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made 
its  first  gravity-assisted  pass  of  the  Earth  in  December.  Meanwhile, NASA 
Administrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect the best ideas on how to 
return to the Moon and go to Mars. 

Six  successful Shuttle missions  were  flown,  a  standdown  of  five  months 
because of  hydrogen  leaks  notwithstanding. Two  Department of  Defense pay- 
loads, a SYNCOM IV communications satellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and 
the  Ulysses spacecraft were deployed, and  the Long Duration Exposure Facility 
satellite was retrieved. The Astro-1 astronomy mission was also successfully com- 
pleted, though not to every scientist’s satisfaction. (NASA Release, 90-160) 

292 

Appendix A 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN SPACE 
FLIGHTS, 1986-1990 

293 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN  SPACE FLIGHTS, 1986 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator ( g )  

350.0 
327.0 
91.3 
28.5 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Jan.  12 
Space Shuttle 
Columbia 
( ST S d lC )  
3A 

Jan. 12 
RCA Satcom K-1 
3B 

Jan. 28 
Space Shuttle 
Challenger 
(STS-5lL) 

Objective: To launch RCA Satcom 
K-1 and to conduct experiments. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carry- 
ing satellite as well as experi- 
ments: Materials Science 
Laboratory-2 (MLS-2), Hitchhiker 
G-1 , Particle Analysis Cameras for 
the Shuttle (PACS), Capillary 
Pump Loop (CPL), Shuttle 
Environment Effects on Coated 
Mirrors (SEECM), 12 experiments 
flown on Get Away  Special (GAS) 
Bridge Assembly, additional GAS 
experiment, and Infrared Imaging 
Experiment (IR-E). Middeck pay- 
loads: Initial Blood Storage 
Experiment (IBSE), Comet Halley 
Active Monitoring Program 
(CHAMF’),  and 3 Space Science 
Student Involvement Program 
(SSIP) experiments. 
Weight: 12,708 lbs. 

Objective: To launch communica- 
tions satellite. Spacecraft Box- 
shaped, 67x84~6 0  inch main 
structure, threeaxis  stabilized, 
twin 280 square ft. solar panels 
deployed after launch. 
Weight at  launch  15,929 Ibs. 

Objective: To deployhaunch 
TDRS-B/IUS (Tracking and Data 
Relay Satellite/Inertial Upper 
Stage), deploy/retrieve the SPAR- 
TAN-203RIalley (Shuttle Pointed 
Autonomous Research Tool for 
Astronomy), and to conduct 
experiments. Spacecraft: Shuttle 
orbiter carrying satellites and 
experiments. Payloads include: 
Hughes Aircraft Company Fluid 
Dynamics Experiment (FDE), 
composed of  six experiments; sec- 
ond flight of  the Comet Halley 
Active Monitoring Program 
(CHAMP); the Phase Padtioning 
Experiment (FPE) to dissolve two 
polymer solutions in water to 

Remarks 

Twenty-fourth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS).Piloted 
by Robert L.  “Hoot” 
Gibson and Charles F. 
Bolden, Jr. Mission 
specialists FranMin R. 
Chang-Diaz, Steven A. 
Hawley, and George D. 
“Pinky” Nelson. 
Payload specialists 
Robert J. Cenker 
(RCA) and Congres- 
sman C .  William “Bill” 
Nelson, first member of 
U.S.  House of  Rep- 
resentatives in space. 
Columbia launched 
from KSC at 6 5 5  a.m. 
EST on Jan. 18. 
Mission  duration: 
6 days, 2 hrs, 4 min. 

35,794.0 
35,781.0 
1,436.2 
0.0 

Second in series of 
satellites for RCA 
American  Communi- 
cations, Inc.Dep1oye.d 
from Columbia. 

N/A 

Challenger failed 73 sec- 
onds into the mission 

291 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Q u a t o r  (g) 

Remarks 

observe separation; six experi- 
ments for the Teacher in Space, 
including hydrophonics, magnet- 
ism, Newton’s laws, effervescence, 
chromatography, and simple 
machines; and three Shuttle 
Student Involvement Program 
(SSIP) experiments. 

Objective: Development of space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Achieved orbit. 

Objective: Development of  space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Objective: Development of  space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Objective: Development of  space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Objective: Development of space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacerraft: Not announced. 

719 
212 
93.9 
39.1 

611 
223 
92.9 
22.8 

Achieved orbit. 

Achieved orbit. 

Crew consisted of 
Leonid Kizim and 
Vladimir Solovyov. 
Docked with M I R  space 
station on May 5-6 and 
transferred to Salyut 7 
complex. Transferred 
from Salyut 7 back to 
M I R  on Jun. 25-26. 
Flight h e :  125 days, 
1 h r . lm i n .  

Launched by  NASA for 
DoDs Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI) space 
intercept and collision 
test. Destroyed. 

Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI) space 
intercept and collision 
test. Destroyed. 

Feb. 9 
Defense 
14A 
Atlas H 

Feb.  9 
Defense 
14E 

Feb.  9 
Defense 
14F 

Feb. 9 
Defense 
14H 

Mar.  13 
SOYUZ T-15 
USSR 
1986-022A 

Sept. 5 
Defense 
69A 
Delta 180 

Sept. 5 
Defense 
69B 

298 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Sept. 17 
NOAA 10 
73A 
Atlas E 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To  launch spacecraft 
into sun-synchronous orbit to 
accomplish operational mission 
requirements. Spacecraft Launch 
configuration: 4.9m high, 1.9m in 
diameter. Weight: 1,712 kg. 

Nov.  14 
Polar Bear 
88A 
scout 

Objective: To place Air Force 
P87-1 satellite into 
orhit to achieve mission objec- 
tives. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 
Weight: 270 Ibs. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (g) 

823 
804 
101.2 
38.7 

,015 
960 
104.9 
89.6 

Dec. 5 
Fltsatcom 7 
96A 
Atlas-Centaur 

Objective: To  launch satellite into 
planned geostationary position. 
Spacecraft Hexagonal, composed 
of payload and spacecraft module; 
22.7 f t  high. Provides 1 E W  and 
23 UHF communications chan- 
nels. Weight at IiftoE 5,073 lbs. 
Weight in orbit: 2,488 lbs. 

36,024 
35,551 
1,436.2 
5.2 

Remarks 

Thud in advanced 
Tiros-N series. Funded 
by  National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric 
Administration 
(NOAA) and launched 
by NASA. Also 
onboard Search and 
Rescue instruments. 

Launched by  NASA for 
Au  Force. Recon- 
ditioned satellite that 
hung for several years 
in National Air and 
Space Museum. 
Experiments to  study 
radio interference 
caused by Aurora 
Borealis, or Northern 
Lights. 

Launched by  NASA for 
Navy; to serve DoD. 

299 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN SPACE FLIGHTS, 1987 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

~~ 

Launch Date (GMT), 
~ 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Feb. 5 
S O ~ U Z  TM-2 
USSR 
1987-013A 

Feb.  12 
Defense 
15A 
Titan 3B 

Feb. 26 
GOES 7 
22A 
Delta  179 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (g) 

Objective: Development of  space- 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

35,796 
35,783 
1,436.3 
0.1 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
planned geostationary position. 
Spacecraft: Cylindrical, 2.2m  in 
diameter and 4.5m long from top 
of  S-band omnidirectional antenna 
mast to bottom of apogee boost 
motor. Apogee boost motor eject- 
ed after synchronous orbit 
achieved. Weight at liftoff: 840 kg. 
Weight in geostationary position: 
456 kg. 

Mar. 20 
Palapa B-2P 
29A 
Delta  182 

Objective: To  launch communica- 
tions satellite. Spacecraft: Drum- 
shaped, telescoping cylinder, with 
antennas deployed 22.1  f t  high, 
and 7 f t  in diameter. Weight at 
liftoff: 7,515 lbs. Weight in geo- 
synchronous orbit:  1,437 ibs. 

35,788 
35,788 
1,436.2 
0.0 

Remarks 

Crew consisted of 
Yuriy Romanenko and 
Aleksandr Laveykin. 
Docked with MIR 
space station. 
Romanenko established 
long-distance stay in 
space record of  326 
days. Flight time:  174 
days, 3 hrs, 26 min. 

Achieved orbit 

Eighth in series of 
operational environ- 
ment monitoring satel- 
lites. Launched by 
NASA for National 
Oceanic and Atmos- 
pheric Administration 
(NOAA). Turned over 
to NOAA Mar.  25  after 
successful apogee 
motor f i e  Feb. 27. 
Spacecraft joins GOES 
6 (WEST) as GOES 7 
(EAST) part of  a two- 
satellite operational 
system. 

Fifth in series of 
Indonesian communi- 
cations satellites. 
Launched by  NASA for 
Republic of  Indonesia. 
Will replace Palapa B2 
launched in Feb.  1984 
by  orbiter Challenger, 
which malfunctioned. 
Palapa B-2P to join 
Palapa B1 orbited by 
Shuttle in Jun.  1983. 
Part of  two-satellite 
system providing ser- 
vice to more than 
13,000 islands. 

303 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (9 

Objective: Development of space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Remarks 

Achieved orbit. 

Objective: To  launch meteorologi- 
cal observation satellite into 
planned orbit  Spacecraft: Same 
basic configuration as DMSP F-6. 
Weight:  1,421 kg. 

857 
Third satellite in Block 
835 
5D-2 series. Data also 
used by National 
101.9 
98.8  Oceanic and Atmos- 
pheric Administration 
(NOAA). 

Crew consisted of 
AleksandrViktorenko, 
Aleksandr Aleksandrov, 
and Mohammed Faris. 
Docked with Mir space 
station. Aleksandrov 
(first Bulgarian in 
space) remained in 
MIR  160 days; 
returned with Yuriy 
Romanenko. 
V i torenko   and Faris 
returned Jul. 30 in 
S o y u  TM-2, with 
Aleksandr Laveykin, 
who experienced med- 
ical problems. Faris 
first Syrian in  space. 
Flight time: 160 days, 7 
hrs,  16 min. 

Objective: To place satellite into 
orbit to achieve Navy  objectives. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Objective: To place satellite into 
orbit to achieve Navy objectives. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

1,175 
1,017 
107.2 
90.3 

First of  two Transit 
satellites launched by 
Scout vehicle. 
Launched  by  NASA for 
DoD. 

Second of  two Transit 
1,181 
1,014 
satellites launched by 
107.2  NASA for DoD on 
same Scout. 
90.3 

Objective: Development of  space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Achieved orbit. 

May  15 
Defense 
43A 
Atlas H 

Jun. 20 
-8 
DMSP F 
53A 
Atlas E 

Jul. 22 
Soyuz TM-3 
USSR 
1987-063A 

Sep.  16 
Defense 
80A 
scou t  

Sep. 16 
Defense 
80B 

Oct. 26 
Defense 
90A 
Titan  34D 

304 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period  (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (3 

Remarks 

Nov. 29 
Defense 
97A 
Titan  34D 

Dec. 21 
SOYUZ TM-4 
USSR 
1987- 104A 

Objective: Development of  space- 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Achieved orbit. 

Crew consisted of 
Vladimir Titov, Musa 
Manarov, and Anatoliy 
Levchenko. Docked 
with MIR space station. 
Crew of  Yuriy 
Romanenko, Aleksandr 
Aleksandrov, and 
Anatoliy Levchenko 
returned Dec.  29 in 
Soyuz TM-3. At  end of 
1987 still docked with 
MIR. Flight time:  180 
days, 5 hrs 

305 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN SPACE FLIGHTS, 1988 

APPENDM A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (krn), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (9) 

Feb. 2 
DMSP F-9 
6A 
Atlas E 

Feb. 8 
8A 
DoD-2 
Delta 181 

Mar. 25 
San Marco D/L 
26A 
scou t  

826 
815 
101.3 
98.7 

333 
223 
90.1 
28.6 

615 
263 
93.4 
3.0 

Objective: To launch meteorologi- 
cal observation satellite into plan- 
ned orbit. Spacecraft Same basic 
configuration as DMSP F-6. 
Weight: 1,421 kg. 

Objective: To demonstrate effec- 
tive ways to discriminate between 
decoys and reentry vehicles. 
Spacecraft Not  announced. 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
low-eaah orbit to explore relation- 
ship between solar activity and 
meteorological phenomena by 
studying dynamic processes 
occurring in tioposphere, stratos- 
phere, and thermosphere. 
Spacecraft: Spherical, 96.5  cm in 
diameter with  four canted 48 cm 
monopole antennas for telemetry 
and command. Weight:  237 kg. 

Apr.  25 
SOOS-3 
33D 
scou t  

Objective: To place Navy satellite 
into orbit to achieve Navy objec- 
tives. Spacecraft Not  announced. 
Weight:  141 lbs. 

Not 
announced 

Remarks 

Achieved orbit. 

Launched  by  NASA for 
Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI). Suc- 
cessful test  of  technolo- 
gy. Reentered Mar.  1. 

Launched by NASA as 
joint research mission 
with  Italian Space 
Commission. Launch 
took place  from San 
Marino Range. Re- 
entered over central 
Africa and was con- 
sumed Dec. 6. 

Launched  by  NASA for 
Navy.  Stacked Oscar 
on  Scout (SOOS)  part 
of  Navy’s long-estab- 
lished continuous all- 
weather global naviga- 
tion  system. 

Apr. 25 
SOOS-3 
33E 
scou t  

Jun. 7 
SOYUZ TM-5 
USSR 
1988-048A 

Objective: To place Navy  satellite 
into orbit to achieve Navy objec- 
tives. Spacecraft Not announced. 
Weight: 141 lbs. 

Not 
announced 

Second of  two satellites 
launched by  NASA for 
Navy. 

Crew consisted of 
Viktor Savinykh, 
Anatoly Solovyev, and 
Aleksandr Aleksandrov. 
Docked with Mir  space 
station. Crew returned 
Jun.  17 in Soyuz TM-4. 
Flight time: 9 days, 20 
hrs, 13 min. 

309 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDE  A 

~ 

Launch Date (GMT), 
~ 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (.) 

Remarks 

Objwtive: To place Navy satellie 
into orbit to achieve Navy objec- 
tives. Spacecraft Cylindrical main 
body, with four solar panels 
extending from main body; 
extendable boom  from central part 
of  satellite. Weight:  375.8 lbs. 

1,199  Third  in series of 
improved Transit navi- 
1,150 
gation satellites 
108.9 
launched by  NASA for 
90.0 
Navy. 

Objective: To place Navy  sate%@ 
into orbit to achieve Navy objec- 
tives. Spacecraft Not announced. 
Weight: 141 lbs. 

1,176  Launched  by  NASAfor 
1,032  Navy  into polar orbit. 
Stacked Oscar on Scout 
107.4 
(SOOS). 
90.0 

Objective: To place Navy  satellite 
into orbit to achieve Navy objec- 
tives. Spacecraft: Not announced. 
Weight:  141 lbs. 

Second of  two satellites 
1,178 
1,032 
launched by  NASA for 
107.4  Navy. 
90.0 

Crew consisted of 
Vladimir Lyakhov, 
Valeriy Polyakov,  and 
Abdul Mohmad. 
Docked with MIR 
space station. Mohmad 
first Afghan  in  space. 
Crew returned Sep. 7  in 
Soyuz TM-5. Flight 
time: 8 days,  19 hrs,  27 
min. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved  orbit. 

Jun.  16 
NOVA-II 
52A 
scou t  

Aug. 25 
SOOS-4 
74A 
scou t  

Aug.  25 
SOOS-4 
74B 
scou t  

Aug.  29 
SOYUZ TM-6 
USSR 
1988-075A 

Sep. 2 
DoD 
77A 
Titan  34D 

Sep. 5 
DoD 
78A 
Titan 2 

3 10 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Sep. 24 
89A 
NOAA- 1 1 
Atlas-E 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
sun-synchronous orbit. 
Spacecraft Launch consguration 
491 cm high,  188 cm in diameter. 
Weight: 1,712 kg. Weight  in orbit: 
1,038 kg. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (g) 

863845 
102.0 
98.9 

Sep. 29 
Space Shuttle 
Discovery 
(STS-26) 
91A 

336 
306 
91.0 
28.5 

, 

Objective: To deploy Tracking and 
Data Relay Satellite-C/lnertial 
Upper StageSpacecraft Shuttle 
orbiter carrying satellite as well as 
experiments: Automated 
Directional Solidification Furnace 
(ADSF), Aggregation of  Red 
Blood Cells (ARC), Earth Limb 
Radiance Experiment (ELRAD), 
Isoelectric Focusing Experiment 
(IFE), Infrared Communication 
Flight Experiment (IRCFE), 
Mesoscale Lightning Experiment 
(MLE), Protein Crystal Growth 
(PCG), Phased Partitioning 
Experiment (PPE), and Physical 
Vapor Transport of Organic Solids 
(PVTOS). Additionally, 3 Shuttle 
Student Involvement Project 
(SSIP) experiments. 
Weight:  38,774 Ibs. 

Remarks 

Fourth of advanced 
TIROS-N  spacecraft. 
Funded by National 
Oceanic and Atmos- 
pheric Administration 
(NOAA) and launched 
by NASA. To replace 
NOAA-9 as afternoon 
satellite in NOAAs 
two-polar-satellite sys- 
tem. Also onboard 
Search and Rescue 
instruments. 

Twenty-sixth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). First 
since Challenger acci- 
dent of  Jan. 28,  1986. 
Piloted by  Frederick H. 
Hauck  and Richard 0. 
Covey. Mission spe- 
cialists John M. 
Lounge, David C. 
Hilmers, and George D. 
Nelson. Discovery 
launched from KSC at 
11:37 a.m.  EDT. 
Satellite deployed and 
experiments conducted. 
Shuttle landed at 
Edwards AFB,  CA, at 
12:37 p.m. EDT on 
Oct. 3. Mission  dura- 
tion: 4 days,  l hr. 

311  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDM A 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To deliver TDRS 
satellite to  stationary geosynchro- 
nous orbit. Spacecraft: Three-axis 
stabilized, momentum-biased 
configuration with two sun-on- 
ented solar panels attached. 
TDRS measures 57.2 f t  tip-to-tip 
of  deployed solar panels. TDRS 
composed of  3 modules:  (1) 
equipment module houses atti- 
tude control, electrical power, 
propulsion, telemetry, tracking, 
and command subsystems; (2) 
payload module consists of pro- 
cessing and frequency-generation 
equipment; and  (3) antenna mod- 
ule supports dual deployable and 
fixed antennas, multiple-access 
array, and remainder of  telecom- 
munications hardware. Weight at 
launch, including Inertial Upper 
State (IUS) booster: 37,699 lbs. 
Weight in orbit: 4,637 lbs. 

Objective: Development of 
spaceflight techniques and tech- 
nology. Spacecraft Not 
announced. 

Apogee and 
Perigee 0, 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Eauator (9 

Remarks 

35,803 
35,779 
1436.3 
0.2 

Third in series. 
Launched from Shuttle 
orbiter Discovery. 
Completes two-satellite 
constellation, located a t  
171'  W. Leased by 
NASA from Contin- 
ental Telephone 
Company (CONTEL). 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Crew consisted of 
Aleksandr Volkov, 
Sergey Krkalev, and 
Jean-Loup Chretien. 
Docked with MIR 
space station. Volkov 
and Krikalev in orbit at 
end of  1988. Soyuz 
TM-6 returned with 
Chretien, Vladimir 
Titov, and Musa 
Manarov. Titov and 
Manarov completed 
366-day mission on 
Dec. 21. Flight time: 
151 days,  11 hrs. 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Sep. 29 
TDRS 3 
91B 

Nov.  6 
DoD 
99A 
Titan  34D 

Nov.  26 
SOYUZ  TM-7 
USSR 
1988-104A 

312 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To deliver TDRS 
satellite to stationary geosynchro- 
nous orbit. Spacecraft Three-axis 
stabilized, momentum-biased 
configuration with two sun-ori- 
ented solar panels attached. 
TDRS measures 57.2 ft tip-to-tip 
of  deployed solar panels. TDRS 
composed of 3 modules: (1) 
equipment module houses atti- 
tude control, electrical power, 
propulsion, telemetry, tracking, 
and command subsystems; (2) 
payload module consists of  pro- 
cessing and frequency-generation 
equipment; and (3) antenna mod- 
ule supports dual deployable and 
fixed antennas, multiple-access 
array, and remainder of  telecom- 
munications hardware. Weight at 
launch, including Inertial Upper 
State (IUS) booster: 37,699 lbs. 
Weight in orbit: 4,637 lbs. 

Objective: Development of 
spaceflight techniques and tech- 
nology. Spacecraft: Not 
announced. 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Sep. 29  
TDRS 3 
91B 

Nov. 6 
DoD 
99A 
Titan  34D 

Nov. 26 
SOYUZ TM-7 
USSR 
1988- 104A 

Apogee and 
Perigee (!-an), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (Q) 

Remarks 

35,803 
35,779 
1436.3 
0.2 

Third in  series. 
Launched from Shuttle 
orbiter Discovery. 
Completes two-satellite 
constellation, located  at 
171'  W.  Leased by 
NASA from Contin- 
ental Telephone 
Company (CONTEL). 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Crew consisted of 
Aleksandr Volkov, 
Sergey Krikalev, and 
Jean-Loup Chretien. 
Docked with MIR 
space station. Vokov 
and Krikalev  in orbit at 
end of  1988. Soyuz 
TM-6 returned with 
Chretien, Vladimir 
Titov, and Musa 
Manarov. Titov and 
Manarov completed 
366-day mission on 
Dec.  21. Flight time: 
151 days,  11 hrs. 

313 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDJX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Dec. 2 
Space Shuttle 
Atlantis 
106A 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To launch classified 
DoD Payload. Spacecraft: Shuttle 
orbiter carrying DoD satellite. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (9 

453 
4.43 
93.6 
57.0 

Remarks 

Twenty-seventh flight 
of  Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by  Robert "Hoot" 
Gibson and Guy 
Gardner. Mission  spe- 
cialists Mike Mullane, 
Jerry Ross, and Bill 
Shepherd. Atlantis 
launched from KSC at 
9:30 a.m. EST.  Satellite 
deployed. Shuttle land- 
ed at Edwards AFB, 
CA, at 3:37 p.m. PST 
on Dec. 6 .  
Mission duration: 4 
days, 9 hrs, 6 min. 

Dee. 2 
DoD 
106B 

Objective: Development of 
spaceflight techniques and tech- 
nology. Spacecraft: Not 
announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

314 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN SPACE FLIGHTS, 1989 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Feb. 14 
GPS (Block IIR) 
13A 
Delta II 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To launch spacecraft 
into orbit. Spacecraft Not 
announced. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Eauator (9 

20,346 
20,018 
718.0 
55.1 

Mar.  13 
Space Shuttle 
Discovery 
(STS-29) 
21A 

337 
305 
91.0 
28.5 

Objective: To deploy Tracking and 
Data Relay Satellite (TDRS)-D. 
Spacecraft Shuttle orbiter cany- 
ing satellite as well as experi- 
ments: Orbiter Experiments 
Autonomous Supporting 
Instrumentation System (OASIS- 
I), Space Station Heat Pipe 
Advanced Radiator Element 
(SHARE), Air Force Maui Optical 
Systems (AMOS) Calibration 
Test, Chromosome and Plant Cell 
Division in Space Experiment 
(CHROMEX), IMAX camera, 
Protein Crystal Growth (PGC), 
and two Shuttle Student 
Involvement Project (SSIP) exper- 
iments. Weight, including spclce- 
craft and experiments: 263,289 
lbs. 

Remarks 

First in series of Block 
II operational 
NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning Satellites 
(GPS) launched aboard 
newest Air Force 
expendable launch 
vehicle, Delta 11. 
Operational system to 
be  composed of  21 
satellites in 6 orbital 
planes. 

Twenty-eighth  flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by  Michael L. Coats 
and John E. Blaha. 
Mission specialists 
James P.  Bagian, James 
F.  Buchli, and Robert 
C.  Springer. Discovery 
launched from KSC at 
9:57 a.m.  EST. Satellite 
successfully deployed 
and experiments con- 
ducted. Shuttle landed 
at Edwards AFB, CA, 
at 9:36 a.m. EST on 
Mar.  18. Mission dura- 
tion: 4 days, 23  hrs, 39  
min. 

317 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To deliver Tracking and 
Data Relay System (TDRS) satel- 
lite into geosynchronous orbit. 
Spacecraft: Three-axis stabilized, 
momentum-biased configuration 
with two sun-oriented solar panels 
attached. TDRS measures 57.2 f t  
tip-to-tip of  deployed solar panels. 
TDRS composed of 3 modules: 
(1) equipment module houses atti- 
tude control, electrical power, 
propulsion, telemetry, tracking, 
and command subsystems; (2) 
payload module consists of  pro- 
cessing and frequency-generation 
equipment; and (3) antenna mod- 
ule supports dual deployable and 
f i e d  antennas, multiple-access 
array, and remainder of  telecom- 
munications hardware. 
Weight at launch, including 
Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) boost- 
er: 43,212 Ibs 

Objective: DoD space test. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Objective: To deploy Magellan 
spacecraft. Spacecraft Shuttle 
orbiter carrying satellite as well as 
experiments: Fluids Experiment 
Apparatus (FEA), Mesoscale 
Lightning Experiment (MLE),  and 
Air Force Maui Optical Site 
(AMOS) Calibration Test. 
Weight,  including spacecraft and 
experiments: 260,878 Ibs. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Eauator P) 

499 
487 
94.5 
47.7 

Remarks 

Fourth in series. 
Launched  from Shuttle 
Discovery. Spacecraft 
replaced partially 
degraded TDRS 1 at 
41'  W,  and TDRS 1 
moved to 79" W,  serv- 
ing temporarily as in- 
orbit spare. Leased by 
NASA from 
Continental Telephone 
Company (CONTEL). 

499  USA 36  (also known as 
487  Delta 183), experimen- 
tal missile-hunting 
94.5 
satellite equipped with 
47.7 
laser radar, 7  video 
imaging cameras, and 
infrared imager. 

Twenty-ninth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by David M. Walker and 
Ronald J. Grabe. Mis- 
sion specialists Noman  
E. Thagard, Mary L. 
Cleave, and Mark C. 
Lee. Atlantis launched at 
2 4 7  p.m. EDT after sev- 
eral countdown holds. 
Satellite deployed and 
experiments conducted. 
Shuttle landed at 
Edwards AFB, CA, at 
3:43 p.m.  EDT on May 
8. Mission duration: 4 
days, 57 minutes. 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mar.  13 
TDRS 4 
21B 

Mar. 24 
USA 36 
26A 
Delta 

May 4 
Space Shuttle 
Atlantis 
(STS-30) 
33A 

318 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

May  4 
Space Shuttle 
Atlantis 
(STS-30) 
33A 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (*) 

33 1 
297 
90.8 
28.9 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To deploy Magellan 
spacecraft. Spacecraft Shuttle 
orbiter carrying satellite as well as 
experiments: Fluids Experiment 
Apparatus (FEA), Mesoscale 
Lightning Experiment (MLE), and 
Air Force Maui Optical Site 
(AMOS) Calibration Test. Weight, 
including spacecraft and experi- 
ments: 260,878 lbs. 

May 4 
Magellan 
33B 

Objective: To place satellite carry-  Trans- 
ing radar sensor into orbit around  Venus  tra- 
Venus to obtain data on planetary  jectory. 
surface. Spacecraft: Three-axis 
stabilized. Length 6.4m; solar pan- 
els with span of  9.2 m.  Composed 
of  satellite structure, thermal con- 
trol, power, attitude control, 
propulsion, command data and 
storage, and telecommunications 
subsystems. Weight, incuding 
spacecraft and Inertial Upper State 
( I U S )  booster: 45,748 lbs. 

Remarks 

Twenty-ninth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by  David M.  Walker 
and Ronald  J.  Grabe. 
Mission specialists 
Norman E. Thagard, 
Mary L. Cleave, and 
Mark C. Lee. Atlantis 
launched at 2:47 p.m. 
EDT after several 
countdown holds. 
Satellite deployed and 
experiments conducted. 
Shuttle landed at 
Edwards AFB, CA, at 
3:43  p.m. EDT on May 
8. Mission duration: 4 
days, 57 minutes. 

Launched from Shuttle 
Atlantis.  Spacecraft 
placed on planned  tra- 
jectory for rendezvous 
and orbit with Venus on 
Aug.  10, 1990. 

May  10 
USA 37 
35A 

Objective: Not  announced. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Jun.  10 
GPS (Block IIR) 
44A 
Delta II 

Objective: To launch spacecraft 
into orbit. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Second in series of 
20,401 
19,962  Block  I1 operational 
718.0  NAVSTAR Global 
54.7 
Positioning Satellites 
(GPS) launched by 
Delta 11. Completed 
system will have 21 
operational and three 
spare satellites. Also 
known as USA 38. 

3 19 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APP3ENDIX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator $) 

Remarks 

Jun.  14 
USA 39 
46A 
Titan 

Objective: To launch upgraded 
Not 
Defense Support Program satellite  announced 
(DSP-1). Spacecraft Not 
announced. 

First  launch of Titan 4 
expendable launch 
vehicle. 

Objective: DoD mission 
Aug. 8 
Space Shuttle 
payload/cargo not announced. 
Columbia (STS-28)  Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carry- 
ing classified DoD payload/cargo. 
61A 
Six Detailed Supplementary 
Objectives @SOs) completed, 
including those associated with 
Extended Duration Orbiter (EDO) 
Medical Program. Weight: Not 
announced. 

317 
314 
90.5 
56.9 

Thirtieth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by  Brewster Shaw and 
Richard Richards. 
Mission  specialists 
James Adamson, David 
Leestma, and Mark 
Brown. Columbia 
launched  from KSC at 
8:37 a.m. EDT.  Shuttle 
landed at Edwards 
AFB, CA, at 9:38  EDT 
on Aug.  13. Mission 
duration: 5 days, 1 
hour. 

Objective: Not announced. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Objective: Not announced. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
orbit. Spacecraft: Not announced. 

20,252 
20,111 
718.0 
55.0 

Third in series of 21 
Block I1 operational 
NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning Satellites 
(GPS) launched  aboard 
Delta II expendable 
launch vehicle. Also 
known as USA 42. 

Objective: Not announced. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Aug.  8 
USA 4 0  
61B 

Aug.  8 
USA 41 
61C 

Aug.  18 
GPS (Block IIR) 
64A 
Delta I1 

Sep. 4 
USA 43 
69A 
Titan  3 

320 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period  (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (") 

Remarks 

Sep. 4 
USA 43 
69A 
Titan 3 

Sep. 4 
USA 44 
69B 

Sep. 5 
Soyuz TM-8 
USSR 
1989-071A 

Sep. 6 
USA 45 
72A 
Titan 2 

Sep. 25 
FltSatCom F-8 
77A 
Atlas Centaur 68 

Objective: Not announced. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Objective: Not announced. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved orbit. 

Crew consisted  of 
Aleksandr Viktorenko 
and Aleksandr 
Serebrov. Docked with 
MIR  space station. 
Viktorenko and 
Serebrov returned Feb. 
9 ,  1990, in Soyuz TM- 
8. Flight time:  166 
days, 6 hrs. 

Objective: Not  announced. 
Spacecraft Not  announced. 

Not 
announced 

Achieved  orbit. 

Objective: To launch Navy  corn- 
munications satellite into geosyn- 
chronous transfer orbit. 
Spacecraft Body 22.8  f t  high and 
8 ft  in diameter. Parabolic antenna 
16 f t  in diameter with 80-inch 
solid center surrounded by  wire 
mesh  screen, 13.5-ft helical 
receiving antenna, 13 inches in 
diameter at base, mounted outside 
edge of  transit antenna dish. Once 
in or bit, folded screen is 
deployed. Weight, going into orbit, 
with apogee kick motor: 5,100 lbs. 

35,799 
35,776 
1,436.2 
4.8 

Sixth, and last, in  series 
of  geosynchronous 
satellites. Launched by 
NASA/industry  team 
for Navy. Last  in 
NASA inventory  of 
Atlas Centaur rockets. 
Part of  worldwide 
Navy, Air Force,  and 
DoD communications 
system. Also known  as 
USA 46. 

321 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (") 

Remarks 

Oct. 18 
Space Shuttle 
Atlantis 
(STS-34) 
84A 

Objective: To  launch GaUeo 
spacecraft toward rendezvous with 
Jupiter. Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter 
carrying spacecraft with Inertial 
Upper Stage (IUS) booster with 
additional experiments: Shuttle 
Solar Backscatter Ultra-Violet 
(SSBUV) Instrument, Growth 
Hormone Concentration and 
Distribution (GHCD) in Plants, 
Polymer Morphology (PM) 
Experiment, Mesoscale Lightning 
Experiment (MLE), Sensor 
Technology (STEX) Experiment, 
Air Force Maui Optical Site 
(AMOS) Calibration Test, IMAX 
camera, and  1 Shuttle Student 
Involvement Project (SSP). 
Weight, including space probe and 
experiments (not includmg 
Shuttle): 46,009 lbs. 

160  Th i r ty - fh t  flight of 
Space Transportation 
160 
System (STS). Piloted 
90  
by Donald E. Williams 
34.3 
and Michael J .  
McCulley. Mission spe- 
cialists Shannon W. 
Lucid, Franklin R. 
Chang-Diaz, and Ellen 
S .  Baker. Atlantis 
launched from KSC at 
12:54 p.m. EDT. 
Shuttle landed at 
Edwards AFB, CA, at 
12:33 p.m. EDT on 
Oct. 23. Mission dura- 
tion  : 4 days, 23 hrs, 39 
min. 

Launched  from Shuttle 
Atlantis. Planned 
arrival at Jupiterin 
December  1995. 

Objective: To  launch spacecraft  Trans- 
Jupiter tra- 
into trajectory toward Jupiter to 
allow close-range studies over 
jectory. 
period of  almost two years. 
Spacecraft Composed of three 
segments: (1) probe, weighing 355 
kg  (including 28 kg of  scientific 
instruments), includes heat shield, 
2.5-m  parachute, six instruments 
together with control and data sys- 
tem, radio-relay transmitter, and 
other supporting equipment; (2) 
spinning main section includes 
propulsionmodule, c om u n i c a -  
tions antennas, main cornputen, 
and most support systems; and  (3) 
fmal segment carries field and par- 
ticle instruments. 
Weight of  orbiter (second and 
third segments): 2,668 kg (inclnd- 
ing  103 kg of  science instruments 
and 935 kg of propellant). 

Oct.  18 
Galileo 
84B 

322 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Oct. 21 
Objective: To launch satellite into 
GPS (Block IIR)  orbit. spacecraft: Not  announced. 
85A 
Delta 11 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (g) 

Remarks 

Fourth in series of 
20,283 
Block II operational 
20,079 
717.9  NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning Satellites 
54.7 
(GPS). Also known as 
USA 47. 

Nov.  18 
COBE 
89A 
Delta 5920 

895 
886 
102.8 
99.0 

Objective: To launch satellite to 
measure diffuse infrared radiation 
(cosmic background). Spacecraft: 
Rotating three-axis stabilized, 
length 7.2 m (stowed) and 27.5 m 
with solar panels deployed in 
orbit. Carries Differential 
Microwave Radiometer (DMR), 
Far Infrared Absolute 
Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), and 
Diffuse Infrared Background 
Experiment (DIRBE). 
Weight:  2,206 kg. 

Objective: Not announced. 
Nov.  23 
Space Shuttle 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter cany- 
Discovery  (STS-33)  ing unannounced DoD satellite. 
90A 

Not 
announced 

Nov. 23 
DoD 
90B 

Dec.  11 
GPS (Block IIR) 
97A 
Delta II 

Objective: Not  announced. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
orbit. Spacecraft Not announced. 

Cosmic Background 
Explorer (COBE) suc- 
cessfully launched 
using  184th, and last, 
NASA-owned Delta. 
COBE is 65th 
Explorer-class mission. 
Launched  from 
Vandenberg AFB, CA. 
Mission life: one year 
planned, primary mis- 
sion; one year planned, 
extended mission. 

Thirty-second flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by  Frederick D. 
Gregory and John E. 
Blaha. Mission special- 
ists Kathryn C. 
Thomton, F.  Story 
Musgrave, and Manely 
L.  “Sonny” Carter. 
Discovery launched 
from KSC at 7:23 p.m. 
EST on Nov. 22. 
Shuttle landed at 
Edwards AFB, CA, at 
7:31 p.m. EST on Nov. 
27. Mission duration: 5 
days, 7 min. 

Fifth in series of Block 
11 operational Global 
Positioning Satellites 
(GPS) launched by Air 
Force Delta II. Also 
known  as USA 49. 

323 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN  SPACE FLIGHTS, 1990 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Jan.  1 
Skynet 4A 
1 A  
Titan 3 

Jan.  1 
JCSAT 2 
1B 

Jan. 9 
Space Shuttle 
Columbia 
(STS-32) 
2A 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (") 

35,782 
33,685 
1,382.5 
3.4 

7,191 
821 
180.1 
0.3 

342 
316 
90.8 
28.4 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To launch satellite. 
Spacecraft Not  announced. 
Weight: 3,320 lbs. 

Objective: To launch satellite. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 
Weight: 14,700 lbs. 

Objective: To launch Syncom IV- 
5, retrieve Long Duration 
Exposure Facility (LDEF), and 
conduct scientific and medical 
experiments while in weightless 
environment. Spacecraft Shuttle 
orbiter carrying satellite as well as 
middeck experiments: American 
Flight Echocardiograph (AFE), 
Characterization of Neurospora 
Circadian Rhythms (CNCR), 
Fluids Experiment Apparatus 
(FEA), LatitudeLongitude 
Locator (L3), Protein Crystal 
Growth (PCG), IMAX camera, 
Mesoscale Lightning Experiment 
(MLE), and Air Force Maui 
Optical Site (AMOS) Calibration 
Test. Weight of  orbiter and cargo 
at SRB ignition: 256,670 lbs. 

Remarks 

Commercial launch by 
M a ~ t i n  Marietta for 
British Ministry of 
Defence. 

Second satellite in dual 
payload Titan 3  launch. 
Satellite owned by 
Japanese Communica- 
tions Satellite Co. 

Thirty-third flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by  Daniel C. 
Brandenstein and 
James D. Wetherbee. 
Mission specialists 
Bonnie J.  Dunbar, 
Marsha S .  Ivins, and G. 
David Low. Columbia 
launched from KSC at 
7:35 a.m. EST. After 
deploying Syncom IV- 
5, Columbia crew 
retrieved Long 
Duration Exposure 
Facility (LDEF) 
(launched by  STS41C  
in April 1984) at  10:16 
a.m. EST on Jan.  11. 
After detailed photo- 
graphic survey, satellite 
berthed in cargo bay 
4.5 hrs later. Shuttle 
landed at Edwards 
AFB, CA, at  1:35 a.m. 
PST on Jan. 20. 
Landing delayed one 
day because of  ground 
fog at landing site. 
Mission duration: 10 
days, 21 hrs, making 
this longest Shuttle 
flight to date. 

321 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Jan. 9 
Syncom IV-5 
(Leasat-5) 
2B 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (Q) 

Remarks 

Objective: To  launch satellite into 
transfer orbit. 
Spacecraft: Cylindrical, telescop- 
ing satellite, 15 f t  long, 13 f t  in 
diameter. Weight  in cargo bay: 
17,000 lbs. Weight of satellite in 
orbit: 3,060 lbs. 

36,363 
34,858 
1,427.1 
1.4 

Fourth operational 
satellite in Leasat sys- 
tem. Launched  from 
Shuttle Columbia for 
Navy.  Replacement for 
FltSatCom spacecraft. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft. Not announced. 

20,088 
718.0 
54.6 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 
Weight: 20,275 lbs. 

549 
532 
95.3 
43 

470 
464 
93.8 
43.1 

Sixth navigation satel- 
lite in  series. Global 
Positioning Satellite 
(GPS). 

Crew consisted of 
Anatoliy Solovyov and 
Aleksandr Balandm. 
Docked with MIR 
space station. Crew 
returned Aug.  9  in 
Soyuz TM-9. Flight 
time:  178 days, 22 hrs, 
19 min. 

Low-power 
Atmospheric 
Compensation 
Experiment (LACE) 
satellite. Part of  Strategic 
Defense Initiative (SDI) 
Program. 

Relay Mirror 
Experiment (RNLE) 
satellite. Part of  Strategic 
Defense Initiative (SDI) 
program testing. 

Jan.  24 
USA-50 
SA 

Feb.  11 
SOYUZ TM-9 
USSR 
1990-014A 

Feb.  14 
USA-5 1 
15A 
Delta I1 

Feb.  14  
USA-52 
15B 

328 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Feb. 28 
Space Shuttle 
Atlantis 
(STS-36) 
19A 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Objective: To launch DoD pay- 
load. Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter 
carrying unannounced satellite. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (") 

264 
248 
89.4 
61.9 

Remarks 

Thirty-fourth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by John 0. Creighton 
and John H. Casper. 
Mission specialists 
David C. H ih e r s ,  
Richard M. Mullane, 
and Pierre J. Thout. 
Atlantis launched from 
KSC at 2:50  a.m. EST. 
Shuttle landed at 
Edwards AFB, CA, at 
10:08 a.m. PST on Mar. 
4. Mission duration: 4 
days, 10 hrs,  19 min. 

Feb. 28 
USA-53 
19B 

Mar.  14 
Intelsat 6 F-3 
21A 
Titan 3 

Mar. 26 
USA-54 
25A 
Delta 111 

Apr. 5 
PEGSAT 
28A 
Pegasus 

Objective: Development of  space- 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Classified payload 
launched by  Shuttle 
Atlantis crew. 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
geosynchronous orbit 
Spacecraft Launch configuration 
17.5 f t  (5.3 m)  long, with diameter 
of  12 f t  (3.6 m). Five antennas and 
2 cylindrical solar m y s .  In orbit, 
telescoping spacecraft is nearly 39 
f t  (11.7 m) long. Weight at launch, 
including apogee kick stage: 
27,425 lbs (12,466 kg). 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft. Not announced. 

338 
166 
89.3 
28.6 

Launch vehicle malfunc- 
tioned, stranding vehicle 
in useless orbit. Intelsat 
may request NASA to 
use Shuttle in rescue 
attempt. 

20,207 
20,059 
716.0 
55.1 

Seventh navigation 
satellite in series. 
Global Positioning 
Satellite (GPS). 

Objective: To launch satellite and 
test new launch delivery system. 
Spacecraft: Two barium canisters, 
50 inches (127 cm) high and 42 
inches (106 cm) wide. 
Weight:  272 lbs. 

682 
500 
96.4 
94.1 

NASA-built small pay- 
load, to obtain environ- 
mental measurements of 
Pegasus launch vehicle 
for DARF'A,  deploy 
Navy satellite, and con- 
duct two NASA scientif- 
ic chemical-release 
experiments over north- 
central Canada. 

329 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (") 

Remarks 

Objective: To launch small experi- 
mental Navy  satellite. 
Spacecraft Polygonal sphere. 
Weight:  150 Ibs. 

673 
498 
96.3 
94.1 

Navy-designed Small 
Experimental 
Communications 
Satellite (SECS) 
deployed from Pegsat. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

First of triple payload 
launch. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Objective: To launch spacecraft 
into geosynchronous orbit. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Objective: To  launch Hubble 
Space Telescope (HST) and con- 
duct scientific and medical experi- 
ments while in weightless environ- 
ment. Spacecraft Shuttle orbiter 
carrying satellite as well  as experi- 
ments: Ascent Particle Monitor 
(APM), EMAX camera, 
Investigation into Polymer 
Membrane Processing 
[lPMP),Protein Crystal Growth 
(PCG), Radiation Monitoring 
Experiment @WE), Ion Arc (stu- 
dent experiment), and Air Force 
Maui Optical Site (AMOS) 
Calibration Test. Weight of  orbiter 
and cargo at main engine cutoff: 
259,229 Ibs. 

Not 
announced 

Second of  triple payload 
launch. 

Not 
announced 

Third of  triple payload 
launch. 

37,785 
35,717 
1,485.1 
0.4 

619 
613 
96.8 
28.4 

Indonesian communica- 
tions satellite launched 
by United States. 

Thuty-fifth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). 
Piloted by  Loren J. 
Shriver and Charles E 
Bolden, Jr. Mission spe- 
cialists Steven A. 
Hawley, Bruce 
McCandless II, and 
Kathryn D. Sullivan. 
Discovery launched 
from KSC at  8:33 a.m. 
EDT. Shuttlelandd at 
Edwards AFB, CA, at 
6:49 a.m.  PDT on Apr. 
29. Mission duration: 5 
days, 1 hr,  16 min. 

Apr. 5 
USA-55 
28B 

Apr.  11 
USA-56 
31A 
Atlas E 

Apr.  11 
USA-57 
31B 

Apr.  11 
USA-58 
31C 

Apr.  13 
PALAPA-B2R 
34A 
Delta 

Apr.  24 
Space Shuttle 
Discovery 
(STS-31) 
37A 

330 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Apr. 25 
Hubble Space 
Telescope 
37B 

May 9 
M- 1 
43A 
scout 

May 9 
M-2 
43B 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator p) 

Objective: To perform variety of 
astronomical observations as long- 
term (15-year) international obser- 
vatory with many W e r en t  scien- 
tific goals and observational 
modes. Spacecraft Cylindrical 
body made up of three major ele- 
ments:  (1) support systems mod- 
ule; (2) optical telescope assem- 
bly; and (3) scientific instruments. 
Electrical power provided by  two 
solar arrays containing 48,000 
solar cells. Optical telescope 
assembly contains two mirrors: 
94-inch primary mirror located 
near center of Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) and  13-inch sec- 
ondary mirror located 16 f t  in 
front of primary mirror. The two 
mirrors must remain in precise 
alignment for the images to be. in 
focus. HST scientific instruments 
are the WidefieldiPlanetary 
Camera, Goddard High Resolution 
Spectrograph, Faint Object 
Spectrograph, and High Speed 
Photometer. Weight at launch 
approximately 25,000 lbs 
(1 1,355.4 kg). 

Objective: Development of space- 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Objective: Development of  space- 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not  announced. 

620 
611 
96.8 
28.4 

783 
64  1 
96.8 
89.8 

782 
640 
98.6 
89.8 

Remarks 

Deployed by  Shuttle 
orbiter Discovery. First 
images taken by 
Widefield/Planetary 
Camera released May 
20. Faint Object Camera 
(FOC) became first sci- 
entific instrument to 
complete its orbital veri- 
fication activities, on 
Jun. 6. Spherical aberra- 
tion in Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) optical 
system announced pub- 
licly Jun.  27. Problem 
traced to spacing error 
in reflective null correc- 
tor, an optical reference 
device used  in manufac- 
ture of  primary mirror. 
WidefieldPlanetary 
Camera was directed to 
study developing storm 
on Saturn; images ex- 
pected to be  3 to  10 
times better than those 
from Earth-based tele- 
scopes. 

First of dual Lightsat 
launch. 

Second of  dual Lightsat 
launch. 

33 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Eauator (g) 

Remarks 

Objective: To conduct an all-sky 
survey for six months, using imag- 
ing telescopes to measure posi- 
tions of  x-ray  and extreme, ultravi- 
olet ( X W )  sources, while obtain- 
ing fluxes and special information 
Spacecraft: Square-shaped central 
body containing scientific instru- 
ments, with three solar arrays. 
Launch configuration dimensions 
4.5 m x 2.2 m x 2.4 m. 
Instrumentation includes most 
powerful x-ray telescope ever 
built, with secondary telescope a 
WidefieldPlanetaq Camera. 
Weight at launch  2,424 kg. 

588 
567 
96.1 
52.9 

Roentgen Satellite 
(ROSAT) international 
cooperative satellite suc- 
cessfully launched from 
Cape Canaveral Air 
Force Station, FL. Joint 
mission with Federal 
Republic of  Germany 
and United Kingdom. 
Two-phase schedule: (1) 
six-month survey to be 
conducted by German 
scientists; and (2) 12- 
month pointed phase, 
where telescopes are 
pointed at preselected 
individual x-ray  sources. 

Obiective: Development of  mace 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Not 
announced 

First of  four satellites 
launched by  single 
booster. 

Objective: Development of  space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Second of  four satellites 
launched by  single 
booster. 

Objective: Development of  space 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Third of  four satellites 
launched by  single 
booster. 

Objective: Development of space- 
Not 
flight techniques and technology.  announced 
_. 
Sp&ecraft:  Not announced. 

Fourth of  four satellites 
launched by  single 
booster. 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Jun.  1 
ROSAT 
49A 
Delta II 

Jun. 8 
USA-59 
50A 
Titan 4 

Jun. 8 
USA-60 
50B 

Jun.  8 
USA-61 
50C 

Jun.  8 
USA-62 
50D 

Jun.  12 
INSAT  I D  
51A 
Delta 

35,914 
35,767 
1,440.0 
0.2 

35,791 
35,785 
1,436.2 
0.0 

Launched by United 
States for India to 
replace INSAT 1B. 
Completes INSAT  1 
series. 

Third in series of  five 
Intelsat 6 satellites. 
Launched by Martin 
Marietta for Intelsat. 
Operational in early 
Sept. 

Objective: To  launch communica- 
tions satellite into geosynchronous 
orbit. Spacecraft: Same basic con- 
figuration as INSAT 1B launched 
by  Shuttle in  1983. 

Jun. 23 
Intelsat 6 F-4 
56A 
Titan 3 

Objective: To launch satellite into 
geosynchronous orbit. 
Spacecraft: Same as Intelsat 6 
launched Mar.  14. 

332 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Jul. 25 
CRRES 
65A 
Atlas l/Centaur  69 

Objective: To  launch satellite into 
highly elliptical geosynchronous 
transfer orbit to enable perfor- 
mance of active chemical release 
experiments in ionosphere and 
magnetosphere. Spacecraft Oct- 
agonal satellite with two attached 
solar arrays and deployable mag- 
netometer boom and 24 releasable 
canisters. Weight: 3,842 lbs. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (.) 

33,612 
335 
591.9 
18.2 

Aug.  1 
Soyuz TM-10 
USSR 
1990-067A 

Aug.  2 
USA-63 
68A 
Delta I1 

Aug.  18 
BSB-R2 
74A 
Delta 

Oct. 1 
USA-64 
88A 
Delta II 

Objective: To place satellite into 
orbit to  achieve Navy objectives. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Objective: To launch satellite. 
Spacecraft Not  announced. 

Objective: To place satellite into 
orbit to achieve Navy objectives. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

20,665 
19,931 
722.7 
54.7 

35,859 
35,565 
1,432.2 
0.3 

20,378.0 
19,984.0 
717.9 
55.0 

Remarks 

Combined Release and 
Radiation Effects 
Satellite, joint 
NASNAir Force pay- 
load, launched atop first 
commercial Atlas 
launch vehicle. First 
canister released over 
South Pacifc Sept.  10. 

Crew consisted of 
Gennadiy Manakov and 
Gennadiy Strekalov. 
Docked with MIR  space 
station. Crew returned 
Dec.  10 with Toyohiro 
Akiyama, Japanese 
astronaut. Flight time: 
130 days, 20 hrs, 36 
min. 

Eighth navigation satel- 
lite. Global Positioning 
Satellite (GPS). 

Launched for British 
Satellite Broadcasting. 

Ninth in series of  Block 
II operational NAV- 
STAR Global 
Positioning Satellites 
(GPS) launched by Air 
Force expendable 
launch vehicle. 
Operational system to 
be composed of 24 
satellites in six orbital 
planes. 

333 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Remarks 

Thirty-sixth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). 
Piloted by  Richard N. 
Richards and Robert D. 
Cabana. Mission spe- 
cialists Bruce E. 
Melnick, William M. 
Shepherd, and Thomas 
D. Akers. Discovery 
launched from KSC at 
7:47  a.m. EDT. Shuttle 
landed at Edwards AFB, 
CA, at 9 5 7  a.m. EDT 
on Oct.  10. 
Mission duration: 4 
days, 2 hrs,  10 min, 54 
seconds. 

Deployed by  space 
Shuttle Discovery. 
Ulysses is a joint mis- 
sion conducted by 
European Space Agency 
and NASA. Ulysses will 
encounter Jupiter in 
Feb.  1992, when space- 
craft will receive gravity 
assisted velocity 
increase, enabling it to 
dive downward and 
away from ecliptic 
plane. Spacecraft will 
reach 70" south solar 
latitude in Jun.  1994. 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Eauator P) 

303.0 
280.0 
90.2 
28.4 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Oct. 6 
Ulysses 
90B 

Oct.  6 
Objective: To launch Ulysses 
Space Shuttle 
spacecrafr toward rendezvous with 
Discovery  (STS-41)  the sun. To investigate interstellar 
space and the sun. Spacecraft: 
90A 
Shuttle orbiter canying spacerraft 
with Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) 
booster and Payload Assist 
Module (PAM-5) with additional 
experiments: Chromosome and 
Plant Cell Division in Space 
Experiment (CHROMEX-2), 
Solid Surface Combustion 
Experiment (SSCE), Shuttle Solar 
Backscatter Ultra-violet (SSBUV) 
Instrument, Intelsat Solar Array 
Coupon (ISAC) experiment, 
Physiological Systems Experiment 
(PSE), Investigations into Polymer 
Membrane Processing (IPMP), 
Voice Command System (VCS), 
and Radiation Monitoring 
Equipment-ID. Weight of experi- 
ments:  1,671 lbs. 

Objective: To  investigate proper-  Heliocen- 
ties of  solar wind, structure of 
tric orbit. 
sun/wind interface, heliospheric 
magnetic field, solar radio bursts 
and plasma waves, solar x-rays, 
solar and galactic cosmic rays, 
and interstellar interplanetary 
neutral gas and dust. Spacecraft: 
Spin-stabilized main bus,  10.5 
x10.8x6.9  ft, 5.4 f t  in diameter, 
parabolic high-gain antenna 
attached to main bus. After 
release from Shuttle payload 
bay,  spacecraft will deploy 18.2 
ft radial boom, 238 ft dipole 
wire boom, and 26.2 f t  agial 
boom. Booms serve as antennas 
for radio wave-plasma experi- 
ment. Power source is radioiso- 
tope thermoelectric generator 
(RTG) attached to main bus. 
Weight, including Inertial Upper 
Stage (IUS) booster  and Payload 
Assist Module (PAM-5): 44,024 
lbs. 

334 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Launch Date (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (g) 

Nov.  13 
USA-65 
95A 
Titan 4 

Nov.  15 
Space Shuttle 
Atlantis 
(STS-38) 
97A 

Objective: Development of  space- 
flighttechniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not  announced. 

Not 
announced 

Objective: To launch classified 
DoD payload. Spacecraft Shuttle 
orbiter canykg  classified DoD 
payloadcatgo. Weight: Not 
announced. 

221.0 
215.0 
88.6 
28.4 

Remarks 

Achieved orbit. 

Thirty-seventh flight of 
Space Transportation 
System. Piloted by 
Richard 0. Covey and 
Frank L.  Culberston, Jr. 
Mission specialists 
Charles "Sam" Gemar, 
Robert C. Springer, and 
Carl J. Meade. Atlantis 
launched from KSC at 
6:48 p.m. EDT.  Shuttle 
landed at KSC at 4:43 
p.m. EST on Nov.  20. 
First KSC Shuttle land- 
ing since 1985. Mission 
duration: 4 days, 21 hrs, 
and 55 min. 

Nov.  15 
USA-67 
97B 

Nov. 26 
USA-66 
103A 
Delta I1 

Dec.  1 
USA-68 
105A 
Atlas E 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not announced. 

Objective: To place Navy satellite 
in orbit to achieve mission objec- 
tives. Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Objective: Development of  space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft Not announced 

Not 
announced 

Launched from Shuttle 
Atlantis. 

20,279.0 
19,935.0 
714.8 
54.8 

Tenth spacecraft in 
series of  operational 
NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning Satellites 
(GPS). 

845.0 
729.0 
100.6 
98.9 

One in  series of  Defense 
Meteorological 
Satellites. 

335 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENDM A 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km), 
Period (min.) 
Inclination to 
Equator (9 

Launch Date (Gh%T), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Dec. 2 
SOYUZ TM-11 
USSR 
1990-107A 

Dec.  2 
Space Shuttle 
Columbia (STS-35) 
106A 

363.0 
350.0 
91.7 
28.5 

Objective: To cany ASTRO-1 
astrophysical observatory into 
orbit and return to Earth. 
Spacecraft Shuttle orbiter 
Columbia carrying ASTRO-1 to 
cargo bay. ASTRO-1 to provide 
around-the-clock observations and 
measurements of  ultraviolet radia- 
tion from celestial objects. 
Instruments include the ultraviolet 
astronomy observatory (ASTRO), 
Broad Band X-Ray Telescope 
( B B m ) ,  Hopkins Ultraviolet 
Telescope (HUT), Wisconsin 
Ultraviolet Photopolarimeter 
Experiment (WIJPPE), and 
Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope 
(UIT). Weight: 27,454 Ibs. 

Remarks 

Crew consisted of 
Viktor Afanasyev and 
Musa Manarov. Docked 
with MIR  space station. 
Toyohiro Akiyama 
returned Dec.  10 with 
previous MIR crew of 
Gennadiy Manakov and 
Gennadiy Strekalov. 
Flight time: 7 days, 21 
hrs, 55 min. 

Thuty-eighth flight of 
Space Transportation 
System (STS). Piloted 
by Vance D. Brand and 
Guy S. Gardner. 
Mission specialists 
Jeffrey A. Hoffman, 
John M.  "Mike" 
Lounge, and Robert A. 
R. Parker. Payload spe- 
cialists Samuel T. 
Durance and Ronald A. 
Parise. Columbia 
launched from KSC at 
1:49 a.m. EST. Shuttle 
landed at Edwards AFB, 
CA, at  12:54 a.m. EST 
on Dec.  1 1. Mission 
duration:  8 days, 23 hrs, 
5 min. 

336 

Appendix B 

ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES 

331 

APPENDIX B 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

.Aeronautics and Space Report of  the President 
.Agence France Presse 

Listed here are the abbreviations used for citing sources in the text. Not all the sources are listed, 
only those that are abbreviated. 
Aero Space Rep  .................... 
AFP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
AP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Associated Press new  service 
ARC Release  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.NASA Ames Research Center news release 
AvWk  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine 
B  Sun  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Baltimore Sun newspaper 
Bus W k   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Business  Week magazine 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .Chicago  Tribune newspaper 
C Trib 
CSM  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Christian Science Monitor newspaper 
D News  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Detroit News  newspaper 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  .Defense News 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Chinese 
number 
Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Eastern 
Europe number 
. . . .  
.Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Latin 
American number 

FBIS-Eas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

FBIS-Lat  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

FBIS-Nes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

FBIS-sov  . . . . . .  

FBIS- Weu 

.Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Near East 
number 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .   .Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet 
number 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  .Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Western 
Europe number 

.Florida Today newspaper 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center news release 

Fla  Today  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
GSFC Release . . . . . . . . .  
H Chron  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Houston Chronicle newspaper 
H Post  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Houston Post newspaper 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  .Huntsville Times newspaper 
Htsvl Tm s  
JPL Voyager Status Report  . . . . . . . . . . . .  .NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Voyager Status 
Report 
. . . . . . . . .  .NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center news 
release 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  .Los Angeles Herald-Examiner newspaper 
LA Herald 
LA Star News  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Los Angeles Star News newsaper 
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  .Los Angeles Times newspaper 
LA Times . . . . . . .  

JSC Release  . . . . . . . . . .  

339 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APPENJXX B 

LRC Release  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Langley Research Center news release 
. . . .  .Miami News newspaper 
. . . .  .NASA George C .  Marshall Space Flight Center 
news release 

MSFC Release  . . 

NASA anno  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
NASA DAR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
NASAMOR  . . .  

NASA Release  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
NASA spl anno  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Nat  Sp Trans Sys 
NY Times  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0 Sen Star  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
P  Inq  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

.NASA announcement 

.NASA Daily Activities Report 
. .NASA Headquarters Mission Operations Report, 
preliminary launch and postlaunch report series 

NASA Post-Flight Operations Report 

.NASA Headquarters news release 

.NASA special announcement 
. .  .National Space Transportation Critical Items List 
.New York Times newspaper 
.Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper 
.Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper 
. .  .Reuters Press Agency 

SF  Chron  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
SP News  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
SSR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

S a n  Francisco Chronicle newspaper 
Space Propulsion newsletter 
.NASA Satellite Situation Report 
. .  .Toronto Star newspaper 
. .United Press International news service 
U SA  Today  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.USA  Today newspaper 
W Post  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   Washington Post newspaper 
W Times  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.Washington Times newspaper 
WH Release  . . 
. .  .White House news release 
WSJ  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  

.Wall  Street Journal  newspaper 

340 

5 1-E Flight Readiness Review (FRR), 44 
5 1 -L Data and Design Analysis Task Force, 2 1, 29 
Abrahamson, James A.,  15 
ADEOS, 274 
ADP,  133 
Advanced Fighter Technology Integration F-113 aircraft, 125 
Advanced Launch System (ALS), 148 
Advanced Microelectronics Program, 96 
advanced short takeoff and vertical landing (ASTOVL) aircraft, 12 
Advanced Stirling Conversion System, 78 
Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System, 243 
Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), 147, 186 
Aero-Space Plane, 80, 89, 96, 127, 188,221 
Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, 20,  125 
Aerojet TechSystem Corporation, 42 
aerospace plane, 3 1,42,44, 214, 246, 266 
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, 77 
Air Force, 5-7,9, 19, 27, 30, 32, 33, 38,41,45-47, 54, 57, 63, 64,70, 73, 81, 83, 95- 
95,98, 103, 104, 111, 119, 122, 125, 133, 135, 139, 143, 148, 153, 163, 165, 
169. 177, 179, 187, 189-192, 199, 199 ,205-208 ,215 ,216 ,219 ,227 ,228 ,231 ,  
232, 235-239,244, 247, 254-256, 258, 259, 263, 267, 269, 274, 277, 280, 281, 
283,285,288,290 
Air Force Weapons Laboratory, 6 
Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition, 259 
Airbus A-310,216 
Alaska SAR Facility,  161 
Aldrich, Arnold D.,  12, 25, 79, 255 
Aldridge, Edward, 38,47,57 
Aldrin, Edwin E. Jr., 224 
Alexandrov, Alexander, 122, 144 
Alice Springs, 96, 109, 142 
Allen, Joseph P., 90 
Allen, Lew, 15,69,95, 96, 107,271, 272, 288 
Aller, Robert O.,  224 
Amazon Basin, 41 
American Geophysical Union, 41 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 64,67, 148,265 
Ames Research Center, 6, 20,22, 52,80, 100-103, 109, 115, 117-119, 123, 137, 141, 

34 1 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

156, 162, 180, 187,200, 199,223,239,257,262,267-269,273,286 
Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, 48, 88, 104, 122, 125,259,263, 287 
Amstrup, Steven, 20 
Antarctic Ozone Project, 130 
Apollo, 30,35,49, 52, 64, 73,76,77, 101, 102, 161, 224, 233,240,243,244, 266 
Apollo 204 Capsule, 266 
Apollo Command/Service Module Program, 76 
Arabsat- 1,3 
Ariane, 42,45,46, 73, 81,85, 130, 161, 167, 172, 182, 190, 199, 204,207,211, 219, 
223,227,229,246,254,261,273 
Ariane 3, 130,161,182,190,223 
Ariane 4, 199,207,219,227,229,246 
Arizona, University of, 135 
Armed Services Committee, 54 
Armstrong, Neil A., 224 
artificial clouds, 34 
Aryan rocket, 3 
Ascension Island, 78 
AsiaSat 1, 261 
Association of  Schools of  Journalism and Mass Communications, 4 
Asteroid Belt, 176 
asteroids, 27,41,44, 180, 265 
Astro UV telescope, 17 
ASTRO-1, 13, 134, 163,290,296 
astronauts, 5, 7, 29, 30,32,43, 51, 56, 62, 65, 81,95, 95, 98, 115, 117, 128, 138, 
169, 175 ,213 ,223 ,224 ,231 ,233 ,240 ,244 ,247 ,248 ,259 ,266 ,286-288  
Astrotech, 26 
ATDRSS, 243 
Atlantic Ocean, 9,29,42, 54, 76, 99, 153,254 
Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, 125 
Atlantis, 4, 19,54, 81, 130, 197, 199,214,215, 231-233, 235,236,248, 249, 252- 
255,258,269,272,273,286,287,288 
Atlas Centaur, 25, 37,75, 105, 121, 150 
Atlas Centaur 67 Investigation Board, 105 
ATLAS-1,163 
Atlas-Agena, 177 
Atlas-E, 63,70, 153, 191 
Atlas-E booster rocket, 63 
Atlas-E rocket, 70, 153 
Atmospheric Sciences Division, 110 
Auburn University, 123 
Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV), 18 1 
Baikonur, 114, 122, 142, 175, 180, 187, 190, 198, 199,217,238,240 
Baker, Ellen S.,  236 

342 

EWEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Baker, Wayne, 8 
Bagian, James, 209 
Ballhaus, William E, Jr., 223 
Banks, Peter, 112 
Barnes, Richard, 81 
Bartoe, John-David, 119 
Bauer, Siegfried J.,  150 
Bassett, Charles, 30 
Beggs, James M., 6, 12, 15 
Bell Aerospace Textron, 42 
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 22 
Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, 97 
Bensimon, Marc, 295 
Big Bang, 95, 185,237,238,245,285 
Bionetics Corporation, 110 
Bishop, Peter, 274 
Black Brant Ix's,  129 
Black Brant X ,  34 
Black, David C.,  102, 
Blagov, Vitor, 105 
Blaha, John, 238 
Bloch, Erich, 48 
Boeing 147, 102, 156 
Boeing Aerospace, 14,40,60, 68, 143, 296 
Boeing Aerospace Company, 40,68, 143 
Bogess, Albert, 24 
Boland, Edward P.,  41,96, 163 
Bollinger, John, 56 
Bondar. Roberta, 246 
Borman, Frank, 15 
Bosh, Amanda, 176 
Boynton, William V.,  135 
Bracken, Richard E.,  11 1 
Brazil, 41,42, 110, 129 
British Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC), 149 
Breton, Jacques, 267 
Brown, June Gibbs, 155 
Brown, Laurie, 82 
Brown, Robert, 14 
Buran, 198 
Burrows, William E., 90 
Bush, George, 208, 211, 212,215,219, 221,223, 224, 247, 251, 253, 257,261, 271, 
272,28 1,284 
Busse, Jon R.,  105, 114 

343 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

C-143 aircraft, 6,29, 111, 137, 162, 167,200 
C-17 transport plane, 70 
Callis, Linwood B.,  77 
Calspan Corporation, 82 
Canada, 26,33, 34,70,98, 101, 123, 169, 175, 181, 185 
Canadian Ministry of State for Science and Technology, 141 
Canadian Mobile Servicing Center, 40 
Cape Canaveral, 7 ,9 ,22 ,  24, 25, 33, 37,41, 63, 67, 73, 81, 86, 104, 105, 115, 131, 
153, 179, 189, 198, 199, 208,215,219,  220, 228,231, 232, 236, 239, 244, 252- 
254 ,258 ,262 ,266 ,267 ,269 ,273 ,274 ,277 ,278 ,284 ,286 ,287 ,288 ,290  
Case Western Reserve University, 123 
Castor IVA booster,  127 
CAT Scans, 43 
Centaur Upper Stage, 19,47, 82 
Centaur-G upper stage, 4 
Centennial Contractors, 295 
Center for Advanced Space Propulsion, 123 
Center for Astrophysical Sciences, 7 
Center for Commercial Development of Space Power,  123 
Center for Secretion Research, 123 
Center for Space Microelectronics Technology, 96, 179 
Center for the Commercial Development of Autonomous and Man-Controlled 
Robotic Sensing System in Space, 123 
Center on Materials for Space Structures, 123 
Centre National dEtudes Spatiales, 51, 104, 267 
Centre National dEtudes Spatiales Jacques-Louis Lions, 104 
cerebrospinal fluid, 55 
Chaffee, Roger, 30 
Challenger, 6 ,9 ,  11-17, 19, 21-23, 25, 26, 29-37, 39,40,42-47,49, 51-54, 56,60, 
62 ,64 ,65 ,67 ,68 ,71 ,73 -75 ,  77-82, 86, 89, 95,95, 98,99, 114, 115, 118, 120, 
122-124, 126, 138, 141, 142, 147, 149-151, 160, 165, 190, 192,208,211-213, 
215,227,231,239,244,248,255,266,282,283,288,290 
Chang-Diaz, Franklin, 236 
Charlesworth, Clifford E.,  76 
Chemical Manufacturers Association, 123 
China, 45,46,65,96,  138, 189,251,255,261 
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 162, 203 
Chretien, Jean-Loup, 199, 1100 
Chu, C.W., 56 
Civil Space Technology Initiative, 80 
Clarkson University, 56 
Clinical Practice Library of Medicine (CPLM), 256 
CLUSTER, 101, 167, 189,205,240,284 
Cohen, Aaron, 73, 108 

344 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Colladay, Raymond S., 19, 148 
Collins, Michael, 102,224 
Columbia, MD, 3 ,7 ,  267 
Columbia University, 64, 208,209 
Colvin, Bill, 39 
Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), 273 
Comet Austin, 263 
Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby, 109, 135 
Comet Wilson,  101, 103 
Cometary Ice and Dust Experiment (CIDEX), 109 
Commercial Crystal Growth in Space, 56 
Commercial Development of Space, 56, 113, 122, 123,258 
Commercial Experiment Transporter, 268 
Commercial Middeck Augmentation Module, 258, 296 
Committee on Science and Technology, 32,45,54,74,79 
Computer Aided Remote Driving, 270 
Computer Sciences Corporation, 89, 104, 133 
Compton, Dale L., 239 
Conestoga rocket, 68 
Congress, 16 ,27 ,33 ,38 ,39 ,44 ,47 ,54 -57 ,67 ,70 ,74 ,96 ,  95,99, 112, 127, 139, 
148, 154, 162, 163, 165, 168, 187, 197, 197, 208, 211,213, 247, 251, 253, 255, 
259,287 
Congressional Budget Office, 22 
Conrail, 54 
Construction Technology Laboratory, 43 
Contel Federal Systems, 268 
control/structures interaction technology, 68 
Convolvotron, 289 
Cook, James, 215 
Cornell University, 229 
Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), 95,  134,237, 285 
Cosmonauts, 23,31,37,98, 108, 114, 122, 143, 144, 172, 187, 189, 197, 1100,214, 
231,240,253,290 
Cosmos 2000,205 
COSMOS 2021,216 
Cosmos-1891, 126 
COSPAS/SARSAT, 69,70,99 
Council of  the Royal Astronomical Society, 24 
Covey, Richard O., 95, 192 
Cowan, Bill, 248 
Cray X-MF',  45 
Cray Y-MP,  187 
Crew Escape, 53, 138, 167 
Crippen, Robert L.,  79,  11 3 

345 

ASTRONAWCS  AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Critical Velocity Effect Theory, 34 
Crossfield, A. Scott, 219 
Cryogenic Propellants, 30 
CSIRO Parkes Radio Telescope, 109 
Culbertson, Philip E.,  143 
Cyclone launch vehicle, 205 
Danforth, John, 54 
Data Relay Satellite-C (TDRS-C),  192 
Deep Black, 90 
Deep Space Network (DSN), 97, 109, 180, 182 
Defense Equipment Collaboration, 12 
Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS), 215 
Delta, 25, 37,44,48, 51, 55,67,75, 95, 95, 99, 104, 127, 129, 134, 135, 150, 153, 
154, 179, 190 ,205 ,208 ,219 ,228 ,235-237 ,239 ,244 ,245 ,252 ,253 ,258 ,267 ,  
273,274,277,278,286,288 
Delta Star, 208, 235 
Dellums, Ronald, 282 
DeLucas, Lawrence J., 280 
Department of Defense, 12, 16, 26,33,47, 52,68, 74, 80, 86, 88, 89,96, 104, 127, 
130, 133, 148, 153, 155, 159, 179, 187, 189, 197, 199,205,214,215,219,221, 
227,231,238,266,273,296 
Design and Data Analysis Task Force, 15 
Development Motor-9 (DM-9), 142 
Differential Microwave Radiometer, 245 
Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment, 245 
Discovery, 6, 7, 19, 23, 55, 83,  110, 120, 122, 138, 140, 141, 148, 149, 164, 167, 
168, 178, 179, 181-183, 185, 186, 190, 192,204,205,207,209,220,227-229, 
233 ,237-240 ,248 ,262 ,263 ,272 ,282 ,284 ,285 ,290 ,296  
DM-8, 127, 128 
Dole, Elizabeth, 62 
Donahue, Thomas, 112 
Downey, James, 214 
DSP-5R, 139 
Dunham, Edward, 176 
Dunning, John, 89 
Dynamic Explorer (DE), 15 1 
Dyncorp, 295,296 
E-ERS 1, 161 
EAA International Fly-In Convention, 53 
Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, 73, 97 
Earth Observation Mission, 4 
Earth Observation Satellite Company, 86 
Earth Observations Commercialization Applications Program, 295 
Earth Observing System (EOS) ,  247,279 

346 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Earth Radiation Budget Experiment, 59 
Earth Resources Satellite (ERS-l),  151 
Earth System Sciences Committee, 48 
Earth-return vehicles, 156 
Edleson, Burton I., 99 
Educational Affairs Division, 14 
Edwards Air Force Base, 7 ,9 ,  27,  143, 192, 199,207,215,227, 236,238, 244,255, 
256,259,263,281,285,288,290 
EG&G Florida, Inc., 89, 148 
EGB-6,203 
Electra, 25,41, 110, 274 
electro-optic devices, 40 
Elliot, James, 176 
Engle, Joe H.,  83 
Entering Space, 90 
Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC), 151 
Environmental Research Institute of Michigan, 123 
Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), 119 
ERS-1 satellite, 8 
ESA, 7, 17,59, 81,96,101, 107, 134, 149, 161, 164, 167, 172, 182, 190, 199,207, 
211,219,223,227,246 
escape systems, 138 
Estess, Roy S . ,  102 
European Remote Sensing Satellite, 7 
European Space Agency, 5, 7, 17, 19, 21-23,40, 60,73,79, 81, 82,98, 101, 107, 
134, 137, 149, 161, 172, 175, 181, 185, 199,204,229,237,246,254,284,296 
European Space Agency's Arianespace company, 19 
European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (EUTELSAT), 13 1 
EUTELSAT-2, 13 1 
Executive Technical Committee, 63 
External Fuel Tank,  11, 269 
Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer, 135, 257 
F-14,269,210 
Fairchild Space Company, 69 
Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, 245 
Federal Aviation Administration, 3,74, 216,282 
Federal Express, 67 
Federal Republic of Germany, 17, 165,253 
Fmarelli, Margaret G., 279 
Fisk, Leonard A., 99 
Fisherr, William J., 273 
fixed-wing aircraft, 62 
Flatow, Fred, 99 
Fleet Satellite Communication, 26 

341 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Fletcer, James, 20, 46 
Fletcher, James C.,  15, 36,37, 39,41,42,44,46,48, 52, 53,55, 56, 60, 62,67,70, 
74, 80, 86, 88, 90, 96,95, 97,  102, 104, 107, 114, 115, 120, 126-128, 137, 139, 
141, 144, 151, 154, 159, 160, 168, 171, 178,197, 198,207,208,210,211 
Flexible Spacecraft, 68 
Flight Readiness Firing (FRF), 178, 186 
FLTSATCOM communications satellite, F-7, 86 
Fluid Mechanics Laboratory, 80 
Fly-In Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition, 53, 121 
Forward-swept-wing X-29 aircraft, 122 
Free-flying platforms, 32 
Freeman, Theodore, 30 
Freedom program, 200,  1 100,207,2 16,22 1,265 
Freedom Star, 64 
French Guiana, 42, 130, 161, 172, 182, 190, 199,204, 207,211, 219, 223, 227, 246, 
254,273 
Fujii, Kozo,  156 
G-STAR, 190 
Gagarin, Yuri, 99 
Galileo, 3, 13, 19,47, 82,96, 107, 134, 141, 162,231-233, 235-237, 252, 287,288, 
295,296 
Gamma Ray Imaging Telescope, 62 
Gamma Ray Observatory, 86, 163, 187,248 
Gam, Jake, 96, 169 
Garriott, Owen K., 45 
GE F-112 engine, 71 
Gemini, 13 1 
GenCorp, Inc., 213 
General Dynamics Convair, 25 
General Dynamics Corporation, 6, 62, 75, 120, 134, 150,246, 273 
Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, 87 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES-H), 98 
Geosynchronous Earth Orbits, 14 
Geosynchronous Operational Environmental Satellites, 25 
Geotail, 244 
Gibson, Robert “Hoot”, 165 
Gibson, Robert L.,  130, 199,271 
Gillam, Isaac T.,  113, 127 
Ginga (Astro-C), 11 1 
GiovaneUi, Ricardo, 229 
Giotto, 5 ,  17,21-24, 128 
Givens, Edward, 30 
Global Geoscience System, 80 
Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind and Polar missions, 199 

348 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Global Outpost, 247 
Goldberger, Marvin, 96 
Goddard, Robert H.,  24 
Goddard Space Flight Center, 6,8,24,25,76,87,  101, 104, 105, 109, 111, 113, 117, 
119, 125, 129, 151, 181, 190,197, 197,198,243,257,262,265,274,295 
GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellites), 134 
GOES-6,99,204 
GOES-7,99,204 
GOES-NEXT, 277 
Goetz, Robert C., 76 
Golombek, Matthew, 82 
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 173 
Gore, Albert, 36, 88, 139 
Graham, William R., 6, 12, 13, 16, 19, 22, 39, 76 
Gramm-Rudman Law, 40,279 
Great Wall, 237 
Gregory, Frederick, 238 
Grey, Jerry, 265 
Griggs, David S., 220 
Grissom, Virgil, 30 
Ground Tracking Stations, 78 
Gmmman Corporation, 269 
H-1,  151, 228, 231 
H-2,257 
Hain-Min Ku, William, 64 
Hall, Asaph,  164 
Halley's Comet, 4-7,  13, 16, 21,23, 24, 31, 149,290 
Harris, Allan, 41 
Hardy, George B . ,  53 
Hauck, Frederick H., 69,95, 192 
Harvard University, 38, 123 
Haynes, Martha, 229 
Haynes, Norman R., 95 
Headquarters Replanning Task Force, 19 
Heath, Donald, 76 
Herbolsheimer, Lawrence F., 47,  12 
Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of  Salt Lake City,  125 
Hermes, 73, 138 
Herschel Medal, 24 
Hewlett-Packard, 22 
Hicks, Donald A . ,  12 
High Alpha, 80 
Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control, 48, 88 
Hilmers, David C., 95, 192 

349 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Hinners, Noel W.,  119, 197,214 
Hipparcos 1,229 
Hook, W.  Ray, 63 
Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project,  186 
Horizon I, 191 
House Appropriations Subcommittee, 39,41, 163 
House Joint Resolution 559, 165 
House of  Representatives, 44,45, 74,79 
House Science and Technology Committee, 74 
Hubble Optical Systems Board of  Investigation, 288 
Hubble Space Telescope, 4,33,60, 83, 87, 103, 134, 163, 187, 197,262,265-269, 
271, 272, 277-279, 284,285,287, 289-296 
Hughes Aircraft Company, 38,46,  104 
Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, 271,289 
Human Performance Research Laboratory, 262 
Human Space Flight Alternatives, 227 
IBM, 54 
Imaging Systems Laboratory of  Florida Atlantic University, 283 
Industrial Space Facility (ISF), 154 
Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), 19,64,82,215,235 
Inspector General Act, 35 
Inspector of  the Royal Moroccan Air Force, 95 
Institute for Space and Astronautical Studies (ISAS),  17 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, 41 
Integrated System Preliminary Design Review, 295 
Intelligent Physics Tutor, 289 
Intelsat 6, 126,268,269 
Intelsat V,  42 
Inter-Agency Consultative Group (IACG), 16 
Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs), 153, 212 
Intercosmos Council, 17 
International Cometary Explorer, 17 
International Halley Watch, 17 
International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, 117 
International Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP), 167 
International Sun-Earth Explorers ISEE- 1, 129 
International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, 126 
International Ultraviolet Explorer, 24, 99, 110, 149 
lraq, 2 3 9 , 2 8 7  
ISEE-2, 129 
J-ERS 1, 161 
Jackson and Tull, 265 
Jacobs Engineering Group, 76 
Jemison, Mae, 233 

350 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Japan, 5, 17, 21,24,40,45,64,79,98,  151, 161, 164, 173, 175, 181,207,219, 221, 
231,244-246,255,257,261,274,289,290 
Japanese Experiment Module (EM), 173,207 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4, 27,44,69,73, 87,95, 96, 97, 103105, 107, 109, 126, 
130, 131, 148, 159, 161, 171, 172, 179, 182, 198, 220,221, 223, 227,228,235, 
243,259,270272,274,286,288 
Johns Hopkins University, 7,263 
Johnson Engineering Corporation, 64 
Johnson Space Center, 15,49, 51,55, 59, 70,73,76, 77,89, 105, 108, 115, 129, 132, 
133, 147, 161, 191,224,231,243,247,257,289 
Jones, Ross M., 148 
Jupiter-C, 152 
Keller, Samuel W.,  216 
Kelly, William R., 76 
Kennedy, Carver, 143 
Kennedy  Space Center, 4, 5 ,7 ,9 ,29 ,30 ,  51,52, 54, 61,63,67,68, 85, 89, 102, 115, 
149, 151, 156, 161, 165, 173, 178, 179, 181, 185, 186, 190-197, 198,200, 199, 
207 ,215 ,224 ,227 ,232 ,235 ,238 ,244 ,245 ,253 ,256 ,263 ,288  
Kerrebrock, Jack, 54 
KH-11,33 
Kingsbury, James E., 28, 31,79 
Klineberg, John M.,  115 
Kofoed, Karen, 4 
Kohrs, Richard H.,  79 
Koopman Express, 235 
Kopernikus, 219 
Kress, Martin P.,  255 
Krick, Irving P.,  21 
Kukkonen, Carl, 96 
Kuiper Airborne Observatory, 6, 29,  111, 137, 162, 176,200 
Kvant space module, 108 
Kvant-2, 238 
Kyl, Jon, 282 
Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite, 199 
Lamer, Richard P.,  95 
Landing safety, 53, 148 
Landsat, 86, 100, 109,219 
Langley Research Center, 115, 130,258,266,283,289 
Large Magellanic Cloud, 99, 103, 109, 111 
Latham, Donald, 33 
Launch abort, 53 
Launch Complex 17B, 104 
Laveikin, Alexander, 98, 114 
LE-7 engine, 257 

351 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Lee, Gentry, 277 
Lenoir, William B., 216 
Levine, Elissa, 85 
Lew Evans Foundation, 143 
Lewis, Tom,  165 
Lewis Research Center, 35, 70, 78, 115, 172, 197, 261 
Liberty Star, 64 
LIDAR, 8 
Lilly, Simon J.,  168 
Lockheed Corporation, 213 
Lockheed Space Operations Company, 68, 102,279 
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF),  163,244 
Lovell, Robert, 99 
Lounge, John M., 95, 192 
Louviere, AI, 5 1 
Lovingood, Judson A . ,  12,83 
Low Power Atmospheric Compensation, 252 
Lucas, William R., 53 
Lucis, Shannon, 236 
Lujan, Manuel, 144 
Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, 59 
Lust, Reimer, 73 
Lyman, Peter T., 68 
Magellan, 4, 82,96, 134, 162, 172, 197, 215,243, 277-279,281, 286,296 
Magnetic field, 8, 81, 82, 129, 167, 182, 183, 200, 199,205, 236,244, 273 
Mahon, Joseph B.,  113,279 
maintenance safeguards, 53 
Man-Tended Free Flyer (MTFF), 164 
Management Study Group, 88, 101, 119 
Manarov, Musakhi, 143 
Markey, Edward, 41 
Marine Corps, 34,64,215,296 
Mark III Hypercube parallel supercomputer, 179 
Mars, 4,27, 80,96, 98, 99, 102-105, 126, 131, 132, 142, 155, 156, 164, 168, 173, 
180, 190 ,204 ,206 ,209 ,211 ,224 ,236 ,245-247 ,252 ,255 ,257 ,259 ,261 ,262 ,  
267,279,282,284,287,296 
Mars Geoscience/Climatology Orbiter, 4 
Mars Observer, 4, 27,96,  103, 190, 204,279 
Mars Observer Mission, 27,  103 
Marsh, James, 87 
Marshall Problem Assessment Center, 82 
Marshall Space Flight Center, 28, 35, 37,45,52,53, 55,59, 77, 79,81,82, 89, 115, 
117, 121, 122, 125,128,155, 160, 182, 189, 1100,211,212,214,223,224, 
252,271,290 

352 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Martin Marietta Corporation, 52,67, 111, 120, 126, 131, 150,213,266,267,269, 
274 
Mashat, Ali, 3 
Mason and Hanger Services, Inc., 283 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 176 
McAuliffe, Christa, 30, 160 
McBride, John A . ,  12 
McBride, Jon, 214 
McCandless, Bruce, 282 
McCartney, Forrest S . ,  63, 151 
McCartney, John P.,  83 
McCulley, Michael J., 236, 279 
McDonald, Allan, 39,47 
McDonnell Douglas, 25, 48, 60, 67,75, 85, 95, 105, 120, 129, 131, 134, 143, 150, 
153, 179, 186, 190,220,246,255,266,271 
McDonnell Douglas' Space Manufacturing Initiatives, 13 1 
McKinnon, William, 2 17 
McNair, Ronald, 30 
MD-95,  153 
MD-96,153 
Mechanical Technical, Inc., 78 
Mercury Conference, 59 
Mendillo, Michael, 152 
Microburst, 74 
Microdevices Laboratory, 96 
microelectronics, 55, 96,  179 
microgravity, 24, 34, 39, 59, 68, 87, 113, 118, 131, 155, 164,207, 209, 246, 274, 
279,289 
microprocessor, 55 
Midgetman, 216 
Midwest Express Airline, 3 
Military, 3, 14, 19, 22, 26,27,44,47,  54, 57,60, 63, 71,76,80, 96, 117, 118, 121, 
122, 130, 134, 135, 138, 139, 148, 156, 160, 171, 189,213,215,219,227,228, 
235,237,239, 246-248,253-255,258,268,273,277,288 
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M), 87 
Minuteman 3 ICBM, 64 
Mir,  15, 23, 37, 98,99,  105, 108, 114, 122, 142-144, 172, 175, 187, 189, 190, 197, 
199, 1100,211,214,221,231,238,240,253,255 
Mission Adaptive Wing  (MAW), 125 
Mission Operations and Data Systems Directorate, 104 
Mitterand, FranGois,  199 
Mobile Remote Manipulator System, 24 
Mobile Servicing Center, 26,40 
Model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System, 289 

353 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Molecular Beam Epitaxy, 56 
Moon, 27, 38,43, 64,75, 102-104, 126, 155, 162, 164, 168,200,204,206,209,212, 
221 ,223 ,224 ,233 ,235 ,236 ,239 ,240 ,245-247 ,252 ,257 ,259 ,261 ,273 ,274 ,  
280,282,284,287,296 
Morton Thiokol, 13-16,21,23, 39,43,44,47,75, 86, 88 ,  95,99, 115, 125, 127, 128, 
139, 142-144, 147, 149, 155, 160, 163, 168, 169, 171, 175, 177, 186,203,206, 
213 
Moser, Thomas L.,  15, 77, 200, 216 
Moss, Frank, 20 
Mueller, Ivan, 56 
Mullane, Richard M.,  130, 199, 253 
Mulloy, Larry, 16 
Mulroney, Brian, 26 
Multiple Access Communications Satellites (MACSATs), 265 
Mumma, Michael, 6 
Murphy, John E, 123 
Musgrave, F. Story, 238 
Myers, Dale D., 76,79, 118, 131,212 
NASADndustry Advanced Turboprop Team, 172 
National Aero-Space Plane, 80,96, 127, 188,221 
National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex, 119, 141 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 5,48,98, 173 
National Radio Astronomy Observatory’s (NRAO), 182, 199 
National Science Foundation, 48,  102, 182, 186 
National Science Teachers Association, 43 
National Scientific Balloon Facility, 54, 75 
National Space Council (NSC), 81 
National Space Technology Laboratories, 43,  102, 129,  185 
National Transonic Facility, 121 
National Transportation Safety Board, 3 
Naval Space Command, 15 
NAVSTAR, 38, 159,205,206,219,228,236,239,258,277,288 
Navy Bureau of  Ordinance, 38 
Navy Remote Ocean Sensing Satellite System Scatterometer (NROSS), 8 
Nedelin, Mitrofan I., 212 
Nelson, Bill, 5 
Nelson, George ‘‘Pinky’’, 2 19 
Neptune, 89, 103, 126, 182, 198, 220, 223, 227-229, 235,239,254 
New Zealand, 29,  111, 123, 137,200,262 
Nicogossian, Amauld E.,  108 
Nike-Black Brant V,  129 
NIMBUS-7,76,273,285 
NOAA-10,70,191 
Nordic communications satellite, 21 1 

354 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

North American Aircraft, 76 
Northern Lights, 8 1 
Novick, R., 64 
Nozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES), 170 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, 43 
Nuclear Reactors, 32 
Nuclear Safety Review Panel, 20, 88 
Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS), 96, 102, 121, 187 
Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility, 156, 180 
Oberg, James, 23 
Oberle, Frank, 141 
Observer, 4, 27, 96, 103, 190, 204,205,279 
Odom, James B.,  121, 160,200,216 
Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, 118, 131, 135, 148,210,255 
Office of Commercial Programs, 47,68, 118, 127,268,278 
Office of  Exploration, 117, 178, 198, 255 
Office of  Safety, Reliability and Quality Assurance, 52 
Office of  Space Science, 4,73,97, 108, 110, 118, 119, 159,197 
Office of Space Science and Applications, 4, 108, 110, 118, 159 
Office of  Space Station, 88,  1100 
Official Flight Kit, 64 
Ohio State University, 56 
Oliver, Bernard M., 22 
Onizuka, Ellison, 30, 160 
Orbital Maneuvering System (OMS), 181 
Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), 48, 83, 259,267 
Orbital Sciences, 27, 255, 258, 261, 271 
Orbiter Project Office, 77 
O-rings, 13, 15, 21-23, 26,29, 31,42, 47, 61,79 
Orion, 11 8,296 
Outdoor Aerodynamics Research Facility, 119 
OV-107, 165,215 
Overmyer, Robert F., 34 
Owen K. Garriott, 45 
Ozone Layer, 76,77, 130, 162,203,236,274 
Pacific Engineering & Production Company, 171 
Pacific Ocean, 64,99, 114, 126, 159, 162, 176,216,261 
Paine, Thomas O.,  15,54 
Palapa-B2P, 104 
Parkes Radio Observatory, 103 
Payload Ground Operations, 61,85 
Payload integration, 83, 173 
Payload/Cargo Processing, 85 

355 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Payloads,  19 ,23 ,24 ,26 ,32 ,40 ,45 ,47 , 53 , 57 , 61 , 63 , 67 , 74 ,8 0 ,8 3 ,9 5 ,9 5 ,  118, 
131, 134, 137, 138, 150, 161, 162, 164, 179, 187, 192, 223, 224, 247,248, 258, 
261,280,281,288,296 
Pedersen, Kenneth S., 69, 199,279 
Pegasus, 259,261,271 
Pellerin, Charles, 278 
Pennsylvania State University, 64, 123 
Pentagon, 27, 31, 38,41,57, 88,98, 134, 138, 142, 172, 208, 288 
Peralta, Manuel,  155, 156,203 
Perkin-Elmer Corporation, 289 
Perry, Sir David, 12 
Peterson, Victor L., 257 
Phase B, 24, 26, 36,38, 39, 59, 63, 117 
Phase I, 77, 103, 143,285 
Phase 11,77, 87, 143, 251,288 
Phobos, 164, 180, 190,204,206,209,236 
Phillips, Samuel C., 49, 98 
Pike, John, 245 
Pioneer  10, 176 
Pioneer  11, 176,254 
Pioneer 9,  101 
Pioneer-Venus, 17 
Pioneering the Space Frontier, 54 
Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, 259 
Planetary Systems Branch, 6 
Plasma Physics Laboratory, 19, 59 
Pluto,  176, 217,254, 284 
Plutonium, 20,41, 23 1, 232 
Pohl, Henry O., 76 
Polyakov, Valery,  187 
Polyvinylchloride, 5 1 
Prahl, Joseph, 280 
Prather, Michael J., 262 
Pratt & Whitney, 6 1, 266 
Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, 11, 29, 37,43, 
52,53, 62, 79 
Press, Frank,  112 
Preston, Robert,  109 
Princeton University, 19,38,238 
Production Verification Motor-1 (PVM-l), 177, 186 
Professorship of Energy Resources, 37 
Project Pathfinder, 155 
Propellant, 29, 34,43, 54, 163, 171, 172, 177, 191 
Propfan Test Assessment (PTA), 114, 121, 163 

356 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Proxmire, William, 127 
Pulse-Code Modulation, 22 
Putty, 23, 26,29, 31, 33 
QM-8,203 
Qualification Motor-6 (QM-6), 169 
Qualification Motor-7 (QM-7), 177 
Quayle, Dan, 22 1, 224, 245, 265, 272, 277 
Radar Tracking, 22,  154 
Rai, Man Rohan, 180 
Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation, 38 
Rand Corporation, 6 
Raven Industries, 54 
RCA, 5 ,7 ,27 ,86  
Real Time Satellite Mapping, 56 
Reconnaissance Satellite, 33, 96, 189, 199, 227, 258 
Redmond, Charles, 164 
Relay Mirror Experiment, 252 
Remote Manipulator Arm, 24 
Remote Sensing, 7, 34,43, 85, 113, 208, 295 
Remote-Controlled Robot,  11 
Resnik, Judith, 30, 160 
Richards, Sue Mathis, 262 
Ride, Sally K.,  62, 115, 117, 126 
Robins, Jr., C. Howard, 203 
Rocketdyne, 51, 129, 143,220,224 
Rockwell International, 16, 69, 76, 123, 124, 129, 134, 135, 143, 165, 197, 206, 224, 
243,246,261,266,271 
Rockwell, Willard, 26 
Rodney, George A . ,  52 
Roentgen Satellite, 135,284 
Roentgen, Wilhelm, 267 
Rogers Commission, 47,49, 53, 73, 74, 120 
Rogers, William P.,  12, 44, 53 
Romanenko,Yuri, 98, 108, 114, 143, 144, 172, 175 
ROSAT, 253,267,284 
Rose, James T., 131, 137 
Rosen, Robert, 210 
Ross, Jerry L.,  130, 199 
Ross, Lawrence, 44 
Round Trip to Orbit, 227 
Rutan, Burt, 69 
Rutan Voyager, 69 
Sacco, Albert, 280 
Safety Advisory Board,  13 

357 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Safety Issue Assessment Center, 82 
Sagan, Carl, 54,98 
Sakigake (Pioneer), 17 
Salyut-7 Space Station, 15 
Satcom, 5 
Saturn, 38,52, 160, 220,221, 223, 224, 228, 233,239, 254,280,288,296 
Schmitt, Harrison, 15 
Science and Engineering Directorate, 28, 31, 82, 1100 
Scobee, Francis R.,  30, 160 
Scout, 81, 164, 165, 169, 170, 177, 187, 199,265 
Sea Satellite, 87 
Seals, 12, 13, 20-22,26, 30, 33, 54, 122,286 
Search and Rescue Satellite (SARSAT), 53 
Search and Rescue Satellite Aided Tracking satellite (SARSAT), 70 
Search and Rescue Satellite System, 80 
Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI), 22 
See, Elliott, 30 
Semi-Autonomous Navigation, 270 
Semiconductor Crystal Growth, 34,40 
Senate Appropriations Committee, 40, 70 
Serebrov, Alexander A., 231 
Shapley, Willis H.,  101 
Shelly, Carl B., 68 
Shepherd, William M., 130, 199 
Sherry, Edwin, 243 
Shoemaker, Eugene, 41 
Short-Takeoff and Landing Aircraft (V/STOL), 141 
Shuttle Imaging Radar-C, 8 
Shuttle-C, 135, 212,251, 256,257 
Sieck, Robert B.,  12 
Silicon Graphics, 268 
Skylab Task Force, 52 
SL-12 Proton, 96 
Slay, Alton D., 96 
Slayton, Donald K.,  113 
Slidell Computer Complex, 89, 182 
Slivan, Steve, 176 
Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR), 77, 87,251,285,288 
Smith, Michael, 30,56 
Smith, Peter G.,  251 
Smith, Richard, 63 
Smith, Richard G., 52 
SN-l1007a, 137 
Sneed, Bill, 214 

358 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Software Support Environment, 120 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), 101, 167 
Solar Max Mission (SMM), 110 
Solar Maximum (Solar Max), 239 
Solar Spectroscopy, 119 
Solar System Exploration Joint Working Group, 286 
Solid Fuel Rocket Booster, 11 
SolidRocketMotor, 11,37,54,75, 107, 117, 122, 125, 127, 134, 139, 142, 149, 
155, 168-170, 175, 177, 178, 182, 186, 189,203,213,263 
Sounding Rockets, 34,59, 129,263,273 
Soviet Space Research Institute, 31, 164 
Soviet Union, 5, 8, 15, 17,21-24, 31, 33,37,46, 64, 69, 70, 80, 85,96-99, 101, 105, 
108-109, 114, 122, 126, 131, 133-134, 138, 141-142, 144, 150, 152-153, 156, 
164, 171-173, 175, 180, 187, 189-190, 198,204,205,209,211-212,214,216- 
217, 221, 231-233,236-238, 240,246, 253-255, 261, 267, 271-274,283-284, 
286,290 
SOYUZ TM-8,23 1 
Space Automation and Robotics, 56 
Space General Corporation, 38 
Space Goals Task Force, 102 
Space Industries Company, 71 
Space Infrared Telescope Facility, 87, 187 
Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the Next Century, 154 
Space Science Board, National Academy of  Sciences, 112 
Space Science Student Involvement Program (SSIP), 43 
Space Services, 34,68, 113, 143,209 
Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), 168, 175, 182,213 
Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA), 156 
Space Shuttle Commission, 12 
Space Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF), 148 
Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Motor (SRM), 75, 134,203 
Space Station, 3, 15, 23, 24, 26, 27, 31, 32, 36, 38-42, 44,48, 49, 52,55,56, 59-63, 
68, 70, 73-75, 77, 81, 83, 86, 88, 89, 95, 97-99, 102, 105, 107, 108, 110, 112- 
114, 119-122, 125, 127-129, 133, 135, 137-144,147, 154, 159, 160,164, 169, 
171-173, 175, 176, 180, 181, 187, 189, 190, 197, 197-200, 1100,203, 207,208, 
211,212,213,  214, 216,221, 224, 227, 231, 238, 240, 243,244, 247,248, 251- 
253 ,256 ,257 ,259 ,265 ,272 ,274 ,277 ,279 ,281 ,282 ,284 ,285 ,287 ,295  
Space Station Freedom Program, 200,  1100,216,221,265 
Space Systems Development Agreement, 186 
Space Telescope Science Institute, 60, 185, 186 
Space Tug, 48,267 
Space-borne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C), 133 
Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF-2), 197 
SPACEHAB, 7,52, 186,295 

359 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Spacelab, 32, 37,45,65, 83, 85, 163, 223,233,246,  248, 252, 279 
Spacenet III Geostar R01,  161 
Spaceplane Hermes, 73 
Spain, 5 ,  160 
Spartan UV  telescope,  17 
Spartan-Halley spacecraft, 64 
Speaks, Larry, 57 
Sport Aviation Exhibition, 53, 121 
SPOT, 86,220,246,290 
Springer, Robert C., 296 
SR-71 Blackbird, 256 
Sriharikota,  106, 181 
ST-6,220 
Stanford University, 6, 31, 115 
Star Find  satellites, 11 3 
Star Wars, 32,282 
START (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty), 258 
Steering, 3,40, 64,  147,278 
Sterling Federal Systems, Inc., 269 
Stirling engine, 78 
Stirling Technology Company, 78 
Stofan,Andrew J . ,   48,63, 139, 154, 160 
Stottlemeyer, David L., 251 
Strategic Air Command, 86 
Strategic Defense Initiative, 26, 32, 88, 142, 150, 153, 208,227,238,  248, 252,265, 
282 
Structural Mechanics Branch, 45 
STS-26, 129, 143, 148, 149, 160, 161, 178-180, 185, 190-192 
STS-27, 130, 197, 199 
STS-28, 143,207,209,216,227,245 
STS-31,262 
STS-33,220,238 
STS-35, 163,290 
STS-38,288 
STS-51A, 69 
STS-7,69 
Student Newspaper Competition, 43 
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, 5 ,  32, 33,  159, 252 
Suisei (Comet), 17 
Sullivan, Kathryn, 54 
Sultan bin Salman, 122 
super computer, 45 
Superbud-A communications satellite, 219 
Supercomputer, 53, 80,96, 102, 121, 156, 179, 180, 187, 188 

360 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Sutter, Joseph F., 77 
Sverdrup Technology, 52 
SYNCOM IV,  296 
Synthetic Aperture Radar, 47, 133, 151, 161, 177, 179 
Szalai, Kenneth J., 287 
T-38, 30,216, 271 
Tanner, E.  Ray, 83, 1100 
Tanner, Ray, 83, 1100,221 
Taurus, 34,220,271 
Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk, 34 
Teacher in Space Program, 13,44 
Technology Utilization Foundation, 289 
Teflon, 51 
TELE-X,  211 
Telecom  lC ,  161 
Teledyne Brown Engineering, 252 
Teresat, Inc., 46, 96 
Tesch, Gary L.,  185 
Texas A&M Research Foundation, 123 
Thermal Control, 26 
Thermal Infrared Radiometer Experiment (TIREX), 109 
Thomas, John W.,  37,77, 122,214 
Thompson, James R.,  19,25,31,59,223 
Titan, 33, 37, 38,43,47, 51, 63,67, 96, 98, 103, 111, 126, 135, 139, 150, 189, 190, 
197 ,215 ,219 ,221 ,231 ,247 ,258 ,267 ,269 ,281 ,283 ,287 ,288  
Titov, Vladimir, 143, 172, 197, 1100 
TM-2,98 
TM-3,  122, 144 
TM-4, 142 
TM-7,  199,214 
TOMSMeteor-3,274 
TopexPoseidon, 51 ,   104, 105 
Topography Experiment for Ocean Circulation, 8 
Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), 273,285 
Townsend, Jr., John W.,  119 
Tracking and Data Relay  Satellite (TDRS), 19,42, 78,249 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, 14 
Trinh, Eugene H.,  280 
Transmitter, 20,209,274 
Transpace Carriers, Inc., 62,75 
Trident 1, 153 
Trident II, 208 
Trident submarine, 70 
Triton, 103,228,235,239 

361 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Truly, Richard H.,  15,21, 27,35, 37,45,47,54,79,95, 105, 114, 119, 122, 123, 
137, 177, 191,211,216,223,239 
TRW, 36,42,48, 186,265,267 
U.S. Deep Space Network, 5 
U.S. Department of Energy, 76 
US.-Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS-I),  107 
UGC-7396,229 
Ulysses,  13, 19,47, 82, 96, 107, 134, 163, 247, 248, 284, 290,296 
UM675,287 
UNISTICK control system, 64 
United Kingdom,  12,24 
United Nations (U.N.),  150 
United Technologies, 43, 80, 125, 135,224, 246,266 
United Technologies Chemical System Division,  125 
University of Alabama, 40,  182 
University of Arizona, 6, 59 
University of C o l o r a d d e n t e r  for Bioserve Space Technologies, 123 
University of Denver, 123 
University of Hawaii, 168 
University of Houston, 46, 56, 274 
University of Illinois,  11 
University of London, 24 
University of Maryland,  113 
University of New Hampshire, 99 
University of  South Carolina, 4 
University of Tennessee, 123 
University of Utah, 20 
University of Washington, 123, 219 
University of Wisconsin, 56 
Uranus, 8,89,220,223,228 
Utah, 20,75,96, 115, 125, 128, 142, 144, 147, 155, 163, 169, 177, 186 
Utsman, Thomas E., 243 
Vandenberg Air Force Base, 19,30, 33,41,46, 57, 63,70, 98,  119, 135, 153, 169, 
177, 187, 189, 191,199,216,235,237,247,254,283 
Van Hoften, James, 46 
Vega, 5,  17,21, 22, 24, 31 
Venus, 4, 5 ,  17, 82, 101, 103, 134, 141, 162, 172, 199, 215, 235, 237, 243,252, 277, 
279,281,286,287,296 
Venus Radar Mapper, 4,215 
Vertical Lift, 62, 71 
Vertical Motion Simulator, 121 
Vertical Stacking, 29 
Very Large Array (VLA), 182, 185 
Very Long Baseline Interferometry, 73,109 

362 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Vibrating Analyzer, 20 
Video Harp, 289 
Viktorenko, Alexander S . ,  122,231 
Vortex breakdown, 156, 157 
Voyager 2 Spacecraft, 8, 182, 198Wallops Island, 68, 109, 113, 118, 142, 151,200 
Watson, Robert T., 262 
Weather Satellite, 37,63,68,70,99, 181, 189, 191, 231 
Weaver, Harold, 6 
Weitz, Paul J., 76, 89 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 7 1 
Wet Countdown Demonstration Test (WCDT), 185 
White 11, Edward H.,  30 
White House, 11, 12, 45,47,57, 60-62,74, 76, 86, 120, 154, 181,211,232,245, 
246,25 1,258,272,279,295 
White House Office of  Science and Technology Policy, 76 
White Sands Missile Range, 63, 209,263 
Whitford, William K . ,  37 
Wilcox, William, 56 
Wilkening, Laurel, 54 
Williams, Clifton, 30 
Williams, Donald E., 236, 254 
Wilson, R., 24 
Wind and Cloud No.  1, 189 
WindTunnels,  80, 118, 119, 121, 141, 286 
Wright Memorial Trophy, 77 
Wyle Laboratories’ Scientific Services & Systems Group, 128 
X-29 program, 269 
X-30 flight vehicle, 127 
X-30 National Aerospace Plane, 246 
X-band synthetic aperture radar (X-SAR), 133 
X-ray Astrophysics Facility, 80, 83, 86, 147, 186 
X-ray spectrometer, 155 
X-ray telescope, 63, 187, 197,267,281,290 
X-SAR, 133 
X-Wing Rotor Systems Research Aircraft, 62 
Yeager, Jeana, 69 
Young, Donald, 20 
Young, John W.,  108, 123 
Young, Leslie, 176 
Young, Wayne R., 76 
Zaragoza Air Base, 160 
Zenit booster, 284 

363 

About the Compilers 

Ihor Y.  Gawdiak, a senior research analyst at the Library of Congress Federal 
Research Division, has  done  extensive research and  written numerous gov- 
ernment  studies  on  Soviet and  East  European political  and  military  topics. 
Since the demise of  the Soviet Union, he has continued to research and write 
primarily  on  political  and military developments in  the  Newly  Independent 
States.  He  is  the  author of  the  “Nationalities and Religions” chapter in  the 
Soviet  Union: A  Country  Study  and  editor  of  Czechoslovakia:  A  Country 
Study, both published by  the Department of  the Army  as part  of  its Country 
Studies/Area Handbook Program. In  addition, he  is  the  author of  the NASA  
Historical Data Book, Volume n/: NASA  Resources 1969-1978.  He is also the 
editor of Ukraine: A Country Study and The Czech Republic: A Country Study, 
both of  which are are scheduled for publication at a  later date. Mr. Gawdiak 
received  his  B.A.  and  M.A.  degrees  in  International Relations  from  Clark 
University in Worcester, Massachusetts. He  has  completed all requirements 
and is working on his dissertation in the doctoral program in Russian History 
at the University of  Maryland. 

Ramdn  J.  Mird  was  a  Latin  American  research  analyst  at  the  Library  of 
Congress Federal Research division  from  1992 to  1996. He  has  a  B.A.  in 
Political  Science  from  the  University  of  Florida  and  an  M.A.  in  Latin 
American Studies from Georgetown University. He resigned from the Library 
of  Congress in  1996 to  accept a  fellowship for  a  doctoral program  in  Latin 
American Studies at Georgetown. 

Sam Stueland has been  a research analyst at the Library of  Congress Federal 
Research Division since 1992 where he has worked on a number of  different 
projects.  Prior  to  joining  the  Library  of  Congress,  Mr.  Stueland  was  a 
researcher at the Smithsonian Institute National Museum of American History, 
Department of History of Science and Technology. He graduated Summa Cum 
Laude in American History from Gallaudet University in  1991.  He has pub- 
lished articles in  “Technology and  Culture” and  “Railroad History.” 

365 

The NASA History Series 

Reference  Works, NASA SP-4000: 
Grimwood, James M. Project Mercury: A Chronology. (NASA SP-4001, 1963). 
Grimwood, James M., and Hacker, Barton C., with Vorzimmer, Peter J. Project 
Gemini Technology and Operations: A Chronology. (NASA SP-4002, 1969). 
Link, Mae Mills. Space Medicine in Project Mercury. (NASA SP-4003, 1965). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1963: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4004, 1964). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1964: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4005, 1965). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1965: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4006, 1966). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1966: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4007, 1967). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1967: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4008,1968). 
Ertel, Ivan D.,  and Morse, Mary Louise. The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology, 
Volume I ,  Through November  7,1962. (NASA SP-4009, 1969). 
Morse, Mary Louise, and Bays, Jean Kernahan. The Apollo Spacecraft: A 
Chronology, Volume 11, November  8,1962-September 30,1964. (NASA SP- 
4009,  1973). 
Brooks, Courtney G., and Ertel, Ivan D.  The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology, 
Volume I l l ,  October I ,  1964-January 20, 1966. (NASA SP-4009, 1973). 
Ertel, Ivan D., and Newkirk, Roland W.,  with Brooks, Courtney G. The Apollo 
Spacecraft: A Chronology, Volume N ,  January 21,1966-July 13, 1974. (NASA 
SP-4009, 1978). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics,  1968: Chronology of Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4010, 1969). 
Newkirk, Roland W.,  and Ertel, Ivan D., with Brooks, Courtney G. Skylab: A 
Chronology. (NASA SP-4011, 1977). 
Van Nimmen, Jane, and Bruno, Leonard C., with Rosholt, Robert L. NASA 
Historical Data Book, Vol. I :  NASA Resources,  1958-1968. (NASA SP-4012, 
1976, rep. ed. 1988). 
Ezell, Linda Neuman. NASA Historical Data Book, Vol 11: Programs and Projects, 
1958-1968. (NASA SP-4012, 1988). 
Ezell, Linda Neuman. NASA Historical Data Book, Vol. I l l :  Programs and Projects, 
1969-1978. (NASA SP-4012, 1988). 

367 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

T h e  NASA Wstory  Series 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1969: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4014, 1970). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1970: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4015, 1972). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, I971 : Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4016, 1972). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1972: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4017, 1974). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1973: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4018, 1975). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1974: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4019, 1977). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1975: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4020, 1979). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1976: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4021, 1984). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1977: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4022, 1986). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1978: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4023, 1986). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1979-1984: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and 
Policy. (NASA 813-4024, 1988). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1985: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NASA SP-4025, 1990). 
Gawdiak, Ihor Y.  Compiler. NASA Historical Data Book, Vol. IV: NASA Resources, 
1969-1978. (NASA SP-4012, 1994). 
Noordung, Hermann. The Problem of  Space Travel: The Rocket Motor. Ernst 
Stuhlinger, and J.D.  Hunley, with Jennifer Garland. Editors. (NASA SP-4026, 
1995). 
Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1991 -1995: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and 
Policy. (NASA SP-4027, 1997). 

Management Histories, NASA  SP-4100: 
Rosholt, Robert L. An Administrative History of NASA, 1958-1963. (NASA SP-4101, 
1966). 
Levine, Arnold S. Managing NASA in the Apollo Era. (NASA SP-4102, 1982). 
Roland, Alex. Model Research: The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, 
1915-1958. (NASA SP-4103, 1985). 
Fries, Sylvia D. NASA Engineers and  the Age of Apollo (NASA SP-4104, 1992). 
Glennan, T. Keith. The Birth of NASA: The Diary of  T. Keith Glennan, edited by  J.D. 
Hunley. (NASA SP-4105, 1993). 

368 

The NASA History Series 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

Seamans, Robert C., Jr. Aiming at Targets: The Autobiography  of Robert C. 
Seamans, Jr.  (NASA SP-4106, 1996). 

Project Histories, NASA SP-4200: 

Swenson, Loyd S., Jr., Grimwood, James M., and Alexander, Charles C. This New 
Ocean: A History  of Project Mercury.  (NASA SP-4201, 1966). 
Green, Constance McL.,  and Lomask, Milton. Vanguard: A History.  (NASA SP- 
4202, 1970; rep. ed. Smithsonian Institution Press, 1971). 
Hacker, Barton C., and Grimwood, James M. On  Shoulders of  Titans: A History  of 
Project Gemini. (NASA SP-4203, 1977). 
Benson, Charles D.  and Faherty, William Barnaby. Moonport: A History  of Apollo 
Launch Facilities and Operations. (NASA SP-4204, 1978). 
Brooks, Courtney G., Grimwood, James M., and Swenson, Loyd S . ,  Jr. Chariotsfor 
Apollo: A History  of  Manned Lunar Spacecraft.  (NASA SP-4205, 1979). 
Bilstein, Roger E. Stages to  Saturn: A Technological History  of  the ApollolSaturn 
Launch Vehicles. (NASA SP-4206, 1980; paperback reprint 1996). 
Compton, W.  David, and Benson, Charles D. Living and Working in Space: A 
History  of  Skylab.  (NASA SP-4208, 1983). 
Ezell, Edward Clinton, and Ezell, Linda Neuman. The Partnership: A History  of  the 
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA SP-4209, 1978). 
Hall, R. Cargill. Lunar Impact: A History  of  Project Ranger. (NASA SP-4210, 1977). 
Newell, Homer E. Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of  Space Science.  (NASA 
SP-4211, 1980). 
Ezell, Edward Clinton, and Ezell, Linda Neuman. On Mars: Exploration  of  the Red 
Planet, 1958-1978. (NASA SP-4212, 1984). 
Pitts, John A. The Human Factor: Biomedicine  in the Manned Space Program  to 
1980. (NASA SP-4213, 1985). 
Compton, W.  David. Where No Man Has Gone Before: A History  of Apollo Lunar 
Exploration Missions.  (NASA SP-4214, 1989). 
Naugle, John E. First Among Equals: The Selection ofNASA Space Science 
Experiments  (NASA SP-4215, 1991). 
Wallace, Lane E. Airborne  Trailblazer: Two Decades with NASA Langley’s Boeing 
737 Flying Laboratory. (NASA SP-4216, 1994). 
Butrica, Andrew J. Editor. Beyond the Ionosphere: Fiftv Years of  Satellite 
Communication. (NASA SP-4217, 1997). 
Butrica, Andrews J. To See the Unseen: A History of  Planetary Radar Astronomy. 
(NASA SP-4218, 1996). 

369 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

The NASA History Series 

Center Histories, NASA SP-4300: 
Rosenthal, Alfred. Venture into Space: Early Years of  Goddard Space Flight Center. 
(NASA SP-4301, 1985). 
Hartman, Edwin, P.  Adventures in Research: A History of Ames Research Center, 
1940-1965. (NASA SP-4302, 1970). 
Hallion, Richard P.  On  the Frontier: Flight Research at Dryden, 1946-1981. (NASA 
SP-4303, 1984). 
Muenger, Elizabeth A. Searching the Horizon: A History of Ames Research Center, 
1940-1976. (NASA SP-4304, 1985). 
Hansen, James R. Engineer in Charge: A History of  the Langley Aeronautical 
Laboratory, 1917-1958. (NASA SP-4305, 1987). 
Dawson, Virginia P.  Engines and Innovation: Lewis Laboratory and American 
Propulsion Technology. (NASA SP-4306, 1991). 
Dethloff, Henry C.  “Suddenly Tomorrow Came...”: A History of  the Johnson Space 
Center, 1957-1990.  (NASA SP-4307, 1993). 
Hansen, James R. Spaceflight Revolution: NASA Langley Research Center from 
Sputnik to Apollo (NASA SP-4308, 1995). 
Wallace, Lane E. Flights of Discovery: An Illustrated History of  the Dryden Flight 
Research Center. (NASA SP-4309, 1996). 

General Histories, NASA  SP-4400: 
Corliss, William R. NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958-1968: A Historical Summary. 
(NASA SP-4401, 1971). 
Wells, Helen T., Whiteley, Susan H., and Karegeannes, Carrie. Origins of NASA 
Names. (NASA SP-4402, 1976). 
Anderson, Frank W.,  Jr., Orders of Magnitude: A History of  NACA and NASA, 1915- 
1980. (NASA SP-4403, 1981). 
Sloop, John L. Liquid Hydrogen as a Propulsion Fuel, 1945-1959. (NASA SP-4404, 
1978). 
Roland, Alex. Editor. A Spacefaring People: Perspectives on Early Spaceflight. 
(NASA SP-4405, 1985). 
Bilstein, Roger E, Orders of Magnitude: A History of  the NACA and NASA, 1915- 
1990. (NASA SP-4406, 1989). 
Logsdon, John M. General Editor. With Lear, Linda J., Warren-Findley, Jannelle, 
Williamson, Ray A,, and Day, Dwayne A. Exploring  the Unknown: Selected 
Documents in the History of  the US. Civil Space Program, Volume I:  
Organizing for Exploration. (NASA SP-4407, 1995). 
Logsdon, John M. General Editor. With Day, Dwayne A., and Launius, Roger D. 
Exploring  the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of  the US. Civil 
Space Program, Volume I I :   External Relationships. (NASA SP-4407, 1996). 

370 

ISBN   0-16-049134-7 

