NASA  SP-2000-4028 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  
AERONAUTICS,  199 1 - 1995 
A Chronology 

Compiled by  Ihor Y.  Gawdiak and Charles Shetland 

THE NASA HISTORY SERIES 

National  Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Office of  Policy  and Plans 
NASA History Division 
Washington, DC 
2000 

For sale by  the U.S. Government Printing  Office 
Superintendent of  Documents, Mail  Stop: SSOP. Washington. DC  20402 -9328  
I SBN  0 - 1  6-050408-2 

I 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Gawdiak, Ihor,  1935- 
Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1991-1995  : a  chronology  /  by  Ihor  Y. 
Gawdiak and Charles Shetland. 
p.  cm. - (NASA history  series) 
Includes index. 
2. Aeronautics-Chronology. 
1 .  Astronautics-Chronology. 
I.  Shetland, Charles,  19??-.  111. Title. 
IV.  Series. 
TL788.5.G38  1997 
629, I  ' 09--dc2  1 

97-202 15 
CIP 

Preface 

This   chronology of  events  in  aeronautics,  aviation, space science, and  space 
exploration was  prepared  by  the   Federal  Research  Division  of  the   Library of 
Congress and RSlS for  the  History Division of  the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration  (NA SA ) .  It  covers the  years  1991-1995 and  continues 
the  series of  annual chronologies published by  NASA. 

T h e   present  volume  uses  the  format  of  the   previous  edition  of  this  series, 
Astronautics  and Aeronautics,  1986- 1990: A  Chronology.  It  also  integrates,  in 
the  appendices,  information  presented  in  previous publications. 

Contents 

. . .  
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  111 

Astronautics  and Aeronautics.  1991  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3 

Astronautics  and Aeronautics.  1992 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
165 

Astronautics  and Aeronautics.  1993 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
291 

Astronautics  and Aeronautics.  1994  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  453 

Astronautics  and Aeronautics.  1995 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
619 

Appendix A 
Satellites. Space Probes.  and  Human  Space Flights 

. . . . . . . . . . . .  
671 

Appendix  B 
Abbreviations  of  References 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
729 

Index 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
735 

T h e  NASA  History  Series 

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
765 

About  the Compilers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  773 

January 

January  I  : Soviet  space  program  experts  announced  that  the  40-ton  Soviet 
Space Station Salyut 7 would  break up and fall  to Earth  in February. Tass, the 
o f ic ia l  Soviet press agency, implied Soviet officials had  lost control of the  sta- 
tion  when  it  said  the   authorities  would  issue  a "timely warning"  to all  coun- 
tries o n  whose territory station  "parts are likely to  fall." Salyut 7 was  launched 
in  1982 and  last  inhabited  in  1986, holding  up  to six  astronauts. T h e  Soviet 
Union  had  planned  to  send  a  rescue mission with  the   Soviet  Space  Shuttle 
Buran but  the Shuttle was  delayed.  (NY Times, J a n  1/91) 

January 2 :  Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology 
Alan  Gu th   theo- 
rized that during a fraction of  a second immediately after the explosion known 
as  the  Big  Bang,  the  universe  underwent  phenomenal  growth.  It  ballooned 
faster  than  the  speed of  light from being smaller than an  atom  to a  size larger 
than  astronomers can  see with  their  most  powerful  telescopes.  Nearly  every- 
thing  that  now  exists had  its origin  during  this  expansion,  which G u t h  calls 
inflation.  ( W S J ,  Jan  2/91) 

January 3: NASA  announced  that  it  recently  signed  an  agreement with  the 
European Space Agency  (ESA) to cooperate  in developing the Cassini space- 
craft  to  study  Saturn.  Th e   Cassini  spacecraft  would  consist  of  the  Saturn 
Orbiter provided  by  NASA and  the  Huygens Probe System provided by  ESA. 
I t  was scheduled for  launch by NASA on  a Titan  IVICentaur vehicle  in April 
1996.  NASA  would  provide  overall  Cassini  mission  operations  and  ESA 
would  support  probe  operations.  T h e   flight  from  launch  to  Saturn  orbital 
insertion requires approximately seven years; once there,  the mission baseline 
lifetime is  four years.  (NASA  Release 91-1) 

Th e  findings of  the  Infrared Astronomical Satellite have caused astronomers 
to  question  part  of  the  Big  Bang  theory,  according  to  a  report  by  Dr.  Will 
Saunders of Oxford University and his colleagues in the journal N a w e .  Th e  cold 
dark  matter  model  cannot  explain  the  giant  superstructures and  companion 
supervoids found  in  galactic surveys. These  structures appear  too  vast  to  have 
formed since the Big Bang. (NY Times, Jan  3/91; W Post, Jan  6/91; LA Times, J an  
4/91) 

Orbital Sciences Corporation  in Fairfax County, Virginia was  issued  its first 
license  for  commercial  space  launches.  Th e   Department  of  Transportation 
licensed  three  launches  to  be  used  for  experiments o n  the  impact  of  weight- 
lessness on  payloads for the Center for the Commercial Development of Space 
at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Orbital, which launched an exper- 
imental winged Pegasus rocket from a NASA B-52 bomber  last year, was  to  use 
a different technology for the DOT-licensed flights. It would launch Prospector 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY 1991 

rockets developed by  the company from a Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch pad 
refurbished by Orbital. Th e   first  launch  was  scheduled for  March  1991, fol- 
lowed  by  launches in  December  1991 and  December  1992. (W  Post, J a n  3/91) 

NASA announced  that  in January 1991, it would conduct experiments from 
an orbiting satellite  to test  the possibility of  creating a n  artificial aurora. T h e  
Combined  Release  and  Radiation  Effects  Satellite  (CRRES) was  to  release 
clouds of  barium  and  lithium  vapor  in  the  Earth's magnetosphere, the  region 
above the atmosphere. 
Th e  CRRES program  is  a joint  NASA  (through its Marshall Space Flight 
Center  in  Huntsville,  Alabama)-U.S.  Air  Force  (Department  of  Defense 
Space Test Program) effort to study the Earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere 
and  to monitor  the  effects of  the space radiation  environment o n  sophisticat- 
ed  electronics. Through  the  CRRES  program's artificial cloud-release experi- 
ments, scientists seek  to understand  the processes  that  cause auroras by  using 
artificial charged-particle clouds to  induce them. 
Seven releases were  planned,  three  in which  lithium  would  produce a  red 
glow  and  four  of  barium, which  would  glow  green  and  purple. Th e  possible 
dates for  the  releases  were January  10, 12, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21,  23,  24,  and  25. 
Exact  times  for  the releases, which were  to  occur over South America at alti- 
tudes  between  3,000  and  21,000  miles,  were  to  be  announced.  (NASA  
Release 91 - 2 )  

Th e   Environmental  Quality  Permit  Board  for  the  State  of  Mississippi  in 
Jackson approved an air  emissions and waste water discharge plan  of NASA, 
needed  to   test-fire rocket  motors  at  the John  C. Stennis  Space Center  near 
Bay  S t .  Louis. Water quality certification  remained  to be  granted. T h e  Board 
had one opposing vote from the head of  the Department  of Wild Life because 
ot NASA's 
to  fill in 69 acres of  wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. T h e  
official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that  there be  no  
net  loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, J an  3/91) 

January  4:  James W.  McCulla, Director  of Media Services, NASA,  replied  to 
an  op-ed  article  in  the Washington  Post  by  Jessica Mathews,  vice  president of 
World Resources Institute. Mathews maintained  that there was no  justification 
for  the  U.S.  space  exploration  program  now  that  the   Cold  War  had  ended. 
McCulla replied that  learning more  about the universe, Earth systems, and  life 
beyond Earth were  significant goals. (W  Post, J an  4/91; P  Inq ,  J a n  4/91) 

January 7 :  NASA named Margaret G. Finarelli as Associate Administrator  for 
External  Relations  and  J o h n   D.  Schumacher  as  Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for External Relations. Finarelli, who has served in a number of 
U .S .   government  agencies,  joined  NASA   in  1981  as  Chief  of  th e  
International  Planning  and  Programs mce.  Schumacher  came to  NASA   in 
1989 from  a  law practice  in New York  City. (NASA  Release 91-3) 

JANUARY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

T h e  N e w  York  Times reported that the United States would  announce today 
a t  a scientific meeting in New Mexico its intention to buy an advanced Soviet 
nuclear  reactor,  known  as  Topaz  2 ,   built  to   power  systems  in  space.  T h e  
United States at present has no  working nuclear reactors in orbit and  this pur- 
chase constitutes  a high point  in  East-West cooperation  on  technical  matters. 
Topaz  2  is  designed  to operate  up  to  five years  in  space and  will  be  set  up  in 
the  Albuquerque  area.  It was  to be  tested  by  the  University of New  Mexico, 
the  Sandia National Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the  
Air Force Phillips Laboratory. T h e  Topaz  2  can generate from 6,000 to  10,000 
watts of  electricity. ( N Y  Times, J an  7/91) 

A n  unmanned  $45   million Delta  2  rocket  carrying a $1 10 million  NATO 
communications satellite  to  replace an  older military spacecraft was  launched 
on  January  7  from  Cape Canaveral  Air Force Station  in  Florida. Th e  rocket 
was  built  by  McDonnell  Douglas Space Systems Company  and was  the  202d 
launch  of  a  Delta.  Th e   satellite,  which  would  enable  political  and  military 
leaders  in  the NATO area  to communicate  with one another, was  the  first of 
two  advanced  NATO  4  satellites  built  by  British Aerospace.  (AP, J a n  7/91; 
N Y  Times,  J an  919 1 ) 

A n   editorial  deplored  efforts  of  the  Virginia  congressional  delegation  to 
block  NASA's  possible  closing  of  its  Reston,  Virginia,  office.  T h e   editorial 
stated  that  to  cut  space  program  costs, which  suffer  from  a  bloated  manage- 
ment  structure,  streamlining  must  occur  and  the  Reston  office  was  a  good 
place  to begin.  (Space  News ,   J a n  7-20191) 

NASA   scientist  Thomas  J .   Miller  said  NASA   would  establish  a  Nuclear 
Propulsion Systems Office at Lewis Research Center  in early 1991 to develop 
nuclear propulsion for spacecraft. Th e  Defense and Energy departments would 
join  in this project; the NASA  FY  1991 budget  included about $1 million  for 
nuclear  propulsion development.  Such propulsion could  significantly reduce 
the  time  required  from Earth  to  the Moon  or Mars.  (AvWk, Jan  7/91) 

T h e   Birmingham  Pos t-Hera ld ,   in  a  series of  articles  on   the  space  program, 
expressed concern  that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center 
in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at 
its  height  in   1970.  By  1989,  contractor  employees  working  on   some  20 
Marshall projects numbered  13,398, more than four times as many as the  civil 
service  staff.  This meant  that  contracts  sometimes could  not  be  monitored 
closely, which  probably was  a factor in  the cost overrun of  the  orbital maneu- 
vering vehicle,  leading  to NASA's  cancellation of  the program.  (Birmingham 
Pos t-Hera ld ,  J a n  7/91) 

NASA's  Kennedy Space Center  asked  for  proposals  for  a follow-on system 
to  its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). Th e  system was  to be  used 

A S TRONAU T IC S   ANL]  A ERONA l J T lC S  

JANUARY   1991 

t o  manage  da ta   relating   t o  payloads  for Space  Shu t t le s  and   iiltimately  for  t h e  
Space   S t a t i o n .  T h e  new   system,  t o  cover   a  10-year period,  was  t o   include   a 
relational  database  management   suhsystem, a project  management   subsystem, 
a techn ica l  documen ta t ion  suhsystem, and  a page printing   subsystem.  (Federctl 
Computer Week ,  J a n  719 1 ) 

NASA's Godda rd  Space  Flight C e n t e r  in  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland ,  announced  
t h a t   it  planned   t o  request proposals  for a study for t h e  Space  Network  C o n t r o l  
( S N C ) .  If  t h e  S N C  becomes  a project,  it  would  result  in  a new  con t ro l  cen te r  
in  t ime   for  t h e   Advanced   Tracking   and   Data   Relay  Sa te l l i te   System 
(ATDRSS )  in  1997 approximately. T h e  ATDRSS  would  increaae serwces and  
add  more  satellites.  (Federal Computer  Week ,  J a n  719 1 ) 

K e n n e t h   Szalai,  recently  named   Director   of  NASA's Ames-Dryden   Flight 
Research  Facility  a t  Edwards Air   Force  Base, stated   t h a t  N A S A  was pu t t ing  a 
new  emphasis  o n  aeronautics .  T h e  facility's numbe r  o n e  project   involved  t h e  
F-18  high-angle-of-attack  program  t o  he lp  design more maneuverable  aircraft. 
Similar  work  was  underway  o n  t h e  X-29 as well  as  m ~ d i f i c a t i o n s  o n  t h e  F-15 
jet  fighter  and   testing  of  Space   S h u t t l e  landing   gear  systems.  (Antelope Valley 
Press, J a n  7 /91 )  

January 8 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronaut   William  F.  Fisher,  M .D . ,   wo i~ ld  
resign  effective January   31 ,   1991. H e  was  t o  return   t o  full-time  medical  prac- 
tice   in  Texas. W i t h  N A S A  since   1980 ,  Fisher  took  part  in  research  and   in  t h e  
twen t ie th   Space   S h u t t l e   mission  in  August  1985   when   h e   engaged  in  t h e  
longest  spacewalk in  t h e  history  of  spaceflight.  ( N A S A  release  91 -4 ;  UP I ,  J a n  
819 1 

In  a commen ta ry  o n  t h e  Report o f  the Advisory  Committee on  the  Future of  the 
U . S .  Space  Program,  released  in  December  1990 ,  A l s ton   C h a s e  pointed   oilt 
t h a t   t h e  report  stressed  t h a t   among  NASA's major  prohlems  were  t h a t   it  "haa 
grown  too  large and   is  trying  t o  accomplish  very complex  tasks in which   the re  
is  little   margin  for  error." A s  a n  example  of  NASA's growth ,   t h e  report   cited  
t h a t  Viking  involved  some   13 ,000  people,  whereas  Apollo   involved   180 ,000 .  
( W  Xmes, J a n  8 / 9 1 )  

A n   article   emphasized  t h e   problems  of  t h e   Sov ie t   space  program  arising 
from  econom ic   a n d   political  causes.  T h e   Space   S h u t t l e ,  unveiled  two   years 
previously,  had   n o t   yet  carried  astronauts   i n t o   space. T h e   100-foot  long  Mir 
Space   S t a t i o n   underwent   repeated  cuts   and   in   1988  t h e   "permanent"   Space  
S t a t i o n   was  left  empty   for  four  mon th s ;   recently,  th ree -man   crews  were 
reduced  to   two.  Military  rocket  launchings  con t inue   but  space program  funds 
were cu t   10  percent   two years in a row. As a result, t h e  reusable S h u t t l e  Ruran ,  
which   was  t o  rendezvous with   Salyut  7 and  bring  it  back  t o  Earth ,  was  unable  
t o  d o  so. Sov ie t  efforts  t o  fund  t h e  space program  th rough  foreign sales proved 
disappointing .   (NY Times, J a n  8 /91 )  

JANUARY   1991 

CHRONOLOGY   199 1 

Resigning astronaut Dr. William E Fisher warned that  the  planned $37 billion 
NASA   Space Station  could be  canceled  if  its redesign  is  superficial. H e  stated 
that   the  Space Station needed  total  rethinking, adding tha t  both Congress and 
a Wh i te  House panel  also  indicated such a need.  (NY Times, J a n  9/91) 

Whereas NASA's Goddard  Institute  for Space Studies in New York  plans  to  
announce   tha t   1990  was  the   hottest   year  ever  recorded,  NASA's  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Cen te r   in  Huntsville,  Alabama,  says  1990 was  only  the   fourth 
hottest   year  since  1979.  T h e   difference  is  accounted  for  by  the   fact  tha t  
Goddard  uses ground-based  thermometers  to record  local heat  while Marshall 
uses satellites, which broadly measure atmospheric temperature worldwide. In  
addition  to   t h e   global  temperature  analysis,  the   World  Resources  Institute 
released  two  related  studies.  O n e   was  by  Richard  Heim   of  t h e   National  
Oceanic   and   Atmospheric  Administration's  Global  Climate   Laboratory. 
(WSJ, J a n  8/91;  W Pos t ,Jan  10191; UP I ,  J a n  10191; LA Times, J a n  10191; CSM, 
J a n  16/91 ; NY  Times M a g a ~ n e ,  Feb  319 1 ) 

T h e   Birmingham  Post-Herald  expressed  the   concern  of  some  NASA   staff 
over  the   number  of  flight  waivers  NASA   had  issued.  NASA   issues  such 
waivers o n  certain  critical  items rather  t h a n  change  the  Shu t t le  design, which 
would  be  very  costly. Statistics  indicate  tha t   the   number of  waivers approved 
since the  Challenger  accident more  than   tripled. According  to  Frank Pizzano, 
head  of  the   reliability  and   maintainability  engineering  division  a t   Marshall 
Space Flight Cen te r  in Huntsville, Alabama, t h e   increase results from stricter 
standards  for  waivers  but  many  weaknesses  were  eliminated  in  the   Shu t t le  
redesign after  the  Challenger  accident.  (Birmingham Post-Herald, J a n  8/91)  

January  9: NASA  announced  it modified its Space Shu t t le  orbiter production 
contract  with Rockwell International  Corporation ,  Space Systems Division in 
Downey, California. T h e  modifications,  a t  a cost of  $93.5 million, extend   the  
mission  duration  of  Columbia  flights from  10  days  to   16  days, plus  a  two-day 
contingency .   Measures  required  include  a  regenerative  carbon   dioxide 
removal system, improved waste collection provisions, added gaseous nitrogen 
and crew stowage provisions,  and  additional power furnished  by an  Extended 
Duration  Orbiter   cryogenic  pallet  holding  spherical  tanks  of  liquid  oxygen. 
(NA SA  Release C91 -c )  

Construction of Endeavour, authorized by  Congress in  1987, is 90  percent com- 
plete and a t  a cost of  $1.88 billion, not  including main engines, was under budg- 
e t  and  on  schedule. Despite  improvements, the  command console  technology is 
20 years old to  be consistent with other orbiters. Endeavour has the capacity of 28- 
day flights; the rollout date was scheduled for April  1991. (CSM, Jan  9/91) 

NASA   planners  discovered  tha t   despite  the   problems  it  encountered ,  
Astro-1  brought  back  much  valuable  data   on   December  10 ,  1990. However, 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY  1991 

there  was  n o   money  in   the   FY  1992  budget  for  Astro-2.  Instead,  NASA  
appeared  to be  concentrating  o n  such priorities  as the  Space S ta t ion  program. 
T h e   Astro  program  is  Shuttle-dependent ,   with  the   assumption  tha t   the  
Shu t t le   would  provide  cheap   and  reliable  space  transportation.  T h e   Astro  
program needs  to be  reexamined.  (CSM ,  J a n  9/91)  

January  10: NASA  stated  tha t  an  artificial aurora borealis  lasting from five t o  
15 minutes would  be  created by  its satellite's  release of  chemicals  the   evening 
of  January 10. T h e  faux aurora  is part of  the  Combined  Release and  Radiation 
Effects Satellite  (CRRES)  project  of  NASA   and   t h e  Air  Force,   robing  t h e  
Earth's magnetic field.  (W  Post, J a n  11/91; UPI , J a n  10191; AP, J a n  11/91)  
NASA   announced   in   t h e   early  evening  of  January  10  tha t   bad  weather 
forced  t h e  cancellation  of  t h e  ~ l a n n e d  event .   (W  Post, J a n   10191; P  Inq, J a n  
10191; W Times, J a n  10191; AP, J a n  10191; UPI ,  J a n  10191) 

*President George  Bush  and  Vice President  Dan Quayle received  the  crew of 
the  Columbia Shu t t le  and  their  spouses.  (UP I ,  J a n  10191) 

NASA's  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen te r   (GSFC ) ,  Greenbelt ,   Maryland, 
announced  tha t  Advanced Computer  Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would 
provide  administrative   automated   da ta   processing  services  for  GSFC's 
Information Management  Division.  T h e  contract   would  take  effect  April  1, 
1991, and  would  consist  of  a one-year basic  period  and   four  one-year priced 
options  for a  total of  $58.8 million.  (NASA  Release C91 -d )  

janumy  1 1 : NASA  Administrator Richard H. Tmly announced additional actions 
to  implement  the recommendations of  the Advisory Committee on the Future of 
the U.S. Space Program. Truly briefed  the National  Space Council on  January 11 
on  the  status of  NASA's review. NASA   decided as  follows: Space science would 
remain NASA's  priority and NASA  would  implement  the  existing strategic plan, 
as  recommended  by  the  advisory committee. In  response  to  the  committee's rec- 
ommendation, NASA  planned to  form a special task force with the Department of 
Defense to assess development over the next two months of an evolutionary heavy- 
lift launch vehicle. Space Station Freedom restructuring activities, centering on life 
sciences on   microgravity  research  and  applications, conducted  in  concert  with 
international partners, would  be  extended to  incorporate the  committee's recom- 
mendations. NASA   would  move  with  the  Office  of  Personnel  Management  to 
structure a personnel management system that  recognizes NASA's special needs to 
attract and retain top-flight scientists, engineers, and other specialists. 
NASA  had  initiated  a number of  studies related to the  report. In addition, it 
was to consider the  committee's recommendations to conduct Mission to  Planet 
Earth as "a constantly  evolving program"; reestablish research and development 
to  support operational government environmental satellites; develop an  agency- 
wide space technology plan  to enable future NASA  missions and spur commer- 
cial  space activities; and  make  certain  organizational  changes  at  NASA ,   e.g., 

JANUARY 1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 I 

the  creation  of  an Office of  Exploration  and  an  Office  of  Human  Resources. 
(NASA Release 91-5; AP, Jan  11/91; Space News, J an  21-Feb 3/91) 

January  12: T h e  first  release  of  barium  vapor,  creating  a  green cloud,  by  the 
Combined  Release  and  Radiation  Effects  Satellite  occurred  the  evening  of 
January 12, NASA  announced. Th e  second  release  consisted of  lithium  vapor 
the night of  January 13, causing a red  cloud. ( P  Inq, J an  14/91; USA Toilay, J an  
14/91; NY  Times, J an  14/91; AP, Jan  13/91; UP1 ,Jan  12/91; W Post, J an  13/91) 

An  international conference at the University of California San Diego, spon- 
sored  by  the  university's  Institute  on   Global  Conflict  and  Cooperation,  the 
California Space Institute, and Los Alamos, New Mexico's National Laboratory 
Center for National  Security Studies expressed concern  over  the  rising  cost  of 
space exploration and the difficulty of  justifying such costly ventures as sending 
humans to Mars. Roger  Bonnet, chief scientist of  the European Space Agency, 
which  cooperates  with  the  United  States  on   the  Space  Station,  regretted 
American hesitations on  the Space Station. (LA Times, Jan  12/91) 

January  13: Reporting on  the huge volume  of  data being created daily  by  the 
government,  the  Los  Angeks  Xmes  stated  that  NASA's  Earth  Observing 
System, set  for  1998 launch, could  generate  the  equivalent  of  all  15 million 
books  in  the Library of  Congress every  12 weeks.  (LA  Times, J an  13/91) 

Work  done  for  NASA  in  connection  with  planning  space  habitats  where 
people would  live for years without  a change of  air revealed  that potted plants, 
including  their  soil  and  microorganisms,  act  to  "eat"  pollutants  commonly 
found  in  indoor air. (LA Times, J an  13/91) 

January  14:  NASA's  Cosmic  Background  Explorer  (COBE),  through  its  Fat 
Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped  the distribution of  nitro- 
gen  throughout  our  galaxy. The   COBE  team  reported  this  information  at  the 
American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measure- 
ments  are  unencumbered  by  atmospheric  and  instrument  emission  and  enable 
astronomers to  understand better  the  processes occurring throughout the  Milky 
Way.  Scientists can measure  the wavelength of  emissions from  ionized  nitrogen 
atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of  three 
instruments  aboard  COBE, NASA's first  satellite primarily  designed  for  cosmo- 
logical studies. Th e  data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center. 
Scientists at the  Philadelphia astronomical conference discussed  the impli- 
cations of COBE findings to date as they affected the Big  Bang theory, the evi- 
dence of  star clusters, and  other cosmic structures, which  present  theories do 
not  explain.  T h e  new  observations were  welcomed  as  putting  astronomical 
work on  a more  scientific footing. 
Scientists  at  the  Philadelphia  conference  also  discussed  the  report  of  the 
findings of  the Japanese Ginga  (Galaxy) satellite, concerning  a very  powerful 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY  199 1 

quasar output. T h e  Japanese*American team spent  a year  verifying the meas- 
urements  and  believed  that  quasars  lie  at  the  center  of  certain  galaxies and 
draw  their  power  from  black  holes.  I t   appeared  that  there  might  be  more 
quasars  and black  holes than  was  previously  believed. 
In other conference discussions, German astronomers reported on  the clus- 
tered  quasars  discovered  by  the  Roentgen  Satellite, or  Rosat,  designed  and 
built  by  Germany  and  launched  in  June   1990 at  Cape  Canaveral,  Florida. 
(NASA   Release  91-6;  W  Post,  J an   15/91; UPI,  J an   14/91; NY  'Times, Jan 
15/91; B  Sun, J an  15/91; AP, J a n  15/91; LA  'Times, J a n  15/91; NY  Tmes ,  J a n  
16/91; W Post, J an  16/91; B  Sun ,  Jan   16/91; LA  Times, Jan   16/91; C  Trin, J a n  
16/91; NY  Times, Jan  22/91; W Post, Jan  21/91) 

Janumy  15: NASA announced the selection of nine scientists as  team members in 
the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) Microwave Observing Project. 
The SETI project has two elements: Targeted Search and Sky Survey. The Targeted 
Search was  to use  the largest available antennas and search over a 1 to 3 gigahertz 
(GHz) frequency range, looking for patterns that could indicate an  artificially gen- 
erated signal. The  search would  conduct the most  sensitive search yet  conducted 
of  nearby  (less than  80 lightyears distant) solar-type stars. The  Sky Survey would 
use  the 34-meter antennas of NASA's Deep Space Network sites to scan the whole 
sky over a  1 to  10 GHz frequency range. The survey could detect signals from  the 
vicinity  of  distant  sunlike  stars  or  from  areas  beyond  the  solar-type  stars.  SETI 
observations were  to begin  on Columbus Day  1992, with  the Sky Survey deployed 
at  Goldstone, Califomia,  and  the  Targeted  Search  mounted  at  the  National 
Science Foundation's Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. 
NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Califomia, is managing the 
overall  SETI  project  as  well  as  the  Targeted  Search  element.  NASA's  J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena,  California,  is  managing  the  Sky  Survey 
aspect. SETI is part of  NASA's Exobiology Program of NASA's Office of  Space 
Science  and Applications. Th e  scientists selected  made  research proposals to 
be  accomplished by the SET1 project  and  were  to  help  SETl  finalize some of 
the  equipment  designs and  refine  search procedures. (NASA  Release 91-7) 

Ariane  44L,  the  most  powerful  rocket of  the  Ariane  series of  Arianespace, 
the  commercial branch  of  the European Space Agency, blasted  into space the 
night  of  January  15  from  the  northeast  coast  of  French  Guyana  in  South 
America. Th e  rocket carried  two European communications  satellites: Italsat 
I ,  the first experimental communications satellite of  the Italian Space Agency, 
and  EUTELSAT 11-F2, the  second  communications satellite  of  the  European 
satellite  organization. (W  Times, J a n  1619 1) 

January 16: Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, 
Maryland,  reported  to   the   American  Astronomical  Society  meeting  in 
Philadelphia that  the  High  Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced  instrument 
on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made  the best  spectrograms ever obtained 

JANUARY 1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

of  Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to  100 times larger than the sun, is  a mas- 
sive star in a galaxy  170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is  evolving 
toward a supernova state in the next few million years,  is shedding its hot gases 
at a great rate in a “stellar wind” that strips the star of  an amount of  gas equal in 
mass to the sun every  100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed 
that the activity of  pulsars  inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was  pre- 
venting  the  collapse  of  matter  into a  black  hole  and  in  some  cases  creating 
“born-again” pulsars in binary pairs form.  (NASA Release 91-8; NY Xme s ,  Jan 
17/91; B  Sun, Jan 17/91; USA  Toduy, J a n   17/91; P Inq, Jan  17/91; W Post, Jan 
17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA ‘limes, Jan 17/91; WTmes, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91) 
* NASA showed on closed-circuit television pictures taken by Magellan after 
it  had  passed  the  halfway  point  in  its  eight-month mission  to  photograph 
Venus. The Magellan flew over 50.9  percent of  the planet’s surface  and made 
successful pictures of  41.4  percent of  the  terrain.  NASA announced some of 
the  findings regarding  the  surface  of  Venus  and  the  effect  of  tectonics  on 
January 25.  (AP, Jan 17/91; NASA Release 91-12; AP, Jan 25/91; NY Times, 
Jan 26/91; AP, Jan  31/91) 

January  17:  NASA  announced  that  the  Combined  Release  and  Radiation 
Effects  Satellite  (CRRES)  would  resume  experiments  after  four  successful 
chemical releases  in the past week. The releases should aid in studying the way 
that charged particles interact with the Earth‘s magnetic and electric fields by 
creating artificial auroras.  (NASA Release 91-9; Time, Jan 21/91) 

0  The Astro  three  ultraviolet  and  one  x-ray  telescopes  carried  by  Columbia 
showed no traces of  the decay processes of  tiny invisible particles known as neu- 
trinos,  it  was  announced at  the American  Astronomical Society  conference. 
These particles are connected with the Big Bang  theory.  (NY ‘Times, Jan 18/91; 
W Post, Jan 18/91; LA Xme s ,  Jan 18/91; C Trin, J an  20/91; CSM, Jan 23/91) 

0  NASA  tightened security measures  at  its key  facilities in the United States 
in the wake  of  the Persian Gulf War  and  the possibilities of  terrorist  activity. 
(UPI, Jan 17/91) 

3 :   NASA  lowered  Lockheed Space Operations Company’s  overall 
annual rating from “excellent” to “very good,” w i th  the company receiving 89 
out  of  a possible  100 points. The   lower  rating  resulted  from  several  Shuttle 
processing accidents, of which one related to Atlantis and three to Discovery. 
(Flu Today, Jan 23/91) 

January 24 :  NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, 
Greenbelt, Maryland, designed  sensors  to monitor potentially damaging  heat 
build-up  in  electronic circuits.  Such technology was  to be  used  in connection 
with the huge  television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 

11 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1991 

27.  NASA's  Technology Utilization program  is  cited  as  an   example of  the 
applications that can be made  from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10) 

0  Scuba  divers  exercising  on  an   underwater  treadmill  at  NASA's  Ames 
Research Center, Moffett Field, California, are helping gather data to be used 
in NASA's space suit design. (NASA Release  91-11) 

0  Navy Captain Michael L.  Coats, the astronaut to command the Discovery 
mission, said  that astronauts in Discovery, although w i th   no military  charge, 
would  seek  to  observe  the  Persian  Gulf  War  in  their  flight. The  Discovery's 
military payloads would provide data to help the United States detect missiles 
fired  in future wars.  (H Post, Jan  24/91) 

January  25:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  signed  an   agreement w i th   the 
National  Science Foundation  (NSF) by  which  the  two  organizations  would 
use Antarctica as a testing site to prepare for future missions to the Moon and 
Mars.  The agreement would  enable NASA to benefit from NSF's  33 years  of 
experience  in  scientific  research  in  the  harsh  Antarctic  environment. 
Scientists believe  that  Antarctica's  climate,  terrain,  temperature,  and  isola- 
tion provide  an environment on Earth  that most  closely  parallels  the condi- 
tions of  isolation and stress to be  faced  on  long-duration human missions  in 
space.  (NASA Release  91-13) 

0 NASA Administrator Richard H. Tmly said that NASA would ask Congress to 
increase its budget by  13 percent in the next fiscal year, emphasizing projects with 
short-term ecological benefits and helping schools and teachers  to encourage stu- 
dents  with  an aptitude for  mathematics  and  science. Tmly  added  that manned 
space flights would be downgraded in importance compared with unmanned pro- 
grams and pure scientific research, particularly research that would benefit the life 
sciences and development  of  a new  rocket engine.  ( S F  Chrcm, Jan 25/91) 

January 26: Soviet media reported that two Soviet cosmonauts spent six hours 
on a spacewalk outside their Mir Space Station, completing the installation of 
two  telescopic booms  that  would  enable  the  transfer of  solar  batteries from 
one pan, of  the Space Station to another. They also  installed laser  reflectors 
that  could  be  used  as beacons for  unmanned  space  ferries  and space shuttles 
arriving at Mir.  (AP, Jan 26/91) 

0  NASA Administrator Richard H.  Tmly  gave  an   interview to Sgace  News 
about  NASA's  role  in  promoting  space  education and  the  Agency's  future 
plans.  One  of  the  difficulties  is  attracting  greater  numbers  of  women  and 
minorities.  He  discussed  NASA's  plan  to  establish  a  new  office  of  human 
resources and the need for more people schooled in Earth sciences.  In an edi- 
torial in the same  issue,  the publication commended NASA  for  its attention 
to  education  in  high-technology  fields  and  efforts  to  recruit  women  and 

12 

JANUARY 1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

minorities. I t  also pointed out the number of  laid off workers in the  aerospace 
industry as a result of  the sharp downturn in the  defense industry as potential 
employees in the space field.  ( S p a c e  News, Feb 4-10/91) 

January  27:  T h e  Houston Chronicle interviewed a number of  experts concern- 
ing NASA's Space Station redesign, based on  a congressional instruction tha t  
the  design be reviewed. Th e  consensus was that as much of  the existing design 
would be kept as possible, with some experts fearing tha t  the changes may be 
too timid.  (H  Chron, Jan  27/91) 

January  28:  NASA  announced  tha t   the  University  of  Tennessee-Calspan's 
Center  for  Advanced  Space  Propulsion  (CASP),  Tullahoma,  had  selected 
three  firms  for  the  launch  and  recovery  of  the   unmanned,  Earth-orbital 
Commercial  Experiment  Transporter  (COMET)  space  system.  Space 
Industries, Inc., Houston, would be responsible for payload integration, orbital 
operations,  and recovery  system and services; Space Services, Inc.,  Houston, 
would  be  in   charge  of  the  launch  vehicle  and  services;  and Westinghouse 
Electric Company, Millersville, Maryland, would supervise systems engineer- 
ing  and  the  service  module.  Th e   initial  funding  for  COMET  in  1991 was 
$10.5 million.  (NASA Release 91-14) 

NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a message to  all NASA staff 
o n  the  fifth  anniversary of  the Space Shuttle Challenger  accident.  He cited 
the  important  lessons  learned,  the stress on  flight  safety,  and  the  successful 
Shuttle missions since that time.  (NASA Release N91-8) 

January 29: NASA announced the selection of 39 research proposals for nego- 
tiation  of  Phase  I1  contract  awards  in  NASA's  Small  Business  Innovation 
Research Program (SBIR). SBIR seeks to  stimulate  technological  innovation, 
increase  the  use  of  small business  in meeting  federal  research  and  develop- 
ment needs, and increase private  sector commercialization of  results of  feder- 
ally  funded  research.  Th e  awards  included  36  small,  high  technology  firms 
located in 17  states and were valued a t  about $19 million.  (NASA Release 91- 
15; Huntsville Ernes, Jan  29/91) 

January  33: NASA  announced  tha t   the next  Shuttle  launch,  scheduled  for 
late February, would  be  delayed until  early March  in order  to  replace  three 
thrusters  used  to  steer  the  ship  in orbit.  During  the  eight-day  flight,  the 44 
thrusters  would  be  used  to  maneuver  the  ship  into  unusual  positions.  The 
ship's  reentry  engines also would  be  fired so a satellite temporarily placed  in 
orbit could observe the  rocket exhaust plumes. Th e  aim was better  identifica- 
tion of  the  plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. 
NASA  also displayed the Gamma Ray  Observatory scheduled  to  be  carried 
into orbit  in early April.  (P  Inq, Jan  30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Toduy, Jan  
30/91; AP, Jan  30/91; N Y X m e s ,  J an  31/91) 

13 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1991 

NASA  announced that  the Ohio  State University’s  Center  for  Mapping, 
Columbus,  one  of  16 NASA  Centers  for  the  Commercial Development of 
Space, had  developed a  system  that  would  reduce  the  amount  of  time  and 
money needed to gather information on highway conditions. The  system uses 
both  positioning  data  from  the  Defense  Department’s  Navstar  Global 
Positioning Satellite Systems and  images  taken from  a pair of  video  cameras 
mounted in a standard van. The  system would help locate roads needing repair 
and other hazardous conditions, including the location of  fatal accidents. The  
18-month project, called  the  Global Positioning System for  Transportation 
Planning, involved the Federal Highway Administration, 38 state transporta- 
tion departments, and the Canadian province of  Alberta. The states had con- 
tributed $565,000 to the project, and NASA had given $280,000. The system 
also  is  ideal  for  mapping  and  the  mobile  unit  enables digitizing  to  be  done 
immediately.  (NASA Release  91-16) 

14 

February  

N A S A   has   developed   a  biological  system  for  treating   wastes,  using  aqua t ic  
plants   t o  recycle  h um a n  waste o n  space stations .  T h i s  system  is  being  adapted  
in  t h e  Appa lach ian   highlands  of Virginia.  Monterey   began  runn ing   its waste 
through   d i tche s  filled with   rocks  and  p lan ted  with   indigenous  bulrushes. T h e  
s ta te   h e a l t h   depa r tmen t   recently  p ronounced   th i s   "microbiological  filter"  a 
success  and   it  is  considerably  cheape r   t h a n   traditional   waste  t rea tmen t   sys- 
tems. However,  artificial  marshes  need   20  times  as  much   land   as mechan ica l  
systems,  limiting   the i r  po ten t ia l   in   urban   areas.  (Virginia  Btcsiness,  Feb  9 1 )  

February   1  : Robert  G i b s o n ,  a n  a s t ronau t  removed  from  command  of  a S h u t t l e  
mission  for  violating   flight-safety  rules,  unofficially  has   set   a  new  a l t i tude  
record  of  27 ,000   feet   in  a  single-engine   Cassutt   Formula  1 "midget"  racing  
plane .   (UP I ,  Feb  1/91; LA  Times,  Feb  3 /91 )  

Feluruaq  2:  Red  S ta r   announced   t h a t   pieces  of  t h e   Sov ie t   40 ,ton   Salyut   7 
Space  S t a t i o n  and   t h e  a t tached  Cosmos-1686  cargo  ferry will  fall  t o  Earth   o n  
February  6  or   7.  T h e  expected   loca t ion   of  t h e   fall  site   was  n o t   known .   ( LA  
Times, Feb  1/91; AP,  Feh  2/91; C Trin,  Feb 3/91;  W Times, Feb 4 /91 )  

O r i o n  Network   Systems of  Rockville ,  Maryland ,  ha s  been   gradually  c rea t -  
ing  a  private   satellite   commun ica t ion s  network   for  businesses  in   t h e   Un i ted  
S ta te s  a n d  Europe.  I t  was awaiting  approval  for  its financing   from  t h e  Federal 
Commun ica t ion s   Commission .   T h e   satellites   were  t o   be  built  by   British 
Aerospace  Limited  and   t h e   launch   was  t o   be  hand led   by  Gene ra l   Dynamics 
Comme rc ia l   Launch   Services  of  S a n  Diego,  wh ich   would  use  A t la s   rockets. 
( W  Post, Feb  2 /91 )  

February  4 :  N A S A  announced   its Mixed  Fleet Manifest  for t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  
and   expendable   launch   vehicles  (ELVs)  for  t h e   nex t   th ree   years.  O f   t h e   26  
Space  S h u t t l e  flights,  18  would  be  for N A S A   payloads  or  joint   NASA / i n t e r -  
na t iona l   payloads.  T h e   S h u t t l e   was  t o   focus  o n   a  variety  of  space  science  
activities   supporting   life sciences ,  materials   science ,  and   astrophysics  investi-  
gations .   T h e  remaining   flights  would  consist   of  two   in te rna t iona l   Spacelab  
missions,  two   flights  of  t h e   commercially   provided  Spacehab   module ,   t h e  
retrieval   a n d  reboost  of  a  stranded  commercial   commun ica t ion s  satellite ,  a n d  
th ree   Depa r tmen t   of  Defense  (D oD )   missions.  T h e r e  were  7  Space   S h u t t l e  
launche s  p lanned   for  1991 ,  8 in   1992 ,  a n d   1 1 in   1993 .  
T h e  first Space  S h u t t l e  launch   in  1991  was scheduled  t o  be  t h e  STS - 3 9 ,  a n  
unclassified  Defense  Depa r tmen t   mission  carrying  payloads  belonging   t o   t h e  
A i r  Force  and   t h e  Strategic  Defense In i t ia t ive  Organization .  NASA's G amm a  
Ray Observatory  was  p lanned   for  launch   in  Ap r i l ,  and   t h e  first  Spacelah  Life 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERCJNAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1991 

Sciences mission  was  planned  in May  aboard orbiter Columbia. T h e  remain- 
ing  flights  were  the   fifth  Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite  in  July,  a  DoD 
Defense  Support  Program  satellite  in  August,  NASA's  Upper  Atmospheric 
Research  Satellite  in  November,  and   the   first  International   Microgravity 
Laboratory spacelab mission  in December. 
Th i r teen  ELV  launches were to  occur over t h e  three years. During the  peri- 
od ,  various activities to  support Space Station  Freedom were  to  be  performed. 
These  included  two  flights  with  planned  space  walks  to   test  planned  Space 
Station  equipment and   techniques, two zero-gravity thermal  system tests,  and  
two tests of environmental  control  systems. (NA SA  Release 91 -1 8) 

T h e   10-day UN   conference  o n   global  warming  opened  o n   February  4  in 
Chantilly,  Virginia. T h e  conference was  to  discuss t h e  greenhouse  effect and  
worldwide  temperature  rises. For  the   first  time,  the  United   States  pledged  a t  
the  conference to  stabilize the  amount  of  "greenhouse7' gases  it  emits into  the  
ax .   (WPos t ,  Feb  3/91;  USA  Today, Feb  4/91; B  Sun ,  Feb  5/91; NY  T m e s ,  Feb 
5/91; W Post, Feb  5/91; W T m s ,  Feb  5/91; LA  Times,  Feb  5/91)  

T h e  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  (JPL )  in  Pasadena, California, began  analyz- 
ing  the   photos  of  Venus  produced  by  the   Magellan  Spacecraft. JPL  operates 
Magellan  for  NASA .   T h e   pictures  show  a  tortured  landscape  featuring 
extreme  volcanism,  particularly  surface  bulges  30  to   140  miles  wide  called 
"arachnoids."  (LA  Times,  Feb 4/91)  

February  5:  T h e   Bush  Administration  proposed  $14.7  billion  for  NASA   for 
FY  1992, a n  increase of $1 .2   billion.  T h e  proposal would  allow starting  a new 
family  of  rockets  to  l i f t   heavy  payloads.  T h e   budget  would  also  authorize 
NASA   and  the   Air  Force  to  spend  $175  inillion  each  to   develop  a  new 
launching system hy  the   end of  the   1990s. T h e  Administration  also proposed 
almost  $2   billion  to  continue  development  of  a Space Station  and  almost  $1 
hillion  for  NASA's  "Mission to   Planet  Earth"  as  part  of  the   study  of  global 
environmental  change.  (NY Xrnes ,   Feh  5/91; U S A  Today, Feb  5/91; WSJ, Feb 
5/91; UPI, Feb  4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla  Today, Feb  7/91)  

February  6:  Soviet  Space  Station   Salyut  7  was  expected  to   fall  today. 
Unexpectedly  high  solar  activity  in  recent  years  had  increased  atmospheric 
drag on   the   station  and   speeded  its  orbital  decay.  (NY T ime s ,  Feb  6/91;  U S A  
Today, Feb 6/91; UP l ,  Feb  6/91)  

NASA  announced  it would  be a major participant  in the  multi-agency High 
Performance Computing  and  Communication   ( H P C C )  to  begin  in  N  1992. 
NASA  had  the   lead  role  in coordinating  interagency  software and  algorithm 
research  and  development.  In   this  connection ,   NASA   wt>uld buy  advanced 
test  beds  from  industry  and  use  test  beds  developed  by  the   Department  of 

FEBRUARY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Defense to evaluate and build  initial applications. NASA  would  also develop 
software  to  solve  major  computational  challenges  involved  with  robotic 
design and control. NASA centers would be equipped with the  latest network 
communications to  support  the National  Research  and  Education Network 
and  NASA  would  expand  the  HPCC  research  program  of  NASA-funded 
research institutes and  through NASA  grants  to universities. 
Another  NASA  project  was  Remote  Experimentation  and  Exploration 
(REE), designed  to develop a prototype high  performance computing system 
to support future space missions. Such autonomous systems would  be  needed, 
for  example,  in  explorations  of  Mars  because  of  the  distance  from  earth. 
(NASA Release 91 -20) 

NASA  Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly  announced  the  selection  of  26 
Space Grant Consortia as a result of  Phase I1 competition. Recipients receive 
four-year, $150,000-per-year grants to  initiate new  programs.  States receiving 
such  grants  were  Alaska,  Delaware,  District  of  Columbia,  Indiana,  Kansas, 
Minnesota,  Mississippi,  Missouri,  New  Hampshire,  New  Jersey,  North 
Carolina, Oregon, Rhode  Island, and Wisconsin. Twelve states with  limited 
aerospace activity would receive similar grants to enhance aerospace research 
and  infrastructure.  They  were  Arkansas,  Connecticut,  Idaho,  Louisiana, 
Maine, Montana,  Nevada,  North  Dakota, Oklahoma,  South Dakota, South 
Carolina, and West Virginia. Both grants require partial matching nonfederal 
funds  and  would  be  used  in  part  to  sponsor fellowship programs  for  under- 
graduate and graduate students. (NASA Release 91-19) 

NASA  announced  it  had  modified  its  Space  Shuttle  contract  with 
Rockwell  International  Corporation's Space Division at an additional cost of 
$21.6 million. The  modification entailed the  design, fabrication, testing, and 
installation of  main propulsion system 14-inch disconnects into orbiter umbil- 
icals  in order to  increase flight safety. Two other companies were  involved  in 
the work:  Parker Hannifin and Martin Marietta. (NASA Release C91-g) 

NASA  announced  its award of  a $191 million, five-year contract  to Krug 
Life  Sciences, Houston, for medical operations and  research support services. 
Th e  work, covering the period March  1 ,1991  through February 29,1996, was 
to be  done at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-f) 

Febncmy 7: NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly briefed members of  the House 
of  Representatives  Committee  on  Science,  Space,  and  Technology  on  the 
President's 1992 budget request of $15.7 billion for NASA, a 13.6 percent increase 
from the  1991 budget. Programs emphasized were the New  Launch System to be 
developed  with  the  Department  of  Defense;  LIFESAT,  a  rekable  biosatellite; 
Mission to Planet Earth, which shows commitment to the ecology; and a 17 per- 
cent increase for NASA's educational activities. (NASA Release 91-21) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTlCS 

FEBRUARY   1991 

NASA   announced   t h a t   two  additional  releases, one  of  barium  and   o n e  of 
lithium, would  be made during February as part  of  the  Combined  Release and 
Radiation  Effects  Satellite  (CRRES) .   CRRES   was  a  joint  NASA -US   Air  
Force program to study the  Earth's magnetic fields and  the  effect of space radi- 
ation  o n  spacecraft components.  (NA SA  Release 91-22; AP, Feb  7/91) 

T h e  report  of  the  committee  appointed  by  the  Bush Administration,  head-  
ed by  Norman  R .  Augustine, chairman  of  Martin  Marietta Corporation ,  pro- 
duced  favorable  comments  from  industry, according  to   the   New  York  Times. 
Industrialists  believe  tha t   the   report  showed greater  realism  about  the   space 
program, with  its  emphasis o n  unmanned  flights and   request  for  larger  fund-  
ing  for  NASA .   In  contrast  to   this  complimentary  review,  Alcestis  Oberg  in 
Space  News  maintained  tha t   the   Augustine    an el's  recommendations  were 
irrelevant and  a new  agency was needed  t o  pursue moon  and Mars  initiatives. 
(NY Xmes, Feb  7/91; SP News,  Feb 4-10/91)  

NASA  announced  tha t  the  Magellan spacecraft was overheating because of 
dust or corrosion  o n  its mirrors. Nevertheless, it should be  able to  map 95  per- 
cen t  of  Venus.  (WSJ, Feb  7/91; USA  Today, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb  7/91) 

Salyut  7,  the   Soviet  Space  S ta t ion ,  crashed  in to  Earth's atmosphere  neqr 
Argentina's border  with Chile .  Powered by  solar energy and  chemical batter-  
ies,  it   contained   n o  nuclear  fuel  or  o the r   dangerous  substances.  (P  Inq,  Feb 
7/91; AP,  Feb  7/91; UPI ,   Feb  7/91; W  Emes,  Feb  8/91; NY  Emes,  Feb  8/91; 
UPI,  Feb  8/91; AP.  Feb  8/91; C Trin, Feb  8/91) 

A n  editorial  in Florida Today  referred  t o  NA SA  Deputy Administrator  J .R .  
Thompson's comment   about NASA   giving serious consideration  t o  consoli- 
dating  Shuttle  operations a t  Kennedy Space Center .  H e  estimated  this would 
cut  Shu t t le  costs by 25  percent.  Such  a move would  also result  in  consolidat- 
ing Shuttle  management, as recommended  in  t h e  Advisory Committee  report. 
(Fla Today, Feb  7/91) 

Washington  Technology  reported  tha t   a  major  effort  is  underway  to  move 
NASA's Space  Station   program  office  to   a  site  near  Goddard  Space  Flight 
Cen te r   (SFC )   in   Greenbelt ,   Maryland.  O the r   sites  being  considered  are 
Johnson   SFC   near  Houston   or  Marshall  SFC   in  Huntsville,  Alabama. 
(Washington Technology, Feh  719 1 ) 

February  8 :   Long  Du ra t ion   Exposure  Facility  (LDEF)   chief   scientist  
William  Kinard of NASA's Langley Research C e n t e r  in  H am p t o n ,  Virginia, 
revealed  t h a t   200  experimenters   in  n ine   countries   were  analyzing  t h e  da ta  
gathered   by  t h e   LDEF  satellite   t h a t   Space   S h u t t l e   Columbia   rescued  in  
1990 .  T h e  plan  was  to   retrieve   LDEF  after  11 mon ths ,   but   delays  and   loss 
of  Cha l lenge r  stranded  LDEF for five years and  n i n e  mon ths .  Nevertheless ,  

FEBRUARY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

experiments  were  conducted  and  interesting  findings  were  being  discov- 
ered.  (CSM ,  Feb 8 /91 )  

Jim Gunn ,  an astronomer at Princeton University and designer of equipment 
for the Digital Sky Survey, was  planning a map of  the universe that would fit  in 
a desk  drawer. Based  on  Gunn's work  on  the  Hale telescope  in  California, the 
Sky Survey's 100-inch "smart" telescope would perch on top of  the Sacramento 
Mountains in New Mexico. (W  T m s ,  Feb 8/91; LA  Trnes, Feb  17/91) 

February  10:  Lowell  Hawkinson,  chairman  of  the  Gensym  Corporation  of 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts, which  created  the  G2  system,  announced  that 
Biosphere  11, would  be  initiated  in  March.  Biosphere  I1  is  an   environment 
controlled  by the  advanced computer program  G2 and designed  for eight  sci- 
entists  to seal themselves inside for  two  years. NASA  had  been  using G2  o n  
its Shuttle flights to control  certain functions since October  1989. According 
to Tony  Heindel, a  light controller  at Mission Control at  the Johnson Space 
Center  in  Houston, G 2   monitors  16,000 data  points  per  second,  gathering 
such  information  as  temperature,  voltages,  availability  of  jet  thrusters,  and 
condition of  on-board computers and  instruments.  (NY Times, Feb  10191) 

Th e   Philadelphia  Inquirer  reviewed  The   Steel  Albatross,  a  novel  about  an  
underwater  craft  undetectable  by  sonar,  just  published  by  NASA   astronaut 
Scott Carpenter. Concurrently,  it reviewed Aurora 7, an  account of  the way  in 
which  various  actual  and  fictional  people were  affected  by  Carpenter's  flight 
in  the Aurora  7  space capsule. ( P  Inq, Feb  10191; W Post, Feb  17/91) 

Fehuary  I  I :   NASA   announced  that  th e   German  Roentgen  Satellite 
(ROSAT) began  a  new  phase  of  operation  o n  February  8. It started  pointed 
observations of  x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high  ener- 
gy  phenomena. Th e  U S  ROSAT Science Data Center at  the Goddard  Space 
Flight  Center,  Greenbelt,  Maryland,  will  process  and  distribute  ROSAT 
pointed  data  and  provide  facilities  for  the  scientific  analysis  of  the  data. 
Britain  is  also  cooperating  in  this  venture,  which  involved  the  original 
ROSAT  launching  from Cape Canaveral, Florida on  June  1, 1990 on  a Delta 
expendable  launch vehicle.  (NASA  Release 91-23) 

Wayne  Littles,  head  of  the  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  office 
charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA pur- 
poses, commented on work  underway. Still  in  the early stages, the  heaviest  lift 
models  would  carry  at  least  200,000 to  250,000 pounds. New  advanced solid 
rocket  boosters were  planned  as well  as work  on  developing an unmanned  ver- 
sion of  the Shuttle, called Shuttle C .  (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb  11/91) 

February  1 2 :  NASA  Administrator Richard H .  Truly announced a nationwide 
search  for  a  senior  official  to  direct  NASA's  activities  to  send  people  to  the 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1991 

Moon and  to explore Mars. This announcement represented  an  implementa- 
tion  of  a  recommendation  of  the  Advisory Committee  on   the  Future of  the 
U.S.  Space Program to  create a new Office of  Exploration under an  Associate 
Administrator.  (NASA  Release 91-24) 

T h e  NASA   Advisory Council  of  25  leaders  in  industry, government,  and 
academia  sent  a  letter  to  Vice  President  Dan  Quayle  commending  NASA  
Administrator  Truly's quick action  in  implementing the Report  of  the Advisory 
Committee on the  Future  of  the U . S .  Space Program).  (NASA  Release N91- 10) 

Th e  National Space Council, headed by  Vice President Quayle,  developed 
a  policy  directive  intended  to   strengthen  the   Nation's  commercial  space 
industry. T h e  policy creates guidelines requiring the government  to  act more 
like  a  private  business  in  dealing  with  space-related  enterprises.  It  calls  for 
increased efforts to  negotiate  trade agreements to  reduce o r  eliminate subsidies 
provided  by  foreign governments,  including  the   Soviet  Union,  Ch ina ,   and 
Japan, to their commercial satellite-launching services. T h e  policy would also 
encourage  government  agencies,  particularly  NASA   and  the   Defense 
Department,  to  support  space activity  by  entering  into cooperative  research 
and  development  efforts  with  private  industry  and  assuming  some  of  the  
financial  risk; basing contracts with  rocket  and satellite makers o n  "perform- 
ance standards" rather  th an  complex military  specifications; and  taking  into 
account  the  government's  overhead  and  development costs  in  assessing bids 
by  private  firms.  ( P  Inq, Feb  12/91; UPI, Feb  13/91) 

An  ongoing NASA project  released  a  lithium canister from a satellite, pro- 
ducing a  red  sphere. Rick  Howard, one of  40  scientists working o n  the  proj- 
ect, said  the  purpose was  to  try  to  inject a n  artificial lithium  plasma  cloud  to 
see if   precipitation  can be  increased.  (AP, Feb.  12/91) 

February  13: T h e  Christian Science Monitor  discussed  the  cases of  Ulysses,  a 
joint  mission  of  NASA   and  the   European  Space  Agency  (ESA),  and 
Hipparcos, an  ESA  satellite. Ulysses, which  was  designed  to  study  the  envi- 
ronment  over  the  north  and south poles of  the  sun, developed a wobble  that 
threatened  its  usefulness,  but  the  problem  was  resolved.  Hipparcos  was 
designed  to   measure  the   positions,  motions,  and  distances  of  more  than  
100,000 stars. It also developed orbit problems but  to date has measured more 
than  1 million stars. (CSM, Feb  13/91) 

President Bush's 1992 budget  included a proposed $15.7 billion for NASA ,  
representing 8.5 percent  real growth after inflation. T h e  request contained n o  
new  projects except  for $175 million  for start-up work  o n  a  more  cost-effec- 
tive  system of  launch vehicles, as  recommended by  the Advisory Committee. 
(W  Post, Feb  13/91) 

FEBRUARY  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Febrwrry  14:  N A S A   Gene ra l   Coun se l   Edward  Frankle  announced   t h a t  
J o h n s o n  Space  Cen te r ' s  Leo Monford  was  NASA's  Inven to r   of  t h e  Year.  T h e  
award,  t o  be  presented   Ma rch   28, was  for  a  docking   a l ignmen t   system called  
Targeting   a n d   Reflective  A l ignmen t   C o n c e p t ,  or   T R A C .  Used  in  comb ina -  
t i o n  with   a n o t h e r  of  Monford's  inven t ion s ,  a Magnetic   End  Effector,  it   could 
change  t h e  shape  of  future  robot   arms, satellites ,  and   Space  S ta t ion s .  

University  of  Colorado   astronomer  Jack  Arandt  talked   of  t h e  discoveries of 
t h e  Hubb le  Space  Telescope,  in  spite  of  its  fuzzy  focusing. Discoveries  includ-  
ed   proof  t h a t   Pluto   has   a  moon   a n d   d rama t ic  photographs   of  a  star  spewing 
h o t  gases during   its b i r th   in  t h e  O r i o n  constellation .   ( W  Times, Feb  14 /91 )  

J o h n  Gue s t ,   a  geologist  from  University   College ,   London ,  was  working  a t  
NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory o n  da ta  from t h e  Magellan  spacecraft's mis- 
sion   t o   Venus.  Evidence  of  volcanic   ac t ion   exists  a l though   Magellan's  map-  
ping mission, begun  September   15 ,  1990 ,  thus  far reveal  n o  volcano   erupting .  
(AP ,  Feb  14/91)  

N A S A   officials  announced   t h a t   its  X-29  experimental   aircraft  flew  five 
times  o n   Janua ry   25,  setting   a  new  record  for  daily  flights  from   t h e   Ames-  
Dryden  test   center .  T h e  second  of  two  X-29s built  by N A S A ,  it  was conduc t -  
ing high   angle  of  a t tack   test  studies a n d  military  utility  in  a joint  project  w i th  
t h e  A i r  Force.  (Antelope Valley  Press, Feb  1419 1 )  

February  15:  N A S A   officials  a t   Goildard   Space   Flight  C e n t e r ,   G r e e n b e l t ,  
Maryland ,   announced   t h e   te rm ina t ion   of  t h e   con t rac t   with   G e n e r a l  Electric 
Company ,  Astro-Space   Division,  for  t h e  design ,  deve lopmen t ,  and   testing   of 
t h e  A t t a c h e d  Payload Accommoda t ion  Equipment   (APAE )  e lemen t  of Space  
S t a t i o n  Freedom. A  congressionally mandated   review of  t h e  Freedom program 
con t r ibu ted   t o  t h e  APAE   te rm ina t ion .   ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 2 7 )  

T h e  Washington Times  cited   a congressional  repo r t ,  Orbiting Debns:  A  Space 
Environmental  Problem,  by  t h e   Office  of  Technology  Assessment.  T h e   report  
warned  of  problems  t o   space  missions  from  debris  in   space  and   t h e   need   for 
in te rna t iona l   negotiations   in   this   regard.  (W  Times,  Feb  15/91;  UP I ,   Feb 
19 /91 )  

T h e   10-day global warming conference   of  some  100 na t ion s  ended  with   lit-  
tle  agreement .   Delegates agreed  t o  establish  two working groups  t o  consider  a 
draft   of  a  treaty   a t   a  second   round   of  talks  later   in   1991 .  T h e  U n i t e d   S ta te s  
a n d   o t h e r   countries   hesitated   t o   comm i t   themselves   o n   specific  emission 
reductions .   ( W  Xmes,  Feb  15/91; USA  Today, Feb  15/91;  W Post, Feb  15/91 ) 

T h e  media  reported   t h a t   S h u t t l e  Discovery  was  hauled   t o   its  l a u n c h  pad  a t  
C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida.  Scheduled   for  a  March   blastoff,  its  mission  was  t o  

ASTRON,4UTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  199 1 

learn more about  how t o  detect  rockets  in flight, part of  t h e  Strategic Defense 
Initiative  missile defense program.  (UP I ,  Feb  15/91; LA  'Times, Feb  16/91)  

February  17:  NASA   Combined  Release  and  Radiation  Effects  satellite 
released  a  barium  canister  to   gain  data   about  the   magnetosphere  and   more 
reliable  predictions  of  magnetic  disturbances  in  space.  (AP,  Feb  17/91;  W 
Times,  Feb  18/91) 

F e b r u q   18: Stanley  G .  Rosen,  retired  director  of  long-range planning  for  the 
U.S. Air  Force Space Divlsion in  El  Segundo, California, and  vice  president for 
public pollcy of the  American  lnstitute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the  
Persian Gulf War demonstrated the  need for radar satellites. Such satellites could 
penetrate  cloud5  and  battlefield  smoke  as  well  as  monitoring  all  troop  move- 
ments and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb  18/91) 

A n   e d~ t o r i a l  commended  the   guidelines  for  invigorating  the   commercial 
space  industry  developed  by  the   National   Space  Council   and  signed  by 
President  George  Bush.  Although   stating  that   the   guidelines  would  be  diffi- 
cult  to  follow and  tough  to enforce, i t   found  the  government's definition  of  a 
commercial  venture  helpful  as well  as the  expansion of  cooperative programs 
between  the   government  and   the   private  sector  in  commercial  space.  (SP  
News,  Feb  18-24/91; AuWk, Feb  18/91) 

William Lenoir, NASA  Space Flight Chief, outlined the  revised plans for the  
Space  Station   to   the   National  Space  Council  o n   February  5.  T h e   revision 
woiilJ save $6 billion over five years and would cut  in half  the  number of  astro- 
nauts to  live aboard as of September  1999. T h e  new design wcjuld  assemble the  
station  in  larger pieces o n  the   ground,  thus  requiring 23  Space  Shuttle  flights 
to  build  instead  of  the   original  34  flights.  T h e   plan  is  due  to  Congress  on  
March  5  hut  tnay  be  extended  to a later date.  (SP News, Feb  18-24/91) 

T h e   Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB )  ordered  an   independent  
engineering review  of  NASA's  plans  for  the  Earth Observing System to  study 
global  climate  change .   A n   Administration  official  said  OMB   wanted  an  
assessment of  the   advisability  of  large, complex  satellires  and  of  the   specific 
sensors and   launch  plans.  ( AuWk, Feh  18/91 

Febrmry  19:   NASA's  Kennedy  Space  Center ,   Florida,  awarded  Metric 
Constructors,  Inc . ,   of  Tampa,  a  $56,215,000  contract   to  build  t h e   Space 
Station   Processing Facility.  T h e  457,000-square-foot  facility was  to   contain  
preflight  and  processing  points  for  Space  Station   Freedom  as  well  as  63,000 
square feet of  dedicated  payload  processing space.  (NA SA  Release C 9 1 - h )  

NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director J o h n  M. 
Klineberg announced   tha t   Peter  T. Burr had  been  named  Deputy  Director  of 

FEBRUARY  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

the   Center .   Burr  had  served  as  Director  of  Flight  Projects  a t  Goddard  since 
August  1989. (NA SA  Release 91-28)  

NASA   released  its  first  in  a new  series of  educational  video  products  en t i -  
tled  "Space Basics," illustrating orbital science. A  teacher's  guide is  also avail- 
able. NASA  planned  that   each future  Shu t t le  mission  would have  a  teacher's 
guide,  "Mission  Watch ,"   and ,   following  the   mission  a  summary  report, 
"Mission Highlights."  (NASA  Release 91-29)  

NASA   officials  reported  tha t   a quality  inspector  had  discovered  a  cracked 
hinge  in  a  fuel  line  door  of  Shu t t le   Discovery.  T h e  effect  of  the   finding  o n  
Discovery's tentative   launch date  of  March 9 was  unknown.  (UP I ,  Feb  19/91; 
AP,  Feb  19/91; B  Sun,  Feb  20191;  W  Post,  Feb  20191; NY  Tme s ,   Feb  20191; 
WS],  Feb  20191;  USA Today, Feb 20191; W Xmes, Feb 20191; UPI ,  Feb 20191) 

Febnulry 20: T h e  Fairfax County Board of  Supervisors passed  a resolution asking 
state and  federal  legislators to block  a proposal  to move NASA's Space Station  
program office out of Reston, Virginia.  (FairjaxJounurl Weekly, Feb  20-21191) 

A n   article  on   the   Hubble  Space  Telescope  commented  tha t   despite  its 
flawed main  mirror,  the   teamwork  of  the  Hubble operational  team  combined 
with  elaborate  computer  processing  had  enabled  a  rich  scientific  harvest. 
(CSM ,  Feb  20191) 

February  21 :   NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .  Truly was  scheduled  to   teach  
n i n t h   grade  geometry  students  at  George  Washington  Junior   High  School ,  
Alexandria,  Virginia,  o n  February  22.  Selected  as  an   "All-Star"  engineer  by 
the   National   Engineers Week  1991 committee ,  Truly was  to   share  his  engi- 
neering and  aerospace knowledge with students. Astronauts Mary Cleave  and 
Bonnie Dunbar were among  t h e  more  t h a n   10,000 engineers  participating  in 
t h e   teaching  program.  (NA SA  Release N91-13)  

Scientists from  several  U.S.  government  and  university  laboratories  reported 
finding the rare atmospheric isotope Beryllium-7 present on the  surface of NASA's 
Lm g   Duration  Exposure  Facility  (LDEF). Dr.  Gerald  J.  Fishman  of  NASA's 
Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  Huntsville, Alabama, commented on   the  signifi- 
cance as  twofold: to date, the  isotope is  known to be produced  at much lower alti- 
tudes than   the LDEF was  orbiting; and only one atmospheric gas, atomic oxygen, 
is previously known as interacting with orbiting spacecraft. The  LDEF was returned 
from  space by  Space  Shuttle Columbia  in  January  1990 after nearly  six  years  in 
Earth  orbit  and  was  still  being  analyzed.  The   LDEF  program  was  managed  by 
NASA's Langley Kesearch Center, Hampton, Virginia.  (NASA  Release 91-30) 

Data  analysis of  cracks on   the  external  door mechanism of  Discovery con -  
tinued,  and   fuel will  be  loaded  without  a decision  as  to  whether   t h e   launch  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

FEBRUARY  199 1 

would  proceed  o n  schedule .  T h e  door  mechanisms  of Space  Shu t t le s  A t lan t i s  
and  Co lumb ia  were  also  exam ined ,  and  cracks were discovered  o n  Columbia .  
( N A S A  Release, Feb  21/91; C Trin, Feb  22/91)  

February  22 :   Dr.  S t e v e  Saunders ,  Project   Scientist   a t  NASA's  J e t  Propulsion 
Laboratory,  Pasadena,  California ,   announced   t h a t   Magellan   t o   da te   had  
mapped  more  t h a n   58   percent   of  Venus,  including   Aph rod i te   Terra ,   t h e  
largest  of  t h e  highland   regions. Various hypotheses  exist  regarding  t h e   forma- 
t ion   of  t h e   different  "continents"   o n   Venus,  a n d   t h e  mapping   should  clarify 
t h e  s i tua t ion .  ( N A S A  Release  91 -31 )  

T h e  Sov ie t  bank ,  Moscow  Narodny ,   financing   t h e  May  Ang lo -Sov ie t  mis- 
sion  aboard   t h e  Sov ie t  Mir Space  S t a t i o n ,  announced   t h a t  He len  S h a rm a n ,  a 
chem i s t ,   would  be  Britain's first  astronaut .   (AP ,   Feb  22/91;  LA  Times,  Feb 
2319 1 ) 

Scientists   from  NASA's   Goddard   Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in   G r e e n b e l t ,  
Maryland ,  reported   t h a t   t h e  ozone ho le  over  t h e  S o u t h  Pole did  n o t   appear  t o  
be  improving.  T h e  ozone  loss  in   1990  equaled  t h e   previous  low  de tec ted   in 
1987  in  "dep th ,   du ra t ion ,   and   area."  T h e   findings  were  based  o n   NASA's  
satellite  observations  of  a complete   cross sec t ion  of  t h e  ozone  layer. T h e  find-  
ings  complemented   measurements  a t  ce r ta in   altitudes   taken   by  t h e  Na t iona l  
O c e a n i c   a n d   A tmo sphe r ic   Administration's   sounding   balloons .   (U P I ,   Feb 
22/91 ) 

N A S A   announced   its closing for security  reasons  of  t h e  public  viewing  site  
for watching   Space  S h u t t l e  landings  a t   Edwards A i r   Force  Base  un t i l   t h e  e n d  
of  t h e  Persian  Gulf  War.  (Daily News,  Feb  22/91)  

February  23:  N i p p o n   Television   Ne two rk   asked  t o   borrow   from   t h e  
Sm i th son ian   t h e   Space   S h u t t l e  Enterprise ,   a n   Apo l lo   capsule,  a  m o o n   c o n -  
veyor  vehicle ,   a  rocket ,   and   a  space  suit.  T h e  Enterprise  is  stored  a t   Dulles 
A i rpo r t   a n d   transporting   i t - -on   t h e   back  of  a  747  or   by  sh ip  would  be  diffi- 
cu l t .   T h e   space  gear  was  t o   be  used  t o   celebrate   t h e   company's  fo r t ie th  
anniversary  in  Tokyo  in  1993.  (W  Post,  Feb  23 /91 )  

February  25:  Nature  quoted   scientists   a t   NASA's  A tmo sphe r ic   Sciences  
Division  in  H am p t o n ,   Virginia,  as  reporting   t h a t   forest  fires-previously 
though t   t o   be  a  major  source  of  nitrous   oxide-actually 
produce   only   abou t  
seven  percent   of  t h e  am o u n t  in  t h e  atmosphere .  T h e  importance  of  t h e  source  
of  nitrous   oxide   relates  t o  its  ac t ion   in  t h e  destruction   of  Earth's ozone  layer. 
( W  Post,  Feb  25/91)  

Bill  Moyers,  a  member   of  a  na t iona l   panel   of  experts   involved   in   Project  
Cen so red ,   a  compend ium   of  t h e   most  underreported   stories  of  1990 ,  dealt  

FEBRUARY  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY   1991 

w i th  N A S A   and   t h e  ozone.  Sov ie t  scientists  first  raised  env i ronmen ta l   ques- 
t ion s  about   t h e  solid  rocket  fuel  used  by  t h e  Space  Shu t t le s .  T h e y  said  it   left 
250  ton s   of  hydrochloric   acid  ea t ing   up  t h e   ozone  layer  after   every  launch .  
T h e  Earth  Island]ournal  and   t h e  San Francisco Chronick  reported  t h e  story. O n  
t h e  program,  env i ronmen ta l   activist  H e l e n  Ca ld ico t t   spoke  of  ch lo r ine  mole-  
cules  t h a t   c h om p  up  ozone  molecules.  ( P  Inq,  Feb  25/91)  

February  26:  N A S A   announced   t h a t  Jou s t   1 ,  a  commercial   suborbital   rocket  
carrying  1 0  materials  and   biotechnology   experiments ,  would  be  launched   o n  
Ma rch   29  from  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida.  T h e  mission  was  sponsored  by  t h e  
University  of Alabama   in Huntsville's Con so r t ium  for Materials  Development  
in  Space   ( U A H  CM D S ) ,  a N A S A   C e n t e r  for  Comme rc ia l  Deve lopmen t   of 
Space .  Space  Data   Division  of  O rb i ta l   Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion   would  provide 
rocket   and   launch   services  t o   lift  t h e   payload  approximately  400  miles  i n t o  
space.  In   add i t ion   t o   U A H  CMD S ,  four  o t h e r  N A S A   commercial   develop-  
m e n t  cen te r s  a n d   two  industrial  firms were  involved .   ( N A S A  Release  9 1 - 3 3 )  

Eugene  Kranz,  Director   of  t h e   Mission  Ope ra t ion s   Directorate   ( M O D )  a t  
J o h n s o n   Space   Cen te r ,   Hou s ton ,   announced   t h e   establishment   of  a  Space  
S t a t i o n  Mission Ope ra t ion  Project  Office w i th in  MOD .  T h e  new office, head -  
ed  by  Cha r le s   R.  Lewis, was  t o  have   responsibility  for  t h e   deve lopmen t   and  
imp lemen ta t ion  of  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom  flight  operations .   ( N A S A  Release 
9 1 - 3 5 )  

February  27:  N A S A   announced   t h e   signing  of  a n   agreement   between   t h e  
Un i ted   S ta te s   and   C a n a d a   t o  participate   in   a  five-year RADARSAT   Ea r th -  
observation  satellite  mission. N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard   H .  Truly was o n e  
of  t h e  U n i t e d   S ta te s  signers.  RADARSAT  was  scheduled  for  launch   in  J u n e  
1994  using  a n  expendable   launch   vehicle   provided  by  NA SA .   RADARSAT  
would  collect  valuable  econom ic  and  scientific  da ta  o n  ice a n d  ocean  surveil- 
lance  and  na tu ra l  resource  managemen t ,  including  surveillance  of  na tu ra l  dis- 
asters.  ( N A S A  Release  91  -34) 

N A S A  announced   t h a t  o n  February  21  test  personnel  a t  its J o h n  C. S t e n n i s  
Space  C e n t e r ,  Mississippi, had   conduc ted  a  1 .5  second   ignition   test  o n  a  new 
turbopump   developed   by  Pratt   and   W h i t n e y   for  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Ma in  
Engine .  T h e  company   test  program,  underway  since   1986 ,  includes  a pa r tne r -  
sh ip   with   Rocketdyne   Division  of  Rockwell  In te rna t iona l .   T h e   pumps  use 
newer design technology  and  materials. S tenn i s  Space  C e n t e r  is NASA's facil- 
ity for testing  all Space  S h u t t l e  Ma in  Engines  t h a t  power  t h e  orbiter  during   its 
first  8 112 minutes   of  flight.  ( N A S A  Release  9 1 - 3 6 )  

N A S A  managers  were  described  as  divided   over   whe the r   Discovery  could 
be  safely launched  o n  Ma rch  9 or   needed   t o  be  taken   off  t h e   launch   pad  a n d  
repaired.  (U P I ,  Feb  27/91)  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY 199 1 

February  28:  NASA   announced   tha t  Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly would 
present  the   1990 George  M.  Low  Trophy, NASA's  Quality  and  Excellence 
Award,  t o   Bob  Minor ,   President ,   Space   Systems  Division ,   Rockwell 
International  Corporation.  T h e  award,  to  be  presented  a t   company  facilities 
in Downey, California, recognizes contractors for outstanding  achievement  in  
quality and productivity  improvement  and  total quality management.  (NA SA  
Release N91-14)  

NASA  announced  its award of  a $38.5 million contract  t o  RMS Associates, 
Linthicum,  Maryland,  to   manage  and   operate  the   NASA   Scientific  and 
Technical  Information Facility  in  Linthicum.  (NA SA  Release C91 - i )  

March  1 : William  Lenoir, head  of  NASA's  space flight program,  announced 
that NASA  was  sending Space Shuttle Discovery  from  the  launch pad  back 
to  th e  hangar  to repair cracked door hinges. Shuttle Director Robert Crippen 
said  Discovery  should  be  ready  to   f l y   in  late  April  or  early  May.  (AP,  Feb 
28/91;  P  Inq, Mar  1/91; NY  Times. Mar  1/91; WSJ, Mar  1/91; W  Times,  Mar 
1/91; USA  Today, Mar  1/91; W Post, Mar  1/91; UPI, Mar  1/91) 

March  4:  NASA  announced  its  selection  of  Orbital  Sciences  Corporation 
(OSC ) ,  Fairfax,  Virginia, for  a  contract  to  provide  ocean  color  data.  These 
data  were  to  support  research performed  by  the  Laboratory  of  Hydrospheric 
Processes, Goddard  Space Flight  Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. T h e  contract 
would  run for  about  7.5 years, of  which  2 .5   years would  be  development  time 
and  five  years  of  data  production.  Th e   mission's scientific  objective  was  to  
measure changes in ocean color that  indicate where concentrations of  phyto- 
plankton  and  chlorophyll  lie  on   the  surface of  the  ocean.  For  global  change 
research, measuring  concentrations of  phytoplankton  are  essential  in  under- 
standing  the  role  of  oceans  in  the global  carbon  cycle. T h e  phytoplankton's 
photosynthesis  stores vast  amounts  of  carbon  and  understanding  better  how 
oceans store and  release carbon will  help understand  global climate. 

Commercial value of  the data was  the ability to pinpoint  likely concentrations 
of  fish. T h e  mission  was  a further  development  of  work  done by  the Coastal 
Zone Color Scanner, carried aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite. T h e  interdiscipli- 
nary uses of  data (oceanography, climatology) characterize NASA's Mission to 
Planet  Earth.  (NASA  Release 91-37) 

Mmch 5: The  New   York  3mes carried an extensive article with diagrams describ- 
ing many of  the proposed reductions contemplated by  NASA  in the cost and role 
of  its orbiting Space Station. The mission  was  to  study  the  long-term effects of 
space on astronauts and other living things and to see whether  the nearly weight- 
less  environment offers commercial possibilities. NASA was  scheduled to deliver 
the  modified  proposal  to  Congress  March  5.  (NY Times,  Mar  5/91; W  Times, 
Mar 5/91 ) 

In  a  I  3mmentary  originally  for  th e   Christian  Science  Monitor,  Richard 
Miniter  cited  th e  British  television  program, "The Greenhouse  Conspiracy." 
The  program  highlighted  the  scientific uncertainties  of  global warming,  rely- 
ing on  testimony from NASA  experts, among others.  ( 0  Sun, Mar  5/91) 

NASA  selected  the  49-foot  Pegasus  rocket  made  by  Orbital  Sciences 
Corporation of  Fairfax, Virginia, for seven launches worth  about $56 million, 
with  an option  for  three  more.  This contract was  additional  to  one for  about 
$43.5 million  for ocean observation.  (W  Post, Mar  5/91) 

27  

ASTRC>NAUTICS A h l )  .AERONAUTICS  

MARCH  1991 

Ce remon ie s  connec ted  w i th  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard   Truly's presen- 
ta t ton   t o   Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   Space   Systems  Division,  Palmdale ,   of  t h e  
1990 George  M.  Low  Trophy  t o  a  con t rac to r  for ou t s tand ing  ach ievemen t   in  
quallty  and   productivity  improvement   were  featured   a t   some  length .   A b o u t  
half  t h e   Palmdale  work  force  were  scheduled   t o  be  laid  off  after  Endeavour's 
comp le t ion ;   t h e   remaining   450  workers  beginning   in   July  would  modernize 
t h e  S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia .  (Antelope Valky  Press, Ma r  5/91) 

March  6:  N A S A   engineers   studied  a  tiny   crack  o n   t h e  h inge   mechanism   of 
S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s  but p lanned   t o  go ahead  with  a l a u n c h  in  April .  A t l a n t i s  was 
scheduled  t o   ferry  i n t o   orbit   t h e   G amm a   Ray  Observatory,  a  Hubb le   Space  
Telescope-class  astronomical   in s t rumen t  built  t o  study extremely  h igh   energy 
radiation  from deep  space. ( N A S A  Release, "STS-37  Mission Advisoryn;  UP I ,  
Mar  619 1 ) 

March  7:  A n  article  pointed   ou t   t h a t  space  exploration   was  n o t   a  sho r t - te rm  
mlssion.  Therefore ,  given  t h e  age of  several existing  Space  Shu t t le s ,  Congress  
should  plan  ahead   and   appropriate   funds  for  additional   Shu t t le s  for  t h e  21st 
century .  (Antelope Valley  Press, Mar   7/91)  

NASA's Earth   Observing   System  faced  possible  funding   cuts   as  a  result  of 
questioning   by  Representative   Ralph   Hall ,   cha i rman   of  t h e   House   Space  
Subcommittee, and  his  colleagues.  Conce rn s   exist  also w i th in  N A S A   regard- 
ing  program  costs.  Tension   reportedly  existed  between   N A S A  Headquarters  
and  Godda rd  Space   Flight Cen te r ,  G reenbe l t ,   Maryland,  ove r  t h e  am o u n t  of 
t h e  da ta   system  t o   be  centered   a t  Godda rd   as  opposed  t o  o t h e r  N A S A   sites. 
Some  congressional members questioned  NASA's  accountability  a n d  deplored  
rivalry  be tween   N A S A   a n d   t h e   N a t i o n a l   O c e a n i c   a n d   A tm o s p h e r i c  
A dm l n~ s t r a t l o n .  (Washington Technology, Mar   7 /91 )  

R e p r e s e n t a t i v e   Lamar   S m i t h ,   R e p u b l i c a n ,   Texas ,   w ro te   N A S A  
Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard   Truly  expressing conce rn   t h a t  NASA's  C om e t   rocket 
program  may  keep   new  firms  from  en te r ing   t h e   commercial   space  industry. 
Truly's office was preparing  a  reply.  (Washington Technology, Mar  7/91)  

Lennard   A .   Fisk,  Associate  Administrator ,   of  NASA's  Office  of  Space  
Sc ience  and   Applications ,   testified  before  t h e   House  Sc ience  Subcomm i t tee  
t h a t   t h e  redesign  of  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom  had   limited   t h e  scope of  t h e  lab- 
oratory,  eliminating   experiments   in   astronomy,  physics,  a n d   ea r th   sciences. 
(Washington Technology, Mar  7/9  1 ) 

March  8:  Scientists   of  NASA's  Magellan  Project ,   together   with   t h e   U.S. 
Geological  Survey, invited   t h e  public  t o  propose  names  of  no tab le  women  for 
t h e  many  impact  craters  and   large  volcanic  vents   being  discovered  o n  Venus. 
Names   sent   t o  Magellan  offices a t  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  were  t o  

MARCH   1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

be  compiled  for  the   Working  G roup   for  Planetary  System  Nomenclature ,   a 
committee  of  the  International  Astronomical Un ion   ( IAU ) .  T h e  IAU ,  which 
makes  the   final  approval, meets  only  every  three  years  and   thus  new  names 
canno t  be considered until  1994. (NA SA  Release 91-38; W Times, Mar 22/91; 
C Trib, Mar  27/91)  

NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly announced  the   selection  of  Ray  J .  
Arnold  as  Deputy  Assistant  Administrator  for  Commercial  Programs.  H e  
replaced  Lawrence  F.  Herbolsheimer,  who  became  Deputy  Assistant 
Administrator for Policy and Interagency Coordination. (NASA  Release 91-39) 

A n  editorial commended NASA  for being more realistic  in  its revised plans 
for  a Space Station  and  particularly  for decreasing  its emphasis o n  t h e  role  of 
humans  in space.  (San  lose  Mercury News, Mar  8/91 ) 

March  10:  Joel   S.  Levine,  a  senior  research  scientist  in  the   Atmospheric 
Sciences  Division  of  NASA's  Langley  Research  Center ,   commented  o n  
NASA's  role  in  researching  the   contribution   of  fires  to   the   "greenhouse 
effect."  He   indicated  tha t   the   oil well fires  in  Kuwait could  be  the   largest sin- 
gle  contributor   to  this  effect.  However,  forest  fires  and  agricultural  burning 
actually  provided  more  carbon  dioxide.  NASA   scientists  studying  t h e   proh- 
lem use  satellite findings  in  their  analyses. (Daily  Press, Mar  10191) 

Rockwell International  announced  tha t   it would  lay  off  450 workers assem- 
bling  the   Space Shuttle   Endeavour  after  its delivery  to  NASA   in  late  April. 
(Antelope Valley  Press, Mar  10191 ) 

March  1 1 :   NASA   spokeswoman  Vera  Hirschherg  said  former  American 
University  president  Richard  Berendzen  was  working  for  Booz-Allen  and  
Hamilton   in  investigating  the   societal  benefits  of  the   Space  Exploration 
Initiative  on  behalf  of  NASA .   (AP, Mar  11/91) 

Bruce  Bunin,  manager  of  Advanced  Commercial  Programs  a t   Douglas 
Aircraft  Company,  stated  tha t   McDonnell  Douglas  Corporation   had  won  a 
contract   for  up  to  $8 million  from NASA's Langley  Research  Cen te r   to  con-  
duct  system  studies o n   the  next-generation  commercial  supersonic  transport. 
T h e   five-year  contract   was  part  of  NASA's  High  Speed  Research  Program 
aimed  at  resolving envtronmental  and   economic  issues and   developing  tech-  
nology  for  a  High  Speed  Civil  Transport  ( H S C T ) .  T h e   H SC T   team  was  t o  
study atmospheric effects, noise  and   sonic boom  reduction,  advanced materi- 
als and   lightweight  structures,  supersonic  laminar flow  control ,  engine  cycles, 
and  airline economics.  (PR  Newswire, Mar  11/91)  

A n  interview  featured  Lawrence Ross,  Director  of  NASA's Lewis Research 
Cen te r  in Cleveland,  a 30-year-old facility with  3 ,000  civil servants.  Priorities 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS  

M A R C H   1991 

a t   Lewis  include  research  in  propulsion,  electric  power  generation,  and  
advanced  communications. Ross  answered various questions  about  the   Space 
S ta t ion ,  solar  dynamic  power  systems,  nuclear  propulsion  research,  the   con -  
tinuing  need  for  maintenance   funds,  and   the   role  of  Lewis  in   the   National  
Aerospace  Plane  program.  ( S P  News ,   1 1 - 17 Mar19 1 ) 

A n   editorial  raised  the   fairness  issue  with  regard  to   NASA's  anchor  
tenancy  contracts  to  help  the  commercial  space business.  To da te ,  Spacehab, 
American  Mobile  Satellite  Corporation ,   and  Orbital   Sciences  Corporation  
have  such contracts. T h e  editorial advocated  tha t   other  agencies, such as  the  
Department  of  Justice  in  the   case  of  mobile  services and  environmental  and 
ocean  agencies in  the  case of  fish  research, should  reimburse NASA   for  these 
costs.  ( S P  New s ,   1 1-17 M a r / 9 l )  

March  12: In  their  column ,  Jack Anderson  and Dale van A t t a  commented o n  
the   strong efforts of  Texas  congressmen  t o  have NASA   move  Space Station  
Freedom  headquarters  from  Reston,  Virginia  to  Houston.  T h e   headquarters 
were moved from Houston  to  Reston  in  1987. T h e  cost of  such a move would 
be  a t   least $26 million,  and   i t  would  probably delay NASA's  program a t   least 
a year.  (W  Post, Mar  12/91) 

A  lengthy  article discussed the  work  of  Dr. Allan  R. Sandage, a former assis- 
tan t   of  Edwin  P.  Hubble  and  his  heir.  Like  Hubble,  Sandage  is  an   observa- 
tional  cosmologist concerned with  investigating  the  galaxies and  the   implica- 
tions  of  the   expanding  universe.  Using  t h e  Carnegie  Institution ,  which  has 
telescopes  at  Mount  Wilson,  as  his  base,  he   was  working  on   a  two-volume 
atlas of  galaxies. ( N Y  Times,  Mar  12/91) 

Scientists at  Los Alamos National   Laboratory  in New Mexico developed  a 
new  technique  of  "clustering"  to   speed  the   analysis of  satellite  images. T h e  
technique  was being adapted  for use  in crop forecasting, land-use studies, pol- 
l u t ~ o n  monitoring, and  mineral  and  oil prospecting.  (NY Times,  Mar  12/91) 

March  14: NASA  announced  tha t  as a result of  the  work of  its Lewis Research 
Center ,  Cleveland ,   the   arcjet  thruster  technology had  been  selected  for  sta- 
tion   keeping  use  o n  AT&T's Telstar 4  communications  satellites.  Arcjet  sys- 
tems  offer a  significant  improvement  in   propellant  use  over  chemical  and 
other   electrically augmented  thrusters,  thus  increasing  the   satellite's on-orbit  
lifetime or payload  mass.  (NA SA  Release 91-40)  

Fairfax  County   Board  Chairman   Audrey   Moore  argued  tha t   if  NASA's 
Space  Station   management  facility  were  moved  from  its  Reston,  Virginia 
headquarters, a t  least half  of  its highly skilled workers would quit ,  delaying t h e  
Space Station  program for months  or  years. T h e  questioning about  t h e  status 
of  the   Reston  facility  resulted  from  a  congressional  order  to  NASA   in  1990 

MARCH  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

tha t   it  overhaul  the  management  structure for  t h e  Space S ta t ion  project.  (W  
Past, Mar  14/91)  

Chase   Manha t tan   Bank  granted  $64  million  five-year  financing  to  
Spacehab  Inc.  Spacehab was  building  a  large  pressurized chamber  to  fit  in to  
the   storage  bay  of  the   Space  Shu t t le ,   giving  the   astronauts  o r   technicians  
more room  to  run  experiments. Spacehab  planned  to  send  its first unit  aloft  in  
December  1992. I t  obtained  capital  from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems 
Company,  Aeritalia  of  Italy,  which  was  designing  and   building  most  of  the  
module  and   its  thermal  controls,  and  the   Mitsubishi  Corporation   of  Japan .  
(NY Tmes, Mar  14/91)  

Grumman  Corporation  announced  a cut  of  110 more employees at  its Space 
S ta t ion  Program Support Division  in Reston, Virginia. T h e  cuts resulted  from 
NASA's  decision  to  reduce  the   scope  of  the   Space  S ta t ion   project.  (PR  
Newswire, Mar  13/91; W Times, Mar  14/91; NY  'Emes, Mar  14/91) 

March  15: Fred  Gordon ,   spacecraft  operations  manager  a t   NASA's  Goddard 
Space Flight  Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported  tha t  NASA   officially had 
retired  the  J3ynamics  Explorer-1 (DE-1)  satellite  o n   February  28,  1991, after 
nine years of  collecting scientific data. T h e  decision was based o n  an  evaluation 
of  the  costs for DE-1's operations compared to  the  expected value of  the  science 
gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the  program, the  
spacecraft's cameras could see an  entire Auroral zone, and the  quality and quan-  
tity of  data  produced by  the  two DE  spacecraft far exceeded expectations.  DE-2 
ended  operations February  19, 1983. (NASA  Release 91-42) 

T h e  Synthesis Group ,  a Wh i te   House  study group, planned  t o  recommend 
U.S. development of nuclear-propelled  rockets to  send manned expeditions to  
Mars, according to  Aviation Week  and Space Tehcnology. NASA  established  the  
group,  chaired  by  retired  Air  Force  General   Thomas   P.  Stafford,  a n  Apollo 
astronaut, to  gather innovative  ideas for lunar and Mars exploration.  (AP, Mar 
15/91; UPI, Mar  15/91) 

T h e   Space  Studles  Board  of  the   National  Research  Council  stated  that   a 
smaller, slrnpler  new  design  for NASA's  Space  Station  did  not   meet  the   basic 
research  requirements  for which  it  was  to be  built. This  development  came  as 
NASA   was  preparing  to  solicit Congress for  its  annual  funding and when  the  
European Space Agency and other  international partners had accepted NASA's 
new  plan.  ( W  Post,  Mar  15/91; AP,  Mar  15/91; UPI,  Mar  15/91; B  Sun, Mar 
16/91; NY  Xmes, Mar  16/91 ; C Trib, Mar  16/91; LA Tmes, Mar  16/91) 

Dr.  Lennard  A .   Fisk, Associate  Administrator  of  NASA's  Office of  Space 
Science  and Applications,  announced   tha t   the  Space Studies Board  has  long 
opposed justifying  Space S ta t ion  Freedom solely o n  scientific merit. However, 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

M A R C H   1991 

t h e  Board  recognizes, a n d  N A S A  concurs ,  t h a t   "there   are  na t iona l  considera-  
tions   for  building  a  Space   S t a t i o n   o t h e r   t h a n   scientific   research."  Congress 
a n d  N A S A  decided  t o  build  t h e  S t a t i o n   in   a n  evolutionary  way  so  t h a t   ulti-  
mately  it  would  meet   t h e  principal   scientific  research  requirements   in tended .  
T h e   S t a t i o n   represents  a  significant  part  of  t h e   long-term   goals  for  t h e   civil 
space  program  set   by  t h e   President .   N A S A   was  confident   t h a t   this   was  t h e  
time   to proceed.  ( N A S A  Editors' N o t e  N 9 1 - 1 7 )  

Ma r t in  Marietta  Co rpo ra t ion  announced   t h a t   it was building a $337  million 
space robo t ,  technically   a Flight  Telerobotic  Servicer,  t o  be used  in con s t ruc t -  
ing Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom. T h e  robot  was  t o  have  artificial  computer   intelli-  
gence   and   video   cameras  o n  each   wrist  and   t h e   top   of  its  hody.  ( 0  Sun ,  Mar 
15/91)  

A  tiny   crack  was  found  o n   o n e  of  t h e   substitute   S h u t t l e   hinges  sen t   from 
Endeavour  t o  spaceship Discovery. Dr. William  Lenoir,  head   of  NASA's  space 
flight  program,  said  t h e   crack  was  too   small  to  be  a  cause  for  conce rn .   (NL' 
Xme s ,   M a r   15/91;  W  Times,  Mar  15/91;   USA  Today,  Mar  15/91;  AP,  Mar 
15/91; UP I ,  Mar  15/91)  

William  Lenoir, NASA's Associate Adm in i s t ra to r  for Space  Flight ,  said dis- 
cussion was  taking  place  conce rn ing  t h e  possibility  of  a Soviet  cosmonaut  fly- 
ing  o n   a  U .S .   S h u t t l e   and   a  U .S .   astronaut   spending   six  mon th s   o n   t h e  
Russian  Space  S t a t i o n  Mir.  (U P I ,  Mar  15/91 ) 

March  16: NA SA   rolled  t h e   S h u t t l e   A t lan t i s   t o   a  launch   pad  a t   Kennedy 
Space   C e n t e r   in  preparation  for  a  scheduled  April   6  liftoff.  (1V  Post,  Mar  
1619 1 ; LA  Xmes ,  Mar  1619 1 ) 

March   17: Later  in  t h e   1990s, N A S A   will  launch   t h e   Sa te l l i te  Test  of  t h e  
Equivalence  Principle   (STEP )  t o  compare   t h e   inertial  and   g rav i ta t ion   1 mass 
of  two objects  suspended  in  o rb i t .  T h e  launch   relates  t o  a n   in te rna t iona l  effort 
t o  s tudy  gravity  and  proposals  for  locating   t h e  Na t iona l   Sc ience  Foundation's  
$21 1 million  Laser  Interferometer  G rav i ta t iona l -Wave  Observatory.  ( W  Post, 
Mar  17/91)  

Two  military  contractors ,   Boeing  Helicopters   and   Bell  Helicopter/Textron  
were  test-flying  models  of  t h e   V-22 Osprey  for  t h e   Marines.  Some   congres- 
sional   supporters  are   promoting   t h e  plane   for  military  use  as well  as  civilian  
flight. T h e  o t h e r  tilt-technology   company,  Ishida, based  its  tilt-wing  plane   on  
technology   pioneered   by  LTV  Co rpo ra t ion   and   Canada i r   irom   t h e   1950s 
th rough   t h e   1970s .  (C  Trib, Mar  17 /91 )  

March   18: N A S A   announced  t h a t  t h e  spacecraft Ga l i leo  would  execu te  a  tra-  
jectory  correction  maneuver  o n  March   20 t o  h e l p  aim  it for t h e  first-ever flyby 

MARCH   1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

of  a n  asteroid  next  October. To perform  the   maneuver,  Galileo would  fire  its 
small thrusters o n  and off during a three  and one  half hour period,  thus chang-  
ing  its  speed  about  five  miles  per  hour.  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory, 
Pasadena, California, manages the  Galileo project.  (NA SA  Release 91-43)  

NASA   issued  a summary fact  sheet  o n   its  earth   science  research  programs. 
Past NASA  satellite missions used  various remote-sensing instruments to study 
parts  of 
t h e   Earth   system.  T h e   Coastal   Zone  Co lo r   Scanne r   o n  
Nimbus-7 observed the  biological productivity  of  the  oceans. T h e  Total Ozone 
Mapping  Spectrometer  (TOMS ) ,  o n   the   same  satellite, returned  12  years  of 
data o n  global ozone levels and  helped  identify the  Antarctic  "ozone hole."  In 
the   1990s, NASA  was to  study the  interaction of  all environmental  factors air, 
water, land, and  biological life, tha t  make  up  the  Earth  system-to 
help  deci- 
sion-makers understand  global environmental  trends  and  protect  the  planet .  
T h e  Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Satellite,  to  be  placed  in   orbit  by  the  
Space Shuttle   in  the   fall of  1991, would  make  comprehensive measurements 
of  the   stratosphere.  TOPEX/Poseidon  is  a  U.S.-French  ocean-topography 
satellite to  be  launched aboard  a French Ariane   rocket  in  1992. It would  pro- 
vide detailed measurements of  the  oceans'  global circulation patterns. Lageos- 
11, a joint  mission  with  the   Italian  Space Agency, would  provide  data  o n  the  
Earth's  geodynamics in  1992. T h e  Earth  Observing System  (EOS )  is  a  series 
of  satellites carrying various  instruments  tha t  were  scheduled  to  make  simul- 
taneous, global-scale observations  of  related  environmental  variables and  cli- 
mate.  T h e  EOS  Data  and   Information  System  were  to   come  on - l ine   in  the  
early  1990s to  analyze existing data  and p o v i d e  them   to scientists around  the  
world. 
EOS data  will also be provided by  Earth Probes, low-cost missions for small 
launch   vehicles  and  instruments  such  as  TOMS .   In  the   mid-1990s,  the  
Tropical  Rainfall  Measuring  Mission,  a  joint  mission  with  Japan ,   would 
observe  rainfall  i n   Earth's  low'latitudes .  T h e   NASA   Scatterometer,  to  be 
launched  in   1995 aboard  the  Japanese Earth Observing Satellite ,  would  pro- 
vide global measurements  of  sea surface winds. 
In   addition,  Space  Shu t t le   missions  provide  a  unique  means  for  experi- 
ments  tha t   require  multiple  flights.  A  series  of  at  least  five  international  
Spacelab missions  in  the   1990s, designated  t h e   Atmospheric  Laboratory  for 
Applications  and  Science ,  were  scheduled  to  investigate  atmospheric science 
and  solar science questions relating  to  global change .  T h e  Shu t t le  also was  to  
carry  the  Shu t t le  Solar Backscatter Ultraviolet  experiment. T h e  Space Radar 
Laboratory was  to  measure surface geology, vegetation,  and  ocean  circulation. 
Mission  to  Planet   Earth  is  NASA's  contribution   to   the   U.S.  Global 
Change  Research  Program, a multiagency  effort. In   tu rn ,  this program  is  part 
of  international  efforts t o  study the  environment ,   including the   International  
Biosphere  Geosphere  Program  and   the   World  Climate   Change   Research 
Program.  (NASA  Facts, Mar  18/91) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MARCH   1991 

NASA's  scaled-back design for Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom was  t o  be considered 
a t   a  Na t iona l   Space   Counc i l   meeting   a t   t h e   W h i t e   House .   T h e   Na t iona l  
Space  Counc i l  members  include  members  of  t h e  C a b i n e t ,  t h e  director   of  t h e  
Office of  Managemen t  a n d  Budget, t h e  W h i t e  House Ch ie f  of  Staff,  t h e  pres- 
idential   science  adviser,  t h e  director   o f  t h e  C e n t r a l   Intelligence  Agency,  a n d  
N A S A  Administrator   Richard   Truly.  ( W  Post, Mar  18/91 ) 

NASA's Hubble   Space  Telescope enabled   t h e  most  detailed   images of Mars 
ever  taken .  Scientists  said t h e  telescope made  possible a  long-term  program  t o  
monitor   seasonal  clirnate  and   surface  changes   o n   Mars  t h a t   previously  had  
been   impossible.  According   to  t h e   Space   Telescope  Sc ience   In s t i tu te   in 
Baltimore,  t h e   images  revealed  Ma r t ian   features  as  small  as  31  miles  across. 
( W  Post, Mar  18/91;  UP I ,  Mar  18/91; CSM ,  Mar  19/91;  Htsvl Tms, Mar  25/91)  

Launch  Box-Your  T V  C o n n e c t i o n   t o  O u t e r  Space ,  a new  14-episode pro-  
gram,  is  a n  educational   series  created   by  teachers   for  classroom  use.  N A S A ,  
Nickelodeon ,   a n d   t h e   Astronauts   Memorial   Foundation   joined  t o   fund   t h e  
series, t h e  first segment  of wh ich  was scheduled  t o  appear  o n  May 9 .  T h e  series 
includes footage of  actual  N A S A  missions  as well  as  lesson plans  for teachers .  
(Business W i re ,  Mar   18/91)  

A n   editorial   in   Aeliation  Week  and  Space  Technology  commen ted   o n   t h e  
regeneration   of  U .S .   aerospace  technological   strengths   represented  by  t h e  
Na t iona l   Aerospace  Plane   ( N A S P )  a n d  NASA's  space program. T h e  editori-  
al  quoted   Assistant   A i r   Force  Secretary  for  Acquisition   J o h n  J .   We lch ,  Jr. as 
strongly endorsing  t h e  NA S P  before  Congress,  calling  it  "our  flagship  science  
a n d   technology  program." T h e  editorial  commend s  NASA's downsizing of  its 
Space   S t a t i o n  plans ,   as  well  as  t h e   work  of  T h e  Synthesis  G r o u p   in  working 
o n  a master  p lan   for  t h e  Moon/Mars  missions.  (AvWk ,  Mar  18/91)  

March  19:  N A S A  spokeswoman Lisa Malone   said  th ree  days of  torrential   rain  
at  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida, had   failed  t o  damage  Space  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s .   ( B  
Sun ,  Mar  19/91; USA  Today, Mar  19/91)  

A  report  cited  efforts of  Byron L.  Dorgan  of  N o r t h   Dakota ,  cha i rman  of  t h e  
new  Democratic   task  force  o n  gove rnmen t  waste,  t o  po in t   t o  NASA's  "Super 
Guppy," a  large  transport   p lane ,  as  a n  example  of  waste  t o  be  eliminated .   ( W  
Post, Mar  19/91)  

A f te r   two  years  of  study, t h e   Na t iona l   Research  Counc i l   in  its  report ,  The 
Decade  of  Discovery  in  Astronomy  and  Astrophysics,  recommended   t h a t   more 
modest  instruments   t h a n   t h e   Hubble   Space   Telescope  a n d   only  a  few  large 
observatories  be  developed .   T h e  n e x t   in s t rumen t ,   t h e  $617  million   G amm a  
Ray Observatory, was t o  be  launched   in April   1991 .  During t h e  1990s, of more 
t h a n  50 proposals  made ,  t h e  report  endorsed  o n l y  four: t h e  $1 .3   hillion  Space  

h4ARCt1  109 1 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

Infrared  Telescope  Facility;  a n   $80   million   infrared-optimized  telescope  o n  
Mauna   Kea  in  Hawaii;  t h e   $1  15  million  Millimeter   Array,  a  group  of  tele-  
scopes  t o   cover   star-forming  regions  a n d   galaxies; a n d   a  $55   million   op t ica l  
telescope  t o  operate   in  t h e  S o u t h e r n  Hemisphere .   T h e  report   recommended  
several  more   modest  programs  including   t h e   $230   million   S t ra to sphe r ic  
Ob se rva to ry   for  Far-Infrared  A s t ronomy ;   t h e   $250   million   A s t rome t r ic  
Interferometry  Mission t o  map  positions  of celestial bodies more  precisely; t h e  
$15  million  Large  Earth-based  Solar  Telescope;  and   a  $70 million   spacecraft 
dedicated   t o  t h e  Far  Ultraviolet   Spectroscopy  Explorer satellite ,   a n d   increas- 
ing  t o  five  t h e  Explorer satellites  t o  he   launched  o n  rockets.  (U P I ,  Mar   19/91;  
W Pos t ,  Mar 20191; W Times, Mar  20191; NY  Times, Mar  20191; LA Times, Mar 
20191; 0 Sun ,  Mar  24/91)  

A  dress  rehearsal  occurred  for  A t lan t i s '   four-man ,   o n e -w om a n   crew   in 
preparation   for t h e  blastoff o n  Ap r i l  5 .  Plans for t h e  Co lumb ia  were  unce r ta in  
after  a  decision  t o  disassemble  t h e  space  ship's boosters  because  da ta   ind ica t -  
ed  a problem  with   t h e  way  t h e  bases of  t h e  rockets  were bolted   t o  the i r  mobile 
launch  platform.  (AP ,  Mar  19/91;  UP I ,  Mar   20191) 

Pamela  C la rk ,   a  former N A S A   employee  who   teaches   chemistry,  wrote  a n  
article  criticizing t h e  lack of support  from upper management   of t h e  space pro-  
gram.  S h e  urged Congress  t o  adequately  f inance  a civilian  space program  t h a t  
would  recognize America's position  of world  leadership .  (H  C h r o n ,  Mar  19 /91 )  

Ma rch   20:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   Aerospace   Safety  Advisory  Panel  
would  present  its annua l  report  t o  N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard   H .  Truly o n  
Ma rch  22.  ( N A S A  editors' n o t e  N 9 1 - 1 9 )  

Ma rch   21:  N A S A   announced   adjustments   t o   t h e  February  1991  Mixed  Fleet 
Manifest  as  a  result  of  t h e   cracks  discovered  o n   Space   S h u t t l e   Discovery. 
Space   S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s   was  t o   fly  in   April;   after  repairs,  Discovery  (STS - 3 9  
mission)   was  t o   f ly   in   May  as  was  STS-40/Spacelab   Life  Sciences   Mission 
aboard   Co lumb ia .   T h e   Tracking   Data   Relay  Sa te l l i te   Mission  originally 
scheduled   t o   fly  o n   Discovery  in  July  was  t o   be  o n  A t lan t i s   in   August .   T h e  
Defense  Support   Program  mission  remained   o n  A t lan t i s   bu t   was  moved   from 
August  t o   December   with   t h e   Uppe r   A tmo sphe re   Research  Sa te l l i te .   T h e  
In te rna t iona l   Microgravity  Laboratory   mission  p lanned   for  December   1991  
would  become   t h e  first  flight  in   1992. T h e  mixed  cargo flight  of  t h e  Tethered  
Sa te l l i te   System  a n d   t h e   European   Space   Agency's  European   Retrievable  
Carrier ,  originally  scheduled  for  February  1992  o n  Discovery,  would  move  t o  
August  1992 o n  A t lan t i s .  O t h e r  mid-1992  flights would  remain   as  scheduled  
earlier.  ( N A S A  release  91-44;  AP, Mar  21/91; UP I ,  Mar  21 /91 )  

N A S A   announced   delivery  of  its  "restructuring"  report   t o   Congress ,  
redesigning   S p a c e   S t a t i o n   Freedom .   W i l l iam   B.  Lenoir ,   A s soc ia te  

ASTRONAUTICS AN ! )   A t  KOl:  -1CTICS 

MARCH  1991 

Administrator  for  Space Flight, stated  that NASA  cut  costs  (by $8.9 million 
through  1999), simplified  the design, and  reduced  the complexity of  the  proj- 
ect  in  accordance with Congress's directions and  the Augustine Commission's 
recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be  needed to achieve the human- 
tended  phase  when  astronauts, brought  by  the  Space Shuttle, work  for  two- 
week  periods. A permanently manned  configuration would be  achieved in  fis- 
cal year  2000, consisting of  the U.S.  laboratory and habitat, and European and 
Japanese  laboratories;  the  Canadian  Mobile  Servicing System; accommoda- 
tions for  a live-in crew of  four; and  three  sets of  solar arrays providing 65 kilo- 
watts of  electric power.  Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return 
Vehicle must  be  available  to evacuate crew  in  emergency; this  phase  requires 
17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scal- 
ing  back  some plans  and  resulting  in  some  layoffs  by  contractors  and  subcon- 
tractors.  (NASA   release  91-45; B  Sun, Mar  21/91; W  Post,  Mar  21/91; WSj, 
Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM ,  Mar 
22/91; W Post, Mar  22/91; B  Sun ,  Mar  22/91; NY Times, Mar  22/91; W Tm e s ,  
Mar  22/91; UP I ,  Mar  22/91; The  Citizen, Mar  24/91) 

Vice  President  Dan  Quayle, head  of  the  White  House's National  Space 
Council,  told  NASA  and  congressional leaders  that  the  National  Research 
Council's  criticism of  the  redesigned NASA  Space Station was  "not  entirely 
appropriate." He  endorsed the project as  advancing U.S.  leadership in  space. 
Quayle also alluded to  the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we 
must  go."  Th e   "pay  as  you  go"  terminology  in  connection  with  the   Space 
Station  project  exasperated  NASA  Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly.  (NY 
Times, Mar  2 1/91; LA  Times,  Mar  2 1/91; AwWk, Mar  25/91) 

NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced  the 
selection  of 
the   Smithsonian  Astrophysical  Observatory,  Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, for  the  contract  to design, develop, and  operate a science sup- 
port center for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). 
AXAF was  scheduled  to  be  launched  in  1998 as  the  third  of  NASA's  Earth- 
orbiting Great Observatories. Th e  center  is  to serve the  international scientif- 
ic community with an observation program for the x-ray telescope and the  data 
it  collects. (NASA  release  91 -46) 

A  group advising the U.N.-sponsored lntergovernrnental  Panel on  Climate 
Change  stated  that  a  10-year delay  in  taking  action  to  curb  global  warming 
would  mean  little  further  increase  in  the  level of  warming  predicted  by  the 
end  of  the  21st  century.  Michael  E.  Schlesinger,  a  climatologist  at  the 
University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana+Champaign, and  Xingjian Jiang authored  a 
study  indicating  this.  Meanwhile,  William  K.  Reilly,  Administrator  of  the 
En~rironmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by  saying "It's better  to 
get  it  right  than  to  act  too precipitously." Scientists disagreed o n  the  subject, 

MARCH  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

and   Sena to r   A1  Go re   strongly  opposed  t h e   Bush  Administration's   position .  
(NY Times, Mar  2 1 /97 )  

George   R h e e ,   a n   astronomer   a t   New   Mexico  S t a t e   University   i n   Las 
Cruces ,   in   a n  article   in  Nature,  discussed  t h e  observed  rate   a t  wh ich   space  is 
expand ing  in   all  directions ,  known   as  t h e  Hubb le  con s tan t .   Rhee   stated   t h a t  
new  measurement   had   produced  t h e  relatively  low value  of  50 kilometers  per 
second   per  megaparsec  ( 3 . 2 6   million  light-years)   for  t h e   Hubb le   c o n s t a n t ,  
agreeing with   t h e   estimate   of  A l lan   R .  Sandage  of  t h e  Ca rneg ie   Institution's  
observatories  in  Pasadena,  California .   (NY T m r s ,  Mar   21/97) 

T h e  C o u n c i l  o n  Competitiveness   i n  its report  found  t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  lead- 
ing  t h e   world  or   holding   its  own   in  6 1  of  94  technologies   considered  crucial  
t o   future   econom ic   progress,  including   rocket  engines ,   compu te r   software, 
biotechnology ,   and   advanced   welding  techniques .   However,  it   deemed   t h e  
Un i ted   S ta te s  trailing  in   3 3  o t h e r  fields  including   laser  technology  a n d   semi-  
conductclr  chips .   In te rna t iona l   compe t i t ion   and   joint   efforts  t o   develop   a 
supersonic  plane   with  a  new  "hypersonic  engine"   are  discussed.  G o r d o n  
Adam s ,   director   of  t h e   Defense  Budget  Project ,   commen ted   t h a t   a l though  
most  such   research  wc>uld be  global,  many  U.S.  firms  still  did   n o t   see  t h em -  
selves  as part   of  a global  industry.  (W  Post, Mar  21/97; P  Inq, Mar  21 /97 )  

March  22:   Major  Gene ra l   Je rem iah   Pearson  I11  appeared   before  t h e   House  
Armed   Services  research  and  defense  subcommittee   t o  testify  o n  behalf  of  t h e  
value of  t h e  \I-22  Osprey.  H e  said  t h e  h lane  would  have   heen   valuable  in  t h e  
Persian  Gulf  War   in  facilitating  POW  rescues.  (W  X m e s ,  Mar  22/97)  

Physicists  a t  Los Alamos  Na t iona l   Laboratory  discovered  t h a t   huge  parts of 
t h e  sun's magnetic   field  break  away  and   are  propelled  i n t o  space  by  t h e   c o n -  
s tan t ly   hlowing  solar  wind.  T h i s   explains   how   t h e   Sun's  magnetic   field 
remains   in   balance   while  new  magnetic   field  lines   a re   formed ,   according   t o  
Los Alamos   physicist J o h n  Phillips.  (W  T imes ,  Mar   22 /91 )  

Sm i th son ian   officials  scaled  back  plans  for  a Na t iona l   Museum  of  A i r   a n d  
Space  annex   from  $325  million  t o  $162  million .  T h e  site  must  he w i th in   o n e  
hour's drive   of  Washington   and   would  he  used  largely  t o   store   airplanes.  In  
o t h e r   testimony,  officials  said  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Enterprise  would  n o t   be 
leased  to   a Japanese   television  network .   (W  Post, Mar   22/91)  

T h e  Ca rneg ie   In s t i tu t ion  of  Wa sh ing ton   assembled  a  group  of  leading   sci- 
en t i s t s  t o  h o n o r  t h e  memory  of  Vannevar   Rush, responsible for t h e  c rea t ion  of 
t h e  Na t iona l  Sc ience  Foundation .  T h e  scientists  deplored  lagging U .S .  invest-  
m e n t   in   materials,  equ ipmen t ,   and   research  related   t o   science   a n d   t h e   fierce 
compe t i t ion   among   corporations   a n d   research  groups  t h a t   led  t o   secrecy. 
James  S. Langer  of  t h e   In s t i tu te   for Theo re t ica l   Physics  of  t h e  University   of 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1991 

California   called  for  "a  less  adversarial"  Na t iona l   Sc ience   Foundation   t o  
restore  more  of  a  sense  of   inquiry  a n d   adven tu re   t o   scientific  research.  (NY 
Times, Mar  22/91)  

A  pressurized  l a b o r a t o q  t o  be  used  o n  Space  S h u t t l e  Columbia's  la te  May 
mission  was damaged when  a techn ic ian   removed  a latch   and   t h e  module  t i l t -  
ed ,   making   a  slight  tear   in   t h e   module's  insulating   thermal   blanket .   N A S A  
spokesman  M i tch   Varnes  said  damage   appeared  m ino r   a n d   should   n o t   delay 
t h e  mission.  (AP, Mar  22/91)  

UP1 stated   t h a t  Columbia's l a u n c h  i n  late  May would  be  delayed  five  t o   11 
days  by  work  t o  realign  t h e  spaceship's twin   boosters.  (UP I ,  Mar   22/91)  

A n   independen t   gove rnmen t  panel ,   t h e  Aerospace  Safety Advisory  Panel ,  
praised  N A S A   for grounding   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  fleet  in  1990  to   fix  fuel  leaks 
and   n o t   sacrificing flight  safety  t o  meet   a  demand ing  launch   schedule .   ( U P ] ,  
Mar  22/91)  

Hughes Commun ica t ion s  Galaxy  is suing N A S A  because  it refused t o  launch  
Hughes'  satellites  from  t h e   Space   Shu t t le   after  t h e   Challenger   accident .  
Edward Frankle, N A S A  general counsel, said t h e  con t rac t  foresaw t h a t  Hughes 
might  n o t   get  t h e  service for  which   it  signed  up.  ( 0  Sun ,  Mar  23/91;  AP, Mar 
25/91;  W  'limes,  Mar  26/91; W  Post,  Mar  26/91;  P  Inq ,   Mar  26/91;  AP,  Mar 
26/91 ) 

March  24:  A s t ronau t   Mark  Lee  said  a  Space   S h u t t l e   flight  in   Endeavour, 
scheduled  for August  3 ,  1992 ,  in  which   his wife J a n  Davis would  also  partici-  
pa te ,  would be  just  a n o t h e r  work assignment. T h e  media  featured  t h em  as  t h e  
first  married  couple   i n  space.  (AP ,  Mar  24/91;  H  Post, Mar  25/91; LA  Times, 
Mar   27/91) 

Japan's  space  agency, t h e   National   Aeronautics   and   Space   Development 
Agency  (NA SDA ) ,  plans  t o   have   three   NASDA   astronauts,  including  o n e  
woman  doctor,  participate  in  N A S A   Space   Shu t t le   flights.  (NY Tm e s ,   Mar 
2419 1 ) 

A n  editorial   in   t h e  Houston  Chronicle stressed  t h e  importance   of U.S.  space 
activities ,  including  t h e  fact  t h a t  "A  pe rmanen t  U .S .  Space  S t a t i o n  is v i ta l  t o  
our   future  technological   deve lopmen t   and   econom ic  prosperity."  (H  Chron ,  
Mar  24/91 ) 

T h e  oldest  B-52  bomber, wh ich  serves  as  a  test-bed   aircraft  for  t h e  N A S A  
Ames-Dryden   facility  a t  Edwards A i r  Force  Base,  and  was  built   in  1952 ,  may 
be  facing  retirement .   Difficulties  in  ob ta in ing   spare  parts  were  a  major  c o n -  
sideration   according   t o   Jack   Levine ,   Director   of   NASA's  Flight  Projects 

MARCH   1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

Division. NASA  would  like  to  substitute a  newer  B-52, such  as  the  G  model 
delivered  in   the   early  1960s,  for  which  spare  parts  are  readily  available. 
(Antelope Valley  Press, Mar  24/91 ) 

March 25: A n  article about the  900 telephone  area code cited  the  use of  a 900 
number  by  the  National  Space  Institute  in  1982, allowing callers  to  listen  in  
o n  conversations between  mission  control  and  Space Shuttle  crews. (AP, Mar 
25/91) 

A n   editorial  in  Space  News  emphasized  the   importance  of  a  U.S.  Space 
S ta t ion  to  continue   improving U.S. competitiveness  in  the  aerospace  indus- 
try.  However,  it  maintained  tha t  NASA   and   the   administration  must  better 
justify  the  cost  of  the  scaled-down version.  (SP  News, Mar  25-31/91) 

C o r t  Durocher, executive director of  the  American  Institute  of Aeronautics 
and  Astronautics  in Washington  and   a  former combat  pilot  and  space  engi- 
neer,  wrote  in  the   Houston  Chronicle  tha t   while  working  to   minimize  risks, 
space  exploration  involves  occasional  failures  and  possible  loss  of  life. 
( H  Chron, Mar  25/91) 

William  Paciesas,  research  professor  of  Physics  a t   the   University  of 
Alabama, Huntsville,  is  co-investigator of  an  experiment o n  NASA's Gamma  
Ray  Observatory  to  be  carried  by Space Shu t t le  Atlantis   in April. T h e  Burst 
and  Transient Source Experiment was to study the  origins of gamma ray bursts. 
Gamma  rays are a t  the  upper end  of  the  energy spectrum, carrying more ener-  
gy  a t  higher  frequency  t h a n   visible  light,  ultraviolet  light,  or  x-rays.  (Hntsul 
Tm s ,  Mar  25/91) 

A  Space Exploration  Initiative  (SEI)  Synthesis Group ,  led  by former astro- 
naut   and  Air  Force general  Thomas  Stafford, was  collecting  ideas for NASA  
and  the  Wh i te  House concerning exploration of  the  Moon and  Mars. A num-  
ber  of  Department  of  Defense programs  relate  to  SEI, such  as  the  Advanced 
Launch   Development   Program  to   improve  propulsion  technology;  the  
National  Aerospace  Plane program  to  develop a hypersonic  research  aircraft; 
radiation-hardened  avionics  and   sensors;  advanced  structural  and   thermal 
protection  materials;  improved  orbital propulsion  systems; and  laser  commu- 
nications  between  spacecraft.  (SP  News, Mar  25-31/91) 

A  space  policy  analyst  for  a major  aerospace  company  in  California  ques- 
tioned  the   lack of  activity  concerning  t h e  Strategic Environmental  Research 
Program (SERP) .  Senator  Sam  Nunn ,  Democrat  from Georgia, sponsored t h e  
program  in  1990 to  bring  vital  data   and   skills from  the   Defense  and  Energy 
departments  to bear o n  problems of  environmental  research and  global warm- 
ing.  T h e   proposal  was  to   select  some  classified  defense  satellite  data   with 
potential  usefulness  in  global  change  research,  declassify  them ,   and   make 

A S TRONAU T IC S   AN11 A ERONAU T IC S  

MARCH   1991 

them  available  to   researchers  in  global  warming.  Congress  authorized  $200 
million  for SERP in the   1991 Defense Authorization Ac t ,  but  nothing  further 
was heard .   (SP  N ew s ,  Mar  25/91) 

T h e   Test  Technique  Demonstrator  program  a t   Langley  Research  Center ,  
Langley,  Virginia,  provided  hypersonic  data  o n   airframelengine  integration 
applicable  to  the  design of  the  National  Aero-Space Plane  (NASP ) .  T h e  pro- 
gram  involves  an   industry  consortium, which  includes  the   North   American 
Aviation   division  of  Rockwell  In te rna t iona l ,   Gene ra l   Dynamics,  and  
McDonne l l   Douglas  for  airframe  design,  a n d   P ra t t   &  W h i t n e y   and  
Rocketdyne  for  the   propulsion  system.  C.  Larry  Edwards,  manager,  NASP  
Aerodynamics  Technology Program, said  the  hypersonic testing phase  should 
he  completed by  1992. ( A L J W ~ ,  Mar  25/91) 

March 26: Several prominent  scientists said NASA's  revised plans skimped o n  
research equipment ,  such as a large centrifuge,  to  study the  debilitating effects 
of  weightlessness adequately.  Life  science  research  is  minimized  in  the   new 
prc3gram.  (NY Xm e s ,  Mar  26/91) 

Lieutenant  General  Donald  Cromer, commander of  t h e  Air  Force Systems 
Command  Space Systems Division,  told  a Space Expo  '91 audience tha t   the  
nex t  generation of  rockets would  l i f t  payloads into  near-Earth orbit for $300 a 
pound  instead  of  the   $3,600 per  pound  it  now  costs a Titan   IV  launch  vehi- 
cle.  Cromer  worked  with  NASA   to   develop  an   advanced  launch  system 
(ALS ) .  T h e  goal was  to  develop engines  ready  for  testing  in  1995-96 with  a 
first flight by  1999-2000. (AP, Mar  26/91) 

NASA  broke ground  at Cape  Canaveral ,  Florida, on  a $56.2 million  facili- 
ty  to  prepare  pieces of  Space Station   Freedom.  (AP, Mar  26/91;  USA  Today, 
Mar  27/91; W Xm e s ,  Mar  27/91; UPI ,  Mar  27/91; CSM, Mar  28/91) 

Two Sovlet cosmonauts who were  running  low o n  food and  water  left Space 
Station  Mir  in  their  Soyuz TM -11  capsule and  flew  to  t h e  port  of  their  astro- 
physics  lab, Kvant.  The i r  cargo ship ,  Progress M-7 ,  had  failed  twice  to  dock 
with Kvant. They  linked  their  capsule with  the  port  when  the  balky  an tenna  
was  located.  Ano the r   attempt   will  be  made  to  a t tach   Progress  to  Mir.  (AP, 
Mar  26/91; W Times ,  Mar  27/91) 

Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r   Director  Jack  Lee  told  the   Huntsville- 
Madison County  Chamber  of  Commerce  tha t   the  news media  were  to  blame 
for NASA's  bad  image during  the  preceding  year.  In  discussing Marshall's eco- 
nomic  impact  o n  the   area, Lee  cited  increases in  its budget, which  had  risen 
from  $1.8  billion  in   1983  to   a  requested  $3.6  billion  in  fiscal  1992. Of  this 
amount ,   an   estimated  $1 .08  billion  would  be  spent  in  Alabama.  Moreover, 

MARCH  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

Marshall civil service and contractor employees represented about  12 percent 
of  the  total Huntsville population.  (Hn tsv  Tm s ,  Mar  26/91) 

March 27: NASA's exhibit at the 39th Paris Air Show, June  13-23, was  to  fea- 
ture  a  full-scale mockup  of  a  Space  Station  Freedom  module.  Th e   exhibit 
would  also  feature NASA  programs Mission  to Planet  Earth  and  aeronautics 
research. (NASA  Release 9 1-47) 

NASA   cleared Space Shuttle Atlantis  for  launch  on  April  5  and  said  the 
mission would  include  the first U.S.  walk  in space  in  five and  one half  years. 
T h e  five-member crew  was  to  deploy  the  17-ton Gamma  Ray  Observatory. 
(AP, Mar  27/91; UPI, Mar  27/91; P  Inq, Mar  28/91; USA  Today,  Mar  28/91; 
W Zmes, Mar  28/91; B Sun, Mar 28/91; B  Sun, Mar 31/91) 

A  solar flare, a strong release  of  energy  from a small area of  the  sun, created 
the most  intense geomagnetic storm on Earth since 1989. Such events increase 
radiation  levels near Earth and affect electrical power systems, satellites, space 
missions, and communications and navigation systems. (UP I ,  Mat  27/91) 

T h e  European organization EUTELSAT selected the Ariane launch vehicle 
of Arianespace, Inc. for the fifth telecommunications second generation satel- 
lite EUTELSAT 11-F5. This satellite  is  a Spacebus 100 spacecraft developed by 
A e ro s~ a t i a l e  and MBB  in Germany, with  a ~ a y l o a d  provided  by  Alcatel. Th e  
satellite would provide full coverage of  the European continent, parts of North 
Africa,  and  the  Middle East. (PR  newswire, Mar  27/91) 

March  28:  A  NASA  scientist,  in  a commentary  accompanying a  paper  pub- 
lished  in the journal Nature, warned against interpreting the breaking apart of 
the Wordie Ice Shelf  in the Antarctic  as a foreshadowing of  widespread melt- 
ing of  the polar ice cap. He maintained  that  this was  a regional warming trend 
not observed elsewhere in Antarctica.  (UP I ,  Mar  28/91) 

A n  editorial criticized expenditures by  Congress and  the  administration  on 
Mission  to  Planet  Earth  with  its  environmental  concerns,  as  opposed  to 
spending larger sums on  space exploration. ( W Times, Mar  28/91) 

A n  alert ground controller  noticed  that the  Progress-7 cargo module was on  
a  collision  course with  Soviet  Space Station Mir  and  deflected  the  module. 
T h e  two cosmonauts succeeded in docking the module and obtaining the food 
supplies. (AP, Mar  28/91; B  Sun, Mar  29/91 ; W Post, Mar  29/91) 

NASA   stated  that  a  computer  glitch  temporarily  put  the  $1.5  billion 
Galileo Jupiter probe  into an  electronic state of  hibernation. Galileo  is  in  an 
elliptical orbit around the sun and was scheduled to  orbit Jupiter for  two years 
in  1995. T h e  computer problem  caused the spacecraft computers to order  the 

ASTRONAUTICS   ANL)  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH  1991 

"safing mode"  but   n o  damage  was  appa ren t .  Engineers  said Ga l i leo  should   be 
back  in  full  operation   by  t h e   time   of  t h e   nex t   compu te r   command s   i n   late  
Ap r i l .  (UP I ,  Mar   28/91)  

McDonne l l  Douglas Space  Systems awarded Hercules  Aerospace  of Magna ,  
U t a h ,  a con t rac t   t o  c o n t i n u e  production   of graphite  epoxy solid rocket  motors  
(GEMS )   for  t h e   Delta  I1  expendable   launch   vehicle .   (PR   newswire,  Ma r  
28/91 ) 

Don   Haley,  spokesman  for  NASA's Ames-Dryden   Flight  Research  Facility 
a t  Edwards Air  Force Base, announced  t h a t  Space  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s ,  wh ich  was 
scheduled   for  launch   o n   April   5 ,   should  land   a t   Edwards  Ap r i l   10 ,  weather  
permitting .   N A S A  officials  preferred  t h e  runway  and   dry  lakebed  a t  Edwards 
t o   Kennedy   Space   C e n t e r   in  Florida,  wh ich   was  ad jacen t   t o   a  swamp. 
(Antelope Va l ley ,  Mar  28/91)  

March   29:  Ellen  S to fan ,   a  Magellan  scientist   a t   NASA's  J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory,  Pasadena,  California ,  said  t h e  p lane t   Venus  may  be  ven t ing   in te -  
rior  h e a t   th rough   giant   h o t   spots  called  co ronae ,   a  form  of  volcanism.  S h e  
indicated   t h a t  Magellan da ta  had  revealed many  exciting  new  aspects of co ro -  
nae .   ( N A S A  Release 91-48)  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard  Truly held   a press conference  during  his visit 
t o   Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   for  its  Honors   Day.  Truly  commended   t h e  
work o n  Space  S t a t i o n  design performed a t  Marshall  and  defended  t h e  Hubb le  
Space   Telescope,  a  Marshall-managed   project.  Fred  Wojtalik ,   Marshall's 
manager  of  t h e   Hubb le   Space   Telescope,  was  given   NASA's  Distinguished 
Service  Medal.  (Htsvl  Tms, Mar  29/91)  

March  3 1 : Dr.  Paul C la rk ,  who  formerly engaged  in  cardiovascular  research for 
N A S A ,  two years ago began  organizing T h e  Manda te ,  a grassroots movemen t  
t h a t   seeks  t o   collect   a t   least  100   million   signatures  worldwide  t o   c rea te   a 
World  Env i ronmen ta l   C o u r t   of  Justice .   Individuals  also  are  asked  t o   ac t  
responsibly  in  a n  env i ronmen ta l   sense.  (UP I ,  Mar   31 /91 )  

April 

Apn'l: NASA's  difficulties in  hiring  and  keeping  experienced  scientists  engi- 
neers  and   the   problems  of  underfunded  projects  and   overworked  staff  were 
described. T h e  article stated tha t  NASA  "has lost more than  half of  its GS/GM  
13-15 scientists and engineers in the  past two years." T h e  retention  problem  in 
the  senior work force caused turmoil at NASA ,  which was criticized for its per- 
formance and management  practices. Efforts a t  pay  reform, it was hoped, would 
improve staff  retention  and  morale.  (Government Executive, Apr/91)  

A  cover  story feature article  o n  Mars dealt  a t   length  with  NASA   and   t h e  
Bush Administration's plans for a "New  Age of  Exploration"  tha t  was  intend-  
ed  to   result  in  the   "terraformation"  of  Mars.  Life  o n   Mars  was  described  a t  
length  and   as  was  planned  launching  of  the  Mars Observer. Various  stages of 
terraformation were discussed, beginning with  the  first (2030-2080) ,  which  is 
to  raise  the   mean  temperature  of  the   planet.  T h e   final  stage  (2150-21 70)   is 
conceived as having achieved  a breathable medium, when  Earth's vast invest- 
ment  would  begin  to  pay  off.  (Life, Apr/91)  

April 1 : T h e  media discussed the  forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the  Gamma 
Ray  Observatory (GRO )  it will  set  in orbit. Gamma  rays have  the  highest of  all 
forms of  radiation and  are born  deep  inside atomic nuclei. G R O  was  to canvass 
the  entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the  whole sky during the  first year 
and concentrating on  the  most  intriguing objects the  second year. G R O  was  to 
be  controlled by  NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center  in Greenbelt, Maryland. 
Scientists from Germany's Max  Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging 
telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment 
was to be the  main instrument for examining the  material enveloping supernovas 
to  look  for  gamma  rays.  University  of  Washington  astronomer  George  Lake 
believed  G R O  would  find  in  the   dark  matter,  strange particles called  "wimps" 
(weakly  interacting  massive  particles)  in  a Milky  Way  object  called  Geminga. 
T h e  Soviet  spacecraft Granat ,  carrying a French  gamma-ray detector, found an  
object  that   accretes surrounding matter, generating  antimatter  that   in  turn  cre- 
ates gamma  rays.  ( P  Inq, Apr  1/91; W Post, Apr   1/91; AP, Apr  1/91; UPI, Apr  
1/91; NY  Times, Apr  2/91; U S A  Today, Apr  2/91; W Times, Apr  2/91; UPI ,  Apr  
2/91; CSM ,  Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr  3/91; U S A  Today, Apr  3/91; UPI,  Apr  3/91; 
AP, Apr 3/91; C Tnb, Apr 3/91 ; UPI, Apr 419 1; P Inq, Apr 5/91 ) 

A NASA  crew hauled  the  Shu t t le  Discovery to  its launch  pad  to  prepare for 
takeoff  approximately  April  25.  (UP I ,  Apr   1/91; AP, Apr   1/91; W Xmes, Apr  
2/91 ) 

A n  experimental rocket motor being tested  for t h e  Air  Force T i tan  IV rock- 
e t   exploded  a t  Edwards Air  Force  Base  in  California. No   one  was  injured  in  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL  1991 

the  explosion. T h e  X t a n   IV,  the  largest unmanned  rocket  in  the U.S. fleet, 
was  scheduled to replace NASA's manned  Shuttle in  flying photo  reconnais- 
sance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr  1/91; W Post, 
Apr  2/91; W Times,  Apr  2/91; USA  Today, Apr  2/91; N Y  Tm e s ,  Apr  2/91; C 
Trin, Apr  319 1 ) 

Th e   Soviet  Union  launched  a  large  new  space  satellite,  Almaz-1, using  a 
giant  Proton  booster  rocket.  Tass  said  Almaz-1  was  launched  from  the 
Raikonur  cosmodrome  in Central Asia. Th e  radar  satellite  would  survey  the 
territory of  the Soviet Union  and  other  countries  "in  the   interest  of  geology, 
cartography, ecology, and agriculture." T h e  Almaz-1 was  the first Soviet satel- 
lite to  provide commercial services for  the American market under  long-term 
contracts. One  of  its principal customers was  to be  the U.S.  Defense Mapping 
Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed  images of 
the  Earth.  (UP I ,  Apr  1/91; AP, Apr  1/91; LA  T rne s ,  Apr  2/91) 

News  editor  Budd  McLaughlin  of  the  Huntsville  New s   denied  the  blame 
placed  on   the  media  by  Jack  Lee,  Director  of  the  Marshall  Space  Flight 
Center, for NASA's poor  public  image. (Hun tsv i l le  New s ,  Apr  1/91) 

NASA's Goddard  Space Flight Center was  testing  a  beta  version of  Com's 
newest OSI  routing  software. T h e  software was  comparable to that known  as 
Open  Shortest Path  First, which  allows intermediate  systems to  talk  to each 
other  and  figure out  the  best  way  to send  information  on  the  network  from 
point A  to point  B.  (Gove rnmen t  Compu te r  New s ,  Apr  1/91) 

T h e  newspaper  summarized  the  controversy over  the  revised  NASA  plans 
for  Space  Station  Freedom  between  NASA  and  the  National  Research 
Council, which maintained  that  the scaling back had  gone too far  to be  valu- 
able.  ( S u n  Jose  Mercury   New s ,   Apr  2/91) 

April  2 :   Grumman Corporation announced  it would  eliminate  1,900 jobs  by 
the  end  of  1991.  T h e   major  cause  was  reduced  U.S.  government  defense 
spending, which  included reductions  in NASA's budget,  leading to  a  scaling 
down of  Grumman's Space Station Support Division. (AP, Apr  2/91) 

T h e   Synthesis  Group,  an  advisory  panel  headed  by  former  astronaut 
Thomas P.  Stafford, outlined  ways  to create a lunar base and make the  35-mil- 
lion-mile  trip  to Mars. T h e  group's report  was  expected  in May, and  John  E. 
P ~ k e ,  space policy expert for the Federation of  American Scientists, said it was 
expected to recommend that the best method for the  flight would be  a nuclear 
reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power  would  cut  the  time  of  the   trip  in half 
from  the 450-500 days needed  using  conventional chemical  rockets. It would 
reyulre  convincing  the  public  of  the  safety  and  desirability of  such  nuclear 
power, which  to date has been  used  only  to produce electrical power for long, 

APR IL   1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

unoccupied  trips such as  that   of  Voyager  tha t  photographed  the  outer planets. 
(Plain Dealer, Apr  219 1 ) 

April  3:  Daniel  S .   Greenberg,  editor  of  Science  and  Government  Report,  a 
Washington  newsletter, questioned  the   redesigned Space S ta t ion  and   expen-  
ditures  to date  o n  the   Station ,  citing  the  views of  the  Space Studies Board of 
the  National  Academy  of  Sciences. ( P  Inq, Apr  3/91) 

T h e  Pentagon was  developing  secretly  a nuclear-powered  rocket  for boost- 
ing  heavy   military  payloads  into   space  as  part  of  the   Strategic  Defense 
Initiative ,  known  as "star wars."  T h e  program was disclosed by  the  Federation 
of  American   Scientists  and   was  confirmed  by  government  documents  
obtained  by  the   New  York  Times. NA SA   reportedly  was  evaluating  the   pro- 
gram quietly. T h e  Federation  opposed the  program  because of  the  risk  of radi- 
ation   release.  (B  Sun, Apr  3/91; W Post, Apr  3/91; UPI ,  Apr  3/91; WSJ,  Apr 
3/91;  VS'  Times, Apr  4/91) 

Johns  Hopkins University  in  Baltimore  announced   tha t   for  financial  rea- 
sons  it  was  ending   its  participation  in  the  Magellan Telescope project  in  Las 
Campanas, Ch i le  as  of  June  30.  It  cited  an   inability  to  raise  the  $15 million, 
which  was  its project  share. T h e  role of  the  Astronomy Department  at Johns  
Hopkins  was  enhanced   th rough   its  space  participation .   T h e   Hopkins  
Ultaviolet  Telescope  was  successfully  flown  aboard  the   Space  Shu t t le   and  
Johns  Hopkins  contains  o n   campus  the   Space  Telescope  Science  Institute ,  
NASA's  center   for  astronomy  programs  with  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope. 
( B  Sun, Apr  3/91)  

Researchers at the  National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration found 
that   the   atmospheric  lifetime of  methane,  a key  "greenhouse gas,"  is  about  25  
percent  longer  than   previously  thought.  The  gas  is  short-lived  compared  to 
other   greenhouse  gases  such  as  carbon  dioxide  and  chlorofluorocarbons  so 
reductions  in methane would  ease the  greenhouse effect. (UP I ,  Apr  3/91) 

April 4 :  Navy Commander  Ken Reightler,  a Marylander, is  scheduled  to  fly o n  
September  19 on   the   Shu t t le   Discovery.  A  Naval  Academy  graduate  and  a 
test pilot, R e~ g h t l e r  will be  a pilot  o n  the  five-day mission tha t  will deploy  t h e  
Upper Atmosphere Research  Satellite .  (B  Sun, Apr  4/91)  

NASA's  goal  was  to   deploy  two  Space  Shu t t le   missions  during  April: 
Atlantis   on  April  5  and   Discovery  o n  April  25 .   T h e   last  two-launch  mon th  
was January  1986. In  addition  to  launching  t h e  Gamma  Ray  Observatory,  the  
Atlantis   flight  would  feature  a  spacewalk  by  Jerry  Ross  and   Jay  Ap t .   (NY 
Times, Apr  4/91; UPI, Apr  4/91; LA Times, Apr 4/91; B Sun, Apr 519 1 ; W Post, 
Apr  5/91; NY  Times, Apr  519 1; W Times, Apr  519 1 ; USA Today, Apr  5/91 ; UP I ,  
Apr  519 1; AP, Apr  5/91 ) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

APRIL   1991 

Mage l lan   p ro jec t   manage r   Tony   S p e a r   a t   NASA ' s   J e t   P ropu l s ion  
Laboratory,  Pasadena ,   Ca l i fo rn ia ,   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   t h e   spacecraft   had   com -  
~ l e t e d  its   ob jec t ive   for  t h e   primary  ~ h a s e  of  t h e  Venus   mission  more   t h a n  
o n e   m o n t h   before  t h e   e n d   of  t h e   first  243-day   mapping   cycle .   Magellan  
mapped   70  pe rcen t   of  t h e    la net  b y  Ap r i l   3, a n d  will  have   mapped   84 per-  
c e n t  by  May  15. T h e  mission  was  t o  be  e x t e n d e d   t o  allow  Magellan   t o  map  
t h e   rema in ing   14 p e r c e n t ,   inc lud ing   t h e  s o u t h  pole .   Toward  t h e   l a t t e r  pa r t  
of  its  mission  it   will  also  acquire   gravity   d a t a .   Magellan's  findings ,   as 
described   i n  Science magazine,  ind ica ted  Venus  was vo lcan ic  a n d  geological-  
ly  ac t ive .   ( N A S A  Release   91 -49 ;   AP,  A p r   4/91;   U P I ,   Ap r   4/91;   AP,  Ap r  
5/91;  N A S A  Release  9 1 - 5 3 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   its  newest  Space   S h u t t l e ,   Endeavour,  would  be 
rolled  o u t  Ap r i l   25  a t  a ceremony  a t  Rockwell  International's   Space  Division 
Facility, Palmdale ,  California .   ( N A S A  Editor's N o t e  N -91 -25 )  

April 5 :  N A S A  satellite  observations   indicated   t h a t   Earth's protective   ozone 
layer  was  t h i n n i n g   twice  as  fast  as  believed  previously.  T h e   Environmental  
P ro tec t ion  Agency  made   t h e  announcemen t .   Richard   S. Stolarski,  a  research 
scientist   a t   t h e   Goddard   Space   Flight  Cen te r ,   found  a  four  t o   five  percent  
average  decrease  over   t h e   11-year period  h e  studied .   During  t h e   winter ,   t h e  
dep le t ion   was  eight   t o   n i n e   percent   of  t h e   layer.  Several   scientists   have  
stressed  t h e   importance  of  t h e  public developing  "good  sun  habits"  in  relation  
t o  t h e  ozone dep le t ion  a n d  reducing  t h e  use of chlorofluorocarbons  (C FC s ) . (B  
Sun ,  A p r   5/91; NY  Xmes,  Ap r   5/91; WSJ,  A p r   5/91; W  Post,  Ap r   5/91;  USA 
Today, A p r  5/91 ; W Xmes, Ap r  5/91 ; LA Times, A p r   5/91 ; UP I ,  A p r   5/91 ; NY 
Times, Ap r   9/91 ; CSM ,  A p r  9/91  ) 

Brief  biographies  of  each  A t lan t i s   astronaut   appeared  . (UP I ,  Ap r   5 /91 )  

NASA's  Godda rd   Space  Flight  C e n t e r ,  G reenbe l t ,   Maryland ,  ha s   selected 
HugheslSanta   Barbara  Research  Cen te r ,   Go le ta ,   California   as  its  con t rac to r  
for  t h e   Mode ra te   Resolution   Imaging  Spec t rome te r -Nad i r   (M 0 D I S . N )  
in s t rumen t  for  t h e  Earth  Observing  System  (EOS )  program.  EOS   is  cen t ra l  t o  
NASA's  Mission  t o   Planet   Earth   Program.  MOD IS -N   is  t h e   key  research 
in s t rumen t   t o  f l y   o n  a  series  of  EOS  unmanned   polar  spacecraft.  O v e r   a  15- 
year  period ,   it  would  measure  terrestrial,  oceanographic ,   and   atmospheric  
parameters  t o  assess env i ronmen ta l  changes .   ( N A S A  Release C9 1 - 1 ) 

N A S A  Administrator   Richard   H .  Truly  announced   t h a t ,  based  o n  a  recent  
policy  review,  NASA's  Space   Flight  Participant   Program  would  be  kept   in  
abeyance  un t i l   1992. N A S A  previously had   indicated   t h a t  when   t h e  program 
resumed,  first  priority  would  be  given  t o   a  teacher   in   space  i n   fulfillment  of 
space education   plans.  ( N A S A  Release  91 -50 ;  UP I ,  Ap r   5/91; LA  Times, Ap r  
619 1 

APRIL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

Royce  Mitchell,  NASA's  Advanced  Motor  Project  Manager  at  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center ,   Huntsville,  Alabama,  announced   tha t   NASA   would 
begin  a series of  sub-scale test  firings t o  evaluate materials  intended  for use  in 
the  new Space Shu t t le  Advanced  Solid Rocket Motor. T h e  first of  five nozzle 
tests  would  occur  o n  April  10, conducted  by  Aerojet  Corporation ,   ASRM 
Division  in  Iuka, Mississippi. (NA SA  Release 91-51)  

ApnE  5: Astronaut  Manley  Lanier  "Sonny"  Carter,  who  flew  on   the   Shu t t le  
Discovery  in  1989, was one  of  those killed  in the  crash of  the  commuter plane 
carrying  former  Senator  J o h n  Tower. Biographic data   were  given.  (UP I ,  Apr 
519 1; AP, Apr   5/91; AP, Apr  6/91; NY  Times,  Apr  6/91; W Pos t ,  Apr  6/91 ) 

Thousands  of  people  watched  Atlantis   take  off  from  Cape   Canaveral ,  
Florida.  T h e   external   fuel  tank  from  Space  Shu t t le  Atlantis   broke  off  after 
takeoff  and  was seen over Hawaii streaking toward Earth. Some accounts gave 
biographic data  of crew members. (AP, Apr  5/91; W Post, Apr  6/91; LA Xme s ,  
Apr   6/91; NY  Times,  Apr  6/91; P  Inq, Apr  6/91; B  S u n ,  Apr   6/91; LA  Xme s ,  
Apr   7/91) 

A p ' l  6: T h e  crew  of  Atlantis   talked  with  American  schoolchildren  while  in 
orbit  over  the   United   States.  (AP, Apr  6/91;  W  Post,  Apr   7/91;  B  S u n ,  Apr  
7/91 ; NY Xm e s ,  Apr   7/91 ) 

Apnl  7:  T h e   crew  of  Atlantis   photographed  the   oil  well  fires  burning  in 
Kuwait as  they  passed over. (UP I ,  Ap r  7/91) 

T h e  Orlando Sentinel S t a r  published  two special reports o n  NASA  and Space 
Shuttles .  T h e  first was a review of  the  first  10  years of space flight: the  dreams 
in  contrast  with  the   reality of  costs  and   delays experienced. T h e  conclusion 
was  tha t   "The   price  of  a rushed  design o n  a  shoestring  budget  has meant ,   for 
the  Shu t t le ,  unreliability." T h e  second article dealt with NASA's plans for t h e  
next  decade with  reference  to  such  items as  the   Personnel  Launch  System, a 
small capsule or  space plane  o n  top  of  a n  expendable  booster  rocket  to  carry 
astronauts and  some cargo to  a Space Station;  the  Advanced  Manned  Launch 
System, a  reusable vehicle  combined  with  a  reusable  booster, capable  of  car- 
rying  more  persons  and   cargo;  and   the   National   Aerospace  Plane  (NA S P ) ,  
which  would  bum   a  "slush"  mixture  of  liquid  and  solid  hydrogen.  Most 
research  funds  to date  went  in to  the   development  of  the  NASP.  ( 0  Sen  Star ,  
Apr   7/91 ) 

A p n l 8 :  Jerry Ross and  Jay A p t  fixed a stuck  satellite an tenna   in NASA's first 
unscheduled  repair  in space, showing the  value of  the  human  element  in space 
flight.  Thereafter  they  remained  outside  for  three  more  hours  to   test  equip- 
ment .  A  further spacewalk was scheduled  before  return  to Earth.  (USA  Today, 
Apr  8/91; B  S u n ,  Apr   8/91; AP, Apr   8/91; UPI ,  Apr  8/91; C Trib, Apr  8/91; 

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

APRIL  1991 

CSM ,   Apr   9/91;  W  Pos t ,   Apr  9/91;  Birmingham  Pos t-Hera ld ,   Apr   9/91; 
Birmingham  New s ,  Apr  1 219 1 ) 

Chairman   Leon  Panetta ,   Democrat  from  California, of  the   House  Budget 
Committee ,   proposed  to  cut   President  Bush's  requested  increase  for  space 
spending  from  12 percent  to   4.2  percent  over  the   present  level-enough 
t o  
keep pace with  inflation.  (UP I ,  Apr  8 /91 )  

Ham  radio  operators  in  Long  Beach,  California,  made  h~ s t o r y  when  they 
successf~~lly  transmitted  a  television  plcture  to  the   Space  Shuttle   Atlantis .  
(LA Times,  Apr  8/91 ) 

T h e  General  Services Administration  (G SA )  and NASA  were  at odds over 
the   timing  and  method  of  moving NASA's main  voice  and  data  network  to 
the  mandatory  FTS 2000 contract .  G SA  was pressuring NASA   to  move all of 
its  Program  Support  Communications  Network  ( P SCN )   to  FTS  2000  by 
September  30 .   PSCN  provides  long  distance  communications  between 
NASA   centers and  its contr'actors and NASA   planned  t o  move  to FTS 2000 
over  a  two-year  period.  Details  of  at.r\rices to  he  provided  remained  to  he 
worked  out .   (Federal Con rpu t r r  Week,  Apr  819 1 ) 

Ap""l9: Ross  and  Apt   made a second spacewalk, this one  of  six hours, testing 
a  cart  running  on   a monorail  along  one  side of  the   Shuttle's cargo hay. They  
also  tested  different  manual,  mechanical,  and   electrical  systems  for  moving 
safely and   efficiently in weightlessness. (LA Xme s ,  Ap r  9/91; B S u n ,  Apr  9/91; 
W Pos t ,  Apr  9/91; NY  Times, Apr  9/91; W Xme s ,   Apr  9/91; USA  Today,  Apr  
9/91; P  Inq, Apr  9/91; AP, Apr  9/91; U P ] ,  Apr  9/91)  

Astronomers Joss Bland-Hawthorn of Rice University, Andrew S. Wilson of 
the   University  of  Maryland, and  R .   Brent  Tully  of  the  University  of  Hawaii, 
~ is ing  the   telescope  atop   Mauna  Kea  volcano  in  Hawaii  have  found  a  huge 
object. It might be a "supermassive black hole," but  if  so it would be more t h a n  
100 million  times  larger than   the   largest black hole  thought   to exist.  It  might 
also he  a dead  or  dormant  quasar. Astronomers  hoped  that   the   Gamma  Ray 
Observatory  of  Atlantis   would  help   to  resolve  the   mystery.  (NY Times,  Apr 
9/91; AP,  Apr  9/91; P  Inq, Apr   10/91; W  Pos t ,   Apr  1019 1 ; USA  Today,  Apr 
10191 ; UP I ,  Apr  10/91; LA  Times, Apr  15/91)  

Former astronaut  Michael Collins in his new hook, Mission  to Ma r s ,  said  tha t  
he believed homosexuals should he harred from space exploration because  they 
would be  likely to  create  interpersonal  problems. NASA  never considered sex- 
ual  orientation  in hiring.  (AP, Apr  9/91; Long Beach  Press  Telegram, Apr  9/91) 

Peenemunde,  Germany  was  the   place  where  the   first  self-propelled rocket 
left the  Earth's atmosphere. Th is  occurred on  October  3 ,  1942 when  the  Nazis 

APRIL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

launched  a  5  112  t o n  V-2  rocket  to  a height  of  more  t h a n   50 miles.  A  muse- 
um was  scheduled  to  open  o n  the  site.  (LA Times, Apr  9/91) 

April  10: Atlantis  made  six passes by  Soviet Space S ta t ion  Mir  as  it  prepared 
to   land. T h e  astronauts finished  experiments  and  tested  a manual  system  for 
chasing down  targets  in orbit.  ( P  Inq ,  Apr   10191; W Times, Apr   10/91; B  Sun, 
Apr   10191;  USA  Today,  Apr   10191; IVY  E m s ,  Apr  10191; LA  Times,  Apr  
10191; C Trib, Apr   10191; AP,  Apr   10/91; UP I ,  Apr  10191) 

NA SA   announced   the   naming  of  astronaut  Colonel   Guy  S.  Gardner   as 
Commandant   of  the   U.S.AF  Test  Pilot  School  a t   Edwards  Air   Force  Base, 
California.  H e  was  to   leave  the   astronaut  corps  in  June   1991 to   assume  his 
new post, which  is  part of  the  Air  Force  Systems Command .   (NA SA  Release 
91-52) 

April  1 1 :   NASA   postponed  the   landing of  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis   because of 
high  winds  at  Edwards Air  Force  Base  in  California  and   bad  weather  a t   the  
alternate  landing site of  Kennedy Space Cen te r  in Florida.  ( P  Inq ,  Apr   11/91; 
B  Sun, Apr   11/91; W Post, Apr   11/91; W Times, Apr  11/91; NY  Times, Apr 
11/91; USA  Today, Apr   11/91; AP, Apr   11/91; UP I ,  Apr  11/91) 

A  panel   o n  global warming  of  t h e  N a t i o n a l  Academy   of  Sciences   urged 
t h e   Bush  adm in is t ra t ion   to   take   various  a n t i - p o l l u t i o n   and   energy  effi- 
ciency  steps  t o  slow global warming. T h e  study was  in i t ia ted   in   1988 when  
Congress  asked  t h e  Env i ronmen ta l   P ro tec t ion  Agency  t o  commission  t h e  
academy  to  study  t h e  subject   and   recommend   ac t ions .  T h e  panel's cen t ra l  
conce rn  was  t o  reduce  greenhouse  gas emissions,  especially t h e  "aggressive 
phase-out"  of chlorofluorocarbons   in acco rdance  with   t h e  timetable   in  t h e  
1990 London   Protocol .   It  also  recommended   energy  conse rva t ion   meas-  
ures a n d  increased  research  i n t o  a l te rna t ive  energy supplies as well  as new -  
gene ra t ion   nuclear   reactors .   ( B  Sun ,  Ap r   11/91; P  Inq, Ap r   11/91; W Post, 
A p r   11/91; USA  Today, A p r   11/91; NY  Times, A p r   11/91; LA  Times, Ap r  
11/91) 

T h e  Hubble Space Telescope proved more useful  t h a n  expected despite  t h e  
flaw  in   its mirror. T h e  congressional  appropriation  of  an   additional  $30 mil- 
lion in  NASA's 1991 budget allowed some repairs to  be made from t h e  ground 
using computer  processing and   radio  control .  NASA   plans  additional  repairs 
by  astronauts  in   1993, attaching   new mirrors  to   the   outside  of  the   telescope. 
( W  Times, Apr   11/91) 

NA SA  revised  its Space Station   plan  to  include a centrifuge.  T h e  absence 
of  a  centrifuge  in  the   scaled-down  plan  was  criticized  by  a  number  of  scien- 
tists, who considered  it  essential  for  the  study of  the  effects of  weightlessness. 
(NY Times, Apr   1 119 1 ) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTI(:S 

APRIL   1991 

Th e  Soviet Union used  the  name  of  Yuri Gagarin, the first human  in space 
30  years  ago,  to   boost  its  emerging  commercial  space  program.  President 
Mikhail  S. Gorbachev  at  an opening  ceremony in  Moscow  said  Soviet  space 
science and  technology were  open  to  international cooperation  and called for 
joint  space research with the  United States, European countries, China, India, 
Japan, and others.  (AP, Apr  1 1/91 ) 

Four  Israeli high school students paid  a two-week visit  to the United  States 
after  winning  an  astrophysics  contest  in  Israel.  T h e   competition  was  spon- 
sored by  the National Museum of  Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa 
to encourage Israeli youth  to  focus o n  technology and  the  sciences.  The  stu- 
dents  visited  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  in  Greenbelt,  Maryland  and 
NASA's headquarters.  (Washington Jewish Week, Apr  1 1/91 ) 

Apn'l 12: Atlantis  landed safely  at  Edwards Air  Force  Base, California, one day 
late.  It  was  to  be  flown  to  Cape  Canaveral atop  a modified  b e i n g   747.  The  
astronauts appeared in excellent condition. (P  Iv, Apr  1219 1 ; B Sun, Apr  1219 1 ; 
W Xmes, Apr  12/91; USA  Today, Apr  12/91; NY Xmes,  Apr  12/91; WSJ,  Apr 
12/91; WPost,Apr  12/91;LATimes,Apr 12/91;AP,Apr 12/91;UPI,Apr 12/91) 

General  Thomas  S .   Moorman,  Jr.,  commander  of  Air  Force  Space 
Command  at  Peterson  Air  Force  Base  in  Colorado,  said  orbiting  satellites 
were  integral  to  mid-air and  ground operations  in  the  Persian Gulf  War.  He 
spoke at  a  conference  at Tufts University  on  "The  United  States Air  Force: 
Aerospace Challenges and Missions in  the  1990s." (CSM, Apr  12/91) 

Th e  Soviet Union observed Cosmonaut Day, marking the thirtieth anniver- 
sary  of  the  space flight of  Yuri  Gagarin.  ( P  Inq, Apr  12/91; USA  Today, Apr 
12/91; AP, Apr  12/91) 

Orbital  Sciences  Corporation  in  Fairfax, Virginia, made  a  reputation  for 
fast, frugal  flights into  space  that won  it  a  number  of  contracts with  NASA  
and  the Air Force.  I t  developed the  Pegasus rocket, which was  launched from 
under  the wing  of  a B-52 in  1990. Since then  it has developed various other 
rockets designed  to boost  Shutt!e  payloads. ( W  Times, Apr  12/91) 

A n   article on   interactive  computer graphics  and  the  virtual  reality system 
they  involve stated that NASA's Visualization for Planetary Exploration project 
might use  such technology. I t  would enable the creation of  environments of  the 
moon and planets that would  use  data gathered by  space probes and satellites to 
allow  users to feel they were visiting those bodies.  (W  Xmes, Apr  12/91) 

Final approval was given for the construction of  a new  visitors' center at  the 
Johnson  Space  Center,  Houston.  The   Manned  Space  Flight  Education 
Foundation  helped  raise funds for  the $60 million structure.  (AP, Apr  12/91) 

APRIL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Aviation Week  and Space Technology reported  tha t   a Soviet spacecraft  carry- 
ing  supplies  for  t h e   two  cosmonauts  aboard  the   Mir  Space  S ta t ion   almost 
collided  with  t h e   station  during  a docking  attempt .   (AP, Apr   12/91; C Trib, 
Apr  1419 1 ) 

T h e  Marshall  Islands commemorated  t h e   ten th   anniversary  of  U.S.  Space 
Shu t t le  flights by issuing a block  of  four stamps.  (AP, Apr   12/91) 

A n  editorial  commended  the   Space  Shu t t le  record  as  remarkably  positive 
over  the   past  10 years.  (Fla Today, Apr   12/91) 

Apnl  13: A  $40  million  communications  satellite  was  launched  by  a  Delta 
rocket  from  Cape   Canaveral  Air   Force  S ta t ion ,   Florida.  T h e   satellite  was 
owned  by  GTE  Spacenet  Corporation  of  McLean, Virginia. T h e  satellite was 
scheduled  to  take  over  the  work  of  the  present  Westar  spacecraft  in June  and 
increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Ap r   1319 1 ; 
UP I ,  Apr   13/91; CSM ,  Apr  15/91)  

T h e  Los  Angeles Air  Force Base  at El Segundo was omitted  from the   list of 
proposed base closings of  the  Department of Defense. T h e  base houses the  Air  
Force  Space Systems Division,  a  3,200-employee unit   tha t   oversees military 
contracts  for procurement of  space hardware.  (LA  Times, Apr  13/91)  

T h e  two astronauts on  NASA's  first Shu t t le  flight  10 years ago, J o h n  Young 
and  Robert  Crippen ,  returned  to  Cape  Canaveral  for  a n  anniversary  celebra- 
tion .   T h e   20,000  workers  at  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   and  their   families were 
invited  for  the  occasion.  (AP, Apr  13/91; B  Sun, Apr   14/91) 

NASA  engineers worried over data  indicating tha t  the  critical  16-foot main 
an tenna   of  Galileo,  essential  for  the  Jupiter  probe,  may  have  failed  to  unfold 
properly. Such  a failure would limit t h e  speed of  transmitting data  from Jupiter  
to  Earth  and   reduce  the   number  of  photographs  tha t   could  be  sent .  Galileo  
was  unique  among  spacecraft  launched  to   date   in  tha t   it  has  a  "dual  spin" 
design with  the   a n t e n n a  being  located  o n   the   spinning  section.  Efforts were 
underway  t o  see how  t h e  situation  could  be  remedied.  (LA Times, Apr   13/91; 
UPI ,  Apr   1319 1 ; AP, Apr   1319 1 ; UP I ,  Apr   1519 1 ; NY  'Emes, Apr   1719 1 ; B Sun, 
Apr   18/91 ; W Xmes, Apr   1819 1 ; USA  Today, A p t   18/91 ) 

A n   internal  memorandum  signed  by  four NASA   officials  as  well  as  inter-  
views  with  staff  a t   the   Reston,  Virginia,  facility  indicated  a  strong  opinion  
tha t  moving  the  headquarters now would  disrupt  development of  the  $30 bil- 
lion  Space  Station .   A t   a  recent  meeting  three-quarters  of  NASA   staff  were 
said  to   oppose  a  move.  Despite  this  fact,  NASA   Assistant  Administrator 
William  B.  Lenoir was said  to  have  decided  t o  recommend  moving  the  head-  
quarters.  ( H  Chron, Apr   13/91) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1991 

Apn'l 15:  Following the Flight Readiness Review, NASA  announced April  23 
as  the  launch date for  Space Shuttle Discovery, with  a seven-man crew com- 
manded by  Navy Captain Michael L. Coats.  (NASA  Release 91-54; W Xmes, 
Apr  16/91; AP, Apr  16/91; UPI, Apr  16/91; B  Sun ,  Apr  17/91; NY  'Times, Apr 
18/91) 

Edward  Stone, new  Director  of  the  California Institute  of  Technology's Jet 
Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL), which  manages  planetary  missions  for  NASA, 
commented on  present  and  future plans.  He stated Magellan was  sending back 
pictures of  Venus; Galileo, on   its way  to  explore Jupiter and  its moons, would 
view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for 
a September 1992 launch. He spoke of  the preliminary unmanned research nec- 
essary  before any exploration of  Mars could be  undertaken.  (CSM, Apr  15/91) 

Astronomer Vera Cooper Rubin discussed dark matter  in the  universe in the 
first  of  a six-part public television series, "The Astronomers." Rubin, a scien- 
tist at the Carnegie Institution for the  past 26 years, concentrated on the study 
of  dark matter, which is thought to account for the mass of  nine-tenths of mat- 
ter  in  the universe. ( W  Post, Apr  15/91; NY  Xmes, Apr  15/91 ) 

NASA and  the Defense Department were expected to present the  National 
Space Council  with  a proposal  to  build  a  new,  heavy  unmanned  booster  for 
the  late  1990s. It  would  be  based  on  a Space Shuttle external  tank  equipped 
with  oxygenhydrogen  engines, using  strap-on solid  rocket  motors. Jack Lee, 
Director  of  the  NASA  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center,  told  the  U.S.  Space 
Foundation  Symposium in Colorado Springs that  the  belief  was  that  the new 
device could achieve a payload cost  to orbit as low  as $500-$1,000 per  pound. 
(AvWk, Apr  15/91 ) 

*  Th e  House  Government Operations  Committee  asked NASA   to  reinstate 
the   third  bidder,  Convex  Computer  Corporation,  for  the   Operations 
Automatic Data Processing contract. Convex was disqualified for filing its bid 
nine  minutes  late. Th e  request  was  made,  according to  committee  chairman 
John  Conyers, Democrat from Michigan,  in order  to encourage competition. 
(Federal Computer Week, Apr  15/91; Government Computer News, Apr  15/91)) 

Construction  of  NASA's Ames-Dryden Integrated Test  Facility a t  Edwards 
Air Force Base was  18 months behind  schedule and $3.1 million over  its orig- 
inal  cost  estimate  because  three  successive  contractors  pulled  out  of  the  job, 
NASA  said.  Efforts  were  underway  to  find  a  new  contractor.  NASA  
spokesman Don Haley asserted  that the  construction delays had no t  hindered 
aircraft tests. (Los Angeks Daily  News,  Apr  15/91; Californian, Apr  19/91) 

A w l   16: NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an independent group of 
industry  and  academic experts, was  pressuring NASA   to consider automated 

APR IL   1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

landings  t h a t  would minimize t h e  need  for human s  a n d  increase  t h e  safety fac- 
tor.  (NY Times,  Ap r   16/91 ) 

O rb i ta l  Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion  of  Fairfax, Virginia,  launched   its first  Firebird 
suborbital  vehicle  from a NA SA  flight cen te r   in Wallops  Island, Virginia. T h e  
launch   was  conducted   under   con t rac t   t o   t h e   Massachusetts  In s t i tu te   of 
Technology's Lincoln  Laboratory in support  of  t h e  Strategic  Defense Initiative  
Organization .  T h e  Firebird  deployed ballistic  missile reentry   targets  t h a t  were 
used  in  tracking  experiments  conduc ted  o n  t h e  ground .  (W  Times, Ap r   1619 1 ) 

N A S A   requested  proposals  t o   establish  six  Regional  Technology  Transfer 
Cen te r s   ( R T T C ) ,  each   funded  a t   about   $1   million  annually.  The se   would 
replace  1 0  Industrial  Applications   C e n t e r s ,  whose  con t rac t s   expire   in   1991. 
T h e   restructuring  was  intended   t o  broaden   geographical  coverage  t o  include  
all  contiguous   states   by  establishing  a  regional  structure   similar  t o   t h e   six 
Federal  Laboratory  Consortiums  for Technology  Transfer. T h e  i n t e n t  also was 
t o  establish  close  ties with  NASA's  C e n t e r s  for t h e  Comme rc ia l  Development  
of  Space   in   various  regions  and   to   encourage   partnerships   w i th   universities 
and   state   organizations  as  well  as  promote   local  businesses.  ( N A S A  Release 
9 1 - 5 5 )  

Sherwood   Rowland ,   a  scientist   from  t h e   University   of  C a l i f o r n i a - l r v~ n e ,  
told  Congress  t h a t   winter   ozone  dep le t ion   over   t h e   n o r t h e r n   U n i t e d   S ta te s  
and   C a n a d a   was  about   one - th i rd   greater  t h a n   t h e   already  alarming   declines  
detailed   in  new N A S A  studies. Rowland   in   1974  was  o n e  of  t h e  first  t o  warn 
of  t h e  dangers  of  ozone-depleting  industrial  compounds   like  chlorofluorocar-  
bons.  (U P I ,  A p r   16/91 ) 

A t lan t i s  began  its piggyback jet  rlde t o  Florida a top  its Aoeing 747 .  (AP ,  Ap r  
16/91)  

April  17: W h i l e   commend ing  Jay Apt's  and   Jerry  Ross's work  in   freeing  t h e  
jammed  a n t e n n a   of  t h e  G amm a   Ray  Observatory   during   the i r   A t lan t i s   mis- 
sion ,   a n   editorial   commen ta to r   advocated   a  re th ink ing   of  spaceflight  goals 
and  greater  realism.  (CSM ,  A p r   17/91 ) 

Sena to r   Albert   Go re ,   Democrat   from  Tennessee ,   cha i rman   of  t h e   S e n a t e  
Comme rce   subcommittee   o n   Comme rce ,   Space ,   and   Transportation ,   ques-  
tioned   t h e   cost  figures  in   NASA's  revised  Space   S t a t i o n   plans.  William  
Lenoir,  head   of  NASA's  space flight ,  conceded   t h a t   t h e   $30 billion   cost  did 
n o t   include  such   items as $1 .5  billion  t o  $ 2   billion  t o  build a n  emergency crew 
return   vehicle .   T h e   Space  Studies   Board  of  t h e   Na t iona l   Research   C o u n c i l  
told  t h e   S e n a t e  subcommittee   t h a t   it  supported  its  earlier  Ma rch   s ta temen t  
about   spending   Space   S t a t i o n   funds  differently.  ( W  Times,  A p r   17/91; UP I ,  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1991 

Apr  17/91; AP, Apr  17/91; Washington Technology, Apr   1819 1; AP, Apr  19/91; 
H t s v l  Tms, Apr  19/91 ) 

Stormy weather  prevented Space Shuttle  Atlantis  from  landing at Kennedy 
Space Center .   I t   landed  instead  a t  MacDill  Air   Force  Base; t h e  flight  would 
resume when  the  weather  cleared.  (AP, Apr   17/91; UPI, Ap r   17/91 ) 

T h e  Sunnyvale ,  California City  Council  approved a position paper prepared 
by  the   Moffett  Field  Committee ,   composed  of  representatives  of  NASA's 
Ames  Research  Center ,   and   several  neighboring  city  councils and  chambers 
of  commerce.  T h e   paper  proposed  t h a t ,   if  Congress  approved  closing  the  
Moffett  Field  Naval  Air  S ta t ion ,  NASA   operate  the   field  instead  to   ensure 
that   research  and   transport  activities continue .   (San Jose  Mercury  News, Apr 
17/91 ; San Jose Mercury  News, Apr   18/91 ) 

A p ' l  18:  The   House  of  Representatives  rejected  President  Bush's  proposed 
budget, allowing only a 4.2 percent  increase in  the  space program to keep pace 
with  inflation,  instead  of  the   recommended  12  percent  increase.  (UP I ,  Apr  
18/91; B  S u n ,  Ap r   18/91) 

NASA   announced   tha t   its  Ames  Research  Cen te r   at  Moffett  Field, 
California, and  Terra-Mar  Resource  Information  Services,  Inc.,  of  Mountain 
View, California, would  jointly  develop a system to  allow firefighters to  merge 
elevation  and  vegetation  data   with  live  pictures  of  forest  fires. Th is   would 
enable  firefighters quickly  to  "see"  through  a smoky forest fire and plan  their 
strategy. T h e   three-year, $600,000 project  called  for NASA   to  expand  exist- 
ing  remote  sensing  technology  and  for  Terra-Mar  t o  develop  portable  com- 
puter  work  stations and   advanced  software. (NA SA  Release 91-56)  

T h e  NASA   Lewis  Research  Center ,   Cleveland,  awarded  a  $1  12  million 
contract   to  General  Dynamics  Commercial  Launch  Services,  Inc.  in  S a n  
Diego,  California ,   for  launch   services  connec ted   with   t h e   Solar   and  
Heliospheric  Observatory  ( SOHO ) .  S O H O   is  part  of  a  cooperatwe  effort 
among  NASA ,   the   European  Space  Agency,  and   the   Japanese  Institute  of 
Space  and  Astronautical  Science  to  conduct  a n  examination  of  the   Sun  and 
various solar phenomena  for  launches in  1992 through  1995. (NA SA  Release 
C91 -m )  

Atlantis  returned  to Kennedy Space Cen te r  from MacDill Air  Force Base  in 
Tampa.  (AP, Apr  18/91) 

NASA  selected  Ball Corporation  of  Muncie, Indiana,  to  repair  the  Hubble 
Space Telescope. (C  Trib, Apr  18/91) 

APRIL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Business, county, and  NASA  officials met  in Reston, Virginia, to  announce  
a  new  hotline   for  anyone  who  wanted  to  keep  the   NASA   Space  S ta t ion  
Program  in  Reston.  T h e  Coalition   for  Space  Station   Continuity   set  up  the  
hotline ,   following reports  tha t   the  Texas Congressional  delegation urged  tha t  
NASA  move  to Houston.  (McLeanlGreat Falls Connection, Apr   1819 1 ) 

A  study by the  University of  Southern   California found  tha t   space  explo- 
ration  was  viewed  as "frivolous" by  the   average American. These  results were 
disclosed a t  the   7th  annual National  Space Symposium. A  space journal  com- 
mented  tha t   NASA   needed  to   find  new  ways  of  communicating  its  message 
more effectively. (Washington Technology, Apr  1819 1 ; AuWk, Apr  29-May 519 1 ) 

A p ' l   19:  The   upper  stage  of  a  commercial  Atlas  rocket  made  by  General 
Dynamics  Corporation   carrying  a  satellite  for  the   Japan   Broadcasting 
Corporation  failed  after  liftoff  from  Cape  Canaveral.  Ron  Maehl  of  General 
Electric Aerospace Group, which made  the satellite, refused to  state  the  cost for 
the  spacecraft and the  launch, saying only that  the  rocket cost slightly more than  
the   satellite.  T h e   accident  was  described  as  a  major  setback  for  General 
Dynamics whose Atlas program lost  $300 million  in  1990. Details of  the  stages 
of  the  Atlas-Centaur  rocket and its intended use  to replace the satellite destroyed 
in  the  explosion of  a European Ariane rocket  in  February  1990 were given. (NY 
Times, Apr  19/91; B  Sun, Apr  19/91; WSJ, Apr  19/91; UPI, Apr  19/91; AP, Apr 
19/91; NY Times, Apr  20191; W Post, Apr  20191; P Inq, Apr 20191) 

NASA   announced  crew  assignments  for  the   International   Microgravity 
flight, scheduled  for February 1992 and  the  Spacelab D-2 mission, the  second 
German   Spacelab  flight,  scheduled  for  February  1993.  Lt.  Col .   David  C. 
Hilmers  was  to  he  mission  specialist  o n   the   microgravity  flight  and  Lt.  Col .  
Jerry  L.  Ross  was  to  serve  as  Payload  Commander  o n   the   spacelab  flight. 
(NA SA  Release 91-57)  

NASA   solicited  proposals  for  establishing  additional  Centers   for  t h e  
Commercial  Development  of  Space  (CCD S ) .  These  centers  were  to  special- 
ize  in  the   commercialization  of  advanced satellite communications  technolo-  
gies and  o the r  space-based telecommunications technologies.  NASA's current  
CCDS   specialize as  follows: materials  processing,  5;  life  sciences,  3 ;   remote 
sensing,  2;  automation   and  robotics,  2 ;  space  propulsion,  1;  space  structures 
and  materials,  1; and  space power,  2.  (NA SA  Release 91-58) 

NASA  announced  tha t   i t  was  conducting  intensive  analysis of  t h e  problem 
tha t   p e v e n t e d   deployment  of  the   Galileo  spacecraft's high-gain  an tenna .  
Even  if  the  an tenna   is  only partially  deployed, the  planned  flyby of  the  aster- 
oid Gaspra o n  October  29 would  take place.  (NA SA  Release 91-59)  

T h e   subcommittee  of  NASA's  Office  of  Astronautics  and   Exploration 
Technology  said  the   redesign of  the   Space Station  would  still  enable  all  pro- 
5 5 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APR lL   1991 

posed experiments   t o  be hand led .  However, two  major experiments  might  n o t  
he  able   to   be  conduc ted   simultaneously  because  of  power  limitations .   (Htsul 
Tms, Ap r   19/91)  

April  20:  N A S A   prepared  t o   begin  coun tdown  for  S h u t t l e  Discovery, despite 
predicted  bad weather. ( P  Iv, Ap r  20/91; W Post, Ap r  21/91; B  Sun ,  Apr  21/91; 
USA  Today, Apr   22/91; W Post, Ap r  22/91; AP, Ap r   22/91; UP I ,  Ap r   2219 1 )  

April 21:  T h e  New York  h
 
featured a  lengthy article o n  robots  tha t  might  be 
s
used  in Martian exploration as well  a s  in  industrial activities. T h e  designer of  the  
principal  robot  under  consideration  was  William  L.  Whittaker ,   a  Carnegie- 
Mellon  University  professor.  He   demonstrated  to   government  officials  t h e  
Ambler,  a  19-foot tall,  six-legged  robot  that   could  step  over  high  boulders  and  
avoid holes. Named Attila ,  t h e  robot has 25 motors and  150 sensors and  develops 
its behavior  from  the   interaction  of  dozens of  independent  processors. T h e  robot 
represents a combination  of electrical and  mechanical  engineering  and computer 
science.  In addition, Whittaker   demonstrated a computer and laser vision system 
that  could steer a vehicle  in a straight  line.  ( N Y T r n e s ,  Apr  21/91) 

Co-workers   a t   Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   organized  a  farewell  party  for  some 
400   workers,  who   would  be  laid  off  when   Shu t t le   Endeavour   rolls  ou t .   (Los 
Angeles Daily News,  Ap r   21 /91 )  

*A   columnist   compared   NASA's  cu t t ing   t h e   plans  and   cost  for  t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n   a t   congressional  request  with   proposed  programs  of  t h e   Strategic  
Defense  Initiative   (SD I ) .  Whe rea s   N A S A   cu t   its  projections ,   t o   t h e   po in t  
t h a t  some questioned   t h e  viability of  t h e  result, SDI appeared  t o  have  a n  undi-  
minished   appe t i te  for funds.  (LA  Times, Ap r   21/91)  

J o h n   W.  "Jack"  Russell,  a  crack  av ia t ion   mechan ic   and   retired  N A S A  
employee ,  was  scheduled  t o  he  t h e  first  member  of  t h e  aviation   support  sector  
t o  he  en sh r ined   in   t h e  Amhe r s t   Museum's Niagara  Frontier  Aviation   Hall  of 
Fame.  (Antelope Valley  Press, Ap r   2 1/91 ) 

April  22 :   T h e  Defense  Depa r tmen t   lifted  military   secrecy  from  S h u t t l e  mis- 
sions ,   n o t   because  of  decreased   Sov ie t   t h r e a t   o r   t h e   n a t u r e   of  t h e   payload 
but   because  of  t h e  cost  of  security. T h e  move   was  expec ted   t o  save  t h e  gov- 
e r nm e n t   $80  million .   Security   would  be  applied   mo re   selectively   because 
t h e   Sov ie t   U n i o n   a n d   t h e  Am e r i c a n   public   were  considered   to   be  familiar  
w i t h   t h e   na tu re   of  most  space   flights   t o   d a t e .  Discovery  would  carry  a  pay- 
load  k n ow n   as C i r r i s ,  for C ryogen ic  Infrared   Rad ia t ion   l n s t r um e n t a t i o n   for 
S h u t t l e ,  designed  t o  de te rm ine   t h e  feasibility  of  t h e  space-based  d e t e c t i o n  of 
enemy   aircraft   a n d  missiles.  (NY  Times, A p r   2219 1 ;  P  Inq, A p r   2319 1 ) 

APRlL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

A  Soviet   commen ta to r   castigated  t h e   Un i ted   States   for  its  refusal  to  
return   t o  Moscow  a  display  model  of  a  spacecraft  nuclear  reactor  Topaz  2 
brought  to  a scientific  conven t ion   in January. T h e  U .S .  Nuclear  Regulatory 
Commission  said  t h e   Soviets   had   unwittingly  exported  it  to  t h e   Un i ted  
S ta tes  and  returning   it  would be  an   illegal  export  under  t h e  A tom ic  Energy 
A c t .  Soviet  news agency  described  t h e  act  as  a "regrettable  breach  of  agree- 
ments"  tha t   would  lead  t o   questioning   Soviet-U .S .   nuclear   cooperation .  
(AP, Ap r   2219 1 ) 

A n  editorial in a space publication  stressed the  need  for space flight  to  gain 
some  congressional  advocates  and   for  NASA's new  launcher  plan  to   be  sal- 
vaged  before  it was  too   late.  (SP News, Apr   22-28/91 ) 

Republican Congressman  from California Tom Campbell said he would no t  
object  to   the  closing of  a  military  installation  in  his  district  provided  tha t   it 
was  "fair."  In   this  connection ,   h e  would  not   oppose  t h e   proposed  closing  of 
Moffett Field, from which NASA   tests aircraft  and spacecraft in  wind  tunnels 
and   simulators  and  the  Navy  flies  its  P -3  O r ion   antisubmarine  warfare mis- 
sions over  t h e  Pacific. Local officials and  business people  argued  tha t   closure 
of  the  field would cause Lockheed Missiles and Space  Company  to  move else- 
where, taking  its  25,000 employees,  in  addition  to   the   some  12,200 jobs  lost 
from  t h e  Navy.  ( W  Post, Apr   22/91) 

NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena,  California,  awarded  a  $145  
million   con t rac t   t o   Loral  Infrared  a n d   Imaging  Systems,  Lex ing ton ,  
Massachusetts to  design and build t h e  Atmospheric  Infrared Sounder  (A IR S ) .  
Th is  instrument  would  fly  o n  NASA's  first Earth Observation  System  (EOS )  
satellite  flights  in  1998.  A IRS   would  be  a  global  thermometer   in  space  to 
study the  effects of  increased greenhouse gases  in the  Earth's atmosphere. T h e  
main  goal of  EOS-A  satellites  is  t o  study t h e  effects of potential  global warm- 
ing  through  long-term  observations.  A IRS   would  operate  continuously  for 
five years.  (NA SA  Release 91-61;  WS],  Apr   23/91) 

Apnl  23:  A n   editorial  summarized  t h e   achievements  of  10 years  of  Shu t t le  
flights. ( B  Sun, Apr   23/91) 

A  British  woman,  Helen   Sharman ,   was  tentatively  selected  for  the   next 
international   space  flight  with  two  Soviet  cosmonauts  to  the   Mir  Space  
Station .   (UP I ,  Apr  23/91) 

NASA   indicated  tha t   the  Shu t t le  Atlantis  had  landed  200 yards short  of  its 
lakebed runway a t  Edwards Air  Force Base  in  California. T h e  reason was  tha t  
astronauts were unaware of  t h e  wind shift, of which ground controllers did not  
inform them  because they  thought  t h e   information was no t  needed. Measures 
have  been  taken   to prevent  similar  incidents  in  t h e  future  by  installing  more 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL  1991 

efficient brakes and a drag chute to help slow the  aircraft after touchdown.  (0 
Sen  Star, Apr 23/91) 

Gerald  Fishman, principal  investigator of  the  Burst  and  Transient  Source 
Experiment,  said  so far  the  experiment  on  the Gamma  Ray  Observatory was 
working as  planned.  (Birmingham Post-Herald, Apr  23/91) 

The   media,  in  a  series  of  articles,  anticipated  the  launching  of  Shuttle 
Discovery,  discussed  preparations  for  blast  off, and  outlined  tasks  to  be  per- 
formed.  (NY Times,  Apr  23/91; W  Post,  Apr  23/91;  USA  Today,  Apr  23/91 ; 
CSM, Apr  23/91) 

NASA  was  considering repairs  costing at  least  $50 million  to   the  Hubble 
Space  Telescope.  In  addition  to  the   telescope  proper,  the   question  was 
whether  to  compensate  for  flaws  in  three  other  instruments:  two  spectro- 
graphs  and  the   faint-object  camera.  Such  repairs  would  involve  Costar 
(Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement)  and cost $30 million 
to  $40 million, while  th e  telescope repair  cost would  be  $14 million. To  test 
the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water 
tank  at  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  would  determine  whether  the   work 
could  be  accomplished in  the estimated  16 hours  required. Despite the  need 
for such repairs, Edward Weiler, NASA  program  scientist for  the observatory, 
stressed  the   achievements  the  Hubble  Telescope  had  made  in  revealing  the 
universe.  (NY Xmes,  Apr  23/91;  0 Sun, Apr  23/91;  Birmingham  News,  Apr 
23/91; AP, Apr  23/91; UPI, Apr  23/91) 

Hours before  Space  Shuttle Discovery was  to  blast  off  on   its  "Star  Wars" 
mission, NASA  canceled  the   launch  because  of  the   failure of  an  electrical 
sensor  that  measures pressure on  an  oxidizer turbopump  on  th e  engine.  (AP, 
Apr  23/91;  UPI,  Apr  23/91; hV Times,  Apr  24/91;  W  Post,  Apr  24/91;  W 
Times, Apr  24/91; USA  Today, Apr  24/91; LA  Times, Apr  24/91; C Trin, Apr 
24/91; AP, Apr  24/91) 

Apnl24:  NASA  announced  the  rescheduling of  the   launch of  Discovery for 
April  28.  (NASA  Release  -  Launch Advisory; 0 Sun, Apr  25/91; NY  Times, 
Apr  25/91; USA  Today, Apr  25/91; AP, Apr  25/91; UPI, Apr  25/91) 

NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly  announced  the   ceremony  that 
would  take  place  on  April  25  on  the  occasion of  the  rolling  out  of  the   new 
Space Shuttle Endeavour. T h e  ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 
in  Palmdale,  California,  where  the   orbiter  was  assembled  by  Rockwell 
International  Corporation's  Space System  Division. Truly  praised  the   efforts 
of  all  those  in NASA  and  industry who had  cooperated on  the program. Part 
of  the  ceremony would  involve  the   presentation  to NASA   by  Robert  Duce, 
Dean of  the University of  Rhode  Island's Graduate School of  Oceanography, 

APRIL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

of  Endeavour's  first  "payload,"  a  sternpost   r em n a n t   recovered  from  t h e  
orbiter's  namesake ,   t h e   first  sh ip   commanded   by   British  explorer   C a p t a i n  
James  C o o k  in   1768-7  1. During   t h e  ceremony  Truly  announced   t h e  c rea t ion  
of  t h e  N A S A  Endeavour  Teacher  Fellowship Program  with   t h e  gifts dona ted  
t o  N A S A  by  t h e  public for t h e  replacement   orbiter .  T h e  program would  award 
scholarships  t o   Ame r ican   undergraduates   studying  t o   be  teachers.  ( N A S A  
Release 91 -62 ;  UP],  A p r   24/91 ; N A S A  Release  91  - 6 4 )  

T h e  House Comm i t tee  o n  Science ,  Space ,  and  Technology approved  a $14.27 
billion  space  program  for  t h e  nex t   fiscal year, a n   increase  of  nearly  six percent  
over  1991 but   $488  million  less  t h a n   President  Bush  had  requested.  Included 
was $1.9 billion for t h e  Space S ta t ion  with  $128.9 million t o  he added when   t h e  
Na t iona l   Academy  of  Sciences comments   o n  NASA's plans  t o  reduce  t h e   size 
of  t h e   station .  T h e   committee   specified  t h a t  NA SA   spend  $25  million  of  the  
Space  S ta t ion   money  o n   developing  a  return   emergency  vehicle  for  Space  
S ta t ion  astronauts.  It  also called  for spending  $30 million  t o  develop  advanced 
propulsion  systems,  including  t h e   first  new  Shu t t le   engine   in  more  t h a n   20 
years. Closer  scientific cooperation  with   t h e  Soviet  U n i o n  and   con t inua t ion  of 
t h e  Landsat earth-monitoring  program  were  also specified.  (AP ,  A p r  24/91 ) 

T h e  Magellan  spacecraft was i n t o  t h e  second  mapping  of Venus, causing sci- 
entists  t o  hope  t h e  second  set of  images might   reveal changes   in  t h e  landscape  
showing  volcanic   or  o t h e r  activity.  (LA  Times, A p r   24/91)  

Apnl  25:  T h e   Christian  Science Monitor  reviewed  env i ronmen ta l   challenges  
facing  scientists  worldwide.  C omm e n t i n g  o n  greenhouse   gases,  it  stated   t h a t  
t h e  in te rna t iona l  program  of C a n a d a ,  t h e  European  Space  Agency, J a p a n ,  and  
t h e   U n i t e d   S ta te s   would  he lp   fill  knowledge  gaps.  W i t h i n   th i s   framework, 
NASA's  Mission t o  P lane t  Earth   formed a major  part.  T h i s   included  t h e  need  
t o  analyze  t h e  hydrological  cycle  over   t h e   oceans ,   represented  in   part   by  t h e  
use  of  a  spectrometer   supplied  by  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in  
Pasadena ,  California .  T h e   lower  atmosphere   also  needed   study,  as was  po in t -  
ed  out   by  Jack  Fishman  of  t h e  N A S A  Langley Research  C e n t e r  in  H am p t o n ,  
Virginia. S u c h  study  would  include   investigation   of  t h e  "self-cleaning  ability" 
represented   by  t h e  hydroxyl  radical.  (CSM ,  A p r   25/91)  

A p n l 2 6 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t  t h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope had  completed  
o n e  year of  ope ra t ion  o n  Ap r i l  25. Jo seph  H .  Ro thenbe rg ,  Associate  Director  
of  Flight  Projects  for  Hubble   Space   Telescope  a t   Godda rd ,   summarized  t h e  
Hubble's achievements .  T h e s e  included  t h e  taking  of  various images and  pres- 
e n t a t i o n   of  da ta   from  observations   a t   key  scientific   meetings.  Scientists  
p lanned   t o   compensate   for  t h e   spherical  aberration   by  modifying  t h e   tele-  
scope's replacement   instruments .  T h e s e   included   t h e  p lacemen t   of  t h e  W i d e  
FieldlPlanetary  Came ra  I1 in   1993  a n d  further  servicing  plans during  a s t ronau t  
space walks.  ( N A S A  Release - Hubble  Space  Telescope; LA Times, A p r  29/91)  

ASTRONAUT lCS   AN l )   AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL  1 9 9 1  

NASA   Project  Scientist  Steve  Saunders stated  tha t   Magellan  scientists  a t  
NASA's Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena,  California,  were  studying  the  
surface features on  Venus caused by  wind. Soviet  landers and  the  U.S. Pioneer 
probes  measured  wind  speeds  near  Venus  a t   two  to   four  miles  per  hour,  or  
about  the   speed  needed  to move  sand grains. T h e  Magellan  images indicated 
wind  streaks. Project  Manager Tony Spear said  that   a new  strategy  to protect 
Magellan  from   the   heat   of  direct  sunlight  has  cooled  t h e   spacecraft  success- 
tully.  (NA SA  Release 9 1 -63 )  

NASA   Administrator  Richard  Truly  announced   the   appointment   of  1. 
Stuart   Fordyce  as  Deputy  Director  of  NA SA   Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,  
Cleveland .  He  had served as Director of  Aerospace Technology a t  Lewis since 
1984. (NA SA  Release 9 1-65)  

T h e  media  covered  the  unveiling  of  the  Shuttle  Endeavour  a t  some length ,  
including  its  new  features  outlined  by  NASA   Administrator  Richard  Truly: 
"The   latest  avionics  navigation  equipment ,  the   finest  mechanical  systems,  a 
new  drag  chu te ,   and  equipment  for  longer  duration   flights."  Endeavour  has 
more  fuel cells, which  generate electricity,  allowing  it  to  stay  in  orbit  as  long 
28  d a y s .   ( P  I n y ,  Apr  26/91; W' Times, Apr   26/91; NY  Times, Apr   26/91; W 
Post, Apr  26/91;  LrSA  Today, Apr  26/91; WS],  Apr  26/91; B  Sun ,  Apr   26/91; 
LA  Daily  N ew s ,   Apr  26/91;  H  Chron ,   Apr   26/91;  AP,  Apr   26/91;  UPI ,  
Apr  2619 1 ) 

Preparations  for the  launching of  Discovery were discussed a t  the  beginning 
of  a three-day  countdown. T h e  Discovery's mission was  described as mimick- 
ing  the   movements  of  a  ballistic  missile  to   help   scientists  working  o n   the  
antimissile  defense  system.  (NY Times, Apr   26/91; AP, Apr   26/91; UPI,  Apr  
26/91; LA  Times, Apr   26/91; W Post,  Apr  28/91; B  Sun ,  Apr   28/91; NY  Times, 
Apr   28/91 ) 

,4prll 27:  Engineers  at  the  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California, 
managed hy  the  California lnstitute  of  Technology for NASA ,  feared it might 
he  necessary  to  send  a  communications  satellite  to  Jupiter  t o  relay  Galileo's 
discoveries  to  Earth.  I t   would  take  three   years  for  such  a  satellite  to   reach 
Jupiter ,  assuming funding  were  available.  However,  the  engineers still hoped 
to  resolve  the   problem  of  the   failure  of  Galileo's high-gain  an tenna   to   open  
properly. Six  nearly  identical  antennas   were  used  o n  NASA's  primary com- 
munications satellites without  encountering  problems.  (LA Times, Apr  27/91; 
B  Sun ,  Apr  28/91; W Post, Apr  30191; NY  Times, Apr  30191) 

T h e   California  Institute  of  Technology  and   the   University  of  California, 
with  funding  from the  W.M.  Keck  Foundation, were preparing  t o  build  a new 
$93.3  million  Keck  I1  telescope  in  1992 o n  top   of  Hawaii's Mauna  Kea  vol- 
cano ,  adjacent  to  the  Keck  I  being  completed. Foundation  chairman  Howard 
B.  Keck  announced   that   the   foundation  would  pay  $74.6 million  for  t h e  sec- 

APRIL  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

ond   telescope.  Edward  C.  S t o n e ,   Director   of  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory, said scientists were  sure NA SA  would  get congressional  approval 
to   finance  t h e   remainder.  T h e   linked  telescopes,  according  to   S tone ,   "can 
explore  the  origin of  the   visible universe  by  peering  back  to  t h e  first  1 billion 
to   2  billion  years after  the   Big  Bang, when  we  believe  tha t   galaxies began  to  
form out of  the  residue of  the  Big Bang." (C  Trib, Apr 27/91; B Sun ,  Ap r  27/91; 
NY  Times,  Apr   27/91; LA  Times, Apr   27/91; W  Post, Apr   27/91; CSM,  Apr  
2919 1 ) 

AM1 28:  As  the   th i r t ie th  anniversary  of  his  trip  as  America's  first space pio- 
neer  approached,  Alan  Shepard  reminisced  about  his  vivid  recollections  of 
tha t   flight  o n  May  5 ,   1961 as well  as  the  33  hours  he   spent  o n   the  Moon   10  
years  later.  Since  tha t   day  in  1961, NASA   has  launched  70  manned  flights 
with  161 individuals.  (LA Times, Apr  28/91 ) 

NASA  stated  tha t  Endeavour would  no t  be  convoyed  through  Lancaster as 
previous  Shuttles   were,  but  instead  would  f l y   via  a  747  jet  t o   Houston's 
Johnson   Space  Center .   There   a  dedication  ceremony  would  be  held  before 
Endeavour  was  flown  to   Florida  to  prepare  for  its  mission.  (Antelope Valley 
Press, Apr   28/91) 

Apn l29 :  Space Shuttle  Discovery blasted off  in  what Mission Director Ronald 
D. Dittemore said was "probably  the  most complex flight flown to date ."  More 
than  60 Shu t t le  maneuvers were  planned  and  17  instruments were  to be  used 
to  study  the   Shuttle's  exhaust  plumes,  chemical  releases,  and  the   Earth's 
atmosphere. A  problem with  a tape  recorder delayed  the   launch  half  a n  hour; 
after  the   launch  further  problems were  experienced with  two  tape  recorders. 
(NY Times,  Apr  29/91;  USA Today, Apr   29/91; W  Post,  Apr  29/91);  B  Sun ,  
Ap r  29/91; CSM ,  Apr  29/91; P Inq ,  Apr  29/91; LA  Times, Apr  29/91; AP, Apr  
29/91; C Trib, Apr   29/91; UPI ,  Ap r  29/91) 

T h e  rocket-launching site a t  Poker Flat, Alaska, is  near  the  North   Pole, has 
a  high  success  rate  for  suborbital, scientific  launches,  and  lacks  military  red 
tape,  being  university  owned.  These   factors  caused  commercial  ventures  to  
inquire  about  possible  commercial  satellite  launches  into   polar  orbits  from 
Poker Flat. G l e n n  Olds, commissioner of  the  State  Department  of  Commerce 
and  Economic  Development,  believed  a  launch   might  occur  in  1993.  (AP, 
Apr   2919 1 ) 

A n  editorial  in a space journal commented o n  the  work of  cosmonauts in the  
Soviet  Mir  Space  Station  who  are  conducting  advanced  materials  and  fluids 
experiments  in  at  least  five  processing  systems.  In  addition,  Soviet  engineers 
were  preparing several evolutionary unmanned  materials spacecraft that  would 
provide  Soviet  scientists  more  processing  time  in  unmanned  spacecraft  than  
their U.S.  counterparts. Whereas  these Soviet facilities presented opportunities 

ASTRONAUT ICS   ANI)   AERONAUT ICS  

APR IL   1991 

for  use  by  American   researchers  for  experimental   purposes,  which   they  were 
doing  increasingly, a challenge was also presented  to   t h e  Un i ted  States. N A S A  
bureaucracy  and   deficiencies  in  t h e   U.S.  microgravity  program,  for  example, 
resulted  in  it  taking  some  researchers  two  years  t o  book  commercial  processing 
flights o n  t h e  Shu t t le .  Although   NASA   planned  microgravity  budget  increases 
from $125  million  in  FY 1992  t o  $225  million  in   FY  1995, this  would  require 
W h i t e  House and  congressional  support. (AvWk, Apr   29-May  5 /91 )  

Representative   Barbara  Boxer,  Democrat   from  California ,   cha i r   of  t h e  
House  G o v e r nm e n t  Ope ra t ion s  subcommittee   o n  gove rnmen t   activities   a n d  
t ran spo r ta t ion ,  announced   a hearing   about   t h e  Space  S ta t ion .  Boxer  said  t h e  
Gene ra l  Accoun t ing  Office report  a n d  t h e  analysis of  he r  staff revealed  "astro- 
nomical"  differences between  N A S A  cost estimates  for t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  and  
"more  objective ,   independen t   analyses."  (AvWk, Ap r   29-May  5/91)  

A  policy  paper  by  t h e   Heritage  Foundation ,   a  conservative   Wa sh ing ton  
t h i n k   tank ,   said  defense  and   na t iona l   security  should   be  top   priority  for  t h e  
U .S .   space  program.  Exploration   of  t h e   Moon   a n d   Mars  should   occur   as  a 
result   of  "ma rke t  
incen t ive s"   o r   i n t e r e s t   of  research   o rgan iza t ion s .  
Env i ronmen ta l  research  should  be  t h e  province   of  t h e  Na t iona l  O c e a n i c  and  
Atmospheric   Adm in i s t ra t ion  or   t h e   Depa r tmen t   of  Energy.  If   NASA's  func -  
t ion s  could  be  performed  by  o t h e r  agencies,  it  should  be  closed.  (AvWk ,  Ap r  
29-May  5/91)  

Daniel  DeVito ,  manager  of  t h e  C e n t r a l  Data   Hand l ing  Facility  ( C D H F )  a t  
NASA's  Godda rd   Space   Flight  Cen te r ,   commen ted   o n   t h e   way  t h e   use  of 
C D H F  in  t h e  forthcoming  N A S A  Uppe r  A tmo sphe re  Research  Sa te l l i te  mis- 
sion  might   lead  t o  similar systems o n  larger N A S A  projects. C D H F  was a new 
concep t   t h a t   both  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Solar  Terrestrial  Physics  project   and   t h e  
Earth   Observing   System  mission  were  looking  a t   t o   hand le   da ta   more  effi- 
ciently   and   distribute   da ta   t o  scientists  th rough   a  multiple   network .   (Federal 
Computer  Week, Ap r   29/91)  

Tom  M cG l y n n ,  a Compu te r  Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion  software scientist for t h e  
G amm a  Ray  Observatory   ( G R O )  Sc ience  Support  C e n t e r  a t  Godda rd  Space  
Flight  C e n t e r   in  G reenbe l t ,   Maryland ,   described  four  da ta   analysis  systems 
developed  for GRO .  T h e  G R O  launched   by  A t lan t i s  carried  four  instruments  
designed  to study overlapping  portions  of gamma  rays, t h e  highest  energy radi- 
a t ion   in   t h e  electromagnetic   spectrum .   (Federal Computer  Week, A p r   29/91)  

A p n l 3 0 :  T h e  crew  of  S h u t t l e  Discovery  prepared  for a  38 -hou r  "space  ballet" 
with  a satellite  t h a t  will study Discovery's exhau s t  plumes.  W i t h  two  recorders 
n o t  working,  t h e  astronauts   tu rned  t o  o t h e r   instruments .  T h e  satellite   launch  
was delayed  t o  allow  t h e  crew  t o  complete  as many  observations  as possible  of 
Earth's aurora before  t h e  coo lan t  for t h e  telescope  ran  ou t .  ( 0  Sun ,  Ap r  30191; 

APR IL   1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

W Times, Ap r   30191 ; W  Post,  Ap r   30191;  USA  Today,  Ap r   30191 ; LA  Xmes ,  
Ap r   30191; AP,  30 A p r  91 ; UPI, 3 0  A p r / 9 1 )  
T h e   Depa r tmen t   of  Energy  requested  $30   million  t o   c rea te   a   new   space 
exploration   program  relating  t o   civilian   space  activities .   T h e   new   request 
brought   t h e  Energy Department's  1992 budget request for space exp lo ra t ion  t o  
$ 1  42 million ,  compared  with  NASA's $94  million.  Some  experts  a n d  officials 
saw  t h e   Energy  Department's   role  in   space  as  desirable,  b o t h   t o   prevent  
NASA's  monopoly  and  because  t h e  Depa r tmen t  ma in ta ined  ac t ive  techno lo -  
gy development   programs whereas N A S A  allowed  its technology  research  a n d  
deve lopmen t   to   wither   as  it  struggled  with   existing   programs.  (W  Post,  A p r  
3019 1  ) 

A   proposal  t h a t   $21  1  million   be  spen t   o n   t h e   c h a n c e   t h a t   gravity  waves 
c s u l d   be  exploited   t o  fa thom   black  holes  and   o t h e r  cosmic   enigmas  divided  
scientists  a n d   faced  Congress  with   a  quandary.  Involved  was  possible  Federal 
funding   of  two  proposed  gravity  wave  observatories,  a   joint  project   of  t h e  
California   In s t i tu te   of  Technology   a n d   t h e   Massachusetts   I n s t i t u t e   of 
Technology.  American   supporters  of  t h e   project ,   t h e   Laser  Interferometer  
Gra\ritational-Wa\7e Observatory  ( L IGO ) ,  admitted   the re  was n o  guarantee  of 
success  but  belie\leil  its  scientific  po ten t ia l   was  gigantic  if  it  succeeded.  ( N Y  
Times, Ap r   30191) 

Cha r le s  A .  Bowsher, comptroller  general  of  t h e  Gene ra l  Accoun t ing  Office ,  
estimated   t h a t   NA SA   had   underestimated   by  $10   billion   t h e   con s t ruc t ion  
cost  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   because  i t   did  n o t   include   t h e   costs  of  flying  t h e  
S h u t t l e  during  S t a t i o n  con s t ruc t ion ,  developing  t h e  crew lifeboat ,  conduc t ing  
scientific  projects ,   and   installing  ce r ta in   equ ipmen t .  N A S A   underestimated  
operations   costs by  $24  billion  because  it  om i t ted  S h u t t l e  flight  costs, salaries 
of  ground-based  personnel ,   t h e   cost  of  research,  and   added   electrical   power. 
(AP ,  Ap r   30191 ) 

M a y :   T h e  AOPA   Pilot  reported   t h a t   as  a  result  of  two  1989   and   o n e   1990  
near-midair-collision   incidents   involving   N A S A   astronauts   flying  T-38A  
Talons,  t h e   N T SB   made  recommendations   t o   N A S A   and   t h e   FAA .   S u c h  
planes  required  t h e  pilot   t o  f l y  manually  without   a n  autopilot   and   t o  navigate  
while  commun ica t ing   with   air  traffic  con t ro l   (A TC ) .   T h e   N T SB   recom-  
mended   t h e   N A S A   planes  be  equipped   with   a l t i tude   alerting   devices  a n d  
upgraded  navigation/communication   equ ipmen t   as  well  as  weather   radar  a n d  
t h a t   pilots  write  down  ATC   instructions   and  file  for preferred  routes.  (AOPA 
Pilot, May  1991 )  

M a y   I :   T h e  N A S A   Lewis  Research   C e n t e r ,  C leve land ,   selected  Cortez   111 
Service  Co rpo ra t ion ,   Alamogordo ,   New  Mexico ,   for  a  $140   million   support 
service  con t rac t  for  cen te r  operations .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 1  - n )  

According   t o  t h e  media ,   in  a Gene ra l  Accoun t ing  Office  ( G A O )  report   t o  
be  submitted   t o   Congress,  N A S A   underestimated   t h e   cost  of  building  t h e  
redesigned  Space   S t a t i o n  by  $10  billion   a n d   t h e   cost  of  operating   it  th rough  
t h e  year  2027 by  about  $24  billion. G A O  is  t o  submit  t h e  report ,   its first since  
t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   restructuring ,   t o   t h e   House  G o v e r nm e n t   Ope ra t ion s  
Subcomm i t tee   o n   G o v e r nm e n t   Ac t iv i t ie s   and   Transportation .   Comp t ro l le r  
Gene ra l   Cha r le s  A .  Bowsher  in  t h e   report   questioned   t h e  cost  value  hecause 
on ly  o n e  of  t h e  original  eight   Space   S t a t i o n   uses,  t h a t   of  a  reseilrcll  ou tpo s t ,  
was  being  me t .   ( W  Post, May  1/91;  NY  Times, May  1 /91 )  

Discovery  astronauts   captured   amazing  aurora  observations   and   con t inued  
t o  t q  t o  fix  t h e   two  faulty  recorders.  After   releasing  t h e   retrievable   SPAS -2  
satellite ,   using  Discovery's 50-foot   robot   a rm ,   t h e   astronauts   had   difficulties 
ge t t ing  t h e  satellite  o r ien ted  properly  t o  observe  t h e  S h u t t l e .  Iliscovery  was  t o  
play  t h e   role  of  a n   enemy   missile,  repeatedly   firing  o n e   of  its  two  orbital  
maneuvering   system  rockets  as  instruments   o n   t h e   SPAS-2   recorded  visible 
light ,   infrared,  a n d   ultraviolet   emissions.  ( W  Times,  May  1/91;  P  lnq,  May 
1/91;  AP, May  1/91;  UP I ,  May  1/91;  LA  Times, May  1 /91 )  

President  Bush barred  t h e  export   t o  C h i n a  of  parts  for  a domestic  commun i -  
cations   satellite ,  known   as  Dong  Fang  Hong   3 ,  citing   concerns   about   possible 
proliferation  of  weapons of  mass  destruction .  Bush  approved  export  of  compo -  
n e n t s  for  two Western   projects,  a n  Australian   communications   satellite  and   a 
Swedish  weather   satellite ,   to   be  launched   from  C h i n a ,  for  which   t h e  Un i ted  
S ta te s  was assured of strict  safeguards. (W  Post, May  1/91; NY  Times, May  1 /91 )  

Ga l i leo ,   t h e  Jup i te r  survey  spacecraft,  was  scheduled   t o   fly-by  t h e  asteroid 
Gaspra   o n  Oc tobe r   29.  S u c h  a n  encoun te r   would  be  a  first  and   was  compli-  

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  199 1 

cated   by  t h e   failure  of  Galileo's a n t e n n a   t o  deploy  completely   so  t h a t   c om -  
munications   were  minimized.  ( C SM ,  May  1 /91  ) 

May  2 :   T h e  media   gave  extensive   coverage  t o   Discovery's maneuvers   as  it  
conduc ted   missile-detecting  experiments   for  t h e   Pen tagon .   T h e   scientific  
satellite ,  which   it  launched   previously, captured  with   infrared  sensors  and   tel-  
evision  cameras  eng ine  exhaust  plumes a n d  plumes from smaller  steering  jets. 
(B  Sun ,  May  2/91; WP o s t ,  May 2/91; WT ime s ,  May 2/91; NY   Times, May 2/91; 
USA  Today, May  2/91;  P  Inq, May  2/91; LA  Times,  May  2/91  AP, May  2/91; 
UP I ,  May  2/91; CSM ,  May  3 / 9 1 )  

T h e  press  reported  hearings  of  t h e  G o v e r nm e n t  Ope ra t ion s  Subcomm i t tee  
o n   G o v e r nm e n t   A c t i v i t i e s   a n d   T r a n s p o r t a t i o n   a t   w h i c h   N A S A  
Administrator   Richard  Truly defended  N A S A  against  charges by  t h e  G e n e r a l  
Accoun t ing  Office  ( G A O )  t h a t   it  understated   t h e  cost  of  t h e  planned   Space  
S t a t i o n   a n d   its  operations   through   2027  by  a t   least  $34   billion.  Truly  ques- 
tioned   G A O  figures a n d  stated   it was  t ime  t o  begin  building  t h e  s ta t ion  ra the r  
t h a n   submit   it  t o  further   study  o r   audit .   ( W  Post,  May  2/91;  NY   Times,  May 
219 1 ; W Times, May  2/91 ; WS],  May  219 1 ;  B  Sun ,  May  2/91; P  Inq, May  2/91 ; 
LA  Times, May  2/91; Plain Dealer, May  5/91)  

Space   S h u t t l e   Columbia   began  its  trip   from  a n   assembly  building  a t  
Kennedy  Space   C e n t e r   t o   t h e   launch   pad  a t   C a p e   Canave ra l ,   a   four-mile 
journey.  (AP ,  May  2/91 ) 

N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  Lawrence I .  DeLucas of  t h e  University  
of  A labama   at  Birmingham   a n d   Eugene  H.  T r inh   of  t h e   J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory, Pasadena, California ,   t o  fly  as payload  specialists o n  t h e  first U . S .  
Micmgravity  Laboratory  mission,  scheduled   for  J u n e   1992.  ( N A S A  Release 
9  1 - 6 6 )  

N A S A   announced   it  was  seeking  applications   from  new  astronaut   cand i -  
dates   with   a   cut-off  da te   of  July   1 ,   1991 .  T h e  nex t   class  of  candidates   was 
scheduled  for  July  1992. Two  types  of  positions  were  available:  mission  spe-  
cialist for those  w i th  significant scientific  backgrounds  a n d  pilot  for those  with  
extensive  piloting  experience   in jet  aircraft.  ( N A S A  Release 91-67;  H Ch ron ,  
May 3/91  ) 

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   a s t ronau t   Mary  L.  C l e a v e  would  become  Depu ty  
P ro jec t   Manager   for   S e a   Viewing  W i d e   Field  Sen so r s   a t   t h e   N A S A  
G o d d a r d   Space   Flight   C e n t e r ,   G r e e n b e l t ,   Ma ry land .   H e r   work  would 
invo lve   supervising   a   joint   N A S A   a n d   comme rc ia l   p ro jec t   t o   lea rn   a b o u t  
t h e   biological   mass  in   t h e   o c e a n   by  s tudy ing   t h e   c h l o r o p h y l l   c o n t e n t   t o  
d e t e rm i n e   how  much   p l a n k t o n   is  p roduced .   ( N A S A   Release   91 -68 ;   H 
C h r o n ,  May  3 / 9 1 )  

hiAY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

David Webb of  the  Wh i te  House National  Commission  o n  Space ,  speaking 
a t  a U.S.  Space Foundation National  Space Symposium in Colorado  Springs, 
said  tha t   the  commission  in  1985 had  recommended  increased NASA  spend- 
ing  for  research  and  development.  However, Admiral J o h n  Poindexter,  t h e n  
National   Security  Adviser,  opposed  it,  with  the   result  tha t   n o   action  was 
taken.  (Washington Technology, May  2/91)  

May  3:  T h e   House  of  Representatives  voted  to  authorize  NASA   to   spend 
$14.9  billion  in  the   next   fiscal  year,  ahout  $500  billion  less  t h a n   President 
Bush had  requested. T h e  approval  included  the  full $ 2   billion  Bush sought for 
Space  Station   Freedom.  Concurrently,  the   House  directed  the   National  
Academy  of  Sciences  to  study whether   the   goals of  the   Space S ta t ion  could 
be  achieved more cheaply by  other  means.  ( W  Post, May  3/91; W Times, May 
3/91; WSJ, May  3/91; NY  Times, May  3/91 

Astronauts  on   Space Shu t t le  Discovery aimed  a research  satellite  a t  rocket 
fuel  spewed  in  space,  then   captured  the   satellite  and   put  it  hack  in   t h e  
Shuttle's cargo bay.  ( W  Post, May  3/91; WSJ, May  3/91; NY  Times, May  3/91; 
LA  Times, May  3/91; AP, May  3/91; UP I ,  May  3/91) 

May   4:  T h e  media  reported  tha t   Discovery astronauts  had  succeeded  in  get- 
ting data  from three  scientific  instruments to  the  ground by  splicing wires and  
rearranging  cables  in a complicated  operation.  In   this way,  they  bypassed t h e  
nonfunctioning  recorders,  hased  o n  procedures  worked  out   from  the   ground. 
T h e  astronauts earlier had  performed  additional  tests  involving  fuel canisters 
hurled  from  the  Shuttle .   (AP ,  May  4/91; UPI, May  4/91; NY Times, May  4/91; 
C Trin, May  4/91; LA  Zrnes ,  May  4/91; NY  Times, May  5/91; P  Inq ,  May  5/91; 
W Post, May  5/91; C SM ,  May  6 /91 )  

T h e   wire  services  commemorated  astronaut  Alan  B.  Shepard's  flight  30  
years ago o n  May  5 as  the   first American  in  space.  (AP ,  May  4/91; UPI, May 
419 1 ) 

May  6:  T h e  Discovery astronauts conducted  final experiments, celebrated  t h e  
30 th   anniversary  of  U.S.  space  flight  on   May  5 ,   and  prepared  t o   return  to 
Earth.  ( P  Inq,  May  6/91; W  Times,  May  6/91;  USA  Today, May  6/91;  B  Sun, 
May  6/91; C Trin, May  6/91; AP, May  6/91; U P I ,  May  6/91)  

UP1 reported  tha t   new  Space Shu t t le  Endeavour was  delayed an  additional 
day  in  its  trip   from  the   factory  in  California  to  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   in 
Florida because of  stormy weather.  (UP I ,  May  6/91) 

According  to  UPI,  an   extraordinarily  sharp  picture  of  Jupiter  taken   by  the  
Hubble  Space  Telescope  showed  the   planet's  turbulent  atmosphere  and  the  
telescope's capabilities. (UP I ,  May  6/91 ) 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  i \ERONAUT ICS  

MAY  199 1 

A n  editorial   in a trade  journal  commended  Rockwell In te rna t iona l  for com -  
pleting   Space   S h u t t l e   Endeavour   o n   time   and   under   budget ,   stating   t h a t  
N A S A   should  expec t   t h e  same  standards  of  performance  w i th   regard  t o  t h e  
Space  S t a t i o n .  (SP  News, May  6-12/91)  

T h e  Ph~lacielphia Inquirer  reported   t h a t   Mae  Jem i son ,  t h e   first  black  female 
astronaut ,   who   was  scheduled  t o   be  a  member   of  t h e   crew  of  Endeavour   in 
August  1992 ,  had   received  a n  honorary  doc to r  of  science  degree from Lincoln  
University.  ( P  Inq, May  6 /91 )  

May 7: T h e  media reported that  because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle  
Discovery landed  at Kennedy Space Cen te r  in Florida. T h e  right  tire was  severely 
damaged o n  landing, but  the  new  stronger brakes worked well.  In  addition, twice 
as much fiberglass thermal tile filler wc>uld have t o  be  replaced t h a n  was customary 
after a flight. T h e  astronauts accomplished 32 of  33  planned  primary observations, 
18 of  2 1 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments.  ( P  Iq, May 
7/91; W  Post, May  7/91; NYTmes ,  May  7/91; USA Today, May  7/91; B Sun, May 
7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; WTimes, May 7/91; LA Tmes, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI ,  
hlay   7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI ,  May 9/91) 

T h e   media  reported   o n   t h e   failure  of  O rb i ta l   Sc ience   Corporation's  
Prospector  rocket  t o  take  off  from  t h e  N A S A   launch  pad  a t  C a p e  Canave ra l .  
T h e  rocket ,   produced  by  t h e  Fairfax,  Virginia  firm, con ta ined   500 pounds   of 
scientific   experiments .   T h e   flight  was  sponsored  by  NASA's  C e n t e r   for  t h e  
Comme rc ia l   Deve lopmen t   of  Space   a t   t h e   University   of  A labama   i n  
Huntsville .   ( W  Post, May  7/91; W  Times, May  7/91;  LA Times, May  7/91)  

A n  editorial   in t h e  Christian Science Monitor commended   t h e  "modest,  sober 
plan"  of  N A S A   for  t h e  revised  Space  S t a t i o n ,  saying  t h a t   it  would  enab le  t h e  
U n ~ t e d  S ta te s  t o  make  progress  in   space  and   should  n o t   be  judged  simply  o n  
its cost.  (CSM ,  May  7/91 ) 

Engineers began a practice countdown for Space Shuttle  Columbia, and the  four- 
man,  three-woman  crew  prepared  to   begin  dress  rehearsal for  a  planned  May  24 
launching. T h e  purpose of  t h e  nine-day  1 l t h  flight of  Columbia was the  Spacelab 
Life  Sciences  mission,  the   first  spacelab dedicated  to   life  sciences research. The 
crew werc  to perform  experiments  to  evaluate  the  adaptation of  humans  t o  space 
flight as  well  as to  conduct some experiments on  animals in a gravity-free environ- 
ment.  T h e  planned  experiments  were  to   be  conducted  in  the   Spacelab  module. 
(NA SA  (;enera1  Release 91-69; AP, May  7/91; UPI, May  7/91; UP1, May  13/91; 
AP, May  13/91; R  Sun, May  14/91; W Xmes, May  14/91; USA Today, May  14/91) 

Space   S h u t t l e   Endeavour   arrived  a t  Kennedy  Space   Cen te r .   Considerable  
work  r em a n e d   t o   be  d o n e   o n   t h e   S h u t t l e ,   i n c l u d ~ n g  t h e   i n s t a l l a t ~ o n  of  t h e  
th ree  main   englnea.  (AP ,  May  7/91)  

MAY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

NASA  announced  that  its mobile  teacher  resource center, LASER, would 
be  o n  display and  open  to  the  public  and  to Washington  metropolitan  area 
teachers during Public Service Recognition Week, May  9- 1 1. (NASA  Release 
N91-31) 

NASA  announced  the names of  eight  firms chosen  as  finalists in competi- 
tion for  the  1991 George M. Low Trophy for quality and excellence. T h e  final 
selections were  to be  announced  in November after validation of performance 
achievements.  (NASA  Release 91-70) 

May  8: President George  Bush  received  the  crew  of  Space  Shuttle Atlantis. 
(UP I ,  May  819 1 ) 

May  9: Th e  Washington Times  reported  that  the  Smithsonian  Institution had 
decided  to  keep  the  National  Air  and  Space  Museum  Annex  at  Dulles 
International  Airport  and  scale  down  the  project,  which  is  to  include  the  
Space Shuttle Enterprise. T h e  cost at Dulles would be  $8 million  less  than  at 
Baltimore-Washington International Airport, and Virginia could make a larg- 
er contribution  than Maryland  to  total  costs.  (W  Times, May  9/91) 

A  giant black  granite  "space  mirror"  at Cape Canaveral, Florida,  honoring 
America's 15 fallen astronauts was prepared for dedication, five years after the 
Challenger  disaster.  Th e   monument  was  dedicated  by  Vice  President  Dan 
Quayle on  May  9,  in  the presence of  relatives of  the  astronauts  killed.  (UPI, 
May  9/91; B  Sun, May  10191; P  Inq, May  10191; W  Times, May  10191;  USA 
Today,  May  10191;  C  Trin,  May  10191; AP,  May  10191; UPI,  May  10191; 
Newsweek, May  1319 1 ) 

NASA  announced  that based  on  satellite observations of  Mexico's Yucatan 
Peninsula, researchers from NASA  and Geo Eco Arc Research  in La  Canada, 
California, had  located a "nearly perfect" semicircular ring of  sink holes form- 
ing a crater more  than  125 miles  in diameter. T h e  scientists believed  that  this 
evidence of  an impact crater formed by  a comet or asteroid might have caused 
the extinction of  dinosaurs and other  species about 65 million years ago. Th e  
findings were  being  published  in  Nature  magazine.  (NASA  Release  91 - 7  1 ; 
UPI, May 9/91: LA Times, May  1019 1 ; Sun Francisco Examiner, May  1019 1 ; Long 
Beach Press Tekgram, May  1 1/91; LA  Times, May  27/91; W Times, May  31/91) 

May  10: The  press cited concern over "millions of  pieces of  trash zooming around 
in  space" and  the  fear  that  they might hit  the Hubble Space Telescope or  some 
orbiting astronauts. The concern caused work  on  new debris-monitoring devices 
and a system to warn  astronauts of  impending collisions with space junk  so they 
could take evasive action. The  U.S. Space Command's space surveillance network 
already kept track of  about 6,700 pieces of  larger litter at least four inches in diam- 
eter that might damage a Space Station. (AP, May  10191; W Times, May  24/91) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  199 1 

UP1  reported   t h a t   t h e   N O A A - D   spacecraft  developed  by  t h e   Na t iona l  
Ocean ic   and  A tmo sphe r ic  Adm in i s t ra t ion   ( N O A A )  and   N A S A   was  sched-  
uled  for  launch  o n  May  14. T h e  satellite ,  which   was  t o  measure  temperatures  
o n   Earth's  surface,  including   oceans ,   and   gathering   da ta   o n   solar  radiation ,  
might   he lp   scientists   better   predict  floods  and   understand   t h e   causes  of 
droughts.  (UP I ,  May  10191) 

May  13: T h e  Washington Post  carried  a  lengthy   article  describing  t h e  need   for 
a new  cheaper ,  dependable  space  launch  system and work being done  t o  devel-  
o p  a new  family of  rockets.  T h e  proposed  new Na t iona l  Launch  System was  t o  
be a hybrid of old and  new  technology  t o  reduce costs. T h e  booster shell would 
derive  from  t h e  Shuttle's   external  fuel  tank ,   topped  by  a T i tan   IV cargo hous-  
ing. T h e  core would  be a newly developed oxygen-hydrogen  engine .  T h e  rock- 
e t s  would  use  from  o n e   t o  several  engines  and   for heavy  payloads  could  strap 
o n  advanced  solid fuel boosters being  developed.  (W  Post, May  13/91 ) 

U . S .  News and  World Report con ta ined  a feature  article  o n  t h e  planet   Venus 
t h a t   included  findings of NASA's  Magellan about   t h e  surface of Venus  as well 
as earlier  Pioneer-Venus mission  mapping d a t a .  ( U . S .  News  and World  Report, 
May  13 /91 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t  N A S A  816 ,  a modified  C o n v a ~ r  F-106B, had   been  
retired  after  more   t h a n   30  years  of  flight  research.  It  was  t o  be  moved  t o   t h e  
new Virginia A i r  and   Space  C e n t e r  in  H am p t o n .  ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 7 3 )  

N A S A   Administrator   Richard   H .  Truly  announced   t h e   c rea t ion   of  a  new 
Systems Analysis a n d  Concep t s  Office a t  NA SA   Headquarters ,  in  accordance  
with   t h e   recommendations   of  t h e  Advisory  Comm i t tee   o n   t h e   Future  clt  t h e  
U.S.  Space  Program. Jame s  D. Bain, v ~ h o  served  as executive  secretary of  t h a t  
comm i t tee ,  was  appointed   Director  of  t h e  new  office.  ( N A S A  Release  91-74;  
SP News, May  20-26191) 

May  14: T h e  Magellan  spacecraft  temporarily  lost  con tac t   with   NASA's J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory  in   Pasadena,  California ,   when   its  a n t e n n a   was  misdi- 
rected   toward  Ea r th .  C o n t a c t   was  restored,  and   only   0 . 3  percent   of  t h e  mis- 
sion's scheduled  surface  mapping  was  lost.  (C  Trin, May  1419 1 ) 

T h e   Baltimore  Sun   reported  tha t   J o h n s   Hopkins   University  astrophysicist 
Sam   Durrance ,   who  flew  with   Shu t t le   Columbia's Astro   flight  in  December 
1990, lobbied  for a n  Astro-2  flight  t o  con t inue  use  of  t h e   telescopes  and  o t h e r  
equipment   t h a t  made significant scientific discoveries.  Some  NA SA   and  o t h e r  
officials were giving t h e  possibility  serious consideration .   ( B  Sun ,  May  14/91 ) 

A  feature  article   in   t h e  New  York  Times discussed  t h e   impact  of  space  rock- 
e t s  o n  t h e  ozone  layer.  Reportedly, N A S A   estimated   t h a t   each  S h u t t l e   flight 
injected  some 75 tons  of ch lo r ine  i n t o  t h e  stratosphere .  Dr. Michael  J .  Prather ,  
70 

h1.4Y  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

a n  atmospheric   scientist  a t  NASA's Godda rd   In s t i tu te   in  New  York  City ,  ca l -  
culated  t h a t  t h e  lifting of  n i n e  Shu t t le s  and  six T t a n   IVs every year would  add  
0.3  pe rcen t   t o  stratospheric  ch lo r ine ,  wh ich   i n   t u r n  would  destroy  much   less 
t h a n  o n e  percent   of  t h e  ozone  the re .  T h i s  made   t h e  S h u t t l e  a  large  source  of 
pollution   but   small  by  comparison   t o  any   o t h e r   industry  such   as  refrigeration 
or   solvents .  (NY  Times, May  14/91)  

T h e  New  York  Times  reported  t h a t   a l though  t h e  weather   satellite  known  as 
GOES -NEXT   ( f rom   n e x t   generation   of  geostationary  operational   env i ron -  
men ta l  satellite)  was flawed  and  would  n o t   gather   all  t h e  da ta   it  was designed 
t o  collect ,  t h e  Na t iona l  O c e a n i c  a n d  A tmo sphe r ic  Adm in i s t ra t ion  planned   t o  
launch   it   anyway  because  t h e  existing  ma in   U.S.  weather   satellite ,  GOES -7 ,  
was  nearing   t h e   e n d   of  its  life.  T h e  GOES -NEXT   program  was  more   t h a n  
th ree   years  behind   schedule   and   was  now  scheduled   for  launch   in  Oc tobe r .  
(NYT ,  May  14/91  ) 

N A S A   announced   its  launching   of  t h e  N O A A - D  env i ronmen ta l   satellite  
from   Vandenberg   A i r   Force  Base,  California .   T h e   satellite   was  t o   collect  
meteorological  and  env i ronmen ta l  d a t a  a n d  ultimately  would  replace N O A A -  
10, wh ich  was  nearing   t h e  e n d  of  its  life.  ( N A S A  Release N91 -36 ;  W Times, 
May  15/91; USA  Today, May  15/91 ) 

N A S A   announced   it  would  test  a  structural  c om p o n e n t  made   of  advanced  
ca rbon -ca rbon   composite   material   as  part   of  t h e   X-30   Na t iona l   Aerospace  
Plane   ( N A S P )  program. T h e  material   took   years  t o  develop  and  was  stronger  
and   lighter   t h a n  metal.  ( N A S A  Release  91 -75 )  

May  15:  N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  IBM  Federal  Sec to r   Division, 
Hou s ton ,  for a  con t rac t   t o  provide  as many   as 48 ground-based ,  mission ope r -  
a t ion s   ma in   frame  computer   systems,  peripheral   equ ipmen t ,   and   services. 
( N A S A  Release C 9 1 - o )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  P a c i f i c c o p   Cap i ta l ,   Inc . ,   Re s ton ,  
Virginia,  for  a  con t rac t   for  In s t i tu t iona l  Au toma t ic   Data   Processing  ( IAD P ) .  
IADP   was  t o   support  t h e   J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r ,   Hou s ton ,   a n d   t h e   W h i t e  
Sand s  Test  Facility, New  Mexico .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 1 - p )  

USA  Today featured  a n   article   o n  Cha l lenge r   C e n t e r s   for  Space   Sc ience  
Educa t ion ,  wh ich  use  simulated  space missions  t o   teach   elementary   and  mid-  
dle   school   students   science ,   ma thema t ic s ,   teamwork ,   a n d   technology.  More  
t h a n   10 ,000  fifth  graders  a  year  use  t h e   G r e e n b e l t ,  Maryland  center .   (USA  
Today, May  15/91)  

According   t o  AP,  a  Gene ra l   Accoun t ing   Office  report   stated   t h a t   N A S A  
improperly managed  hazardous wastes,  creating   pollution   problems  t h a t   must 
be  corrected   a t  some  of  its n i n e  centers .   (AP, May  15/91)  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1991 

PR  Newswire  reported   t h a t   Loral  Space   Information   Systems  awarded 
C o n t r o l  Data  a $6 .5  million  con t rac t   for a Flight Analysis and  Design  System 
t o   modernize  mission  p lann ing   for  NASA's   Space   S h u t t l e   program.  (PR  
Newswire, May  15/91)  

According   t o  AP,  t h e  Magellan space probe completed   its ma in  n i n e -m o n t h  
radar survey of Venus, mapping  84 percent   of  t h e  surface.  I n  t h e  second  phase, 
t h e  remaining  surface was  t o  be  covered.  (AP ,  May  15/91)  

May  16:  T h e  media   reported   t h a t   t h e  House   Appropriations   Subcomm i t tee ,  
by  a  six  t o  th ree   vote ,  had   agreed  t o  c u t  all but   $100  million  of  t h e  projected  
$2  billion  Space   S t a t i o n   budget  for  t h e   fiscal  year  beginning   Oc tobe r   1991 .  
T h e  $100  million   was  t o   be  used  t o  close  t h e  project  a n d   study  two   a l te rna -  
tive   space  science   projects.  ( W  Post,  May  16/91;  WS],  May  16/91;  W  Times, 
May  16/91;  AP, May  16 /91 )  

UP1 reported  t h a t  workers a t  Baikonur Cosmodrome  had  rolled a Soyuz T M -  
12 rocket  i n t o  place  t o  take  two Soviet  cosmonauts  a n d  a British woman  t o  t h e  
Mir Space  S t a t i o n  in  a commercial mission.  (UP I ,  May  16/91; AP, May  16/91)  

Washington  Technology  conducted  a n   interview  with  Representative  E  James 
Sensenbrenner,  Republican  from  Wisconsin  and   ranking  Republican  o n   the  
House Space Subcommittee. He  predicted N A S A  would face cost-overrun scan- 
dals in  t h e  coming years because when  N A S A  lacked funds t o  pay contractors  it  
tended  t o  stretch  out  project  completion.  (Washington Technology, May  1619 1 ) 

According   t o  Washington  Technology, Citizens  Against   G o v e r nm e n t  Waste  
had   prepared  a  study  i n d i c a t ~ n g  t h a t   NASA's  proposed  Earth   Observing  
System was  t o  double   in  cost  t o  $60  billion  but   would  n o t  be  able   t o  meet   its 
techn ica l   objectives   because  its  key   sensors  were  n o t   "fundamentally  differ- 
en t"   from  previous  sensors.  (Washington TechnoIogy, May  16 /91 )  

May  17: T h e  press carried  accounts  of  administration   statements ,   led  by  Vice 
President   Dan  Quay le ,  vowing  t o  fight   t o  save  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  despite   t h e  
Appropriations  Subcomm i t tee  ac t ion .   ( P  Inq, May  17/91;  W Post, May  17/91;  
B  Sun, May  17/91; AP, May  17/91;  UP I ,  May  17/91)  

UP1 reported  t h a t   t h e  Huhb le  Space  Telescope had  de tec ted  gas clouds  t h a t  
appear  t o  be  from  t h e  universe's  early day much   nearer   Earth   t h a n  previously 
though t   possible.  N A S A   also  released  pictures  taken  by  Hubb le  of  a n  unusu-  
al  jet  spouting   from  a  massive,  unstable   star   called  Eta  Ca r inae ,  which   upset 
existing  ~ d e a s  about   how  t h e  star  spewed  out   matter .   (UP I ,  May  17/91)  

May  18: T h e  media reported  t h a t  a British woman ,  He len  S h a rm a n ,  wen t  i n t o  
space  in  a Soyuz TM - 1 2  rocket  with   two Sov ie t  astronauts ,  destined  for Space  

MAY  1991 

CHRONOLC7C;Y  1991 

S t a t i o n   Mir.  T h e   astronauts   were  t o   remain   o n   Mir  t o   d o   repairs  while 
S h a rm a n  was t o  re tu rn  with   t h e   two  Sov ie t  astronauts  now o n  Mir.  (AP ,  M a y  
18/91;  UP I ,  May  18/91;  B  Sun ,  May  19/91;  P  Inq, May  19/91;  NY  Times, May 
19/91;  LA Times, May  19/91)  

T h e  media  carried  extensive  coverage  of  t h e  preparatory  stages for  t h e  mis- 
sion  of  Space  S h u t t l e  Columbia  and   its crew. T h e  four medical  specialists were 
t o  conduc t   tests o n  h um a n  body  func t ion s  while  t h e  th ree   astronauts  flew t h e  
S h u t t l e  and   were  subject   t o  some  of  t h e   tests.  Scientists  hoped   t o  learn   why 
astronauts   re tu rn   t o   Earth   with   weakened  immune   systems,  reduced  bone  
mass, a decrease  in  body  fluid  or  blood ,   fewer  red  blood  cells, a n d   less muscle 
p ro te in ,   as  well  as  space  mo t ion   sickness.  T h e  3 0  white   rats  and   2 ,478   tiny  
jellyfish  being   carried  were  t o   be  analyzed  after   t h e   flight .   (AP ,  May  18/91;  
UP I ,  May  18/91;  B  Sun ,  May  19/91; P  Inq, May  19/91;  LA  Times, May  19/91; 
W Post, May  20/91; AP,  May  20191; UPI ,   May  20191; C SM ,  May  20191; NY 
Times, May  21/91; USA  Today, May  21/91;  UP I ,  May  21 /91 )  

According   t o   t h e   press,  A l   Boggess,  a n   astronomer   a t   NASA's  Godda rd  
Space   Flight   C e n t e r ,   a t   a  news  briefing  a t   t h e   Space   Telescope  Sc ience  
In s t i tu te   i n   Baltimore  announced   t h a t   t h e   Hubb le   Space   Telescope  had 
observerd  t h a t  a gas disk  t h a t  ringed  t h e  star  Beta Pectoris appeared  t o  include  
large  clumps of  ma t te r  spiraling  in  toward  it  a t  speeds of  up  t o   120 miles  a sec-  
o n d .   T h i s   was  a  "new  p h e n om e n o n ,   no t   seen   a round   any  o t h e r   star."  (NY 
'Times, May  18/91; C Trin, May  19/91;  CSM ,  May  22/91)  

May  19:  T h e  Baltimore  Sun  commen ted   a t   leng th   o n   a n   article   o n   galactic  
studies  appearing   in   t h e  Ap r i l   20   issue of  The Astrophysical Journal.  T h e  a r t i -  
c le   described  work  done   by  a  group  of  scientists   using  t h e   In te rna t iona l  
U l t rav io le t   Explorer  ( IUE ) ,  a  scientific  satellite   operated   hy  N A S A   a n d   t h e  
European  Space  Agency. T h e  yearlong work required 60 observatiuns  with   t h e  
IUE  studying  t h e  cores of  rare galaxies.  (B  Sun ,  May  19 /91 )  

May  20:  NASA   announced   tha t   t h e  second Astro  mission,  dedicated  to  astro- 
physics, would  fly  aboard  t h e  Space Shu t t le .  T h e  success of  t h e   first  Astro  mis- 
sion and  the  ability of  t h e  instruments t o  acquire high-quality scientific data  were 
major  reasons for t h e  decision. T h e  following instruments were  t o  f l y  on  Astrcj-2 
t o   observe  the   ultraviolet  part  of  t h e   electromagnetic  spectrum:  the   HoFkins 
Ultraviolet  Telescope,  which   performs  spectroscopy;  the   Ultraviolet  Imaging 
Telescope, which  produces  images of components  of nebulae, stars, and  galaxies; 
and  t h e  Wisconsin  Ultraviolet  Photopolarimeter  Experiment,  which  measures 
light  polarization.  ( N A S A  Release 91-76; AP, May  20191; B Sun, May  21/91 ) 

May 21 : T h e  media carried commen t s  by William  B.  Lenoir, N A S A  Associate 
Administrator ,   t h a t   if  t h e  congressional  appropriations  process  did  n o t   restore 
t h e  c u t   in  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  fund ing ,  it  would  kill  t h e  project  a n d  signal  t h a t  

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS  

MAY  1991 

t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  "was  going ou t  of  t h e  manned  space  business."  In   add i t ion ,  
some media articles  commended   Congress  for  its ac t ion  or  raised  serious ques- 
tions   about  NASA's  new  design or   its educa t ion  of  t h e  public  abou t   t h e  need  
for a Space  S ta t ion .   (NY  Times, May 21/91; AP, May 21/91; B Sun ,  May 21/91; 
SP  News, May  20-26191) 

O rb i ta l   Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion ,   Fairfax,  Virginia,  rescheduled  its  launch   of 
t h e  Joust   1 rocket  a t  C a p e  Canave ra l  for J u n e  5 ,  according   t o  t h e  Wushington 
Times.  ( W  Times, May  21 /91 )  

USA  Today  carried  a n  article   conce rn ing  t h e   large  growth   of  communities  
a n d  companies  along  t h e  "Space Coa s t"  of Florida as a  result  of  t h e  success of 
t h e  S h u t t l e  program. Figures of population   increases, numbers  of  workers, a n d  
firm  incomes  were  given .   (USA  Today, May  21/91)  

USA  Today  reported   t h a t   five  years  later   N A S A   was  still  tracking   down  
debris  from  Cha l lenge r   in  t h e   hands   of  collectors  because  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  
was  gove rnmen t  property.  (USA  Today, May  2 1/91 ) 

Acco rd ing   t o   UP I ,   Soviet   President  Mikhail   Go rbachev   hailed   t h e   crew 
members of  Mir  o n  the i r  successful docking  of  t h e  TM - 1 2  capsule.  (UP I ,  May 
21 /91 )  

T h e  press  reported  t h a t   t h e   panels  of  t h e   astronaut   memorial  monumen t  
t h a t   developed  jagged  cracks  are  being   investigated.  (AP ,  May  21/91;  USA 
Today, May  22/91; LA Times, May  22/91) 

May  22:  N A S A  announced  t h e  po s tponemen t  of  t h e  launch   of  Space  S h u t t l e  
Co lumh ia  because  of  last m inu te  problems  discovered:  two  computer   devices 
and   n ine   four-inch   temperature   sensors.  T h e  flight  was  t o  be  delayed  a t   least 
11 days. Reasons for  t h e  delay  in  finding  t h e  flaws were discussed.  ( P  Inq ,  May 
22/91; NY Times, May  22/91; W Post, May  22/91; USA Today, May  22/91; AP, 
May  22/91;  UP I ,   May  22/91;  LA  Tme s ,   May  22/91;  P  Inq,  May  23/91;  NY 
Times,  May  23/91;  W  Post,  May  23/91;  USA  Today,  May  23/91;  AP,  May 
23/91; UPI ,  May  23/91)  

According  t o  t h e  New York  Times, J a p a n  was reassessing its decision  t h a t  pre- 
serving good  trade  relations  with   t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  was more   impo r tan t   t h a n  
q i c k l y   developing   a  competitive   space  industry.  Because  its  own   heavy-lift 
rocket  program  r a n   i n t o  endless problems  a n d  delays, J a p a n  turned   t o  foreign 
companies  t o  launch   its satellites. But  t h e  two  satellite  accidents ,  of  which   t h e  
most  recent   was  t h e   loss  of  t h e   Atlas   C e n t a u r   rocket  launched   from  Cape  
Canaveral   hy Gene ra l  Dynamics Co rpo ra t ion  earlier  in  1991, caused  consider- 
able  Japanese  conce rn .  T h e  loss had  a major  impact o n  Japan's high-definition  
television  projects, which  were  developing  rapidly.(NY Times, May  22/91) 

MAY  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Queen   Elizabeth  visited  Johnson   Space  C e n t e r   in  Houston.  (AP,  May 
22/91; W Times, May  23/91; LA Times, May  23/91; UPI ,  May  23/91) 

May  23: T h e  media  reported  tha t   President  Bush  had  informed  two  senators, 
Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake G am ,  Republican of U t a h ,  
both   o n  the   Sena te  space subcommittee,  and  NASA  Administrator  Richard 
Truly  tha t   he   would  actively  campaign  to  reverse  the   congressional  panel's 
decision  to  scuttle  the  Space S ta t ion .  (AP, May  23/91; B  Sun, May  24/91; W 
Post, May  24/91) 

NASA   announced   it  would  hold  the   first Long Duration  Exposure Facility 
(LDEF)  Post-Retrieval  Symposium  June   2-8,  1991,  in  Kissimmee,  Florida. 
LDEF exposed 57  science  and  technology  experiments  to  t h e   space environ-  
ment   for  almost  six  years  until  Shu t t le   Columbia  returned  it  to   Earth  in 
January  1990. T h e  conference  was  planned  to  examine  the   results  of  LDEF 
and   the   effects  of  a  long-term  space  environment   on   materials  and   systems. 
(NA SA  Release N91 -38 )  

May  24: According  to  the  Wall  Street Journal, Telesat Canada   planned  to  file 
a $240 million  insurance  claim  because of  the   failure of  its An ik   E2  commu- 
nications  satellite launched  in April  to deploy one  of  its two an tennae .  (WSJ, 
May  2419 1 ) 

T h e   Washington  Xmes  reported  tha t   NASA's  Johnson   Space  Cen te r   near 
Houston  had  842 pounds  of  moon  rocks brought  back by  12 moonwalkers o n  
six Apollo  flights between  1969 and   1972. T h e  rocks  are  loaned  t o  scientific 
groups for study. Each nation   in t h e  world  also has a small piece of Moon rock, 
sent  a t  President Nixon's instruction in the  early 1970s. (WTimes, May 24/91) 
May  24:  T h e  media  reported  tha t  NASA   engineers  had  debated  whether   to  
remove  additional  sensors  in   Columbia  tha t   might  be  cracked.  NASA  
planned  to  create a new investigative  team  to  review the  process of  flaw detec-  
tion.  (NY Times, May  24/91; W Post, May  24/91; B  Sun, May  24/91; W Times, 
May  24/91;  USA  Today, May  24/91; AP, May  24/91; UPI ,  May  24/91) 

NA SA  announced  tha t  David Reasoner, Combined  Release and Radiation 
Effects Satellite  (CRRES)  project  scientist  a t  NASA's Marshall  Space Flight 
Center ,   Huntsville,  Alabama,  would  chair  the   May  28  meeting  of  t h e  
American   Geophysical  Un ion   in  Baltimore.  A t   the   session,  results  of  t h e  
CRRES  artificial  Earth  auroras  experiment  would  be  discussed.  (NA SA  
Release 91-77)  

NASA  announced  t h e  May 3 0  harvesting of  its first research crop of  lettuce  
grown  in a specially outfitted chamber  at Johnson  Space Center ,  Houston ,  by 
t h e  Engineering Directorate's  Crew and Thermal  Systems Division.  Th is  har-  
vest was to  follow a test crop harvested  in February as part of  the  Regenerative 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  ANL I   (IERC)N.I\UTICS 

MAY  199 1 

Life Suppo r t  Systems  program  focused  o n  recycling air and  water  a n d  produc-  
ing  food ,  as  part   of  NASA's  future  long   du ra t ion  missions  o n   t h e  Moon   a n d  
Mars.  ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 7 8 )  

N A S A   Administrator   Richard   H.  Truly  announced ,   following  a  senior  
management   meeting ,   t h a t   N A S A   would  conduc t   a  thorough   review  of  t h e  
recent   discovery  t h a t  a fuel  sensor removed  from Space  S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia  last 
fall  was  cracked .   However,  Truly  indicated   t h a t   t h e   sensor  problem  o n  
Columbia   had   heen   corrected   and   the  S h u t t l e  was  now  tentatively   scheduled  
for  launch   o n   J u n e   I .   ( N A S A   Release  91 -79 ;   AP,  May  25/91;  UPI ,   May 
25 /91 )  

May  25:  T h e  Washington  Post  cited   t h e   Synthesis  G r o u p  unpublished   report  
stating   t h a t   a l though   a  Space   S t a t i o n   in  Earth   orbit   was  preferable,  if  such  
could  n o t   be  built  in  timely  fashion   and   with   t h e   desired  capabilities,  o n e  
could  consider  using  t h e  moon   as  a  preparatory  e n v i r o nm e n t  for  a  Mars  mis- 
sion .   ( W  Post, May  25 /91 )  

In  a subsequent  editorial ,  Space PropuIsion  newsletter  urged  t h a t  t h e  press c o n -  
ference  o n  t h e  report  be eliminated  a n d  t h e  report  be published  as soon  as pos- 
sible.  (SP  News, May  27-June  2/1991)  

According   t o  t h e  Los Angeles  'Times, N A S A  personnel   were  warning   elect-  
ed   officials  across  t h e   coun t ry   t h a t   t h e   killing  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   would 
mean   lost  jobs  in  the i r  districts.  (LA  Times, May  25/91)  

May  26: Major articles  in  t h e  New York  'Times and   t h e  Los Angeles Tme s  raised 
questions   about   NASA's  proposed  Space   S t a t i o n  w i th   regard  t o   its  cost ,   t h e  
functions   i t  was  supposed  t o  perform,  and   t h e  need   for such  space  ventures   in 
relation   t o   o t h e r   needed   expenditures .   T h e   Los  Angeles  Times  stated   t h a t  
Soviet  Space  S t a t i o n  experience  showed  t h a t  "at  cu r ren t  levels of  technology ,  
reusable  spaceships  were  more  expensive   t h a n   throwaway  models."  ( N Y T ,  
May  26/91;  LA Times, May  26/91 ) 

May  27:  Tass  announced   t h a t   t h e   first  British  astronaut   a n d   two  Soviet   cos- 
monauts   had   returned   safely from  Mir  Space  S t a t i o n ,  landing   o n  t h e   steppes 
of  Kazakhstan.  Sov ie t  space officials considered  British participation   valuable  
in   terms  of  Soviet-British   cooperation ,   a l though   commercially  t h e   mission 
failed  t o  gain  British  sponsorship.  (U P I ,  May  27/91)  

A  space  journal  editorial   advocated   t h a t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   be  judged  by 
Congress  o n  its own  merits  and   t h a t   space exploration   was  also  a social need ,  
medically,  environmentally ,   and   agriculturally.  N A S A   did   what   Congress 
requested  and   t h e   comm i t tee   needed   t o   explain   its  failure  t o   approve  t h e  
revised  Space  S t a t i o n  plans.  (AvWk ,  May  27 /91 )  

MAY  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

May  28:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  new  Crew   Transport   Vehicle  ( C T V )  h a d  
been   developed   t o  allow  t h e  crew  efficient  egress after  S h u t t l e  flights  t o  facil- 
i ta te  life sclence  or  medical  investigations.  T h e  CTV was a renovated   "people 
mover."  ( N A S A  Release 91  - 8 0 )  

Gerald  Fishman, a NASA   astrophysicist a t  t h e  Marshall  Space Flight Center ,  
Huntsville, Alahama, announced  at a conference of  t h e  American  Astronomical 
Society  in Seattle  tha t  t h e  Burst and  Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) car-  
ried o n  NASA's Gamma  Ray Observatory was  detecting  gamma-ray bursts with 
greater  sensitivity  than  previously.  ( N A S A  Release 91 -8 1 ; UPI ,  May  2819 1 ) 

Officials  of  t h e   European  Space   Agency   and   NASA's   J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory  in  Pasadena,  California ,   announced   t h a t   scientific   teams   c o n -  
cerned   with   t h e   Ulysses  mission  t o   t h e   poles  of  t h e   sun   were  preparing  for 
physics  investigations   during   Ulysses's forthcoming   encoun te r   w i th   Jupiter .  
Ulysses  was  expected   t o   reach   Jup i te r   and   its  satellites  o n   February  8,  1992 ,  
and  make   a  two-week  sweep  past  t h e  p lane t .   ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 8 2 )  

NASA's Lyndon B. J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r  ( J S C ) ,  Hou s ton ,  announced   t h a t  
it   h a d   selected  J o h n s o n   Con t ro l s   World  Services ,   Inc . ,   C a p e   Canave ra l ,  
Florida, for a J S C  p lan t  ma in tenance   and  ope ra t ion  support c o n t r a c t .  ( N A S A  
Release C 9  1 -q )  

According   t o   t h e   press,  t h e   Japanese   gove rnmen t   was  angry  t h a t   its 
participation   in  t h e  proposed  Space  S t a t i o n  was  th rea tened   by  congressional 
budget  cuts. Reportedly,  it  issued  a warning   t h a t   it  m igh t  refuse  t o  con t r ibu te  
t o   U.S.-led  major   scientific  projects  in  t h e   future   unless  plans   t o   build  t h e  
Space  S t a t i o n  rema in   in tac t .   (NYT, May  28/91; UP I ,  May  2819 1 )  

UP1  reported   t h a t   ground   had   been   broken   for  t h e   $70   million   Space  
C e n t e r     dust on  being h u i ~ t  just  outside  J o h n s o n  Space  Cen te r .  T h e  cen te r   is 
t o   be  a n   "experience  cen te r"   providing   visitors  with   a  sense  of  daily  Space  
S t a t i o n  life.  (U P I ,  May  28/91)  

May   29:  T h e  media  covered  t h e   comp le t ion  of  sensor  repairs,  t h e  beginning  
of  t h e  second coun tdown  for Columbia's  medical  research  mission, con t inu ing  
preparations  for  t h e   launch ,  and   final  clearance   for  t h e  launch .   ( W  Post, May 
29/91;  W  Times,  May  29/91;  USA  Today,  May  29/91;  AP,  May  29/91;  UP I ,  
May 30191; AP, May  30191; USA Today, May 31 /91 ;  W Times, May 31/91;  AP, 
May  31/91;  UP I ,  May  31/91)  

A t  a  press conference   associated  with   t h e  Ame r ican   Astronomical   Society  
mee t ing  in  Sea t t le ,  Ted  S teche r ,  Ultraviolet   Imaging Telescope  ( U I T )  princi-  
pal  investigator ,  announced   t h a t  U I T  team   members  had   identified  hundreds  
of  newly  found   young  stars  in  t h e   Large  Magellanic  C loud .   Several   of  these  
h o t   stars might   eventually  become  supernovas.  ( N A S A  Release  9 1 - 8 4 )  

77 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

MAY  199 1 

NASA   announced   tha t   at  its  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility,  at 
Edwards, California, simulator  research showed tha t  multiengine aircraft with 
specially  programmed  flight  control   systems  could  touch  down  safely  using 
only  the  engines  to  turn  and  land.  (NA SA  Release 91-85)  

According  to AP,  a  communications  satellite needed  t o  transmit  long-dis- 
tance   telephone  calls  made  in  Alaska  was  successfully launched  from  Cape  
Canaveral Air  Force Station .   (AP, May  29/91; W  Post, May  30191) 

A P  reported  tha t   T h e   Save Ou r  Wetlands  environmental  group  had  filed 
suit  against NASA   to  stop t h e   testing  of  an  advanced solid fuel rocket  motor 
for  Space Shuttles  on   the   Mississippi Gulf  Coast.  T h e  group also  asked  tha t  
the   Environmental  Protection  Agency  make  NASA   comply  with  clean  air 
and  water  laws. NASA  officials maintained  tha t  NASA   received  the  needed 
S ta te  and  Federal permits  to  test  the   boosters.  (AP, May  29/91) 

Nationally syndicated economics columnist Warren  Brookes questioned  the  
administration's efforts  to  rescue NASA's  Space  Station   and  the   new  space 
program  represented  by  the   National  Aerospace  Plane.  Brookes  stated  tha t  
possibly national  security concerns justified  both  these programs but  their eco- 
nomic  justification  was  dubious.  ( W  Times, May  29/91)  

According  to   the   Fairfax j o u m l  Weekly, C. McClain  Haddow, a  Herndon ,  
Vlrginia  lobbyist, asserted  tha t   i f   NASA   were  to   leave  Reston  for  Houston ,  
probably  other   Federal  offices  would  move  from  Northern   Virglnia  as  well. 
(Fairjax  Journal  Weekly, May  29-30191) 

May   30:  T h e  media  gave extensive  coverage  to  Magellan's completion  of  its 
initial  nine-month   mapping  of  Venus  and   the   amazing discoveries made. To 
date ,  84 percent  of  Venus was  mapped  and  in  the   second  phase  chief  project 
scientist  S tephen   Saunders  stated  tha t   95  percent  of  Venus'.  surface  was 
expected  to  be  covered. Magellan's powerful  radar  system enabled  i t   to  pene-  
trate  the   clouds  of  carbon  dioxide  tha t   cover  Venus.  (NY Times, May  30191; 
USA   Today, May  30191; 0 Sun ,  May  30191; UP I ,  May  30191 ; AP/May  30191; 
C SM ,  May  31/91)  

A t   a  meeting  of  the   American  Astronomical  Society  in  Seattle ,  research 
physicist  Michael  S.  Briggs  reported  finding a  second  huge  source  of  gamma 
rays  in  the   Milky  Way.  T h e   Soviet  satellite  G rana t   and  a  gamma  detector 
aboard NASA's Gamma  Ray  Observatory were  to  be  used  to observe the  new 
source.  ( LA  Xmes ,  May  30191) 

May  31:  T h e   Philadelphia  Inquirer  carried  an   article  about  the   new  issue  of 
Science magazine  and   its  reports  o n  the   likely  creation  of  holes  in  the  Arctic  
ozone. T h e  article quoted Robert Watson, head of NASA's atmospheric ozone 

MAY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

program, as saying t h a t  Earth's ozone layer was declining  as much  as eight  per- 
c e n t   each   decade;   scientists  previously  though t   it  was  only  two  t o   four  per- 
c e n t .  Also  N A S A   research  found  t h a t   losses occurred  in   t h e  spring  as well  as 
winter ,  raising conce rn  t h a t  ultraviolet  radiation  might  th rea ten   crops, forests, 
and  ecological processes.  ( P  Inq, May  3 1/91)  

N A S A  officials George  Rodney, t h e  Agency's top  safety official, a n d  Robert  
C r ippen ,  head  of  t h e  S h u t t l e  program,  said a special investigating  team  would 
spend   t h e   summer  reviewing  t h e   way  N A S A   approved  S h u t t l e   componen t s  
for  flight.  ( W  Post, May  31 /91 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronaut   J o h n  M.  Lounge  would  leave  N A S A  
J u n e  2 1   t o  become  director  of  Hou s ton  Ope ra t ion s  for Spacehab ,  Inc . ,  wh ich  
is  providing  a pressurized module  for  future  space flights.  ( N A S A  Release  91 - 
86) 

In  a n  article  o n  t h e  budget  process,  t h e  Christian Science Monitor s ta ted  t h a t  
despite   it   being  a  Bush  Adm in i s t ra t ion  priority,  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  may  go   in  
t h e   budget  because  of  t h e   deal   t o   bring  t h e   Federal  deficit  under   con t ro l .  
(CSM ,  May  3 1/91)  

June 

June  1 :   T h e  media  reported  tha t   t h e   launch  of  Shu t t le  Columbia  was  again 
~ o s t ~ o n e d  because  of  problems  with  the   navigation  equipment.  (UP l ,  J u n  
1/91; AP, J u n  1/91; P  Inq ,  J u n  2/91; W Post, J u n  2/91; NY  Times, J u n  2/91; LA 
Times, J u n  2/91; CSM, J u n  3/91;  USA  Today, J u n  3/91 ) 

June 3: According  to AP, NASA  began  its  third  countdown  for  the   launch  of 
Columbia,  rescheduled  for June  5.  (AP, J u n  3/91) 

NASA   announced   that   Joust  1, a  commercial  suborbital rocket,  would  be 
launched  from Cape  Canaveral  on  J u n e  7 .   (NA SA  Release, unnumbered) 

T h e   press  reported  o n   Bush  administration  efforts  to  save  Space  Station  
Freedom  in   the   light  of  actions  of  the   House  Appropriations  Committee   as 
- -  
- 
well  as  t h e   protests  of  participating   na t ions   t h a t   were  angered  a t  
congressional action ,  such as Japan ,  Canada ,  and  the  European Space Agency. 
( B  Sun, J u n  3/91; W Post, J u n  3/91) 

In  a n  article by  NASA  Deputy Administrator  J .R .Thompson ,  he  called  o n  
the  Wh i te  House to  rescue t h e  Space S ta t ion ,  citing its contribution  to main-  
taining  American   leadership  in  space,  international   cooperation  in   science 
and   technology,  jobs,  and  education,  in  addition  t o   its  specific  scientific 
research  contributions.  (Roll Call, J u n  3 /91 )  

Newsweek  carried  a  feature  article  about  NASA's discoveries regarding  the 
heavens: quasars, galaxies, black holes, dark matter, and the   like, as presented at 
the   annual meeting  of  the  American  Astronomical  Society. Special credit  was 
given  to  the   instruments NASA   developed  to explore space. Highlighted  were 
the  mysteries remaining  to  be  explored and   the   new  telescopes  being  installed 
to  catch  infrared rays to help  solve some of  the  mysteries. (Newsweek, J u n  3/91) 

June 4:  NASA   announced   the   award  of  an   avionics  systems engineering  and 
analysis support contract   to  the  Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.  T h e  work  was  to  include work  o n  Space  Station   Freedom  as 
well  as  Space  Shuttles   and  advanced  spacecraft,  manned  and  unmanned .  
(NA SA  Release C 9 1  -s)  

NASA   issued  a  release  indicating  tha t   as  a  result  of  Apollo  data   findings 
NA SA   scientists and  o the r   researchers  had  a  revised  theory  of  the   origin  of 
life o n  earth .  Life may have begun more  than  once  and been  wiped out  sever- 
al  times by  rare,  planet-melting  superimpacts o n  t h e  Earth. Evidence  of  such 
early solar system impacts  is well-preserved o n  the  Moon.  (NA SA  Release 91- 
87;  UPI ,  J u n  5/91; AP, J u n  5/91; San Jose Mercury  News, J u n  6/91)  

ASTRONAUTICS   AN13 AERONAUTICS  

J U N E  1991 

T h e  press  reported  the  House Appropriations  Committee  action  voting  to  
kill  NASA's Space S ta t ion   and  ignoring  a Wh i te   House  veto  threat   in  tha t  
regard. ( W  Post, J u n  4/91; B Sun, J u n  4/91 ; USA Today, J u n  4/91; W Times, J u n  
4/91;  P  Inq ,   J u n  4/91; WSJ, J u n  4/91; AP, J u n  4/91; UPI ,  J u n  4/91; SP News, 
J un  3 -919 1 ; LA  Times, J u n  419 1 ) 

T h e   media  covered  preparations  for  launching  by  the   crew  of  Shuttle  
Columbia.  (AP, J u n  4/91;  UPI ,  J u n  4/91; NY  Times, J u n  5/91; W  Times,  J u n  
5/91;  USA Today, J u n  5/91; W Post, J u n  5/91; B Sun, J u n  5/91; P Inq ,Jun  5/91)  

June  5 :  According  to   the   media,  the   Bush  Administration  was  pressuring 
Congress  to   retain  the   appropriation  for  the   Space  Station .   (NY  Times,  J u n  
5/91; W Xmes, J u n  5/91; USA Today, J u n  5/91; W Post, J u n  5/91; AF', J u n  5/91; 
UPI, J u n  5/91)  

June 6: Extensive coverage was given to  t h e  launch of Columbia o n  June  5 and  
the   astronauts' biomedical  studies.  (B   Sun,  J u n  6/91;  P  Inq,  J u n   6/91;  NY 
Times, J u n  6/91; W  Post, J u n  6/91; W  Times,  J u n  6/91; C Trin, J u n  6/91; LA 
Times, J u n  6/91; AP, J u n  6/91;  UP l ,  J u n  6/91) 

T h e   media  reported  o n   Administration  efforts  to  have  the   elimination  of 
funding for  the  Space Station  reversed in the  House of  Representatives. In  this 
connection ,  the  New York  Times carried a major editorial urging tha t  the  Space 
Station   not   be  funded.  In  response  to   that   editorial,  NASA   Administrator 
Richard H. Truly released  a letter of  support for the  Space Station  from Thomas 
Stafford, Chairman  of  the   Synthesis Group,  to Representative  George  Brown, 
Chairman  of  the  House Committee on  Science, Space, and Technology.  (USA 
Today, J u n  6/91; NY  Times, J u n  6/91; NASA   Release N91-42;  WSJ,  J u n  6/91; 
CSM, J u n  6/91; UPI, J u n  6/91) 

A n  article  in the  Washington Post  commented  that   the  House Appropriations 
Committee's  decision to  delete  funding  for  NASA's  Space  Station   from  the  
1992 budget  represented  a  setback  for  a  number  of  defense  and  space-related 
contractor companies that  were  counting o n  the  project.  ( W  Post, J u n  6/91) 

A Chnstiun Science Monitor editorial commended NASA's work with regard  to 
the  Magellan spacecraft's survey of  the  surface of  Venus. However, the  editorial 
deplored  the   indecision  and  delays  in  the   U.S.  space  program  resulting  from 
congressional  ambivalence  and  stressed  the  need  for  the   administration  to 
achieve a sustainable program.  (CSM, Jun  6/91) 

A P  reported  tha t   researchers  had  found  tha t   the   seeds, spores, and   shrimp 
eggs  flown  on   the   Long  Duration  Exposure  Facility  for  five  years  by  NASA  
experienced  some  bizarre  mutations  but  space  radiation  had  a  less  serious 
effect o n  the   life forms t h a n  expected.  (AP, J u n  6/91)  

J U N E  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

NASA  Administrator Richard H .  Truly  issued  a statement  following action  
by  the   House  of  Representatives  to  con t inue   the   development  of  Space  
Station   Freedom.  Truly  commended  the   bipartisan  vote  in  the   House, 
expressed  his confidence that   Freedom would win  support  in  the  Sena te ,  and  
expressed his commitment  to  shape the  final NASA  FY  1992 budget  in  a way 
tha t  balanced  the   various research  and  project  areas.  (NA SA  Release 91 -88 )  

Nature   magazine contained  an  article  by  its associate editor  David  Lindley 
tha t   was  extremely  laudatory  of  the   findings  of  the  Hubble  Space Telescope, 
in  spite  of  its  flaws.  H e   referred  specifically  to  data  obtained  from  the   two 
spectrometers,  designed  to   operate  primarily  a t   ultraviolet  wavelengths  to  
which  the  Earth's  atmosphere is  opaque.  (Na tu re ,  J u n  6/91)  

June   7:  T h e   media  covered  the   House  vote   of  240  to   173  overturning  t h e  
House  Appropriations Committee   action  halting   the   Space S ta t ion  program 
and  authorizing $1.9 billion  to  keep the  program going. T h e  role of  t h e  Wh i te  
House  in pressuring Congress to support  the  project  was  stressed. Several arti. 
cles  also  commented  tha t   the   action   was  a  boon  to   aerospace  firms.  T h e  
importance of  the  United   States maintaining  its space  leadership  and  having 
a  permanent   presence  in   space,  despite  t h e   high   costs  entailed ,   also  were 
emphasized.  ( P  Inq, J u n  7/91; WSJ,  J u n  7/91; NY  Times, J u n  7/91; B S u n ,  J u n  
7/91; W Times, J u n  7/91;  USA  Today, J u n  7/91; LA  Times, J u n   7/91; W  Post, 
J u n  7/91; C Trin, J u n  7/91; AP, J u n  7/91; UPI ,  J u n  7/91; Htsvl  Tms ,  J u n  7/91; 
NY  Times, J u n  8/91 ; Birmingham News, J u n  10191 ) 

Prior  to  the   House  vote,  Thomas   M.  Donahue,  Professor  of  Planetary 
Science  at  the   University  of  Michigan,  wrote  an   article  published  in   the  
Christian  Science Monitor.  In   it  he   sharply  criticized  NASA   for  making  the  
Space  Station   its  priority  rather  t h a n   scientific  inquiry  and   urged  Congress 
not   to  support  t h e  Space S ta t ion .  C SM ,  J u n  7/91) 

T h e   press  reported  tha t   NASA   was  considering  having  two  astronauts 
engage in  a spacewalk to fix a cargo-door seal of Columbia  tha t  could prevent 
a safe return  to  Earth.  T h e  seal  apparently  shook  loose during  launch .   It  was 
later  reported  that  NASA  ground  personnel  determined  the  seal posed  no  re- 
entry problems so n o  spacewalk was needed. Th is  allowed the  astronauts more 
time  to  pursue  their  scientific  experiments  and  medical  research.  ( P  Inq ,  J u n  
7/91; NY  Tm e s ,  J u n  7/91; W  Post, J u n  7/91; W  Times, J u n  7/91; LA Xmes ,  J u n  
7/91; AP,  J u n  7/91; UPI ,  J u n  7/91; B  S u n ,  J u n  8/91; NY  Times,  J u n  8/91;  W 
Post, J u n  8/91;  AP, J u n  8/91; UP I ,  J u n  8/91; N Y  Times, J u n  9/91; W  Post, J u n  
9/91; C Trin, J u n  10191; LA  Times, J u n  10/91) 

T h e  Baltimore Sun   reported  tha t   thanks  to  a NASA   program  to  establish  a 
super  computer  network  among  black  universities,  Morgan  S ta te  University 
had  received  a  super  computer.  T h e   university  planned  t o   make  t h e   super 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

J U N E  1991 

computer  the  foundation  of  a  new  Center  for  Applied  Space  Science  and 
Engineering.  ( B  Sun ,  Jun  7/91) 

NASA  announced  that  as  part  of  its  Planetary  Astronomy  Program  of  the 
Office of  Space Science and Applications, a team of  radar astronomers had  iden- 
tified  a near-Earth metal asteroid for the first time. Their discovery, observed from 
the  giant Arecibo  radarlradio telescope  in  Puerto Rico, was  published  in  Science 
magazine. The  object, called  1986 DA,  was  observed  and  analyzed  by  a  team 
under Steven Ostro of  NASA's Jet  Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. 
The   asteroid contains mostly  iron  but  also  eight percent  nickel  as well  as  some 
platmum-group metals and gold. (NASA Release 91-89; NY  Xmes, Jun 11/91) 

NASA  gave an  update  about  the   launching of  Joust 1, a commercial subor- 
bital  rocket  being  launched from Cape Canaveral Air  Force  Station, Florida. 
Because of  bad  weather,  the   launch  was postponed  t o  June  9.  (NASA  Joust  1 
Update, Jun  7/91) 

June 8 :  According  to  the Huntsville  T r n e s ,  NASA's Advisory Council  met fol- 
lowing  the  House  of  Representatives  vote  to   discuss  plans  for  the  Space 
Station  and  how  to  put  the  "A"  for  aeronautics  back  in to   NASA .   Edward 
Starke  Jr., chairman  of  the  ad  hoc  committee  on   the  High  Speed  Research 
Program  reported  o n  plans  for  a  new  supersonic jet  to   be  used  by  the   com- 
mercial aviation  industry.  (Htsvl Tm s ,  Jun  8 /91 )  

.,June 9: T h e  Huntsville Times  published a history of  NASA   in connection with 
its  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center   and  the   Army  Ballistic  Missile  Agency 
Development  Operations Division  in  Huntsville. Reference was  made  to  the  
early days of  the  Redstone Arsenal  as  well  as  to  statistics of  employment  and 
various Shuttle  launches.  (Htsvl Tm s ,  Jun  9 /91 )  

June  10:  Robert  F.  Sekerka,  Dean  of  the  College  of  Science  at   Camegie- 
Mellon University  in Pittsburgh and Cha i r  of  the  Committee on  Microgravity 
Research of  the Space Studies Board, wrote an  article in the Wall S tree t  journal 
sharply criticizing the  appropriation  for  the Space Station. He questioned  the 
purpose  of  the  Space Station and  its cost-effectiveness. ( W S J ,  J u n  10191) 

Peter J .  Wylie, professor of  geology at  the California  Institute of Technology, 
commended NASA's mapping of Venus but stated  that only 29 percent  of  the 
Earth's  surface has been  mapped in detail. He suggested tha t  NASA's Mission 
to Planet  Earth  take  the  form of  an  integrated  space-borne  and  ground-based 
mission  that  could  map  the  remaining  71  percent  of  the  surface beneath  the  
ocean.  (LA  Times, J u n  10191; P  Inq, Jun  22/91) 

A  space  publication  reported  that   NASA  Administrator  Richard  Truly 
would  forgo  attendance  at  the  1991 Paris  Air  Show  in  order  to  remain  in 

JUNE  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Washington  to keep close watch o n  the  congressional fight to  keep the Space 
Station appropriation in the budget. In an editorial  in the same journal,  it was 
stated  that  maintaining  the  Space  Station "at  the  cost  of  nearly  everything 
else NASA  does would  be  a major mistake." Subsequently, an editorial  in the  
San Jose Mercury  News  expressed similar concern  that  NASA's other  impor- 
tant programs would be  sacrificed for the  sake of  the Space Station.  (SP News, 
Jun  10-16/91; San lose Mercury News, J u n  1 1/91) 

Encore  Computer Corporation  filed  an  agency  protest  of  a  $191  million 
award by  NASA  Johnson Space Center to  IBM Corporation for a mainframe 
requirements contract. NASA  officials were  to meet with Encore representa- 
tives over  the  disagreement, which  involved pricing  information  submitted. 
(Federal Computer Week, Jun  10191) 

Federal Computer Week  reported o n  NASA's plans to award contracts for up 
to  13,700 Unix-based work  stations spanning seven classes. (Federal Computer 
Week, J u n  10191) 

June  11 :   According  to  the  media,  the  Columbia  astronauts  were  ahead  of 
schedule on  their experiments after spending 16- to  18-hour days working and 
planned to ease off and enjoy space more. On June 12 and  13, the press report- 
ed  the  continuing  scientific  experiments  of  the  astronauts,  culminating  in 
efforts to fix two malfunctioning freezers in order to preserve experiment  sam- 
ples prior  to final preparations for a landing o n  June  14. ( P  Inq, Jun  11/91; NY 
Times, Jun  11/91; B Sun, Jun  11/91; W Post, Jun  11/91; USA Today, Jun  11/91; 
UPI,  Jun   11/91; USA  Today, Jun   13/91; W  Post,  J u n   13/91; AP,  Jun   13/91; 
UPI, Jun  13/91; LA  Times, June  13/91; P  lnq ,  Jun  14/91; NY Times, J u n  14/91; 
WPost, J u n  14/91; WTimes, Jun  14/91; B Sun, J u n  14/91; FJaToda~ ,  Jun  14/91; 
AP, Jun  14/91; UPI, J u n  14/91) 

Th e  New York  Times carried a major article stating tha t ,  to shave costs, aero- 
space experts have  broken some of  the  rules about  specifications and  testing, 
resulting in  significant flaws. Unless NASA  were  given more generous fund- 
ing so it could stop "corner cutting" compromises, more serious problems were 
likely  to  arise. Norman  R .  Augustine,  head  of  Martin Marietta  Corporation, 
was  quoted with  regard  to  the  importance  of  testing  that  should not  allow  it 
to  be  affected by  budget  reduction.  (NY Times, Jun  11/91) 

NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly  issued  a  statement  expressing his 
pleasure  at being present with  the Space Exploration Initiative and  the  work 
done  by  retired  Air  Force  Lieutenant  General  Thomas  S .   Stafford  and  his 
Synthesis Group.  He  referred  to  past  cooperation  of  NASA   with  these  and 
other agencies and  appreciation  for  innovative suggestions received from the 
Outreach  Program efforts. Press  comments o n  the  Stafford committee report 
emphasized the  controversial  nature of  some of  its  recommendations,  such as 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JUNE   1991 

landing   Americans   o n   Mars  by  2014  and   ob ta in ing   metals,  ceramics,  a n d  
energy  sources  from  t h e   Moon   a n d   Mars.  ( N A S A  Release  unnumbe red ;  LA 
Times ,  J u n  12/91;  W Post, J u n  14/91; Huntsville  N ew s ,  J u n  25/91)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e  application   of  its sensor  technology   led  t o  t h e  
deve lopmen t  of  a portable   fetal  hea r t   mon i to r  by  a Langley  Research  C e n t e r ,  
H am p t o n ,  Virginia team ,  headed  by  A l lan  J .   Zuckerwar. T h e  marketing  of th i s  
mon i to r  was  t o  be  part   of  t h e  N A S A   program  t o  transfer  t h e  Agency's space 
age  technology   t o  t h e  private   sector.  ( N A S A  Release  91 -90 )  

J u n e  14 :  T h e  press  reported  t h a t  N A S A  h a d   staged  a  mock  emergency  land -  
ing  in   preparation   for  Columbia's  touchdown   a t   Edwards  A i r   Force  Base, 
California .   (USA  Today, J u n  14/91;  AP, J u n  14/91)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   its G amm a   Ray  Observatory   ( G R O )  was  maneu -  
vered  t o   po in t   a t   its  first  scientific  target  of  opportunity ,   t h e   sun ,  o n  J u n e  7 .  
Con t ro l le r s   a t   Goddard   Space   Flight  C e n t e r ,   G reenbe l t ,   Maryland,  reposi- 
t ioned   t h e   observatory  t o   ga the r  da ta   from  two   X-class  solar  flares.  All   four 
G R O   instrument   teams   reported  receiving  good  da ta   o n   solar  activity   as  a 
result.  ( N A S A  Release  9 1 - 9 1 )  

T h e  media covered  t h e  flawless touchdown  of  S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia  o n  J u n e  14 .  
T h e  S h u t t l e  appa ren t ly  suffered  n o  major  damage.  A f te r   a  night's  sleep, four 
of  t h e  astronauts  remained   t o  undergo  a series of  medical  a n d  physical tests of 
the i r   readjustment   t o  gravity.  Tests  also were  t o  be  performed  o n  t h e  animals  
t h a t   traveled  o n  Co lumb ia .   (UP I ,  J u n   14/91; W  Post, J u n   15/91;  P   Inq, J u n  
15/91;  AP, J u n  15/91; U P 1 , J u n  15/91;  W Post, J u n   16/91)  

NASA's n e x t  S h u t t l e  mission  is  t o  be  t h a t  of  A t lan t i s ,  scheduled  for  launch  
in July  t o   release  a  g ian t  Tracking  and   Data   Relay  Sa te l l i te   in tended   t o   link 
Shu t t le s   and   o t h e r   low-orbiting   spacecraft  w i th   t h e   ground.  C o n r a d   Nagel, 
t h e  N A S A   manager  responsible  for  t h e   launch   preparation ,   raised  t h e  possi- 
hility  t h a t   A t lan t i s   might   be  launched   earlier  t h a n  July  25.  (FIa  Today ,  J u n  
14/91;  AP, J u n  15/91)  

June   15: A n   ed i to r ia l   in   t h e   Sarasota  Herald-Tribune,  cha rged   t h a t   N A S A  
historically   sough t   t o   c u t   co rne r s   i n   space   as  a  result   of  unde r fund ing ,  
a c c e p t i n g  t h e   cheape s t   hi& ,   a n d   sk ipp ing  safety  check s .   P u t t i n g   eng inee r s  
i n   cha rge   a n d   greater   discipline   were  factors   advoca ted .   (Sarasota  Herald- 
Tribune ,  J u n   1519 1 ) 

June   16:  According   t o  Florida  Today ,  a  group  of  Florida  universities  hoped   t o  
a t t rac t  a five-year, $ 5  m ~ l l i o n  N A S A  g ran t  t o  se t  up a commercial  space devel-  
o pm e n t   center .   T h e   cen te r   would  focus  o n   t h e   commercial   po ten t ia l   of 
advanced   satellite  communicatios   technology.  (FIa Today ,  J u n  16 /91 )  

JUNE   1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

June  17: Astronaut  Guion  Bluford Jr . ,  in  a commencement  speech  a t  Drexel 
University's 100th  anniversary, called  for  a new national  commitment  t o  "sci- 
entific  literacy." 

A  space  journal  commended  Lieutenant  General  Thomas   P.  Stafford's 
Synthesis  Group   report  for  its  role  in  separating  the   issues  involved  in  the  
space exploration  initiative. T h e  editorial stated tha t  now NASA  must deliv- 
er with  respect both   to the  Space S ta t ion  and  Mission to Planet Earth in order 
to  convince  Americans  of  the   desirability  of  sending  astronauts  to  Mars. 
(AuWk, J u n  17/91)  

June  18: A n   article  by  Charles  Krauthammer  of  The  New  Republic  discussed 
argutnents by  foes of  the  Space Station  and concluded tha t  a bold  new initiative 
in  the  form  of  a  Moon  base  was  a  preferable next  step  in  space.  ( P  lq, J u n  
18/91 ) 

A lengthy  account  in  the   New  York  Xmes  dealing  with  asteroids  and  the  
threat  they  posed  t o  early  life  as  well  as  the   continuing  possibility they  might 
destroy Earth, referred to  NASA's findings about early life forms based  o n  a sur- 
vey  of  impact craters o n  the  moon.  Several scientists' findings, discussed in the  
journal Cell, were  also reported. T h e  newspaper also published an  article citing 
NASA's expenditure  of  somewhat  less  t h a n   $1  million  a  year  t o   search  for 
Earth-crossing asteroids. NASA   reportedly was  also studying t h e  feasibility of 
nudging  asteroids  aside  and  in  this  connection   is  to   help  sponsor  the   first 
International  Conference o n  Near-Earth Asteroids.  (NYT ,  J u n  18/91) 

According  to  the   media,  a  small  Prospector  rocket,  launched  by  Orbital 
Sciences  Corporation  of  Fairfax,  Virginia  from  Cape   Canaveral  Air  Force 
Station ,  was  blown  up  shortly after  liftoff  when  it veered  off  course. This  was 
Orbital's third  attempt  to  launch  the   rocket  for  the  University  of  Alabama  in 
Huntsville,  one   of  sixteen NASA  Centers  for  the   Commercial  Development 
of  Space. (AP, J u n  18/91; NYT, J u n  19/91; USA Today, J u n  19/91; W Xmes, J u n  
19/91; WSJ, J u n  19/91; B Sun ,  J u n  19/91; WPo s t ,  J u n  19/91; C Trin, J u n  19/91; 
LA Tme s ,  J u n  19/91; AP, J u n  19/91; UP], J u n  19/91; H Chron, J u n  20191) 

AP  reported  that  Japan  planned  to start developing a small unmanned  Space 
Shuttle   in  1992 and wanted  to  launch  it by  2000. (AP, J u n  18/91) 

Lewis  Schiff,  program  coordinator  for  NASA's  High  Alpha  Technology 
Program, a cooperative  research program  a t  NASA's Ames, Langley, and  Lewis 
Research Centers ,  announced  tha t   tests were  underway o n  an   F/A-18  fighter 
aircraft  in  the   world's  largest  wind  tunnel  a t  Ames  Research  Center ,  Moffett 
Field, California.  (NA SA  Release 91-92; LA  Xmes, J u n  24/91) 

June  19:  T h e   Philadelphia  Inquirer  reported  tha t   the   National   Weather  
Service's  one   weather  satellite  was  nearing  the   end   of  its  life.  However, 

87  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

J U N E  1991 

NASA's  nex t   generation   of  satellites,  o n e   of  which   was  t o   replace  it ,   were 
th ree   years  behind   schedule   a n d  $500 million   over  budget.  T h e  atmospheric  
sensor  of  t h e   new  model  reportedly   tested  poorly,  but  N A S A   planned   t o  
launch   it  nevertheless .   A P   quoted   J o a n   A .   Knauss,  head   of  t h e   Na t iona l  
Ocean ic   and   A tmo sphe r ic   Adm in i s t ra t ion   ( N O A A ) ,  as  saying  t h a t   mean -  
while  the re   were  contingency   plans   t o   use  b o t h   N O A A   and   Defense 
Depa r tmen t  polar o rb i t ing  satellites  and  a European weather  satellite  to  watch  
hurricanes   in  t h e  A t l a n t i c  and  C a r i b b e a n . (P  Inq, J u n  19/91;  AP, J u n  19/91)  

According   t o  AP,  t h e   S h u t t l e  Columbia   left  California   o n  a  piggyback  jet 
ride  t o   its  home   a t   Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  a t   C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida.  (AP ,  
J u n  19 /91 )  

UP1  reported  t h a t   N A S A   managers  reviewed  plans   t o   resume  rou t ine  
S h u t t l e   landings  a t   Kennedy  Space  Cen te r .   T h e  ~ n p r e d i c t a b i l i t ~  of  Florida's 
coastal weather  was a t  issue but  it was  felt  t h a t   improvements  N A S A  made   in 
t h e   S h u t t l e  fleet  were  such   t h a t   routine   landings  could  now  occur .  (U P I ,  J u n  
19 /91 )  

NASA's Goddard  Space  Flight Cen te r ,  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland, announced  t h e  
selection   of  TRW,  Inc . ,   Redondo   Beach,  California ,   for  o n e   Total   Ozone  
Mapping  Spectrometer/Earth  Probe Spacecraft  (TOMS IEP ) .  T h e  con t rac t  was 
t o  provide  for the  design, development ,  fabrication,  assembly, test,  integration ,  
launch ,   and  post-launch   support of  t h e  aircraft.  ( N A S A  Release  C 9 1 - t )  

According  t o   Reuters,  as  reported  by  t h e   Orlando  Sentinel  Star,  Jean-Marie  
Luton, director .general of  the  European Space Agency, said a t  a news conference 
a t   the   Paris Air  Show t h a t  plans  t o   launch  a European  Space  Shu t t le  were pro- 
ceeding despite cost overruns and  technical  problems.  (0 Sen  Star, J u n   19/91) 

June  20:  T h e   media  reported   NASA's  a n n o u n c em e n t   t h a t   hence fo r th   t h e  
Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  in  Florida would  be a prime  S h u t t l e  landing  site  begin- 
ning   with   A t lan t i s '  mission  in  July.  However,  because  of  Florida's  tempera-  
men ta l  weather ,  Shu t t le s  were  expected   t o  return   t o  California   6 0  percent   of 
t h e   time ,  according   t o  Robert   L .  C r ippen ,   Director  of  t h e  Space   S h u t t l e  pro- 
gram.  (AP ,  J u n 2 0 / 9 1 ; U P I ,  J u n 2 0 / 9 1 ;  NYT, J u n 2 1 / 9 1 ; B S u n ,  J u n  2 1 / 9 1 ;LA  
Xme s ,  J u n  21/91)  

N A S A   announced   it  was  scheduled  t o   launch   a  $ 3   million  U .S .  A i r  Force 
Radiation   Experiment   (REX)   Scou t   rocket  J u n e   28  from  Vandenberg   A i r  
Force  Base, Ca l i fom ia .  T h e  REX was designed  t o  test  sophisticated  commun i -  
ca t ion s  in  a  high-radiation   env i ronmen t .   ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 9 3 )  

In   a n   article   written   for  t h e   Houston  Post,  Republican   Congressman   Jack  
Fields strongly  advocated   S e n a t e  support  of NASA's Space  S t a t i o n .  Referring 

J U N E  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

t o  various uses  of  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  program  in  t h e  fields of  medicine ,   indus- 
trial  production ,   a n d  basic  science ,  h e  stressed  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  c omm i tm e n t  
t o  space exploration .   ( H  Post, J u n  20191) 

A n   article   by  S .   Fred  Singer,  guest  scholar   a t   t h e   Woodrow   Wilson  
In te rna t iona l  C e n t e r  for Scholars  a t   t h e  Sm i th son ian   In s t i tu t ion ,  where  h e   is 
completing   a  book  o n   space  policy,  discussed  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   and   t h e  
Stafford  comm i t tee   report .   H e   advocated   Ma r t ian   Moon   exploration   as 
NASA's  best  solution .   (H  Post, J u n  20191; W Times, J u n  25/91)  

June  21:  According   t o   UP I ,   in  a  paper  submitted   t o   t h e   journal  Science,  J .  
Fishman   of  NASA's  A tmo sphe r ic   Sciences   Division  a n d   th ree   o t h e r   scien-  
tists, satellite  monitoring  da ta  a n d  ground-based  pollution  measurements  indi-  
ca ted  t h a t  air  pollution   from bu rn ing  forests in  tropical  and  subtropical  Africa 
was wafting  th roughou t   t h e  S o u t h e r n  Hemisphere ,   previously  considered  rel- 
atively  c lean  compared   t o  t h e  heavily  industrialized N o r t h .   (U P I ,  J u n  21 /91 )  

N A S A  Administrator   Richard  H .  Truly announced  t h e  selection  of Darleen  
A.  Druyun  as  Assistant   Administrator   for  t h e   Office  of  Procurement .   T h e  
highest   ranking   woman  career  executive   in  A i r  Force con t rac t ing ,  she  served 
previously  as  Principal   Assistant   Deputy  Ch ie f   of  Staff  for  C o n t r a c t i n g ,  
Headquarters   A i r   Force  Systems  C omm a n d ,   And rew s   A i r   Force  Base, 
Maryland.  ( N A S A  Release 91 - 9 4 )  

AJournul of  Commerce editorial  analyzed t h e  factors relating  t o  NA SA  and  t h e  
Federal  Communications  Commission's  licensing of  a  private  communications  
consortium  joint  venture   t o   develop  a  mobile  satellite  t o   provide  clear  voice 
communications  in remote U.S. areas. In  early  1991, t h e  U .S .  Cou r t  of Appeals 
for  t h e   District  of  Columbia  challenged  the   FCC's  authority   t o  form  the   joint 
venture   and   license  it ,  with  t h e   result  t h a t  Congress  cut  NASA's proposed  $56  
million contribution  t o  the  project. T h e  companies feel cheated  and  t h e  editori- 
al advised t h a t  N A S A  should no t  be  involved.  Uournul of  Commerce, J u n  21/91) 

According   t o  AP, Space  S h u t t l e  Columbia   returned   home   t o  Florida  after  a 
one-week  trip  from  t h e  West Coast .  Reportedly, N A S A  would  save $1  milllon ,  
in  additlon   t o  travel  time ,  by  landing  a Shu t t le   in  Florida.  (AP ,  J u n e  21/91)  

T h e  media  reported   engineers  were  studying  a possible  problem   connec ted  
w i th   a  $100   million   Tracking   a n d   Data   Relay  Sa te l l i te   ( T D R S )   t o   be 
launched   by  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s .  T h e  problem   involved   t h e  motor   t h a t  deployed 
a boom   carrying  a six-foot-wide  a n t e n n a .  T h e  main  T D R S  a n t e n n a s  are fold- 
ed  for  launch ,  bu t  o n c e  t h e  satellite   is  i n  o rb i t ,  t h e  a n t e n n a  booms  ro ta te  o u t -  
ward  and   t h e  a n t e n n a s  o p e n  up  like umbrellas.  O n  J u n e  24, N A S A  manager  
of  t h e   project   Nicholas   Chrissotimos ,   stated   t h a t   t h e   problem  was  resolved. 
(U P I ,  J u n  21/91; AP, J u n  22/91;  C Trin, J u n  25 /91 )  

A S T R O N A U T l C S  A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

J U N E  1991 

l u n e  23:  According   t o  UP I ,  reporting   from  Soviet   television ,  a  small satellite  
launched   from  Mir  Space   S t a t i o n   had  n o t   operated   s ince   it   was  lifted  o n e  
week  previously.  (UP I ,  J u n  23/91 ) 

June  24:  T h e  Christian  Science Monitor carried  a  descriptive  article   about   pro- 
grams  of  t h e   Howard  B.  Owen s   Sc ience   C e n t e r   in  Prince   Georges   Coun ty ,  
Maryland.  Schoo lch i ld ren  spend  two hours  the re  simulating  e i t h e r  landing  o n  
t h e   moon   or   rendezvousing  with   Halley's C om e t .  T h e  program  is  part   of  t h e  
Cha l lenge r   C e n t e r   for  Space   Sc ience   Education ,   founded   by  t h e   families  of 
astronauts  killed  in   t h e  Cha l lenge r  disaster a n d  t o  wh ich  N A S A  con t r ibu ted .  
(CSM ,  J u n  24/91)  

NASA's Ame s  Research  Cen te r ,  Moffett  Field,  California ,   announced   t h a t  
it had  selected  BAMSI ,   Inc . ,  Titusville ,  Florida, for  a $140  million  p reven t ive  
a n d   remedial  ma in tenance   and   services  con t rac t .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 1  -u )  

A  space  journal  article   discussed  t h e   likelihood  of  NASA's  taking   over  
Moffett  Field  in  California   in  order  t o  keep  t h e  Ames  Research Cen te r ,  which  
it  shares  with   t h e   Navy,  going.  Reportedly,  N A S A   was  considering   such   a 
move  if  t h e  Defense Depa r tmen t  closed  t h e  naval  air station .  T h e  result would 
be operating  a  1 ,000  acre  airfield w i th  two  runways more  t h a n  8 ,000  feet  long ,  
t h e   largest  airfield  complex  operated  by  NA SA .   (AvWk, J u n  24/91)  

Two  articles  in   a  space  journal  described  t h e   software  devised  by  N A S A  
research  pilot  C. G o r d o n  Fullerton   t h a t  enabled   con t ro l   of  a disabled  aircraft 
w i t h   e n g i n e   t h r u s t   a l o n e .   T h e   jou rna l   repo r ted   t h a t   N A S A   funded  
McDonne l l   Aircraft   research  o n   implementing   t h e   software.  (AuWk,  J u n  
2419 1 

N A S A   announced  t h a t   t h e  first mirror  for its Advanced  X-ray Astrophysics 
Facility  (AXA F )   space  observatory  was  successfully  completed   a t   Hughes  
Danbury  Op t ica l   System ,  Danbury, C o n n e c t i c u t ,   and   shipped   o n  J u n e   12  t o  
Eastman  Kodak,  Rochester ,  New  York,  for  assembly. T h e  AXAF  observatory 
was  to   consist   of  six  nested   pairs  of  mirrors  t o   ob ta in   h i g h   resolution  x-ray 
images of  t h e  universe.  ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 9 5 )  

June   25:  NASA's   Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r ,   G r e e n b e l t ,   Maryland ,  
announced   its  selection   of  Fairchild  Space ,   Ge rman town ,   Maryland ,   for  a 
con t rac t   t o   provide  engineering   support  services  for  t h e   Space   Technology  
Division.  ( N A S A  Release C 9  1 -w) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   preliminary  da ta   from  its  Total   Ozone   Mapping  
Spectrometer ,   a n   in s t rumen t   o n   t h e   Nimbus-7   satellite ,   indicated   t h a t   a 
4 ,800-mile-long   cloud  of  sulfur  dioxide   was  spread  across  t h e   tropical  

J U N E  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

No r the rn  Hemisphere from t h e  major eruption of Mount  Pinatubo volcano in  
the   Philippines. (NA SA  Release 91-96; UPI, J u n  26/91) 

T h e  media  reported  the  successful efforts of  two Soviet cosmonauts  outside 
the   Mir  Space  Station   t o  replace  a  damaged  an tenna .   (AP, J u n   25/91;  UPI, 
J u n  25/91)  

According to  t h e  media, engineers  waited out  the  storm  a t  Cape  Canaveral  
and   t h e n  hauled  Shu t t le  Atlantis   t o   its  launch   pad.  T h e  Shu t t le  was  sched- 
uled  to   launch   a  Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Satellite  to   replace  the   Indian 
Ocean   relay  station .   (UP I ,  J u n  25/91;  NY  Tme s ,  J u n  26/91;  W  Times, J u n e  
26/91; USA  Today, J u n  26/91; C Trin, J u n  26/91) 

June  26:  NASA   announced  the   selection  of  Taft  Broadcasting  Company   of 
Houston  for  a  contract   providing  television  support  services for  the  Johnson  
Space Center ,  Houston.  (NA SA  Release C91 -x )  

June  27:  NASA   announced  tha t   t h e  Infrared  Astronomical  Satellite  ( IRAS )  
had   discovered  a new,  distant  object  tha t   astronomers  described  as  t h e  most 
luminous  object  ever  seen  in  the   universe.  Findings  were  published  in  the  
British science journal Nature,  indicating it was a massive dust cloud tha t  radi- 
ated  99  percent  of  its light  in  the   infrared part  of  the  spectrum. Astronomers 
speculated  it might  be  a massive galaxy  in  the  process of formation or  a quasar 
in a massive galaxy. (NA SA  Release 91-98; P  Inq, J u n  29/91) 

NASA   announced   information  about  the   flight of  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis  
scheduled  for  launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center .  T h e  Shu t t le  was  t o  
deploy NASA's  fourth  Tracking  and   Data  Relay  Satellite  (TDRS )  in to  orbit  
to  update  the  satellite tracking network. Details  of  the  TDRS ,  its  size, capac- 
ities, and  capabilities, were provided.  (NA SA  Release 91-97)  

T h e  media  reported  tha t   a private  study  by  American  scientists  concluded 
tha t   a n  international  manned  mission  to  Mars  could  be  done within  21  years 
for  less  t h a n   $60   billion.  These   figures  represented  faster  and  cheaper  esti- 
mates  t h a n  those  of  a proposed United  States-only project.  (USA  Today, Jun  
27/91; UPI, J u n  27/91; AP, J u n  27/91; H Post, J u n  30191) 

In  a  letter  to   the   editor,  Lennard  A .   Fisk,  Associate  Administrator  of 
NASA's Office of  Space Science and  Applications, and  J o h n  N .  Bahcall, pro- 
fessor  of  natural  science  a t   the   Institute  for  Advanced  Study  a t   Princeton ,  
declared  tha t   "There   is  strong  national   support  for  both  a  vigorous  manned 
space program and  a strong science program." Believing tha t  both  were essen- 
tial,  they  pointed  out  tha t   to   maintain   its  space  leadership  position,  the  
Un i ted   States   must  con t inue   such  programs  as  t h e   Advanced   X-Ray 
Astrophysical  Facility,  missions  to  a  comet  and   to   Sa tu rn ,   and   the   Earth 
Observing System.  ( W  Post, J u n  27/91) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN 1 1  A E R O N A U T I C S  

J U N E  1991 

UP1  reported  t h a t  G e n e r a l  Dynamics concluded   from  its  investigation   t h a t  
n  piece  of  dehris  sucked  i n t o   a  pump   apparently   triggered  a n  eng ine   failure 
April   18  t h a t   sen t   a  curnrnerclal Atlas-1   rocket  tumbling   out   of  control .   T h e  
rocket  was  carrying  a  satellite  for  t h e  J a p a n  Broadcasting  Co rpo ra t ion .   (U P I ,  
J u n  27/91)  

According  t o  UPI, a jammed  a n t e n n a  crippling  NASA's $1.4 billion  Ga l i leo  
Jup i te r  probe  might  pop  free after  its support  structure  con t rac t s  i n  t h e  cold of 
space.  (UP I ,  J u n  27 /91 )  

June 28:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   its Ga l i leo  spacecraft would  tu rn   a n d  fire  its 
on -hoa rd  thrusters  o n  July 2  t o  set   its course  for  a n  encoun te r   w i th   t h e  aster- 
oid  Gaspra   in  Oc tobe r   1991.  T h i s   would  be  t h e   first  flyby  of  a n   asteroid .  
( N A S A  Release 9 1 -99 )  

J i ~m e s  Head  of  Brown  University,  a geologist o n  Magellan's N A S A  science  
team ,  announced   t h a t   t h e  Magellan  spacecraft  t h a t   was  mapping   t h e  surface 
of  Venus with   imaging radar, had   discovered  a  lava  flow  t h a t  might   represent  
a  volcanic   e rup t ion   similar  t o   those   currently   occurring   in   J a p a n   a n d   t h e  
P h i l~ p p i n e s .  ( N A S A  Release 91-100)  

T h e  Washington Post quoted  J o h n  Knauss, head  of  t h e  Na t iona l  O c e a n i c  and  
Atmospheric   Adm in i s t ra t ion ,  which   includes  t h e  Na t iona l   Wea the r  Service ,  
as  say ing   t h a t   "We  c a n   n o  longer  assume  t h a t   a  NASA -bu i l t   satellite   will 
serve our   needs."  T h e  s ta temen t   referred  t o  NASA's  plans   t o  launch  GO E S -  
NEXT,  t h e   n e x t   gene ra t ion   of  Geostationary   Ope ra t iona l   Env i ronmen ta l  
Satellites .  N A S A   tests  indicated   t h a t   two  of  t h e  ma in   instruments   t o  be  used 
o n   t h e   satellites,  a n   imager  a n d   a  temperature-humidity   sensor  called   a 
sounder,  were  defective .  UP1  indicated   t h a t   Knauss  announced   t h e  appo in t -  
men t   of  a  task  force  t o   consider   a l te rna t ive   courses  of  ac t ion   regarding  a 
weather  satellite ,  such  as  leasing  a Japanese  o r  European  satellite .  (W  Post, J u n  
28/91;  UP I ,  J u n  28/91;  NY  Tm e s ,  J u n  29/91; Time, J u l  1 /91 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronaut   Bryan  D. O 'C o n n o r  would  leave N A S A  
July  29  t o  become   Commande r   of  t h e  Marine   A i r   D e t a c hm e n t  a t   t h e  Nava l  
A i r  Test Cen te r ,  Pa tuxen t  River, Maryland.  ( N A S A  Release 91-101;  UP I ,  J u n  
28/91 ) 

June  29:  According   t o   Tass,  two  Sov ie t   cosmonauts   in   a  long   spacewalk 
installed  two   panels  o n   t h e  surface  of  Mir  t o  study  t h e  generation   a n d  distri-  
hu t ion  of  super-heavy nuclei   in  t h e  galaxy as well as a set  of detectors  t o  meas- 
ures streams and  spectra  of  charged  
of  space origin.  (UP I ,  J u n  29 /91 )  

JUNE  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

According to  the Washington Post, as part of  US.-Soviet discussions leading 
to a summit, was  the  possible exchange of  American  astronauts flying o n  Mir 
and Soviet cosmonauts being launched  on  a U.S. Space Shuttle. ( W  Post, J u n  
29/91 ) 

June  30: Th e  New  York Times  reported that fuel cells, first developed for use  in 
space in  the  1960s, were being  used  increasingly  in commercial plants. A  fuel 
cell  is  a  device  that  converts  the  energy  of  a  fuel  directly  to  electricity and 
heat, without  combustion. Th e  United  States had developed an experimental 
plant  in San Ramon, east of  San Francisco, and other plants were considering 
use  of  the new  technology. ( N f l ,  Jun  30191) 

Maryland  Democratic  Senator  Barbara  Mikulski,  chair  of  the  Senate 
Science Space and  Technology subcommittee,  visited  the  Space and  Rocket 
Center  in Huntsville  and NASA's Space Camp  for  young  people.  According 
to  the  Huntsville  Times,  Mikulski  strongly  supported  the  Space  Station  and 
said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about 
math  and science." (Htsvl Tms, J u n  30191) 

July 

July  I : NASA   announced   tha t ,   o n  June   29,  its  114th  Scout   launch   vehicle 
placed  an   Air  Force  Radiation  Experiment  (REX)  in to   a  450  nautical  mile 
polar orbit. T h e  launch occurred from Vandenberg Air  Force Base, California, 
and was  delayed for one  day  by  bad  weather.  (NA SA  Release 91-102)  

A  number  of  NASA   scientists participated  in  the   International Conference 
o n  Near-Earth Asteroids held  in San  Juan  Capistrano, California, jointly  spon- 
sored by  NASA   and T h e  Planetary Society. A t  congressional request, a NASA  
committee  headed  by  David  Morrison,  space science  chief  at  Ames  Research 
Center   in Mountain  View,  was  to  recommend  how  to  improve  the   search  for 
asteroids.  Another   committee  was  to  advise  how  best  to   divert  threatening 
asteroids. A t   the   end of  the   conference  on  July 3 ,  a statement  advocated  con-  
struction of  several sophisticated new  telescopes  to find all significant asteroids 
and  learn  if  any  were  on   a  collision  course with  Earth.  (AP, Jul   1/91; AP,  Jul  
419 1 ; LA  Times, Jul  4/91 ; P Inq, J u l 6 / 9  1 ; Oakland Tnbune, J u l 8 / 9  1 ) 

X m e   published  an   interview  with  NASA   Administrator  Richard  Truly  in 
which various questions were asked about the  Space Station .  Truly justified pro- 
posed expenditures by  stressing the   payoff  in  such areas as environmental  con- 
trol,  life-support research,  power  generation,  and  health  care  technologies  as 
well  as  the  discoveries  themselves. He  also stated  that  Mission  to  Planet Earth 
was  poorly understood but  promised  "unbelievable benefits."  (Time, Jul  1/91)  

In   an  article  in  t h e  Science section,  Time  discussed  the   theory  tha t   a giant 
comet   tha t   struck  the   ea r th  was  responsible  for  killing  off  dinosaurs.  In   this 
connec t ion ,   the   findings  of  a  team  of  scientists  led  by  Charles   Duller  a t  
NASA's Ames Research Cen te r  were mentioned .  From satellite photos of  the  
Yucatan, the  team discovered the  semicircle tha t  might  indicate a huge buried 
crater of  an  asteroid.  (Time, Jul   1/91)  

T h e  Huntsville  Times  quoted  the  General  Accounting  Office  as  saying tha t  
contrary  to  earlier  concerns,  a  survey  revealed  tha t   potential   retirements  of 
skilled NASA   scientists and   engineers  would  not  be  a  problem.  (Htsul Tms, 
Ju l  1/91) 

July 2:  T h e  media reported  o n  NASA's plans to  install corrective  lenses o n  the  
Hubble  Space Telescope  in  order  t o  correct  the   faulty  lens  and   at  the   same 
time  to make  other   repairs.  Details remained  to  be  announced .  (AP, Jul  2/91; 
NY Times, Jul  3/91; W Times, Jul  3/91)  

NASA  announced  tha t  as a result of  the  huge outpouring of  volcanic mate- 
rial  from  Mount  Pinatubo  in  the   Philippines,  a  research  team  of  NASA  

ASTRClNAUTlCS ANL) AERCIKAUTICS  

JULY 1991 

atmospheric scientists was being sent  to  the  West  Indian  island of  Barbados to  
gather  data   to  help   evaluate  the   global  atmospheric  effects  of  this  event .  
Several  NASA   scientists  subsequently  commented  o n   Pinatubo's  plume and 
its spreading.  (NA SA  Release 91-103; W Post, Jul  8/91)  

*According  t o  the  media,  spacecraft Galileo  successfully fired  its thrusters  to  
alter  its  course,  enabling  i t   to   flyby the   asteroid  Gaspra  o n  October   29.  (AP, 
Ju l  2/91; UPI, Jul  2/91; USA  Today, Jul  3/91 

July  3: NASA   announced  tha t   astronaut Michael  L.  Coats  would  retire  from 
t h e   Navy  and  leave  NASA   August  1  to  become  director  of  Advanced 
Programs  and  Technical  Planning  a t   Loral  in  Houston.  (NA SA  Release 91-  
104; AP, Jul  3/91)  

NASA  announced  tha t   its Lewis Research Center ,  Cleveland,  had  selected 
RMS Technologies,  Inc., of  Landover, Maryland,  for  a contract   for  the  com- 
puting,  communication,  and  network  mission  needs  of  the   center.  (NA SA  
Release C 9  1 -y)  

Per Gloersen, a senior scientist a t  NASA's Goddard Space Flight Cen te r   in 
Greenbelt ,  Maryland, was quoted by the  media as reporting in the  British ~ u b -  
lication  Nature  findings  concerning  the   shrinking  of  t h e   polar  ice  cover. 
Global  warming  might  be  the   cause,  but  Gloersen  said  3 0   years  of  records 
would  be  needed  for a definite conclusion. (UP I ,  Jul  3/91; B Sun ,  J u l 4 / 9 1 ;  LA 
Times, Jul  4/91; W Post, Jul  8/91)  

UP1 reported  the  practice  countdown of  the  crew of  Shu t t le  Atlantis  for  its 
flight  July  23.  NASA   announced   tha t   Atlantis   would  put  NASA's  fourth 
Tracking  and Data Relay  Satellite  into  orbit on   its mission  in order  to  update 
the   satellite  tracking  network.  (UP I ,  Jul  3/91;  unnumbered  NASA   General  
Release, undated)  

According  to   the  Cleveland Plain Dealer,  the  O h i o  EPA  ordered  an   investi- 
gation  and   cleanup  of  contamination   a t   NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center .  
NASA  officials stated  voluntary  cleanup  efforts were  underway and  Peter W. 
McCallum, NASA's  chief of  environmental  safety, said  most  of  t h e   sites had 
been  cleaned  up  or  soon would  be;  he  was  confident  no   contamination   was 
leaving NASA's  property. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, Ju l  3/91)  

July  4 :  T h e  media  reported  tha t   the   Air   Force  had  launched   an   unmanned  
Delta  rocket  from  Cape   Canaveral   o n  July 3 .  T h e   rocket  con ta ined   a  $65 
million  satellite   t h a t   joined  10  advanced  Global   Positioning  System  space- 
craft  already  circling  t h e   globe  in  order  to   assist  military  forces  o n   t h e  
ground,  a t   sea, and  in  t h e  air  to  determine   the i r   location .   (UP I ,  Ju l  4/91; W 
Times, Ju l  5 /91 )  

JULY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

July  5:  According  to  the  Washington  Times,  Orbital  Science  Corporation 
announced it planned  to  launch  the state's first privately funded orbital flights 
from  the NASA   base  on  Wallops  Island  by  1993. Orbital  was  pressuring  the 
governor of  Virginia  to make the area  a tax-free foreign-trade zone, compara- 
ble  to  legislation that has declared Cape Canaveral,  Florida, tax-free in  order 
to reduce  the  launch  cost.  (W  Xmes, Jul 5/91) 

NASA  announced  that Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, had selected the  
team  of  General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati, and  United  Technologies 
Pratt  and  Whitney  Divsion,  West  Palm  Beach,  Florida,  for  a  contract  for 
propulsion materials to be  used  on  a 21st century High Speed Civil Transport. 
(NASA  Release C91 - z )  

NASA  announced  that  a  15-member delegation  of  Soviet space officials, 
headed by  Oleg N .  Shishkin, minister of  General Machine  Building, would be 
visiting NASA   Headquarters  and  Space Centers  from  July 9  to  16.  (NASA  
Release 91-105) 

July  6: Th e  press  reported  that  NASA  agreed on  July 5  to  seek  new  bids  on 
the $191 million mainframe computer contract awarded IBM  but protested by 
the Fort Lauderdale, Florida-based Encore Computer Corporation. (NY Tmes, 
Ju l6 /91 ;  H Chron, J u l 6 / 9 1 )  

July  7:  Th e  Antelope Valley Daily  News  reported  that NASA   might be  tlying 
one  of  the  Advanced  Tactical  Fighters,  namely  the  F-23  prototype,  about 
which  it was  negotiating  with  Northrop  Corporation. Th e  aircraft u~ould be 
used  for  aeronautics  research  at  NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility  at 
Edwards Air Force Base.  (Antelope Valley  Daily  News,  Jul 7/91) 

July  8 :  PR Newswire  reported  that  engineers from McDonnell  Douglas Space 
Systems Company would meet with  representatives of  NASA  and  its interna- 
tional partners from July 8 to 25 to review changes to the basic deslgn of Space 
Station Freedom. Discussion is  to  center on  Work Package 2 dealing with such 
factors  as  the   propulsion  assembly,  resource  node  design,  external  thermal 
control, data  management,  communication and  tracking, extra\.ehicular  sys- 
tems  and  guidance,  and  navigation  and  control  systems.  (PR Newswire, Ju l  
8/91) 

According  to  a  space publication,  NASA's cost  estimate  for  its  Advanced 
Solid Rocket Motor  (ASRM )  program  had  increased  to  about $3 billion, and 
NASA  formally  announced  that  the  main  ASRM  goal  was  to  aid  the   con- 
struction  of  the  Space Station. Th e  ASRM  was  intended  to  launch  an extra 
8,000 pounds  of  Space  Station  equipment  on   each  Shuttle  flight  carrying 
Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91 ) 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JULY  1991 

T h e  Space Propulsion newsletter   commen ted   o n  t h e   report   of  t h e  S tan fo rd  
University  professors who ,  together   w i th   Sov ie t  aerospace engineers ,  project-  
ed  t h a t   a t   a  cost  of  $60   billion  (abou t  one -e igh th   NASA's  e s t ima te )   a  joint  
ven tu re  using  t h e  Sov ie t  Energia  heavy-lift  rocket  could  land  human s  o n  Mars 
by  2012.  In   con t ra s t ,  t h e  Stafford Synthesis  G r o u p  estimated   2014  as  t h e  ear-  
liest  da te   t o   reach   Mars,  using  lunar   bases  established  in   t h e   in te r im .   Some  
civilian   space  experts   found   flaws  in  t h e   Stanford   study.  i n   line   with   com -  
men t s  o n   t h e  S tan fo rd  report ,   t h e  New  York  Times  featured  a  leng thy  article  
o n  t h e  designer  of  t h e  Energia  rockets,  currently  visiting New   York  and  seek- 
ing a U .S .  buyer  for  t h e  rocket .   (SP  News, J u l 8 - 1 4 / 9 1 ;  NY Times, J u l 9 / 9 1 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   spacecraft  Ulysses had   fired  two   small  thrusters   t o  
set   t h e  final  course  for  its early  February  1992  rendezvous with   Jupiter .  Many 
of  Ulysses'  science   experiments   were  expected   t o   yield  new  da ta   abou t  
Jupiter's magnetic   field  a n d   particle   env i ronmen t .   ( N A S A   Release  91-106;  
AP, J u l  8/91;  P  Inq, J u l 9 / 9 1 ;  W  Post, J u l 9 / 9 1 ;  USA  Today, J u l  9/91;  W  Times, 
J u l  9 /91 )  

N A S A   announced   it   would  resume  ac t ive   space  physics  experiments   by 
conduc t ing  several  chemical   releases  in  July a n d  August  with   t h e  C om b i n e d  
Release  and   Rad ia t ion   Effects  Sa te l l i te .   Barium  vapor   releases  i n   t h e  
Ca r ibbean  area  were  involved .  ( N A S A  Release  91 -107 )  

T h e  New  Republic carried  a  seven-page  article   en t i t led   "The   Case   Against  
NA SA "   by  Gregg  Easterbrook,  con t r ibu t ing   editor   of  Newsweek  and   t h e  
Atlantic.  T h e  a u t h o r  asserted  t h a t   N A S A   needed   t o  be  "truly  reformed"  and  
ou t l ined   unde r   25  headings,  ranging  from  "Boosters"  t o   "W h a t   Is  To  Be 
Done? ,"  t h e   failures  h e  perceived  i n  N A S A ,   together   with   some  suggestions 
for  improvement .   (New  Republic, J u l 8 / 9 1 )  

T h e  Washington Post  carried   a n  article   about   t h e  difficulties  Spacehab  Inc .  
was  hav ing  commercially. N A S A   said  the re   was  a  need   for  its product:   a  10- 
foot-long  pressurized  module   t h a t   fits  i n  t h e   cargo  area  of  t h e  Space   S h u t t l e ,  
expanding   t h e  cramped   living  and   storage quarters.  Problems  arose, however ,  
over   NASA's  ability  t o   cance l   con t rac t s   unilaterally  (w h i c h  might   occur   if 
Congress  in   its annua l  appropriations  cu t  NASA's  funds)  and  Congress's abil-  
ity  t o  c u t  funds for Spacehab  in  spite  of  any  comm i tmen t s  N A S A  made   t o   it .  
T h e   lengthy   article   reviews  t h e   history  of  Spacehab   a n d   its  operations .   ( W  
Post, Ju l  8 / 9 1 )  

July  9:  N A S A   announced   its  Godda rd   Space   Flight  Cen te r ,   G reenbe l t ,  
Maryland,  would  participate   in   two   experiments   t o   study  t h e   July  11  solar 
eclipse from t h e  ground  a n d  from space. A  new cryogenic  in s t rumen t  a t tached  
t o  NASA's  Infrared Telescope Facility  a top  Mauna  Kea, Hawaii ,  was  t o   test  a 
theory   about   t h e  sun's atomic   processes  in  its  infrared  regions.  Also ,   a n   x-ray 

JULY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

telescope  in  a  sounding  rocket,  to   be  launched  from  Wh i te   Sands,  New 
Mexico, was  to  study  the  solar corona.  (NA SA  Release 91-108)  

ST  Systems  Corporation ,   Vienna,  Virginia,  announced   its  selection  by 
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Cen te r  to  provide  support for  the  High Energy 
X-ray Telescope Sounding Rocket  Program.  (PR Newswire, J u l 9 / 9 1 )  

T h e   media  reported  tha t   14  major  scientific  organizations  were  joining 
forces  to  warn  of  the   "excessive  cost"  of  the   planned  $30  million  Space 
Station   tha t  would  "threaten  the  vitality"  of  essential  scientific research  pro- 
grams  and   imperil  U.S.  leadership  in   world  technology.  T h e   organizations 
urged  a "balanced" space program but did  not   call for the  Space Station   to  be 
killed.  (LA  Times, Jul  9/91; P  Inq ,  Ju l  10191; W  Post, Jul   10191; NY  Times, Jul  
1019 1 ; Science, Jul  1919 1 )  

T h e  Wall Street Journal  criticized NASA's decision  to drop a proposed  instru- 
men t   to  de tec t   environmental   change ,   t h e   High-Resolution   Imaging 
Spectrometer, or HIRIS, and  to  substitute  a Japanese  instrument  being offered 
NASA   a t  no  cost. T h e  Japanese  instrument  to  be  built  by  Japan's Ministry of 
International  Trade  and  Industry,  is  the   Advanced  Spaceborne  Thermal 
Emission and  Reflection Radiometer, or Aster,  to  detect  minerals and  geobgi-  
cal  formations  that   may  contain  oil.  Criticism  of  the   decision, which  NASA  
said  was  based  on   HIRIS  being  too  risky  and  too  expensive,  centered  o n   the  
boost Aster would give Japanese technology as well  as  the  Japanese oil  indusrry 
and  the   lost U.S. ability to detect environmental change.  (WS J ,  J u l 9 / 9 1 )  

July  10:  NASA   announced   tha t   the   second  mission  of  the   Pegasus  air- 
launched  space booster was scheduled  for July  17. Pegasus was  to be  launched 
from  below  the  wing  of  a NASA   B-52  aircraft  based  at  Ames-Dryden  Flight 
Research  Facility,  Edwards,  California.  Pegasus  was  to  carry  seven  small 
Defense  Department  satellites  for  the   Defense Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency  and  put  them   in to  low  Earth  orbit.  (NA SA  Release N91 -49 )  

Former  astronaut  Thomas   Stafford,  head  of  the   Synthesis  Group ,   told 
Congress it would not  require much start-up  money to set the  U .S .  o n  a course 
to  Mars  in  t h e   next   century.  H e   said  funds  could  come  in  savings  from  t h e  
Department  of  Defense and Department  of  Energy budgets.  (AP, Ju l  10191) 

T h e   Huntsville  Times  reported  tha t   volunteers  in  a  water  taste  test  a t  
NASA's  Marshall Space Flight C e n t e r  had  difficulty or were  unable  to distin-  
guish recycled  from regular water. T h e  recycled water  came from perspiration 
collected  i n  a test  chamber, and  in  which  the   salts, oils,  and  microorganisms 
were  subsequently removed. T h e  recycling process was designed  to  be used  o n  
the   Space Station   to  minimize  the  need  for  additional water.  (H t su l  Tm s ,  Jul  
10191; W Zmes ,  Jul   19/91) 

ASTRC3NAUTICS  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

JULY  1991 

]tdy  1 1  : T h e  media  reported   t h a t   o n  July  10 t h e  Sena te  Appropriations   sub- 
comm i t tee ,   d e s p ~ t e  t h e   strong   opposition   of  t h e   scientific   community ,  
approved  $2.02  billion-the 
full  amoun t   requested  by  t h e   Bush  administra-  
tion-to 
con t inue   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   project  for  o n e   more  year.  Sena to r  
Barbara  A .   Mikulski,  Democrat   of  Maryland ,   a n d   Sena to r   Jake   G a m ,  
Republic   of  U t a h ,   were  key   supporters  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   funding .   T h e  
Space  S t a t i o n  vote  was  at  t h e  cost  of  cuts  and  delays  in  separate  satellite  pro-  
grams  and   unmanned   space  exploration .   ( W Post,  J u l   1 1/91; WSJ,  Ju l   1 1/91; 
W Times, J u l  11/91; USA Today, J u l  11/91; LA Times ,Jul  11/91; AP, J u l  11/91) 

According   t o   t h e   press,  S e n a t e   budget  leaders  expressed  conce rn   over  
NASA's  ability  t o   launch   t h e  GOES -NEXT  weather   satellite   in   t ime   t o  meet  
weather   monitoring   needs.  T h e y   urged  t h a t   t h e   Na t iona l   Wea the r   Service  
buy  a  $100  million  backup  satellite ,   possibly  ob ta in ing   o n e   from  Japan .  
N A S A   Administrator   Richard   Truly  said  N A S A   accepted   responsibility  for 
t h e  delays and  cost overruns  in  t h e  con s t ruc t ion  of  t h e  new  satellites .  ( W  Post, 
J u l  11/91;NYTimes, J u l  11 /91 ;CT r in ,  J u l  11/91; AP, J u l  11/91; UPI ,  J u l  11/91)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e  U .S .  and  S p a i n  had  signed a space cooperation  
agreement  providing  for  t h e  use  of  Span i sh  bases  and   installations  as  a l te rna -  
tive   landing   sites  for  t h e  U.S.  Space  S h u t t l e .  ( N A S A  Release 91-109)  

N A S A  announced   t h a t   it would  display  a new  exh ib i t ,  "NASA :   Expanding  
t h e   F ron t ie r s   of  F l igh t ,"   a t   t h e   3 9 t h   A n n u a l   E x p e r im e n t a l   A i rc ra f t  
Association   In te rna t iona l  Fly-In C o n v e n t i o n ,  July 26  - August   1, in O shko sh ,  
Wisconsin .   ( N A S A  Release  91-1 10 )  

T h e   press  quoted   t h e   official  No t imex   news  agency  as  reporting   t h a t   t h e  
rocket  t h a t  was  t o  provide  da ta   about   t h e  sun  during   t h e   to ta l   eclipse o n  July  
11  failed  t o   send  back  any  data .   T h e   project  was  jointly   sponsored  by   t h e  
Florida  In s t i tu te  of  Technology  a n d   t h e  Na t iona l   Au tonomou s  University   of 
Mexico.  (AP ,  J u l  11/91; B  Sun ,  J u l  12/91)  

O n  t h e   to ta l   solar  eclipse,  t h e   media  reported   o n   t h e   "spectacular"  na tu re  
for some viewers  but  t h e  confusing na tu re   for some telescopes. Drake Deming  
of  NASA's Godda rd   Space  Flight  C e n t e r   in   G reenbe l t   said  his  team   was  up 
most  of  t h e  n i g h t  but  succeeded  in  time   t o  solve  a ~ r o b l e m  with   o n e  of  the i r  
instruments .   (AP ,  J u l  11/91; UP I ,  J u l  11/91; W Post, J u l   12/91) 

According   to  AP,  t h e   Na t iona l   Research  Counc i l   endorsed   NASA's 
planned   Earth  Ob se rva t ion  System, wh ich  it  called " the   largest  single compo -  
n e n t   of  t h e   most  ambitious   scientific   enterprise   ever   undertaken ."   The 
Counc i l   stated   it   had   some conce rn  over   t h e  program's managemen t ,  howev-  
er, and   urged  t h e  ea r th   science  and  space  research  commun i ty  t o  keep  a close 
eye  o n   t h e  program.  (AP ,  J u l  11/91; W Post, J u l  13/91)  

JULY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

T h e  wire  services reported  tha t  NASA  managers  reaffirmed  their   previous 
decision  to resume routine Florida Shuttle  landings. This  occurred prior to  t h e  
start of  a two-day review  to  clear Atlantis  for blastoff around July 23.  (UP I ,  Jul  
11/91; AP, Jul   12/91) 

T h e   Huntsville  Times  reported  tha t   Boeing's  top  space  scientist,  H a ~ e y  
Willenberg, who had returned from a trip to the  Soviet Un ion ,  was convinced 
from  the  Mir  experiments he  saw  tha t  NASA   needed  to build  Space S ta t ion  
Freedom. T h e  experiments in the  area of  microgravity were especially impres- 
sive. (H t su l  Tms, Jul  11/91)  

Ju ly  12 :  T h e  media gave a detailed report o n  ~ lag ia r ism  involving students of pro- 
fessor Walter Frost, and a private for-profit research firm of  Frost's tha t  did work 
for NASA .  NASA's Office of  Inspector General was  currently  investigating the  
apparent extensive ~ lag ia r ism ,  which  involved at least one  NASA  staff member. 
(WS],  Jul  12/91; AP, Jul  12/91; Htsvl  Trns, J u l   14/91; WSJ,  Jul  15/91; NYT, Jul  
15/91; AP, Jul 15/91; AP ,Jul  18/91; W Post, Jul  22/91; Htsul  Tms, Jul  24/91) 

McDonnell  Douglas  Space  Systems Company  announced  it  has  teamed  up 
with Japanese architectural and engineering firm Shimizu Corporation to devel- 
op  space  exploration  technologies for  the   proposed U.S.  lunar/Mars  initiative. 
Each company was to fund  its own research, which  included applying solar ener- 
gy  o n  the   lunar surface  to process materials into  useful  resources such as  oxygen 
and creating closed  system that  would  recycle most of  the products needed for a 
lunar base or long-term expedition to Mars. (WSJ, Jul  12/91; LA Tmes ,Jul  12/91) 

NA SA  announced  tha t  July 23 would be  the   launch date  for Space Shu t t le  
Atlantis ,   which  was  to  deploy  the   fifth  Tracking  and   Data  Relay  Satellite. 
(NASA  STS-43 Launch Advisory) 

July   1 3 :  A n  article  in Congressional Quarterly  described  the   careful  trimming 
of  various  programs  performed  by  Senator   Barbara Mikulski  in  order  to   pro- 
vide sufficient funds for the  Space Station .  (Congressional Quarterly, Ju l  13/91) 

July   14:  Parade Maga?ine  contained  a feature  article o n  Barbara Morgan, who 
following  the   death   of Christa  McAuliffe  in  t h e  Challenger  disaster, was  her 
designated  successor  as  NASA's  teacher   in  space.  NASA   Administrator 
Richard  Truly  was  quoted  as  saying  tha t   after  NASA's annual   review  of  the  
subject,  i t   was  determined  tha t   it  was  no t   yet  appropriate  to   send  ano the r  
teacher  o n  t h e  Shuttle   although  it  was  only  a matter   of  time. Morgan  stated 
she  recognized  the  risks of  space flight  but  was  nevertheless  eager t o  go ahead 
with  a flight mission.  (Parade, Jul  14/91) 

According  to  the  New   York Times, the  Space Studies Board of  t h e  National  
Research  Council   recommended  tha t   NASA   move  quickly  to   develop  and  

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JULY  199 1 

deploy a system of Earth-monitoring  satellites  with  the   intention   of  studying 
climate.  T h e  proposed  Earth  Observing  System  called  for  six  large, heavily 
instrumented  orbiting  platforms  and  smaller  supplemental  satellites,  to  cost 
$30 billion  over  the  next   30  years.  (NYT, Jul   14/91)  

]uly  15:  NASA   announced   tha t   the   last  of  three  SR-71  aircraft,  loaned  to  
NASA   by  the   U.S.  Air   Force, was  scheduled  to  arrive  a t   the   Ames-Dryden 
Flight Research  Facility, Edwards, California, in  late July. T h e  Antelope Valley 
Press  earlier  reported  the   successful check  flight  of  the   Blackbird on  July  10, 
prior  to  delivery  to  t h e  NASA   facility. T h e   "Blackbirds" were  t o  be  used  for 
high-speed,  high  altitude  research  in  such  areas as  aerodynamics, propulsion, 
structures,  and   thermal   protection   materials.  (NA SA   Release  91-111;  
Antelope Valley  Press, Jul   11/91) 

]uly  16:  A n   article  in  the   Washington  Post  pointed  out   NASA's  policy  of 
spreading  out   its  contracts   for  the   Space  Station   and   other   space  projects 
among  numerous  states,  which  helped  gain  the   support  of  congressional  fig- 
ures for NASA   funding. ( W  Post, Jul  16/91 ) 

NASA   announced   tha t   the   Aviation  Safety  Reporting  System  (ASRS ) ,  
which  it  manages  for  the   Federal  Aviation  Administration ,   had  prevented 
many  air  accidents and   saved lives over  the  past  15 years. ASRS  also  identi- 
fied  safety  issues for  the   aviation  community  and  released  research  papers o n  
aviation  safety.  FAA  and   NASA   celebrated  the   15-year anniversary  of  the  
program.  (NA SA  Release 9 1 - 1 12; Inside DOT, Jul  2519 1 ) 

NASA   announced   some  of  the   results  of  its  Long  Duration  Exposure 
Facility  (LDEF),  built  by  NASA's  Langley  Research  Center ,   Hampton ,  
Virginia. T h e  LDEF was  in  a  space environment   from April  1984 to January 
1990, with various materials,  samples, and  experiments o n  board. T h e  57 sci- 
ence  and   technology  experiments  gathered  data  o n   space  radiation,  atomic 
oxygen, meteoroids,  contamination ,   space debris,  space  systems, and   life  sci- 
ences.  Implications  of  LDEF  results  were  being  used  in  the   design  of  lunar 
bases  and Mars-bound  aircraft.  (NA SA  Release 91-1 1 3 )  

According  to UPI ,   a French  Ariane   rocket  successfully boosted  the   first  in  
a  new  series of  advanced  European  environmental   remote  sensing  satellites 
into   orbit  from  the   European  Space  Agency's  jungle  complex  o n   S o u t h  
America's northern   coast. T h e  satellite, with  a three-year life, had  a radar sys- 
tem  and other  equipment  to  study Earth's oceans, ice packs, and  land  areas  in 
great detail.  (UP I ,  Jul   16/91; P  lnq, Jul  18/91) 

AP  reported  that  the  Council of  Engineers and  Scientists Organization, whose 
member unions represent 80,000 scientists, engineers, technical, and professional 
staff sent a letter  to each senator endorsing the Space Station. (AP, Jul 16/91) 

JULY 1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

Th e  Los  Angeks  Times  quoted National  Hurricane  Center Director Robert 
C .  Sheets as being concerned  about  the  "precarious situation" with  regard  to 
hurricane  forecasting. Th e  GOES-7, the  only U.S.  weather  satellite  in orbit, 
was  nearing  the  end  of  its  five-year  life  expectancy  and  no   replacement  was 
available in  the  near  future. Among possibilities were  buying a satellite  from 
Japanese or European makers.  (LA Times, Ju l  16/91) 

Sam  F.  Iacobellis, executive  vice  president  and  chief  operating  officer  of 
Rockwell  International  Corporation,  wrote  a  guest  column  stressing  the 
importance of  the Space Station to manned  flight and  the opportunity  it pro- 
vided not only for space leadership but  also for  the development of  weightless 
materials sciences and biotechnology. (Flu Today, Jul 16/91) 

July  17:  Th e   media  reported  a  problem  with  an  electronic  component  in 
Space Shuttle Atlantis but  it was no t  expected  to delay the  launch. However, 
another power supply problem with the  data processor might cause difficulties. 
(AP, Jul 17/91; UPI, Ju l  17/91; USA  Today, Jul 17/91) 

NASA   announced  a contract  with  Thiokol  Corporation  of  Ogden, U tah ,  
to  manufacture  68  additional  flight  sets  (136 motors)  of  redesigned  Solid 
Rocket  Motors  and  six  additional  motors  for  flight  support  for  the  Space 
Shuttle. (NASA  Release C91-bb) 

According to UP I ,  an Orbital Sciences Corporation winged  Pegasus rocket, 
carrying  seven  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  "Microsat" 
research  satellites, was  launched  o n  July  16 from  a  B-52  jet.  However, con- 
trollers  lost  track  of  the  payload  after  a  possible  malfunction.  On  July  18, 
Orbital Sciences heard  signals from space and  learned that  the satellites were 
functioning  but  had  entered  a  flawed  orbit,  limiting  their  lives  to  less  than 
three  years but sufficient to test a new military communications system. (UP I ,  
Jul  17/91; USA  Today,  Jul  18/91; WSJ,  Ju l   18/91; W  Times,  Jul  18/91; LA 
Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Ju l  19/91; USA Today, Jul 19/91; P Inq ,  
Jul 19/91; W Times, Ju l  19/91; LA  Times, Jul 19/91) 

July  18: Th e  Senate on  July 17  voted  64  to  35  to  approve  President  Bush's 
$2.03 million  request for  the Space Station  in  the new  fiscal  year,  $100 mil- 
lion  more  than  the  House  appropriated.  ( W  Post,  Jul  18/91; W  Times,  Ju l  
18/91; LA  Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; UP1 ,Ju l  18/91) 

AP  cited  a NASA   statement  that  despite engineers cooling and  shrinking 
of  spacecraft  Galileo's  stuck  main  antenna,  the  antenna  remained  stuck, 
threatening the  ultimate  exploration  oflupiter.  (AP, Jul 18/91) 

T h e  media reported an article in the  journal  Science, indicating  that despite 
reports  of  global  warming  and  African  drought,  the  Sahara  desert  shrank 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JULY  1991 

markedly since  1984, following  a  substantial  expansion  over  the   preceding 
four  years.  Two  NASA  scientists,  Compton  J .   Tucker  and  William  W. 
Newcomb,  at  NASA's  Laboratory  for  Terrestrial  Physics  in  Greenbelt, 
Maryland,  and  Harold  E.  Dregne  of  Texas  Tech  University's  International 
Center  for  Arid  and  Semi-Arid  Land  Studies,  conducted  the  research. 
Satellite measurements of  vegetation on  the  ground were used  to calculate the 
extent of  the desert. (AP, Ju l  18/91; NASA Release 91-1 14; W Post, Ju l21 /91 ;  
P  lnq, Ju l  22/91; LA  Times, Ju l  22/91) 

UP1  quoted  Krmnaya  Zvesda  (Red S ta r ) ,   the  official  Soviet  armed  forces 
daily,  as  saying that  the  Soviet Union  would  cancel  one manned  space  mis- 
sion, launch another without  a flight engineer, and  leave  a cosmonaut on  the  
Mir  Space Station beyond  his  planned  six-month stay  to  save money.  (UP I ,  
Jul 18/91) 

July 19: According  to the  wire services, discovery of  trouble  in  a circuit  used 
to separate the orbiter  from  the external  fuel tank would  delay  the  launch  of 
Atlantis until July 24.  (AP, Ju l  19/91; UPI, Jul 19/91) 

July 20: AP  quoted Guy Brasseur, director of  the  atmospheric chemistry divi- 
sion at  the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, 
as  stating  that  his  research  indicated  the  eruption  of  Mount  Pinatubo  could 
lead  to reduced  levels of  protective  ozone over North America  and Europe  in 
the winter of  1991-92 and  the summer of  1992, possibly  increasing the risk  of 
skin  cancer.  Richard  Stolarski, ozone  researcher  at  NASA's Goddard  Space 
Flight Center  in Greenbelt, Maryland, said  the projections were plausible but 
based  on  ozone depletion  from El  Chichon, a Mexican volcano  that  erupted 
in  1982, he  thought  there  would  be  less ozone depletion  than predicted.  (LA 
Times, Jul 20191; P  Inq, Jul 20191) 

July 21 : T h e  press reported that NASA began  its countdown  for the  launch of 
Atlantis,  now  ~ o s t ~ o n e d  until  July 24.  (AP, Jul 21/91; W  Times, Jul 22/91; 
U S A  Today, Jul 22/91; UPI, Ju l  22/91) 

July 2 2 :  NASA  announced  that seven of  its sounding rockets would be part of 
an international campaign to study polar Noctilucent Clouds, the highest and 
coldest  clouds on   Earth,  from  Kiruna,  Sweden, July  25  through  August  12, 
1991. (NASA  Release 91-115) 

Th e  media  covered the  final countdown  preparations of  the   astronauts for 
the  scheduled launch  of  Atlantis  on  July 24.  Mission managers were satisfied 
with  the  completion  of  all necessary  repairs. Th en  a storm on  July 23  threat- 
ened  to delay the  blastoff, followed by  the discovery early the  morning of  July 
24  of  trouble  with  a  critical  main  engine  computer.  Th e   discovery  forced 
launch  cancellation  and  postponement  of  the  flight  by  at  least  one week  to  

JULY 1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

install a new  unit .  UP1 reported  o n  repair efforts and  attempts  to discolrer the  
source of  the  problem.  (AP, Jul  22/91; C  Tn'n, Jul  22/91; LA  Times, Jul  22/91; 
AP, Jul  23/91; UPI ,  Jul  23/91; NY   Times, Jul  24/91; U SA  Today, Jul  24/91; W 
Post, Jul  24/91; W  Times, Jul  24/91; AP, Jul  24/91; LA  Times, Jul  24/91; CSM ,  
Jul   24/91; UP I ,  Jul   24/91;  W  Post,  Jul   25/91;  P  Inq, Jul   25/91;  W  Times, Jul  
25/91; NY   Xmes, Ju l  25/91; AP,  25 Ju1/91; UPI ,  25 Jul  91 )  

T h e  Huntsville Times quoted Aerospace America  as saying tha t  Soviet officials 
confirmed  reports  tha t   the   Soviet  military  was  preparing  a  manned  space 
fighter  with  a  crew  of  two  t o  use  against  the  U .S .   Space  Shuttle .   T h e   story 
cited  a  visit  by  General  Dynamics  technology  analyst  Richard  Ward  with 
Soviet designers. (Htsvl Tms ,  Jul  22/91) 

July  2 3 :   NASA   announced   tha t   its  In-Space   Technology  Experiments 
Program  would  pass  a  major  milestone  when  the   Tank  Pressure  Con t ro l  
Experiment  would  go  in to  orbit  aboard Atlantis .  Transfer and  control  of  very 
cold  (cryogenic) fluids  in  microgravity  is  critical  to   plans  for  several  future 
U.S. space efforts. Th is  experiment was  to  demonstrate how cryogenic storage 
tank  pressures could  be  controlled.  (NA SA  Release 91-1 16) 

Members of NASA's Project  Viking,  the  group tha t  put  the   first  two space- 
ships o n  Mars  15 years previously, gathered a t  the  Langley Research Cen te r  to 
commemorate  tha t   event   o n  July  20,  according  to  the  Washington Times. ( W  
Tmes ,  Jul  23/91) 

NASA   announced   the   selection  of  Cortez  111  Sew ice   Corporation ,  
Alamogordo,  New Mexico, t o  provide  institutional  and programmatic  support 
services  for  Space Station   Freedom  Program  and  Operations  Office,  Reston ,  
Virginia.  (NA SA  Release C 9  1 -cc)  

July 24 :  RMS  Technologies, Inc.,  Marlton,  Pennsylvania,  announced   it  had  
received  a  contract   from NA SA   to  provide  operational  support  for  worksta- 
tions, o the r  computers, and  peripheral  equipment  at NASA's  Lewis Research 
Center .   ( P  Inq, Ju l  24/91) 

July  25:  Vice  President  Dan  Quayle,  speaking as  chairman   of  t h e   National  
Space  Council ,   said  the   U.S.  would  no t   buy  or   build  more  Space  Shu t t le  
orbiters.  I t  is  to  continue  to  use  the  four existing  orbiters  in to  the  next  cen tu -  
ry  but  planned  to  develop a new family of  rockets  to  replace  the  current  fleet 
of  unmanned  vehicles. NASA  Administrator  Richard H. Truly said he helped 
devise  the  policy's wording and was "totally  in support" of it.(P l q ,  Jul  25/91; 
W Post, Ju l25 /91 ;  B Sun, Ju l25 /91 ;  W Times, Ju l25 /91 ;  U S A  Today, Ju l25 /91 ;  
W S J ,  Jul  25/91; NY Times, Jul  25/91; Washingon Technology, Jul   25/91;  Htsell 
Tms ,  Jul  26/91; Peninsula  E m s  Tribune, Jul  30191  quoting  Sun  Diego  Tribune; 
B  Sun, J u l 3 1 / 9 1 )  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1991 

T h e   media  reported  o n   hearings  of  t h e   House  Committee   o n   Science ,  
Space ,   and   Technology  regarding  the   U.S.  weather  satellite.  T h e   General  
Accounting   Office  ( G A O )   found  t h a t   t h e   program  for  a  new  satellite ,  
GOES-NEXT,  was  more  t h a n   three  years  behind  schedule  and   costs  more 
than   doubled  because  of  mismanagement  by  NASA   and  the   National  
Oceanic   and  Atmospheric  Administration ,   and   poor  workmanship  by  con-  
tractors.  T h e  G A O  report  considered  t h e   problem  originated  when  NASA  
neglected  to  have   a  critical  engineering  review  of  the   feasibility  of  t h e  pro- 
gram's objectives  a t   the   beginning  of  the   project.  (UP I ,  Jul   25/91;  AP,  Jul 
25/91;  NY  Times, Jul  26/91) 

According  to  the  Los Angeks Times,  a n  Air Force-funded research center   in  
El  SegunJo ,  California, was  to  begin  in  the   fall  to  study  the   effect of  rocket 
launches o n   the  Earth's  fragile ozone shield.  Aerospace  Corporation  planned 
to  investigate  the  role of  solid rocket fuel combustion in the  destruction of  the  
ozone.  These  studies  would  supplement  studies  of  ozone  depletion  done   by 
NASA  and would  likely influence  the   types of  fuels to  be used  in the  National  
Launch  System,  a new  generation  of  rockets  scheduled  for  use  after  the   year 
2000.  (LA  Xmes, Ju l  25/91) 

NASA   announced   tha t   the   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center's   Energetic 
Gamma  Ray  Experiment Telescope (EGRET) ,  an  instrument  aboard NASA's 
Gamma Ray Observatory, had  detected  "the  most distant  and  by  far, the  most 
luminous  gamma-ray  source  ever  seen."  T h e   EGRET  team ,   led  by  Carl  
Fichtel,  reported  to   t h e   International   Astronomical  U n i o n ,   Cambridge ,  
Massachusetts,  tha t   a  source  of  intense  gamma  radiation  was  detected  
between  J u n e   15  and   J u n e   28.  T h e   source  was  identified  as  the   variable 
Quasar  3C279, located  in  the   constellation  Virgo.  ( N A S A  Release  91-1 17; 
W Post, J u l   29/91) 

NASA   announced   tha t   a  developmental  Space  Shu t t le  main  engine  sus- 
tained  extensive  internal  damage while  it was  undergoing  ground  testing July 
24  at  NASA's  Stennis   Space  Cen te r ,   near  Bay  S t .   Louis,  Mississippi.  T h e  
engine differed  from engines used  in Shuttle  flights. (NA SA  Release 91-1  1 8 )  
July  26:  NASA   Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly  and  Secretary  of  Energy 
James D. Watkins  signed  an   interagency  agreement  o n  cooperation  in  areas 
relating  t o  space  isotope  power. T h e  agreement  updated  a n  earlier  1965 pact 
and  delineated  authorities of NASA  and  DOE o n  research,  technology  devel- 
opment ,  design, production,  delivery, spacecraft  integration,  and  launch  sup- 
port  for  radioisotope  power systems. (NA SA  Release 91-1  19)  

NASA  announced  its release of  new Magellan  radar  images of  Venus repre- 
senting  coverage of  90  percent of  the  planet. T h e  images highlighted  the  con -  
tinuing  volcanism  and  tectonism  o n  Venus.  (NA SA  Release 91-120; AP,  Jul  
27/91; C Trin, Jul  28/91) 

JULY  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

July 28:  T h e  Chicago Tribune  reported  tha t  Northwestern University  scientists 
had  discovered a process called  sputtering tha t   can  coat  hardened  steel with 
titanium  nitride  films  a few  microns  thick  and double  its hardness. T h e  com- 
puter-controlled  system was built  for Northwestern's Basic  Industrial Research 
Laboratory (BIRL) in  a project  tha t  also  involved funds from NASA   and  the  
Department of  Energy.  (C  Trin, Ju l 28 /91 )  

July  30:  The  media  covered  NASA's  go-ahead to  ~ r c x e e d  toward  launch  of 
Atlantis on August  1. The countdown began on July 29. (NASA STS-43 Launch 
Advisory; P  Inq, ]ul30/91; W 'Times, Jul 30191; NY  Tmes, Jul30/91;  USA  Today, 
Jul30/91; UPI, Jul30/91; P Inq, Jul31/91;  UPI, Jul 3 1/91; C Trin, Jul31/91)  

T h e  New  York  Tme s  reported o n  the  work  of W.C. Wolverton, who former- 
ly  worked  for NASA   in  research on plants  that  help clean  indoor  air. He  left 
NASA   to  establish  his own  firm  to   research  the  use  of  houseplants  in  coun- 
tering  air  pollution.  Wolverton  indicated  that  NASA   was  continuing  its 
research  in  this  area.  (NY 'Times, Ju l 30 /91 )  

July  31:  NASA   announced  that  contrary  to  a  news  report  that   appeared, 
NASA  was  no t   planning  a mission  to  visit  the  Hubble  Space Telescope any 
earlier  than   late  1993. Th e   science  community  had  discussed  this  possibility 
because of  some observed erratic behavior  of  the Hubble  in one of  the maneu- 
vering  gyros.  Alternative  servicing  strategies  were  being  evaluated.  Th e  
announcement  contradicted  a  Washington  Post  article.  (NASA   Release  91- 
121; W Post, Ju l31 /91 ;  AP, Jul  31/91; UPI, Ju l  31/91; B  Sun ,  Aug  1/91; P  Inq ,  
Aug  1/91; USA  Today, Aug  1/91)  

According  t o   AP,  the   House  subcommittee  on   Science,  Space,  and 
Technology  planned  to   examine  NASA's  "midlife  crisis,"  referring  to   the 
Agency's  "management  failures"  and  "loss  of  leadership."  T h e   report  men- 
tioned  NASA's recent  series of  problems with  the  Hubble  Space  Telescope, 
the GOES weather  satellite,  the  postponements  in  the Space Shu t t le  launch, 
and  the Galileo space probe's jammed  antenna .  (AP, Jul 3 1/91 ) 

NASA announced that as part of  the agreement between  Presidents Bush and 
Gorbachev during the July 30-31 Summit  in Moscow,  the U.S. and  the  Soviet 
Union  had  agreed  to   expand  space  cooperation.  This  is  to   consist  of  flying  a 
U.S.  astronaut  on   a  long-duration  Soviet  Space  Station  Mir  mission  and  a 
Soviet  cosmonaut on  a U.S.  Space Shuttle mission,  increasing cooperation  in 
monitoring  the global environment from space, and  initiating  annual consulta- 
tions between  the  two  governments on civil space  issues.  (NASA  Release 91- 
122; P  Inq, Aug  1/91; NY  'Times, Aug  1/91; AP, Aug  1/91; W Post, Aug  1/91) 

A  column  by Robert  C .  Cowen  cited  variances  in  figures for  global  warm- 
ing  among  NASA's  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r   and  the   University  of 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

JULY  1991 

Alabama  at  Huntsville  from  those  of  NASA's  Goddard  Institute  for  Space 
Studies  in New  York,  the Climate Research Un i t  of  East  Anglia  in  England, 
and  the  Soviet  Union's  Hydrometeorological  Scientific  Research  Center. 
According  to  the   British  and  the  Goddard  Institute,  1990 was  the  warmest 
year  on  record  globally but  according to  the  Marshall Center, using different 
data,  the  hottest  years  in descending order were  1987, 1988, 1983, and  1990. 
(CSM , ]u l  31/91; B  Sun, Aug  1/91) 

August 

August:  T h e   publication  Government  Executive  carried  a  feature  article  o n  
NA SA  by Mark L.  Goldstein  entitled  "Lost  in  Space." Goldstein  summarized 
NASA   funding  and  projects  as well  as  its  contracting .  A  table  of  1990 con -  
tract  awards lists the  3 0  principal  contractors  in order of rank and the  amounts 
of  their   contracts ,   Rockwell  International   being  the   largest,  followed  by 
Lockheed.  (Government Executive, Aug/91)  

August 2: T h e  scheduled  launch of Atlantis  o n  August  1 was delayed by  a false 
alarm over a pressure valve and  t h e n  by bad weather,  t h e  media reported. T h e  
launch  was  rescheduled  for  August  2 .   T h e   astronauts' first  task  after  takeoff 
was  to  launch  the  $120 million Tracking and  Data  Relay Satellite, which was 
done   successfully. Various  onboard  experiments  were  begun,  together  with 
some medical  research  experiments designed  to  test  the  effects of weightless- 
ness.  ( 0  Sun, Aug  2/91; USA  Today, Aug  2/91; NY  Times, Aug  2/91; AP, Aug 
2/91; UPI ,  Aug 2/91; P lnq, Aug 319 1; NY  Times, Aug 3/91; W Post, Aug 3/91; 
AP,  Aug  3/91; UPI ,  Aug  3/91; W Post, Aug  4/91; NY  Xmes, Aug  4/91; UPI ,  
Aug 4/91; C Trib, Aug 4/91; B Sun, Aug 5/91; W Times, Aug 5/91; USA Today, 
Aug  5/91; P  Inq, Aug  5/91; C Trib, Aug  5/91; LA  Times, Aug  5/91; AP,  Aug 
5/91 ; UPI ,  Aug  5/91 ) 

T h e  press  reported  tha t   t h e  subcommittee o n   investigations  and  oversight 
of  the   House  Committee   on   Science,  Space,  and  Technology  o n   August  1 
examined NASA's functioning  a t  a hearing entitled  "NASA's Midlife Crisis." 
T h e  chairman  of  the   subcommittee, Howard Wolpe, Democrat  of  Michigan, 
cited  the   need  for NASA   t o  be  a  "prudent  steward"  and  expressed a  lack  of 
confidence  in  NASA's ability to  carry out   its mission. Various  industry  repre- 
sentatives  testified  about  NASA's  operations  and  its  contracting .   NASA  
inspector general  Bill D. Colvin  said NASA  had  failed to  keep a sharp eye o n  
its programs, operations, and  contractors,  resulting  in  the  waste of  millions of 
dollars.  (W  Post,  Aug  2/91; B  Sun, Aug  2/91; LA  'Times, Aug  2/91; AP,  Aug 
2/91; AvWk, Aug 5 /91 )  

August  3:  A n   article  about  the   colorful  sunsets  along  the   California  coast 
referred  to  the   effects  of  the   eruption  of  Mount   Pinatubo.  According  to  
Francisco  Valero,  chief  of  atmospherics  research  a t   NASA's Ames  Research 
Cen te r  in  Mountain  View, California, Pinatubo probably spewed some  16 mil- 
lion  tons  of  sulfur  dioxide  in to   the   atmosphere,  causing  the   spectacular sun-  
sets.  However,  the   aftereffects  were  that   the   cloud  of  sulfuric  acid  droplets 
could  further  accelerate the  depletion  of  the  ozone layer.  ( P  Inq, Aug 3/91)  

August  4 :   According  to  AP,  antennas   o n   six  major  spacecraft  had  malfunc- 
tioned  during  the  preceding  17 months ,  threatening  t h e  crucial  flow  of  infor- 

A S TRONAU T IC 5  ANL)  " \ERONAUTICS  

AUGUST   1991 

mation   from  missions.  Accordinglv  engineers   conduc ted   extra   reviews  of 
a n t e n n a s  o n  A t lan t i s .  Henry   Hoffman ,  guidance  and  con t ro l  chief  a t  NASA's 
Godda rd  Space  Flight C e n t e r ,  said part  of  t h e  problem was  t h a t  an tenna s  were 
increasingly  large  and   comp lex ,   requiring  folding  for  launch   a n d   problems 
arose when   they  were  ex tended  or  unfolded.  (AP ,  Aug  4 /91 )  

Gregg Easterhrook  wrote  a n  article   en t i t led   "Space Agency  Lost  its Edge  in  
Technology  Long  Ago ,"   in   which   h e   criticized  NASA's  techno logy  o n   t h e  
Atlantis .   As  a n  example ,  t h e  computer   system had  only  o n e  megabyte  of  ran -  
dom-access memory  in contrast   t o  laptop  computers  available a t  Radio  Shack  
with   two  t o  four megabytes of memory. T h e  au tho r  a t t r ibu ted  much   of  t h e  loss 
of  a   technological   cu t t ing   edge  to   overstaffing  and   gove rnmen t   paperwork 
requirements   as  opposed  t o   t h e   rapid  and   creative   activity  of  NASA's early 
days.  (LA  Times,  Aug  419 1  ) 

August 5 :  N A S A   announced   a  number   of  con t rac t   arrangements .  A   con t rac t  
extension   was  awarded  t o   Vitro  Co rpo ra t ion   of  Silver   Sp r ing ,  Maryland,  t o  
c o n t i n u e  safety  and   support  services a t  N A S A  Headquarters   in  Wa sh ing ton ,  
D .C .   N A S A   further   selected  Nichols   Research  Co rpo ra t ion ,   Hun t sv i l le ,  
A labama ,  and   RDM   Federal, I n c . ,  McLean, Virginia,  t o  compe te  for a  support  
con t rac t   for  t h e   Earth   Observing   System  Program  Office  in  Washington .   I n  
add i t ion ,  NASA's J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r ,  Hou s ton ,  con t rac ted  with   J o h n s o n  
Con t ro l s ,   Inc . ,   C a p e   Canaver;ll ,  Florida  t o   provide  ma in tenance   and   opera-  
tional   services a t  J o h n s o n .  ( N A S A  Releases C91 -dd ,  C 9 1 - e e ,  C91 - f f )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   o n   July  1 5   at  its  Ames-Dryden   Flight  Research 
Facility,  Edwards,  California ,   NASA's F/A-18   H igh -A lpha   Research  Vehicle 
maneuvered   in   flight  for  t h e   first  time   using  a   specially  designed  thrust   vec-  
toring  system.  Such  research  flights were  t o  con t inue   over   t h e  nex t   two  years 
and  were  designed  t o  make  future  jet  fighters safer.  ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 1 2 3 )  

A n  editorial   in  Aviation  Week  and  Space Technology, commended   U.S. gov- 
e r nm e n t - s p o n s o r e d   e d u c a t i o n a l   displays  a t   t h e   Expe r imen ta l   A i rc ra f t  
Association's exh ih i t ion  a t  O shko sh ,  Wisconsin .   It  specifically complimented 
NASA's Space  S t a t i o n  a n d  Space  S h u t t l e  displays and  astronaut  S teve  Nagel's 
presentations   as  effectively  commun ica t ing   U.S.  space  leadership.  (AvWk ,  
Aug   519 1 ) 

August  6:  Extensive  media  coverage  of  experiments   performed  hy  t h e   astro-  
nauts   aboard  A t lan t i s   con t inued .   Among   such   experiments   were  t h e   testing  
of  equ ipmen t   t o   be  used  o n   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n ,  such   as  fiber  op t ic   cables  t o  
transmit   signals, a   cooling  system, and   modifications  in  controls   for  compu t -  
ers.  A n o t h e r   experiment   invo l~ red  lighting   a   small  fire  t o   learn  how  flames 
propagate  in   t h e   absence  of  gravity.  In   add i t ion ,  a   NA SA   optometrist   tested 

AUGUST  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

eye  drops  o n   himself  and  astronauts  performed  treadmill  tests  and  blood 
experiments. Astronauts  commented  o n  the  large amount  of  haze  around  the  
Earth, possibly from  the  Kuwaiti oil  field  fires or  from  the  volcanic  eruptions 
of  Mount   Pinatubo.  ( P  Inq ,   Aug  6/91; NY  Tm e s ,   Aug  6/91; W  Times,  Aug 
6/91; W Post, Aug 6/91; USA  Today, Aug 6/91; AP, Aug 6/91; UPI, Aug 6/91; 
P lnq ,  Aug  7/91; W  Times, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91 ; USA Today, Aug  719 1; 
AP, Aug  7/91; UPI ,  Aug  7/91; P  Inq ,  Aug  8/91; NY  Times, Aug  8/91; W Post, 
Aug  8/91; USA  Today,  Aug  8/91; CSM ,  Aug  8/91; AP,  Aug  8/91; UPI ,   Aug 
8/91; B  Sun ,  Aug 9/91; W  Zm e s ,  Aug  9/91; AP,  Aug 9/91; UPI, Aug 9/91 ) 

NASA   announced   tha t   the  Johnson   Space Cen te r ,  Houston ,  had   made  a 
supplemental  agreement  to  the   contract   with  McDonnell  Douglas  Space 
Systems Company, Huntington   Beach, California. T h e  modification  included 
the   changes  made  in  Space  S ta t ion   Freedom  Program  review  activities. 
(NA SA  Release 91 - 124)  

Randy  Berridge  of  the   Astronauts  Memorial  Foundation  stated  tha t   the  
memorial  to  American  astronauts  killed  in  the   line  of  duty  was  closed  for 
inspections  after strange noises were heard coming from the  monument .  After 
engineers  checked  the   structure,  it  reopened  on   August  1 7 .   Subsequently, 
Representative   Vernon   Peeples,  cha i rman   of 
t h e   Florida  House 
Transportation  Committee ,   questioned  whether  money  for  the   monument  
had  been  misused.  (UP I ,  Aug 6/91; P lnq ,  Aug  7/91; W Post, Aug  7/91; USA  
Today, Aug  7/91; LA  Times, Aug  19/91; P lnq, Aug  20191) 

August  7:  According  to  AP,  two  congressmen,  Howard  Wolpe,  Democrat  of 
Michigan,  and  Shenvood  Boehlert, Republican  of  New  York,  urged  tha t   t h e  
United   States  "borrow" or  buy  a GMS -5  weather  satellite being  built  by  t h e  
U.S. firm Hughes  for Japan .  This  would  allow NASA   time  to  fix  the  problems 
with the  Geostationary Operational  Environmental  Satellite (GOES -NEXT ) .  
In  connection  with GOES ,  Washington Technology reported  in  some detail  o n  
the   "troubled  history"  of  the   weather  satellite  and  its  contractors  and   con -  
gressional criticism  of  the  program. T h e  Christian Science Monitor  reported  o n  
lessons learned  from GOES -Nex t ,  including  not   to cut  corners in developing 
sophisticated  technology  and   the   importance of sharing weather  data  global- 
ly.  (AP, Aug  7/91; Washington Technology, Aug 819 1; CSM ,  Aiig  2019 1 ; H Post, 
Aug  21/91) 

NA SA   announced   tha t   results  from  a NASA   flight  test  program  showed 
tha t   new  sensor  technology  might  provide  airline  flight  crews  with  advance 
warning  of  "microbursts"  tha t   sometimes  harbored  potentially  dangerous 
windshears.  (NA SA  Release 91- 125)  

August 8: T h e  media reported  a study contained  in  the  British journal  Na tu re ,  
written by  Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Cen te r   in 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST  1991 

Moffett  Field, California, Christopher   P. McKay,  who  also worked  at  Ames, 
and  James F.  Kasting, associate professor of  geosciences a t  Pennsylvania  S ta te  
University.  T h e   authors  concluded  it  would  be  relatively  easy  to   alter  Mars' 
atmosphere  to  make  it  suitable  for  plants.  Making  t h e   planet  fit  for  people, 
however, would  take about  100,000 years.  ( P  Inq, Aug  8/91; USA  Today, Aug 
8/91; C Trin, Aug  8/91; LA  Times, Aug 8/91; UP I ,  Aug  8/91)  

NASA   announced   the   signing  of  an   agreement  in  Buenos  Aires  by  Vice 
President  Dan  Quayle  and  Argentine   President  Carlos Menem  o n  coopera- 
tion   in  the  civil  uses  of  space. A  framework for future  cooperative space proj- 
ects between  NASA  and   the  newly  created Argentine  National  Commission 
o n  Space Activities  was  established.  (NA SA  Release 91 - 126) 

Washington  Technology  carried  two  articles  o n   NASA's  Earth  Observing 
System  (EOS ) .  T h e   first  discussed  the   possibility  of  the   EOS   instrument  
being  divided  among  three   launch   vehicles while  still  maintaining  
its  "simultaneity."  T h e   second  quoted  NA SA   officials  Lennard  Fisk  and  
Shelby Tilford  as addressing  t h e  EOS Engineering Review  Panel  in La Jo l la ,  
California .  They  said NASA  had  devised  a restructured plan  to  remove  sev- 
eral  of  t h e   EOS  satellite   sensors  and   replace  them   with  "ballast"  of  thou -  
sands   of  pounds   of  lead  to   m a i n t a i n   payload  ba lance .   (Washington 
Technology, Aug  819 1 ) 

August  9: T h e  Washington  Post  reported  o n  growing congressional hesitations 
about  supporting  NASA's  Mission  to  Planet  Earth  program.  Legislators 
recently  realized  the  mission would  cost  almost  as much  as  the  Space S ta t ion  
although  it  would  carry  only  robots,  no t   people.  T h e   Sena te   recommended 
cutting   $50 million  from  the   administration's  1992 Earth  Observing  System 
(EOS )  budget request. The EOS, which would  involve a series of  large, sophis- 
ticated  satellites,  is  to  be  the  centerpiece of  the  mission. T h e  House cut  $145 
million  from  the   proposed  budget  request.  Meanwhile,  a  panel  of  aerospace 
experts  is  reviewing  the   EOS  engineering  design  and  posing  difficult  ques- 
tions.  ( W Post, Aug 9/91)  

According  to  the  Washington  Times,  Eosat, based  in  Lanham, Maryland, a 
joint  venture  of  Hughes  Aircraft  Company  and   General   Electric  Company, 
defeated  its  competitor  and  gained  t h e  contract   for  distributing  images  from 
t h e  new Soviet Almaz satellite. ( W  Times, Aug  9/91)  

T h e  New York  Times  cited  a report by  Jean  0. Dickey, a geodesist at NASA's 
J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California,  and Raymond Hide, a geo- 
physicist at Oxford, published  in the journal Science. They analyzed the  rotation 
of  the  earth ,  which  is  fitfully and almost imperceptibly slowing. More  accurate 
measurements than  in the  past  were possible by  bouncing laser signals off quartz 
reflectors  left o n  the moon by  Apollo astronauts. (NY Times, Aug 9/91) 

AUGUST 1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

Several media articles dealt with attempts  to  rescue spacecraft Galileo's mis- 
sion. T h e  Los  Angeks Times  described Galileo's flight, which was  functioning 
perfectly  toward  Jupiter,  apart  from  its  malfunctioning  an tenna .   Engineers 
sought bo th  by heating  and cooling  the  craft t o  unstick  the  an tenna .  T h e  New 
York  Times  reported  in  detail  o n   efforts  by  engineers  at  t h e   J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory in Pasadena, operated by  the  California Institute of Technology for 
NASA ,   to  free  the   an tenna ,   thus  salvaging  the   mission.  I f   efforts  failed, 
Galileo would  be  unable  to  communicate  discoveries to  scientists because the  
craft's small antennas  could  no t   transmit  recorded  pictures  until   returning  to 
the  vicinity  of  Earth. T h e  third  attempt   to  fix  the  an tenna  was  pronounced  a 
failure  o n   August  20.  O t h e r   possible  courses  of  action   were  discussed.  (LA 
Times, Aug  9/91; NY  Times, Aug  12/91 ; AP, Aug  12/91 ; W Times, Aug  13/91; 
W  Post, Aug  13/91; USA  Today, Aug  13/91; AP, Aug  13/91; AP, Aug  20191; 
UP I ,  Aug  20191;  NY  Times, Aug  21/91; P Inq, Aug  21/91; B  Sun, Aug  21/91; 
UPI ,  Aug  21/91; AP, Aug  28/91)  

T h e  Antelope Valky  Press  quoted  J o h n  Young,  special  assistant for  engineer- 
ing, operations, and safety a t  NASA's Johnson  Space Center  in Houston, as say- 
ing  that   for  NASA   to   land  Shuttles  at  Kennedy  Space  Center   instead  of 
Edwards  Air  Force  Base  in  California  posed  an   increased  risk.  Although  the  
Florida landing saved NASA  the  cost of  ferrying a Shuttle  back from California 
and   the   five  to  seven  days  involved,  Florida  weather  was  more  problematic. 
Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only 
one.  J o h n   E.  Pike,  space  policy  analyst  for  the   Federation  of  American 
Scientists, said  NASA   should  wait  o n   Florida  landings  till  all  Shuttles  were 
equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley  Press, Aug 9/91) 

August  10: A P  reported  tha t  Space Shuttle  Columbia was bolted  atop  a jumbo 
jet  and   flown  from  Cape   Canaveral  t o   MacDill  Air   Force  Base  in  Tampa, 
before  proceeding o n  August  11 to  Rockwell  International's Shu t t le  assembly 
plant   in  Palmdale, California. T h e  arrival of Columbia  in Palmdale on  August 
13  was  greeted  enthusiastically by  the   inhabitants.  (AP, Aug  10191; Antelope 
Valky, Aug  14/91 ) 

August  12: The  media gave extensive coverage to  the  smooth  landing and  suc- 
cessful mission  of  Atlantis  tha t   ended  with  touchdown  at  the   Kennedy Space 
Center  at Cape  Canaveral on  August  11. In addition to launching  a giant com- 
munications  satellite  to  channel   data  from  low-orbiting spacecraft,  the   astro- 
nauts  tested equipment, such as computer  items, for possible Space Station  use 
and conducted 22  scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with  final exper- 
iments   o n   board  and   preparations  for  landing .   ( W   Post,  Aug  10191; 
LA  Times, Aug  1019 1 ; AP, Aug  1019 1 ; UPI, Aug  10191; NY Times, Aug  1 1/91; 
W  Post,  Aug  11/91;   NY  Times,  Aug  12/91;   W  Post,  Aug  12/91; 
W Times, Aug  12/91; WS],  Aug  12/91; P Inq, Aug  12/91; LA  Times, Aug  12/91; 
AP, Aug  12/91; UPI ,  Aug  12/91; B  Sun, Aug  13/91; NY Times, Aug  13/91) 

ASTRONAUTLCS  AND  A ERONAU T IC S  

AUGUST  1991 

A  Business Week  article  o n  attempts  to  make  t h e  commercial space-launch  
business  p ro f i tab le ,   quo ted   N A S A   Deputy  A dm i n i s t r a t o r   J am e s   R. 
Thompson   Jr. H e   stressed  the   need  for  "real,  nongovernmental   customers" 
in order  to  make  the  program  a  success. T h e  article  summarized t h e  work  of 
various  commercial  firms  and   mentioned   a   number  of  instances  of  unsuc- 
cessful rocket  launches.  (Bus Wk, Aug  12/91)  

NA SA   announced   tha t   t h e  first  flight of  a  NA SA   ozone  instrument   o n  a  
Soviet   spacecraft  would  occur  in   August.  NASA's  Total  Ozone  Mapping 
Spectrometer   ( TOM S )  was  t o  be  flown  o n  a  Soviet  Meteor-3  meteorologi- 
cal  satellite   to   be  launched   August  15  from  the   Plesetsk  Cosmodrome  
aboard  a   Soviet  Cylone   rocket.  (NA SA   Release  91-127;   LA  Times,  Aug 
16/91 ) 

T h e   media  discussed  plans  for  NASA's  nex t   Shu t t le   flight,  t h a t   of 
Discovery  in   September ,   to   deploy   a   satellite   to   study  t h e   ozone  layer  in 
Earth's upper atmosphere.  Discovery was  moved  to  t h e   launch  pad ,  and  var- 
ious systems were connec ted  to  prepare for a  practice  countdown .   (UP I ,  Aug 
12/91; W Times, Aug  13/91;  USA  Today, Aug  13/91)  

August  13: According  to   the  wire services,  two of  th ree  generators o n  Space  
Shu t t le   Atlantis   were  left  running   inadvertently   after  t h e   landing.  As  a  
result,  t h e   generators  were  flooded  with  water,  a   byproduct  of  t h e   power- 
generating   process,  and   were  being  checked.  (AP ,  Aug  13/91;  UP I ,   Aug  
14/91; 0 Sen Star, Aug  15/91;  Fla  Today, Aug   15 /91 )  

NASA   announced   t h e  opening  of  t h e  new  Biocomputation  C e n t e r  a t   its 
Ames  Research  Cen te r ,   Moun ta in   View,  California .   T h e   center ,   under 
Muriel  Ross, had   t h e  task of  studying t h e  neural  network  to  understand  how 
nerves  are  organized  and   function .   (NA SA  Release  91 - 129 )  

August  14: According  to   Patrick  McCormick  of  NASA's Langley Research 
C e n t e r   in  Hamp ton ,   Virginia,  t h e   eruption   of  Mount   Pinatubo   in  the  
Philippines might  cool global  temperatures  by  a  few  t e n t h s  of  a  degree for  as 
long as  five  to   10  years.  ( W  Post, Aug  14/91)  

NA SA   announced   tha t   its  Soft   X-ray  Telescope,  which   is  designed  to 
study solar flares, was scheduled  to  be  launched  aboard  a  Japanese  spacecraft 
o n   August  26 ,   under  a   cooperative  agreement   with  t h e   Japanese .   ( N A S A  
Release  9 1  - 130 )  

A n   article  citing   Technology  Review,  referred  to   t h e   system  developed  by 
NASA's  Ames  Research  C e n t e r   and   Terra-Mar  Resources  Information 
Services t o  fight  fires by  enabling  firefighters  to  "see"  through   t h e  fire.  (San 
Francisco Examiner, Aug  1  419 1  ) 

AUGUST  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

Augwt  15: T h e   media  reported  the  launch  of  the   Soviet  Meteor-3  weather 
satellite  carrying  the  NASA-built   Total  Ozone  Mapping  Spectrometer 
(TOMS ) .  Th e  Meteor  was  to  view  the  hole  in  the  ozone over Antarctica  in 
September  and  October;  the  United  States  and  the   Soviet  Un ion   were  to  
share ozone  information  gained.  (AP, Aug  15/91; UPI, Aug  15/91; P Inq, Aug 
16/91; W Post, Aug  16/91; LA  Times, Aug  16/91) 

August  16:  NASA   announced  tha t   investigations  of  the   sun's  fiery outer 
atmosphere  would  intensify  when  the   Ulysses  spacecraft  passed  behind  the  
sun  on   August  21.  Edward  J .   Sm i th ,   Project  Scientist  for  NASA's  J e t  
Propulsion Laboratory,  Pasadena, California, said  tha t   at   conjunction   (when 
the  spacecraft and  Earth  are on  opposite  sides of  the  sun ) ,  radio waves  trans- 
mitted  from the spacecraft would  travel  through  and  become distorted  by  the  
innermost  region of  the corona. (NASA  Release 9 1 - 13 1 ) 

NASA   announced  the  granting  of  three  study  contracts  to   Lockheed 
Missiles  and  Space  Company,  Sunnyvale,  California;  McDonnell  Douglas 
Corporation,  Huntington  Beach,  California;  and  TRW,  Redondo  Beach, 
California. Th e  contracts were  intended  to  support  the  definition of  the   new 
National  Launch  System,  a  modular  family  of  launch  vehicles  to   support 
NASA   and  Department  of  Defense  missions  into  the  21st  century.  (NASA  
Release C91-gg; UPI, Aug  16/91; Business Wire, Aug  19/91)  

A n  editorial commended NASA  for considering a plan  to  decrease the  risk 
of  space experiments  by  using  a larger number  of  small satellites, with  smaller 
numbers of  instruments.  This would  increase flexibility in  the  space program, 
making  it more  efficient and  possibly  cheaper.  (SF Chron, Aug  16/91) 

August  18: T h e  Washington  Post  discussed  the  success of  NASA   engineers  in 
fixing  the  computer software  "bug"  tha t   caused  spacecraft Magellan,  after  its 
arrival at Venus, to  lose contact with Earth. Magellan Mission Director James 
Scott  of  NASA's Je t  Propulsion  Laboratory in  California  confirmed  that  the 
problem  was  solved  and  possible  similar flaws  in  other   space  programs  were 
being eliminated.  ( W  Post, Aug  18/91) 

*According to the Los Angeks Tmes, NASA  researchers produced various veg- 
etables in  their  imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at  Kennedy  Space 
Center, Florida. Th e   experiment,  designed  to  prepare for  Space  Station exis- 
tence, could  no t ,  however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Tmes, Aug  18/91 ) 

Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor for Newsweek  and Atlantic Monthly, 
wrote  a  lengthy  article  criticizing NASA's slow response  to  the  need  for vari- 
ous reforms. He particularly faulted the formation of  commissions as being eas- 
ier  than  correcting  errors and  discussed the  U.S.'s lack of  a "throwaway space 
booster." ( W  Post, Aug  18/91) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST  199 1 

August  2 0 :   T h e   media  covered  t h e   des t ruc t ion   after  launch   of  O rb i ta l  
Sciences  Corporation's   Aries  rocket  carrying  secret  Pen tagon  experiments  
for  S ta r  Wars. T h e  rocket   went   ou t   of  con t ro l   soon  after   liftoff  and  had   to  
be  des t royed .   (AP ,   Aug  20191;  UP I ,   Aug  20191;  NY  Times,  Aug   21/91; 
WSJ,  Aug  21/91;  W  Po s t ,   Aug  21/91;   USA  Today ,   Aug   21/91;  P  Inq ,   Aug  
21/91;   W  T imes ,   Aug  21/91;   B  S u n ,   Aug  21/91;   C  Trib, Aug  21/91;   LA 
T imes ,   Aug  2 1/91)  

NASA's  Advanced   Commun ica t ions   Technology  Sa te l l i te   ( A C T S )  
Experiments  Program  Manager  Dean  Olmstead  expressed  NASA's  pleasure 
that   the   U.S.  Army  had  joined  NASA   to   conduct  various  A C T S   experi- 
ments.  AC T S  forms  the  center  of  NASA's  satellite communications  research 
and development  efforts.  (PR  Newswire, Aug  20191) 

NASA   announced   tha t   researchers from  its Goddard Space Flight Center's 
Wallops  Flight  Facility, Wallops  Island,  Virginia, would  use  satellite  and  air- 
borne  instruments to  measure the  surface elevation  of  polar glaciers. T h e  pro- 
gram  was  designed  to  aid  scientists  in   determining  ice  buildup  or   melting 
resulting  from  global climate  change .  T h e  program  is  to  occur  in  Greenland  
between  August  23  and  September  16. (NA SA  Release 91-133)  

NASA   announced  tha t   its J o i n t  Program  Office, consisting of  NASA   and  
the   Department  of  Defense,  was  sponsoring  a  competition  for  t h e   Nation's 
undergraduate  engineering schools to  design and  build  a mock-up of  the  X-30 
National  Aerospace  plane.  (NASA  Release 91 - 134) 

NASA   announced  tha t ,  subsequent  to  the  failure of  its attempt   the  preced- 
ing  week  to  release  the   an tenna   of  spacecraft Galileo,  it  would  try  again  in 
December  1991 when Galileo would  be  farther  from the   sun and   thus cooler. 
(NA SA  Release  91-135;  AP,  Aug  20191;  LA  Xme s ,   Aug  21/91;  UPI ,   Aug 
2 1/91; CSM ,  Aug  22/91; H tsv l  Tms, Aug  28/91) 

August 21 : A P  reported  tha t  astronaut J o h n  Blaha, commander of  the  Atlantis  
mission, said  he  used  the  post-flight  news  conference  to  express his  views on  
the  space program and the   importance of  t h e  Space S ta t ion ,  after reading crit-  
icism of  t h e   latter.  (AP, Aug  21/91)  

August 2 2 :  NASA  announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch 
on   September  12,  would  deploy  the   Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Satellite 
(UARS )  350 miles above Earth. The  UARS  is  to study humankind's effect on  the 
planet's atmosphere and  its  shielding ozone  layer and  is  the first major flight ele- 
ment of  NASA's Mission  to Planet Earth. (NASA  Release 91-136) 

Augwt 2 2 :  According  to the  Washington Post,  the  Hubble Space Telescope dis- 
covered  evidence  tha t   dying  stars can  rejuvenate  themselves  when  they  col- 

AUGUST  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

lide  with  each  other.  T h e   violent  collision  enables  them   to   be  reborn  as  a 
younger, brighter  star.  (W  Post, Aug  22/91 ; NY   Times, Aug  27/91 ) 

August  2 3 :  NASA   announced  crew  members  for  eight  future  Space  Shuttle  
missions, of  which  the   first, a  Microgravity  Laboratory  mission,  is  scheduled 
for May  1992. (NA SA  Release 91-137;  AP, Aug  23/91; UPI ,  Aug  23/91; LA 
Xme s ,  Aug  24/91; AuWk, Aug  26/91) 

NASA  Administrator Richard  H .  Truly announced  the  selection of General  
Spence M. Armstrong, USAF   (Re t i red ) ,  for the  newly established  position  of 
Associate  Administrator  for  Human   Resources  and  Education.  (NA SA  
Release 91-138)  

Concurrently, NASA  Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the  appoint- 
ment  of  Michael D.  Griffin  for  the  new  position of  Associate Administrator  for 
Exploration.  (NASA  Release 91-139; SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91) 

NASA  program scientist Edward  Weiler said  in a  telephone  interview with 
UP1 tha t  an  emergency Shuttle  mission to  replace  faulty gyroscopes and  solar 
panels  aboard  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope  was  not   needed  before  a  flight 
already set for  1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NA SA  engineers 
were perfecting computer control  software tha t  would  stabilize the  telescope  if 
all  its  gyroscopes  were  to   fail,  until  a  Shuttle   repair  mission  were  mounted. 
(UP I ,  Aug  23/91) 

August  26:  T h e   media  carried  the   discovery,  announced   o n   August  23,  by 
three  astronomers,  Donald  P.  Schneider  of  the   Institute  for  Advanced  Study  
in  Princeton ,  Maarten Schmidt  of  the  California Institute  of  Technology  and  
James E.  G u n n  of  Princeton  University  of  the  oldest  and  most distant  object 
yet  found, a 900-million-year-old quasar. T h e  discovery resulted  from  t h e  use 
of  a  supersensitive  digital  camera,  developed  by  G u n n   for  t h e   Hubble 
Telescope. T h e  camera  was  attached   to Mount  Palomar's Hale  telescope  and  
special  filters were  used.  ( B  Sun, Aug  26/91; NY   Times, Aug  27/91; W Times, 
Aug  27/91; L A  Times, Aug  27/91) 

A n  editorial in a space publication urged  the Bush Administration  to  put pres- 
sure o n  NASA   to  implement the  recommendations of  the Augustine panel with 
regard  to   NASA's  structure,  management,  and  priorities,  and  the  Synthesis 
Group, or Stafford report o n  exploration missions. (SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91) 

Space  Propulsion  newsletter carried a discussion of NASA's 1993 budget plan, 
scheduled  to  be  submitted  to   the  Wh i te   House August  30.  In   view  of  budget 
limitations, and a n  inflation rate of 4.1 percent, the  article highlighted  the  call 
in the  Senate  report for NASA  to  submit a budget that  assumed only a five per- 
cen t  annual  increase through  1995. (SP  News ,  Aug  26-Sep 8/91)  

ASTRC>NAUTICS A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST  1991 

August 27: Mtchael  Griffin ,  deputy  for  technology  a t  t h e  Pentagon's Strategic  
Defense  l n ~ t i a t i v e  Organization,  said  t h a t   t h e   reason  t h e   Aries  rocket   of 
O rb i ta l  Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion  had  t o  be  destroyed when   it  wen t  off  course o n  
August  20 was  t h a t  a techn ic ian   loaded  t h e  wrong  computer  program  i n t o  t h e  
rocket's guidance  unit .   T h e  ma t te r  would  be  investigated.  ( P  Inq, A u g  27/91; 
W  Times, Aug   27/91; W  Post, Aug   27/91; NY  Times, Aug   27/91;  USA  Today, 
Aug  27/91; LA  Times, A L I ~  27/91; AP, Aug  27/91)  

NASA's  Lewis  Research  Cen le r ,   C leve land ,   t h e   Ame r ican   In s t i tu te   of 
Ae ronau t ic s  and  Astronautics ,   and   t h e  O h i o  Aerospace   In s t i tu te  announced  
t h e  cosponsorship  of  a conference   o n  Advanced  Space  Exploration   Initiative  
(SE I )  Technologies  a t   t h e  C leve land  C o n v e n t i o n  C e n t e r  Sep tembe r  4-6. T h e  
conference   is  to   he  part  of  t h e   Lewis  Center's  5 0 t h   anniversary   celebration .  
( N A S A  Release  9 1 - 1 4 0 )  

T h e  Wall  Street Journal  featured  two  inventors ,   of  whom   o n e ,  K h a n h  D i n h  
of  Vietnamese  origin ,  with  NASA's  assistance, developed   a n   innova t ive  h e a t  
pipe  technology.  His  company   won   a  N A S A   con t rac t   t o  work  o n   t h e   h e a t -  
removal  system  for  t h e   Space  S h u t t l e  a n d  also  won   a  federal  award  for help-  
ing  t o  commercialize  space  technology.  (WSJ, Aug   27/91 ) 

August  28:  N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  BDM  Federal,  Inc . ,  McLean ,  
Virginia,  as  t h e   mission  advisory  and   assistance  con t rac to r   for  t h e   Earth  
Observing  System  Program  Office  in Washington .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 1 - i i )  

NA SA   announced   t h a t   September   12  was  se t   for  t h e   launch   of  Space  
S h u t t l e   Discovery  and   its  Uppe r   A tmo sphe re   Research   Sa te l l i te .   T h e  
a n n o u n c em e n t  followed  completion   of  t h e  Flight Readiness  Review.  ( N A S A  
Launch   Advisory,  Aug   28/91; CSM, Aug   28/91; UP I ,  Aug   28/91;  DPA ,  Aug  
28/91;   P  I n q ,   Aug   29/91;  W  Times, Aug   29/91; NY  Tme s ,  Aug   29/91;  USA 
Today, Aug   29/91 ; LA  Times, Aug   29/91; AP, Aug  29/91)  

Rob  MacMillan ,   public  information   manager  for  t h e   J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory  in  Pasadena ,  said scientists  had  ordered  t h e  Magellan  spacecraft t o  
reduce  its mapping  of Venus and  stay  in  t h e  shade  t o  prevent   recording  equip-  
men t   from  overheating .   (AP ,  Aug  28/91)  

James  R .  Thomp son ,  N A S A   Deputy  Administrator ,   was  quo ted   as  praising 
NASA's   preeminence   in  space  a n d   aeronautics   technology   but  adm i t t ing   its 
recent   ciifficulties. In  view  of  these ,  Thomp son   indicated   h e   though t   N A S A  
should  s low  its push for t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  a n d  instead  adapt   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  
t o  i l y   longer missions  t o  demon s t ra te  why  a Space  S t a t i o n  would  be  valuable. 
(Birmingham News,  Aug   29/91 ) 

AUGUST   I991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

August  30:  N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   t h e   Mage l lan   spacecraft ,   mapping   t h e  
surface  of  Venus  with   imaging  radar ,   had   discovered   t h e   longest   c h a n n e l  
known   in  t h e   solar  system,  4 , 2 0 0   miles  long.  S t e v e   Saunde r s ,   Project  
Sc ien t i s t   a t   NASA's  J e t   Propulsion   L;ihoratory,  Pasadena ,   said  it   was  n o t  
k n ow n   wha t   formed  t h e   c h a n n e l .   ( N A S A   Release  91 -141 ;   LA  Times, 
Aug   30191; UP I ,  Aug   30191) 

Japan's  In s t i tu te  of  Space  and  Astronautical   Science  announced   t h a t  J a p a n  
had   successfully  launched   a  solar  flare  observation   satellite ,  designed  t o  ana -  
lyze X-rays and  gamma  rays  from  solar  flares.  (LIPA, Aug   30191) 

the  Mom1 and Mars, a  report by  the  congressional Office of Technology 
E , ~ h n g  
T h e  report advocated  the  need  for  the  United  States to  
Assessment, was 
take  the  development  and use  t
 rohotic  technology Inore seriously  if  robots are to  
i
be  used  in a  mission to  Mars. Furthermore,  the  report projected  that   robots would 
be  considerably  cheaper  than   human   exploration  that  NASA   appeared  to   favor. 
(W  7imes, Aug 30/91) 

Rohert   C. C ow e n ,  a  science  writer   for  t h e  Christian  Science Monitor,  wrote 
of  a   recent   article   in  t h e  journal  Science hy  C om p t o n  J .  Tucker  and  Wilbur  W. 
Newcomh   of  NASA's  Goddilrd  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in   G reenbe l t ,   and  
Harold   E .   I3regne  of  Texas  Technical   University   in  Luhhock.  T h e y   used 
Ame r ican   polar-orhiting  weather   satellites  t o   show  t h e   shifting   sands  of  t h e  
Saha ra  Desert.  ( B  Sun ,  Aug   30/91)  

A P  reported  t h a t  t h e  Baikonur Space  S t a t i o n  in  western Kazakhstan seemed 
ready  t o  avoid  t h e   problems  t h a t   harmed   nuclear   testing   at  Semipalatinsk .  A  
Soviet   space  delegation   \.isitcd  t h e   Kazakh  capital   of  A lma   A t a   in   Ap r i l   t o  
concluile  a  program  of  scientific ,   techn ica l ,   and   econom ic   cooperation  
between   t h e   two  countries   and   t o   builil  a   training   school   for  young  cosmo-  
nau t s   in  Leninsk.  (AP ,  Aug   30191) 

According   t o   t h e   Press Trust  o f   India ,  quo t ing   t h e   Ind ian   Space  Research  
Organization ,   India's second   remote-sensing  satellite ,   launched   o n  August  29  
hy  a  Soviet   rocket  from  t h e  Raikonur  cosmoilrome,  sent   hack  its  first  pictures 
August  30.  (AP .  Aug   30191) 

August  3 1  : T h e  media  covered  N A S A   commen t s   o n   new  discoveries  abou t  
Venus, wh ich   appeared  to   have   ongoing  geological processes. Jeffrey J .   Plaut ,  
a  N A S A  scientist ,  compared  radar  images taken  by  t h e  Magellan  spacecraft  in 
Novemher   1990   urith  those   taken   in   July  1991 .  T h e   images  revealed  wha t  
S t e p h e n  Saunders ,  t h e  Magellan  Project  scientist ,  described  as  a  "giant  land -  
slide." ( P  lnq ,  Aug   31/91; WP o s t ,  Aug  31/91;  NY  Times, Aug  31/91;  LA Times, 
Aug   31/91;  AP, Aug   31/91; UP I ,  Aug   31 /91 )  

September 

September: Mark Washburn, a freelance science writer who covered NA SA  for 
15  years,  questioned  whether  NASA   was  needed,  having  become  a  huge, 
entrenched   bureaucracy.  H e   advocated  the   following:  giving  aeronautical 
functions to t h e  Federal Aviation Administration;  giving t h e  Space Shu t t le  to  
t h e   Pentagon;  turning  over  weather  satellites  and  o the r   Earth-resource  pay- 
loads  to   the   National   Cen te r   for  Atmospheric  Research  and   the   National  
Oceanic  and  Atmospheric  Administration;  putting  planetary  and  astronomi- 
cal missions  under  the  National   Science Foundation; granting  independence 
to  NASA   centers   such  as  the   J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Ames  Research 
Center ,   and  Goddard  Space  Center;   and   replacing  headquarters  with  a 
National  Space  Policy Commission, similar  to   the   Federal Communications  
Commission. Washburn  believed  such  measures  were  necessary  to   preserve 
America's future  in  space.  (Sky and  Tekscope, Sep   1991)  

In   an   article  entitled   "Freedom's Wobbly Flight," Mark  L.  Goldstein   criti- 
cized  NASA's  large  spending o n   t h e   Space  S ta t ion   a t   the   expense  of  o the r  
NASA  programs. H e  gave a history  of  t h e  Freedom program,  its costs, and   its 
relationship to  Congress as well as  the  criticisms by  the  scientific  community. 
(Government  Executive, Sep  1991 ) 

Steve  Piacente, W a s h i n g o n  correspondent  for  the  Cha rk s ton  Post-Courier, 
wrote "Weather  Service Modernization:  N o  Goes" describing problems of  t h e  
National   Oceanic   and  Atmospheric  Administration   ( N O A A )   and  NASA  
with  launching  new  weather  satellites.  Lack  of  effective  supervision  of  con -  
tractors  and  poor  engineering  workmanship  were  among  the   shortcomings. 
(Government  Executive, Sep  199 1 ) 

Henry  S.F.  Cooper,  Jr.,  in   an   18-page  article  in  the   New   Yorker  entitled  
"Annals   of  Space-We  Don't  Have  t o   Prove  Ourselves,"  discussed  NASA's 
programs  primarily as  seen from  the  work  of  two prominent  NASA   veterans, 
Maxime  A.  Faget,  chairman  of  the   board  of  Space  Industries  International ,  
and  Caldwell C. Johnson ,  the  firm's chief designer.  (N ew  Yorker,  Sep   ?/91)  

September  I :  Galileo  Galilei,  t h e   1 7 t h  century  Italian  astronomer, is  to be  the  
first  classical  scientist  to   be  honored   by  the   Space   Hall  of  Fame  in  
Alamogordo,  New  Mexico.  T h e  U .S .   spacecraft  o n   its  way  t o  Jupiter   since 
1989 was  named  in his honor.  ( C  Trin, Sep  1/91)  

T h e   Los  Angeles  Times  reported  tha t   in   order  to   minimize  the   impact  o n  
California's  economy of  job  losses  in   t h e   aerospace  industry, Governor   Pete 
Wilson  sent  letters to Congress supporting  the  B-2 bomber and  NASA's Space 
S ta t ion  project.  (LA Times, Sep  1/91)  

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

SEPTEMBER  1991 

September  2 :   Th e  media reported  the  Air  Force  announcement  that  the   sec- 
ond  attempted  launch  of  an Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments was 
postponed  for  at  least  one  month  because  of  a  technical  problem.  (AP, Sep 
2/91; NY Times,  Sep  3/91; W  Post,  Sep 3/91; W  Times,  Sep 3/91; P  Inq,  Sep 
3/91; USA  Today, Sep 3/91; C Trin, Sep 3/91; LA  Times, Sep 3/91) 

Th e   Los  Angeles  Times  covered  the  fifth  annual  Conference  o n   Small 
Satellites, held at U tah  State University. Most  of  the scientists and  engineers 
attending favored NASA  using  smaller satellites for  specific goals rather than  
larger  spacecraft, which  they  believed  to  be  NASA's  trend.  (LA   Times,  Sep 
2/91) 

September 3: Th e  New  York  Times reported  that  Soviet space officials told  the 
White  House  that  the  Soviet civilian  space program  might  collapse  unless  it 
made  large sales to the  West. Soviet economic problems were  the major cause 
as well  as parliamentary attacks on  the  space program as wasteful. (NY Tm e s ,  
Sep 3/91; UPI ,  Sep 3/91; USA  Today, Sep 4/91; Fla Today, Sep 4/91) 

A  Chicago  Tribune  article  discussed  the  progress  and  problems  facing  the 
development of  the National Aerospace Plane. On e  of  the difficulties was  that 
above Mach  8, engineers deal with  such high  speeds that  there  are  no  wind 
tunnels  in  which  simulations  can  be  performed.  Furthermore,  six  separate 
designs  from  five  major  contractors:  Rockwell  International,  General 
Dynamics,  McDonnell  Douglas,  Pratt  and  Whitney,  and  the  Rocketdyne 
Division  of  Rockwell  International  were  integrated  into  a  single  vehicle. 
More  than  1,000 engineers from  these  firms were  assigned  to  the  project.  (C  
Trin, Sep 319 1 ) 

September 4 :  Th e  Baltimore Sun  reported that NASA  engineers were  trying to  
fix  an  intermittent  power failure in the Hubble Space Telescope affecting one 
of  the  two  ultraviolet  detectors  housed  in  the  Goddard  High  Resolution 
Spectrograph. As  a result, some  30 percent  of  research  planned  for  the  spec- 
trograph must be  postponed.  ( B  Sun ,  Sep 4/91; LA Times, Sep 9/91) 

According  to  UPI,  an   Atlas-2  rocket  built  by  General  Dynamics 
Corporation was  seriously damaged during a fueling test at the  launch  pad  on  
August  25.  As  a  result,  the   rocket's  launch,  which  was  to  ferry  a  Defense 
Satellite Communications  System  satellite  into  orbit  for  the  Pentagon,  was 
postponed till November.  (UPI, Sep 4/91) 

Florida Today  described  the  opening on  September 3 at  the  Kennedy Space 
Center of  a  third  garage for NASA's Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. T h e  hangar 
was  outfitted with equipment  intended  for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle 
launch  site at Vandenberg Air Force Base  in California,  saving NASA  about 
$40 million.  ( F h  Today, Sep 4/91) 

SEPTEMBER  1991 

CHRONOLCKY 199 1 

September 5: A P  covered  the  three-day  conference attended  by  more t h a n  500  
people,  in  Cleveland,  home  of  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center ,   to   discuss 
advanced Space Exploration  Initiative  technology. A  number of  NASA   offi- 
cials participated  and  cited  the  need  to  get  the  support  of  the  American  pub- 
lic  to  send people back  t o  the  Moon  and o n  to Mars. Nuclear  rocket  technol-  
ogy and space mechanics were among topics covered.  (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland 
Plain D e a k r ,  Sep 5/91 ) 

September 6: NASA  announced  tha t   scientists  at  the  Ames Research  Center ,  
Mountain   View,  California,  and  the   Paris Observatory,  using  data   from  t h e  
Voyager  1 spacecraft, for the  first time had  described an  anti-greenhouse effect 
o n  a solar  system  body. In   an  article  in  Science magazine, they  also described 
the  temperature structure and energy balance o n  T i tan ,  Saturn's largest moon. 
(NASA  Release 9 1 - 143) 

September 7:  Extensive  media  coverage  preceded  the   scheduled  launching  of 
Space  Shuttle   Discovery  on   Septemher  12. T h e  countdown  was  planned  t o  
begin  on  September 9 ,  but  the  discovery of  a  leak  in  the  orbital  steering sys- 
tem might delay the  mission. T h e  flight was  to be  the  first  in NASA's Mission 
to   Planet   Earth  program  and  was  to  place  into   orbit  the   Upper  Atmosphere 
Research  Satellite   (UAR S ) .  T h e   UARS   was  to   carry  10  scientific  instru- 
ments, of which four would study the  ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep  8/91; 
W Post,  Sep  8/91; NY Times,  Sep 8/91; P  Inq, Sep  9/91; W  Post, Sep  9/91; W 
Times, Sep  9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B S u n ,  Sep 10191; NY 
Times, Sep  10191 ; P  Inq, Sep  10191 ; W  Times, Sep  10191 ; LA  Times, Sep  1019 1 ; 
AP,  Sep  10191 ; UPI ,  Sep  10191 ) 

T h e   media  reported  the   concern   of  Soviet  cosmonauts  aboard  the   Mir 
Space S ta t ion  tha t   the  station  and  the  space program in general might  be sold 
because of Russia's economic plight. T h e  role of  the  new Soviet republics with 
regard  to  space was  also undetermined.  Subsequently, Yuri  Semenov, general 
designer  of  the   Energia  team  tha t   managed  Mir,  said  according  to  Tass,  tha t  
the  Space Station  would  remain  the  property of  his collective. (NY Times, Sep  
719 1; AP, Sep 7/91 ; P Inq, Sep  8/91 ; B S u n ,  Sep  8/91 ; AP, Sep  12/91; NY  Times, 
Sep  1319 1 ) 

UP1  quoted  the   publication  Aviation  Week  and   Space  Technology  as  saying 
tha t  a huge  Soviet SL-16 Zenit  rocket  carrying a spy satellite exploded  short-  
ly  after  launch  o n  August  30.  (UP I ,  Sep  7/91) 

A  local  newspaper described  the  flight  of  t h e  ER-2  (Earth  Resources) giant 
high-flying  spy  plane  tha t   flew over t h e  San  Joaquin-Sacramento  Valley.  In  4 
112 hours, the  plane of  the  NASA-Ames  Research Cen te r  captured more t h a n  
seven million  acres o n  film. T h e  photographs were to  be a resource for the  best 
use  of  water  supplies in California.  (Bakersfield Californian, Sep  7/91) 

ASTRONAUT ICS   ANL)  AERONAUT ICS  

SEPTEMBER   1991 

September  9:   According   t o   t h e   New  York  Xmes,  t h e   Na t iona l   O c e a n i c   a n d  
Atmospheric   Adm in i s t ra t ion   was  completing   arrangements   t o   get   exclusive 
use  of  t h e   European   weather   satellite   Meteosat-3 .   T h e  purpose  would  be  t o  
move  it  further  west  t o  cover  t h e  U n i t e d   S ta te s  more   thoroughly   if  t h e   U .S .  
weather  satellite ,  GOES - 7 ,  were  t o  fail. N A S A  was several years beh ind   in  t h e  
development   of  new  U .S .   weather   satellites,  t h e   GOES-NEXT ,   originally 
scheduled  t o  begin  operating   in  1989  but  now  probably  late   1992  a t  t h e  earli-  
est.  Subsequently,  several  newspapers  reported  arrangements   made  for  t h e  
Un i ted   S ta te s   t o   borrow  a t   least  o n e   and   possibly  more   European   weather  
satellites.  (NY  Tme s ,   Sep   9/91;  W  Post,  Sep   14/91;  NY  Tme s ,   Sep   15/91;  B 
Sun, Sep   1519 1 ) 

I n  a detailed  presentation   accompanied  by  a statistical  table ,  t h e  Wall Street 
Journal  recounted   t h e   p lanned   and   actual   flight  dates   and   costs  of  N A S A  
space projects  t o  da te .  It concluded  t h a t   t h e  U A R S  flight of Discovery was  t h e  
only  o n e   t o  stay w i th in   its  cost  projection ,   but  it  would  be  almost  two   years 
late .   (WS],  S e p  9 /91 )  

A  space publication   printed   a n  adapted   version  of  Sena to r   Dale  Bumpers' 
(L km o c r a t  from  Arkansas)   speech  when   h e   introduced   legislation  in  July   t o  
cu t  funding  o n  t h e  N A S A  Space  S t a t i o n  drastically.  He   favored  solving U .S .  
problems  o n   t h e   ground ,   n o t   in   space.  T h e   same  issue  carried   remarks  of 
Sena to r   J im   Sasser  (Democ ra t   from  Tennessee)   t h a t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   was 
something  t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  could  n o t  afford. Furthermore ,  t h e  magazine  car-  
ried  a n   interview   with   J im   Beggs,  cha i rman   of  Spacehab   Inc .   and   former 
N .4SA   Administrator ,   conce rn ing   his  organization's relationship   t o  N A S A .  
(SP  News,  Sep  9- 15/91 ) 

September  10: Lennard   A .   Fisk,  NASA's  Associate  Administrator   for  Space  
Sc ience  and  Applications ,   announced  t h e  appo in tmen t   of  Dirk  D.  Frimout  as 
payload  specialist  for  t h e   A tmo sphe r ic   Laboratory  for  Applications   a n d  
Sc ience   (ATLAS - 1 )   Spacelab   mission,  scheduled  for  early  1992.  ( N A S A  
Release  91 - 144 )  

September  I  I :   Lennard   Fisk,  NASA's  Associate  Administrator ,   announced  
t h a t   t h e  two  largest  mirrors for NASA's  Advanced  X-ray Astrophysics Facility 
have  been   tested  successfully in t h e  new X-ray Ca l ib ra t ion  Facility at Marshall 
Space  Flight C e n t e r ,  Huntsville ,  Alabama .   ( N A S A  Release  91 -145 )  

N A S A   also  announced   t h a t   President  George   Bush  would  join  N A S A  
Administrator   Richard  Truly  in  a back-to-school  special program  for  e lemen -  
tary  students   o n  N A S A   Select  Television.  ( N A S A  Release 9 1- 146) 

September 12:  T h e  media  covered  extensively  final preparations   leading  up  t o  
t h e   even ing   launch   of  Discovery  in   its  1 3 t h  flight,  a  record.  Biographic  da ta  

SEPTEMBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

were  given  concerning  members of  the   mission  as  well  as  descriptions  of  the  
satellite  to  be  launched  t o  gather  ozone  information.  (0  Sun, Sep   12/91; NY 
Times,  Sep   12/91;  USA  Today,  Sep  12/91; P  lnq,  Sep  12/91; LA  Xmes,  Sep  
12/91; AP, Sep  12/91; UPI, Sep  12/91; NY Xmes, Sep  13/91; B Sun, Sep  13/91; 
P  Inq, Sep  13/91; W Post, Sep  13/91; WS],  Sep  13/91; USA  Today, Sep  13/91; 
W Times, Sep  13/91; LA  Times, Sep  1319 1; AP,  Sep  13/91; UPI ,  Sep  13/91; LA 
Times, Sep  1419 1 ; NY  Tmes, Sep  1419 1 ) 

NA SA  announced  the  launching  by  USA  Today, together with NASA   and 
the   National   Association  of  Elementary  School  Principals,  of  "Visions  of 
Exploration."  This  was  the   first  multimedia  educational  program designed  to  
bring  the   spirit  of  exploration  in to   the   classroom  in  1992,  the   International  
Space Year.  (NA SA  Release 91 -147)  

September  13: NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly  announced  plans  to  
create a new Office of  Space Flight Development. Th is  would allow the  exist- 
ing Office of  Space Flight  to concentrate  o n  the  safety and efficiency of space 
flight.  (NA SA  Release 91-148)  

According  to   the  Los  Angeks  Xmes,  an   ingenious  "Mars  rover"  tha t   Soviet 
scientists want  to  send  to  Mars, was  ready  to  be  tested  in  the  Mojave  Desert. 
T h e  desert was  selected  because  it   resembles the   surface of  Mars.  (LA Times, 
Sep   13/91) 

T h e  local newspaper carried a n  article  o n  an  area resident, Dale Reed, who 
said his "lifting-body conceptv-an  aircraft shape  tha t  eliminated  the  need for 
wings, influenced  the  design of  t h e  Space Shu t t le .  He  built  scale models of  his 
idea  and   convinced  his  boss,  Paul  Bikle, Director  of  NASA's  Dryden  Flight 
Research  Cen te r   a t  Edwards Air   Force  Base, to  try  it  o n  a glider. Reed  was  a 
NA SA  engineer  for  32  years  and  subsequently worked  as  senior  engineer  for 
PRC ,  Inc.,  a NASA  contractor.  (Antelope Vaffey  Daily News,  Sep  13/91 ) 

September  14:  Several  newspapers  commented  o n   the   study  by  a  panel  of 
experts ,   headed   by   Edward  A .   Frieman  of  Scripps   Ins t i tu t ion   of 
Oceanography,  released by  the  Federation  of  American  Scientists. T h e  report 
recommended  tha t   NASA   scrap  plans  for  six  huge  scientific  platforms  to  
gather  data   for  studies  of  global  warming  as  part  of  t h e   Earth  Observation 
System.  Instead,  experts  urged  tha t   NA SA   use  smaller  satellites  tha t   could 
provide  critical  data  more  quickly  and  more  cheaply.  (LA  Times,  Sep   14/91; 
NY Times, Sep   16/91; Rme,  Sep  16/91; NY  Times, Sep  20191 ) 

September  15: NASA's  launch  of  the  UARS   satellite  to  study  the   ozone  layer 
was  covered  extensively  by  the   media.  T h e   launch  was  slightly  delayed  by 
communications  hitches  between  ground  and   the   satellite  and  communica- 
tions difficulties continued  after  the   launch .  Later  reports, however, indicated 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERON.4UT1( :S 

SEPTEMBER   1991 

controllers   had   succeeded  i n   getting   t h e   faulty  data   receiver  t o   work.  O n  
September   16, t h e  Discovery temporarily had  t o  move t o  a lower orbit   t o  avoid 
possible collision with   a n  old Soviet  rocket.  (NY Times, Sep   15/91; B  Sun, Sep  
15/91; P lnq ,  Sep  15/91; W Post, Sep   15/91; AP, S e p  15/91; UPI ,  S e p  15/91; NY 
Times, Sep  1619 1 ; B  Sun, Sep  1619 1 ; USA Today, Sep  16/91  ; W Post, S e p  16/91 ; 
W Times, S e p   16/91; B  Sun, Sep   17/91; W Times, Sep   17/91;  P  I n q ,  Sep   17/91)  

September  16:  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard   H.  Truly  released  a  le t te r   from 
N o rm a n   R.  Augustine ,   former  cha i rman   of  t h e  Advisory  C omm i t t e e  o n   t h e  
Future  of  t h e  U.S.  Space   Program, assessing NASA's  efforts over   t h e  preced-  
ing  n i n e  mon th s   t o  implement   t h e  committee's  recommendations .   T h e  letter  
recognized  t h a t  N A S A   took  "many significant  actions"  but   "much   is  yet  t o  be 
accomplisheci."  ( N A S A  Editors' N o t e  N91 -60 ;  UP I ,  S e p   16/91)  

According   t o   Aviation  Week  and  Space  Technology,  quoting   t h e   Earth  
Observing  System  (EOS )  Engineering  Review  Panel ,   NASA's  plans  for  EOS  
satellites A  and   B "should  be  completely  reconfigured."  T h e  panel   also  stated  
t h a t   t h e   EOS   Data   and   Information   System  was  incorrectly  configured  and  
lacked  cen t ra l  c c ~ n tm l  of  da ta   archiving  a n d  distribution .  N A S A   released  t h e  
report  o n  September   2 3 .  T h e  same  issue of  t h e  magazine  reported  t h a t  N A S A  
was  discussing  with   Martin   Marietta  reintroducing   t h e   Tttan   3  booster  t o  
launch   t h e   EOS  spacecraft  i n t o  polar  orbit   from  Vandenberg  A i r   Force  Base, 
California ,  in  t h e  late  1990s. (AuWk, Sep  16/91; N A S A  Editor'sNote  N91-64) 

September  17: T h e  media  covered  preparations  of  t h e   Discovery  crew  for  t h e  
first S h u t t l e  night   landing  a t  C a p e  Canaveral ,  scheduled for September   18. A s  
it  developed ,  t h e   bad  weather   forced  a  diversion  of  t h e  S h u t t l e  from  Florida, 
and   t h e   actual   landing  occurred  t h e   n igh t   of  September   1 8  a t   Edwards  Air  
Force  Base, California .  Reportedly, preliminary  findings  were  t h a t   t h e  Shu t t le  
was  in  good  shape   after  its  landing.  (USA  Today, S e p   17/91; AP,  Sep   17/91; 
UP!,  Sep   17/91;  W  Times,  Sep   18/91;  USA  Today,  S e p   18/91;  W  Post,  S e p  
18/91; C Trin, Sep   18/91;  AP, Sep   1819 1 ;  UP I ,  Sep  18/91; P  lnq ,  S e p  19/91;  NY 
Times,  Sep   19/91; W  Times, Sep   19/91; WSJ,  Sep   19/91; W  Post,  Sep   19/91; 
USA Today, S e p  1 919 1 ; LA  Times, Sep   1 919 1 ; AP, Sep  1919 1 ; B Sun, S e p  1 919 1 ) 

A P  reported ,  as quo ted  i n  t h e  Washington Times, t h a t  t h e  Sov ie t  cosmonauts  
were  waiting   t o   return   home ,   puzzled  by  home   conditions .   T h e i r   return   was 
postponed  after  t h e  Republic  of  Kazakhstan  claimed  ownership  of  t h e  territo-  
ry  o n  which   they  were  supposed  t o   land .   Furthermore ,   t h e  Sov ie t  space  pro-  
gram  was  experiencing   financial   a n d   administrative   difficulties.  (AP ,   S e p  
1 7/91; W  Times, S e p   17/91 ) 

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h e   resignation   for  personal   reasons   of  Deputy  
Administrator   J .R .   Thomp son   Jr . ,   a n   in te rna t iona l ly   recognized  propulsion 
expe r t ,  who   served  more  t h a n   2 5   years  in   NASA .   ( N A S A   Release  91 -149 ;  

SEPTEMBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

AP,  Sep   17/91; W  Post,  Sep  18/91; Decatur Daily, Sep  18/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep  
18/91; Birmingham News,  Sep  18/91; NY  Times,  Sep   19/91; Birmingham  Post- 
Herald, Sep  19/91; AvWk, Sep 23/91) 

President George Bush, speaking to school children over a NASA  hook-up, 
said h e  would probably be  rejected  by NASA  for a space launch because of  his 
age, 67. (UP I ,  Sep  17/91; AP, Sep  17/91; W Emes, Sep  18/91)  

September  18:  According  to  AP,  NASA   and   t h e   Pentagon  were  undecided 
how  much  information  they  would  give  about  the   next   Shu t t le  mission,  the  
November  launch  of  Atlantis ,   intended  t o  release a satellite designed  to  spot 
a n  enemy missile attack.  (AP, Sep   1819 1 )  

September  19: A  senior  U.S.  trade  official, o n  condition  of  anonymity,  stated 
tha t   Japan  had   drafted  a plan  to  subsidize  the  entry  of  several Japanese com- 
panies  into  the  commercial satellite-building industry but  abandoned  the  plan 
under U.S. pressure. Hiroshi Hirabayashi, economics  minister  a t  the  Japanese 
Embassy  in  Washington,  confirmed  the   existence  of  such  a  plan  but  said  if 
implemented  it  would  probably  be  limited  to  research  satellites.  (NY  Times, 
Sep   19/91; WS],  Sep   1919 1 ) 

NASA   issued  a preliminary report  o n  findings of  the  June  Spacelab Shuttle  
mission.  T h e  human  body's adaptation  to  weightlessness began  o n  the   launch 
pad  and researchers needed  to develop new ways to counteract these physiolog- 
ical effects. These effects include weight loss, loss of body fluid, drop in red  blood 
cell production,  and reduced heart pumping capacity. (UP I ,  Sep  19/91; AP, Sep 
20191; NY Times, Sep 20191; W Post, Sep 20191; USA  Today, Sep 20191 ) 

September 23: NASA  announced tha t  its Goddard Space Flight Center/Wallops 
Flight  Facility, Wallops  Island, Virginia, had  selected H  and  H  Consolidated, 
Inc.  of  Hampton,  Virginia, for  an   operation/maintenance  and  alteration  con-  
tract  of  facilities and  equipment  services. (NA SA  Release C91-jj)  

Business Week  reported  tha t  NASA   planned  to use  three  giant ,  70-foot-tall 
computer-controlled  robots  to   inspect,  clean ,   dry,  and  line   new  and   refur- 
bished  solid  rockets  for space flights. Vadeko  International ,   Inc.,  a Canad ian  
engineering  company,  was  to   design  and  build  the   robotic  system,  to  be  in 
service  in  1993. (Bus Wk,  Sep 23/91) 

NASA  announced  the  renaming of  the  Gamma  Ray Observatory, deployed 
April  7 ,   1991, by  Space  Shu t t le   Atlantis ,   in  honor   of  American  physicist 
A r thu r  Holly Compton .   (NA SA  Release 91 -15 1 )  

Gerald  Fishman of  NASA's Marshall  Space Flight Cen te r  a t  a press confer- 
ence   spoke  of  the   findings  of  the  Gamma   Ray  Observatory  to   date.  H e   said 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

SEPTEMBER   1991 

tha t   an   instrument  called  the   Burst  and  Transient  Source  Experiment  had 
detected  117 gamma  ray  bursts  since  launching.  Thse   bursts  were  randomly 
scattered, not  from the  center  of  the  Milky Way Galaxy  as previously thought .  
(AP, Sep  23/91; P Jnq,  Sep 24/91; USA  Today, Sep  24/91; W Post, Sep 24/91; 
NY Times, Sep 24/91; W Xmes,  Sep 24/91) 

T h e  Government  Accounting  Office  issued  a study criticizing NASA's  sys- 
tem  of  testing spacecraft before  launching.  It  called  the   system poorly organ- 
ized  with  testing practices varying from one  center  to  ano the r  because NASA  
lacked uniform policies. T h e  study dealt with  t h e  Hubble Space Telescope and  
the   weather  satellites,  as  well  as  Space  Shuttles.  (AF', Sep   23/91;  UPI,  Sep 
23/91;  LA  Times, Sep   23/91; NY  Times, Sep   24/91;  USA  Today,  Sep   24/91; 
WSJ,  Sep  2419 1 ; W Times, Sep  24/91 ) 

T h e  Chicago Tribune featured Elmhurst College professor Frank Mittermeyer 
who has  been  growing tomatoes from some  1,000 seeds  tha t  orbited  Earth  for 
six  years  and   were  retrieved  by  Space   S h u t t l e   Cha l lenge r   in   1990. 
Mittermeyer  noticed  the   second  generation  of  space  tomatoes  were  not   as 
robust  as  the  first.  (C  Trin, Sep 23/91) 

NASA   announced   tha t   the   first  United   States-Soviet  space  art   team 
exchange  would  occur  o n   September  28  when  the   U.S.  team  arrived  in 
Moscow. T h e  purpose was  to  have  each  team  produce  paintings  of  t h e  o the r  
country's  space activities. (NA SA  Release 91-152)  

NASA  announced that scientists and engineers at its Je t  Propulsion Laboratory, 
Pasadena, California, successfully tested the mini-rover Rocky  I11  in  the Avawatz 
Mountains  south  of  Death  Valley.  T h e   mini-rover, weighing  52  pounds,  was 
designed  to be  used  on Mars. (NASA  Release 91-153; Bus Wk, Sep 9/91) 

Septemlwr  24:  According  to  the  Washington  Xmes,  Aurora  Flight  Services 
Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won  a contract from NASA  for up  to three of 
Aurora's Perseus A pilotless high altitude research aircraft. ( W  Times, Sep 24/91) 

September 25 :  The  media  covered NASA   spokesman Mitch  Vames'  report that  
during routine  structural  inspections of  Atlantis  in  the  hangar  cracks were  dis- 
covered on  the protective panel joints of  the  wings. As a result, NASA  was strip- 
ping  the  special,  heat-resistant  seals  and  seeking  to  discover  the  source  of  the 
cracks. It was uncertain whether  the discovery would delay the  November launch 
of  Atlantis.  (UPI,  Sep  25/91;  AP,  Sep  26/91; UPI,  Sep  26/91; NY Times, Sep 
27/91; W Times, Sep 27/91; W Post, Sep 27/91; USA  Talay, Sep 27/91) 

T h e   press  reported  tha t   Space  Shu t t le   Discovery  left  California  o n  
September 24 enroute  back  to  Florida, flying piggyback aboard a jetliner.  (LA  
Times, Sep 25/91; UP I ,  Sep  26/91; NY  Xmes,  Sep  27/91) 

SEI'TEh lHEK   1991 

CHRONOLOGY   1991 

September  26:  NASA   announced   tha t   Franco  Malerba  would  be  Prirne 
Payload  Specialist  and  Umberto   Guidoni   Backup  Payload  Specialist  for  the  
Tethered Satellite System mission o n  Space Shuttle  Atlantis  in  the  summer of 
1992. This   is  a cooperative mission between  NASA   and  Italy's space agency, 
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana.  (NA SA  Release 9 1 - 154) 

NASA   announced   that   preliminary  data  from  its  Upper  Atmosphere 
Research  Satellite  appeared  to   confirm  aircraft  and   ground-based  research 
about the  chemical processes leading  to ozone depletion.  (NA SA  Release 91- 
155 )  

A P  reported  tha t  House-Senate  legislators agreed  to  provide  $26 hillion  in 
1992  for  NASA's  planned  Space  S ta t ion .   (AP,  Sep  26/91;  Htssll  Tms,  Sep  
28/91; Htsell  Tms, Sep  29/91) 

NASA  announced  tha t  scientists studying data  from spacecraft Galileo con -  
cluded  there were  lightning storms o n  Venus. Science magazine just  published 
eight  scientific  articles  based  o n   Galileo's  Venus  observations.  ( N A S A  
Release 91-156; W Post, Sep  30191) 

September 27: NASA  Administrator Richard H .  Truly  presented  the  Minority 
Contractor   of  the  Year  Award  to Consolidated  Industries,  Inc.,  of  Huntsville, 
Alabama,  and   the   Minority  Subcontractor   of  the   Year  Award  to  Network 
Solutions, Inc., of  Hemdon ,  Virginia.  (NA SA  Release 91-1 57)  

In  response  to   the   House-Senate Conference  report  o n  the  N  1992 budg- 
et ,  NASA  Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly said  tha t  NASA  was  very  grateful 
for  the  funding for Space Station  Freedom. However, it was disappointed tha t  
the  total  NASA   appropriation  did  not   keep  up  with  inflation.  (NA SA  
Release 91-158)  

T h e  Discovery  astronauts  held  a  press conference  a t  which  they  answered 
questions  about  their   flight.  T h e y  indicated  it  was  easy  to  avoid  t h e   Soviet 
rocket  chunk   but  tha t   space  debris  could  be  a  major  threat   to   future  crews. 
T h e  amount  of haze  in the  atmosphere  from Mount  Pinatubo or  other  sources, 
particularly  struck  astronauts  who  participated  in  earlier  flights  and  aroused 
concern for the  environment .  (AP, Sept 27/91; UPI ,  Sep  27/91; LA Times, Sep  
2819 1 ) 

T h e   Huntsville  Times  reported  tha t   engineers  a t   Marshall  Space  Flight 
Cen te r   had  successfully  tested  a  17.5-foot-long  solid  rocket  motor  o n  
September 26.  (Htsvl Tms, Sep  27/91) 

According  to  the  Huntsville Times, Boeing donated  $300,000 on  September 
26  toward  building a  full-size mockup  of  Space S ta t ion  Freedom  at  the   U.S. 
Space and  Rocket Cen te r  in Huntsville.  (Htsell Tms, Sep  27/91) 

129 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  AERONAUTI(:S 

SEPTEMBER   1991 

September 28: T h e  Philadelphia lnquirer  reported  t h a t  t h e  six moons  of N e p t u n e  
discovered  by  Voyager  2  spacecraft  in   1989   were  given  names   by  t h e  
l n t e r n a t i o n a l   A s t ronom ica l   U n i o n ' s   C e n t r a l   Bureau  for  A s t ronom ica l  
Telegrams.  In   add i t ion ,  Saturn's  newest  moon ,   P a n ,  was  discovered  by  Mark 
Showalter ,   a  scientist   a t   NASA's Ames   Research  C e n t e r   in  Moun ta in   V ~ ew ,  
California .   ( P  Inq, Sep  28 /91 )  

September 29:  T h e  Washington Times discussed  t h e  viability of  t h e  Washington  
area  as  a  launch/landing   site   for  space  rockets.  T h e   various  space-related  
industries  already  found   in   t h e   area  were  men t ioned ,   but  a n   engineering  
school  was  lacking  t o  provide  a  local  ta len t   pool.  ( W  Times, S e p  29 /91 )  

T h e  Washington  Times  also  dealt   with   space  law  and   t h e   risks  involved   in  
such   matters   as  rocket  launches .   In   t h e   latter   c o n n e c t i o n ,   it  cited   O rb i ta l  
Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion   a n d   its  difficulties.  Because  most  commercial   space 
companies  had  N A S A  or  t h e  U .S .  gove rnmen t  as a customer, changes   in  gov-  
e r nm e n t  had   a n  impact   o n  t h e  legal aspects.  ( W  Times, S e p  29/91)  

According   t o   t h e  Washington  Post,  in  a n  article  o n  t h e   use  of  chlorofluoro-  
carbons   (C FC s )  and   the i r   impact  o n   t h e   e n v i r o nm e n t ,  NA SA   used  20 ,000  
gallons  of  CFC s  yearly  t o  decon tam ina te   t h e   inside  of  its  Space  Shu t t le s  a n d  
orbiters   and   t o   scrub   down   t h e   hardware   o n   t h e   launch   pad s . (W   Post,  S e p  
2919 1 ) 

T h e   Washington  Times  asserted  t h a t   science   fiction   based  o n   t h e   work  of 
lsaac  Asimov   influenced  Bib C i t r o n  who  helped   design  t h e  Spacehab  module  
th rough   his  work  for  t h e   Space   Travel  Company .   T h e   flight   of  t h e   first 
Spacehab  module  was  t o  he  in  July  1993.  ( W  Tm e s ,  S e p  29/91)  

September 30: According   t o   t h e  Washington  Post, new  findings  of  astronomers  
tended   t o  indicate   t h a t   t h e   universe  was  b o t h  smaller  a n d  younger  t h a n  pre- 
viously  though t .   T h e  result,  if  t h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope  should  be  able   t o  
provide  accurate   readings o n  t h e  matter ,  might  prove   t h a t   t h e  calculations  of 
t h e  Hubble  con s tan t   (regarding  t h e  age a n d  size of  t h e  universe)  needed   t o  be 
revised.  ( W  Post, S e p  30191) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e  Soft  X-ray  Telescope,  o n e  of  four  instruments  
o n   t h e  Japanese   Solar-A   spacecraft  launched   August  30 ,   1991 ,  took   its  first 
soft  x-ray  image of  t h e  sun .  ( N A S A  Editor's N o t e  N 9 1 - 6 8 )  

October 

October  1 :   In  an   editorial  entitled   "Fiscal  Realism  a t   NASA ,"   NASA   was 
commended for  its  reported  readiness  to  stress smaller, less costly missions.  In 
this  connection ,   the   paper  believed  tha t   Space  Station   Freedom  should  be 
scrapped as well  as  the  Earth Observing System platforms. (CSM, O c t   1/91)  

T h e   New  York  Times  cited   t h e   recent   issue  of  Nature  with   articles  by 
NA SA   scientists  and   others  o n   the   possibility of  using  advanced   techno lo -  
gies  to   make  Mars's  env i ronmen t   more  terrestrial  and   thus   hospitable   to  
humans .   A  May  issue  of  Life  magazine  was  also  cited   as  evidence   of  grow- 
ing  scientific   interest   in  the   po ten t ia l   habitability   of  Mars.  Nevertheless ,  
serious  obstacles  remained ,   in  addition   to  t h e   tremendous  costs  t h a t  would 
be  involved .   (NYT, O c t   1 /91 )  

October 2 :  T h e  media covered extensively NASA's receiving $2 billion  for the  
planned  Space Station   in  the   House  budget  action  but  having  a new  launch 
system and   the  National  Aerospace  Plane cu t  drastically. T h e  House  voted  to  
give NASA   14.3 billion  in FY  1992 and  the   Sena te  later  approved  t h e  com- 
promise bill.  (UP I ,  O c t  2/91; AP, O c t  3/91; P  Inq ,  O c t  3/91; C Tr in ,  O c t  3/91; 
NY  Times, O c t  319 1 ; W Xme s ,  O c t  319 1 ; LA Times, O c t  3/91 ; USA  Today, O c t  
3/91; CSM ,  O c t  4/91)  

NASA   said  small cracks were  found  in  the   thermal  seals o n  the  wings  of  a 
second Space Shu t t le ,  the  Columbia. T h e  cause of  the  cracks remained  unde- 
termined.  (AP, O c t  2/91; Fla  Today, O c t  2/91 ; W Tmes, O c t  3/91) 

A  Soyuz  rocket  blasted  off  from  the   Baikonur  Cosmodrome  for  the   Mir 
Space  Station   carrying  an  Austrian  electronic  engineer  and   the   first  cosmo- 
naut   from  the  Republic  of  Kazakhstan, where  Baikonur  is  located.  T h e  joint 
Soviet-Austrian  mission  was  part  of  a  Soviet  effort  to  help   pay  for  t h e  space 
program with joint  international  flights. Tass reported  the  rocket docked with 
Mir  o n   October   4.  O n   October   10,  two  Soviet  cosmonauts  and  the   first 
Austrian  in  space  returned  to   Earth,  according  to  Tass.  (AP, O c t  2/91; UPI ,  
O c t  2/91; P  Inq ,  O c t  3/91; C Tr in ,  O c t  3/91; AP, O c t  4/91; AP, O c t  10191) 

October 3:  NASA's Soft  x-ray Telescope  aboard  the  Japanese Solar-A  space- 
craft  launched  from Japan's Kagoshima Space Cen te r  o n  August  30, made  its 
first x-ray  images of  the   sun. T h e  purpose of  the  mission was  to  produce  pic- 
tures  of  the   genesis  and   life  of  solar  flares  to  enable  scientists  to  learn  more 
about  them .   (W  Xmes, O c t  3/91 ) 

NASA  announced  tha t  the  X-29, an  unusual research aircraft built  to inves- 
tigate  the  feasibility of  a forward-swept wing design, made  its  last flight  in  its 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N l )  .ITI:ONAC'TICS 

OCTOBER  1991 

high  angle  of  attack  research  program  o n   September  30  at  NASA's Ames- 
I3ryden Flight Research Fac~lity ,  Edwards, Ca l~ fo rn ia .  (NA SA  Release 91 -159; 
Antelope Valley  Press, O c t  4/91 ) 

NASA  Administrator  Richard  H .  Truly announced  the  planned creation  of 
the  Office of Management Systems and  Facilities. Benita A. Cooper was  to  be 
the   Associate Administrator  for  this office which was  t o  enhance   total q a l i -  
t y   management.  (NA SA  Release 9 1 - 160 )  

NASA   Administrator  Richard H .  Truly  announced  two key  appointments: 
Arnold  D. Aldrich  to be  Associate Administrator  for the  new Office of  Space 
Systems  Development  and  Richard  H.  Petersen  to   become  Associate 
Administrator  for  the   Office of  Aeronautics  and  Space Technology.  (NA SA  
Release 91-161;  AP, O c t  3/91; Daily  Press, O c t  4/91; W Post, O c t   10/91)  

NASA   discovered  cracks  In  the   protective  thermal  layer  of  the   wings  of 
Iliscovery, the   third  Space Shuttle  to  experience this problem.  (AP, O c t  3/91; 
W T rne s ,  O c t  419 1 ) 

October 4: NASA  announced  the  selection of  two new  institutions  to serve as 
NASA   Specialized Centers  of  Research  and Training  (NSCORT ) .  T h e  cen-  
ters  are  to  be  at  the   University  of  California,  San   Diego,  and   Lawrence 
Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, California. A  foreign center ,  the  University  of 
Giessen, was tentatively selected but  awaited full endorsement and funding by 
the  Ge rman  government.  (NA SA  Release 91-163)  

NASA   announced   the   selection of  MK-Ferguson Corporation,  Cleveland 
for  a contract   to  provide  engineering, construction,  and  maintenance   servic- 
es  to  NASA's Lewis Research Center ,  Cleveland .  (NA SA  Release C91 -mm )  

October 5 :  William  R .   Lenoir said NASA's manned  space flight  division must 
cut  expenses by  three   percent  each  year  in  the   nex t   five  years  to  save $1 bil- 
lion. T h e  last  alternative  would  be  to  reduce  the  number of  space flights but 
tha t  would  be  "a  couple  o f  years  away."  Later media comments  indicated  tha t  
NASA's  budgetary  discipline  and  the   slimming  down  of  t h e   Space  Station  
plans  appeared  to  be  paying off  for NASA   in  relation  to Congress.  (AP, O c t  
5/91; AuWk, O c t  21/91; W Post, O c t  28/91) 

T h e  Baltimore Sun  published  an  article quoting Richard  Stolarski, research 
scientist  at  NASA's Goddard  Space  Flight  Center ,   concerning  ozone  deple- 
tion.  He  stated  that   the   hole  in  the   ozone  layer  over  the  Antarctic   failed  to  
shrink  as  was  hoped.  He  wondered  whether  the   same  might  occur  over  t h e  
No r th   Pole  and  indicated  the   need  to  understand  the   limits  under  which 
ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA  announced  the  findings of  its 
Total Ozone  Mapping  Spectrometer, which  indicated  the  ozone depletion  in 

LICTOBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

Antarctica  was  almost  as  severe as  t h e  record  year  of  1987. ( B  Sun, O c t  5/91; 
NA SA  Release  91-165; AP,  O c t  9/91; UP I ,  O c t  9/91; NY  Zmes, O c t   10191; 
USA  Today, O c t   10191; CSM ,  O c t   10/91; W Post, O c t   11/91) 

October  7:  A n   editorial  in  a  space  publication  criticized  NASA   and   the  
Na t iona l   O c e a n i c   and   A tmosphe r ic   Adm in is t ra t ion   ( N O A A )   for  its 
handling  of  GOES  meteorological  satellites. T h e   magazine  maintained  tha t  
the  two agencies failed "in  their effort  to balance  the  risk  of  buying new  tech-  
nology  with  t h e  need  to  provide  assured  satellite service."  (SP  News,  O c t   7 -  
13/91)  

October  8:  NASA   announced  tha t   its  newest  Tracking  and  Data  Relay 
Satellite ,   launched  from  Atlantis   on  August  2 ,   1991, was  operational.  Th is  
expanded  the   communications  capability  required  by  the   increasing  number 
of  scientific  spacecraft.  (NA SA  Release 91-164; Business Wire, O c t  9/91) 

NASA   further  announced  the   selection  of  two  additional  Centers   for  the  
Commercial Development of  Space  (CCD S ) .  These  were  the  Cen te r   for  the  
Commercial  Development  of  Space  in  Satellite  and  Hybrid  Communication  
Networks,  University  of  Maryland  Systems  Research  Center ,   College  Park, 
and   t h e   Space   Communications   Technology   Cen te r ,   Florida  A t l a n t i c  
University  Research Corporation,  Boca Raton.  In  an  unrelated action ,  NASA  
and   Vanderbilt  University,  Nashville,  Tennessee,  agreed  to  discontinue  the  
Cen te r   for  Space  Processing of  Engineering  Materials  because of  a decline  in  
research  by  metals producers.  (NA SA  Release 91 - 166; B  Sun, O c t   10191) 

October 9:  T h e  Christian Science Monitor commended NA SA  for naming  t h e  
orbiting  Gamma  Ray  Observatory  the   Arthur   Holly  Comp ton  Gamma   Ray 
Observatory  because of  the   late  Nobel  Prize  laureate's  studies of  the   subject. 
Moreover,  the   renaming focused  a t ten t ion  o n  o n e  of  NASA's  "outstandingly 
successful missions."  (CSM ,  O c t  9/91) 

NASA   announced   the   selection  of  new  Regional  Technology  Transfer 
Centers  to  replace  the   Industrial Applications Centers  whose contracts  expire 
in  1191. T h e  centers  were  the   following: Northeast--Center   for Technology 
Commercialization, Westborough,  Massachusetts; Mid-Atlantic-University 
of  Pittsburgh;  Mid-West-Battelle  Memorial  Institute ,   Columbus,  O h i o ;  
Southeast-University  of  Florida, Alachua; Mid-Continent-Texas  A  and  M 
University ,   College   S t a t i o n ;   and   Far  West-University 
of  S o u t h e r n  
California, Los  Angeles.  (NA SA  Release 91-167)  

NASA   announced  tha t   the  Antarctic   ozone  levels had  reached  the   lowest 
values ever observed  o n  October  6  ( 1  10, plus  or  minus  6 ) ,  according to  pre- 
liminary  data   from  NASA's  Goddard   Space  Flight  Cen te r ,   Greenbelt ,  
Maryland.  (NA SA  Release 91-168;  LA Xmes, O c t   10191) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

OCTOBER  199 1 

NASA  Administrator  Richard  H .  Truly met  with senior NASA  officials in 
Washington  to   discuss  Deputy  Administrator  James R .   Thompson's  interim 
viewpoints  o n  roles  and   responsibilities of  NASA   Centers  and  Headquarters 
offices.  Thompson's  final recommendations  and  a  proposed  implementation  
plan  were  t o  follow in  early November.  (NA SA  Release 91-169)  

October  10: NASA   announced   tha t   beginning  October   1 2 ,  1992, 500  years 
after  Columbus's  discovery of  America,  NASA   would  begin  the   most  com- 
prehensive  search  ever  for  evidence  of  intelligent  life  elsewhere  in  t h e   uni- 
verse.  T h e  NASA   Search  for  Extraterrestrial  Intelligence  (SETI)  microwave 
project  is  to  be  a ground-based  decade-long effort  to  detect   microwave  radio 
transmissions.  (NA SA  Release 91 - 170; UPI ,  O c t   1 119 1 )  

William  J .   O'Neil ,  manager  of  the   $1.4 billion  Galileo  project  a t  NASA's 
J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory, said Galileo fired its  thrusters  to  put  it  o n  a  course 
to   take  it  close  t o   t h e   asteroid  Gaspra  o n   October   29.  (AP, O c t   10191; W 
Xmes, O c t   10191; LA  Times, O c t   10191) 

T h e  speech of  Lennard  A.  Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for  Space 
Science  and  Applications,  at  a  September  19  meeting  of  the   American 
Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics,  was  published  in  Washington 
Technology.  Fisk  first  dealt  with  the   causes  and  effects  of  negative  publicity 
about NASA  and  went o n  to defend NASA's accomplishments and  t h e  ration* 
ale for NASA's existence as being an  absolute rather than  a relative one ,  which 
made  developing  a  consensus  harder.  He   concluded  tha t   "The   adventure  of 
space is  a vital part  of  our society. T h e  space program needs  to be  perceived as 
the  best  this  country has  to offer."  (Washington Technology, Oc t   10191) 

According  to  the   Los  Angeles  Daily  News,  NASA   decided  t o   modernize 
Space  Shuttles  Atlantis   and   Discovery  in   Florida  rather  t h a n   in   Palmdale. 
This   development,  which  was  designed  to  save  time  and  money, would  cost 
t h e   Antelope   Valley  of  California  more  than   400  jobs.  (LA  Daily  News, 
O c t   10191) 

October  I 1  :  T h e   Washington  City  Paper  carried  an   article  featuring  Ali 
Abutaha, whom  it described as "telling NASA   things  it would  rather  not hear" 
over  the   preceding  five  years.  H e   filed  suit  against  NASA ,   Rockwell 
International  (maker  of  the   Shuttle's orbiter),  and  the   American  Institute  of 
Aeronautics  and Astronautics. However, the  U.S. District Court  in Alexandria, 
Virginia  rejected his  three  suits.  (Washington City  Paper, O c t   11/91) 

T h e   Daily  Press  recounted  the   dedication  o n   October   10 of  the   100-ton  
Variable  Density Wind   Tunnel   as  a National   Historic  Landmark.  T h e  cere- 
mony  occurred  a t   NASA's  Langley Research  Center .   T h e   wind  tunnel   was 
responsible for more efficient wing designs of  aircraft  and established NASA's 

OCTOBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

predecessor,  t h e  Na t iona l   Advisory C omm i t t e e  for  Aeronautics ,   as  a  t e c h n o -  
logically  c om p e t e n t  organization.  (Daily Press, O c t   11 /91 )  

October  13: A  feature   article  i n  t h e  Los  Angeles  Times discussed  t h e  chang ing  
qualifications  for  astronauts .   I n   t h e   early  days  of  N A S A ,   they  were  tough ,  
independen t  male  test  pilots. More   recently,  t h e y  became  be t te r  educated   and  
diverse  i n   backgrounds,  men   a n d   women   a n d   of  different  e t h n i c   origins.  A 
second   article   described  Mae   Jem i son ,  NASA's  only  black  female  astronaut .  
(LA Times, O c t   13/91)  

October  14:  T h e  media  reported  t h e  launch   from  C a p e  Canave ra l   by  O rb i ta l  
Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion  of  a small Aries  rocket   carrying S t a r  Wars  experiments  
for  t h e   Defense  Department .   T h e   experiments   were  in tended   t o   he lp   i n  
designing  sensors  t o  measure hea t -em i t t ing   "signatures"  of  ballistic  missiles  i n  
flight .  (AP ,  O c t   14/91; W  Times, O c t   15/91)  

Representative  Howard Wolpe  wrote  in a space  trade journal  concerning   t h e  
GOES -NEXT  weather  satellites. H e  commended  Comme rce  Secretary  Robert  
Mosbacher's s ta temen t  t h a t  although  GOES -NEXT  would n o t  be  launched  o n  
schedule ,  it  would  meet  original specifications. H e  con t inued   t o  be concerned  
abou t   a  possible  five-year gap  without   a  weather   de tec t ion   system  and   stated  
t h a t   firm commitments   of  assistance must  he obtained   from Europe  and  J a p a n .  
H e  also criticized N A S A  for lacking a planned  prototype  instrument  for G O E S  
a n d  for  its  ineffective cost controls .   (SP  News, O c t   14-20191) 

October  15: BDM  Federal,  Inc.  president ,   Earle C. Williams,  a n n o u n c e d  t h a t  
t h e  McLean ,  Virginia,  firm  won  a  con t rac t   t o  provide  techn ica l   and  manage-  
m e n t  assistance for NASA's Earth  Observing  System Program. (PR  Newswire, 
O c t   15/91)  

N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Richard   H .   Truly  announced   t h e   appo in tmen t   of 
Paul  F.  Holloway  as  Director   of  t h e   Langley  Research  C e n t e r ,   H am p t o n ,  
Virginia.  ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 17 1 ) 

October 16: N A S A  announced   tha t   Pennsylvania  S ta te  University's C e n t e r  for 
C e l l   Re sea rch ,   S t a t e   Co l lege ,   a  N A S A   C e n t e r   for  t h e   C omm e r c i a l  
Development  of  Space ,  had  begun a new  space program  t o  enable U .S .  industry 
t o   enhance   t h e  purification  and   processing  of  cells,  subcellular  particles,  pro- 
teins, growth  factors, and  o t h e r  biological products.  ( N A S A  Release  91-172)  

NASA's  Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r ,  G r e e n b e l t ,  Maryland ,   announced  
t h e   award  of  a  con t rac t   t o   t h e  Ball  Co rpo ra t ion ,  Boulder, Co lo rado ,   t o  com -  
p le te   c o n s t r u c t i o n   of 
t h e   C o r r e c t i v e   O p t i c s   S p a c e   Telescope   A x i a l  
Rep lacemen t  for  t h e   Hubble   Space  Telescope.  ( N A S A  Release  C91-oo; AP, 
O c t   16/91;  PR  Newswire, O c t   16/91;  0 Sun ,  O c t   17/91; WSJ, O c t   17 /91 )  

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1991 

October 17: NASA's Johnson  Space Center ,  Houston announced  the  award of 
a  contract   to   McDonnell  Douglas  Space  Systems  Company,  Huntington  
Beach, California, modifying t h e  Space Station  Freedom Program  Integration 
Support  (Schedule B) contract .  Schedule B  involved  the   integration of  Space 
S ta t ion  components.  (NA SA  Release C 9  1 - n n )  

October  18: T h e  American  Institute of  Aeronautics  and Astronautics  (A IAA )  
sponsored a workshop of  scientists, environmentalists,  regulators, and aerospace 
industry representatives the  summer of  1991. As a result, a report was  issued o n  
October  17, concluding that  rockets blasting into  space generate pollutants  that  
deplete  stratospheric  ozone,  increase acid  rain,  contribute  t o  global  warming, 
and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the  
A IAA ,  said  all nations  that   launch  rocket-powered vehicles should contribute 
to an  international effort to reduce the  problems. T h e  United  States used  more 
solid  rockets  than   any  other  nation.  For  example, NASA   estimated  that   each 
Space  Shuttle  flight deposited  about  75  tons  of  chlorine  into   the   ozone  layer. 
Subsequently, Reuters  interviewed Steve Newman,  chief  environmental  engi- 
neer  in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA  played a minor role 
in  depleting  the   ozone  layer  it  was  studying but  said  NASA   was  working  to 
make  its next generation  of  space vehicles more environmentally  friendly. (NY 
Xmes, O c t   18/91; B  Sun, O c t  2819 1 ) 

October 19: According to  UPI, the  new Shu t t le  Endeavour's maiden voyage in 
April  1992 faced a significant delay because of  numerous problems discovered 
after  it was delivered  to  the  Kennedy Space Center .  Among other   reasons for 
the  delay were  the  parts cannibalized  from  Endeavour  to  avoid  major  launch 
delays of  other  orbiters. As  the   Shuttle  was  inspected,  more  than   1 ,400  prob- 
lem  reports were  filed  regarding work  needed.  (UP I ,  O c t   19/91)  

October  20:  NASA   scientists  connected   with  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope 
correction  project  were  quoted  with  reference  to   t h e   amount   of  work  to   be 
done. T h e  Hubble science  team, subject  to  top-level NASA  approval,  was  to  
build  a  second  generation  Wide  FieldIPlanetary  Camera  (WFPC )  with  only 
four  instead  of  eight  of  the   powerful  electronic  light  detectors  known  as 
charge-coupled devices  (CCD s ) .  T h e  proposed  change  took  account  of  tight 
money  and  time  pressures  but  meant  that   the   photographic  operation  might 
take  10 to   20  percent  longer, according  to   Ed  Weiler, NASA's chief  Hubble 
scientist.  T h e   extent   of  repairs  to   be  made  would  be  decided  by  the   end   of 
1991  but  probably  would  involve  Shuttle   astronauts  making  three  or  four 
spacewalks  of  at  least  six  hours  each.  ( W  Post,  O c t   20191;  NY  Times,  O c t  
23/91; USA  Today, O c t  23/91) 

Douglas Birch  authored  a feature  article o n  the  Hubble Telescope, its find- 
ings,  and  its  limitations  because  of  the   flawed  main  mirror.  Reportedly,  the  
Hubble  repair  mission  is  t o   occur  in   November  or  December  1993. 

OCTOBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

Astronomers   were  also  conce rned   about   t h e   telescope's  age  in   terms  of   its 
effectiveness. Much   of  Birch's article   cen te red   o n  a n   interview  w i th   Douglas 
Duncan ,  a n  astronomer  a t  t h e  Space  Telescope Sc ience  In s t i tu te  o n  t h e  cam -  
pus of J o h n s  Hopk in s  University, who  used  t h e  Hubble   telescope  spectrograph  
da ta  extensively.  ( B  Sun  Magazine, O c t  20191) 

T h e  Washington  Tm e s   carried  a n   article   o n  Baikonur,  t h e   rocket   workers' 
town  in  t h e  Sov ie t  U n i o n  founded   by   t h e  military  in   1955 ,  t h e  same  year  as 
t h e   Cosmodrome .   N o   pe rmanen t   residents  were  registered  in  Baikonur ,  
known   as Leninsk ,  but   t h e   city  had   100 ,000  inhab i tan t s   crammed   i n t o  a  4 .5  
square  mile area .  Tables of Sov ie t  "space  firsts" a n d  "space  endu rance  records" 
were  included .   A n o t h e r   article   in   t h e   same  issue  described  Sov ie t   efforts  t o  
sell  or   ren t   space  gear,  including   parts  of  t h e   orbiting   Mir  Space   S t a t i o n ,   t o  
ease  t h e  financial  s i tua t ion  of  t h e  space program. 
A  f u r t h e r   a r t i c l e  discussed  Ch ina ' s   space  program ,   de sc r ibed   as  mak ing  
"steady   a n d   s u b s t a n t i a l   progress."  D a t a   varied   c o n c e r n i n g   t h e   co s t   of 
C h i n a ' s   space   efforts .   A c c o r d i n g   t o   t h e   Fa r   Eastern   Economic  Reuiew,  in  
May  1 9 8 8  t h e   a n n u a l  co s t   was  "abou t   $1 .5   h i l l ion ."   J i a o  Yong,  a  v ice   pol-  
icy  d i r e c t o r   w i t h   t h e   C h i n e s e   M in i s t ry   of  Ae ro space   Indu s t ry ,   to ld   t h e  
Hong  Kong  Standard   i n  May  1991  t h a t  C h i n a   s p e n t   less  t h a n   $ 1 0 0   b i l l ion  
o n   ae ro space  o v e r   t h e  p rev iou s  3 5  years.  U n i t e d   S t a t e s  officials ,  howeve r ,  
e s t im a t e d   t h a t   C h i n a   s p e n t   mo re   t h a n   $100 m i l l ion   pe r   year   o n   its   c om -  
me rc ia l   s p a c e   indu s t ry   a l o n e .   C omm e r c i a l   l a u n c h   se rv ice s   i n c l u d e d  
l a u n c h i n g   of  c omm u n i c a t i o n s   s a t e l l i t e s   for  o t h e r   c o u n t r i e s ,   such   as 
Au s t ra l ia .   I n   a d d i t i o n ,   acco rd ing   t o   Interavia  Space  Markets ,   a  p u b l i c a t i o n  
of  t h e  J a n e ' s  I n f o rm a t i o n  G r o u p ,  C h i n a  a n d  Russia  were  t h e  o n l y  c o u n t r i e s  
offering   recove rab le  sa te l l i te s  for  microgravity   e x p e r im e n t s .  C h i n a  o p e r a t -  
ed   t h r e e   ma jo r   l a u n c h i n g   sites:  J i u q u a n   S a t e l l i t e   L a u n c h i n g   C e n t e r   i n  
n o r t hw e s t  G a n s u  P r o v i n c e ,  X i c h a n g  S a t e l l i t e  L a u n c h i n g  C e n t e r   i n  s o u t h -  
west   S i c h u a n  P rov ince ,   a n d  Ta iyuan  L a u n c h i n g  C e n t e r  n e a r   t h e  c a p i t a l  of  
S h a n x i   P r o v i n c e .   ( W  Times,  O c t  20191) 

October  21  : A  discussion of  t h e  robot  explorer  Magellan's probe  of Venus du r -  
ing  its  16 m o n t h s  a n d  more  t h a n  3 , 0 0 0  orbits,  mapping  more   t h a n  9 0  pe rcen t  
of  t h e   surface,  appeared  in   t h e   Washington  Post.  Lead  scientist   S t e p h e n  
Saunders  of  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  California ,  wh ich   manages 
t h e  mission, was quoted   as saying  t h a t  scientists  were  looking  for  "active  plate  
tectonics"  such  as "con t inen ta l  drifts"  wh ich  occur o n  Earth .  To  d a t e ,  n o  such  
discoveries have  occurred .   ( W  Post, O c t  21/91)  

N A S A   announced   November   13 as  t h e   launch  da te   for C o n s o r t  4 ,   a  com -  
mercial  suborbital  rocket   carrying  n i n e  microgravity  experiments .  T h e  exper-  
iments  were  t o  be  launched  from  t h e  Nava l  O r d n a n c e  Missile Test S t a t i o n  a t  
W h i t e  Sands  Missile Range ,  New  Mexico ,  w i th  material   from  t h e  University  

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER  1991 

of  Alabama  in  Huntsville's Consortium  for Materials  Development  in  Space. 
(NA SA  Release 91-  173)  

A  trade  publication  reported  tha t  NASA   Administrator  Richard  H. Truly 
had  asked Vice President  Dan Quayle  to signal strong support  to Congress for 
the  X-30 National  Aerospace  Plane  (NA S P )  program. NASA   feared a major 
cut   in  funding  of  t h e  NASP  would  significantly  delay  the   program.  (AvWk, 
Oct  21/91) 

T h e  same publication discussed the  way  in which Michael Griffin, described 
as  "NASA's new moon/Mars  czar," was  shaking  up NASA's  space exploration 
initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted  to  move fast  on   launching  a "relatively 
inexpensive,  high-visibility  space  mission,"  such  as  sending  an   unmanned 
spacecraft to  scout  for  a permanent  base  on   the  moon.  (AvWk, O c t  21/91) 

October  22:   Forrest  McCartney,  Director  of  the   Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   a t  
Cape   Canaveral ,   said  NASA   might  have  to   close  one   of  its  two  Shu t t le  
launch  pads  to  save money.  ( P  Inq ,  O c t  22/91) 

T h e  United   Nations  (U .N . )  reported  tha t   the  world's ozone  layer, particu- 
larly  over  the   Antarctic ,   was  th inne r   t h a n   ever  and  the   "hole"  over  the  
Antarctic   was  increasing.  However,  U .N .   scientist  Ruman  Bojkov  said  the  
U.S.  Space Shuttle  Challenger had no t  significantly contributed  to  the  situa- 
tion.  Readings were  taken  by  NASA   satellites  and  ground-based  spectrome- 
ters  and   the   data  analyzed  by  international  scientists convened  by  the   U .N .  
Env i ronmen t   Program  and   t h e   World  Meteorological   Organization .  
Subsequently,  Environmental  Protection  Agency  Administrator  William  K. 
Reilly said  "The  problem  is  more serious t h a n  we  believed."  (UP I ,  O c t  22/91; 
P  lnq, O c t   23/91; W Post, O c t  23/91;  USA  Today, O c t   23/91; NY  Times, O c t  
23/91;  WS], O c t   23/91; CSM ,  O c t   23/91;  W  Xmes,  O c t   23/91;  B  Sun ,  O c t  
23/91; LA  Times, O c t  23/91 ) 

AP   quoted  President  Bush's  science  adviser, D.  Allan   Bromley, as  saying 
that  declassification  of  Star  Wars  technology  would  enable NASA   to  begin a 
$30 billion  study of  Earth's environment   earlier  and  cheaper. Bromley added 
tha t   the   Department  of  Defense  and   the   Department  of  Energy  would  allow 
the  use  of  some of  their  inventions  for non-military  purposes. T h e  most  impor- 
tan t   was  a  technology  tha t   allowed pointing  an   instrument  from  space with 
greater accuracy to a given spot o n  Earth and  holding i t ,  as well as a technique  
to  f l y   individual  satellites, bring  them  together, and  lock  them   into  formation 
so several  satellites can  look a t  the  same spot o n  Earth.  (AP, O c t  22/91) 

According  to  a  local  newspaper,  a  NASAIAmes   research  plane  equipped 
with  infrared scanners tha t   can  cut  through  smoke gave firefighters their  first 
clear  v l ew   of  the   intensity  of  t h e  fire in t h e  Oakland  hills. A  videotape  of  t h e  

OCTOBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

infrared data  helped  the  firefighters and because  the  C-130B senses hea t ,  not  
light,  the  NASA   plane  can  provide  information not   available  from  firefight- 
ing helicopters.  (San Jose Mercury News, O c t  22/91) 

October  23:  NASA   announced   tha t   both   Voyager  spacecraft were  still  going 
strong after  14 years, more  than   two years after Voyager  2  observed Neptune .  
T h e   two  Voyagers  were  in  a  new  phase,  called  the   Voyager  Interstellar 
Mission,  searching  for  the   outer   edge  of  the   solar  system,  the   heliopause. 
(NA SA  Release 91 - 174)  

NA SA  announced  t h e  naming  of  M.  Rhea  Seddon  as payload  commander 
for  Spacelab Life  Sciences-2  Space Shu t t le  mission, scheduled  for  launch   in 
July 1993. (NA SA  Release 91-175)  

Rockwell  International   Corporation   stated  tha t   NASA   had  awarded  it  a 
three-year  $453.5  million  contract   extension  to   provide  maintenance   and  
repair  for  the  Space Shuttles.  (UP I ,  O c t  23/91) 

According to  AP,  the  Hubble Space Telescope presents  astrophysicists with 
a mystery:  the   existence of  hydrogen  clouds  in  space  tha t   should  have  dissi- 
pated  billions  of  years ago. According  t o  Ed  Weiler, NASA's  space  telescope 
program manager, this was Hubble's most  significant  finding  to  date .  (AP, O c t  
2319 1 ) 

Florida Today  reported  tha t   Forrest McCartney, who  had  headed  Kennedy 
Space Cen te r  since  1986, would  be  retiring  in about  a year. Subsequently,  the  
media  reported  tha t   McCartney  had  been  asked  to   step  aside  early  by  top  
NASA   managers.  ( F h  Today, O c t   23/91; UP I ,  O c t   25/91; AF', O c t   26/91; W 
ITimes, O c t  27/91; 0 Sen Star, O c t  30191) 

October  24:  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis   was  slowly  hauled  to   its  launch  pad  for  a 
scheduled  November  19  blastoff,  according  to   UPI.  NASA   announced   its 
mission was  to  deploy a Defense Support Program satellite designed  to detect  
nuclear  detonations ,  missile  launches, and  space launches from a geosynchro- 
nous orbit. A number of o the r  experiments are to  be performed during  t h e   10- 
day flight.  (NA SA  Release 91-176; UP I ,  O c t  24/91) 

NA SA   announced   tha t   in   con junc t ion   with  t h e   Federal  Aviation  
Administration  it would  sponsor an  international  government/industry work- 
shop  o n  aircraft  icing. T h e  workshop  is  to  be  held  a t  NASA's Lewis Research 
Cen te r  in  Cleveland ,  which has  the  Lewis Icing Research Tunnel ,  the  world's 
largest refrigerated  icing  tunnel .   (NA SA  No te   to  Editors N91 -75 )  

October 25:  T h e  Washington Post highlighted  Japan's  rocket  industry,  which  
after 3 0  years of  sending  t h e  country's own  payloads  in to  space, was  prepar- 

.ASTRONAUTIC:S  A N D  AERON . 4L  TIC'> 

iX:TORER  1991 

ing  t o  \\.in  r ~ g h t s  t o   launch  foreign  satellites .  Its H - l l  was a  heavy-lifter   rock-  
e t ,   wh ich   should   be  ready  for  test  f l ~ g h t  in  1993 ,   according   t o   Hiroshi  
Irnamura ,  execu t ive  vice  presiilent  of  Rocke t   System  Cn rpo ra t ion .   ( W  Post, 
C)ct  25 /91 )  

According   t o  t h e  press, two  members of  t h e  House subcommittee   t h a t  over-  
sees  N A S A   spend ing ,  C h a i rm a n   Aoh  Traxler,  Democrat   of  Michigan ,   and  
ranking  minority  member  Bill G r e e n ,  Republican  of  New  York, asked  N A S A  
A d n~ i n i s t r a t o r  Richard  Truly why  N A S A  did  no t   huy  a  Mir  Space  S t a t i o n  or  
o t h e r   technology  from  t h e   Soviet  U n i o n .  N A S A   replied  tha t   t h e  U .S .  aero-  
space  inilustry  w o l~ l d  no t   like  it.  (AP, O c t  25/91 ; H Sun ,  O c t   26/91 ; LA  Times, 
O c t  27 /91 )  

October 27: T h e  media covered  t h e  Galilee's approach   t o  t h e  asteroid Gaspra ,  
w i th in   wh ich   it  was  scheduled  t o   f l y   1 ,000  miles,  making   t h e   first  relatively 
close-up  pictures  of  a n  asteroid.  O n  O c t o h e r  29 ,  Galileo   took   photographs   of 
Gnspra  as   it  flew  by,  but  because  its  ma in   a n t e n n a   remained   jammed  t h e  
images could  n o t   be  transmitted   until   t h e  m ;~ l f u n c t i o n  was  fixed.  (NY Times, 
O c t   ? i / 9 1 ;  W  Times, O c t   28/91;  P  Inq ,  O c t   28/91;  W  lJost, O c t   30191;  P  lnq, 
 T o d a y ,  O c t   30191; H 
O c t   30191; B  Sun ,  O c t   30/91; 0 Sen  S ta r ,  O c t  33/91;  F ~ I
Chroii, C3ct  30/91; H  Post, O c t   30191; C  Trin, O c t   30191; U P ] ,  O c t  30191) 

October  28:  NA SA   announced   t h a t   Dudley  McConne l l ,   Associate  Director  
for ,4pj,lic;ltions  for NASA's Earth  Sc ience  and  Applications  Division ,  died of 
a n   apparent   heart   a t tack .   ( N A S A  Obituary;  Flil  To&?,  O c t   29/91;  W   Post, 
O c t   31/91)  

NA SA   announced   t h a t   i t   and   o t h e r   institutions  such   as  t h e   National  
C e n t e r   for  Atmospheric   Research  in   Boulder,  Co lo rado ,   t h e   Na t iona l  
Ocean ic   ;*nil Atnlospheric   Aiiministration ,   and   a  numher   of  universities  had  
I,egtun  a  s ix -mon th  airborne   study  t o  de te rm ine   t h e  prohahility  th;lt  a n  ozone 
" l u ~ l e , "  silnilar  to  t h e  annua l  phenomenon   seen  in  t h e  A n t a r c t i c ,  wo i~ ld  devel-  
o p   in  t h e   No r the rn   Hemisphere .   ( N A S A   Release  91-178;   Flil  Today,  O c t  
2919 1 )  

Quo t ing   the   Dclllas  Times  Hera ld ,   AI'  reported   on   a  study  k i n g  done   t o r  
N A S A   h y   L)r.  Cha r le s   Pak,  head   o f   t h e  Mineral   h4etaholism  I k p a r tm e n t   , ~ t  
t h e  University  of  Texas Southwestern   bledic;ll C e n t e r  in  l3allas. According   to  
Pak ,  white   males  might   no t   be  able  to   urithhtand  long  trips  in  space  because 
the i r   bones  tend   t o   deteriorate   during   ex tended  weightlessness. Young  black 
Inen  were  t h e  best  c;lndidates for  long-term  space  travel  because  women ,  who  
h;t\.e  s~ n n l l e r  hone   structure ,   also  lose  bone   more  rapidly.  Dr.  Stanley   Feld, 
clinical  professor  a t   t h e   Meilical  C e n t e r   ; ~ n d  head   of  endc~crinology  a t   t h e  
Presbyterian  Hospital ,   said  t h e   impo r tan t  th ing  was  t o  find  ways  t o  s top  hone  
loss  111 space .  (AP ,  C3ct  28/91; Fh  Tothy ,  O c t  29/91 ) 

OCTOBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

According to  Florida Today, t h e  Atlantis  astronauts were scheduled  to arrive 
a t  Kennedy  Space Cen te r   in  a few  days,  to  begin  preparations  and  a practice 
countdown  for  the   Space  Shu t t le   flight.  (Fla  Today,  O c t   28/91;  UPI ,   O c t  
31/91)  

October 30: James T. Rose, Assistant Administrator  for Commercial  Programs, 
announced  his  plan  to   leave NASA .  NASA   Administrator  Richard  H.  Truly 
announced tha t  John  G. Mannix would take his place. (NASA  Release 91-1 79) 

NASA  Administrator Richard Truly spoke o n  the  opening day of  t h e  Space 
Exploration  '91  convention   in  Houston ,   sponsored  by  the   NASA   Alumni  
League. He  said tha t  recent  successes by unmanned  missions were paving  the  
way  for  future  space  initiatives. H e  also stressed  the  need  for  belt  tightening 
over  t h e  next   several years.  ( H  Post, O c t  30191; H Chron, O c t  30191) 

NASA   unveiled  a  three-dimensional  view  of  Venus  created  from  images 
recorded  by the  Magellan  spacecraft. Magellan  detected  a five-mile high  vol- 
cano  known  as Maat Mons, about  the  size of  Earth's  largest volcano, Hawaii's 
Mauna  Kea.  ( P  Inq, O c t  30191; W Post, O c t  30191; NY Times, O c t  30191; W 
Times,  O c t   30191; NY  Emes,  O c t   30191;  Fla  Today, O c t   30191; C  Trin,  O c t  
30191; AF', O c t  30191) 

Flonda  Today  published  figures of  Kennedy Space Cen te r   spending  for  the  
fiscal  year  ending   September  30 ,   1991.  T h e   center   spent  $1.42  billion  in 
Florida,  an   increase  of  3 .6  percent  over  the   previous  year.  Of  tha t   amount ,  
$1.03  billion  went  for on-site  contractors.  (Fla Today, O c t  30191) 

October 31 : NASA  Administrator Richard H .  Truly named Robert  L. Crippen  
as  the  new Director of  the  J o h n  F.  Kennedy Space Center ,  effective January  1, 
1992. Crippen  is  to   replace  Forrest  S. McCartney.  (NA SA  Release  91-180; 
A&  O c t  31/91; UPI ,  O c t  31/91; 0 Sen Star, Nov  1/91; Fla Today, Nov  1/91)  

November  

November   1 : N A S A  announced  t h a t  it  had  reached  agreement  with  Co lumh ia  
Commun ica t ion s   Co rpo ra t ion ,   Hono lu lu ,   t o   delay  for  up  t o   six  mon th s   t h e  
start  of operations  under Columbia's lease of NASA's Tracking a n d  Data  Relay 
Satellite   System  ( TDR S S )  C -Band   capacity. N A S A   leased  t o  Co lumh ia   t h e  
C -Band   transponders   o n   two  geostationary   TDRSS   satellites  t o   serve  c om -  
mercial  in te rna t iona l   telecommunications   customers  in  t h e   A t l a n t i c   and  
Pacific  coastal  regions.  ( N A S A  Release  9  1  - 181  ) 

T h e   med ia   repo r ted   t h a t   o n  O c t o b e r   3 1 ,   a   Federal   g rand   jury  in   lowa  
h a d   i n d i c t e d   t h e   Rockwe l l   I n t e r n a t i o n a l   C c ~ r p o r a t i o n  a n d   two   of  its  
employees   o n  cha rge s  of  o v e r b i l l i n g  N A S A   for work   o n   t h e  S p a c e  S h u t t l e  
p rog ram .   O n  N o v em b e r   8,  N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   its   su spen s ion   of  C o l l i n s  
C omm e r c i a l   A v i o n i c s ,   C e d a r   Rap id s ,   l ow a ,   a  d i v i s i o n   of  Rockwe l l  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   from   f u r t h e r   g o v e r nm e n t   c o n t r a c t s   because   of  t h e   i n d i c t -  
m e n t .   (NY  T imes ,  N o v   1 /91 ;  WSJ,  N o v   1 /91 ;  P  l n q ,  N o v   1 /91 ;  B  S u n ,  N o v  
1 /91 ;  W  T ime s ,  N o v   1 /91 ;  AP,  N o v   1 / 9 1 ;  U P I ,  N o v   1 /91 ;  N A S A   Release  
9 1 - 1 8 6 ;   AP,  N o v   9 / 9 1 ;   Flu  Today ,   N o v   1 1 / 9 1 ;  W  Po s t ,   NO \ '  1 1 / 9 1 ;  WSJ, 
N o v   11 /91 ;  U P I ,  N o v   1 1 / 9 1 )  

T h e  Phrladelphia  Inqu irer ,  quo t ing  AP,  reported  t h a t   a  hydraulic  fuel  tank   in 
o n e   of  Space   S h u t t l e   Atlantis's  solid  rocket   boosters  burst  after  a  test  o n  
Oc tobe r   3  1.  However,  according   t o  N A S A   spokeswoman  Lisa  Ma lone ,   t h e  
rupture   should  n o t  delay  t h e  scheduled  launch  of  A t lan t i s .   ( P  fnq, Nov   1 /91 )  

T h e   media   discussed  Forrest  McCa r tneyb   heing  xsked  by  N A S A   t o   s t e p  
aside  as  head   of  t h e   Kennedy   Space  C e n t e r   so  t h a t   h e   could  he   replaced  by 
Robert  C r ippen .  McCartney   said h e  would  have   liked  t o  stay o n  a n o t h e r  year, 
but   th i s  was  n o t   possible.  (W  Pos t ,  Nov   1/91; W Times, Nov   1/91;  Fla  Today, 
Nov   1/91;  0 Sen   S t a r ,  Nov   1/91; AP, Nov   1/91;  P  I n q ,  Nov   2/91;  UP I ,  Nov  
2/91; NY  Times,  Nov   3/91;  SP News ,   Nov   4-10191; O Sen  S ta r ,  Nov   9/91 ) 

November   3:  A n   A P   article   discussed  NASA's   Fort  Lightning ,   near   C a p e  
Canave ra l ,  where  Bill Jaffetis manages NASA's  lightning   research  process.  By  
greater  understanding   of  lightning ,  forecasting could  he  improved ,  thu s  reduc-  
ing  interruptions   and   delays  in   S h u t t l e   launches   and   saving  money,  equ ip -  
m e n t ,  and   lives.  (W  Times,  Nov   3 / 9 1 )  

November   4 :   N A S A   announced   t h a t   undergraduate   engineering   s tuden t s   at 
Mississippi  S t a t e  University,  Starkville ,   had   won  t h e   compe t i t ion   t o   huild  a 
50-foot  mockup   of  t h e  X -30 /Na t iona l  Aerospace   Plane .   ( N A S A  Release  9  1 -  
182 ;  Fla  Today ,  Nov   10/91)  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

NOVEMBER   1991 

In  repositioning  one  of NASA's Tracking and Data  Relay Satellites, TDRS-  
3 ,   o n   October   22,  it  came  near  a  Hughes  Communications'  Galaxy   1 .  O n  
October  23, it disturbed GE Americom's Satcom  1R. T h e  result was tha t  cable 
television   nationwide   was  disrupted .   NASA   Associate  Adm in is t ra to r  
Charles  T. Force said  engineers  suspected a hardware  failure o n  TDRS  caused 
the  problem.  (AvWk, Nov  4/91 ) 

November  5: NASA   announced   the   successful  testing  of  a  new  method  to  
measure surface pressure o n  airplanes during flight; such  information provides 
data for  improving plane designs. NASA  tests used paint   tha t  becomes irides- 
cent   under  ultraviolet  light. T h e   intensity  of  the   light  radiated  by  t h e  paint ,  
as  seen  in  photographs,  results from  t h e   flight  pressure.  (NA SA  Release  91-  
183; Antelope Valley  Press, Nov  8/91 ) 

Hughes  Aircraft  Company  said  its  Space and  Communications  Group  had 
signed  a  $300  million  contract   to   build  three  communications  satellites  for 
Alpha   Lyracom, a private global communications satellite operator.  T h e  first 
satellite  was  scheduled  for  launch  in  May  1994  and   is  to   serve  the   Pacific 
Ocean   region.  ( WSJ, Nov  5/91 ) 

November  6:  Findings  presented  a t   the   American  Astronomical  Society's 
Division of  Planetary  Sciences conference suggested tha t  Mercury had  an   ice 
cap o n  its no r th  pole, even  though  it was  the  planet nearest  the  sun. The find- 
ings surprised the  California Institute of Technology scientists who discovered 
them  and were based on  August experiments, the  first radar photographs  of  a n  
entire   hemisphere  of  Mercury. T h e  brightest  reflection  o n  the   planet's no r th  
pole  indicated a highly  reflective substance such as ice over a n  area of  a n  esti- 
mated  150 square miles. (AP, Nov 6/91; B Sun ,  Nov  7/91; P  lnq, Nov 8/91; LA 
Times, Nov   1 1/91 ) 

November  7:  NASA   announced   tha t   November  19  had  been  set  for  the  
launch of  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis ,  which would carry a full load of military and 
scientific  experiments during  its  10-day mission. Of  major  importance would 
be  its deployment  of  the   latest  in  a series of  Defense Support  Program recon- 
naissance satellites.  (NA SA  Launch Advisory; AP, Nov  7/91; UPI ,  Nov  8/91) 

NASA   announced  the   selection  of  301  research  proposals  (from  2,583 
received) for  immediate  contract  negotiation  in NASA's  1991 Small Business 
Innovation  Research  Program. While   meeting  federal  research  and   develop- 
ment  needs, the  program  aims to  stimulate technological innovation .  (NA SA  
Release 9 1 - 184 )  

NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly  announced   the   award  of  the  
George  M.  Low  Trophy,  recognizing  the   best  contractors  o n   the   space  pro- 
gram,  to  Grumman   Technical  Services  Division,  Tltusville,  Florida,  and  

N O V EM B E R   1991 

CHRONOLOGY  1991 

T h i o k o l  Co rpo ra t ion ,  Space  Ope ra t ion s ,  Brigham  City ,  U t a h .  G r umm a n  pro- 
vided  hardware  and   support  services  t o   t h e   integrated   launch   team   a t   t h e  
Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r ,  Florida. T h i o k o l  provided  t h e  redesigned solid  rocket  
mo to r  propulsion  system  t h a t   produced  8 0  pe rcen t   of  t h e  thrust   necessary  for  
Space  S h u t t l e  liftoff.  ( N A S A  Release  91-185;  PR Newswire, N o v   7 /91 )  

NASA's  J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r   announced   t h e   award  t o   McDonne l l  
Douglas Space  Systems Company ,  H u n t i n g t o n  Beach, California ,  of a modifi- 
c a t i o n   t o  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom  Schedule   A  con t rac t .   Schedu le  A  pro-  
vided  hardware   componen t s  for  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  and   t h e  modification   will 
encompass   t h e   In teg ra t ion ,   Test ,   and   Verification  Env i ronmen t   and   Ada  
Compiler .   ( N A S A  Release C 9  1 - p p )  

November  8: A P  reported   t h a t  N A S A  found  a way  t o  circumvent   t h e  jammed 
a n t e n n a   o n  Ga l i leo   in  order   t o   receive  photographs   of  t h e   Gaspra   asteroid. 
Images were  being  sen t  with   t h e  smaller a n t e n n a  a t  a very slow rate .   (AP ,  Nov  
8/91;  B  S u n ,  Nov   9 /91 )  

November   9 :   T h e   Baltimore  S u n   reported   a  N A S A   a n n o u n c em e n t   o n  
November   8  t h a t   its  $10   million  effort  to  determine   whe the r   a  ho le   in   t h e  
Earth's protective  ozone  layer was developing  over t h e  N o r t h   Pole, was delayed 
by  mechanical  problems  in bo th   t h e  project's aircraft. Mike Kurylo, manager  of 
NASA's Upper   Atmosphere   Research  Program, said  t h e  DC - 8  jet  had   a crack 
in  its  landing  gear a n d  t h e  high-altitude  ER-2 aircraft was grounded  for a prob- 
lem with   its wings.  In   addressing  t h e  same  subject ,  t h e  N ew  York  Times quoted  
t h e  project's chief scientist  as  saying three   ER-2 planes would  be  used  t o  survey 
t h e  ozone layer  a t  high   altitudes.  ( B  S u n ,  Nov   9/91;  NY  Times, Nov   10191) 

T h e   Baltimore  S u n   quoted   A n n e   Thomp son ,   a n   atmospheric   scientist   a t  
NASA's  Godda rd  Space  Flight  C e n t e r  with   reference  t o   t h e   in te rconnec ted -  
ness  of  t h e   atmosphere's  moun t ing   problems:  global  warming ,   ozone  deple-  
t ion ,   a n d   smog. A s   examples  she   pointed   out   t h a t   some  hyd roxy l -enhanc ing  
gases  con t r ibu ted   t o   acid  rain;   o the r s   con t r ibu ted   t o   t h e   greenhouse   effect, 
while  a t   t h e  same  t ime ,  hydroxyl  played  a  vital   role  in  stemming  dep le t ion  of 
t h e  Earth's  ozone layer.  ( B  S u n ,  Nov   9 /91 )  

10: T h e  media quoted Aviation Week a n d  S p c e  Journal magazine as say- 
Nov& 
ing  that   a $70 million  cost  overrun  had  doubled  the   price of  two NASA   space- 
craft  being  developed  to   study  t h e   interaction  between  t h e   Earth  and   t h e   Sun .  
T h e  craft were being built  for use  in  the   17-nation  International  Solar Terrestrial 
Physics  Program. NA SA   officials  reportedly  confirmed  the   cost  increases.  (AP, 
Nov   10191; W  Xmes, Nov  11/91; Fla Today, Nov   11/91; B  Sun ,  Nov   11/91) 

November   1 1 :   D rama t ic   pictures   were  published   of  N A S A   spacecraft  
Magellan's findings o n  Venus. T h e s e  included  several of a peak  t h a t  may be a n  

ASTRC7NAUTI<:S  AN11 A ERONAU T IC S  

NOVEMBER   1991 

active   vo lcano   surrounded  by  fresh  lava,  as  well  as  t h e   first  global  map   of 
Venus.  (Newsweek ,  Nov   1 1 /91 )  

November   12 :   T h e   British  journal  N a t u r e   carried  a n   article   by  Rodney   A .  
Viereck  a n d  Edmond  Murad  of  Phillips Laboratory, a space  research  cen te r   a t  
Hanscom   Air   Force  Base,  Bedford,  Massachusetts.  T h e i r   findings  indicated  
t h a t   t h e  probable  reason  for  t h e  eerie  orange  glow of  t h e  Shu t t le s  was  caused 
hy  oxygen  in  t h e  upper  atmosphere  striking  nitric   oxide  o n  t h e  Shuttle's   skin ,  
forming  excited   nitrogen   dioxide ,  which   radiates  light  when   it  moves  o f f   t h e  
surface.  ( N Y  Times,  Nov   12/91;  Xinhua ,  N o v   12/91)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   its  latest   target  in   efforts  t o   understand   t h e  global 
climate   and   predict  future  pa t te rn s   are  t h e   cirrus  clouds.  In   mid-November ,  
atmospheric   scientists  from  NASA's  Langley  Research  C e n t e r ,   H am p t o n ,  
Virginia,  t o   lead  were  researchers  t o   Coffeyville,  Kansas,  where  ground ,   air-  
bo rne ,   and   satellite   measurement   platforms  were  t o  conduc t   intensive   cirrus 
cloud  investigation   for 25  days.  ( N A S A  Release  91 -187 )  

O rb i ta l  Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion ,  Fairfax, Virginia, announced  t h e  appo in tmen t  
of  former  N A S A   Deputy  Director  J .R .  Thomp son  Jr.  as  executive   vice  presi- 
cient. H e  was  t o  manage  t h e  new  Orbital   office  in  Huntsville ,  Alahama ,   near  
Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r .   (AP ,  Nov   12/91; W Post,  Nov   13/91; W Times, 
Nov   1 3/91 ; Htsell Tm s ,  Nov   13/91; (No r the rn  Virginia) Journa l ,   Nov   14/91)  

November   13: A  University   of  A labama ,  Huntsville-managed   sounding   rock-  
et  launch  was canceled  o n  November   12 when   a n  electrical  problem  occurred 
with   o n e   expe r imen t .   T h e   launch   of  t h e   Con so r t   4  from  t h e   W h i t e   Sands  
New   Mexico   Missile  Range  was  reset  for  November   16.  (Htszll  Tm s ,   Nov  
13/91; AP, Nov   13 /91 )  

T h e   A i r   Force  Eastern  Space   a n d   Missile  C e n t e r   became  t h e   4 5 t h   Space  
W ing  o n  November   12. T h e  East  Coa s t   launch   organization  was  responsible 
for facilities a t   Patrick ,  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  An t igua ,  and  Ascension .   (Fla Today, 
Nov   1 319 1 ) 

November   14:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   its  research  plane   F- 16XL demon s t ra t -  
ed   laminar   airflow  over  a  significant  part   of  its wing  while  flying  a t  superson- 
ic  speeds.  T h i s  could  increase  flight  efficiency  and   reduce  fuel  consumption .  
T h e  experiment   occurred  in  a  series  of  28  flights  a t   NASA's  Ames-Dryden  
Flight  Research  Facility,  Edwards,  California .   In   th i s   c o n n e c t i o n ,   t h e   N ew  
York  Times  wrote  about   wind  shear   problems  faced  by  aircraft,  leading  t o   air- 
line   disasters,  a n d   NASA's  work  o n   th ree   predictive   systems  made   by 
Lockheed  Co rpo ra t ion ,   Rockwell  In te rna t iona l ,   and   Turbulence   Prediction  
Systems.  ( N A S A   Release  91-188;   Daily  Press ,   Newpor t   News ,   N o v   20191; 
Antelope  Valley  Press, Nov   21/91;  NY  Times,  Nov   24 /91 )  

NOVEMBER   1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

N A S A  released  t h e  first photograph   of  a n  asteroid ,  t h a t  of Gaspra ,  taken  by 
Ga l i leo  O c t o b e r   29.  ( N A S A  Release  91-189;  UP I ,  Nov   14/91; W Pos t ,   Nov  
1519 1 ; NY  Times, Nov   1519 1; W Xmes ,  Nov   15/91 ; USA  Today, Nov   15/91;  B 
Sun ,  Nov   15/91;  LA  Times, Nov   15/91;  P  I n q ,  Nov   15/91; AP, Nov   15/91)  

N A S A  Administrator  Richard H .  Truly released a n  internal  Agency report o n  
roles  and   responsibilities  of  N A S A  Cen te r s  a n d  Headquarters  offices, prepared 
by  former  Deputy  Administrator  James  R.  Thompson .   Thomp son   focused  o n  
three   thrusts:  building o n  NA SA  field organizations  as Centers  of Excellence  in 
specific areas of  science ,  technology,  and   development;  a  reminder   t o  "stick  t o  
basics"  in  engineering  disciplines,  and  program  management ,  and   realignments 
of  certain  N A S A  Headquarters office  responsibilities  t o  achieve  more efficient 
program  execution .   ( N A S A  Release  91 -1 90;  AP, Nov   15/91 ) 

A n  article  in  Florida Today  referred  t o  former N A S A  Deputy  Adm in i s t ra to r  
J .R .   Thompson's   proposal  t h a t   some  100  top   S h u t t l e   program  managers 
around  t h e  country  be moved  to  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  unde r  a consolidation  
plan  N A S A  was considering.  T h e  recotnmendations   were  t o  be  discussed  a t  a 
December   9 - 1 0   meeting   with   N A S A   Administrator   Richard   Truly.  ( F l a  
Today, Nov   15 /91 )  

Noelember  15: N A S A   announced   t h e  holding   of  a  second  na t iona l   techno lo -  
gy  transfer  conference   a t   t h e   S a n  Jose   C o n v e n t i o n   Cen te r ,   December   3-5. 
Spon so red   by  N A S A   a n d  
t h e   Techno logy   U t i l iza t ion   F o u n d a t i o n ,  
Technology  2001  would  showcase  leading-edge  technologies   from  t h e   Space  
Agency   and   o t h e r  Federal  agencies.  ( N A S A  Release 9 1 - 19  1 ) 

A rno ld   A ld r ich ,   Associate   Adm in i s t ra to r   for  NASA's  office  of  Space  
Systems Development ,  met  with  all staff a t  t h e  Re s ton ,  Virginia Space  S t a t i o n  
Freedom  office.  H e  said  N A S A   intended   t o  ma in ta in   a  strong   a n d   effective 
team   a t   Reston   during   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom  deve lopmen t   period. 
( N A S A  Release 91  - 192;  (Northern  Virginia) Journal,  Nov   15/91;  W Post, Nov  
1619 1; Washington Technology, N o v   2 119 1 ) 

November  16 :  A P  reported   t h a t  after  a delay caused  by  a battery  failure  in  o n e  
of  t h e   experiments ,   a  t h r e e - t o n  Starfire   1 rocket   blasted  off  from  t h e  W h i t e  
Sand s  Missile Range ,  New  Mexico .  After   its  15-minute  flight  peaking   a t   185  
miles  above   Earth ,   researchers  recovered  t h e   rocket's payload  in  t h e   missile 
range  50 miles from t h e  launch  pad. T h e  rocket  spen t  seven  minutes   in micro-  
gravity,  a n  area  of  Little gravity o n  t h e  edge  of  space, where   n i n e  expe r imen t s  
were  conduc ted .  (AP ,  Nov   16/91)  

November  17:  The  media  gave  extensive   coverage  t o   preparations   for  t h e  
launch   of  S h u t t l e   A t lan t i s ,   scheduled  for  November   19 .  Coverage   included 
men t ion  of  a "spy  camera" designed  t o  take detailed  pictures of  installations  o n  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER   199 1 

Earth  from  space.  ( P  Inq ,  Nov  17/91; W Times, Nov  17/91; USA  Today, Nov 
18/91; 0 Sun, Nov  18/91; W Times, Nov  18/91; NY  Xmes, Nov  18/91; C Trin, 
Nov  18/91; LA  Times, Nov  18/91; AP, Nov  18/91; UPI ,  Nov  18/91; NY Xmes, 
Nov   19/91; USA  Today, Nov  19/91; K'  Post, Nov  19/91; UPI, Nov  19/91) 

T h e  Huntsville  Times  indicated  tha t  NASA   and   consumers  in  general  had 
much  in  common ,   namely  a  situation  of  being  caught  in  a  recession  when 
careful budgeting was necessary. Nonetheless, many NASA  programs, such  as 
Magellan's probe of  Venus, and  the  Hubble Space Telescope, were  continuing  
their  g a d  work.  (Htsvl Tms, Nov  17/91 ) 

November 18: T h e  Washington Post featured the  space biology team a t  NASA's 
Johnson   Space Cen te r   in  Houston ,  which  has  created  a  stir  with  a  govern- 
ment-patented   invention  that   allows large quantities of  many  types of  human  
cells  to   be  grown  by  removing  the   force  of  gravity.  NASA's Rotating  Wall 
Bioreactor had  great potential  for  improving patient   treatment   and may  grow 
still  more  cells  when  used  in  space.  In  this  connection ,   NASA   announced  
tha t   the   rotating  wall  vessel  developed  at  t h e   Johnson   Space  Center's 
Biotechnology  Program, would  be  tested  in  space during  the   Atlantis   flight. 
( W  Post, Nov  18/91; NASA   Release 91-195)  

Thirteen  European  countries-Austria,  Belgium,  Britain,  Denmark,  France, 
Germany,  Ireland,  Italy,  the   Netherlands,  Norway,  Spain ,   Sweden,  and  
Switzerland-met 
to discuss European Space Agency plans that  were threatened 
by  Germany's lack of  funds. The  German research budget was short $930 million 
because  of  an  economic  slowdown  and  the   huge  costs of  German  unification. 
T h e  space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into  space 
and  according to Germany's ZDF  television network, was  assured of  funds. T h e  
question of  funds for  other projects, for which Germany and  France were  major 
funders, remained unclear.  (AP, Nov  1819 1; Science and Technology, Nov  25/91 ) 

Robert  Brown  and  Riccardo  Giacconi   of  the   Space  Telescope  Science 
Institute  in  Baltimore  wrote  an   article  favoring NASA's  shift  toward a more 
halanced  program  of  small,  intermediate,  and  large missions. T h e  reason was 
tha t   important  research goals must  be  pursued  with  appropriate  tools,  includ- 
ing  large  spacecraft.  For  example,  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope,  which  was 
proving  so valuable, needed  a  larger  spacecraft  as was  t o  be  the  case with  t h e  
Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility under development.  (SP  News, Nov  18- 
2419 1 ; NY  Times, Nov  2419 1 ) 

A  space journal  reported  that  Vice  President  Dan Quayle had   asked  David 
Thompson ,   former  NASA   engineer  and  current   chairman ,   president,  and 
chief executive officer of  Orbital  Sciences Corporation  of  Fairfax, Virginia, t o  
take  the  post of NASA  Deputy Administrator. Thompson  was considering  the  
matter.  (SP  News, Nov  18-24/91)  

NOVEMBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

November  19:  T h e  Washington  Post  highlighted   NASA's  encouragement   of 
education  and  research by its so-called G e t  Away Special  ( G A S )  program  in  
which  it  carried space experiment  canisters  in to  space for nominal   fees. T h e  
cost ,  set  i n   1976, ranged from $3 ,000  to  $10 ,000 ,  depending  o n  t h e  canister  
size.  However,  these  fees  recently  were  more  t h a n   doubled,  making  them  
prohibitive   for  many  educational   institutions .   Robert  Tucker,  NASA's 
Director  of  Space  Transportation  Services,  indicated  t h a t   ne i the r   t h e   old 
no r   the   new  prices  represented  t h e  true   cost,  which  NA SA   subsidized.  ( W  
Post, Nov   19/91)  

NASA   announced   the   selection of  seven  Historically  Black  Colleges  and  
Universities  to  receive Core  Research  C e n t e r  grants  to  develop further  their  
research  capability  and   research  infrastructure.  T h e   institutions  were: Clark  
A t lan ta   University,  A t lan ta ;   Fisk  University,  Nashville;  Florida  A&M 
University,  Tallahassee;  Hampton   University,  Hampton ,   Virginia;  Howard 
University,  Washington ,   D.C.;  No r th   Carolina   A&T   S ta te   University, 
Greensboro;  and   Tuskegee  University,  Tuskegee, Alabama.  (NASA   Release 
91-193)  

NASA   officials  told  UP1 tha t   a  1993 Shuttle   flight  would  end  with  a  fully 
automatic,  hands-off  landing  to  test  untried  systems  tha t   might  be  needed  if 
pilots were no t  up  to the  task after a long-duration mission.  (UP I ,  Nov   19/91) 

November  20:  O n  the   night  of  November  19 ,  NASA   delayed  the   launch   of 
Atlantis  for  at  least  five days because  of  the  malfunction  of a navigation  unit  
in  the  satellite rocket  tha t  provided  liftoff. ( P  lnq, Nov  20191; NY Times, Nov  
20191; W Post, Nov  20191; USA  Today, Nov  20191; LA  Times, Nov   20191; AP, 
Nov  20191; UPI, Nov   20191) 

A mysterious object was scheduled  to fly near Earth  in December. Scientists 
d o  not  know whether  it  is a new  type of  asteroid or  a 20-year-old Apollo rock- 
e t   tha t   shot  past  the   moon  and   was  returning  home.  Subsequently,  it  was 
reported  to be  a tiny asteroid  in  circular  Earth  orbit. However, further  report- 
ing by  another   team of  observers indicated  i t  was  more probably a cartwheel- 
ing  rocket  carcass.  ( W  'Times, Nov  20191; NY  Times, Nov  20191;  USA  Today, 
Nov   21/91; P Inq, Dec  1/91; W Post, Dec 9/91)  

A U.N.-sponsored  study, the  committee  for which  was co-chaired by  Robert 
Watson ,  a NASA  scientist, provided  the  first evidence of  a summertime  t h i n -  
ning  of  the   Earth's  protective  ozone  layer  over  parts  of  t h e   No r the rn  
Hemisphere,  including  the   United   States.  T h e  findings  were  based  o n  both  
ground  and satellite data ,  according  to Watson  in a briefing. Evidence  showed 
three   percent  of  the   summertime ozone  layer and  six  percent  of  the   winter- 
time ozone  layer were  lost over  the  middle-latitude regions during  the   1980s; 
similar results were  expected  for  the   1990s. 

ASTRC3NAUTICS , 4N I>  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER   1991 

In   connec t ion   with  t h e   ozone  dep le t ion ,  chemist   J im  Ande r son   of  Harvard  
University,  together   with   some  120  scientists   from  six  universities,  NA SA ,  
and   two  na t iona l   laboratories, was preparing  t o   launch   a $10  million  research 
expedition   of  50  airplane   flights   over  t h e   Arctic .   Scientists   also  proposed 
planes  spraying  50 ,000  ton s  of  propane  or  e t h a n e  high  over   t h e  S o u t h  Pole as 
a possible way  t o  neutralize  t h e  An ta rc t ic  ozone hole .   (UP I ,  Nov   20191; P Inq, 
Nov   22/91; W Post, Nov   25/91; NY  Times, Nov   2 6 / 9 1 )  

November  2 1 :   Robert   Brown  and   Paul  A .   Vanden   Bout,  astronomers   a t   t h e  
Na t iona l  Radio  Astronomy  Observatory  in Charlottesville ,  Virginia, using  t h e  
12 -me te r  telescope  o n  Kitt  Peak, Arizona ,   in July discovered  ca rbon  monox -  
ide  in  a strange  object   previously  found  by  researchers  in  Ursa  Major.  A  huge 
gas  cloud ,   a t   t h e   fringe  of  t h e   universe,  it  might   he   linked  t o  a  galaxy  in   for- 
mation .   ( P  Inq ,   Nov   21/91; LA  Times, Nov   25/91)  

Noz~ember 2 2 :  NASA  announced  tha t  t h e  University  of  Alabama  in Huntsville's 
Consortium  for  Materials  Development  in  Space,  a  NASA   Cen te r   for  t h e  
Commercial  1)evelopment  of  Space ,   had  selected  EER  Systems  Corporation ,  
Vienna ,  Virginia,  t o  provide  vehicle,  launch,  and  recovery  services for t h e  next  
series of  Consort  suhorhital  rocket  missions. (NA SA  Release 01 -194)  

Ntwernher 2 3 :  A t  a  news conference a t  Goddard Space Flight Center ,  researchers 
from NASA   and from  the  Soviet Cen t ra l  Aerological Observatory near Moscow 
announced   the  success of  the  first US . -Sov ie t  space effort in  16 years. T h e  engi- 
neer's  model  of  t h e   first  Total  Ozone  Mapping  Spectrometer  (TOMS--U.S. 
technology-transfer  la~v s  prohibited  the   launch  of  a  state-of-the-art  T OM S  
aboard  a S o v ~ e t  satellite) was  launched  aboard  a Soviet satellite August  15, and  
was  sending  hack  " h i g h - q ~ ~ a l i t y  data ,"   accoriling  to   Soviet  Lleputy  Director 
Vyachesl;tv Khattatov.  ( B  Sun ,  Nov   2319 1;  NY  T i incs ,  N o \ ,  23/91 ) 

NASA's  proposed launch   o n  Columbus  Day  1992 of  a n  ex tended  Sea rch  for 
Exttw-Terrestrial  Intelligence   (SET I )   was  described  in  some  detail .   SETl's 
seven-year duration   was  t o  have   two phases, a "targeted  search" directed   from 
NASA's  Ames   Research  C e n t e r   in  Moun ta in   View,  California ,   using  t h e  
world's largest  radio  telescope  in  Areciho ,   Puerto  Rico,  a n d  a n  all-sky survey, 
run  by  t h e   J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena  over   a  five-year  period ,  
heginning  with  NASA's Deep Space  Netu'ork  radio observatory  in  Go ld s tone ,  
l i q ,  Nov   25/91; W Times, Nov  29 /91 )  
Ca l i fc~m ia .  ( B  S u n ,  Nov   23/91;  I' 

November  2 5 :  Med ia   coverage   of  t h e   l a u n c h   of  S p a c e  S h u t t l e  A t l a n t i s  o n  
N o v em b e r   24  a n d   t h e   release   o f   a  $300  m i l l ion   A i r   Force   early   wa rn ing  
s a t e l l i t e  o n   N c~ v em b e r  25  was  e x t e n s i v e .   Repo r t s   t h e r e a f t e r   c o n c e n t r a t e d  
o n   t h e   e x p e r im e n t s   c o n d u c t e d   by  t h e   a s t r o n a u t s   aboa rd   t h e   S h u t t l e ,  
inc lud ing   s p o t t i n g   preselected   Ea r th   s i te s   from   space .   O n  N o v em b e r   28, 
A t l a n t i s  maneuve red   o u t  of  t h e  way  of  a  c h u n k  of  a S o v i e t   rocke t .   ( 0  S u n ,  

NOVEMBER 1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

N o v   25/91;  NY  Times,  Nov   25/91;   W  Post,  Nov   25/91;  W  Times,  N o v  
25/91;   USA  Today,  Nov   25/91;  P  Inq,  Nov   25/91;   WSJ,  Nov   25/91;   AP, 
Nov   25/91;  UP I ,  Nov   25/91; NY Times, Nov   26/91;  AP, Nov   26/91; B S u n ,  
Nov   27/91;  USA  Today, Nov   27/91;   C  Trin,  Nov   27/91;  AP,  Nov   27/91; 
UP I ,  Nov   27/91;  B  Sun ,  Nov   28/91;  NY  Times, Nov   28/91; W  Times, Nov  
28/91;  UP I ,  Nov   28/91;  B  Sun ,  N o v   29/91;   P  Inq,  N o v   29/91;  W  Times, 
Nov   29/91;  USA  Today,  Nov   29/91;   LA  Times,  N o v   29/91;  UP I ,   Nov  
29/91; W  Post, Nov   30191) 

A  feature  article  dealt  with   NASA's  management  overhaul,  which  it  
described as nearly complete and based o n  recommendations of Congress,  t h e  
Augustine panel,  and   the  most  recent  report of  former Deputy Administrator 
J.R. Thompson.  ( W  Post, Nov  25/91) 

T h e  Los Angeles Times described at some length  the  Yellow Creek  Advanced 
Solid Rocket Motor Facility, to be  located o n  the  Tombigbee Waterway of  the  
Tennessee Valley  Authority ,  in  the  home   district  of Jamie  L.  W h i t t e n ,  chair-  
man  of  the  House Appropriations Committee .  T h e  $3 million  project  was  to 
introduce  a  solid  rocket  system  tha t   was  mandated  by  Congress  but  which 
NASA's  advisory panel  said  was  no t   needed  and  might  no t   be  as  reliable  as 
existing  systems.  T h e   unemployment  rate  in  this   district  of  no r the rn  
Mississippi was more  t h a n  20 percent ,  and  critics maintained  this was  the  rea- 
son  for  the  facility being  constructed here.  (LA Times, Nov   25/91) 

November  26:  T h e  media  reported  tha t   t h e  National   Space Council   decided 
tha t   the   new  Landsat  satellite  to  study environmental  changes o n  Earth  and 
military movements, Landsat VII, would be funded by NASA  and  the  Defense 
Department.  Landsat  VII  was  to   resemble  Landsat  V1,  which  was  scheduled 
for launch  in late  1992. NA SA  Administrator Richard Truly testified a t  a con -  
gressional hearing  o n  the   subject  November  26.  (WSJ, Nov  26/91; AP, Nov  
26/91; W Times, Nov  27/91) 

NASA  announced  tha t  t h e  first demonstration  of  digital  radio broadcasting 
via  satellite  to   a mobile  vehicle  would  occur  December  2-6  in  Washington, 
D.C.  T h e   presentation  represented  a  joint  effort  of  NASA   and   the   U.S. 
Information Agency's Voice of America.  (NA SA  Release 9 1 - 196)  

November  28:  T h e  Baltimore  Sun discussed  a  cooperative  program  between 
NA SA  and  t h e  Italian  Space  Agency, which  was  t o  supply t h e  satellite .  T h e  
program  involved  a  tethered   satellite ,  a  concep t  developed  by  engineers  a t  
Martin   Marietta   Corporation .   Martin   Marietta   developed  t h e   boom  t h a t  
was  t o  deploy  t h e   satellite ,  which   would  be  connec ted   to   t h e   Shu t t le   by  a 
long  "string"  or   cable .  T h e  first  mission  was  t o  include   a n  electrodynamics 
test  in  which  the  satellite  and  te the r  were  t o  be  used  to  generate  electricity. 
( B  Sun, Nov   28/91)  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

NOVEMBER   1991 

November  29:  NASA   announced  that  its  John   F.  Kennedy  Space  Center, 
Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of  its contract 
for base  operations services. (NASA  Release C91-qq) 

December 

D e c~m b c r :  An  ; ~ r t i c l r  in  ,4ir Combat  dealt   with  NASA's  use  of  t h e  Lockheeil 
SR - 7 1A  R l i~ckh i rd ,  which   t h e   military  retired  from  use.  Se \~e r ; l l  top   military 
officers commen ted   t h a t   t h e  Blackbird  and   its unique   capabilities  would  have  
been   useful  in  t h e   Persian  Gulf   War   in  updating   t h e   military's con s tan t ly  
chang ing  hirttle  plans .  N A S A  usecl  its  th ree  YF-12As, t h e  predecessors  of  t h e  
SR -71A s ,   in  t h e   1970s  and   got  much   da ta   on  high-speed  flight .   Currently ,  
N A S A  was  using  its  SR -71A s  similarly  because  t l ~ e y  were  exce l len t   for  test-  
ing  equ ipmen t   and   new  materials  in  a  n~ o d e r a t e l y  high   (compared   t o   t h e  
Mach   2 5  uf  t h e  X - 3 0 )  speed  range. Thu s ,   t h e  SR -71A s  would  he  useful  t o  t r s t  
materials  for  t h e  X-30, ivhich  was  being  developed .   (A i r  Combat, Lkc  9 1 )  

According   t o  21  feature> ;\rticle  in   t h e  ,4tiation Safety Journal, a major  may  for 
pilots  t o   learn   how  t o   respond  t o   emergency  situations   u . a s   through   t h e  
Aviation   Safety  Reporting   System  (A SR S ) .  T h i s   system,  initiated   by  t h e  
Federal  Aviation   Association  in   1975 ,  enabled  pilots  t o  profit  from  t h e  expe-  
rience  of  others .   (Atliation Safety Journal,  Fall 91 ) 

NASA's  Kevin  Tucker described  NASA's  role  in  its  Avi;ltion  Safety  and  
A u t om a t i o n   (A S IA )  program.  Regun  in  1989 ,  t h e  program  was  to develop   a 
- 
~ 
technology   t o  impro\re  t h e  safety of  t h e  na t iona l  airspace system, hy  maximiz- 
ing  effectiveness  and   safety  of  autom;ition   without   compromising   h um a n  
authority .   (Azliution Safety Journal, F;i11 91 ) 

December  1 : Media  coverage  was  extensive   of  NASA's  cu t t ing  sho r t   by  three  
days  t h e   mission  uf  Space   S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s   because  of  a  failed  navigational  
un i t .  A t lan t i s   landed  a t  Edwards A i r  Force  Rxse, Ca l i to rn ia ,  December   I .  T h e  
S h u t t l e   landed  in  good  cond i t ion   a l though  ~t lost  a small  electrical  c o n n e c t o r  
part  o n   landing .   ( W  P o s t ,   Dec  1/91; W  Xmes,  l l e c   1/91;  NY  Times, L3ec  1 /91 ;  
R Sun ,  Dec  l J 9 l ; P  Inq, l k c  1/91;  P Inq ,  Dec  2/91; NY  Times, Dec 2/91 ; W I'ost, 
L3ec  2/91; N17'imrs, Llec  2/91; B Sun ,  Dec  2/91; USA   Today, Dec 2/91; AP, Dec 
2/91; C Trin, Dec  2/91 ; UP I ,   l)ec  2/91; B  Sun ,  Llec  3/91 ; NY  Times, Dec   3/91 ; 
W Times, Dec  3/91; USA  Today, Dec  3 /91 )  

December 2: A spy satellite monitoring center, officially known as  the  Ckizuka Air  
Force  Base, near  Sunnyvale, California, needed  n o   longer  t o   be  considered  top 
secret.  T h e   center   controlled  80  Pentagon  milit;~ry  and  spy  satellites  but  this 
responsibility  u.;ls  g r ; ~ d u a l l ~  being  transferrril  t o   t h e   Consolidated   Space  
<)perations Cen te r  a t  Falcon Air Force Base  in Colorado. According t o  a govern- 
ment  report,  the  transfer would no t  he complete until  1993. (LA  Times, l l e c  2/91) 

A n  editorial   in   a  space  journal  advocated   t h a t   N A S A  wind  down   its  pro-  
gram  for  t h e   construction   of  t h e   Na t iona l   Aerospace   Plane ,   t h e   X-30 ,   for 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER  1 9 9 1  

which  it has n o  funds, rather  than  wait until  1993 to  decide.  Instead  t h e  jour- 
nal  advocated  NASA's  focusing o n   "research  and   development  tha t   would 
continue   its already impressive advances in materials and  propulsion  technol-  
ogy."  (SP  News, Dec  2-8/91) 

December  4:  NASA   announced   tha t   a  soccer  ball-shaped  carbon  molecule 
might  be  t h e  perfect propellant for a spacecraft engine tha t  produced  thrust by 
expelling  charged  atoms  or   molecules.  Stephanie   D.  Leifer,  a n   engineer  a t  
NASA's Je t  Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, and Winston  A .  Saunders of  the  
California Institute of  Technology proposed to  use  t h e  molecule Carbon  60 as 
a fuel  in  ion  engines.  (NA SA  Release 91 - 197)  

NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .  Truly  announced   the  appointment  of  H. 
Lee  Beach Jr. as  Deputy Director  of  the   Langley Research Center ,   Hampton ,  
Virginia.  (NA SA  Release 91 - 198) 

NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence  (SETI)  program was featured 
in  the  Christian  Science Monitor. Harvard  University  professor Paul  Horowitz, 
designer of  the   Planetary  Society  equipment, was  cited  as  an  enthusiastic  lis- 
tener  for signals from space over  the  past  eight  years. (CSM ,  Dec 4/91) 

December 5: NASA  announced  tha t  early results from  its Upper Atmosphere 
Research Satellite  (UARS )  confirmed  t h e  link between  t h e  presence of  chlo-  
rine  monoxide  and  the   depletion  of  ozone  in  Earth's  upper atmosphere. T h e  
UARS   was  launched  by  Space  Shu t t le   Discovery  o n   September  12,  1991. 
(NA SA  Release 9 1 - 199 )  

T h e  Antelope Valky  Press  reported  o n  NASA's testing of  extensively  modi- 
fied  F-16 jets  as  the  first swept-winged aircraft  t o  make  laminar flow  flights a t  
supersonic  speeds. Laminar  flow  was  t h e   even   travel  of  air  over  an   aircraft's 
surface  when  in  flight.  T h e  tests  would  provide  useful  data   for  avoiding  tur-  
bulence  in  commercial  airline flights. (Antelope Valky Press, Dec 5/91)  

NASA   Associate  Administrator  Spence  Armstrong  met  with  Marshall 
Space Flight Cen te r  officials o n  December 4.  H e  said NASA's programs put  i t  
in  a  good  position  to   continue   to   attract   top   engineering  talents.  NA SA  
would  need  to   attract   engineers  from  several  previously  underrepresented 
groups,  including  blacks,  women,  the   disabled,  and  o the r   minorities.  (Hesvl 
Tms, Dec  5/91 ) 

December  6:  NASA   announced   tha t   t h e  Italian  Space  Agency  (AS I )  would 
design and  develop  two Mini  Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space S ta t ion  
Freedom  under  a  memorandum  of  understanding  signed  with  NASA   in 
Washington.  NASA   Administrator  Richard  H .   Truly  signed  o n   behalf  of 
NASA   and  Luciano  Guerriero,  President  of  ASI ,   signed  o n   its  behalf.  T h e  

DECEMBER  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 1991 

two agencies also agreed to work  toward expanding  their relationship,  includ- 
ing the  provision of  a Mini Laboratory. (NASA  Release 91-200) 

NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced  the award of  an exten- 
sion to  the United  Technologies Corporation's Hamilton  Standard Division's 
Extravehicular Mobility Unit  hardware contract. (NASA  Release C91-rr) 

NASA   announced  the  naming  of  two  additional  NASA  astronauts  and 
three payload specialists to the crew for the Spacelab Life  Sciences-2 mission, 
set for  launch  in  mid  1993. (NASA  Release 91 -201 ) 

NASA  held  a news  briefing designed to show  that  Space Station Freedom 
was  back  on   track.  NASA   Administrator  Richard  Truly  indicated  that  the 
final design of  the station would be  streamlined in weight and electrical power 
and would rely on  robots for repairs. (USA Today, Dec 6/91; W  Pos t ,  Dec 6/91; 
W Emes ,  Dec  6/91 ; AP, Dec 6/91 ) 

December   7:  A n   Atlas-2  rocket  boosted  an   $85  million  European 
Telecommunications  Satellite  Organization  (Eutelsat)  2  communications 
satellite  into orbit from Cape Canaveral. T h e  satellite was  the third  in a series 
of  French-built  relay stations designed to route television and  radio telephone 
signals across Europe.  (UP I ,  Dec  7/91) 

Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted  atop NASA's  Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, 
began  its  two-day flight back  to Kennedy Space Center  in  Florida.  (AP, Dec 
7/91; W Times,  Dec 8/91) 

December  9:  AP   reported  that  statistically  it  was  inevitable  that  astronauts 
would be obliged to make detours to  avoid space junk.  It happened  twice with- 
in  the previous three  months, most  recently with  Atlantis  a week  and  a half 
earlier, when  it  had  to  dodge 3,200 pounds  of  rocket  debris. Under  mission 
rules adopted after the Challenger explosion in  1986, astronauts must distance 
themselves from orbiting objects if  they are expected  to pass  within  a security 
zone  that  is  3.1  miles  long,  1.2 miles  wide,  and  1.2 miles  deep. NASA   esti- 
mated there was one chance  in  100,000 that a detectable object would collide 
with  a spacecraft once  inside that  zone.  (AP, Dec 9/91; NY  Zm e s ,  Dec  10/91) 

December  10: Sam E  Iacobellis, executive  vice  president  and  chief operating 
officer of  Rockwell International Corporation, presented a check  for $87,500 
to  the Challenger  Center for Space Science  Education  to support a national 
educational  teleconference  to  be  aired  in  the   fall  of  1992  on   Discovery 
Networks.  (Business Wire, Dec  10191; LA  Times,  Dec  12/91) 

December  1 I  : T h e   Washington  Post,  quoting  Edward  Weiler,  NASA's  chief 
Hubble  Space  Telescope  scientist,  said  that  a  computer  programming  error 

caused  t h e  Hubhle   t o  shu t   itself down   temi-lorarily o n  Decemher  9 .  T h e  proh-  
Iem  was  not   con s i~ ie re i i  serious and should  result  in  losing only  t\vo days of  sci- 
entific   o h s e r v , ~ t l o ~ ~ s .  NA SA   ;~nnoilnceLI o n   L>ecernber  12  tha t   t h e   Hubhle  
resumed  science  da ta   collection   as  of  t h a t  morning   and   returned   safely  from 
its  standby   cond i t ion   or  safe  mode ,   ;I  capability  built  i n t o   a11  N A S A   space- 
craft.  In  connec t ion   with   t h e   Hubhle ,   t h e   Rultltnore Sun  reported  a   problem 
with   its  spectrograph ,  ~ v h i c h  NA SA   believed  it  solved  by  lea r ing   t h e   power 
supply units  for bo th   ultraviolet  detectors  o n  a11  t h e  time .   ( W  P o ~ t ,  L>ec  11/91;  
UP I ,  L>ec  11/91; AP, Dec  11/91;  W'  Times, Llec  12/91;  N A S A  Release 91 -204 ;  
(:  T ~ I T I ,  L>ec  1719 1 ; \V'  ['osr,  Dec  13/91 ; H Sun ,  Llec  1 319 1 ) 

NA S , 4   ;innounced   t h e   awarci  t o  melnhers  ot th ree   Space   S h u t t l e  crews  of 
t h e  Vladinlir  M .   Komarov  Lliplv~na  by  t h e  N a t i o n ; ~ l  A e r o n : ~ ~ ~ t i c  Association  
for the i r  "outstaniiing  achievements in  t h e  field of  exploration  of  ou te r  space." 
T h e   awards  were  from   t h e   C o u n c i l   of  t h e   Fede ra t ion   A e r o n a u t i q u e  
In te rna t iona le .  T h c  crews  receiving  t h e   awards  were  t h e  Jiinuary  1990  STS- 
32 
\ v l l i c l~  I-etrieved  t h e   Long  Ll~rration  E s p o s i~ r e  Facility;  t h e  
I I ~ ~ S S ~ O I ~ ,  
Llecernher  1990  STS - 3 5   ~ n i s s i o n ,  wh ich   carried  t h e   A S TRO -  I  astrophysics 
o h s e r v ; ~ t o r ~ ;  
; tn J  t h e  Oc tobe r   1990  tnissicln STS - 4 1 ,  lvhich  deployed  t h e  joint 
NAS ,4/European   S p ~ e  Agency's Ulysses spacec r ;~ f t  t o  t u d y  t h e  sun .  ( N A S A  
Release  9 1 - 2 Q 2  Revised; Fln  Today,  L3ec  15/91 ) 

N A S A   a n t l o u ~ l c c ~ t  a  recent   agreement   between   its  Office  of  Co l rune rc i ;~ l  
Programs and   t h e  University  of  A l a h i~m a ,  Huntsville   ( U A H ) ,  t h a t  would  pro-  
vide  adilitional  tlight  research  opportunities  o n  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  for NASA's 
1 7  Cen te r s  klr  t h e  ( : o ~ n ~ n e r c i a l  l>evelopnlent  of  S l x ~ c e  (CCIIS). In  support  of 
t h ~ s ,  1nstrunnent;lticm  Technology  Associates,  Inc . ,   Exton ,   Pennsylvania ,  
s i g n e~ i  a  sommerci;ll  ;lgreement  with  U A H   t o   pro\riile  t h e   university's 
in  Sp;ice C:CLlS,  ~ 1 t l 1  flight  hardware 
Consorriuin   tor M ; ~ t t , r i ; ~ l  L>eve lop~ne~ l t  
tha t   would  he  ilown  on   five  S h u t t l e  missions.  ( N A S A  Release  91 - 2 0 3 )  

December  12: Paul Hays, scientist  in charge for N A S A  of  one  of  10 instruments  
o n  the  Upper Atmosphere  Research Satellite   ( U A R S ) ,  I;~irnched by  L>isco\iery 
o n  September   1 5 ,  said  t h e   UAR S  discovered  surprihingly violent ,   c o n t i n e n t -  
size  200-mile-per-hour  tvindstorms  in  a   rarely  stticlied  part  of  t h e   atmosphere  
known   as  t h e   mesosphere.  (AP. L>ec  12/91 ; C  Trin,  l l e c   1  319 1 ; 1'  Iiy, Dec 
1419 1 ; W' I'ost,  l k c  1619 1 ; LA  T t n r s ,  Llec  1619 1 ; hTk' 'Timrs, L7ec  1 719 I )  

T h e  Aerospace  Industries  Association  said  on Decelnber  11  t h a t   t h e   U.S. 
aerospace  industry  would  post  record  sales  of  $ 1  40   hillion  in   1991 ,  hut  t h a t  
ernpli>yment during   t h e   year  dropped  eight   percent   t o   1.16 million  ~vo rke r s .  
(LA  Tm e s ,  L)ec  l 2 / 9  1  ) 

Joseph   S t ick le ,   chief  engineer   a t   NASA's  Langley Research  Cen te r ,   was 
quc>ted in  connec t ion   with   NASA's  role  in  promoting   small  planes.  He   said 

DECEMBER  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

tha t  t h e  annual  convention  of  the  Experimental  Aircraft Association, held  in 
Oshkosh, Wisconsin,  was  a place  where NASA   featured  its  innovations  tha t  
would  make  small  planes  safer, such  as  a  spin-resistant design, lightning-pro- 
tection   technology,  or  airfoils. (WS],  Dec  12/91) 

December  13: T h e  media  covered  the   refusal  of  a Federal judge  o n  December 
1 2  to  order the  public release of  the  audio tape of  the  last moments of  the  seven 
astronauts  who  died  aboard  the   Space  Shuttle   Challenger  in  1986, saying  it 
would  violate  the   privacy  of  the   victims'  families. (NY Xrnes,  Dec  13/91; W 
Post, Dec  13/91; USA  Today, Dec  13/91 ; W Xmes, Dec  13/91; AP, Dec  13/91) 

William  B.  Lenoir, Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Flight,  said NASA  
hoped  to  cut   the   operating  cost  of  its  Space  Shu t t le  program  by  15 percent 
over  a  five-year period.  It  planned  to  do   this  by  eliminating  a  layer of  man-  
agement  and  merging  t h e  offices of  the   Program Directorate  in  Washington, 
Level  I,  with  the   Program  Office  located  a t   the   Lyndon  B.  Johnson   Space 
Cen te r   in   Houston,  Level  11.  T h e   reorganization  plan  as  yet  lacked  final 
approval.  (W  Xmes, Dec  13/91; Fla  Today, Dec  1319 1 ) 

*NA SA   announced   the   development  by 
its  Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory, 
Pasadena, of  a new, more accurate, airborne radar system for  topographic map- 
ping  of  the   Earth's surface. T h e   instrument,  called TOPSAR   for  topographic 
synthetic aperture  radar, would  be  about three  times more accurate  t h a n  exist- 
ing topographic mappers and  had many commercial and  scientific uses, accord- 
ing  to Howard  Zebker of  the  Pasadena laboratory. (NA SA  Release 91-205) 

NASA   announced   tha t   researchers  at  its  Langley  Research  Center ,  
Hampton ,   Virginia,  had   developed  a  laser-based  system  for  measuring  winds 
above  launch  sites.  T h e   system  called  CLAWS,  for  Coherent   Launch  Site  
Atmospheric Wind  Sounder, was  created  by  the   Spacecraft  Controls  Branch, 
Flight Systems Directorate, and Lockheed. CLAWS was used  in the  September 
12  launch  of  Space Shuttle   Discovery  and  might  eventually  replace  weather 
balloons as  a means of  gathering  data  aloft.  (NASA  Release 91-206)  

December  14:   T h e   Cleweland  Plain  Dealer  reported  tha t   NASA's  Lewis 
Research  Cen te r  o n  December  13 refused  t o  sign cleanup orders for n ine  sites 
within  the  Brook Park complex  tha t  were contaminated  with hazardous mate- 
rials.  NASA   officials  indicated  they  wished  to  continue   talks with  the  O h i o  
Environmental  Protection  Agency  and  tha t   signing  the   orders  would  mean 
waiving  their  right  to  appeal.  Moreover,  they  complained  the   agreement did 
no t   limit  the   sum  the   Oh io   EPA  could  charge  for  overseeing  the   cleanup. 
(Cleveland Plain  Dealer, Dec  14/91)  

December  15: The  Chicago  Tribune  carried  an   article  dealing  with  the   boon 
tha t   the   blurred  vision  of  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope  was  proving  t o  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

DECEMBER   1 9 9 1  

researchers.  Some  dozen  teams  of  scientists  took  Hubb le  d a t a  a n d  using  the i r  
computer  e n h a n c em e n t  programs produced  clearer  images. In  t h e  process  t h e y  
have   raised  the i r  own   profiles  in   a  sometimes  obscure  research  field.  (C  Tnn ,  
Dec  15/91)  

According   t o   t h e  Washington Post,  for  t h e  fou r th   t ime   since  April ,   N A S A  
scientists  a t   t h e  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena  were  trying  t o  free t h e  
a n t e n n a   o n   t h e   robot   explorer  Galileo .   T h e  scientists  deduced   t h a t   th ree   of 
t h e   18  ribs of  t h e   a n t e n n a  were  stuck  i n  t h e  closed position .   Being  unable   t o  
deliver  direct   force,  they   sought  t o   "shake"  t h e  structure   by  alternately   h e a t -  
ing and  cooling  it. O n  December  14-15 ,  N A S A  tried  again  t o  free t h e  jammed 
a n t e n n a   without   success.  (W  Post,  Dec   15/91;  UP I ,   Dec  16/91;  W  Post,  Dec 
17/91; W Post,  Dec  18/91; USA  Today, Dec  18 /91 )  

December  16: N A S A   announced   t h e   Extreme   Ultraviolet   Explorer  (EUVE )  
satellite   was  scheduled  t o   be  launched   from  C a p e   Canave ra l   A i r   Force 
S t a t i o n ,   Florida,  o n   May  28,  1992.  T h e   delay  in   t h e   originally   scheduled 
launch   time   \\.as  caused  by  t h e   need   for  Modular  A n t e n n a   Po in t ing  System 
accep tance  testing ,  which   was  completed ,  a n d  softwarefiardware  verification ,  
which   remained   t o  be  completed .   ( N A S A  Release 91 -207 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   appo in tmen t   of  Leonard  S .  Nicholson   as  director ,  
Space   S h u t t l e   program,  replacing  Robert   L.  C r ippen   who   is  t o   be  director ,  
Kennedy   Space  C e n t e r ,  Florida.  ( N A S A  Release  91-208;  AP,  Dec  16/91;  W 
Tme s ,  Dec  1719 1 ; LISA  Today, L)ec  1719 1 ; Fla  Today, Dec  1719 1 ; W  Post, Dec 
18/91)  

December  17:  T h e   Wall  Street  J o u m l   discussed  t h e   January   1989   offer  by 
Nikolai  Ponomarev-Stepnoy ,   leader  of  a  Soviet   design  team   t h a t   built  a  top  
secret  military  spy  satellite ,  t h e   Topaz-2,  t o  sell,  for  a  few  million  dollars,  t h e  
Topaz-2 with   t h e  satellite's lightweight  nuclear  reactor.  Moscow had  n o  money 
t o  develop  t h e  reactor  for commercial use but  t h e  paper deplored  t h e  U .S .  delay 
in   taking  up  t h e  offer. T h e  above discussion  followed  up o n  a s ta temen t  by  t h e  
Pentagon's Strategic  Defense  Initiative  Office,  reported  o n  December  11 ,  t h a t  
t h e   office  stopped  its  share   of  funding  for  a  space-based  nuclear   reactor  pro-  
jected  t o   cost  $1 .6   billion  by  2002.  T h e   reactor  program,  called  SP -100 ,  was 
shared  by  NA SA   and   t h e  Department   of  Energy. Instead  t h e  Pentagon   office 
was  inclined  t o  go with  t h e  Soviet-style  process  represented  by  t h e  Topaz, for 
which   it  earmarked  $15  million.  (WS],  Dec  1 1/91; WSJ, Dec  17/91 ) 

N A S A  released  a lengthy  report  summarizing its  1991  activities .  In  add i t ion  
t o  t h e  various space flights and  satellites deployed,  t h e  report  covered  t h e  fol- 
lowing fields: N A S A  managemen t ;  space  science  and   applications ,  with   spe- 
cific  reference  t o  Mission  t o  Planet  Ea r th ,  astrophysics, life sciences, solar sys- 
tem   exp lo ra t ion ,   space  physics,  a n d   ground-based  research;   space  flight ,  

DECEMBER  1991 

CHRONOLOGY 199 1 

including  the  Space  Shuttle and  flight  systems;  space  systems  development, 
stressing Space Station Freedom; exploration; aeronautics and  space technol- 
ogy,  including  the  X-30  National  Aerospace  Plane;  commercial  programs, 
covering the commercial use  of  space,  technology utilization, and  small busi- 
ness innovation research; international relations; space communications; edu- 
cation;  safety  and  mission  quality;  and  FY  1992  NASA   appropriations. 
(NASA  Release 91 -209) 

December  19:  Stephanie  E.  Meyers,  Director  of  the  Office  of  Commercial 
Space Transportation  in the Office of Transportation,  set forth the role of  her 
office and  the goals for commercial space. She saw the goals as the creation of 
space  and  ground  systems  essential  to  space  operations  in  low  Earth  orbit. 
These  ground  systems  needed  to  be  adequate  to  support  launches.  Second, 
there  must  be  government-owned  and  privately-owned  launch  vehicles  to 
carry  freight  and  passengers  to  the  Space  Station.  In  addition,  commercial 
space companies faced obstacles  in pursuing business  in  this very competitive 
industry  and  fair-trade  relationships  needed  to  be  established.  (Washington 
Technology, Dec  1919 1 ) 

December  1 9:  NASA's Goddard  Space  Flight Center/Wlallops Flight Facility, 
Wallops  Island, Virginia, announced  a contract  award to H&H  Consolidated, 
Inc., of  Hampton, Virginia for operationlmaintenance and  alterationlmodifi- 
cation  of  facilities and equipment  services. (NASA  Release C91-ss) 

Th e   Christian  Science  Monitor  reviewed  NASA's  nine  proposed  Space 
Shuttle missions  for  1992. It noted  the  strong  international flavor of  the  mis- 
sions, including the  ascent of  the first  Italian  Space Agency astronaut  aboard 
Atlantis  in  July  1992.  Astronauts  from  Canada  and  the  European  Space 
Agency  were  to  fly  o n  several  missions.  In  August, Japan's first  professional 
astronaut  was  to  ride  on   the  new  orbiter  Endeavour, scheduled  to  debut  in 
May  as  replacement  for  the   Challenger.  Other  proposed  missions  and  their 
scheduled dates were outlined.  (CSM, Dec  19/91 ) 

Th e   New  York  Times  reported  that  Edward  C. Aldridge,  Jr., president  of 
McDonnell  Douglas Electronic  Systems, who  served  on   the  National  Space 
Council  that  made  recommendations  o n  NASA's  programs, was  to   become 
president  and chief executive of  Aerospace, a federally financed research and 
development  center  in  E l  Segundo, California.  (NY Emes, Dec  19/91) 

T h e  media stated that Space Shuttle Discovery was rolled to the launch pad 
to  prepare  for  its  scientific  research  mission  in  late January  1992.  (AP, Dec 
19/91; W Times, Dec 20191; USA  Today, Dec  20191; LA  Times, Dec 20191) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

DECEMBER   199 1 

December  20:   N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  70  research  proposals  for 
nego t ia t ion   of  Phase  I1  con t rac t s   in   NASA's  Small   Business  Innova t ion  
Research  Program.  T h e   high   technology   firms  were  located  in  21  states. 
( N A S A  Release  91-2  1 0 )  

December  22:  A n   article   critical   of  N A S A   for  emphasizing  space  a t   t h e  
expense  of  t h e  domestic   av ia t ion   industry  appeared  in   t h e  Los Angeks  'Times. 
A n  example   cited   was  Boeing's need  t o   use  a  wind  t u n n e l   research  facility  
operated  by  t h e  Royal Aerospace  Establishment  in  Britain  t o  test  its new  top -  
secret  777  passenger  jet  because  N A S A   had   shu t   its decrepit   wind  t u n n e l   in  
Sunnyva le ,  sou th   of  S a n   Francisco.  T h e   aeronautics   commun i ty   reportedly 
felt neglected  because  only  6 percent   of NASA's  budget was allocated   t o  aero-  
nautics.  A s   a  result,  there   was  little   government   support   for  research  and  
deve lopmen t   in  U .S .  general  av ia t ion ,  which   has   suffered  in   relation   t o  gov- 
e r nm e n t   support  given  by  o t h e r   countries   t o   the i r   aviation   industries.  (LA 
'Times, Dec  22/91)  

According   t o  t h e  Los  Angeles Xmes,  t h e  Soviet   space program  was  facing  a 
difficult  future. T h e  ma in  e lemen t s  of  t h e  Sov ie t  space program  were  c o n c e n -  
trated   in  th ree  republics:  Russia, Uk ra ine ,  and  Kazakhstan. Rockets  were  built 
primarily  in   Uk ra ine ,   con t ro l   centers   and   instrument   manufacturing   plants  
were  mainly  in   Russia,  a n d   t h e   principal   launch   facility,  t h e   Baikonur 
Cosmodrome ,  was  in Kazakhstan. Marcia S .  Sm i t h ,  t h e  Sov ie t  space expert  o n  
t h e   staff  of  t h e   Congressional   Research  Service ,   said  those   th ree   republics 
agreed  i n  early  Oc tobe r   they   could  operate   by  themselves.  However ,  t h e  eco-  
nom ic   s i tua t ion   became  worse,  causing  increasing  criticism.  Nevertheless ,  
commun ica t ion s  satellites  were  essential  t o  produce  foreign  investments   and  
ma in ta in   a  link   with   t h e   outside  world.  Space   research  had   technological  
spinoffs  in  areas  such   as  computers ,   transportation ,   communications ,   and  
propulsion.  Therefore ,   U .S .   experts  did  n o t   believe  t h e   former  Sov ie t  states  
would  allow  t h e  space program  t o  die .   (LA  Times, Dec  22/91)  

December  23:  James  C.  Fletcher ,  who  twice  served  as  N A S A   Administrator  
(Ap r i l   1971  -  May  1977 ,  May  1986  -  Ap r i l   1989 ) ,  died  of  cancer .   (AP ,  Dec  
23/91;  W Post, Dec  24/91; NY  'Times, Dec  24/91;  W Times,  Dec  24/91)  

T h e   Gene ra l   Accoun t ing   Office  ( G A O )  report   o n   N A S A   indicated   it 
needed   t o   improve  con t rac t   oversight  t o   reduce  cost  overruns   and   schedule  
delays. According   t o  t h e  G A O ,  o n e   in  every  th ree  N A S A   con t rac t s  experi-  
enced   cost  overruns   a n d   two  in   five experienced   delays. T h e  conclusion   was 
based  o n   audits   a t   Marshall,  Kennedy,  Godda rd ,   a n d   J o h n s o n   field  cen te r s  
based  o n  a  statistical  sample  of  317 ac t ive  or  administratively  closed-out  c o n -  
tracts  between   1984 a n d   1989 .  (Htsasll Tms, Dec  23/91)  

DECEMBER  199 1 

CHRONOLOGY  199 1 

NA SA   announced   details  of  Space  Shuttle   mission  STS-42 ,  a  worldwide 
research  effort  in  the   behavior  of  materials  and  life  in  weightlessness. 
This  would  be  t h e   15 th  flight  of  Discovery and   was  scheduled  for  launch  o n  
January  22,  1992  from  Edwards A i r   Force  Base,  California.  Scientists  from 
NASA ,  t h e  European Space Agency, the  Canadian  Space Agency, the  French 
National   Cen te r   for  Space  Studies,  the   German   Space  Agency,  and  the  
National  Space Development Agency  of  Japan  cooperated  in planning  exper- 
iments aboard  the  International  Microgravity Laboratory-1, which  Discovery 
was  to  carry. Th is  was  to  be  the  first of  eight Space Shuttle  flights planned  for 
1992,  five  of  which  were  to   feature  international   participation.  (NA SA  
Release 92-2  1 1 )  

December  24:  In   an  article  o n   the  Antarctic ,   Robert  Bindschadler,  a NASA  
glaciologist,  was  quoted  as  pointing  to   his  photos  tha t   marked  two  huge 
streams,  3 0  miles  wide,  of  solid  ice.  H e  planned  t o  drive  stakes  in to   the   ice 
along  a 90-mile line  just  below  t h e  mouth ,   and   return  two  years  later  t o  see 
how far  the  stakes moved. By  comparing t h e  outflow of  ice with measurements 
of  snow accumulation  in  the   interior, scientists can  calculate whether  the   ice 
sheet  is  shedding ice.  (WSJ ,  Dec  24/91) 

T h e  New  York  Times  printed  a  feature  article  concerning  the   effects of  El 
Nifio  and   of  the   volcanic  eruption  of  Mount   Pinatubo  o n   global  climate. 
Reportedly, most climatologists agreed tha t   the   tiny  drops of  sulfuric acid and  
water  produced  by  Mount   Pinatubo's  gaseous  cloud  would  exert  a  cooling 
effect  o n   the   planet.  NASA's  James E.  Hansen ,   of  the   Goddard  Institute  of 
Space Studies  in New York, attempted  to  calculate the  magnitude of this cool- 
ing.  Based  on  a  computerized  simulation of  the  global  climate, he  placed  the  
expected  cooling  a t   about  1 degree Fahrenheit-about 
enough  to cancel  ou t ,  
temporarily,  the   global  warming  tha t   occurred  over  the   last  100 years.  (NY 
Times, Dec  2419 1 ) 

December  25:  Ivan  Bekey,  a  NASA   space  power  expert,  was  quoted  by  the  
New  York  Times  in  connection   with  an   article  o n   solar  power  from  space. 
Bekey  said  tha t   power beaming  was  not   a  problem.  Rather,  the  difficulty was 
getting  a  large  enough  satellite  into   orbit.  Currently  large  satellites  ran 
between  20,000  to  30 ,000  pounds  whereas  a  satellite  to  enable  developing 
solar power  would  need  to  be  some  100 times  larger  than   tha t .  Ano the r   pos- 
sibility would  be  to  mine  the  silicon for  the  solar cells and   the   aluminum  for 
the   structure  from  the   moon.  Those   materials  might  make  up  9 0  percent  of 
the  mass,  meaning  less weight  would  need  to  be  launched  from Earth.  Bekey 
foresaw  tha t  developing power  from  space would  be  20  or  30 years away.  (NY 
Times, Dec  25/91) 

December  26:  T h e   U .S .   Space  Surveillance  Network,  inside  Cheyenne  
Mountain ,  Colorado, originally designed  to  serve  as  an  early warning  system 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1991 

against missile attacks, was described. T h e  organization now mainly is engaged 
in  tracking  7,000  pieces  of  orbiting  space  debris,  to  which  some  240  new 
pieces were added each year. Efforts were being made internationally  to devel- 
op  new  technologies  to  track  space  debris.  In  all, more  th an   100 spacecraft 
fragmented  while  in  orbit,  including  at  least  12  satellites  deliberately 
destroyed by  the United  States and the  Soviet Union during weapons testing. 
( P  Inq, Dec 26/91 ) 

December  27:  T h e  Los  Angeks  'limes indicated  that  various  scientific  teams 
from  the  United  States,  Japan, and  Europe, were  trying to  develop  solar-sail 
spacecraft to  race to the  moon. A t  the time of  writing, the Russian Federation 
was  ahead  of  the  other  teams  and planned  to  launch a  test  craft  in October 
1992. None  of  the  research  teams  was  government-sponsored and  financing 
was a problem. Theoretically, the sail craft were to be propelled through  space 
by  tiny solar particles called photons.  (LA Xmes,  Dec  27/91) 

December 28:  UP1 reported tha t  although  the  Soviet Union n o  longer existed 
officially, the Soviet Space exhibit  in Fort Worth, Texas, had not changed  its 
name, nor would  this happen when  the space show move  to St. Louis  in early 
January. Th e  exhibit proved  very  popular and  attendance was  up  60 percent; 
no  official figures were given.  (UPI, Dec  28/91) 

According  to   AP,  Ron  Williams,  who  was  chief  pilot  in  a  five-month 
research  project  sponsored  by  NASA   to  determine  whether  the   Arctic  had 
the  same kind  of  ozone hole  detected  over  the Antarctic  five years previous- 
ly,  was  about to f l y  his ER-2 plane from Bangor, Maine, with  a ton of  scientif- 
ic  instruments aboard. (AP, Dec 28/91; W Xrnes,  Dec 29/91) 

December  31:  T h e   PhiIadelphia  lnquirer  described  the   Temple  University 
Hospital study o n  behalf  of  NASA  to  determine whether  amino acid  supple- 
ments  could  retard  muscle  loss.  If  so, astronauts  on   long  space flights might 
not need to devote so many hours to  exercise. Eighteen volunteers were being 
cycled through  the  six-day bed  rest  program,  in  groups of  three.  (P  Inq, Dec 
31/91) 

January 

January  2 :   NASA   announced   tha t   on   January  6,  1992,  Administrator 
Richard  H.  Truly  will  officially  present  the   NASA   1991  George  M .   Low 
Trophy to Thiokol  Corporation ,  Space Operations employees, Bringham City, 
Utah .   T h e   trophy  recognizes  NASA   prime  contractors,  subcontractors,  and  
suppliers for  outstanding  achievetnents  in  quality  and   productivity  improve- 
ment   and  Total  Quality  Management  ( TQM ) .  Thiokol's  Space  Operations  
provides  the   redesigned  solid  rocket  motor  propulsion  tha t   produces  80  per- 
cen t  of  the   thrust  necessary for Space Shu t t le  liftoff. In  addition ,  Thiokol  pro- 
vides  engineering  services  for  sounding  rocket  design  for  NASA's  Goddard 
Space Flight Center ,  Greenbelt ,  MD.  (NA SA  Note  N92-1)  

January 6: Following a routine star calibration, the  Magellan spacecraft, which 
had  completed  15 months  of  service and  3,880 orbits  of  successfully mapping 
over 95 percent of  the  surface of Venus, appeared to  have suffered a component  
failure  in one  of  its  two downlink  transmitters,  temporarily halting  the   recep- 
tion  of  mapping data with  its high-resolution radar. (NA SA  Release 92 -1 )  

January  7 :   NA SA   announced   t h a t   t h e   first  flight   of  t h e   IM L - 0 1  
(International  M~crogravity  Laboratory), was  set for January 22,  1992, aboard 
the  Space Shuttle  Discovery. Over  220 scientists  from 14 countries were t o  be 
represented  in  this  unprecedented  ~ n t e r n a t i o n a l  effort  to  conduct  research  in  
both   materials  and  life  sciences  In  the   microgravity  environment .   (NA SA  
No te  N92 -3 )  

Jat~uary  9 :  Many scientists, concerned  that   there might  not   be  enough  money 
for basic research, question  the  wisdom of  spending huge sums o n  projects such 
as  the   Space  Station .   Yet,  research  shows  that   the   economic  benefits  of 
NASA's programs are greater than  generally recognized. In  1987, NASA's pro- 
curement budget  generated $1 7,800 million  in  total industry sales, had a "mul- 
tiplier  effect"  on   the  economy of  2.1  million  people,  created  209,000 private- 
sector jobs  and $2 ,900  million in business profits, and generated $5,600 million 
in  Federal, State  and   local government  tax   revenues. Furthermore,  these  ben-  
efits were widely  distributed  throughout  the  country.  (Nature ,  J a n  9/92) 

January  13: A t   the  American  Astronomical  Society's semiannual meeting  in  
A t lan ta ,   a  team  of  scientists  announced   tha t ,   using  NASA's Hubble  Space  
Telescope ( H S T ) ,  they had  made the  most precise measurement  to  date  of  t h e  
percent  of  heavy  hydrogen  in  space,  which  better  determines  the   physical 
conditions  present  in  the   theorized  Big  Bang  at  the   origin  of  t h e   universe. 
Deuterium,  also  called  heavy  hydrogen,  differs  from  ordinary  hydrogen  by 
having one  neutron   in  addition  to  one  proton  in  its nucleus. A  measurement 
of  the   ratio  of  deuterium  to  ordinary  hydrogen  provides a critical  test  of  con -  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY  1992 

ditions  in  the   universe  a t  the   time  of  the  Big  Bang because  it  is  believed  tha t  
essentially all of  the  deuterium now present was created at tha t  time. If further 
research finds no  evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," t h e n  t h e  new 
deuterium  measurements  strengthen   the   idea  tha t   t h e  universe  will  expand 
forever.  I f   true,  the   universe  had  a  brilliant  beginning but  will  have   n o  end .  
(NA SA  Release 92.2) 

Astronomers reported  interesting  initial  results  from a survey  of  several hun-  
dred quasars being studied with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST ) .  Using 
Hubble's high  resolution  images,  the  "Snapshot Survey" program detected  evi- 
dence o n  gravitational lensing at a level of  detail not  usually found with ground- 
based  telescopes. The   findings set  new  limits  on  the   nature  and  distribution of 
material  in  the   universe.  T h e   results  provided  information  o n  objects such  as 
stars and  galaxies that   can  be  detected  with  telescopes as  well  as  non-luminous 
material or "dark  matter."  In  the  past  decade, about a dozen examples of  proba- 
ble  gravitational  lenses  had  been  discovered  by  ground-based  telescopes. 
According t o  conventional theoretical  models, approximately half  of  all multi- 
ple-image gravitational lenses cannot  be  identified from ground-based telescopes 
because  the  separation between  the   images would  be  less  than   one  arc  second, 
which  is  below  the  nominal  resolution  limit  for  ground-based telescopes. T h e  
Hubble Space Telescope routinely provides 0.1 arc second resolution of  moder- 
ately bright point sources, making  it  a unique and powerful  tool for searching for 
multiple-image lenses. T h e   HST  data  may  ultimately  provide  new  and  unex- 
pected  insights into  the  early universe. While the  Snapshot Survey will not offer 
insights into the  competing Big  Bang models, results will  provide scientists with 
the denizens of  the universe but not  how  they got  there.  (NASA  Release 92-3) 

A t  a press conference of  the   179th meeting of  the  American  Astronomical 
Society in A t lan ta ,  astronomers  reported  tha t   recent  ultraviolet observations 
with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (H S T )  suggest tha t  what were thought  
to  be  randomly distributed, nearby primordial  clouds of  hydrogen  may  actual- 
l y  be  associated with  ,galaxies or  clusters of  galaxies. (NA SA  Release 92-4)  

Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (H S T ) ,  astronomers announced  the  
detection   of  the   rare  element  boron  in  an  ancient   star. Th is  element  may  be 
"fossil"  evidence  of  energetic  events   which  accompanied  the   birth  of  the  
Milky Way galaxy. A n  alternative  possibility is  tha t   this rare  element  may  be 
even  older, dating from  the  birth  of  the  universe.  If  tha t   is  the  case, t h e n  the  
HST   findings  may  force  some  modifications  in  theories  of  t h e   Big  Bang. 
(NA SA  Release 92 -5 )  

January  14: Dr.  Carl  Fichtel, principal  investigator  for  the  Energetic  Gamma  
Ray  Experiment  Telescope  (EGRET) ,   announced  tha t   NASA's  Comp ton  
Gamma  Ray  Observatory  found  three  new  gamma-ray quasars, detected  more 
than   200  cosmic gamma ray  bursts, and captured  the  best ever observation of 

JANUARY   1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

the   glow  of  gamma  radiation  from  the   disk  of  the   Milky  Way  galaxy.  T h e  
Comp ton  Observatory, built  by  TRW  Inc . ,  Redondo Beach, California,  is  the  
second  o f   NASA's  "Great  Observatories."  T h e   first  was  the   Hubble  Space 
Telescope,  launched  in  April  1990.  T h e   Compton   Observatory,  deployed 
April  7 ,   1991, from  the  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis ,  orbits Earth  at  an  altitude  of 
268 by  262 miles.  (NA SA  Release 92 -6 )  

January  15:  NASA's  Assistant  Administrator  for  Procurement  Darleen  A .  
Druyun  lifted  the   suspension  of  the   Collins  Avionics  and  Communications  
Division  (CACD ) ,  Rockwell  International   Corp . ,  Cedar   Rapids,  Iowa.  T h e  
suspension was  imposed November  8,  1991, following a  15-count  indictment  
charging  the  firm and   two  individuals with  mail fraud and  submission of  false 
claims.  (NA SA  Release 92-7)  

Project  officials a t  NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, 
announced   tha t   t h e  Magellan  spacecraft would  use  its  backup  transmitter  t o  
resume mapping  the   surface of  Venus  with  imaging  radar  o n  January  24, fol- 
lowing a week  of  routine  battery  recharging.  (NA SA  Release 92 -8 )  

January  16:   Using  NASA's  Hubble   Space   Telescope  ( H S T ) ,   Dr.  J o n  
Holtzman, of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, led a team of scientists in 
discovering  new  clues  to  cataclysmic  events  in  the   history  of  the   peculiar 
galaxy N G C  1275, located  approximately  200 million  light-years from Earth. 
T h e  scientists  discovered  about  50 bright  objects  a t   the   center  of  the   galaxy 
which  appear  to  be  young  massive  globular  star  clusters. Th is   discovery was 
surprising because most  globular clusters  are  among  the   oldest  objects  in   the  
universe.  (NA SA  Release 92 -9 )  

Based  upon  images  taken   by  NASA's  Hubble  Space  Telescope  ( H S T ) ,  
astronomers  reported  that   they  had  found  intriguing  evidence  that   a  black 
hole ,  weighing over  2.6 billion  times  the  mass of  the  Sun ,  exists at  t h e  center  
of  the   giant  elliptical  galaxy  M87.  Galaxy  M87  is  at  the   center   of  a  nearby 
cluster of galaxies in  the  constellation  of Virgo, 52 million  light-years distant ,  
and  contains  more  than   100 billion stars.  (NA SA  Release 92-10)  

January  17: NASA  Administrator  Richard H .  Truly met with  representatives 
from  seven  Historical  Black  Colleges  and   Universities  (HBCUs ) ,   the   latest 
recipients  of  NASA's  Research Cen te r   grants.  T h e   awards  were  the   latest 
approach  to  meeting  some of  NASA's present  and  future  research  and  work- 
force needs  and   in  tapping  into  scientific  resources found among  under-repre- 
sented  minority  students  and   faculty  a t   qualifying  universities.  (NA SA  
Release 92- 1 1 )  

January 22 :  Amid  concerns  over  cold  weather,  the   Shuttle  Discovery  was  pre- 
pared for launch from Cape Canaveral at 8:53 a.m. EDT. (USA Today, J a n  22/92) 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY 1992 

T h e  flight of  Space Shuttle  Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from  three 
countries, was  the  second Shuttle  mission  in a row  to carry an  array of  life sci- 
ence  experiments focusing o n  t h e  effects of  space travel o n  humans and  o the r  
organisms, with  an  eye  toward preparing  to  send  astronauts o n  interplanetary 
flights,  specifically, NASA's  proposed  manned  mission  t o   Mars.  T h e   astro- 
nauts  split  12-hour work  shifts so  experiments  including  a battery  of  medical 
tests  could  be  conducted  non-stop .  Researchers  hoped  to   learn  more  about 
space motion  sickness and  back  pain,  common  ailments  among  astronauts  in 
orbit.  Experiments  were  also  to  be  conducted  in  the   cargo  bay  to   measure 
effects of  zero  gravity, fertilization  of  eggs, and   cartilage  formation  in  various 
organisms. T h e  Shuttle  would  also study t h e  effect of bombardment  by  high-  
energy cosmic rays  o n  living  tissue. ( 0  Sun ,  J a n  22/92; NY  Times, J a n  23/92) 

J.P.  Mitchell,  Pratt  & Whitney's  Space  Shu t t le   Main  Engine  (SSME)  
Alternate   Turbopump  Development  project  manager,  reported  tha t   a pair  of 
Pratt  & Whitney  designed high-pressure turbopumps had  been  tested  success- 
fully a t   100 percent  rated power o n  a SSME a t  NASA's J o h n  C. Stennis  Space 
Cen te r   in Mississippi.  (PR Newswire, J a n  23/92) 

January  24: President  Bush  held  a scheduled  meeting  with  NASA   astronauts 
in the  Oval  Office, followed by  an  address to Young Astronauts Council  in t h e  
Old  Executive Office Building. (NA SA  Release 92-12)  

Wh i te   House  administration  officials  reported  tha t   President  Bush  had  
called for an   11  percent  increase in the  Space Station  project  for  1993, as well 
as additional money  to  put  robots o n  the  Moon and  build  a new space launch  
system  and   a  hypersonic  transport  plane.  T h e  Space  Station   project,  which 
aims  to   launch  a  permanent  orbiting  platform  by  1996, was  slated  for  $2.25 
billion.  Bush  also requested  $8 million  to develop a NA SA  plane  tha t   could 
make  direct  flights  from  Earth  to   orbit  without  using  the   traditional  rocket 
booster  launch  system.  If  successful, it would  revolutionize  air  travel  by  flying 
around  the  world  in a fraction of  time compared  to conventional  aircraft. (NY 
Tines, J a n  25/92; P  Inq, J a n  25/92; WSJ,  J a n  27/92) 

A r thu r  C. Clarke,  the   legendary  science-fiction writer, whose  accomplish- 
ments  include  numerous  literary awards, academic  honors, and more  t h a n  70 
written  works,  including  "2001:  A  Space  Odyssey," declared  tha t   his  latest 
personal  odyssey was  contemplating  t h e  feasibility of  "colonizing" and  "farm- 
ing"  o n   Mars.  "Mars  is  the   next   frontier,  what  the   Wild  West  was,  what 
America  was  500  years  ago ... Mars  is  where  the   action  is  going  to   be  in  the  
next  thousand  years," declared Clarke .  (LA  Times, J a n  24/92) 

O n  the  second day of  Discovery's mission, astronauts took  turns being spun 
in  a chair, strapped  blindfolded  on to  a  lurching sled, and  jolted  by  electrodes 
high  above  the   Earth  in  a  study  of  space  motion  sickness. Between  medical 

tests,  t h e  seven   cistronauts  tended   t o  organisms  carried  In to  o rh i t  for  research ,  
inc lud ing  r o u n d a~ o rm s ,  fruit  flies,  stick  insects ,  len t i l   roots ,   hacteria ,   a n d   hil- 
lions   of  single  cells.  T h e  mission  was  scheduled   t o  e n d   at   Edwards  A i r   Force 
Base  i n  California .   (NY  7i'mes, J a n  24 /92 )  

Prcsicient  Bush  k~ c k e d - o f f  In te rna t iona l   Space   Year  (ISY),  a   year-long 
worlJ\vidc  c e l e h r ; r t ~ o r ~  of  space  cooper;ltion  and  ciisco\.ery. Illlring  t h e  year,  29  
space  agencies  anil  ministries  from  arounil   t h e  world,  I 0   in te rna t iona l   o rgan -  
izations,  a n d   t h e   U n i t e d   Na t ion s   p l a ~ i n e d  t o  celebrate   t h e   spirit  of  discovery 
and  work  toge the r  t o  p romo te  a  new   e ra  of global  coope ra t ion  a n d  to  increase  
knowledge  of  p l i ~ n c t  Ea r th .   ( N A S A  Release  92-1 3 )  

Juntlary  25: Ihlvid  H .  S u ~ l d e t h ,  63 ,  a N A S A  engirlcer who  w7;ts hono red   by  t h e  
Agericy  for  his   work  on   propulsion   systems  for  spacecr,ltt,  died   in   Bowie, 
h4aryland.  His   research  included   work  o n   Iiydrazine-fueled  rocket   eng ine s  
used  ro  g i ~ i d e  sittcllitcs  and   t h e   Viking   spacecraft ,  wh ich   landed   o n  Mars  in 
1976. H e   wa:,  \vith  NASAb   Goildard   Space  F l ~ ~ h t  
from  its  ~ n c e p t i o n  
in   rhe   late   1953s until   h e   retired  i n   1990 .  ( W  Po s t ,  J a n  30192) 

L.  Eugene  R o o t ,   a  p ionee r   U .S .  aircraft   buililer  who   led  L o c k h e e ~ l  Missile 
a n d  Space  C:o~npan), t o  n1;rturity  anil   was  a  mernber  of  t h e  Rand   t h i n k   t a n k ,  
died  in  Men lo   I1,lrk, C< t l i t ; ) r n~ a ,  a t   t h e   age  of  P i .  .As  president   of  t h e   In s t i tu te  
of  Ae ronau t ica l   Sc ience s   111  1962 ,  Roo t   c o ~ u h i n e d  h i s   organi:atic>n  with   t h e  
Ame r ican   Rocket   Society ,  cc ) - f 'c )u~ l J i~ ig  
t h e   m n j ~ ) r  U .S .   aerosp'lce  society,  t h e  
Americ:tn  I n s t ~ t t l t e  ot' .4eron ,irltics  an<{ Astron;ltrtics.  (LA  Xm c s ,  I a n  25 /92 )  

1 ~ ~ 1 1 t ~ i ~ 1 . y  26:  I)isccn~eryb asrron ,luts   Jil111nc~I  the   S h u t t l e   lights  to  conscr1.c 
t h e   weeklong   research  o~issicln  h y   w 
energy   21s  N A S A   considerec1 e x t e r ~ d i n ~  
d a y   t o  collect   extra   scientific  da ta .   ( P  Inq ,  J a n  2 7 / 0 2 ;  \V  Tiines, J a n  27 /92 )  

Ja lu~a ry  27:  T h e   !]lain  Ruhsian  T V   news  reportcci  t h ~ r t  some   meinhers   of  t h e  
former  Soviet   Union's  co smonau t  ground   controllers  p lanned   ;I  u7;rrning strike  
t o  protest   low. wages, which   in  many  cases were ec lu i \~a len t  t o  $6 a  n l o n t h .  T h e  
television  report   said  t h a t   "O n e   of  t h e   most  prestigious  johs  o n   Ea r th   had  
hecome   o n e  of  t h e   1i)west-paid." (W T imes ,   J a n  28/92;  P  Inq,  28 /92 )  

William   R .   Sch ind le r ,   64,  a  former  project   manager   of' t h e   Delta   I;wnch  
hrehiclc project   at   NASA's  Goildard   Space  Flight  C c n t c r ,  ~ f i e d  i r l   Lc~rna L inda ,  
Ca l i fo rn ia .  ( W  Pos t ,  Jiln  29/92)  

Janua ry   28:  I t 1   a n   article   i n   t h e   Janua ry   1 6   issue  o t   t h e   journal  N a t u r e ,   Lh. 
C h r i s  Argyrou  Hajivassilivir  o f   t h e  Mullard  Radio  Astronomy   Observatory   i n  
Cainhridge ,   Eng land ,  proved  th rough   statistical  analysis  t h a t   t h e  sca t te r ing  of 
radio  waves  caused hy  turbulent  interstellar   electrically  chargecl gases, o r  plas- 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY   1992 

ma, is  present  in areas of  the galaxy where  it had  not  been previously proven 
to  exist. Th e  findings are considered evidence  that  the solar system  is  encap- 
sulated  in an envelope  of  these gases, probably the  relic  of  the explosion of  a 
nearby  massive  star  tens  of  millions  of  years  ago.  In  his  article,  Dr. 
Hajivassiliou said that he hoped scientists would be  able to use his findings to 
identify any black hole  left by that  explosion. (NY Tm e s ,  J an  28/92) 

George  C.  Patterson  Jr., 67,  a  retired  NASA  official who  worked  for  the 
Agency  for  30  years  before  retiring  in  1987  as  a  flight  mission  simulation 
coordinator,  died  of  emphysema  January  26  at  Holy  Cross  Hospital, 
Kensington, Maryland. ( W  Post, Jan  28/92) 

Scientists from University of Washington  in Seattle, writing in Science mag- 
azine, said that the sulfuric haze that causes acid rain might also be protecting 
the  Northern  Hemisphere  by  countering  the  warming  brought  on   by  the 
greenhouse effect.  ( P  Inq ,  Jan  28/92) 

As part of  the  1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of  two 
major  NASA  projects-a 
scientific mission  to   rendezvous with  an  asteroid 
and  a  program  to  build  more  powerful  Space  Shuttle  boosters.  Under  the 
budget  plan,  the  White  House cancelled  the Advanced  Solid Rocket  Motor 
(ASRM ) ,  a $3 billion program to  develop new and more powerful boosters for 
the Space Shuttle, as well  as  the Comet  Rendezvous Asteroid  Flyby mission, 
a $700 million spacecraft slated for  launch  in  the  late  1990s. T h e  1993 Bush 
plan  allocated  a  $700  million  increase over  the  1992  $14.3  billion  NASA 
budget.  (Space N e w s ,  J an  28/92) 

Final  preparations  were  made  for  the  launching  of  Earthwinds,  a  balloon 
whose  three-member  crew  hoped  to be  the  first  to circumnavigate  the  world 
in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain  of  the Earthwinds and a 
former crew member  of  both  the  transatlantic balloon flight  in  1978 and  the  
transpacific flight  in  1981, predicted a successful voyage of  some 22,000 miles 
at an  altitude of  about 35,000 feet. Included in the  crew, was  to be Maj. Gen .  
Vladimir  Dzhanibekov,  chief  of  astronaut  training  in  the  Russian  air  force. 
T h e  balloon, which  is  higher  than  the Statue of  Liberty, would  carry scientif- 
ic  experiments built  in  the  former Soviet Union  and NASA.  (NY Times, J an  
29/92) 

January  29:  Jim  Sco t t ,   Magellan  project  manager  at  the  NASA's  J e t  
Propulsion Laboratory, expressed  regret  a t  NASA's decision  to  cut  short  the 
spacecraft's mission.  Since  its  launching  from  the  Space Shuttle Atlantis on  
May  4,  1989, the  spacecraft had  mapped  97  percent  of  Venus'  surface, using 
radar  to peer  through  the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of  the  rugged, 
volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped  to continue mapping  in more detail dur- 
ing  an   "extended  mission"  ending  in  1995, but  NASA   officials decided  to  

JANUARY 1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

avoid  adding $80 million  to  the  cost by  ending  t h e  mission o n  September 30 ,  
1993. T h e  budget  decision meant  tha t   engineers would  not   be  able  to  move 
Magellan  from  its  elliptical  orbit   and  into   a  lower  circular  orbit  starting  in 
May  1993. T h a t  would  have  allowed Magellan  to  remap Venus with  three  t o  
10  times more detail  t h a n   the  pictures  it  already had  taken.  (NA SA  Release, 
92-14;  W Xmes, J a n  29/92) 

T h e  Space Shu t t le  Discovery's international  crew  took  time  off  from  their  
scientific work  to  remember  the  seven astronauts who died  in the  explosion of 
the  Shu t t le  Challenger  six  years ago. "It  being  the   28th ,  we're all mindful  of 
the   sacrifices made  along  the  way,"  Discovery  crewman William  Readdy said 
during a news conference from space. It was  the  first time  tha t  Americans had 
been  in   orbit  o n   t h e   anniversary  of  the   January  28,  1986  explosion  of 
Challenger  73  seconds  after  it  took  off  from  Cape   Canaveral .   ( P  lnq ,   J a n  
29/92; USA  Today, J a n  29/92) 

W i th   the  dissolution  of  the  Soviet Un ion ,  the  fate of  the  Russian space pro- 
gram  is  in doubt .  Although  most  of  the   republics  tha t  make  up  the   successor 
to  the  Soviet  Un ion ,   t h e  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States ,  had  signed 
an   agreement  pledging  to   continue   t h e   space  program  and  to  honor   all  the  
Soviet  Union's  international   agreements  o n   space  projects,  many  experts 
questioned the  impoverished nascent  union's ability to  follow through. "There 
is  a high  level of uncertainty," said James Head, a planetary scientist at Brown 
University.  "The   commonwealth  will  absolutely  not   be  able  t o   maintain   a 
space program  a t   the   same  level  of  activity,"  declared  Roald  Sagdeev, former 
director  of  the   Soviet  institute  tha t   ran  all  scientific  research  programs  in 
space.  (C  Trib, J a n  29/92; Boston Globe, J a n  30192) 

February 

February  I :   NASA's  plan  t o   transfer  work  modifying  Space  Shuttles   from 
Palmdale  to   its  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   in  Florida  triggered  protests  from 
California's  congressional delegation  and   t h e   governor's  office. T h e  NA SA  
decision  would  affect  about  500  jobs  a t   Rockwell  International's  Palmdale 
facility, where  five  of  the   orbiters  had  been  assembled  since  t h e   1970s and  
where  the   space  agency  had  done   major  modification  work  o n   the   Shu t t le  
fleet.  (LA Tmes, Feb  1/92) 

February  2 :   Florida Today  reported  tha t   the  Hubble Space Telescope, despite  a 
flawed primary mirror  tha t  prevented  it  from stargazing perfectly, nevertheless 
had  shown  astronomers  enough of  the  universe  to  rattle  their  theories of  cre- 
ation  and the  nature  of  the  universe. Circling the  Earth  every 90  minutes, t h e  
Hubble  has  provided  new  insights  in to   "globular  clusters,  t h e   black  hole ,  
gaseous  hydrogen  isotopes,  and  a  shell  of  gas  moving  from  a  giant  star  in 
another  galaxy." (Flonda Today, Feb  2/92)  

F e b r y  3:  According  to   some  scientists,  recent  observations  by  NASA's 
Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Satellite  (UARS )   have   shown  exceptionally 
high  levels of  chlorine monoxide  (C IO )  a t  high northern   latitudes, raising t h e  
possibility  of  enhanced   ozone  depletion  over  populated  areas  of  t h e   Earth. 
UARS's  Microwave  Limb  Sounder   (MLS )  detected  elevated  levels  of  C I O  
over  large areas of  Europe and  Asia no r th  of  about 50  degrees latitude. Dr. Joe  
Waters of  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory said  tha t   high  C I O  levels were 
observed  over  Scandinavia  and  No r the rn   Eurasia,  including  the   cities  of 
London, Moscow, and Amsterdam. These CIO levels, approximately o n e  part 
billion  by  volume,  are  comparable  to   levels  observed  within  the   Antarctic  
ozone hole. Waters  said  tha t  sustained  levels of  CIO could  lead  to  significant 
ozone destruction  over  t h e  no r the rn  hemisphere  and perhaps  even   lead  to  an  
ozone hole over  the  Arctic.  (NA SA  Release 92-18) 

It was reported  tha t  NASA's decision t o  kill off  a multibillion-dollar  program 
to develop a new, more powerful solid rocket booster for the  Space Shuttle  fleet 
was  a carefully  planned  move  actually  intended  to  help  save  the  project.  T h e  
advanced  solid-rocket motor program, which would have cost nearly $500 mil- 
lion  in   1993, was  eliminated  with  the   expectation  tha t   funds  for  the   project 
would be  restored by Representative  Jamie  L. W h i t t e n  (D-Miss .) ,  chairman of 
the  House Apppropriations Committee.  (LA Trnes, Feb 3/92)  

February 4:  Many scientists believe  tha t  by  using "telepresence,"  a unique mix 
of science and engineering tha t  NASA  was developing, astronauts may  some- 
day  explore  Mars  without  leaving  their  base  camp.  Dr.  Geoffrey  Briggs  of 
NASA's  Ames  Research Center ,   Mountain   View,  California,  said  "telepres- 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY   1992 

ence  will  allow  human s   t o  project  themselves,  by  way  of  a  suitably  equipped  
r o b o t ,   i n t o   a  r em o t e   e n v i r o nm e n t   w i t h o u t   e n d a n g e r i n g   t h em s e l t~ e s . "  
Telepresence, which   is similar t o  "virtual  reality," will allow a researcher, wear- 
ing  a  video  headset ,   t o   see  remote   locations   th rough   cameras  moun ted   o n   a 
remotely  operated   robotic  vehicle .  T h e  researcher  points   t h e  camera  by  mov-  
ing his or  he r  head   and  steers t h e  vehicle  with   a pair of  joysticks  or  with  body 
mo t ion .  Manipulators   o n  t h e   robot  relay  t h e   "feel"  of  a n  object's  weight a n d  
texture .   Briggs  called  t h e   research  techn ique   "revolutionary"  because  it  made  
it   possible  to  simulate  planetary  studies  in  hostile   earthly   env i ronmen t s ,  such  
as  t h e  frigid  waters  of  An ta rc t ica ,   and   even tua l ly  t o  ~ e r f o r m  real  research  o n  
t h e  Moon   and  Mars.  ( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 2 0 )  

NA SA ,  in conjunction   with  t h e  Nation's two  leading  aircraft  engine  makers, 
reported  t h a t   it  would  be  developing  advanced  materials  t h a t   could  make  a 
next-generation   supersonic  airliner  possible by  t h e  year  2005.  A  five  year, $88 
million  partnership   with   General   Electric  Aircraft  Engines,  C inc inna t i ,   and  
Un i ted   Technologies, Pratt  & Wh i tney   Division,  East  Hartford,  Connec t icu t ,  
was  t o  cen te r  o n  critical  composite  materials  and   processes  tha t   U .S .   industry 
would need  t o  design and  build a fleet of  high-speed civil transports. T h e  planes 
would  fly  a t   more  t h a n   twice  t h e  speed of  sound  and   a t  much   higher  altitudes 
t h a n  today's commercial airliners. A  cost-effective,  environmentally  compatible 
supersonic  airliner  could  cu t   long-distance  trip   times  in  half.  For  example,  a 
future  high-speed  civil  transport  could  fly  from  Los Angeles  t o  Tokyo  in  4  112 
hours instead of  t h e  1 0  hours taken  by  present subsonic passenger planes. Wh i le  
NA SA ,  Pratt  & Whitney ,  and  General   Electric  will  form  t h e  core of  t h e   team ,  
many o t h e r  U .S .  engine  companies, materials  suppliers, and   composite fabrica- 
tors  also will  play  a n   integral  part.  Th i s   interaction   will  provide  t h e  base  for  a 
future U.S.  manufacturing  capability  in  high-temperature  composites  and  will 
let  t h e   involved  firms  take  early  advantage  of  t h e  program's technical   results. 
T h e   composites  also  will  help  American   manufacturers  of  subsonic  airplanes, 
power systems, and  military  aircraft.  ( N A S A  Relese 92 -21 )  

N A S A   issued  its strongest warning yet  about  t h e  quickening deterioration  of 
the  ozone layer over  large, ~ o ~ u l a t e d  
areas in  no r the rn  latitudes. Experts warned 
t h a t   th inn ing  ozone will  let  in  more harmful  ultraviolet  rays  from  t h e  S u n  and  
lead  t o  more  skin cancer  and  cancer  deaths .  A n  ozone  layer  hole   could  appear 
as  early  March   1992  if  certain   meteorological  and   chemical  conditions  occur, 
said  the  scientists. Even  if  t h e  hole does no t   appear  right  away, the  chances  are 
"very  high"  tha t   it  will  occur  over   t h e   next   decade,  said  James  Anderson ,   a 
Harvard  University  chemistry  professor  who  is  involved  in  t h e   project.  (WSI ,  
Feb  4/92;  P  Inq,  Feb  4/92;  NY  Tm e s ,   Feb  4/92;  USA  Today, Feb  4/92; W Post, 
Feb 4/92; W Times,  Feb 4/92; LA  Times, Feb  4/92;  B  Sun, Feb 4 /92 )  

Dr. Mark M .  Phillips,  acting  director  of  C e r r o  Tololo,  a n  Ame r ican  ope ra t -  
ed  observatory  in  C h i l e ,   said  t h e   New  Technology  Telescope  developed  in 

FEBRUARY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Europe  was  capturing  images  up  to  six  times  more  revealing  than   those 
obtained  by  comparable  American  telescopes  of  conventional  design.  T h e  
new European telescope contained advanced optical  elements  that  automati- 
cally  correct  the  distortions  caused  by  gravity  and  wind  as  the  telescope 
moves. There was an  uneasy feeling among some scientists that  the salad days 
of  United  States  astronomy  were  drawing  to  a  close  and  tha t   the   new 
European  telescopes  would  leave  American  astronomers  far  behind.  (NY 
E m s ,  Feb 4/92) 

February 5:  Explorers reported  that  the  lost city of  Ubar, called "the Atlantis 
of  the  Sands" by Lawrence of  Arabia, had been found in Oman using pictures 
taken  from  the  Space  Shuttle  Challenger  in  October  1984. Th e   city  was 
thought to have been  inhabited  from 2800 B.C. until A.D.  100. (USA Today, 
Feb 5/92; W Times, Feb 5/92; P  Inq, Feb 5/92; NY  Times International, Feb 5/92; 
B  Sun, Feb 5/92) 

Thomson Consumer Electronics, owned by the French electronics concern 
Thomson  SA ,  said  that  it  would  help  launch  a  satellite-to-home television 
broadcasting system  through  a  venture  with  the  Hughes Electronics division 
of  General Motors Corporation.  T h e  system, called DirecTV, would  be  capa- 
ble  of  providing more  than  100 channels  to  18-in-diameter outdoor  satellite 
dishes. ( B  Sun, Feb 5/92) 

February  7:  A  panel  of  experts a t  a meeting of  the American  Association for 
the Advancement of  Science said that  computers now perform some medical 
functions better  than doctors and  that machines are going to  get even smarter 
in  the future. Terrell Ward Bynum of  Southern Connecticut  State University 
said  that  NASA  and  the  Department  of  Defense were  working  on   a "smart" 
battlefield  stretcher,  which  as  envisioned,  could  provide  expert  diagnostic 
capabilities and  would  be  able  to  dispense drugs  or  even  jolt  the  heart  back 
into normal rhythm. (AP, Feb  7/92) 

February  10: Space Shuttle Mission STS-45 was  designated for  the  first flight 
of  the   Atmospheric  Laboratory  for  Applications  and  Science  (ATLAS-1). 
Th e  ATLAS-1 was  to measure  long te rm   variability  in  the  total  energy  radi- 
ated by  the  Sun and measure the Earth's middle atmospheric constituents over 
one  11-year solar cycle.  (NASA  Note N92-14) 

It was  reported that  the Hubble Space Telescope (H S T )  was  studying auro- 
rae o n  the  giant planet Jupiter. T h e  HST made observations of  Jupiter over a 
four-day period when E SANA SA  Ulysses spacecraft swung by  the giant plan- 
e t .  While  passing  Jupiter,  Ulysses  made  measurements of  Jupiter's powerful 
magnetic  field  and  the  flow of  subatomic particles along magnetic  field  lines. 
Simultaneously, HST   was  looking  a t   aurorae,  one  visual  manifestation  of 
these electrical  fireworks. These joint  observations provided  a unique  oppor- 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY  1992 

tunity  to   combine  ultraviolet  images  and  spectra  with  information  o n  parti- 
cles and fields. By  studying the  activity oflupiter's  aurorae, astronomers hoped 
t o   learn  more  about  the   dynamics  of  Jupiter's  immense  magnetic  field, the  
structure of  the  giant  planet's  upper atmosphere, t h e   effects of  aurora  on   t h e  
chemistry  of  the   polar  regions  o n  Jupiter, and   Jupiter's interaction   with  the  
Moon  Io via  a magnetic "flux  tube."  (NA SA  Release 92-22)  

Reinhard Genzel of  t h e  Max  Planck  Institute  for Extraterrestrial  Physics  in  
Garching,  Germany,  declared  that   there  was  mounting evidence  tha t   a black 
hole about a million  times  the  mass of  the  Sun  is sucking away  at  the  heart  of 
the  Milky Way,  Earth's home  galaxy. T h e   latest  clue was  a bubble of  gas pos- 
sibly  as  ho t   as  a  million  degrees  centrigrade  discovered  near  a  mysterious 
source of  radio waves known  as  Sagittarius A ,  which had   for  some time  been 
t h e   leading  candidate  for  the   location  of  the   suspected  black  hole.  ( W  Post, 
Feb  10192; P  Inq, Feb  6/92; USA  Today, Feb 6/92)  

February  11:  It  was  reported  tha t   NASA's  latest  effort  to  free  a  stuck  main 
an tenna  aboard the  Galileo space probe had failed. Galileo, e n  route t o  Jupiter  
for  a  1995-97 mapping  mission, had  a  smaller an tenna   tha t   transmitted  only 
2,200  of  the   50,000 hoped-for  photos.  ( W  Times,  Feb  11/92; AP,  Feb  10192; 
USA  Today, Feb  11/92) 

A  15-story unmanned  Atlas  rocket  was  launched  in to  space with a military 
communications satellite  intended  t o  link  the  Wh i te   House with  U .S .   forces 
around the  world during nuclear attacks or other  crisis. In peacetime, the  $130 
million  satellite was t o  serve as a switchboard for t h e  Defense Department  per- 
sonnel.  ( B  Sun, Feb  11/92; AP,  Feb  11/92) 

February  12:  NASA   research  aircraft  were  exploring  the   potential   of  fiber 
optic  sensors in  critical  aircraft  flight  control  systems. Because of  fiber optic's 
advantages  in   flight  systems,  researchers  believe  fiber  optics  will  improve 
flight  control ,  engine  performance,  and  safety. T h e  research  project  is  part  of 
the   Fiber  Op t ic   Con t ro l   System  Integration  program  managed  by  NASA's 
Lewis Research Center ,  Cleveland  and  jointly funded by NASA  and  the  U.S. 
Navy's Naval Air  Systems Command .  T h e  first NASA  plane  to  f l y  with  fiber 
optic   sensors  was  the   F-15  Highly  Integrated  Digital  Electronic  Con t ro l  
(H ID EC )   aircraft  at  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility,  Edward, 
California.  (NA SA  Release 92 -23 )  

It was reported  tha t  the  spacecraft Ulysses had revealed unexpected changes 
in  the  violent  vicinity  of  Jupiter  since the   last Earth probe  flew past  in  1979, 
including  a  swelling  of  the   giant  planet's  magnetic  field  and   a n   apparent 
abatement   in volcanic  eruptions o n  the  Jovian  Moon  lo.  ( W  Post, Feb  12/92; 
NY  Times, Feb  12/92; USA  Today,  Feb  12/92; W  Times,  Feb  12/92; AP,  Feb 
11/92; B Sun, Feb 9/92; P  Inq, Feb  9/92) 

FEBRUARY  1992 

CHRON0LC)GY 1992 

Februnry  13:   Sen io r   members  of  t h e   Bush  administration   launched   t h e  
"Na t iona l  Technology  Initiative ,"   a  program  t h a t  would  speed  t h e  movemen t  
of  technology  ou t  of  t h e  Nation's   huge  Federal  laboratories  and   i n t o  comme r -  
cial markets .   ( W  Post, Feh  13 /92 )  

Evgeny Sverdlov ,  director  of  t h e  In s t i tu te  of  Molecular Gene t ic s  in  Moscow, 
told  t h e   a n n u a l  meeting   of  t h e  Ame r ican   Association   for  t h e   Advancemen t  
of  Sc ience  ( A A A S ) ,  t h a t   t h e  demise of  t h e  former Sov ie t  U n i o n   had   created  
a  "brain   drain"   t h a t   challenged   t h e   future  existence   of  t h e  Russian  scientific  
research  commtlnity.  Because of  t h e  lack  of  funds, many  research  cen te r s  were 
o n   t h e   verge  of  collapse.  He   added  t h a t   it  was  good  for  young  scientists   t o  
h o n e   the i r   skills  abroad .   But  h e   said  it  would  be  a   disaster  for  science   in  his 
country   if  they  did  no t   re tu rn .   (CSM ,  Feh  13/92)  

February   14:   " S p ; ~ c e  A s t r o n om y   U p d a t e , "   a   new   te lev i s ion   program  
launched   by  N A S A ,  was  scheduleil  for dehu t   over  N A S A  Se lec t  Television .  
T h e  program ,  wh ich  was  t o  o r ig ina te   from   t h e  N A S A   Heallquarters   aud i to -  
r ium ,   W a s h i n g t o n ,   D .C . ,   aimed   t o   provide   a n   unde r s tand ing   of  how   ou r  
views   of  t h e   universe  are   chang ing   th rough   c o n t i n u i n g ,   newr results  from  
astrophysical   observations   such   as  t h e   Hubb le   Space   Telescope ,   C o ~ n p t o n  
Ga rnma   Ray  Observatory ,   and   t h e   Co sm ic   R:~ckgrounil  Explorer.  ( N A S A  
Release   9 2 - 1 5 )  

In  a n  effort  to   i m p r e  \tudent .;  t o  btuily  nlathematics ,   science ,  and   t e c h n o l -  
ogy, almost   1,000 engineers  from  NA SA   planned   t o  \'isit schools  na t ionw ide  
d u r ~ n g  t h e  week  of  February  16-22 .  NASA's  "teachers  for  a   day"  will  he  par-  
ticipating   in  t h e  Na t iona l  Engineers Week's Discover " E  Program,  t h e   largest 
s tuden t  ou t reach  effort  sponsored hy  t h e  engineering  profession.  N A S A  engi-  
neers  were  t o  participate   in  career  day  activities ,  teach   students ,  conduc t   sci- 
ence   competitions ,   participate   in  teacher   workshops,  and   judge  science   fairs. 
N A S A  A dm~ n i s t r k~ t o r  Richard  H .  Truly said ,  "Sp:~ce  exploration   and   its mon -  
umen ta l   engineering   feats  are  vital   t o  America's future   competitiveness ,  will 
s t reng then   d om e s t ~ c  economy,  p r o v ~ d e  jobs  for  Am e r ~ c a n s ,  a n d   lnsplre  s tu -  
den t s   t o  study  m a t h em n t~ c a  'ind  hc~ence ."  ( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 2 4 )  

February  15:  T h e  Associated  Press  reported   t h a t   two  ex-Soviet   cosmonauts  
circling  t h e  Earth  wen t  o n  television  t o  reassure  t h e  puhlic  t h a t  t h e y  were safe 
and   working  hard .   despite  t h e   many  difficulties  caused  by  t h e   turmoil   back 
home .  T h e  demise of  t h e  Soviet  gove rnmen t  and   independence  of  t h e  former  
republics  had   th rown   t h e   space  program  i n t o   disarray,  delaying  t h e   cosmo-  
naut's   return  for mon th s .   (AP ,  Feb  15/92)  

February  16:  Space   S h u t t l e   LXscovery,  wh ich   flew  in   space  n i n e   days  in  
January ,  returned   home   after   14 J ; ~ y s  o n  t h e  ground  in  California   and  a  cross- 
country   piggyhack  trip  o n   a  Roeing  7 4 7 .   T h e   S h u t t l e   left  for  t h e   Kennedy  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

FEBRUARY  1992 

Space Center, stopping overnight  at  Biggs Army  Air  Field  in  El  Paso, Texas 
and  at Kelly Air Force Base  in  San Antonio, Texas.  (AP, Feb  16/92) 

February  17:  It  was  reported  that  NASA's  Johnson Space  Center  plans  to 
award  a broad  computer services contract  later during the year  to support the 
center's  host  computers,  networks,  workstations,  application  software,  and 
telecommunications  systems. Th e  contract, which  analysts estimate will  cost 
up  to  $180  million,  was  to  include  software  acquisition,  development  and 
maintenance,  installation,  engineering,  integration,  and  costumer  services. 
(Federal Computer Week,  Feb  17/92) 

February  18: Scientists reported that  enhanced versions of  the pictures taken 
from the Voyager 2  spacecraft reveal what  look like three gigantic ice-gushing 
volcanoes on  Neptune's frozen Moon  Triton.  (NY Times,  Feb  18/92; AP,  Feb 
14/92) 

Scientists  working  in  Antarctica  were  seeking evidence  of  radiation  from 
space. In  one project, directed by  Dr. Douglas M. Lowder of  the University of 
California at Berkeley, a hot water  jet  drilled two holes 2,600 feet deep in the 
ice  to  test  the   possibility  of  detecting  the  elusive  particles  called  neutrinos 
that  after  traveling  through  space, traverse the entire Earth  to emerge at  the 
pole. Scientists hope scanners in a series of  such holes will  be  able to  identify 
the sources of  neutrinos  in  the Arctic sky. (NY Times, Feb  18/92) 

February 20: NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appoint- 
ment  of  Aaron  Cohen,  Director  of  the  Johnson  Space Center, Houston,  as 
acting  Deputy  Administrator.  Prior  to  being  named  acting  Deputy 
Administrator, Cohen  had  been  Director of  the Johnson Space Center since 
October  1986. He  joined  NASA  in  1962 in  the  Apollo  Spacecraft Program 
Office at  the Manned  Spacecraft Center.  (NASA  Release 92-25) 

February  23:  After  two  failed  launch  attempts,  the  Earthwinds  around-the- 
world balloon flight was postponed until November. Th e  captain, airline pilot 
Larry  Newman  of  Scottsdale, Arizona, and  his crew, Don  Moses  and  Russian 
cosmonaut Vladimir  Dzhanibekov, need  near-calm conditions on  the ground 
and  the right trajectory to launch  the  trip, expected to last from  12 to  2 1 days 
at  an altitude  of  about 35,000 feet.  I t  would  be  the  first balloon  to circle the 
world.  (LA Times, Feb  23/92;) 

Yuri  P.  Semenov, general  director  of  NPO   Energia,  the   Russians' civilian 
manned  space  program,  invited  U.S.  officials to  lease  room  aboard  the  Mir 
Space  Station, orbiting  240  miles  above  Earth,  to   conduct  experiments.  In 
addition, Semenov  also proposed  selling Russians' most  powerful  rocket,  the 
Energia, which  exceeds  the  lifting  capacity of  any  U.S.  launch  vehicle.  (W  
Post, Feb  23/92; NY  Times, Feb  23/92) 

FEBRUARY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

I t  was  reported  th a t  a Delta  2  rocket  carrying  a $65 million military  nav -  
igation  satellite was  launched  in to  space.  T h e  Global  Positioning  System 
"Navstar"  satellite  is  the   12 th  in  a  globe-spanning  network  of such  space- 
craft  th a t   allow  military  forces  o n   th e   ground,  at  sea,  and  in   th e   air  to  
determine  their  location  and  altitude  to   within  53  feet  anywhere  in  th e  
world.  After  a  flawless  boost  in to   space,  th e   satellite  was  released  in to   a 
preliminary  orbit  about  25  minutes  after  liftoff.  On-board  rockets  were 
scheduled t o  fire later  to  put t h e  satellite in  a circular  12-hour orbit  12,500 
miles  up.  (UP I ,  Feb  23/92;  B  Sun, Feb  24/92; W Times,  Feb  24/92;  USA 
Today,  Feb  24/92) 

February  24:  After  triumphing  in  a bruising congressional battle  in  1991 and 
securing a  $2.25  billion  berth  in  the   Administration's  1993 budget,  NASA  
officials  and  Space  Station  Freedom  contractors  said  they  were  on   target 
toward  a  scheduled  launch  of  the   first  Space  Station  components  in 
November  1995. T h e  station,  to  be  lofted  piece  by  piece  aboard  the  Space 
Shuttle, was  to  be  partially operational by 1997, and permanently  manned  by 
a four-astronaut crew by  2000.  (LA Tm e s ,  Feb  24/92) 

It  was  reported  that  a  Russian-German  space  crew  will  blast  off  from 
Kazakhstan on  March  17, 1992, the first manned  flight since the birth  of  the  
Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  (C IS ) .   German  cosmonaut  Klaus- 
Dietrich  Flade was  scheduled to  travel aboard a Soyuz craft  to  the Mir  Space 
Station, six weeks after his countryman Ulf Merbold  returned  from a success- 
ful  eight-day mission  aboard  the  U S .  Shuttle Discovery  in  January. Kayser- 
Threde  GmbH ,  a  small Munich  high  technology  firm, would  produce  hard- 
ware for scientific tests during Flade's week-long mission. (Reuters, Feb 24/92) 

Associated Press  reported  that  a military  satellite  capable  of  guiding war- 
planes,  ships,  and  tanks with  an   accuracy  of  50  feet  or  better  circled  Earth 
Monday  after a ride on  a Delta rocket.  (AP, Feb  24/92) 

It  was  reported  that  Russian  scientists  successfully  tested  an   engine  for  a 
space plane  in  1991. (Time, Feb  24/92) 

February  25:  Milton  B.  Ames  Jr.,  78,  an  aeronautical  engineer  who  was 
Mission  Director  for  the  Pegasus  satellite  launches  using  Saturn  rockets and 
who  was  a  recepient  of  numerous  NASA   awards,  died  of  heart  failure  at 
Mount Vernon Hospital, Alexandria, Virginia. (W  Post, Feb 25/92) 

Milan J .  Krasnican, 68, a retired  aerospace engineer with NASA ,  who was 
a member of  the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on  
the  orbiting  geophysical observatory spacecraft  program  at  Goddard  Space 
Flight  Cen te r ,   died  at  Sibley  Hospital.  A  long-term  resident  of  th e  
Washington  area, he  lived  in Bethesda. (W  Post, Feb 25/92) 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AEKONALJTI(:S 

FEBRUARY  1992 

According   t o  a  released  congressional  study, a $3 billion  U.S.  space  agency 
satellite  program  to  monitor   t h e   env i ronmen t   would  be  useless without   mas- 
slve  new  computer   technology.  T h e   study  said  t h a t   N A S A   would  need   t h e  
new  technology   to  store   and   distribute   t h e   information   its  satellite   program 
gathers .  T h e  Earth  Observing  System  ( EO S )  was designed  to  take  con t inuou s  
measurements  of  ozone dep le t ion ,  global  alarming, polar  ice me l t ,  depletion  of 
rainforests,  and   o t h e r  env i ronmen ta l   developments .   But  t h e   study  also  indi-  
ca ted   t h a t   t h e   da ta   collected   by  EOS  would  require  vast  new  ways  t o   store  
information  and  make  it  available t o  a wide range of  researchers.  (Reuters ,  Feb 
25/92; AP,  Feh  25 /92 )  

Februaq  26 :  A  new  hearingless rotor  system  developed  by  McL)onnell  Douglas 
Helicopter  Company, Mesa, Arizona, which  promised  t o  be a s i p i f i c a n t  advance 
in  helicopter  technology,  was  tested  by  NASA .   T h e   tests,  conducted  in  Ames 
Research Cen te r  wind  tunnel ,  evaluated  the  rotor  concept  and  gathered  data  t o  
help develop cornputer programs needed  to  &sign  a new generation of hearingless 
rotors. T h e  new  system, which  e l i~n ina te s  hinges  and  hearings  that   usually  con -  
nect  the  blades  to   the   rotor shaft,  is  the  key  t o  the   innovative system. T h e  blades 
have  advanced  airfoils and  are made of  high  strength  comptsites. T h e  technolo- 
gy  was  expected  to  have  many  benefits,  including  easier maintenance  and  lower 
fuel use.  "The  new  rotor system would allow for faster, more agile, more cost eRec- 
tive and  safer helicopters,"  saiil Steve Jacklin, project  manager  for  the  wind  tun -  
nel  test at  the  Ames Research Center .  ( N A S A  Release 92-27)  

Reuters  reported  t h a t   two   telecommunications   satellites  worth   more  t h a n  
$350  million  were  placed  i n t o   oriht   t i ~ r  J a p a n   and   t h e   Arah   League  after 
launch   from  a  European  base  in  French   Gu iana .   (Reu te r s ,  Feh  26/92)  

T h e   G e n e r a l   Accoun t ing   Office  recommended   t h a t   NA SA   should  n o t  
award  a  p lanned   con t rac t   for  t h e   da ta   management   po r t ion   of  t h e   Earth  
Ohserving   System  it  had   slated  for  deployment   during   t h e   coming   decade .  
C i t ing  past  criticism  o f  NASA's hand l ing  of  da ta  from  its  space  missions,  t h e  
G A O  report  emphasized t h a t   t h e  Space  Agency  should work  toward  t h e   long- 
term   viability  of  a new  d a t a  system.  (VC'  Times, Feh  26/92) 

Fearing  t h a t   unemployed  scientists   in  t h e   former  Soviet   U n i o n   might   put  
the i r  talents   t o  use building weapons of  mass destruction   for unsavory  regimes, 
t h e  Un i ted  S ta te s ,  Germany ,  a n d  Russia announced  t h e  formation  of  a n  in te r -  
na t iona l   cen te r   t o  promote   "nc~n-military  endeavors."  ( P  lnq ,  Feb  26/92)  

February 2 7 :  Associated  Press reported  t h a t  th ree  soldiers had  burned   t o  d e a t h  
as  hundreds   of  con s t ruc t ion   troops  rioted  a t   Baikonur  Space   C e n t e r   in  
Kazakhstan  after   complaining   of  " inhuman   t rea tmen t"   by  the i r   superiors. 
Baikonur  was  t h e  ma in   space  launch   site  in  t h e  former  Sov ie t  U n i o n .   ( P  Inq, 
Feb  27/92)  

FEBRUARY   1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

I n   a  speech   t o   t h e  Na t iona l   Space  C l u b ,  outgoing   N A S A   Chief   Richard  
Truly, who   resurrected  t h e  S h u t t l e  Space  program  after  t h e   1986  tragedy, said 
t h a t   t h e   country's  space program  is  in   jeopardy  and   t h a t   " the   cheap   shots"  
com ing  from  t h e  Na t iona l   Space  C o u n c i l ,  headed   by  Vice  President  Quay le ,  
"must  end"   if  t h e  W h i t e   House  a n d  Congress  wan t   t o   ma in ta in   U.S.  leader- 
sh ip  in  space. ( U S A  Today, Feb 27/92;  W Times, Feb 27/92; W Pos t ,  Feb 26/92;  
Fh Today, Feb  15/92;  0 Sen ,  Feb  14 ,  1992; Birmingham  Post-Herald, Feb  18/92;  
Defense  New s ,   Feb  17/92;  B  S u n ,   Feb  19/92; Space New s ,   Feb  17/92;  AP,  Feb 
19/92;  NY  Times,  Feb  20192) 

Congressional   investigators  said  t h a t   t h e   Space   Agency's  Earth-observing  
satellite   program  was  flawed  because  of  risky  plans  for ga the r ing   information  
from  t h e  satellites.  ( N Y  Xme s ,   Feb  27/92)  

Febrwcry  28:  A  status  briefing  marking  t h e   20 th   anniversary  of  Pioneer   10's 
launch  was scheduled  for March   2 a t  Ames  Research C e n t e r ,  Moun ta in  View, 
California .  T h e  briefing  was  t o  examine   new  and  past  space accomplishments  
and   a spacecraft signal was scheduled  t o  be  "piped  in"  t o  t h e  briefing  from five 
billion  miles  away.  Also  featured  in  t h e  briefing  would  be  a  launch-identical ,  
full-scale replica of  Pioneer  10 shown  for t h e  first time.  ( N A S A  No te  N92 -16 )  

T h e   Washington  Post  announced   t h a t   Representative   Howard  Volpe  of 
Michigan   had   accused  N A S A   of  teach ing   workers  how   t o   avoid  disclosing 
controversial   information ,   including   rewriting  documen t s   a n d   destroying 
them .   T h e   congressman  said  t h a t   congressional  investigators  looking  i n t o   a 
program  t o  develop  t h e  SP-100  nuclear  space reactor h a d  found  a two-page se t  
of  instructions   o n   how  t o   deal   with   Freedom  of  Information   A c t   requests. 
( N A S A  Release 92-041 ,  Feb  28/92; P la in  Dea ler ,   Feb  28/92; AP,  Feb  27/92)  

Representative   Richard   J .   Durbin ,   Illinois  Democrat ,   and   S e n a t o r   Dale 
Bumpers,  Arkansas   Democrat ,   released  a  G A P  analysis  t h a t   said  t h e   Space  
Agency  was comm i t t ing  itself  t o  more projects  t h a n  for which   it  could  expec t  
t h e   country   t o   pay.  "In   sho r t ,   it  is  chasing   too   many   programs  for  t o o   few 
dollars."  ( W  Times, Feb  28/92: AP, Feb  27/92)  

Dr. Lynn Wiley, a n  obstetrician  who  had  worked w i th  N A S A  since  t h e  early  
1980s,  reported   t h a t   because  of  plans  for  long-term   missions  in   space ,   t h e  
question  of  sex  and  reproduction   had   become  very  impo r tan t  issues. M e n  a n d  
women  could  be  teamed   i n  lunar  colonization  efforts planned   after  t h e  tu rn  of 
t h e   century   a n d   in   trips  t o   Mars,  wh ich   could  take   two  t o   th ree   years  for  a 
round   trip .  Dr.  Stewart  W h i tm a n   of  t h e  Space  S e t t l em e n t  Studies  Program a t  
Niagara University  agreed t h a t  research was "essential  if  males a n d  females are  
going  t o  be  o n   long-term  missions  together."  But  Barbara Schwartz ,  a  spokes- 
woman  for  t h e  J o h n s o n  Space  S h u t t l e  C e n t e r ,  said S h u t t l e  sex  is n o t  feasible 
because  the re   is  n o  "privacy"  and   stressed  t h a t  N A S A  plans   n o  sexual  exper-  

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

FEBRUARY  1992 

iments  involving humans.  (W  Emes ,  Feb  28/92; Huntsville Tm e s ,  Feb  20/92; 
Birmingham News, Feb  20192; NY  Times, Feb  11/92) 

Yuri  N .   Koptev, a  top Russian space official, declared  in  Izvestiya, that  the 
six-year-old Space Station Mir  must  be  replaced by  1994 and  suggested turn- 
ing  to  the West  for  technical  and  financial  assistance. "We  do  not  exclude 
attracting foreign  capital  and  forming  a  joint  stock company for  joint  use  of 
the Mir Station," he  said.  (AP, Feb  28/92) 

M a r c h  

March  3: N A S A   selected  28  research  proposals  for  immediate   nego t ia t ion  of 
Phase  I1  con t rac t s   in   NASA's Sma l l   Business  Innova t ion   Research   Program 
(SB IR ) .   T h e   proposals  were  submitted   by  65   small ,   high   technology   firms 
located   in  16 states .  Total  value of  t h e  28  awards was $ 1 4  million.  SBIR objec-  
tives  are   t o  stimulate   technological   innova t ion   in   t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  by  using 
small  business,  including   minority   a n d   disadvantaged   firms,  t o   he lp   meet  
Federal  research  and  development   needs   and   t o  encourage  commercial   appli-  
cations   of  federally  funded   research  innovations .   T h e  SBIR  program  is  m a n -  
aged  by  NASA's  Office  of  Commercial   Programs,  N A S A   Headquarters ,  
Wa sh ing ton ,   D .C . ,   and   all  individual   SBIR  projects  are   managed   by  n i n e  
N A S A   Field Cen te r s .   ( N A S A  Release  92 -27 )  

March  4:  A  press briefing  was  scheduled   t o  be  held   by  a  science   team   for  t h e  
ATLAS-1   mission  o n  March   23,  1992 ,  a t   t h e   Marshall  Space  Flight  C e n t e r  
(M S FC ) ,  Huntsville ,   Alabama .   T h e  briefing  was  t o  discuss  t h e  mission's sci- 
ence  activities  and  was  t o  consist  of  two  panels.  ( N A S A  N o t e  N92 -18 )  

A  $25   million ,   five-year program  t o  expand   t h e   ability  of  he l icop te r  pilots 
t o  f l y   close  t o   t h e  ground ,  around   obstacles  and   in  bad  weather ,  was  in i t ia ted  
by  N A S A   and   t h e   U .S .   Army.  Experiments   conduc ted   a t   N A S A   Ames  
Research  Cen te r ,   Moun ta in   View,  California ,   would  study  displays  t h a t   give 
pilots  information ,   be t te r   guidance   a n d   navigation   systems,  a n d   ways  t o  
improve  helicopter   weapons  systems. T h e  program's ma in  research  tool  would 
be  a modified  UH - 6 0A  Black  Hawk  helicopter   called  t h e  Rotorcraft-Aircrew  
Systems Concep t s  A i rbo rne  Laboratory  o r  "RASCAL ."   I n   add i t ion  t o  Ames ,  
flight   tests  were  also  t o  be  conduc ted   a t  Crows  Landing ,  a U .S .   Navy   facility 
in California's S a n  Joaqu in  Valley. ( N A S A  Release  92 -28 )  

N A S A  reported  t h a t  a n  SR -71A  "Blackbird"  research  aircraft will  test  a key 
propulsion  system for t h e  X-30 N a t i o n a l  Aero-Space  Plane   ( N A S P ) .  T h e  SR -  
7 1A  would  ac t  as a high-speed  testbed  t o  prove  t h e  concep t  of burning  hydro-  
gen  fuel outside  t h e  X-30's eng ine  exhau s t  nozzles as  a way  t o   improve  overall  
flight  efficiency.  If   t h e   program  operations   received  approval ,   t h e   SR -71A  
would  be  modified  and   flown  a t   N A S A   Ames-Dryden   Flight  Research  
Facility,  Edwards,  California .   T h e   N A S P   J o i n t   Program  Office,  W r igh t -  
Paterson  AFB, O h i o ,  funded   t h e  preliminary  design work  for  t h e  experiment .  
T h e  N A S P   program  is  a  joint  effort  involving   N A S A ,   t h e   Depa r tmen t   of 
Defense, and   a U.S.  industry  team .   ( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 2 9 )  

March  5:  In   a n   expe r imen t   co-sponsored  by  N A S A   and   t h e   Wa l te r   Reed  
Army   In s t i tu te  of Research ,  Wa sh ing ton ,  D .C . ,  a novel  cell  cu l tu re  system for 
growing  bone   cells  was  t o   undergo   its  first  test  in   weightlessness  o n  a  Space  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1992 

Shuttle mission. The  objectives of  the Space %sue  Loss-1  (STL )  experiment 
involve  studying  the  effects  of  the  microgravity  environment  on   the   bio- 
chemistry  and  functional  activity  of  various  tissues  including  muscle,  bone, 
and  blood  cells.  Post-flight  electron  microscopic  analyses  of  cells  from  the  
flight  experiment  were  to be  conducted by Dr.  Stephen  Doty  of  the   Hospital 
for  Special Surgery  in New  York City.  (NASA  Release 92-30) 

March 6: David Wolf, Ray Schwarz, and Tinh Trinh of NASA's Johnson Space 
Cen te r  ( J SC )  were selected by NASA's General Counsel Office to  receive the 
Inventor of  the Year Award  for their development and design of  a new class of 
horizontally  rotating  tissue culture  systems-also  known  as  the  rotating wall 
bioreactor-that 
in  some  ways  simulate  microgravity.  Bioreactors  are  cell 
maintenance  devices used  for  research in growth and  culturing  cells or  tissues 
and have been  recognized as valuable tools for pioneering  research in  lung tis- 
sue,  skin  growth,  intestinal  disease,  cartilage  growth,  colon  cancer,  brain 
tumor g o w t h ,  and  therapeutics. (NASA  Release  92-33) 

March  9: NASA   announced  tha t  more than   700 researchers from around  the  
world would convene on  March  16-20, 1992, at Johnson Space Center's ( JSC )  
Gilruth Center  in  Houston, Texas for  five days of  discussions on  research o n  
the  universe,  with  much  of  the   focus  on  Venus  and  findings  from  NASA's 
Magellan probe. Magellan, deployed from the Space Shuttle Atlantis  in  1989, 
has mapped about 97 percent of  the Venusian surface with  its remote  sensing 
cameras. A n   overview  of  the  Magellan  program  called  "Magellan  at  Venus: 
Th e  Global  Perspective Emerges,"  was  scheduled  to   start  the  conference  on  
March  6,  1992. (NASA  Note N92-19) 

A  House  panel  raised  legal  questions  about  the National   Space  Council's 
hand l ing   of  a  proposal 
t o   restructure  space  program  management . 
Representative  Howard Wolpe  of  Michigan,  chairman  of  the  House  Science 
subcommittee on  investigations and oversight, charged in a letter to  President 
Bush  that  the council's official circulation of  the proposal was  in conflict with 
the  1958 Space  Act.  T h e   proposal,  prepared  by  the  Livermore  Laboratory's 
Lowell  Wood,  also  violated  the   council's charter  no t   t o   interfere  with  line 
management  responsibility in NASA.  (AvWk, March 9/92)  

David  A .  Paige  of  the University  of  California  at  Los  Angeles  reexamined 
the  thermodynamics  of  ice  under  Martian  conditions  and  concluded  tha t  
there could be  some ground-ice deposits just  a few  feet  below  the surface and 
that  "these deposits could be  a valuable resource for  human  exploration." (W  
Post, Mar 9/92) 

Researchers  reported  in  Science  magazine  tha t   two  groups  of  meteorites 
thought  to  be  fragments of  long-vanished  planets  had  been  dated  t o  within 
100 million years of  the  formation  of  the solar system about 4.56 billion  years 

h l 4 1 i c :H   1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

ago. T h e  research could  lead  t o  a  better   understanding  of  how planets  emerged 
from  t h e  d e h r ~ s  of  interplanetary   collisions.  ( P  Inq, Mar  9 /92 )  

March  10 :  N A S A   t e c h n o l o g y   s tud ie s   h a v e   ind ica ted   t h a t   a   n e x t - g e n e r a -  
t i o n   h igh - speed   c iv i l   t ran spo r t   ( H S C T )  would  be   ab le   t o   m e e t   e n g i n e  
em i s s ion   a n d   no i se   ta rge t s ,   a l t h o u g h   t h e   s o n i c - b o om   p rob lem   would 
r em a i n .  Agency   s tud ie s  h a d   s h ow n   t h a t   em i s s ion s  cou ld   be  reduced   t o  a n  
a c c e p t a b l e   level   by  c o n t r o l l i n g   t h e  fuel   air   r a t i o   in   t h e  c om b u s t o r  t o  e l im -  
i n a t e  h i g h   peak  tempe ra tu re s .   N A S A  was  also  s t u d y i n g  new   h igh - l i f t   flaps  
t h a t   allow   t h e   a i rc ra f t   t o   c l i inb   rapidly ,   reduc ing   t h e   no i se   f o o t p r i n t .  
(Flight  International ,  Ma r   10192) 

March  1 1 :   In   a n   official  s ta temen t ,  N A S A   Administrator   Richard   H .   Truly 
t h e   n om i n a t i o n   of  Dan ie l   S .   G o l d i n   t o   be  n e x t   N A S A  
welcomed  
Administrator .   "I  am   pleased  t o   learn   t h a t   President   Bush  nom ina ted  
Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  as  t h e  nex t  Adm in i s t ra to r  of N A S A  .... I  wish  h im  every  suc- 
cess as  h e  comes  t o   this   elite  organization,"  said Truly.  ( N A S A  N o t e  9 2 - 2 0 )  

March  12:  It  was  reported  t h a t  o n  Ma rch   17 ,  1992 ,  t h a t   t h e  Aerospace  Safety 
Advisory  Panel   will  present  its  annua l   report   t o   N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  
Richard   H .   Truly  a t   N A S A   Headquarters ,   Wa sh ing ton ,   D .C .   T h e   panel  
reviews,  evaluates ,   and   advises  t h e   N A S A   Administrator   o n   present   a n d  
future   N A S A   programs  and   activities .   Priority  is  given   t o   programs  t h a t  
involve   t h e  satety  of  manned   flight.  ( N A S A  No te   9 2 - 2 1 )  

A   congressional  investigator   recommended   t h a t   t h e   gove rnmen t   scrap 
development   of  a  space nuclear  reactor  unless  t h e  N a t i o n  was willing  t o  com -  
mit  more  t h a n  $2  billion   t o  t h e  project.  T h e  space  reactor  project   was  begun 
as  a   joint  ven tu re   of  NA SA ,   t h e   Depa r tmen t   of  Energy,  a n d   t h e   Pentagon .  
T h e   latter   agency  envisioned   a   use  of  t h e   project  in   its  Strategic   Defense 
Initiative ,   t h e   space-based  nuclear   defense  shield .   But  Mark  E.  Geb icke ,  
Director  of N A S A   issues for G A O ,  said  t h e  proposed  reactor   suffered because 
N A S A   refused  t o  identify  a  specific  mission  in  wh ich  t h e   nuclear   technology  
would  be  used  as  a  power  source or  propulsion  system.  (AP ,  Mar   12 /92 ) .  

Murch  13:  Dr.  Everett   G ib son   of  NASA's  J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r   ( J S C ) ,  
Hou s ton ,   Texas,  Dr.  Haraldur   Karlsson,  and   scientists   a t   t h e   University   of 
Ch icago  analyzed  drops of  water  ex t rac ted  from several meteorites  believed  t o  
have   come   from  Mars  a n d   concluded   t h a t   t h e   oxygen  isotopes  in   t h e   water 
were  extraterrestrial .   Photographs   returned   t o  Earth   from  t h e  Ma r ine r  9   a n d  
Viking spacecraft show features  t h a t  suggest Mars o n c e  may  have  had   a  water- 
rich   atmosphere   and   flowing water  o n   its  surface.  T h r o u g h   t h e  years,  several 
~ n e t e o r i t e s  have   been  collected   o n   Earth   t h a t   scientists   have   identified  as 
Ma r t ian  by  comparing  t h em   t o  information  gleaned  by  t h e  Viking  spacecraft. 
Six  of  these   meteorites  were  used  in  t h e  water  ex t rac t ion  procedure.  Findings 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH  1992 

from  the  work  completed  by  t h e   team  may  answer some questions  about  the  
processes operating  in  the   solar system.  (NA SA  Release 92-35)  

March  14:  It  was  reported  tha t  Vice  President  Dan  Quayle's National   Space 
Council   had  tightened  its  control   over  space  activities  by  dividing  NASA's 
responsibility  for  t h e   U.S.  Moon-Mars  project  among  several  government 
agencies. Quayle  released a directive, approved by  the  president,  tha t   assigns 
"major  roles"  t o   the   Department  of  Defense  and   the   Department  of  Energy 
while establishing NASA  as the  principal  agency. (Mercury New s ,  Mar  14/92) 

T h e  new  Space Shuttle  Endeavour was  hauled  slowly  to  its seaside launch- 
ing  pad  for  work  to   ready the   ship  for  an   engine  test  firing  in  April  and   its 
maiden  flight  in   early  May.  Mounted  atop   a  powerful  Apollo-era  crawler- 
transporter,  Endeavour  began  the  4  112 mile, six-hour  trip  to    ad  39-B a t  7: 18  
a.m.  EST.  Engineers  spent  the   afternoon  hooking  up  fuel  lines  and  various 
mechanical,  hydraulic  and  electrical  systems.  (UP I ,   Mar  14/92;  AP,  Mar 
13/92; P  Inq, Mar  14/92) 

In   an  effort  to  reduce  vibrations  in  helicopters,  a  team  of  engineers a t   t h e  
University  of  Maryland  were  developing  "smart"  rotor  blades  tha t   measure 
aerodynamic  stresses  and  change  shape  in   flight  to   reduce  them .   T h e   team 
also hoped to  build rotor blades tha t  can  warn pilots when t h e  blades are about 
to  crack or  fail.  ( B  Sun, Mar  14/92) 

March  16: T h e  Lunar  and  Planetary  Science Conference  in  Houston ,  Texas, 
announced   tha t   the  Magellan  spacecraft's orbit  around Venus would  be  low- 
ered to  just  above  the  planet's  dense atmosphere to  conduct gravity studies o n  
Venus. T h e  spacecraft's closet approach t o  Venus was  t o  be moved downward 
from 186 miles to  11 1 miles above the  surface for maximum sensitivity  to  vari- 
ations  in  the   gravity  field.  T h e   Magellan  Project  is  managed  by  JPL   for 
NASA's Office of  Space Science and  Applications.  (NA SA  Release 92-36)  

March  17: James V.  Correale, 69 ,  a native of  Philadelphia who figured out  how 
to clean  the   air  tha t  Apollo  13  astronauts rapidly were  running  out  of  during 
their mission  to the  Moon   in  1970, died Saturday  a t  a hospital  in Nassau  Bay, 
Texas.  ( P  Inq, Mar  17/92) 

March  18: Researchers from NASA's Goddard  Space Flight Center's Wallops 
Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, used  laser-ranging instruments aboard 
t h e  Wallops P-3B (HL )  O r ion  aircraft t o  measure t h e  Arctic  sea ice above t h e  
water  and   the  Greenland  polar glacier elevations  in order  t o  study global  cli- 
mate changes. T h e  data  gathered was  to  be  compared  to  previous studies and  
used  t o  develop a baseline for future studies. Scientists are  interested  in devel- 
oping accurate measurements  of  sea  ice and  glaciers because changes in  these 
systems may  indicate  trends  in  world  climate.  Appreciable  changes  in  these 

MARCH  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

ice  systems,  such  as  increased  melting,  could  directly  affect  global  climate. 
(NA SA  Release 92-38) 

Managers a t  NASA's Compton  Gamma  Ray  Observatory  were  implement- 
ing a new  set of  operating  procedures because of  a problem  in  t h e  playback of 
recorded data. Scientific and  spacecraft data  was  to be  transmitted  directly  to  
the  Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System  (TDRSS )  and  t h e n  t o  a ground 
control  center, without  using  tape recorders. However, because of  the  capabil- 
ity of  TDRSS,  using  two of  its  spacecraft would  enable nearly full coverage of 
each Compton   orbit.  Th is  procedure will  be  used  while  a n  investigation  con-  
tinues  in to  t h e  cause of  the   problem. Compton  Gamma Ray Observatory, the  
second  of  NASA's Great   Observatories,  was  launched  April  5,  1991, by  the  
Space Shuttle  Atlantis  to  study high-energy  radiation  from  space. T h e  space- 
craft was developed and  is managed and  operated  by  GSFC  for NASA's Office 
of Space Science and Applications,  Washington, D .C .  (NASA  Release 92-39) 

March  18: A German  and  two Russian  astronauts were  launched  in to  space in  
the  first space mission of  the  post-Soviet  era. T h e  160 foot Soyuz TM-14  rock- 
e t  was scheduled to  rendezvous o n  March  19 with the  Mir Space Station  orbit- 
ing 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped  the  launching would  attract  
more  foreign investment  for future  joint  missions  to  help finance future  space 
explorations.  (NY Times, Mar  18/92; W Post, Mar  18/92; LA Times, Mar  18/92) 

T h e  Aerospace  Safety  Advisory  Panel,  in   its  annual   report  t o   officials of 
NASA ,  questioned  the  Agency's decision  to  save money  by  eliminating  sev- 
eral  engine  improvement  programs,  which  could  compromise  the   safety  of 
future  Space  Shu t t le   flights.  Although   t h e   panel  said  NA SA   was  generally 
doing  a good job  o n  safety  issues,  t h e  panel  said  it was  unwise for  the  Agency 
to  stop  developing a new main  combustion chamber for t h e  engine and a new 
hydrogen  fuel pump.  (NY 'Xmes, Mar  18/92) 

A draft report  issued by  the  National  Research Council  claimed  tha t  NASA  
was  failing  to   provide  the   technological  support  needed  by  the   U.S.  aircraft 
industry  to  face down foreign  rivals. T h e  study raised  serious questions about 
NASA's  role in  supporting  basic  technology  tha t   U.S.  manufacturers  of  air- 
craft  jet  engines  and  components  rely  o n   in  meeting  international   competi- 
tion .   (LA Times, Mar  18/92) 

March  19: According to a poll  commissioned by  the  company that built the  U.S. 
Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and 
President  Bush's proposed missions to  the  Moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent  of 
the  Nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared 
with 74 percent two years ago, and 78 percent  in  1988. Support for an outpost o n  
Mars,  a goal  announced  by  Bush  during his first year  in office, had  slipped to 49 
percent from 62 percent  in  1990 and 66  percent  in  1988. (0 Sen, Mar  19/92) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH  1992 

Hugo Wahlquist, of NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory, said that Italian and 
American  scientists would  spend nine  to  12 months  looking for signs of  grav- 
ity waves-distortions  in  space  and  time  caused by  gigantic black  holes-in 
tape  recordings of  radio transmissions between Ulysses and stations on  Earth. 
Discovery  of  gravity  waves  would  provide  strong  confirmation  of  Albert 
Einstein's theory of  how  the universe works,  and could prove  the  existence of 
black  holes.  (W  Tmes, Mar  19/92; AP, Mar  19/92) 

March  20:  NASA  released  to  Congress a  report  o n  the  Restructuring  of  the 
Earth Observation  System  (EOS). T h e  system  is  the  centerpiece  of  NASA's 
Mission to Planet  Earth,  a coordinated  program  to study th e  Earth's environ- 
ment  as  a complete global  system and  is  composed of  two series of  spacecraft 
to collect  data  over  15 years.  "The  restructured EOS program meets  the  con- 
cerns  for  a  less  costly  more  flexible  program  while  maintaining  the   science 
observations needed  to support global change research," said Dr.  Lennard A. 
Fisk,  NASA's Associate Administrator  for  Space  Science  and  Applications. 
(NASA  Note N92-22) 

A  Russian-German  crew  docked  with  the  Mir  Space  Station  and  was  to 
relieve a Russian  cosmonaut who had  been  orbiting over an  extended  period 
of  time. T h e  ITAR-Tass news agency reported tha t  the  TM-14 capsule docked 
on  schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would 
replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev  and Alexander  Volkov, who were  sched- 
uled  to   return  to  Earth  on  March  25.  Germany  paid  $24  million  to send  its 
astronaut  Klaus Dietrich  Flade  into space. He  was  to spend six days studying 
the  influence of  zero gravity o n  the human body.  ( P  Iq, Mar  20192; AP, Mar 
19/92) 

March  24:  T h e   scheduled  launch  of  Space  Shuttle  Atlantis  was  canceled 
because of  fuel leaks, but NASA  decided  it was  a fleeting problem  that posed 
no  danger. Launch Director Bob  Sieck said he  was  confident  the  trouble was 
not  a  recurrence  of  the  hydrogen  leaks  that  grounded  the   Shuttle  fleet  for 
almost six months  in  1990. T h e  launch was  rescheduled  for the  next day.  (W  
Post, Mar 24/92; NY  Times, Mar 24/92; W Times, Mar 24/92; P Inq, Mar 24/92) 

NASA   announced  that  both  tape  recorders  aboard  the   $617  million 
Compton  Gamma  Ray  Observatory  were  malfunctioning,  and  engineers 
directed the  craft to  not use the machines. Compton, a joint  project of NASA 
and  the European Space Agency, was built by  the  space and technology group 
of  TRW  under  the   direction  of  Daniel  S .   Goldin,  the  man  selected  by 
President  Bush  to   become  the   new  NASA   Administrator.  ( W  Post,  Mar 
24/92) 

March  25:  Michael Griffin, Associate Administrator  of NASA ,  told an  open- 
ing session of  a NASA  conference,  that NASA  was  in  trouble with  the   tax- 

MARCH   1942 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

paying public because it had no t  been  running  efficient programs. Griffin said 
NASA  risks  losing support for its projects-like  proposed returns to  t h e  Moon 
and  manned  missions  to  Mars-because 
t h e   public  perceives  it  is  employing 
more  people  t h a n   it  needs  and  not   giving  a  good  return  for  the   money  it 
spends.  (Birmingham News,  Mar  25/92) 

T h e  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis  and  its  seven-member crew was  launched  into  
orbit   to  begin  eight  days  of  around-the-clock  research  to  probe  the  hea l th  of 
Earth's polluted atmosphere. Embarking o n  NASA's first manned  "Mission to  
Planet Earth," Atlantis' flight was  the  first of  10 planned over t h e  next  decade 
to  chart   subtle  atmospheric  changes  as  the   Sun's  energy waxes  and  wanes 
slightly  over  a  complete , l l - y e a r   "solar  cycle."  (W  Post,  Mar  25/92;  USA 
Today,  Mar  25/92; WS],  Mar  25/92; 0 Sun, Mar  25/92; NY  Times, Mar  25/92; 
AP, Mar  25/92) 

It was reported that  the Bush administration's commitment to keeping Russia's 
nuclear  scientists employed by  offering financial assistance and  technical  coop- 
eration was  running  into  obstacles as U.S. officials held  up  some deals and  sent 
conflicting  signals  about  others.  Among  the   projects  awaiting  approval  were 
requests by  Federal agencies to acquire Russian-made plutonium, buy  a Russian- 
made  reactor for  the U.S. space program, and join  an   international consortium 
with Russia and others to  explore use  of  fusion energy.  (W  Post, Mar  25/92) 

March  26:  Outgoing NA SA  Administrator  Richard  H .  Truly announced   his 
support  for  using  space  to  enhance   education  and  his  recommendation  to  
administrator-nominee  Daniel  S.  Goldin   that   NASA   fly  Barbara  Morgan, 
who was  a backup  to Christa  McAuliffe.  (NA SA  Release 92-40)  

A TRW  unit was served with a whistle-blower  lawsuit alleging tha t  the  firm 
made  fraudulent claims for  payments  o n  government  satellite  contracts.  T h e  
suit, filed in  U.S. District Cou r t  in Los Angeles, alleged tha t  TRW's Space and  
Technology  group  in Redondo  California  Beach,  used  improper  design  stan-  
dards  for  the   spy,  communications,  and  scientific  satellites,  t h e n   billed  the  
government  for  the  cost of  correcting the  errors.  (LA Zm e s ,  Mar  26/92) 

Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned  to  Earth five months  later t h a n  
originally planned. T h e  33-year-old flight  engineer's stint   in  space aboard  t h e  
Mir  Space  S ta t ion   had  been  originally  scheduled  to   end   in  October.  But 
because  of  the   disintegration  of  t h e   Soviet   U n i o n ,   money  problems  in 
Moscow, and  Kazakh nationalism, he  was asked t o  extend  his space journey by 
almost  five months ,  creating  a predicament  for him   and making  him  a media 
celebrity.  (NY Times, Mar  26/92; USA  Today, Mar  26/92; W Post, Mar  26/92; 
WSJ, Mar  26/92; B  Sun, Mar  26/92) 

A S TRONAU T IC S   A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

MARCH  1992 

Belgium's Prince  Philippe ,  who   is  t h e  nephew  of  King Baudouin  and  he i r  t o  
t h e   t h r o n e ,   called  t h e   crew  members  of  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s   t o   c o n -  
gradulate   t h em   o n   the i r   launch   and   t o  h o n o r   Dirk  Frimout ,  t h e  first  Belgian 
i n  space .  (AP, Mar  26/92; UP I ,  Mar  26/92)  

March  28:  T h e  Bush  administration   announced   t h a t   t h e   gove rnmen t   would 
import  Russian  technology  for  t h e  U.S.  space program.  "We  hope   t h a t   th i s   is 
t h e   beginning   of  a  long  series of  transactions   n o t   only  w i t h   Russia  bu t   w i th  
Uk ra ine   and   with   o t h e r   republics,"  said  o n e  official.  T h e  U n i t e d   S ta te s  was 
buying  a  small  amoun t   of  p lu ton ium   fuel  for  space  exp lo ra t ion   as  well  as  a 
reactor  designed  for  t h e  same purpose  a n d  four thruster   rockets  built   t o  shift  a 
satellite   from   o n e  orbit   t o   ano the r .  T h e  administration   also  said  t h a t   it   has  
approved  a  license  for  a  private  Ame r ican   company   to huy  Russian  thrusters .  
T h e  sets of  deals are worth   a n  estimated  $14.3 million .   ( W  Post, Mar  28/92; P 
lnq, Mar  28/92; B  S u n ,  Mar  28/92)  

A s t ronau t s  aboard  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s  photographed   natural   auroras 
a n d   fired  clouds  of  gas  i n t o  space  as  they   circled  Earth   for  a  fou r th  day.  (NY 
Times, Mar  28/92; P  lnq, Mar  27/92; W Post, Mar  27/92) 

March  30:  A  22-second  Flight  Readiness  Firing  (FRF)  of  t h e   Space   Shu t t le  
Endeavour's three   main   engines  was  scheduled  for  Monday,  April  6 ,   1992, a t  
NASA's  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r ,   Florida.  Prior  t o   launch ,   a  successful  main 
engine   test  firing is  required  of  all new Space  Shu t t le  orbiters. A  primary objec- 
tive of  the  mission was  t o  capture, retrieve,  repair, and  redeploy a n  INTELSAT- 
VI  communications  satellite  t h a t  had   been   stranded  i n  a n  incorrect  orbit  since 
March  1990. A n   additional  goal  was  to   demonstrate  and   verify  Space  S ta t ion  
Freedom EVA maintenance  and  assembly capabilities.  ( N A S A  No te  N92 -26 )  

It  was  reported  t h a t   a  set   of  briefings  o n   Endeavour's  maiden   flight  were 
scheduled  for  April   7  a n d   8,  1992,  a t   t h e   John son   Space   C e n t e r ,   Houston  
( J SC ) .  T h e  Space  Shu t t le  Mission  STS - 4 9  crew  members were  t o  rendezvous, 
capture ,   repair,  and   deploy  t h e   stranded   International   Telecommunications 
Satellite   ( INTELSAT )   and   test  and   evaluate   a  variety  of  Space   S t a t i o n  
Freedom assemhly techniques  during three  space walks.  ( N A S A  N o t e  N92 -25 )  

Dr.  William  B.  Lenoir,  NASA's  Associate Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Space  Flight ,  
suhmitted   his  letter  of  resignation  to N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Richard   H .  Truly, 
t o  be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenu re ,  N A S A  safely and  suc- 
cessfully launched   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e   17 times  a n d  completed   a major  restruc- 
turing  of  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom program,  reducing   its development   costs  
by  $6 billion ,   simplifying  its  subsystems  a n d   improving   its  on -o rb i t   assembly 
process.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -41 )  

MARCH  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

NASA  officials added an extra day  to the environmental mission of  the Space 
Shuttle Atlantis  so its seven-member crew could conduct more  research on  the 
atmosphere. ( P  lnq, Mar 30192; N Y   Xmes ,  Mar 30192; USA  Today, Mar 30192) 

James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of  America's Space Agency 
was  instrumental  in  putting  a  man  on   the  Moon,  died  March  27  at 
Georgetown University  Hospital.  During Mr.  Webb's tenure,  America's first 
manned  space flight took place as well as  the first orbital flight by  John  G lenn  
and  the   first  walk  in  space  by  Edward  White.  ( W  Times,  Mar  30/92;  USA 
Today, Mar  30192; NY  Times, Mar  29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92) 

Chinese engineers blamed  a faulty  ignition  circuit for botching  the  launch 
of  an  Australian  communications  satellite.  Investigators checking  the  Long 
March-2E rocket that failed to blast off  on  March 2 2  found a fault in the  igni- 
tion  system circuits that  led  to an emergency engine  shutdown. According  to 
Chinese officials, the  launch will be  attempted again later during  the year.  ( P  
Inq, Mar  30192) 

March 31 : NASA announced  the selection of  19 new  astronaut candidates for 
the  Space Shuttle program. Th e  group  consisted of  four pilot  astronaut candi- 
dates  and  15 mission  specialist astronaut  candidates,  including nine  civilians 
and  10 military officers. Th e  candidates, who were chosen from  2,054 qualified 
applicants, were  to  report  to  the  Johnson Space Center, Houston,  in  August 
1992 to begin  a year of  training and  evaluation.  (NASA  Release 92-42) 

Atlantis' astronauts reported the loss of  a second scientific instrument, a tel- 
escope probing  galaxies millions of  light  years  away.  Controllers  spent  hours 
trying  to restore the  telescope but  to  no  avail. The  telescope, the only astro- 
nomical  instrument  abroad,  accomplished  19  observations  before  the  fuse 
blew.  More  than  34  were  planned  for  the  nine-day  mission.  ( W  Post,  Mar 
31/92;  USA  Today,  Mar  31/92; W  Times,  Mar  31/92; B  Sun, Mar  31/92; NY 
Xmes, Mar 3 1/92) 

In order to study the  rarefied  region  that  lies between  10 to  20 miles above 
the Earth, designers were developing a new class of  robot airplanes to monitor 
zone  depletion  and  global  warming. A  half-dozen companies were  proposing 
drones designed  to work  at  these altitudes,  travel  thousands of  miles without 
refueling, or stay high  in the sky  for days, if  no t  weeks, at a times. Some of  th e  
proposals  are  modifications of  military models, while  others  harness  unusual 
engines, airframes or materials.  (NY Times,  Mar 3 1/92) 

Scientists  reported  that  an  array  of  instruments  that  detect  the  faintest 
twitches  in  the  Earth's gravitational  field had for the first  time taken  the pulse 
of  the planet's  solid inner  core. T h e  discovery opens a new  avenue for  study- 
ing  the  detailed  structure  of  the  Earth's deep  interior, from which  physicists 
would be  able to calculate the  mass of  the Earth's inner core and  to infer com- 

positions  of  b o t h   t h e   inne r  a n d  ou te r  core. T h e  ach ievemen t  was expected   t o  
shed  light   o n  such  enigmas  as  t h e  na tu re   of  t h e   electric   dynamo   believed  t o  
drive   t h e  Earth's wavering magnetic   field.  (NY Times, Mar 31/92) 

April 

April  1 : Virginia Governor  L.  Douglas Wilder was  scheduled  to  dedicate  o n  
Sunday  April  5,  the   new  Virginia  Air  and  Space  Center  in  Hampton, 
Virginia. Th e  $30 million facility, which was  to serve as  the  new official visi- 
tor center for the NASA  Langley Research Center, has a 300-seat IMAX the- 
ater and was  to feature exhibits o n  the  Viking Orbiter and Viking Lander,  as 
well  as numerous exhibits  on  the  history  of  flight  and  space exploration.  (W  
Post, Apr  1/92) 

A t   the   request  of  Congress, a  NASA   team  researched  the   issue  of  killer 
asteroids and  concluded  that  the odds of  a major  collision in th e  next  centu- 
ry were  "extremely small." But  the  team  added  that  asteroid impacts posed  "a 
significant hazard  to   life  and  property" and  called  for an   international  effort 
"to  provide  insurance  for  our  planet  against  the  ultimate  catastrophe."  T h e  
reporting team gave no  cost estimates for the endeavor but said if  construction 
began  soon, a worldwide network of  warning  telescopes could be  operational 
by  1997. (NY Times, Apr  1/92; W Zmes, Apr  1/92) 

A  technical  consultant  to  the  House Committee  on  Space,  Science,  and 
Technology, said  that  if  the hypersonic National  Aerospace Plane  is  built,  it 
would  be  assembled  in  Palmdale, California.  Scott Crossfield, a  former  test 
pilot,  said  President  Bush, Vice  President  Quayle, and  the   National  Space 
Council  were  strong  supporters of  the  X-30. Crossfield said  it  would  cost  an  
estimated $5 billion  to $12  billion for  the pair of X-30s.  (Antelope Valley  Press, 
Apr  1/92) 

NASA  reported that the  Agency would start supersonic flight tests of a new 
electronic control system that would  improve the  performance, reliability, and 
safety of  high-speed military aircraft, future commercial supersonic transports, 
and  the  X-30 National Aerospace Plane. A NASA  F-15 research aircraft was 
to begin supersonic testing at the  Performance Seeking Control in April  1992 
at  NASA's  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility,  Edwards,  California. 
(NASA  Release 92-44, Apr  1/92) 

April  2 :   After winning Senate approval in near-record time, Daniel S. Goldin 
was  sworn in as NASA's n in th  Administrator.  (WP, Apr  2/92) 

T h e   Space  Shuttle  Atlantis  made  a  near-perfect  touchdown  a t   Cape 
Canaveral  after a nine-day atmospheric research  flight, NASA's  first manned 
"Mission  to  Planet  Earth."  Atlantis'  ambitious  flight  marked  the  first  in  a 
series of  at least 10 such missions to study the  Sun and Earth's atmosphere over 
the next decade to chart subtle changes in  the Sun's energy output  that  affect 
chemical processes critical  to  life o n  Earth. Th e  Shuttle circled the  world  143 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1992 

times  during  its  nine-day voyage  and  traveled  3.7  million  miles.  (UP l ,  Apr 
2/92; AP, Apr  2/92) 

U.S. officials announced a  tentative  agreement between  the  United  States 
and Europe limiting government  support for the commercial aircraft industry. 
T h e  deal would cap government support to Airbus for developing new aircraft 
at 30 percent  to  35 percent  of  production  costs. T h e  sort of  indirect  support 
that  the  Europeans had  charged U.S. manufacturers with  receiving would  be 
limited to  5 percent of  a company's sales of  civil aircraft. ( B  Sun, Apr 2/92; LA 
Times, Apr  2/92; WSJ, Apr  2/92; NY Times, Apr  2/92) 

Loral Corporation became  the  first U.S.  aerospace company  to win  govern- 
ment approval to buy  advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. 
Th e  Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Pa10  Alto, 
California, to  import  tiny  electric satellite  thrusters that  are  used  to  position 
satellites in  space. Loral's Russian partners are Fake1 Enterprises of  Kaliningrad, 
which makes  the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of  Applied 
Mechanics and Electrodynamics of  Moscow.  (WS],  Apr  2/92) 

Orbital  Sciences Corporation  of  Fairfax, Virginia, said  it  had  successfully 
launched  a rocket-borne  telescope from a site north of  Fairbanks, Alaska. T h e  
telescope, sponsored by  the  Strategic  Defense Initiative  organization, would 
monitor  infrared  characteristics  of  the   aurora borealis, commonly known  as 
northern  lights.  ( W  Times, Apr  2/92) 

It  was  reported  that  for  the   first  time  in  a  generation, NASA   and  the  Air 
Force were  developing a new  rocket engine  and  launch system. Th e  National 
Launch  System  (NLS ) ,  which  was  to   consist  of  three  new  vehicles,  would 
become operational  in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to  
Space Station Freedom.  ( W  Times, Apr  2/92) 

NASA announced  the selection of 33 participating scientists to take part  in 
a  wide  range  of  investigations  o n   the   Mars  Observer  mission,  planned  for 
launch September  16, 1992. These scientists would  be  added  to  the current 
science teams in October 1992 to increase the range of studies planned  for the 
2-year  global  mapping  mission.  Besides  representing  U.S.  universities  and 
research  centers,  the newly selected group of  participating  scientists included 
four  individuals from  the United  Kingdom, France, and Germany. Six scien- 
tists  from Austria,  the United  Kingdom, France, and  Germany  were  already 
involved in the  mission, and a group of  10 participating  scientists from Russia 
were  to be  added  later  this  year.  (NASA  Release 92-45) 

NASA  selected  the ColeJon Corporation of  Cleveland, Ohio, for negotia- 
tions  leading  to  award  of  a  support  service contract  for  operations,  mainte- 
nance,  and  repair  of  facilities a t  NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, 

APRIL  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Oh io .   Estimated  value  of  the   contract   was  approximately  $30   million. 
(NA SA  Release C92 -3 )  

April 3 :  NASA  Administration  Daniel S .  Goldin  said President Bush's goal of 
a manned  flight  to  Mars by 2019 was  unrealistic because  it  would  take  longer 
to   develop  t h e   spaceship  and  fly  t h e   robotic  missions  tha t   must  precede 
humans.  (USA  Today, Apr  3/92)  

A  space-for-rent company unveiled  its first Shu t t le  module, which  is sched- 
uled  to   f l y   aboard  Atlantis   in  the   spring  of  1993.  T h e   Spacehab   module, 
which consists of  up  to 61  lockers for experiments, would  be  the  first private- 
ly owned  and operated space facility  tha t  can  be  tended by  astronauts in  orbit. 
(AP, Ap r  3/92) 

April  4:  NASA   started  a  countdown  toward  test-firing  t h e   Space  Shu t t le  
Endeavour's main engines. Endeavour's three  main engines were t o  be fired for 
2 2   seconds.  If  all  goes well,  launch   teams  would  begin  preparing  t h e  Shu t t le  
for a satellite rescue mission in early May  1992. ( W  Times, Ap r  4/92; AP, Ap r  
4/92; UPI ,  Apr  6/92) 

April  7:  C h i n a  reported  tha t   it  would  send  astronauts  in to  space by  t h e  year 
2000 as the  first step toward launching  its own Space S ta t ion .  "Before the  year 
2000  C h i n a   will  have   completed  its  research  in to   experimental  'manned  
spacecraft  and   carrier  rockets,"  said  t h e   S ta te  Commission  o n   Science   and  
Technology. (UP I ,  Apr  7/92; LA  Times, Apr  8/92)  

I t  was  reported  tha t  a recently discovered galaxy, 13  billion  light-years from 
Earth,  may  provide  answers  about   the   early  formation  of  t h e   universe. 
Researchers  studying  the  galaxy, designated  10214+4724, said  they believe  it 
is  forming new stars a t  more  than   1 0  million  times  the  rate of  the  most prolif- 
ic star-forming mass  in  the  Milky Way.  (NY Times, Apr   7/92) 

In  a  letter  sent   to   the  chairwoman of  t h e  subcommittee  tha t   funds NA SA ,  
Senator   Howell  T.  Heflin  said  killing  t h e   Advanced  Solid  Rocket  Motor 
(ASRM )  would  cost  almost  twice  as  much  as  building  i t .   NASA   and   t h e  
W h i t e  House  had moved  t o  cancel  the  $3 billion  program, saying the  cost  of 
keeping  it  going would  n o t   fit  in NASA's  tight  budget  request  of  $15  billion 
for fiscal year  1993. Using figures obtained  from NA SA  and  from t h e  ASRM's 
contractors,  Heflin  calculated  tha t   killing  t h e   program  would  cost  NASA  
$2.65  billion  through  the  year  2000.  By  contrast,  he   said  it  would  cost  $1.29 
billion  to   finish  building  t h e   rocket,  n o t   including  $510  million  to   buy  t h e  
first six sets of  motors.  (Htsvl  Times, Apr  7/92; Binningham  News ,  Apr   12/92) 

April  8: NA SA   managers  decided  t o  replace  all  three   main   engines  aboard 
t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Endeavour  because  of  problems  with  powerful  oxygen 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1992 

pumps  that  came  to  light  after  an  engine  test  firing. Rocket  engineers  ini- 
tially  believed  that  Endeavour  had  sailed  through  its  flight  readiness  firing 
in good  condition, with n o  signs of  any major problems in th e  ship's propul- 
sion  system. But detailed analysis of  data  from th e  22-second  test  indicated 
the  liquid oxygen high pressure  turbopump bolted  to main engine No.  2 had 
experienced  high  vibration  levels  during  engine  operation,  apparently 
because of  abnormal bearing wear. NASA  decided  to replace all  three of  the  
engines  to  minimize  th e   impact  on   th e   Shuttle's  launch processing.  (UP I ,  
Apr  8/92; AP, Apr  8/92) 

April  9:  Astronomers  using  th e   Hubble  Space  Telescope  announced  th a t  
they  had  spotted  the   gathering  of  swirling stars  th a t   is  believed  to  be  th e  
gravitational  signature  of  a  black  hole  in  a  galaxy  called  M32.  Todd  R. 
Lauer  of  th e   Na t iona l   Op t ica l   Astronomy  Observatories  in  Tucson, 
Arizona, and a scientist using th e  Hubble, said th a t  based upon what he  has 
seen  so far,  "I  would  be  surprised  if  M32  turns  out  no t   to  be  a black  hole." 
Concurrently,  th e   Comp ton   Gamma  Ray  Observatory  discovered  11 
objects  i n   space  th a t   constitute  "a  new  class  of  objects-the 
gamma  ray 
quasar." T h e  new  gamma  ray  quasars,  some  as  far  as  10 billion  light-years 
away,  are  probably  similar  to  the   thousands  of  o the r   quasars  detected  in 
recent years, but  th e  nature of  quasars is still debated.  (AP, Apr 9/92; B Sun, 
Apr 9/92; LA  Times, Apr  9/92; W Times, Apr  9/92; U  Post, Apr  13/92; USA 
Today, Apr 9/92; CSM, Apr  14/92; NASA  Release 92-46 and 92-47; NASA  
No te  N92-28) 

Seven  scientists,  engineers, and  government  officials told  a  congressional 
subcommittee that the often cited claim by  National Science Foundation offi- 
cials  that  the United  States faces a major shortage of  scientists and  engineers 
was false. Witnesses told th e  hearing that the  shortage tha t  was to  have begun 
a few years ago--and  which was  to have  left  the Nation  with  a "shortfall" of 
675,000 scientists and engineers by  2010-never  materialized. Quite the con- 
trary,  they  said,  there was  now  such  a surplus of  scientists and  engineers that 
unemployment rates in some disciplines far exceeded those for the country  as 
a whole. ( W  Post, Apr  9/92; B  Sun, Apr  14/92) 

Apnl  10:  Senator  Barbara  Mikulski  of  Maryland  called  for  immediate  con- 
gressional action  to shift U.S. research  and  development  from military  hard- 
ware  to products that would  compete  in  the  "environmental  marketplace" of 
th e   future.  NASA ,   she  said,  should  develop  " the   second-generation 
Concorde ... and  leapfrog our  competitors  i n  a  21st  century  industry tha t  will 
generate a $200 billion market of  the  future."  ( W  Post, Apr  10192) 

Apn'l 11:   Spencer Moxon  Beresford,  73, a former general counsel  for NASA  
under  President Nixon, died April  7  in an automobile accident  in Miami.  (W  
Post, Apr  11/92) 

APRIL  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

Th e  University of  Maryland received $20 million from NASA  to help build 
and  equip  the  Christopher  Columbus  Center  of  Marine  Research  and 
Exploration.  (AP, Apr  11/92) 

Agnl  13: According  to Michael Griffin, NASA's Associate Administrator  for 
exploration, NASA  needs $3  billion annually to conduct a program of  human 
exploration of  the Moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sac- 
rificing other space projects if  NASA's overall budget could  not  be  increased, 
Griffin said. (Space News, Apr  13/92) 

TRW  Inc.  said  it  had  named  R.  Gordon  Williams  to  succeed  Daniel  S. 
Goldin,  the  new  head  of  NASA,  as  vice  president  and  general  manager  of 
TRW's Space  and  Technology Group. Williams, 61, was  formerly vice  presi- 
dent and general manager of  TRW's Federal Systems division, which manages 
TRW's major space systems and  projects for NASA.  (UP I ,  Apr  13/92) 

Apnl15: Th e  National Space Club named  the NA SA PRW  observatory team 
that  built  the  Compton  Garnma  Ray  Observatory  the  winner  of  the  1992 
Nelson  P.  Jackson  Award  at  an  April  10  awards  ceremony  in  Washington, 
D.C. This award honors the firm responsible for "an outstanding  contribution 
to the  missile, aircraft, and space fields."  (Business Wire, Apr  15/92) 

Apnl  17: A  space  agency  spokesperson  said  that NASA   had  failed  again  to 
open  the main  antenna of  its Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft. Engineers had 
heated  the antenna with  sunlight over  three days  in March, then  cooled  it  in 
shade. They hoped  the  antenna would expand and then shrink enough  to free 
its  jammed  parts,  said Jim Wilson,  a  spokesman for  the  Space Agency's Je t  
Propulsion Laboratory. ( P  Iq, Apr  17/92; USA  Today, Apr  17/92) 

Agnl  18: It was  reported  that  in  the  upcoming flight of  the Shuttle Endeavour, 
NASA would  try for the first  time to revitalize a crippled satellite while in orbit. 
During a four-day procedure, Endeavour's crew were  to rendezvous with Intelsat 
6, pull the satellite into the spaceship's cargo bay and mate it to a new solid rock- 
et motor.  Intelsat 6 then would be  released and  its rocket motor fired to send  it 
into a  22,300 mile-high orbit. Th e  hope was  that  then,  for  the next  14 years, 
Intelsat 6 would  relay  trans-Atlantic telephone calls and  television shows from 
Europe  to North America and South America. (W  Tmes ,  Apr  18/92) 

Ap i l   19: NASA  officials said  that  tomatoes grown  by  students  and  teachers 
from seeds  that had  been  in space for  nearly  six years show  little or no  differ- 
ence  from  the  fruit  of  seed  that  never  left  the  Earth.  Th e   tomatoes  from  a 
batch  of  12.5 million space-borne seed were  as  healthy as  their  earthly  coun- 
terparts,  though  "findings  suggest  that  the  space-exposed seeds  germinated 
slightly  faster"  and  "seedlings  had  a  faster  initial  growth  rate,"  the   officials 
said. ( W  Tiines, Apr  19/92; WPost, Apr  20/92; NASA  Release 92-49) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1992 

April  20:  It  was  reported  that  a  NASA-led  team  might  travel  to   Russia  to 
explore areas  for  joint  cooperation  on  axisymmetric scramjets. A t   the  top  of 
the  list  was  the  possibility of  the U.S.  joining  in  a second flight  later  during 
the  year  of  the  Russian  scramjet  that  already had  achieved  about  three  sec- 
onds of  supersonic combustion.  (AvWk, Apr  20192) 

Explorers  who  uncovered  the  lost  Arabian  city  of  Ubar  by  using  ancient 
maps  and  photographs  from space  have  also  found  a  bigger  site. Th e  second 
site,  at  the  base  of  Oman's Qara  Mountains  about  20  miles  northeast  of  the 
Indian  Ocean  port  of  Salalah,  was  called  Saffara  Metropolis o n   the  map  of 
Roman historian Claudius Ptolemy, drawn around A.D.  100, said Juris Zarins. 
Zarins said  the  find  indicates  an Arabian  Peninsula network  of  frankincense 
trade  existed  more  than  three  millenniums  before  scholars  previously 
believed. (AP, Apr  20192;  P  Inq ,  Apr  2 1/92) 

NASA   awarded  research  grants  to  three  universities  to  develop  teacher 
training courses that would enable middle school teachers to incorporate aero- 
space topics  and  concepts  into  their  classrooms and  to create new  and  imagi- 
native  practices  in  learning.  The  Teacher Training Pre-Service Program  is  a 
two-year  program.  T h e   following schools were  selected  from  responses  to  a 
solicitation  of  proposals:  Fayetteville  State  University,  Eastern  Michigan 
University, and  the  University  of  Alabama.  Each  was  to  receive  a  $83,000 
grant  and  were  expected  to  provide  matching,  non-Federal  funds.  (NASA  
Release 92-50) 

Ap i l   21:  American  space  scientists  said  the  hottest  star  ever  recorded-33 
times hotrer than the Sun-had  been photographed  in a faraway galaxy by  the 
Hubble  Space Telescope. Burning  at  360,000 degrees Fahrenheit,  the  white 
star at the heart  of  a glowing red  nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy 
is  going  out  in  a  "blaze  of  glory,"  said  Sally  Heap,  an   astrophysicist  with 
NASA.  (NY Xmes,  Apr  21/92; AP,  Apr  21/92; W  Xmes,  Apr  21/92;  U S A  
Today, Apr  2 1/92) 

Apn"l23: Th e  Justice Department  accused a large military electronics maker of 
falsifying  results  of  tests  on   sophisticated  weapons  and  spacecraft, including 
the  Space  Shuttle.  T h e  department  joined  a  $250 million  civil  lawsuit  that 
accused Teledyne Relays, a Teledyne Inc. unit, of  falsifying tests to ensure the 
reliability of  electromagnetic  relays,  according  to  court  papers. Government 
contracts  accounted  for  about  a  third  of  Teledyne's  $3.2 billion  in  sales  last 
year.  (AP, Ap t  23/92) 

T h e   Magellan  spacecraft, which  had  used  radar  to  unveil  97  percent  of 
Venus' cloud-covered volcanic landscape, started measuring the  planet's grav- 
ity. Magellan showed that Venus' crust is built up vertically as volcanoes erupt, 
adding  material  to  the  surface.  Th e   measurements  should  help  scientists 

APRIL  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

understand  the  planet's  interior  and  how  internal  activity  shapes  the   rugged 
surface. (NY Times, Apr  23/92) 

Daniel S. Goldin, the  newly appointed NASA  Administrator,  said he was  a 
strong supporter of  the  controversial Space Station Freedom, which was being 
developed  in  part  at  the  NASA   Lewis  Research  Cen te r   in  Cleveland.  Th e  
Space Station Freedom, whose price had soared from $8 billion  to  $40 billion, 
was  a  frequent  target  of  lawmakers  looking  to  trim  NASA's  budget.  But 
Goldin  said, "I  believe  that  there  is  a  crying need  for  human  interaction  in 
space. If we  are to fulfill our role of  NASA  and  to have humans seek their des- 
tiny  in  space,  we  must  understand  the  interactions  of  humans  in  a  hostile 
space environment, the  long-term impacts of  zero  gravity, microgravity, radi- 
ation."  (News-Herald, Apr  23/92; Plain  Dealer, Apr  23/92) 

It was announced  that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer  (COBE) satel- 
lite  had  achieved  two  of  the  three  goals of  its $400  million  mission  to  study 
the  "big bang."  In  1991, COBE had  shown  that   the wavelength  or  "color" of 
the  cosmic background radiation  was  consistent with  what  the   big-bang the- 
ory  predicted,  said John  Mather,  project  scientist  at  NASA's Goddard  Space 
Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met 
its  second  goal:  detecting  the  oldest  structures  in  the   universe,  thereby 
explaining how  matter  first  started  clumping  together  in  the   young  universe 
t o  produce galaxies and stars. COBE was  launched from Vandenberg Air Force 
Base  on  November  18,  1989. I t   was  carried  into  a  559-mile-high, near  polar 
orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine  strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr  23/92; 
LA  Times,  Apr  24/92; B  Sun, Apr  24/92; NY  Times, Apr  24/92;  USA  Today, 
Apr  24/92; NASA   Release  92-5 1 ) 

Apnl24: During  the Soviet period, Ukrainian  scientists and  industry were  an  
integral  part  of  the  Soviet space program, which  employed over 250,000 peo- 
ple.  Wh en   the   breakup  of  the  Soviet  Union  fragmented  its  space  program, 
Ukraine  gained one of  the  world's most  advanced  aerospace  industries, capa- 
ble  of  producing  everything from  rockets  to   satellites.  However, without  the  
Soviet Union  to pour  money  into space exploration, Ukraine was  looking for 
new ways  to keep  its aerospace industry working. (LA Xmes, Apr  24/92) 

Flights of  the X-31 enhanced fighter maneuverability  demonstrator aircraft 
resumed  at  NASA's  Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility,  Edwards, 
California.  Th e  X-31s were  being flown at  Ames  to  show  the   value of  thrust 
vectoring  (directing  engine  exhaust  flow)  coupled  with  an  advanced  flight 
control  system for  close-in  air  combat  at  very  high  angles-of-attack.  (NASA  
Release 92-52) 

Apnl26: Th e  Air Force reported  that  a T ~ t a n  2  rocket was  launched  into space 
carrying a secret military payload  into a polar, low-Earth orbit. Th e  two-stage 

A S TRONAU T lC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

APRIL  1992 

rocket,  a modified Ttan   intercontinental  ballistic missile, was  launched  from 
Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base,  about  250  miles  northwest  of  Los  Angeles.  (W  
Xmes, Apr  26/92) 

Agnl  28:  NASA   delayed  the   maiden  flight  of  t h e   new  Space  Shu t t le  
Endeavour  from May  4  to May  7  to  allow  a daylight  liftoff. Tom Utsman ,  act-  
ing  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Flight  a t   NASA ,   said  officials  had  
reviewed the  criteria and  decided  tha t   it would  be prudent  t o  delay the   flight 
so  detailed  photographs  and   documentation   could  be  made  for  analysis. A 
daylight  liftoff  also would  allow  Endeavour's seven-member crew  to  make  a 
daylight  landing back  at  the  Kennedy  Space Cen te r  in case of  an  engine  fail- 
ure  early  in  flight.  (UP I ,  Apr  28/92;  W  Post,  Apr  28/92;  USA  Today,  Apr 
28/92; NY  Xmes,  Apr  28/92) 

April  29:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   predicted  a  "Perils  of 
Pauline"  battle  in  Congress over  the   survival of  Space Station  Freedom, say- 
ing the  outpost was an  investment  in  the  future tha t  should no t  be squandered 
for  short-term  gains.  Despite  the   high  costs  and   frequent  redesigns, Goldin  
said the  station  was  vital  to  the   future  of  America's  space program. Although  
he  refused to  predict  the  outcome of congressional debate ,  h e  expressed guard- 
ed  optimism  tha t   Freedom  would  survive  the   latest  challenge.  (UP I ,   Apr 
29/92)  

Gerard K .   O'Neill ,  a visionary Princeton physicist who popularized the  idea 
of  colonizing  space,  died  in  Redwood  City, California.  O'Neill ,  65 ,  was  t h e  
author   of  The  High  Frontier,  a  1977 book  tha t   proposed  the   construction  of 
giant solar-powered cylinders in which as many as 20 million people could  live 
in space.  ( P  Inq ,  Apr  29/92) 

T h e  Air   Force  reported  tha t   a YF-22 Advanced  Tactical  Fighter, prototype 
of  the  planned  F-22, had slammed on to  the  main  runway of  Edwards Air Force 
Base  with  its wheels  retracted  during  a practice  approach. T h e  radar-eluding 
plane,  designed  to  be  the  hottest   air  combat  fighter  going  in to  the   21st  cen-  
tury, slid  several  thousand  feet  and  burned  for  90  seconds. A  Lockheed  pilot 
escaped with only minor  injuries.  ( B  Sun ,  Apr   29/92) 

Opponents  of  Space Station  Freedom, led by  Representative Tim Roemer of 
Indiana ,  said they would  try to  strip from  the   1993 Federal budget virtually all 
of  the   $2.25  billion  requested  for  the   project  by  NASA .   T h e   attack   would 
come  as an  amendment   to  legislation  tha t  would  set maximum  spending lev- 
els for  the  Agency  over the   next  three  years.  (LA Times, Apr  29/92) 

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   announced   his  first  hiring  deci- 
sions, naming four men  t o  senior management  posts a t  NASA   Headquarters. 
T h e   new  appointments-Maj.  Gen .   Jeremiah  W.  Pearson  111,  Bryan  D. 

APRIL  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

O'Connor, Charles E Bolden, and Frederick D. Gregory-included 
three pres- 
en t   or  former  astronauts  and  a  Marine  .general  who  led  forces  during 
Operation Desert Storm.  (W  Post, Apr  29/92; NASA  Release 92-54) 

April 30: T h e  planned U.S. Space Station Freedom survived an  attempt to  kill 
it when the House of  Representatives defeated a move to cut the  $2.25 billion 
needed  to keep  the program  o n  track. T h e  254-159 vote  to  continue funding 
marked the fourth time the House had voted o n  the costly and ambitious pro- 
gram  in  recent  years.  (UPI, Apr  30192;  AP,  Apr  30192; W Post,  Apr  30192; 
USA  Today, Apr 30/92) 

Russia  faced  a  new  dispute  over  the   famed  Baikonur  spaceport  in 
Kazakhstan. Russian President Boris Yeltsin revealed that Kazakhstan had pre- 
vented  the  liftoff of  a satellite  at the  Baikonur cosmodrome. "Kazakhstan was 
playing  games. It wanted  to  show  tha t   there  has  to be  a Russian-Kazakhstan 
agreement o n  Baikonur," Mr.  Yeltsin  said. Mr.  Yeltsin  said he would propose 
to  Kazakhstan  President Nursultan  Nazarbayev either joint  financing  of  the 
famed  spaceport, Russian purchase of  the property, or  a form of  joint  venture 
with  the  Kazakhstan republic. (W  Times, Apr 30192) 

Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study  indicat- 
ed  that  the   ozone  shield  of  the Northern  Hemisphere  was  increasingly vul- 
nerable  to depletion  by  man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson  of  Harvard 
University, the study's Mission scientist, and  80  other scientists of  the  second 
Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE 11)  used  two NASA  aircraft 
to examine  the  ozone-related chemistry and  air  motions  of  the  lower  strato- 
sphere  from  early  October  1991  through  late  March  1992. Th e   extensive 
measurements, combined  with  satellite  and  meteorological data, provide  the 
first detailed picture of  the  factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer 
from  fall,  through  winter,  and  into  spring.  (NASA  Release  92-55;  NASA  
Release 92-56) 

May  1 : NASA Headquarters reported that  eight finalists had  been chosen for 
the  1992 George  M.  Low  Trophy-NASA's  Quality  and  Excellence Award. 
The finalists were:  Cray Research  Inc.,  Honeywell Inc.,  IBM  Federal  Sector 
Division, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems, Paramax Systems Corp., Rocket 
Research  Co.,  Stanford  Telecommunications  Inc.,  and  Technical  Analysis 
Inc. (NASA  Release 92-57) 

NASA  scientists, reviewing results of  seven months'  observations, said  that 
after a record buildup of  ozone-damaging chemicals last January, the amounts 
rapidly  dissipated  because of  sudden warming  in  February and March. While 
the  tests  continued  to  show  a  thinning  of  the  ozone  layer  that  protects  the 
Earth  from ultraviolet  rays,  the  sudden warming  prevented  any  severe ozone 
depletion  over  the Arctic  region, the  scientists said. Nevertheless,  they said, 
the  potential  for  severe  ozone  destruction  over  parts  of  the  United  States, 
Canada, and  Europe remains a matter  of  serious concern because of  the high 
concentrations  of  destructive  chlorine  that  were  detected.  (W  Times,  May 
1/92; NY  Xmes ,   May  1/92; W  Post,  May  1/92; USA  Today,  May  1/92; LA 
Trnes, May  1/92) 

May  2:  Scientists probing river muck  have  discovered bacteria  that  can "eat" 
the  main  chemicals  threatening  the  ozone  layer,  the U.S. Geological Survey 
reported. T h e  bacteria  that break down chlorofluorocarbons, known as CFCs, 
were  found  along  the   Potomac  River  in  Virginia  and  in  pond,  marsh,  and 
swamp sediments  in Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia. Th e  CFC-eat- 
ing bacteria  are  harmless  to humans,  but  can  operate  only in  the  absence of 
oxygen,  according  to   Derek  Lovley,  a  microbiologist  working  a t   th e  
Geological Survey  in Reston, Virginia.  (W  Post, May  2/92) 

May  3:  Senate  leaders  announced  the  appointment  of  Harriett  G .  Jenkins, 
Assistant Administrator  for  Equal  Opportunity  Programs at NASA,  to  head 
the Senate's new  office of  fair  employment practices. Carl D.  Moore, general 
counsel  for  the  General  Accounting  Office's personnel  appeals  board,  was 
named Deputy  Director  in a joint  appointment by  Majority  Leader George J .  
Mitchell  of  Maine  and  Minority  Leader Robert  J .  Dole  of  Kansas.  ( W  Post, 
May  3/92) 

If  Japan follows through  o n  plans to launch a probe toward Mars  in  1996, it 
will become the  third Nation  to explore the red planet, following the U.S. and 
Russia.  Budgeted at  $96.8  million,  the  550-pound  Japanese  probe  has  heen 
dubbed  Planet  B.  It would  begin  to orbit Mars by October  1997, according to 
Japan's Institute  of  Space  and  Astronomical  Science, which  is  ~ l a n n i n g  the  
project.  (Parade Magazine, Mar 3/92) 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1992 

May  4:  Preston Rogers  Bassett,  100, an  inventor  and  retired  president  of  the 
Sperry Gyroscope Co .  who  served  on   the   National  Advisory  Committee  for 
Aeronautics  from  1954 to  1958, died of  cardiac arrest April 30 at his home  in 
Ridgefield, Connecticut.  (W  Post, May  4/92) 

May 5: Th e  House of  Representatives approved a $47.3 billion  space program 
for  the  next  three  years  after  voting  to  limit  spending o n  development  of  an  
advanced solid-fuel rocket motor. Th e  bill reauthorizing NASA  for fiscal years 
1993  through  1995 was  passed  by  voice  vote  and  sent  to  the  Senate. Th e  
House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned  Space S ta t ion ,  nearly $8 
billion  for  other  space  science  applications,  and  $12.5  billion  for  the   space 
shuttle program. Before approving the hill, the  House  agreed to  cut  in  half, to  
$260  million,  the  1993  budget  for  the   next  generation  solid-fuel  rocket, 
designed t o  enable the  Space Shuttle to carry heavier  payloads, including  key 
components of  the Space Station. (AP, May  5/92) 

Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on  Goddard Space 
Flight  Center  contract  involving  Earth  measurement,  died  April  25  at  
Washington  Hospital  Center  of  combinations  after  surgery  for  an   aterial 
aneurism.  A  resident  of  Washington  area  since  1947, h e   lived  in  Bethesda. 
Gun the r  was  an expert  on  satellite  geodesy and  author of  the  NASA  directo- 
ry  of  station  locations.  (K' Post, May  5.92) 

May  6:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  announced  the  selection  of 
Darleen A .  Druyun as chief of  staff. T h e  Chief of Staff facilitates communica- 
tions  between  the  Administrator's office and  senior  staff  members, as well  as 
with private sector executives and international visitors. In addition, the  chief 
of  staff focuses on  internal NASA  Headquarters management and operations, 
aiming  to  increase the  efficiency of  the  organization.  (NASA  Release 92-58)  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  appointed Dr.  Charles J .   Pellerin, 
Jr., to  the position  of  Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission 
Quality.  Pellerin  was  also  to   serve  as  Special Assistant  to   the  Administrator 
for  Long-Range Planning.  (NASA  Release 92-59)  

May  7:  NASA's  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Wallops  Flight  Facility, 
Wallops Island, Virginia, selected  the  New Mexico S ta te  University, Physical 
Science Laboratory of  Las  Cruces, New  Mexico,  to  negotiate  a cost contract 
for  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  scientific  balloon  facilities  and  engi- 
neering support for the NASA  Balloon Program. T h e  total  cost for  the   5-year 
program was  $65 million.  (NASA  Release C92-6) 

NASA's Hubble Space Telescope revealed an  unusual new optical  jet  in  the  
nucleus of  the elliptical galaxy N G C  3862. N G C  3862, also known  as 3C264, 
is  a bright  radio  source and  x-ray source.  It  is  the   sixth brightest  galaxy in  a 

MAY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

rich  cluster  of  galaxies known  as  Abell  1367, located  a t   a distance  of  about 
260 million  light-years away  in  the  constellation  Leo.  (NA SA  Release 92-61)  

In   a mission called  "La  Chalupa   30," four men  were  to   conduct  investiga- 
tions  in  an  underwater  habitat  without  any direct outside  human   contact   for 
30  days, giving the  Behavior and Performance Laboratory a t  NASA's Johnson  
Space Center ,  Houston,  the  opportunity  to  study team  performance  as part  of 
its continuing   investigation  to  identify pertinent   psychological issues for  long 
duration   space  flight.  "The   mission  will  serve  as  a n   environment   which  is 
analogous t o  future extended space missions o n  the  Shuttle  or Space Station ,"  
said  Dr.  A1  Holland,  head  of  t h e   Behavior  and  Performance  Laboratory. 
(NA SA  Release 92-62)  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   said  he   found  employees worried 
tha t   the  space agency was  letting outsiders set priorities,  allowing buildings to  
decay and  wasting its skills by  using contractors. "There  seems to  be  a concern  
we  overpromised  in  the   beginning o n  technical   issues  and  tend  to  underesti- 
mate  costs ... The re   is  concern  about  future funding of  new  activities  and  the  
agency's ability  to set priorities. T h e y  feel we  must  take  charge of our destiny," 
Goldin  said. (Fla Today, May  7/92) 

T h e  names of  Michael  Adams  and  Manley  "Sonny"  Carter,  two  astronauts 
who died  in  the   line  of  duty, were  scheduled  to  be  added  to   the   $6.2 million 
Space  Mirror  memorial  a t   Kennedy  Space  Center .   T h e   50   foot  by  42  foot 
memorial  was  conceived  as  a way  to  pay  tribute  to  t h e  seven  astronauts who 
died  aboard  the  Space Shu t t le  Challenger  in  1986. But  i t  became  a memorial 
for all U.S.  astronauts who had  died  in  the   line of  duty. T h e  names of  Adams 
and   Carter,  who  died  in   1991  in   a  commuter  plane  crash  on   their   way  to   a 
NASA  speaking engagement, were added  to the  memorial when workers were 
repairing  cracks  tha t   had  developed  around  the  astronauts'  names, which  are 
cut   through black-granite panels. (0 Sent, May  7/92) 

T h e  Senate ,  defying veto  threats  by  the  Wh i te  House, adopted an  $6 .3  bil- 
lion savings package tha t  demanded deep cuts  in President Bush's military and  
space  priorities,  including  the   Strategic Defense  Initiative.  Approved  61-38, 
the  measure would  take  $1 .3  billion  from prior appropriations for SDI and  $1 
billion  from  production  funds  for  the   B-2  bomber.  T h e   cuts  from  t h e   space 
program,  though  much  smaller, dealt  a  further  blow  to   exploration  of  Mars, 
and  they  would  k i l l   an  on-going project  to design  a high-speed  aircraft  capa- 
ble of orbiting in to  space after launch from a conventional  runway. (WS],  May 
7/92) 

May  8:  NASA   delivered  a  report  to   the   U .S .   Senate   outlining  a  shift  in 
emphasis  towards  smaller,  lower  cost  and  more  frequent  planetary  missions. 
T h e   Small  Planetary  Mission  Plan,  which  was  requested  by  the   Sena te  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1992 

Committee o n  Appropriations, Subcommittee o n  VA, HUD, and Independent 
Agencies  chaired  by  Senator  Barbara  Mikulski, described  two  proposed  mis- 
sions  tha t  NASA   had  selected  for  preliminary  studies  leading  to  launches  in 
1996  and  1998.  T h e   two  missions  were  the   Mars  Environmental  Survey 
Pathfinder  and  the  Near  Earth Asteroid Rendezvous. (NA SA  Release 92-63)  

Lending  their  expertise  with  long-duration  exposure  to  microgravity,  the  
Skylab 1V  astronaut  crew was  scheduled  to participate  in a series of  undenva- 
ter  tests  tha t  would  help   in  the  development  of  Space Station  Freedom. T h e  
tests  will  be  monitored  by  engineers  represented  by  NASA ,   the   Boeing 
Defense  and  Space  Group,  and  international   partners  from  the   European 
Space Agency  and  the  Japanese Space Agency.  (NA SA  Note  N92 -42 )  

It was reported that  Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned  the  six-year 
venture  into   the   commercial satellite  launching  business  that   it  started  in  the 
summer of  1986, seven months  after  the  explosion of  the   Shuttle  Challenger. 
T h e  original plan  was  to build  20 Titan rockets for  commercial launches. Tha t  
number  was  reduced  to  12, and  the   company  charged  $90  million  to  fourth- 
quarter  earnings  in  1988  for  a  reserve  to  help  finance  the   launch  venture. 
Martin  eventually  built  only  four  commercial 
the   last  of  which  was 
scheduled for  launch  in  September  1992, carrying a payload to  map the  surface 
of Mars  and  look  for possible  landing sites on  that  planet.  ( B  Sun ,  May  8/92) 

Thomas 0. Paine,  70, who  was  Deputy Administrator  and  Administrator  of 
NASA  from  1968 to  1970, died of  cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles. In 
1985, President Reagan  named  him  chairman  of  the  National  Commission on 
Space  to  set goals  for  future space exploration.  He  also was  a member  of  Vice 
President  Quaylels Advisory  Committee  o n   the   Future  of  the   U.S.  Space 
Program. After  leaving NASA ,  he  returned  to GE  where he  became a vice pres- 
ident  and  power  generation  group  manager.  In  1982,  he   retired  from  the  
Northrop Corporation as its president. (W  Post, May 8/92; NY  Times, May  7/92) 

Albert  Parry, 92 ,  a  professor  emeritus  of  Russian  civilization  and  language 
and  founder  and   former  chairman  of  the   department   of  Russian  studies  a t  
Colgate University, died  in Los Angeles.  In  1954, Dr.  Parry warned  in  an  arti- 
cle  that   the   Soviets would  soon  be  able  to  launch   a  space  satellite,  and   in 
another   article  published  in  July  1957,  he   predicted  the   launching  would 
occur o n  September  17. T h e  Soviet Un ion   launched Sputnik  I  on  October  4. 
(NY  Times, May  8/92)  

May  9:   A  research  arm  of  Johns  Hopkins University  was  chosen  to  design  a 
spacecraft  intended  to  take  the  first close-up  look  a t   the   kind of  asteroid  tha t  
could  one   day  collide  with  Earth.  Hopkins'  Applied Physics  Laboratory  in 
Laurel, Maryland, was  given  a  $450,000 contract   by  NASA   for  preliminary 
work  o n   the   Near  Earth  Asteroid  Rendezvous  satellite,  called  NEAR .   If  

MAY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

NASA   and   Congress  approved  costruction  of  the   compact  $150  million 
spacecraft,  it could begin orbiting  an  asteroid called  "nereus" in January 2000. 
(0  Sun ,  May  9/92)  

May  10: It  was  reported  tha t   the   Kennedy  Space Cen te r  was  about  to  break 
ground  on  a second  Space Station  project,  a new  building  to  service  t h e  ou t -  
post's  propulsion  modules.  T h e   3 ,000   square  foot  building,  to   be  located 
behind  and  south of  the  operations and  checkout  buildings i n  Kennedy Space 
Center's  industrial  area, would  be  the   space center's third  hazardous process- 
ing plant .  This  one  was  to  be  dedicated  to  servicing  a single  type  of  payload: 
800-gallon  modules  filled with  propellant,  which  would  be  used  t o  keep  t h e  
space station  positioned  properly  in  orbit. T h e  new building would  be  able  to  
accomodate  testing, cleaning,  and   servicing  of  two  to  four modules  simulta- 
neously. T h e  Kennedy Space Cen te r  was soliciting bids for construction  of  the  
plant ,  which  was  to  be  70  feet  high,  135 feet  long  and  65  feet  wide. A  con -  
tract, worth about $1 1 million, was expected to be awarded in June  1992, with 
construction  beginning in July, said payload projects manager J oA n n  Morgan. 
(Fla Today, May  10192) 

T h e  Delta  launch  team  a t  Cape  Canaveral  Air   Force S ta t ion  reported  tha t  
the   McDonnell  Douglas  Space  Systems Company  group  was  gearing  up  for 
two launches in the  nex t  25 days. T h e  first, a mission  to  deploy an  Indonesian 
communications  satellite,  and   the   second,  a  mission  during  which  NASA's 
Extreme  Ultraviolet  Explorer  would  be  hurled  in to   orbit ,  was  scheduled  for 
launch June  4 ,   1992. (Fla Today, May  10192) 

Facing  a  tight  budget,  National   Aerospace  Plane  officials proposed  extra 
steps  to   slow  the   program  aimed  a t   building  two  runway-to-orbit  research 
planes.  T h e  program's  goal was  to  make  the   first  flight  of  a n  X-30 aerospace 
plane by  late  1999. T h e  revised  program director Robert  Barthelemy present- 
ed  the   revised  schedule  to  top  Air  Force  and  NASA   officials  in  a  quarterly 
technical  review  a t  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Cen te r   in Cleveland .  Congress 
approved $250 million  for  the  program for the   1992 year  after slashing nearly 
$100  million  from  the   Bush  adminstration's  $303.8  million  request.  (Fla 
Today, May  10192) 

McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company's Kennedy Space C e n t e r  divi- 
sion  was  chosen   as  a  finalist  for  the   1992 George  M .   Low  Trophy, which  is 
given  annually  t o   the  NASA   contractor   which  makes  the   greatest  achieve-  
ments  in applying Total Quality Management  ( T QM )  principles  to  their  day- 
to-day  operations.  T h e   goals of  the   award  are  to  incorporate  more  efficient 
ways  of  doing business  throughout  NASA   and   its contractors  and  to  transfer 
the   performance  improvement  methods  of  award  winners  from  company  to 
company. "It  is  clear  from your  company's application  tha t  you  have  positive 
steps  to  advance  quality,  productivity  and  the   continuous  improvement 

ASTRONAUTICS ANL)  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1992 

process,"  NASA   Safety  Chief  George  Rodney  told  division  officials  in  a 
recent  letter.  ( F l a  Today, May  10/92)  

May  1 I  : A  briefing and  demonstration  of  a prototype low  vision  enhancement 
system (LVES), cooperatively developed by  NASA  and  the Lions Vision Center  
at  the  Johns  Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, was  scheduled to be  held  May  13  at 
the   Oncology Center  Auditorium. The   LVES  technology, originally developed 
for  possible  use  o n   Space  Station  Freedom,  potentially  could  help  millions  of 
Americans afflicted with certain  low  vision problems. (NASA  Note N92-43) 

May  1 2 :   NASA's  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   said  tha t   NASA   was 
involved  in  too  many  differing projects,  and  must  zero  in  o n  which  ventures 
to  pursue and  which  to abandon .  "NASA  has a very  broad  range of  things  o n  
its  plate,"  said  NASA   Chief  Daniel  S. Goldin .   "We  don't  have  to  do every- 
t h ~ n g  .... If   we  can   get  more  focused,  we'll  he  much  more  efficient."  (U SA  
Today, May  12/92) 

May  13: T h e  Wall  Street Journal  reported  tha t  NASA   officials had  scheduled 
an  unprecedented  spacewalk by  three  Shuttle  astronauts  to  rescue a satellite. 
T h e   Agency  decided  to   undertake  the   third  and  final  three-man   rescue 
attempt   upon  the   request  of  Shuttle   Endeavour's  commander.  (WSJ,  May 
13/92; USA  Today, May  13/92; M Post, May  13/92; W Times, May  13/92; NY 
Times, May  13/92; LA  Times,  May  13/92; P  lnq,  May  13/92; AP,  May  13/92; 
UP I ,  May  13/92) 

May  1 4 :   NASA   joined  Auburn  University  in  co-sponsoring  the   1992 
National   Science  Olympiad  to   be  held  a t   the   Auburn ,   Alabama,  campus. 
More  t h a n   1,500 of  the  Nation's  top  junior  and  senior  high  school  students 
were  to  compete  in  the   33-event Olympiad ,  the   largest  science event   in  the  
United   States.  (NA SA  Release 92 -66 )  

May   15:  Scientists  at  NASA's  Ames  Research  Cen te r ,   Moffett  Field, 
California, were  investigating  the  importance of  gravity to  life o n  Earth. They  
also were  studying whether  intermittent   exposure  to  gravity might  help  keep 
future  space explorers healthy. Volunteers were  confined  to  their  beds for  24- 
hours  a day  in  the  head-down position  to  induce  the  physical changes associ- 
ated  with  exposure  to   the  microgravity of  space. Results of  the   study  indicat- 
ed  tha t   these  volunteers  could  avoid  the   changes simply  by  standing  quietly 
for  15 minutes of  each  hour   over  a  16-hour period.  Standing  for  two hours  a 
day  or  walking a t   three   miles  per  hour  were  almost  as  effective,  according  to  
Dr. Joan  Vernikos, the  study's principal  investigator  and  actlng chief of  Ames' 
Life  Science Division.  (NA SA  Release 92-67)  

A  spokesman  for  t h e   international  Telecommunications   Sa te l l i te  
organization  said  a  23,000-pound  rocket  motor  clamped  t o   the   marooned 

MAY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Intelsat   6  satellite  by  t h e  crew  of  Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  fired  flawlessly a t  
1:25  p.m.  EDT   while  bo th   were  orbiting   about   230   miles  over   Africa.  T h e  
122 -na t ion   consortium ,   based  in   Wa sh ing ton ,   owns  a n d   operates   t h e   $150-  
million  satellite .   (LA  'limes, May  15 /92 )  

Astronaut  Kathryn T h om t o n  became the  second woman  to  walk in space when 
she floated  into  the  open  cargo bay  of  Endeavour and  tested  techniques for build- 
ing a Space Station .  T h om t o n  was  accompanied by  Thomas  Akers, one  of  three  
men  who had  captured  a wayward  satellite  t h e  day before. ( C  Tnb, May  15/92) 

T h r e e   Ame r ican   astronauts   took   a  historic   spacewalk  using  the i r   gloved 
hand s   t o  make   a  last-ditch   rescue  of  a wayward  satellite .   It  was  t h e   first  t ime  
so  many  astronsuts  had   gone  forth   i n t o  space  together   a n d   t h e   first  t ime  any-  
o n e  h a d  captured   a n  orbiting   satellite  with   n o t h i n g  bu t   the i r   hands .   A l l   pre- 
vious  salvage  operations  had  mainly  used  some  type  of  h igh - techno logy  ha rd -  
ware. A t  230  miles  above  t h e  Ea r th ,  t h e  th ree  astronauts  of  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  
Endeavour  grabbed t h e  wobbling 4.5  t o n ,  17 foot satellite  a n d  stopped  its rota-  
t ion ,   holding   it  motionless  for  abou t   a  m inu te   while  sloshing  fuel  settled  
down .   (NY Xme s ,  May  14/92;  B  Sun ,  May  14/92;  USA  Today, May  14/92;  W 
Times, May  14/92; W Post, May  14/92; P  Inq, May  14/92;  AP, May  14/92)  

M a y   17: S t a t e  S e n a t o r  Ga ry  K .  Ha r t  of California  au tho red  a bill wh ich  would 
require  t h e  Depa r tmen t  of  Comme rce  t o  c rea te  a special program  for  assisting 
commercial   space  ventures   t h a t   originate   in   Califomia .   U n d e r   t h e  proposal, 
t h e   Comme rce   Depa r tmen t   would  boost  California   as  t h e   place  t o   launch  
commercial  space  ventures .   (LA  Times, May  17 /92 )  

Space Shu t t le  Endeavour touched  down  o n  Rogers Dry Lake, California, end -  
ing a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. T h e  public's response t o  Endeavour's mis- 
sion,  which  featured  a n   unprecedented  three-astronaut  capture  of  a  stranded 
communications  satellite, was  the  most  enthusiastic  since  the   Shu t t le  program 
resumed  in   1988, N A S A  officials said. A  crowd of  a n  estimated  125,000 tumed  
out   in  t h e  desert  t o  watch  t h e  landing. (LA  Times, May  17/92; P lnq, May  17/92; 
AP, May  16/92; W Xmes, May  17/92; B Sun, May  16/92; W Post, May  17/92)  

M a y   18: A  company   spokesman  for  Rockwell  Co rpo ra t ion   said  t h a t  N A S A  
was negotiating   with  Rockwell  t o  build  spare parts  in  t h e  An te lope  Valley  for 
t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  program.  Rockwell was  negotiating   t h e  terms of  a $ 5 5  mil- 
lion  con t rac t   t o  build a midbody fuselage a n d  a tail  for t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  fleet .  
T h e  work  would  be  performed  in  t h e  hange r  where   t h e   company   built  all  of 
t h e   Space  Shu t t le s  for  NA SA .  Wo rk   would  begin  with   70   employees  and   is 
expected   t o   last  un t i l   1999.  (Daily New s ,  May  18 /92 )  

USA Today reported  t h a t  a video  headset  would  soon  allow people  with   lim- 
ited  vision  t o  see  the i r  world  as  if  projected  o n  a 6 0 - i n c h  black-and-white  T V  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1992 

screen.  T h e   portable,  16-ounce  Low  Vision  Enhancement  System  (LVES) 
should be  commercially available in  three  years  at a cost of  $3,000. It  should 
help many  of  the  three million people with visual  impairments due to diseases 
such as diabets, glaucoma, multiple sclerosis, and mucular degeneration.  (USA  
Today, May  18/92) 

T h e   commander  of  the  Space  Shuttle  Endeavour,  Capt.  Daniel  C .  
Brandenstein of  the Navy, said that the problems and needs of America's cities 
were no reason  to divert money from the space agency's annual budget of  $14 
billion.  If  anything, Captain  Brandenstein  said  a  strong  space  program  was 
needed to inspire young people  to high achievement  and hopes for the future. 
He said  that  voyages of  exploration  were  a vital social  investment,  today  and 
centuries  ago. "America  is  a country based  o n  boldness  and  looking into the  
future, not  looking out  the back of  the  bus," said Captain Brandenstein.  (NY 
Times, May  18/92) 

It was  announced that  the staff director of  the National Space Council, the  
Cabinet-level agency  that  sets  the Nation's space  policy,  was  stepping down 
after a three-year tenure marked by  calls for better management at NASA and 
a  push  for  smaller,  less-expensive  space  projects. Mark  J .   Albrecht,  41,  who 
was  a national  security  aide  to  then-Senator  Pete Wilson, was  widely  viewed 
as  one of  the principal  architects  of  the council's  efforts to  curb  the  appetite 
of  NASA  for  more  long-range,  expensive  space  endeavours.  Albrecht 
declined  to  discuss  his  plans,  but  some council  members said  that  he  would 
join  a private  consulting firm.  (LA  Times, May  18/92; B  Sun ,  May  18/02) 

May  19:  NASA  reported  that  astronaut  Bruce  E.  Melnick,  Commander 
USCG,  will  be  leaving  NASA  in  July  1992. Melnick,  who  flew  on   Space 
Shuttle  missions  STS-41  and  STS-49,  accepted  the   position  of  Director, 
Shu t t le   Processing  Con t rac t   Process  Improvement  Technology  with 
Lockheed  Space Operations  Co .  (LSOC )  at Kennedy  Space Center, Florida. 
(NASA  Release 92-68; USA  Today, May  20192; AP, May  19/92) 

Scientists  at  NASA's Goddard  Institute  for  Space  Studies said  chemicals, 
particularly  sulfurs,  spewed  into  the  atmosphere  by  the  eruption  of  Mount 
Pinatubo  in  the  Philippines are  reflecting  two  percent  of  sunlight  back  into 
space, reducing heat.  Th e   impact  is  global;  local  temperatures might  not  be 
affected. Scientists said early studies of  the effects of  Pinatubo's eruption indi- 
cated  volcanoes play  a far  greater role  in  climate  change  than  once  thought. 
(USA  Today, May  19/92; W Tm e s ,  May  19/92; W Post, May  19/92; P lnq, May 
19/92; B  Sun ,  May  19/92) 

The  Washington  Post  reported  that Mark J.  Albrecht  was  leaving his  post 
as  executive  secretary  of  the  National  Space  Council.  Albrecht's successor 
will  be  Brian  D.  Dailey,  a  Republican  staff  member  of  the  Senate  Armed 

MAY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

Services Committee .  Albrecht  said h e  had   taken   a job  with  t h e  Washington  
area  office  of  Science  Applications  International   Corporation  as  a  senior 
manager.  ( W  Post, May  19/92) 

May  21:  U.S.  scientists  solved  a  20-year-old  mystery  about  the   nature  of 
Geminga, one  of  the  brightest  emitters of  high-energy gamma  rays  in  the   sky. 
Using  data  from  two different  spacecraft, scientists  now  know  tha t   the  power 
plant  in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern 
of  Columbia  University  and   Dr.  Stephen   Holt  of  NASA's Goddard  Space 
Flight Cen te r  reported  tha t   they had  observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga 
using  data  from  the  Ge rmadAme r ican   Roentgen  Satellite  (ROSAT ) .  These 
observations  firmly establish Geminga  as  a close cousin  of  the  Crab  and Vela 
nebulae, which  also have  pulsating  neutron  stars  at  their  cores. T h e   rotating 
neutron  star produces focused beams of  radiation much  like the  periodic flash- 
ing or pulsating lighthouse  beacon.  (NA SA  Release 92-69)  

India launched  a research satellite in to  orbit using  local technology in what 
officials  called  an   important  milestone  in   the   country's  ambitious  space pro- 
gram. T h e  750-foot rocket  blasted  off  from an   island  off  the  southern  state  of 
Andh ra  Pradesh. N ine  minutes in to  the  flight, the  $7 million rocket propelled 
a  research  satellite  in to   orbit  280  miles  above  Earth.  T h e   flight  was  pro- 
nounced'i   total  success. ( W  Times, May  21/92) 

May  22: NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  announced  the  appointment  
of  Bill  Livingstone   as  Special   Assistant  
to   t h e   Adm in is t ra to r   for 
Communications.  (NA SA  Release 92-71)  

A newspaper reported  tha t   three NASA   aquanauts submerged since May  6 ,  
1992,  in   a  research  station   30   feet  below  the   surface  of  Emerald  Lagoon, 
Florida  were  doing  well  but  missed  sunshine  and  their   family  members. 
T h e   exercise  was  part  of  preparation  for  months-long   stays  aboard  Space 
S ta t ion  Freedom. (USA Today, May  22/92) 

May  24:  It was reported  t h a t  astronomers had  discovered expanding "bubbles" 
of ho t  hydrogen gas in dwarf galaxies tha t  apparently  are caused by  t h e  explo- 
sions  of  hundreds  of  stars collectively blowing  matter  completely  out  of  t h e  
small galaxies. T h e  discovery suggests tha t   some galaxies are dying  and   tends 
to   confirm  conventional   theories  about  star  formation.  T h e   discovery  was 
based o n  recent  observations a t  the  Very Large Array Radio Telescope (VLA ) .  
( W  Times, May  24/92; NY  'limes, May  24/92) 

May  26:  NASA   announced   tha t   Laurie A .   Broedling had  been  appointed  as 
Associate  Administrator  for  Continuous   Improvement.  S h e   would  report 
directly  to  the  Administrator  and serve as NASA's primary facilitator of Total 
Quality  Management.  "This  appointment   is  an   important  step  in  bringing  a 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1992 

world-class  TQM  program  t o  NASA , "  Administrator   Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  said. 
( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 7 2 )  

N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S. Go ld in   announced   t h a t   his  agency  had  
started  a n  intense  exam ina t ion  of  itself and   its programs aimed a t  se t t ing  goals 
for  t h e   Nation's   civilian  space  program  a n d   con t ro l l ing   costs  i n   t h e   future .  
G o l d i n  said  h e  had   named   two   teams  t o  undertake   a n  agencywide analysis  of 
what  N A S A  should  be doing  and  what   it  could  d o  w i th in   t h e  con s t ra in t s  of  a 
limited   budget.  T h e  self-analysis  was  organized, G o l d i n   said,  after  h e   exam-  
ined  t h e  N A S A  budgets  for t h e  coming  years a n d  realized  t h a t  t h e  agency was 
committed   t o   programs  t h a t   could  no t   he  funded   in   a n   era  of  t igh t   Federal 
spending .   (AP ,  May  26/92) 

Scientists  now believe  t h a t   all  t h e  visible  stars and  galaxies accoun t  for  less 
t h a n  o n e  percent   of  t h e  mass of  t h e  universe, with   t h e  rest  being  some k ind  of 
invisible,  or   dark   matter .   Finding   t h e   "stuff'  of  this   h idden   mass  could  alter  
theories   of  particle   physics  and   would  be  a  major  s tep   in   understanding   t h e  
structure   a n d  evo lu t ion  of  t h e   universe.  It  might   also  enab le  cosmologists  t o  
predict  whe the r   t h e   universe  is  destined   t o   c o n t i n u e   expand ing   forever  o r  
eventually  t o  collapse of  its own  gravity.  If dark  ma t te r  does exist ,  a n d  most  of 
it  turns   ou t   t o   be  unlike   t h e   ordinary   atoms   of  stars  and   people ,   t h e   philo-  
sophical  implications  would  be profound  and  humbling .  Dr. Bernard Sadou le t ,  
a  physicist  a t   t h e  University   of  California   a n d  a  leader  of  t h e  search   for dark  
matter ,   said:  "It  will  be  t h e  ultimate   Cope rn ican   revolution .   N o t   only  would 
we  no t   be  a t   t h e  cen te r   of  t h e  universe  as we  know   i t ,  but   we  wouldn't  e v e n  
made  up  of  t h e  same stuff as most  of  t h e  universe."  (NY Times, May  26/92)  

A f te r   hearing   complaints   from  employees  across  t h e   n a t i o n ,   N A S A  
Administrator   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   unexpectedly  announced   he  was  chang ing  
t h e   Agency's  logo.  G o l d i n   killed  t h e   despised  "worm,"  wh ich   displayed 
"NASA "   in   h igh - tech   red  lettering ,   and   restored  t h e   insignia  affectionately 
known   as  t h e   "meatball."  T h e  meatball ,  which   served  t h e   agency  from  1959  
t o   1975 ,  consists  of  t h e  agency's name   surrounding  a  starry  blue  background, 
a red  wing  shape   and   t h e  flight  p a t h  of  a spaceship.  I t  was worn  by  astronauts  
o n  Mercury, G em i n i ,  and  Apollo   missions.  ( W  Post, May  26/92) 

N A S A   launched   a  rocket  from  Puerto  Rico's n o r t h   coast  a t  7:55  p.m.  EDT  
t o  study  radio  waves  in  t h e  ionosphere .  T h e  launch ,  originally  set  for May  18 
but  delayed due   t o  bad  weather ,  was  t h e  first  t ime  N A S A  had   launched   from  
t h e  Ca r ibbean   island  since   1967 .  (USA  Today, May  26/92; AP, May  26/92) 

A  team  of  scientists  using  two satellites  i n  o rb i t  announced   t h e y  had  solved 
t h e  puzzle  of  a  mysterious  source  of  high-energy   gamma  rays,  located   in   t h e  
direction   of  t h e  constellation   G em i n i  and   known   as Gem inga .  According   t o  
a  report  in   t h e  journal  Nature,  t h e  gamma  rays were  flowing from  a  sp inn ing  
300 ,000  year  old  n e u t r o n   star  or  pulsar.  Scientists   d o   n o t   understand   why  
2 1 2  

MAY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

Gem inga  favors gamma rays over  o t h e r  wavelengths .  Two o t h e r  bright  sources 
of  gamma  rays  already  known   t o  be  pulsars,  buried  w i th in   t h e  C r a b  and  Vela 
supernova   remnan t s ,  emit   radiation   in  x-ray,  radio ,  and   optical   wavelenghts .  
(W  Post, May  26/92; P  Inq, May  22/92)  

May  27:  T h r e e  U .S .   scientists,  including   o n e   from  NASA's   Ames   Research  
Cen te r ,  completed   t h e  first joint  U.S./Russian  A n t a r c t i c  exped i t ion  s ince  t h e  
breakup  of  t h e   former  Soviet   U n i o n .  T h e   purpose  of  t h e   exped i t ion  was  t o  
investigate   t h e   physical,  chemical ,   and   biological  properties   of  ice-covered 
lakes  in  t h e  Bunger Hills Oasis of  East An ta rc t ica .  T h i s  was t h e  first  t ime  U .S .  
scientists  had   explored  these  lakes, which   are  near   a Russian  research  s ta t ion .  
( N A S A  Release  92 -73 )  

Nearly   300   atmospheric   researchers  were  scheduled  c o n v e n e   t o  study  t h e  
effect of  clouds o n  global climate   in  a n   in te rna t iona l  cooperative   expe r imen t .  
W i t h   N A S A   as  t h e   coordinating   agency,  scientists   from  over   5 0   research 
institutions   in   t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  and  seven  o t h e r  countries  would  employ  t h e  
combined   measurements  from  land ,  sea ,  air, a n d  space platforms.  T h e  project  
was  t o   be  based  in   t h e   Azores  a n d   Madeira  Islands  of  t h e   ea s te rn   A t l a n t i c  
O c e a n .   ( N A S A  Release  92 -74 )  

N A S A  announced   t h a t  a n  exo t ic  mix  of  materials  and  equ ipmen t  would  be 
exposed  t o   t h e   unique   cond i t ion s   of  microgravity  during   Space   S h u t t l e  
Columbia's  13-day  mission  scheduled  for  J u n e   1992 .   T h e   flight  would  be 
NASA's  longest  S h u t t l e  mission  and  was  t h e  first  of  a series of  missions  lead- 
ing  t o   90-day   assignments  aboard  t h e   planned   Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom. 
A s t ronau t   Bonnie   Dunbar   a n d   th ree   scientists  were  scheduled   t o  spend  most 
of  the i r   time   in   t h e   pressurized  Spacelab   module   in   Columbia's  cargo   bay. 
(USA  Today, May  27 /92 )  

May  28: N A S A  announced  t h a t   it would  kick-off a nationwide   tou r  of  its full- 
scale  traveling  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom model   in   t h e  Wa sh ing ton ,  DC ,  metro-  
politan   area.  T h e   model ,   wh ich   is  housed  in   two  connec ted   tractor   trailers, 
features  t h e  U.S.  living quarters  a n d   t h e  U.S.  laboratory  module   of  t h e   in te r -  
na t iona l   space-based  research  facility. ( N A S A  N o t e  N92 -47 )  

Large  landslides have   been   identified  o n  Venus  by Magellan  Project  sc ien -  
tists a t  NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory,  Pasadena, California .  T h e y  are sim- 
ilar  t o  landslides  t h a t   have   been   known   for  some  t ime   t o  occur   o n  Ea r th   a n d  
Mars, a  project  spokesman  said.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -75 )  

May  29:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronaut   James  E  Buchli  (Co l . ,  U SM C ) ,  a 
ve te ran   of  four  Space   S h u t t l e   missions,  was  t o   retire  from  t h e   U .S .  Ma r ine  
Corps   and   leave  N A S A   t o   accept   t h e   position   of  manager,  S t a t i o n   Systems 
Ope ra t ion s   a n d   Requirements   with   Boeing  Defense  and   Space   G r o u p ,  
Hun t sv i l le ,  A labama .   ( N A S A  Release: 9 2 - 7 7 )  

2 1 1  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1992 

Associated  Press  announced  tha t   Hughes Aircraft  and  Japan's JVC  togeth-  
er  plan  to  build  projection  displays  tha t   would  allow  airline  passengers  to 
watch  movies with  the  window shades up,  and   teleconferences  to  be  held  in 
rooms with  the   lights on .  T h e  basic  technology, known  as  liquid crystal light 
valve projection, will  allow projection  of  very  bright,  high-resolution  images. 
T h e  joint  venture  was  to  be  based  in  Carlsbad, California, and  employ about 
200  people  by the  end  of  next   year.  (NA SA  Current  News  92-107)  

May  30:  Advanced  techniques  used  to   place  criminals  are  now  being 
employed  in  NASA's  continuing   investigation  of  microbial  activity  in  the  
weightless  environment   of  orbiting  spacecraft.  Since   the   Apollo  program, 
medical  researchers  have  investigated  the   possibility of  microbial  cross-con- 
tamination  between  astronauts  confined  to  a spacecraft. T h e  advent  of  recent 
methods  such  as DNA   fingerprinting,  which  studies organisms a t   t h e  molec- 
ular  level,  has  allowed  scientists  to   track  the   transfer  of  a  specific microbe 
within  the   environment   of  the   Space  Shu t t le   orbiter,  according  to  a  joint 
study by  NASA's Johnson  Space Cen te r  and  t h e  University of Texas Medical 
School .  (NA SA  Release 92-79)  

June 

June  2 :   NASA   reported  tha t   the   TOPEX/Poseidon  satellite  would  be 
launched  aboard an  Ariane  IV  launch vehicle from  the  Guiana  Space Cen te r  
( C S G )  in  Kourou,  French  Guiana .  T h e   satellite,  a  joint  program  of  NASA  
and  the  Cen t re  Nationale  d'Etudes Spatiales,  the  French  space agency, was  to  
study ocean  circulation  and  its  role  in  regulating  the  global climate.  (NA SA  
No te  N92-50)  

NASA's Hubble  Space Telescope  ( H S T )  revealed  a  new  class  of  object  in 
grouping of  gigantic  star clusters produced  by the  collision  of 
the  universe-a 
galaxies. Images of  the  core of  the  peculiar  galaxy Arp  220 show tha t  stars are 
produced  a t  a furious rate  from the  dust  and  gas supplied by t h e   interaction  of 
two galaxies. T h e  discovery was made  by Dr.  Edward Shaya and  graduate  stu- 
den t   Dan  Dowling,  University  of  Maryland,  and  the   Wide  Field/Planetary 
Camera Team.  (NA SA  Release 92-80)  

June 9: NASA   Headquarters  announced  tha t  Space Shu t t le  Columbia would 
be  launched on a  13-day mission  on  June  25,  1992. Mission STS-50 ,  planned 
to  be  the   longest  flight  to  date   in  the  Shu t t le  program, will  carry  t h e  United  
States  Microgravity Laboratory-1 payload  into  orbit. A  Spacelab long module 
was  to  serve  as  an   in-orbit  laboratory  for  seven crewmembers  and   31 experi- 
ments  devoted  to  material  science,  fluid  physics,  combustion  science,  and 
biotechnology.  (NA SA  STS -50  Launch Advisory) 

NASA   engineers  were  preparing  to   do  the   first  assembly  of  a  large-scale, 
parabolic  an tenna   in  a huge water  tank  whose  buoyancy  lets  researchers sim- 
ulate working in  the  microgravity environment  of  space. T h e  tests would help  
establish assembly times for such antennas ,  evaluate work  procedures and  task 
coordination ,   and  check  the   compatibility  of  the   hardware  itself.  (NA SA  
Release 92-84)  

June  10:  NASA   Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Flight  Jeremiah   W. 
Pearson ,   111,  announced  
t h a t   Thomas   U t sm a n ,   Deputy  Associate  
Administrator, Office of  Space Flight,  will  become  the   Program  Director  for 
the   Space Shuttle .  He  will direct  long-range Shu t t le  planning,  Space Shu t t le  
continuous   improvement  activities,  and   efforts  to  reduce  Shu t t le  operations 
costs while  maintaining  safety. (NA SA  Release 92-83)  

Th rough   a  letter   agreement ,   NASA   and   t h e   Na t iona l   C e n t e r   for 
Manufacturing  Sciences,  Inc.  (NCM S ) ,  A n n   Arbor,  Michigan,  have   estab- 
lished  a  continuing   program  for  technology   development   and   transfer 
between  NASA ,  NCMS ,   and  its member  companies to  advance  the   state  of 
U .S .   manufacturing. NASA   and   NCMS   agreed  to  establish  procedures  and  

ASTRONAUTICS   Ah'l)  AERONAUTICS  

J U N E  1992 

principles  for  research endeavors  in  the   area  of  advanced  manufacturing  sci- 
ences.  (NASA  Release 92-85)  

A 50-foot-long X-30 National Aerospace Plane  (NASP )  mockup rolled out 
of  its hanger  in  ceremonies at  Mississippi  State University, Starkville.  Forty- 
five  students  in  Mississippi  State's  engineering  program  worked  for  five 
months  t o   construct  the  5,000-pound  mockup  at  the   University's Raspet 
Flight Research Laboratory. Throughout  the  project, they had access to  NASP  
program officials, who advised  them on  technical aspects of  the X-30's design. 
Th e  program was  directed  by  Dr. George Bennett.  (NASA  Release 92-86) 

June  1 1 :   Two  astronauts  at   NASA's Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena, 
California, said that  they had evidence of  planets or o the r  bodies around  eight 
stars they  had  studied  in  a star-forming region  of  the  Milky Way  Galaxy, 450 
light  years  from  Earth.  Th e   scientists,  Drs.  Kenneth  Marsh  and  Michael  J .  
Mahoney, said their discovery of  unseen  companions  around  low-mass stars in 
the Taurus-Auriga region of  the  Milky Way had resulted from the study of data 
from the  Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in  1983 and data from ground- 
based  observations acquired mostly  from  1981-1983. (NASA  Release  92-87)  

June   1 5 :   Dr.  Harriett  G .   Jenk ins ,   Assistant  Administrator  for  Equal 
Opportunity  Programs, resigned  her NASA   position  to  become  first director 
of  the newly established Office of  Senate  Fair Employment Practices. (NASA  
Release  92-89) 

June  18: NASA  Administrator Daniel  S .  Goldin  and Yuri  Koptev, the direc- 
tor  general  of  the  Russian  Space  Agency,  ratified  the  first  contract  between 
NASA  and  a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The  contract was  for  the  
study  of  applications  of  Russian  space  technology  to   the  Space  Station 
Freedom  program.  T h e   contract was  for  an  initial  period  of  one  year  with  a 
value of  $1   million.  (NASA  Release 92-91) 

June  24:  In  remarks  before  the  National  Space  Club, NASA   Administrator 
Daniel  S .  Goldin  said  tha t   the  United  States needs  a  labo ra to r -  in  space so 
scientists can  learn  how  to  protect  the  health  of  humans  living and  working 
for  long  periods  in  space  and  improve  the  quality  of  life  on   Earth.  "We  can 
light  up  the sky with  the  inspirational  work  of  Space Station Freedom, or we 
can stand by and watch  the greatest technological  bonfire of  the century  if  it's 
canceled. We need Space Station Freedom and we  need  it now," said Goldin. 
(NASA  Release  92-92) 

Robotics  engineers  and  scientists  at  NASA's Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory 
( J P L ) ,  Pasadena, California,  planned  to  demonstrate  a  new  planetary  lander 
and  robotic  rover at  a specially designed test  site near  the  laboratory. "Rocky 
IV," a prototype of  a mini-rover, might be  launched  to  Mars in  1996 as part of 

J U N E  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

t h e   Mars  Env i ronmen ta l   Survey   (MESUR )   Pa th f inde r   mission.  T h e   16.5- 
pound   testbed  would  let  N A S A   researchers  study how   t o  integrate   planetary  
lander   func t ion s   a n d   science   instruments   unde r   cond i t ion s   approximate   t o  
those  of  a Mars  mission.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -93 )  

N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n  announced   t h e  appo in tmen t   of key 
personnel   in   t h e  Office of  Public Affairs  and   t h e  Office of  Equal Oppo r tun i ty  
Programs.  Bill  Livingstone  was  appointed Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r  for  Public 
Affairs;  S u e  Ma th i s   Richard   was  appo in ted   Deputy  Associate   Adm in i s t ra to r  
fo r   Public   Affairs;  Lewin   S .   W a r r e n   was  a p p o i n t e d   a c t i n g   A s s i s tan t  
Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Equal  Oppo r tun i ty   Programs; and   Oceo la   S .  Ha l l  was  des- 
ignated   ac t ing   Deputy   Assistant   Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Equal  O p p o r t u n i t y  
Programs.  ( N A S A  Release 9 2 - 9 4 )  

June 25:  It  was  announced   t h a t   astronaut   J o h n  0. C re igh ton   (C a p t . ,  U S N )  
would  retire  from  t h e  U .S .  Navy  a n d  leave N A S A  t o  work  in  t h e  Comme rc ia l  
A i r p l a n e   G r o u p   of  t h e   Boeing   C o . ,   S e a t t l e ,   W a s h i n g t o n ,   b e g i n n i n g  
Sep tembe r   1 ,   1992.  He   was  t o   work  as  a  production   test  pilot   and   as  a n  
instructor  pilot   in   t h e  customer  support  area .   ( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 9 6 )  

June  29:  Using   NASA's  Hubble   Space   Telescope  ( H S T ) ,  a n   in te rna t iona l  
team  of  astronomers  took   a  major  s tep  in  redetermining   t h e  expansion   rate   of 
t h e  universe.  T h i s  rate ,  known   as  t h e  Hubble  C o n s t a n t ,   is  o n e  of  two  critical  
numbers  needed   for making  a precise  de te rm ina t ion  of  t h e  size  and  age  of  t h e  
universe.  T h e   C o n s t a n t   is  a n   estimate   of  t h e   rate   a t   which   t h e   universe  is 
expand ing  a n d  is expressed  in  kilometers  per second  per megaparsec (3 .26  mil- 
lion   light  years). T h e  results were reported  by  Drs. F.  Duccio  Macche t to ,  N i n o  
Panagia ,   a n d   A b h i j i t   S a h a   of  t h e   Space   Telescope  Sc ience   I n s t i t u t e ,  
Ba l t imo re ,   M a r y l a n d ;   A l l a n   S a n d a g e   of  t h e   C a r n e g i e   I n s t i t u t i o n   of 
Wa sh ing ton ;  and  Gu s tav  Tammann  of  t h e  University  of  Basel, Switzerland ,  a t  
t h e   in te rna t ion l   workshop  "Science  with   t h e   Hubble   Space  Telescope,"  held  
in  Sardinia ,   Italy, J u n e  29  through   July 9 ,   1992 .  ( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 9 7 )  

N A S A   reported   t h a t   a  survey  of  t h e   heavens   with   t h e   Hubb le   Space  
Telescope  ( H S T )  was  uncovering   remote   a n d   unusual  galaxies  never   before 
resolved  by  optical   telescopes  o n  Earth.  H S T  revealed  a n  unusual  variety  of 
shapes a n d  structures  in  these  d i s tan t  galaxies, wh ich  previously had  appeared  
as  fuzzy  blobs  in   ground-based  sky  surveys.  T h e   results  might   lead  t o  much  
clearer  understanding   of  t h e  formation   a n d  evo lu t ion  of  galaxies.  T h e  results 
were  presented   by  Dr.  Richard   Griffiths   of  t h e   Space   Telescope  Sc ience  
Institute ,   Baltimore,  Maryland.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -98 )  

June  30:  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S .  G o l d i n   signed  a n   agreement   with  
In te rna t iona l   Technology   Underwriters   ( IN T EC )   t o   explore   ways  t h a t   t h e  
insurance   industry  can   assist  in   financing   h um a n   and   robotic   satellite   rescue 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

J U N E  1992 

and   repair  missions.  INTEC  would  also  look  a t  op t ion s   for  providing   incen -  
tives  in   t h e  con s t ruc t ion  of  commercial  satellites  t o  make  t h em  easier  t o  res- 
cue   and   repair  if  problems  develop.  "We  need   t o  consider  new  approaches   t o  
-  - 
salvaging  satellites  t h a t  will encourage  t h e  further  commercialization  of  space, 
such  as robotic  rescues  in  high  a n d  lower orbits," G o l d i n  said. (NASA  Release 
92-99) 

July  

Ju ly   1 :   N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h e   d e p a r t u r e   of  Navy   C a p t .   D a n i e l   C. 
Brandenstein ,   chief of  t h e  A s t ronau t  Office ,  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r ,  Hou s ton ,  
since   1986   and   a  veteran   of  four  Space   S h u t t l e   missions,  effective  about  
O c t o b e r   1.  Selected   by   N A S A   in  1978 ,   Brandenstein   first  flew  as  a  pilot 
aboard  t h e  S h u t t l e  Cha l lenge r  in   1978  and  holds   t h e  record  for  t ime   in  space 
( 7 8 9  hou r s )  among  Space  S h u t t l e  astronauts .   ( N A S A  Release  92 -100 )  

Newly-released  photographs  from  t h e  Hubb le  Space  Telescope showed  t h a t  
t h e  "Whirpool   Galaxy"  may  have   a black  ho le  a t   its co re  and   t h a t   t h e  co re  of 
a powerful  infrared radiating  galaxy called A r p  220  supports vigorous  star b i r th  
a n d  supernova  star explosions. Astronomers   suspect t h a t  A r p  220  is  t h e  prod-  
uct   of  a n  earlier  collision  of  two  "parent"   galaxies.  (CSM ,  J u l   1 /92 )  

Co rne l l  University   astrophysicist T h om a s  G o l d   said  in   t h e  "Proceedings  of 
t h e  Na t iona l  Academy   of  Sciences"  t h a t   the re   is  probably  more  life  inside t h e  
Earth   t h a n   the re   is  o n   its  surface.  T h i s   life  would  be  in  t h e   form  of  bacteria  
a n d  o t h e r  microorganisms,  a n d   its  overall   volume   probably  surpasses  t h a t   of 
all  t h e   plants   a n d   animals   living   o n   t h e   planet's  surface.  N A S A   scientist  
S t e p h e n  Ma ran   said  t h a t   if  Gold's  ideas prove  correct ,   "they   will  revo lu t ion -  
ize  scientific   theories   of  geology  and   t h e   evo lu t ion   of  life  o n   Earth."  Go ld  
speculated  t h a t  similar  life forms may exist  inside t h e  Moon   and  o t h e r  planets  
in ou r  solar system.  "T h e  surface  life o n  Ea r th ,  based  o n  photosynthesis  for  its 
overall  energy supply, may be just  o n e  strange  b ranch  of  life. T h e  deep ,  c h em -  
ically  supplied  life,  however,  may  be  very  common   in  t h e   universe,"  G o l d  
commen ted .   ( P  Inq ,  J u l  1 /92 )  

Scientists   studying  da ta   from  t h e  Magellan  radar-mapping  satellite   around  
Venus concluded   t h a t  Venus is n o t  a tw in  of  t h e  Earth .  Magellan has  produced 
images  1 0  times  sharper   t h a n  any  seen  before  of  more  t h a n  97 pe rcen t   of  t h e  
planet's surface.  Magellan's  images show Venus  t o  be  as  geologically  ac t ive  as 
t h e  Ea r th ,  but  whereas Earth's  crust is  shaped  by  con t inuou s  recycling, Venus' 
surface  appears  t o  evolve  by  building  crust  vertically  as  lava  flows o u t  of  vol-  
canoes   or  meteorite   craters .   (CSM ,  J u l  1 /92 )  

N A S A   chose  Rockwell  International's  Palmdale  plant   in  California   t o  refit 
t h e  seven-year-old  Space  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s ,  allowing t h e  spacecraft t o  stay aloft 
longer  and   possibly  enabling   it   t o  rendezvous with   t h e  Russian Space  S t a t i o n  
Mir.  (LA  Times, J u l  2 /92 )  

T h e  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   awarded  th ree   indefinite-delivery,  indefinite-  
quan t i ty   con t rac t s   for  its  Personal  Compu te r   Acquisition   con t rac t   program. 
T h e  th ree  winners  were  t o  provide  a range  of personal  computers ,  peripherals ,  

A N D  .4ERCPiAllTlCS 
. ~ I T K L > N . ~ ~ ~ T I ( ' ~  

JULY  1992 

and   software  packages  and   would  be  required  t o  compe te   against  e a c h  o t h e r  
for  N A S A   orders  throughout   t h e   duration   of  t h e   con t rac t ,   a n   arrangement  
LieslgneLl  t o  provide N A S A  with   t h e  most  up-to-date   equ ipmen t  a t  t h e   lowest 
co s t .   ( F r d r n t l  Computer  Week, July  13/92)  

] u l y   3 :  N A S A   launched   t h e   first  of  its  new,  low-cost  spacecraft,  t h e   Solar, 
Anomalous ,   and   Magnetospheric   Particle   Explorer  satellite   (SAMPEX) 
aboard  a  four-stage Scou t  rocket  from Vandenberg  A i r  Force  Base, California .  
T h e   spacecraft  was  designed  t o   study  anomalous   cosmic  rays  in  a n   effort  t o  
improve  i ~ n c l e r s t a n d i n ~  of  t h e  evolution   of  t h e  S u n ,  t h e  solar system, and   t h e  
Milky  Way (;alaxy.  ( N A S A  Release  29-102;  The Sun ,  J u l 4 / 9 2 ;  P I q ,  J u l 4 / 9 2 ;  
W Times, J u l  4 /92 ;  W Post, J u l  4/92;  LA  Times, J u l  5/92;  NY  Times, J u l  5/92)  

Space   Shu t t le   Co lumb ia   Commande r   Richard   N .   Richards   made   a   p i tch  
toilay  for  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom, saying  t h a t  astronauts  o n  t h e  Co lumb ia  
S h u t t l e   flight  needed  more   time   in   orbit   t o   conduc t   scheduled  experiments .  
Such   time   would  be  available  o n   t h e   Space  S ta t ion ,   which   had   experienced  
funding  difficulties  in  Congress.  Two  S h u t t l e  astronauts  worked  though   part  
o f t h e i r  breaks  as  they   rushed  t o  complete   experiments ,   o n e  dealing  with   t h e  
growth  of  crystals  and   t h e  o t h e r  with   dust  particles.  ( W  Post, J u l  4 /92 )  

July  4 :  A s t ronau t s  aboard  t h e  S h u t t l e  C:olumbia  beamed  down   Fourth   of  July  
greetings o n  t h e   10 th  day of  a  planned   13-day mission,  t h e  longest  in  S h u t t l e  
history.  T h e   goal  of  Columbia's  was  twofold:  t o   study  t h e   effects  of  weight-  
lessness  o n   physical,  chemical ,   medical ,   a n d   biological  processes,  and   t o  
demon s t ra te  t h e  Shu t t le ' s  capability  t o  remain  in  orbit  a t  least  13 days. A  wide 
range  of   experiments   aimed  a t   generating   knowledge  from  microgravity  sci- 
ence  were  underway  in  t h e   long  Spacelab  module  being   flown  o n  Co lumb ia .  
( U P ] ,  Jul  4/92; AP ,  Ju l  4/92;  LA  'limes, J u l  5/92; W Post, J u l  5/92; NY 'limes, 
J u l  5/92; P  Inq ,  J u l  5/92; W Times, J u l  5/92;  Keuters, J u l  4/92;  AvWk, J u l  6 /92 )  

J u l y   6 :  T h e  Space   S h u t t l e  Columbia   and   its  crew  set   a   record  for  t h e   longest 
Space   S h u t t l e   flight  o n   t h e   11 th   day  of  a   laboratory  research  mission. 
Columbia   passed  t h e  previous  S h u t t l e  endu rance  record  of  10 days,  21  hours ,  
and  o n e  m inu te  set  in   1990  by  a n o t h e r  S h u t t l e  Columbia   crew.  ( W  Times, J u l  
7/92;  The  Sun ,  J u l  7/92;  VC'  Post,  J u l   7/92; AP  J u l   7/92;  UP1 J u l   76/92;  USA 
T o d a y ,  J i l l  7/92)  

Scientists   announced   t h a t   dust  and   chemicals   from  last  year's e rup t ion   of 
Moun t   P ina tubo   in   t h e   Philippine   Islands  had   cooled  t h e  Earth   by  blocking  
incoming  sunlight .  T h e  planet's  average temperature  dipped  about  o n e  degree 
h e t u~ e e n  t h e  J u n e   16 ,  1991 ,  eruption   and  May  of  this   year  because  a   layer  of 
sulfuric acid  droplets  released  by  t h e  vo lcano  had   reduced  t h e  to ta l  am o u n t  of 
solar  energy  reaching   t h e   Earth's  surface.  T h e   scientists  said  t h e   cooling  
should  last  about   five years.  ( W  Times, J u l  7/92; A P ,  J u l  7/92)  

JULY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Engineers  from  Stanford  University  announced   tha t   they  had  teamed  up 
with  Russian  space  exploration  experts  to   define  an   international   manned 
mission t o  Mars tha t  would cost about $70 billion,  a relative bargain compared 
with NASA's estimates of  a U .  S .-only  mission. Significant  contributions  from 
t h e  European Space  Agency  and Japan  were  also  included  in  the  plan, which 
envisioned  sending  six  astronauts  to   Mars  for  a  500-day  visit  in   2009.  T h e  
plan  relied on  readily available space technology  and would not   require major 
new  appropriations  from Congress.  ( A uW k ,  Jul  67/92) 

July 7:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   announced   the   appointment  
of  Samuel  W.  Keller  as  Associate  Administrator  for  Russian  Programs. T h e  
new  position was  established  to  provide  focus for  the   many  programs involv- 
ing NASA   and   the  former Soviet Union .   (NA SA  Release 92-103)  

NASA   ground  controllers  said  they  had  reactivated  two  key  scientific 
instruments  aboard  t h e  Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Satellite  and   hoped  t o  
revive  the  o the r  eight   in coming weeks following two major glitches with  t h e  
motors  tha t   drive  the   solar  power  array. T h e  problems had   sent   the   satellite 
in to   a  quiescent  safe  mode  J u n e   1  and   2.  T h e   Microwave  Limb  Sounder, 
which  helps  measure ozone depletion ,  and   the  Cryogenic  Limb Array  Etalon 
Spectrometer, which  has  a  limited  lifetime, were  restored  to   service.  (Space 
N ew s ,  Jul  7/92) 

July  8:  Weather  conditions  forced  postponement  of  the   Space  Shu t t le  
Columbia's return,  lengthening  what  is  already NASA's  longest Shu t t le  mis- 
sion  in to   a  full  two  weeks.  ( P  lnq,  Jul  9/92; LA  X m s ,  Jul   9/92;  W  Post, Jul  
9/92; NY Times, Ju l  9/92; W Times, Ju l  9/92; The  Sun ,  Jul  9 /92 )  

Russian  cosmonauts Alexander  Viktorenko  and  Alexander  Kalery worked 
outside  the  Mir Space Station  o n  an  unscheduled  two-hour spacewalk to  acti-  
vate  a pair of  gyroscopes tha t  help  stabilize the  Space S ta t ion .  T h e  gyroscopes 
had  worn ou t  naturally during the  course of Mir's  life and had  t o  be  replaced. 
(A P  Ju l  8/92)  

A  spokesman  announced   tha t  NASA   had  failed  in  its  latest  attempt   to  fix 
the   jammed  main  an tenna   o n   the   Jupiter-bound Galileo  spacecraft,  but   the  
Agency  said  it would  try different  repair methods next   year. Engineers  turned 
Galileo's main  an tenna   toward  t h e  Sun   to  warm  i t ,   t h e n  cooled  it  in   shade, 
but  the  an tenna  remained  stuck. T h e  latest warming and  cooling of  the  a n t e n -  
na  was  the  seventh  and  final effort to open  the  an tenna  by  thermally  expand- 
ing  o r  shrinking  what NASA   engineers  think   are  stuck  pins  o n  three   of  t h e  
antenna's ribs. Despite the  loss of  the  main an tenna ,  NASA  scientists expect- 
ed  to  complete  70 percent  of  Galileo's mission  by  using  a small an tenna .  T h e  
small an tenna ,  however,  is  capable of  transmitting  only  one  percent  as many 
computer "bits"  as  the  main  an tenna  would  have  sent .  (AP ,  Jul  8 /92 )  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1992 

July 9: To help bolster the competitiveness of American  industry, NASA  and 
the  Department  of  Energy announced  that  they had  formed a  partnership  to 
enhance  the   transfer  of  technologies  developed  in  their  laboratories  to 
American  enterprise. Areas of  cooperation  included outreach to business and 
non-profit  research  organizations,  access  to  Federal  technology  resources, 
training and education, dissemination of  scientific and  technical information, 
and  technology transfer policy and program analysis. 

The  two agencies also signed a cooperative agreement on  energy-related civil 
space programs. T h e  agreement provided  overall principles that  outlined  the  
responsibilities and  authority  of  both  NASA   and  the  Department  of  Energy 
in  research  and  development,  fundamental  science,  advanced  technology 
development, and education efforts. (NASA  Releases 92-104 and 92-107) 

T h e   Space  Shuttle  Columbia  landed  at  the  Kennedy  Space  Center  in 
Florida at  the conclusion of  the  longest-ever Shuttle flight, a  14-day research 
mission  intended  as  a  rehearsal  for  NASA's  Space  Station. T h e   arrival was 
diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base  in California, because 
of  rain.  ( P  Inq, Ju l  10192; The Sun, Ju l  10192; LA Tmes, Ju l  10192; W Xmes, Jul 
10192; W Post, Jul9192, 10192; CSM, Jul 10192; NY  Times, Jul 10192; WSJ, Jul 
10192; AP, Jul09192; UP I ,  J u l 9 / 9 2 )  

NASA  researchers  said  they  had  "flown"  a  complete  three-dimensional 
high-performance aircraft in  a supercomputer for  the first  time. T h e  research 
was  part  of  an effort  to  reduce  wind  tunnel  tests of  new  aircraft designs. Th e  
new  supercomputer techniques have  promise in aerodynamic studies of  fight- 
er aircraft and  in other areas where fluid  flow is modeled, such as weather pre- 
diction, spacecraft entry, artificial heart  design, etc.  (NASA  Release 92-105) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin  and  National  Space  Council 
Executive Secretary Brian  Dailey  left with  an  interagency delegation  to visit 
the European  Space Operations Center  in Germany. Th e  delegation planned 
to proceed  on   to Moscow  to gain  a first-hand  understanding of  Russia's space 
program.  (NASA  Release 92- 106) 

In  a  letter  to  the  British  journal  Nature,  two  American  scientists  at  the 
University  of  Arizona's  Lunar  and  Planetary  Laboratory,  David  Kring  and 
William Boynton, said  that  they had  found what  they believe  to be  the  loca- 
tion  where  a gigantic object  from  outer space crashed  into  the Earth  65 mil- 
lion  years  ago, possibly ending  the  age  of  the  dinosaurs. Th e  site  is  a  buried 
crater  110 miles  across  on   the  Yucatan  Peninsula  in  Mexico.  (The Sun, Jul 
9/92; WS),  1~119192) 

In  another  article  in  Nature,  scientists  from  NASA   and  Hughes  STX 
Corporation  in  Lanham,  Maryland,  said  that  the  uppermost  part  of  Earth's 

JULY 1992  

CHRONOLOGY 1992  

protective   ozone layer was about   seven  percent   t h i n n e r   in   1989  t h a n  it  was  in  
1980.  T h e   conclusions   were  based  o n   observations   taken   by  t h e   Nimbus-7 
env i ronmen ta l  research satellite  launched  in  1978  a n d  refined by  a ca l ib ra t ion  
device   o n   a  Space   S h u t t l e   mission  in   Oc tobe r   1989. T h e   new  observations  
were  consistent   with   previous projections  of  ozone dep le t ion .  (UP1 J u l 9 / 9 2 ;  

N A S A  announced  t h a t  it  expected  t o  launch  a radar satellite  in August  t h a t  
would  sweep above  t h e  Bering  Sea  off  Alaska  and  beam  down  a detailed  radar  
snapshot  giving  t h e  location   of  every  fishing vessel. T h e  project  was  in tended  
t o  be  t h e  beginning   of  a foolproof  system t o  police  t h e  world's fishing grounds 
against  pirate   trawlers.  N A S A   expected   t o   spend  $650 ,000   as  its  share   of  a 
program  t o  transfer its sophisticated  technology  t o  commercial  uses.  ( P  Inq ,  Ju l  
9 /92 )  

July  10:  W r i t ing   in  t h e   Astrophysical  Journal,  two   astronomers   a t   t h e  
University   of  H a w a ~ i  discussed  evidence   of  a  monstrous  black  ho le   with   t h e  
mass of  a billion   suns ,  100  times more  powerful  t h a n  any  appa ren t  black  ho le  
previously  de tec ted .  T h e  suspected  hlack  ho le   a t   t h e  cen te r   of  N G C  31  15 ,  a 
galaxy 3 0  million   light-years away, appears t o  be about  half as large as our  solar 
system.  T h e  discovery  moves  t h e   concep t   of  black  holes   further   a long   from 
theo re t ica l  prediction   t o  accepted   reality.  It  also  illuminates  t h e  na tu re  of  t h e  
mysterious, brilliant   objects  known   as  quasars.  (LA  Times, J u l   10192; W Post, 
J u l  10192; W  Xmes, J u l  10192) 

T h e  European  Space  Agency's G i o t t o  space probe ,  wh ich  six years ago flew 
w i th in   335   miles  of  C om e t   Halley,  flew  past  C om e t   Grigg-Skjellerup. 
A l though   t h e  probe's cameras were  too  badly  damaged  from  t h e  Halley  fly-by 
t o  be used, Giotto's  o t h e r   instruments  measured  magnetic   fields, dust  impacts ,  
electrically  charged  gases,  a n d   t h e   chemical   makeup   of  particles  from  a  dis- 
tance  of  124  miles.  (A P ,  J u l  7/92 ,  J u l  11/92;  P  Inq ,  J u l  11/92)  

A  recen t   U .S .   Sena te  C omm i t t e e  o n  Gove rnmen ta l   Affairs  oversight  sub- 
comm i t tee  report  said  t h a t  millions  of  dollars had   been  wasted  in  recen t  years 
because  of  poor  auditing   and   con t rac t   management   a t   39   federally  funded  
research  and   development   centers .   T h e  report   concluded   t h a t   standard   gov- 
e r nm e n t   accoun t ing   a n d   aud i t ing   requirements   were  o f ten   "missing  o r  
ignored"  a t   t h e   privately  owned   but   publicly  funded   research  cen te r s ,  wh ich  
toge the r  received  con t rac t s  worth  more  t h a n  $10  billion   last year. Among   t h e  
laboratories   criticized   was  t h e   J e t   Propulsion   Laboratory 
in   Pa sadena ,  
California ,  wh ich  recelved  $1  billion   in fiscal year  1990  funding  from NA SA .  
(W  Post, J u l  10192) 

N A S A  officials scheduled   t h e  nex t   S h u t t l e  launch  for July 31 ,  th ree  weeks 
after  t h e   S h u t t l e  Columbia   returned   from  its  record-breaking   two-week  mis- 
sion. A t lan t i s '  seven-day  flight  was  slated  t o  troll  a n   Italian   satellite  o n  a  12-  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

JULY  1992 

mile-long  tether   and   t o   launch  Eureca,  a  European  satellite,  o n   a  one-year 
mission.  (AP ,  Ju l  10192, Jul  26/92; W Times, Jul  27/92; NY   Trmes, Jul  28/92) 

July  11 :  Harrison  A .  Storms, Jr., an  aeronautics pioneer,  died  at  his  home   in 
Rancho   Palos  Verdes,  California,  a t   age  76.  Storms'  designs and  leadership 
played  a  key   role  in  developing  B-25  and   P-51  Mustang  fighters  in  
World War  I1  and  in  Project  Apollo's billion.dollar  race  for  t h e  Moon   in  the  
1960s. H e  served  as  an   advisor  to  NASA ,   the  Air   Force, and  the   Pentagon. 
(NY Times, Jul   16/92) 

]uly  12 :  T h e  Pentagon  announced   tha t   it  would  allocate $1.5  billion  for  the  
V-22 Osprey to  keep development of  the  aircraft alive  through  next  year. T h e  
move  temporarily  settled a  three-year  battle  between  Defense Secretary  Dick 
Cheney  and  a coalition of V-22 supporters in Congress and  the  military. (USA  
Today, J u l  13/92) 

July 13: NASA   started t h e  first flight  test  in  Denver  of  a laser-based sensor to  
p o v i d e  airline pilots  with  advance warning  of  "microbursts" tha t   can  harbor 
potentially  dangerous  windshears. T h e  Federal Aviation  Administration  has 
mandated  tha t   airlines  must  select  and  install  an   approved  microburst  detec-  
tion  system o n  their  aircraft  by  the  end  of  1995. (NA SA  Release 92-108) 

Scientists from  the   United   States  and  Australia  announced   completion  of 
t h e   Southern   Ocean  Waves  Experiment.  From  June  6  through  June   18 ,  t h e  
scientists  observed  how  ocean  winds  and   waves  affect  one   another   off  t h e  
coast of  Australia.  Project findings were  expected to  improve  the  reliability of 
ocean   wave  forecasting  and  
t o  
improve   measurements 
from 
t h e  
TOPEX/Poseidon  satellite.  Th is   satellite,  a  joint  U.S./French  venture ,   was 
scheduled  for  launch   in  August  1992 and was  to  study ocean  topography and 
circulation,  leading  to  better  understanding  uf  the   oceans'  role in  global  cli-  
mate  change.  (NA SA  Release 92-109)  

July 14: A NASA   "aquanaut"  set an  endurance  record of  69  days, 20 minutes 
underwater  after spending time  in  a scuba divers' lodge submerged in a Florida 
Keys  lagoon. Richard  Presley began  the  habitation  May  6 as part of  an  exper- 
iment  by  NASA   on  conditions  astronauts would  face during  long space mis- 
sions.  (W  Times, Jul   15/92; USA  Today  15/92; AP ,  Jul  15/92)  

Engineers at the  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory said  that  the  Magellan spacecraft, 
already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, had developed 
serious transmitter  trouble  and  for more  than   a week  had  been  unable  to  send 
usable  data  and  pictures  for  the   completion  of  its  mapping  survey  of  the  
Venusian  surface.  Magellan's only  functioning  radio  transmitter  begun  over- 
heating,  a  repeat  of similar  trouble  more  than   a year  ago. Engineers hoped  to 
devise a solution within a few days. (NY Times, Jul  15/92; NY 'Times, Jul  18/92) 

JULY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

NASA   announced   tha t   Rockwell  International   Corporation's  Space  
Systems  Division  had  received  NASA's  first-ever  award  for  World  Class 
Performance  in  recognition of  its  exemplary  work  in  building  the   new  Space 
S h u t t l e   o rb i te r   Endeavour.  T h e   award 
t h e   N A S A  
is  given   when  
Administrator  determines  tha t   an   organization  has  performed  world-class 
work  of  significant  benefit  to  the  Agency  and  U .S .   taxpayers.  (PR  Newswire, 
J u l  14/92)  

July  15:  NA SA   said  tha t   construction  had  started  on   a  high-flying,  light- 
weight,  unpiloted  research  aircraft  called  "Perseus"  tha t  NASA   was  to  use  to  
measure  ozone  levels  and   o the r   atmospheric  conditions.  NASA   viewed 
Perseus  as  t h e   first  step   toward  general  use  of  advanced  aircraft  for  many 
aspects of  Earth  sciences research  such  as climate  and  radiation  studies,  trop- 
ical  dynamics,  meteorology,  and   for  studies  of  t h e   stratosphere  and  tropo- 
sphere. Aurora  Flight  Sciences Corporation   of  Manassas, Virginia,  won  the  
$2.25  million  contract   to  design,  build,  and  flight  test  two  Perseus  aircraft. 
Flight  tests were  slated  t o  begin  in  late  1992. (NA SA  Release 92 - 1 10) 

Solar scientists  were  puzzled  by  an   unexpected  "gamma  ray  afterglow"  dis- 
covered o n  the  Sun  by NASA's Compton  Gamma Ray Observatory. T h e  glow, 
a  strong  emanation  of  high-energy  gamma  rays,  persisted  for  more  t h a n   five 
hours  after  a  solar  flare  explosion  o n  June   11,  1991. A  similar  phenomenon  
occurred  four  days  later.  T h e   scientists  also  announced  tha t   the   Compton  
Gamma Ray Observatory had  taken  the  first image of  the  Sun  in  neutrons, t h e  
first  picture  of  any  celestial  object  ever  made  with  neutrons,  tha t   is,  matter, 
rather  than  light. Ano the r  scientist reported  tha t   the  Hubble Space Telescope 
had  found  evidence of  powerful beams of  downward-streaming protons  at  the  
onset of  a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more t h a n  30 light-years 
away.  Solar  flares  can  produce  magnetic  storms  o n   Earth  tha t   interfere  with 
electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA  Releases 92-1 1 2  and 92-1 13; 
N Y X m e s ,  Jul  16/92; U S A  Today, Jul  16/92; The Sun ,  Jul  16/92; P  lq, Jul  16/92; 
UP I ,  Jul  15/92, Ju l  17/92; W Post, Ju l20 /92 ;  Space News ,  J u l 2 7 -A u g  9/92)  

A  study  conducted  for  the   Federal  Aviation  Administration   by   the  
Metropolitan  Washington  Council   of  Governments   concluded  tha t   the  
Washington  area  could  support  flights of  "tiltrotor"  aircraft  to  New  York  and  
Boston.  Tiltrotors  would  be  competitive  with  commercial  aircraft  within  a 
range  of  about  350  nautical miles from Washington. To date ,   tiltrotor  aircraft 
had  been  developed  and  flown  by  the  military, which  hoped  to  use  the   craft 
for  transporting  troops.  (W  Post, J u l  16/92)  

T h e  "New York  Times" reported that  the  Georgia Institute of  Technology was 
engaged  in  experiments  to  measure  the   impact  of  sonic  booms  o n  people  and 
buildings.  T h e  research was  part  of  a NASA   program  to  develop  a  supersonic 
commercial airplane  larger and faster than  the  Concorde. (NY Times, Jul  15/92) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JULY  1992 

July  16: NASA   announced  tha t  a group of  Alaskans  had  started  a  three-year 
experiment  i n   the   use  of  a  small  emergency  radio  transmitter  known  as  a 
Personal  Locator  Beacon  to  communicate  with  a  10-year-old search  and   res- 
cue  satellite  system  tha t   up  to  now  had  been  used  primarily  for  aircraft  and 
ship  emergencies.  T h e   locator  beacon  has  the   potential   t o   save  lives  when 
used  in emergencies in remote areas. T h e  experiment was being carried out  by 
NASA ,  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric Administration ,  the  U.S. Air  
Force, and  t h e  U .S .  Coast Guard .  (NA SA  Release 92-115)  

A t   a  news  conference  in Moscow,  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S .  Goldin 
announced plans for  the  United  States and Russia to implement the  agreements 
Presidents Bush  and  Yeltsin  announced  o n  June   17,  1992. Goldin  said signifi- 
cant  progress was  made  in developing a plan  to  carry out  a wide  range of  proj- 
ects,  including  expansion  of  cooperation  in  life  sciences  and   global  change 
research, the  exchange  of  an  American  astronaut  and  Russian cosmonaut,  and  
a Space Shuttle  rendezvous and docking with  the  Russian Mir Space Station .  A 
tentative  date  of  October  1993 was  set for  a cosmonaut  on   the   Space Shuttle ,  
with  an  American o n  the  Russian Space Station  Mir  the  next year. Goldin also 
signed a $1  million contract with  the  Russian space agency for  a detailed  study 
of  the   use  of  Russian  space  technology  in  the   U.S.  space  program.  (NA SA  
Release 92-1 16; UPI ,  Jul17192; WSJ ,Jul17/92;  AP, Jul16192; W Post ,Jul20/92)  

T h e  No r th  American Air Defense Command  said  tha t  it was tracking near- 
ly   7,000 spacecraft  and  pieces of  debris bigger  t h a n  a square yard  tha t  were  in 
orbit around the  Earth. T h e  proliferating use  of satellites has resulted  in a ring 
of  several hundred  of  the   spacecraft  around  the   Earth's equator, most  in  low- 
Earth  to mid-Earth orbit. As a result,  concerns were being  raised  about  possi- 
ble  interference from one  satellite to  another  and about  the  need  for adequate 
distance  between  satellites  in  view  of  plans  for  more  satellites  in  the   1990s. 
(W  Times, Jul  19/92) 

July  20:  NASA   announced   tha t   the   Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Satellite 
(UARS )  had  resumed full science operations following the  resolution  of  prob- 
lems with  t h e  satellite's  solar array drive. Flight controllers had  turned  off  the  
satellite's instruments June  2 after observing that   the  solar array drive was no t  
operating smoothly and  tha t  the  solar array itself was not  properly tracking  the  
Sun .   UARS   was  launched  September  12,  1991,  by  t h e   Space  Shu t t le  
Discovery. It was designed to  study the  chemistry, dynamics, and  energetics of 
the   Earth's  upper  atmosphere,  focusing  particularly  on  ozone  depletion. 
UARS   was  the   first  major  satellite  element   of  NASA's  Mission  to  Planet 
Earth.  (NA SA  Release 92- 1 17)  

A  V-22  Osprey  "tiltrotor"  aircraft  carrying  seven  people  crashed  in to   t h e  
Potomac  River  a t   the   Quantico   Marine  Corps  Air   Station   in  northern  
Virginia,  killing  all  seven  passengers.  T h e   crash  involved  the   fourth  of  five 

JULY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

prototype  Ospreys built  by  t h e  military  since   1989. T h e  craft  was o n  its maid-  
e n  flight  from Florida when   t h e  crash  occurred.  ( W  Post, Ju l  21/92;  NY  'Tzmes, 
J u l  21/92; The  Sun ,  J u l  22/92) 

T h e  seven   astronauts   who   returned   t o   Earth   July  9 after  spend ing   1 4  days 
o n  t h e  S h u t t l e  Columbia   said  t h a t  ge t t ing   used  t o  Ea r th  again  h a d  b e e n  sim- 
ilar  t o   adjusting  after   shorter   flights .  T h e y   also  said  t h a t   preliminary  results 
indicated   the i r  experiments  h a d  been   successful. T h e  crew  grew p ro te in   crys- 
tals for use  in medical  research,  studied  fire safety  in  space  by  lighting  candles  
and   igniting  wiring  insulation   and   polyurethane   foam ,  jiggled  drops  of  liquid 
with   sound  waves  t o  see how  fluids behave   in  space, and   tested   a  new  minia-  
ture  space greenhouse .   (AP, J u l  10192, Ju l  21/92)  

July  21 : N A S A  a n d   t h e  N a t i o n a l   In s t i tu te s   of  H e a l t h  signed   a n  ag reemen t  
t o   e n h a n c e   e a c h   agency's  biomedical   research   capabilities .   T h e   agencies  
pledged  t o  deve lop  programs  t h a t   apply NASA's  un ique   expertise   t o  p rac t i -  
ca l ,  medical   needs   o n  Ea r th   a n d   in   space .   T h e   ag reemen t   was  i n t e n d e d   t o  
s t imu la te  new  oppo r tun i t ie s   i n  t h e  biomedical   a n d  behav io ra l  research   co tn -  
mun i ty  because  it  provides  for greater   access  t o  space-based  facilities   as well 
as  invo lvemen t   by  university-based   research   cen te r s .   It  was  expec ted   t o  
increase   support   for  Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom ,   funding   for  w h i c h   was  unde r  
a t t a c k  i n  Congress .   ( N A S A  Release  92 -1  19; W Post ,  J u l  22/92;  Space News ,  
J u l 2 7 - A u g  9 / 9 2 )  

A  division  of Rockwell In te rna t iona l  agreed to  pay $1.42  million  and   t o  per-  
mit   t h e   Federal  gove rnmen t   t o   lecture   employees  about   honesty   t o   settle   a 
fraud  case  involving   Space   S h u t t l e   work.  Prosecutors  said  they   would  d rop  
charges  t h a t   Rockwell's  Co l l in s   Comme rc ia l   Avionics  Division  in  C e d a r  
Rapids,  Iowa,  which   makes  a n d   repairs  S h u t t l e   flight  instruments ,   h a d  
defrauded  N A S A   by  altering   t ime   cards  for  work  d o n e   o n   t h e   S h u t t l e   pro-  
gram.  ( P  Jnq, J u l  22/92; NY Times, J u l  22/92; WSJ, J u l  22/92; AP ,  Ju l  21 /92 )  

July  22:  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n  announced   t h e  expan s ion  of 
t h e  Na t iona l   Space  G r a n t  College   and   Fellowship Program  t o   include   all  50 
states  and  t h e  District  of Co lumb ia .  T h e  Space  G r a n t  Program  offers s ta te s  t h e  
opportunity   t o   receive  grants   t o   fu r the r   projects  in  aeronautics ,   space ,   a n d  
related  fields.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -1  1 2 )  

Vice  President  D a n  Quayle  called   for  a major  review  of  t h e  Nation's  space 
policies  t h a t   could  lead  t o  formal merger of  some civilian   a n d  military  activi-  
ties  for  t h e  first  t ime  since  t h e  Space  Age  began. Quayle  essentially  suggested 
t h a t   t h e   Na t iona l   space   agency  consider  increasing   t h e   in te rac t ion   between  
civil  a n d  na t iona l  security space activities ,  lowering some of  t h e  techn ica l  and  
managerial  walls, a process  already occurring  o n  a n  ad h o c  basis, analysts said. 
( W  Post, J u l  23/92)  

ASTRON j lUTLCS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JULY  1992 

Ju ly   24:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   announced  a  series  of  pro- 
curement reforms  to make NASA  the  model of excellence  for the  Federal gov- 
ernment .  Goldin  said  reforms  in NASA's procurement process were  necessary 
because  90  percent  of  the   Agency's  budget  is  spent  through  contracts. Major 
changes  in  procurement  will  include the  award of  new contracts  to companies 
that  have demonstrated  accountability  by delivering quality systems that  meet 
cost, schedule, and  technical  requirements.  (NA SA  Release 92-123)  

According  to  NASA   scientists, human ,  plant ,   and   animal cells exposed  to  
the   microgravity  of  space  for  only  a  few  days  show  changes  in  function  and 
structure. Although  preliminary, the  results of  t h e  recent  life sciences research 
o n  the  Space Shuttle  suggest  alteration  in metabolism,  immune  cell function ,  
cell  division, and  cell  attachment .   Scientists also  reported  dramatic  changes 
from  space  travel  in  some of  the   body's systems.  Four  principal  investigators 
from the  Space Life Sciences-1 mission flown aboard Space Shu t t le  Columbia 
in  June   1991 reported  key  finds  in  the  areas of  cardiovascular, musculoskele- 
tal,  and  neurovestihular  physiology. (NA SA  Release 92-1 24) 

NASA   launched  a  rocket  carrying  a  Japanese  scientific  satellite  called 
"Geotail"  tha t  will  swing by  the  Moon  and  be  flung by  lunar gravity nearly  a 
million miles  in to  space. T h e  satellite was  intended  to  explore  the  effect of  the  
solar wind  on  the  tail  of  t h e  magnetosphere, a comet-shaped  region surround- 
ing Earth  and containing  radiation  belts. T h e  $160 million, four-year mission 
was  a joint  project  between  NASA   and  the  Japanese Institute  for  Space  and 
Astronautical  Science .  ( W  Post, Jul  25/92; APn, Jul  24/92) 

NASA   researchers said  tha t   tests  o n  astronauts aboard  a J u n e  5-14,  1991, 
flight  of  the  Space  Shuttle   Columbia  found  their   hearts,  lungs,  immune  sys- 
terns,  and  nervous  systems  responded  in   unexpected  ways.  Involved  were 
blood  pressure, muscle mass,  production  of key  cells,  and  proper  balance  and 
orientation .  T h e  results do  no t  suggest any major obstacles t o  long-term space 
missions,  according to  Ronald  Wh i te ,  NASA's  chief of  Life  Sciences.  Longer 
human   space flights,  however,  might  depend  o n  developing artificial  gravity 
or   o the r   measures  to   minimize  the   physical  effects  of  spaceflight.  (UP I ,  Jul  
25/92; NY  Times, Ju l  25/92; W Post ,Jul  25/92) 

July 27: A  joint  Russian-French crew  blasted  off  o n  a  12-day mission  aimed  a t  
keeping  the aging Space Station Mir  in orbit until  1996.  T h e  cosmonauts were 
slated  to install a complex of  stabilizing gyroscopes inside the Station and also to 
work  in space to assemble an  engine to make space navigation easier.  (W  Times, 
JuI 22/92; AP, J u l   21/92, Jul 27/92; UPI, Jul 27/92; The Sun, Ju l28 /92 ;  WSJ, Jul  
28/92; W Post, Jul 28/92; NY Times, July 28/92; APn, Jul  27/92; U r n ,  Jul 27/92) 

NASA   engineers decided  to  stop  operating  the   radar  aboard  t h e  Magellan 
Venus  mapping  probe  until  early  September  in  an   attempt   to   preserve  the  

JULY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

spacecraft's o n e  fully  operational  transmitter  until  Magellan  swings over  one  
of  the   large regions of  the  planet  tha t   it  has no t   mapped. Ground  controllers 
had   relied  o n  Magellan's  backup  transmitter  since  January,  but  the   backup 
unit   had  developed  radio  noise  tha t   interfered  with  its periodic  transmissions 
of  scientific  data.  (Space News, Ju l  27-Aug 9 /92 )  

Recent   findings  by  the   Very  Large  Array  radio  telescope  i n  New  Mexico 
confirmed  tha t  the  so-called "Great Annihilator ,"  a mysterious region close to  
t h e   center   of  the   Milky Way  galaxy  tha t   spews  out   bursts  of  high-energy 
gamma rays, does seem to  be a black hole, but  it  is  much smaller t h a n  thought  
and   it  is,  indeed, merely close to ,  not  a t  t h e  center  of, the  galaxy.  It seems also 
to be powered by  collisions between  matter  and   antimatter .  (Time, Jul  27/92)  

NASA   and  air  industry sources said  recently  tha t  a decision  to  narrow  the  
number  of  engine concepts  for  t h e  U.S.  high-speed civil  transport  would  slip 
by about a year. Test facility startup delays and   the  failure of  preliminary noz- 
zle  tests  to   allow  early  identification  of  a  preferred  noise  suppression system 
were  cited  as  t h e  main  reasons for t h e  slip. Postponement  of  t h e  decision was 
no t   expected  t o  affect the   pace  of  high-speed  civil  transport development  or  
t h e  program's long-term schedule, which  could  lead  to an  operable  aircraft  in 
2005.  (AuWk, Ju1 27/92) 

Recent   studies  showed  tha t   the   technology  spinoffs  from  National   Aero- 
Space  Plane  (NA S P )  research  and  development  had  already  had  a  positive 
impact  o n   U.S.  aerospace,  automotive,  medical,  chemical,  food  processing, 
and  energy  industries. T h e  studies predicted  tha t   the  Gross National   Product 
could expand by  about  $26 billion over  the  next   10-15 years as a result of pro- 
ductivity  gains  fostered  by  the   program  and  tha t   employment  also  could 
increase  by  a n   average  of  40,000  jobs  annually.  In   particular,  t h e   studies 
showed  tha t   NASP   research  could  significantly  benefit  industries  such  as 
aerospace, motor  vehicle, and  emerging  industries such  as ceramics and  high-  
speed civil  transportation.  (AuWk, Jul  27/92) 

Contractors   were  awaiting  the   award  of  the   $ 3   billion  Earth  Observing 
System  Data  and  Information  System  (EOSDIS)   contract ,   which  had  been 
expected  in early July .  T h e  proposal had  been  undergoing  review and  evalua- 
tion ,  and  several suggestions for  increasing  the  utility  of  the  system  for global 
environmental   change  research  were  offered  in   the   opening  of  the   initial 
report.  In   March  1992, NASA   projected  EOSDIS  spend  about  $200  billion 
through  the   1990s. (Federal Computer Week, J u l   27/92) 

July  28:  T h e  Kennedy  Space  Center ,   Florida,  said  it  had  awarded  first-of-a- 
kind  contracts   to  three   firms under  NASA's Personal  Computer  Acquisition 
Con t rac t   program.  Throughout   the   five-year  life  of  t h e   contracts ,   the   three  
companies  would  have  to   compete  against  each   o the r   for  NASA   orders  to 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

JULY  1992 

supply  personal  computer  hardware  and  software  to  Kennedy  Space Center 
and other NASA  locations. NASA  established this competitive  arrangement 
so  that  the  Agency could  be  assured  of a steady  supply  of  high-quality  prod- 
ucts for  the best price.  (NASA  Release C92-10) 

T h e  countdown  began for  the  Space Shuttle Atlantis  on   a mission  to  test 
an  Italian  satellite  linked to  the Shuttle by  1 2  miles  of  electricity-generating 
cord. NASA  officials said there was a 90 percent  chance of  acceptable launch- 
ing  conditions on  July  31.  (NY Times,  Jul 29/92, Ju l  31/92; CSM ,  Jul 29/92; 
UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30192, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30192, Ju1 31/92; USA 
Today ,  Jul 3019.2, Jul 31/92; The   Sun ,  Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA  Times, 
Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92) 

July  29:  A Russian-French crew  docked with  the Space Station Mir  during the 
first  of  several  joint  missions  intended  to  strengthen both  countries' space pro- 
grams.  While  aboard  M ir ,   the  crew  was  scheduled  to  conduct  several  experi- 
ments,  including one  into  the  chemistry of  urine  and  saliva  in  weightlessness. 
They also would  test vibrations and pressure on the human body.  (AP, Jul29/92) 

Th e   Space  Station  Freedom  was  saved,  as  the  House  of  Representatives 
voted  down  an  amendnlent  aimed  at  killing  the  $40  billion  project.  T h e  
House  voted  237-181 against  an  appropriations bill  amendment  that  would 
have cut $1.2 billion from  the  1993 budget for NASA, effectively eliminating 
the Space Station. Th e  Station was  expected  to cost $40 billion  to  build  and 
$100 billion more to operate over its lifetime. I t  was  the fourth time in the  last 
two  years  that  the  House  had  affirmed  its  commitment  to  build  the  Space 
Station. Supporters said the  vote  could well  represent  the program's last  seri- 
ous Congressional challenge. ( P  Inq, Ju l30 /92 ;  LA  Xmes ,  Jul30/92; NY  Times, 
Jul 30192; WSJ, Jul 30192; W Tm e s ,  J u l  30192; W Post, Jul 30192; The  Sun, Jul 
30192;  USA  Today,  Ju l  30192; AP, Jul 30192;  UPl, Jul 30192;  Htsvl  T m ,  Jul 
30192; AelWk,  Aug  3/92) 

July  30: A  Senate Appropriations  subcommittee  recommended spending no 
additional funds for NASA's advanced solid-rocket motor plant  in Mississippi. 
O n  July 29, the House of  Representatives voted  249  to  159 to eliminate $265 
million  in  research  and  development  funds  for  the  project,  leaving only  $50 
million  to close  it down.  (W  Post, Ju l  31/92; Htsvl Tm s ,  Jul 30192) 

July  31: The  Shuttle Atlantis  rocketed  into orbit  on  a seven-day mission car- 
rying a science satellite that  is  to be  left  in space and another satellite that was 
to be  reeled out  12 miles and back  in a critical test of  tethered  space flight. Dr. 
Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge 
of  the  tether  operation. Another  European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a  test  pilot 
and  research  scientist  from  Switzerland, was  to oversee  the deploying of  the  
European  Space Agency's  Eureca  satellite,  designed  to  investigate  materials 

JULY  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

processing  and  life  sciences.  T h e  other  crew  members,  all  Americans,  were 
Col. Loren J .   Shriver  of  the Air Force, Maj .  Andrew M .  Allen  of  the Marine 
Corps, Marsha S.  Ivins, Dr.  Jeffrey A .  Hoffman, and  Dr.  Franklin R .   Chang- 
Diaz. (NY Times, Aug  1/92, Aug  2/92; P  I n q ,  Aug  1/92; The S u n ,  Aug  1/92; W 
Post, Aug  1/92; W Times, Aug  1/92) 

August 

August 2: A s t ronau t s  aboard  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s  released  t h e  European  
Space  Agency's  Eureca satellite ,  but   it  encoun te red   immediate  problems w i th  
its  steering   system  and   remained  in  too   low  a n   o rb i t .   Engineers  a t   t h e  
European  Space  Agency's con t ro l  cen te r   in Darmstadt ,  Germany ,   struggled  t o  
understand   t h e  problem,  hop ing  to boost  t h e  satellite  i n t o  its proper  orbit   320  
miles  above   t h e   Earth  w i th in   a  day  or   two.  ( W  Times, Aug   3/92;  WS j ,  Aug  
3/92;  The Sun ,  Aug  3/92;  LA Times, A u g  3/92;  NY  Times, Aug  3/92;  P Inq, Aug  
3/92;  APn ,  A u g  3/92;  UP],  Aug   3/92)  

August  3 :  Technicians   a t   t h e   Kennedy   Space   C e n t e r   in   Florida  placed  t h e  
Mars Observer  spacecraft a top  its upper-stage rocket  in  preparation   for launch  
some t ime  during   t h e  September   16 t o  Oc tobe r   1 3  launch   window.  T h e  craft 
was  expected   t o  take   11 m o n t h s  t o  cover   t h e  450  million   miles  ( 7 4 0  million  
kilometers)   t o  Mars. O n c e  the re ,  Mars Observer  was  expected   t o  compile   t h e  
first  comprehensive   database  of  Ma r t ian  geophysics  and   climate .   (CSM ,  Aug  
26/92; H Chron ,  Aug  20192) 

August  4 :   S h u t t l e   A t l a n t i s '   a s t ronau t s   un ree led   a  t e t h e r e d   sa te l l i te   in   a 
risky  e lec t r ica l  e x p e r im e n t  n e v e r  before   t r ied   in  space ,  bu t   t h e  effort   imm e -  
d ia te ly   r a n   i n t o  difficulties .  Four  hou r s   a n d   abou t   a  dozen   tries   were  n e e d -  
ed   t o   free  t h e   sa te l l i te   from   t h e   S h u t t l e .   T h e n   t h e   un ree l ing   t e t h e r   l i n e  
jammed   tw ice ,   a n d   t h e   sa te l l i te   e n d e d   t h e   day  a b o u t   8 5 0   fee t   instead   of 
1 2 . 5  miles   from   t h e   S h u t t l e .  N A S A   added   a n  e i g h t h   day   to   A t l a n t i s '  mis-  
s i o n   because   of  p rob lem s   w i th   t h e   Eureca   a n d   t e t h e r e d   s a t e l l i t e   expe r i -  
m e n t s .   (W  Post,  Aug   5/92;   The  Sun ,  A u g   5/92;   LA  Times, A u g   5/92;   WS j ,  
A u g   5 /92 ;  USA  Today,  Aug   5 /92 ;  NY  Tirnes, A u g   5/92;  P  Inq,  A u g   5/92;  W 
Times,  Aug   5 /92 ;  AP n ,   A u g   5/92;   U P I ,  A u g   5/92;   C  Trib,  A u g   5/92;   T ime  
Magazine,  A u g   1 7 / 9 2 )  

August 5 :  NASA's Godda rd  Space  Flight C e n t e r  in  G reenbe l t ,  Ma ry land ,  said 
i t   h a d   se lec ted   Lockheed   Missiles  &  S p a c e   C om p a n y   of  S u n n y v a l e ,  
California ,   t o  nego t ia te   a  cost-plus-awlard-fee,  level-of-effort  c o n t r a c t  for  t h e  
Hubble   Space   Telescope  Mission  Ope ra t ion s ,   Systems  Engineering ,   and  
Software  effort. T h e  c o n t r a c t  was  in  excess  of  $100  million  a n d  was  a follow- 
o n   t o   existing   contracts .   T h e  proposed  effort  included   ma in tenance   o f   t h e  
spacecraft's  h e a l t h   and   safety,  efficient  operation   of  t h e   ohser\.atory,  systems 
managemen t ,  and  servicing  mission support .   ( N A S A  Release 0 2 -  11  ) 

A s t ronau t s  o n  t h e  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s  cleared  a snag i n  t h e  t e t h e r  cord  linking  
t h e   Italian-built   s a t e l l ~ t e  t o   t h e   S h u t t l e   and   safely  reeled  t h e   satellite  back 
i n t o   t h e  Shuttle's  cargo bay,  averting   t h e  need   for  a n  emergency  space walk. 
T h e   satellite   flew  above  A t lan t i s   for  24  hours ,   never   going  higher   t h a n   850  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST   1992 

feet  o n   t h e   te the r ,  far  sho r t   of  t h e   12 .5  mile  target.  Even   though   t h e   experi-  
m e n t  fell sho r t  of  its goal of  generating  electricity  w ~ t h  a te the red  satellite ,  t h e  
exercise  showed  t h a t   te the red   vehicles  probably  c a n  be  reliably  con t ro l led   in  
space. (LA  Xmes, Aug  6/92;  P Inq, Aug  6/92;  W Post, Aug  6/92;  W Times, Aug  
6/92;  NY  Times, Aug  6/92 ,  Aug   9/92;  USA  Today, Aug  6/92;  WSj, Aug   6/92;  
APn ,   Aug   6 /92 ,   Aug   8/92;  UPI ,   Aug   6 /92 ,   Aug   7/92;   The  Sun ,   Aug   6/92;  
AvWk, Aug   10192) 

August  6:  Nature  magazine  reported   t h a t   astronomers  had   de tec ted   t h e  most 
distant   source known  for very high-energy  gamma  rays-a 
galaxy w i th  a pow- 
erhouse   nucleus.  T h e   radiation   is  about   a  trillion   times   as  energetic   as  ordi-  
nary  starlight .  Astronomers  were puzzled as  t o  how   t h e  Markarian  421  Galaxy, 
20  times  farther  away  t h a n  any  o t h e r  galaxy  previously  reported  t o  emit   such  
radiation ,   produces  it .   ( P  lnq ,  Aug  6 / 9 2 )  

T h e  Eureca  satellite   t h a t   failed  t o   e n t e r   proper  orbit   after  being   released 
from  t h e  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s   responded  t o  commands   t o  boost  itself  i n t o  a h igh -  
e r  orbit .  T h e  reusable satellite  held  experiments  using shrimp  eggs, seeds, crys- 
tals,  bacteria   spores, solar  mon i to r s ,  cosmic  dust   catchers ,   a n d  a  telescope.  It 
was  slated  t o   remain   in  orbit   for  several  m o n t h s   before  being   retrieved  a n d  
returned   to Earth   for study.  ( P  Inq ,  Aug   7/92; LA  Times, Aug   7/92; NY  'Times, 
Aug   7/92; W  Times, Aug   7/92;  USA  Today, Aug   7/92; The  Sun, Aug   7/92; W 
IJost, Aug   7/92; AelWk, Aug   10192) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  Board  of  Investigation  had   been   formed  t o  assess 
t h e  problem  of  t h e   fouled  te the r   t h a t   prevented   t h e   successful  release  of  t h e  
Tethered   Sa te l l i te   System  during   S h u t t l e   A t lan t i s '   just-completed  flight .  
N A S A  officials said  t h a t  any decision  about   reflight  of  t h e  $380  million  t e t h -  
er system  would  depend   in part  o n  a quick  de te rm ina t ion  of  wha t  wen t  wrong 
and   how  much   it  would  cost  t o  solve  t h e  problem.  N A S A   se t  a n  August  28  
deadline   f i x  t h e  board  t o  report   its findings.  ( N A S A  Release 92 -129 ;  W  Post, 
Aug   7/92;  AvWk, Aug   10192, Aug   17 /92 )  

August  8: T h e  S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s   landed   a t  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida, end ing   a 
mission  t h a t   deployed  a  European   scientific  satellite   but   t h a t   failed  t o   com -  
plete   a n  experiment   with   a  te the red   satellite .   (USA   Today, Aug   10192; UP!, 
Aug   8/92;   P  Inq ,   Aug   9 /92 ;  W  Post,  Aug   9/92;  The  Sun ,  Aug  9 /92 ;  W Times, 
Aug  9/92;  NY Times, Aug  9/92; C SM ,  Aug   10192; WSj ,  A u g   10192) 

Augrcst  9: T h e  Associated  Press  reported  t h a t  Japanese  space officials  recently  
had   travelled  t o  Russia  for  two  weeks  of  talks  and   tours  of  previously  off-lim- 
its  space  facilities.  During  t h e   trip ,   t h e  officials discussed  a  space cooperation  
treaty   t h a t   would  grant   Japan   access  t o   Russian  manned   spaceflight  da ta   for 
use  in  medical  research  and  t o  remote-sensing  technology  for use o n  satellites .  
(A P ,  Aug  9 /92 )  

AUGUST  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

August  10: Russian  space  authorities   reported   t h a t   they   had   developed  a  new  
design for the i r  Mir 2  Space  S t a t i o n  and   t h a t   initial  production   of  t h e  primary 
module  had  already started .  T h e  new M i r  2 design envisioned   a  co re  with   five 
modules  t h a t  were  t o  be  a t tached   t o   t h e  middle  of  a   long  beam .  T h e  officials 
said  they  expected   Mir  2  t o   be  launched   in  t h e  mid-1990s  and   t h a t   it  repre- 
sented   Russia's de te rm ina t ion   t o  c o n t i n u e  its  long-term  plan   of  m a n n e d  flight 
activities   despite   t h e   difficult  financial   a n d   political  s i tua t ion   in  Russia. 
(AuWk ,  Aug   10192) 

A   Russian  industry  grouping  called  t h e   Space   Regatta   Con so r t ium   said  it 
h a d  developed  and  would  test  a  prototype   solar sail  in   1992 as  t h e  first s tep  in  
a n  ambitious  program  aimed   a t  using  such  sails  for  spacecraft  propulsion  and  
o t h e r   applications .   T h e   prototype   sail  was  t o   he  carried  by  a   Progress  cargo  
spacecraft  scheduled  for  launch   t o  t h e  Mir  1  Space  S t a t i o n  in  late  Oc tobe r  o r  
early November .   Program  managers  envisioned   a   number   of  applications   for 
solar  sails  in   t h e   future .   O n e   is  as  a   means   of  propulsion  for  spacecraft .  
A n o t h e r   is  t o   use  huge  sails  as  reflectors  t o   illuminate   selected  points   o n  
Earth .   (AuWk ,  Aug   10192) 

European  Space  Agency  mission  controllers  doubted   t h a t   t h e  G i o t t o  space- 
craft  would  be  able  t o  perform  a  flyby of  a   third   come t .  Scientists  were  e n t h u -  
siastic  about   Giotto's   encoun te r   with   C om e t   Grigg-Skjellerup  o n  July  10 ,  a  
followup o n  its original  mission  t o  C om e t  Halley  in   1986. But  low fuel  supply 
a n d  ou t -o f -da te  commun ica t ion  systems probably  sign;llled  t h e  e n d  of G io t to ' s  
usefulness.  (AvWk, Aug   10192) 

A   U S . - F r e n c h  satellite  roared  i n t o  orbit   aboard  a  European  A r i a n e  4  rock-  
e t  from  Kourou, F rench  Gu iana .  T h e  $706  million  TOPEX/Poseidon   satellite  
carried   a   $30   million   altimeter   designed  for  N A S A   by  J o h n s   Hopkins  
University   scientists  t o  measure  ocean  topography  t o  w i th in   1.2 inches  o r  less 
from  830  miles  in  space.  During  t h e  n e x t   th ree   t o  five  years,  scientists  hoped  
t o  use  t h e   a l t ime te r   t o  make   a  comprehensive   map  of  ocean   currents ,   aiding 
t h e  study of  how  they  pump  hea t  from t h e  tropics  t o  t h e  poles. N A S A  said  t h e  
research  could  eventually   improve  long-range   c l ima te   forecasts  and   predict  
large-scale weather   patterns ,   such  as  t h e  El  Nifio  \\farming  trend   in  t h e   east-  
e r n  Pacific  O c e a n ,  and   he lp   in  understanding   t h e   impact  of greenhouse  gases 
o n  climate .   Also   in   t h e  payload  were  a   small  S o u t h  Korean   commun ica t ion s  
satellite   and   a   French   technological   satellite .   (The  Sun ,   Aug   10192;  USA 
Today, Aug   11/92;  AP ,  Aug   10192; LA  Times,  Aug   13/92)  

Two  Russian  cosmonauts   a n d   a  F rench   researcher   landed   safely  in  
Kazakhstan  after   completing   scientific  experiments   aboard  t h e   orbiting   Mir 
Space  S t a t i o n .  T h e  14-day mission  brought  t o  a  close  t h e  third   joint   Russian- 
French   flight  since   1982. T h e  th ree   worked  o n   experiments   involving   astro-  
physics,  biology,  a n d   bioengineering .   T h e y   also  conduc ted   geophysical 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUTLCS 

AUGUST   1992 

research  based  o n  commercial  con t rac t s  from  several European  countries   and  
members of  t h e  Commonwea l th  of  Independen t  States .   (AP ,  Aug   10192; UPI ,  
Aug   10192; The Sun ,  Aug   11 /92 )  

August  1 2 :   T h e   Na t iona l   Sc ience   Board,  t h e   policy-making  arm   of  t h e  
Na t iona l   Sc ience  Foundation ,   warned  t h a t   t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s  was  losing  its 
competitive   edge  in  technologies  of  t h e  future .  Blaming  gove rnmen t   incom-  
pe tence ,   leveraged  buyouts,  and   executives'  and   investors' sho r t - te rm   focus, 
t h e  panel   urged  increased  public  funding   and   changes   in   tax  laws  t o  coun te r  
technological   compe t i t ion   from  Europe  and   J a p a n .   It  said  ways  t o   improve 
performance   included  studying  process  technologies   t o  make   better   products, 
training   more   engineers ,   and   creating   a  better   understanding   of  t h e   role  of 
research.  (LA  Times, Aug   13/92;  NY  Tme s ,  Aug   13/92;  W Post, Aug   13 /92 )  

Scientists   studying  t h e   effects  of  ozone  dep le t ion   in   Earth's  atmosphere  
reported  t h a t   t h e   frequencies  of  light   passing  th rough   a  depleted   ozone  layer  
may  n o t   cause  t h e  widespread  catastrophic   darnage  t o  plants   scientists  previ- 
clusly  predicted .  T h e y  found  t h a t   t h e  kind   of  ultraviolet   radiation   t h a t   causes 
t h e   most  darnage  t o   alfalfa  plants   passes  straight   th rough   t h e   ozone  layer, 
meaning  a depleted  ozone  layer would  n o t   increase exposure t o  t h e  most dam -  
aging  light .  Significant  depletions   in   t h e  ozone  layer  would  certainly  send   up 
t h e  cancer   rate  in  human s  qu i te  substantially, biophysicist J o h n  Su the r land  of 
t h e  Brookhaven  Na t iona l  Laboratory in  U p t o n ,  New York, said ,  but plants  are 
n o t   likely  t o  be  t h e  most  severely affected  by  t h e   increased  ultraviolet   light  
h i t t i n g  Earth   hecause of  a  t h i n n i n g  protective   layer.  (U P I ,  Aug   13/92)  

NASA  Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin  charged  a new  team of  agency officials 
with  finding  a cheaper way  t o  build  Space S ta t ion  Freedom, even   if  tha t   meant  
assembling much  of  it  without  the  Space Shu t t le .  T h e  team ,  comprised  mainly 
of  officials within NA SA  but  outside the  S ta t ion  program, was asked t o  redesign 
the  S ta t ion  so  t h a t  it can  be  completed o n  time despite congressionally  imposed 
spending  limits. Goldin's directive  came  in   the   wake  of  reduced  Space S ta t ion  
funding in both   the  House of  Representatives and  the  Senate .  Findings were due 
to  Goldin  by November.  (Space News, Aug  17/92; AvWk, Aug  24/92) 

A u w t   13: Scientists   from  NASA's  Ames   Research  C e n t e r   in  Moffett  Field, 
California ,  said  they planned   t o  seek  answers t o  such  problems as  t h e  develop-  
ment  of  frog eggs in  weightlessness  and  control  of  space motion   sickness o n  t h e  
nex t  Shu t t le  flight scheduled for mid-September. Space  Shu t t le  Endeavour was 
slated  t o   carry  a  crew  of  seven ,   including  a  Japanese   mission  specialist,  a n d  
Spacelab-J ,  a  science  laboratory  con ta in ing   43  experiments ,   34  of  them   pro- 
vided  by  J a p a n ,  o n  a six-day mission.  ( N A S A  Releases 92 -  130 and  92-  128 )  

August  14:  A  group of  scientists said  in  today's issue  of  the  journal  Science t h a t  
new  studies prove  t h a t  a buried  crater  in  t h e  Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico is  the  

AUGUST  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

point  of  impact  of  an   asteroid  that   smashed  into  the   Earth  about  65  million 
years ago, contributing to the  extinction  of  the  dinosaurs. T h e  Yucatan crater  is 
big enough  to be  linked directly to ancient  extinctions, and  its mineral content  
is  also  compatible with  that   produced by  an  ancient  explosion. Geologists, led 
by  Carl C. Switcher 111  of  the  University of  California  a t  Berkeley, California, 
have  dated  rocks  from  the  crater  to  64.98 million years  old, making  the   crater 
the   leading candidate  for  a cataclysmic impact  thought  to  have  contributed  to  
the  mass extinction of  life forms, including dinosaurs, 65 million years ago. (NY 
Times, Aug  14/92; B  Sun, Aug  14/92; C Trib, Aug  14/92) 

Reacting  to  the  recent  failed attempt  a t  tethered  space flight by  the  crew of 
Shuttle   Atlantis ,   Astronaut  Jeffrey  Hoffman,  the   payload  commander,  said 
NASA  needed  to  improve the  way equipment was tested o n  the  ground before 
flight.  "When   we're doing f u n d a m e n ~ a l l ~  new  things, we've  really got  to  pay 
close  a t ten t ion   to  how  we're doing  the   testing  o n   t h e   ground  or   else  we're 
going to continue   to  get  surprised," Hoffman  said. (APn ,  Aug  14/92)  

August  17: T h e  launch  of  Consort  5, a commercial  suborbital  rocket  carrying 
nine   microgravity  experiments,  was  scheduled  for  September  10  by  t h e  
Un~ve rs i ty  of  Alabama  in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development 
in Space. A  two-stage Starfire  solid fuel rocket  would  carry  the  payload  to  an  
altitude of  200 miles and provide t h e  experiments with seven to eight minutes 
of  microgravity  exposure  or  weightlessness. T h e   rocket  and  launch  services 
were funded by  a grant from NASA's Office of Commercial Programs. (NA SA  
Release 92-133)  

NASA   announced  tha t   it  had  selected  31 experiments from t h e  public  and  
private  sectors  for  inclusion  in   the   Advanced  Communications  Technology 
Satellite  ( A C T S )  Program. Scheduled for  launch  in early  1993, this  national  
communications facility was to  operate as an  orbiting testbed  for the  next  gen- 
eration of  commercial  communications satellites. A  two-year experiment ,  the  
AC T S   program  was  designed  to  offer  a  unique  opportunity  for  commercial, 
governmental, and academic organizations t o  experiment with and to validate 
new  communications satellite technologies.  (NA SA  Release 92-134)  

Some  leading  American  astronomers  complained  about  the   failure  of  the  
Federal  government  to  provide  dependable  financial  support  for  astronomical 
research in  the United States. T h e  absence of  dependable funding put American 
astronomy at  a serious disadvantage in  the  competition  with  its  counterparts  in 
Europe and Japan ,  the  astronomers charged. Federal  financing had  flagged, they  
said,  just  as  a  steam  of  new  telescopes  and  telescope-enhancing  devices were 
ready  to  be  exploited.  There  were  also  management  problems.  Dr.  Riccardo 
Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that  poor 
management of  America's space and  astronomy programs had  hobbled efforts to  
compete with European science. (NY Xmes, Aug  18/92) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

AUGUST  1992 

T h e  A i r   Force  a n d  N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   they   were  deve lop ing   a  new  
family  of  rockets   t o  mee t   t h e  u nm a n n e d   l a u n c h  needs   of  t h e  n e x t   century .  
A s   cu r ren t ly   c o n c e i v e d ,  t h e   N a t i o n a l   Launch   System   would  ~ n c l u d e  t h r e e  
new   vehicles   designed   t o   lift  cargoes  ranging   from   20,000  t o   130,000 
pound s   i n t o   low  E a r t h   o r b ~ t .  T h e   new   rockets   were  expec ted   t o   become  
o p e r a t i o n a l   i n   2002  a n d   would  carry  supplies   t o   Space   S t a t i o n  Freedom   a t  
less  co s t   t h a n   p re sen t   U.S.  delivery   systems.  ( W   Times,  A u g   18/92; 
Birmingham  N e w s ,  A u g   19/92) 

T h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  and   France  recently  announced   plans   t o   increase  civil 
space program  cooperation .   T h e  two countries  said  they  were  also prepared  t o  
inv i te  Russia  t o  join  with   t h em   in  new  cooperative   endeavors .  T h e   focus  of 
this   new  cooperation   was  t h e   monitoring   of  t h e   global  env i ronmen t   a n d  
bringing  France  and  Russia  in  with   t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  as major partners  o n  t h e  
Mission  t o   Planet   Earth   program.  T h e  August  10 launch   of  t h e  U .S ./French  
Topex-Poseidon  ocean  survey satellite  laid  t h e  foundation   for t h e  U .S . /F rench  
initiative .   (AuWk, Aug   17/92) 

August  20: N A S A   researchers  began  a  three-week  airborne   study  t o   increase 
understanding   of  microscopic  plant   productivity   in   t h e   equatorial   region  of 
t h e   Pacific  O c e a n .  T h e  principal   scientific  objective   was  t o   understand   why 
lnicroscopic  p lan t   productivity   involving   phy top lank ton   is  so  limited  in   t h e  
Pacific  compared   t o  t h e  A t l a n t i c  Ocean .   ( N A S A  Release  92-135) 

A n  experimental   tilt-rotor   forerunner  of  t h e  controversial  V-22 Osprey  air- 
craft crashed during  a routine   training  flight  a t  A r l ing ton ,  Texas, slightly injur- 
ing  t h e   pilot  and   co-pilot .   A l though   t h e   XV-15  looks  much   like  t h e   V-22 
Osprey, a spokesman said t h e  plane's development  was no t  part of  t h e  V-22 pro-  
gram.  T h e  XV-15  resulted  from  cooperation  between   Bell Helicopter ,  NA SA ,  
and   t h e  Defense Advanced   Research  Project Agency.  ( P  Inq, Aug  21/92; WS], 
Aug  21/92; USA  Today, Aug   21/92; AP, Aug  20182; U P I ,  Aug  20192) 

Je rem iah   Pearson,  NASA's  Associate  Administrator   for  space  flight,  said 
N A S A   planners   were  studying  ways  t o  cu t   up  t o   25  percent   from  t h e   Space  
S h u t t l e  budget by  1997, a much  more extensive  reduction   t h a n  previously pro-  
jected.  T h e  25  percent  c u t  would  produce  savings of  about  $ 3  billion ,  Pearson 
said. Managers  a t   t h e  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   in  Florida were  already working 
t o  cu t   10 percent   from  t h e  Shuttle's  1994 budget.  (Space News, Aug  24-30192) 

Augwt  21 :   T h e  journal  Science  carried  reports  by  two  teams  of  scientists who  
had  found new  evidence  tha t  speeding objects from space struck  t h e  Earth  370 
million  and   65  million  years  ago,  possibly  disrupting  t h e   global  climate   a n d  
causing mass extinctions .  T h e  scientists found  tiny glass beads called microtek-  
tites  in Belgian shale. T h e  beads, more t h a n  400 of  which  were found  in  a rock 
layer two t o  four inches  thick ,  were reported  t o  have  round ,  elongated ,  teardrop  

AUGUST  199  2 

CHRONOLOGY 1992  

a n d   dumbbell   shapes.  T h e   scientists  said  geochemical  analysis  strongly  sug- 
gested  t h a t   they were  p o d u c e d   from  a  cosmic collision.  (C  Tnb, Aug  23/92)  

August  22: A n  A t la s   1 rocket  tumbled   ou t  of con t ro l  after o n e  of  two  C e n t a u r  
second-stage  engines  failed  t o   ignite ,  destroying  a  cable  television   satellite   in  
a  $150  million   failure  for  Gene ra l   Dynamics' commercial-launch   business.  It 
was  t h e   second   catastrophic   failure   i n   seven   flights  for  G e n e r a l   Dynamics  
Space   Systems  Division  of  S a n  Diego, California ,   which   was  trying  t o   ove r -  
take   t h e   European  consortium   Arianespace   for  con t ro l   of  t h e   world's com -  
mercial  launch   market .   Lost with   t h e  A t la s   1 was  a  Galaxy   1R cable   televi-  
sion   relay  s ta t ion ,   a  satellite   built  by  Hughe s  Aircraft   Company .   ( U P ! ,  Aug  
22/92; WSJ, Aug   24/92; LA Times, Aug   23/92)  

August  24:  T h e   Association   of  Space   Explorers  Eighth   Planetary   Congress  
opened  a t  Georgetown  University  in  Wa sh ing ton ,  D .C .  It was a t tended  by  t h e  
largest  group  of  astronauts   a n d   cosmonauts   ever   assembled,  with   over   100  
in te rna t iona l   space  flyers,  representing   19  na t ion s ,   in  a t tendance .   T h e   c o n -  
gress opened  with   remarks by  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n  and  was 
conce rned   mainly  with   discussions  abou t   a n   in te rna t iona l   mission  t o   Mars. 
G o l d i n  also men t ioned  t h e  practical  applications  of NASA's technology  i n n o -  
vations  s ince  t h e   1960s. H e  identified  C A T  scans ,  laser surgery, and   in ten s ive  
care   units   as  hav ing   had   the i r   genesis  in   t h e   space  program.  "New  products ,  
new  industries ,   and   new  jobs  come   th rough   N A S A   research,"  G o l d i n   said. 
( N A S A  N o t e   t o  Editors:  N92 -75 ;  W T imes ,  Aug  31/92)  

Officials a t  NASA's J o h n  E  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   in  Florida  said  t h a t   t h e  
agency  had   selected  I -Ne t ,   Inc.  of  Bethesda,  Maryland  for  nego t ia t ion   of  a 
con t rac t   t o   provide  engineering   support  services  t o   t h e   center's  Engineering  
Deve lopmen t  Directorate .  T h e  con t rac t  was t o   run  for five years and  h a v e  a n  
estimated   value  in  excess of  $100  million .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 2 - 1 2 )  

N A S A   officials were  reported  t o  be  focusing o n   a Septemher   1994  S h u t t l e  
flight  t o   rendezvous  with   t h e   Russian  Mir   Space   S ta t ion   and   possibly  bring  
back  a U.S.  astronaut  launched  t o  t h e  outpost  earlier t h a t  summer. T h e  Shu t t le  
launch  was  tentatively   scheduled  for September  9 ,  1994 ,  after  extensive  mod-  
ifications t o  install a Russian  docking  fixture  in  t h e  Shu t t le  A t lan t i s  cargo bay. 
A  different  S h u t t l e  mission  scheduled  for November   1993  was  listed  as  a  pos- 
sibility  for a flight  featuring a Russian  cosmonaut .   (Space News,  Aug  24/92)  

Augw t   25: T h e  U .S .  Air   Force, N A S A ,  a n d  G r umm a n  aircraft  company   said 
they   had   reached   t h e   m id -po in t  of  t h e  X-29  vortex   flow  con t ro l   (V FC )  pro-  
gram a t  Edwards A i r  Force Base  in  California ,  producing  yaw  rates of  up  t o  20 
degrees. T h e  use  of  V C F  t o  yaw  t h e  aircraft while  a t   a  high   angle-of-attack   is 
a n  av ia t ion  first  according   t o  C o l .  William   G o t c h e r ,  X-29  program  manager. 
(Flight  International, Aug   19-25/92)  

i\STRONAUTICS AN13 ,4ERON24UTICS 

AUGUST  1992 

August  27: NASA   announced  tha t   the  Mars Observer spacecraft was  serious- 
l y   contaminated  with  metal filings, paint chips, and other  trash  and could  not  
be  launched  until  it  had  been  cleaned.  T h e   contamination   may  have   been 
introduced  when  technicians  tried  to  protect  the   spacecraft  from  possible 
damage  from  Hurricane   Andrew.  Originally  scheduled  for  launch   o n  
September  16, NASA   officials  estimated  a  postponement  of  a t   least  10 days 
or  possibly twtl  weeks  in  the   launch  date.  (NY Times,  Aug  28/92; AP ,   Aug 
28/92; W Post, Aug  29/92; The Sun ,  Aug  29/92; W Times, Aug  29/92) 

Scientists reported  tha t   the  eruption of  the  Mount  Pinatubo volcano in  the  
Philippines  last June  sent  massive  amounts of  sulfur dioxide  in to   the   atmos- 
phere,  which  in  turn  was  contributing  to   the   erosion  of  Earth's protective 
ozone layer and  to  warming in  the  tropics. While  the  depletion  could  amount  
to   5  or  10  percent ,   the   researchers  expected  the   effect  to   be  temporary. 
Detailed  observations  of  the  ozone  layer were  being  made  by  NASA's Upper 
Atmosphere Research  Satellite  launched  last  year.  (UP I ,  Aug  27/92) 

August 28: T h e  fifth meeting of  the  Space Agency Forum o n  the  International  
Space Year  (SAFISY) opened  in Washington, DC. T h e  forum  is  composed of 
29  members  (national   and   multinational  space  agencies), including  NASA ,  
and   10  affiliate  members  (international ,   space-related  organizations).  T h e  
meeting was  called  to  revlew progress of  the  various SAFISY-sponsored inter-  
national  space year projects  and  to  discuss options for post-1992  cooperation. 
(NA SA  Note   to Editors N92-76) 

T h e   Tethered  Satellite  System  Investigative  Board  presented  an   interim 
report  o n   the  cause of  the   failure of  the   tethered  satellite experiment  on   the  
Shuttle   Atlantis   mission  earlier  this  month .   Preliminary  findings  indicated 
tha t  a bolt one-quarter  of  an   inch   in  diameter got  in  the  way  of  a reel of  cord, 
causing  i t   to  jam.  T h e  bolt  was  part  of  a  structural change  made  earlier  this 
year  to   strengthen   the   tether   system's a t tach   points  to   withstand  better  the  
rigors of  launch  and  landing, NASA   said.  Italian  scientists  hope  to  retry  t h e  
experiment.  A  complete  report  was  expected  in  about  a  month .   (AP ,  Aug 
29/92; API ,  Aug  28/92;  UPI,  Aug  28/92; NY  Times, Aug  30192; C Trib,  Aug 
30192; W Times, Aug  29/92) 

In   an   ~n te rv iew  with  Final  Frontier  magazine,  NASA   Administrator  
Daniel S. Goldin   gave his  views about NA SA   and   its contribution   to  
American  society.  "I  took  this  job  because  I  believe  NASA   is  critical  to  
America's future. NASA   provides  hope ,   opportunity,  and  inspiration  to   t h e  
American   public.  It  does  this  through  its  primary  mission:  t o   reach  for  t h e  
stars,  in  the   broadest  sense,  of  course.  .  . . For  the   last  3 0  years  it  has  been 
demonstrated  over  and  over  again  tha t   t h e   space  program  helps  take 
America's value-added  industry  right  t o   the   cutting   edge  and   provides  jobs 
and  opportunity."  (Final Frontier,  Sep t /92 )  

AUGU ST   1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Augwt   30:  For  t h e  first  time ,  virtually  every  na t ion   with   a n   interest   in  space  
o r   its practical   benefits  sen t  delegates  t o  t h e  World  Space  Congress  Mee t ing  
in  Wa sh ing ton ,  DC. A t  t h e  inv i ta t ion  of President  George  Bush, almost  4,000 
representatives  began a week of meetings  t h a t  were expected  t o  usher  in  a new  
era   of  in te rna t iona l   cooperation   in   space  exploration .   T h e   conference   was 
sponsored  by  t h e  C omm i t t e e  o n  Space  Research of  t h e   In te rna t iona l  C o u n c i l  
of  S c i e n t i f i c   U n i o n s ,   N A S A ,   t h e   U.S.  Academy   of  S c i e n c e s ,   t h e  
In te rna t iona l   A s t ronau t ica l   Federation ,   and   t h e   Ame r ican   In s t i tu te   of 
Ae ronau t ic s  and  Astronautics.  (The  Sun, Aug   3 1/92;  CSM ,  A u g  3 1/92) 

Augw t   31: N A S A   announced   t h a t   its Extreme  U l t rav io le t  Explorer  (EUVE )  
satellite   had   de tec ted  a n  object   em i t t ing  ex t reme  ultraviolet   radiation   loca t -  
ed   outside   t h e   Milky  Way  galaxy  th rough   interstellar   dust   a n d   gas,  o n c e  
t h o u g h t   t o   block  th i s   source  of  radiation .   EUVE  also  had   de tec ted   a  new 
source  of ex t reme  ultraviolet  radiation  com ing  from  t h e  corona   of a star  m u c h  
like t h e  S u n  located  about   16 light-years  from Earth .  T h e  EUVE  satellite ,  now  
six  weeks  i n t o  a  survey  of  t h e  en t i re   sky  i n  extreme   ultraviolet   wavelengths ,  
was  intended   t o  provide  astronomers  with   the i r  first detailed  maps  in  multiple  
ex t reme  ultraviolet   energy  bands.  ( N A S A  Release 92-138) 

September 

September 1 : N A S A  set September   12 as t h e  launch  da te  for t h e  seven-day sci- 
en t i f ic   mission  of  t h e   S h u t t l e  Endeavour.  T h e   5 0 t h   S h u t t l e   mission  was  t o  
include   a  numbe r  of  S h u t t l e  mission  firsts:  t h e   first  married  couple ,   t h e   first 
black  woman ,   a n d   t h e  first Japanese   astronaut   o n   a U.S.  spacecraft.  ( N A S A  
Release  STS - 4 7  Launch  Advisory;  USA  Today, Sep t   2/92)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   its  Sea rch   for  Extraterrestrial   Intelligence   (SET I )  
program  had   been   renamed   t h e   High   Resolution   Microwave  Survey   in   a  bid 
t o  defuse  criticism  of  t h e  program,  especially by  congressional  budget-cutters .  
T h e   new  $100   million   program  aimed  t o   survey  t h e   en t i re   sky   by   t h e   year 
2010  and  specifically  target  about   a  thousand   stars.  (CSM ,  Sep t   2 /92 )  

Lockheed   Missiles  and   Space   Company   received  two  N A S A   con t rac t s  
wo r th  $267  million   for  work  o n  t h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope.  T h e  flight  sys- 
tems   con t rac t ,   valued  a t  $147  million ,   includes  funds  for  servicing  missions, 
t h e   first  of  wh ich   was  set   for  December   1993  and   was  t o   deliver  a n  optical  
in s t rumen t   t o  correct   t h e  telescope's  flawed  mirror. (WS],  S e p t  2 /92 )  

Two  Russian  cosmonauts   made   a  spacewalk  t o   position   a  cable   t h a t   will 
power  a n  exterior  eng ine  o n  the i r  Mir Space  S t a t i o n .  ( A P  S e p t  9 /92 )  

Sepwmber 2:  International  cooperation  in  space exploration and  new  opportuni-  
ties  between Western  nations  and   the  Russian  Federation  were  among  t h e  top-  
ics N A S A  Administrator  Daniel S .  Goldin  discussed in his address t o  t h e  World 
Space  Congress  in  Washington ,  DC. Goldin   said  t h e   changes  in   governments 
around  t h e  world present challenges but  also new opportunities. H e  said cooper- 
ation  with Russia was among those opportunities.  (Spacewatch, Sept  9 2 )  

O rb i ta l   Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion   of  Fairfax,  Virginia  said  it   had   won   a  $13 .5  
million   con t rac t   from  Brazil's civilian   space  agency  t o   launch   a  remote-sens-  
ing  and  data-relay  satellite   in   1992.  ( W  Times, S e p t  2/92)  

T h e   launch   d a t e  of  Mars  Observer  was  rescheduled  from  Sep tembe r   16 t o  
25  in  t h e  aftermath  of Hurricane  Andrew. A l though   t h e  hu r r icane  passed well 
s o u t h  of C a p e  Canave ra l ,  t h e  craft was none the le s s  removed  from  t h e  l a u n c h  
pad  for  p ro tec t ion .   It  required  c lean ing   before  it  could  be  repositioned   for 
l a u n c h ,   nece s s i ta t ing   l a u n c h   p o s t p o n em e n t .   ( N A S A   Re lea se   L a u n c h  
Advisory, S e p t  2/92; W Post, Sep t  4/92;  A P  Sep t  3 / 9 2 )  

N A S A  selected  Dr. C laude  R. Canizares, head  of  t h e  Astrophysics Division  
a t  Massachusetts  In s t i tu te   of  Technology,  as  t h e   new  cha i rman   of  t h e   Space  
Sc ience  a n d  Applications   Advisory Comm i t tee .   ( N A S A  Release 92 -141 )  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

SEPTEMBER  1992 

September 3 :  A t  a meeting with NASA   employees a t  Edwards Air Force Base, 
NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  emphasized  the  need  for  increased 
a t ten t ion  to aeronautics  research  in  the   face of  competition  from  Europe and 
Japan. Goldin  also  said  that  NASA   would  have  to  do  things  "better,  faster, 
cheapern-the  message Congress had just  sent the agency by  no t  increasing its 
$14  billion  budget.  Goldin  also  urged  senior  managment  to   place  more 
minorities  in  its ranks  and  indicated  that   agency  personnel  would  be  reshuf- 
fled  in  the  future.  (Daily News ,  Sept 4/92; Antelope Valley  Press,  Sept 4/92)  

September 4:   Rockwell  International  and NPO  Energia of  Kaliningrad  agreed 
September 4 to  discuss cooperation  in space flight and technology and to  work 
together on  a docking system that will connect  the U.S.  Space Shuttle to the  
Russian Mir Space Station.  (Space News,  Sept  14-20192) 

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  endorsed  the  creation  of  a  Space 
Agency Forum to  coordinate activities among the  leaders of  the world's space 
agencies to prevent  duplication  and  overlap.  (NASA  Release 92-143) 

September 8: NASA   proposed  to explore  the  planet  Pluto  by  dispatching  two 
small spacecraft with cameras and  a few  essential instruments  as early  as  1998 
on flights taking  them  close to  the  planet  in  seven or eight  years.  Such a rnis- 
sion would utilize  existing technology and  cost  an  estimated  $400 million,  an  
example  of  NASA's  new  philosophy  of  "better,  faster,  cheaper."  Scientists 
were  anxious  to  send  a mission  to   Pluto  in  the   near  future,  since  the   planet 
was favorably positioned  relative  to  Earth  and  its atmosphere was  in  a gaseous 
state,  conditions  that  would  not  continue  beyond  about  2010.  (NY Times, 
Sept 8/92; CSM, Nov  4/92) 

T h e  Magellan spacecraft resumed  its radar-imaging of  Venus  after a seven- 
week  outage, making radar pictures of  some of  the   last unmapped  regions o n  
Venus. Magellan was also scheduled to go into a lower orbit to measure Venus' 
gravity  and  t o   explore  the  planets'  internal  structure.  Th e   spacecraft  has 
mapped  99  percent  of  Venus' landscape.  Plans  were  under  consideration  t o  
extend  the  life  of  the  mission  until  November  1994  to   obtain  even  more 
detailed  pictures of  Venus.  (AP ,  Sept 9/94; W Times, Sept 9/92)  

Lockheed,  a  principal  designer  of  NASA's  Hubble  Space  Telescope, won 
$267  million  in  contracts  to  maintain,  service, and  help  repair  the  orbiting 
observatory. ( W  Post,  Sept 9/92)  

September 9:  NASA   scientists were  baffled  by  a brownish discoloration,  rep- 
resenting  some  kind  of  growth,  on   the  Long  Duration  Exposure  Facility 
(LDEF) satellite. T h e  LDEF was  retrieved by  a Space Shuttle in January  1990. 
Whatever  the  growth, it had  formed in space and despite high ultraviolet  radi- 
ation  and  the  corrosive power  of  atomic oxygen. ( W  Times, Sept 9/92)  

SEPTEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Rockwell International  and a Russian company announced  plans  to  collab- 
orate  o n  a system  to  enable  the  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis   to  dock with  Russia's 
Mir  Space  S ta t ion .  Rockwell  said  it  had  signed  an   agreement  under  which 
N P O  Energia would  develop  hardware  for  the  system and build  some compo- 
nents .   (AP, Sep t  9/92) 

T h e  U .S .  Sena te  rejected  by  a wide margin  a move  to  cancel NASA's  inter. 
national   Space  Station   but  forbade  NASA   from  significantly  changing   the  
laboratory's design and schedule.  I f  approved by the  House of Representatives, 
t h e  restriction would  severely limit NASA's ability  to  overhaul key aspects of 
the  program.  (Space News,  Sept  14-20192) 

Orbital   Sciences Corporation  announced   tha t   it  had  reached  a  key  mile- 
stone   in  development  of  the  Taurus  launch  vehicle  with  t h e  successful in te -  
gration and  testing of  a full-scale engineering vehicle  at  its Chandler ,  Arizona, 
facilities.  Taurus  was  designed  t o   place  payloads  of  up  to   3,000  lbs.  in  low 
Earth  orbit or  950 Ibs.  in geostationary  transfer orbit.  It was part  of  a program 
t o   develop  a  new  class  of  U .S .   launch   vehicles  chat  could  be  integrated ,  
checked  ou t ,  and  launched on  short  notice.  (AvWk, Sep t  7/92) 

J o i n t  N A S A F A A   tests in Denver  and Orlando  showed tha t  advanced, pre- 
dictive sensor systems could provide  airline crews up  to 30 seconds warning of 
wind shears during takeoff and landing phases of  flight. Of  three  forward-look- 
ing  sensors  tested,  the   modified  Doppler  weather  radar  detected  wind  shear 
consistently  and  a t  longer  ranges t h a n   light detection  and  ranging systems or 
infrared  sensors. Wind  shear  caused  more  than   26  U.S.  air  carrier  accidents 
between  1964 and   1985. (AvWk, Sept  7/92) 

NASA   announced   tha t   five  contractors  had  been  selected  to   develop 
designs  for  two  Earth  Observing  Systems  spacecraft,  EOS-PM  and   EOS  
Chemistry,  scheduled  for  launch  in   2000  and   2002,  respectively.  NASA  
planned  to  spend about $12 million o n  the  five studies.  (AvWk, Sep t  7/92) 

Leaders  of  the  world's space nations  attending  the  World  Space Congress in 
Washington,  D.C., last week  said  that   they  lacked  the  money  to go  it  alone  in 
space, yet  the  will  to  cooperate  internationally  seemed  also  to   be  lacking. Two 
views  about  space  exploration  emerged  among  scientists. A n   optimistic  view 
held  tha t  space exploration methods could be worthwhile projects at  affordable 
prices. The  pessimistic view held  that  space cost too much, lacked public support, 
and that   ideas must be  constrained. T h e  Congress, the  largest gathering of  space 
experts ever convened, attracted more  than  5,000 delegates from 70 nations and 
featured more  than   2,700 technical  papers.  (Space News, Sept 7-13/92) 

T h e  Sena te  approved  funding of $2.1 billion  for continuation   of  t h e  Space  
S ta t ion   after  defeating  a  proposal  to  close  down  the   project  because  of  its 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

SEPTEMBER  1992 

expense. T h e  Senate  vote, together with House approval  in July, assured con -  
tinued funding and  congressional support for the  Space Station .  ( W  Post, Sept  
10192; LA  Xmes,  Sept   10192; WSJ,  Sept  10192; AP ,  Sept  10192) 

September 10: A  Starfire 1 rocket manufactured by  EER  Systems Corporation of 
Vienna, Virginia  failed  to achieve suborbital flight after launch  from  the  White  
Sands Missile Range. T h e  flight carried nine microgravity experiments. A t  a cost 
of $3 million, the Starfire rocket was  thought  to be  an  inexpensive way  to carry 
out  experiments without  the   costs  associated with  programs  such  as  the  Space 
Shuttle .  (Las Cruces ,  NM ,  Sun News, Sept  11/92; El Paso Xmes, Sept  11/92) 

September 1 1 : T h e  Boeing Aircraft Company announced plans to  produce some 
jetliner  parts  in  the  former Soviet Union   as  soon  as possible. T h e  effort would 
enable  Boeing  to  gain  increased  access  to  the  Russian  aviation  market  and  to 
meet stiff competition from Russian and European firms.  (WSJ, Sept  11/92) 

NASA   announced  tha t  a Space Shu t t le  flight  link  up with  t h e  Russian Mir 
Space  Station ,   tentatively  planned  for  September  1994, would  be  retargeted 
for  launch  in April  1995. A  flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard  the  Shu t t le  
Discovery  remained  o n   track  for  launch  on   November  16,  1993.  T h e   first 
flight  t o  begin  building  the  planned  Space S ta t ion  Freedom was  rescheduled 
for July  1996. (Space News,  Sept  14-20192) 

In   an   interview  in  Huntsville,  Alabama,  Vice  Presidential  candidate  A l  
Go re  said  tha t  a C l in ton  administration would  support a return   t o  t h e  Moon  
and  Mars but  would  not   commit major  resources  to such efforts. Given  o the r  
current  NASA  priorities, Gore said the  longer-range mission  to Mars "must be 
pursued  according to a sensible  timetable." (Htsvl  Tm s ,  Sep t   11/92) 

Scientists  studying  data  from  Jupiter's highly  charged  magnetic  enviroment 
reported  that the solar wind exerts a much stronger influence o n  the  planet's mag- 
netic field than  previously thought. The  discovery was the result of the  unique tra- 
jectory  of  the spacecraft Ulysses, a joint  NASA-European Space Agency mission 
o n  its way  to study the  poles of  the Sun. (NASA  Release 92-145) 

September  1 2 :  T h e  Space Shu t t le  Endeavour  roared  in to  orbit  on   September 
12 o n  a history-making  seven-day mission. It carried  the  first married  couple, 
Mark  Lee  and  J a n  Davis;  the   first  Black  woman,  Mae  Jemison; and   the   first 
Japanese  person,  Mamoru  Mohri;  to   f l y   o n  a U .S .   spacecraft.  I t   also  carried 
fish, frogs, hornets, flies, and fertilized chicken  eggs, all subjects of  the  research 
mission.  Endeavour's  flight was  also  the   first U .S .   space  mission  devoted  to  
Japanese  research.  Japan   supplied  34   of  the   43  Spacelab  experiments,  t h e  
u n i t e d  States  seven ,  and   two  were  shared.  Japan  contributed  $90 million  of 
the  estimated  $363 million  cost of  the  flight.  ( C SM ,  Sept   14/92; W  Post, Sep t  
13/92; W Times, Sept  13/92; NY Xmes, Sept   13/92; The Sun ,  Sep t  13/92; P  Inq, 

SEPTEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Sep t   13/92; W Times, Sept   12/92; W Post, Sept  12/92; The Sun, Sept   12/92; C 
Tnb, Sept   12/92;) 

September 13: O n  their  first full day  in space, two crew members of  the  Space  
S h u t t l e   Endeavour  conducted   experiments   involving   mo t ion   sickness. 
Understanding   motion  sickness  has  high   priority  among  space  agencies 
around t h e  world. It strikes most astronauts during their  first few days in space, 
and   it  affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are  never  scheduled 
early in  a mission.  (W  Post, Sept   14/92; NY Times, Sept   14/92; W Tmes, Sep t  
14/92; AP ,  Sept   14/92; W Post, Sept   13/92) 

September  14:  In   the   summer  1992 issue of  Phi  Kappa  Phi Journal, Richard  H. 
Kohrs,  Director  of  Space  S ta t ion   Freedom  in  NASA's  Office  of  Space  
Development,  discussed  the   advantages  and  challenge  of  constructing  Space  
S ta t ion  Freedom. Aside  from  the   international  cooperation  required  t o  build 
and  operate  it ,   Kohrs  gave  three  primary  functions  tha t   the   Space  S ta t ion  
would  perform  in  the  U .S .  civil  space program:  1 )  it would  enable  humans  t o  
learn to  live  and work productively  in space; 2)  it would  serve as a n  advanced 
research  facility; and  3 )  i t  would  provide  experience and  knowledge of  build- 
ing, operating, and  maintaining  large systems in space. T h e  Space  S ta t ion  was 
also expected  to  be  a vital  component  of  the   total  U .S .   civil  space program, 
augmenting  the   planetary  exploration  program,  astronomical  research,  life- 
sciences  program,  aeronautics  research,  and  transportation  program.  (Phi 
Kappa Phi ]ournal,  Summer  1992) 

Astronauts  aboard the  Space Shuttle  Endeavour  resumed science work  after 
successful repairs  Sunday  night   o n  a  set   of  water-cooled  furnaces critical  to  
several of  the  43  experiments aboard  the  shuttle .  T h e  crew observed  irradiat- 
ed  fruit  f l y   larvae,  fertilized  frog  eggs,  kept  tabs  on   two  fish  with   electrodes 
attached   to   their   brains,  and  tested  a  new  manufacturing  method  for  elec- 
tronic  components .  (NY Times, Sept  15/92; W 'limes, Sept  15/92; W Post, Sep t  
15/92; The  Sun, Sept   15/92) 

Deidre Lee was appointed Deputy Assistant  Administrator for Procurement 
at NASA  Headquarters. (NA SA  Release 92-  146; Space News, Sep t  2 1-27/92) 
September 15: T h e  Magellan  spacecraft fired  its  four  thrusters  t o  swoop with-  
in  113 miles of  the  surface of Venus for study of t h e  planet's gravity and  promi- 
n e n t  surface details.  Since  its deployment  in  1989, the  Venus  probe  has  used 
radar  t o  map  99  percent  of  the   planet ,   exceeding  its  goal  of  70-90 percent .  
W i th   its mission  completed beyond expectations, NASA   scientists  expected 
t o   shut   down  Magellan  in   May  1993  as  a  cost-cutting   measure.  ( N A S A  
Release 92-148; USA  Today, Sept   15/92; LA  Times, Sept   15/92)  

A NASA  Ames Research  ER-2 aircraft was scheduled  to  take  high  altitude  
aerial  images  of  the   Hawaiian  Islands  to  help   officials  determine   the   f u l l  
ex ten t  of  the  damage caused by  Hurricane  Iniki.  (NA SA  Release 92-149)  
247 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEPTEMBER  1992 

Weather  satellite  officials  a t   the   National   Oceanic   and   Atmospheric 
Administration  expressed  concern   about  the   heightened  danger  from  hurri-  
canes because of delays in modernizing the  U.S.  weather satellite system. T h e  
delays forced t h e  use of  antiquated  and  poorly  positioned  satellites tha t   raised 
the   risk  of  forecasting  errors. Two  hurricanes,  Andrew  and   Iniki, showed  the  
limits  of  the   antiquated  satellites.  Replacement  satellites were  stymied  by  a 
series of  technical  failures, delaying the  first  launching from  1989 to   1994. In  
the  meantime,  t h e  Un i ted  States  was borrowing surplus satellites from Europe. 
(NY Times, Sept  15/92; W Times, Nov  15/92) 

NA SA  managers said last week tha t  they would refashion the  way  the  Space 
Agency conducts  its programs, drawing o n  the  results of  internal  NASA  stud-  
ies  now  under  way  and   the   advice  of  outside  groups.  T h e  proposed  reforms 
would  serve  as  a  test  of  whether  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin's vision  of 
faster and  cheaper space projects could work  in practice.  (NA SA  Release 92 -  
154; Space News, Sep t   14.20192) 

Dr.  David M. Rust, chief  scientist for  the   Flare Genesis project,  a powerful 
solar telescope project  developed by  a team  a t  Johns  Hopkins University,  said 
t h e   telescope  could  be  launched  as  early as  December  1993. Rather  than   be 
launched  o n   a  NASA   rocket  or   from  a  Space Shu t t le ,  which  might  take  a 
decade of  planning  and cost hundreds of millions of  dollars, the  telescope was 
to  be  dragged  19 miles  above  Antarctica  by  a balloon.  T h e  project  would  be 
another   in   a  series  of  long-duration  research  flights  using  large  balloons. 
Project  scientists hoped  to   use  the   telescope  to  explore  the   precise  cause  of 
solar  flares.  (The Sun, Sept  15/92) 

NASA   scientists  announced  tha t   they  would  use  "telepresence"  technology 
in the  Antarctic  this fall to see  if  life tha t  existed millions of 
ago o n  Earth 
could provide clues about organisms tha t  once may have  lived o n  Mars. A team 
was scheduled to  travel to Antarctica  in October to  study sediment o n  the  bot- 
tom of  ice-covered Lake Hoare o n  Ross Island. (NA SA  Release 92-147) 

A n  editorial  in Aviation Week  B Space Technology lamented  the   lack of  pri- 
orities  in developing more new space launch  and propulsion  systems t h a n  t h e  
Un i ted   States  could  possibly  use.  It  stated  tha t   the  Wh i te   House,  Congress, 
NASA ,  the  Defense Department, and o the r  agencies involved  in space  trans- 
portation  are  the  bodies tha t  should  lay out   a realistic  national  plan  to devel- 
op  new  launch  systems and   technologies.  (AvWk, Sept  14/92) 

T h e  European  Space Agency  (ESA )  reported  last  week  tha t   Hermes,  the  
ESA's spaceplane program, already scaled back to an  unmanned  demonstrator, 
would  have  to  be  downgraded to  a technology development  program because 
of budgetary constraints. O n  another  project, ESA's scientists were  evaluating 
data  from a test of  inter-satellite communications conducted by  Eureca, ESA's 
large, retrievable satellite. (AvWk, Sept   14/92) 

SEPTEMBER   1992 

C H R O N O L O G Y  1992 

T h e   N a t i o n a l   C e n t e r   for  Advanced   Technologies  received  a  two-year, 
$200 ,000   grant   from  N A S A   a n d   t h e   Aerospace  Industries  Association   t o  
s tudy   civil   space   techno logy   needs   and   technology   transfer  mechanisms .  
(AvWk, S e p t   14/92)  

According   t o   a  report  in  Aviation  Week  B Space  Technology, wind  t u n n e l  
facilities  a t   Russia's S ibn la   Research  a n d   Development   C e n t e r   were  being  
made   available  t o  Western   companies .  (AvWk, S e p t   14/92)  

N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  appeared  ready  t o  a b a n d o n  t h e  X -  
3 0  Na t iona l   Aerospace  Plane  program  with  its goal of  con s t ruc t ing  a n d  flying 
a  single-stage-to-orbit  air-breathing  vehicle   in  favor  of  a  hypersonic   research  
effort.  T h e   latter,  t h e   N A S A   Ames-Dryden   Flight  Research   Facility  effort ,  
cen te r s  o n  a  manned ,  Mach   10-class reusable  test   aircraft  launched   from  t h e  
back  of  a NASA lLockheed  SR - 7 1A ,  a n d  o n  a n  unmanned  ~ l a t f o r m  launched  
a t o p  a rocket   t o  explore  physical phenomena   a t  speeds approaching  M a c h  25. 
(AvWk, S e p t   14 /92 )  

N A S A   acknowledged  t h a t   it  could  n o t   keep   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n  project   o n  
schedule  e v e n  with   t h e  most  optimistic  cu r ren t  funding  projections .  T h e  p ro -  
jected  level  of  congressional  appropriations  for t h e  n e x t  few years m e a n t  ce r -  
ta in   delays  in   deve lopmen t  and   launch   schedules  of  any th ing  up   t o   12 o r   1 8  
mon th s .   S u c h   delays  would  mean   t h a t   t h e   s ta t ion   would  miss  t h e   official 
December   1999  target   for  being  able  t o  support  a  crew  o n  a pe rmanen t   basis. 
(AvWk, Sep t   14 /92 )  

T h e  Na t iona l   Aerospace   Plane  program  applied  a  battery  of  op t ica l   instru-  
m e n t a t i o n   t o  t h e  problem  of  measuring  t h e  chemistry  a n d  aerodynamics  of  a 
hypersonic  combustor  during  0 .002-second  shock  t u n n e l  test  runs .  T h e  N A S P  
test   e n v i r o nm e n t  has   t h e  unique  challenge  of  a h igh  M a c h  numbe r ,  sho r t  r u n  
t ime ,  a n d  a flow so energetic  t h a t  measurements  were  obscured  by  t h e  bright-  
ly  glowing air.  (AvWk, S e p t   14/92)  

Space  magazine   carried   a n   assessment   of  NASA's  new   A dm i n i s t r a t o r ,  
Dan ie l   S.  G o l d i n ,   five   m o n t h s   after   h i s   c o n f i rm a t i o n   as  NASA's   ch ie f .  
Go ld in ' s  task  was  t o  drag  N A S A  o u t  of  its  do ld rum s  by  shee r   force   of  will .  
I n   h i s   first  five  m o n t h s ,   G o l d i n   h a d   a l ready   s h a k e n   up   t h e   U.S.  space  
agency   by  app ly ing  business   a n d  m a n a g em e n t   p rac t ice s  h o n e d   a t  t h e  h e lm  
of  some  of  TRW  C o r p o r a t i o n s  mo s t  s ign i f ican t  space  p ro jec t s ,  s u c h  as  t o t a l  
qua l i ty   m a n a g em e n t .   T h e   Huntsville  News  viewed  G o l d i n   as  a n   a g e n t   of 
c h a n g e ,  d e t e rm i n e d   to  revamp   N A S A   from  w i t h i n .   ( S p a c e ,  A u g -S e p t   9 2 ;  
Htsvl  Tms, S e p t  3 / 9 2 )  

S h u t t l e   Endeavour's  astronauts   reported   abnormal   behavior   for  tadpoles  
h a t c h e d   aboard   t h e   shu t t le .   O r i e n t a l   ho rne t s   similarly  displayed  confused ,  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

SEPTEMBER   1992 

disoriented  behavior ,  seemingly unable   t o  build  nests  in a weightless e n v i r o n -  
m e n t .   T h e  tadpoles  and   hornets   were  part   of  43  experiments   i n   weightless 
cond i t ion s  being carried  ou t  o n  t h e  S h u t t l e .  (UP I ,  Sep t   15/92;  W Times, S e p t  
16/92;  UPI ,  S e p t   16/92;  AP ,  S e p t   16/92)  

Two  Russian  cosmonauts   o n  Tuesday  completed   a  series  of  spacewalks  t o  
install  a n  eng ine   and   move  a n   a n t e n n a   o n   t h e  Mir  Space   S t a t i o n ,  partly   i n  
preparation   for docking  with   a U .S .   Space  S h u t t l e   in  1994. (AP ,  Sep t   15/92)  

*September 16: Astronomers   reported  t h a t   they  had   recently  de tec ted  a small  
fa in t  object   beyond  N e p t u n e  and   Pluto  t h a t  could  be  t h e  first d i rec t  ev idence  
for  t h e  existence   of  t h e  Kuiper  belt ,  a  broad  belt  of  icy  minor   planets   t h a t   is 
presumably  t h e   source  of  many  short-period   comets   streaking   in   from  t h e  
fringes  of  t h e   solar  system.  Initial   observations   suggested  t h a t   t h e   ob jec t   is 
abou t   120 miles  in diameter ,  has  a reddish glow, and   is  traveling  i n  a  200-year 
orbit   between  3.4 and   5.5 billion  miles  from t h e  Sun .   (NY Times, S e p t   16/92;  
W Post, S e p t   16/92;  Time, Sep t  28 /92 ) )  

T h e  U.S.  Defense  Depa r tmen t   announced   t h a t   it   had  n o  further   plans   t o  
use  t h e  Space   S h u t t l e   for  major  payloads  after  launch  of  a  classified  military 
satellite  during  a S h u t t l e  flight  in  November.  T h e  Pentagon ,   wh ich  o n c e  had  
p lanned   t o  be a prime  user of  t h e  space shuttles ,  was t o  be  relegated  t o  a m ino r  
a n d   occasional   S h u t t l e   customer.  In  place  of  t h e   Shu t t le s ,   t h e   Pen tagon  
p lanned   t o  rely much  more heavily  o n  expendable  launch  vehicles  for military  
payloads.  (Space News, Sep t   14-20/92)  

September  17: Dr.  Wesley  T.  Huntress ,  Jr . ,  Director  of  NASA's So la r  System 
Exploration   Division,  last week  received  t h e  Korolev  Medal ,  awarded  by  t h e  
Russian  Federation   of  Astronautics   and   Cosmonautics   for  ach ievemen t   in 
space  research.  ( N A S A  Relesase  92 -15  1 ) 

September 18: Astronauts aboard t h e  Space Shuttle  Endeavour began testing a sys- 
tem t o  deliver  intravenous fluids in  weightlessness, a step toward meeting t h e  pos- 
sible medical needs of  astronauts who stay in space long te rm .   (AP  Sept   18/92) 

Dick We in s te in ,  manager  of  engineering  standards  and  practices  for N A S A ,  
said N A S A  was predominantly   non -me t r ic  and   likely t o  stay  t h a t  way  in  view 
of a September  3 0 , 1 9 9 2 ,  deadline  for t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  t o  conve r t  t o  t h e  me t -  
ric  system. We in s te in  predicted ,  however,  t h a t  by   1995  N A S A  would  be well 
i n t o  t h e  conversion   process.  (Washington Technology, S e p t   10 /92 )  

T h e  Pen tagon ,  bowing  t o  congressional  pressure,  revealed  t h e  existence   of 
t h e  super-secret  agency  t h a t  buys  and   operates   t h e  Nation's  spy satellites  a n d  
its  o t h e r   airborne   espionage  systems.  T h e  Na t iona l   Reconnaissance   Office's 
mission  is  t o  ensure  t h a t  t h e  Un i ted  S ta te s  has  t h e  technology  and  spaceborne  

SEPTEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

and  airborne assets needed  to acquire intelligence worldwide, according to the  
Pentagon .  ( P  Inq,  Sept  1992; C Trib, Sept   18/92)  

NASA   announced   signature  of  a  $59.3  million  supplemental  agreement 
with  Rockwell International's Space Systems Divison for  the  design, develop- 
men t ,   test,  and   evaluation  of  a  new  system  to  update  Space  Shu t t le   orbiter 
cockpit displays.  (NASA  Release C92 -  15)  

September  20:  T h e   Space  Shuttle   returned  to  Earth  with  its  seven-member 
crew,  two Japanese carp ,  four  frogs  and   assorted  tadpoles,  hornets ,   and  flies. 
Th is  was the  first Shuttle  flight devoted to  Japanese research.  (NY Times, Sept  
21/92;  P  Inq,  Sep t   21/92;  The  Sun ,   Sept   21/92; W  Times,  Sept   20192,  Sep t  
21/92; W Post, Sept  20192, Sept  21/92; AP ,  Sept  20192, Sept  21/92; UPI ,  Sep t  
21/92;  USA Today, Sept  21/92; LA  Times, Sept  21/92) 

A  new  5,000-mile-wide radio  telescope  designed  to  probe  the  edge  of  the  
universe was near completion in the  United  States ,  according t o  Peter Napier, 
project manager for the  Very Long Baseline Array project. T h e  federally fund- 
ed project, actually a series of  10 dish-shaped  antennas ,  was expected  t o  begin 
high-resolution  imaging work  by  December.  (W  Times, Sept  20192) 

September  21:  A  satellite  launched  to  study oceans  and  global  climate  was 
maneuvered  into   position  Monday  for  months  of  tests  before  beginning  its 
mission. T h e  TOPEX/Poseidon, the  first major space mission conducted joint- 
ly  by  the   United   States  and  France,  was  launched  August  10  from  French 
Guiana.  (AP ,  Sept  21/92) 

T h e  first  student-managed  and  built  payload  flown o n   a NA SA   sounding 
rocket  was  launched  successfully from  the  NASA   flight  facility on   Wallops 
Island, Virginia.  (NA SA  Release 92-156) 

September 22: A  NASA   airplane, equipped with delicate  instruments, carried 
three  astronomers  to 41 ,000  feet above Hawaii last mon th   to  examine  indica- 
tions  of  a  "black hole"  at  the  heart  of  the  Milky Way Galaxy. T h e  launch   of 
t h e  Hubble  Space Telescope and   improvements  in  ground-based  instruments 
led  to  several announcements  this year of  tangible  evidence for  the  existence 
of  "black holes."  (LA  Times, Sept  21/92) 

House-Senate negotiators agreed  yesterday  t o  provide  $2.1  billion  nex t   fis- 
cal year for  Space Station  Freedom. T h e  agreement spelled  the  end  of  a n o t h -  
er  year  of  efforts by  opponents  to  kill  a program  they  consider  too  expensive 
and  of  little  scientific  value. T h e  Space S ta t ion  was  expected  to  cost $40  bil- 
lion  to  build  and  $100 billion  more  to  operate  over  its planned  30-year  life- 
time.  ( W  Post, Sept  23/92; USA Today, Sept  23/92; LA  Eme s ,  Sept  23/92; The 
Sun ,  Sept   23/92; AP ,  Sept  23/92) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEPTEMBER 1992 

NASA   inspectors  announced  tha t   they  had  discovered  a pinhole-size  leak 
in  an   O-ring   seal  of  a  solid  rocket  booster  intended  for  Space  Shu t t le  
Discovery's November  15  launch.  Technicians  replaced  the   seal, which  was 
similar  to  the   one   tha t   caused  the   1986 Challenger  explosion.  (USA Today, 
Sept  23/92; W Trnes, Sept  23/92; AP, Sept  23; UP], Sep t  23/92) 

NASA   announced   plans  to   revamp  its cumbersome  procurement  rules  t o  
entice  more small businesses  to  bid  for contracts  as a way  of  ensuring con t in -  
ued  technological  and  economic  growth  in  the   United   States.  (Flu Today, 
Sept  23/92; Space News,  Sept  2 8 - 0 c t  4/92) 

September 23:  A    inched  piece  of  rubber  filler-not 
a  faulty  O-ring   seal- 
caused  a  leak  in  a solid  rocket  booster  being  readied  for  t h e   launch  of  Space 
Shu t t le  Discovery, NASA  said. T h e  booster's three O-rings seals were  in good 
condition .   (AP ,  Sept  24/92; UPn, Sept  24/92; W Tmes, Sept  25/92) 

NASA   announced   tha t   congressionally  imposed  funding  limits  for  Space  
S ta t ion  Freedom would  delay  its full operation  by about n ine  months. Unde r  
a  revised  schedule, NASA  would  begin  launching parts  of  t h e  Space S ta t ion  
in  March  1996, a  four-month  delay.  T h e   station  would  be  ready  for  limited 
astronaut  use  in  June   1997 and   for  full  astronaut  use  in  June   2000,  a  n ine -  
mon th  delay. (Space News, Sept  28-October 4/92)  

NASA   announced   tha t   more  than   200  scientists  from  13 countries  were 
participating  in  a  science  expedition,  spearheaded  by  NASA ,   to   investigate 
newly  discovered  concentrations   of  harmful1  ozone  over  large  regions  of 
southern   Africa  and   Brazil.  T h e  ozone  pollution  was  recently  uncovered  by 
satellite analysis. (NA SA  Release 92-155)  

Sep& 
24: NASA  and the Federal Aviation Administration began evaluating 
new  technology  that   could substantially improve  the   efficiency of  the  Nation's 
air  traffic  system, including improved on-time arrivals, increased fuel  efficiency, 
and  a  decreased  work  load  for  air  traffic  controllers, according  to  scientists at 
NASA's Ames Research Center.  (Commercial Aviation News, Sept 22/92) 

September 25: NASA's Mars Observer space probe,  the  first American mission 
t o  Mars in  17 years, blasted  off  from Cape  Canaveral. T h e  probe was  to  search 
for  future  landing  sites  and  map  the   planet's geology  and  climate.  Despite  a 
radio  blackout  before  a  critical  rocket  firing tha t   left  flight  controllers in  t h e  
dark  for  nearly  two hours,  the  spacecraft was successfully  boosted out  of Earth 
orbit on  an   1 1-month ,  450-million-mile journey  t o  Mars after a flawless launch  
atop  a Titan  3 rocket.  It was also the  first mission for the  Transfer Orbit  Stage, 
a  13-foot thrusting unit  designed to  fire for  two and  a half  minutes  t o  provide 
the   final  shove  to  put  the   probe  o n   its  11-month  coast  to  Mars. T h e  launch  
heralded  an  era of  unprecedented  United  States-Russian cooperation  in space. 

SE I 'TEMHEK   1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Eleven Russians were  part  of  t h e  spacecraft's science  team ,   and   t h e  orbiter  was 
designed t o  he lp  relay pictures and  da ta  from Russian probes  scheduled  t o  land  
o n  Mars  in  1995 and   1997. (UP I ,  Sep t  25/92, Sep t  26/92; AP ,  S e p t  25/92, S e p t  
26/92; W Post, Sep t  25/92, Sep t  29/92; The Sun, Sep t  26/92, Sep t  27/92; P Inq, 
Sep t  26/92, Sep t  27/92; NY Times, Sep t  26/92; W Times, Sep t  26/92) 

Air  Force officials employed a revised  and  more accurate  compu te r  model of 
wind  d i rec t ion   and   speed  in  t h e   launch   of  t h e   Mars  Observer.  T h e  officials 
insisted  o n   ideal  weather   cond i t ion s   before  allowing  t h e   launch   because  of 
conce rn s   t h a t   a  plume   of  harmful  nitrogen   tetroxide   could  drift   over   nearby  
populated   areas  should  t h e   T i tan   3 rocket  explode   w i th in   t h e   first  20 t o  30 
seconds  of  flight.  T h e  new  computer   model  allows  t h e  Ma r t in  Ma r ie t ta -bu i l t  
T i t a n  family of  rockets  t o  con t inue  as launch  vehicles,  a l though  t h e  modelling  
may make   it  more  difficult  t o  launch  o n   time.  (Fla Today, O c t  4/92) 

T h e  House  of  Representatives  voted  t o  spend  $2.1 billion  n e x t  year for work 
o n  NASA's  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom as opponen t s  ended   the i r  efforts t o  scu t t le  
t h e  project .   (The  Sun, Sep t   26/92; W Times, Sep t  26/92) 

N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S .  Go ld in   announced   new  minority   c o n t r a c t  
goals  and   t h e   formation   of  a  N A S A   Minority   Business  Resource  Advisory 
Comm i t tee .  H e  also announced  t h a t   t h e  Minority  Con t rac to r   of  t h e  Year was 
Jackson   &  Tull,  Cha r te red   Engineers,  of  Seabrook ,   Maryland;   B  &  W 
Se rv ice s ,   I n c . ,   Bay  S t .   Louis ,   Mississippi,  was  se lec ted   as  M i n o r i t y  
Subcon t rac to r  of  t h e  Year.  ( N A S A  Release 92-158) 

September 26: A Japanese  amateur  astronomer  detected  C om e t  Swift-Tuttle  o n  
its return   t o  t h e  inne r  solar system. Swift-Tuttle,  last seen  during  t h e  Ame r ican  
C iv i l   War ,   is  currently  t h e   longest  predictable  periodic  come t ,   returning  
approximately  every  130 years.  (W  Post, Sep t  29/92; NY   Times, S e p t  30192) 

September  27: Ge rmany  announced   t h a t   it would  go ahead  w i th   a ce leb ra t ion  
t o   mark   t h e   5 0 t h   anniversary  of  t h e   first  launch   of  t h e   V-2 rocket   despite  
British  protests.  T h e  organizers  said  t h e  e v e n t  would  celebrate   t h e   "first  s tep  
i n t o  space"  and   did  n o t   represent   a  glorification  of  a  Nazi  weapon .   (W  Post, 
S e p t  28/92; The Sun, S e p t  26/92) 

Douglas  Broome, Jr . ,  Deputy  Director  of  t h e   solar  system  exploration   d iv i -  
s ion  a t  N A S A ,  died of  liver cancer  September  27 in  Fairfax, Virginia.  (W  Post, 
S e p t  30192; W Times, Sep t  30192) 

September  28 :   James   Abrahamson ,   former  director   of  t h e   Strategic   Defense 
Initiative ,   left  Hughes  Aircraft  t o  serve  as  co-chairman   of  O rac le   Systems.  A 
former Air   Force general, Abrahamson  was expected  t o  supervise such  projects 
as NASA's Space Shu t t le  and  the  Air  Force's F- 16 fighter.  (Bus Wk, Sep t  28/92) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER   1992 

A  high-powered  panel  of  space  experts  appointed  by U .S .   Vice  President 
Dan  Quayle  was  scheduled  to  begin  deliberations  o n   October   1  tha t   were 
intended  to   lay  the  groundwork for a revamped U.S. space program. T h e   11 - 
person  panel  was  to  advise on  ways  to change  the  space effort  in  light  of  the  
Cold War's end ,  tight  budgets, and  rapid  technological  advancements.  (Space 
News, Sep t  2 8 - 0 c t  4/92) 

Reacting  to  a wave of  international  protest  and  some severe domestic  criti-  
cism, Germany canceled  a celebration of  the  50th  anniversary of  the  first suc- 
cessful  V-2  rocket  launch  a t   the   Peenemunde  range  o n   the   no r th   Ge rman  
coast. T h e  first V-2  rocket  was  fired o n  October  3 ,   1942, under  the  direction  
of  Wernher   von   Braun,  then   a  young  scientist.  T h e  date   is  generally  recog- 
nized as the  birth of the  space age.  (LA Xmes, Sept  29/92; W Post, Sept  29/92) 

NASA   and  Thiokol  Corporation  officials were working o n  a modification 
t o  prevent  a  field  joint  lining from  creating  leaks  in  the   cases of solid  rocket 
boosters  for  the  Space  Shuttle .  This  effort came after  engineers  discovered  a 
leak  in  a  segment  of  the   booster  rocket  assembled  for  the   Space  Shu t t le  
Discovery's scheduled November  launch.  (AvWk, Sept  28/92) 

A n   experimental  aircraft  known  as  the   X-31  had  flown  maneuvers  a t   a 
70-degree angle of  attack,  the   Pentagon  announced .  All of  the  plane's exper- 
imental  flights  were  flown  a t   the   NASA   AmesPDryden  Flight  Research 
Facility  in  Edwards, California. (AP ,  Sep t  28/92) 

September  29:  Scientists  at  Lawrence  Livermore  National   Laboratory  in 
California  announced  plans  to  blast  an   11-pound projectile  from  a  155-foot- 
long cannon  into  a California  hill. T h e  test sho t  was  intended  t o  demonstrate 
tha t  an  ultra-high-velocity gun  hitherto  used  only  for  laboratory research  can  
be  adapted  t o  send  payloads in to  space a t  on ly  about  one-fortieth  of  what  it 
costs  to  orbit  them  by  Space Shuttle .  T h e  gun  was  the  product  of  a program 
called  the  Super High Altitude  Research  Project.  (NY Xmes, Sept  29/92) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel S .  Goldin  announced  in a number of  speech- 
es  t h e   first  major  reforms  resulting  from  the   internal  review  of  NASA   pro- 
grams  he  had  ordered.  T h e   Earth  Observing  System  would  be  streamlined 
again, and   incentives  to  Space Station  Freedom contractors might  be  pooled 
to  assure tha t  they worked as a team. T h e  reforms were designed to  make U.S. 
civil space programs better, faster, and cheaper. Money saved would be  applied 
to  new missions using small spacecraft. (AvWk, Sept  28/92; Science, O c t  2/92)  

General  Motors  and Ford  automotive companies began experimenting with 
technology derived kom  the  National  Aerospace Plane (NA S P )  project. Both 
companies were testing automobiles equipped with titanium aluminide valves. 
Application  of  existing  NASP   materials  technology  to  current   automobile 

SEPTEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

engines could reduce  the  weight of  their  moving parts  by 5 0  percent,  increas- 
ing  fuel  efficiency  and  durability,  according  to  materials  scientists.  (A vWk ,  
Sep t  28/92) 

T h e  Galileo  space  probe,  o n   its  way  to   study  the   planet  Jupiter,  recently 
passed  within  5,300 kilometers  (3,300 miles) of  the  asteroid  951  Gaspra, and  
scientists  instructed  it  to  take  the   first  ever  closeup pho to  of  such  a n  object .  
T h e   irregular shape suggests  tha t  Gaspra  was  chipped  from  a  larger  body in  a 
mammoth  collision.  (Time, Sept  28/92) 

NASA  selected  Hughes Aircraft  Company  to build  a data  and   information 
system  for  the   Earth  Orbiting   System.  T h e   program,  which  would  collect 
environmental  data  from satellites, was  expected  to cost NA SA  about $3 bil- 
lion.  (NA SA  Release  C92-16; NY  Times,  Sep t   30192; WSI,  Sept   30192;  W 
Post, Sep t  30192; AvWk, O c t  5/92)  

NASA   announced  tha t  satellite measurements showed tha t   the  ozone hole  
over  Antarctica   was  now  the   largest  on   record,  being  almost  three   times  as 
large  as  the   area  of  the   United   States.  Measurements  by  the   Total  Ozone 
Mapping  Spectrometer   instrument   aboard  t h e   Nimbus-7   satellite   last 
Wednesday  showed  tha t   the   south  polar  territory  under  the   depleted  ozone 
area extended  to about 8.9 million  square miles, about  15 percent  larger t h a n  
t h e  ozone hole  measured in  1991. (NA SA  Relese 92-159; W Post, Sep t  30192; 
'lime,  O c t  5/92; AP ,  Sept  30192; UPI, Sept  30192) 

T h e  Pentagon  said tha t   the  crash of  an  experimental V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor  
aircraft tha t  claimed seven lives in July was caused by  a combination  of  a flash 
fire, engine failure, and  a failed drive shaft. T h e  statement  did  no t  make clear 
whether   t h e   problems  arose  from  a  design  flaw  or  some  defect  in   a  part   or  
parts.  ( P  Inq, Sept 30192; NY  Times, Sept  30192) 

September 30: A  bipartisan  group of  prominent  Americans proposed  a plan  t o  
reduce  government  spending,  invest  in  growth,  and  reshape  the   income  tax 
system in  the  hope of  balancing  the  Federal budget  in a decade.  Decisions o n  
which programs would be  cut  were  left  to Congress and  t h e  president, but  t h e  
group  suggested  tha t   NASA's  planned  Space S ta t ion ,  mass  transit  operating  
aid t o  cities, and  other  programs would be prime candidates for funding reduc- 
tions.  (AP ,  Sep t  30192) 

Shu t t le  managers  said  budget-cutting  goals  recently  mandated  by  N A S A  
Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  could mean the   loss of  as many as 800  jobs  o n  
top   of  the   300  to  400  being  phased  out   during  the   new  fiscal  year  a t   the  
Kennedy  Space Center. T h e  cuts were part  of Goldin's pledge  to  run  a leaner, 
more  efficient  space agency. (0 Sen Star, Sept  30192) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1992 

T h e  National  Research  Council  said NASA  should  increase  its  budget  for 
civil  airliner  and   air  traffic  control  research,  even  if  it  means  a  cutback  in 
NASA's military  and   space  programs.  T h e   council,  an   arm  of  the   National  
Academy  of  Sciences, said the  United  States  status as  the  world  leader  in air- 
craft  manufacturing would  continue   to  erode  if  NASA   did  not   enter   in to   a 
major  cooperative program with  industry, universities, and o the r  government 
agencies to  develop a new generation of  airliners.  (W  Post, O c t  1/92) 

October  I :  T h e  Navy  said ~ e s t e r d a ~  
tha t  a Ju ly  20 crash of  a V-22 Osprey tilt-  
rotor aircraft outside Washington had  been caused by  oil or  transmission  fluid 
being  sucked  in to  one  of  the   aircraft's  two  engines and   not   by  a  fuel  leak  as 
had   been  reported  earlier. All  seven  crewmen  were  killed  when  the   aircraft 
crashed.  ( P  Inq, O c t  2/92) 

Astronaut   J o h n  Young  was  awarded  the   NASA   Outstanding   Leadership 
Medal   today  by  N A S A   Adm in is t ra to r   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   a t   N A S A  
Headquarters in  Washington, DC. Young, 62 ,  was  currently  serving as  Special 
Assistant  to  the   Director  of  the   Johnson   Space  Center ,   Houston ,   for 
Enginering,  Operations,  and  Safety.  (NA SA  Release  92-160;  Fla  Today, O c t  
11/92)  

T h e   National   Association  of  Small  Disadvantaged  Business  presented 
NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  with  its Meritorious Award. It was t h e  
second  time Goldin  had  received  t h e  award.  (NA SA  Release 92-162)  

October 2:  Ceremonies  a t  Edwards Air   Force Base  marked  the   50 th  anniver-  
sary of  the  birth  of  the  jet  age. O n  October   2 ,   1942, Bob Stanley first flew  the  
XP-59 above Rogers Dry Lake Bed a t  Muroc Air Base  (now  Edwards Air Force 
Base). (Antelope Valley  Press, O c t  2/92) 

T h e  first  meetings  of  the   National   Space  Policy  Assessment  Task  Group  
took place  o n  October   1 and  2  in  Washington,  DC. T h e  group was  consider- 
ing policy changes to military, civilian, and  commercial  space efforts and ways 
to  make  them  work  more  in  tandem   now  tha t   the   Cold War  had   ended .  A t  
t h e  meetings,  government officials urged  t h e  group's members to  privatize  the  
weather  satellite system, t o  call for revamping  commercial  space rules, and  t o  
decry missile proliferation.  (Space New s ,  O c t  5 -  11/92)  

Defense contractor Teledyne, Inc., announced tha t  i t  would pay  $17.5 million 
in  fines to  settle Federal criminal  charges alleging that   the  company systemati- 
cally  falsified  reliability  tests  of  electromagnetic  relays.  T h e  relays  are  used  in 
virtually  all  U.S.  weapons  systems and  space  programs,  including  the   Patriot 
missile and the  Space Shuttle .  It was not  known  if  any systems failures had been 
caused by  the  relays, which function as electronic switches. (AP  O c t  3/92) 

NA SA   announced   tha t   extended  observations  by  the   Hubble  Space 
Telescope indicated  tha t  Jupiter's moon 10  has a smaller atmosphere  t h a n  pre- 
viously  thought ,  with  very  dense  regions possibly over  volcanoes  and   surface 
frost. T h e  observations  also showed  tha t   despite  continual   volcanic  activity, 
10's  surface has  remained  largely  unchanged  since  first  photographed  by  the  

ASTRC3NAUTICS  ,AND AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER  1992 

L70yager spacecraft  in   1979.  ( N A S A  Release  9 2 - 1 6 3 )  
Oc tober  3 :  T h e  Pioneer  Venus orbiter  ran  ou t  of  thruster  propellant   today after  
circling  Venus  f ~ j r  14  years.  T h e   orbiter   was  expected   t o  b um   up  in  Venus' 
atmosphere   sometime   in  t h e   coming   week.  T h e   orbiter   was  t h e   first  U .S .  
spacecraft  t o  circle  Venus.  It  used  a crude  radar  t o  map more  t h a n  9 0  percent  
of  t h e  planet's surface.  (AP ,  O c t  3/92;  U P I ,  O c t  3/92 ,  O c t  5/92; W Times, O c t  
5/92; NY  Tm e s ,  O c t  6 / 9 2 )  

Oc tober   4 :  J o h n  L.  Sloop ,  76 ,  a n  electrical  engineer  who  was  a  retired  official 
of  N A S A ,  died  in  Wa sh ing ton ,   DC .   Mr.  Sloop   retired  in  1972  as  Assistant  
Associate  Administrator   for  Advanced   Research  and   Propulsion  after  a  30- 
year  ca ree r   w i th   N A S A   a n d   its  predecessor ,   t h e   N a t i o n a l   Advisory  
C omm i t t e e  for Aeronautics .   ( W  Post,  O c t   7/92)  

Zoltan   L.  Ray,  a  research  physicist  who   developed  t h e   first  radar  t o  study 
celestial  bodies,  died  of  emphysema  a t   his   home   in  C h e v y  Cha se ,  Maryland .  
Born  in Hungary, h e  taught  physics  a t  Szeged University   in  t h e   1930s and  was 
research  professor  a t   George   Washington   University  before  joining  t h e  
Na t iona l  Bureau of  S tanda rd s  in   1955 .  ( W  Pos t ,  O c t  11/92; C Trib, O c t  11 /92 )  

Oc tobe r   5:  NASA's  funding   remained  flat   as  congressional  appropriations  
committees  completed   work  o n  NASA's  1993  budget.  A l though   some  h igh -  
profile  programs  such   as  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   and   a  constellation   of  env i ron -  
men ta l   monitoring   satellites  emerged  virtually  unscathed ,   newer  or   less visi- 
ble  efforts  suffered setbacks. A n  advanced   series of  tracking   satellites,  robotic  
missions  t o   t h e   Moon ,   a n d   a  new  generation   of  launchers   were  among   t h e  
efforts put   o n  ho ld   for  a t   least  t h e  n e x t  year. Spend ing  o n  space  research  and  
technology  was  reduced  by  13  pe rcen t .  (Space  N ew s ,  O c t  5-1 1 / 9 2 )  

N A S A  announced  t h a t  asteroid Toutatis would pass w i th in  2.2 million miles 
of  Earth  o n   Oc tobe r   8,  a n   unusually  close  encounter .   Toutatis  is  about   two 
miles in diameter  and  passes Earth every four years, making  it o n e  of  t h e  largest 
objects   t o   cross  Earth's orbit   o n   a  regular  basis.  In  2004 Toutatis   would  pass 
w i th in  one  million  miles  of  Earth .   ( N A S A  Release  92-164;  UPI O c t   5/92) 

Directors  of  t h e   U.S.  and   Russian  space  agencies  announced   plans  in 
Moscow  t o  put  a Russian  cosmonaut  o n  the  Space  Shu t t le   in November   1993  
and   t o  f ly   a n  American   astronaut  o n  a Soyuz  rocket  t o  t h e  Mir  Space  S t a t i o n  
in  1995. In addition  t o  the  projects involving  cosmonauts  and  astronauts  work- 
ing  together   in  space, plans  were  announced   t o  put  American   instruments  o n  
board  a n  unmanned  Russian  scientific flight  t o  Mars  in   1994. ( N A S A  Release 
92-165;  LlPI  O c t   5/92; NY  Times,  O c t  6/95; W  Times,  O c t  6/92;  W  Post,  O c t  
6/92;  The  Sun; O c t  6/92;  AzlWk, O c t   12/92; SCM ,  O c t   14/92)  

Oc tobe r   6:   N A S A   set  a n   O c t o b e r   22  launch   d a t e   for  Space   S h u t t l e  

OCTOBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Columbia's  satellite-delivery and   research  mission. T h e  six-member  crew was 
t o  release  t h e   Italian   Space  Agency's  Laser Geodynam ic  Sa te l l i te ,  o r  Lageos, 
t h e n   conduc t   spacecraft  tracking   experiments   and   mechanical   and   medical 
tests.  ( N A S A  Release  N92-88;  LA Times, O c t  7/92)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   Sergei  K .   Krikalev  and  Col .Vladimir  G .  Titov   had  
been  approved  as  t h e   two  Russian  candidates   to   be  trained   t o   f ly  o n  a  Space  
S h u t t l e  mission  scheduled  for November   1993 .  ( N A S A  Release  92 -166 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  had   awarded  about   $15  million   for  124  micro-  
gravity  research  grants   t o   develop   t h e   research  po ten t ia l   of  Space   S t a t i o n  
Freedom  as  o n e  of  t h e  Nation's   premiere  science  and   technology   assets.  T h e  
grants  represent  a n  increase of  70 pe rcen t   in  t h e  numher  of  investigators spon -  
sored  by  NASA's microgravity division .  T h e  division  now sponsors nearly  200 
scientific  investigators and  plans  t o  expand  t o  a t  least  300 hefore  t h e  Agency's 
planned   Space   S t a t i o n   becomes  operational   in  t h e   late   1990s.  ( N A S A  
Release  92-167;  Fla  Today, O c t   1 1 /92 )  

President  George   Bush  signed  a n   appropriations  hill  providing  $2 .1  billion  
for  N.4SA's  Space   S t a t i o n   in  fiscal  year  1993 .  O t h e r   projects  t o   be  funded  
inc lude   t h e   C o n s o r t i um   for  I n t e r n a t i o n a l   Ea r th   S c i e n c e   I n f o rm a t i o n  
Network ,   which   was  t o   provide  social  scientists   w i th   Earth   science   da ta  
beamed from N A S A  env i ronmen ta l  mon i to r ing  satellites  t o  understand   issues 
such   as  land   use  a n d   population   growth .   A   program  for  developing   a   new 
NASA -P e n t a g o n  rocket  t o  put  satellites  i n t o  space ,  ensuring  con t inued  use of 
Ma r t in  Marietta's T i tan  IV booster for satellite  launchings ,  was  te rm ina ted .  ( P  
Inq, O c t  7/92; A P  O c t ,  7/92; W Post, O c t  7/92; Space News, O c t   12 -18 )  

Congress   planned   t o   give  t h e   fledgling  U .S .   commercial   space  business  a  
boost  next   year by  pumping  $10  million  i n t o  launch   site  improvements .  Most 
of  t h a t   money  was  expected   t o   be  spen t  o n  upgrades  t o  C a p e  Canave ra l  A i r  
Force  S t a t i o n  facilities.  (F la  Today, O c t   8 /92 )  

October 8 :  Hubble  Space  Telescope scientists  announced  t h a t  Huhh le  has used 
a na tu ra l  "zoom  lens"  it discovered  i n  space t o  photograph   a n  otherwise   invis- 
ible  d i s tan t  galaxy  a n d   t o  c h a r t  concen t ra t ion s  of  t h e  mysterious  dark  ma t te r  
t h a t  controls   t h e  fate  of  t h e  universe. T h e  astronomers  said  t h a t   t h e  telescope 
was  actually  seeing  a   p h e n om e n o n   known   as  a  gravitational   lens ,   wh ich  
occurs when   t h e  gravitational   field of  a  massive object   bends  light   rays from  a  
more  d i s tan t   source. T h e y   regarded  t h e   ability  t o  discern   i n  detail   t h e   struc-  
ture   of  t h e   d i s tan t   magnified  object   as  a  major  breakthrough   in  ohserving  
techniques .   ( W  Post,  O c t   9 /92 ;   UPI ,  O c t   8/92;  NY  Times, O c t   9/92;  N A S A  
Release 92-87   and  92 -168 )  

NASA's  Pioneer   12 spacecraft  fell  o u t   of  radio  c o n t a c t   with   Earth   as  t h e  

,4STRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1992 

craft, dipping lower and lower with each orbit, faced the prospect of  a slow and 
fiery death  In  Venus' atmosphere during the next few days. Launched  in  1978 
on  a radar-mapping mission  planned  to last only 15 months, the craft worked 
nearly  perfectly for  14 years,  using  radar  to make  a crude topographic map of 
93  percent  of  Venus' surface.  (AP ,  Oc t   9/92;  UPI, Oc t   8/92; W  Times, Oc t  
9/92; The  Sun ,  Oc t  9/92) 

NASA   announced  that  astronomers  using  a  new  NASA   satellite  had 
detected  a  powerful, exotic object 2 billion  light-years beyond  the  Milky Way 
Galaxy.  Th e   radiation  source  was  observed  by  the   Extreme  Ultraviolet 
Explorer Spacecraft launched  o n  June 7.  (NASA  Release 92-169) 

David  Williamson,  Jr.,  62,  retired  Assistant  Administrator  for  Special 
Projects with  NASA, died at  his home  in Bethesda, Maryland. (W  Post, O c t  
9/92) 

October 9: In a speech to the Society of  Hispanic Professional Engineers in Los 
Angeles, NASA Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin said NASA  was  committed 
to  building  a  culturally  diverse  workforce  as  it  pursued  the  exploration  of 
space.  (NASA  Release 92-170) 

October 10: Th e  Argentine weather service reported that the outer edge of  the  
"ozone  hole"  has  shifted for  the  first  time  to  a populated  island  in Tierra del 
Fuego  off  the  southern  tip  of  the  South  American  mainland.  Data  from 
NASA's Total Ozone Mapping  Spectrometer  o n  the Nimbus  7  satellite  con- 
firmed  that  the  area  of  depleted  ozone extended  for  some 8 .9  million  square 
miles over  the south polar  region, an  increase of  about  15 percent  from  1991, 
the  largest ozone hole ever observed. (W  Tmes, Oct  11/92; AvWk, Oc t   12/92; 
P lnq, Oct  16/92; AP, Oct  16/92) 

October  12: Astronomers  resumed  the  search  for  evidence  of  extraterrestrial 
intelligence  (SETI)  today  with  simultaneous  commands  to  computers  and 
radio  telescopes  at  Areciho,  Puerto  Rico,  and  in  the  Mojave  Desert  of 
California. Although  there  have  been  previous  limited  projects, NASA  offi- 
cials, who  are  financing and  directing  the  new  project,  said  the  planned  10- 
year, $100 million search would  be  the most comprehensive and ambitious one 
ever undertaken  to  search  for  signals of  life  beyond Earth's galaxy. Later, more 
radio  telescopes around  the world  were  to  join  the  search, which NASA   has 
renamed  the High Resolution Microwave Survey. Th e  latest  SETI project was 
timed  to hegin on  the 500th anniversary of  Columbus' discovery of  land in the 
Americas.  (NY E m s ,  Oct  6/92, Oc t   13/92; W Post, Oct  5/92; LA  Tmes, O c t  
7/92; The Sun ,  Oct 8/92; Newsweek, Oct  12/92; AP, Oc t  10192, Oc t  12/92; UPI, 
Oc t   13/92; C Trib, Oct  10192; P Inq, Oct  10192; 13/92; NASA Release 92-160) 

A group of NASA scientists sampling the air over southern Africa found mas- 
sive  pollutic>n usually  associated  with  the  industrial  centers  of  the  Northern 

26C  

OCTOBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

Hemisphere. Most  of  the  pollution  is  caused  by  peasant  farmers burning  huge 
tracts of  scrub brush  to clear their land for planting. The  group arrived in south- 
em  Africa in early October after studying a virtually identical problem in Brazil. 
Together, the  pollution  from  the  two  regions was  thought  to be  changing  the 
atmosphere throughout the Southern Hemisphere. Some 180 scientists from  13 
countries were  involved  in what was  considered the most detailed atmospheric 
study ever made of  the South Atlantic.  (AP, Oct  12/92; AuWk, Oct  12/92) 

A  Defense  Science  Board  review  of  the  National  Aerospace  Plane  ruled 
against building the single-stage-to-orbit vehicle in the near future, citing per- 
sistent  technology shortfalls. (AvWk, Oc t   12/92) 

T h e   U.S.  National  Research  Council  urged  NASA  to  expand  study  of 
advanced  subsonic aircraft  in  order  to  keep  U.S.  aerospace  companies  com- 
petitive  in  the  face  of  growing  advances made  by  foreign  industry. A  council 
report  said NASA  should focus on  improving aircraft performance and  oper- 
ating efficiency and coordinate  the work  with  industry and academia. ( A v W ,  
Oc t   12/92; National Research Council Neua  Report, Fall Report) 

October 13: NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was  res- 
cued  thanks  to  a distress signal picked  up  by  a Russian  satellite and  relayed  to 
the  U.S.  Air  Force  and  search  teams. Th e  hunter  carried  a  tiny  experimental 
emergency transmitter that may  eventually become available for widespread use 
by  campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The   international  satellite-aided 
search  and  rescue  system  started  10 years  ago  and  includes  Canada,  France, 
Russia, and  the United  States. (NASA  Release 92-17 1; UPI, Oct  13/92) 

NASA's Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory in  Pasadena  was  added  to  the  Federal 
Superfund  list  of  the Nation's most  dangerous dump  sites  because  toxic  sol- 
vents  used  40  years  ago  during  research  on   liquid  rocket  propellants  had 
leaked  into ground  water.  (LA  Times, O c t   14/92; AP, Oc t   14/92) 

October  15: NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S .  Goldin  announced  a  series  of 
structural  changes  at  NASA  to   improve management  and  to  bring  focus  to 
programs that  are essential to  the Nation's space effort. Th e  changes affected 
divisions dealing with  the  Space  Station Freedom, Science  and  Technology, 
Earth  and  Planetary  Science, Aeronautics,  and  Russian  Programs.  (NASA  
Release 92-172; Space News, Nov  2-8/92; Science, O c t  23/92) 

T h e  Air  Force  test-fired a  new  booster  for  the  xtan  IV  rocket  and  said  it 
was  the second successful test since an  explosion ruined a firing last year. Th e  
new  booster would  allow T ~ t a n  IVs, which  launch U.S. spy  satellites, to  carry 
heavier  payloads. (AP  Oct  16/92) 

NASA  officials said  that  the  last  scheduled U.S.  shuttle  flight  this  year, a 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS  

OCTOBER  1992 

military  mission by  Discovery, probably would  be  delayed because of  a  faulty 
component  in  the  orbital maneuvering  system. A December 2  launch date  was 
subsequently  planned.  (AP ,  O c t   15/92; NY  Xmes,  O c t   16/92; W  Times, O c t  
16/92; AP ,  Nov  2/92) 

T h e  International  Astronomical Un ion   for  the   first  time  issued  a warning 
of  a potential  collision between  Earth  and  a comet,  in  this case Come t  Swift- 
Tuttle. T h e  date  of  a potential  collision  is  more  than  a century away, and  the  
odds  of  a  collision  about  one   in  10,000.  (NY Zmes,  O c t   27/92; C  Trib, O c t  
31/92; NY Times, Nov  3/92; W Post, Nov  4/92)  

October 16: Space Cen te r  Houston opened o n  this date. T h e  $70 million  n o n -  
profit center ,  which expected  to  lure two million  visitors a year,  is  designed  to 
bring  the  "wonder days" of  the  early space program to a generation of  children 
tha t   has  known  only  the   Space  Shuttle .   T h e   Center ,   o n   the   periphery  of 
NASA's  space  campus,  supplants  the   former  visitor  facility  inside  t h e  
Lyndon  B.  Johnson   Space  Center .   (USA  Today,  O c t   14/92; H  Chron,  O c t  
14/92, O c t   16/92; AP ,  O c t   16/92; Newsweek, O c t  26/92; The Sun, O c t  25/92) 

Orbital  Sciences Corporation  of  Fairfax, Virginia, suffered another  failure of 
one  of  its rockets. Ground  controllers blew up  t h e  rocket  about seven minutes 
in to   its  flight  a t  Wake  Island  in  t h e  Pacific Ocean ,   conducted  as  part  of  the  
Pentagon's  "Brilliant Pebbles"  program.  ( W  Post, Nov  4/92) 

October  19:  NASA   announced   tha t   Dr.  Chiaki   Mukai  of  t h e   Japanese 
National   Space Development Agency  had  been  designated  as  the   prime pay- 
load  specialist  for  the   second  International  Microgravity  Laboratory mission 
scheduled  for  launch  aboard  t h e   Space  Shu t t le  Columbia  in  July  1994. S h e  
was  to  be  t h e  first Japanese woman  t o  take  part  in  a  U.S.  space shuttle  mis- 
sion.  Dr.  Jean-Jacques  Favier,  a  scientist  with  the   French  Atomic   Energy 
Commission, was  selected  as  an  alternate  payload  specialist.  (NA SA  Release 
92-173; UPI, O c t  20192) 

NASA's  inspector general, Bill Colvin ,  said tha t  an   investigation had  been 
going o n  for  nearly  two years as  to whether  t h e  Perkin-Elmer Corporation  of 
Danbury,  Connecticut ,   maker  of  the   flawed  mirrors  of  the   Hubble  Space 
Telescope, withheld  data   tha t  would  have   revealed  focusing problems  before 
Hubble was  sent  aloft.  (The Sun, O c t  20192; WSJ, O c t  20192) 

Democratic  vice  presidential  candidate  Albert  Go re   criticized  the   Bush 
Administration  for  misdirecting  the   national   space  program  before  an   audi- 
ence  a t  NASA's Goddard Space Flight Cen te r   in Greenbelt ,  Maryland. Go re  
said tha t  the  administration had  failed to  establish strategic priorities and tha t ,  
under  President  Bush, NASA  had  found  itself working o n  too  many programs 
with  too   little  money. H e   pledged  tha t   a  Bill  C l in ton   administration  would 

OCTOBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

seek  to  spend  $35 billion  by  the  end  of  the  decade  to  build  an  orbiting  space 
station ,  in  part  to replace jobs  lost  in military  industries.  (The Sun, O c t  20192; 
NY Times, O c t  20192; Prince Georges J o u m l ,  O c t  2 1/92; W.  Post, O c t  20192) 

T h e  countdown began  for  the   launching  of  the  Space Shuttle  Columbia  o n  
a  research  and  satellite  delivery  mission.  (NY Tmes ,  O c t   20192;  U P ] ,  O c t  
20192; NY  Xmes, O c t  22/92; UPI, O c t  22/92) 

October  20:  NASA   Acting   Deputy  Director  Aaron   C o h e n   announced   tha t  
IBM  Federal  Systems Company,  Houston;  and  Honeywell,  Inc.,  Space  and 
Strategic  Systems  Operations,  Clearwater,  Florida;  were  the   recipients  of 
NASA's  Quality  and   Excellence  Award.  T h e   announcement   came  a t   the  
N i n t h   Annua l  NASA/Contractors   Conference  o n  Quality  and  Productivity 
in Pasadena,  California.  (NA SA  Release 92-178)  

October 21 : During  Space  Shu t t le   Columbia's  upcoming  mission, scientists 
planned   to   test  a  theory  which   may  have   applications  ranging  from  hurri-  
c a n e  dynamics  to  superconductivity. T h e  Lambda-Point  Experiment  was  t o  
study   t h e   strange  behavior  of  helium   a t   its  critical  temperature   of  2.177 
degrees  above  absolute  zero.  O t h e r  experiments  were  to  study  t h e   effects  of 
gravity  o n  metals  and   semiconductors  as  they   solidify o n  Earth  and   i n  orbit  
and   vibrations  in   the   Shu t t le   as  t h e  vibrations  affect  t h e  o the r   two  experi-  
men ts .   T h e   S h u t t l e   crew   was  also  schedu led   t o   deploy   t h e   Laser 
Geodynamics  Sa te l l i te ,  a n   Italian   satellite   to   study  the   movements   of  t h e  
Earth's  crust  and   o the r   phenomena .   ( N A S A  Releases  92-175   and   92-176;  
LA  Times, O c t  2/92) 

NASA   chose  29  supercomputing  research proposals tha t   the  agency hoped 
would  lead  to  a revolution  in the  way  scientists study the  Earth and  space. T h e  
goal  was  to   achieve  computational  capabilities  far  beyond  those  of  today's 
machines, enabling researchers to  produce  realistic simulations of phenomena  
such  as  the   interaction  of  Earth's oceans,  air, and   land masses and  reconstruc- 
tions of  the   evolution  of  stars, galaxies, and  t h e  universe. 

NASA   researchers  found  unexpectedly  high  productivity  of  microscopic 
plants  near  the   equator  in  t h e   Pacific Ocean  during  a  recent  airborne  study 
aimed  a t   increasing  understanding  of  these  plants  in  the   region.  T h e  plants, 
called  phytoplankton ,   play  a n   important  role  in  the   absorption  of  carbon 
dioxide  from  t h e  atmosphere.  (NA SA  Release 92-179) 

NA SA   scientists  tapped  into   a 300-year-old  lead  coffin  in  S t .  Mary's City, 
Maryland,  in  a search  for air free of man-made pollutants. Samples of such air 
was expected to  aid  in understanding ozone damage  in the  present-day  atmos- 
  here.  Tests o n   this  and  other   coffins also helped  NA SA   scientists evaluate 
the  effectiveness of  a tool  that  examines metal  for tiny cracks or  corrosion  tha t  
occur  in  aircraft or spacecraft.  (USA  Today, O c t  21/92) 

263 

ASTRONAUTICS AN13 AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER  1992 

NASA-sponsored   research  i n t o   t h e  biological  effects  of  space  flight  a t   t h e  
University  of  Wisconsin   suggested  t h a t   astronauts   may  have   t o   workout  in 
space  t o  protect   the i r  bones  o n  long-duration  flights. Dr. A r t h u r  Vailas of  t h e  
university's  Biodynamics  Laboratory  based  his  conclusions   o n   t h e  metabolic  
processes  in   t h e   bones  of  rats  t h a t   had   experienced   days  of  weightlessness 
aboard  t h e  Space  Shu t t le .   (L JP I ,  O c t  2 1 / 9 2 )  

U .S .   Rep. Louis Stokes ,  who  criticized  N A S A  hiring  policies  as   racially dis-  
criminatory   during   congressional  deba te   in  July, said  t h a t  h e  was  encouraged  
by  recen t  steps  toward  diversification  discussed  by  t h e  space agency a t  a ga th -  
ering  of  top  N A S A  officials a t  a mostly  Rlack elementary  schcwl in C leve land .  
T h e  gathering   included  a  visit  by  Rlack  a s t ronau t  Cha r le s  Bolden.  (T h e  Plain 
Deak r ,  O c t  22 /92 )  

Oc tobe r   2 2 :   T h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia   blasted   i n t o   space   unde r   c o n t r o l  
of  a  f i v e -m a n ,  m e - w o m a n   crew.  In   cotnrnand   was  J am e s  W e t h e r b e e   of  t h e  
Navy ;  his  co -p i lo t  was C a p t .  M ichae l  Baker.  Mission  specialists  were C a p t .  
W i l l iam   S h e p h e r d   of  t h e   Navy ,   flight   eng inee r ;   C h a r l e s   Lacy  Veach ;  
Tamara   J e r n i g a n ;   a n d   C a n a d i a n   researcher   S t e v e n   MacLean .   O n   board  
were  commercially   sponsored   expe r imen t s   t h a t  were  t o  e x am i n e  a p o t e n t i a l  
t r e a tm e n t   for  osteoporosis ,   ma te r ia l   crystals  t o   increase   t h e   speed   of  c om -  
pu te r s ,   p ro te in   c ry s ta l s   t o   d e t e rm i n e   t h e   molecular   s t ruc tu re   of  "alfa-2b  
in te r fe ron"   used  in   t h e   t r e a tm e n t   of  some   cance r s ,   a n d   expe r imen t s   o n  
microgravity   effects   o n   a s t ronau t s .   ( N A S A   Release   9 2 - 1 8 0 ;   P  Inq ,   O c t  
22 /92 ;   LJP1, O c t   22/92;   A P ,   O c t   22/92;   P  Jnq,  O c t   23/92;   NY  Times,  O c t  
23 /92 ;  O c t   25 /92 ;  W  T imes ,   O c t   23/92;   USA  T o d a y ,  O c t   23/92;   A P ,  O c t  
23/92;  C SM ,  O c t   23/92;  LA  Times,  O c t   23 /92 ;  T h e   S u n ,  O c t   23 /92 ;  C Tr ib ,  
O c t   23 /92 )  

A J a p a n e s e  scientist ,  Eiichi Yamaguchi, a senior  research scientist  a t  N i p p o n  
Telegraph  and   Te lephone   Co rpo ra t ion ,   said  t h a t   h e   had   observed  "cold" 
nuclear  fusion five times s ince  t h c  beginning  of August .  Much  about  his claim  
remained  unclear,  however.  (T h e  Sun ,  O c t  23/92)  

T h e  "Brilliant  Pebbles"  missile-defense  system  sufYered  a new  setback  when  
t h e  test  of  a n  experimental   rocket  was aborted   55 seconds after  launch .  It was 
t h e  second  failure  in   three   experitnental   launches .   ( W  Pos t ,  O c t  25/92) 

October  23:  N A S A   signed  a n   agreement   with   t h e   Na t iona l   ln s t i tu te   o n  
Deafness  a n d  O t h e r  Commun ica t ion   Disorders,  N IDCD ,   t o  expand   biomed- 
ical cooperation   between   t h e  two agencies. T h e  agreement  was  in tended  t o  be 
t h e   beginning   of  NASA's  cooperation   with   various  institutes   w i th in   t h e  
Na t iona l   Institutes   of  H e a l t h .  T h e   major  goal  of  th i s   collaboration   was  t h e  
e n h a n c i n g   of  basic  knowledge  a n d   understanding   of  vestibular  func t ion   in 
b o t h  normal   and  clinical  states.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -182 )  

OCTOBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

Astronomer  Duncan  Steel of  the  Anglo-Australian Observatory  in  Sydney 
warned  of  a possible  collision  between  the   Earth  and   Come t  Swift-Tuttle in 
t h e  year  2 1  16. Several years would be  needed  to  track the  comet  to  determine  
its orbit with  accuracy and  to decide whether  or  not   a collision  is  likely.  (The 
Sun, O c t  26/92; W Times, O c t  27/92) 

October 24:  Shu t t le  Columbia astronauts carried  out  experiments designed  to 
ease  reentry  from  space. They  pedalled  furiously  o n   a  stationary  bicycle  and 
floated  in  a  depressurization sack  to   draw  blood  from  the   top  of  the   body  to  
t h e   legs.  They   also  grabbed  an   aluminum  panel  with  the   Shuttle's  arm  and 
swung it about the  spacecraft's cargo bay  to test  a Canadian  rohotic vision sys- 
tem.  A  day  earlier,  they  deployed  the   Lageos  I1  geodynamics  satellite.  (NY  
Times,  (O c t  25/92; W Post, O c t  25/92; P  Inq O c t  24/92; The  Sun ,  O c t  25/92) 

Two NASA  workshops held  during  t h e  past  year  produced  a recommenda- 
tion   tha t   a  multi-governmental  effort  be  undertaken  to  detect   dangerous 
asteroids using a worldwide network of  telescopes a t  a cost of  $50 million. T h e  
second  workshop  examined  methods  for  deflecting  or  destroying  asteroids. 
T h e  chance  of a catastrophic collision  in  the  average person's  lifetime is quite  
1 in   10,000, the  scientists said.  (USA  Weekend, O c t  23-25/92) 
small-about 

October 26: O n  the  fourth day of  their  mission, Shuttle  Columbia's astronauts 
measured  ozone  in  Earth's  upper  atmosphere  and   tested  a  new  toilet .   T h e  
flight was scheduled  to last  ten  days.  ( W  Post, O c t  26/92; P  Inq, O c t  26/92; The 
Sun, O c t  26/92; USA  Today, Oc t  26/92; W.  Tmes, O c t  26/92; AP ,  O c t  25/92, 
O c t  26/92; UPI, O c t  26/92) 

A  physicist a t  the  University of Maryland, Richard  L.  Greenc ,  developed  a 
type of  microscope  tha t  utilizes superconducting wire  tha t   is  supersensitive  to  
magnetic   fields.  Known  t o   physicists  as  Supe rconduc t ing   Quan tum  
Interference Devices, the  superconducting filaments in  the  microscope zero  in 
o n  magnetic fields with great accuracy when passed  over an  object. T h e  tech-  
nology  has  medical,  military,  and   industrial  applications.  (The  Sun ,   O c t .  
26/92) 

Pratt  & Whitney  said tha t  it had  agreed to market  rocket propulsion  systems 
in  t h e  Un i ted   States  made  by  Russia's N P O  Energomash,  including  the   RD-  
170 rocket  engine. N PO  Energomash engines placed  in to  orbit all of  the  space 
vehicles  launched  by  the   former  Soviet  Un ion .   (NY Times, O c t   27/92; AP ,  
O c t  27/92; Washington Technology, Nov  5/92 ) 

October 27:  Geologists a t  NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory and  at  Louisiana 
S ta te   University  announced   tha t   they  had  discovered  several  previously 
unknown  earthquake  faults  in   California's  northeastern   Mojave  Desert  hy 

4STRON.4UTIC:> :\NL 

1  i

f

 K('Y;\UTICS 

OCTOBER  1992 

analyzing  remote   sensing  images  a t   op t ica l ,   infrared,  a n d   radar  wavelengths. 
A t   a  meeting   of  t h e   Geological   Society  of  America   i n   C i n c i n n a t i ,   JPL's 
Dr. J o h n  Ford outlined   how spaceborne  imaging techno logy  has  helped   scien-  
tists  find  these  nelvly observed faults.  ( N A S A  Release 92-186;  A P  O c t  27/92)  

October 28:  N A S A  announced   t h a t  Cha r le s  F.  Bolden, Jr. Col . ,  U SMC ,  would 
command   Space   S h u t t l e   mission  STS - 6 0   in  November   1993. O t h e r   crew  
members  would  be  Pilot  K e n n e t h   S.  Reightler,  Jr.;  a n d   mlssion  specialists 
Franklin  R. Chang-Dia:;  J a n  Davis, Ronald M .  Sega, and  a Russian cosmonaut  
yet  t o  be  designated .   ( N A S A  Release  92-188;  Space N ew s ,  Nov   2-8/92)  

October  29:  NA SA   announced   t h a t   Dr.  Ma r t in  J .  Fettman   of  Co lo rado  S t a t e  
University's College  of  Veterinary  Medicine  would  be  t h e  prime  payload  spe-  
cialist  for  t h e   second  Spacelab  Life  Sciences  mission  scheduled   for  launch   in  
August  1993 .  Previously  narned  crew  members  consist  of  Commande r   J o h n  
Rlaha;  Pilot  Richard   Searfoss;  Payload  Commande r   Rhea   Seddon ;   and  
Mission  Specialists  Willianl  S.  McA r thu r ,   Jr.;  S h a n n o n   Lucid;  a n d   David 
Wolf.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -  190 )  

NASA   a n n o ~ r n c e d  t h a t   t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom program  had   in i t ia ted  a 
new  effort  t o   reduce  dramatically  t h e   time   it  would  take   t o   integrate   small 
experiments  o n  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n .  Called  EXPRESS  for Expedited  Processing 
of  Experiments  t o  Space   S t a t i o n ,  N A S A   engineers  hoped   t o  reduce  t h e  time  
it  takes  t o  get  a  small payload  flown  aboard  Freedom  from  up  t o  five years  t o  
less  t h a n  one .   ( N A S A  Release  92.191  ) 

October  30: N A S A   and   t h e  Environmental   Protection   Agency   (EPA )  signed 
a n   agreement   t o   hroaden   cooperation   between   t h e   two  agencies.  T h e  agree- 
men t   addresses  env i ronmen ta l   research,  pollution   monitoring ,   and   o t h e r  
activities  where  t h e  research  capabilities  of  N A S A  c a n  support  EPA's mission 
t o  protect   t h e  env i ronmen t .   ( N A S A  Release 9 2 - 1 9 2 )  

T h e   Inter-Agency   Con su l ta t ive   G roup   for  Space   Sc ience   announced   in  
Wa sh ing ton ,   DC,  t h a t   scientists   from  t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s ,  J a p a n ,  Russia,  and  
Europe  were  moun t ing   a  cot>rdinated ,  multi-mission  effort  in  solar-terrestrial 
science  during  t h e  nex t   four years. T h e  effort  began with   t h e  launch   of Japan's  
Geo ta i l   satellite   in  July  1992  and   was  t o  con t inue   with  t h e   1993  launch   of 
NASA's W I N D  spacecraft  and   missions  from  Russia  in   1993  and   Europe  in  
1995.  NASA's  Interplanetary   Mon i to r ing   Platform  and   Japan's  AKEBONO  
spacecraft were  t o  provide  important   da ta   as well.  ( N A S A  Release 92 -193 )  

T h e  Pontifical  Academy  of  Sciences  of  t h e  Roman  C a t h o l i c  C h u r c h  adm i t -  
ted  in  Rome   t h a t   clerical  judges  erred  in   1633  when   they  condemned   t h e  

OCTOBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Italian   ma thema t ic ian   and   astronomer   Ga l i leo   Galilei   for  propagating  t h e  
n o t i o n   t h a t   t h e  Earth   revolves  around   t h e  S u n .  ( P  Inq ,   Nov   1 /92 )  

NASA   astronomers   a t   Kitt   Peak  Na t iona l   Observatory   announced   t h a t  
they  had  observed what   they helieved  t o  he  a galaxy  in  t h e  process of  forming .  
T h e y  estimated   t h a t  t h e  galaxy  is more  t h a n   I 0  hillion  light  years d i s tan t .   ( W  
Times, Nov   1/92;  NY  Times, Nov   3/92;  AP ,  Nov   11/92)  

November 

Nowmber  1 : Space Shu t t le  Columbia landed  a t  Cape  Canaveral ,  ending  a  10- 
day journey during which  the  crew released a laser-reflecting satellite and  test- 
ed  a robotic  eye. (NY Tmes, Nov  2/92; P lnq, Nov   2/92; W Post, Nov  2/92; W 
Zmes, Nov  2/92; AP ,  Nov  2/92; UPI ,  Nov   2/92; The Sun, Nov  2/92)  

* Rockwell's Space Systems Division  and  NPO  Energia announced   tha t   they  
had  signed a contract   that  was  the  first step  in building docking hardware  for 
a  U .S .   Space  Shuttlefiussian   Mir  Space  Station   mission  planned  for  1995. 
(AuWk, Nov   2/92) 

Planetary  scientists a t  NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  and   a t  California 
Institute  of Technology recently  reported  tha t  they  had  found water ice o n  the  
planet  Mercury. Radar  beams aimed  a t  both   of  the  planet's  poles bore telltale 
signs of  having  bounced  off  of  frozen surfaces. (Erne, Nov  2/92) 

T h e  European  Space Research  and  Technology  Cen te r   a t  Noordwijk,  the  
Netherlands,  said  it  would  use  a new  robotics  center   to  support  planning  for 
t h e  European  Space Agency's manned  space operations.  (AvWk, Nov  2/92)  

Michael Griffin, NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Exploration, said  tha t  
a  new  heavy-lift  vehicle  built  from  components  of  the   Space  Shu t t le   trans- 
portation  system should  be  able to  launch  elements of  Space S ta t ion  Freedom 
a t  a  cost comparable  to  tha t  of  t h e  space shuttle .   (AvWk, Nov  2/92)  

Japanese and  Chinese   researchers  announced   tha t   they would  study  single 
by  semiconductors during  the  first joint  space experiment  by 
crystals 
the   two countries.  (AvWk, Nov  2/92)  

NASA   and  a contractor   team  headed  by  Rockwell  International   said  they 
were  conducting   supersonic  laminar  flow  experiments  using  two  General  
Dynamics  F-16XL   demonstrators o n   loan   from  the   U .S .   Air  Force.  (AvWk, 
Nov  2/92)  

November 3: NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  announced  the  appoint-  
ment   of  Dr.  Charles Pellerin  as Associate  Deputy Administrator  for Strategic 
Planning,  J o h n  R .  Dailey as  Associate  Deputy  Administrator,  and   Ralph  C. 
Thomas  as  Assistant  Administrator  for  Small  and  Disadvantaged  Business 
Utilization.  T h e   appointments  continued   management  changes Go ld in   had 
instituted  in  recent  months.  (NA SA  Release 92-194; Space News, Nov  9 -15 )  

NA SA  began  assembling Space Shuttle  Discovery for  launch   in December 
o n   a  mission  to  deploy  a  secret  Department  of  Defense  satellite.  Liftoff  was 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

NOVEMBER  1992 

scheduled  for December  2 ,  nearly  a month   behind  schedule  because  of  prob- 
lems with  a faulty steering engine.  ( P  Inq, Nov  4/92; W Tmes ,  Nov  4/92)  

Former NASA   Administrator  Richard  Truly  said  tha t   he   would  assume  a 
new  job  as  director  of  the   Georgia  Tech Research  Institute ,  a  branch  of  the  
Georgia  Institute  of  Technology.  (Space News, Nov   9-15/92) 

November  5:  NASA   announced   that   an   array  of  powerful,  interconnected  
computers  would  help  NASA  solve some of  the  complex problems associated 
with  designing  aircraft  propulsion  systems.  T h e   Lewis  Advanced  Cluster 
Environment  system  a t   NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center ,   Cleveland ,   is  a 
network  of 33  IBM  RISC/6000 computer stations  tha t  can perform up  to  one  
billion  floating  point  operations  per  second  and  has  three  billion  bytes  of 
memory,  making  it  t h e   world's  most  powerful  IBM  workstation  cluster. 
(NA SA  Release 92- 195) 

General  Dynamics Corporation  said  its space systems unit had won  a $1 12.6 
million  Air   Force  contract   to  modify  space-launch  facilities  a t  Vandenberg 
Air  Force Base  in California.  (WSJ, Nov  6/92) 

NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin  agreed  to  seek increased funding for 
NASA's life sciences program destined  for  the  Space S ta t ion  Freedom, calling 
current  funding  levels "disgraceful"  and  clearly  in  need  of  increased  funding. 
(Space News, Nov   9-15/92)  

November  6:  NASA's Tethered  Satellite  System  Investigative  Board  released 
~ t s  report, presenting the  panel's finding on  problems which had prevented full 
deployment of  t h e  satellite during Space Shu t t le  mission  STS-46 .  T h e  report 
identified  causes for  four of  five problems tha t  occurred  and  made  recommen- 
dations  for  actions  to   prevent  similar  occurrences  in  the   future.  (NA SA  
Release 92-  196; UP I ,  Now  6/92)  

A  task group looking in to  issues concerning future satellite rescue and  repair 
said  NASA   should  continue   to  perform  such  missions  but  only  when  they 
"produce genuine benefits  to U .S .  interests  in view of  the  inherent  risks to  the  
Shu t t le  and   its crew."  T h e   task  force  also  recommended  tha t   NASA   should 
charge  higher  fees fo;  the   risky  and  expensive  work  of  retrieving  commercial 
satellites with  the  Space Shuttle .  (NASA  Release 92-197; The Sun, Nov  7/92; 
AP ,  Nov. 6/92; W Post, Nov  7/92; Space News, Nov  16-22/92)  

0  NASA  scientists  a t   the  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory and  the  U.S.  Geological 
Survey  in  a published  paper  said  tha t  Mars was  once  very  active  tectonically 
and  may  still be  shaken h y  quakes daily. T h e  scientists said  tha t   although  the  
planet  is  less  seismically active  than   the  Earth,  their  studies, based  o n  Viking 
photos, predict  tha t   about  two marsquakes of  magnitude  five or greater  occur 

NOVEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY   1992 

per  year, and about  a hundred  quakes of  magnitude  three  or greater  occur per 
year.  (NA SA  Release 92-198; LA  Times, Nov 6/92; W Times, Nov  7/92; P Inq, 
Nov  26/92) 

A n  article in  the  Chicago Tribune  discussed  the  Soviet Space Shu t t le  Buran; 
built  in  the  early  1980s, the  Buran flew only  once   in November  1988. Today 
all  three models of  the  spacecraft sit  idle, victims of  the  economic downsizing 
in  Russia. T h e  Buran program seems destined for oblivion. ( C  Trib, Nov  8/92)  

Radio astronomers meeting in Sydney, Australia, said tha t  stray radio signals 
from  manmade  sources were  spilling  over  in to   the   radio  bands  set  aside  for 
radio and  space research, swamping and  threatening  the  reception of extreme-  
ly  weak  radio  signals from  space. ( C  Trib, Nov  8/92)  

November  9:  NASA   announced  tha t   it  would  help  sponsor the   third  national  
technology  transfer  conference  and  exposition  in  Baltimore  December  1-3, 
1992. TECHNOLOGY   2002  was  scheduled  to  highlight  leading-edge  tech- 
nologies from NASA  and other  Federal agencies which U.S.  industry could use 
to  develop new  or  improved products  and processes. (NASA  Release 92-199)  

Teledyne  Industries paid  a record  $17.5 million  in criminal fines for falsify- 
ing  tests  o n   electronic  relay  switches  used  in  high-tech  weapons  and  space- 
craft,  including  the   Space  Shuttle .   Teledyne  pleaded  guilty  to   35  criminal 
counts.  ( W  Times, Nov  10192; WSJ, Nov   10192; USA  Today, Nov  10192; AP, 
Nov   9/92; U P I ,  Nov  9/92) 

A report  for t h e  Aerospace  Industries Association  said U.S. aerospace man- 
ufacturers would  cut  at  least  78,000 jobs  in   1992 and  tha t   sales would decline 
for the  first  time  in more  than   20 years.  ( W  Post, Nov  10 /92 ) .  

November  10:  Scientists  from  NASA   and   the   National   Science  Foundation 
detailed  experimental  projects  scheduled  to  be  undertaken  in  the   winter  in 
Antarctica .  T h e  Antarctic  Space Analog  Program was  to use  the  harsh, frigid 
conditions  of  the  Antarctic   con t inen t   to  test  technology  and  techniques  for 
future  missions  to  the  Moon  and Mars.  (NA SA  Release 92-200)  

European,  Canadian ,   and  Finnish  ministers,  meeting  in  G ranada ,  Spain ,  
approved  spending  cuts for  the   European  Space Agency  of  about  13  percent 
through  the   year  2 0 0 0 4 o w n  to  $26 billion.  T h e  biggest  cuts will  affect  the  
Hermes Space Shuttle .  T h e  ministers also launched  a three-year study of ways 
to  work  with  Russia  o n  future space missions.  (WSJ, Nov  11/92) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin   told  a meetlng of  the  Washington 
Space  Business  Roundtable  in  Washington,  DC,  tha t   the   U.S.  government 
should  spin off more new  technology to  help  boost  the  economy. He  also said 

A S T R C )NAU T I C S  A N D  AERC)NAUTI<:S 

NOVEMBER   1992 

t h a t   t h e  space business  sector  must move beyond  its a t temp t s  t o  sell goods a n d  
services  t o  t h e  gove rnmen t  t o  become  a real  commercial  industry. G o l d i n  said 
NASA's  newly created   Office  of  Advanced   Concep t s   and  Technology  would 
he  given  hroad  authority   t o  pursue  innova t ive   ideas,  seek  ou t   new  techno lo -  
gies,  and   accelerate   transfer  of  t h e   Agency's  own   breakthroughs   t o   industry. 
(Space New s ,  Nov   16-22/92; AvWk, Nov   16/92) 

November  1 2 :  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n  announced  t h a t  Paul  F. 
Holloway,  in  addition   t o  his  responsibilities  as  Director   of  Langley  Research 
C e n t e r   in   H am p t o n ,   Virginia,  would  be  assigned  temporarily  t o   N A S A  
Headquarters   as  a  Special   Assistant  t o   t h e   Administrator .   G o l d i n   also 
announced   t h e   departure   of  Don   G .   Rush,  Assistant   Adm in i s t ra to r   for 
Procurement ,   effective January   1 1 ,   1993 .  ( N A S A  Release 92 -292 )  

November  13:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   Hubble   Space   Telescope  h a d  
revealed  a  c h a i n   o f   luminous   knots   in   t h e   co re   of  t h e   most  d i s tan t   known  
galaxy-one 
t h a t   existed  in   t h e   infancy  of  t h e   universe  a n d   is  located   more 
t h a n   10 billion   light-years  from  Earth .  T h e  new   photos ,   taken   with   t h e   tele-  
scope's  wide  field and   planetary   camera ,   reveal  detail   10  times  be t te r   t h a n  
photographs   previously taken   with   ground-based  telescopes.  ( N A S A  Release 
92 -203 ;  W T m e s ,  Nov   14 /92 )  

A  team  of  Ame r ican   and   British  astronomers  de tec ted   t h e  flare  of  a  super- 
nova   almost  halfway  t o   t h e   edge  of  t h e   known   universe-five 
billion   light-  
years  axvay,  t h e   most  d i s tan t   such   supernova   ever   observed.  Light  from  t h e  
supernova   was  expected   t o   help   astronomers   grapple  with   t h e   questions   of 
whe the r   t h e  universe  is  infinite  and  will  expand  forever o r  whe the r   it   is  finite  
and  will eventually   slow down   and  collapse.  (NY Times, Nov   15 /92 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  321   research  proposals  for  immediate  
negotiation   of  Phase  1  con t rac t s   under   t h e   Agency's  1992  Small   Business 
Innova t ion   Research  Program.  T h e  program  aims  t o   stimulate   technological  
innova t ion   in  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  by  using  small business  t o  he lp  meet   Federal 
research  and  development   needs  and  t o  encourage  commercial  applications  of 
federally  supported  research  innovations .   ( N A S A  Release  92 -204 )  

J a n  H .  O o r t ,  9 2 ,  whose  discoveries o n  t h e  origins of  comets  a n d  t h e  move-  
m e n t   of  t h e   Milky  Way  made  h im   o n e   of  t h e   2 0 t h   century's  leading 
astronomers ,   died  in  Leiden ,   Ho l land ,   in   early  November.  ( W  Times,  Nov  
13/92; P  l r q ,  Nov   13/92)  

November  16: N A S A   said  t h a t   it  was collaborating  w i th  Cray  Research ,   Inc . ,  
of  Eagan,  M inne so ta ,   t o   conduc t   joint  research  a n d   deve lopmen t   activities  
using  t h e   company's Cray   T 3 D  supercomputer.  N A S A   scientists   a t   t h e   J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory  expected   t o   use  t h e   T 3 D  system  for  applications   t h a t  

NOVEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY   1992 

require  high-power  computers, such  as  turning  planetary  data  from spacecraft 
in to  three-dimensional anitnations and analyzing Earth satellite data .  (NA SA  
Release 92-205; NY Xmes, Nov  17/92; WSJ, Nov  17/92; W Post, Nov   17/92)  

A t  the  Asia-Pacific International Space Year Conference in Tokyo, Russian cos- 
monaut Vladimir Shatalov called for strengthened space monitoring to determine 
compliance of major military powers with strategic nuclear arms reduction treaties. 
Shatalov said such collaboration in space also would  help uncover possible efforts 
by  smaller countries to develop nuclear weapons. Japan announced a plan to allow 
Southeast Asian countries to use  a module that will be  built onto  the future inter- 
national space station for scientific experiments in orbit. (UP!,  Nov  16/92) 

November  17:  NASA   said  the   Advanced  Communications  Technology 
Satellite  Conference  '92,  co-sponsored  by  NASA ,   Comsat  Laboratories, 
Harris Corporation ,  and  Mitre Corporation ,  scheduled for November  18- 19 in 
Washington,  DC,  would  focus  o n   pioneering  communications  technology 
developments  to  provide  better  service,  lower cost, greater  convenience,  and 
improved reliability. T h e  conference marked  another  of NASA's partnerships 
with  industry  in  developing advanced  technologies  tha t   create  new  markets 
and  commercial  applications.  (NA SA  Release 92-206)  

In  a carefully hedged  report,  the  General  Accounting  Office  said  tha t   cru- 
cial American  high-technology industries  including  consumer electronics and 
robotics may  have  lost ground  in  the   1980s to foreign competitors, particular- 
ly Japan .  T h e  sectors examined were: semi-conductors, semiconductor equip- 
ment ,   supercomputers,  pharmaceuticals,  telecommunications,  fiber  optics, 
robotics,  consumer  electronics, civilian aircraft, advanced materials, and  flex- 
ible manufacturing systems. (NY Xmes, Nov  18/92; LA  Times, Nov   18/92) 

NASA   and  McDonnell-Douglas  announced   completion  of  negotiations  of 
a  cost-plus-award-fee  contract   to  provide  continuation   of  Spacelab  integra- 
tion   activities. T h e  amount  of  the   contract  was  $163 million, with  four nne-  
year options of  $34.6 million, $29.7 million,  $28 .6  million, and $27.3 million. 
(NA SA  Release C92 -  1 9 )  

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  said  that   he  would  act  promptly  to  
implement   t h e   recommendations   of  a  Management   Review  Team  for 
enhanced   security a t   the  Ames Research  Center   in  Moffett Field, California. 
T h e   team  considered  Ames  high  risk  for  hostile  intelligence  operations. 
(NA SA  Release 92-207;  UPI, Nov  18/92; LA  Times, Nov   19/92; USA  Today, 
Nov  19/92; W Xrnes, Nov  19/92; P Inq, Nov  19/92; AP, Nov  18/92, 19/92, and 
20192; W.  Post, Nov  20192; NY  Times, Nov  22/92; Space News, Nov  23-29/92) 

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Go ld in ,   speaking  at  the   University  of 
Hartford, Connecticut ,  said spending o n  space exploration was an  investment 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOV EMB ER   1992 

in  t h e  future ,  but   t h a t   t h e  nation's  space agency  must  get  more   for  its money 
t h a n  it  had   in   t h e  past. NA SA   research has  econom ic  benefits  for t h e  Na t ion ,  
providing jobs  and  developing  technologies  with commercial  applications ,  but  
just  as  impo r tan t   is  t h e  Agency's role  in  supporting  exploration   t h a t   increases 
knowledge  of  t h e   universe  and   provides  hope   for  a  better   future ,   Go ld in  
added .   (Hartford  C o u r a n t ,  Nov   18 /92 )  

November  18: Lockheed  Corporation's  Space  Ope ra t ion s  Company   un i t   won 
t h e   compe t i t ion   for  a  $200-million-a-year  con t rac t   t o  manage  t h e   Kennedy 
Space  C e n t e r  in  Cocoa  Beach, Florida. N A S A  said  t h e  con t rac t  would  run  for 
a n  initial  period of four years, plus  th ree   two-year op t ion s ,  for a to ta l  po ten t ia l  
con t rac t   period  of  1 0  years.  Its  estimated   value  over   t h e   10-year period  was 
$1.9  billion .   (WSJ, Nvv   19/92;  W Post, Nov   19/92;  Fla  Today, Nov   19/92)  

A  r e c e n t   G e n e r a l   A c c o u n t i n g   Office   c om p r e h e n s i v e   aud i t   of  NASA's 
f inanc ia l   m a n a g em e n t   cha rged   t h a t   NASA's   i n t e r n a l   c o n t r o l s   a n d   f i n a n -  
cial   m a n a g em e n t   systems  h a d   failed  t o  en su re  e f f ic ien t   e x p e n d i t u r e  of  t a x -  
payers'  money .   A c c o r d i n g   t o   t h e   r e p o r t ,   NASA ' s   fiscal  1991   year-end  
repo r t s  c o n t a i n e d   mo re   t h a n  $ 5 0 0  m i l l ion   in   errors .   (An te lope  Valley Press, 
N o v   18 /92 )  

Noelember  19: Walter  Jaffe of  t h e  Leiden Observatory   in  t h e  Ne the r land s  said 
t h a t   t h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope had   captured   t h e  most  detailed  view  yet  of 
a n  immense  caldron   of  h e a t ,  violence ,  and  energy surrounding  what  might   be 
called a "black hole ,"  a celestial object   10  million  times more massive  t h a n  t h e  
Sun .  Astronomers  said  t h e  photograph   provided  powerful  support  for  t h e  t h e -  
ory  of  "black  holes"  by  showing  several  of  t h e  features  predicted   t o  surround 
them .   T h e  galaxy  belongs  t o   t h e   Virgo  Cluster   of  galaxies  about   45  million 
light-years  from  Earth .   ( W  Times,  No \?  20/92;  U S A  Today, N o v   20192; NY  
Times,  Nov   20192;  W  Post,  Nov   20192;  P  Inq,  Nov   20192;  LA  Times,  Nov  
20192; AP, Nov   20192;  U P l ,  Nov   20192;) 

N A S A  set   a  December  2  launch  da te   for  t h e   year's e igh th   and   last  S h u t t l e  
flight ,   a  military  mission,  designated  STS -53 .   Five  astronauts ,   all  military 
men ,  will  release  a  classified  satellite ,  though t   t o  be  a Lacrosse  radar-imaging 
satellite   from  t h e  S h u t t l e  Discovery. Crew   members  are  David  Walker,  com -  
mander;   Robert   C a b a n a ,   co-pilot;   Jame s  Voss,  G u i o n   Bluford,  and   Michael  
Richard   Clifford.  ( W  Times, Nov   20192; U P ] ,  Nov   19/92;  U P ] ,  Nov   30192) 

A  panel   of  experts   recommended   tll  it  t h e  A i r   Force  assume  sole  responsi- 
bility  for  developing   a  new  all-purpcw   na t iona l   launch   system  called  t h e  
"Spacelifter"  by  t h e   e n d   of  t h e   decade .   NASA's  fleet  of  Shu t t le s   would  be 
phased  ou t   a t  t h e  earliest  opportunity ,  having   become  t o o  costly  and   fragile  a 
system  t o  dom ina te   t h e   space  program  much   longer.  T h e  report   did  no t   call  
for  a  large,  heavy-lift  vehicle   but  focused  instead  o n   development   of  lower- 

NOVEMBER   1992 

C H R O N O L O G Y   1992 

cost ,  medium-size  rockets  t h a t   could  satisfy virtually  all known  payload  needs  
a n d  be  tailored  t o  carry  cargo or  people.  ( W  Post, Nov   19/92  a n d  N o v   21/92; 
USA  Today, Nov   20192; NY  Xmes,  Nov   20192; LA   Times, N o v   20192; P  Inq ,  
Nov   20192  and  No\!  22/92; AP ,  Nov   20192; U P ] ,  Nov   19/92)  

November  21:   N A S A   launched   a  small  satellite   o n  a  $19  million  mission  t o  
he lp   t h e   Pentagon   develop   its  strategic   missile  de tec t ion   system.  A  Scou t  
rocket   lifted  t h e   Miniature   Seeker   Technology  Integration-1   satellite   i n t o  
orbit .   T h e   satellite   carried  miniaturized  cameras  and   sensors  designed  t o  
de tec t   a n   a t tack   by  medium-and   short-range   missiles.  ( W  Rme s ,  N o v   23/92; 
W Post, N o v   23/92; AP ,  Nov   21/92;  P  Inq, Nov   22 /92 )  

November  22 :   A  Russlan  space  capsule  con ta in ing   a  cut-glass  replica  of  t h e  
S t a t u e   of  Liberty  and   greetings  from  Russian  President   Boris  N .   Yeltsin 
splashed  down   in  t h e  Pacific  O c e a n  off  Washington   s ta te .  T h e  Resource  500  
satellite  was hilled  as Russia's first private  space  launch   and  hono red   t h e  500th 
anniversary  of  t h e  voyage  of  Columbus   in  1492 .  (The  Sun ,  Nov   23/92; P  lnq ,  
Nov   23/92  and   Nov   25/92;  W  Rmes ,   Nov   23/92;  N'  Post,  Nov   23/92;  USA  
Today, N o v   23/92;  UP I ,  Nov   23/92; LA  Times, Nov   25 /92 )  

Noelember  23:  Responding   t o   evidence   t h a t   Earth's protective   ozone  layer  is 
t h i n n i n g  or  disappearing faster t h a n  was forecast, env i ronmen ta l  officials from 
8 1  countries   me t   in  Copenhagen   t o  consider   revising  t h e  Mon t rea l   Protocol  
o n   t h e  con t ro l   of  substances  t h a t   a t tack   ozone. T h e  main   po in t   of  t h e  mee t -  
ing,  sponsored  by  t h e   Un i ted   Na t ion s   Env i ronmen t   Program,  was  t o   set   a 
timetable   for  t h e   phaseout  of  chlorofluorocarbons ,  halons ,   a n d  ca rbon   te t ra -  
chloride .   (The  Sun ,  Nov   22/92;  

Gene ra l   Electric  said  t h a t   it  had   agreed  t o   sell  its  aerospace  business  t o  
defense  giant   Ma r t in   Marietta   for  $3   billion .   T h e   deal  would  take   Gene ra l  
Electric  ou t   of  t h e   defense  business  a n d   make  Ma r t in   Marietta   t h e   world's 
largest  aerospace  electronics   company.  (U SA   Today,  Nov   24/92;  WSJ,  Nov  
24/92;  W Post, Nov   24/92; NY Times, N o v   24/92;  W Times, Nov   24/92)  

November  25:  T h e  Na t iona l   Technology  Transfer  C e n t e r   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   it 
had   launched   t h e   Strategic   Partnership   In i t ia t ive   t o   fund   proposals  with  
ma tch ing   awards  of  up  t o  $200 ,000   for  t h e  purpose  of  fostering  new  and   pro-  
ductive   technology   transfer  and   commercialization   partnerships   between  
Federal  laboratories  a n d   U.S.  industry,  research  universities,  and   S t a t e   a n d  
local non -p ro f i t  organizations.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -209 )  

W i t h  just ove r  three   years left before con s t ruc t ion  of Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom 
begins  in   Earth   o rb i t ,   N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  would  add  spacewalks  t o  
upcoming  S h u t t l e  flights when  possible,  beginning  with  o n e  during  S T S - 5 4  in 
Janua ry  1993.  ( N A S A  Release 9 2 - 2 1 0 )  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER  1992 

Meeting  in  Copenhagen,  the  United  Nations  environmental  conference 
agreed  to phase out some ozone-destroying gases by  the end of  1995, four years 
ahead  of  a previous deadline.  Delegates agreed  to phase-out  chlorofluorocar- 
bons by 1995 instead of  1999 and to  eliminate halons by  1994, six years ahead 
of  a  previous  deadline,  and  methyl  chloroform by  1996 instead  of  2005.  (W  
Post, Nov  26/92; The  Sun, Nov  26/92) 

November  29:  Th e   countdown  for  the  December  2  launch  of  the  Shuttle 
Discovery began, the   10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated  to  
U.S. Department of  Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satel- 
lite,  astronauts  were  to  conduct  a  number  of  military  experiments,  such  as 
testing  a  Shuttle  laser  system  and  releasing  of  metal  balls  to  be  tracked  by 
space debris researchers.  (T h e  Sun, Nov  29/92; W  Post,  Nov  28/92  and  Nov 
29/92; W Times, Nov  28/92; Nov  29/92, and Nov  30192; CSM ,  Nov  27/92; P 
Inq, Nov  30192; USA  Today, Nov  30192; U P l ,  Nov  30192) 

Scientists prepared  to decide whether  Dante, a walking robot, would make 
a descent next  month  into an active Antarctic  volcano. T h e  project had  two 
goals: testing the prototype robot for possible Mars missions, and getting a rare 
look  at  the  minerals  and  gases  ejected  by  the  12,000-foot icebound volcano. 
Scientists  also wanted  to  learn  about  the  permanent  lava  lake  that  bubbles 
and  boils  on  the   crater's  floor.  NASA,  along  with  the  National  Science 
Foundation, was funding the $2 million project. (The  Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, 
Nov  29/92; P Inq, Nov  18/92) 

November 30: NASA  and NPO-Energia, a Russian company, planned  to meet 
during  the  next  two  weeks  for  a  final  review  on  the  feasibility  of  using  the 
Soyuz TM  spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard 
the  Space  Station.  Th e   Soyuz  spacecraft was  one  of  various  concepts  being 
considered for  use  as a return  vehicle.  (NASA  Release 92-212) 

I n   a  broad-ranging interview, NASA Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin said 
that  he  expected  to  deal  with  declining  Agency  budgets  by  prioritizing and 
focusing NASA  projects. He  estimated  that  a substantial cut had  been  made 
in  the  Agency's  costs during  a  review of  the  last  few months-perhaps  one- 
third  to one-half  of  a needed $17  billion  in  savings-and 
that new  programs 
would  not  be  multi-billion-dollar projects but would  cost  in  the  range of  tens 
tc7  hundreds of  millions of  dollars. (Aerospace America, Nov  92 )  

December 

December  1 : N A S A   astronomers  announced   t h a t   t h e  Huhble  Space  Telescope 
had  caught  a clear glimpse of more t h a n  300 galaxies clustered  four billion  light- 
years  away, giving astronomers their   first detailed  view of  galactic structure  a t  a 
time  when   t h e   solar  system  was  just  beginning.  T h e   Hubble   images  revealed 
t h a t  star-forming galaxies were far more prevalent  in  t h e  clusters of  t h e  younger 
universe  t h a n   in  modem   clusters  of  galaxies  near   us  today. T h e  findings  have  
important   implications for  theories  of  how  galaxies have   evolved  and  are  c o n -  
tinuing   t o  evolve  a t   a n  apparently  rapid  rate.  T h e  observations  also may  have  
uncovered  t h e  most distant  cluster of  galaxies pet  seen a t  a distance of  10 billion 
light-years,  two-thirds  of  t h e  way  back  t o   the   presumed  origin  of  t h e   universe. 
( N A S A  Release 92-213; NY   'Emes, Dec  2/92; LA Xmes, Dec 2/92; W Post, L>ec 
2/92; The Sun, Dec  2/92; USA  Today, Dec  2/92;  UP I ,  L>ec  2/92) 

N A S A  announced  plans  t o  consolidate  some management   functions  for t h e  
Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom  program  and   t o   c rea te   a  contractor-led   integration  
team   t o  ensure   t h e   successful  building  a n d   deployment   of  t h e   in te rna t iona l  
Space   S ta t ion .   T h e   consolidations   affected  operations   in  Re s ton ,   Virginia, 
a n d  a t  t h e  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r  in  Hou s ton ,  Texas. T h e  consolidation   came  
amid  charges  of  cost  growth  and   delays  a t  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r  and   among  
t h e   center's  team   of  contractors   led  by  McDonne l l   Douglas.  T h e   problems 
associated  with   t h e   $5   billion   c o n t r a c t   had   prompted   two  audits   and   o n e  
investigation   by  NASA's  inspector  general .   ( N A S A  Release  92-2  14;  W Post, 
Dec   2/92;  Space News ,  Dec   7-13/92; AuWk,  Dec  7/92)  

T h e   Technology   2002  con fe rence ,   sponsored  by  N A S A ,   opened   in 
Baltimore  t o  display  t h e  wares of Federal agencies and  private  companies   t h a t  
had   developed  products   they  hoped   t o  sell o r  license  for  use  in  new  products .  
T h e  conference   was  billed  as  a  way  for  entrepreneurs   and   companies   t o   look 
ove r  t h e  latest  innova t ion s  coming  ou t  of  Federal  laboratories.  Equally  impor-  
t a n t ,   t h e   conference   was  a  way  for  t h e   Federal  gove rnmen t   t o  find  practical  
uses  for  t h e   technology   t h a t   had   been   developed   with   billions  of  dollars  of 
taxpayers'  money. (The  Sun ,  Dec   23/92)  

N A S A   scientists   held   t h e   first  news  conference   broadcast  live  from  t h e  
s o u t h em  polar  region.  T h e  broadcast  via  satellite   t o  N A S A   Ames   Research  
C e n t e r  in  Moffett  Field,  California ,  mean t   t h a t  An ta rc t ica   researchers  would 
be   able   t o   talk   with   t h e   outside  world  th rough   e lec t ron ic   means  instead  o f  
h am   radios.  More   importantly ,   N A S A   Ame s   scientists   hoped   t o   use  t h e  
hookup   t o  employ  special  technology-"virtual 
reality"  technology-to 
c o n -  
trol   remote   exploration   vehicles  probing   Antarctica's   ice-covered  lakes. 
Scientists  hoped   t o  study lake sediments  because  they  might  c o n t a i n  life forms 
similar t o  one s  t h a t  might  have  existed  a t  o n e  t ime  o n  Mars.  I n  t h e  future ,  sci- 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS  

DECEhtUEK  1992 

entists  hope  to  use  "virtual  reality"  technology  for  Martian  exploration. 
(Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec  2/92; Sun Jose Mercury  News, Dec  2/92) 

December 2: NASA  and  several o the r  U.S. and  Canadian  agencies announced  
selection  of  an   international   team  of  more  t h a n   200  scientists  to   study  the  
relationships  between  northern   forests  and  the   atmosphere  and  how  those 
relationships  affect the  global environment .  The study, the  Boreal Ecosystern- 
Atmosphere  Study, was  intended   to   conduct  ground-based,  air-borne,  and  
satellite measurements  in  a  four-year, $30-million  program. NASA's  compo- 
nen t   is  part  of  Mission to  Planet Earth, the  Agency's long-term effort  to  study 
the   Earth  as a global environmental  system.  (NA SA  Release 92-215)  

Space Shuttle  Discovery  lifted off on  a secret mission  for  the  Pentagon, car-  
rying what  analysts surmised  was  a spy  satellite  to  monitor  troop  movements 
in Eastern Europe, Asia,  and  the  Middle  East. Several days of  technology  and 
medical  experiments  were  also  scheduled  for  the   week-long  mission.  T h e  
launch was  delayed 85 minutes  while  the  Sun  melted  a thick  coat  of  ice from 
its  fuel  tank.  This   eighth  and  last  Shu t t le   mission  of  1992,  the   52nd  for 
NASA's  program,  concluded  NASA's  busiest  year  since  1985,  when  nine  
Shuttles  flew. I t  was  also  the   last  to  carry  a classified military cargo. 

T h e   crew  consisted  of  Shuttle   Commander  David  Walker,  a  Navy  captain; 
Pilot  Robert  Cabana ,   a  Marine  colonel;  Guion   Bluford,  Jr . ,   an   Air  Force 
colonel  in  charge  of  the   satellite; James  Voss,  an   Army  lieutenant-colonel ,  
and  Michael Clifford,  an  Army  lieutenant-colonel  in  charge  of  releasing  six 
metal  balls  tha t  space debris researchers o n  the  ground were  to track  radar and  
telescopes.  (The Sun, Dec 3/92; P  Inq, Dec 3/92; NY Times, Dec  3/92; W Post, 
1)ec  1/92;  LA Times, Lkc 3/92; WSj, Dec 3/92; USA  Today, Dec 3/92; AP ,  Dec 
2/92, L)ec  3/92; U P ] ,  Dec 3/92) 

Astronomers  associated  with  several  major  observatories  in  the   United  
States   raised  concerns  anew  about  light  pollution  from  cities  and  highways. 
Astronomers have  long said  that   artificial light threatens  their  ability to  study 
the   heavens  from  Earth,  but  some  are  also  saying  tha t   the   glare  threatens  
everyone's view. T h e  scientists'  campaign to curb  light pollution  has gained  a 
wider  audience as  non-astronomers have  realized  tha t  shading lights can  save 
money  as  well  as heavenly  views. Efforts to  curb excessive light pollution have 
improved  astrononlical  viewing  at  such  major  observatories  as  Kitt  Peak  in 
Arizona.  ( W  Times, Llec  2/92)  

A t   the   annual   meeting  of  the   American  Astronautical  Society  in   S a n  
Francisco,  California,  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   said  tha t  
NASA   should  decide  within  five years whether  to  replace  t h e  Space Shu t t le  
after  2005.  A  decision  in  the   matter  should  be  made  by  1997, Goldin   said, 
although  in  any  even t ,  t h e   space  agency would  continue   to  fly the   Shuttles  

LIECEL lRER   1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

un t i l   a t   least  2005.  S h u t t l e  costs would  have   t o  come  down   in   t h e  mean t ime ,  
however,  even   as safety  improvements  con t inued .   (Space New s ,  Dec   7-13/92)  

December  3: N A S A  Chief   Daniel  S. G o l d i n  promised  a  bolder,  "new"  N A S A  
t h a t   would  con t ro l   costs  o n   its  scientific   missions  in  space  and   support   t h e  
research  a n d  development   efforts of  domestic  aircraft  makers. Goldin's prom- 
ise came  a t  a NASA town  meeting  a t  California  S t a t e  University ,  Dominguez 
Hills  campus, where  several hund red  people   showed  up  for  a n  oppo r tun i ty   t o  
question   G o l d i n  about   overpriced  componen t s ,  underfunded  programs,  and   a 
lack  of  d i rec t ion   in   t h e  nation's  space  program.  I t  was  t h e   fou r th  town   mee t -  
ing  G o l d i n  had  hosted  around   t h e  coun t ry  since  taking  over  as NASA's Ch ie f  
Adm in i s t ra to r   in  April .   (LA  Times ,  Dec  9 /92 )  

I n   a  real  sign  t h a t   t h e   "space  race"  between   Russia  a n d   t h e  U n i t e d   S ta te s  
was over, t h e  director  of  t h e  Russian  Space  Agency, Yuri Koptev, was  taken  o n  
a  tour  of  t h e  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California .  Koptev  was  i n  
sou the rn  California   t o  familiarize  himself  with   t h e  U .S .  space program  and   t o  
develop   con tac t s   w i t h   local   aerospace  companies .   T h e   U n i t e d   S ta te s   a n d  
Russia already had  plans  t o  cooperate  o n  two unmanned  missions  t o  Mars, a n d  
Ame r ican   space  officials  were  discussing  t h e  possibility  of  using  t h e   Russian 
Soyuz  spacecraft  as  a  lifeboat  in  space  for  astronauts   aboard  Space   S t a t i o n  
Freedom.  (S ta r -New s ,  Dec 4/92)  

December  4 :   N A S A   sen t   its  remote-controlled   robot   named   "Dante"   t o  
An ta rc t ica ,   where   it  was scheduled  t o  explore  t h e  active  vo lcano  Erebus. T h e  
$2 million  mission was  in tended  t o  use An ta rc t ica   t o  test possible Mars-bound  
technology  because  t h e  harsh   climate   is  as close  t o  t h a t  of  Mars as occurs  n a t -  
urally o n  Earth .  Upcom ing  U .S .  missions  t o  Mars were expected   t o  land  small 
robots  programmed  t o  look  a round ,  take   samples, a n d  perhaps  begin mapping  
t h e   p lane t ,   all  tasks  "Dante"   would  test  in  An ta rc t ica .   ( W S ] ,  Dec   8/92;  N Y  
Times, Dec  8 / 9 2 )  

In   t h e   last  of  a  week-long   series  of  talks   a t   t h e   Ca l i fo rn ia   I n s t i t u t e   of 
Technology   in   Pasadena ,   N A S A   A dm i n i s t r a t o r   Dan ie l   S.  G o l d i n   said 
N A S A ,   its  pa r tne r s ,   a n d   its  con t rac to r s ,   were  suffering  from  a  bu reauc ra t ic  
"sickness"  a n d   political   infighting   t h a t   h a d   sapped   t h e   U .S .   c iv i l ian   space  
program's will  t o  take  risks o r  t o  adm i t  mistakes.  "We  need   a c om p l e t e  resur- 
gence   of  ou r   space   program  t o   be  bold ,   t o   take   risks,  a n d   accep t   failure ,"  
G o l d i n  said du r ing  a lively, two -hou r  discussion  a n d  d e b a t e  w i t h  C a r l  S a g a n ,  
a s t ronome r   a n d   found ing   p re s iden t   of  t h e   P lane ta ry   Society ,   based  i n  
Pasadena .  Sagan  agreed  t h a t  N A S A  h a d   lost  its  "sense of d i rec t ion"  a n d  said 
t h a t  t h e  key que s t ion s  facing  N A S A  were wha t  would be   its role   in  t h e  post-  
C o l d  War   era   a n d  wha t   could   it   accomp l i sh   t h a t  was  in   t h e   n a t i o n a l   i n t e r -  
est  in   a  t ime   of  pressing  econom ic   problems .   (Space  N ew s ,  Dec   14-20192) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  ANL) AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER   1992 

December 5: Paul Beaver, editor  of  the  military  affairs magazine Jane's Defense 
Weekly, said  in  an  interview  tha t   the  U .S .  Air Force was operating  a new gen- 
eration of  secret spy planes capable of  reaching eight  times the  speed of  sound. 
Code-named "Aurora," the  plane was believed  to operate a t  night and  to incor- 
porate  the   latest radar-evading technology. Pentagon officials denied  that   such 
an  aircraft existed or was contemplated. For years, some scientists and  aviation 
fans had  speculated tha t  a successor to  the  famed SR-71 "Blackbird"  spy  plane 
was under  development and   testing.  (The  Sun, Dec  6/92; W  Post, Dec  12/92) 

Astronomers  protested  plans by  the  American  military  to  launch  a satellite 
carrying  a  Russian  nuclear  reactor  in   a  test  for  the   "Star  Wars"  antimissile 
defense system. T h e  astronomers  said  radiation from t h e  reactor could disrupt 
operations of  several  important  present  and   future  science missions  in  space, 
as  had  happened  in   the   past  with  Soviet nuclear-powered  satellites.  T h e  sci- 
entists were  seeking the  support  of NASA   in trying  to halt  or modify  the   test 
flight.  (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Tnb, Dec  6/92)  

December  6:  After  four  days  of  trying,  laser  signals beamed  up  from  Florida 
were  received  aboard  t h e   Shuttle   Discovery.  T h a t   success  came  a  day  after 
NASA   had  decided  to   cancel  a  major  experiment  in  tracking  space  debris 
because of  a dead battery  aboard  the   Shuttle .   (NY Times, Dec.  7/92; The Sun, 
Dec  7/92;  USA  Today, Dec  7/92; AP ,  Dec  7/92;  UPI ,   Dec  5/92; W  Post,  Dec 
7/92; NY  Times, Dec  8/92)  

December  7:  T h e  asteroid  Toutatis  passed  within  about  2.2  million  miles  of 
Earth o n  its orbit  around  the   Sun ,  the  closest an  object of  that   size  is  known 
to  scientists  to  have  come  to  Earth.  Toutatis  is  about  one   to  two  miles wide, 
large enough to  survive passage through the  atmosphere  and crash  into  Earth's 
surface, potentially  causing major ecological and  human  disaster. ( W  Post, Dec 
8/92; The Sun, Dec 8 /92 )  

T h e  U.S.  Air  Force said tha t  budget  realities had  necessitated  cuts  in  plans 
to  have   the  National  Aerospace  Plane  reach  orbit  and  fly  25  times  the  speed 
of  sound.  T h e  experimental  hypersonic  craft's top  speed was  likely  t o  be  cut 
from  Mach  25  to   Mach  12  or  Mach  15  and   its  runway-to-space  approach 
might  be  abandoned  in  favor  of  launch  from  the   back  of  another   airplane. 
Cost was projected  to drop from $10 billion  to $3 billion. (W  Times, Dec 9/92)  

December 8: NASA's Galileo  spacecraft flew by  the  Earth  a t   10:09 a. m.  EST, 
completing  a  t h r e e y e a r   gravity-assist  program  and  setting  course  to  reach 
Jupiter   in  December  1995. T h e  spacecraft  was  programmed  to   measure  the  
near-Earth environment  and  to observe Earth and  t h e  Moon during  this flyby. 
(NA SA  Release  92-2 17; UPI,  Dec  2/92,  Dec  7/92,  Dec  8/92; Dec  9/92; AP ,  
Dec  1/92, Dec  8/92; NY  Times,  Dec 8/92; W Post, Dec 9/92; WP, Dec  9/92)  

DECEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

Veteran NA SA  astronauts Richard 0. Covey and  Kenne th  Bowersox, along 
with ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier, were named to  the  crew for STS-61 ,  the  
Hubble  Space  Shu t t le  Telescope  servicing  mission  scheduled  for  late   1993. 
Covey  was  appointed  the   mission  commander,  and  Bowersox  was  to   be  t h e  
pilot.  Nicollier was  named  to  be  a mission specialist. Th ree  o the r  crew mem- 
bers previously named  to  the  STS -61  mission were Payload Commander  Story 
Musgrave,  and  Mission  Specialists  Tom  Akers,  Jeffrey  A .   Hoffman,  and  
Kathryn D. Tho rn ton .   (NA SA  Release 92-218)  

NASA   officials  used  satellite  photos  to  make  a  video  showing  how  the  
ground  moved  along  fault  lines  during  California's  strongest earthquake  in  
decades o n  June  28. Shown  at  the  American  Geophysical Union's fall meet- 
ing  in S a n  Francisco, California, t h e  video  showed how  Mojave  Desert faults 
moved during  the  magnitude-7.5  Landers  earthquake. Th is  was  the  first  time 
fault motion has been observed by using  images from space. O t h e r  NA SA  sci- 
entists  presented  evidence o n   the   theory  of  plate  tectonics.  Extremely  accu- 
rate  laser, satellite, and  o the r  measuring devices have detected  what appear  t o  
be  tectonic   movements  as  small  as  one-eighth   of  an   inch   a  year.  (WP, Dec 
8/92; LA  Times, Dec  9/92)  

T h e  U .S .  Department  of  Energy  and   the  Mayak  Production Association of 
the  Russian Ministry of Atomic  Energy signed a contract  by  which t h e  Energy 
Department  would  buy  Russian-produced  plutonium-238  for  use  as  a  power 
source in U.S. spacecraft. T h e  contract  provided  for  the  Un i ted  States  to  pur- 
chase  up  to   40  kilograms  ( 8 8  pounds)  over  five years.  T h e  plutonium  is  not  
weapons-grade and   is  t o  be used  by NASA  to  power unmanned  space missions 
tha t   are being  planned.  (WSJ, Dec  29/92; W Post, Dec  29/92) 

December  9 :  NA SA  Administrator   Daniel  S .  Go ld in   issued a call   to  restore 
America's  leadership  in   aeronautics   t h a t   is  th rea tened   by  failure  t o   invest  
adequately  in  research  facilities  a n d  advanced   technology.  Go ld in   told  t h e  
Ame r ican  Ins t i tu te  of  Aeronautics   and  Astronautics   meeting   in  A r l ing ton ,  
Virginia,  t h a t   additional   spending   had   to   be  directed   t o   high   speed 
research,  advanced  subsonic and  systems in teg ra t ion ,  critical  research  facil- 
ities,  and  hypersonic  research.  Top priority  needed  t o  be  given  t o  develop-  
ing  a hypersonic  commercial  plane   t h a t  could  carry  300 passengers  a t   least 
6 ,000  miles  nons top   a t   two-and-one-half   times  t h e  speed  of  sound   by  t h e  
year  2005. NASA's budget  provided  for  $1 .1  billion   for  aeronautics ,  or   7.9 
percent ,   Go ld in   said, a funding   level  t h a t  had   t o   increase.  ( N A S A  Release 
92-219;   The  Sun ,   Dec  10192;  LA  Times,  Dec  10192; H  Post,  Dec  10192; 
AvWk, Dec  14 -21 /92 )  

McDonnel!  Douglas  Space  Systems  Company  was  awarded  a  three-year 
extension  of  its  existing  contract   for  payload  ground  operations  services, 
valued  a t   approximately  $561.4  million,  at  the   Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   in  
Florida.  (NA SA  Release C92-2 1 )  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AN11 AERONAUT ICS  

L)ECEMBER  1992 

Space   S h u t t l e   Discovery  landed   a t   Edwards  A i r   Force  Base  in   California  
because  of  bad  weather   a t   C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida.  A s t ronau t s  h a d   t o  wait 
more  t h a n   two  hours   before  debarking  because  of  toxic   fumes  from  a  leaking 
thruster.  T h e   ma in   mission,  t h e   deployment   of  a  secret   Pentagon   satellite ,  
occurred  soon   after  launch   in  what   was  t h e   last  S h u t t l e  mission  for  t h e  U.S. 
military.  T h e   day  before,  t h e   S h u t t l e  had   t o  swerve  in  orbit   t o  avoid  a  four- 
inch   plece  of  space junk,  t h e  third   such   incident   in   two  years.  (The  Sun ,  Dec 
10192; AP ,   Dec  9 /92 ,   Dec  10192;  UPI ,   Dec  9/92 ,   Dec   10192; W  Post,  Dec  
10192; NY Times, Dec  10192; WSJ, Dec  10192; P Inq, Dec   10192; LA Tm e s ,  Dec 
13/92; USA  Today, Dec  10192; W Times, Dec  1 1 /92 )  

Two Ame r ican  scientists  presented  a new  theory  o n  t h e  evo lu t ion  of  Earth's 
con t inen t s   a n d   o n   early  mass  ex t inc t ion s   of  life.  Michael   Ramp ino   of  New 
York  University   and  Verne  Oberbeck ,   a  geologist  a t  NASA's Ame s  Research 
C e n t e r   in  Moffett  Field,  California ,   discussed  evidence   t h a t   suggests  t h a t   a 
huge asteroid  struck Earth   250 million  years ago, helping  break up a super land  
mass  called Gondwana land   and  con t r ibu t ing  t o  Earth's  worst  mass e x t i n c t i o n  
of  lit; 
forms.  T h e  new  theory,  presented   during   t h e   Ame r ican   Geophysical  
Union's  fall  meeting   in   S a n   Francisco,  was  met   by  disbelief  a n d   skepticism ,  
even   by  scientists  who   believe  the re   is  overwhelming   ev idence   t h a t   a n o t h e r  
later  asteroid  impact   wiped  out   t h e  dinosaurs  a n d  o t h e r  species  by  disrupting  
Earth's  climate   65 million   years  ago.  ( P  Inq,  Dec  10192; The  Sun ,  Dec   10192; 
W  Post,  Dec  10192; AP ,  Dec  10192; W Times, Dec  20192) 

Scientists  with   t h e  Na t iona l  Ocean ic  a n d  Atmospheric  Administration   said 
tha t   t h e   ozone  hole   over   t h e   An ta rc t ic   t h a t   has   formed  annually   since   1987 
had  closed  up  again  after setting  records  for depleting  Earth's protective   ozone 
layer. After  falling from Oc tobe r   12 t o  December  5 ,  ozone levels rose above t h e  
levels  considered  t o  be  a  "hole"  o n  December  6. T h e  ho le   formed  earlier  and  
lasted  longer  this  year  t h a n  ever  before,  t h e  scientists said.  (UP I ,  Dec  10192) 

December  10: Britain ,  Germany ,  Italy, and  S p a i n  agreed today t o  produce  a less 
expensive   version  of  Europe's  most  ambitious   defense-industry  project ,   t h e  
European  Fighter Aircraft .  Defense ministers from t h e  four countries  approved 
plans for a new  fighter  t h a t  was  t o  cost 3 0  pe rcen t  less t h a n  t h e  original plane ,  
projected   a t   $38   billion .   Flight  tests  were  expected   t o   begin  nex t   year,  with  
t h e  new  plane   i n  service  in   2000.  (NY Times,  Dec  11 /92 )  

N A S A  s c i e n t i s :~  a t  t h e  Ame r ican  Geophy s ica l  Union's  fall meeting   in  S a n  
Francisco  said  t h a t   a  N A S A   satellite   had   provided  overwhelming   evidence  
t h a t   industrial  pollutants   were  responsible  for  t h e   ho le   i n  Earth's  protective  
ozone  layer  above   An ta rc t ica .   T h e   Upper   A tmo sphe re   Research  Sa te l l i te ,  
launched   in   1991 ,  also had   produced  ev idence  t h a t   t h e  A n t a r c t i c  ozone ho le  
may  ac t   as  a  "sink,"  sucking  in  and   destroying  ozone   from  much   of  t h e  
S o u t h e r n  Hemisphere .   (AP ,  Dec  10192) 

DECEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

December  I  I :   NASA's  Cassini  mission  t o   S a t u r n   passed  a  major   milestone  
with   t h e   comp le t ion   of  a  project-wide   critical   design  review.  T h e   review 
included  a comprehensive  exam ina t ion  of  t h e  mission  and  spacecraft. ( N A S A  
Release  92 -222 )  

T h e  Russian Space  Agency  a n n o u n c e d  plans  for  th ree  piloted  missions  a n d  
six  Progress  flights  in   1993. T h e   first  mission  of  t h e   series  was  scheduled  for 
Janua ry  24,  1993.  (Itar-Tass, Dec  1 1 /92 )  

A i r   Force  Secretary   Donald   Rice  voiced  strong   support  for  designing  a 
Na t iona l   Aerospace  Plane  capable  of  flying  i n t o  orbit .  Rice's s ta temen t   came  
in response t o  news reports abou t  plans  t o  lower t h e  aerospace plane  programs' 
goals  in   response  t o   congressional  conce rn s   about   t h e   cost  of  t h e   program. 
France  and   Russia  were  also  reported   t o  be  working  jointly  t o  develop   aero-  
space-plane  type engines  t h a t  could  t h r e a t e n  America's  leadership  in t h e  field. 
Known   as  t h e  X-30, t h e  plane   would  be  t h e  world's  first single-stage-to-orbit  
vehicle.  (Antelope Valley  News,  Dec  19/92)  

December  14:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   scientists  from  t h e   Ames   Research 
Cen te r ,  Moffett  Field,  California ,  and   across  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  would  partici-  
pate   in   a Russian  biomedical  space  mission  later   th i s  m o n t h .  T h e  Cosmos  '92 
"biosatellite" was  t o  be  a n  unpiloted ,   recoverable  spacecraft  t h a t  carried  p lan t  
a n d   animal   experiments .   Cosmos  '92  would  become  t h e   e igh th   Russian 
biosatelite  mission  in which N A S A  had  participated.  ( N A S A  Release  92 -223 )  

Researchers  a t  NASA's Ames  Research  C e n t e r  in  Moffett  Field, California ,  
said  t h a t   t h e y  would  take   part   in   a  Russian  biomedical  space  mission.  Ames  
scientists  expected   t o  use  monkeys  t o  study  t h e   effect  of  lengthy   space  travel 
o n   bones,  eyes,  and   inne r   ear   receptors.  T h e   space  mission  would  involve  
experiments  from  several na t ion s  and  was expected   t o  be  launched  December  
29.  (UP I ,  Dec   14/92)  

December  15: N A S A   officials  said  t h a t   t h e   Ga l i leo   spacecraft  and   its  atmos-  
phe r ic  probe had  passed t h e  half-way mark  o n  the i r  voyage  t o l u p i t e r .  T h e  first 
full  test  results  o n  November   20  and  December  2  since  launch   th ree  years ago 
showed  t h a t   t h e     robe's  systems  were  in   good  working  order.  Ga l i leo   was 
scheduled   t o  arrive  a t  Jup i te r  in   early Decemher   1995. A  major  milestone   in  
space commun ica t ion s  was  achieved   recently  when  N A S A  scientists  success- 
fully  transmitted   laser  signals  t o  Ga l i leo   a t   a  distance   of  1.3 million   miles. 
( N A S A  Releases  92-224  and  92-225;  AP ,  Dec  16 /92 )  

In   t h e  cu r ren t   issue  of  t h e  British  journal  Nature,  two   scientists,  Ma r t in   1. 
Hoffert  of  New   York  University   a n d   C u r t   Covey   of  Lawrence  Livermore 
Na t iona l   Laboratory  i n  California ,   reported   new  findings,  largely  developed  
from  geological  studies,  o n   how  Earth's  c l ima te   responded  t o   changes   in  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

DECEMBER  1992 

atmospheric  heat-trapping   carbon  dioxide  and   o t h e r  influences  in   t h e  d i s tan t  
past.  Using climatic  da ta  from two periods  in  t h e  past, o n e  20 ,000  years ago in  
t h e  midst  of  t h e  last  ice  age ,  a n d  t h e  o t h e r  i n  t h e  mid-Cretaceous  period  1 0 0  
million  years ago, t h e   two  scientists  found  t h a t   if  atmospheric  carbon   dioxide  
doubles from  its present  level ,  t h e  average global climate  will become  abou t  4 
degrees  Fahrenheit   warmer. T h e s e  findings agree w i th  computer  models of cli-  
matic  change .  T h e y  are  also compatible  with  earlier work by  N A S A  scientists  
a t   t h e  Godda rd   In s t i tu te  for Space  Studies   in New  York, whose  climatic  stud-  
ies  predicted  t h a t  a doubling  of  carbon   dioxide would  reproduce  a warming of 
about   5.4  degrees Fah renhe i t .  (NY Times, Dec  15/92)  

December  16: N A S A   scientists   using  t h e   Hubble   Space   Telescope  said  they  
had   discovered  extended   disks  of  dust  around   15  newly-formed  stars  in   t h e  
O r i o n  Nebula  s ta rb i r th  region  1 ,500  light-years away. S u c h  disks a re  a prereq- 
uisite  for  t h e   formation   of  solar  systems  like  t h e   Sun's.  Hubble's detailed  
images  confirm   more   t h a n   a  century   of  speculation ,   conjecture ,   and   theory  
about   t h e  genesis  of  solar systems. Astronomers   said  t h e  Hubb le  da ta  was  t h e  
strongest  evidence   yet  t h a t   planets   could  exist   beyond   t h e   solar  system  a n d  
may  even   he  a  common   occurrence .   "We  have  found   a  place  where   it   is  very 
possible  tha t   the re   will  be  planets   within   t h e   nex t   few  million   years,"  said 
Edward Weiler, program  scientist  for t h e  space telescope,  a t  a N A S A  briefing. 
( N A S A  Release  92-226;  W Times, Dec  17/92;  USA Today, Dec   17/92;  W Post, 
Dec.  17/92;  NY  Tm e s ,  Dec  17/92; LA Times, Dec  17/92; CSM  Dec   17/92; T k  
Sun, Dec  17/92; AP ,  LJec  17/92;  UP I ,  Dec   17/92;  APn ,  Dec  17/92;  Newsweek, 
Dec  28/92) 

In  his  annua l   speech   t o   t h e   Aerospace   Industries  Association ,   President  
Donald  Fuqua  predicted  a n o t h e r  year  of  declining   production   and   more  lay-  
offs.  "T h e   long-term   outlook   fo r   t h e   aerospace  industry  is  for  a  con t inued  
decline   in  overall  sales  volume  for  t h e   rest  of  t h e   decade,"  Mr.  Fuqua  told  
industry  officials  in Wa sh ing ton ,  D.C. (The Sun ,  Dec  17/92; USA  Today, Dec  
17/92; W Post, Llec  17/92;  AP, Dec  16/92)  

N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel   S. Go ld in   said  t h a t   t h e  e n d  of  t h e  Co ld  War  
had  created   a  new  era  of  space cooperation   with   Russia a n d  We s te rn  Europe. 
G o l d i n  spcrke  t o  a  public meeting   a t   t h e  University  of Wa sh ing ton   in  Sea t t le .  
N A S A   in tended   to  study  t h e   possibility  of  using  t h e   Soyuz  capsule  as  a 
"life  ratt"  for  Space   S ta t ion   Freedom  and   might  begin  using  some  Russian 
booster  rockets  in  t h e  future ,  h e  added .  A t  t h e  same  time ,  N A S A  would  have  
to   balance  these  advantages   against  t h e   risks  associated  w i th   such   coopera-  
t ion .   (Seattle Post-lntellige?~cer, Dec  17/92)  

NASA  continued  t o  prepare for what  it called "the most aggressive" space-shut- 
tle mission  yet-its  mission  t o  repair the  Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set 
for December  7,  1993. As conceived, it would  require four astronauts working  in  

DECEMBER   1992 

CHRONOLOGY 1992 

two-person shifts several days t o  make  the  repairs. They  would need  three  or pos- 
sibly  four space walks  to  complete  t h e  work. T h e  main  task  was  t o   install  a new 
camera  and   a  set  of  corrective  mirrors  t o  compensate for spherical  aberration  in 
the  tnain  2.4-meter rnirrc~r. These  and  other  repairs would, N A S A  hoped, restore 
9 0  t o  95 percent  of  Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM ,  Dec  16/92)  

December  18: N A S A  unveiled  its h igh - f ly ing ,  unpiloted   a t~ n o s p h e r i c  research 
aircraft  called  "Perseus"  a t  Manassas,  Virginia.  Perseus-A  is  t h e   first  aircraft 
designed  specifically  for  atmospheric  science .  I t  will carry up  to   110  pounds  o f  
instruments   t o  a maximum  a l t i tude  of  82 ,000  feet a n d  is  expected  t o  begin  fly- 
ing  scientific  missions  in   1994.  Perseus-A  was  huilt   for  N A S A   by  Aurora  
Flight  Services  Co rpo ra t ion   in  Manassas  at  a  cost  of  $ 1 . 5   million .  Company  
engineers   expected   Perseus  t o   break  t h e   world  altirude   record  for  unmanned  
aircraft  and   t h e  record  for  a l t i tude  in  horizonal  flight  by  a n  airplane .   ( N A S A  
Release  92 -227 ;  W Post, Dec  19/92, Dec  28/92)  

December 21 : N A S A  hailed   1992 as  a "blockbuster  year"  for N A S A  space sci- 
e n c e  missions,  with   scientific  discoveries  ranging  from  t h e  beginning   of  time  
to   black  holes  t o   t h e   innermost   workings  of  t h e   h um a n   cell.  "G iven   t h e  
unprecedented   return   o n  science   information   and   t h e   robust  launch   record ,  
1992   was  t h e   most  productive   year  in  t h e   history   of  space  science ,"   said 
Dr.  Lennard   A .   Fisk,  Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r   for  NASA's  Office  of  Space  
Sc ience  and  Applications   in Wa sh ing ton ,  DC. ( N A S A  Release  92 -228 )  

December 22:  N A S A  managers  set  January   1 3  as  t h e   launch  da te   for  t h e  first 
S h u t t l e  mission  of  1993 .  Designated  STS - 5 4 ,  t h e  flight  was  t o  have   two  pri- 
mary  ob jec t ive s -dep loymen t   of  t h e   Tracking   and   l2ata  Relay  Sa te l l i te  
(TDRS -F )  a n d  astronomical  observations  of  invisible  x-ray  sources w i th in  t h e  
Milky  Way  Galaxy   with   t h e   Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer .   T h e  crew  was  to be 
comprised  of' J o h n   Casper,  commande r ;   l l o n   McMonagle ,   pilot;   a n d   th ree  
mission  specialists, Mario  Runco ,  Greg  Harbaugh ,   and   Susan  Helms.  ( N A S A  
Release N92 -110 ;  C Trib, Dec  23/92; AP ,  Dec  22/92;  U P I ,  Dec  22 /92 )  

N A S A   scientists  released  pictures  and   results  from  spacecraft  Galilee's 
December  8 flight over   t h e  Moon's no r th   pole  and   189  miles  above  t h e  south-  
e m   A t lan t ic   Ocean .   Th e   flyby  allowed  Ga l i leo   t o   practice   for  Jup i te r   by 
studying Earth  as if  it were a n  alien  planet .  T h e  craft detected  radio signals t h a t  
changed  frequencies  in  a repeating ,  artificial way,  indicating  intelligent   life o n  
Earth .   It  also detected   ice  clouds  in  t h e  stratosphere  t h a t  he lp  c rea te  a ho le   i n  
t h e   protective   ozone  layer  above  An ta rc t ica   and   found  evidence   t h a t   t h e  
Moon  once  was more volcanically active  t h a n  though t .  (AP ,  Dec 22192,23192; 
C Trib, I lec  23/92; W Times, Dec  23/92; NY Times, Llec  23/92; UPI, Dec 23/92)  

A  passenger  jet  was  flown  for  t h e   first  time   after   undergoing   nearly  th ree  
years  of  modifications  t h a t   conve r ted   it  i n t o   a  S h u t t l e   landing-gear   test   air-  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

DECEMBER   1992 

craft. T h e  modified Convair  990 was  in  the  air for  about o n e  hour  in  the  first 
of  three  flights planned  by  NASA   in advance of  the  actual  landing gear  tests. 
(Antelope Valley  Press, Dec  23/92) 

December  23:  Technicians  searching  for  a  leak  in  a  Space  Shu t t le  solid-fuel 
booster  rocket  found  a  1-inch  hair  pressed  into   a  secondary  seal,  a  NASA  
spokesperson said. T h e  leak  was  detected  yesterday  in  a segment  of  a booster 
for  the   Shuttle   Columbia,  which  was  being  prepared  for  a  February  launch  
date.  It  was  a  leak  in  an   O-ring   seal  tha t   was  blamed  for  the   1986 Shu t t le  
Challenger  explosion  in  which  seven  astronauts were  killed.  ( W  Xmes, Dec 
27/92; W Post, Dec  17/92; The Sun ,  Dec  27/92) 

December  28:  A  group  of  physicists  working  at  Fermilab  near  Chicago 
announced  tha t   they had  observed a "top  quark," the   last of  the  fundamental 
building  blocks  of  matter  to  have  its  existence  confirmed  i n   the   laboratory. 
Repeat  experiments to  confirm  the  existence of  the  top  quark were underway, 
but  if  the  findings hold up ,  the  event  could become  one  of  the  most  celebrat- 
ed  in  the  study of  particle  physics.  ( B  Sun ,  Dec  28/92) 

NASA   scientists  began  a  new  attempt   to  open   the   stuck  an tenna   o n   the  
Galileo  space probe by  rotating  the  satellite to  point  the  an tenna  toward  the  
Sun .  They  hoped  the  warmth would expand the  metal fittings and  release the  
stuck mechanism. If  this maneuver  fails, they were prepared to  tu rn  t h e  an ten -  
na's electric  motors  o n   and   off  a t   rapid  intervals  to  "hammer"  the   jammed 
mechanism  in a final bid  to overpower what they believed were stuck pins and 
pop  open   the   an tenna .   ( W  Post, Dec  26/92,  Dec  29/92,  Dec  30192;  The  Sun ,  
Dec  26/92,  Dec  30192,  Dec  31/92;  USA  Today,  Dec  29/92,  Dec  31/92;  NY 
Times, Dec 29/92, Dec 3 1/92; UPI, Dec 29/92, Dec 30192; AP ,  Dec 28/92, Dec 
29/92, Dec 30192; P Inq ,  Dec  31/92; W 'Times, Dec 31/92)  

Lockheed  Corporation  formed  a  joint  venture  with  Russian  aerospace  firm 
Krun~chev  Enterprise  to market  the Russian-built Proton  rocket for commercial 
satellite  launches,  a  move  that   could  help  make  Russia  one   of  the   dominant 
forces  in  the  world-wide  commercial  launch  business.  Lockheed  was  to   be 
responsible  for  marketing  the   Russian  rocket  to Western  customers and  would 
provide payload  integration. Rockets were to  he  launched from the  Baikonur slte 
In  Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Xmes, Dec  29/92) 

Russia  launched  a spaceship carrying insects and  two monkeys  into  orbit  to  
conduct  radiation  experiments  o n   the   creatures.  Experts  from  the   European 
Space Agency  as  well  as  Italian, German ,  and  o the r  foreign scientists were  to  
oversee the  biological experiments. T h e  ITAR-Tass news agency also said tha t  
Cosmonauts  Anatoly  Solovyov  and   Sergei  Avdeyev,  who   had   spent   five 
~ n o n t h s  ahoard  the  Mir  Space Station ,  were  in good  condition  following rou- 
t ine  medical  examinations.  (AP ,  Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92) 

DECEMBER  1992 

CHRONOLOGY  1992 

Astronomers  ruled  out  any possibility  that  Comet Swift-Tuttle would  col- 
lide with  the  Earth on  its next  pass  through  the  inner  solar system  in 2126. In 
October  astronomers warned  that  the  comet might  hit  the  Earth during  that 
pass, potentially  creating  a pall  of  dust  capable of  blocking sunlight, disrupt- 
ing  climate, and  threatening human  civilization. More  accurate  calculations 
of  Swift-Tuttle's orbit showed  that  there  was  no   chance  of  a  collision.  (NY 
Zmes, Dec 29/92; The Sun ,  Dec 30192) 

December  30: Th e  eight-legged rappeling robot Dante was  placed  in position on  
the  rim of  the Antarctic  volcano Mt.  Erebus  in preparation for  its exploration 
of  the  interior of  the crater and  its lava  lake. NASA  and  the National  Science 
Foundation hoped  that  the  Dante  project  would  help develop technology  and 
telecommunications capabilities that NASA could use  in future explorations of 
the Moon  or Mars  or  in ongoing  research  activities in  the Antarctic.  (NASA  
Dante Advisor #3;  UP I ,  Dec  28/92; AP, Dec  28/92, Dec 31/92) 

ASTRONAUTlCS  AND AERONAUTICS  CHRONOLOGY   1 993 

January 

January  1 : Fred  J .   Friel,  a radio  scientist  and  amateur  radio operator,  died  of 
renal  failure on  December  24.  Mr.  Friel worked  as  a radio engineer  for  RCA 
and as an engineer for  the Navy before  joining NASA when  that  agency was 
created.  Friel served  as  radio frequency spectrum manager with  NASA  from 
1971  to  1975.  He  also  served  as  an   adviser  to  the  president's  Office  of 
Telecommunications Policy. ( W  Times, Jan  1/93) 

January  3: Th e  project  to send the eight-foot-high, 1,000-pound robot  Dante 
to explore Mount Erebus, an active volcano  in Antarctica, was  aborted  a day 
after  the  robot  started down  the  volcano. T h e  robot  had  gone  about  21  feet 
into  the   volcano  when  a  communications  cable  linking  the  machine  to  its 
control  station  broke. NASA  scrubbed  the  mission  after  it  had  been  deter- 
mined  that  repairs  to  the  damaged  cable  could  not  be  made  in  time  for  the 
mission to be  completed before  severe weather  set  in. 

NASA  said  that  its mission  to  send  a robot  into an Antarctic  volcano had 
opened  the way  for  exploration  of  the  Moon and Mars.  Despite the  fact  that 
the  mission  had  to  be  aborted,  David  Lavery, director  of  the  Dante  project, 
noted that the objectives of controlling the  robot from afar and  testing sophis- 
ticated  hardware  in  a harsh  environment had  been met. 

Th e  $2 million Dante project was  sponsored by  Carnegie-Mellon University 
and  the New  Mexico Institute  of  Mining  and  Technology. Backed  by  NASA 
and  the  National  Science  Foundation,  the  project  was  directed  by NASA's 
Goddard  Space Flight Center  in  Greenbelt, Maryland. (B Sun, J an  1/93; J an  
2/93; AP, J an  4/93; NY  Times, 2/93; W Post, Jan  3/93; W Times, Jan  3/93; WSJ, 
Jan  4/93) 

January  4: When  asteroid Toutatis passed  within  2 .2   million miles  of  Earth  in 
December, NASA  took  100 times more detailed radar images of  it than had ever 
been taken of  that kind of  object before. According to astronomer Steven Ostro, 
"This is our first clear look at one of  the many thousands of  asteroids whose orbits 
can intersect Earth's orbit." The  images show asteroid Toutatis comprises two big 
chunks of  rock,  probably  held  in contact  by gravity. One chunk has an average 
width  of  about  2.5  miles; the other  is  about  1.6 miles wide.  Toutatris  is  "among 
the  50 largest Earth-approaching asteroids  that  we  estimate to exit," Mr.  Ostro 
said. NASA bounced radar waves off  the asteroid using a 230-wide antenna dish 
at a tracking station in the California Mojave Desert. ( B  Sun, Jan  4/93; NY Times, 
Jan 4/93; W Post, Jan  4/93;  USA  Today, Jan 4/93; AP, Jan  4/93) 

The  Navy  announced  that  it  was  turning  over  the  Moffett Field  Naval  Air 
Station, located  40  miles  south of  San Francisco, California, to  NASA's Ames 
Research  Center,  which  is  located  on   the  base.  Th e  Center  was  to  continue 

29 1 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

JANUARY  1993 

developing  and  testing  space  and  aircraft-related  technologies.  The   Center's 
wind  tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test 
generations of  spacecraft and  commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. 
(AP, Jan 4/93) 

Studies o n  the feasibility of  using Soyuz TM  spacecraft as crew return vehi- 
cles for the  U.S.IInternationa1 Space Station were scheduled to enter a more 
detailed  phase  according  to  NASA  Associate  Administrator  Arnold  D. 
Aldrich.  NPO   ENERGIA  was  to   study modifications,  launch  options,  and 
costs  for  one  year.  Th e  Soviet  hardware could allow NASA  to  permanently 
staff  the  station by  1998 or  1999. (AvWk, J an  411993) 

Florida Today reported that NASA was  launching a new type of  air-launched 
Pegasus rocket that activates only after being released from the wing of an air- 
craft.  T h e   winged  vehicle,  which  was  developed  by  Orbital  Sciences 
Corporation, has a solid-fuel rocket that gives it the  ability to put small satel- 
lites  into  orbit  a t   a  bargain  price.  Plans  called  for  the  Pegasus  to  carry  a 
Brazilian remote sensing satellite.  (F1 Today, J a n  4/93) 

]anuar)r  5 :  Vice President Dan Quayle's space policy  advisory board  released a 
report  stating  that  "The  U.S.  government's  organization of  space activities  is 
not  appropriate  for  the  post-Cold  War  era."  T h e   report  noted  that  space 
bureaucracy must be  simplified and centralized and that more technology must 
be  shared  between  government  and  industry.  It  also called U.S.  space  launch 
capabilities inefficient and unsafe.  ( W  Post, Jan  5/93; Space News ,  Jan  5/93) 

NASA's  new  Shuttle  toilet,  the  Improved  Waste  Collection  System 
( IWCS ) ,  was  slated for  its first space-flight test  later  this month. T h e  IWCS, 
which  is  designed t o  accommodate long-term flights, has "basically unlimited 
capacity" because of  its innovative  method of  compacting solid waste and use 
of  a modular  removal  container.  T h e  device's $30 million  price  tag  brought 
criticism from government  auditors. (W  Post, Jan  5/93; USA  Today, J an  6/93; 
AP, Feb  13/93) 

Satcon  Technology Corporation  (SATCON )  entered  into  an   agreement 
with  Advanced  Medical  Systems  Inc.  (AMS )  for  the  joint  development  of 
cardiovascular medical devices. SATCON was using  its active motion  control 
technology  to  develop  these  devices. This  technology was  developed  as  part 
of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  NASA's SBIR program;  the   program was 
established by  Congress to provide money  to  U.S. small businesses t o  develop 
innovative  products with high  commercial potential.  (AP, J an  5/93) 

Astronomers  have  discovered  a  huge  concentration  of  mysterious  "dark 
matter," which  scientists believe  may  make  up  as much  as  95  percent  of  the  
universe.  Th e   finding  was  the  first  to   "indicate  that  there  may  be  enough 

JANUARY   1993 

CHRONOLOGY   1993 

material  to  close t h e  universe," said  the  research  team's Richard E  Mushotzky 
of NASA's Goddard  Space Flight Cen te r   in Greenbelt ,  Maryland.  I n  a closed 
universe,  the  expansion of  t h e  universe,  which  is  being slowed  by  t h e  pull  of 
gravity, would come  to  a halt  or  nearly  so. T h e  discovery was detected  by  the  
international   ROSAT   x-ray  satellite  observatory.  ROSAT,  a n   acronym  for 
Roentgen  Satellite,  is  a joint  project  of  Germany, the  United   States ,  and   t h e  
United   Kingdom.  It  was  launched  o n   a  Delta  11  rocket  from  the   Cape  
Canaveral Air  Force S ta t ion ,  Florida, o n  J u n e  1 ,  1990. (NA SA  Release 93-1;  
W Post, J a n  5/93; W Post, J a n  8/93;  B  Sun ,  J a n  5/93, J a n  8/93; NY Times, J a n  
5/93; Arizona Republic, J a n  5/93; P  Inq, J a n  8/93; Newsweek, J a n  1 8 )  

Shortly  after  Space  Shuttle   Endeavour's launch  later  this  mon th ,   techni-  
cians  and  engineers  from  GTE   Government   Systems  Corporation   were  to  
establish  an   almost  continuous  communications  link  with  the   Shu t t le .  T h e  
space  link  to   Earth  would  come  through  a  system  of  tracking  and   data   relay 
satellites  (TDRS ) ,   which  would  be  supplemented  by  a  satellite  carried  by 
Endeavour.  (Business Wire, J a n  5, 93 ) .  

NASA  announced that  engineer Karl Anderson from the  Ames-Dryden Flight 
Research Facility,  Edwards, California, had  invented  a process  that   yields more 
accurate, faster stress measurements. Anderson's method uses  a circuit  called  a 
"constant  current  loop";  the   system  prevents  errors  caused  by  temperature 
changes  in  the   wires  that   link  instruments,  called  strain  gauges,  to   recording 
devices. (NASA  Release 93-002; AP, Jan  25/93; Antebpe Valley  Press, J a n  20193) 

January  6: A team of  astronomers  from the  University  of Arizona  told  a meet- 
ing  of  t h e  American  Astronomical  Society  tha t   they  had  found  convincing  
new evidence tha t  a black hole  the  size of  a million  suns is  a t  t h e  center  of  t h e  
Milky  Way  Galaxy.  T h e   astronomers  reported  tha t   they  had  detected   faint  
infrared emissions from an  area a t  the  galactic core tha t   is  the  source of a pow- 
erful  radio  signal  possibly  produced  by  forces surrounding a  black  hole .  T h e  
team detected   the  emissions by  using  a new  adaptive optics  system known  as 
FASTTRAC ,   developed  by  graduate  student   Laird  Close  and   Donald  W. 
McCarthy  Jr., of  the  University  of  Arizona.  ( W  Post, J a n  6/93; NY  Tines, J a n  
6/93; USA  Today, J a n  6/93)  

NASA  has chosen 38  research proposals t o  be  incorporated in to  phase  I1 of 
its Small Business Innovation  Research  Program (SBIR) .  T h e  projects  will be 
conducted  by  3 6  small  business  from  18  states;  the   projects  have   a  value  of 
approximately $19  million. NASA   will  select  approximately  100 additional 
research  proposals in January and February  1993. 

SBIR attempts  to  stimulate technological  innovation   in  the  Un i ted  States  
by  using  small  businesses  to  help   federal  agencies  meet  their  research  and  
development  needs.  (NA SA  Release 93-003) 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY  1993 

N A S A  released  two  new  Hubble   space telescope  photographs   t h a t  show 
a  bullet  of  gas  streaking   across  t h e   sky.  According   t o   J .   Jeff  Hester,  a n  
Arizona  S t a t e   University   astronomer ,   t h e   new  pictures   show  a  "shock 
wave  from  a  colossal  explosion   of  a  s ta r   15 ,000  years  ago  smashing   i n t o  a 
pocket   of  interstellar   gas,  hea t ing   t h e   gas  a n d   causing   it  t o   glow." 
Following  t h e  blast  wave  is  a shaft  of  gas  traveling   a t  more  t h a n   3 million  
miles  a n  hour .   T h e   images  show  t h e   s t ruc tu re  beh ind   t h e   shock  waves  in  
t h e   Cygnus  Loop  supernova   remnan t .   T h e   Hubble   photos   are  giving 
astronomers   the i r   first  detailed   look  a t   t h e  anatomy   of  t h e  powerful  astro-  
physical  shock  wave  .generated  by  a supernova .   ( N A S A  Release  N93 -002 ;  
B  Sun, J a n  8/93;  W  Post, J a n  18/93)  

According  to  Neal  Pellis of  t h e  University of Texas M .D .  Anderson  Cance r  
Cen te r ,  a research  project  from the  Cancer  C e n t e r  aboard  the  Space Shu t t le  
Endeavour could  provide  "a  big  step  in developing better   treatments  for can -  
cer patients." T h e  experiment  will attempt   to  find out  more about the  human  
immune  system  and   why  i t   does  no t   work  as well  i n  long-term  space  travel. 
( H  Post, J a n  6/93)  

January 7: A  rocky asteroid, rather  than  an  icy comet ,  probably caused a huge 
explosion  over  Siberia  in  1908 tha t   flattened  at  least 40,000 trees over about 
850   square  miles.  A  research  team  from  NASA   and   the   University  of 
Wisconsin  used  a computer simulation to  determine  tha t  a n  asteroid measur- 
ing  about  65  yards was  a  better  explanation   t h a n   the   comet;   the   simulation 
revealed  tha t   comets would  explode  much  too high  in  the   sky to  fit  t h e  pro- 
jected  altitude of  the  Tunguska blast.  ( B  Sun, J a n  7/93; NY  Tmes, J a n  7/93; LA 
Times, J a n  8/93; W Post, J a n  11/93; P  lnq ,  J a n  7/93; WP, J a n  11/93)  

NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  announced  tha t  NASA  was  raising 
the  number of  contracts  i t  had  with  small, disadvantaged,  and  women-owned 
businesses.  According  to   Goldin ,   $310  million  would  be  set  aside  under  a 
Determinations  and  Findings  (D&F )  to  make  sure tha t  NASA   awarded eight 
percent  t o  such  businesses. Eight percent  was  the  figure set by  Congress.  (LA  
Watts Xmes, J a n  7/93) 

Russia  agreed  to   help  build  a  U.S.  atom  smasher  in  Waxahachie,  Texas. 
Russian scientists would be  involved in the  design, engineering, and production 
of  two  of  the   Collider's  booster  accelerators  in  addition  to  its  experimental 
detectors. According to the   terms of  the  agreement, which could add $100 mil- 
lion  to  the  Russian economy and save the U.S.  a similar amount, Russia would 
provide  Russian hardware at half price.  (WSJ, J a n  7/93; USA Today, J a n  7/93) 

By  using  t h e   Hubble   Space  Telescope,  astronomers  have  concluded   t h a t  
t h e  Markarian  315 Galaxy,  a galaxy  t h a t  has  been   observed  for  1 0  years,  is 
in  reality  composed  of  two  merged  galaxies; t h e  collision  of  t h e   two  galax- 

J A N U A R Y   1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

ies is  though t   to  have  provided  new fuel for a massive black hole ,  which  has  
a  "tail"  of  gas  240 ,000  light-years  long.  ( N A S A  Release  93-006;  W  Times, 
J a n  8 ,   1993 )  

Using  the   Cosmic  Background  Explorer  (COBE ) ,  NASA   scientists meas- 
ured  thermal radiation differences across the  universe and came up with more 
conclusive  evidence  than  ever  to  support  the  "Big Bang"  theory  tha t   the  uni- 
verse was created by  a single blast  15 billion  years ago. Measurements made by 
COBE revealed  tha t  99.97 percent  of  the  early radiant energy of  the  universe 
was released within  the  first year  after the  Big Bang  itself. "This is  the  ultimate 
in  tracing  one's  cosmic  roots,"  said NASA   scientist  J o h n  C .   Mather,  who 
announced  the   findings at  a meeting of  the  American  Astronomical  Society. 
(NA SA  Release 93-5;  USA Today, J a n  8/93; NY  Times, J a n  8/93; AP, J a n  8/93; 
AuWk, J a n  25/93) 

NASA   released  four  new  images  gathered  by  the   Cosmic  Background 
Explorer. T h e   images,  which  were  released  at  the   American  Astronomical 
Society  meeting  in  Phoenix ,  Arizona,  showed  infrared  sources  such  as  dust 
within  the  Solar System, stars  in  the  Milky Way Galaxy, and dust  and  stars  in 
o the r   galaxies.  T h e   images  were  created  from  Diffuse  Infrared  Background 
Experiment  (DIRBE) data.  (NA SA  Release 92-256)  

Static  firing  tests  of  a propulsion development  test  article  for  Space Station  
Freedom began at NASA's White   Sands Test Facility (WSTF )  in New  Mexico 
in  late  December. T h e   tests checked  the  preliminary  design  for  the   propulsion 
module  that  was to be  used  for Space Station attitude control, orientation, speed 
and altitude control, and avoidance of  space debris.  (NASA  Release 93-7) 

January   8:  A  U t a h   S ta te   University  group  sponsored  by  NASA's  National  
Space G ran t  College  and Fellowship Program Office was scheduled  to  launch 
a high-altitude  research  balloon  o n  January  11  to  measure  ozone distribution 
and wind parameters  in the  Earth's stratosphere. T h e  balloon, which was  to  f l y  
across t h e  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  Florida, was  t h e  eleventh   launched  by  this  team 
and  the  first of  24-hours duration .  

Throughout   the  balloon's flight, teams of  amateur  radio operators  in  Texas, 
Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and  Florida were to  receive information from 
the   balloon's gondola; this  information  was  to  be  relayed  by  high-frequency 
radio  to   the  U t a h  S ta te  University  team. O t h e r  flights of  an   longer duration  
were scheduled  to be  launched  from Canada ,  the  United   States, Mexico, and  
Cen t ra l  America.  (NA SA  Release 93-8)  

NASA  announced  tha t   it would  soon begin  tests using  a modified Convair  
990 commercial  jet  airliner  to  expand  the  operational  landing capabilities of 
the  Space Shuttle  system. T h e  Convair  has been undergoing modifications  for 

ASTRONAUTICS  AN11 AERONAUT1(:S 

JANUARY  1993 

two  years  in  preparation   for  tests  t h a t   would  he lp   J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r  
researchers  better   understand   t h e   operational   capabilities  of  t h e   S h u t t l e  sys- 
tem .   (Desert Wings, J a n  8/93)  

A   Gene ra l  Accoun t ing  Office  ( G A O )  report   charged  t h a t  N A S A  was very 
resistant  t o  change .  Some  of  t h e  GAO ' s  criticisms,  including  poor  budgeting ,  
con t rac t   managemen t ,  and   organizational  culture ,  had   also been  identified  as 
problem  areas  by  a  W h i t e   House  scientific  panel .   ( N Y  Times, J a n  8/93;   USA 
Today, J a n  8/93)  

A   report  released  hy  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S .   G o l d i n   said  t h a t  
N A S A  must  improve  its ability  t o  transfer  technology  t o  business. T h e  report 
included  eight   recommendations   for  chang ing   NASA's  culture   t o   facilitate  
technology   transfer. 

T h e  report   no ted   t h a t  NASA's efforts were qu i te  good  in  areas where   t e c h -  
nology  transfer  was  t h e   primary  mission  activity.  T h c s e   areas  included  aero-  
nautics ,   t h e   Small   Business  Innova t ive   Research  (SR IR )   program,  a n d   t h e  
Cen te r s   for Conlmercial   Development   of  Space. 

N A S A   c rea ted   t h e   Office   of  A d v a n c e d   C o n c e p t s   a n d   Techno logy   last 
No \ ,emhe r   to  b e t t e r   mee t   t h e   needs   of  industry ,   academ ia ,   a n d   N A S A  
commun i t ie s .   Ensuring   t h e   rapid  transfer   of  techno logy   i n t o   t h e   c omm e r -  
cial   sec to r   is  o n e  of  t h e   new  office's ma jo r   func t ion s .   ( N A S A  Release   93 -  
0 0 9 )  

January   I  I :   In   a n   interview   in   t h e   Scientist,  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Dan ie l  
G o l d i n   said  t h a t   t h e   cu r ren t   N A S A   reorganization   would  make   sc ience  
more   of  a  priority   i n  N A S A  and   invo lve   t h e  sc ience  commun i ty   in   co r rec t -  
ing  problems   a t  N A S A .  H e  s t a t e d ,  "NA SA   is  sc ience  a n d   exp lo ra t ion ,   n o t  
infrastructure   and   bureaucracy."  In   response   t o   a   que s t ion   abou t   jobs,  h e  
n o t e d   t h a t  N A S A  was n o t  a  jobs  program ,  hu t   r a t h e r  existed  for  "inspiration  
a n d   h o p e ,   a n d   a   basic  unde r s tand ing   of  science ."   H e   said  t h a t  h e   hoped   t o  
launch   a   small  discover).  sa te l l i te   every   year,  while   c u t t i n g   back   Space  
S h u t t l e  flights   from  12  or   13  t o  six  ;I  year.  (The  Scientist, J a n   11/93;  At:Wk, 
J a n  25 /93 )  

A   team   of  a s t ronome r s  from  t h e  University   of  Massachusetts   i n  Am h e r s t  
a n d   Arizona's   Kitt   Peak  Observatory   a n n o u n c e d   a t   a   ga the r ing   of  t h e  
Am e r i c a n  A s t ronom ica l   Society   in  Phoen ix   t h a t   they  h a d  g o t t e n   a  glimpse 
of  hund red s   of  S u n - l i k e  stars  sho r t ly  after   t h e  stars  emerged   from  t h e  clouds  
of  dust   t h a t   would  have   obscured   the i r   b i r th .   T h e   team   found   t h a t   many  
stars  begin   life  in   small ,   t i g h t - k n i t   families  a n d   a t   t h a t   stage  a re  surrounded  
by  o rb i t ing   disks  of  dust   grains   a n d   gas.  Sc ien t i s t s   belit.\.e  t h a t   th i s   is  t h e  
material   from  wh ich   p lane t s   like  Ea r th   are   derived .   ( W  Post, J a n  1 1 / 9 3 )  

JANUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Janm r j  1 2 :  NA SA  announced  tha t   it planned  to  use  the  eight  Space Shu t t le  
flights scheduled  for  1993 for  research  relating  to  the   building  and   operation 
of  Space S ta t ion  Freedom, scheduled  to  be  launched  in  three  years. 

Endeavour,  scheduled  for  its  first  1993  launch  in  January, was  to  conduct  
extravehicular  activities  involving station   assembly  and   maintenance;   a  10- 
hour   test  shut-down  of  one   of  the   Shu t t le  electricity-generating fuel  cells  in 
order  t o  demonstrate  t h e   capability  required  to  certify  the   Shu t t le   for  long 
duration  stays  a t   the   Freedom;  and   an   experiment  called  the   Application 
Specific  Preprogrammed  Experiment  Culture  System  (ASPECS )  designed  as 
a  cell  growth  and   maintenance   device  to   support  cell  biology  research  and 
improve existing bioreactor  technology 

Columbia, a German-sponsored mission, the  first Spacelab module flight  of 
1993, scheduled  for  launch  in February, was  scheduled  to  continue   studies  in 
materials and  life sciences research. T h e  Spacelab Discovery, scheduled for l i f t  
off  in March, was  to measure  the   long-term variability  in the   total energy radi- 
ated  by  the   Sun   and  study  its  interaction   with  the   Earth's atmosphere.  A n  
April  Endeavour  flight  was  t o   f l y   the   first  Spacelah  middeck  augmentation 
module and  retrieve the  European Retrievable Carrier deployed from Atlantis  
in August  1992. Spacehab  also would  carry  a space station  flight  experiment 
called   t h e   Env i ronmen ta l   C o n t r o l   and   Life  Support   Systems  Flight 
Experiment, containing  two components  of  Freedom's environmental  control  
system. A  Discovery  flight  in July was  scheduled  to  expose  various materials 
t o  the  space environment   to help  determine  which  materials would work  best 
in future spacecraft design, including the  space station .  T h e  Columbia ,  sched- 
uled  to  be launched  in August, was to  focus on  understanding how  the  human  
body  reacts and   adapts  itself  to  t h e  space flight  environment .  

A  November  Discovery  flight,  the  second  Spacehab  flight  of  the  year,  was 
scheduled to  cany the Wake Shield Facility  (WSF ) ,  designed  to be  released from 
the  payload bay  to create an atomic oxygen wake as i t  circled the Earth. Discovery 
astronauts would  conduct  experiments to  determine  the  effect  the  "space wake" 
had  on  them.  T h e  December  flight  of  Endeavour  was  scheduled  to  he  the  first 
servic~ng mlssion to  the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA  Release 93-10) 

NASA   appointed  Deidre  A.  Lee  as  acting  Associate  Administrator  for 
Procurement. She  replaced Don G .  Bush, who announced his intention  to resign 
in  November  1992. Since  September  1991, Lee  has  been  serving  as  Deputy 
Assistant Administrator  for  Procurement.  Prior  to  that   she was  the  executive 
officer to  NASA's  acting Deputy Administrator.  (NASA  Release  93-1 1 )  

Russian scientists o n  the  Mir  spaceship were  scheduled  t o  begin  an  experi- 
ment   tha t   involved  using  a  mirror  to   reflect  sunlight  down  to  Earth.  In   the  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AN11 AERC3NAUTICS 

JANUARY  1993 

expe r imen t ,  a 65-foot-diameter  disk of  aluminum-coated  plastic film would  be 
unfurled  in   space.  T h e  experiment   would  test  t h e  possibility of  illuminating  
areas  o n   t h e   Earth   with   light  equivalent   t o  t h a t   of  several  moons.  Scientists  
agree  o n   t h e   need  for  env i ronmen ta l   studies  t o   access  t h e   possible  effect  of 
such   a  practice.  ( B  Sun ,  J a n   12/93;  NY   Times, J a n   12/97; W Xmes,  Feb  3/93;  
AP,  Feb  3/93;  USA  Today, Feb  4/93; W Post, Feb 4/93; LA  Times, Feb  4/93)  

Researchers hoped  t h a t  t h e  lead coffins buried  benea th   t h e  floor of  t h e   1 7 t h -  
century  G rea t   Brick  Chape l   in  S t .  Mary's City ,  Maryland, con ta ined  300-year- 
old  air. However, according  t o  Joe l  Levine ,  t h e  scientist  who  headed  t h e   team  
analyzing  t h e   air  a t  NASA's  Langley Research  C e n t e r   in  H am p t o n ,  Virginia, 
t h e   coffins  appeared  t o   con ta in   modern   air,  as  signalled  by  t h e   presence  of 
Ch lo ro f luo roca rbon s ,   w h i c h   were  first  manu fac tu red  
in  
t h e   1940s .  
Scientists  hoped   t o   compare   t h e   chemistry  of  t h e   old  air  with   modern   air  in 
order   t o  de te rm ine  how  much   t h e   atmosphere   has  been   altered  by  industrial 
pollution   and   t h e   burning   of  fossil  fuels. A l though   disappointed  t h a t   n o  "old 
air" was  found  in  t h e  coffins, Levine was pleased with   t h e  technology  t h a t  had  
been  developed t o  extract   it. ( B  Sun, J a n  12/93;  P Inq, J a n  13/93;  AP  J a n  12/93)  

T h e  military's plans  t o   test  a Russian Topaz  2  nuclear   reactor  in   orbit   were 
criticized  by  t h e   governing   counc i l   of  t h e   Ame r ican   Astronomical   Society  
and   some  o t h e r  scientists.  Counc i l   members  were  concerned   because  experi-  
ence  with   previous Russian  reactors had  shown   t h a t   t h e y  emit   radiations  t h a t  
"can   significantly  disrupt   x-ray  and   gamma-ray  astronomical   obsenrations." 
Society  officials  noted   t h a t   t h e y  were  n o t   opposing  t h e  mission  or   t h e  use  of 
nuclear   reactors  in  space;  rather   they   were  asking  t h a t   t h e   test  be  conducted  
a t   higher   levels, which   would  presumably  be  safer. 

Plans called for the  Topaz 2  reactor  t o  be put  into  a n  orbit  1,000 feet high; over 
the  span of a year, the  spacecraft housing the  reactor would be  lifted t o  19,000 feet 
by  an electric propulsion system powered by  t h e  reactor. T h e  mission was project- 
ed  to  cost  $150  million.  To stay within  this budget,  the   Pentagon would  need  to  
use  t h e   planned  Delta  rocket  rather  t h a n   a  more  expensive  Atlas  rocket.  (NY 
T i m e s ,  J a n  12/93) 

January  13:  Crew  members  of  a  NASA   booster-recovery  ship  waiting  for  the  
launch  of  the   Shuttle   Endeavour  rescued  three  Cubans   found  floating  in  the  
ocean  about 37 miles east of Cape  Canaveral. T h e  Cubans, who were floating o n  
two  large inner tubes fastened  together with boards and  ropes, said  they had been 
at  sea  for eight days and without  food  and  water  for six days. They  were heading 
for Miami.  (W  Post, J a n  13/93; A P  J a n  12/93) 

According to  reports, the  planet-probing  spacecraft Galileo  was approaching its 
last  pre-Jupiter  target, t h e  asteroid  Ida. It was  t o  pass  about  1 ,500  miles from  t h e  
asteroid o n  August 28 and  was scheduled to  arrive at Jupiter o n  December 5, 1995. 

JANUARY   1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Galileo's  con t ro l le r s   a t   t h e   Ca l i fo rn ia   In s t i tu te   of  Technology's  J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL )  in   Pasadena,  California ,   con t inued   t o  work  o n  
unfurling  t h e   spacecraft's  stuck  high-gain   a n t e n n a .   If  the i r   a t temp t s   were 
unsuccessful,  t h e   craft's controllers   would  use  Galileo's  low-gain  a n t e n n a   t o  
ga the r   d a t a ,   including   da ta   from  a  probe  t h a t   would  descend  i n t o   Jupiter's 
atmosphere .   Use   of  t h e  back-up  system  would  enable   N A S A   t o  complete   70 
pe rcen t  of  its mission,  according  t o  project  manager  William  O 'N e i l l .  ( C SM ,  
J a n  13/93)  

T h e  th ree  main   commercial  sponsors of  t h e   52-foot Conestoga   1620  rocket 
scheduled   t o  be  launched   t h ~ s  spring from Wallops  Island, Virginia, were  sell- 
ing  ad  space  o n   t h e   shell   of  t h e   rocket .   T h e   pnce:   $500 ,000   for  58  fee t   of  
space.  T h e  Conestoga   launch   was  part   of  NASA's Comme rc ia l   Experiment  
Transport  program.  ( P  Inq, J a n  14/93;  USA  Today, J a n  13/93;  Advertising- Age, 
J a n  11/93;  W Post, J a n  26 /93 )  

Research   recently  confirmed  t h a t   6 5  million  years  ago  a  come t   or   asteroid 
crashed  i n t o  Earth   a t   t h e  no r the rn   t i p  of  wha t   is  now  t h e  Yucatan  peninsula .  
Because  dinosaurs  disappeared  a t  abou t   t h e  same t ime ,  researchers  have  spec- 
ulated  t h a t   the re   might   be  some  c o n n e c t i o n   between   t h e   impact   a n d   t h e  
dinosaurs' disappearance .  However,  t h e  come t  or  asteroid  t h a t   gouged ou t   t h e  
c ra te r   seems  t o   have   been   only  o n e   cause  of  t h e   massive  ex t inc t ion s   t h a t  
occurred  a t   t h e   time.  According   t o   Walter   Alvarez  of  t h e   University   of 
California ,   Berkeley,  "If  a  single  big  impact   and   a  single  big  ex t inc t ion   were 
t h e  whole   story,  it   would  be  clear  by  now.  Instead  we  keep   finding   mysteries 
wrapped  up  in  enigmas."  ( C SM ,  J a n  13 /93 )  

January  14:  T h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavor   lifted  off  o n   t h e   year's first  S h u t t l e  
flight.  During  t h e   six-day mission,  crew  members  would  conduc t   a  variety  of 
tasks a n d  experiments   in  Earth  o rb i t .  S ix  hours  after  t h e  Shuttle's  launch  from 
Florida's Kennedy  Space  Cen te r ,   t h e  crew  successfully deployed  t h e  Tracking 
and   Data   Relay  Sa te l l i te  System  ( T D R S S ) ,  a  network   t h a t   provides  commu -  
n ica t ion s ,  tracking ,   telemetry, da ta   acquisition ,  and  command   services for  t h e  
Space  S h u t t l e .  Crew   members  were  also  scheduled  t o   take   astronomy   obser- 
vations   using  t h e   Diffuse  X-ray  Spec t rome te r   (DX S ) ;  perform  t h e   first  in  a 
series  of  test  spacewalks  designed  t o  refine  t ra in ing  methods   for  f ~ i t u r e  space-  
walks,  for  example ,   t h e   Hubble   Space  Telescope  repair  mission  scheduled   for 
later   in   t h e  m o n t h ;  conduc t  a  series of  scientific  experiments  covering  a wide 
range  of  disciplines; and   test  a new  S h u t t l e  toilet ,  which   has unlimited   capac-  
ity  a n d   is  in tended   t o  accommodate   crews o n  future   lengthy   space  missions. 
T h e  crew  was  also  scheduled  t o  use  toys  t o  demon s t ra te  physics  principles  in  
a T V  broadcast  t o  four  elementary   schools  in  crew members' home town s  and  
t o   take   part  in   t h e   na t iona l   bell-ringing  ceremony   marking   President-elect  
Bill  Clinton's   inauguration .  ( N A S A  Release 93-004;  P  lnq ,  J a n  11/93;  B  Sun ,  

ASTRC7NAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

J A N U A R Y  1993 

J a n  10193, J a n  11/93, J a n  14/93, J a n  18/93; USA  Today, Jan   11/93? Jan  13/93, 
J a n  14/93, J a n  18/93, J a n  19/93; W Xm e s ,  J a n  11/93, J a n  14/93; AP, Jan   11/93, 
J a n  12/93, J a n  13/93, J a n  14/93, J a n  19/93; W P o s t ,  J a n  14/93; UP11 Jan  11/93, 
J a n  13/93; LA Times, Jan  14/93, J a n  17/93, J a n  18/93; NY Times, J a n  12/93, J a n  
Inq ,   ]an   14/93; W Times, Jan  
14/93, J a n  17/93, J a n   18/93; WS I ,   J a n  14/93; 
18/93;  USA  Today, J a n  18/93; UPI, J a n  19/93; AVW, J a n  25/93) 

Courtney  Stadd ,  acting  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  the  Office  of 
Advanced  Concepts  and Technology  a t  NASA ,  was  given  the   job  of  design- 
ing  an  effective commercialization  office  at  the  Agency.  His office was  com- 
missioned t o  work  o n  space cornmercialization, engineering analysis, technol-  
ogy  development,  and  tech   transfer. (Washington  Technology, J a n  14/93)  

In  his  final report  on  U.S.  space policy, Vice President  Dan Quayle warned 
that  the  planned  Space Station Freedom would not survive unless NASA  stuck 
to   its  current budget  and  schedule. In  his  report,  he  also urged  replacement  of 
the  Shuttle  fleet by  different launch systems. T h e  report called for a more cost- 
effect  and  efficient  method  of  sending  humans  into  space  to  be  developed  by 
2005; urged  tha t   no more  than   five years elapse between  approval and  launch 
of  future  science  programs; and  supported  international  partnerships  in  space 
with  the  caveat  that   such  transactions  should not  endanger  our economic and  
security interests.  (AP, J a n  14/93; W  Post, J a n  15/93; USA  Today, J a n  29/93) 

A NASA   in-house study reported  that   the  agency's technology  transfer rep- 
utation  had been  overblown. According t o  the  assessment,"Technology trans- 
fer  processes  are  non-integrated ,  undocumented,  and  too  slow."  T h e   report 
was  requested  last  May  by  NA SA   Administrator   Daniel   S .   G o l d i n .  
(Washington  Technology, J a n  14/93) 

A panel of  government scientists announced  that volcanic eruptions had made 
the last half-year the fifth coldest on record  in the United  States. The  year would 
have heen the coldest since  1958 worldwide had not a surprisingly strong El Niiio 
brought  warming  effects. The  eruptions may  also have  increased  the  ozone hole 
over  the  Antarctic, the   scientists reported.  ( W  Post,  Jan   14/93; NY X m s ,  Mar 
9/93 

Janumy   15: A n  x-ray spectrometer aboard  the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunc- 
tioned while scanning the  space between  stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard 
Space Flight Center  in Greenbelt, Maryland were  attempting to correct the prob- 
lem.  T h e   spectrcjmeter  measures  low-energy  x-rays  emitted  from  the  space 
between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped  to prove or disprove the  theory 
that  a  bubble  of  hot  gas  in  the  Milky  Way  Galaxy  was  produced  by  a  nearby 
exploding star.  Meanwhile, Endeavour  crew  members  conducted  medical  tests 
and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school class- 
rcwm  presentation called "Physics of  Toys." (NY Times, Jan  15/93; AP, J a n  15/93) 

l:\NL':II<Y 

I ' lL)3 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

According  to   Luke  Dones,  a  visiting  assistant  research  astronomer  a t  
NASA's Ames Research Center ,  Moffett Field, California, the  Earth's rotation  
rate may be  caused by  early collisions with  rocks as  large as Mars. W i thou t  t h e  
large  impacts,  the   Earth  would  rotate  only  every  200  hours  instead  of  the   24  
hours  it  rotates today, said Dones.  (NA SA  Release 93-012;  AP, J a n  14/93; NY 
Times, J a n  19/93) 

David  L.  Akin   and  a  team  a t   t h e  University  of  Maryland's Space Systems 
Laboratory were working o n  developing a data  base o n  how  to operate robots 
in  space. T h e  process  involved  testing  robots  in  a  50-feet-deep,  $1.7 million 
Neutral  Buoyancy  Research  Tank  indoor  pool.  By  testing  t h e   robots  in   the  
simulated weightlessness of  the  tank ,  scientists could  learn which would work 
best  in  outer  space. T h e  Space Systems Laboratory was  funded  by  NASA .   (B  
Sun, J a n  15/93)  

Included  in  the   promises  Bill  C l in ton   made  during  his  presidential  cam- 
paign  were  two  relating  to   NASA .   C l in ton   promised  to   create   a  civilian 
research  agency to  serve as a means of  transferring new  technologies  in to  new 
products. He  also promised  to support construction  of Space S ta t ion  Freedom. 
(AP, J a n  15/93) 

January  18: O n  December  23, Bill C l in ton   picked  J o h n  H .  Gibbons ,  head  of 
the   Congressional  Office  of  Technology  Assessment,  t o   be  his  science  and  
technology  advisor. Gibbons  planned  to   emphasize  civilian-sector  competi-  
tiveness;  he  also  hoped  to  broaden  industry's  input  in to  Wh i te   House  policy 
making  while  making  sure  that   companies  invested  serious money  in to  gov- 
ernment-backed  projects.  (Bus Wk ,  J a n  18/93) 

T h e   Na t iona l   Ocean ic   &  A tmosphe r ic   Adm in is t ra t ion 's   Space  
Environment  Services  Cen te r   in  Boulder,  Colorado,  prepared  software  tha t  
allowed scientists  to   state   the   level  of  confidence  they  had  in  their   weather 
predictions. Such software allowed utilities  to  better gauge when to  start back- 
up  power  tha t   would  make  outages  caused  by  stormy  weather  less  harmful. 
(Bus Wk, J a n  18/93) 

Januarj   19:  NASA   scientists  at  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center,  Greenbelt, 
Maryland, reported  that depletion of  stratospheric ozone over Antarctica  in  1992 
was  as  severe  as  in any previous year.  Ozone  is  destroyed by  chorofluorocarbons, 
or CFCs, which are used  as solvents, propellants, and coolants. On September 23, 
1992,  the   surface  area  of  the  ozone  hole  reached  8.9  million  square  miles. 
Measurements were  taken by the N1mbus.7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping 
Spectrometer (TOMS )  Instruments.  (NASA  Release 93-14; UPI, Jan  19/93) 

Astrophysicists  reported  that   data   from  a n   x-ray  spectrometer  aboard  the  
Space  Shuttle   Endeavour  might  have  come  from  a  million-degree  gas  pro- 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY  1993 

duced by  a nearby and fairly recent supernova, or exploding star. Scientists have puz- 
zled  over  these  x-rays  for  25  year.  Wilton  T.  Sanders  from  the  University  of 
Wisconsin commented, "There's a lot more analysis that needs to be done before we 
can start pinning down the exact origin of  these x-rays. At this point, we're just very 
happy  with  the  results that we're getting. The x-rays do seem  to clearly be  from  a 
thermal prc~ess." (W  Tmes ,  Jan 19/93; B Sun, Jan 19/93; NASA Release,Jan 21/93) 

lanumy  20:  The  Shuttle  Endeavour  and  its  crew  of  five  landed  January  19  at 
Kennedy Space Center  in Florida. Endeavour circled Earth  96  times and  traveled 
2,501,277 miles during its six-day flight. The Shuttle and its five crew members were 
said  to be  in good  shape. (LA Tmes ,  Jan 20193; W Tmes ,  Jan 20193; NY Xmes, Jan 
20193; B Sun, Jan 20193) 

Vice  President  I h  Quayle,  head  of  the  National  Space  Council, presented 
Thomas I?  Stafford,  a  retired  Air  Force  lieutenant  general  and  former  astronaut, 
with  the Congressional Space Medal of  Honor "for  exceptional meritorious efforts 
and contributions to the welfare of  the Nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space 
in the  1960s-twice  aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around 
the  Moon, and once  in  a  rendezvous  and  docking of  the  Apollo capsule with  a 
Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, J a n  20193) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin volunteered  to  remain  at NASA  until 
the  Clinton  administration appointed  an  replacement.  He  made  the  offer  in  a 
January  14  letter to  the White House. Meanwhile, he  suspended an agency  reor- 
ganization that he had just  begun following months of  review. White House officials 
have just  begun  to collect names of  potential NASA chiefs and solicit opinions on 
Goldin's record, according to government officials. (W  Post, J a n  20193; Space  News, 
Jan 25-3 1) 

Germany's space agency was  scheduled to be  in charge of  the scientific aspect of 
Shuttle Columbia's next research mission. NASA would oversee Shuttle operations 
during the flight. Ninety-three experiments were planned, two-thirds sponsored by 
German  institutions and  the rest  by  other European  countries, the United States, 
and  Japan. This would  only be  the  second  time  in  32  years  of  American manned 
spaceflight that  a mission had  been managed  from outside  the United States. (AP, 
Jan 20197) 

lanuary 21 : NASA announced that  it had been unable to repair the Galileo space- 
ship's main  antenna, which had  failed  to open despite repeated  attempts to fix  it. 
The problem left  the craft disabled for  its  1995-96 Jupiter exploration. 

NASA  said  that  it expected to complete 70 percent of  the Galileo mission even 
if  it were forced to rely solely on the spaceship's small antenna. (W  Tmes ,  Jan 21/93; 
NYTm e s ,  Jan 21/93; USA Talay,Jan 21/93; W Post, Jan 21/93; WP, Jan 21/93; AP, 
Jan  21/93) 

JANUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Janwlry  22:  Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology( MIT) and 
NASA   reported  that water  that  evaporates on  the equator  flows  towards  the 
Earth's poles  in  airborne  "rivers"  of  vapor  that  can equal  the   volume  in  the  
Amazon.  Reginald  E.  Newell  of  MIT  said  that  researchers  were  trying  to 
determine how  and  why  these  atmospheric  rivers occurred  and  what  role,  if 
any, they  played  in  cyclones and  other  phenomena.  Th e   rivers  were  discov- 
ered  using  data  collected  in  1984  and  1991  by  NASA's  Measurement  of 
Atmospheric  Pollution  by  Satellite  program  and  analyzed by  the  European 
Center  for  Medium-Range Weather  Forecasts.  (LA Times, J a n  22/93; B  Sun, 
Jan  22/93; AP, Jan  22/93; W Post, J an  25/93; NY  Times, J an  26/93) 

NASA  contracted with  Stanford  University  to  do  additional  work  on   the 
Gravity  Probe-B experiment. T h e  experiment  tests predictions of  the general 
theory  of  relativity.  Gravity  Probe-B  determines  how  space  and  time  are 
warped  by  the  presence  of  the   Earth  and  its  rotation  by  measuring  small 
changes  in  the  spin of  four gyroscopes  in  a satellite  at 400 miles  altitude  in  a 
Earth polar orbit. T h e  first Shuttle test flight was  scheduled for October  1995. 
(NASA  Release C93-b) 

Officials at  the  University of  California,  Berkeley,  announced  that  a  vio- 
lent  overnight  wind  storm  had  destroyed  a  multimillion-dollar  radio  tele- 
scope. T h e  85-foot diameter dish, which was  built  in  1962, was  located at the  
Hat  Creek  Observatory  in  the  Lassen  National  Forest  70  miles  northeast  of 
Redding. NASA used  the dish as part of  its Crustal Dynamics Program, which 
measures motion  of  plates that compose the Earth's crust.  (UP I ,  J a n  22/93) 

Th e  government-backed  computer  chip consortium  Sematech  announced 
Thursday that  it had  produced  chips with  electrical devices just  0.35 microns 
wide  using  American  production  equipment.  T h e   announcement  indicated 
that  the  American  chip  industry was  coming back  on   track  technically. T h e  
state-of-the-art in  chip production  was  0.6 microns; however, Japanese com- 
panies  recently  began  demonstrating  their  ability  to  produce  0.35  chips. 
Achieving  0.35 micron capabilities by  the  end of  1992 was  one of  Sematech's 
goals at  its founding in 1987. (LA Tlmes, J an  22/93) 

Th e   European Space Agency  in  the  Netherlands  invented  new  shoes  for 
astronauts  to use  in orbit. Th e  new  shoes, which  look  like  ordinary sneakers, 
have  small  suction  cups  on   the   bottom  of  each  shoe. Th e   suction  cups grip 
floor, wall, and ceiling and allow the astronauts to walk  around  in the weight- 
less Shuttle. Up  until now, in order to get around astronauts have had  to stick 
their  feet  into loops placed  around  the Shuttle. (AP, J an  22/93) 

Outgoing  Energy  Secretary James D.  Watkins  conceded  in  a  letter  to   the 
chairman  of  the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee  that  for- 
eign governments probably would not pick up much of  the cost of  the $8.2 bil- 

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY  1993 

lion   Superconducting   Supe r   Collider   ( S C C ) ,  which   is  under   con s t ruc t ion  
near   Waxahach ie ,   Texas.  T h e   project  would  consist  of  a  54-mile   t u n n e l  
through   which   subatomic   particles  would  be  hurled   against  e a c h   o t h e r   a t  
nearly  t h e   speed  of  light   in  a n   a t temp t   t o  discern  t h e   na tu re   of  matter.  T h e  
S C C ,  which   was  supported  by  many  of  t h e  Nation's  scientists ,  was  vulnerable  
because  it  had   n o   immediately  practical  application .   (AP, J a n  22/93)  

Junuary   23:  McDonne l l   Douglas  Co rpo ra t ion ,   t h e   Nation's   largest  defense 
con t rac to r ,   announced   t h a t   it   planned   t o   c u t   10  percent   of  its  work  force ,  
including  4 ,000   t o   5 ,000  jobs  a t   its  commercial   aircraft  un i t   in  Long  Beach ,  
California .   A s   of  t h e   end   of  1991, t h e   company's employment   numbers   h a d  
fallen  by  27 pe rcen t ,  or  about  2 1 ,700  jobs.  ( W  Times, J a n  23/93; NY  Times, J a n  
23/93; WS],  J a n  25/93)  

T h e  Ma r t in  Marietta   Co rpo ra t ion  announced   t h a t   it  h a d  delayed comp le t -  
ing  its  pending   acquisition   of  t h e  Gene ra l   Electric's Aerospace  division;   t h e  
delay  was  caused  in   part  by   gove rnmen t   an t i t ru s t   concerns .   T h e   sale  would 
double  Ma r t in  Marietta's  size.  (NY Em e s ,  J a n  23/93)  

A  spaceship, with   two  cosmonauts  o n  board,  was  launched   from Kazakhstan 
t o   test  a  new  docking   procedure  for  a  possible  linkup   with   a  U.S.  Space  
S h u t t l e .  T h e  spaceship was  scheduled  t o  dock  with   t h e  orbiting  Space  S t a t i o n  
Mir  a n d  deliver  t h e  two  cosmonauts ,  who  would  replace  t h e   two currently  o n  
board  t h e  Mir.  ( W  Times, J a n  23/93; AP, J a n  24/93; UP I ,  J a n  24/93)  

January  25:  Researchers have   turned   the i r  military  projects  t o  commercial  and  
o t h e r   uses,  and   experts   say  t h a t   t h e   real  winner   would  be  t h e   economy.  A t  
Georgia  Tech ,  scientists  conve r ted  a project  t h a t   involved  using a laser t o  he lp  
fighter  pilots  see  t h e  enemy   th rough   icy  clouds  t o  a  project   t h a t   uses  lasers t o  
he lp  weather   forecasters measure ozone. Agencies   like N A S A  a n d  t h e  Energy 
Depa r tmen t   now  supply  20  percent   of  t h e   $380   million  budget  a t   Lincoln  
Laboratories  in  Bedford,  Massachusetts;  t h e   laboratory  o n c e  worked  only   for 
t h e  Defense  Department .   (AP ,  J a n  25/93) 

Louis  Williams,  Director   of  High-Speed   Research  for  N A S A ,   lectured   a t  
NASA's  Langley Research  C e n t e r   about   a n   environmentally   safe,  econom i -  
cally  sound  supersonic  transport   ( S S T )  t h a t   is w i th in  t h e  Nation's  techno log -  
ical  reach .  T h e  p lane ,  which  would  ferry  300 people  across  t h e  Pacific  O c e a n  
i n  four  hours ,  would  go  twice  as  fast  as  t h e  Conco rd   and   carry  th ree   times  as 
many   people.  G o v e r nm e n t   research  o n   t h e   project  began  in  1990  a n d   was 
scheduled   t o   run  a n o t h e r   two  years;  early  research  focused  o n   t h e   project's 
env i ronmen ta l   goals,  which   Williams  maintained   were  being  met .   T h e  
Federal  gove rnmen t  gave  $450  million  t o  t h e  project. 
T h e   aerospace  industry  appeared  t o   be  somewhat   skeptical  of  t h e   project 
because  of  its high  costs and   t h e  number  of  technical   breakthroughs  needed  t o  

JANUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

get  t h e  project  off  t h e   ground.  Some  estimates  placed  t h e   cost  of  developing  
t h e  SST a t  around  $15 billion, as opposed  t o  t h e  $4 billion cost associated  with  
developing  a conven t iona l  plane .   (Newport News  Daily  Press, J a n  25/93)  

January  26:  Daniel  J .  Jone s ,  8 0 ,  a  senior  aeronautical   engineer   who   retired  in  
1973  after  20 years with   t h e  Army  Material   C omm a n d ,  died  Janua ry  23  after  
a  hea r t   a t tack .   H e   served  in   t h e  Navy   from  1941  t o   1953, and   had   tours  of 
duty  w i th   t h e  naval   Aviation   Engineering  Division  in  t h e  S o u t h  Pacific  du r -  
ing World   War   I1  and  with   t h e  Nava l   Bureau  of  Ae ronau t ic s   in  Wa sh ing ton  
during   t h e  Korean  War.  (W  Post, J a n  26 /93 )  

Rockwell   I n t e r n a t i o n a l   C o r p o r a t i o n   C h a i rm a n   a n d   CEO  Dona ld   R .  
Beall  p re sen ted   t h e  Cha i rman ' s  Team  Award   t o  N a t i o n a l   A e r o s p a c e   P lane  
eng inee r s   in   recogn i t ion   of  t h e  Eng ine   Flowpath   Team's s ign i f ican t  c o n t r i -  
b u t i o n s   t o   hype r son ic   propulsion   d e v e l o pm e n t   in   t h e   U n i t e d   S t a t e s .  T h e  
t e am   was  compo sed   of  11  eng inee r s   from   G e n e r a l   Dynamics ,   M cD o n n e l l  
Douglas,  P r a t t   & W h i t n e y ,  Rockwell's  Rocke tdyne   a n d   N o r t h   Am e r i c a n  
A i rc ra f t   businesses,  a n d  NASA's  Langely  Re sea rch  C e n t e r .  (Antelope  Valley 
Press, J a n  26 /93 )  

Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   Co rpo ra t ion ,   based  in   Seal   Reach ,   California ,  
a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   it   h a d   agreed   t o   pay  $225   m i l l ion   for   S u n d s t r a n d  
Corporation's   Data  C o n t r o l  subsidiary. Rockwell  would  merge  t h e  subsidiary, 
wh ich  makes flight-control   systems a n d   instruments ,   i n t o   its Co l l in s  avionics  
division ,  wh ich   makes  communications ,   navigation ,   flight  con t ro l ,  a n d   posi- 
t ion   loca t ion  gear.  (WSJ, J a n  26 /93 )  

Loral  Corporation's  Loral  Vought  Systems  un i t   announced   t h a t   J a p a n  had  
agreed  t o  buy  a multiple-launch   rocket  system. T h e  four-year  c o n t r a c t  was for 
$250 million .  T h e  agreement   included   1 ,300  tactical   and  practice   rockets ,  47  
launcher   trainer  pods, and  3 6  launchers  for  t h e  ground-to-ground  defense  sys- 
tem .   (WSJ, J a n  26/93)  

A  W h i t e   House  panel   recen t ly  called   for  t h e   Ame r ican   space  program  t o  
c u t  back  its program  significantly. T h e  panel's report ,   issued  o n  December   17 ,  
said  t h a t  duplication   among  agencies had   t o  be eliminated  a n d  cold-war  secre- 
cy  reduced .   T h e   panel   added  t h a t   t h e   U n i t e d   S ta te s   should  seek  t o   make  
in te rna t iona l   cooperation   a n   essential  c om p o n e n t   of  its  space  exp lo ra t ion  
strategy.  (NY Em e s ,  J a n  26/93) 

A t   a  recent   meeting   in   S t .  Louis,  astrophysicists  discussed  t h e   mystery  of 
blasts  of  gamma   rays  t h a t   appear   every  few  days  from  somewhere ,  but   never  
from t h e  same place. A f te r  reviewing new  satellite  observations  a n d  discussing 
various  theories ,   experts   could  n o t   e v e n   de te rm ine   where   t h e   gamma  ray 
bursters,  as  t h e y  are  called,  were  coming  from. 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

JANUARY  1993 

Speculation  continued,  however. A  survey  by  the Compton Gamma  Ray 
Observatory, an orbiting  telescope  launched  in April  1991, revealed  that  the 
distribution of  the bursters seemed to suggest extragalactic origins. Hence  sci- 
entists had  focused  on  conceiving what  kind  of  violent  forces could  produce 
high-energy gamma  rays  that  could  be  detected  by  Earth-orbiting  spacecraft. 
Several scientists proposed  that the bursts involved catastrophic encounters of 
ultra dense neutron  stars with each other or with black holes. Astrophysicists 
conceded that  there might  be  no  single source or explanation for the bursters; 
it  was  possible  that  the  flashes  were  related  to   some  physical  process  still 
unknown.  (NY Times, J an  26/93) 

House of  Representatives freshmen, one-third of  the  110 new  House mem- 
bers, want  to serve on  the Science, Space, and Technology Committee. Twenty 
new  members won  seats on  the committee. The  main draw appeared  to be  the 
potential  for  scientific research  and  applied  technology to save or  create jobs 
in  their  districts. Committee  members  could  promote  technology  programs 
without  earmarking Federal funds for specific areas.  (W  Post, Jan 26/93) 

After  a  two-day  trip,  a  Soyuz  rocket  docked  with  the  Mir  Space  Station, 
using  an apparatus designed  to  link  the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. O n  board 
were  two  Russian  cosmonauts. They  were  scheduled to  replace  the  two  cos- 
monauts  who  have  been  on   Mir  for  the  past  six  months.  James Oberg,  an 
expert on  former Soviet science and  technology, said  that  "the success of  this 
test  clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." ( B  S u n ,  J an  
27/93; UP I ,  J an  26/93) 

January  27:  NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin  awarded  test  pilot 
A.  Scott Crossfield the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contribu- 
tions  to aeronautics and  aviation  during his career of  50 years. 
Crossfield played a key part  in NASA's research aircraft program in the late 
1950s and early  1960s. Recently he had been a key  proponent  of  the National 
Aerospace  Plane  (NASP )   program,  serving  as  technical  consultant  to  the 
U .S .   House  of  Representatives  Committee  on  Science  and  Technology. 
(NASA  Release 93-16; Antehpe Valley  Press, Feb 4/93) 

Three  major aerospace companies announced  cutbacks yesterday, with  the 
states  of  Connecticut  and  Washington  losing  most  of  the  jobs.  Pratt  & 
Whitney, a jet  engine manufacturer whose plants  are mainly  in Connecticut, 
said  that  6,700  jobs  would  be  eliminated  over  the  next  12  months.  T h e  
Boeing Company announced  that  it would  cut back production  of  all models 
of  jet  airliners. Such a downsizing could  result  in as many as 30,000 lost  jobs. 
McDonnell  Douglas, which  had  already  announced  that  8,700  jobs  would 
soon be  eliminated, most  of  them  production  jobs  in  its California factories, 
said  that  1,500 white-collar jobs  would  disappear from  its S t .  Louis headquar- 
ters.  (NY Xmes, J an  27/93; WS],  J an  27/93) 

JANUARY 1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

Standard  & Poor's Corporation  downgraded  its ratings o n  about $1.7  billion 
of  Lockheed  Corporation's  debt.  T h e   lowered  ratings  reflected  Lockheed's 
proposed $1.52  billion  acquisition  of  General  Dynamics Corporation's fighter 
plane  unit .  
In  a separate  announcement ,  Lockheed  said that   it had  finalized a venture 
with  Khrunichev  Enterprises  to   market  the   Russian-built  Proton  rocket  for 
commercial  satellite  launches.  (WSJ, J a n  27/93) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   and astronaut Mae Jemison visited 
the   Challengers  Boys  and  Girls  C lub   in  South-Central   Los  Angeles  and  
announced  funding of  a science room  in  the  club's new facility. T h e  club runs 
all-day education,  social, and  sports programs, six days a week. 
Writing  in the  Los Angeks Times, Louis Friedman,  the  executive director of 
T h e   Planetary  Society  in  Pasadena,  California  and   past  head  of  advanced 
studies  a t   the   J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in  California,  urged  t h e   Sou the rn  
California  aerospace  community  t o   support  efforts  such  as  t h e  Challengers 
Club. He  wrote, "We have a special opportunity  in  Los Angeles because of  t h e  
confluence of  a large and  changing aerospace  industry with  a larger and  more 
changing social situation  in our  inner city." (LA Times, J a n  27/93) 

Robert  S.  Harrington,  50,  an   astronomer  with  the   United   States  Naval 
Observatory  in Washington, died of  cancer January 23 a t  George Washington 
University  Hospital. Dr. Harrington was known for his work concerning 
the  
possible  existence  of  a  10th  planet  beyond the   orbit of  Plato.  He  also focused 
o n  precise  stellar distances, solar system dynamics, and multiple  star dynamics. 

Dr.  Harrington   received  the   Simon   Newcomb  Award  from  the   Naval 
Observatory  for his  work  o n   the   dynamics of  the   solar system. Minor  Planet 
32 16 was  named  after him .  ( W  Post, J a n  27/93; NY Tmes ,  J a n  27/93)  

January  28:  NASA's  newly  formed  Minority  Business  Resource  Advisory 
Committee met  in Washington  to  discuss their charter and  to begin developing 
an   agenda.  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin,  who  formed  the   group, 
charged  them  with  helping  NASA   respond  to  a directive  from  Congress  that  
required  the  Agency  to  award  eight  percent  of  the   total  value of  the  Agency's 
contracts  t o  economically and   socially disadvantaged businesses  and  minority 
educational  institutions  involved  in  key  NASA   activities.  Goldin  pledged  in 
September that  NASA  would meet its eight percent  goal. In an  attempt to  meet 
his  pledge,  the   Agency  identified  26  procurements  that   would  be  set  aside for 
small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) and  for members of  the  Small Business 
Administration's 8 ( a )  program  for  minority-owned  firms.  (NA SA  Release 93- 
17; Federal Computer Week, Feb  1/93; Set-As&  Ak r t ,  Mar  15/93) 

T h e  Boeing Company  and  the  four leading European  aerospace companies, 
partners in the  Airbus  Industrie consortium, reached  an  agreement to  conduct  

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY  1993 

a  one-year  study  of  the   feasibility  of  jointly  building  a  superjumbo  airliner 
capable  of  carrying up  t o  800  passengers.  (NY Emes, J a n  28/93) 

K'ash~ngton  Technology  reported 
t h a t   R ich   Fleet ,   president   of 
Herndonwirginia-based  PacAstro,  planned  to   build  an   inexpensive  launch 
rocket.  Using  technology  from  Apollo-era  liquid  rocket  boosters  and   o the r  
reliable  time-tested  components,  Fleet  intended   to  offer  750-pound,  low- 
Earth-orbit  access for  $5   million  a  shot .  Th is  amount  was  half  of  what  o the r  
mainline smallsat launch firms such as Orbital  Sciences and  EER  were  asking. 
Fleet  also  runs  PacAstro's sister company  AeroAstro,  a manufacturer  of  low- 
cost smallsats. (Washington Technology, J a n  28/93) 

Working with  a  team  of  Hopkins scientists  last spring, Kimberly Ennico,  a 
20-year-old junior  at Johns  Hopkins University, discovered a small flaw in  the  
video camera  tha t  acts as a range finder for  the  Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope 
scheduled for launch  aboard a Space Shuttle  in January 1995. Ms.  Ennico dis- 
covered  tha t   the  telescope's video  range finder slightly distorted  the  positions 
of  stars  and  distant  galaxies. Her  discovery allowed  astronomers  to  compen- 
sate for  the   flaw by adjusting  their  computations.  ( B  Sun, Jan  28/93) 

A n   analysis of  more  than   27,000 recordings  of  temperatures taken   a t  vari- 
ous altitudes over the  Arctic Ocean  in the  past 40  years did not  show the  glob- 
al  warming  predicted  by computer  simulations,  according  to   a  report  in   t h e  
journal  Nature.  Coauthor   Jona than   Kahl,  an   assistant  professor  of  atmos- 
pheric  science  a t   the   University  of  Wisconsin  a t   Milwaukee,  said  tha t  
the  findings do  not  disprove the  warming theory. He  added, "If they're not  get-  
ting  the  Arctic  quite  right,  then  maybe  they're not   getting  the  whole picture 
quite  right."  (W  Times,  J a n   28/93;  USA  Today,  January  28/93;  0 Sen  Star, 
January 29/93) 

Flags  flew  at  half-staff and  flowers were  placed  at  the  astronauts'  memorial 
at  Kennedy Space Center   on  Thursday, the  seventh  anniversary of  the  Space 
Shuttle  Challenger explosion. T h e  Challenger explosion, which  took place 73 
secunds  after  liftoff  o n   January  28,  1986, killed  all  seven  o n   board.  (AP, 
January 28/93) 

January 29: T h e  Senate  confirmed John  H .  Gibbons as President Clinton's sci- 
ence   and   technology  adviser.  Gibbons  was  scheduled  to  direct  t h e  Office  of 
Science and  Technology Policy (O S T P ) ,  which advises t h e  president o n  issues 
such  as  global warming, AIDS   research,  and   support  of  science education  in 
schools. A  nuclear  physicist, Gibbons ,  64, headed  the  congressional Office of 
Technology Assessment  (OTA )  for  13 years.  (W  Post, J a n  29/93) 

Executives  from  two  major  players  in  t h e   aircraft  industry,  Un i ted  
Technologies  Corporation  and  General  Electric  Company, said  tha t   job  cuts 

JANUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

and   productivity   improvement   programs  will  n o t   by  themselves   pull  t h e  
industry o u t  of  its down tu rn .  T h e y  were beginning  t o  h i n t  t h a t  they  would  like 
t o  team   up  with   each   o the r ,  perhaps   through   more  joint   research  and   devel-  
o pm e n t  projects.  Such   h i n t s  might   be  merely  a  means   of  testing   how   far  t h e  
C l i n t o n   administration   would  let  t h em   bend  an t i t ru s t   laws.  However ,   e t 7 e n  
t h e   suggestion of  cooperation   revealed  t h e   turrnoil  in   t h e   jet  eng ine  market ,  
wh ich   was  suffering  because  of  slumping   airline   order   and   deep   cuts   in   gov -  
e r nm e n t  spending  o n  military  aircraft.  (WSJ, J a n  29 /93 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   Kennedy  Space   C e n t e r   (KSC) con t rac t   award 
protests  were  settled .   EG&G   Florida,  Inc ;   RAMSI ,   Inc.;  and   Westinghouse  
K SC   Company ,   Inc.  protested  t h e   awa r J ing   of  t h e   con t rac t   t o   Lockheed  
Space   Ope ra t ion s   Company ,   charging   t h a t   there   were  deficiencies  in   t h e  
Agency's activities  during  t h e  original  proposal submission. As part   of  t h e  se t -  
t lemen t ,  N A S A   agreed  t o  rescind  its  nrigin;ll  selection   and   said  t h a t   each   of 
t h e   four  competitors   would  be  ahle   t o   submit  a  revised  proposal.  ( N A S A  
Release  93 -18 ;  WSJ,  Feb  2/93;  AP,  February  2/93;  0 Sen  Star, J a n   19/93;  Fh 
Today, J a n  29 /93 )  

In  a report t o  Congress, the  Gene ra l  Accuunting  Office  ( G A O )  reported  t h a t  
NA SA   had   underestimated  the  cost  of  its programs  by  billions  of  dollars.  T h e  
report noted  t h a t  original estimates for 25 of  t h e  29 NA SA  programs G A O  ana -  
lyzed were  too   low. G A O  found  t h a t  more  than   a  third  cost  Inore  t h a n  double 
t h e  early  estimates, while  on ly  fc)ur cost  less  t h a n   those  estimates. Most  of  t h e  
programs cost between  50 and  99  percent  more  t h a n  t h e  early projections. O n e  
notable   exception  was  Space Shu t t le  Endeavour;  its $1.8  billion  cost  was  $399 
million  less  than   t h e  original  estimate. NA SA  officials cited  "overoptimism"  as 
a  reason  why  initial  estimates were  often  significantly  lower  t h a n  current   esti- 
mates. (hJY Tm e s ,  J a n  3 1/93;  AP, J a n  30193; Space News,  Feh  8- 14/94)  

January  31:  After   conferring  with   Space  S t a t i o n   con t rac to r   McDonne l l  
Douglas,  space officials confirmed  t h a t   a  cost  overrun   of  a t   least  $500  million  
was expected  if costs were n o t  brought  under  control .  T h e y  told a congressional 
panel   t h a t  t h e  S t a t i o n  was now  a $31 .3  billion  project .  T h e  increases  appeared 
t o   be  mainly  in   t h e  J o h n s o n  Space   C e n t e r   portion   of  t h e   program.  NASA's 
Marty  Kress, t h e   Space  S t a t i o n  project's  new Deputy  Director,  said  managers 
were  determined   t o   lower  costs and   were  considering  various  means  for  J o i n g  
so. Key  congressional aides expressed  anger  a t  t h e  news of  t h e  overrun ,  no t ing  
t h a t   for  years  N A S A   had   ignored  the i r   advice  o n   a  design  strategy  to  lower 
costs.  (W  Post,  J a n  31/93;  Space News ,   Feb  1-7/93;  0 Sen  Stur, Feh  3 /93 )  

I n  a  1992  report   t o  Congress o n  t h e  danger  posed  by  asteroids smashing  i n t o  
Earth ,   N A S A   estimated   t h a t   the re   were  about   1 ,000   t o   4 ,000   "near-Earth  
asteroids"  larger  t h a n  a half-mile ,  t h e  minimum   size  capable  of  causing global 
disaster;  such   asteroids  crash   i n t o   Earth   about   o n c e   every  300 ,000   years. 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY  1993 

According  to  the   report,  during  our  lifetime there  was  a  small  chance  (very 
roughly 1 in  10,000) that  the Earth would be  struck by  an object  large enough 
to  destroy  food  crops  on   a  global  scale  and  "possibly  end  civilization  as  we 
know  it."  (AP, Jan  31/93) 

February 

February  1 :   Daniel  S.  Go ld in ,   NASA   Administrator ,   presented  G e n e  
Roddenberry, creator of  t h e  S t a ~  Trek  television  series, NASA's  Distinguished 
Public  Service Medal on  January 30 .  T h e  medal, which  was  awarded posthu- 
mously, was  presented  to  Roddenberry's widow, Majel  Barrett  Roddenberry. 
G e n e  Roddenberry  died  in October   1991. 
Roddenberry  was  credited  with  popularizing  the   exploration  of  space 
through  t h e   original  Star Trek  television  series, six  motion  pictures,  and   the  
later  television  series Star Trek.  (NA SA  Release 93-019)  

Harris  B.  Hull,  83, a retired  Air  Force brigadier general  and  former Special 
Assistant  to  t h e  Administrator of NASA ,  died January 29  a t  Sibley Memorial 
Hospital  in  Washington  after  a  heart   attack.  General   Hull  was  assigned  to  
NASA   in  1963. After  retiring  from  the  Air  Force  in  1964, he   remained  with 
NASA   until  retiring  in  1986. (W  Post, Feb,  1/93; NY Zmes ,  Feb  2/93) 

Two Russian  cosmonauts  returned   to  Earth   o n  Monday  after  189  days  in  
space.  T h e  two  cosmonauts  made  four  space walks during  the i r   stay  o n   t h e  
orbiting   Space  S t a t i o n  Mir  and   carried  ou t   a  variety  of  experiments .   (AP ,  
Feb  1/93)  

NASA   announced  tha t   it planned  to  launch a $550 million-plus mission  to  
repair  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope.  Observers  viewed  the   mission  as  very 
important  for NASA's future; failure to  repair  the   telescope would  not  only be 
a blow  to  astronomy but  also would  fuel the  debate  in Congress about NASA's 
ability  t o  build  Space Station  Freedom later  in  the  decade. T h e  concern  over 
the  repair mission  led  to extensive oversight, numerous  internal debates about 
the   mission, and   talk  of  a possible  lengthening  of  the  duration  of  the  mission 
in  order  to   allow  for  as  many  as  six  spacewalks.  (Space  News,  Feb  1-7/93; 
Science, Feb  12/93; RTw, Mar  11; B Sun Magazine, Mar  14/93; Tm e ,  Mar 22/93) 

Jack Gibbons ,  President  B i l l  Clinton's  science advisor, said tha t  t h e  C l in ton  
administration  was  debating  various  options  for  space  policy  management. 
Cen t ra l  was the  question of whether to  centralize control  of  the  space program 
in  a  single Wh i te   House  office  or  spread  out   military,  individual,  and  com- 
mercial  space  policy  among  several  high-level  councils.  T h e   role  of  science 
and  technology  in  the  C l in ton   administration  was  scheduled  to  be  discussed 
during  a January 30-31 meeting  in  Maryland.  (Space News,  Feb  1-7/93)  

NASA  described Space S ta t ion  Freedom as  a laboratory  for  industry as well 
as government  and set aside a third of  the  Station's experiment space for com-  
mercial  research. NASA   planned  to begin  launching  pieces of  Space S ta t ion  
Freedom  into  orbit  in  1996. (Space News,  Feb  1-7/93)  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

FEBRUARY  1993 

NASA   announced   t h a t   Guy  Ga rdne r ,   NA SA   Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  for  space flight-Russian  programs,  had   been  put  in  charge  of 
overseeing two joint  missions with  the  Russian  space program. 
In  November,  a cosmonaut  was  scheduled  to  spend  eight  days  aboard  the  
U .S .   Space  Shuttle   Discovery.  In   1995, an   American  and  two  cosmonauts 
were  scheduled  t o   take  off  aboard  a  Russian Soyuz  rocket  for  a  three-month  
stay aboard  the  Mir  Space Station .  T h e  following J u n e ,  the  Shu t t le  Atlantis ,  
carrying  two  cosmonauts,  four  Americans,  and  a  Russian-built  docking  sys- 
tem ,  were scheduled  to  link up with Mir for five days of joint  medical research. 
T h e  American  astronaut  and  the   two cosmonauts  launched  in  March  would 
return  to Earth on  Atlantis .   (Space News,  Feb  1 -7 )  

NASA   said  tha t   the   titanium   weld  in  Columbia's main  engine  might  be 
weak; engineers were  attempting   to  determine   whether  the   weld  was  strong 
enough  for  the   Shuttle's  scheduled  launch  later  in  the   month .   NASA  
spokesman  George  Diller  said  that   the   turbopump  would  be  replaced  if  the  
weld  did  not   meet  safety standards.  ( A c  Feb  1/93) 

NASA   announced  that   five  NASA   officials  would  leave  as  the   Clinton  
administration took office: Bill Livingstone, Associate Administrator of  Public 
Affairs; Sue Richard, Livingstone's Deputy; Courtney  Stadd ,  acting  Associate 
Administrator  for  the   Office  of  Advanced  Concepts  and  Technology; Holly 
Stevens,  an   administrative  assistant;  and  Robert  Simon, writer  and  editor  in 
Administrator Daniel Goldin's office. (Space News ,  Feb  1-7/93)  

February  2:  NASA   announced   tha t   additional  analysis had  revealed  that   a 
suspect weld  in Columbia's main engine fuel pump  was  strong enough  for  the  
Shuttle's scheduled  launch  late  in  the   mon th .   Liftoff  tentatively  was  set  for 
February 25. (AP, Feb 2/93) 

February  3:  NASA   added  a  spacewalk  to  Space  Shuttle   mission  STS-51 
aboard  Discovery,  set  for  launch  in  July.  T h e   spacewalk  would  continue  
extravehicular  activity  tests  tha t   began  with  the   addition  of  a  spacewalk  to  
NASA's first Shuttle  flight  in January of  this  year.  (NA SA  Release 93-21 ) 

Joseph George  Sobala, 60, a  retired  chief  of  the   communications  systems 
branch  of  NASA ,  died of  cancer January 29 at his home  in  Washington, DC. 
Mr.  Sobala  joined  NASA   in  1963 a t   the  Goddard  Space Flight C e n t e r  in 
Greenbelt ,  Maryland.  In   1977, he  moved  to  NASA  Headquarters  as commu- 
nications  program manager; h e  was  later promoted  to  the   position  of  chief  of 
the  communications  systems branch,  a post  h e  held  at  the   time  of  his  retire- 
ment   o n  January 25.  (W  Post,  Feb 3/93)  

Callers  jammed  switchboards at  Cape   Canaveral,  Florida,  reporting  that   a 
fiery  object  had  lit  up  the   night  sky  over  the   Southeast.  People  in  Georgia, 

FEBRUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

Alabama ,   N o r t h   Carolina ,   and   Tennessee  reported  seeing  a n   object  streak 
across  t h e   sky  about   10 p .m .   Tuesday.  Some  observers  said  t h e   object   h i t   t h e  
ground and  exploded. NA SA  confirmed  t h a t  it had  launched  a navigation  satel- 
lite  at  t h a t   time ,  but  t h e  boosters  fell  i n t o  t h e  A t lan t ic  Ocean   as planned ,   said 
Gary  Peltier, a spokesman  at Cape  Canaveral .   (AP ,  Feb  3/93; B  Sun ,  Feb  4/93)  

N A S A   appeared   t o   be  receiving   l i t t le   a t t e n t i o n   from  t h e   C l i n t o n  
administration .   Ne i the r   administration   representatives   nor   N A S A   officials 
were  present  when  a House  subcommittee  held   t h e  first of  a t  least  10 hearings  
planned   for  this  year  to  set   space  program  priorities.  Meanwhile ,   t h e  W h i t e  
House  had   n o   commen t   o n   whe the r   it  would  retain   Dan ie l   S.  G o l d i n   as 
N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  or  choose   a  new  head .   (0 Sen Star ,  Feb  3 /93 )  

February  4:  A  commercial   suborbital  rocket   carrying  seven   experiments   was 
scheduled   t o   be  launched   o n   February  10 by  t h e   University   of  Alabama   in  
Huntsville's Con so r t ium  for Materials  Development   in Space   ( U A H  CM D S ) ,  
a  N A S A   C e n t e r   for  t h e   Commercial   Development   of  Space .   T h e  Con so r t  
rocket   and   launch   services  are  funded   by  a  grant   from  t h e   Space   Agency's 
Office  of  Advanced  Concep t s  and  Technology.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -22 )  

Ellen Ochoa ,  t h e  first Hispanic woman  astronaut ,  was  scheduled  t o  be  a mis- 
sion specialist  o n  t h e   Shu t t le  Encieavour launch  March   23.  Her  mission  raised 
anticipation   in  the   Hispanic  community,  and   NA SA   invited  several  Hispanic 
educators  and   activists  t o   be  present  a t   t h e   launch .   N A S A   planned   t o   send 
O c h o a  o n  a tour  of  several cities  later  in  t h e  year.  (E l  Sol, Feb 4/93, Feb  10193) 

Motorola Inc. announced  yesterday tha t   it had contracted  with a Russian firm, 
Khrunichev  Enterprises, t o  launch  21  of  t h e  satellites needed for Motorola's  pro- 
posed  $3.37  billion  Iridium  communications  network.  T h e   Iridium  project, 
scheduled  to   begin  operating  in   1998, required  various  government  approvals 
and a definitive financing agreement before  it could go forward. ( B  Sun, Feb 4/93; 
WSJ, Feh  4/93; W Times, Feb 4/93; C Trib, Feb 4/93; UPI ,  Feb  21/93) 

A modified  troop   and  cargo plane   described  as  a "flying  laboratory"  crashed  
and  burned   after  taking  off  from  Dobbins  A i r  Force  Base  in  suburban  A t l a n t a .  
T h e  seven   people  aboard ,   all  Lockheed  employees, were  killed.  T h e  p lane ,   a 
modified  troop   a n d  cargo  plane ,   was  used  by  Lockheed  for  testing   newf tech -  
nologies .(B  Sun ,  Feb 4/93)  

N A S A   officials said  t h a t  Ge rmany  was  being   charged  only  $1 50 million  of 
t h e  $400  million  cost of  launching  a science  mission aboard S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia  
o n   February  25.  Columbia's  crew  was  expected   t o   include   two   G e rm a n  
researchers  and   a  laboratory  of  G e rm a n   science   experiments .   T h e  price  was 
agreed upon   in   1986  under   a pricing  policy N A S A  officials adm i t ted  was o u t -  
da ted .  (0 Sen Star, Feb 4 /93 )  

A S T R O N A U T I C S   A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

FEBRUARY  1993 

February   5:  Dr.  Lonnie   Reid ,   a  fluid  dynamics  expert   a t   NASA's   Lewis 
Research  C e n t e r   in  C leve land ,   was  scheduled  t o  be  inducted   i n t o   t h e  O h i o  
Sc ience  Technology  and   Industry  Hall   of  Fame  in Co lumbu s  o n  February  7. 
Reid,  who   would  be  t h e   first  NASA   researcher  and   o n e  of  th ree   African  
Americans   in  t h e  Hall  of Fame, was being hono red   for his pioneering  work  in  
integrating   theoretical   and   experimental   methods   in   t h e   science   of  fluid 
dynamics.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -23 )  

N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S .   G o l d i n   announced   t h a t   t h e   agency  had  
exceeded  its  1992   goal  of  awarding  6 .7   percent   of  t h e   to ta l   value   of  t h e  
Agency's  prime   a n d   subcontracts   t o   small  disadvantaged  businesses.  O v e r  
$865   million  was  awarded  t o  m i n o r ~ t y  organizations;  th i s   figure  represented 
7.2  of  t h e   total   $12  billion  awarded  during  t h e  last  fiscal year.  (Na t iona l  B lack  
R e v ~ ew ,  Feb  5 /93 )  

S e n i o r   A s t r o n a u t   Je r ry   Ross,  payload   c omm a n d e r   for  t h e   S h u t t l e  
Columbia's February  2 5  mission,  said  t h a t  N A S A   should  revamp  globe-span-  
n ing   training   because  such   programs  endangered   fliers'  family  life and   could 
lead  t o   physical  a n d   men ta l   exhaustion .   Ross  and   a n o t h e r   astronaut   spen t  
abou t   28  weeks  in  Ge rmany   preparing  for  t h e   G e rm a n   spacelab  mission 
aboard   Columbia .   (USA   Today,  Feb  5/93;  W  Times,  Feb  5/93;  AP,  Feb  4/93;  
Space News ,   Feb  8- 14 )  

Russians  scientists  and  engineers  unfurled  a t h i n  aluminum   and  plastic  mir- 
ror  in  space ,  sending   a  narrow  beam  of  reflected  sunlight   flashing  across  t h e  
night   side  of  t h e   Earth .   T h e   experiment   could  be  t h e   first  step   in  creating   a 
solar  spotlight   t h a t   could  eventually  be  used  t o   light   up  n igh t t ime   work,  res- 
cue  operations ,  blacked-out  cities, or Sun-deprived  polar areas. T h e  main  pur-  
pose of  t h e   test  was  t o  see whe the r   t h e  sheet   could  be  opened   using  centrifu-  
gal force and   t h e n  maneuvered .   ( W  Post, Feb  5/93; P lnq, Feb 5/94;  NY  Times, 
Feb  5 / 9 3 )  

T h e   C l i n t o n   administration   considered  cancelling   NASA's   $30  billion  
Space  S t a t ~ o n  a n d  t h e  $8.2 billion  Super  Collider  but  decided  t o  keep  t h e  pro- 
grams  after  encoun te r ing   intense   opposition   t o  the i r  cance l la t ion .  C o s t  over- 
runs o n  t h e  two  programs,  however, have  damaged  the i r  political  prospects  in  
t h e   administration   and   Congress.  (Space   New s ,   Feb  8-14/93;  AP,  Feb  6/93 ,  
8/93;  UP I ,  Feb  5/93, Feb 8 /93 ;  W  Post, Feb 6/93; W  Times,  Feb 6/93;  P Inq, Feb 
6/93;R  Sun ,  Feb 6 /93 ;  NY  Times,  Feb 6 /93 )  

February  7: T h e  Federal Aviation  Adm in i s t ra t ion  was studying a controversial  
proposal  t o  improve  pilot  alertness a n d  performance  by  scheduling  naps   in  t h e  
cockpit   o n   long-haul   flights.  T h e   proposed  nap   policy  would  apply  only   t o  
three-pilot   crews; two  pilots  would  be o n  duty  a t  all  times while  t h e  third   o n e  
slept.  A t   least  one  union   representing  p i lo t s s t rong ly  objected ,   charging   t h a t  

FEBKUARY   1993 

CHRONOLOGY  I993  

t h e  proposal  would  sacrifice  public  safety, while  allowing  t h e  airlines   t o  save 
money   by  reducing   t h e  number   of  pilots. 
A  N A S A   study  of  log  books  kept   by  pilots  and   published  in   December  
1991 reported  t h a t  pilots  took  naps  In  t h e  cockpit   11 percent   of  t h e  time   they  
were  o n  duty.  (Bos ton  Sunday  G lobe ,  Feb  7/93)  

Febrwrry  8: Richard  B.  Hoover of  the  Marshall  Space Flight Center ,  Hunts\,ille, 
Alabama ,  was named NASA   inventor  of  t h e  year for his invention  of  t h e  Water- 
Window   Imaging X-ray Microscope. Th i s   instrument  shc>uld enable  researchers 
t o  see  in  great  detail  high  contrast  x-ray  images  of  proteins,  chromosomes,  and  
o the r  tiny  carbon  structures  inside living cells.  ( N A S A  Release 93-024)  

N A S A   officials  announced   t h a t   they   planned   t o   e l im ina te   a  numbe r   of 
expensive  facilities and  delay  several Space  S t a t i o n  assembly missions  in  the i r  
a t t em p t  t o  c u t  growing  cost  projections   for  t h e  program.  Sen io r  program  offi- 
cials  said  t h a t   they   had   reduced  $1.08 billion  in   anticipated   cost  increases for 
t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  t o  $678  million.  (Space  News ,   Feb  8 -14 /93 )  

O rb i ta l   Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion   of  Fairfax,  Virginia,  announced   t h a t   it  was 
again  p lann ing   t o   launch   its  Pegasus  orbital   rocket  after  scrubbing  launches  
th ree   times  in   t h e  past  two mon th s   because  of  techn ica l  problems. 
Pegasus,  a  winged,  three-stage   rocket   t h a t   can   put   payloads  weighing  as 
much   as  900  pounds   i n t o  low-Earth  o rb i t ,  was  t o  launch   a data-relay  satellite  
t h a t   was  designed  and   built  in  Brazil. T h e  rocket   would  be  dropped   from  t h e  
wing of  a B-52 bomber  airborne  80 miles  off Florida's  east coast. T h e  satellite ,  
wh ich  weighs 350  pounds ,  was designed  t o  he lp  monitor   Brazil's env i ronmen t .  
(W  Post,  Feb  8/93;  U SA   Today, Feb  8 / 9 3 ) ;  USA  Today,  Feb 9 /93 )  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S. G o l d i n  instructed   senior  N A S A  managers 
t o  begin  a f ive -mon th  study  t h a t  would  exam ine  whe the r   t o  replace  t h e  Space  
S h u t t l e   after  2005  or   upgrade  t h e   fleet  so  t h a t   shuttles   could  fly  un t i l   2030. 
T h e  study  was  being   led  by  A rno ld  A ld r ich ,  N A S A  Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r  
for Space  Systems Development .   (Space  New s ,   Feb.  8 -14 /93 )  

N A S A   added  a  spacewalk  t o  a  U.S.  S h u t t l e  mission  scheduled   for July   as 
part   of  a  con t inu ing  program  t o  give  astronauts  experience  before  t h e  start   of 
Space  S t a t i o n  construction   in   1996 .  (Space  New s ,   Feb  8 -14 /93 )  

Some   N A S A   scientists ,   following  t h e   "faster,  better ,   cheaper"   advice   of 
N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Dan ie l  S .  G o l d i n ,  want   to send  two  small space probes 
t o   study  Pluto ,   t h e   solar  system's  last known   unexplored   p lane t .   T h e   P la to  
mission  could  cost  $600   million   t o   $1   billion ,   depend ing   o n   whe the r   t h e  
probes  were  reached   by  Russian  or  U .S .   rockets ,  respectively.  By  comparison ,  
N A S A   expected  t o  spend  more  t h a n  $ 2  billion   t o  launch  a  spaceship  in   1997 
t o  explore  Sa tu rn .   (Al',  Feb  8 / 9 3 )  

ASTRON.-ZCJTI(:S  .AND  AERC)NAI.!TI(:S 

FEBRUARY   1993 

A   first  formal  industri;tl  test  of  a   system  t h a t   uses  computer-set   lights  t o  
iidjust  ;I  p e r s o ~ i i  sleep  patterns   got  underway  in  January   at  a   S a n  Diego  G a s  
and   Electric  Company   p lan t .   T h e   system may  prove  useful  in  keeping   astro- 
n;ttits  ; ~ n ~ l  n ~ g h t  workers  alert ,   easing  jet  lag,  helping   older  people  sleep,  a n d  
tlelping  teens  get  out   of  bed .  N A S A  started  using  t h e  system  in  1991 t o  adap t  
astronauts   t o   n i ~ h t  I a t~ n c h e s  anci  shift work. 

light  were  applied  late   in  t h e  even ing  t o  delay  t h e  on se t  
In  t h e   test,  doses 
of  sleepiness or 
o t h e r  times  t o  fool  t h e  body's in te rna l  clock .  T h e  illumina-  
tion   w a s   50 t o   100  times   brighter  t h a n   no rma l   indoor   light ,   but   only   about  
c ) ~ ~ e - t h c , t l s ; ~ ~ l J t l ~  
;IS  bright  as  sunlight  o n  a  sunny  day.  (AP ,  Feh  8 / 9 3 )  

Officials  a t   NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL )  recommended   elimi-  
na t ing  t h e  JI'L  Edwards Test  Facility, staffed by  28 JPL  employees and   18 c o n -  
tractors ,  a t  Edwards A i r  Force  Base  in  t h e  Mojave  Desert.  If   N A S A  managers 
;icceptecl t h e   recommenda t ion ,   t h e   facility  could  shu t   down   by  1996.  (U P I ,  
Ft.17  819 3 ;   Feb  9 1A n t e l o p   Valley Press, Feh  9 /93 )  

Frhruclrv  9 :  Robert  M.  Rados,  73 ,  a   retired  N A S A  meteorologist,  died  of  ca r -  
J i a c   ;trresr February  3  at Georgetown   University   Hospital ,  Wa sh ing ton ,  D.C. 
Mr. Rasdos joined  N A S A   in  1961 .  His work  the re   included  service as proj-  
ec t  mm a g e r   tor  t h e  T IKOS  weather  satellite  program  and  global atmospheric  
research.  He  retired  in  1980.  (W  Post,  Feb  8/93)  

Space   scientists   a t   NASA's   Ame s   Research   C e n t e r ,   Moffett   Field ,  
California ,   th ink   they   have   identified  what   ma t te r   in  deep  space  is  absorbing 
certain  w;ivclengths of  light  from  distitnt  stars.  Researchers  Farid  Salama  a n d  
1-ouis A1l:tmandolii  dernonstrateil  t h a t   t h e   light  is  absorbed  by  unexpectedly  
large  o rg ;~n ic  molecules  spread  th roughou t   t h e  vacuum  of  space. The se  mole-  
cules,  411;1peC1  l i k ~  c11icke11 wire,  are  called  polycyclic  aromatic   hydrocarbons  
(!?,4Hs). 
S a l am :~  said,  "We  th ink   PAHs  are  t h e   by-product  of  old  ca rbon - r ich  stars 
hurning   ou t .   T h i s   challenges   t h e   traditional   view  of  interstellar   chemistry, 
u l l ich   ;~ s s um r s  tha t   all  interstellar  molecules  are  produced  in  t h e   interstellar  
nledium."  ( N A S A  Release  93 -025 )  
L3aniel S. C o l d i n ,  N A S A  Administrator ,  who  described himself as "an agen t  
of  ihilnge"   in  a  la te -Novembe r   interview   w i th   Government  Executive  maga- 
x n e ,   has   sct   abut  instituting   t h e   "faster,  better ,   cheaper"   goals  popularized 
o \ ~ r  
t h e  p;tst  two  years  by  t h e  Na t iona l   Space  Counc i l .  
Employee  review  teams  set  in  nlotion   by  G o l d i n  came   up  with   1 7  percent  
r e d u c t i ~ ) ~ ~  
in  future  program  costs.  Most  of  these   savings  would  come   from 
repackaging N A S A   s;itellites i n t o  smaller, less  expensive  parcels.  G o l d i n  also 
c omm i t t e J  himself  t o  diversifying NASA's top  managemen t .  H e  noted   t h a t  h e  
hiicl  moved  "four  brilliant ,   distinguished  black  Americans"   i n t o   senior   slots 
a n d  also h,ld prolnc~teil women   and  pushed  con t rac t s  for minority   firms. 

FEBRUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

Goldin   also  addressed  customer  and   supplier  relations.  Reaching  out   to 
held  a 
what  he  calls  NASA's  "customer"-the  American  people-Goldin 
series of  six  "town  meetings"  around  t h e   country  late  last  year  t o   talk  about 
NA SA  and  answer questions. Go ld in  also was  looking to change  t h e  Agency's 
relationship  with  its  suppliers. A  recent  General   Accounting   Office  report 
found  tha t   costs  in a sampling of  29  NASA   projects were  running  75  higher, 
o n   average,  than   had  initially  been  p o j e c t e d .   Goldin   declared  war  o n   the  
practice  of  companies under-bidding and  hoping  to  make  up  t h e   loss  in  later 
contracts.  (Government  Executive, Feb/93) 

A  Pegasus rocket launched from a B-52 bomber flying eight miles above the  
Atlantic   Ocean  propelled  a  Brazilian  environmental  satellite  into  orbit .  T h e  
Pegasus was dropped off  the  wing of  the  8 - 5 2 ,  which was modifted by NASA .  
After  five seconds of  free fall, the  rocket motors were fired one  by  one  and  lift- 
ed  the  satellite  in to  an  orbit  about  470 miles  high .  
T h e  satellite, which cost $20 million, was designed t o  monitor  the  Amazon 
River  and  surrounding  rain  forests.  It  was  built  by  Brazil's space  agency  and  
launched  by the  Orbital  Sciences Corporation  of  Fairfax, Virginia. T h e  satel- 
lite was  the  first of  a series of  satellites  planned  by  Brazil. (AP, Feb  9/93; UPI ,  
Feb 9/93;  USA  Today, Feb  10193; W Times, Feb  10193; Phil  Inq, Feb  10193; NY 
'limes, Feb  10193; WSJ, Feb  10193; W Post, Feb  10193) 

February  10: T h e  National  Air  and  Space Museum's new  permanent   exhibi-  
tion ,   "Where  Next ,  Columbus!"  sums up  U .S .  space explorations to  date   and  
attempts   to  guess  what  lies  ahead. T h e  show  ends without  any  firm  answers; 
exploration  is  limited  by  technological feasibility, but  it  is  also, as  this exhibi- 
tion   emphasizes, very  much  a  cultural  enterprise,  shaped  by  the   values  of  a 
given  society. ( P  Inq ,  Feb  10193) 

T h e  Sm i thson ian   Museum  put   t h e   A i r   and   Space  Museum  A n n e x   pro-  
posed  for Dulles  Airport   o n   its priority  list  for  1993 .  T h e  annex  would  dis-  
play, for  t h e  first  time ,  such  pieces  of  aeronautical   history  as  t h e  Enola  Gay  
a tom ic   bomber,  the   Space   S h u t t l e   Enterprise ,   and   t h e   SR-71   "Blackbird" 
spy  plane .  
Representative  Frank  R.  Wolf  of  Virginia  reported  tha t   very  likely  both  
houses  of  Congress  would  soon  be  getting   legislation  authorizing  construc-  
tion   of  the   Annex   a t   Dulles  Airport .   Construction   of  the   Annex   had   been 
delayed  for  years  because  of  disagreement  in  Congress  as  t o   its  location. 
(Reston Connection ,  Feb  10193) 

President  C l in ton   dissolved  the   Cabinet-level  National  Space  Council   as 
part  of  staff  cuts  t o  reduce  the  budget. T h e  duties  of  the   Space Council  were 
t o   come  under  the   umbrella  of  a  broader  policy-making  group  called  the  
Office of  Science  and  Technology Policy  headed  by  new  presidential  science 
adviser Jack  Gibbons.  (H  Chronicle,  Feb  10193; Space News,  Feb  15/93)  

A S TRONAU T lC S  ANL> A ERONAU T IC S  

FEBRUARY  1993 

February  1 1 :   N A S A   announced   t h a t   scientist   Dr.  Robert   Wa t son   would 
receive  t h e  Scientific  Freedom  a n d  Responsibility  Award  from  t h e  Ame r ican  
Association   for  t h e  Advancemen t   of  Sc ience  ( A A A S )  o n  February  15. 
T h e   A A A S   was  t o   h o n o r   Dr.  Wa t son ,   Director   of  t h e   Process  Studies  
Program Office in  NASA's Earth  Sc ience  a n d  Applications   Division, a n d  D a n  
A l b r i t t o n   of  t h e   N a t i o n a l   O c e a n i c   a n d   A tm o s p h e r i c   A dm i n i s t r a t i o n  
( N O A A ) ,  for  the i r   con t r ibu t ion s   t o   t h e   scientific  and   policy  discussions  o n  
global  ozone depletion .   ( N A S A  Release 93-26) 

N A S A   announced   t h e  selection  of  11 new  science  mission  concepts   in  t h e  
Discovery  Program  for further  study during  this  fiscal year. T h e  Discovery mis- 
sions  were  selected   from  73  concepts   discussed  a t   t h e   Discovery  Mission 
Workshop  held   last November .  T h e  po ten t ia l  projects  were  those   though t   t o  
have   t h e   highest   scientific   value  as  well  as  a  reasonable  c h a n c e   of  meeting  
budgetary  guidelines.  Discovery  missions  were  designed  t o   proceed  from 
development   t o  flight  in   less t h a n   th ree  years. 
T h e   11  mission  concep t s  t o  be  studied  were: Mercury  Polar  Flyby, Hermes  
Global   O rb i te r   t o  Mercury,  Venus  Multiprobe   Mission,  Venus  Compo s i t ion  
Probe ,   Cometary   C om a   Chem ica l   Compo s i t ion ,   Mars  Uppe r   A tmo sphe re  
Dynamics,  Energetics,  a n d   Evolution   Mission,  C om e t   Nucleus  Tour,  Sma l l  
Missions  t o   Asteroids   a n d   Come t s ,   Nea r   Earth   Asteroid   Returned   Sample ,  
Earth  O rb i ta l  Ultraviolet   Jov ian  Observer, a n d  W ind  Sample  Re tu rn .   In  addi-  
t ion ,   th ree   concep t s  were  targeted  for  fu r the r  consideration   during   t h e   fiscal 
year: Ma inbe l t  Asteroid  Rendezvous Explorer, C om e t  Nucleus  Penetrator ,  and  
Mars  Polar  Pathfinder.  ( N A S A  Release 93-027) 

A s t ro -D ,   a  cooperative   x-ray  astronomy  mission  with   Japan's   Institute  of 
Space   and   A s t ronau t ica l   Sc ience   ( I SA S )   and   N A S A ,   was  scheduled   for 
launch ing  February  11  from  t h e  ISAS  Kagoshima Space  C e n t e r   in  Japan .  
T h e  A s t ro -D  project ,  wh ich  was  t o  pu t   a high-capability  x-ray observatory 
i n t o  o rb i t ,  had   been   designed  t o   he lp   understand   t h e  physics  of  a  variety  of 
cosmic sources. During early  operations ,  t h e  observatory's four telescopes were 
t o  po in t  a t  approximately  two  targets per day. T h i s  numbe r  would  be  increased 
t o  as many as six per day; t h e   targets would  include  supernova  remnan t s ,  stars, 
neu t ron   stars,  black  holes,  active   galactic  nuclei ,   a n d   clusters  of  galaxies. 
( N A S A  Release 93-28) 

N A S A   completed   its  review  of  t h e   flight  readiness  of  Co lumb ia   S h u t t l e  
Mission  STS -55 ,  a mission  dedicated   primarily  t o  t h e  G e rm a n  Space  Agency  
for  research  in  life  and   microgravity  sciences.  During  t h e   review,  inspectors 
decided  t o  replace  t h e  Shuttle's   high  pressure  oxidizer  pumps. 
T h e   replacement   comes   because  officials  were  unce r ta in   whe the r   t h e  
retalners  for seals  in  Columbia's  high-pressure oxidizer  pumps were  a new   a n d  
tighter   kind   or   a n   old  variety.  If  a  retainer   broke ,   a  piece  of  it   could  damage  
t h e  tu rb ine  blades  and   t h e  eng ine  could  s h u t  down ,  according  t o  Larry Salter ,  

FEBRUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

a main-engine  expert a t  NASA .  A  paperwork problem  caused t h e  confusion. 
NASA   officials said  tha t   a t   least  some  of  t h e   eight  Space  Shu t t le  missions 
launched  since  March  1992 might  have   been  put  into   orbit  without  proper 
inspection of  the  retainers.  (NA SA  Note   to  Editors: N93-7;  B Sun ,  Feb  11/93; 
USA  Today, Feb  11/97; W Post, Feb  11/93; P  Inq, Feb  11/93; AP,  Feb  11/93; 
NY  Xme s ,   Feb  12/93; Au  Wk, Feb  15/93) 

T h e   Russians  have   attempted   to   sell  previously  classified  Soviet  satellite 
pictures  to  American  scientists  and oil companies. T h e  photographs were no t  
taken  by  Soviet  spy  satellites  hut  by  o the r   spacecraft,  such  as  the  Mir  Space 
S ta t ion .  O i l  companies considering  prospecting  for oil in Russia were particu- 
larly  interested,  according  to  Sergey  Vikhrov,  of  the   All-Russian  Foreign 
Economic Association  o n  Geological  Prospecting.  (AP, February  11/93) 

February  1 2 :   According  to  reports,  the   C l in ton   administration's  new  budget 
would cu t  funding for NASA's planned  Space  Station  by  40  percent;  t h e  cuts 
were predicted  to  trigger  another  major  restructuring  of  the  project  and  more 
delays.  Key  Capitol  aids  said  the   House  had  approved  $1.35  billion  for  the  
program  in  the   next   fiscal  year,  instead  of  the   $2.25  billion  NASA   had  
requested,  C l in ton   was  reported  to  be  troubled  by  the  massive  cost-overruns 
associated  with  the   project.  (W  Post,  Feb  12/97; AP,  Feb  12/93,  Feb  13/93; 
UPI, Feb  12/93, Feb  13/93) 

In   1989, NASA   embarked  o n  a vast  program,  the  Mission  to Planet  Earth, 
which set out  to  monitor  the  effects of  climate change o n  Earth's atmosphere, 
land  surface, and  oceans. T h e  centerpiece of  this program was  to  be  t h e  Earth 
Observing  System,  or  EOS,  a  group  of  30,000-pound  space  platforms  tha t  
could cost as much  as $30 billion  to build,  launch ,  and operate. T h e  platforms 
were p o j e c t e d   to  beam home   one  trillion  bits  of  data  each  day, ranging  from 
the   flux  of  solar  radiation  into   the   atmosphere  t o   the   growth  of  plankton  
beneath   t h e  ocean  surface. 
Controversy  had  surrounded  the   EOS  program  since  its  inception;  critics 
argued  tha t   EOS was  a grandiose  program  tha t   would  produce  huge  amounts 
of  undigestible  data   and   would  take  money  away  from  other-perhaps  more 
useful---efforts  a t   climate  monitoring.  Critics  continued   to  maintain   tha t  
long-term,  continuous   monitoring  of  crucial  climate  variables,  monitoring 
tha t  has been postponed  until  EOS gets launched ,  would  be more  useful. 
T h e  EOS  budget  through  the   end  of  t h e  century  had   been  trimmed  from 
$17 billion  to  $8 billion  and  the  mission  had  been modified. If  the  budget  got 
much  tighter,  NASA   would  have   to   completely  rethink   Mission  to   Planet 
Earth.  (Science, Feb  12/93)  

WorldView Imaging of  Livermore, California received a government  license 
to   launch  small,  inexpensive  spy  satellites.  WorldView claimed  tha t   it  could 
take  super-sharp  photos  from  250  feet  up  and   sell  the   photos  for  about 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERC)h'AUTI(:S 

FEBRUARY  1993 

half  t h e   $4 ,000   charged  by  t h e   government's  Landsat  a n d   France's  S P O T  
Image.  Possible  uses  included  traffic  monitoring ,   urban   planning ,   and   corpo-  
rate   spying.  (USA  Today, Feb  12/93;  NY  Times, Feb  12 /93 )  

A  panel   of  experts  tasked with   examining   t h e  Space  Shuttle's  ma in  engines  
said  t h a t   they  were  safe  t o  fly  provided  t h a t   techn ica l  checks  were  made  "vig- 
orously  a n d   rigorously." T h e   panel   noted   t h a t   t h e   engines   were  so  fussy t h a t  
they needed  con s tan t  ma in tenance .  S u c h  a t t e n t i o n  was o n e  of  t h e  factors t h a t  
had   d r iven   t h e   cost  of  e a c h   S h u t t l e   flight  t o   about   $500   million.  T h e  panel  
suggested  t h a t   N A S A   con t inue   t o   press  forward  o n   a  number   of  techn ica l  
improvements   already  in   t h e  works.  (AP ,  Feb  12/93)  

According  t o   officials  a t   NA SA ,   a  bad  lot  of  batteries,  made  by  Gates  
Aerospace  Battery  Company,  might  shut   down  several  satellites,  including  the  
$363  million  Upper  Atmosphere   Research  Satellite  (UAR S )   sooner  than  
expected.  To make  sure  t h a t   UAR S  would  finish  its  minimum  18-month  mis- 
sion, N A S A  scientists had  t o  adjust  t h e  satellite's hardware.  Instead of  gathering 
extra data from UAR S  for  10 t o  12 years as expected, scientists now estimate tha t  
contact  with  the  satellite would  last only four or  five years.  (Scienre, Feb  12/93) 

F e h r y   13:  N A S A   released  45   photos   of  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Challenger's  
smashed  crew  cab in ,   after  they  were  given  t o   t h e   New  York  Xmes  by  a  man  
who   had   ob ta lned   them   under   t h e  Federal  Freedom of  l n f o rm a t ~ o n  A c t .  T h e  
pictures  were  taken   after   t h e   crew  cab in   was  recovered  from  t h e   A t l a n t i c  
O c e a n  in   1986 .  (AP ,  Feb  15/93;  R  Sun, Feb  15;  W Post, Feb  15/93;  USA Today, 
Feb  15/93; P  Inq, Feb  15/93; NY  Trmes, Feb  13 /93 )  

NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility  a t   Edwards  A i r   Force  Rase  in 
California  announced  t h a t   nearly  two dozen engineers  from t h e  C e n t e r  would 
visit  22  schools  in   t h e   An te lope   Valley  t o   celebrate   Na t iona l   Engineer's 
Week .  (LA  Times, Feb  13/93)  

In response t o  questions from reporters, President C l in ton  said tha t  there  might 
be  some  changes  in  t h e  space program  but  t h a t  supporters  of  NASA   should  be 
pleased with his recommendations. He  gave n o  details, but W h i t e  House officials 
said  t h e   President  would  call  for  fu l l   funding  for  the   Space  S ta t ion   when   h e  
addressed Congress February  17. J o h n  H. Gibbons,  the  President's  science advi- 
sor,  o n   t h e   o the r  had ,   said  tha t   big  science  projects  would  he  cut   back  as  the  
administration  searched  for  ways  t o  pay  for  them.  (AP,  Feh  13/93,  Feb  16/93; 
Space News, Feh  15-2 1 ; LA Times, Feb  13/93; USA Today, Feb  17/93)  

J o h n   A a r o n ,   t h e   project  manager  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n ,   resigned  after  
Sena to r   Bob  Krueger,  D-Texas,  demanded   Aaron's  resignation  in   re tu rn   for 
con t inued   funding   for  t h e   project.  Krueger  said  Aa ron   must  be  removed 
because  "precious  tax   dollars  have   been   mismanaged.  T h e r e   is  n o   question  

FEBRUARY  1993 

C:HRONOLOGY  1997 

t h a t   a  new   managemen t   team  must  get   t o  work  immediately  t o  increase  effi- 
ciency  a n d  productivity."  (U P I ,  Feb  13 /93 )  

February  15: A  New  York  Tmes  editorial  suggested t h a t   if  pain   alas t o  he  spread 
two   biggest  sc ience   p ro jec t s ,   t h e   $ 8 . 3   h i l l ion  
fairly,  t h e   country's  
Supe rconduc t ing  Super  G ~ l l i d e r  now  being  huilt   in Texas and   t h e  $30 hillion 
Space  S t a t i o n ,  had   t o  be  c u t  along with   o t h e r  vital  programs. 
T h e  editorial  no ted   t h a t  some reviews have  said  t h a t  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  had  
on ly  o n e  impo r tan t  goal  t h a t  c a n n o t  he me t  o n  Earth:   it  woulcl serve as a base 
for biomedical  studies of  what  happens   t o  human s  and   animals  who   remain   in 
space  for  long  periods.  T h a t   goal,  t h e   editorial   suggested,  could  he  rnet  more 
cheaply .   A  harder   call,  according   t o   t h e   editorial ,   was  t h e   Super   Collider  
because,  according   t o   all  accounts ,   this   was  a  pioneering   research  project  
designed  t o  yield secrets of  ma t te r   t h a t  could  n o t  he  found  any o t h e r  way .   But 
in   t h e  e n d ,  big science  must  do  its  share .   (NY  Times,  Feh  15/93)  

N A S A  managers and engineers warned  tha t   infighting and  confusion jeopard- 
ized  t h e  Space S ta t ion  effort. Critics said  tha t  NASA  must  strengthen  accounta- 
bility,  d o  away  with  bureaucratic  constraints,  and   forge  a  more  cohesive  team. 
The re  was  widespread  disagreement  among  Space Station   players  over  whether 
N A S A   should  make  some  personnel  changes  or  take  a  more  radical  path ,   for 
example,  invest more authority  in t h e  program ogice  in Reston, Virginia, or cim-  
centrate  effort at a single NASA   center. (Space Neuls, Feh  15-21/93) 

Russian  scientists from  t h e  Baikonur C e n t e r  near  Moscow and  the i r  U.S.  col- 
leagues  from  t h e   N A S A   Ames  Research  Cen te r ,   Stanford   University,  and  
McDonne l l  Douglas Corporation  have  heen  working t o  build  more enthusiasm  
for exploration  of  Mars. J o i n t  efforts were  needed  if  exploration  were  t o  g o  for- 
ward  said  Dr.  Louis D.  Friedman,  executive   director  of  T h e  Planetary  Society, 
a  Pasadena-based  in te rna t iona l  space advocacy group. T h e  society  was  a  part-  
ner   in  t h e  Russian mission  t o  launch  orbiters scheduled  t o  carry robotic  explor- 
ers t o  Mars  in   1994  and   1996. (AP ,  Feh  15/93;  W 'Times, Mar  14/93)  

S e v e n   of  t h e   Federal  government's   inspectors  general  last  year  accepted  
bonuses-up 
t o   $20,000-from 
t h e   agencies  they  review.  NASA's  inspector  
general ,  Bill C o l v i n ,  received  t h e  biggest bonus ,  $20 ,000 .  C o l v i n  said  t h e  cash 
would  n o t  sway h im .  "If  I've got  a n  allegation  against  t h e  head   of  m y  agency, 
he  said, " the   chips  are  going  t o  fall where   they  may."  (USA  Today, Feh  1 5 )  

February  16: N A S A ,   t h e  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL ) ,  a n d   t h e  S o u t h e r n  
California   Small  Business Utilization   Counc i l  were  scheduled   t o  co-sponsor 
t h e   1993   High   Technology   and   S ~ n a l l  Business  Development   Procurement  
Con fe rence  o n  March   1 -2  in  Los Angeles .  Ahou t   200 government   prime  c o n -  
tractors ,   Federal  agencies,  and   o t h e r   large  procurement   organizations  were 
expected   t o  participate   in   t h e  conference .   ( N A S A  Release  93 -029 )  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN I )   A E RONAU T I < ' S  

FEBRUARY  1993 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  mysterious  glirch   had   caused  t h e   Ulysses  solar 
explorer  spacecraft  t o   s h u t  down   its  instruments   and   s top   sending   da ta   over  
t h e  weekend .  Eight  of  t h e   instruments  were working by  t h e  Tuesday  following 
t h e   shu tdown ,   and   NA SA   predicted  t h a t   t h e   n i n t h   in s t rumen t   ulould  be 
operational   w i th in   days. A  similar, still  unexplained   malfunction   occurred  in  
1991. Ulysses was  released  from  a Space  S h u t t l e  in  1990  o n  a $750  mission  t o  
s t i d y   t h e   Sun's poles  in   1994-95 .  (AP ,  Feh  16/93;  W  Post,  Feb  1 7 / 9 3 ) ;  U S A  
Today, Feb  17/93;  AP, Feb  17/93)  

February  17:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  study  at  NASA's  Ames   Research 
Cen te r ,  Moffett  Field, California ,  might   lead  t o  a  reduction   in   t h e   l igh thead -  
ness  astronauts   feel  after  returning   t o   Earth   from  space.  A  reduced  level   of 
plasma  was  believed  t o   con t r ibu te   t o   t h e   tendency   t o   feel  faint .   ( N A S A  
Release  93 -030 )  

A  spacewalk  was  added  t o   Space   S h u t t l e   mission  STS - 5 7   aboard  Space  
S h u t t l e   Endeavour   as  part  o f   a  series  of  spacewalk  tests  N A S A   p lanned   t o  
conduc t  during  t h e  nex t   th ree  years t o  prepare  for t h e  con s t ruc t ion  and  ma in -  
t e n a n c e   of  Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom.  Endeavour   was  scheduled   for  a n   Ap r i l  
launch .   T h e   main   objectives   of  t h e   STS - 5 7   mission  were  retrieval   of  t h e  
European  Retrievable  Carrier   (EURECA )  deployed  during  a S h u t t l e  flight  i n  
August  1992  and   t h e   conduc t ing   of  research  in  t h e   Spacehab   module. 
( N A S A  Release  93 -3  1 ) 

Bernard  A .   Harris,  MD ,   a n   African   Ame r ican ,   was  set   t o   make   his  first 
S h u t t l e  flight aboard  Space  Shu t t le  Columbia   in  la te  February. H e  was  sched-  
uled  t o  conduc t  experiments   exploring  t h e  behavior  of  human s ,  living organ-  
isms, and  materials. 
T h e   February  launch   would  be  Columbia's  14 th   voyage  i n t o   Earth   orbit .  
T h e  primary  payload  was  Spacelab  D2,  a self-contained ,  space-based research 
laboratory  carried  inside  t h e   Shuttle's   60-foot-long  cargo  bay.  (Philadelphia 
N e u )  Observer ,  Feb  17/93)  

T h e  C l i n t o n  administration   decided  to  increase funding  and  con t inue  work 
o n   t h e   $8.2  billion   Superconducting   Super   Collider   under   con s t ruc t ion   in 
Texas, according  t o  Sena to r  Bob Krueger, D-Texas, and  o t h e r  sources. Krueger 
said  t h a t  C l in ton ' s  Office of  Managenlent   a n d  Budget  h a d  budgeted  t h e  proj- 
ec t   at  $640   million  f(>r fiscal  1994 ,   a  24  percent   increase  over   t h e   cu r ren t  
year's spenciing levels.  However, just  before  h e   left office  last m o n t h ,  outgoing  
Energy  Secretary  James   D.  Wa tk in s   said  t h a t   t h e   1994  funding   level  would 
have   t o  be  $ 1 . 2   billion  t o  keep  t h e  project  o n  schedule  for comp le t ion  by  t h e  
end  of  t h e  decade .   ( W  Post, Feb  17 /93 )  

Speaking  on CNN ' s  morning   news  show, Sena to r  J im  Sasser, D-Tennessee, 
cha i rman  of  t h e  S e n a t e  Budget  Comm i t tee ,  called  t h e  Superconducing   Super  

FEBRUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

Collider   a  $7  billion   scientific  pork  barrel.  H e   said  h e  would  propose  cu t t ing  
it   ou t  of  t h e  budget  along  with   t h e  Space  S ta t ion .   (AP ,  Feb  7 /93 )  

February  18: T h e   President's  1994   budget  request  fur  N A S A   called   for  a n  
increase  over   last  year's budget  and   con ta ined   key  provisions  for  t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n   program  and   t h e   development   of  impo r tan t   new  technologies .   T h e  
President  was  t o  propose  a $14.7 billion  budget  for N A S A  for fiscal year  1994, 
up  from $14 .1  billion   during  t h e  current   year. 
President  C l i n t o n   directed  N A S A   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Gn ld in   t o  
redesign  t h e   Space  S ta t ion .  Goldin   said  tha t   NA SA   officials w o ~ ~ l d  come   up 
with  new  designs, expected within  9 0  days, tha t   increased  t h e  project's  efficien- 
cy  and  produced "greater returns o n  our  investment ."  ( N A S A  Release 93-32; W 
Post, Feb  18/93, Feb  19/93; X'S],  Feb  1 7/93, Feb  18/93, Feh  19/93; NY Tme s ,  Feh 
18/93, Feb  19/93; B  Sun. Feh  18/93; 1' 
Inq, Feh  18/93; AP, Feb  18/93;  UP I ,  Feh 
18/93, Feb  19/93, Feh  20193, Mar  3/93; AP, Feh  17/93; W  Post,  Feh  19/93; NY 
Xrnes ,   Feb  19/93; WSJ,  Feb  19/93; AP,  Feb  19/93; AP,  Feh  19/93; UP I ,   Feh 
19/93; LA Times, Feb  22/93; Space News ,  Feh  22-23; A v W ,  Feh  22/93)  

Speaking   a t   a  press  conference   a t   t h e   annua l   meeting   of  t h e   Ame r ican  
Association   for  t h e   Advancemen t   o f   Sc ience ,   J o h n   G ihhon s ,   President 
C l in ton ' s  science  advisor,  said  t h a t   science  and   technology  would  take  cen te r  
stage as  t h e  dual  eng ine  for  economic   growth   in  t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s .  He   added  
t h a t   t h e  administration   ~ v o u l d  need   t o  make  some hard   choices  ahou t  expen -  
sive projects  such  as  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n ,  find  ways  t o  gain  more  practical   hen-  
efit  from  basic  scientific  research  without   limiting   its  creativity,  iinil  learn   t o  
be  a  true   in te rna t iona l  partner .   (CSM ,  Feh  18/93;  W Post, Mar   3/93)  

According  to   NASA ,   President  Clinton's  plans  for  t h e   Space  S ta t ion   could 
threaten   some of  the   1 2 5  Maryland  jobs  connected  with  the  project.  Ahout  $14  
million  was being spent  in Maryland  on station-related work.  ( B  Sun ,  Feh  18/93) 

February  19 :  N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  11 1  research  proposals  for 
immediate   negotiation   of  Phase  I1   con t rac t s   in   NASA's  Small   Business 
Innova t ion   Research  Program  (SB lR ) .  The se  proposals  and   t h e  3 8  previously 
selected  proposals  came   from  130  small ,  high  technology  firms  located  in   27 
states.  T h e  SB lR   program  is  intended   t o  stimulate   technological   innova t ion  
by  using  small husinesses,  including  minority  and  disadvantaged  firms, t o  he lp  
mee t   Federal  research  and   deve lopmen t   requirements   and   t o   encourage   t h e  
commercial   application   of  federally-funded  research  innovations .   ( N A S A  
Release  93 -  33; Wmhington  Technology, Feh  25 /93 )  

Russia's Mir  Space   S t a t i o n   celebrated   its  seven th   anniversary   in   orbit   o n  
February  20.  T h e   M i r   has  given  Russian  cosmonauts   much   experience   with 
extended   periods  in  space. Abou t   a  half  dozen  cosmonauts  have   made   multi-  
ple  flights a n d  spen t  a  total   of  more  t h a n  a  year  in  orhit .   (AP ,  Feh  19/93)  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1993 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   th ree  engine   pumps-removed 
from  Space  S h u t t l e  
d o l um h i a  for fear  t h a t   t h e  seal retainers   in  t h e  pumps were a n  old  variety  t h a t  
required  inspection   after each  flight-were 
a newer  version  t h a t   did  n o t  need  
automatic   pre-flight  inspection .   T h e  confusion   stemmed   from  a  paperwork 
mixup  a t   t h e  Rockwell  In te rna t iona l  Co rpo ra t ion ,  maker  of  t h e  engines .   (NY 
Times, Feb  19 /93 )  

T h e  W h i t e  House  released  estimates  of  t h e  numbe r  of  job  cuts  faced by e a c h  
Federal  agency. N A S A  was slated  t o  lose  1 ,000  positions.  ( ( W  Post, Feb  19 /93 )  

George   A .   Burch,  62, a n   engineer   who  since   1960  had   worked  o n   various 
NA SA   projects,  died  of  lung   cancer   January   2 5   a t   G rea te r   Laurel-Beltsville 
Hospital  in   Maryland.  Mr.  Burch  was  employed  by  Bendix  Co rpo ra t ion .   ( W  
Post, Feb  19/93)  

W r i t ing   in  t h e   Washington Post,  Michael   Schrage ,   a  columnist   for  t h e  Los 
At1gele.s  Titnes,  suggested  t h a t   a  dramatic   a n d   effective  way  t o   boost  t h e  
Naticm's industrial  competitiveness  while  sending  a  signal t h a t  t h e  C o l d  War  
was  over  would  be  t o  cu t   in  half  t h e  budget  of  t h e  na t iona l   laboratories.  T h e  
move  might  shock  t h e   labs  i n t o  more  energetically  redefining  the i r   mission, 
;tccording t o  Schrage .  T h e  na t iona l  labs  include  t h e  University  of  California's 
Lawrence  Livermore  Lah,  Los  Alamos   in   New  Mexico ,   a n d   Brookhaven   in  
New  York.  ( W  Post, Feh  19/93)  

Fchrunry  21:  A r t h u r   L.  H .   Rudolph ,   a  Ge rman -bo rn   scientist   who   played  a 
crucial   role  in  developing   t h e   S a t u r n   5  rocket  used  in   t h e   American   Moon  
landings ,  lost  his  a t t em p t  to  regain  his  Ame r ican   citizenship.  H e  gave  up  his  
citizenship  in  1984  when   h e   faced  depo r ta t ion  for Nazi  war  crimes. 
After  t h e  war, Rudolph was o n e  of  118 Ge rman  scientists secretly brought  t o  
the   U n i t e ~ l  States   t o   work  in  t h e   American   missile  program.  H e   became  t h e  
Sp;ice Agency'vprojiraln manager  for the  Sa tu rn  project.  (NY Xmes, Feb 20193) 

Feb r tu ry   22 :   NA SA   announced   t h a t   N A S A   and   industry  engineers   had  
designed  a n d  huilt  a  new  measuring device  t h a t  would  save Ame r ican  taxpay- 
ers more  t h a n  $ 1   million  o n  a N A S A  project .  T h e  device ,  a n  improved  "inlet  
rake,"  measures  t h e  air flowing  i n t o  o n e  of  t h e  engines  o n  t h e  F /AS -18  H igh  
.Alpha  Research  Vehicle  (HARV ) ,  based  a t  NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research 
Facility,  Edw;*rds, California .  Engineers would  be  able  t o  use  t h e  air  flow d a t a  
to  help   f i i~ re  fighter-type  aircraft  more  power  and   be t te r   hand l ing   qualities. 
(NASA Release  9 W 3 5 ;  Antelope Valley  Press, Mar  19 /93 )  

NASA   managers a n d   industry  contractors   blamed  Space  S t a t i o n  cost  over-  
runs  o n   t h e   rush  t o   redesign  t h e   effort  in   1990  a n d   1991 .  Congress  directed  
NA SA   in Oc tobe r   1990  to  shave  $6 billion  from  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  over  five 
ycsrs.  N A S A   settled   o n  a  plan   in  early  1991 t o  sho r ten   t h e  pressurized mod-  

FEBRUARY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

ules and  reduce  the  number  of  solar arrays. T h e  Agency  also pushed  back  the  
date  when  t h e  crew could occupy t h e  Space S ta t ion  by  two years-to 
1999- 
and  reduced  the  crew size by half.  In  addition ,  NASA   redid plans for  t h e   lat-  
ticework  structure  tha t   forms  t h e  Space Station's  backbone  and the  Johnson  
Space Center's  major responsibility in  the  program. According t o  Jack Boykin, 
Johnson's acting  Project  Director,  the  plan was  too  optimistic  in  its  estimates 
of  cost  and   technical  complexity. 
Robert  Moorehead,  NASA's  Deputy  Program  Director  for  the   Space  
S ta t ion ,  warned  his  superior  in  writing  on  March  13, 1992, tha t   the  Center's  
work  was  veering  out  of  control .   His  concerns  suggested  tha t   the   Space 
Station's  problems  were  recognized  within  the   Agency  well  before  they 
became  public.  (Space Neaa ,  Feb  22-28) 

A n   editorial  in  Aviat~on  Week  and  Space  Technology,  praised  President  Bill 
C l in ton  as generally being "on  track" with  his space and aeronautics program. 
However,  the   author   suggested  tha t   President  C l in ton   needed  t o   clarify  his 
vision  for  t h e   Space  Station;   decisive  action   was  needed  in  a  project  tha t  
already  had  consumed  $8   billion  over  nearly  a  decade.  A n   editorial  in  t h e  
Orlando  Sentinel  urged  President  C l in ton   t o   keep  his  commitment   to  the  
Space S ta t ion  but  to  do  so  with  an   "eye  toward  greater  efficiency."  (AvWk, 
Feb  22,  1993; 0 Sen Star, Feh  22/93) 

Space News praised President  Bill  Clinton's space plan as a "rational,  sound 
approach tha t  will  keep  the   station  alive, head  NASA   in  the  right direction ,  
and   keep  NASA   Administrator  Dan   Goldin   around."(Space News,  Feb  22-  
28/93 ) 

Writing  in  t h e  Wall Street Journal, Allan  H. Meltzer, professor of economics 
a t  Carnegie-Mellon  and visiting scholar  a t  the  American  Enterprise  Institute ,  
said  tha t   if  the  C l in ton   administration  were  serious about  reducing  spending 
it would eliminate the  $30 billion Space S ta t ion ,  reduce entitlements ,  and  cu t  
wasteful projects.  (WSJ, Feb  22/93) 

February  23:  Kennedy Space Cen te r  spokesman Hugh  Harris announced   t h a t  
former  astronaut  Brewster  Shaw  had   told  NASA   tha t   he  would  resign  as 
Deputy Director  of  the  Space Shu t t le  program  in April. Shaw was  responsible 
for  approving  Shu t t le   launches  in  the   final  moments  of  a  countdown   ( W  
Tmes, Feb  23/93; AP, Feb  24/93) 

February  24:  A  Washington  Post  editorial  had  generally  favorable  comments  
regarding  President  Clinton's  economic stimulus-deficit  plan,  noting   tha t  h e  
had  taken  on  some formidable  interest  groups. It  suggested, however,  tha t   h e  
could  have  killed  the   Space   Station   as  "unaffordable  in  present  circum- 
stances." A Washington Tmes  editorial argued tha t  both   the  Space S ta t ion  and  
the  Superconducing Super Collider should  be  cut .  A  Philadelphia lnquirer edi-  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY  1993 

torial  called  for  a  delay  in  building  the  Space  Station  because  of  funding 
issues.  (W  Post, Feb 24/93; W Times, Feb  26/93; P  Inq, Mar  7/93) 

NASA announced that new  information on the El Nifio ocean current would 
be  discussed at a briefing o n  the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite mission on  February 
26. Th e  satellite was  launched in August  1992 to map circulation of  the world's 
oceans and study  the oceans' role  in climate. (NASA  Release N93-08) 

February  2 5 :  NASA  scientists  reported  in  the  British  journal  Nature  that  a 
supernova  may  have  caused  a  huge  void  known  as  the  "Local  Bubble"  that 
envelopes  the  solar  system  and  many  nearby  stars. Researchers  at  NASA's 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said  that  evidence  sug- 
gests  that  the bubble, an area about 300  light-years across, was  formed by  the 
supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. Th e  blast was  strong 
enough  that  its  radiation  could have  disrupted Earth's protective  ozone  layer 
and  caused  extra  sunburns  on  the  ancestors  of  modern  humans.  (NASA  
Release 93-036; USA  Today, Feb  25/93; NY  Times, Feb 25;  P Inq, Mar  5/93) 

NASA  announced  tha t ,  beginning  in  February,  it  would  test  "technology 
incubation,"  a  new  laboratory-to-market  approach  designed  to  help  space 
technology contribute to U.S.  industrial competitiveness. NASA was  funding 
two  centers,  the  Ames  Research  Center,  Moffett  Field,  California,  and  the  
Johnson Space Center, Houston. Th e  three-year experiment, which was being 
operated  by  the  University  of  Texas,  Austin,  was  receiving  funding  of 
$800,000 this year.  (NASA  Release 93-037) 

Th e  General Accounting Office (GAO )  reported that the  Superconducting 
Super Collider  was  millions of  dollars over  budget  and  that  construction  was 
behind  schedule. According t o  the  investigators, trend  analysis suggested that 
the  Collider could have a $650 million cost overrun; G A O  also estimated that 
the project was  19 percent  behind  schedule. ( W  Post, Feb  25/93) 

Government  officials  reported  that  a  high-altitude  weather  satellite  bor- 
rowed  from  Europe  had  been  positioned  to  monitor  the   weather  over  the 
United  States. It  joined  the GOES-? U.S.  weather satellite, which  had  been 
working alone since its companion satellite failed in  1989. T h e  addition of  the 
European satellite  restored  the normal system of  having two weather satellites 
in orbit, one each over  the  East  and West  Coasts. (NY Times, Feb  25/93) 

Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, named Dr.  Joseph F.  Shea, adjunct 
professor  of  aeronautics  and  astronautics  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology and  former NASA  employee, to be  in  charge of  the   redesign  of 
the Space Station. Goldin also announced  measures to conserve resources and 
restrict new  spending during the redesign transition.  (NASA  Release 93-038; 
Space News, Mar  1-7;  UPI, Feb  27/93; W Post,  Feb  27/93) 

FERRUARY  1993 

CHRONOLCGY 1993 

NASA   announced  funding  for  11  mission  concept   studies  tha t   would 
attempt   t o  design  a  solar  system  exploration  mission  for  under  $150 million 
each.  A  parachute-descending  Venus  atmospheric  probe  proposed  by  the  
University  of  Colorado  was  one  of  the   ideas  funded.  (Washington  Technology, 
Feb  25/93) 

Feb rua ry   26:  N A S A  
t h e   U S . - F r e n c h  
from 
t h a t   da ta  
reported  
TOPEX/Poseidon  oceanographic  indicated  tha t   t h e   E l   Niiio  event   off  the  
western  coast  of  Sou th   America  was  strengthening ,  which  meant  tha t   the  
weather  conditions   associated with  i t   were  likely  to  continue .   These  condi-  
tions  included  wetter  than   normal  weather  in  California, wetter  and   colder 
winters  t h a n   normal  in  the   eastern  United   States,  and  warmer  and   dryer 
summers t h a n  normal across the  southern  hemisphere. (NA SA  Release 93-39;  
B  S u n ,  Feb  28/93) 

NASA   announced   tha t   Russian  cosmonauts  Colonel   Vladimir  G .   Titov 
and  Sergei K.  Krikalev were  scheduled  to meet with  the  media  for interviews 
o n  Tuesday, March  9. T h e  two  cosmonauts were  training  as  mission  special- 
ists  for  Shu t t le   mission  STS -60   set  to  be  launched  in  late  1993.  (NA SA  
Editors Note  N93 -9 )  

Benson Edward Gammon ,  76, a retired  research  scientist with NASA ,  died 
o n  February  24 .  Mr. Gammon  worked  with  NASA   and  its  predecessor agen- 
cies for 32 years. H e  served as chief of  research  and  technology  in  the  office of 
plans and  program evaluation, where  he worked  on  the  proposal for a manned 
flight  to  Mars.  ( W  Post,  Feb  26/93) 

February   27: NASA   announced  tha t   it  had  notified  all  its  contractors  to dis- 
continue   all  overtime  on  Space S ta t ion  work  and   said  tha t   it  would  "restrict 
new  spending."  ( W  Times, Feb  27/93) 

J e t  Propulsion Laboratory Director  Edward S tone  announced  tha t   the   labo- 
ratory  expected  to  eliminate  1,000 of  its  7,500  jobs  in  five  years.  T h e   cuts 
resulted  from  t h e  "realities  of  t h e  Federal budgetn and   the   drop  in  aerospace 
work  from defense contractors,  according  to  S tone .  ( W  Times,  Feb  27/93) 

NASA   announced  that   a  German-chartered  Space  Shuttle  mission  was 
scheduled for launch March  14 after a delay of more than  two weeks. NASA  said 
the   delay was  caused  by  a  false  alarm with  the   space  shuttle  Columbia's main 
engines,  which  were  suspected  of  containing  outdated  parts.  (W  Xmes ,   Feb 
2 7/93 ) 

T h e  New  York  Times reported  that  a n  Orion  rocket being prepared for launch 
at  t h e  European Space Range  in  Kiruna, Sweden, ignited  while  o n   its  flatbed 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

FEBRUARY  1993 

and shot through  two buildings, killing a technician and  injuring three others. 
T h e  20-foot rocket was  to have measured the  Earth's ozone layer, using  equip- 
ment from a German Space organization. (NY Times, Mar  1/93; RT, Feb  27/93) 

March 

March  1 : Texas Monthly  reported   t h a t   Forrest  M.  h~ t im s  111,  a n  ama teu r  scien-  
tist  who   daily  measures ozone  readings  with   a  pair  of  hand -he ld   instruments  
pu t   together   for  less  t h a n  $500 ,  had   conv inced  N A S A   t h a t   its multimillion-  
dollar   spectrometer   was  off  by  about   1 . 7  pe rcen t .   NASA's  14-year-old spec- 
trometer ,   t h e   Nimbus-7 ,   apparently   had   drifted  slightly  in  its  orbit .   It  was 
scheduled   t o   be  replaced  in   1994;   until   it  was  replaced,  N A S A   scientists  
would  have   t o  compensate  for  t h e  error.  (Texas Monthly, Mar  1 /93 )  

Government Computer  News  reported   t h a t  NA SA  had  designated  Laurie A .  
Broedling,  a n  Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Con t inua l   Imp rovemen t ,   t o   take  
charge  of  t h e  Agency's Total  Quality   Management   ( T Q M )  program.  I n  adcli- 
t i o n ,  N A S A   established  a  quality  steering   team   of  senior  officii~ls and   a  c o n -  
t inua l   improvement   council .   (Goelernment Computer  N e u ~ s ,  Mar   1 /93 )  

T h e  C l i n t o n   administration   announced   t h a t   it  was  moving  t h e   manage-  
men t   team   for  a  Space   S h u t t l e   con t rac t   from  t h e   Marshall  Space   F l ~ g h t  
C e n t e r   in   Huntsville ,   Alabama ,   t o   t h e   J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r   in  Hou s ton ,  
Texas.  T h e   decision  affected  9 0   engineering   and   ~ n a n a g em e n t  employees. 
According   t o   t h e   Wall  Street  Journul,  t h e   move  was  m e a n t   to   discipline  
A labama   Sena to r  Richard   Shelby, who ,   after  lohhying  t h e   administraticln  t o  
c o n t i n u e   funding   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n ,   had   publicly  criticizeil  t h e   President's 
econom ic   program  for  failing  t o   c u t  more  from  Federal  spending .   (WS ] ,  Ma r  
1/93; Newsweek, Mar  8/93)  

Writing   in  the   Christian Science Monitor, James Oherg ,   a  professional  space 
engineer  and   a  specialist  o n  Russian  aerospace,  hailed  t h e   success  of  Russia's 
manned  Space  S ta t ion ,  Mir. H e  noted   tha t   the  Mir, launched  in  1986, had  heen  
continuously  occupied  since mid-1989  by  successive teams o f  cosmonauts. 

According   t o  Oberg ,  Ame r ican   space  engineers  who   visit  R u s s i ; ~ ' ~  
space  c e n -  
ter   have   been   impressed  with   t h e   program's  "sound,  intelligent  space   hard-  
ware."  Yet,  Oberg   no ted ,   t h e   Western   press  pays  l re ry  l i t t le   a t t e n t i o n   t o  
Russian  accomplishments   in   space .  H e   suggested  t h a t   awareness  c ~ f  what   t h e  
Mir  had   accomplished  could  be  useful  in   t h e   upcoming   round   of  pcilirical 
deba te   o n   whe the r   t h e   U .S .   is  "too   poor  t o   run  a  mannccl  Space   S ta t ion ."  
(CSM, Mar  1/93) 

Several  life  science  researchers  questioned  whether   a  redesigned  Space 
S ta t ion  would accomplish enough  life science o l~ jec t ive s  t o  he worth  the   invest- 
men t .   Researchers  a t   a  meeting   of  the   National   Research  Co i~nc i l ' s  Space  
Studies Board said  tha t   they  expected  a  redesign  t o  e i the r  shrink  or  reduce  thc  
centrifuge, a set of  spinning  modules designed  for precise gravity experiments on  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN11 A ERONAU T IC S  

MARCH   1993 

animals  ahoard  t h e   station .   Harold  Guy,  a  professor  at  t h e   University  of 
California's School  of  Medicine  in  LaJolla, California, said  t h a t  without   a  large 
centrifuge, much  of  t h e  station's experimental  value for  life scientists would be 
lost. "The   life science community  may  hail out ,"  said  Fred  Turek, a neurobiolo- 
gist and  chairman  of  the  space biology and  medicine committee  o n  t h e  National  
Research Council's Space  Stirdies Board.  (Space New s ,  Mar  1/93)  

A n  article  in  Space  News  o n  Daniel  S. Goldin's decision  t o  remove  Leonard 
Fisk  as manager  of  the  Agency's space science program discussed Fisk's manage- 
rial  style. Last  October  Goldin   changed  Fisk's title  t o  chief  scientist, a  position 
without  management  authority  According t o  the  article, many scientists viewed 
Fisk  as  synclnymous with  advocating  and   delivering  quality  space  science mis- 
sions; others  said  that   his  record  for delivering  missions o n   budget  and  o n  time 
was  mixed  and  that  NASA   could  n o   longer afford  to  sacrifice cost  and schedule 
to  deliver t h e  biggest  science  possible  t o  space.  (Soace Neuls, Mar  1-7/93) 

Edward  Frietnan ,   who  served  as  cha i rman   of  t h e   Wh i te -Hou se - led   Earth  
Observing  System  Engineering  Review  C omm i t t e e ,  said  t h a t   N A S A   needed  
t o  in s t i tu te  a n  outside   review  process  for  its  science  missions.  NASA's  in te r -  
nal  review  process  tended   t o  bloat   rather   t h a n  streamline  science  missions,  h e  
said.  "They're  really  n o t   review  teams ,   they're  t h e   advocates,"  said  Frieman ,  
director   of  t h e   Scripps  In s t i tu t ion   of  Oceanography   in  LaJolla,  California .  
(Sbace  N ew s ,  Mar  1 -7 /93 )  

Space  New s   reported  t h a t   European  space  officials  were  mon i to r ing   news 
about  t h e   fate  of  t h e   Un i ted   States   Space   S t a t i o n   under   t h e   C l i n t o n  
administration .   T h e  13 -na t ion  European  Space  Agency   ( E SA )  had   agreed  t o  
spend   abou t   $2.8  billion  o n   its  Co lumbu s   Space   S t a t i o n   program.  T h e  
European  program  included  a  habitable   laboratory  t h a t   was  t o  be  a t tached   t o  
t h e  S t a t i o n  and   related  ground  equ ipmen t .   (Space N ew s ,  Mar  1 -7 /93 )  

Oper;~tc-rrs of  Biosphere  2 ,  t h e  world  under  glass expe r imen t ,  named  J o h n  B. 
C o r l ~ s s ,  ;I  N A S A   con su l tan t ,   to   head   research  for  t h e   $150   million  private  
LYenture. (AP ,  Mar  1/93)  

Federal  Computer Week  reported  t h a t   a  small woman-owned Florida  firm had 
protested  ~ a r i h a l l  Space   fight  Center's decision  t o   let  companies  with   up  t o  
1,500 employees bid  o n  a small, disadvantaged  business (SDB)  set-aside program 
there.  Challenger  Engineering  Inc.,  S t .   Petersburg,  Florida,  maintained  tha t  
NASA's  procurement  policy  was  unfair  t o   smaller  minority-owned  firms  t h a t  
ccluld  not   compete  with  larger companies. (Federal Computer W e e k ,  Mar  1/93) 

March  2:  Retired   Admiral   T h om a s  H .  Moorer,  former  cha i rman   of  t h e  J o i n t  
Chiefs  of  Staff, writing  in   t h e  Washington Times ,  suggested  t h a t   using  a  float-  
ing,  or   "Hydra,"  launch   system  would  massively  lower  t h e   cost  of  space 

MARCH   1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

launches  for commercial  conce rn s  a n d  break  t h e  cu r ren t  space  launch   bo t t le -  
neck .  Commercial   launches  now  can  he   preempted   by  gove rnmen t   launches .  
H e  no ted   t h a t   t h e   Sov ie t  Navy  had   used  t h e   Hydra  techn ique   to  l'lunch  its 
nuclear   armed  ballistic  missiles  from  submarines  for  more  t h a n   25  years.  ( W  
Xmes ,  Mar  2 /93 )  

French   scientists ,  led  by  Dr. Jacques  Laskar of  t h e  Bureau des Longitudes  in 
Paris,  writing  in  t h e   journal  N a t u r e ,   and   Dr.  Jack  Wisdom ,   a n   astronomer   a t  
t h e   Massachusetts  In s t i tu te   of  Technology,  writing  in  t h e   journal  Science, 
described  t h e   implications  of  chao s  in   t h e  solar system. New   computer   simu-  
lations  have  revealed  t h a t  over  great  spans of  time,  small g r a ~ h t i o n a l  distur-  
bances  from  neighboring  planets ,  comb ined  with   the i r  own  wobbly  rotations ,  
c a n  cause significant  fluctuations  in  t h e  orbits  and  o r ien ta t ion s  of  t h e  planets ,  
leading   t o ,  for example ,  great  temperature   fluctuations .  Mars, for  exainple ,   is 
still undergoing  great  variations.  According   to  scientists,  Earth   may  bc spared 
such  variations  because  of  t h e  stabilizing influence  of  t h e  Moon ,  t h e  only  large 
satellite   in   t h e  inne r  solar system.  ( N Y  Times,  Mar  2/93; Time, Mar  8 /93 )  

Ma rch   3: Congress  held   a n  oversight   hearing   March   2 ,   in   which   members  of 
Congress  a t temp ted   t o  de te rm ine  what   had   led  t o  a  po ten t ia l  $ 1   billion   over-  
run   i n   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n  program.  Space   S t a t i o n  managers  testified  o n  how 
t h e  overruns  had   developed  and   how   they  p lanned   t o  fix  them .   A t   t h e  hea r -  
ing,  N A S A   officials  said  they   had   offset  all  bu t   abou t   $500   million  of  t h e  
po ten t ia l   cost  overruns  for  t h e  n e x t   th ree   years;  they   had   done   so   largely  by 
c u t t i n g  management   jobs  and  replacing  consultants  with  government   employ-  
ees.  ( W  Post, Mar  3/93; LA  Times,  Mar  3/93; USA  Today, Mar  3/93;  AP, Mar  
3/93; Spare News, Mar   8-14/93;  AelWk, Mar   8/93;  H Post, Mar  3/93)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   when   t h e   first  U.S. cominercial  rocket   lifts  off  in  
May,  its  ma in   h se lage   a n d   booster  rocket  were  scheduled  t o   carry  t h e   logo, 
"Last  A c t i o n   He ro ,"   t h e   t i t le   of  a  Columbia   Pictures  summer  movie  release 
starring  A rno ld   Schwarzenegger. Co lumb ia   paid  $500 ,000   for  t h e   ad ,  which  
was  t o  be  orbiting  Earth  for more  t h a n   two years.  (WSJ, Mar 3 /93 ;  B  Sun ,  Mar 
3/93;  W Post, Mar 3/93; LA  T m e s ,  Mar  3 /93 ;  USA  Today ,  Mar  3/93;  UP I ,  Mar 
3/93;  AP, Mar  3 /93 )  

Speaking   a t   t h e   a n n u a l   meeting   of  t h e   American   Association   for  t h e  
Advancemen t   of  Sc ience ,  George   Smoo t ,   a n   astrophysicist  a t   t h e   Lawrence 
Berkeley  Laboratory  in  Berkeley,  California ,   described  his   cosmic  research 
work  using  t h e  space-time  ripples  t h a t  were  discovered  a year  ago ,  Sinoot  a n d  
his   group  want   t o  explore   backward  in   time   toward  t h e   universe's  origin and  
forward t o  t h e  universe of  today .  In   its  investigation ,  t h e  group uses o n e  of  t h e  
instruments   o n   t h e   Cosmic   Background  Explorer  Sa te l l i te   t o   study  t h e  
microwave  radiation   t h a t  permeates  t h e  cosmos. Cosmologists now  have  wha t  
Sm o o t   compares   t o   "a  baby  photograph   of  t h e   universe  a t   about   five  hours  

ASTRONAUTlCS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

MARCH  1993 

in to  a human   lifetime."  T h a t  snapshot contains  enough  information to allow 
investigators  to  work  backward  and  forward  in  time.  (CSM ,  Mar 3/93) 

Senator  John   Warner  (R-Virginia),  introduced  legislation  to  kill  NASA's 
manned Space Station project. Calling the  Space Station "wasteful  and unneces- 
sary,"  the  senator urged  President Clinton  to kill  the  project. (W  Post, Mar 3/93, 
Mar 4/93) 

N A S A  announced  at least a two-day delay  in  the  planned March  14 launch  
of  Space  Shu t t le   Columbia  because  of  a  ruptured  hydraulic  hose  tha t   had 
sprayed fluid  in  t h e  engine compartment .  This  was  the  second  delay in  three 
weeks for  the  Ge rman  Spacelab mission. (AP, Mar  3/93, Mar  4/93; UPI ,  Mar 
3/93;  P  Inq, Mar 4/93; USA  Today, Mar 4/93; RTw, Mar  3 /93 )  

March  4:  NASA   announced   tha t   it  had  chosen  t h e   University  of  Texas 
Southwestern  Medical  Cen te r   in  Dallas  to   become  the   NASA   Specialized 
C e n t e r  of  Research  and  Training  in  Integrated  Physiology. T h e   new  center  
would  focus o n  arriving  at  a better  understanding of  how  different  organ sys- 
tems of  various species react  to  space flight.  (NA SA  Release 93-040)  

Analysis of measurements from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment 
(ERBE) satellite  confirmed  tha t  Mount  Pinatubo's eruption  in the  Philippines 
in June  1991 had  resulted  in  a temporary cooling of  the  Earth  tha t  equated  to 
a  decrease  in  global  surface  temperature  of  approximately  o n e   degree 
Fahrenheit  (0 .5  degree  Celsius).  T h e   data  provided  the   first  conclusive  evi- 
dence  of  a  significant  change  in  global  energy  caused by  a volcanic  eruption. 
(NA SA  Release 93-41; P lnq ,  Mar 5/93; 0 Sun ,  Mar 5/93; NYTimes ,  Mar 9/93) 

March 8: Launch of  the  Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET ) ,  which 
was  scheduled  to  lift  off  March  31,  was  postponed  for  a t   least  two  months. 
NASA   contributed  $85  million  toward  three  launches  of  the   COMET;  the  
spacecraft was  to  carry  11  experiments  from NASA's commercial space devel- 
opment centers. COMET  was also serving as the  first space billboard. Columbia 
Pictures paid $500,000 to  advertise an upcomlng Arnold Schwarzenegger movie 
o n  the  rocket.  (Space News, Mar 8-14; AP, 9/93, Mar  10193) 

NASA   announced  tha t   i t   had  awarded  Government   Technology  Services 
Inc., of Chantilly ,  a contract  to  provide Unix  work station products to NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight Center   in Greenbelt ,  Maryland. (W  Times, Mar 4/93)  

NA SA  announced  tha t  an  ER-2 aircraft, an  updated  version of  the  U -2  spy 
plane ,  would  spend  seven  months  next  year  researching  the  ozone  hole  over 
Antarctica .   T h e  study, part   of  a  joint  New  Zealand-U.S.  atmospheric  study 
in to  ozone depletion, would  explore  the  extent  of  the  hole  in  the  ozone  layer. 
NA SA   research  pilot  J i m  Barrilleaux was  to  f ly   the  NASA-owned   ER-2  air- 
craft. T h e  work  was  scheduled  to  begin  in  late March  1994. (RTw, Mar 4/93)  
1 3 2  

MARCH  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Ma rch  5: NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom 
Utilization  Conference, planned  for June  21-24 in San Francisco, California. 
NASA   managers  decided  to  postpone  the  conference  because  of  recent 
instructions  to redesign  the Space Station. (NASA  Media Advisory) 

NASA  announced  that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of  color  in 
space, had  resigned  to  pursue  interests  in  "teaching, mentoring,  health  care 
issues,  and  increasing participation  in  science  and  technology  of  those  who 
have  traditionally been  left out."  Jemison, who joined  the astronaut program 
in  1987, was  a science mission specialist on  STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 
1992, a cooperative mission with  the  Japanese to study life sciences and mate- 
rials processing. (NASA  Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar  7/93; B Sun, Mar  7/93; W 
Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar  7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, 
Mar 9/93; Peopk  Magaz ine ,   Apr/93) 

Europe's Arianespace, Inc. announced  that  it had  signed a  launch  contract 
for  two  intelsat  VIII  satellites.  T h e   satellites  were  to  be  built  by  General 
Electric Corporation's Astro Space Division and  launched  in  1996 from a site 
in  French Guiana.  ( W  Xmes, Mar 5/93) 

Daniel  S .   Goldin,  NASA  Administrator,  attempted  to  smooth  over 
"strained" relations with  top NASA  management,  upset over a  letter  that he 
had  written  to a House  subcommittee  investigating space station funding.  In 
part  the   letter  read,"I  have  been  concerned  with  regard  to the  validity of  the 
present  cost  and  schedule  estimates."  NASA   officials  scheduled  to  testify 
before  the  subcommittee  said  that  Goldin's comments  seemed  to  discredit 
what  they  had  to  say  even  before  they  said  it. Yesterday, Goldin  denied  that 
he distrusted his  top managers.  (W  Post, Mar  5/93) 

T h e  French National Space Agency announced  that Western Europe's first 
Ariane-5 solid-fuel rocket booster  had  undergone  successful  tests at  a  launch 
center  in French Guiana. (RTw, Mar  6/93) 

Ma rch   7 :  Atmosphere researchers urged government science agencies to speed 
up  their evaluation of  the large pilotless drone called the Condor, fearing tha t  
the  aircraft would  be  scrapped  if  the  government  did  not  buy  it. T h e  drone, 
which cost an  estimated $300 million, was  built as a prototype spy  aircraft for 
the Pentagon  by  Boeing Corporation. It can fly more  than  20,000 miles with- 
out  refueling. Converting  the drone  from military  to  civilian  use  would  cost 
an estimated $70 to $100 million.  (NY Xrnes, Mar  7/93) 

Ma rch   8 :  T h e  Los  Angeles  Chamber  of  Commerce  announced  that  it  had 
awarded NASA  Administrator  Daniel S .  Goldin, U.S.  Air Force Lt. General 
Edward  Barry, and  the Je t  Propulsion Laboratory  (JPL) its Kitty  Hawk, Sands 
of  T m e  Award. T h e  chamber annually  recognizes individuals and companies 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1993 

in  the  aerospace  industry as a means of  promoting  the   industry. (Space News, 
March  8 -  14/93 ) 

General  Dynamics Space Systems Division  of  S a n  Diego  proposed  return-  
ing to  the  Moon for a 2 1-day, two-person mission in  1999. T h e  mission would 
use  a capsule and  return  vehicle  transported  by  the  U.S.  Space Shuttle  and   a 
X t a n   4  rocket  with  a Cen tau r  upper  stage;  the   proposal did  not   call  for  t h e  
construction  of  a new  launcher. However, NASA's head of  exploration called 
many of  the  calculations in the  proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough 
draft  for  a  lunar  base  program  entailed  construction  of  a  new  launcher  and 
higher  costs  than   those  projected  in  the  General  Dynamics proposal.  (Space 
News, March  8.14193) 

NASA  announced  tha t  a hydraulic hose tha t  ruptured  in  Columbia's engine 
compartment  during a launch-pad test had a manufacturing  defect; the  defect 
was  also  found  in  nine   o the r   lines  in   t h e   Shuttle .   T h e   problem  delayed 
Columbia's German   Spacelab mission,  scheduled  for  March,  by  at  least  five 
days.  (AP, Mar  8/93)  

C l in ton  administration officials said tha t  the  fate of  the  U.S.  Space S ta t ion  
depended on  finding a new design tha t  would not  absorb NASA's entire  budg- 
e t .  Dr. J o h n  H. Gibbons ,  head  of  the  Office of  Science and Technology Policy 
in  t h e  W h i t e   House,  said  that   the   administration  had   ordered  the   redesign 
after  i t   discovered  tha t   the   rising costs of  the  project  threatened   all  the  o the r  
civilian space and  aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9 /93 ;  W 
Times, Mar 9/93; USA  Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8 /93 )  

Aviation Week  B Space Technology  reported  tha t  Lockheed was  leading a six- 
member  industry  team  in  an   effort  to  develop  an   unsolicited  National  Aero-  
Space Plane  (NASP )  proposal  for the  Air Force. T h e  team was  to recommend 
scrapping  the   NASP   in  favor  of  a  much  lighter  hypersonic  research  vehicle 
called NORA ,  for National  Orbital Research Aircraft. NORA'S $5  billion price 
tag was car  less than   the  $10- 1 5  billion slated for the  NASP. ( A v W ,  Mar 8/93) 

March 9: T h e  Washington Post  reported  tha t  Sally K .  Ride's name kept coming 
up as a possible candidate  to  run NASA  but   tha t  Ride had apparently said tha t  
she was  not   interested  in  the   job.  ( W  Post, Mar 9/93) 

NASA  awarded the  Arlington ,  Virginia-based Analytic Services Inc. a one-  
year  grant  to  help   study  opportunities  for  cooperation  among  nations  with 
space programs.  ( W  Tm e s ,  Mar 9/93) 

Two Russia cosmonauts  training for a U.S. Shuttle  flight said  that   they were 
eager t o  try  out   America's  spaceship. T h e  two  cosmonauts  had  two  and  one -  
half  years  of  space  experience  between  them.  (AP, Mar  9/93; W  Times, Mar 
10193) 

3 34 

MARCH  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

March  1 I :   NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   announced   a  number  of 
organizational  changes in  the  Agency. He  named J o h n  R .  Dailey  to  be  acting 
Deputy  Administrator  and  said  tha t   Dr.  Joseph  Shea ,   recently  named  as 
Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space S ta t ion  Analysis, would have  over- 
sight over all Space Station  related  development  activities. 
Goldln  also reorganized the  Agency's science divisions: Harry C .  Holloway, 
deputy  dean  of  the  Uniformed  Services University of  t h e  Health   Sciences  in 
Bethesda ,   Ma ry land ,   was  scheduled  
to   become  NA SA   Associate  
Administrator  of  t h e  new  Life  and Microgravity Science office. Assisting him  
was  to  be  Bonnie  J .  Dunbar,  a NASA   astronaut ,  who  has  a doctorate  in bio- 
medical  engineering.  Others   named  included  Deidra  A .   Lee,  appointed 
Associate  Administrator  for  Procurement.  (NASA  Release  93-044; W  Post, 
Mar  15/93; Space  News, March  16-2 1 )  

T h e   first  flight  of  NASA's  Small  Expendable-tether  Deployer  System 
(SEDS)  was  scheduled  to  be  launched  aboard  a U .S .  Air  Force Delta  2  rock- 
e t  from Cape  Canaveral Air Force S ta t ion ,  Florida, n o  earlier  t h a n  March  18. 
T h e  SEDS tether   system would be  a secondary payload o n  the   Delta  2  launch 
vehicle.  (NA SA  Advisory, Mar  11/93)  

NASA   announced   tha t   the   Galileo   spacecraft's  main  an tenna   remained 
jammed  following  an   increase  in  the   spacecraft's spin rate,  a  maneuver  tha t  
was  executed  as  a test  for a future mission but  also had  a possibility of  releas- 
ing  the  stuck  an tenna .  NASA  gave  up  any real hope of  fixing the  problem  in 
January  after  h i t t ing   the   stuck  an tenna   dish  13 ,320  times  with  motors  tha t  
were designed  to  open  the  device. 
T h e  jammed  an tenna  was  expected  to  hamper  the   ship's $1 .4  billion  mis- 
sion to  Jupiter  because the  spacecraft would have to use  a much smaller a n t e n -  
na  dish  to  transmit  data .  NASA  said  it  expected  to  accomplish  70 percent  of 
the  mission's scientific goals. (AP, Mar  11/93)  

Officials  a t   NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in   Pasadena,  California, 
announced   tha t   an   SR-71  Blackbird  reconnaissance  aircraft,  once   used  as  a 
spy  plane ,   took  off  this  week  on   its  maiden  science  flight.  T h e   plane  was 
equipped  with  an  ultra-violet camera  to study stars and comets. 
T h e  plane ,  one   of  six  planes  decommissioned  by  the   Air   Force  two  years 
ago  and   turned  over  to   NASA ,   was  operated  by  NASA's  Dryden  Flight 
Research  Facility  and  was  expected  to  be  flown  an   average of  once   a month  
for  the   rest  of  t h e   year.  (NA SA  Release  93-071; RTw,  Mar  11/93; AP,  Mar 
22/93; Antelope  Vaiky  Press, Mar  13/93) 

March  12:  Daniel S. Goldin ,  NASA   Administrator,  announced  that   following 
a White   House directive, NASA   had  begun  a  redesign  of  the   proposed  Space 
Station  to make  it  simpler, smaller, easier to  build, and cheaper  to  operate. T h e  
redesign team planned  to present three proposed models to  the Clinton  admin- 

ASTRONAUTI(:S AN ll AERONAUTIC'S 

MARCH   1993 

istration by  J u n e  1. Go ld in  said  tha t   the  Agency  would  make  maximum  use  of 
the   $8.5-billion worth   of  work  tha t   had   gone  i n t o  designing and   planning   t h e  
Space S ta t ion  since t h e  mid-1980s.  (NY  'limes, Mar  12/93; W  Times, Mar  12/93; 
LA  Times, Mar  12/93; B  S u n ,  Mar  12/93; AP, Mar  11/93, Mar  12/93; W S j ,  Mar 
12/93; Space Ncw s ,  Mar  15-2 1 ; AvWk, Mar  15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93 ,  Mar  12/93)  

Henry  Knight   Bradford,  88, a retired  engineer  w i th  NASA's Godda rd  Flight 
C e n t e r ,  died March   10  in California .  H e  had  Parkinson's disease. Mr. Bradford 
joined  N A S A   in   1960; h e  retired  in  1972. ( W  Pos t ,  Mar  12/93)  

March  13: NASA  announced  a Ma rch  2 1 launch  da te  for Columbia's G e rm a n  
spacelab  mission.  T h e  launch  was  delayed  twice  because  of  mechanical   prob-  
lems with  t h e  S h u t t l e .  ( P  Inq ,  h4ar  13/93; W Post, Mar   14/93; UP I ,  Mar  12/93 ,  
Mar  13/93; RTW,  h4ar  12/93)  

March  14: According   t o  a report  in  Reuters,  t h e  Arianespace  consortium  c o n -  
tinued  t o   be  t h e   world  leader  in  number   of  commercial  satellite   launches .  
Ariane   filled  t h e   void  when   N A S A   stopped  launching   commercial  payloads 
after  the  Space  Shu t t le  Challenger   exploded  in January   1986. U .S .  launchers ,  
especially  t h e  Gene ra l  Dynamics Atlas  series, which  has  t h e  capacity t o  launch  
large payloads, were  fighting  for each   launch   con t rac t .  (RTW ,  Mar  14/93)  

March  15:  Researchers  writing  in   t h e   cu r ren t   issue  of  t h e   journal  N a t u r e  
announced   t h a t   they   had   de tec ted   a  guitar-shaped  nebula   a t tached   t o   t h e  
fastest  known   star  in  t h e  galaxy;  t h e  star   is  a t   t h e  t i p  of  t h e  neck   of  t h e  "gui- 
tar."  T h e   speed  of  t h e   star,  a  pulsar,  which   scientists   calculated  travelled  a t  
least  500   miles  per  second   through   t h e   Milky  Way  galaxy,  created   a  "bow- 
shock"  wave  in   t h e   rarified  gas of  outerspace.  T h e  shockwave  hea ted   t h e   gas 
it  encoun te red  a n d  made  i t  give off energy, now  appearing  as t h e  ou t l ine  of  t h e  
star's  wake. T h e  wake  was detectable   only  with   t h e  world's most  powerful  tel-  
escope,  according   t o   Co rne l l   University   astronomer   Jame s  M.  Cordes .   ( W  
Pos t ,  Mar  15/93; Time, Mar  22/93)  

Speak ing  
t h e   Am e r i c a n   A s t r o n a u t i c a l   Soc ie ty ,  
t o   a  mee t ing   of 
Representative  A l a n  Mollohan   warned  tha t   unless N A S A  could  prove  it  c o n -  
tributed  t o  U .S .  economic  competitiveness,  politicians would view  it  as a "cold 
war  anachronism ."   According   t o   a n   article   in   Space  News ,   Mollohan's com-  
ments   reflected  t h e   view  of  bo th   t h e  W h i t e  House  and  members  of  Congress. 
T h e  message: change  or  become  irrelevant .  (Space News ,  Ma rch   15-21 ) 

Europe,  J a p a n ,   and   Canada-the  Un i ted   States's  partners   in   t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n  project-rejected  NASA's move  t o  redesign  t h e  project .  T h e y   instead 
demanded   t h a t   t h e   team   begin  by  considering   revisions  t o   t h e   cu r ren t   plan .  
T h e y   warned  t h a t   they  might   he  forced  t o   pull  o u t   of  t h e   program  if  t h e  
Un i ted   S ta te s  changed   t h e  plan   significantly. (Space  New s ,  Ma rch   15 -21 /93 )  

MARCH  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

According   t o   Space  N ew s ,   in   a  March   10  letter   t o   Vice  President  Go re ,  
Sena to r  Howell   Heflin ,  D -A labama ,  argued  against  canceling   t h e  Advanced  
Solid  Rocket   Mo to r   program.  Heflin   said  h e  opposed  a  proposal  t o  close  t h e  
rocket   motor   p lan t   in   Iuka ,  Miss.;  those   opposing  t h e  closing  hoped   t h a t   t h e  
p lan t   eventually  would  be  used  t o  huild  a  hybrid  rocket  mo to r  for  a N a t i o n a l  
Launch  Cen te r .   (Space N ew s ,  Ma rch   15 -21 /93 )  

Representative  George   E.  Brown  J r ,  cha i rman  of  t h e   House  Comm i t tee   o n  
Sc ience ,   Space ,   and   Technology,  warned  t h e   C l i n t o n   administration   t h a t  
ordering  a  redesign  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   might  doom   n o t   only   t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n  but  also o t h e r  in te rna t iona l  "big science" projects. He  also sen t  a letter  
t o  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel S. G o l d i n  cautioning  h im   against abandoning  
t h e  current   design, which  had  cost  $8 billion  so far.  ( W  Post, Mar  16/93)  

March  16: N A S A   announced   t h a t  unde r  a recently  signed  agreement  N A S A  
engineers  a n d  Learjet  Inc .  engineers ,  hased  i n  W ich i ta ,  Kansas, would work o n  
t h e  development   of  a new  high   performance  business  jet.  T h e  engineers  were 
t o   study  aircraft  size  and   aerodynamics  t o   c rea te   t h e   plane;   they   would  use 
state-of-the-art   supercomputers  and   wind  tunne l s   a t  NASA's  Ame s  Research 
C e n t e r ,  Moun ta in   View, California .   ( N A S A  Release  93-46;  AP, Ma r   15 /93 )  

N A S A   and   t h e   seven  C e n t r a l  America   na t ion s   began  a  program  t o  study, 
preserve,  a n d  protect   t h e   region's rain   forest by  expanding   t h e  use  of  satellite  
d a t a  by  C e n t r a l   American   scientists .  U n d e r   a n   agreement   with   t h e   C e n t r a l  
Ame r ican   Commission   for  Env i ronmen t   a n d   Deve lopmen t ,   N A S A   would 
t ra in   a n d   provide  equ ipmen t   t o   scientists   from  all  t h e   C e n t r a l   Ame r ican  
coun t r ie s .   By  using  d a t a   f rom   t h e   A d v a n c e d   Very  H i g h -R e s o l u t i o n  
Radiometers  flying aboard several U.S.  weather   satellites,  t h e  scientists  would 
be  able   t o  estimate   t h e  am o u n t  and   type  of  vegetation   cover   and  forest  cover  
in  t h e  region  and   t o  conduc t   costal  studies.  ( N A S A  Release  9 3 - 4 7 )  

March  16:  N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   N A S A   personnel   had   moved   t h e   Space  
S h u t t l e   Disco~rery  t o   t h e   launch   pad  o n  Monday,  Ma rch   1 5 .   L3iscovery  was 
scheduled   t o   be  launched   in  Ap r i l   o n   a n   a tmo sphe r ic   research  mission. 
Meanwh i le  preflight  work  resumed  o n  Co lumb ia ,  wh ich  was scheduled   t o  be 
launched   in  less  t h a n   a week.  ( W  T ime s ,  Mar  16/93;  U S A  T o d a y ,   Mar  16/93;  
AP, Mar  15 /93 )  

G. Joseph  M ine t t i ,   8 5 ,  died  of  h e a r t  failure  o n  March   13. He   served o n  t h e  
Civil  Ae ronau t ic s  Board  for  2 2   years,  leading  t h e  panel   during   years of  e n o r -  
mous  expansion   and  change   in  t h e  av ia t ion   industry.  ( W  Post, Mar  1 6 / 9 3 )  

T h e   C l i n t o n   administration   announced   tha t   it  hail  launched   a  complete  
review  of  U.S.  policy  toward cu t t ing  global-warming 
but  had  n o t  yet 
abandoned   t h e  stance   taken  by  t h e  Bush administration .   ( B  S u n ,  Mar  16/93)  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MARCH   1993 

March  17: N A S A   and   t h e   European  Space  Agency   ( E SA )  were  cooperating  
o n  a n  experiment   t h a t   involved   th ree   spaceships "listening"  for passing  grav- 
i ta t iona l  waves. T h e  spaceships, now  travelling  t o  separate  destinations   in  t h e  
solar  system,  were  NASA's  Mars Observer ,  Galileo ,   and   t h e   ERS's Ulysses 
spacecraft. 
S u c h   waves  of  gravity  have   never   been   directly  de tec ted ,   a l though   the i r  
existence   was  predicted  decades  ago  in  Einstein's  theory   of  relativity.  T h e  
joint  NASA -ESA   experiment   would  be  t h e   first  t ime   th ree   spacecraft  would 
make observations  simultaneously, thu s  greatly increasing t h e  reliability of any  
de tec t ion .   ( N A S A  Release 93 -38 ;  AP, Mar  22/93)  

March  18:  T h e   Washington  Post  reported  that   a  subcommittee  of  the   House 
Administration  Committee  had  approved  the  extension of  the  National  Air  and  
Space Museum  at Washington  Dulles  International  A i ~ o r t .  T h e  two  bills were 
forwarded t o  the  full committee. T h e  legislation called for an appropriation of  $8  
million  in fiscal year  1994 for the  start-up of  the  air and space extension. ( W  Post, 
Mar  18/93)  

A  spokesman   for  Lawrence  Livermore  Na t iona l   Laboratory  in   California  
said  t h a t  a pressure  buildup  ripped  apart  a n  experimental   supergun designed  t o  
fire  objects   i n t o   space.  T h e  acc iden t   delayed  a  demon s t ra t ion   scheduled  for 
th i s  spring. Scientists  hoped  t o  use  t h e  gun ,  which   is  like a n  enormous  air rifle, 
t o  shoo t  payloads  i n t o  space a t  a fraction  of  t h e  cost of  sending  them   i n t o  orbit  
via  a Space  Shu t t le .   (AP ,  Mar  18/93;  USA  Today, Mar   18/93;  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   14 astronauts  who  orbited   t h e  Earth  during  Project  
G em i n i  were  installed  in  t h e  U .S .  A s t ronau t  Hall  of  Fame. T h e  new  inductees  
were  J o h n   W.  Young,  James   A .   McD iv i t t ,   t h e   late   Edward  H.  W h i t e   11, 
Cha r le s  C o n r a d  Jr., Frank  Borman ,  James  A .  Lovell, Thoma s  P.  Stafford, Neil  
A .  Armstrong ,   David  R .   S c o t t ,  Eugene  A .  C e r n a n ,  Michael  Co l l in s ,  Richard  
F.  G o r d o n   J r . ,   a n d   Buzz  A ld r in .   (UP1 ,   Mar  18 /93 ,  March   22/93;   Reuters ,  
March   22/93; AF', Mar  22/93; P  Inq, Mar  21/93)  

Astronauts   aboard  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Columbia   were  t o  be  injected   with   a 
saline  solution   and   wired  w i th   ca the te r s  during   nex t   week's research  mission 
in  a n  a t t em p t  t o  he lp  doctors  understand   t h e  effects of  weightlessness  o n  t h e  
body. T h e  two G e rm a n  astronauts  o n  board would  also have  ca the te r s  in  the i r  
veins  during   t h e  launch   in order   t o  measure  blood  pressure. 
Eighty-eight  experiments   involving   200   scientists   from  around   t h e  world 
were  p lanned  during   t h e  nine-day  German-sponsored   research  flight .  A l l   t h e  
science   would  be  managed  from  a  con t ro l   cen te r   in   Germany .   N A S A   was 
scheduled  t o  hand le   everything  else.  (AP ,  Mar  18/93; Reuters, Mar  17 /93 )  

N A S A   was  scheduled  t o  launch  a n  unmanned   Delta   rocket   with   a military 
navigation   satellite  a n d  NASA's  tagalong  t e t h e r  expe r imen t .  T h e  12  112-mile 
te the r ,   which   is  just  th ree -hund red th   of  a n   inch   thick-is  wound  around   a 

MARCH   1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

spool. O n e  end of  the  cord  is  tied  to a 57-pound aluminum box. Everything  is 
mounted  o n  the  rocket's second  stage. NASA  planned  to  pop  the   box  off  t h e  
spent booster an  hour after the   launch. As it shoots away, the  box should cause 
the   tether   to unwind.  Instruments o n  board  would  record  the   speed and   ten-  
sion  of  the   tether   and  send  the  data   to  Earth.  (AP, Mar  18/93) 

NASA   said  tha t   the  Mars  Observer  spacecraft  fired four of  its  24  thrusters 
as  a  means  of  adjusting  its  course  so  it  could  begin  orbiting  Mars  o n  August 
24. Th is  was  the  third  correction maneuver since  the  spacecraft was  launched 
September 25  from Cape  Canaveral ,  Florida.  (A P n ,  Mar  18/93) 

In  its annual  report, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel said  tha t   the  
Space Station  had "progressed considerably  in the  past year."  T h e  report  went 
o n  to say  tha t   the  effort "exhibits a degree of  stability and continuity  tha t  has 
previously been  absent." (AP n ,  Mar  18/93)  

March  19: NASA   announced   tha t   Leonard  Nicholson  was  leaving his  posi- 
tion   as  Space  Shuttle   program  manager  to  assume  t h e   position  of  acting 
Director  of  Engineering  a t  Johnson   Space Cen te r ,  Houston,  Texas.  Brewster 
Shaw, currently NASA's deputy  shuttle  director, was  scheduled  to  take  over 
the  duties  formerly performed by  Nicholson.  (NA SA  Release 93-49;  AP, Mar 
22/93) 

NA SA   announced   tha t   the   Agency  had  selected  GE  Gove rnmen t  
Services,  Houston ,   to  begin  final  contract   negotiations  for  the   Science 
Payloads  Development,  Engineering,  and  Operations  Con t rac t .   (NA SA  
Release C 9 3 - d )  

NASA   announced   tha t   bad  weather  had  forced  the   military  to   postpone 
launch of  a rocket  scheduled  to  unfurl a tether  in space and tha t  t h e  delay had 
forced  NASA   to  bump  the   launch  of  Shu t t le   Columbia  from  Sunday  to  
Monday.  (RTw,  Mar  19/93; AP,  Mar  19/93; UP I ,   Mar  19/93; W  Post,  Mar 
19/93) 

March  22:  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,   Cleveland ,   and   t h e   O h i o  
Aerospace  Institute were scheduled  to  host  a conference in Cleveland ,  March 
3 0  and  3 1, focusing o n  the   new  world  of  cyberspace. T h e  conference,  called 
the  Vision  21 Symposium o n  Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering  in the  
Era of Cyberspace, would  provide "a  panoramic view of  t h e  research and  tech-  
nology  tha t  will  assist humans in exploration activities," said Dr. Sheila Bailey, 
conference chairperson.  (NA SA  Release 93-50)  

After a month  of delays, NASA  prepared for launch of  the  Shuttle  Columbia's 
German mission.  Forecasters were  predicting  a  70  percent  chance  of  favorable 
liftoff conditions.  T h e  flight would be Columbia's fourteenth  in  12 years. 

ASTRONAUT1C:S  A N D  AERC)NAUTICS  

MARCH  1993 

T h e   Shu t t le   was  t o   take  two  Ge rman   physicists  in to   orbit   t o   perform  low 
gravity  experiments  inside  the   cargo  bay  of  t h e   $1  billion  research  module 
spacelab.  Five  N A S A   astronauts  were  to   accompany  them   o n   the   nine-day 
flight. T h e  German-sponsored  research  program  touched  a wide range of  fields, 
from electronics and  fluid physics t o  biology  and  astronomy. T h e  astronauts also 
planned  t o  test a rohot arm mounted  in t h e  Spacelab module.  ( P  Inq, Mar 22/93; 
W Times,  Mar  22/93; UPI ,  Mar  22/93; Reuters, Mar  22/93; AP, Mar  22/93) 

Th e  Freedom  Forum,  a  group  t h a t   funds  journalism  programs,  presented   a 
$100 ,000  grant   t o   t h e  Mercury Seven  Foundation   t o  establish  a  lecture  series 
aboclt  space.  The  series,  which   was  intended   t o   he lp   improve   public  under- 
s tand ing  of  space  issues, was  t o  be  held   annually   in  Florida's  Brevard Coun ty ,  
t h e   location   of  t h e  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r .   (AP ,  Mar  22 /93 )  

T h e  Air   Force  cancelled   its  planned   launch   of  a  rocket  with   a  navigation  
satellite   and   te the r   experiment   because  of  problems  with   ground  support 
equ ipmen t .  A  damper  o n  t h e  launch  pad  became  stuck  in  t h e  final minutes  of 
Friday's coun tdown ,   causing  rocket  valves  t o  freeze. A l though   workers  fixed 
t h a t   problem ,   t h e   temperature   of  t h e   helium   needed   t o   pressurize  t h e   fuel 
tanks  did  no t   rise  hack  up  fast  enough  t o  permit   t h e  launch .   (AP ,  Mar  22 /93 )  

NASA  a n n o i~ n c e d  tha t  it  had banned news organizations from covering meet-  
ings  ahout  the   redesign  c t f   Space  Station   Freedom.  NA SA   said  t h e   meetings 
would  be  closed  hecause  they  involved  mainly  NA SA   employees,  not   outside 
advisers. NASA  has formal advisory committees, which meet openly  in compli- 
ance  with a  1972 law governing  such meetings.  ( S w e  Neuls, March  22-28/93) 

A  NA SA   s a k t Y  panel  reported  tha t   inspection  of  recovered  Space  Shu t t le  
solid  rocket  motors  had   found  traces  of  soot  o n  O-rings   and   recommended  a 
redesign  of  o n e   of  t h e   motor's  main  joints.  T h e  Aerospace  Safety  Advisory 
Panel   (A SA P )  warned  NA SA   o n  March   18 t h a t   t h e  possibility of  a  problem 
was "sufficiently high"  t o  warrant  t h e  joint's  redesign. (Space New s ,  Mar  22/93) 

According   t o   a  report  in  Space  New s ,   N A S A   a n d   W h i t e   House  officials 
agreed  last  week  t o  consider  partner   concerns   about   t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  design 
effort.  T h e   U .S .   government   would  give  the i r   European,  Japanese ,   and  
C a n a d i a n  partners   greater  representation   in   t h e  project   a n d   ensure   t h a t   any 
a l te rna t ive  design did  n o t  exclude  the i r  hardware. T h e  agreement  was  laid o u t  
in  a  March   19 d ~ c u i n e n t .  (Space New s ,  Mar  22-28/93)  

According  t o  a report   in Space New s ,  senior  N A S A  managers  testified  about  
cost  increases  in   a  Ma rch   1 7  hearing   called  by  Representative   Louis  Stokes  
(D -O h i o ) ,   cha i rman   of  t h e   House  appropriations   subcommittee   t h a t   ha s  
N A S A   oversight.  T h e  subcommittee   examined   in  detail   six N A S A  projects 
t h a t   cost  far  more  t h a n   t h e   Agency   estimated   originally:  Advanced   Solid  

M A R C H   1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Motor ,   Advanced   Turbopump ,   Transfer  O r b i t   Stage ,   Mars  Observer,  Space  
S t a t i o n ,  a n d   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  waste  collection   system. 
Daniel   S .  Go ld in   promised  t h e  subcomm i t tee  t h a t  h e  would  press  forward 
w i th   managemen t   reforms  t o   ba t t le   t h e   cost  growth  seen   in   many   Space  
Agency   projects .   In   re tu rn ,   t h e   cha i rman   of  t h e   c omm i t t e e   signalled 
Congress'  willingness t o   provide  N A S A   with   a  lump   sum  covering   several 
years-rather 
t h a n   just  annua l   appropriations-to 
conduc t   some  space  sci- 
e n c e  efforts.  (Space News ,  Mar  22-28/93;  AuLVk,  Mar  22 /93 )  

Acco rd ing   t o   Space  News ,   seven   m o n t h s   after   a  NASA - a p p o i n t e d  
Managemen t  Review Team  reported  t h a t   lax  security had   created   a  h igh   risk 
of  espionage  a t   t h e   Arnes  Research  C e n t e r   in  N o r t h e r n   California   further  
investigations  by  t h e  FBI  and  NASA's  inspector  general  had   n o t   sub s tan t ia t -  
ed   those  charges.  In  t h e  mean t ime ,  however, Arnes  had   implemented   many  of 
t h e  team's recommendations .   (Space News ,  Mar  22-28/93)  

Space  News  reported  t h a t   congressional  lawmakers who   supported  NASA's 
Space  S t a t i o n  were a t temp t ing  t o  s top  t h e  W h i t e  House from  scaling back  t h e  
program.  Democrats  appeared  t o  be  seeking  a compromise  while  Republicans  
were  th rea ten ing   a p b l i c  fight .   (Space News ,  Mar  22-28;  AelWk, Mar   22 /93 )  

N A S A  reported  t h a t   t h e  launch  of  Space Shu t t le  Columhia  had  been  halted  
th ree   seconds  before  liftoff  because  of  a  main  engine  failure  caused  by  a  mal- 
functioning   engine   valve.  W h e n   t h e   Shuttle's  computers  detected   a  faulty 
valve,  t h e  safety system shut  down  the  Shuttle's  main  engines. CX~c ia l s  stressed 
t h a t   t h e  crew o n  t h e  $ 1  billion German-charted   research  mission  was  never  in 
any  danger  because  of  t h e   aborted  liftoff. Repairs  were  expected  t o   take  about 
three  weeks. The shutdown  was  t h e   third   launch  pad  abort  in  Shu t t le  program 
history.  (Reuters ,  Mar 22/93, Mar  23/93; AP, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar  22/93; 0 Sun ,  
Mar  23/93;  P   Inq,  Mar  23/93; CSM ,  Mar  23/93;  NZ' Times, Mar  23/93;  U S A  
Today, Mar  23/93; W Post, Mar  23/93; W Times, Mar  23/91; W S J ,  Mar  21/93)  

I n  a Space  News  interview, J o h n  G ibbon s ,  Director  of  t h e  Office of  Sc ience  
a n d   Technology,  defended   t h e   W h i t e   House  decision  t o   require  N A S A   t o  
redesign  t h e  Space  S ta t ion ;  h e  also said  t h a t  h e  did  no t   t h i n k  t h a t  space would 
have   a  lower  priority  in   t h e   C l i n t o n   administration   as  a  result  of  t h e   space 
council's  being  folded  i n t o   t h e   Office  of  Sc ience   and   Technology.  Am o n g  
o t h e r   topics,  t h e   interview   touched   o n   whe the r   NA SA   would  h a n d l e   c om -  
mercial  and   military,  as  well  as  civilian ,   space  issues;  how   space  issues  ~ . o u l d  
be  coordinated   among  Federal  agencies; Earth   ohservntion  programs; and   t h e  
func t ion  of  a Space  S t a t i o n .  (Space News ,  Mar  22-28/93)  

A n  article   in   Auiatinn  Week & Space  Technolorn reported   t h a t   Europe  was 
abou t   t o  decide  how  t o  parcel  ou t   $1 .5   billion   in  new  science  a n d  exp lo ra t ion  
space  missions.  Roger  Bonne t ,   director   of  science   a t   t h e   European   Space  

ASTRON .4UT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

M A R C H   1993 

Agency   ( E SA ) ,   was  reported  as  saying  t h a t   ESA   would  focus  o n   "all 
European"  programs  i n   order   t o  distance   itself  from  t h e   troubles   a n d   unce r -  
tainties  of  space cooperation  with   t h e  U .S .  H e  n o t e d ,  "We will now  study mis- 
sions  in  t h e  c o n t e x t  of  a  European  framework  t o  be  sure  we  can  hand le   t h em  
in  ESA ,   t h e n  define  coope ra t ion  afterward.". 
T h e   biggest  European  decision   would  focus  o n   deve lopmen t   of  a  $600-  
700-million   infrared  telescope  t h a t   could  de tec t   t h e  most  primitive  ma t te r   in 
t h e  uni~gerse a n d   Project  Ro se t ta ,  a n  $800-million  mission  t h a t  would  be  t h e  
first  t o  sample  t h e  surface of  a come t .   (AvWk, Mar  22/93)  

March  24:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   most  recen t   findings  by  t h e   Pioneer  
Venus O rb i te r  spacecraft s t rong ly  suggested  t h a t  p lane t  Venus o n c e  had   th ree  
and  a half  times more water  t h a n  though t  earlier-enough  water  t o  cover   t h e  
en t i re  surface  between   25 a n d  7 5  feet  deep .  T h e  findings  supported  t h e  possi- 
bility  of  t h e   presence  of  lightning   o n  Venus  a n d  discoveries  about   t h e   iono-  
sphere   and   top   of  t h e   atmosphere   of  Venus.  Venus,  considered  Earth's  twin  
planet ,   is  today  very  dry  a n d  ho t .   ( N A S A  Release 93-5  1 )  

N A S A  named  A lphon so  V.  Diaz as t h e  Deputy Associate Adm in i s t ra to r  for 
t h e  Agency's  new Office  of  Space  Sc ience ,  effective  immediately.  During  h i s  
career   a t   NA SA ,   Diaz  served  as  Deputy   Associate   Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Space  
Sc ience  and   Applications ,   managed  t h e  Ga l i leo  and   Ulysses programs  i n  t h e  
Solar  System Exploration  Division,  a n d  developed  space science  programs for 
Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -53 )  

Scientists   reported  t h a t   a  periodic  come t   named   Swift-Tuttle   might   h i t  
Earth   o n   August  14 ,   2126.  Later  calculations   suggested  t h a t   Swift-Tuttle  
would  no t   be  a  th rea t   o n   t h a t   da te   but  would  be  a  definite   th rea t   in   3044 .  
(Smithsonian Magazine, March193) 

T h e  Washington  Post  reported   t h a t  Maxime  Faget, cha i rman  a n d  founder  of 
Space   In te rna t iona l   Inc.,  had   resigned  from  his  position   as  con su l tan t   t o   t h e  
Space   S h u t t l e   redesign  team .   Some   N A S A   employees  questioned   Faget's 
objectivity   because  his   company   had   earlier  proposed  its  own   a l te rna t ive  
Space   S t a t i o n  and   design  a n d   because  t h e   company  would  likely bid  o n  any 
new  design proposal.  Faget's resignation  "was determined   by  bo th  N A S A   and  
Space   Industries  as  necessary."  (W  Post, Mar  24 /93 )  

N A S A  unveiled  a $300  million  radar  system  t h a t  can   take  color  pictures  of 
Earth's  damaged  env i ronmen t   from  a  Space   S h u t t l e .   According   t o   N A S A  
project  scientist   Diane  Evans, "In  many  cases,  radar  is  t h e  only  way  scientists  
c a n   explore   unaccessible  regions  o n  Earth's  surface." T h e  camera   was  sched-  
uled  t o   fly  o n  t h e   S h u t t l e   th ree   times,  in  1994 ,   1995 ,  a n d   1996. N A S A   a n d  
t h e  G e rm a n  and  Italian  space agencies cooperated  o n  t h e  project .  N A S A  paid 
half  t h e  cost .   (AP ,  May  14/93)  

MARCH  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

NASA  removed scientific samples and volatile  fuels from the  Space Shu t t le  
Columbia  o n   Tuesday.  T h e   Shu t t le   was  g o u n d e d   for  at  least  three  weeks 
because of  an  engine shutdown tha t   had occurred  three  seconds before liftoff. 
(AP, Mar  24/93; UPI ,  Mar  24/93)  

March  25:  NASA   announced  that   the   Langley  Research  Cen te r ,  Harnpton, 
Virginia, would  lead a multi-year  research  program effort  to  develop technol-  
ogy  for  a  future  high-speed  civil  transport.  According  to  Louis  Williams, 
Director   of  t h e   High-Speed   Research  Division,  NA SA   Headquarters ,  
Washington, D.C.,  "The  program is  laying a technical  foundation  for an  envi-  
ronmentally  compatible,  economically  practical  commercial  transport  tha t  
could  contribute  up  to  140,000 jobs  and  $200 billion  to  the  national   econo-  
my  in  the  nex t  century."  (NA SA  Release 93-52; Daily  Press, May  24/93) 

NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin  announced  tha t  the  activities of  the  
Office of  Exploration  would be absorbed by  the  Office of  Space Science, effec- 
tive  immediately. (NA SA  Release: 93-54)  

March  29:  Federal  Computer Week  recognized  three  NASA   employees for  their 
work  in  procurement.  Don  Lovall,  chief, Technical  and  Information  Systems, 
Design Engineering Directorate at  the  NASA   Kennedy  Space Center, was  rec- 
ognized,  together  with  his  team,  for  awarding  the   Personal  Computer  
Acquisition Contract  (PCACP ) ,  an  innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's 
first  consolidated  microcomputer  buy.  PCAC  was  unusual  because  it  fostered 
competition  among  three  chosen  vendors  throughout  its  five-year  life.  Skip 
Kemere, ADP procurement branch  chief, NASA  Goddard Space Flight Center, 
was  also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in  the SEWP BOWL, 
its  first Agencywide buying vehicle for high-powered work  stations. Darleen A .  
Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement a t  NASA ,  was recognized  for 
her  action  on  the   awarding  of  NASA's  Earth  Observing  System  Data  and 
Information System core contract. Instead of  accepting low-ball bids from major 
firms,  she  sent  the  bids  back  to  the  bidders  and  asked  that   they  be  adjusted- 
reflect more  realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93) 
upward-to 

March  30:  NASA   announced   tha t   it  had  awarded  a  contract   t o   Hughes 
Applied  Information  System.  Inc.,  Seabrook, Maryland,  to  design,  develop, 
integrate,  maintain ,   and  operate  t h e   NASA   Earth  Observing  System  Data 
and  Information  System  (EOSDIS)  Core   System. T h e  system would  support 
the   acquisition,  processing,  archiving,  and   distribution  of  data   from  U .S .  
Earth-observing  spacecraft.  NASA   estimated  tha t   thousands  of  scientists 
around  the   world  would  eventually  study  and   analyze data  provided  by  the  
new  system.  (NA SA  Release 93-56; W Post, Apr  1 /93 )  

NA SA   announced   tha t   t h e   Ames  Research  Cen te r ,   Moffett  Field, 
California, and California wine growers would  use  aerial and satellite  images to  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH  1993 

battle  an   insect  problem  encountered  by  California's wine industry.  Sensitive 
electronic scanners on  aircraft  and  satellites would  help  a group from govem- 
men t ,  industry, and  several universities map  and  analyze root  louse  damage  in 
northern  California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA  Release 93-55; 
UPI, Mar  31/93; SF Chron, Mar  31/93; P  Inq, May  2/93) 

A Delta  2  rocket  successfully ejected a television-size satellite o n  12 and   112 
miles  of  cord.  T h e   experiment  demonstrated  tha t   tethers  could  be  used  to  
deploy  small  payloads  in  space, NASA   said. T h e  tether,  which  was  th in   as  a 
kite string, dangled  the  57-pound box  for 90  minutes at an  altitude of 450 feet. 
(W  P o s t ,  Mar  31/93; NY   T i m e s ,  Mar  31/93; P  lnq, Mar 31/93)  

NASA   announced  tha t   the   Space  Shuttle   Discovery  would  be  sent  o n   its 
eight-day  atmospheric  research  mission  next  week,  pushing  Columbia's 
German-sponsored  science flight into  late April. T h e  Columbia was scheduled 
for  launch April  24.  (UP I ,  Mar 30193; W P o s t ,  Mar 31/93; RTw, Mar  31/93)  

April 

April  I :   N A S A   announced   t h a t   findings   by  scientists  at  NASA's  Atnes 
Research  C e n t e r ,   Moffett  Field,  California ,   challenge   t h e   theories   of  how 
galaxies  evolve.  T h e   U.S.  team  incluclecj  a   scientist  from  t h e   Max  Planck 
In s t i tu te ,  Heidelberg ,  Germ;iny. 
Scientists  observed  huge  ;Imounts of  nlicrosccqiic iliamonds  111 star-forming 
clouds   in   t h e  Milky  Way  Galaxy.  T h e y  also  observed  softer  hydrocarbons   in 
t h e   t h i n   space  between   clouds.  T h e   observations   of  these   two   independen t  
and  very different  types of  interstellar  hydrocarbon  dust suggest t h a t   t h e  ma te -  
rials  are  no t   mixing  a9  generally  assumed. Lou  A l lamando la ,  head   of  t h e   sci- 
ence   observation   team ,  said  t h a t   t h e  "team's observations  support  t h e   theory  
t h a t  meteoritic   diamonds  form  in  many  regions of  space ,  e i the r   in ca rbon  star 
atmospheres  or  as  t h e  result  of  ca rbon  grains colliding  a t  high   speeds  in   in te r -  
stellar  space."  ( N A S A  Release  93 -58 ;  Timi.,  Apr   12/93; UP I ,   Apr   12/93;  AP, 
Ap r  411 2  ) 

N A S A   natned  representatives  frotn  gove rnmen t  and   industry  and   acadern- 
ic   experts   from  across  t h e   country   t o   take  part  in  a n   independen t   review  of 
NASA's Space  S h u t t l e  redesign  options .  A   to ta l  of  16 individuals  were  inv i t -  
ed  t o  serve o n  t h e  comm i t tee .  Cha r le s  M .  Vest had   previously  heen   named   by 
Vice  President  A lbe r t  Go re  t o  head  t h e  ,4dvisory C omm i t t e e  o n  t h e  Redesign 
of  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n .  T h e  Advisory C omm i t t e e  was  t o  suhmir  its  recommen -  
da t ion s   in  J u n e .  ( N A S A  Release 9  3 -59 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   April   marked  t h e   1 0 t h   anniversary   of  NASA's 
Tracking   and   Data   Relay  Sa te l l i te  System  ( TDR S S ) ,  a   space-hased  network 
developed   t o   meet  telecommunications   needs   of  Space   S h u t t l e ,   Space  
S t a t i o n ,   and   o t h e r   low  Earth-orbiting   spacecraft  missions.  T h e   TDR S S   is 
equipped  t o   support  up  t o   24  user  spacecraft,  including   t h e   Space   S h u t t l e ,  
simultaneously.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -60 )  

N A S A   spokeswoman  J u n e  Malone  said  a   broken  pin  was  responsible  for  a  
leaky engine  val\.e  removed  from  Space Shu t t le  Discovery, scheduled  t o  lift off 
o n  a n  atmospheric  research  mission nex t  week. T h e  alignment  pin  broke while 
technicians   were  removing  plumbing  from  around  t h e   valve  for  leak  tests 
ordered after  t h e  March  2 2  main engine  shutdown  of Columbin. (AP ,  Apr   1/93)  

April 2 :  N A S A   and   t h e  Russian  Space  Agency   ( R S A )  announced   t h a t   Sergei 
K .  Krikalev would  he  t h e  prime mission  specialist and  Vladimir G .  Titoyov  t h e  
backup  mission  specialist  o n   t h e   STS - 6 0   mission  currently   scheduled  for 
launch   in  November   1993. T h e  two cosmonauts  had   heen   in  mission  special- 
ist  t ra in ing  at NASA's J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r ,  Hou s ton ,  since  early Novembe r  
1992 .  ( N A S A  Release 93-61  ) 

A4STKL>NAUTICS AN11 AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1993 

N A S A   a n d   t h e  Russian   S p a c e  Agency   ( R S A )  a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   they   h a d  
signed  a c o n t r a c t  t o  fly  two  U .S .  Mars  O x i d e n t  Expe r imen t   ( M O X )  in s t ru -  
m e n t s   o n   t h e   Russian   Mars  '94   Mission .   T h e   c o n t r a c t   h a d   a  p o t e n t i a l  
va lue   of  $1 .5   m i l l ion .   T h e  Mars   '94   Mission ,  schedu led   t o  be   l a u n c h e d   i n  
Novembe r   1 9 9 4 ,  would  deploy   small   l a n d i n g  s t a t i o n s  a n d  p e n e t r a t o r s   a n d  
carry   i n s t r um e n t s   t o   study   t h e   surface   a n d   a tm o s p h e r e   of  Mars.  ( N A S A  
Release   9 3 - 6 2 )  

April 3: T h e  Itar-Tass news agency reported  t h a t  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  a n d  Russia 
planned   a joint  mission  t o  Mars  in  Oc tobe r  of  1994. According   t o  t h e  report ,  
t h e   Russian  Space  Agency   and  N A S A   signed  a n  agreement   o n   t h e  Mars-94  
project  late   last  year.  Scientific   equ ipmen t   o n   board  a  Russian  spacecraft 
would  include  two  small landers  with  probes  for analyzing  t h e  Ma r t ian  surface 
and   atmosphere .  T h e  oxidization  capability  of  t h e  Ma r t ian   soil would  also be 
measured, Tass said.  (RTW ,  Ap r   4 /93 )  

T h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery, with   five astronauts  o n  board ,  was  scheduled  
t o  liit  off  a t   1:32 a.m. April   6 t o  study  t h e  cond i t ion  of  t h e  Earth's ozone layer 
a n d   sample  30   t o  40  o t h e r  gases. T h r e e   instruments   in   t h e  S h u t t l e  cargo  bay 
would  measure ozone,  a n d   four  o the r s  would  probe  solar energy. A  n igh t t ime  
launch  was necessary  t o  put  Discovery o n  t h e  desired  course for observing sun -  
rises  in   t h e   N o r t h e r n   Hemisphere .   Meteorologists  predicted  a n   80  pe rcen t  
c h a n c e  of  good weather.  ( W  Post, Ap r  5/93 ,  A p r  6/93;  W Times, A p r  5/93; LA 
Times, Ap r  5/93; NY  Times, A p r  4/93;  AP, A p r  5/93; U P n ,  Ap r  3/93;  RTw, Ap r  
3 /97 )  

Astronaut   Ellen  O c h o a ,   scheduled  t o   be  aboard  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e  
Discovery  when   it  was  launched   in  Ap r i l ,  would  be  t h e   first  Hispanic   female 
t o   f l y   ~ I I  space.  O c h o a ,   an   expert   with   t h e   Shuttle's  50-foot-long  robot   a rm ,  
was  scheduled  t o  cleploy a n d  retrieve  a $ 6  million  spacecraft while o n  t h e  mis- 
sion .   (FL Today, Ap r  3 / 9 3 )  

April  4 :   According   t o   a n   article   in   t h e   Washington  Xm e s ,   scientists  from 
N A S A   and   t h e  Na t iona l   Sc ience  Foundation   were  using  t h e  An ta rc t ica   as  a 
model  for  Mars  in  t h e   An ta rc t ic   Space   Ana log   Program.  T h e  program  used 
t h e   harsh   An ta rc t ica   terrain   t o   test  technology   a n d   techniques   t h a t   might  
work  o n  Mars.  Sophisticated   robots,  already being  used  in  An ta rc t ica ,   would 
pave  t h e  way  for h um a n  exploration   of  Mars.  A  spaceflight may  carry  a  small 
robot  t o  Mars  as  early  as  1997.  ( W  Xtnes,  A p r  4/93)  

A p l  5:  N A S A   reported  t h a t   t h e   new  joint  U .S .-French   TOPEX/Poseidon  
satellite   had   ohserved  giant  waves measuring up  t o  40  feet  high   in   t h e  N o r t h  
A t lan t ic   o n  March   14. T h e  satellite's mission  was  " to   study   t h e   dynamics  of 
t h e   currents   of  t h e   world's  oceans   by  measuring  t h e   sea  level  using  a  radar 
altimeter."  ( W  Post,  Ap r   5 /93 )  

APRIL   1993 

C H R O N O L O G Y  1993 

April  6:   N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   N A S A   scientists   had   d i rec t   ev idence   t h a t  
red  supergiants-the 
largest  stars  known-end 
the i r   ex i s tence   i n   massive 
explosions   k n ow n   as  supernovae .   U n t i l   th i s   week,  a s t ronome r s   could   on ly  
specu la te  t h a t   these   explosions   represented   t h e  d e a t h  of  such   stars. NASA's 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   U l t rav io le t   Explorer   ( IU E )   sa te l l i te   ob ta ined   t h e   new  ev i -  
d e n c e   t h r o u g h   observations   of  a   new  supernova   o n   M a r c h   30.  ( N A S A  
Release  9 3 - 6 3 )  

J o h n  H .  G ibbon s ,  Director,  Office  of  Sc ience  and   Technology  Policy,  o u t -  
lined   t o   t h e  members-designate  of  t h e  Advisory  C omm i t t e e  o n   t h e  Redesign 
of  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n ,  th ree  budget  options .  T h e  th ree  options  are a  low op t ion  
of  $5 billion ,  a  mid-range  op t ion  of  $7   billion ,  and  a  h igh  op t ion  of  $ 9  billion .  
Each  op t ion  would  cover  t h e  to ta l  expenditures  for t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  from fis- 
cal  year  1994  through   1988. ( N A S A  Release  93 -64 )  

Bryan  O 'C o n n o r ,  a   former  astronaut   a n d  Deputy  Director   of  t h e   Redesign 
Team  and   Deputy  Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r   of  t h e   Office  of  Space   Fltght  a t  
N A S A ,  said  t h a t  N A S A   engineers  planned   t o  have   three   new design op t ion s  
ready  by  J u n e .  O 'C o n n o r  said  t h a t   two  plans  could  c u t  t h e  cost  of  t h e  project 
by  5 0  percent   o r  more.  T h e  third   p lan ,  wh ich  would  be  based  o n   t h e  cu r ren t  
Space   S t a t ~ o n  Freedom  concep t ,   would  cost  more.  W h e t h e r   t h e   redesign 
effort  could  be  d o n e  quickly  and   cheaply   was  still  in   doub t ,  O 'C o n n o r  said. 
(AP, A p r  6 /93 ;  W   Post, Ap r  6 /93 )  

The  Wall Street Journal  reported   t h a t  NASA's  Langley  Research   C e n t e r   i n  
H am p t o n ,   Virginia ,   was  searching   for  a n   easy-listening   son ic   boom .   T h e  
sea rch  was  a   key  pa r t   of  early  U .S .   research   efforts  t o  design   a   new   a i r l ine r  
t o  fly  twice   as fast  as  sound .  
S i t t ing   inside  a   f ~ ~ a m - l i n e d  cinder-block   box  t h e   size  of  a   toddler's  play-  
house ,  more  t h a n  3 0  volunteers  were being  paid  $30  for t h e  afternoon   t o  judge 
how   "annoying"  different  sonic   booms were  compared   t o  o t h e r  aircraft  noise. 
If   researchers c a n  solve t h e  sonic  boom  problem ,  t h e  economic   rewards  could 
be  significant .  (WS  Journal, A p r  6 / 9 3 )  

A n   article   in   t h e   journal  Nature  reported   t h a t   when   t h e   European-  
Ame r ican  spacecraft Ulysses flew by Jup i te r  in  February  1992 ,  it de tec ted  puffs 
of  p lane ta ry  dust  coming  from  t h e  planet .   Six   times  a n   instrument   o n  Ulysses 
recorded  bursts  of  tiny   dust  grains  striking   t h e   craft ,   coming   a t   intervals   of 
abou t   28  days.  T h e   same  spacecraft  also  discovered  dust  grains  from  beyond 
t h e  solar system  in  t h e  env i ron s  of Jupiter .   (NY 'Times, A p r  6/93)  

A n  article   in  t h e  Washington Post discussed  t h e  failed launch  of  t h e   14-story 
A t la s -Cen tau r   rocket   from  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida  o n  Ma rch   25.  T h e  rock-  
e t  partially  lost  power  24  seconds  after   liftoff  a n d   sent   its  military  commun i -  
ca t ion s  satellite  i n t o  a  useless orbit .  T h i s  was  t h e  third   problem-filled G e n e r a l  

ASTRONAUT ICS   <AND AERONAUTICS  

APRIL   1993 

Dynamics  launch  in  two  years.  Future  launches  were  placed  on   hold  until 
completion of  investigation of  the  failed  launch .  (W  Post, Apr  6/93) 

T h e   launch  o t   Space  Shu t t le   Discovery's  eight-day  scientific  mission, 
scheduled  for 2:32  a.m. April  6 from Cape  Canaveral ,  Florida, was aborted  11 
seconds before  liftoff when  computers  detected  a  problem.  It  was  the   second 
aborteci  launch  in  two  weeks  for  the   Shuttle   program. T h e  previous  launch ,  
involving  the   Shu t t le   Columbia,  was  halted  three  seconds  from  liftoff  o n  
March  22. 
T h e   likely  cause  of  the   shutdown  was  a  computer  circuit  problem. 
Computer  data  indicated  a  valve  had  not   closed  in Discovery's main  propul- 
sion  system, raising  the   danger  of  a  hydrogen  fuel  spill and  a possible  explo- 
sion. Engineers, however, believed tha t  t h e  valve had closed properly and  tha t  
a  t' ,~ulty  sensor switch  or  broken  wire  prevented  tha t   information  from being 
received  by  the   on-board  computers.  NASA   hoped  t o   launch  Discovery  o n  
April  8.  (AP,  Apr   6/93 ,  Apr  7/93;  UPN ,   Apr  4/93;  W  Post,  Apr   7/93;  NY 
X m s ,  Apr  7/93; W Times, Apr  7/93; B  Sun ,  Apr  7/93; UPI, Apr   7/93) 

J o h n  H .   Gibbons,  director  of  the   Wh i te   House's Office  of  Science  and 
Technology  Policy,  said  tha t   the   United  States   and  its  International   Space 
Station  partners-Europeans,  Canadians,  and Japanese-have  agreed to  give 
"full  consideration" to  use  of  Russian  space technology and  experience  in  the  
redesign of  the  American  Space Station   Freedom. Gibbons  said  tha t   Russian 
help  would  be  requested  "on  an   as-needed  consulting  basis"  if  NASA   found 
tha t  Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the  United  States .  
Russia  had  been  operating  the   Space  Station   Mir  for  more  than   a  decade. 
( W  Post, Apr   7/93, Apr  13/93; NY  'Times, Apr   7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr   11/93, Apr  
13/93; LA  Times, Apr  7/93; AP, Apr  6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM ,  Apr  8/93; 
RTW, Apr  11/93; P  Inq, Apr  13/93; 0 Sun, Apr  13/93) 

T h e  N ew  York  Times  reported  tha t   a new  exploding  star, or  supernova,  was 
discovered on  March  28 by  an  amateur astronomer  in Spain. T h e  new  super- 
nova  lies about  1 2  million  light  years from t h e  Earth. Describing t h e  superno- 
va ,  Dr. Alex  Fillipenko o t  the  University of California a t  Berkeley, said, "This 
is  the  brightest  supernova  explosion  the  Northern   Hemisphere  has  seen since 
1937."  Scientists  hoped  tha t   the   star  would  provide  more  clues  to   t h e   uni- 
verse. (NY Tm e s ,  Apr  7/93; W Post, Apr   12/93; AP, Apr  5/93, Apr  13/93; RT, 
Apr  12/93; APn ,  May  5/93)  

April 8: In  a speech delivered April  2  in Washington, DC, at  the   annual  con-  
ference  of  the   National   ~ s s d c i a t i o n  for  ~ ~ u a l  Opportunity   in  Higher 
Education,  Daniel  S.  Goldin ,   NASA   Administrator,  outlined  what  NASA  
was  doing  to emphasize cultural diversity within  the  organization. 
In  the  address, Goldin  announced  a plan  to  double  support for Historically 
Black Colleges and Universities.  He  also said tha t   the  agency had  set a goal of 

APRIL  1091 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

awarding  a t   least  eight  percent  of  its  contracts   to  small  and  disadvantaged 
women-owned  businesses  by  1994, tha t   t h e   Agency  had  established  a  $310 
million  set-aside  for  high-tech   work  b y   small  and   disadvantaged  firms,  and  
tha t   t h e  Agency  would  sponsor  2 7   conferences  for  small  and  disadvantaged 
businesses  in 2 2  cities this year. In  addition, he  outlined Agency  incentives for 
the  space industry to exceed small  and disadvantaged business subcontracting 
goals.  (NA SA  Editor's Note  N93-19)  

NASA  announced details of  regional tneetings &inned  for April under the  aus- 
pices of  the White  House Technology Reinvestment  Project. NASA  was  x h e d -  
uled  to collaborate with other government agencies In  a $471 million interagency 
effort  to develop dual-use technologies and  to help small defense firms make  the  
transition  to commercial manufacturing projects.  (NASA  Release 93-65) 

NASA  awarded the  Applied  Research Corporation ,  a Landover, Maryland, 
high-tech  firm, a one-year, $95,401 contract   to  study archival ultraviolet and  
infrared data .  ( W  Xmes, Apr  8 /93 )  

Scientists  a t   a  Glohal  Warming  Conference  warned  that   glohal  warming 
might  unleash  a  variety  of  deadly diseases o n   the  world  population.  T h e  sci- 
entists  said  tha t   outbreaks  of  malaria,  cholera, diseases born  by  various para- 
sites, dengue,  and  yellow  fever, and  other   potential  epidemics were  likely  to 
become more common  if   the   burning of  fossil  fuels enhanced   the  greenhouse 
effect and  heated  the  Earth.  ( B  Sun ,  Apr  8 /93 )  

Shu t t le  Discovery  lifted off  from Cape  Canaveral,  Florida, a t   1:29  a.m., ET, 
on   an   eight-day mission  to  study  Earth's  endangered  ozone layer. Thursday's 
liftoff  followed  an   earlier  aborted  launch.  According  to  reports,  the   Shu t t le ,  
which carried  a crew of  five,  lit  up  the  night   like a huge blowtorch  as  it  rock- 
eted into  orbit. (AP, April 4/93; RT, Apr 8/93; RTW, Apr  4/93; UPI ,  Apr  4/93; 
USA  Today, Apr  8/93; W Post, Apr   8/93; 0 Sun ,  Apr  8/93) 

Shu t t le  astronaut  Mae  Jernison was  scheduled  to  make  a  guest  appearance 
o n  a  "Star  Trek: T h e  Next  Generation"   episode during  the  week  of  May  31 .  
Very  much  in  demand  as  a  speaker when  she  was  with  NA SA ,  Jemison  also 
had  a  school  named  after  her  in  Detroit.  (AP,  Apr  4/93,  Apr  19/93, May 
24/93, May  26/93) 

A p l 9 :  NASA   announced   tha t   the   Clementine   mission  t o  orbit   t h e  Moon  
and  to visit an  asteroid would be  headed  by  Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of  t h e  U.S. 
Geological Survey, Flagstaff, Arizona. C lemen t ine ,  sponsored by   the  Strategic 
Defense  Initiative Office  (SD IO ) ,  was  scheduled  t o  launch  a small spacecraft 
in January  1994 to orbit  the  Moon for several months. T h e  mission would  test 
new,  lightweight  sensors  in  a  space  radiation  environment   and   demonstrate 
autonomous navigation  and  spacecraft operation.  (NA SA  Release 93-66)  

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

APR IL   1993 

N A S A   said  t h a t   two   ozone  monitors   aboard  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Discovery 
were hav ing  difficulty  sending  measurements  t o  ground  controllers .  Two mon -  
itors--one   G e rm a n   and   t h e  o t h e r  American-had 
trouble   sending  measure- 
ments   t o   t h e  ground .  T h e  U .S .   monitor ,  which   was  supposed  t o  supply  most 
of  t h e   atmospheric   research  da ta ,   was  also  i n   danger   of  losing  information .  
T imo thy  Miller,  mission  scientist   for  N A S A ,   said  a  backup  recorder  for  t h e  
U .S .   ozone  in s t rumen t   could  hold   just  over   half  t h e   am o u n t  of  da ta   sought .  
N A S A  ground  controllers  were  a t temp t ing  t o  solve t h e  problem.  ( 0  Sun ,  Ap r  
9 /93 ;  NY  Times, A p r  9/93;  USA  Today, A p r  9/93;  W Post, A p r  9/93;  UP I ,  Ap r  
9/93; AP, Ap r  9/93)  

Speaking  a t  a news conference ,  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  said 
t h a t  N A S A   intended   t o  close  a n  office  in  charge  of  p lann ing  Ame r ican   voy- 
ages t o  t h e  Moon  and  Mars and  t o  shift research  t o  airplanes. T h e  Agency  was 
also dropping  work o n  a  huge  new  launch   vehicle  a n d   tu rn ing  t o  simpler,  less 
expensive   commun ica t ion s   satellites.  G o l d i n   said  t h e   Agency   was  merely 
"taking  a pause"  in  its pursuit  of earlier space exploration  goals.  (W  Times, A p r  
9 /93 ;  AP, A p r  4/93;  C Tnb, Ap r   11/93;  LA Xmes ,  Ap r   9 /93 )  

T h e  W h i t e  House p o v i d e d  more details o n  President Clinton's  plans t o  shift 
spending   from  defense  t o   domestic  "investment"  priorities.  T h e   1994  N A S A  
budget request  moved  t h e  agency  away  from big  space flight  projects  involving 
human s  toward  development   of  new  technologies  with   potential   for  practical 
use  o n   t h e   ground.  T h e   agency's total   budget  would  go  t o  $15 .27   billion,  a n  
increase  of  almost $1  billion.  Most  of  the   increase  would  be  spent  o n  aeronau-  
tics  and   o the r   technologies,  for  example, development   of  a  fleet  of  high  speed 
planes  for public  transport  and  high  speed computing.  ( W  Post, Apr  9 /93 )  

Awl  I i : Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery  astronauts  released  a  spacecraft  t h a t  was  t o  
study  t h e  solar wind  a n d  t h e  Sun's co rona .  T h e  spacecraft would  be picked  up 
by  Discovery  after  two days .  
Using  t h e  Space  Shuttle's   robot  a rm ,  astronauts  Ellen O c h o a  lifted  t h e  $6 
million   SPARTAN   satellite ,  which   is  about   t h e  size  of  a  large  air-condition-  
ing  un i t ,   from  its position   in  Discovery's cargo bay  a n d   threw   it  i n t o  space. 
SPARTAN  carried  two telescopes  t h a t  would study t h e  Sun's halo: a white-  
light  coronagraph   t o  exam ine  electrons   and   a n   ultraviolet   spectrometer   t h a t  
would  study  protons   a n d   hydrogen  atoms.  T h e   spacecraft  was  t o   investigate  
how  t h e  solar wind  is generated   in  t h e  Sun's corona .  T h e  wind  frequently  dis- 
rupts  navigation ,   commun ica t ion ,  a n d  electrical  systems o n  Ea r th .  
A n o t h e r   highlight   of  t h e   Discovery  mission  occurred  when   Discovery 
astronaut   Michael   Foale  cha t ted   by  h a m   radio  with   a  crew  member   o n   t h e  
Russian  Space   S t a t i o n  Mir.  T h e  con tac t   was  t h e   first  sh ip - to - sh ip  conversa-  
t ion   in   t h e  S h u t t l e  program. 
Meanwh i le ,  a da ta  relay problem  affecting o n e  of  t h e  main  ozone mon i to r -  
ing  instruments   o n   board  Discovery  was  solved,  and   mon i to r   readings  were 

APRIL  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

successfully  sent,  although  at  a  much  slower  rate.  Flight  Director  John  
Muratore said such  transmissions could  free  the  recorder's tape and  allow sci- 
entists  to obtain all their  required data. (AP, Apr  11/93; R W ,  Apr  11/93; NY  
Emes, Apr  12/93; U S A  Today, Apr  12/93; W  'Times, Apr  11/93; P  Inq,  Apr 
11/93, Apr  12/93; W Post, Apr  12/93) 

Aw l   13:  Scientists  at  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL)  and  the 
California Institute of  Technology announced  that  they had  developed a com- 
puter  software  system  to  catalog  and  analyze  the  estimated  half  billion  sky 
objects in the second Palomar Observatory sky survey. (NASA Release 93-067) 

NASA scientists reported that ozone-destroying forms of chlorine had  exist- 
ed  for much  longer  in  the Arctic stratosphere this winter  than  last. Northern 
Hemisphere ozone abundance also was  observed  to  be  some  10 percent  below 
that  measured  during  the  same  period  last  year,  with  some  areas  20  percent 
lower. NASA's  Upper Atmosphere  Research  Satellite  (UARS )  provided  the 
information.  (NASA  Release 93-068; NY  'Times, Apr  15/93; AP, Apr  14/93) 

NASA  reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the 
$6  million  satellite, called  the  SPARTAN,  that  they  had  released  into space 
two days previously. When  the Shuttle came to within  35 feet of  the satellite, 
astronaut  Ellen Ochoa  grabbed  it  with  the  arm  of  the  Space  Shuttle's  robot 
and   laced  it  in  its cradle  in  the Shuttle bay. Th e  SPARTAN spent  about  50 
hours as  a free-flying satellite  with  two  automated  telescopes  gathering  data 
about  the Sun  and  the solar wind  streaming from  it.  (AP, Apr  13/93; RT, Apr 
13/93; NY   Times, Apr  13/93; W  Times, Apr  13/93, Apr  14/93; W Post, Apr 
14/93; B  Sun ,  Apr  14/93; P  Inq ,   Apr  14/93; UPI , Apr  13/93; RT,  Apr  13/93; 
USA  Today, Apr  13/93, Apr  14/93, Apr  15/93; C Trib, Apr  15/93) 

Scientists a t  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M IT )  reported that 
a powerful new  x-ray camera had  been shot  into orbit just  in time  to focus on  
the newly discovered supernova. Th e  scientists reported  that  the  camera was 
providing  very  detailed  information  about  the  cosmic  explosion.  The  MIT 
camera was  one of  several Japanese and  American  instruments put  into orbit 
aboard a Japanese spacecraft launched on February  20. ( N Y  Trnes, Apr  13/93) 

Martin  Marietta  Corporation  reported 
its  Martin  Marietta 
tha t  
Astronautics  Group  had  received  a  $35  million  contract  from  NASA's J e t  
Propulsion Laboratory  to build  the  propulsion module  subsystem for NASA's 
Cassini  spacecraft mission  that  was  to  study Saturn, its Moon  T t a n ,  and  the 
rest of  the Saturnian system. T h e  Cassini was  scheduled for launch in  October 
1997. (W  Times, Apr  13/93) 

Ap ' l   14:  A  leading  astrophysicist,  Dr.  George  E  Smoot  of  the   Lawrence 
Berkeley  Laboratory  in   California,  reported  in  a  lecture  at  the   Carnegie 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL   1993 

in s t i tu t ion   of  Washington   t h a t   radio   receivers  i n   space  and   o n   t h e   ground  
might   be  recording  t h e  passage of  cosmic  gravity  waves,  huge  movements   of 
space t h a t  e c h o  t h e  expansion  of  t h e  universe  15 billion  years ago. I f  h e  is  co r -  
rect ,   scientists  would  have   a  powerful  new  tool   for  studying  t h e   birth   of  t h e  
universe.  (NY Times, Ap r   14/93)  

4  T h e  head   of  t h e  Japanese  space agency's  office of  space  utilization  said  t h a t  
Japan   was  unhappy   with   cutbacks   t o   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom  project .  
Prime  Minister   Kiichi  Miyazawa  may  bring  up  t h e   issue  a t   a  meeting   with  
President  C l i n t o n ,  scheduled  t o  be held   in Washington   this  week.  (LA Times, 
A p r   14/93)  

Space  Marketing   Inc.  of  Rosell, Georgia ,   planned   t o  launch   t h e  first  space 
billboard  in  1996 .  T h e  orbital   advertising  sign  was  being  produced  in  collab-  
o ra t ion   with   engineers   a t   Lawrence  Livermore  Na t iona l   Laboratory  and   t h e  
University   of  Colorado .   T h e  project  triggered  angry  reactions   from  scientists  
and  environmentalists .   (Antelope V a l l ey   Press, Ap r   14/93;  W Times, Ap r   15/93; 
NY  Times, May  4 / 9 3 )  

April  15: N A S A  announced   t h a t  N A S A  technology  developed  t o  keep  astro-  
nau t s  cool  o n  t h e   lunar  surface  and  a N A S A  pa t ien t -mon i to r ing  device ,  orig- 
inally  designed  for  astronaut   heart   rate   transmittal ,   were  scheduled   t o   be 
inducted   i n t o  t h e  U.S. Space  Foundation's  Technology  Hall  of  Fame  o n  Ap r i l  
16.  ( N A S A  Release 93 -069 )  

T h e  Washington Post  reported  t h e  W h i t e  House was  seeking  t o  quell  expec-  
ta t ion   ahout   U .S .  and   Russian  cooperation   o n  Space   S t a t i o n  Freedom.  In   a n  
Ap r i l   13  letter   t o  N A S A   Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n ,  W h i t e  House  sci- 
e n c e  advisor J o h n  H .  G ibbon s  stated  t h a t  t h e  "W h i t e  House  has  made n o  pol- 
icy decision  t o  focus our  Space  S ta t ion  redesign  effort  around  present  or  future  
Russian  capabilities."  H e   went   o n   t o   say  t h a t   "NASA   should  n o t   limit   its 
redesign  options   t o  those   compatible  with   t h e  orbit   of  t h e  Russian  Mir  Space  
Station ."   ( W  Post, Ap r   15/93;  AP, Ap r   15/93)  

According  t o  a report  in  the  B d t im r e  Stin, Space Shu t t le  Discovery lifted off 
with  a  pair  of  pliers stirck o n  a  rocket  boostcr. Officials said  the   pliers posed  n o  
danger  during  liftoff, but  t h e   incident  was  getting  much   a t ten t ion   in  manage- 
ment   circles.  A  Kennedy  Space C e n t e r  spokesperson  said  tha t   t h e   pliers  were 
noted  missing in a daily tool  inventory a t  Discovery's launch  pad o n  April  2  but  
tha t   a  proper  lost-and-found report,  which  would  have   prompted  a  search, was 
no t   filed. NASA   was  also  investigating  how  a  foot-long metal  scrap  that   could 
have  set off a n  explosion became lodged in o n e  of  four launch-pad  posts tha t  held 
up one  of Shu t t le  Discovery's rocket  boosters. ( B  Sun, Apr   15/93; AP, Apr   15/93) 
Writing  in  t h e  Los Angles Times, columnist Michael  Schrage noted   t h a t  "the  
Space  Age  is  dead ."  A n   article  in  t h e  Washington  Post  seemed  t o  arrive  a t   t h e  

APRL  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

same conclusion. A space analyst noted tha t  "the  technologies no  longer define 
our times, and the  public has grown weary of  multibillion-dollar celestial invest- 
ments  tha t  yield minimal  psychic  or  economic  rewards." O the r  commentators 
agreed that  space as something special-as 
something tha t  "embodies American 
values and  self-imagen-was  dead. T h e  emphasis was on  programs that  were fast, 
cheap, and cost-effective. (LA Times, Apr  15/93; W Post, Apr  19/93) 

T h e  Washington Post  reported  t h a t   ozone  layer problem  appeared  to  be  on  
the   way  to  a  solution.  Thanks   to   the   Montreal  Protocol,  an   international  
treaty obligating signatory countries  to phase our ozone-destroying chemicals, 
scientists expected  the   threat   of  ozone  destruction  to   peak  in  2000.  In   tha t  
year,  according  to  the   latest scientific projections,  the  ozone layer should start 
slowly  getting  thicker  and  better  able  to  block  the   Sun's harmful  ultraviolet 
(UV )  rays.  (W  Post, Apr   15/93)  

April  16:  I n   a  speech   to   t h e   N a t i o n a l   Space   Symposium,  NA SA  
Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  ~ l e d g e d  to make  the   space program relevant 
t o  all Americans. H e  said  he wanted  everything  smaller, faster, cheaper,  and 
more varied. And  he  wanted  to  take more  risks. 
Commenting  about  the  Space Station  project, Goldin  said  tha t  h e  wanted 
o n e  tha t  would  cost half  as much  t o  develop  and  half  as  much  to operate but 
would d o  more. H e  also urged  the  Un i ted  States  to enter   into  an  internation-  
al  partnership  with  the   Russians  to   put  Space  S ta t ion   Freedom  in to   orhit .  
(Gazette Telegraph, Apr   16/93; Denver Post, Apr   17/93) 

A  fighter  plane  shaped  like  an   arrowhead  flew  in to   NASA's  Langley 
Research  Cen te r   this week. T h e  plane ,  a heavily modified version  of  the  Air  
Force F-16 fighter,  has  a wing  tha t   is  narrow  near  the   front  of  the  plane  and 
flares out  near  the   tail.  T h e  plane  was  part  of  a  program  to build  a n  efficient 
supersonic jetliner.  (Daily Press, Apr   16/93) 

Apnl  17:  T h e  Shuttle  Discovery  landed  a t   the   Kennedy  Space Center   after  a 
day's delay  caused  by  stormy  weather.  Brewster  Shaw,  Deputy  Space  Shuttle  
Program  Manager,  pronounced  the   mission  "very  successful."  T h e   landing 
cleared  the   way  for  launch  preparations for  Shuttle  Columbia's second  launch 
attempt, scheduled for April  14, just  seven days after the  Discovery landing. This 
was  shortest  time  between  manned  missions  in  the   history  of  American  space 
travel. Columbia's first  launch  attempt was  aborted  by  an  engine  shutdown  on  
March  22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by  Germany. 
(RTW, Apr  17/93; Ap ,   April  17/93; UPI,  Apr  4/17;  W  Post,  Apr  18/93; NY 
Xmes, Apr  18/93; P Inq, Apr   18/93; USA  Today, Apr  18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93) 

Brian Marsden, director  of  the  Central  Bureau  for  Astronomical  Telegrams, 
an  agency in Massachusetts that  reports o n  discoveries in astronomy, announced 
tha t   a  big  comet  had  broken  into   a t   least  20  chunks  that   were  now  orbiting 

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

A PR IL   1993 

Jupiter. Astrcmomers said  the   situation  was  reminiscent  of  t h e  catastrophe  t h a t  
occurred  65 million  years ago when   t h e  Earth  was  bombarded with  debris from 
a  heavenly  body.  It  was  t h a t   bombardment ,   they  maintain ,   tha t   destroyed  t h e  
dinosaurs  and   many  o the r   species.  Calculations   show  tha t   the   original  comet  
probably  broke  up  under  t h e  force  of  Jupiter's gravity  last  May  when   it  appar- 
ently was within  659 ,000  miles of  the  planet .   (NY  Times, Apr  17/93, J u n e  1 /93 )  

A p i l   18: Writing   in   t h e  N ew  York  Times,  Robert   L.  Park,  professor  of  physics 
a t   t h e  University  of  Maryland ,  suggested  t h a t  now  t h a t   t h e  cold war was  over  
and   the re  was  n o  longer  any  need   t o  demon s t ra te  U.S. space  superiority  over  
t h e  Soviet   U n i o n ,   t h e   time   had  come   t o   "put  Space   S t a t i o n  Freedom  o u t   of 
its  misery."  Parks  noted   t h a t   the re   was  very  little   o n e   could  d o   in  a  Space  
S t a t i o n ;  h e  added  t h a t   t h e  scientific  accomplishments  of  t h e  Russian  cosmo-  
nauts   in  Russian Space  S t a t i o n  Mir  had   been  meager  and   t h a t   the re  was  l i t t le  
expec ta t ion  t h a t   U .S .  astronauts   \vould d o  any  better .  He  n o t e d ,  further ,  t h a t  
t h e  costs connec ted  with   t h e  s ta t ion  were  enormous .   ( N Y  Times, Ap r   18/93)  

April  I Y :   T h e  new  Keck  Telescope  i n  Hawaii ,   t h e  world's  largest optical   and  
infrared  telescope,  revealed  unprecedented   detail   i n   a n   image  of  t h e  farthest  
known  galaxy  in  t h e  universe. T h e  image showed a galaxy  in  the  constellation  
Lynx, nea r   t h e  Big  Dipper,  t h a t  was  though t   t o  be  12 billion  light-years away. 
( W  Post,  Ap r   19/93; B  Sun ,  A p r   18/93) 

T h e  New   Ytrk  Times  reported  tha t   a dispute  had   broken  out   in  t h e  C l i n t o n  
administration   over  Vice  President  A l   Gore's attempts   to  convince   President 
C l i n t o n   to  fulfill  a  campaign  pledge  t o   reduce  t h e   th rea t   of  global  warming. 
G o r e  urged  t h e   President  t o  commit   t h e  Un i ted   States  t o  freezing a t   1990  lev-  
els  t h e   amount   of  global-warming  pollution   stemming   from  cars,  trucks,  a n d  
factories;  t h e   standard   would  be  reached  by  2000.  O t h e r   administration   offi- 
cials, principally  Treasury Secretary Lloyd  Bentsen  and  Energy Secretary Hazel 
R. O'Leary, con tended  t h a t  t h e  administration  h a d  no t  adequately studied how 
such  a mandate   would  affect American   industry.  (NY Times,  Apr   19/93)  

Russian  officials announced  t h a t   two Russian  cosmonauts  had  taken  a space 
w a l k  t o  rearrange  solar panels o n  t h e  outside  of  t h e  Mir Space  S t a t i o n  in order  
t o   increase  t h e  panels'  efficiency. T h e   rearrangement   also would  prepare   t h e  
Mir  for  a n   even tua l   docking   by  t h e   U.S.  Space   S h u t t l e .   T h e   cosmonauts  
encoun te red   several  problems  d u r ~ n g  t h e   walk  and   had   t o   stay  o u t s ~ d e  the i r  
c , ~ pw l e  longer  t h a n  p lanned .  (AP ,  Ap r  4/19 ,  A p r  4/20;  RTW, A p r  20193; USA 
Todu?, Apr   20 /93 )  

NASA   Administrator   Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  announced   t h e  appo in tmen t  of Jeff 
Lawrence,  a senior  congressiunal  staff aide with  experience   in space and   aero-  
nautics   matters ,   as  t h e   agency's  Associate  Administrator   for  Legislative 
Affairs.  ( N A S A  Release  93-70;  W Pos t ,  Ap r   21 /93 )  

APRIL  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

April  21:   According   t o   news  reports,  Russia  was   scheduled   t o   launch   a n  
Israeli-made  commun ica t ion s  s;ltellite  in  1995. T h i s  was  t h e  first  such   agree- 
men t  between   t h e  two  countries .   (AP ,  Ap r   2 1 /91 )  

Russian  experts  were  expected   t o   arrive  in Washington   this  week  t o  ac t   as 
consultants   t o   t h e   U .S .   Space   S t a t i o n   redesign  team .   N A S A   selected   t h e  
East-West Space  Sc ience  C e n t e r  a t   the   University  of  Maryland  t o  coo rd ina te  
t h e  effort  under   t h e  direction   of  Dr. Roald  Sagdeev.  A rno ld   A ld r ich ,  N A S A  
Associate   Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Space   Systems   Deve lopmen t ,   no ted   t h a t   a n  
ambitious  joint   spaceflight  program  already  was  in  process.  Two Russian  cos- 
monauts  were  training   a t   t h e  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r  in  Hou s ton ,  for example ,  
and   early  nex t   year  two  American   astronauts  would  go  t o  Russia  for  training .  
(CSM ,  Apr   21/93; B  Sun ,  Apr   21/93)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia ,  with   a  science  mission  paid  for 
and   directed   by  Germany ,   was  scheduled   to   he  launched   o n   April   24.  T h e  
launch   was  scheduled   t o   take   place  just  seven  days  after  Discovery's re tu rn  
from  a n   atmospheric   research  flight .   A n   engine   shutdown   Ma rch   22  halted  
Columbia's  launch   w i th   just  th ree   seconds  to   go.  (AP,  4/21;  93 ;  RTW,  A p r  
4/93;  UP I ,  Ap r   21/93; USA  % d a y ,   Ap r   22/93; W Post, Apr   22/93)  

April  22:  Measurements  taken   recently  in  Barrow,  Alaska ,   o n e   of  se\leral 
ozone  monitoring   stations ,   revealed  t h e   first  signs  of  ozone  dep le t ion   over  
N o r t h   America .   T h e  dep le t ion ,  however,  was  far  less  severe  t h a n   t h a t   found 
over  An ta rc t ica .   (L'SA Today, Ap r   22 /93 )  

Fourteen  scientists, most  of  thern  from NASA's Goddard  Space Flight C e n t e r  
i n   G r e e n b e l t ,   Maryland ,   a n d   t h e   N a t i o n a l   Oceitnic   a n d   A tmo sphe r ic  
Administration   ( N O A A ) ,  said  t h a t  world ozone had  dropped  to   its  lowest  lev- 
els since scientists began  monitoring  the   protective  layer. T h e  drop  might  he  a  
delayed effect of  the  eruption  uf Moun t  Pinatubo  in  1991. T h e  scientists empha-  
sized  t h a t   the  findings did no t  mean  t h a t  t h e  No r the rn  Hemisphere was experi- 
encing   a n   "ozone  hole"  like  the   one   tha t   forms  over  the   Sou th  pole,  and  tha t  
t h e  o:one  hole  did  not   pose a  significant hea l th   threat .  T h e  n e a r  findings  were 
based  o n   observations  by   several  Earth-orbiting  satellites  operated  by  NA SA  
and   N O A A   and   confirmed  by  ground-hased  ozone  monitoring   instruments. 
(NA SA  Release  93-74; AP, Ap r   22/93,  Ap r   23/93;  LiSA  T h y ,  Ap r   23/93; W 
Post, Ap r  23/93; B Sun, Apr   23/93; WSJ, Apr  23/93; NY  Times ,  Ap r   23/93)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a n   Aincrican   satellite   had   de tec ted   t h e   most 
intense   flash  of  gamma  radiation   observed  in  t h e   two  years  of  its  ope ra t ion .  
T h e  burst ,  known  as  " the  super bowl"  e v e n t  because  it  occurred  o n  t h e  day of 
th i s  year's na t iona l   champ ion sh ip  game ,   appeared  t o   produce   1 0  times  more  
energy  t h a n  any  previously  observed  gamma-ray  burst.  T h e  burst  also  led  sci- 
entists   t o   say  t h a t   t h e   bursts  were  no t   t h e   product   o f   merely  h o t   "cooking  
objects ,"  hut  of  particles being accelerated  t o  near   t h e  speed of  light  and  being 
1 5 5  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

APRIL  1993 

emitted  in  focused beams, or  jets.  Th e  new  findings suggested  that  the  bursts 
originated far beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA  Release 93-72; Reuters, 
Apr  22/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; NY  Times, Apr 23/93; B Sun ,  Apr 23/93; APN, 
Apr  4/23) 

NASA  announced  that  a NASA  F-15 research  aircraft made  a touchdown 
on  April 2 1 ,  using only engine power for control. The  plane landed at NASA's 
Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility,  Edwards,  California.  T h e   flight  was 
part  of  NASA's attempt  to develop a computer-assisted engine control system 
that  lets  a  plane  land safely with  only engine power  if  its normal  control sur- 
faces are disabled. (NASA  Release 93-75) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  announced  that  Bryan O'Connor, 
Deputy  Director  of  the  Space  Station  redesign  team,  would  take  over  man- 
agement of  the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by  the  
tram's leader, Joseph F.  Shea, that his workload be  reduced. Shea submitted his 
resignation as Assistant Deputy  Administrator  for Space Station analysis; he 
was  to  serve  as  Special  Advisor  to  the   Administrator  and  advisor  to 
O'Connor. (NASA  Statement on  Advisory Committee Meeting) 

April 23: NASA announced  that the  December flight of  the  Endeavour Space 
Shuttle mission  to service the Hubble Space Telescope was  scheduled to  last 
11 davs and  to  involve a record  of  five spacewalks, with  the possibility of  two 
additional walks,  if  needed.  (NASA  Release 93-76; W E m e s ,  Apr  25/93) 

Richard  T.  Barrett,  a  senior  design  engineer  at  NASA's Lewis  Research 
Center,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  was  awarded  the   Federal  Laboratory  Consortium 
Award  of  Excellence in Technology Transfer for 1993. (NASA  Release 93-73) 
April  24:  NASA  canceled the Space Shuttle Columbia launch, scheduled for 
April  24,  because  of  problems with  a  key  navigational  aid. T h e  launch  was 
rescheduled  for  1050 a.m. April  26. (UPI ,  Apr 24/93; RTW, Apr 24/93; P Inq, 
Apr  25/93; NY  Xme s ,  Apr  25/93; B Sun ,  Apr 24/93) 

U.S. Senate candidate Richard Fisher called Space Station Freedom a "pork 
barrel"  project  in  a speech on  Friday.  Fisher, a Texas  investor, was  running as 
a Democrat  in a special May  1 election. Fisher had  advised  the   independent 
presidential campaign of  Ross  Perot, who  had  criticized  the   lack  of  spending 
controls on  the Space Station project. Fisher, who in the  past had  voiced sup- 
pvrt for the Superconducting Super Collider, said that he  was still studying the 
project's worth.  (H  C h r o n ,  Apr  24/93) 

April  25: NASA   officials announced  on  April  25  that  a  three-month review 
of  the development of  Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been suc- 
cessfully completed. The  work package involved work o n  laboratory and  crit- 
ical  subsystems. T h e  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  and  its  main  contractor 

APRIL  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

Boeing Defense & Space Group  were  responsible for  the  work, which  includ- 
ed many elements considered  the  core of  t h e  Space S ta t ion .  (UP I ,  Apr  25/93) 

Space Shuttle  Columbia was fueled for the  third  launch attempt  of  a science 
mission chartered by  Germany. T h e  mission, which was years behind  schedule, 
was scheduled for  launch Monday, April 26 at  10:52 a.m. (UP I ,  Apr  25/93; AP, 
Apr  26/93; NY  Times, Apr   26/93; USA  Today, Apr  26/93; RTw, Apr  26/93 

T h e  Washington Post  reported   t h a t  N A S A ,  under  W h i t e  House   instruc-  
t ions   t o  cu t   t h e  budget  of  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom,  was  a t t em p t i n g  t o  push 
t h e  McDonne l l  Douglas  Co rpo ra t ion   out   of  t h e   $30  billion   Space  S t a t i o n  
c o n t r a c t .   McDonne l l   Douglas  was  t h e   prime  c o n t r a c t o r   in   t h e   project ,  
which   had  cosr  overruns  of  between   $300  million   and  $ 1  b i l l ion .   ( W  Post, 
Ap r   25/93)  

In  a letter  to  the  editor of  the  Washington  Post, Michael Oppenheimer ,  sen-  
ior scientist a t  the  Environmental Defense Fund  in New York, took  issue with 
an  April  5 Washington  Post  article o n  ozone depletion.  Oppenheimer  charged 
tha t   the   article failed  to "convey  the   seriousness of  the  ozone depletion  prob- 
lem."  ( W  Post, Apr  25/93) 

T h e  Los Angeles Tmes reported tha t  NASA  was using a new x-ray machine ,  
called  the   Reverse  Geometry  x-ray  system,  to   examine  parts  of  t h e   Space 
Shu t t le .  T h e   new  technology,  produced  by  the   Digiray  Corporation ,   elimi- 
nates fuzzy  images and displays a  3 -D  picture almost  instantly.  (LA Times, Ap r  
25/93; AP, May  24/93) 

April  26:  Space  Shuttle   Columbia  was  launched  o n  Monday, April  26, o n  a 
German  science mission  tha t  had  been delayed for over  tw o  months .  This  was 
the   third  attempt   a t   launching  the  Columbia  mission. By  launching  t h e  mis- 
sion  only  nine   days  after  the   return  of  Shuttle   Discovery, NASA   broke  the  
record  for the   shortest  interval between  U .S .  human   space flights. 
T h e  flight was dedicated  to  German  scientific research,  including  studies of 
how  the  human   body  reacts  to  the   reduced gravity  in  space. T h e  mission  fea- 
tured  88  experiments  in  materials,  science,  medicine,  biology,  astronomy, 
Earth  observation, and  robotics.  (UP I ,  Apr  26/93; RTW, Apr  26/93; Ap ,  Ap r  
27/93;  P  Inq ,   Apr   27/93;  D  Sun, Apr   27/93;  USA  Today, Apr   27/93; W  Post, 
Apr  27/93; NY  Times, Apr  27/93; W Times, Ap r  27/93) 

A jm l27 :  T h e  New  York  'Times reported  tha t   1993 had  become  the   year  of  the  
supernova for astronomers and astrophysicists. T h e  appearance o n  March 28 of 
a  rare  and  very  bright  supernova  named  SNI993J  led  to   a great  deal  of  infor- 
mation. Researchers also made many  discoveries about  supernova by conduct-  
ing laboratory experiments and  by using powerful supercomputers to  test  com- 
peting  theories. T h e  former  investigations were  conducted  by  research  teams 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

APRIL  1993 

at the TRIUMF National  Laboratory in Vancouver, British Columbia, and Yale 
University. Th e  Lawrence Livermore National  Laboratory  in  California used 
its  supercomputers  to  pick  out  the  theory  that  appeared  best  to  explain what 
astronomers see when  a supernova explodes. (NY 7imes, Apr  27/93) 

The  journal  Science reported  that  the  brightness of  a full Moon,  thought  to 
be caused by  a process called shadow hiding, in which  the  Sun shining direct- 
ly  on  the  Moon minimizes shadows, is  really  caused by  a phenomenon  known 
as coherent backscatter. 
Coherent  backscarter involves "reflection of  light  rays  from  the  surface of 
the Moon, which combine with  light  from  the Sun  to  create  a brighter  lunar 
appearance  as  seen  from  Earth,"  according  to   Robert  M.  Nelson,  a n  
astronomer at  the Je t  Propulsion Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California, and  the 
author of  the new  study.  (NY Times, Apr  27/93) 

Astronauts aboard Shu t t le  Columbia left  their medical and scientific stud- 
ies  on  Tuesday, April  27,  to work  on   repairing  a malfunctioning  toilet  and 
waste-water system. Engineers believed  that  a device  that squirts waste over- 
board  from  a  storage  tank  got  stuck  and  caused  th e   tank  to  spring  a  small 
nitrogen  leak. T h e  astronauts rerouted  the  waste  into two  rubber-lined  stor- 
age  bags  until  the   problem  could  be  fixed.  NASA   said  that  the   problem 
would  not  endanger th e  nine-day  mission. Earlier in  the day,  the  astronauts 
carried  out  a series of  medical  and  scientific  experiments.  (UP I ,  Apr  27/93; 
AP,  Apr  28/93; RTW, Apr  27/93, Apr  28/93; NY  Times, Apr  28/93; C  Trib, 
Apr  28/93) 

A p n l 2 7 :  Reinhard  Furrer,  a former German astronaut, criticized  the German 
government  for  planning  to  cut  funds  for  manned  space  flights such  as  the 
U.S.-German  Shuttle mission now  orbiting  the  Earth.  Furrer flew  on  a  joint 
US . -Ge rman  scientific mission  in  1985. (RTW, Apr  27/93) 

During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on  April 26, daughters of Johnson 
Space Center employees got  to see where  astronauts prepare  for  space flights 
and were even able t o  test the  pressurized space suit gloves worn by  astronauts. 
Daughters were  also  welcomed  at  NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility, 
where  they  toured  the  control  room,  investigated  an  SE-71  cockpit,  and 
crawled around  inside a modified Boeing  747.  (AP, Apr  27/93; W Xmes,  Apr 
29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr  29/93) 

Apnl  28:  An   article  in  the  Christian  Science  Monitor  reported  that  scarce 
NASA  funding  jeopardized  the  Space  Station  and  manned  flights.  NASA  
had  asked  for  a  $1   billion  increase  over  fiscal  year  1993;  however, 
Representative Ralph Hall, D of  Texas, the chairman  of  the House space sub. 
committee, told Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator,  that a billion-dollar 
increase was  not very  likely. (CSM ,  Apr  28/93) 

APR IL   1993 

CHRONOLWY  1993 

NASA   announced   tha t   Marta  Bohn-Meyer,  an   aeronautical  engineer  at 
NASA's Dryden Flight  Research  Facility, was  one  of  10 Federal government 
employees  chosen  to   receive  the   1992  A r thu r   S.  Flemming  Award.  T h e  
reward  "recognizes U .S .  government  employees for  outstanding  and  meritori- 
ous work,"  according  to  NASA .   (Antelope Valky  Press, Apr   28/93)  

April 29: T h e  media reported  tha t  the  crew aboard Shu t t le  Columbia had  suc- 
ceeded  in  flushing urine  and  other  waste water  into  space from a backup  stor- 
age system. This  was  the  first time crew members had attempted  to  dump fluid 
overboard  from  contingency  containers .   Later  in  the   day,  the   astronauts 
repaired  a  nitrogen  gas  line,  restoring  the   shuttle's  normal  water  pressure, 
which  had  dropped  as  a  result  of  the   Shuttle's 
problems. T h e  mis- 
sion's science experiments continued  as planned. 
Late Wednesday, April  28, German   astronaut  Hans  Schlegel  turned  o n  a 
2  1/2-foot-long robot  arm and got  it  to move as planned  after adjusting  a joint 
tha t   NASA   scientists  said  might  have  been  bumped  out   of  place  during 
launch .   Later,  NASA   ground  controllers  maneuvered  the   robot  t o   demon-  
strate  how  robots  perform  in  microgravity.  ( W  Post,  Apr   29/93;  B  Sun ,  Ap r  
29/93;  USA  Today, Apr   29/93;  P  lnq ,   Apr   29/93; RTw,  Apr   29/93;  AP,  Apr 
29/93; UP I ,  Apr  29/93) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   Na t iona l   Technology  Transfer  C e n t e r  
( N T T C ) ,  Wheeling ,  West Virginia,  had  entered   in to  a n  agreement with  t h e  
Strategic  Defense Initiative Organization  (SD IO )  t o  assist SD IO  in t h e  oper-  
ation   of  its Technology  Applications  Information  System and   to  help   identi-  
fy  items  tha t   should  he  included  in  the   technology  applications  database. 
(NA SA  Release 93 -77 )  

April  30: T h e  Wall  Street Journal  reported  tha t   a  cable-television venture  by 
NASA   was  becoming  very  popular  among  space  buffs  nationwide.  Called 
NASA   Select ,  the  channe l  p o v i d e s  a variety  of  coverage,  ranging  from  rou- 
tine   news  briefings on  space  issues  to  reports  o n   the  current  Columbia  space 
mission. Viewers said tha t   they were  especially excited by  the  spectacular  vis- 
tas  beamed  down  from  space.  T h e   channe l   airs  as  a  public  service  o n   local 
cable-TV  systems Monday  through  Friday  from  noon   until  4  a.m.  (WSJ ,  Apr 
30193; C Tnb, May  2/93) 

T h e  media  reported  tha t   Columbia's astronauts were  attempting   t o  find  a 
slight air leak tha t  NASA  said posed no  danger t o  the  crew. T h e  leak had  been 
detected   t h e   previous evening.  According  to  NASA   sources, the   leak  would 
no t   affect  the  duration  of  the   space mission.  (AP, Apr  30193) 

Writing  in  the   Washington  Post,  columnist  Michael  Schrage  reported  tha t  
physicist J o h n  H .  Gibbons ,  Wh i te  House science and  technology policy advi- 
sor, was  facing  some  tough  choices. He   soon  had  to  decide  whether  science 

ASTRONAUTICS AN13 AERONAUT ICS  

APR IL   1993 

a n d   technology  would  play  a  leadership  role  in  t h e  C l i n t o n   administration's  
economic   agenda  o r  merely  a  supporting  one .  T h a t  cho ice   appeared  t o   be  as 
yet  unmade .   (W  Post, A p r   30193) 

M a y  2 :  N A S A  rewarded  t h e  Columbia  astronaut's energy-conservation  efforts 
by  adding  a day  t o  t h e  Space  Shuttle's  mission. T h e  ex t ra  day would  allow  sci- 
en t i s t s  t o  mee t  a n d  possibly exceed  mission goals, wh ich  had  been  jeopardized 
by  equ ipmen t  problems. 
Ge rman  researchers announced   t h a t  their  robot arm had  successfully grabbed 
a  free-floating  object  in  space  under   remote   control   from  Earth .   They   also 
reported t h a t  some of  t h e  larval fish and  tadpoles aboard  t h e  Shu t t le  were dying .  
Among  o t h e r  experiments  unde r taken  o n  t h e  last days of  t h e  flight was t h e  
in jec t ion  of  two  G e rm a n  astronauts  with  nearly a half-gallon of saline  solution  
e a c h   i n   a n  expe r imen t   in tended   t o   test  how  t o   fight  d e h y d r a t ~ o n  in  space. 
(AP, May  2/93,  May  3/93 ,  May  4/94;   RTW,  May  3/93 ,   May  4/93;   UPI ,   May 
3/93;  W Post, May  2/93, May 3/93; W Times, May  1/93; B S u n ,  May  2/93, May 
3/94;  USA  Today, May  3/93; NY  Times, May  2/93, May  3/93)  

May  3: William   E  Ballhaus Jr.  was  named   president   of  t h e   Ma r t in   Marietta  
Corporation's   A e r o   &  Nava l   Systems  division  i n   Maryland .   Ballhaus  was 
Director  of NASA's Ame s  Research C e n t e r  for a numbe r  of  years. ( B  Sun, May 
3 /93 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e  Mars Observer   spacecraft  had   returned   t o  no r -  
mal   operations   after  its  ma in   a n t e n n a   failed  t o   point   a t   Earth   for  t h e   third  
t ime   in   about   four  months .   Engineers  were  fiairly  ce r ta in   t h a t   t h e   glitch   had  
b e e n   caused  by   a  computer-programming  problem.  (AP, May  3/93;  W Times, 
May 4 /93 )  

M a y   4 :   T h e   Houston  Post  reported  tha t   the   two  committees  charged  with 
redesigning  Space   S ta t ion   Freedom  were  behind  schedule. T h e   two  groups,  a 
technical  redesign team mainly made up of N A S A  employees and  a team of  out-  
side experts, had  been faced with much  infighting  at NA SA  and  a barrage of  crit-  
icism from Congress and  t h e  foreign countries participating  in t h e  Space S ta t ion  
project. N A S A  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  asserted t h a t  t h e  work would be 
finished  o n  time.  (H  Post, May 4/93; A v W ,  May  3/93; H Chronicle, May  6/93)  

T h e  Washington  Times  reported   t h a t   a  group  of  five  investors,  headed   by 
retired   Navy   Admiral   T h om a s  H .  Moorer,  had   signed  a  joint   ven tu re   agree- 
m e n t   w i th   Russia's Association   for  t h e   Conve r s ion   of  Submarine-Launched  
Ballistic Missiles. T h e  group  p lanned   t o   use  Russian  missiles  t o  put   satellites  
i n t o   low  orbits   t o   transmit   te lephone  calls o r  compu te r  data   or   carry  o u t   sci- 
entific  experiments .   ( W  Times, May  4/93)  

N A S A   reported   t h a t   it   had   lost  all  c o n t a c t  with   Shu t t le   Co lumh ia   for  80 
minutes   o n  May  4  because  of  a n   erroneous   compu te r   command   sen t   t o   t h e  

ASTRC)NAUTICS   AN [ )   i\ERONAUTIC:S 

MAY  199 3 

Shu t t le .  T h e  blackout  led  t o  t h e   loss  of  some  science  da ta  bu t   did  n o t   cause 
any  major  problems; NA SA  officials, however,  reviewed  procedures for c rea t -  
ing  and   sending  commands   t o  t h e  S h u t t l e  a n t e n n a .  
During  a  briefing  for  Mayo  clinic   physicians,  Bernard  Harris  Jr.,  a  doctor-  
astronaut  aboard Culumbia ,  said  t h a t  the   human  heart   shifts  inside  t h e  body  in 
zero gravity. Space  travel  also leads  t o  swollen faces, engorged  eye blood  vessels, 
and   space  motion   sickness,  said  Harris.  (UP I ,  May  4/93; RTW,  May  4/93; W 
Times, May  5/93; USA Tnday, May  5/93; B  Sun ,  May  5/93; NYT im e s ,  May  5/93)  

Ma?  5 :  Astronauts  ahoard  Space  S h u t t l e  Columbia  prepared  for a May 6 land-  
ing  a t   Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   in  Florida.  T h e  S h u t t l e  was  scheduled  t o   land 
a t   9:03  a .m . ,  t e n  days after   launch .  
Columbia's   astronauts  flexed  a  life-size  robot   o n e   last  t ime   in   space  and  
completed   as  many   laboratory  experiments   as  possible  before  getting   ready  to 
return   home .   (UP I ,  May  5/93;  RTu:  May  5/91;  N  Times,  May  6/93;  W  Post, 
May  6/93;  LISA  Today, May  6/93; P  Inq ,  May  6/93; B  Sun ,  May  6 /93 )  

T h e   Prince  William  Journal   reported  
t h a t   Dan ie l   G o l d i n ,   N A S A  
Administrator, had  decided tha t  N A S A  should spend  $90  million for t h e  devel- 
clpment of  t h e  I'erseus  aircraft, a remote-controlled  drone  tha t  N A S A  had  con -  
tracted  with  Aurora  Flight  Science  Corporation   of  Manassas  to   build.  T h e  
unmanned  aircraft  would  he used for environmental   studies of  t h e  upper atmos- 
phere.  (Prince N'illiamJournal,  May  5/93; LA Tmes ,  May 9/93;  UPI ,  May  14/93) 

May  6:  T h e  Wll  Street Journal  reported   t h a t   techn ica l   problems  had  delayed 
until   August  t h e   launch   of  t h e   unmanned   C om e t   space  rocket  o n   which  
Columbia   Pictures had  a giant  outer-space  billboard advertising  its major sum-  
mer  mo\.ie,  "Last  A c t i o n   Hero."  (WS J ,  May  6/93;  W  Xmes ,   May  7/93;  NY 
Times, May  1 1/93)  

T h e  media   reported   t h a t   House  of  Representative   lawmakers h a d   charged 
t h a t   N A S A   and   t h e   Depa r tmen t   of  Defense  were  dragging  the i r   feet  in  ge t -  
ting  a hypersonic  airplane ,  t h e  Na t iona l  A e r o s p a c e  Plane   ( N A S P ) ,  o u t  of  t h e  
design  stage. House members complained   t h a t   t h e  $ 2  billion   invested  s o  far  in  
t h e  N A S P  had   no t   brought  t h e   project  any  closer  t o  fruition .   Experts  ma in -  
tained   t h a t  t h e  NA S P  would be  t h e  fastest  aircraft  in  t h e  world a n d  would rev- 
olutionize   space  t r a~ r e l  as  well  as  make  t h e   N a t i o n   more  economically   com -  
petitive .   (Antelope Valley  Press, May  619 3 ;  Washington Technology, May  20193) 

According   t o  t h e  Wall  Street Journal ,  five  aerospace companies  were propos- 
ing t o  revive p lann ing  for a n  advanced  new  rocket  t o  carry  satellites and  o t h e r  
commercial  payloads  in to  space. T h e  companies  had   asked  N A S A   t o  join  in  
p lann ing   and   researching  t h e  project;  they   an t ic ipa ted  t h a t   it  would  h e l p  t h e  
U.S.  gain  a  greater  share   of  t h e   cc~mmercial  launch   business  now  dom ina ted  
by  ,4rianspace ,  a  European  joint  venture .   (WS J ,  May  6/93)  

MAY  1993 

CHRON0LOC;Y  1991 

May  7: T h e  W Tm e s  reported  t h a t   a joint   U S . - G e r m a n  experimental   fighter  
jet  h a d   completed   a  revolutionary   rapid  tu rn   in   flight.  T h e   aircraft  slowed 
from  a  speed  of  about   300  miles  a n  hou r   and   reversed  d i rec t ion   in   only   n i n e  
seconds  using  a  t igh t ,   looping  tu rn .  According   t o  t h e  Pen tagon ,  t h e   tu rn   was 
far  beyond  t h e   aerodynamic   capability   of  any  conven t iona l   fixed-wing  air-  
craft. T h e  test  flight  took   place  a t  Edwards Air   Force  Base, California .  
( W  'Times, May   7/93)  

T h e   European   Space   Agency  ( E S A )  announced   t h a t   it  had   picked  two 
Ge rman s ,   a  Spaniard ,   and   a  Swede   for  its  first  joint  missions  with   Russian 
astronauts   t o   t h e   Mir-1  Space   S t a t i o n   in   1994   a n d   1995.  T h e   ESA  had  
reserved  o n e  slot each  for t h e  turv  flights. A  decision o n  which   two men  would 
participate   would  be  made  in  t h e  weeks  before  t h e  flight.  (RTw, May  7/93)  

A t  a news conference  during  t h e  annua l  Naval   Aviation   Symposium ,  astro-  
nau t s  Eugene C e r n a n ,  A l a n  Shepa rd ,  Neil  Armstrong ,  and  James  Lovell spoke  
of  t h e   importance   of  con t inued   exploration   of  t h e   M o o n .   C e r n a n ,   t h e   last 
m a n  t o  walk  o n  t h e  Moon ,  said, "We  are going  t o  go.  It's man's in tu i t ive  spir- 
i t  t o  go back  and  go  o n  t o  Mars."  (AP ,  May  7 /93 )  

T h e   media  reported   t h a t   t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Columbia   landed   May  6  a t  
Edwards  A i r   Force  Base,  California ,   after  low  clouds  a t   C a p e   Canave ra l ,  
Florida, forced  it  t o  divert   t o  California .  
N A S A   called  t h e  Columbia's return   "a  significant milestone"  because  shu t -  
tles  have  now  spent  a  to ta l  of  more  t h a n  a year  in  orbit  since   t h e  first o n e  \\.as 
launched   in   1981. However, J o h n   Pike ,   a  space  analyst  for  t h e   Federation   of 
American   Scientists ,  said h e  wondered  if  t h e   Shu t t le  flight  was worth   wha t   it  
cost. T h e r e  are  "good reasons for flying  in space, bu t  science  isn't o n e  of  them ,"  
Mr.  Pike  said.  (A P n ,  May  5/93; USA  Today, May  7/93; W Times, May  7/93; N 
Sun, May  7/93; LA  Times, May  7/93; NY   Times, May  7/93; W Post, May  7/93)  

May  9 :   T h e  New   York  Times  reported   t h a t   astronomers   were  uforried about  
growing light  pollution ,   wh ich  makes  it  very difficult for even   t h e  strong  200- 
i n c h   telescope  o n   M o u n t   Palomar   in  California   t o   pick  up  faint   g:llaxies. 
Some  cities,  hop ing   t h a t   brighter   lighting  would  de te r  c r ime ,  were  installing 
white   street   lights  as  opposed  t o  low-pressure  sodium  lamps, wh ich   are  easily 
filtered  from  telescopes.  In   add i t ion ,  a Georgia  company   announced   plans   t o  
pu t   a  one -m i le   reflective  panel   i n t o   space  some   time   in  1996;  t h e   satellite ,  
which   would  appear   nearly  as  large  as  t h e  Moon ,  would  add  t o   t h e   light   pol-  
lu t ion .   ( N Y  Xmes ,  May  9 / 9 3 )  

May  10 :  T h e  Washington  Post  reported  t h a t   NASA   had  selected  three   design 
concepts  from among  t h e  many  t h a t  had  been  proposed  since  t h e  W h i t e  House 
told  t h e  Agency  t o  come   up  with   a  new,  h a l f - p i c e  plan   by  early J u n e .  W h i t e  
House guidelines called for N A S A  t o  design a long-duration  lahoratory  in  orhit  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N I )   A E R O N A U T I C S  

MAY  1993 

t h a t  would  use  t h e  weightlessness  of  space  as  a  tool   for  research  o n  materials 
and   living  things ,  as  a means  of  developing  technology  and  engineering   skills 
for  advanced   h um a n   and   robotic   space  systems,  and   as  a  way  to   encourage  
in te rna t iona l  cooperation .   ( W  Post, May  10193) 

T h e  Houston  Chronicle  announced   t h a t  N A S A ,  responding   t o  criticism  of 
its cost overruns  a n d  t h e  quality  of  its  projects ,  had   announced  major  reforms 
in   t h e  way  it  did  business.  In   add i t ion  t o  o t h e r  changes ,  procurement   reforms 
would  levy  greater  penalties   o n   contractors   t h a t   deliver   defective   products, 
continually   exceed  cost  estimates ,   or   fall  beh ind   schedule .   ( H  Chron ,   May 
10/93;  Federal Computer Week, May  24/93) 

I n   a n   address  t o   t h e   American   Institute   of  Aeronautics   and   Astronautics  
( A I A A ) ,  Lhniel   S.  G o l d i n ,   NA SA   Admintstrator ,   said  t h a t   t h e   redesign 
effort  for  Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom  was  making  "great  progress."  (AvWk, May 
lQ i 9 3 )  

Gregory  M .   Reck ,  NASA's Ac t ing   Associate  Administrator   for  Advanced  
concep t s   and   Technology,  announced   t h a t   t h e   first  flight  of  C om e t ,   t h e  
Commercial  Experiment  Transporter ,  would  slip from mid-June  t o  a t  least July  
or   August .   T h e   launch   had   already  been   delayed  for  two   mon th s   because  of 
techn ica l  difficulties.  (AuWk, May  10193) 

May  1 1 :   NA SA   announced   t h a t   t h e   Agency  would  design  and   install  a n  
acoustic  lining   in   the   wind  tunne l   a t   NASA's  Ame s   Research  C e n t e r ,  
hdountain  View,  California.  T h e   improved  wind  tunne l   ultimately  would  he lp  
U .S .   industry  design  quiet   engines  for  a  future  high-speed  civil  transport  and  
for newf helicopters.  ( N A S A  Release  93-81;  San Francisco Examiner, May  9/93)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  and   t h e   Na t iona l   C e n t e r   for  Manufacturing  
Sciences   ( N CM S )  had  signed  a n  agreement   t h a t   would  allow  t h e   two  organ ,  
izations  t o  propose joint  research  projects. T h e  N CM S  is a non-profit  research 
conhortium  created  by  U .S .   industries  t o   conduc t ,   sponsor,  fund ,   a n d   o t h e r -  
wise  promote   development   of  technologies   or  scientific   applications   t h a t  
would  improve  manufacturing   in  t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s   and   C a n a d a .   ( N A S A  
Release 9 3 - 8 2 )  

T h e  LA  Times  announced   t h a t  Russian space officials had   signed a con t rac t  
in  late  April   for  t h e   first  commercial   launch   of  a Western-built   satellite   by  a 
Russian  rocket .   T h e  agreement   was  signed  w i th   Inmarsat ,   a  67-country   c o n -  
sortium   t h a t   puts  up  satellites  for  mobile  communications .   (LA   Times,  May 
11 /93 )  

T h e  NY  Tmes   reported   t h a t   after  exam in ing  t h e  problem  for  more  t h a n   a 
year.  a  supe rcompu te r   h a d   c o n c l u d e d   t h a t   t h e   T h e o r y   of  Q u a n t um  

MAY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Chromodynamics was probably correct. T h e  theory  accounts for  the  relation- 
ships between  fundamental particles  called  hadrons.  (NY Xm e s ,  May  11/93) 

European  space officials in   Paris announced   tha t  Western  Europe's A r iane  
rocket  had  deployed  a  US . - b u i l t   television  satellite  o n   Wednesday  after  a 
launch  from French  Guyana.  (RTW, May  11/93) 

May  12 :   USA  Today  reported  tha t   scientists  o n  the   Space Shu t t le  Columbia 
during  its fall mission were scheduled  to  behead five white rats. Space program 
scientists  Frank  Sulzman  said  tha t   killing  the   rats  in  orbit  would  give 
researchers better   information  o n  the  effect of  weightlessness o n  the  animals. 
(USA Today, May  12/93) 

T h e  Christian Science Monitor  reported  tha t  astronomers who study the  evo- 
lution  of  the   cosmos hoped  tha t   the   Hubble  Space  Telescope,  if  it  could  be 
repaired  as  planned  this December, would  help   them  resolve a paradox  relat- 
ing to the  universe's  age. Cu r ren t  research  implies tha t  the  universe  is younger 
than   the  oldest stars. O n e  of  the  Hubble's key missions was  to refine what had  
become  the  foundation  for many  cosmic distance scales. (CSM ,  May  12/93)  

May  13:  T h e  media  reported  tha t   a  23-year-old computer  hacker  had  pene- 
trated  the   top-secret computer  files of  NASA ,  forcing  t h e  closure of  the   sys- 
tem for 24 hours. T h e  hacker, Richard Martin Jones ,  also helped  ano the r  com-  
puter  buff  en te r  the  NASA   files.  (UP I ,  May  13/93; RTw, May  13/93)  

May  14:  NASA   announced   tha t   scientists  at  its  Ames  Research  Cen te r ,  
Moffett Field, California, would use a satellite video link  to attempt  t o  maneu- 
ver  a Russian robotic "rover"  in a Moscow  laboratory. (NA SA  Release 93 -84 )  

T h e  Associated  Press  announced   tha t   NASA   engineers  had   searched  for 
the   source  of  a  mysterious  "bang"  in  Shu t t le   Endeavour's engine  compart-  
ment .   T h e   sound  was  heard  as  the   Shuttle   was  being  prepared  for  a  J u n e  3 
launch.  (AP, May  14/93) 

NASA   announced   the   solicitation  of  proposals  for  the   Technology 
Reinvestment  Project,  a  $471  million  Federal  interagency  effort  t o  develop 
and   deploy  dual-use  technologies  and  a t   the   same  time  give  a  competitive 
advantage  to  American  companies.  (NA SA  Release 93-85)  

T h e  media  reported  tha t   NASA   administrators were  seeking  to  quell  t h e  
concerns  of  European  space  officials over  the   redesign  of  the   planned  U.S. 
Space  S ta t ion .  Clinton's decision  t o   redesign  the   project  could  have  "disas- 
trous  effects"  if  it  results  in  an   orbiting  lab  unsuitable  to   foreign  partners,  a 
German  executive said. (WSJ, May  14/93; AP, May  13/93)  

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTLCS 

MAY  1993 

Defense  Secretary  Les  Aspin  announced   tha t   t h e  C l in ton   administration 
would  continue  work  o n  anti-missile  weapons but  tha t   Reagan's "Star Wars" 
program was  being  reduced  to  small-scale research  and   renamed  the   Ballistic 
Missile  Defense  Organization.  In   California  alone,  the   cutback  threatened  
more  t h a n  $1 billion  in  annual  contracts  and   thousands  of  jobs,  according  to  
economists  in  the  area. (NY Times, May  14/93; LA  Times, May  14/93)  

President C l in ton  named David R. Hinson, an  aerospace executive and  for- 
mer  Navy  fighter  pilot,  to   head  the   Federal  Aviation  Administration. 
Mr.  Hinson  was  founder  of  Midway Airlines.  In   his  new  job,  Hinson  would 
oversee the  safety of  the  aviation  industry and be  responsible for initiating  and 
enforcing  safety  regulations  and  operating  t h e   air  traffic control  system.  (NY 
Times, May  14/93; LlSA  Today, May  14/93)  

May  17:  NASA   announced   that   researchers  a t   NASA's  Lewis  Research 
Center ,  Cleveland ,  Oh io ,  had developed an  ion exchange material  tha t  in lab- 
oratory  tests effectively removed contaminants  from water. Tests showed  tha t  
the  new material was easy  to  use and  inexpensive  t o  produce.  (NA SA  Release 
93-86)  

T h e  media  reported  tha t  NASA  and  the   astronomical  community had  dif- 
fering views o n  an  orbiting  billboard  tha t  would  beam  a Moon-sized message 
hack  to Earth. NASA  spokesman Charles Redmond  said  tha t   the  "space  bill- 
board" was  in  line with  the   Space  Agency's aims,  tha t   is, t o  encourage  com- 
mercial  development  of  space. A  quite  different  view  was  expressed by  Carl  
Sagan ,  a well-known U.S. astronomer and university professor, who called  the  
project  an  "abomination" and  said  tha t   it was "the  th in  edge of  a wedge which 
may  destroy optical ground-based astronomy ...." A n  American Astronomical 
Society  spokesman  said  the  billboard  would  hamper  Earth-based  astronomy, 
add  to  the   growing pollution  of  the  night   sky  by  light,  and  even  infringe  o n  
everyone's enjoyment  of  nature's  sunsets."  (RTW, May  17/93)  

NASA   announced   the   formation  of  an   International   Mars  Exploration 
Working  Group.  In   addition  to  NASA ,   members  included  the   European 
Space  Agency,  the   Russian  Space  Research  Institute,  the   Italian  Space 
Agency, the  German  Space Agency, and  the  French Cen t re  National  dlEtudes 
Spatiales.  T h e   group would  focus on   producing  an   international   strategy  for 
the   exploration of Mars after  the   year  2000.  (NA SA  Release 93-87)  

NASA  announced  tha t   i t  had joined  with American  Bio-Technologies Inc .  
of  Cambridge, Massachusetts,  in  an  attempt   to  arrive  a t   a better  understand- 
ing of  Acquired  Immune  Deficiency Syndrome  (A IDS ) .  T h e  goal was  to   use 
advanced  x-ray  technology  and  expertise  developed  by  NASA's  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center ,   in  Huntsville,  Alabama,  t o   advance  knowledge  of 
Human  Immunodeficiency  Virus  (H IV )  and AIDS ,  to develop new  therapeu- 

MAY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

tic  approaches  for  HIV  and AIDS ,  and   to  develop superior biological materi- 
als for vaccine development  and  HIV detection .   (NA SA  Release 93-88)  

T h e   Associated  Press  reported  tha t   the   Everglades-style airboat  used  to 
maintain   navigation  lights  at  the  Space Shuttle's  California  landing  site had 
been named "Puddle shuttle," after a contest  among workers. (AP, May  17/93) 

T h e  Washington  Post  reported  tha t  NASA's  dream of  building  a permanent  
human  outpost in space was generating much controversy. President Clinton's  
decision  to  shrink Space Station  funding and  his mandate  tha t   t h e  station  be 
redesigned added  to  the  controversy.  ( W  Post, May  17/93) 

May  18: NASA   announced   tha t   the   Magellan  spacecraft would  dip  in to   the  
atmosphere  of  Venus  beginning  May  25  in  a n  "aerobraking"  maneuver  tha t  
would  slow  the   spacecraft  and   allow  it  t o   circularize  Magellan's  orbit. 
Currently  Magellan was looping around Venus  in a highly elliptical orbit. T h e  
new  orbit would  make possible better  measurements  of Venus' gravity fields. 
(NA SA  Release 93-89)  

A Christian Science Monitor editorial urged the Clinton administration to rethink 
its civilian space program, noting that the  program had drifted without overall pur- 
pose  since rivalry with  the old Soviet Union  had  ceased to be  a significant factor. 
T h e  editorial urged  the  administration to  define what  the  United  States should 
accomplish in space and outline a realistic program to do it.  (CSM, May  18/93) 

T h e   Washington  Xmes  reported  tha t   the   former  Soviet  military  had  wel- 
comed  the   U.S.  decision  to   scrap  most  of  the   Strategic  Defense  Initiative .  
Russian  Defense  Minister  Pavel  Grachev   called  the   decision  a  "reasonable 
decision"  and  said  tha t   "it  seems  there's  no   reason  to  raise  the   possibility 
again" of  putting weapons  in  space.  ( W  Times, May  18/93)  

T h e  Baltimore  Sun  reported  tha t   researchers  believed  tha t   a meteorite  tha t  
crashed  through  a  Japanese home   in  December    rob ably  was  a  piece  of  the  
same space object  as  a falling star tha t   landed  in  Japan  more  t h a n  a thousand 
years  ago. ( B  Sun, May  18/93) 

A  NASA   spokesman  announced   tha t   the   Mars  observer  spacecraft  had 
spent eight days pointing  the  wrong direction but  engineers thought  tha t   they  
now  had  t h e   problem  under  control.  It  was  the   Observer's fourth  such  mal- 
function .  Mars Observer was scheduled  to go in to  elliptical orbit around Mars 
o n  August  24.  (AP, May  18/93)  

Robert  T.  Dulaney, a salesman who sold foreign-made  fasteners  to a NA SA  
contractor   in   violation  of  a  Federal  law  tha t   required  tha t   all  fasteners  pur- 
chased by NA SA  be domestic  in origin, was sentenced  to five years probation, 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

MAY  1993 

including   60  days  home   con f inemen t .   Dulaney  was  also  ordered   t o   repay 
$26 ,567 .73  t o  NA SA .   (UP I ,  May  18/93)  

N A S A   engineers  believed  t h a t   they  had   identified  t h e  source of  a mysteri- 
ous  "bang"  in  S h u t t l e  Endeavour's eng ine  section .  A  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  
spokesman  said  t h a t   probably  a  ball  inside  a  flexible  joint  o n  a  fuel  line   h a d  
go t ten   pinched .   (AP ,  May  18/93)  

U .S .   and   European  space  officials  announced   t h a t   they   had   postponed   a 
p lanned   rocket   firing  in tended   t o   move  t h e   European   Retrievable   Carrier  
( EUR ECA )  t o  a  position  where   it  could  he  retrieved  by  a Space  S h u t t l e  nex t  
m o n t h .  A n  appa ren t  gyroscope  prohlem  ahoard  t h e  orbiting   research  satellite  
forced  t h e  po s tponemen t .   (RTW ,  May  18/93) 

A n  article  in  Flight  lnternutional featured  t h e  U .S .  Spacehab ,  t h e  world's first 
privately  owned ,  manned   microgravity  labo ra to ry  T h e  Spacehab  was  sched-  
uled  t o  he  lifted  aboard  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  mission o n  J u n e  3 .  
T h e  Spacehah  was  funded  partly  hy  a  $185 million   con t rac t   from  N A S A  
t h a t   enabled   t h e   ,4gency   t o   use  two-thirds  of  t h e  Spacehab's  capacity  during  
t h e  first  six  flights. T h e  Spacehah ,  houwver, would  need   t h e   comm i tmen t   of 
commercial  customers  in  order  t o  survive, according  t o  t h e  au tho r  of  t h e  arti-  
c le.  (Flight lnce i~~ar iom l ,  May  18/93)  

May  19: N A S A  reported   t h a t   t h e  agency  was working with   t h e  Nation's  large 
aerospace companies  t o  de te rm ine  how  N A S A  compu te r  programs  could he lp  
industry design and  produce  aircraft more efficiently  T h e  ultimate   goal was  t o  
integrate   all  t h e   factors  involved  in  aircraft  design  a n d   production   so   t h a t  
aeronautical   engineers  would  he  able  t o  design  aircraft  systems simultaneous-  
l y   rather   t h a n  separately  as  is  done  now.  ( N A S A  Release 9 3 - 9 0 )  

N A S A   announced   a new  initiatiLfe t o  commercialize N A S A   inven t ion s  by 
using  top   graduate   students   a t   Case   Western   t o   come   up  with   new  product  
ideas  a n d   strategies.  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,   t h e   Battelle   Memorial  
In s t i tu te ,  and  Case  Western  Reserve University,  all based  in C leve land ,  O h i o ,  
were  involved  in   t h e  progralu.  ( N A S A  Release 93 -91 )  

T h e  media  reported   t h a t   a  Naval   panel   inquiry  i n t o   t h e   crash  of  t h e  V-22 
experimental   aircraft ,   nicknamed   t h e   Osprey,  in   t h e   summer  of  1992   h a d  
found  evidence   t h a t  a n   improperly  installed  seal may  have  permitted   gearbox 
oil  t o   leak,  possibly  con t r ibu t ing   t o   t h e  crash .  T h e  panel   also  no ted   t h a t   t h e  
pilot ,   unde r   strung   pressure  t o   arrive  o n   time   for  a  ceremony   a t   Q u a n t i c o  
Ma r ine   Rase,  had   skipped  a  scheduled  refueling  s top   a n d   ignored  a  warning  
t h a t  might  have  forced  h im  t o  ground  t h e  plane  for a ma in tenance   check .  T h e  
Navy  authorized  resumption  of  flight  testing  of  t h e  Osprey after  release of  t h e  
final  report .   ( W  Post, May  19/93;  P lnq ,  May  19/93; USA  Today, May  19/93)  

MAY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

T h e  Washington 'limes reported  tha t   the  journal  Science had  added  its voice 
to   those who maintained  tha t   the  ozone-depletion  threat   had  been  overesti- 
mated.  In  a n  earlier  article, the  Washington Post, which  in  the  past had  edito-  
rialized  strongly for  worldwide  controls  o n  ozone-depleting  substances,  also 
concluded  tha t   many  scientists,  including  some  in  the   environmental  move- 
ment ,   agreed  tha t   the   ozone  threat   had   been  overestimated. No t   all  experts 
agreed with  the  position taken  by  t h e  authors of  the  articles in  Science and the  
Post, however.  ( W  'limes, May  19/93) 

May  20:  NASA  announced  tha t  a 50-monitor videowall would be  featured  a t  
t h e  NASA  exhibit  a t   the  40th   Paris A i r  Show, Le  Bourget, France, June  10- 
20.  T h e   video  presentation  featured  interviews  with  Carl   Sagan ,   James 
Michener, and  Roald Sagdeev, among others .  (NA SA  Release 93-92)  

Washington Technology  reported  that   at a May  11 appearance before  the  annu-  
al meeting of  the  National Center  for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS ) ,  NASA  
Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  emphasized his  commitment  to NASA's  tech- 
nology-transfer outreach to industry. A t  the  meeting, Goldin announced a mem- 
orandum of  understanding that  allowed NASA   and the  NCMS  to propose joint 
research projects.  (Wbshz~gron Technology, May  20,  1993) 

NASA   announced   tha t   scientists  a t   t h e   Ames  Research  Center ,   Moffett 
Field,  California,  were  measuring  how  the   human   body  reacted  to  exercise 
done   o n  Earth  and   comparing  those  measurements  to   the   exercise  measure- 
ments   of  astronauts working  in  the   microgravity  environment   of  space. T h e  
goal  was  to   try  to  improve  the   productivity  of  astronauts  involved  in  space 
walks.  (NA SA  Release 93-93)  

May  21 : NA SA  announced  tha t  J u n e  3, 1993 had  been  set  as  the   target  date  
for  t h e   STS-57  mission  of  Space  Shu t t le  Endeavour.  T h e  mission  would  be 
highlighted  by  the   retrieval  of  the   European  observation  satellite  EURECA 
and   t h e   first  flight  of  Spacehab,  a  commercial  spacelab  facility.  (NA SA  
Editors Note  N93-28)  

In   his  keynote  address  a t   t h e   inaugural  University  of  Southern   California 
Engineering  Day,  Daniel  S. Go ld in ,  NASA   Administrator,  emphasized  tha t  
space exploration  involved  risks but  tha t   they were worth taking.  He also said 
tha t  NASA's specific challenge was  to  "win  back  our  credibility through  per- 
formance."  (LA Xmes,  May  21/93) 

T h e  media  reported  tha t  Representative George  E.  Brown, chairman  of  the  
House  Science ,  Space,  and   Technology  Committee ,   told  a  news  conference 
tha t   NASA's  effort  to   save  Space  Station   Freedom  was  doomed  unless  t h e  
project  continued  with  a scaled-down version of  the  current design. Although  
t h e   streamlined  model  of  Freedom  was  the   most  expensive  of  the   three 

ASTRONAUTICS   AN [>  AERONAUTICS  

MAY  1993 

options   being  analyzed,  Brown  no ted   t h a t   it  was  also  t h e   o n e   with   years  of 
experience  and  $8 billion   in  development   costs beh ind   it .  (WP, May  21/93; H 
Chron ,  May 2 1/93; LA Times, May 2 1/93; W Xmes, May 2 1/93; NY  Times, May 
21/93; W  Post, May  21/93; AuWk ,  May  24/93)  

W r i t ing   in  t h e  Philadelphia  Inquirer, Daniel   S .  G reenbe rg  noted   t h a t   "times 
are  bad"  for  t h e   so-called  mega  projects  of  our   era:  S ta r   Wars,  t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n ,  and   t h e  super a tom  smasher  in Texas. H e  warned,  however,  t h a t   big- 
science   mobilization  should  n o t   automatically   be  suspect ,   suggesting,  for 
example ,   t h a t   t h e   country   would  benefit  from  a n   all-out   effort  o n   a  project 
such  as  t h e  electric  car.  ( P  Inq, May  21/93)  

May  23:  T h e  Washington  Times  reported  t h a t   t h e   launch   of  a  rocket  with   a 
"star  wars"  payload  had   been   scrubbed  o n  May  22,  just  a  m inu te   before  its 
scheduled  launch .  T h e  A i r  Force blamed  t h e  failed  launch  o n  a  power  outage  
in a  computer. T h e  launch  was  rescheduled  for May 23.  ( W  Times, May  23 /93 )  

May  24:  T h e   ITAR-Tass  news  agency  announced   t h a t   a  cargo  sh ip   loaded 
with   food,  water,  fuel ,   and   equ ipmen t   had   docked   with   t h e   o rb i t ing   Space  
S t a t i o n  Mir.  T h e   cargo  ship   also  delivered  a  landing   capsule  t o   t h e   two  Mir 
astronauts ,  who  had   been   aboard  t h e  Mir for  four  mon th s .   (AP ,  May  24 /93 )  

Aviation Week B Space Technology reported  t h a t  a N A S A  advisory panel  had  
found  t h a t   t h e   Hubb le   Space   Telescope  would  have   had   even   more  compo -  
n e n t  failure  i n  o rh i t  if  t h e  launch  h a d  n o t  slipped from 1986 t o  1990  as a result 
of  t h e   Cha l lenge r   accident .   T h e  delay  enabled   technicians   t o   d o   additional  
testing   t h a t   revealed  suspect parts.  (AuWk ,  May  24/93)  

T h e  A P  reported  t h a t   t h e  nonprofit   group  SatelLife,  based  in  Cambridge ,  
Massachusetts,  last  year  had   launched   a  low-orbiting  satellite   t h a t   "talks"  t o  
t h e   In te rne t   and   coordinates   t h e  H e a l t h n e t   message-relay  service  connec ted  
with   t h e  satellite. T h e  service makes  it possible for remote  regions of  t h e  world 
t o  receive  much-needed   medical  advice.  (AP, May  24/93)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  N A S A   F/A-18, modified  t o  test  t h e  newest  and  
most  advanced   system  technologies ,  made  its  first  research  flight  o n  May  21 
at  NASA's Ames-Dryden   Flight  Research  Facility,  Edwards,  California .   T h e  
Systems  Research  Aircraft  ( SRA )   was  evaluating   technologies   t h a t   would 
benefit  bo th   civilian   and   military  aircraft.  ( N A S A   Release  93-95;   Mojave 
Desert News, May  27/93)  

A  commen ta ry   in   t h e   Houston  Chronick ,   applauded  NASA's  decision  t o  
financially  penalize  contractors   who   delivered  defective   products,  did  n o t  
mee t   schedules,  o r   continually   exceeded   cost  estimates.  NASA's  proposed 
procurement   reforms  would  d o   away  with   t h e   "cost-plus"  con t rac t s   under  

MAY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

which  the   government  typically  negotiated  costs  as  a  project  moved  along, 
rather  than   seeking  bids  and  holding  contractors  to  them.  ( H  Chron,  May 
24/93) 

May  25:  NASA   announced  tha t   the   location  of  a  third  radiation  belt  of  cos- 
mic  rays  had  been  pinpointed  several  hundred  miles  above  the   Earth.  A 
NASA   satellite, orbiting  375  above  the   Earth,  had  mapped  a portion  of  the  
new  belt.  (NA SA  Release 93-94; AP, May  25/93; B  Sun ,  May  26/93) 

NASA  announced  that   a  task  force  established  hg   NASA  Administrator 
Daniel  S. Goldin  to  review  plans  for  the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mis- 
sion  had  concluded  that  "the  mission  is  achievable." The   servicing mission  was 
currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA  Release 93-96) 

NASA  announced that  the Hubble Space Telescope had  looked into the  nucle- 
us  of  a galaxy  created by  the  collision of  two  galaxies and  had  discovered a pin- 
wheel-shaped disk  of  gas surrounded by  clusters of  young stars horn as result of  the 
collision.  "This  tnay  unlock  the  key  for  understanding how  all  globular clusters 
formed  in  ellipticals," said  Dr.  Brad  Whitmore  of  the  Space  Telescope  Science 
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA  Release  93-97; USA  Today, May  26/93; 
NY Xrnes, May  26/93; W Post, May  26/93; UPI, May  25/93) 

The  Washington  Times  reported that  a conference of  scientists and policy makers 
had  discussed  the  question of  what  to do  with  the  "junk  science"  that  makes  its 
way  into public policy. The  conference, which was  held  in  the Washington, DC  
area, was sponsored by  the International Institute of George Mason University and 
the Science and Environmental Policy  Project.  (W  Xmes, May  25/93) 

The  Houston Chronick  reported  on  a new  nationwide poll  of  registered  voters 
conducted  by  Yankelovitch  Partners  and  sponsored  by  NASA   contractor 
Rockwell  International  Corporation.  The   poll  revealed  that  70  percent  of 
American  voters  supported  the  construction  of  a  permanently  staffed  Space 
Station and 63 percent believed  that  the United States should spend "whatever is 
necessary" to preserve  its  lead  in space activities. Some of  the poll  results, howev- 
er, reflected  wide  swings of  support for  the  space program. 
( H  Chron, May 
25/93) 

The   P h n   Dealer  reported  that   a  group  of  African  American  employees  at 
NASA's Lewis Research Center had charged that  the  materials used  in a pilot pro- 
gram  intended to promote  better communication between employees of  differing 
cultural  groups  instead  fostered  racism.  NASA   was  investigating.  (The   P h n  
Deakr, May  25/93; Space Neus, May  31-June 6/93) 

NASA   announced  that  the Magellan spacecraft had  successfi~lly completed its 
mission of  radar-mapping  the  planet  Venus  and  was  beginning  a new  80-day 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

MAY  1993 

maneuver  that   would  put  it  in  a more  circular  orbit  around Venus.  T h e  new 
mission  would  give  scientists  a  better  understanding  of  t h e   planet's  interior 
and  its atmosphere. (NASA  Release 93-98;  RTW, May  25/93; AP, May  25/93; 
NY  Xtnes, May  27/97) 

A n   improperly etched  spring in one  of  Space Shuttle  Endeavour's three oxy- 
gen  turbopumps could delay next  week's planned  launch  of  the  Space Shuttle .  
T h e   inspection  stamp was  etched  in  a  high-stress  area  rather   t h a n   in   a  spot 
with minimal  stress, NA SA  officials said. T h e  spring holds the  pump bearings 
in  place.  If  the   improperly marked spring broke  at  liftoff,  the  affected bearing 
cage could come  loose.  (AP, May  25/93) 

A  NASA   panel  recommended  tha t   the   Space  Agency  plan  two  Space 
Shu t t le   missions  rather  than   the   scheduled  one   to   repair  t h e   Hubble 
Telescope. T h e  panel  agreed tha t   the  repairs could be done, but  suggested tha t  
because of  the   complexity  of  the   task,  a back-up mission  should  be  planned. 
(UP I ,  May  25/93; AP, May  25/93) 

May 26: NASA  announced  tha t  almost  15 years after they were  launched, t h e  
Voyager  1  and   2  spacecraft  had  discovered  t h e   first  direct  evidence  of  t h e  
heliopause,  the   boundary  tha t   separates  Earth's  solar system  from  interstellar 
space. 
Since  August  1992, radio  antennas   o n   the   spacecraft  had  been  recording 
intense  low-frequency radio  emissions coming  from  beyond t h e  solar system. 
Scientists concluded  tha t   t h e   radio  waves  had   been  produced  by electrically 
charged gases, or plasma, from t h e  Sun  interacting with  cold gases from inter- 
stellar  space  at  the   edge  of  the   solar  system,  a  boundary  known  as  t h e  
heliopause. A member of  the  Voyager science team said, "Our assumption  tha t  
it  is  the  heliopause  is  based  o n  t h e  fact tha t   there  is  no  o the r  known structure 
out  there  tha t  could  be  causing these  signals." (NA SA  Release 93-099;  USA 
Today, May  27/93; NY  Xmes, May  27/93, May 30193; W Tm e s ,  May  27,  1997; 
AP, May 27/97; UPI, May  26/97; RTW, May  26/97; W Post, May  31/93; B  Sun ,  
June  8 /93 )  

May  27:  NASA   Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen te r ,   Greenbelt ,   Maryland, 
announced   tha t   it  had  selected  NSI  Technology  Services  Corporation ,  
Fairfax, Virginia,  for  negotiations  leading  to   t h e   award  of  a  cost-plus-award- 
fee  contract   for  integration  and  test  support  services. T h e   contract ,   which 
covered  seven  years, had  an   estimated  value  of  $200 million  and  would  pro- 
vide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, 
Wallops  Island, Virginia.  (NA SA  Release C93 -e )  

T h e   Washington Post  reported  tha t   NASA   had   requested  a n   18  percent 
increase in  1994 for aeronautics research.  If granted  this amount  would be  the  
largest  jump  for  aeronautics  in  decades.  Increased  funding would  be  used  to  

MAY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

increase  funding   o n   a  "environmentally   friendly"  supersonic  jetliner,  new 
materials  and   methods   t o  make   routine   air   travel  safer and   cheaper ,  advances  
in  supercomputers ,  and  upgrades  t o  old  wind  tunne l s   t o  be  used  by  U .S .   com-  
panies  for  testing.  ( W  Post, May  27 /93 )  

May  28:  Reu te r   reported  t h a t   Arianespace   had   signed  a  con t rac t   for  t h e  
launch ing   of  a n   Israeli  Amos-l  telecommunications  satellite   by  a n   A r iane  
rocket   in  1995.  (RTW ,  May  28/93)  

T h e   magazine  Science  reviewed  t h e   th ree   main   redesigns  of  t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n ,  no t ing   t h a t   t h e  W h i t e   House's manda te   t h a t   N A S A   produce   a  less 
costly s ta t ion  design had   upset  t h e  U.S.'s internaticmal  partners .   (Science, May 
28 /93 )  

Science reported   t h a t  N A S A  had   agreed  t h a t  N A S A   a n d  Russian  scientists  
would cooperate   in several research projects aboard  t h e  Russian  Space  S t a t i o n  
Mir   in   1994 .  T h e  joint  effort would  be  part  of  a scientific  exchange  signed by 
t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  and  Russia  last July.  (Science, May  28/93)  

May 29:  T h e  Washington Times  reported  t h a t  a Russian  commun ica t ion s  satel-  
lite  had   been   lost  in  a  low  orhit   after  t h e  booster  rocket  apparently   ran  ou t  of 
fuel.  ( W Tmes ,  May   29/93)  

May  30:  In   a n  article   in  t h e  Washington  Post Mngazine, en t i t led   "Has  N A S A  
Lost  Its Way!"  au tho r  Peter  Chrlson  described his viewing of  a S h u t t l e  launch ,  
wh ich   h e   called  "inspiring,"  and   reviewed  t h e   history  of  Space   S t a t i o n  
Freedom.  Abou t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n ,   h e   conc luded ,   "So  if  they  can   cur  t h e  
waste  and   trim   t h e  fat ,   if  they  c a n   really  do  it  cheaper ,  faster,  better ,   t h e n   let 
t h em  d o  it."  ( W  Post, May  30193) 

May  31 : Reuter   reported  t h a t  Australian   rocket   scientists  had   completed   t h e  
world's  first  successful test  flight  of  a model  scramjet ,   a  supersonic  a i r -b rea th -  
ing  eng ine   t h a t   might   make   sub-orbital   space  flight  common .   (RTW ,  May 
3 1/93)  

T h e  Washingon Post  reported  tha t   t h e  Space S ta t ion  Freedom  redesign  team  
was  struggling  over   a  key  issue:  how  t o  c u t   t h e   facility's costs  while  retaining  
enough   power  to   make  t h e   facility  worth  bu i ld ing   In   1985, N A S A   engineers 
envisioned a power system t h a t  supplied  135,000 kilowatts ( kW s ) ,  far more t h a n  
any   o the r   spacecraft.  T h e  basic  ou t l ine  of  the   original  plan  remained ,  but  t h e  
planned   capacity had  dropped  t o  about  57kW. President C l i n t o n  could select  a 
new  space design by  mid-June.  (WP o s t ,  May  31/93; LlSA  Today, J u n e  2/93)  

T h e  Washington Times printed   a le t te r  from Richard  A .  Kerr, senior  writer  a t  
Science and  au tho r  of  a n  article  o n  ozone dep le t ion   in  t h e  magazine, in which  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1993 

he disputed  the  Times' coverage of  his article. Contrary  to what the  T i m e s  said, 
Kerr  maintained  tha t   he  did no t   in  any way  question  the  fundamental  fact  of 
ozone depletion ,  which, Kerr said, continues  at a pace far faster t h a n  imagined 
10 years ago.  (W  Times, May  3 1/93)  

In  May:  T h e  Aviation  Safety journal  summarized  some of  the   significant  find- 
ings from  the  NASA  Ames  Fatigue Countermeasures Program. T h e  research 
program  was  initiated  in  response  to  a  NASA   workshop  requested  by 
Congress  in  1980 to  examine possible  safety problems caused by  fatigue  in air 
transport operations. T h e  Ames study was continuing .  (Aviation Safety journal, 
Vo1.3, No .  1/93) 

NASA   reported  tha t   NASA's  Shu t t le   Mission,  STS-57 ,   scheduled  for 
launch  in early June ,  would highlight  the   beginning  of  a new  era  in  the  com-  
mercial  development  of  space.  T h e   Endeavour's  six-person  crew was  sched- 
uled  to  retrieve a European satellite and also was scheduled  to use experiments 
designed  by  and   for  students,  operate  a  payload  tha t   might  improve  crystal 
growth  techniques,  and  demonstrate  possible  on-Earth   refueling  techniques. 
(NA SA  Release 093-78)  

June 

June  1 : T h e  New York Xmes  reported  t h a t  astrophysicist Dr. E. Miles Standish  Jr., 
writing  in  t h e  Astronomical Journal,  had  concluded  tha t   astronomers  could  quit  
looking for t h e  elusive "Planet X  because it was n o t  there. T h e  planet's existence 
was  inferred from what  seemed  t o  be  irregularities in  t h e  orbital  motions of  sev- 
eral known  planets.  Standish's  analysis, however, demonstrated  t h a t  t h e  old cal- 
culations were erroneous. He  was  t h e  first  t o  make  use  of  a  new measurement of 
Neptune's  mass made by  Voyager  in  1989. (NY 'Times, J u n e  1 /93 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  remote-control   technology  used  by  Agency   sci- 
entists   t o  guide  a  robot  in   a  recent   cross-country  test  was  being   licensed  t o  a 
private   firm  for  commercial  deve lopmen t .   T h e   name   of  t h e   firm  was  n o t  
revealed.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -  1 0 0 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e  Agency  was  accepting   applications  for mission 
specialist and  pilot  astronaut   positions  effective  immediately. T h e  cut-off d a t e  
for  applications  was July  1 ,  1993 .  ( N A S A  Release  93 -101 )  

UP1  reported   t h a t   a  solar-powered drill  used  t o  bore  i n t o   icecaps  o n  Earth  
could   be  used  o n   a  mission  t o  Mars  t o   collect   ice  samples  from  Mar's n o r t h  
pole .  T h e  drill would  sample a core  about   th ree  feet  deep .  T h e  drill was sched-  
uled  t o  be  used  this   summer  t o   sample  two   ice  caps  in   t h e   Peruvian   Ande s .  
(U P I ,  J u n e  6 /93 )  

T h e   Washington  Post  reported   t h a t   t h e   U .S .   Space   & Rocke t   C e n t e r   was 
operating   two  nonprofit   Space  Camps ,   o n e   in   Huntsville ,   Alabama ,   and   t h e  
o t h e r   in   Florida,  near   t h e  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r .  T h e  programs  a t  t h e  camp  
were  designed  t o  encourage   young  people  t o   th ink   abou t   careers  in   science ,  
technology ,   and   t h e   aerospace  industry  when   they   grow  up ,   or   t o  encourage  
t h em   t o   try  t o   become  astronauts .   S i n c e   t h e   program  began  in   1982 ,  more  
t h a n   150 ,000  students   have  graduated  from  t h e  program.  ( W  Post, J u n e  1 /93 )  

June  2:  USA  Today  reported   t h a t   t h e  world's average  temperature   rose  abou t  
o n e  degree during  t h e  past  year. Scientists  writing  in  t h e  Na t iona l  Geog raph ic  
Society's Research  B Exploration con t inued   t o  disagree o n  t h e  cause and  effect 
of  t h e  temperature   rise.  (USA  Today, J u n e  2/93)  

W r i t ing   i n   t h e   Baltimore  S u n ,   Gw y n n e   Dyer,  syndicated   co lumn i s t ,  
described  t h e  plan   for  "terraforming"  Mars held  by  a group  of  scientists  loose- 
ly  called  "The   Mars  Underground ."   O n e   of  t h e   leaders  of  t h e   group  was 
Ch r i s tophe r  McKay of  NASA's Ame s  Research  C e n t e r  in  California .  
T h e  group had worked ou t  a plan ,  based o n  currently available o r  a t  least eas- 
ily  imaginable technology, for turning  Mars  into  a second Earth over a period  of 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY   1991 

280   years.  Dyer  concluded  her   discussion  by  noting   tha t   unless  we  take  more 
care  of  our  own   earthly  env i ronmen t ,  we  might  well  have   t o   use  some  of  t h e  
technology envisioned for Mars t o  maintain  our own  planet .   ( B  Sun ,  J u n e  2/93) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   material  t h a t   keeps  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   from 
burning   up  when   it  returns   from  space  may  he lp   t rea t   medical  problems  o n  
Earth .   Researchers  from  NASA's Ames   Research  C e n t e r   in   California   were 
working  with   physicians  in  S a n  A n t o n i o   t o   de te rm ine   whe the r   t h e   Space  
Shuttle's   ceramic  surface  insulation   m a t e r~ a l s  could  be  used  in   bone   trans-  
plants.  ( N A S A  Release  9 3 -  1 0 2 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  new  camera   t o  fix  t h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope's 
blurry  vision  had   been   shipped   from  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  California ,  
where  it was built ,  for  testing  a t  Godda rd  Space  Flight C e n t e r  in Maryland.  It 
was  scheduled  t o  he   sen t   i n t o  vrbit   la te r  in   t h e  year.  (AP ,  J u n e  2/93)  

N A S A   said  t h a t   t h e  launch   of  Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  would  be  delayed 
for  a t   least  two   weeks  because  t h e   Shuttle's  eng ine   maker,  Rocketdyne ,   had  
failed  t o  correctly  documen t  whe the r  o n e  of  t h e  engine's parts was  reliable.  In  
a  review  of  Rocketdyne's ope ra t ion ,  N A S A   discovered  many  problems  with  
how  t h e   company   documen ted   its  work.  I n   o n e   case  earlier  in  t h e   year,  a 
paperwork  problem  made  it  impossible  for  N A S A   t o   de te rm ine   whe the r   a 
Shuttle's   engines  con ta ined   proper  seal  retainers  or  older, phased-out  models. 
In  add i t ion ,  t h e  review  found  cases where  t h e  general  engineering  drawings 
a n d  instructions  t o  Rocketdyne's  assemblers were n o t  as specific  as  they should 
have   been .   T h e   situation   led  t o   "several  hundred"   discrepancies  between  
eng inee r ing   drawings   a n d   employees'   workshop   manuals .   A  company  
spokesperson  said  t h a t  some workshop manuals  were  being  rewritten   t o  elim-  
ina te   discrepancies  and   ambiguities.  (0 Sen   Star, J u n e  2/93; LA  Tiines, J u n e  
3/93)  

June   3:  Richard   Ma r t in   Jone s ,   a n   Australian   computer   hacker   who   closed 
down   NASA's computer   system  for  24  hours ,  was  placed  o n  a  good  behavior  
bond .  H e  was also ordered  t o  complete   300 hours  of  unpaid  commun i ty  work. 
(RTW ,  J u n e  3 / 9 3 )  

T h e  U .S .   Postal Service  unveiled  a new  $2.90  s tamp  featuring  t h e   image of 
a  futuristic  spaceship.  Deputy  Postmaster  G e n e r a l  Michael  Cough l in   a n d  ex-  
astronaut   Robert   C r i p p e n ,  Director  of  t h e  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r ,  decilcated 
t h e  s tamp  a t  a  brief  ceremony   tha t   was  t o  have   occurred  t h e  same  day  as  t h e  
launch  of  S h u t t l e  Endeavour. T h a t  launch  was delayed  for  two weeks because 
of  eng ine  problems.  (AP ,  J u n e  3 /93 )  

A  N A S A   official  said  t h a t   Rocketdyne   might   lose  as  much   as  $29   million 
in  profits o n  its Space  S h u t t l e  eng ine  program because  of  manufacturing  prob-  

J A N U A R Y  1991 

CHRC>NC)LCK;Y  1991 

lems  a t   its  Canoga   Park  p lan t .   T h e  company   could  lose  t h e   funds,  known   as 
award  fees,  if  N A S A   determined   t h a t   t h e   company   had  performed  poorly 
be tween   N o v em b e r   a n d   A p r i l .   N A S A   was  c om p l e t i n g   a   review   of 
Rocketdyne's  Space   Shu t t le   eng ine   manufacturing   ope ra t ion .   (Daily  Nesus, 
J u n e  3 /93 )  

N A S A  announced  t h a t   it had  hegun  testing  a  powerful new  eng ine  for  large 
subsonic  passenger  jets.  T h e  eng ine  could  c u t  fuel con sump t ion  up  t o   1 2  per- 
c e n t  a n d   significantly  reduce  eng ine   noise.  A   N A S A   spokesperson  said  t h a t  
t h e  Advanced  Ducted  Propulsor  ( A D P )  should  be  ready for use  in  commercial  
transport   aircraft  hy  t h e   tu rn   of  t h e   century .   ( N A S A  Release  93-103;  U P ] ,  
J u n e  3 /97 )  

A n   e d ~ t o r i a l  in   t h e   Houston  Chronicle  criticized  political  opponen t s   of  a  
pe rmanen t   U.S.  Space   S t a t i o n ,   arguing  t h a t   t h e   Space   Station's   detractors  
risk  costing   this   N a t i o n   its  scientific   a n d   technological   preeminence   for 
decades  t o  come .   ( H  Chron, J u n e  2 /93 )  

T h i r t e e n  h igh  school  students  from Laurel, Ma ry land ,  took con t ro l  of  a  400-  
pound ,  $20 million  satellite  as  it  beamed  information   for a  solar particle  study 
t o  NASA's  Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in  G r e e n b e l t ,  Maryland .  To   he   o n  
t h e  safe side, a  team  of engineers  stood  by  t o  make sure no th ing  untoward  hap -  
pened .  
T h e  day  was  t h e  cu lm ina t ion   of  a   two-year  project  designed  t o   get   more 
students   interested   in   space;  students   had   studied  for  two  years  before  being  
allowed  t o  ope ra te  t h e  controls .   (AP ,  J u n e  3 /93 )  

T h e  Christian  Science Monitor,  no t ing   t h a t   Space   S h u t t l e  Endeavour's mis- 
sion   would  symbolize  what   N A S A   called  " the   year  of  commercial   space," 
reported  t h a t  companies  had  been  slow t o  exploit  t h e  commercial  possibilities 
of  space.  For  example ,   a l though   N A S A   had   leased  200  of  t h e   3QO   locker 
spaces  available  o n  Spacehab's first  six  flights, t h e  Agency  had   few  customers  
for  t h e  o t h e r   100  lockers.  (CSM ,  J u n e  3 /93 )  

June  4:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   redesign  team   would  suh- 
mit  its  final  report   o n   th ree   design  op t ion s   t o   t h e   W h i t e   House  Advisory 
C omm i t t e e   o n   t h e   Redesign  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   o n  Monday ,  J u n e   7.  T h e  
th ree   op t ion s   included  a   modular   concep t   t h a t   would  use  existing   flight-  
proven   hardware ,   a  derivative   of  t h e   cu r ren t   Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom  design, 
a n d  a  Space  S t a t i o n  t h a t   could  be  placed  i n t o  orbit   w i th   a  single  launch   of  a  
Shu t t le -d r iven   vehicle.  ( N A S A  Release  93- 104; UP l ,  J u n e  611 993; AP, J u n e  
7/93;  NY  Times, J u n e  6/93;  VIr  Post, J u n e  6/91;  B  Sun ,  J u n e  6/93) 

T h e  magazine  Science reported  t h a t   some researchers were  complaining   t h a t  
N A S A  was  overselling  its  satellites'  products. T h e y  cited  as  a n  example  news 

A S T R O N . 4 U T I C S   ANL) A E R O N A U T I C S  

J U N E  1993 

stories  that   fueled  excitement  ahout  images  of  what  NASA   called  black  holes. 
Referring t o  an   image featured o n  the  front  page of  a November  issue of  the  New 
Ytnk  Tiirws, one  expert  said  that   labeling  the  pictured  cloud  of  dust  a black  hole 
was  largely wishful  thinking  o n  the   part  of  the   observers and  t h e  backers of  the  
space  telescope.  Sclenci. noted  that   outside  astronomers  often  criticized  NA SA  
prcss releases, charging  that   they  were misleading. (Science, June  4/93)  

T h e   Washingon X ines   reported  that   workers had  replaced an engine pump o n  
the  Shuttle  Endeavour  in preparation  f o r  a planned  mid-June launch. Endeavour 
had  heen  scheduled  for  IiftofYon J u n e  3 ,  hut  the   launch  was  delayed because of 
engine prc)hlems. ( W  T imes ,  J u n e  4/93) 

NASA  announced  that  Salisbury State  University had become  the  first college 
in Maryland named  to  participate  in a joint  study program with NASA .  T h e  uni- 
verslty  was  expected  t o  receive  a  $1 10,000 grant  over  three  years  from NASA's 
Jo in t  Venture  Institutions program. ( 0  Sun, June  4/93) 

June 7: NASA   announced  that   J u n e  20,  1993, had  been  set  as  the   new  launch  
date  for  the   next   flight  of  Space Shuttle   Endeavour. T h e   launch  originally had 
been scheduled for J u n e  3.  (NA SA  Launch Advisory) 

NASA   announced  that   recent  discoveries  from  t h e   Agency's  Extreme 
Ultmvioilet Explorer (EUVE)  would be presented  at the  National  Meeting of  the  
American  Astronomical  Society, University  of  California  a t  Berkeley o n  June  7 
and  ti. 
T h e   new  results  included  discovery of  elements  tha t   blanket  the   light  from 
white dwarf stars, the  detection  of  ionized helium  in  the  local  interstellar gas, t h e  
detection  of  a n  extreme ultraviolet  shadow  in  the  local  interstellar  medium,  and  
new  findings o n  the  mysteries  of  rare  extragalactic  objects.  (NA SA  Release 93- 
105; AP, J u n e  8/93) 

A Russlan would-be cosmonaut, now in  t h e  United  States pursuing a doctorate 
in space policy at American University  in Washington, was  in  Houston for three  
months  o n  a U.S. government subcontract, helping two Russian cosmonauts pre- 
pare for tlights  in U.S. spaceships in  1993 and  1995. (LA  Xmes, June  7/93) 

The  W d  Street  J o u d  reported  that   critics  were  warning  tha t   President 
Clinton's  plan  t o  redesign  the  Space  Station  might  inadvertently end  up  killing 
the  program because of  concerns a h u t  cost estimates  and  technology. "I  believe 
therc's a  real  possibility  [ the  Space  Station]  may  not   survive because of  political 
considerati~)ns ,"  said J o h n  W inch ,  a Boeing Company vice president.  (WSJ, June  
719 3 ) 

J t trw   8:  NASA   announced  tha t   its  astronomers  investigating  how  stars are  born 
were  using new  instruments t o  observe clumps of  interstellar  gas  that   were about 

JUNE  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

t o  become  new  stars and  planetary systems. T h e  astronomers were  using  instru- 
ments  developed  for  NASA's  High  Resolution  Microwave  Survey  (HRMS ) ,  
which  was  searching  for  radio  signals that   might  be  coming  from  technological 
civilizations o n  planets orbiting distant stars. (NA SA  Release 93- 106) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   scientisrs  had  found  water  molecules  frozen  in   t h e  
surface  ices of  Jupiter's Moon   lo. According   t o  Dr.  Farid Sa lama ,  University  of 
California ,   Berkeley,  who   led  t h e   project   a t  NA SA ,   "This   is  t h e   first  strong  
evidence   of  solid  water  o n   t h e   surface of  this   satellite."  ( N A S A  Release  93 -  
107;  NY  Times, J u n e  15/93)  

T h e  media  announced   t h a t  N A S A   had   unveiled  four  designs  for  a  scaled-  
down  Space  S t a t i o n .  N o n e  of  t h e  designs,  however, could  be  built  as  cheaply 
as t h e  W h i t e  House  had   requested  and  still  meet  t h e  orbital   laboratory's main  
goals. T h e   team   presented  cost  figures ranging  from  a  low  of  $ 1  1.9  billion   t o  
$13.3  billion  t o  build  t h e  design  t h a t   more  completely  resembled  t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n  Freedom. T h r e e  of  thee  op t ion s  were  similar  t o   t h e  original  design  of 
t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  but  achieved   savings th rough   reduction   in  hardware ,  m a n -  
agemen t ,  and  capability. 
T h e  design  team  also  reported  t h a t  NASA's  estimate  for t h e  present  design 
of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   had   been   understated   by  some   10  percent   because  of 
costs  t h a t   had   been   hidden   th roughou t   t h e   Agency's  budget.  ( W  Pos t ,   J u n e  
8/93;   NY  Times, J u n e  8/93;  LA  Times, J u n e  8 /93 ;  W  Times,  J u n e  8 /93 ;  B  S u n ,  
J u n e  8/93;  USA  Today,  J u n e  8/93; AP, J u n e  8/93;  RTW, J u n e  7/93; UPI, J u n e  
7/93; WS],  J u n e  8 / 9 3 )  

T h e   N ew   York  Times  reported   t h a t   a t   a  meeting   of  t h e   Ame r ican  
Astronomical   Society, Dr.  Douglas N .C .   Lin of  t h e  University  of  California   a t  
S a n t a  Cruz h a d  described t h e  Milky Way  as practicing  "galactic cannibalism." 
Lin  explained   t h a t   t h e  gravitational   force  of  ma t te r   in   t h e   vast  ha lo  e n c om -  
passing  t h e   Milky  Way  Galaxy  was  causing  t h e   Milky  Way  t o   consume   t h e  
stars   a n d   gases  of  its  nearest  galactic   neighbor,  t h e   Large  Magellanic  C loud  
160 ,000  light-years away.  (NY  Xme s ,  J u n e  8/93;  LA   Times, J u n e  811993; USA 
Today,  J u n e  8/93;  B  Sun ,  J u n e  8/93;  P  Inq, J u n e  8 /93 )  

T h e   Washington  Post  published  a  le t te r   from  James   E.  Han sen ,   Director ,  
N A S A   Godda rd   In s t i tu te   for  Space   Studies ,   in   which   h e   charged  t h a t   a 
Washington Post  article ,  "Greenhouse   Effect Seems  Benign S o  Far"  [front  page, 
J u n e   11, misrepresented  his  views.  T h e   article   depicted   t h e   scientific   under-  
s tand ing  of  t h e   human -made   greenhouse   effect  as  a  retreat   from  earlier  pre-  
dictions   t h a t   global  warming  th rea tened   t h e   Earth's  env i ronmen t .   In   fact ,  
according   t o  H a n s e n ,  computer   models  confirmed  t h a t   t h e  Earth's c l ima te   is 
"sensitive  a n d   can   be  expected   t o  warm  about   five  degrees  Fah renhe i t   when  
human -made   greenhouse  gases  reach   a n  amoun t   equivalent   t o  a  doubling   of 
atmospheric   carbon   dioxide ."   ( W  Post,  J u n e  8 /93 )  

.ASTRONA117'1(:S  AN I )   .AEKON r \ lJT I ( :S  

J U N E  1993 

T h C  ue\vl\;  rcle;lsed  proposals  t o   redesign  Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom  drew 
 nixed  reviews  c111  C:;~pitol Hill ,  with  supporters praising  t h e  effort  and  detrac-  
tors  s i t ~ n g  t h e   cost  o t  t h e  project  ;IS  further   evidence   t h a t   it  should   be  aban -  
i l~ ,~nc i i .  (\X'I'ost,  J u n e  9/93; LA  Tines ,  J u n e  9/93;  USA  Today, J u n e  9/93; P lnq, 
J u n c  9/93;  AP, J u n e  9/93;  AP n ,  J u n e  3/93;  RTW,  J u n e  8/93;  H  Chron ,  J u n e  
9 /93 ;  H  Post, J u n e   10193) 

June  9:  NA SA   a ~ l n u u n c e d  t h a t   astronomers  working  with   t h e  Hubb le  Space  
Telescope had  some success in  the i r  a t temp t s  t o  measure t h e  Hubble  C o n s t a n t  
; ln J   t h e   age  of  t h e   universe.  T h e  Hubble   C o n s t a n t   (HO )  is  t h e   ratio   of  t h e  
recession  \relocities  o f   galaxies  to   their   distances   in  t h e   expanding   universe. 
T h e  age ot  t h e  tuniverse c a n  be  estimated  from  t h e  Hubble  C o n s t a n t  and  cur-  
rently  is  though t   t o  lie between   10 a n d  20 billion  years. A   more  precise  meas- 
urelnelnt  o t   t h e   Huhble   C o n s t a n t   is  required  t o   narrow  th i s   range.  ( N A S A  
Rele;rw  93-  I d s ;  P  Inq, J u n e  10193; RTw, J u n e  9 / 9 3 )  

NASA's  Hubble   Space   Telescope  ( H S T )  discovered  a   group  of  stars  t h a t  
apparently  had  been  c ;~nn iha l ized  of  the i r  cooler ou te r  gas layers by o t h e r  pass- 
ing stilrs, resulting  in stellar "naked  cores" w i th  surface temperatures  five times  
ho t te r   t h a n  Earth's Sun .  ( N A S A  Release 93 -109 ;  NY  Times, J u n e  10193; P lnq ,  
J u n e  lc?/93; B  S I L ~ ,  J u n e  10193; LA  Times, J u n e  10193; AP, J u n e  10193; Science, 
J u n e  14 /93 )  

T h e  Irl'i~shington Post  reportecl  t h a t   t h e  panel   advising  t h e  W h i t e  House  o n  
recie~igtni~lg t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  had  suggested  t h a t   t h e  proposed  astronaut   o u t -  
post  be  1;rtlnched  i n t o  a  "world  orbit"  where  it   could  be  reached  n o t   o n l y  by 
,41ucric;1n S p ; ~ c e  Shu t t le s  but  also  by  Russian, Japanese ,  a n d  Ch ine se   rockets. 
(IV' Post, J u n e  9 / 9 3 )  

I.JS24 Tc)&cy  reported  t h a t   t h e   Superconducting   Super   Collider ,   a   53-mile  
c i r c u l ; ~ r  t u n n e l   k i n g   build  ou t s ide   Dallas ,   m i g h t   n o t   su rv ive   t h e  
cong rea s io r~ ;~ l  huclget  cutters .  T h e   11  billion ,  over-budget  science  project  was 
he ing   t ; u y c t e J  by  cc~ngressional t l e ~ n n c r a t s .  (USA  Today, J u n e  9 / 9 3 )  

T h e   IY'cl.shii~gtun I'ost  reported   t h a t   two  separate   investigations   of  a   failed 
Atl'is rocket  launch   last  March  had  concluded   t h a t   t h e  mishap was  caused  by 
t h e  Icx).;ening o t  a  tiny  screw t h a t  helps  regulate  t h e  flow of  liquid  oxygen pro-  
pe l len t .   T h e   comp le t ion   of  t h e   investigations   allowed  Gene ra l   Dynamics 
C :o rpo r ;~ t~on ,  t h e  company  t h a t  built  t h e   rocket ,  to  resume  launches .  (W  Post, 
J u n e  9/93;  L . W  Tudily, J u n e  9/93;  H Chron ,  J u n e  9 / 9 3 )  

NASA described  t h e  STS - 6 1  Space   S h u t t l e  Endeavour  mission, scheduled  
t;>r L>t.ct>lnher, a s   t h e  "most  complicated   repair  mission  ever  attempted ."   T h e  
seven  ;Istronauts ahc,ard  Endeavour  were  scheduled  t o  a t t em p t  t o  service a n d  

J U N E  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

repair  the  Lockheed-built  Hubble  Space  Telescope.  Crew  members  were  to 
repair  the  telescope's  primary  mirror, which  had  a distorted  spherical mirror, 
as well  as  do regular maintenance work on  the telescope. (F l igh t  International, 
June  9-15/93; B  Sun ,  June  17/93) 

June  10:  T h e   House  Space,  Science,  and  Technology Committee  passed  a 
$15.16 billion  authorization for NASA ,  in effect rejecting  the attempt  to kill 
the  Space Station. T h e  authorization would  give  the  Space Station $1.9 bil- 
lion a year for  the next six fiscal years and $1.3 billion  in  the fiscal year 2000. 
Congressional opponents of the  station, however, vowed  to  take  the  fight  to 
the  House  floor.  (NY Times, June  10193; LA  Times, June   10193; USA  Today, 
June  10193; AP, June  10193) 

T h e   Federal  Aviation  Administration  authorized  civilian  pilots  to  use  a 
satellite-based  navigation  system  that  would  enable  them  to  choose  direct 
routes without  relying on   navigational  aids  o n  the   ground. T h e  system, the 
Global  Positioning  System,  uses  a  network  of  24  satellites  orbiting  11,000 
miles above the Earth. Each satellite sends out a continuous signal that can be 
computed by  receivers to determine an exact position.  (NY Times, June  10193) 

A  Deutsche  Aerospace AG  (DASA )  executive  called o n  Europe  and  the 
United  States  to cooperate  in  setting quotas  for  launches  of  Russia's  Proton 
Booster  rocket  until  such  time  as  market  economy  conditions  prevailed  in 
Russia. Werner  Heinzmann,  president of  DASA's space systems group, told  a 
news conference  that  currently  the  Proton  costs only a fraction  of  a western 
launcher because of  the value of  the  rouble. (RTW, June  10193) 

Th e   press  reported  that  the   House  Appropriations  Sub-committee  on  
Energy  and  Water  had  appropriated  $629  million  for  the  Superconducting 
Super Collider  for fiscal year  1994. T h e  Clinton  administration  had  request- 
ed  $640 million for  the Collider.  (UP I ,  June  10193) 

June  I  1 :   NASA   announced  that  on  June  13 Pioneer  10 would  celebrate  the 
tenth  anniversary of  becoming the first spacecraft to explore beyond  the  orbit 
of  Pluto,  the  most  distant  solar  system  planet  as  yet  discovered.  (NASA  
Release 93-110; W Times, June  12/93) 

Sky  and  Telescope  magazine  sponsored a contest  to choose a more  accurate 
name  than   "big bang1' to  describe  the  creation  of  the  universe.  (NY Times, 
June  11/93; AP, June  11/93; LA  'Times, June  11/93; W Post, June  16/93) 

Th e   Los  Angeles  Times  reported  that  congressional supporters of  the  pro- 
posed Space Station were warning that  the project would  face serious trouble 
if  President  Clinton  supported  a  radical,  low-cost design. Supporters  of  the 
Station made  it clear that  they supported the most elaborate and expensive of 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JUNE   1993 

the three  redesigns developed by  NASA.  This design, which would  cost $13.3 
billion  over  the  next  five years, would  cut more  than $4  billion from  the cost 
of  the Station, yet  it would keep most of  the Station's capabilities and make use 
of  much  of  the work  that  NASA  had  done  on   the project over  the  last  nine 
years. (LA Xmes, June 11/93) 

June  12:  In  a report  delivered  to  the White House,  a panel  appointed  by  the 
President said  it  found  the  two  cheaper options for  a Space Station  to  be  the 
"most deserving of  further  support." However, according to  press  reports, th e  
most  expensive  option  and  the  one  that  most  resembled  Space  Station 
Freedom was  the design favored by  the  majority of  the  members of  the House 
Committee on  Science, Space, and Technology. (W  Tmes ,  June  12/93; C Tnb, 
June  13/93) 

Intelsat and Martin Marietta  reached  a tentative settlement of  lawsuits con- 
nected  with  a communications satellite  that  Space Shuttle astronauts rescued 
after it was  stranded in low orbit. The  lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 
1990 launch of  a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went  into a  low, useless 
orbit  after a Martin Marietta  rocket  launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts 
attached  a  new  rocket  booster  package  to  the  satellite  in May  1992, and  the 
satellite  then  fired  itself  into  its  proper  orbit.  (W  Tmes ,  June  12/93; W Post, 
June 12/93) 

June  13:  Two NASA  scientists told  a meeting of  the American Astronomical 
Society  that  a  cosmic  collision  as  powerful  as  the  one  that  many  scientists 
think  killed  all  the dinosaurs on  Earth 65 million years ago may  take place on 
the  planet  Jupiter  in  1994. Th e   scientists speculated  that  the  impact  might 
come from the comet Shoemaker-Levy, which last year came so close to  Jupiter 
that  the  planet's powerful gravitational field  shattered  the  comet  into about a 
dozen large chunks. Recent calculations show that most of  the comet's remain- 
ing  chunks  may  hit  Jupiter  in  July  1994. Because  of  uncertainties  about  the 
comet's orbit, however, it was  possible that  the collision might not occur at all. 
( C  Trib, June  13/93; P Inq, June  20193; W Post, June  28/93) 

June  14:  NASA   announced  that  it  had  selected  the  Universities  Space 
Research Association, Columbia, Maryland,  to  negotiate  a cost-plus-fee con- 
tract  for  the  Visiting  Scientists  Program  at  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center, 
Greenbelt,  Maryland.  The   five-year  contract  was  expected  to  take  effect 
September I ,  1993; the proposed  cost for the five-year period was  $31 million. 
(NASA  Release C93-g) 

USA  Today  reported  that  an  article  in  Florida  Today  suggested  that  cuts  in 
quality-control staffs at NASA  and workers' fear of  admitting error were creat- 
ing potentially deadly problems for  the  Space Shuttle program.  (USA  Today, 
June 14/93) 

J U N E  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

NA SA   announced   tha t   t h e   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center ,   Greenbelt ,  
Maryland ,   had   selected   Fairchild  Space   and   Defense  Co rpo ra t ion   o f  
Germantown ,  Maryland,  for negotiations  leading  t o  the  award of  a cost-plus- 
award-fee  contract .   T h e   seven-year,  $91  million  contract   would  provide 
instrument  support  services  to   t h e   Engineering  Directorate  a t   Goddard. 
(NA SA  Release C93 -h ;  W Post, June  15/93)  

Donald  K.  Slayton ,  one   of  the   original  seven  American  astronauts,  died 
June  13 at his home  in  League City, Texas, of  brain cancer. H e  was  69. 
Mr.  Slayton, known  by  the  nickname  Deke, was  assigned  to  f ly   the   second 
Mercury mission  in  orbit m May  1962 but  was  grounded two months  before  the  
mission because of an  abnormal heartbeat. His heart condition cleared up in  1971, 
enabling him  to qualify for the  last available seat on  the  last Apollo mission. 
T h e  New   York  Times notes tha t  o the r  astronauts and space officials say tha t  
Mr.  Slayton  probably had  a greater  influence on  the  American  space program 
over a  longer period  of  time  t h a n  any o the r  single astronaut.  For  many  years, 
he  served as chief of  flight operations at the  Johnson  Space C e n t e r  and  in tha t  
position  was  in charge of astronaut  training and  chose crews for nearly  all mis- 
sions. He  retired  from NASA   in  1982. A t  the  time of  his death ,  he  was direc- 
tor  of  Space Services Inc . ,  a company  tha t   launched  small satellites. 
A  memorial  service  was  scheduled  for  June   19  at  the   Johnson   Space 
Center .   (UP I ,  June  13/93; RTW, June   13/93; NY  Times, June  14/93; W Tmes, 
J u n e  14/93; USA  Today, June   14/93; W  Post, June   14/93, June  20193; B  Sun, 
June  14/93; P lnq, June  14/93; WS],  June  14/93; AP, J u n e  14/93) 

Ten  years ago  this week, the  United   States  sent   its first woman,  Sally Ride, 
in to  space. Ride, who flew  in space twice,  is  a physics professor and  director of 
t h e  California Space Institute.  (AP, June   14/93)  

Aviation Week  B Space Technology magazine  reported  tha t   the  Wh i te  House 
had  begun  to  review  the   i~a r ious  options  for  redesign  of  the   Space  Station .  
The re  were reports  tha t  t h e  President  might  be wavering in his support for the  
Station   and  perhaps  would  be  willing  to  sacrifice it  for  his  broader  economic 
goals. (AvWk, June  14/93) 

]une  15:  Space  Shu t t le   Endeavour  was  scheduled  to   blast  off  J u n e  20  o n   a 
seven-day mission  tha t   included  a n  attempt   to  retrieve  a science satellite, t h e  
European Retrievable Carrier  (EURECA ) ,  and  a spacewalk to prepare  for  t h e  
Hubble  Space  Telescope  repair  mission.  T h e   Shu t t le   was  also  carrying  t h e  
world's first  commercial  space  laboratory,  Spacehab ,  which  had  o n  board  2 2  
experiments  underwritten  by  NASA .   (USA   Today, J u n e   17/93; B  Sun, J u n e  
17/93; UPI ,  June  17/93; AP, June  17/93)  

June  16: T h e  Los  Angeles  Times reported  tha t ,  according  to  congressional  aids, 
President  C l in ton   had  decided  to   push  for  construction  of  a  sophisticated, 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N n  AERONAUTICS  

JUNE  1993 

orbiting  space  laboratory  tha t   would  make  use  of  much  of  the   technology 
already developed  for Space Station  Freedom. T h e  President  appeared  to  h i n t  
at  this decision  in a June  15 press conference.  (LA Times, June  16/93) 

NASA   announced  tha t   a  specially modified NASA   F-15  research  aircraft 
had arrived at the  Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. 
T h e   F-15  was  to  be  involved  in  a  research  program  aimed  at  substantially 
advancing the  cruising efficiency and flight maneuverability  of  future U .S .  air- 
craft.  (NA SA  Release 93-1 15 )  

Gu ion  Bluford Jr . ,  America's first African  American  astronaut  in  space, was 
scheduled  to  leave NASA   in July to  join NYMA,  Inc., a Greenbelt ,  Maryland, 
engineering  and   computer  software  company.  (USA   Today,  June   16/93; 
NASA  Release, 93-1  13 )  

Wh i te   House  officials said  tha t   President  C l in ton   had  decided  to   proceed 
with  a  slightly slimmed down  version  of  the  original  Space S ta t ion  Freedom 
design. T h e  Space Station  was  expected  to  cost  about  $10.5 billion  over  five 
years.  (RTw, J u n e  16/93; NY  Times, June   17/93; USA  Today, J u n e  17/93; AP, 
June  1 7/93 ) 

A  European  Space  Agency  official  said  tha t   a  re-usable  science  satellite 
scheduled  to  be  rescued  during Space Shu t t le  Endeavour's mission next  week 
would  be  mothballed  after  astronauts  returned  i t   to  Earth  and  experiments 
were  removed  from  it.  T h e   satellite  was  scheduled  t o   be  flown  four  more 
times,  but  there was  no  budget  for  additional flights.  (RTW, June   16/93) 

June  17: Scientists writing  in  the  journal  Nature suggested tha t  multiple  mete- 
orites,  rather  t h a n   one   big  meteorite,  might  have   caused  the   extinction   of 
dinosaurs.  ( P  Inq ,  June  17/93; NY  Times, J u n e  22/93) 

Writing  in the  New York  Times, author  J o h n  Lukacs called the  proposed $8.4 
billion  Super Collider  in Texas "super nonsense."  He   labelled as outdated  t h e  
view held by proponents of  the  Super Collider tha t  science might discover t h e  
smallest  building  block  of  the   universe  and   tha t   the   universe  could  be 
explained  by  a Grand  Unified  Theory.  (NY  Times, June   17/93) 

A n  editorial  in  the  Baltimore Sun urged  President C l in ton   t o  give a "strong 
go-ahead"  to  the  building  of  Space Station  Freedom.  ( 0  Sun, J u n e  17/93) 

President  Bill  C l in ton   announced  tha t   he  would  ask Congress  to  support  a 
scaled-down version of  Space S ta t ion  Freedom and  would  attempt  to  broaden 
international   participation  in  the   program.  C l in ton   said  tha t   he   would  also 
support  the  Superconducting Super Collider project.  (RTW, J u n e  17/93; UPI, 
June   17/93; W  Post,  June   18/93;  LA  Times,  J u n e   18/93;  USA  Today,  June  

J U N E  1993 

[:I  

[ l<ONO [ -CX ; I '  I1W3 

18/93;  NY T r n e 5 ,  J u n e   18/93 ,  LV'  Tune). J u n e   1819 'I,  B Sun, J u n e   1819 5,  \VSJ, 
J u n e  13/93;  AP, J u n e  18 /93 )  

June 18: N A S A  announced  t h e  selection  of  100 mlnority  high  schctol s t~ r Jen t . s  
t o   participate   in  ;I  new  NASA   e d u c a t i ~ , n  prc,gs;lul  c;llleJ  SHAK P   PLUS  
Research  Apprenticeship   Prt)gr'rrn.  T h e   prograln  is  a  c o l l a l x ~ r i l t i ~ e  effort 
between   NASA ,  Historically  Hl;lck  (:alleges and   Universities ,   kind  aerospace 
and  o t h e r  industries  t o  increase opportunities   for minority  students   interested  
in   careers  in  mathematics ,   science ,   anil  engineering   by  offering  rese;rrch 
apprenticeships .   ( N A S A  Release  9 3 -  116 )  

June 20: N A S A  delayed  t h e  launch  of  Space  S h u t t l e  Ende;i\lctur, scheduled  t o  
blast  off  o n  J u n e  20,  because  of  poor  weather   a t   C:;rpe  C a n a ~ e r a l ,  Florida. A  
second   launch   a t t em p t   was   expected   for  Mond;iy morning ,   J u n e   2 1 .   (RTW ,  
J u n e   20193;  UP I ,   J u n e   20/91,  J u n e   21/93;  A p ,   J u n e   21/93;  NY  T i n e s ,  Jim 
21/93; LA  Xmes ,  J u n e  21/93; W'  Pos t ,  J u n e  21/97;  L7SA  T I C ~ Z ~ ,  
J u n e  21/93;  I%' 
Ztnes ,  J u n e  21/93; B  Sun ,  J u n e  21 /93 )  

Robert   McClure   of  1)i)minlon  Astrctphysic;ll  Observatory  in  Victoria ,  
British  Columbia ,   said  t h a t   Canadi;ln   ; l n ~ i  U .S .   ilstrononlerx  had   used  a  tc le -  
scope o n  Mauna  Kea, Hawaii,  to oh ta in  t h e  first  clear pictclres showing  ga l ; l s -  
ies  colliding   and   merging  o n  "a  really  gr;ind  scale." T h e  plctures  supported   a 
theory   t h a t  postulates   tha t   elliptical  galaxies  were  ictr~ned by  galactic  mergers 
such  as  those  observed.  (K' Times, J u n e  2@ /93 )  

June   21 :   T h e  
in   C:amhridge, 
I n t e r n a t i o n , l l   Astronctulical   U n i o n  
Massachusetts,  said  t h a t   a n   asteroid  had   colne   tvithin  90 ,000  miles  of  E a r t h  
last  m o n t h   without   being  de tec ted .   T h i s   wra.\  t h e   closest  encoun te r   ever  
recorded.  T h e  asteroid ,  n;lmeil  1993  KA ? ,  was  ~ l i scovc red  by  asteroiil  h u n t c s  
David  Rabinoavit:.  ( W  Posr, J u n e  21  193; P  I n q ,  J u n e  2 1 /95 )  

T h e  Danish   industry  ministry  i~ n n o u n c e i l  t h a t   1)enruark  was  scheduled   t o  
take  part   in  a  scientific  satellite   project  in  cooperation   with   NASA in  1995 .  
T h e  project  i n v o l v e~ l  t h e  launch  of  a  small  1)anish  satellite   i n t o  orhit   t o  study 
Earth's magnetic   field.  (MU ,  J u n e  2 1 /93 )  

In  mid-June  a   new  breed  of  spacecratt,  the   Llelta  Clipper  XI  ( L X - X ) ,  ux s  
scheduled  t o  be  launched for a  brief  test.  If  things go accol-cling t o  pl;ln, t h e  craft 
would hover  briefly  100 feet  in  the  air, and   then   settle  hick   in  its 1;lunching paci. 
T h e  spacecraft, hililt by  McDon~ le l l  l lo t~g la s  Aerospace, wxs   to  take  off  verticill- 
l y   and   land  the   same  \\7;1):  Sorne  experts  in  the   fielil  suggested  that   t h e   LX:-X 
 U.S.  space  explor,)tion.  (R~c s r i ie .~~  
might  mark  the   next  phase  t
\Y2ek,  J u n e  
i
21/93) 

N A S A  announced   tha t   it  ;inJ   the  National   Institute  o n  Deafnes:,  anti O t h e r  
C om~ n i l n i c a t i o n  l)isorilcrs  ( N I I X D )  had  selel.ttd  ;I  propos;ll trom  ;I  cct11sort1~1111 
i n i  

ASTRON.\UTI<:S  AN [ )   AEKONAUT I ( ,S  

J U N E  1993 

of  institutions  t o   place  t h e   Cen te r   for  Vestibular  Research  a t   Northwestern  
University,  Evansttrn,  Illinois.  T h e  cen te r  would  work  o n   defining  the   contri-  
butions of  the  \~estihular  system to  t h e  control  of  halance, posture, and   locomo- 
tion   through  ground-based and  space-hased studies.  ( N A S A  Release  93-1 11 )  

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   40  college  s tuden t s   had   s ta r ted   a  six-week  Space  
Life  Sc ience s  Training   Program  a t  NASA's   Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r ,  Florida. 
T h e  summer   residence   t ra in ing   program  was   for  college  s tuden t s   interested  
in   life  sciences ,   b ioeng inee r ing ,  ecology,  or  related   fields.  ( N A S A  Release  
93 -1  1 7 )  

Space   S h u t t l e   Endeavour   blasted  i n t o   space  o n  J u n e   21,  after  a  one-day  
launch   delay.  T h e   shuttle's  mission  was  multipurpose,  featuring   experiments  
in   t h e  world's first  commercial   research  laboratory,  Spacehab;  t h e   retrieval  of 
a  European  science   satellite;  and   a  spacewalk  geared  t o  preparing  astronauts  
for t h e  Hubble  Space  Telescope  repair mission  scheduled  for December.  (UP I ,  
J u n e   21/93;  AP,  J u n e   21/93;  RTW ,   J u n e   21/93;  USA  Today,June  22/93;  NY 
Times, J u n e  22/93;  W Post,  J u n e  22/93; LA  Times, J u n e  22/93; W Times,  J u n e  
22/93; B  Sun ,  J u n e  22/93)  

T h e   House  Sc ience ,   Space ,  and   Technology  C omm i t t e e   voted  J u n e   9  t o  
prevent   N A S A   from  moving   approximately  9 0   Space   S h u t t l e   jobs  from 
Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in  Huntsville ,   A labama ,   to   J o h n s o n   Space  
C e n t e r   in  Hou s ton .   (Space ~Vezc~s, J u n e  2 1-27/93)  

J u n e  23: N A S A   announced   t h a t ,  despite transmitttng   problems,  t h e  onboard  
da ta   recovery  system  of  Space   Shu t t le   STS - 5 6  had   captured   103 orbital   sun -  
rises  and   sunsets  observed  by  t h e  A tmo sphe r ic  Trace  Molecule  Spectroscopy 
(ATMOS) instrument   aboard  t h e  S h u t t l e .  ( N A S A  Release 93-1 18 )  

President  C l i n t o n   thanked   t h e   crew  members  aboard   Space   S h u t t l e  
Endeavoiir  for  giving  "a  great  deal   of  credibility"  t o  his  a t t em p t   t o  save  t h e  
Space   S t a t i o n .  T h e   President  called  t h e   crew  o n   Tuesday,  J u n e   22.  (USA  
Today, J u n e  23/93;  NY Times, J u n e  23/93; VC!  Times, J u n e  23/93) 

A  New   York  Times  editorial   recommended   t h a t   Congress  e l im ina te   t h e  
Space  S t a t i o n  program  because  of  t h e  need   t o  find  deeper  budget  cuts  and   t h e  
fact t h a t  t h e  program  looked  "more  like pork-barrel spending  for t h e  aerospace 
industry   t h a n   a n   exciting   technological   venture ."   T h e   editorial   no ted   t h a t  
cu t t ing   t h e  program  would  force  t h e  N a t i o n   to reassess just  wha t  role  human s  
should  play  in  space.  (NY  Times, J u n e  23/93) 

A  Depa r tmen t   of  Energy  draft  report  s a d  t h a t   t h e   Superconducting   Supe r  
Colllder   program  had   r x k e d   up  a t   least  $216   million  in   unreasonable   sub- 
con t rac to r  expenses.  ( W  Post, J u n e  23 /93 )  

J U N E  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1 99  3 

T h e  House  Appropriations  C omm i t t e e  adopted   a  revised  space  budget  t h a t  
fully  funded   t h e   redesigned  Space   S t a t l o n  but  called  for  large  cuts   elsewhere  
in NASA's  hudget.  (\VSJ, J u n e  23/93)  

T h e   Washington Times reported  t h a t   Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  had   t o  delay 
firing a jet  t o  avoid  possibly  coming   in  con tac t  with   a  piece  of  space  trash ,   in  
this   instance ,   a  27-year-old  spent   Russian  rocket.  Th i s  was  t h e  fourth   time   in  
two  years  t h a t  S h u t t l e  astronauts  had   to   take measures  t o  avoid  trash  in  space. 
T h e r e  were hundreds  of  thousands  of  pieces of  trash floating  in space as a result 
of space missions. (AP ,  J u n e  23/93; IVTimes, J u n e  24/93; NY  Tm e s ,  J u n e  24/93)  

By  a  one -vo te   margin ,   t h e   House   of  Representatives   voted   t o   fund   Space  
S t a t i o n   Freedom.  As  a  result  of  a  216-215   vote ,   t h e   program  escaped  a n  
a t temp t   by  budget-cutting   lawmakers  t o  scrap  t h e  m i~ l t ib i l l ion -do l la r  project. 
(WSJ, J u n e  24/93; NY  Times, J u n e  24/93; LA Times, J u n e  24/93; W Times, J u n e  
24/93;  U S A  Today, J u n e  24/93; AP, J u n e  24/93; U P l ,  J u n e  23/94;  RTW ,  J u n e  
23/93; W  Post, J u n e  24/93)  

June   2 4 :   N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  NASA -Un ive r s i ty   of  New  Hampshire  
study  had   revealed  increased  tropical  deforestation   and   adverse  effects  o n  
tropical  forest  hah i ta t   since  t h e   late   1970s. ( N A S A  Release  93 -1  1 9 )  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   announced  the   appointment  of  two 
astronauts, William M .  Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, t o  senior management 
positions at NASA   He;ldquarters, Washington, K. (NA SA  Release June  24/93) 

T h e  Washington Post  reported  t h a t  a W h i t e  House  official had   indicated   t h a t  
President  C l i n t o n   intended   t o  retain  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n ,  
a  Bush appointee .   T h e  W h i t e  House  apparently  had   decided  t h a t  G o l d i n  was 
just  t h e  type  of  hard-nosed  Administrator   t h a t  N A S A  needed .   ( W  Post, J u n e  
24/93; UP I ,  J u n e  24 /93 )  

Responding   t o   a n  Op-Ed   piece  by  J o h n  Lukacs  in  t h e  New   Krrk  Times  t h a t  
attacked   b o t h   t h e   Super   Collider   a n d   t h e   field  of  particle   physics,  Edward 
Farhi ,  Professor of  Physics, MIT,  insisted  t h a t   t h e  Super  Co l l ide r  uruuld  open  
a  new  window  o n  a n  energy  range  n o t  yet  explored  by  physicists,  saying  t h a t  
it  must  he  built  if  "progress  is  to   proceed."  (NY Times, J u n e  24 /93 )  

Some   members  of  Congress  have   introduced   a  bill  t h a t   would  bar  space 
advertising.  T h e  hill  would  prohibit   t h e   transportation   secretary  from   issuing 
launch   licenses for  any  vehicles  carrying materials  t o  he  used  as  ads  in  space .  
( W  Times, J u n e  24 /93 )  

Writing   in   t h e  journal  Nature, scientists  reported  t h a t   they  t h i n k   they   have  
discovered  a  belt  of  asteroids  in   orbits  so  close  t i)   t h e  Earth's orbit   t h a t  many  

4STKON.411T1('< 4x1)  .\tKON,\LlTI('S 

J U N E  1993 

of  them   m a y   h i t   our  planer  a t   sonw  time  or  c~ the r .  However,  most  o f   these  
,t,terclicis  are  s o  small  t h ~ t  t h e \  will  explode   in  space without   doing  any  dam -  
age.  ( N Y  Tiincs, J L I I ~ ~  74/0 1 )  

Western  Europe's Ariane  42P rocket  deplcqled a n  American  communications  
satellite  Into  space cin  J u n e  24. T h e  rocket ,  which  was  launched   from  French 
Guyana   after  n  long  series  of  delays,  was  owned  by  t h e   Los  Angeles  based 
t l i~g lac sSpac t .  < l n J  Commun ica t ion s  Company.  (RTW ,  J u n e  24/93)  

\,ored to  k i l l   t h e  $1  1 billion  Superconducting  
T h e  Houhe  o t  R e p r c s e n t ;~ t i \~ e s  
Super  Collider   project.  T h e   project ,   which  had  President  Clinton's   support ,  
\via5  I~ e t n g  bi111t in  Texas.  T h e  Super  Collider,  which  nras designed  to discover 
sub - :~ tom ic  particles  that   C C I L I I ~  ~ l r c , \ . i~ i e  clues tv   t h e  origins o t  t h e  universe, fell 
pressures.  (RTW ,  J u n e  24/93; UP I ,  J u n e  24/93; 
\.ictim  t o  political  and   b ~ ~ d ~ e t  
N\' X i n c s ,  J u n e  25/93; B  S u n ,  J i ~ n e  25/93; 1V P u s t ,  J u n e  25/93)  

(Xt'iclills said  t h a t   talks  hetween  Vice  President  A1 G o r e  and  Russian  Prime 
t o  discuss mutual   space  exploration   had  been  
h~linister  Viktor  C h e r n ~ m ~ r i l i n  
p u t   off  indefinitely  because  of  triction  over  a  $400  million  con t rac t  for  Russia 
t c )   sell rocket  engines  t o  India.  ( U P l ,  J u n e  24/93; RTW, J u n e  25/93)  

*  Writing   in  t h e  Chicago E ib t tne ,   clxnrnentator  J o a n  Beck  called  on  Congress 
to  kill  t h e  Space  S t i ~ t i u n .  S h e  aL31nitted that  killing t h e  project would  cost jobs, 
l j i~ t  argued  tha t   Liolng  so  w a s   necessary  if' progress were  to  he  made  in   cu t t ing  
l u c k   t h e  clef~crt. (C Trih, J u n e  24/93) 

j u n c   25: ,After making  ;I  final series of  engine  maneuvers  t h a t  brought  it  with-  
In  reach  of  t h e   European  Ketrievahle  Carrier   (EURECA ) ,  a  free-flying  plat-  
tcvm  of  science experiments ,  t h e  commander  of  Shu t t le  Endeavour plucked  t h e  
batellite  out   o t  space  and   stowed  it  in  the   Shuttle's  cargo  hold   for  return   t o  
E'lrth. 
Asrron;lut  I);r\.iil L C ~ V  
fixed  two stuck  an tenna s  o n  EURECA   during  a  later  
.;p,~ccwnlk; during  tilt,  \ y a k ,  which  w a s   originally  planned   as  an   training  exer- 
cise  to   prepare  tor  the   birthhle Spacc Telescope  repair  mission, he   also  twirled 
;mother astronaut  around  to   test  how difficult  it would be  t o  move large objects 
in  sp;\ce. Astrcmauts  also worked, unsuccessfully  as  it   turned  o u t ,  o n  repairing 
a  cloggecl  line  in  ;I  wi~ter-recycling  experiment .   (W  Po s t ,   J u n e   25/91,  J u n e  
76/93:  L A   T t n c s ,  J u n e   25/93, J u n e  27/93; NY  Times,  J u n e   25/93,  J u n e   29/93; 
AP, J u n e  25/93; RTW, J u n e  25/93; USA  Todq, J u n e  25/93 ,  J u n e  28/93; B  Sun ,  
I u n e  26/93; 1V Xmc s ,  J u n e  26/93; P  Inq ,  june   26/93; P  fly, J u n e  29 /93 )  

Satellite   rese;lrch  suyporteil  hy  NASA   found  tha t   far  fewer  trees  had   been  
cut  111  t h e   d4m;l:cin  rain  h r e s t   than   previously  nsaumed.  However,  the   same 
study  ; ~ l s o  t;)unil  t h a t   three   times  as many  animal  and  p lan t  species were  being 
killed  I t r   were  near   ex t inc t ion   t h a n  previclusly had   been  estitnated .   (AP ,  J u n e  
h / 2 5 ;   \ \ ' l l o s r ,   J ~ I I I C  25/93: RTW, J u n e  24/93; NY T imes ,  J ~ l n e  29/93)  

JUNE  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Western Europe's second Ariane-5  booster was  tested  in a jungle  clearing in 
French  Guyana ,   space  officials  announced .   T h e   first  Ariane-5   rocket  was 
scheduled  for  launch  in  1996. (RTW, June  25/93) 

June  26: NA SA  unreeled  1 ,640  feet  of  cooper wire above Earth  and  conduct-  
ed  electricity through  the   line  in a space  tether  test. When   refined, such  te th -  
ers  could  be  used  to   dispel  electrical  charges  from  spacecraft  and   change  
spacecraft orbits.  T h e   tether   spool was  carried  into  space  by  a  Delta  2  rocket 
launched by  the  Air Force.  (AP, J u n e  26/93; RTW, J u n e  26/93; NY Times, J u n e  
27/93; W Post, June  27/93) 

Roald  Sagdeev, director  of  the   Space  Research  Institute   i n  Moscow  from 
1973-1988 and  now  professor  of  physics a t   the  University  of  Maryland, and  
Michael Nach t ,  dean  of  the  school of  public affairs at t h e  university, argued i n  
a New  York  Times  article  tha t   NASA   should  solicit  Russian design  help   and  
begin  plans  to modify the  Space Station's orbit so  tha t   it  could  be  reached  by 
launch   vehicles  from  both   the   Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   and  the   Baikonur 
Cosmodrome.  T h e   authors  also  noted  tha t   a  University  of  Maryland  study 
commissioned  by  NASA   found  tha t   a wider  use  of  Russian  technology  could 
reduce  costs by  up  to a billion  dollars a year  after  the  station  was operational. 
(NY  Xmes, June  26/93) 

A  satellite  was  launched  from Vandenberg  Air  Force  Base  carrying  a mili- 
tary satellite designed t o  improve t h e  accuracy of  radars tha t  track planes, mis- 
siles, space junk,  shuttles, and  o the r  spacecraft.  (AP, June  26/93) 

June 27: Space School, a method of  teaching ma th  and  science tha t  uses space 
age  technology  to   beam  educational  "adventures"  in to   classrooms  across 
America, was scheduled  to  open  August 30 .  Space School  lessons, which were 
to be  carried  o n  a delivery system called  "distance  learning," would  be  broad- 
cast  from a studio in Spokane ,  Washington ,  beamed  up  to  a satellite, down  to 
a receiver, and   transmitted  to a television  in  the  classroom. Space School  was 
to  be operated  and partially financed by the  Young Astronaut  Council ,  a n o n -  
profit  organization  started by t h e  W h i t e  House  in   1985. (Parade, J u n e  27/93) 

June  28:  NASA   announced   tha t   during  the   first six  months   of  their   mission 
scientists  using  the   US . -F r e n c h   TOPEX/Poseidon  oceanographic  satellite 
had  recorded  t h e   most  accurate  measurements  to  date   of  global  sea  level 
changes.  Oceanographers  would  use  the   data   to   calibrate  computer  models 
tha t  help  forecast future climate  changes.  (NA SA  Release 93-122)  

Writing  in   the   Los  Angeles  Times,  commentator  James Flanigan  made  t h e  
case for funding the  Space Station ,  reminding readers of  the  Vest Commission 
report, ordered  last March by  the  Wh i te  House. T h e  report  listed  three  main 
goals of  the   Space  Station   program:  to   learn  about  space  travel,  specifically 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

J U N E  1993 

how  human  beings  and  materials  react  to  prolonged weightless exposure; to 
gather  technological  and  engineering knowledge; and  to  further  internation- 
al cooperation.  (LA  Times, Jun e  28/93) 

Th e  House of  Representatives voted  to maintain  $2.1 billion  in  funding for 
the  scaled-down  Space  Station  Freedom  by  a  220  to   196  vote.  NASA  
Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin attributed  the  growing  support to  an  intense 
lobbying effort  by  the White  House  and  congressional supporters. Th e  pro- 
ject's  chance  of  surviving  the  Senate  vote  were  seen  as  good.  (RTW, June  
28/93; UPI, June  28/93; APn ,  June  29/93; AP, June  29/93; W Post, June  29/93; 
LA  Tmes, June  29/93; H Post, June 29/93; B  Sun, June  29/93; W Times, June  
29/93; NY  Times, June  30193) 

A National  Research Council  (NRC )  study found that Space Shuttle com- 
puter  software programs were  flawed by  lax attention to safety by NASA  engi- 
neers. Nancy  Leveson,  who  headed  the  NRC   committee  that  prepared  the  
report, said that  "many of  the same kinds of  mistakes that  played a role  in  the 
Challenger accident  are now being repeated with  the Shuttle flight software." 
NASA, which  requested  the  study, was  considering some of  the  report's rec- 
ommendations.  (AP, June  28/93; USA  Today, June 29/93; B  Sun, June  29/93) 

Bad  weather  delayed the  landing of  Space Shuttle Endeavour  at  Kennedy 
Space Center. Th e  landing was  rescheduled  for June 30, weather permitting. 
(UPI, June  29/93, June 30193; W Post, June  30193; USA  Today, June  30193; NY 
Times, June  30193; B  Sun, June  30193; AP, June 30193; RTW, June  30193) 

June 30:  NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  hired  two  astronauts  to  fill 
senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and vet- 
eran  of  three  Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee,  a former  test pilot 
who  had  flown  two  Shuttle missions.  They  were  scheduled  to  help  lead  the  
Agency's transition  to  a  smaller, cheaper  Space  Station  program.  ( W  Post, 
June  30193) 

An editorial  in  the Washington Post  noted  that  in  light of  the budget deficit 
it  was  difficult  to  quarrel  with  Congress's decision  to  kill  funding  for  the 
Superconducting  Super  Collider.  By  that  same  token,  however,  the  Space 
Station deserved  to  be  killed, especially because  the  Super Collider  had  the  
potential  to contribute to human  knowledge while the  Space Station did not. 
( W  Post, June  30193) 

A  team of  Russian and French cosmonauts was  scheduled to blast off  to the 
Mir  Orbital Space Station on  July  1 ,  for  a  three-week mission  during which 
the  team would  carry out  a series of  medical and  scientific experiments. This 
was  the  fourth  joint  Russian-French space  mission  since  1982. Th e   mission 

IUNE   1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

h a d  been   largely  overshadowed  by  t h e  space program's serious financial   prob- 
lems  caused by  t h e  collapse of  t h e  Sov ie t  Union.  (RTW, J u n e  6/30) 

July  

I :  N A S A   announced  t h a t   it  had  selected  investigators  t o  work o n  a  new 
]uly 
mission,  called   T IMED   (Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere   Energetics 
and   Dynamics) .   T h e  mission  was  t o   study  t h e   atmospheric   regions  t h a t   lie 
roughly  between  40 t o  110  miles  ( 6 0  and   180 kilometers  above t h e  Earth's sur- 
face. T h e   investigators  come   from  four  different  universities,  two  oi NASA's 
research  centers ,   a n d  four  nonprofit   research  and/or   i n d u s t r~ a l  l a b o r a t o r~ e s  in 
t h e  Un i ted   States .   ( N A S A  Release 9 3 - 1 2 3 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  had   set  July  17 as  t h e   launch   da te   for  t h e   Space  
S h u t t l e   Discovery's  1 7 t h   flight.  T h e   n ine -day   mission  of  STS-51  was  t o  
include   deployment   of  a n  Advanced   Commun ica t ion s   Technology  Sa te l l i te  
( A C T S )  a n d  dep loymen t  and   retrieval  of  t h e  Ge rman -bu i l t  ORFEUS-,SPAS 
astrophysics  free-flier. A  six-hour  space walk  by  two astronauts  was also sched-  
uled.  ( N A S A  N o t e   t o  Editors N93-38) 

Energy  Secretary  Hazel  O'Leary harshly   criticized  t h e   managemen t   o f   t h e  
$1 1  billion   Federal  Superconducting   Supc r  Collider   project   scheduled  t o  he 
built  in  Texas.  O'Leary said  she  was distressed  by  reports of  wasteful  e s p e n d i -  
tures,  erroneous  cost  estimates ,  and   t h e  contractor's  failure  t o  cooperate   with  
gove rnmen t  auditors.  S h e  said she  would  move  t o  replace  t h e  principal   c o n -  
tractor ,  Universities   Research  Association ,   Inc.  ( U R A ) ,  in   t h e  n e x t   30 days. 
(W  Post, Ju l   1/93; NY  Times, Ju l   1/93) 

T h e  Los  Angeks  Times  reported  t h a t   a  dispute  was  brewing  within   NA SA  
regarding who  was  t o  be assigned t o  t h e  management   team  overseeing work  o n  
t h e  redesigned  Space S t a t i o n .  N A S A  Administrator  Daniel S. Golitin  tvas sa id  
t o  be  looking for new  blood  o n  t h e  management   team.  (LA T m c s ,  Ju l   1 /93 )  

In   letters  t o   t h e   editor   of  t h e   Baltimore  S u n ,  two  J o h n s  Hopkins   University 
physics professors defended  t h e   importance  of  t h e  Super  Collider.  Roth  writers 
said t h a t  t h e  project  represented  basic research of  t h e  highest caliher  anil  rlc~ted 
t h a t   its fate  should  n o t   be  tied  t o  t h a t  of  t h e  Space  S ta t ion .   ( B  S u n ,  Ju l   1 /93 )  

T h e   S h u t t l e   Endeavour   landed   a t   t h e   Kennedy  Sp;icc C e n t e r  on   July   1 ,  
after  a  two-day  delay   caused  by  bad  weather .   T h e   S h u t t l e   carried  a  sclence  
satellite   t h e  astronauts   had   retrieved   in  orbit .  
Meanwhile ,   t h e  crew  of  S h u t t l e  Discovery ~ v s s  practicing   fo r   t h c   Shu t t le '?  
n e x t   mission,  scheduled   t o   begin  July   17 .   During  t h e   six-hour   space\v;llk 
~ l a n n e d  for t h e  mission, astronauts  were  t o  test Hubhle  Space  Telescope rcpair 
tools. T h e  Hubble   repair  mission  was  scheduled   for  L3ecember.  (AP ,  J i l l   119 3 ;  
RTW ,  J u l  1/93; UP I ,  Ju l  1/93; USA Today ,  J u l  1/93; NY rlirnes, J u l 7 / 9 1 ;  N IP o . s t ,  
J u l  2/93;  W Times, J u l  2/93; AklVk, J u l  5/93)  

ASTRONACITICS  ANI)   AERONAUT ICS  

JULY  1993 

N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S .   Go ld in   told  a  S e n a t e   panel   t h a t   Space  
S t a t i o n  Freedom  needed  t o  be  everything   from  a  scientific  laboratory  t o  "an 
inspiration   t o  children ."   Disagreeing  with  G o l d i n ,  Robert   L.  Park, represent-  
ing  t h e  Ame r ican   Physical  Society, argued  t h a t   t h e  "Space  S t a t i o n   is  unlike-  
ly  t o  make  any   significant  scientific  contribution ."   (AP, J u l  1/93 ,  J u l  2 /93 )  

A  team   of  Russian  a n d   French   cosmonauts   blasted  off  t o   t h e  Mir   O rb i ta l  
Space  S t a t i o n  o n  July  1 ,  for a three-week  mission. T h e  team  was  scheduled  t o  
carry  ou t   a  series  of  medical  and   scientific  experiments   and   undertake   th ree  
space walks.  T h i s  was  t h e  fourth  joint  Russian-French  space flight since   1982 .  
(RTW ,  J u l  1/93;  RT, J u l   1 /93 )  

July  2 :   N A S A   announced   t h a t   it   had   selected  SYSCON   Services,  Inc., 
Wa sh ing ton ,  DC,  for  negotiations   leading  t o  t h e  award of  a  con t rac t   t o  pro-  
vide  techn ica l   and   support   services  a t   NASA's  Ame s   Research  Cen te r ,  
Moffett  Field, California .   ( N A S A  Release C93-j ) 

J u l y   3:  A  Soyuz  spacecraft  with   a  Ru s s~an -F rench  crew  docked  successfully 
with   t h e  Mir O rb i ta l  Space  S t a t i o n  o n  July 3. (RTW ,  July   3 /93 )  

July  5:  N A S A   said  t h a t   t h e   US . -F rench   TOPEX/Poseidon   satellite   h a d  
revealed  t h a t   sea  levels  dropped  12 inches  off  t h e  East  Coast   during   t h e  peri- 
od  hetween   O c t o b e r   1992  t o   March   1993   as  cold   winter   air  chilled   t h e  
A t lan t ic  O c e a n  and  made  t h e  water  con t rac t .  T h e  satellite  also found  t h a t  sea 
levels n>se 1 2  inches   in  parts  of  t h e  S o u t h e r n  Hemisphere ,  where  warm  sum-  
mer  air heated   t h e  oceans  and  made  t h e  water  expand .  
According   t o  Lee Fu, chief scientist  of  t h e  $706  million  project  a t  NASA's 
J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory,  these   measurements  were  t h e  most  accurate  yet  of 
glohal  sea  level  changes   and   showed  how  sea  levels  were  affected  by  b o t h  
winds  and   seasonal  temperature   changes   in  ocean  water.  (AP, ] u l 5 / 9 3 )  

Donald   Yeornans  of  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in   Pasadena ,  
California ,   said  t h a t   "there   is  almost  n o   question"   t h a t   major  c h u n k s  of  t h e  
come t   Shoemaker-Levy  9 would  h i t   t h e   p lane t   Jup i te r   in   la te   July  of  1994 .  
Astronomers   planned   t o  aim  virtually  every  telescope  in   t h e  world  a t  Jup i te r  
in  late  J u l y   t o  see what   happens   when   big  chunk s  of  a  shattered   come t  crash  
i n t o   t h e   largest  known   p lane t   a t   almost  4 0  miles  a  second .  Astronomers   pre- 
dicted   t h a t   t h e  chunk s  would  explode  with   t h e  energy equivalent   t o  almost  a 
billion  megatons  of  TNT .   (W  Post, Ju l  5/93; W Times,  O c t   5 /93 )  

July  6:  Sena to r  Jame s  M .  Jeffords  a n d  a  group  of  House  members   last  m o n t h  
introduced   a n   amendmen t   t o   t h e  Commercial   Space  Launch   A c t  of  1984  t o  
prohibit   t h e   Depa r tmen t   of  Transportation   from  licensing   a  payload  t h a t  
would  result  in  advertising  from  space.  T h e  amendmen t   was  in  response  t o  a 
proposal  by Space  Marketing   lnc .  of  Roswell, Georgia ,   t o   launch   a mile-long  

JULY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY   1993 

inflatable  billboard  into  space.  T h e  company planned  to stuff  the  billboard  in 
a  satellite;  after  the   satellite  reached  orbit ,   it  would  open   and  the   billboard 
would  jump  out   like  "a  giant  life  raft." 
Opposition  t o   the   billboard  was  spearheaded  by  a  lobbying  effort ,  "Save 
Ou r   Skies,"  put  together  by  3 0   state  chapters  of  Public  Interest  Research 
Groups.  ( W Post, J u l 6 / 9 3 ;  C  Tnb, J u l   7/93) 

J o h n  Bolton, a pioneer in radio astronomy, died  a t  Buderim in Queensland, 
Australia.  H e  was  71.  Bolton  was  credited  with  having discovered,  in  1947, 
the  first radio "stars," galaxies tha t  broadcast  incredibly strong signals in radio 
wave  length .  (NY Times, Jul  20193) 

July  7: Shu t t le  builder Rockwell lnternational  Corporation  announced  tha t   i t  
would  acquire  Russian  docking  equipment   for  Space  Shu t t le   Atlantis'  
planned  linkup  with  Russia's Mir  Space  Station   in  1995. Acquisition  of  the  
docking  adapter  was  part  of  an   agreement  between  the   two  countries  tha t  
included  flying  a Russian cosmonaut o n   the   Shu t t le  Discovery  in  November 
and  sending an  American  astronaut to  Mir for  three months  in  1995. (AP ,  Jul  
7/93; H Chron, J u l   8 /93 ) )  

French  Prime  Minister  Edouard  Balladur  said  tha t   European  countries 
should  attempt   to cooperate on  space projects  because progress  in  technology 
was a way  to  assert themselves o n  the  world stage. He made the  comment  after 
talking by  satellite link  with  a French  cosmonaut who was  on  a joint  Franco- 
Russian mission.  (RTW ,  Ju l  7/93) 

NASA   announced  tha t   it  had  awarded  contracts   to  three  U.S.  aerospace 
companies  to  develop  materials  and  materials  fabrication  technology  for  a 
future U.S.  high-speed  civil  transport. Contracts  went  to Boeing Commercial 
Airplane  Group ,   Seattle ,  Washington;  Lockheed  Aeronautical  Systems C o ,  
Ma r ie t ta ,   Georgia;   and   McDonne l l   Douglas  Aerospace ,   Long  Beach ,  
California.  (NA SA  Release 93 -  124 )  

July 8: Texas Senator  Kay  Bailey  Hutchinson  pledged  to fight  for  t h e  survival 
of  NASA's  Space  Station   as  she  inspected  a mockup  of  the   proposed  orbital 
base  at  the  Johnson  Space Cen te r   in  Houston.  (H  Chron, Ju l8193 )  

Lowell  Nesbitt ,   an   artist  who  documented  the   Apollo  9  and   13   space 
launches for NASA ,  was found dead  in his Manha t tan  studio on J u l y   8. Death  
was  attributed  to  natural  causes. He  was  59. (UP I ,  Ju l  8 /93 )  

In   a n   ironic   twist,  Space   S ta t ion   Freedom's  "program  office" in   Reston ,  
Virginia,  which  led  t h e   charge  to   cut   waste  and   inefficiency  in  t h e   space 
program,  including  warnings  of  cost  overruns  a t   Johnson   Space  C e n t e r   in 
Texas,  was  said  t o   stand   t h e   best  chance   of  being  eliminated   as  NASA  

.L\STKC>N 4l.  TI( 

\U I  

\ I  K t ' \   21 lT1( 'S 

JULY  1993 

a t t em p t e d   t o  s t ream l ine  t h e   managemen t   of  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  program.  ( H  
C h r o n ,  J u l  8 /93 )  

Fred  E.  Weick ,   a   pioneering   aviation   engineer   and   designer  died  of  hea r t  
disease  o n  July  8 in Vero  Reach, Florida.  He   alas  93. 
N A S A   ctfficials said  t h a t   Mr.  Weick's "genius  touched   almost  every  aero-  
nautical   discipline"  for  half  a  century .   His  career   was  devoted   t o   making 
planes  snore aerodynamically  e f f ic ien t ,  safer, and   easier  t o  fly.  A   major  inno -  
vation   was  his  stable ,   tricycle-like   landing   gear,  which   hecame   standard   for 
virtually  all  aircraft,  including   t h e  space  shu t t le .  (NY Times, J u l  11/93)  

Ju ly   9:  N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   it  would  pa r t ic ipa te   in  t h e   N a t i o n a l  
Assctciation  for  t h e  A d v a n c em e n t   of  Co lou red   People's ( N A A C P )  n a t i s n -  
;11  A f ro -Academ ic  C:ultur;ll,  Technctlogicai ,  a n d  Sc ien t i f ic  O lymp ic s  ( A C T -  
SO )  c om p e t i t i o n ,   t o  he  helci  in   c o n j u n c t i o n   w i th   t h e  groups's a n n u a l   c o n -  
\ , e n t i ~ > n  in  J u l y .   T\vo  thou sand   h i g h   schoo l   s t u d e n t s ,   rep re sen t ing   600 
c i t ie s ,   were  schedu led   t o   c om p e t e   for  n a t i o n a l   h o n o r s .   N A S A   sc ien t i s t s  
a n d   eng inee r s  were  t o  pa r t ic ipa te   as  sc ience   fair  judges.  N a t i o n a l   w inne r s  
woulcl  receive   ce r t i f ica te s   from  N A S A   a n d   a  sponsored   visit  t o   a   N A S A  
Field  C e n t e r .  
Astronaut   Bernard  Harris, M.D., who  completed   his  first  Space  S h u t t l e   in 
May,  was  also  scheduled  t o   participate   in   several  c o n v e n t i o n   activities .  
( N A S A  Media  Advisory) 

Ju ly   I  I :   Writing   in  t h e   Washington  Times, Representative   George   E .   Brown, 
California   Democrat  and   cha i rman   of  t h e   House  C omm i t t e e   o n   Sc ience ,  
Space ,   a n d  Technology,  argued  t h a t   critics  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n  were  t h em -  
selves  partially  responsible  for  t h e   delay,  confusion ,   and   high   costs  of  t h e  
S t a t i o n  because  of  t h e  annua l  sniping ,  redrafting,  and  re t renchmen t   t o  which  
they  have   subjected   t h e   Space   S ta t ion .   Brown  maintained   t h a t   t h e   U n i t e d  
S ta te s  needs  t h e  jobs  provided by  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n ,  needs  t h e  scientific  cha l -  
lenges  of  space-based design  and   engineering ,   and   needs   t h e   emcttional  satis- 
6 a i  : tton   of  exploration   and   clisccl\fery. 
Arguing  t h e  coun te r  position ,  Representative  Richard  Zimmer, New Jersey 
Republican ,   said  t h a t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   is  "simply  n o t   worth   t h e   billions  of 
dollars we  have   heen   asked  t o  spend  o n   it."  H e  argued  t h a t  many  worthwhile  
scientific  projects  had   suffered fro111 lack  of  funding  because  money was  being 
poured  in to   t h e  Space  S ta t ion .   ( W  Times, J u l   11/93)  

T h c   s ta te   of  Louisiana  and   N A S A   signed   a n   ag reemen t   o n   J u n e   24  in  
R;ltcln Rouge   reaffirming  t h e  c omm i tm e n t   t o  transfer  techno logy  developed  
by  N A S A   t o  husineases, ~ n d u s t r i e s ,  academ ic  in s t i tu t ion s ,  research   labs, a n d  
~ n c l ~ v i d u a l s  
in   Louisiana.  T h e  goal  of  NASA's   technology   transfer  program 
is  t o   en su re   t h e   widest  possible  in fo rma t ion   t o   po ten t ia l   beneficiaries. 
(I'icaynt,, J L I I   11/93) 

JULY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

July  12: NASA   and  Supra Medical Corporation ,  Chadds  Ford, Pennsylvania, 
announced   tha t   they  would  jointly  develop advanced  ultrasound  instrumen- 
tation .  NASA  planned  to use  the   instrumentation  for non-destructive  evalu- 
ation  of  a new class of woven composite materials, and Supra Medical planned 
to  use  i t   to  extend   its  high  resolution  capability  for  the   non-invasive  exami- 
nation   of  the  breast.  (NA SA  Release 93-125)  

Writing  in  Spmts  Illusmared,  Robert H. Boyle  took  to  task  those members  of  the 
media who have asserted that environmental problems such as depletion of the ozone 
layer and acid rain do not exist, that they were cooked up by  scientists greedy for fund- 
ing.  Boyle  pointed  the finger at  talk show host Ross Limbaugh but  said  that  main- 
stream publications such as  the Washingtun Post  and the Wd Street .Id had  also 
been guilty of misrepresenting environmental problems.  (Sports Illustrated, Jul12193) 

July  13:  NASA  announced  that  it  had  resnuctured  the  agreement  under  which 
Columbia leases the commercial C-band capacity on  board  two of NASA's Tracking 
and  Data  Relay  Satellites  (TDRS). Under  terms  of  the  restructured  agreement, 
Columbia would  share with NASA  all  revenues  received from  leasing capacity to 
third parties. (NASA  Release 93- 126) 

The  United States and Russia  appeared to be  nearing a compromise in a dispute 
over  a proposed Russian sale of  rocket  engines and associated  technology  to  India. 
Under the expected compromise, Washingon would allow Moscow to sell the rock- 
et engines to India  but  halt the  transfer  of  some associated  technology that  initially 
was  to be  a key  part of  the deal. The technology was  meant to give India  the capa- 
bility to manufacture its own ballistic missile engines, which could be used  for either 
military or commercial space launch vehicles. (AP, Jul 13/93; W Post, Jul14/93; UPI, 
Jul 14/93) 

Guy Bluford, the nation's first Afncan American astronaut in space, was scheduled 
to retire later in the month.  Bluford, 50, who went on  four Shuttle missions, planned 
to work  for a Maryland aerospace company. (AP, Jul 13/93) 

July  14: Writing  in  the journal Nature, U.S.  scientist Walter Jaffe said  that his  team 
had  taken  pictures of  a so-called  nuclear accretion disk, which  scientists have  long 
theorized surrounds a black hole. The  idea is  that matter swirls around the black hole 
as  it  is  being pulled  in, forming an  accretion disk, a  flat ellipse resembling a  round 
Danish pastry.  T h e  disk was discovered through use  of  the planetary  camera on  the 
Hubble Space Telescop.  (RTW, Jul 14/93) 

NASA  began  the countdown for  the planned weekend  launch of  Space Shuttle 
Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mis- 
sion, the  astronauts were  to  release an  experimental communications satellite des- 
tined for a 22,300-mile-high orbit and an  ultraviolet telescope to be remeved six days 
later and returned to Earth. They also planned  to  test  new  navigation  equipment  

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1993 

and  conduct  a  spacewalk  to  try  out  tools  needed  for  the   Hubble  Space 
in  December.  (AP, Jul   14/93; RTW, Jul   14/93; USA 
Telescope repair  m i s s~ c~ n  
Today,]ul  15/93 ,  J u l  16/93; P  Inq ,  Jul  15/93; W Xmes, J u l   16/93; NY  Xmes, J u l  
17/93) 

July  15:  NASA's  exhibit  a t   the   Experimental  Aircraft  Association  Fly-in 
Conven t ion   and  Sport   Aviation  Exhibition  a t   Oshkosh ,   Wisconsin,  from 
July  29  through  August  6 ,  was  scheduled  to  focus  on   general  aviation  tech-  
nology. T h e  exhibit was  to explain how NASA  was  addressing the  challenges 
of  aircraft  in  every speed  regime. I t  also planned  to  stress how  NASA's "cus- 
tomers,"  tha t   is,  t h e   government,  industry,  universities,  and ,   ultimately,  the  
American  taxpayer,  benefitted  from  the   Agency's  advances  in  aeronautics. 
(NA SA  Release 93-1 28 )  

T h e  Russians, eager  to hawk  their  space wares to  the  West, were  scheduled 
to hold a conference on  the  Mir Space Station  Ju ly   2 7  to July  28 a t  the  Dulles 
Hyatt  in  Hemdon ,   Virginia.  Hosted  by  NPO   Energia,  manufacturer  of  t h e  
Mir, t h e  conference  is  scheduled  to  cover  all  aspects of  the  platform.  A  large 
delegation  was  expected  from  the   NASA   Space  S ta t ion   redesign  team. 
(Washington Technology, Jul  15/93) 

A  NASA-developed  automated  air  traffic control   tool  tha t   could  save air- 
lines hundreds of  millions  of  dollars was  to  be  presented  to  aviation  industry 
representatives  a t   a  briefing  co-hosted  by  NASA   and   the   Federal  Aviation 
Administration  scheduled  for July  19-20. 
T h e  Cen te r /TRACON   Automation   System  (CTAS )  helps  air  traffic con -  
trollers  schedule  arriving  aircraft  more  effectively, starting  when  planes  are 
still  about  200 miles  from an  airport.  (NASA  Release 93-127)  

Pollution of  the  world's atmosphere could  trigger huge  temperature changes 
like  those  before  the   last  Ice  Age,  the   British  journal  Nature  reported. 
Scientists  examining  glacier  samples say  tha t   when  temperatures  during  the  
last warm  period  rose  an  average o f   3 .8  degrees Fahrenheit  above  normal  lev- 
els,  they  also  started  fluctuating by  as  much  as  1 8  degrees Fahrenheit  (USA  
Today, Jul  15/93; WSJ, Jul   15/93; W Post, Jul  19/93) 

July  16: NASA   announced   tha t   a  team  of  astronomers  had  reported  tha t  
recent NASA  Hubhle Space Telescope observations  of  a class of  active galax- 
ies  further  supported  the   theory  tha t   they  are  fueled by  a massive  black  hole 
at  the  center.  (NA SA  Release 93-130; RTW, Jul   16/93; W Post, J u l   17/93) 

Aaron   Cohen ,   Director  of  the   Johnson  Space Cen te r ,  announced   tha t   h e  
had  accepted  an  appointment  as t h e  Zachry Professor of  Engineering at Texas 
A&M  University  and would  retire  from NASA   on  August  20. C o h e n  jolned 
NASA   in  1962.  He   became  Director  of  t h e  Johnson  Space Cen te r   in  1986. 

JULY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

(NA SA  Release  93-131; AP,  Jul   17/93; RTW, Jul  16/93; UPn ,  Jul  16/93; W 
Post, Ju l  17/93)  

T h e  United   States  and Russia  reached  a last-minute  agreement  on   the   sale 
of  rocket  engines and  related  technology  to  India. T h e  deal would allow some 
of  t h e  rocket engines to  be  transferred  to  India but  would  limit  t h e  transfer of 
technology  and   would  not   impose  any  sanctions  o n   Russia,  (Reuters,  Jul  
16/93; APn ,  Jul  17/93 

Brazil was scheduled  to  begin  a campaign  in July to  fight  the  burning of  the  
Amazon rain forest.  T h e  months  from July  to  November make up  the  dry sea- 
son  in  the   Amazon,  and   clearing of  t h e   rain  forest  through  burning  largely 
occurs in tha t  period.  NASA  has agreed to  monitor fires through  its satellites 
and  o the r  equipment .   (Reuters, Ju l  16/93) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Go ld in  announced  tha t   he  had  appointed 
Margaret  G.  Finarelli  t o   be  assistant  for  strategic  planning .   Prior  to   her  
appointment ,   she   served  as  NASA's  Associate  Administrator  for  Policy 
Coordination  and  International  Relations.  (NA SA  Release 93-132)  

July  17: NASA  halted   t h e  countdown  for  Space Shu t t le  Discovery  less  t h a n  
an  hour  before  scheduled  liftoff because of  a bad  electrical circuit  controlling  
a  set  of  launch  pad  safety  locks.  A  second  launch   attempt   was  expected  t o  
take  place  n o   earlier  than   late  nex t   week.  (AP, J u l   17/93; UPn ,   Ju l   17/93; 
RTW, Jul   17/93; USA  Today, Ju l  19/93; P lnq ,  Ju l  18/93; NY  Times, Jul   17/93; 
W Times, Jul   18/93; W Post, Jul  18/93)  

July  18:  India  announced   tha t   it  would  develop  powerful  rocket  technology 
tha t   it   said  it  had  been  denied  as  a  result  of  an   accord  between  Washington 
and   Russia.  In   tha t   accord, Russia  agreed  to   sell  some  rockets  to  India  but ,  
bowing to  U.S.  pressure, agreed n o t  to  provide  India with  the  accompanying 
technology.  (NY Xmes, Jul  18/93) 

July  19: A  team of astronomers using NASA's Hubble  Space Telescope discov- 
ered  a  "double  nucleus"  in  the   center  of  the   neighboring  spiral  galaxy  M31, 
located  in  the  constellation Andromeda.  Hubble  shows that   the  M31 nucleus 
is  much more complex than  previously though, according to  Dr. Todd R.  Lauer 
of  the  National  Optical  Astronomy  Observatories, Tucson, Arizona.  (NA SA  
Release 93-133; NY Times, Ju l20 /93 ;  CSM ,  Ju l20 /93 ;  AuWk, Jul  19/93) .  

Responding  to A lan  Shepard's June  19 letter  o n  t h e  DC-X  (Delta  C l ippe r ) ,  
Charles Conrad  Jr., a former astronaut  and  staff vice  president  a t  McDonnell 
Douglas Aerospace,  defended  t h e   concept  behind  t h e  vertical-takeoff, verti- 
cal-landing  vehicle.  He   also  noted   tha t   by  the   time  the   vehicle  would  be 
operational  it  would  no t   be  a  Shu t t le   replacement  but  would  provide 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN I )   AERONAUTICS  

JULY 1993 

a n   ad junc t   t o   t h e   space  lift  capacity  in   t h e   20 ,000-pound-payload   category. 
C o n r a d  no ted   t h a t   t h e  experimental   vehicle  was designed  t o  be  reusable,  like 
aircraft.  ( W  Post, J u l  19/93)  

In   a  Time  magazine  essay, Dennis  Overbye   advocated   cooperating  w i th   t h e  
Russians  in  building  t h e  new  Space  S ta t ion .  H e  suggested  t h a t   t h e   inclusion  
of  Russia would  b rea the  new  life  i n t o  t h e  tired  Space  S t a t i o n  project .   A t  t h e  
very  least,  h e   advocated   t h a t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   go  i n t o   a  h igh - inc l ina t ion  
orhit   so  t h a t   Russian  spacecraft  could  visit  from  t h e   Baikonur  spaceport   a n d  
perhaps  perform  rescue  operations .   (Time, Ju l   19/93)  

After   back-to-back   failures,  rocket-maker   Gene ra l   Dynamics  successfully 
launched   a  hooster  with   a  military  commun ica t ion s  satellite   built  t o  survive 
nuclear   ,ittack.  T h e   15-story Atlas   blasted  of  from  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida. 
( P  Inq, J u l  20193) 

July  20:  As  t h e   C l i n t o n   administration   urged  t h e   Federal  research  complex  
i n t o  do ing  more  t o  he lp  Ame r ican  businesses,  experts  said  t h a t   it  should   take  
a  lesson  from   wha t   had   happened   w i th   t h e   $600   m i l l ion   A d v a n c e d  
Commun ica t ion s   Technology  Satellite   ( A C T S ) ,  wh ich   was  expected   t o   be  
put  i n t o   orhit   shortly  after  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Discovery  got  off  t h e   ground .  
Labeling  t h e  project  a  white   e lephan t ,   critics  said  t h a t   t h e  satellite   h a d  gen-  
erated   little   or   n o   interest   among   its  main   targets-American 
satellite  
builders, who   said  its  gadgetry  was  e i t h e r   irrelevant   t o   the i r  needs   or   com ing  
along  far  too   late   t o  he  of  any  use. 
Analysts  said  t h a t   t h e  gove rnmen t  should  tread  very carefully w h e n  it  tried 
t o  he lp   industry  technically   and   t h a t  any  programs  t h a t  did materialize should  
be  structured  so  t h a t  husinesses paid  a substantial  part  of  t h e  costs, creating  a n  
open ing  for  t h e  discipline  of  market  mechanisms.  (NY Tmes ,  J u l  20193) 

T h e   Washington  I'ost  reported   t h a t   firms  t h a t   did  work  relating   t o   t h e  
Strategic   Defense  i n ~ t i a t i v e  (SD I )   in  t h e  past  were  a t temp t ing   t o   t u r n   the i r  
SDI-related   discoveries  t o   commercial   use.  For  example ,   P h o t o n   Research 
Associates  Inc .   in A r l ing ton ,  Virginia, worked  o n  mapping  t h e  Earth's ocean s  
and   land   masses  so   t h a t   space-based  sensors  could  differentiate   between  
incoming   enemy   missiles  and   t h e   Ea r th   in  t h e   background.  T h e  company  
switched  tct  developing  sensors  for N A S A   t h a t  would  study  t h e  planet's n a t u -  
ral  resources  anii  to mon i to r  pollution .   ( W  Post, J u l  20193) 

Writing   i t 1   t h e  Los  Angeles  Times, aerospace  engineer James E  Glass advocat-  
ed  funding  the   Space  S ta t ion ,  arguing  tha t   n o t   only  does N A S A  provide  jobs 
and  dreams, but  it  also keeps  t h e  country  pulling  together  for America's future. 
He  noted   t h a t  when  NA SA ,  with all  its faults, spends a dollar, t h e  taxpayer usu- 
ally  receives  a  dollar's  value.  Ultimately,  in  Glass's view,  t h e  country  needs   t o  
focus o n  more  t h a n  survival;  it  must  reach  for t h e  stars.  (LA Xmes, Jul20193)  

JULY 1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

A t   a public  hearing  on  July 20,  the National  Transportation  Safety Board 
described a scene of  confusion in the  mission control room  during the  launch 
of  a Pegasus rocket made by  Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia. 
Control  room  operators  at  a  NASA   command  center  in  Wallops  Island, 
Virginia, ordered the  launch of  the Pegasus from a B-52 bomber, then ordered 
the launch aborted, only to rescind  that order seconds later. Federal safety offi- 
cials want stricter controls over commercial satellite  launches. (AP, Ju l21 /93 )  

NASA  announced  that  it  had  selected  Computer  Sciences Corporation, 
Applied Technology Division, Falls Church, Virginia, to negotiate a contract for 
scientific computing operations, maintenance,  and communication services in 
support of  the Center Scientific Computing Complex  (CSCC )  at  the Langley 
Research Center, Hampton, VA.  (NASA  Release C93-1; W Times, Jul 22/93) 

NASA   managers  set  July  24  as  the  new  launch  date  for  Space  Shuttle 
Discovery's Mission  STS-5 1 .  A  problem  with  the  Pyro  Initiator  Controller 
(PIC)  unit  on   the  launch  pad  caused  the  Kennedy  Space  Center  Launch 
Director  to  abort  the  launch attempt  on  July 17. (NASA  Launch Advisory) 

An   official of  Japan's Science  and  Technology Agency announced  that  it 
would  spend $4.6 billion developing an  unmanned  Space Shuttle tha t  would 
repair  satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro- 
gravity experiments.  (RTW, Jul 7/93) 

July 21  : Charles  H. Vermillion, chief of  the  international data  systems office 
at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged 
in a six-count  indictment with  violating  Federal conflict-of-interest  laws and 
converting government  property to his own use.  Vermillion, who said he was 
innocent, was  charged with  taking NASA-developed  plans for a programma- 
ble  frame  synchronizer,  assembling  the  synchronizers  a t   his  own  plant,  and 
selling them privately.  ( W  Post, Jul 23/93) 

July  2 2 :   Three  cosmonauts,  including  one  French  person,  landed  in  th e  
Central  Asian  republic  of  Kazakhstan  after  a  successful  mission  aboard  the 
Russian Space Station Mir.  Th e  22-day Russian-French mission was launched 
from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan o n  July 1 onboard a Soyuz TM -  
17  craft and  two days  later docked with Mir.  (UPI, Jul22/93; AP, Ju l22 /93 )  

NASA  announced  that  the  Agency,  a t   the   request  of  the  Federal 
Emergency  Management  Agency  (FEMA),  had  flown  specialized  sensors 
mounted  in  an airplane over portions  of  the midwestem states  in an  effort to  
gather information on  the  flood-damaged Midwest.  FEMA planned  to use th e  
collected  images to assist  in charting flood-damaged areas, to boost  the  emer- 
gency management Agency's computer data base o n  the region, and to  update 
flood  insurance maps.  (NASA  Release 93- 134) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

JULY 1993 

N A S A   said  t h a t   it   would  try  again  Saturday   morning ,   November   24,  t o  
launch   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery  o n  a nine-day   flight.  T h e  mission  was  t o  
feature  two  satellite   releases,  t h e   retrieval   of  o n e   of  those   satellites,  a n d   a 
spacewalk  t o   test  tools needed   for  t h e  Hubb le  Space  Telescope repair  mission 
planned   for  t h e  winter.  ( AP, 1 ~ 1 2 2 1 9 3 ;  RTW ,  J u l 2 2 / 9 3 ;  NY  Times, J u l 2 4 / 9 3 )  

David  Lux,  project   manager  for  t h e   SR-71  "Blackhird"  spy  plane ,   which  
crisscrossed  t h e  globe  o n  cold war  spy missions,  said  t h a t   t h e  plane  had   a  new 
job  helping   N A S A   generate   a  database   t o   be  used  by  people  who   d o  aircraft 
design.  H e  said  t h a t   Blackbird  would  soon   take   t o  t h e  skies  t o  see  if  it  were 
possible  t o   e l im ina te   or   reduce  sonic   booms  for  future   high-speed  airliners. 
(UP I ,  J u l  25/93)  

July  24:  Compu te r s   halted   S h u t t l e   Discovery's coun tdown   only   19  seconds 
before  launch   when   they   sensed  a  problem  with   o n e   of  t h e   spaceship's  two  
booster  rockets.  N A S A   said  t h a t   t h e   flight  could  n o t   be  rescheduled  un t i l  
sometime   in  t h e   first  week  of  August ,   after  engineers   had   replaced  a  bad 
hydraulic   power  un i t   in   t h e   booster.  It  was  t h e   second  launch   delay.  Five 
astronauts   aimed   t o  deploy  a n   experimental   commun ica t ion s  satellite  during  
t h e  mission.  (RTW ,  J u l 2 4 / 9 3 ;  AP, J u l 2 4 / 9 4 ;  UP I ,  J u l 2 4 / 9 3 ;  W  Pos t ,  J u l 2 5 / 9 3 ;  
NY  Times, J u l  25/93; W  Tm e s ,  J u l  25/93; USA  Today, J u l  26/91)  

July  26: T h e  Washington  Post  reported  t h a t  U .S .   and  Russian  scientists  would 
meet   in Washington   during  t h e  week  t o  discuss ways  t o  cooperate  o n  U .S .  a n d  
Russian  Space  S ta t ion s  and   possibly merge  t h e   two  s ta t ion s  in   t h e   late   1990s. 
T h e  Post  said  t h a t   Vice  President  Al  G o r e  was  leading  t h e  W h i t e   House 
initiative   o n  this  subject .   (RTW ,  J u l  26/93; W Post, J u l  26 /93 )  

W r i t ing   in  t h e  Washington  Post,  Boyce  Rensberger  identified  two  points   of 
view o n  global warming. James  Han sen ,  a Godda rd  Institute  for Space  Studies  
scientist ,   asserted  t h a t   Earth's  atmosphere   ha s   been   warming  since   t h e   mid- 
1970s. H e  said  t h a t  his readings  indicated  t h a t   t h e  lower  atmosphere's  average 
temperature   rose  by  abou t   a  quarter   of  a  degree  Fah renhe i t   in   t h e   late   1980s 
before  t h e   e rup t ion   of  Moun t   P ina tubo   chilled   t h e   air.  Christy   and   Roy 
Spence r  of  NASA's  Marshall  Flight  C e n t e r   have   a  different  op in ion .   T h e y  
ma in ta in   t h a t ,  overall ,  there   had   been   n o  warming  t rend .  
W h y   t h e  difference?  Christy   Spence r  said  t h a t   the i r  da ta  came   from satel-  
lite   readings  taken  over   t h e  en t i re  globe  while  t h e  da ta  used  by  Han sen   came  
from  thermometers ,  most  in  industrial  areas, which   c a n  be  "heat   islands"  and  
h e n c e   give  artificially  high   readings.  Han sen   countered   t h a t   th i s   factor  had  
been   taken   i n t o   accoun t   in  t h e   readings  and   no ted   po ten t ia l   problems  with  
t h e   accuracy  of  t h e  satellite   readings.  Rensberger  concluded   t h a t ,  given  such  
ambiguous  results,  t h e   clamor   t o   "do  something"   about   global  warming 
remains   largely a n  emotionally  guided  phenomenon .   ( W  Post, Ju l  26/93)  

]ULY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

T h e   Sena te   approved  legislation  during  the   previous  week  requiring  the  
Smithsonian   Institution   to   build  a  proposed  annex   to   the  National   Air  and 
Space Museum near Dulles International  Airport.  T h e  b i l l   already had  passed 
the  House, and President C l in ton  was expected  to  sign  it.  (W  Post, Ju l  26/93) 

A  NASA   study  of  safety  in  the   Space  Shuttle   program  found  tha t   honest 
mistakes go  unreported  if  workers fear blunders  can  cost  their  jobs.  T h e  study 
found  no  major  safety concerns  but  said managers  had  not   bridged  the  com-  
munications gap  identified  in  the   investigation of  the   1986 Challenger disas- 
ter.  T h e   report  said  tha t   "exaggerated"  news  coverage  of  safety-related  inci- 
dents   led  t o  the  mistaken  perception  among workers  tha t   reporting  incidents 
and mistakes might  result  in  punitive  action.  (RTW ,  Ju l  26/93) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Go ld in  notified  employees in  a memo  dis- 
tributed  the   previous  week  tha t   t h e   scaled-back  Space  Station   would  mean 
the  loss of  about  1 ,300  jobs  among Federal workers alone.  Space Station  work 
involved  2,300 of  NASA's 24,000 employees. (AP, Ju l26 /93 ;  Sp News, J u l 2 6 -  
Aug  1/93; B  Sun ,  Jul  27/93) 

NASA   began  airborne mapping of  Napa  Valley  to  help  winegrowers battle  
a n  aphid-like  insect  tha t  nearly destroyed vineyards  in  France and  California 
in  t h e   19 th  century.  Officials said a single-engine Cessna  fitted with  an  elec- 
tronic  sensor would  map  50  acres of  the   Robert  Mondavi  vineyards  infected 
by  phylloxera.  (AP, Jul  7/93) 

NASA   announced  an   August  4  launch   attempt   for  the   Space  Shuttle  
Discovery.  (RTW, Jul  7/93; USA  Today, Jul  28/93) 

July  27: NASA   announced  the   assignment  of  Dr. J o h n  Cox  as  acting  Deputy 
Director,  Program  and  Operations ,   Space  S ta t ion   Freedom  Program,  and 
Robert  Moorehead  as  chief  engineer  for  the   Office  of  Space  Systems 
Dearelopment  (OSSD ) ,   NASA   Headquarters,  Washington,  DC.  (NA SA  
Release 93-136)  

July  28: NASA  announced  tha t   it was adapting an  existing, cutting-edge x-ray 
system  to  improve  inspections  of  aging aircraft while  saving American   indus- 
tries  money.  T h e   x-ray  system,  which  combines  TV-like  scanning  by  x-ray 
beams with  digital  data  acquisition, was  originally  intended  for medical, den -  
tal,  and   other   industrial  purposes.  NASA  was  to  adapt  the   system  to   inspect 
aircraft  wings,  turbines,  and   propeller  blades  for  corrosion,  cracks,  and  dis- 
bonding.  T h e   system  ufas developed  by  the   Digiray  Corporation.  (NA SA  
Release 93-137)  

Belgian scientists, using research from outer space, invented  a new detection  
system  they  hoped  would  prevent crib deaths. Physics professor Manuel Paiva 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JULY  1993 

monitored  the   breathing  of  astronauts  during  a  Space  Shuttle  mission  two 
months  ago by  using  a custom-made space suit with  special sensors built  into 
the  garment.  Paiva  said  that  he  had  used  the  same  technique  for  babies  by 
attaching the electronic sensors inside pajamas.  Th e  sensors are able to detect 
a range of  respiration problems. Paiva  said  research had  so far  been  promising 
but another six months were needed t o  complete the studies. (RTW, ]ul28/93) 

Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas 1. Lee, Director of  NASA's 
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of 
understanding to conduct a joint  effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA- 
contractor-derived  technologies  to   businesses,  industries,  academic  institu- 
tions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA  Release  93-138) 

J u l y   29:  NASA  selected  Hughes  STX  Corporation,  Lanham,  Maryland,  to 
negotiate  a five-year contract, proposed at $121.7 million,  to provide support 
of  computer  systems  management  for  Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen te r ,  
Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA  Release C93-m) 

NASA  selected  AlliedSignal  Technical  Services  Corporation,  Greenbelt, 
Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at 
$40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for  the Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The  contract was  to directly support 
Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The  SLR technique measures 
the round-trip flight time of  very  short laser pulses from ground-based stations to 
retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release (293-11) 

A  240-pound Array of  Low-Energy X-ray Imaging Sensors (ALEXIS) satel- 
lite was  launched  into orbit April  25 onboard an Air  Force Pegasus  rocket for 
th e   Los  Alamos National  Laboratory  in  New  Mexico. Officials  at  the  New 
Mexico  laboratory had  hoped  to  demonstrate  that  they  could  handle  space 
missions  faster, better,  and  cheaper  than  NASA.  However, one of  the  satel- 
lite's  four  solar panels was  damaged during  the  launch,  and  the  satellite  was 
deemed a  loss. 
Unmanned  satellites frequently diagnose their own maladies, make adjust- 
ments needed  to survive, and  allow  themselves to be  reprogrammed  in orbit. 
This  is  what  happened  to ALEXIS, which  on  July 5 was  brought  under con- 
trol  and  a week  later conducted  its first experiment. Scientists now  expect  to  
get  much of  the data  they  seek from  the  damaged satellite. Th e  craft  uses  six 
telescopes  to capture  x-rays that  could  reveal evidence  of  weapons prolifera- 
tion,  and  it  carries an experiment  designed  to  determine how  Earth's atmos- 
phere distorts radio signals.  (LA T i m e s ,  Jul 29/93) 

T h e   House  of  Representatives  passed  an   amendment  to  the  National 
Helium Act of  1960. Th e  amendment  judged  the helium program as a case of 
government  waste  and  voted  to end  its monopoly on  sales  to  the  space pro- 

JULY  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 199 3 

gram. T h e   1996  A c t  required  N A S A   t o  buy  its helium   from  t h e  gove rnmen t -  
run   reserve,  e v e n  though   it  could  he  bought   for  as  much   as $10  less per  1 ,000  
cubic  feet   o n   t h e  open   market .  T h e  S e n a t e  was  still  considering   t h e   am e n d -  
m e n t .  
I n   t h e   same  session,  t h e   House   passed  a  hill  authorizing  N A S A   t o  spend  
$30  billion  over   t h e   n e x t   two  years.  ( W  I'ost,  J u l   30193; AP,  J u l   29/93;  J u l  
30193; 0 S u n ,  Aug   23/93; NY  Times, S e p  21 /93 )  

T h e  Goddard   Space  Flight C e n t e r  in  Greenbelt, Maryland  hosted  six  th ree -  
day sessions of  Aerospace  for Kids, designed  t o  teach   children   ahout   aerospace 
technology  and  Goddard   this  summer.  T h e  program  was  t o  host   150 ch i ld ren  
over  a six-week  period  this  summer.  (Prince George's Sentinel, J u l  29 /93 )  

July  30: N A S A  negotiated   with   PRC ,   Inc .  of  McLean ,  Virginia, 
sole  source 
c o n t r a c t   extension   t o  provide  da ta   processing  a n d   telecommunications  sup- 
port   for N A S A  Headquarters ,  Wa sh ing ton ,  D .C .   ( N A S A  Release (293-0) 

N A S A   astronaut   Bernard  A .   Harris  J r . ,  M.D.  was  scheduled   to  present   a 
Na t iona l   U rban   League  ( N U L )  banner ,   flown  o n   t h e  STS - 5 5  Space   S h u t t l e  
mission,  t o   N U L   President  J o h n   Jacoh   during   t h e   organization's  open ing  
keynote   ceremony  o n  Sunday ,  August  1 ,  in Wa sh ing ton ,  LX.  ( N A S A  Media 
Advisory)  

Arkansas  G o v e r n o r  J im  Guy  Tucker and  Thoma s  J .  Lee, L3irector o fNASA ' s  
Marshall  Space  Flight Cen te r ,  Hun t sv i l le ,  A labama ,  signed  a memo randum  of 
understanding   t o   conduc t   a  joint  effort  t o   transfer  NASA -de r ived   and  
NASA - c o n t r a c t o r   derived  technologies   t o   businesses,  industries,  academic  
institutions ,   research  facilities,  a n d   individuals  in  t h e   state .   ( N A S A  Release 
93 -138 )  

N A S A   postponed   a  scheduled  launch   of  Space   S h u t t l e   Lliscovery  until  
August   12 because of  t h e  Perseid  meteor   shower.  T h i s  was  t h e  third   time   t h e  
mission  had   been   delayed .   T h e  Perseid  meteor   shower occurs each  August;   it 
was  expected   t o  be more  in ten se   t h a n  usual  th i s  August,  raising  t h e  possihili- 
ty  t h a t   a  spacecraft  in   Earth's orbit   could  be  damaged  by  a  piece  of  dehris. 
(UP I ,  J u l  30193; RTW, J u l  30193; AP, J u l  31/93; VC'  Post, Ju l  31/93;  NY  Times, 
J u l 3 1 / 9 3 ;  B  S u n ,  Aug  4/93;  USA  Today, Aug   10193, Aug   11/93 ,  Aug   12/93)  

Reuters   reported   t h a t   British  television  had   shown   rare  film  of  a  string   of 
Sov ie t   space  disasters,  most  of  wh ich   were  kept   secret  a t   t h e   time   by  t h e  
Commun i s t   leadership. T h e  film, which   became  available  after t h e  breakup  of 
t h e  Sov ie t  U n i o n ,  shows t h e  "Nedelin   explosion"  t h a t  killed  a top  Sov ie t  offi- 
cial   in   1960 ,  rescue  workers  trying  unsuccessfi~lly t o  revive  th ree   cosmonauts  
killed  after  t h e  Soyuz  11 landing   in   1971 ,  a n d  t h e  wreckage  of  t h e  Soyuz  1 ,  in  
wh ich  Vladimir  Komarov  was killed  in   1967.  (RTW ,  J u l  30193) 

August 

August  I :   T h e   media  reported  t h a t   N A S A   was  working  w i th   t h e   Federal 
Av ia t ion   Agency   (FAA )   and   t h e   manufacturers  of  aircraft  t o   utilize  new  
technology   in   general  aviation   in  order   to   reduce  t h e  skill  required  for  flying 
a  light  airplane .   (Sunday Post Crescent,  Aug   1/93  ) 

August 2: T h e  Wall Street Journal  reported  t h a t   t h e  G r umm a n  Co rpo ra t ion  was 
unde r  criminal   investigation  for  allegedly  overcharging  N A S A  by  as much   as 
$8  million;   t h e   probe  th rea tened   t h e   company's  eligibility  for new   Federal 
con t rac t s .  (WSJ, Aug  2/93; AP, Aug  8/93;  UP I ,  Aug  8/93;  W Xmes, Aug  3/93;  
NY  Times, Aug  3 /93 )  

Aviation  Week  S Space  Technolorn  reported  t h a t   N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  
Daniel   S .  Goldin's  shuffling  of  top   Space   S t a t i o n  officials  had   led  t o   in te rna l  
friction   between   N A S A   a n d   officials  a t   t h e  Re s ton ,  Virginia  program  office 
for  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n .  NASA's  in te rna t iona l   partners   in  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n  
were  also  reportedly  conce rned   t h a t   they  were  no t   fully  involved   in  key  deci-  
sions  involving   t h e  S t a t i o n .  (AuWk, A u g  2 /93 )  

Joseph  R.  C ip r iano ,  associate  director   of  t h e  department's  Energy  Research  
Office,  recommended   t h a t   t h e   depa r tmen t   fire  t h e   project  manager   for  t h e  
$1 1 billion  Supe r  Conduc t ing   Super  Collider ,  slash  President  C l in ton ' s  budg- 
e t  request ,  and  "take  a year ... t o  fix problems."  In  a memo ,  C i p r i a n o  no ted   t h a t  
morale  was very  low, confidence   in existing  management   was practically  n o n -  
ex i s ten t ,  and  cost  and   schedule  t rend s  were  worsening a t  a n  alarming  rate .   A 
nonprofit   group  of  research  universities,  Universities   Research  Association ,  
Inc . ,  was  under   con t rac t   t o  build  t h e  instrument .   ( W  Post, A u g  2/93)  

T h e  Hooker   Telescope o n  M t .  Wilson   in  California ,  wh ich  o n c e   ranked   as 
t h e  world's biggest, was w r i t ten  off as a n  astronomical  anachronism   e igh t  years 
ago.  However, using  t h e   latest  e lec t ron ic  sensors and   image-enhancers ,  scien-  
tists and  philanthropists   led by  Robert  Jastrow  of  t h e  Mt .  Wilson   In s t i tu te  a n d  
t h e  founder  of  NASA's Godda rd   In s t i tu te  for  Space   Flight,  were  reported   t o  
be  working  t o  salvage  t h e  Hooker  Telescope.  Jastrow  had  raised  $250 ,000  for 
repairs  and   was  seeking  a n o t h e r   $250 ,000   t o   make   t h e   telescope  useful  i n t o  
t h e   2 1st century .  (LA  Times, Aug   2 /93 )  

A  T i tan  4  rocket  carrying a n  expensive  military  spy  satellite  system  explod-  
ed  minutes  after liftoff from Vandenberg  A i r  Force Base.  Th i s ,  t h e  first  failure 
of  t h e  four-year-old T i tan  4 program, was a $2-billion  acc iden t ,  said J o h n  Pike ,  
director   of  t h e   space  policy  project   a t   t h e  Federation   of  Ame r ican   Scientists  
in  Wa sh ing ton ,   a  liberal  group  t h a t   researches  classified  aerospace  projects. 
Pike  consistently   ha s   criticized  U .S .   spy  satellites.  T h e   accident   wiped  ou t  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAV T IC S  

AU(;UST 

1993 

most  of  the   savings Congress  took  from  the   intelligence  budget  during  the  
year.  (RTW, Aug  2/93; AP,  Aug  3/93; USA  Today, Aug  3/93, Aug  4/93; LA 
Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug  3/93; NY  Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, 
Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93) 

August  marked  the   10 th  anniversary  of  the   first  use  of  NASA's  Tracking 
Data  and  Relay  Satellite  System  (TDRSS ) .   T h e   system  consists  of  several 
satellites plus a ground station  at Wh i te  Sands, New Mexico.  (Onset Magazine, 
Aug  2/93)  

August  3: NASA   announced   tha t   astronaut James P.  Bagian, M.D., P.E., was 
taking  a  leave of  absence  from NASA   to  work  as  vice  president  of  corporate 
development  and medical affairs a t  Somanetics Corporation ,  Troy, Michigan. 
Bagian  was  scheduled  to   head  up  the   company's clinical  research  activities. 
(NA SA  Release 93- 139)  

NASA   named  astronauts Tamara  E.  Jem igan ,  Thomas  David  Jones ,  James 
S .  Voss, and Ellen Ochoa  as payload  commanders o n  upcoming Space Shu t t le  
missions.  (NA SA  Release 93-  140)  

NASA   announced   tha t   scientists  using  the   Earth-orbiting  Comp ton  
Gamma-Ray Observatory  had   discovered  a powerful  pulsar  tha t   had  become 
one   of  t h e   brightest  x-ray  sources  in  the   sky  during  the   past  two  weeks. 
(NA SA  Release 93-  14 1 ) 

August  4 :  NASA   announced   tha t   Goddard  Space  Flight  Center ,  Greenbelt ,  
Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered  Engineers of Washington, 
DC for  negotiations  leading  to   award  of  a  cost-plus-award-fee  contract   for 
multidisciplinary  research and development.  (NA SA  Release C93-p)  

W r i t ing   in   t h e  Washington  Post,  writer  Deborah   Shapley   predicted   t h a t  
t h e   demise  of  t h e   Supe rconduc t ing   Super   Collider   had   brought   t o   an  
e n d   t h e   U n i t e d   S ta tes '  60-year   dom inance   i n   high-energy   physics  a n d ,  
symbolically,  i n   physical   science   in   general .   S h e   reminded   t h e   reader  of 
t h e   importance   of  basic  science   a n d   asked  scientists   t o   muster  t h e i r  
courage  a n d  "argue ... t h a t   t h e  most  basic  forces  of  ma t te r   and   t h e  b i r th   of 
t h e   universe  are  things   worth   s tudy ing  in  themselves   and   wo r thy  of  sup-  
port."  ( W  Post, Aug  4 /93 )  

T h e  Houston  Post  reported  tha t   a  faulty  command  from  Mission  Con t ro l  
during   a  Shu t t le   flight  a  month   ago  caused  sparks  aboard  Endeavour  and  
knocked  out   power  to  some of  its  equipment.  T h e  six  astronauts  aboard  t h e  
Shuttle  were  in  n o  danger, and  power was  restored  in   10  minutes.  T h e   inci- 
d e n t ,  however, did  lead NASA   to  convene  a safety board meeting.  (AP, Aug 
4/93; W Post, Aug  5/93; RTW, Aug 4/93; UPI ,  Aug 4/93) 

,.\UC;UST  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1 99 3 

President  C l i n t o n  signed  legisl;ltion  o n  August  2  authorizing  $8 million  for 
p lann ing  and  design of  a  $162 million  Na t iona l  Air  and  Space  Museurn  huild- 
ing  near   Lhlles   International   Airport .   (AP ,  Aug  4 /93 )  

T h e  Russian  foreign  ministry  announced   t h a t   Russia  had   fully suspended  a 
$359  million  con t rac t   t o  sell  India   rocket  engines  and   t h e  technology   needed 
t o  make  them .   (RTW ,  Aug  4 / 9 3 )  

August  5: NASA's Mars  Ohserver  spacecrift   returned  its  first  image  of  Mars 
taken   last week  when   t h e  spacecraft  was  3.6 million miles from  t h e  red  planet .  
Mars Observer  was  t o  orbit  Mars on  August  2 4 ,  and  glohal mapping operations  
were  scheduled  t o  begin  L3ecemher  16. ( N A S A  No te   t o  Editors N93 -43 )  

August 6: NA SA  announced  t h a t  scientists  from  t h e  University  of  Hawaii and  
NASA's  Ame s   Research  C e n t e r ,   Moffett  Field,  California ,   had   determined  
t h a t  t h e  p lane t  Pluto   is covered with   surface  ices t h a t  are  9 8  percent   n i t rogen .  
T h e  scientists  concluded   t h a t  with  such  ahundan t  nltrclgen  surf;~ce  ice, Pluto's 
t h i n  atmosphere  must  he primarily  gaseous nitrogen .   ( N A S A  Release 93 -142 )  

A $67  million   weather   satellite   t o   track  storms, floods, and   env i ronmen ta l  
damage wen t   i n t o  orhit    board  a n  Atlas-E  rocket .   It  also was  scheduled  t o  he 
used  t o   p inpo in t   t h e   sites  of  plane   crashes  a n d   shipwrecks.  T h e  N O A A - 1 3  
satellite  reached  its 541-mile-high  orbit  o n  schedule .  T h e  new  satellite ,  which 
eventually  was  scheduled  t o  replace  t h e  aging NOAA - 1 1  satellite ,  was  t o  cir-  
cle  Earth  every  103 minutes  and  view  t h e  en t i re  planet   twice daily. (NY Times, 
Aug   10193; RTW, Aug   10/93  

Az~gust 9:  NA SA   grounll  crews  hegan  final  preparations   t o  launch   t h e  Space  
S h u t t l e  Discovery  o n  a  satellite  delivery mission.  T h e  liftoff was scheduled  for 
August  12 .   Discovery  alas  t o  carry  two  satellites.  Five astronauts  were  sched-  
uled  t o  put  o n e  satellite  in orhit   t o  conduc t   ad\,iinced c o m m u n i c a t i o ~ ~ s  exper-  
iments .   T h e  o the r ,  a  telescope,  was  t o  he  let  out   of  t h e   cargo  hay  for  several 
days  of  celestial  observatic~ns ,  t h e n   captured   and   returned   t o   Earth .   (RTW ,  
Aug  9/93;  AP, Aug  9 /93 ,  Aug   1@/93;  W Post, Aug   10/93;  UP I ,  Aug  8 / 9 3 )  

Sotheby's  auction  house  announced  t h a t   it had  agreed  t o  sell more  t h a n  200  
items frorn  t h e  So\ .iet  space  progrilm,  including  t h e  first Moon  rock  fragments 
ever  t o  go  lip for sale.  T h e  items were being  sold hy   filrnily members of  t h e  top  
participants  as well as  t h e  s ta te  factories  t h a t  produced  t h e  space suits and  cap-  
sules being  offered  for sale. T h e  Russian  gove rnmen t   was  no t   involved   in  t h e  
sale.  (RTW ,  August  9 /93 ;  AP, Aug   1 1 / 9 3 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   researchers  a t   t h e  N A S A   Lcwis  Research  C e n t e r ,  
C leve land ,  O h i o ,  had  developed  a  new  and   unique   group  of  ceramic  process- 
ing   chemicals   t h a t   might   revolutionize  t h e   ceramic   industry.  T h e  new  pro-  

A S T R c 3NA L ' T I C S  ANL)  A E R O N A U T I C S  

AUGUST   1993 

cessing  chemicals  might   lead  t o  high   purity  ceramic  products  t h a t   could  bet-  
ter  withstand   temperatures   over   2102  degrees  F  (1200   degrees  Celsius) .  
( N A S A  Release  93 -143 )  

A u p t   10:  Negotiations   between   G r umm a n   Aerospace   Co rpo ra t ion   and  
Federal  prosecutors  broke  down   as  they  sought   t o  resolve  long-standing   alle-  
gations  stemming  from  t h e  "I11 W ind"  defense con t rac t ing  scandal.  G r umm a n  
agreed  t o  pay  about   $20  million   in  penalties  t o  se t t le  a civil  proceedings  from 
t h e   investigation ,   but  said  t h a t   t h e  company  wanted   t o  simultaneously  settle  
allegations  t h a t   it had  overcharged N A S A  o n  a computer  con t rac t .   T h e  pros- 
ecutors   refused  t o   se t t le ,   pending   a  Justice   Depa r tmen t   investigation   of  t h e  
N A S A   sources. ( W  Post, Aug   10193) 

J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL )  Magellan  Project   officials  announced   t h e  
successful  first-of-a-kind  experiment   t o  "aerobrake"  a  spacecraft  by  dipping   it 
i n t o  t h e  atmosphere  of  a planet .   T h e  Magellan  spacecraft's orbit  was changed  
from  highly  elliptical   t o  nearly  circular  by  dragging  it  through   t h e   top  of  t h e  
thick   Venusian  atmosphere   repeatedly  over   a  period  of  70  days,  end ing   o n  
August  3 ,  1997. 
T h e  maneuver   required  minimal   use  of  thruster   fuel.  Because  fuel  weight 
increases  a  spacecraft's  launch ing  costs  a n d   limits  how   many   science   experi-  
ments   it  c a n  carry, aerobraking  might  allow N A S A  t o  save fuel a n d  money  o n  
future  spacecraft and  conduc t  explorations  t h a t  otherwise  would  n o t  be possi- 
ble,  according   t o  Magellan's  Deputy   Mission  Director.  T h e   experiment   also 
made   it  possible  t o  gain  a n o t h e r  year  of  science   from  a n  old   craft  already  in  
space. 
Scientists  said  t h a t   t h e   new  orbit   would  give  them   a n  opportunity   t o  ana -  
lyze  t h e  rolling  mo l ten   interior   of  Venus  and   study  t h e  planet's dense   carbon  
dioxide  atmosphere .   C o n t i n u i n g  w i th  t h e  
however, was dependen t  o n  
inclusion  of  t h e  project  in NASA's budget  for nex t  year.  ( N A S A  Release 93 -  
144; AP,  Aug   10193) 

T h e  first  test flight of  a reusable single-stage rocket ,  called  t h e  Delta  C l ippe r  
Experimental ,  was  scheduled  t o  occur  shortly  a t   t h e  W h i t e  Sand s  test  facility, 
a Federal  site   in  t h e  New   Mexico  desert .   T h e  42 - foo t ,  20 - ton   prototype   was 
built  by  t h e   McDonne l l   Douglas  Co rpo ra t ion   for  t h e   Defense  Depa r tmen t .  
(NY 'Times, Aug   10193) 

T h e  Wall  Sneet  Journal  reported  o n   t h e   efforts  of  J a p a n  t o  develop   its  own  
aerospace  program,  especially  its work  in  developing   advanced   ceramic  com -  
posite materials  t h a t  could  he lp  protect   future Japanese  planes  a n d  spacecraft. 
(WSJ, Aug   10193) 

C l i n t o n  administration  officials reported  t h a t  t h e  W h i t e  House was complet-  
ing plans  t o  permit  t h e  export of U.S. rocket  technology  t h a t  had  been  restrict- 

AUGUST  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

ed o u t  of fear it would be used t o  develop ballistic missiles. T h e  proposal t o  allow 
t h e  sale of  space  technology under  strengthened  safeguards was  part  of  a  review 
of  export  policy  ordered by  President C l i n t o n .  (LA  Times, Aug   10193) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   during   t h e   third   week  in  July  it  had   delivered  t h e  
first da ta   sets from t h e  Cosmic  Background  Explorer  (COB E )  t o  t h e  Na t iona l  
Space   Sc ience   Data   C e n t e r   a t   Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in  G r e e n b e l t ,  
Maryland.  A s  a  result,  researchers  from  around   t h e  world  now   have   access  t o  
t h e  COBE  da ta  t h a t  provided  t h e  scientific  commun i ty  with   a n  i~ n p r e c e d e n t -  
ed   look  a t  how  t h e  universe  began .   ( N A S A  Release  93 -145 )  

Technicians   reentered   t h e  eng ine  compa r tmen t  of  Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery 
t o   replace  what   was  b e l~ e v e d  t o   be  a  bad  temperature   sensor.  T h e  problem 
delayed  some  launch   coun tdown   preparations   bu t ,   according   t o  S h u t t l e  Test 
Director   Mike  Leinbach ,   posed  n o   th rea t   t o   t h e   launch ,   scheduled  for  t h e  
morning  of  August  12 .  ( B  Sun, Aug   12/93;  R TW  Aug   11/93 ,  Aug   12/93;  UP I ,  
Aug   11/93;  P Inq, Aug   12/93;  W Post, Aug   12/93;  USA  Today, Aug   12/93)  

T h e  San  Francisco Chronicle reported   t h a t   N A S A  was  renewing   its  interest  
in   aeronautics .   In   1992 ,   aeronautics   accounted   for  ahout   eight   percent   of 
NASA's $14 .3  billion  budget;  if  t h e  Agency  got  t h e   funding  it  had   requested ,  
N A S A   planned   t o   spend   $8.6  billion   o n   aeronautics   from  1994   though  
increase of  50 percent .   (Sun Francisco Chronicle, Aug   11 ,   1993; LA 
1998-an 
Times, Aug  25 /93 )  

August  1 1 :  LTX  C o r p o r a t i o n   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   NASA ' s   J e t   Propulsion  
Laboratory  ( JPL )  had   taken  delivery of  a S y n c h r o  mixed  signal  test  system  for 
use  in  t h e  radiation   effects a n d  testing   laboratory  in Pasadena, California .   (PR  
NEWSW IRE ,  Aug   11 /93 )  

August  12 :  T h e  N A S A   Lewis  Research  C e n t e r ,  C leve land ,  selected  NYMA ,  
Inc., G reenbe l t ,  Maryland ,  for negotiations   leading  t o  t h e  award of  a  con t rac t  
for  scientific ,   engineering ,   techn ica l ,   a dm i n i s t r a t~ v e ,  and   related   support  
activities  of  Lewis'  mission responsibilities.  ( N A S A  Release  C 9 3 - q )  

Twenty-six Prince  George's Coun ty ,  Maryland ,  students  with   physical ,  m e n -  
tal ,   or  learning   disabilities  spent   six  weeks  in  a  jobs  program  at  NASA's 
Goddard  Space  Flight C e n t e r  in G reenbe l t ,  Maryland during  t h e  summer.  T h e  
program,  which   was  under   t h e   auspices  of  t h e   President's Commission   o n  
Employment  for  Persons  W i t h  Disabilities, aimed  t o  steer  more  young  people 
i n t o  fields like science ,  engineering ,  and  computer  programming.  (W  Post, Aug  
12/93 ) 

Writing   in   LJSA Today,  S e n a t o r  Kay  Bailey  Hu tch in son (R -Texa s ) ,   no ted  
t h a t   research  p lanned   for  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   program  would  he lp   women. 
Research   already  scheduled  for  t h e   newly  redesigned  Space   S t a t i o n   would 
4 1  1 

.i\TI:i)h  A l l   I  li  i.  \ \ I   1  2 EK c )NA l   ITIC'h 

AUGUST   1993 

addrehs several  \vorncr~'s diseases, from  osteoporosis t o  ovarian   and  breast  c a n -  
cer   to   immune-system disorders.  (LISA  Today, Aug  12/93)  

In  ; I   letter  sent  1 0   the   W h i t e   tloilst.,  five  sem to r s   pressed  t h e   C l i n t o n  
adrninistri~tion  t o   maintain   tight   restrictions  o n   t h e   export   of  space-launch  
technology tha t  could  he useJ  t o  de\.elop ballistic missiles. T h e  letter  was signed 
1.y  Senators   (:laihome  Pell  (11-RI);  Jesse  Helms  ( R - N C ) ;  Jeff  Bingaman 
(1 ) -Nh ' l ) ;  J o h n  ( ; len r~  (1)-Ohio);  and  J o h n  McCain   (R-Ariz) .  (LA  TTirnes, Aug 
12/93) 

0 n h ) : l r d  cotnputers ahortecl t h e  launch  of  Space S ta t ion  Discovery just  three  
at.cc)nds before liftoff. Th i s  was  the  fourth delay  for Discovery, which was halted  
twice  ti)r t e c h ~ ~ i c i ~ l  
prc)blerns in July and   rescheduled  because of  a meteor  show- 
er o n  .4ugubt  11. NASA   said  t h e  next   try  could  come   in  three   to  six weeks. 
T h e  c ; ~ u s e  o f   t h e   prohlern  was  n o t   identified ,  a l though  space  officials  sus- 
p r c t e J   t11i1t  a  tucl  \ensor  might  have   fed  wrong  information   t o   t h e   Shu t t le ' s  
computers .  I t  told  t h a t   o n e  of  t h e   th ree   main   engines  was  n o t   receiving  fuel, 
t h e   computers   bvt-rulcl trigger  a n   autoruatic   shu tdown .   (RTW Aug   12/93; AP, 
.An::  13/93; \V'  Times, Aug   13/93;  USA  Today, Aug  13/93; WSJ,  Aug   13/93; 
U r l ,  Aug  11/93; NY  r l i n ~ e s ,  Aug  13/93; B  Sun ,  Aug   13/93;  W Post, Aug   13/93)  

Elevrn   high   school   students   participated   in  a n   eight-week   Summe r  H igh  
School   .4pprenticeship   Research  Program  ( S H A R P )   a t   NASA's  Dryden  
S p i c e  C e n t e r   this  summer.  Four  days  a  week,  t h e   participants   completed   a 
reg11l:tr e igh t -hou r  workday, working alongside  engineers  and  o the r s ,  learning  
firsthand  whar  it  takes  t o  succeed  in  these  careers.  T h e  fifth  day was spen t  in  
c;treer exploration ,   perhaps  a  tour   of  different  facilities  a t  Edwards  AFB  or   a 
{.isit to   a  u t~ i \ .e r s i ty  such  as  UCLA .   (Antelope Valley  Press, Aug   12 /93 )  

Aupnt  13: NASA   announced   tha t   it had  tested  helicopter rotor performance  in  
icing  cvnilitions.  T h e   tests  were  performed  in  t h e   Icing  Research  Tunnel   at 
NASA5  Len.i.4 Research Center ,  Clevelanil, Oh io .   T h e  new  experimental data-  
hasr  resulting from these tests was  t o  he used  t o  further refine and  validate  a com- 
puter  cchk  that   predicts  helicopter  rotor  performance  loss  occurring  when   ice 
accumt~lates  o n  the   rotors during an   icing encounter.  (NA SA  Release 93-147)  

Aug~,.lut 14: U n d e r   its High-Speed  Research  Program  (H SR P ) ,  wh ich  began  in  
1990 ,  N A S A  was  doing  basic  research  o n  developing  a "clean"  supersonic air-  
liner,  including  preliminary  studies of  t h e  potential   of  new  materials.  A s   part 
o t  this  work, NA SA  ur;ls studying t h e  atmospheric  effects of  supersonic aircraft 
in   t h e   stratahphere.  T h e  third   report   from  th i s   study,  still  in  draft  form  and  
~~ n l l h - e l y  
t o  be  puhlishcd  i n   1993 ,  p ru~u i sed  t o  dampen   t h e  optimism  of  previ- 
ous  rere'lrch. (Neul Scientist, A u g   14 /93 )  

.August  15:  Technical   breakthroughs  in   space  have   helped   launch   clinical  
aLlvancrs C,n  Earth .   Space   S h u t t l e  experiments ,   wh ich   focus  o n  de te rm in ing  

4 1 2  

how best  to maintain  the health  of  astronauts  aboard a future  Space S ta t ion ,  
continue  to  provide  spin-offs for  clinical  medicine  on   Earth,  from  program- 
mable pacemakers to a better understanding  of  vestibular disorders. Th e  cost, 
however,  is  very  high,  and  the  question  remains  whether  the  Space  Station 
project  represents  a  potentially  giant  leap  for  medicine  or  a  small  step  for  a 
select few.  (Medical World News, Aug  15/93) 

August  16: NASA's Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL ) ,  Pasadena,  California, 
announced  the  selection  of  two  major  aerospace companies  as  the   associate 
contractors for  the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network  Phase B1 
study and  MESUIR  Pathfinder  support  effort.  Th e   companies  were  Hughes 
Aircraft  Company;  Hughes  Spacecraft  &a  Communications,  El  Segundo, 
California; and Rockwell  International Corporation, Space Systems Division, 
Downey, California.  (NASA  Release C93 - r )  

August  17:  NASA   announced  that  the  Johnson  Space  Cen te r   ( J SC )   in  
Houston,  Texas,  had  awarded  the   Space  Shuttle  Orbiter  Avionics  Software 
contract  to   IBM  Corporation,  Houston.  Th e   contract  was  for  the   develop- 
ment  and maintenance  of  the  primary  avionics  support  software, tool  devel- 
opment  and  maintenance,  and  certification  of  primary  flight  software. 
(NASA  Release C93-s) 

Th e  Delta Clipper-Experimental  (DC -X )  rocket's  first flight was  scheduled 
for  August  18 at White  Sands Missile  Range  in  Southern New  Mexico. Th e  
42-foot-tall, bullet-shaped DC-X  is  a one-third scale prototype of  single-stage, 
reusable rocket  tha t  would  be  light  enough to  reach  orbit and  return without 
needing  expensive  lower  stages  or  boosters  that  get  thrown  away  o n   every 
flight.  I t  would  fire its engines to land vertically. Th e  DC-X was developed by 
McDonnell  Douglas  with  funding  by  the   Federal  Ballistic  Missile  Defense 
Organization.  (AP, Aug  17/93) 

NASA   Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin announced  that   the Johnson Space 
Center,  Houston,  had  been  selected  as  the   host  center  for  the  new  Space 
Station program, replacing  the  center at Reston, Virginia. About  220 NASA  
workers  in  Reston  would  he  reassigned  or  offered  incentives  to   retire,  the 
Space Agency  said. Local  Virginia  lawmakers  said  tha t   they  would  continue 
to  fight NASA's decision  to  move  the  headquarters  to  Houston. Th e  Boeing 
Defense and Space Group, based  in  the  Seattle area, was selected as the  prime 
contractor. (NASA  Release 93-148; H Post, Aug  17/93; W  Times, Aug  18/93; 
NY  Times, Aug  18/93, Aug  19/93; LA 'Times, Aug  18/93, Aug  19/93; WS],  Aug 
18/93; USA  Today, Aug  18/93; W Post, Aug  18/93; RTW, Aug  17/93; AP, Aug 
17/93; UPI, Aug  18/93; H Post, Aug  19/93; Space  News ,  Sept  13-19/93) 

T h e   New  York  Times  reported  tha t   a  radio  telescope  spread  across  5,000 
miles  had  been  finished.  Th e   new  telescope,  called  the   Very  Long  Baseline 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST  1993 

Array  (VLBA ) ,  h a s   1 0  a n t e n n a s  scattered  across U n i t e d   S ta te s  territory  from 
t h e  cen t ra l  Pacific O c e a n  t o  t h e  Caribbean .  A l l   1 0  a n t e n n a s  are very well syn- 
chronized  as a  single telescope  of  gigantic  size, a n  arrangement   t h a t  gives  t h e  
VLBA  far  sharper  vision  t h a n   t h a t   of   any  o t h e r   telescope.  T h e   telescope's 
revolving  power  is  such   t h a t   a n   observer  in  New   York  C i ty  would  be  able   t o  
read  a  newspaper  in  S a n  Francisco.  T h e  VLBA  was  t o   be  used  t o  probe  t h e  
dep th s  of  time   and  space.  (NY Times, Aug   17/93)  

August  18:  Officials  a t   t h e   W h i t e   Sand s   Missile  Range   in   New   Mexico  
announced   t h a t   t h e  Delta  Clipper-Experimental   rocket  h a d  successfully com -  
pleted  its  first  test  flight,  boosting  backers'  hopes t h a t   t h e  Single-stage design 
would  be cheaper  a n d  more  reliable t h a n  cu r ren t  space launch  rockets. During 
t h e   test  flight,  which   lasted  only   abou t   a  m inu te ,   t h e  rocket   hovered  briefly, 
flew  about   350  feet  t o  o n e  side ,  and   t h e n   touched   down   vertically  o n  a  land -  
ing  pad.  I t   was  t h e  first  time   a  spacecraft  had   landed   vertically  o n  Earth .   A 
second   test  flight  was  tentatively   set  for Aug .   2 7 .   I n   t h a t   test ,   t h e  rocket   was 
scheduled  t o  go  up about  650  feet.  (AP, Aug   18/93;  WS],  Aug   19/93;  H Chron ,  
Aug   19/93;  H Post, A u g   19/93; W  Times, Aug  21/93; Time, A u g  30193) 

N A S A  began  replacing  Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery's ma in  engines  in  prepara- 
t ion   for  a n o t h e r   launch   a t t em p t   nex t   m o n t h .   T h e   th i rd   coun tdown   for 
Discovery  ended  o n  August  12 with  a n  engine  shu tdown  th ree  seconds  before 
launch .   Engineers  traced  t h e  problem  t o  a sensor  t h a t  was  supposed  t o  mon -  
itor  t h e   flow of  fuel  in  Ma in  Engine No .   2.  (AP ,  Aug   18/93)  

Late  th i s  m o n t h ,  t h e  Jupiter-bound  Ga l i leo  spacecraft was scheduled  t o  visit 
a  big  chunk   of  rock  named   Ida ,   only   t h e   second  asteroid  t o   be  explored  up 
close.  Galileo ,   launched   from  a Space  S h u t t l e   i n   1989 ,  was  scheduled   t o  be 
w i th in   1,500 miles  of  Ida  in   late   August ,   o n   its  way  t o   its  1995  rendezvous 
w i th   Jup i te r .   G a l i l e o   made   t h e   world's  first  asteroid   encounter-with  
Gaspra-in  Oc tobe r   199  1. 
T h e  mission  was  successfi~lly carried  ou t  o n  August  28, w h e n  Ga l i leo  pho -  
tographed   t h e   asteroid  from  a  distance   of  1 ,500  miles.  T h e  resulting  mosaic 
of  five  photographs   shows  a  narrow  object   32  miles  long,  riddled  with   pock- 
marks.  ( N A S A  Release 93-149;  AP, Aug   18/93; B Sun ,  A u g   19/93; NY  Times, 
Aug  22/93,  Sep t   28/93)  

Several   articles   in   t h e   media  discussed  t h e   p lane t   Mars.  A n  article   in   t h e  
Christian Science Monitor discussed Mars exploration ,  no t ing  t h a t  t h e  arrival  of 
t h e  Mars Observer  spacecraft  o n  Mars was just  t h e  beginning   of  a new  saga of 
planetary   exploration .   U .S   News  and World  Report,  in   a  cover   story o n  Mars, 
suggested  t h a t   exploration   of  t h e   red  p lane t   would  usher  in   a  new   space  age; 
t h e  article  men t ioned   t h e  upcoming  missions t o  Mars, for example  t h e  N A S A  
Mars  Observer   spacecraft,  a n d   t h e n  wen t   o n   t o   identify  key  questions   abou t  
Mars  t h a t   explorations  hoped   t o  resolve.  The se  questions  conce rned  whe the r  

AUGUST 1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

or no t  Mars has water, what  the  weather  is  like, and  what gave Mars its shape. 
T h e  article  also discussed where scientists  are headed  in  their  explorations of 
this planet.  (CSM ,  Aug  18/93; U .S .  News  and World  Report, Aug  23/93) 

Augwt  19: Mars Observer was scheduled  to zoom  into  orbit around Mars next  
week, as  t h e  United   States  returned  to  Martian   skies for  t h e  first  time  in  17 
years. Mars Observer, which was  launched  from Florida o n  September 25, was 
scheduled  to  reach Mars on  August  24. After  maneuvering  a near-polar  orbit ,  
it  was  scheduled  to   turn  o n   its  instruments  and  make  one   complete  photo-  
graphic  map  of  the   planet  during a month-long   test.  It was  scheduled  to  for- 
mally start  its exploration o n  December  16. ( P  Inq, Aug  19/93) 

August 23: NASA  said that  satellite controllers had  lost contact with the NOAA -  
13 satellite o n  August  21, and preliminary  indications were  that   the  spacecraft's 
power system was  not  working.  NOAA  was the  newest  in a series of  polar-orbit- 
ing weather satellites. Designed  to monitor  the Earth's ocean and  atmosphere, it 
collects meteorological and ocean data for direct transmission to users around the  
world and  to central data processing centers. (NASA  Release 93-151) 

T h e  1993-94 season of NASA's Update  for Teachers telecasts was scheduled 
to feature presentations on  astronomy, life sciences, research, high-speed  aero- 
nautical  research,  and  the   environment   and  global  change.  T h e   telecasts,  a 
series of  four, one-hour,  live  and   interactive   education  television  programs, 
were  broadcast  via  satellite  t o  schools  in  all  50  states, Canada ,  Mexico,  and 
Puerto Rico between  3 -4  p.m.  Eastern Time.  (NA SA  Release 93-150)  

Th ree  days before the  Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to  begin orbit- 
ing  the  red  planet ,  NASA  engineers  lost  communications with  the  $1   billion 
probe.  Radio  contact   broke  off  after  engineers  commanded  the   spacecraft  t o  
prepare  for a crucial  rocket  firing o n  August  24  that  was  designed  to  send  the  
spacecraft in orbit around  the  planet. Mars Observer was programmed to auto-  
matically  fire  its  rockets, but  NASA   needed  to  hear  from  the  spacecraft to  be 
certain  tha t  had  happened. If  the  commands were not   received, the  ship could 
f ly   past  Mars  completely.  NASA   officials  expressed  grave  concern   over  the  
problem but said tha t  communications could be restored a t  any moment.  (UP I ,  
Aug  22/93;  AP/Aug  23/93;  RTW,  Aug  23/93;  WSJ,  Aug  23/93;  P  Inq,  Aug 
23/93;  B  Sun ,   Aug  23/93;  U S A  Today,  Aug  23/93;  W  Post,  Aug  23/93;  NY 
Tm e s ,  Aug  23/93; C Trib, Aug  23/93; LA  Times, Aug  23/93; RT, Aug  23/93) 

Vigyan  Corporation,  Hampton,  Virginia,  last  week  asked  the   General 
Services  Administration's  Board  of  Contract   Appeals  to   overturn  what  was 
thought  to  be  the   largest minority-set-aside contract  ever, a $180  million pact 
with Nyma Corporation, Greenbelt ,  Maryland, for engineering support services 
at  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center.  Vigyan  specifically charged  both  Nyna  and 
NASA with conflict of  interest, saying the company's winning proposal  listed  a cur- 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

AUGUST  1993 

rent NASA employee "who possesses both proprietary and source-selection mforma- 
tion" relevant  to Vigyan's bid.  (Federal Comptdng Week,  Aug 23/93) 

August 24: NASA officials said that  the Mars Observer mission could be a total loss if 
ground controllers failed to reestablish contact with  the probe  in  time for the sched- 
uled  start  of  the orbit on August  24.  Engineers  suspected  that  a faulty  flight  clock 
aboard  the craft  might  have caused communications  to cease. New  computer com- 
mands were  sent  telling Man Observer to switch to a backup  clock.  However, the 
commands failed to restore contact with  the spacecraft, suggesting that the clock the- 
ory  was  wrong.  If  contact could  not  be  restarted, controllers would  have no way  of 
receiving scientific data or even  confirming if  the Mars Observer probe had made  it 
into orbit. The Mars Observer project was  the first U.S. mission to Mars in  17 years; it 
was designed to pave  the way  for  a new  generation of  international planetary explo- 
ration centered on Mars. 
The  prognosis  was  even worse  for  a  $67  million weather  satellite  launched  for 
NASA by the Air Force from California on August 9.  Officials said  today that  they 
were 90 percent certain that  an electrical ~nalfunction had  killed  the satellite, called 
NOAA-13. (AP, Aug 24/93: RT,Aug 24/93; USA Today, Aug 24/93, Aug 25/93; NY 
T i ,  Aug 24/93, Aug 25/93; P lnq, Aug 24/93, Aug 26/93; LA Xmes, Aug 24/93, Aug 
25/93; W Trrnes, Aug 25/93; WSJ, Aug 25/93; W Post, Aug  25/93; B Sun, Aug 25/93; 
RTW, Aug 25/93; UPn, Aug 24/93; C Trib, Aug 24/93) 

Some scientists, led  by  former CBS News  science adviser Richard C. Hoagland, 
accused NASA  of  not  doing  enough  to  investigate  surface features  that  may  be 
signs of  intelligent life. The critics say  that computer-enhanced photographs taken 
by  the  1976 Viking  Mars  mission  show  objects  on  the  Cydonia Plain  that  they 
believe  were  left  by  an  extraterrestrial civilization.  Mr.  Hoagland  said  a  "rogue 
group  in  N A S A  might  have  sabotaged the  Mars  Observer  mission  to  suppress 
information about the Cydonia Plain structures. NASA officials denied the charge. 
(APn, Aug 24/93; LA  Times, August  25/93; Weekly World, Sept 14/93) 

Augwt  25:  NASA  announced  that  it  would  fund  three  new  university research 
centers charged with fostering the next generation of  researchers and engineers in 
hypersonic  aeronautics-flight 
at  more  than  five  times  the  speed  of  sound. 
Scheduled to receive $200,000 annually for  three years were  Syracuse University, 
New  York; the University of  Maryland, College Park; and  the University of  Texas 
at Arlington. (NASA Release 93-1 52) 

A s tudy  by  James W. Elkins of  the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adrmnistration 
i c d  that worldwide emisions of  the two worst ozonedesmying chemicals were slowing 
sooner than h e r s  had expcted, and the gradual repair of W s
 m n e  layer could 
begm by  20CO.  This news  came as NASA  satellite data  indicated that  the smtospheric 
oxme layer that shields the Earth frvm cane raus ing  ultraviolet radiation had dropped to 
its lowest  levels ever. A NASA &cia1  said that even with the peak  in emissions d chlo- 
d u o d m  by  2C00,  it  would  take about a century for  the owne layer  to recover to 

AUGUST  1993 

(:HRC>NC>LC>GY  199 3 

what  ~t was before tmnedestroying chem~cals began to be  d e l y  ~lsecll m the  1962s and 
1970s. (AP, Aug 25/93; USA T h y ,  Au~g 26/93; W P o ~ t ,  Aug 26/93; NYTmx, Aclg  30/93) 

August  26:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   named  Dr.  Timothy  Coffey, 
director  of  research  a t   the  Naval  Research Llhoratory, Washington, LK, to  head 
the   review board  t o  investigate the   loss of contact  with  the  Mars <%sewer  space- 
craft.  (NA SA  Release 93-153) 

NASA  annc~unced  that  a  12-member pnnel ot expert\ from NASA   ,lnit NOAA  
had been  named  to   investigate  the {allure o f   the  NOAA -13  meteorolog~cnl 5 . d -  
Iite.  (NASA  Release 93- 154) 

T h e  Mars Observer failed to call Enrth o n  A u p s t  25, when a five-day timer should 
have had  it send an emergency signal, lessening h o p s  that  the  mission could be sal- 
vaged. Observer was  the  latest retninder of  the growing prohlems d t h e  U.S. sFace pro- 
gram.  T h e  Observer failure added to  a string t i  expensive space h ih~ re s :  the  I t s  ear- 
lier in August of  a  $503-million spy  satellite, then  of  a $67-million weather satellite, 
and a series o f  mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other p1anetx-y probes. 
In  Washington,  congessional  strategies  anil  p r i ~ l t e  analyhts  suggested  tlxlt 
NASA's latest failure was  likely to  make  the Agency more vu lne r~h le  to  budget  cuts 
as Congress considered the appropriations bill  covering the  space program. Ideas also 
were  floated a b u t  new, cheaper ways  to  get a peek at Mars, for example, m d i@ i n g  
small, inexpensive "Star Wars" satellites and hurling thein toward Mars.  Another  idea 
mentioned was closer collaboration with  Europe and Russia.  (LA Tm s ,  Aug 25/93; 
WSJ, Aug 26/93, Aug 30193; USA Today, Aug 26/93, Aug 30193; W Post, Aup 26/93; 
W Xmes; AP, Aug 26/93; RTW, Aug 25/93; UPI, Aug 25/93; NY  Tm s ,  Aug 29/93) 

Orbital Sciences G)rporation  of  Chantilly, Virginia unveiled the  Orbcomm com- 
municaticlns satellite, which  was  designed  to  provide global personal  cornmunica- 
tions  service.  T h e  company  said  it  planned  to   initiate  C l r k omm  senlice  in  the  
United States by  mid-1994 and planned worldwide senlice by  1995. T h e  Orbcoinm 
system planned  to  provide low-cost, two-way data  communications  t o  users world- 
wide  through a constellation of  26 small satellites. (W  Times, Aug 26/93) 

A  senior NASA  official who  askeJ  not   t o  he  named  said  that   the  Agency was 
seriously  considering  attaching  Space  Station   Freedom  mtdules   t o   Russia's Mir 
Space Station  and helping  to refurbish the  seven-year-old  facility. NASA  was  also 
actively  looking  at  combining  Freedom  with  the   next-generation  Mir  Station ,  
which Moscow said it planned  t o  launch  around  1996. (Defense l l a i l y ,  Aug 26/93) 

' 

August  27: NASA  announced that  Kennedy Space Center  L3irector Rohert Crippen 
and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had  signed  a n  agreement  that  would  t ~ m s f e r  
benefits derived from the U.S. space program  to  the  private sector and  industries in 
Florida.  T h e  two parties agreed to  set aside $1 million each for the  next twc) years to  
implement projects under this agreement. (NASA  Release 93-1 55 )  

, 4STRC )NAUT ICS   AN11  AERONAUTICS 

AUGUST   1993 

August  28:  NA SA   announced   t h a t   t h e   Galileo   spacecraft  had   successfully 
explored  t h e  asteroid  Ida  located  between   Mars  a n d   Jupiter .  A l though   h am -  
pered  by  a  jammed  main   a n t e n n a ,  Galileo   zoomed  around   1,491 miles  from 
Ida  and   took  all  but  three  of  2  1 planned   photographs .   T h e  th ree  missing pho -  
tos  were  t h e   longest-distance   photos   and   un impo r tan t   compared   with   t h e  
close-ups.  T h e  first  photos   were  n o t   scheduled   t o  arrive  a t  Earth   for  a n o t h e r  
two months:   t h e  o the r s  were to he  transmitted   in  t h e  spring of  1994. (AP ,  A u g  
28/93; KTW, Aug  28/93;  LISA  Toduy, Aug   30193; NZ' X in r s ,  Aug   29/93 

August  29:  Russian  Prime  Minister   Viktor  Chernornyrdin   said  t h a t   Russia 
would  start   selling foreign countries   space  technology  without   t h e  machinery  
t o  launch   n i~c le ; l r  missiles. Che rnomy rd in  spoke hefore  leaving Moscow for a n  
official visit  t o  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  t h a t  had been  set  for J u n e  but  cancelled  after 
a  dispute  with  Wa sh ing ton  over   rocket  technology   sales  t o  India .  
Che rnomy rd in   began  his  U.S.  trip   in  Hou s ton ,  where  his  visit  was  t o  c e n -  
ter  o n   meetings  Monday  with   U .S .   business  from  t h e   energy  and   aerospace 
industries  and  was  t o  include  a  tour   of  t h e  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r   (RTW ,  Aug  
29/93)  

T h e  f:~ilure of  t h e  Mars Observer  mission  led  t o  a  deba te  over   t h e  need   for 
hig, costly  space projects.  C omm e n t i n g  o n   t h e   loss of  t h e  Mars Observer ,  a n  
editorial   in  t h e  Christiun  Science Monitor  advocated   moving   away  from  c om -  
plex  missions  t h a t  take  a  decade  or  more  t o   launch   in  favor of  cheape r ,  simple 
spacecraft.  In  this  rerard,  t h e   editorial   suggested  t h a t   N A S A   Administrator  
Ilaniel   S .   t i o l d i n   and   t h e   C l i n t o n   administration   reconsider  t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n   program,  which ,   in  t h e   editorial   writer's  view,  robs  NA SA   of  t h e  
money  needed  for  :I  broad  effective  space program. 
Wricing  in  t h e   Baltimore  Sun ,  Robert   L.  Park,  professor  of  physics  a t   t h e  
UniLrersity  of  Ma ry land ,  College   Park ,   expressed  similar  views.  H e   traced 
NASA's  cu r ren t   prohlems  t o   t h e  Agency's abandon ing  of  all  existing   launch  
systems  for  t h e   expensi1.e  manned   Space   S h u t t l e .   Parks  emphasized  t h a t   a  
replacement   must  h e   developed  for  t h e   S h u t t l e ,  t h a t   t h e   excessive emphasis 
o n  h um a n  space flight  must  end ,  t h a t   t h e  bureaucracy  t h a t   is  chok ing  N A S A  
must  he  streamlined ,   and   t h a t   t h e  old  spirit  o f  elan   t h a t   o n c e  permeated  t h e  
Agency  rnust he   restored. 
Doug  Randow,  a  senior   fellow  a t   t h e   C a t o   In s t i tu te ,   also  argued  t h a t   t h e  
space  prograrn  should   he  cu t   hack.  H e  no ted   t h a t   while  NASA's  recent   fail- 
ures  were  unfc)rtunate,  t h e y  would  have   a   positive  effect  if  they   forced  law- 
makers  t o   reconsider  t h e   justification  hr  t h e   multi-billion-dollar   space  pro-  
gram.  H c  said  t h a t   U .S .   budget  priorities  should  lie  much   closer  to  home .  
Writing   in  support  of  t h e   Space  S t a t i o n  was  ex-astronaut   A lan   Shepard ,   t h e  
first American   t o  travel  in space and   t h e  commande r  of  t h e  Apollo  mission t o  
t h e  Moon .  
A   commentary   in  t h e  Philadelphia  Inquirer  outlined   t h e   issues  involved   in  
t h e   deba te   oLrer big  missions  versus  small  missions,  while  a  commen ta ry   in  

AUGUST  1993 

c  I  ~ I < C I N C > L C X Y '  19L)3 

Time  magazine  suggested  t h a t   N A S A   "learn  t h e  fine  a r t  of  lowering  expecta-  
tions."  B  Sun ,  Aug   29/93; CSM ,  Aug  32/93;  W  Times, S e p t   1/93; P  l n q ,  Sep t  
2/93; Tm e ,  Sep t  6/93;  W Times, Sept   15/93)  

August 30:  Astronauts   assigned  t o   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Columbia   mission  in  t h e  
fall  of  1993  were  scheduled  t o   cclncli~ct experiments   o n   rats  while  in  orbit .  
After   beheading   the rats, they were  to  dissect  thern. This ~vould be the  first dissec- 
tion  of  an animal  in  space, to NASA's  kno~vledge. T h e  remaining rats  aboard  the 
Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned tc) Earth.  NASA's Willy 
Hinds, a biologist  and immunc~logist whc~ is  in charge of  the  project, said  that  "these 
tissues ... are the  biological equivalent of  the M t x ~ n  rocks."  ( A e  Aug30/93; LA Times, 
Sept  5/93) 

Scientists failed in a new  attempt to  get the  Mars Observer spacecraft to  re-estah- 
lish contact with Earth, NASA's Je t  Propulsion Lahorntory said. T h e  spacecrafr did 
not  respond to  comlnands  to  turn  o n  its primary  telecommunications  equipment. 
A  proposal to  try  t o  restart the  Observer's central computer was rejected because it 
was  thought  to pose  an  unnecessaq  risk  to   telecommunications  with o the r  space- 
craft. (RTW, Aug 70193; W Post, Aug 3 1/93; AP, Aug 3 11931 CSM, Sept   1/93) 

T h e  European Space Agency, eager to  boost  its cooperation with Russia, said that  
it was  studying the  joint  de\~elopment  d a new  generation  of space  vehicles. Jean -  
Jacques Llork~n, director c ~ f  policy planning, told journalists o n  the  eve of Moscow's 
first aerospace show that   the  agency had  contracts worth   nill lions of dcdlars with  a 
number of  Russian firms. (RTW, Aug  30193) 

Augwt 3 1 : G b i t n l  Sciences G ~ p r a t i o n  said its Orhita1Ini;lging G \ r p ) r a t i o n  unit had 
k e n  awarded a two-year, $7  million connact  to provide atmospheric research data to  
NASA's Matsh;tll S race  Flight Center.  (W  Tmr, A i ~ p s t  31/93) 

People with  temperature disorders have benefitted from suits developed by  NASA  
for use  hy  astronauts in very hot  temperatures.  T h e  su i ts  h a~ r e  heen modified for peo- 
ple who ne td  help in keeping their hdy  tempmn l re  dotvn in hot weather.  T h e  suiE 
for children are vests  stuffed with detachable "cold  packs," much   like  those  used  t o  
keep  food  cold  in picnic  coolers.  O t h e r  suits are powered  hy  hatten;  packs  and  
fitted with  tubes  tha t   circulate  coolant .  T h e  suits are made  of  a material  known 
as Thinsulate .   (Fairfax County journal,  Aug  31/93)  

Moscow  held   its first  in te rna t iona l  aerospace  show  in  Moscow.  A s  many   as 
200  foreign  aerospace companies  and   250 enterprises  from  all over   t h e  former 
Sov ie t  U n i o n   took  part  in  t h e  shot\,, t h e  largest  e v e n t  of  its kind   ever  held   in  
Russia.  Russian military space equ ipmen t  was o n  show for t h e  first  time .   (UP I ,  
Aug   31/93; LA  Xmes, Sep t   1 / 9 3 )  

September 

September  I :  NA SA   Administrator   Daniel  S. Go ld in   announced   t h e  estab-  
lishment   of  a   study  team  at  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena, 
California ,   to   explore  possibilities  for  a   return   mission  t o  Mars  t o   recover 
some of  the   scientific objectives of  t h e  Mars Observer mission,  if communi-  
cations  with  t h a t   spacecraft  could no t   be  reestablished.  ( N A S A  Release  93-  
157; UPI ,  Sep   1/93;  AP,  Sep   1 /93 )  

Rocketdyne ,  the  Canoga  Park unit  of Rockwell International ,  was blamed 
for the   last-minute  blastoff delay of Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery.  T h e  shutdown  
was  traced  to   a   faulty  fuel  sensor  in   o n e   of  Discovery's  engines ,   built  by 
Rocketdyne.  Th is  was  not   the   first  time  tha t   Rocketdyne  had   been  blamed 
for  a   day.  T h e  company  makes  the   Shuttle's  main  engines,  which  in   1993  
caused  two last-minute  aborted  launches. They  have  also caused  a t  least  two 
more  launch   delays  involving  t h e  Columbia  and  Endeavour Space  Shu t t les .  
(LA 'Times, Sep   1/93)  

Sepember  2 :   Vice  President   G o r e   a n d   Russian  P r ime   M in is te r  
Che rnomy rd in   signed  an   agreement  to   embark  o n   a   joint  effort  to   design 
and   construct   an   international   Space   S ta t ion .   In  a   separate  agreement ,  
Russia  also agreed  to  place  export  controls  o n  missile technology,  a  precon-  
d i t ion  set by  the  C l i n t o n  administration  to  cooperation   in space. Russia also 
gained  access  to   the   l u c r a t~ v e  international   market  for  launching   commer-  
cial   satellites.  ( N A S A  Release  93-158;   UP I ,   Sep   2/93; AP,  S e p  3/93;  NY 
Times, Sep   3/93;  P  Inq ,   Sep  3 /93 ) ;  W S ] ,  Sep   3/93; LA  'Times, Sep   3/93;  W 
Post, S e p  3/93;  W Times, Sep  3/93; RTW, Sep  3/93;  B  Sun, Sep  5/93; C SM ,  
Sep   14/93; National Journal,  Sep   11/93)  

September  3:  Richard  H .   Kohrs,  director,  Space   S t a t i o n   Freedom,  retired 
from  NASA   after  3 0   years  of  service.  Kohrs  was  appointed   Space   S t a t i o n  
Freedom  director  o n  J u n e  1 ,  1989. ( N A S A  Release  93 -160 )  

NA SA  announced  a  ceremonial  ground-breaking  for  two NA SA  projects 
a t   the  Wheeling  Jesuit  College ,  Wheeling ,  West  Virginia:  t h e  Classroom of 
the   Future  and   t h e  Na t iona l  Technology Transfer  C e n t e r   ( N T T C ) .  
T h e   Classroom  of  the   Future  is  a   leading-edge,  educational   technology 
initiative   t o   improve  t h e   quality  of  science ,  mathematics ,   and   technology  
education   nationwide .   It  is  a  laboratory  to  develop   stimulating ,  interactive  
multimedia   curriculum  materials  and   model  preservice  and   in-service 
teacher   education   programs.  T h e  N T T C   operates  a   na t iona l  gateway  serv- 
ice  tha t   assists U .S .  firms  in  rapidly  locating  Federal  laboratory  technology 
and  provides  t h e  associated  technology  transfer  assistance.  ( N A S A  Release 
93-158)  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEPTEMBER  1993 

Martin Marietta Corporation, which  in one  three-week  period  in August, 
saw  one of  its  rockets explode soon after  launch  and  two  of  its satellites lose 
contact  with  Earth,  announced  on  September  3  that  it  was  undertaking  an 
internal  investigation of  all phases  of  its space division. ( W  Post,  Sep 4/93) 

September 7: NASA  reportedly was  taking action  to rectify the problems  that 
had  beset  recent  space  missions.  Led  by  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin, 
NASA  was  itself  doing more  rigorous  quality  testing, adopting Total Quality 
Management,  and  making  contractors  financially  liable  for  shoddy  work. 
(U SA  Today, Sep 7/93; 0 Sun ,  Sep 5/93) 

Using  the  Hubble  Space  Telescope,  astronomers have  been  able  to  see  a 
double star whose  existence  they  had  known  only by the   intermittent  bursts 
of  x-rays  recorded  over  the  last  20  years. Th e  binary  star, made  up  of  a  neu- 
tron star and  a white dwarf, is  30,000 light-years away from Earth. Th e  report 
of  the  discovery  was  recently  published  in  Astrophysical Journal  Letters.  (NY 
Times,  Sep 7/93; W Times,  Sep 5/93; W Post, Sep  13/93). 

Christa  McAuliffe,  the  teacher-astronaut  who  was  killed  when  the  Space 
Shuttle Challenger blew  up,  is  the subject of  a new  biography, written  by  her 
mother,  Grace  George  Corrigan.  T h e  biography, A  Journal  for  Christu,  pub- 
lished  on  September  7 ,  by  the University  of  Nebraska Press,  lends weight  to 
arguments that NASA pressed ahead with  the high-profile flight to win men- 
tion of  it  in  President Reagan's State of  the Union  message, which had  been 
scheduled for January 28, the day of  the launch. (AP, Sep 7/93; NY  Times, Sep 
8/93; B  Sun ,  Sep 8/93) 

September 8: NASA  selected USN  Commander  James D. Wetherbee  to  com- 
mand the STS-63 mission  aboard Shuttle Discovery  in mid-1994.  Other crew 
members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foale; Janice 
E.  Voss;  Bernard  A .   Harris, Jr.; and  Russian Air  Force  Colonel  Vladimir  G. 
Titov. Collins  is  the  agency's first woman pilot. 

NASA announced  that  Shuttle Discovery was  to conduct  an unprecedent- 
ed  fly-around maneuver of  the Russian  Mir  Space Station in June. Although 
the  operation  was  not  to  include  a  docking  of  the  two  spacecrafts, it  would 
help to establish the  rendezvous procedures for a docking mission planned  for 
June  1995. (NASA  Release 93- 161; H Ch ron ,  Sep 9/83) 

September  9:  NASA  settled  a  union  grievance with  Reston,  Virginia, Space 
Station  employees  and  cleared  the   way  toward  opening  a  new  office  in 
Houston, Texas.  ( H  Post,  Sep 9/93) 

Space  Station  backers  reportedly were  worried  about  uncertainties  about 
Russia's role  in  the  proposed new  Station.  Senator  Barbara A.  Mikulski,  D- 

SEPTEMBER  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

Maryland,  who  chairs  the   Senate   appropriations  subcommittee  tha t   funds 
NASA ,  said, "We  support a cooperative  effort with  Russia, but  we  believe  the  
Space  Station   effort,  if  approved  by  Congress,  must  be  an   American  Space 
Station." 
NASA   presented  the   latest  in  a  series  of  redesigns  and  downsizing  of  the  
Space Station  to  President Clinton  o n  September 7.  T h e  plan envisions attach-  
ing two Soyuz ships to the  Station as "assured crew return vehicles." I t  also spoke 
favorably of  using  the  Russian Salyut space tug for steering  the  Station ,  instead 
of a propulsion module developed by  the  Pentagon. (W  Post, Sep  9/93; AP, Sep 
9/93, Sep  22/93; CSM ,  Sep  10193; AvWk, Sep  13/93; LA Tme s ,  Sep  16/93) 

September  10:  NA SA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   announced   tha t  
Dr. France Anne  Cordova, head of  the  astronomy and astrophysics department, 
Pennsylvania State  University, was  scheduled  to  assume  the   responsibilities of 
NASA  Chief Scientist effective mid-October. She  was to be  o n  extended detail 
from  the  University  to  NASA .   (NASA  Release 93-162) 

T h e  Senate Appropriations Committee  approved $1.9 billion  for  continued 
work o n  Space Station  Freedom, but  the project faced a fight in  the full Senate ,  
where opponents wanted  to cut funding.  (USA Today, Sep  10193) 

September  1 I :   T h e  Delta  Clipper-Experimental,  a 42-foot prototype  for  a  new 
generation  of  reusable  spacecraft, climbed  to   about  300  feet,  hovered,  moved 
laterally  about  350  feet,  then   made  a  vertical  landing  at  the   Wh i te   Sands 
Missile Range  in New Mexico.  This  was  the  spacecraft's second successful  test 
flight.  ( B  Sun ,  Sep  12/93; National journal,  O c t  2/93) 

September  12: Space Shuttle  Discovery was  launched  on  a satellite-deployment 
mission  after two months of  delays.  T h e  liftoff had  been  postponed  five  times 
for  equipment  failure, payload  problems, and  a  meteor  shower.  After  a  short 
delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts o n  board  success- 
fully  deployed  the   $363  million  Advanced  Communication   Technology 
Satellite  (ACTS). T h e  satellite  could o n e  day  shrink  the   diameter  of  satellite 
dishes to one  and one-half  feet. 
On September 14, after a ninety-minute delay  caused by  a communications 
problem, astronauts placed  in  space a second satellite,  an  $80 million  reusable 
craft made by  Germany. T h e  satellite, which had a n  ultraviolet  telescope and a 
spectrograph to study interstellar gas, was scheduled to be  retrieved by  the  astro- 
nauts  in six days for  the  trip home. On September  16, two  astronauts conduct- 
ed a seven-hour spacewalk to  test  tools needed for  the  Hubble Space Telescope 
repair  mission  scheduled for December; and  o n  September  19, using  a 50-foot 
robot  arm,  they  retrieved  a n  orbiting German  telescope  loaded  with  nearly  a 
week's worth of star observations. T h e  retrieval of  the  satellite was  the  crew's last 
major  job. 
Discovery  touched  down  a t  Cape  Canaveral, Florida, on  September  22,  its 
return  having been  delayed  one  day because  of  bad  weather. This  was  the  first 

ASTRONAUTlCS AN13 AERONAUTICS 

SEPTEMBER  1993 

Shuttle   landing  in  Florida a t  night.  (RTW, Sep  12/93, Sep   13/93, Sep   14/93, 
Sep   15/93, Sep  16/93, Sep   19/93; P  lnq,  Sep  13/93, Sep  14/93, Sep  17/93; B 
Sun, Sep   13/93, Sep  14/93, Sep  17/93; NY  Xmes, Sep  13/93, Sep   16/93, Sep 
17/93; W I'ost,  Sep  13/93, Sep  14/93, 15/93, Sep   17/93, Sep  19/93, Sep 20193; 
USA  Today,  Sep   13/93, Sep  14/93, Sep  20193;  AP,  Sep  12, Sep   14/93, Sep  
15/93, Sep   16, Sep  17/93, Sep  20, Sep  22/93; UP1,Sep  12/93 Sep  13/93, Sep 
14/93, Sep  16/93, Sep  17/93, Sep  19/93, Sep 22/93; RTW, Sep 22/93; W Post, 
Sep  23/93) 

September 13: Writing  in  Business  Week, science writer J o h n  Carey predicted 
tha t   Congress  would  ultimately  keep  alive  the   Space  S ta t ion ,   which  h e  
labelled  a  boondoggle,  and  very  likely  k i l l   the   scientifically  worthy  Super 
Collider.  Carey  charged  that   the   Space Station   was  mainly  being  kept  alive 
to  preserve  15,000 mostly  high-paying jobs  in  areas  hard  hit   by  defense  cu t -  
hacks.  H e  viewed  the   cries of  those  who  charged  tha t   the   country  couldn't 
afford  the  Super Collider  as hypocrisy, noting   tha t   Congress  funds much  less 
worthy  projects.  (Business Week,  Sep t .  13/93)  

September  14:  NASA   selected  Recom  Technologies,  San   Jose, California,  a 
small disadvantaged  business,  for  negotiations  leading  to  award  of  a contract  
for Computational  Administrative,  Professional, and  Engineering  Services  to 
support NASA's  Lewis Research  Center ,  Cleveland.  (NA SA  Release C 9 3 - t )  

September  17:  A  NASA   SR-71  "Blackbird"  research  aircraft  made  t h e   first 
triple-sonic flight test of a laser measurement system tha t  could give pilots more 
accurate data  on  their  air speed and aircraft attitude.  (NASA  Release 93-163) 

According  to   a U SA   Today/CNN/Gallop  Poll,  most  Americans  now  feel 
the   nation   should  cut  or   eliminate  spending  for  the   space  program.  Marcia 
Smith   of  the  Congressional  Research  Service  said  that   people  are  concerned 
about where  to cut  the  budget, and  NASA   is  seen as a discretionary  program. 
T h e  poll  also revealed  that   people  were  losing faith  in NASA's performance. 
(USA Today, Sep  7/93) 

September 20: Two separate  teams of  astronomers  reported  finding what  could 
be  t h e  first direct  evidence of  the  existence  of  chunks of  invisible matter  that  
in  theory  form a massive, unseen halo  around Earth's galaxy, the  Milky Way. 
If  the  finding stands up,  it is a significant breakthrough in  t h e  search for so- 
called dark matter. A US . -Aus t ra l ian  team announced  the  Jiscovery  simulta- 
neously with  a  French  team.  ( W  Post,  Sept .  21,  P  Inq,  Sep  21/93; NY  Times, 
1993; UPn ,  Sep 2 1/93)  

Over  the  next  two decades, NASA   planned  to  launch  more  than  two  dozen 
satellites for  its "Mission to  Planet Earth." These satellites were scheduled to col- 
lect information about clouds, ocean circulation, and ice and pollution in order to 
help scientists refine their predictions of  global warning. (Newsweek, Sep 20193) 

SEPTEMBER  1993 

iR<WOILX;Y  1 0 9  3 

Marshall  Engineers  and  Sc ien t~ s t s  Association  President  Wesley  Lhrhro  said 
that   it  appeared  tha t   t h e  Marshall  Space  Flight Cen te r   urcx~ld lay  off  ahout  478 
workers, all  associated  with  the   Space  Station   program.  (H14ntsz)iUc. Titnes,  Sep  
20/93) 

September 21:  Air  traffic controllers reported  t h ; ~ t  their new $839 million railar sys- 
tem  has  some serious  flaws:  planes vanish  from  screens, phantom   images appcar, 
and  even   a  squirrel can  chew  up  the   network.  NASA   said  that   it  has  recei\recl 
many complaints a t  its Ames Research Cen te r  at Moffett Field, California, home 
of  NASA's  aviation safety reporting  system. (AP, September 21/93 

T h e  Sena te   endorsed  t h e  C l l n t o n  a dm ~ n ~ s t r , - l t ~ o n ' s  
plan   t o  h u ~ l d  t h e  Space  
S t a t ~ o n  hy  refusing  t o  cut   fclndlng for  t h e   1994 yrojir,tm iron1 $ 1   94 h ~ l l l o n  t o  
$500  m ~ l l ~ o n .  T h e  latter  amoun t  would  hd t rc  beet1 uaeil  t o  shu t  dorm t h e  pro-  
gram.  (RTW,  S e p   21/93,  UP I ,   S e p   21/93,  AP,  J u n e   22/93,  LA  'Xmes, S e p  
22/93; P  Inq,  S e p  22/93; NY  E r n e> ,  Sep   23/93)  

September  2 2 :  New   software,  t h e   New  Spectral   Imaging  Processing  System 
(NEWS IPS ) ,  was  giving researchers a  remarkably  i~tipro\red  look  a t  da ta  from 
NASA's  In te rna t iona l  U l t rav io le t  Explorer  ( IU E ) ,  t h e  space agency's longesr- 
runn ing   astronomical   satellite   in  Earth   orhi t .   (NA SA  Release  93- 164) 

September  2 3 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t   researchers  h;id  r c c o r ~ l e ~ l  une spcc ted ,  
huge   flashes  of  light  i n   t h e   upper  atmosphere   t h a t   might   a i k c t   atmosphcric  
ozone  and   present   po ten t ia l  
for  h igh -a l t i tude   research  planes .   T h e  
flashes  occurred   above   a  severe  thunde r s to rm   in   t h e  Mid\vest  in  t h e   summer 
a n d  were recorded  aboard NASA's  DC-8 A ~ r h o r n e  Laboratory, h , i d  a t  Ames  
Research   Cen te r ,  Moffett  Field, California .   ( N A S A  Rcleasc  91-  167; W  l'os t ,  
S e p  24/93; AP,  Sep  23/93)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   results  from   a  Spacelah  crystal  growth   experiment  
flown aboard  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  last summer  had  hrought  researchers closer  t o  
understanding   t h e  molecular  structure   of  proteins;  such   unclerst;~ntling  wix~lcl 
aid  scientists   in   developing   more  effective  disease-fighting,  an t i -pa ra s i t ic  
drugs.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -  166) 

N A S A  announced   t h a t  flight  tests with   a N A S A   research  aircraft  last  week 
had  demonstrated   t h e  first precision  au toma t ic  approaches  a n d  landings  using 
Differential  Global   Positioning   System  (DG P S )   navigation   satellite  sign'lls. 
T h e   procedures  were  carried  ou t   without   using  cc~mplex  processing  t e c h -  
niques.  ( N A S A  Release  93-165) 

September  24:  N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  four  cand ida te   Small  
Explorer  missions:  t h e   J o i n t   Ultraviolet   N igh t   S k y  Observer   ( J U N O ) ,  t h e  
Positron  Electron  Magnetic  Spec t rome te r  ( PO EM S ) ,  t h e  Tran>itic)n;ll Region  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

SEPTEMBER  1993 

a n d   Co rona l   Explorer  ( T R A C E ) ,   and   t h e   Wide-Field  Infrared  Explorer 
(W IR E ) .   T h e   four  proposed  missions  were  scheduled   t o   e n t e r   a  t e n -m o n t h  
de f in i t ion  phase.  After   t h a t   phase,  N A S A   planned   t o  confirm   two  missions 
for developmenc  and  flight  a n d  t o   launch  t h e  confirmed  missions  i n   1997 a n d  
1998.  ( N A S A  Release 9 3 - 1 6 8 ) .  

N A S A  officials announced  t h a t   further   testing  on  t h e  Wide  Field/Planetary 
Came ra   11  (WF /PC I I ) ,  a n   in s t rumen t  scheduled   t o  fly  o n   t h e  Hubble   Space  
Telescope  Servicing   Mission  in   December,  might  be  necessary.  Tests  had  
cleared  t h e  camera   of  suspicion  t h a t   it  was  flawed, but   N A S A   asked  for  o n e  
last  independen t   review  of  t h e   da ta   just  to   make   completely  sure.  ( N A S A  
Release  93 -  169; W Post, S e p  28/93)  

September 27: Lt. G e n .  James  H .  Doolittle ,   legendary Army  aviator  a n d  World 
Wa r   I 1  hero ,  died  a t   t h e  age of  96.  H e  was  best  known  for  leading  "Doolittle's 
Raiders"  in  a daring  bombing  run   o n  Tokyo and  o t h e r  Japane se  cities  in  April  
1942.  T h e   raid  brought   t h e   war  home   t o  J a p a n  for  t h e   first  t ime   a n d   lifted 
American   morale  when   t h e  country  was  still  reeling  from a string  of  Axis  vic- 
tories.  After   t h e  war, Gene ra l  Doolittle   served  as president  of  t h e  In s t i tu te  of 
Space   and   Aeronautical   Sc ience   and   cha i rman   of  t h e   Na t iona l   Advisory 
C omm i t t e e  for Aeronautics ,   t h e  forerunner  of  NASA .   ( B  Sun ,  O c t  1/93;  AP, 
O c t   1/93; W I'ost,  O c t  2/93)  

September  28:  Rep re sen ta t ive s  
t h e   Federal   A v i a t i o n  
from  N A S A ,  
Adm in i s t ra t ion   ( F A A ) ,  and   industry  described  how   they  h a d  worked  toge th -  
e r   t o   take  windshear  advance-warning  devices  from  t h e  drawing  hoard  t o  t h e  
commercial  aviation   marketplace   in  just  five  years.  T h e  windshear  reports, 
part  of  a  NASA IFAA   conference   in  H am p t o n ,   Virginia,  detailed   develop-  
men t   of  microwa\,e  radar,  laser  radar,  a n d   infrared  sensors  t h a t  provide  up  t o  
40  seconds warning  of  windshear. Now N A S A  and  t h e  FAA  were  considering  
whe the r  pilots  should  have  formal  training   t o   in te rac t  with   these   new  instru-  
ments .   ( N A S A  Release  93 -270  and   93-1 71; AuWk, O c t .   18/93)  

T h e  Spacelah  Life Sciences-2  (SLS - 2 )  mission scheduled  for O c t o b e r  would 
offer  scientists   unprecedented   opportunities   t o   learn  more  about   how  life 
adapts   t o   t h e   microgravity  env i ronmen t   of  space  flight.  For  t h e   first  t ime   in  
t h e  history  of  space flight ,  scientists were  to  collect   tissues during  t h e  mission. 
Crew  memhers were  t o  draw blood samples from b o t h   themselves  a n d  rats  and  
were  t o  dissect  five  rats  in  space.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -173 )  

September  30:  N A S A   a n d   t h e   Federal  Av ia t ion   A dm i n i s t r a t i o n   ( F A A )  
descrihed   i n n o v a t i v e  new   aerctnautics  research   programs  t h a t  would  let   a i r -  
ports   across  t h e   n a t i o n   a n d   a round   t h e   world  h a n d l e   mo re   planes   w i t h  
fewer delays while  m a i n t a i n i n g  today's h igh   level  of  safety.  ( N A S A  Release  
9 3 - 1 7 2 )  

SEPTEMBER  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

NASA's  Hubble's  Space  Telescope's  picture  of  Nova  Cygni  1992  gave 
astronomers their earliest look  at a rapidly ballooning bubble of gas  blasted off a 
star. Nova Cygni  1992 erupted on February  19, 1992. (NASA Release 93-174) 

T h e   Sena te   voted 
th e   multibillion-dollar 
to  con t inue   funding 
Superconducting Super Collider project, which  the House had voted  to elim- 
inate.  The issue now goes to a House-Senate conference as part of  a $22.5 bil- 
lion  spending bill  for fiscal  1994 energy and water  projects.  (UP I ,  Sep 30193; 
W Post, Oc t   1/93; NY Times, Oc t   1/93) 

During September: A University of New Hampshire-NASA study revealed that 
tropical  deforestation  and  adverse  effects  on  tropical  forest  habitat  have 
increased in  the Brazilian Amazon Basin  since the  late  1970s. Data  from  the 
Landsat-4  and  -5  satellites  covering  1978-88  indicated  that  although  the 
extent  of  deforestation  was  less  than  expected,  deforestation  had  increased 
substantially and created adverse "edge-effects1' that posed  a substantial threat 
to the habitat  of  plant  and animal  species.  (E l  Mundo  Latino,  Sep/93) 

Commentaries  appeared in  the press both  supporting and opposing funding 
for  the Superconducting Super Collider. Supporters of  the  project  noted  that 
the Super Collider  involved basic  scientific research  that would  benefit soci- 
ety  in  countless ways.  Critics,  admitting  that  the  Super Collider might  well 
advance science, argued that  the cost of  continuing the program was  too high 
in  the   current  budgetary climate.  (LA   Em e s ,   Sep  24/93;  U S A  Today,  Sep 
28/93; W Post, Sep 29/93) 

October 

October  1 : House-Senate  conferees killed NASA's program  to  search for signs 
of  intelligent  civilization  beyond  Earth  and   reduced  funding  available  for  a 
reflight  of  t h e   agency's  lost  Mars  Observer  mission.  In   approving  a  total 
agency  budget  of  $14.5 billion,  the   legislators barely   reserved  a  program  to 
build  a more powerful  rocket  booster for  the  Space Shu t t le  and  provided  very 
little   funding  for  developing  new  technology  needed  for  the   National  
Aerospace   Plane.  T h e  planned  Space S ta t ion  was  fully funded a t  $2.1  billion 
for fiscal 1994.  ( W  Post, Oc t .  2/93; AP  O c t  2/93) 

October 4:  NASA   announced  tha t   NASA   scientists  were  t o  spend  October  
and  November  in Antarctica  testing  "telepresence  technology"  tha t  might be 
used  in  the  future  to explore Mars. T h e  research expedition was sponsored by 
a  joint  NASA -Na t iona l   Science   Foundation   An ta rc t ic   Space   Analog  
Program  and   funded  for  NASA   by 
the   Offices  of  Space  Science  and  
Advanced  Concepts  and Technology. (NA SA  Release 93-178; LA  Times, O c t  
3/93; UP I ,  O c t  4/93) 

Hughes Aircraft  and  Perkin-Elmer Corporation   agreed  t o  pay  $25 million 
to   head  off  a  threatened   government   lawsuit, charging  them   with   liability 
for  the   defect  t h a t   crippled  t h e   $2-billion   Hubble  Space   Telescope,  t h e  
Justice   Department   announced .   (UP I ,  O c t   4/93;  AP, O c t   5/93;  NY  Times, 
O c t  5/93;  B  Sun, O c t  5/93, O c t  8/93;  W Post, O c t  5/93;  WSJ, O c t  5/93; LA 
Times, O c t  5 /93 )  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   announced   the   recipients  of  the  
Minority Contractor   and  Subcontractor  of  the  Year  Awards  in  recognition  of 
minority  businesses  tha t   had  made  outstanding   contributions   to   NASA .  
Hernandez Engineering,  Inc., Houston ,  was named  as Minority Contractor   of 
the   Year.  A J T   and  Associates,  Inc.,  C a p e   Canaveral ,   Florida,  was  named 
Minority Subcontractor  of  the  Year.  (NA SA  Release 93-177)  

NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was  to  receive a scheduled boost 
to a higher  orbit  beginning o n  October 4,  to  prevent  the   spacecraft from reen- 
tering the  Earth's atmosphere. T h e  reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit 
decay, which  is  the  result  of  solar  activity  slowly  pushing  the   satellite  toward 
Earth over a period of  time, said NASA   officials. (NASA  Release 93-1 79) 

October 5: A conference committee of  the  Senate  and  House eliminated $12.3 
million  earmarked for  the  Search  for Extraterrestrial  Intelligence (SETI)  proj- 
ect .  Angry  astronomers  began  seeking  private  funds  to  continue   their   work, 
which  had   been  underway  for  barely  a year.  (SF Chron, O c t  6/93; NY  Times, 
O c t  7/93; San Francisco Examiner, O c t  4 /93 )  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1993 

Oc tobe r   6:  A  $220  million  Landsat  6  Earth  Observation  satellite  was 
launched  into  the wrong orbit, and  ground  controllers  were  unable  to  make 
contact  with  the   satellite,  according  to   a  mission  spokeswoman  for  Earth 
Observation  Satellite  Company  (ESAT). T h e   satellite  was  supposed  to  go 
into orbit  over the  poles during a five-year mission studying the Earth's envi. 
ronment. An  ESAT official said  that  the  company hoped  to get  the  satellite 
into the proper orbit by  the  end of  the week.  (W  Pos t ,  Oc t  6/93; USA Today ,  
AP, O c t  6/93) 

NASA's  inspector general  told  Congress that  NASA  is  plagued  with  con- 
tractors who overcharge, receive bonus  payments while running  up  huge cost 
overruns  and  employ  workers  who  frequently  sleep on   the  job.  T h e   agency 
currently  has  more  than  400  criminal  fraud  investigations  under  way,  the 
inspector general  told  the  House  Government  Operations  Committee.  (AP, 
Oc t  6/93; NY  Times,  Oc t  6/93, Oc t  7/93; LA  Tm e s ,  Oc t  7/93) 

Oc tober   7: U.S.  space pioneer William H. Pickering was  th e  first  recipient  of 
the  $250,000  Francois-Xavier  Bagnoud  Aerospace  Prize,  the   largest  of  its 
kind.  As  director  of  the  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  in  California,  Pickering 
prepared  the  first U.S. satellite, Explorer  1, for  launch  in just  83 days follow- 
ing the  launch  of  the Soviet Sputnik  1 in  1957. (W  Post,  Oc t  7/93) 

NASA  reported  that  an explosive designed to  free  a satellite  aboard  Space 
Shuttle Discovery  accidentally detonated while  the  Shuttle was  in  orbit  last 
month, hurling shrapnel  though the cargo compartment.  T h e  five astronauts 
were never  in  any danger, a NASA  official said. T h e  damage would  not delay 
Discovery's next  flight  in January. (RTW, Oc t   7/93; AP, Oct  8/93; F l a   Today, 
Oc t   11/93, Oc t   14/93) 

Oc tober   8: A  recent  Space Shuttle experiment  on   rats  may  lead  some  day  to 
the discovery of  the  genes that  direct bone  cells to  produce more bone.  T h e  
third  Physiological  and  Anatomical  Rodent  Experiment  (PARE-3) studied 
changes in  the activity of  bone-forming cells after nine days of  space flight.  I t  
also  investigated whether  these  changes  were  reversed  within  three  days  of 
return  to  Earth.  (NASA  Release 93-181) 

Oc tobe r   12: NASA  scientists were  scheduled to  test  an "intelligent"  comput- 
er o n  the  14-day Spacelab life sciences mission, scheduled for  launch  in early 
October.  Th e   computer,  known  as  the  Astronaut  Science  Advisor,  was 
designed  to  help  astronauts work  more  efficiently and  improve  the quality of 
science  in  space. (NASA  Release 93-180) 

In  the current  issue of  the journal  Science, astronomers reported tha t  refined 
analysis  of  spacecraft data  had  led  them  to  estimate  that  the  heliopause  is 
somewhere  from  116 to  177  times farther  away  from  the   Sun  than  is  Earth. 

OCTOBER  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

T h e  previous calculations, announced   in May, gave a  lower  estimate of  82  to 
130 times.  (NY Xmes ,  O c t   12/93) 

NASA  officials said tha t  its Comp ton  Gamma-Ray Observatory  had yield- 
ed three  major breakthroughs, two of which would enable scientists  to  unmask 
hidden  supernovae buried deep in the  center  of  the  Milky Way.  T h e  third  dis- 
covery  pinpoints  a  source  of  t h e   mysterious  cosmic  rays  in  this  galaxy  tha t  
have puzzled  researchers since  the   rays  first were detected  more  than   80 years 
ago.  (NA SA  Release 93- 182 )  

NASA   announced  that   it  had   received  a  request  from  Russian  physicians 
treating  victims  of  the   recent  emergency  in  Moscow  for  medical  assistance 
from U.S. clinicians.  T h e  medical consultations were to  use a previously estab- 
lished U.S./Russian  satellite  telemedicine  program  known  as  "Spacebridge  to 
Moscow." NASA   first  became  involved  in  satellite  telemedicine  programs  in 
the   1970s when a NASA  satellite was used for medical consultation and health  
care delivery to  remote  sites in  Alaska.  (NA SA  Release 93-183)  

October  13:  NASA   announced   t h e   formation  of  an   investigation  board  to  
examine  the  causes of  a  simultaneous  detonation   of  two  Super  Zip  explosive 
cords, one  primary  and   the  o the r  a backup,  tha t   occurred  during  the  deploy- 
ment  of  t h e  Advanced Communications Technology Sa te l l i te (ACTS )  and   its 
Transfer  Orbit   S ta te   ( T O S )  booster  from  Discovery  during  Shu t t le  mission 
STS -5  1 (September  12-20, 1993) .  (NA SA  Release 93-  184 )  

NASA's  Johnson   Space  Cen te r ,   Houston ,   Texas,  selected  Lockheed 
Engineering  and   Sciences Corporation ,   Houston,  for  the   Engineering, Test, 
and  Analysis contract  worth $12.5 billion  over  10  years, beginning January  1 ,  
1994.  (NASA  Release C93-y)  

Miles  "Mike"  Ross,  former  deputy  director  of  the   Kennedy  Space Cen te r ,  
died  of  cancer Wednesday a t  his  home.  He  was  74.  Mr. Ross  joined  NASA  
in  1967  as  deputy  director  of  the   center's  engineering  and   technical  opera- 
tions.  H e  became deputy  center  director  in  1970. (Fl Today, O c t   15/93)  

October  14: A  last-minute glitch  in  a computer  system  that   monitors Shu t t le  
takeoffs  to   ensure  people's  safety on   the   ground  forced NASA   to   scrub  t h e  
launch  of  Shu t t le  Columbia  o n  a medical  research  mission. NASA   said  tha t  
it would  try  for a n  October   15 launch ,  if  t h e  weather  cooperated. 
A  small  group  of  animal  rights  protesters  carried  signs  a t   G a t e   2  of  the  
Kennedy  Space C e n t e r  o n   t h e   day  of  t h e   expected  launch;   they  objected  to 
the  use of  rats  in experiments aboard the  Columbia. (AP, O c t  14/93; UPI , O c t  
14/93; NYEmes, O c t  14/93, O c t  15/93; B Sun ,  O c t  15/93; W Post, O c t   15/93; 
P Inq, O c t  14/93, O c t  15/93; FI  Today, O c t  15/93; 0 Sen Star, O c t   15/93; USA 
Today, O c t   14/93) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN I ,   AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER  1993 

October  15:  Scientists   a t   NASA's  Ame s   Research  C e n t e r ,   Moffett  Field, 
California ,   and   t h e   J o i n t   Astronomy   C e n t r e ,   H i lo ,   Hawaii ,   discovered  a n  
~ l n e x p e c t e d  type  of  molecule  in  t h e   ices  of  a  star-forming  cloud.  T h e  scien-  
tists  have   de tec ted   large  amoun t s  of  molecular  hydrogen  frozen  i n t o   t h e   ice 
grains  in  a  dense   molecular  cloud  in  R h o   Ophiuchus .   R h o   Oph iuchu s   is 
known   as a stellar nursery,  a  region  in   t h e  Milky Way Galaxy  where  new  stars 
are  being  formed.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -187 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   1C2  Institute ,   Au s t in ,   Texas,  had   appo in ted  
J o h n   S.  G e e   as  t h e   director   of  t h e   Ames   Technology   Commercialization  
C e n t e r   ( A T C X )  located   in  Sunnyva le ,  California .  T h e   IC2   Institute ,   a  un i t  
of  t h e   University   of  Texas,  was  con t rac ted   by  NASA's  Office  of  Advanced  
Concep t s  Technology, Wa sh ing ton ,  DC, t o  assist N A S A  C e n t e r s  in  t h e  trans-  
fer  of  technology  t o   t h e  private  sector.  ( N A S A  Release 93 -185 )  

T h e  N A S A  Office  of  Advanced   Concep t s  and  Technology  selected  5 2  pro-  
posals for negotiations  leading t o  Phase A  awards t o  develop  flight experiments  
in  response  t o  t h e   1992 In-Space  Technology Experiments  Program  ( IN -TEP )  
A n n o u n c em e n t  of  Opportunity .   For  t h e   1992 program,  proposals were solicit- 
ed  in  eight  different  technology  areas:  space  communications;   cryo fluid  h a n -  
dling;  human   support;  in-space  construction ,   repair,  a n d   ma in tenance ;  space 
materials, coatings, and  environmental   effects; space power, science sensor, and  
sensor cooling;  and   vibration   isolation.  ( N A S A  Release  93-186)  

N A S A   Administrator   Daniel  S .   G n l d i n   told   Congress  t h a t   t h e   U n i t e d  
S ta te s  could save $3.5 billion  by  building  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  with   t h e  Russians. 
H e  also  testified  t h a t  a joint  Space  S t a t i o n  could  be finished  a n d  inhab i ted  by 
U.S. astronauts  by  Ap r i l  2001, two years earlier  t h a n  without   Russian cooper-  
a t lon .   (lVSJ, O c t   15/93; Hun t sz i lk  Times, O c t   15/93)  

A  report  by  t h e  Gene ra l  Accoun t ing  Office found  t h a t  for years N A S A  h a d  
disregarded  or   misunderstood  property  regulations.  Unde r   Federal  regula- 
tions ,  contractors  doing  business with   t h e  gove rnmen t  must provide  the i r  ow n  
equ ipmen t   unless  the i r   reasons  are  approved  by  t h e   agency  signing  t h e   c o n -  
tract .   N A S A ,  however,  rarely  applied  these  tough   regulations  t o   its  con t rac -  
tors, so t h a t  businesses have   billions of  dollars of  taxpayer-purchased  property. 
(Fla Today, O c t   15/93 ,  O c t  18/93) 

October  16: Two  Russian  cosmonauts  orbiting  the   Earth  since July  have   been  
forced t o  extend  their  stay o n  the  Mir Space Station  by 49  days because of a delay 
in sending a  relief craft, a space agency officials announced .   (RTW, O c t  16/93)  

October  18: N A S A  officials announced   t h a t   t h e  Hubb le  Space  Telescope had  
p r o v ~ d e d  t h e   mobt  detailed   look  yet  a t  C om e t  Shoemaker-Levy  5 ,  wh ich  was 
hu r t l ing   t tw a r d   a  July  1994  cclllision w ~ t h  t h e  planet   Jupiter .   Hubble's high  

OCTOBER  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

resolution  images showed tha t   the  approximately  20 objects tha t  make up  t h e  
comet  are  much  smaller  t h a n   originally  estimated  from  observations  with 
ground-based  telescopes. (NA SA  Release 93-188; USA  Today, O c t  15/93; S F 
Chron, O c t   15/93; RTW, O c t   14/93; W Post, O c t  25/93) 

NASA   took  action  to   limit  expenditures  o n   the   Advanced  Solid  Rocket 
Motor  (ASRM )  program.  NASA   informed  its  field  installations  involved 
with  the  ASRM  tha t   if  the  pending  appropriations bill becomes  law,  it would 
require  termination  of  the  ASRM program.  (NA SA  Release 93-189)  

Antarctic  ozone levels have reached  record lows, according  to data  obtained 
by  scientists  a t  NASA's  Goddard  Space Flight Center ,  Greenbelt ,  Maryland, 
and   the   National   Oceanic   and   Atmospheric  Administration  ( N O A A ) ,  
Climate  Monitoring and  Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record  low  lev- 
els  were  recorded  a t   the   Sou th   Pole  S ta t ion ,   Antarctica ,   a t   the   end   of 
September and early October   1993 and confirmed  by  satellite measurements. 
(NA SA  Release  93-190; B  Sun,  O c t   16/93; AP,  O c t   18/93; NY  Times,  O c t  
19/93; W Post, O c t   19/93; USA  Today, O c t   19/93) 

T h e  United  States ,  Canada ,  Japan ,  and  t h e  European Space Agency  (ESA )  
have   invited Russia  to help  them  build  a new Space Station ,  according to a n  
announcement   by  the  ESA.  (RTW ,  O c t   18/93; NASA  Release N93-650)  

Space Shu t t le  Columbia, carrying  seven astronauts, 48  rats,  and   a medical 
research  lab,  blasted  into   orbit  for  a  record  14 days  of  experiments  to   learn 
more about keeping  astronauts healthy  during long voyages in weightlessness. 
T h e  research was also expected  to  shed  light o n  o the r  hea l th  issues, including 
hypertension,  anemia,  and  osteoporosis.  Th is   mission  was  only  the   second 
mission  in  5 8  Shu t t le  trips focused entirely o n  medical  research. 
For  most  of  the   planned  investigations,  astronauts were  to   serve  as  both  
experimenters and  subjects, donating  blood, saliva, and  urine samples for post- 
flight  analysis.  They  also planned  to  participate  in  several  tests  t o  character-  
ize changes  in the  vision, balance, perception, and  o the r  senses affected by  t h e  
loss of  gravity. 
T h e   launch ,   which  took  place  four  days  late  after  two  earlier  launch  
attempts   had   been  derailed  by  bad  weather  and   technical  problems,  had  a 
trouble-free  countdown.  T h e  Shu t t le  was  scheduled  to   land  November  1 a t  
Edwards Air   Force  Base.  (UP I ,  O c t   18/93: RTW, O c t   18/93; AP, O c t   18/93, 
O c t   20193;  B  Sun,  O c t   19/93;  USA  Today,  O c t   19/93; W  Post,  O c t   19/93; 
RTW, O c t   19/93; NY  Times, O c t  20103) 

October  19: By  firing  small jets  10 times  in   one-minute   bursts, NASA   engi- 
neers have raised  the  orbit of  t h e  giant Comp ton  Gamma-Ray Observatory  by 
66 miles  and  saved  i t   from crashing to  Earth. T h e  observatory was  scheduled 
to travel  around Earth in  a n  egg-shaped orbit  until  late November when a sec- 

A S T R O N A U T l C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

OCTOBER   1993 

o n d  series of  firings was t o  circularize  its travels so  t h a t   it would  he a t  280  miles 
altitude   all  around   t h e  globe .  (AP ,  O c t   19 /93 )  

T h e  House  of  Representatives   voted   t o  d e n y  funding   requests  for  two  sci- 
e n c e  projects:  President  C l in ton ' s  request  for  $640   million  for  t h e   supercon-  
ducting   Super   Collider   a n d   $4  billion   for  NASA's  request  t o   build  a  more 
powerful  Space   S h u t t l e   eng ine .   (AP, O c t   19/93;  W  Post,  O c t   20193;  USA 
Today, O c t   20193, O c t   21/93; NY  Times,  O c t   20193; W  Post,  O c t   21/93,  O c t  
22/93; C Tnb, O c t  22/93; B  Sun ,  O c t  25/93)  

N A S A   said  t h a t   engineers   have   launched   a  review  of  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e  
Columbia's liftoff t o  identify debris seen  near  Columbia's th ree  ma in  engines .  
A  spokesman  said  t h a t   t h e  S h u t t l e  performed  flawlessly during   its a scen t ,  but 
t h a t   officials  were  intrigued  by  video   images  t h a t   captured   a n   object   "of 
unknown   origin"  falling  i n t o   t h e   fiery  eng ine   plume  about   45  seconds  after  
liftoff.  (RTW ,  O c t   19/93)  

October  20: N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S.  Go ld in   announced   t h a t   t h e  
Otfice  of  Space   Flight  would  assume  responsibility  for  management   of  t h e  
Space  S t a t i o n  Program.  Je rem iah  W.  Pearson  111,  Associate  Administrator   of 
Space   Flight ,  was  scheduled  t o  lead  t h e   integration   of  these   major  programs. 
( N A S A  Release  93-1291;  AP, O c t  20193) 

N A S A  announced  t h a t  t h e  mystery of t h e  "fastest flickering" galaxy, Galaxy  
N G C   6814 ,  had   been   solved.  Astronomers   discovered  t h a t   t h e   flickering  is 
no t   related  t o  t h e  galaxy hut   ra the r   t o  two stars t h a t  orbit   each  o t h e r  near   t h e  
line   of  sight  hetween   Earth   and   t h e   galaxy.  W h e n   t h e   two   stars--called  a 
hinary  system-become 
aligned  with   each   o t h e r   i n   relation   t o   Earth ,   t h e  
galaxy  image appears much  brighter.  W h e n  t h e  hinary  stars move ou t  of  align-  
men t ,   t h e  galaxy hecomes dimmer.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -192 )  

T h e  House of Rep re sen ta t~ve s  voted  for t h e  second  time  s ince  J u n e  t o  reject 
financing   for  t h e   Super   Collider.  Supporters   said  t h a t   t h e   project  appeared 
dead .   (NY  Times, O c t  20193; WP o s t ,  O c t  20193) 

October  21:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  planned   t o   launch  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  
and   seven   astronauts   o n   Decemher  1  o n   a  mission  t o   repair  t h e   trc3uhled 
Huhble   Space  Telescope.  (U P I ,  O c t  21/93)  

October  22:  Scientists   reported   t h a t   NASA's Galileo   spacecraft  had   de tec ted  
changes   in   t h e   interplanetary   magnetic   field  as  it  passed  t h e   asteroid  Ida  o n  
Atlgust  28.  ( N A S A  Release  93-  193 )  

October  25:  Tests  of  a  new  NASA -deve loped ,   in-flight  weather   information  
system  show  t h a t   lt  could  he lp   a i r l ~ n e s  save  nearly  $6  million  per  year. T h e  

OCTOBER  199 3 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

Cockp i t  Wea the r   Information   Needs   ( C W I N )  system  draws  o n  several  com -  
mercial  da ta   sources t o  create   radar  maps of  storms  and   l igh tn ing  and   reports 
of  surface  observations.  In   N A S A   simulations  from  Ma rch   t o  July, pilots  o n  
14  flight  crews burned   less  fuel  and   flew  fewer miles  in   avoiding  bad  weather  
using  CW I N  displays.  ( N A S A  Release  93 -194 )  

October  26:  NA SA ,   t h e  Alaskan   Volcano  Observatory   (AVO )  and   Carnegie  
Mellon  University,  Pittsburgh ,  have  agreed t o  a second robotic  volcano  explo-  
ration   involving   D a n t e ,  a n  eight-legged  rohot   t h a t   a t temp ted   t o   explore  M t .  
Erebus  in  An ta rc t ica  earlier  th i s  year. ( N A S A  Release  93 -195 ;  AP, O c t  26/93; 
W Times, O c t  3 1 /93 )  

October 27: NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  announced   t h a t  the  Un i ted  
States  plans as many  as  10  Shu t t le  missions t o  the  Russian Mir Space S ta t ion  as 
t h e   two  countries  prepare  t o  join  in   t h e   future development  of  a joint  In tema -  
tional  Space S ta t ion .  Go ld in  said  t h a t   t h e  plans  for  t h e  dockings are  contained  
in  a N A S A  proposal  for expanded  cooperation   in space with   t h e  Russians  t h a t  
h e  ~ l a n s  t o  submit  t o  t h e  C l i n t o n  administration  early next   week. T h e  propos- 
al  calls  for  US . - l e d   construction   of  a n   International   Space  S ta t ion   in  Earth  
orbit  beginning  in   1997. (H  Chron, O c t  28/93; NY  Times, Nov  5/98, Nov   13/93; 
W Post, Nov   4/98; LA  Times, Nov   5/98, AP, Nov   5/98; B  Sun, Nov   5/98)  

October  28: A  two - ton  c h u n k  of  a Ch ine se   reconnaissance   satellite   launched  
earlier  this   m o n t h   fell  i n t o   t h e   Pacific  O c e a n   1 ,000  miles  west  of  Peru,  t h e  
U .S .   Space  Command   said.  (U SA  Today,  O c t .  28/93 ,  O c t   29/93;  P  l n q ,  O c t  
28/93, O c t  29/93; W Post, O c t  28/93,  29/93; NY  Times, O c t  26 /93 )  

Dinosaurs  became  extinct   no t   as  a  result  of  a  giant  asteroid,  as  one   theory 
holds, but because of  a n  atmospheric change  tha t  left too  little oxygen  t o  support 
their  inefficient  respiratory systems, according to  Gary Landis, a U .S .  Geological 
Survey geologist.  He  was  one  of  four scientists who presented  the  n e a r  theory  at 
the  Geological  Society of  America's annual  meeting.  ( P  Inq, O c t  28/93) 

October 29: NA SA  announced   t h a t  it had  begun  flight  tests of  a fiber optic  c o n -  
trol  system  tha t   could  result  in   lighter, more  fuel-efficient  airplanes with   more 
capable  control   and  monitoring  systems.  T h e   tests,  using  t h e   F/A-18  Systems 
Research  Aircraft  at  NASA's Ames-Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility, Edwards, 
California,  were  developing  fiber  optic   systems  tha t   weighed  less  a n d   took  up 
less space t h a n   t h e  copper wiring  in   today's aircraft. ( N A S A  Release  93-199)  

NA SA   announced   t h a t   s ta r t ing   in   Janua ry   1994 ,   t h e   N A S A   Sc ience  
In te rne t   (N S I )  would  c o n n e c t  research sites in  t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  with  Russia's 
Space  Research  Institute   ( IK I )   in   Moscow.  N i n e   additional   Russian  space-  
related  institutions   were  t o   he  connec ted   through   what   is  called  t h e  Russian 
Space  Sc ience  In te rne t   (R S S I ) .  ( N A S A  Release  93 -196 )  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

OCTOBER  1993 

Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific  expedition have shed new 
light  o n  t h e  geology of  eastern Russia.  T h e  data  was  obtained  in August  and 
September by  NASA   and  Russian scientists  using  NASA's  Learjet Model 23 
based  a t   t h e   J o h n  C. Stennis   Space  Cen te r   in  Mississippi.  T h e   expedition 
studied a variety of  sites o n  the  Kamchatka  peninsula;  the  data  were to be used 
to  study  t h e   geologic  evolution  of  t h e   volcanoes  o n  the   peninsula  as  well  as 
t h e   impact  of  large  volcanic  eruptions o n   the   atmosphere  and   its  chemistry. 
T h e  data  were also to  be used  to model  thermal and  dynamical  aspects of  vol- 
canoes.  (NA SA  Release 93- 198)  

NASA  announced  tha t   it had started flight tests of a fiber optic  control  sys- 
tem  tha t  could  result  in  lighter, more  fuel-efficient airplanes  with  more  capa- 
ble  control   and   monitoring  systems.  T h e   tests,  which  used  the   F/A-18 
Systems  Research  Aircraft,  took  place  a t   NASA's  Ames-Dryden  Flight 
Research  facility, Edwards, California.  (NA SA  Release 93-199)  

October 30: NASA   announced  a new  initiative  tha t  would create  Louisiana's 
first formal concentration  of  aerospace engineering courses a t  the  historically 
Black  Sou the rn   University  and   A&M  College,  Baton  Rouge,  Louisiana. 
NASA's  five-year, $2 .5   million  grant  was  intended   t o   help  the   university 
develop  an  aerospace engineering undergraduate  option   in  the  department  of 
mechanical  engineering.  (NA SA  Release 93- 197)  

A n  article  in New  Scientist suggested tha t  many failures in  space are n o t  t h e  
fault  of  electronics  or  software,  but  something  more  fundamental-the 
mechanics.  T h e  article  identified  a number of  space missions  that   had  prob- 
lems  caused by mechanical  failures. Examples  include  the   mission  involving 
the   European  Retrievable  Carrier  (EURECA ) ;  Germany's TVSAT1 ,  a direct 
broadcast  satellite  launched  in  November  1987;  and   the   Hubble  Space 
Telescope.  (New Scientist, O c t  30193) 

November  I :   Dr.  David  1.  Larkin  and   team  members  from  NASA's  Lewis 
Research  Center ,  Cleveland,  Oh io ,   announced  a  new  silicon  carhide  crystal 
growth  process,  called  "site  competition  epitaxy,"  in  a  paper  presented  at  the  
International   Conference  o n   Silicon  Carhide  and  Related  Materials  in 
Washington, DC.  T h e  new growth process can be  used  to  produce superior sil- 
icon  carbide  semiconductor electronic devices, which  can  withstand  tempera- 
tures much higher  than  conventional semiconductors. (NASA  Release 93-200) 

T h e  Space Shuttle   Columbia  landed  smoothly  at  Edwards  ,4ir  Force  Rase 
after  14  days  in  orbit ,   ending  the   Shu t t le   program's  longest  flight  with  a 
wealth of  new data  on  weightlessness in humans. Columbia's mission was only 
the  second  in  U.S.  history totally  devoted  to  medical  research.  T h e  Shuttle  
logged  5.8 million miles and circled  Earth  2 2 5  times during  its journey,  which 
began October   18.  Columbia performed well but sustained damage to thermal 
barriers around  engine heat  shields and  to  its  protective  tiles.  Both  problems 
have   occurred  before  and   will  con t inue   to   be  investigated,  a  NASA  
spokesperson said. 
Shortly  after  touchdown,  Columbia's  seven crew  members  were  taken  on 
stretchers to  a base  lab, where  they were to  undergo new  tests heforc  their hod- 
ies had  time  t o  readjust  to Earth's  gravity. T h e  crew, including  two physicians, 
a biochemist,  and  a veterinarian, conducted  medical  research during  the  mis- 
sion.  T h e y  pedaled bicycles, drew blood samples, dissected  laboratory  rats, and 
performed other  tests in a self-contained  space clinic.  T h e  tests were designed 
to  provide  new clues o n  how  harmful effects of  weightlessness c;ln he  corrnter- 
acted during long space voyages. T h e  astronauts conducted more than   125 tests 
intended to  help solve such medical riddles as why muscles weaken, hones soft- 
e n ,  and  red  blood-cell production  drops during  lengthy  space journeys.  (  USA 
Today, O c t  20193, O c t  27/93, Nov  1/93, Nov   2/93; NY  Times, Ocr  20193, O c t  
21/93, O c t  22/93, O c t  31/93, Nov  1/93, Nov  2/93; KTW, O c t  19/93; O c t  20/93, 
O c t  21/93, O c t  25/93, O c t  26/93, O c t  27/93, a c t  30/93, O c t  31/93, Nov  1/93; 
UP I ,   O c t   19/93, O c t   20193, O c t   21/93, O c t   25,  O c t   27/93,  Oc t   31/93, Nov 
1/93; AP, O c t  20193, O c t  21/93, Oc t   22/93, O c t  25/93, O c t  26/93, Oc t   27/93, 
Nov  1/93, Nov  2/93;  Antelope  Valley  P r e s s ,   O c t   22/91; 1%' T imes ,   C3ct  25/93; 
Reuters, O c t  23/93; W Post, O c t  31/93, Nov  1/93, Nov  2/93; R  Sun, O c t  31/93, 
Nov  2/93; Phil  Inq, O c t  31/93, Nov  2/93; LA  Times, Nov  2/93) 

November  2:  A  spokesman  said  tha t   NASA   had  delayed  loading  the   Huhblc 
Space Telescope's replacement  parts  into  Space Shuttle  Endea\?our hecaiise a 
fine,  sandy  substance  had  been  found  o n   two  sealed  plastic  bags  containing  
instruments needed  to  repair  the  telescope. A wind storm was  thought  respon- 
sible.  Officials  were  to   inspect  the   instruments  to  make  sure  the).  had  not  
been  damaged.  NASA   did  no t   believe  the   inspection  would  delay  the   mis- 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER  1993 

sion's target  liftoff of  December  1. (AF', Nov  2/93; RTW, Nov  2/93, Nov 4/98; 
B  Sun ,  Nov  4/93) 

November  5:  NASA  and  the   Ozark  Heritage  Region,  Southern  Missouri, 
announced  that  they would  sponsor  a  two-day conference  to  provide  infor- 
mation  to  minority  and  women-owned  businesses  interested  in  contracting 
opportunities  with NASA.  Th e  conference was  scheduled for December  1-2 ,  
1993, at  the Civic Center, West  Plains, Missouri. (NASA  Release 93-201) 

November  8: NASA  announced  that  it had  officially kicked off  Phase  11  of  its 
High-Speed  Research  Program,  a  partnership  with  U.S.  industry  to  develop 
technology  that  could  enable  the  development  of  a  next-generation  super- 
sonic airliner. (NASA  Release 93-202) 

NASA  announced  that  in one of  the deepest celestial surveys yet  made  by 
the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers had discovered a small group of pre- 
viously unknown  interacting  galaxies estimated  to be  three  billion  light-years 
away.  Because Hubble caught  the galaxies in  an early stage of  evolution,  they 
offer  new  clues  as  to  how  galaxies have  changed  over  time.  (NASA Release 
93-203) 

Dr. John  Peoples Jr., director of  the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory 
in  illinois,  was  appointed  to  take  over  direction  of  the  dismantling  of  the  
Superconducting Super Collider in Texas. Dr.  Peoples was  to replace Dr.  Ray E 
Schwitters, the Super Collider's founding director, who resigned  last week  after 
Congress decided  to  terminate  the $1 1 billion project.  (NY E m s ,  Nov 9/93) 

*  NASA  held  a marathon, 59-hour dress rehearsal of  the  agency's $251 mil- 
lion  miss~on to  service  the  Hubble  Space  Telescope  and  repair  its  flawed 
vision.  Th e   1 1-day mission  aboard  the  Shuttle  Endeavour  was  planned  for 
December  1 .  
Despite  its  flawed  mirror,  the  Hubble  telescope  has  produced  a  steady 
stream  of  important  discoveries.  More  than  290  Hubble-based  scientific 
papers  have  been  published  around  the world.  ( 0  Sun, Nov  7/93, Nov  9/93, 
Nov  15/93; W Post, Nov  22/93) 

November  9:  NASA  announced  that  sea  surface measurements taken  by  the  
US . -F rench  TOPEX/Poseidon  satellite  have  confirmed  that  conditions  are 
ripe  for  development  of  an  El  Nifio  even  in  the  eastern  equatorial  Pacific 
Ocean  this winter.  (NASA  Release 93,205;  USA  Today, Nov  10193) 

NASA  said that  it would headquarter  its first-ever Small Business Outreach 
Program  at  the New  Hampshire Technical  College  in Nashua.  Th e  outreach 
program  is  a  pilot  project designed  to  assist New  England  businesses compet- 
ing  for NASA  contracts. (NASA  Release 93-206) 

NOVEMBER   1993 

CHRONOLOGY 1993 

November   10: NASA  researchers a t  Goddard Space Flight Center ,  Greenbelt ,  
Maryland,  and  t h e   University  of  Hawaii  have   discovered  a  faint  spot  of 
infrared emission tha t  moves across Jupiter  in concert with  the  orbital motion 
of  its Moon  10.  T h e   image  is  caused by the  electrical  interaction  between  lo  
and  Jupiter's  magnetic  field. (NA SA  Release 93-208)  

November   12: NASA   announced  the   selection  of  3 17 research  proposals for 
immediate  negotiation  of  Phase  1 contracts   in NASA's  1993 Small  Business 
Innovation  Research  Program  (SBIR).  Over  2,850  proposals were submitted 
by  small,  high  technology  businesses  from  all  parts  of  the   United   States. 
(NA SA  Release  93-207) 

November   13: NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  and  a team based at t h e  
J e t  Propulsion Laboratory in  Pasadena, California, which manages most plan-  
etary  flights, have  examined a variety of  options for  a new mission to  Mars to 
achieve  the   scientific  goals of  the   lost  Mars  Observer  at  less  cost.  T h e  flight 
would  be  launched  no  earlier  t h a n   1996. ( W  Post, Nov  13 /93 )  

November   14:  Funds  for  NASA's  Search  for  Extraterrestrial  Intelligence 
(SETI)  have  been  cut  from NASA's budget.(NY T m e s  Magazine, Nov  14/93)  

November   15:  NASA   announced   tha t   J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL ) ,  
Pasadena,  California,  scientists  have  developed  a  multifunctional  glass  tha t  
detects   pollutants  in  the   air  by  a  dramatic  change  in  color.  Dr.  Albert 
Stiegman,  a JPL chemist,  and  his  associates described  t h e  development  in  a 
paper  in  the   journal  Chemistry  of  Materials.  (NA SA  Release 93-209)  

NA SA   awarded  20  universities  grants for  the   first phase  of  a new  training 
program  tha t   ultimately  would  create   a  cadre  of  young  engineers  skilled  in 
multi-disciplinary design  and   analysis  methods.  Each  university  was  t o   get 
about   $50,000  to   define  a  multi-disciplinary  curriculum  and   graduate-level 
research  program  in  the   aeronautics  field  tha t   would  be  accomplished  with 
industry. T h e   universities  also were  t o   prepare  proposals  for  Phase  I1  of  the  
effort.  (NA SA  Release 93-210)  

NASA  announced  tha t   it had cleared  t h e  instruments scheduled  to  be  used 
for  the  Hubble Space Telescope repair mission.  It was  feared tha t   the   instru- 
ments  had  been  contaminated   by   sandy  grit  tha t   had  seeped  in to   the   cargo 
room where  the  equipment was  being  stored. T h e  grit problem  forced NASA  
to   move  the   Endeavour  to  a  different  launch  pad.  ( B   Sun ,   Nov   16/93;  W 
T m e s ,  Nov  16/93; LISA  Today ,  Nov  16/93; RTW, Nov   15/93)  

November   16 :  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Go ld in   told  a  Senate   panel 
tha t  t h e  U.S. space program "is  in chaos" because of  congressional budget cuts. 
NASA's  five-year budget plan dropped  from $106  billion  last year  to  $71 bil- 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

NOVEMBER  1993 

lion. Noting   tha t  NASA's budget changed every  two or three months ,  Goldin  
called  o n   Congress  to   institute  a  multiyear  budget  tha t   would  enable  t h e  
agency to  develop a strategic plan.  (USA  Today, Nov   17/93; W Times, Nov   17;  
Reuters, Nov  16/93, Nov  17/93; Fla  Today, Nov  17/93) 

November  17: NASA  announced  that  USN Captain Richard N. Richards would 
command  the   STS-64 mission scheduled  for  the  fall  of  1994 aboard  Discovery. 
T h e  STS-64 mission  was  scheduled  to  carry  the  LIDAR  In-Space Technology 
Experiment  (LITE), a project  to  measure  atmospheric parameters from a  space 
platform utilizing laser sensors, the  Robert Operated Materials Processing System 
(ROMPS)  to  investigate robot  handling  of  thin   film  samples, and  the   Shuttle 
Pointed Autonomous Research Tool  for Astronomy  (Sparton-201), a free-flying 
retrievable x-ray  astronomy platform. (NASA  Release 93-204) 

NASA   announced  tha t   the   flight  of  Space Shuttle   Endeavour  o n  Mission 
STS-61   to  repair  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope  ( H S T )   was  scheduled  for 
December  1, 1993. T h e  flight  was  the   first  in  a series of  planned  visits to  the  
orbiting telescope. T h e   1 1-day mission was designed to  accommodate a record 
five spacewalks with  the  capability  for an  additional  two  if  needed. 
T h e   first  HST   servicing  mission  was  to  have  three  primary  objectives: 
restoring the  planned  scientific capabilities of  the  telescope (because of  a man- 
ufacturing mistake, Hubble's  primary mirror was too flat along its edge by about 
1/50 of  the   thickness  of  a human  hair,  leading to  blurry  images); restoring  the  
reliability of  HST  systems; and validating  the  HST  on-orbit servicing concept. 
(NA SA  Release 93-204; NASA   Note   to   Editors  N93-66;  USA  Today,  Nov 
18/93; RTW, Nov  17/93; AP n ,  Nov  17/93; B Sun, Nov  17/93; P  lnq, Dec  1/93)  

Yuri  Koptev, head  of  the  Russian Space Agency, said  tha t  Russia would def- 
initely  take part  in  the  creation  of  a proposed Space Station  with  the  United  
States.  Work  on   the   Station   should  start  in  1997  and  be  finished  by  2001. 
(Reuters, Nov   16/93; P  lnq, Nov   26/93) 

November  19:  NASA   announced   tha t   the   Marshall  Space  Flight  Center ,  
Huntsville,  Alabama,  had  been  selected  to   design  and   build,  in-house,  t h e  
Space S ta t ion  Furnace  Facility, the   first major  element  of  Space Station   sci- 
entific  instrumentation  and   the   focus  of  microgravity  materials  science 
research o n  the  Space Station .   (NA SA  Release 93-21  1 )  

NASA  said  tha t   it planned  to  launch  a repair mission to  the  Hubble Space 
Telescope  as  planned  next  mon th   despite  a  troublesome  sensor  on   one   of 
Shu t t le  Endeavour's wing  flaps. T h e  faulty sensor poses  n o  safety problems,  a 
NASA   spokesperson said.  (AP n ,  Nov  19/93; RTW, Nov  19/93) 

November  22: NASA  announced  tha t   it had chosen  five finalists from among 
the  hundreds of  suggested new  names  for  the  planned  Space Stations:  Unity, 

A l l iance ,   Au ro ra ,  A l p h a ,   and   Sigma .   Former  President   Reagan  dubbed   t h e  
proposed  Space   S t a t i o n   "Freedom"  in  1988   hut   President  C l i n t o n   asked 
N A S A   for  a   new  name   this  year  t o  go  along  w i th   a   new  design,  lower  costs ,  
and   Russian  involvement   o n   t h e   project .   N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S .  
Go ld in   was  scheduled  t o   make   t h e   final   cho ice   in   con su l ta t ion   with   t h e  
W h i t e  House.  (1V Times, Nov   22/93; A p n ,  Nov   19/93)  

NASA ' s   $30   h ~ l l ~ o n  S p a c e   S t a t ~ o n  w r v ~ v e d  ~ t s  t h i r d ,   a n d   presumably 
f l n a l ,  v o t e   In  t h e  Houze  of  R e p r e s e n t ' r t~ v e s ,  w h e n  members   vo ted   248 -184  
t o   keep   ~t  from  be ing   grounJecl  by  budge t -cu t te r s   ( H  Po<[ ,  N o v   23/93;   H 
Ch ron ,  N o v   2 2 / 9 3 )  

N A S A   said  t h a t   scientists   a t   t h e   NASA -L a n g l e y  Re sea rch   C e n t e r   had  
deve loped   a   radar   t h a t   c a n   d e t e c t   wind   shea r   before  pilots   fly  i n t o   i t .   T h e  
F A A  con s ide r s   t h e  Langley  dev ice   a n   imp rovemen t   o v e r  o t h e r  wind   shea r  
radar   on  t h e  ma rke t ,   acco rd ing   to  a n  FAA   spokesperson .   N A S A   n om i n a t -  
ed   Langley's  radar   work  for  t h e   1 9 9 3  Robe r t   J .   Co l l ie r   Trophy ,   a   n a t i o n a l  
award  g iven   annua l ly   hy  t h e   N a t i o n a l   A e r o n a u t i c s   A s soc ia t ion   t o   t h o s e  
who   h a v e   made   t h e  greatest   a c h i e v em e n t   in   ae ronau t ic s   a n d   ;istrsnautics .  
(Daily  Press, N o v   22 /93 )  

November  28:  T h e   ccluntdown  began  for  t h e   Hubhle  Space   Telescope  repair 
mission,  considered  by  many  t o  he   NASA's  biggest  challenge   in  space  since  
t h e   Apo l lo  Moon   landings.  T h e  Space   S h u t t l e  Endeavour   was  scheduled   t o  
lift  off  o n   t h e   1  1-day flight  o n   December  1 .   ( B  Sun, Nov   28/93,  Nov   29/93; 
USA  Today,  N o v   29/93;  P   Inq,  Nov   29/93;  NY  Times  M a g a ~ n e ,  Nov   28/93;  
USA Weekend, Nov   26-28;  W Post, Nov   28/93 ,  Nov   29/93;  RTW ,  Nov   27/93, 
28/93;  A P n ,  N o v   27/93 ,  Nov   28/93;  U r n ,  Nnv   26/93,  Nov   28/93;  W  Tm e s ,  
Dec   1 / 9 3 )  

November  29: N A S A   satellite  d a t a ,  used  t o  study  t h e  expansion   and   con t rac -  
tion   of  t h e  deserts and   semi-arid  lands  of  Africa ,  are   t h e  principle  da ta   source 
providing  early warning  of  po ten t ia l  famine  and  desert  locust swarms.  N A S A  
announced   t h a t   its Goddard   Space   Flight  Cen te r ,  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland ,   and  
t h e  U .S .   Agency   for  In te rna t iona l   Development   ( A I D )  were  cooperating   o n  
a  project  t o   provide  da ta   t o   AID'S Famine   Early  Wa rn ing   system.  ( N A S A  
Release 93-2  1 3 )  

in  A n a h e im ,  
America's  technological   leaders  were  scheduled  t o   meet  
California ,   from  December   7-9   1993 ,  t o  explore   innova t ive   ideas  t h a t   could 
be  used  t o   solve  engineering   problems,  c rea te   new  products   and   industry 
opportunities ,   and   facilitate   t h e   transfer  of  govertunent-sponsored   techno lo -  
gies  t o  Ame r ican   industry.  T ECHNO LOGY  2003 ,  t h e  fourth   annua l   n a t i o n -  
al  technology   transfer  conference   and  exposition ,   was  sponsored  by  N A S A ,  
"NASA   Tech   Briefs"  magazine,  a n d   t h e   Technology  Utilization   Foundation .  
( N A S A  Release 93-2  1 2 )  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER  1993 

NASA  announced  that  i t   had  selected  the  team  of  General  Electric 
Corporation, Cincinnati and United Technologies Pratt & Whitney Division, 
West Palm Beach, Florida, for final negotiations leading to award of  a contract 
to develop critical propulsion component technologies for  a future U.S.  high- 
speed civil transport.  (NASA  Release C93-dd) 

November 30: NASA Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin announced  that NASA  
had  awarded 8.5  percent  of  its  1993 fiscal  year  contracting budget  to socially 
and economically disadvantaged firms, achieving a congressionally mandated 
goal of  8 percent  for FY  1994 a year  early. (NASA  Release 93-214) 

December  

December  I :   Daniel  S.  Goldin ,   NASA   Administrator,  announced   agency 
plans  to   use  its  nearly  completed  Advanced  Solid  Rocket  Motor  (ASRM )  
Yellow  Creek  facilities  in  luka, Mississippi, for manufacture  of  nozzles for  the  
current  Space  Shuttle   Redesigned  Solid  Rocket  Motor  (RSRM )   program. 
(NA SA  Release 93-2 1 5 )  

President  C l in ton  declared his support  for building  a Space S ta t ion  in part- 
nership  with  the   Russians and  received  support  for  the   project  from  key  fig- 
ures  in Congress  during  a Wh i te   House  meeting  on  November  29.  ( W  Post, 
Dec  1/93; RTW, Dec  1/97; AP, Dec  1/97; APn ,  Dec  1/93; NY Xmes, Dec  1/93; 
USA  Today, Dec  1/93)  

December  2:  Law  enforcement  sources said  tha t   the   FBI  has  been  conducting 
a  wide-ranging  "sting"  investigation  into   allegations  of  fraud  at  NASA's 
Johnson  Space Cen te r ,  including  t h e  possible payment  of  bribes and gratuities 
for  the   placement  of  medical  products  o n   the   Space  Shuttle .   About   six 
NASA   employees,  including  an   unidentified  astronaut,  about  15  contractor  
employees, and  a t   least  two major  aerospace  firms were  potentially  implicat- 
ed ,  sources said.  ( W  Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn ,  Dec 3/93; RTW, Dec 
2/93;  USA  Today, Dec  3/93; B  Sun, Llec  3/93; W Times, Dec  3/93; WSJ, Dec 
3/93; LA Xme s ,  Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H  Post, Dec 4/93; 
H Chron, Dec  7/93) 

After  a  one-day weather  delay, Space  Shuttle   Endeavour  lifted  off  before 
dawn  on   a  mission  to   repair  the   out-of-focus  $3  billion  Hubble  Space 
Telescope.  Four  members  of  the   Shuttle   crew, made  up  of  six  men  and   o n e  
woman,  were  to   take  five  planned  day-long  spacewalks  in  an   attempt   to 
restore t h e  f u l l  capability of  the  Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; 
TRW, Dec  2/93; USA  Today, Dec 3/93; B  Sun, Dec  3/93; NY  Times, Dec 3/93; 
APn ,   Dec  3/93; W Xme s ,   Dec 3/93; LA  Times, Dec 3/93)  

December  4 :   T h e   Department  of  Justice  filed  a  complaint  accusing  Paul 
Buchanan, director of NASA's  Biomedical Operations  and  Research Office a t  
Kennedy Space Cen te r ,  of submitting false vouchers claiming lodging expens- 
es  for  time  spent  in  Washington,  DC ,  while  o n   temporary  du ty  for  NASA .  
(Fla  Today, Dec 4/93; C Trib, Dec  5 /93 )  

A New Yurk Times  article reported  that  a debate  is  going on over the  degree of 
danger posed by the  Space Shuttle's solid-fueled rocket boosters.  Repeatedly this 
year,  the   boosters  have  shown alarming variations  in  their  thrust,  prompting  a 
number of  quiet NASA   investigations and  accusations by  critics that   the  prob- 
lem  is  a time bomb waiting  to go off.  (NY Times, Dec 4/93; F1 Today, Dec 7/93) 

ASTRONAUTICS AN11 AERONAUTICS 

DECEMBER  1993 

China's  s ta te - run  media  reported  t h a t  C h i n a  had  reached   its first agreement  
with   t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s   t o   ren t  
space  in   t h e  U.S.  Space  S h u t t l e  pro- 
gram for  scientific  research  projects.  J i a n  J ing shan ,  director   of  t h e  C e n t e r  for 
Space   Sc ience  and   Applied   Research  a t   t h e  C h i n e s e  Academy  of  Sciences ,  
said his  cen te r  had   rented   eight   payload  booths   t o  carry  equ ipmen t  for  exper-  
iments   in  space physics.  (C  Trib, Dec  5 / 9 3 )  

December  6: NA SA   announced   t h a t   t h e  Ulysses  spacecraft,  which   was  o n   its 
way  t o  explore  t h e  polar  regions of  t h e  S u n ,  had  become  t h e  first spacecraft  t o  
reach  further   sou th   t h a n   t h e  most  southerly  d ip  of  t h e  Sun's magnetic   equa -  
tor.  Ulysses's ohservations   revealed  t h a t   t h e   fast-moving   stream   of  charged 
particles,  called  t h e   solar  wind ,   is  twice  as  fast, but   less  dense ,   t h a n   near   t h e  
Sun's  equator .  ( N A S A  Release 93 -217 ;  U P n ,  Dec  6 /93 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  was  working  with   industry  partners   t o  develop   a 
new  techno logy  for parts  t r a c k i n g   T h e  new  technology,  a  small binary  sym- 
bol  similar t o  a checkerboard ,  can  c o n t a i n  much  more  information  a n d  occu-  
py  less space  t h a n  a bar  code   and   be  easily marked  directly  o n  a part's  surface 
for pe rmanen t   identification .   ( N A S A  Release  93 -218 )  

Space-agency  officials  from  t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s ,  Europe,  C a n a d a ,  and  J a p a n  
agreed  to  inv i te   Russia  t o   join  them   i n   building  a n   In te rna t iona l   Space  
S t a t i o n  t h a t   would  he   t h e  world's largest  collaborative  science  project .   (WSJ, 
Llec  7/93;  B  Stcn,  Dec  7/93; TTw ,  Dec 6 / 9 3 )  

December  7 :  Space   S h u t t l e   Endeavour's  spacewalkers were t h e   first  t o   wear 
new  spacesuit  gloves  t h a t   provide  n o t   only  more  the rma l   p ro tec t ion  but   also 
a  better   sense  of  touch   t h a n   earlier  models.  T h e  gloves  are  t h e  first  t o  have  
breaks  in  t h e  gray   silicone-coated  Keviar  finger a n d  palm  surface so joints  c a n  
bend   easier.  T h e y   are  also  insulated  with   Nomex   felt  for  added   warmth   in  
space,  where  temperatures   can   plunge  t o   hundreds   of  degrees  below  zero. 
(USA  Today, Dec  7/93)  

December  1 1 :  Director   Dale  C om p t o n   a n d  Deputy   Director   Victor  Peterson ,  
t h e   two  top   directors   a t   NASA's  Ame s  Research   C e n t e r ,  were  scheduled   t o  
retire   a t   t h e  e n d   of  t h e   year. T h e  re t i remen t s   c om e  a t  a  t ime   w h e n  women  
and   members  of  m ~ n o r i t y  groups  have   complained   t h a t   t h e  center's  t o p  jobs 
are  reserved  for  a n  "old  boy  network"  of  white  men .   (Sun  Jose Mercury New s ,  
Dec  11 /93 )  

December  13 :   T h e   Space   S h u t t l e   Endeavour   landed   a t   C a p e   Canave ra l ,  
Florida, after  an   11-day mission  t o  repair  t h e  Hubb le  Space  Telescope. 
T h e  flight was considered  t h e  most  complex  mission  in more  t h a n   1 2  years 
of  S h u t t l e  flying,  t h e  biggest  space  repair  job  ever,  and  NASA's biggest  cha l -  
lenge since   t h e  Apo l lo  Moon   landings  20  years ago. 

LlE(:Eh4RER  199 3 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

During  their   five  spacewalks, astronauts  successfully replaced  two  of three  
pairs  of  gyroscopes  (used  to   position  the   telescope)  and  their   control   unit;  
replaced  two  solar panels  tha t   supply electricity;  installed  ano the r  set  of  cor- 
rective  optics  to  compensate for  flaw  in  signal to o the r  instruments; fixed two 
magnetometers, which  tell  NASA   the  position of  the   satellite; upgraded  the  
Hubble computer; and  installed  a new  camera with  corrective  lenses t o  com-  
pensate  for flaw  in Hubble's primary mirror. 
According to  NASA  scientists, Huhble's new optics would have to  be fine- 
tuned  and  tested  for  six  to   eight  weeks  before NA SA   would  he  able  to  tell 
whether  the   repairs  actually  had  worked.  (RTW,  Dec  6/93,  Dec  7/93,  Dec 
8/93,  Dee  9/93, Dec  12/93, Dec  13/93; APn ,  Dec,  8/93, Dec 9/93,  Dec  13/93; 
WP, Dec  7/93, Dec  12/93; W Times, Dec 6/93; Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec  10193; 
USA  Today, Dec 6/93, Dec  7/93, Dec 9/93; Dec  10193, Dec  13/93, Dec  15/93; 
NY  Times, Dec 4/93, Dec 5/93, Dec 6/93, Dec  7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec  10193, Dec 
11/93; Dec  12/93; LA  Times, Dec  5/93, Dec  7/93,  Dec  9/93, Dec  10193; Dec 
13/93; CSM, Dee 6/93 ,  Dec  7, Dec  10193; P  Inq, Dec 5/93, Dec  10193; 0 Sun, 
Dec  5/93, Dec  6/93, Dec  7/93, Dec  9/93, Dec  10193, Dee  1 1/93 ,  Dec  121993, 
Dec  13/93; Dec  19/93; APn ,  Dec 6 ,  Dec  7/93, Dec 8/93, Dec 9/93, Dec  10193, 
Dec  12/93, Dec  13/93; W Tlmes, Dec 4/93, Dec 5/93, Dec 6/93; Dec 9/93, Dec 
12/93, Dec  13/93; UPn ,  Dec  6/93, Dec  7/93, Dec  8/93 ,  Dec  9/93, Dec  10193, 
Dec  13/93; Time, Dec  12/93; 0 Sen, Dec  7/93, Dec  9/93, Dec  1 1/93; W Post, 
Dec 4/93, Dee  5/93, Dec 6/93, Dec  9/93, Dec  11/93, Dec  12/93, Dee  13/93; C 
Trib, Dec 5/93, Dec  12/93; Newsweek, Dec 6/93; WSJ, Dec 9/93; H Chron, Dec 
9/93; H  Post, Dec 9/93; Flu  Today, Dec 9/93, Dec  14/93)  

December  15: NASA   announced  the   selection  of  130 research  proposals for 
negotiation  of  Phase  I1  contract  awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation  
Research  Program  (SBIR) .  T h e   SBIR  goals  are  to   stimulate  technological 
innovation ,   increase  the   use  of  small businesses  (~ n c l u d i n g  minority  and  dis- 
advantaged  firms)  in  meeting  Federal  research  and  development  needs  and  
increase  private  sector  commercialization  of  results  of  federally-funded 
research.  (NA SA  Release 91-219)  

Russia's  space  facilities  in  Kazakhstan  appeared  adequate  to  support  the  
C l in ton   Administration's  plan  for  a  joint  Russian-American  Space  S ta t ion  
program, but  the  United  States  may  have   to  invest  $100 million  for  various 
improvements,  Representative  George  E.  Brown,  J .   (D -CA ) ,   said  Tuesday. 
Brown,  chairman  of  the   House  Space  Science  and   Technology Committee ,  
and  a  team  of  space  experts  from  his  committee  toured  the   Baikonur 
Cosmodrome  the  week  of  December  5 ,   1983. (LA  Times, Dec  15/93; Defense 
Daily, Dec  15/93; Fla  Today, Dec  15/93) 

Engineers  from  Russian  and  American  rocket  companies were  at  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Center ,   Huntsville,  Alabama,  displaying  a  pair  of  Russian 
engines  for  sale  to  the   American  space  program.  Aerojet  and  Russian  engi- 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN11 A ERONAU T IC S  

DECEMBER  1993 

neers  briefed  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r   propulsion  engineers  o n   the  
design,  manufacturing  and   test  history  of  the   engines,  which  date   to  the  
Soviet manned  lunar program  in  the   1960s. (Huntsuilk Times, Dec  15/93). 

NASA   has  begun  full-scale  development   of  t h e   first  spacecraft  t o   ren -  
dezvous  w i th   a n d   o rb i t   a n   as te ro id .   C a l l e d   N e a r   E a r t h   As te ro id  
Rendezvous  (N EAR ) ,  the   mission  received  funding   in  t h e   FY  1994  budget 
and   was  scheduled  t o   be  t h e   first  in  NASA's  new  Discovery  program  of 
small-scale,  cost-effective  space  exploration   missions  to   be  launched .  
(NA SA  Release  93 -220 )  

In  the   wake  of  Shuttle   Endeavour's successful  repair  flight,  commentators 
expressed  their   views  o n   the   significance  of  the   mission.  Writing  in  the  
Washington Times, A1 Rossiter Jr., assistant  vice  president  a t  Duke University, 
argued tha t   the  Endeavour  astronauts who  fixed  t h e  Hubble Space Telescope 
during  five  successful  spacewalks should  have  removed  any  lingering  doubts 
about  the   usefulness  of  people  in  space  and  the   value  of  the   s h u t t l e   as  an  
orbital  service station .  
C omm e n t a t o r   M ichae l   D.  Lemonick ,   writing   in  T ime ,   asked  "W h a t  
will  N A S A   do   for  a n   e n c o r e ? "  n o t i n g   t h a t   while   t h e   flight   to   fix  t h e  
Hubble  Telescope might   have  been   a  t r iumph ,  t h e  agency's future  was still  
c louded .  William   J .   C o o k ,   writing   i n   U . S .  News  and  World  Report,  after  
praising  t h e   Endeavour   mission,  argued  in  favor   of  building   a U .S .   Space  
S t a t i o n   and   of  adding   Russia  as  a  pa r tne r   in   t h e   project .   A n   Orlando 
Sentinel  editorial   agreed  t h a t   t h e   s t u n n i n g   success  of  t h e   Hubb le   repair 
mission  had   put   N A S A   back  o n   track   for  greater   cha l lenges ,  such   as  c re -  
a t ing  a Space  S t a t i o n .  T h i s  view  was  shared   by  t h e  writer   of  a C Trib ed i*  
to r ia l .   U S A  Today's  "Op in ion   Line"  recorded   o t h e r   positive   responses 
from  t h e  U .S .  media .   ( W  Times ,  Dec   15/93;  T ime ,  Dec  201;  U . S .  News  and 
World  Report,  Dec  20193;  0 Sen ,   Dec  1 1 / 9 3 ;  U S A  Today ,  Dec  15/93;  C 
Trib, Dec  1 8 / 9 3 )  

NASA   said  tha t   the   agency had  ordered  special  tests  for  all  44  of  Shu t t le  
Discovery's small nose-and-tail steering jets  after  a microscopic puncture  was 
found  in  one  of  the   thrusters.  T h e  tests  c o i~ l d  delay  Discovery's next  mission 
by as  much  as  a week, possibly longer  if  any  thrusters  needed  to  be  replaced. 
(Fla Today, Dec  15/93; APn ,  Dec  14/93) 

A n   unmanned   probe  was  scheduled  to   be  launched  in  1996  to  orbit  the  
asteroid  Eros,  a  giant  rock  tha t   periodically  passes  close  to   the   Earth.  T h e  
spacecraft  was  to  he  built  and   operated  by  the   Johns   Hopkins  University 
Applied  Physics Laboratory for NASA .  It will  spend almost  three years flying 
toward a rendezvous with  Eros and t h e n  spend another  year orbiting the  aster- 
oid.  (A p n ,  Dec  16/93; B  Sun ,  Dec  16/93; RTW, Dec  15/93; AP, Dec  16/93; W 
Post,  Dec  20193; Defense  Daily, Dec  22/93) 

DECEMBER  1993 

CHRONOLOGY  1993 

December  16: NASA   announced  tha t  NA SA   and   the  Russian Space Agency 
had   agreed  to  up  to   10  Shu t t le  flights  to  Mir  with  a total   of  24  months   time 
o n   board  Mir  for  U S .  astronauts,  a  program  of  scientific and  technological 
research,  and t h e  upgrade and  extension  of  the  Mir  lifetime during t h e  period 
1995-1997.  (NA SA  Release 93-222)  

NASA  and  the   Russian  State   Committee   for  the   Defense  Branches  of 
Industry  signed  a memorandum of  understanding  in  Moscow  to  cooperate  in 
eight  areas  of  fundamental  aeronautical  sciences.  T h e   agreement  called  for 
cooperative  activities in  the  following areas:  transition  and   turbulence,  com- 
posite  structures  and materials, chemically  reacting flows, thermal  protection 
system  materials,  environmental  concerns  in  aviation,  hypersonic  technolo-  
gies,  experimental  test  facilities,  and  advanced  aerospace  materials.  (NA SA  
Release 93 -22 )  

NASA  officials said tha t   the  Hubble Space Telescope appeared  to  be  func- 
tioning well, but  tha t  they  would no t  know  until  February whether  or  n o t  the  
Hubble's vision ~ r o b l em s  had been corrected. (W  Times, Dec  16/93; Fla Today, 
Dec  14/93, Dec  16/93; RTW, Dec  15/93; UPn ,  Dec  15/93)  

T h e   Un i ted   S ta tes   and   Russia  formally  joined  as  partners   o n   a n  
International   Space  Station   and   announced   tha t   the   first Russian  astronaut 
would f l y   in the  Space Shuttle  Discovery  in six weeks. Russia also accepted an  
invitation  to  join  t h e  United   States, Europe, Japan ,  and Canada   in building  a 
revamped  Space  Station .   (NY Times, Dec  17/93; LA  Times,  Dec  17/93; 0 Sun, 
Dec  17/93; P  lnq, Dec  17/93; AP n ,  Dec  16/93; C Trib, Dec  17/93)  

December  20:  NASA   announced   tha t   scientists  at  Ames  Research  Center ,  
Moffett Field, California, had created  the  first geographically precise  image of 
the   Earth  "breathingn-removing 
and  releasing  carbon  dioxide  in to   the  
atmosphere. T h e  dynamic computer model shows mon th ly  changes for carbon 
dioxide  released  in to   the   atmosphere  as  microbes decompose  plant   debris  in 
the  Earth's soil. (NA SA  Release 93-223; UPI ,  Dec  20193) 

A Washington Times editorial  questioned  t h e  wisdom of  the  space partner-  
ship   between  Russia  and   t h e   Un i ted   States ,   finding  significant  problems 
with   t h e   agreement .   First,  should  t h e   Russian  fascists  come  to   power,  t h e  
Un i ted   States  would have  provided  a hostile  government  with  very  detailed 
insights  in to   t h e   state   of  our  advanced  technologies.  Second ,   t h e   writer 
charged,  the   Un i ted   S ta tes   was  being  tricked  in to   purchasing  obsolete 
equipment   for  t h e   joint  s ta t ion ;   th i rd ,   Russia's  space  launch   base,  called 
Baikonur, was  reported  to  be  badly decayed; and ,  fourth ,  there  were  issues of 
crew safety-two 
fires were known   to  have   taken  place  in  similar modules of 
Russian  Space  Stations  and   t h e  Russians  had   no t   provided  complete  details  
of  these   events .  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

DECEMBER  1993 

A n  editorial   in   t h e  Christian  Science Monitor,  o n   t h e  o t h e r   h a n d ,   praised 
t h e  agreement   with   Russia,  no t ing   t h a t   it  was  clear   t h a t   manned   space  flight 
must become   truly  in te rna t iona l  because of  t h e  h i g h  costs involved with   space 
programs.  (W  Ilmes ,  Dec  20193) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  was  phasing  out   support  fkr  six  of  t h e  Cen te r s  for 
t h e  Commercial   Development  of  Space .  T h e  Cen te r s   losing  funding  were  t h e  
C e n t e r  for Advanced  Materials, Battelle Laboratories, Columbus, O h i o ;  C e n t e r  
for Commercial  Crystal G row th   in  Space, Clarkson  University,  Potsdam, New 
York;  C e n t e r   for  Materials  for  Space   Structures ,   Case   Western   Reserve 
University,  Cleveland ,   O h i o ;   C e n t e r   for  Ce l l   Research,  Pennsylvania  S ta te  
University, University Park, Pennsylvania; C e n t e r  for Space  Transportation  and  
Applied  Research, University  of  Tennessee, Tullahoma,  Tennessee; and   Space 
A u t om a t i o n   and   Robotics   Cen te r ,   Env i ronmen ta l   Research  In s t i tu te   of 
Michigan ,  A n n  Arbor, Michigan.  (NA SA  Release  93-225)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  had   successfully  boosted  its  C om p t o n   G amm a -  
Ray Observatory  i n t o  a h ighe r  orbit  around  Earth ,  a move t h a t  would  keep  t h e  
1 7 - t o n  satellite   from  reentering   t h e   atmosphere .   T h e   reboost  ex tended   t h e  
mission  life of  t h e  observatory  by five years and  prevented   a  reentry   in  wh ich  
large  parts  from  t h e   spacecraft  could  have   struck  Earth ,   said  officials  a t   t h e  
Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in   G reenbe l t ,   Ma ry land ,  wh ich   managed  t h e  
spacecraft.  ( N A S A  Release 93 -224 )  

December  21:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   its  Perseus  remotely   piloted   research 
aircraft had  made   its first  flight ,  beginning  a n  ambitious  test  program  t h a t  was 
in tended   t o   qualify  t h e   plane  for  operational   atmospheric   science   missions. 
( N A S A  Release  93 -227 )  

A  feature   in   t h e  NY  Times  about   Daniel  S. G o l d i n ,  N A S A  Administrator ,  
called  h im  a  "bold  remodeler  of  a  drifting  agency." G o l d i n  was  quo ted   in   t h e  
article   as  saying  t h a t   h e   believes  "non l inea r   thinking"   is  essential  t o   t h e  
rebirth   of NA SA .   (NY  Times, Dec  21/93)  

December 22:  N A S A   reported  t h a t   t h e  agency  had  overcome  a  thruster  glitch  
t o  successfully complete   t h e  reboost  of  its C om p t o n  Gamma -Ray  Observatory  
( G R O ) ,  adding  five years  t o   t h e  spacecraft's on -o rb i t  lifetime.  (Defense Daily, 
Dec  22/93)  

December  23:  T h e   final   operational   in s t rumen t   o n   t h e   Cosmic   Background 
Explorer  (COBE )  spacecraft, NASA's  first spacecraft  t o  explore   t h e  origins of 
t h e   universe ,   was  scheduled   t o   be  turned   off  after  comp le t ing   four  years  of 
landmark   research ,   including   confirmation   of  t h e   Big  Bang  theory   t h a t   says 
t h e   universe  was  created   in   a  single  momentous   explosion .   ( N A S A  Release 
93-228;  NY Xmes, Dec  24/93; A P n ,  Dec  23/93) 

DECEMBER  1993 

CHRONOLOGY 199 3 

N A S A  scientists  said they  were "ecstatic" over  the i r  progress  in bringing  t h e  
Hubble   Space   Telescope  back  t o   life  after   this  month's  repair  mission. 
Hubble's ground  handlers  a t  N A S A  predicted   t h a t  they  would focus t h e  obser- 
vatory   completely   by   t h e   end   of  January ,   about   two  weeks  quicker   t h a n  
expected .   (H  Post, Dec  23/93; A P n ,  Dec  29/93; B  Sun ,  Dec   25/93)  

A S TRONAU nC S  AND  AERONAUTICS  CHRONOLOGY   1 994 

January 

Janwoy  3:  After  a Wh i te   House  meeting  of  top   aides from  several  agencies, 
NASA   issued a statement  saying tha t   its researchers had used  human  subjects 
in  the   1960s and   1970s in  investigations of  t h e  possible  effects of  exposure  to  
radiation.  It  pledged  to   investigate  fully whether  the   subjects  were  properly 
informed.  Some  Energy  Department  tests  were  first  disclosed  in  1986  in   a 
report  to Congress by  the  General  Accounting  Office. (NY Times, Jan  4/94) 

In   a  written  statement ,  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Go ld in   said  the  
Department  of  Energy  had  told  his  office  tha t   NASA   was  "involved  in  t h e  
sponsorship  or  co-sponsorship  of  some human   experiments  to  determine   t h e  
effects  of  radiation"  during  the   1960s and   1970s. Goldin   did  not   say  what 
experiments had  taken  place. He  promised a full public  accounting.  "There  is 
n o   place  in  this  agency  for  human   medical  experimentation   conducted  in  
secrecy  or  without  full  respect  for  human   dignity  of  each  and  every  partici- 
pant,"  the  statement  said. 
Goldin   named  Donald  Robbins,  Deputy  Director  of  Space  and   Life 
Sciences  at  Johnson   Space  Cen te r   in  Houston,  to   lead  a  team  to   search 
NA SA  records involving  radiation  tests o n  humans. Goldin  said Robbins will 
"cooperate  fullyH with the  Energy Department  and  independent  review groups 
investigating  the   tests,  including  Congress.  (Ffu Today, J a n  4/94, J a n  6 /94 )  

A n  editorial in  a major space journal  urged tha t  the  European Space  Agency 
(ESA)   no t   abandon   its  Columbus  space  station   module  program,  despite  a 
redesign  of  the   Freedom station   in  favor of  a U.S./Russian station  core. Th is  
threat ,   due  to  funding  crises  in  Germany  and  Italy,  would  jeopardize  one   of 
ESA's  own  justifications  for  existence.  While   ESA's  near-term  strategy  is  to  
maintain  Columbus  and  increase ESA's participation  in  the   station ,  its  long- 
term  strategy  is  for  an   advanced  crew  transfer  spacecraft  for  station   opera- 
tions-a  major European  technological development. T h e  U S . ,  Russia, Japan  
and  Europe  all  need  this  new  vehicle.  Launched  by  Ariane-5,  it  should  be 
ready  around  2005-2007,  after  Columbus  in  2001.  Further,  European  man-  
agers  rightly  stressed  tha t   the   station   program  should  make  better   use  of 
Ariane-5  for resupply as well as  launches, but  costs now 30 percent  over budg- 
e t  must be  reduced.  (AuWk, J a n  3/94)  

T h e   same  journal  also  urged  increased  research  funding  to   yield  break- 
throughs  in   human   factors  engineering  to   reduce  future  errors  in  civil  avia- 
tion .  W i th   a fleet  expected  to  double  by  2010, according  to  a  Boeing official, 
a t   the   current   rate  of  hull  losses  human   error  could  cause  a  major  accident 
every  10   days  by  2006.  T h e   man-machine  interface  must  be  optimized 
between  automation  and  man-in-the-loop .  Several  diverse  key  factors  from 
the   effects of  long-range flights and  information  technology  to   national   cul- 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

JANUARY   1994 

tural  differences and  air  traffic  control  must  be  addressed. With  government 
funding a critical factor, a 1990 FAA/NASA/DoD master plan remains a good 
guide.  (AuWk, Jan 3/94) 

January 5:  The   astronauts who  made  a  nearly  flawless  repair  mission  to  the 
Hubble Space Telescope said  they  owed  much  of  their  success to  the extraor- 
dinary  training  that  went  into  the  high-profile mission.  The   seven-member 
crew was  picked  earlier and trained longer-nearly 
any previ- 
two years-than 
ous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, 
at  their  first  post-flight news  conference  they  cautioned  that  future  Shuttle 
missions would nut get the same kind of support from the space agency's money 
managers. Th e  mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard 0. Covey, said 
that clearly the NASA  budget was  not  a limitless amount of  money. 
NASA  officials said  that  since  its  release December  10, Hubble had  been 
undergoing focusing and  engineering tests conducted  by  remote control from 
the Goddard Space Flight Center  in Greenbelt, Maryland. ( B  Sun J an  5/94) 

NASA officials said  that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had  not  been home 
to  any  secret  radiation  tests  on   humans,  and  no   workers  were  unknowingly 
exposed  to  any  harmful  materials. "We  do  not  do  anything  like  that  here," 
KSC  spokesperson  Lisa  Malone  said.  Life  science  research  underway  at  the 
Space Center mostly  involves growing  plants  and  food  in  an environmental- 
l y   controlled  chamber  at  Cape  Canaveral  Air  Force  Station as  well  as  some 
muscle  fatigue research  in  long-term  bedrest  studies  to  simulate  weightless- 
ness. Th e  Johnson Space Center  in  Houston  and  the Ames Research Center 
near  San Francisco are the facilities where most  medical  research  on  humans 
is  conducted. 
Agency  spokesperson  Michael  Braukus  noted  that  the  agency  was  still 
organizing  its  efforts  to  find  out  exactly  how  NASA   was  involved  in  the 
nuclear  research. NASA's use  of  radioactive materials has centered  on  devel- 
oping rocket  engines powered by  nuclear  reactions  and  using  a nuclear  reac- 
tion  to  generate  electricity  in  space. Former  astronauts Alan  Bean  and Gene 
C em an  said they had never served as human guinea pigs. (Fla Today, J a n  5/94) 

Two  American  scientists, Clark  Chapman  and  David  Morrison, wrote  in 
Nature  magazine  that  society might  want  to decide whether  to  pay  for a sky 
survey t o  track comets and  asteroids that  could crash into the Earth with cat- 
astrophic  results,  so  that  governments  could  use  nuclear  arms  to   smash  or 
divert  them. NASA  proposed  a Spaceguard Survey to map  all asteroids large 
enough  to  cause global  catastrophe.  It  would  cost  $50 million  to  set  up  and 
$10 million  in  annual operating costs.  (Reuters, J an  5/94) 

NASA  continued  tests of  the Research  External Vision  Display  (REVD), a 
new  optical system allowing pilots to see a runway  during nose-high landings 

I A N U A R Y   1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

without  computer-generated  views.  T h e   REVD,  basically  an   upside-down 
periscope, is a system of  lenses and mirrors tha t  reflects the  view of  the  runway 
under  the  aircraft nose  to the  pilot. NA SA  started the  first of  up  to  20  tests on  
the  device o n  an  F-104 aircraft at  its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at 
Edwards Air Force Base, California. T h e  REVD approach differs from tha t  used 
in  the   European  Concorde  and  Russian Tu-144  supersonic  transports,  which 
drop the  entire nose of  the  aircraft  in front of the  windshield.  It could be  used 
o n  a future U .S .  supersonic airliner.  (NA SA  Release, 94-2)  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   announced   receipt  of  a  report 
investigating  t h e   loss  of  the   Mars  Observer  mission.  Dr.  Timothy  Coffey, 
director of  research  a t  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory, Washington,  DC, and  
chairman  of  the   independent  investigative  board  studying t h e  Mars Observer 
failure, delivered  the   report  to  the  NASA  Administrator. Dr. Coffey "candid- 
ly  pointed  out  management  and  technical  concerns  tha t  must  be  addressed." 
(NASA Release  94-  1 ,  219) 

NASA   awarded  a  four-year,  $39.8-million  contract   to   the   California 
Institute  of  Technology  (C I T )  for  t h e  design  and  development  phase  of  the  
Advanced  Composition  Explorer  (AC E )  science  payload.  T h e   science  pay- 
load  o n   the   ACE   spacecraft  consists  of  n ine   instruments:  a  Solar  Isotope 
Spectrometer:  a Cosmic Ray  Isotope  Spectrometer; a Solar Wind  Ionic Mass 
Spectrometer;  a Solar Wind  Ionic Composition  Spectrometer;  an  Ultra   Low 
Energy  Isotope  Spectrometer;   a  Solar   Energetic  Particle  Ionic  Charge  
Analyzer; a Magnetometer; an  Energetic Electron, Proton ,  and Alpha-particle 
Monitor;  and   a  Solar  Wind   Electron,  Proton ,   and   Alpha-particle  Monitor. 
(NASA  Rekase C 9 4 - a )  

T h e  Mars Observer  spacecraft,  the   first  U .S .   mission  to   study Mars  since  
the  Viking missions  18 years  ago, fell silent   three   days before  en te r ing  orbit  
around  Mars. NA SA  officials reported  t h e  probable  cause of communication  
loss  as  a  rupture  in  t h e  fuel  (monomethyl  hydrazine-MMH) 
pressurization 
side of  the  spacecraft's propulsion system. Th is  would have  caused a n  unsym- 
metrical  pressurized  leak  of  helium   gas  and   liquid  MMH ,   resulting  in   a  n e t  
spin   rate ,   which   in  tu rn   would  have   put  t h e   craft  in  a  contingency   mode. 
Tests  conducted   a t   the   J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL )   a t   Pasadena, 
California ,  yielded  several ~ o s s i b l e  failures. Go ld in  asked Dr. Wes Huntress ,  
Associate  Administrator   for NASA's  Office of  Space  Science ,   to  conduc t   a 
thorough  review of  t h e  findings and  recommendations  and   t o  report  back  in  
t h e  near  future o n  corrective  actions  t o  be  taken  by  NA SA .  (NA SA  Release 
94-1;  USA  Today, J a n  6/94;  NY  Times, J a n  6/94; 3 Sun ,  J a n  6/94;  WSJ, J a n  
6/94;  W Post, J a n  6/94;  LA  Times, J a n  6/94;  W Times, J a n  6/94)  

January 6:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S .  Goldin   announced   a  number  of 
management  appointments   and  organization  structural  changes  a t   NA SA  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS  

IANUARY  1994 

Headquarters  and   various  Field  Centers .   T h e  changes   will  affect  N A S A   sci- 
ence ,  technology, research facilities a n d  major programs,  as well  as t h e  agency's 
Advisory  Comm i t tee  structure. 
New C e n t e r  Directors:  Dr. Ken  Munechika ,  executive  director of  t h e  Office 
of  Space   Industry of  t h e  S t a t e  of  Hawaii, was  appointed   Director  of  t h e  Ame s  
Research C e n t e r  a t  Moffett  Field, California .  K e n n e t h  J .   Szalai was  appointed  
t h e  new  director  of  t h e  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility, which  was  t o  become 
a  separate  en t i ty   from  Ames.  Project  reporting  lines  would  directly  link   t h e  
centers  and  t h e  N A S A  Headquarters offices t h a t  Dryden supports, thus  reflect- 
ing t h e  comm i tmen t  by  N A S A   t o  reduce  layers of  management .  
Dr. Carolyn   Hun toon ,   Director  of  Space  and   Life  Sciences  a t   t h e  J o h n s o n  
Space   C e n t e r ,   Hou s ton ,   Texas,  since   1987 ,   a n d   formerly  t h e   Cen te r ' s  
Associate  Director,  was  appointed   Director  of  t h e   Cen te r .  G.P.  Bridwell  was 
appointed  Director  of  t h e  Marshall Space  Flight  Cen te r ,  Huntsville ,  Alabama .  
Donald  J .   Campbell   was  appointed   Director  of  t h e   Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,  
Cleveland ,  Oh io .  
Key  appo in tmen t s  a t  N A S A  Headquarters:  Michael  I. Mo t t  was  appointed  
Associate  Deputy  Administrator   ( t e c h n i c a l ) ,  reporting  t o   t h e   Administrator  
o n  analyses of  t h e  early stages of  programs and  reviews of major  issues. Thoma s  
( J a c k )  J .   Lee  was  appointed   Special  Assistant  for  Access  t o   Space ,   t o   lead 
NA SA   efforts  t o   define  a  technology  program  t o   retain   U.S.  leadership  in  
space.  Dr.  Charles   E  Kennel   was  appointed   Associate  Administrator   for 
Mission  to  Planet   Earth .   Dr.  Mark  Abbo t t   was  named   Chief   scientist  of  t h e  
Office  of  Mission  t o   Planet   Earth .   Lawrence  J .   Ross,  former  Director  of  t h e  
Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,  was  appointed   Director  of  t h e  W ind   Tunnel   Program 
Office, reporting  t o  t h e  Office  of  t h e  Administrator .  
Because  of  major  expansions  in  the   Space  S ta t ion   program,  Administrator  
Go ld in  made several  key  appointments   there:  Wilbur C .  Trafton, was  appo in t -  
ed  Deputy Associate Administrator   for t h e  Space  S ta t ion .  Randy  Brinkley was 
assigned as  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  Program  Manager,  for management   of  all Un i ted  
States-Russian  activities  in  Phase  1 and   Phase  11,  t o  ensure  implementation   of 
t h e  In tema t iona l  Space  S ta t ion .  H e  was mission director  for t h e  recent  Hubble  
Space   Telescope  servicing  mission  (STS - 6 1 ) .   C a p t a i n   William  Shephe rd ,  
U SN ,   was  t o   con t inue   as  manager  for  all  technical   activities  related  t o   t h e  
In tema t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n ,  reporting  t o  Brinkley, and   thu s  concen t ra t ing  o n  
t h e   design,  development ,   and   assembly of  t h e   Space   S ta t ion .   Daniel  C. Tam 
was  assigned  as  Deputy  Program  Manager  for  Business  in  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n  
Program  Office  a t   t h e  John son   Space   Cen te r ,   handling   all  business  manage- 
m e n t  operations .  
T h e  N A S A   Advisory  Counc i l   also  acquired  new  leadership:  Dr.  Bradford 
W.  Parkinson,  was  appointed   head  of  t h e   Counc i l .   A n n e   L.  Accola   was 
appointed   staff director  of  t h e  Counc i l .   ( N A S A  Release  94-3;  Cleveland  Plain 
Dealer, J a n  8/94;  Bakersfield Californian, J a n  7/94; Antehpe  V a k y  Daily  News, 
J a n  8/94;  [Houston]  Citizen, J a n   19/94; Natiord Journal, J a n   1 5/94) 

JANUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

Systems  Integration   G roup ,   TRWS   Fairfax,  Virginia-based  subsidiary,  was 
awarded  a N A S A   con t rac t  for  $173 million  t o  manage  a  network   of  comput-  
erized  ground  stations   receiving  da ta   from  government   satellites  t h a t   observe 
t h e  Earth's env i ronmen t  and  climate  changes .  ( W  Post, J a n  6/94) 

Dr. R. Malcolm  Brown, Jr . ,  a University  of Texas botanist  a n d  expert  o n  bac- 
terial  cellulose,  ha s  created   a  new  substance  by  fermenting   sugar  uslng  a  par-  
ticular  bacteria  s t ra in  wh ich  h e  ma in ta in s  c a n  replace no rma l  cellulose and  be 
used  in  numerous  applications ,  including  p o d u c i n g  edible  spacesuits. N A S A ,  
along   with   t h e   U.S.  Depa r tmen t   of  Agriculture   and   t h e   S t a t e   of  Texas, 
financed   his  research.  (WSJ ,  J a n  6/94)  

January   7 :  Intermetrics ,   Inc . ,   of  McLean ,   VA,  was  awarded   a n   $ 8 1 -m ~ l l i o n ,  
10-year   c o n t r a c t   as  part  of  NASA's  Mission  t o   Planet   Earth .   I t   provides 
Independen t   Verification  &  Validation   ( IV&V )   of  t h e   Earth   C3hserving 
System   (EOS )   Data   and   Information   System  (EOSD IS ) ,   for  t h e   Chdda rd  
Space   Flight  C e n t e r   (GSFC ) ,   G r e e n b e l t ,  Maryland .   EOS   was  projected  t o  
gene ra te  about   o n e   trillion   bytes  of  new   da ta   per  day ,  offering  access  t o  da ta  
o n   t h e   Earth's  ecosystem,  permitting   scientists   to  distinguish   natural   from 
human -made   changes.  ( N A S A  Release C94-h) 

Janua ry   8 :   Russian   Space   Mission   C o n t r o l   spokesperson   A l e x a n d e r  
Volchenkov   announced   t h a t   t h e   Soyuz T U - 1 8  rocket  had   lifted  off  Saturday 
for  rendezvous  w i th   t h e  orbiting   Mir  Space   S ta t ion .   Aboard   were  th ree   cos- 
monauts ,  o n e  of whom  may  a t temp t  a new  record  for living  in  space. T h e  craft 
was  scheduled  t o  dock  with  Mir  for  a  crew  change ,  after  200  days   in  space for 
t h e  cu r ren t  crew. 

January  10: The crew  for  t h e  STS - 6 6  mission  aboard  A t lan t i s   in  t h e   fall  of 
1994 was  selected. A i r  Force L ieu tenan t  Co lone l  Donald   R. McMonagle  was 
t o   command   t h e   mission ,   called   ATLAS -03 .   T h i s   th i rd   A tmo sphe r ic  
Laboratory  for  Applications   a n d   Sc ience   (ATLAS )  mission  would  c o n t i n u e  
Space lab  studies  of  solar  energy  effects  o n   t h e   Earth's climate   and   env i ron -  
men t .  USAF Major  Cu r t i s  L.  Brown, Jr., was named   pilot;  Sco t t   E.  Parazynski, 
M .D . ,   Jo seph  R.  Tanne r ,   and   ESA  a s t ronau t  Jean-Francois   Clervo).:  mission 
specialists; a n d  Ellen  O c h o a ,   Ph.D.,  payload  commander .   Tasks  included   t h e  
CR ISTA -SPAS   Cryogenic   Infrared  Spec t rome te r  Telescope  for  A tmo sphe re  
o n   t h e  S h u t t l e  Pallet   Sa te l l i te ,  jointly  w i th  Germany .   ( N A S A  Release  94-4;  
Def  Daily, J a n  12 /94 )  

T h e   crew   for  t h e   STS - 6 7   mission  aboard   Co lumb ia   for  late   1994   was 
a n n o u n c e d .  S t e p h e n  S. Oswald  was  t o  command  t h e  A s t ro -2  astronomy  mis- 
s ion   t o  study  t h e   far  ultraviolet   ( U V )  spectra   of  fa in t   astronotnical   ob jec t s  
a n d   polarization  of  UV   light   from   h o t   stars   a n d   galaxies.  U SA F   Major  
William   G .  Gregory  was named   p i lo t ,  Navy  L i e u t e n a n t  C omm a n d e r  Wendy  

A S TRONAU T IC S  ANL)  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY  1994 

B.  Lawrence  mission  specialist ,  Rona ld   A .   Parise  and   Samue l   T.  Durrance  
payload  specialists,  Tamara   E.  Je rn igan   payload  commander ,   a n d   J o h n  M. 
Grunsfeld  mission  specialist. 

A  flight  plan   change   seven   mon th s   before  t h e  Mars Observer   l a u n c h  may 
have   caused  t h e  craft's failure.  Its  propellant   tank s  were  pressurized  n o t   five 
days after  launch  bu t   e leven  mon th s   i n t o  t h e  flight  as  it  reached  Mars,  the re -  
by  apparently   causing  a ca ta s t roph ic  rupture   in  a fuel  l ine  t h a t  spun   t h e  craft  
ou t   of  con t ro l .   Pressuration ,   needed   t o   fire  t h e   braking   rockets   t o   put   t h e  
craft  i n t o   orbit   a round   Mars,  involves  open ing   previously  closed  valves  a n d  
releasing  high-pressure  he l ium   t o   squeeze  t h e   hydrazine  fuel  a n d   n i t rogen  
te t rox ide  oxidizer  from  separate   tank s   t o  mix  and   ignite .  M inu te   amoun t s  of 
condensed   oxidizer possibly  reached   t h e  hydrazine  fuel,  ignited ,  and  ruptured  
t h e  pipes, wh ich   released  propellant   i n t o  space  and   caused  t h e  uncon t ro l led  
sp in .  Peter  G .  W i lhe lm ,  director   of  t h e  Nava l   C e n t e r  for  Space  Technology ,  
a  panel   member   who   focused  o n   t h e   propulsion   system ,  said  t h a t   t h e   team  
deba ted   t h e   c h a n g e   extensively ,   a n d   JPL   p ro jec t   manage r   G l e n n   E .  
C u n n i n g h am   stated   t h a t   t h e   team   considered   a n d   rejected   a n   o p t i o n   t o  
change   valves  as  t o o   costly  a n d   slow,  a n d   as  a  procedure  t h a t   might   have  
mean t   missing  t h e   1992   launch   window,  thu s   requiring   a  two-year  launch  
delay.  ( W  Post, J a n  10194) 
T h r e e  unmanned   supply  craft  were  scheduled   t o  visit  Mir  during   th i s  mis- 
sion .  A  U.S.-Russian  agreement   signed  in  December  worth   $400   million   t o  
Russia  over   t h e  nex t   four  years  called  for up  t o   1 0  U .S .  S h u t t l e  flights  t o  Mir. 
(AP ,  J a n  8/94;  UP I ,  J a n  8/94;  Reuters, J a n  8 /94 )  

Ma r t in  Marietta   Co rpo ra t ion  announced   it would  n o t  claim  a $21.3 million 
on -o rb i t   performance  fee  a n d   would  return   $17  million   already  received 
because  of  t h e   failure  of  t h e  Mars  Observer   craft .  T h e   to ta l   cost  of  t h e   craft 
and   its  instrument   cargo was  $1   billion.  Referring  to   t h e  presumed  explosion  
caused  by  a  change   in  t h e  flight  plan   with   a n   1 1 -m o n t h  delay  in  pressurizing 
a system, discussed  in  t h e  four-volume  report  but om i t ted   in news media  in te r -  
views,  Dr.  Timothy   Coffey,  director   of  research  a t   t h e   Naval   Research 
Laboratory  and   leader  of  t h e   panel   investigating   t h e   failure ,   said  t h a t   "had 
JPL  heen   more  closely  involved  with   Ma r t in  Marietta   in  t h e  development   of 
t h e  spacecraft,  it  is  conceivable   this  issue would  have  been   identified  earlier." 
(NY Times, J a n   1 1/94; W Post, J a n  11/94)  

Dr. T imo thy  Coffey, director  of  research  a t   t h e  Naval   Research  Laboratory, 
Wa sh ing ton ,  LX, a n d  cha i rman  of  t h e  independen t  ~nve s t iga t ive  hoard  study- 
ing  t h e   Mars  Observer   failure,  delivered  t h e   report   o n   t h e   Mars  mission  t o  
NA SA .  T h e  spacecraft,  t h e   first U .S .   mission  t o  study  Mars  since   t h e  Viking 
missions  18 years ago, fell silent   three   days before  en te r ing  orbit   a round  Mars. 
Despite  lack  of  any   c omm u n ~ c a t i o n  with   t h e   craft ,   t h e   board  found   t h a t   t h e  
probable  cause  of  t h e   loss  of  commun ica t ion   was  a  rupture   of  t h e   fuel 

J A N U A R Y  1994 

CHRONOLCXY  1994 

(m o n om e t h y l   hydrazine-MMH) 
pressurization  side  of  t h e   spacecraft's 
propulsion  system. T h i s  would  have  caused  a n  unsymmetrical  pressurized  leak 
of  helium   gas  a n d   liquid  MMH ,   resulting  in  a  n e t   spin   rate ,   wh ich   in  t u r n  
would  have  caused  t h e  craft  t o  e n t e r  a con t ingency  mode.  Tests conduc ted  a t  
t h e   J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  ( JPL )  at  Pasadena ,  California ,   yielded  several 
possible  failures.  T h e  board  discussed  a  number   of  o t h e r  conce rn s  of  a  proce- 
dural  nature .   ( N A S A  Release  94 -1 ;  USA Today, Jan 6 /94 ;  NY  T imes ,  Jan  6 /94 ;  
B  S u n ,  ]an  6 /94 ;   WSJ,  J a n  6/94;   W  Post,  J a n   6/94;   LA  Tunes,  J a n   6/94;   W 
Times, J a n  6 / 9 4 )  

January  1 1  : N A S A   reported  t h a t   tests  of  corrections   made  t o   t h e   Hubble  
Space  Telescope  ( H S T )  were  proceeding  well  and   t h a t   t h e   first  new  pictures 
were  expected   w i th in   days.  David  Leckrone ,   Hubble   project  senior   scientist  
a n d  N A S A  public  information  officer Mike  F inne ran  at Godda rd  Space  Flight 
C e n t e r ,  G reenbe l t ,  Ma ry land ,  expressed  great  satisfaction  with  progress made .  
To  perform  o n e   of  its  primary  mission  objectives ,   t h e   study  of  t h e   universe's 
infancy,  t h e   H S T  must  concen t ra te   70  percent   of  a n   object's  light   w i th in   a 
core   image o n l y  0.1 arc-second  in  diameter ,  hut   t h e  HST's previous  spherical-  
aberration  defect  distorted   its 2 .4-meter  ( 9 4 . 5 - i n c h )  ma in  mirror  t o  t h e  e x t e n t  
t h a t  only  15  percent   of  t h e  light  reached   t h e  shalp-focus  zone. Two sets of  cor-  
rective   optics   were  installed-the  Wide-Field  Planetary   Came ra   (due   for 
rep lacemen t ,   anyway)  a n d   t h e   Corrective   Op t ic s   Space   Telescope  Axial  
Rep lecemen t   (CO S TAR ) ,  a  two-meter-long  set  of  five  pairs  of  coin-size mir- 
rors.  A  problem   of  jittering  caused  by  solar-cell arrays  was  also  resolved,  and  
new  gyroscopes,  magnetometers ,   and  computer   electronics  were  installed  and  
have   been   tested.  (CSM ,  J a n   11 /94 )  

O v e r  200  scientists  a t  a  conference   a t  t h e  University  of  Maryland ,  College  
Park, Maryland ,  planned   observations  of  t h e  coming   impact  of  t h e  newly  dis- 
covered   C om e t   Shoemaker-Levy-9   i n t o   Jupiter .   University   of  Maryland 
astronomer   Lucy McFadden ,   t h e  conference   organizer,  discussed  t h e  prepara-  
tions .  Twelve  observatories  i n  Europe  and   t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s  were  scheduled  
to   work  in   a joint   effort called  t h e  C om e t  Impact  Network   Experiment .   T h e  
astronomers  were organizing observations  by  nearly  every  large observatc>ry o n  
t h e  Earth  as well as by  the   Hubble   Space  Telescope, o t h e r  orbiting  observato-  
ries,  a n d   t h e   Kuiper  A i rbo rne   Observatory .   A s t ronome r   Michael   A'Hearn  
compared   t h e  anticipated   power of  the   impact  of  t h e  cornet's train   of  2 1   two- 
mile-diameter   fragments  in  terms  of  nuclear   explosiims with   t h a t   of  t h e  6  t o  
12-mile-diameter   come t   t h a t   h i t   Yucatan ,   Mexico ,   65   million  years  ago. 
Harvard   University   astrophysicist  George   Field  said  e a c h   fragment   would 
unleash   energy  equal   t o   10 million   megatons   of  TNT .   Paul  C h o d a s   of  t h e  
California   In s t i tu te   of  Technology   discussed  t h e   problems  of  predicting   t h e  
impact   for  observations  by  t h e  Ga l i leo  spacecraft.  Both   visible,  infrared,  and  
spectrographic  observations  were  t o  be  performed.  ( B  Sun ,  J a n  11/94;  AP, J a n  
12/94; W Xmes, J a n   12 /94 )  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1994 

TRW,  Inc . ,  received  a  seven-year, $172-million contract   t o  build  the   EOS 
Data  and Operations  System  (EDOS ) ,  part  of NASA's Earth Observing  Data 
and   Information  System  (EOSDIS) .  T h e   contract   called  for  TRW  t o   build 
three  facilities  to  deal  with  terabytes  of  climate data   from  t h e  EOS  platform 
each   day,  as  part  of  an   international  study of  worldwide environmental  con -  
ditions. EOSDIS would  be  the   largest database  and  archival system ever built 
and would process, distribute, and  store two trillion bytes of data  daily-about 
equivalent  to   the   amount  of  information  in   the   Library  of  Congress.  EDOS 
would  use  a  network  called  ECOM-EOS  Communications-to 
send  data  
from Wh i te   Sands t o  over  eight centers.  (Federal Computer Week, ]an   10194) 

January  12:   Dr.  Carolyn  Hun toon ,   the   new  Director  of  the   Johnson   Space 
Cen te r   ( J SC ) ,  appointed George W.S. Abbey  as  Deputy  Director  of  JSC. He  
succeeded Paul J .   "P.J." Weitz, who was  to  serve as Acting  Associate  Director 
during  transition of  the  new Cen te r  management  team  and who had been  the  
Center's Deputy  Director  since  1987 and Acting  Director  since August  1993. 
(NA SA  Release 94-26;  Def  Daily, J a n  12/94)  

A  study  by  Loren Thompson ,  Deputy  Director  of  Georgetown University's 
National  Security Studies Program, was one  of  several major  sources examin- 
ing  the   U .S .  space  industry's growing challenge from competition  and  domi- 
nation  by  foreign governments' expanding space programs and  their  successes 
w i th  smaller but  cheaper  launch  vehicles. 
Richard DalBello led another  study by  t h e  W h i t e  House's Office of  Science 
a n d   Technology  Policy  ( O S T P ) ,   while  Mark  A lb rech t   of  Sc ience  
Applications international Corporation  (SA IC )  expressed the   industry's con -  
cern .   Further,  the   U .S .   Senate   Armed  Services  Committee   (SASC )  was  to  
study launching U.S. military satellites o n  Ariane-5. 
Norman  R .  Augustine, chairman  of  Martin Marietta, which  had  agreed to 
buy General  Dynamics Corporation's rocket division for $208 million, stressed 
tha t   the   industry was  on   its way  t o  "being  des t royed   if  t h e  U.S. government 
didn't  help. T h e  company  wanted  a  law  saying federal  agencies must  launch 
payloads  only  on   U .S .-huilt   rockets.  As  competitors,  Europe's Arianespace, 
Russia's Proton ,  and  China's Long  March  offer  increasingly  reliable  alterna- 
tives  to  the   U.S.  launch  industry's  former  monopoly tha t   extended  through 
the   1970s. T h e   foreign  rockets  offer  substantial  savings  through  remarkably 
lower production  and  servicing costs. 
Building t h e  Proton  takes  one-fifth t h e  employee hours  needed  to  make  a 
U.S.  rocket,  and  it  spends only  a few  hours o n  the   launch  pad, with  a  launch 
crew  of  50. Ariane-4  spends  10  days, with  a  launch  crew of  100, whereas  the  
U .S .  Deltas  and  Atlases  need  three  to  eight  weeks and  crews of  300, and   t h e  
Titan   IV  takes  three  months  and  a crew of  1,000. Finally, for payload  launch ,  
the  Russians and Chinese   launches cost  $4,000 per  pound  and  Ariane-5  cost 
$8,000 per pound, while U .S .   rockets cost $12,000. A  table  compares six cost 
facturs of  t h e  seven major  rockets.  (W  Post, J an  12/94; H Chron, J a n  23/94)  

JANUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

White House officials said  President Clinton was  scheduled  to name  a civil- 
ian  panel  of  scientists to  independently  review  human  radiation  test  data  in 
hundreds of  thousands of  documents uncovered  by  a government-wide search 
and  to  determine  whether  ethical  standards  had  been  violated.  Energy 
Department spokesperson Michael Gauldin said the panel members would con- 
sist  of  health  physicists,  experts on  radiology, and specialists in medical ethics. 
He  also  said  that  an  interagency  "working  group"  formed  to  coordinate  the 
search of  records  in  eight agencies and  departments was  trying  to define more 
clearly  what  experiments  should  be  included.  He  predicted  it  would  take 
"months, perhaps years"  to find all  the records  and  analyze them.  (W  Post, Jan  
1 2/94) 

A dispute of  possible  long-term import with hundreds of millions of  dollars at 
stake appeared  to  be  brewing  between NASA  and  the  television  industry  over 
local multipoint distribution service (LMDS), pitting the satellite industry against 
proponents  of  this  low-cost alternative to  cable  television. Further, the  Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) was  approaching an  auction of  some  air- 
waves  for  a new  generation of  wireless communications services. Charles Force, 
NASA  Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Communications,  stated  that  "It 
appears  that  there  is  a  significant possibility  for  interference with  LMDS  from 
satellite uplinks; this was no secret to the FCC." He suggested a four-year delay in 
LMDS service to deal with  interference in the disputed 27.5-to-30-gigahertz spec- 
trum band. The  FCC believed that LMDS can coexist with satellite use  and was 
preparing to authorize nationwide deployment of  LMDS.  (LA Xmes, Jan  12/94) 

Lieutenant  General  Malcolm  O'Neill,  director  of  the   Ballistic  Missile 
Defense  Organization  (BMDO ) ,  proposed  to   Pentagon  Acquisition  Chief 
J o h n  Deutch  cancellation  of  th e   purchase  of  four  Russian  Topaz  I1  space 
nuclear  reactors-believed 
to be  th e   last  in  Russia's inventory-to  be  used 
in  the  DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. S teven  Aftergood, of  the  
Federation of  American  Scientists, said  th a t  th e  Air  Force might  take over 
the   ground  test  program.  T h e   Nuclear  Electric  Propulsion  Space  Test 
Program, with  which  they  might  have been  used, was  also dropped. These 
moves  continued  a  trend  in  th e   cancellation  of  several  NASA   and  Air 
Force  efforts  to  develop  space  nuclear  power.  A  Wh i t e   House  Space 
Nuclear  Power  Interagency Working Group was  scheduled  to  draft  admin- 
istration policy  by  July  1994 and  a U.S.  position  for  th e  February meeting 
of  th e   Un i ted   Nations  Committee  o n   Peaceful  Uses  of  Ou te r   Space 
(CO PUO S )  Science and Technology Subcommittee.  (D e f  Daily ,  J a n  12 /94 )  

NASA   Chief  Engineer  Michael  Griffin,  Director  of  NASA's  former 
Exploration Office, planned  to  resign  to  join  Space  Industries International, 
Inc., as senior vice president of  program development. (De f  Daily, J an  12/94) 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY   1994 

McDonnell  Douglas  awarded Computer  Sciences Corp  (CSC), with  EER 
Systems  and  CTA,  Inc.,  a  five-year,  $49  million  subcontract  to  support 
NASA's  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center  (GSFC ) .  Th e   Systems  Engineering, 
Integration  and Management Support Services contract would  support sever- 
al space observation missions. (Def Daily,  12 Jan/94) 

January  13: Dr. Gary A. Bower, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science 
Institute  (ST I )   in  Baltimore,  said  at  an  American  Astronomical  Society 
(AAS )  conference  that Hubble Space Telescope (H S T )  repairs were  success- 
ful  and would enable  the HST  to measure the velocity of  stars and other mat- 
ter  rotating  near  the centers of  galaxies and  thereby more firmly establish the 
existence  of  black  holes.  (NYT, Jan   13/94; Reuter, J an  13/97; AP, J a n  12/97; 
AP, Jan   13/94) 

Astronomer  Holland  C.  Ford  and  COSTAR  project  manager  Dr.  Jim 
Crocker, both  with  the  Space Telescope  Science  Institute  (STScI) at Johns 
Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at  the  remarkable photos 
from  the  recently  repaired  Hubble  Space Telescope  (HST ) .  COSTAR  is  the 
Corrective  Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement  package that  repaired 
the  HST. Dr. Gary A.  Bower, an  HST  astronomer  in  a group of  1,800 attend- 
ing  an  American  Astronomical  Society  (AA S )  conference  in  Crystal  City, 
Virginia, predicted  that  the  HST would  be  able  to confirm evidence of  black 
holes  at  the center of  galaxies. Dr.  Edward J .  Weiler, an HST program  scien- 
tist  at NASA  Headquarters, reserved  judgement.  ( B   Sun, J an  13/94; AP,  J an  
13/94) 

Engineers William Weist  and  Ray  McLaughlin, with  three  other scientists 
and  pilots of  AlliedSignal,  Inc.,  have  since October  1991 been  flying  a con- 
verted  1952 Convair with powerful, updated turboprops at 300 feet  in Florida 
testing a new  system to detect  low-level wind  shear. In summer, bursts of  con- 
centrated cold  air  descend  to  the ground and  violently spread out horizontal- 
l y   in  all  directions,  causing  unpredictable  changes  in  wind  direction  at  low 
altitude.  Identified only two decades ago, wind shear has since  1964 caused  at 
least 26 aircraft accidents in the U S . ,  killing more than 500 people. Although 
airports  are  installing  radar,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA )  
reported  chat  air-traffic controllers  might  need  two  minutes  to  warn  pilots, 
who might have only  10 seconds to  react. In contrast, this system can warn  in 
50  seconds, despite  analyzing  four  million  pieces  of  information  per  second 
and  filtering out ground clutter such as  traffic.  (WSJ, Jan  13/94) 

Th e  Earthwinds balloon flew  200 miles  in seven hours from Reno, Nevada, 
over  the  Sierra  Nevada  and  landed  200  miles  north  of  Los  Angeles  in  its 
fourth  failed  attempt  since  its  initial  try  in  February,  1992, to  make  the  first 
nonstop  round-the-world  flight. Th e  hourglass-shaped craft about  the  length 
of  a football field  consists of  an  upper  teardrop-shaped, helium-filled bag  sep- 

JANUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

arated by  a three-man crew capsule from its lower round, air-filled anchor hal- 
loon. T h e  project, sponsored mainly b y  hotel magnate Barron Hilton, has cost 
$ 7   million  to  date,  with  $700,000 for  non-reusable  balloons  and  helium  for 
each  flight.  Project manager  Don  Engen  expected  no  new  flight  this  season, 
but project  advisor, Apollo XVII  commander Gene Cernan, predicted ano th -  
er attempt. (Reuters, J a n  12/94) 

SET1 Institute  President  Frank  Drake  announced  that  the  organization  in 
Moffett Field, California, will work  with private backing, despite cancellation 
by  NASA   due  to  a  funding  cut  by  Congress.  SETI-the 
Search  for 
Extraterrestrial  Intelligence-was 
to  continue  as  the  new  Project  Phoenix, 
with some NASA scientists doing the  latter half of  the former NASA project, 
which  had  been  a sky  survey by  the J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  and  a targeted 
search  by  NASA's  Ames  Research  Center.  They  planned  to  target  areas 
around  1,000 nearby  Sun-like stars. The  NASA  project was  begun  as a $100- 
million,  ten-year  project  on  October  12,  1992,  the  500th  anniversary  of 
Columbus'  landing in  the  Americas, but  was  stopped  less  than  one year  into 
its planned  10-year life. Observations were  now  planned  to  last  into the next 
century.  Major  donors  included  Arthur  C .   Clarke  through  the  British 
Interplanetary  Society (BIS) and  the founders of  Hewlett-Packard,  Intel, and 
Microsoft.  It was  announced  that  $4.4 million of  the $7 .3  million  needed  for 
the next  year had  been raised.  (Reuters, Jan  12/94; AP, Jan  13/94) 

NASA  and  the California Institute of Technology (C I T )  signed a five-year, 
five-billion-dollar,  cost-plus-award-fee contract  to  manage  NASA's  7,300- 
member Je t  Propulsion Laboratory  (JPL). This contract consolidated two pre- 
vious  contracts for  CIT, which  has managed  J PL   since NASA's inception  in 
1958. JPL, NASA's  lead site  for  solar  system  exploration,  designed  and  built 
the  Wide  Field/Planetary Camera  (WF/PC  11)  recently  installed  on  NASA's 
Hubble  Space  Telescope  (HST ) .   It  also  runs  programs  such  as  NASA's 
Mission to Planet  Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and  the Magellan mis- 
sion to Venus, as  well  as  the U.S. half  of  the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission  to 
the  Sun ,  the NASAICNES  TOPEX/Poseidon,  and  the   SIR-C/X-SAR radar 
system on  the Shuttle.  (NASA  Release C94 -c )  

January 14: NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin declared  tha t ,  after five 
weeks  of  engineering  checkout,  optical  alignment,  and  instrument  calihra- 
tion,  the  Shuttle mission  to  repair  th e  Hubble  Space Telescope  (H S T )  was 
fully  successful. He  spoke  at  a  press  conference  at  NASA's Goddard  Space 
Flight  Center,  Greenbelt,  Maryland,  along  with  Dr.  John   H .   Gibbons, 
presidential  assistant  for  science  and  technology,  and  Senator  Barbara  A. 
Mikulski,  chair  of  the  Appropriations  Subcommittee  on   VA,  HUD,  and 
Independent Agencies  (including NASA ) ,  who  unveiled  two  new  HST pic- 
tures. Th e  repairs have  extended  astronomers' view  across  the  universe hy  10 
times  and  enlarged  the   visible  volume  of  space  by  1,000  times.  (NASA  

..\STRONAUTI(:S  ANL)  A E R O N A U T I C S  

J A N U A R Y   1994 

Release  94.7;  W Times, J a n  14/94; B S u n ,  ]an   14/94;  P Iw ,   J a n   14/94; WSJ9  J an  
14/94; C  Tr th ,  J a n  13/94; NY  Xme s ,  J a n   14/94; W Post, Jan   14/94; LA  Trnes?  
J a n   14/94; Def  Dally, J a n   14/94;  AP, J a n   14/94; Reuters,  J a n   13/94;  UPI,  Jan  
13/94 ,  LJSA To&y,  J a n  14/94; H t s v l   Times, J a n  16/94;  
I a n  24/94)  

NA SA   Administrator   Daniel  S.  Go ld in   announced   t h e   appo in tmen t   of 
Brigadier  Gene ra l   Elmer  T.  Brooks,  U SA F   (Re t i red ) ,   as  Deputy  Associate 
Adtuinistrator   for NASA's Office of  Space  Commun ica t ion s  (OSC) a t  N A S A  
Headqua r te r s .   C h a r l e s   Force ,   A s soc ia te   A dm i n i s t r a t o r  
for  S p a c e  
Commun ica t ion s ,   c omm e n t e d   o n   t h e   problems   facing   NASA's  use  of 
te lecon~mun ica t ion s  technologies  w i th  reduced  funding .  OSC was responsible 
for planning ,   deve lopmen t ,  and  operation   of  NASA's worldwide commun ica -  
tions ,   telemetry,  and  da ta   acquisition  activities .  ( N A S A  Release 94 -9 )  

T h e  Na t iona l   Research  Counc i l   ( N R C )  warned  in   a  th i rd   and   final  report  
t o  N A S A   t h a t   its Earth  Observing  System (EOS )  would  n o t  meet  users' needs  
without  major  revisions  in t h e  $2.6 billion  EOS  Data  a n d  Information   System 
(EOSD IS )  t h a t   was  t o  hand le ,  store ,  a n d  distribute  EOS  data .  A n  evo lu t ion -  
ary system  like EOSD lS  must  he  open  and  extendable .  T h e  centralized  na tu re  
of  t h e  EOSDIS  C o r e  System  ( EC S )  being  built was unresponsive  t o  user needs  
a n d  needed  major  revisions  in  its a rch i tec tu re ,  leadership,  and  user  empower-  
m e n t .   Sl~ecifically ,  users  would  n o t   be  able  t o   automatically   comb ine   d a t a  
fro111 different  sensors  or   alter   da ta   products  t o   meet   particular  needs.  (Def 
Daily, J a n   14/94; Federal Compu te r  Week, J a n  24/94)  

Russian  cosmonauts  Vasily Tsibliyev a n d  Alexander   Serebrov  o n  t h e  Soyuz 
TM - 1 7  landed  safely and  without   incident   after six mon th s   in  t h e  Mir  s ta t ion ,  
although   t h e   module   had   collided  with   Mir  before  descent .   T h e y   were 
replaced  hy   two  cosmonauts ,   including  Valery  Polyakov, due  t o  stay  a  record-  
breaking   14  mon th s   in  space ,   t o   hreak  t h e   record  366   days  set  by   Vladimir  
T i tc~v  a n d  Musa  Manarov   in  1988-1989. 
(Reucers, J a n  14/94)  

Janua ry   17:  NA SA   announced   t h a t   t h e  C om p t o n   G amm a  Ray  Observatory  
satellite   h a J   \.ielcled  da ta   indicating   t h a t   gamma-ray  bursts  show   relative  
"time-iiilation"-"a 
result  of  t h e   Gene ra l   Theo ry   of  Relativityn-suggesting 
they  occur   no t   only  near   t h e  Milky  Way  Galaxy   but   also  far  away,  a n d   thu s  
indicating   expansion   of  t h e  universe.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -10 )  

J a n t l a q   1 8 :  NASA's Office of  Advanced   Concep t s  and  Technology  ( O A C T )  
scheduled  a  one -day   forum,  including   a n   Aerospace  Industry  Technology 
Program  ( A I T P ) ,   t o   encourage   high-risk ,   high-payoff  technology   develop-  
m e n t .  N A S A   responsiveness  to   industry's need  was shown  by  industry  partic-  
ipa t ion   in  all  aspects  and   phases  of  t h e  A I T P  program,  with   representatives  
making  presentations  o n  b o t h  program  c o n t e n t   a n d  structure .  T h e  fiscal  1994  
budget allocation  for this  technology  initiative  was $20 million .  ( N A S A  N o t e  
t o  Editors N 9 4 - 6 )  

JANUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

January  19:  Ecologists  Christopher   Potter  and   Steven   Klooster  of  NASA's 
Ames Research Cen te r  processed  10  years of data  to construct a map charting  
one  month's  exchange  of  the  heat-trapping  gas  carbon  dioxide  between  t h e  
atmosphere and  the  Earth's land plants and  soils. Th is  is a key process in  deter-  
mining  the  ex ten t  to  which  the  release of  this gas through burning  fossil fuels 
and  land-use changes might  cause global climate warming, and  this  is  the  first 
time  satellite  data   have  been  combined  with  computer  simulation  of  soil 
processes.  A  1990  Intergovernmental  Panel  o n   Climate   Change   gave  esti- 
mates  in  billions  of  tons  of  carbon  per  year  to  try  to   answer  t h e   question  of 
where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton  
University  geochemist  Jorge  L.  Sarmiento   hypothesized  a  terrestrial  sink ,  
while  Harvard  University  geochemist  Steven  Wofsy  agreed with  Potter  tha t  
simulation  also  needed  detailed  studies  of  plant-soil  processes.  (CSM, J a n  
19/94)  

Turkey scheduled  the   launch  of  its first satellite  aboard  an  Ariane-4  rocket 
from French Guyana .  ( B  Sun ,  J a n  19/94) 

T h e  Hughes Network  Systems  telecommunication  firm  contracted  with  the  
Hawaiian corporation I l T I  to install a high-speed satellite link dubbed "Teleport 
Asia" between the  Eastern and Western hemispheres on  the  island of Oahu, with 
twin Earth stations facing toward Asia and North  America. (W  Tmes, J a n  19/94) 

lanuary  20:  Dr.  Thomas   S.  Burks,  executive  vice  president  for  research  and  
academic  affairs,  and  veterinarian  Dr.  Bradford  S .   Goodwin,  professor  and  
executive director  for  laboratory  animal medicine and   care  at  t h e  University 
of  Texas  Health   Science  Center ,   discussed  the   scientific  necessity  of  raising 
genetically  uniform  rats  and   mice.  T h e y   are  used  as  subjects  for  research 
throughout  t h e   community.  NASA   used  four  dozen  aboard  t h e   Shu t t le  
Discovery.  ( H  Chron, J a n  20194) 

January  21:  T h e   NASA   Lewis  Research  Center ,   Cleveland ,  Oh io ,   awarded 
the   Engineering  Design  Group ,   Inc.,  Tulsa,  Oklahoma ,   a  contract   for  engi- 
neering, construction ,  and environmental  services in  the  rehabilitation ,  mod- 
ification  and  construction  of  research  and  institutional  facilities  and   systems. 
Th is   small-business  cost-plus-fee  contract   had   a  two-year  basic  period  and  
three  one-year renewals, a base value of $13.6 million, and  a total  value of $45 
million.  (NA SA  Release C94 -e )  

January  24:  Swales  and   Associates,  Inc . ,   Beltsville,  Maryland,  received  a n  
eight-year  small business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee con t rac t  of  $275 mil- 
l ion   t o   suppo r t   t h e   M e c h a n i c a l   Systems   Division   of 
t h e   Godda rd  
Engineering  Directorate  a t  Goddard   Space  Flight  C e n t e r   (GSFC ) .  ( N A S A  
Release  C 9 4 d )  

ASTRC3NAUTICS  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

JANUARY   1994 

January  25:  NASA's  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r   ( J S C ) ,  Hou s ton ,  Texas,  selected  
Pioneer   C o n t r a c t   Services   for  a  five-year ,  $42  million  cost-plus-award-fee 
con t rac t   for logistics  support ,  such  as all  hand l ing  of  property, warehouse, and  
bondroom   operations .   ( N A S A  Release  C 9 4 f )  

N A S A  announced  t h e  crew of  t h e  STS - 6 0  mission  aboard t h e  Space  Shu t t le  
Discovery,  scheduled  for  flight  from  February  3  t o   11,  1994:  mission  com -  
mander,  Cha r l ie   Bolden;  pilot ,   Ken  Reightler;  mission  specialists,  J a n  Davis, 
R o n  Sega, Franklin  Chang-Diaz ,  a n d  Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut  with  
two  long-duration  flights  aboard  t h e  Mir  S ta t ion .  His  flight  will  begin  a  new 
three-phase  era of cooperation:  10 Shu t t le -M i r  missions, joint  work o n  t h e  co re  
Space  S t a t i o n ,  and   expansion  of  t h e  S t a t i o n  t o  all o t h e r  partners. 
T h e  S T S - 6 0  will deploy  t h e  first Wake Sh ie ld  Facility  (WSF) t o  grow semi-  
conductors .   T h e  WSF   is  a  $13 .5   million ,   12-foot-wide  satellite   t h a t   was  t o  
float  free of  t h e  S h u t t l e  for  th ree  days.  If  t h e  vacuum-grown  film yielded  op t i -  
mum  g row th ,  future  fleets of shields might  grow crops of  such  film. T h i s  would 
also  mark  t h e   second  flight  of  t h e   1 ,100-cubic-foot   Spacehab   facility  for 
biotechnology   and   o t h e r   payloads  a n d   t h e   1 0 0 t h  G e t  Away  Special   ( G A S )  
since   its  1982  start ,   with   five  payloads.  T h e   crew  also  was  t o   commun ica te  
with   s tuden t s   in   t h e   U n i t e d   S ta te s   a n d   Russia  with   t h e   S h u t t l e   Ama teu r  
Radio  Experiment-I1 (SAREX-11). STS - 6 0  was scheduled  t o  be  t h e  1 8 t h  flight 
of  t h e   Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery  and   t h e   6 0 t h  flight  of  t h e   Space  S h u t t l e  sys- 
tem .  ( N A S A  Release 94 -  1 1 ; H Chron, J a n  20194; H Chron ,  J a n  2 1/94; N A S A  
No te   t o  M i t o r s  N94 -9 ;  AP, J a n  26/94, P Inq, J a n  28/94; USA Today, J a n  31/94; 
AP, J a n  30194; AP, J a n  31/94;  U P I ,  J a n  31/94;  B  Sun Feb  2/94)  

T h e   University   of  Hou s ton   ( U H )  was  scheduled   t o   take   over   from  t h e  
Massachusetts  In s t i tu te   of  Technology   as  h om e   for  a  rocket   laboratory 
researching  t h e  feasibility  of  charged  plasma  propulsion  for  future   in te rp lane -  
tary  flight.  T h e   facility  was  t o   be  called  t h e   Advanced   Space   Propulsion 
Laboratory .  A s t ronau t   a n d   plasma-physics  expe r t   Franklin   Chang-Diaz   was 
appointed   t h e  facility's director .  Chang-Diaz  hoped   t o  c rea te  a small test  rock-  
e t   t o  release  from  a Shu t t le .   ( H  Post, J a n  21 /94 )  

Carl   Pilcher,  who  works  o n   advanced  planning   issues  in  NASA's  Office of 
Space  Science ,  told  t h e   agency's Space  Science  Advisory  Comm i t tee   t h a t   top  
NA SA  managers were drafting a  12-20  page strategic plan  giving highest  budg- 
e t   priority  t o   t h e  Mission  to   Planet   Earth  (MTPE ) .  T h e  MTPE  was due   t o   t h e  
insistence  of  Vice  President  Go re ,   reflecting  messages  N A S A   Administrator  
Go ld in  was receiving from  t h e  W h i t e  House  in  response  t o  his  submitted  pro- 
posals. (Def Daily, J a n  2 1/94)  
N A S A  and  t h e  Department  of  Defense (D oD )  scheduled t h e  launch  of  the i r  
joint   p ro jec t ,   t h e   Deep   Space   Program  Sc ience   Expe r imen t ,   dubbed  
C lemen t ine ,  o n  a T t a n  IIG rocket  from Vandenberg Air  Force Base, California. 
Th i s  first U.S. lunar mission  in two decades was scheduled  to  spend two mon th s  

JANL1.4KY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

in  polar  orbit  of  the  Moon  every  five hours, photographing  it  from  as  close  as 
250 miles with  its  three  cameras (two  infrared  and  one  ultraviolet/\~isible) and 
LlDAR  (laser image detection and ranging) unit, and then  was to  go o n  to  pho- 
tograph  the  near-Earth  asteroid Geographos. 
T h e   933-pound  craft  was  built  by  the   Naval  Research  Laboratory  (NRL) ,  
which  was  to  also  oversee ground  command;  i t   was  to   be  tracked  by NASA's 
Deep Space Network.  Its main  goal:  to  test  five sensors designed  to detect  and 
track  missiles. T h e  project's other  goal was  to  aid  in  the  design  of  light-weight 
and  low-cost components usable in a fleet of  missile-defense satellites or guided 
missiles,  which  could  be  tested  without  violating  the   Anti-Ballistic  Missile 
Treaty.  This  reflected  the   project's  roots  in  the   Strategic  Defense  Initiative 
(SDI)  or Star  Wars, now  called the  Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. 
Despite  Apollo  and  later  missions, NASA   officials noted  that   the   Moon, 
especially the   far  side, had  never  been  mapped  completely nor  explored  with 
modem  instruments.  T h e  Clementine  Program  could  ~ r o v i d e  the  overall  pic- 
ture  that   researchers have  always wanted.  (Orlando Sentinel, J a n  24/94; W Post, 
J a n  24/94; H Post, J a n  24/94; B Sun, J a n  26/94; NY Xmes; J a n  26/94; W Post, J a n  
26/94;  USA  Today, J a n  26/94; W Tmes, J a n  26/94; AP,  J a n  26/94; B  Sun, J a n  
27/94 

T h e  media reported  that   Pratt  & Whitney  and Rockwell  Intemational  were 
negotiating  a  potential  $1   billion  deal  with  Russian  aircraft  manufacturer 
Ilyushin to  produce jetliners. T h e  project  could  involve  the   initial  purchase of 
20  aircraft by  Aeroflot  Russian  International  Airlines  and  create  $1 billion  in 
U.S.  exports. Pratt & Wh i tney  would  p o v i d e   the  engines and Rockwell would 
provide  the   avionics. T h e   11-96M  is  a  four-engine wide-body craft  tha t   carries 
300  passengers.  ( P  I n q ,  J a n  22/94) 

Japan scheduled the launch of  the  H-2 ,  its first rocket built without U.S. tech-  
nology, whose development has taken  10  years  and  $2.4 billion. A  consortium 
of 74 Japanese companies built  it  and formed  the  Rocket Systems Corporation 
to  market  it.  ( C  Tnb, J a n  23/94, NY  Times, J a n  26/94, WSJ, J a n  31/94, Reuters, 
J a n  30194, Reuters, J a n  3 1/94, Reuters, J a n  30194; CSM, Feb 3/94) 

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   had  an   extensive  interview  with 
U.S. Black  Engzneer (USBE) Magazine on  his past and current experience, com- 
mitment,  and  achievements  in  promoting  minority  advancement  in  the   aero- 
space field. He  detailed how  in his long career in rising through  the  field he had 
worked  for minority progress. 
A t   TRW  he   worked  with  Hank  Wilfong  of  the   National  Association  of 
Small  and  Disadvantaged Businesses  (SDB)  in  setting  aside  $250  million  and 
searching  the   country  for  the   top  30  minority-owned  businesses, and  he   suc- 
ceeded  in contracting high-tech  electronics projects with  them. 

ASTRONAUT ICS   .4NL)  AERONAUT ICS  

JANUARY  1994 

T h e   interview  mentioned   government   programs,  including  t h e   President's 
Na t iona l  Technology  Initiative   a n d  a congressional  bill  manda t ing  N A S A   t o  
d o  eight  percent  of  its $ 1 2  billion   in  con t rac ted  business with  minority  groups. 
Men t ioned  also were set-asides, DoD's men to r sh ip  program,  and   t h e  Office of 
Federal  C o n t r a c t  Comp l iance   (O FCC ) .  
C om i n g   t o   N A S A ,   Go ld in   found   only   14  African   Americans   in   t h e  
agency's 535  senior  executive  service  (SES )  slots. H e  instituted   a h i r ing  freeze 
un t i l   a  new  SES  t ra in ing   program  got  underway.  H e   also  called  in   t h e  chief 
executive   officers  (CEO s )   of  N A S A   prime  con t rac to r s   and   told  them   t o  
expand  cultural  diversity  in   the i r  subcontractor   workforce. 

Jo seph   P.  M a r t i n o ,  sen io r   research   scientist   a t   t h e   Un ive r s i ty   of  Day ton  
Research   In s t i tu te ,   exa tn ined   space  l a u n c h   costs   in   a  study  released  by  t h e  
Los Angeles-based  Reason   Founda t ion .  Because  of  h igh  costs ,  h e  n o t e d   t h a t  
t h e  U n i t e d   S t a t e s  was  now   fa r the r   away  from  hav ing   people   o n   t h e  M o o n  
t h a n   w h e n   President   Kennedy   launched   t h e   A p o l l o   program .   I n   1994 ,   it 
cost   $3 ,500   per  pound   t o  pu t   items   i n t o   o rb i t .  T h e  co s t   increase   s ta r ted   in  
t h e   1950s ,  when   h igh   performance   of  ballistic  missiles  was  needed   a t   any  
price  a n d  has  been   c o n t i n u e d  by  NASA's  policy  of  deve lop ing  new   t e c h n o l -  
ogy  for e a c h  new  mission .  Launch  costs  must  be   lowered  a n d  c a n  be by  t h r e e  
new  approaches:   t h e   use  of  comme rc ia l   practices   for  veh ic le   c o n s t r u c t i o n ,  
long   p roduc t ion   runs   of  single   designs,  a n d   designing   launche r s   t o   be 
reusable  like  aircraft   instead   of  p roduc ing  single-use  like  missiles.  ( W  Times, 
J a n  25 /94 )  

Dr.  Edward  Tagliaferri ,   a  physicist   a n d   c o n s u l t a n t   for  t h e   Ae ro space  
C o r p o r a t i o n ,  a n  e n g i n e e r i n g  firm   i n  El S e g u n d o ,  Ca l i fo rn ia ,   t h a t  he lp s   t h e  
A i r   Force   r u n   its   many   sa te l l i te   programs ,   was  lead  a u t h o r  of  a  repo r t   dis- 
cussing   declassified  A i r   Force   s tud ie s  of  me teo r s   a n d   t h e i r   possible   t h r e a t .  
T h e  repo r t   is  a  c h a p t e r   in   a  book   e d i t e d   by  Dr.  Tom   G e h r e l s ,   a  p lane ta ry  
a s t r o n om e r   a t   t h e   Un ive r s i ty   of  A r izona ,   a n d   pub l i shed   b y  t h e  university .  
T h e  p o t e n t i a l   t h r e a t   is  viewed  i n  t h e  l igh t  of occu r rence s  s u c h  as t h e  s t r i k e  
in   Tungu ska ,   S ibe r ia ,   a n d   t h e   p robab le   s t r ike   i n   Yuca tan ,   Mex ico .   (NY 
Times, J a n  25 /94 )  

NASA's  budget  was  scheduled   t o  face  possible  major  cuts   according  t o  t o p  
cong re s s iona l   sources .   T h e   S p a c e   S t a t i o n ,   E a r t h   O b s e r v i n g   Sy s tem ,  
In te rna t iona l   Ultraviolet   Explorer,  Extreme   U l t rav io le t   Explorer,  Cosmic  
Background   Explorer ,   C o m p t o n   G amm a   Ray  Ob se rva to ry ,   Mission  
Ope ra t ion s  and   Data   Analysis, Cassini ,  AXAF,  a n d   two  $1-billion  wind  t u n -  
nels  for  t h e  H i g h  Speed  Civil  Transport  program  could  be  affected. 
N A S A  reconfigured  its accoun t  structure  i n t o  four parts: space science  a n d  
aeronautics ,  S h u t t l e  a n d  Space  S t a t i o n  activities ,  tracking  a n d  personnel ,  a n d  
research  and   program  management .  

JANUARY  1994 

c:HRONOLcX;Y  1994 

T h e  Space  S t a t i o n ,  however,  had   presidential   support  and   was  a  signature  
foreign policy  initiative ,   especially  in  terms of  cooperation  w i th   t h e  Russians, 
wh ich  may  protect   it.  (Def Daily, J a n  24/94;  Sunnytlale Sun ,  J a n   12/94)  

T h e   NA SA -D oD   Na t iona l   A e r o s p a c e   Plane   ( N A S P )   achieved   positive 
th ru s t  for  a  scramjet  eng ine  a t  speeds of  up  t o  9 ,500  miles  per  hour   o r  Mach  
14, according   t o   con t rac to r   team   member   P ra t t  & Whirney .   T h e   tests  were 
made   a t   Calspan   Corporation's   hypersonic  shock  t u n n e l   facility  a t   Hutfalo, 
New  York.  (Def Daily, J a n  24/94)  

Retired   Air   Force  Co lone l   Ken  Munech ika ,   former  chief   of  C3ni:uka  A i r  
Force  Base's Sa te l l i te  Test  C e n t e r ,  was  designated   t h e   new  chief   of  NASA's  
Ame s  Research  C e n t e r   ( A R C ) .  (Sunnyvale Slm, J a n  1 2 / 9 4 )  
N A S A   established  t h e   J o h n s o n   Technology  Commercialization   C e n t e r ,  
modelled  o n   t h e   Au s t in   Technology   Cen te r ,   t o   promote   space  technology. 
T h e  cen te r   was  scheduled  t o   accept   a n d   subsidize  a  few  rigorously  screened  
applicants   as  "start-up"  and   will  nu r tu re   t h em   rhrough   t h e   "learning   curve" 
over   th ree   years  toward  the i r   "graduation"  t o   independen t   operation   in   t h e  
marketplace .  T h e  program  was pa r t  of  NASA-sponsored   Regional Technology 
Transfer C e n t e r s  for technology   assessment and   licensing. Texas was  also part 
of  a  14-state  M i d -C o n t i n e n t  Technology  Transfer C e n t e r ,  unde r   t h e  umbrella 
of  t h e  Na t iona l   Technology  Transfer Cen te r .   (H  Post, J a n  12/94)  

NASA's  Office  of  Space   Sc ience  was  scheduled  t o   use  t h e  Godda rd   Space  
Flight  Center's  Wallops  Island  Flight  Facility  t o  manage   a  Sound ing  Rocket  
Program  of  almost  50 missions  worldwide  in   1994. O n e  study ove r  Fairbanks, 
Alaska ,   was  t o  exam ine  auroras  by using  eight   unguided  suborhital  sounding  
rockets  a t  altitudes  of  55  t o  287  miles. O n e  rocket  was  t o  carry  a  21-foot-long  
payload called  t h e  Auroral  Turbulence  Rocke t ,  with   28  instruments  o n  a main  
payload  a n d  two  subpayloads.  T h e  latter  two would  be deployed from  t h e  ma in  
payload  in   space,  and   simultaneous   measurements   from  t h e   th ree   spacecraft 
would  permit   a study  during  9 of  t h e   12 m inu te s  of  flight .  T h e y  were  tcl  meas- 
ure  t h e  acceleration  process  t h a t  energizes particles  and  causes  t h e  emission o f  
light  called  auroras.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -12 )  

Dr.  Robert   W inga te   of  NASA's   Langley  Research  C e n t e r ,   H am p t o n ,  
Virginia,  as  cha i rman   of  a n   investigation   board  appointed   h p   J r r em i a h  
Pearson ,  N A S A  Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r  for Space  Flight,  released  a study  of 
t h e  cause of  a n  anomaly  o n  S h u t t l e  Discovery-STS-5  1. During  deployment  
of  t h e  A C T S  commun ica t ion  satellite ,  commands  for firing a  single explosive 
cord   caused  t h e   firing  of  b o t h   primary  and   backup  cords,  which   ruptured  a 
c o n t a i nm e n t   tube  and  released  debris  i n t o  t h e  cargo  h a p   T h e  study described 
t h e   primary  and   con t r ibu t ing   causes-a 
10-year-old  design  flaw-and  made  
recommendations   for  corrections .   ( N A S A  N o t e   t o  Editors 94-8, USA  T o d a y ,  
J a n  28/94; AP, J a n  27 /94 )  

ASTRONAUTICS ANL)  AERONAUTICS 

JANUARY 1994 

Spence  Armstrong,  Associate  Administrator  for  NASA's  Office of  Human 
Resources  and  Education,  announced  its  Experimental  Program  to   Stimulate 
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This was  a three-year, $500,000 annual  award 
to  six  states  as  a  new  initiative  to   improve  their  research  and   competitive 
capability while  expanding  education  and  training  opportunities  for  women 
and   minorities.  T h e   funding  would  enable   states  t o   develop  a n   academic 
research enterprise for long-term, self-sustaining, nationally competitive capa- 
bility, contributing  to  the  States' economic viability. T h e  involved  states were 
Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Montana ,  and  t h e  Commonwealth  
of  Puerto  Rico. 

January 27: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Cen te r  opened  its Clean  Room- 
the  world's largest at  100 feet by  125 feet  and  n ine  stories high-for 
joumal- 
ists  to   inspect  the   15,000  pounds  of  parts  removed  from  the   Hubble  Space 
Telescope and returned  for examination ,  particularly  the  Wide Field/Planetary 
Camera. Hubble  flight systems chief Frank Cepollina  and  NASA  expert J o h n  
Wood  discussed both  the  signs of wear from three  years in space and  problems 
of  controlling  contamination  here.  ( B  Sun ,  J a n  27/94; AP, J a n  27/94) 

British astronomers  reported  in  the  journal  Nature o n  finding new physical 
evidence of  "ripplesn in space, ho t  and  cold  spots confirming  1992 findings by 
NASA's  Cosmic  Background  Explorer (COBE)   Satellite ,  tha t   shed  light  o n  
the   origin  of  the   universe.  Rod  Davies  of  the  University  of  Manchester  dis- 
cussed  studies  done   by  radio  telescope  in  t h e   Canary  Islands  tha t   revealed 
microwaves  from  when   t h e   universe  was  only  300 ,000   years  old .  
Astrophysicist  Joseph  Silk  of  the   University  of  California  at  Berkeley  com- 
mentell  that   the   findings could  offer  the   most  intriguing  possibility  tha t   the  
universe  is  open ,   i.e., would  expand  indefinitely  ( W  Post,  J a n   27/94;  USA 
Today, J a n  27/94;  AP, J a n  27/94) 

T h e   L X - X   unmanned   Delta  Clipper-Experimental  launch   vehicle  project 
was  dropped  by  McDonnell  Douglas  because  of  exhaustion  of  its  initial  $58 
million  funding by  the  Department  of  Defense  (DoD) .  Bill Gaubatz, head  of 
the  project  for McDonnell a t  the  Wh i te  Sands Missile Range  in  New Mexico, 
stated  that   l>oD had  informed him of cancellation  of  the   contract .  
T h e  42-foot-tall ,  21-ton  cone-shaped  test  model  is  one   third  the   size  of 
envisioned  vehicle,  which  would  be  able  to  lift up  to  25,000 pounds  of  cargo 
into  orbit. T h e  rocket was part of  DoD's Ballistic Missile Defense Organization 
(BMLK)) program  to  lift  missile defense  shields  and   weapons  to   orbit ,  but  a 
final  $5  million  was  shifted  to  DoD's Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
(ARI'A).  ARPA,  in  turn ,   was  reported  t o   have   been  instructed  by  Defense 
Undersecretary  J o h n  M.  Deutch  not   to  release  the   funds.  (LA  Zme s ,   J a n  
27/94;  NY  Times ,  J a n  3 1/94) 

JANUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

Januury 2 8 :  Science reported  t h e  results  by  researchers  from Co lumb ia  and   t h e  
University   of California ,   S a n  Diego,  refuting  past  studies  o n  global warming. 
T h e y  found  flaws in  a  1993  study of  deep-core  G r e e n l a n d  ice by  European  sci- 
entists   t h a t  said global warming  could  cause ab rup t ,  disruptive  cold  along  t h e  
N o r t h   A t l a n t i c   Ocean .   T h e   U .S .   researchers  said  t h a t   Earth's  climate   is 
remarkably  stable  a n d   likely  t o  remain   so.  (USA  Today, J a n  28 /94 )  

Numerous   Federal  agencies,  including   NASA's  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory 
( JPL ) ,  were  accused  in   a  S e n a t e  report   of  "offloading"  by  devising  elaborate  
practices  for circumventing   Federal  law so t h a t  hundreds   of  millions  of  dollars 
in   g o v e r nm e n t   business  could   go  t o   favored   compan ie s .   T h e   S e n a t e  
G o v e r nm e n t a l   Affairs  subcommittee   o n   oversight  of  gove rnmen t   manage-  
m e n t   said  t h e y  had   "abused  and   misused"  t h e   law  and   otherwise   could   have  
c u t  costs by  half.  ( W  Post, J a n  28/94)  

G e rm a n  Economics Minister  G u e n t e r  Rexrodt   urged  t h e  U .S .   t o  grant  c o n -  
cessions  in   in te rna t iona l   talks  o n   aerospace  subsidies,  particularly  NASA's 
indirect   subsidies o n  R&D.  T h i s  issue was n o t  dealt  with   in  t h e   1993  Gene ra l  
Ag reemen t   o n  Tariffs and   Trade  ( G A T T )  agreement .   Ge rmany   was  studying  
ways  t o  shift  direct   support ,  a n d   Deutsche   Aerospace  A G  has   released  a  10- 
point   program.  (Reuters ,  J a n  27/94)  

January 3 1 : A s  part  of  NASA's High-Speed  Research  Program, NASA's Ame s  
Research  C e n t e r   ( A R C )  was  using  its  Na t iona l   Full-Scale  Aerodynamics  
Comp lex   t o  study  and   curb   t h e  noise  from  t h e   takeoff  exhau s t  or   "plume"  of 
tu rbu len t  air  in  t h e  wake  of  future  supersonic  jetliners  w i thou t  affecting  take-  
off  performance .   Project  Manager   Paul  Sode rman ,   a n   aeronautical   a n d  
acoustical  engineer ,  said  t h a t  such   future   aircraft  would  have   t o  comply  with  
Federal  Aviation   Adm in i s t ra t ion   ( FAA )  regulations.  A n  exhaust  nozzle of  a n  
"ejector  suppressor"  type  was  being   studied  by  laser  and   infrared  video .  
( N A S A  Release, J a n  3 1/94) 

N A S A   reportedly   transferred  $990 ,000   t o   t h e   Defense  Department's  
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization  t o  ma in ta in   t h e  Delta  C l ippe r  program. 
McDonne l l   Douglas  Aerospace  h a d   developed   a  rocket  t h a t   takes  off  a n d  
lands vertically ,  wh ich   is  covered  by  this  program. N A S A  wished  t o  keep   t h e  
op t ion   of  using  t h e   DC-X  as  a  flight  demonstrator   of   single-stage-to-orbit  
technologies   in   support   of  NASA's   advanced   launch   technology   effort.  T h e  
program  was  operated   from  t h e  W h i t e   Sand s  Missile  Range   in  New   Mexico .  
(RTW ,  J a n  31/94; H Post,  Feb 3 /94 )  

February 

Febncary  1 :   T h e   Pentagon  announced  that   Under  Secretary  of  Defense  for 
Acquisition J o h n  Deutch had agreed to  hold $10 million in Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  (ARPA )  funding  pending  the   outcome  of  a  Department  of 
Defense  (DoD )  launch modernization  study  and  a 60-day NASA-DoD   review 
of  the  Delta Clipper-Experimental  (DC-X) flight  test  program.  (Defense Dally, 
Feb  2/94; NY Times, Feb  2/94; AP, Feb  2/94; H Post, Feb 3/94) 

Febncary 2:  NASA   announced  a major milestone in  the Space Station Program 
as of  February 1, with the signing by NASA  and contractor officials of documents 
ending  the   Freedom Work  Package  contracts.  NASA   had  signed  these  agree- 
ments with Boeing Defense and Space Group, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, 
and  the  Rocketdyne Division  of  Rockwell  Intemational.  Instead, responsibility 
for  design, development,  and  integration  of  work  on   the   Intemational  Space 
Station  program  was  b a n g   concentrated  in  a  single  contract  with  Boeing 
Defense and Space Systems Group, Seattle. (NASA  Release 94-1 5) 

Although   Congress  killed  NASA's  search  for  extraterrestrial  intelligence 
(SETI)  program, the   subject  survived as  Project  Phoenix. T h e  SET1 Institute  
in Moffett  Field, California,  indicated  existing  contributions  of  $4.4  million 
of  the  $7.3  million  needed  for  the  project.  NASA   renamed  the  project  High 
Resolution Microwave Survey to  reflect  the   technology's ability t o  screen  out  
Earth-based  radio  interference while listening for cosmic signals o n  millions of 
channels  a t  once.  (CSM, Feb 2/94; W Post, Feb  15/94) 

Febrwrry  3:  Shu t t le   Discovery  blasted  off  from  Cape   Canaveral  carrying  for 
the  first  time a Russian  cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had  spent   15  
months  aboard Mir Station ,  and  five American  astronauts.  Discovery's eight-  
day  research  flight  was  to   include  deployment   and  retrieval  of  t h e   Wake 
Shield  Facility, designed  for growing  experimental  semiconductor  materials, 
and   various  microgravity  and   life  science  experiments.  (AP, Feb  3/94;  UP I ,  
Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Xmes, Feb 4/94; P Inq ,  Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 
4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY  Xmes ,   Feb  4/94;  USA  Today, Feb  4/94; WSJ, Feb 
4/94; C Trib,  Feb  4/94; AP, Feb  4/94)  

NASA   announced   the   selection  of  astronauts  Norman   E.  Thagard  and 
Bonnie J .   Dunbar as prime and  backup  crew members for a th ree -mon th  flight 
o n  Russian Space Station  Mir  in March  1995. Both  astronauts flew on  previ- 
ous  U.S.  Shu t t le   flights  and  conducted  various  scientific  experiments. 
(NA SA  Release 94-  16 )  

NASA  announced  the  first government/industry Technology Reinvestment 
Program ( TR P )  with Hi-Shear  Technology Corporation ,  Torrance, California. 

ASTRONAUTICS AN11 AERONAUTICS  

FEBRUARY  1994 

T h e  program  was  designed  t o  create   a  new  generation   of  portable   emergency 
rescue  equipment   by  using NASA -deve loped  py ro techn ica l  technology  t o  free 
accident   victims  from  wrecks.  ( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 1 7 )  

T h e  launch   of  t h e   H-I1  (also  seen   as  H -2 )  rocket  created   by  t h e  Japanese  
consortium   Rocket   Systems  Co rpo ra t ion   was  scheduled  for  February  4.  T h e  
rocket ,   large  enough   t o   lift  a  two - ton   payload  i n t o   geostationary   o rb i t ,   cost 
$2 .5   billion  t o  develop   and   was  two   years  behind   schedule.  (CSM ,  Feb  3/94;  
Reuters,  Feb 4/94; UP,  Feb  4/94;  LA Times, Feb  7/94)  

A i r   Force  Co lone l   Sanford  Mangold  told  members  of  t h e   House   of 
Representatives  G o v e r nm e n t  Ope ra t ion s  C omm i t t e e  of  his  dismissal  for  rec- 
ommend ing   t h e   cancellation   of  t h e   $ 2 7   billion   military  satellite   program 
Milstar. H e  considered  Milstar,  in tended   t o  provide  worldwide military  com -  
munications   during   a  nuclear   war,  t o   have   "fundamental ,   insurmountable  
problems,"  including   "unacceptable"   costs  of  $1 .4   billion   for  e a c h   satellite .  
(NY Xmes, Feh  3 /94 )  

Foilowing  a  final  flight  ceremony   a t   NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  
Facility  a t   Edwards A i r   Force Base, N A S A   retired  its  last  F-104 fighter  jet  of 
t h e   1950s. N A S A   used  t h e   plane ,   known   as  t h e   Starfighter ,   for  biomedical 
research  and   t o   simulate   t h e   X-15  jet.  T h e   F-15  was  t o   replace  Lockheed's 
Starfighter.  (Bakersfield Californian, Feb  4/94)  

February  4 :   N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  42  additional   proposals  for 
negotiation   of  Phase  I1   con t rac t   awards  in   its  Small   Business  Innova t ion  
Research   Program  (SB IR ) .   T h e   programs  supplemented   t h e   1 3 0   firms 
announced   in  December  1993. ( N A S A  Release  94-  18) 

Andrea   Donne l lan ,  a  geophysicist  a t  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  
Pasadena,  California ,   stated   t h a t   O a t   Moun ta in   in  t h e   S a n t a   Su sana  range ,  
n o r t h   of  t h e  S a n  Fernando   Valley, had   jumped  several  inches  during   t h e  6 .6  
earthquake   t h a t   h i t   Los  Angeles   January   17. N A S A   collected   da ta   from  a 
global  network  o f 4 5  stations .  ( N A S A  Release 94-19;  W Post, Feb 8/94;  P Inq, 
Feb  13/94;  National  Black  Reuiew, Feb/Mar/94) 

February  5:  Burton   J .   Squires ,  a n  engineer   a t   NASA's Goddard   Space   Flight 
Cen te r ,   in   a  le t te r   t o   t h e   editor   of  t h e   Washington  Post,  commen ted   o n   t h e  
media's  failure  t o   commend   t h e   ou t s tand ing   success  of  t h e   Hubble   Space  
Telescope repair  mission.  (W  Post, Feb  5 / 9 4 )  

February  6: O n  February  5 and  6, N A S A  astronauts  tried  unsuccessfully  t o  pu t  
t h e   Wake   Shield   Facility  satellite   in   o rb i t .  T h e y  encoun te red   problems  first 
with  radio  interference   from  t h e  S h u t t l e   and   t h e n  with   failures  in  t h e   satel-  
lite's guidance  and   navigation   system.  (U P I ,  Feb  6/94;  Reuters ,  Feb  6/94;  NY 

FEBRUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

Xrnes, Feb 6/94; W Post, Feb 6 /94 ;  NY  Times, Feh  7/94;  W  Post, Feb  7/94; USA 
Today, Feb  7/94; P  Inq, Feb  7/94; B  Sun ,  Feh  7/94; AP, Feh  7/94)  

J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r  Director  Carolyn   H u n t o o n   announced   some organi-  
zational  changes ,   including   t h e   closing  of  offices  connec ted   with   Integrating  
programs  with   t h e   Russian  Space   S t a t i o n   Agency  and   t h e   New   Initiatives  
Office.  (Fla Today, Feb 6/94) 

February  7:  O n  February  9 ,   t h e   Discovery  was  t o   launch   t h e   O rb i ta l   Debris 
Radar   Ca l ib ra t ion   Spheres ,   designed  t o   he lp   locate   "little  junk"  orbiting   in  
space ,  wh ich  could  pose  a hazard  t o  space  flight.  (CSM ,  Feh  7/94)  

N A S A   announced   a  new  Mars  exploration   program  in   fiscal  year  1995 
involving   t h e   deve lopmen t   of  a  small  Mars  Surveyor  orbiter.  T h e   J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena ,   was  t o   manage   t h e   program,  wh ich   was 
designed  t o  study  t h e  surface of  Mars.  ( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 2 0 )  

President  C l i n t o n ,  who  was  in  Hou s ton ,  spoke  t o  t h e  Discovery  astronauts .  
Mission C o n t r o l  earlier  had   instructed   t h em   t o  abandon   efforts  t o  launch   t h e  
Wake   Sh ie ld   Facility  satellite.  (UP ,  Feb  7/94;  W  Times,  Feb  8 /94 ;  WSJ,  Feh 
8/94;  W Post, Feb  8/94; P  lnq, Feb  8/94;  LA  T m e s ,  Feb 8/94;  0 Sun ,  Feb  8/94; 
USA  Today, Feb 8 / 9 4 )  

A n  A i r  Force  T i t a n  4 ,  t h e  most  ~ o w e r f u l  U.S.  unmanned   rocket ,   boosted  a 
$1 billion  military communications   satellite  (M i l s ta r )  i n t o  space. T h e  satellite  
formed  t h e   initial   link  in   a  controversial   $17.3  billion   da ta   relay  network  
designed   t o   provide  secure  commun ica t ion s   during   a  nuclear   conflict .   ( W  
Post,  Feb  8/94;  WSJ,  Feb  8/94;  B  Sun, Feb  8/94;  AP, Feb 8/94)  

In   t h e  administration   budget  presented  t o  Congress, N A S A   suffered a $281  
million  c u t  for t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  program,  t h e  first cu t   in  22  years. T h e  budg- 
e t   proposals  increased  amoun t s   for  new  technology,  aeronautics ,   computers ,  
and   global  warming  research  but   required  cance l la t ion   of  t h e  Long  Lluration 
Orbiter ,   t h e   Comme rc ia l   Experiment   Transporter ,   and   t h e   Advanced   Solid  
Rocket  Motor.  (Reuters ,  Feb  7/94; B  Sun ,  Feb 8/94;  USA  Today, Feb 8/94;  AP, 
Feb  8/94;  W Post, Feb  10194) 

February  8:  A  feature  article   described  t h e   po ten t ia l   scenario   envisaged  hy 
David  Morrison ,   chief  of  space  science   research  a t   NASA's  Ames   Research 
Cen te r ,   Moffett  Field,  California ,   and   C la rk   C h a pm a n   of  t h e   Planetary  
Sc ience   In s t i tu te   a n d   Sc ience   App l ica t ion s   In te rna t iona l   C o r p o r a t i o n ,  
Tucson ,  Arizona .  T h e i r  20-year study of  asteroids  led  t h em  t o  predict  t h a t   t h e  
Earth   was  o n  a  calamitous  collision  course  w i th   a n  asteroid  t h a t   could  kill  1 
billion  or   2  billion  people.  T h e  odds of  t h e  collision  in  any  o n e  year were  1  in 
500 ,000 .  (USA  Today, Feb  8 /94 )  

A5TKCWAUTICS .4ND AERONAIJTICS 

FEBRUARY  1994 

Russian  cosmonaut   Krikalev  aboard  Discovery  exchanged   greetings  w i th  
Russian cosmonauts  aboard  Space  S t a t i o n  Mir. T h e  Sov ie t  cosmonaut  also got 
through   by  ham   radio  t o  students   in  Mars,  Pennsylvania .   (AP ,  Feb  8/94;  UP, 
Feb  8/94;  Reuters,  Feb  8 /94 ;  W' Times,  Feb 9/94;  B  Sun ,  Feb 9/94;  USA  Today, 
Feh  9 / 9 4 )  

T h e  Space   T e l e s c ~ ) ~ e  Science   Institute   released  photographs   made   by  t h e  
repaired  Huhble   Space  Telescupc of  come t  fragments  t h a t   were  t o  smash  i n t o  
t h e   planet   Jup i te r   in  July.  T h e   fragments  were  projected  t o   strike  with   t h e  
force  of  100 t n i l l i o t~  hydrogen   bombs,  with   t h e   explosions  so  bright   t h a t   t h e  
light   wcruld  he  reflected  off  Jupiter's moons.  (Reuters ,   Feb  8/94;   B  Sun ,   Feb 
9 /94 ;  LISA  Today, Feb 9/94;  AP, Feh  9 / 9 4 )  

Febrlu~ry 9:   NASA's   Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,   C leve land ,   O h i o ,   selected 
G e n e r a l   Llynamics  Comme rc ia l   L a u n c h   Services ,   Inc . ,   of  S a n   Diego ,  
California ,  fc~r  cuntr;lcc  negoti:ltions  for  two definite   launches  and  options  for 
seven   acided  launches   using  t h e   Atlas   intermediate   expendable   launch   veh i -  
cle .  T h e  first  mission  was  t o  he  t h e  Earth  Observing  System-AM-1   spacecraft 
scheduled  for  1998. ( N A S A  Release  C 9 4 - g )  

N A S A  announced   tha t   as  a  result  of  a  10-year joint  NASA -A rm y  research 
program  ( t h e  UH-60 Airloads   Program)  a t   NASA's  Ames   Research  C e n t e r ,  
Moffett  Fielcl,  California ,   a n   helicopter   rotor   v ib ra t ion ,   noise ,   mo t ion ,   and  
airflows,  future  helicopters   urould  be  quieter   and   more  efficient.  ( N A S A  
Release  94-2  1;  UP I ,  Feb  9/94)  

N A S A   annoc~nced  t h e   appo in tmen t   of  Robert   E.  Wh i tehead   as  Deputy 
Asbociatc   A dm i n i s t r a t o r  
tor  
t h e   Office   of  A e r o n a u t i c s   a t   N A S A  
He;\Jqt~;lrters .  (NA SA  Release  9 4 - 2 3 )  

S h u t t l e  Discovery  launched   th ree  pairs  of  stainless steel  spheres as part   of  a 
study  of  space  debris  in  which   ground  stations   were  t o  track  junk  t h a t   could 
pose  a  collision  hazarci  for  spacecraft.  O n  February  8, it  left  a  small G e rm a n  
satellite ,  Aremsat,  in  orhit   t o  conduc t   six  science  experiments .   (Reuters ,  Feb 
9/94;  USA  Today,  Feh  10194; AP,  Feb  10194) 

Fehrlcury  I L 7 :   NASA's Office of  Safety  and  Mission Assurance ,  in con junc t ion  
with   NASA's  Inven t ion s   and   Con t r ibu t ion s   Board,  created   t h e   Software  of 
t h e  Year Award  t o  recognize  such  technology  used by NA SA .   ( N A S A  Release 
94 -22 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   results  of  joint  NASA - indu s t ry   research  experi-  
ments   t o   reduce  exhaust   emissions  of  future   supersonic  airliners   t o  env i ron -  
mentally  compatil-rle  levels  substantially  exceeded   program  goals.  Using   a n  
engine   fuel  combustion   chamber   sector, N A S A   surpassed  its goal  of  gene ra t -  

FEBRUARY  1994 

CHRONOLCXjY  1994 

ing n o  more   t h a n   5  grams of  oxides of  nitrogen   per  kilogram  of  fuel burned   a t  
supersonic  flight  speed.  ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 2 4 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   S h u t t l e   Co lumb ia   was  scheduled   t o   take   off  i n  
Ma rch  o n  a  two-week  mission  t o  conduc t   various  experiments   en ta i l ing  such  
areas  as materials  processing,  biotechnology,  mictogravity, medical   concerns ,  
a n d  env i ronmen ta l  monitoring .   (NA SA  Release  94 -25 )  

February  1 1  : Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery  returned   t o  Earth   after  making  a n  addi-  
t iona l  orbit   because  of  had  weather   a t  C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida.  I n  spite  of  its 
inahility  t o   release  t h e   Wake   Sh ie ld   Facility,  t h a t   satellite   was  t h e   site   for 
growing  h igh -g rade   sem iconduc to r   films   while   a t t a c h e d   t o   Discovery. 
Discovery  also conduc ted   12 experiments   in  Spacehab ,  a  commercial   labora- 
tory,  in  t h e  cargo  bay.  (NY  Tm e s ,  Feb  12/94;  B  Sun, Feb  12/94; W  Post,  Feb 
12/94; AP, Feb  12 /94 )  

Boyce Mix ,  deputy  manager for t h e  S h u t t l e  main  eng ine  program a t  NASA's 
Marshall  Space  Flight C e n t e r  in  Hun t sv i l le ,  A labama ,  said t h a t  techn ic ian s  a t  
Paragon  Precision  Products  of  Valencia,  California ,  had   used  a  super-strength  
glue  for  as  many  as  six  years  t o  make  unauthorized  repairs  o n   Space   S h u t t l e  
engines ,   without   t h e   knowledge  of  company   officers.  A  Janua ry   inspection  
revealed  t h e   glue  and   t h e   s i tua t ion  was  corrected .   (AP ,   Feh  11/94;  Reuters ,  
Feb  12/94; W Post, Feb  12/94;  NY  Times,  Feb  13/94;  USA  Today,  Feb  14 /94 )  

NASA's  C leve land  Lewis Research  C e n t e r  was  scheduled  t o  work  with   t h e  
Russians  o n   a  project   t o  use  t h e   Sun's rays  t o   power  t h e   Russian  Mir   Space  
S t a t i o n .  In   add i t ion ,  t h e  Lewis C e n t e r  was   t o  d i rec t  t h e  building  of  two  wind 
tunne l s   desired  by  t h e   commercial   aircraft  industry   t o   h e l p   design  airliners  
t h a t   fly  at  2.4  times  t h e   speed  of  sound .  T h e  two  projects  would  he lp   com-  
pensate   for jobs  lost  at  Lewis hy  funding  cuts.  (Plain Dealer, Feb  1 1 / 9 4 )  

Fehruary  13: NASA's  Astrophysical  Data   Service   allowed  access  t o   a n  astro-  
nomical  da ta  base t h a t  ultimately  was t o  c o n t a i n  nearly  a billion  stars a n d  sev- 
eral   million  galaxies.  T h e   da ta   resulted  from  t h e   comprehensive   N a t i o n a l  
Geog raph ic   Sky Survey  made  by  t h e   M o u n t   Palomar  Observatory   in   t h e  
1950s. To   this ,   M o u n t   Palomar  added  a  second   survey,  underway  for  several 
years,  of  t h e  n o r t h e r n  sky covering  more  t h a n   50 million   galaxies a n d  nearly 
2  billion  stars.  ( W  Times, Feb  13 /94 )  

February  1 4 :  Space  Tec  Ventures,  a  H am p t o n ,  Virginia  company   created   by 
Joseph  Casas, helped NASA's Langley Research C e n t e r  in  Virginia build a laser 
scheduled  t o  be be  used  t o  monitor   Earth's env i ronmen t  from space. T h e  laser 
was  t o  measure  t h e  amounts  of  carbon  dioxide  in  t h e  atmosphere  and  was t o  be 
aimed  a t   Earth   from  Space  Shu t t le   Endeavour's cargo bay.  T h e  firm  built   two 
o the r   lasers t h a t  were  scheduled  for N A S A   flights  in  August  and  September .  

ASTROrjAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1994 

F e h r y  1 5 :  G l e n n  C u n n i n g h am ,  manager  of  t h e  new  program  a t  NASA's J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena,  California ,   said  N A S A   planned   a  new 
program of  Mars exploration .  T h e  program  was  t o  begin with   t h e  launch ing  of 
two  small  unpiloted   flights  i n   November   1996 .   Launchings   were  t o   occur  
every  25  mon th s   over   t h e  nex t   10  years,  using  relatively  low-cost  spacecraft. 
Funds  in   t h e   cu r ren t  N A S A   budget  were  t o   go  for  designing  t h e   first  of  t h e  
o rb i t ing   c ra f t ,   t h e   Mars   Surveyor .   A n o t h e r   Mars   program ,   t h e   Mars  
Env i ronmen ta l  Survey (MESUR ) ,  was t o  establish  a seismic network  o n  Mars. 
T h e   program  was  t o   begin  with   t h e   already  authorized   $175   million  
Pathfinder   mission.  (NY Times,  Feb  15/94; CSM, Feb  16/94)  

In   a n   address  t o   business  executives ,   N A S A   Administrator   Dan ie l   S .  
G o l d i n  also spoke  of  NASA's goal  of  pu t t ing  a man   o n  Mars. W i t h   t h e  prop-  
e r   techn ica l   groundwork  a n d  econom ic  a n d   political  conditions ,   G o l d i n   felt  
10  years was  a  reasonable  time   frame  for accomplishing  this .  T h e  plan  was for 
innova t ive  technology  t o  c u t  t h e  cost ,  such  as drawing m e t h a n e  from Mars  t o  
use  as  fuel  for  t h e   re tu rn   t r ip ,   thu s   cu t t ing   t h e   space  vehicle's  size  in  half. 
A n o t h e r   part  of  NASA's vision  was  t o  learn  how  t o  work  together   with   o t h e r  
countries   in  space programs.  (Reuters ,  Feb  15/94)  

Sena to r   Barbara  Mikulski,  Democrat   from  Maryland ,   in   addressing  a 
Maryland  Space  Business Roundtable ,  warned aerospace contractors   t h a t  c o n -  
gressional  budget  cutters   were  targeting   NASA's  Space   S t a t i o n ;  meanwhile  
o t h e r   congressional  members  supported  increased  funds  for  h um a n   services 
programs  and   sought   t o   c u t   from  science   and   technology  projects.  S e n a t o r  
Mikulski  stressed  t h e   itnportance   of  investments   in   science   a n d   technology  
w i th in   t h e   framework  of  a  balanced  budget.  ( B  Sun, Feb  16/94)  

February  16: N A S A  announced   t h a t   t h e  official  launch  da te  of Space  S h u t t l e  
Columbta  would  he  March   3. During  t h e  14-day flight ,  a five-person  crew was 
t o  conduc t  numerous  scientific  experiments  ranging  from materials  processing 
t o  biotechnology  and   env i ronmen ta l  monitoring .   ( N A S A  Editor's N o t e  N94 -  
18;  AP, F r b   16/94;  Reuters ,  Feh  16/94; W Times, Feb  17/94)  

T h e   European  Space   Agency   ( E SA )  Gove rn ing   C o u n c i l   announced   i n  
Paris  it  would  proceed  with   a manned   space program  by  t h e  year  2000. J e a n -  
Marie   Lu ton ,   t h e   French   director   general   of  ESA ,   said  member   states   had  
approved  a  $227  million  Manned   Space   Transportation   Program  a n d   c o n -  
s t ruc t ion   o f   a  $299   million  Columbus   module   t o   form  part   of  t h e   U.S. 
Freedom Space  S t a t i o n  being prepared by  NAS.4.  T h e  program was t o  include  
a Crew  Transport  Vehicle  ( C T V )  t o  be  launched   by  a European  A r i a n e  rock- 
e t .   Meanwhile ,   Jan -Ba ldem   Menn icken ,   chief  of  Germany's  space  agency 
DARA ,  revealed Germany's 1994  space program. Co s t ing  $940  million ,  it  was 
$1  17 less t h a n  t h a n  for  1993 .  T h e  budget  included  $579  million  for ESA ,  w i th  
t h e   remainder   including   funds  for  in te rna t iona l   programs  for  Earth   observa- 

FEBRUARY  1994 

C H R O N O L O G Y  1994 

tion   and  a  20-nation  project  to  send  a  satellite  to   Mars  from  the   Russian 
Baikonur  Space Cen te r   in October   1994. (Reuters, Feb  16/94) 

February  17: Lawrence Dietlein,  assistant  director  for  life sciences a t  NASA's 
Johnson  Space Center ,  Houston,  said  tha t   in  1963 and  1974 the  Cen te r  con -  
ducted  experiments  involving  the   use  of  very  small  doses  of  radiation  o n  
humans. T h e  experiments, done  with  the  consent  of  the   subjects,  concerned 
bone   loss  and  weightlessness  during  space  flight.  (Reuters,  Feb  17/94; W 
Times, Feb  18/94; USA  Today, Feb  18/94) 

February  18: Two NASA-sponsored  scientists,  Scott   Hudson  of  Washington 
S ta te   University,  Pullman,  Washington,  and  Steven   Ostro   of  NASA's  J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory  (JPL) ,  Pasadena,  California,  created  the   first  three-  
dimensional model  of  an   asteroid  based  o n  radar  data.  T h e  asteroid  was  the  
double-lobed 4769 Castalia, discovered by  Eleanor Helen  of JPL  a t  the  Mount 
Palomar Observatory  in  1989. T h e  model  and  resulting  pictures  appeared  in 
the  February  18  issue of  Science magazine.  (NA SA  Release 94-26)  

T h e   Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA )  authorized  airlines  to   begin 
using  military   satellite   signals  for  nav iga t ion .   T h e   military's   G loba l  
Positioning  System, consisting  of  24  orbiting  satellites,  according  to  the   air- 
lines would save them  millions of dollars by  flying more efficient  routes.  It was 
unclear  what  the   FAA  would  do   with  existing  microwave  landing  systems. 
(WSJ, Feb  18/94; W Post, Feb  18/94; NY  Tmes ,  Feb  18/94)  

NASA's  Deputy Associate Administrator  for  the   Space Station  Wilbur C. 
Trafton  said  he   expected  Russia  to   participate  in  the   Space S ta t ion  partner- 
ship  in  accordance with  the   agreement  reached  in  1993. Such   participation 
was  scheduled  to  allow  the   project  to  be  completed  in  J u n e  2002  instead  of 
2003 and  save $2 billion.  I f   Russia should withdraw  from participation,  back- 
up  plans  existed.  (AP, Feb  18/94; Reuters, Feb  18/94)  

Itar-Tass news  agency reported  from Moscow  tha t  n ine   the  Russian women 
went  in to  training for  long-haul space flights by  starting a four-month stint  of 
lying  with  their  heads  below  their   feet.  T h e   Institute  of  Medicobiological 
Problem  was  in  charge  of  the   experiment ,  which  simulated  lengthy  space 
flights aboard  the  Mir Space Station .  O n e  woman was  to be  selected  to  f ly  o n  
Mir  in November.  (Reuters, Feb  18/94; B  Sun, Feb  23/94) 

February  20:  Th ree  cosmonauts aboard Russian Space Station  Mir  celebrated 
the  eighth  anniversary of  the  Soviet Union's launch  of Mir  in  1986. (AP, Feb 
20194; W Times,  Feb  2 1/94)  

February  22:  A  feature article described the  work  of  astronomers  a t  the  Space 
Telescope Science  Institute  in Baltimore. T h e  astronomers devised plans  for a 

A S TRONAU T IC S  AN11 AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY  1994 

Polar Stratospheric Telescope (POST )  intended to  reveal stars and galaxies in 
twice  the  detail  possible  with  the Hubble Telescope and  do so more cheaply. 
Th e  telescope, which was  to hang from a blimp tethered  over  the South Pole, 
was  to  be  the  prototype  for  a new  generation  of  observatories that  could  fol- 
low  Hubble  in to   space.  T h e   Institute,  together  with  John s   Hopkins 
University, a consortium of  other universities, and  two private manufacturers, 
planned to ask NASA  for $500,000 to $1,000,000 for a six-month design and 
cost study.  ( 0  Sun, Feb 22/94) 

Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, said the com- 
pany would not buy General Dynamics Corporation's space-launch business for 
$208.5 million as ~ l a n n e d  unless  the government agreed  to pay  more for those 
services. Martin Marietta wanted  a part of  the more  than $400 million in sav- 
ings  it  anticipated  that  the  government  could  realize  over  10 years as  a result 
of  Martin  Marietta  merging  its  T ~ t a n  IV  heavy-launch  rocket  business  with 
General  Dynamics' medium-lift Atlas-Centaur  system. (WSJ, Feb  22/94) 

A  20-month  long Justice Department  sting operation  centered on  NASA's 
Johnson  Space  Center  in  Houston  resulted  in  criminal  fraud  and  bribery 
charges against nine  employees  and  one  contractor.  Two  other  contractors, 
General  Electric Corporation  and  Martin  Marietta  Corporation, which  had 
employed two  of  those  charged, agreed to pay  the government  $1   million  to  
cover  cost  of  the  undercover  operation,  code  named  Operation  Lightning 
Strike. Th e   two  firms  cooperated  with  the  probe  and  might  continue  to  do 
business  with  the  government.  Among  the charged were Astro  International 
Corporation  of  League  City,  Texas,  and  two  NASA  employees.  Th e   sting, 
conducted  by  the FBI, NASA's Office of  Inspector General, and  the  Defense 
Criminal  Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and  Life 
Sciences  Division  in  Houston.  In  October  1993, NASA   Inspector  General 
Bill Colvin  told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud  investiga- 
tions  underway.  (Reuters,  Feb  22/94; UP,  Feb  22/94; W  Post,  Feb  23/94; W 
Times,  Feb  23/94; USA  Today, Feb  23/94; NY  Times,  Feb  23/94; B  Sun,  Feb 
23/94; WSJ, Feb  23/94; AP,  Feb  23/94; C Trib, Feb  23/94) 

T h e  new Canadian Liberal government  announced that  budget constraints 
obliged  it  to   discontinue  participation  in  NASA's  planned  International 
Space  Station.  Later,  the  Canadian  government  said  t h ~ s  was  a  misunder- 
standing  and  that  Canada's commitment  was  to  be  reduced.  (Reuters,  Feb 
22/94; UP, Feb  22/94; AP, Feb  23/94; AP, Feb  24/94) 

NASA  downplayed a  slip  in  the  first  U.S.  assembly  launch  for  the  Space 
Station, promising no more  schedule bumps. Originally scheduled for  launch 
in July 1997, the Boeing-built node was now scheduled for launch in December 
1997. Moreover, the U.S. Habitation  module was  now scheduled for  launch in 
March  2002  instead  of  January 2001. Th e  program  changes annoyed congres- 

FEBRUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

sional  staffers  because  the   program  put  more  dependence  o n   the   Russians. 
NASA   station  chief Wilbur C. Trafton  remained  confident  that   the   changes 
would no t  cause serious harm  to  station  assembly.  (Defense Daily, Feb  22/94) 

Jim  Doyle,  spokesperson  for  NASA's  Je t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena, 
California,  said  tha t   additional  Federal  funding  would  allow  the   Magellan 
Spacecraft to continue studying Venus' interior and atmosphere at least through 
September  1994. Space Shuttle Atlantis  launched Magellan in May  1989, and 
it  arrived a t  Venus  15 months  later. (AP, Feb  28/94; W Post, Mar  1/94)  

F e h r y  23:  A NASA   engineering team  succeeded  in  lifting  the  endangered 
Comp ton   gamma-ray  observatory  to   a  safe  orbit   after  its  propulsion  system 
malfunctioned. NASA   said  the   reboost  had   extended  the   mission  life  of  the  
observatory  by  five  years,  thus  meeting  its  original  two-to-eight-year  life 
span-it  was  launched o n  April  5 ,  1991. (CSM ,  Feb  23/94) 

NASA  announced  the  selection of  astronaut Kenneth  D. Cameron  to man-  
age NASA  operational  activities at Star  City, Russia, and a t  the  Russian con -  
trol center  a t  Kaliningrad.  (NA SA  Release 94-27)  

NASA's  Office of  Space Communications  announced   the   installation  of  a 
Video Teleconference  System facility at Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island, to  expand video  teleconferencing coverage to  Russia. T h e  installation 
supplemented  the   university's  existing  video  teleconferencing  capabilities 
with  the   Russian  Institute   of  Space  Research  in  Moscow.  T h e   new  facility 
allowed  NA SA   scientists  and   engineers  to   work  directly  with  Soviet 
researchers.  (NA SA  Release 94-28)  

Claude  Am a u d ,  professor of  medicine  a t   the  University  of  California, San 
Francisco,  in   a  paper  presented  to  t h e   national   meeting  of  the   American 
Association  for  the   Advancement   of  Science ,  stated  tha t   his  research  indi- 
cated  tha t   the  bone-weakening process experienced by  astronauts  in  space  as 
a  result  of  extended  weightlessness might  be  corrected  with  common   drugs 
tha t  prevented  calcium  loss.  (AP, Feb  23/94; UP,  Feb  23/94; USA  Today, Feb 
24/94; UPI, Feb  28/94) 

T h e   seven  astronauts  who  repaired  the   Hubble  Space  Telescope  in  
December  1993 were designated  recipients of  the  Freedom Forum's Free Spirit 
Award. I n   their  names,  $250,000 was  to  be  donated  to a scholarship fund for 
dependents of NA SA  employees. T h e  award ceremony occurred o n  March 28. 
(AP, Feb  23/94; AP, Mar  28/94; UP, Mar  28/94; USA Today, Mar  29/94) 

Februury  24: Spence  Armstrong, NASA  Associate  Administrator  for Human  
Resources,  stated  tha t   in  order  to  cu t   more  than   1,000  jobs  as  Congress 
ordered,  NASA   needed  to   offer  buyouts  to  staff.  To  restructure  the   Space 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN17  AERC INAL IT ICS  

FEBRUARY   1994 

S t a t i o n   Freedom  project ,   N A S A  had   t o   c u t   1 , 3 0 0  positions,  bu t   employees 
a t t r i t ion  of  only 600  t o  700 
were no t   leaving  in  normal  a t t r i t ion  numbers-an 
persons was  predicted  for  fiscal  1994 ,  without   buyouts.  N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  
Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   said  further   cuts   would  endanger   NASA's  en t i re   mission. 
T h e  Vice  President's "reinventing   government"   group  said N A S A   needed   t o  
accelerate   its  job  cuts  but   stick  with   a t t r i t ion   and   buyouts  rather   t h a n   reduc- 
tions  in  force. T h e  group offered n o  specifics as t o  positions N A S A  should  cu t .  
(Federal Times, Feb  24/94)  

Bernadette   Ca rdena s ,  a n  aerospace  engineer   a t   t h e  J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r ,  
Hou s ton ,  filed a civil  suit  against astronaut  Lt .  Co l .  Cha r le s  ( S am )  Gema r  and  
his wife  C h a r l e n e ,  also a N A S A   employee.  T h e  suit  claimed  t h e  Gema r s  had  
harassed  he r   mentally   and   physically;  Mrs.  Ca rdena s   wanted  t o   force  Col .  
Gema r  t o  submit  t o  blood  tests t o  establish paternity   for he r  two-year-old son .  
N A S A  said  t h e  lawsuit  would  n o t  prevent   Gemar's participation   in   t h e  fo r th -  
coming   shu t t le   mission.  (AP ,   Feh  24/94;  NY  Times,  Feb  25/94;  B  Sun ,   Feb 
25/94;  USA  Today, Feh  25/94)  

U .S .  astronauts   No rman   Thagard   a n d   Bonnie   Dunbar   arrived  in  Russia  t o  
begin  the i r  yearlong training .  T h e  training  was t o  stress physical cond i t ion ing ,  
essential  for  long-duration   space  flights  in  order   t o  coun te r   bone   a n d  muscle 
de te r io ra t ion .  T h e  astronauts   were  t o  wear  Russian  space  suits  bearing  b o t h  
Russian  and  U.S.  flags.  (AP ,  Feb  24/94; AP, Feb  28/94; UP, Feb  28/94)  

Ce leb ra t ing   Na t iona l   Engineers  Week ,   more  t h a n   20   engineers   from 
NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  C e n t e r  visited  classrooms  around   An te lope  
Valley  t o  discuss  the i r  careers.  (Antelope Valley  Press, Feb  24/94)  

February  25:  N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S .  Go ld in   announced   a  report   by 
t h e   G e n e r a l   Av ia t ion   Task  Force  of  NASA ' s   A e r o n a u t i c s   Advisory  
Comm i t tee .  T h e  report  of  t h e  industry-led task  force  called o n  N A S A  t o  revi- 
talize  its  general  aviation   program,  make  its  wind  tunnels ,   laboratories,  and  
simulators more  accessible  t o   t h e  general  aviation   community,  and   better   bal- 
ance  its technology  program  t o  meet  general  aviation  needs. T h e  four areas o n  
which   t h e   report  called  o n  N A S A   t o  concen t ra te  were: propulsion, noise, a n d  
emissions  work;  aeronautical   systems  research;  structure   a n d   materials  devel-  
opmen t ;  and  aerodynamics research.  ( N A S A  Release  94-29;  Wichita Eagle, Feb 
26/94)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   U .S .   componen t   of  t h e   G loba l   Geospace  
Sc ience   ( G G S )  program,  t h e   W ind   and   Polar  spacecraft,  would  experience  
launch   delays  t o   give  N A S A   a  c h a n c e  tn   exam ine   t h e  materials  and   process 
used  t o  build  two  power  subsystem e lec t ron ic  boxes o n  each  spacecraft similar 
in design t o  those  determined   t o  be  t h e  cause of  t h e  N O A A - 1 3  spacecraft fail- 
ure  in  1993.  T h e   decision  followed  a  G G S   techn ica l   review  a t   NASA's 

FEBRUARY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

Godda rd   Space   Flight  Cen te r ,   G r e e n b e l t ,   Maryland .   Instead   of  launches  
occurring   in  April   a n d  J u n e  1994 ,  they  probably  would  occur   in  t h e  n e x t   fis- 
cal  year.  ( N A S A  Release 94-30;  De fense   Da i ly ,  Mar  1 /94 )  

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h e   s e l e c t i o n   of  R a y t h e o n   S e r v i c e   C om p a n y ,  
Burlington ,   Massachusetts ,   t o   provide  logistics  support   t o   t h e   Mission 
Ope ra t ion   and   Llata  Systems Directorate  a t  t h e  Goddard   Space  Flight C e n t e r ,  
G reenbe l t ,  Maryland.  ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - h )  

February  2 8 :   T h e   countdown   began  for  t h e   liftoff  o n   Ma rch   3  of  S h u t t l e  
Columbia .  Columbia  was  scheduled  for a basic  14-day research  flight featuring 
materials  development   and  protein   crystal  growth  as  well  as  medical  experi- 
ments .   ( B  S u n ,  Feh  28/94; AP, Feb  28/94; UP, Feb 28/94; Reuters ,  Feb  28/94)  

N A S A  announced   t h e  add i t ion  of  Jerry M.  Linenger  t o   t h e  crew of  t h e  fall 
1994  flight  of  Space  S h u t t l e  Discovery. T h e  mission  of  this   flight  was  sched-  
uled  t o   be  comp lex ,   including   a  rende:vous,  proximity  operations ,   and   a 
spacewalk;  thu s   crew  operations   needed   t o   be  more  efficiently  distributed .  
( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 3  1 )  

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   Marshall   Space   Flight   C e n t e r ,   H u n t s v i l l e ,  
A labama ,  was  t o  develop  and  manufacture  a n  improved ,  lighter  version of  t h e  
Space  S h u t t l e  External  Tank .  T h e  Super  Lightweight  External  Tank  was  t o  be 
made of aluminum  alloys a n d  weigh  8 , 0 0 0  pounds  less t h a n   t h e  cu r ren t  model. 
( N A S A  Release  94 -32 ;  AP, Feh  28/94;  Defense  Da i ly ,  Mar  1 /94 )  

NASA's Lewis Research C e n t e r ,  C leve land ,  O h i o ,  announced   t h e  selection  
of  Robert   P.  Madison   In te rna t iona l   for  a n   engineering ,   con s t ruc t ion ,   a n d  
env i ronmen ta l   services  con t rac t   a t   t h e   Lewis  Research  C e n t e r   and   a t   Plum 
Brook  Scation ,   Sandusky,  O h i o .   ( N A S A  Release  C94 - i ;  Defense  Da i iy ,   Mar 
1 / 9 4 )  

A  ceremony   held   a t   NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Facility  marked  its 
return   t o  its former status  as a n  independen t  N A S A  center .  For  13  years  it was 
administered  by  NASA's Ames  Research  C e n t e r  in  Moffett  Field,  California ,  
a n d  designated  a  facility. K e n n e t h  J .  Szalai, formerly  deputy   director  of  Ame s  
Research  C e n t e r   for  Dryden ,   was  named   Dryden  director .   (A n t e l o p e   Va l ley  
Press, Mar   1 / 9 4 )  

February:  A  feature   article   o n   N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S .  Go ld in   and  
N A S A  described  t h e  Agency's ups and  downs  over   t h e  years.  It  cited  Goldin's 
man t ra   "smaller, faster,  cheaper"   but  said  NASA's real  problems  were  hudget-  
ing, con t rac t ing ,   p rocu remen t ,  a n d   financial   accoun t ing  systems.  T h e  article  
commended   NASA's  recent   cost   estimates   as  more  realistic  and   referred  t o  
Goldin's  push  t o   include   Russia  in   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   project   as  a  mean s   of  

ASTRONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS 

FEBRUARY  1994 

reduclng  costs.  Stressing  t h e   agency's financial  management  problems,  the  
article  pointed  out   tha t   NASA   still  lacked  a  chief  financial  officer,  which 
Congress  required.  T h e   article  lauded  the   success of  t h e  Hubble  rescue mis- 
sion  as a NASA   triumph  and  referred  to  o the r  Goldin  plans  such  as  focusing 
o n  Mission to  Planet  Earth  to monitor  the  Earth's environment  and   improv- 
ing aeronautical  research.  (Government Executive, Feb/94) 

NASA's appointment  of  France  Cordova  as  the  Agency's Senior Scientific 
Adviser, on  a three-year  leave of  absence  from Pennsylvania S ta te  University 
was  featured.  She  was  to  serve  as  the   principal  link between NASA   and   the  
science community  and ensure  tha t  NASA  programs were  regarded as scien- 
tifically and  technologically well-founded. S h e  was also t o  coordinate an  inte-  
grated strategic plan  for all t h e  scientific disciplines within NASA .   (The  Penn 
Stater ,  Fehl94) 

March 

March 2 :  NA SA  announced  the  postponement  of  the  launch  of Space Shu t t le  
Columbia  until  March  4  because  of  a  severe  storm.  (AP, Mar  2/94;  Reuters, 
Mar  2/94; NY  Xrnes ,   Mar 3/94; P Inq, Mar  3/94; USA  Today, Mar  3/94)  

Clementine   spacecraft,  launched  January  25  from  Vandenberg  Air   Force 
Base,  California ,  took  just  released  high-resolution  color photographs  of  the  
Moon .  T h e  purposes of  the   spacecraft were  t o  test  anti-missile military  tech-  
nology  and   explore  space. Reportedly,  t h e   pictures,  which  were  available  t o  
the  public, were of  high quality and t h e  cost of  the  program was relatively  low. 
(Reuters, Mar 2/94; W Times, Mar  20194) 

Businessman James Robertson  of James M .  Beggs Associates consulting firm 
of  Arlington ,   Virginia,  pleaded  guilty  to   accepting  inside  bid  information 
involving  NASA   contracts  a t   Johnson   Space  Center ,   Houston.  (AP,  Mar 
2/94) 

March  3:  NASA   announced   the   selection  of  a  system  to   control   microbial 
contamination   in  drinking  water  as  bo th   the  NASA   1993 Invention   of  the  
Year and t h e  NASA   1993 Commercial Invention  of  the  Year. NA SA  Johnson  
Space  Center ,   Houston,  Deputy  Chief  of  the   Biomedical  Operations   and  
Research  Branch  Richard  L.  Sauer  developed  t h e   system  together  with 
Gerald  V.  Colombo  and  Clifford  D.  Jolly  of  Umpqua  Research  Company, 
Myrtle Creek, Oregon. T h e  process had applications for long-term space flight 
as well  as commercial  use  in developing  nations  particularly.  (NA SA  Release 
94-33)  

NASA   announced   tha t   transmission  of  data   from Galileo  spacecraft  indi-  
cated its observation  of what was probably a satellite of  the  asteroid  Ida, which 
would  be  t h e  first Moon of  a n  asteroid  ever sighted. T h e  flyby of  Ida occurred 
August  28,  1993. (NA SA  Release 94-34; AP, Mar 4/94)  

March 4:  Preparations  for  the   launch ,  the   launch  itself, and  experiments con -  
ducted  aboard  the   Space Shu t t le  Columbia  received  extensive media  cover-  
age. Fueling began  the  morning of  March 4 prior  to  the  crew's boarding.  T h e  
mission commander  and   the  pilot  wore  newly  devised  long  johns  with  tubes 
tha t   plugged in to  water  pumps  to  keep  them   cool while  awaiting takeoff  and  
during  reentry. Most  of  the  major  experiments were  to  he  operated  from  the  
ground  so  tha t   the   astronauts  could  concern   themselves  with  medical  tests, 
some mechanical structures, and observation of  the  12 rats used  in  a bone  den -  
sity  study. O n  March  5, one   of  Columbia's three   auxiliary  power  units  regis- 
tered  a n   unusually  high  pressure  reading,  causing  concern;   the   readings 
returned  to normal when  the  crew switched to  o the r  heaters.  It developed tha t  
t h e  high  pressure  apparently resulted  from an   ice  buildup  in  one  of  t h e  auxil- 
485 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AND  A ERONAU T IC S  

M A R C H   1994 

iary  power  units.  Meanwhile, several  articles  expressed  concern   tha t   budget 
cuts  endangered  the   safety  of  NASA   flights,  but   NASA   Administrator 
Daniel S. Goldin  denied this  was true. As t h e  space flight ~ rog ressed ,  two crew 
members  a t   a  time  took  turns  in  taking  four  hours  off  duty  in  view  of  the  
lengthy  nature  of  the  mission. ( W  Post, Mar 4/94; AP, Mar 4/94; UP, Mar 4/94; 
Reuters, Mar 4/94; W Times, Mar 5/94; M Xmes, Mar 5/94; W Post, Mar 5/94; 
B Sun, Mar 5/94; P lnq, Mar 5/94; W Times, Mar 6/94; W Post, Mar 6/94; P Inq ,  
Mar 6/94; Daily  News, Mar 6/94; UP, Mar 6/94; Reuters, Mar 6/94; NY  Xrnes, 
Mar  7/94;  AP,  Mar  7/94; UP,  Mar  7/94;  Reuters,  Mar  7/94; NY Times,  Mar 
8/94; CSM ,  Mar 8/94; W Post, Mar 8/94; C  Tnb, Mar 8/94; Reuters, Mar 8/94; 
AP, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar  9/94)  

O n e  of  the   major  experiments  conducted  o n  Columbia  involved  growing 
crystals,  which  had   many  potential   commercial  and   medical  applications. 
However, results to  date  were no t  promising and  caused criticism  of  expendi- 
tures  involved.  (Fla Today, Mar 4/94)  

March 7: NASA  announced  tha t  the  second mission of  its Small Expendable- 
tether   Deployer  System  (SEDS-2) was  scheduled  for  launching  from  a  U.S. 
Air   Force  Delta  I 1  rocket  no  sooner  than  March  9  from Cape  Canaveral  A i r  
Force Station ,  Florida. T h e  project  was designed  to  demonstrate  an  economi- 
cal  way  of  delivering  smaller  payloads,  such  as  micro-satellites,  to   higher 
orbits.  (NA SA  Release 94 -35 )  

NASA   announced  tha t   its  Office  of  Safety  and   Mission  Assurance, 
Washington,  DC, was  to  receive  valuable  data   from a  flight  test  in J u n e  of  a 
new  laser-diode initiated  ordnance  system o n  Orbital  Sciences Corporation's 
Pegasus air-launch space booster. (T h e  in ten t  is  tha t  space flight operations be 
safer and more efficient  than  with present  electrical  systems.) (NASA  Release 
94-36)  

Following  a  protest  ruling  in  its  favor,  Recom  Technologies,  San   Jose, 
Ca l i fo rn ia ,   received  payment   for  its  Compu ta t iona l ,   Adm in is t ra t ive ,  
Professional, and Engineering  Services contract  with NASA's  Lewis Research 
Center.  (Federal Computer Week, Mar  7/94)  

March 8: NASA  announced  tha t   it and  t h e  Department of Defense had  insti- 
tuted policies to standardize requirements  so as  to  improve the  quality of con -  
tractor*delivered products  to  both  agencies.  (NA SA  Release 94-37)  

George  Brown,  Democrat  from  California  and  chairman   of  the   House  of 
Representatives  Science  Committee ,   told  the   seven-member Space  Shu t t le  
crew tha t   repaired  the  Hubble Space Telescope in September  1993, tha t  their  
successful mission would  help  restore support  for the  space program.  (Reuters, 
Mar 8/94; 0 Sun, Mar 9/94)  

MARCH   1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

A  Federal grand  jury  indicted  Ram  Bachan  Ram, chairman   of  the   mathe-  
matics  department   a t   Hampton  University,  o n   seven  counts   of  mail  fraud 
related  to   alleged plagiarism  in  submitting  a  proposal  for  a  research  grant   t o  
NASA .  T h e  proposal concerned "Implications of  Pressure Diffusion for Shock  
Waves,"  and  for  it  Ram  received  $100,810  from  NASA's Langley  Research 
Center .  However, it  developed  tha t  Ram had  stolen the  proposal and findings 
from  the   work  of  a  professor  a t   Clemson  University  in  Sou th   Carolina. 
(Virginia Pilot, Mar 9/94)  

March  9:  NASA   announced  the  scheduled  delivery o n  March  24 of  a Boeing 
757-200 aircraft to  serve as a "flying laboratory" for aeronautical research. T h e  
research  was  intended  to   benefit  the   U.S.  aviation  industry  and  commercial 
airline customers.  (NA SA  Release 94 -39 )  

NASA   announced   tha t   Space  Shu t t le   Endeavour  was  t o   be  launched  in 
April  to  study  Earth's  global environment .   T h e  Space  Radar  Laboratory  was 
to   consist  of  t h e   Spaceborne  Imaging  Radar-C/X-Band  Synthetic   Aperture 
Radar  and   the  Measurement  of  Air  Pollution  from  Satellite .  Of  these  instru- 
ments,  t h e   German   Space Agency  (DARA )  and  the   ltalian   Space  Agency 
(AS I )  were  to   provide  t h e   X-Band  Syn the t ic  Aperture  Radar.  A n   in tema -  
tional  team  of  49  science  investigators  from  13 nations  were  to  conduct  the  
experiments.  In   addition,  the   mission  was  to   include  NASA's  G e t   Away 
Special  experiments  tha t   allow  average persons  a  chance   to   perform  experi- 
ments  in  space;  it  was  also  to  be  the   first  cooperative  initiative  with  the  
National  Institutes  of  Health   using  a  special  cell  culture  system.  (NA SA  
Release 94-38)  

A n  Air   Force Delta  2  rocket  blasted  into  orbit  carrying  the   final advanced 
satellite  in  the   U.S.  military's Global  Positioning  System, Navstar.  Delta  2 
also carried NASA's experiment  to test a space tether   12.5 miles long to deter-  
mine how  long  it  survived  in  orbit  among  space  junk.  T h e  tether   could  ulti- 
mately be  used  for various purposes  such  as generating electricity or  changing 
spacecraft  altitudes.  (Reuters, Mar  9/94; U&  Mar  9/94; AP,  Mar  10194; NY 
Times, Mar  11/94; NY  Times, Mar  15/94) 

As  the   astronauts  aboard  Space  Shuttle   Columbia  neared  and   passed  the  
halfway  point  of  their  mission,  they   continued   medical  and  metal  research 
experiments,  growth  studies  with  protein  crystals,  and  physical  exercises. 
Lettuce and  other  seeds flown o n  Columbia were  to  be  planted  after  the   shut-  
tle  returned and t h e n  tested. Apart  from the  desire for a hot   shower, the  astro- 
nauts had  n o  complaints and hoped  they  might  break  the  U.S. record of  time 
in space flight. T h e  study of  spacecraft glow on  March  12 experienced  difficul- 
ty when  the  ultraviolet  light  detector malfunctioned.  O n  March  14 ,  the  astro- 
nauts began tests of  a robot  arm targeting system. On March  17, the  astronauts 
started  packing  up  experiments  in  preparation  for  landing  the   following day. 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MARCH   1994 

Columbia  landed uneventfully o n  March  18, having completed  223 orbits over 
5.8 million miles.  (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar  10194; AP, Mar  10194; Reuters, 
Mar  10194; Reuters,  Mar  1 1/94; AP,  Mar  11/94; UP,  Mar  11/94;  Sun, Mar 
12/94; W Post, Mar  12/94; NY  Times, Mar  12/94; Reuters, Mar  12/94; W Times, 
Mar  12/94; LA  Times, Mar  13/94; B  Sun, Mar  13/94; Reuters, Mar  13/94; UP, 
Mar  13/94; B  Sun, Mar  14/94; P Iy, Mar  14/94; USA  Today,  Mar  14/94; AP, 
Mar  14/94; UP, Mar  14/94; AP, Mar  15/94; Reuters, Mar  15/94; UP, Mar  15/94; 
W Post, Mar  16/94; AP, Mar  16/94; C Tnb, Mar  16/94; USA  Today, Mar  17/94; 
W Times, Mar  17/94; AP, Mar  17/94; UP, Mar  17/94; Reuters, Mar  17/94; UP, 
Mar  18/94; AP, Mar  18/94; Reuters, Mar  18/94; B  Sun, Mar  19/94; NY Xmes ,  
Mar  19/94; W Times, Mar  19/94; W Post, Mar  19/94; USA  Today, Mar 21/94) 

March  10: T h e  government announced  tha t  i t  would allow companies  to mar- 
ket  sophisticated  spy  satellite  technology  worldwide. U .S .   firms  could  build 
and   operate  f o r - ~ r o f i t  satellite  systems powerful  enough  t o   take 
from 22,300 miles above  the  Earth  and show objects o n  the  ground as  small as 
one  square yard. (NY Ttmes, Mar  11/94; USA  Today, Mar  11/94; W Post, Mar 
11/94; WSJ, Mar  11/94)  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   addressed  the   National   Space 
Society's conference and  challenged  the   space community  t o  define  the  U.S. 
role  in  space. H e  expressed frustration at  repeated  congressional efforts to k i l l  
the  planned  International  Space Station .   (Fla Today, Mar  11/94) 

March  13:  NASA   budget  cuts  and  various  problems  experienced  in  recent  
flights aroused concern  for  the  safety  of  astronauts,  according  to  NASA   crit- 
ics.  Despite  assurances by  Daniel  Mulville,  Director  of  NASA's  Engineering 
and  Quality  Management  Division  tha t   standards  were  not   compromised, 
fears of  another  Challenger  type disaster persisted. (AP, Mar  13/94; P Jnq, Mar 
14/94; LA  Times, Mar  20194; Fla  Today, Mar  24/94) 

Orbital  Sciences Corporation  launched  the  Taurus rocket  from Vandenberg 
Air  Force  Base, California,   lacing  two military  satellites  into  orbit.  (C Trib, 
Mar  14/94; W Post, Mar  15/94)  

Ten   Louisiana  colleges  were  scheduled   t o   benefit   from  NASA's 
Experimental  Program  to  Stimulate Competitive  Research. They  were  select- 
ed  for  a  three-year award  of  up  t o  $500,000,  which  must  be  matched  by  the  
Louisiana  Educational  Quality   Support  Fund.  T h e   funds  were  designed  to  
enable states to  develop an  academic research enterprise directed toward long- 
term  capability  in  space  science  and  applications,  aeronautical  and  space 
research,  and  technology  programs.  (Picayune ,  Mar  13/94)  

March  14: NASA  announced  the  selection by  its NASA-industry  team of  two 
engine  cycle concepts  o n  which  to  focus  the   next  three  years  of  propulsion 

MARCH  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

research  for a next-generation   supersonic  airliner. T h e  two  concepts-"m~xed  
flow  turbofan"  and   " F L A D E   (fan-on-blade)-were 
designed  t o   be  env i ron -  
mentally   compatible   and   economically  practical .   ( N A S A  Release  94-41  ) 

N A S A   announced   t h e   open ing   of  a  new,  remote   ground   s ta t ion   in 
Tidbinbilla,  Australia ,   called  t h e   G amm a   Ray  Observatory   ( G R O )  Remote  
Terminal  System .  T h e  s ta t ion  was  t o  receive scientific da ta  from  t h e  C om p t o n  
GRO via  a  Tracking   and   Data   Relay  Satellite   t h a t   \vas  moved  i n t ~  position  
over   t h e  Ind ian  Ocean .   ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 4 2 )  

N A S A  announced  t h a t   its Office  of  Space  Conlmuniciltions ,  Headquarters ,  
Wa sh ing ton ,  DC, was  initiating  a n  opportunity   for  private  industry  t o  conduc t  
experiments   of  future  telecommunications   technologies   via  t h e   Tracking  a n d  
Data   Relay  Satellite   System  (TDRSS ) .  Called   t h e   Mobile  Sa tcom   TDRSS  
(M O S T )  Experiment  Program,  it  was  designed  tcl  e n h a n c e  U.S.  competitive-  
ness  in   t h e  global  satellite  telecommunications   area.  ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 4 3 )  

March  15: Volodymyr  Go rbu l in ,  head   of  Ukraine's space  agency,  aypc:iled  t o  
t h e   West   for  full  space  research  cooperation   to  save  Ukraine's   aeronautics 
industry  from  collapse. Go rbu l in   expressed  d i sappo in tmen t   t h a t   NA SA   offi- 
cials  had   refused  t o  discuss  joint  space  con s t ruc t ion   a t   talks  in  Kiev  t h e   fol- 
lowing week because Uk ra ine  had  n o t  yet  signed  in te rna t iona l   ;Igreements o n  
proliferation  of  advanced   rocket  technology.  (Reuters ,  Mar  15 /04 )  

Russia's  Interfax  news  agency  reported   t h a t   t h e   previous  week  a  fire  had  
destroyed  a  con t ro l   facility  a t   t h e   Baikonur  cosmodrome   in  Kazakhstan. 
Experts s ta ted ,  however,  t h a t  launches  would n o t  he  affected. (AP ,  Mar  15 /94 )  

N A S A  Space  S h u t t l e  Director  Tom U t s ~ n a n  announced  NASA's  i n t e n t   t o  
accomplish   all  major   modification   work  o n   t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   fleet  a t  
Rockwell  International's  facility  in  Palmdale ,  California .  T h e  decision  result- 
ed   from  expand ing   requirements   associated  with   t h e   Russian  cooperative  
effort,  t h e   ability  t o   support  future   operations   of  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  
S t a t i o n ,  a n d   t h e  desire  t o  c o n t i n u e  t o  prelaunch   process  t h e   S h u t t l e  orhitcrs  
for  flight  a t   t h e   Kennedy   Space   C e n t e r ,   Florida.  ( N A S A   Releasc  94 -44 ;  
Antelope  ValLy  Daily  News,  Ma r   16/94; Antelope Valley  Press, Mar  16/94; Fla 
Today, Mar  19/94;  AetWk, Mar  21/94) 

Nava l  Academy  graduate  Wendy  B.  Lawrence was scheduled  to  f l y  o n  Space  
S h u t t l e   Columbia   in   December.  A f te r   ea rn ing   a  master's  degree  in  ocean  
engineering   a t   Massachusetts  In s t i tu te   of  Technology,  she   taught   physics  a t  
t h e  Nava l  Academy.  (Capitol, Mar   1 5 / 9 4 )  

March  16:  D iane   Farrar  of  NASA's  Ame s   Research  C e n t e r ,   Moffett  Field, 
C a l i f o r n i a ,   s t a t e d   t h a t   N A S A ,   t h e   N a t i o n a l   O c e a n i c   A t n l o s p h e r i c  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MARCH   1994 

Adm in i s t ra t ion ,   a n d   t h e   Na t iona l   Sc ience   Foundation   were  conduc t ing   a n  
e igh t -mon th   airborne   study  of  t h e   An ta rc t ic   ozone  hole   and   its  possible 
effects. T h e  study, wh ich  was  t o  use h igh -a l t i tude  ER-2 N A S A   aircraft, was  t o  
he  based  in  Hawaii and  New  Zealand. T h i s  was  t h e  first NASA-sponsored   air- 
borne  study  of  t h e   sou the rn  polar  region  since   t h e   1987 campaign   t h a t   c o n -  
firmed chlorofluorocarbons  were  t h e  primary  cause of' ozone destruction .   (UP ,  
Mar  16/94)  

March  17: N A S A   announced   tha t   t h e   System  Design  Review  (SDR )  for  t h e  
ln te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n  program  was  t o   be  held  March   23  and   24  a t   t h e  
J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r ,  Houston .   T h e  following  were  t o   be  present:   N A S A  
managers  and   those   from  t h e  C a n a d i a n   Space  Agency,  t h e  European   Space  
Agency,  t h e   Italian   Space   Agency,  t h e   Japanese  Space   Agency,  t h e   Russian 
Space   Agency,  t h e   prime   con t rac to r   Boeing,  and   Tier  1  subcontractors  
Rocketdyne  and  McDonne l l  Douglas. Randy  Brinkley, Space  S t a t i o n  Program 
Manager ,  said  t h e   SL3R  alas  scheduled  to  "lock  in  t h e   key  techn ica l  elements  
of  t h e  system  as  well  as  t h e  schedule  and   cost."  ( N A S A  Release  94 -45 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   i n  cooperation   with   t h e  C iv i l   Air   Patrol   a n d   t h e  
Federal Aviation  Adm in i s t ra t ion  it was hosting  a na t iona l  conference  for edu -  
cators   o n   "Aviation   and   Space   Education:  America's  Leading  Edge"  in 
Norfolk ,  Virginia, April   6-9 .   ( N A S A  Release 94-46)  

N A S A   announced   t h e  selection  of  Kathryn  C. T h o r n t o n  and  C a t h e r i n e  G. 
C o l em a n   for  t h e   16-day  M ic rng rav~ ty  Laboratory  mission  scheduled  for 
launch   in  t h e   fall  of  1995  aboard  Space   S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia .   ( N A S A  Release 
94 -47 )  

March  18: T h e  Un i ted   S ta te s ,  C a n a d a ,  Japan ,  and   t h e  European  Pa r tne r  met  
in   Paris  with   officials  of  t h e   Russian  Federation   for  t h e   first  t ime   t o   discuss 
steps  t o  implement   t h e   decision  t o  bring  Russia  i n t o   t h e  Space   S t a t i o n  pa r t -  
nership .   T h e   resulting  joint  s ta temen t   referred  t o  Russia's p lanned   con t r ibu -  
t ion ,   enhanc ing   S t a t i o n  capabilities ,  needed   changes   t o   t h e   legal  framework 
of  t h e   1988  agreements  t o  include  Russia, and  a schedule  t o  complete   negoti-  
ations ,   beginning  with   a n  April   meeting .   ( N A S A  Editor's N o t e  N 9 4 - 2 3 )  

NASA's Dryden  Flight Research  Cen te r ' s  Western  Aeronautical   Test Range  
passed  a  milestone   o n   March   18:  t h e   10 ,000 th   mission  monitored   hy  t h e  
range.  I n  this  case  it  was NASA's F-18 High  A l p h a  Research  Vehicle's second  
flight  of  t h e  day. (Antelope Va l ley   Press,Mar  19/94) 

March  19: U .S .   Defense  Secretary  William   Perry  arrived  in  Kazakhstan  from 
Russia. O n  Ma rch  20 ,  h e  visited  t h e  formerly  super-secret Baikonur  space c e n -  
ter.  He   saw  a  Soyuz  space  rocket   belng  readied  for  a n   unmanned   mission  t o  
Russia's  Mir  Space   S t a t i o n   and   t h e   former  Sov ie t   Un ion ' s  grounded  Space  

hl.4RC:H  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

S h u t t l e   rockets.  Baikonur  h a d   launched   more  t h a n   twice  t h e   453   space 
launches  of  C a p e  Canave ra l  since   1957 .  Bob C la rke ,  a N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  
who   accompanied   Perry,  no ted   t h a t   ,ground  crews  for  Soyuz-manned   flights  
could  prepare  t h e  pad  for  a  new  launch   o n l y  six hours   after  o n e  capsule  took  
off  whereas  t h e   C a p e  Canave ra l   tu rn -a round   time   uras o n e  m o n t h .  Admiral  
William   Owen s ,  vice  cha i rman  of  t h e  U .S .   J o i n t  Chiefs  of  Staff ,  marveled  a t  
the  workmanship   of  t h e   welds  o n   t h e   Soyuz  rocket  being  readied .   (Reuters ,  
Mar  19/94;  AP, Mar  20194; Reuters, Mar   20194; W Post, Mar  2 1/94; NY Xmes, 
Mar   21/94; Moscow Times, Mar   22/94) 

March  2 1 :   Jack   Anderson's  column   conce rned   t h e   probe   by  t h e   Office  of 
Special   Investigations   (O S I )   of  N A S A   Inspector  Gene ra l   Bill  C o l v i n   for 
alleged  serious misconduct .  Two OSI  investigators  reportedly  began  t h e  probe  
in   late   1992 .   T h e   investigation   cen te red   o n   whe the r   C o l v i n   had   lost  t h e  
independence  necessary for a watchdog  by  becoming  t o o  friendly with  N A S A  
executives.  ( W  Pos t ,   Mar  21/94) 

N A S A  announced  t h e  selection  of  two Winston-Salem  S t a t e  University  fac- 
ulty  members  t o  participate   in  t h e   NASA/University   J o i n t  Venture   Program 
( JOVE ) .  T h e   program  enabled   faculty  and   students   t o   become  in\7olved  in 
space science  research. N A S A  was  t o  invest  $138 ,000  over  th ree  years  t o  sup- 
port  Winston-Salem   State's program  participation .  A s  part of  t h e  program, two 
faculty  members  would  spend  10  weeks  in   t h e  summer of  1994  at N A S A  Field 
Cen te r s  being  "mentored"  by  N A S A   scientists.  ( N A S A  Release 94 -48 )  

A n  A i r   Force  panel   was  completing   t h e   space  launch  modernization   study 
manda ted   by  Congress;  and   t h e   W h i t e   House   Office   of  Sc ience   a n d  
Technology  Policy  was preparing  recommendations   o n  vehicle  developments .  
T h e   trade  Aviation  Week  B  Space  Technolop  
advocated   t h e  
Un i ted   S ta te s '  developing   a mode rn   expendable   launch   vehicle   with   money 
b o t h   from  gove rnmen t  and   industry.  T h e  n e x t  s tep ,  which   would  need   multi-  
billion-dollar  investment ,   would  require  "leapfrog  technology"  such  as   t h e  use 
of propulsion,  and  could benefit  from cooperation  with   t h e  Commonwea l th   of 
Independen t   S ta te s .  (AelWk, Mar   21/94)  

N A S A  encountered  difficulties  in  its desire  t o  deliver planetary  video da ta   t o  
microcomputer  users because of  t h e  limitations  of  t h e  technology. Mike Martin ,  
a  science  data   systems technologist  with  NASA's J e t  Propulsic>n Laboratory  in 
Pasadena, California,  said  t h a t  so far h e  and   his  colleagues  had   been  unable  t o  
incorporate  Apple  QuickTime   video  in to   multimedia  presentations  to   run  o n  
t h e  Macintosh  and  multimedia  PCs.  (Government Computer News, Mar  21/94) 

March 2 2 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t  Jack  Farmer,  a paleontologist  and  geologist 
a t  Ame s  Research  C e n t e r ,  Moffett  Field,  California ,  had  developed   a strategy 
t o  search   for  microfossils  o n   t h e   p lane t   Mars.  Farmer  presented   his  strategy, 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MARC13  1994 

which  was based  o n  principles of  Precambrian  paleontology, a t  t h e  Geological  
Society  Meeting   of  America   in  S a n  Bernardino ,  California .   ( N A S A  Release 
9 4 - 4 9 )  

Franklin  Chang-Diaz,  a  Costa  Rican   immigrant  t o   t h e   Un i ted   States ,  
addressed t h e  National   Hispanic University mathematics  and  science convoca-  
tion   in  S a n  Jose t o  tell  Hispanic  students  how  he   became  t h e  first Hispanic  in 
space. He  flew with  t h e  N A S A  five-person crew with  Russian cosmonaut  Sergei 
Krikalev o n  Shu t t le  Discovery in February.  (San Jose Mercury News,  Mar  22/94) 

March  23:  N A S A   showed  photographs   taken   by Galileo   spacecraft  revealing 
for  t h e  first  t ime  a n  asteroid  orbited   by  its own  moon .  NASA's J e t  Propulsion 
Laboratory  released  t h e   pho to s   of  asteroid  Ida .   ( N A S A   Release  94-50;  
Reuters ,   Mar  23/94;  P  lnq ,   Mar  24/94;  LA  Times,  Mar  24/94;  W  Post,  Mar 
24/94;  LISA  Today, b la r   24/94;  NY  Times,  Mar   24/94)  

A n   independen t   safety  review  panel   said  NASA's  Space   S h u t t l e   fleet 
urgently  needed   a  safer  fuel  pump   a n d   feared  t h a t   con t inued   job  cuts   a t  
Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  would  endanger  astronauts .  T h e  panel   also  advocated  
t h e  need   for more  specific  plans  t o  avoid  crashing   i n t o  orbiting   "space  junk" 
as  well  as  t h e  need   t o  finalize  a  quick-escape  system  for Space  S t a t i o n  astro- 
nauts .   (H  Post, Mar  24/94) 

A  congressional  report ,   based  o n  a  House  Subcomm i t tee  o n  Space   tour   of 
t h e   European  and   Rusaian  space  communities ,   said  Europeans  were  tired  of 
U .S .  changes   in  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n  project  a n d  unce r ta in   about  
U.S. plans  t o   take  Russia  in  as  a  full  partner.  T h e   report   also  expressed  c o n -  
ce rn  about   how  well  Russia could   support  its part  of  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  agree- 
men t .   (AP ,  Mar  23/94)  

NASA   announced   t h e  signing of  a memorandum  of  understanding  with   t h e  
Commission   for  Space   Ac t iv i t ie s   of  t h e   Federative   Republic   of  Brazil 
(COBAE ) .  T h e   two  parties  were  t o   conduct   a  sounding  rocket  campaign  in  
Brazil  from July through  October   1994  t o   investigate  t h e  electrodynamics  and  
irregulartties  in  the   ionosphere  and  mesosphere  along  t h e   Earth's  magnetic 
equator   and   study  their   relationship  with  the   neutral  atmosphere  a n d   winds. 
NA SA   was  to   launch ,   with  t h e   support  of  COBAE ,   33  rockets  from  t h e   new 
Brazilian  launch   range,  C e n t r o   de  L a n ~ a m e n t o s  d e   A l c h t a r a   in   M a r a n h ~ o .  
Brazilian scientific participation  was t o  be coordinated  by  t h e  Instituto  Nacional 
de   Pesquisas Espaciais ( INPE )  and  was  t o  be  named   the  Guara  Campaign  after 
a  hird  native   t o  t h e  equatorial  region  of  Brazil.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -51 )  

N A S A  announced  t h e  selection  of  55  researchers  t o  receive  two-year grants  
t o   conduc t   microgravity  research.  A n n u a l   funding   of  e a c h   proposal  was 
approximately   $50,000,  for  a n   overall  total   of  more  t h a n   $5.6  million .  

MARCH  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

Proposals selected were  24  in fluid physics,  26  in materials  science, and  six  in 
fundamental  physics. T h e  goal was  to  explore new  ideas about  the   influence 
of gravity on  physical and chemical processes tha t  might  improve Earth-based 
production methods  and materials.  (NA SA  Release 94-52)  

NASA   announced   the   completion  of  the   International   Space  S ta t ion  
System  Design  Review.  Using  approximately  75  percent  of  Space  S ta t ion  
Freedom  hardware,  the   completed  S ta t ion   was  to   consist  of  U.S.  elements, 
including the   integrated  truss, habitation  module,  and  laboratory module;  t h e  
Russian science power  platform,  service  module,  and  functional  cargo  block 
vehicle  (FGB);   the   European  laboratory  module;  the   Japanese  experiment 
module  and  exposed  facility;  and  the   Canadian   remote  manipulator  system. 
T h e   assembly  was  to  begin  with  launch   of  the   FGB  vehicle  in  November 
1997. T h e  U.S.  contribution   to   t h e  S ta t ion  was  estimated  to  cost  $17.4  bil- 
lion  from  fiscal year  1994 until  assembly was  complete  in  2002. T h e  ground 
system  for  the   Station   was  to  build  o n   t h e   Shu t t le   and   Freedom  programs. 
(NASA  Release 94-53; USA  Today, Mar 25/94; W Xrnes, Mar  25/94; AP, Mar 
25/94; Antelope Valley  Press, Mar  26/94) 

T h e  Congressional Budget Office (CBO )  in  its report  faulted NASA's  effort 
t o  fit  a  program  p o j e c t e d   in   the   late  1990s to   cost  more  t h a n   $20  billion  a 
year  into   an   annual   budget  of  $14  billion.  T h e  CBO  said  such  effort  risked 
delay  and failure, and  the  CBO  offered t h e  alternative  of  grounding the  astro- 
nauts and ending  the  Space Shu t t le  program. Specifically, the  report  proposed 
one  of  t h e  following: ending costly piloted  space flight, concentrating   instead 
o n   robot  aircraft  and   new  technology  for  industry;  emphasizing  a  roboting 
spacecraft  and  conducting  only  four  instead  of  eight  Space  Shu t t le  flights  a 
year;  concentrating   o n   piloted  space  flight,  building  the   Space  S ta t ion   and  
planning  for manned  missions to  the  Moon  and Mars, limiting robot  missions 
to  pathfinder  projects  for  the   Moon-Mars  effort.  NASA   Administrator 
Daniel  S. Goldin  said  NASA   would  not   back  away  from  the  administration's 
balanced  aeronautics and space program. H e  added  tha t  any of  the  three CBO  
alternatives  would  destroy  tha t   balance  and   tha t   NASA   could  accomplish 
daring and  difficult missions o n  a tight budget.  (NA SA  Editor's No te  N94-27;  
B  Sun, Mar  25/94;  W  'Times, Mar  25/94;  P  Inq,  Mar  25/94;  NY  Tmes,  Mar 
25/94; 0 Sen  Star, Mar  25/94; W  Post,  Mar  25/94; AP,  Mar  25/94; LA  Daily 
News,  Mar  27/94; Federal Computer Week, Mar  28/94; 0 Sen Star, Mar 3 1/94)  

James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and  ranking member  of 
the   House  Space  Subcommittee,  wrote  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. 
Goldin  requesting  information about U .S .  dependence o n  Russia, payments t o  
the   Russian  government,  cost  constraints  o n   the   Space  S ta t ion   in   view  of 
NASA's  tight  budget,  and  financial  agreements  with  S ta t ion   international  
partners.  He  expressed reservations  over  t h e  decision  t o  move  the  S ta t ion   to  
a higher orbital  inclination  a t  the  Russian  request and  expressed the  fear tha t  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1994 

t h e  agreement  with  Russia was  negotiated   from  a position  of  U .S .  vulnerabil-  
ity  because  of  budgetary  limits.  (Defense Daily ,  A p r   1 /94 )  

March  24:  Six   astronauts   wen t   th rough   a  coun tdown   drill  aboard  S h u t t l e  
Endeavour,  and   N A S A   set   t h e  da te   of  Ap r i l   7  for  t h e   spaceship's  launch   o n  
a n  env i ronmen ta l   research  mission.  (Reuters ,  Mar   24/94)  

A n  unmanned   cargo  craft  bearing  food,  fuel,  and   equ ipmen t  docked   with  
Russia's Mir  Space  S t a t i o n  according  t o  Itar-Tass news  agency.  (Reuters ,  Mar 
24/94) 

March  25:  Former N A S A  Space  S t a t i o n  Director  Richard  Kohrs was  a mem-  
ber  of  a  team   t o   revamp   t h e   Cassini   mission  for  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory.  N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   also  con tac ted   h im ,  
reportedly  asking  t h a t   h e   look  a t   t h e   troubled  Space   S t a t i o n   program.  (SP  
News, Mar  28 -Ap r  3 /94 )  

Eric  Glomboske ,   a n   1 1 t h  grader  a t   Highland   H igh   Schoo l ,  was  o n e   of  10  
reg iona l   w inne r s  
in  
t h e   NASA - s p o n s o r e d   S p a c e   S c i e n c e   S t u d e n t  
Invo lvemen t  Program.  To  compete ,   Eric  designed,  p lanned ,   a n d  mapped  o u t  
a h um a n  journey  t o  Mars.  (Antelope Valley  Press, Mar   25/94)  

Ma rch   28:   GO E S - 8 ,  a  s o p h i s t i c a t e d  w e a t h e r   s a t e l l i t e ,  was  t h e  first   of  five  
a d v a n c e d   GO E S -N EX T   sa te l l i te s   s c h e d u l e d  t o  be   dep loyed   by  2003 .  T h e  
N a t i o n a l   O c e a n i c  a n d  A tm o s p h e r i c  A dm i n i s t r a t i o n  managed   t h e  G O E S  
program   b u t   e n g i n e e r s   a t   NASA's  G o d d a r d   S p a c e  F l igh t   C e n t e r  oversaw  
d e v e l o pm e n t   of  t h e   spacec ra f t .   T h e s e   e n g i n e e r s   rede s igned   w e a t h e r  
i n s t r um e n t s   used  by  p o l a r - o r b i t i n g  w e a t h e r   sa te l l i te s   t h a t   flew  5 0 0  miles  
h i g h   t o  o p e r a t e   i n s t e a d  a t   22 ,300  miles   h i g h .  T h e  system   h a d  vast   p o t e n -  
t ia l   bene f i t   for  f i re f igh te r s ,  fa rme r s ,  m a r i n e   a n d   a v i a t i o n   n a v i g a t o r s ,   a n d  
o t h e r s   t h r o u g h   imp rov ing   t h e   accu racy   of  w e a t h e r   fo reca s t ing .   ( W  Post ,  
M a r   2 8 / 9 4 )  

In  connec t ion  w i th   its Ap r i l  mission, Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  was  t o  carry 
a radar  imaging experiment   t h a t  would  collect  d a t a  o n  surface  tex tu re   in  sev-  
eral  areas of  t h e  globe ,  including  California's Mojave  Desert and  Dea th  Valley. 
T h e  movemen t  of  sand  was determined   by  a complex   interrelationship   among  
wind  velocity,  wind  intensity ,   and   t h e   surface  texture   of   t h e   ground .   Diane  
Evans,  a  geologist  a t   NASA's   J e t   Propulsion   Laboratory  in   Pasadena ,  
California ,  explained  t h a t   if  t h e  experiment  works well  it  might  become  a per-  
m a n e n t   part   of  NASA's comprehensive   study  of  global  change .   T h e  experi-  
men t   also  was  t o  study  vegetation   around   t h e  world;  in  order   t o  see  as much  
of  t h e  Earth  as possible,  t h e  Endeavour  was  t o  be launched  o n  a trajectory  t h a t  
would  cover  most  of  t h e  globe ,  with   t h e  orbit   ranging  from  5 7  degrees  n o r t h  
of  t h e  equator   t o  57  degrees  sou th .   (LA  Times, Mar  28 /94 )  

MARCH  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

Russia  inherited  t h e  Soviet Union's  ambitions in  space but  lacked  its main 
launch  pads.  Russian President  Boris Yeltsin  in a visit  t o  his Kazakh counter-  
part,  Nursultan  Nazarbayev,  hoped  to  sign  a  30-year  lease  o n   the   Baikonur 
Cosmodrome.  T h e  outcome  was  a  20-year  lease with  an  option   to  renew  for 
10   more  years,  and   an   annual   payment  of  about  $115  million.  However, 
should  this  effort  prove  unsuccessful,  Russia  was  developing  o the r   sites. 
Russian space scientists considered  t h e  Plesetsk Cosmodrome  in  the  far  north  
unsuitable  for manned  flights, but  Colonel  General  Vladimir  lvanov  told  the  
Itar-Tass news  agency  tha t  Russia  planned  to  build  a major new  space center  
in  the  far east a t  Svobodny, north  of  Blagoveshchensk.  (LA Times, Mar  28/94; 
Reuters, Mar  28/94; W Post, Mar  29/94) 

George Brown, Democrat  from California,  chairman  of  t h e  House  Science 
Committee ,   sent   a  letter   to   NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S .  Goldin   asking 
tha t  NASA  develop cost estimates  for upgrading  the   infrastructure  surround- 
ing  Russia's Baikonur  Cosmodrome.  H e   also  requested  tha t   NASA   explore 
options  for  establishing  direct  relations  with  Kazakhstan  in   the   areas of  sci- 
ence  and  technology.  (Defense Daily, Apr  1/94) 

March  29:  Douglas  B.  Shaffer, president  of  Astro  International  Corporation ,  
and   Kenneth   E.  Sm i th ,  the   company's director  of  NASA   programs, pleaded 
guilty to soliciting  and  accepting  inside  information o n  a $3.3 million NASA  
contract .  T h e  company  also pleaded  guilty. (AP, Mar  29/94) 

March  30:  NASA   announced   t h e   development  at  NASA's  Ames  Research 
Center ,   Moffett  Field,  California,  of  a  new  tile  known  as  Toughened  U n i -  
Piece  Fibrous  Insulation  (TUF I ) .  T h e   low-density composite  thermal  insula- 
tion   was  to  undergo  its  first  flight  test  on   the   Endeavour  in  April.  (NA SA  
Release 94-54) 

Thomas   D.  Jones   was  one   of  the   astronauts  scheduled  to   f l y   o n   the  
Endeavour. Since  boyhood he  always wanted  both   to fly and  to study science. 
( B  Sun, Mar  30194) 

India  signed  a  new  agreement  to   buy  seven  rocket  engines  from  Russia's 
commercial  space organization,  according to  U .R .  Rao, outgoing  head  of  the  
Indian  Space Research  Organisation. T h e  first engine was  to  be  delivered  in 
1996 and  t h e  remainder  over a three-year period.  (Reuters, Mar  30194) 

March  3 1 : NASA   announced   tha t   the   first  cooperative  space flight  research 
between NASA  and  t h e  National   Institutes of  Hea l th  ( N I H )  was  intended  t o  
help  scientists better  understand  the  effects of  microgravity on   the  growth  of 
human  bone and  muscle cells during space flight. It might  also increase under- 
standing  of  changes  in  muscle and   bone  o n  Earth  after  severe  injury, certain 
degenerative diseases, or  prolonged  bedrest.  Th is  research was  to  he  a part  of 
the  April Space Shu t t le  mission.  (NA SA  Release 94-55)  

49 5 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1994 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin  paid  a  90-minute  visit  to 
Rocketdyne's main  factory  in Canoga  Park, California. He  said  the  company 
had  made  some  progress  in  correcting  quality  control  problems  that  caused 
two Shuttle launches to be  aborted seconds before  liftoff and two other sched- 
uled  flights to be  postponed.  (LA  Times, Apr  1/94) 

MarchlApn'l: Th e   Space  Shuttle crew  that  repaired  the   $1.6 billion  Hubble 
Space Telescope were commended for  their work, which  enabled  the  view of 
stars  10 times  as  faint  as  previously.  T h e   instrument  more  than  doubled  the  
telescope's previous range. (Life Magarine, Mar/Apr/94) 

April 

Apnl  I :   Abe  Martinez,  assistant U .S .  attorney  in Houston,  said  tha t   one  cor- 
poration  and   eight  individuals,  including  a   NASA   contracting   officer, 
S tephen  CIeland ,  had  pleaded  guilty  to  criminal  charges  in  connection   with 
Operation   Lightning  Strike  a t   NASA's  Johnson   Space  Center .   T h e   U .S .  
attorney's  office  was  to  ask  a   grand  jury  to  indict  another   Johnson  official, 
David  Proctor.  (SP New s ,  Apr  4-10194) 

Apn l4 :  NASA   announced   the   rescheduling  of  the   launch  of  Space  Shu t t le  
Endeavour  to April  8 to  allow further inspections of m e t a l l~ c  vanes in the  high 
pressure oxidizer preburner  pump volute housings of  its main engines.  (NA SA  
Release  94-028; AP, Apr  4/94;  UP,  Apr   4/94; Reuters,  Apr   4/94;  P   lnq ,  Apr  
5/94; W Xrnes ,  Apr  5/94; USA  Today, Apr   5/94) 

Laurie Boeder, NASA  Associate Administrator  for Public Affairs, discussed 
NASA's  struggles to   fund  NASA   Select ,   a   television  channe l   tha t   covered 
Space  Shu t t le  missions  for  broadcast  o n   cable  and  use  h y   commercial  ne t -  
works.  (SP  N ew s ,  Apr  4-10194) 

Sidney  Gutierrez  was  featured  as  making  history  because  he   was  the   first 
Hispanic to command a  spacecraft. Scheduled to command the  Endeavour  o n  
its April  flight h e  said he  was happy  i f  he  could s e n r e  as a  role model for young 
people.  (H  Post, Ap r  4/94)  

April 5: A  joint  s ta temen t  was  issued  following  a   meeting   of  the   heads  of 
space agencies  involved  in   t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  S ta t ion :   t h e   Canad ian  
Space   Agency  ( C S A ) ,  t h e   European  Space   Agency  ( E SA ) ,  t h e   Na t iona l  
Space   Development   Agency  of  J a p a n   (NA SDA ) ,   the   Russian  Space  
Agency  ( R S A ) ,  and  NASA .  T h i s  was  t h e   first  group meeting   since  Russia 
accepted   the   collective   inv i ta t ion   to   join  the   In te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n  
partnership   in   December  1993 .  T h e   heads  of  agencies  discussed  t h e   o u t -  
come  of  t h e   recently  completed   Space   S t a t i o n   System  Design  Review. 
C S A ,   ESA,  and   NASDA   no ted   the   remarkable  progress  made  to   accom-  
modate   Russia  as  a   new  partner   and   to  satisfy  t h e   interests  of  all  t h e   part-  
ners   i n   t h e   new  program  structure ,   and   they   commended   NA SA   for  its 
efforts  t o   improve  program  efficiency  and   to   clarify  t h e   po ten t ia l   for  addi-  
t iona l  partner   con t r ibu t ions .  
Activities  a t   the   government  and   agency  levels  have  paved  the   way  for 
negotiation  of  the   agreements  necessary to  formalize Russia's inclusion  in  the  
program. All expressed support for proceeding with  these  negotiations, sched- 
uled  to  start  in   late  April,  in  an   expeditious  manner.  T h e  heads  of  agencies 
also  noted  the   importance  of  concluding,  in  a   timely  manner,  the   interim 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

APRIL   1994 

agreement   between   N A S A   and   R SA   t o  facilitate  Russia's early participation  
in  program  management   mechanisms.  ( N A S A  Editor's No te   N 9 4 - 2 8 )  

N A S A   announced   its  i n t e n t   to  grant   t h e   Arkansas   Aerospace   Education  
C e n t e r  $500,000 t o   implement   its  Technology  Industry  Resource  Project   t o  
h e l p   deve lop   e n r i c hm e n t   oppo r tun i t ie s   for  seconda ry   schoo l   s t u d e n t s  
statewide   in  mathematics ,   applied  sciences,  and   technology.  ( N A S A  Release 
94 -56 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e  departure   from N A S A ,  effective April   11 ,  of  Space  
S h u t t l e  astronaut   Ronald   J .   G rabe .  H e  was  t o  become  vice  president  of  busi- 
ness  development   for O rb i ta l  Sciences  Corporation's   Launch  Systems G roup .  
( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 5 7 )  

N A S A   found  n o  defects  in   Endeavour's th ree   pumps  during   its  inspection  
and   cleared  t h e  spacecraft  for  launching   o n  Ap r i l  8 ,  weather   permitting .   (AP, 
A p r  5/94; UP, A p r  5/94; Reuters, Ap r  5/94; W Times, A p r  6 /94 ;  AP, Ap r  6/94;  
UP, Ap r  6/94;  Reuters, Ap r  6/94;  NY  Times, Ap r   7/94; W Post, Ap r   7/94; USA 
Today, Apr   7/94;  W Times, Apr   7 /94 )  

A  study  released  by  t h e  Virginia-based Teal  space consulting  group said  t h a t  
since  t h e  space  age  began,  271  missions  have   failed  o r  malfunctioned .  Of  t h e  
271 missions,  108 were considered  failures  and  of  these ,   two-thirds  or   a n  esti-  
mated   71   were  Soviet .   T h e  remaining   34   failures  were  Ame r ican .  T h e  most 
failure-prone   spacecraft  over   t h e   period  appeared  t o   be  t h e   Sov ie t -made  
Cosmos  satellite .   (Reuters ,  Ap r   5 /94 )  

Russian Military Space  Forces official Sergei Go rbunov  said  t h a t  Russia had  
decided  t o  develop  a new  giant  booster  rocket  t h a t  was  t o  have  a reusable first 
stage a n d  burn  a special, safer low-pollution  fuel mixture .  T h e  rocket ,  Angara-  
24, would  be  appropriate  for a new  far ea s te rn  launch  site  if  Russia decided   t o  
build  it  as  a n   a l te rna t ive   t o   t h e   Baikonur  Cosmodrome   in  Kazakhstan.  T h e  
booster  was  t o  be  tested  in  1998  a n d   t h e   first  launch   was  p lanned   for  2000. 
(Reuters ,  Ap r   5/94)  

Gregory  Reck ,   Ac t ing   Associate   Adm in i s t ra to r   of  NASA's  Office  of 
Advanced  C o n c e p t s  a n d  Technology   ( O A C T ) ,  said  t h a t   N A S A  h a d   tasked 
a n  industry  team  with   reviewing  t h e  direction   of  its research  and  deve lopmen t  
(R&D )  efforts  in  space commun ica t ion s  technologies .  T h e  group, wh ich  was 
t o   be  composed  of  satellite   manufacturers   such   as  Hughes   and   Space  
Systems/Loral,  ground   s ta t ion   builders  like  Harris  Co rpo ra t ion ,   and   small 
aerospace  firms  like  O rb i ta l   Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion ,   was  t o   identify  future  
space-based  systems,  b o t h   in  low-Earth  a n d  geosynchronous  orbits ,   and   how 
they  might   tie   i n t o   t h e  Na t iona l   Information   Infrastructure.  NASA's role  in 
t h e   activity   was  t o   be  directed   by  Samue l   Venneri ,   head   of  spacecraft  a n d  

APRIL  1994 

CHRONO LOGY   1994 

remote sensing in  OACT .  T h e  consensus findings of  the   team were to  be  used 
in  relation  to  NASA   fiscal  year  budgets.  According  to   the  NASA   officials, 
the  key motivation  behind  the  initiative was to minimize inroads by  European 
and Japanese competitors into  the  6 0  percent market  share held by  U.S. firms 
in  satellite communications.  (Defense Daily, Apr  7/94) 

April  6:   Lieutenant  Colonel  Tom  Akers,  an   astronaut,  a resented  NASA's 
$500,000  check  to  the   state  of  Arkansas's  Aerospace  Education  Center .  
(Arkansas Democrat Gazette, Apr  6/94; Fh Toby, Apr  17/94) 

NASA  Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin  said he  personally would discuss the  
Space  S ta t ion   program  with  220  members  of  Congress  before  the   House  of 
Representatives  votes o n  the  Station   in  the  summer. (SP News, Ap r  1 1-1  7/94; 
AvWk, Apr   1 1/94)  

Kenneth   J .   Szalai,  Director  of  NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Cen te r ,  
received  the   Distinguished  Executive  Presidential  Rank  Award.  (Antelope 
Valley  Press, Apr  6/94) 

April  7:  Jack  Anderson's  column  reported  tha t   Margaret  Barnes,  a  NASA  
employee,  sent   a  confidential  letter  to   Senator   J o h n   G l e n n ,   Democrat  of 
Oh io ,   o n   September  2 ,   1993, alleging  among  other   things,  tha t   women  in 
NASA   Inspector  General  Bill  D.  Colvin's office  were  treated  like  "second- 
class citizens." Barnes was called  in and  berated  by  Colvin  who had   a copy of 
the   letter, which was  apparently  leaked by  Glenn's office. NASA   sources said 
G A O  had  added  the  BarneslGlenn episode  to  its  investigation of  Colvin .  ( W  
Post, Apr   7/94)  

NASA   announced  the  selection of  39  researchers  to  receive  three-   to  four- 
year grants for microgravity combustion  research  totaling more  t h a n  $13  mil- 
lion. Of  the  grants,  33  were  for Earth ground-based  research  and  six  for flight 
definition  efforts.  (NA SA  Release 94-58)  

NASA  spokesperson Bruce Buckingham  at Kennedy  Space Cen te r  said  t h e  
tether   launched  by  the   Space Shu t t le  was  working  well.  I t   could  be  used  t o  
move  satellites around  in different  orbits  in  space.  Originally about  12 miles 
long, atomic  oxygen and  tiny  meteorites  ate  it  so  tha t   it  was  now  only  about 
five miles  long. (0 Sen Star, Apr   7/94) 

T h e   International   Federation  of  Professional  and   Technical   Engineers 
filed  unfair  labor  practice  charges  against  NASA   because  of  t h e   April   4 
memorandum  from  Jeremiah   Pearson,  Associate  Administrator   for  Space  
Flight,  transferring  several  positions  from  headquarters  to   Johnson   Space  
C e n t e r  and  Kennedy Space  C e n t e r  without  collective  bargaining.  (SP  News, 
Apr   1 1 - 17/94)  

ASTRC)NXUTICS  A N D  ; \ERONAIJTICS  

APRIL  1994 

April  8: NA SA   Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel   S .  Go ld in   addressed  t h e   University   of 
Arizona's  O p e n   Sciences   Forum  a t   which   professors  presented  overviews  of 
t h e ~ r  space-related  work.  H e   assured  t h e   faculty  a n d   students   t h a t   N A S A  
would  con t inue   t o   fund  University   of  Arizona  research  projects  such   as  t h e  
$3.6  billion  Cassini   Sa tu rn   probe.  H e  urged  scientists  t o  simplify  t h e  way  in  
which   they  discuss  the i r   experiments   so  t h a t   lay  people  would  understand  
them   and   thus   increase scientific  awareness. Stressing  t h e  concep t  t h a t  "small 
is  better ,"  h e  men t ioned   t h e  developinent   of  robots  t h a t   may  o n e  day  ex t rac t  
fuel  from  t h e   Moon   or   Mars,  thus   reducing   t h e   am o u n t   of  propellant   t h a t  
w o i~ l d  need   to  be  stored  o n  Moon -  or  Mars-bound  spacecraft.  (Tucson Citizen, 
Apr   9 /94 )  

I n  a te lephone   interview, N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S. G o l d i n ,  who  was 
formerly  general manager  of TRW's Space  and  Technology G roup   in  Redondo  
Reach,  California ,   answered  questions  about   N A S A   and   his  efforts  t o  revive 
t h e   Agency.  Among   o t h e r   topics,  h e   discussed  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  
S t a t i o n ,  t h e  difficulties of  working  in  space ,  and   t h e  problems  of  budget  cuts  
t h a t  NA SA   faced.  (O range  Coun ty   Register, Ap r   8 /94 )  

A p d  9:   Space   S h u t t l e  Endeavour,  which   had   been   rescheduled  t o   lift  off  o n  
April  8, was  launched   April  9 because  of  bad  weather.  In   its cargo bay was t h e  
Space   Radar  Laboratory,  weighing  23 ,000   pounds  and   con ta in ing   $366 mil- 
lion  worth  of  imaging systems. T h e  system was t o  bounce   radar waves off Ea r th  
in  th ree   frequency  bands  t o   produce   three-dimensional   maps  of  ocean   cur-  
rents ,   river  valleys,  forests  and   farm  lands ,  t h e  geology  of  volcanoes ,  and   fea- 
tures  under   desert  sands.  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in   Pasadena, 
Ca l i fo rn ia ,  and   t h e  G e rm a n   and   Italian   space  agencies  developed   t h e   equip-  
men t .  T h e  radar  developect a ,glitch after  t h e  first  day, but   ground  con t ro l  was 
able  to  repair  it  and   t h e  results  were most successful.  (NY Times, Ap r  8/94;  W 
Post, A p r  8/94; B  S u n ,  Ap r  8/94; Reuters, Ap r  8/94;  USA Today, A p r  8/94;  AP, 
A p r  8/94;  UP, Ap r  8/94;  Reuters, A p r  9/94;  AP, A p r  9/94;  W Post, A p r   10194; 
NY T imes ,   A p r   10194; R  S u n ,  A p r   10194; P  Inq, Apr   10194; UP I ,  A p r   10194; 
Reuters ,  Apr   lo /% ;   AP, A p r   11/94) 

N A S A  researchers were  t o  go underground  o n  Ap r i l   1 1 in  Lechuguilla C a v e  
in Carlsbad  Cave rn s  Na t iona l   Park  in New  Mexico   t o   try  t o  replicate  cond i -  
tions   o n   Mars.  N A S A   engineer   Larry  Lemke  was  mainly  interested   in   t h e  
technology  aspect  of  developing   robots  t o   collect   t h e   rnicroorganisms  in 
Lechuguilla  if  it  proved  a  useful  source.  N A S A   planetary  scientist   Ch r i s  
McKay  a n d   con t rac t   microbiologist  Penny   Boston  wanted   t o  see  if  microor- 
ganisms  living  inside  Lechuguilla  coilld  reveal  life  t h a t   might   exist   o n  Mars. 
Bacteria  in  t h e  cave   get  the i r  energy  from  sulfur  and   iron ,  believed  t o  be  two  
ma in   ingredients   of  Mars's  soil.  Samples   taken   during   t h e   five-day  unde r -  
ground  stay  t h a t  ended  o n  April   16 were  t o  be analyzed a t  t h e  U .S .  Geological  
Survey  laboratory  in  Denver ,   a  NASA -con t rac ted   laboratory  in   Boulder, 

APRIL  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

Colorado,  and   the   University  of  Massachusetts  a t   Amherst.  (AP, Apr   9/94;  
AP, Apr   13/94; AP, Apr   18/94) 

Apnl  1 1 :  Astronaut   Tom Jones  o n  Space  Shu t t le  Endeavour  answered  ques- 
tions  about  radar  mapping  and   the   Earth's  ozone layer from  students   a t   his 
former  school  in  Stemmers  Run ,   Maryland .   Among   t h e   areas  Endeavour 
radar  was  mapping  were  traces  of  anc ien t   rivers beneath   t h e  Sahara  Desert. 
O t h e r   areas  being  targeted  for  mapping  were  the   Andes   and   t h e   East 
Australian  Cu r ren t   as  well  as  fires  in  C h i n a   south   of  t h e  Yellow  River  and  
flooding  in   the  Midwest. Astronauts  assured C-SPAN   television  questioners 
tha t  t h e  mapping radar was strictly for scientific no t  military purposes. A t  the  
halfway point  of  t h e  mission, NASA  said Endeavour  already had  collected 95  
percent   of  the   data   it  was  to   gather.  T h e   astronauts  were  divided  in to   two 
shifts of  three  persons each  in order  to  work round  t h e  clock monitoring  radar 
performance,  taking  pictures  of  t h e   Earth ,   and   recording  observations  o n  
tape. A n  air pollution monitor aboard  Endeavour  found surprisingly high  lev- 
els of  carbon   monoxide  in  t h e  No r the rn   Hemisphere,  according  to  NASA .  
NA SA   scientists  o n   t h e   ground  were  delighted  with  the   quality  of  pictures 
and  o the r  da ta  beamed  by radar. 
As part  of  their  preparations for returning  to Earth o n  April  19, the  astro- 
nauts  test-fired  their   steering  jets  and  wiggled  their   flaps  o n   April  17.  O n  
April  18 ,  Endeavour took radar pictures of  19,300 square miles of no r th  C h i n a  
from 140 miles up  in space. Meanwhile, according to  the  official Xinhua News 
Agency,  Chinese   remote-sensing  aircraft  a t   3.7  miles  up  used  radar  and   a 
mobile  microwave  scatter  meter  and   surveyors o n   the   ground  also joined  in. 
T h e   astronauts  t h e n   began  t o   stow  away  equipment  and   turn  off  radars  in 
preparation  for  landing.  Because  of  adverse  weather  conditions  April   19 ,  
Endeavour was unable  to  land until April  20 and was diverted t o  Edwards Air 
Force Base, California.  (UP, Apr   11/94; Reuters, Apr  11/94; B  Sun, Apr   12/94; 
USA Today, Apr   12/94; Fla Today, Ap r  12/94; 0 Sen Star, Apr   12/94; H Chron, 
Apr   12/94; AP, Apr   12/94; UP,  Apr   12/94; W Post, Apr   13/94; H Chron, Apr  
13/94;  H  Post,  Apr  13/94;  USA  Today,  Apr   14/94; Fla  Today,  Apr  14/94; 
Reuters,  A p t   14/94; UP,  Apr   14/94;  USA  Today,  Apr   15/94; H  Chron,  A P ~  
15/94; AP, Apr   15/94; C Trib, Apr   16/94; W Times, Apr   16/94; UP, Apr   16/94; 
AP,  Apr   16/94; W Times, Apr   17/94; UP, Apr   17/94; P  Inq ,  Apr   18/94; CSM, 
Apr   18/94; USA  Today, Apr  18/94; AP, Ap r   18/94; UP, Apr   18/94; Reuters, 
Apr   18/94; USA Today, Apr   19/94; AP, Ap r  19/94; Reuters, Apr  19/94; H Post, 
Apr   20194; H Chron, Apr   20194; AP, Apr   20194; UP, A p t  20194; Reuters, Ap r  
20194; NY  Ernes, Ap r   21/94; W  Post, Apr   21/94; W Times, Apr   21/94;  USA 
Today, Apr  21/94; B  Sun, Apr   21/94; C Trib, Apr  21/94; AP,  Apr  21/94) 

Although  NASA  as yet lacked congressional approval for a proposed $2 bil- 
lion  wind  tunnel   complex  for  testing  commercial  aircraft, California's  con-  
gressional  delegation  lobbied  NASA's  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   t o  
have t h e  wind  tunnel  built  in California at NASA's Ames Research Cen te r  in 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL  1994 

Moffett  Field.  Goldin   refused  to  discuss  the   subject.  Virginia  also expressed 
interest  in  being  a  site  for  the   wind  tunnels,  according  to   Representative 
Robert  C .   Scott .   (LA  Times,  Apr  12/94;  SF  Chron,  Apr   12/94;  San  Jose 
Mercury N e w ,  Apr   12/94; LA  Times,  Apr  12/94; Daily  Press, Apr  20194) 

Harry  Holloway, Associate  Administrator  for  NASA's  Office of  Life  and 
Microgravity Sciences and  Applications, stressed  tha t   both   t h e  Spacelab and  
Mir  were  crltical  elements  in  NASA's  orbital  research  program.  During  t h e  
next  three  years, NASA  was  scheduled  t o  f ly   four Spacelab missions and  five 
of  the  scheduled  10 Shu t t le  flights to Mir were  to use  the   long Spacelab mod- 
ule  to  conduct  p r~o r i ty  research  in  fluid  physics  and   combustion.  (SP  News, 
Apr  1 1 - 17/94)  

Arthur   E Obenschain,  project  manager  for NASA's Goddard  Space Flight 
C e n t e r   in  G r e e n b e l t ,   Ma ry land ,   had   overseen   cons t ruc t ion   of 
t h e  
Geostationary  Operational  Environmental  Satellite  (GOES )  weather  space- 
craft.  H e  reported  tha t   all  previous major  technical  problems had   been  over- 
come  and  that   the   first  of  the   GOES   was  scheduled  for  launch   from  Cape  
Canave ra l   o n   behalf  of 
t h e   Na t iona l   Ocean ic   and   A tmosphe r ic  
Administration  on  April  13. Launched  on  schedule, GOES  was  predicted  to 
provide  more  accurate  tracking of  hurricanes  and   other   storms  t h a n  did  pre- 
visous  weather  spacecraft.  (NY Times,  Apr   12/94; Fla  Today, Apr   12/94; H 
Chron, Apr  12/94; AP, Apr  13/94; USA  Today, Apr  14/94; W Post, Apr   14/94; 
NI' Titnrs,  Apr  14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr  14/94)  

As  part  of  the   administration's efforts  to   gain  congressional  support  for 
NASA's International  Space S ta t ion  project, NASA  was considering  removal 
of  the   Russian  Salyut  Functional  Cargo  Block  (FCB)   vehicle  from  the  
redesigned configuration. I f   the  FCB were removed, which some key members 
of  Congress wanted  in  order t o  reduce dependence upon Russia, NASA  might 
replace  it  with  Lockheed's Bus-1.  Following  the   March  International   Space 
Station   System  Design  Review,  international   partners  and   Wh i te   House 
advisers,  including  members  of  the   presidential  panel  reviewed  the   Station  
redesign and ,  in general, seemed favorably disposed to  the  S ta t ion .  T h e  panel 
was  headed  by  Charles  Vest,  president  of  the   Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology. (AvWk, Apr  11/94)  

NASA   in  a  cooperative   agreement   no t ice   called  o n   third   parties   to  
clevelop public-use  applications   of  its  remote   sensing  databases  in  order   to  
make  use  of  t h e   reams  of  Earth   and   space  science   da ta   collected   t o   date .  
Paul  Hun te r ,   Program  Manager   for  NASA's  Information   Infrastructure  
Technology  App l ica t ions   program,  said  N A S A   p lanned   t o   g ran t   abou t   8 
to  10   large  awards  of  $500 ,000   t o   $1.5  million   per  year,  a n d   e igh t   t o   20 
sm:~ller  awards  of  about   $100 ,000   t o   $300 ,000 .   (Federal  Computer  Week, 
Apr   11 /94 )  

APRIL  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

Apnl  1 2 :  NASA   announced  t h e  signing o n  April  7  of  a technology  reinvest- 
ment program agreement  to  develop hybrid rocket motor  technology between 
NASA's  Marshall  Space Flight  Center ,   Huntsville,  Alabama,  and   a  consor- 
tium  of  three  U .S .   aerospace  companies.  T h e   firms  consisted  of  Martin  
Ma t ie t ta   Manned   Space   Systems,  New  Orleans;   Un i ted   Technologies 
Corporation's  Chemical   Systems  Division,  S a n   Jose,  California;  and  t h e  
American  Rocket Company, Ventura, California.  (NA SA  Release 94-59)  

Russia  marked  its  Space  Day  in  a  subdued  mood,  with  the   Baikonur 
Cosmodrome having become part of  Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team 
decreased from  100 to 40 people. T h e  Buran Space Shuttle  was ended after  its 
only  unmanned  test  flight  in  1988. But  workers  remaining  a t   t h e   Molniya 
complex  in  northwestern  Moscow, established  to   construct  Buran,  hoped  to  
work  o n  the  MAKS project  involving small shuttles launched  from  the   giant 
An-225   Mriya  transport plane  t o  carry cargo  into  space.  (AP, Apr   12/94) 

Lockheed  Corporation   in   Calabasas,  California,  and  Rocketdyne,  the  
Canoga  Park  division  of  Rockwell  International ,  teamed  up  to  compete with 
o the r  aerospace  companies for  $167  million  in  grants  from NA SA   over  the  
next   five  years  to  explore  the   feasibility  of  a  "single-stage-to-orbit"  ( S S TO )  
rocket.  It  was  uncertain  whether  the  W h i t e  House  and  the  Pentagon  favored 
such  a  plan,  which  NASA   considered  a  cost-saving  alternative   to  updating 
current  rockets.  (LA  Xme s ,  Apr   12/94) 

April  13:  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   told  the   House  Space 
Subcommittee  tha t   the   Space Station   program was  proceeding  but  cost  and 
schedule  savings were  decreasing. NASA   earlier estimated Russian participa- 
tion  would  save two years and $2   billion. After  the  Systems Design Review, it 
appeared  time would  be  speeded by  15 months  and savings probably would be 
$1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million  instead of  $400 million for 
lease of  the  functional cargo block  vehicle.  Furthermore, agreement needed  t o  
be  reached  with  Russia o n  t h e  cost of  a major component  required  t o  provide 
navigation  and  reboost  capability  for  the   S ta t ion .   NASA   assured  the  
Comtnittee   tha t   the   Agency  would  never  cede  control   of  the   S ta t ion   to 
Russian ground  commanders. Goldin   also said  it  was  essential  for  NASA   to 
have   stable  funding.  (Reuters ,  Apr   13/94; Defense  Daily, Apr  14/94; 0 Sen 
Star, Apr  14/94; H  Post, Apr  14/94) 

C h i n a   recently  suffered  a  fire  a t   its  Xichang  Long  March  launch   facility, 
damaging  a  Fengyun  I1  weather  satellite  and   adjacent  work  areas.  (Defense 
Daily, Apr   14/94)  

NASA   Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science  told  the   NASA  
Advisory Council  tha t  NASA  wanted  to  launch one  Discovery mission every 
12  to   15  months   o n   a  Delta  or   smaller  expendable  launch   vehicle  (ELV). 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN11 A ERONAU T IC S  

APRIL   1994 

NASA's Goddard  Space  Flight  Cen te r   planned  to  issue  a  competitive  pro- 
curement  later  in  the  year  for  up  to   15  ELVs,  paying $25 million  t o  $30 mil- 
lion per  vehicle.  (Defense Daily, Apr   14/94) 

April  14: NASA  announced  tha t ,  o n  April  28,  100 girls, ages 9 t o   15 ,  were  to  
join  the   NASA   Headquarters  workforce  as  part  of  National  Bring  Your 
Daughters  t o  Work  Day.  (NASA  Release 94-60; AP,  Apr   20194) 

Representative  Ralph  Hall,  Democrat  from  Texas  and   chairman   of  the  
Space  Subcommittee  of  t h e   House  Committee   o n   Science,  Space,  and 
Technology, said  he was  not   sure  the   President  was  doing enough  to  prevent 
defections  among  Space  Station   supporters.  Representative  George  Brown, 
Democrat  from  California  and   chair  of  the   parent  committee ,   threatened  to 
withdraw  his  support  if   t h e  President  could  not   get  sufficient  funds for  o the r  
science projects.  (H  Chron, Apr   15/94; National Journal, Apr   23/94) 

April  16: O n  April  9-10 ,  radio  astronomy  experts  from  Stanford  University 
and  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena  sent   a  signal  from  the  
Clementine   spacecraft,  which  was  engaged  in  a  Moon-mapping  mission  for 
t h e   Pentagon,  in to   a  huge  crater  o n   the   lunar  Sou th   Pole.  NASA's  Deep 
Space Network  picked  up  the   reflection  of  t h e  signal,  and  the   Pentagon  was 
scheduled  to undertake a preliminary  review of  the  data  to determine whether 
the  Moon  contained   ice.  (AP, Apr   16/94)  

April  18:  NASA   announced  the   updated  schedule  of  Space  ShuttleISpace 
Station  missions  through  calendar  year  1997 and  expendable  launch  vehicle 
missions through calendar year  2001.  Included were  10 Space Shuttle  flights to 
Russian  Space Station  Mir between  1995 and  1997. (NASA  Release 94-61)  

T h e   six  pilots  at  NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Cen te r   at  Edwards  Air 
Force Base believed  tha t   they had  the  best  flying job  in  the  world. The i r  work 
entailed  a  great  deal  of  variety,  flying  in  different  types  of  planes  and   con-  
ducting  numerous  research  experiments.  (Antelope Valley  Daily  News,  Apr  
18/94) 

A p l   19:  NASA   announced   the   selection  of  Praxair,  Inc.,  of  Danbury, 
C o n n e c t i c u t ,   and   A i r   Products   and   Chem ica ls ,   I n c . ,   of  A l len town ,  
Pennsylvania, for  15-year contracts  to  supply liquid hydrogen to  government 
and contractor  facilities.  (NA SA  Release C94-j) 

A  House  Na tu ra l   Resources  subcommittee   sought   t o   get  t h e   In te r io r  
Depa r tmen t   ou t   of  t h e   helium   business  and   limit   losses  t o   t h e   U.S. 
Treasury.  T h e  greatest   gove rnmen t   demand   for  helium   was  from  N A S A ,  
and   by  law  gove rnmen t   agencies  must  buy  helium   from  t h e   Bureau  of 
Mines.  Congress  sought  to   e n d   gove rnmen t   participation   in  t h e   sale  of 
he l ium .   (AP ,  Ap r   19 /94 )  

APRIL  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

A p n l 2 0 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  and   t h e  Federal  Emergency Managemen t  
Agency  were  exploring  a  cooperative   ven tu re   t o  test  and   imp lemen t  a  proto-  
type  remo te  sensing system  t h a t  was  t o  acquire ,  process,  and  distribute  p h o t o -  
graphic-like  digital  images of  disaster-damaged  areas t o  response and   recovery 
officials  in  near-real  time .   ( N A S A  Release  94 -62 )  

NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena ,   California ,   announced   t h e  
award  of  a  g ran t   t o  Sierra  College ,   Rock l tn ,  California ,   for  a   hand s -on   com -  
munity   college  engineering  curriculum  as  pa r t   of  t h e  government's  techno lo -  
gy  re inve s tmen t  project .   ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 6 3 )  

N A S A  announced  t h e  deve lopmen t  by  t h e  Ames  Fatigue Countermeasures  
Program of  a  t ra in ing  course t h a t  taught   pilots  steps t o  be  used against fatigue. 
T h e  first workshop was  t o  be held   a t  NASA's Ame s  Research  C e n t e r ,  Moffett 
Field,  California ,  o n  May  18-19. ( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 6 4 )  

N A S A   faced   tough   o p p o s i t i o n   o v e r   Russian   p a r t i c i p a t i o n   in   t h e  
In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n  during   hearings  of  t h e   House   Subcomm i t tee  o n  
Space .   Bo th   comm i t tee   cha i rman   Ralph   Hall ,   Democrat   from  Texas,  and  
Jame s   Sen senb renne r ,  Republican   from  Wisconsin   and   ranking   Republican  
member, believed  strongly t h a t   it should  he a n  Ame r ican  S t a t i o n .  (0 Sen Star, 
Ap r   21/94)  

April  21:   N A S A   announced   t h a t   a   small  quan t i ty   of  nitrogen   tetroxide  
( N 2 0 4 )  was accidentally  released from t h e  The rmochem ica l  Test  Area   a t  t h e  
J o h n s o n  Space   Cen te r ,   Hou s ton ,   during   a   test  setup .  T h e   resulting  cloud  of  
N 2 0 4  gradually dissipated, bu t  area traffic was ha l ted  briefly and  some  46 peo- 
ple  were  treated   in  local  medical  facilities  for  mild  respiratory  symptoms. 
N i t rogen  tetroxide   is  a n  oxidizer  used  in  some rocket  engines.  ( N A S A  Release 
94-030;  AP, Ap r   21/94;  Reuters,  Ap r   21/94;  H Chron ,  Ap r   22/94; NY  Times, 
A p r   22/94; W Post, Ap r   22/94;  USA  Today, Apr   22/94;  UP, Ap r   22 /94 )  

Flight  tests  of  t h e   X-31  a t   NASA's  Dryden   Flight  Research  C e n t e r   a t  
Edwards  A i r   Force  Base  were  featured.  Dryden   Director   K e n n e t h   J .   Szalai 
no ted   t h a t  t h e  X-3  1 h a d  completed   more  flights t h a n  any  o t h e r  expe r imen ta l  
aircraft,  demonstrating   methods   of  e n h a n c i n g   fighter   maneuverability.  Gary  
Trippensee  was N A S A  project  manager  a n d  director  of  t h e  In te rna t iona l  Test 
Organization   t h a t   included  t h e  Depa r tmen t   of  Defense's Advanced   Research  
Projects Agency, t h e  Navy, A i r  Force, Rockwell Aerospace ,  t h e  G e rm a n  gov- 
e r nm e n t ,  and  Deutsche  Aerospace .  T h e  prograin focused o n  technology  trans-  
fer-industrial 
use  of  da ta   gathered   during   gove rnmen t   research  projects. 
(Antelope Valley  Press, A p r   2  1/94;  Bakersfield Californian,  Ap r   2 1 / 9 4 )  

A p n l 2 2 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t  some  50 U .S . ,  C a n a d i a n ,  and   European  sci- 
entists  had  begun  t h e  second  phase  of  a  detailed  ecological study  of  t h e  forests 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN 1 1  AERONAUT I ( :S  

APRIL   1994 

of  Canada   and   t h e   role  these  forests  played  in  climate   change .   T h e   Boreal 
Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study (BOREAS )  was a large-scale, ground-based, and  
remote-sensing  investigation  of  t h e   way  t h e   forests  a n d   t h e   atmosphere  
exchange  energy, hea t ,  water, carbon  dioxide, and  o t h e r  trace gases. From April  
1 1  t o  May  2 ,  scientists  were  t o  study  t h e   forests during  t h e   annua l   snowmelt. 
T h e  Focused Field Campaign-Thaw ,  t h e  second  of  five parts  of  BOREAS ,  was 
t o  build  o n  spaceborne  data   resulting  from  t h e   first  flight  of  t h e  Space  Radar 
Laboratory (SRL )  aboard Space  Shu t t le  Endeavour.  BOREAS  and  SRL  formed 
part  of  NASA's  Mission t o  Planet   Earth.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -65 )  

Astronomer   Alexander   Wolszczan  at  Pennsylvania   S t a t e  University   in   a n  
article  published  in Science magazine, claimed  "irrefutable evidence"  of  a t  least 
first  confirmed  observation  of    la nets 
two  planets  orbiting   a  nearby  star-the 
outside  t h e   Earth's  solar system. T h e  planets  were  in  orbit   around   a n  unusual 
neu t ron  star  located  1 ,200  light-years away  in  t h e  constellation  Virgo. Various 
N A S A   staff  memhers  commen ted  o n  t h e  discovery. Robert  Millis,  director   of 
t h e   Lowell  Observatory,  Flagstaff,  Arizona ,   said  N A S A   had   a  major  effort 
underway  t o  search   for  planets   around   stars but  its  program  focused  o n  ordi-  
nary  stars  like  t h e  S u n .  (LA  Times, A p r   22/94; USA  Today, A p r   22/94; P  Inq, 
A p r   22/94; W Post, Ap r   22/94; NY  Times, A p r   22/94)  

NASA's  inspector general   in  a  report  published  in   February  indicated   t h a t  
a n  audit  showed  t h a t   astronauts  flew  two-seater  supersonic  t ra in ing  jets,  T -38  
Talons,  t o  Colorado   Springs o n  weekends during  ski  season as well  as  t o  New 
O r lean s   and   Fort  Lauderdale,  Florida.  N A S A   required  astronauts   t o   log  15  
hours  of  proficiency  flying  each  m o n t h .  S t e v e  Holly, N A S A   Deputy  Director  
for Flight Crew  Ope ra t ion s ,  said a l though  flying  10  t o  12 hours  a day was effi- 
c ien t   in  a  time   iuanagement   sense,  improved  proficiency was  gained   th rough  
more  shorter  flights.  (NY Times, Ap r  24/94; B  Sun ,  Ap r  24/94; UP, A p r  25/94) 

In  discussing  t h e   role  of  t h e  S o u t h   Pole  Infrared  Explorer  (SPIREX) ,   a n d  
tw o  o t h e r  projects  operated   by  t h e  Na t iona l   Sc ience  Foundation's C e n t e r  for 
Astrophysical  Research  in  An ta rc t ica   ( C A R A ) ,  a  comparison   was  made   of 
t h e  way  in which  work  from  t h e  S o u t h  Pole o n  t h e  ground  resembled  work of 
t h e   Hubble   Telescope  in  space.  T h e   astronomers  involved ,   together   w i th  
those   a t   t h e  J o h n s  Hopkins   University   and   t h e  Space  Telescope  In s t i tu te   in  
Baltimore were seeking N A S A  support for a design  and  cost study of  a balloon  
t h a t   would  float  40 ,000   feet  above   t h e   S o u t h  Pole  and   carry  a  powerful  tele-  
scope.  (AP ,  Ap r   22/94)  

,4prll25: Jack  Anderson's column   indicated  t h a t  t h e  ties of  Isadore Hyde, c o n -  
\.icted  in  1993  of  defrauding  t h e  Federal  gove rnmen t ,  t o  Sena to r  T ren t   Lo t t ,  
L>etllocri~t from  Mississippi, were  investigated  by  N A S A   officials  among   o t h -  
ers.  Hyde's company   received  a  cvn t rac t   in  1984  t o  provide  security  services 
at  t h e  S tenn i s  Space  C e n t e r   in Mississippi, and  diverted  more  t h a n  $186 ,000  

APR IL   1994 

CHRONOLCXY   1994 

for  personal  use.  Former  Hyde   employees  alleged  t h a t   Hyde  used  N A S A  
resources  t o  d o  political  favors  for  Lott   and   pu t   Lott's mother ,  who  was  7 1  a t  
t h e  time ,   o n  t h e  company's  payroll.  ( W  Post,  Ap r   25/94)  

Some   20  s tuden t s   in   t h e   S tuden t   Rocket   Program  a t   t h e   University   of 
Alaska ,   Fairbanks,  built  a  rocket  from  scratch   over  t h e  preceding   year  and   a 
half.  T h e  rocket  was  t o  be  launched   when   N A S A   radar  techn ic ian s  came   t o  
Poker  Flat  for  o t h e r   planned   launches .   N A S A   and   o t h e r   U.S.  gove rnmen t  
agencies  invested  millions  of  dollars  t o   upgrade  25-year-old  Poker  Flat ,   t h e  
world's only  university-owned  rocket  range, which  had  a n  excellent   far n o r t h -  
e r n  location .  T h e  objective  of  t h e  rocket  flight was  techn ica l  performance:  t o  
get   t h e   $20 ,000   rocket  i n t o   t h e   Earth's  stratosphere   and   t o  keep   in   c o n t a c t  
w i th   it  during   its  brief  flight  by  satellite-relayed  signals.  (AP, Ap r   25 /94 )  

N A S A  Administrator  Daniel S .  Go ld in  spoke  t o  workers a t  Martin  Marietta 
Manned   Space  Systems  in  eastern  New  Orleans ,   praising  the   company's  new 
contract  with NA SA  t o  make lightweight Space Shu t t le  external fuel tanks ,  call- 
ing t h e  tanks a n  essential part  of  the  Space S ta t ion .  (Xmes-Picayune, Apr  26/94) 

N A S A   was  t o   award  a  Program  Information   System  Mission  Services 
(P r ISMS )  con t rac t  worth  up  t o  $800  million  by  May  1. T h r e e  companies  were 
seeking   t o   win  t h e   eight-year   Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   con t rac t :  
Compu te r   Sciences  Co rpo ra t ion ,  Harris  Co rpo ra t ion ,  and   incumben t   Boeing 
Compu te r  Services ,  Inc .  T h e  w inn ing  PrISMS  vendor  was  t o  manage  N A S A -  
wide  communications ,   provide  some  NASA -w ide   infortnation   management  
services,  and  run   extensive  compu ta t iona l  services a t  Marshali .  PrISMS  had  a 
two-year base with   six one-year  options;   10  pe rcen t   of  t h e  work  was  t o  be  set  
aside for small, disadvantaged  businesses.  (Federal Computer Week, A p r   25 /94 )  

T h e   launching  of  GOES-1   on  April  13 opened  a  new  era  for  the   National  
Weather   Service's  ( NW S )  Modernization  Program.  GOES   was  not   the   only 
N W S   program  t o   experience  trouble  because  t h e   Next-Generation   Weather  
Radar  (Nex rad )  also  had  technical   problems  but  according  t o  Randolph   H i te ,  
assistant  director   in   t h e   G e n e r a l   A c c o u n t i n g   Office's  A c c o u n t i n g   and  
Information Management  Division, was  now  working  ~ve l l .  More accurate  fore- 
casts could now be made further  in advance. (Fedma1 Computer Week, Ap r  25/94) 

April  26:  Reporting   o n  Spacecraft  C l em e n t i n e ,  a n  $ 8 0  million  joint  military-  
civilian   venture ,   which   sen t   t h e   first  close-up  pictures  of  t h e  Moon   in  more  
t h a n   20  years,  t h e   mission  was  considered  a  possible  model  for  N A S A .   O n  
May 3 ,  Clementine's  rocket  was  t o  be  fired  t o  leave luna r  orbit   and  head   for  a 
rendezvous a t  t h e  end  of August with  a small asteroid ,  1620  Geographos .  S o o n  
the rea f te r ,   C l em e n t i n e   m igh t   disappear   from   view;   h e n c e   t h e   n am e .  
Meanwhile ,   Eugene M.  Shoemaker ,  Clementine's  chief  scientist   and   a  plane-  
tary geologist  assigned by  N A S A ,  was studying pictures  sen t  by  t h e  spacecraft, 

ASTKC )NA I IT IC h   ANL,  . 4FKON  4UT IC 'h  

APR IL   1994 

including   t h e   possible  existence   of  ice  a t   t h e   lunar   poles.  T h e  mission  was 
considered  a n   example   of  a  "cheaper,  taster,  better"   approach   t h a t   could  pay 
off. (NY Times,  Ap r   26 /94 )  

China's  space  agency  said  t h a t   t h e  April   2  blast  t h a t  killed  o n e  person  a n d  
injured  20  woulil  no t   delay  t h e   launch ing   of  th ree   foreign  commun ica t ion s  
satellites  from  t h e   Xichang   Sa te l l i te   Launching   C e n t e r   in  southwestern  
C h i n a .   T h e   th ree   satellites   were  manufactured   by  Hughes   Space   a n d  
C o r nm u n i c a t i o~ l s  Colllpany  for  Hong   Kong  and   Australian   customers.  (NY 
Tiines, Ap r   27/94)  

I'ac~l F.  tIolloway,  Director   of  NASA's  Langley  Research  Cen te r ,   said  t h e  
C e n t e r   had  no  desire  t o   serve  as  a  site   for  t h e   two   new  wind  tunnels .   T h e  
C e n t e r   fet'areil ~ t s  e x~ h t i n g  research  would  suffer  if  t h e   new  structures   were 
l o c ; ~ t ~ d  
the re .   California ,   West  Virginia,  Tennessee,  and   Washington   were 
vying  a s  wind  tunne l   sites.  (Daily I'ress,  A p r   27 /94 )  

L4pril 27: T h e  U.S. company   Space   Express  Co rpo ra t ion   planned   t o   build  a 
rocket  launch   site  in  no r the rn   Ge rmany   t o  send  satellites  i n t o  space ,  accord-  
ing  t o  S t e m  1u;lg;l:ine.  Richard  Co leman ,  head   of  t h e  Wa sh ing ton ,  DC-based  
company ,  discussed  t h e   project  with  N A S A .  (UP, Ap r   27/94)  

Api1  28:  N A S A   annoiunced  a  number   of  personnel   changes   in   t h e  Office  of 
Space   Flight  ( O S F )   a t   N A S A   Headquarters   in   Wa sh ing ton ,   DC.  T h e s e  
inclucied  t h e   a p p o i n tm e n t   of  Bryan  O 'C o n n o r ,   cu r ren t ly   OSF  Deputy  
Associate  Administrator ,   t o   assume  t h e   post  of  Space   S h u t t l e   Program 
L h e c t o r .  O 'Conno r ' s  position  was  t o  be  assumed by  Richard  Wisniewski, who  
retired  from  NA SA   in  1990   after  35  years  of  gove rnmen t   service.  ( N A S A  
Release  94 -66 ;  WP, M a y   20/04)  

T h e  justice  L>epartment  joined  a  whistle-blower,  David  Vosoughkia,  in   a 
lawsuit  accusing  t h e   Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   Co rpo ra t ion   of  overcharging  
N A S A  hy  millions of  dollars for con t rac t s  t o  build parts for t h e  Space  Shu t t le .  
(Reuters ,  Ap r   28/94; UP, Ap r   28/94; NY  Times, A p r  29/94; WSI, A p r   29/94)  

T h e  ashes  ot "Star  Trek"  creator  G e n e  Roddenberry  were  flown o n  a  Space  
Shu t t le  after his  dea th   in Clctober  1991 ,  a t  t h e  request  of  his widow, according  
t o  a NA SA  spokesperson. (AP ,  Apr  28/94; UP, Apr  28/94; Reuters, A p r  28/94) 

April 30: T h e  Roeing Company  denied any intentional  wrongdoing but  paid  t h e  
U.S. Gove rnmen t  $75   million  t o  settle  accusations t h a t   it   systematically  over-  
charged  and  mischarged  t h e  Gove rnmen t  o n  military  contracts.  U .S .  A t to rney  
Kate  Pflaumer  said  t h e   most  egregious  mischarging  was  in  Boeing's divisions 
t h a t   exploreci artificial  intelligence  applications  t o  robotics, military  command  
anL]  con t ro l ,   high-speed  jets,  and  Space   Stations .   Boeing  admitted   having  

APRIL  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

improperly charged the  Govemment  several million dollars in costs incurred  in 
selling aircraft overseas and having charged the  Govemment  millions of dollars 
for hazardous-waste disposal. (NY Times, Apr 30194; WSJ, Apr  30194) 

MarchlApiE:  NASA   achieved  its  congressionally  mandated  small  disadvan- 
taged business  (SDB) contracting  goal o n e  year early. It was t o  reach an  8 per- 
cen t  SDB goal  by fiscal year  1994. Instead,  in  1993, NASA  awarded  8.5 per- 
c e n t  of  its contracting  budget  to  SDBs, women-owned  firms, and  Historically 
Black Colleges and Universities.  (Minmmty Business  Entrepreneur, MarIApr 9 4 )  

A w l :  NASA   opened  its  first  Small  Business Outreach   Program  a t   the   New 
Hampshire  Technical  College  in   Nashua .   T h e   C e n t e r   for  Technology 
Commercialization ,   one   of  NASA's  six  Regional  Technology  Transfer 
Centers ,  signed an  agreement t o  oversee  the  program, which was a pilot  proj- 
ect   to   assist  New  England  businesses  competing  for  NASA   contracts .   T h e  
Program  was  to   focus  o n   small  and  disadvantaged  businesses.  (Black  Media 
News, Apr  94 )  

NASA's Goddard  Space Flight Center ,  Greenbelt ,  Maryland, and  t h e  U .S .  
Agency  for  International  Development  (A ID )  since  1987 had  cooperated  to  
provide  data  to  AID'S Famine  Early  Warning  System  (FEWS ) .  NASA   satel- 
lite data ,  used  to  study the  expansion and contraction  of  deserts and  semi-arid 
lands  of  Africa,  were  the  principal  data  providing  early  warning  of  potential  
famine  and  desert  locust swarms. Using daily data  from  the  National  Oceanic  
a n d   A tmosphe r ic   Adm in is t ra t ion   meteorological   satellites ,   sc ien t is ts  
measured  the  density  of  green  vegetation  every  10  days.  W h e n  drought  con -  
ditions  were  detected ,  an   AID-FEWS  team  could  begin  to   coordinate  relief 
efforts,  if   needed. T h e  same  data   also  were  used  for  locust  control   purposes. 
(Black Media News, Apr  94 )  

A  feature  article described  repairs executed  by  NASA  astronauts, and  par- 
ticularly  board-certified  surgeon  Story  Musgrave,  to   the   Hubble  Space  
Telescope. T h e  Hubble now  could  spot the   light of  a  firefly 8 ,500  miles  away. 
James Crocker,  an   engineer  with  the   Space  Telescope  Science   Institute   in 
Baltimore,  proposed  Hubble's  "eyeglasses,"  called  COSTAR   (Corrective  
Optics  Space  Telescope Axial Replacement);  other  equipment also was added. 
Details concerning Mars Observer spacecraft also were given. (Popular Science, 
Apr  94)  

May  1 :  Of  the   250  people  who  flew  in  orbit  o n  U.S.  spaceships since  1961, 
only six astronauts were black. Th is  surprised J.  Alphred  Phelps, a retired  Air  
Force master sergeant and author of  a just  published book:  They Had a Dream: 
The  Story  of  Afncan  American  Astronauts.  T h e   author  described  two  black 
Americans who almost became astronauts  in  the   1960s, as well as  the  six who 
made  it:  Gu ion   Bluford,  Ronald  McNair,  Frederick  Gregory,  Mae  Jemison ,  
Charles  Bolden,  and Bernard Harris.  (Fla Today, May  1/94) 

Worldwide pollution was revealed  among other   things by  the  Measurement 
of  Air   Pollution  by  Satellite  (MAPS )   instrument,  flown  o n   Space  Shu t t le  
Endeavour, which  showed atmospheric carbon  monoxide  levels. No t  only can  
this pollution  contribute  to global wartning but  i t  also can  make  it more diffi- 
cult  for  the  atmosphere to cleanse  itself. (Fla Today, May  1/94)  

T h e  publication  of  Moon  Shot by A lan   Shepard  and  Deke  Slayton was  set 
for  release  one   mon th   before  the   25th   anniversary  of  t h e   Apollo  11  lunar 
landing.  T h e   book  gives  a  history  of  space  flight  and  includes  many  little-  
known  anecdotes.  (Fla Today, May  1 /94 )  

May  2:  NASA  announced  tha t   the  six astronauts who recently returned  from 
Endeavour's mission  would  be  available  for  interviews  as  time permits  during 
their  debriefing  schedule.  (NA SA  Release 94-67)  

Astronaut   Tom  Jones  was  featured  in  a  telephone  interview  in  which  he  
described  his  thrill  with  the   experience  of  weightlessness,  t h e   spectacular 
views from  the  air, especially of  the  oceans and   the  disrinctiveness  of  the  var- 
ious  continents ,   the   beauty  of  the   United   States,  and   the   difficulty  of 
readjusting  physically to  Earth's atmosphere.  ( B  Sun, May  2/94) 

NASA's  last SCOUT (Solid Controlled  Orbital  Utility  Test)  launch  vehi- 
cle  was  scheduled  to   blast  off  May  6  from  Vandenberg  Air   Force  Base, 
Lompoc, California,  the   final  of  118 space  missions  tha t   began July  1,  1960. 
Called  the   Miniature  Seeker  Technology  Integration  spacecraft,  t h e   satellite 
is  one   in  a series of  military spacecraft  being  launched  t o  develop sensors for 
ballistic missile devices. Since  the  mid-1960s, NASA  gradually has gotten  out  
of  t h e  unmanned   rocket  business, which was  transferred  to  commercial  man-  
ufacturers.  (Fla Today, May  2/94; NASA  Release 94-72; Fla Today, May  9/94; 
Reuters,  May  9/94)  

NASA  announced  the  selection of a research consortium headed  by IBM  to 
carry  out   research  and  test  computer  systems for  a  new  national   aeroscience 
research program using parallel computer technology. NASA's Ames Research 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

MAY 1994 

Cen te r ,   Moffett  Field,  California ,   was  t o   be  t h e  main   computational   site   for 
t h e  new  program  ( N A S A  Release  C 9 4 - k )  

N A S A   astrophysicist  Fred  Espenak stated   t h a t   a n  annu la r  eclipse would  be 
visible  t o  observers w i th in   a  145-mile  wide  p a t h  from El  Paso, Texas, th rough  
Toledo ,  O h i o ,  and  much  of  New   England  o n  May  10. T h e  M o o n  will  appear  
completely  s i lhoue t ted  against  t h e  S u n ,  wh ich  will  form  a  dazzling unb roken  
ou te r   ring  for up  t o  six minutes .   People  outside  t h e  ground  ~ a t h  will see o n l y  
a  partial   eclipse.  (Reuters ,  May  2/94; W Post, May  4/94;  B  Sun ,  May  8/94;  W 
Times, May  8/94;  W Post, May  9 /94 )  

T h e   enthusiastic   response  of  girls  t o   a t tend ing   NASA's  "Take  O u r  
Daughters  t o  Work  Day"  o n  Ap r i l  28 was  highlighted .  T h e  girls, ages 9  t o   15, 
heard   speakers a n d   t h e n   trailed  the i r  parents   or  o t h e r  staff members.  (Federal 
Xrnes, May  2/94) 

Vice  President  A1  Go re   made   a  brief  fundraising  s top   in  Huntsville ,  
Alabama .   H e  said  t h a t   t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n  h a d   tremendous   for-  
eign policy  advantages  for  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  as part  of a new effort  t o  c rea te  a 
partnership   with   Russia.  G o r e   also  cited   Russia's  decision   t o   c h a n n e l   its 
resources  i n t o  t h e  S t a t i o n  rather   t h a n  ballistic missile programs, for  example .  
(Huntsville New s ,  May  3/94;  Htsvl  Tm s ,  May  3 / 9 4 )  

May  3:  Robot   spacecraft  C l em e n t i n e   successfully  completed   a  two -mon th  
mission  t o  map  t h e  Moon's  surface in   unprecedented   detail .  Radar   da ta   indi-  
c a t e   wha t   scientists   term   a n   "astonishing"  d e p t h   of  7.5  miles  in   o n e   of  t h e  
Moon's a n c i e n t  basins.  O t h e r  da ta  may  reveal  ice  in  a pe rmanen t ly  shadowed 
spot  a t  t h e  lunar   sou th  pole. A t  6:20 p.m.  EDT,  controllers  were  t o  command  
t h e  spacecraft  t o  fire  its rockets for four  m inu te s  t o  remove   it  from  lunar  o rb i t ,  
loop  around  Ea r th ,  a n d  head  for t h e  small asteroid  1620  Geographos  for a la te  
August  rendezvous.  N A S A   provided  funding   t o   refocus  t h e   mission  effort, 
substituting   t h e   Moon   and   asteroids  for  man -made   "Star  Wars"  objects.  (W  
Post, May  3/94; NY  Times, May  4 /94 )  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  announced  Agency  plans  to   proceed 
with the  use of  the  nearly completed facilities at Yellow Creek in luka, Mississippi, 
originally  designed  for  use  with  the   proposed  Advanced  Solid  Rocket  Motor 
(ASRM) ,   for  use  with  t h e  manufacture  of  nozzles  for  t h e  current  Space Shuttle  
Redesigned  Solid  Rocket  Motor  (RSRM)   program.  NASA   and  the   Thiokol 
Corporation  worked  out  plan  implementation,  which  was  scheduled  t o   take 
approximately two and a half years. Thiokol  plans  t o  move all of  its nozzle opera- 
tions  t o  the  Yellow Creek facility. In view of  the  Federal government's investment 
of  taxpayer money  in  the   construction  of  the   Yellow  Creek  facility, NA SA   was 
committed  to  obtaining maximum  return while seeking t o  mitigate  t h e  economic 
impact  o n   the   region  resulting  from  the   ASRM   termination.  (NA SA   Release 
94-68) 
5 1 2  

MAY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

NASA's  Marshall Space Flight  Center ,  Huntsville,  Alabama,  awarded  the  
Computer  Sciences Corporation ,  Arlington ,  Virginia,  an  eight-year contract  
to  provide Program Information Systems Mission Services (PrISMS) .  (NA SA  
Release C94-1; W Post, May  4/94)  

T h e  Air  Force  launched  a Titan  4 rocket  with  a Defense Department  secret 
payload  from  Cape   Canaveral ,   Florida.  (Reuters, May  3/94; H Chron,  M a y  
4/94; H Post, May  4/94)  

May  4:  NASA   Program  Manager  for  Human   Systems  Technology  in  the  
Office of Aeronautics, Washington, DC, announced  tha t  NASA  was  design- 
ing an  electronic chart   to  make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often  fly 
in  potentially  dangerous  conditions  above forest  fires. T h e   Electronic C h a r t  
Display  being  developed  a t   NASA's  Ames  Research Center ,   Moffett  F ~ e l d ,  
California,  shows pilots  an  area's terrain  and  obstacles on   a  computer  screen. 
(NA SA  Release 94-69)  

NASA   recognized  24  students  from  ~ u b l i c  and  private  schools  across  the  
Un i ted   States   as  winners  in  its  1 4 t h   annua l   Space   Science   S tuden t  
Involvement  Program.  Co-sponsored  by  NASA   and  the   National  Science 
Teachers Association,  the  program  involved  more  than  4,000 students  in ele- 
mentary, junior  high, and high  school who competed  in five categories: math-  
ematics,  science,  technology,  art ,   and   creative  writing.  In  addition  to  being 
recognized  in Washington  at  the  National  Space  Symposium, May  7-11 ,   stu- 
dents were  to have t h e  chance of  interning at a NASA  Field Center  for a week 
in  summer and   to receive a Space Camp  scholarship.  (NA SA  Release 94-70)  

NASA's  Langley  Research  Center ,   Hampton ,   Virginia,  announced   the  
selection  of  EG&G  Langley,  Inc.,  Hamp ton ,  Virginia,  for  a  contract   to  pro- 
vide  maintenance ,   construction ,   and  engineering  support  for  the   Center .  
(NA SA  Release C94 -m )  

Interfax  news  agency  reported  tha t   following  unsuccessful  talks  with 
Kazakhstan about extending  t h e  use of  its traditional  base  at  Baikonur, Russia 
planned  to   launch  a  post-Soviet  space  ship  in  1996  from  its  own  territory, 
using  t h e  rocket  complex  a t  the  city  Svobodny-18  in  the  northeastern  Amur 
region.  (Reuters, May 5/94) 

Jack  Levine,  Director  of  Flight  Programs  in  NASA's  Office of  Advanced 
Concepts  and  Technology, said  tha t   after  considering  the   findings of  a  tech-  
nical  review  panel,  NASA   decided  to   cu t   off  funding  for  the   Commercial 
Experiments Transporter  (C om e t )  in  FY  94. Come t  was conceived  as an  alter-  
native  to  the  Space Shuttle;   it would  use  an  expendable rocket  to  orhit  com- 
mercial  experiments, some of  which would be brought  back  to Earth  aboard a 
recovery  capsule  after  30 days. Costs exceeded  estimates  and   for  tha t   reason 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT1C:S 

MAY  1994 

and   t h e  panel's findings, N A S A  decided  t o  d i scon t inue  t h e  program.  (Defense 
Daily,  May  5/94)  

N A S A   A dm i n i s t r a t o r   Dan ie l   S .  G o l d i n  gave   a n   impassioned   de fen se   of 
N A S A  t o  a group  of  aerospace   execu t ive s  a t t e n d i n g  a n  Am e r i c a n   I n s t i t u t e  
of  A e r o n a u t i c s   a n d   A s t r o n a u t i c s  c o n f e r e n c e   in   subu rban  W a s h i n g t o n .   H e  
descrihed   t h e   hudget   f igh t   as  pa r t   of  Congress's  c o n t i n u i n g  effort   t o   t u r n  
t h e   space   program   i n t o   a   "debating  society"   a n d   said   it   was  t im e   for  t h e  
talk   t o   s top .   H e   dep lo red   t h e   fact   t h a t   N A S A   was  n o t   g iven   e n o u g h  
money   t o   c r e a t e   a   space   program   a b o u t   w h i c h   Am e r i c a n   you th   cou ld  
d r e am .   J i m  S e n s e n h r e n n e r ,   R e p u b l i c a n   f rom  W i s c o n s i n ,   w h o   sa t   n e x t   t o  
G o l d i n ,   i n   c o n t r a s t   spoke   of  "a  fatally   flawed  space   s t a t i o n   program"   o n  
wh ich   space   do l la r s   shou ld   n o t   he  risked .   (0 Sen   S t a r ,   May  5 /94 ;   Space  
New s ,   May  9 / 9 4 )  

M a y   5 :   G e o r g e   Brown ,   Democ ra t   from   Ca l i fo rn ia   a n d   c h a i rm a n   of  t h e  
Hou se   C o t nm i t t e e   o n   S c i e n c e ,   S p a c e ,   a n d   Techno logy ,   called   a   c lo sed -  
doo r   m e e t i n g   o n   May  5  t o   discuss  t h e   $30   b i l l ion   I n t e r n a t i o n a l   S p a c e  
S t a t i o n .   H e  ca l led   t h e   m e e t i n g   a f te r   a dm i n i s t r a t i o n   officials   assured  h i m  
t h a t   S p a c e   S t a t i o n   co s t s   would   n o t   s h o r t c h a n g e  o t h e r   N A S A   programs .  
Ob se rve r s   said  Brown  wished   t o   assure  t h a t   N A S A   rece ived   sufficient  
fund s   t o   c o n d u c t   its   ac t iv i t ie s .   C omm i t t e e   members   dec ided   t h e y   cou ld  
take   n o   a c t i o n   u n t i l   they   h e a r d   of  t h e   dec i s ion s   of  t h e   A p p r o p r i a t i o n s  
C omm i t t e e .   ( F l a  Today ,   May  5 /94 ;  AP, May  5 / 9 4 ;  0 S e n  S t a r ,  May  6 /94 ;  H 
C h r o n ,  May  6 / 9 4 ;  H  Post ,  May  6 / 9 4 ;  F la   Today ,   May  6 / 9 4 ;  LA  T imes ,   May 
1  1 / 9 4 ;  Hun t sv i l le  N ew s ,   May  1 1 / 9 4 )  

A   Russian Military  Space  Forces official  told  Reuters  t h a t  Russia planned   a  
series  of  unmanned   space  launches   t o   its  orbiting   Space  S t a t i o n  Mir  in  May 
before  a   manned   launch   in  J u n e  with   a   cosmonaut   from  Kazakhstan.  T h e  
unmanned   launches   were  t o  consist  of  a   cargo  spacecraft,  a   commun ica t ion s  
satellite   in  a   joint  program  with   t h e  U.S.  company   Rimsat ,  a n d   two  military 
satellites.  (Reuters ,  May  5/94)  

N A S A   Administrator  Daniel  S. G o l d i n   announced   t h a t   members  of  t h e  
N A S A   Hubb le   Space   Telescope  Recovery  Team  would  receive  t h e   1993  
Robert  J .  Collier  Trophy  from  t h e  Na t iona l  Ae ronau t ic  Association  o n  May  6  
for  the l r  outstanding   work .  ( N A S A  Release  94 -71 ;  H  Post,  May  6 / 9 4 )  

May  6:  Two  former  e~np loyee s  of  Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   Co rpo ra t ion   who  
worked  in  company  mach ine  shops  in  Hou s ton   and  Canoga   Park, California ,  
called  t h e  N e w  York  Times  t o  charge   t h a t   they  observed  supervisors  falsifying 
accounts   by  charging   items  to   N A S A   when   workers  were  actually  idle  or  
working  o n   personal  projects.  Rockwell  officials  indicated   they   found   t h e  
charges  hard   t o  believe.  (NY Times,  May  7/94)  

MAY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

May  8:  Dale  Hemke ,   a  spokesperson  for  t h e   Goddard   Space   Flight  Cen te r ,  
G reenbe l t ,  Maryland ,  said  t h a t  n o t  only  does N A S A  wan t  t h e  public  t o  know 
about   some of  t h e   important   work  being  d o n e  a t   t h e  C e n t e r  but  also  it  wants  
ch i ld ren  t o  participate   in  t h e  technology  so  t h a t   their   interest   in  mathematics  
will  con t inue .  Ch i ld ren  can  spin  in   t h e  gyro chair ,  command   a mock  G em i n i  
spacecraft,  and   retrieve  a  satellite.  But  t h e   most  popular  e v e n t  occurs  o n   t h e  
first and   third  Sundays of  t h e  m o n t h  when   a  launch   pad  is  set up  and  en thu s i -  
asts may watch  or  participate  in  safe model  rocket  launches.  ( B  Sun ,  May 8 /94 )  

N A S A  plans  t o  shouf  "Destiny  in  Space"  o n  t h e  2 5 t h  anniversary  of  t h e  his-  
toric   Apollo   11  launch ,   July  16, according   t o   Eddie  Harrison ,   chief  of  t h e  
media  services  branch   a t  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r .  T h e  IMAZ  film  t o  he  shown  
a t   Spaceport   U SA   includes  photos   of  t h e   Huhble   Telescope  repair  mission. 
( F l u  Tt~day ,  May  8 / 9 4 )  

May  9:   Representatives   of  N A S A   and   t h e   Departments   of  C omm e r c e ,  
Defense,  Energy,  and   Transportation   conduc ted   a  Na t iona l   Facilities  Study. 
T h e  s tudy  established  t h e  need   for  two   new  wind  tunne l s   and   made  70  rec- 
ommenda t ion s  affecting  aeronautics   and   space  facilities  nationwide .   ( N A S A  
Release  94-73;  Fla  Today, May  22 /94 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   signing  of  a  con t rac t   modification   w i th   Rockwell 
In te rna t iona l  Space  Systems Division ,  D o a n e y ,  California .  T h e  con t rac t   pro-  
vided  for  t h e  production   of  t h e   Multifunction   Electronic   Display  Subsystem 
(MEDS )  t o  be  installed  in  each  of  t h e  four Space  S h u t t l e  orbiters.  MEDS  is  t o  
replace  some  of  t h e   current   e lec t rc~mechan ica l  flight  instruments   a n d  meters 
in   t h e  shu t t le  cockpit .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - n )  

T h e  Defense  Depa r tmen t   said  t h a t   robot   spacecraft  C l em e n t i n e  suffered  a 
malfunction   o n  May  7 t h a t   would  prevent   it   from  flying  by  and   pho tog raph -  
ing   t h e   asteroid  Geographos .   However,  C l em e n t i n e   u7as t o   c o n t i n u e   t o  per-  
form  a military  mission  t h a t   would  test  23  "advanced   technologies."  O n  May 
19 ,  t h e  managers of  C l em e n t i n e  were  t o  fire  its main   thruster   t o  ease  t h e  craft 
i n t o  a circular  pa th   between   t h e  Moon  a n d  Ea r th ,  where  t h e y  can  c o n t i n u e  t o  
test   its  prototype  military  componen t s   in   t h e  upper  reaches  of  t h e  Van  A l len  
radiation   belts  around   t h e   h la net.  S i n c e   its  Janua ry   25  launch ,   C l em e n t i n e  
has  provided  1 .5  million  images of  t h e  Moon  a t  a bargain  price.  ( W  Post, May 
10194; NY Times, May  10194; USA  Today, May  10194; W  Post, May  11/94;  W 
Times,  May  13/94;  W  Post, May  19/94)  

T h e  Boeing Company   announced   t h a t   it   p lanned   t o  c u t   about   9 0 0  jobs  a t  
its  p lan t   in   Huntsville ,   Alabama ,   because  it  lost  a n  eight-year ,  $1.05 hillion  
con t rac t   with   NA SA .   However,  Boeing  anticipated   t h a t   Compu te r   5 - '  
u e n c e s  
Co rpo ra t ion ,  wh ich  won  t h e  N A S A   con t rac t ,  would  hire   most  of  t h e   affect- 
ed workers.  (NY  Times, May  10194) 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

MAY  1994 

O n  May  9 ,  NASA   stopped  accepting  proposals  for  its  pilot  project  High 
Performance Computing  and Communications Program. More t h a n  400 com- 
munities,  corporations,  and   school  districts  submitted  proposals  for  using 
NASA's  LYast databases  via  the   Internet .   Winners  of  t h e   cooperative  agree- 
ments were  to  be  announced   in July. Scottsdale, Arizona,  one  of  the   commu- 
nities  tha t   submitted  a  proposal,  hoped  to  use  NA SA   data   to  help   urban 
development  and balance  such development  against environmental  consider- 
ations.  (LA  Times, May  10194) 

Lockheed  Space  Operations  Company  in   Ttusville  announced   tha t   183  
personnel  would  lose  their   jobs  as  a  result  of  NASA   budget  cuts.  Lockheed 
was  the   main  contractor   in  a  $607  million-a-year  shuttle   processing  agree- 
ment  with NASA .   (Fla Today, May  10194) 

Robert  Raspen, NASA   deputy  assistant  inspector general  for auditing, said 
NASA  had  rejected  its auditor's advice tha t   it discontinue  its use of Spacehab  
Corporation .   NASA   felt  it   needed  Spacehab  t o   conduct  its  commercial 
experiments.  (Fla Today, May  10/94) 

May  10: NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center ,   Cleveland ,  Oh io ,   announced   the  
award to Gilcrest Electric and Supply Company, Elyria, O h i o ,  of  a contract  t o  
provide  technical  and  fabrication  services for  the  Center's  in-house  research 
and  development program. T h e  Lewis Cen te r  also announced  the  selection of 
R&R  International ,  Akron ,  Oh io ,  for  a  contract   for  facilities operations and  
technical  support  services. (NA SA  Release C94-o;  NASA  Release C94 -p )  

J o h n  Gibbons, Wh i te   House  science  adviser, said  tha t   as  a  result  of  tight 
buJgets  the  Government   would  combine  t h e  operations of  civilian  and  mili- 
tary  weather  satellite systems: two belonging  to  the   Defense Department  and  
two  belonging  to  the   National  Oceanic   and   Atmospheric  Administration 
( N O A A ) .  T h e  combining should  save as much as $300 million  by  the  end  of 
1999. Under  an   interagency  agreement, t h e  Defense Department  was  to  pro- 
cure  future  weather  satellites,  the   Commerce  Department's  Atmospheric 
Agency  was  to   operate  the   system, and   NASA   was  to   conduct  research  o n  
advanced  technology  t o   be  incorporated  in to   t h e   new  spacecraft.  T h e   pro- 
gram became a joint  Defense Department-NASA  project i n  1993. NASA  was 
to build  and  launch  a  Landsat  7  spacecraft to  replace  the  aging Landsat 4 and  
5 spacecraft. NASA   also was  to design a new generation of spacecraft to com-  
pete  with  foreign  satellites  tha t   p o v i d e   similar  data .   On  May  11  J o h n  
hlorgan ,   Director  of  the   European  weather  satellite  operations  (Eumetsat)  
said  he  would  discuss with  nations   tha t   participate  in  European  satellite  and  
space programs NOAA's  invitation  to  join  the  combined weather  satellite sys- 
tem.  These  agencies  already  cooperate  with  N O A A   o n  developing  a  J o i n t  
Polar  System.  (AP, May  10194; NY Xmes, May  11/94; W Post, May  11/94; 0 
Sen  Stur, May  11/94; Fla  Today, May  12/94) 

MAY 1994 

CHRONOLOGY  I994 

Th e  General Accounting Office, in  a report  to Congress, said that NASA's 
Je t  Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, managed  by the  California 
Institute  of  Technology, was  poorly controlled  and  lost  about  $1  million  in 
property  annually.  (Reuters,  May  10194; 0 Sen  Scar, May  11/94; F.!u  T&y, 
May  11/94; AP, May  11/94) 

May  I  I :   NASA   announced  that  as  a result  of  tests  it  conducted  jointly  with 
McDonnell Douglas and  the U.S. Army, converting  a small area of a helicop- 
ter  main  rotor  blade  into  a  controllable  flap  reduced  by  40  percent  the  
strength of  the  sound from "blade slap."  (NASA  Release 94-74; W Post, May 
12/94; Daily  Press, J u n  13/94) 

Th e  new  chairman of  the House  Appropriations Committee, David Obey, 
Democrat from Wisconsin, divided a $540 billion Federal spending budget  in 
such a way  that NASA  had  a good chance of  getting 98 percent  of  the funds 
it  requested for FY  1995. Efforts  to kill  the  International  Space Station proj- 
ect  o n  the   House  floor  remained  likely.  ( 0  Sen  Star,  May  12/94; Fla  Today, 
May  12/94; H Chron, May  13/94; H Post, May  13/94; W Post, May  13/94; SP 
New s ,  May  16/94) 

Th e  Technical  and  Business  Exhibition  and  Symposium  (TABES) held  a 
two-day session in Huntsville, Alabama. The  five panelists a t  the opening ses- 
sion were  Ben  Bova, e ~ - ~ r e s i d e n t  of  the  National  Space Society; John  Pike, 
space  policy director  for  the  Federation  of  American  Scientists; Harry  Craft 
Jr.,  Director  of  the  Technology  Transfer  Office  at  NASA/Marshall  Space 
Flight  Center;  Peter  Diamandis,  co-founder  of  the  International  Space 
University;  and  Richard  Jacobson,  former  president  of  Spacehab,  Inc.  Th e  
panelists debated how practical NASA  could be  and still have a visionary pro- 
gram  for science exploration.  Panelists concluded that NASA  needed  to do a 
better  job  of  marketing  its  product.  (Huntsville News, May  11/94; Htsvl Tms, 
May  11/94) 

Japanese  Prime  Minister  Tustomu  Hata's  Space  Activities  Commission 
announced  that  Japan's  first  woman  astronaut,  Chiaki  Mukai,  a  medical 
researcher, was  to  take  part  in NASA's Columbia  flight set for  launch July 8. 
T h e   flight  was  to   conduct  some  80   experiments  under  th e   second 
International  Microgravity  Laboratory  Project,  of  which  Japan  is  a  member. 
(UP, May  11/94) 

May  1 2 :   NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  announced  that  NASA  
would  stop work on  the  Polar spacecraft and would  continue with  pre-launch 
activities on  the Wind spacecraft. Work on  Polar was  to resume only after the 
Wind spacecraft had  operated successfully on-orbit and after a reevaluation of 
resources needed  to  complete  the   program  within  budgetary  limits.  (NASA  
Release 94-75; SP News, May  16-22/94) 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

MAY  1994 

N A S A   staff  a t   t h e  Kennedy  Space   C e n t e r   began  moving  i n t o   a  new  $ 7 2  
million  building  where   all  U S . ,   European ,  Japanese ,   a n d   C a n a d i a n   s ta t ion  
hardware  were  t o  be  prepared  for  launch .  T h e  modern   computers   and   equip-  
men t   in  t h e   new  con t ro l   rooms  were  commended   particularly   in   t h e  media. 
(Fla Today, May  13/94;  0 S u n ,  J u n  2/94; W Post, J u n  2/94; 0 Sen  Star, J u n  2/94; 
CSM ,  J u n  3 /94 )  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  gave t h e  commencemen t  address a t  
Tullahoma   t o   22  University   of  Tennessee  Space   In s t i tu te   graduates.  H e   said 
Congress  had   been   supportive  bu t   t h e  N a t i o n   needed   t o  decide  where   it   was 
going.  America   used  t o  have   a  vision  a n d  be  willing  t o   take   risks, bu t   it  had  
lost  confidence   i n   itself  and   was willing  t o  settle   for  mediocrity.  H e  pointed  
ou t   t h a t   t h e  cost  of  t h e  en t i re  space  program  "was  only  a qua r te r  of  a  percent  
of  t h e   gross  na t iona l   product"   so  canceling   o n e  program  would  n o t   solve  t h e  
Nation's  p o b l em s .   ( H t s v l  Tms ,  May  13/94; Independent, May  14/94) 

Wh i le  visiting  t h e  University  of Tennessee, N A S A  Administrator   Daniel  S .  
Go ld in   said N A S A   had   t o  share   responsibility  for  t h e   failure of  t h e  canceled  
Comme rc ia l   Experimental   Transporter  (C om e t )   spacecraft  program.  T h e  
University   of  Tennessee  Space   In s t i tu te   (U T S I )  managed  t h e  project ,   wh ich  
involved  o t h e r  universities  and  private  con t rac to r s .  T h e  goal was  t o  provide  a 
lower  cost  a l te rna t ive   for  ferrying  private  industrial  experiments   i n t o   orbit .  
G o l d i n  said  UTS I   was  no t   t o  blame  for t h e  cost  overruns  t h a t   nearly  doubled  
t h e   project's  price;  in  retrospect ,  N A S A   should   have   been   more  ac t ive   and  
offered h e l p  t o  UTS I .   (AP ,  May  13/94) 

May  13:  NASA's  Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r ,   Hun t sv i l le ,   A labama ,  
announced   t h e   selection   of  Boeing  Defense  a n d   Space   G roup ,   Missiles  and  
Space   Division,  S e a t t l e ,  Wa sh ing ton ,   for  a  con t rac t   t o   provide  t h e   S h u t t l e  
Uppe r   S tage  system  with   related  integration   and   launch   support  services for 
t h e   space-based  Advanced   X-ray  Astrophysics  Facility  (AXAF ) .   ( N A S A  
Release  C 9 4 4  

May  15: Rene   Pellat ,  head   of  t h e  French   space organization  CN E S ,  said  t h a t  
b o t h   t h e  Mars  9 4  a n d  Mars 9 6  proposed  Russian missions  w i th   large  i n t em a -  
t iona l   participation   were  t o   be  postponed   by  a t   least  two  years  because  of 
Russia's econom ic  difficulties.  (W  Times, May  15 /94 )  

Hal   Francis,  t h e   former  FBI  agent   who   led  t h e   20 -mon th   investigation   of 
N A S A  conducted   by  t h e  FBI, t h e  NA SA  Office of  t h e  Inspector  G e n e r a l ,  a n d  
t h e  Defense  C r im ina l   Investigative  Agency,  said  a t   least  25-and 
perhaps  as 
many  as 50--cases  of  suspected co r rup t ion  among  employees a n d  con t rac to r s  
a t   N A S A   were  strong   enough   t o   merit   criminal   charges.  To  d a t e ,  however, 
charges  had   been   filed  against  only   e igh t   individuals  and   o n e   company   as  a 
result of  Ope ra t ion   Lightning  Strike .  Francis believed  t h a t   t h e  U .S .   attorney's 

MAY  1994 

(:HRONOLOGY  1994 

office  ~ u r s u e d  only  the   "easy"  cases,  but  Assistant  U.S.  Attorney  Abe 
Martinez  denied  this  and  said other  charges were  to  be  filed. Francis  and  his 
colleagues  in  the   sting  operation  demonstrated  they  could  influence  illegal 
major  government  contracts  worth  nearly  $2.4  billion  at   Johnson  Space 
Cen te r  alone.  (H  Chron ,  May  15/94)  

May  16: T h e  anticipated fight over the  budget and, specifically, the  likelihood 
tha t   NASA's  appropriation  would  be  cut   and  that  further  efforts  would  be 
made  to   eliminate  funding  for  the   International  Space  Station  was  featured 
prominently  in  the  media.  (SP  News,  May  16-22/94; Fla  Today, May  16/94; 
Defense Daily, May  16/94; H Chron ,  May  17/94) 

In  the absence of  a National  Space Council  chaired  by  the  Vice President, 
Vice  President A1 Gore's office became  the   focal point  for  space policy. Gore 
and  the Wh i te  House seemed confident tha t  the administration had sufficient 
support t o  pass  the  Space Station. (SP  News, May  16-22/94) 

More  than  1,200 NASA   workers  of  the   nearly  2,000  NASA   staff  who 
applied  received  an   early  retirement  bonus.  Th e   early  retirement  program 
reduced NASA  personnel  from 24,000 a t  the  beginning of  1994 to  22,500 as 
of  the  beginning of  1995. (SP  News, May  16-22/94) 

Sayed  Z.  Shariq,  Director  of  the  M i c e   of  Commercial  Technology  at  
NASA's  Ames  Research  Center,  said  NASA   had  reshaped  its  technology 
transfer  program  so  as  to   make  it  an   integral  part  of  NASA's  business rela- 
tionships  with  the private  sector. In  this  regard, Shariq said  tha t  government 
should adapt  to industry's practices and both NASA  and  industry should work 
together  during  the  research  and  development,  product  planning,  prototyp- 
ing, and fabrication  stages. In addition, Agency staff performance evaluations, 
incentives, and awards should be structured  to foster commitment  to  the  com- 
mercial program. On e  of  the  first signs of  NASA's commercialization mission 
was  the  Aerospace  Industry Technology Program, funded  at  $20  million  for 
FY  1994. ( A v W ,  May  16/94) 

U.S.  astronauts Norman  Thagard  and  Bonnie  Dunbar, who  are  training  in 
Russia,  returned  to  Johnson Space Cen te r  with  the   four Russian cosmonauts 
with  whom  they  will  f l y   in  March  1995. Th e   six  were  in  Houston  for  three 
weeks  to   learn  about  U.S.  science  experiments  planned  for  their  flights.  ( H  
Post, May  17/94) 

Astronaut  Bill  Shepherd, deputy  manager  of  the   Space  Station  program 
office  in  Houston,  said  that  NASA   had  contingency  plans  for  building  the 
In te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i on   without   Russian  assistance,  i f   necessary. 
However, NASA  fully expected Russian participation. ( F h  Today, May  17/94; 
H Chron ,  May  17/94) 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1994 

May  J 7: NASA  was commended for raising the problem of debris mitigation 
in  space  to  a high  policy  goal  and  for  being  in  the   process  of  drawing  up  a 
detailed  rule  book  for  its  spacecraft  designers,  launchers,  and  operators  to 
avoid  creating  debris.  T h e   commercial  sector  was  the  unknown  in  this 
regard, particularly  with  reference  to communications satellites. T h e  matter 
was  a  vital  one  because  over  the  years  several  satellites  were  lost  for 
unknown  causes  and  may  have  been  victims  of  "space  junk."  (NY  Times, 
May  17/94) 

Terri Bracher, Patrick Air  Force  Base  spokesperson, said  the  first nighttime 
practice rescue operation  for Space Shuttle crew who might be  downed a t  sea 
is  to be  conducted  on  May  18 near  Kennedy  Space Center.  More  than  200 
members of  the Air  Force, Air  National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, 
Coast Guard, and NASA were  to take part. Rescuers were  to use  night  vision 
goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find  the float- 
ing crew members.  (0  Sen  Star, May  17/94) 

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin  told  the  House  Appropriations 
Subcommittee meeting  to consider NASA's budget, that  NASA  needed $2.1 
billion for  the  International Space Station and could not  build  the station for 
less.  (AP, May  17/94) 

William  Baragar,  Boeing  Company's  corporate  director  of  congressional 
affairs, said  that  Boeing  planned  to  help  NASA  develop  a High  Speed Arm 
Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 
12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had  asked Congress for $220 million for 
research  on   the plane,  which  could  fly at  about  2.4  times  the  speed of  sound 
or  slightly  faster  than  the  Concorde  and  carry  about  300  people.  NASA 
Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin also discussed the project with a British news- 
paper. (Antelope Valley  Press, May  17/94; Financial Tmes of  London, May  30194; 
LA  Times, Jun  1/94) 

May  19:  NASA  announced  that  the  Hubble  Space Telescope's Wide  Field 
Planetary Camera  2  returned  valuable new  images of  the supernova  1994 I  in 
the  inner  regions of  the  "Whirlpool Galaxy," M51 ,   located  20  million  light- 
years  away  in  the constellation  Canes Venatici. A supernova is  a violent  stel- 
lar  explosion that destroys a star while ejecting  the products of  nuclear bum- 
ing  into the gas between  stars.  (NASA  Release 94-76) 

NASA  also announced  that  the Hubble Space Telescrope had obtained the 
best  images yet  of  a mysterious mirror-imaged pair of  rings of  glowing gas  that 
encircle the site of  the stellar explosion supernova 1987A. Th e  explanation of 
the  pair  of  rings was  uncertain.  (NASA  Release 94-77; Reuters, May  19/94; 
AP, May  19/94; NY  Times, May  20194; B  Sun, May  20194; W Post, May  20194; 
USA  Today, May  20194; C SM ,  May  26/94) 

MAY  1994 

CHRON ( IL0G I '  1994 

N A S A  announced  t h e  award of con t rac t s  t o  16 research  teams for a d v ;~ n c e d  
aeronautics  projects a n d  studies in  its largest solicitation  of  breakthrough   ideas 
from  industry,  universities,  a n d   o t h e r   gove rnmen t   agencies.  Sponsored  hy 
NASA ' s   O f f ice   of  A e r o n a u t i c s ,   unde r  
t h e   A d v a n c e d   C o n c e p t s   for 
Aeronautics   program,  t h e   con t rac t s   were  t o   develop   aeronautical   concep t s  
t h a t  were  technologically  risky, but   had   a high  po ten t ia l  payoff for U.S.  incius- 
try.  ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - r )  

NASA's   Goddard   Space  Flight  C e n t e r ,  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland ,  and   its  affili- 
a ted   sites-Wallops  Flight  Facility  in  Wallops  Island,  Virginia,  a n d   N A S A  
t h e   selection   of  Cortez   111 
Headquarters   in   Wa sh ing ton ,   DC-announced  
Services  Co rpo ra t ion   of  Albuquerque ,   N e ~ v  Mexico ,   t o   provide  comp rehen -  
sive  logistics  services  t o   these   sites.  T h e   services  included  t ran spo r ta t ion ,  
flight  project  p lann ing   and   coo rd ina t ion  support ,  supply  managemen t ,  ware- 
housing ,   property  management   and   disposal, mail  services,  forms  and   records 
managemen t ,  and   interior  design.  ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - s )  

Geo rge  E. Brown, J r . ,  Democrat  from  California   and  cha i rman  of  t h e  House  
Sc ience ,  Space ,  and   Technology  C omm i t t e e ,  said  t h a t   if  Congress   allocated  
N A S A   less  t h a n   $14 .15   billion   in  t h e   1995  budget ,   h e   would  prohnhly 
oppose   con t inu ing   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   program  in   its  present   form.  Hc   said 
t h a t   h e  would  submit   a   reduced  N A S A  budget  t o  Congress   t h a t   kept   Space  
S t a t i o n   funding   in tac t   but   e l im ina ted   o n e   S h u t t l e   flight ,   t h e   p lanned   Mars 
Surveyor  project ,   a n d  o t h e r   items.  S e n a t o r  Barbara M i k u l s k~ ,  Democrat   from 
Maryland   a n d   cha i r   of  t h e   suhcomm i t tee   t h a t   oversees  NASA's   annua l  
app rop r ia t ion ,   said  t h e   suhcomm i t tee   needed   t o   receive  a  higher   602   ( R )  
budget  a l loca t ion   t h a n   its  House  coun te rpa r t   t o   sustain   NASA's  programb. 
S h e  added   t h a t   if  t h e  Space   S t a t i o n   lost  in   t h e   House ,   she   though t   it  urould 
be  difficult  t o   ma in ta in   it.  ( W  Post,  May  20194; NY Tunes,  Ma):  2L7194;  F l a  
Today, May  20194; 0 Sen Star, May  20194; T le fense   Daily, May  20194; \& 'P o s t ,  
May  20194; AuWk, May  23/94)  

May  20:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  had   assumed  t h e   s a t e l l i t e - d c t~ e l o p~ n e n t  
con t rac t   for  Landsat   7   from  t h e   Depa r tmen t   of  Defense.  NASA's  Godda rd  
Space  Flight  Cen te r ,  G reenbe l t ,   Maryland ,  was  t o  manage  t h e   con t rac t   with  
Ma r t in   Ma r ie t ta   A s t ro   Space ,   Valley  Forge,  Pennsylvania .   Landsat  7  was  t o  
provide  essential  land   remote-sensing  da ta  critical   t o  understanding   en\riron-  
men ta l   change .  ( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 7 8 )  

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   t h e   first  set  of  solar  array  moiiules  fix  t h e  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l   S p a c e  S t a t i o n   program  were  t o   he  shipped   from  t h e   I Jn i te i l  
S t a t e s   t o  Russia  a t   t h e   e n d   of  May.  T h e  modules   were  prototypes   of  t l i ~ h t  
un i t s   t o  be  delivered   i n   Sep tembe r   t o   he  inco rpo ra ted   i n t o   advanced   solar  
arrays  for   use  o n   Russia's  Space   S t a t i o n   Mir.  ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 7 9 ;  UP ,  
May  23 /94 )  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AN11 AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1994 

From  Raikonur  Cosmodrome   In  Kazakhstan,  Russia  launched   o n e   of  its 
Gorizont   commun ica t ion s  satellites  for  t h e  U .S .  firm  Rimsat ,   pu t t ing   it  i n t o  
orbit   a t   about   22 ,300   miles  above   Earth .   T h i s   was  t h e   second   launch   of  a  
Russian  spacecraft  for  Rimsat .   T h e  Gorizont   went   i n t o   orbit   over   Malaysia, 
with   AllAsia   S a t  of Manila   as  its  first  customer.  (UP, May  2011994) 

T h e  Ame r ican  Society  of  Mechanical   Engineers  task  force studying  budget- 
ing  for  N A S A   issued  its   report   t o   t h e   subcomm i t tee   of  t h e   S e n a t e  
Appropriations   Comm i t tee .   It  said  t h a t ,   " the   proposed  funding   levels  are  
inadequate   t o  support  bo th   a  balanced   aerospace science-technology  program 
and   a n  active   program  of  h um a n   spaceflight,  including   t h e   redesigned  space 
s ta t ion ."   T h e   report  maintained   t h a t   t h e   work  in tended   for  t h e   proposed 
Space  S t a t i o n  could  he  done  by  robotic   spacecraft  or  o t h e r  efforts.  ( H  Ch ron ,  
May  2 1 /94 )  

May  2 2 :  Alex   Roland ,   a  professor  o f   military  history  and   technology   a t   Duke 
University,  wrote a  feature article  in  t h e  "Outlook"   section   in which   h e  ma in -  
tained   t h a t   promoters  of  t h e  costly  Space  S t a t i o n  and   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  were 
forcing  abandonmen t   of  science   experiments   t h a t   would  be  more  valuable. 
( W  Post, May  22/94)  

May  23:  Former  N A S A   astronaut   and   Space   S h u t t l e   commande r  Ronald   J .  
G rabe  assumed  his new  post  as  vice president  of  business development   for  t h e  
launch   systems  group  of  O rb i ta l   Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion   ( O S C )   in   S te r l ing ,  
Virginia.  He   explained   t h a t  OSC's  specialty was providing  access  t o  space  for 
small  satellites  at  reasonable  cost. O n e  of  his  priorities  was  t o  find   new  mar- 
kets   for  C>SC1s Taurus  and   Pegasus  rockets.  OSC also  was  about   t o  e n t e r   t h e  
commun ica t ion s  field  th rough   its ORBCOMM   satellite  system.  (W  Post, May 
23 /94 )  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  announced   t h e  signing of  a n  agree- 
men t   between   N A S A   and   t h e   Multiple   Sclerosis  Association   of  America  
( M S A A )  t o  collaborate  t o  advance   t h e  application  of  cool  suit  technology  for 
multiple   sclerosis  (M S )  p a t i e n t s   More  t h a n   300 ,000   Americans   suffer  from 
MS ,  for which   the re   is  n o  known  cure .  Abou t   1 ,000  MS  pa t ien t s  use  t h e  cu r -  
rent   cool  suit ,  used  as a  space suit undergarment   for cooling  astronauts  o n  t h e  
surface  of  t h e  Moon   or   during   space  walks,  for  systematic  relief.  Members  of 
NASA's J o h n s o n  Space  Cen te r ,  Hou s ton ,  a n d  Ames  Research  Cen te r ,  Moffett 
Field, California ,  were  t o  work  with  M SAA  staff tcl  improve  t h e  performance 
of  cool  suits.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -80 )  

May  24 :   N A S A   announced   t h a t   together   with   t h e   Ame r ican   Geophysical  
U n i o n   it  was hono r ing  pioneer  space scientist  James  A .  Van A l l e n  o n  h i s  8 0 t h  
birthday.  Dr.  Van  A l len ,   Professor Emeritus  a t   t h e  University   of  Iowa, over   a  
50-year period ,  studied  planetary  magnetospheres  and  cosmic rays. He  discov- 

MAY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

ered  t h e   belt  of  radiation  around  the   Earth  tha t   hears  his  name.  (NA SA  
Release 94-81;  Fla Today,  May  25/94) 

Russian  cosmonaut  Sergei Krikalev  planted  a  12-foot  live  oak  tree  beside 
NASA's  headquarters  building  a t  Kennedy  Space  Center .  Th is   was  to  com-  
memorate  his  flight  on   Space  Shu t t le   Discovery  in  January. In   Russia, cos- 
monauts plant   trees  to  commemorate  each  of  their   space flights.  (Fla Today, 
May  25/94)  

M a y   25: NASA   announced  tha t   the  Hubble  Space Telescope had  discovered 
the   best  evidence  yet  of  a  black  hole   in  the   constellation  Virgo.  T h e   proof 
consisted  of  a whirlpool  of  ho t  gas a t  the  core of  galaxy M87 ,  which  lies more 
t h a n  52 million  light-years  from Earth. T h e  stars in  the  whirlpool appeared  to 
be  streaming  toward  the   galaxy's center   and  then   in to   orbits  hound  to  an  
apparent  black  hole  hidden  at  M87S core.  Data  from  the   Hubble spectrome- 
ter,  used  to  measure  the   velocity  of  stars  orbiting  within  the   nucleus  of  the  
M57  galaxy, also  appeared  to  confirm  the   black  hole.  Sally  Heap,  a  NASA  
astronomer,  at  a  national   meeting  of  the   American  Astronomical  Society, 
commented  on   the   Hubble  findings  in  terms  of  her  own  research.  ( N A S A  
Release  94-82;  Flu  Today,  May  25/94;  B  S u n ,  May  26/94;  LJSA To&?,  May 
26/94;  W  Post,  May  26/94; NY  Xm e s ,  May  26/94; W  Times,  May  26/94;  Fla 
Today,  May  26/94; WSJ, May  26/94; 0 S e n  Star, May  26/94; AP, May  26/94; 
CSM ,   May  26/94;  Oregon ian ,   May  27/94;  Fla  Today,  May  29/94;  AP,  May 
30194; H C h r o n ,  May  31/94; C Trib, May  31/94; 1V Post, J u n  2/94; Plain Dea ler ,  
J u n  2/94; Newsweek,  J u n  6/94) 

NA SA  released new pictures of  asteroid  243  Ida  and  its  recently  discovered 
Moon  taken  by  the  Galileo  spacecraft. A l though  similar  in  color  and  bright- 
ness,  Ida  and  its  moon  appear  to  be  composed  of  different  types  of  material. 
(NASA  Release 94-83)  

T h e  Space Coast Science Cen te r   in Melbourne, Florida, which was  used  to  
educate  children  in  t h e   area  about  science,  closed  because  o f   lack  o f   funds. 
(Fla Today, May  27/94) 

M a y   26:  Major  Oleg Kulakovsky  of  the  Milltary  Space  Forces, the   branch  of 
the  Russian army  tha t   runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was  quoted  as  saying that  
people  were  leaving  adjacent  Leninsk  because  "there's nothing   to  stay  for." 
T h e   population  was  said  to   have  fallen  from  100,000  to   45,000  since 
Kazakhstan gained  independence  from  the  Soviet  Un ion  in  1991. Kazakhstan 
has  a  severe energy  crisis  and  a  chronic   water  shortage, which  contribute   to 
the  harsh life for the  population. Since  t h e  first Soviet manned  space flight by 
Yuri Gagarin  in  1961, Baikonur  has  averaged one   launch  a mon th ,  according 
to  General  Oleg G o q u s h k i n ,  space center  deputy  commander. However,  the  
space  industry  appears  to be  undergoing  a crisis of  confidence, and  in  view  of 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

MAY  1994 

Russia's economic  crisis, t h e  cost of ma in ta in ing  Baikonur  is being  questioned .  
(UP ,  May  26/94)  

N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   t h e   C l em e n t i n e   mission,  sponsored  by  t h e  
Depa r tmen t  of  Defense  Ballistic  Missile  Defense  Organization ,   had   comp le t -  
ed   systematic  mapping   of  t h e   lunar   surface  t o   produce  t h e  first  global  digital 
map  of  t h e  Moon .  NASA's C l em e n t i n e  science   team  mapped  t h e  topography 
and   composition   of  major  regions of  t h e  Moon   in   detail   and   produced  o t h e r  
im p o r t a n t   s c i e n c e   results   released  a t   t h e   m e e t i n g   of  t h e   Am e r i c a n  
Geophysical  U n i o n   in  Baltimore, Maryland. T h e  digital da ta  cover  38  million 
square  kilometers  of  t h e   M o o n   mapped  i n   11  colors  i n   t h e   visible  a n d   near  
infrared  parts  of  t h e   spectrum   during   t h e   mission's  7 1   days  in  lunar   o rb i t .  
( N A S A  Release 94 -84 ;  B  Sun ,  May  27/94)  

After   t h e  S e n a t e  decided  t o  adjourn  o n  May  25  for  t h e  Memorial  Day  ho l -  
iday,  t h e  S e n a t e  Appropriations   subcommittee t h a t  con t ro l s  N A S A  spending  
postponed   its  initial  hearings  o n  N A S A   t o  J u n e  7.  (Flu Today, May  27 /94 )  

I n   a  speech   t o   t h e   Ame r ican   Geophysical   U n i o n ,   N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r  
Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  challenged   scientists  t o  establish  a n  ambitious  new  goal  for 
space  science   t h a t   would  un i te   compe t ing   research  disciplines  a n d   resurrect 
public  exc i temen t .  As  a  possible  goal,  G o l d i n  suggested  t h a t  N A S A   comm i t  
itself  t o  finding  habitable   planets  outside  t h e  solar system.  (SP  News, May 30- 
J u n  12 /94 )  

Bowman C u t t e r ,  deputy  assistant  to   t h e  President  for economic  policy,  took  
a  lead  in developing  a space policy for t h e  adm in i s t ra t ion ,  according  t o  a s ta te -  
m e n t   h e  made  o n  May  26. A s   a  first  s tep ,  h e  convened   a  meeting  May  13  a t  
t h e  W h i t e  House  with   a  diverse  a n d  bipartisan  group  of  industry  representa-  
tives,  N A S A   managers,  military  officers,  and   academicians   t o   discuss  t h e  
space  program's  future .   A l though   the re   was  some  talk   about   t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n ,  t h e  major  emphasis was o n  longer-term  policy. Ra the r   t h a n  new  pro-  
grams, W h i t e  House  officials said  t h e  focus was  to  be o n  streamlining  NASA's 
bureaucracy,  focusing  research  and  development   t o  help   private  industry, a n d  
pushing small missions  t o  demon s t ra te  advanced   technologies .  (SIJ News ,  May 
3 0 - J u n  12 /94 )  

May  27:  Space   S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s ,   refitted  over   a  19 -mon th  period  a t   a  cost  of 
$96  million  t o  enab le   it  t o  dock  with   Mir, was expected   t o  arrive  a t  Kennedy  
Space   C e n t e r   from  its  overhaul   a t   Rockwell  Space   Systems  Division  in  
Palmilale,  California .   T h e   plan   was  for  A t lan t i s   t o   dock   w i th   Mir   during   a 
series of  10  s h u t t l e  flights  between   1995 and   1997. O t h e r  modifications  were 
designed  t o   make   A t lan t i s   safer.  A t lan t i s '   re tu rn   means   limited  space  a t  
Kennedy  Space   C e n t e r  for  processing  t h e   various  Shu t t le s .   (FIa  Today, May 
27/94;  AP, May  29/94; W Post, May  30194; Flu  Today, J u n  1/94)  

MAY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

NASA   announced   the   selection  of  six  Hispanic-serving  universities  to  
receive  five-year,  Institutional  Research  Award  grants  for  multidisciplinary 
research  in  science  and  engineering.  T h e   universities  were  to   receive 
$400,000 the  first year, $600,000 the  second year, $800,000 the  third  year, and  
$1  million  in   t h e   fourth  and   fifth  years,  for  a  total   of  $3.8  million  over  the  
five-year period. T h e  universities selected were: California  S ta te  University a t  
Los  Angeles;  Florida  l n t e r n a t i o n a l   University ,   Miami;  New   Mexico  
Highlands  University,  Las  Vegas;  City  College  of  New  York;  University  of 
Puerto  Rico,  Rio  Piedras; and  University  of  Texas  a t   San  An ton io .   (NA SA  
Release 94-85)  

NASA   announced   tha t   scientists  a t   its  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center ,  
Huntsville, Alabama, had discovered unusual gamma-ray flashes i n  t h e  upper 
atmosphere  high  above  thunderstorms.  T h e   heretofore  unseen  flashes  were 
detected  by  the   Burst  and  Transient  Source  Experiment,  a  Marshall  instru- 
ment   aboard  NASA's  orbiting  Comp ton  Gamma  Ray  Observatory.  (NA SA  
Release 94-86; W Post, May  30194) 

NASA   announced   tha t   Space  Shuttle   astronaut  William  E.  T h o r n t o n  
would  retire  from NA SA  o n  May  31. (NA SA  Release 94-87)  

J o n  Linderman,  a  National   Research  Council   fellow  a t   NASA's  Ames 
Research Center ,  said tha t ,  based o n  experiments with  rats, exercise combined 
with growth hormone  may help  prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, 
and  patients  confined  to  bed  following  illness or  injury. Russian  cosmonauts 
discovered  tha t   extensive  exercise  alone   was  insufficient  to   prevent  muscle 
atrophy.  (UP, May  27/94; UP, J u n  3/94)  

As  a  result  of  an   investigation  by  NASA's  Inspector General ,   Omniplan  
Corporation ,  with offices near t h e  Johnson  Space Center ,  four related compa- 
nies,  and  five  employees, together  with  t h e   Chief  Executive  Officer  Ralph 
Montijo   Jr.  and  his  wife,  Guillermina ,  were  named  in   a  Federal  grand  jury 
indictment .   T h e y  were  charged  with  conspiracy  t o   present  false  claims  t o  
NASA ,   embezzling  from  a n  employee benefits  plan,  money  laundering,  and  
making  false  statements  to NASA ,   t h e   Internal  Revenue  Service, the   Small 
Business Administration,  and t h e  Defense Con t rac t  Audit  Agency.  The com -  
pany  had  been  previously  indicted  for  allegedly  swindling  $4  million  from 
NA SA   and  its  own  employees. Omn ip lan   subcontracted  through  Rockwell 
Space  Operations  Company  to  write flight plan  documentation  for  t h e  Space  
Shu t t le .  T h e  government  filed  a  lawsuit  to   try  to  recover  $3.75 million.  ( H  
Post, May  28/94) 

May  29:  T h e   Book  Review  section  carried  an   extensive  review  of  Eric  J. 
Chaisson's The Hubble  Wars:  Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in  the  Two-Billion- 
Dollar  Struggle Over   the  Hubbk  Space Telescope. Chaisson  served as spokesper- 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AERONAUT ICS  

MAY  1994 

son   and   director   of  educational   programs  for  t h e   Space   Telescope  Sc ience  
Institute ,   a  NASA - suppo r ted   group  of  astronomers  responsible  for  p lann ing  
a n d  directing  t h e  telescope's observational  program. According   t o  t h e  au tho r ,  
t h e   space  telescope's  progress  toward  scientific  discovery  was  hampe red   by 
squabbling  among  N A S A ,  t h e  military  intelligence   community ,   industry,  t h e  
press,  a n d   scientists.  Some   of  t h e   problems  might  have   been   avoided   if  t h e  
Hubble   scientists  had   had   access  t o   t h e   techn ica l   experience   of  t h e  military 
intelligence  community .   (NY T imes  Book  Rev iew ,  May  29/94)  

May  30:  Jean -Ma r ie  Lu ton ,   director   general   of  t h e   European   Space   Agency  
( E SA ) ,  announced  a t  a news conference   in Berlin t h a t  veteran  G e rm a n  astro- 
nau t   Ulf  Merbold   would  join  two  Russian  cosmonauts   for  t h e   first  joint 
European   and   Russian  EUROM IR   94   space  flight  scheduled   for  O c t o b e r   3. 
During  t h e   30-day  flight ,   3 0   experiments   prepared  by   scientists   from  ESA  
states   were  t o   be  performed  o n   board  Russian  Space   S t a t i o n   Mir.  (Reuters ,  
May  30194) 

European  Space  Agency   ( E SA )  scientific  director  Roger  Bonnet   told  a news 
conference   t h a t   scientists  and   officials  from  t h e  world's ma in   space  agencies 
were  t o  mee t   in  Switzerland o n  May 31  t o  discuss a n  ESA proposal  for a joint  
in te rna t iona l  Moon   program.  T h e  program,  t o  cover   a  period  up  t o  40  years, 
would  begin with  modest  lunar  orbit  satellite  missions and  conclude  by  se t t ing  
up h um a n  outposts  o n  t h e  Moon .  Participants  in  t h e  four-day conference  were 
t o   include   N A S A ,   a n d   t h e   Russian  and   Japanese   space  agencies.  (Reuters ,  
May  30194) 

N A S A   scientist   Michael   Van  Woert   discussed  plans  for  a  satellite   in  
NASA's  Mission  t o   Planet   Earth ,   which   was  t o   be  a  follow-on  t o   t h e  
U .S ./French   topex/Poseidon   t h e n   in  o rb i t .  T h e   successor,  t o   be  launched   in 
1998 ,  would  be  smaller  a n d  cost  $200  million .   However,  N A S A   c a n n o t  find  
t h e  $1  20 million  for its sha re ,  which  was t o  include  building  t h e  spacecraft bus 
and   integrating   t h e   instruments .  T h e  French   space agency, CN E S ,  offered  t o  
build  t h e   bus  if  N A S A   would  he lp   w i th   integration   and   launch   it ,   which  
should  save  t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  some $50  million .   (AvWk ,  May  30194) 

Ken Szalai, Director of  NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center  at Edwards Air 
Force  Base, said  tha t   construction  of  the   hypersonic  National  Aerospace   Plane 
(NASP ) ,  the   X-30,  and  its  first  flight  scheduled  for  2000 were  n o   longer  goals. 
Funding  for  the   plane  runs  out  in  1994, but  Szalai said  research  into  supersonic 
flight would  no t  end .  J o h n  Bass, deputy program manager  for  the  NASP  consor- 
tium of government  and  industry, including  five aerospace firms, the  Department 
of  Defense and  NASA ,  considered the  decision a great loss. T h e  one  area remain- 
ing a problem was  tha t  of  propulsion, which engineers could not   test  because t h e  
scramjet  engine  required  t o  power  the  X-30 needed  an  environment  where wind 
speeds reach  25  times  the  speed  of  sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May  30194) 

blAY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1934 

Sena to r   Barbara  Mikulski,  Democrat   from  Maryland   and   cha i r   of  t h e   suh- 
comm i t tee   t h a t   oversees  NASA's   appropriation ,   wrote  a  major  article   on 
space policy  for a space trade  journal .   In  it  she  discussed  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  and  
NASA's various redesigns  of  i t ,  a n d  t h e  lack  of  a clear  mission  a n d  a clear pur-  
pose.  S h e  said  t h e   redesigned  s ta t ion   cost  t o o   much   and   its  early  scientific  
capabilities  were  t o o  limited .  Specifically, she  pointed   o u t   t h a t   in  t h e  summer  
of  1993, N A S A   and   t h e   W h i t e   House   Office  of  Sc ience   and   Technolog\  
Policy promised  t h e  S e n a t e  Appropriations  C omm i t t e e  with  N A S A  oversight 
t h a t   the re  would  be  t h e  same  level  of  science  capability  o n  t h e  new  s ta t ion  as 
o n  Space  S t a t i o n  Freedom. T h a t  mean t   twice  t h e  power  and   space  available 
o n  t h e  cu r ren t  Space  Shu t t le .  However, by  November   1993 ,  t h e  power  for sci- 
e n c e  had  been  c u t   t o  about  half  of  t h a t  available  o n  t h e  cu r ren t  Shu t t le .  T h i s  
mean t  t h a t   it was far more difficult  t o  win congressional  support  for t h e  Space  
S t a t i o n ,  particularly  as  budgets  became  tighter.  Mikulski  questioned   whe the r  
enough   votes  for  t h e   S t a t i o n   would  be  available  if  it  mean t   "killing  t h e  
increase  for  Na t iona l   Sc ience  Foundation   grants ,  na t iona l   service ,  and   fund-  
ing  for  env i ronmen ta l   technology   or   climate   change."  Furthermore ,   t o   avoid 
defeat ,   t h e  S t a t i o n  needed  t o  be  approved  by  t h e  House  hy   ;I  reasonable  mar-  
gin .   S h e  ma in ta ined   t h a t   "Space  policy  should  n o   longer  be  d r iven   by  t h e  
dom ina t ion   of  t h e   space  station ,"   adding   t h a t   t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s   needed  t o  
establish  a  consensus o n  space  policy.  (SP  Neecis,  May  3 0 - J u n  12 /94 )  

S a n d y  Valenti ,  project  team   leader  a t  NASA's Lewis Research  C e n t e r ,  said 
t h e  C e n t e r  had   compiled   a n   inventory   of  space-related   technology   t h a t   has 
relevance   t o  biotechnology   and   t h e  work  of  medical  researchers  in  no r thea s t -  
e r n  O h i o .  NASA's  goal was  t o  support   existing  organizations  in  t h e   commu -  
nity,  such   as  local  hospitals  and   universities.  Six   specific  research  areas  in 
wh ich  N A S A  could provide  technological  support were fluid mechanics ,  elec-  
tronics,  commun ica t ion   and   in s t rumen ta t ion ,   materials  deve lopmen t   a n d  
structural   design,  surface  modification ,   and   energy  storage  systems.  (Crain's 
Ckveland   Business, May  30194) 

May-June:  A  feature   article   o n   t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n   quoted   t h e  
project's  chief   scientist   Robert   W.  Phillips  a t   t h e   Ame r ican   Association   for 
t h e   A d v a n c em e n t   of  Sc ience   mee t ing   in   S a n   Francisco  as  saying  t h a t   t h e  
S t a t i o n   "is  a  facility  t h a t   supports   lots  of  individual   experiments-small 
sci- 
ence ."   T h e   au tho r   assessed  t h e   chance s  of  t h e   S t a t i o n   heing  realized  in  t h e  
face  of  congressional  budget-cutting   pressures  and   commended   t h e   political 
savvy of  N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S. G o l d i n .  (Space ,  May - June  9 4 )  

June 

June  1 : N A S A  announced  t h e  ded ica t ion  of  t h e  Independen t  Verification and  
Validation  facility, a new research facility in Fairmont ,  West Virginia, t h a t  was 
to   support  NASA's  work  in   advanced   research,  stimulate   commercialization  
efforts, a n d  provide  training   in  a  variety  of  engineering   a n d   techncdogy  areas. 
In  add i t ion   t o   housing  staff working  o n  software  for  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  
S t a t i o n ,   it  was  t o   house  parts  of  t h e   Earth   Observing   System  Data   and  
Ope ra t ion s   System.  S e n a t o r  Robert   C.  Byrd  a t tended   t h e   opening .   ( N A S A  
Release 94 -88 ;  Times-West  Virginian, J u n  2 /94 )  

June  2 :   University   of  Maryland  radio  astronomers   indicated   they   had   spotted  
water  clouds  nea r   t h e   c e n t e r  of  a  galaxy  called   Markarian   1 ,  which   is  abou t  
200  million   light   years  away  i n   t h e   constellation   Pisces.  T h e   finding   was 
reported   a t   t h e  Minneapolis  meeting   of  t h e  Ame r ican  Astronomical   Society. 
A t  t h a t  meeting ,  J o h n s  Hopklns  University  astronomers  reported  several days 
previously  hav ing   "very  strong"  ev idence  of  a  black  ho le  a t   t h e  cen te r   of  t h e  
And romeda   galaxy. ( B  Sun ,  J u n  2/94; P  Inq, J u n  3/94;  W Post, J u n  3/94;  USA 
Today, J u n  3/94;  NY  Times, J u n  3 / 9 4 )  

N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   visited  t h e   University   of  N o r t h  
Dakota's C e n t e r  for Aerospace  Sciences   ( C A S ) .  G o l d i n  visited  a t   t h e   inv i ta -  
t ion  of S e n a t o r  Byron Dorgan ,  a member  of  t h e  Comme rce  Comm i t tee ,  which  
oversees N A S A   a n d   its budget.  G o l d i n  was  impressed  w i th  CAS ' s  new   t e c h -  
nology  a n d   t h e   educational   services  a n d   programs  it   conducted   for  ch i ld ren  
and   t h e  public  as well  as  college students .   (Gland  Forks Herald, J u n  3 /94 )  

June 3 :  NA SA  and  t h e  Canad ian  Space Agency  ( C S A )  announced   their  agree- 
m e n t  t c ~  put   their  space cooperation  o n  a long-term basis. T h e  arrangement  pro- 
vided for expanded  cooperation  in  space science, microgravity  research, and  t h e  
Mission  t o  Planet   Earth ,   as  well  as  Canada's  continued  full  partnership   in  t h e  
International   Space S ta t ion  program.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -89 )  

N A S A   announced  names  of  members of  t h e  crew  of  A t lan t i s  for  its mission 
in  mid-1995  t o  perform  t h e  first  docking  with  t h e  Russian  Space  S ta t ion  Mir. 
Robert  L. Gibson  was  to  command  t h e   10-day mission,  which  was  t o  include  a 
Spacelab  module.  ( N A S A  Release 94-90;  H Chron, J u n  4/94; H Post, J u n  4 /94 )  

June 6:  NASA's Office of Advanced  C o n c e p t s  and  Technology  announced   its 
solicitation   of  proposals  from  all  sources  for  industry-led  research  a n J  devel-  
o pm e n t  projects  under   t h e  Aerospace   Industry  Technology   Program  (A I T P ) .  
A I T P   aims  t o   develop   and   apply  advanced   technology   rapidly   in  t h e   aero-  
space   industry  a n d   in  t h e   non-aerospace   commercial   marketplace .   ( N A S A  
Release  94 -91  ) 

ASTRONACJTICS AND  i \ERONAUT ICS  

I C N E   I994 

A  feature   article  described ways  in  which   Pittsburgh  was  becoming   "Robot  
City ,  USA ."   O n e  of  t h e   reasons  was NASA's  $2.5 million  grant   in  May  1994  
t o  Carnegie   Mellon   University's Robotics   In s t i tu te   t o  establish  a n  engineer-  
ing  consortium   t h a t   would  transfer  robotics  technology   t o   U.S.  industry. 
O t h e r   robotic   firms  also  came   t o   Pittsburgh  recently.  O t h e r   t h a n   industrial 
uses  for  robots ,  N A S A   wants  t o   use  robots  t o   explore  Mars  and   get   instru-  
ments   o n   t h e   planet's  surface.  David  Pahnos ,   director   of  t h e   new  N A S A -  
CM U   consortium ,   saw  a n  opportunity   for  Pittsburgh  t o   become  a  techn ica l  
cen te r   t h a t   pushed  techno logy  forward.  (CSM ,  J u n  8 / 9 4 )  

Russian  and  U.S.  Mars mission  planners  were  meeting   t h e  week  of J u n e  6 a t  
NASA's J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  Pasadena,  California ,   t o   define   how  t h e  
tw o   countries   could  best  cooperate   in  a  proposed  mu l t ina t iona l   space  explo-  
ration   program  t o  he called  "Mars Together." France ,  Germany ,  and   ltaly were 
also  considering   joining   t h e   new  1998  mission  t o   Mars.  T h e   new  mission 
resulted  from Russia's delay  in  its originally proposed  "Mars 94" and  "Mars 96" 
flights. T h e  idea would be  t o  combine  major  technological  e lemen t s  o n  which  
individual  na t ion s  were  already working.  (AvWk, J u n  6 /94 )  

N A S A   and   t h e  Defense Depa r tmen t  were  evaluating   a  lunar  rover  mission 
for  a  C l em e n t i n e   1  follow-on  flight  t h a t   would  con t inue   t h e   validation   of 
advanced ,   lightweight   technologies   for  antiballistic   defense  applications .  
C l em e n t i n e   1 was  a  Ballistic  Missile  Defense  Organization   (BMDO )  mission 
t h a t   tested  new  avionics   and   sensor  technologies   during   its  lunar   mapping. 
T h e  C l em e n t i n e  follow-on  flight  could  apply  BMDO's technology   t o  bring  a 
rover  t o   t h e  Moon's  surface. (AelWk, J u n  6 / 9 4 )  

June   7:  N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   by  t h e   W h i t e   House  of  Cha r le s   R .  
Chappe l l ,   Associate  Director   for  Sc ience   a t  NASA's  Marshall  Space   Flight 
Cen te r ,   t o   serve  a  one-year   assignment  as  Deputy  Director  of  t h e   Global  
Learning  and   Observations   to   Benefit  t h e   Env i ronmen t   (GLOBE )  program. 
Chappe l l  was  t o  head  NASA's   participation   in   t h e  GLOBE  program  and  was 
to  report  ilirectly t o  t h e  N A S A  Administrator .  Chappe l l  was t o  be assigned  t o  
t h e   W h i t e   House  and   together   with   t h e   GLOBE   director ,  Thoma s   Pyke  Jr . ,  
was  t o  work o n  t h e  design and   imp lemen ta t ion  of  t h e  GLOBE  program  for t h e  
Vice  President.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -92 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   award  of  a  con t rac t   t o   t h e   Boeing  Company ,  
Commercial   A i rp lane   G roup ,   R e n t o n ,   Wa sh ing ton ,   for  engineering   design 
and  trade  studies in support  of  t h e  Na t iona l  Wind  Tunne l  Comp lex  ( NW T C ) .  
T h e  N W T C  was a  joint  etiort  between  gove rnmen t  and   industry  t o  construct  
s ta te -o f - the -a r t  transonic  and  low-speed wind  tunne l s  t o  meet  t h e  tu rn -o f - the -  
century   needs  of  t h e  aerospace  industry.  T h e  W ind  Tunne l   Program  Office  a t  
NASA's  Lewis  Research  Cen te r ,   C leve land ,   O h i o ,   was  t o  manage   t h e   c o n -  
tract .   ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - u )  

J U N E  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

Senator   Barbara  Mikulski,  Democrat  from  Maryland  and  head  of  t h e  
Appropriations subcommittee tha t  oL7ersaw NASA  funding, informed NASA  
Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin   that   he   must  consider  cutting   one   of  two 
major  programs:  the   Cassini  mission  to   Saturn   or  the   Advanced  X-ray 
Astrophysics  Facility  tha t   included  the   Hubhle  Space Telescope. Reportedly, 
Mikulski  said  that   if NASA   did  not   make  the  decision, Congress would. O n  
June  8, Goldin   met  with  James  Sensenhrenner,  Republican  from  Wisconsin 
and  the   highest  ranking  Republican  o n   the   House  space  subcommittee,  to  
answer his concerns about Russia's stability  in view of  its major Space Station  
role.  ( N Y  Times, J u n  8/94;  8 Sun ,  J u n  8/94; USA  Today, J u n  8/94;  C Trib, J u n  
8/94; H  Chron ,  J u n  8/94; H  Post, J u n  8/94; H Chron ,  J u n  9/94; 0 Sen Star ,  J u n  
13/94; USA  Today, J u n  13/94)  

Canadian   Industry Minister  J o h n  Manley  said  tha t   Canada   was  cutting   its 
contribution  to  the   International  Space S ta t ion  program from $1 .2   billion  t o  
$500 million.  It  could not  afford the  proposed level of  funding and  instead was 
focusing its energies o n  helping Canadian   space  industries.  ( H  Post, J u n  7/94) 

June  8: NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   announced   contract   awards 
for two new "Smallsat" satellites to  observe the  Earth with unprecedented  sen-  
sor  technology.  T h e   awards  went  to   two  teams  led  by  CTA   of  Rockville, 
Maryland,  and  TRW, Inc., of Redondo  Beach, California. T h e  teams were  to 
build,  launch ,  and operate  the  satellites-each 
no  bigger t h a n  a  console  tele-  
vision set-for 
less than  $60 million each .  T h e  satellites were  to  be developed, 
launched ,  and   delivered  o n   orbit  in   24  months   or  less  on   a   Pegasus  launch  
vehicle.  (NA SA  Release  94-94;  AP,  J u n  8/94; Reuters,  J u n  8/94; NY   Tm e s ,  
J u n  9/94; W Post, J u n  9/94; USA Today, J u n  9/94; WSI, J u n  9/94; H  Ch ron ,  J u n  
9/94; H   Post, J u n  9/94;  S P  News, J u n  13-19/94; W Post, J u n  14/94) 

NASA  announced  the  selection of  38  college students for  an   intensive six- 
week  Space Life  Sciences  Training  Program  at  its  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r   in 
Florida. T h e   summer  residence  training  program  was  for  undergraduate  stu-  
dents  majoring  in  life  sciences, bioengineering, and  related  science and  engi- 
neering fields. (NA SA  Release 94-95)  

NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  released a  statement   in  response to  
the   markup of  NASA's budget  by  the  House  Appropriations Subcomittee  o n  
VA-HUD-Independent   Agencies.  He   said  tha t   "Given  the   enormous  chal-  
lenge  that   Chairman   Stokes and   the   members of  his  committee  had  in  ade- 
quately  addressing  the   many  needs  of  the   agencies  covered  in  this  budget, 
NASA   is  pleased with  today's markup." He  added  tha t  NASA  was   leased  to  
comply with  the   further  challenge  Stokes presented  in  the   markup.  (NA SA  
Release, J u n  9/94; AP, J u n  9/94; W  Times,  J u n  10194; 0 Sen  Star ,  J u n  10194; 
Plain Dealer, J u n  10194; H Post, J u n  10194; F l a  Today, J u n  10194; AP, J u n  10194; 
S P  News, J u n  13-19/94)  

ASTRONAUTICS  AN13 AERONAUT ICS  

JUN E  1994 

Itme  9 :   T h e   U .S .   a t to rney   confirmed  t h a t   David  R .   Proctor,  a n   engineer  
assigned  t o   t h e   Life  Sciences   Project  Division,  was  t h e   first  N A S A   J o h n s o n  
Space   C e n t e r   employee  indicted   as  part   of  t h e   FBI's  Ope ra t ion   Lightning  
Strike .  T h e  O p e r a t i o n  began  in  December  1991 as  a n  undercover   probe  i n t o  
aerospace  contractors .   Proctor   was  indicted   o n   charges  of  conspiracy  a n d  
bribery,  among  others .   (UP ,  J u n  9 / 9 4 )  

June  1 2 :  Ulysses, a European  spacecraft deployed by  U .S .  S h u t t l e  Discovery  in  
Oc tobe r   1990 ,  took  th ree  a n d  a half  years  t o   travel  t h e  9 3  million  miles  from 
Earth   t o  t h e  Sun's sou th  pole.  Between J u n e  and   t h e  fall of  1995 ,  when   it  was 
due  t o  pass  t h e  Sun's n o r t h  pole,  it  would  exhaustively  exam ine  t h e  Sun-the 
first  time  t h e  S u n  had  been  observed  from  pole  t o  p o l e  Ulysses was  t o  exam-  
ine   t h e   Sun's  magnetic  field, which   influenced   t h e  solar cycles  as well  as  t h e  
climate   o n  Earth .  T h e   spacecraft  also  was  t o  search   for  t h e   source  of  gamma  
and  gravity  rays  and   tct  exam ine  solar flares.  ( W  Times, J u n  12/94)  

A  feature  article  o n  astronaut   Eileen Collins ,  based  a t  Ellington  Field,  indi-  
cated   t h a t   bhe  was  scheduled   t o  be  t h e   first  woman   t o  pilot  a  Space   S h u t t l e  
when   t h e  flight  c>ccurred in  February  1995 .  (Texas, J u n  12 /94 )  

Astronaut   Jan ice  Voss,  training   for  a mission  aboard Russian Space  S t a t i o n  
Mir,  appeared  in  a  two-hour  electronic   conference   conce rn ing  t h e  Mir  flight ,  
NA SA ,   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n ,   a n d   he r   qualifications  for  being   a n   astronaut .  
(Fla  Today, J u n  12 /94 )  

June  13:  Vice  President  A l   Gore's  G loba l   Learning   and   Observations   t o  
Benefit  t h e   Env i ronmen t   (GLOBE )   program  was  described.  GLOBE   was  a 
joint  effort  among   t h e   Na t iona l   O c e a n i c   and   A tmo sphe r ic   Adm in i s t ra t ion  
( N O A A ) ,  N A S A ,  t h e  EPA,  and   private   contributors .   Funding  was  proposed 
in t h e  budget a t  $13 million: $7  million  from N O A A ,  $5   million  from N A S A ,  
and  $1 million  from  EPA. T h e  goal was  t o  promote   techn ica l  education  while 
collecting  env i ronmen ta l   data .   (Federal Computer  Week, J u n  13 /94 )  

N A S A   planned   t o   launch   a  Mentor-Protege   Program  later   in   1994.  T h e  
goal  was  a  three-year   pilot  program  t o   encourage   prime  contractors   t o   take  
young  minority-   and   woman-owned   businesses  under   the i r   wings  and   teach  
them   corporate  skills.  (Federal Computer Week, J u n  13/94)  

T h e   Hubble  Space  Telescope  enabled  a  team  led  by  Rice  University  astro- 
physicist Robert O'Dell t o  suwey  110 young stars in a field of  3 ,000  in  the  O r ion  
Nebula,  which  was  1 ,500  light-years from Earth. A s  a  result, O'Dell reported  a t  
a NA SA   news  conference,  scientists  found  t h a t   the  material  required  t o  create 
planets was common  around stars; t h e  same would be  true of Earth's home  galaxy, 
the   Milky Way.  (Reuters, J u n  13/94; W  Post,  J u n   14/94; B  Sun, J u n  14/94; NY 
Ttnes, J u n  14/94; LA Tmes ,  J u n  14/94; USA Today, J u n  14/94; H Post, J u n  14/94)  

JUNE  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

June 14: Groups  of  citizen  lobbyists, particularly  from  Florida,  Texas,  and 
Ohio, came to Washington  to lobby Congress on  the  importance of  th e  Space 
Station  to  the  continuation  of  a  manned  space  program.  (Flu  Today,  Jun  
15/94; 0 Sen Star, J u n  15/94) 

Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent  S. Maleche was  sen- 
tenced  to   a  two-month  prison  term  and  a  fine  for  providing  confidential 
NASA   documents  to  an  undercover  agent.  T h e  charge of  fraud occurred  in 
connection  with Operation Lightning Strike. O n  June 15, former Armstrong 
Laboratory  employee  at  Brooks Air  Force  Base  in  San Antonio, William  C 
Alexander,  pleaded  guilty  to  providing  documents  to  an  FBI  undercover 
agent.  (Reuters, Jun  14/94; UPI ,  J u n  15/94; H Chron, J u n  16/94) 

June 15: NASA  announced the selection of Honeywell, Inc., for a contract for 
developing  flight  deck  technologies  in  support  of  NASA's  High  Speed 
Research program. NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, was 
to  manage the  eight-year project. T h e  advanced technologies to be developed 
included  design  for  a  potential  future  High  Speed Civil  Transport.  (NASA  
Release C94-r) 

Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to  the launch pad  to begin preparations 
for a July launching  at Kennedy Space Center.  (Reuters, J u n  15/94; H Chron, 
Jun  18/94) 

After  a  closed  door  session  of  the  House  Space  Committee,  Chairman 
George  Brown, Democrat  from  California,  said  he  would  support  the  Space 
Station. T h e  growing support for th e  Space Station also was reflected in pub- 
lic  opinion  polls.  However,  James  Sensenbrenner  Jr.,  Republican  from 
Wisconsin  and  senior  Republican  on   the   Committee,  was  angry  at  the  
response to  his concern about Russian participation  in the  space program from 
White House science adviser John  H. Gibbons.  ( H  Chron, Jun  16/94; H Post, 
Jun  16/94; Flu  Today, J u n  16/94; H Chron, J u n  17/94) 

Vice  President  Al  Gore  addressed  a  group  of  NASA   employees  in 
Washington  and  commended  the work of NASA  staff at  the Kennedy Space 
Center  (KSC). He  indicated  tha t   in  the past  few years  the  KSC shuttle  team 
had  cut  the cost of  each shuttle flight by  $43 million  and  assembled shuttles 
and  moved  them  to   the  launchpad  40  percent  faster  and  with  one-third  as 
much  labor.  (Flu Today, Jun  16/94) 

June  16:  NASA   Johnson  Space  Center  Director  Carolyn  L.  Huntoon 
announced  a number of  changes designed to assure  the  success of  the Shuttle 
and  International  Space  Station  programs. Changes  included  the   establish- 
ment  of  a new  Projects m i c e ,  a new Business Management  Directorate,  and 
a new  Information  Systems Directorate;  encouragement  of  rotational  assign- 

,\STRONAIJTICS A K l )   AERONAUTICS 

JUN E   1994 

men t s   and   "teaming";   and   new  leadership  appo in tmen t s .   Larry  Bourgeois 
became  head  of  t h e   Projects  Office,  Terrence   Hesse  became   Director   of  t h e  
Business Managemen t   Directorate ,   and  J a n e  S t e am s  became   Director  of  t h e  
Information   Systems Directorate .  A  numbe r  of  o t h e r  appo in tmen t s  also were 
announced .   ( N A S A  Release  94 -036 ;  H Chron ,  J u n  17/94;  H  Post, J u n  17/94)  

Ma r t in   Marietta   Co rpo ra t ion   announced   it   would  e l im ina te   1 ,800  of  its 
2 ,100  jobs  a t   its  recently  acquired  space  launch   business  i n  S a n  Diego.  T h e  
company   planned   t o  move  t h e  production   of  A t la s  a n d  C e n t a u r   launch   sys- 
tems  t o  its T i tan   rocket  p lan t   in  Denver.  (LA Times, J u n  17/94)  

June  17: NA SA   announced   t h a t  Space  S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia  was  t o  conduc t   t h e  
second  flight  of  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Microgravity  Laboratory-2.  T h e   flight 
\vou l~ t  en ta i l  worldwide  research  i n t o  t h e  behavior  of  materials  and   life  in   t h e  
weightless  env i ronmen t  of  Earth-orbit .  Experiments  were  t o  include  studies of 
subtle   forces  t h a t   affect  microgravity  a n d   t h e   reaction   of  living  organisms  t o  
microgral~ity .  Scientists  from  NA SA ,  t h e  European  Space  Agency,  t h e  French  
Space  Agency,  t h e  G e rm a n  Space  Agency,  t h e  C a n a d i a n  Space  Agency,  a n d  
t h e   Na t iona l   Space   Development   Agency   of  J a p a n   cooperated   in   p lann ing  
t h e  experiments .   ( N A S A  Release 94 -96 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronaut  Cha r le s  E  Bolden  Jr. was  leaving  N A S A  
after  14 years  t o  return   t o  t h e  Marine  Corps   t o  serve as Deputy  C omm a n d a n t  
of  Midshipmen   a t   t h e  Naval   Academy.  ( N A S A  Release  94-97;  W Times,  J u n  
1 9/94 

Guy   Rluford,  t h e   first  African   Ame r ican   astronaut   in  space,  served  as  mas- 
ter  of  ceremonies   of  a  celebration   t h e   week  of  J u n e   13, hono r ing   t h e   3 0 t h  
;~nnivt .rsary  of  t h e   C iv i l   Rights   A c t .   T h e   Tuskegee  A i rmen   participated   as 
NA SA   hono red   those   known   as  t h e   "Civil  Rights  Movemen t   of  t h e  Armed  
Services o f  World  War  11."  (Metro Herald, J u n  17/94;  Washington  Informer, J u n  
2 3-29/Y4) 

In  n  pa ten t  case, Hughes Aircraft  Company  won  $1 1 4  million  from t h e  U.S. 
gove rnmen t   (represented  by  t h e  Defense Depa r tmen t  and  N A S A )  as opposed 
t o  t h e  $4 .8  billion  it  sought .  A t   issue were  royalties due  unde r  a pa ten t  devel-  
oped by  h r m e r  Hughes engineer  Lhna ld  D. Williams  in   1959  for a single rock- 
e t   nozzle  for  satellites.  (NY Times, J u n   18/94;  P Inq, J u n   19/94; W Times,  J u n  
19/94; \VS], J u n  20 /94 )  

J tm e  20:  NA SA   a n n o i ~ n c e d  t h e   selection   of  specialists for  t h e  Spacelab  mis- 
sion .   ( N A S A  Release  94 -98 )  

T h e  Russian embassy in Wa sh ing ton  announced  t h a t  during  Prime Minister  
Victor  C h e r n o ~ n ~ r d i n ' s  visit  t o   t h e   U n i t e d   S ta te s   t h e   week  of  J u n e   20,  a n  

JUNE  1994 

CHRONOLOGY   1994 

agreement   o n   joint  space  exploration   was  scheduled   t o   be  signed.  (Reuters ,  
J u n  20194; USA  Today, J u n  21/94; AP, J u n  21/94  

During  Russell  Colley's 35  years of  employment   as  a n  engineer   and   inven -  
to r  a t  B.F.  Good r ich  Company   in  A k r o n ,  h e  earned   65  patents .   Among   these  
was  t h e   spacesuit  a n d  a   deicing  device   for  planes.  I n   t h e  recen t   past,  N A S A  
awarded Co l ley  its Distinguished  Pubtic  Service  Medal ,  t h e  highest   h o n o r  for 
a  civilian .   (Plain Dealer, J u n  20/94)  

June  21 : Former CRS news ancho r  Walter  C r o n k i t e  was quoted   as saying t h a t  
in   view  of  t h e   lack  of  a   guarantee   t h a t   money  saved  from  t h e   space  program 
would  be used for urgent  needs  such  as h e a l t h ,  housing,  educa t ion ,  a n d  crime ,  
t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  could n o t  afford no t   t o  c o n t i n u e  going  i n t o  ou te r  space. (LA  
Times, ] un   2  1/94)  

NASA's  Office  of  Advanced   C o n c e p t s   and   Technology  announced   t h e  
selection   of  six  research  proposals  for  con t rac t s   unde r   Phase  I  of  t h e   Small  
Business Technology  Transfer  Program. T h i s  phase  allows con t rac t s  valued  a t  
up  t o  $100 ,000  with   12 mon th s   t o  complete .   ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 9 9 )  

June  22:  N A S A   announced   t h e  selection  of  3 4  scientists  t o  participate   in   t h e  
experiment   definition   phase  of  t h e  Neurolab   Space  S h u t t l e  mission. T h i s  was 
t o  be  a   14-  t o   16-day mission  jointly  with   t h e  Na t iona l   Institutes   of  H e a l t h ,  
devoted   t o   brain   and   behavioral   research  a n d   was  scheduled   for  launch   in  
early  1998 .  Various  domestic   and   in te rna t iona l   partners   also  were  participat-  
ing,  such   as  C a n a d a ,   France ,   Ge rmany ,   Italy,  J a p a n ,   t h e   Ne the r land s ,   and  
Nigeria.  ( N A S A  Release 94-100;  Reuters ,  J u n  22/94)  

T h e  Hou se  App rop r ia t ion s   C omm i t t e e  app roved   a  N A S A  budget   of  $14  
b i l l ion ,   $240   m i l l ion   less  t h a n   t h e   adm in i s t ra t ion ' s  request .   T h e  app roved  
budge t   included   full  fund ing ,  $2 .1   b i l l ion ,   for  t h e  S p a c e  S t a t i o n .  However ,  
o p p o n e n t s   t h r e a t e n e d   a   major   f igh t   o n c e   t h e   budge t   c am e   t o   t h e   Hou se  
floor.  Following   rece lp t   of  assurances   "p ro tec t ing   t h e  Am e r i c a n   taxpayers  
f rom  any  un fo re seen  failure   i n  t h e  U S . -R u s s i a n  space  pa r tne r sh ip"   in  a   l e t -  
te r   from   P re s iden t  C l i n t o n  t h e  e v e n i n g  of  J u n e  2 2 ,  t h e  r a n k i n g  Repub l ican  
o n   t h e   H o u s e   s u b c omm i t t e e   o n   s p a c e ,   J am e s   S e n s e n b r e n n e r   f r om  
W i scon s in ,   said  h e   would  suppo r t   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n .   (AP ,   J u n   22/94;  
Reu te r s ,   J u n   22 /94 ;  W  Times,  J u n   23 /94 ;  W  Post,  J u n  2 3 / 9 4 ;  H   Post,  J u n  
23/94;  H Ch ron ,  J u n  23/94;  H Ch ron ,  J u n  24/94;   USA  Today, J u n  28/94;  W 
Times,  J u n  28/94   ) 

N A S A   Associate  Adm in i s t ra to r  Cha r le s   Kennel   visited  t h e   University   of 
N o r t h   Dakota's  ( U N D )  C e n t e r  for Aerospace  Sc ience  ( C A S ) .  Kennel   was  in  
charge  of  NASA's Mission  t o  P lane t  Ea r th ,  for wh ich  UND's  Associate  Dean  
George  Seielstad said U N D  had   a  small con t rac t .  Kenne l  stated   t h a t  C A S  was 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

J U N E  1994 

well  equipped  and  positioned  to make data  about  the  Earth  available  to  non -  
traditional  users.  (Grand Forks  Herald, J u n  23/94) 

Commenting  o n  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin's urging  of  space 
scientists to  search  for  a habitable  planet  among  the   stars, science columnist 
Robert C. Cowen  viewed  such a quest  as  feasible in view of  the  discoveries of 
the  Hubble  Space Telescope. He   saw  the  next   phase  of  the   search  as  involv- 
ing  a  look  for  signs of  gravitational  interaction  of  a  star  and   planets.  (CSM ,  
J u n  22/94) 

June  23: NA SA  announced  tha t  it  and  the  Russian Space Agency  (RSA )  had 
signed  an   "Interim  Agreement  for  t h e   Conduc t   of  Activities  Leading  to  
Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil  Space Station." T h e  agree- 
ment  governed  Russian participation  until  an   Intergovernmental  Agreement 
and  a  NASA -RSA   Memorandum  of  Understanding  could  be  concluded. 
NASA   and   RSA  also  signed  a  separate  $400  million  contract   under  which 
NASA   was  t o  buy  hardware  and  services from RSA   for  approximately  $100 
million  annually  through  1997  in  support  of  a  joint  program  involving  t h e  
U S .  Space Shu t t le  and   t h e  Russian Mir  Space S ta t ion .  Key  elements  of  the  
contract  were  spelled ou t .  T h e  agreement  and contract  were  signed separate- 
l y  by  NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin  and RSA  Director General  Yuri 
Koptev  at  the   end   of  the   US .-Russia   J o i n t  Commission  o n   Economic  and  
Technological  Cooperation  meeting  headed  by  Vice  President  Go re   and 
Prime Minister Chernomyrdin .  (NA SA  Release 94-101; AP, J u n  23/94; P Inq, 
J u n  24/94; C Trib, J u n  24/94) 

NASA   and  the   Federal  Aviation  Administration  announced   their  joint 
sponsorship of  a general aviation design competition  for students at U .S .  aero- 
nautical  and   engineering  universities.  Teams  of  ,graduate and  undergraduate 
students,  working  with  faculty advisers, were  to   develop  a  multidisciplinary 
design  for  a general  aviation  aircraft.  (NA SA  Release 94-102)  

June 24: Alumni  of  the  Aerospace  Human  Factors Division office of NASA's 
Ames  Research  Cen te r   at  Moffett  Field,  south  of  San   Francisco,  reportedly 
were  exerting  pressure  to  maintain  the   division  as  a  separate  entity  in  the  
restructuring  taking  place  under  new  director  Ken  K.  Munechika.  These 
alumni  had  prominent  positions  in  the   airline  industry, aircraft  manufactur- 
ing, and  government. Moreover, NASA  created human  factors research and a 
human   factors pioneer  such  as  J o h n  Lauber, of  the   National  Transportation 
Safety Board, maintained  that   a separate  organizational  structure, combining 
computer  sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine,  and  other  disciplines, 
was essential.  ( W  Post, J u n  24/94) 

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   stated  tha t   the   "GAO   report  is  a 
validation  of  what  we've been  saying for  months-Russian 
participation  in 

J U N E  1994 

CHR0NOLCX;Y  1994 

t h e  Space  S t a t i o n   is  a   good  dea l  for  t h e   Ame r ican   taxplayer."  G o l d i n  added  
t h a t   it  would  save hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars. H e  was "particularly  pleased 
with   t h e  GAO ' s  positive assessment of  how  valuable  t h e  Russian con t r ibu t ion  
will be  in  terms  of  significantly  improving  t h e  capability  for science  a n d  cngi-  
neering   tesearch."  O t h e r  benefits of R u s s ~ a n  cooperation   included  colnpleting  
t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   15  mon th s   earlier  t h a n   otherwise  would  be  possible. 
( N A S A  Release  94-103;  AP, J u n  24/94;  Reuters,  JU I I   24/94) 

"Destiny  in  Space,"  t h e   latest   IMAX   space  film,  heing   shown   in  Langley 
T h e a t e r  in  t h e  Na t iona l  Air  and  Space  Museum, took  viewers o n  a  40 -m inu te  
h i g h - t e c h   space  ride  t h a t   examines   space  exploration   by  astronauts   a n d  
robots.  (Journal, J u n  24/94)  

June  27:  In   a n   interview   with   N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S .  G o l d i n   c o n -  
ce rn ing  dangers  t o  t h e  proposed  Space  S t a t i o n  from man -made  space junk,  h e  
said  t h e  danger  of  debris smashing  th rough   t h e  S t a t i o n  shield  was  20  percent  
over   its  expected   10-year life a n d   t h a t  N A S A  would  d o  whatever   was  neces-  
sary  t o  get  adequate   safety.  Because  of  t h e   lengthy   period  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  
was  scheduled  t o   spend   in  space,  t h e   danger   was  greater  t h a n   for  a   single 
S h u t t l e  flight.  William  M .  Shephe rd ,  Deputy  Manager  for  t h e  J o h n s o n  Space  
C e n t e r   in   Houston ,   said  t h a t   each   module   for  astronauts   was  getting   about  
3 ,000  pounds  of  added  shielding  t o  he lp  protect   it  from  t h e  greater  velocity  of 
orbiting  junk .  G o l d i n  asserted t h a t  a n  in te rna t iona l  agreement  for con t ro l l ing  
t h e  con tam ina t ion   of  space was  needed   t o  deal  with   t h e  s i tua t ion .  (NY Times, 
J u n  27/94;  USA  Today, J u n  27/94; C Trib, J u n  27/94;  F l a   Today, J u n  28/94)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e  Ulysses spacecraft  had   become  t h e  first  robotic  
exploration   vehicle   in   history  t o   reach   a   polar  region  of  t h e   S u n   when   it 
passed ove r  t h e  Sun's sou the rn  polar area J u n e  26 after  a  journey  of  almost  four 
years  from  Earth .   T h e   European   Space   Agency   built   Ulysses,  and   Space  
S h u t t l e   Discovery  deployed  it   in   Oc tobe r   1990 .   I n   February  1992 ,  Ulysses 
spen t   nearly  11  days  exploring   unknown   regions  of  Jup i te r   before  it   gained  
enough  momen tum   t o  loop  i n t o  a n  orbit   t h a t  passed over  t h e  poles of  t h e  S u n .  
T h e  S u n  has  a  global magnetic  field and  magnetic  poles, but  many  d e t a ~ l s  c o n -  
ce rn ing  t h e  polar  caps and  magnetic   fields,  including   t h e   influence  of  incom -  
ing  cosmic   rays,  remain   unclear.  ( N A S A   Release  94 -104 ;   FIa  Today,  J u n  
29/94)  

A n  unmanned   DC-X  (D e l t a  C l ippe r  Expe r imen ta l )  rocket  made   a n  eme r -  
gency landing  a t  t h e  W h i t e  Sand s  Missile Range  following a  mysterious exp lo -  
sion  soon  after  its engines  started .  T h e  Ballistic Missile Defense Organization  
developed  t h e  missile,  and  McDonne l l  Douglas Co rpo ra t ion  manufactured   it. 
T h e  flight was t h e  fifth  for t h e  unusual rocket ,  wh ich  was made  t o  take  off  and  
land   vertically. T h e  DC-X  was  grounded   in   t h e  fall of  1993  w h e n  t h e  project 
ran   ou t   of  money.  However ,  N A S A   came   up  with   enough   funds  t o  keep   t h e  

ASTKONAUTICS A N D  AERONAUTICS  

J U N E  1994 

program  going  until   Congress  appropriated  $ 5   million  t o  comp le te   its  flight  
test  program.  Ultimately ,   t h e   rocket  was t o   he   tu rned   over  t o  NA SA .   (NY 
Times, J u n  28/94)  

Jtcne 28:  In  preparation   for  commemorating   t h e   2 5 t h   anniversary  of  Ne i l   A .  
Armstrong's walk  o n   t h e  Moon   o n  July  20,  1969, t h e  media  featured  various 
articles ,   hooks,  films,  television  specials,  a n d   high-level   conferences   o n   t h e  
meaning   of  t h e  Moon   landing .  O n e  article  commen ted  o n  t h e  significance  of 
these  publications  and  even t s ,  with  particular  reference  t o  Moon Shot, a mem-  
oir cow r i t ten  by  A lan   B.  Shepard  Jr. and  t h e  late  astronaut   Deke Slayton .   (LA  
Tm e s ,  J u n  28 /94 )  

N , 4SL 4  announced   tha t   Su:anne  Smrekar ,   a  geophysicist  a t   NASA's  J e t  
Propuision Laboratory in  Pasadena ,  California ,  who  h a d  been  working o n  da ta  
from  NASA's  Magellan  mission, had   found   t h a t   t h e   p lane t   Venus  was  still 
geologically  active   in  places, even   though   radar  images of  its  surface  indicat-  
ed  little   change   in  t h e  past  half-billion  years.  Data   suggested  t h a t   the re   were 
at  least  two,  a n d   possibly  more,  active   h o t   spots  o n  Venus.  ( N A S A  Release 
94 -105 )  

June  29:  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S .  G o l d i n   issued  a  s ta temen t   hailing  
t h e  vo te   in  t h e  House  of  Representatives  t h a t  defeated  a n  amendmen t   t o  end  
t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  program. In  his s ta temen t ,  h e  expressed  appreciation  for t h e  
leadership  of  t h e   President ,   t h e   efforts  of  t h e   Vice  President ,   and   t h e   hard  
~ v o r k  of  C h a i rm a n  Brown and  Representative  Walker. H e  also praised  t h e  col-  
laboration   of  N A S A   with   in te rna t iona l   partners ,   wh ich   s t reng thened   t h e  
U.S. space program.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -106 )  

T h e  House  by  a  278  t o   155  vote   rejected  t h e  amendmen t   t h a t   would  have  
ended   t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  program  t h e  nex t   fiscal year  and   redirected  $ 2 . 1  bil. 
lion  in  proposed  f i~ n d i n g  t o  o t h e r  N A S A   programs.  A  key  factor  in  building 
support  was  t h e   Station's  foreign  policy  significance  as  a  result  of  bringing  
Russia  in  as  a  S t a t i o n  partner.  Intense   lobbying efforts by  t h e  C l i n t o n  adm in -  
istration  also were  a factor.  (Reuters ,  J u n  29/94; AP, J u n  29/94; UP, J u n  29/94; 
\VSJ, J u n  30194; P  Inq, J u n  30194; W Post, J u n  30194; USA  Today, J u n  30194; 
W T r n e s ,  J u n  30194; Fh Today, J u n  30194; Fla  Today, J u l  1/94;  C Trib, J u l 5 / 9 4 )  

June  30:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   hased  o n   technology  developed   for  its 
Hubhie   Space   Telescope,  a  new,  non-surgical  breast  biopsy  techn ique   had  
been   developed.  T h e  new  techn ique ,  known   as stereotactic   large-core needle  
biopsy, was  predicted  t o  reduce  na t iona l   h e a l t h  care  costs by  about   $1  billion  
annually.  T h e   techn ique   involved  a n   improvement   t o  digital  imaging  t e c h -  
nology  called  a  Cha rge   Coupled   Device,  a  high   tech   silicon   ch ip   t h a t   c o n -  
verted  light   directly  i n t o  a n  e lec t ron ic  image.  ( N A S A  Release 9 4 - 1 0 7 )  

July 

July 1 : S tu  Grissom ,  manager  for project  deve lopmen t  of  hardware  a t  NASA's 
J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r ,   said  N A S A   was  evaluating   mechanical   difficulties 
with   a  Russian-made  docking   device   critical   t o   plans   for  a  first  linking   of  a 
Space  S h u t t l e  t o  t h e  Mir Space  S t a t i o n  in  mid-1995 .  N A S A  was  surprised  to 
learn   earlier  t h a t   t h e  Mir side of  t h e  docking  device  had  explosive charges  o n  
o n l y  t h e  active  hooks  whereas t h e  S h u t t l e  side had  charges o n  b o t h  t h e  active  
a n d  passive  mechanisms .  T h e  second  problem  was  t h e  failure  of  a  laboratory 
version  of  t h e   Shu t t le /M i r  docking   mechanism   t o  fully  pass  two  of  five  cold 
temperature   runs  in   J u n e   a t   N P O   Energia  ( a   subcon t rac to r   t o   Rockwell 
In te rna t iona l )   facilities  in  Russia.  T h e  failure, which   was  being   investigated ,  
might  be t h e  result  of  t h e  quality of  lubricant   used.  ( H  C h r o n ,  J u l 2 / 9 4 ;  H Post, 
J u l  2/94; AwWk, J u l 4 1 9 4 )  

July 3 :  Itar-Tass  news  agency  reported   t h a t   a  Russian  spaceship  manned   by  a 
Russian  and   a Kazakh  cosmonaut   had   docked  with  Mir.  (H  Post, Ju l  4/94) 

T h e  na tu re  of  experiments   scheduled  t o  be  performed  by  astronauts   aboard 
Space   S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia   in   its  forthcoming   flight  was  described.  I n   t h e   field 
of  life  sciences,  t h e   experiments   were  intended   t o   reveal  t h e   role  gravity 
played  in   t h e   reproduction   and   early  deve lopmen t  of  plants   and   animals .   I n  
t h e  second  area ,  materials  science ,  in   t h e  absence  of  gravity, engineers  hoped  
t o  show  a po ten t ia l   for  forging  strong ,  new  metal   alloys, high-speed  semicon-  
ductors ,   and   o t h e r  componen t s  for  use  i n  aerospace  and   e lec t ron ic  products .  
( H  C h r o n ,  J u l 3 / 9 4 )  

A n  article  about  U.S. astronauts  No rman  Thagard   and  Bonnie  Dunba r  a n d  
the i r   t r a i n ~ n g  in  Russia  stressed  the i r   intensive   Russian  language  lessons  a n d  
the i r  sense of Russia's space program  accomplishments   in  t h e  face of  t h e  coun -  
try's  serious  econom ic   problems.  T h e y   believe  b o t h   countries   would  benefit  
from  space  cooperation:   t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s   would  gain  from  t h e   experience  
and  da ta  Russia had   collected  from  long  stays  in  space a n d  Russia would  prof- 
it   from  U.S.  technology   and   t h e  use  of  t h e  U.S.  S h u t t l e  t o  ferry  large  cargos 
t o  Mir.  (C  Trib,  J u l  3 /94 )  

T h e   cond i t ion   of  t h e   Russian  space  program  was  described  in   view  of 
Russia's new  space cooperation   with   t h e  U n i t e d  States .  Russian  policy  was  t o  
ac t iva te   t h e   con t ro l   cen te r   for  Space  S t a t i o n  M i r   only  when   t h e  ground   was 
in  c o n t a c t  with   Mir. Otherwise   t h e  cen te r  was  closed  and   personnel   returned  
t o   the i r   primary  employment:   moon l igh t ing  jobs.  T h e  primary  Russian  c o n -  
tractor   o n  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n ,  N P O  Energia, had   made  progress  toward  priva- 
tization ,  but  upper management   remained  comm i t ted  t o  t h e  traditional   Sov ie t  
pa t te rn   of  secrecy and   exclusion  of  outside  supervision.  (0 Sen  S ta r ,  J u l 3 / 9 4 )  

,4STRONALTI<:S AN11 AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1994 

In  connec t ion   with   t h e   upcoming  25 th   anniversary  of  t h e  first  moonwalk ,  
NASA's  current   role  and   t h e   ways  it   had   changed   from  earlier  days  were 
assessed. Among   t h e   differences  noted   were  t h e   emphasis  o n  science   ra the r  
t h a n   t h e  ability  t o  engineer   space  travel ,  global  teamwork  ra the r   t h a n   a  race 
t o  heat   t h e  communists ,   and   t h e   stress  o n  "smaller,  cheaper ,  faster,  better"   as 
NASA's  new mo t to .   ( P  Inq, J u l  3 /94 )  

Ju ly   5: T h e   app roach ing  2 5 t h   anniversary  of  t h e   first  Moon   landing   by  Ne i l  
Armstrong   occasioned  a  feature   article   o n   G e n e   Kranz,  N A S A   Flight  
Lhec ro r ,  who   enabled   t h e  operation   t o  occur.  (LA  Times, J u l  5 /94 )  

T h e   coun tdown   hegan  for  t h e   launch   of  S h u t t l e   Columbia   scheduled   for 
J u l y  6 .  ( W Times, J u l  6/94;  USA  Today, J u l  6 /94 )  

July 6: T h e  pressure  o n  California's  space firms t o  adapt   t o  a new  mission, sur- 
vival ,   in   view  of  congressiowdl hudgetcutting   a n d  con s tan t   funding  problems 
was  highlighted .  T h e  role of commercial  firms in t h e  space industry  as opposed 
t o  N A S A  was  raised as was  t h e  fact  t h a t  t h e  space program  n o  longer revolved 
around   compe t i t ion  with  t h e  Sov ie t  U n i o n .   (LA  Times, Ju l  6 / 9 4 )  

N A S A  irnnounced  t h a t   astronaut   Richard  0. Covey  would  leave N A S A   as 
of July  1 1  and  \vould  retire  from  t h e  A i r  Force o n  August  1 .  H e  was scheduled 
t o   became   director   of  Business  Development   a t  Ca l span   Services  Con t rac t s  
Division,  a  part  of  Space   Industries,  Inc .  ( N A S A  Release  94 -1  1 0 )  

N A S A   annclnnced  its  selection   of  Brown  & Root   Services  Co rpo ra t ion ,  
Hou s ton ,   as  a  con t rac to r   t o   provide  minor   con s t ruc t ion ,   modification ,   a n d  
rehahilitation   t o  N A S A  Goddard   Space  Flight C e n t e r ,  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland .  
( N A S A  Release  C 9 4 - y )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   a n  in te rna t iona l   team   of  astronomers  had   used  t h e  
European  Space   Agency's  Faint   Ob jec t   Came ra   o n   t h e   Hubb le   Space  
Telescope t o  confirm  a prediction  of  t h e  Big Bang theory-that 
helium  should 
he  widespread  in  t h e   early  universe.  T h e  July  7  issue  of  t h e   British  science  
journal  Nature  reported   t h e  way  in  wh ich   t h e  helium   was  de tec ted .   ( N A S A  
Release  94-1  0 9 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   it  would  negotiate   con t rac t s  with   15 small compa -  
nies  t o  enah le  t h em  t o  fully develop  innova t ive  new  high   technology  products 
they  had   proposed  for  application   in  t h e   aerospace  industry.  T h e   con t rac t s  
would  he  financed   under   NASA's  Small   Business  Technology   Transfer 
Program.  ( N A S A  Release 94 -1  1 1 ) 

N A S A   announced   members  of  t h e   crew  for  t h e   second  Wake   Sh ie ld  
F a c i l~ t y  S h u t t l e   flight  aboard  Endeavour,  scheduled   for  mid-1995 ,   unde r   t h e  
command   of  David  M .  Walker.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -  1 1 2 )  

JULY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

July  8 :  NASA   announced  the   selection  of  two  Space  G ran t   Consortiums: 
Virginia  and  Colorado,  and  two  universities:  the  University  of  Pennsylvania 
and  the   University  of  Cincinnati ,   to  participate  in  the   Student   Launch 
Program.  T h e   program  was  intended  to  provide  undergraduate  students 
hands-on  experience  in flying space and  Earth  science experiments on  subor- 
bital  sounding rockets  and  scientific  balloons.  (NA SA  Release 94-1  1 3 )  

NASA   announced   that   in  August  1994 scientists  would  have  a  chance   to  
study how  the   Earth's  global environment  was  changing when  Space Shu t t le  
Endeavour  began  its  10-day mission, carrying  the   Space Radar Laboratory o n  
its second  flight. T h e  mission, which  wc~uld feature  various  international  sci- 
entific  experiments,  would  he  under  the   command  of  Michael  A .   Baker. 
(NA SA  Release 94- 1 14 )  

Space  Shuttle   Columbia  lifted  off  o n  schedule, and  t h e   seven  astronauts, 
including  the   first Japanese woman  in  space,  began  their   experiments.  T h e  
embryonic  newts  were  thriving,  and  the   adult  female  newts  had  produced 
additional  eggs. T h e  astronauts also hegan  ~ e r f o rm i n g  tests  to determine  how 
their  hodies  were  adapting  to   weightlessness. O n e   effect  of  the   absence  of 
gravity  was  tha t   astronauts  tended  to  grow  two  or  more  inches  in  space 
because of an  elongated  spine; they  would  revert  to  normal  height  o n  Earth. 
Findings could  help   in  treating hack  pain  o n  Earth. Among  the   animals car- 
ried  for experimental purposes were  four pregnant  newts.  By July  17, t h e  sec- 
ond  newt had died for  an  undetermined  reason. T h e  scientists also levitated a 
pea-sized  drop  of  gold  inside  an  electromagnetic  field  to  investigate  ways  to  
exploit the  absence of gravity in manufacturing. T h e  astronauts worked  in  two 
shifts  around  the   clock  in  order  to   complete  all  but  one   of  the   planned  82 
experiments. A  blown  fuse  in  the   French-built  electrophoresis  unit  kept  the  
astronauts from conducting  their   final  experiment  before  preparing  to  return 
to  Earth. O n  July 20, the  astronauts marked  the  25th  anniversary of  the  Moon 
landing.  Because  of  heavy  rainstorms,  the   projected  landing  o n  July  2 2   was 
postponed;  because  of  the   delay,  the   mission  set  a  new  Space  Shuttle   flight 
duration  record.  In  the  course of  the  flight, a number of  the  eggs hatched ,  and  
scores of  eggs were  laid by  the  various animals aboard.  ( B  Sun, J u l 9 / 9 4 ;  C Trib, 
Ju l  9/94; NY  Times, Jul  9/94; W Post, Jul  9/94; W Times, Jul  9/94; Reuters, Jul  
9/94;B Sun, Jul  10194; W Post, Jul  10194; AP, Ju l  10194; UP, Jul  10194; Reuters, 
Ju l   10194; U S A  Today, Ju l   11/94; W Times, Jul   11/94; AP, Jul   11/94; Reuters, 
Ju l  11/94; B  Sun, Jul   12/94; W Post, Jul   12/94; USA  Today, Jul   12/94; AP, Jul  
12/94; Reuters,  Jul   18/94; UP,  Jul   18/94; Reuters,  Jul   18/94; NY  Times, Jul  
19/94; U SA  Today, J u l   19/94; W Post, Jul   19/94; AP, Jul   19/94; UP, Jul  20194; 
AP, Jul  20194; AP,  J u l   22/94; UP, Jul  22/94; Reuters, Jul  22/94) 

July  9:  Itar-Tass  news  agency  reported  tha t   two  Russian  cosmonauts  had 
returned  to Earth  near Arkalyk,  Kazakhstan, after nearly  six months  o n  board 
Space Station   Mir. They   left  behind  a  colleague  who  intended  to  break  the  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

JULY 1994 

current  record  of  366  consecutive  days spent  in   space  by  remaining  o n  Mir 
429 days.  ( B  Sun, J u l 9 / 9 4 ;  AP, J u l 9 / 9 4 )  

July 10: A  lengthy   review  of  the   four-hour  TBS   documentary  film  "Moon 
Sho t ,"  described  the   extraordinary  footage  obtained   from  NASA ,   primarily 
from the  Johnson  Space Center ,  and  the  story behind  the  U .S .  10-year race t o  
beat  the   Soviet Un ion   to  the  Moon.  (TV Times, Ju l  10-16/94) 

Various  special  television  programs  were  scheduled  to   commemorate  t h e  
25th   anniversary  of  the  Moon  landing. In  addition,  the  press  planned  to  fea- 
ture accounts recalling events of  the  first Moonwalk.  (B  Sun ,  Ju l  10194; C  Trib, 
J u l  10194; LA  Times, J u l   10194; AP, Jul   10194; USA  Today, Jul   11/94; W Post, 
Jul   11/94; AP, Jul   11/94)  

J u l y   1  1 : In  connection with  the July 16 projected  smashing into  Jupiter of  frag- 
ments of  the  comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 a t  a speed of about  130,000 miles an  hour, 
numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were  scheduled to  
occur on   the  far  side of  Jupiter, the  impact sites should  rotate  into  view  in  less 
than  an hour, so lasting effects could be  studied by  observatories on  Earth and by 
NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA  was  setting up an around-the-clock 
Comet   Impact  Newsroom  at  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center   to  assist  scientists 
interpreting  the  event.  (SP News, Jul  11-1 7/94; LA  Times, Jul  11/94; NY Times, 
Jul  12/94; LA  Times, Jul  12/94; USA  Today, Jul  12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94) 

T h e  National  Research  Council  reported  tha t  NASA   officials had   n o t  yet 
established  a solid working relationship with  the  Russian Space Agency. T h e  
Council  found  tremendous  improvement  in NASA  management  but  consid- 
ered  tha t  NASA   thus far  lacked a strong grip o n  Russian  involvement.  Since  
1985,  the   Council ,   the   operating  arm  of  the   National   Academy  of  Science 
and   the  National   Academy  of  Engineering,  had  reviewed  the   Space S ta t ion  
regularly  under  Federal  funding.  T h e   Space  Station   Committee ,   headed  by 
Jack  Kerrebrock,  a  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  professor,  also 
expressed concern  tha t  NASA  needed  t o  invest more  in  experiment develop- 
ment   and   preparatory  work  o n   Spacelab,  the   Shuttle's  science  laboratory. 
(SP  News, Jul   11-17/94; NY  'Times, Jul  29/94;  Phillips  Business  Information, 
Jul  29/94) 

Officials at  NASA ,   Los  Alamos National   Laboratory  in New  Mexico,  and  
the  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena,  California, said  mission designers 
were  being  discouraged  from  including   Radioisotope   The rmoe lec t r ic  
Generators  (RTGs )   in  future  satellites.  RTGs  were  plutonium-powered  and  
were used most frequently on  spacecraft traveling beyond Earth's orbit because 
solar panels  became  increasingly less efficient  t h e  farther  they  were  from  the  
Sun .   Scientists  and  engineers  planning  NASA's  proposed  Pluto  Fast  Flyby 
mission  wanted  to  use  a n  RTG ,  but  thus  far  approval  had  been  refused. T h e  
scientists were  concerned  tha t  NASA  was becoming anti-nuclear, but NASA  

JULY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

officials and  the  White House denied  there was  a policy  decision to end  the  
use  of RTGs.  In  late June, a Technology Challenge  team  headed  by  Dwight 
Duston,  director  of  science  and  technology  for  the  Ballistic Missile Defense 
Organization, "unanimously recommended  the use  of  an RTG  without  reser- 
vation"  for the Pluto Fast Flyby. (SP  News, Jul 11-17/94) 

July  12 :   A  feature  article  described  the   training  program  in  Russia  of  U.S. 
astronauts Norman  Thagard  and  Bonnie  Dunbar.  Thagard  was  scheduled  to  
blast  off  to  Russian  Space Station Mir with  two  cosmonauts  in March  1995; 
Dunbar was his backup. They  were studying Russian intensively, both the  spo- 
ken  language  and  technical  terminology.  In  addition,  they  practiced  o n   a 
Soyuz simulator, conducted  serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian 
psychological training  for  iong-haul space crews.  (LA Emes, Jul  12/94) 

NASA   announced  that  astronaut  William  E  Readdy  would  replace 
Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA  manager of operational activities a t  S ta r  City, 
Russia. As  Director  of  Operations, Russia, Readdy would  work  with  Russian 
trainers,  engineers,  and  flight  controllers  to   support  the  training  of  NASA 
astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut  Training Center, Star City, and  to enhance 
continued  cooperation  between NASA   and  Russia's Space Agency.  (NASA  
Release 94- 1 15 )  

July 13:  NASA announced the appointment of  Brian Welch as Chief of News 
and  Information  a t  NASA  Headquarters, Washington,  DC.  (NASA  Release 
94-1 16 )  

July  14: NASA   announced  the   selection  of  a  team  led  by Lockheed  Space 
Operations,  Inc., Ttusville,  Florida,  for  a contract  to provide propulsion  test 
and  technical  services  a t   the   John   C.  Stennis  Space  Center  in  Hancock 
County, Mississippi.  (NASA  Release C94-aa) 

July  1.5:  NASA  announced  tha t   the   Space  Station  Control  Board  had 
approved a revised  assembly sequence that provided significantly more power 
for the U.S.  laboratory, provided an  earlier U.S.  capability for essential Space 
Station  systems,  and  produced  hardware  in  an  efficient  and  cost  effective 
manner  while  still  meeting  the   $2.1  billion  annual  spending  cap.  (NASA  
Release 94-1 17 )  

NASA   announced  the  award  of  a  $440  million  contract  to  Boeing 
Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington, with McDonnell  Douglas 
Aerospace, Long Beach, California, and  other companies to develop airframe 
technologies  for  aerodynamics, flight  systems, and  materials  and  structures. 
Th e  award marked  the first time  the two  leading U.S.  airplane manufacturers 
would  have  teamed  up  to   develop  technologies  for  a  potential  future  U.S. 
High-Speed Civil Transport.  (NASA  Release 94-1 18) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

JULY  1994 

July  16:  A n   article   discussed  finding   o t h e r   planetary  systems  as  a n   inspiring 
new  challenge  for astronomy  a n d  pointed   o u t  NA SA  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S. 
Goldin's proposal  t h a t   NASA's  core  mission  might   be  t h e  search  for  a  hab i t -  
able  p lane t .  M e n t i o n  was  made  of  Proxima  Cen tau r i ,   t h e  nearest  neighbor   of 
a  bigger,  hotter ,   brighter   star:  t h e   S u n ,  wh ich   made   it   a n   easy  star  a round  
which   t o   look  for planets.  NASA's Hubble   Space  Telescope was  used  t o  study  
Proxima C e n t a u r i  and  recently  t h e  Hubble  discovered discs in  t h e  O r i o n  neb -  
ula,  wh ich   might   produce   planetary   systems.  A l though   t h e   search   for  extra-  
terrestrial  intelligence   (SET I )   was  eliminated   by  Congress ,   SET1 con t inued  
with   private  money   and   became  Project  Phoen ix ,  scheduled   t o  be  connec ted  
with   t h e   Parkes  radio  telescope  in  Australia   in   early  1995  a n d   t o   listen  for 
faint   radio  signals from  hundreds   of  stars.  (Economist ,  Ju l   16/94)  

July  17: A  biography  of N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S. G o l d i n  hased  o n  a n  
interview   with  h im ,   said  t h a t   G o l d i n   put  in  15-hour  days;  originally,  h e   did 
th i s  seven  days a week but  now h e  did  it five and  a half  days a week.  In   r e t um -  
ing t o  NASA  from  TRW ,  h e  determined   t o  ba t t le   t h e  bureaucracy  and  did  so. 
H e   expressed  conce rn   abou t   America   hav ing   become   a  n a t i o n   of  consump-  
t i o n ,   interested   mainly  in  e n t e r t a i nm e n t   and   recreation .   His  major  present  
conce rn  was  keeping  t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  o n   track .   (N ew s  Register, J u l   17/94)  

July 18: N A S A  announced   t h a t   it  and  t h e  Na t iona l   Space  Agency  of  Uk ra ine  
( N S A U )  had  agreed July  13 t o  explore  possible cooperation   in  remote  sensing 
and  Earth  sciences,  telemedicine ,  space biology, space welding, advanced   c o n -  
cepts  a n d  technology ,  and  s tuden t  and  scientist  exchanges .  Robert  W. C la rke ,  
NA SA   Associate  Administrator   for  Policy  Coo rd ina t ion   and   In te rna t iona l  
Relations ,   headed   t h e   U .S .   delegation   and   Valeriy  G .   K<>marov, Deputy 
Director   Gene ra l   of  NSAU ,   headed  t h e   Uk ra in ian   delegation .   ( N A S A  
Release  94- 1 19 )  

T h e   impact   of  a  huge  Fragment  G ,   a  two-mile-wide   piece   of  C om e t  
Shoemaker-Levy  9 ,  was  as great  as  six million  megatons  of  T N T  when   it  h i t  
Jup i te r  early  July  18 ,  according   t o  NASA's  Goddard   Space   Flight  Cen te r .   A 
similar piece  h i t   la te  J u l y  18 ,  a n d  a  further   piece  was  expected   o n  July 20.  In  
con t ra s t ,   t h e   to ta l   energy  t h a t  could  be  created   o n  Earth   w i th   a tom ic  bombs 
was  10,000 megatons.  T h e  come t   left  a  scar  larger  t h a n   Earth's diameter   o n  
Jupiter's  gaseous  surface.  Scientists   began  t o   study  t h e   long-term   effects  o n  
Jup i te r  of  t h e  comet's  impact .  T h e  media  also  focuseJ  on   t h e  work  of  NASA's 
Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r ,   G reenbe l t ,   Maryland,  in  tracking   develop-  
ments   o n   Jup i te r   and   t h e   excellent   view  of  Jup i te r   for  astronomers   a t   t h e  
S o u t h  Pole. In  t h e  final  stage of  t h e  come t  barrage t h a t  ended  late  July 21, four 
large  come t  fragments  h i t  Jupiter ,  creating   tremendous  fireworks  for watching  
astronomers .   Furthermore ,   as  a  result  of  t h e   scars  made  by  t h e   fragments, 
white   h o t   gases  from  t h e  planet's  ~ n t e r i o r  erupted   th rough   t h e  holes   i n  great  
fireballs.  In  measuring  t h e  dazzling light  produced ,  astronomers  believed  they  

JULY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. T h e  
potential  dangers  associated  with  the   comet  collision  with  Jupiter  led  the 
House Committee  o n  Science, Space, and Technology to propose  legislation 
tha t ,   if  passed, would  direct  NASA   to submit a  plan  by  February  1995 for  a 
10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that  are greater than  one 
kilometer  in diameter"  traveling along orbits  that  intersect  that of  the  Earth. 
(LA Times, Ju l  18/94; C Trib, Ju l  18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; 
W Times, Ju l  19/94; USA  Today, Jul 19/94; B  Sun, Jul 19/94; C Tn'b, Jul 19/94; 
NY Times, Ju l20 /94 ;  USA  Today, Jul20194; W Emes, Jul20194; LA  Times, Jul 
20194; B  Sun, Ju l  20194; CSM, Jul 20194; C Trib, Jul 20194;  P  lnq, Jul  20194; 
NY  Times,  Ju l  21/94; USA  Today, Ju l  2 1/94; B  Sun, Ju l  2 1/94; LA  Times, Jul 
21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Ju l  21/94; LA  Times, Jul 22/94; NY  Times,  ~ u l
22/94; W Post, Jul22194; B Sun, Jul22/94; USA  Today, Jul2.2194; W Times, Jul 
22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA  Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Ju l26 /94 ;  USA  Todayj 
Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY  Times, Aug  1/94) 

 

Astronaut Neil Am s t rong  made  a rate  public appearance at an airshow  in 
New  Knoxville, spoke briefly  to  reporters and  signed  autographs. He  said  he 
had accepted an invitation to the Wh i te  House on the  25th anniversary of his 
Moon walk.  (Western Star, Jul 20194) 

July  19: A  feature article on  NASA stated  that cooperation with  the Russians 
in space was  an  important  foreign policy initiative  of  the Clinton  administra- 
tion. In  this connection, NASA  was working hard  at merging many of  its pro- 
grams with  those  of  Russia, as NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  indi- 
cated  in a recent  interview. (NY  Times, Ju l  19/94) 

Roger Bonnet,  science director of  the  European Space Agency  (ESA ) ,  stat- 
ed  in an interview that  the ESA, a consortium of  scientists from  14 countries, 
sought  some $350 million  from member  states  to  fund  the  first  in  a series of 
lunar programs that could end in a manned Moon station within  2 5  years. Th e  
first European emissary to  the Moon,  a small, unmanned  craft  named  LEDA 
(Lunar  European  Demonstration  Approach),  could  land  on   the  Moon  by 
2001. LEDA would carry instruments to  measure the darkness of  the  lunar sky, 
the  frequency of  meteorite  impacts,  and  the  stability  of  the   ground,  factors 
that would  affect the functioning  of  a future astronomical observatory. LEDA 
would  also need  to  analyze lunar  soil for components  to be  used  in  the  con- 
struction  and  operation  of  a  permanent  station.  Such  a  European  approach 
would bypass NASA's plans for an  orbiting Space Station, a plan  with which 
many European countries had become  disenchanted. (NY Times, Jul  19/94) 

Fifty-four minority  high school  students, mostly African  Americans,  from 
the  Los  Angeles  area, began  a  four-week stay at Central State University  in 
Wilberforce, Oh io ,   studying  computer  science,  Earth  sciences,  and  mathe- 
matics.  NASA   sponsored  the  $300,000  Earth  to  L.A.  program  in  order  to 

ASTRONAUTICS  AN[)   AERONAUTICS  

JULY  1994 

encourage  minority students  to pursue such  courses a t  traditionally black  col- 
leges  and  universities.  Following  the   courses  at  Central   S ta te ,   the   students 
would  spend  two weeks visiting  12 black  colleges, looking  toward  future  col- 
lege entrance .   (LA Times, Jul  2 1/94) 

July  20:  NASA   announced  that   as  of  July  25  it  would  n o   longer  distribute 
news  releases or  contract   announcements  by  mail.  Instead  it would  use  elec- 
tronic  distribution  services. (NA SA  Release 94-121; P  lnq, Jul  29/94)  

A biographic account  of  NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin stressed his 
enthusiasm  for  sending humans  into  space combined  with  a  tremendous work 
ethic .  As an  administrator at aerospace manufacturer TRW, he developed strong 
ideas  about  what  was  wrong  with  the   space program  and  how  to  fix  it.  Space 
advisers  to   President George  Bush  found NASA   unresponsive  to  change  and 
decided to offer the  NASA  Administrator's job  to  Goldin. Among his manage- 
ment  tools, Goldin said, was  the  creative use  of chaos. ( W  Post, Jul 20194) 

Senator  Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland,  described some of  t h e  
benefits Americans enjoyed  in  their daily lives tha t   resulted  from space-based 
research.  Among  these  were  insulation  techniques  used  by  Meals  on  Wheels 
to  deliver  food  to  senior  citizens, miniaturization  and   computers, laser  tech-  
nology  for  use  in   the   information  superhighway, and  biomedical  discoveries. 
T h e   latter  included  laser  systems  used  in  heart  treatment ,   pacemakers,  and  
body  imaging  techniques  used  in  breast  cancer  detection .   In  addition,  the  
space  program  created  thousands  of  jobs.  Despite  t h e   above  achievements, 
Mikulski admitted  tha t  NASA   in the  past had over-promised technology  and  
underestimated  cost.  NASA   needed  a  clear  set  of  priorities,  and  space  pro- 
grams must  become multinational.  ( W  Post, Jul  20194) 

T h e  25th anniversary of  the  first Moonwalk was the  occasion of  several arti-  
cles  looking  hack  a t   the   excitement   of  tha t   event   and  subsequent  develop- 
ments  as  well  as  an   assessment  of  the   current  status  of  the   space  program. 
Noting  tha t   one-third  of  the  U.S. population was  not   alive  in  1969, the  arti- 
cles especially remarked  upon  a lack of  enthusiasm about space, together  with 
concern   about  earthly  matters.  Neil  Armstrong's  role in  the   Moon  landing  
and   the   fact  tha t   he  never  became  a ~ u b l i c  hero  also was  touched  upon.  ( W  
Post, Ju l  20194; NY  Times, Jul  20194; USA  Today, Ju l  20194; C  Trib, J u l  20194; 
WSJ, Jul  20194; LA  T rne s ,  Jul  21/94; H Post, Jul  22/94; P  Inq, Ju l  22/94) 

O n  the  25th anniversary  of  the  Moon  landing, President C l in ton  and  Vice 
President  Gore   welcomed  the   three   Apollo  11  astronauts:  Neil  Armstrong, 
Edwin  "Buzz" Aldrin ,  and  Michael  Collins, a t  a Wh i te  House ceremony. T h e  
U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the   1969 event .  (UP, Jul  
20194; Reucers, J u l  20194; W  Post, Ju l  21/94; NY  Times, Ju l  21/94;  B  Sun, Ju l  
21/94; USA  Today ,  Ju l  21/94; P  Inq, Ju l  21/94; LA  Times, Ju l  21/94) 

JULY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

NASA  and  Carnegie Mellon University  scientists gave a preliminary test  to  
an  eight-legged robot name Dante  11. They  sent  it down a gravel quarry to  test 
the  $1.8 million  robot's satellite  and   fiber-optics  links  and  software. O n  Ju ly  
22, or  soon  thereafter, they  ~ l a n n e d  to  send  it  down  Mount  Spurr, an   active 
volcano 8 0  miles west  of  Anchorage.  Such robots would  be  useful  in extreme 
terrains  and   climates.  O n  J u l y  28  a NASA   scientist, Butler H ine ,  said  tha t   a 
communications  problem  resulting  from  a  poor  satellite  link  with  the   robot 
was delaying the  robot's mission  in to  the  volcano. T h e  robot  took  its first steps 
o n  July  29  and  was  scheduled  t o  walk  12 hours  a day. By late  o n  Ju ly  31 ,  the  
robot  was  about  150 feet from its goal, a field of  volcanic  vents o n  the  bottom 
of  the   crater. As  of  August  2,  the   robot  was  sending  back  valuable  scientific 
data   from  inside  the   crater, despite  being  h i t   by  a falling rock. O n  August  3 ,  
Dante   I1  began  its steep walk  out  of t h e  crater. T h e  climh halted  o n  August 4 
because of  a faulty power  unit  on  the  crater rim. Scientists fixed t h e  electrical 
problem  but  o n   August  6  the   robot  fell  on   its  side.  Possible  methods  for 
retrieving t h e  robot  were  under  consideration. A n  attempt   to airlift  t h e  robot 
by  helicopter  o n  August  9  failed  when  the  cable snapped, dropping  Dante   11 
further  down  the   crater.  O n   August  13 ,   two  experienced  climbers  climbed 
in to   the  crater  and  manually wrapped  a sling  around  the   robot  and  attached  
it  to a line  from  the  helicopter, which t h e n  pulled Dante  11  up.  (AP, Ju l  21/94; 
AP, Jul  26/94; USA  Today, Ju l  27/94; Reuters, Ju l  28/94; NY  Times, J u l  30194; 
AP,  Jul   30194; W  Times,  Jul   31/94;  C  Trib,  Ju l  31/94; NY  Times,  Aug  2/94; 
Reuters, Aug  2/94; AP, Aug  2/94; AP, Aug  3/94; AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 
4/94;  USA  Today, Aug  5/94; Reuters, Aug  6/94;  USA  Today, Aug   8/94; NY 
Times,  Aug  9/94;  USA  Today, Aug  9/94; AP, Aug  9/94; Reuters, Aug  9/94; B 
S u n ,  Aug  10194; W Post, Aug  10194;  AP,  Aug  10194;  Chronicle of Higher 
Education, Aug  10194; AP, Aug  13/94; Reuters, Aug  14/94; W Post, Aug  15/94; 
NY  Tm e s ,  Aug  15/94; USA  Today, Aug  15/94; CSM ,  Aug  15/94; T ime ,   Aug 
15/94; AuWk, Aug  15/94; Chem ica l  and Engineering News, Aug  15/94; AP, Aug 
22/94; LA  Ttmes, Aug  28/94)  

July  21: NASA  announced   tha t  of  the   various devices  left  by astronauts Neil 
Armstrong and  Buzz  Aldrin  o n  the  Moon  2 5  years ago, a laser ranging retrore- 
flector  continued  to  provide  fundamental  scientific  data.  From  the   data  
obtained  and new  observations,  scientists  now  believed  tha t   the  Moon might 
have  a  liquid core. Among  o the r  findings from  the   laser  ranging  experiments 
were a verification  of Einstein's  theory of  relativity  and the  direct influence o n  
the  Moon's orbit of  ocean  tides o n  Earth .  (NA SA  Release 94-122)  

T h e   Italian  Foreign Ministry  announced   tha t   Italy  and  the   United   States  
would  launch  a spacecraft in  October   1997 o n  a seven-year voyage  to  Saturn .  
T h e  Cassini  would  leave  a  special  probe,  called  Huygens,  o n   the   surface of 
Saturn's largest  moon,  T i tan ,   to   gather  data  o n   the   atmosphere,  magnetos- 
phere,  and  chemical make-up of  the  rings of  Saturn  and  the  movements of  its 
satellites. A n   agreement  to  conduct   the  mission, which  was  heing  developed 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

JULY  1994 

by  NASA  and  the  Italian  Space  Agency,  was  signed  by  Italian  Foreign 
Minister  An ton io   Martini  and  U.S.  Ambassador  to   Italy,  Reginald 
Bartholomew.  (Reuters, Ju l  21/94) 

July  25:   Th e   National  Full-Scale  Aerodynamics  Complex  (NFAC ) ,   the  
ulorld's  largest  wind  tunnel,  turned  50  in  1994. Th e  NFAC,  located  o n   12 
acres  of  NASA's Ames  Research Center  in  Moffett  Field, California,  tested 
World War  I1  aircraft and  continued  to operate  by testing  the  Space Shuttle 
and  other aircraft and equipment.  (UP I ,  Jul 25/94) 

Scottsdale,  Arizona,  received  $750,000  in  grants  from  NASA   and  the 
Department  of  Energy  to   use  multispectral  imaging  to  map  and  study  the 
nearby  McDowell Mountains.  In  August,  a  Learjet provided  by  NASA   and 
equipped with  instruments that measured light ranging from infrared to ultra- 
violet was  scheduled to be  flown over the McDowells. T h e  remote sensing sys- 
tem would permit a precise study of  all that composes the mountain range and 
would  be  used  to produce a  three-dimensional  map. NASA  made  the  system 
available for civilian use, and Scottsdale was  the first city to take advantage of 
the possibility.  (Arizona Republic, Ju l  25/94) 

July  26:  NASA   announced  that  scientists  at  its  Ames  Research  Center, 
Moffett  Field,  California,  and  the  New  York  Medical  College  (NYMC)  in 
Valhalla, New  York,  were  using  satellite  remote  sensing and  computer  tech- 
nology  to  predict  the  risk  of  Lyme  disease  transmission. T h e  NASA   team, 
working  with  Dr.  Durland  Fish  of  NYMC  and  Westchester  County  Health 
Department  investigators, found  that  the  higher  the  proportion  of  vegetated 
residential area next  to woods within  a municipality, the higher  the transmis- 
sion risk.  (NASA  Release 94-123) 

NASA  announced that  it had  recorded on  video for the  first time hundreds 
of  spectacular red  and blue flashes of  light that extended  upward from electri- 
cal  thunderstorms  to  altitudes  as  high  as  60 miles. T h e  flashes occurred over 
thunderstorms  in  the Midwest between June 28  and July  12 during a NASA -  
sponsored  investigation  into  the   phenomenon.  T h e   principal  investigators 
were  two  University  of  Alaska,  Fairbanks  professors,  Davis  Sentman  and 
Eugene Wescott, who used  special low-light-level cameras aboard  two jet  air- 
craft flown out of Oklahoma City. (NASA  Release 94-124; W Post, Aug  1/94) 

Ju ly   27:  In  a hearing of  the House Energy  and Commerce Committee,  chair- 
man  John   Dingell,  Democrat  from  Miclugan,  pressed  NASA   officials  to 
explain  why  they  had  selected  Boeing  as  prime  contractor  for  the   Space 
Station in late  1993 in spite of  the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-con- 
trol  reviews.  NASA  officials  admitted  they did  not  know  that  Boeing  was 
under 2 1  federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay  the  government 
$161  million  in  settlements.  Testifying  for  NASA   were  Deidre  A.  Lee, 

JULY  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

Associate  Administrator   for Procurements ,  and  Deputy Administrator  J o h n  R. 
Dailey.  In   add i t ion  t o  t h e  prohlems with   Boeing, Michael  T h i b a u l t ,  Assistant  
Director  of  t h e  13efense Con t rac t   Aud i t   Agency, said  t h a t   a n  audit  of  charges  
by  IBM,  a   subcontractor   t o   McDonne l l   Douglas,  o n e   of  t h e   earlier  Space  
S t a t i o n   contractors ,   found  t h a t   about   20   percent   of  IBM1s $490   million  
charges were  n o t  allowable under   its cclntract.  (LA  Times, J u l  28/94; SP  News, 
Aug   1-7/94)  

July  28:  Sc ien t i s t s   at  NASA's  J e t   Propnlsion  Laboratory 
in  Pasadena ,  
California ,   released  photos   of  t h e  Ch icxu lub  crater  o n  t h e  Yucatan  peninsula  
in  Mexico .  T h e  pho to s ,  taken  from NASA's  spaceborne  radar, showed t h e  site  
where  scientists  considered  a n  impact  65 million  years ago might   have  caused 
climatic   changes   t h a t   killed  t h e  dincxlurs .   (USA  Today, J u l  29/94)  

July  29: N A S A  agreed  t o   launch   in January   1996  S o u t h  Africa's  first satellite ,  
Sun sa t ,  which   was  developed  at  Stellenbosch   University  nea r  C a p e  Town.  A  
four-memher N A S A   team   ev:liuated  t h e  Stellenbosch  project   and  offered  t h e  
university  a   free  launch   in  return   for  minor   additions   of  U.S.  equ ipmen t .  
S te l lenbo sch  project  leader G a r t h  Milne   said  t h e  satellite  would  deliver  high-  
resolution  multispectral  stereo   images  of  t h e   Earth   a n d  would  carry  amateur  
radio  equ ipmen t   tha t   would  allow  ch i ld ren   t o   talk  t o   t h e   satellite .   N A S A  
structural   engineer   h4arisa  A c h e e   said  N A S A   was  keen   t o   l a u n c h   Sunsat  
because  it  could  carry  a   U.S.  G loba l   Positioning   System  receiver  and   a   laser 
reflector  needed   t o   monitor   variations   in  the   Earth's gravitational   field.  T h e  
university  was  scheduled  t o   con t ro l   t h e   satellite   during   its  four-year  life. 
(Reu te r s ,  J u l  29/94)  

July  317:  T h e   officiill  newspaper,  China Daily,  quoted   a   spokesperson  for  t h e  
Ch ina   Aerospace   Co rpo ra t ion   as  expressing  confidence   it   would  fulfill  all 
launch   services  for  overseas  c l ien t s   in  1994 .   C h i n a   launched   t h e   Apstar-1  
satellite   made  by  U .S .   Hughes   Aircraft ,   from  t h e   Xichang   Space  C e n t e r   i n  
southwest   C h i n a   o n   July  2 1 .   A n   Australian   satellite   was  scheduled   t o   be 
launched   in August .  C h i n a  sought  a  larger share  of  t h e  commercial  space  mar-  
ket  dom ina ted  hy N A S A ,  Europe's Arianespace ,  and  Russian  launchers .  (UP I ,  
J u l  30194) 

July/Augusr:  A  lengthy  interview   with   N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S. 
G o l d i n   stressed  his   emphasis  o n   t h e   future   rather   t h a n  NASA's  p a s t   I n  th i s  
c o n n e c t i o n ,  h e  concen t ra ted   o n  four objectives:  de te rm ine  how  people  could  
live  and  work  productively  in  space ,  how   t o  d o  this  o n  a n   in te rna t iona l   basis, 
improve  systems managemen t  in  order  t o  accomplish  these  objectives  in  e igh t  
years,  and   America   must  regain  its  self-confidence.  G o l d i n  believed  all  these  
objectives  could be accomplished  by  creating   t h e  In te rna t iona l  Space  S t a t i o n .  
(Final Frontter, J u l /A u g  9 4 )  

August 

August  1:  Space  News  reported  on   the   financial  and   o the r   difficulties  con -  
fronting  the   Russian  space  program.  Few  of  the   staff  of  the   Russian  Space 
Agency  (RSA )   were  receiving  pay  checks;  many  space  workers  were  o n  
unpaid  leave and  o the r  scientists  and engineers had  left RSA ;  unlike  NASA ,  
RSA   had  oversight  responsibility but  did  no t   manage  space projects,  leading 
to  power  struggles with  companies engaged  in  space work  and  with  the  mili- 
tary with whom  RSA must negotiate such matters as rental  fees for using mil- 
itary facilities for  launches.  (SP News, Aug  1-7/94) 

NASA   announced  that   its  Marshall  Space  Flight  Center  in  Huntsville, 
Alabama,  had  signed  an  agreement  with  McDonnell  Douglas  Aerospace  in 
Huntington Beach, California, to reconfigure the Delta Clipper experimental vehi- 
cle  (DC-X) using  advanced  lightweight materials and advanced auxiliary propul- 
sion systems. NASA  was acquiring the  DC-X from the Department of  Defense to 
test new technologies needed to develop a reusable launch vehicle that  could assist 
NASA's ultimate goal of gaining low-cost access to space. (NASA  Release 94-125) 

NASA   announced   tha t   it  would  conduct   a  joint  campaign  with  Brazilian 
space  agencies  to   study  the   Earth's  space environment   over  the   magnetic 
equator   from  August  1 5   th rough   Oc tobe r   20 ,   1994 ,   as  part   of  t h e  
International   Equatorial  Electrojet  Year.  During  the   campaign,  NASA's 
Goddard  Space  Flight  Center's  Wallops  Flight  Facility,  Wallops  Island, 
Virginia, was scheduled  to  launch  3 3  rockets from the  Cen t ro  de Lancamento  
de  Alcantara   launch  range  in   the   northeastern   state  of  Maranhao,  Brazil. 
(NA SA  Release 94-126) 

NASA   was  experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of  materials 
to  fill  the  Shuttle's cargo bay  in order  to  justify  a planned  ten   Shu t t le  flights 
to  Russian  Space Station  Mir.  It  might  develop tha t   only  six  or  seven flights 
would  be  needed  according  to  NASA   Shu t t le   Chief  Btyan  O'Connor .  
(Phillips Business Information, Aug  1/94) 

August 2: T h e  General  Accounting  Office issued a report to  the  Congress stat-  
ing  tha t   Russian  participation  in  t h e   U .S .   Space  S ta t ion  project  would  add 
nearly  $400  million  to   the   Station's  cost  as  well  as  $1 .4   billion  for  o the r  
NASA   programs  tha t  supported  t h e  S ta t ion ,  instead of  saving tha t  amoun t ,  as 
had  been  predicted.  (Reuters, Aug  2/94; P Inq, Aug  3/94; AP, Aug  3/94) 

August  3:  T h e   Sena te   voted  6 4   to  36   to   defeat  t h e   amendment   offered  by 
Senator   Dale  Bumpers,  Democrat  from  Arkansas,  to   end   funding  for  the  
International   Space  Station .   ( W  Post,  Aug  4/94;  W  Times,  Aug  4/94; 
Huntsville News, Aug 4/94)  

A S TRONAU T IC S  AN11 AERON  AU T lC S  

AUGUST   1994 

NASA  Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin  issued a statement  following the  defeat 
of  the   Senate   amendment   t o  end  funding  for  the   International  Space  Station .  
Goldin  praised  t h e   Senate's vote of  confidence  as  a n   indication  of  a  bipartisan 
coalition of  support. H e  said tha t  t h e  Space Station  was a "truly  international  sci- 
entific effort, and  a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in  t h e  post Cold War 
world."  Subsequent  t o   Goldin's  statement ,   various  media  comments   appeared 
stressing the  commitment  of  "time and political capital" by  t h e  President  and  t h e  
Vice  President  t o   supporting  t h e  Space  Station ,   in  addition  t o  Goldin's tireless 
efforts. (NA SA  Release 94- 127; SP News, Aug  8-14/94; B Sun, Aug   12/94) 

N A S A   announced   t h e   establishment  of  a  committee   t o   develop  a  ~ l a n  t o  
identify and  catalogue, t o  t h e  ex ten t  p a c t i c a b l e  within   10  years, all comets and  
asteroids t h a t  might  th rea ten  t h e  Earth. Eugene Shoemaker, a n  astronomer with 
t h e   Lowell  Observatory,  was  appointed   chairman   of  t h e   eight-member  Near- 
Earth  Object   Search   Comm i t tee .   T h e   committee   was  formed  in   response  t o  
congressional  direction   t o  NASA   t o  develop  a  plan   in   coordination   with   t h e  
Department   of  Defense  and   t h e   space  agencies  of  o the r   countries.  Gregory 
Benford, professor  of  physics a t   the   University of  California,  Irvine,  commen t -  
ed  o n   t h e  congressional  charge  by  saying  tha t   publicizing  such   tracking  would 
be  a n   opportunity   for  NA SA   for  "smart  public  relations  and   smart  science." 
( N A S A  Release  94-128;  LA  Times, Aug  21/94; B  Sun ,  Aug  24/94) 

N A S A   announced   its  selection   of  NSI  Technology  Services of  Sunnyvale ,  
California ,   for  a  con t rac t   t o   provide  engineering ,   techn ica l ,   logistical,  a n d  
administrative   techn ica l  services t o  support  two  airborne  science  aircraft a t   its 
Ame s  Research  C e n t e r ,  Moffett  Field,  California .   ( N A S A  Release  C 9 4 - b b )  

A  N A S A  B-52 successfully launched   a standard   Pegasus booster  carrying a n  
Advanced   Photovoltaic   and   Electronic   Experiments  (APEX )   spacecraft, 
which   O rb i ta l   Sciences   Co rpo ra t ion   had  developed  for  t h e   U S .  A i r   Force. 
APEX  was  t h e   first  satellite  developed  using  Orbital's  standard   satellite   plat-  
form  and   represented  t h e   first  Pegasus  mission  t h a t   maximized  t h e   payload 
a n d  weight   capability  of  t h e  standard  booster.  (AuWk ,  Aug  8 / 9 4 )  

August  4 :  N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronaut   Sidney  M .  Gutierrez  would  leave 
N A S A   effective August  8 a n d   retire   from  t h e  Air   Force  t o  become  Manager  
for  Strategic   P lann ing   and   Development   a t   Sand ia  Na t iona l   Laboratories  in  
his  home town  of  Albuquerque ,  New  Mexico.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -129 )  

N A S A  stated  t h a t   it p lanned  t o  launch  Space  Shu t t le  Endeavour o n  August 
1 8  for  a  10-day Ea r th -mon i to r ing  mission.  (AP ,  Aug  4/94;  Reuters,  Aug  4/94;  
USA Today, Aug  5/94)  

Augwt  7:  Some   100   astronomers   from  around   t h e   world,  including   Tim 
Livengood  from  t h e   Godda rd   Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in  G reenbe l t ,   Ma ry land ,  

AUGUST 1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

traveled  t o  t h e  European  S o u t h e r n  Observatory   a t   La  Silla   in   t h e  mountains  
of  no r the rn   C h i l e ,  t o  view  t h e  collision  of  t h e  come t  w i th  Jup i te r  in Ju ly   (W  
Times, Aug   7/94)  

A n   article   o n   electronic   navigation   a n d   t h e   G loba l   Positioning   System 
(G P S )  using  24  satellites  described  t h e   advantages  of  GPS  and   its  uses.  T h e  
article   reported   t h a t   using G P S  a n d   a  sophisticated   flight   computer   ahoard   a 
737  aircraft  owned   by  N A S A ,   more  t h a n   36   "hands-off'   precision  landings 
were  completed   a t  Wallops  Island  airfield  in  Virginia.  (C  Trib, Aug   7/94) 

Augwt  8: N A S A   announced   t h e   appo in tmen t   of  J .  S t u a r t  Fordyce,  currently  
Deputy   Director   of  NASA's  Lewis  Research  C e n t e r ,   C leve land ,   as  Ch ie f  
Sc ien t i s t  a t  t h e  O h i o  Aerospace  In s t i tu te ,  C leve land ,  effective Sep tembe r  18. 
( N A S A  Release  94- 130)  

N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   of  RDM  Federal,  Inc.,  McLean ,   Virginia, 
t o  form  a  Remo te   Sensing   Public  Access  C e n t e r   for  demon s t ra t ing ,  testing ,  
a n d  transferring  technology  t o  he lp  provide  public  use  of  Earth   a n d  space sci- 
e n c e  da ta  over  t h e  In te rne t .   ( N A S A  Release  94-131;  Federal Computer   Week, 
Aug   22/94) 

T h e  na tu re   of  Space   S h i p  Endeavour's  forthcoming   mission,  after  its  pro-  
jected  launch  o n  August  18 was  described.  I n  comparison   t o  t h e  Ap r i l   flight 
t h a t  mapped  vegetation   across  t h e  globe ,  searched  for a n c i e n t  rivers  a n d  trade  
routes,  a n d  studied  t h e  world's oceans ,   t h e  August  flight ,  using  t h e  $600-mil-  
lion   Space   Radar  Laboratory,  by  taking   t h e   same   trajectory  was  t o   compare  
seasonal  variations   and   verify  scientists'  ability  t o   interpret   radar  da ta .   T h e  
first six  days of  t h e   10-day flight  essentially were  t o  be  a near   duplicate  of  t h e  
Ap r i l  flight.  T h e  last four days were  t o  use  t h e  radar  lab's instruments   t o  per-  
form  interferometric  measurements  of  t h e  Earth's  surface. Interferometry   typ- 
ically used  multiple   a n t e n n a s  t o  observe  a  single s i te ,  t h e n  calculated   t h e  dif- 
ference   in   t h e   returned   signals  t o   de te rm ine   t h e   d i s tance   t o   t h a t   site. 
Endeavour  scientists  hoped   t o  ach ieve  t h e  same  result  by  using the i r  single set 
of  radar  t o  observe  t h e  same  ground   tracks  from  parallel  orhits .  T h e y   expec t -  
ed   t o   have   th ree   oppo r tun i t ie s   t o   observe  long  ground  tracks  in   N o r t h  
Ame r ica   a n d   two   for  C e n t r a l  Africa ,   e a c h  for  about   20  minutes .   T h e  opera-  
t i o n  would  require  expe r t  navigation   and   flying  t o   ma in ta in   a  correct   obser- 
va t ion  position  w i th in   850 meters.  (AvWk, Aug   8/94)  

T h e  requirements   for  Rockwell  International's   Space  Systems  L3ivision  in 
integrating   a Russian-built  mechanism   i n t o  airlock  hardware  it  had   manufac-  
tured   so   Space   S h u t t l e   A t lan t i s   could  dock   with   Space   S t a t i o n   Mir  were 
described.  T h e  docking   assembly  would  he  t h e   first  in  what   could  he  a  long  
line   of  hybrid  US . -R u s s i a n  space  hardware.  Rockwell  executives  were  confi-  
d e n t   they   could  mee t   t h e   May  1995  launch   d a t e   for  A t lan t i s .   Rockwell's 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGU S T   1994 

Russian  pa r tne r   was  N P O  Energia,  with   whom   it  had   worked  some  20  years 
previously  o n  t h e  Apollo-Soyuz Test Project .  Some  of  t h e  complications  of  t h e  
collaboration were discussed.  (AtjWk, Aug  8 / 9 4 )  

A Japanese  cab ine t  advisory  commission  report  stated   t h a t  J a p a n  needed   t o  
double   its  space  budget  over   t h e   nex t   15  years  t o   in i t ia te   planetary   expedi-  
tions ,   become   a  leader  in  Earth   observation ,   and   develop   advanced   robotics. 
T h e  new  space plan   confirmed  Japan's  existing  comm i tmen t   t o   in te rna t iona l  
space  programs,  inclduing   t h e   Japanese   Experiment   Module   for  NASA's 
In te rna t iona l   Space   S ta t ion .   T h e  recommendations   came   from  a  long-term  
p lann ing   group  w i th in   t h e   Space  Activities   Commission   and   were  t o   be  for- 
warded  t o  Japan's  Finance  Ministry  a t  t h e  end  of  August w h e n  t h e  fiscal  1995  
budget  would  be  prepared.  (AvWk, Aug  8 / 9 4 )  

August 9: A n  article  highlighted   t h e  benefits  satellite  reporting  could  provide 
for  various  earthly   activities .  A n  example  given   was  t h e  way  in  which   Frank 
Lamb, president  of  Eastern O regon  Farming Company  a n d  C rop ix ,  Inc.,  who  
had  a grant   from NASA's  Earth  Observation   Commercialization  Applications  
Program,  used  satellite   observations   t o  check   on  t h e   h e a l t h   of  plants   in   his 
O regon   farm  h y   determining   t h e   rate   of  photosynthesis.  T h e   images  enabled  
;I  farmer  to   de tec t   problems  such   as  irrigation-equipment   failure,  drainage  
problems,  and   pest  infestation .   Satellite   images  were  also  used  by  t h e   S o u t h  
Florida  Wa te r   Management   District  to   update   its  maps  and   identify  illegal 
tampering   of  wetlands ,   as  well  as  t o   create   maps  of  Midwest  flood  areas  for 
damage  a n d   rebuilding  plans.  (USA  Today, Aug  9 /94 )  

U .S .   astronauts   and   Russian  cosmonauts   met   a t   t h e   1 0 t h  congress  of  t h e  
Association   of  Space  Explorers  tha t   opened   in  Moscow. Participants   stressed 
t h e   importance   of  space  cooperation   now  t h a t   t h e   space  race  was  over. T h e  
conference   theme  was  devoted   to   protecting   Earth's ecology.  (AP ,  Aug  9 /94 )  

August  10:  N A S A   a n n o u n c e d   t h a t   t h e   F rench   space   agency,  C e n t r e  
Naticlnale   d 'E tude s   Spa t ia le s   ( C N E S )   was  awa rd ing   t h e   U .S . -F r e n c h  
TOPEX/Poseidon  management   team   t h e  CN E S  Medal  in  recognition  of  the i r  
achievements .   S e v e n  team  members  from N A S A  Headquarters ,  Wa sh ing ton ,  
DC ,  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory, Pasadena,  California ,   and   t h e  CN E S  
p ro jec t   office 
received  
t h e   awards .   Launched   August   1 0 ,   1 9 9 2 ,  
TOPEX/Pc~seidon  con t inued   t o  study  t h e   topography  of  t h e   oceans .   ( N A S A  
Release  94-  132 )  

August  I  I :   NA SA   announced   t h e   appo in tmen t   of  Earle  K .   Huckins   I11  as 
Cassini   Program  Director   in   t h e   Office  of  Space   Science .   A n   in te rna t iona l  
program,  Cassini   was  designed  t o   explore   t h e   planet   S a t u r n ,   its  rings  and  
moons ,  and  t h e  surrounding  env i ronmen t .  Scheduled  for launch  o n  a T i t a n  IV  
C e n t a u r   in  O c t o b e r   1997 ,  t h e  Cassini  spacecraft  was  t o  swing  by  Venus,  t h e  

AUGUST  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

Ea r th ,  a n d  Jup i te r  before  being  inserted  i n t o  orbit  around  S a t u r n  in  J u n e  2004. 
Cassini  was  projected   t o  orbit   S a t u r n  for  four years.  ( N A S A  Media   Advisory 
A u g   11/94)  

A n  article   criticized  of  t h e  ways  i n  wh ich  N A S A   spent   more  t h a n  half  t h e  
funds   allocated   t o   it   o n   unproductive   matters   t h a t   h a d   n o t   advanced   t h e  
design  of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n .  T h e  article   alleged  t h a t   a t   least  24  m o n t h s   of 
delays  resulting  from  congressional  budget-trimming   a n d   frequent   redesigns 
cost  $1.6  billion,  a  "hefty  extra   layer of  management"   cost  $1 .1  billion;  a  dis- 
carded  propulsion  and   guidance  un i t   cost  $900  million ,  a failed da ta  manage-  
m e n t   system  cost  $500  million ,   a n d   o t h e r   redesigns  and   deletions   cost  $600  
million .   S i n c e  t h e  appo in tmen t   of  Daniel   S. Go ld in   as  Administrator ,   many  
of  t h e   problems  had   been  fixed,  but   if  techn ica l   glitches   a n d   congressional 
meddling   recurred,  t h e   program  could  again  he  in   trouble .   (Bus   Wk,  Aug  
15 /94 )  

Sc ien t i s t  J o h n  Bradley  of  MVA   Inc .   in  Norcross,  Georgia ,   said  in   a  report  
i n   t h e   journal  Science  t h a t   a n c i e n t   space  dust  particles,  composed  of  a  black 
glassy  substance   embedded   with   metal ,   t h a t   zipped  i n t o   Earth's  atmosphere  
m igh t  be  older   t h a n   t h e  solar system. S om e  of  these   tiny  dust  grains  appeared 
t o  be similar  to  o n e  of  t h e  major raw materials of  t h e  universe,  interstellar  dust 
grains, known   as GEMS  @ass  with   embedded   metal  and   sulfides). Scientists  
collected  GEMS ,  which   they  believed  were  left  from  a  passing  comet's  wake, 
from  a NA SA  U -2  airplane  several miles above  Earth .  T h e  GEMS  were rare- 
only  o n e  or  two  were collected   per  hou r  of U -2  flight  time-hut 
showed signs 
of  exposure t o  irradiation  when  studied  under   a  transmission  e lec t ron  miscrcl- 
scope.  (UP, Aug   11 /94 )  

August  12:  NASA  announced   t h a t   its  Galileo   Spacecraft   had   begun  a  six- 
m o n t h  process  of  radioing  t o  Earth   da ta   taken  during  t h e  collisions of  C om e t  
Shoemaker-Levy  9  a t  Jup i te r  in July. ( N A S A  Release  94-1  33) 

NASA's  Ames   Research  C e n t e r ,  Moffett  Field, California ,   a n n o u n c e d   t h e  
award of  a  con t rac t   for  information   a n d  commun ica t ion s  support   services  for 
Ame s   t o   I -N e t ,   Inc . ,   Bethesda,  Maryland.  ( N A S A   Release  C 9 4 - b b   ( s i c ) ;  
duplicates  number   o n  c o n t r a c t  a n n o u n c em e n t  of  August  3) 

N A S A   Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   spokesperson  Bruce  Buckingham   s a d   t h a t  
t h a t   N A S A   had   worked  ou t   a  plan   t h a t   would  allow  N A S A   employees  to  
have   t h e   Labor  Day  weekend   off  a n d   still  would  permit   t h e   launch ing   of 
S h u t t l e  Discovery  o n  September   9 .  (Flu Today, A u g   15/94)  

August  13: N A S A   researchers  hoped   t h a t ,   among  o t h e r   things ,   Endeavour's 
comparison  radar  images from  its second  env i ronmen ta l   voyage would  enab le  
t h em   t o  peer  through   t h e  mists  of  Rwanda  to   track   t h e   imperiled  moun ta in  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

AUGUST  1994 

gorilla.  In   the   category  of  experiments,  shortly  after  liftoff,  the   crew  of 
Endeavour  were  scheduled  to   engage  in  mixing  up  a  batch  of  special  order 
concrete ,  which was  t o  be  allowed t o  harden  during  the   10-day voyage. After 
the   f l igh t ,  Master  Builders  Inc.  of  Cleveland,  who  had     re pared  the   ingredi- 
ents ,   were  to   test  the   concrete  to  determine  the   critical  particle  dispersion 
tha t   ensured  hardness  for  possible  future  construction  o n   the   Moon  or  else- 
where.  A n  experiment  in  earthquake  forecasting  also was  planned.  Ano the r  " 
planned  experiment  was  t h e   dumping  of  oil   and  algae  byproducts  in to   t h e  
North   Sea  off  Denmark  to   see  if  Endeavour's  radar  could detect   them.  T h e  
countdown  for  the   flight  began  August  1 5 .   (AP, Aug  13/94; AP, Aug  15/94; 
UP, Aug  15/94; Reuters, Aug  15/94; NY  Times, Aug  16/94; USA  Today, Aug 
16/94; AP,  Aug  17/94; Reuters,  Aug  17/94; NY  Times,  Aug  18/94; W  Times, 
Aug  18/94;  W  Post,  Aug  18/94;  USA  Today,  Aug  18/94;  AP,  Aug  18/94; 
Reuters, Aug  18/94) 

Augwt  14:  T h e   digital  data  representing  t h e   first  direct  image  of  Come t  
Shoemaker-Levy  9  slamming  into   Jupiter   reached  Earth  from  Galileo.  T h e  
impact  of  the   explosions  was  presumed  to  have  created  waves  in  the   atmos- 
phere,  and  these  were  being  sought  by  the   Infrared  Telescope  Facility  tha t  
NASA   operated  atop  Mauna  Kea  mountain   in  Hawaii.  T h e   explosions  sent  
substantial  amounts  of  helium  hundreds  of  miles  above  the   top  of  Jupiter, 
which  was  a  surprise  and  which  NASA's  Extreme  Ultraviolet  Explorer 
satellite detected.  (NY Times, Aug  16/94) 

In   anticipation   of  spending  cuts  when  t h e   new  fiscal  year  would  begin 
October   1,  NASA   had  begun  to  cut  civil  service and   contractor  positions  a t  
the  Kennedy  Space Cen te r   (KSC)  a t  Cape  Canaveral. Although  NASA   was 
elltninatlng  four  tlmes  as  many  jobs  as  in  the   previous  two  years,  KSC  con-  
tractors  were  obliged  to  let  17 workers go for every government job  eliminat-  
ed.  These  cuts  were  taking  place  despite  NASA's  plan  for  eight   Shu t t le  
launches in  the  coming year.  (0 Sen Star, Aug  14/94) 

August  16: NASA  announced  tha t   it had  signed an  agreement  o n  biomedical 
research  with  the  National   Institutes of  Health   (N IH ) .  NASA  was  t o  use  its 
hioreactor technology  to produce  three-dimensional tissue cultures for labora- 
tory research. T h e  goal of  the  agreement was t o  engineer a human  lymph node 
model  for AIDS  research  and   to  extend  this  technology  to  a  broad  spectrum 
of  tissues.  (NA SA  Release 94-134; AvWk, Aug  22/94) 

August  18:  NASA   announced   tha t   the   flight  of  Space  Shu t t le   Discovery, 
scheduled  for September  1994, would  include  two firsts: atmospheric research 
using a laser, the  Lidar  In-Space Technology Experiment  (LITE) ,  and  robotic 
processing  of  semiconductor  materials.  T h e   mission  would  also  feature  the  
deployment  and  retrieval  of  a  free-flying astronomical  observer  and   the   first 
untethered  spacewalk  by  astronauts  in  more  t h a n   10 years.  O n   August  31 ,  

AUGUST  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

NASA   officials  indicated  there   might  be  a  delay  in  the   contemplated 
September  9  launch  because  of  problems  with  the   craft's propulsion  system. 
(NA SA  Release 94-135; AP, Aug  31/94; Reuters,  Aug 31/94)  

T h e  flight of  Space Shuttle  Endeavour was aborted  1.9 seconds before  liftoff 
as a result of  automatic engine shutdown caused by  an  overheated  fuel pump. 
In  consequence, NASA   officials stated  tha t   they  were  moving  t h e   launch  of 
Endeavour  to   the   first week  of October   because  of  the   time  it  would  take  to  
refurbish  t h e  craft.  (UP, Aug  18/94; AP, Aug  18/94; Reuters,  Aug  18/94; NY 
Tm e s ,  Aug  19/94; W Post, Aug  19/94; W Times, Aug  19/94; USA Today, Aug 
19/94; AP, Aug  19/94; F k z   Today, Aug  19/94; 0 Sen Star,  Aug  19/94; NY Times, 
Aug  21/94; AuWk, Aug  22/94) 

Japan's new H-I1 rocket was aborted six seconds before  liftoff when  its main 
liquid fuel engine was  ignited but  the  solid fuel booster rockets failed t o  ignite. 
Japan's National  Space Development Agency  said  the  problem appeared  to  be 
in a ground-control computer known as  the  countdown sequencer  rather  than  
in   the   rocket. O n  August  28,  the   H-I1 rocket  was  launched  again.  However, 
Japan's space agency said  o n  August  3 1 tha t   it was  abandoning  efforts to  put 
in to  orbit  an   experimental  satellite  launched  by  the  H-I1 rocket.  (NY Times, 
Aug  19/94; 0 Sen  Star, Aug  19/94; Reuters, Aug  28/94; NY  Times, Aug  29/94; 
CSM, Sep  1/94) 

August  19: NASA   announced   tha t   recent  results  from  the   Haystack Orbital  
Debris  Radar  measurements  of  orbital  debris  were  good  news  for  the  
International  Space Station .  T h e  radar, which  was operated  for NASA  by  the  
MIT   Lincoln  Laboratory,  showed  tha t   the   measured  debris  at  low  altitudes 
(250-400  miles) was below predicted  levels. T h e  improvement resulted  in part 
from  NASA's  Orbital   Debris  Mitigation  Program  under  which  NASA  
informed other  nations  of  the  hazards resulting  from  third  stage rocket  explo- 
sions,  which  led Japan ,  Ch ina ,   and  Russia  to  join  NASA   in  modifying  their  
launch vehicles and  satellites. O the r  reasons were  the  decreased military space 
activities  of  Russia  and  the  U.S.  and   the  decrease  in worldwide space launch-  
es.  (NA SA  Release 94-136)  

Drucella  Andersen,  who  served  as  head  of  public  affairs for  aeronautics  a t  
NASA ,  moved  to  the   Federal Aviation  Administration  as  Deputy  Assistant 
Administrator  for  Public Affairs. ( W  Post, Aug  19/94)  

August 21 : In discussing the   training of  two U.S. astronauts in Russia, William 
Saxe, NASA's representative  in Moscow, was  quoted  as  saying tha t  when  the  
astronauts  arrived  in February, they were  refused maps or phone   books of  Star  
City, their  training center ,  because these were considered  top  secret. However, 
the   astronauts  were  not   denied  entrance   t o  any  of  the   buildings.  T h e   astro- 
nauts were  not   to  begin  training with Russian cosmonauts  until  t h e  fall.  (NY 
Times, Aug  2 1/94) 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

AUGUST   1994 

In  September, a conference on  space debris was  scheduled to be  held  at Kent 
University's Unit  for Space Sciences in Canterbury, England. Experts from space 
agencies  around  the  world  were  to  attend  the  three-day  conference.  Kent 
University had  become a center of  expertise in  the  study of  space debris, having 
mounted experiments o n  the subject o n  several spacecraft. (Times of  London, Aug 
2 1/94) 

August  23: NASA   announced  the  creation  of  the   Office of  Space Access  and 
Technology a t  NASA  Headquarters in Washington and the  selection of John  E. 
Mansfield as  the  new NASA   Associate Administrator  for the  office. T h e  merg- 
er of  two previous offices: the Office of  Advanced Concepts and Technology and 
the  Office of  Space Systems Development gave greater focus to the development 
of  advanced  space  technologies and  future space  launch  systems. The   changes 
were  to  take  effect  September  6.  (NASA  Release  94-137; Defense  Daily, Aug 
24/94) 

August  24: NASA   announced  its selection of  15 organizations to receive a  total 
of  $20 million to help develop applications and  technologies as part of  NASA's 
efforts  to  provide  public use  of  Earth  and  space science data  over  the  Internet. 
The   remote  sensing  database  applications would  make  the   information  more 
accessible to a wider audience than   in the  past.  (NASA  Release 94-138) 

NASA   announced  the   successful completion  of  the  first  and  largest  of  eight 
mirrc>rs for  the  Advanced  X-ray Astrophysics Facility  (AXAF). T h e  mirror was 
scheduled to be  a part of  the AXAF telescope which was to  be launched in 1998. 
(NASA  Release 94-139) 

NASA  announced  the  discovery in the  southern  constellation Scorpius of  an  
unusually  bright  X-ray  source  by  an   instrument  aboard  NASA's  Compton  
Gamma-Ray Observatory. i t  remained to be determined whether  the  new source 
was a black hole, a pulsar, or some new  object, according to B.  Alan Harmon  of 
NASA's Marshall Space  Flight  Center,  Huntsville, Alabama.  (NASA  Release 
94-140) 

NASA   announced the members of  the  mid-1995 Space Shuttle mission  that  
was  scheduled to cany a NASA  Tracking and Data Relay Satellite. The  satellite 
was  intended  to provide for telecommunications needs essential to the success of 
Space Shuttle  and low-Earth orbit spacecraft missions. The  Space Shuttle was  to 
be  commanded by  Terence T. Henricks. (NASA  Release 94-141) 

Bryan O'Connor, overseer of  Shuttle operations a t  NASA   Headquarters, said 
that  NASA  expected to receive shortly a Russian-built Androgynous Peripheral 
Docking  Assembly  tha t   would  enable  Space  Shuttle  Atlantis  to  dock  with 
Russia's Mir  Space  Station.  A  damaged  tube  delayed  delivery  of  the  docking 
component. (Phillips Business  Information, Aug 25/94) 

AUGUST  1994 

C:HRONOLOGY  1994 

A  report  by  the  NASA   Advisory  Council  Task  Force  o n   the   Shuttle-Mir  
Rendezvous and  Docking  Missions  criticized  the   lack  of  one  person  being  in 
charge  of  t h e  Shuttle-Mir  phase  one   (1995-97)  project.  Accordingly, NASA  
was  moving  to   remedy  the   situation   and   make  the   Space  S ta t ion   program 
structure  similar  to   the   existing  Space  Shuttle   program  structure.  (Phillips 
Business Information, Aug  25/94) 

August  25: NASA   announced  tha t   astronaut  Franklin  Chang-Dia:  would  be 
payload  commander for the  Space Shu t t le  mission scheduled for early  1996 in 
which  t h e   Tethered  Satellite  System  (TSS )  would  be  flown  for  t h e   second 
time.  Because  of  the   preparation  time  required  for  this  mission  designed  to  
orbit  the  TSS a t   the  end  of  a  13-mile-long tether   to  test  techniques  for man-  
aging  aircraft  a t   great  distances  and  t o   study  the   electrodynamic  effects  of 
moving  a conductive  tether   through  the  Earth's magnetic  field, the   selection 
was  made early.  (NASA  Release 94-142)  

NA SA   announced   tha t   it ,  a  team  of  U .S .   aircraft  and  engine  manufactur- 
ers,  and  t h e   Russian  aircraft  firm,  Tupolev  Design  Bureau,  planned  to   use  a 
Russian Tu-144 supersonic  transport  as  a  flying  testbed  for  conducting  flight 
research o n  high-speed enabling technologies.  Included  in  the  U .S .  team were 
Boeing, McDonnell  Douglas,  Rockwell  International ,   General   Electric,  and 
Pratt & W h i t n e ~ .  (NASA  Release 94-143; Antelope Valley  Press, Sep  1/94)  

NASA's Johnson  Space Cen te r  ( J S C ) ,  Houston ,  announced  the  selection of 
Loral  Space  Information  Systems  of  League  City, Texas,  t o   provide  Support 
services for  JSC's Safety, Reliability,  and   Quality  Assurance  Office.  (NA SA  
Release C94 -cc )  

A t  Rockwell International's  Science Cen te r   In  Thousand  Oaks, California, 
scientists  such  as  Maribeth  Hun t   were  finding ways  to  transfer  environmen-  
tally oriented  space science  to  uses  o n  Earth.  For  example, Hun t   was  packag- 
ing a spaceship's laser-powered, toxic-gas analyzer into  something  the  size of a 
duffel  bag  tha t   earthly health   officials could  use  to  catch   industrial  polluters. 
(LA Emes, Aug  25/94) 

August  27:  A n  Air  Force Tltan  4  rocket  was  launched  successfully from Cape  
Canaveral  Air   Station   and   deployed  "in  the   desired  orbit."  T h e   classified 
satellite was  thought   to have  an  electronic  eavesdropping platform  capable of 
tapping  in to  military and  civilian  communications.  (Reuters, Aug  27/94; W 
Post, Aug  28/94) 

A t   Russia's  request,  the   Federal  Aviation  Administration  was  about  to 
launch   a sweeping  inspection of  Russia's airlines  and  air  safety  controls. T h e  
review resulted from three  serious air crashes in Russia during  the  year and  dire 
warnings of  the  dangers of  Russian air travel.  (W  Post, Aug  27/94) 

..ISTRCINAUTI(;S  AN 1 3  A ERONAU T IC S  

AUGUST   1994 

D o n n a   Shirley ,   Director   of  NASA's   newly  formed   Office   of  Mars  
Exploration  at  t h e  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory  in  Pasenda ,  California ,  discussed 
NASA's  plans t o  send  up  t o  28 orbiters ,  landers, and   rovers  t o  Mars w i th in  t h e  
next   decade .  G l e n n  C u n n i n g h am ,  program  manager  for NASA's Mars G loba l  
Surveyor,  was  quoted   in  c o n n e c t i o n   with   keeping   t h e   program  w i th in   cost 
limits  and   t h e   November   1996  scheduled  launched   of  t h e   Mars  G loba l  
Surveyor  aboard  a  Delta   2  rocket.  (Flu Today, Aug  27/94) 

August  29:  After   a n  unsuccessful  a t temp t   t o  link  with   t h e  Mir  Space  S t a t i o n ,  
a n  unmanned   Progress M - 2 4  Russian  cargo craft  was scheduled  t o  try  again o n  
August  30.  A  Russian  spokesperson  said  t h e   docking   mechanism   of  t h e  
Progress  appeared  t o o   sensitive  for  t h e   Mir's  vibrations.  T h e   a t t em p t   of 
Progress t o  dock  August  30  again was unsuccessful.  However, o n  September   1, 
a Russian  cosmonaut  successfully docked  t h e  unmanned  supply ship .  (AP ,  Aug  
29/94;  Reuters,  Aug   29/94; C Trih, Aug   31 /94 ;  UP, S e p   2/94; NY  Times,  Sep  
3/94; VC' Post, Sep   3/94; W Trnes ,  S e p  3/94;  P  Inq,  Sep  4 /94 )  

Itar-Tass  news  agency  reported   t h a t  Russia had   launched   t h e  Kosmos-2290 
military  satellite   from  t h e   Raikonur  Cosrnodrome   in   Kazakhstan.  (W  Ttmes, 
Aug  30194) 

Rohert   Schock ,   deputy   associate  director   of  t h e   energy  program  a t   t h e  
La\vrence Livermore Na t iona l  Laboratory, Livermore, California ,  said  t h a t   t h e  
same  fuel  t h a t   powered  space  shuttles   could  propel  fuel-efficient,  env i ron -  
mentally   friendly cars of  t h e   future. T h e   laboratory  had   a  $1   million   g ran t  t o  
analyze  hyd rogen   applications   particularly   in   t h e   transportation   field.  (UP ,  
Au::  29/94)  

T h e   Paris-based  Eurc>consult organization  assessed  world  space  markets  
th rough   t h e   year  2004.  T h e   European  t h i n k   t a n k   studied   U .S . ,   A s ian ,   a n d  
European  space  and   commun ica t ion s   companies ,   agencies,  and   analysts.  It 
co~~cIuClell tha t   new  commun ica t ion  programs  would  result  in  a $95  billion   t o  
$ 1  1 5  hillicln global market   for satellites,  ground  stations ,  a n d   launch  services 
d t ~ r i n g  t h e   period  and   t h a t  U .S .   industry M>;IS  increasing  its  share  of  t h a t   mar- 
ket .   (Az'L\I:k,  Aug   29/94)  

Aupcst 30: Martin  Marietta  Corporation   of Bethesda, Maryland, and Lockheed 
Co rpo ra t ion  of  Calahasas, California ,  reached  agreement   t o  merge  and   create  
t h e  ~ r o r l d ' s  largest  space and  defense company. T h e  agreement  remained  t o  be 
approved  h ) ,  shareholders   and   regulators.  According   t o   Lockheed  chairman  
L3an1el M .   Tellep  t h e  merger  would  result  in  "significant  reduction   of  costs  t o  
t h e   government ."   Biographic  da ta   o n   No rman   R .   Augustine ,   cha i rman   a n d  
chief  executive   of  Ma r t in   Marietta   and   president-designate  of  Lockheed 
Martin   Corporation ,   were  included.  (W  Post, Aug   30194; CSM, S e p   1/94; W 
Post,  Sep  4/94;  U . S .  News and  World  Rebort,  Sep   12/94)  

AUGUST  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

August  31: NASA's Jo hn  C. Stennis Space Cen te r   (SSC ) ,  Hancock  County, 
Mississippi, announced  the award of  a contract to Lockheed Space Operations 
Company, T~tusville, Florida, to  provide propulsion  and  technical  services at  
SSC. (NASA  Release C94-dd) 

NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston,  announced  the  award  of  a  con- 
tract  for  logistics  services  to  Pioneer  Contract   Services,  Inc.,  Houston. 
(NASA  Release C94-ee) 

Augwt: A n  article  described in  words  and photographs  the  "CAN  DO"  proj- 
ect  of  students  in  Charleston  County,  South  Carolina,  which  flew  on   the 
Space  Shuttle  Endeavour. T h e   students' scientific  package  consisted  of  four 
cameras and  261  test  tubes filled with  samples of  all  kinds,  that NASA   tech- 
nicans placed  in a G e t  Away  Special  (GA S )  canister  tha t  NASA  made avail- 
able  for  educational, government,  and  research  use.  Students  decided, using 
weather  and  orbital  data,  what  Earth  features  to  photograph  with  the   C A N  
DO  camera assembly, which  they called GEOCAM. T h e  students set up  their 
control center for GEOCAM  at   the Medical University  of  South Carolina  in  
Charleston,  and  using  headphones, were able  to commuicate with  each other 
and  with  the  Johnson Space  Cen te r   in  Houston.  Th e   results  of  the   photo-  
graphs and  experiments  were  integrated  into  thelr  courses of  study.  (National 
Geographic, Aug  94 )  

NASA's budget  situation  and  the  impact  of  its  congressionally mandated 
budget cutting on  contractors were  discussed. Spending on  the   Space Station 
was  cut  significantly, but  because  most  of  NASA's budget  was  tied  to  long- 
term  space projects downsizing trends were  slow  to affect contractors. A  table 
was given of  the 20 major NASA  contractors in fiscal year  1993, including the 
parent  company, the  subsidiary, the   parent's  location,  and the  amount  of  the 
contract. NASA   was  working  on   reducing  the  time  required  to  select  con- 
tractors  and  improving  the  internal  procurement  process.  (Government 
Executive, Aug 94) 

September 

September  I :   NASA  announced  that  it  had  reached  agreement  with  the 
Boeing  Company  on   the  key  elements  of  the  prime  contract  for  the  
International  Space  Station. Th e   agreement  dealt  with  the  scope  of  work, 
program  schedule,  cost  ceiling,  and  fee  arrangements  as  well  as  establishing 
contractual  terms  for  the  contract  to   be  signed  before  year's  end.  (NASA  
Release 94-144) 

September  2:  NASA   announced  the names of  the crew for  the Space Shuttle 
mission  to  rendezvous  and  dock  with  the  Russian  Space  Station  Mir  in 
October  1995.  T h e   mission  commander  was  designated  as  Kenneth  D. 
Cameron. (NASA  Release 94-145) 

September  3:  Before  setting  the  final  date  for  the  launch  of  Space  Shuttle 
Discovery, NASA  engineers were  studying the  results  of  tests  conducted  o n  
Space  Shuttle  Endeavour's main  engine  that  shut  down  1.9 seconds before 
takeoff,  aborting  the  launch.  (AP, Sep 3/94; W  Times,  Sep 4/94; B  Sun, Sep 
4/94; W Post, Sep 4/94; Ffu  Today,  Sep 4/94) 

September  5:  In  a  wide-ranging  interview,  NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. 
Goldin  reviewed  his  tenure  to  date  and  focused  on   prospects  for  civil  space 
flight. Goldin proposed  that while private  industry would use  the  low  orbiting 
costs offered  by a new  single-stage-to-orbit vehicle  to profit  from commercial 
space  applications, governments would  cooperate  o n  building  a  space  infra- 
structure to support robotic and human exploration. He believed that countries 
could cooperate in space infrastructure while maintaining competition in  space 
ventures such as the development of  a  launch vehicle.  (AvWk, Sep 5/94) 

T h e   projected  testing  of  the  SAFER  (Simplified  Aid  for  EVA  Rescue) 
device  during  an  Extravehicular  Activity  (EVA)  by  the   astronauts  in  the 
September Discovery  flight was  discussed at some  length. SAFER was  devel- 
oped by  engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was  designed  to sta- 
bilize  an   astronaut,  allowing  the   astronaut  to  fly  back  to  safety  should  the 
astronaut  drift  too  far  from  a  structure  during  an  untethered  EVA.  T h e  83- 
pound  SAFER  was  intended  to  be  attached  to  the  bottom  of  an   astronaut's 
spacesuit. O the r  objectives of  the  Discovery flight were  to  orbit  the  Langley 
Research Center's LITE  (Lidar  In-space Technology Experiment)  payload, a 
laser-observation of  the Earth, and  to release and  retrieve  the Goddard  Space 
Flight  Center's  SPARTAN 201  solar-wind  research  satellite.  (AvWk,  Sep 
5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94) 

September 6:  T h e   countdown  began  for  the   launch  of  Shuttle  Discovery o n  
September  9.  (AP, Sep  6/94;  UP,  Sep  6/94; Reuters,  Sep  6/94;  W  Post,  Sep 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEFTEMRER  1994 

7/94; USA  Today, Sep 7/94; AP, Sep  7/94; UP,  Sep  7/94; NY  Times, S ~ P  9/94; 
USA  Today, Sep 9/94; W Post,  Sep  9/94; W Times, Sep  9/94; C SM ,  Sep  9/94; 
Daily  Press,  Sep 9/94; Virginian-Pilot, Sep 9/94)  

September 7: NASA  announced  tha t  its Magellan probe on  September 6 began 
a  unique  experiment  designed  to  return  data   about  the   upper  atmosphere of 
Venus  and   the   behavior  of  a  spacecraft  entering   it.  Th is   would  mark  the  
beginning of  Magellan's final activities because  it was expected  to  bum   up  in 
the  atmosphere of  Venus by  October   14. (NA SA  Release 94-147)  

September 8: NASA   announced   tha t  a new  on-line  system  available  over  t h e  
Internet   was  speeding  up  NASA's MidRange  procurements.  MidRange was  a 
simplified procedure  for  procurements  between  $25,000 and  $500,000;  corn* 
panies would have  direct access to  such procurement  information  through the  
Internet .   (NA SA  Release 94-148)  

NASA   announced   the   selection  of  an   ancient   flood  plain  o n  Mars  as  t h e  
landing site  for  t h e   1997 mission  of Mars Pathfinder, one  of  t h e  first  in a new 
generation of  small, low-cost aircraft. T h e  Pathfinder was  scheduled  t o  arrive 
at Mars on  July  4 ,   1997. (NA SA  Release 94-149) 

A  feature  article,  including  photographs, described  the  problems centering  
around  adequate  living  room  in  space for  astronauts  in  relation  to  the  design 
of  the   Space  Station .  T h e   main  factor  limiting  space  of  the   28-by-14.5  foot 
habitat   was  the   size  of  the   Space  Shuttle's cargo  bay  in  which  it  would  ride 
into  orbit.  (NY Xmes,  Sep  8/94)  

New  Mexico's  senators,  Democrat  Jeff  Bingaman  and   Republican  Pete 
Domenici,  sent  a letter  urging NA SA  t o  keep two data  facilities a t  t h e  W h i t e  
Sands Space Network  Complex  northeast  of  Las Cruces.  A  $5 million  build- 
ing planned  for NASA  data  operations remained empty  in Las Cruces because 
NASA   had  decided  t o  shift  activities to  West  Virginia,  according  to NASA  
officials. However, NASA's  inspector general  said NASA  could  save $39 mil- 
lion  through  fiscal year  2000 and  nearly  $97 million  thereafter  if  data  opera- 
tions  connected  with  t h e  Earth Observing System remained  a t  Wh i te   Sands 
instead of  being moved t o  Fairmont, West Virginia. According to  a September 
5 syndicated column  by Jack Anderson,  Senator  Robert  Byrd  engineered  the  
change  in  location.  (Las Cruces  Sun-News ,   Sep  9/94;  Las Cruces  Sun-News ,  
Sep  10/94; h Cruces  Sun-News ,  Sep 12/94; Times-West Virginian, Sep  15/94)  

September  9:  Space  Shu t t le   Discovery  was  launched ,  and   t h e   six  astronauts 
began  a  series  of  experiments.  These  included  testing  the   first  space-based 
optical  "radar"  to   p o b e   clouds  and   aerosols  in  t h e   atmosphere; carrying  t h e  
first  automated  factory  in which  a robot, no t   a n  astronaut, did  the  work; and  
later  in  the  week  testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered  backpack. 

SEPTEMBER  1994 

CHRONOI.OGY  1994 

Also   being   tested  was  t h e  Shuttle's   manipulator  arm  t o  measure  t h e  effect  of 
Discovery's thruster   plumes, wh ich  might  pose  a  prohlem   u l t i~ n a t e l y  in  dock -  
ing  with   t h e  Russian  Space  S t a t i o n  Mir. T h e  astronauts  experienced  some dif- 
ficulties with   a  high-speed  da ta   recorder  t h a t   woulil  no t   work  and   a  commu -  
nications   glitch   related  t o   t h e   analysis  of  steering  jet  exhaust   plumes.  T h e  
astronauts   successfully conducted   extensive   env i ronmen ta l   monitclring  using 
this  connec t ion ,  N A S A  warned  t h a t   Iook- 
t h e  LIDAR   space-based radar-in 
ing  a t   Discovery  through   a   large  telescope  might   result  in   eye  damage.  O n  
S e p t em b e r   1 3 ,   Discovery  released  
t h e   SPARTAN   ( S h u t t l e   P o i n t e d  
Au tonomou s  Research  Tool  for  A s t r o n om ) ~ )  satellite  t o  study  t h e  solar wind ,  
t h e   streams  of  charged 
hu r t l ing  from  t h e   S u n  th rough   t h e  solar  sys- 
t em  a t   1.5 million  mph .  T h e  SPARTAN   was  scheduled  t o  he  picked  up  again 
by  Discovery  o n  September   15, hut   t h e  capture  of  t h e  s;ltellite  would  he  com-  
plicated   by  t h e   failure of  Discovery's radar  system, which   nie:mt  t h a t   SPAR -  
TAN   could  n o t   he  tracked .   Meanwhile ,   NA SA   added  a n o t h e r   day  t o  
Discovery's  mission t o  allow  more  laser-beam  anil  jet-exhaust   experiments   t o  
be  conduc ted .   O n  September   15 ,   t h e   astronauts   rec;lptured  SPARTAN   o n  
schedule  a n d  t h e  radar ope ra ted ,  facilitating  t h e  ope ra t ion .  O n  Sep tembe r  16 ,  
two  of  t h e   astronauts   took  spacewalks  without   a  te the r ,   testing   SAFER  in 
space  for t h e  first  time. T h e y  took  turns  during  a 6.5 hour  ou t ing  and  were  lirn- 
ited   t o  staying w i th in   25  feet  of  t h e   S h u t t l e  so  t h a t   they  could  he  retrieved  if 
SAFER   failed. Bad  weather   prevented   t h e   S h u t t l e  land ing  o n  Sep tembe r   19 ;  
it   ultimately  was  diverted   t o   Edwards  A i r   Force  Rase,  C:alifornia,  where  it 
landed   September   20.  (H  Ch ron ,  S e p   10194; LISA  T o d a y ,   Sep   12/94; H  I'ost, 
S e p   12/94; H  Ch ron ,  Sep   12/94;  C SM ,  Sep   13/94;  USA  To&?,  S e p   13/94;  P 
Inq,  S e p   13/94;  AP,  S e p   13/94; W  Post,  Sep   14/94;  P  I q ,  S e p   14/94;  C Trib, 
S e p   14/94;  UP,  Sep   14/94;  Reuters ,   Sep   14/94;  NY  Times,  Sep   15/94;  USA  
Today,  S e p   15/94;   P  Inq ,   Sep   15/94;  W  Times,  Sep   15/94;  UP,  Sep   15/94;  
Reuters ,  Sep   15/94;  W Post, Sep   16/94; NY  Times, Sep   16/94;  USA  Today, S e p  
16/94; 0 Sun ,  S e p  16/94; W Times, Sep  16/94;  C SM ,  Sep  16/94;  AP, Sep  16/94;  
UP, Sep  18/94;  Reuters ,  Sep   18/94;  USA  Today, Sep  19/94;  AP, S e p  19/94; UP, 
S e p   19/94; Reuters ,   Sep   19/94; W  Post,  Sep   20194; NY  Times,  Sep   20194;  R 
Sun ,   S e p   20194;  P  Inq,  Sep   20194;  USA   Today,  S e p   20194;  AP,  Sep   20194; 
Reuters,  S e p  20/94;  LA  Times,  S e p  21/94;  W Post,  S e p  21/94;  W  Times,  S e p  
21/94; P  I n q ,  Sep  21/94; B  Sun ,  Sep  21/94; H Post,  Sep  21/94; AP, Sep  21 /94 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   award  of  a   con t rac t   t o   t h e   ~ n d u s t q  team   of  (;E 
Atrcraft   E n g ~ n e s  and  U n ~ t e d  T e c h n o l o g~ e s '  Pratt   & W h ~ r n e y  for work  on  t h e  
p r o p u l s~ o n  componen t   t e c h n o l o g ~ e s  for  a  214 t   cen tu r l   H ~ g h - S p e e d  ( : I \ I I  
Transport .   ( N A S A  Release  94-  150 )  

September I  I :  W i t h  aid  from N A S A ,  t h e  University  of  Florida Medical  Schoo l  
created   a   microcomputer ,  more   t h a n   14  years  in  t h e   making ,   which   enabled  
physicians  t o  commun ica te  via  satellite  or  te lephone .  T h e  compu te r  held   t h e  
latest  information  from  12 medical  reference  books and  more  t h a n   1 ,000  mell- 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AND  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEPTEMBER  1994 

ical  journals  and  was  updated  cparterly.  Both  an   electronic  library  and   a 
record-keeping  system  were  provided  to   doctors.  System  2000  was  originally 
designed  to help ailing crew members on  distant  space stations diagnose their  
own  illnesses. NASA's  Director  of  Aerospace  Medicine  and   Occupational  
Health ,  Dr.  Earl  Ferguson,  expected  the  use  of  telecommunications  in hea l th  
care  delivery  to  "totally  revolutionize  the   way  we  practice  medicine."  (Flu 
Today, Sep   1 1/94) 

NASA   was  scheduled  to  conduct  a  completely  computerized  conference, 
beginning  September  12  and  lasting  through  September  30 ,   dealing  with 
flight  control  projects  involving an  F-15 research  aircraft.  Some 200 pages  of 
text   and   graphics  were  to  be  presented  on   a  computer  network.  (Antelope 
Valley Daily  N ew s ,  Sep  11/94) 

September  12: NASA   announced  tha t   its  prime  contractor   for  Space Shu t t le  
orbiters,  Rockwell  Aerospace,  o n   September  11  received  the   Russian-built 
docking   mechanism ,   t h e   Androgynous   Peripheral   Docking  Assembly 
(APDA ) .  This   mechanism  would  enable  Space Shuttle   Atlantis   to  join  the  
orbiting  Russian  Mir  Space  Station   in  J u n e   1995.  Work  was  scheduled  t o  
begin  immediately  at  Rockwell's  Space  Systems  Division  t o   assemble  the  
APDA   with  the   Rockwell-built  docking  system  hardware.  (NA SA  Release 
94 -151 )  

NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S .  Goldin   visited  the  Johnson  Space Cen te r  
in  Houston  as  his  first  stop o n  a  fall  tour  of  all NASA   facilities.  I n  a  tough 
speech  to  all employees, he  said he  wanted  more  innovation  and   less  bureau- 
cracy.  He   stressed  that   in  a  time  of  tight  government  budgets,  "every  single 
person  is  going tn have  to  justify  their  activity-all 
the   time." In emphasizing 
the   need  to  improve  business  practices,  he  cited  the  NASA   worker-to-man- 
ager  ratio  o n  some projects  as  2-to-1 ,  whereas  12-to-1 was  the  private  sector 
goal.  ( H  Post, Sep   13/94; H  Post, Sep  14/94)  

September  13: Two  Russian  cosmonauts  stepped outside  Space Station   Mir  in 
order  to  reposition  solar  panels  outside  the   Station .   They   were  expected  to  
spend  five hours outside, and  the   repositioning  of  t h e  panels  should  facilitate 
the   visit of  U .S .  Shuttle  Atlantis   in  1995. (AP, Sep  13/94)  

September  14: NASA   Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science Wesley  T. 
Huntress  announced  two  new  science  missions,  both  aboard  small,  relatively 
inexpensive  spacecraft.  T h e   first,  the   Transitional  Region  and   Coronal  
Explorer  ( TRAC E ) ,  woi~ld observe the  Sun  to  study  the  connection  between 
its magnetic fields and  the  heating of  the  Sun's corona. TRACE ,  scheduled for 
launch  in  1997, would  have  Alan   Ttle  of  the   Lockheed  Palo A l to  Research 
Laboratory, California, as the  Principal Investigator. T h e  second spacecraft, the  
Wide  Field  Infrared Explorer  (W IRE ) ,  scheduled  for  launch  in  1998 to  study 

SEI'TEMAER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

the  evolution of  galaxies, would be  headed  by Perry B.  Hacking of  NASA's J e t  
Propulsion  Laboratory, Pasadena,  California.  T h e   two  missions  were  part  of 
NASA's  Small  Explorer Program  for  highly  focused  science  missions.  Small 
Explorer  spacecraft weigh  approximately  500 pounds,  and  the   missions  were 
expected  to cost approximately $50 million  for design, development, and  oper- 
ations through the  first 30  days  in orbit.  (NA SA  Release 94-152)  

September  15: NASA   announced  tha t   it  had  begun  resurfacing the   runway  a t  
the   Kennedy Space Center ,  which  would  improve  the  wear  o n  Shu t t le   tires 
and  potentially  lead  to  an   expansion  of  the   Return  t o  Launch  Site   landing 
crosswind  flight  rule  beyond  t h e   present  constraint   of  15  knots.  (NA SA  
Release 94- 153)  

A n  August  17  letter  by  David  Margolis, associate deputy  attorney  general, 
confirmed  tha t   t h e  FBl's Office of  Professional Responsibility was  investigat- 
ing  allegations  concerning  the   Justice Department's  "investigative  and  pros- 
ecutive  functions"  in  the  Houston-based Operation  Lightning Strike  involv- 
ing NASA   and  its  contractors.  (UP, Sep   15/94; H Chron, Sep   15/94; H Post, 
Sep  15 /94 )  

T h e  Congressional Black Caucus  Foundation, Inc.  held  a  legislative confer- 
ence  in Washington,  DC, at which  NASA  had  the   largest government  career 
recruiting  exhibit  of  any  agency.  NASA's  Associate Administrator  for  Equal 
Opportunity  Programs, Yvonne  B.  Freeman, said  that  NASA  was  now  aggres- 
sively recruiting future black scientists as early  as  elementary school and  paying 
for their training. Of  the $740 million NASA  spent on  education each year, $70 
million  now  went  to  Historically Black  Colleges and  Universities,  up  from  $6 
million two years previously. Representative Louis Stokes, Democrat from Ohio ,  
who  formerly criticized NASA   for doing little to  hire blacks or enter  in to  con-  
tracts with  black  companies, said NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  had 
really  made  a difference  in NASA's programs. Stokes's appropriations subcom- 
mittee  was responsible for NASA   funding. (Plain Dealer, Sep  16/94) 

September  16: Scientists said tha t  the  first spacecraft to  f ly  over t h e  Sun's south 
pole-the  Ulysses probe, a joint  project of  the  European Space Agency  (ESA )  
the   climax  of  a  3  billion-kilometer  journey  through 
and  NASA-reached 
space the  week  of  September  12. As  it did so, 80  of  t h e  project's 120 scientists 
met  a t   ESA's research  center   in  the   Dutch   town  of  Noordwijk  to   assess data  
gained  during   the   four-year  space  odyssey.  Ulysses'  chief  scientist  Richard 
Marsden  believed  tha t   the   mission would  give  scientists greater  insight  in to  
how  the   solar  wind  interfered  with  radio  communications  and  electrical 
devices o n  Earth.  (Reuters ,  Sep   16/94) 

September 19: NASA   announced  tha t   high-speed  information  technologies  it 
had developed  could support  physicians in  remote  locations  on  a new medical 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUT ICS  

SEPTEMBER  1994 

information   superhighway  by  providing  t h em   in s tan t   access  t o   information  
a n d   t rea tmen t   strategies  for  the i r   patients .   T h e   new,  integrated   compu t ing  
a n d   telecommunications   technologies   developed  by  NASA's  J e t  Propulsion 
Laboratory,  Pasadena, California ,  were scheduled  t o  be demonstrated   t o  mem-  
bers  of  Congress  a n d   t h e   C l i n t o n   administration   o n   September   20  by   t h e  
Na t iona l   Information   Infrastructure  Testhed,  a  non-profit   consortium   of  cor-  
porations ,  universities,  and   government   agencies.  ( N A S A  Release  94-1 56 )  

T h e  ma t te r  of  space  science   research-its 
cost  and   its  usefulness-was  dis- 
cussed  in  a  feature  article .  S u c h  research  developed  more  or   less  as  a n   after-  
though t ,   but  it  had   already  proved  valuable  in  such   ways  as  making   precise 
measurements  of  t h e  thickness  of  clouds and  dust  t o  enab le  au toma ted  wea th -  
e r  satellites. Assessing  t h e  legitimacy of  t h e  high   costs involved  was more  dif- 
ficult,  but   valuable  scientific  findings  had   resulted,  such   as  chang ing   ideas 
about   how  different  levels  of  compression  a t   t h e   top   and   bo t tom   of  t h e   lung 
affected  t h e   way  t h e   lung   functioned   and   con t rad ic t ing   expectations   about  
how   t h e  circulation   of  blood  in   t h e  body  worked.  (Boston Globe, S e p   19/94)  

September 20: N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   12-member  panel   investigating  t h e  
failure  of  t h e  Na t iona l   Ocean ic   and   Atmospheric   Administration   ( N 0 A A ) -  
13 meteorological  satellite   in  August  1993  had   concluded   t h a t   t h e   probable 
cause was  a sho r t  circuit   t h a t  prevented   t h e  solar  array  cu r ren t  from  powering 
t h e  spacecraft  and   recharging  t h e  batteries.  T h e  sho r t  circuit   probably  result- 
ed  from a  1 .25  inch  screw t h a t  ex tended  too  far below  a n  aluminum   plate  and  
penetrated   t h e   insulation .   T h e   hoard  made  recommendations   for  future  
N O A A   spacecraft;  NA SA   supervised  t h e   design  and   con s t ruc t ion   of  t h e  
weather   satellites.  ( N A S A  Release 94 -157 ;  P lq, S e p  21/94; AP, Sep  21/94)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   t h e   i n t e r n a t i o n a l   A s t ronom ica l   U n i o n   had  
approved  t h e  name   Dactyl  for  t h e   tiny  moon  discovered  o n  August  28,  1993 ,  
in  orbit   around   t h e  asteroid  Ida,  by  NASA's  Ga l i leo  mission.  Dactyl  was  t h e  
first  natural   satellite   of  a n   asteroid  ever   discovered  and   photographed .   T h e  
name   derived  from  t h e   Dactyli,  a  group  of  mythological  beings  who   lived  o n  
Moun t   Ida,  where   t h e   infant   Zeus  was  h idden .   ( N A S A  Release,  Sep   20194; 
Reuters,  Sep  20194; H  Post, S e p  21/94)  

N A S A   announced   t h e  selection   of  Gene ra l   Sciences  Corporation,  Laurel, 
Maryland ,   for  a  con t rac t   t o   provide  support  services  for  two   Moderate  
Resolution  Imaging Spectroradiometer  science  support  teams ,  which  were key 
instruments   for NASA's Earth  Observing  System.  ( N A S A  Release  C94 - f f )  

September 21:  N A S A  announced   t h a t   it  had  selected  t h e  science  team  for  t h e  
first  spacecraft  designed  t o   rendezvous  with   a n   asteroid,  t h e   Near   Earth  
Asteroid  Rendezvous  (NEAR )  mission.  T h e  NEAR   spacecraft  was  scheduled  
for launch   in February  1996  aboard  a Delta  2 rocket  and  should  arrive  in orbit  

SEPTEMBER  1994 

CHRONO LCXY   1994 

around  asteroid 433 Eros  in  early January 1999. It would  survey Eros  for a min- 
imum  of  one   year,  a t   altitudes  as  close  as  1 5   miles.  T h e   NEAR  Science 
Payload  would  consist  of  six  instruments:  a  m u l t i ~ ~ e c t r a l  imager  system,  a 
near-infrared  spectrograph,  an  X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer,  a magnetome- 
ter, a  laser altimeter, and  the  spacecraft's radio, which was sued  also for  gravi- 
ty  measurements. Members of  the  science team were asslgned  to each of  these 
instruments.  (NA SA  Release 94-159)  

NASA   announced  tha t  astronomers  using  its Hubble  Space Telescope had 
found  a  new  quasar,  a  mere  600   million  light  years  away  in  Earth's  cosmic 
backyard, as  opposed  to   other   quasars  tha t   were  billions  of  light  years  away. 
T h e  discovery of  a quasar  in  galaxy  Cygnus  A  would  give  astronomers their  
first opportunity  for detailed study of  a quasar. (NA SA  Release 94-160)  

A  German   company  set up  a j o ~ n t  venture  with  Ch ina ,  called  EurasSpace, 
t o   develop  state-of-the-art  satellites.  It  expected  to   launch  its  first  high. 
capacity  data   transmission  satellite,  the   Sinosat-1 ,  in  1997  for  the   People's 
Bank  of  Ch ina .   T h e   satellite  would  be  assembled  and  tested  in  C h i n a   and  
boosted  in to  orbit  by  a Chinese  Long March  rocket.  (UP, Sep  2 1/94)  

September  22:  Northrop   Grumman   Corporation   announced   tha t   it  would 
reduce  its workforce by  9,000 people, or  nearly 20 percent, by  the  end  of  1995. 
T h e  reduction  resulted from the  shrinking  U.S.  military budget and   the  merg- 
er of  t h e   two  corporation, Northrop   and  Grumman ,   in  May  1994. T h e  areas 
tha t   would  be  hard  hit   by  the   layoffs were  California  and  Long  Island.  (NY 
Eme s ,  Sep  23/94) 

September  24: A  former NASA   researcher  and  subcontractor  at  the   Johnson  
Space  Center ,   Jong-Hun   Lee,  was  ordered  deported  as  a  suspected  No r th  
Korean  agent. T h e  action  followed a hearing  at which  he  was  not   allowed  to  
see all  the  evidence against him .   (AP, Sep 24/94) 

September 26: NASA   prepared  t o  begin  the   countdown  o n  September  2 7   for 
t h e  scheduled  September 3 0  launch  of  Space  Shu t t le  Endeavour  on   its  envi-  
ronmental  mission. T h e  Shuttle  was  launched  o n  schedule o n  September 30 .  
(Reuters,  Sep   26/94;  USA  Today,  Sep  27194;  AP,  Sep  28/94;  H  Chron ,   Sep 
30194; USA Today, Sep 30194; B Sun ,  Sep  30194; Fla Today, Sep  30194; AP, Sep  
30194; Reuters, Sep 30194; W Post, O c t   1/94)  

September 28: NASA   announced   tha t   more  than   a decade  after  affecting  cli- 
mate  o n  a global  scale, residual  signs of  a powerful El  Niiio  were  still  visible 
from 
t h e   U .S . -F rench  
from 
space.  Oceanographers   using  da ta  
TOPEXIPoseidon  satellite were  tracking t h e  remnant  wave  of  the   1982-83 El 
Nifio  as  it  moved  across the  Northwest  Pacific Ocean ,  where  some  scientists 
theorized  it  might  still  be  affecting weather  in  the   region. TOPEX/Poseidon, 

A S TRONAU T IC S   !.bill  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEPTEMBER  1994 

a  joint  program  of  N A S A   and   t h e   C e n t r e  Na t iona le   d'Etudes Spatiales ,  t h e  
French   space  agency,  used  a  radar  altimeter   t o   precisely  measure  s e am r f a c e  
height .   T h e   study  was  part  of  NASA's  Mission  t o   Planet   Earth .   Launched  
August  10, 1992 ,  t h e  satellite  had   completed   two  years of  its  three-year  prime  
mission.  ( N A S A  Release  94-162;  W Post, O c t   3 /94 )  

A t   a  conference   a t   N A S A   Headquarters   in   Wa sh ing ton ,   DC, officials  of 
N A S A  a n d  of  Spacehab  I n c . ,  t h e  A r l ing ton ,  Virginia, company  t h a t  built  a n d  
leased  t h e  laboratories  t h a t   fly  in   t h e  Space  Shu t t le ,  described  progress made  
in  t h e  more  t h a n  8 0  missions  t h a t   had   ~ n c l u d e d  research  payloads.  O t h e r  pri- 
vate   and   university  researchers were encouraged  t o  join  in  such  projects.  (UP, 
Sep  28/94)  

Two  groups  o f   astronomers ,   o n e   cen te red   a t   Indiana   University   and   t h e  
o t h e r  a t  Harvard  Universiry,  announced ,   based  o n  findings  from  t h e  Hubble  
Space  Telescope,  t h a t   t h e   universe  was  billions  of  years  younger  t h a n   previ- 
ously estimated .  T h e  Indiana   group said  t h e  universe  could be  as  little  as  7 bil- 
lion  years old  whereas  t h e  Harvard  group estimated   t h e  age  of  t h e  universe  a t  
between  9 billion  and   14  billion  years. T h e  Indiana   study was published  in  t h e  
Sep tembe r   29  issue  of  Nature   a n d   t h e   Harvard   study  in   t h e   c u r r e n t  
Astrophysical Journal.  According   t o   S t e p h e n   Ma ran ,   a  senior   astronomer   a t  
NASA's  Godda rd   Space   C e n t e r   and   a  spokesperson  for  t h e   Ame r ican  
A s t r o ~ ~ o m i c a l  Society,  t h e  findings  should  lead  t o  further   research  t o  explain  
t h e   discrepancy  beween  t h e   oldest  stars  and   t h e   age  of  t h e   universe.  (LA  
Tm r s ,  Sep  29 /94 )  

September  29:  N A S A   announced   t h a t   a  press  conference   was  being  held  a t  
N A S A   Headquarters   in  Wa sh ing ton ,  DC ,   a t   which   four  astronomers  would 
discuss  t h e   initial   findings   resulting  from  t h e   Hubble   Space   Telescope  a n d  
spectroscopic da ta  conce rn ing  t h e  spectacular July  bombardment   of Jup i te r  by 
comet   P/Shoemaker-Levy  9. Two of  t h e   astronomers  were  affiliated  with   t h e  
Space  Telescope Sc ience  In s t i tu te ,  which   was  operated   by  t h e  Association  of 
Universities  for Research   in Astronomy,  l n c . ,  for N A S A ,  under  con t rac t  with  
t h e  Goddard   Space  Flight C e n t e r ,  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland.  Among  questions   t o  
be  discussed  was  t h e   na tu re   of  t h e   body  t h a t   struck   Jupiter:   whe the r   it   was 
indeed  a come t  or  a n  asteroid.  ( N A S A  Release 94-161;  W Post, S e p  30194; H 
Chron, S e p  30194; H  Post, Sep  30194) 

T h e  Hamme r  Award,  developed  by  Vice  President  A l  G o r e  as  part   of  t h e  
C l i n t o n   administration's   "reinventing"   gove rnmen t ,   was  presented   t o  J o h n  
Muratore ,   Chief   of  t h e   J o h n s o n   Space   Center's   C o n t r o l   C e n t e r   Systems 
Division,  and   his  staff.  T h e y  were  hono red   for  the i r   innova t ive   approach   t o  
establishing  a  high-speed ,  h igh -da ta - ra te  compu te r  system  t h a t  would  enab le  
t h e   new  N A S A   Mission  C o n t r o l   C e n t e r   t o   con t ro l   a  space  shu t t le ,   t h e  
Russian Mir Space  S t a t i o n  as well as t h e  p lanned  In te rna t iona l  Space  S t a t i o n .  

SEPTEMBER  1994 

CHRONOLCXiY  1994 

They   developed  a  strategy  linking  smaller,  less  expensive  computers  within 
the   nearly  200  flight control  work  stations.  ( H  Chron, Sep  30194) 

September 30: NASA   announced  tha t   two companies had  been  recognized as 
minority  contractor  and   subcontractor of  the  year  for  their  outstanding  con -  
tributions  t o   the   space  program.  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin  
named  ERC,  Inc . ,  Tullahoma, Tennessee, as Minority  Contractor   of the  Year 
and  BST Systems, Inc., Plainfield, Connec t icu t ,  as Minority  Subcontractor  of 
the  Year.  (NA SA  Release 94-163)  

NASA   announced  assembly  sequence  refinements  tha t   incorporated  the  
latest  updates  to  plans  for  the   International   Space  Station .   T h e   sequence 
incorporated early provisions for a centrifuge  and  allowed for  t h e  earlier  con-  
struction  of  Russia's Solar  Power  Platform  hut  did  not   affect  existing  major 
milestones.  (NA SA  Release 94-  164 )  

NASA   learned  that   instead of  the  anticipated  $ 2 2 5  million  cut  in  its Space 
Shu t t le  budget  for  1995, Congress  had  cut  an   additional  $141  million, for  a 
total   Shuttle   budget  cut   of  $366  million.  President  C l in ton   had  signed  t h e  
NASA   1995 spending  bill, which  allocated $3.18 billion  for  the  Shu t t le  pro- 
gram out  of  a  total NASA  budget of  $14.37 billion. T h e  effects of  the  cuts o n  
NASA   operations remained  to  be determined.  (Fla Today, Sep 30194) 

Jean-Marc  Artaud,  program director for  the  Ariane-5  rocket  for the  French 
National   Space Agency  (CNES )   in  Guiana ,   discussed  the   launch  tha t   took 
place of  a solid propellant booster  tha t  was part  of  the   new generation  rocket. 
T h e  rocket was  launched from a European Space Agency  (ESA )  center   in the  
jungle  of  French  Guyana  on   the   northeast  coast  of  Sou th  America  in  a  test 
aimed  a t   keeping  the   ESA  In  the   lead  in  launching  heavy  satellites  into   the  
next  century.  (Reuters, Sep  30194) 

October 

October  1 :   T h e   media  continued  to  give  extensive  coverage  to  t h e   flight  of 
Space  Shuttle  Endeavour. O n e  of  the   natural  phenomena  o n  which  the   radar 
photography  concentrated  was  volcanoes.  O n   October   1 ,   it  photographed 
Russia's Klyuchevsky Volcano o n  the  Kamchatka  Peninsula, which  had  erupt- 
ed the  previous day. Endeavour also scanned Hawaiian volcanoes and dormant 
Mt.  Rainier  and  the   Rwandan  \lolcanoes where  endangered  gorillas  lived.  In  
addition,  it  sought  traces of  ancient  river  trihutaries buried by  the  Sahara ,  for- 
est  fires  and   thunderstorms  in  various  areas  of  the   globe,  and  an   earthquake 
that   had  occurred  in  Japan .  Another   goal  was   to  map  Earth's appearance  in 
early  autumn  and  note  seasonal environmental  changes  between  photographs 
taken  in  April  and  those  in  October.  If  the   radar  could  determine  small 
changes on  Earth  it could eventually  be  used  to  predict earthquakes or  volcano 
eruptions.  O n   October  6 ,  German   oceanographers  dumped  106  gallons  of 
diesel oil and 26 gallons of  algae products in to  the  North  Sea to  determine how 
well Endeavour's radar could detect oil slicks and differentiate  them  from algae. 
Workers  o n   two  oil-recovery  ships  started  to  clean  up  the   mess  as  soon  as 
Endeavour passed  and expected  to finish within  two hours. To gather as much 
data  as possible,  the   astronauts worked  in two  12-hour shifts. 

T h e  failure  of  a Space Shuttle steering jet  on  October  5  forced NASA  to  sus- 
pend  Endeavour's  radar  survey of  Earth. The   astronauts had  been  engaged  most 
recently in hydrology studies of such regions as the  rain forests of Brazil,  the moun- 
tains of  California, and  the  deserts of  Australia. By  using manual  controls when 
the steering jet  failed, the astronauts were able to trace both the  oil and the  algae. 
NASA  ground  personnel  put  together  a computer program  to bypass  the  sensor 
and restore use  of the jets.  NASA  also added an  1 l t h  day  to the mission to allow 
for  more  radar  observations. On October  7, NASA  scientist Henry Reichle said 
that  the  air pollution monitor on  b a r d  Endeavour showed an  increase in carbon 
monoxide  above  South  America,  southern  Africa,  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean 
between  the   two continents, and  north  of  Australia. On  October  10, the   astro- 
nauts began to stow scientific gear in preparation for a return on  October  1 1. Bad 
weather in Florida o n  October  11 forced Endeavour to land at Edwards Air Force 
Base  in California instead.  (W  Post, Oct  1/94; AP, Oct   1/94; LA T m s ,  O c t  2/94; 
UP, Oc t  2/94; AP, Oc t  3/94; W Post, Oc t  4/94; W Xmes, Oc t  4/94; USA  Today, 
Oc t  4/94; AP, O c t  4/94; Reuters, Oc t  4/94; UP, Oc t  4/94; AP, O c t  5/94; Reuters, 
O c t   5/96; UPI,  Oc t   5/96; AP,  O c t  6/94; UP1,  O c t  6/94; Reuters, Oc t  6/94; NY 
Tmes, Oc t   7/94; H  Post, O c t  7/94; H Chron, Oc t  7/94; AP, Oc t   7/94; NY Tmes, 
O c t  8/94; W Xmes, O c t  9/94; NY Tmes, Oc t  9/94; W T m s ,  Oc t  10194; NY Tmes, 
Oct   10194; W Post, Oct   10194; AuWk, Oc t  10/94; AP, Oc t  10/94; UPI, O c t  10194; 
Reuters, O c t  10194; NY  Xm s ,  Oc t  1 1/94; W Post, Oct  1 1/94; W Tmes, O c t  1 1/94; 
AP, O c t  11/94; Reuters, Oct  11/94; NY Times, O c t   12/94; W Post, Oc t   12/94; W 
Xmes, O c t  12/94; C Trib, Oct   12/94; AP, Oc t   12/94) 

ASTRC>NAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER   1994 

October  2:  A  photograph   was  featured  of  t h e   first  node   of  NASA's  i n t em a -  
tional   laboratory  designed  as  part   of  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n .   It  was 
being  manufactured   by  Boeing  a t   NASA's  Marshall Space   Flight  C e n t e r   in  
Huntsville ,  Alabama .   (Fla Today, O c t  2/94)  

October  3:  O n e   of  t h e   results  of  t h e   da ta   produced  by  t h e   U S . - F r e n c h  
TOPEX-Poseidon   satellite ,  part   of  NASA's  Mission  t o  P lane t   Ea r th ,  was  t h e  
mapping  of  ocean   circulation ,   o n e   of  t h e   least  understood   areas  of  c l ima te  
research.  Data   had   shown   t h a t   t h e   El  Niiio   r em n a n t   wave  was  pushing  t h e  
cu r ren t  northward   off  t h e  coast  of J a p a n ,  raising t h e  temperature   of  t h e  n o r t h -  
west  Pacific.  ( W  Post, O c t  3/94)  

A n  article   analyzed  t h e  role  played  by  lasers  i n  advanc ing  atmospheric   sci- 
ence .   Reference   was  made  t o   t h e   e n d   of  t h e   last  Space   S h u t t l e   flight  when  
N A S A   was  gathering   da ta   simultaneously  from  different  altitudes   over   t h e  
same  spot   o n  Earth   w i th   th ree   laser  systems--one  o n  Discovery  a n d   two   o n  
research  aircraft.  A  fou r th ,  ground-based  Lidar  ( l igh t  de tec t ion   a n d  ranging)  
a t  NASA's Langley Research C e n t e r  in H am p t o n ,  Virginia, also gathered  da ta  
concurrently .   T h i s   comb ina t ion   should   significantly  advance   technology  
toward  t h e  goal of  a pe rmanen t ,   automated   Lidar  satellite .  T h e  article  provid- 
ed scientific  details of  t h e  flights unde r taken  a n d  Discovery's ope ra t ion  of Lite ,  
t h e  Lidar  In-space Technology  Experiment .   (AvWk ,  O c t  3 /94 )  

N A S A  announced   t h e  identification  of  n i n e  proposals  t o  begin cooperative  
agreement   negotiations   in   NASA's Aerospace   Industry  Technology   Program 
(A I T P ) .  A I T P  was  established  t o  focus  industry's research  a n d  deve lopmen t  
efforts  o n   dual-purpose  aerospace  technologies   t h a t   showed  po ten t ia l   for 
strong   commercial  applications   t h a t   might   also  benefit  NASA's  programs.  In  
add i t ion   t o  N A S A   funding ,   each   project  also  would  involve   50  percent   or  
more  in  non -gove rnmen t  cost-sharing .   ( N A S A  Release 94 -165 )  

October  4:  A  Russian  Soyuz  rocket   was  launched   from  t h e   Baikonur  
Cosmodrome   in Kazakhstan  carrying  two  Russian  cosmonauts  a n d  a G e rm a n  
physicist.  Its   de s t ina t ion   was  t h e  Mir   Space   S t a t i o n   where  t h e   crew  would 
exchange    laces  with   existlng  Mir  cosmonauts .  T h e  rocket   ducked  w i th   Mir 
o n  O c t o b e r  6. O n  Oc tobe r   12 ,  t h e  Interfax  news agency reported  t h a t  Mir  was 
experiencing   power  supply  problems  because  of  t h e   drain   o n   its  power  cells 
from   t h e   presence  of  six  astronauts   during   t h e   change-over   perlod.  O n  
Oc tobe r   28, t h e  G e rm a n  astronaut   was  scheduled   t o  break  t h e   record  for  t h e  
longest space flight  by  a West European.  (UP, O c t  4/94;  Reuters, O c t  4/94; AP, 
O c t  6/94;  AFP, O c t  6/94;  Reuters,  Occ  6/94;  NY  Times, O c t   7/94; CSM ,  O c t  
7/94;  AuWk, O c t   10194; AP, O c t   12/94; Reuters,  O c t  28/94)  

T h e  New  Zealand  Antarctic   Programme and  the National   Institute  of  Water 
and Atmospheric Research  (N IWA )  issued a joint  statement  saying that  a hole in  

OCTOBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

the ozone  layer over the Antarctic had  reappeared and was  wider  than  in  1993. 
NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that  NASA  data showed a rectangular-shaped 
area  of  very  low  ozone  concentration  covering  Antarctica,  compared  with  a 
slightly smaller  triangular  hole  in  1993. In  contrast  to  the   NIWA  statement, 
NASA  announced on  October 6 that  a NASA  instrument aboard a Russian satel- 
lite  had  detected  a hole  in  the  ozone  layer  over Antarctica  with  a  surface  area 
equal to  the  size of  the  North American  continent.  I t   added that   that   the ozone 
hole  levels  for  1994 were  "nearly as  large  and  as  deep  as  the   record  lows  from 
October  1993," according to  preliminary data  obtained  by  scientists at NASA's 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenhelt, Maryland.  (Reuters, Oc t  4/94; NASA  
Release 94-167; USA  Today, Oct  7/94; AP, Oc t  7/94; NY Xmes, O c t  8/94) 

October  6:  NASA's  Langley  Research  Center ,   Hampton ,   Virginia,  and   Ford 
Motor Company, Dearborn,  Michigan,  announced  they had concluded a two- 
year  cooperative  agreement  for  the   transfer  of  NASA-developed  technology  
to  improve  the   design  and   engineering  of  Ford  vehicles.  Th is   was  the   first 
broad  technology transfer process hetween NASA   and   any  automotive  man-  
ufacturer.  (NA SA  Release 94-166; H Post, O c t   7/94; CSM, O c t   13/94) 

As  an  example  of  NASA's undertaking  t o  transfer  space technology  to  pri- 
vate   industry  a  surgical  instrument  was  cited. T h e  device  was  a n   instrument 
designed  to   reduce  t h e   time  required  for  surgeons  to   close  sutures  during 
abdominal endoscopic surgery. (Antelope Valley  Press, O c t  6/94; Antelope Valley 
Daily News,  O c t   17/94; Desert Wings, O c t  21/94) 

October  7:  NASA   ground  controllers  were  to  send  final  commands  to   the 
Magellan space probe o n  October  7  to send it crashing to  its death  in  the  atmos- 
phere of  Venus o n  October  11. T h e  robot had  been  in  a highly successful Venus 
orbit since  1990 but  its solar panels were failing and  its gyroscopes worn out. On 
October  12, NASA   announced  that  Magellan  was  expected to  bum  up  within 
two  days.  NASA's Jet   Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena,  California, declared 
Magellan dead  on  October  12. However, Magellan  lasted  long  enough  to  radio 
back  telemetry  showing how much  rocket power would  be  required  to offset  the  
increasing  atmospheric  turbulence,  which  was  useful  data  for  future  designers 
seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, O c t  6/94; AP, 
O c t  6/94; USA Today, O c t  7/94; C Trib, O c t  9/94; W Post, Oc t  10194; A v W ,  O c t  
10194; AP,  Oc t   11/94; Reuters, Oc t   11/94; W  Times, Oct   12/94; LA  Xmes, O c t  
12/94; CSM, Oc t   12/94; NASA   Release 94-170; Fh  Today,  Oc t   12/94; Reuters, 
Oc t   12/94; W Post, Oc t  13/94; NY Xmes, Oct   13/94; SP News, O c t  17-23/94) 

NASA  announced  tha t  Russian cosmonauts o n  Mir had completed t h e  first 
i n   a  series  of  U.S.  experiments   using  NASA's  Space   Acce le ra t ion  
Measurement  System  (SAMS ) .  SAMS   was  activated  October   4  to  collect 
vibration  data   in  preparation  for  future  chemistry  and   physics  experiments. 
(NA SA  Release 94- 168) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A S [ )  A ERONAU T lC S  

OCTOBER  1994 

A  feature   article   described  th ree   women   engineers   who   worked  a t   t h e  
Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  a n d  were among  t h e   120 finalists being  interviewed  by 
NASA's astronaut  selection  boarJ   for assignment  as astronaut  candidates .   (FIa 
Today, O c t  7 /94 )  

October  8:  Space   S h u t t l e   Columbia   stopped  a t   Huntsville  e n   route   t o  
Rockwell  International's  facility  a t  Palmdale ,  California ,  for  scheduled  ma in -  
tenance .   Thou sand s   of  people  came   t o   t h e   airport   t o   see  t h e  Shu t t le .   (Htsvl 
Tms, O c t  9 /94 )  

I  I :   Boeing   C om p a n y   of  S e a t t l e ,   p r ime   c o n t r a c t o r   for  t h e  
October  
In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n ,  submitted   a  proposal  t o  N A S A   ou t l in ing  work 
t h a t   would  be  performed  under   a  final  con t rac t   and   t h e   cost  of  each   task. 
N A S A   was  t o   review  t h e   proposal  and   t h e n   begin  negotiations .   (SP N ew s ,  
O c t  17-23/94)  

O n  t h e  occasion  of  t h e   25 th   anniversary  of  t h e   first  moon land ing  mission, 
t h e   Italian   newspaper  La Repubblica  published  a n   interview   with   N A S A  
Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S.  Go ld in .   In   it  h e   complimented   Italy  for  its  good 
space knowhow, saying Italians  were magicians  in  t h e  area of  space commun i -  
ca t ion .  H e  also men t ioned   ways  in  which   Italy  was  cooperating   with   N A S A  
such  as t h e  Italian  a s t ronau t  who  was t o  he lp  complete   t h e  testing  of  t h e  t e t h -  
ered  satellite  system  and   t h e  Italian  Space  Agency's  work with  N A S A  o n  t h e  
Cassini  Space  Mission. H e  pointed   ou t  t h a t  above all NA SA   coun ted  o n  Italy 
for  t h e  construction   of  logistic  pressurization  modules  and   t h a t   this  construc-  
t ion   would  give  Italian   firms  a  technological   capacity   t h a t   would  have   an  
impact  o n  all  Italian   industries.  (La Repubblica, O c t   11/94)  

October  12:  N A S A   announced   t h e   naming   of  Italian   scientist   Umbe r to  
Gu idon i   t o  t h e  Co lumb ia  Space   Shu t t le  mission  in  early  1996. H e  would  be 
involved  with  experiments   dealing  with  t h e   Tethered   Sa te l l i te  System ,  with  
which   h e  had   previous experience .   ( N A S A  Release 94 -169 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   selection   nt  Boeing  Information   Services  Inc . ,  
V ienna ,  Virginia,  t o  provide  Information   Resources  Management   Support   a t  
N A S A   Headquarters .   ( N A S A  Release  C94-gg;  Federal Computer  Week, O c t  
24/94)  

A t   a  press  briefing  a t   t h e   Kennedy   Space   C e n t e r ,   N A S A   Associate  
Adm in i s t ra to r   for  Space   Flight  Je rem iah   Penrson  said  N A S A   was  currently  
unde r tak ing   a review  t o  gauge  t h e  S h u t t l e  program's h e a l t h   after  budget   c u t -  
backs  and   t o   identify  possihle  add i t iona l   savings. T h e   review  was  scheduled  
t o  be  completed   i n  early January .  Bryan  O 'C o n n o r ,  S h u t t l e  program  d i rec to r  
a t   N A S A   Headquarters ,   said  13  teams   a t   N A S A   Field  C e n t e r s   across  t h e  
coun t ry  were  exam in ing  jobs,  procedures,  a n d   requirements   t o   improve   effi- 

OCTOBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

ciency.  However,  he  indicated  tha t   much  of  1994's $141  million  cut   in  t h e  
Shu t t le   program's operating  budget  could  be  made  up  with  expected  reim- 
bursements and   reassignment  of  funds. For  example, Congress had  suggested 
tha t   t h e   program  use  a  $22  million  reimbursement  from  Japan   for  Shu t t le  
flights  to   tha t   end.  (Ffu  Today, O c t   13/94; SP News, O c t   17-23/94; AvWk, 
O c t   17/94; AP, O c t  24/94) 

Bill  Townsend,  Deputy  Associate  Administrator  for  NASA's  Mission  to 
Planet  Earth,  was  quoted  as  saying  tha t   with  NASA   starting  t h e   new  fiscal 
year  with  a  smaller budget,  the   Space Radar  Laboratory might  have  mapped 
its  last mountain   range.  Diane  Evans,  t h e  radar's U.S.  project  scientist,  indi- 
cated  tha t  t h e  world was waiting  to see what NASA  would do  with  the  Space 
Radar Laboratory, which  to  date  had  mapped  only  five percent  of  t h e  Earth's 
surface,  in   comparison  with  t h e   extensive  coverage  of  the   topography  of 
Venus.  ( 0  Sen Star, O c t  12/94)  

October  14:  More  t h a n   700  Space  Shu t t le   support  personnel  at  NASA's 
Kennedy Space Cen te r  had been o n  strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with 
contractor  EG&G Corporation .  T h e  International  Association  of Machinists 
and  Aerospace  Workers,  the   labor  union   representing  the   striking  workers, 
said  negotiations  were  deadlocked  over  a n   EG&G  demand  to   limit  hea l th  
insurance  benefits  for  its  employees. NASA   denied  charges  tha t   safety  had 
been  compromised during  the   three  Shu t t le  flights  launched  since  the   strike 
began  July  5.  O n  October   21  negotiators  reached  a  tentative   agreement  in 
their  meeting a t  the  Federal Mediation and Conciliation  Service headquarters 
in  Washington,  DC. T h e  contract  proposal  covered  hea l th   insurance, wages, 
and   pensions.  T h e   contract   remained  to   be  approved  by  three  EG&G  suh- 
contractors  and   t h e n   ratified  by  the   striking  union   members.  (Defense Daily, 
O c t   14/94; AP, O c t  21/94) 

October  16:  T h e   O h i o   Environmental  Protection  Agency  (EPA)   ordered 
NASA   in  1991 t o  conduct  a sitewide  investigation of  longstanding environ-  
mental   problems  across  its  352-acre  complex  o n   the   western  border  of 
Cleveland Hopkins International  Airport. T h e  problems included dumps con -  
taining  spent  rocket  fuel and  contamination  of  soil and  water  by  mercury. To 
date,  there  was  little  evidence of  progress  apart  from much  discussion of  how 
the   eventual  cleanup would  be  done.  (Plain Dealer, O c t   16/94)  

A critical article broke down the  percentages NASA  would devote to various 
programs  during  the   1995  fiscal  year,  out   of  the   $14.4  billion  approved  by 
Congress.  T h e   following  categories  were  listed:  Space  Shuttle ,   25  percent; 
NASA   bureaucracy,  15 percent;  Space Station ,   15 percent; Mission  to  Planet 
Earth, 9 percent; physics and  astronomy, 8 percent; aeronautics, 6 percent; plan- 
etary exploration, 5 percent; advanced concepts and technology, 4 percent; mis- 
sion communications, 3 percent;  launch services, 2  percent; life and micrograv- 

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER 1994 

ity  sciences,  2  percent;   space  communication   and   telecommunications,  1 per- 
cen t ;  new  construction ,   1 percent;  safety office,  . 5  percent;  inspector general,  .5  
percent .  N o t   included were  wind  tunnel  operations.  ( 0  Sen Star, O c t   16/94) 

A n o t h e r   article   in  t h e   same  newspaper  commended   N A S A   for  hav ing  
learned   t h e   secret  t o  getting   along  with   Congress:  humility   equaled   stability. 
N A S A   had   d o n e   its  homework  prior  t o   submitting   its  budget  request  a n d  
received  almost  everything   it  asked  for. T h e  writer  gave  most  of  t h e  credit   t o  
N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S.  Go ld in   whose  man t ra   of  "cheaper,  better ,  
faster"  had   forced  N A S A   staff t o  wake  up  t o  reality.  ( 0  Sen Star, O c t   16/94)  

A n   example  was  given  of  t h e   way  in  which   NASA-sponsored   research  in  
aeronautics ,   in  this   case  a t   t h e   Ames-Dryden   Flight  Research  Facility,  had  
practical  applications   in  daily  life. T h e  example   involved  a  redesign  of  big  rig 
trucks, based o n  Ed  Saltzman's research, which  made  t h e  trucks more  fuel effi- 
c ien t .   (Antelope Valky  Daily  News, O c t   16/94)  

October  17: N A S A   announced   t h a t   its  Hubble   Space  Telescope  ( H S T )  had  
provided  new  insights i n t o  how  stars might  have  been  formed billions  of  years 
ago  in  t h e  early universe. A  preliminary  assessment of  H S T  observations  indi-  
cated   t h a t   a  pair  of  clusters  in   t h e   Large  Magellanic   Cloud   instead  of  c o n -  
taining   fewer  t h a n   1 ,000   stars  as  earlier  though t ,   con ta ined   nearly   10 ,000  
stars. I f  this  were  true  billions of  years ago, it would have  altered  drastically  t h e  
early   history  of  t h e   universe,  according   t o   N i n o   Panagia  of  t h e   Space  
Telescope  Sc ience   In s t i tu te   in  Baltimore  and   t h e   European   Space   Agency. 
( N A S A  Release  94-  17 1 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e  establishment  of  a Phase O n e  Program Office  a t   t h e  
J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r ,   Hou s ton ,   t o   direct   upcoming  S h u t t l e   flights  t o   t h e  
Russian  Mir  S t a t i o n .  Tommy  Holloway  was  appo in ted  manager  of  t h e  office. 
( N A S A  Release  94 -1  7 2 )  

T h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n  was  en te r ing   a  decisive  s ix -mon th  period 
in  which   governments   in  t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s ,   Russia,  J a p a n ,   Europe,  and  
C a n a d a   were  poised  t o   sign  t h e   final   industrial  con t rac t s   a n d   intergovern-  
men ta l  accords needed   t o  build  t h e  facility. Barring  unforeseen  deve lopmen t s ,  
t h e   European  Space   Agency   would  be  unable   t o  comm i t   itself  t o   t h e   Space  
S t a t i o n   before  November   1995 ,   when   its  member  governments'   ministers 
were  scheduled   t o  convene .  O t h e r  remaining   hurdles  were  t h e  signing  of  t h e  
prime  c o n t r a c t   for  S t a t i o n   hardware   between   N A S A   a n d   t h e   Boeing 
Company ;  t h e  conclusion   of  a  smaller  con t rac t   between   t h e  C a n a d i a n  Space  
Agency  and  Spar  Aerospace;  a final round  of negotiations  bringing  Russia  i n t o  
full S t a t i o n  partnership;  a n d  a n  agreement   among   t h e  partners  o n  who  would 
con t r ibu te  what   t o  t h e  Station's  upkeep and   t h e  apportioning   of  access t o  t h e  
Station's  limited  electricity  and   o t h e r  resources.  (SP  News, O c t   17 -23 /94 )  

OCTOBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

JoBea  Way,  a  radar  scientist  a t   NASA's  Je t   Propulsion  Lahoratory  in 
Pasadena,  California,  came  up  with  the   idea  for  KidSat  in  November  1993 
while  working with  scholarship  students  in NASA's Space Radar  Laboratory 
program. KidSat was  a project  t o  establish  a permanent  orbiting  research pay- 
load  tha t   only  students  could  operate  to  broaden  their   educational  horizons. 
Sally Ride,  director  of  the   California  Space  Institute  a t   the   University  of 
California, San  Diego, was backing the  project, which  would  enlist  help  from 
NASA   and o the r  organizations such as  the  National  Science Foundation  and 
private  charitable  foundations.  T h e   aim  would  be  to   begin  the   first  KidSat 
classroom lessons  in  the   1995-96 school  year.  (SP  News, O c t   17-23/94)  

Flight  tests of  new  terminal  automation  software confirmed that   airline  traf- 
fic could  be  routed  to  arrive at  a gate  within  20  seconds or  less  of  a scheduled 
time,  while  enabling  fuel-efficient  descents  initiated  a t   pilots'  discretion. 
According  to NASA   researchers, when  deployed  a t  hub  airports, the  complete 
Center-Tracon Automation System (CTAS )  would optimize the  flow of  aircraft 
and  improve  air  traffic  control  productivity  significantly. Recent  evaluations 
dealt with  the  Descent Advisor portion of CTAS  but other  parts of CTAS  pro- 
vided air traffic controllers with the  data they  needed to  ensure efficient and safe 
operations.  T h e   recent  flight  tests  were  performed  under  a  joint  research  and 
development  effort  involving  the   Federal  Aviation  Administration,  NASA's 
Ames  and  Langley  Research  Centers,  the   National  Center   for  Atmospheric 
Research, several contractors,  and United  Airlines.  (AuWk, Oc t   17/94) 

NASA  Adm in~s t ra to r  Daniel  S. Goldin  was  the  scheduled  keynote  speaker 
for  an  October   27-28 conference  at  Auburn  Un~ve rs i ty  o n  the   past, present, 
and  future  of  the  U.S. space program.  (Htsvl Tms ,  O c t   17/94)  

NASA  was  expanding  its  efforts t o  make  procurement  information  readily 
accessible o n  the   Internet .  In  the  procurement  reform  act signed by  President 
C l in ton  the  previous week, NASA  was granted authority  to test soliciting bids 
for  mid-range  procurement  (from  $25,000  to  $500,000  annually)   on   the  
In te rne t .  ( AvWk, O c t   17/94) 

T h e  crew of NASA j  November Atlantis Shuttle mission were scheduled to  test 
the  feasibility of  an  unusual  rendezvous  procedure  for  the  second  docking  with 
Russia's Mir Space Station in  1995. They would f ly  Atlantis o n  a "plus R bar"  ( the  
radius vector from the  target's center of mass  to the Earth's center) to  rendezvous 
with and retrieve  the Crista-Spas atmospheric research satellite on the  n in th  day 
of  the planned  11-day mission. The  new approach would  save fuel and not require 
any  braking.  Crista-Spas was  to  be  deployed  from  Atlantis's robot  arm  within 
about 20 hours of  Atlantis's launch.  ( AuWk, Oct   17/94; SP News, Oc t  24-30) 

T h e  C l i n t o n  administration  authorized NASA   to be  an  advocate  for satel-  
lites  
in  
t h e   evo lv ing   N a t i o n a l  
In fo rma t ion  
In f ras t ruc tu re /G loba l  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1994 

Information  infrastructure  (N l l /G l I ) ,  the  so-called  information  superhigh- 
way.  Th e  Administration  wanted  to  ensure  that  industry-satellite  builders 
and  operators  and  telecommunications  users-was 
intimately  involved  in 
. formulating  satellites' role  in  the   NII/GII.  Industry  in  turn  wanted  NASA  
to  provide  research  and  development  o n   "pre-competitive  technologies." 
. ( AuWk, O c t   17/94) 

NASA  was  scheduled to  test fly Pratt  & Whitney's new  high-pressure oxi- 
dizer  turbopump on  only one of  Discovery's three  main  engines  in June 1995 
hefore  committing  itself  to   the   advanced  design  pump's  use  on   all  Space 
Shuttle engines. Th e  new  pump  was  intended  to  simplify Shuttle processing 
and  Increase  the  margin  of  safety.  It  was  designed  to  f ly   10  times  before 
removal  or  replacement  was  required, compared with  the single-flight ability 
of  the current pump.  (AuWk, O c t   17/94) 

NASA  was  consulting  researchers  in  Canada,  Europe,  and  Japan o n  how 
best  to  build  on  two  successful Earth  surveys by  a Shuttle-borne  set of  com- 
plex, m u l t i f r e q ~ e n c ~  radar  instruments carried by  the  Space Radar Laboratory. 
NASA  had asked  the National Academy of  Sciences to recommend the next 
step, such as  the  possibility of  a reflight  of  the Laboratory. But  a major objec- 
tive was  by  international consultation  to  determine the potential for combin- 
ing  international  efforts  into  a  joint  project  to  orbit  a  highly  capable space 
radar  system,  according  to  William  Townsend,  NASA   Deputy  Associate 
Administrator  in charge of  the Office for the Mission  to Planet Earth.  (AuWk, 
O c t   17/94) 

Oc tobe r   18: A Federal grand jury  indicted Samuel Johnson, president  of Nor- 
Cal  Supply  Company  in  San  Leandro,  California,  in  connection  with  the  
sale of  faulty  aerospace bolts  to  commercial  airlines  and  government  avia- 
tion  agencies,  including NASA .  T h e  charges  resulted  from a major  investi- 
gation  h y   th e   FBI  and  the   Defense  Criminal  Investigative  Service.  (SF 
C h r o n ,  Oc t   19 /94 )  

Oc tober   19:  NASA  announced  that  November  3  was  the  launch  date  for 
Space  Shuttle  Atlantis  and  its  six-person crew  on   an  11-day mission.  The 
launch  date  was  predicated  o n  successful  launch  of  the  Wind  spacecraft o n  
November  1 aboard  a  Delta  rocket.  (NASA  Release  94-173; H Chron,  Oc t  
20194; USA  Today, Oc t  28/94) 

NASA  announced  that  it  had  released  the  Draft  Environmental  Impact 
Statement  for  the  Cassini  mission  to  Saturn, which  would  be  available  for 
public review  and  comment  over  a  45-day period. Cassini was  a cooperative 
scientific  mission  of  the  U.S.  and  European  space  agencies  scheduled  for 
launch  in October  1997 for  a seven-year robotic spacecraft journey  to Saturn. 
(NASA  Release 94- 174) 

I>C:TORtK  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

During  a meeting   in  Moscow with  U .S .  Congressman  Jame s  Sen senb renne r ,  
Republican   from Wisconsin  and  ranking  member  of  t h e  House  space subcom-  
m i t tee ,  Russian First Vice-Premier O leg  Soskovets  said  t h a t   t h e  In te rna t iona l  
Space   S t a t i o n   Project  A lpha   would  henefit   Russia  from   a n  econom ic   view- 
po in t .   A  con t rac t   t o  create   a n   In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n  had   been   signed 
earlier  by  Russia's  M.V.  Kh run ichev   Space   Research  C e n t e r   and   t h e   U .S .  
Lockheed Co rpo ra t ion .  During Russian President  Boris Yeltsin's recen t  visit  t o  
t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s ,  h e   gave  t h e   project  a  high   appraisal.  Soskovets  drew  t h e  
a t t e n t i o n  of  t h e  U .S .  congressional delegation  t o  t h e  financial  estimates  of t h e  
project  and   t o  t h e  need   t o  inv i te  C h i n a  tcl  participate .  Sen senb renne r  said t h e  
ma in   prohlem   was  t o   conv ince   t h e   European  U n i o n   a n d  C a n a d a   first  of  t h e  
need   for o t h e r  participants   t o  meet   the i r  comm i t tnen t s  in  f inanc ing  t h e  proj- 
ec t .   Russian  Space  Agency   chief   Yuri  Koptev  told  Itar-Tass  t h a t   t h e   U n i t e d  
S ta te s   had   already  s e n t   72  N A S A   specialists  t o   Moscow  a n d   assigned  more 
t h a n  "$17,000  million   for  t h e  elaboration   of  t h e  project   and   $14 ,000  million  
for  t h e   Station's   operation  for  10  years."  I n   answer  t o   a  media  question   o n  
Oc tobe r   18 ,  N A S A  Administrator   Daniel   S. Go ld in   said  t h a t   w h e n   h e  m e t  
recently  with   Ch ine se   officials,  t h e  ma t te r   of  t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   neve r   came  
up.  In  mid-November ,  in  discussing  t h e  possihle  inclusion  of Go ld in   i n  a  visit 
t o   C h i n a   and   Japan   by  a  U .S .   science   and   technology   delegation ,   Richard  
DalBello,  assistant  director   for  aeronautics   a n d   space  in   t h e   W h i t e   House  
Office  of  Sc ience   and   Technology   Policy, said  the re   would  be   n o  discussion 
during   t h e   trip   of  Ch ine se   inclusion   in   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n .   (Itar-Tass,  O c t  
19/94;  Defense Daily, O c t  21/94;  SP  News ,  Nov   2 1-Dec  4/94) 

*  T h e  Ana ly t ic   Sciences  Corporaticln  ( TA SC )  signed  a  three-year   coopera-  
tive   agreement   with   N A S A   t o   make   NASA's  space  a n d   Earth   science   d a t a  
available   t o  elementary   school  s tuden t s  and   the i r   teachers   over   t h e  I n t e r n e t .  
T A S C  was  scheduled   t o  work  with   t h e   staff  a t  Franconia   Elementary   Schoo l  
in   Fairfax  Coun ty ,  Virginia,  to  design  and   develop  software  allowing  kinder-  
garten   th rough   6 t h   grade  s tuden t s   t o   access  NASA's  vast  remote   sensing  
weather   da ta .  Fritz Hasler, manager  of  t h e  project   a t  NASA's Goddard   Space  
Flight Cen te r ,   said  t h a t   t h e  project   should  n o t   only  he lp  students   lea rn  abou t  
t h e   weather   but   also  improve  the i r   knowledge  of  t h e   information   highway. 
(PR  Newswire, O c t   19 /94 )  

October  20: Some  of  U .S .  astronaut   No rman   Thagard's equ ipmen t   would  n o t  
reach   Russian  Space   S t a t i o n   M i r   until   May  e v e n   though   h e   himself  was 
scheduled   t o  reach  Mir  o n  Ma rch   14. T h e  equ ipmen t  was  all  t o  have   preced-  
ed  h im   but   Russia  had   experienced   problems  with   some  of  its  space  cargo 
flights. T h e  result would  be  t h a t   the re  would  be fewer  blood,  saliva, a n d  urine  
samples  returned   t o  Earth   and   some  work  would  be  started   later   because  of 
lack  of  test   equ ipmen t .  J im  Nise ,  N A S A   manager  of  Mir-Space  S h u t t l e  pro- 
grams  a t  J o h n s o n  Space   C e n t e r ,  was  doing   his  best  t o   expedite   matters   a n d  
Thaga rd   was  philosophical  abou t   t h e   s i tua t ion .   I n   November ,   N A S A  

ASTRONAUTlCS AND AERONAUTICS 

OCTOBER  1994 

Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  told  the American  Astronautical  Society of 
the  delay,  indicating  there  was  a  problem  getting  Thagard's gear  for  experi- 
ments  through  Russian  customs.  (H  Post, Oc t   20194; NY  Times,  Nov  29/94; 
Birmingham  Post-Herald, Nov  30194) 

Freelance  journalist  Alcestis  Oberg  maintained  tha t   following  th e  
November  elections NASA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin  planned  to  cut 
jobs  at  Johnson Space Center  drastically.  According  to   the   article, Goldin 
hoped  to reduce the Space Shuttle operations workforce  by  50 percent  in five 
years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of  30 percent  in  1995. (H  Post, Oc t  
20194) 

NASA   announced  that  it  would  continue  to  study how  the  Earth's envi- 
ronment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the 
upcoming  flight  of  Space  Shuttle  Atlantis.  This,  the   third  flight  of  the 
Atmospheric  Laboratory  for Applications  and  Science  (ATLAS) was  part  of 
NASA's Mission  to  Planet  Earth.  Also  during  the  mission  astronauts  would 
deploy  and  retrieve  a  freeFflying  satellite  designed  to  study  the  middle  and 
lower thermospheres and would  perform various experiments covering life sci- 
ences  research  and  microgravity  processing.  Th e   flight,  commanded  by 
Donald  R. McMonagle, was  scheduled for  launch  on  November  3.  (NASA  
Release 94- 175) 

T h e  Department  of  Energy  (DOE )  unveiled "a  revolutionary 21st century" 
lighting system that used a bulb of  sulfur bombarded by microwaves to produce 
bright  illumination  resembling sunlight-and  did  so at  a fraction  of  the  cost 
of  many  conventional  systems.  T h e   prototype  lamp  was  invented  by  a 
Rockville, Maryland, start-up company called Fusion Lighting Inc. and devel- 
oped  under contract  to  DOE. NASA  had  a  two-year contract with  the  com- 
pany  to develop lights for growing  plants  in  space.  ( W  Post, Oc t  21/94) 
NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S .   Goldin  presented  Congressman  Louis 
Stokes  with  the  National  Association  of  Small  Disadvantaged  Businesses 
Meritorious Award  "for  his  outstanding  contributions  in  the  performance of 
contracts  at  the  NASA  Lewis  Research  Center  and  turning  NASA  Lewis 
Research Center around."  (Call and  Post, Oc t  20194) 

In  a  speech  to  aerospace  executives  at  the  South  Bay  Association  of 
Chambers of  Commerce, NASA  Administrator  Daniel S. Goldin stated  that 
"survival of  the fittest," the new motto at NASA's contract office, should also 
be  the  rule  at  aerospace companies. He  asserted  that  defense and  space com- 
panies  must  follow  NASA's  lead  in  streamlining  operations  and  delivering 
results for  the public.  (Daily Breeze, Oc t  21/94) 

October  21:  T h e  publication  of  former  astronaut  Jim Lovell's new  book, Lost 
Moon: The Perilous Voyage of  Apollo  13, led  to an article recounting the Apollo 

OCTOBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

13  flight  24  years previously. He   stated  his  belief  tha t   NASA   Administrator 
Daniel S. Goldin   should  do more  to  use  NASA's  past successes to  show how 
NASA   had  progressed  since.  (W  Times, O c t  21/94) 

NASA   announced   tha t   it  had  selected  412  small business research  propos- 
als for  immediate  negotiation  of  Phase  1 contracts  up  to  $70,000 t o  perform  a 
six-month  feasibility study under  its  1994 Small Business Innovation  Research 
Program. Successful completion of  Phase  1 would  make companies eligible  t o  
compete  in  1995 for  two-year contracts  in  t h e  amount  of  $600,000.  (NA SA  
Release 94- 176; Huntsville News, O c t  26/94) 

October  2 2 :  A n  article described  awards of  t h e  National   Science  Foundation 
(NSF )  to Historically Black Colleges and  Universities  and   institutions serving 
Latinos  and Native  Americans.  Specific reference was made  to  Clark  A t lan ta  
University  in  Georgia, which had  built  a multimillion-dollar science research 
facility, doubled  its  science  faculty,  increased  the   number  of  students  in  sci- 
ence  and mathematics, and attracted  large federal grants, including funds from 
NASA .   As  a  result  of  its  efforts, Clark  Atlanta   was  now  a  finalist  for  o n e  of 
six $25 million NSF grants.  (C  Trib, O c t  22/94)  

NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin  and astronaut James D. Halsell gave 
a talk  a t  California State  University, Los Angeles (C S LA ) .  Both men stressed 
the  importance of education  and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. T h e  
talk  ended  with  congratulations  t o   CSLA   electrical  engineering  professor 
Helen   Boussalis, who  won  a  $3.8 million  grant  for  her   project  to  design  and 
build  a model  space segmented  telescope.  (University Times, O c t  27/94) 

A l though   t h e   November  3  mission  of  Space   Shu t t le   A t lan t is   would  be 
devoted   primarily  t o   t h e   study  of  Earth's  ozone layer, it  would  also  en ta i l   a 
study  of  mammalian  development   in   space, based  o n   research  o n   ten   preg- 
n a n t   laboratory  rats  and   their   twin  offsprings.  T h e   countdown   for  the  
launch  was  t o  begin  o n  Oc tobe r  31.  ( F l a  Today, O c t   22/94; AP, O c t   31/94; 
Tass, Nov  1/94)  

October  23: T h e   research  of  engineers  a t  NASA's Langley  Research  Cen te r ,  
Hamp ton ,  Virginia,  was  featured,  together  with  its  applications  to   industry. 
Specifically, pistons were discussed and  the  benefits of  making  them  from car-  
bon  instead  of  aluminum.  NASA   had  "working  agreements"  with  Ford, 
General   Motors,  lawn  mower  engine  maker  Briggs  &  S t ra t ton   Inc.,  and  
engine  maker  K&B  Manufacturing  Company,  that   would  allow  them   to  use 
Langley piston  technology  if  they  should  decide  to  make  the   pistons.  (Daily 
Press, O c t  23/94) 

NASA   was  among  the   agencies  making  presentations  at  the   briefing  on  
women's  h e a l t h   sponsored   by 
t h e   Public   H e a l t h   Service   a n d   t h e  

ASTRONAUT ICS   A N D  AERONAUTI<:S 

OCTOBER  1994 

Congressional  Caucu s  o n  Women's Issues. Public H e a l t h  Service  officials pre-  
dicted   t h a t   high-contrast   digital  detectors   would  be  capable   in  t h e   nex t   o n e  
o r  two  years of  finding  breast  cancers  a t  early  stages w h e n  they  were  still  t o o  
small t o  be detected   by  today's radiology equipment .  N A S A  a n d  t h e  Na t iona l  
C a n c e r   In s t i tu te   were  funding   research  t h a t   should  produce  t h e   new  de tec -  
tors.  ( W Xmes,  O c t  23/94)  

October  24:  N A S A   was  pressuring  t h e   European  Space   Agency   (ESA )   t o  
allow  U.S.  personnel   greater  access  t o   European  industry,  laboratories,  and  
reviews  in   order   t o   provide  additional   assurance  t h a t   t h e   U.S./European 
Cassini  mission  to  S a t u r n  would succeed. T h e  mission was of great  importance  
t o  N A S A  a n d  it  felt   t h a t  ESA's  con t r ibu t ion   t o  Cassini  was  no t  being  coordi-  
na ted   fully with   N A S A .  T h e  pressure  was  creating   sharp  controversy  among  
Europeans who  did  n o t  want  such  extensive  U.S. access a l though  N A S A  pro-  
posals  included  greater  European  access  t o   U .S .   facilities.  N A S A   managers 
raised  t h e   issue  with   the i r   European  counterparts   beh ind   t h e   scenes  a t   t h e  
In te rna t iona l  Astronautical   Federation  conference   tak ing  place   in Jerusalem. 
N A S A   pressure  resulted  from  N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S .   Goldin's 
instruction   t o  N A S A   Cassini  managers  t h a t   they  must  assume  responsibility 
for  quality  con t ro l  n o t  just  for t h e  orhiter  but  t h e  whole  mission, including  t h e  
Ma r t in  Marietta   T i t a n - 4  booster  and   t h e  ESA   probe.  (AuWk, O c t  24 /94 )  

T h e  Federal  Av ia t ion  Adm in i s t ra t ion   ( F A A )  was pushing   ahead   with   ce r -  
tification   of  predictive  wind  shear   systems.  Robert   Passman,  FAA   associate 
program  manager  for  airborne   wind  shear   research,  said  h e  believed  airborne  
predictive  systems  worked,  based  o n   observing  o n e   o n   a  N A S A   aircraft  in  
O r lando ,   Florida,  in   1993. He   no ted   t h a t   t h e   alarms  from  such   a  system  cor-  
related  well with  ground-based  Terminal  Doppler Wea the r  Radar de tec t ion  of 
microbursts.  (AvWk, O c t  24/94) 

NA SA   announced   tha t   its  geologists  were  using  radar  images  and   pho to -  
graphs taken  during Endeavour's recent  Space  Shu t t le  mission  t o  study possible 
new  lava flows from Moun t  Klyuchevsky o n  Russia's Kamchatka peninsula. T h e  
daily Shu t t le   tracking  of  t h e  eruption   provided  t h e   most  detailed  ducumenta-  
tion   of  such  a n  eruption  ever obtained   from orbit.  ( N A S A  Release  94-1 79 )  

T h e  U .S .   Energy  Depa r tmen t  decided  t o  stop   funding  work  o n  p lu ton ium  
powered  Radioisotope   The rmoe lec t r ic   Gene ra to r s   (RTG s )   after   1966.  T h e  
decision   caused  conce rn   among   scientists   a n d   engineers   a t   N A S A   and   t h e  
Energy  a n d   Defense  depa r tmen t s   t h a t   America's  space  nuclear   power  pro-  
grams  might   be  ended ,   making   it  more  difficult  t o   conduc t   missions  t o   t h e  
ou te r   planets   such   as  t h e   planned   Pluto   Fast  Flyby.  To  da te   t h e   Energy 
Depa r tmen t   a n d   its   contractors   had   designed,  built ,   fueled,  and   tested  every 
RTG  earmarked  for N A S A  and  Defense Depa r tmen t  spacecraft. RTGs ,  wh ich  
conve r ted   hea t   from  decaying   plutonium   i n t o   electricity ,   were  considered 

OCTOBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

essential  for  missions  to  the   most  distant   planets  in  the   solar  system  where 
solar panels were  unable  to  ~ r o d u c e  enough  power.  (SP  New s ,  O c t  24-30194) 

T h e  previous week NASA  had   released documents  laying the  ground  rules 
for  what  was  certain   t o  be  a  heated  competition  among  U.S.  aerospace con -  
tractors.  Final  documents  were  scheduled  t o   be  released  in  mid-November. 
NASA's need  was  for  a  revolutionary  rocket  to  replace  the  Space  Shu t t le ,  a 
Reusable Launch  Vehicle  (RLV). It  was  to  be  a  cooperative project  between 
NASA   and   industry, with  industry  participating  in  the   funding  of  the   RLV. 
T h e   goal  was  a n  operational  single-stage-to-orbit rocket  tha t   would  replace 
t h e  Space Shu t t le  in  2010 or  2012.  (SP  News ,   O c t  24-30194) 

Anser  Inc . ,  a public  service research  institute ,  announced  t h e  appointment 
of  Richard  Kohrs,  formerly  director  of  Space  S ta t ion   Freedom  a t   NASA  
Headquarters  in  Washington,  DC,  as  manager,  aerospace  business  develop- 
ment .  Kohrs served more t h a n  3 0  years with NASA   in various capacities.  (PR  
Newswlre, O c t  24/94) 

NASA   created or  saved an  estimated  5 ,300  direct  and   indirect  jobs  in  the  
U.S.  economy  in  the  preceding  1 8  months  because of  technology  transfer pro- 
grams a t  Marshall Space Flight Cen te r   (MSFC ) .  Of  these, some  1,170 were  in 
Alabama,  according  to   Harry  Craft  Jr . ,  manager  of  the   MSFC  Technology 
Transfer Office,  1 ,078  in  Pennsylvania,  and  430  in  Tennessee.  Most  of  the  
companies helped  were  small businesses.  (HtsvI Tms ,  O c t  24/94) 

October  25: Observations  from  Space Shuttles  and  o the r  vehicles  revealed  a 
clearly visible  line  stretching  for hundreds  of  miles  across  t h e  Pacific Ocean .  
T h e  dark green  line,  from one  t o  several miles wide, was  attributed  by scien- 
tists to  an  abundance of microscopic plants  tha t   thrived  where cold, nu t r ien t -  
rich water from polar  seas met warm  equatorial currents. New observations of 
the   interaction   between  these  two  currents  were  made  from  the  NOAA - 1 1  
weather  satellite  and  NASA's P-3 research  aircraft  flying  500  feet  above  the  
water.  ( N Y  Times,  O c t  25/94; AP, O c t  31/94)  

A n  obituary of Myron S .  Malkin described him as  the  physicist who was  the  
first director of  t h e  Space Shu t t le  program from  1973 to   1980. He  sewed  as  a 
consultant  to  NASA   and  was  in  the  control  room  for  the  Shuttle's first flight 
i n  April   1981. (AP, O c t  25/94; N Y  Times,  O c t  26/94) 

NASA   was  scheduled  to   open   a  new  facility,  the   Global  Hydrology  and 
Climate  Center ,   in  Cummings  Research  Park  West  in  Huntsville,  Alabama, 
October   27 .   T h e   focus  of  the   Center's  $15  million  annual   program  was  to  
study Earth's water  cycle and   the  ways  in which  it  affected climate. Research 
would  involve collection  and   analysis of  rainfall,  lightning,  and  temperature 
data  o n   a  global  scale,  according  to   Cen te r   director  Ron  Greenwood.  T h e  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

OmOBER  1994 

C e n t e r  was  t o  house  42  scientists  from  Marshall  Space  Flight C e n t e r ,  59  from 
t h e  University  Space  Research  Association ,  and  46  faculty, staff, and  students  
from  the  University of  Alabama  in Huntsville. NASA   Administrator  Daniel S .  
G o l d i n  was  present   t o  open   t h e  Cen te r ,  which   was  t o  operate   in  cooperation  
with   t h e   o t h e r   in s t i tu t ion s  men t ioned   a n d   t o  concen t ra te   o n  studying  water 
vapor.  (H t s v l  Tm s ,  O c t  25/94; H tsv l   Tm s ,  O c t  27/94)  

I n   a  press  release,  J im  Wa te rman ,   Roeing  Space   S t a t i o n   manufacturing  
manager,  said  t h a t  Boeing had   built  18,700 pounds  of  hardware  t o  da te  for t h e  
In te rna t iona l   Space  S t a t i o n  and   was  o n  schedule   t o  comp le te  almost   50 ,000  
pounds  of  hardware  w i th in   t h e  nex t   year. Using  t h e  manufacturing  facility  a t  
Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   originally  built  for  fabricating   S a t u r n   rocket 
stages,  it   had   made   a  good  start   o n   th ree   pressurized  modules  for  t h e   S t a t i o n  
as well  as ha tche s  a n d  experiment   racks.  (Aerospace  Daily,  O c t  26/94)  

Victor  Blagov,  deputy  head   of  Russian  space missions, said  t h a t   t h e  six cos- 
monauts   o n  t h e   aging Mir  Space  S t a t i o n  would  have   t o  ra t ion   electricity   for 
several  mon th s   after  t h e   craft's  solar  batteries   were  unexpectedly   drained .  
Problems  first  appeared  o n   O c t o b e r   11   after   a  powerful  piece  of  electrical  
equ ipmen t  suddenly  sprang  t o  life, shu t t ing  down  part  of  t h e  S t a t i o n  and  run -  
ning  down  four of  t h e  six batteries.  Four o t h e r  solar batteries  could  n o t  be pu t  
aboard Mir  un t i l   t h e  m i Jd le  of  1995.  (Reu te r s ,  O c t  25/94)  

Oc tobe r  26: An  article  criticized N A S A  for abandon ing  its big space plans and  
instead  engaging  in   some  rather   abstruse  scientific   studies  as  a  result  of  its 
Mission  t o  Planet   Earth .   (W  Post,  O c t  26 /94 )  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   astronomers  using  its Hubble   Space  Telescope had  
taken   a n  impo r tan t  s tep  toward  de te rm in ing  t h e  age a n d  size of  t h e  universe. 
T h e y  had   been  able  t o  calculate  with   considerable  precision  t h e  distance   t o  a 
remote   galaxy,  M100 ,   in   t h e   Virgo  cluster  of  galaxies.  T h i s   measurement  
established  t h e  distance  t o  t h e  cluster as 56  million  light-years (w i t h  a n  uncer-  
tainty   of  + / -  6 million   light-years) .  T h e  research  results, wh ich  were  t o  be fur- 
the r   refined,  were  being  published  in   t h e   Oc tobe r   27  issue  of  Na tu re .   T h e  
overall   conclusion   was  t h a t   t h e   universe  was  only   8  t o   12  billion   years  old. 
( N A S A  Release  94-180;  Reuters ,  O c t   26/94;  N Y  Times,  O c t   27/94;  W  Pos t ,  
O c t  27/94; USA  Today ,  O c t  27/94; W Tm e s ,  O c t  27/94;  H Post, O c t  27/94; C 
Tnb, O c t  27/94; Bakersfield Ca l iforn ian ,  O c t  27/94; CSM ,  O c t  28/94; W Times, 
O c t  29/94;  Time, N o v   7/94;  U . S .  News   and World  Report, Nov   7/94)  

Wilbur   Trafton ,   NASA's  Space   S t a t i o n   program  director ,   who   was  in  
Hou s ton   t o   a t t e n d   t h e   Space   Exploration   94   conference   sponsored  by  t h e  
N A S A  A lumn i   League, said several C h i n e s e  officials a t tend ing  a gathering  of 
aerospace  professionals  in   Huntsville ,   A labama ,  asked  informally  about   join-  
ing  t h e   U S . - l e d   In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n   program.  T h e y   were  urged  t o  

OCTOBER  1994 

(:tiRClNOLOGY  1994 

pursue  their  goal  through  diplomatic channels.  ( H  Chron, O c t  27/94; H  Post, 
O c t  27/94; W Times, O c t  27/94) 

NA SA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin  visited Huntsville and t h e  Marshall 
Space  Flight  Cen te r   but  declined  to   endorse  Representative  Bud  Cramer, 
Democrat, saying  it  was  not   appropriate  for him  to  get  into  partisan  politics. 
Goldin   did ,   however,  give  Cramer  credit  for  his  help   in  saving  the   Space 
Station   and  he   announced   tha t   a  new  generation  launch  vehicle  would  be 
developed  at Marshall.  (Huntsville News, O c t  28/94) 

Senator  Howell Heflin, Democrat  from Alabama, told  a space conference a t  
Auburn  University  tha t  he  owed  his  life  to  the   space program. He  referred  to  
angioplasty,  a  pacemaker,  and   a  steel  artery  expansion  device,  all  of  which 
were based o n  space-related  research. NASA  Administrator Daniel S .  Goldin  
and  several Auburn  graduate astronauts also took  part  in  the  program.  (Htsvl 
Tms, O c t  28/94) 

In   a  speech  to  the   Huntsville-Madison  County   Chamber   of  Commerce ,  
NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   said  tha t   the   Marshall  Space Flight 
Center's  top priority  was  safe  Space  Shuttle   propulsion.  T h e   second  priority 
was the  Center's share  in  the  Space S ta t ion  program  and  the   third  priority was 
the   Advanced  X-ray  Astrophysics Facility, and  X-ray  telescope  scheduled  to 
be  launched  in  the   late  1990s. (Htsvl Tms, O c t  28/94) 

October 28: NASA  scientist David R. Proctor, a defendant  in the  NASA  sting 
operation ,  wrote  a  letter  to Attorney  General  Jane t  Reno on  October  8, giv- 
ing details  of  his  1993 encounter  with  FBI  agents and  his n ine  weeks as  their  
informant. Proctor claimed he  had been  accused of  crimes he  did  not   commit 
and asked  tha t  his  indictment  he halted  while Reno  examined his complaint .  
(H  Post, O c t  28/94)  

NASA   announced  the  creation  of  an  Office of  Policy  and  Plans  at NASA  
Headquarters,  with  A lan   Ladwig  as  Associate  Administrator.  Previously, 
Ladwig  had  been  a  senior  space  policy  analyst  in  private  industry.  (NA SA  
Release 94-  18 1 ) 

October 30:  Prior  to  each  Shu t t le   launch ,  NASA   was  obliged  to  remove  the  
alligators  tha t  nested  in  the  ditches  along  the   causeway leading  to  the   launch  
site. NASA   had  requested  permission  t o  fill  in  the   ditches  in  order  to   solve 
the  problem.  (0 Sen Star, O c t  30194) 

NASA's  Kennedy  Space Cen te r  obtained  an  Andros  robot  t o   increase  t h e  
safety of  its workforce and save time and  money. T h e  rohot could perform such 
tasks as deflating Space Shu t t le  tires and checking for bombs, which would be 
dangerous for humans.  (Fla Today, O c t  30194) 

ASTRONAUT ICS   ANL)  AERONAUT ICS  

OCTOBER   1994 

NASA's W i n d   spacecraft,  built   by  Ma r t in   Marietta   A s t ro   Space   in   East 
Windsor, New  Jersey, was  scheduled  t o  be  launched   November   1 or   2, weath-  
er  permitting .   T h e   spacecraft  was  t o   study  t h e   solar  wind ,   its  origin ,   t h r e e -  
dimensional  features, a n d   in te rac t ion  with   t h e  Earth  over  a two-to-three-year  
p e r i o d   Specifically, t h e  principal  goal of  t h e  mission  was  t o  measure t h e  mass, 
momen tum ,   a n d  energy  of  t h e  solar wind  t h a t   somehow  was  transferred  i n t o  
t h e   space  env i ronmen t   around   t h e   Earth .   T h e   spacecraft  was  launched   suc- 
cessfully  November   1.  (Star-Ledger, O c t   30194;  Coldsboro  News-Argus,  Nov  
1/94; NY  Times, Nov   2/94; W Post, Nov   2/94; CSM ,  Nov   2/94; H Chron ,  Nov  
2/94;  USA  Today, Nov   2/94)  

A  retrospective  article   looked  a t   t h e   role  t h a t   NASA's  Dryden  Flight 
Research  C e n t e r  a t   Edwards A i r   Force  Base  in  California   h a d   played  in   t h e  
past,  beginning  with   its establishment   i n   1947. It  asserted  t h a t   a l though  now 
Dryden  was  used  only   for Space  S h u t t l e  landings when   bad  weather  p reven t -  
ed  t h e   S h u t t l e   from  landing   in  Florida,  it  still  managed  t o   keep   some  1 ,000  
gove rnmen t  and  civilian   employees busy.  (Antelope Valky  Press, O c t  30194) 

October 3 1:  NASA's Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r ,  Florida, announced   t h e  award of 
a  con t rac t   t o   Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   Co rpo ra t ion ,   Downey,  California ,   t o  
con t inue  providing  S h u t t l e  O rb i te r  logistics operations  requirements .  ( N A S A  
Release C 9 4 - h h )  

T h e   work  of  NASA's  Ames   Technology  Commercialization   C e n t e r   in  
Sunnyva le ,  California ,  was commended   in  a n  article .  S ince  its e s tab l i shmen t ,  
t h e  year-old  C e n t e r  had  created   13 companies  t h a t  were waiting for financing  
from  joint   ven tu re  companies  or  private   sources for  projects  relating   t o  space 
work.  (Sun Jose  Business journal,  O c t  3 1 /94 )  

October:  A  lengthy   article   unde r   t h e   heading:   "NASA's  Research  a n d  
Development   Enhances   Life  o n   Earth ,"  described  NASA's   ongoing  env i ron -  
men ta l   research.  Among   t h e   specific  programs  covered ,   together   with   t h e  
functions  of  each ,  were:  t h e  Upper   A tmo sphe re  Research  Sa te l l i te ,  t h e  U S . -  
French   TOPEX-Poseidon   Oceanographic   Spacecraft ,   Wea the r   Satellites ,  
Geostationary   Satellites ,  Polar-Orbiting  Satellites ,   t h e  Advanced  Microwave 
Sound ing   U n i t ,   t h e   Total   Ozone  Mapping   Spectrometer ,   t h e   Atmospheric  
Laboratory  for Applications   and   Sc ience ,  t h e  Stratospheric   Aerosol  a n d  Ga s  
Expe r imen t ,   a n d   t h e   Lidar  (L igh t   D e t e c t i o n   a n d   R a n g i n g )   I n -S p a c e  
Technology  Experiment .   (Bay Runner, O c t  9 4 )  

November 

November  I :  NASA announced the  appointment of astronaut Ronald M. Sega 
as  Director  of  Operations,  in  charge  of  NASA   operational  activities  at   Star 
City, Russia, near Moscow. His assignment was  to  support training and  prepa- 
rations  of  NASA   astronauts  at   Gagarin  Cosmonaut  Training  Center,  S ta r  
City. (NASA  Release 94- 182) 

Kenneth  lliff, NASA  Dryden Flight  Research Center's  first chief scientist, 
was  featured.  He  developed  a  mathematical  methodology  used  by  nearly  all 
the free world's flight test organizations to study flight dynamics, performance, 
and  aerothermodynamics.  (Antelope Valky  Press, Nov  1/94)  

November  2:  NA SA   announced   th a t   t h e   Geostationary  Ope ra t iona l  
Environmental  Satellite  (GOES ) -8  had  successfully  completed  basic  engi- 
neering  testing  and was beginning  to  p o v i d e  more precise  data for  improved 
weather forecasting. Th e  older GOES-7 was  to be shifted further west  to  cover 
storms approaching  from  the   Pacific.  (NASA  Release  N94-77; W Post, Nov 
8/94; W Times, Nov  9/94)  

In order  to  carry  out  a complex docking  experiment  tha t   involved  detach- 
ing  the   Soyuz  spacecraft from  Mir  and  then   redocking  using  automatic  sys- 
tems,  the  three  cosmonauts  aboard  the  Russian  Space  Station would  remain 
in  space  an   additional  day.  Th e   operation  was  carried  out  successfully  o n  
November  2.  O n  November  4,  the   German  scientist  and  two  cosmonauts 
returned  to   Earth.  (Reuters, Nov  2/94; Phoenix  G a ~ e t t e ,  Nov  4/94; AP,  Nov 
4/94; UP, Nov  4/94) 

NASA's Hubble Space Telescope t w k  new  images of  the  planet Uranus  that 
revealed the planet's rings, at  least five of  the inner mwn s ,  and bright clouds and 
a high  altitude haze above the planet's south pole.  (NASA Release N94-78) 

November  3 :  Space  Shuttle Atlantis  was  launched  and  after  reaching  a  184- 
mile  high  orbit,  the  astronauts  activated  the   Atmospheric  Laboratory  for 
Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion 
of  Earth's protective  ozone  layer. Jacques Cousteau  was  on  hand  to watch  the 
launch, at  the  invitation of  several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois 
Clervoy planned  to  launch a German satellite November  4 to study the  ozone 
layer  and  the  effects  of  solar  radiation.  A  new  approach  was  to   be  used  t o  
retrieve  the satellite, comparable to  a pocedu re   to  be  used  ultimately  in dock- 
ing with  Mir. O n  November  5,  it was  reported  that  a German  ozone monitor 
was  not  operating despite efforts  to  cool  it  and  then   rewarm  it. O the r   instru- 
ments  aboard,  however,  were  able  to   monitor  the   ozone.  A t   one  point  on  
November  6 ,   the  Shuttle  briefly  lost  contact  with  NASA's  control  center  

ASTRONAUT ICS   .4ND  AERONAUT ICS  

NO\,EblBER  1994 

because of  crossed radio signals. T h e  astronauts also studied  the  seasonal hole 
in  the   ozone  layer  over  Antarctica.  O n   November  9 ,   for  the   third  time, 
Atlantis   astronauts  aimed  solar-energy  monitors  at  the   Sun   seeking  clues 
about  the   dwindling  ozone  layer  and  global  warming.  A  German   satellite 
released from Atlantis  t h e  previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind glob- 
al  map  of  oxygen  particles  tha t   scientists  believed  help  cool  the   Earth.  O n  
November  10, scientists in Germany and Russia  as well as  those  in the  United  
States  launched ozone-mapping balloons and  rockets  as Atlantis  and  its satel- 
lite passed  overhead. NASA  had  launched  18  weather  balloons  and   20 small 
rockets  from Wallops  Island, Virginia, thus  far  in  an  experiment  to  verify the  
spacecraft's data .   T h e   astronauts  successfully retrieved  the   German   ozone- 
measuring  satellite  on   November  12.  Bad  weather  at  t h e   Kennedy  Space 
Center ,   Florida  caused  NASA   managers  to  divert  Atlantis's  landing   o n  
November  14 to  Edwards  Air  Force  Base, California.  (Reuters, Nov  3/94; W 
Post,  Nov  4/94;  NY  Times, Nov  4/94;  LISA Today,  Nov  4/94; W  Times,  Nov 
4/94; H Ch ron ,  Nov  4/94; AP, Nov  4/94; F l a   Today, Nov 4/94; UPI ,  Nov  4/94; 
Reuters, Nov  4/94; W Post, Nov  5/94; Reuters, Nov   5/94; LA  Times, Nov  6/94; 
W  Post,  Nov  6/94;  NY  Times,  Nov  6/94;  AFP,  Nov  6/94;  UP,  Nov  6/94; 
Reuters,  Nov  6/94; USA  Today, Nov  7/94; W Times, Nov  7/94; W Post, Nov 
7/94; C  T,-ib, Nov  7/94; rZvWk, Nov  7/94; NY  Times, Nov  8/94; W Post, Nov 
8/94; W  Times, Nov  8/94; AP,  Nov  8/94; NY  Times, Nov  9/94;  W  Post,  Nov 
9/94;  USA  Today,  Nov  9/94;  AP,  Nov  9/94; NY  Times,  Nov  10194; W  Post, 
Nov  10194; USA Today, Nov  10194; Daily Gleaner ,  Nov  10194; AP, Nov  10194; 
W  Times, Nov  1 1/94; NY  Times,  Nov  12/94; Salt  Lake  ~ r i b u n e ,  Nov  12/94; H 
Ch ron ,  Nov  12/94; AP, Nov  12/94; Reuters, Nov  12/94; W  Post,  Nov  13/94; 
NY  Times,  Nov  13/94; W  Times,  Nov  13/94; W  Tm e s ,  Nov  14/94; Reuters, 
NOV  14/94; AP,  Nov  14/94; UP,  Nov  14/94; Reuters,  Nnv  14/94; LA  Times, 
Nov  15/94; NY  Times, Nov  15/94; W  Post, Nov  I  5/94; AP, Nov  15/94)  

Jeffrey E.  Carr, a spokesperson a t  NASA's Johnson  Space Center ,  confirmed 
tha t  NASA  had ordered  a safety investigation  of  a medical experiment sched- 
uled  for  spaceflight  in  1995 after  an   astronaut  collapsed  and  required  emer- 
gency  treatment   during  a test  of  a chemical used  in  the   research.  It  was  later 
revealed  tha t  the   incident occurred  to Bonnie J .  Dunbar, while  in Houston for 
training  in  October;  a  review  board  was  to   examine  the   incident .   (AP, Nov 
3/94; H  Post, Nov  4/94; AelWk, Nov  7/94) 

NASA   announced   that   astronauts  J o h n  E.  Blaha  and  S h a n n o n  W.  Lucid 
had  been  selected  to  train  for  the   second  of  a t   least four scheduled  astronaut 
stays  aboard  Russian  Space  Station   Mir.  T h e   two  were  to   begin  training  in 
Star  City, Russia,  in  February  1995. (NA SA  Release 94-  183) 

NASA   announced  tha t  the  fifth annual  technology  conference and  exposi- 
tion ,   Technology  2004,  would  be  held  November  8-10   a t   the   Washington 
Conven t ion  Cen te r ,  Washington,  DC.  (NA SA  Release 94-184)  

NOVEMBER  1994 

(:t-1RONOLOGY 1994 

November 6: T h e  joint  Air  Force-NASA space plane program, which  involved 
NASA's  Langley  Research  Cen te r   in  Hamp ton ,  Virginia,  ended  September 
30 .  It was replaced by  a program tha t  focused o n  the  plane's engine rather  t h a n  
the   entire   plane.  Engineers  a t   Langley  had  conducted  space  plane  engine 
research  for  35 years under  the  Hypersonic  Systems Technology  Program and 
were  attempting   to   solve  the   most  challenging  problem:  how  to  propel  t h e  
space  plane  in to   space.  Currently,  they  were  testing  a  scramjet  (supersonic 
combustion  ramjet) .   In   addition  to   Langley,  engineers  were  working  o n   t h e  
space  plane  a t   NASA   centers  in  Oh io ,   California,  and  Mississippi,  and  at 
Wright-Patterson  Air Force Base  in Oh io .  (Daily Press, N o v   6 /94 )  

7 :  A n  article about  technology  transfer, in discussing progress made  in 
Nw&  
this  regard,  mentioned  that  NASA   had  ordered  that  technology  transfer  be  an 
integral part of  every employee's job. It also indicated that NASA's Small Business 
Technology Transfer awards were judged  as "balanced and fair." (AvWk, Nov 7/94) 

NASA ,  together with  the  U.S. Department  of  Energy, the  U .S .  Department 
of  Defense Information  Systems Agency, AT&T, and  Fvxworth & Dinkins, a 
Washington,  DC-based  marketing  firm,  sponsored  a  three-day conference  at 
Clark   A t lan ta  University  November  7-9  tha t   b r c ~ g h t  representatives  of  the  
117 Historically  Black Colleges and Universities  to explore  the  opportunities 
for  minority  students  in  science  and  mathematics.  NASA   Administrator 
Daniel  S.  Goldin   was  one   of  the   conference  speakers.  (Atlanta  Business 
Chronicle, Nov  1 1 - 17/94) 

NASA  was scheduled to de l~ve r  in late October for  the Clinton  administration 
review  a comprehensive plan  for  the United  States to develop a reusable launch 
vehicle  (RLV). Proposals were  contemplated  that   would  be  funded  by  business 
with NASA  providing the needed  technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small 
payloads and the  X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of  the 
Shuttle. T h e  goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). 
With  a declining budget NASA's future depended on  cheap space transportation 
and thus far there was little evidence that  such RLVs were likely in the near future. 
In late November i t  was  reported that  Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas 
Corporation would announce o n  November 29 that  they were joining  to compete 
for  initial contracts  to  build  a  next-generation  Space Shuttle  based  on  reusable 
rockets. McDonnell Douglas had  led  in  the  development of  single-stage-to-orbit 
launch systems and Boeing was  a major  integrator of  complex programs. (AvWk, 
Nov  7/94; WSJ, Nov  29/94; Reuters, Nov  29/94; AP, Nov  29/94; LA  Times, No \ ,  
30194; USA Today, Nov 30194; H Post, Nov 30194; Antelope V a k y  Press, Dec  1/94; 
SP News, Dec 5-  1 1/94; CSM, Dec 6/94) 

NASA  was  evaluating  28  proposals for  innovative,  low-cost planetary  sci- 
ence   missions  and  was  expected  to  make  selections  by  late  January  1995. 
(AvWk, Nov  7/94) 

A S T R O N A U T I C 3  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

NOVEMBER  1994 

NASA's  Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   and   a  consortium   led  by  Texas 
Instruments'   Metallurgical  Materials  Division  were  trying  t o   use  advanced  
aerospace materials  t o  develop  a demonstrator   automobile  eng ine  significant-  
ly  lighter  and  more efficient  t h a n  t h e  one s  in present  use. T h e y  p lanned  t o  use 
h igh - tempe ra tu re ,  h igh - s t reng th  materials developed  for t h e  de func t  Na t iona l  
A e r o s p a c e  Plane .  N A S A  would  provide funding  under   its Aerospace  Industry 
Technology  Program.  (AvWk, Nov  7/94) 

Seven  European  nations-Britain,  France ,  Germany ,  Italy, t h e  Ne the r land s ,  
Spa in ,  and  Sweden-planned 
t o  combine   the i r  aeronautics  agencies t o  c rea te  
t h e   Association  of  European  Research  Establishments   (AEREA ) .  T h e   goal 
would  be  t o  streamline  development ,   e l im ina te  dup l ica t ion ,  improve efficien- 
cy, and   lay  t h e  groundwork  for a unified  European  technology  base. T h e  seven  
agencies had  a cotnbined  workforce  of  19 ,930 ,  including  8 ,695  scientists ,  engi-  
neers,  and   technicians .   AEREA   was designed  in part   t o  coun te r  a "U.S.  t e c h -  
nology  threat ."   (AtxWk, Nov   7/94)  

T h e   European  Transonic   W i n d t u n n e l   ( E TW ) ,  which   was  about   t o   o p e n ,  
posed  a  challenge   t o  t h e  U n i t e d   S ta te s  and   t o  NA SA .  T h e  project   was fund -  
ed hy  Britain,  France ,  Germany ,  and   t h e  Ne the r land s  a n d  was o n e  of  t h e  most 
advanced   aeronautical   research  facilities  in   t h e  world.  U .S .  officials had   used 
t h e  E TW  as  a n  example  of  why N A S A   should  build  at  least two  new  tunne l s  
t o  he lp  U .S .   comp;lnies compe te  with   European  rivals. ETW  officials said  t h e  
new  tunne l   kvas  already  hooked  through   mid-1996 .   (AwWk, Nov   7/94)  

T h e  Wide   Field  Infrared  Explorer  (W IRE )  spacecraft  was  designed  t o   use 
recent  advances  in  large format  infrared  technology  t o  answer some key  ques- 
tions  concerning   t h e   formation   of  stars.  T h e  project-the 
fifth  in   a  series  of 
NA SA   Small Explorer  program  missions-was  being designed  t o  observe star- 
hurst galaxies about  500 times fainter  t h a n  those  recorded  a t  25  microns by t h e  
Infrared  Astronomical   Satellite   in   1983.  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory 
worked with  t h e  Space  Dynamics Laboratory  at U t a h  S t a t e  University  t o  build 
t h e   cryogenically cooled  infrared  telescope.  T h e   three-axis  spacecraft,  wh ich  
would  he  provided  hy NASA's Goddard   Space   Flight  Center-would 
be  t h e  
same  design  Codda rd   developed  for  t h e   S u b~ n i l l im e t e r  Wave  Astronomy  
Satellite ,  a Small  Explorer mission planned  for  1995. T h e  W IRE  spacecraft was 
t o   be  launcheit  o n   an   O rb i ta l   Sciences  Corporation   Pegasus  XL,  wh ich   was 
scheduled  t o  he  air-dropped t i om  a n  L- 101 1 carrier aircraft. (AvWk, Nov   7/94)  

Nop.lcmber 8: Using  t h e  Hubble  Space  Telescope, astronomers mapped  t h e  pre-  
viously  unseen   face  of  T i tan ,   Saturn's largest  M o o n ,  a n d  discovered  a  surface 
feature  t h a t  was  t h e  size of  Australia .  Peter  Sm i t h  of  t h e  University  of Arizona  
presented   t h e   findings  of  his  team   a t   t h e   a n n u a l  meeting   of  t h e   Division  of 
Planetary  Sciences   of  t h e   American   Astronomical   Society.  (NY Times,  Nov  
8/94;  0 Sen Star, Nov   27/94)  

NOVEMBER   1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

NASA   announced   the   appointments  of  astronauts  Kevin  P.  Ch i l ton   and 
William  E  Readdy to  command  the   third  and  fourth Space Shuttle/Mir  dock- 
ing  missions  respectively. T h e   missions were  scheduled  for  March  and   July 
1996. (NA SA  Release 94-1 85 )  

November 9: NASA   announced  that   aerospace industry engineers were finding 
NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT )  at the  Ames Research Center ,  
Moffett Field, California,  was saving  them  time  and money  in  testing  a model 
of  a  next-generation  supersonic  transport.  T h e   RAWT  was  equipped  with  a 
computer  and  video  camera  tha t   allowed  them  to   send  real-time  test  data   to  
engineers  at aerospace companies nationwide.  (NASA  Release 94-186)  

November  10: NASA  announced  tha t  the  Ulysses spacecraft, the  first probe to 
explore  the   Sun's environment   at  high  altitudes,  had  completed  a  pass  o n  
November 5 over  the  southern  solar pole, ending  the  first phase of  its primary 
mission. Members of  NASA's J e t  Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, 
reported  the   development  including  the   fact  tha t   Ulysses  found  a  uniform 
magnetic  field  a t   the   Sun  rather  than   any  magnetic  poles.  In  the   Sun's polar 
regions, t h e  solar wind was found t o  be flowing at a very high velocity of  about 
750 kilometers per  second, nearly  double  the  speed of  the   solar wind  at  lower 
latitudes.  (NA SA  Release 94-187; LA  'Times, Dec 4/94; UPI ,  Dec  5/94)  

November  11:  Following  what  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin  
described  as  two  successful days of  talks with  Russian  Space  Agency  officials 
about  the   International  Space  S ta t ion ,  Goldin   said  the   Station   was  still  on  
track  despite  problems  with  Russia's Mir  orbital  laboratory. Goldin   said  the 
United  States was paying Russia more than  $300 million  to  place its astronauts 
aboard Mir  over  the  next  two  years.  T h e  Russian  segment  of  the   Station  was 
to  be  run  by  the   mission  control  center   in  Kaliningrad  near  Moscow.  Jo in t  
training was already being condcted a t  the  Russian and American control cen-  
ters. T h e  Russian newspaper Krasnaya  Zve7d.a  said  tha t   the   United   States  put 
the  cost of  the   Space  Station  at $20  billion  and  added  tha t   it  was  not  known 
what  the   cost would  be  to Russia or  how  the   cost  would  be  funded. T h e  cur- 
rent  situation  in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would  need  t o  rely 
o n  its own  efforts  and could  not   count   o n  funds from  abroad.  (Itar-Tass, Nov 
11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov  12/94; lzvestiya, Nov   12/94; Krasnaya  Zvezda, Nov 
15/94) 

November  12: A  feature article described the  Voyager spacecraft and the  work of 
Paul Schenk ,  who had  been  a college summer intern  a t  NASA'S Je t  Propulsion 
Laboratory  in  Pasadena, California  and was now  with  the  Lunar and  Planetary 
Institute  (LPI)  in  Houston.  Schenk  became  fascinated  with  Voyager  and  its 
images. W i th  his colleagues, Daniel G .  Wilson and Robert D. Morris of  LPI  and 
Jeffrey  M.  Moore  of  NASA's  Ames  Research  Cen te r   in  Moffett  Field, 
California, Schenk created  stereo views of  various bodies  in  the  outer solar sys- 
tem using  images provided by  Voyager.  (Science News, Nov  12/94) 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

NOVEMBER  1994 

November  13: N A S A   was  learning   t o   "fly  leaner"  as  a  result  of  a  sh r ink ing  
budget.  Examples given  were  t h a t   launches  now  were n o  longer scheduled  o n  
weekends when  ove r t ime  would  need   t o  be  paid  and   if  t h e  weather   were bad ,  
liftoff  was  called  off  before  fueling,  saving   $400 ,000   in   tank ing   costs.  More  
t h a n   1 ,400  Shuttle-processing  jobs  h a d  been  eliminated  a t  t h e  Kennedy  Space  
C e n t e r   in   t h e   previous  th ree   years  a n d   various  S h u t t l e   improvements   h a d  
been  deferred.  (W  Times, Nov   13/94)  

A  feature  article  described  t h e  newly  opened   simulated  space mission  inside 
t h e  Brownsburg,  Ind iana ,  Cha l lenge r  Learning  Cen te r .   It  was  o n e  of  26  such  
centers  across t h e  country  opened  by  t h e  Cha l lenge r  C e n t e r  for Space  Sc ience  
Education .   T h e   program  was  founded  by  families  of  t h e   Cha l lenge r   crew. 
(Indianapolis S ta r ,  Nov   13 /94 )  

in  Michigan  
Space   S h u t t l e  Endeavour   passed  over   four  U .S .   sites-forests 
a n d   N o r t h   C a r o l i n a ,   waterways   i n   O k l a h om a ,   a n d   de se r t   l a n d s   i n  
California-twice 
a day o n  its flight, allowing much  d a t a  t o  be collected.  S u c h  
da ta   were  now  being  studied  as  regarded  Michigan's  Uppe r   Peninsula   a n d  
specifically,  t h e  H iawa tha  Na t iona l   Forest.  T h e y  would  provide  insights as  t o  
how  forests  were  affected  by   timber-cutting ,   deve lopmen t ,  and   global  warm- 
ing .  (K a I am a~ o o  Gazette ,  Nov   13/94; G rand  Rapids Press, Nov   14 /94 )  

Noelember  15: A l though   t h e  Novembe r   8 elections   gave  con t ro l   of  Congress 
t o  t h e  Republicans ,  major  changes   in  funding  for  t h e  space program were  n o t  
expected .  T h i s  was  t h e  case despite  t h e  fact   t h a t  Newt   G ing r ich ,  Republican  
from  Georgia ,   who   was  expected   t o   be  t h e   n e x t   Speaker   of  t h e   House   of 
Representatives ,   was  a n   outspoken   space  advocate   as  was  Representative  
Robert   Walker,  Republican   from  Pennsylvania   a n d   ranking   Republican   o n  
t h e   House  Science ,   Space ,   a n d   Technology  Comm i t tee .   NASA  was  already 
making  plans   t o  sell  t h e  Space   S t a t i o n  program  to   t h e   11 freshman  Sena to r s  
and  approximately  85 new  House members who  were  t o  take  office  in January .  
(SP  N e u a ,  Nov   14-20194) 

N A S A   announced   t h a t   two   teams  of  astronomers ,  working  independently  
with   NASA's  Hubble   Space  Telescope,  had   ruled  o u t   t h e  possibility  t h a t   red 
dwarf  stars  consituted   t h e   invisible  ma t te r ,   called  dark   matter ,   believed  t o  
accoun t   for  more  t h a n   9 0   percent   of  [he   mass  of  t h e   universe.  T h e  results 
increased  t h e  mystery  of  t h e  missing  mass  because  whatever   dark  ma t te r  was, 
its gravitational   pull  ultimately  would  de te rm ine  whe the r   t h e  universe would 
expand   forever  or   would  someday collapse.  Bruce  H .  Margon ,   a n  astrophysi- 
cist  a t   t h e  University   of  Washington   a t   Sea t t le ,   in   discussing  t h e  mystery  of 
t h e  missing  matter ,   said  "It's a  fairly  embarrassing  situation   t o  adm i t   t h a t   we 
can't  find 9 0  percent   of  t h e  universe."  Various  theories  had   been   proposed  by 
physicists,  such  as  t h a t   neu t r ino s ,  electrically  neutral   subatomic  particles  pro-  
duced   prolifically  in  t h e  Big  Bang, had   mass,  o r  t h a t   t h e  value  of  t h e  cosmo- 

NOVEMBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY 1994 

logical constant ,   a concept   invented  by  Albert  Einstein, was  low, helping  to  
account   for  the   difference  between  the   observed  density  of  matter   and   t h e  
critical  density. (NA SA  Release  94-188;  Reuters, Nov  15/94; W  Post,  Nov 
16/94; H Chron, Nov  16/94; C Trib, Nov  16/94; CSM ,  Nov  17/94; AvWk, Nov 
21/94; NY Times, Nov  29/94) 

NASA   announced   tha t   a  new  satellite,  the   NOAA - J ,  a  joint  project  of 
NASA ,   the   National   Oceanic   and  Atmospheric  Administration ,   and  the  
U.S.  Air   Force,  was  scheduled  t o   be  launched  o n   December  4  from 
Vandenberg  Air   Force  Base,  California.  T h e   new  satellite  would  circle  the  
Earth  every  102 minutes,  passing  over  the   No r th   and  Sou th   Poles  o n   each 
orbit.  T h e   satellite  would  collect  meteorological  data   and  transmit  them  
directly to  users  around  the  world  to enhance  local weather  analysis and  fore- 
casting.  (NA SA  Release 94-189)  

NASA   announced   the   signing  of  a  collaborative  agreement  of  the   chief 
executive officers of  the  nation's 28 largest aerospace contractors, NASA ,  and 
the  U .S .  Department  of  Education  in  a plan  to   improve  the  nation's mathe-  
matics,  science,  and  technology  education  goals.  T h e   agreement  was  in  fur- 
therance  of  President  Clinton's  Goals 2000: Educate  America  A c t ,  which  he  
signed March 3 1 ,  1994. (NA SA  Release 94-  190)  

NASA   announced  the   selection  of  Orbital   Sciences Corporation ,   Dulles, 
Virginia, as  a contractor   to provide  launch  services to  deploy Ultralight-class 
payloads  into   their   required  orbits.  (NA SA  Release  C94-ii;  Htsvl  Tms,  Dec 
5/94)  

A  feature  article, accompanied  by  photographs of  Mount Rainier  and of  the  
newly  exploding  Russian volcano  taken   from  the   radar  images  brought  back 
by  Space  Shu t t le   Endeavour,  commended  t h e   extraordinary  quality  of 
NASA's Spaceborne  Imaging Radar.  It  discussed  the   process  by which  more 
t h a n  500 sites were reviewed and  gave particular  a t ten t ion  to  efforts to further 
define  ancient  Ubar,  buried  beneath  desert  sand.  (Newsday, Nov  15/94)  

November  16: NASA   announced   the   resignation  of  Jeremiah  W.  Pearson  as 
Associate  Administrator  for  the  Office of  Space Flight  and   the  appointment  
of  Wayne  Littles  as  new  Associate  Administrator.  (NA SA  Release  94-191;  
AP, Nov   16/94; H Post, Nov  17/94; W Post, Nov   18/94; NY  Times, Nov  21/94; 
AuWk, Nov  21/94; SP News,  Nov  21-Dec 4/94)  

NA SA   announced   t h a t   166  small,  high   technology  firms  located  in  31  
states   had   been   selected  for  Phase  I1  con t rac t   awards  i n   NASA's  Small  
Business  Innova t ion   Research  Program.  Funding   for  Phase  I1   con t rac ts  
could  be  up  to   $600 ,000   for  a  two-year  performance  period.  ( N A S A  
Release  94 -192 )  

ASTRONAUTICS A N I )   .4ERON24UTICS 

NOVEMBER  1994 

NASA   announced   t h e   near  completion   of  a  $1 15 million  restoration  of  a 
unique   NA SA   wind  tunne l   located  a t   Ames   Research  Cen te r ,  Moffett  Field, 
California, which began operating  nearly 50 years ago. ( N A S A  Release 94-193)  

NA SA   announced   t h e   selection  of  Science   Applications   International  
Co rpo ra t ion ,  of  S a n  Diego, California ,  for  a  con t rac t   t o  provide  occupational  
safety, industrial hygiene, and  environmental   services t o  support NASA's Ames  
Research Cen te r ,  Moffett  Field, California.  ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - j j )  

Richard  DalBello,  assistant director  for  space  programs  in  t h e  W h i t e  House 
Office  of  Science   and   Technology  Policy,  said  t h a t   NASA's competion   for  a 
reusable  rocket  t o   replace  t h e   Space  Shu t t le  was  o n  hold   while W h i t e  House 
budget  officials mulled  over  t h e  technical ,  financial ,  a n d  political  prospects  for 
t h e   program.  T h e  W h i t e   House  Office  of Management   and   Budget  must  sign 
off o n  t h e  N A S A  plan  before N A S A  officials invited  t h e  U.S. aerospace  indus- 
try  t o   submit  competing   d e s~ g n s  for  t h e   rocket .   Most  U .S .   aerospace  firms 
already had  competing  blueprints  for a reusable  rocket.  ( S P  News, Nov   21-Dec 
4/94  1 

Space ,  Inc . ,  a Clear  Lake company, and  its vice president Leonard N. Jackson ,  
pleaded  guilty in a Federal undercover probe of fraud among  N A S A  contractors  
and   employees.  ( H  Chron, Nov   16/94)  

November  17: Russia again  postponed  t h e   launch   of  t h e   Spektr   research mod-  
ule,  scheduled  t o   rendezvous  with  Space   S ta t ion   Mir  in   December.  Itar-Tass 
news  agency  reported  t h a t   t h e   launch   had  been  postponed  until  May  1995. 
(Itar-T'ISY, No\ .   17/94)  

T h e   Russian  President  made  a n   edict   in   mid-November   establishing  t h e  
state's first experimental  space center  a t  Plesetsk. T h e  edict divided t h e  Plesetsk 
facility, with o n e  part being retained  by  t h e  strategic missile forces a n d  t h e  o t h e r  
transferred  t o  Russia's military  space forces without ,  however,  increasing  logis- 
tical  support, staffing, or  pay.  I n  contrast   t o  Baikonur,  for which  Russia annua l -  
l y   paid  Kazakhstan  $1 16 million,  t h e  Plesetsk  Space  C e n t e r  would  give Russia 
its own   launching   site. From  t h e  Soviet  era  Plesetsk  had   n ine   launchpads  and  
was  t h e  top  secret site for launching  more  t h a n  half of  all satellites. However,  a 
critical state  of electricity supply t o  industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast  
had  occurred,  resulting  from  t h e  payments crisis, which   threatened   a cut-off  of 
electricity  t o   Plesetsk  and   t o   Severodvinsk,  where  atomic   submarines  were 
built.  (Izwi'stiya, Nov   17/94)  

November  18: NA SA   announced  t h e  selection  of  10  organizations t o  receive  a 
total   of  $6.8 tnillion  t o   help   develop  applications  and   technologies  as  part  of 
NASA's efforts t o  stimulate public use  of  Earth  and   space science da ta  over  t h e  
Internet .   ( N A S A  Release  94-194)  

NOVEMBER  1994 

CHRONC7LOGY  1994 

N A S A  announced  t h e  names  of  t h e  remaining  members of  t h e  second  U .S .  
Microgravity  Laboratory  mission  scheduled   for  t h e   fall  of  1995  aboard  Space  
S h u t t l e  Columbia .   ( N A S A  Release  9 4 - 1 9 5 )  

November  18: T h e   celebration   for  t h e   re tu rn   of  Space   S h u t t l e   Colurnbia   t o  
Palmdale ,  California   for modifications  and   inspections  was  also  t h e  occasion 
for celebrating   t h e  return   t o  work  of  some  200  laid-off Rockwell Co rpo ra t ion  
employees.  (Antelope Valley Daily  NEWS, Nov   19/94)  

November  19:  France's na t iona l   space  agency  CN E S   launched   a  public  rela-  
tions   campaign   featuring   its astronauts   in  order   t o   improve  strained   relations  
between   C N E S  and   t h e   inhab i tan t s   of  French   Guyana   o n   S o u t h  America's 
no r thea s t   coast ,   where   t h e   A r iane   rocket   series  was  launched .   T h e  G u i a n a  
space  cen te r   gave  France  independen t   launch   capacity  for  civilian   and   mili- 
tary  satellites.  (Reuters ,  Nov   19 /94 )  

November  20:  Kevin  Zahnle ,   a  research  scientist   a t   NASA's Ames   Research 
C e n t e r ,  Moffett  Field, California ,  was quo ted  conce rn ing  t h e  large  am o u n t  of 
information   gathered   by   spacecraft  Ga l i leo   about   Jup i te r   t h a t   woulcl  be  lost 
because   of 
t h e   c r ipp l ing   of  (3alileo's  c omm u n i c a t i o n s   capab i l i t ie s .  
Nevertheless ,  much  remained  t o  he  learned  from  t h e  da ta  already t ran sm i t ted ,  
as was  seen   a t   t h e   recent   meeting   of  t h e   Planetary   Sciences   Division  o f   t h e  
Ame r ican   Astronomical   Society  held   in   Bethesda ,  Maryland .   (Contra   Co s ta  
Tme s ,  Nov   20194) 

November  21  : In  connec t ion   with   t h e  November   2 1 field hearing   in  Spokane ,  
Wa sh ing ton ,  of  t h e  Advisory  C omm i t t e e  o n  H um a n  Radiation   Experiments ,  
t h e   media  featured  articles  o n   tests  performed  o n   1 3  1  prison  inmates   in  
O regon   and  Wa sh ing ton  from  1963  t o   1971 .  T h e  tests  were  sponsored  by  t h e  
A tom ic   Energy Commission   in   order   t o  he lp  de te rm ine  how   much   radiation  
U .S .   astronauts   could  safely bear  during   spaceflights. T h e  testicles  of  inma te  
volunteers   were  irradiated  in  return   for  a  small  stipend .  Classified  dclcuments 
dealing   with   t h e   project  were  only  made  available  recently.  ( W  Post,  Nov  
20194; USA  Today, Nov   21/94; AP, Dec  5 / 9 4 )  

U.S.  firms  such   as  Ma r t in   Marietta   and   Lockheed  and   t h e   U.S.  Air   Force 
were  interested  in learning  from  t h e  Moscow-based  Design Bureau of  Transport 
Machinery   (DB TM )  ways  in   which   t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s   could  modernize  its 
aging  launch  site structure .  DRTM was warking  with  Martin  Marietta   in  eval-  
uating   upgrades  t o   t h e  company's Atlas   launch   sites. Lockheed  was   interested  
in   Russian  automated   launch   pad  technology  for  its  propose  single-st:ige-to- 
orbit   vehicle.  T h e  U.S. A i r   Force  was  impressed  by  t h e   simplicity  a n d   oper-  
ability  of  Russia's Zen i th  prelaunch   process: "There   is  n o  need  for h um a n  pres- 
ence  o n  t h e  launch  pad  as  t h e  booster  is  autc>matically erected ,  connec ted ,  and  
launched ."  According   t o   DBTM  managers,  t h e  highly  automated   techniques  

ASTRCIN.4UTICS AKL)  AEKONAUTLCS 

NOVEMBER   1994 

used  a t   t h e  Baikonur Cosmodrome  Zenith   launch  site enabled   two of  t h e  pow- 
erful boosters  t o  be launched  from t h e  same pad w i th in  five hours. Robert  Ford, 
Martin   Marietta   Astronautics'  manager  of  Russian  programs,  said  his  firm  was 
looking  at  seven  potential   jobs  for  DBTM  o n   t h e  Atlas   launch   pads,  ranging 
from  introducing   higher   levels  of  automation   t o   controlling   burn-off  effects 
after each  liftoff. In  t h e  future Ma r t in  Marietta  might  also have  DBTM   look a t  
its  Titan   launching   system  as  well.  In   o t h e r   Russian-related  activity,  Ma r t in  
Marietta   was  moving  ahead   o n   its evaluation  of  two Russian  engineers  for use 
o n  a n  upgraded  Atlas.  (AvWk, Nov   21/94)  

T h e   retrieval  of  t h e   G e rm a n   Crista-Spas   satellite   by  A t lan t i s   during   its 
recent   mission  proved  t h e   validity  o f   t h e   rendezvous  approach   t h a t   N A S A  
now  planned   t o   use  for  all  dockings  with   Russia's  Mir  Space   S t a t i o n .  
Technical  details  were given  of  t h e  "plus R bar" approach .  (AwWk, Nov   21/94)  

D u r ~ n g  a  visit  t o  C a p e  Canave ra l  wlth   his  crewmates,  Russian  cosmonaut  
Vladimir  Titov   familiarized  himself  with   t h e   Spacehab   module  t h a t   was 
scheduled  t o  be  carried  o n  his   S h u t t l e  flight  in   February  1995 .   (AvWk ,  Nov  
2 1/94) 

Disagreements  con t inued   t o   exist  between   t h e   U n i t e d   S ta te s   a n d   Russia 
over   t h e   Salyut  FGR  "space  tug"  with   regard  b o t h   t o  t h e   tug's price  a n d   t h e  
cost  of  launching   it ,   which   Russia  wanted   t h e   Un i ted   S ta te s   t o   pay. 
Khrunichev   Mach ine  Building  Enterprise was in  t h e  early stage of  working o n  
t h e   tug.  A n  agreement   was  worked  out  o n  November   10 about   t h e  medical 
certification   process  for joint   flights, under  which   each  country   would  accept  
t h e  medical  certification   of  t h e  other's  space  flight personnel   un t i l   prelaunch  
exam ina t ion s  were  performed  30-45  days  in   advance   of  Russian  Soyuz flights 
and   10 days  in  advance  of  U S .  S h u t t l e  flights.  (AvVlrk, N o v   21/94) 

Kockwell  Aerospace  planned   t o   deliver   t h e   O rb i te r   Docking  System  t o  
N A S A   (111 November   21 .   To  achieve   a  system  t h a t   would  enab le   a  U.S. 
S h u t t l e   to   dock  with  Space   S t a t i o n  Mir,  Rockwell  Space   Systems  Division 
integrateil  ;I  Russian-built  docking  mechanism   i n t o   t h e   system.  (AvWk, Nov  
2 1 /94 )  

A  feature  article  o n  Ca r l  Sagan  described his  various accomplishments   and  
men t ioned  his  fascination  with  stargazing  and  his he lp  t o  N A S A   in  designing 
robotic   missions,  which   h e   had   been   doing   since   t h e   la te   1950s.  (AP ,  N o v  
21 /94 )  

A  Russian  television  program,  "Science  Today,"  commented   o n  t h e  roles  of 
t h e  Russian Energiya-Ruran and  t h e  U.S.  Space  Shu t t le  systems in reducing t h e  
costs c~f placing payloads in space. In  this connec t ion  t h e  program promoted  t h e  
putential  of  t h e  Russian-Ukrainian  project "Maks" based o n  a n  existing aircraft, 

NOVEMBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

t h e   Mriya.  T h e   Russian  Maks  program  was  commended   by  G.  Le.  Lozino- 
Lozinskiy, general designer of  t h e  "Molniya"  and  British Aerospace agreed  it was 
necessary  t o   begin  building  winged  transport  systems with   t h e   Maks  a n d   pre- 
sented  t h e  Maks system t o  the  European Space  Agency. (FBIS-Sov, Nov   29/94)  

November  22:  N A S A   announced   t h e   signing  of  a  con t rac t   w i th   t h e   Pa ton  
Welding   Institute   in  Kiev, Uk ra ine ,   t o  develop  a plan   for flying  a space weld- 
ing  tool  aboard  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  in Oc tobe r   1997 .  T h e  Uk ra in ian  Universal  
H a n d   Tool  was  a n   electron   beam  welding  device   developed   a t   t h e   In s t i tu te  
a n d  used  by  Salyut  7  cosmonauts   in   1984  and   1986  in   t h e  first  e lec t ron  beam  
welding  in  space experiments .   ( N A S A  Release 94 -196 )  

O n e  of  NASA's h igh -a l t i tude ,  remote-controlled ,   Perseus  research  aircraft 
crashed ,  severely damaging  t h e  plane .  NASA's Dryden Flight Research  C e n t e r  
operated   t h e   c ra f t ,  wh ich  was  used  t o  collect   da ta   from  t h e   upper  reaches  of 
t h e  atmospherepit   could  f ly   up  t o  a n  a l t i tude  of  90 ,000  feet .   (Antelope Valky 
Press, Nov   23/94; H Chron,  Llec  5/94; LA Xmes ,  Dec  5/94)  

Noelember  23: NASA's  Kennedy Space  Cen te r ,  Florida, announced   t h e  award 
of  a  life  sciences   support   services  c o n t r a c t   t o   Dynamac   C o r p o r a t i o n ,  
Rockv i l le ,   M a r y l a n d .   T h e   c o n t r a c t   suppo r ted   Kennedy's   B iomed ica l  
O p e r a t i o n s   a n d   Re sea rch   O f f ice   a n d   t h e   Payload   M a n a g em e n t   a n d  
Ope ra t ion s   Directorate   in   program  management   support   for  life  sciences  
activities .  T h e  work  included  processing  medical ,  biomedical,  and   biological 
flight  experiments   for  launch   and   landing   in   add i t ion  t o  con t inu ing   research 
o n   NASA's  Con t ro l led   Ecological  Life  Support   System,  a  bioregenerative  
concep t   for  long-term   space  travel.  I n  add i t ion ,  Dynamac  would  be  responsi- 
ble for env i ronmen ta l  and  ecological monitoring  of  Kennedy's  premises, locat-  
ed  o n  a na t iona l  wildlife  refuge.  ( N A S A  Release C 9 4 - k k )  

In   a report   by  t h e  House  G o v e r nm e n t  Ope ra t ion s  C omm i t t e e   it  concluded  
t h a t   NASA's  sloppy  management   had   resulted  in  some  $14  billion   of  N A S A  
equipment-including 
up  in  
computers  and  con s t ruc t ion  equipment-ending 
t h e   hand s   of  contractclrs.  Moreover,  N A S A   had   failed  t o   cu rb   unallowable  
con t rac t   costs.  Furthermore ,   NASA's  recordkeeping   was  so   bad  t h a t   it   was 
almost  impossible  t o   edit   NASA's  books.  I n   add i t ion ,  C omm i t t e e   cha i rman  
J o h n  Conyers ,  Democrat   from Michigan ,  said NASA's  "planning  is  so unreal-  
istic  t h a t  budgets are  hopelessly  optimistic ."  A  report  in  a n o t h e r  c o n t e x t  c o n -  
ce rn ing  Houston's J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r ,  dealt   with   equ ipmen t   failures  a n d  
h um a n   errors  resulting  from  carelessness  or   s tup id i ty   (Tampa  Tribune,  Nov  
24/94; 0 Sen Star, Nov   24/94;  H  Pos t ,  Nov   30194) 

N A S A   Adm in i s t ra to r   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   announced   t h e   a p p o i n tm e n t   of 
Ch r i s tophe r   C .  Kraft,  former  Director   of  t h e  J c ~ h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r ,  t o   form 
a n d  lead  a n  ex te rna l  independen t   team   to review da ta  from  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

NOVEMBER  1994 

Functional  Workforce  Review  and  make  recommendation  to  Goldin  for 
implementation.  Kraft's  team  would  be  charged with  evaluating  the  current 
process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, 
Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order 
to  recommend  a  better  operating  structure.  Initial  efforts  would  focus  on 
Kennedy  operations.  In  addition  to  the  Space  Shuttle  program,  the  team 
would  review  related  Space  Station  activities.  (NASA   Release  94-197;  SP 
N ew s ,  Dec  5-1 1/94) 

NASA  officials at  Kennedy Space Center  released  their  annual  economic 
impact  statement  in  terms  of  the  effect  of  the  Center  on   Brevard  County. 
Despite  budget  cuts,  the  1994  impact  on   the  economy was  $1.18  billion  in 
comparison to $1.32 billion  in  1992; the  total  workforce  (including contrac- 
tors,  civil  service,  and  construction)  was  16,500  in  1994  in  contrast  with 
18,700 in  1992. Th e   review  of  NASA  operations  should  result  in  more  joh 
cuts, which would  occur  in early  1995. (Fla Today, Nov  24/94) 

November  26:  Russian  television on  the "Aerospace Salon" program discussed 
various Russian  space flights. T h e  correspondent  said  that  much  was  known 
about Salyut flights 1, 6, and  7  but  nothing had  been publicized  about Salyut 
2 ,   3 ,  and  5  missions. It  developed that  the  flight engineers for  these missions 
were  military  cosmonauts  and  that  they   involved  Almaz  orbital  reconnais- 
sance stations. Th e  Almaz  hulls were  launched  as Salyuts, the first  unsuccess- 
fully  in  1973 and  two more  in  1974 and  1976. A cosmonaut who flew on  one 
of  these, V.V. Gorbatko, was  quoted as saying that  the  initial  intention was  to 
arm  the  Almaz  station  but  the  one  on  which  he  flew  had  reconnaissance 
equipment  only.  (FBIS-Sov, Nov  30194) 

November  28:  Th e  United  States  and  Ukraine  signed  a  five-year civll  space 
agreement  the  week  of  November  21,  which  established direct  cooperation 
between NASA   and  the  Ukrainian  National  Space Agency  and  created  the 
legal  basis for  bilateral  scientific cooperation.  T h e  agreement, which  provid- 
ed  for  cooperation  in such fields as remote sensing, telecommunications, bio- 
medical  sciences and  biotechnology, and  space  research  and  technology, was 
described  as  "almost  exactly  the  same"  as  the  1992  agreement  with  Russia. 
( A v W k ,  Nov  28/94) 

A scale model of  Boeing's High Speed Commercial Transport was  undergo- 
ing testing  in  the supersonic wind  tunnel  at NASA's Ames Research Center. 
( A v W k ,  Nov  28/94) 

NASA and contractor engineers were  studying a number of  existing engine 
designs as they tried to  lower the propulsion  technology risk  for private devel- 
opment  of  a  reusable  launch  vehicle  (RLV)  in  the  early  2000s. Operability 
rather  than  performance would  be  the  key  to  any RLV  engine.  According  to 

NOVEMBER 1994 

CHKONOLCXIY  1994 

Len  Worlund ,   director  of  t h e   Advanced   Transportation  Technoli~gy  Office  a t  
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Cen te r ,  t o  get reusability, N A S A  and  its partners 
were working  t o  build  components  t h a t  better  withstood  repeated  firings. They  
were  also  trying  t o   lower  the   high   turbine   temperatures  t h a t   had   saddled  t h e  
Shuttle's   engines  with   crack-prone   cooling  shields  t h a t   required  frequent 
repairs.  (Ae lWrk ,  Nov   28/94) 

Stanford  research  associate S tephen  Morris said  tha t  Stanford  had  successful- 
l y   designed, built,  and   flown  a  model  of  a  supersonic  "wing"  t h a t   should  ulti- 
mately be  able t o  c u t  drastically  t h e  t ime  needed  t o  reach Tokyo o r  London  from 
t h e  Un i ted  States. N A S A  and  Stanford  studies  indicated  t h a t  a n  oblique flying 
wing with  a 400-foot  wingspan  could  carry 400 passengers from  Los Angeles  t o  
Tokyo  in seven hours  instead of  t h e   10 hours now  required.  (UP ,  Nov   28/94) 

November  29:  After   12  years  of  work,  O r ion   Network  Systems,  a  Rockville, 
Maryland, firm, launched  its first satellite. O r ion  was  t h e  first company  t o  apply 
in  1982 t o  t h e  Federal Communications   C om~ n i s s i o n  t o  provide  international  
satellite  communications.  O r i o n   won   FCC   approval  in  1987  and   lntelsat  
approval  in  1989 o n  condition   t h a t   it  n o t   harm   any  existing  Intelsat  business. 
O r ion  formed  a consortium, O r i o n  A t lan t ic ,  which   included British Aerospace, 
which   built  the   satellite,  and  Martin   Marietta   Corporation   of  Bethesda, 
~ a r y i a n d ,  which  provided  t h e  Atlas  rocket.  (W  Post, Nov   30194) 

NA SA   and   Loma  Linda  University  in   California  announced   t h a t   N A S A  
planned   t o  use  the  University's Proton  Treatment  C e n t e r  t o  find ways t o  protect 
astronauts  in space. T h e  University had   t h e  nation's only hospital-based  proton  
treatment   center   for  cancer.  T h e   program  did  no t   involve  experiments   o n  
h um a n  subjects.  ( N A S A  Release N94-83;  Sun, Nov   30/94) 

November  30: C h i n a  successfully launched   a  new  telecommunications  satellite ,  
t h e  Dongfanghong 111, using a Long March  3A  rocket  from t h e  Xichang base  in 
S ichuan  province, southwestern C h i n a .  (AFP, Nov   30194; Xinhua  news agency, 
Nov  30194) 

N A S A  announced   a series of  education  telecasts  for t h e   1994-95  school  year 
featuring  t h e  following:  t h e   recent   collision  of  comet   Shoemaker-Levy, unique  
research  in  microgravity,  t h e   Earth's  changing   env i ronmen t ,   and   t h e   diverse 
role  of  lasers in NA SA   technologies.  ( N A S A  Release  94-198)  

A  laudatory  assessment  was  given  of  NASA's Technology Transfer  program 
with  specific reference t o  t h e  Marshall Space Flight Cen te r .  According  t o  Harry 
Craft ,  Jr., Technology Transfer office manager,  t h e  program  had  three   elements: 
Industrial  Ou t reach ,   Space  A c t   Cooperative   Agreements,  and   Dual  Use  
Programs. Each was  intended   t o  increase  cooperation  between government  and 
industry. In  t h e   Industrial Ou t reach  area, industries came  t o  N A S A  with   prob- 

ASTRONAUTICS  ANL)  A t  I<Oh,\[1Ti<'S 

NOVEMBER  1994 

lems  they  needed  t o  resolve,  requiring  less t h a n  40 hours  work.  For  more com -  
plex  prc~blems, Space  A c t  Coope ra t ive  Agreements   were  used.  T h e  Dual Use  
Program  was  a  technology   reinvestment   program  in  wh ich   b o t h   gove rnmen t  
and   industry   con t r ibu ted   funds  and   techno logy   t o   benefit  b o t h   parties. 
(Huntsville News, Nov   30194) 

November: A  feature  article   commemorated   t h e   rendezvous  o n  July  17 ,   1975  
of  t h e  Sov ie t  Space   S h i p  Soyuz  and   t h e   U .S .  Apollo .   T h e  occasion  was  also 
used  t o  discuss  t h e  new  policy  of  Russian-U.S.  cooperation   in  space  a n d   t h e  
forthcoming   plan  for  Space   S h u t t l e   A t lan t i s   t o   rendezvous  with   Russian 
Space  S t a t i o n  Mir  in  1995 .  ( S k y ,  Nov  94) 

A  lengthy   article   o n   t h e  C l i n t o n   administration's  science   a n d   technology  
policy dealt  with   these  two  fields and  t h e  President's goals in  the i r  regard. T h e  
government   spent   more  t h a n  half  of  its  research  and  development   money   o n  
developing   usable  technologies .   T h e   remainder   was  divided  almost  evenly  
between   applied  research  and   basic  research.  However,  t h e   availability  of 
funding   was  a  serious  problem.  Funding   increased  significantly  during   t h e  
Co ld  War  but  scientific disasters such  as  t h e  failure of  a nuclear  reactor   a t  t h e  
T h r e e  Mile  Island  electric   power  p lan t   a n d   t h e   explosion  of  t h e  Cha l lenge r  
Space   S h u t t l e   eroded   public  support  a n d   federal  funding .   T h e   accomplish-  
ments   of  t h e  Na t iona l   Sc ience  and  Technology  Counc i l   ( N S T C )   in  consoli-  
da t ing   t h e   two  weather   satellite   systems  of  t h e   Defense  Depa r tmen t   and   t h e  
Na t iona l   Ocean ic   a n d   Atmospheric   Adm in i s t ra t ion   as  well  as  t h e   NSTC's  
initiative   in  coordinating   space  launch  policy  among  N A S A  and  t h e  Defense, 
Comme rce ,  and  Transportation   depa r tmen t s  were  commended .   (Government 
Executtve, N o v   9 4 )  

T h e  fact  t h a t   each  year  a  Space  S h u t t l e  liftoff was  seen  as  more   unremark-  
able   t h a n   t h e   preceding  year  testified  t o  t h e   small  and   particular   miracles of 
engineering ,   mechanics ,   and   electronics   t h a t   made   each   mission  fly.  T h e  
process  of  mating   t h e  orbiter   t o  a n  enormous  ex te rna l  fuel  tank   and   two  solid 
rocket  boosters, con s t i tu t ing  t h e  S h u t t l e ,  was described  in  some detail   as well 
as  t h e   fueling of  t h e  Shu t t le .   (Destination Discovery, Nov   9 4 )  

A  discussion  of  enthusiastic   hobbyist  rocketeers  involved  in  model  and  
high-power  rocketry  contrasted   this with  NASA's  programs and  bore  t h e  title ,  
"Tired: N A S A ;  Wired:  Amateurs."  (Wired, N o v   94 )  

December 

December  I :   Possible  evidence  of  a  new  planetary  system  only  5 2   light-years 
away  arising from  observation  of  a  star  named  Beta  Pictoris  was  published  in 
Nature. Harold  E  Levinson and colleagues at the  Southwest  Research Institute 
in San  An ton io  showed how a system of  planets  and  comets could account  for 
the   phenomena  seen near  the   star. NASA's  Hubble Space Telescope enabled 
some of  these  new  discoveries.  Planet  hunter   Charles M.  Telesco a t  NASA's 
Marshall Space Flight Center   in Huntsville, Alabama  said of  Levinson's work, 
"Whenever  you  can  put  a body  of  evidence  into  a coherent  picture  like  that ,  
everybody feels much better."  (CSM, Dec  1/94; H  Post,  Dec  1/94)  

NA SA   named  J o h n  C. Lynn  to   head  t h e   new  office  of  Chief  Information 
Officer  within  the   Office  of  the   Administrator  at  NASA   Headquarters  in 
Washington, D C  (NASA  Release 94- 199) 

Western  Europe's 70th  Ariane  rocket  sent   a U.S.  PanAmSat   comrnunica- 
tions  satellite  worth  more  t h a n   $150  million  plunging  in to   the   Atlantic  
Ocean   off  French  Guyana  after  its  third   stage  malfunctioned.  Th is   was  the  
second  Ariane   rocket  failure  in  1994 and  the   seventh   since Western  Europe 
began  launching  the  Ariane  series  in  1979. (Reuters, Dec  1/94)  

T h e  group  of  scientists  from  Phillips  Rocket  Laboratory  investigating  the  
disappearance  of  the   Mars  Observer more  than   one   year  ago  concluded  the  
probable  cause  of  the   accident.  Phillips  aeronautical  engineer  and  project 
manager  said  the   likely cause was  failure  of  a  small  pyro  valve  tha t   allowed 
propellants  to mix. Th is  in tu rn  could cause the  rupture  of  a tube  and  result In 
the  Observer tumbling out  of  control .   (Antelope Valley  Press, Dec  1/94) 

December  2: David R .   Proctor,  a NA SA  engineer, pleaded  guilty to one  count  
of  conspiracy, three  counts of  bribery, one  coun t  of  violating Federal procure- 
ment   regulations,  and   one   count   of  accepting  a  gratuity  in  a  case  involving 
Operation   Lightning Strike. T h e  case resulted  from his  actions  in  relation  to 
an  FBI  agent  posing  as  a  corrupt  businessman  seeking  a NASA   contract .   ( H  
Chron, Dec 3/94; H  Post, Dec  3/94; AP, Dec  3/94)  

Johnson Space Center denied one of its largest prime contractors, Martin Marietta 
Services of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, an "award  fee" or profit on  its contract for  the 
six-month period  ending March 31,  1994. The  action resulted  from  a much more 
stringent contract compliance policy by NASA  and the fact that  the contractor did 
not control its labor costs under the terms of  the contract. ( H  Chron, Dec 3/94) 

Eleven  District  of  Columbia  students from Ballou  Senior  High  School  and 
Johnson  Junior  H igh  School  took  part  in a week-long NASA   Space Camp   in 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER  1994 

Huntsville, Alabama. They all earned certificates, wings, and a space outfit as 
well  as one college credit  from  the University of  Alabama.  (Washington Afro- 
American, Dec 3/94; W Xmes, Dec  5/94) 

December  4:  Astronaut  Frank  Culbertson,  charged  with  helping  to   arrange 
the  series of  Shuttle  missions  to  Russian  Space  Station Mir, discussed some 
of  the  frustrations  of  working with  the Russians and  the  American  need  for 
patience  and  flexibility, given  the   linguistic,  cultural,  and  economic  differ- 
ences  between  th e   two  countries.  Culbertson  indicated  that  the  initial 
Russian  response  to   U.S.  requests  was  "No"  and  tha t ,   for  example,  the  
Russians had  withheld  key  information  about  the  explosive charges, which 
were  developed  for  a  military  program,  tha t   were  involved  in  the   Russian 
latching  mechanism  tha t   would  enable  U.S.  Shuttle  Atlantis  to  dock  with 
Mir,  Another  problem  was  th e   delay  in  getting  U.S.  astronaut  Norman 
Thagard's equipment to  Mir. A  longer range h i tch  entailed  the  Russian guid- 
ance  and  propulsion  module  being  built  for  the   U.S.  International  Space 
Station. So  far  the  Russians had  received a U.S.  commitment of  $ 2 5   million 
for  th e  component  but  it  appeared  they  wanted  up  to  $245  million.  Wh en  
Thagard  was  interviewed  about  U.S.+Russian space  work,  h e   said  tha t   it 
would  seem  that  thus  far  the  two  had  managed  to   make  their  cooperation 
work.  ( H  Chron, Dec  4/94) 

T h e   proposed  merger  of  Martin  Marietta  Corporation  and  Lockheed 
Corporation  was  analyzed. T h e  result would  be  not  only  the  world's  largest 
defense company but  also, according to  the writer, "the most  politically pow- 
erful"  because of  its  lobbying clout. Th e  new  firm would  excel particularly in 
missiles and jets. Th e  proposal caused numerous rumors of other merger efforts 
by  defense firms.  (0  Sen  Star, Dec 4/94;  W Post, Dec 6/94) 

NASA's  attempts  to  streamline  its  management  of  space  programs  and 
cu t   costs were  highlighted with  details  of  personnel  cuts  and  commenda- 
tion  of  th e   efforts  of  Jeremiah  Pearson  who  had  served  as  Associate 
Administrator  for Space Flight. A n  example of  Shu t t le  and  Space S ta t ion  
mergers  was  th e   Johnson   Space  Center's  new  $ 2 5 0   million  Mission 
Con t ro l   Center.  T h e   C en t e r   could  hand le   Shu t t le   missions,  activities 
aboard  th e  Mir,  and  th e   new  In te rna t iona l  Space  S ta t ion   simultaneously. 
( H  Chron,  Dec  4/94) 

December 5: New  Republican House Speaker Newt  Gingrich  indicated  in  an 
interview  that  he  favored  a  NASA  confined  to   research  and  development, 
with  remaining functions  contracted  out  to th e  private  sector as  far  as  possi- 
ble. His overriding mission for NASA was drastically reducing the  cost of  get- 
ting  into  space. Gingrich  praised  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S.  Goldin's 
efforts to reshape NASA  but considered th e  agency still to be "a people-heavy, 
obsolescent bureaucracy." (AvWk, Dec 5/94) 

DECEh,fBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

Jack  Mansfield,  who  was  named  in  September  1994  as  NASA   Associate 
Administrator  for  Space Access  and   Technology,  discussed  his  position  and 
the   Reusable  Launch  Vehicle  (RLV) program  in  an   interview.  Previously he  
served  as  a  Republican  staff  memher  o n   t h e   Sena te   Armed  Services 
Committee   but  h e   did  not   consider  this  past  affiliation  a  problem  because 
NASA   deserved  and   got  strong  bipartisan  support.  W i th   regard  to  the   RLV 
program,  Mansfield  said  tha t   in  the   past  NASA   had  been  able  t o  solve  all 
technical   problems  but  not   always  all  operability  problems,  such  as  high 
cost-this  was where  the   use  of  a RLV  came  in.  (SP  News ,  Dec 5-1 1/94)  

According  to  NA SA  Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin ,  NASA   received  28 
outstanding  proposals from  universities,  the   aerospace  industry,  and   govern- 
ment   laboratories  for  smaller, less expensive planetary  science missions under 
its new Discovery program. By  January 1995 NASA  was  to select a few t o  pur- 
sue  seriously with  the   expectation  tha t   one   or   two  would  be  developed  and  
launched  by  the   period  1999-2001. NASA   set  forth  specific funding  limita- 
tions  and  wanted  models of  streamlined  management  of  such  projects  while 
demanding  high quality. ( A u W ,  Dec  5/94) 

Johns  Hopkins  University's Applied Physics Laboratory  (APL )  was making 
components  and  expected  to  integrate  t h e  Near  Earth  Asteroid  Rendezvous 
(NEAR )   by  early  June   1995.  NEAR  was  the   second  mission  approved  in 
NASA's  Discovery  program but  would  be  the  first  to  be  launched.  To make  a 
scheduled  January  1999 encounter  with  433 Eros-a 
silicate rock  asteroid- 
NEAR  would  need  to   be  launched  within  a  two-week  period  beginning 
February  17,  1996.  It  would  be  launched  o n   a  Delta  2  and   would  swing  by 
Earth  in  1998 so tha t   its plane  could  be  changed  to  match   tha t   of Eros.  T h e  
spacecraft would  carry four instruments: a  visible imager, a n  X-raylgamma-ray 
spectrometer, a near  infrared spectrograph, and  a magnetometer.  In  entrusting 
to  APL  its first planetary  science mission  to be developed outside the  Agency, 
NASA   turned  to  a  laboratory experienced  in   rapid,  inexpensive  space  pro- 
grams. APL was  responsible for three  other  proposals tha t  NASA  was consid- 
ering  under  the  Discovery program.  (AvWk, Dec  5/94)  

Mars  Pathfinder, the  first of NASA's  Discovery missions, was beginning con -  
struction  in preparation for  launch  in  two years' time. Anthony   J .   Spear, proj- 
ect  manager  for  the   Mars  Pathfinder  project  at  the  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory 
in  Pasadena, said  fabrication  of  the   cruise portion's  structure had  begun; final 
assembly of  the   spacecraft was  to  begin  in June  1995. Testing of  various kinds 
would  follow  with  the  spacecraft being shipped  to Cape Canaveral for  launch  
by  early September 1996. T h e  primary goal was  an  engineering demonstration 
of  a low-cost Martian  landing system.  (AvWk, Dec 5/94)  

Lockheed  said  it  could  arrange  private  financing  for  a  low-cost,  reusable 
launch   vehicle  (RLV)  if  t h e   U .S .   government  would  give  it   all  the   Space 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER   1994 

Shu t t le  and Titan  business for a t  least five years. I n  return ,  Lockheed  estimat- 
ed  that   the   government  would  get  $2   billion  a  year  savings. To make  such  a 
RLV,  Lockheed  would  call  o n  Rocketdyne  for  propulsion,  Rohr  Corporation  
for high  temperature structures, and  Martin  Marietta-Denver for  tanks for liq- 
uid  oxygen and  hydrogen. (AvWk, Dec  5/94) 

T h e   French   na t iona l   space  agency  CNES   proposed  for  gove rnmen t  
approval  developing  a series of  small spacecraft  t o  broaden   science  mission 
oppo r tun i t ies  a t  lower  cost .  I f   approved  i n  1995 ,  France  would  inv i te  o t h e r  
European  countries   o r   t h e   U n i t e d   S ta tes   t o   participate .   Acco rd ing   t o  
Pierre  Con t re ras ,   head  of  t h e   System  Engineering   Division   a t   t h e   CN E S  
Toulouse Space  C e n t e r ,  satellites  weighing  abou t  500  kilograms  were  c o n -  
templated .   T h e  first  flight  would  be  a  radar  a l t ime te r   spacecraft  designed 
as  a follow-on  to   t h e  NASA /CNES  TOPEX/Poseidon   sea  surface  topogra-  
phy  mission  currently   underway.  T h e   c h a i rm a n   of  t h e   European   Space  
Agency's  ( E SA )  Space   Sc ience   Advisory  C omm i t t e e ,   Lodewijk  Woltjer ,  
said  t h a t  all ESA members "like  t h e   idea  of  small missions  because of  the i r  
low  costs,  but  for  most  of  ESA's  objectives  small  satellites   are   too   small." 
(AvWk, Dec  5 /94 )  

December 6: After  three  years of  testing by  NASA's Langley, Virginia, research 
center ,   the   airline  industry,  industry  suppliers,  and  the   Federal  Aviation 
Administration,  a new device was approved  to  alert pilots  of  wind  shear dan -  
ger.  Called  the   Bendix  RDR-4B,  it  was  made  by  Allied  Signal  Inc.  in 
Morristown,  New  Jersey and  was  being  installed  by  various  commercial  air- 
lines.  T h e  device  complements  ground-based  wind-shear  detection   systems, 
known as Terminal Doppler Weather  Radars, being  installed  a t  47 major U.S. 
airports.  ( W  Times, Dec 6/94)  

NASA  announced   tha t  astronomers  using  its Hubble Space Telescope had 
obtained  the  clearest  views yet  of  distant  galaxies tha t   existed  when  the  uni-  
verse  was  a  fraction of  its  current  age. Hubble  findings suggested tha t   ellipti- 
cal  galaxies  developed  quickly  into   their   present  shapes.  However,  spiral 
galaxies in  large clusters evolved over  a much  longer period.  (NA SA  Release 
94-201; Reuters,  Dec  6/94; NY  Xmes,  Dec  7/94; W  Post, Dec  7/94; W Times, 
Dec  7/94; H Chron, Dec 7/94; USA  Today, Dec  7/94; CSM, Dec  7/94; H Post, 
Dec  7/94; Newsweek, Dec  19/94) 

NASA  announced  tha t   it had  selected eight projects  tha t  could lead  to new 
private  sector  applications of  space-based and  airborne sensing  technologies. 
Named  Earth  Observations  Commercial  Applications  (EOCAP )   '94,  the  
projects  represented  the   fourth  cycle  i n   a  continuing   program  designed  to  
increase  use  of  NASA-developed  technology  for  gathering  and   analyzing 
valuable data  about Earth and  ocean  resources through  remote satellite or air- 
craft observations.  (NA SA  Release 94-203)  

DECEMBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

T h e   $20  million  docking  ring,  known  as  the   Androgynous  Peripheral 
Docking  System, which  would  enable  Space  Shuttle  Atlantis  to   dock  with 
Russian Space Station Mir in  1995, arrived from Russia after  it had been  test- 
ed  in  Russia,  in  Califomia,  and  in  orbit.  NASA   managers  expressed  confi- 
dence  in  the   ring  although  they  could no t  read  the  Russian plaque  on   it.  (0 
Sen Star, Dec  7/94; F l a   Today, Dec  7/94) 

NASA  scientists would  like t o  send an  unmanned  spacecraft to  look for ice 
inside craters on  Mercury, the  solar system's hottest  planet with  temperatures 
reaching  800 degrees  at  its equator.  However,  inside  the   craters  a t  Mercury's 
poles the  temperatures were  235  below  zero and  scientists conceived  that  life 
might  exist. Robert M. Nelson  of  NASA's Je t  Propulsion Laboratory (JPL )  in 
Pasadena  discussed JPL's proposal  for  a  mission  to  Mercury,  named  Hermes, 
which  NASA  was  considering. T h e  discussion occurred  at   a meeting  of  the  
American Geophysical Union.  (AP, Dec 6/94) 

December  7: NASA   was  preparing  to  move  t o  a new  Mission Con t ro l  room 
in  1995 for  the   first  time  since  1965. Of  particular  concern  was  th e   new 
world  of  computer  linkage  th a t   was  challenging  security-minded planners. 
T h e  planners  feared  various  security  problems  related  to   computers  includ- 
ing  sabotage,  computer  viruses,  software  imperfections,  and  confidentiality 
of  data.  (H  Post, Dec 7/94) 

Scientists of  NASA's Je t  Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Califomia, which 
managed  the  U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon  oceanography  satellite,  had  been 
studying data it developed. The  findings from two years of  monitoring the oceans, 
which were  to  be  announced at   the  fall  meeting  of  the  American Geophysical 
Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had  risen about 0.12 
inches a year from December  1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indica- 
tor of global change and supported theories than an  increase in "greenhouse" gases 
was causing long-term global warming.  (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94) 

A n   interview  was  published  with  retired  Princeton  physicist  Freeman 
Dayson  in which  he  strongly criticized NASA .  He  advocated  tha t  NASA   be 
dismantled  like AT&T, feeling it was overly expensive and  inefficent.  Instead, 
science  should  be  done  by  individuals following their  own curiosity and  cre- 
ativity.  (CSM, Dec 7/94) 

NASA   announced  tha t   scientists  at   its  Marshall  Space  Flight  Cen te r   in  
Huntsville, Alabama,  were  observing rare  gamma  ray  flashes above  thunder- 
storms  at  a  rate  six  times  that   of  previous  observations.  Steve  Goodman  of 
Marshall's Space  Sciences Laboratory said  the   observations were  being made 
by  the  Burst  and  Transient  Source  Experiment  aboard  NASA's  Compton 
Gamma Ray Observatory, which was  recently modified by  ground commands 
to  be  more sensitive  to  such events. NASA  ~ l a n n e d  t o  bring  together  inves- 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

IECEMRER   1994 

tigators  from  t h e   fields of  space  and   atmospheric   physics  t o   srudy  t h e   newly 
discovered  even t s .  ( N A S A  Release  94-204;  AP, Dec  7/94)  

December 8: N A S A   announced   t h e  names  of  1 9  new  astronaut   candidates   for 
t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   program.  T h e   1995 group  consisted  of  10  pilots  a n d   n i n e  
misslon  specialists,  including  six  civilians and   13  military  officers,  all  chosen  
from among  2,962 applicants .  In te rna t iona l  candidates  were also t o  be  includ-  
ed  and   these   names  would  be  announced   later.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -205 )  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S .  Go ld in  made  a state-of-the-agency  address 
t o  all staff members  in  which   h e  stressed  t h a t  N A S A   in tended   t o  hecome   less 
costly  and   quicker   during   t h e   nex t   four  years,  end ing  with   as  many   as  4 ,000  
fewer  workers.  Kennedy   Space   C e n t e r   Deputy  Illrector   G e n e  Thoma s ,   who  
answered  questions  after  t h e   televised  address,  said  ~t would  be  a  year  of  "sig- 
nificant   change ."   ( 0  Sen Star, Dec 9 /94 )  

Con s t ruc t ion  was ge t t ing  underway o n   t h e  Space  S t a t i o n  project  according  
t o  J o h n  W i n c h ,  Boeing Defense  and  Space  G roup  manager  in  charge  of build- 
ing  t h e  hab i ta t ion  and   laboratory models for t h e  S ta t ion .  Boeing workers were 
abou t   t o   go   o n   a  three-shift ,   five-day  week  to   expedite   t h e   program.  (Fla 
Today, Dec  8/94)  

December  9:  N A S A   announced   t h e  appo in tmen t   of  Larry  lIeLucas ,  a  former 
Space   S h u t t l e  payload  specialist  and   a n  expert   in  protein   crystallography, as 
ac t ing  senior  scientist  for t h e  Space  S ta t ion .   ( N A S A  Release 94 -206 ;  Phillips 
Business  Information ,   Dec  14/94)  

N A S A   announced   t h a t   students   in  t h e  Un i ted   S ta te s  would  be  able  to   see 
and   talk  t o  scientists  in An ta rc t ica  during  unique  educatiowal broadcasts from 
t h e  S o u t h  Pole  beginning   December  13. ( N A S A  Release  94 -207 )  

Kathryn   Hire ,  who  worked  a t  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   (K SC )  for  Lockheed 
Space  Ope ra t ion s  Company ,  became   t h e  first  KSC  worker  t o  he  selected  as  a 
future  astronaut .   ( 0  Sen Sm, Dec  9 /94 )  

December  10:  W h e n   Tropical  S to rm   G o r d o n   blew  th rough   Florida  in  
Novembe r ,   a  tugboat   pulling  NASA's  $50   million  ex te rna l   fuel  tank   for 
S h u t t l e   A t lan t i s   lost  power  and   was  rescued  by  a  tanker.  T h e   tanker   could 
claim  salvage rights  from  N A S A  or  claim  t h e   tank ,  and  N A S A  had   n o  insur- 
ance   t o  cover   law  suits o n  t h e   fuel  tank .   ( 0  Sen Star, Dec  10194) 

December  1 1 :  N A S A  de te rm ined   it   was cheaper   t o  tear  down  t h e  g ian t  h am -  
merhead   c rane   originally  built  for  t h e   Apollo   Moon   landing   program  ra the r  
t h a n   t o  refurbish  it .  Therefore ,   t h e  c rane  was  in  t h e  process  of  being  disman-  
tled  a t  t h e  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   launch   pad.  ( F l a  Today, L3ec  11/94)  

DECEMBER 1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

December  12 :   NASA   announced   t h e   members  of  the   crew  of  the   Space  
Shu t t le  mission  for  the   fall  of  1995 under  the   command  of  Brian  Duffy.  A 
Japanese  National  Space  Development  Agency  specialist  was  included  and  
one  of  the   mission objectives  was  to  retrieve  a  science satellite  scheduled  to  
be  launched  by  a Japanese H-2 rocket  in  early  1995. T h e  Shu t t le  would  also 
retrieve  ano the r  science satellite, t h e  Shu t t le  Pointed  Autonomous  Research 
Tool for Astronomy  (SPARTAN) .  In  addition ,  two spacewalks would  be  con -  
ducted.  (NA SA  Release 94-208) 

NA SA   announced   the  development  and  testing  of  a new  integrated  flight 
and   propulsion  control   system  t o  help   pilots  land  under  difficult  conditions. 
Aerospace  engineers  a t   NASA's  Ames  Research  Center ,   Moffett  Field, 
California, were developing the  digital  fly-by-wire control  system  t o  reduce  a 
pilot's workload and  help stabilize landing aircraft. NASA  was  testing t h e  new 
system  in   t h e   Vertical/Short  Takeoff  and   Landing  (V /STOL )   Systems 
Research  Aircraft  (VSRA )   t o   improve  takeoff  and  landing  capabilities  for 
V/STOL  aircraft  in  reduced  visibility. T h e  VSRA  was  a  modified  version  of 
the  U .S .  Marine  Corps' AV-8B Harrier  jet  fighter,  which  could  take  off  and 
land  vertically.  ( N A S A  Release 94-209)  

NASA  announced  the  death  of S tua r t  Allen  Roosa, one  of  six Apollo  astro- 
nauts  to fly solo around  the  Moon.  (NA SA  Release 94-210; UPI ,  Dec  13/94; 
0 S e n  S ta r ,  Dec  13/94; F l a   Today, Dec  13/94) 

NASA   announced   t h e  release of  EOSDIS Version 0 to  users  i n  the   Earth 
Observing  System  (EOS )  community.  T h e  release  was  NASA's  first  step  in  
developing  a nationwide, globally available  data  system  tha t  would  provide  a 
variety  of  users  with  information  needed  to   make  informed  decisions  about 
how  humans  could  control   their   environment .   Ultimately,  EOSDIS  would 
serve  several functions such  as  controlling  EOS  spacecraft,  relaying  raw  data 
to   the   data  processing  centers,  and   through  its  Distributed  Active   Archive  
Centers   ( t o  be  located  a t   eight  sites  around  the   country)  serving  as  a  foun- 
tainhead  of  information.  (Unnumbered  NASA  Release) 

France  planned  o n  its  next   manned  mission  to  Russian  Space S ta t ion  Mir 
in   January  1996  to   use  an   advanced  Aerospatiale  system  called  Alice  2  to  
improve  knowledge  of  fluid  behavior  in   microgravity  conditions  for  use  in 
materials  processing. (AvWk, Dec  12/94) 

A  feature  article gave high  praise  t o  t h e  achievements of  the  Hubble Space 
Telescope  quoting  J o h n   N .   Bahcall,  professor  of  natural  science  a t   the  
Institute  for  Advanced  Study  a t   Princeton   University,  as  saying  "Hubble  is 
bowling  us  over  every day with  what  it  does."  A  number of  Hubble's  discov- 
eries were  outlined ,   including  data  o n   the   age  of  the   universe,  t h e  Big  Bang 
theory,  and  t h e  size of  the  universe.  ( P  Inq, Dec  12/94)  

ASTRONAUTICS  A N I )   A E R O N  4UT lr  

I IECEMBER   1994 

December  13:  J o h n   F.  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   Llirector  Robert  L.  C r ippen  
announced  h e  would  leave NASA  January 21  after more t h a n  25 years with  t h e  
Agency.  Crippen   indicated  in  a   press  conference  t h a t   N A S A   budget  slashing 
had  made  h im   uncomfortable  and   concerned   about  t h e   safety of  Shu t t le  mis- 
sions.  ( N A S A  Release  94-21 1; C Trib, Dec  13/94; 0 Sen   S tar ,   Dec  13/94; F h  
Today, Dec  13/94; H Post,  L3ec  14/94; C SM ,  Dec  14/94; Fla  Today, Dec  14/94)  

N A S A   announced   it  had   begun  p lann ing   for  a   new  multidisciplinary  life 
and   microgravity  sciences  Spacelah   research  mission  t o   be  flown  o n   Space  
S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia   in  mid- 1996.  ( N A S A  Release  94 -2  1 2 )  

December  14: S tuden t s  and   teachers  a t  A lv in   High   Schoo l  in Texas, with   t h e  
assistance   of  a   n e i g h b o r i n g   c omm u n i t y   college   a n d   membe r s   of  t h e  
Con so r t ium   for  Aerospace  Technology  Education   (CATE ) ,   were  building 
the i r   own   space  cen te r   similar  t o   t h a t   a t   t h e   C o n t r o l   C e n t e r   Comp lex   of 
NASA's  J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r   ( J S C ) .  Frank  Hughes ,   chief  of  t h e   Flight 
Training   Division  a t   J S C ,   initiated   t h e   CATE   program,  which   integrated  
coope ra t ion   from  industry  (Rockwe l l )  with   t h a t   of  community   colleges  and  
universities.  ( H  C h r o n ,   I3ec  14 /94 )  

N A S A  a n d  Russian  Space  S h u t t l e  mission  managers met   a t  J o h n s o n  Space  
C e n t e r   and   announced   t h a t   they  were  targeting   a   launch   da te   between   J u n e  
8 a n d  J u n e  10 for S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s  and   its five-astronaut ,  two-cosmonaut  crew. 
T h i s  represented  a  postponement   of  t h e  original  blast-off  da te  of  May   24  a n d  
resulted  from  a   delay  from  February t o  May  1995  in   t h e   launch   of  a   Russian 
Spek t r  science  module.  T h e  launch   of  A t lan t i s   was  scheduled  t o  be  followed 
three  days  later  hy  a  docking  with  Russian  Space  S t a t i o n  Mir.  (Fla Today, Dec 
15/94;  H   C h r o n ,  Dec  17/94)  

N A S A   announced   t h e   establishment   of  a   joint  gove rnmen t   research  pro-  
gram  t h a t   might   result  in  developing   plants   t h a t   could  withstand   d rough t ,  
unseasonable  temperatures ,  soil salinity, and  o t h e r  adverse growth  conditions .  
T h e   program,  called  t h e  Research   Network   o n   P lan t   Sensory  Systems,  was 
supported  by  N A S A  and   t h e  Na t iona l  Sc ience  Foundation .  T h e  program  also 
was  selected  as  NASA's  n i n t h   Specialized C e n t e r   of  Research  and   Training .  
( N A S A  Release  94 -213 )  

Representative   Robert   Walker,  Republican   from  Pennsylvania ,   who   was 
scheduled  t o   chair   t h e   House  Sc ience  C omm i t t e e   in  t h e   new  Congress ,  said 
he   felt  t h a t   Space   S t a t i o n   appropriatations   by  Congress  were  safe.  H e  indi-  
ca ted  he  wanted   t o  explore  ways of  linking  N A S A   facilities with   universities 
and   in te rna t iona l   partnerships   as  well  as  tax  incentives   for  space  business 
deve lopmen t ,   all  of  which   h e   saw  as  ways  of  saving  space  funds .   (AP ,   I lec  
14/94; G a n n e t t  News  Service ,  Dec  14/94;  H   C h r o n ,  Dec   15/94; Congressiunal 
Quar ter ly's  Congressivnal  Mon i tor ,   I lec   15/94;  Flil  Today, Dec  I  5 /94 )  

DECEMBER   1994 

CHRONOLO(3Y  1994 

T h e  deed   t o   NASA's Compu te r   Comp lex   in  Slidell ,   Louisiana  was  t ran s -  
ferred  t o   t h e  city  o f  Slidell  a t  a  ceremony   a t tended   by  N A S A   Ac t ing   Deputy 
Administrator   Gene ra l  J o h n  R .  Dailey  among  o the r s .  For more  t h a n  30 years, 
t h e  Slidell complex  had   provided  support  for t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  ex te rna l   t a n k  
program  as  well  as  o t h e r  Office  of  Space   Flight  administrative   a n d   program 
activities .  However, these  functions  recently  were moved  t o  NASA's Marshall  
Space  Flight C e n t e r  in  Huntsville ,  Alabama .  Various plans were  underway for 
ways  in  wh ich  t h e   Slidell  facilities could  be  used.  (Sentry News ,  Dec  15 /94 )  

December  15: N A S A  Administrator   D a n ~ e l  S. G o l d i n  named  Jay E Honeycu r t  
as Director  of  t h e  J o h n  F.  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r  upon   t h e  departure  of Robert  
L.  C r ~ p p e n  o n  Janua ry  21,  1995 .  ( N A S A  Release 94-214;  AP,  Dec  15/94;  F l a  
Today,  Dec  16/94;  0 Sen  Star, Dec   16/94;  H  Ch ron ,   Dec  16/94;  H  Post,  Dec 
16/94;  AP,  Dec  16/94;  W  Post,  Dec   17/94;  Fla  Today,  Dec   18/94;  0 Sen  Star ,  
Dec   20194; F l a   Today,  Dec  20194) 

Findings about   t h e  Moon   resulting  from  t h e  71-day rendezvous of  t h e  mili-  
tary  probe  C l em e n t i n e   were  reported   a t   t h e   recent   Ame r ican   Geophysical  
U n i o n  meeting .   It developed ,  according  t o  geophysicist Maria  Zuber of  J o h n s  
Hopkins  University   and  NASA's Godda rd  Spaceflight  C e n t e r ,  t h a t   "Now  we 
know   t h a t   we  don ' t   understand   t h e   Moon   as  well  as  we  t h o u g h t   we  did." 
Instead  of  n o  activity  o n  t h e  Moon   in  t h e  preceding  th ree  million  years,  the re  
was  volcanic   activity   as  recen t   as  o n e   hillion   years  ago.  T h e   crust  was  very 
variable  and   t h e   Moon   had   a  c ra te r   large  enough   t o   span   t h e   c o n t i n e n t a l  
Un i ted   S ta te s   as  well  as  a n o t h e r   fresh-looking  c ra te r   created   by  a n   impact  
recorded  by  12 th  century   monks.  (LA  Xme s ,  Dec  15/94)  

A  solid-fuel hooster  for A r iane -5 ,  t h e  new  rocket  designed  t o  keep We s te rn  
Europe  in   t h e   lead  in  launch ing   heat-y  satellites  i n t o   t h e   21st  century ,   was 
tested  successfully  in   t h e   jungles  of  French   Guyana ,   according   t o  Jean -Ma rc  
A r taud ,   A r iane -5   program  director   for  t h e   CN E S   French   na t iona l   space  
agency  in  Gu iana .   (Reu te r s ,  Dec  16 /94 )  

A  leak of  toxic   rocket  propellant   o n  a n  Alr   Force T i tan  4  rocket   forced  t h e  
po s tponemen t   of  t h e   rocket's  launch   t o  December  20.  (Fh  Today,  Dec  17/94;  
Fla  T ' y ,  Dec  18/94;  0 Sen  Star ,  Dec   20194; Fla Today,  Dec   20194) 

December  16: N A S A  announced   t h e  selection  of  Boeing  Information  Systems ,  
Inc . ,   V ienna ,   Virginia,  for  a  c o n t r a c t   t o   provide  information   resources  a n d  
management   support  services  t o   N A S A   Headquarters ,   Wa sh ing ton ,   DC .  
( N A S A  Release  C94-11) 

A  Youth  Sc ience   Symposium,  "Your  Place  in  Space ,"   drew  400   middle  
school   students   t o   t h e   California   Museum  of  Sc ience   and   Industry.  Randii  
Wessen, a science  systems engineer  w i th  NASA's J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory  in 
Pasadena,  was  a n   instructor   in  o n e  of  t h e  space-age exercises. O t h e r  s tuden t s  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER  1994 

launched  rockets  and  learned  the  fundamentals  of  comets  and  rockets.  (LA  
Times, Dec  16/94) 

NASA  officials indicated  that details of  scientific evidence supporting the 
theory that man-made chlorine  was  causing  the ozone hole above Antarctica 
would be  released on  December 19. Th e  evidence was  based on  three years of 
data  from NASA's  Upper  Atmosphere  Research  Satellite  (UARS ) .  UARS 
instruments  had  found  chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)  used  in  electronics  and 
refrigeration  systems  in  the   stratosphere.  T h e  stratospheric  ozone  layer was 
responsible for protecting  people, animals, and plants  from  too much ultravi- 
olet sunlight. (Reuters, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; NASA  Release 94-215; 
UP,  Dec  19/94; Reuters,  Dec  19/94; LA  Xmes ,   Dec  20194;  NY Times,  Dec 
20194; W Post, Dec  20194; W Times, Dec  20194; USA  Today, Dec  20194; WSJ, 
Dec 20194; 0 Sen Star, Dec 20194; F l u  Today, Dec  20194; H Chron, Dec 20194; 
H Post, Dec  20194; C Trib, Dec  20194; AP, Dec  20194) 

On e  of  the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system 
shock absorber, failed its test and  the Russian builder wished  to replace all six. 
This might  delay the  June  8, 1995 launch  of  Shuttle Atlantis  to  dock  with 
Russian Space Station Mir. (0 Sen Star, Dec  15/94) 

December  16: U.S. Vice  President A1 Gore and Russian  Prime Minister Viktor 
C h em om ~ r d i n  signed a  number  of  cooperation  agreements  in  Moscow.  Th e  
agreements included one to conduct joint  space research to gather data on  the 
Earth's  atmosphere  and  to  cooperate  on  the  International  Space  Station. 
According  to Yuriy  Koptev, director of  the  Russian  Space Agency,  the  agree- 
ment with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instru- 
ments  for  measuring  the  ozone  layer  and  atmospheric  components  to  be 
installed on  Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be  launched in  1996 and 
1999. Agreement  was  also  reached  on   a  joint  program  of  biologicial  experi- 
ments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be 
launched. Gore and Chemomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing 
for  duty-free clearance  of  goods  shipped  to  Russia  for  cooperation  in  space, 
which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program. 
Also among the agreements was one concerning  space medical research. In 
that  connection,  Amauld  Nicogossian,  NASA's  Washington-based  chief 
medical officer, said  the  space agencies of  the two countries planned  to  spend 
about three months working out details. NASA  proposed to offer $500,000 in 
equipment,  materials, and  money  to enable  the  Russians to  establish a Space 
Biomedical  Center  for  Training  and  Research  near  the  Moscow  State 
University  and  Russia's  Institute  of  Biomedical  Problems.  Russia  would  be 
expected to contribute a similar amount. Th e  U.S. counterpart to the Russian 
training  and  research  center  would  be  at NASA's  Johnson  Space Center  in 
Houston, where  officials planned  to establish  a similar alliance  of  university 
and  commercial medical research  institutions.  (Reuters, Dec  16/94; UP,  Dec 

DECEMBER  1994 

C H R O N O L O G Y  1994 

16/94; Interfax  news  agency,  Dec  16/94 quoted  in  B B C   Summa?  of  World 
Broadcasts,  Dec  19/94;  Phillips  Business  Information,  Dec  19/94;  Phillips 
Business Information, Dec 22/94; H C h r o n ,  Dec  23/94) 

NASA  was  preparing  three  rendezvous with  Russian Space S ta t ion  Mir  to  
launch  the  new  cooperative effort  between  Washington  and  Moscow.  In   the  
first, scheduled  for  February  1995, Shu t t le  Discovery would  simulate docking 
with Mir but  not   in  fact  touch  i t .   In June   1995, Shuttle  Atlantis  would  actu- 
ally dock with Mir and  remain  together for four days, ultimately  taking aboard 
U.S.  astronaut  Norm  Thagard   who  would  have  joined  Mir  in  March.  In  
October   1995, Atlantis  would  he  outfitted  with  an  Orbiter   Docking  System 
tha t   would  be  installed  o n  the   Space Station   to  facilitate  future  rendezvous. 
(AFP, Dec  16/94) 

Larry  DeLucas,  recently  appointed  chief  scientist  of  the   NASA   Space  
S ta t ion  project, said  the   Station  provided  the  next  step  for businesses such as 
pharmaceutical  companies  tha t   were  trying  to   develop  new  and   improved 
products  such  as high  quality  crystals, uninhibited  by  t h e  Earth's gravitation- 
al  environment .   (Phillips Business Information, Dec  22/94) 

December  17: A n  audit report  by  NASA's  inspector general, which was  still  in 
draft, noted  tha t  NASA  could have  saved almost $6 million  in business  trav- 
el costs  in  1993 by  flying available commercial  flights instead  of  using NASA  
aircraft. As  a  result, NASA   planned  to  rewrite  rules  for  the   use  of  its planes, 
according  to  Laurie  Boeder,  Associate  NASA   Administrator  for  Public 
Affairs. Jack Anderson's column  contained  a  critical account  of NASA   trav- 
el  concentrating   on  NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin's use  of NASA  
aircraft  in  the   six-month   period  from  October   1 ,  1992  through  March  31 ,  
1993, which  reportedly  cost  taxpayers $514,000 more  t h a n   if  he  had   flown  a 
commercial  airline.  (Fla Today, Dec  17/94; W Pos t ,   Dec  19/94)  

December  19:  A  NASA   delegation  led  by  Mike  O'Brien  from  NASA's 
External Affairs Division in Washington was  in Moscow to present  to  Russian 
officials  the   draft of  the  Memorandum of  Understanding  (M O U )  concerning  
the   International   Space Station .  T h e  MOU   detailed  services  to  be  provided 
by  S ta t ion   partners  and   the   percentage  of  S ta t ion   resources-power,  water, 
storage  space--each  would  receive.  Bill  Shepherd ,  deputy  program  manager 
for NASA's Station  program, was optimistic about the  Russian response to  t h e  
MOU   and also optimistic about NASA's  purchase of  t h e  20-ton  FGB naviga- 
t ion   and   propulsion  tug  ( t h e   first  S ta t ion   component   to  be  sent   up )   from 
Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec  19/94)  

December 20: A feature article described some of  the findings of  spacecraft Ulysses, 
which used  Jupiter's gravity to enter an  orbit perpendicular to  those of  the  planets 
and  for  the  preceding  four  months  had  been  studying  the  Sun's polar  regions. 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER  1994 

These were  hitherto  unexplored  areas, and Ulysses  mapped  the  Sun's magnetic 
field and its cosmic rays, providing a wealth of data about solar dynamics. Ulysses 
was  launched from a Space Shuttle in October 1990. (NY Tmes, Dec  20194) 

NASA   spokesperson George Diller  said  that  as  a  result  of  an  engine  leak 
discovered in California, NASA  had decided to check the  welds on  all engine 
nozzles of  Space Shuttle Discovery.  This fact, combined with  the decision  to 
replace one of  Discovery's auxiliary power  units, might result in a delay of  th e  
scheduled February 2,  1995 launch of Discovery.  (0 Sen Star, Dec  20194) 

NASA   announced  the   highlights  of  its  1994  activities  and  provided  a 
chronology  of  major  space  events.  Of  particular  no te   were  the   flight  of  a 
Russian  cosmonaut  aboard  a U.S.  spacecraft  for  the   first  time  and  a  spec- 
tacular  cosmic collision tha t  occurred  on  Jupiter. However,  it was  the  work 
of  th e  refurbished Hubble Space Telescope th a t  dominated NASA   news  in  
1994.  Among  Hubble  results  were  the   following:  evidence  of  a  massive 
black  hole  in  th e  center of  a galaxy 50 million  light-years away, supporting 
Einstein's theory of  relativity; observations  of  huge  pancake-shaped disks of 
dust, raw  material for planet formation, swirling around half  the  stars in  th e  
O r ion  Nebula;  confirmation  of  a  critical  prediction  of  the   Big  Bang  theory 
tha t   helium  should  be  widespread  in  the   early  universe;  and  significant 
progress  in determining  th e  age of  the  universe-between  8 and  12 billion 
its size.  (NA SA  Release 94-216; UP I ,  Dec  22/94) 
years-and 

NASA   unveiled  its  new  Mission Control Center  in Houston  with  a flight 
simulation  that pretended  to  rendezvous a Space Shuttle with a satellite. T h e  
demonstration went well  and provided  an  opportunity  to  identify additional 
equipment  needed,  such  as  more  display facility. T h e  new  center  should  be 
directing the  Shuttle in orbit by  the summer of 1995. (Federal Computer Week, 
Dec 20194; H Post, Dec  21/94) 

December 21 : NASA announced the completion of the second of  two shipments 
of  solar panel  modules,  marking delivery  of  the  first U.S. Space Station flight 
hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavours with Russia. Th e  shipments 
each consisted of  45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar 
array  project, an  effort  that  brought  together  NASA's  advanced photovoltaic 
technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of  the 
modules  were  scheduled  to  be  integrated  with  Russian-made  frames  in  42 
hinged parts. T h e  completed array would be  returned to the United States to be 
taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. 
(NASA  Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94) 

NASA   announced  the  award  of  a  supplemental  agreement  to  Martin 
Marietta Astro Space of  the  Martin Marietta Corporation East Mindsor, New 
Jersey. The   agreement  provided  for  two  additional advanced  meteorological 

DECEMBER  1994 

CHRONOLOGY  1994 

satellite  spacecraft  through  the   Televisision  Infrared  Observation  Satellite  
project  contract   a t   t h e  Goddard  Space  Flight  Center ,  Greenbelt ,   Maryland. 
(NA SA  Release C94-mm)  

Decembet  22:  NASA   Associate  Administrator  for  Space  Science,  Wesley  T 
Huntress Jr., announced  the  selection of  a scientific investigation that   included 
the development of a new camera for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST ) .  NASA  
was scheduled to work with Holland Ford of Johns  Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
to develop a new camera, called Hubble Advanced Camera for Exploration. T h e  
new camera would be  installed on  the HST  by  Shuttle astronauts during the  third 
servicing mission scheduled for November 1999. (NASA  Release C94-00) 

NASA   announced   the   preliminary  findings  of  the   investigating  team   a t  
NASA's  Dryden  Flight  Research  Cen te r ,   Edwards,  California.  T h e   findings 
indicated  tha t   a  faulty  vertical  gyro  was  responsible  for  t h e   accident  
November  2 2   tha t   resulted  in  severe  damage  to   a  Perseus  remotely  piloted 
research  aircraft.  (NA SA  Release 94-2  18) 

Charles  Bigot,  chairman  of  Arianespace,  told  a  news  conference  t h a t   the  
company  hoped  to  resume  launches  of  Ariane   missiles  in  two  months'  time. 
Following  the   failure  of  the   December  1  launch ,   which  sent   an   American 
PanAmsat-3  communications satellite to  t h e  bottom  of  t h e  A t lan t ic ,  2 1   cor- 
rective  measures  had  been  taken.  French-based  Arianespace  had  captured 
more  tha t   60  percent  of  the  world's satellite launch  market  and had  orders to  
launch  37  satellites.  (Reuters, Dec  22/94) 

December  28: NASA   announced that   its scientists now believed  that   it was  the 
sulfur-rich atmosphere created in the  aftermath of  an  immense asteroid collision 
with Earth 65 million years ago that  brought about a global freeze and  the  demise 
of  the   dinosaurs. According  to  planetary  geologist  Adriana  C. Ocampo  and 
atmospheric  scientist  Kevin  H.  Baines,  both   of  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion 
Laboratory's Earth  and  Space  Sciences  Division,  Pasadena,  California,  the  
impact of  this asteroid hit  a geologically unique, sulfur-rich region of  the  Yucatan 
Peninsula in Mexico. They estimated that   the   impact kicked  up  billions of  tons 
of  sulfur and other  materials and was between  10,000 to  50,000 times more pow- 
erful  than   the   comet  Shoemaker-Levy 9  impact  o n  Jupiter  the  preceding July. 
Persistent clouds generated by this  impact caused temperatures to plunge global- 
ly  to  near freezing. These environmental changes lasted for a decade, causing half 
of  the  species on  Earth to  become extinct.  (NASA  Release 94-219) 

December: A  feature article, accompanied by  extensive photographs, discussed 
t h e  capabilities  of  the   radar  systems carried  by  Space Shu t t le  Endeavour  and  
t h e   new  perspective  they  provided  of  the   Earth's  environment .   (Scientific 
American, Dec 9 4 )  

- - 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTlCS CHRONOLOGY  1 995 

January 

January  2:  Data  from  NASA's  Upper  Atmospheric  Research  Satellite  indicate 
t h a t   chlorofluorocarbons  (CFCs)   are  responsible  for  t h e   destruction  of  Earth's 
protective  stratospheric ozone layer. By  mid-1995, t h e  amount  of  methyl chloro-  
form  in   t h e   atmosphere  was  found  to   have   begun  t o   decrease,  although   the  
An ta rc t ic   hole  in  the   ozone  grew  significantly.  (NA SA   Release  95-1 15; NY 
Times, Ju l   16/95,  Aug   3/95,  O c t   12/95 & Nov   29/95;  W  Post,  Ju l   14/95,  Sep  
13/95; W Times, O c t  12/95; UP I ,  S e p  20195; AtlWk, J a n  2/95; Science, O c t  20195 ) 

T h e  United  States and  Russia began  taking practical steps toward merging their  
manned  space programs. NASA  expected t o  begin shuttle  flights t o  t h e  Mir Space 
S ta t ion  as a step in  a joint  venture  t o  build a space station. T h e  agreement  called 
for seven  flights through  1997 in which  U.S.  space shuttles would dock with Mir 
and  allow t h e  exchange of  crews. O n e  shuttle  mission  in  1995 u~ould  supply solar 
arrays tha t  would combine U.S. advanced photovoltaic  technology  with Russia's 
expertise in  space structures and  mechanisms  in order t o  boost Mir's electrical out-  
put by  six kilowatts.  (AuWk, J a n  2/95; San Dego Union-Tribune, J a n  4/95)  

Scientists   a t   t h e  University   of  Ch icago   advanced   a  new  theory   explaining  
t h e  "mass extinctions"   of  living species t h a t  have  occurred  o n  Ea r th ,  t h e  most 
famous being  t h a t   of  t h e  dinosaurs  65  million  years  ago.  T h e y   theorized  t h a t  
supernovas  burned  off  t h e   Earth's  ozone  layer   and   caused  t h e   Sun's  rays  t o  
flood  t h e   surface  with   deadly  radiation .   T h e   theory   horrows  from  work  d o n e  
o n   t h e   effect  of  ozone  dep le t ion   in   An ta rc t ica .   Scientists   estimate   t h a t   five 
mass  ex t inc t ion s   have   occurred  o n  Ea r th ,   o n e   every  120 million   years.  (A P ,  
J a n  2/91; C Trib, J a n 3 / 9 5 )  

N A S A   selected   t h e   IBM  T h i n k p a d   7 5 5C  as  t h e  Space  Shuttle's  new  s t a n -  
dard   portable   computer .   It  will  supplement   t h e  Shu t t le ' s  compu t ing  capahili-  
ty  a n d   manage   in-orbit   activities .   Sixty   computers   were  purchased   a t  
$400,000.  Pend ing  comp le t ion  o n  testing ,  they will he  used  o n  all S h u t t l e  mis- 
sions s ta r t ing  with  Mission  63  n e x t  Ma rch .   (AvWk, J a n  3 /95 )  

N A S A   reported   t h a t   th ree   years  of  da ta   collection   from  its  Uppe r  
A tmo sphe re  Research  Sa te l l i te   ( U A R S )  confirmed  t h a t   chlorofluorocarbons 
(C FC s )  cause ozone  loss. T h e  satellite  de tec ted  CFC s  and   hydrogen   fluoride ,  
a  product   of  t h e  chemical   breakdown  of  CFCs,  in  t h e   stratosphere .   (AelWk, 
J a n  2/95; The  Grand  Rapids Press, J a n  2/95)  

A  Gene ra l   Accoun t ing   Office  report   called  NASA's  plans  to  expand   and  
fund   t h e  scientific  research  needed   t o  support  a manned   space  facility unreal-  
istic. T h e  report   indicated   t h a t  NASA's  projected  $18 billion   cost  for  Space  
S t a t i o n  Freedom was  far  t o o   low.  T h e  chief   congressional  critic   of  t h e   Space  

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY  1995 

Station ,   Senator  William  Cohen ,   estimated  a  $71  billion  price  tag.  (AuWk, 
J a n  2/95; The G r a n d  Rapids  Press, J a n  2/95) 

Janua ry   6:  During an  occultation  of  the  comet Ch i ron  and a star, an  airborne 
NASA   observatory  was  used  to   help  determine  the   size  of  this  comet   tha t  
orbits  like a planet  in  a nearly circular orbit  in our solar system. According  to 
an   international   team  of  scientists,  Ch i ron   is  between  103 and   193 miles  in 
diameter  and   20  times  the   size  of  Halley's  comet.  T h e   Kuiper  Airborne 
Observatory  flew  near  Recife,  Brazil,  on   this  project.  Ch i ron   orbits  the   Sun  
once   in  50 years.  (NY  Times,  J a n  10195; UPI , J a n  6/95)  

*NASA's Space Station  came  under  attack  a t  a press conference by  Senator  
Dale Bumpers (D -A r k )  and several o the r  Democratic  senators. Bumpers intro- 
duced  legislation  in  the   Senate   that   would  k i l l   the   Space  S ta t ion   program 
a1o11.g with  six  defense projects.  (I-Itsvl Tm s ,  J a n  6/95) 

*Several  Senate   Democrats  proposed  a  $33   billion  package  to   balance  the  
budget  by  the   year  2002  by  cutting  defense and  space programs.  T h e  package 
included  elimination  of  NASA's Space  S ta t ion   for  a  savings  of  $10  billion 
over  five  years.  (Fo r t   Worth  Star-Telegram,  J a n  6/95; H  Ch ron ,   J a n  6/95,  J a n  
8/92; Greensboro  News   t??  Record, J a n  6/95; New s  a n d  Record,  J a n  6/95) 

Data collected from a NASA  airborne observatory fitted with a 36-inch tele- 
scope helped  astronomers estimate the  size of  the   largest known comet, Chiron .  
This  cotnet  is  between  100  and  187  miles  in  diameter,  20  times  the   size  of 
Haley's comet. ( A P ,  J a n  8/95) 

At   a  hearing  of  the   House  of  Representatives  Science Committee ,  NASA  
Administrator  Daniel  S. Goldin   testified  tha t   NASA   had  experienced  a  30 
percent  budget  cut  in  the   last  two years but  said he  was  prepared  to  oversee a 
"cleanup"  of NASA  management. H e  asked Congress not   to ask  for  any more 
cost-saving  redesigns  of  the   space station .  Goldin   said  the  Agency  was  com- 
mitted  to   change  by   functioning  more  efficiently  with  less  money  and  by  
forming more  partnerships  with  business  to  enhance   the   transfer of  the   latest 
technical  information  to   industry.  (UP I ,  J a n  6/95;  G a n n e t  New s   Service, J a n  
6/95; Federal New s   Service,  J a n  6/95; H  C h r o n ,  J a n  7/95; NY  Times,  J a n  7/95; 
W Pos t ,  J a n  7/95; A P n ,  J a n  6/95)  

After  the   successful  launch  of  a  satellite  called  "Wind," NASA   gave  the  
manufacturer,  Martin  Marietta  Astro  Space, the   go-ahead  to  build  a  second 
satellite called"  Polar." T h e  purpose of  both   satellites  is  to measure the  forces 
of  solar wind. (Star-Ledger,  J a n  6 /95 )  

A n  air-safety computer system developed  by  NASA  at  its Langley Research 
Cen te r   in  Hampton ,  Virginia,  in  1985 had  yet  to  be  approved  by  the  Federal 

JANUARY   1995 

CHRONOLOGY  1995 

Aviation Administration.  T h e  Takeoff Performance  Monitor  was designed  to 
help  pilots handle   takeoff mishaps more  quickly and  safely, but  airlines, man-  
ufacturers, and  Federal Aviation Administration  officials said the  cost and   lia- 
bility burdens outweighed  the  henefits. Troublesome takeoffs occur less  t h a n   1 
percent of the  time hut  account for  10 percent of all serious airplane accidents, 
according  to  the  National  Transportation Safety Board.  (CSM ,  J a n  6/95)  

NASA's Johnson Space Center denied Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Co. 
a large p o f i t  fee because of poor performance under a tougher procurement com- 
pliance ~ o l i c y  implemented by the  space agency  in  1994. (H  Chrun, Jan  7/95) 

January  8: A  press  report  said  tha t   President  C l in ton   was  expected  to   meet 
with  about  20  former admirals  and   generals  to  seek  their  advice  on   national  
security  issues.  Among   those  who  were  expected  to   attend   was  Vice  Adm .  
Richard  H .  Truly, former head  of NASA .   (A P  J a n  8/95)  

NASA   expected  to  begin wind  tunne l  tests  of  its  newest  jet  fighter, t h e  X -  
32 ,  in  the  summer of  1995. A  lightweight ,  compact aircraft capable of  maneu- 
vering  like  a helicopter, the  plane  will  employ  the   latest  in  stealth  technolo-  
gy  and wlll  not   need  runway  space for  landings  and   takeoffs. Tests were  to  he 
conducted  at  NASA's  Ames  Research  Cen te r   in  Moffett  Field,  California. 
(NA SA  Release 95-4; San Jose  Mercury News, J a n  8 /95 )  

January  9:  A  large  storm  o n   Saturn   was  imaged  by  the   Hubble  Space  
Telescope on   December  1 ,   1994. T h e   storm, which  was  o n   Saturn's equator 
and   the  size of  Earth, was  white  and   in  the  shape of  an  arrowhead.  It was  only 
the   third  storm  seen on  Saturn  in  t h e  past  two centuries.  (AwWk, J a n  9 /95 )  

T h e   1 ,700   Ih.,  $ 1 . 7   m~ l l i o n  robot  Dan te   11,  built  by  Carnegie  Mellon 
University scientists,  took gas samples and  video pictures of  the  Spurr volcano 
in Alaska. T h e  research  is  almed  a t  proving  tha t  cheap  robots  can  he  used  o n  
dangerous missions o n  Mars.  (Bus Wk, J a n  9/95)  

NA SA   scientists  expressed  conce rn   abou t   space  trash  from  spen t   sa te l -  
lites and  burned  ou t  rocket  boosters  t h a t  pose a hazard  t o  func t ion ing  satel-  
lites and  space shuttles .  Instead  of  a t temp t ing  to collect  such debris, NA SA  
has  been   concen t ra t ing   o n  preventing   its  further   buildup  by programming 
satellites  and  boosters  to  spiral  i n t o  t h e  atmosphere   and   burn   up  harmless- 
ly.  In   the   future ,  however,  NASA   may  take   a  closer  look  a t   t h e   possibility 
of  retrieving  space debris. A t   tha t   p o i n t ,  t h e   research  of  Kumar Ramoha l l i ,  
formerly  of  NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory,  who   was  a t temp t ing   t o  
develop  a debris  retrieving  satellite ,  should  be  useful.  (CSM ,  J a n  9 / 9 5 )  

Two new  images taken  by NASA's Huhble Space  Telescope provided details 
of  the   results  of  two  violent  cosmic  events.  O n e   image  shows  a  single  star, 

A S TRONAU T IC S   A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

JANUARY  1995 

actually a planetary  nebula   in t h e  constellation   Draco, which  blew off  its ou te r  
shell   1 ,000  years  ago  a n d   is  i n  t h e   last  stages of  its  life. T h e  o the r   shows  t h e  
result  of  a  rare  and   spectacular  head -on  collision  between   two  galaxies  locat-  
ed  500  million  light-years  away  in   Sculptor .   ( N A S A  Release  N95 -1 ;   B  Sun ,  
J a n  12/95)  

A  space  endu rance   record  was  set  by  Russian Co smonau t  Valeri  Polyakov, 
who  comp le ted  his  3 6 7 t h  day  aboard  t h e  Russian Space  S t a t i o n  Mir.  Polykov 
was  launched   i n t o  orbit  January  8, 1994 ,  and  was  expected   t o  remain   o n  Mir  
until  Ma rch  2 2 .   (Phillips Business Information, J a n  9/95; USA Today, J a n  10195; 
AP ,  J a n  10195) 

A  team  of  na t iona l  geologists working with  N A S A  scientists  dropped  a 700-  
pound. weight  o n  a  jumbled  mound   of  rock   i n  Canyon land s  N a t i o n a l  Park  i n  
U t a h   in  a n  a t t em p t  t o  de te rm ine  whe the r  Upheava l   Dome  is  a  badly  eroded  
salt  dome   or   t h e   remnan t s   of  a  five-mile-diameter   meteorite   impact   crater .  
Earlier  studies  of  sha t te red   rocks  a n d   quartz  crystals  h a d   already  conv inced  
many  researchers  t h a t   a n  asteroid  or   come t  fragment  slammed  i n t o  southeast  
U t a h   sometime  between   5  and   100  million  years  ago.  Impact   craters  such   as 
Upheava l   Dome  are   c omm o n   i n   t h e   solar  system,  s o   t h e   geologists  were 
a t temp t ing   t o  learn  how   such  craters  form.  (Salt Lake C i q  Tribune, J a n  10195) 

January  10: Supercomputers  helped   scientists  from  t h e  University  of  Arizona  
and   t h e   Los  Alamos   Na t iona l   Laboratory  t o   understand   t h e   h idden   mecha-  
nism  by  wh ich  massive  stars explode.  Compu te r  simulations  show   t h a t  stellar  
explosions  (supernovas)   e rup t   unevenly   from   t h e  collapsed  stellar  core .   T h e  
trigger appears t o  be  t h e  energy of  neutrinos ,  particles  t h a t  have  near  zero mass 
a n d  zero  electrical  charge .   ( W  Post, J a n  10195, LA  Times, J a n  10195) 

A  senior  scientist  a t  t h e  Na t iona l  Museum  of  Na tu ra l  History, K e n n e t h  M .  
Towe,  refuted  a  recen t   satellite-based  N A S A   claim   t h a t   t h e   presence   of 
hydrogen  fluoride  In  t h e  atmosphere   confirms  t h a t  ozone dep le t ion   is  largely 
caused  by  chlorofluorocarbons.  Towe  pointed   o u t   t h a t ,   contrary   t o  NASA's 
c o n t e n t i o n ,   hydrogen  fluoride  does  have   a  na tu ra l   source-it 
is  em i t ted   by 
volcanoes-and 
it   plays  a  large  role  in   t h e  de s t ruc t ion  of  ozone  i n  t h e   lower 
stratosphere .  Towe's position   received  corroboration   from  a n o t h e r   authority ,  
Michael   S .   Coffman ,   president  of  Environmental   Perspectives,  Inc.,  in  
Bangor, Ma ine .   (W  Times, J a n  10195; WS],  J a n  12/95; Bangor Daily  News, J a n  
1 1 / 9 5 ) )  

Remo te   con t ro l   technology   a n d   t h e   In te rne t   a re   expected   t o   play  major 
parts  in  t h e   ope ra t ion  of  t h e  S o u t h  Pole  Infrared  Explorer  telescope  a n d   t h e  
A n t a r c t i c   Subm i l l ime te r   Telescope  a n d   R em o t e   Observatory ,   b o t h   in  
An ta rc t ica .  The se   instruments   were  built  a n d  are  operated   by  t h e  C e n t e r  for 
Astrophysical  Research  in   An ta rc t ica ,   a  consortium   of  universities  a n d  

JANUARY 1995 

CHRONOLOGY  1995 

research  laboratories  supported  mostly  by  the   National  Science  Foundation. 
Astronomers will  be  able  to  control   these  instruments  from  any  place  in  the  
world  with  an  Internet   or  modem  connection .   ( N Y  Times, J a n  10195) 

Boris Ostroumov,  deputy  general  director  of  the  Russian space agency, said 
tha t  t h e  Baikonur Cosmodrome  is  a scientific  and  technical  complex  and  that  
it  will n o t  become  a Russian miliary base. T h e  facilities will be  used  for scien- 
tific  and   national   economic  needs  and   will  be  administered  by  the   Russian 
space agency, Ostroumov said. (FBIS-SOU, J a n  10195) 

T h e  claim  of  a new  discovery by three  NASA   astronomers  was  refuted  hy 
a galaxy expert who was  invited to  their  press conference. A t  a meeting of  the  
American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona,  the  astronomers claimed 
to   have  discovered  six  dwarf  spiral  galaxies,  which  they  also  claimed 
astronomers  long  thought  existed  but  had  never  found. T h e  Canadian   galaxy 
expert  claimed  tha t   dwarf  spirals had  been  discovered  b y   astronomers  in  the  
1950s. (AP ,  J a n  1 1/95; Reuter, J a n  10195) 

Industry analysis by  the  Virginia firm Teal Group  showed tha t   almost  1 ,000  
satellites,  mostly  for  communications,  will  be  launched  during  the   next   10 
years.  Most  of  these  satellites  will  belong  to   mobile  communications  multi- 
satellite  systems  such  as  Motorola's  Iridium  and   Space   Systerns/Loral's 
Globalstar. T h e  most common destination  for these satellites will be Earth  low 
orbit.  (Defense Daily, J a n  10/95) 

January  1 1 :  After  several  attempts   in  1994, Russian  cosmonauts successfully 
tested  t h e  Mir Space Station's automatic  docking equipment ,  clearing the  way 
for the  seven to  ten  scheduled dockings with American space shuttles through 
1997. (AP ,  J a n  11/95; H Chron, J a n  12/95; Dayton Daily  News ,  J a n   1 2 / 9 5 ;  C 
Trib, J a n  12/95) 

Intelsat,  the   U.S.  satellite  operator,  signed  a  record  $ 2   billion  insurance 
contract  for  10  satellite launches with  t h e   insurance  firm  International  Space 
Brokers,  Inc.  T h e   contract   covered  launches  o n   the   Ariane   4  rocket  of  the  
European  Arianespace  Consortium  and  o n   China's  Long  March  rocket. 
(Reuters, Jan   1 1/95)  

Astronomers detected  a gigantic mass, equivalent  to 4 0  million  Suns ,   in  a 
distant  galaxy  tha t   they  believe  to  be  a black hole .  T h e  discovery, announced  
a t   a meeting of  the  American  Astronomical  Society  in Tucson, Arizona,  was 
made  by  a team of American  and Japanese scientists using a computer-linked 
system  of  10   radio  telescope  dishes  stretching   from  t h e   Virgin  Islands  ro 
Hawaii known  as  t h e  Very Long Baseline Array. Since  black  holes,  by  defini- 
tion ,  emit  no  visible light o r  o the r  radiation,  astronomers  infer their  presence 
by  their  strong  gravitational  pull  o n   surrounding  stars.  T h e   discovery  was 

.4STRDNAllTIC'S .AN[)  .;IERONAI!TICS 

JANUARY 1995 

made  hy  observing  t h e   ro ta t ton   of  a  disk  of  gas  a n d  dust  surrounding a  galac- 
tic  nucleus.  (NY T m e s ,  J a n  12/95;  W Times, J a n  12/95;  W Post, J a n  12/95 ,  AP ,  
J , ln   12/95; H Ch ron ,  J a n  12/95;  CSM ,  J a n   13 /95 )  

Two astronomers  a t   t h e  Ame r ican   Astronomical   Society's annua l   meeting  
in Ttlcson, Arizona ,  presented  a n  extraordinary  photograph   of  a nearby star   in 
red -ho t   d e a t h   throes   similar  t o   t h e   cataclysm  t h a t   astronomers   theorize  will 
clestroy  t h e   solar  system  in   several  billion   years.  T h e   pho to ,   taken   w i th  
NASA's  Hubble   Space   Telescope,  showed  never-before-seen  de ta i l   i n   t h e  
glowing  red  gas  cloud  ejected   by  t h e   dying  star.  T h e  "Cat's  Eye  Nebula ,"   or  
NGC  6543 ,   is  ahout  3 ,000  light-years from  Earth   in   t h e  constellation   Draco ,  
t h e  dragon .   ( R  Sun ,  J a n   12/95)  

Astronomers   using  t h e   Hubble   Space   Telescope  t o  study  quasars  began  t o  
reassess  the i r   theories   after  studying   a  series  of  quasars  during   t h e   past  few 
u n c n t h ~ .  T h e   astronomers  expected   t h e   quasars,  though t   t o   be  super-massive 
"hl;ick  holes,"  t o   he  surrounded  by  galaxies  t h a t   "feed"  t h e   quasar.  Instead ,  
none  of  t h e  first eight  quasars they  studied was surrounded  by  a galaxy, raising 
questions  ahout  of how black  holes form and  sustain  themselves.  "I  really don't  
understand   this,"  said  project  astronomer   J o h n   Bahcall  in   a  report   t o   t h e  
A111eric:ln Astmnclmical Society  in  Tucson, Arizona.  (LA  Tme s ,  J a n  13/95;  W 
I'ost,  J a n   13/95)  

Atmospheric  scientists  presented  some  40  papers or  abstracts  a t  t h e  fall meet- 
~ n g  ()i the   A~ n e r i c a n  Geophysical  Un ion   in  T t~c son ,  Arizona,  o n   the   topic  of 
newly-Jiscovered  d i s c h a r p   of  lightning  in  Earth's  upper  atmosphere.  T h e  
upper-atmospheric  lightning   materializes  above  thunderheads   and   shoots  
~rpward ,  not   downward,  in  holts  and  flickers tha t   soar as  high  as 60 miles above 
the   slidace  of  t h e   Earth.  Satellites have   detected  gamma  ray  bursts  emanating  
from  thunderheacis,  whereas  red  flashes  have  been  linked  t o   powerful  burst  of 
r :~d io  ~ a v e s .  NASA   plannecl  to   fly  a  jet  loaded  with  cameras  and  instruments 
across the  thunderstorm helt of  Sou th  America  in February t o  begin serious study 
o f   upper  atmospheric lightning.  (NY Xm s ,  J a n  17/95; H Chron, J a n  23/95) 

N A S A   inv i ted   bids  from  t h e   Nation's   aerospace  compan ie s   t o   deve lop  
two  reusable  rocket   designs  unde r  a  nove l   strategy  t h a t  called   for  t h e   indu s -  
try  t o  pay  much   of  t h e  cost .   T h e  goal  was  t o  e n h a n c e   t h e  compe t i t ive   foo t -  
ing  of  U .S .   compan ie s   In  t h e   lucrative   global   commercial   l a u n c h   ma rke t  
\vhile  lowering   t h e   am o u n t   spen t   annua l ly   by   t h e   federal   gove rnmen t   o n  
space  t ran spo r ta t ion .  
NA SA   envisioned   t h a t   t h e  larger  of  t h e   two  vehicles  would  be  capable  of 
lofting  25 ,000   pounds   of  cargo  or   a  h um a n   crew  t o   t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space  
S t a t i o n  as  a  replacement   for t h e  Space  Shu t t le .  A  gradual replacement   of  t h e  
5huttle   might  hegin   in   2005. T h e  smaller  vehicle   would  be  designed  for  t h e  

JANUARY 1995 

CHRONOLOGY  1995 

small  volume ,   1 ,000-to-2 ,000-pound   satellites  envisioned   in   t h e   nea r   future  
with   new  advances   in   electronics .   T h e  deve lopmen t   of  a  new   space  trans-  
po r ta t ion   system  is  t h e   first  unde r taken   by  N A S A   s ince   it   in i t ia ted   t h e  
S h u t t l e  program  i n  t h e  mid-1970s.  ( N A S A  Release 95 -1 ;  H C h r o n , ] a n   14/95)  

January  1 2 :   N A S A   requested  proposals  for  two  vehicles,  X-33  and   X-34 ,   t o  
prove  t h e   concep t   of  single-stage  t o   orbit .   T h e  X-33  would  he  a  technology  
demonstrator   vehicle   a n d  t h e  X-34 would  he  a  reusable, or  partially-reusable ,  
booster for placing  small payloads i n t o  a  low Earth  orbit .  Significant  cost-shar-  
ing by  industry  was anticipated .   ( N A S A  Releases 95-1 ,  23, 38 & 4 0 )  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S. G o l d i n  applauded  Japan's  con t r ibu t ion   as  ;I 
pa r tne r   in   t h e   Space   S t a t i o n   program  when   h e   spoke  t o   h igh   level  science  
officials  i n   Tokyo.  G o l d i n   was  o n   his  first  trip   t o   J a p a n  as  head  of  NA SA .  
(Phillips Business  I n f m t i o n ,  J a n .  16 /95 )  

N A S A  astronomers  said  t h a t   a stellar  object   t h a t  erupted   last  summer with  
powerful  bursts  of  x-rays  a n d  jets  of  h o t   gas  a t   near   t h e  speed  of  light  may  he 
a  black  ho le  o r  possibly a  neu t ron   s ta r   in  t h e  ac t  of  gohbling  up  a compan ion  
star. T h e  object ,   a  relatively  close  10 ,000  light-years  from  Ea r th ,  was  cliscov- 
ered   in  Ju ly  when   it  exploded  with   flashes of  t h e  most  pc~werful natural   x - r q r s  
i n  t h e  heavens .  T h e  radiation  was de tec ted  by NASA's C om p t o n  G amm a  Ray 
Observatory.  (AP ,  J a n  12/95)  

January  13: A  con t rac t   for  t h e   design  and   developtnent   of  t h e   1ntern;ational 
Space  S t a t i o n  was signed  today by N A S A   and   t h e  Boeing Defense  and  Space  
G r o u p ,  Missiles and  Space  Division. T h i s  4 0 0 - t o n  Space  S t a t i o n  will he  a c a t -  
alyst  for  global  coope ra t ion ,   bringing   together   resources  from  t h e   U n i t e d  
S ta te s ,   Russia,  J a p a n ,   member   na t ion s   of  t h e   European   Space   Agency, 
C a n a d a ,   and   Italy.  T h e   new  con t rac t   was  for  $5 .63   billion.  Assembly  will 
begin  in  November   1997 w i th  t h e  l a u n c h  of  t h e  US . - p u r c h a s e d  Russian FGR 
"space  tugn-  a power  a n d  propulsion  module .  I t  will be followed in  Llecemher 
1997  w i th  N o d e   1, t h a t   will  c o n n e c t   laboratory  and   crew  modules  and   allow 
t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   t o   dock .   ( N A S A  Releases  95-2   &  13;  Space  News ,   May  
1/95; AwVlrk, A p r   10 /95 )  

T h e  1995  A s t ronau t   Class, which   begins  in  Ma rch ,  will  include   two  in te r -  
na t iona l   candidates .   T h e y   are   Japanese   astronaut   Takao  Doi ,   Ph .D . ,   and  
C a n a d i a n   a s t ronau t  David  S. Williams,  h1. D.  T h e i r   selection   as mission  spe- 
cialists brings  t h e  class size  t o  2 1.  ( N A S A  Release  9 5 - 3 )  

Large-scale   c o n c e p t u a l   mode l s   of 
t h e   X -32   C o m m o n   A f fo rdab le  
Lightweight  Fighter  are  scheduled  t o  begin  a t  t h e  Ames  Research  C e n t e r  this  
summer   a n d   c o n t i n u e   th rough   t h e   summer  of  1996 .  T h e   idea  for  t h e   X-32 ,  
wh ich  could  be  introduced   i n t o  service  around   2010 ,   is  t o  have   two  versions. 

O n e  would  be  a  conven t iona l   take-off  a n d   landing   aircraft.  T h e   second   ver- 
> ion  \VOLIIJ he much   as  t h e  first, except  configured  for short   take-offs  and  ver- 
tical  landings. They  w ~ u l d  share  ;I  common  fuselage and   eng ine ,  while  a  pow- 
e re~ l - l i f t  p i x ) p~~ l s i o n  h\Stt'ln  \vould  be  used  for  vertical  landings.  ( N A S A  
Release  95 -4 )  

T h e   Huhhle  Space  Telescope's images  of  14 bright  quasars  produce  a   giant  
Icitp  backward  In  the   scientific understanding  of  thetn.  Cu r ren t   theory  caused 
astronomers t o  expect each  quasar t o  be  surrounded by  its host galaxy. However, 
Inobt  were  alone   in  space.  Scientists  will  have   t o   rethink   theories  about  what  
n1,lkt.s cluasilrs shine.  ( W  Post, J a n   13/95; Science, J a n  27/95  C; Nov   24/95) 

NA SA   a n d   ISoeing  Ilefense  and   Space  G roup   of  H o ~ ~ s t o n ,  Texas, signed  a  
$5 .63   b i l l i ~m  contr;lct   for  t h e   design  and   d e v e l o p ~ n e n t  o f   t h e   In te rna t iona l  
5ruc.e  S ta t ion .   In  particular,  Roeing  accepted   re spon s ih i l~ ty  for  t h e   design, 
delivery  of  t h e   U.S. on -o rh i t   segments  o f   t h e   s ta t ion   in  a  
~ l i a ~ i ~ ~ t a c t u r e ,  
, ~ n ~ l  
con t rac t   t h a t   ex tended   th rough   2003.  Assembly  of  t h e   Space  St.ation  is  pro- 
jectecl  t o   begin  in  Noventher   1997;  comp le t ion   is  foreseen  in  J u n e   2002. 
( N A S A  Release  95 -2 ;  H Chron ,  J a n   14/95;  Phillips  Business  Information, J a n  
17/95;  Ad%",  ] a n   23/95)  

Anatoly   Kiselyr>v, C3eneral  Director   of  t h e   Khrunichev   S t a t e   Space  
1ie.se;lrcIi ;rnd  Industri:~l  C e n t e r ,   said  t h a t   NASA's  terms   for  financing   t h e  
work  t o  develop  anil  huild  t h e  cargo ~ n o c l i ~ l e  
for t h e  A lpha  S t a t i o n  were  unre-  
alistic  and   t h , ~ t  Russian  air  a n d   space firms  could  no t   agree  t o  t h em .  Kiselyov 
5:1i,l  t h e   re;tl  cc~sts  of  huilding  t h e  functional   cargo module  would  be  40   t o   50 
percent   h ~ g h e r  t h a n   American   estimates ,  or   a t   least  $220 million .  T h e  cargo 
module   is  to  he   t h e   first componen t   of  a  future  space s ta t ion  and   is  scheduled  
t ; ~ r  I;u1nc11 in  Novetnher   1997.  It  will  serve  as  t h e   hasis  o n  which   t o   build  a 
iu tc~ re  sp;icc co tnp l rx .   (FBIS-Soc, J a n   13/95)  

lanun r s   16: A  Jz~pane se -Ge rman  a t t em p t  t o  put  a  space capsule  i n t o  orhit   for 
five  clays  o t  e spe r imen t s   failed,  sending   it  tumbling   th rough   t h e   atmosphere  
tvherc  i t   broke  up  ;inJ   hrlrned  over   t h e   Pacific  after   two  or   th ree   orbits.  T h e  
$60  n ~ i l l i o n  "Express"  satellite   was  supposed  t o   land   in  Australla's  outback  
S;~rurclay for  retrieval .   ( H  Chron ,  J a n  17/95;  Retrters, J a n   16/95)  

jctnuilry  18:  NASA   announced   tha t   it  planned   a   February  2  liftoff  for  the  
S h u t t l e   lliscovery, whose  astronauts  were  t o  a t t em p t  t h e  first  rendezvous  of  a  
q1;1se  shu t t le   with   t h e   Russian  Space   S t a t i o n   Mir.  T h e   planned   eight-day  
flight   \\,as  considered  a  rehe ;~ r sa l  for  a  series  of  Shu t t le -M i r  docking  missions 
set  to   begin  in  late   M a y   or   early  J u n e .  T h e  STS - 6 3  Mission  was  t o   be  com -  
rnancieci  h y   James  D. We the rbee ,   with   Eileen  M .   Co l l in s   as  pilot.  ( N A S A  
Re le ;~ae ,  95.5;  H   Chron ,  J a n   19/95;  AFI',  J a n  19/95;  APn ,  J a n   18//95;  N A S A  
No te   t o  Editors, N 9 5 - 4 )  

JANUARY   1995 

(:t 

tKON ( l l .O ( ;Y   1995 

January  19: A n  experimental   X-3 1  aircraft  crashed  a t  Edwards A i r  Force Rase 
in   California .   Its  G e rm a n   military  pilot  ejected   safely. T h e  craft ,   o n e   of  two 
X - 3  1's operated  a t  N A S A  Dryden  Flight Research  Cen te r ,  was re tu rn ing  from 
a   one -hou r   test  flight   when   it  crashed .   First  floum  in   1990 ,  t h e   a i r c n~ f t  had  
proven   its  ability   t o   ou tmaneuve r   o t h e r   fighters,  particularly   a t   low  speeds. 
T h e   cause  of  t h e   crash  was  under   investigation .   (Antelo/)e Valley  Press,  J a n  
20195; H Chron ,  J a n  20/95; Daily  News, J a n  20195; APn ,  J a n   i 9/95;   LJPn, J a n  
19/95;  USA  Todny, J a n  20195; W  Post, J a n  20195; C Trib, J a n  2 0 / 9 i ;  LA  Daily 
Neua ,  J a n  20195; LA  Times, J a n  20195; Bakersfield (:alifornian,  J a n  2 0 / 9 i ; )  

A   Russian  space en thu s ia s t ,  Sergei  Le sko~ ;  lainented   t h e  declining   s ta te  ( i f  
t h e  Russian space program  in  t h e  Janua ry  19  issue of  "lzvestia."  Production   of 
rockets  and  o t h e r  hardware has  declined   in  t h e  last few years, Leskov said, and  
even   t h e   hardware   in   orbit   was  o n   its  last  legs. T h e  Mir  Space   S t a t i o n ,  too ,  
had   grown  old  and   increasingly  gave  mission  controllers   nasty  surprises.  He 
noted   t h a t  during   t h e  past  five years, funding  o f   t h e  s p ;~ c e  sector  had  been   cu t  
five-to-ten-fold  in ce r ta in  areas. T h e  con t rac t  with  t h e  U n i t e d  S ta te s  for c o n -  
s t ruc t ion   of  t h e   A l p h a   space  s ta t ion   had   been   t h e   salvation   of  t h e   Russian 
space sector, hut  only  a  small  range  of  enterprises  tvere  involvecl  in  it ,  and   t h e  
project  did  n o t   prolnote  deve lopmen t  of  new  technologies .  W i t h o u t   a n   infu-  
sion   of  more  money, Leskov  wrote ,   t h e  Russiiln  space  sector  could  find  itself 
as much   a   part  of  history  as  t h e  Pyramid  of  Cheop s .   (RDC St~mmary  of  LY4)rld 
Broadcasts, J a n  2 3 /95 ) .  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S .  G o l d i n  said N A S A   in tended   t o  c u t  a t   least 
2 ,500  civil servants  from its payroll hefore t h e  end  of  t h e  century ,  scaling hack 
its work  force  t o  levels no t   seen  since  t h e  early  1960s. Supervisory positions  at 
N A S A   Headquarters  and   its  Field C e n t e r s  were  t o  he  targeted  as  t h e  Agency  
tried  t o   stay  in  s tep  with   C l i n t o n  administration   plans  to  s h r ~ n k  t h e  g o \ - e r n -  
m e n t .   ( H  Chron ,  J a n  20195; APn ,  J a n  20195; W Times, J a n  24/95;  AzrLVk,  J a n  
23/95; Fla  Today, J a n  22/95)  

January  23: N A S A   and  Russian  space  station  officials were  scheduled  t o  hegin 
a  series o f  technical  exchange  meetings  a t  t h e  John son  Space C e n t e r  i n t e n~ l e d  
t o   give  clear  direction   t o   joint  cooperation   in  constructing   the   in te rna t ion ;~ l  
space  station .   Twenty-five  teams  of  Russian  technicians   and   engineers  were 
expected  t o  arrive  t o  discuss  a  number   of  issues,  including docking  procedc~res, 
power supply distribution, structural mechanics ,  deprcssuri:;~tion, irnil  place  and  
use  of  an tennae .  Crew size was also  t o  be  discussed. T h e  meetings  were expecr- 
ed  t o   last  until   Fehruary  10. NA SA   officials hoped  tc,  agree  o n   ;IS  much   coin-  
mon  groc~nd  as  possihle so  tha t  Ru s s i ;~  could  he  made  a n  official partner   i n   thc  
station  project  before  t h e  year  is  ou t .   (Phillips Business  lnfonnn t ion ,  J a n   19/95)  

January  24: T h e  Neul Ibrk  Tiines reported  t h a t  this m o n t h  University  of  Illinois 
atmospheric  scientists began  aiming a  po\verfill laser heam  i n t o  t h e  a t~ n o s p h e r e  

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

lANUARY  1995 

above  t h e  S o u t h  Pole, expecting  t o  illuminate  many details  about   t h e  de le t ion  
of  t h e  global ozone  layer. T h e  scientists hoped   t h a t  t h e  laser will h e l p  t h em  cre-  
a te  continuous  three-dimensional  maps of  t h e  chemical  composition  and  phys- 
ical  details of  t h e  atmosphere   throughout   t h e  year.  ( N Y  Times, J a n  24/95)  

According  t o  a n  article  in  S ~ u c e  News,  the  fate of a proposed U.S. mission  t o  
Pluto  rested  o n  t h e  ability  of N A S A  engineers  t o  c u t  t h e  program's cost  below 
t h e   existing  $580  million  estimate ,   presumably  by  incorporating   high-risk 
technc~logies. U .S .  scientists said time  was running  o u t  for a Pluto mission. T h e  
planet  is  currently  moving  away  from  t h e   Sun .   Scientists   predicted  t h a t   by 
2 0 2 5 ,   Pluto's atmosphere   will  he  completely  frozen  for  centuries ,   precluding 
any   effort  t o  view  t h e   planet's  surface. T h e  existing  plan   called  for  launching  
two  probes  in  2001  t h a t  would  map  the  surfaces of  Pluto  a n d  its Moon  C h a r o n  
hefore  Aping  off  i n t o   deep   space.  Co s t -cu t t ing   measures  being   considered 
included  reducing  t h e   amoun t   of  fuel  for maneuvers  a t   Pluto  and   t h e   type  of 
power  source t h e  craft  will utilize  for t h e  mission.  (Space News, J a n  23-29/95)  

A n  article  in Space News  no ted  t h a t   in  t h e  year since  its dramatic  repair, t h e  
once-ridiculed  Hubble  Space  Telescope had  opened  a new window o n  t h e  uni-  
verse  a n ~ i  established  itself  as  o n e   of  t h e   most  impo r tan t   observatories  ever  
built.  Astronomers   were  hi11  of  praise  for  Hubb le ,  which   had   finally  lived  up 
to   its pre-launch   hype.  (Space News ,  J a n  23-29/95;  Fla  Today, J a n  22/95)  

Scientists   a t   NASA's  J e t   Propulsion  Laboratory  in  Pasadena ,   California ,  
announced   t h a t   t h e   El  Nifio  p h e n om e n o n   had   returned   and   was  ge t t ing  
stronger. T h e  TOPEX/Poseidon  satellite ,  a program  of  N A S A   and  t h e  French  
space  agency,  C e n t r e   Na t iona le   d'Etude  Spatiales ,   provided  radar  da ta   con -  
firming  t h e   huildup  of  a  large  warm  water  mass  called  a  Kelvin  wave  in  t h e  
tropical  Pacific  O c e a n .   T h i s   high   sea-surface  temperature   hea t s   t h e   atmos- 
phere   and   alters atmospheric  jet  streams, wh ich  affect worldwide weather  pa t -  
terns .   (NA SA  Release  95 -7 ;  W Post, J a n  25/95;  LA  Times, J a n  25/95; AP ,  J a n  
24/95;   H Post,  J a n   25 /95 ;   Krutcrs  Press  Agency,  J a n   24/95;   Bakersfield 
C'ulifun~icln, J a n  25/95)  

.4 Russian booster  rocket  placed  a U .S .  commercial communications  satellite 
into  orbit  tor  t h e  first time. T h e  FAISAT satellite was owned by  Final Analysis, 
inc . ,  o f  G reenbe l t ,  Maryland.  ( H  Chron ,  J a n  25/95;  [TAR-TASS, J a n  24/95) 

Russian  cosmonauts   aboard  t h e   Mir  Space   S t a t i o n   carried   out   geological 
studies  of  t h e   Earth's surface  and   its  mineral   and   petroleum   resources.  T h e  
th ree   cosmonauts   underwent   physical  exam ina t ion s   and   were  reported  
hea l thp .  (ITAR-TASS, J a n  24/95)  

January 2 5 :  A Ch ine se  Long Ma rch  2E rocket   carrying a telecommunications  
satellite   exploded   and   crashed  t o   Earth   momen t s   after  launch ,   a  setback   t o  

JANUARY 1995 

(:HRONOI.IX;Y  1995 

space  ambitions   of  C h i n a  a n d  major  global  broadcasters.  T h e  Apstar   2  satel-  
l i te ,   built by  Hughes  Aircraft ,  would  have  pro\.ideJ  television ,  te lephone ,  and  
digital  commun ica t ion s  t o  a  vast  swath  of  Asia ,  Eastern Europe, N o r t h  Africa ,  
a n d   Australia .   (W   Post,  J a n   26/95;  USA  Today ,   J a n   26/95;  Xinhua  News  
Agency ,  J a n  26/95; Reuters, J a n  26/95; A P ,  J a n  25/95; LJPI, J a n  25/95; WSJ, J a n  
27/95;  LA  T m e s ,  J a n  27/95; C S M ,  J a n  27/95)  

Scientists   a t  NASA's Dryden  Flight  Research  C e n t e r  a t   Edwards Air   Force 
Base  in  California  said  t h a t   they  had   developed  a  $14  million  wing panel   t h a t  
would he lp   t h em  devise cheaper   a n d  more  efficient ways  t o  operate   superson-  
ic  aircraft. T h e  experimental   panel   was  t o  be  t~ s e d  in   laminar   airflow  tests  t o  
search   for  ways  t o   reduce  aerodynamic   drag  and   fuel  consumption  under  
NASA's High  Speed  Research program. Tests were scheduled  un modified  ver- 
sions  of  t h e  U .S .   A i r   Force's F -16XL   and   Russia's TU-144  supersonic  trans-  
port .   (Antelope  Valley Press, Jan /95 ;  Bakersfield Califomiail, J a n  25/95;  Antelope 
V a l k y  Daily  N ew s ,  J a n  29/95)  

January  27: G loba l  warming  resumed  i n   1994 ,  after  a   two  year  lull  caused  hy 
t h e   m id -1991   e rup t ion   of  M o u n t   P ina tuho .   1%.  J,lmes  H a n s e n ,   heail  o f  
NASA's Godda rd   In s t i tu te  for  Space  Studies   in  New  York,  said  h e  was  more  
con f iden t   t h a n   ever   the re   is  a   real  warming   t h a t   is  a   long - te rm   t rend .   T h i s  
warming  was confirmed   in several  ways la te r  in  t h e  year.  I f  t h e  effects of  glob-  
al warming  raise  sea  levels  a n  average  of  a   foot   and   a   half  around   t h e  world, 
as  some  scientists  preihct ,   parts   ot  many   populated   deltas   would  become  
u nm h a b ~ t a b l e .  (NY Xm e s ,  J,ln 27/95 ,  Feh  12/95 ,  Sep   10/95 ,  Sep   18/95 & Sep  
26/95; W Post, A p r   2519 5 ,  O c t   25/95 ,  Fla  Today ,  O c t   1 /95 ;  Science, Feh  3/95 ,  
A p r  21/95,  J u n  9/95 ,  J u n  16/95 ,  S e p  22/95 ,  N o \ ,  3/95  ck l3cc  8 /95 )  

N A S A   announced   t h e   crew  members  for  t h e   S h u t t l e   Colunihia   STS.75 
mission  in   early  1996 .   T h i s   flight   was  t o   be  t h e   second  of  t h e   Tethered  
Sa te l l i te  System  ( T S S )  a n d  also marked  t h e   third   devoted   t o  orhital   investi-  
gations   using  t h e   U .S .   Microgravity  Payload.  Marine   Lt .   Col.  And rew   M. 
A l l e n  was  named   commande r   and   A i r   Force  Major  S c o t t  J .   Horowitz,  pilot .  
Jo in ing   t h em   were:  payload  commande r   Franklin   R.  C h a n g - L h z ;   Italian  
Space   Agency   T S S   payload  specialist  Umbe r to   Gu idon i ;   mission  spec ia lk t  
Jeffrey A .  Hoffman,  and   European  Space   Agency   mission  specialists  C laude  
Nicollier  from Switzerland and  Maurizio C h e l i  from Italy. (NA SA  I i e l e ; ~ s r  95-  
9; H Post, J a n  3 1 /95 )  

January  29:  N A S A   began  a   110-hour  coun tdown   t o   t h e   first  of  a n   ilnprece- 
den ted   series  of  U .S .   missions  t o   the   Russian  Space  S ta t ion   Mir.  Launch   of 
Discovery  a n d   its  crew  of  six-including 
t h e   first  woman  S h u t t l e  pilot  a n d   ;I 
famed cosmonaut-was 
set for February  2.  T h e  eight-day  flight was  to  include  
a spacewalk  by  two astronauts ,  deployment  and  retrieval of  ;In astronomy s ; ~ t e l -  
lite ,   a n J   science  experiments   in  a  comlnercial  space  laboratory.  T h e   prit~xiry  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

JANUARY  1995 

of  t h e  mission was t o  be t h e  rendezvous with  Mir.  (Reuters, J a n  29/95; APn, 
J a n  29/95; H Chron, J a n  31/95; H Post, J a n  31/95; H C h r o n ,  J a n  29/95)  

January   3 1 : A  te s tbed   for  a  solar-powered   regene ra t ive   fuel  ce l l   system  was 
ded ica ted   a t   Edwards  A i r   Force   Base.  T h e   Lewis  Re sea rch   Cen te r ' s   new  
g o ~ ~ e r n m e n t  a n d   industry   mu l t i -u se   regene ra t ive   fuel   ce l l   program   mirrors 
t h e   ad tn in i s t ra t ion ' s  policies   of  deve lop ing   techno log ie s   t h a t   b o t h   foster  
U . S .   c om p e t i t i v e n e s s   a n d   s u p p o r t   g o v e r n m e n t   p rog ram s .   T h e   J e t  
Propulsion   Laboratory   is  a n  ac t ive  membe r  of  t h e  Lewis  fuel  ce l l  team .   Fuel 
cell   app l ica t ion s  inc lude  e lec t r ic  cars ,  buses,  a n d  locomo t ive s  in  a d d i t i o n  t o  
less  expen s ive   mean s   of  power   d i s t r ibu t ion   for   commun i t ie s .   ( N A S A  
Release   9 5 - 8 )  

In  experiments   aimed  a t   answering o n e  of  t h e  most  intriguing  questions   in  
particle  physics  and   cosmology, scientists  a t  Los Alamos  Na t iona l   Laboratory 
in  N e w   Mexico   produced  especially  strong   evidence   t h a t   elusive  particles 
called  neutrinos   d o  indeed  have   mass.  If   proven ,   t h e  finding  means   t h a t  neu -  
trinos  could  con s t i tu te  a major  componen t   of  t h e  mysterious  invisible matter ,  
t h e   long-sought missing mass, t h a t  cosmologists  th ink   fills and  shapes  t h e  uni-  
verse  and   could  d ic ta te   its  fate.  Finding  a  mass  for  t h e   ubiquitous  neu t r ino  
wouW  help   toward  completing  a n  inventory  of  t h e  missing matter ,  a  tally  t h a t  
will  determine   whether   t h e  universe will fly  apart ,  fall  in  o n  itself, or  settle  o n  
a nlicidle pa th .  D.  Hywel W h i t e ,  leader of  t h e  research team ,  said t h a t  t h e  most 
likely explanation   for t h e  observed  behavior  of  neutrinos  produced by  a proton  
accelerator  was  t h a t   these  particles  have  some as yet  undetermined   amoun t  of 
mass.  (NY Xmes, J a n  3 1/95)  

N A S A   officials  dedicated   a  new  testbed  a t   Edwards  A i r   Force  Base  i n  
California's Mojave   Desert  for  development   of  a  solar-powered  regenerative  
tuel  cell system  t h a t   they hope  will o n e  day provide c lean  a n d  efficient  renew- 
able   electric   power.  T h e   testbed  is  t h e   hea r t   of  Cleveland-based   Lewis 
Research  Center's  new  gove rnmen t   a n d   industry  multi-use   regenerative   fuel 
cell  program  and   mirrors  t h e  government's  policy  of  developing   technologies  
t h a t  will b o t h  foster U.S. competitiveness  a n d ,  a t  t h e  same  t ime ,  support  gov- 
e r nm e n t  programs.  ( N A S A  Release 95-8)  

February 

February  3:  Launch  of  Space  Shu t t le   Discovery  (mission  STS -63 ) .   O n  
February  6  Discovery  approached  to  within   37  feet of  the  Kristall  module  of 
the  Russian Space S ta t ion  Mir, where  t h e   two  100-ton  spaceships flew  in for- 
mation  for a time. Th is  rendezvous was  a dress rehearsal for  the  first in a series 
of  seven shuttle  docking  flights  to Mir  tha t  would  begin  in June .  Th is  series, 
which will  involve  t h e  Space Shu t t le  Atlantis ,  is  intended  to  give t h e  United  
States  and  Russia an  unprecedented opportunity  to combine flight operations, 
ground  control ,  training  activities, and   research. 
A  spacewalk,  in  which  Dr.  Bernard  Harris  practiced   lifting  t h e   2 ,600-  
pound  SPARTAN  astronomy  satellite   before  stowing  it   for  t h e  retrun   t r ip ,  
helped   prepare  NASA   for  assembling  t h e   In te rna t iona l   Space   S t a t i o n .  
STS - 6 3  was historic   in  several o the r  respects. First,  it was  t h e  first  time   t h a t  
a  woman  pilot ,   Eileen  M.  Co l l ins ,  flew  t h e   Space  S h u t t l e .  Second ,   it  was 
t h e   second  time  t h a t   a  Russian,  Vladimir  Titov   (w h o  spen t   a  record  365  
days  aboard  Mir  in   1987 -88 ) ,  was  launched   aboard  a U.S.  spacecraft.  T h e  
shu t t le   flight  ended   with   a  predawn  landing   a t  Kennedy  Space  C e n t e r   o n  
February 1 1. (NA SA  Release  95-5;  NY  Times, Feb 4/95,  Feb 5/95, Feb 6 /95 ,  
Feb  7/95,  Feb  8 /95 ,  Feb  10195, Feb  11/95 & Feb  12/95;  W  Post, J a n  29/95 ,  
Feb  2/95 ,  Feb  3/95 ,  Feb  5 /95 ,  Feb  6/95 ,  Feb  7/95 ,  Feb  8 /95 ,  Feb  9/95 ,   Feb 
10195  & Feb  12/95;  CSM ,   Feb  8/95   & Feb  13/95; Fh  Today,  J a n   29/95; 
Reuters ,  J a n  31/95)  

February  5: A  protocol  was  signed  for  the   Russian  Functional  Energy  Block 
(FGB)   to   be  launched  in  November  1997  as  t h e   first  element   of  t h e  
International  Space Station .  After  initial use as a propulsion module, t h e  FGB 
will  serve  as  a fuel storage module  and   a service  area, which  will  provide  liv- 
ing  and   experimentation  space  as  well  as  backup  guidance,  navigation  and  
control.  T h e   FGB  will  also  serve  as  an   integral  part  of  t h e   Space  Station's 
overall  power  and   information subsystems.  (NA SA  Release 95-13)  

February  7:  Images from t h e  international  Space Radar Laboratory  (SRL)  may 
help  researchers find previously unknown  settlements  near  t h e  ancient  city of 
Angkor  in Cambodia. T h e  radar  data  was  obtained  during  the  October  flight 
of  the  Space Shu t t le  Endeavour. SRLs complementary radars, the  Spaceborne 
Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic  Aperture  Radar  (X -SAR ) ,  is  a joint  mis- 
sion  of  the   United   States,  German ,   and  Italian  space  agencies.  (NA SA  
Release 95-12; Space News, Feb  27/95; Science, Feb  17/95)  

Fehrualy  9:  Remotely  controlled  tests  by  Ames Research Center  of  a  modified 
Russian planetary rover, Marsokhod, are planned for February  13-18 in a volcanic 
area that  resembles the surfaces of  the Moon and Mars. T h e  test  site is  in Kilauea 
Volcano's  summit  caldera  and  southwest  rift  zone  o n   the  island  of  Hawaii. 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

FEBRUARY  1995 

Marsokhod, which combines  the  Russian  rover chassis with western avionics,  is  a 
sophisticated  prototype  of  a long-distance  rover. (NA SA  Release 95-14) 

February  20:  A  N A S A   white   paper  calls  for  t h e   reorganization  of  its  Field 
Cen te r s ,  but doesn't foresee  any closures.  (Space News, Feb  20195; Science, Feb 
24/95 

February 23:  Astronomers  using t h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope ( H S T )  found  a n  
oxygen  atmosphere   o n   Jupiter's  second  Moon ,   Europa.  T h i s   de tec t ion   was 
made   by  a  team   of  researchers  at  J o h n s   Hopkins   University   a n d   t h e   Space  
Telescope  Sc ience   Institute ,   b o t h   in  Baltimore.  T h e y   used  da ta   provided  by 
HST's   Godda rd   High   Resolution   Spectrograph   ( G H R S )   in s t rumen t   from 
observations  taken  o n  J u n e  2,  1994. Europa's atmosphere   is  only  o n e  hund red  
billionth   t h a t  of  Earth .  Europa, about   t h e  size of Earth's Moon ,  has a n  unusu- 
ally  smooth   surface  of  solid  water  ice.  T h e  oxygen  o n  Europa,  whose  surface 
temperature   is  -230  degrees  Fah renhe i t ,   is  formed  from  purely  non-biological  
processes. Wa te r  vapor  and   t h e  gases oxygen  and  hydrogen  are  formed  by  t h e  
comb ina t ion  of  sun l igh t  a n d  t h e  bombardment   of  t h e  du s t  a n d  charged  parti-  
cles trapped  in Jupiter's  intense  magnetic  field.  ( N A S A  Release 95 -1  7; C Trib, 
Feb  23 /95 )  

February 26:  Radioactive  debris leaking  from  a large group of  orbiting  Russian 
nuclear  reactors make  up  t h e  puzzling clouds of junk  orbiting  Earth .  T h i s  is  t h e  
conclusion   of  a  team   of  scientific  sleuths  who  have   been  sifting clues  for five 
years.  T h e   clouds,  which   seem  destined   t o   grow,  are   th rea ten ing   t o   wreak 
havoc   in  t h e  most crowded  orbit   in  t h e  heavens ,  roughly  600  miles  LIP. I n  all ,  
33   nuclear-powered  radar  satellites  t h a t   spied  o n   t h e   movements   of  Western  
warships  were  launched   in to   orbits   about   150   miles  above   t h e   Earth .  
Afterward,  as  a safety precaution ,   Moscow  boosted  t h e  old   reactors   i n t o  park-  
ing  orbits  roughly  600  miles  up.  Published  designs  of  t h e  Russian  space  reac- 
tors  show  they   were  filled  with   sodium-potassium  coo lan t .   Liquid  droplets  
m u t i n g  a t  kilometers  a  second   are  just  as  dangerous  t o  a  spacecraft  as  a  solid 
object .  W h i l e   t h e   drops  pose  n o  radioactive   h e a l t h   danger   t o  human s ,   they 
will force  engineers  t o  add more shielding  to he lp  protect   new spacecraft.  (NY  
Times, Feb  26 /95 )  

February  27:  N A S A   plans   for  a  very  active   period  soon   conce rn ing  expend -  
able   launch   vehicles  (ELVs). A n  unspecified  small  ELV  would  operate   from 
Wallops  Island, V i r g~ n i a .  (AvWk, Feb  27 /95 )  

February  28:  Four  more  missions  have   been   selected  for  NASA's  Discovery 
program.  Formally  started   i n  NASA's N  1994  budget ,   it  features  small p lane -  
tary  exploration   spacecratt  with   focused  science   g o d s   t h a t   c a n   be  built  in 
about   36 m o n t h s  for  about  $150 million .  Lunar  Prospector  was judged  mature  
enough   t o   proceed,  while  missions  to  study  t h e   S u n ,   Venus,  and   a  come t  

FEBRUARY  1995 

CHRON0LCX ;I'   199 5 

(Mission  Stardust)  were  selected  for  further  detailed  study. TWO missions are 
already  under  development  in  t h e   Discovery  program:  the   Near  Earth 
Asteroid  Rendezvous  (NEAR )  mission-which  would  orbit  t h e  asteroid  Eros 
in  1999-and 
the   Mars  Pathfinder,  which  woulJ  land  o n   Mars  in  1997. 
(NASA   Releases 95-19 ,  94,  112 & 209;  W  Posc,  Mar  2/95,  May  15/95; Fla 
Today, Nov  5/95; AP, Mar  5/95 & Nov  27/95; AtlK'k,  Mar 6/95 & L3ec  11/95; 
Science, Mar  10195) 

A  non-invasive  and  direct  method  of  measuring  the   bending  stiifness  of 
long bones was developed by  the  Ames Research Cen te r ,  Stanford University, 
and   Ga i t   Scan   Inc.,  of  Ridge,  New  Jersey.  T h e   device  is  known  as  the  
Mechanical Response Tissue Analyzer  (MRTA ) .  NASA   is  interested  in   using 
it  to   test  the   bones  of  astronauts, who  lose  calcium  from  their  bones  Juring  
space flight. W h e n  a forearm or  leg  is   rested o n  a stable support, a  small prohe 
is  placed o n  t h e  skin which  transmits a "buzz" that   lasts less  than  five seconds. 
Th is  new  technology  has  already been  used  to  show  the   fragility of  bones  in 
patients  diagnosed with  brittle  bones. T h e  MRTA  is  also expected  to  he  used 
for follow-up testing of  patients with osteoporosis and  for monitoring the  heal- 
ing of  broken  bones.  (NASA  Release 95-20)  

March  1 :  NASA   has  collaborated  with  WGBH-TV,  Boston,  and   Scholastic, 
Inc.,  New  York,  to   produce  an   interactive  videodisc  "Interactive  NOVA:  
Earth"  tha t   allows  students  to  go  o n  electronic  field  trips  to   remote  areas  t o  
find  clues  of  how  life  began  o n   Earth.  NASA's Offices of  Mission  to   Planet 
Earth  and  Human  Resources and  Education contributed  to  this  effort by  pro- 
viding data ,  visualizations, and o the r  video resources as well  as by  actively par- 
ticipating  in  the   current  development  through  the   involvement  of  key 
Agency  researchers.  (NA SA  Release 95-21)  

March  2 :   Launch   of  Space   S h u t t l e  Endeavour  (STS - 6 7 )  o n   a   17-day mis- 
sion.  T h e  mission  included  t h e   use  of  th ree   unique   ultraviolet   telescopes 
mounted   o n   t h e   Astro   2  observation   platform.  I t   built   o n   t h e   findings  of 
Astro's  first  flight  in  December,  1990 ,   when  t h e   Instrument   Po in t ing  
System  was  balky.  ( N A S A  Release  95-18;  NY  Times,  Mar  3/95,  Mar  7/95, 
Mar  12/95 &M a r   13/95;  W Post, Mar  3 /95 ,  Mar  7/95 & Mar  10195; Reuters ,  
Mar  5 / 9 5 )  

March 3: NASA's Infrared Telescope Facility observed  the  collision  of  Come t  
Shoemaker-Levy 9  with  Jupiter  from July  12 t o  August  7,  1994. T h e  analysis 
of  numerous  observations  were  published  in  Science. All  impacts warmed  the  
stratosphere  and   some  of  t h e   troposphere  up  to  several  degrees.  ( H  Chron, 
May  14/95; Science, Mar  3/95)  

March  6:   A   94-percent  scale  model  of  Boeing's proposed  J o i n t   Advanced 
Strike   Technology  Fighter  ( JA S T ) ,  now  under  construction,  is  planned  to  
begin  using  the   80 by  120 foot  wind  tunnel   at  the  Ames  Research  C e n t e r  in 
early 1996. (AvWk, Mar 6/95) 

March  8: NA SA   has  selected  four  companies   to  en te r   i n t o  negotiations   for 
t h e  X-33 and  X-34 reusable  launch   systems. Around   t h e  end  of  t h e  decade ,  
t h e   results  of  t h e   X-33  compe t i t ion   and   subsequent  flight   demons t ra t ion  
could  lead  t o  a  decision  t o  develop  a n  operational   next-generation   reusable 
launch   system. T h e  X-34  booster  will  demons t ra te   advanced  technologies  
t h a t  may  apply  t o  reusable  launch  systems and  provide  significantly reduced 
mission  costs for  placing  small payloads  i n t o  low Earth   orbit .  T h e  th ree   X -  
3 3   selectees  are:  Lockheed  Advanced   Development   Co .;   McDonne l l  
Douglas  Aerospace;  and   Rockwell  In te rna t iona l   Co rp . ,   Space   Systems 
Division.  T h e   X-34  selectee  is  O rb i ta l   Sciences   C o r p . ,   Dulles,  Virginia. 
After   tests  are  completed   in  1999 ,  i t   would  be  up  to   the   aerospace  industry 
to   build  and   operate   any   new  rockets.  ( N A S A  Release  95 -23 ;  NY  Times, 
Mar   12/95 & J u n   19/95; Fla  Today, Ju l  2/95; AwWk,  Mar  13/95, Mar   27/95  
& J u n  19/95)  

ASTKONAUTI<:S  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1995 

March  10: Several NASA -bu i l t  components  of  t h e  Infrared Telescope  in Space  
(1RTS)-the 
first  Japanese   orbiting   telescope  dedicated   t o   infrared  astrono-  
he   launched   aboard  Japan's Space   Flyer  U n i t   (SFU )  o n  Ma rch   15 
my-will 
from Japan .  U .S .  scientists, in  collaboration  with  Japanese  colleagues, built  two  
of  t h e  four  IRTS  instruments.  O n e   is  t h e  Mid-Infrared Spectrometer   (M IRS ) ,  
wh ich   will  observe  wavelengths  between   5  a n d   12 microns.  T h e   two-pound  
MIRS  will provide measurements "100-1 000  times more sensitive" t h a n  before. 
T h e   second  componen t   is  t h e   Far-Infrared  Photometer   (FIRP)   which   will 
image between   150  and   700 microns.  T h e  SFU  is  scheduled  t o  be captured   i n -  
orbit   by  t h e   S h u t t l e   Endeavour   during   mission  STS - 7 2 ,   scheduled   for 
December  1995. After   several  days of  systems checks ,  t h e  SFU  will be  boosted 
by  onboard   rockets  t o  a  500  km  circular orbit .   ( N A S A  Release  95 -24 )  

March  1 5 :  A  team   of  aerospace  executives   has   recommended   t h a t   N A S A  
modify  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   program's  management   structure .   T h e   team   was 
headed   by  former  J o h n s o n   Space   C e n t e r   Director   Ch r i s tophe r   Kraft.  T h e  
report   t o   N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   recommends   separating  
developmental   activities  from flight operations .  T h e  Kraft  report  endorses  t h e  
themes   of  reducing  t h e   role  of  civil  service  employees,  increasing  con t rac to r  
accoun tah~ l i ty ,  and   reducing   t h e   number   of  gove rnmen t - to -con t rac to r   in te r -  
faces. ( N A S A  Release 95-27;  N Y   Times, May  22/95 & Ap r   14/95; W Post, J u n  
7/95;  Fla  Today, Mar  2/95 & Ap r   5/95; Reuters,  Mar  13/95;  AvWk, Mar 6 /95 ,  
Mar  20195, A p r   10195 & J u n  12/95)  

March  16 :  A  Soyuz  TM - 2 1  has   launched   t h e   first  U .S .   astronaut   t o  t h e  Mlr 
s ta t ion .   A s t ronau t   N o rm a n   E.  T h a g a r d ,  M.D.,  lifted  off  from  t h e   Baikonur  
Cosmodrome   in Kazakhstan o n  Ma rch   14 ,  a n d  t h e  Soyuz docked  with   Mir o n  
March   16. Thagard   and   t h e  o t h e r  Soyuz cosmonauts  will spend   th ree  mon th s  
on   Mir,  t h e n   re tu rn   aboard  Space   S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s .   ( N A S A  Release  95-25;  
N Y   Times, Mar  14/95 ,  Mar  15/95  & Mar  17/95; W Post, Mar  14/95 ,  Mar  15/95, 
Mar  17/95  & A p r   23/95;  USA Today, Mar  14/95 & J u n  7/95; Fla  Today, Ap r  
2/95  & J u n  7/95; Space N ew s ,  May  1/95; Reuters ,  Mar  13/95;  AP, Mar  13/95 ,  
Mar 3 /14  & A p r  9/95;  U P l ,  Mar  11/95; AvWk, Mar  20195  & A p r   17/95)  

G loba l   views  of  Venus  from  Magellan's  imaging  radar  were  released. T h e y  
will be  t h e  basis for  all  future  scientific  studies of  Venus  and   t h e  maps for  any  
future   mlssions  t o  Earth's  sister  planet .   Magellan  was  launched   May  4 ,   1989  
and   concluded   last  Oc tobe r  after  mapping  more  t h a n  9 8  percent   of  t h e  plan-  
e t .  Space  radar  findings  also con t inue   t o  con t r ibu te  t o  a be t te r  understanding  
of  Earth .   ( N A S A  Releases  95-28  & 201; Science, Dec   1 /95 )  

March  1 9 :  In  t h e  midst of  t h e  budget wars  in  Wa sh ing ton ,  N A S A  a n d  its ven -  
tures  are   under   increasingly  hostile   fire.  N A S A  has   trimmed   fat  from  dozens 
of  programs  a n d   it  is  weighing  whe the r   t o  e l im ina te  o n e  of  its dozen  cen te r s ,  
which   employ  tens   of  thousands   of  people.  T h e  Agency   is  also  investigating  

MARCH   1995 

Cl-1RONOLOGY 199 5 

ways t o  l igh ten  t h e  cost of  lofting  its fleet  of  four shu t t le s ,  which   consume  bil- 
lions  of  dollars every year. S ta r t ing  in   1996 ,  the re  will be  seven  missions  a  year 
ra the r   t h a n   e igh t .  A n d   last  week,  a n   inilependent   advisory  report   suggested 
t h a t  N A S A   consider  turning   over   S h u t t l e  operations   t o  a  private   con t rac to r  
a n d  c u t  back  its safety checks .  (NY  Tm e s ,  Mar  19/95;  W  Post, Mar  27/95, Mar 
28/95 ,  Mar  29/95 & Apr   7/95;  Fla  Ttdny, Mar  14/95 ,  Mar   28/95 & A p r  8/95;  
Space  Neuls,  Mar   13/95,  Mar  27/95 ,   A p r   3/95,  Ap r   10195  &  Apr   24/95; 
Reuters ,  Aug   22/95;  WSJ ,Oct   2/95; AvWk,  Feh  13/95 & Mar  27/95;  Science, 
Mar   3/95 ,  Mar  17 /95 ,  Apr   14/95 & A p r   21 /95 )  

M a r c h   20:  T h e   J e t   Propulsion   L;lhoratory  se lec ted   Lockheed   M a r t i n  
Astronautics   t o  develop   two  s ~ n a l l  spacecraft  t h a t   will  explore  Mars  in   1998. 
They  will  be  half  the  weight  and   cost  of  t h e   1996 Mars G loba l  Surveyor  and  
Mars  Pathfinder.  The i r   low  weights  of  t h e   new  orbiter   a n d   lande r  will  allow 
t h em   t o  be  launcheil  o n   a   new  launch   vehicle  called  t h e  Med-Lite ,  wh ich   is 
heing  developed  by  Mc1)onnell  llouglas .  ( N A S A  Releases 9 5 - 3 0  & 196; Space 
N e w s ,  Mar  27/95)  

March   2 1 :  T h e   Huhhle  Space  Telescope  serves  as  an   interplanetary   weather  
satellite   for  hliirs  a n d  Venus.  It  shows  th;lt  t h e   Martian   climate   has   changed  
since  Viking \,isired Mars  in  the  mid-1970s. T h e  planet   is  now cooler, clearer, 
and   Jrier .  Venus con t inue s  t o  recover  from  a n  intense   shower of  sulfuric "acid 
rain"  triggered  by  a  suspected  volcanic   e rup t ion   in  t h e   la te   1970s.  S u c h  
knowledge  of  weather   is   critical   t o   t h e   p lann ing   of  future   missions  t o   these  
planets .  T h e y  also make  natural   laboratories  for testing  compu te r  models  t h a t  
will  lead  t o   a   general  theory  of  t h e   behavior   of  planetary   atmospheres .  T h e  
Huhble   Space   Telescope  is  a   project  of  in te rna t iona l   cooperation   between  
N A S A   and   t h e   European  Space  Agency   (ESA ) .   ( N A S A  Release  95-31;  Fh 
Today, M a y   14/95; AvWk, Mar   27/95;  Science, M a r  31/95)  

N A S A   accepted   a   proposal  from  J o h n s  Hopkins   University  t o   restructure  
t h e   Agency's Far  Ultraviolet   Spectrc)acopic  Explorer  (FUSE ) .  In   add i t ion   t o  
launch ing   t h e   spacecraft  two  years  earlier  t h a n   originally  p lanned ,   t h e   size, 
complexity,  and   cost  of  t h e  program  have   also heen   reduced.  T h e  goal  of  t h e  
Explorer  program  restructuring   was  t o   enab le   funding   for  more   frequent  
Med i i~ rn  Explorer  (MIDEX)  missions  launched  o n  a  new medium-lite  expend -  
able  launch   vehicle .  T h e  FUSE mission  was  designed  t o  study  t h e  origin  a n d  
evolution   of  t h e   lightest  e lemen t s  created   shortly  after  t h e  Big  Rang, and   t h e  
forces a n d  processes  involved  in  t h e  evo lu t ion  of  galaxies, stars, a n d  p lane ta ry  
systems. T h e  far  ultraviolet  region  of  t h e  spectrum  can   only  be  observed  o u t -  
side  t h e  Earth'a atmosphere .   ( N A S A  Release  95 -33 ;  Space Newls,  Aug   28 /95 )  

Ma rch   2 2 :  T h e  atmospheric   prohe  o n   t h e  Ga l i leo  o rb i te r  passed  all  tests  in   its 
first  commun ica t ion   in   27  mon th s .   After   deploying  t h e   probe ,   Ga l i leo   will 
change  its course tcl  pass  133,000 miles above  Jupiter's  clouds. T h e  orbiter  will 

ASTRONAUT lCS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

MARCH   1995 

collect  the data  from  the probe and  transmit  it  to Earth  before  it begins  two 
years of  operations near Jupiter. (NASA  Release 95-34; Flu  Today, Apr  10195) 

March  27:  Astronaut  Richard J .  Hieb will  leave NASA  to  join  AlliedSignal 
Technical Services Corp.'s Civilian Space Business Enterprise as senior engi- 
neering  advisor.  (NASA  Release 95-36) 

March  3 1 : A  two-decade old  cosmic mystery about hydrogen clouds  in  inter- 
galactic space is being cleared  up  by recent Hubble Space Telescope data from 
46  galaxies.  Th e   results  suggest  that  the  hydrogen clouds  are  vast  halos  sur- 
rounding  galaxies  and  extending  20  times  farther  than  the  diameter  of  a 
galaxy.  These  findings  confirm  earlier  Hubble  data  of  more  than   a  dozen 
hydrogen  clouds within  less  than  a  billion  light-years of  our  galaxy.  (NASA  
Release 95-4 1;  NY  Xmes, Apr  18/95; Science, Mar  24/95) 

April 

A p n l 3 :  NASA   is  working with  industry  to  develop an  air-launched, fly-back 
booster  called  the   X-34.  T h e   U.S.  hopes  tha t   a  financially  viable  X-34  will 
return  it  to  leadership  in  commercial  space  transportation.  ( F l a  Today,  Mar 
3 1/95; AuWk, Apr  3/95)  

Apnl4:   Data from NASA's ER-2 and DC-8 aircraft show that  climate computer 
models have significantly underestimated the  amount of solar energy absorbed by 
clouds. The  data were taken as  the ER-2  flew at about  12 miles altitude while the  
DC-8 flew  five to  seven miles below  it. T h e   improved models will  increase the  
accuracy of  weather forecasting. (NASA  Release 95-43; Science, J a n  27/95) 

April  6:  NASA   has  signed  a  contract   with  EER  Systems  Corp.  of  Vienna, 
Virginia  to  provide  on-orbit  and   experiment  recovery  services during  a mis- 
sion  from Wallops  Island,  Virginia  this  summer. Launch  is  expected  to   take 
place  in  late July  1995 aboard  a  Conestoga  launch  vehicle.  (NA SA  Release 
95-44; Space News ,  J a n  9/95 & Apr   17/95)  

April  10:  A  Harrier  V/STOL   attack   aircraft  pilot  will  now  be  able  t o  make 
"blind"  landings  on   a  40  by  70  foot  pad  using  Ames  Research  Center's  new 
head-up display formats and  flight  control  system.  (AelWk, Apr  10195) 

April  12: Dr. T. Keith  G lennan ,   the  first  chief  of  NASA ,  died  a t  age  89 .  (NY 
Times, Apr  1 2 ,  1995; W Post, Ap r   12/95; Space  News ,  Apr  17/95) 

Apnl  19: T h e  Chicago Fire Department  has  signed a Space Ac t  agreement to  
explore  ways  space  technology  can   be  used  to  enhance   emergency  services. 
Candidate   activities  include:  locating  firefighters  within  a  2,400  foot  area; 
monitoring  the  vibration  signature of  a burning  structure  to determine  when 
the  firefighters must be evacuated; checking  in to  t h e  feasibility of  using  liquid 
oxygen in a new breathing apparatus; identifying the  location of an  emergency 
91 1 call made  from a cellular  phone;  and  warning hearing  impaired drivers of 
an   approaching  emergency  vehicle.  (NA SA   Releases  95-51   &  116; Space 
News ,  Apr   24/95; C  Trib, Apr  20195) 

Hubble Space Telescope (H S T )  images of  t h e  asteroid, Vesta,  indicate  tha t  
this  325 mile diameter  object has  such features  as  ancient   lava  flows,  impact 
craters, and  an  exposed mantle.  Th is   suggests tha t   Vesta  has  survived  essen- 
tially  intact   since  the   formation  of  the   planets  and  could  be  the   "sixth"  ter- 
restrial planet.  (NA SA  Release 95-52) 

HST  has discovered a new  great dark  spot  in the  Neptune's northern   hemi-  
sphere.  Only  last  June ,  Huhble  images revealed  tha t   a great  dark  spot  in  the  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AbiD AERONAUT ICS  

APRIL  1995 

sou the rn   hemisphere   discovered  by  Voyager  2  in   1989  had   disappeared.  ( I n  
contrast ,   Jupiter's G r e a t  Red  Spo t  ha s   remained  stable   for  300  years.) W h i l e  
t h e  energy from  t h e  S u n  drives t h e  Earth's weather  system, t h e  mechanism  o n  
Nep tune   must  be  very  different  because  t h e   p lane t   radiates  two  times   more 
energy  t h a n   it  receives  from  t h e   S u n .   ( N A S A   Release  95-53;   W  Post,  A p r  
20195; F l a   Today, J a n  22/95; AvWk, A p r  24/95; Science, J u n  23/95) 

Apnl  21:  Senior   N A S A   managers  have   recommended   t h a t   Ame s   Research 
C e n t e r  be  placed  under   t h e  oversight  of  a private   contractor .   However,  it  also 
recommended   t h a t   Ames'  aerospace  facilities  be  transferred  t o   Langley 
Research   C e n t e r   and   t h a t   its  Space   S t a t i o n   centrifuge   be  transferred  t o  
J o h n s o n  Space  Cen te r .  T h e  Zero Based Review Team  also endorsed  sweeping 
changes   in  t h e  organization  of NASA's o t h e r  research facilities, but   rejected  a 
proposal  t o  have   a con t rac to r  run   t h e  Kennedy  Space  Cen te r .   (SF  Exam,  Feb 
18/95;  Science, A p r   2 1 /95 )  

A w l  27: T h e  Ga l i leo  spacecraft has  produced  hard  evidence   in  t h e  form of  a n  
image  t h a t  asteroids c a n  have   satellites.  T h e  satellite   in  orhit   around   asteroid 
243  Ida  has  a  1.6 km   ( o n e  mile)  diameter.  (Reuters ,  Ap r   26/95)  

May  2:  N A S A  ha l ted  con s t ruc t ion  of  a   rocket-motor   nozzle  factory a t  Yellow 
C r e e k ,  Mississippi,  i n  favor of  a  duplicate  capability  in  U t a h .  ( N A S A  Release 
95-60;  Fla  Today, May  3/95;  AvWk ,  May  29 /95 )  

May  12: A  new  generation   of  air  traffic  con t ro l   tools  a re  being   field  tested  a t  
t h e   Denve r   In te rna t iona l   A i rpo r t .   T h e   C e n t e r - TRACON   A u t om a t i o n  
System  (C TA S )  became  its primary  traffic managemen t  tool  t h e  day  it  opened  
o n   February  28.  C T A S  was  designed  with   t h e   invo lvemen t   of  t h e   ultimate  
users,  t h e   controllers   and   t h e  pilots .   It  consists  of  th ree   software systems:  t h e  
Descent  Advisor  ( D A ) ,  a n  airlground  datalink   system, and   advanced   cockpit  
au toma t ion .  T h e  D A  has  routinely  met   its  goal  of  reducing   arrival  t ime  pre- 
d ic t ion  accuracy  t o  under  20 seconds. I n  add i t ion  t o  reducing  traffic controller  
workload ,  C TA S  will  increase  aircraft  fuel  efficiency  a n d   reduce  delays.  T h e  
field  tests  are   jointly  conduc ted   by  N A S A   and   t h e   Federal  Av ia t ion  
Adm in i s t ra t ion   ( FAA )  which   con temp la te  more  such   fruitful partnerships   in 
t h e  future .   ( N A S A  Releases  95-66 ,   198  &a  150; Av\Vk, J u l  31 /95 ,  Aug   21/95 
& O c t  30195) 

May  15: N A S A  tests a  new  noise reduction   jet  exhaust  nozzle for a  h igh  speed 
civil  transport   ( H S C T ) .  T h e  tests  are  being  conduc ted  a t   t h e  Ame s  Research 
Cen te r .   ( N A S A  Releases  95-69;  AelWk, May  15/95)  

May  16 :  NASA's  telescope  o n   its Kuiper  A i rbo rne  Observatory   has  begun  t o  
exam ine  t h e  chemical   composition  of  Mercury,  which  is  t h e   least  iinderstood 
of  t h e   four  terrestrial  planets-Earth ,   Mars,  Venus,  and   Mercury.  Flying  a t  
41 ,000   feet ,   t h e   specially  outfitted   C- 1 4 1  military  transport   plane   is  ahle   t o  
de tec t   invisible  infrared  radiation   t h a t   is  refracted  and   reflected  by  t h e  p lan -  
et's  surface rocks. W h i l e  no th ing   startling   \vas  disco\,ered  immediately  ahou t  
t h e   planet's  surface, weeks  o r   mon th s   of  awnlysis  are  likely  t o   t u r n   up  new 
information   about  Mercury.  (NY Times, May  16/95; Flu  Today, J u l ,  9 /95 )  

May  1 9 :  A n  in te rna l  N A S A  review  team  has produced  proposals  t h a t   include  
sweeping  management   and   organizational  changes   t o  c u t   spend ing  a n   add i -  
t iona l  $5 billion  by  t h e  e n d  of  t h e  decade .   ( N A S A  Releases 95 -65 ,  73,  123 &a 
132;  NY  Times, May  20195) 

May  22:  Today  is  t h e   first  of  th ree   dates   t h a t   Earth   will  be  ahle   t o  view  t h e  
rings of  Sa tu rn  o n  edge  in  about   15 years. T h i r t e e n  of  Saturn's   18  moons  were 
discovered  during   past  ring  crossings.  T h e  o t h e r   two  dates   in  this   trio   will  be 
August  10,  1995  and   February  11 ,   1996 .  T h e  J e t  Propulsion  L ~ b o r a t o r y  will 
use  these  opportunities   t o  f i n e  tune   t h e  mission  of  t h e  Cassini  spacecraft  to he  
launched   in  1997 for  a n   exam ina t ion   of  Sa tu rn   beginning   in   t h e   year  2004. 

.4STRONAUTICS AND  AEKCINAUTICS 

MAY  1995 

( N A S A  Releases  95-72  &a  118; VC7  Post, May  3/95; C Trib, Ap r   28/95; AuWk, 
Ap r   24/95)  

T h e   Huhble   Space   Telescope  provided  surprising  findings   abou t   two  
extremely   faint   explosive  white   dwarfs, VW  Hydri  and   U  Gem ino rum ,   t h a t  
have   been  known   for  about   30 years.  Evidence  shows t h a t   they  are  far  cooler 
a n d  spin  much  more  slowly  t h a n  expected .   ( N A S A  Release 9 5 - 7 5 )  

N A S A  Adm in i s t ra to r  Daniel  S. Golclin  announced   t h e  Agency  would  c u t  
28,000 C iv i l  Service  positions, restructure  e a c h  of  its  1 0  cen te r s ,  a n d  t u r n  over  
t h e   operation   of  t h e   Space   S h u t t l e   t o   a  private   industry.  (NY Rm e s ,   May 
22/95;  W Post,  May  22 /95 )  

May  23:  T h e  proposed  U.S. Space  S t a t i o n  A l p h a  is o n  schedule  for ope ra t ion  
by  t h e  year  2002.  (Reuters ,  May  23/95)  

May  26:  A  panel   of  t h e   Na t iona l   Academy  of  Sciences   asserts  t h a t   t h e  
G rav i ty  Probe-B  is  worth   its cost.  T h e  controversial  space expe r imen t  t o  test  
Einstein's general   relativity  theory   is  expected   t o   cost  a  half  billion  dollars. 
(LA   Times,  Aug   31/95;   Space  News ,   Feh  20195  & Sep   25/95;  Science,  Mar 
24/95 & May  26/95) 

N A S A   Administrator   Daniel   S.  G o l d i n   hopes  t o   c rea te   six  Sc ience  
Institutes   run   by  universities  or   companies .  G o l d i n   says  t h e   institutes   would 
no t   save  money  but  h e  believes  they  would  improve  t h e  quality  of  science   in  
t h e  Agency.  (Science, Feb  24/95, Mar  17/95  & May  26 /95 )  

T h e  C l em e n t i n e   1 research  satellite  has   shown   t h a t   t h e   bulk  composition  
of  t h e   Moon   has  less  iron   t h a n   t h e   Earth ,   suggesting  a  different  origin .   ( F l a  
Today, J u l  2/95; Science, May  26/95 & Dec  8 /95 )  

May 31 : A  converted  DC-9 aircraft, which  will be used  for microgravity  exper-  
iments,  was  rolled  out   today  a t  NASA's  Lewis  Research  Center .   T h e  aircraft 
will provide  investigators with   a series of  18-22 second  periods  of  near  weight- 
lessness by  flying parabolic  maneuvers.  It  will  support  research  in  t h e  areas of 
hiotechnology, combustion  science ,  fluid physics, and  materials science.  I t  also 
will support  t h e  development   of  equ ipmen t  for use  o n  t h e  In te rna t iona l  Space  
S ta t ion   and  o t h e r  orbital  platforms.  ( N A S A  Release  95 -79 )  

June 

June  1:  Woodpeckers  riddled  t h e   insulating  foam  of  t h e   external   fuel  tank   o n  
top  of  t h e  Space Shu t t le  Discovery, causing t h e  Shu t t le  t o  be moved  t o  a hangar  
for repairs.  Its mission t o  launch  a communications  satellite is delayed until  July. 
(W ITimes, J u n  3/95  & Ju l  13/95; W Post, J u n  1/95 & J u n  3/95; USA Today, J u n  
2/95; Fla Today, J u n  3/95 & J u n  5/95; Space  News, J u n  5/95; AP, J u n  2/95 & J u n  
8/95; Reuters, J u n  1/95; UPI ,  J u n  1/95; AuWk, J u n  5/95 & J u n   12/95)  

June 6: T h e  final states  of  starbirth  shown  in new  pictures by  t h e  Hubble  Space  
Telescope, seem  t o  touch  off a cosmic celebration .  O u t  of  t h e  dense  whirlpools 
of  gas  a n d  dust  creating   t h e  stars erupt   jets  of  shimmering  gases extending   bil- 
lions   of  miles.  T h e   stars  themselves,  in   machine-gun   fashion ,   fire  bursts  of 
material   a t  speeds  of  half  a  million  miles  a n  hour,  creating   what   appear   t o  be 
glowing  beads. W h i l e  many  questions  remain   t o  be  answered,  t h e  Hubble   pic- 
tures  appear  t o   exclude  whole   classes  of  models  regarding  jet  formation   and  
evolution .   ( N A S A  Release  95-83;  NY Times, J u n  7/95; W Post, J u n  7/95; USA 
Today, J u n  7/95; AP, J u n  7/95; Reuters, J u n  6 95; Time, J u n  16/95)  

Virtual-reality  computers   a t tached   t o   gloves  may  assist  astronauts   training  
t o  perform ma in tenance   in  space.  (C SM ,  J u n  6 / 9 5 )  

June 9 :  Mysterious red flashes t h a t  ex tend  up t o  55  miles above  thunderstorms ,  
called  sprites, have   been   found  over   Peru.  A  NASA - spon so red   investigation  
used special low-light-level  cameras aboard  a Westwind-2  jet  aircraft  t o  record 
t h e  brief  flashes. Fewer sprites were  found   in  S o u t h  America   t h a n  were found  
over   quickly  moving  storms  in   t h e  c e n t r a l  U .S .   last  summer.  Sprites   can   be 
seen   from  t h e  ground  after  dark   unde r   certain   conditions .   Blue  jets  were  also 
documen ted  in  t h e  U S . ,  a l though  n o  blue jets were seen  over  S o u t h  America .  
( N A S A  Release 95 -84 ;  New  Scientist, Aug   19/95)  

June  1 2 :   Astronomers   using  NASA's  A s t ro -2   observatory  announced   t h e  
definitive   de tec t ion   of  o n e   of  t h e   two  original   building  blocks  of  t h e   un i -  
verse-the 
e lemen t   helium   created   i n  t h e  Big  Bang  explosion .  T h e  ev idence  
was found  using  t h e  Hopkins  Ultraviolet   Telescope ( H U T ) ,  o n e  of th ree  ultra-  
violet  instruments  o n  t h e  A s t ro -2  observatory which   was operated   in   t h e  pay- 
load bay  of  t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Endeavour  during   its  17-day mission  in  Ma rch .  
J o h n s  Hopkins  University   astronomers  were  able   t o  de tec t   t h e  helium   in   t h e  
light   from  a  d i s tan t   quasar  called  HS1700+64 ,   about   10  billion   light   years 
away. Essentially,  t h e  astronomers  were  looking  a t  t h e  universe  when   it  was  a 
qua r te r  of  its present   age. 
T h e  H U T  da ta   also  appear  t o   give  a  partial  answer  t o   t h e   puzzle  of  dark  
matter.  Ca lcu la t ion s  based  o n  HUT'S  da ta  show  t h a t   t h e  primordial  hydrogen  
a n d  helium   are  about   equal   t o  t h e   total   am o u n t  of  baryunic  dark  ma t te r   sci- 

ASTKC)NAUTI(:S  AN [ )   A ERONAU T IC S  

IUNE   1995 

entists   believe  exists.  ( N A S A   Release  95 -87 ;  W  Post,  Ap r   19/95;  AP,  J u n  
12/95; r im e ,  Mar  6/95;  Ax>\Vk, Feh  27/95; Science, J a n  13 /95 )  

June  14: T h e  Hubble   Space  Telescope has  detected   a  long-sought  population  
of  comets  dwelling  at  t h e   icy  fringe of  t h e  solar  system. Rased  o n  t h e  Hubb le  
c~bservations ,  astronomers   estimate   t h e   belt  con ta in s   a t   least  200  million  
comets.  T h e   existence   of  a  come t   belt  encircling   our   solar  system-like  t h e  
rings  of  Saturn-was   first  hypothesized  more  t h a n   4 0  years  ago  by  astronomer  
Gerard   Kuiper.  T h e   theory   remained  conjecture   un t i l   1992  w h e n   ground-  
based  telescopes began  de tec t ing  about   20  large  icy  bodies ranging  from  6 0  t o  
200  miles  in  diameter .   Hubhle   was  able   t o   identify  objects   just  a  few  miles 
across. Th i s   region  is  though t   to  he  t h e  source of  t h e  short-period  comets  t h a t  
orbit   t h e   S u n   in  less  t h a n   200   years.  T h e   planet   Pluto   is  considered  by 
;Istronomzrs to   be  t h e   largest  member  o t  the   Kuiper  Relt  region. T h e  come t -  
disk  l ~ e s  just  beyond  Nep tune   and   might  s t re tch   500  times  farther   from  t h e  
S u n  t h a n   Earth .  
T h e  Kuiper  Relt  is  100  times  closer  t o   Earth  t h a n   t h e   hypothesized  O o r t  
clL,tid, commonly   though t   t o  be  a  vast  repository  of  comets   tossed  o u t  of  t h e  
early  solar  system.  ( N A S A  Release  95 -88 ;  NY  Times,  J u n   15/95; W Post,  J u n  
1 5/95; Discover, Nov   95 ;  AelW'k,  Aug   7/95; Science, J u n  23/95)  

.4 ne\v  report  o n  orbital  debris has determined   t h a t   t h e  hazard  t o  spacecraft 
posed  b y  artificial  d e h r ~ s ,  though   still  small,  is  growing  and   requires  i n t em a -  
t iona l   ac t ion .   Ob jec t s   much   smaller  t h a n   those  presently   cataloged  c a n  
destroy  a spacecraft  in  a collision .  Even  collisions  t h a t  d o  nu t  destroy a space- 
craft  can  degrade  its performance  or  cause  it  t o  fail. T h e  report  was funded  by 
N A S A   a n d   coniiucted   by  a  comm i t tee   o f   t h e   Na t iona l   Research  Counc i l .  
( N A S A  Release  95-88;  USA  Today, J u n  14/95; Flu  Today, Aug   26/95)  

June  19:  T h e  Maglifter  introduced   last  year  by  NASA's Advanced   C o n c e p t s  
Office  is  being  developed  by  a nonprofit   consortium   t h a t   believes  it  c a n  raise 
$ 2   billion .  A  six  mon th   fe;lsihility study  will begin  this  summer, followed  by  a 
year-long prototype  and   demonstration .   I f   successful,  a  for-profit corporation  
would  complete   t h e  Maglifter  facility  and   hegin  operations   in  1999.  (AelWk, 
J u n   19/95 & O c t   23/95)  

June  20: NASA   Administrator  Daniel  S. Go ld in   released  a  s ta temen t   regard- 
ing  t h e  effects of  t h e  proposed  five-year, $2 .7   billion  reduction .   H e  essentially 
stated  t h a t  t h e  House of Representatives' FY96  budget resolution  assumes mas- 
sive cuts  in NASA'.; eficlrts t o  study  t h e  Earth.  It would  tu rn  a n  integrated  glob- 
al program  in to  a series of  disconnected  and  fundamentally  less effective meas- 
urements. T h e  cuts would cripple  t h e  core of  t h e  program,  t h e  Earth  Observing  
System. T h e  U.S.  government   in   partnership   with  scientists,  private  compa-  
nies,  and   o the r  nations   must  ensure  tha t   this  cutting-edge  research  t h a t   is  t h e  
foundation   of  blission  t o  Planet   Earth  is  con t inued .  W h i l e  N A S A   is  commit-  

l U N E   1995 

CHRONOLOGY 1995 

ted  t o   prudent  and  permanent  deficit  reduction,  further  cuts  to  Mission  to  
Planet Earth-and 
environmental research  in general-seriously 
jeopardize  an  
investment  in  the  future  tha t  will  return  economic and quality of  life benefits 
far  in excess of  what we  spend today.  (NA SA  Releases 95-54 & 99 )  

T h e  J e t  Propulsion Laboratory has developed  an  Active  Pixel Sensor which 
is  virtually  a  camera  o n  a  chip .  Using  complementary metal-oxide semicon- 
ductor  (CMOS )   technology,  it  costs  about  three  times  less  to  make  t h a n   a 
charge-coupled device  (CCD )  sensor.  I t   is  also  less  susceptible  to   radiation 
damage  in  space.  It  is  under  consideration  by  several  major  companies  for 
licensing.  (NA SA  Release 95-98; Business  Week, Mar 6/95; AuWk, Ju l  17/95)  

June 23:  Loss of  a second Pegasus launch vehicle o n  June  22 has created a seri- 
ous  shortage  of  small  launch  vehicle  support  for  NASA's  sc~en t i f ic  missions. 
NASA   anticipates  requesting  industry  t o   provide  suggestions  for  alternate  
sources  of  small  expendable  and   reusable  services.  Although   the   Agency 
would  prefer  to  use  U.S.  vehicles,  the  Wh i te   House could  change  t h e  policy 
tha t   precludes  the   use  of  others .   (NA SA   Release  95-101; Space  News,  J u n  
26/95 & Aug  28/95; AtlWk, Jul  10195 & Sep  4/95)  

The  death   of  a  laboratory  rat  while  under  anesthesia  triggered  a  ten-week 
ban  on  animal  research  at  the   Ames Research  Center .   (Fla Today, J u l  30195; 
AP, Jul  25/95; Science, J u n  23/95) 

June  27: T h e  launch of  the   Space Shu t t le  Atlantis   (mission STS -71 )  and   the  
first docking mission with Russian Space Station  Mir occurred almost 20  years 
after the  Apollo-Soyuz linkup  in July  1975. T h e  joined  spacecraft had  a record 
mass  of  about  200  tons  and  held  a  record  10  people-6  Americans  and   4 
Russians ( 8  men  and   2 women) .  After  five days of  joint  operations 245 miles 
above  Earth,  during  which  Mir's current   crew  underwent  extensive  medical 
testing  in  a  shuttle   cargo  bay  laboratory,  the   Mir-18  crew  returned  with 
Atlantis ,  having been  replaced  by  two Russian cosmonauts. 
American  astronaut  Dr.  Norm  Thagard ,   52,  who  was  aboard  Mir  since 
March  16 th ,  also  returned  home  with  the  American  record  for  a single space 
flight after more  t h a n   115 days  in  space.  ( A  Russian doctor holds the  current  
world  r e c o r d 4 3 9  days.) In contrast  to  the  cosmonaut crew, Norm elected  to  
walk  off  of  the   Shuttle   after  returning  to   Earth.  Atlantis   landed  a t  Kennedy 
Space Cen te r  on  July 7. Six more  trips by  Atlantis  to Mir are planned over the  
next  few years. (NA SA  Releases 95-59  & 95; NY  T m e s ,  Jitn 29/95; J u n  30195, 
Jul  1/95, Ju14/95; Jul 5/95, J u l 8 / 9 5  & Jul  11/95; W Post, J u n  28/95, J u n  29/95, 
J u n ,  30195, Jul   1/95, Jul  2/95, J u l   3/95, Jul  5/95  & Jul   8/95; USA  Today, J u n  
28/95,  J u n   29/95, J u n  30195, Jul   3/95  & Jul   5/95;  Fla  Today, J u n  28/95, J u n  
29/95, Jul   1/95, Ju l  2/95, Ju l  3/95, Ju l  4/95, Jul  5/95, Jul  7/95 & Ju l  8/95; AP, 
J u n  27/95, Ju l  6/95 & Ju l  8/95;  Reuters,  J u n  27/95, Ju l  1/95 & Ju l  2/95; UP I ,  
J u n  27/95; AP, Jul  2/95; Newsweek, Ju l  10195; AuWk, ] u l 3 / 9 5 )  

ASTRONAUTICS .AN12 AERONAUTICS 

J U N E  1995 

June  28: Veteran   Space  S h u t t l e  astronauts  Kenne th   S .  Reightler,  Jr., Richard  
N .   (D i c k )  Richards  and   Pierre  J .   T h u o t   have   left  t h e  A s t ronau t   Office.  Ken 
Reightler   will  join  Lockheed   Ma r t in ,   Hou s ton ,   as  t h e   program  manager  for 
Engineering ,  Test, a n d  Analysis. Dick  Richards  remains  a t  N A S A ,  moving  t o  
t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  Program  Office t o  serve as  t h e  mission director   for  t h e  sec- 
o n d   servicing  mission  for  t h e   Hubble   Space   Telescope.  After   th ree   S h u t t l e  
flights, T h u o t  will  teach   astronautics  courses  a t   t h e  Naval   Academy .  ( N A S A  
Release  95-104;  AvWk, J u l  10195) 

June  29:  N A S A  selected  30 research  proposals  for nego t ia t ion  of  Phase  I  c o n -  
tracts   as  pa r t   of  t h e   1995 Small  Business Technology  Transfer  Pilot   Program 
( S T T R ) ,  wh ich  is  o n e  of  t h e  ways  t h a t  N A S A   takes  t h e  knowledge gained   in  
air  and   space  exploration   and   transfers  it   t o  t h e  public.  Compan ie s  t h a t   suc- 
cessfully comp le te  Phase  I  activities  are eligible t o  compe te  for Phase I1 awards 
t h e   following  year.  T h e  Phase  I1  award  allows  for  two-year,  fixed-price  c o n -  
tracts  of  up  t o  $500,000. ( N A S A  Release  95-103) 

July 

July  7:  T h e   Delta  3  launch  vehicle  has  a  new  second  stage  rocket  engine 
planned  for use  in  1998. T h e  new engine will be  capable of generating 24,000 
pounds  of  thrust.  In   combination  with  the   larger  solid-fueled  boosters,  t h e  
McDonnell Douglas Delta 3 will be  able to  carry twice the  weight of  t h e  Delta 
into  an  orbit 22,300 miles above the  surface of  the  Earth's equator.  (Fla Today, 
J u l 7 / 9 5 ;  AvWk, Sep 25/95) 

T h e   turn-around  maneuver critical  to  the   vertical  landing  scheme  for  the  
X-33  reusable  launch  vehicle  was  demonstrated  in  a  test  flight.  (NA SA  
Releases 95-1  14  & 219; Sbace News, Ju l20 /95 ,  Oc t  30195 & Nov  6/95; AvWk, 
Jul  17/95, Sep  18/95 & Nov  13/95) 

July  10: A  report  from  the  Office of  Technology  Assessment  warns  of  short-  
comings in U.S. space policy. I t  says tha t  the  efforts of NASA  and  t h e  Defense 
Department  to  upgrade space launch  technologies are not   sufficiently coordi- 
nated  and  tha t   some  of  efforts could  undermine  the   goal  of  revitalizing  the  
sector's global commercial  effectiveness. (AvWk, Jul  10195) 

July  12:  NA SA  is developing plans for the  science institutes which are expect-  
ed  to   help   streamline  the   Agency's management  structure  and   improve  the  
quality  of  its scientific  research. Two  institutes  are being  defined  as pathfind- 
ers. O n e  is  affiliated with NA SA  Johnson  Space Cen te r   tha t  would  conduct  
biomedical  research.  T h e   other   is  affiliated  with  NASA   Ames  Research 
Cen te r   tha t   would  focus  o n   research  related  to  the   origins  and   evolution  of 
life,  and   planetary  biology.  (NASA   Releases  95-110   &  132;  Science,  Nov  
17/95 ) 

July  13:  Launch  of  Space  Shuttle   Discovery  (mission  STS-70)   marked  the  
100th  human   spaceflight. Th is  event   occurred  3 4  years after A lan   Shepard's 
historic  15-minute  sub-orbital  flight  in to   space.  STS-70's primary  objective 
was deployment of  the  Tracking and  Data Relay Satellite-G .  Discovery  used  a 
new  version  of  a  main  engine   which  took  a  decade  to  develop.  (NA SA  
Releases 95-32, 59  & 71; NY  Xmes, Jul  14/95; W Post, Jul   14/95; USA  Today, 
Jul  14/95, Jul  17/95; Fla Today, Jul  11/95, Ju l  12 /95 ,Ju l  16/95 & J u l  17/95; AP, 
Jul  12/95, Jul  13/95 & Ju l20 /95 ;  UPI, Ju l  12/95 & J u l 2 1 / 9 5 ;  Reuters, J u l 2 0 / 9 5  
& Jul 21/95; AvWk, Ju l  17/95) 

Galilee's atmospheric probe  was  successfully released  after  almost  six years. 
T h e   probe  will  achieve  t h e   highest  impact  speed  (106 ,000   mph )   of  any 
human-made   object  o n   December  7  as  it  passes  in to   Jupiter's  atmosphere. 
(NA SA  Releases 95-108 ,  11 1 & 122; NY Times, Ju l  11/95 & Ju l28 /95 ;  W Post, 
Ju1 13/95, Jul  14/95 & Jul  28/95;  USA  Today, Jul   12/95; Fh Today, Jul   12/95, 

ASTRONAUT ICS   AND  AEKON .4UTICS  

JULY   1995 

Jul  13/95, J u l   14/95 & Jul 28/95; Reuter\ ,  Jul   13/95 & Jul  27/95; AP, Jul  12/95, 
J u l   13/95, Jul  25/95 ,]ul  27/95 & A u g  7/95; UPI, Jul  13/95; Scrence, O c t  27/95) 

Several  wave  motions  of  the   Sun  were  detected  hy  the   Ulysses  spacecraft. 
T h e  measurement  of  an   approximately  five-minute wave  and  another   about 
three-hours  long were  made by  particle  detectors. T h e  shorter wave  was  con-  
firmed by  corresponding  tones  in  the  magnetic  field data .  Ulysses mission sci- 
entists have  also found  tha t   the  solar wind  in  the   Sun's polar  regions is  near-  
l y   twice  the  velocity measured  at  lower solar latitudes. T h e  Ulysses spacecraft 
was  designed to  study the   regions  above  the   Sun's  poles. It  is  jointly  managed 
by NASA  and  the  European Space Agency  (ESA ) .  Ulysses will  reach  a max-  
imum northern   latitude on  J u l y  31. T h e  spacecraft will  then   begin  to journey 
out   to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter, returning  in  Septemher 2000  to  the   vicinity  of  the  
Sun ,   which  will  t h e n   be  at  t h e   peak  o f   the   11-year  solar  cycle.  (NA SA  
Releases 95-26, 96 & 109; Flu  Today, Apr  2/95)  

July  14: T h e  Mars robot, which will  land  around  Ju ly  4,  1997, will  be  named 
after  "Sojourner  Truth,"  who  advocated  t h e   right  for  all  people  to   be  free. 
(NA SA  Release 95-1 12; N Y   Xm e s ,  ] i l l   16/95; AP, Jul  14/95)  

July  1 5 :  A  new  mission  control  center   at  the   Johnson   Space  Cen te r   hegan 
operating  ahout  10 hours  after  the   launch  of  t h e  Space Shuttle  Discovery.  It 
replaces  the   30-year-old  mission  control  which  began  contrcdling  manned 
space  flights  in  Houston  rather  than   at  Cape  Canaveral,  Florida. A  network 
of  200 computer work  stations are  replacing  the  lumbering and  inflexible, but 
highly  reliable mainframe computer. Launchings  and   landings, t h e  most  dan-  
gerous  parts  of  space  flight,  will  be  monitored  from  the   original  Mission 
Con t ro l  at  least  through  t h e  end   of  the   year  to  he  sure  there  are  no  glitches 
with  the   new  center.  (NY Times ,  J u l   15/95;W Post, 1111 16/95; Fla  Today, Feb 
12/95  61  15/95;  Space  New s ,   Dec  11/95; H  Chron ,   Jul   9/95;  AP,  Ju l   15/95; 
Reuters, Jul   14/95; AuWk, Jul  31/95) 

July  19:  Russian  rocket  engines  will  be  offered  by  Un i ted   Technologies  for 
sale  in  t h e   Un i ted   States .   Un i ted   Technologies  Gorp's Pratt   & Wh i tney  
unit   agreed  to market  two of  Energomash's rocket  engines. T h e  hope  is  tha t  
t h e   engine   will  power  the   X-34  reusable  rocket.  (Space  N ew s ,   J u n   26/95; 
WS],  J u l  19/95)  

NASA   discovered singe marks  in  primary  O-ring  seals on  both  the   Shuttle  
Discovery, launched  July  13, and  the   Shuttle  Atlantis ,   launched  on  June  27. 
T h e   seals  are  in  one   of  five  nozzle  joints  in   t h e   Redesigned  Solid  Rocket 
Motor  (RSRM )  o n   the   left  boosters.  Neither   flight  encountered  problems. 
T h e   investigation will  delay  the  August  launch  of  Space  Shuttle   Endeavour 
on  mission STS-69 .  (NA SA  Release 95-130; N Y  Times ,  Jul  27/95 & Jul  29/95; 
W Post,  Jul  28/95, Aug 7/95, Aug  12/95 & Aug  25/95; USA  Today, Ju l  24/95, 

JULY  1995 

CHRONOLOGY  1995 

J u l 3 1 / 9 5  & Aug  14/95; Fla  Today,]ul  19/95, Jul  28/95 & Aug  17/95; Reuters, 
Aug   25/95; AP, Jul  24/95, Jul  26/95, Ju l  29/95 & Aug  18/95; UP I ,  Ju l  26/95; 
AvWk, Ju l  3 1/95 ,  Aug  7/95, Aug  14/95 & Sep  18 /95 )  

July  23:  Two  amateurs  discovered  comet   "Hale-Bopp,"  which  will  pass  near 
Earth  in  1996. It  could  be  the   brightest  comet   in  20  years.  Pictures  from  the  
Hubble  Space Telescope show  a  remarkable  pinwheel  pattern   and  a  blob  of 
free-flying debris near  the   comet's  nucleus. (NA SA  Release  95-178; W  Post, 
J u l 3 1 / 9 5 ;  F h  Today, Aug  27/95; AuWk, O c t   16/95) 

July  24:  "National  Leadershiprnational  Partnership"  is NASA's theme   a t   the  
Experimental  Aircraft  Association  (EAA )   Fly-ln  Conven t ion   and   Sport  
Aviation  Exhibition  July  27-August  2  a t   Oshkosh,  Wisconsin.  A  featured 
exhibit  identifies  unique  partnerships formed between  government ,  industry, 
and  academia  t o  revitalize the  general aviation  industry  in areas ranging from 
modernizing  cockpits  to  reducing  aircraft  weight  and  cost.  Highlighted  arc 
activities  of  selected  companies  developing  general  aviation  technology 
through   t h e   NASA   Small  Business  lnnovation   Research  (SBIRP)  program. 
(NA SA  Releases 95- 1 19 ,  128, 129 & 174)  

Hubble  shows  tha t   the   "faint  blue  galaxy" once   thought   to  be  rare  is  ac tu -  
ally  the  most common type  in  t h e  universe.  A t  the  faintest  limits  ( i .e . ,  sever- 
al  billion  years  ago)  more  t h a n   half  of  the   galaxies  seen  are  small  irregular 
objects  called  "blue dwarfs." (NA SA  Release 95-120; NY Times, Apr   7/95; W 
Post, Aug  14/95)  

A  solid-fuel booster  for  Ariane-5   was  tested  in  French  Guyana .  T h e  new 
rocket  is designed to  keep Western  Europe's lead  in  launching heavy satellites 
in to  the  next   century. Arianespace has held  the   lead  in world  launch  market 
share for many  years since  1988. (NY Times, Apr   5/95; Space News, J a n  9/95; 
Reuters, Jul  24/95; AuWk, Ap r   10195, J i l l   10195, Aug  7/95, Sep  1 1/95 & O c t  
219 5 )  

July  25:  Supersonic  Laminar  Flow  Con t ro l   (SLFC)  experiment  may  apply  to 
High-Speed  Civil Transport  (H SC T )  which  could  f l y   twice  as  fast  as  today's 
typical  airliner.  SLFC  is  a  special  structure  mounted  on   the   wing  of  an   F- 
16XL. (NA SA  Releases 95-124 & 184; Interavia, Jan/95;  AvWk, O c t  23/95) 

July  27:  President  Bill C l in ton  presented  astronaut J im  Lovell with  the   Space 
Medal  of  Honor,  25  years  after  he  brought  his  crippled  Apollo  13 spacecraft 
home. Actor  Tom Hanks, who played Jim  Lovell in  the  film "Apollo  13 ,"  was 
present  at  the   ceremony. T h e  President  said  tha t   t h e  "extraordinary mission" 
was made even  more vivid by  the  recent  "Apollo 13" film. ( W  Post, J u l y  27/95; 
W Times, J u l 2 7 / 9 5 ;  USA Today,]ul 27/95; AP, J u l 2 6 / 9 5  & Jul27195; Reuters, 
Jul  26/95; UPI ,  Ju l  26/95) 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

JULY  1995 

July  28:   During  t h e  edge-on   view  of  Saturn's rings  o n  May  22 by  t h e  Hubb le  
Space  Telescope,  astronomers   found  what   may  be  two   new   Moons .   ( N A S A  
Release  95-127;  W Post, May 3/95 & Ju l  28/95;  USA  Today, Ju l  28/95; C Tnb, 
Ap r   28/95; AP, J u l 2 8 / 9 5 ;  AuWk ,  A p r   24/95 & Aug   7/95; Science, Aug  4/95)  

July  30:  Astronomers   have   confirmed  t h e   existence   of  a  brown  dwarf,  t h e  
object   of  a  30-year  search .  Twenty  t o  50  times  t h e  size  of  Jup i te r  and   t o o  h o t  
t o  be  classified  as  a p lane t ,  GL229B  is  a  small compan ion  to  t h e  cool  red  star 
Gliese   229   in  t h e   constellation   Lepus.  It  is  near   t h e   theoretical   limit  (e igh t  
pe rcen t   of  t h e   mass  of  t h e   S u n )   where  a  star   ha s   enough   mass  t o   sustain 
nuclear   f u s ~ o n .  T h e  brown  dwarf was  first  sighted  using  t h e  60 - inch   observa- 
tory o n  Mt .  Palomar.  Scientists  identified  it  i n  Oc tobe r   1994. Follow-up obser- 
va t ion s  were  made  by  Hubble's W ide  Field  Planetary  Cameras2  o n  Novembe r  
17 ,   1995.  A n o t h e r   Huhble   observation   six  mon th s   from  now  will  yield  a n  
exact   distance   t o  GL229B .  
T h e  difference between  planets  and  brown  dwarfs  is based  o n  how   t h e y  are 
formed.  A  p lane t   is  formed  from  dust  while  a  brown  dwarf would  have   gravi- 
tationally   collapsed  out   of  a  large cloud of  hydrogen.  ( N A S A  Release 95-212;  
NY  Tmes ,  S e p  14/95; FIa Today, Jul30195  & Sep  24/95;  Newsweek, Dec  11/95;  
AuWk ,  Dec 4/95;   Science, Dec  1 /95 )  

July   31:  A  prototype   of  t h e  Cockp i t   Wea the r   Information   Needs   ( C W l N )  
concep t  developed  by  Langley Research  C e n t e r  is  being  installed  o n  a Un i ted  
DC -10 -10 .  I t  will be  operated   for a t   least  th ree  mon th s  o n  scheduled ,  revenue  
flights  t o  evaluate   t h e  cost  and  safety  benefits.  Initially  t h e  weather   da ta   will 
be  limited  t o  a  nationaly   radar  summary  and   a n  air-to-ground   lightning   map. 
N A S A   has  plans   to  add  terminal   forecasts  and   surface  observations .   (AuWk ,  
J u l 3 1 / 9 5 )  

August 

August  1 : Ulysses has flown over  bo th   poles of  the  Sun   in  an   unprecedented 
voyage  giving  insights  into   magnetic  fields, solar winds,  and   cosmic  rays.  It 
reached  its  highest  point  on   July  31 .   It  passed  over  the   south   pole  last 
September. T h e  European Space Agency's (ESA )  Ulysses spacecraft is  the  first 
to  f l y   over bo th  poles  of  the  Sun .  It will complete  the  no r the rn  polar  pass  o n  
September  29  and  begin  to  journey  back  out   to   the  orbit  of Jupiter. (NA SA  
Release 95-125; NY Xmes, Aug  1/95; Fla  Today, Sep  17/95; Reuters, Aug 8/95;  
Science, May  19/95 & Nov  10195) 

August 3: Rockwell and Lockheed  are  forming a joint  venture  called  "United 
Space Alliance"  as  a contender  for  the   Shu t t le  contract .  Together  these  two 
companies have  overall  dominance   in  the  Shu t t le  field.  (WSJ, Aug  3/95; Fla 
Today, Aug  3/95 & Dec  1/95) 

August  7:  T h e   Hubble  Space  Telescope  (H S T )   shows  tha t   radio  galaxies 
which--existed  when  the   universe  was  half  its  present  age-are 
surprisingly 
varied  and  intricate  structures  tha t   are  even  more  complex  t h a n   previously 
thought .  A  team  of  astronomers a t  Cambridge University, England,  is  analyz- 
ing  28  radio  galaxies  tha t   have  been  imaged  by  HST   in  visible  light, by  the  
Very  Large  Array  Radio  Interferometer,  and  by  the   UK   Infrared  Telescope. 
They  propose  that   the  remarkable structures seen in the  Hubble  images are dif- 
ferent manifestations of  activity associated with  radio galaxies. T h e  new details 
may  be  a  combination  of  light  from  massive star  forming regions, small  satel- 
lite dwarf galaxies, and  bow  shocks caused by  jets  of  ho t  gas blasted  out of  the  
galaxy's core by a suspected black hole. T h e  period of  strong radio emissions is 
quite  short relative  to  the  total  lifetime of  a galaxy. (NA SA  Release 95-133) 

T h e  first NASA   Starlink  flight  successfully bounced  aircraft-based  remote 
sensing  data  off  a  satellite  for  real-time  delivery  to   an   Earth  station .   I t   will 
allow NASA   ground  stations  and   remote  nodes  to  monitor  and  process data  
from  multiple,  aircraft-based,  high-altitude  experiments  in  real  time.  T h e  
technology  can   also  be  used  to   assist  response  t o   major  fires,  floods,  ea r th -  
quakes, and  hurricanes.  (AuWk, Aug  7/95) 

August  1 1 :  About  100 legally blind  people  are  now  seeing  normally  due   to  a 
product   of  NASA's  Technology   Transfer  Program.  T h e   Low  Vision 
Enhancement   System  (LVES), known  as  "Elvis"  to  its  users,  is  worn  o n   the  
head  covering  both   eyes. Three   frontal  cameras  send  signals  t o  a  box  where 
the   images are  processed  for  increased  contrast .  A  black  and  white  projector 
mounted  over each ear feeds the   images through optics which  account  for the  
user's  eyeglass  prescription.  T h e   headset  and  the   hand-held   control   weigh 
about  two pounds  each.  (NA SA  Release 95-136; LA  Times, J u n  28/95) 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

AUGUST   199 5 

August  14 :   Conestoga   rockets  are  expected   t o   be  launched   from  Wallops 
Island, Virginia. The se   52  foot  rockets  could  bring  life back  t o  o n e  of  t h e  ear-  
liest  launch  sites i n  t h e  country. T h e  rockets  are  produced  by  EER  Systems t o  
launch   satellites  for  global  commun ica t ion   a n d   high-technology   navigation .  
Today's launch   was  postponed   due   t o   hydraulic  failure  in   two  engines .   ( W  
Post ,  A u g   14/95 & O c t   1 1/95; W Times, July  20195  & Aug   14/95;  Space News, 
J u l  24/95 & Aug  28/95;  LA  Times, O c t  8 /95 ;  AvWk, Aug  28/95)  

August  16:  Lockheed  Martin's  new  rocket  malfunctioned   as  it  was  Launched 
from  Vandenberg  AFB ,   California .   T h e   Lockheed  Launch   Vehicle  (LLV-1) 
was  designed  t o  place  payloads  weighing  up  t o   o n e   con  i n t o   low Earth   o rb i t .  
(USA  Today, Aug  16/95;  Fh Today, S e p  3/95;  Space News, O c t  2/95; AP, Aug  
16/95; AvWk, Aug   14/95, Aug   2 1/95; Aug  28/95,  Sep  4/95  & Dec  18 /95 )  

A u w t  18: Twro-time Space  S h u t t l e  astronaut   Dr. Jame s  P.  Ragian has   left  t h e  
astronaut   corps  for  a  position   with   t h e   Environmental   Protection   Agency's 
Na t iona l   L'ehicle  and   Fuel  Emissions  Laboratory  in   A n n   Arbor ,   Michigan .  
( N A S A  Release  95 -142 )  

Nobe l  laureate  Samuel  T ing  of  M I T  hopes   t h a t   t h e  Space  S h u t t l e  will carry 
a Ch ine se -bu i l t  magnet   for t h e  de tec t ion  of  a n t im a t t e r  in  1998. If  it  perfixms 
successfully, it  may  gain  a  place  aboard  t h e  Space   S t a t i o n   in   2001.  However, 
t h e  W h i t e   House   ha s   warned  N A S A   t o   avoid  in i t ia t ing  joint  projects  with  
C h i n a .   (Science, Aug   18 /95 )  

August  21:   NA SA   expects   t o   select  a  single  prime  con t rac to r   for  its  Space  
S h u t t l e  program  w i th in   a  year  and   tu rnove r   S h u t t l e  operations   in   1998.  ( W  
Post,  Aug   22/95;  USA  Today, Aug   22/95;  Space News,  Aug   28/95;  WSJ,  Aug  
22/95; AP, Aug  21/95;  UP I ,  Aug   21/95; AvWk, Aug  28/95)  

August 23: U .S .  polar  orbiting  weather  satellite  programs  are being  combined  
t o   save  money.  Costs   for  t h e   combined   program  will  be  split  between   t h e  
N a t i o n a l   O c e a n i c   a n d   A tm o s p h e r i c   A dm i n i s t r a t i o n   a n d   t h e   Defense  
Depa r tmen t .   N A S A   will  he  in   charge   of  developing   t h e   technology   for  t h e  
new  systems.  (AP ,  Aug   23/95)  

August  28:  T h e  Cassini   spacecraft  is  being  tested  in  preparation   for  integra-  
t i o n   of  its  major  systems  nex t   year.  T h e   mission  is  scheduled   t o   l a u n c h   in  
Oc tobe r ,  1997 with  t h e  spacecraft's arrival a t  S a t u r n  in  2004.  ( N A S A  Release 
95-1  18; A v W ,  Aug  28/95) 

August  29:  A  natural   laser  in   space was  detected   coming   from  a  young,  very 
h o t ,   luminous  star  in  t h e   constellation   Cygnus.  T h e   laser  was  created   as 
intense   u l t r a v~ o l e t  light   from  t h e   star  excites   t h e   densely  packed  hydrogen 
atoms   in  t h e   gaseous,  dusty  disk  surrounding   t h e   star.  W h e n   infrared  light 

shines  o n  t h e  excited   hydrogen  atoms ,   it  causes  t h e  atoms   t o  em i t  a n   in ten se  
beam  of  light  a t  exactly  t h e  same wavelength ,  creating  t h e  circumstellar  laser. 
T h i s   natural   laser  was  detected   o n   NASA's  Kuiper  A i rbo rne   Observatory  
( K A O )  during  missions  based  o n  Hawaii .  T h e  existence  of such  natural   lasers 
was predicted   more  t h a n   15 years ago.  ( N A S A  Release 95-148;  Reuters ,  Aug  
29/95;  Fh  Today, S e p  10195; Science, S e p  8 / 9 5 )  

T h e  Ga l i leo  spacecraft  is   lowing  t h r o u g h  t h e   most  intense   interplanetary  
dust  storm   ever   measured.  T h i s   is  t h e   greatest  of  several  large  dust   storms  
encoun te red   since  Decemher  1994 ,  when   t h e   spacecraft  was  still  almost  110 
million  miles from Jupiter .  ( N A S A  Releases 95 -147 ;  NY  Times, S e p  3/95;  USA 
Today, Aug  31/95;  FlcI  Today, Aug  31 /95 ;  Space News, S e p  4/95; AP, A u g  29/95 
& Aug  31/95;  AtsWk, Sep   11/95)  

TOPEX/Poseidon ,   t h e  U.S./French  ocean-observing  satellite ,  ha s  comp le t -  
ed   its three-year  mission.  Fortunately,  t h e  hea l th  of  t h e  satellite  leads  its m a n -  
agers t o  expec t  it  t o  con t inue  operating  a n o t h e r  four years. T h e  J e t  Propulsion 
Laboratory  manages  t h e   U . S .   portion   of  t h e   mission  for  NASA's  Office  of 
Mission  t o   Planet   Earth .  T h e   satellite  ha s  de tec ted   t h e  oceans   to  have   risen 
more   t h a n   a  t e n t h   of  an   inch   in  each   of  t h e  past  two  years. However ,   it  may 
be  too   soon   t o   tell  whether   t h e   rise  seen   by  t h e   TOPEX/Poseidon   ocean  
ohserving satellite  will con t inue .   ( N A S A  Release 95 -146 ;  AP, May 4/95; UPI, 
May  4/95; Flrl  Today, J u n  25/95; Space News, Sep  4/95;  Science, May  5/95)  

T h e   American   Association  for  t h e   A d v a n c em e n t   of  Sc ience   ( A A A S )  
warns  t h a t   " the   long  term   effects  of  dismantling   a  cohe ren t   scientific  e n t e r -  
prise  could  be  very  harmful."  (NY  Times,  Aug  29/95; W Post, Aug   29/95)  

Sexren  U.S.  rockets   will  he   launched   i n t o  space  from  Australia .   Five  U.S. 
i~n ive r s i t ie s  will  be  watching   t h e   launchcs   very  closely. T h e   payloads  will  be 
launched   aboard  Black  Brandt  1X  rockets.  ( N A S A   Release  95 -187 ;   Space 
Netus, NOV  27/95; AP, Aug  29 /95 )  

September 

September  1:  NASA  is  shifting  its  ~ l a n s  for  the  multibillion-dollar  Earth 
Observing System (EOS) away  from  long-term global change  toward  acquir- 
ing  information  more  immediately useful  to  such  groups as  farmers  and  the 
fishing  industry.  A  panel  convened  by  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences 
endorses EOS while making several suggestions. (NASA  Release 95-65; Space 
News, O c t  9/95; Science, Apr  21/95, Sep  1/95 & Sep 22/95) 

September 4:  Th e  first  element  of  the   International Space Station Alpha  will 
be  the  Functional Cargo Block  (FGB). It  is  actually a 21-ton "space tug" being 
built in Russia and set for launch in November  1977. Th e  U.S. Boeing Defense 
and  Space Group has  teamed  with  Russia's Khrunichev Space Center o n  this 
project. Boeing will  procure  one block  for  launching.  (Fh Today, Aug  18/95; 
Reuters, Aug  15/95; Space News, Dec  18/95; AvWk, May  8/95 & Sep 4/95) 

September 7: T h e  Space Shuttle Endeavour (STS-69) was  launched  to  deploy 
and  retrieve  two scientific spacecraft. On e  was  the second flight of  the Wake 
Shield  Facility-2, a  12-foot diameter  disk  for  growing  semiconductor  films. 
Th e  other was  the SPARTAN  201 on  its third  flight. Its mission  was  to study 
the   outer  atmosphere  of  the  Sun  and  its  transition  into  the   solar wind  that 
constantly  flows  past  the  Earth.  (NASA  Releases 95-121 & 164; NY  Times, 
Sep 3/95, Sep 14/95, Sep 15/95, Sep 16/95, Sep 17/95, Sep 18/95 & Sep 19/95; 
W Post,  Sep 8/95, Sep  11/95, Sep  12/95, Sep  17/95, Sep  18/95 & Sep  19/95; 
USA  Today,  Sep  11/95 & Sep  13/95; Fh  Today,  Sep  11/95, Sep  12/95, Sep 
14/95 & Sep  17/95; CSM, Sepl1/95; AP,  Sep 7/95, Sep 8/95, Sep  10195, Sep 
12/95, Sep  15/95 & Sep  18/95; Reuters,  Sep 9/95,  Sep  11/95 & Sep  14/95; 
UPI, Sep 7/95; AvWk, Sep 11/95 & Sep  18/95) 

September  1 1  : A  600 pound,  solar power  aircraft named  Pathfinder  set a new 
altitude record  of  50,500 feet. Th e  remotely-controlled  vehicle  is being eval- 
uated  by  NASA  and  industry for environmental  sampling missions.  (NASA  
Release 95-152; AvWk, Sep 18/95 & Sep 25/95) 

NASA   engineers are  investigating technologies  to be  used  on  an  inexpen- 
sive "lifeboat," X-35, for  the  International  Space Station's crew.  (AvWk, Sep 
11/95 & Dec  18/95) 

NASA   managers have  drawn up  plans  to  furlough  up  to 92  percent  of  the  
Agency's  21,500-member  workforce  if  the  Federal  government  runs  out  of 
money o n  October  1. (Space News, Sep 1 1/95) 

Last month, the Russians declared their own version of  bankruptcy by  con- 
fiscating Rimsat's investment. T h e  deal  between  an  American  company  and 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

SEPTEMBER  1995 

Informcosmos had  several Gorizont  satellites  in orbit  in  1994, providing  tele- 
vision  and  cellular  networks  in  Asia.  A t   issue  is  who  owns  the   satellites. 
(Space News, Dec  11/95; WS],  Sep  11/95) 

September  18:  Childbirth   is  expected  to   be  made  safer  and   easier  with  the  
space-age forceps being  developed  by  Marshall  Space Flight Cen te r  with  the  
Collins  Clinic   in  Slidell,  Louisiana.  Using  space  program  instrumentation 
technology, fiber optic  sensors in the  forceps will enable the  physician to  mon-  
itor  forces on   the   infant  throughout  the  delivery. T h e  use  of  composite mate-  
rials  will  help   ensure  a  safer  distribution   of  pressure  o n   t h e   infant .  
Additionally,  the   instrumented  forceps will  allow obstetrical students t o  learn 
to  use  forceps within  safe  limits before  entering  practice.  (NA SA  Release 95- 
153)  

September  19: A n  early goal of  NASA's proposed  New Millennium program  is 
to  test  highly  sophisticated  space hardware  t o  prove  tha t   scientific  spacecraft 
can   be  built  more  t h a n   30  percent  smaller  without  sacrificing performance. 
T h e   first  New  Millennium  spacecraft  will  explore  a  comet ,   an   asteroid,  or  
some cornhination of  them.  Three  deep space missions  are  to be  flown by  the  
year  2000.  (NA SA  Releases 95-100 & 155; Space News,  Feb  13/95, J u n  5/95 
& Sep  4/95; AuWk, May  15/95 & Sep  25/95) 

September 22 :   Predictions  of  El  Niiio  can   now  be  made  more  t h a n   a  year  in 
advance  due  to  computer  models  that   now  incorporate  ocean  data .   (NA SA  
Release  95-159;  USA  Today,  O c t   26/95;  Fla  Today,  Nov  26/95;  Science, Sep  
22/95) 

September  25:  TRW  received  a  contract   to  build  two  more  Earth  Orbiting  
Systern (EOS )  spacecratt. EOS  is  the  centerpiece of NASA's Mission to  Planet 
Earth,  a  long-term  effort  to   study  global  climate  changes.  (Space News,  O c t  
9/95; AwWk,  Sep  25/95) 

NASA's  Optical  Transient  Detector  ( O T D )   has  found  a  relationship 
between  intense  satellite-observed  lightning  activity  and  tornado  formation. 
Launched  April  3  aboard  a  Pegasus  rocket,  the   O T D  observed  a  peak  of  6 0  
flashes per  second  a minute  before  a  tornado  was  seen  touching  t h e  ground. 
(NA SA  Release 95- 160; Space News, O c t  30195) 

Microcosm  Inc.  is  developing  a  rocket  engine  that   would  be  the   basis  of  a 
"Scorpius" family of  low-cost launch vehicles. It estimates that   its "Liberty" ver- 
sion  would  cost  one - ten th  the   price  of  the   Lockheed  Launch  Vehicle  (LLV). 
Liberty  invcllves  four stages, seven propulsion pods,  and  49  engines. T h e  work 
started  with  a  Small  Business  lnnovative  Research  (SBIR) contract  from  the  
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization  in  1993. NASA   is  deciding whether  to  
fund several SBIR contracts for a one-engine "SR-S" rocket. (AvWk, Sep 25/95) 

SEPTEMBER   1995 

CHRONOLOGY  1995 

September  29:  To  insure  that  new  and  far-reaching  concepts  continue  to  be 
identified,  NASA   has  initiated  a  program  called  Advanced  Concepts 
Research  Projects.  It  intends  to   fund  eight  ACRP  fellows  in  1996.  (NASA  
Release 95-165; Space News,  Oc t  9/95; AvWk, Oc t   16/95) 

Pioneer  11  is  scheduled  to  end  operations  after  an   epic  career.  Although 
launched  a  year  before  Pioneer  11,  Pioneer  10  inexplicably  has  a  stronger 
power  supply  and  should  function  for  another  three  or  four  years.  (NASA  
Release 95-163; AP, May  15/95)  

-- 

Oc tober  

October  5:  Saturn's  possible  two  new  moons  sighted  by  t h e   Hubble   Space  
Telescope  ( H S T )  o n  May  2 2   are  though t   instead  t o   he  orbiting   clumps  of 
icy  rubble.  Images  from  the   August  10  "ring  plane   crossing"  presented   a 
new  mystery. They   seem  to   show  a t   least  three   new  objects ,  which   are   in 
different  orbits  t h a n   t h e   two  May  objects .   A n   exp lana t ion   is  tha t   a  sha t -  
tered moon le t  would be  brighter  and  more  visible,  t h a n  when  all of  its mass 
was  compressed  i n t o  a  single solid  body.  ( N A S A  Releases  95-172;  Science, 
O c t  20195) 

I n  2004,  the  asteroid Toutatis will pass by  Earth  a t  a range of  four times  the  
distance between  the  Earth  and  the  Moon .  Unlike  t h e  rotations  of  hundreds 
of asteroids tha t  have  been  studied with optical telescope, Toutatis nas neither  
a simple rotation   nor  a fixed pole, according to  two NASA-sponsored  scien- 
tists. T h e  asteroid  is 2.9 miles  by   1.5 miles by  1.2 miles. N o  known asteroid  or 
comet  will  approach  Earth  as  close  as  Toutatis  until  the   year  2060.  (NA SA  
Release 95-  17 1; Science, O c t  6/95)  

October  6:  A  panel  of  industry  managers  and  academic  researchers  recom- 
mends  improvements  in  the   way  NASA   conducts  scientific  research.  It  rec- 
ommends tha t  the  Agency give its chief scientist more authority, develop real- 
istic  priorities  to   match  a  slowly  declining  budget,  combat  the   "insular  cul- 
ture"  a t  NASA  Centers  and subject technology  to  more exacting peer review. 
(Space News, O c t  9/95; Science, O c t  6/95)  

October  7:  A  robot  alfalfa  harvester  is  a  joint  project  of  Camegie   Mellon, 
NASA ,  and   the  New  Holland  farm equipment  company. Although   America 
lost  the   robot  wars  in  the   last  few  decades,  many  new  applications  are  now 
seen. (NY Xmes, O c t  7/95; AvWk, J u n  26/95) 

October  10: NASA   is  flight  testing  an   aircraft  with  controlled  nose  strakes 
tha t   promises  increased  maneuverability and   agility  in  air combat  situations. 
T h e   strake  project,  called  Actuated   Nose  Strakes  for  Enhanced  Rolling 
(ANSER ) ,   consists  of  two  moveable  "flipper-like"  panels  called  strakes 
installed  o n  the  upper nose of  an  F-18 aircraft. T h e  hinged  four-feet long, six- 
inch   wide  panels  will  assist  the   pilot  in  yawing  to  the   right  o r   left  a t   high 
angles of  attack  when  conventional   rudders  lose  their   effectiveness.  (NA SA  
Release 95-175; Antelope Valky  Press, O c t   18/95; AvWk, Nov  20/95) 

October  16: T h e  H S T  has  discovered  ozone  on  Jupiter's satellite  Ganymede, 
making  it  one   of  the   solar  system's  rare  moons  tha t   have  atmospheres. 
Ganymede's  ozone  is  produced  when   it  passes  through  charged  particles 
trapped  in Jupiter's powerful magnetic field.  (AuWk, O c t   16/95)  

,4STKONAUTICS A N D  AERONAGTICS 

OCTOBER  1995 

H S T   has   also  imaged  bright  auroras  of  Saturn's  no r the rn   and   sou the rn  
poles  in  far  ultraviolet   light .  T h e  circular  band   centered   o n  t h e  n o r t h   pole  is 
a n  enormous  auroral  cu r ta in   rising  as  far  as  1 ,200  miles  above   t h e   cloudtops .  
T h i s   cu r ta in   changed   rapidly  over   t h e   two   hou r   period  of  Hubb le   observa- 
tions.  T h e  aurora  is  produced  as trapped  charged  particles  collide w i th  atmos-  
pheric   gases-molecular  and   a tom ic   hydrogen   in   Saturn's  case.  (AvWk ,  O c t  
16/95;  Science, A u g   18/95)  

October  18: N A S A  physicists  have   assembled  t h e  first view of  t h e  spiral struc-  
ture  of  our   solar  system's magnetic   field.  T h e  aerial  p h o t o   of  t h e   in te rp lane -  
tary  magnetic  field  became  possible  as Ulysses flew over   t h e  sou th  pole  of  t h e  
S u n   in   1994. T h e  me thod   involved  tracking   t h e  bright  spots  of  radio  waves 
excited  by  moving  electrons  ejected   from  t h e  S u n  a t  speeds over  6 2 , 1 0 0  miles 
per  second .  S u c h  spots are  caused  by  solar  flares o r  o t h e r  explosive  even t s  o n  
t h e   S u n .  T h e   travel  of  electrons   is  constrained   t o   t h e   large-scale  magnetic  
field  lines, much   as cars follow  roads.  A  c h a r t  of  t h e  received  radio  emissions 
shows  they  follow  t h e  expected  spiral shape ,  even   including  kinks due  t o  vari- 
a t ion s   in  solar wind  speed.  A t   these  high   speeds, t h e  whole   pa th   takes  about  
20  minutes   t o  Earth's o rb i t .  ( N A S A  Release  95-185;  W Post, O c t  23 /95 )  

October  20:  Space   S h u t t l e  Co lumb ia   (STS - 7 3 )   is  launched .   During  t h e  mis- 
sion  Co lumb ia   provided  a  calm ,   stable   platform  for  16  days  of  on -o rb i t  
research  using  t h e  Microgravity  Laboratory  (USML -2 )  Spacelab   t h a t  consist-  
ed  of  over  4 0  fluid-physics, material  science ,  and   biotechnology  experiments .  
Co lumb ia   landed   o n   November   5.  Columbia's  window was  nicked   by  space 
debris. T h e  Space  S h u t t l e  also received  a  1 cm  crater   in  its cargo bay door, t h e  
biggest  impact   t o   date .   ( N A S A   Release  95-152;   NY  Times, O c t   21/95,  O c t  
22/95 ,  O c t  27/95 & Nov   5/95;  W Post, O c t  29/95 & Nov   6/95;  F l a  Today, O c t  
27/95 ,  Nov   3/95  & Nov   4/95;   USA  Today, N o v   6/95;  Space News,  Nov   6/95  
& Dec  4/95; AvWk, Nov   13/95)  

October  23:  A  Conestoga   rocket  exploded   45   seconds  after  liftoff  from 
NASA's Wallops  Island ,  Virginia. Built  by  EER Systems C o r p . ,  t h e  rocket  was 
end ing   its  first  stage  when   it   blew  up.  (NY  Times,  O c t   24/95;  W  Post,  O c t  
25/95;  W Times, O c t  25/95; USA Today, O c t  24/95; Space News, O c t  9 /95 ,  O c t  
30195 & Dec  11/95; AwWk, O c t  30195) 

Astronauts   Wendy   Lawrence  and   S c o t t   Parazynski  were  rejected  as  cand i -  
dates  t o  fly  onboard   Soyuz due  t o  height   requirements .  S c o t t  was  t o o  tall   and  
Wendy  was  too  short .   ( N A S A  Releases  95 -156  & 191;  W Times, O c t   18/95 & 
O c t  30195; USA  Today, O c t   16/95; AP, Nov   9/95;  AwWk, O c t  23/95)  

October  26:  Galileo's tape  recorder,  which   had   been   balky,  is  again  working. 
Scientists   will  avoid  using  t h e   magnetic   tape   near   e i the r   e n d   of  t h e   reel  t o  
reduce  t h e   power  needed  t o   operate   t h e   recorder.  ( N A S A  Releases  95-168 ,  

OCTOBER  1995 

CHRONOLOGY  1995 

182, 188 &  193; NY   Times, O c t  21/95; W Post,  O c t   13/95, O c t   23/95  &I  O c t  
29/95; Ffa  Today, Nov  5/95; Space News, O c t   16/95, O c t  23/95, O c t  30195 & 
Dec  11/95; AvWk, O c t  23/95, & O c t   30195; Science, O c t  27/95) 

October  27: A n   historic  wind  tunnel   a t   NASA   Langley  Research  Center ,  
Hampton ,  Virginia  is  being  retired. Originally called  the   "Full  Scale Tunnel" 
when  bu i l t   in   1931, i t   was  the   largest  wind  tunnel   in  the   world  until  1945. 
(NASA  Release 95-194;  AuWk, Nov  20195) 

November  2 :  T h e  Hubble  Space Telescope has  provided  pictures  of  a  special 
type of  newborn star emerging from dense, compact pockets of  interstellar gas 
called  evaporating gaseous globules (EGGs ) .  Hubble found  the  EGGs, appro- 
priately  enough,  in   t h e   Eagle  nebula  which  is  a  star-forming  region  of  t h e  
nearby  constellation  Serpens.  Many  EGGs  are  found  a t   the   tip  of  the   two 
largest finger-like features ~ r o t r u d i n ~  
from the  nebula's monstrous columns of 
cold  gas,  dubbed  "elephant  trunks."  Photos  of  EGGs  a t   different  stages  of 
being  uncovered  provide  a n   unprecedented  look  a t   how  stars  and   their   sur- 
roundings  appear before they  are  truly stars. This  process of  forming stars from 
high-speed  columns  of  hydrogen  is  quite  different  from  t h e   process  of  stars 
forming  in  isolation.  Th e  EGGs appear  unable  to  form the  disks tha t  go o n  to  
become  solar systems.  (NA SA  Release 95-190; NY Times, Nov  3/95; W Post, 
Nov  3/95; W Times, Nov  3/95; USA  Today, Nov/95; Fla  Today, Nov  3/95; AP, 
Nov   3/95; Newsweek, Nov  13/95) 

November  6:   NASA's unmanned  spacecraft  Wind ,   patrolling  interplanetary 
space 662,000 miles from Earth, detected  a "giant magnetic cloud" o n  October  
18. A n  updated  "space weather alert" was  issued  to  commercial  satellite oper- 
ators,  electrical  utilities  and  other   organizations  worldwide. T h e  disturbance 
was  speeding  to  Earth  at  over  2.1  million  miles  per  hour.  It  produced  a mag- 
netic   storm  and   auroral  displays  tha t   persisted  for  two  days.  Future  distur- 
bances  are  anticipated  as  the   11-year sunspot  cycle is expected  to  peak  short-  
ly  after  t h e  year 2000. T h e  Wind  spacecraft was  launched November  1 ,  1994. 
(NA SA  Release 95-202; Space  News ,  O c t  30195) 

NASA  suspended  the  X-34 program for two weeks o n  November 2 over t h e  
issue  of  whether   a  U.S.  or  a  Russian  engine  would  be  used.  T h e   next   day  
Wh i te   House  officials denied NASA's  request to  withdraw  from  the  govern- 
ment-industry  team  building  the   unmanned   reusable  launcher.  (Space News ,  
Nov   6/95; A vW k ,  Nov  6/95)  

Lockheed Martin  plans t o  develop an  advanced Atlas rocket  to  launch  large 
commercial  satellites.  T h e   " I I A R   would  be  ready  to   launch  medium-lift  t o  
intermediate-lift payloads in  December,  1998. Th is  new  rocket  is  a challenge 
to  Arianespace,  the   53-member  European  space  consortium,  and   t o   t h e  
McDonnell  Douglas Corp.  (WSJ, Nov   6/95)  

Boeing  C o .   is  developing a  venture  to  use  converted  oil-drilling  platforms 
to  launch  satellites  atop  Zenit  rockets,  which  are  built  by N PO  Yuzhnoye  of 
the  Ukraine .  T h e  plan would  allow as  many  as  22   launches  through  2001,  as 
long  as  world  demand  for  launches  to  geosynchronous  orbits  remains  strong. 
(Space News ,  Dec  11/95; WSJ, Nov   6/95 & Dec 6/95) 

A S T R O N A U T L C S  A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

NOV E h l B E R   1995 

November  7 :  A  satellite   payload  designed  and   built  hy  college  students   was 
launched   onboa rd   a  N A S A   launch   vehicle .   Sho r t ly   after   launch   t h e  
SURFSa t -1  was  separated   from  t h e   primary  payload  and   moved  in to   a  polar 
o rb i t .  W h e n   t h e  project  began  in   1987 ,  six  C a l t e c h   students   were  chosen   t o  
begin  t h e   Summe r   Undergraduate   Research  Fellowship  (SURFS a t ) .   Each 
summer  a new  group  of  undergraduates  took  over. T h r o u g h   1994 ,  6 1  students  
have   participated .   T h e   satellite   has   two  experiments:   o n e   tests  how  Earth's 
a tmo sphe re   affects  t h e   new  Ka-band   being  implemented   o n   NASA's   Deep  
Space  Network ,   and   t h e  o t h e r   tests  ground  stations   supporting  NASA's new 
Space  Very  Long  Baseline  Interferometry  project.  T h e   la t te r   will  he  used  t o  
commun ica te  with   a Japanese  spacecraft t h a t  will make  radio  astronomy  s tud -  
ies  of  quasars  and   o t h e r  objects  a t   t h e   edge  of  t h e   universe.  ( N A S A  Release 
95-204;  Space N ew s ,  Sep  4/95  & Nov   13/95)  

N A S A  will pursue  a non -compe t i t ive  con t rac t  with  Un i ted   Space  Alliance  
t o   assume  responsibility  eventually   for  Space   S h u t t l e   operat  ions.  Rockwell 
In te rna t iona l  a n d  Lockheed  Ma r t in  Co rpo ra t ion ,  together  ho ld ing  69  percent  
of  t h e  dollar  value of  all S h u t t l e  related prime con t rac t s ,  formed t h e  joint  ven -  
ture ,   "Un i ted   Space  Alliance ."   T h e  non -compe t i t ive  con t rac t   was  clearly  in  
t h e  public  interest   as  n o  o t h e r   company   could  possibly  meet  NASA's safety, 
manifest  and  schedule  requirements .  ( N A S A  Releases 95 -1  58  & 205; W  Post, 
Nov   8/95;  W S J ,  Nov   8/95;  Fla  Today, Nov   8 /95  & L3ec  6/95;  Space N ew s ,  Lkc  
4/95; AP, Aug   3/95; A v W k ,  Nov   13/95)  

November  12:  Space   S h u t t l e  A t lan t i s   (STS - 7 4 )   is  launched .   O n   its  second  
visit  t o  Space  S h u t t l e  Mir, A t lan t i s   added  a pe rmanen t  Russian-built  docking  
port .   T h e   15-foot ,   9 ,000   pound   docking   t u n n e l   came   with   two  new  solar 
arrays,  o n e  built  in  Russia  and  o n e  provided  by  N A S A ,  t h a t  woiild  he  assem- 
bled  later.  T h e  link   up, wh ich   occurred  o n  November   15 ,  required  t h e  pilot ,  
Kenne th   C am e r o n ,   t o   aim   for  a  target  about   th ree   inches   in  diameter   and  
c o n n e c t  a t  a speed of  less t h a n  o n e - t e n t h  of  a mile per  hour .  T h e  quarter-mil-  
lion-pound   spacecraft docked  with  Mir, of  about   t h e  same weight, as they  sped 
through   space  a t   17 ,500  mph .  T h e y  remained   docked   for  th ree   days. Mission 
STS - 7 4   ended   o n   November   20,  paving  t h e   way  toward  assembly  of  t h e  
In te rna t iona l  Space  S t a t i o n  beginning   in November   1997 .  
T h e  show went  o n  despite  a possible G o v e r nm e n t  shutdown .  Mission  c o n -  
trol jokingly  told  t h e  five astronauts ,  "We  expec t  you  t o  show up  for work, fur- 
lough  o r   not."  ( N A S A  Release  95-192;   N Y   Times ,  Nov   13/95,  N o v   15/95, 
Nov   16/95 ,  Nov   19/95 & Nov   21/95; W  Post,  Nov   13/95 ,  N n v   14/95, N o \ ,  
15/95,  Nov   16/95 ,  Nov   19/95  & Nov   21/95;   USA  Today,  No\., 13/95 ,  Nov  
14/95 & Nov   20195; Fla  Today, Nov   14/95 & Nov   23/95)  

November  13:  T h e  Far  Ultraviolet  Spectroscopic Explorer  (FUSE) mission will 
be  launched   in  Oc tobe r   1998 .  Th i s  mission  was  selected  earlier  in  the   year  as 
part  of  an  overall restructuring of  t h e  Explorer program.  Beginning in  1958, t h e  

Explorer program provides Earth-orbiting  satellites t o  conduct   research in  space 
physics and   astrophys~cs .  (NA SA  Release  95-206; Spme News ,  Nov   27/95) 

Noelemher  15:  A   temporary  gove rnmen t   shutdown   is  being  considered .  
A l though   t h e   Space   S h u t t l e  would  remain   in  orbit ,   N A S A   TV-the 
en t i ty  
t h a t   provides  footage  of  t h e   astronauts   during   t h e  mission-could 
be  closed. 
(CSM ,  N o v   15 /95 )  

November  17: N A S A   plans   t o   create   independen t   institutes   t h a t   would  take  
over   much   of  t h e   research  now   being  performed  at  five  NA SA   centers .  
However,  many  scientists  fear  t h a t   t h e   reforms  were  hastily  conceived   a n d  
could  shortchange  N A S A   research.  (Science, Nov   17/95)  

Noslember  20: Two  large  aerospace  con t rac to r s ,  Boeing  C o .   and   M c n o n n e l l  
Douglas C o r p . ,  are  investigating  the i r  merger  potential .   (WSJ, Nov   20195) 

November  2 1 :  A n   in te rna t iona l   team   of  scientists  have   examined   da ta   from 
t h e  Japanese/U .S .   X-ray  astronomical   satellite   "ASCA "   wh ich   may  confirm  
how   cosmic rays achieve  speeds near   t h e  speed  of  light .  Enrico  Fermi  suggest- 
ed  a  theory   in  1949 in which  charged  particles are  bounced  between   tu rbu len t  
regions  inside  t h e   shock  front   of  a  supernova   explosion.  Bouncing  much   like 
a  ping  pong  ball  between   a   table   and   a  paddle  as  t h e  paddle  is  brought   closer 
t o  t h e  table ,  a  charged  particle  gains energies up  t o  100  trillion  e lec t ron  volts. 
T h e  tell-tale   clue  t o  t h e  discovery  was  t h e  de tec t ion   of  two  oppositely-locat-  
ed  regions  in  t h e   rapidly  expand ing  remnan t   of  t h e   Supernova   of  1006  A D .  
T h e  A S C A  satellite  con ta in s  telescopes for  simultaneously  taking   images and  
spectra  of  X-rays, allowing astronomers   t o  distinguish  between  different  types 
of X-ray  emission from nearby  regions of  t h e  same celestial object .  A S C A  was 
launched   February 20 ,   1993.  ( N A S A  Release  95-208)  

November 28: A   fully au toma ted  landing  of  a  transport  aircraft was made  using 
only  eng ine   thrust   for  con t ro l .   Landing   was  a   McDonne l l   Douglas  MD - I  1 
using  a   Propulsion  Con t ro l led   Aircraft   (PCA )   system  a t   NASA's  Dryden 
Flight  Research  Cen te r .   P C A   is  expected   t o   become  a n   impo r tan t   back -up  
system  in  t h e   e v e n t   of  a   loss  of  a n   aircraft's hydraulic  flight  con t ro l   system. 
( N A S A  Release 95 -149 ;  Fla  Today, Sep  24/95; AuWk, Sep  4 /95 )  

Scientists   a t   NASA's  Marshall  Space   Flight  C e n t e r   have   de te rm ined   a  
three-dimensional   a tom ic   structure  of  a n   impo r tan t  enzyme  from  o n e  of  four 
species  of  parasites  t h a t   cause  schistosomiasis. Using  highly  specialized  X-ray 
equ ipmen t   and   protein   crystallization  techniques   developed  for  space-based 
microgravity  research,  they  were  able  t o  perform  a n  impo r tan t  step  leading  t o  
t h e   use  of  drugs  and   vaccines.  Schistosomiasis  affects  200  t o   300  million  
people  and   is  second  only   t o   malaria  in  cause  of  dea th   worldwide.  ( N A S A  
Release 95 -2  1 1 ; HtsvI  Tms, Dec 3 / 9 5 )  

December 

December  I :   NASA's  Galileo  spacecraft  has  confirmed  it  has  reached  the 
inside of  Jupiter's magnetosphere.  Direct  measurements of  the  Jupiter system 
may  now  begin.  Final  tuning  of  the   flight path  is  scheduled  for  December  2 .  
O n  December  7 ,  Galileo's previously deployed atmospheric probe will  plunge 
into Jupiter's cloud  tops and descend  into the giant planet on  a parachute. A n  
hour  after  the  probe  mission  is  completed,  Galileo  will  begin  to   fire  its 
onboard  rocket  beginning  a two year  mission  of  close-up studies of  the  plan- 
et's  large  moons,  Jupiter  itself,  and  the   magnetosphere.  Th e   spacecraft  was 
launched  aboard  Space  Shuttle Atlantis  and  an  Interim  Upper  Stage  ( IUS )  
on  October  18, 1989. (NASA  Releases  95-207 & 215; NY  Times, Dec  3/95, 
Dec  7/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec  11/95; W Post,  Dec 4/95,  Dec  8/95 & Dec  11/95; 
USA  Today, Dec  1/95, Dec  7/95 & Dec  8/95; Fla  Today, Dec  7/95; WS],  Dec 
7/95; T m e ,  Dec  11/95; Newsweek,  Dec  18/95; AuWk,  Nov  27/95, Dec 4/95 & 
Dec  11/95; Science, Dec  15/95) 

December  2:  T h e  Solar  and  Heliospheric  Observatory  ( SOHO )  satellite  was 
launched  to  probe  the  Sun's hidden  interior,  its boiling  atmosphere, and  the  
physics  behind  the  supersonic  solar  wind.  S O H O   is  a  joint  project  of  the  
European Space Agency and NASA .   It will  be  positioned  at   the point  where 
the  gravitational pull  of  the  Sun  and  Earth  cancel  out.  (NY Times,  Dec  3/95 
& Dec  5/95; W  Post, Dec 3/95 & Dec 4/95;  USA  Today, Dec 4/95; Fla  Today, 
Nov 22/95, Nov  24/95, Nov  28/95 & Dec  1/95; C SM ,  Nov  28/95; Space News, 
Nov  6/95; AvWk, Nov  13/95) 

December  4:  NASA's  Office  of  Space  Access  and  Technology  selected  12 
research proposals  for negotiation. T h e  proposals are for  Phase  I1 contracts  in 
NASA's  Small  Business  Technology  Transfer  ( S T J R )   Pilot  Program.  Th e  
STTR  program  is  similar to  the  Small Business Innovation  Research Program 
(SBIRP) but  varies  by requiring  small business concerns  to  conduct  coopera- 
tive  research  and  development by  partnering with  a  research  institution.  A t  
least 40 percent of  the work must be performed  by the  small business concern, 
and  at  least  30 percent  of  the  work  must  be  performed  by  the   research  insti- 
tute.  STTR  and  SBIRP  comprise  only  some  of  the   many  research  grants 
NASA  awards  each  year.  (NASA  Releases  95-46,  103,  165,  174,  183,  199, 
210 & 214) 

T h e   Hubble  telescope  has  confirmed  a  second  super-massive black  hole. 
Located  in  the  direction  of  the  constellation  Virgo,  it  has  a  mass  1.2 billion 
times  that  of  the  Sun. First  identified  in  Hubble  observations made  in  1992, 
new Hubble  images  reveal  the   structure  within  the  disk.  In  this  case  the disk 
is  off-center, which  is  evidence  for  a dynamic  close encounter. Another  puz- 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

DECEMBER  1995 

zling  aspect  is  tha t   the   black  hole  is  offset  from  t h e   center   of  its  galaxy. 
(NA SA  Release 95-2  16; Science, Dec  15/95)  

December  15:  A  device  invented   a t   NASA's  Langley Research  C e n t e r  may 
protect  homeowners everywhere  from deadly  carbon monoxide fumes. It uses 
a new class of  low-temperature  oxidation  catalysts to  convert  carbon monox- 
ide  to  non-toxic   catbon   dioxide  a t   room  temperature.  It  also  can   remove 
formaldehyde  gas. (NA SA  Release 95-218)  

December  19:  Daniel  S. Goldin ,  head  of  the  Nation's space  agency, has  won 
support  in   the   W h i t e   House  for  his  philosophy  of  smaller,  better,  and   less 
expensive spacecraft. A  case in point  is  the  early planning  for a Pluto mission. 
Four  years ago, engineers  came  up  with  a  concept  costing as  much  as  $4  bil- 
lion. After  many  redesigns they  developed  a mission, called  Pluto Express, a t  
an  estimated  cost of  $400 million.  Instead  of  packing  many  instruments  into  
a  single craft  weighing several tons,  engineers designed  two  lightweight craft 
weighing as little  as 300 pounds each .  I n  t h e  proposed mission, the  craft would 
be  launched   separately,  perhaps  by  Russian  Proton   rockets,  o n   "fast" 
trajectories.  They  should  be  able  t o  reach  Pluto  in  6 to  8  years, compared  to  
Voyager  2's travel time of  12 years t o  distant  Neptune .  

T h e  Discovery program of  small spacecraft is already a start  in the  direction of 
lower-cost  flights.  The  large,  ultimately  unsuccessful  Mars  Observer  was 
launched  three   years  ago on   a Titan   3 rocket  costing $350 million. But  craft 
the   size now  being  planned  could  be  launched with  less  powerful  Delta  rock- 
ets costing $60 million  or  less.  (NA SA  Release 95-  195; NY l im e s ,  Dec  19/95; 
Space News, N o v   27/95) 

December  20:  In   t h e   three  years since NASA  began funding a group consist- 
ing of  five  leading origin-of-life researchers and   their   20  students a t  four sep- 
arate   institutions,  they  have  published  a  bevy  of  high-profile  papers  and  
thrown  fuel o n  a number  of  long-smoldering debates. T h e  group believes t h a t  
while science may  not   unravel  the  exact origin  of  life,  it  is  constantly moving 
toward  a  plausible explanation  of  it.  (Science, Dec  22/95) 

SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND  HUMAN  SPACE 
FLIGHTS,  1991-1995 

APPENLXX A 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

Launch   Date  ( G M T ) ,  
Spacecraft  Name ,  
COSPAR  
Des igna t ion ,  
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission  Ob jec t ives ,  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
Period  (m tn . )  
Inc l ina t ion   to  
Equator  ( " )  

Remarks 

Objective: Devehpmen t  of  space- 
fllght techniques and  technology. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

No t   First  launch of T t a n  IV 
from the  WSMC .  In 
announced. 
orbit. 

Mar.  8 
USA -69  
1 7A  
T i t an  1V 

Apr .  5 
Space Shu t t l e  
A t lan t is  
(STS -37 )  
27A  

Ohjecti<.e: To successfully launch 
the Gamma Ray Ohsem~tory. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orhiter carrying 
satellite. Addittonal  experiments 
include EVA Development  Flight 
Exper~ments (EDFE), Ascent 
Particle Monitor  (APM ) ,  Rioserve 
ITA Materials Dispersion 
Apparatus  (RIMDA) ,  Protein 
Crystal Growth-Ill  (PCG - I l l ) ,  
Shu t t le  Radiation Monttoring 
Equipment-111 (RME-I l l) ,  Atr 
Force Maui Optical System 
(AMOS ) ,  and Space Station  Hear 
P i p  AJvanccd Radiator Element- 
11  (SHARE-11). 

Objecrive: To succesfully  launch 
Apr.  7 
satelltte for two-year measurement 
G amm a  Ray 
Observatory  ( G R O )   of  gamma rays covcrtng most of 
the  entire  celestial sphere. 
27R 
S~ a c e c r a i r :  Rect;lngular shaped 
txxly  wlth dual solar panels 
extending  from the  satelhte. One 
high-rain and two low-gain an ten-  
nas. Four scienttfic instruments 
Include Burst nnd  Tran.ient  Source 
Expfrlment  (BATSE), Oriented 
Sctntillatlon  Spectrometer 
Experiment  (OSSE) ,  
lmaglng Comp ton  Telescope 
(COMM E L ) ,  and Energetic 
Gamma Ray  Experiment 
Telescope (EGRET). 
Wetght: 3 5 , W  lhs. 

465.0  Thirty-ninth  fltght d the  
449.0  Space Transportation 
93.8  System. P ik~ ted  by 
28.5  Steven R. Nagel and 
Kenneth  D.  Cameron. 
Mlssion speclalists Linda 
Godwin, Jeny  L. Rms, 
and Jay Ap t .  Launchcd 
from KSC. Pad  398 a t  
9:22:45 a.m., EST 
Landed at Edwards AFB, 
CA . ,  Apr.  11 at 9:55 
a.m., E n .  
Mission duraticm: 6 days, 
32 mln. 

444.0  Successfully launched 
432.0  h m  Shuttle Aclanns. A 
93.3  NASA  ctxyerative pro- 
28.5  gram with  the Federal 
Repithltc of Germany, 
with  co-investigator sup- 
port from The 
Netherlands,  the 
European Space Agency, 
the  United Kingdom, 
and  the Unitcd  States. 
Satellite placed  In  space 
by  Remote Manipulator 
System (RMS)  arm. 
Rerurntng data. In orhlt. 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee and  
Perigee (km) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

Apr.  28 
Space Shu t t le  
D~scovery 
(STS -39 )  
31A  

Objective: To wcond t  Air Force 
and Strategic Defense Initiative 
(SDIO) experiments in orbit. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter ca r ry .  
ing satellites and additional scien- 
tific experiments. 

Fortieth flght of  the 
Space Transportation 
System. PiW by 
Michael L (30a6 and 
Blaine Hammond, Jr. 
Mission specialists 
Gregory L H h u g h ,  
h n a l d  R. McMonagle, 
Guion S. Bluford, C. 
Lacy Veach, and R i M  
1. Hieb. Launched from 
KSC Shuttle lar&ng 
Facility, Runway  15, at 
2:55  p.m., EM, May 6 .  
Mision duration: 8 days, 
7 h., 22  min. 

Apr. 28 
USA -70  
3 1C  

Objective: Developments of 
space flight techniques and tech- 
nology. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Not 
announced. 

Succeufully deployed 
from Shuttle Dwovety 
In &it. 

Objective: To obtain scientific 
May  1 
Infrared  Background  data for use in development of 
ballistic missile defense sensor 
Signature Survey 
systems for the Strategic Defense 
(IBSS)  
Initiative Organization (SDIO). 
31B 
Spacecraft: Shuttle Pallet 
Satellite I1  (SPAS 111 
Rectangular bus on which various 
experiments can be monitored. 
Weight: 4,197 Ibs. 

succenfully deployed 
from Shuttle cargo bay by 
Remote M a n i i h  
Sp t em  (RMS) arm a t  
4:17  a.m., EM. 
Discovery's manipulator 
arm grappled the payloed 
at 6:25 p.m., 
EM, May 2. Payload 
returned data on release 
of  unspnmeaic dimethyl 
hydrazme h Chemical 
Release Observation sub- 
satellites. Retumed  to 
~ i n c a I g o b a y o f  
DkcDvery. 

May  2 
Chemical  Release 
Observation  (CRO )  
subsatellite 
31D  

Objective : To provide short-lived 
clouds of vapor and frozen parti- 
cles in orbit for observation by 
IBSS orbiting payload. 
Spacecraft: Cylindrical 

Not 
announced. 

Successfully deployed 
from Shuttle h e r y .  
Reented Mav  14. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

May  2 
Chem ica l  Release 
Observation  (CRO )  
subsatellite 
31E 

Objective: To provide short-lived 
clouds of  vapor and frozen particles 
in orbit for observation by  IBSS 
orbiting payload. Spacecraft: 
Cvlindrical. 

Not  Successfully deployed 
announced.  from Shuttle  Dwovery. 
Reentered May  12. 

May  3 
Chem ica l  Release 
Observation  (CRO )  
satellite 
31F 

Objective: To provide short-lived 
Not  Successfully deployed 
clouds of vapor and frozen particles  announced.  from Shuttle  Dwovely. 
in orbit for observation by  IBSS 
Reentered May  13. 
orbiting payload. Spacecraft: 
Cvlindrical. 

Objective : To  launch spacecraft 
into a Sun-synchronous orbit of 
sufficient accuracy to  enable space- 
craft to  accomplish its operational 
mission. To acquire daily global 
weather  informat~on for the  short- 
and  long-term forecasting needs of 
the National Weather Service. 
Spacecraft: In  launch configura- 
tion  is  37 cm  high, 188 cm  in 
diameter; three-axis-stabilized. 
Instruments include Advanced 
Very  High Resolution Radiometer 
(AVHRR), TIROS  Operational 
Vertical Sounder System (TOVS) ,  
Space Environmental Monitor 
(SEM), and Argos Data 
Collection System (DCS) provid- 
ed  by  France. Weight at launch: 
1418 kg. Weight in orbit, with 
Apogee Kick Motor (AKM) 
expendables consumed: 735 kg. 

May  14 
NOAA -12  
3 2A 
Atlas E 

May  18  
Soyuz TM-  1 2 

841.0  Succgsfully launched by 
821.0  NASA  from 
101.3  Vandenberg AFB, CA ,  
98.7  Space Launch 
Complex 3 West  (SLC- 
3W) at  11:52 a.m., E M .  
Joins NOAA-  10  and 
NOAA-11 in collecting 
meteorological and envi- 
mnmental data and will 
eventually replace 
NOAA-10, launched in 
Sept. 1986. 

ORUCCltlSLECeddAraroly 
ArMhmky>SasrKnlcalw, 
Helen Sharman IMd 
VkhMtr*SQcrn. 
Helen Sharman k fran 
UnidI<lrgdunroAyin 
space. Crew ofviktnr 
Afanaryev, Musa 
Manarov, and Helen 
Sharman returned May 
20,1991. Amebasky and 

677  

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

Jun .  5 
Space Shu t t le  
Columbia 
(STS-40)  
40A 

Objective: To carry Spacelab Life 
Sciences (SLS-1) dedicated life 
sciences research module in cargo 
bay. Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter 
Cnlumbia carrying SLS-1 and G e t  
Away Special (GAS)  Bridge 
experiments in the  cargo bay. 
Middeck payloads: Physiological 
Monitoring System (PMS) ,  Urine 
Monitoring System (UMS) ,  and 
Animal Enclosures Modules 
(AEM). SLS-1 includes 18 pn-  
man/ scientific expr imen ts .  

Jun .  29 
Radiation 
Experlrnent  (REX) 
45A  
Scout 

Objective: To  launch U.S. Air 
Force rad~ation experiment satel- 
lite. Spacecraft: Not  announced. 
Weight: 188 I b .  

JuI. 4 
USA-71  
47A 
Delta  11 

Objective: To place satellite into 
successful orbit from which Navy 
objectives can be met. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Knkalev remained on  
board Mir, with 
k h k
y
 returning on 
Oct. 10, 1991, and 
Krtkalev doing so Mar.  25, 
1992. 

302.0  Fortyfim flight of the 
276.0  Space Trampna t ion  
90.1  System. Piloted by  Bryan 
39.0  D. O'Conner and Sidney 
M.  Gutierrez. Mission 
specialists James I? 
b a n ,  Tamara E. 
Jernigan, and M.  R h e a  
Seddon. Payloed special- 
ists Francis A .  (Drew) 
Gafmey and Milhe 
HugheFulford. 
Launched from KSC ,  Pad 
398, at 9:24 a.m., EDT. 
Landed  at Edwards AFB, 
CA ,  11:39 a.m., E M ,  
Jun. 1 4  Mission duration: 
9 days, 2   IS.,  15  min. 

871.0  Succwfully launched  by 
770.0  NASA for Air Force from 
101.3  Vandenberg AFB, CA ,  
89.6  Space Launch Complex 
(SLC) 5, at  10:W  a.m., 
EDT. Test of  qh i s t i c a t ed  
communications in a 
h&-radiation  envimn- 

20,250.0  Eleventh in a series of 
19,45 1.0  operational N a v m  
704.6  Global Pmlt~oning 
55.3  Satellites (GPS) launched 
by  Air Force  expndable 
hooster. Operational sys- 
tem to be  composed of  24 
satellites in 6 orhital 
planes. In orbit. 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
peiigee  (km ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  to 
Equator  ('1 

Remarks 

LOSAT-X 
4 7 8  

Objective: Development of space 
flight techniques and technology. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Jul.  17 
Microsat-1 
51A 
Pegasus 

Objective: To  launch small satel- 
lite for communications ex@- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and  1/2 
inches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49  Ibs. 

Objective: To launch small satel- 
lite for communications experi- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and  112 
inches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49 Ibs. 

Objective: To launch small satel- 
lite for communications experi- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and  112 
inches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49  lbs. 

Objective: To  launch small satel- 
lite for communications experi- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and  112 
inches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49 Ibs. 

Objective: To launch small satel- 
lite for communications experi- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and  112 
inches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49  Ibs. 

416.0  Secondary payload 
402.0  launched by  Delta  11. 
92.8  Reentered No$:  15, 1991 
40.0 

454.0  Successfully launched by 
356.0  Pegasus vehicle camed to 
92.7  altitude by  NASA  B-52 
82.0  off CA  coast. Satellite 
sponsored by  the Defense 
Advanced Research 
Projects Agency 
(DARPA). In orbit. 

457.0  Second of seven satellites 
359.0  launched for DARPA. In 
92.7  orbit. 
82.0 

442.0  Third of  seven satellites 
355.0  launched for DARPA. In 
92.5  orbit. 
82.0 

457.0  Fourth of  seven satellites 
359.0  launched for DARPA. In 
92.7  orbit 
82.0 

457.0  Fifth of  seven satellites 
360.0  launched fo r  DARPA. In 
92.7  orbit. 
82.0 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft  Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
P e w e e  (km ) ,  
Period  (m rn . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Aug.  2 
Space Shu t t le  
A t lan t is  
54A 

458.0  Sixth of seven satellites 
359.0  launched for DARPA. In 
92.7  orbit. 
82.0 

458.0  Seventh of  seven satel- 
359.0  lites launched for 
92.7  DARPA. In omit. 
82.0 

329.0  Forty-second flight of  the 
309.0  Space T m r t a t i o n  
90.6  System. Piloted by John  
28.4  E.  Blaha and Michael A .  
Baker. Mission specialists 
Shannon W.  Lucid, G .  
David Low, and James C. 
Adamson. Launched 
From  KSC, Pad  39A, 
1 l:02  a.m., EDT. Landed 
at KSC  Shuttle Landing 
Facility, Aug.  1 1, at 8:23 
a.m., E M .  
Mission duratron: 8 days, 
21  hrs., 21 min. 

- 
-- 
- -  
Objective: To launch small satei- 
lite for communications experi- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and 1/2 
rnches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49 Ibs. 

Objective: To launch small satel- 
lite for communications experi- 
ment. Spacecraft: Seven and  112 
inches high, 19 inches wide. 
Weight: 49 Ibs. 

Objective: To successfully place in 
orbit NASA's fourth Tracking and 
Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-5). 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter canying 
satellite with  Inertial Upper Stage 
(IUS). Cargo bay  payloads: 
Station Heat  Pipe Advanced 
Radiator Element-11 (SHARE-[I), 
Shuttle Solar Backscatter 
Ultraviolet Experiment (SSBUV), 
and Optical Communications 
Through the Shuttle Window 
( O m ) .  Middeck payloads: Air 
Force Maui Optical System 
(AMOS) ,  Auroral  Photography 
Experiment-B (APE-B), Biosewe- 
Instrumentation Technology 
Associates Materials Dispersion 
Apparatus (BIMDA), 
Investigations into Polymer 
Membrane Processing (IPMP), 
Protein Crystal Growth-I11 (PCG- 
III), Space Acceleration 
Measurement System (SAMS), 
Solid Surface Combustion 
Experiment  (SSCE), and T n k  
Pressure Control Experiment 
(RPCE). Weight of  experiments: 
2.699  Ibs. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GMT ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
pe;ig;e 
( km ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( * )  

Remarks 

Aug.  2 
Tracking and  Data 
Relay Satellite  5 
(TDRS -5 )  
54B 

S e p  1 2  
Space Shu t t l e  

Objective: To launch satellite to  
TDRS-3, into successful geosyn- 
chronous orbit with s a l c i e n t  sta- 
tion-keeping fuel on board to  com- 
plete  the on- orbit constellation 
and meet NASA  requirements to  
prcvide full-capability user  support 
xrvices.  Spacecrah: Three-axis 
stabillzed, momentum- biared con- 
figuration with  two Sun-oriented 
solar panels attached. TDRS  meas- 
ures 57.17  ft.  tip to  tip of  deployed 
solar panels. Composed of  three 
modules:  ( I )  equipment module 
houses altitude control, electric 
power, propulsion, telemetry, 
tracking and command subsystems; 
( 2 )  payload module consists of  pro- 
cessing and frequency-generation 
equipment; (3)  antenna module 
.  . 
supports dual deployable and fixed 
antennas, multiple-access array, 
and  remainder of  telecommunica- 
tions hardware. 
Weight at  launch, including IUS: 
37,640 l h .  In orbit TDRS-5 will 
we&  4,637 Lbs.  and measure 57.2 
f t .  tiom t ~ p  to tip ofsolar panels by 
46.6 k from  outer edge to  edge of 
its S~ng l e  Access antenna. 

Obiective: To successfullv launch 
~ p k r  Atmospherr  ~ e s & c h  
Satellite (UARS)  and conduct 
other experiments. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter canying 
satellite with  additional experi- 
ments. Cargo Bay: Atmospheric 
Particle Monitor-3 (APM-3) .  
Middeck payloads: Radiation 
Monitoring Equipment-I11 (RME- 
111 M ) ,  Protein Crystal Growth-7 
(PGC-7) ,  Middeck 0-G Gravity 
Dynamics Experimentel (MODE- 
Ol), Investigations into Polymer 

39,011.0  Successfully launched 
38,855.0  from Atlantis  and suc- 
1,599.8  cwfully  transferred  to  
0.1  geosynchronous orhit by 
IUS. Placed at  175- 
degree-W longitude. 
Oc t .  7 officially replaced 
TDRS-3 as primary 
povider of  customer s u p  
porter in the western 
location. In  orbit. 

553.0  Forty-third flight of  the 
538.0  Space Tramporration 
95.4  system Piloted by  John  
56.9  Creighton and Kenneth 
Reightler, Jr. Misston 
specialists Charles D. 
Gemar, James E  Buch l~ ,  
and Mark N. Brown. 
Launched from  Pad 
39A, KSC, at  7:11 p.m., 
E M :  Landed at Edwards 
AFB, C A ,  3:38  a.m., 
EDT, Sep. 18. Weather 
conditions forced change 
of  landing site from 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  ( G M T ) ,  
Spacecraft  Name ,  
COSPAR  
D e s~gn a t ion ,  
Launch  V e h ~ c l e  

Mission Ob jec t ives ,  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
Pengee  (km ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inc l ina t ion   t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

580.0  KSC. 
574.0  Miss~on duration: 5 days, 
96.2  8 hrs., 28 mm. 
57.8 

Satellite succes~fully 
launched  from Discovery 
cargo bay  by  Remote 
Manipulator System 
(RMS) arm a t   12:23 
a.m., ELM. Will make 
measurements over the  
full range of  local times 
a t  most geographic loca- 
tions every 36 days. First 
major flight element of 
NASA's Mission to 
Planer Lath. Design life 
of  36  months. Returning 
data. In orbit. 

S e p  1 5  
Upper  A tmosphere  
Remo te  Research 
S a t e l l ~ t e  
( U A R S )  
63  B 

Membrane  Pnressing-4  (IPMP- 
04 ) ,  Phys~ological and Anatomical 
Rodent  Experiment-I (PARE-1), 
Shuttle Activation Monttor-I 
(SAM-O3), Cosmic Radra t~on  
Effects and A c t iv a t~on  Monitor-I 
(CREAM-01 ), Air Force Maul 
Q t ~ c a l  System-12 (AMOS ) ,  and 
Electron~c Still Photography 
Camera. W e ~ g h t :  475 Ibs. 

Oh jec t~ve :  To launch  satellite to  
study mankind's effect on  planet's 
atmosphere and  IB  sh ie ld~ng  ozone 
layer. Spacecraft: C o n t a ~ n ~ n g  nine 
complimentary expnm en t s :  
Cryogen~c  Limb A m y  Etalon 
Spectrometer  (CLAES) ,  Improved 
S tra t lupher~c  and  Mesospheric 
Sounder  (ISAMS) ,  Microwave 
Limh Sounder  (MLS), and 
Halogen Occulation Experiment 
(HALOE)  to  measure  the chem- 
1 s t ~  of  the  atmosphere; High 
Resolution Dlppler  Imager 
(HRD I )  and Wind  Imaging 
Intcrfen~rneter (WINDII)  to meas, 
ure  the dynam~cs  of  the atmos- 
phere; Solar U l trav~o le t  Spctral 
IrraJiance  Monitor (SUSIM) ,  
S)lar/Stellar l r r d i a ~ l c e  
G ~m p a r i x r n  E x p r ~ m e n t  (SOL- 
STICE) ,  , ~ n d  Par t~c le  Environment 
M o n ~ t o r  (PEM) to determine 
energy  inputs from the Sun and 
Earth's magnetosphere. A ten th  
instrument, Actlye C a v ~ t y  
Radiometer  Iradrance  M o n ~ t o r  11 
(ACRIM  II), will  extend  long- 
tenn  measurements c>f the  solar 
constant, 3-axls stahlized  space- 
craft h d y .W e ~ g h t :  14,419 Ibs. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

O c t .  2 
Soyuz TM -13  

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km) ,  
Period  (m i n . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator  ('1 

Remarks 

Crew consisted of 
A l e h n d r  Volkov, 
Toktar Aubaklrov 
(Kazakh Republic),  and 
Franz V 1 e h k k  
(Austria). Dxkd with 
Mir Space S t a t~on .  
Crew returned Oct.  10, 
1991, with Anatoly 
Ambarsky .  

Nov.  8 
USA-72  
76A 
T i tan  1V 

Nov.  8 
USA-74  
76C 
T i tan   IV 

Nov.  8 
USA-76  
76D 
Titan  IV 

Nov.  8 
USA-77  
76-E 
Trtan  1V 

Nov.  24 
Space Shu t t le  
A t lan t is  
(STS-44)  
80A  

Objective: To place satellite into 
successful orbit from which DoD 
objectives can be  met. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Not 
announced. 

Objective: To place satellite in  suc- 
cessful orbit from which DoD 
objectives can be met. 
Spacecraft: Not announced. 

Not 
announced. 

In orbit. 

Objective: To place  satellite into 
successful orblt from whlch DoD 
objectives can be  met. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Objective: To place satellite into 
successful orhit from which  &ID 
objectives can be met. 
Spacecraft: Not  announced. 

Objective: To deploy a Defense 
Supp lr t  Program (DSP) satellite 
and to work with a variety of  sec- 
ondary payloads: Interim 
Operational Contamination 
Monitor  in the Cargo Bay; Terra 
Scout, Military Man in Space 
(M88 - I ) ,  Air Force Maui Optical 
System, Cosmic Radiation Effects 
and Activation Monitor, Shuttle 
Activation Monitor, and 3 others 
as Middeck Payloads. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carrying 
the  experiments listed a k ~ v e .  

Not 
announced. 

In orbit 

Not 
announced. 

Forty-fourth flight of  the 
Space Tiansportat ion 
System. Piloted by  Fred 
Gregoty and Tom 
Henrlcks. Misslon spe- 
cialists Jim Voss, Story 
Musgrave, and Mario 
Runco, Jr. Payload s p -  
cialist Tom  Hennen. 
Launched from KSC 
6 4 4  p.m., EST. Landed 
at a w a r d s  A m ,  CA ,  
5:34 p.m., EST, Dec. 2. 
Mission duration: 6 days, 
22 hrs., 51 min. 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch   I l a t e   ( G M T ) ,  
Spacecraft N am e ,  
COSPAR  
D e s~gn a t ton ,  
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission  O b j e c t ~ v e s .  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
l n c l i n a t ~ o n  to  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

NOV .  25 
I3efense Suppor t  
Program 
(DSP - I )  
U SA - 7 5  
8 0 8  

Objective: To launch  an  enhanced 
Defense Support Program  (DSP) 
satellite, the   third  in the  "DSP-I" 
block of  satell~tes. Spacecraft: A 
survtvahle and  reliable system that 
d e t e c ~  and reports o n  rea l- t~me  
missile launches, space launches, 
and  nuclear detonations. 

Nov.  28 
Llefense 
M e t e ~ ~ r u l o g ~ c a l  
Sa te l l i te   (F 1 1 )  
USA -73  
8!A 
Atlas  E 

Objectwe: To launch  the  first of 
the  improved  Block  5D-2 satellites 
In  the  Defense Meteorological 
Satellite  Program. T h e  sensor corn- 
plement  on  thrs satellite  includes 
the  first water vapor profiler placed 
in orbit. Th ls  sensorprov~des infor- 
mation o n  the  vertical humidiry 
profile and water vapor con ten t  on  
a global basis. 

No t   Satellite successfully 
launched from Atlantts 
announced. 
by  an  lnertlal U p p r  
Stage  with two solid 
rocket motors at  7:16 
a.m., EST .  Th e  DSP 
satellite wetghs  approxi- 
mately  2,360 kg.  and  is 
about  10 meters long. It 
measures a b u t  6.7 
meters across IE  
deployed solar array sur- 
face area and employs 
infrared detectors to 
sense h r a t  from m i s ~ l e  
plumes. 

855.0  O n e  tn a series of 
835.0  Defense Meteorolog~cal 
101.8  Satellites. Launched 
98.9  From SLC-3W of 
Vandenberg AFB,  CA .  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

J an .  22 
Space Shu t t le  
Discovery 
(STS-42)  
2A  

Feb. 1 0  
DSCS 111 
USA-78  
6 A  
Atlas  II 

Feb.  23 
G P S  
USA-79  
9A  
Delta  I1 

Mar.  14 
Galaxy  5 
13A  
Atlas  I 

Mar.  17 
Soyuz TM-14 

Objective: To conduct a world- 
wide  research effort m the behav- 
ior of materials and  life  in weight- 
lessness. Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter 
carrying the  International 
Micrograviv Laboratory-1 (IML- 
1) in  the cargo bay. IML-1 includ- 
ed 42  experiments in life and 
materials sciences. In addition 
STS-42 included Get Away 
Spec~a l  payloads from 6 countries, 
including China for the first  tlme, 
and the 5 th  Shuttle flight of  the 
Investigations into Polymer 
Memhrane Processing  (IPMP), 
among others. 

305.0  Forty  fifth flight of  the 
392.0  Space Transportation 
90.5  System. Piloted by  G I .  
56.9  Ronald J .  Grabe (USAF) 
and Stephen S .  Oswald. 
Mission specialists Dr. 
Norman E.  Thagard, 
MD, Lt.  GA. David C. 
Hilmers (USMC), and 
William E Raddy. 
Payload specialists Dr. 
Roberta L.  b n d a r ,  PhD 
and MD of  the CSA ,  
and Ulf  hlerhold of  the 
ESA. Launched 9:55 
a.m., EST  from Kennedy 
Space Center. Landed 
11:07 a.m., EST, Jan. 30 
at Edwards AFB. 

Objective: To launch a new 
Defense Satellite Communications 
System (DSCS 111) satellite. 
Spacecraft: 110" long, 76" wide, 
77" deep. Six SHF channels. 

Objective: To add to  the existing 
constellation of Global Positioning 
System satellites in orbit. 
Spacecraft: A Block IIA satellite 
operating in inclined, semi-syn- 
chronous orbit. 

Objective: To launch a commer- 
cia1 communications satellite. 
Spacecraft: A communications 
satellite canying 24 C-band 
transponders. 

Not  This launch marked the 
announced.  start of  a replen~shment 
program for the DSCS 
constellation of  satell~res. 

20,323.0  Twelfth ~n a series of 
20,039.0  operational GPS  satel- 
71 7.9  lites. System expected  to 
54.6  he comptsed of 24 satel- 
lites in 6 orh~ ta l  planes. 
In o rh~ t .  

35,789.0  Launched from Cape 
35,787.0  Canaveral, AFS, FL.  In 
1,436.1  orhit. 

Crew cons~sted of 
Alexandr V~ktorenko, 
Alexandr Kalen, Klaus- 
D ~ e t r ~ c h  Rade 
(Germany). First 
manned CIS  space 
mission. Docked WI~I  M a  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) .  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Llesignat~on, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Oblectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

-  - 
Avogee  and 
P e r~g e e  ( k m ) ,  
Period  (min.) 
Inclination  to  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

Space Station Mar.  19. 
Th e  TU -13  capsule with 
Flade, Aleksandr Volkov, 
and Sergei Krikalev 
returned to F d h  Mar. 
25. Krikalev had  been  in 
space 3 13 days. 
Viktorenko and Kalen 
remained in the T U -  14 
spacecraft. Flight  time: 
145 days, 15 hrs.,  11 min. 

304.0  Forry-sixth flight of  the 
292.0  Space Transportation 
90.4  System. P~ lo ted  by  Col. 
57.0  Charles E  Bolden 
(USMC)  and Lt. GI. 
Brian b 6 y  (USAF). 
Mission specialists 
Kathryn D. Sullivan, 
Capt. David C .  Leestma 
(USN) ,  and Michael 
Foale. Payload specialists 
D r k  D. Frimout (ESA) 
and Byron K. 
Lichtenberg. Launched 
at 6:13 a.m., EST  from 
KSC .  Landed 6:23 a.m., 
EST  at Rwy 33 of  the 
KSC Shuttle Landing 
Faciliry on  Apr.  2. 

Mar.  24 
Space Shu t t le  
Atlantis 
(STS-45)  
15A 

Objectwe: To  study the Sun, the 
u p p r  reaches of the Earth's atma+ 
phere, and astronomical objectives. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carry- 
ing the Atmospheric Laboratory 
for Applications and Science- i 
(ATLAS-1 ) containing  12 i n sm -  
ments from 7 countries that will 
conduct  13 experiments to  study 
the chemisny of  the atmosphere, 
solar radiation, space plasma 
physics, and ulwviolet  astronomy. 
STS-45 also carried other e x p r i -  
ments, including IPMP 

Apr.  10  
GPS  
USA -80  
19A 
Delta  11 

Apr.  2 5 
USA-81  
23A 
T i tan   IV 

Object~ve: To add  to  the existing 
constellation dG l o h a l  
positioning  Systems satellites In 
orbit. 
Spacecraft: A Block  IIA satellite 
op r a t lng  in  inclined, sem i-qn-  
chronous orbit. 

20,381.0  Thirteenth in a series of 
19,98 1.0  opra t iona l  GPS satel- 
718.0  lites. System expected to  
55.2  be  composed of 24 satel- 
I ~ e s  In 6 orbital planes. 
In orbit. 

Ohject~ve: To place  satellite into 
successful orbit from which DoD 
objectives can be met. Spacecraft: 
Not  announced. 

Not  Launched from 
announced.  Vandenberg AFB, CA .  
In orbit. Forty-seventh 
flight of  the S p x  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
P e r ~ o d  (m in . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

May  7 
Space Shu t t le  
Endeavour 
(STS-49)  

Objective: To rendezvous with, 
repair, and reboost  a crippled 
INTELSAT V1  communications 
satellite. Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter 
with  INTEEAT  perigee kick 
motor and support equipment, 
including a capture bar assembly, 
plus equipment to demonstrate 
and verify Space Station Freedom 
maintenance and assembly tasks as 
well  as a protein c~ystal growth 
experiment. First  flight of newest 
orbiter, Endeavour. 

375.0  Transportation System. 
363.0  Piloted by  Capt. Daniel 
9 1 .9   C .  Brandenstein (USN) 
28.3  and Lt. Col. Kevin I? 
C h ~ l t o n  (USAF) .  
Mission spciallsts 
Richard J.  Hieb, Cmdr. 
B ~ c e  E.  Melnick 
(USCG) ,  Cmdr. Pierre J .  
Thout  (U SN ) ,  Kathryn 
C .  Thornton, and 
Thomas D. Akers. 
Launched 7:40 p.m., 
EDT from KSC. Landed 
4:57 p.m., EDT, May  16 
at Edwards AFB. 

May  14 
Palapa  B-4 
27A 
Delta 

Objective: To launch an 
lndones~an  communications satel- 
lice. 

35,799.0  Launched by  a Delta 
35,777.0  rocket. Sp e c~ f~ c s  unavail- 
1,436.2  able. 
0 .0  

Jun .  7 
Extreme Ultraviolet 
Explorer  (EUVE) 
31A  
Delta  11 

Object~ve: To launch a satellite 
that will make both  spectroscopic 
and wide-band observations over 
the entire extreme ultraviolet spec- 
m m .  Spacecraft: Rectangular 
shaped body with dual solar arrays. 
Four  telescopes each 40 centime- 
ters across: three scanners and one 
deep survey/spectrometer tele- 
Scope 

532.0  Launched ahlard a Delta 
5 17.0  I1  rocket from Cape 
9 5.1  Canaveral. Returning 
28.4  data. In orbit. 

Jun .  10 
INTELSATK 
32A  
Atlas  IIA 

Objective: To launch the highest 
pw e r ed   lntelsat satellite to date. 
Spacecraft: A communications 
satellite equipped with sixteen 54 
megahertz transponders. 

35,791.0  Launchedonan  Atlas 
35,782.0  11A from Cape 
1,436.1  Canaveral AFS.  In orbit. 
0.0  Entered into service S p .  
1, 1992. 
Fortyeighth  flight of  the 

A S TRONAU T IC S  ANI)   AERONAUT ICS  

APPEN l lIX   A 

Apogee  and  
Perigee  ( km ) ,  
P e r ~ o d  ( n i i n . )  
I n c l ~ n a t i o n  to  
Equrttor  (') 

309.0 
297.0 
90.6 
28.5 

Launch  l h t e  (GbZT ) ,  
Spacecratt  Nan ie ,  
COSPAR  
D e s lgnn t~nn ,  
Launch  Vehlclc 

M ~ s s i o n  O h j e c t ~ v e s ,  
Spc~cecr ; tfr  I)ara 

Jun .  25 
Space Shu t t l e  
C o l u m h ~ a  
( S T S - 5 0 )  
34A 

Oh j e c t~v e :  To p r fo rm   around-the- 
d ~ k  
investigations of  the  effects of 
we~ghtlessness on  plants, humans, 
and matenals. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orhiter carrying 
U.S. b l~crogn \ , i ty  Laboratory-l , 
tncluding 31  experiments ranging 
from manufacrunng cr).stals for 
pcbs~hle xm iconduc tur  use  to the 
heha\  lor  of  uze~gh t les  fluids. Also 
~ncluLles the  lnvest~gations into 
P<)lvmcr Mcmhrrtne  P n ~ e w i n g  
experiment  ;mnJ  the  Space Shuttle 
Armmtcur  R,~ilio Expen~nent-11. 

Ju l .  2 
LXCS   Ill 
USA -82  
3 i A  
A t las   11 

Objective: To launch  a new 
Not 
Lkfense Satellite Cnmmun~ca t ions   a n n o u n c d .  
S p t e m  (DSCS )  Ill  sa te l l~ te .  
Spacc~rafr :  110"  long, 76" w ~ d e ,  
77" deep. Six SHF  channels. 

684.11 
511.0 
96.7 
81.7 

Ju l .  3 
Ob jec t~ve :  To launch  the first 
Solar, Anonialou.\ 
spacecraft ~n .m  new  series of Small 
and  M agn e to sph e r~ c   Explorers desiLmed to  investigate 
Particle  Explorer 
;mn<~maloub cmmtc rays, galactic 
cmrrnlc rays  in the  vicinity of  Earth, 
(SAMPEX )  
holar energetic particles, and o ther  
3RA 
Scou t  
phenomena of  space physics. 
Spacecraft: T h e  first  in NASA's  
new Small Explorer series, the  rec- 
r,tnguldr spacecraft w r igh~ng  348 
p ~ u n i i s ;  4.5  fect  rall  and 2.8 feet 
u d e  without  tts two solar arrays 
Jeployed; they extended  its wtdth 
to  6.9 fect. Carries four c tsm lc  
monitoring  instruments. 

Ju l .  7 
G PS 
USA -83  
39A 
I le l ta   I 1  

Ohjectlve: To add to the  existing 
constellation  of Glohal  Positioning 
System sa te l l~ tes  ~n orbit. 
Spacecraft: .4  Block  IIA satellite 
o p r a t l n g  in  inclined, semi-syn- 
chronous orhit. 

20,403.0 
19,960.0 
718.0 
55.0 

Remarks 

Space Tm s p o r t a t ~ o n  
System. Piloted  by 
Richard N .  R ~ c h a d s  and 
Kenneth  1).  Fkiwerx)x. 
Mission spec~a l~s ts  
& ~ n n i e  Duiihar, Ellen 
Raker, and C)I. Carl 
Meade (USAF ) .  Payload 
specialists Lawrence 1. 
DeLucas and Eugene H. 
T r i h .  Launched from 
KSC at  12:1!  p.m., ElIT. 
Landcd at KX:  July 9 .lt 
7:43 a.m., E I lT  aftcr a 
1 3  Jays, 
r e c o r d - h r ~ t k 1 1 1 ~  
19 h n . .  ,ind  3 1  minutes 
fl1ghr. 

Launched Into ncar- 
p i h r  orhit by  a Scout 
rcwket  at  1 0 1 9  a.m., 
E I lT  from Vandenherg 
AFR.  In urhit. Ruilt hy 
the  G o d d a d  Space 
R ~ g h t  Center, SAMPEX 
carries sc~entific instru- 
ments from  the 
University of M;mryl;+nd, 
(:,~l~fornin Insttture of 
Techn(ilogy, the 
Aerospace Coqwration, 
and the  Max Planck 
Institute for 
Extraterrestrial Phyb~cs in 
Germany. 

Fourteenth  in a serles of 
opraticmal GPS  satel- 
lites. System expected to 
Ix  compared of  24  satel- 
I ~ t e  in  6 orbital planes. 
In o r h ~ t .  L t u n c h ~ d  hy a 
f i n t d  
Lklra  Il--the 

APPENDIX  A 

A S TRONAU T IC S  AN11 A ERONAU T IC S  

Launch  Date  ( G M T ) ,  
S p a c e ~ r ~ ~ f t  N;lnie, 
COSPAR  
l)c \ igna t i< in ,  
Launch  Vehicle 

Misbinn O h j e c t ~ v e s ,  
Spacecraft  D;lr.i 

Apogee  and  
Perigee  ( km ) ,  
Period  (m t n . )  
I n c l ~ n ~ ~ t t o n  
to  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Ju l .  24 
G e o t a ~ l  
44A  
Delta  11 

(Ibjective:  To  tnvestigate the gee- 
magrleric tail region  (if  the  m a a i r -  
tosphere. Sp a c e c~ i f t :  A spn-st;thi- 
Itzed, cylln~irical satellite apprcixl- 
matel!.  2.2  meter5 in  i l ~ ~ ~ n e t e r ,  
a 
height  of  1.6 meter\  ;]nil A  u n g h t  
of  ,llu~ut 1,009 kg. wlth  2  ruechanl. 
cally despun antennas. Uesibmed 
hy  the  Institute (mt Spacc and 
As tn~nau t ica l  Science ( ISAS )  c d  
Japan ,  wlth  2  ISAS, ? NASA ,  and 
3  jc>tnt ISAS/NASA  Instntments. 
An  element  in  the  1ntrmar1on;ll 
S<ilar Tcrrcrrt;ll  Physics ( ISTP )  
P r o k ~ ~ ~ ~ n .  

Ju l .  31 
Space  Shu t t l e  
A t lan t is  
( S T S - 4 6 )  
49A  

CAjective: To evaluate the  capahil- 
try  for sately depkiying, controlling 
and  retrieving a tethered  and to 
demonstrate  the capability of  the  
hystcm  tc,  serve as  a facility  fiir 
research  in gct:er,physical and space 
phys la .  Spacecraft: Shuttle orhirer 
carrying Tethered Satellite  Systcm- 
1, n ~ ( x n t  pr<~ jec t  of  the Unltcd 
State5 and  Iraly, wetghlng 1 , I  39 
Ihs. T h e  crew  was  able  to deplkry 
the T S S  satellite to  only 256 
meter; instead ( ~ f  the  goal rif  2 0  

hunch  waler NASA's 
M d l um  ELV  launch sew- 
ice ccmmact with 
Mcnimnt.ll Dtngbs 
G~rporation-at  1026  
a.m., ED 7  horn C lp c  
 The  rnltlal 
( ~ \ T T ; I ~ .
o h i t  IS  car dismit from the 
Ewth d will  last about 2 
and a 114 yars ,  after 
whtch the ~ t e l l t t e  will he 
mmmeuverc~l c hw r  in  tci 
measure the  m~d-mabme- 
t(nrherc. 1nrtolJ <$the 
g~ rxn ap c c t c  tall nxam  <if 
the  mgn c t cn~h e r e  exani- 
i n d  earlier. In orhit. 

Crew ummbtcd ld Anatoly 
Solo\yr)v, Sergei Avdeye\: 
and M i ch~ e l  X w i n ~  
(Frmcc). Lkxkcd with 
Mu Space  S t a t r ~ n  Jul29. 
X~m tn c  r e tun id   to Earth 
in TM-14 caFule  wlth 
Aleksandr Kaleri. 
,Sok)\yw and Avdeyev 
spcnt over six mnonh ui 
dle Mir orhltal uimplex 
and r e tw n d  a1 Euth  In 
the dWm r   vchtcle of  the 
TM- 15  space craft on I 
F e b r u q  1993. 

F o q n m t h  flight of  the 
Space T ~ ~ p > r t a t i n n  
Sbstetn. P i lo td  hy  '211. 
Loren J .  Shnver (USAF) 
anc4 Maj. Andrew h l .  
Allen (USMC) .  Mision 
.y*uli;llu;ts Claude 
Niudlier  (ESA). Manha 
S. Ivltl\, Jeffn.y '4. 
H<~ftiiwn, 
,mncl  Fmnklin R. 
ChwL)laz.  Paykwd  s p -  
cralist  F m c o  Maleha 
(Italian Space Agency). 
A t l an r~ r  launched 9 5 6  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX A 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Des~gna t lon ,  
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  ( km ) ,  
Period  ( m ~ n . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator  (P) 

Remarks 

k~lometers. Other payloads includ- 
ed ESA's Eureca- 1, an IMAX cam- 
era for filming parts of  the mission, 
a n d  4 experimenrs. 

a.m.,  EDT from KSC. 
Landed  at KSC  Shuttle 
Landing Facility a t  9:12 
a.m.,  E m  Aug. 8. 

,05504.0  Successfully deployed by 
94.8  Space Shuttle Atlantis 
28.5  and subsequently boosted 
to its desired orbit using 
its own propukion on  
Aug. 6. To remain in 
orbit for 6 to 9 months 
before retrieval. 

1,341.0  Successfully launched 
1,330.0  from Kourou, French 
1 12.4  Guiana on  an Ariane 
66.0  42P booster  at 8:08  p.m. 
local time. On Sep. 21, 
the satellite completed 
the  last of 6 maneuvers 
that placed  it  in  the 
required orbit. 

Aug.  2 
Eureka- 1 
4 9 8  

Ohject~ve: To perform  research in 
the  f ie lk  of material and life x i -  
ences plus  radio-biology ~n a con- 
trolled micrograviry environment 
at an operational orbit of  515 km. 
and return to  a lower orbit for 
retrieval by  another orbiter. 
Spacecraft: European Retrievable 
Carr~er  (Eureka) des~gned and 
developed by  ESA. A  rectangular 
aateliite with twin  solar arrays, 
equipped with an altitude and 
o r b ~ t  control system to keep distur- 
bance or microgravity experiments 
at  a Launch Mass: 4,491 kg. 

Objective: To Increase our under- 
Aug.  10 
TOPEX/POSEILWN  standing of  global ocean dynamics 
by maklng precise and accurate 
52A 
o k r v a t i o n s  of sea Level, thus 
A r ~ a n e  42P 
yieldlng global ocean t o p o p p h y .  
Spacecraft: Basically  rectangular 
satellite with  a single solar array 
and five  instruments: 3 prov~ded 
by  NASA  (a Dual-Frequency 
Radar Altimeter, the TOPEX 
Microwave Radiometer, and a 
Glohal Positioning Demonstration 
Receiver) and 2 by  the French 
Centre D'Emdes Spatiales (a Dual- 
Doppler Tracking System Receiver 
and a Single-Frequency Solid- 
Srate Radar A l t~me ter) .  Joint 
US.-French spacecraft, part  of 
NASA's Mission  to  Planet Earth. 
Weight: 2,520 kg.; length: 5.5 m.; 
span: 11.5 m.; height: 6.6 m. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Ob j e c t~v e s ,  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
perigee  (km) ,  
Period  (m i n . )  
In c l in a t~on  t o  
Equator  ( * )  

Remarks 

Aug.  31 
Satcom C 4  
57A 
Delta  l i  

Sep. 9 
G P S  
USA-84  
Delta  I1 

Sep.  10 
Satcom C 3  
60B 
Ariane  4 4LP  

Sep.  1 2  
Space Shu t t le  
Endeavour 
(STS -47 )  
61A  

Objective: To  launch a commer- 
cia1 communication.? satellite. 
Spacecraft: A communications 
satellite to  support cable TV pro- 
gramrnlng. 

35,814.0  Successfully launched 
35,761.0  from C a p  Canaveral. 
1,436.2  In o r b ~ t .  
0.2 

Objective: To add  to  the  existing 
constellati<~n of Global Positioning 
System satellites in orbit. 
Spacecraft: A Block  IlA satellite 
operating in  inclined, semi-syn- 
chronous orbit. 

20,630.0  Fifteenth  in a series of 
19,979.0  operational GPS satel- 
723.0  lites. System expected to  
54.8  be c o m p c d  of  24 satel- 
kites  in 6 orbital planes. 
In orbit. 

Object~ve: To launch a commer- 
cia1 communicata>ns satellite. 
Spacecraft: A communications 
satellite to provide domes t~c  sew- 
tce. 

35,799.0  Successfully launched 
35,780.0  from Kouroil, French 
1,436.3  Guiana hy  an Ariane 
0.1  44LP.  In orbit. 

Objective: To perform  successfully 
the materials and  life sciences 
investigat~on of  Spacelab 1, a joint 
laboratory sponsored by  NASA  
and  the National Space 
Development Agency  (NASDA)  
ofJapan .  Spacecraft: Shuttle 
orbiter c q i n g  24 materials sci- 
ence and  19 life science investiga- 
tion.? involv~ng government, 
industry, and university spt~nsors in 
Japan and the U.S. STS-47 sec- 
ondary objectives, includtng 9 Get 
Away S p c i a l  (GAS )  experiments, 
the  Israel Space Agency 
Investigation about Hornets 
(ISAAH), Shuttle Amateur Radio 
Experiment  (SAREX), and  the 
S o l d  Surface Combustion 
Experiment  (SSCE). 
Payload weight: about 28,158 Ihs. 

301.0  Fift~eth fight t i  Space 
297.0  T r am p r a t i o n  System. 
90.5  Piloted by  Robert L. 
56 .9   G ~ b s o n  and Curtis L. 
Brown, Jr. Miscion spe- 
cialists Mark C .  Lee, 
Jerome Apt, N. Jan  
Davis, and Dr. Mae C. 
Jemlson, the first 
African-Amencan 
woman  to  fly  in space. 
Payload specialist 
M a m o ~  Moh r~ ,  the first 
Japanese to fly  aboard a 
NASA spacecraft. Lee 
and Davis were the first 
married  couple in  space 
together. Endeavour 
launched at  10:23 a.m., 
E M  from KSC. Landed 
there at 8 5 3  a.m., E M  
on Sep. 20. 

ASTRONAUTICS   A N D  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name. 
COSPAR 
Ljesigndtlon, 
Launch  V eh~ c l e  

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Sep. 25 
Mars Ohserver 
63A  
T i tan   Ill 

< k t .  22 
Space S h u ~  
:tie 
C o l um h ~ a  
(STS -52 )  
70A 

On way  to   Successfully launched 
Mars orbit.  from Complex 40 at 
Cape Canaveral AFS at 
1:05 p.m.,  EDT with  its 
T d e r  Orbit Stage to  a 
parking orbit from which 
the TO S  ignited setting 
satellite on  its  1 I-months 
journey  to  Mars orbit, 
expected to begin in 
August  1993. 

Objective: To study the  geology, 
geophysics, and climate of Mars. 
Spacecraft: Rectangular satellite 
with solar power, 7  complementary 
instruments (Gamma Ray 
Spectrometer, Mars Ohserver 
Science Camera, Thermal 
Em ~ s s a ~ n  Spectrometer, Pressure 
Modulator Infrared Radiometer, 
Man  Observer Laser Altimeter, 
Radio Science, and Magnetometer 
and Electron Reflectometer) and  a 
Mars Balloon Relay to  relay scien- 
t~ f i c  telemetry from equipment 
deployed  by  the Russian Man  94 
misslon. 

Objective: To provide television, 
r ad~o ,  and data communication 
services throughout Germany. 
Spacecraft: Kopemicus. 

35,832.0  Launched by  M c h e l l  
35,738.0  Douglas for Germany. In 
1,436.1  gmynchronous orbit. 
0.0 

Objective: To study  the  influence 
of  gravity on basic fluid and solidi- 
f ica t~on  process using U.S. 
Mlcrcgravlty Payload  (USMP)-1 
and to deploy the second Laser 
Geodynamics Satellite (LAGEOS 
11) to  measure the Earth's crustal 
movement plus nine secondary 
payloads In  an  international mis- 
slon with cooperative efforts 
hetween NASA  and  the French, 
Italian, and Canadian space pro- 
L T A I ~ ~  &\  well as the European 
Space Agency  (ESA) .  

299.0  Fifty-first flight of  the 
290.0  Space Transparcation 
90.4  System (STS). Piloted 
28.4  by  James D. Wetherbee 
and Michael A. Baker. 
Mission specialists 
Charles L.  Veach, 
William M. Shepherd, 
Tamara E.  Jernigan. 
P a y l d  specialist SosMn 
C.Mdem.L;anrhed 
6unKSC li%p.nL,EIXl 
LatdedatKSC!?C5arn, 
EST,Nov. I
 
.
h
h
h 9 ~ 2 D h Q 5 7 m i k  
U t e 5  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft  Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
. . 
Perigee (km) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

O c t .  23 
LAGEOS  I1 
70B 

O c t .  3 1 
CTA  
70C 

Nov.  21 
MSTI- 1 
78A 
Scout 

Nov.  28 
USA  86 
83 A 
T i tan  1V 

5,95 1.0  In a joint  NASA and 
5,616.0  Italian Space Agency 
222.5  mission, the passive 
52.7  satellite was successfully 
launched from Columbia 
at 9 5 6  a.m. EDT  In 
orbit. 

243.0  Released from Columbia 
164.0  and tracked on  Oct. 31. 
88.4  Reentered  the atmas- 
28.4  phere and burned  up 
Nov.  1 .  

Objective: To measure regional 
crustal deformation, improve geo- 
detic reference datum and Earth 
orientation, measure secular varia- 
tion  in Earth's polar axis plus vari- 
ations in Earth rotation. 
Spacecraft: No moving parts, 
designed for use  as target for laser 
ranging from 65 sites around the 
world, operated by  30 countries. 

Objective: To test the  Canadian 
Space Vision System, itself 
designed to enhance human vision 
in connection with operation of 
the Canada ann ,  by  taking it 
through a series of maneuvers, and 
then to  release and track  the  
Canadian Target Assembly  (CTA)  
in  space using  the Space Vision 
System. Spacecraft: A small satel- 
lite. 

Objective: To demonstrate low- 
cost, light-weight modular test bed 
for Miniature Seeker and Sensor 
technologies. Spacecraft: A Block 
11 satellite in the  NAVSTAR 
Global Positioning System. 

20,251.0  Sixteenth  in a series of 
18,341.0  operational GPS  satel- 
681.4  lites. System expected to  
53.5  be composed of 24 satel- 
lites in inclined, semi- 
synchronous orbit. In 
orbit. 

Objectwe: To deliver a ckssified 
payload  into orbit. Spacecraft: Not 
announced. 

Not  Launched from 
announced.  Vandenberg AFB. C A  
In orbit. 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUT lCS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Des~gna t lon ,  
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee (km ) ,  
Period  (m i n . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Dec.  2 
Space Shutc 
:le 
Discovery 
(STS-53) 
86A  

Objective: To deploy the last 
major DoD classified payload cur- 
rently planned for the Shuttle 
fleet. Secondary objectives include 
ten different payloads  including 
Space Ttssue Loss (STL) and 
Battlefield Laser Acquisition 
Sensor Test  (BLAST). Spacecraft: 
Shuttle orbiter with  13 detailed 
test objectives and  12 detatled sup- 
plementary objectives. 

38 1.0  Fifty-second STS flight. 
372.0  Piloted by  David M. 
92.0  Walker and Robert D. 
57.0  C a b .  Mission special- 
ists Guion S. Blufford, Jr., 
James. S .  Voss, and 
Michael Richard 
Clifford. Launched h m  
KSC  at 8:24 a.m. EST. 
Landed Edwards Am ,  
C A ,  3:43 p.m. EST, Dec. 
9. Mission duration: 7 
days, 7 hn . ,   19 min. 

Dec.  2 
DoD  1 
USA   89 
86A 

Dec.  18  
GPS  
USA  87 
89A  
Delta  [ I  

Objective: To deliver a classified 
payload  into orbit. Spacecraft: 
Deployable spacecraft and asxwiat- 
ed  a t r b r n e  deployment system. 

Not  Launchcd from 
announced.  Discovery, 9th dedicated 
DoD Shuttle mission. In 
orbit. 

Objective: To provide radio p i -  
tioning and navigation, including 
position, velocity, and  timing data 
to the  DoD and civilian uxn. 
Spacecraft: A Blofk  I1  satellite in 
the NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning System. 

20,323.0  Seventeenth  in a series 
20,039.0  of  operational GPS satel- 
718.0  lites. System expected to 
54.7  be c o ~ n p m d  of  24  satel- 
lites  in  inclined, semi- 
synchronous orbit. In 
orbit. 

SATELLITES,  SPACE PROBES ,  AND H UM A N  SPACE  FL IGHTS   1 993 

APPENDIX  A  . 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km), 
Period  (m in .)  
In c l~n a t ion  t o  
Equator  ( * )  

Remarks 

Jan .  13 
TDRS-6 
3B  

Jan. 13 
TDRS-6 
3 8  

Jan. 24 
SOYUZ TM-  16 

Objective: To deploy Tracking and 
Delta Relay Satellite (TDRS-6) 
and operate the Diffused X-ray 
Spectrometer Hitchhiker experi- 
ment  to collect data on  stars ,and 
the surrounding galactic 
gasses. Other objectives included 
the  second Phys~ological and 
Anatomical Rodent Experiment 
(PARE-2), a Solid Surlace 
Combustion Experiment, and the 
second group of Physics of  Toys 
experiments to  be broadcast to  
classrooms throughout the nation. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter with 
above experiments and equipment. 

Objective: To launch the sixth in a 
series of  communications satellites 
in  the Tracking and Data Relay 
Satellites System (TDRSS) to  pro- 
vide communications with the 
Space Shuttle and other spacecraft 
in low-Earth orbit. Spacecraft: 
Satellite equ ippd  with  nvo solar 
arrays, two single access antennae, 
a C-band antenna, a K-band 
antenna, and an  omni antenna. 

307.0  Fifty-third STS flight. 
302.0  Piloted by  John  H. 
90.6  Casper and Donald R. 
54.7  Monagle. 
Mission specialists 
Gregory J ,  Habau&, 
Mario Runco, Jr., and 
Susan J .  Helms. Launch 
from KSC at 8:59  a.m., 
EST. Landed at KSC 
8:38 a.m., W, Jan  20. 
Mission duration: 6 days, 
23 h a . ,  39 min. 

35,708.0  Designated TDRS F 
35,704.0  until in orbit. Following 
1,43 1.9  its release kom 
0.5  Endeavour's cargo bay, 
on  Jan. 14, it reached  tts 
initial destination follow- 
ing two successful boost- 
er firings of  the  inertial 
u p p r  stage. In orbit. 

Crew consisted of 
Gennady Manakov and 
Aleksandr Poleshchuk. 
Docked with Mir Space 
Station Jan .  26. On  July 
22,1993, the TM-16 
descent cabin landed 
back  on  Earth with 
Manakov, Poleshchuk, 
and French cosmonaut 
Jean-Pierre Haignere 
from Soyuz TM- 17 on  
board. 

ASTRC3NAUTICS ANL) AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GMT ) .  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
I k s t g n a t ~ u n ,  
Launch  Vehicle 

M~ss ion  Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Dara 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km ) ,  
P e r ~ o d  (m in . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( @ )  

Remarks 

Feh. 3 
GPS 
USA 88 
7A 
l k l r a  I 1  

Feh. 9 
OXP-  1 
9A  
Pegaus 

Feb. 9 
SCD- 1 
Y B 
Pegasus 

bii~r. 25 
U r n - 1  
15A 
Atlas- 
Centaur 11 

Mar. 30 
G P j  
USA  9@ 
17A 
b l t a  11 

Objecttve: To provide radio p i -  
t ~ o n ~ n g  and navigation, including 
px i t ion ,  veloc~ty, and  timing data 
to  the Do l l  and civilran WE. 
Spacecraft: A  Block  11  satellite ~n 
the NAL'STAR Global Positioning 
Svstem 

i7hjective: To demonstrate new, 
commercial, global, mobile com- 
municatlonc from  low-Earth orbit. 
Spacecraft: An experimental, 
demonstration satellite weighing 
about 32  Ibs., the size of  a large 
briefcase, for m m i t t i n g  brief 
messages with hand-held commu- 
nlcators. 

Objective: To monitor cloud cover, 
rdlnfall, f lmd  a d  tide  levels, and 
atr qual~ty over Braztl. Spacecraft: 
Satellite de Culeta de Ddos 
(SCD), a remote, sensing spacecraft 
that  collects environmental data 
from ground senson in the 
A m a a ~ n  River  Basin. 

Ob jec t~ve :  To provide communica- 
tlons  and UHF links for the U.S. 
Navy, Strategtc C~xnm and ,  and 
Anny/Marine Rapid Drploytnent 
Forces. Spacecraft: A 6,319-pound 
~ a t e l l ~ t e  with a planned lifetime of 
14 yean and greater communica- 
tions capacity than  the Navy's 
current commun~ c a t ion~  spacecraft. 

Ob jec t~ve :  To provide radio posi- 
tloning and navigation, including 
position, velocity, and timing data 
to DoD and civilian users. 
Spacecraft: A  Block  I1  satellite in 
the NAV,STAR  Global Positioning 
System. 

Eighteenth in  a series of 
operational GPS satel- 
lites. System expected to  
be composed of  2 4  satel- 
lites  in  inclined, semi- 
synchronous orbit. 
In orbit. 

Launched by  Pegasus 
rocket, carried t o  40,000 
feet for release and k t -  
stage motor  ignition in a 
NASA  8 - 5 2 ,  which had 
taken off  from KSC. 
In orbit. 

Launched by  Pegasus 
rocket, carried to 40,000 
feet for release and first- 
stage motor  ignition  in  a 
NASA  B -52 ,  which had 
d e n  off  from KSC. 
In orbit. 

Because of  malfunction 
of  the Atlas stage, the 
satellite went  into lower 
o r b ~ t  than  r e q u i d .  
With insufficient fuel to  
move  lt  to  opra t iona l  
orhit, the Navy moved  it 
above geosynchronous 
altitude and declared it a 
total loss. In orbit 

Nineteenth  in a series of 
opra t iona l  GPS satel- 
lites. System expected to  
be composed of  24 satel- 
lites in inclined, semi- 
s ~ c h r u n o u s  &it. 
In  &t 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
.  - 
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
l n c l i n a t ~ o n  to 
Equator  ( * )  

Remarks 

Mar. 30 
SEDS I 
17B 
Delta  11 

Apr. 8 
Space Shuttle 
Discovery 
(STS-56) 
23A 

Objective: To allow scientists to  
compare data on acrual tether 
dynamics with computer mtdels of 
predicted behavior. Spacecraft: Th e  
Small Expendable Tether 
Deployable System (SEDS I ) ,  an  85- 
pound satellite attached by  a 20- 
kilometer-long flexible cable to  
Delta's x cond  stage. 

Not  During the  80-minute 
announced.  deployment, the entire 
length of  tether slowly 
unreeled until the pay- 
load began  swinging like 
a pndulum.  Once it 
ceased swinging and 
came to  a vertical p i -  
rion, it was  severed 
and allowed to bum up 
as  ~t reentered the 
Earth's atmcsphere. 

Objective: To  provide the orbiter 
Discovery and  the Spacelab pallet  as 
a platform for experiments on  the 
Atmospheric Laboratory for 
Applicat~ons and Science (ATLAS) 
payload, to  monitor global ozone 
with  the Shuttle Solar Backscatter 
Ultraviolet instruments, and  to  
study the solar 
wmnd  and  the Sun's corona, among 
other purpses.  Spacecraft: Shuttle 
orbiter featuring  12 development 
test objectives and  15 derailed 
supplemental objectives. 

Objective: To study the velocity and 
acceleration of  the solar wind  and 
ohserve aspects of  the Sun's corona. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle Point 
Autonomous Research Ttml for 
Astronomy (SPARTAN-201 ),  a 
free-flying payload with two tele- 
scopes, the White Light 
Coronagraph (WLC), and the 
Ultraviolet Coronal Spectrometer 
(UVCS) .  

307.0  Fifty-ft~urth STS flight, 
295.0  piloted by  Kenneth D. 
90.5  Cameron and Stephens 
57.0  S. Oswald. Payload 
Commander C. Michael 
Foale. Mission special~sts 
Kenneth D. Cockerell 
and Ellen Ochoa. 
Launched h m  KSC 
1:29 a.m., EDT Landed 
a t  KSC 7:37 a.m., Apr. 
17. Mission duration: 9 
days, 6 hrs., 9 min. 

3 1 1.0  Astronauts released the 
295.0  Spartan insauments 
90.3  platform from Discovery 
57.0  a t  2:11 a.m., E M  and 
recovered it between 
2:30 a.m. and 4:02  a.m., 
E M ,  on Apr.  13. 

Apr. 25 
ALEXIS 
26A 
Pegasus 

Objective: To test  technology for 
detecting ulra-soft  x-rays emitted 
from space nuclear testing and  to  
examine ionospheric distortion of 

844.0  First such flight of  an  all- 
749.0  DoE sponsored satellite. 
99.6  It u x t  $17 million for 
70.0  the satellite and  its inte- 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name. 
COSPAR 
Des igna t~on ,  
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Daca 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km ) ,  
Period  (min.) 
Inclination  to  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

VHF radio signals. Spacecraft: 
Array of Low Energy X-ray 
Imaging Senson (ALEXIS) 
Spacecraft, featuring a smaller, 
faster, and cheaper spacecraft bus, 
x-ray detecton, and a very high 
frequency receiver and digitizer. 

Objective: To launch, operate and 
return Spacelab D-2, a German- 
sponsored payload for conducting 
rnicn)gravity research, to  Earth. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter featur- 
ing a Spacelab long module with 
t r a d e r  runnel, a unique support 
structure for mounting experi- 
ments outside the module, and the 
autonomous payload, Reaction 
Kinetics in Glass Melts-all to  
investigate material and life sci- 
ences, space  technology, automa- 
tion, and robotics. Secondar). 
objective: Shuttle Amateur Radio 
Experiment  11. 

grated components. 
In orbit. 

306.0  Fifty-fifth STS flight. 
298.0  Piloted by  Steven R. 
90.5  Nagel and Terence T. 
28.4  Henricks. Mission spe- 
cialists J e q  L.  Ross, 
Charles J .  Precourt, 
Bernard A .  Harris, Jr. 
Payload  specialists U h c h  
Walter and Hans 
Schlegel. Launched from 
KSC  10:SO a.m., E m .  
Landed a t  Edwards Am, 
CA ,  10:29 a.m., EDT, 
May 6,  1993. Mission 
duration: 9 days, 
23 hrs., 39 min. 

Objective: To provide radio p i -  
tioning and navigation, including 
p s i t ion ,  velocity, and  timing data 
to the DoD and civilian users. 
Spacecraft: A Block  I1  satellite in 
the NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning System. 

20,342.0  Twentieth in a series of 
20,020.0  operational GPS  satel- 
7 17.9  lites. System expected to 
55.0  be  composed of  24 satel- 
lites in inclined, semi- 
synchronous orbit. 
In orbit. 

Objective: To provide a platform 
for experimene  on  the SPACE- 
HAB-1 payload  and to  retrieve the 
ESA's European Retrievable 
Carrier satellite deployed from 
Atlantis Aug. 2,  1992. There 
were a h  7 secondary objectives, 
16 developmental test objectives, 
and  11 detailed supplemental 
objectives. Spacecraft: Shuttle 
orbiter featuring SPACEHAB, 

483.0  Fifty-sixth STS flight. 
407.0  Piloted by  Ronald 1. 
93.5  GI&  and Brian J .  h@. 
28.4  Mission specialists G .  
David Low, Nancy J .  
Sherlock, Peter J.K. 
Wisoff, andJanice E. 
Voss. Launched from 
KSC 9 0 7  a.m., EDT. 
Recovered Eureca at 1236 
p.m. EDT Jun 24. 

Apr.  26 
Space Shuttle 
Co lumbu  
(STS-55) 
27.4 

May  13 
GPS 
USA  91 
32A 
k l t a  11 

Jun   21 
Space Shuttle 
Endeavour 
(STS-57) 
3 7A 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name,  ' 
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
. - 
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ('1 

Remarks 

Jun. 25 
RADCAL 
41A 
Scout 

Jun. 26 
GPS  
USA  92 
42A 
Delta 11 

Jun. 26 
Plasma Motor 
Generator 
42B 
Delta 11 

Jul. 1 
Soyuz TM- 17 

a commercially developed, pressur- 
ized module that provides about 
1,100 cu. ft.  of  additional pressur- 
ized volume to  the Shuttle's habit- 
able working space and suppx ts  
primarily orbiter middeck-type 
experiments. 

Objective: To provide space-based 
radar  calibration for over 70 
ground-based radars and to  verify 
GPS  use for satellite positioning. 
Spacecraft: Radar Calibration 
(RADCAL) experiment. 

Landed  at KSC  8:52 
a.m., EDT, Jul. 1 .  
Mission duration: 9 days, 
23 hrs., 46 min. 

883.0  Twenty-second consecu- 
752.0 
tive successful Scout 
101.3 
launch. In orbit. 
89.6 

Objective: To provide radio posi- 
tioning and navigation, including 
position, velocity, and timing data 
to  DoD and  civilian users. 
Spacecraft: A Block I1 satellite in 
the NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning System. 

20,248.0  Twenty-first  in a series of 
20,115.0  operational GPS satel- 
718.0 
lites. System expected to 
54.7  be  u~mposed  of 24 satel- 
lites in  inclined semi- 
synchn>nous orhit. 
In orhit. 

Objective: To demonstrate the 
ability of  a tether  to  generate an  
electrical current in space. 
Spacecraft: The tether consisted of 
two plasma contractors, or hollow 
cathode tubes, a t  either end of  a 
500-meter-long thin copper cable 
coated with teflon. 

844.0  Launched from Cape 
196.0  C m v e r a l  AFS 9:27 a.m. 
94.8  attached to  second stage 
25.7  of  Delta 11. Decayed 30 
August  1993. 

Crew consisted of Vasilty 
Tsihliyev, Aleksandr 
Serebrov, and Jean-Pierre 
Haignere. D x k e d  with 
Mlr Space S t a t~on  Jul. 3. 
Hargnere returned to  
TM- 
Earth w ~ t h  S ~ ~ U Z  
16. Serebrov, and 
Tsibllyev landed In TM 
17 space craft &edd 
fiscal y am  Jan 14,1994. 
F l r g h r h  l%&  
17 
h, 45 min 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS 

APPENDIX A 

Launch  Date  (GMT), 
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
Perigee  (km) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  to 
Equator (P) 

Remarks 

Jul. 19 
DSCS I11 
USA 93 
46A 
Atlas I1 

Aug. 9 
NOAA- 13 
50A 
Atlas E 

Objective: To provide a world- 
wide, secure, uninterrupted com- 
munications capability in support 
of  globally distributed DoD wen. 
Spacecraft: Improved, third-gener- 
ation Defense Satellite 
Communications System (DSCS) 
satellite. 

Initial DSCS use of 
35,743.6 
35,743.6  Atlas I1  launch k t e r  
1,440.0  coupled with an  inertial 
0.0  upper stage for achieving 
Earth orbit. Satellite to 
be  cut over to opera- 
in early N 
tional &LC 
1994 in  the West Pacific. 
In orbit. 

860.0  The  purpose of  the satel- 
lite was  to replace the 
846.0 
102.0  aging NOAA-11, but all 
98.9  communications with 
NOAA- 13 ceased Aug. 
21  and attempts to 
restore them have not 
been  successful. In orbit. 

Objective: To provide global envi- 
ronmental observation; land, sea, 
and air temperature, and mcisture 
profiles; and to detect emergency 
beacons from ships and planes. 
Spacecraft: A  3-axis-stabilued, 
near-polar-orbiting satellite 
equipped with an  Advanced 
Very High Resolution Radiometer, 
a High-resolution Infrared 
Sounder, a Solar Backscatter 
Ultraviolet Spectral Radiometer, 
plus Search and Rescue instru- 
ments provided by  Canada and 
France among other equipment. 

Aug.  30  
GFS  
USA-94 
54A 
Delta 11 

%.  3 
U D 2  
USA-96 
56A 
Atlas-Centaur 1 

Objective: To provide radio p i -  
tioning and navigation, including 
position, velocity, and timing data 
to DoD and civilian users. 
Spacecraft: A Block I1 satellite in 
the NAVSTAR Global 
Positioning System. 

20,257.0  Twentysecond in a series 
20,109.0  of  operational GFS  satel- 
lites. System expected to 
718.0 
59.0  be  corn+ 
of  24 satel- 
lites in  inclined, semi- 
synchronous orbit. 
In orbit. 

Objective: To provide communica- 
tions and UHF links for the U.S. 
Navy, Strategic Command, and 
Armymarine Rapid Deployment 
Forces. Spacecraft: Second of 
nine UHF satellites built for the 
Navy by  Hughes Space and 
Communications Corp. to replace 
an  aging Fleet Satellite 
Communications System. 

36,446.0  Successfully launched 
35,140.0 
i n t o ~ c h m n o u s  
1,436.5  orbit and aansitioned to 
5.1  normal operating mode 
with all systems nominal. 
In orbit. 

APPENDIX  A 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

Launch  Date  ( G M T ) ,  
Spacecraft N am e ,  
COSPAR  
Designation, 
L a c~n ch  Vehicle 

Mission Ob jec t ives ,  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
Period  (m i n . )  
I n c l i n a t i ~ > n  to  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Sep. 12 
Space Shuttle 
Discovery 
(STS-5 1 ) 
58A 

Sep.  1 2  
ACTS 
5RB 

Sep.  13 
ORFEUS- 
SPAS 
5 8 C  

Objective: To deploy a  satellire 
that  will serve as a  testhed Rlr  new 
commun~ c a t~on s  satellite  technol- 
oby  as well ns  to  deploy and 
retrieve a U .S . /Cennan  free-flying 
scientific observation satellite, 
among numenlus other missions. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orhiter i v ~ t h  
Advanced  Communications 
Technology Satellite  (AC T S ) ,  
Orbiting and Retrieving Far  and 
Extreme U l t r~v io l e t  Spectrometer- 
Shuttle Pallet Satellite  (ORFEUS- 
SPAS) ,  plus nine other cargo hay 
and  in-cahin payloads. 

Objective: To flight test high-risk, 
advanced  communication.^  satellite 
technology for providing up  to 
three  tlmes  the commun ica t~ons  
capability fbr  the weight of  today's 
satellites, 20  rimes  the  rare of corn. 
munications  trrtwecn uscr;, and 
other advances over existing tcch- 
n o l (w .  Sp~ c e c r a f t :  B:~s~cally rec- 
tangular satellite equipped with 
two solar arrays, a 30-GHz receiv- 
ing an tenna ,  a C-band omni 
an tenna ,  a s teenh le  antenna, and 
a 20-Ghz transmitting  an tenna ,  
among other equ ip~nen t .  

Ohjectivc: % investigate very ho t  
and  very cold matter in the  uni- 
verse using the   retrievable 
ASTRO-SPAS spacecraft built by 
Germany. Spacecraft: ASTRO-  
SPAS con t a~n ing  the  one-meter 
diameter ORFEUS-Telescope with 
the  Far Ultraviolet  Spectrograph 
and the  Extreme Ulnaviolet 
Spectrograph, plus the   Interstellar 
Medium Ahsorption  Profile 
Spectrograph and  the Surface 
Effects Sample Monitor. 

307.0  Fifty-seventh S T S  flight. 
275.0  Piloted hy  Frank L. 
90.3  Culhertson, Jr., and 
211.4  W i l l ~ tm  E  Reac~dS .  
M i s ~ o n  specialists James 
H. Newman,  Daniel W. 
Bunch, and Carl E. 
Walz. Launched fn)m 
KSC at  7:45 a.m., EDT. 
Landed  at KSC  3:56 
a.m., EDT, S e p  22. 
Mission duration: 9 days, 
20 hrs,  1 I  min. 

35 ,929 .0   Deployed from  D~sccwer j  
35 ,709 .0   at  5 : 1 3   p.m., EDT. 
1 ,437 .8   Transfer Orhit Stage fired 
0 .2   on  time 45 min. later 
and txxsted  11 to  irs 
planned orbit. Sc iond  
mission of Transfer Orbit 
Stage and ftrst use  on  a 
Shuttle nuwicln.  In orhit. 

304.0  T h e  I)~sc<>\>er). 
crew 
270.0  rele;~wd ORFEUS-SPAS 
90.1  o n  the  i n ~ >m i n g  of Sep. 
28.4  13. hlisslon Spcc~;rlist 
[)an Bursch recaptured 
the sarellire a t  7:50 a .m . ,  
EDT, o n  Sep .   19 using 
the Shu t t les  n>k> t ic  
arm. 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  ( km ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( * )  

Remarks 

Oct. 5 
Landsat-6 
63A 
Titan I1 

Objective: To monitor Earth 
resources in support of global 
change research, coastal zone mon- 
itoring, timber management, envi- 
ronmental monitoring, and other 
programs. Spacecraft: Landstat-6. 

813.0  Satellite's kick motor 
786.0 
failed to  place it in final 
100.6  orbit, and communica- 
tions with  it ceased  (i.e., 
98.5 
launch was successful but 
not satellite). 

Oc t .  18 
Space Shuttle 
Columbia 
( S E - 5 8 )  
65A 

Obiective: To determine the 
effeca of microgravity on  human 
and animal subjects using  the 
Spacelab Life Sciences-2 payload. 
Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carrying 
SLS-2. 

291.0  F ih-e igh th  flight of 
282.0  SIS. Piloted by  John  E 
90.2  Blaha and Richard A. 
39.0  Searfm. Payload 
Commander M. Rhea 
Seddon, MD. Mission 
specialists Shannon W. 
Lucd, PhD; David A. 
Wolf, MD; William S. 
McArthur, Jr. Payload 
specialist Martin J .  
Femnan, DVM, PhD. 
Launched from KSC 
10:53 a.m., E m .  Landed 
at Edwards AFB  11:22 
a.m., E M ,  Nov.  1. 

Oc t .  26 
GPS 
68A 
Delta 11 

Nov.  28 
DSCS I11 
74A 
Atlas 11 

Objective: To provide radio posi- 
tioning and navigation, including 
position, velocity, and timing data 
to DoD and civilian men. 
Spacecraft: A Block 1lA satellite in 
the NAVSTAR Global 
Pmitioning System. 

20,268.0  Twenty-third in a series 
20,093.0  of operational GPS satel- 
lites. System to  be wm -  
717.9 
55.2  posed of24  satellites in 
inclined, s e m i - s y n b  
nous orbit. In orbit. 

35,533.0  Cu t  over to  operational 
160.0  d
c
 
in mid-1994. 
623.3 
ln orbit 
26.5 

Objective: To provide long-haul, 
high capacity communications sys- 
tem supporting the worldwide 
command and control of the U.S. 
Armed Forces and other 
Government  agencies. Spacecraft: 
Improved, third-generation 
Defense Satellite Communications 
system (DSCS) satellite. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km), 
Period  (m in .)  
Inc l ina t ion  to 
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Dec. 2 
Soace Shuttle 
Endeavour 
(STS-61) 
75A 

Objective: To restore the planned 
scientific capabilities and reliability 
of  the Hubble Space Telescope and 
to  validate the on-orbit servicing 
concept for HST. Spacecraft: 
Shuttle orbiter equipped with HST  
replacements. 

Dec. 8 
NATO  IVB 
76A 
Delta  I1 

Objective: To provide secure and 
reliable military communications 
between NATO  member nations 
and NATO military forces. 
Spacecraft: Military communica- 
tions satellite built by  British 
Aerospace. 

594.0  Fifni-ninth flight of STS. 
588.0  Piloted by  Richard 0. 
96.5  Covey and Kenneth  D. 
28.4  Bowersox. Mission spe- 
cialists Tom Akers, 
Jeffrey A .  Hoffman, 
Kathryn C. Thornton, 
Claude Nicollier 
(Switzerland), and F. 
Story Musgrave. 
Launched from KSC a t  
4:27 a.m., M. Landed 
at KSC 26 minutes afcer 
midnight on k c .  13. 
Mission duration: 10 
davs,l9 hn . ,  58 Min. 

35,914.0  Launched commercially 
762.0  by  McDonnell Douglas. 
644.5  In orbit. 
23.3 

Dec.  16 
Telstar 401 
77A 
Atlas 11 

Objective: To provide  television 
and data communications services 
for U.S. customers. Spacecraft: 
AT&T  communications satellite. 

35,804.0  Launched commercially 
188.0  by  General Dynamics. 
Inorbit. 
631.2 
23.9 

SATELUTES ,SPACE PROBES.  A N D  HUMAN SPACE  FLIGHTS.  1 994 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Mission Objecttves, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (k in ) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator 

Remarks 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

J an .  8 
Soyuz TM -  18  

J an .  25 
C lemen t ine  
4 A  
% t a n  11 

Feb. 3 
Space Shu t t le  
Discovery 
(STS -60 )  
6A  

Ohlective: To test  in  space 23 
advanced  technologies  for h igh-  
tech,  lightweight  missile  defense. 
Spacecraft: A  deep space prohe 
consisting  of  newly developed 
hardware,  such  as  lightweight 
tmaging sensors, all developed 
since  1990. 

Objective: To deploy  and 
retrieve  a free-flying disk 
d e s t p e d  to  generate new  semi- 
conductor  films for advanced 
electronics and  provide  th e  
second  flight of  a commercially 
developed  research  facility. 
Spacecraft:  Shu t t le  orbiter carry- 
ing  the  Wake  Shield Factlity, a 
12-foot-diameter, stainless  steel 
disk, and  SPACEHAB. 

Crew consisted of Viktor 
Afanasye~: Yuri  Usachev, 
and Valety  Polyakov. 
Docked wtth Mir Space 
Station Jan. 10. 
Afanasyev and Usachev 
landed  in  the TM-18 
spacecraft on  
Jul. 9, 1994. Polyakov 
remained ahcard Mir  tn 
the attempt to  establish a 
new  record  for 
endurance in space. 
Flight time:  182 days, 
27  mtn. 

Conceived, butlt, and 
launched in  2 2  months, 
the satellite, whose p s i -  
tion changed over the 
c o um  of  the year, also 
provlded 1.8 million 
images of  the surhce of 
the Moon. 

Sixtieth flight of  the 
STS. Piloted hy  Charles 
E  Bolden and Kenneth 
S. Reightler, Jr. Mwion 
specialists N .  Jan  Davts, 
PhD, Ronald M. Sega, 
PhD, Franklin R. 
Chang-Diu, PhD, 
who also was payload 
commander, and Sergei 
Konstanrinovich 
Krikalev  (Russta), whosc 
presence signtf~ed a new 
era In  ctx>peration in 
space between  the U.S. 
and Russta. Launched 
from KSC at 7:10 a.m., 
EST. Landed  at KSC at 
2:19 p.m., EST .   Feb.  11. 
M~sston duration: 8 days, 
7 hrs., 9 min. 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
Perigee (km) ,  
Period  (m i n . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

Feb. 7 
Milstar 
9A  
Taitan  1V 

Feb.  9 
ODERACS  
6B-6G 
Space Shu t t le  

Feb. 9 
BREMSAT 
6H  
Space Shu t t le  
D~scovery 

Feb.  19 
Galaxy  1R 
13A 
Delta  11 

Not  Launch  included first use 
announced .   of  Xtan lV with Centaur 
upper stage. First Milstar 
satellite. In orbit. 

Ob jec twe :  To begin  a multi- 
channe l ,  EHF/'UHF satellite 
communications system provid- 
ing survivable,  enduring, and 
iam-resistant secure voice data 
communication  for  the  Armed 
Forces and o ther  users. 
Spacecraft:  A  communications 
satellite using  extremely  high- 
frequency  radio and encription 
technology  to  prevent  jamming 

Objective: To  improve  the   abili- 
ty  of  ground-based  radars to  
detect  and  track  small debris 
objects. Spacecraft:  Six spheres 
ranglng  in diameter from  two t o  
six  inches. 

Elements  Deployed from the 
vary.  orbiter's payload bay.  In 
orbit at end of N but 
ODERACS A & B 
(COSPAR designations 
6B & 6C)  decayed Oct. 
2 & 4 respectively. 

Objective: To study various phe- 
nomena  in  space  including  heat 
conductivity, the  forces of  accel- 
eratlon, and  atomic forces. 
Spacecraft: T h e  University  of 
Bremen  Satellite, built  by  tha t  
institution's Cen ter   of  Applied 
Space Technology  and 
Microgravity. Weight:  140 Ibs. 
( 6 3  kg .) ;  Length:  19" (480  mm). 

Objective: To p rov~d e  video 
communications. Sapcecraft: A 
geostationary  communication 
s a t e l l~ t e  with  24 C-band 
transponders,  owned  by  Hughes 
Commun i c a t~on s ,  Inc. 

320.0  Spring-ejected from  its 
302.0  canister in the orbiter's 
90.8  bay.  In orbit. 
57 .0  

3 7,300.0  Launched commerc~ally 
2,933.0  by  M c h n n e l l  Douglas. 
Inorbit. 
715.3 
25.1 

Mar. 9 
Space Shu t t le  
Columbia 
(STS-62)  
15A 

Objective: To conduct  dozens of 
experiments in such  areas as 
materials processing, biotechnol- 
ogy,  advanced  technology,  and 
environmental  monitoring. 
Spacecraft:  Shu t t le  orbiter 

309.0  Sixty-first flight of  the  
296.0  STS. Piloted by  John  H .  
90.4  Casper and Andrew M. 
39.0  Allen. M h i o n  specialists 
Pierre J .  Thuo t ,  
Charles D.  Gemar, and 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Ohjecrives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km) ,  
P e r ~ o d  (m in .)  
Inclination  to  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Mar.  10 
GPS 
16A 
Delta  I1 

Mar.  LO 
SEDS-11 
16B 
Delta  11 

Mar.  13 
ARPASAT 
17A 
Taurus 

equiped  with  the  U.S. 
Microgravity  Payload-2,  the  
Office of  Aeronautics  and  Space 
Technology-2, th e  Shu t t le  Solar 
Backscatter Ultraviolet  instru- 
m en t ,  and o ther  payloads. 

Objective: To provide  radio posi- 
tioning and nawga t ion ,  includ- 
ing position, velocity, and  timing 
data  to  DoD and  civilian users. 
Spacecraft:  A  Block  11  satellite 
in  th e  NAVSTAR  Global 
Positioning  System. 

Objective: To suspend a te ther  
in space with  a  rninlmurn of 
swing and t o  determine  the  
resistance  of  its braided  poly- 
e the lene   to  rnicrorneteoroids, 
space debris, and  atomic oxygen. 
Spacecraft: A  23-kilogram  mini- 
satellite. 

h4arsh;i S. Ivlns. 
hun ch ed   fkom  KSC at 
8:53 a.m., LT. Landed 
at KSC 8:10 a.m., EST, 
Mar.  18. bllssion duta- 
tlon:  I 3  days, 23  hn . ,  
17 min. 

20,348.0  Tiventy-fourth and Anal 
20,016.0  srrtelllrc in  the GPS con- 
718.0  stellatlon. In orhit. 
55.0 

358.0  Ejected  by the Delta's 
344.0  second stage using  a 
9 1.3  spring-loaded de\.icc.. 
32.3  A t  20 kilometers,  the 
longest object ever 
pl;~ced in  space. Severed 
on Mar.  15, hut  the 
remaining  10-12 kms. 
remained attached to the 
n ~ k e t ' s  second stage 
until  ~t decayed May 8 .  

Nor  Lnunchcd h y  the first 
Objective: To demonstrate  a 
low-cost, classified space capahil-  announced.  Taurus standard small 
launch vchicle. In a  290- 
ity, validate  advanced  technolo- 
nautical-m~le, 105- 
gies, and  assess th e  operational 
degrec-~nclination orhit. 
utility  of  direct user  tasking  and 
collection  of payload data. 
Spacecraft: A  400-lb  satellite 
developed  by  Ball  Aerospace 
Corporation  for  the  Advanced 
Research  Projects Agency  of 
DoD. 

Mar.  13 
STEP-TAOS  
17B 
Taurus 

Objective: To demonstrate and  
validate  state-of-the-art  space- 
craft  technologies  t o  ensure 

No t   Launched  hy  th e  f~ r s t  
announced .   Taurus standard  small 
launch  vehicle.  In a 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

APPENI3IX A 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km), 
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator 

Remarks 

- 

290-nautical-mile, 105- 
degree-inclination orbit. 

autonomy and survivability  in  an  
op e r a t~on a l  space env ironmen t .  
Spacecraft:  Space Test Program 
Exp r lm en t a l   Platform 
Technology for Autonomous 
Operational  S u r v ~ v a b i l i t ~ ,  also 
known  as STEP-0. 

Objective: No t  announced .  
Spacecraft: No t   announced. 

No t  
announced. 

In  orbit. 

Objective: To gather Earth 
images from Space Radar 
Laboratory-l  to   improve  the  
u n d e r s t a n d ~ n ~  of  our planet's 
carbon, water, and  energy cycles 
and   th e  effects humans have  on  
them.  Spacecraft: Shu t t le  orbiter 
carrying SRL-1 and o ther  pay- 
loads. 

218.0 
204.0 
88.7 
56.9 

Sixtysecond  flight of  the 
STS. Piloted by  Sidney 
M. Guthiertez and Kevin 
P.  Chilton. Mission  spe- 
cialists Jemme Apt, 
Michael R. Clifford, 
Linda M. G d w i n  (also 
payload commander), 
and Thomas D. Jones. 
Launched from KSC at 
7:05a.m.,  E m .  Landed 
at EAFBat  12:54 p.m., 
EM, o n  Apt. 20. 
Mission duration: I 1 
days, 5 hrs.,  50 min. 

Objective: To provide  more pre- 
cise and   timely weather observa- 
tion  and data o n  the  atmos- 
phere.  Sapcecraft: Geostationary 
Operational  Environmental 
Satellite-8 with  three-axis 
stabilization  t o  permit  continous 
observation  of  Earth. 

35,805.0 
35,773.0 
1,436.2 
0.2 

Satellite positioned at 90 
degree West Longitude 
during checkout, but 
plan..  called for it  to  be 
moved to  75 degree 
West Longitude once ~t 
became opetational. 
In o rb~ t .  

Ob jec twe :  To provide  DoD with 
enhanced  missile warmlng and 
surveillance  capabilities. 
Spacecraft: T h e  17 th  Defense 
Support Program satellite in geo- 
stationary orbit. 

No t  
announced. 

Mar.  13 
No t   announced 
1 7C-  171 

Apr. 9 
Space  Shu t t le  
Endeavour 
(STS-59)  
20A 

Apr.  13 
GOES-8  
22A 
Atlas  I 

May  3 
DSP 
26A 
T i tan   I V  

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUT ICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) .  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mrssion Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
. - 
Perigee ( k m ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

Objective: To provide  ballistic 
missile  Launch  detection  and 
envrronmental/ecological 
monitoring. Spacecraft: 
Miniature Sensor Technology 
Integration-2 satellite with 
short-wave infrared sensors. 

Objective: To evaluate unusual 
detection  techniques for  th e  
DoD so as  to  separate  ad jacen t ,  
overlapping  co-channel  cornmu. 
nications  transmitted  at  a  low 
signal level. Spacecraft:  Space 
Test Program Experimental 
Platform. 

Objective: To provide  U H F  
communications  for DoD. 
Spacecraft: Th ird  Ultra  High 
Frequency Follow-on satellite 
built  by Hughes Aircraft 
Company for  the  Navy  t o  
replace  th e  FLTSATCOM 
system. 

May  9 
MSTI-2 
28A 
Scout 

May  19 
STEP-2 
29A 
Pegasus 

Jun .  24 
UFO-3 
35A  
Atlas  I 

Ju l .  1 
Soyuz TM -  19 

433.0  Launched  hy the   last 
41 5.0  Scout  in to  Sun-syn- 
93.1  chronous orbit. 
97.1 

817 .0   In  orbit 
600.0 
99 .0  
82.0 

15,457.0  First Asian launch con- 
383 .0   ducted by  Martin 
283.6  Marietta following its 
27.1  purchase of  the Atlas 
business from Genetal 
Qnam ics .  In orbit. 
Became operational over 
the Atlantic Ocean 
in Octoher  1994. 

Crew consisted of  yurt 
Malenchenko and Talgat 
A. Musahayev. Dtxked 
Mir Space Station Jul. 3. 
Both Malenchenko and 
Musabayev returned to 
Earth with  the Soyuz- 
TM  19 spacecraft, land- 
ing  in Kazakhstan on 
Nov. 4 ,  together with Ulf 
Merhold of Germanv. 
who went up  aboard 
Soyuz TM-20 on Oct  3, 
1994. Merhdd  gathered 
biologrcal samples on  the 
effect of  weightlessness 
on human body in  thc 
first of  the two  ESA mi\- 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  ( GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Ob j e c t~v e s ,  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee ( km ) ,  
Period  ( m ~ n . )  
Inclination  to  
Equator  ('1 

Remarks 

sions to  Mir to prepare 
for the  international 
Space Statlon. Flight 
time:  125 days, 22  hrs., 
53 min. 

Sixty-third flight of  the 
STS. Piloted by  Robert 
D. Cabana and James D. 
Halsell, Jr. Mission spe- 
cialists Richard J. Hieb 
(also payload command- 
er), Carl E. WaL, Leroy 
Chiao, PhD, and Donald 
A. Thomas, PhD. 
Payload specialist Chiaki 
Nato-Mukai, MD, PHD 
(Japan). Launched from 
K S C  at  12:43 p.m., EDT 
Landed  at K S C  on  Jul. 
23  following a record 
duration flight of  14 
days, 17 hrs.,  55 min. 

Pegasus launch vehicle 
carried by  a EL52  bomber 
that took off  from EAFB. 
In orbit. 

39,445.0  Launched commercially 
196.0  by Martin Mariem. 
703.4 
In orbit. 
26.9 

Ju l .  8 
Space Shu t t le  
Columbia 
(STS -65 )  
39A 

Objective: To conduct  research 
in to  the  behavior  of  materials 
and  life  in  the  nearly weightless 
env ironmen t  of  low Earth orbit. 
Spacecraft:  Shu t t le  orbiter 
equipped  with  the   In terna t iona l  
Microgravity Laboratory-2  and 
o ther  payloads. 

Aug.  3 
APEX 
46A 
Pegasus 

Aug.  3 
DBS-2 
47A 
Atlas  I1A 

Objective: To test  the   impact  of 
radiation  in  th e  Van  A l len  belt 
o n  two  target  instruments. 
Spacecraft: Advanced 
Photovoltaic Experiment,  a  test 
spacecraft carrying  three diag- 
nostic  instruments. 

Objective: To provide  commer- 
cial  television  service to   th e  48 
continguous states in  the  Un i ted  
States. Increase  channe l  capacity 
from DBS-1  ( a lon e )  to   150 
channels.  Spacecraft: 
Geostationary communications 
satellite owned  by  DirecTV and 
Un i ted  S ta tes  Satellite 
Broadcasting. Named  Direct 
Broadcast Satellite-2 or 
DIRECTV-2. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GMT ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
-  - 
Perigee  (km) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( 9 )  

Remarks 

Aug.  27 
USA   I 0 5  
54A  
T i tan  IV 

Aug.  29 
DMSP F-12 
57A 
Atlas  E 

Aug.  29 
No t   announced 
57B-57E 

Sep .  9 
Space Shu t t le  
Discovery 
(STS -64 )  
5 9A  

Objective: Classified DoD mis- 
sion.  Spacecraft: Not 
announced .  

No t   In orbit along with 548 ,  
announced.  about which no  informa- 
tion is  available. 

856.0  In orbit. 
838.0 
101.9 
98.9 

Objective: To provide  specialized 
meteorological  data  in support  of 
DoD operations, including  cloud 
coverage, wind speed,  and pre- 
cipitation.  Spacecraft: Defense 
Metorological  Satellite  Program 
Satellite F-I  2  (indicating th e  
12 th  satellite  in  Block  5D )  with 
eight  sensors to  measure ocean  
surface wind  speed, areas and 
intensity of precipitation, cloud 
water con t en t ,  land  surface mois- 
ture, and  space environmental 
da ta .  

Objective: No t   announced .  
Spacecraft: No t   announced. 

Elements  In  orbit. 
vary. 

 

Objective: To perform  atmos- 
pheric  research  using a Laser, 
conduct  robotic processing of 
semi-conductor  materials.  deolov 
.
.
.
and  retrieve  a  free-flying astro- 
nomical sub-satellite, and per- 
form th e  first untethered  space- 
walk  by astronomers  in  over  ten  
years. Spacecraft:  Shu t t le  orbiter 
equipped  with LIDAR  In-Space 
Technology Experiment, the  
Rohot  Operated  Processing 
System, Shu t t le  Polnted 
Autonomous Research  Tool,  and 
Simplified A d  for EVA  (Extra 
Vehicular  Ac t iv i ty)  Rescue, 
among o ther   items. 

269.0  Sixtyfourth flight of  the 
259.0  STS. Piloted by  Richard 
89.5  N. Richards and L. 
56.9  Blaine Hammond, Jr. 
Mission specialists]. 
M. Linenger, MD, PhD, 
Susan J .  Helms, Carl J .  
Meade, and Mark C. 
Lee. Launched at 6:23 
p.m.,EDT, and landed at 
5: 1 3 EDT, at EAFB on  
Sep. 20. Mission dura- 
tion: 10 days, 22  hrs., 
50 min. 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch Date  (GMT ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( Q )  

Remarks 

Objective: To explain how  th e  
solar wind  is generated by  t h e  
Sun. Spacecraft: Shu t t le  Pointed 
Autonomous Research Tool-201, 
a battery-powered  sub-satellite 
equipped  with  a pointing  system 
and  recorder  for capturing da ta  
about  th e  acceleration and 
velocity of  th e  solar wind  plus 
aspects of  the  Sun's corona. 

Objective: To refly  th e  Space 
Radar Laboratory and provide 
scientists with detailed  informa- 
tion  to help distinguish  between 
human-induced  environmental 
changes  and o ther  natural  forms 
of  change. Spacecraft:  Shu t t le  
orbiter equipped  with Space 
Radar Laboratory-2, G e t  Away 
Special experiments, and a num-  
ber  of  in-cabin payloads. 

Sep.  13 
SPARTAN-201 
59B 
Space Shu t t le  
Discovery 

Sep. 30  
Space Shu t t le  
Endeavour 
(STS-68)  
62A  

O c t .  3 
Soyuz TM -20  

Oc t .   6 
lntelsat  703 
64A 
Atlas  IIAS 

Objective: To  provide  television 
and  telephone  service for N .  
Pacific region. 

50 minutes  Released from 
beh ind   Discovery's payload  bay 
Discovery  and recovered on  
Sep. 15. 

Sixty-f&  flight of $23. 
Piloted by  Michael A. 
Baker and Terrence D. 
Wilcutt. Commander 
and Mission Specialist 
Thomas D. Jones. 
Mission specialists 
Steven L.  Smith, Dan~e l  
W. Bunch, and Peter 1. 
K. W i f f .  Launched 
(after an  initial abort on  
Aug.  18) a t  7:16 a.m., 
Em, from Cape 
Canaveral. Landed at 
EAFB on  Oct.  11. 

Crew consisted of 
Aleksandr Viktorenko, 
Telena Kondakova, and 
Ulf Merbold  (USA) .  
Soyw TM- 19 returned 
to Earth on Nov. 4, with 
Yuri Malenchenko, 
Talgat Musabayev, and 
Ulf M e h l d .  Valety 
Polyakov remained 
aboard Mir. 

APPENDIX   A 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  ANI,  A ERONAU T IC S  

Launch  l h t e  (GXZT) ,  
Spacecraf t  N am e ,  
COSPAR  
D c s ~ g n a t ~ o n ,  
Launch   \'chicle 

h l ~ s a i o n  Objectives, 
Spacecraf t  Data 

Apogee  and  
P e r ~ g c e  ( k m ) ,  
Per lc~d  ( n l ~ n . )  
In c l tn a t t<>n  t o  
Eyu t~ to r  (') 

Rema rks  

Nov .   1 
W lnd  
71A  
Delta  11 

N o \   3 
Space  Sh u t t l e  
A t l a n r ~ r  
( S T S - 6 6 )  
73A 

Nov.  29 
O r ion  
79A  
A t las   IIA  

Dec.  2 2  
DSP- 17 
( U S A -  107)  
84A  
T i tan   I V  

Dec  30 
N O A A - 1 4  
( N O A A - J  hefore 
o rh t t )  
R9A 
A t las   E 

Ob jec t ive :  To  mcasurc  solar 
wind   plasm;^  and   magne t ic   field. 

Variahle  Part of GGS /ISTP  
parameters  p r o p l n .  

O h j e c t ~ \ e  To  co l lec t   tempera-  
rure  anil  9olar  energ)   da ta   fur 
NA SA   .+nil N O A A  

3100   D c p l ~ ) ) c dA t l ~ 5 - 3 ,  
296 0  SSRUV, and CRISTA-  
91 0 SPAS- l  pa \Io .~d \  
5 7  0 

O h p x i v e :  To  prov ide   tr lev ia ion  
s c r v ~ c e .  

36.022.0  Gernmn  spacecr~f t  
35,62 1 .0  
1,438.0 
30.0 

O h j e c r ~ v c :  To  p r o v ~ d c  early 
wam tng  m~ s s i l e  l a un ch  d c t e c -  
t lon .  

C>eosynchr(~ 
nous. 
Exact 
yara~ncrcn  
no t  
available. 

Oh j e c t lv e   T o  measure  wea ther  
d a t a ,  such   as  a tmospher ic   tern- 
pera ture   and  molsture 

858 0  Replaced NOAA - 11  
845 0 
102 0 
98  9 

SATELLITES,SPACE PROBES, AND  HUMAN  SPACE FLIGHTS .   1 995 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

To provide  radio and  television 
coverage for Middle  East, Africa, 
and Europe. 

J an .  10  
Intelsat  704 
1 A 
A t las  IIAS  

Jan .  28 
EHF-F4 
(UFO-4)  
(USA -  108)  
3A  
Atlas  11 

Feb. 3 
Space Shu t t le  
Discovery 
(STS-63)  
4A  

Feb.  7 
SPARTAN  204 
4B 
STS-63  

Feb.  7 
ODERACS  2A-2E 
4C-4G  
STS-63  

Mar. 2 
Space Shu t t le  
Endeavour 
(STS-67)  
7A 

Mar.  14  
Soyuz TM -21  

Remarks 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  to  
Equator  (') 

35,797.0 
35,776.0 
1,436.0 
0.02 

To provide  naval cornmunica- 
tions. 

36,388.0  DoD payload on com- 
24,474.0  mercial ELV.  First UHF 
1,17 1 .0   Follow-On to cany EHF 
5.4  package. 

First close encoun ter  in nearly 
20 years between  U .S .  and 
Russian spacecraft  (Mir); prelude 
t o  in terna t iona l  Space S ta t ion .  

342.0  Carried SPARTAN 204, 
310.0  SSCE, and AMOS pay- 
91.0 
loads. 
51.6 

Far-ultraviolet  spectrograph  saw 
galactic  dust  clouds. 

Similar  t o   Shuttle Pointed 
STS-63.  Autonomous Research 
Tool for Astronomy. 

Provide  calibration for  radar 
echoes. 

Similar t o   Very small Orbital Debris 
STS-63 .   Radar Calibration 
Spheres. 

First ultraviolet  images of t h e  
Moon  taken  by  ASTRO-2   ( t r io  
of  ultraviolet  telescopes). 

363.0  Also conducted protein 
349.0  crystal growth experi- 
91.0  ment. 
28.5 

Crew consisted of 
Vladimir Dezhumv, 
Gennadi Strekalov, and 
Norman Thagard 
(USA). '&gad  was 
first American astronaut 
to  fly on  a Russian rocket 
and  to stay on the 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

~p p~~ 

Apogee  and 
Perigee  (km ) ,  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

Mir Space Station. Soyuz 
TM-20 returned t o  Earth 
on  Mar. 22, 1995, with 
Valeq  Polyakov, 
Aleksandr Viktorenko, 
and Yelena Kondakova. 
Polyakov set world 
record by  remaining in 
space for 438 days. 

Mar.  22 
Intelsat  705 
13A 
Atlas  I lAS  

Mar.  24 
Defense 
Meteorological 
Satellite  Program 
DMSPF13  
(USA -109 )  
15A 
Atlas E 

Apr. 3 
Orbcomm  1 & 2 
17A & 17B 
Pegasus 

Apr. 3 
Microlab  1 
17C  
Pegasus 

Apr.  7 
MSAT 
(AMSC-  1) 
19A  
Atlas  I1A 

To  provide  telecommunications 
for Latin America. 

35,800.0 
35,776.0 
1,436.0 
0.04 

To replenish  DoD meteorologi- 
cal  constellation. 

854.0  Final Atlas E  launch .  
847.0 
102.0 
98 .8  

To provide global  paging and 
data  communication. 

747.0  First  of  26  planned 
734.0 
satellites. 
100.0 
69 .9  

Microsatellite  with  global light- 
ning mapper and G P S  radio 
receiver. 

747.0 
734.0 
100.0 
69 .9  

To provide  mobile  telephone 
communication. 

Geosynchro  American  Mobile 
nous.  Satellite Corp .  
Exact 
parameters 
no t  
available. 

APPENDIX  A 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name ,  
COSPAR  
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km) ,  
Period  (m in . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  (') 

Remarks 

May  14 
DoD  classified 
payload 
(USA-1  10) 
22A 
T i tan   IV 

May  23 
GOES-9  
(GOES-])  
25A 
Atlas  I 

May 31 
EHF-F5 
(UFO-5)  
(USA -1  11) 
27A 
Atlas  11 

Jun .  25 
Space Shu t t le  
A t lan t is  
(STS-7  1 ) 
30A  

Jul.  10 
DoD classified 
payload 
(USA -1  12) 
34A  
T i tan  1V 

Jul.  13  
Space Shu t t l e  
Discovery 
(STS-70)  
35A  

To provide  electronic  intelli- 
gence. 

Parameters 
no t   available. 

Image cloud  cover; measure 
atmospheric temperature and 
moisture. 

35,806.0  Replaced GOES-7 over 
35,775.0  west coast o f th e  United 
1,436.0  States. 
0.07 

To provide  naval communica- 
t ion .  

Geosynchron  DoD payload on  corn. 
ous.  mercial ELV. 
Exact 
parameters 
not  available. 

To rendezvous with Mir Space 
S ta t ion .  

385.0  Bmught up Mir  19 crew; 
296.0  returned Mir  18 crew to  
91  .O  Earth. 
51.6 

To provide  signal  intelligence. 

39,200.0 
1,300.0 
720.0 
64.0 
(Da ta  esti- 
mated 
by  Jane's  
Intelligence 
Review) 

To deploy Tracking and  Data 
Relay Satellite  (TDRS) .  

3 15.0  First Shuttle mission to  
287.0  use new Mission Control 
91.0  Center  in Houston. 
28.4 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

APPENDIX  A 

L'lunch  Darc  ( G M T ) ,  
Spacecraft N am e ,  
COSPAR  
l)esign;ition, 
Launch  Vehlclc 

Mission  Ob jec t ives ,  
Spacecraft  Data 

Apogee  and  
Perigee  ( k m ) ,  
Period  ( m i n . )  
l n c l ~ n a t i o n  ro 
Equator  ( * )  

Remarks 

Ju l .  13  
TI>RS-7 
35R  
STS-iL7 

To rt'lcking and  Dara  Relay 
Satell ire  ( TDR S )  for o th e r  
spacecraft and  ground  in   F and  
Ku  h;inJs. 

35,803.0 
35,773.0 
1,436.0 
0 .43  

Ju l .  11 
Ik f en s e   Sa te l l l tc  
C omm u n ~ c ; ~ t i o n . r  
System 
(D SC S - I l l )  
( U S A   111) 
18.4 
Atlaa  11.4 

To  provide  r n ~ l ~ t a r y  commun ica-   Geosynchrci 
nous. 
t ion .  
Exact 
parameters 
no t  
a\railahle. 

T(, pro\.lde  Sourh  Kore;r  televi- 
> I L I I I .  

29 ,798 .0   Failed  to rcach getsta- 
26 ,777 .0  
tion;iry orhit  initlalip 
1 ,062 .0  
0 .07  

.Aug  2 8  
JC S a t  1 
43A  
Atl'ls IIA 

To  carry  vc)ice. d a t a ,  and   J ig i ta l   Geosynchro   Japan's first regional 
n ~ u h .  con~municaticrns 
te lc \~ is i< ,n  signals. 
Exact 
ipacecrak. 
p;ir;rmcters 
no t  
av a~ l ah l e .  

Crew u)nsiarcJ o i  Yur~ 
( i~ i l lenko ,  Serge1 
Avdeyev, and Thomas 
Reiter (ESA). S~yuz 
Tin-2 1  retumcd  to Eanh 
o n  Scp.  11,  1 9 9 5 ,  with 
h l ~ r  19 crew (An a to l~y  
S , lo \ye \f  and Nikolay 
Rud;irln). 

Sep .  7 
Space  Shu t t l e  
Endeavour 
( S T S - 6 9 )  
48A  

Tc,  deploy  SPARTAN  and  W ak e  
Sh ie ld  Facility. 

-370 .0  
91 .0  
28.4 

APPENDIX A 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft Data 

Apogee and 
~e;i!k!ee  (km ) ?  
Period  (m in .)  
Inclination  to 
Equator (P) 

Remarks 

Sep. 8 
SPARTAN 201 
4 8 8  
STS-69  

To provide X-ray, far-ultraviolet, 
and  visdible  instruments  to  study 
soloar corona  and  galactic 
clusters. 

Parameters 
similar to  
STS-69. 

Grow special semiconductors. 

Parameters  Terminated early because 
similar to  of  overheating. 
STS-69. 

To carry out microgravity experi- 
ments  in  the U.S.  Microgravity 
Laboratory Spacelab. 

-267.0 
90.0 
39.0 

To deploy military UHF  commu- 
nications. 

27,571.0 
277.0 
479.0 
27.0 

Remote  sensing. 

790.0  Canadian spacecraft. 
785.0 
101.0 
98.6 

Summer undergraduate  Research 
Fellowship Satellite. 

1,495.0  Micrcrsatellite to assist 
rests of Deep Space 
93  5 .O 
110.0  Network. Launched from 
100.6  second stage of  Delm  11. 

To provide military communica-  Geosynchro 
nous. 
tions. 

Sep.  11 
Wake Shield 
Facility 
(WSF-2)  
48C 
STS-69  

O c t .  20 
Space Shu t t le  
Columbia 
(STS-73)  
56A 

Oc t .   22 
EHF-F6 
(U SA  114) 
(UFO-6)  
57A 
Atlas  I1 

Nov.  4 
RADARSAT 
59A 
Delta  I 1  

Nov.  4 
SURFSAT 
59B 
Delta  I 1  

Nov. 6 
Milstar 2 
(USA   11 5 )  
60A  
Titan  IV 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

APPENDIX  A 

Launch  Date  (GM T ) ,  
Spacecraft Name, 
COSPAR 
Designation, 
Launch  Vehicle 

Mission Objectives, 
Spacecraft  Dara 

Apogee  and 
Perigee (km ) ,  
Period  (m i n . )  
Inclination  t o  
Equator  ( P )  

Remarks 

-- 

Nov.  12 
Space Shu t t le  
Atlantis 
(STS-74)  
61A  

To  install  Docking Module  o n  
the  Mir Space S ta t ion  and pro- 
vide  logistic support. 

396.0  Second of  9 planned 
39  1.0  flights to  Mir. 
92.0 
51.6 

Dec.  2 
S O H 0  
65A  
Atlas Cen taur   l lA S  

To provide  solar and 
Heliospheric  Observatory  on  
space physics mission. 

Orhits  th e   European Space Agency- 
Sun .   NASA spacecraft to 
examine the Sun and 
its wrcmna. 

Dec.  5 
USA   116 
66A  
Titan  1V 

Dec.  14 
Galaxy 3-R 
69A  
Atlas  Ila 

Dec. 30  
RXTE 
74A 
Delta  I1 

Classified military  reconnais- 
sance. 

976.0  Reporred  to be member 
156.0  of Keyhole cc>nstellation. 
96.0 
97.8 
(da ta  
estimated  by 
I tar-Tass 
agency). 

commercial commu- 
To 
nications sacellire. 

Rossi X-ray  Timing  Explorer, an  
astrophysics mission. 

583.0 
565.0 
96 .0  
22.9 

ABBREVIATION OF REFERENCES 

APPENDIX  B 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Listed here   are  t h e   abbreviations used  for  citing  sources  in  the   text .  N o t   all 
the  sources are  listed, only  those  tha t   are abbreviated. 

Aero  Space Rep  Pres 

Aeronautics  and  Space Report  of  the  
President 

AFP 

AP  

A R C  Release 

B Sun 

Bus Wk 

C Trin 

CSM  

D  News 

Agence France  Presse 

Associated  Press new  service 

NASA  Ames Research Cen te r  news 
release 

Aviation Week B Space Technology 
magazine 

Baltimore Sun  newspaper 

Business Week magazine 

Chicago Tribune newspaper 

Christian Science Monitor  newspaper 

Detroit News  newspaper 

Def  News 

Defense News 

Foreign Broadcast Information 
Service, Chinese  number 

Foreign Broadcast Information 
Service, Eastern Europe number 

Foreign Broadcast Information 
Service, Latin  American  number 

Foreign Broadcast Information 
Service. Near  East number 

Foreign Broadcast Information 
Service, Soviet number 

ASTRCINAUTICS  ANL) AERONAUT ICS  

APPENDIX  R 

Fla  Today 

G S FC  Release 

H  C h r o n  

H  Post 

H tsvl  T m s  

Foreign  Broadcast  Information   Service ,  
Western   Europe  number  

Florida  Today  newspaper 

N A S A  Goddard   Space  Flight C e n t e r  
news  release 

Houston   Chronicle newspaper 

Houston   Post  newspaper 

Huntsville  Times  newspaper 

JPL  Voyager S ta tu s  Report  

N A S A  J e t  Propulsion  Laboratory, 
Voyager S ta tu s  Report  

JSC Release 

LA Herald 

LA  Star  N ew s  

L A  Xm e s  

LRC  Release 

M  N ew s  

MSFC  Release 

N A S A   a n n o  

N A S A  DAR  

N A S A  MOR  

N A S A  PFOR  

N A S A  Release 

N A S A  Lyndon B. J o h n s o n  Space  C e n t e r  
new  release 

Los Angeles  Herald-Examiner  newspaper 

Los Angeles  Star  New s   newsaper 

Los  Angeles  Times newspaper 

Langley  Research  C e n t e r  news  release 

Miami  N ew s   newspaper 

N A S A  George  C. Marshall  Space  
Flight  C e n t e r  news  release 

N A S A   a n n o u n c em e n t  

N A S A  Daily  Activities   Report  

N A S A  Headquarters  Mission 
Ope ra t ion s  Report ,   preliminary 
launch  and  ~ o s t l a u n c h  report   series 

N A S A  Post-Flight  Ope ra t ion s  Report  

N A S A  Headquarters  news  release 

APPENDIX   B 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A E R O N A U T I C S  

N A S A   spl  a n n o  

N a t  S p  Trans  Sys 

NY  Xmes 

0 Sen Star 

P  lnq 

Reuters 

Science 

SF  Chron 

SP  News 

SSR 

Tor Star 

UP1 

USA  Today 

W  Post 

W  Times 

W H  Release 

WSJ 

N A S A   special a n n o u n c em e n t  

Na t iona l   Space  Transportation  
C r i t ica l   Items List 

New  York  Xmes newspaper 

Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper 

Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper 

Reuters  Press  Agency 

Science magazine 

San Francisco Chronicle newspaper 

Space Propukion  newsletter  

N A S A  Sa te l l i te  S i tua t ion  Report  

Toronto Star newspaper 

U n i t e d   Press  In te rna t iona l  news  service 

USA  Today  newspaper 

Washington Post  newspaper 

Washington 7imes newspaper 

W h i t e  House  news  release 

Wall  Street Journal  newspaper 

Index 

Abbo t t ,  Mark, 456 
Abrahamson, James A.,  253 
Abutaha ,  A l i ,  134 
Accola, A n n e  L., 456 
Adams, Gordon ,  37 
Adams, Michael,  205 
Advanced  Communications Technology  Satellite ,  ACTS ,   116, 237, 273 
Advanced Composition Explorer, ACE ,  455 
Advanced  Computer  Systems, Inc . ,  8 
Advanced  Launch Development  Program, 39 
Advanced  Manned  Launch System, 47 
Advanced  Medical  Systems Inc . ,  AMS ,  292 
Advanced  Solid Rocket Motor, ASRM, 47 ,97 ,  170, 195 
Advanced  Space Exploration  Initiative ,  SEI, Technologies,  118 
Advanced  Tracking and Data Relay Satellite  System, ATDRSS,  6 
Advanced X  ray  Astrophysics Facility, AXAE  36, 90, 91,  124, 148 
Advisory Committee  o n  the  Future of  t h e  U.S. Space Program, 6, 8, 20, 70, 
126,206 
Aerojet  Corporation ,  47 
Aerospace Corporation ,  106 
Aerospace  Industries Association,  A IA ,   156, 248, 271, 284 
Aerospace  Safety Advisory Panel, ASAP, 35, 38, 52, 185, 187 
Aerospatiale, 41 
Agriculture,  U.S.  Department  of, 457 
A'hearn, Michael, 459 
A i r  Force, U.S.,  8,  16, 18, 21,  22, 43,  50,  102, 122, 150, 194, 199, 200, 226, 
238,253,  261, 274, 278,280 
Air  Force Space  Command ,  U.S., 50, 69 
Air  Force Systems Command ,  49, 
Air Traffic Con t ro l ,  ATC ,  65 
Akers, Thomas ,  209, 281 
Albrecht ,  Mark J.,  210, 21 1 
Aldrich ,  Arnold  D.,  132, 147, 292 
Aldridge,  Edward  C . ,  Jr.,  159 
Allen ,  Andrew M.,  231 
Alvin  High  School ,  610 
American  Association  for the  Advancement  of  Science, AAAS ,   177 
American Astronomical Society, AAS ,  9,  11, 77, 78, 81, 144, 165, 166, 278, 
293 ,295 ,296 ,623 ,624  
American Geophysical  Un ion ,  A C U ,  75, 281, 282, 61 1, 624 
American  Institute  o f  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics, A IAA ,   2 2 ,  39, 118, 
134, 136, 169,241,281 

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

American Mobile Satellite  Corporation ,  30 
American  Rocket  Society,  169 
American Telephone and Telegraph, AT&T,  30 
American University,  29 
Ames-Dryden  Flight Research  Facility, 6, 21, 38, 42,  52, 78,99, 102, 110, 
132, 146, 176, 183, 193, 199 ,249 ,293 ,455  
Ames, Milton  B., Jr., 179 
Ames Research Center ,  NASA  ARC ,   10, 12, 54, 87, 90, 95, 97,  109, 11 1, 
112, 114, 121, 123, 130, 132, 138, 150, 173, 180, 181, 183, 208, 213, 
236, 247, 252, 273, 277, 282, 283, 291, 292 ,447 ,456 ,621 ,625  
Anderson, Jack ,  30, 613 
Anderson, James, 150, 174, 201 
Anderson,  Karl, 293 
Antarctic  Submillimeter Telescope and  Remote Observatory, 622 
Antelope  Valley  Press, 6, 21, 28, 29, 39, 42, 56, 61 
AOPA   Pilot,  65 
Aphrodite  Terra, 24 
Apollo, 5, 81, 112, 212, 213 
Application  Specific Preprogrammed Experiment  Culture  System, ASPECS, 
297 
Ap t ,  Jay, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53 
Arecibo Observatory,  10 
Argentine  National  Commission  o n  Space Activities,  112 
Ariane ,  44L,  10, 33 ,41 ,  55, 102, 148, 453, 61 1 
Arianespace,  10,41, 239, 615, 663 
Arizona S ta te  University,  294 
Armstrong, Spence M . ,   1 17, 154 
Army, U.S.,  1 16 
Arnold ,  Ray  J . ,  29 
Artaud ,  Jean-March ,  61 1 
Asimov, Isaac, 130 
Associated  Press, AP,  177 
Association  of  Space Explorers, 239 
Assured Crew Return  Vehicle, ACRV, 36, 276 
Astro- 1, 7 
Astro-2 ,  8 
Astronauts Memorial  Foundation, 34,  11 1 
Atlantis, 24, 28, 32 ,34 ,  35, 39, 41, 42, 43,45, 46,  47, 48,49, 50, 53, 54, 57, 
62, 69, 86, 88, 89, 91, 96,  101, 103, 104, 107, 109, 110, 114, 116, 127, 
128, 129, 133, 134, 139, 141, 143, 147, 148, 149, 150, 153, 155, 159, 
170, 184, 188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 219, 230, 233, 234, 237, 240, 244, 
297 ,610 ,612 ,614 ,664 ,667  
Atlas-Centaur,  55, 239,457 
Atmospheric  Infrared Sounder, AIRS,  57 
Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications  and Science, Atlas,  15, 124, 175, 
176, 183,239 

INDEX  

A S TRONAU T IC S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

Atomic  Energy Act, 57 
Auburn  University, 208 
Augustine, Norman  R . ,  Commission,  18, 36, 85, 11 7,  126, 151 
Aurora  7 ,   19, 225 
Aurora Flight Services Corporation, 128, 285 
Aviation  Safety Reporting System, ASRS,  102, 153 
Bahcall, John  N . ,   91 ,624  
Baikonur, Leninsk, 72,  119, 137, 180, 201 
Bain, James D., 70 
Baines, Kevin H., 61 5 
Baker, Michael, 264 
Ball Corporation, 54,  135 
Baltimore-Washington International Airport, 69 
BAMSI, Inc., 90 
Bassett, Preston Rogers, 203 
Battelle Laboratories, 448 
Bay, Zoltan L., 258 
BDM  International,  Inc.,  110, 118, 135 
Beach, H .  Lee, Jr., 154 
Bean, Alan,  454 
Beaver, Paul, 280 
Beggs, James, 124 
Bekey, Ivan,  161 
Bennett, George, 216 
Berendzen, Richard, 29 
Beresford, Spencer Moxon,  196 
Berridge, Randy, 11 1 
Beta  Pectoris, 73 
Big  Bang, 3, 9,  11, 61,  165, 166, 295, 448 ,614  
Biggs Army Air  Field,  178 
Bigot, Charles, 615 
Bikle, Paul,  125 
Bindschadler, Robert,  161 
Biosphere 11,  19 
Birch, Douglas,  136, 137 
Blaha, John,  116, 266 
Bland-Hawthorne, Joss, 48 
Bluford, Guion, Jr., 87, 274, 278 
Boeder, Laurie, 613 
Boehlert, Sherwood, 1 1 1 
Boeing, 32, 160, 206, 213, 217, 246, 453, 611, 625, 626, 663, 665 
Boggess, Al,  73 
Bojkov, Ruman,  138 
Bolden, Charles E ,  Jr., 200, 264, 266 
Bonnet,  Roger, 9 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

Booz-Allen a n d  Ham i l ton ,  29 
Bout ,  Paul A .   Vanden ,   150 
Bowersox, K e n n e t h ,  281 
Bowsher, Cha r le s  A . ,   63, 65 
Boxer,  Barbara, 62 
Boynton ,  William ,   222 
Brandenstein ,   Daniel  C., 210, 219 
Brandt ,  Jack ,  21 
Brasseur, Guy,  104 
Braukus, Michael ,  454 
Bridwell, G e n e  Porter,  456 
Briggs, Geoffrey,  173, 174 
Briggs, Michael   S., 78 
Brinkley,  Randy,  456 
British Aerospace  Limited,  15 
Broedling, Laurie  A , ,  2 1 1 
Bromley, D. A l l a n ,   138 
Brookes, Wa r ren ,  78 
Broome, Douglas, Jr . ,  253 
Brown, Cu r t i s  L., Jr . ,  457 
Brown, George ,  82, 445 
Brown, R .  Malcolm ,  Jr., 457 
Brown, Robert ,   150 
Brown  University,  92,  17 1 
Brookhaven  Na t iona l   Laboratory,  236 
Buchli, James  F.,  213 
Bumpers,  Dale ,   124, 181, 620 
Bunin ,   Bruce,  29 
Buran,  3, 6 
Burr, Peter  T.,  2 2 ,  23 
Burst  and  Transient   Source  Experiment ,  BATSE,  77 
Bush, Don  G.,  272, 297 
Bush, George ,   President ,  8, 16, 18, 20, 22, 37, 43 ,48 ,49 ,  54, 59, 65,67, 68, 
75, 79, 81, 82, 100, 103, 107, 117, 124, 127, 138, 168, 169, 170, 177, 
184, 185, 188, 189, 190, 193, 195 ,207 ,241 ,259 ,  262 
Bush, Vannevar,  37 
Bynum, Terrell Ward ,   175 
C a b a n a ,  Robert ,   274, 278 
Ca ld ico t t ,  He len ,   25 
California   In s t i tu te  of  Technology, C IT ,  52, 60, 63, 84,  1 13, 144, 154, 269, 
279,455,459 
California  Museum  of  Space  a n d   Industry,  61 1 
California  Space   In s t i tu te ,  9 
California  S t a t e  University,  279 
Came ron ,  Kenne th ,   664 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Campbell ,   Donald ,  456 
Campbe l l ,  Tom ,   57 
C a n a d i a n  Mobile  Servicing  System ,  36 
C a n a d i a n  Space  Agency,  161 
Canizares, C laude  R.,  243 
C a p e  Canave ra l ,  Florida, 3, 5,  10, 10, 19, 21,  25, 34, 40, 47, 50, 51, 55, 68, 
69, 74,  77,  78, 81, 84, 87, 88, 91, 96, 97,  110, 113, 135, 138, 143, 146, 
158, 167, 171, 193 ,207 ,234 ,243 ,  252, 259, 269, 282, 293 ,454  
Carnegie   Institute ,   37, 52, 217 
Ca rneg ie  Mellon  University,  56, 84, 291,  62 1 
Ca rpen te r ,  S c o t t ,  19 
Ca r te r ,  Manley  Lanier, 47, 205 
Ca se  Western   Reserve University,  448 
Casper ,  J o h n ,  285 
Cassini ,  3 ,  283 
C e n t e r  for Advanced  Space  Propulsion,  CASP ,  13 
C e n t e r  for Astrophysical  Research  in An ta rc t ica ,   622 
C e n t e r  for Space  Processing  of  Engineering  Materials,  133 
C e n t e r  for Technology  Commercialization ,   133 
Cen te r s  for  t h e  Commercial   Development   of  Space ,  CCD S ,  3 ,  14, 25, 53, 
55, 68, 87,  133, 135, 150, 156, 296, 448 
C e n t r a l  Data   Hand l ing  Facility, CDHF ,  62 
C e n t r a l   Intelligence  Agency, C I A ,  34 
C e n t r e  Na t iona le   d'Etudes Spatiales ,  French   Space  Agency,  161, 2 15, 61 1 ,  
628 
C e m a n ,  G e n e ,  454 
Challenger ,   7,  13, 18, 38, 69, 74, 90, 101, 128, 138, 155, 157, 159, 171, 175, 
205 ,206 ,219 ,252 ,286  
Cha l lenge r  C e n t e r  for Space  Sc ience  Education ,   7 1 ,  90 
Chang-Diaz ,  Franklin  R.,  23 1, 266 
C h a pm a n ,  C la rk ,  454 
Cheney ,  Dick ,  224 
C h em om y r d i n ,  Viktor, 6 12 
Ch ine se  Ministry  of  Aerospace   Industry,  137 
Chlorofluorocarbons ,  CFCs ,  46, 53, 612, 619 
Choda s ,  Paul,  459 
Chrissotimos ,  Nicholas ,   89 
Ch r i s tophe r  Columbus ,   134, 197, 260 
Citizens  Against  G o v e r nm e n t  Waste ,  72 
C i t r o n ,  Bib,  130 
C la rk ,  Pamela ,  35 
C la rk ,  Paul ,  42 
C la rk  A t l a n t a  University ,   149 
C la rke ,  A r t h u r  C . ,  168 
Clarkson   University,  448 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  A N D  A ERONAU T IC S  

C leave ,  Mary, 23, 66 
C l em e n t i n e ,  61 1 
Clervoy, Jean-Francois ,  457 
Clifford, Michael   Richard ,   274, 278 
C l i n t o n ,  William  J . ,  President ,  246, 621, 627 
Close ,  Laird,  293 
Coa t s ,  Michael   L.,  12, 52, 95 
Coffey, Timothy ,  455, 458 
Ccdfman, Michael  S . ,  622 
C o h e n ,  Aa ron ,   178, 263 
C o h e n ,  William ,  620 
C o h e r e n t  Launch   S i t e  Atmospheric   W ind   Sounder ,   157 
Co ld  War, 4, 254, 280, 284, 292 
Co le jon  Co rpo ra t ion ,   194 
Co lga te  University,  206 
Co l l in s ,  Eileen  M . ,  626 
Co l l in s ,  Michael ,  48 
Co l l in s  Commercial   Avionics,  143 
Co lo rado  S t a t e  University,  266 
Columbia, 7, 8,  11, 16, 18, 23, 24, 28, 35, 38, 66, 68, 70,  73,  74,  75, 76, 77, 
81, 82, 83, 85, 86, 88, 89, 113, 131, 213, 220, 221, 222, 223, 228, 
258, 262, 263, 264, 265, 269, 286, 297 
C o l v i n ,  Bill D.,  109, 262 
Comb ined   Release and  Radiation   Effects Satellite ,  CRRES ,  4 ,  8, 9, 1 1 ,  18, 
22 ,98  
C om e t  Rendezvous Asteroid   Flyby, CRAF,  170 
Commercial   Experiment  Transporter, COMET ,   13 
Comme rce ,  U .S .  Depa r tmen t  of, 209 
Commonwea l th  of  Independen t   S ta te s ,  CIS, 171, 179, 236 
C om p t o n ,  A r t h u r  Holly,  Gamma   Ray Observatory,  127, 133, 167, 187, 188, 
196, 197, 225,448,625 
Com sa t ,  273 
Congress, US., 7,  12, 2 2 ,  27, 28, 31, 34, 35, 36, 40,41, 49, 53, 54, 63, 65, 
76,  82, 83, 89, 98, 99, 121, 132, 138, 151, 181, 188, 193, 200, 207, 2 2 1 ,  
224,227, 248, 255, 259,292, 294,453,610,620 
Congressional  Research  Service ,   160 
Con so r t ium  for  Aerospace  Technology  Education ,  CATE ,  610 
C o n s o r t i i~m  for Materials  Development   in  Space ,  CMDS ,  25 
Conva i r ,  286,  295 
C o n v e x  Compu te r  Co rpo ra t ion ,  52 
Conyers ,  J o h n ,  52 
C o o k ,  C a p t a i n  James ,  58 
C o o k ,  William  J . ,   446 
Cooper ,  Benita  A . ,  132 
Cooper ,  Henry   S.F.,  Jr . ,  121 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AN11 AERONAUTLCS 

Co rne l l  University,  2 19 
Co r rea le ,  James  V.,  186 
Corrective   Op t ic s  Space  Telescope Axial   Rep lacemen t ,  COSTAR ,  459 
Cortez   I11 Service  Co rpo ra t ion ,  65, 105 
Cosmic   Background  Explorer,  COAE ,  9, 177, 199, 295, 448 
Counc i l  of  Gove rnmen t s ,  225 
Counc i l  o n  Competitiveness ,   37 
Covey ,  C u r t ,  283 
Covey, Richard  O . ,  281, 454 
Cowen ,  Robert  C . ,  107, 1 19 
Cray  Research  Inc . ,  203, 272 
C re igh ton ,  J o h n  O . ,  21 7 
Crew  Transport  Vehicle,  CRV, 77 
C r i p p e n ,  Robert   L., 27, 51, 79, 88, 141, 143, 158, 610 
Cromer ,  Dona ld ,  40 
Cryogenic   Infrared Radiation   In s t rumen ta t ion  for S h u t t l e ,  C IRR IS ,  56 
C u n n i n g h am ,  G l e n n  E., 458 
Dailey, Brian  D . ,  210, 222 
Dailey, J o h n  R . ,  269, 61 1 
Dan te ,   276 ,279 ,287 ,291 ,621  
Davis, N .  J a n ,  38, 246, 266 
Deep  Space  Network ,   DSN ,   10, 150 
Defense Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency, DARPA ,  99, 103, 238 
Defense Authorization   A c t ,  40 
Defense Mapping  Agency, DMA ,  44 
Defense, U .S .   Depa r tmen t  of, DOD ,  5, 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 35, 39, 5 1, 52, 
56 ,88 ,90 ,99 ,  115, 116, 135, 138, 151, 175, 176, 183, 193,248,250, 
269,292,454 
Depa r tmen t  of  Defense Space  Test  Program,  4 
Delta ,   5, 19, 42, 51, 96, 169, 179, 199, 207,  293 
DeLucas,  Lawrence I . ,  66 ,613  
Deming ,  Drake ,   100 
Denma rk ,   148 
DeVito ,  Daniel ,  62 
Dickey, J e a n  O . ,  1 12 
Diffuse  Infrared  Background Experiment ,   DIRBE,  295 
Diller, George ,  614 
D i n h ,  K h a n h ,   118 
Discovery,  1 2 ,  2 1 ,  23,  25,  27, 32, 35, 43, 45, 47, 52,  56, 58, 60, 61, 62, 65, 
66, 67, 68, 114, 116, 118, 124, 126, 128, 129, 132, 134, 157, 159, 161, 
165, 167, 168, 169, 171 ,  177 ,  179, 188, 226, 251, 252, 254,  261, 269, 
274, 276, 278,280, 282, 297 ,446 ,613 ,614 ,626 ,668  
Dittemore ,   Ronald   D.,  61 
Doi ,  Takao ,  625 
Dole ,  Robert  J . ,   203 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Donahue ,  Thoma s  M.,  83 
Dorgan,  Byron  L., 34 
Douglas Aircraft  Company ,  29 
Downey, California ,   7 
Doty, S t e p h e n ,  184 
Dowling, Dan ,  2 15 
Draco ,  622 
Draper  Laboratory,  81 
Dregne,  Harold  E.,  104, 1 19 
Drexel University,  87 
Druyun ,  Darleen  A., 89, 167, 204 
Dryden  Flight  Research  Cen te r ,  97, 125, 456, 615, 627, 629 
Duce, Robert ,   58 
Duller, Cha r le s ,  95 
Dulles  In te rna t iona l  A i rpo r t ,  24, 69 
Dunbar ,  Bonnie ,   23, 2 13 
Duncan ,  Douglas,  137 
Durbin ,   Richard  I . ,   181 
Durocher,  C o r t ,  39 
Durrance ,  Samuel  T . ,  70 
Dzhanivekov, Vladimir,  170, 178 
Earth  Observing  System ,  EOS ,   22, 28,33, 46, 57, 62, 72,  100, 102, 110, 112, 
1 2 5 ,  126, 131, 135, 180, 188, 245, 254,  255,457 
Earth  Observing  System Data   and   Information   System, EOSDIS ,  33, 229, 
45 7 
Easterbrook, Gregg ,  8, 110, 115 
Eastman  Kodak,  90 
Edwards A i r   Force  Base, 6, 24, 38, 42, 43, 49, 50, 52, 57, 86, 97, 99, 113, 
125, 126, 132, 153, 161, 168 ,222 ,257 ,282 ,455 ,627 ,629  
Edwards, Larry, 40 
EER  Systems Co rpo ra t ion ,   150, 245 
EG&G   Co rpo ra t ion ,   152 
Einstein ,  614 
El  C h i c h o n ,   104 
Elmhurst  College ,   128 
Encore  Compu te r  Co rpo ra t ion ,  85, 97 
Endeavour,  7, 28,  2, 38, 46, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 68,  136, 159, 186, 190, 195, 
196, 197, 200, 208, 209, 225, 236, 241, 246, 249, 250, 293, 294, 297, 
446,615 
Energetic  G amm a  Ray Experiment  Telescope, EGRET,  106, 166 
Energy, U .S .  Depa r tmen t  of,  DOE,  5, 62, 63,  106, 107, 138, 158, 186, 2 2 2 ,  
281,453 
Enterprise,  24, 37, 69 
Env i ronmen ta l  P ro tec t ion  Agency, EPA, 36, 46, 49,  78,  157, 266 
Env i ronmen ta l  Quality   Permit   Board,  4 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Env i ronmen ta l  Research  In s t i tu te  of M ich igan ,  448 
Europe,  15, 135, 162 
European  Space  Agency, ESA ,  3, 9, 20, 31, 54, 59, 73, 77, 81, 88, 102, 148, 
161, 175, 188, 221, 223, 230, 233, 235, 246, 248, 269, 271, 286, 453, 
625,667 
Eutelsat ,   10, 41 
Expedited  Processing  of  Experiments  t o  Space  S t a t i o n ,  EXPRESS, 266 
Expendable  Launch  Vehicle,  ELV,  15, 16, 19 
Explorer, 35 
Extreme  Ultraviolet   Explorer,  EUVE ,   158, 241 
Faget, Maxime  A . ,  12 1 
Far  Infrared Absolute   Spectrophotometer ,   FIRAS ,  9 
Far U l t rav io le t  Spectroscopic  Explorer,  FUSE ,  664 
Favier, Jean-Jacques ,  262 
Fayetteville  S t a t e  University,  198 
Federal Aviation   Adm in i s t ra t ion ,  FAA ,  65, 102, 121, 139, 153, 224, 225, 
245 ,252 ,454 ,621  
Federal Commun ica t ion s  Commission ,  FCC ,  15, 89, 12 1 
Federal Highway Adm in i s t ra t ion ,   14 
Federal Laboratory Consortiums   for Technology  Transfer,  53 
Federation   of  Ame r ican  Scientists ,  45,  113, 125 
Feld,  Stanley ,  140 
Fermi, Enrico ,  665 
Fermilab,  286 
Fe t tman ,  Ma r t in  J . ,  266 
Fichtel ,  Ca r l ,   106, 166 
Field, George ,  459 
Fields, Jack ,  88 
Finarelli, Margaret  G . ,  4 
F inne ran ,  Mike ,  459 
Fisher, William  E ,  6 ,  7 
Fishman ,  Gerald  J . ,  23, 57, 59, 77, 89,  127 
Fisk, Lennard   A . ,   28, 31, 91,  112, 124, 134, 188, 285 
Fisk  University,  149 
Flade, Klaus Dietrick ,   188 
Fletcher ,  James  C . ,   160 
Flight  Readiness Firing, FRF,  190 
Flight  Readiness  Review,  FRR,  52 
Florida  A&M   University,  149 
Florida  A t l a n t i c  University  Research  Co rpo ra t ion ,   133 
Florida  In s t i tu te  of  Technology,  100 
Force, Cha r le s  T., 144 
Ford,  Ho l land ,  615 
Ford, J o h n ,  266 
Fordyce,  ] .Stuart ,   60 

Freedom  of  Information Act, FOIA,  181 
Frankle, Edward, 21, 38 
French  Atomic  Energy  Commission, 262 
French Guyana,  10 
Friel, Fred  I . ,  291 
Friernan, Edward A . ,  125 
Frimout, Dirk  D.,  124, 190 
Frost, Walter,  101 
Fullerton, C .  Gordon, 90 
Fuilua, L>onald, 284 
Gagarin, Yuri,  50 
Galilei, Galileo, 12 1, 266, 283, 459 
Galileo, 3 2 ,  33, 42,  51, 52, 55, 60, 65, 66, 92, 96,  103, 113, 116, 129, 134, 
140, 145, 147, 158, 176, 197, 221, 255, 280, 285, 286 ,667  
Gamma Ray  Observatory, GRO ,  13, 28, 34, 39, 41, 43, 45, 48, 53, 58, 62, 
77,  78, 86, 106, 127, 133, 166, 177 
Gardner, Guy  S . ,  49 
Garn, lake, 75,  100 
Gaspra,  5 2 ,   5 5 ,  65, 92, 95 
Gebicke, Mark  E.,  185 
Gemini, 2 12 
General Accounting Office, GAO ,  62, 63, 65, 66, 71, 95, 106, 128, 160, 
180, 203, 273, 274 ,296 ,619  
General  tlynamics, Commercial Launch Services, 15, 54, 55, 74, 92,  105, 
122 ,239 ,269 ,  270 
General  Electric, GE, 21, 55, 97,  112, 174, 206, 275 
General  Motors, 254 
Generill Services Administration, GSA ,  48 
Gensym Corporation,  19 
Genzel, Reinhard, 176 
Gec~logical Society o f  America,  266 
Geological Survey, U S . ,  USGS, 28, 203 
George Washington Junior High School, 23 
George Washington University, 258 
Georgetown University, 239 
Georgia Institute of  Technology, 225, 270 
Geostationary Operational Environmental  Satellite, GOES, 7 1 ,  92,  100, 
103, 106, 107, 111, 123, 133, 135 
Get Away  Special, GAS ,   149 
Giaconni, Riccardo, 237 
Gibson, Everett,  1 85 
Gibson, Robert,  15 
Glenn, John ,  191 
Glennan, T. Keith, 639 
Global  Positioning Satellite System, GPS,  14, 179 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Global  Positioning System for Transportation  Planning,  14, 96 
Gloersen, Per, 96 
Goddard  Institute for Space Studies, GISS, 7,  108, 161, 284 
Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA GSFC, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 18, 19, 21, 22, 
23, 24,  27,  28, 31 ,43 ,  44, 46, 50, 59, 62, 66, 71, 73, 86, 88, 90, 96, 98, 
100, 104, 106, 110, 116, 119, 122, 127, 132, 133, 135, 145, 150, 159, 
160, 165, 169, 179, 186, 187, 199, 204,  210, 211, 233, 262, 291, 293, 
248 ,454 ,457 ,459 ,611 ,615  
Gold, Thomas,  2 19 
Goldin, Daniel S., 185, 188, 189, 193, 195, 197, 199, 200, 204, 208, 211, 
212, 216, 217, 218, 221,  2 2 2 ,   227, 228, 236, 239,  240, 243, 244, 248, 
249, 253, 254, 255, 257, 261, 269, 271,  272, 273,  274,  276, 278, 279, 
281, 284, 294, 296 ,448 ,453 ,455 ,456 ,  610, 613 ,620 ,625 ,627 ,668  
Goldstein,  Mark L.,  109, 121 
Gorbachev, Mikhail S., 50, 74,  107 
Gordon, Fred, 31 
Gore, Albert, Vice  President, 37, 53, 246, 262, 612 
Green, Bill, (R )  New York,  140 
Greenbelt, Maryland, 6, 8, 10, 11, 18, 19, 43 
Greenberg, Daniel S., 45 
Greene, Richard L.,  265 
Gregory, Frederick D., 200 
Gregory, William G . ,  457 
Grey, Jerry, 136 
Griffin, Michael D.,  117, 118, 138, 188, 197, 269 
Griffiths, Richard,  21 7 
Grumman  Corporation, 31, 44,  144, 145 
Grunsfeld, John  M., 458 
GTE  Spacenet Corporation, 5 1, 293 
Guerriero, Luciano, 154 
Guest, John ,  21 
Guidoni, Umberto,  129 
Gunn ,  James E.,  19, 1 17 
Gunther, Thorsten  L . ,   204 
Gu th ,  Alan,  3 
H  and H Consolidated,  Inc.,  127 
Haddow, C .  McClain,  78 
Hajivassiliou, Chris Argyrou, 169, 170 
Hale,  telescope, 11 7 
Haley, Don, 42, 52 
Hall, Oceola,  2 17 
Hall, Ralph, 28 
Halley's Comet, 90, 235 
Halpern, Jules, 2 1 1 
Hampton University, 149 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Hanscom Air  Force Base,  146  
Hansen ,  James E.,  161 ,402 ,  629  
Harbaugh, Gregory J . ,  285 
Harris, Bernard,  63 1 
Harris Corporation ,  273 
Ha r t ,  Gary K . ,   209 
Harvard  University,  150, 154, 174, 201 ,459  
Hawaii, 47 ,  60 ,   141 
Hawkinson, Lowell,  19 
Hays, Paul,  156 
Head, James, 92 ,   171 
Heap, Sally, 10 
Heflin, Howell T.,  195 
Heim, Richard, 7 
Heindel ,  Tony,  19 
Helms, Susan, 285 
Herbolsheimer,  Lawrence E ,  29 
Heritage  Foundation, 62 
Hester, J .   Jeff, 294 
Hide, Raymond ,  112 
High  Energy  X-ray Telescope Sounding Rocket  Program, 99  
High  Performance Computing  and Communication ,  HPCC ,   16 ,  17 
High  Resolution  Imaging Spectrometer, HRIS ,  99 
High  Resolution  Spectrograph,  10  
High  Speed Civil  Transport, HSCT, 29, 97 
Hilmers, David C., 55 
Hirabayashi, Hiroshi,  127 
Hirschberg, Vera, 29 
Historically  Black  Colleges and  Universities,  HBCU7s7 149, 167 
Hoffert, Martin  I . ,   283 
Hoffman, Henry,  1 10  
Hoffman, Jeffrey A.,  231, 237, 281 
Hoffman,  Robert, 31 
Holland, Al ,  205 
Holloway, Paul F.,  135, 2 7 2  
Holt ,  S tephen ,  2 11 
Holtzman, J o n ,  167 
Honeycutt ,  Jay E ,  61 1 
Honeywell  lnc . ,  203,  263 
Honolulu,  143 
Hopkins Ultraviolet  Telescope, 73 
Horowitz, Paul,  154 
Howard, Rick,  20 
Howard University,  149 
Hubble, Edwin, 30  

INDEX  

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Hubble Space Telescope, HST,  10, 11, 21, 23, 28 ,30 ,34 ,  37, 42, 49, 54, 58, 
59, 67, 69, 72, 73, 83, 95,  107, 116, 117, 122, 128, 130, 135, 136, 137, 
139, 148, 155, 156, 157, 158, 165, 166, 167, 173, 175, 177, 196, 198, 
204, 213,  217, 219, 225,  243, 244, 257, 259, 262, 272, 274,  277,  281, 
284, 285,  294, 294, 297, 445, 446, 447, 449, 454,456,459, 614, 615, 
621 ,624 ,626 ,628 ,632 ,637 ,638 ,  639,642, 643, 644, 650, 651,659, 
660,663, 667 
Hughes Communications Galaxy, 38,  144 
Hughes Corporation ,  46, 90, 111, 112, 213, 2 2 2 ,  253, 255, 629 
Hughes,  Frank,  610 
Hun toon ,  Carolyn, 456 
Huntress, Wesley T., 250, 455, 615 
Huntsville, Alabama, 4, 5,  18, 23, 36, 47 
Huygens Probe System, 3 
Hydrometeorological  Scientific Research Center ,   108 
Iacobellis, Sam  E ,   103, 155 
IBM Corporation ,  85, 97, 203, 263 
Imamura, Hiroshi,  140 
Improved Waste Collection  System, IWCS ,   292 
Independent  Verification & Validation, IV&V,  457 
India, 50 
Indian  Space Research Organization,  1 19 
I -Ne t ,  Inc., 239 
Infrared Astronomical  Satellite,  IAS ,  3 
Institutional  Automatic  Data  Processing, IADP, 71 
Intelsat,  10, 190, 197, 209 
Interim Upper  Stage, IUS, 667 
International  Astronautical  Federation, IAF,  241 
International  Astronomical Un ion ,  IAU ,  29, 106, 130, 262 
International  Biosphere Geosphere Program, 33 
International  Council  of  Scientific Unions ,   241 
International  Microgravity Laboratory, IML,  16, 161, 165 
International  Space Brokers,  Inc., 623 
International  Space S ta t ion ,  Freedom, 6, 7, 8, 9,  12, 13, 16, 18, 21, 22,  22, 
23, 25, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35,36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44,  45, 49, 51, 53, 54, 
56,59, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77,  78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 
84, 85, 87, 88, 89, 93, 95, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 110, 
112, 113, 115, 116, 121, 123, 124, 129, 131, 132, 136, 145, 147, 154, 
155, 158, 159, 165, 168, 170, 178, 179, 190, 199, 200, 201, 206, 211, 
213,  216, 220, 227, 230, 236, 245, 247, 252, 253,  254, 255, 258, 259, 
261,266,270,275,277,  284, 292, 295, 297 ,446 ,456 ,610 ,612 ,613 ,  
619,625, 664 
International  Space Year,  ISY,  125, 169, 273 
International  Technology Underwriters, 2 17, 2 18 
International  Telecommunications Satellite,  208 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

International Ultraviolet  Explorer, IUE, 73 
Inventor  of  the  Year,  21 
Infrared Astronomical Satellite, IRAS, 91 
Italian  Space Agency, Aeritalia,  10, 31,  33,  151, 154, 159 
Iuka, Mississippi, 47 
Ivins, Marsha S.,  231 
Jacklin, Steve, 180 
Jackson, Nelson  P.,  197 
Jaffe, Walter, 274 
Jafferis, Bill,  143 
Jane's Information Group, 137 
Japan Broadcasting Corporation, 55, 92 
Japanese Institute of  Space and Astronautical  Science, 54, 228 
Jemison, Mae, 68,  135, 246 
Jenkins, Harriett  G . ,  203, 216 
Jemigan, Tamara, 264 ,458  
Je t  Propulsion Laboratory, JPL, 10, 16, 21, 24,  28, 33 ,42 ,  46, 52, 57, 59, 60, 
66, 70, 77, 84,  112, 115, 118, 121, 128, 134, 137, 150, 154, 157, 158, 
167, 173, 186, 188, 197, 213, 216, 223, 224, 265, 269, 270, 272, 279, 
4 5 5 , 4 5 8 , 4 5 9 , 6 1 1 , 6 1 5 , 6 2 8  
Jiang, Xingjian, 36 
Johns H o ~ k i n s  University, JHU ,  45, 70,  137, 206, 208, 235, 248, 446 ,611 ,  
615 
Johnson, Caldwell C . ,  12 1 
Johnson Controls World Services, Inc.,  77, 1 10 
Johnson Space Center, NASA JSC ,  17, 18, 19, 21, 25, 50, 61, 7 1, 75, 77, 
85, 91,  110, 111, 113, 136, 145, 148, 154, 160, 178, 181, 184, 185, 190, 
191, 204, 213, 219, 257, 262, 277,  296 ,454 ,456 ,  610, 611 ,612 ,  621, 
62 7 
Jupiter, 51, 52, 60, 65, 67, 77, 92, 98,  121, 175, 176, 197, 613 
Justice, U.S. Department  of,  198 
Kalery, Alexander,  22 1 
Karlsson, Haraldur, 185 
Kasting, James E ,   112 
Keck, Howard B., 60 
Keck, W.M., Foundation,  60 
Keller, Samuel W.,  221 
Kelly Air Force Base,  178 
Kennedy Space Center, John  F.,  NASA  KSC, 5,  18, 2 2 , 3 2 , 4 2 , 4 9 , 5 1 , 5 4 ,  
67, 68, 88, 91, 113, 115, 122, 136, 138, 139, 141, 143, 145, 146, 147, 
152, 158, 160, 172, 177, 190, 200, 205, 207, 210, 219, 229, 230,  233, 
238 ,239 ,  255 ,274 ,281 ,454 ,610  
Kennel, Charles E ,  456 
Khattatov, Vyacheslav,  150 
Khrunichev State Space Research and  Industrial Center, 626 

INDEX 

A S T R O N A U T I C S  AN I )  A E R O N A U T I C S  

Kinnard ,  William ,   18 
Klsclyov, Anatoly ,   626 
Kitt   Peak  Na t iona l  Ohservatory,  150, 267, 278, 296 
Klineherg, J o h n  M . ,  22 
Knauss, J o a n  A., 88, 92 
Kohrs, Richard   H . ,  247 
Komarov,  L'ladirnir M . ,   Diploma,  156 
Koptev, Yuri  N . ,  182, 216, 279, 612 
Korolev  Medal ,  250 
Kranz, Eugene,  25 
Krauthammer ,  Cha r le s ,  87 
Krikalov,  Sergei,  188, 189, 259 
Kring, David ,   222 
Krc~g Life  Sciences ,   17 
Kuiper A i rho rne  Ohservatory, 459 
Kurylu, Mike ,   145 
Lake, George ,  43 
Landsat ,  59,  151 
Langer, James  S., 37 
Langley  Research  Cen te r ,  N A S A  LaRC ,   18, 23, 29, 40,  59, 86, 87, 102,  105, 
114, 134, 135, 146, 156, 157, 272 ,620 ,  668 
Laser Geodynarnic  Sa te l l i te ,  Lageos, 33, 259, 263, 265 
Laser  Interferometer  G rav i ta t iona l -Wave  Observatory,  L IGO ,  63 
Lauer, Todd  R . ,   196 
Lavery, David ,  291 
Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratories,  132 
Lawrence  Livermore  Na t iona l   Laboratory, 254, 283 
Lawrence, Wendy   B.,  457 
Leckrone ,  David,  459 
Lee,  Deidrc,  247, 297 
Lee, Mark ,  38, 246 
Lee, Thoma s  J . ,  40, 44,  52, 456 
Leiden  Ohservatorc ,  274 
Leifer, S t e p h a n i e  D.,  154 
Lemonick ,  Michael   D . ,  446 
Lenoir, William ,   22, 27,  32,  51, 53, 73,  132, 157, 190 
Leskov, Sergei, 627 
Levine ,  Jack ,  38 
Levine ,  Joe l  S . ,  29 
Lewis, Cha r le s  R.,  25 
Lewis  Icing Research  C e n t e r ,   139 
Lewis Research  C e n t e r ,  N A S A   LeRC ,  5, 29, 30, 54, 65 ,  87, 95, 96, 97,  105, 
118, 123, 132, 139, 157, 176, 194, 199, 207, 270 ,456  
LIFESAT,  17 
Lincoln  University ,  68 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

INDEX 

Lindley, David, 83 
Littles, Wayne,  19 
Livingstone, Bill,  2 1 1 
Lockheed, 11, 57,  109, 146, 152, 153, 169, 210, 233, 243, 244, 249, 274, 
286,613,621,663,664 
Long Beach, California, 48 
Long Duration Exposure Facility, LDEF,  18, 23, 75, 82, 102, 156, 244 
Loral Corporation, 57, 72,  193 
Los  Alamos National  Laboratory, 5, 9, 30 ,37 ,  622 
Louisiana State University, 265 
Lounge, John M.,  79 
Low, George M., Trophy, 26,  28, 69,  144, 165, 203, 207 
Low  Vision Enhancement System, LVES,  210 
Lowder, Douglas M., 178 
Lowell Observatory, 167 
LTV  Corporation, 32 
Lucid, Shannon W., 266 
Luton, Jean-Marie, 88 
Maat Mons,  141 
Macchetto, F,  Duccio, 217 
MacDill Air Force  Base,  54, 113 
MacLean, Steven, 264 
MacMillan,  Bob,  118 
Maehl, Ron, 55 
Magellan, 11, 16, 18, 21, 24, 28, 42,  45, 46,  52, 59, 60, 70, 72,  78, 82, 92, 
106, 115, 118, 119, 137, 141, 145, 148, 165, 167, 170, 171, 184, 186, 
198 ,213 ,219 ,224 ,228 ,229 ,244 ,247  
Magnetic End  Effector, 21 
Mahoney, Michael J . ,   216 
Malerba, Franco, 129 
Malone, Lisa,  34, 143, 454 
Manned  Space Flight  Education Foundation, 50 
Mannix, John G., 141 
Maran, Stephen, 2 19 
Mars, 5, 9,  12, 17, 18, 20 ,34 ,  39 ,43 ,44 ,  52, 62, 76, 86, 87, 91, 98, 99, 101, 
102, 105, 112, 123, 125, 131, 168, 169, 173, 185, 186, 187, 189, 195, 
197, 203, 205, 206, 213, 216, 217, 221, 233,  239, 246, 248, 258, 276, 
277 ,279 ,287 ,291 ,455 ,458  
Mars Observer, 52, 194, 233, 240, 243, 252,  253, 455, 458, 668 
Marsh, Kenneth, 216 
Marshall  Space Flight Center, George C., NASA MSFC, 4, 5,  7,  18, 19, 23, 
36, 40, 41,42, 44,47, 52, 58, 75,  77, 84 ,99 ,  107, 124, 127, 129, 146, 
154, 160, 183 ,445 ,446 ,456 ,611 ,665  
Martin Marietta Corporation, 17, 18, 32, 85, 126, 151, 206, 253, 259, 275, 
458 ,614 ,620  

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, MIT, 3, 53, 63, 243 
Mather, John C., 295 
Mathews, Jessica, 4 
Mayak Production Association, 281 
McAuliffe, Christa, 101 
McCallum, Peter W., 96 
McCarthy, Donald W., Jr . ,   293 
McCartney, Forrest, 138, 139, 141, 143 
McConnell, Dudley,  140 
McCormick, Patrick, 114 
McCuila, James W., 4 
McDonnell Douglas Corporation, 5, 29, 3 1 , 4 2 , 9 0 ,  97, 101, 11 1, 115, 122, 
136, 159, 180 ,203 ,207 ,273 ,  277, 281,663,665 
McFadden, Lucy,  459 
McGlynn, Tom, 62 
McKay, Christopher P.,  1 12 
McLaughlin, Budd, 44 
McMonagle, Donald  R . ,   285,457 
Melnick, Bruce E.,  210 
Menem, Carlos, 11 2 
Merbold, Ulf,  179 
Mercury,  144, 212, 269 
Meteosat, 124 
Metric Constructors, Inc.,  22 
Meyers, Stephanie E.,  159 
Mikulski, Barbara, 75 ,93 ,  100, 101, 196, 206 
Milky Way, 9, 43, 78,  128, 166, 167, 176, 216, 220,  229, 241,  251, 260, 272, 
285,293,295 
Miller, Thomas J.,  5 
Miniter, Richard, 27 
Minor, Bob, 26 
Mir, 6, 12, 24, 32, 40 ,41 ,49 ,  51, 57, 61, 72,  73,  74,  76, 90, 91,  104, 107, 
123, 131, 137, 140, 182, 187, 188, 189, 219,  221, 226, 230, 235, 243, 
244, 246, 250, 258, 269, 286, 297,447, 458, 610, 612, 613, 614, 619, 
622 ,623 ,626 ,627 ,664  
Mission Control Center, MCC, 614 
Mission to Planet Earth, MTPE, 8,  16, 27 ,33  
Mississippi State University,  143 
Mitchell, George J.,  203 
Mitchell, J.P., 168 
Mitchell, Royce, 47 
Mitre Corporation, 273 
Mitsubishi Corporation, 31 
Mittermeyer, Frank, 128 
MI-Ferguson Corporation, 132 

\ \TRc lh   i L  Tic .i 4N 1 )   AERONAUT ICS  

Moderate  Resolution   Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir ,  MOD IS -N ,  46 
Moffett  Field Comm i t tee ,   54 
bloffett   Field Naval   A i r   S t a t i o n ,  54, 57, 90,  112, 291 
Mohri ,  Mamoru ,  246 
Monfc~rd ,  Leo,  2 1 
Moon ,  5 ,   12, 20, 34, 39, 62, 81, 86, 89,  174, 186, 187, 189, 197, 224, 228, 
246, 258, 280, 285, 287, 291, 611 
Moore ,  Audrey,  30 
Moore ,  C a r l  D.,  203 
Moo rman ,  Thoma s  S . ,  Jr . ,  50 
Morgan ,  Barbara,  10 1, 189 
Morgan  S t a t e  University,  83 
Morrison ,  I h v i d ,  95, 454 
Moses,  L>on, 178 
Motorola ,  623 
M n t t ,  Michael   I., 456 
Moun t   Palomar,  1 17 
Motlnt  P i n a t~ l h o ,  91, 95, 96, 104, 109, 111, 114, 129, 161, 210, 220,  240, 
402 
Moun ta in  Vie\\', California ,   12 
Moyers, Bill,  24 
h luka i ,  Ch iak i ,   262 
Murad ,  Edmond ,   146 
Musgra\ ,e ,  Story, 281 
Mushot:ky,  Richard  F., 293 
Nagel, C o n r a d ,  86 
Nagel ,   S t e v e n ,  110 
Napier ,   Peter,  2 5  1 
N A S A  Advisory C o u n c i l ,  N A C ,  456 
N A S A   A lumn i   League,  141 
N A S A   Specialized  Cen te r s   of  Research  a n d  Training ,  NSCORT ,   132 
Na t iona l  Academy   of  Sciences ,  NA S ,  45, 49, 219, 255 
Na t iona l   Advisory  C omm i t t e e  o n  Aeronautics ,   N A C A ,   135, 204 
Na t iona l  Ae ronau t ic s  and  Space  Development   Agency, N A S D A ,  20, 31, 
38, 262 
Na t iona l   A e r o s p a c e   Plane ,  NASP ,  X-30, 30, 34, 39, 40, 47,  71, 116, 122, 
1 3 1 ,   143, 153, 158, 183, 193, 207, 249 ,254 ,  261 ,283  
Na t iona l   Association  of  Elementary  Schoo l  Principals,  125 
Na t iona l   Au tvnomou s  University  of  Mexico,  100 
Na t iona l   C e n t e r  for Advanced  Technologies,  248 
Na t iona l   C e n t e r  for A tmo sphe r ic  Research ,  N C A R ,   104, 140 
Na t iona l  C e n t e r  for  Manufacturing  Sciences ,  Inc . ,  2 15 
Na t iona l   Commission  o n  Space ,  67, 206 
Na t iona l   Hu r r icane  C e n t e r ,   103 
Na t iona l   Institute   o n  Deafness  and  O t h e r  Commun ica t ion   Disorders,  264 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

National   Institutes of  Health ,  N IH ,   227 
National   Launch System, NLS,  70,  106, 115,  194 
National  Museum of  Natural History, 622 
National  Museum of  Science, Planning,  and  Technology, 50  
National  Oceanic  and Atmospheric Administration ,  NOAA ,  7, 24,  28, 45 ,  
62, 70, 88 ,  92,  106, 121, 124, 133, 140, 226, 247, 282 
National  Optical  Astronomy  Observatories, 196 
National  Radio Astronomy  Observatory,  150 
National  Research  and Education Network,  17 
National  Research Council ,  NRC ,  31, 34 ,  44 ,  53,  100, 101, 187, 255,  261 
National   Science Foundation, NSF,  10, 12 ,  32 ,  37 ,  38 ,   121, 196, 236,  271, 
2 7 6 , 2 8 7 , 2 9 1 , 6 1 0 , 6 2 3  
National  Space  Club ,   197, 2 16 
National   Space Council ,  NSC ,  8 ,  20,  2 2 , 3 4 ,  36, 52 ,  105, 151 ,  159, 184, 
186, 193, 210, 222 
National   Space Development Agency, Japan ,  161 
National  Space  G ran t  College  and  Fellowship Program,  17 ,  227 ,295  
National  Space  Institute,  3 9  
National   Space Policy Commission,  121 
National  Transportaion Safety Board, NTSB ,  65 
National  Weather  Service, 87, 92 ,  100 
Naval Air  Systems Command ,  U.S.  Navy,  176 
Naval Air  Test Center ,  92 
Naval  Research  Laboratory, 4 5 5 , 4 5 8  
Navy, U.S.,  57, 96 ,  257 
Near  Earth Asteroid  Rendezvous, NEAR ,   2 0 6 , 4 4 6  
Netherlands ,   148 
New Mexico  Institute  of Mining  and Technology, 291 
New Mexico S ta te  University,  37 
New Technology Telescope,  175 
Newcomb, William  W.,  104, 119 
Newman,  Larry,  170, 178  
Newman, Steve ,  136 
Nichols Research  Corporation ,  110 
Nicholson ,  Leonard  S., 158  
Nickelodeon,  34  
Nicogossian, Arnauld ,  61 2 
Nicollier, Claude ,  230, 281 
Nimbus-7, 27, 33 ,  223, 255 
Nippon  Telegraph  and Telephone Corporation ,  264 
N ixon ,  Richard,  President, 75,  196  
N o r t h  American  Air  Defense Command ,  226 
No r th  A t lan t ic  Treaty Organization, NATO ,   5 
No r th  Carolina  A&T   S ta te  University,  149 
No r th   Pole, 61 ,   132, 145 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

Northrop Corporation, 97, 206 
Northwestern  University, 106 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, NRC, 57 
Nunn, Sam, 39 
Oberbeck, Verne, 282 
Oberg, Alcestis,  18 
O'Brien, Mike, 613 
Ocampo, Adriana  C., 615 
Ochoa, Ellen, 457 
O'Connor, Bryan D., 92, 200 
Office of  Management  and Budget, OMB, 2 2 , 3 4  
Office of  Personal Management, OPM, 8 
Oh io  Aerospace Institute,  118 
Oh io  State University, 13 
Olds, G lenn ,  61 
Olmstead, Dean,  116 
O'Neil, William J . ,  134 
O'Neill, Gerard K.,  200 
Onizuka Air Force Base,  153 
Oo r t ,  J an  H.,  272 
Orbital Sciences Corporation, OSC ,  3, 25, 27 ,30 ,  50, 53, 68, 74, 87, 97, 
103, 115, 118, 130, 135, 146, 148, 1 9 4 , 2 4 3 , 2 4 5 , 2 6 2 , 2 9 2  
Orion Network Systems,  15, 21 
Ostro, Steven, 291 
Ostroumov, Boris, 623 
Owens, Howard  B.,  90 
Oxford University, 3 
Paciesas, William, 39 
PacificCorp Capital, Inc.,  71 
Paige, David  A.,  184 
Paine, Thomas O . ,  206 
Pak, Charles,  140 
Panagia, Nino, 2 17 
Panetta, Leon, 48 
Paramax  Systems Corporation, 203 
Parazynski, Scott E.,  457 
Paris Air Show, 41, 84, 88  
Paris Observatory, 123 
Parise, Ronald A . ,  457 
Parker Hannifin,  17 
Parkinson, Bradford W., 456 
Parry, Albert, 206 
Pasadena, California, 37, 42 
Patterson, George C.,  170 
Payload  Data Management  System, PDMS, 5 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT lCS  

Pearson, Jeremiah W.,  200, 215, 238 
Peenemunde, Germany, 48,  254 
Peeples, Vernon,  11 1 
Pegasus, 27, 50, 179, 292 
Pellerin,  Charles J . ,   204,  269 
Pellis, Neal ,  294 
Pennsylvania State  University,  PSU ,   112, 135,448 
Pentagon, 45,  122, 127, 250, 255, 259, 262, 278, 282 
Perkin-Elmer Corporation ,  262 
Perseus, 285, 448, 615 
Persian Gulf War,  11, 22, 24, 37, 50, 152, 153 
Personnel  Launch System, 47 
Petersen, Richard H.,  132 
Phillips, J o h n ,  37 
Phillips, Mark M.,  174 
Phillips Laboratory, U.S.  Air  Force, 5 ,   146 
Piacente, Steve ,  12 1 
Pike, J o h n  E.,  44,  113 
Pioneer,  258, 259 
Pizzano, Frank,  7 
Planck, Max,  176 
Planetary  Society, 95 
Plaut, Jeffrey J . ,   119 
Plesetsk,  114 
Pluto,  21, 244 
Poindexter, J o h n ,  67 
Polyakov, Valeri, 622 
Ponomarev-Stepnoy,  Nikolai,  158 
Prather Michael  J . ,  70 
Pratt  &a  Whitney ,  25 ,40 ,  97,  122, 168, 174, 265 
PRC ,   Inc.,  125 
Presley, Richard, 224 
Prince Philippe, Belgian,  189 
Princeton  University,  19 
Program Support Communications  Network,  PSCN ,  48 
Propulsion Controlled  Aircraft, PCA ,  665 
Quayle,  Daniel, Vice  President,  8, 20, 36, 69, 72,  105, 112, 138, 148, 
181, 186, 193,206,227,253, 292 
Queen  Elizabeth, 75 
RADARSAT, 25 
Radiation  Experiment, REX, 88, 95 
Rampino, Michael,  282 
Rand ,   169 
Readdy, William,  17 1 
Reagan, Ronald,  206 

ASTRONAUTICS  AND AERONAUTlCS 

Reasoner, David, 75 
Reed, Dale,  125 
Regional Technology Transfer Centers, RTTC,  53,  133 
Reightler, Kenneth S., 45, 266 
Reilly, William K.,  36 ,  138 
Remote Experimentation  and Exploration, REE,  17 
Research External Vision  Display, REVD, 454 ,455  
Reston, Virginia, 5, 23 
Rhee, George, 37 
Rice, Donald, 283 
Rice University, 48 
Richard, Sue Mathis,  217 
Richards, Richard N.,  220 
RMS Associates, Technologies, 26, 96,  105 
Robbins, Donald, 453 
Rocket Research Company, 203 
Rocketdyne Corporation, 40,  122 
Rockville, Maryland, 15 
Rockwell International Corporation, 7,  17, 25, 26, 28, 29, 40 ,46 ,  56, 58, 68, 
103, 109, 113, 122, 134, 139, 143, 155, 167, 173, 209, 219, 225, 227, 
244 ,25  1 , 2 6 9 , 6 6 4  
Rodney, George, 79, 208 
Roemer, Tim, 200 
Roentgen  Satellite, Rosat, 9 ,  19, 21 1, 293 
Root, L.  Eugene, 169 
Rose, James T., 141 
Rosen, Stanley G., 22 
Ross, Jerry L., 45, 47 ,48 ,  53, 55 
Ross, Lawrence, 29, 456 
Ross, Muriel, 114 
Rothenberg, Joseph H.,  59 
Rowland, Sherwood, 53 
Royal Aerospace Establishment, 160 
Rubin, Vera, 52 
Runco, Mario, 285 
Russell, John  W.,  56 
Russian Space Agency, 216 
Rust, David M.,  248 
Sadoulet, Bernard, 2 12 
Sagan, Carl, 279 
Sagdeev, Roald,  17 1 
Saha, Abhijit, 217 
Sahara Desert, 119 
Salyut, 3 ,  6 ,  15, 16, 18 
Sandage, Allan R., 30, 37, 217 

INDEX  

ASTRONAUT ICS   AN11 AERONAUT ICS  

Sasser, J im ,  124 
S a t c o n  Technology  Co rpo ra t ion ,  SA TCON ,  292 
Satellite  Test  of  t h e  Equivalence  Principle ,  STEP, 32 
Sa tu rn ,  3,  130, 283, 621 
Saunders ,  S teve ,  24,  59 ,  78 ,   119 ,  137 ,  154  
Saunders ,  Will ,  3  
Schiff ,  Lewis, 87  
Schindler ,  William  K.,  169  
Schlesinger, Michael   E . ,  36  
Schm id t ,  Maa r ten ,   1  17 
Schneider ,   Donald  P.,  117  
Schumache r ,  J o h n  D., 4  
Schwartz ,  Barbara,  18 1  
Schwartz ,  Ray,  184 
Sc ience ,   184 
S c o t t ,  James ,  11 5,  170  
S c o u t ,  rocket ,   275 
Scripps  In s t i tu t ion  of Oceanography ,   12 5  
Sea rch  for  Extraterrestrial  Intelligence ,   SET I ,  10 ,  134,  150, 243 ,  260  
Searfoss, Richard ,   266 
Seddon ,  M. Rhea ,   139 ,  266  
Sega ,  Konald M . ,  266 
Sckerka ,  Rohet   F.,  8 4  
Semenov ,  Yuri  P.,  123 ,  178  
Sen senh renne r ,  F.  Jame s ,  72 
Shatalov ,  Vladimir,  273  
Sha rman ,  He len ,   24,  57 ,  72 ,  73 
Shaya ,  Edward,  215 
Shee t s ,  Robert  C., 103 
Shepa rd ,  A l a n  R., 61 ,  67  
Shephe rd ,  William ,   264, 456 ,  613  
Shimizu Co rpo ra t ion ,   101  
Sh i shk in ,  O leg  N . ,   97  
Shriver ,  Loren J . ,   231 
Showalter ,  Mark ,   130  
Sieck ,  Robe r t ,   188  
Singer ,  S .  Fred, 89  
Skylah ,  205 
S loop ,  J o h n  L.,  258  
Small  Business  Innova t ion   Research ,  SBIR ,   13 ,  144 ,  160 ,  183 ,  272 ,  292 ,  
293 ,  296 ,  4 4 5 , 6 6 7  
Small  Business Technology  Transfer, S T TR ,  667  
Sm i t h ,  Edward J . ,   11 5 
Sm i t h ,  Lamar,  28 
Sm i t h ,  Marcia  S . ,  160 

ASTRONAUTICS   AND  AERONAUTICS  

Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 36 
Smithsonian Institution, 69 
Smithsonian National Air & Space Museum, NASM,  24 ,37 ,69  
Society of  Hispanic Professional Engineers, 260 
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, SOHO ,  54, 667 
Solar Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer, SAMPEX, 220 
Solid Rocket Motor, SRM,  103 
South Pole  Infrared Explorer, 622 
Soyuz,  187,276,279,284,292,457 
Space Act of  1958, 184 
Space Agency  Forum  on  the  International Space Year, SAFISY, 240, 244 
Space Communications  Technology Center,  133 
Space Exploration Initiative, SEI, Synthesis Group, 39, 44, 85, 117 
Space Industries Intemational,  121 
Space Infrared Telescope Facility, SIRTF, 35 ,98  
Space Network Control, SNC ,  6 
Space Services, Inc.,  13 
Space Shuttle, 6, 7,  11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 23, 25, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 38, 39, 45, 
46, 51, 56, 61, 62, 65, 66,67, 68, 69, 70, 71,  72, 73, 74, 76, 78,  79, 81, 
87, 101, 103, 106, 107, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 121, 122, 123, 125, 
126, 127, 128, 131, 132, 136, 141, 143, 145, 149, 150, 151, 153, 156, 
157, 158, 161, 165, 168, 169, 170, 171, 173, 215,  219, 222, 227, 244, 
246, 248,  254, 263, 264, 265, 266, 269, 270, 271, 274, 275, 279, 282, 
285, 286,293,  294, 295 ,296 ,611 ,613 ,614 ,619 ,624 ,625 ,664 ,665  
Space Shuttle Main Engine, SSME, 25,  168 
Space Telescope Science  Institute, 34, 45, 73,  137, 148, 21 7 
Space Tissue Loss, STL,  184 
Spacehab Inc., 98 
Spacelab, 68 
Spain,  148 
Spear, Tony, 46, 60 
Sperry Gyroscope Co., 204 
S T  Systems Corporation, 99 
Stafford, Thomas I?,  31, 39, 44,  82, 85, 87, 99, 117 
Stanford Telecommunications Inc.,  203 
Stanford University, 98, 221 
Star Wars,  122, 135, 138, 280 
Stark, Charles, 81 
Starke, Edward, Jr., 84 
Statue of  Liberty, 170, 275 
Stecher, Ted, 77 
Steel, Duncan, 265 
Stennis Space Center, John  C . ,  NASA  SSC, 4, 25,  106, 168 
Stickle, Joseph, 156 
Stofan, Ellen, 42 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

Stokes, Louis, 264 
Stolarski, Richard S., 46,  104, 132 
S tone ,  Edward  C . ,  52, 60, 61 
Storms, Harrison A . ,  Jr . ,  224 
Strategic Defense Initiative, SDI ,  22, 53, 56,  118, 185, 194 
Strategic Environmental  Research  Program, SERP, 39, 40 
Stratospheric Observatory  for Far-Infrared Astronomy,  35 
Suddeth ,  David H.,  169 
Summer Undergraduate Research  Fellowship, SURFsat, 664 
Sutherland ,  J o h n ,  236 
Sverdlov, Evgeny,  177 
Swift-Tuttle Come t ,  253, 262, 265, 287 
Switcher, Carl C., 111,  237 
Synthesis Group ,  3 1, 34, 82, 99 
Szalai, Kenneth  J . ,  6 ,  456 
Taft Broadcasting Company, 9 1 
Tam, Daniel C . ,  456 
Tanner, Joseph R.,  457 
Targeting and  Reflective Alignment  Concep t ,  TRAC ,  21 
Technical Analysis Inc . ,  203 
Technology Utilization  Foundation,  147 
Teledyne,  Inc.,  198, 257, 271 
Telstar 4, 30 
Temple University,  Hospital,  162 
Terra-Mar Resource  Information Services,  Inc., 54 
Tethered  Satellite System  Investigative  Board, 240 
Texas, 55 
Texas A&M  University,  133 
Thagard ,  Norm, 613 
T h e  Decade of  Discovery  in Astronomy  and  Astrophysics, 34 
T h e  Steel  Albatross,  19 
Thiokol  Corporation ,  103, 144, 145, 165, 254 
Thomas ,  Ralph C., 269 
Thompson ,  Anne ,   145 
Thompson ,]ames   R., Jr., 18, 81,  114, 118, 126, 134, 146, 148, 151 
Tho rn ton ,  Kathryn C . ,  209, 281 
Tilford, Shelby,  11 2 
Titan ,  3, 40, 43, 44,  70,  199, 200, 206,  253, 261, 61 1 
Tltov, Vladimir G . ,  259 
Tokyo, 24 
Toon, Brian,  1 11 
Topaz 2, 5 
TopexlPoseidon,  33, 215, 235,  251, 628 
Total Ozone Mapping  Spectrometer, TOMS ,  33, 88, 90,  114, 115, 132, 150, 
255 ,260  

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTlCS 

Total  Quality  Managemen t ,  T Q M ,  165, 212 
Toutatis ,  280, 291 
Towe,  K e n n e t h  M . ,  622 
Tower, J o h n ,  47 
Tracking  and  Data  Relay  Sa te l l i te ,  TDRS ,   16, 35, 89, 91, 96,  101, 109, 133, 
143, 144, 187 ,285 ,293  
Trafton ,  Wilbur  C., 456 
Transportation ,  U .S .   Depa r tmen t  of, 3 
Traxler,  Bob,  ( D )  Michigan ,   140 
T r inh ,  Eugene H., 66,  184 
Truly, Richard   H . ,  8 ,  12, 13, 17, 19, 20, 23,  25, 26, 28, 29, 34, 35, 36, 42, 46, 
5 8 , 6 0 , 6 6 , 7 0 , 7 5 , 7 6 , 8 2 , 8 3 , 8 4 , 8 5 , 8 9 , 9 5 ,  100, 101, 105, 106, 117, 
124, 125, 126, 129, 132, 134, 135, 138, 140, 141, 144, 147, 151, 154, 
165, 167, 177, 178, 181, 185, 189, 190 ,270 ,621  
TRW,  Inc . ,  88, 115, 188, 189, 197 ,249 ,457  
Tucker, C om p t o n  J . ,   104, 119 
Tucker, Kevin ,   153 
Tucker, Robert   L.,  149 
Tufts University,  50 
Tully, R.  Brent ,  48 
Tuskegee  University,  149 
Ultraviolet   Imaging  Telescope, UIT ,   77 
Ulysses, 20, 77, 98,  115, 175, 176, 188, 613 
Un i ted   Nations ,   U N ,  16, 36,  138, 169, 276 
Un i ted   Space  A l l iance ,  664 
Un i ted   S ta te s  Information  Agency, U S IA ,   151 
Un i ted   Technologies,  97, 155, 174 
University  College ,  21 
University  of  A labama ,  3, 25, 39, 66, 87 ,  108, 146, 150, 156, 237 
Universicy  of  Arizona ,  222, 293, 622 
University  of  Rasel, Switzerland,  2 17 
University  of  California ,  9 ,  53, 60,  132, 178, 184, 212, 237 
University  of  Ch icago ,  619 
University  of  Co lo rado ,   2 1 
University  of  Giessen ,   132 
University  of  Hartford ,   273 
University  of  Hawaii ,  48, 223 
University  of  Illinois,  36, 627 
U n i ~ ~ e r s i t y  of  Maryland ,  48,  133, 186, 197, 215, 265 
University  of  Massachusetts,  296 
University   of  Michigan ,   83 
University   of  Pittsburgh ,   133 
University  of  Rhode   Island,  58 
University  of  S o u t h e r n  California ,   55, 133 
University  of  Tennessee,  13, 448 

INDEX 

ASTRONAUT ICS  AND  AERONAUTICS  

University  of  Texas,  140, 2 13, 294, 457 
University  of  Washington,  43,  170, 284 
University  of  Wisconsin,  264, 294 
Upper  Atmospheric Research Satellite, UARS ,   1 6 , 3 3 ,  62,  116, 118, 123, 
124, 125, 129, 145, 154, 156, 173, 221 ,226 ,282 ,612 ,619  
U.S. Space Foundation,  52, 67 
U tah  State University,  122, 295 
Utsman, Thomas E.,  200, 215 
V-22, 257 
Vadeko International , Inc.,  127 
Vailas, Arthur, 264 
van A t ta ,  Dale, 30 
Vandenberg Air  Force Base, 7 1 ,  95,  122, 126, 199, 200, 220 
Vanderbilt  University,  133 
Variable  Density Wind  Tunnel,  134 
Varnes, Mitch,  38,  128 
Veach, Charles Lacy, 264 
Venus, 11, 18, 21, 24, 28, 42, 45, 46, 52, 59, 60, 70, 72, 78, 82, 84, 92, 106, 
119, 129, 141, 145, 146, 148, 165, 167, 170, 171, 186, 198, 213, 219, 
228,244,  247 ,258 ,260  
Vernikos, Joan ,  208 
Very  Large  Array  Radio Telescope, VLA, 2 11 
Very  Long Baseline Array, 25 1, 623 
Very  Long Baseline  Interferometry, VLBI,  664 
Viereck, Rodney A.,  146 
Viking,  169, 185, 193, 270, 458 
Viktorenko,  Alexander,  221 
Virginia Air  and Space Center,  70,  193 
Virgo, 274 
Vitro Corporation,  1 10 
Volchenko, Alexander, 457 
Volkov, Alexander,  188 
Volpe, Howard,  181 
von  Braun, Wernher,  254 
Voss, James, 274, 278 
Voyager, 45,  123, 139, 178, 257 
Wahlquist,  Hugo,  188 
Wake Shield  Facility, WSF, 297 
Walker, David, 274,  278 
Walker, Robert, 610 
Wallops Island, Wallops Flight  Facility, WFF,  53, 97, 116, 127, 159, 186, 204 
Walter  Reed  Army Institute of  Research,  183 
Warren, Lewin S.,  217 
Washbum, Mark,  121 
Washington  Post,  18 1 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

Waters, Joe, 173 
Watkins, James D.,  106 
Watson, Robert,  149 
Webb, David, 67 
Webb, James Edwin,  191 
Weiler, Edward]., 58,  117, 136, 139, 284 
Weinstein, Richard H.,  250 
Westinghouse Electric Company, 13 
Wetherbee, James, 264, 626 
White, Edward,  191 
White, Ronald, 228 
White House, Oval Office, 7, 3 1 , 3 4 , 3 9 ,  6 2 , 6 7 ,  82, 83,  117, 122, 168, 170, 
176, 181, 195 ,248 ,  296 ,453 ,663 ,668  
White Sands Test  Facility, WSTF,  71, 99,  137, 146, 147, 246, 295 
Whitman, Stewart, 181 
Whittaker, William L.,  56 
Wh i t ten ,  Jamie L.,  151, 173 
Wide Field  Planetary Camera, WFPC,  136 
Wilder, L.  Douglas, 193 
Wiley, Lynn,  181 
Wilhelm,  Peter G . ,  458 
Willenberg, Harvey,  101 
Williams, David  S . ,  625 
Williams, Earle C., 135 
Williams, R. Gordon,  197 
Williams, Ron,  162 
Williamson, David, 260 
Wilson, Andrew S., 48 
Wilson, Jim, 197 
Wilson, Pete,  121, 210 
Wind, spacecraft, 266, 663 
Wojtalik, Fred, 42 
Wolf, David,  184, 266 
Wolpe, Howard, 109, 11 1 ,  135, 184 
Wolverton, W.C.,  107 
Wood, Lowell, 184 
Woodrow  Wilson  International Center for Scholars, 89  
World Climate Change Research Program, 33 
World Resources Institute,  4,  7 
World Space Congress,  241, 243, 245 
Wylie, Peter J . ,  84 
X-29, 21 
X-31, 62 
X-34, 663 
Yamaguchi, Eiichi, 264 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

Yeltsin, Boris, 201, 275 
Yong, Jiao,  137 
Young, John ,  51,  113 ,257  
Young  Astronauts Council,  168 
Xichang Satellite Launching Center,  137 
Zarins, Juris, 197 
Zimmer, Richard, 396 
Zuber, Maria, 61 1 
Zuckerwar, Allan J . ,   86 

T h e  NASA History Series 

Reference  W o r k s ,  NASA SP-4000: 

G r imwood ,  J am e s  M .  Project  Mercury:  A Chronology.  ( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 1 ,   1 9 6 3 ) .  

G r imwood ,  J am e s  M . ,   and   Hacker ,  Bar ton   C., w i th   Vorzimmer,  Pe ter  J .  Project 
G em in i  Technology and  Operations: A Chronology.  ( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 2 ,   1 9 6 9 ) .  

L ink ,  M a e  Mills.  Space M e d ~ c ~ n e  In  Project Mercury .   ( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 3 ,   1 9 6 5 ) .  

A s t ronau t~ c s  and  Aeronautics,  1963 : Chrono lo f fy  of  S c ~ e n c e ,  Technology, and  Policy. 
( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 4 ,   1 9 6 4 ) .  

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1964 :  Chronology  of  Science,  Technology, and  Policy 
( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 5 ,   1 9 6 5 ) .  

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1965 : Chronology  of  Science, Technology, and  Policy. 
( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 6 ,   1 9 6 6 ) .  

Astronautics  and  Aeronautics,  1966 :  Chronology  of  Science,  Technology, and  Pollcy 
( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 7 ,   1 9 6 7 ) .  

Astronautics  and  Aeronauhcs ,   1967 :  Chronology  of  Science, Technology, and  Policy. 
( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 8 ,   1 9 6 8 ) .  

Er te l ,   Ivan   D.,  and   Morse,  Mary  Louise.  T h e  Apollo  Spacrcrujt:  A Chrono logy ,  Vo lum e  
I ,  Through  November  7 ,  1962 .   ( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 9 ,   1 9 6 9 ) .  

Morse ,  Mary  Louise, and  Bays, J e a n  K e rn ah an .   T h e  Apollo  Spacecraft: A Chrono logy ,  
Vo lum e  11, November  8 ,  1962-September  3 0 ,  1 9 6 4 .  ( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 9 ,   1 9 7 3 ) .  

Brooks, C o u r t n e y  G . ,  and   Er te l ,   Ivan   D.  T h e  Apollo  Spacecraft: A Chrono logy ,  Vo lum e  
111, October  1 ,  1964-January  2 0 ,   1966 .  ( N A S A  S P - 4 0 0 9 ,   1 9 7 3 ) .  

Er te l ,   Ivan   D . ,  and   Newk lrk ,  Ro land   W.,  w l th   Brooks, C o u r t n e y  G .   T h e  Apollo 
Spacecraft: A Chronology, Vo lume  IV ,  J u n ~ w r y  2 1 ,   1966-Ju ly  1 3 ,  1974   ( N A S A  S P -  
4 0 0 9 ,   1 9 7 8 ) .  

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUTICS  

THE  NASA  HISTORY  SERIES 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1968: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4010, 1969). 

Newkirk, Roland  W., and  Ertel,  Ivan D., with  Brooks, Courtney G. Skylab: A 
Chronology. (NA SA  SP-4011, 1977) .  

Van  Nirnmen, Jane ,  and Bruno, Leonard C., with  Rosholt, Robert L.  NASA 
Historical Data Book, Volume  I:  NASA Resources,  1958-1 968.  (NA SA  SP-4012 ,  
1976, rep.  ed.  1988) .  

Ezell, Linda Neuman.  NASA  Historical Data Book, Volume  11:  Programs and Projects, 
1958-1 968.  (NA SA  SP-4012,  1988). 

Ezell, Linda Neuman. NASA  Historical Data Book, Volume  111:  Programs and Projects, 
1969-1978. (NA SA  SP-4012,  1988). 

Gawdiak,  lho r  Y.,  w i th   Fedor, Helen. Compilers. NASA Historical Data Book, Volume 
IV:  NASA  Resources, 1969- 1978. (NA SA  SP-4012, 1994). 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1969: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4014,  1970) .  

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1970: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4015,  1972) .  

Astronautics and  Aeronautics, 1971 : Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Poky .  
(NA SA  SP-4016 ,  1972) .  

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1972: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4017,  1974). 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1973: Zhronobgy of  Science, Technology, and P o k y .  
(NA SA  SP-4018, 1975). 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1974: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4019,  1977). 

THE NA SA  HISTORY SERIES 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

A s t rm u t i c s  and Aeronautics, 1975: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4020,  1979). 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1976: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4021,  1984). 

Astronautics and Aeronautics, 1977: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4022,  1986). 

A ~ ~ T O M U L ~ C S  
and Aeronautics, 1978: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4023,  1986) .  

Astronautics and A e r o ~ u t i c s ,  1979-1984: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and 
Policy.  (NA SA  SP-4024,  1988). 

Astronautics and  Aeronautics, 1985: Chronology of  Science, Technology, and Policy. 
(NA SA  SP-4025,  1990). 

Noordung,  Hermann.  The  Probkm of  Space Travel:  The Rock t  Motor. Stuhlinger, 
Emst,  and  Hunley, J.D.,  w i th  Gar land ,  Jennifer. Editor. (NA SA  SP-4026 ,  1995). 

A s r r o ~ u t i c s  and Aeronautics,  1986-1 990: A Chronology. (NA SA  SP-4027,  1997). 

Management Histories,  NASA S P - 4  100: 

Rosholt, Robert  L. An  Administrative History  o fNASA ,   1958-1963. (NA SA  SP-4101, 
1966) .  

Levine,  Arnold  S. Managing NASA  in  the ApoUo  Era .   (NA SA  SP-4102,  1982). 

Roland, Alex.  Model  Research: The National Advisg,  Committee for Aeronautics, 
1915-1958. (NA SA  SP-4103,  1985) .  

Fries, Sylvia D.  NASA  Engineers and  the Age  of  Apollo. (NA SA  SP-4104,  1992) .  

G lennan ,  T. Keith.  The Birth  of  NASA:  The Diary  of  T.  Keith  Gknnan .   Hunky ,  J . D .  
Editor.  (NA SA  SP-4105,  1993) .  

ASTRONAUTICS AND  AERONAUTICS 

THE  NASA   HISTORY  SERIES 

Seamans ,  Rober t  C . ,  J r .  A im ing   a t   Targets: T h e  Autobiography  of  Kobert  C .  S eaman s ,  I T .  
( N A S A  SP-4106 ,   1996)  

Pro jec t   H is tor ies ,   NASA SP-4200: 

Swenson ,  Loyd  S., Jr., Gr imwood ,  James M . ,  and  A lexander ,  Char les  C. Th i s  N e w  
O c e a n :  A  History  o f  Project  M e r cu r y .   ( N A S A  SP-4201 ,   1966 ) .  

G r e e n ,  Con s tance  McL., and   Lomask, M i l ton .  Vangua rd :  A History.  ( N A S A  SP-  
4202 ,   1970; rep.  ed .  Sm i thson ian   Ins t i tu t ion   Press,  1971). 

Hacker ,  Barton  C . ,  and  G r ~m w o o d ,  James M .  O n  Shoulders  of  T t a n s :  A H ~ s t o r y  of 
Project  gem in^.  ( N A S A  SP -4203 ,  1977) .  

Benson,  Char les   D.  and  Faherty, William  Barnaby. Moonpor t:   A  History  of  Apollo 
h u n c h  Facilities and  Opera t ions .   ( N A S A  SP-4204 ,  1978 ) .  

Brooks, Cour tney  G . ,  Gr imwood ,  James M . ,  and  Swenson ,  Loyd  S . ,  Jr. C h a n o t s  for 
A p o l b :  A History  of  Manned   Lunar   Spacecraft.  ( N A S A  SP-4205 ,   1979 ) .  

Bilstein, Roger E.  Stages  t o  S a t u m :  A  Technological Hu to r y   o f  the  Apo l lo lSa tum   Launch  
Vehzcles.  ( N A S A  SP-4206 ,   1980) .  

SP-4207  nor  published. 

Comp ton ,  W.  Davtd, and   Benson, Char les  D.  L ~ v i n g  and  Wo r k ing  in   Space: A History 
of  S k y lab .   ( N A S A  SP-4208 ,   1983) .  

Ezell, Edward C l i n t o n ,  and   Ezell, Linda  Neuman .   The  Parmershlp: A  History  of  the 
A p o l b -   So yu z   Tes t  Project.  ( N A S A  SP-4209 ,  1978) .  

Ha l l ,  R .  Cargill.  Lunar   Impac t:  A   History  of  Project  Ranger.  ( N A S A  SP-4210 ,   1977 ) .  

Newe l l ,  Homer   E.  Beyond  the A tmosphere:   Early  Years o f  Space  Sc ience .   ( N A S A  SP -  
4211 ,   1980 ) .  

Ezell, Edward C l i n t o n ,  and  Ezell, Linda Neuman .   O n  Ma r s :  Exploration  of  the  Red 
P lane t ,   1958-1 978 .   ( N A S A  SP-4212 ,  1984) .  

T H E  NASA   HISTORY  SERIES 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

Pitts, John A. The Human Factor:  Biomedicine in  the Manned Space Program  to  1980. 
(NASA  SP-4213, 1985). 

Compton, W.  David. Where No Man  Has Gone Before:  A  History  of  Apollo  L U M ~  
Exploration Missions. (NASA SP-4214, 1989). 

Naugle, John  E.  First Among Equals: The Selection of  NASA  Space Science 
Experitnew.  (NASA SP-4215, 1991). 

Wallace, Lane E.  Airborne Pallblazer:  Two  Decades with NASA Langley's Boeing 737 
Flying Lnboratory. (NASA SP-4216, 1994). 

Butrica, Andrew J. Editor.  Beyond the  lonosphere:  Fifty  Years  of  SateUite Communication 
(NASA  SP-4217, 1997). 

Butrica, Andrews J .   To  See  the  Unseen:  A  History  of  Planetary Radar Astronomy. 
(NASA  SP-42 18, 1996). 

Mack, Pamela E.  Editor.  From Engineering Science  to  Big Science:  The NACA  and 
NASA CoUler Trophy Research  Project Winners.  (NASA SP-4219, 1998). 

Reed, R.  Dale. With Lister, Darlene. Wingless Flight:  The Lifting Body  Story. (NASA  
SP-4220, 1997). 

Heppenheimer, T.A.  The  Space Shuttle Decision: NASA's Quest for a  Reurabk Space 
Vehicle  (NASA  SP-422 1 ,1999) .  

Swanson, Glen E.  Editor.  "Before  This Decade 1s Out.. . " Personal Refictions  on the 
A p o b  Program.  (NASA SP-4233, 1999). 

Center Histories, NASA SP-4300: 

Rosenthal, Alfred. Venture  into Space: Early Years of  Goddard Space  Flight  Center. 
(NASA  SP-4301,  1985). 

Hartman, Edwin, P.  Adventures in Research:  A  History  of  Ames  Research Center,  1940- 
1965. (NASA  SP-4302, 1970). 

ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS 

THE NASA HlSTORY SERIES 

Hallion, Richard P.  On  the  Frontier: Flight  Research a t  Dryden,  1946-1981. (NA SA  
SP-  4303,  1984) .  

Muenger, Elizabeth A.  Searching t k  Horizon:  A H i s t v  of  Am&  Research C m ,  
1940-1 976 .   (NA SA  SP-4304 ,1985) .  

Hansen ,  James R.  Engineer in Charge: A  History of  the Lrmgley Aeronuuncal hbora&ny, 
191 7-1 958 .   (NA SA  SP-4305 ,  1987). 

Dawson, Virginia  P.  Engines and  Innovation: Lewis  Laboratory  and Ammican Propulsion 
Technology. (NA SA  SP-4306, 1991 ). 

Dethloff,  Henry C. "Suddenly  Tomorrow Came.. . ": A History  of  the Johnson Space 
Center.  (NA SA  SP-4307,  1993). 

Hansen ,  James R. Spaceflight Revolution: NASA Lnngfey  Research Center from Sputnik 
to A p o b .  (NA SA  SP-4308 ,  1995) .  

Wallace,  Lane E.  Flights  of  Discovery:  5 0  Years  a t  the NASA Dryden Flight Research 
Center.  (NA SA  SP-4309 ,  1996). 

Herring, Mack  R.  Way  Station to  Space: A  History  of  t k  John C .  Sm n i s  Space Center. 
(NA SA  SP-43  10, 1997) .  

Wallace,  Harold  D.,  J r .  Wallops Station and  the Creation of  the  American Space 
Progmm.  (NA SA  SP-4311, 1997). 

Wallace,  Lane E.  Dreams, Hopes, Realities:  NASA's Goddard Space Flight  Center,  T k  
First Forty  Years  (NA SA  SP-43  12, 1999). 

Dunar, Andrew J . ,   Waring,  S tephen   P.  Power  to Explore: A History  of  M a r s h d  Sm 
Flight  Center,  1960-1 990.  (NA SA  SP-43 13, 1999). 

General Histories,  NASA SP-4400: 

Corliss, William R .  NASA  Sounding Rockers,  1958-1968: A Historicd Summar)l. 
(NA SA  SP-4401 ,  1971 ). 

TH E  NASA  HISTORY SERIES 

ASTRONAUT ICS  A N D  AERONAUT ICS  

Wells, Helen Z, Whiteley, Susan H., and Karegeannes, Carrie. Origins of N A S A  
Names .   (NASA  SP-4402, 1976). 

Anderson, Frank W., Jr. Orders o fMagn i tude:  A History  of  N A C A  and  N A S A ,  1915- 
1980. (NASA  SP-4403, 1981). 

Sloop, John  L.  Liquid Hydrogen as  a Propulsion Fuel,  1945-1959. (NASA SP-4404, 
1978). 

Roland, Alex. A Spacefaring People: Perspectives  on  Early  Spaceflight.  (NASA  SP- 
4405,  1985). 

Bilstein, Roger  E.  Orders of  Magnitude: A History of  the N A C A  and  N A S A ,  1915- 
1990. (NASA  SP-4406, 1989). 

Logsdon, John  M .  Editor. With Lear, Linda J.,  Warren-Findley, Jannelle, Williamson, 
Ray  A,, and Day, Dwayne A. Exploring  the  Unknown :  Selected  Documents  in  the 
History of  the  U . S .  Civil Space  Program, Volume I ,  Organizing for  Exploration.  (NASA  
SP-4407, 1995). 

Logsdon, John  M. Editor. With Day, Dwayne A., and Launius, Roger D. Exploring the 
Unknown :  Selected  Documents i n  the  History  of  the  U . S .  Civil Space  Program, Volume 
11,  Rekxtions with O t h e ~  Organizations.  (NASA  SP-4407, 1996). 

Logsdon, John  M .  Editor. With Launius, Roger  D., Onkst, David H . ,  and Garber, 
Stephen E.  Exploring the  Unknown :  Selected  Documents in  the  History  of  the  U . S .  Civil 
Space  Program, Volume 111,  Using Space.  (NASA  SP-4407, 1998). 

Logsdon, John  M.  Editor.  With  Williamson, Ray A . ,  Launius, Roger  D., Acker, 
Russell J . ,  Garber, Stephen J . ,  Friedman, Jonathan L.  Exploring  the  U n k n o m :  Selected 
Documents  in the History  of  the  U . S .  Civil  Space  Program, Volume IV ,  Accessing  Space. 
(NASA  SP-4407, 1999). 

About  the  Compilers 

Iho r  Y.  Gawd iak ,   a  sen io r  research   analyst   a t   t h e  Library of  Congress  
Federal  Re sea rch  Division ,  ha s  d o n e  ex ten s ive  research   a n d  w r i t t e n  
nume rou s  g o v e r nm e n t  studies  o n  Sov ie t   a n d  East  European   po l i t ica l   a n d  
military   topics .   S i n c e  t h e  demise  of  t h e  Sov ie t  U n i o n ,  h e  ha s  c o n t i n u e d  
t o  research   a n d  write   primarily  o n  political   a n d  military   deve lopmen t s   i n  
t h e  new   C omm o nw e a l t h  of  I n d e p e n d e n t   S ta te s .   H e  is  t h e   a u t h o r   of  t h e  
"Na t iona l i t ie s   a n d  Religions"  c h a p t e r   in   t h e  Soviet  Union:  A Country  
Study  a n d  ed i to r   of Czechoslovakia: A  Country  Study, b o t h   published   by  t h e  
D e p a r tm e n t   of  t h e  Army   as  pa r t   of  its  C o u n t r y  StudiesIArea   H a n d b o o k  
Program .   I n  add i t ion ,   h e   is  t h e   a u t h o r  of  t h e  NASA   Historical  Data  Book, 
Volume  IV, NASA   Resources  1969-1978.  H e   is  also  t h e  ed i to r  of  Ukraine: 
A Country   Study a n d   The Czech  Republic:  A  Country   Study. 

Mr.  Gawd iak   received   his   B.A  a n d  M .A .   degrees  in   I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
Re la t ion s   from  C l a r k  Un ive r s i ty   i n  Worcester ,  Massachusetts .   H e  h a s  
comp le ted   all   requ i remen t s  a n d   is  working  o n  his  d i s se r ta t ion   in   t h e  d o c -  
to ra l  program  in  Russian  History  a t  t h e  University   of  Maryland .  

T h i s  ch rono logy  was coau tho red   w i th  C h a r l e s  S h e t l a n d ,  a n   i n d e p e n d e n t  
researcher   employed   by  RS   In fo rma t ion   Systerns,  Inc .  

ISBN   0 - 1  6 - 0 5 0 4 0 8 - 2  

