NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
NASA held dedication ceremonies for the newly renamed John C. Stennis Space Centerformerly the National Space Technology Laboratoriesin Hancock County, Mississippi. The Center was named for Mississippi's retiring senator by an Executive order signed May 20, 1988, by President Ronald Reagan. (NASA Release 8893)
Congress ordered a temporary halt to NASA's efforts to lease a commercial crewtended space laboratory, citing several irregularities in NASA's handling of the procurement process and questioning the space agency's abrupt reversal of its prior opposition to the facility. The chairmen of the House appropriations subcommittee for NASA, Representative Edward Boland, and the Chairman of the House authorization subcommittee for NASA, Representative Bill Nelson, agreed to freeze funding for the facility until these issues could be addressed. Several ranking members of the House and Senate had written NASA to complain that the Agency was moving ahead with a contract without congressional authorization. (H Post, Mar 24/88; AvWk, Mar 28/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
