The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
The media covered the House vote of 240 to 173 overturning the House Appropriations Committee action halting the Space Station program and authorizing $1.9 billion to keep the program going. The role of the White House in pressuring Congress to support the project was stressed. Several articles also commented that the action was a boon to aerospace firms. The importance of the United States maintaining its space leadership and having a permanent presence in space, despite the high costs entailed, also were emphasized. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; WSJ, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; USA Today, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; C Trin, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; Htsvl Tms, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; Birmingham News, Jun 10/91)
A space journal reported that Vice President Dan Quayle had asked David Thompson, former NASA engineer and current chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, to take the post of NASA Deputy Administrator. Thompson was considering the matter. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91)
An article in Congressional Quarterly described the careful trimming of various programs performed by Senator Barbara Mikulski in order to provide sufficient funds for the Space Station. (Congressional Quarterly, Jul 13/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, wrote a guest column stressing the importance of the Space Station to manned flight and the opportunity it provided not only for space leadership but also for the development of weightless materials sciences and biotechnology. (Fla Today, Jul 16/91)
The press reported that the subcommittee on investigations and oversight of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on August 1 examined NASA's functioning at a hearing entitled "NASA's Midlife Crisis." The chairman of the subcommittee, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, cited the need for NASA to be a "prudent steward" and expressed a lack of confidence in NASA's ability to carry out its mission. Various industry representatives testified about NASA's operations and its contracting. NASA inspector general Bill D. Colvin said NASA had failed to keep a sharp eye on its programs, operations, and contractors, resulting in the waste of millions of dollars. (W Post, Aug 2/91; B Sun, Aug 2/91; LA Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; AvWk, Aug 5/91)
The press carried accounts of administration statements, led by Vice President Dan Quayle, vowing to fight to save the Space Station despite the Appropriations Subcommittee action. (P Inq, May 17/91; W Post, May 17/91; B Sun, May 17/91; AP, May 17/91; UPI, May 17/91)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
The press reported on Bush administration efforts to save Space Station Freedom in the light of actions of the House Appropriations Committee as well as the protests of participating nations that were angered at Congressional action, such as Japan, Canada, and the European Space Agency. (B Sun, Jun 3/91; W Post, Jun 3/91)
The media reported that the House Appropriations Subcommittee, by a six to three vote, had agreed to cut all but $100 million of the projected $2 billion Space Station budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1991. The $100 million was to be used to close the project and study two alternative space science projects. (W Post, May 16/91; WSJ, May 16/91; W Times, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
AP reported that the Council of Engineers and Scientists Organization, whose member unions represent 80,000 scientists, engineers, technical, and professional staff sent a letter to each senator endorsing the Space Station. (AP, Jul 16/91)
James W. McCulla, Director of Media Services, NASA, replied to an op-ed article in the Washington Post by Jessica Mathews, vice president of World Resources Institute. Mathews maintained that there was no justification for the U.S. space exploration program now that the Cold War had ended. McCulla replied that learning more about the universe, Earth systems, and life beyond Earth were significant goals.(W Post, Jan 4/91; P Inq, Jan 4/91)
The media reported on hearings of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology regarding the U.S. weather satellite. The General Accounting Office (GAO) found that the program for a new satellite, GOES-Next, was more than three years behind schedule and costs more than doubled because of mismanagement by NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and poor workmanship by contractors. The GAO report considered the problem originated when NASA neglected to have a critical engineering review of the feasibility of the program's objectives at the beginning of the project. (UPI, Jul 25/91; AP, Jul 25/91;  NY Times, Jul 26/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle received the crew of the Columbia Shuttle and their spouses. (UPI, Jan 10/91)
The press reported the House Appropriations Committee action voting to kill NASA's Space Station and ignoring a White House veto threat in that regard. (W Post, Jun 4/91; B Sun, Jun 4/91; USA Today, Jun 4/91; W Times, Jun 4/91; P Inq, Jun 4/91; WSJ, Jun 4/91; AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; SP News, Jun 3-9/91; LA Times, Jun 4/91)
The Los Angeles Times described at some length the Yellow Creek Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Facility, to be located on the Tombigbee Waterway of the Tennessee Valley Authority, in the home district of Jamie L. Whitten, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. The $3 million project was to introduce a solid rocket system that was mandated by Congress but which NASA's advisory panel said was not needed and might not be as reliable as existing systems. The unemployment rate in this district of northern Mississippi was more than 20 percent, and critics maintained this was the reason for the facility being constructed here. (LA Times, Nov 25/91)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
A group advising the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that a 10-year delay in taking action to curb global warming would mean little further increase in the level of warming predicted by the end of the 21st century. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Xingjian Jiang authored a study indicating this. Meanwhile, William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by saying "It's better to get it right than to act too precipitously." Scientists disagreed on the subject, and Senator Al Gore strongly opposed the Bush Administration's position. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
The House of Representatives voted to authorize NASA to spend $14.9 billion in the next fiscal year, about $500 billion less than President Bush had requested. The approval included the full $2 billion Bush sought for Space Station Freedom. Concurrently, the House directed the National Academy of Sciences to study whether the goals of the Space Station could be achieved more cheaply by other means. (W Post, May 3/91; W Times, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91
A giant black granite "space mirror" at Cape Canaveral, Florida, honoring America's 15 fallen astronauts was prepared for dedication, five years after the Challenger disaster. The monument was dedicated by Vice President Dan Quayle on May 9, in the presence of relatives of the astronauts killed. (UPI, May 9/91; B Sun, May 10/91; P Inq, May 10/91; W Times, May 10/91;  USA Today, May 10/91; C Trin, May 10/91; AP, May 10/91; UPI, May 10/91; Newsweek, May 13/91)
The NASA Advisory Council of 25 leaders in industry, government, and academia sent a letter to Vice President Dan Quayle commending NASA Administrator Truly's quick action in implementing the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program. (NASA Release N91-10)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
A trade publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly had asked Vice President Dan Quayle to signal strong support to Congress for the X-30 National Aerospace Plane (NASP) program. NASA feared a major cut in funding of the NASP would significantly delay the program. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, presented a check for $87,500 to the Challenger Center for Space Science Education to support a national educational teleconference to be aired in the fall of 1992 on Discovery Networks. (Business Wire, Dec 10/91; LA Times, Dec 12/91)
An article in the Washington Post commented that the House Appropriations Committee's decision to delete funding for NASA's Space Station from the 1992 budget represented a setback for a number of defense and space-related contractor companies that were counting on the project. (W Post, Jun 6/91)
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement in Buenos Aires by Vice President Dan Quayle and Argentine President Carlos Menem on cooperation in the civil uses of space. A framework for future cooperative space projects between NASA and the newly created Argentine National Commission on Space Activities was established. NASA Release 91-126)
President Bush barred the export to China of parts for a domestic communications satellite, known as Dong Fang Hong 3, citing concerns about possible proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Bush approved export of components for two Western projects, an Australian communications satellite and a Swedish weather satellite, to be launched from China, for which the United States was assured of strict safeguards. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, announced the appointment of former NASA deputy director J.R. Thompson Jr. as executive vice president. He was to manage the new Orbital office in Huntsville, Alabama, near Marshall Space Flight Center. (AP, Nov 12/91; W Post, Nov 13/91; W Times, Nov 13/91; Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 14/91)
The National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, developed a policy directive intended to strengthen the nation's commercial space industry. The policy creates guidelines requiring the government to act more like a private business in dealing with space-related enterprises. It calls for increased efforts to negotiate trade agreements to reduce or eliminate subsidies provided by foreign governments, including the Soviet Union, China, and Japan, to their commercial satellite-launching services. The policy would also encourage government agencies, particularly NASA and the Defense Department, to support space activity by entering into cooperative research and development efforts with private industry and assuming some of the financial risk; basing contracts with rocket and satellite makers on "performance standards" rather than complex military specifications; and taking into account the government's overhead and development costs in assessing bids by private firms. (P Inq, Feb 12/91; UPI, Feb 13/91)
Astronaut Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter, who flew on the Shuttle Discovery in 1989, was one of those killed in the crash of the commuter plane carrying former Senator John Tower. Biographic data were given. (UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 6/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, speaking as chairman of the National Space Council, said the U.S. would not buy or build more Space Shuttle orbiters. It is to continue to use the four existing orbiters into the next century but planned to develop a new family of rockets to replace the current fleet of unmanned vehicles. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said he helped devise the policy's wording and was "totally in support" of it.(P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; B Sun, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; USA Today, Jul 25/91; WSJ, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; Washington Technology, Jul 25/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 26/91; Peninsula Times Tribune, Jul 30/91 quoting San Diego Tribune; B Sun, Jul 31/91)
