NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Rodney E. Slater, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin joined in leading an aviation safety event at Dulles International Airport in Virginia. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had invited media representatives and interested spectators to the event, to observe demonstrations of the new technologies that the agencies had developed to improve the safety of flying aboard commercial, private, and government aircraft. NASA made available one of its Boeing B-757 research aircraft, providing hands-on demonstrations of the new techniques and technologies produced by NASA’s and the FAA’s Task Force on Aviation Safety.(NASA, “Vice President To Showcase Aviation Safety Technologies Developed by NASA and FAA,” news release N97-47, 14 July 1997.)
The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security, chaired by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., released its recommendations for reforming the United States’ aviation industry. The Commission challenged NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the U.S. Department of Defense to combine their efforts, with the goal of reducing aircraft accident rates by 80 percent over the next five years. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin voiced immediate support for the challenge, explaining, “We’re looking for solutions that will save lives.” He pledged NASA’s commitment to interagency cooperation and committed US$500 million in NASA funds, to achieve a major reduction in aircraft-related fatalities. Both NASA and the FAA cited previous successful collaboration efforts between their agencies. The Gore Commission’s most controversial recommendation was the use of computerized databases to identify potential terrorists. Critics quickly called the plan an exercise in profiling, which would foster biased treatment, especially toward Arab Americans and passengers with Arab- sounding names. Other safety proposals included requiring children under the age of two to sit in their own seats, rather than on the lap of an adult, as the airlines had long permitted. The Commission further suggested that user fees, rather than ticket taxes, fund air-traffic control; that airports deploy a new satellite-based, air-traffic-control system, as soon as possible; and that airports make all airmail packages weighing more than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) subject to inspection. In total, the Commission recommended 53 changes to the current system.(NASA, “NASA, FAA, and DOD Challenged To Achieve White House Commission Goal To Reduce Aircraft Accidents,” news release 97-26, 12 February 1997; John Mintz, “Gore Panel Proposes Aviation Safety Steps,” Washington Post, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “FAA Ready To Depart on ‘Clear Path of Action’,” USA Today, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “53 Air Safety Changes Urged,” USA Today, 13 February 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States’ concern that the Russian Space Agency’s lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. “We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side,” said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summit’s reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russia’s trustworthiness.(Associated Press, “US-Russia,” 6 February 1997; Reuters, “Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit,” 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, “Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
President William J. Clinton used his newly bestowed line-item veto power to cut funding for a “reusable space plane.” The US$10 million appropriation was a priority of the U.S. Air Force Space Command and space officials. In total, Clinton’s line-item vetoes trimmed about US$144 million from the 1998 U.S. Department of Defense appropriations bill, less than one-tenth of 0.1 percent of the total bill.(John M. Broder, “Clinton Gently Vetoes $144 Million in Military Budget Items,” New York Times, 15 October 1997; David L. Chandler, “Clinton Veto Delays Space Plane Plans,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997.)
President William J. Clinton released his budget proposal, which included a request for US$75 million to develop the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. NASA had argued that the infrared telescope would aid scientists in answering some of the universe’s most fundamental questions including, what is the energy source for the universe’s brightest stars? and, where is the universe’s missing dark matter? Presidential support for the initiative led NASA to hope that it might finally receive the funding necessary to begin building the last of four space-based telescopes proposed as a part of the Great Observatories program. In addition to the highly publicized Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had successfully placed in orbit the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and had immediate plans to launch the nearly completed X-ray Astrophysics Facility. NASA expected the four telescopes, using various kinds of cosmic radiation to survey the atmosphere, would provide an unprecedented view of the universe. The four telescopes operating together would allow us “to look at the universe at all ages at once,” explained Michael Werner, a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Upon the program’s conception in 1991, the National Academy of Sciences had called the Great Observatories the “highest priority for any major new program in space-based astronomy,” but a steady stream of budget cuts had made it increasingly difficult to realize the project.(Paul Hoversten, “NASA Seeks $75 Million for Another Eye in the Sky,” USA Today, 6 February 1997.)
NASA Administer Daniel S. Goldin praised the Clinton administration’s budget proposal for 1998 as a sign that NASA’s deep budget cuts were leveling off. NASA had braced itself for a budget as low as US$13.1 billion, and, therefore, found President William J. Clinton’s US$13.5 billion proposal a pleasant surprise. The request still entailed a US$200 million budget cut, and Congress might reduce the budget further. Nevertheless, Goldin responded to the proposed budget exuberantly, exclaiming, “Holy mackerel⎯this is a great program,” and remarking that for the first time during his five-year tenure, NASA could hope for budgetary stability. The proposal also projected that NASA’s budget in 2000 would be approximately US$13.2 billion, rather than the US$11.6 billion forecast in previous Clinton administration proposals. NASA planned to absorb the small reduction in funding by increasing efficiency, especially in the Shuttle program, having recently transferred management of the program to the privately held United Space Alliance. NASA officials believed that NASA could continue sending up seven or eight Shuttle missions annually, if budget trends continued to stabilize. On the day of the budget announcement, however, a NASA advisory panel warned once again that a drastic decrease in the Shuttle’s funding would compromise its safety. Nevertheless, Goldin maintained that the proposal would allow NASA to continue fostering “faster, better, cheaper” science.(Anne Eisele, “Budget Plan Brings Stability by 2000,” Space News, 10−16 February 1997; Larry Wheeler, “NASA Makes Do on Slimmer Budget, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1997; Sean Holton, “NASA Cheers Budget that Cuts Agency Only a Bit,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, “we don’t need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. It’s called the International Space Station.” GAO’s report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen” (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, “Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, “Space Station,” 11 June 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert “Bob” Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Graham’s plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Graham’s plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, “Graham: Let’s Make Money in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
The New York Times reported a soon-to-be released study by Research Policy, providing strong evidence that publicly funded scientific research often fueled industrial advancements in the United States. According to the study, prepared for the National Science Foundation, 73 percent of all American industrial patents filed during the two-year study cited scientific advancements made possible by government funding. The report had particular relevance because the Clinton administration and its congressional allies, both Democratic and Republican, had considered paring down the nation’s science outlays to balance the federal budget. The Council of Scientific Society Presidents called the report “a wake-up call for [f]ederal investment policies.” The study joined an ongoing debate over exactly what contribution general scientific research made to the national economy. The National Science Foundation and NASA were two of the agencies most cited in industrial patent requests.(William J. Broad, “Study Finds Public Science Is Pillar of Industry,” New York Times, 13 May 1997. 249 NASA, “NASA Earth Science Research Aircraft Soars to New Heights,” 13 May 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
