At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die,” 12 July 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would “compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches,” while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, “Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur.” Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, “Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project,” Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
As part of an overall restructuring, the Boeing Company announced plans to reduce its workforce by 12 percent over the next 18 months, through the layoffs of as many as 28,000 workers. Much of the restructuring plan focused on the company’s commercial airplane business, affecting those workers who were once part of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which Boeing had purchased in 1997. In contrast, the company reported it was making strides in its defense and space work.(Tim Smart, “Boeing To Retool, Lay Off Thousands; Condit Cites Need To Reduce Costs,” Washington Post, 14 August 1998.)
The U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, responsible for allocating space funding, voted to back funding for NASA’s ISS obligations but “cautioned the space agency to control costs and ensure Russia’s commitment to the expansive project.” The subcommittee voted for a US$13.6 billion budget for NASA for the fiscal year, including US$2.3 billion for the space station. Senate Subcommittee Chairperson Christopher Bond (R-MO) said that, although the budget was US$150 million more than President William J. Clinton had requested, it was US$33 million less than NASA’s 1998 spending level.(Patrick Connole for Reuters, “US Senate Panel Backs Space Station, Cut Superfund,” 9 June 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
Michael I. Mott, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), one of NASA’s top three managers, announced his decision to leave NASA to join Boeing Space Transportation in Seal Beach, California, as Vice President of Business Development. Mott had served as NASA Associate Deputy Administrator since January 1994.(NASA, “Michael I. Mott To Leave NASA,” news release 98-99, 8 June 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL) offered an amendment to the Subcommittee on Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies’ FY 1999 appropriations bill, adding US$33 million to the US$150 million budget for NASA already approved by the Senate Committee on Appropriations. The Senate defeated the amendment by a vote of 58 to 37. President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget had requested a US$183 million reduction in NASA’s budget.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Senator Sessions Offers Amendment To Increase NASA’s Budget by $33 Million,” government news release, 17 July 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, “detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station.” The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to “ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station.” In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force’s findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to “direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.”(Federal Document Clearing House,” Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan,” government news release, 24 June 1998.)
