Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
NASA’s Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASA’s Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.’s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide “continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet.” Gross suggested that it was “ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images” were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice President’s US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for “pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth.” NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “Assessment of the Triana Mission” (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, “Gore’s Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says,” Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, “AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, “Biographical Data: James C. Adamson,” http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
President William J. Clinton signed into law the FY 2000 appropriations bill for the Department of Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Other Agencies, which included the US$13.65 billion NASA budget. Congress had approved NASA’s budget on 7 October. In keeping with the President’s original request, the final appropriation included full funding for the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle program; US$80 million for Spaceliner 100, an MSFC program to find new propulsion technology; US$25 million for Shuttle upgrades; US$5 million for the National Center for Space Research and Technology, a joint venture including MSFC, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and private industry; and US$3 million to continue research into tether-guided satellites. The U.S. House of Representatives’ version of the bill had cut US$900 million from NASA’s funding, but the U.S. Senate had approved a budget equal to NASA’s FY 1999 budget: US$13.6 billion. House Republicans had voted to eliminate funding for Triana, a controversial Earth-observing satellite first envisioned by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., but the House and Senate conference committee had voted on a compromise, providing for the National Academy of Sciences to review the program and forbidding NASA from launching Triana until 1 January 2001.(Brett Davis, “Congress Approves Full NASA Budget,” Huntsville Times (AL), 8 October 1999; Stephen Koff and Tom Diemer, “Cleveland NASA Unit, CMHA Get Funding,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 21 October 1999.)
Following a series of launch failures, Lockheed Martin Corporation announced management changes in three of its business sectors. Raymond S. Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, retired, effective immediately, and G. Thomas Marsh, Executive Vice President of Missiles and Space, succeeded him. Lockheed named the President of Missiles and Space, K. Michael Henshaw, as President and Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Environment Sector, effective 1 June. In that position, Henshaw succeeded Robert J. Stevens, who had served in dual positions but was directed to “devote his full attention” to his role as Corporate Vice President of Strategic Development. Albert E. Smith, President of Aerospace Electronics Systems and of Sanders, a Lockheed Martin company in Nashua, New Hampshire, succeeded Henshaw as President of Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California. Lockheed named Walter P. Havenstein President of Sanders and Acting President of Aerospace Electronics System, a promotion from his former position as Executive Vice President. In addition to the recent launch failures, Lockheed had been “bedeviled” by problems in its space business, including a 10 percent reduction in sales in its Space and Strategic Missiles Sector and a 17 percent decline in operating profit, after inadequate preparation and cancellations had caused the delay of commercial satellite launches.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Management Changes,” news release, 11 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesManagementCh.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Lockheed Revamping 2 Units: New Leaders Named After Series of Launch Failures,” Washington Post, 12 May 1999.)
Advanced Communication Systems Inc. announced that the Naval Air Systems Command had awarded its Aerospace Division a five-year contract with option years. The Naval Air Systems Command intended the US$46 million Aircraft Structural Life Surveillance contract to assist the U.S. Navy in developing, verifying, executing, and enhancing methods and processes for monitoring aircraft structural fatigue. Advanced Communication’s Aerospace Division Vice President Thomas M. Brennan remarked that the contract covered air vehicle technology that would “have application across all military services, as well as NASA and the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration].”(PR Newswire, “ACS Wins $46 Million Aircraft Structures Contract,” 5 April 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force announced that Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton would not replace Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing at Patrick Air Force Base, but would lead the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base near Sacramento, California. Starbuck was to remain in command of the 45th Space Wing indefinitely until the Air Force had chosen another successor. The change followed “the U.S. launch industry’s worst string of accidents in more than a decade,” including “three consecutive failures of Air Force Titan rockets” launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Air Force also reported that, earlier in May, a military navigation spacecraft had sustained US$51 million in damage during a thunderstorm. The Air Force announced that it had opened a formal investigation into that incident, in addition to the investigation President William J. Clinton had ordered into the string of launch failures. The President had appointed the CIA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA to carry out that investigation.(Robyn Suriano, “Chilton Not Coming to Cape; Starbuck To Remain Indefinitely,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak– built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imaging’s test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, “Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space,” New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
