nasa management meeting held to brief key officials on a manned space station program and to discuss possible FY 1964 funding.
Decision on whether nasa or usaf would be assigned development of orbital space stations was reported in process within the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing the Air Force Association in Las Vegas, said: “The United States, in keeping with our motivations in freedom and peace, has embarked upon a space program aimed at peace building, constructive exploitation of space—second to none. “In the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the nation has mobilized an effort unprecedented in history, nasa is making progress, because it has imaginative leadership, a competent staff, extensive facilities, and wholehearted support from all elements of industry and government which can contribute, especially the Air Force. “In addition to our contribution to the success of the nasa program, the Air Force is required by its own mission to put its energies into a different kind of space effort. We are reaching a clearer definition of that mission as it relates to space. . . . “The United States is dedicated as a matter of national policy to the peaceful exploitation of the space medium. The United States does not intend to extend the arms race into space. “We are, however, taking the step to enable us to protect ourselves in the event the Soviets or any other nation were to undertake missions in space that would endanger our security. . .. “The dual-vehicle orbital experiment of the Soviets, when coupled with their previous claims, seems to indicate that the need for protection against possible threats to our security will be in the near orbital stage of space, rather than farther out. One possible instrument of security that might be useful at this level in space may be found in extending the X-15 and X-20 technology, leading to craft which could operate from surface to orbit and back, and perform defense missions at the edge of the atmosphere. Another might be the permanently manned orbital space station designed for military purposes. Progress toward utilization of such a vehicle for security and protection would be speeded by capitalizing upon the nasa program to acquire knowledge and competence in manned orbital flight. . . . “These are the principles on which Air Force space program must be based: (a) Ample preparation to utilize the space medium; (b) Ample preparation to defend ourselves in case others choose to extend the threat of aggression to outer space; (c) Concentration on the really important tasks, including today’s job and not just tomorrow’s, and finally, (d) An organizationally disciplined space program—well planned and specific—which fits into overall national plans and objectives. “We in America have no choice but to extend our defenses as far as they need to be extended to save freedom on earth. . . .”
