Houston Chronicle reported nasa Manned Spacecraft Center was planning 30-man space station that could stay in orbit for five years; msc had solicited contractors’ proposals for electrical power system capable of producing 40,000 watts. (Houston Chron. in upi. Boston Sunday Advertiser, 1/13/63)
Design for 216-ft. nuclear-powered space station had been awarded patent by U.S. Patent Office, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. announced. Invented by S. B. Kramer and E. H. Visscher of Lockheed, prefabricated station would be assembled in orbit from cylindrical and spherical subsections. Lockheed said it would be useful as a manned space station and observation platform. (NYT, 4/9/63,10)
Dr. James E. Roberts, usaf scientist, told aerospace medicine conference at sam that permanent five-man space station could be established “in the late 1965 or early 1966 time period.” Such a station, called “Mark I,” could be placed in orbit by Saturn I or Titan III vehicle, he said. Mark II station, three times as big as Mark I, could replace the initial station by the end of the decade. The space stations discussed by Dr. Roberts would be primarily for scientific and engineering research. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/63, A3)
General Electric Co. said four men would spend one month inside full-scale model of space station at GE’s Space Technology Center, in test of man’s reactions and performance in simulated space-flight conditions. Experiment would begin in September. (AP, NYT, 7/8/63,25)
Georg von Tiesenhausen, chief of future studies for nasa Launch Operations Center, told ias meeting in New York that by 1970 U.S. would need an orbiting space station to launch and repair spacecraft; space station could double as a manned scientific laboratory. Describing station 300-ft. long and 33-ft. in diameter, von Tiesenhausen said it could be launched in two sections by Saturn C-5 vehicles and joined together in space rendezvous. (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 1/22/63)
Under Secretary of the Air Force Brockway McMillan said in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Our assessment of the nasa programs in the light of your questions has strengthened our conviction that the potential joint value of the nasa and Defense Department programs can be more fully realized by closer collaboration in the early conceptual phases, to insure that the objectives of each agency are clearly recognized at each successive stage of program evolution. Our point is illustrated by recent experience in developing experiments to be sponsored by the Defense Department on the Gemini flights. Although the concerted joint effort, under the guidance of the Gemini program planning board, has been fruitful, it has become obvious that an earlier beginning of intensive collaboration might well have allowed greater results. Looking to the future, we hope to apply this lesson in the establishment of an orbital space station program. We view a space station as an essential preliminary to an operational space defense system, and as a valuable source of experience which will apply to nasa objectives. As this program is in the early conceptual phase, we think it possible to begin now to fully exploit its high potential to serve both civilian and military needs. As you know, the Defense Department has proposed to nasa that there be collaboration in studies leading to the definition of the space station program. . . .” (Letter, CR, 8/9/63,13900)
Proposed nasa-usn program of high-altitude, long-duration balloon flights was outlined m Missiles and Rockets. Pending dod approval, program would be conducted by nasa oart and usn BuWeps and would call for three types of flights: three-man, three-day flight using basic gondola and existing balloon of 10-million-cu.-ft. class; 14-day flight, possibly with larger crew and expanded equipment; and 30-day nights with six- or seven-man crew. Program objectives: to check out space station equipment and components and to study biomedical and psychological factors. (M&R, 5/27/63,18)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced two types of orbital manned space stations would be studied to compare concepts for 24-man operational station—one concept by Lockheed Co. California Div. and the other by Douglas Aircraft Missiles and Space Systems Div. Each station would be designed to remain in orbit at 200- to 300-mi. altitude for about three years, with resupply and crew changes every three months. {L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/6/63)
A “flying carpet” escape system from orbital space stations has been advanced by Douglas Aircraft Co. The escape system would be a saucer shape that would expand into a blunt-nosed, cone-shaped vehicle 25 ft. across at its base. Passing through the atmosphere, the vehicle would act as its own brake. Re-entry heating problems would be met by using fabrics woven with filaments of nickel-based alloys that can withstand 1,600-degree temperatures. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/9/63, 52)
usaf announced issuing Requests for Proposals for studies of manned orbital space station. From the bidding industries usaf will select three contractors to conduct parallel four-month studies “to define characteristics from which a space station could be designed to demonstrate and assess quantitatively the utility of man in space for military purposes.” (dod Release 1261-63)
