Lockheed-CaUfornia Co. released details of its recommendations to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on a scientific space station program. Lockheed study concluded manned station with crew of 24 could be orbiting the earth in 1968. Total cost of program—including logistics spacecraft and ground support—for five years’ operation was estimated at $2.6 billion. Study recommended launching the unmanned station into orbit with a Saturn V launch vehicle, then launching manned logistics vehicle to rendezvous and dock at the station. (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/27/64; msc Roundup, 3/4/64,8)
NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston divulged that its post-Apollo study emphasis would be on a Y-shaped 36-man National Multipurpose Space Station that could be launched by Saturn V and be the primary space scientific and technical experimental center for at least five years in the mid-1970’s.	(Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 51)
Goodyear Aerospace Corp. developed solar collector for usaf. The 4-story-high mirror, to be used in tests of electricity sources for manned space station, was capable of setting fire to buildings or blinding people with a single flash of sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/64)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. proposed 100-ton space station that would support up to 24 men on long-duration earth-orbiting missions. Known as Olympus, the station would be 63 ft. long and 118 ft. in diameter with central hub and three radiating spokes. Each of spokes would carry cylindrical module 18 ft. in diameter and 40 ft. long. (Tulsa Daily World, 7/12/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Missiles and Rockets interview that NASA was tentatively planning to initiate program definition of Apollo-X spacecraft in FY 1965. He stressed, however, that NASA manned space station of from six-months to one-year lifetime would receive no hardware funding until the 1970’s. He also said NASA’s Apollo-X study did not compete with usae Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program: “mol is important for the military as a method of determining what opportunities there are for men in space. It is not suitable to fulfill NASA requirements to gain scientific knowledge.” {M&R, 10/26/64,14)
Patent for manned space station design was awarded to its inventor Emanuel Schnitzer, technical assistant at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The space station was designed to erect itself in space after being lofted into orbit. Crewmen could be sent up in an auxiliary spacecraft or launched to it later in a ballistic “ferry.” Until two weeks ago, Schnitzer was at NASA Hq. in Advanced Manned Missions Program Office. (Justice, Houston Post, 8/15/64; nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8/15/64)
USAF announced selection of Douglas Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., and General Electric Co. for orbital space station study-contracts. The studies would aid in defining tests and experiments for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), (dod Release 148-64)
Lt. Col. Robert S. Buchanan (USAF) of Aerospace Research Pilots School, Edwards afb, told space medicine conference at Brooks afb that the greatest potential dangers to large scientific space station with crew of 15 or more men would be fire and collision with a meteoroid or space debris. Studies were considering possibility of separating space stations into individual compartments that could be sealed off in case of catastrophes such as fire. (AP, Houston Post, 2/6/64)
Discussing mol’s growth potential in testimony before House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on R&d, Director of dod Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown said: “I want to make a distinction between its ultimate capability and what is in the program. . . . What is in the program is not a space station in that sense. It is an experimental laboratory. But . . . this could grow to be a space station, if and after ... we conclude . . . that a man can have a substantial military purpose [in space].” Dr. Brown said dod should “move more aggressively into the manned space flight arena in order to explore more fully man’s utility for the performance of military space missions and to develop . . . his full capabilities in any area where potential exists.” (SBD, 2/17/64, 260; M&R, 2/24/64, 15)
Thomas E. Dolan, nasc staff member, proposed at aiaa Symposium on Space Stations and Their Logistics Support in Pasadena that “saddlebags” be attached to lem to increase its carrying capacity for use in equipping a lunar base. 3,000-5,000 lbs. of supplies would be attached to manned Lunar Excursion Module. Hie system would make it possible to set up a lunar base with a 7- to 10-day staytime. He said saddlebags mode would increase total Apollo spacecraft weight by 15,000 lbs., but Saturn V/Apollo system theoretically had growth option of 100% and 15—20% growth was entirely possible. “The LEM saddlebag concept would avoid multiple launches, hardware development programs for unmanned landing systems, dependence on successful unmanned landing system performance prior to manned landings, and dependence on surface rendezvous. As such, the post-Apollo exploration phase could be carried on with higher mission success and with less total investment than that estimated for the other systems.” (M&R, 4/20/64,15; SBD, 4/17/64, 98)
