PROTON I space station, launched July 16 by the U.S.S.R., had, for the first time, trapped particles with energy of 100 trillion electron volts and a measured energy spectrum of cosmic rays containing such particles, Nikolai I. Grigorov, head of Cosmic Ray Laboratory at Moscow Univ. Institute of Nuclear Physics, told Pravda. He said that precise measurements of high-energy particles required the use of a heavy ionizing calorimeter which could not have been orbited without the lifting capacity of Russia’s new large rockets. Prof. Grigorov explained that high-energy particles never reached earthbound registering devices because they were absorbed and transformed as they collided with atoms of earth’s atmosphere. (Pravda, 8/20/65, atss-t Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 8/22/65, 72)
Tass released a picture of what was described as a working model of an orbiting space station. Six hermetically sealed compartments branched out from a central stem. The compartments included a control desk, a laboratory, a garden, an orientation system, radar section, and a heliostation with a system for carrying on conversation with incoming spaceships. (Tass, ap, Wash. Post, 7/8/65, D5)
A full-scale aluminum model of a 1,400-lb. telescoping space structure had been fabricated to verify design theory and manufacturing techniques, afsc announced. Built by Martin-Denver, the 15-by-8-ft. expandable structure could be launched into space in a compact package and then, like a telescope, opened to full size after reaching orbit. Several of the expandable structures stacked on a booster’s upper stage could be sent into space and expanded to form a rotating space station. (afsc Release 4.64)
proton ii 26,900-lb. unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit: apogee, 638.7 km. (396 mi.); perigee, 191.9 km. (119 mi.); period, 92.6 min.; inclination, 63.5°. Tass said that instrumentation on proton ii would study cosmic particles of superhigh energies, cosmic rays and their radiation danger, and the nuclear interaction of cosmic particles with super-high energies up to 1,000	billion electron volts. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. (NYT, 11/3/65, 5; ap, Balt. Sun, 11/3/65, 4; upi, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A21)
Caption under a photograph in East German newspaper Berliner Zeitung read: “A model of a future Soviet space station envisages six hermetically grouped sections around a central core. These are: the control station, a laboratory and a garden, an orientation system, the radar equipment, and a heliostation. In addition, the station has facilities for voice communications with space ships.” (Berliner Zeitung, 7/25/65, 4)
proton i, unmanned space station launched by U.S.S.R. July 16 with instrumentation for studying high-speed cosmic particles, was functioning normally, Tass reported. (Tass, 7/29/65)
