American Nuclear Society held panel session in Washington, D.C., on “The U.S. Space Program: Achievements and Objectives.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, declared: “We must step up the rate at which we tap the vast potential of nuclear energy for the space activities of tomorrow. . . . if we do not make greater use of nuclear energy, we will neglect our mission of learning rapidly more and more about the solar system in which we live and about the planet where we reside. In the field of propulsion, chemical rockets, both liquid and solid, can be vastly improved when combined with the products of nuclear technology.” Combining nuclear stage with Saturn V “will greatly increase that rocket’s power of achievement. . . . Not only will we have the vast power of the atom at our command, but it will be compact, self-contained, long lived, highly maneuverable, and virtually independent of its surrounding environment. . . . Atomic energy will enable the space effort to reach for the infinite.” (Text) NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs discussed “Research and Technology for the Future”: “The difference between success and failure of [nasa] missions . . . lies in our knowledge of the flight sciences and our skill for applying this knowledge to the development and operation of space vehicles. ... A natural characteristic of technology is its multiapplicability; an improvement in guidance or communication equipment, for example, may find many uses in space missions as well as non-aerospace applications. A key to making this process productive ... is a continuing research program . . . that has a good balance between the effort in the scientific and engineering disciplines and in the technologies needed to explore the unknown.” (Text) Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said: “The first practical application of space electric power systems, which have been under development over the past 10 years, may well be found in our second generation orbital space station program. Consistent with our present estimates of station initial power requirements, and allowing for growth, a zirconium hydride reactor coupled with a thermoelectric conversion system is being studied for application on such a space station.” (Text; Reuters, B Sun, 11/14/68, A10)
msfc awarded nine-month, $99,000 contract to Raymond Loewy/William Snaith, Inc., to conduct habitability studies of planned earth orbital space stations. Basic goal would be to ensure that workshop configurations were comfortable and functional structures in which to live and work, (msfc Release 68-79)
Boeing Co. said it would build one-fifth size thermal models of manned space stations under $156,500 NASA contract to determine their feasibility for predicting temperatures in full-size earth-orbiting station. (Boeing Release S—9840)
