NASA would require $5- to $5.6-billion annual budget “within three years” for simultaneous development of orbiting space station and lunar exploration in 1970 and onward, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, said in Washington Post interview. (Cohn, W Post, 4/17/69, A3)
Underwater test program begun at msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator several years earlier was providing information essential for design of first U.S. space station, NASA reported. Technicians, design engineers, and professional divers in spacesuits and scuba gear were conducting tasks similar to those necessary to activate space orbiting workshop, in 1.4-million-gal water tank containing mockups of aap cluster elements (Saturn I Workshop, lunar module ascent stage, Apollo Telescope Mount solar observatory, and airlock and multiple docking adapter), simulating weightlessness of space. Weightlessness was impossible to duplicate on earth for longer than fraction of minute. Conclusions from tests would be reflected in workshop’s final design, with decision expected in May 1969. (nasa Release 69—4)
MSFC announced it had awarded $173,000, 11-mo contract to Boeing Co. for study of cost-reduction methods in future space vehicle logistics systems, including expendable and reusable systems. Major emphasis of study would be on space station logistics missions in 100- to 300-mi orbits, with 5,000- to 50,000-lb payloads, and capable of holding 12 passengers and 3,000- to 12,500-lb cargo, (msfc Release 69-26)
New York Times published interview in which Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. President Llewellyn J. Evans expressed concern over possibility of failure in future space missions. “It has been one big gamble up to this point. This country must come up with rescue hardware. It would be shocking if someone got stuck in orbit someplace.” He saw need for four space facilities: space station in earth or lunar orbit, shuttle for travel between earth and space laboratory, space “tug” to go between nonatmospheric orbits, and rescue vehicle. (Kampel, NYT, 8/3/69, F7)
John N. Wilford said in New York Times: “Even though the Soyuz flights accomplished less than American observers had expected, they served notice that the Soviet Union may have forged ahead in space-station development while the United States was concentrating on the Apollo moon flight preparations.” But if U.S.S.R. had meant missions as beginning of first space station, “they fell far short.” There were “no link-ups of vehicles, no transfers of crews between ships and no test of the effects of long-duration weightlessness. None of the three ships was placed in an orbit high enough for the prolonged flights being considered for space stations.” Mission accomplishments could prove useful for construction of future space stations. “They proved that they were able to launch three manned spacecraft in three consecutive days, which the United States has not done. Such precision launchings are necessary for space station deployment.” Missions also had demonstrated first welding in space. “It will probably be necessary to weld together sections of a space station, rather than rely solely on the mechanical clamps used for present docking operations, and to make repairs by welding during flight.” (NYT, 10/19/69, E9)	..
MSFC announced engineer Chester B. May would be member of oceanologist Dr. Jacques Piccard’s six-man crew on Gulf Stream Drift Mission, scientific undersea journey aboard submersible vessel Ben Franklin (PX—15). Vessel would drift with Gulf Stream current from Miami, Fla., to Halifax, Nova Scotia, from four to six weeks beginning in June. May would study vessel’s operation and evaluate analogies between it and future NASA space station. Mission, covering 1,450 nm, would be conducted at 1,000-ft average depth, with periodic excursions to 300 ft and 2,000 ft. PX—15, designed by Dr. Piccard, would remain submerged throughout journey. Crew would experience space station characteristics: isolation, confinement, and stressful environment. (msfc Release 69—100; Marshall Star, 4/9/69, 1)
msfc announced it had issued rfps for experiment modules to be used with proposed manned space station to orbit earth in 1970s. Study, under eight-month contract, would analyze scientific and engineering need for experiment modules and develop concepts for least number of modules needed. Study tasks included further defining candidate experiment groupings, developing preliminary module concepts, defining minimum number of concepts, developing preliminary design and cost analysis for each module concept, and making proposed plan schedule. Proposals were due May-22. (msfc Release 69—125)
