In LaRC test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft, four crewmen were sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Div. of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in Huntington Beach, Calif. During 90-day experiment, part of NASA oart program, crew would drink reclaimed water and breathe regenerated oxygen. Information obtained would be applied to operation of three-man Skylab workshop scheduled for 1971 launch and to design of 12-man space station for later in 1970s. (Langley Researcher, 6/26/70,1)
msfc announced NR had been awarded two modifications to contract for Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II): $1 768 228 for changes to original contract awarded in 1962 for manufacture and test of 15 S-II flight versions and $2 429 005 to identify S-II’s capabilities for launching space stations and determine what production impacts would result from msfc space station studies, (msfc Release 70-172)
Proposal for space station to be assembled in orbit one module at a time was being studied at msfc and MSC, NASA announced. Station, to provide centralized facility for research, applications, and operations for 6 to 12 men over 10 yrs, would be composed of cylindrical modules 4.3 m (14 ft) in diameter and 17.7 m (58 ft) long, joined to form variety of shapes. Individual modules would be carried into orbit on reusable shuttle vehicle. Station could be assembled within months in circular orbit 320-480 km (200-300 mi) high with 55° inclination. (NASA Release 70-192)
NASA delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. space talks—headed by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director—arrived in Moscow for Oct. 26-27 meetings to discuss cooperation in developing manned space stations and linking spacecraft in orbit. (Clarity, NYT, 10/25/70, 24)
Four crewmen sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. [see June 12] successfully completed first 30 days of scheduled 90-day confinement. (Langley Researcher, 7/24/70, 1)
MSFC announced award of $320 000 contract to NR Space Div. for lunar base synthesis study to define and analyze lunar exploration missions, establish requirements, and develop conceptual descriptions of semipermanent lunar surface bases. Study would appraise mobile systems for long traverses of lunar surface, examine different surface drills and other tools and equipment, and relate capabilities of flying and surface roving vehicles to mission needs. Study also would examine operation of semipermanent lunar base without lunar orbit space station, operation of base while space base was in lunar orbit, missions that could be performed from base, and surface missions that could be performed from either lunar orbit or surface base, (msfc Release 70-119)
msfc engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 520 496 for Serpentuator—snake-like instrument to move men and tools under weightless conditions around space station. Series of metal tubes with motors at joints to control angles could be regulated from control panel inside or outside space station. (Jones, NYT, 7/18/70, 29; Patent Off)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, discussed future ofU.S. space program on abc program “Issues and Answers.” Dr. Paine said he did not anticipate further cutbacks in NASA personnel and facilities. “In my opinion we have slimmed down the NASA base to the point where we now have something which I would expect to see extended throughout the seventies and eighties.” He was “quite optimistic about the future of the space agency.” Dr. von Braun said “in the long haul” U.S. could not compete with U.S.S.R. at $3.333-billion budget level. It was obvious “that we are ahead in some areas,” but U.S.S.R. was probably ahead in space station field. (NASA Special Ann, 3/11/70; SBD, 3/17/70, 76)
MSC announced award of $100 000 NASA contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for study of station operating techniques during space station mission to define crew command structure necessary to ensure successful operations, (msc Release 70-68)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II-13) was successfully captive-fired for 367 secs at MTF. Stage would be used to launch Skylab space station in late 1972. (msfc Release 70-85)
NASA announced award of $1.5-million contract extensions to McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Div. to continue parallel space station program-definition studies through Feb. 1, 1971. (NASA Release 70-136)
msc announced selection of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to receive 18-mo, $1075 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for large space station solar-array technology-evaluation program. Program objectives were to conduct technical evaluation of current state of the art of solar systems and design analysis and test evaluation of components. Work would be conducted under MSC direction, (msc Release 70-48)
arc biochemists were developing process to convert principal body wastes—carbon dioxide and water—into palatable food for long-duration space missions, arc announced. Methods to turn carbon dioxide and water vapor exhaled and water recovered from urine into sugars and glycerol in series of chemical reactions might also be applied to solve food problems on earth. Work was under way by arc, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and two industrial contractors to develop system to produce chemical foods under space conditions, including weightlessness, and reduce food deliveries to orbiting space station, (arc Release 70-3)
Convair engineers presented results of “Phase A” experiment module concepts study during meeting at MSFC of NASA representatives and Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. Meeting was also attended by French representatives of ESRO. Module would be extension of space station that could be outfitted on ground and transported into space by shuttle vehicle. Program technical director Max E. Nein said module was attractive to European scientific commmunity because country desiring to participate could either build module complete with experiment package or build experiment package for integration into U.S. module. (MSFC Release 70196)
