First detailed Soviet analysis of U.S. plan for Grand Tour of outer planets was reported by New York Times. In Vestnik, principal publication of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet space expert Timur M. Eneyev had suggested that four missions covering two planets each might be more successful than the two missions to three planets contemplated by NASA. He indicated Soviet scientists favored approach of delivering automatic space stations to outer planets and suspending them by balloons in planetary atmosphere. He said technique, “for all its exotic aspects and difficulties of realization, is probably the most promising because it would yield far more data about the nature of the giant planets than could be obtained from fly-by trajectories.” (Shabad, NYT, 5/9/71)
NASA announced assignment of Robert 0. Aller, Manager of Space Station Operations, Space Station Task Force for omsf, to Skylab Program Office as Director of Operations. Aller would be responsible for coordination and development of operationally related program and mission planning activities, (nasa Hq WB )
nasa press conference at msc summarized June 21-25 U.S — U.S.S.R. discussions on joint space docking. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director and head of NASA delegation to discussions, said talks had been friendly throughout. “It was a period of hard work covering very difficult technical areas.” Meetings had been successful “in reaching conclusions, in principle, on all these subjects that we discussed, and in some detail in several of the subjects.” Need had been felt by both sides for “possibility of flight studies to test the technical requirements for docking and rendezvous, . . . one that would use the actual kind of compatible . . . equipment” that would make possible space rescue from spacecraft of either side that might be in trouble. U.S. and Soviet CMS and space stations with mixed crews could orbit earth within four years. Soviet crews and U.S. crews “would no doubt, if they docked, . . . want to open the hatches and visit with one another.” Dr. Gilruth said flight test might take place in mid-70s. (Transcript)
Major Soviet space station project included “powerful new launch vehicle in the class of America’s Saturn 5,” Kenneth Gatland said in New Scientist and Science Journal article. Prototype had been destroyed by fire in 1969 while undergoing static test on launch pad at Baykonur, he reported. (New Sci & Sci J, 4/29/71, 256-7)
Boris Petrov, chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Scientific Council on Space, said in Pravda that deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts would not halt U.S.S.R.’s manned orbital space station: “New flights into space, the building of new manned orbital stations of the Salyut type, lie ahead. Undoubtedly, larger and more complex multipurpose and specialized manned space stations will be built. One can say with confidence that the 1970s will become an epoch of the development and broad use of long-term manned orbital stations with changing crews which will make it possible to switch from occasional experiments in space to a regular vigil by scientists and experts in space laboratories.” (upi, NY News, 7/5/71, 7)
Future space shuttle missions were described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in speech before South Carolina Lions Clubs in Greenville, S.C.: “These payloads cover the areas of space physics, astronomy, space applications, life sciences, unmanned planetary exploration, and earth resources, military and commercial.” Payloads ranged from 113-kg (250-lb) Explorer and Space Physics Satellites to 9100-kg (20 000-lb) astronomy mission “requiring annual revisits by the shuttle for servicing maintenance and updating of instrumentation.” Sortie flights conducted solely by shuttle could be made within its seven-day orbit capability. Scientist could “conduct his own experiment in the orbiting shuttle and return with the data as well as his own observations. When the space station becomes operational, crew rescue missions could also be flown.” (Text)
