All outstanding options on the Concorde supersonic transport had been dropped, The Washington Post reported. British Aircraft Corp-Aerospatiale combined British-French manufacturers, would take only direct orders. The action had followed the cancellation of 20 options by U.S. commercial airline companies and would end marketing “brinkmanship.” (Egan, W Post, 3/29/73, Cll) March 30:	Preparations for twin launches of the Skylab space station and its first three-man crew continued with few significant problems, NASA announced. Major elements of the space station had completed integrated mission simulation and flight-readiness testing. Seventy percent of stowed items had been placed in the Workshop section. Simulated loading of propellant into the Saturn IB launch vehicle had been completed. A leaking valve in the service module had caused replacement of a 244- by 91-cm (96- by 36-in) panel containing propellant tanks, plumbing, and engines. Excessive leakage in the oxidizer tank bladder was also being investigated, (nasa Release 73-61)
The possibility that three Soviet cosmonauts had died in training accidents early in the Soviet space program was discussed by James E. Oberg of the Dept, of Defense Computer Institute in a speech before the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C. Oberg, a Soviet space program observer, said photos and training films showed four cosmonauts— identified only as Ivan, Vasily, Grigori, and Valentin—in 1960 and 1961, before the April 12, 1961, Vostok 1 first manned orbital space flight. None of these cosmonauts had been seen or heard of since. Oberg said they might still be training for a Salyut space station or a lunar landing mission or they could have been killed in accidents before making their intended flights. Oberg said there was no apparent truth to stories that as many as 18 cosmonauts had died secretly. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/13/73, A3) April 13:	Preparations for the first Skylab mission, launch of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop scheduled for May 14, continued with only minor discrepancies, NASA announced. Onboard experiments and major spacecraft elements that had not flown before required extensive first-time testing. Lower than desired voltage had been detected in one cell in each of two important flight batteries. The batteries would be replaced and tested. Stowage of crew equipment and consumables in the Orbital Workshop had been completed. Testing of the Saturn IR and the command and service modules continued without major problems, (nasa Release 73-74)
U.S. space observers believed an accident to the Soviet Salyut 2 space station launched April 3 had prevented the U.S.S.R. from carrying out a maximum one-month mission manned by a Soyuz crew, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. Their assessment was that Salyut 2 had begun tumbling in orbit when a maneuvering engine fired and then kept firing out of control. The firing had forced Salyut 2 into cartwheel motion through space. Its solar panels had been torn loose, cutting the station off from almost all its electric power. The only electricity supplied to Salyut 2 after the accident had come from batteries that might now be burned out. A few U.S. observers thought the Soviet tracking ship that instructed the station to make the fatal maneuver had received details of the accident by radio from Salyut 2 before communications ceased. The ship had left its station off Newfoundland and had joined a sister ship in Curasao, Dutch West Indies, where both had been refueled and refitted. The ships were now in Cuba, which had led some space observers to think they might put to sea again to await a further Soviet attempt to launch a Salyut station. (W Post, 5/2/73, A20)
