The U.S.S.R. announced the mission of the Salyut 3 space station (launched 25 June) had been “completely fulfilled.” The “main program of work” had ended 23 Sept, and the recoverable module containing research materials and experiments had separated from Salyut 3. Engines were discarded before entry into the atmosphere, and the parachute system was activated at an altitude of 8.4 km to land the module in a preset area of the U.S.S.R. Salyut 3 plans had been for a
The universe was 16 billion yrs old, 6 billion yrs older than earlier estimates, according to California Institute of Technology astronomer Dr. Allen R. Sandage, the Washington Post reported after an interview. After 10 yrs of observing 50 galaxies, Dr. Sandage had dated the galaxies from 14 billion yrs ago, meaning that 2 billion yrs were required for the primordial gas cloud to cool enough for stars to begin forming. Working with Swiss astronomer Gustav Tamman, Dr. Sandage had arrived at his new date when his observations had led him to recalculate the Hubble Constant, the rate of speed for the expansion of the universe. He had checked his figures by dating stars in globular clusters in the Milky Way and by measuring the amounts of metal still burning in their atmospheres. (O’Toole, W Post, 11 Dec 74, Al)
Experiments carried out during the U.S.S.R.’s eight-day Soyuz 13 mission launched 18 Dec. 1973 were further evidence that the U.S.S.R. was continuing manned space station efforts, a Spaceflight article said. The flight had included the Oasis 2 experiment, part of a plan to demonstrate that biological closed-cycle life support systems could be used for large space stations and other long-duration manned missions. Observation of stars in the ultraviolet range with the Orion 2 telescope was also a continuing program related to space station activity. Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov had said in a statement to the British Interplanetary Society that, in the years between the Soyuz 11 tragedy in June 1971 and the Soyuz 12 mission in September 1973, design engineers had been analyzing the performance of all spacecraft systems and making modification and improvements. He stressed that work on manned space stations was continuing because of the importance of these stations in the exploration of natural resources. Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13 crews had made multispectral photos of the earth’s surface. (SF, March 74, 110)
