The European Space Agency’s launch vehicle Ariane during its 5-yr development period would use hydrazine fuel supplied by the USSR, reported the British journal New Scientist. The U.S. hydrazine plant near Baltimore had been closed down because of contamination by nitro-samines, hydrazine sources suspected of causing cancer. Hydrazine, highly corrosive and difficult to handle, had not been manufactured in Western Europe, and no one wanted to do so, according to the report. Ariane’s discontinued predecessor Europa used a less powerful fuel— liquid oxygen and kerosene—and the USSR had used hydrazine from the plant near Moscow to power the large rockets that launched the Salyut space stations and large interplanetary probes. The report said that the hydrazine deal stemmed from France’s longstanding cooperation with the USSR in aerospace technology; if the Soviets should restrict hydrazine supplies, France would build a European plant because its commitments would override environmental objections. (W Post, 22 Apr 76, A-52)
Recovery of the unmanned Soyuz 20 spacecraft that landed in Kazakhstan 16 Feb. carrying a “comprehensive biology payload”—including both plant and animal life—concluded what the Christian Science Monitor described as an impressive 3-mo biology experiment. Results from Soyuz 20 would be compared with those of similar experiments— including some from the U.S.—carried on the Vostok-type biosat Cosmos 782 which stayed 19.4 days in space last year. Cosmos 782 had carried a small centrifuge to test effects of artificial gravity on flora and fauna; comparison of the previous tests with those from Soyuz 20 would help decide whether—and how much—artificial gravity would be needed in future space stations. Soyuz 20 had docked with the Salyut 4 space station 19 Nov. 1975, an example of a self-docking biolab that demonstrated the USSR plan for assembling complex space objects from separately launched modules. (CSM, 26 Feb 76, 6)
NASA selected Grumman Aerospace Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to negotiate fixed-price contracts for parallel systems analyses of concepts for space stations in low- and synchronous-altitude earth orbits, including orbit-to-orbit transportation. The 2 studies, each to last 18 mo and cost about $700 000, would be managed by MSFC for Grumman and by JSC for McDonnell Douglas; the work would begin 1 Apr. The studies would define an operational base in space to serve as a space laboratory, of modular construction with potential for growth over the years. Proposals were also received from Rockwell International Space Div. and Boeing Aerospace Co. (NASA Release 76-41; JSC Release 76-19; MSFC Release 76-50)
Soyuz 21 cosmonauts Boris Volynov and Vitaly Zholobov, who landed safely 24 Aug. from a 48-day mission to Soviet space station Salyut 5, returned to Moscow from the Baykonur cosmodrome near Tyuratam where they had been resting after their flight. The two received the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, Volynov for the second time. The news agency Tass reported that Salyut 5 was flying in a “controlled automatic regime.” In a Pravda interview, Academician Georgy Petrov emphasized the importance of orbiting stations, which he said would serve in preparing for space flights to other planets as well as in studying the earth from outer space. Petrov predicted the building of space stations with changeable crews of 20 to 30, serving for periods of time up to decades, and later the establishment of “super-large multipurpose orbital complexes with crews consisting of a hundred members and more.” A special role would be that of stations for moon study in selenocentric orbits, from which crews would land on the moon’s surface in “small expeditionary spacecraft.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 1-6 Sept 76)
The 2 Soyuz 21 cosmonauts aboard space station Salyut 5, first manned space mission since last July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, were experiencing “a state of sensory deprivation, a sort of sensory hunger,” according to the government newspaper Izvestia. Although Col. Boris Volynov and Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov continued to carry out their scientific and medico-biological experiments as they entered the 7th wk of their stay on Salyut 5—the halfway mark toward breaking the U.S. endurance record of 84 days in space set by 3 Skylab 4 astronauts in 1973—and despite their years of training to combat the problem, Izvestia said “the organism still reacts in a peculiar way to space conditions.” One symptom of “the increase in their need for communication” was that the cosmonauts were asking ground control more and more often for news from earth. On the advice of psychologists, ground control had begun playing music to the cosmonauts, Izvestia said. (UPI, in W Star, 17 Aug 76, A-4)
Clocking the speed of plasma at 50 km per sec in the active regions of the sun was “among the most interesting results” of investigations carried out aboard the USSR space station Salyut 4, Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov wrote in the Bulletin of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Feoktistov, one of the cosmonauts on the flight of Voskhod 1 in Oct. 1964, was quoted in a Tass broadcast as saying that data from the two manned expeditions to Salyut 4 were still being processed, but that the missions had established man’s ability to “work well in conditions of weightlessness” for more than 2 mo. Citing the stay of Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov aboard the station from 25 May to 25 July last year, and describing the use of exercises and pressurized suits to maintain health during that time, Feoktistov said the mission results offered hope that orbital stations and piloted space flights would be further developed. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 May 76)
