The NY Times reported that “observers in the U.S. and abroad” were puzzling over a Soviet space vehicle called Cosmos 929 that had been orbiting for a mo and was large enough to be manned, but apparently carried no passengers. Orbital and radio telemetry characteristics of the vehicle were like those usually related to a manned mission; speculation was that the vehicle might be the first unit of a large space station to be assembled in orbit. Reports from Europe that the USSR would launch a space vehicle during the summer had assumed that the mission would be another Salyut, five of which had previously been orbited, the first early in 1971. Cosmos 929, launched July 17, had drawn attention because of its size and its unusual telemetry, apparently two distinct systems, as though it were two objects joined together. On Aug. 18, after a major change in orbit, one of the two radio transmissions had also changed “significantly,” and part of the vehicle might have been detached at that time. Members of the Kettering Group, an international group of nongovernment space watchers, had confirmed that the vehicle was as large as a Salyut and that its 51.6° orbital inclination had usually, though not exclusively, been used for manned flights as had its telemetry signals. Cosmos 929 had produced no voices, however, and the group was “virtually certain” that no crew was aboard. (NYT, Aug 26/77, A10)
MSFC announced it would consider using the Space Shuttle’s external fuel tank (ET) as a permanent space platform. James E. Kingsbury, head of MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate, proposed to replace 57m3 of an ET’s liquid oxygen with provisions for 90 days, then launch another Shuttle to bring a crew, a Skylab-airlock module and multipledocking adapter, and a solar electric-conversion wing to the orbiting ET to constitute a habitable space station. All the required equipment, now in storage or on display in the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, had been flight-tested. (MSFC Release 77-36; NASA Release 77-42; Htsvl Times, Feb 20/77, 8)
Tass reported that Soviet space station Salyut 4, launched Dec. 26, 1974, to house cosmonauts working in space up to 90 days, disintegrated over the Pacific Ocean when it moved on ground command into “a descent trajectory” and burned up. Tass noted that the station had flown for 3mo joined to the unpiloted space capsule Soyuz 20. The longest, most successful career of a Salyut in the 16yr-old USSR space program had included what Tass called “an extensive program of medical and biological research” as well as study of the sun, stars, and planets in the electromagnetic spectrum; views of Soviet territory in the middle and southern latitudes; and a great amount of data on physical processes in earth atmosphere and in space. Cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Aleksey Gubarev had docked Soyuz 17 with Salyut 4 for 29 days between Jan. 10 and Feb. 9, 1975; Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov failed to dock with Salyut 4 on Apr. 5 of that yr; and Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov had docked Soyuz 18 with Salyut 4 May 25 and remained for 63 days, during which they talked with their compatriots on the ASTP mission and returned July 24 with the Soviet duration record for a manned mission. Salyut 4 had completed 12,188 orbits around the earth before being destroyed, Tass said. (Today,, Feb 4/77, 10A; FBIS, Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 3/77)
The Soviet Union had radioed commands to its orbiting Salyut 5 space station to position it for rendezvous with a forthcoming Soyuz launch, according to a story in the Washington Post. Ideal time for a Soyuz launch would be within the next 5 days, the report said, and two Soviet tracking ships were already on station in the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea to keep in touch with the cosmonauts. (WPost, Jan 21/77, C8)
NASA had decided to plan construction of an orbiting space station from existing hardware because the Carter and Ford administrations had refused funds for major space station development, AvWk reported. Four station concepts were under examination: increasing the duration of Space Shuttle missions, using Skylab Apollo telescope-mount components to supply additional electricity for any extended mission; making a Space Shuttle external fuel tank into a Skylab-type station [see Mar. 7]; launching unmanned platforms to be occupied in the future; and modifying the ESA-NASA Spacelab to fly as an independent orbiting laboratory, without Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 42)
NASA announced publication of the first book of a series on the Skylab mission, Skylab, Our First Space Station (NASA SP-400), a general introduction to and overview of the mission’s problems and successes. The 10 chapters tell how Skylab grew from existing technology; how it nearly failed when its micrometeorite shield and one of its solar panels were lost, and how it was saved; how 3 manned visits occurred, one of them for a record 84-day occupation; and how it proved the possibility of living and working for extended periods in a space environment. (NASA Release 77-135)
