The Washington Post reported that two Soviet cosmonauts had set a new Soviet space walk record on July 29, spending 125min outside the Salyut 6 space station testing a new type of suit and working with equipment mounted on the station, the accompanying Progress 2 supply ship, and their own Soyuz 29. Cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were the fourth team of cosmonauts to successfully board the Salyut 6 after it reached orbit the previous Sept. Kovalenok had filmed his colleague during part of the walk and had relayed the color footage to earth for broadcast on Moscow television. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the two cosmonauts had dismantled instruments and devices on the outer shell of Salyut 6, loading them into Soyuz 29 for shipment to earth, and had mounted new instruments, including devices to measure radiation^ on the Salyut. Instruments being returned had measured micrometeor activities and had aided research on "polymers, optical and other structural material used in building advance spacecraft,” Tass said. The report did not give details on the new space suit, but the cosmonauts said that their “semistiff’ clothes were well designed and that life-support systems had been improved to facilitate movement and “better fixation outside the station.” U.S. experts had interpreted the length of the Salyut mission and repeated trips to it by Soviet cosmonauts as indicating a focus by the Soviet space program on building permanent orbital platforms. The report had not indicated when the two cosmonauts would return to earth, but observers suggested that the next mission (Soyuz 30) would probably come soon and would be a marathon stay aboard the orbiting station. (WPost, July 30/78, DIO; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/78)
U.S. analysts believed the USSR would continue to fly manned military space station reconnaissance missions even though the Soviets had not launched any such Salyuts since June 1976, Av Wk reported. Salyut 3, launched in June 1974, and Salyut 5, launched in June 1976, were successful military missions; the Salyut 2 spacecraft, which failed in orbit in April 1973, was also apparently a military Salyut. Significant design differences between the military and scientific versions included docking configuration, overall structure, and solar-panel placement. Introduction of the military configuration as early as the second Salyut flight was considered to be evidence of USSR emphasis on military-man-in-space planning and engineering. Photo reconnaissance was the prime objective of Salyut military missions; other military activities such as high energy research for possible weapons application were secondary. (AvWk, Dec 4/78, 17)
The USSR had decided to keep a permanent manned space station in earth orbit as a result of the current Salyut 6 space station mission, AvWk reported. Staffing this and follow-on Salyuts without major intervals between missions would be a milestone in manned spaceflight, and would demonstrate the USSR’s decision to invest major resources in space. The USSR had claimed the Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 mission was more scientific than military; its activities had included photographing the Soviet Union to explore for natural resources, detailed medical studies of cosmonaut blood circulation, and upper-atmosphere and micrometeorite monitoring. The crew had also devoted more time to system checkout and monitoring, because the design of Salyut 6 was a significant change from that of previous Salyut space stations: The USSR had not previously flown a spacecraft configuration like Salyut 6/Soyuz 26/Soyuz 27 to test the interaction of three large vehicles. It had tried various spacecraft attitudes to evaluate stresses during maneuvers on the docked system, and had transferred food and equipment from the Soyuz 27 resupply vehicle and film, biological samples, and records to the Soyuz 27. The Soyuz/Salyut mission had achieved three manned-spaceflight firsts: four-man space station, simultaneous docking of two transport spacecraft with an orbiting space station, and manned resupply of an occupied station. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 20; Jan 9/78, 25; Jan 16/78, 20; Jan 23/78, 19)
Soyuz 31, carrying East Germany’s first cosmonaut and a Soviet commander, had docked with the Salyut 6 space station, the Washington Post reported. The USSR had launched Soyuz 31 Aug. 26 at 17:51 Moscow time. Sigmund Jahn of East Germany and Valery Bykovsky had joined the Soyuz 29 cosmonauts who had been circling earth in the space station since June 16. Tass said the crew was well and had begun implementation of tasks assigned to them. It added that the launch of Soyuz 31 had been part of the preparations for an historic event, the 30th anniversary of the creation of the first German socialist state. The flight had been intended as an example of the use of space for peaceful purposes, based on “disinterested international cooperation and comradely mutual assistance.” (WPost, Aug 27/78, A 21; FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 26/78)
Aerospace Daily reported that Progress 3, launched by the USSR to dock with Salyut 6, had carried 6171b of food, 9921b of oxygen-regeneration equipment, and 41gal of water to cosmonauts Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov, according to cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, one of the designers of the Progress resupply vehicles. UPI quoted a Novosti report that consumption of food, water, and air by a 2-man space crew would range from 44 to 661b per day; a 2-man space station would need about lOtons of these supplies to stay in full operation for a year. (A/D, Aug 16/78, 202)
