Flight controllers at JSC reported that they would halt their 24-hour Skylab watch February 2, following NASA’s decision to abandon attempts to boost or deorbit the space station. The January 25 maneuver that positioned Skylab’s solar panels for constant sun tracking had removed it from the minimum-drag position and would result in speeding up its orbital decay. The repositioning was intended to increase power available to controllers to alter the path of Skylab’s descent, now expected between June and August. (JSC Release 79-03)
The Washington Post said the empty Soviet spacecraft that linked up December 19 with Salyut 6 was probably a three-person version of the vehicle the Soviet Union had been launching for 10 years. The Soyuz T (probably for Transport) docked on ground command at one end of the two-part space station in the fourth unmanned test of the new configuration (the first was Cosmos 869, November-December 1976; the second, Cosmos 1001, April 1978; the third, Cosmos 1074, January, 31-March 1, 1979). The Washington Post said the interior of the Soyuz “command craft” probably was changed to accommodate three instead of two cosmonauts;, making it easier for the Soviet Union to use the Salyut as a permanent orbital station with interchangeable crews, difficult with only two men at a time. (WPost, Dec 20/79, A-27)
August 19 saw the end of the record-breaking flight in the Salyut 6 space station of Soyuz 32 cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin, returned safely in the Soyuz 34 capsule after 175 days in space since launch February 25. FBIS had carried daily reports of their progress. Besides the experiments in materials processing (alloys and coating processes) and the intensive physical routines designed to assist long-term assignments in space, the crew in their last days in orbit had worked with the KRT-10 radiotelescope sent last month by cargo craft and unfurled in space to study extraterrestrial radio sources and nonatmospheric radioastronomy. As early as August 15, they had begun to pack the return capsule with items demonstrating the results of their space stay. Difficulty with the radiotelescope had presented another challenge to the crew; upon completion April 9 of the scheduled scans, the antenna was to be jettisoned, leaving the docking unit free. “Space sprung another surprise,” Tass reported, when the antenna became entangled with a projection on Salyufs surface. The crew tried to free it by “a minor jerk of the station,” which was not successful. A space walk was already scheduled to check the exterior of the station, dismantle outside scientific equipment, and retrieve samples of materials exposed for a long time to outer space. Ground control wanted to spare the cosmonauts the stress of an extra task in outer space, but the crew insisted it was the only sure way to solve the problem. On August 15, the crew in “full pressure suits” opened the hatch, and flight engineer Ryumin moved to the attachment point, releasing the 10-meter (30-foot) antenna with pliers, and “imparted the antennae acceleration relative to the station” (in other words, pushed it away toward the Earth for reentry). Then, Ryumin and Lyakhov disassembled and brought in the micrometeorite registration instruments and the panels with samples of structural, optical, insulation, and polymer materials, some of which were in orbit since Salyut 6’s launch in September 1977, others installed by the Soyuz 29 crew in July 1978. Total time of the space walk was 1 hour, 23 minutes: Tass noted that the suits, “fitted out with metal shielding against cosmic radiation and possible concussions” from meteorites, had previously served Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov of Soyuz 29 and Grechko and Romanenko of Soyuz 26. The cosmonauts landed safely August 19 and appeared to be in the best shape yet: they wanted to walk but were not allowed to do so immediately, although they did get brief dips in the hotel swimming pool. Later reports praised the exercise routine for its good effects on the crew, who agreed that even longer flights were possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 1-25/79; CSM, Aug 14/79, 2; NY Times, Aug 16/79, A-19)
