Cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin set a new record for spaceflight duration, breaking the mark of 175 days, 36 minutes set last year by a crew in Soyuz 32. Ryumin had been on that record mission also; he had stayed on Earth for only 236 days since February 25, 1979. Popov, 40, and Ryumin, 34, had set out April 9, 1980, in Soyuz 35 to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 launched September 29, 1977, one of 13 crews to visit the 20-ton 49-foot-long space station. Three times during the spring and summer visiting crews brought the “permanent occupants” food and experiment materials, life-support equipment, and companionship. These relief missions included the first Vietnamese, Hungarian, and Cuban cosmonauts. Earlier this week, an unmanned cargo ship Progress 11 arrived with fresh supplies of food, fuel, and technical equipment for the cosmonauts. The Soviet Union had not set a time limit for the Salyut-Soyuz flight; Popov and Ryumin reported themselves healthy. (NY Times, Oct 2/80, A-17)
Progress reports on the continuing flight of Leonid Ryumin and Valery Popov in the Salyut 6-Soyuz 37 orbiting space station noted that their mission had lasted 115 days as of August 1. The cosmonauts were busy redocking Soyuz 37 (which Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko had used to get to the Salyut) to make room for more supply-ship missions. The visitors had returned to Earth safely July 31 in the Soyuz 36 craft; next on the list for the long-term occupants was “cleaning of the premises of the orbital complex” and physical training, Tass said. On August 5 Tass reported completion of various crystal experiments using Splav and Kristall apparatus in “cosmic material studies” of semiconductors cast from gallium arsenide, and crystals of indium antimonide and gadolinium cobalt, a magnetic material. Tass August 9 reported a first: crystallization of a substance from a smelt in “directional microgravitation.” The idea was to form crystals at more than “minimum microacceleration.” The crew put into the Splav an ampule of raw material and activated it; they then used the space station’s motors in a twisting maneuver during which the station became “a sort of centrifuge” for a few hours. Acceleration, zero at the center, “near the transfer compartment and transfer chamber. . .was at its maximum.” Previous experiments had always been during sleep periods, as movement of people around the station affected the results. For more data on crystal formation in orbit, the crew tried it in the span between Earth gravity and zero gravity. Tass called the test a first step in a new science of “weightlessness physics” whose practical conclusions were already being felt. On August 12 Tass noted the crew had been in space for 18 weeks; further tests were going on, making special glass in zero gravity and monocrystals of germanium. On August 22, Moscow radio said that this expedition had had more technological tests than any previous ones: the lsparitel apparatus alone had provided more than 186 samples, most of them deli vered to scientists on Earth by Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko. One substance, a solidified solution of cadmium telluroid and mercury telluroid, would be impossible to obtain on Earth where “when molten they separate out as oil and vinegar do when poured into the same glass.” The large crystals of this obtainable in space would permit “heat viewing” or detection of negligible variations in temperature, important to industry and to medicine. (FBIS, Tass in English; Moscow Dom Svc, Aug 1-26/80)
