NASA issued a Requet for Proposal (RFP) for definition and preliminary design of a permanently manned Space Station to be operational in low-Earth orbit early in the 1990s. Proposals were due by November 15. The Space Station would support scientific and commercial endeavors in space, stimulate new technologies, enhance space-based operational capabilities, and maintain U.S. leadership in space. The RFP contained four “work packages” covering definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of Space Station elements. NASA planned to let competing contracts for each of the work packages and scheduled April 1, 1985, as the effective date of the contracts. (NASA Release 84-130)
Svetlana Savitskaya, a Soviet cosmonaut, today became the first woman to walk in space. Savitskaya, 36 years old, performed welding and soldering operations in the course of her walk in space, which lasted 3 hours and 35 minutes. She was also the first woman to make two spaceflights, her first being in August 1982 aboard the Soyuz T-7, which like the current flight linked with the Salyut 7 space station for a brief period. Savitskaya went into space July 18 along with Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Igor Volk aboard Soyuz T-12 and linked with the Salyut-7 space station, where three other cosmonauts had been in orbit for more than five months. Tass said that the main goal of the space walk was to test a new general-purpose handoperated tool designed “to carry out complex technological operations.” Dzhanibekov accompanied her on the space walk. Savitskaya, along with Dzhanibekov and Volk, returned to Earth July 29 aboard Soyuz T-12. They landed in an area 140 kilometers southeast of Dzhezkazgan. The three were reported to be feeling fine after landing. Remaining aboard Salyut 7 were cosmonauts Leonid Kisim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov. Savistskaya was born in Moscow and graduated from the Sergo Ordzhonikidze Aviation Institute in Moscow. She had worked as an instructor pilot and, since 1976, had been a test pilot on 20 types of aircraft, Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 17/84; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/84; NY Times, July 26/84, A-24; W Post, July 26/84, A-31)
NASA announced that approximately 200 people representing every NASA installation and the JPL were selected to augment the staff of JSC to help plan the next phase of NASA’s Space Station Program. This team had two major objectives: issue a request for proposals to industry for the definition of the specific elements of the Space Station and define a reference configuration or configurations to accompany the request for proposals. “The purpose of the reference configuration is to provide a framework to help industry understand how the various elements of the Space Station are related,” said Dr. Ralph Muraca, deputy head of LaRC, designated a “center of excellence” to help plan this next phase of the program. “In addition, it will help individual companies determine which of the elements or work packages they would be interested in competing for.” The group’s guidelines were to develop a configuration that would meet all the requirements associated with the final configuration of the Space Station, expected to be operational in the 1999-2000 time frame, and then scale that PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED back to an $8 billion configuration that would provide maximum mission capability in 1991. (LaRC Release 84-35)
NASA announced that it had selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach., Calif., and TRW, Inc., Space and Technology Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotiations that would lead to two parallel Space Station study contracts, each contract for a firm fixed price of approximately $2 million, covering a performance period of approximately 27 months, beginning in March. Contracts would be for the development of functional, performance, and technology requirements; the definition of system architecture for the Space Station data system; and the relationship of that system to the overall NASA end-to-end flight and ground information system. The studies would define the role of the Space Station data system and its relationship, and interfaces to the Space Station information systems elements. They would also define the data system to determine the environment in which both the user and facility subsystems interface and operate; address all avionics and other electrically automated Space Station functions; develop a clear understanding of system functional, operational, and interface requirements; identify major cost items to enable effective management decisions and development control; and define a program plan. NASA’s JSC would negotiate and administer the TRW contract; NASA’s GSFC, the McDonnell Douglas contract. (NASA Release 84-36)
The congressional Office of Technology Assessment released a report, “Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space,” which said that the kind of Space Station that NASA was planning could not be justified on scientific, economic, or military grounds. It went on to say that not just Congress, but the entire nation, ought to consider what the country wanted to do in the second quarter-century of the space era. The Space Station envisioned by NASA, the report said, “is only one alternative in a wide range of options.” Thomas F. Rogers, director of the two-year study, said that the time had come for the general public to play a greater role in space program goals. “We’ve been spending $7.5 billion a year, every year; we can do anything want to do,” he said. “It’s great, it’s exciting, but we’re missing large numbers of important activities by allowing all this to go on under technological drive— not policy drive, economic drive, social drive, the way everything else is done in this country at that level of public expenditure.” The report characterized the nation’s goals in space as shortsighted and narrow, reflecting the views only of the science and technology communities and not of the general public, which foots the bills. The study also said, “There is no compelling, objective, external case” for building a Space Station “to be used to support over 100 conceptual uses, few of which have been sharply defined or gained wide acceptance as important objectives of the space program.” The report concluded by spelling out the “kinds” of goals the nation should set: increase the efficiency of space activities and reduce their costs; involve the public; reap scientific, economic, social, and political benefits; increase international cooperation; and “spread life, in a responsible fashion, throughout the solar system.” (Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space, (D.C.: OTA, 1984; W Post, Nov 14/84, A.-4; NY Times, Nov 14/84, B-20)
