The text of a joint declaration made public today at the end of a seven-nation economic conference in Bonn, West Germany, contained a statement concerning space activities, the NY Times reported. The text read: "We welcome the positive responses of the member states of the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan to the invitation of the president of the United States to cooperate in the United States manned space station program on the basis of a genuine partnership and a fair and appropriate exchange of information, experience, and technologies. Discussions on intergovernmental cooperation in development and utilization of permanently manned space stations will begin promptly. We also welcome the conclusions of the ESA Council on the need for Europe to maintain and expand its autonomous capability in space activity, and on the long-term European space plan and its objectives." (NYT, May 5/85, A16)
NASA selected the dual keel reference configuration, a modification of the power tower concept, for the proposed permanently manned space station, the Spaceport News reported. It was called the dual keel because of twin vertical booms that would provide the framework for attachment of other structures. The concept's primary attributes were that it would provide better customer accommodations and servicing, increased attachment area, and a more versatile design for growth based on future requirements and changing station roles. Another change in space station planning was placement of the pressurized modules near the station's center of gravity to increase the amount of space available for experiments, such as crystal growth, that needed a microgravity environment. NASA selected the dual keel configuration from a variety of layouts devised by teams of contractors working on two-year space station definition and preliminary studies. Overall space station shape and module placement were just two of the many significant technical decisions program officials had made since the space station definition period began in April 1985. NASA would conduct over the next three to five months a series of reviews to narrow design choices so that it could select by early 1986 a baseline structure for the proposed space station. Contractor teams would spend the second half of the study phase doing space station subsystem preliminary designs, leading to start in mid-1987 of the planned development phase. (Spaceport News, Oct 25/85, 2)
NASA announced it signed with the University of Arizona, Tucson, a memorandum of understanding to study, plan, and, if approved by Congress, develop an orbiting astrometric telescope facility, which would be mounted in the mid-1990s on the planned space station, to detect and study planetary systems around other stars. Astrometric telescopes measured with extraordinary precision positions of stars and other celestial objects. Eugene Levy, director of the University's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and David Black, head of Ames Research Center's (ARC) Space Sciences Division, would be project principal scientists. Black described the effort as "the beginning of a new scientific discipline. The results of the search, whether positive or negative, will profoundly alter our view of the universe." The gravitational pull of planets orbiting a star causes it to wobble as seen against the sky. By measuring this wobble, an astrometric telescope could determine the presence of planets and perhaps determine the properties of such a planetary system. Although ground-based telescopes use the wobblemeasuring technique to measure properties of double stars in orbit around one another, an astrometric telescope could measure the disturbance in a star's motion caused by objects as small as planets. Until researchers find other planetary systems, they cannot fully test theoretical models used to explain the origin of our solar system or the formation of stars. The joint project would be coordinated with development of photometric and spectroscopic techniques and theoretical modeling of planetary system formation. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED ARC would clarify final telescope design and manner of mounting on the space station as well as oversee telescope and instrument construction and mounting. The University would establish operating facilities on the ground and coordinate continuing scientific investigations that would extend more than a decade. The project would include a core program of planet detection and study, and guest investigators could use the telescope for astrometric studies of other important celestial objects. Initial study and definition work would begin shortly; ultimate implementation would require Congressional approval and funding. (NASA Release 85-3; ARC Release 85-01; ARC Astro-gram, Jan. 17/85, 1; A/D, Jan 17/85, 95)
France turned down President Reagan's invitation to participate in the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) project because of the subordinate role France would have to play and because it was at that time promoting its own French-led European advanced technology/space research project that included some key technologies related to strategic defense, Defense Daily reported. French President Francois Mitterrand told a news conference May 4 at the close of the Bonn economic summit that President Reagan used the term "subcontractors" in reference to Europe's role in the SDI project, which confirmed his view that the U.S. would not treat France and other European countries as equal partners in SDI and that they would not get access to all research results. "The technology interests me," Mitterrand said, "but the strategic project is interesting only for the future when man becomes a master of space." Fie urged other European nations to join France in an independent advanced technology R&D program called "Eureka," which would explore civilian uses of space and other advanced technologies including high-power lasers, optics, microelectronics, and high-speed computers. Although these technologies would apply to a number of areas including strategic defense, the primary aim of Eureka would be to "explore space through advanced research in order to master new technologies," Mitterrand said. He noted that Eureka was important for Europe because of the need to "preserve their fund of intelligence, technology, and brains. All this has to be mobilized in a great project that is European." According to reports, Mitterrand told Reagan that he was concerned about actual deployment of SDI because it could alter the strategy of mutual assured destruction that had successfully prevented nuclear war. (France had its own small nuclear deterrent, but it was more vulnerable to ballistic missile defense than the large strategic forces of the U.S. and USSR.) France had agreed to support the European Space Agency's proposal to define a pressurized module called Columbus for the U.S. space station, if all parties could work out adequate arrangements. (D/D, May 7/85, 35)
NASA announced its Administrator James Beggs and the Director General of the European Space Agency (ESA) would sign June 3 at the ESA pavillion at the Paris Air Show a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the conduct of a cooperative program for detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned space station [see Space Station Program, Apr. 1]. The cost of the Phase B studies carried out by European industry under ESA management, together with the corresponding technology program, amounted to 80 million accounting units or $64 million at the current rate of exchange. Cooperation during the space station's development, operations, and use phases required separate agreements. (NASA Release 85-78)
Over 700 enterprises and organizations in the Soviet Union used pictures taken from Soviet orbital Salyut space stations, helping to save the equivalent of $8 million, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. For example, the photos assisted in selecting routes of tunnels for the Baykal-Amur railway in eastern USSR. And cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinykh, then aboard Salyut 7, were working on a new program of geophysical research. (FBIS Moscow World Service in English, July 28/85)
The Canadian government decided to join the U.S. and other allies in producing an orbiting space station, agreeing in principle to spend up to $600 million over the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. U.S. space officials had encouraged Canada for more than a year to join the U.S.-led project, which already had the participation of the European Space Agency (ESA) and Japan, together expected to spend about $4 billion. Canada's science minister Tom Siddon said that Canada's involvement in the space station could produce economic benefits valued at more than $2 billion by the year 2000. (W Times, Mar 22/85, 5A)
Tom Rogers, project director of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA) space station study, said in testimony before the U.S. House space subcommittee that OTA in its controversial November 1984 space station report [see Space Station Program, Mar. 13] never meant to oppose development of a space station but only to suggest that its elements might be altered for more adequate attainment of space goals, Defense Daily reported. "I want to make it clear that OTA remains convinced that there is a strong rationale for some long-term habitable infrastructure in a low earth orbit. . . In other words, OTA is very positive about the principle behind the President's call for a 'space station' and Congress's decision to fund a 'space station' line item in NASA's budget," Rogers said. However, he pointed out that OTA's concerns about the space station centered on its cost and the fact that there was no proper assessment of long-range U.S. space goals, which made it infeasible to determine what elements should make up the station. "To be more certain that the facilities actually constructed are the ones most likely to lead to optimum space development, they must be constructed with an eye to the nation's long-range civilian space goals and objectives," Rogers testified. "Unfortunately, the only space goals discussed to date are those formulated by the space community itself; there has been little broad-based discussion and agreement on a set of long-range goals for the United States." He recommended particularly that, in parallel with NASA's Phase B station studies, "Congress seek independent studies suggesting goals and specific objectives for the nation's future activities in space, studies conducted primarily by people outside the space community." Rogers then outlined OTA's alternatives for the space station program. These included using the $3 billion in foreign funding as part of the $8 billion station cost, not as an addition; using private investment to pay for elements of the station; increasing use of the human-tended approach and automation/robotics to reduce station costs; examining alternative station designs costing less than “the canonical $8 billion"; developing the orbital maneuvering vehicle and any reusable orbital transfer vehicle "in close concert with those in the private sector who look forward to using them to provide satellite support services," thus reducing NASA's costs; and having contractors work to performance specifications rather than to detailed engineering specifications for other than "cutting edge" technologies. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 162)
The Washington Post reported that Britain would accept a Reagan administration invitation to contribute an expected $300 million to build a permanent space station scheduled for launch in 1992, making Britain along with W. Germany [see Jan. 17] the first noncommunist industrialized nations to participate in the space station program. Geoffrey Pattie, British minister of state for industry and information technology who was in Washington to consult with lawmakers and Reagan Administration officials about scientific cooperation, technology transfer, and telecommunications policies, said Britain would announce the contribution at the European Space Agency's (ESA) Rome meeting [see European Space Agency, Jan. 18]. President Reagan had invited Australia, Canada, Japan, and the U.S.'s Western European allies to join in funding and building the modular space station and expected France, Italy, and Japan to announce soon their intention to PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Pattie said Britain wanted access to technologies to design and build space stations as well as the results of research carried out in space laboratories; initial space station plans called for biological and physical sciences labs. While France and Germany were interested in rocketry research, Britain had focused its space expenditures on improving data transmission and expected the space station to enhance these technical capabilities. Pattie did note, however, that Britain feared the U.S. would impose export controls on some of this technology and that technology transfer questions required resolution during two years of space station feasibility studies. He emphasized the U.S. had to fashion "sensible" restrictions "instead of saying no to [exports of| everything, which is counterproductive to U.S. as well as European interests." (NYT, Jan 18/85, A1)
Geoffrey Perry of the United Kingdom's Kettering Group said the radio aboard the Soviet Salyut 7 space station came on the air June 12, indicating the two cosmonauts who entered it had been successful in repair efforts, Aerospace Daily reported. Perry said he had received no radio signals from the Salyut for some time, supporting the belief of Western observers that the space station experienced some kind of electrical problem since the last cosmonauts had left it in October 1984. Perry noted the cosmonauts were transmitting on June 12 from 7:09 a.m. to 7:16 a.m. GMT on the Soyuz frequency, but by 8:46 a.m. GMT, the next time they were within his radio range, they had switched to the Salyut frequency. (A/D, June 13/85, 2)
