Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney announced Canada's decision to proceed with Space Station participation when he visited with President Ronald Reagan. Canada agreed to perform preliminary design of a Mobile Servicing Center during Phase B of the Space Station definition and preliminary design study that would consist of a base structure with accommodations for payloads, orbital replacement units, utilities and thermal control. It would function as a multipurpose structure equipped with manipulator arms that would be used to help assemble and maintain the Space Station, as well as help keep instruments and experiments mounted on the Station's framework. (NASA Release 8633)
NASA announced that it would cease implementation of work package realignment for a period of up to 90 days while two teams composed of NASA personnel, Phase B contractors, and representatives from user groups and international partners reviewed Space Station design and work package assignments and functions. The task force, headed by W. Ray Hook, Manager, Space Station Office, would critically examine all aspects of the current Space Station baseline configuration in terms of the amount of extravehicular activity required for assembly and maintenance, launch capacity of the Shuttle fleet, assembly sequence of the baseline configuration, resultant impact to the utilization of the station, potential impact on international partners, and overall technical performance and integrity of the Station. The Executive Technical Committee, headed by NASA Associate Administrator Andrew J. Stofan, would approve the assumptions, engineering, and technical constraints identified by'50*the task force and oversee their activities. (NASA Release 86116)
NASA announced the termination of a contract with TRW to design a baseline hybrid power system for the Phase B Space Station electrical power system. TRW expressed their wish not to pursue the project, but remained a major contributor to three other work packages. (NASA Release 8655)
Analysis conducted by the Office of Space Station in the areas of Space Station management, use of expendable launch vehicles, and cost impacts resulting from design changes was accepted by NASA. Changes included replacing the nodes and tunnels that connected pressurized modules with larger resource nodes, revising the assembly sequence to provide early scientific return and reduce extravehicular activity, achieving an initial power level of 37.5 kilowatts, achieving permanent human capability, and placing fixed servicing capabilities closer to the modules. Realignment of certain work package responsibilities was also recommended; the total cost increase would be around $49 million. (NASA Release 86180; 86181)
The Pentagon, which had previously voiced objection to the Space Station, asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and foreign participants because the Department of Defense (DoD) hoped to use the orbiting laboratory for some of its Strategic Defense Initiative experiments. The DoD envisioned only a very limited need for the facility, but other countries would no doubt vehemently object because the project was intended only for peaceful purposes. (WSJ, Dec 22/86; NY Times, Dec 20/86)
NASA announced the formation of an operations task force for the Space Station, cochaired by Carl B. Shelly and Dr. Peter T. Lyman. The task force was to explore alternative approaches to operating and managing a deployed Space Station that had to integrate a diverse set of U.S. and International hardware elements to accommodate a wide range of tended and untended user activities and to recommend an effective concept for operating the system. (NASA Release 86129)
NASA considered both a crewtended station and one that would be permanently tended. The Phase B study period for the Space Station identified and evaluated alternative systems, components and philosophies that would result in a configuration responsive to the needs of potential users, be costeffective to operate and maintain, and flexible in terms of growth, size, and capabilities. A crewtended station could have people aboard only when a Shuttle orbiter docked to it; the orbiter would provide the habitable facilities. While Congress directed NASA to examine an option "which phases in permanent crew features of the Station," NASA pointed out that the "phased approach would force postponement of experiments important to advancement of manned spaceflight and would increase the total cost of developing the permanently manned Space Station." NASA went on to argue that the savings achieved by the phased approach would be offset by the cost of operating the Station in a crewtended mode for several years and by the cost of maintaining the industrial base during the delay period before resuming assembly of the permanently tended station. Savings of the crewtended phase were estimated at $284 million in 1984 dollars and total cost prior to permanently crewtended capability at $1 billion. (NASA Release 8659)
With a request for proposals issued to approximately 250 firms, NASA planned to implement a Technical and Management Information System (TMIS) to support overall functions of the Space Station, including design, development, and operation. The TMIS would link the various NASA centers involved with the program and would automate the generation and interchange of documents, correspondence, schedules, engineering data and drawing, budget data, and other management information. Carried out in implements, the first would be operational less than one year after the contract award date. (NASA Release 8688)
Ground testing of auxiliary thrusters designed to allow the Space Station to maintain a proper orbit and altitude demonstrated that the thrusters can operate for long periods of time with no hardware degradation. Fueled by water broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, the thrusters ran for as long as 22,000 seconds, and, with a target of 10 years of Space Station life, the goal was for them to run 40,000 to 60,000 seconds. Bell Aerospace Textron and Aerojet TechSystem Corporation conducted the tests for NASA. (NASA Release 8665)
Soviet cosmonauts made a historic trip between Space Stations as they traveled 1,800 miles in their Soyus T15 transport module from the recently launched Mir to the Salyut7 station. The mission was broadcast on state television. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), May 6/86; B Sun, May 7/86; NY Times, May 8/86)
NASA announced a sevenyear schedule of tasks for the Shuttle fleet, and that Shuttles would resume flying in early 1988. The schedule reflected President Ronald Reagan's directive to phase out commercial and foreign launches, inasmuch as 24 of the 44 contracts had been voided. This left only 12 percent of the Shuttle missions devoted to commercial and foreign launches. An increase to 41 percent of the payloads, as opposed to 31 percent, would be given to Department of Defense missions. The remaining 47 percent of the schedule was reserved for the space agency's own missions, 33 percent for scientific studies and other needs, and 14 percent for the Space Station. The first year, said NASA, would see only 5 flights; that number would, it was hoped, increase to 16 flights per year by the 1990s. (WSJ, Oct 6/86; W Post, Oct 4/86; P Inq, Oct 4/86; B Sun, Oct 4/86; NY Times, Oct 4/86)
