NASA agreed with most of the findings and recommendations listed in the report by the National Research Council Committee on Space Station. Agency officials disagreed, however, with the findings that the deployment of the Space Station with the current Space Transportation System was risky. NASA also found the Committee's cost estimate for backup hardware and test program enhancements to be too high. (NASA Release 87135; NY Times, Sept 15/87; LA Times, Sept 15/87; H Post, Sept 15/87)
NASA granted the Space Station Program Support Division, of Grumman Aerospace Corporation in Bethpage, New York, a contract to provide systems engineering and integration for the Space Station. The contract also called for Grumman to provide a broad base of management support to the Space Station Program Office in the areas of program control and management; information systems; operations; program requirements and assessment; and safety, reliability, and quality assurance. (NASA Release 87110; WSJ, July 3/87; B Sun, July 3/87)
NASA issued Requests for Proposals to U.S. industry for a detailed design and construction of a permanently habitable Space Station. The two options proposals were due by July 21, 1987. Option one was for a phased program calling for a permanentlyh)0*0*0*tended Space Station to be operational by 1996. Option two was the enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. (NASA Release 8765; LA Times, Apr 25/87; NY Times, Apr 25/87)
The Christian Science Monitor cited Soviet news agency TASS as reporting that the two Soviet cosmonauts aboard Soyuz TM2 had successfully linked up with the Soviet space station Mir. CSM, Feb 9/87)
The United States and potential foreign partners agreed to resume negotiations aimed at building a Space Station in the 1990s. After a twoday meeting between representatives from the United States, Canada, Japan, and the 11nation European Space Agency, agreement was reached that the project would remain a civilian endeavor. NASA negotiators emphasized, however, that they saw no conflict between the "peaceful purposes" of Space Station and potential use by the Pentagon for "nonaggressive" activities. h)0*0*0*NY Times, Feb 13/87; USA Today, Feb 13/87)
NASA announced selection of the Astronautics Division of the Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, in Sunnyvale, California, for the design, development and implementation of the Software Support Environment (SSE) for the Space Station. The SSE contract was to be managed by the Space Station Program Office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 87107)
President Ronald Reagan signed into law a $9.6 billion authorization bill that provided NASA full funding to begin work on the Space Station. (W Post, Oct 31/87)
NASA awarded contracts to the four aerospace firms it had selected on December 1, 1987, to design, develop, test, evaluate, and deliver the components and systems comprising the proposed crewtended Space Station, planned for orbit in the mid1990s. The contracts issued covered Phase I, the already approved elements of the Space Station program. Phase II would cover any potentially needed enhancements of the Space Station's capabilities. The four companies selected, each to perform a unique but interdependent portion of the total program, were Boeing Aerospace Company, Huntsville, Alabama; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, with locations in Huntington Beach, California and Houston, Texas; General Electric Company, AstroSpace Division, with locations in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania and East Windsor, New Jersey; and Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California. (NASA Release 87177; NASAh)(0*0*0*Release 87187; C Trib, Dec 2/87; LA Times, Dec 2/87; NY Times, Dec 2/87; WSJ, Dec 2/87; W Post, Dec 2/87)
NASA announced that it was proceeding toward design and development of a Space Station that would establish a permanent U.S. human presence in space by the mid1990's. It would seek proposals from industry for a phased development of the Space Station, including estimates for an enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. NASA reported that the first phase of the Space Station development, the revised baseline configuration, which would provide an initial, permanently habitable research capability by 1996, had been approved by the President. It would include a laboratory and habitation modules, four resource nodes, a polar orbiting platform, and experiment provisions outside of the pressurized modules. (NASA Release 8750; LA Times, Apr 4/87)
NASA began a threeday ground system test of the scientific instruments to be carried on the Hubble Space Telescopeh) 0*0*0*(HST). The five scientific instruments to be carried aboard the HST were the widefield and planetary camera, the high resolution spectrograph, the faint object spectrograph, the high speed photometer, and a faint object camera. (NASA Release 8735)
