Margaret G. Finarelli was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective December 12. Finarelli had been serving as Director of the Policy Division in the Office of Space Station. (NASA Release 88164)
NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateral memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design, development, operation, and use of the permanently crewtended civil international Space Station complex. Under the terms of the new MOU, ESA would provide the Columbus laboratory module to the international Space Station complex. This permanently attached, pressurized module would support approximately 40 single equipped racks for payloads and storage. ESA would also provide an untended, freeflying polar platform for Earth observation experiments, complementing the polar platform under development by the United States. As a third element, ESA would provide a mantended free flyer (MTFF) designed to accommodate longduration microgravity applications in the fields of fluid physics, life, and material sciences. (NASA Release 8844)
An untended Soviet Progress38 supply spacecraft, bound for the Mir space station, was launched from the Baikonur launch facility. The Tass News Agency reported the Progress38 ferried "expendable materials and various loads" for use by the Mir threeman crew. (SSR 1988 083A; C Trib, Sep 11/88;
Negotiations were completed among the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan on the framework for international cooperation in the Space Station program. Under the agreements, the United States would provide the overall Space Station framework: operating subsystems, including life support and 75 kilowatts of power; laboratory and habitat modules; and a freeflying platform that would be placed in polar orbit for Earth observation. Canada would provide a Mobile Servicing System, which would be used in conjunction with the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of Space Station elements. Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The European Space Agency would provide a pressurized laboratory module, which would be permanently attached to the crewtended base; a freeflying polar platform to work together with the U.S. polar platform; and an astronauttended free flyer to be serviced at the crewtended base. The United States anticipated spending approximately $16 billion (fiscal year 1989 dollars) to develop Space Station hardware. The total foreign commitment to the Space Station was in excess of $7 billion. Furthermore, the partners would cover more than 25 percent of the Space Station's expected annual operating costs throughout the 2030 year life of the program. Signature of the agreements was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 8874)
After a tense 24hour delay of deorbit burn, a Soviet Soyuz TM5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia. The Soyuz TM5, returning to Earth from a weeklong visit to the Mir space station, experienced premature shutdowns of its reentry motor during the first two deorbit burn attempts. The first shutdown had been caused by a malfunction in the automatic guidance system, whereas the second failure resulted from improper resetting of the flight computer. The problem was considered by some U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because the Soyuz was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left and a limited amount of fuel with which to attempt a third deorbit'"0*burn. The mission had been noted for the participation of an Afghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space station of a physician crew member. (FBISSOV88175, Sep 9/88; AP, Sep 7/88; NY Times, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 7/88; WSJ, Sep 7/88; W Times, Sep 7/88; B Sun, Sep 7/88)
NASA announced that Andrew J. Stofan, Associate Administrator for the Space Station, would retire from the Agency on April 1. Stofan's career with NASA spanned nearly 30 years. He had directed the Space Station program since June 1986. During his tenure, the program underwent a major cost review which culminated in an Administrationapproved plan to develop the Space Station in two phases. Stofan also oversaw the establishment of the Space Station program office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 8816)
NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the Earth as a single ecological system, the Los Angeles Times reported. Called the Earth Observing System, the U.S. portion of the multinational project would cost well above $2 billion and would use a wide range of orbiting laboratories, including free flying platforms and facilities aboard the international space station. The heart of the program would include four platformstwo from the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japanthat would be launched into polar orbit around the Earth by the participating countries. The program, which was still in the planning stage, was described by NASA science division spokesman Charles Redmond as "a critical element in NASA's strategic plan." LA Times, Mar 23/88)
