PR Newswire reported that engineers from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company would meet with representatives of NASA and its international partners from July 8 to 25 to review changes to the basic design of Space Station Freedom. Discussion is to center on Work Package 2 dealing with such factors as the propulsion assembly, resource node design, external thermal control, data management, communication and tracking, extravehicular systems and guidance, and navigation and control systems. (PR Newswire, Jul 8/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that Boeing's top space scientist, Harvey Willenberg, who had returned from a trip to the Soviet Union, was convinced from the Mir experiments he saw that NASA needed to build Space Station Freedom. The experiments in the area of microgravity were especially impressive. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 11/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA personnel were warning elected officials across the country that the killing of the Space Station would mean lost jobs in their districts. (LA Times, May 25/91)
Soviet media reported that two Soviet cosmonauts spent six hours on a spacewalk outside their Mir Space Station, completing the installation of two telescopic booms that would enable the transfer of solar batteries from one part of the Space Station to another. They also installed laser reflectors that could be used as beacons for unmanned space ferries and Space Shuttles arriving at Mir. (AP, Jan 26/91)
Representative Barbara Boxer, Democrat from California, chair of the House Government Operations subcommittee on government activities and transportation, announced a hearing about the Space Station. Boxer said the General Accounting Office report and the analysis of her staff revealed "astronomical" differences between NASA cost estimates for the Space Station and "more objective, independent analyses." (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA announced the selection of Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, to provide institutional and programmatic support services for Space Station Freedom Program and Operations Office, Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release C91-cc)
NASA announced that the University of Tennessee-Calspan's Center for Advanced Space Propulsion (CASP), Tullahoma, had selected three firms for the launch and recovery of the unmanned, Earth-orbital Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET) space system. Space Industries, Inc., Houston, would be responsible for payload integration, orbital operations, and recovery system and services; Space Services, Inc., Houston, would be in charge of the launch vehicle and services; and Westinghouse Electric Company, Millersville, Maryland, would supervise systems engineering and the service module. The initial funding for COMET in 1991 was $10.5 million. (NASA Release 91-14)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it was building a $337 million space robot, technically a Flight Telerobotic Servicer, to be used in constructing Space Station Freedom. The robot was to have artificial computer intelligence and video cameras on each wrist and the top of its body. (B Sun, Mar 15/91)
A columnist compared NASA's cutting the plans and cost for the Space Station at congressional request with proposed programs of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Whereas NASA cut its projections, to the point that some questioned the viability of the result, SDI appeared to have an undiminished appetite for funds. (LA Times, Apr 21/91)
In an article on the budget proces, the Christian Science Monitor stated that despite it being a Bush Administration priority, the Space Station may go in the budget because of the deal to bring the federal deficit under control. (CSM, May 31/91)
The media reported the successful efforts of two Soviet cosmonauts outside the Mir Space Station to replace a damaged antenna. (AP, Jun 25/91; UPI, Jun 25/91)
AP reported that House-Senate legislators agreed to provide $26 billion in 1992 for NASA's planned Space Station. (AP, Sep 26/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 28/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 29/91)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for NASA's office of Space Systems Development, met with all staff at the Reston, Virginia Space Station Freedom office. He said NASA intended to maintain a strong and effective team at Reston during the Space Station Freedom development period. (NASA Release 91-192; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 15/91; W Post, Nov 16/91; Washington Technology, Nov 21/91)
In an editorial entitled "Fiscal Realism at NASA," NASA was commended for its reported readiness to stress smaller, less costly missions. In this connection, the paper believed that Space Station Freedom should be scrapped as well as the Earth Observing System platforms. (CSM, Oct 1/91)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that a Soviet spacecraft carrying supplies for the two cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station almost collided with the station during a docking attempt. (AP, Apr 12/91; C Trin, Apr 14/91)
Grumman Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,900 jobs by the end of 1991. The major cause was reduced US government defense spending, which included reductions in NASA's budget, leading to a scaling down of Grumman's Space Station Support Division. (AP, Apr 2/91)
A lengthy article discussed the work of Dr. Allan R. Sandage, a former assistant of Edwin P. Hubble and his heir. Like Hubble, Sandage is an observational cosmologist concerned with investigating the galaxies and the implications of the expanding universe. Using the Carnegie Institution, which has telescopes at Mount Wilson, as his base, he was working on a two-volume atlas of galaxies. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
The subcommittee of NASA's Office of Astronautics and Exploration Technology said the redesign of the Space Station would still enable all proposed experiments to be handled. However, two major experiments might not be able to be conducted simultaneously because of power limitations. (Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
NASA planners discovered that despite the problems it encountered, Astro-1 brought back much valuable data on December 10, 1990. However, there was no money in the FY 1992 budget for Astro-2. Instead, NASA appeared to be concentrating on such priorities as the Space Station program. The Astro program is Shuttle-dependent, with the assumption that the Shuttle would provide cheap and reliable space transportation. The Astro program needs to be reexamined. (CSM, Jan 9/91)
NASA revised its Space Station plan to include a centrifuge. The absence of a centrifuge in the scaled-down plan was criticized by a number of scientists, who considered it essential for the study of the effects of weightlessness. (NY Times, Apr 11/91)
Fairfax County Board Chairman Audrey Moore argued that if NASA's Space Station management facility were moved from its Reston, Virginia headquarters, at least half of its highly skilled workers would quit, delaying the Space Station program for months or years. The questioning about the status of the Reston facility resulted from a congressional order to NASA in 1990 that it overhaul the management structure for the Space Station project. (W Post, Mar 14/91)
Two Soviet cosmonauts who were running low on food and water left Space Station Mir in their Soyuz TM-11 capsule and flew to the port of their astrophysics lab, Kvant. Their cargo ship, Progress M-7, had failed twice to dock with Kvant. They linked their capsule with the port when the balky antenna was located. Another attempt will be made to attach Progress to Mir. (AP, Mar 26/91; W Times, Mar 27/91)
An editorial commended NASA for being more realistic in its revised plans for a Space Station and particularly for decreasing its emphasis on the role of humans in space. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 8/91)
NASA broke ground at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a $56.2 million facility to prepare pieces of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Mar 26/91; USA Today, Mar 27/91; W Times, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; CSM, Mar 28/91)
According to the press, the Japanese government was angry that its participation in the proposed Space Station was threatened by congressional budget cuts. Reportedly, it issued a warning that it might refuse to contribute to U.S.-led major scientific projects in the future unless plans to build the Space Station remain intact. (NYT, May 28/91; UPI, May 28/91)
Robert F. Sekerka, Dean of the College of Science at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and Chair of the Committee on Microgravity Research of the Space Studies Board, wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal sharply criticizing the appropriation for the Space Station. He questioned the purpose of the Space Station and its cost-effectiveness. (WSJ, Jun 10/91)
The media covered extensively NASA's receiving $2 billion for the planned Space Station in the House budget action but having a new launch system and the National Aerospace Plane cut drastically. The House voted to give NASA 14.3 billion in FY 1992 and the Senate later approved the compromise bill. (UPI, Oct 2/91; AP, Oct 3/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; NY Times, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 3/91; LA Times, Oct 3/91; USA Today, Oct 3/91; CSM, Oct 4/91)
According to the media, in a General Accounting Office (GAO) report to be submitted to Congress, NASA underestimated the cost of building the redesigned Space Station by $10 billion and the cost of operating it through the year 2027 by about $24 billion. GAO is to submit the report, its first since the Space Station restructuring, to the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation. Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher in the report questioned the cost value because only one of the original eight Space Station uses, that of a research outpost, was being met. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors passed a resolution asking state and federal legislators to block a proposal to move NASA's Space Station program office out of Reston, Virginia. (Fairfax Journal Weekly, Feb 20-21/91)
AP reported that the Baikonur Space Station in western Kazakhstan seemed ready to avoid the problems that harmed nuclear testing at Semipalatinsk. A Soviet space delegation visited the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata in April to conclude a program of scientific, technical, and economic cooperation between the two countries and to build a training school for young cosmonauts in Leninsk. (AP, Aug 30/91)
Stephanie E. Meyers, Director of the Office of Commercial Space Transportation in the Office of Transportation, set forth the role of her office and the goals for commercial space. She saw the goals as the creation of space and ground systems essential to space operations in low Earth orbit. These ground systems needed to be adequate to support launches. Second, there must be government-owned and privately-owned launch vehicles to carry freight and passengers to the Space Station. In addition, commercial space companies faced obstacles in pursuing business in this very competitive industry and fair-trade relationships needed to be established. (Washington Technology, Dec 19/91)
NASA announced that it recently signed an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) to cooperate in developing the Cassini spacecraft to study Saturn. The Cassini spacecraft would consist of the Saturn Orbiter provided by NASA and the Huygens Probe System provided by ESA. It was currently scheduled for launch by NASA on a Titan IV/Centaur vehicle in April 1996. NASA would provide overall Cassini mission operations and ESA will support probe operations. The flight from launch to Saturn orbital insertion requires approximately seven years; once there, the mission baseline lifetime is four years. (NASA Release 91-1)
UPI quoted Krasnaya Zvesda (Red Star), the official Soviet armed forces daily, as saying that the Soviet Union would cancel one manned space mission, launch another without a flight engineer, and leave a cosmonaut on the Mir Space Station beyond his planned six-month stay to save money. (UPI, Jul 18/91)
An article in the Washington Post pointed out NASA's policy of spreading out its contracts for the Space Station and other space projects among numerous states, which helped gain the support of congressional figures for NASA funding. (W Post, Jul 16/91)
NASA announced the award of an avionics systems engineering and analysis support contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The work was to include work on Space Station Freedom as well as Space Shuttles and advanced spacecraft, manned and unmanned. (NASA Release C91-s)
An editorial in the Christian Science Monitor commended the "modest, sober plan" of NASA for the revised Space Station, saying that it would enable the United States to make progress in space and should not be judged simply on its cost. (CSM, May 7/91)
Prior to the House vote, Thomas M. Donahue, Professor of Planetary Science at the University of Michigan, wrote an article published in the Christian Science Monitor. In it he sharply criticized NASA for making the Space Station its priority rather than scientific inquiry and urged Congress not to support the Space Station. CSM, Jun 7/91)
Daniel S. Greenberg, editor of Science and Government Report, a Washington newsletter, questioned the redesigned Space Station and expenditures to date on the station, citing the views of the Space Studies Board of the National Academy of Sciences. (P Inq, Apr 3/91)
An alert ground controller noticed that the Progress-7 cargo module was on a collision course with Soviet Space Station Mir and deflected the module. The two cosmonauts succeeded in docking the module and obtaining the food supplies. (AP, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 29/91; W Post, Mar 29/91)
Red Star announced that pieces of the Soviet 40-ton Salyut 7 Space Station and the attached Cosmos-1686 cargo ferry will fall to Earth on February 6 or 7. The expected location of the fall site was not known. (LA Times, Feb 1/91; AP, Feb 2/91; C Trin, Feb 3/91; W Times, Feb 4/91)
The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council stated that a smaller, simpler new design for NASA's Space Station did not meet the basic research requirements for which it was to be built. This development came as NASA was preparing to solicit Congress for its annual funding and when the European Space Agency and other international partners had accepted NASA's new plan. (W Post, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91; B Sun, Mar 16/91; NY Times, Mar 16/91; C Trin, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle stressed the importance of US space activities, including the fact that "A permanent U.S. Space Station is vital to our future technological development and economic prosperity." (H Chron, Mar 24/91)
The newspaper summarized the controversy over the revised NASA plans for Space Station Freedom between NASA and the National  Research Council, which maintained that the scaling back had gone too far to be valuable. (San Jose Mercury-News, Apr 2/91)
The Houston Chronicle interviewed a number of experts concerning NASA's Space Station redesign, based on a congressional instruction that the design be reviewed. The consensus was that as much of the existing design would be kept as possible, with some experts fearing that the changes may be too timid. (H Chron, Jan 27/91)
In an article entitled "Freedom's Wobbly Flight," Mark L. Goldstein criticized NASA's large spending on the Space Station at the expense of other NASA programs. He gave a history of the Freedom program, its costs, and its relationship to Congress as well as the criticisms by the scientific community. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
In their column, Jack Anderson and Dale van Atta commented on the strong efforts of Texas congressmen to have NASA move Space Station Freedom headquarters from Reston, Virginia to Houston. The headquarters were moved from Houston to Reston in 1987. The cost of such a move would be at least $26 million, and it would probably delay NASA's program at least a year. (W Post, Mar 12/91)
Major articles in the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times raised questions about NASA's proposed Space Station with regard to its cost, the functions it was supposed to perform, and the need for such space ventures in relation to other needed expenditures. The Los Angeles Times stated that Soviet Space Station experience showed that "at current levels of technology, reusable spaceships were more expensive than throwaway models." (NYT, May 26/91; LA Times, May 26/91)
NASA announced that its Galileo spacecraft would turn and fire its on-board thrusters on July 2 to set its course for an encounter with the asteroid Gaspra in October 1991. This would be the first flyby of an asteroid. (NASA Release 91-99)
According to the media, the Bush Administration was pressuring Congress to retain the appropriation for the Space Station. (NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91; USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; UPI, Jun 5/91)
Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 was expected to fall today. Unexpectedly high solar activity in recent years had increased atmospheric drag on the station and speeded its orbital decay. (NY Times, Feb 6/91; USA Today, Feb 6/91; UPI, Feb 6/91)
Salyut 7, the Soviet Space Station, crashed into Earth's atmosphere near Argentina's border with Chile. Powered by solar energy and chemical batteries, it contained no nuclear fuel or other dangerous substances. (P Inq, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb 7/91; UPI, Feb 7/91; W Times, Feb 8/91; NY Times, Feb 8/91; UPI, Feb 8/91; AP. Feb 8/91; C Trin, Feb 8/91)
Grumman Corporation announced a cut of 110 more employees at its Space Station Program Support Division in Reston, Virginia. The cuts resulted from NASA's decision to reduce the scope of the Space Station project. (PR Newswire, Mar 13/91; W Times, Mar 14/91; NY Times, Mar 14/91)
The Senate on July 17 voted 64 to 35 to approve President Bush's $2.03 million request for the Space Station in the new fiscal year, $100 million more than the House appropriated. (W Post, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; UPI, Jul 18/91)
