Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania, who was scheduled to chair the House Science Committee in the new Congress, said he felt that Space Station appropriatations by Congress were safe. He indicated he wanted to explore ways of linking NASA facilities with universities and international partnerships as well as tax incentives for space business development, all of which he saw as ways of saving space funds. (AP, Dec 14/94; Gannett News Service, Dec 14/94; H Chron, Dec 15/94; Congressional Quarterly's Congressional Monitor, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 15/94)
An article criticized of the ways in which NASA spent more than half the funds allocated to it on unproductive matters that had not advanced the design of the Space Station. The article alleged that at least 24 months of delays resulting from congressional budget-trimming and frequent redesigns cost $1.6 billion, a "hefty extra layer of management" cost $1.1 billion; a discarded propulsion and guidance unit cost $900 million, a failed data management system cost $500 million, and other redesigns and deletions cost $600 million. Since the appointment of Daniel Goldin as Administrator, many of the problems had been fixed, but if technical glitches and congressional meddling recurred, the program could again be in trouble. (Bus Wk, Aug 15/94)
NASA also announced that the Hubble Space Telescrope had obtained the best images yet of a mysterious mirror-imaged pair of rings of glowing gas that encircle the site of the stellar explosion supernova 1987A. The explanation of the pair of rings was uncertain. (NASA Release 94-77; Reuters, May 19/94; AP, May 19/94; NY Times, May 20/94; B Sun, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; USA Today, May 20/94; CSM, May 26/94)
NASA announced the completion of the International Space Station System Design Review. Using approximately 75 percent of Space Station Freedom hardware, the completed Station was to consist of U.S. elements, including the integrated truss, habitation module, and laboratory module; the Russian science power platform, service module, and functional cargo block vehicle (FGB); the European laboratory module; the Japanese experiment module and exposed facility; and the Canadian remote manipulator system. The assembly was to begin with launch of the FGB vehicle in November 1997. The U.S. contribution to the Station was estimated to cost $17.4 billion from Fiscal Year 1994 until assembly was complete in 2002. The ground system for the Station was to build on the Shuttle and Freedom programs. (NASA Release 94-53; USA Today, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 26/94)
NASA downplayed a slip in the first U.S. assembly launch for the Space Station, promising no more schedule bumps. Originally scheduled for launch in July 1997, the Boeing-built node was now scheduled for launch in December 1997. Moreover, the U.S. Habitation module was now scheduled for launch in March 2002 instead of January 2001. The program changes annoyed congressional staffers because the program put more dependence on the Russians. NASA station chief Wil Trafton remained confident that the changes would not cause serious harm to station assembly. (Defense Daily, Feb 22/94)
NASA announced assembly sequence refinements that incorporated the latest updates to plans for the International Space Station. The sequence incorporated early provisions for a centrifuge and allowed for the earlier construction of Russia's Solar Power Platform but did not affect existing major milestones. (NASA Release 94-164)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 returned valuable new images of the supernova 1994 I in the inner regions of the "Whirlpool Galaxy," M51, located 20 million light-years away in the constellation Canes Venatici. A supernova is a violent stellar explosion that destroys a star while ejecting the products of nuclear burning into the gas between stars. (NASA Release 94-76)
An unmanned cargo craft bearing food, fuel, and equipment docked with Russia's Mir orbiting Space Station according to Itar-Tass news agency. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
NASA announced that the Space Station Control Board had approved a revised assembly sequence that provided significantly more power for the U.S. laboratory, provided an earlier U.S. capability for essential Space Station systems, and produced hardware in an efficient and cost effective manner while still meeting the $2.1 billion annual spending cap. (NASA Release 94-117)
The anticipated fight over the budget and, specifically, the likelihood that NASA's appropriation would be cut and that further efforts would be made to eliminate funding for the International Space Station was featured prominently in the media. (SP News, May 16-22/94; Fla Today, May 16/94; Defense Daily, May 16/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
NASA's budget situation and the impact of its congressionally mandated budget cutting on contractors were discussed. Spending on the Space Station was cut significantly, but because most of NASA's budget was tied to long-term space projects downsizing trends were slow to affect contractors. A table was given of the 20 major NASA contractors in fiscal year 1993, including the parent company, the subsidiary, the parent's location, and the amount of the contract. NASA was working on reducing the time required to select contractors and improving the internal procurement process. (Government Executive, Aug 94)
The new Canadian Liberal government announced that budget constraints obliged it to discontinue participation in NASA's planned international Space Station. Later, the Canadian government said this was a misunderstanding and that Canada's commitment was to be reduced. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 24/94)
Larry DeLucas, recently appointed chief scientist of the NASA Space Station project, said the Station provided the next step for businesses such as pharmaceutical companies that were trying to develop new and improved products such as high quality crystals, uninhibited by the Earth's gravitational environment. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
Rockwell Aerospace planned to deliver the Orbiter Docking System to NASA on November 21. To achieve a system that would enable a U.S. Shuttle to dock with Space Station Mir, Rockwell Space Systems Division integrated a Russian-built docking mechanism into the system. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that its Galileo Spacecraft had begun a six-month process of radioing to Earth data taken during the collisions of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at Jupiter in July. (NASA Release 94-133)
