NASA announced that Boeing Company’s cost overruns for the International Space Station (ISS) had increased by about 30 percent to US$783 million, and that NASA intended to “further cut the company’s bonus fees.” In reporting to NASA the latest cost overruns, Boeing had explained that “continued production and testing and the need to set aside money for contingencies” had caused the latest increase, US$183 million more than the US$600 million previously estimated. Under the terms of NASA’s cost-plus-fee contract, Boeing would lose an additional US$27.5 million in bonus fees, besides the US$78 million reduction that NASA had imposed.(Seattle Times (WA), “Boeing Reports More Space Station Overruns,” 7 August 1998.)
The crew of the Mir space station replaced the malfunctioning computer block, which had failed on 2 January, and restarted the station’s orientation system. This common type of malfunction, which had occurred seven times in 1997, did not create life-threatening conditions, but it did reduce the power supply to the space station, thereby crippling the gyroscope that oriented the station’s solar panels. Using the Soyuz escape module engines to control its orientation, Mir turned off all nonessential systems, to conserve energy until the crew had completed the repair.(Washington Post, “Mir Crew Replaces Computer Block,” 4 January 1998; Chicago Tribune, “New Year, Old Woe—Mir Computer Glitch,” 3 January 1998.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, and the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics to conduct “parallel six-month definition studies of a new small satellite to monitor variations in the amount of radiant solar energy that reaches Earth,” as part of the preparations for the Total Solar Irradiance Mission.(NASA, “Two Studies Will Refine and Expand Solar Monitoring Task,” news release 98-47, 19 March 1998. 444 Brett Davis, “Space Station Costs Irk Congress,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 March 1998; Tamara Lytle, “U.S. Legislators Criticize Increasing Cost of NASA’s Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 20 March 1998.)
NASA modified a contract with Boeing Information, Space and Defense Systems, increasing by US$163.4 million the company’s contract for work on the ISS. Under the modified contract, Boeing would supply additional engineering support and prelaunch testing for the ISS. The original eight-year prime contract, effective since 1995, had a value of US$7.1 billion and covered the construction and integration of the ISS. The modification covered sustained engineering for station elements, engineering support following a component’s delivery to NASA, and support of multielement integrated testing.(NASA, “Engineering and Testing Support To Be Supplied by International Space Station Contract Modification,” contract announcement c98-u, 2 December 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin, trying for a third time, successfully stabilized a bent solar panel during a spacewalk of 4 hours and 15 minutes. The solar panel was only one of 10 nonfunctioning panels. The crew had not intended to repair the damaged panel fully, but only to stabilize it, so that it would not break loose and hit the space station. The cosmonauts cut short the spacewalk, scheduled to take 51⁄2 hours, when the thruster engine aligning Mir with the Sun ran out of fuel. Forced to return to the space station early, the cosmonauts were unable to remove some scientific equipment attached to the outside of the station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Mir Crew Shortens Spacewalk After Thruster Fuel Runs Out,” 7 April 1998. 459 Edith M. Lederer for Associated Press, “Europe-Space Water,” 7 April 1998; Washington Times, “Europe’s Space Surveyor Finds Water Vapor Near Stars, Planets,” 8 April 1998.)
NASA awarded US$33 million in grants to 48 researchers, to conduct microgravity biotechnology research through NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications. To those investigators awarded the 40 grants for ground-based research, NASA provided access to its microgravity research facilities, including aircraft flying parabolic trajectories and sounding rockets. NASA awarded eight grants to flight-definition investigators, to prepare for experiments on the International Space Station (ISS).(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Microgravity Biotechnology,” news release 98-217, 1 December 1998.)
