SPACEHAB Inc. and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) signed a contract granting SPACEHAB the use of one of the CSA’s experiment lockers on the International Space Station (ISS), beginning in May 2001. According to the agreement between the two organizations, the CSA had committed to commercializing half of its allocated space aboard the space station, a global first in space commercialization.
NASA announced that new analysis of data from the Galileo spacecraft suggested that Jupiter is possibly much older and colder than previously thought. Upon reaching the planet on 7 December 1995, Galileo had dropped a probe carrying a mass spectrometer into Jupiter’s atmosphere to measure its chemical composition. The spectrometer had “detected surprisingly high concentrations of argon, krypton, and xenon,” raising questions about the noble gases’ provenance. Because Jupiter would have trapped the gases through condensation or freezing, scientists did not believe Jupiter’s atmosphere had trapped the gases at its present site. As positioned at present, Jupiter is too close to the Sun and too warm to have trapped the gases. Tobias Owen, an astronomy professor at the Institute for Astronomy of the University of Hawaii and a member of the Galileo probe Neutral Mass Spectrometer team, suggested three hypotheses to explain how the gases had been trapped within the Jovian atmosphere: 1) Jupiter had formed in the area around the Kuiper Belt829 and was dragged inward to its present location; 2) the solar nebula, the cloud of gas and dust that formed the solar system, had been much colder than scientists had previously believed; and 3) the solid materials that had brought the gases to Jupiter had begun to form in the original interstellar cloud of gas and dust, before the cloud had collapsed to form the solar nebula. Owen remarked further that, if either of the last two hypotheses were correct, then giant planets might be able to form closer to their stars than current theories had predicted. Such a finding could help explain “the new observations of planetary systems around other stars, in which such close-in giant planets are relatively common.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Probe Results Suggest Jupiter Had an Ancient, Chilly Past,” news release 99-096, 17 November 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/glprobeargon.html (accessed 12 March 2008); Tobias Owen et al., “A Low-Temperature Origin for the Planetesimals that Formed Jupiter,” Nature 402, no. 6759 (18 November 1999): 269–270.)
An Israeli court indicted Israeli teenager Ehud Tenenbaum and four accomplices⎯Guy Fleisher, Ariel Rosenfeld, Barak Abutbul, and Rafael Ohana⎯for illegal entry of computers in the United States and Israel. The group allegedly hacked into the computer systems of the Pentagon and NASA, as well as those of academic institutions in Israel and Israel’s Knesset.(Chicago Tribune, “5 Are Indicted for Hacking in the U.S.,” 10 February 1999. 667 Associated Press, “Hubble May Have Early Planet Images,” 10 February 1999.)
