Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, only the 14th time that a NASA Shuttle had landed in darkness. NASA controllers used infrared cameras to monitor the Shuttle’s final descent. The return of the Shuttle ended the crucial mission to repair the ISS and reset the space station’s orbit to an optimal altitude. NASA’s Mission Control, congratulating the crew on a “super mission,” began almost immediately to anticipate the flurry of missions that would finally complete construction on the ISS. Atlantis had sustained minor damage during the trip, mainly dents and scratches on its wings caused by ice. Three members of the returning crew, astronauts Susan J. Helms and James S. Voss and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, had a special interest in monitoring the ISS’s completion, because they had been selected for the second research crew to the ISS and would make a long-term stay aboard the research station.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Ends Repair Trip to Station,” Washington Post, 30 May 2000; USA Today, “Shuttle Crew Returns from Space Station Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000; Associated Press, “Nighttime Landing Ends Shuttle Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000.)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Cassini spacecraft, after successfully undergoing a series of tests, was resuming the use of its electrically powered reaction wheels to control its orientation. Although mission scientists were uncertain of the cause of the spacecraft’s switch to a different maneuvering system, they suggested that a small piece of material, perhaps from the motor’s magnets, might have lodged in an area where it caused friction. Because the scientists were unable actually to detect any such material, they speculated further that either centrifugal force had subsequently forced the material out, or the motor had ground it up. Scientists also suggested that reduced lubrication in the bearings, during prolonged operation at reduced speeds, might have caused the problem, and that, perhaps, the increased motor speeds used during the tests had restored the lubrication.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Resuming Use of Reaction Wheels,” news release, 21 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=6 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
