Data from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft revealed a new radiation belt around Saturn. Researchers already knew that Saturn had radiation belts―ring-shaped concentrations of ionized particles―outside the orbit of the planet’s rings. However, the newly discovered rings were inside Saturn’s rings. Previously, scientists had thought that a radiation belt could not exist inside the planet’s rings, because they believed that the rings would absorb any ionized particles that approached Saturn. The presence of radiation within the orbit of the rings indicated that the radiation belt’s particles are able to move through Saturn’s rings.(John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Finds Belt Around Saturn Unlike Any Ever Seen Before,” New York Times, 6 August 2004.)
NASA’s Cassini spacecraft provided data revealing two previously unknown moons orbiting Saturn―a new total of 33 identified moons orbiting the planet. The two moons―designated S/2004-S1 and S/2004-S2, until receiving their formal names―measured 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) and 21⁄2 miles (4 kilometers) in diameter. Because of the moons’ diminutive size, scientists suspected that they might be fragments from a larger moon.(Mark Carreau, “Cassini Finds Two More Saturn Moons,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2004; New York Times, “2 Little Saturn Moons,” 17 August 2004.)
A group of astronomers announced the most detailed telescopic view ever taken of the visible universe. NASA’s HST had captured a 1 million-second-long exposure of a small portion of dark sky, with a resulting image containing an estimated 10,000 galaxies, some so far away that astronomers had never before seen them. Astronomers called the image the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. They believed that the Hubble Ultra Deep Field might have revealed light from galaxies created near the time of the Big Bang and hoped that the image would provide information about the creation of the universe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Deep View of the Universe Unveils Earliest Galaxies,” news release 04-086, 9 March 2004; Dennis Overbye, “Images Reveal Deepest Glance into Universe,” New York Times, 10 March 2004.)
