NASA celebrated the HST’s 15th anniversary with the release of new images of the Eagle Nebula and the Whirlpool galaxy (spiral galaxy M51), two of the most well-known objects that the Hubble had observed to date. The new images, made with the HST’s newest camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), were among the largest and sharpest the Hubble had yet captured, so sharp that, even if enlarged to billboard size, the image would preserve the stunning details. The new image of the Eagle Nebula revealed ultraviolet light originating from a group of massive hot stars and sculpting a tall, dense tower of gas. The new image of the Whirlpool galaxy, in addition to displaying its classic features, revealed a companion galaxy located at the end of one of the Whirlpool galaxy’s arms. The launch of the HST in 1990 had ushered in a new era in astronomy. Before the existence of the HST, no telescope had viewed the universe in visible light from above Earth’s atmosphere, which blurs light and causes images to appear fuzzy. Among its many achievements, the HST had helped astronomers calculate the precise age of the universe; helped confirm the existence of dark energy; detected small protogalaxies; proved the existence of supermassive black holes; provided sharp views of a comet hitting Jupiter; and demonstrated that the process of planetary system formation is common throughout the galaxy.(NASA, “Hubble Celebrates 15th Anniversary with Spectacular New Images,” news release 05-104, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05104_HST_anniversary.html (accessed 29 June 2009). 782 NASA, “NASA Establishes Exploration Systems Advisory Committee,” news release 05-106, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05106_esac_meeting.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
Scientists announced that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had detected water vapor on Enceladus, one of Saturn’s moons. Scientists described this as one of the most important findings in planetary science, because the discovery suggested that liquid water might exist on Enceladus. Liquid water is a prerequisite for the formation of life. Scientists had already known that Enceladus has a crystalline ice covering, the most reflective type of surface in the solar system, making Enceladus the brightest object in the solar system with the exception of the Sun. In addition, scientists had already known that diminutive Enceladus, which is only 310 miles (500 kilometers) in diameter, is the smallest object in the solar system to have volcanic activity. However, scientists were surprised to discover water vapor over Enceladus’s south pole, and they were unable to explain the finding. NASA and ESA had launched Cassini in 1997 to survey Saturn and its moons.(Guy Gugliotta, “Water Vapor Discovered on Tiny Moon of Saturn,” Washington Post, 19 September 2005. 838 NASA, “NASA Releases Plans for Next Generation Spacecraft,” news release 05-226, 19 September 2005; NASA, “NASA’s Exploration Systems Architecture Study,” November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/exploration/news/ESAS_report.html (accessed 10 July 2009).)
