nasa management meeting held to brief key officials on a manned space station program and to discuss possible FY 1964 funding.
Decision on whether nasa or usaf would be assigned development of orbital space stations was reported in process within the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing the Air Force Association in Las Vegas, said: “The United States, in keeping with our motivations in freedom and peace, has embarked upon a space program aimed at peace building, constructive exploitation of space—second to none. “In the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the nation has mobilized an effort unprecedented in history, nasa is making progress, because it has imaginative leadership, a competent staff, extensive facilities, and wholehearted support from all elements of industry and government which can contribute, especially the Air Force. “In addition to our contribution to the success of the nasa program, the Air Force is required by its own mission to put its energies into a different kind of space effort. We are reaching a clearer definition of that mission as it relates to space. . . . “The United States is dedicated as a matter of national policy to the peaceful exploitation of the space medium. The United States does not intend to extend the arms race into space. “We are, however, taking the step to enable us to protect ourselves in the event the Soviets or any other nation were to undertake missions in space that would endanger our security. . .. “The dual-vehicle orbital experiment of the Soviets, when coupled with their previous claims, seems to indicate that the need for protection against possible threats to our security will be in the near orbital stage of space, rather than farther out. One possible instrument of security that might be useful at this level in space may be found in extending the X-15 and X-20 technology, leading to craft which could operate from surface to orbit and back, and perform defense missions at the edge of the atmosphere. Another might be the permanently manned orbital space station designed for military purposes. Progress toward utilization of such a vehicle for security and protection would be speeded by capitalizing upon the nasa program to acquire knowledge and competence in manned orbital flight. . . . “These are the principles on which Air Force space program must be based: (a) Ample preparation to utilize the space medium; (b) Ample preparation to defend ourselves in case others choose to extend the threat of aggression to outer space; (c) Concentration on the really important tasks, including today’s job and not just tomorrow’s, and finally, (d) An organizationally disciplined space program—well planned and specific—which fits into overall national plans and objectives. “We in America have no choice but to extend our defenses as far as they need to be extended to save freedom on earth. . . .”
Under Secretary of the Air Force Brockway McMillan said in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Our assessment of the nasa programs in the light of your questions has strengthened our conviction that the potential joint value of the nasa and Defense Department programs can be more fully realized by closer collaboration in the early conceptual phases, to insure that the objectives of each agency are clearly recognized at each successive stage of program evolution. Our point is illustrated by recent experience in developing experiments to be sponsored by the Defense Department on the Gemini flights. Although the concerted joint effort, under the guidance of the Gemini program planning board, has been fruitful, it has become obvious that an earlier beginning of intensive collaboration might well have allowed greater results. Looking to the future, we hope to apply this lesson in the establishment of an orbital space station program. We view a space station as an essential preliminary to an operational space defense system, and as a valuable source of experience which will apply to nasa objectives. As this program is in the early conceptual phase, we think it possible to begin now to fully exploit its high potential to serve both civilian and military needs. As you know, the Defense Department has proposed to nasa that there be collaboration in studies leading to the definition of the space station program. . . .” (Letter, CR, 8/9/63,13900)
usaf announced issuing Requests for Proposals for studies of manned orbital space station. From the bidding industries usaf will select three contractors to conduct parallel four-month studies “to define characteristics from which a space station could be designed to demonstrate and assess quantitatively the utility of man in space for military purposes.” (dod Release 1261-63)
Houston Chronicle reported nasa Manned Spacecraft Center was planning 30-man space station that could stay in orbit for five years; msc had solicited contractors’ proposals for electrical power system capable of producing 40,000 watts. (Houston Chron. in upi. Boston Sunday Advertiser, 1/13/63)
Dr. James E. Roberts, usaf scientist, told aerospace medicine conference at sam that permanent five-man space station could be established “in the late 1965 or early 1966 time period.” Such a station, called “Mark I,” could be placed in orbit by Saturn I or Titan III vehicle, he said. Mark II station, three times as big as Mark I, could replace the initial station by the end of the decade. The space stations discussed by Dr. Roberts would be primarily for scientific and engineering research. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/7/63, A3)
Georg von Tiesenhausen, chief of future studies for nasa Launch Operations Center, told ias meeting in New York that by 1970 U.S. would need an orbiting space station to launch and repair spacecraft; space station could double as a manned scientific laboratory. Describing station 300-ft. long and 33-ft. in diameter, von Tiesenhausen said it could be launched in two sections by Saturn C-5 vehicles and joined together in space rendezvous. (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 1/22/63)
General Electric Co. said four men would spend one month inside full-scale model of space station at GE’s Space Technology Center, in test of man’s reactions and performance in simulated space-flight conditions. Experiment would begin in September. (AP, NYT, 7/8/63,25)
Design for 216-ft. nuclear-powered space station had been awarded patent by U.S. Patent Office, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. announced. Invented by S. B. Kramer and E. H. Visscher of Lockheed, prefabricated station would be assembled in orbit from cylindrical and spherical subsections. Lockheed said it would be useful as a manned space station and observation platform. (NYT, 4/9/63,10)
Proposed nasa-usn program of high-altitude, long-duration balloon flights was outlined m Missiles and Rockets. Pending dod approval, program would be conducted by nasa oart and usn BuWeps and would call for three types of flights: three-man, three-day flight using basic gondola and existing balloon of 10-million-cu.-ft. class; 14-day flight, possibly with larger crew and expanded equipment; and 30-day nights with six- or seven-man crew. Program objectives: to check out space station equipment and components and to study biomedical and psychological factors. (M&R, 5/27/63,18)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced two types of orbital manned space stations would be studied to compare concepts for 24-man operational station—one concept by Lockheed Co. California Div. and the other by Douglas Aircraft Missiles and Space Systems Div. Each station would be designed to remain in orbit at 200- to 300-mi. altitude for about three years, with resupply and crew changes every three months. {L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 7/6/63)
A “flying carpet” escape system from orbital space stations has been advanced by Douglas Aircraft Co. The escape system would be a saucer shape that would expand into a blunt-nosed, cone-shaped vehicle 25 ft. across at its base. Passing through the atmosphere, the vehicle would act as its own brake. Re-entry heating problems would be met by using fabrics woven with filaments of nickel-based alloys that can withstand 1,600-degree temperatures. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/9/63, 52)
Lockheed-CaUfornia Co. released details of its recommendations to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on a scientific space station program. Lockheed study concluded manned station with crew of 24 could be orbiting the earth in 1968. Total cost of program—including logistics spacecraft and ground support—for five years’ operation was estimated at $2.6 billion. Study recommended launching the unmanned station into orbit with a Saturn V launch vehicle, then launching manned logistics vehicle to rendezvous and dock at the station. (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/27/64; msc Roundup, 3/4/64,8)
NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston divulged that its post-Apollo study emphasis would be on a Y-shaped 36-man National Multipurpose Space Station that could be launched by Saturn V and be the primary space scientific and technical experimental center for at least five years in the mid-1970’s.	(Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 51)
Goodyear Aerospace Corp. developed solar collector for usaf. The 4-story-high mirror, to be used in tests of electricity sources for manned space station, was capable of setting fire to buildings or blinding people with a single flash of sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/64)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. proposed 100-ton space station that would support up to 24 men on long-duration earth-orbiting missions. Known as Olympus, the station would be 63 ft. long and 118 ft. in diameter with central hub and three radiating spokes. Each of spokes would carry cylindrical module 18 ft. in diameter and 40 ft. long. (Tulsa Daily World, 7/12/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said in Missiles and Rockets interview that NASA was tentatively planning to initiate program definition of Apollo-X spacecraft in FY 1965. He stressed, however, that NASA manned space station of from six-months to one-year lifetime would receive no hardware funding until the 1970’s. He also said NASA’s Apollo-X study did not compete with usae Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program: “mol is important for the military as a method of determining what opportunities there are for men in space. It is not suitable to fulfill NASA requirements to gain scientific knowledge.” {M&R, 10/26/64,14)
Patent for manned space station design was awarded to its inventor Emanuel Schnitzer, technical assistant at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The space station was designed to erect itself in space after being lofted into orbit. Crewmen could be sent up in an auxiliary spacecraft or launched to it later in a ballistic “ferry.” Until two weeks ago, Schnitzer was at NASA Hq. in Advanced Manned Missions Program Office. (Justice, Houston Post, 8/15/64; nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 8/15/64)
USAF announced selection of Douglas Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., and General Electric Co. for orbital space station study-contracts. The studies would aid in defining tests and experiments for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), (dod Release 148-64)
Lt. Col. Robert S. Buchanan (USAF) of Aerospace Research Pilots School, Edwards afb, told space medicine conference at Brooks afb that the greatest potential dangers to large scientific space station with crew of 15 or more men would be fire and collision with a meteoroid or space debris. Studies were considering possibility of separating space stations into individual compartments that could be sealed off in case of catastrophes such as fire. (AP, Houston Post, 2/6/64)
Discussing mol’s growth potential in testimony before House Armed Services Committee, Subcommittee on R&d, Director of dod Research and Engineering Dr. Harold Brown said: “I want to make a distinction between its ultimate capability and what is in the program. . . . What is in the program is not a space station in that sense. It is an experimental laboratory. But . . . this could grow to be a space station, if and after ... we conclude . . . that a man can have a substantial military purpose [in space].” Dr. Brown said dod should “move more aggressively into the manned space flight arena in order to explore more fully man’s utility for the performance of military space missions and to develop . . . his full capabilities in any area where potential exists.” (SBD, 2/17/64, 260; M&R, 2/24/64, 15)
Thomas E. Dolan, nasc staff member, proposed at aiaa Symposium on Space Stations and Their Logistics Support in Pasadena that “saddlebags” be attached to lem to increase its carrying capacity for use in equipping a lunar base. 3,000-5,000 lbs. of supplies would be attached to manned Lunar Excursion Module. Hie system would make it possible to set up a lunar base with a 7- to 10-day staytime. He said saddlebags mode would increase total Apollo spacecraft weight by 15,000 lbs., but Saturn V/Apollo system theoretically had growth option of 100% and 15—20% growth was entirely possible. “The LEM saddlebag concept would avoid multiple launches, hardware development programs for unmanned landing systems, dependence on successful unmanned landing system performance prior to manned landings, and dependence on surface rendezvous. As such, the post-Apollo exploration phase could be carried on with higher mission success and with less total investment than that estimated for the other systems.” (M&R, 4/20/64,15; SBD, 4/17/64, 98)
PROTON I space station, launched July 16 by the U.S.S.R., had, for the first time, trapped particles with energy of 100 trillion electron volts and a measured energy spectrum of cosmic rays containing such particles, Nikolai I. Grigorov, head of Cosmic Ray Laboratory at Moscow Univ. Institute of Nuclear Physics, told Pravda. He said that precise measurements of high-energy particles required the use of a heavy ionizing calorimeter which could not have been orbited without the lifting capacity of Russia’s new large rockets. Prof. Grigorov explained that high-energy particles never reached earthbound registering devices because they were absorbed and transformed as they collided with atoms of earth’s atmosphere. (Pravda, 8/20/65, atss-t Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 8/22/65, 72)
Tass released a picture of what was described as a working model of an orbiting space station. Six hermetically sealed compartments branched out from a central stem. The compartments included a control desk, a laboratory, a garden, an orientation system, radar section, and a heliostation with a system for carrying on conversation with incoming spaceships. (Tass, ap, Wash. Post, 7/8/65, D5)
A full-scale aluminum model of a 1,400-lb. telescoping space structure had been fabricated to verify design theory and manufacturing techniques, afsc announced. Built by Martin-Denver, the 15-by-8-ft. expandable structure could be launched into space in a compact package and then, like a telescope, opened to full size after reaching orbit. Several of the expandable structures stacked on a booster’s upper stage could be sent into space and expanded to form a rotating space station. (afsc Release 4.64)
proton ii 26,900-lb. unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into orbit: apogee, 638.7 km. (396 mi.); perigee, 191.9 km. (119 mi.); period, 92.6 min.; inclination, 63.5°. Tass said that instrumentation on proton ii would study cosmic particles of superhigh energies, cosmic rays and their radiation danger, and the nuclear interaction of cosmic particles with super-high energies up to 1,000	billion electron volts. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. (NYT, 11/3/65, 5; ap, Balt. Sun, 11/3/65, 4; upi, Wash. Post, 11/3/65, A21)
Caption under a photograph in East German newspaper Berliner Zeitung read: “A model of a future Soviet space station envisages six hermetically grouped sections around a central core. These are: the control station, a laboratory and a garden, an orientation system, the radar equipment, and a heliostation. In addition, the station has facilities for voice communications with space ships.” (Berliner Zeitung, 7/25/65, 4)
proton i, unmanned space station launched by U.S.S.R. July 16 with instrumentation for studying high-speed cosmic particles, was functioning normally, Tass reported. (Tass, 7/29/65)
proton hi unmanned scientific space station was launched by U.S.S.R. into earth orbit with 630-km. (391-mi.) apogee; 190-km. (118-mi.) perigee; 92.5-min. period; and 63.5° inclination. Instruments —including "special scientific apparatus” for continuing complex investigations of cosmic rays—were functioning normally. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/8/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
nasa ApoUo Service Module (Sm) propulsion engine test phase was completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
usaf selected Martin Co. to develop SV-5P manned lifting-body vehicle to explore flight characteristics and atmospheric maneuverability of wingless lifting bodies. Initially, the 5,000-lb., 24-ft. wingless vehicle would be dropped from a B-52 bomber at 40,000- to 50,000-ft. altitude at 500 mph for powerless, gliding flight, landing at Edwards afb at 120 to 150 mph; in later powered tests, it would accelerate to mach 2 speeds at 100,000-ft. altitude and then maneuver to landing. Airfoil shape of vehicle, which resembled "a delta shaped porpoise with vertical fins,” provided lift normally derived from wings. Future vehicles, developed as part of afsc’s Piloted Low Speed Test (Pilot) project, would be launched to ferry supplies and crews between earth and orbiting space stations, (dod Release 343-66; Wilford, NYT, 4/27/66, 22)
U.S. could have a permanent manned space station in orbit by 1970, predicted Charles W. Mathews, Director of Saturn/Apollo Applications, NASA Hq. omsf, in Space Business Daily interview. Mathews said that by clustering various modules, instrument packages, and spacecraft in orbit for reuse and utilizing resupply of expendables and crew replacement, it would be possible to extend capabilities of hardware currently under development to the point where such a space station could be permanently manned in about three years. (SBD, 1/16/67, 63)
Low-orbit space operations from a manned orbital base “has the potential to reduce operating costs by a factor of two” for the mission traffic anticipated for post-1970, G. A. Sears of the rand Corp. had concluded. His papier, Orbital Baaing: Key to Low Cost Space Operations?, compared present earth-based manned spaceflight program with concept of basing spacecraft at manned space station. Spacecraft would be injected into mission orbits as required and later rejuvenated for reuse by rendezvous with station. Spacecraft would have to operate nearly coplanar with base, a constraint acceptable to many but not all low-orbit missions; however, as method of reducing costs, orbital basing “deserves attention on a par with recovery-to-earth and reuse and extended-life concepts,” Sears stated. (Text)
NASA was negotiating nine-month, $275,000 contract with Planning Research Corp. to identify, analyze, and evaluate potential economic returns from possible space station activities in mid-1970’s. Earth-oriented application areas such as natural resources, meteorology, and communications would be considered as they might affect both the national and world economy. Univ. of Michigan would be major subcontractor to Planning Research in technical feasibility of remote sensing. Contract would be managed by omsf Advanced Manned Missions Program. (nasa Release 67-^54)
American Nuclear Society held panel session in Washington, D.C., on “The U.S. Space Program: Achievements and Objectives.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, declared: “We must step up the rate at which we tap the vast potential of nuclear energy for the space activities of tomorrow. . . . if we do not make greater use of nuclear energy, we will neglect our mission of learning rapidly more and more about the solar system in which we live and about the planet where we reside. In the field of propulsion, chemical rockets, both liquid and solid, can be vastly improved when combined with the products of nuclear technology.” Combining nuclear stage with Saturn V “will greatly increase that rocket’s power of achievement. . . . Not only will we have the vast power of the atom at our command, but it will be compact, self-contained, long lived, highly maneuverable, and virtually independent of its surrounding environment. . . . Atomic energy will enable the space effort to reach for the infinite.” (Text) NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology James M. Beggs discussed “Research and Technology for the Future”: “The difference between success and failure of [nasa] missions . . . lies in our knowledge of the flight sciences and our skill for applying this knowledge to the development and operation of space vehicles. ... A natural characteristic of technology is its multiapplicability; an improvement in guidance or communication equipment, for example, may find many uses in space missions as well as non-aerospace applications. A key to making this process productive ... is a continuing research program . . . that has a good balance between the effort in the scientific and engineering disciplines and in the technologies needed to explore the unknown.” (Text) Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said: “The first practical application of space electric power systems, which have been under development over the past 10 years, may well be found in our second generation orbital space station program. Consistent with our present estimates of station initial power requirements, and allowing for growth, a zirconium hydride reactor coupled with a thermoelectric conversion system is being studied for application on such a space station.” (Text; Reuters, B Sun, 11/14/68, A10)
msfc awarded nine-month, $99,000 contract to Raymond Loewy/William Snaith, Inc., to conduct habitability studies of planned earth orbital space stations. Basic goal would be to ensure that workshop configurations were comfortable and functional structures in which to live and work, (msfc Release 68-79)
Boeing Co. said it would build one-fifth size thermal models of manned space stations under $156,500 NASA contract to determine their feasibility for predicting temperatures in full-size earth-orbiting station. (Boeing Release S—9840)
NASA would require $5- to $5.6-billion annual budget “within three years” for simultaneous development of orbiting space station and lunar exploration in 1970 and onward, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, said in Washington Post interview. (Cohn, W Post, 4/17/69, A3)
Underwater test program begun at msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator several years earlier was providing information essential for design of first U.S. space station, NASA reported. Technicians, design engineers, and professional divers in spacesuits and scuba gear were conducting tasks similar to those necessary to activate space orbiting workshop, in 1.4-million-gal water tank containing mockups of aap cluster elements (Saturn I Workshop, lunar module ascent stage, Apollo Telescope Mount solar observatory, and airlock and multiple docking adapter), simulating weightlessness of space. Weightlessness was impossible to duplicate on earth for longer than fraction of minute. Conclusions from tests would be reflected in workshop’s final design, with decision expected in May 1969. (nasa Release 69—4)
MSFC announced it had awarded $173,000, 11-mo contract to Boeing Co. for study of cost-reduction methods in future space vehicle logistics systems, including expendable and reusable systems. Major emphasis of study would be on space station logistics missions in 100- to 300-mi orbits, with 5,000- to 50,000-lb payloads, and capable of holding 12 passengers and 3,000- to 12,500-lb cargo, (msfc Release 69-26)
New York Times published interview in which Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. President Llewellyn J. Evans expressed concern over possibility of failure in future space missions. “It has been one big gamble up to this point. This country must come up with rescue hardware. It would be shocking if someone got stuck in orbit someplace.” He saw need for four space facilities: space station in earth or lunar orbit, shuttle for travel between earth and space laboratory, space “tug” to go between nonatmospheric orbits, and rescue vehicle. (Kampel, NYT, 8/3/69, F7)
John N. Wilford said in New York Times: “Even though the Soyuz flights accomplished less than American observers had expected, they served notice that the Soviet Union may have forged ahead in space-station development while the United States was concentrating on the Apollo moon flight preparations.” But if U.S.S.R. had meant missions as beginning of first space station, “they fell far short.” There were “no link-ups of vehicles, no transfers of crews between ships and no test of the effects of long-duration weightlessness. None of the three ships was placed in an orbit high enough for the prolonged flights being considered for space stations.” Mission accomplishments could prove useful for construction of future space stations. “They proved that they were able to launch three manned spacecraft in three consecutive days, which the United States has not done. Such precision launchings are necessary for space station deployment.” Missions also had demonstrated first welding in space. “It will probably be necessary to weld together sections of a space station, rather than rely solely on the mechanical clamps used for present docking operations, and to make repairs by welding during flight.” (NYT, 10/19/69, E9)	..
MSFC announced engineer Chester B. May would be member of oceanologist Dr. Jacques Piccard’s six-man crew on Gulf Stream Drift Mission, scientific undersea journey aboard submersible vessel Ben Franklin (PX—15). Vessel would drift with Gulf Stream current from Miami, Fla., to Halifax, Nova Scotia, from four to six weeks beginning in June. May would study vessel’s operation and evaluate analogies between it and future NASA space station. Mission, covering 1,450 nm, would be conducted at 1,000-ft average depth, with periodic excursions to 300 ft and 2,000 ft. PX—15, designed by Dr. Piccard, would remain submerged throughout journey. Crew would experience space station characteristics: isolation, confinement, and stressful environment. (msfc Release 69—100; Marshall Star, 4/9/69, 1)
msfc announced it had issued rfps for experiment modules to be used with proposed manned space station to orbit earth in 1970s. Study, under eight-month contract, would analyze scientific and engineering need for experiment modules and develop concepts for least number of modules needed. Study tasks included further defining candidate experiment groupings, developing preliminary module concepts, defining minimum number of concepts, developing preliminary design and cost analysis for each module concept, and making proposed plan schedule. Proposals were due May-22. (msfc Release 69—125)
In LaRC test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft, four crewmen were sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Div. of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in Huntington Beach, Calif. During 90-day experiment, part of NASA oart program, crew would drink reclaimed water and breathe regenerated oxygen. Information obtained would be applied to operation of three-man Skylab workshop scheduled for 1971 launch and to design of 12-man space station for later in 1970s. (Langley Researcher, 6/26/70,1)
msfc announced NR had been awarded two modifications to contract for Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II): $1 768 228 for changes to original contract awarded in 1962 for manufacture and test of 15 S-II flight versions and $2 429 005 to identify S-II’s capabilities for launching space stations and determine what production impacts would result from msfc space station studies, (msfc Release 70-172)
Proposal for space station to be assembled in orbit one module at a time was being studied at msfc and MSC, NASA announced. Station, to provide centralized facility for research, applications, and operations for 6 to 12 men over 10 yrs, would be composed of cylindrical modules 4.3 m (14 ft) in diameter and 17.7 m (58 ft) long, joined to form variety of shapes. Individual modules would be carried into orbit on reusable shuttle vehicle. Station could be assembled within months in circular orbit 320-480 km (200-300 mi) high with 55° inclination. (NASA Release 70-192)
NASA delegation to U.S.-U.S.S.R. space talks—headed by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director—arrived in Moscow for Oct. 26-27 meetings to discuss cooperation in developing manned space stations and linking spacecraft in orbit. (Clarity, NYT, 10/25/70, 24)
Four crewmen sealed into space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. [see June 12] successfully completed first 30 days of scheduled 90-day confinement. (Langley Researcher, 7/24/70, 1)
MSFC announced award of $320 000 contract to NR Space Div. for lunar base synthesis study to define and analyze lunar exploration missions, establish requirements, and develop conceptual descriptions of semipermanent lunar surface bases. Study would appraise mobile systems for long traverses of lunar surface, examine different surface drills and other tools and equipment, and relate capabilities of flying and surface roving vehicles to mission needs. Study also would examine operation of semipermanent lunar base without lunar orbit space station, operation of base while space base was in lunar orbit, missions that could be performed from base, and surface missions that could be performed from either lunar orbit or surface base, (msfc Release 70-119)
msfc engineer Hans F. Wuenscher was awarded U.S. patent 3 520 496 for Serpentuator—snake-like instrument to move men and tools under weightless conditions around space station. Series of metal tubes with motors at joints to control angles could be regulated from control panel inside or outside space station. (Jones, NYT, 7/18/70, 29; Patent Off)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, discussed future ofU.S. space program on abc program “Issues and Answers.” Dr. Paine said he did not anticipate further cutbacks in NASA personnel and facilities. “In my opinion we have slimmed down the NASA base to the point where we now have something which I would expect to see extended throughout the seventies and eighties.” He was “quite optimistic about the future of the space agency.” Dr. von Braun said “in the long haul” U.S. could not compete with U.S.S.R. at $3.333-billion budget level. It was obvious “that we are ahead in some areas,” but U.S.S.R. was probably ahead in space station field. (NASA Special Ann, 3/11/70; SBD, 3/17/70, 76)
MSC announced award of $100 000 NASA contract to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for study of station operating techniques during space station mission to define crew command structure necessary to ensure successful operations, (msc Release 70-68)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II-13) was successfully captive-fired for 367 secs at MTF. Stage would be used to launch Skylab space station in late 1972. (msfc Release 70-85)
NASA announced award of $1.5-million contract extensions to McDonnell Douglas Corp. and NR Space Div. to continue parallel space station program-definition studies through Feb. 1, 1971. (NASA Release 70-136)
msc announced selection of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. to receive 18-mo, $1075 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for large space station solar-array technology-evaluation program. Program objectives were to conduct technical evaluation of current state of the art of solar systems and design analysis and test evaluation of components. Work would be conducted under MSC direction, (msc Release 70-48)
arc biochemists were developing process to convert principal body wastes—carbon dioxide and water—into palatable food for long-duration space missions, arc announced. Methods to turn carbon dioxide and water vapor exhaled and water recovered from urine into sugars and glycerol in series of chemical reactions might also be applied to solve food problems on earth. Work was under way by arc, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, and two industrial contractors to develop system to produce chemical foods under space conditions, including weightlessness, and reduce food deliveries to orbiting space station, (arc Release 70-3)
Convair engineers presented results of “Phase A” experiment module concepts study during meeting at MSFC of NASA representatives and Convair Aerospace Div. of General Dynamics Corp. Meeting was also attended by French representatives of ESRO. Module would be extension of space station that could be outfitted on ground and transported into space by shuttle vehicle. Program technical director Max E. Nein said module was attractive to European scientific commmunity because country desiring to participate could either build module complete with experiment package or build experiment package for integration into U.S. module. (MSFC Release 70196)
First detailed Soviet analysis of U.S. plan for Grand Tour of outer planets was reported by New York Times. In Vestnik, principal publication of Soviet Academy of Sciences, Soviet space expert Timur M. Eneyev had suggested that four missions covering two planets each might be more successful than the two missions to three planets contemplated by NASA. He indicated Soviet scientists favored approach of delivering automatic space stations to outer planets and suspending them by balloons in planetary atmosphere. He said technique, “for all its exotic aspects and difficulties of realization, is probably the most promising because it would yield far more data about the nature of the giant planets than could be obtained from fly-by trajectories.” (Shabad, NYT, 5/9/71)
NASA announced assignment of Robert 0. Aller, Manager of Space Station Operations, Space Station Task Force for omsf, to Skylab Program Office as Director of Operations. Aller would be responsible for coordination and development of operationally related program and mission planning activities, (nasa Hq WB )
nasa press conference at msc summarized June 21-25 U.S — U.S.S.R. discussions on joint space docking. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director and head of NASA delegation to discussions, said talks had been friendly throughout. “It was a period of hard work covering very difficult technical areas.” Meetings had been successful “in reaching conclusions, in principle, on all these subjects that we discussed, and in some detail in several of the subjects.” Need had been felt by both sides for “possibility of flight studies to test the technical requirements for docking and rendezvous, . . . one that would use the actual kind of compatible . . . equipment” that would make possible space rescue from spacecraft of either side that might be in trouble. U.S. and Soviet CMS and space stations with mixed crews could orbit earth within four years. Soviet crews and U.S. crews “would no doubt, if they docked, . . . want to open the hatches and visit with one another.” Dr. Gilruth said flight test might take place in mid-70s. (Transcript)
Major Soviet space station project included “powerful new launch vehicle in the class of America’s Saturn 5,” Kenneth Gatland said in New Scientist and Science Journal article. Prototype had been destroyed by fire in 1969 while undergoing static test on launch pad at Baykonur, he reported. (New Sci & Sci J, 4/29/71, 256-7)
Boris Petrov, chairman of Soviet Intercosmos Scientific Council on Space, said in Pravda that deaths of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts would not halt U.S.S.R.’s manned orbital space station: “New flights into space, the building of new manned orbital stations of the Salyut type, lie ahead. Undoubtedly, larger and more complex multipurpose and specialized manned space stations will be built. One can say with confidence that the 1970s will become an epoch of the development and broad use of long-term manned orbital stations with changing crews which will make it possible to switch from occasional experiments in space to a regular vigil by scientists and experts in space laboratories.” (upi, NY News, 7/5/71, 7)
Future space shuttle missions were described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in speech before South Carolina Lions Clubs in Greenville, S.C.: “These payloads cover the areas of space physics, astronomy, space applications, life sciences, unmanned planetary exploration, and earth resources, military and commercial.” Payloads ranged from 113-kg (250-lb) Explorer and Space Physics Satellites to 9100-kg (20 000-lb) astronomy mission “requiring annual revisits by the shuttle for servicing maintenance and updating of instrumentation.” Sortie flights conducted solely by shuttle could be made within its seven-day orbit capability. Scientist could “conduct his own experiment in the orbiting shuttle and return with the data as well as his own observations. When the space station becomes operational, crew rescue missions could also be flown.” (Text)
All outstanding options on the Concorde supersonic transport had been dropped, The Washington Post reported. British Aircraft Corp-Aerospatiale combined British-French manufacturers, would take only direct orders. The action had followed the cancellation of 20 options by U.S. commercial airline companies and would end marketing “brinkmanship.” (Egan, W Post, 3/29/73, Cll) March 30:	Preparations for twin launches of the Skylab space station and its first three-man crew continued with few significant problems, NASA announced. Major elements of the space station had completed integrated mission simulation and flight-readiness testing. Seventy percent of stowed items had been placed in the Workshop section. Simulated loading of propellant into the Saturn IB launch vehicle had been completed. A leaking valve in the service module had caused replacement of a 244- by 91-cm (96- by 36-in) panel containing propellant tanks, plumbing, and engines. Excessive leakage in the oxidizer tank bladder was also being investigated, (nasa Release 73-61)
The possibility that three Soviet cosmonauts had died in training accidents early in the Soviet space program was discussed by James E. Oberg of the Dept, of Defense Computer Institute in a speech before the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C. Oberg, a Soviet space program observer, said photos and training films showed four cosmonauts— identified only as Ivan, Vasily, Grigori, and Valentin—in 1960 and 1961, before the April 12, 1961, Vostok 1 first manned orbital space flight. None of these cosmonauts had been seen or heard of since. Oberg said they might still be training for a Salyut space station or a lunar landing mission or they could have been killed in accidents before making their intended flights. Oberg said there was no apparent truth to stories that as many as 18 cosmonauts had died secretly. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/13/73, A3) April 13:	Preparations for the first Skylab mission, launch of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop scheduled for May 14, continued with only minor discrepancies, NASA announced. Onboard experiments and major spacecraft elements that had not flown before required extensive first-time testing. Lower than desired voltage had been detected in one cell in each of two important flight batteries. The batteries would be replaced and tested. Stowage of crew equipment and consumables in the Orbital Workshop had been completed. Testing of the Saturn IR and the command and service modules continued without major problems, (nasa Release 73-74)
U.S. space observers believed an accident to the Soviet Salyut 2 space station launched April 3 had prevented the U.S.S.R. from carrying out a maximum one-month mission manned by a Soyuz crew, Thomas O’Toole reported in the Washington Post. Their assessment was that Salyut 2 had begun tumbling in orbit when a maneuvering engine fired and then kept firing out of control. The firing had forced Salyut 2 into cartwheel motion through space. Its solar panels had been torn loose, cutting the station off from almost all its electric power. The only electricity supplied to Salyut 2 after the accident had come from batteries that might now be burned out. A few U.S. observers thought the Soviet tracking ship that instructed the station to make the fatal maneuver had received details of the accident by radio from Salyut 2 before communications ceased. The ship had left its station off Newfoundland and had joined a sister ship in Curasao, Dutch West Indies, where both had been refueled and refitted. The ships were now in Cuba, which had led some space observers to think they might put to sea again to await a further Soviet attempt to launch a Salyut station. (W Post, 5/2/73, A20)
The U.S.S.R. announced the mission of the Salyut 3 space station (launched 25 June) had been “completely fulfilled.” The “main program of work” had ended 23 Sept, and the recoverable module containing research materials and experiments had separated from Salyut 3. Engines were discarded before entry into the atmosphere, and the parachute system was activated at an altitude of 8.4 km to land the module in a preset area of the U.S.S.R. Salyut 3 plans had been for a
The universe was 16 billion yrs old, 6 billion yrs older than earlier estimates, according to California Institute of Technology astronomer Dr. Allen R. Sandage, the Washington Post reported after an interview. After 10 yrs of observing 50 galaxies, Dr. Sandage had dated the galaxies from 14 billion yrs ago, meaning that 2 billion yrs were required for the primordial gas cloud to cool enough for stars to begin forming. Working with Swiss astronomer Gustav Tamman, Dr. Sandage had arrived at his new date when his observations had led him to recalculate the Hubble Constant, the rate of speed for the expansion of the universe. He had checked his figures by dating stars in globular clusters in the Milky Way and by measuring the amounts of metal still burning in their atmospheres. (O’Toole, W Post, 11 Dec 74, Al)
Experiments carried out during the U.S.S.R.’s eight-day Soyuz 13 mission launched 18 Dec. 1973 were further evidence that the U.S.S.R. was continuing manned space station efforts, a Spaceflight article said. The flight had included the Oasis 2 experiment, part of a plan to demonstrate that biological closed-cycle life support systems could be used for large space stations and other long-duration manned missions. Observation of stars in the ultraviolet range with the Orion 2 telescope was also a continuing program related to space station activity. Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov had said in a statement to the British Interplanetary Society that, in the years between the Soyuz 11 tragedy in June 1971 and the Soyuz 12 mission in September 1973, design engineers had been analyzing the performance of all spacecraft systems and making modification and improvements. He stressed that work on manned space stations was continuing because of the importance of these stations in the exploration of natural resources. Soyuz 12 and Soyuz 13 crews had made multispectral photos of the earth’s surface. (SF, March 74, 110)
The U.S.S.R. launched its 76th space mission for 1975, an unmanned Soyuz 20, from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam, and established a new procedure by identifying the unmanned flight as a spacecraft designed for manned flight. Reuters quoted Soviet scientist Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov as saying the purpose of the flight was to develop a transport system either to supply a space station with expendables, or to serve as an emergency rescue ship. One possibility would be to automatically dock a Soyuz with the manned station after one of the cosmonauts had removed the original Soyuz, or perhaps a new Soyuz would be used as a new return vehicle: one of these procedures would be required unless the Salyut space station had been designed with two docking positions. The Soviet director of July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, Konstantin Bushuyev, in Houston for a conference, said Soyuz 20 had not been designed to transfer expendables to the current Salyut 4 space station; Christopher S. Wren, reporting from Moscow for the New York Times, pointed out that it was not known how provisions could be transferred from the Soyuz to the space station, since neither craft had been reported to have such an automatic capability. (NYT, 20 Nov 75; 21 Nov 75, 25; SBD, 18 Nov 75, 90; 21 Nov 75, 114)
The European Space Agency’s launch vehicle Ariane during its 5-yr development period would use hydrazine fuel supplied by the USSR, reported the British journal New Scientist. The U.S. hydrazine plant near Baltimore had been closed down because of contamination by nitro-samines, hydrazine sources suspected of causing cancer. Hydrazine, highly corrosive and difficult to handle, had not been manufactured in Western Europe, and no one wanted to do so, according to the report. Ariane’s discontinued predecessor Europa used a less powerful fuel— liquid oxygen and kerosene—and the USSR had used hydrazine from the plant near Moscow to power the large rockets that launched the Salyut space stations and large interplanetary probes. The report said that the hydrazine deal stemmed from France’s longstanding cooperation with the USSR in aerospace technology; if the Soviets should restrict hydrazine supplies, France would build a European plant because its commitments would override environmental objections. (W Post, 22 Apr 76, A-52)
Recovery of the unmanned Soyuz 20 spacecraft that landed in Kazakhstan 16 Feb. carrying a “comprehensive biology payload”—including both plant and animal life—concluded what the Christian Science Monitor described as an impressive 3-mo biology experiment. Results from Soyuz 20 would be compared with those of similar experiments— including some from the U.S.—carried on the Vostok-type biosat Cosmos 782 which stayed 19.4 days in space last year. Cosmos 782 had carried a small centrifuge to test effects of artificial gravity on flora and fauna; comparison of the previous tests with those from Soyuz 20 would help decide whether—and how much—artificial gravity would be needed in future space stations. Soyuz 20 had docked with the Salyut 4 space station 19 Nov. 1975, an example of a self-docking biolab that demonstrated the USSR plan for assembling complex space objects from separately launched modules. (CSM, 26 Feb 76, 6)
NASA selected Grumman Aerospace Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to negotiate fixed-price contracts for parallel systems analyses of concepts for space stations in low- and synchronous-altitude earth orbits, including orbit-to-orbit transportation. The 2 studies, each to last 18 mo and cost about $700 000, would be managed by MSFC for Grumman and by JSC for McDonnell Douglas; the work would begin 1 Apr. The studies would define an operational base in space to serve as a space laboratory, of modular construction with potential for growth over the years. Proposals were also received from Rockwell International Space Div. and Boeing Aerospace Co. (NASA Release 76-41; JSC Release 76-19; MSFC Release 76-50)
Soyuz 21 cosmonauts Boris Volynov and Vitaly Zholobov, who landed safely 24 Aug. from a 48-day mission to Soviet space station Salyut 5, returned to Moscow from the Baykonur cosmodrome near Tyuratam where they had been resting after their flight. The two received the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, Volynov for the second time. The news agency Tass reported that Salyut 5 was flying in a “controlled automatic regime.” In a Pravda interview, Academician Georgy Petrov emphasized the importance of orbiting stations, which he said would serve in preparing for space flights to other planets as well as in studying the earth from outer space. Petrov predicted the building of space stations with changeable crews of 20 to 30, serving for periods of time up to decades, and later the establishment of “super-large multipurpose orbital complexes with crews consisting of a hundred members and more.” A special role would be that of stations for moon study in selenocentric orbits, from which crews would land on the moon’s surface in “small expeditionary spacecraft.” (FBIS, Tass in English, 1-6 Sept 76)
The 2 Soyuz 21 cosmonauts aboard space station Salyut 5, first manned space mission since last July’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, were experiencing “a state of sensory deprivation, a sort of sensory hunger,” according to the government newspaper Izvestia. Although Col. Boris Volynov and Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov continued to carry out their scientific and medico-biological experiments as they entered the 7th wk of their stay on Salyut 5—the halfway mark toward breaking the U.S. endurance record of 84 days in space set by 3 Skylab 4 astronauts in 1973—and despite their years of training to combat the problem, Izvestia said “the organism still reacts in a peculiar way to space conditions.” One symptom of “the increase in their need for communication” was that the cosmonauts were asking ground control more and more often for news from earth. On the advice of psychologists, ground control had begun playing music to the cosmonauts, Izvestia said. (UPI, in W Star, 17 Aug 76, A-4)
Clocking the speed of plasma at 50 km per sec in the active regions of the sun was “among the most interesting results” of investigations carried out aboard the USSR space station Salyut 4, Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov wrote in the Bulletin of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Feoktistov, one of the cosmonauts on the flight of Voskhod 1 in Oct. 1964, was quoted in a Tass broadcast as saying that data from the two manned expeditions to Salyut 4 were still being processed, but that the missions had established man’s ability to “work well in conditions of weightlessness” for more than 2 mo. Citing the stay of Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov aboard the station from 25 May to 25 July last year, and describing the use of exercises and pressurized suits to maintain health during that time, Feoktistov said the mission results offered hope that orbital stations and piloted space flights would be further developed. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 May 76)
The NY Times reported that “observers in the U.S. and abroad” were puzzling over a Soviet space vehicle called Cosmos 929 that had been orbiting for a mo and was large enough to be manned, but apparently carried no passengers. Orbital and radio telemetry characteristics of the vehicle were like those usually related to a manned mission; speculation was that the vehicle might be the first unit of a large space station to be assembled in orbit. Reports from Europe that the USSR would launch a space vehicle during the summer had assumed that the mission would be another Salyut, five of which had previously been orbited, the first early in 1971. Cosmos 929, launched July 17, had drawn attention because of its size and its unusual telemetry, apparently two distinct systems, as though it were two objects joined together. On Aug. 18, after a major change in orbit, one of the two radio transmissions had also changed “significantly,” and part of the vehicle might have been detached at that time. Members of the Kettering Group, an international group of nongovernment space watchers, had confirmed that the vehicle was as large as a Salyut and that its 51.6° orbital inclination had usually, though not exclusively, been used for manned flights as had its telemetry signals. Cosmos 929 had produced no voices, however, and the group was “virtually certain” that no crew was aboard. (NYT, Aug 26/77, A10)
MSFC announced it would consider using the Space Shuttle’s external fuel tank (ET) as a permanent space platform. James E. Kingsbury, head of MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate, proposed to replace 57m3 of an ET’s liquid oxygen with provisions for 90 days, then launch another Shuttle to bring a crew, a Skylab-airlock module and multipledocking adapter, and a solar electric-conversion wing to the orbiting ET to constitute a habitable space station. All the required equipment, now in storage or on display in the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, had been flight-tested. (MSFC Release 77-36; NASA Release 77-42; Htsvl Times, Feb 20/77, 8)
Tass reported that Soviet space station Salyut 4, launched Dec. 26, 1974, to house cosmonauts working in space up to 90 days, disintegrated over the Pacific Ocean when it moved on ground command into “a descent trajectory” and burned up. Tass noted that the station had flown for 3mo joined to the unpiloted space capsule Soyuz 20. The longest, most successful career of a Salyut in the 16yr-old USSR space program had included what Tass called “an extensive program of medical and biological research” as well as study of the sun, stars, and planets in the electromagnetic spectrum; views of Soviet territory in the middle and southern latitudes; and a great amount of data on physical processes in earth atmosphere and in space. Cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Aleksey Gubarev had docked Soyuz 17 with Salyut 4 for 29 days between Jan. 10 and Feb. 9, 1975; Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov failed to dock with Salyut 4 on Apr. 5 of that yr; and Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov had docked Soyuz 18 with Salyut 4 May 25 and remained for 63 days, during which they talked with their compatriots on the ASTP mission and returned July 24 with the Soviet duration record for a manned mission. Salyut 4 had completed 12,188 orbits around the earth before being destroyed, Tass said. (Today,, Feb 4/77, 10A; FBIS, Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 3/77)
The Soviet Union had radioed commands to its orbiting Salyut 5 space station to position it for rendezvous with a forthcoming Soyuz launch, according to a story in the Washington Post. Ideal time for a Soyuz launch would be within the next 5 days, the report said, and two Soviet tracking ships were already on station in the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea to keep in touch with the cosmonauts. (WPost, Jan 21/77, C8)
NASA had decided to plan construction of an orbiting space station from existing hardware because the Carter and Ford administrations had refused funds for major space station development, AvWk reported. Four station concepts were under examination: increasing the duration of Space Shuttle missions, using Skylab Apollo telescope-mount components to supply additional electricity for any extended mission; making a Space Shuttle external fuel tank into a Skylab-type station [see Mar. 7]; launching unmanned platforms to be occupied in the future; and modifying the ESA-NASA Spacelab to fly as an independent orbiting laboratory, without Space Shuttle. (AvWk, Apr 18/77, 42)
NASA announced publication of the first book of a series on the Skylab mission, Skylab, Our First Space Station (NASA SP-400), a general introduction to and overview of the mission’s problems and successes. The 10 chapters tell how Skylab grew from existing technology; how it nearly failed when its micrometeorite shield and one of its solar panels were lost, and how it was saved; how 3 manned visits occurred, one of them for a record 84-day occupation; and how it proved the possibility of living and working for extended periods in a space environment. (NASA Release 77-135)
The Washington Post reported that two Soviet cosmonauts had set a new Soviet space walk record on July 29, spending 125min outside the Salyut 6 space station testing a new type of suit and working with equipment mounted on the station, the accompanying Progress 2 supply ship, and their own Soyuz 29. Cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were the fourth team of cosmonauts to successfully board the Salyut 6 after it reached orbit the previous Sept. Kovalenok had filmed his colleague during part of the walk and had relayed the color footage to earth for broadcast on Moscow television. Tass, the Soviet news agency, said the two cosmonauts had dismantled instruments and devices on the outer shell of Salyut 6, loading them into Soyuz 29 for shipment to earth, and had mounted new instruments, including devices to measure radiation^ on the Salyut. Instruments being returned had measured micrometeor activities and had aided research on "polymers, optical and other structural material used in building advance spacecraft,” Tass said. The report did not give details on the new space suit, but the cosmonauts said that their “semistiff’ clothes were well designed and that life-support systems had been improved to facilitate movement and “better fixation outside the station.” U.S. experts had interpreted the length of the Salyut mission and repeated trips to it by Soviet cosmonauts as indicating a focus by the Soviet space program on building permanent orbital platforms. The report had not indicated when the two cosmonauts would return to earth, but observers suggested that the next mission (Soyuz 30) would probably come soon and would be a marathon stay aboard the orbiting station. (WPost, July 30/78, DIO; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/78)
U.S. analysts believed the USSR would continue to fly manned military space station reconnaissance missions even though the Soviets had not launched any such Salyuts since June 1976, Av Wk reported. Salyut 3, launched in June 1974, and Salyut 5, launched in June 1976, were successful military missions; the Salyut 2 spacecraft, which failed in orbit in April 1973, was also apparently a military Salyut. Significant design differences between the military and scientific versions included docking configuration, overall structure, and solar-panel placement. Introduction of the military configuration as early as the second Salyut flight was considered to be evidence of USSR emphasis on military-man-in-space planning and engineering. Photo reconnaissance was the prime objective of Salyut military missions; other military activities such as high energy research for possible weapons application were secondary. (AvWk, Dec 4/78, 17)
The USSR had decided to keep a permanent manned space station in earth orbit as a result of the current Salyut 6 space station mission, AvWk reported. Staffing this and follow-on Salyuts without major intervals between missions would be a milestone in manned spaceflight, and would demonstrate the USSR’s decision to invest major resources in space. The USSR had claimed the Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 mission was more scientific than military; its activities had included photographing the Soviet Union to explore for natural resources, detailed medical studies of cosmonaut blood circulation, and upper-atmosphere and micrometeorite monitoring. The crew had also devoted more time to system checkout and monitoring, because the design of Salyut 6 was a significant change from that of previous Salyut space stations: The USSR had not previously flown a spacecraft configuration like Salyut 6/Soyuz 26/Soyuz 27 to test the interaction of three large vehicles. It had tried various spacecraft attitudes to evaluate stresses during maneuvers on the docked system, and had transferred food and equipment from the Soyuz 27 resupply vehicle and film, biological samples, and records to the Soyuz 27. The Soyuz/Salyut mission had achieved three manned-spaceflight firsts: four-man space station, simultaneous docking of two transport spacecraft with an orbiting space station, and manned resupply of an occupied station. {AvWk, Jan 2/78, 20; Jan 9/78, 25; Jan 16/78, 20; Jan 23/78, 19)
Soyuz 31, carrying East Germany’s first cosmonaut and a Soviet commander, had docked with the Salyut 6 space station, the Washington Post reported. The USSR had launched Soyuz 31 Aug. 26 at 17:51 Moscow time. Sigmund Jahn of East Germany and Valery Bykovsky had joined the Soyuz 29 cosmonauts who had been circling earth in the space station since June 16. Tass said the crew was well and had begun implementation of tasks assigned to them. It added that the launch of Soyuz 31 had been part of the preparations for an historic event, the 30th anniversary of the creation of the first German socialist state. The flight had been intended as an example of the use of space for peaceful purposes, based on “disinterested international cooperation and comradely mutual assistance.” (WPost, Aug 27/78, A 21; FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 26/78)
Aerospace Daily reported that Progress 3, launched by the USSR to dock with Salyut 6, had carried 6171b of food, 9921b of oxygen-regeneration equipment, and 41gal of water to cosmonauts Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov, according to cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, one of the designers of the Progress resupply vehicles. UPI quoted a Novosti report that consumption of food, water, and air by a 2-man space crew would range from 44 to 661b per day; a 2-man space station would need about lOtons of these supplies to stay in full operation for a year. (A/D, Aug 16/78, 202)
Flight controllers at JSC reported that they would halt their 24-hour Skylab watch February 2, following NASA’s decision to abandon attempts to boost or deorbit the space station. The January 25 maneuver that positioned Skylab’s solar panels for constant sun tracking had removed it from the minimum-drag position and would result in speeding up its orbital decay. The repositioning was intended to increase power available to controllers to alter the path of Skylab’s descent, now expected between June and August. (JSC Release 79-03)
The Washington Post said the empty Soviet spacecraft that linked up December 19 with Salyut 6 was probably a three-person version of the vehicle the Soviet Union had been launching for 10 years. The Soyuz T (probably for Transport) docked on ground command at one end of the two-part space station in the fourth unmanned test of the new configuration (the first was Cosmos 869, November-December 1976; the second, Cosmos 1001, April 1978; the third, Cosmos 1074, January, 31-March 1, 1979). The Washington Post said the interior of the Soyuz “command craft” probably was changed to accommodate three instead of two cosmonauts;, making it easier for the Soviet Union to use the Salyut as a permanent orbital station with interchangeable crews, difficult with only two men at a time. (WPost, Dec 20/79, A-27)
August 19 saw the end of the record-breaking flight in the Salyut 6 space station of Soyuz 32 cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin, returned safely in the Soyuz 34 capsule after 175 days in space since launch February 25. FBIS had carried daily reports of their progress. Besides the experiments in materials processing (alloys and coating processes) and the intensive physical routines designed to assist long-term assignments in space, the crew in their last days in orbit had worked with the KRT-10 radiotelescope sent last month by cargo craft and unfurled in space to study extraterrestrial radio sources and nonatmospheric radioastronomy. As early as August 15, they had begun to pack the return capsule with items demonstrating the results of their space stay. Difficulty with the radiotelescope had presented another challenge to the crew; upon completion April 9 of the scheduled scans, the antenna was to be jettisoned, leaving the docking unit free. “Space sprung another surprise,” Tass reported, when the antenna became entangled with a projection on Salyufs surface. The crew tried to free it by “a minor jerk of the station,” which was not successful. A space walk was already scheduled to check the exterior of the station, dismantle outside scientific equipment, and retrieve samples of materials exposed for a long time to outer space. Ground control wanted to spare the cosmonauts the stress of an extra task in outer space, but the crew insisted it was the only sure way to solve the problem. On August 15, the crew in “full pressure suits” opened the hatch, and flight engineer Ryumin moved to the attachment point, releasing the 10-meter (30-foot) antenna with pliers, and “imparted the antennae acceleration relative to the station” (in other words, pushed it away toward the Earth for reentry). Then, Ryumin and Lyakhov disassembled and brought in the micrometeorite registration instruments and the panels with samples of structural, optical, insulation, and polymer materials, some of which were in orbit since Salyut 6’s launch in September 1977, others installed by the Soyuz 29 crew in July 1978. Total time of the space walk was 1 hour, 23 minutes: Tass noted that the suits, “fitted out with metal shielding against cosmic radiation and possible concussions” from meteorites, had previously served Kovalenok and Ivanchenkov of Soyuz 29 and Grechko and Romanenko of Soyuz 26. The cosmonauts landed safely August 19 and appeared to be in the best shape yet: they wanted to walk but were not allowed to do so immediately, although they did get brief dips in the hotel swimming pool. Later reports praised the exercise routine for its good effects on the crew, who agreed that even longer flights were possible. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 1-25/79; CSM, Aug 14/79, 2; NY Times, Aug 16/79, A-19)
Progress reports on the continuing flight of Leonid Ryumin and Valery Popov in the Salyut 6-Soyuz 37 orbiting space station noted that their mission had lasted 115 days as of August 1. The cosmonauts were busy redocking Soyuz 37 (which Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko had used to get to the Salyut) to make room for more supply-ship missions. The visitors had returned to Earth safely July 31 in the Soyuz 36 craft; next on the list for the long-term occupants was “cleaning of the premises of the orbital complex” and physical training, Tass said. On August 5 Tass reported completion of various crystal experiments using Splav and Kristall apparatus in “cosmic material studies” of semiconductors cast from gallium arsenide, and crystals of indium antimonide and gadolinium cobalt, a magnetic material. Tass August 9 reported a first: crystallization of a substance from a smelt in “directional microgravitation.” The idea was to form crystals at more than “minimum microacceleration.” The crew put into the Splav an ampule of raw material and activated it; they then used the space station’s motors in a twisting maneuver during which the station became “a sort of centrifuge” for a few hours. Acceleration, zero at the center, “near the transfer compartment and transfer chamber. . .was at its maximum.” Previous experiments had always been during sleep periods, as movement of people around the station affected the results. For more data on crystal formation in orbit, the crew tried it in the span between Earth gravity and zero gravity. Tass called the test a first step in a new science of “weightlessness physics” whose practical conclusions were already being felt. On August 12 Tass noted the crew had been in space for 18 weeks; further tests were going on, making special glass in zero gravity and monocrystals of germanium. On August 22, Moscow radio said that this expedition had had more technological tests than any previous ones: the lsparitel apparatus alone had provided more than 186 samples, most of them deli vered to scientists on Earth by Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko. One substance, a solidified solution of cadmium telluroid and mercury telluroid, would be impossible to obtain on Earth where “when molten they separate out as oil and vinegar do when poured into the same glass.” The large crystals of this obtainable in space would permit “heat viewing” or detection of negligible variations in temperature, important to industry and to medicine. (FBIS, Tass in English; Moscow Dom Svc, Aug 1-26/80)
Cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin set a new record for spaceflight duration, breaking the mark of 175 days, 36 minutes set last year by a crew in Soyuz 32. Ryumin had been on that record mission also; he had stayed on Earth for only 236 days since February 25, 1979. Popov, 40, and Ryumin, 34, had set out April 9, 1980, in Soyuz 35 to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 launched September 29, 1977, one of 13 crews to visit the 20-ton 49-foot-long space station. Three times during the spring and summer visiting crews brought the “permanent occupants” food and experiment materials, life-support equipment, and companionship. These relief missions included the first Vietnamese, Hungarian, and Cuban cosmonauts. Earlier this week, an unmanned cargo ship Progress 11 arrived with fresh supplies of food, fuel, and technical equipment for the cosmonauts. The Soviet Union had not set a time limit for the Salyut-Soyuz flight; Popov and Ryumin reported themselves healthy. (NY Times, Oct 2/80, A-17)
At 9:57 local time May 23 the Soviet Union launched supply ship Progress 13, which docked automatically with Salyut Ts service module at 11:57 Moscow time May 25, bringing 660 kilograms of fuel and 290 liters of water as well as air, food, equipment, and mail. On May 28, Tass described the unloading and refueling procedures. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 13-28/82; NY Times, May 19/82, A-4)
Tass reported that the two cosmonauts aboard Salyut 7 had opened doors to a large attached module, Cosmos 1443, and were working in essentially a three-part assembly consisting of a Salyut, a Cosmos, and the Soyuz T-9 in which they arrived at the space station June 28. When the Cosmos docked automatically March 10 with the Salyut, U.S. space experts said that it would double the size of the 21-ton Salyut and had carried 3 tons of cargo, such as scientific gear, experiments, and life-support materials. Cosmos had sets of small thrusters generally used to change the orbit of the entire complex, which weighed in total about 50 tons. The Cosmos itself, 43 feet long and 13 feet in diameter with solar-cell panels to generate electricity, consisted of an orbital module and a descent module. The descent module could return to Earth unmanned and land by parachute carrying experimental data and materials no longer needed on the Salyut, giving the same sort of round-trip supply service instead for the U.S. Shuttle without being reusable. Tass said that the cosmonauts, Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, were unloading Cosmos 1443 and reactivating systems on Salyut 7, putting film into cameras and turning on observation instruments, such as an East German mass spectrometer, which would photograph and measure “vast tracts of Soviet territory in middle and southern latitudes.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 1/83; NY Times, July 1/83, A-l)
Tass announced the docking of Cosmos 1443, probably an advanced version of earlier Salyut craft, with Salyut 7 that had been orbiting since April 1982. Cosmos 1443, launched unmanned from Baykonur March 2, weighed about 20 tons and was larger than the Soyuz or Progress spacecraft. The 21-ton Salyut 7 was about the size of a small house trailer., said the New York Times. The linkup was thought to demonstrate the Soviet Union’s ability to assemble larger space stations. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 10, 11/83; NY Times, Mar 11/83, A-12; W Post, Mar 11/83, A-24)
NASA issued a Requet for Proposal (RFP) for definition and preliminary design of a permanently manned Space Station to be operational in low-Earth orbit early in the 1990s. Proposals were due by November 15. The Space Station would support scientific and commercial endeavors in space, stimulate new technologies, enhance space-based operational capabilities, and maintain U.S. leadership in space. The RFP contained four “work packages” covering definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of Space Station elements. NASA planned to let competing contracts for each of the work packages and scheduled April 1, 1985, as the effective date of the contracts. (NASA Release 84-130)
Svetlana Savitskaya, a Soviet cosmonaut, today became the first woman to walk in space. Savitskaya, 36 years old, performed welding and soldering operations in the course of her walk in space, which lasted 3 hours and 35 minutes. She was also the first woman to make two spaceflights, her first being in August 1982 aboard the Soyuz T-7, which like the current flight linked with the Salyut 7 space station for a brief period. Savitskaya went into space July 18 along with Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Igor Volk aboard Soyuz T-12 and linked with the Salyut-7 space station, where three other cosmonauts had been in orbit for more than five months. Tass said that the main goal of the space walk was to test a new general-purpose handoperated tool designed “to carry out complex technological operations.” Dzhanibekov accompanied her on the space walk. Savitskaya, along with Dzhanibekov and Volk, returned to Earth July 29 aboard Soyuz T-12. They landed in an area 140 kilometers southeast of Dzhezkazgan. The three were reported to be feeling fine after landing. Remaining aboard Salyut 7 were cosmonauts Leonid Kisim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov. Savistskaya was born in Moscow and graduated from the Sergo Ordzhonikidze Aviation Institute in Moscow. She had worked as an instructor pilot and, since 1976, had been a test pilot on 20 types of aircraft, Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 17/84; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/84; NY Times, July 26/84, A-24; W Post, July 26/84, A-31)
NASA announced that approximately 200 people representing every NASA installation and the JPL were selected to augment the staff of JSC to help plan the next phase of NASA’s Space Station Program. This team had two major objectives: issue a request for proposals to industry for the definition of the specific elements of the Space Station and define a reference configuration or configurations to accompany the request for proposals. “The purpose of the reference configuration is to provide a framework to help industry understand how the various elements of the Space Station are related,” said Dr. Ralph Muraca, deputy head of LaRC, designated a “center of excellence” to help plan this next phase of the program. “In addition, it will help individual companies determine which of the elements or work packages they would be interested in competing for.” The group’s guidelines were to develop a configuration that would meet all the requirements associated with the final configuration of the Space Station, expected to be operational in the 1999-2000 time frame, and then scale that PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED back to an $8 billion configuration that would provide maximum mission capability in 1991. (LaRC Release 84-35)
NASA announced that it had selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach., Calif., and TRW, Inc., Space and Technology Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotiations that would lead to two parallel Space Station study contracts, each contract for a firm fixed price of approximately $2 million, covering a performance period of approximately 27 months, beginning in March. Contracts would be for the development of functional, performance, and technology requirements; the definition of system architecture for the Space Station data system; and the relationship of that system to the overall NASA end-to-end flight and ground information system. The studies would define the role of the Space Station data system and its relationship, and interfaces to the Space Station information systems elements. They would also define the data system to determine the environment in which both the user and facility subsystems interface and operate; address all avionics and other electrically automated Space Station functions; develop a clear understanding of system functional, operational, and interface requirements; identify major cost items to enable effective management decisions and development control; and define a program plan. NASA’s JSC would negotiate and administer the TRW contract; NASA’s GSFC, the McDonnell Douglas contract. (NASA Release 84-36)
The congressional Office of Technology Assessment released a report, “Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space,” which said that the kind of Space Station that NASA was planning could not be justified on scientific, economic, or military grounds. It went on to say that not just Congress, but the entire nation, ought to consider what the country wanted to do in the second quarter-century of the space era. The Space Station envisioned by NASA, the report said, “is only one alternative in a wide range of options.” Thomas F. Rogers, director of the two-year study, said that the time had come for the general public to play a greater role in space program goals. “We’ve been spending $7.5 billion a year, every year; we can do anything want to do,” he said. “It’s great, it’s exciting, but we’re missing large numbers of important activities by allowing all this to go on under technological drive— not policy drive, economic drive, social drive, the way everything else is done in this country at that level of public expenditure.” The report characterized the nation’s goals in space as shortsighted and narrow, reflecting the views only of the science and technology communities and not of the general public, which foots the bills. The study also said, “There is no compelling, objective, external case” for building a Space Station “to be used to support over 100 conceptual uses, few of which have been sharply defined or gained wide acceptance as important objectives of the space program.” The report concluded by spelling out the “kinds” of goals the nation should set: increase the efficiency of space activities and reduce their costs; involve the public; reap scientific, economic, social, and political benefits; increase international cooperation; and “spread life, in a responsible fashion, throughout the solar system.” (Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space, (D.C.: OTA, 1984; W Post, Nov 14/84, A.-4; NY Times, Nov 14/84, B-20)
Tom Rogers, project director of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA) space station study, said in testimony before the U.S. House space subcommittee that OTA in its controversial November 1984 space station report [see Space Station Program, Mar. 13] never meant to oppose development of a space station but only to suggest that its elements might be altered for more adequate attainment of space goals, Defense Daily reported. "I want to make it clear that OTA remains convinced that there is a strong rationale for some long-term habitable infrastructure in a low earth orbit. . . In other words, OTA is very positive about the principle behind the President's call for a 'space station' and Congress's decision to fund a 'space station' line item in NASA's budget," Rogers said. However, he pointed out that OTA's concerns about the space station centered on its cost and the fact that there was no proper assessment of long-range U.S. space goals, which made it infeasible to determine what elements should make up the station. "To be more certain that the facilities actually constructed are the ones most likely to lead to optimum space development, they must be constructed with an eye to the nation's long-range civilian space goals and objectives," Rogers testified. "Unfortunately, the only space goals discussed to date are those formulated by the space community itself; there has been little broad-based discussion and agreement on a set of long-range goals for the United States." He recommended particularly that, in parallel with NASA's Phase B station studies, "Congress seek independent studies suggesting goals and specific objectives for the nation's future activities in space, studies conducted primarily by people outside the space community." Rogers then outlined OTA's alternatives for the space station program. These included using the $3 billion in foreign funding as part of the $8 billion station cost, not as an addition; using private investment to pay for elements of the station; increasing use of the human-tended approach and automation/robotics to reduce station costs; examining alternative station designs costing less than “the canonical $8 billion"; developing the orbital maneuvering vehicle and any reusable orbital transfer vehicle "in close concert with those in the private sector who look forward to using them to provide satellite support services," thus reducing NASA's costs; and having contractors work to performance specifications rather than to detailed engineering specifications for other than "cutting edge" technologies. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 162)
France turned down President Reagan's invitation to participate in the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) project because of the subordinate role France would have to play and because it was at that time promoting its own French-led European advanced technology/space research project that included some key technologies related to strategic defense, Defense Daily reported. French President Francois Mitterrand told a news conference May 4 at the close of the Bonn economic summit that President Reagan used the term "subcontractors" in reference to Europe's role in the SDI project, which confirmed his view that the U.S. would not treat France and other European countries as equal partners in SDI and that they would not get access to all research results. "The technology interests me," Mitterrand said, "but the strategic project is interesting only for the future when man becomes a master of space." Fie urged other European nations to join France in an independent advanced technology R&D program called "Eureka," which would explore civilian uses of space and other advanced technologies including high-power lasers, optics, microelectronics, and high-speed computers. Although these technologies would apply to a number of areas including strategic defense, the primary aim of Eureka would be to "explore space through advanced research in order to master new technologies," Mitterrand said. He noted that Eureka was important for Europe because of the need to "preserve their fund of intelligence, technology, and brains. All this has to be mobilized in a great project that is European." According to reports, Mitterrand told Reagan that he was concerned about actual deployment of SDI because it could alter the strategy of mutual assured destruction that had successfully prevented nuclear war. (France had its own small nuclear deterrent, but it was more vulnerable to ballistic missile defense than the large strategic forces of the U.S. and USSR.) France had agreed to support the European Space Agency's proposal to define a pressurized module called Columbus for the U.S. space station, if all parties could work out adequate arrangements. (D/D, May 7/85, 35)
The Washington Post reported that Britain would accept a Reagan administration invitation to contribute an expected $300 million to build a permanent space station scheduled for launch in 1992, making Britain along with W. Germany [see Jan. 17] the first noncommunist industrialized nations to participate in the space station program. Geoffrey Pattie, British minister of state for industry and information technology who was in Washington to consult with lawmakers and Reagan Administration officials about scientific cooperation, technology transfer, and telecommunications policies, said Britain would announce the contribution at the European Space Agency's (ESA) Rome meeting [see European Space Agency, Jan. 18]. President Reagan had invited Australia, Canada, Japan, and the U.S.'s Western European allies to join in funding and building the modular space station and expected France, Italy, and Japan to announce soon their intention to PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Pattie said Britain wanted access to technologies to design and build space stations as well as the results of research carried out in space laboratories; initial space station plans called for biological and physical sciences labs. While France and Germany were interested in rocketry research, Britain had focused its space expenditures on improving data transmission and expected the space station to enhance these technical capabilities. Pattie did note, however, that Britain feared the U.S. would impose export controls on some of this technology and that technology transfer questions required resolution during two years of space station feasibility studies. He emphasized the U.S. had to fashion "sensible" restrictions "instead of saying no to [exports of| everything, which is counterproductive to U.S. as well as European interests." (NYT, Jan 18/85, A1)
Geoffrey Perry of the United Kingdom's Kettering Group said the radio aboard the Soviet Salyut 7 space station came on the air June 12, indicating the two cosmonauts who entered it had been successful in repair efforts, Aerospace Daily reported. Perry said he had received no radio signals from the Salyut for some time, supporting the belief of Western observers that the space station experienced some kind of electrical problem since the last cosmonauts had left it in October 1984. Perry noted the cosmonauts were transmitting on June 12 from 7:09 a.m. to 7:16 a.m. GMT on the Soyuz frequency, but by 8:46 a.m. GMT, the next time they were within his radio range, they had switched to the Salyut frequency. (A/D, June 13/85, 2)
Over 700 enterprises and organizations in the Soviet Union used pictures taken from Soviet orbital Salyut space stations, helping to save the equivalent of $8 million, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. For example, the photos assisted in selecting routes of tunnels for the Baykal-Amur railway in eastern USSR. And cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinykh, then aboard Salyut 7, were working on a new program of geophysical research. (FBIS Moscow World Service in English, July 28/85)
NASA announced its Administrator James Beggs and the Director General of the European Space Agency (ESA) would sign June 3 at the ESA pavillion at the Paris Air Show a memorandum of understanding (MOU) for the conduct of a cooperative program for detailed definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of a permanently manned space station [see Space Station Program, Apr. 1]. The cost of the Phase B studies carried out by European industry under ESA management, together with the corresponding technology program, amounted to 80 million accounting units or $64 million at the current rate of exchange. Cooperation during the space station's development, operations, and use phases required separate agreements. (NASA Release 85-78)
NASA announced it signed with the University of Arizona, Tucson, a memorandum of understanding to study, plan, and, if approved by Congress, develop an orbiting astrometric telescope facility, which would be mounted in the mid-1990s on the planned space station, to detect and study planetary systems around other stars. Astrometric telescopes measured with extraordinary precision positions of stars and other celestial objects. Eugene Levy, director of the University's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and David Black, head of Ames Research Center's (ARC) Space Sciences Division, would be project principal scientists. Black described the effort as "the beginning of a new scientific discipline. The results of the search, whether positive or negative, will profoundly alter our view of the universe." The gravitational pull of planets orbiting a star causes it to wobble as seen against the sky. By measuring this wobble, an astrometric telescope could determine the presence of planets and perhaps determine the properties of such a planetary system. Although ground-based telescopes use the wobblemeasuring technique to measure properties of double stars in orbit around one another, an astrometric telescope could measure the disturbance in a star's motion caused by objects as small as planets. Until researchers find other planetary systems, they cannot fully test theoretical models used to explain the origin of our solar system or the formation of stars. The joint project would be coordinated with development of photometric and spectroscopic techniques and theoretical modeling of planetary system formation. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED ARC would clarify final telescope design and manner of mounting on the space station as well as oversee telescope and instrument construction and mounting. The University would establish operating facilities on the ground and coordinate continuing scientific investigations that would extend more than a decade. The project would include a core program of planet detection and study, and guest investigators could use the telescope for astrometric studies of other important celestial objects. Initial study and definition work would begin shortly; ultimate implementation would require Congressional approval and funding. (NASA Release 85-3; ARC Release 85-01; ARC Astro-gram, Jan. 17/85, 1; A/D, Jan 17/85, 95)
The text of a joint declaration made public today at the end of a seven-nation economic conference in Bonn, West Germany, contained a statement concerning space activities, the NY Times reported. The text read: "We welcome the positive responses of the member states of the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan to the invitation of the president of the United States to cooperate in the United States manned space station program on the basis of a genuine partnership and a fair and appropriate exchange of information, experience, and technologies. Discussions on intergovernmental cooperation in development and utilization of permanently manned space stations will begin promptly. We also welcome the conclusions of the ESA Council on the need for Europe to maintain and expand its autonomous capability in space activity, and on the long-term European space plan and its objectives." (NYT, May 5/85, A16)
NASA selected the dual keel reference configuration, a modification of the power tower concept, for the proposed permanently manned space station, the Spaceport News reported. It was called the dual keel because of twin vertical booms that would provide the framework for attachment of other structures. The concept's primary attributes were that it would provide better customer accommodations and servicing, increased attachment area, and a more versatile design for growth based on future requirements and changing station roles. Another change in space station planning was placement of the pressurized modules near the station's center of gravity to increase the amount of space available for experiments, such as crystal growth, that needed a microgravity environment. NASA selected the dual keel configuration from a variety of layouts devised by teams of contractors working on two-year space station definition and preliminary studies. Overall space station shape and module placement were just two of the many significant technical decisions program officials had made since the space station definition period began in April 1985. NASA would conduct over the next three to five months a series of reviews to narrow design choices so that it could select by early 1986 a baseline structure for the proposed space station. Contractor teams would spend the second half of the study phase doing space station subsystem preliminary designs, leading to start in mid-1987 of the planned development phase. (Spaceport News, Oct 25/85, 2)
The Canadian government decided to join the U.S. and other allies in producing an orbiting space station, agreeing in principle to spend up to $600 million over the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. U.S. space officials had encouraged Canada for more than a year to join the U.S.-led project, which already had the participation of the European Space Agency (ESA) and Japan, together expected to spend about $4 billion. Canada's science minister Tom Siddon said that Canada's involvement in the space station could produce economic benefits valued at more than $2 billion by the year 2000. (W Times, Mar 22/85, 5A)
Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney announced Canada's decision to proceed with Space Station participation when he visited with President Ronald Reagan. Canada agreed to perform preliminary design of a Mobile Servicing Center during Phase B of the Space Station definition and preliminary design study that would consist of a base structure with accommodations for payloads, orbital replacement units, utilities and thermal control. It would function as a multipurpose structure equipped with manipulator arms that would be used to help assemble and maintain the Space Station, as well as help keep instruments and experiments mounted on the Station's framework. (NASA Release 8633)
NASA announced that it would cease implementation of work package realignment for a period of up to 90 days while two teams composed of NASA personnel, Phase B contractors, and representatives from user groups and international partners reviewed Space Station design and work package assignments and functions. The task force, headed by W. Ray Hook, Manager, Space Station Office, would critically examine all aspects of the current Space Station baseline configuration in terms of the amount of extravehicular activity required for assembly and maintenance, launch capacity of the Shuttle fleet, assembly sequence of the baseline configuration, resultant impact to the utilization of the station, potential impact on international partners, and overall technical performance and integrity of the Station. The Executive Technical Committee, headed by NASA Associate Administrator Andrew J. Stofan, would approve the assumptions, engineering, and technical constraints identified by'50*the task force and oversee their activities. (NASA Release 86116)
NASA announced the termination of a contract with TRW to design a baseline hybrid power system for the Phase B Space Station electrical power system. TRW expressed their wish not to pursue the project, but remained a major contributor to three other work packages. (NASA Release 8655)
Analysis conducted by the Office of Space Station in the areas of Space Station management, use of expendable launch vehicles, and cost impacts resulting from design changes was accepted by NASA. Changes included replacing the nodes and tunnels that connected pressurized modules with larger resource nodes, revising the assembly sequence to provide early scientific return and reduce extravehicular activity, achieving an initial power level of 37.5 kilowatts, achieving permanent human capability, and placing fixed servicing capabilities closer to the modules. Realignment of certain work package responsibilities was also recommended; the total cost increase would be around $49 million. (NASA Release 86180; 86181)
The Pentagon, which had previously voiced objection to the Space Station, asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and foreign participants because the Department of Defense (DoD) hoped to use the orbiting laboratory for some of its Strategic Defense Initiative experiments. The DoD envisioned only a very limited need for the facility, but other countries would no doubt vehemently object because the project was intended only for peaceful purposes. (WSJ, Dec 22/86; NY Times, Dec 20/86)
NASA announced the formation of an operations task force for the Space Station, cochaired by Carl B. Shelly and Dr. Peter T. Lyman. The task force was to explore alternative approaches to operating and managing a deployed Space Station that had to integrate a diverse set of U.S. and International hardware elements to accommodate a wide range of tended and untended user activities and to recommend an effective concept for operating the system. (NASA Release 86129)
NASA considered both a crewtended station and one that would be permanently tended. The Phase B study period for the Space Station identified and evaluated alternative systems, components and philosophies that would result in a configuration responsive to the needs of potential users, be costeffective to operate and maintain, and flexible in terms of growth, size, and capabilities. A crewtended station could have people aboard only when a Shuttle orbiter docked to it; the orbiter would provide the habitable facilities. While Congress directed NASA to examine an option "which phases in permanent crew features of the Station," NASA pointed out that the "phased approach would force postponement of experiments important to advancement of manned spaceflight and would increase the total cost of developing the permanently manned Space Station." NASA went on to argue that the savings achieved by the phased approach would be offset by the cost of operating the Station in a crewtended mode for several years and by the cost of maintaining the industrial base during the delay period before resuming assembly of the permanently tended station. Savings of the crewtended phase were estimated at $284 million in 1984 dollars and total cost prior to permanently crewtended capability at $1 billion. (NASA Release 8659)
With a request for proposals issued to approximately 250 firms, NASA planned to implement a Technical and Management Information System (TMIS) to support overall functions of the Space Station, including design, development, and operation. The TMIS would link the various NASA centers involved with the program and would automate the generation and interchange of documents, correspondence, schedules, engineering data and drawing, budget data, and other management information. Carried out in implements, the first would be operational less than one year after the contract award date. (NASA Release 8688)
Ground testing of auxiliary thrusters designed to allow the Space Station to maintain a proper orbit and altitude demonstrated that the thrusters can operate for long periods of time with no hardware degradation. Fueled by water broken down into hydrogen and oxygen, the thrusters ran for as long as 22,000 seconds, and, with a target of 10 years of Space Station life, the goal was for them to run 40,000 to 60,000 seconds. Bell Aerospace Textron and Aerojet TechSystem Corporation conducted the tests for NASA. (NASA Release 8665)
Soviet cosmonauts made a historic trip between Space Stations as they traveled 1,800 miles in their Soyus T15 transport module from the recently launched Mir to the Salyut7 station. The mission was broadcast on state television. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), May 6/86; B Sun, May 7/86; NY Times, May 8/86)
NASA announced a sevenyear schedule of tasks for the Shuttle fleet, and that Shuttles would resume flying in early 1988. The schedule reflected President Ronald Reagan's directive to phase out commercial and foreign launches, inasmuch as 24 of the 44 contracts had been voided. This left only 12 percent of the Shuttle missions devoted to commercial and foreign launches. An increase to 41 percent of the payloads, as opposed to 31 percent, would be given to Department of Defense missions. The remaining 47 percent of the schedule was reserved for the space agency's own missions, 33 percent for scientific studies and other needs, and 14 percent for the Space Station. The first year, said NASA, would see only 5 flights; that number would, it was hoped, increase to 16 flights per year by the 1990s. (WSJ, Oct 6/86; W Post, Oct 4/86; P Inq, Oct 4/86; B Sun, Oct 4/86; NY Times, Oct 4/86)
The Christian Science Monitor cited Soviet news agency TASS as reporting that the two Soviet cosmonauts aboard Soyuz TM2 had successfully linked up with the Soviet space station Mir. CSM, Feb 9/87)
NASA issued Requests for Proposals to U.S. industry for a detailed design and construction of a permanently habitable Space Station. The two options proposals were due by July 21, 1987. Option one was for a phased program calling for a permanentlyh)0*0*0*tended Space Station to be operational by 1996. Option two was the enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. (NASA Release 8765; LA Times, Apr 25/87; NY Times, Apr 25/87)
NASA announced that it was proceeding toward design and development of a Space Station that would establish a permanent U.S. human presence in space by the mid1990's. It would seek proposals from industry for a phased development of the Space Station, including estimates for an enhancedcapability Space Station configuration. NASA reported that the first phase of the Space Station development, the revised baseline configuration, which would provide an initial, permanently habitable research capability by 1996, had been approved by the President. It would include a laboratory and habitation modules, four resource nodes, a polar orbiting platform, and experiment provisions outside of the pressurized modules. (NASA Release 8750; LA Times, Apr 4/87)
NASA began a threeday ground system test of the scientific instruments to be carried on the Hubble Space Telescopeh) 0*0*0*(HST). The five scientific instruments to be carried aboard the HST were the widefield and planetary camera, the high resolution spectrograph, the faint object spectrograph, the high speed photometer, and a faint object camera. (NASA Release 8735)
The United States and potential foreign partners agreed to resume negotiations aimed at building a Space Station in the 1990s. After a twoday meeting between representatives from the United States, Canada, Japan, and the 11nation European Space Agency, agreement was reached that the project would remain a civilian endeavor. NASA negotiators emphasized, however, that they saw no conflict between the "peaceful purposes" of Space Station and potential use by the Pentagon for "nonaggressive" activities. h)0*0*0*NY Times, Feb 13/87; USA Today, Feb 13/87)
President Ronald Reagan signed into law a $9.6 billion authorization bill that provided NASA full funding to begin work on the Space Station. (W Post, Oct 31/87)
NASA announced selection of the Astronautics Division of the Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, in Sunnyvale, California, for the design, development and implementation of the Software Support Environment (SSE) for the Space Station. The SSE contract was to be managed by the Space Station Program Office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 87107)
NASA agreed with most of the findings and recommendations listed in the report by the National Research Council Committee on Space Station. Agency officials disagreed, however, with the findings that the deployment of the Space Station with the current Space Transportation System was risky. NASA also found the Committee's cost estimate for backup hardware and test program enhancements to be too high. (NASA Release 87135; NY Times, Sept 15/87; LA Times, Sept 15/87; H Post, Sept 15/87)
NASA awarded contracts to the four aerospace firms it had selected on December 1, 1987, to design, develop, test, evaluate, and deliver the components and systems comprising the proposed crewtended Space Station, planned for orbit in the mid1990s. The contracts issued covered Phase I, the already approved elements of the Space Station program. Phase II would cover any potentially needed enhancements of the Space Station's capabilities. The four companies selected, each to perform a unique but interdependent portion of the total program, were Boeing Aerospace Company, Huntsville, Alabama; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, with locations in Huntington Beach, California and Houston, Texas; General Electric Company, AstroSpace Division, with locations in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania and East Windsor, New Jersey; and Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International, Canoga Park, California. (NASA Release 87177; NASAh)(0*0*0*Release 87187; C Trib, Dec 2/87; LA Times, Dec 2/87; NY Times, Dec 2/87; WSJ, Dec 2/87; W Post, Dec 2/87)
NASA granted the Space Station Program Support Division, of Grumman Aerospace Corporation in Bethpage, New York, a contract to provide systems engineering and integration for the Space Station. The contract also called for Grumman to provide a broad base of management support to the Space Station Program Office in the areas of program control and management; information systems; operations; program requirements and assessment; and safety, reliability, and quality assurance. (NASA Release 87110; WSJ, July 3/87; B Sun, July 3/87)
Negotiations were completed among the United States, Canada, Europe, and Japan on the framework for international cooperation in the Space Station program. Under the agreements, the United States would provide the overall Space Station framework: operating subsystems, including life support and 75 kilowatts of power; laboratory and habitat modules; and a freeflying platform that would be placed in polar orbit for Earth observation. Canada would provide a Mobile Servicing System, which would be used in conjunction with the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of Space Station elements. Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanently attached pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposed facility and an experiment logistics module. The European Space Agency would provide a pressurized laboratory module, which would be permanently attached to the crewtended base; a freeflying polar platform to work together with the U.S. polar platform; and an astronauttended free flyer to be serviced at the crewtended base. The United States anticipated spending approximately $16 billion (fiscal year 1989 dollars) to develop Space Station hardware. The total foreign commitment to the Space Station was in excess of $7 billion. Furthermore, the partners would cover more than 25 percent of the Space Station's expected annual operating costs throughout the 2030 year life of the program. Signature of the agreements was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 8874)
NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateral memorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design, development, operation, and use of the permanently crewtended civil international Space Station complex. Under the terms of the new MOU, ESA would provide the Columbus laboratory module to the international Space Station complex. This permanently attached, pressurized module would support approximately 40 single equipped racks for payloads and storage. ESA would also provide an untended, freeflying polar platform for Earth observation experiments, complementing the polar platform under development by the United States. As a third element, ESA would provide a mantended free flyer (MTFF) designed to accommodate longduration microgravity applications in the fields of fluid physics, life, and material sciences. (NASA Release 8844)
Margaret G. Finarelli was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations, effective December 12. Finarelli had been serving as Director of the Policy Division in the Office of Space Station. (NASA Release 88164)
After a tense 24hour delay of deorbit burn, a Soviet Soyuz TM5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in Soviet Central Asia. The Soyuz TM5, returning to Earth from a weeklong visit to the Mir space station, experienced premature shutdowns of its reentry motor during the first two deorbit burn attempts. The first shutdown had been caused by a malfunction in the automatic guidance system, whereas the second failure resulted from improper resetting of the flight computer. The problem was considered by some U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because the Soyuz was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left and a limited amount of fuel with which to attempt a third deorbit'"0*burn. The mission had been noted for the participation of an Afghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space station of a physician crew member. (FBISSOV88175, Sep 9/88; AP, Sep 7/88; NY Times, Sep 7/88; W Post, Sep 7/88; WSJ, Sep 7/88; W Times, Sep 7/88; B Sun, Sep 7/88)
NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the Earth as a single ecological system, the Los Angeles Times reported. Called the Earth Observing System, the U.S. portion of the multinational project would cost well above $2 billion and would use a wide range of orbiting laboratories, including free flying platforms and facilities aboard the international space station. The heart of the program would include four platformstwo from the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japanthat would be launched into polar orbit around the Earth by the participating countries. The program, which was still in the planning stage, was described by NASA science division spokesman Charles Redmond as "a critical element in NASA's strategic plan." LA Times, Mar 23/88)
An untended Soviet Progress38 supply spacecraft, bound for the Mir space station, was launched from the Baikonur launch facility. The Tass News Agency reported the Progress38 ferried "expendable materials and various loads" for use by the Mir threeman crew. (SSR 1988 083A; C Trib, Sep 11/88;
NASA announced that Andrew J. Stofan, Associate Administrator for the Space Station, would retire from the Agency on April 1. Stofan's career with NASA spanned nearly 30 years. He had directed the Space Station program since June 1986. During his tenure, the program underwent a major cost review which culminated in an Administrationapproved plan to develop the Space Station in two phases. Stofan also oversaw the establishment of the Space Station program office in Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release 8816)
NASA issued a request for proposals to design and build a groundbased radar that would quantify and characterize debris orbiting between 180 to 360 miles above Earth. The radar would have the capability of detecting debris as small as 1 centimeter in diameter, contrasted with the 10centimeter capability of current radar systems. The data gathered by the orbital debris radar would be used in designing the permanently crewtended Space Station Freedom, which would be built to withstand as much orbital debris damage as possible. (NASA Release 898, Jan 19/89; W Times, Jan 23/89; NY Times, Jan 24/89; P Inq, Jan 29/89)
Two Soviet cosmonauts successfully docked with the Mir Space Station and began activating the facility's systems after a fourmonth hiatus. (FBISSov89173, Sep 8/89; SSR 1989 071A; AP, Sep 8/89; UPI, Sep 8/89)
Thomas L. Moser, acting Associate Administrator for the Space Station Freedom program, announced he was leaving NASA0*effective May 13. Moser, appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for the Freedom program in December, had been serving as the acting Associate Administrator since April 30. (NASA Release 8972, May
NASA director of the Space Station Freedom Program Office, Ray Tanner, announced his resignation from the space agency, citing new ethics rules on contract work by former Federal employees as the reason for his departure. Tanner was a 30year NASA veteran.(Wash Tech, Jul/89)
detail of a young star system known as 30 Doradus, 160,000 light years from Earth. After scientists corrected the flawed mirror problem with computer enhancement, the telescope revealed 60 of what were yet the youngest and heaviest stars known. The "star nursery," was once thought to have only one large star; the most advanced telescope prior to the Hubble telescope had raised that number to 27. (W Post, Aug 14/90; W Times, Aug 14/90; P Inq, Aug 14/90; NASA Release 90111)
The Galileo spacecraft came to within 590 miles of Earth and received a push from Earth's gravity that increased its speed from 67,000 m.p.h. to 78,000 m.p.h. This was the first of two gravity assisted passes by Earth that were planned for the craft, enabling it to reach Jupiter in December 1995. It collected numerous data from Earth, as it would again on its second pass. (CSM Dec 10/90; NY Times, Dec 9/90)
The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee recommended an increase of NASA's budget from $12.3 billion to $17 billion for the next year, including the $2.9 billion earmarked for continued development of the Space Station. Committee members acknowledged that the final spending plan would probably be lower but wanted to show their support despite NASA's recent problems. (P Inq, Sep 20/90)
The Hubble Telescope failed a test on this date as scientists attempted to direct it toward stars emanating a common brightness; the telescope was able to find none. It was later discovered that the problem originated from an error in the telescopes computer guidance system, and a new program with an updated star chart was sent up. (NY Times, May 10/90; W Post, May
NASA announced its Integrated System Preliminary Design Review for Space Station Freedom was completed. Preliminary figures for June 1990 showed Freedom's weight to be 143,000 pounds lighter than the allocated limit of 512,000 pounds and that the housekeeping power limit of 45 kilowatts was exceeded by 15 kilowatts. A summerlong resources scrub reduced weight estimates by 130,000 pounds and housekeeping power by 13 kilowatts. "What this means," said Deputy Manager Marc Bensimon, "is that the design is maturing and converging." (NASA Release During December: NASA awarded contracts to Centennial Contractors, SPACEHAB, and Dyncorp. Centennial was given a '(0*year $5 million contract for various minor constructions, modifications, and rehabilitation projects at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, SPACEHAB received a 5year $184,236,000 contract for providing commercial middeck augmentation module services: physical and operational integration of the module and the experiments; power, cooling, data management; and crew training in six Space Shuttle flights at sixmonth intervals. Dyncorp procured a $30 million contract for technical services that included operation and maintenance of radar, telecommunications, and optical services. (NASA Release C90gg; 90157; W Times, Dec 4/90)
AP reported that the Baikonur Space Station in western Kazakhstan seemed ready to avoid the problems that harmed nuclear testing at Semipalatinsk. A Soviet space delegation visited the Kazakh capital of Alma Ata in April to conclude a program of scientific, technical, and economic cooperation between the two countries and to build a training school for young cosmonauts in Leninsk. (AP, Aug 30/91)
Major articles in the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times raised questions about NASA's proposed Space Station with regard to its cost, the functions it was supposed to perform, and the need for such space ventures in relation to other needed expenditures. The Los Angeles Times stated that Soviet Space Station experience showed that "at current levels of technology, reusable spaceships were more expensive than throwaway models." (NYT, May 26/91; LA Times, May 26/91)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it was building a $337 million space robot, technically a Flight Telerobotic Servicer, to be used in constructing Space Station Freedom. The robot was to have artificial computer intelligence and video cameras on each wrist and the top of its body. (B Sun, Mar 15/91)
NASA revised its Space Station plan to include a centrifuge. The absence of a centrifuge in the scaled-down plan was criticized by a number of scientists, who considered it essential for the study of the effects of weightlessness. (NY Times, Apr 11/91)
NASA planners discovered that despite the problems it encountered, Astro-1 brought back much valuable data on December 10, 1990. However, there was no money in the FY 1992 budget for Astro-2. Instead, NASA appeared to be concentrating on such priorities as the Space Station program. The Astro program is Shuttle-dependent, with the assumption that the Shuttle would provide cheap and reliable space transportation. The Astro program needs to be reexamined. (CSM, Jan 9/91)
The media reported the successful efforts of two Soviet cosmonauts outside the Mir Space Station to replace a damaged antenna. (AP, Jun 25/91; UPI, Jun 25/91)
The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors passed a resolution asking state and federal legislators to block a proposal to move NASA's Space Station program office out of Reston, Virginia. (Fairfax Journal Weekly, Feb 20-21/91)
Soviet Space Station Salyut 7 was expected to fall today. Unexpectedly high solar activity in recent years had increased atmospheric drag on the station and speeded its orbital decay. (NY Times, Feb 6/91; USA Today, Feb 6/91; UPI, Feb 6/91)
NASA announced the award of an avionics systems engineering and analysis support contract to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The work was to include work on Space Station Freedom as well as Space Shuttles and advanced spacecraft, manned and unmanned. (NASA Release C91-s)
According to the media, the Bush Administration was pressuring Congress to retain the appropriation for the Space Station. (NY Times, Jun 5/91; W Times, Jun 5/91; USA Today, Jun 5/91; W Post, Jun 5/91; AP, Jun 5/91; UPI, Jun 5/91)
Grumman Corporation announced a cut of 110 more employees at its Space Station Program Support Division in Reston, Virginia. The cuts resulted from NASA's decision to reduce the scope of the Space Station project. (PR Newswire, Mar 13/91; W Times, Mar 14/91; NY Times, Mar 14/91)
AP reported that House-Senate legislators agreed to provide $26 billion in 1992 for NASA's planned Space Station. (AP, Sep 26/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 28/91; Htsvl Tms, Sep 29/91)
An editorial commended NASA for being more realistic in its revised plans for a Space Station and particularly for decreasing its emphasis on the role of humans in space. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 8/91)
The media covered extensively NASA's receiving $2 billion for the planned Space Station in the House budget action but having a new launch system and the National Aerospace Plane cut drastically. The House voted to give NASA 14.3 billion in FY 1992 and the Senate later approved the compromise bill. (UPI, Oct 2/91; AP, Oct 3/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; NY Times, Oct 3/91; W Times, Oct 3/91; LA Times, Oct 3/91; USA Today, Oct 3/91; CSM, Oct 4/91)
An article in the Washington Post pointed out NASA's policy of spreading out its contracts for the Space Station and other space projects among numerous states, which helped gain the support of congressional figures for NASA funding. (W Post, Jul 16/91)
An editorial in the Christian Science Monitor commended the "modest, sober plan" of NASA for the revised Space Station, saying that it would enable the United States to make progress in space and should not be judged simply on its cost. (CSM, May 7/91)
Fairfax County Board Chairman Audrey Moore argued that if NASA's Space Station management facility were moved from its Reston, Virginia headquarters, at least half of its highly skilled workers would quit, delaying the Space Station program for months or years. The questioning about the status of the Reston facility resulted from a congressional order to NASA in 1990 that it overhaul the management structure for the Space Station project. (W Post, Mar 14/91)
According to the media, in a General Accounting Office (GAO) report to be submitted to Congress, NASA underestimated the cost of building the redesigned Space Station by $10 billion and the cost of operating it through the year 2027 by about $24 billion. GAO is to submit the report, its first since the Space Station restructuring, to the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Government Activities and Transportation. Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher in the report questioned the cost value because only one of the original eight Space Station uses, that of a research outpost, was being met. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
An alert ground controller noticed that the Progress-7 cargo module was on a collision course with Soviet Space Station Mir and deflected the module. The two cosmonauts succeeded in docking the module and obtaining the food supplies. (AP, Mar 28/91; B Sun, Mar 29/91; W Post, Mar 29/91)
The Houston Chronicle interviewed a number of experts concerning NASA's Space Station redesign, based on a congressional instruction that the design be reviewed. The consensus was that as much of the existing design would be kept as possible, with some experts fearing that the changes may be too timid. (H Chron, Jan 27/91)
NASA announced that its Galileo spacecraft would turn and fire its on-board thrusters on July 2 to set its course for an encounter with the asteroid Gaspra in October 1991. This would be the first flyby of an asteroid. (NASA Release 91-99)
The Huntsville Times reported that Boeing's top space scientist, Harvey Willenberg, who had returned from a trip to the Soviet Union, was convinced from the Mir experiments he saw that NASA needed to build Space Station Freedom. The experiments in the area of microgravity were especially impressive. (Htsvl Tms, Jul 11/91)
Prior to the House vote, Thomas M. Donahue, Professor of Planetary Science at the University of Michigan, wrote an article published in the Christian Science Monitor. In it he sharply criticized NASA for making the Space Station its priority rather than scientific inquiry and urged Congress not to support the Space Station. CSM, Jun 7/91)
Robert F. Sekerka, Dean of the College of Science at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and Chair of the Committee on Microgravity Research of the Space Studies Board, wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal sharply criticizing the appropriation for the Space Station. He questioned the purpose of the Space Station and its cost-effectiveness. (WSJ, Jun 10/91)
Red Star announced that pieces of the Soviet 40-ton Salyut 7 Space Station and the attached Cosmos-1686 cargo ferry will fall to Earth on February 6 or 7. The expected location of the fall site was not known. (LA Times, Feb 1/91; AP, Feb 2/91; C Trin, Feb 3/91; W Times, Feb 4/91)
The subcommittee of NASA's Office of Astronautics and Exploration Technology said the redesign of the Space Station would still enable all proposed experiments to be handled. However, two major experiments might not be able to be conducted simultaneously because of power limitations. (Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
NASA announced the selection of Cortez III Service Corporation, Alamogordo, New Mexico, to provide institutional and programmatic support services for Space Station Freedom Program and Operations Office, Reston, Virginia. (NASA Release C91-cc)
The Senate on July 17 voted 64 to 35 to approve President Bush's $2.03 million request for the Space Station in the new fiscal year, $100 million more than the House appropriated. (W Post, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; UPI, Jul 18/91)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle stressed the importance of US space activities, including the fact that "A permanent U.S. Space Station is vital to our future technological development and economic prosperity." (H Chron, Mar 24/91)
In their column, Jack Anderson and Dale van Atta commented on the strong efforts of Texas congressmen to have NASA move Space Station Freedom headquarters from Reston, Virginia to Houston. The headquarters were moved from Houston to Reston in 1987. The cost of such a move would be at least $26 million, and it would probably delay NASA's program at least a year. (W Post, Mar 12/91)
Grumman Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,900 jobs by the end of 1991. The major cause was reduced US government defense spending, which included reductions in NASA's budget, leading to a scaling down of Grumman's Space Station Support Division. (AP, Apr 2/91)
UPI quoted Krasnaya Zvesda (Red Star), the official Soviet armed forces daily, as saying that the Soviet Union would cancel one manned space mission, launch another without a flight engineer, and leave a cosmonaut on the Mir Space Station beyond his planned six-month stay to save money. (UPI, Jul 18/91)
According to the press, the Japanese government was angry that its participation in the proposed Space Station was threatened by congressional budget cuts. Reportedly, it issued a warning that it might refuse to contribute to U.S.-led major scientific projects in the future unless plans to build the Space Station remain intact. (NYT, May 28/91; UPI, May 28/91)
Soviet media reported that two Soviet cosmonauts spent six hours on a spacewalk outside their Mir Space Station, completing the installation of two telescopic booms that would enable the transfer of solar batteries from one part of the Space Station to another. They also installed laser reflectors that could be used as beacons for unmanned space ferries and Space Shuttles arriving at Mir. (AP, Jan 26/91)
Representative Barbara Boxer, Democrat from California, chair of the House Government Operations subcommittee on government activities and transportation, announced a hearing about the Space Station. Boxer said the General Accounting Office report and the analysis of her staff revealed "astronomical" differences between NASA cost estimates for the Space Station and "more objective, independent analyses." (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
In an editorial entitled "Fiscal Realism at NASA," NASA was commended for its reported readiness to stress smaller, less costly missions. In this connection, the paper believed that Space Station Freedom should be scrapped as well as the Earth Observing System platforms. (CSM, Oct 1/91)
In an article on the budget proces, the Christian Science Monitor stated that despite it being a Bush Administration priority, the Space Station may go in the budget because of the deal to bring the federal deficit under control. (CSM, May 31/91)
Salyut 7, the Soviet Space Station, crashed into Earth's atmosphere near Argentina's border with Chile. Powered by solar energy and chemical batteries, it contained no nuclear fuel or other dangerous substances. (P Inq, Feb 7/91; AP, Feb 7/91; UPI, Feb 7/91; W Times, Feb 8/91; NY Times, Feb 8/91; UPI, Feb 8/91; AP. Feb 8/91; C Trin, Feb 8/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA personnel were warning elected officials across the country that the killing of the Space Station would mean lost jobs in their districts. (LA Times, May 25/91)
A lengthy article discussed the work of Dr. Allan R. Sandage, a former assistant of Edwin P. Hubble and his heir. Like Hubble, Sandage is an observational cosmologist concerned with investigating the galaxies and the implications of the expanding universe. Using the Carnegie Institution, which has telescopes at Mount Wilson, as his base, he was working on a two-volume atlas of galaxies. (NY Times, Mar 12/91)
NASA announced that it recently signed an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) to cooperate in developing the Cassini spacecraft to study Saturn. The Cassini spacecraft would consist of the Saturn Orbiter provided by NASA and the Huygens Probe System provided by ESA. It was currently scheduled for launch by NASA on a Titan IV/Centaur vehicle in April 1996. NASA would provide overall Cassini mission operations and ESA will support probe operations. The flight from launch to Saturn orbital insertion requires approximately seven years; once there, the mission baseline lifetime is four years. (NASA Release 91-1)
NASA broke ground at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a $56.2 million facility to prepare pieces of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Mar 26/91; USA Today, Mar 27/91; W Times, Mar 27/91; UPI, Mar 27/91; CSM, Mar 28/91)
The newspaper summarized the controversy over the revised NASA plans for Space Station Freedom between NASA and the National  Research Council, which maintained that the scaling back had gone too far to be valuable. (San Jose Mercury-News, Apr 2/91)
A columnist compared NASA's cutting the plans and cost for the Space Station at congressional request with proposed programs of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). Whereas NASA cut its projections, to the point that some questioned the viability of the result, SDI appeared to have an undiminished appetite for funds. (LA Times, Apr 21/91)
Daniel S. Greenberg, editor of Science and Government Report, a Washington newsletter, questioned the redesigned Space Station and expenditures to date on the station, citing the views of the Space Studies Board of the National Academy of Sciences. (P Inq, Apr 3/91)
NASA announced that the University of Tennessee-Calspan's Center for Advanced Space Propulsion (CASP), Tullahoma, had selected three firms for the launch and recovery of the unmanned, Earth-orbital Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET) space system. Space Industries, Inc., Houston, would be responsible for payload integration, orbital operations, and recovery system and services; Space Services, Inc., Houston, would be in charge of the launch vehicle and services; and Westinghouse Electric Company, Millersville, Maryland, would supervise systems engineering and the service module. The initial funding for COMET in 1991 was $10.5 million. (NASA Release 91-14)
Two Soviet cosmonauts who were running low on food and water left Space Station Mir in their Soyuz TM-11 capsule and flew to the port of their astrophysics lab, Kvant. Their cargo ship, Progress M-7, had failed twice to dock with Kvant. They linked their capsule with the port when the balky antenna was located. Another attempt will be made to attach Progress to Mir. (AP, Mar 26/91; W Times, Mar 27/91)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for NASA's office of Space Systems Development, met with all staff at the Reston, Virginia Space Station Freedom office. He said NASA intended to maintain a strong and effective team at Reston during the Space Station Freedom development period. (NASA Release 91-192; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 15/91; W Post, Nov 16/91; Washington Technology, Nov 21/91)
Stephanie E. Meyers, Director of the Office of Commercial Space Transportation in the Office of Transportation, set forth the role of her office and the goals for commercial space. She saw the goals as the creation of space and ground systems essential to space operations in low Earth orbit. These ground systems needed to be adequate to support launches. Second, there must be government-owned and privately-owned launch vehicles to carry freight and passengers to the Space Station. In addition, commercial space companies faced obstacles in pursuing business in this very competitive industry and fair-trade relationships needed to be established. (Washington Technology, Dec 19/91)
The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council stated that a smaller, simpler new design for NASA's Space Station did not meet the basic research requirements for which it was to be built. This development came as NASA was preparing to solicit Congress for its annual funding and when the European Space Agency and other international partners had accepted NASA's new plan. (W Post, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91; B Sun, Mar 16/91; NY Times, Mar 16/91; C Trin, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that a Soviet spacecraft carrying supplies for the two cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station almost collided with the station during a docking attempt. (AP, Apr 12/91; C Trin, Apr 14/91)
In an article entitled "Freedom's Wobbly Flight," Mark L. Goldstein criticized NASA's large spending on the Space Station at the expense of other NASA programs. He gave a history of the Freedom program, its costs, and its relationship to Congress as well as the criticisms by the scientific community. (Government Executive, Sep 1991)
PR Newswire reported that engineers from McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company would meet with representatives of NASA and its international partners from July 8 to 25 to review changes to the basic design of Space Station Freedom. Discussion is to center on Work Package 2 dealing with such factors as the propulsion assembly, resource node design, external thermal control, data management, communication and tracking, extravehicular systems and guidance, and navigation and control systems. (PR Newswire, Jul 8/91)
Opponents of Space Station Freedom, led by Representative Tim Roemer of Indiana, said they would try to strip from the 1993 federal budget virtually all of the $2.25 billion requested for the project by NASA. The attack would come as an amendment to legislation that would set maximum spending levels for the agency over the next three years. (LA Times, Apr 29/92)
The planned U.S. Space Station Freedom survived an attempt to kill it when the House of Representatives defeated a move to cut the $2.25 billion needed to keep the program on track. The 254-159 vote to continue funding marked the fourth time the House had voted on the costly and ambitious program in recent years. (UPI, Apr 30/92; AP, Apr 30/92; W Post, Apr 30/92; USA Today, Apr 30/92)
NASA and the National Institutes of Health signed an agreement to enhance each agency's biomedical research capabilities. The agencies pledged to develop programs that apply NASA's unique expertise to practical, medical needs on Earth and in space. The agreement was intended to stimulate new opportunities in the biomedical and behavioral research community because it provides for greater access to space-based facilities as well as involvement by university-based research centers. It was expected to increase support for Space Station Freedom, funding for which was under attack in Congress. (NASA Release 92-119; W Post, Jul 22/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
The U.S. Senate rejected by a wide margin a move to cancel NASA's international Space Station but forbade NASA from significantly changing the laboratory's design and schedule. If approved by the House of Representative, the restriction would severely limit NASA's ability to overhaul key aspects of the program. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
House-Senate negotiators agreed yesterday to provide $2.1 billion next fiscal year for Space Station Freedom. The agreement spelled the end of another year of efforts by opponents to kill a program they consider too expensive and of little scientific value. The Space Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its planned 30-year lifetime. (W Post, Sept 23/92; USA Today, Sept 23/92; LA Times, Sept 23/92; The Sun, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23/92)
The Space Station Freedom was saved, as the House of Representatives voted down an amendment aimed at killing the $40 billion project. The House voted 237-181 against an appropriations bill amendment that would have cut $1.2 billion from the 1993 budget for NASA, effectively eliminating the Space Station. The Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its lifetime. It was the fourth time in the last two years that the House had affirmed its commitment to build the Space Station. Supporters said the vote could well represent the program's last serious Congressional challenge. (P Inq, Jul 30/92; LA Times, Jul 30/92; NY Times, Jul 30/92; WSJ, Jul 30/92; W Times, Jul 30/92; W Post, Jul 30/92; The Sun, Jul 30/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92; AP, Jul 30/92; UPI, Jul 30/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92; AvWk, Aug 3/92)
In a mission called "La Chalupa 30," four men were to conduct investigations in an underwater habitat without any direct outside human contact for 30 days, giving the Behavior and Performance Laboratory at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, the opportunity to study team performance as part of its continuing investigation to identify pertinent psychological issues for long duration space flight. "The mission will serve as an environment which is analogous to future extended space missions on the Shuttle or Space Station," said Dr. Al Holland, Head of the Behavior and Performance Laboratory. (NASA Release 92-62)
The House of Representatives voted to spend $2.1 billion next year for work on NASA's Space Station Freedom as opponents ended their efforts to scuttle the project. (The Sun, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
A joint Russian-French crew blasted off on a 12-day mission aimed at keeping the aging Space Station Mir in orbit until 1996.  The cosmonauts were slated to install a complex of stabilizing gyroscopes inside the Station and also to work in space to assemble an engine to make space navigation easier. (W Times, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92, Jul 27/92; UPI, Jul 27/92; The Sun, Jul 28/92; WSJ, Jul 28/92; W Post, Jul 28/92; NY Times, July 28/92; APn, Jul 27/92; UPn, Jul 27/92)
A newspaper reported that three NASA aquanauts submerged since May 6, 1992, in a research station 30 feet below the surface of Emerald Lagoon, Florida were doing well but missed sunshine and their family members. The exercise was part of preparation for months-long stays aboard space station Freedom. (USA Today, May 22/92)
NASA acknowledged that it could not keep the Space Station project on schedule even with the most optimistic current funding projections. The projected level of Congressional appropriations for the next few years meant certain delays in development and launch schedules of anything up to 12 or 18 months. Such delays would mean that the station would miss the official December 1999 target for being able to support a crew on a permanent basis. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
Rockwell's Space Systems Division and NPO Energia announced that they had signed a contract that was the first step in building docking hardware for a U.S. Space Shuttle/Russian MIR Space Station mission planned for 1995. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Many scientists, concerned that there might not be enough money for basic research, question the wisdom of spending huge sums on projects such as the Space Station. Yet, research shows that the economic benefits of NASA's programs are greater than generally recognized. In 1987, NASA's procurement budget generated $17,800 million in total industry sales, had a "multiplier effect" on the economy of 2.1 million people, created 209,000 private-sector jobs and $2,900 million in business profits, and generated $5,600 million in federal, state and local government tax revenues. Furthermore, these benefits were widely distributed throughout the country. (Nature, Jan 9/92)
A briefing and demonstration of a prototype low vision enhancement system (LVES), cooperatively developed by NASA and the Lions Vision Center at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, was scheduled for to be held May 13 at the Oncology Center Auditorium. The LVES technology, originally developed for possible use on Space Station Freedom, potentially could help millions of Americans afflicted with certain low vision problems. (NASA Note N92-43)
A bipartisan group of prominent Americans proposed a plan to reduce government spending, invest in growth, and reshape the income tax system in the hope of balancing the federal budget in a decade. Decisions on which programs would be cut were left to Congress and the president, but the group suggested that NASA's planned Space Station, mass transit operating aid to cities, and other programs would be prime candidates for funding reductions. (AP, Sept 30/92)
The Senate approved funding of $2.1 billion for continuation of the Space Station after defeating a proposal to close down the project because of its expense. The Senate vote, together with House approval in July, assured continued funding and Congressional support for the Space Station. (W Post, Sept 10/92; LA Times, Sept 10/92; WSJ, Sept 10/92; AP, Sept 10/92)
Several life science researchers questioned whether a redesigned Space Station would accomplish enough life science objectives to be worth the investment. Researchers at a meeting of the NationaL Research Council's Space Studies Board said that they expected a redesign to either shrink or reduce the centrifuge, a set of spinning modules designed for precise gravity experiments on animals aboard the station. Harold Guy, a professor at the University of California's School of Medicine in LaJolla, California, said that without a large centrifuge, much of the station's experimental value for life scientists would be lost. "The life science community may bail out," said Fred Turek, a neurobiologist and chairman of the space biology and medicine committee on the National Research Council's Space Studies Board. (Space News, Mar 1/93)
Static firing tests of a propulsion development test article for Space Station Freedom began at NASA's White Sand's Test Facility (WSTF) in New Mexico in late December. The tests checked the preliminary design for the propulsion module that was to be used for Space Station attitude control, orientation, speed and altitude control, and avoidance of space debris. (NASA Release 93-7)
A Washington Post editorial had generally favorable comments regarding President Clinton's economic stimulus-deficit plan, noting that he had taken on some formidable interest groups. It suggested, however, that he  could have killed the Space Station as "unaffordable in present circumstances." A Washington Times editorial argued that both the Space Station and the Superconducing Super Collider should be cut. A Philadelphia Inquirer editorial called for a delay in building the Space Station because of funding issues. (W Post, Feb 24/93; W Times, Feb 26/93; P Inq, Mar 7/93)
NASA announced that it had cleared the instruments scheduled to be used for the Hubble Telescope repair mission.  It was feared that the instruments had been contaminated by sandy  grit that had seeped into the cargo room where the equipment was being stored. The grit problem forced NASA to move the Endeavour to a different launch pad. (B Sun, Nov 16/93; W Times, Nov 16/93; USA Today, Nov 16/93; RTw, Nov 15/93)
The magazine Science reviewed the three main redesigns of the Space Station, noting that the White House's mandate that NASA produce a less costly station design had upset the U.S.'s international partners. (Science, May 28/93)
In a report delivered to the White House, a panel appointed by the President said it found the two cheaper options for a Space Station to be the "most deserving of further
Richard H. Kohrs, Director, Space Station Freedom, retired from NASA after 30 years of service. Kohrs was appointed Space Station Freedom Director on June 1, 1989. (NASA Release  93-160)
According to a report in Space News, NASA and White House officials agreed last week to consider partner concerns about the Space Station design effort. The U.S. Government would give their European, Japanese, and Canadian partners greater representation in the project and ensure that any alternative design did not exclude their hardware. The agreement was laid out in a March 19 document. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
NASA described Space Station Freedom as a laboratory for industry as well as government and set aside a third of the Station's experiment space for commercial research. NASA planned to begin launching pieces of Space Station Freedom into orbit in 1996. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
U.S. Senate candidate Richard Fisher called Space Station Freedom a "pork barrel" project in a speech on Friday. Fisher, a Texas investor, was running as a Democrat in a special May 1 election. Fisher had advised the independent presidential campaign of Ross Perot, who had criticized the lack of spending controls on the Space Station project. Fisher, who in the past had voiced support for the Superconducting Super Collider, said that he was still studying the project's worth. (H Chron, Apr 24/93)
NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the agency's new office of Space Science, effective immediately. During his career at NASA, Diaz served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, managed the Galileo and Ulysses programs in the Solar System Exploration Division, and developed space science programs for Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 93-53)
NASA announced that it had notified all its contractors to discontinue all overtime on Space Station work and said that it would "restrict new spending." (W Times, Feb 27/93)
An editorial in the Washington Post noted that in light of the budget deficit it was difficult to quarrel with Congress's decision to kill funding for the Superconducting Super Collider. By that same token, however, the Space Station deserved to be killed, especially because the Super Collider had the potential to contribute to human knowledge while the Space Station did not. (W Post, June 30/93)
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved $1.9 billion for continued work on Space Station Freedom, but the project faced a fight in the full Senate, where opponents wanted to cut funding. (USA Today, Sep 10/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, commentator James Flanigan made the case for funding the Space Station, reminding readers of the Vest Commission report, ordered last March by the White House. The report listed three main goals of the Space Station program: to learn about space travel, specifically how human beings and materials react to prolonged weightless exposure; to gather technological and engineering knowledge; and to further international cooperation. (LA Times, June 28/93)
Writing in the Los Angeles Times, aerospace engineer James F. Glass advocated funding the Space Station, arguing that not only does NASA provide jobs and dreams, but it also keeps the country pulling together for America's future. He noted that when NASA, with all its faults, spends a dollar, the taxpayer usually receives a dollar's value.  Ultimately, in Glass's view, the country needs to focus on more than survival; it must reach for the stars. (LA Times, Jul 20/93)
In letters to the editor of the Baltimore Sun, two Johns Hopkins University physics professors defended the importance of the Super Collider. Both writers said that the project represented basic research of the highest caliber and noted that its fate should not be tied to that of the Space Station. (B Sun, Jul 1/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that a dispute was brewing within NASA regarding who was to be assigned to the management team overseeing work on the redesigned Space Station.  NASA
By a one-vote margin, the House of Representatives voted to fund Space Station Freedom. As a result of a 216-215 vote, the program escaped an attempt by budget-cutting lawmakers to scrap the multibillion-dollar project. (WSJ, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93; LA Times, June 24/93; W Times, June 24/93; USA Today, June 24/93; AP, June 24/93; UPI, June 23/94; RTw, June 23/93; W Post, June 24/93)
An editorial in the Houston Chronicle criticized political opponents of a permanent U.S. Space Station, arguing that the Space Station's detractors risk costing this nation its scientific and technological preeminence for decades to come. (H Chron, June 2/93)
Onboard computers aborted the launch of Space Station Discovery just three seconds before liftoff. This was the fourth delay for Discovery, which was halted twice for technical problems in July  and rescheduled because of a meteor shower on August 11. NASA said the next try could come in three to six weeks.
NASA's $30 billion Space Station survived its third, and presumably final, vote in the House of Representatives, when members voted 248-184 to keep it from being grounded by budget-cutters (H Post, Nov 23/93; H Chron, Nov 22/93)
Writing in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Daniel S. Greenberg noted that "times are bad" for the so-called mega projects of our era: Star Wars, the Space Station, and the super atom smasher in Texas. He, warned, however that big-science mobilization should not automatically be suspect, suggesting, for example, that the country would benefit from an all-out effort on a project such as the electric car. (P Inq, May 21/93)
Europe, Japan, and Canada--the United States's partners in the Space Station project--rejected NASA's move to redesign the project. They instead demanded that the team begin by considering revisions to the current plan. They warned that they might be forced to pull out of the program if the United States changed the plan significantly. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
The Russians, eager to hawk their space wares to the West, were scheduled to hold a conference on the Mir Space Station July  27 to July  28 at the Dulles Hyatt in Herndon, Virginia.  Hosted by NPO Engergia, manufacturer of the Mir, the conference is scheduled to cover all aspects of the platform.  A large delegation was expected from the NASA Space Station redesign team. (Washington Technology, Jul 15/93)
The President's 1994 budget request for NASA called for an increase over last year's budget and contained key provisions for the Space Station program and the development of important new technologies. The President was to propose a $14.7 billion budget for NASA for fiscal year 1994, up from $14.1 billion during the current year.
The media reported that Representative George E. Brown, chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, told a news conference that NASA's effort to save Space Station Freedom was doomed unless the project continued with a scaled-down version of the current design. Although the streamlined model of Freedom was the most expensive of the three options being analyzed, Brown noted that it was also the one with years of experience and $8 billion in development costs behind it. (WP, May 21/93; H Chron, May 21/93; LA Times, May 21/93; W Times, May 21/93; NY Times, May 21/93; W Post, May 21/93; AvWk, May 24/93)
The Washington Post reported that NASA's dream of building a permanent human outpost in space was generating much controversy. President Clinton's decision to shrink Space Station funding and his mandate that the station be redesigned added to the controversy. (W Post, May 17/93)
Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that the White House had begun to review the various options for redesign of the Space Station. There were reports that the President might be wavering in his support for the Station and perhaps would be willing to sacrifice it for his broader economic goals. (AvWk, June 14/93)
Studies on the feasibility of using Soyuz TM spacecraft as crew return vehicles for the U.S./international Space Station were scheduled to enter a more detailed phase according to NASA Associate Administrator Arnold D. Aldrich. NPO ENERGIA was to study modifications, launch options, and costs for one year. The Soviet hardware could allow NASA to permanently staff the station by 1998 or 1998. (AvWk, Jan 4/1993)
A New York Times editorial suggested that if pain was to be spread fairly, the country's two biggest science projects, the $8.3 billion Superconducting Super Collider now being built in Texas and the $30 billion Space Station, had to be cut along with other vital programs.
Writing in the Washington Times, Representative George E. Brown, California Democrat and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, argued that critics of the Space Station were themselves partially responsible for the delay, confusion, and high costs of the Station because of the annual sniping, redrafting and retrenchment to which they have subjected the  Space Station. Brown maintained that the United States needs the jobs provided by the Space Station, needs the scientific challenges of space-based design and engineering, and needs the emotional satisfaction of exploration and discovery.
NASA settled a union grievance with Reston, Virginia Space Station employees and cleared the way toward opening a new office in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Sep 9/93)
According to NASA, President Clinton's plans for the Space Station could threaten some of the 125 Maryland jobs connected with the project. About $14 million was being spent in Maryland on station-related work. (B Sun, Feb 18/93)
In an article in the Washington Post Magazine, entitled "Has NASA Lost Its Way?," author Peter Carlson described his viewing of a Shuttle launch, which he called inspiring," and reviewed the history of Space Station Freedom. About the Space Station, he concluded, "So if they can cut the waste and trim the fat, if they can really do it cheaper, faster, better, then let them do it." (W Post, May 30/93)
The media reported that NASA administrators were seeking to quell the concerns of European space officials over the redesign of the planned U.S. Space Station. Clinton's decision to redesign the project could have "disastrous effects' if it results in an orbiting lab unsuitable to foreign partners, a German executive said. (WSJ, May 14/93; AP, May 13/93)
Scientists reported that NASA's Galileo spacecraft had detected changes in the interplanetary magnetic field as it passed the asteroid Ida on August 28. (NASA Release 93-193)
The newly released proposals to redesign Space Station Freedom drew mixed reviews on Capitol Hill, with supporters praising the effort and detractors citing the cost of the project as further evidence that it should be abandoned. (W Post, June 9/93; LA Times, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; P Inq, June 9/93; AP, June 9/93; APn, June 8/93; RTw, June 8/93; H Chron, June 9/93; H Post, June 10/93)
Writing in the Chicago Tribune, commentator Joan Beck called on Congress to kill the Space Station. She admitted that killing the project would cost jobs, but argued that doing so was necessary if progress were to be made in cutting back the deficit. (C Trib, June 24/93)
NASA announced that the Space Station redesign team would submit its final report on three design options to the White House Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station on Monday, June 7. The three options included a modular concept that would use existing flight-proven hardware, a derivative of the current Space Station Freedom design, and a Space Station that could be placed into orbit with a single launch of a Shuttle-driven vehicle. (NASA Release 93-104; UPI, June 6/1993; AP, June 7/93; NY Times, June 6/93; W Post, June 6/93; B Sun, June 6/93)
The media announced that NASA had unveiled four designs for a scaled-down Space Station. None of the designs, however, could be built as cheaply as the White House had requested and still meet the orbital laboratory's main goals. The team presented cost figures ranging from a low of $11.9 billion to $13.3 billion to build the design that more completely resembled the Space Station Freedom. Three of thee options were similar to the original design of the Space Station but achieved savings through reduction in hardware, management, and capability.
In its annual report, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel said that the Space Station had "progressed considerably in the past year." The report went on to say that the effort "exhibits a degree of stability and continuity that has previously been absent." (APn, Mar 18/93)
Representative Robert Walker, Republican from Pennsylvania, who was scheduled to chair the House Science Committee in the new Congress, said he felt that Space Station appropriatations by Congress were safe. He indicated he wanted to explore ways of linking NASA facilities with universities and international partnerships as well as tax incentives for space business development, all of which he saw as ways of saving space funds. (AP, Dec 14/94; Gannett News Service, Dec 14/94; H Chron, Dec 15/94; Congressional Quarterly's Congressional Monitor, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 15/94)
An article criticized of the ways in which NASA spent more than half the funds allocated to it on unproductive matters that had not advanced the design of the Space Station. The article alleged that at least 24 months of delays resulting from congressional budget-trimming and frequent redesigns cost $1.6 billion, a "hefty extra layer of management" cost $1.1 billion; a discarded propulsion and guidance unit cost $900 million, a failed data management system cost $500 million, and other redesigns and deletions cost $600 million. Since the appointment of Daniel Goldin as Administrator, many of the problems had been fixed, but if technical glitches and congressional meddling recurred, the program could again be in trouble. (Bus Wk, Aug 15/94)
NASA also announced that the Hubble Space Telescrope had obtained the best images yet of a mysterious mirror-imaged pair of rings of glowing gas that encircle the site of the stellar explosion supernova 1987A. The explanation of the pair of rings was uncertain. (NASA Release 94-77; Reuters, May 19/94; AP, May 19/94; NY Times, May 20/94; B Sun, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; USA Today, May 20/94; CSM, May 26/94)
NASA announced the completion of the International Space Station System Design Review. Using approximately 75 percent of Space Station Freedom hardware, the completed Station was to consist of U.S. elements, including the integrated truss, habitation module, and laboratory module; the Russian science power platform, service module, and functional cargo block vehicle (FGB); the European laboratory module; the Japanese experiment module and exposed facility; and the Canadian remote manipulator system. The assembly was to begin with launch of the FGB vehicle in November 1997. The U.S. contribution to the Station was estimated to cost $17.4 billion from Fiscal Year 1994 until assembly was complete in 2002. The ground system for the Station was to build on the Shuttle and Freedom programs. (NASA Release 94-53; USA Today, Mar 25/94; W Times, Mar 25/94; AP, Mar 25/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 26/94)
NASA downplayed a slip in the first U.S. assembly launch for the Space Station, promising no more schedule bumps. Originally scheduled for launch in July 1997, the Boeing-built node was now scheduled for launch in December 1997. Moreover, the U.S. Habitation module was now scheduled for launch in March 2002 instead of January 2001. The program changes annoyed congressional staffers because the program put more dependence on the Russians. NASA station chief Wil Trafton remained confident that the changes would not cause serious harm to station assembly. (Defense Daily, Feb 22/94)
NASA announced assembly sequence refinements that incorporated the latest updates to plans for the International Space Station. The sequence incorporated early provisions for a centrifuge and allowed for the earlier construction of Russia's Solar Power Platform but did not affect existing major milestones. (NASA Release 94-164)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 returned valuable new images of the supernova 1994 I in the inner regions of the "Whirlpool Galaxy," M51, located 20 million light-years away in the constellation Canes Venatici. A supernova is a violent stellar explosion that destroys a star while ejecting the products of nuclear burning into the gas between stars. (NASA Release 94-76)
An unmanned cargo craft bearing food, fuel, and equipment docked with Russia's Mir orbiting Space Station according to Itar-Tass news agency. (Reuters, Mar 24/94)
NASA announced that the Space Station Control Board had approved a revised assembly sequence that provided significantly more power for the U.S. laboratory, provided an earlier U.S. capability for essential Space Station systems, and produced hardware in an efficient and cost effective manner while still meeting the $2.1 billion annual spending cap. (NASA Release 94-117)
The anticipated fight over the budget and, specifically, the likelihood that NASA's appropriation would be cut and that further efforts would be made to eliminate funding for the International Space Station was featured prominently in the media. (SP News, May 16-22/94; Fla Today, May 16/94; Defense Daily, May 16/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
NASA's budget situation and the impact of its congressionally mandated budget cutting on contractors were discussed. Spending on the Space Station was cut significantly, but because most of NASA's budget was tied to long-term space projects downsizing trends were slow to affect contractors. A table was given of the 20 major NASA contractors in fiscal year 1993, including the parent company, the subsidiary, the parent's location, and the amount of the contract. NASA was working on reducing the time required to select contractors and improving the internal procurement process. (Government Executive, Aug 94)
The new Canadian Liberal government announced that budget constraints obliged it to discontinue participation in NASA's planned international Space Station. Later, the Canadian government said this was a misunderstanding and that Canada's commitment was to be reduced. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; AP, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 24/94)
Larry DeLucas, recently appointed chief scientist of the NASA Space Station project, said the Station provided the next step for businesses such as pharmaceutical companies that were trying to develop new and improved products such as high quality crystals, uninhibited by the Earth's gravitational environment. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
Rockwell Aerospace planned to deliver the Orbiter Docking System to NASA on November 21. To achieve a system that would enable a U.S. Shuttle to dock with Space Station Mir, Rockwell Space Systems Division integrated a Russian-built docking mechanism into the system. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that its Galileo Spacecraft had begun a six-month process of radioing to Earth data taken during the collisions of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at Jupiter in July. (NASA Release 94-133)
NASA's space station came under attack at a press conference by Sen. Dale Bumpers (D-Ark) and several other Democratic senators. Bumpers introduced legislation in the Senate that would kill the space station program along with six defense projects. (Htsvl Tms, Jan 6/95)
The Hubble Space Telescope�s images of 14 bright quasars produce a giant leap backward in the scientific understanding of them. Current theory caused astronomers to expect each quasar to be surrounded by its host galaxy. However, most were alone in space. Scientists will have to rethink theories about what makes quasars shine. (W Post, Jan 13/95; Science, Jan 27/95 & Nov 24/95)
The Cassini spacecraft is being tested in preparation for integration of its major systems next year. The mission is scheduled to launch in October, 1997 with the spacecraft�s arrival at Saturn in 2004. (NASA Release 95-118; AvWk, Aug 28/95)
The proposed U.S. Space Station Alpha is on schedule for operation by the year 2002. (Reuters, May 23/95)
NASA announced that the newly refurbished and improved HST had allowed astronomers to observe the fading, visible-light counterpart of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), a process that researchers called “one of the most energetic and mysterious” in the universe. The scientists speculated that the observable counterpart signified the existence of an unobservable, catastrophic burst of gamma rays, unleashing as much energy in a few seconds as the Sun does in 10 billion years. The New Technology Telescope and the W. M. Keck Telescope, added to the HST in 1997, had enabled scientists to make the observation. According to Gerald J. Fishman of Marshall Space Flight Center, the lead investigator of NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, astronomers could not overestimate the significance of the find, even if the visible- light phenomenon was only an indicator of another unobservable phenomenon. “This [discovery] opens up a whole new era in GRB research,” Fishman explained. “We now know that it is possible to see the fading optical emission by rapid follow-up observations with powerful telescopes. With several more of these, we should be able to narrow the models of what could be causing these gigantic outbursts.”(NASA, “Hubble Tracks the Fading Optical Counterpart of a Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 97-63, 1 April 1997.)
The crew of the Mir space station replaced the malfunctioning computer block, which had failed on 2 January, and restarted the station’s orientation system. This common type of malfunction, which had occurred seven times in 1997, did not create life-threatening conditions, but it did reduce the power supply to the space station, thereby crippling the gyroscope that oriented the station’s solar panels. Using the Soyuz escape module engines to control its orientation, Mir turned off all nonessential systems, to conserve energy until the crew had completed the repair.(Washington Post, “Mir Crew Replaces Computer Block,” 4 January 1998; Chicago Tribune, “New Year, Old Woe—Mir Computer Glitch,” 3 January 1998.)
NASA awarded US$33 million in grants to 48 researchers, to conduct microgravity biotechnology research through NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications. To those investigators awarded the 40 grants for ground-based research, NASA provided access to its microgravity research facilities, including aircraft flying parabolic trajectories and sounding rockets. NASA awarded eight grants to flight-definition investigators, to prepare for experiments on the International Space Station (ISS).(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Microgravity Biotechnology,” news release 98-217, 1 December 1998.)
NASA modified a contract with Boeing Information, Space and Defense Systems, increasing by US$163.4 million the company’s contract for work on the ISS. Under the modified contract, Boeing would supply additional engineering support and prelaunch testing for the ISS. The original eight-year prime contract, effective since 1995, had a value of US$7.1 billion and covered the construction and integration of the ISS. The modification covered sustained engineering for station elements, engineering support following a component’s delivery to NASA, and support of multielement integrated testing.(NASA, “Engineering and Testing Support To Be Supplied by International Space Station Contract Modification,” contract announcement c98-u, 2 December 1998.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, and the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics to conduct “parallel six-month definition studies of a new small satellite to monitor variations in the amount of radiant solar energy that reaches Earth,” as part of the preparations for the Total Solar Irradiance Mission.(NASA, “Two Studies Will Refine and Expand Solar Monitoring Task,” news release 98-47, 19 March 1998. 444 Brett Davis, “Space Station Costs Irk Congress,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 March 1998; Tamara Lytle, “U.S. Legislators Criticize Increasing Cost of NASA’s Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 20 March 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin, trying for a third time, successfully stabilized a bent solar panel during a spacewalk of 4 hours and 15 minutes. The solar panel was only one of 10 nonfunctioning panels. The crew had not intended to repair the damaged panel fully, but only to stabilize it, so that it would not break loose and hit the space station. The cosmonauts cut short the spacewalk, scheduled to take 51⁄2 hours, when the thruster engine aligning Mir with the Sun ran out of fuel. Forced to return to the space station early, the cosmonauts were unable to remove some scientific equipment attached to the outside of the station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Mir Crew Shortens Spacewalk After Thruster Fuel Runs Out,” 7 April 1998. 459 Edith M. Lederer for Associated Press, “Europe-Space Water,” 7 April 1998; Washington Times, “Europe’s Space Surveyor Finds Water Vapor Near Stars, Planets,” 8 April 1998.)
NASA announced that Boeing Company’s cost overruns for the International Space Station (ISS) had increased by about 30 percent to US$783 million, and that NASA intended to “further cut the company’s bonus fees.” In reporting to NASA the latest cost overruns, Boeing had explained that “continued production and testing and the need to set aside money for contingencies” had caused the latest increase, US$183 million more than the US$600 million previously estimated. Under the terms of NASA’s cost-plus-fee contract, Boeing would lose an additional US$27.5 million in bonus fees, besides the US$78 million reduction that NASA had imposed.(Seattle Times (WA), “Boeing Reports More Space Station Overruns,” 7 August 1998.)
NASA announced that new analysis of data from the Galileo spacecraft suggested that Jupiter is possibly much older and colder than previously thought. Upon reaching the planet on 7 December 1995, Galileo had dropped a probe carrying a mass spectrometer into Jupiter’s atmosphere to measure its chemical composition. The spectrometer had “detected surprisingly high concentrations of argon, krypton, and xenon,” raising questions about the noble gases’ provenance. Because Jupiter would have trapped the gases through condensation or freezing, scientists did not believe Jupiter’s atmosphere had trapped the gases at its present site. As positioned at present, Jupiter is too close to the Sun and too warm to have trapped the gases. Tobias Owen, an astronomy professor at the Institute for Astronomy of the University of Hawaii and a member of the Galileo probe Neutral Mass Spectrometer team, suggested three hypotheses to explain how the gases had been trapped within the Jovian atmosphere: 1) Jupiter had formed in the area around the Kuiper Belt829 and was dragged inward to its present location; 2) the solar nebula, the cloud of gas and dust that formed the solar system, had been much colder than scientists had previously believed; and 3) the solid materials that had brought the gases to Jupiter had begun to form in the original interstellar cloud of gas and dust, before the cloud had collapsed to form the solar nebula. Owen remarked further that, if either of the last two hypotheses were correct, then giant planets might be able to form closer to their stars than current theories had predicted. Such a finding could help explain “the new observations of planetary systems around other stars, in which such close-in giant planets are relatively common.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Probe Results Suggest Jupiter Had an Ancient, Chilly Past,” news release 99-096, 17 November 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/glprobeargon.html (accessed 12 March 2008); Tobias Owen et al., “A Low-Temperature Origin for the Planetesimals that Formed Jupiter,” Nature 402, no. 6759 (18 November 1999): 269–270.)
SPACEHAB Inc. and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) signed a contract granting SPACEHAB the use of one of the CSA’s experiment lockers on the International Space Station (ISS), beginning in May 2001. According to the agreement between the two organizations, the CSA had committed to commercializing half of its allocated space aboard the space station, a global first in space commercialization.
An Israeli court indicted Israeli teenager Ehud Tenenbaum and four accomplices⎯Guy Fleisher, Ariel Rosenfeld, Barak Abutbul, and Rafael Ohana⎯for illegal entry of computers in the United States and Israel. The group allegedly hacked into the computer systems of the Pentagon and NASA, as well as those of academic institutions in Israel and Israel’s Knesset.(Chicago Tribune, “5 Are Indicted for Hacking in the U.S.,” 10 February 1999. 667 Associated Press, “Hubble May Have Early Planet Images,” 10 February 1999.)
NASA’s JPL announced that the Cassini spacecraft, after successfully undergoing a series of tests, was resuming the use of its electrically powered reaction wheels to control its orientation. Although mission scientists were uncertain of the cause of the spacecraft’s switch to a different maneuvering system, they suggested that a small piece of material, perhaps from the motor’s magnets, might have lodged in an area where it caused friction. Because the scientists were unable actually to detect any such material, they speculated further that either centrifugal force had subsequently forced the material out, or the motor had ground it up. Scientists also suggested that reduced lubrication in the bearings, during prolonged operation at reduced speeds, might have caused the problem, and that, perhaps, the increased motor speeds used during the tests had restored the lubrication.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Resuming Use of Reaction Wheels,” news release, 21 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=6 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, only the 14th time that a NASA Shuttle had landed in darkness. NASA controllers used infrared cameras to monitor the Shuttle’s final descent. The return of the Shuttle ended the crucial mission to repair the ISS and reset the space station’s orbit to an optimal altitude. NASA’s Mission Control, congratulating the crew on a “super mission,” began almost immediately to anticipate the flurry of missions that would finally complete construction on the ISS. Atlantis had sustained minor damage during the trip, mainly dents and scratches on its wings caused by ice. Three members of the returning crew, astronauts Susan J. Helms and James S. Voss and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, had a special interest in monitoring the ISS’s completion, because they had been selected for the second research crew to the ISS and would make a long-term stay aboard the research station.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Ends Repair Trip to Station,” Washington Post, 30 May 2000; USA Today, “Shuttle Crew Returns from Space Station Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000; Associated Press, “Nighttime Landing Ends Shuttle Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000.)
A team of astronomers using the HST published results of the first direct detection and chemical analysis of the atmosphere of a planet located outside of the solar system. The scientists had used Hubble to examine the planet’s atmosphere as it passed in front of its parent star―called HD 209458―a technique that enabled them to see the star’s light filtered through the planet’s atmosphere. During the analysis, the astronomers had detected sodium in the planet’s atmosphere. They hoped that the observation was a harbinger of a new phase in analyses of extrasolar planets, often referred to as exoplanets. Scientists also hoped that this type of analysis would enable them to measure any unusual abundance of atmospheric gases created by living organisms, thereby offering them a method of acquiring direct evidence of life on other planets.(NASA, “Hubble Measures Atmosphere on World Around Another Star,” news release 01-232, 27 November 2001.)
NASA awarded Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems a US$936 million modification to its contract for the ISS. Under the contract, which had commenced in 1995, Boeing was providing construction, integration, and operations for the ISS. The modification extended Boeing’s integration and operation work until 31 December 2003 and increased the total contract value to US$10.7 billion.(NASA, “NASA Awards $936 Million Modification to Boeing Space Station Contract,” news release c02-d, 7 February 2002.)
of two objects that orbit around a common center of mass as they both orbit the Sunwith a highly eccentric orbit and a long period. However, they had found that 1998 WW31 is very different from the Pluto/Charon system, which was previously the only known binary in the Kuiper Belt. The Kuiper Belt is the region of space that extends from Neptune, at 30 AU (astronomical units)the approximate mean distance between Earth and the Sun) to more than 100 AU. Since its discovery in 1992, the Kuiper Belt has helped scientists understand the solar system’s formation. Although scientists had discovered 1998 WW31 in 1998, they had reported it as a single Kuiper Belt object. However, analysis of observations made in 2000 indicated that the object might contain two components. Further analysis, using ground-based and HST observations made in 2001 and 2002, confirmed 1998 WW31’s binarity.(Christian Veillet, “The Binary Kuiper-Belt Object 1998 WW31,” Nature 416, no. 6882 (18 April 2002): 711– 713; NASA, “Hubble Hunts Down Odd Couples at the Fringes of Our Solar System,” news release 02-70, 17 April 2002.)
Scientists announced an estimate of the universe’s age based on new HST images of very faint white dwarf stars in Messier 4 (M4), a cluster of stars in the constellation Scorpius. The researchers had closely examined M4’s white dwarf starslow-mass stars that have exhausted their fuel sources for thermonuclear fusion. Although white dwarfs cool at a predictable rate, enabling scientists to estimate their age, they become progressively fainter as they cool, making them difficult to observe. The HST had provided the first deep exposures of these dim stars, which the astronomers discovered were M4’s oldest white dwarf stars, at around 12 to 13 billion years old. Earlier Hubble observations had revealed that the first stars in the universe had formed less than 1 billion years after the universe’s emergence from the Big Bang. Thus, the researchers had discovered that the age of these M4 white dwarfs supported the previous estimates that the universe’s age is 13 to 14 billion years old. The use of this new methodology to estimate the universe’s age represented a major departure from those used previously.(NASA, “Hubble Uncovers Oldest ‘Clocks’ in Space To Read Age of Universe,” news release 02-73, 24 April 2004; Brad M. S. Hansen et al., “The White Dwarf Cooling Sequence of the Globular Cluster Messier 4,” Astrophysical Journal 574, no. 2 (1 August 2002): L155–L158.)
The Canadian Space Agency awarded a four-year, US$116 million contract to MD Robotics to provide engineering services for robotic elements for the ISS. Under the contract, MD Robotics, a subsidiary of MacDonald, Dettweiler and Associates Ltd., would maintain and upgrade software for robotic components and would continue developing and testing a two-armed robot called Dextre, scheduled for installation at the ISS in 2005. MD Robotics had designed Dextre for attachment to the ISS, either at the end of the robotic arm currently in place―Canadarm 2―or on the mobile base station. Dextre would perform external maintenance tasks at the ISS.(Jason Bates, “MacDonald Dettweiler Nabs Space Station Contract,” Space News, 3 June 2003.)
NASA’s Cassini spacecraft provided data revealing two previously unknown moons orbiting Saturn―a new total of 33 identified moons orbiting the planet. The two moons―designated S/2004-S1 and S/2004-S2, until receiving their formal names―measured 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) and 21⁄2 miles (4 kilometers) in diameter. Because of the moons’ diminutive size, scientists suspected that they might be fragments from a larger moon.(Mark Carreau, “Cassini Finds Two More Saturn Moons,” Houston Chronicle, 19 August 2004; New York Times, “2 Little Saturn Moons,” 17 August 2004.)
A group of astronomers announced the most detailed telescopic view ever taken of the visible universe. NASA’s HST had captured a 1 million-second-long exposure of a small portion of dark sky, with a resulting image containing an estimated 10,000 galaxies, some so far away that astronomers had never before seen them. Astronomers called the image the Hubble Ultra Deep Field. They believed that the Hubble Ultra Deep Field might have revealed light from galaxies created near the time of the Big Bang and hoped that the image would provide information about the creation of the universe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Deep View of the Universe Unveils Earliest Galaxies,” news release 04-086, 9 March 2004; Dennis Overbye, “Images Reveal Deepest Glance into Universe,” New York Times, 10 March 2004.)
Data from NASA’s Cassini spacecraft revealed a new radiation belt around Saturn. Researchers already knew that Saturn had radiation belts―ring-shaped concentrations of ionized particles―outside the orbit of the planet’s rings. However, the newly discovered rings were inside Saturn’s rings. Previously, scientists had thought that a radiation belt could not exist inside the planet’s rings, because they believed that the rings would absorb any ionized particles that approached Saturn. The presence of radiation within the orbit of the rings indicated that the radiation belt’s particles are able to move through Saturn’s rings.(John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Finds Belt Around Saturn Unlike Any Ever Seen Before,” New York Times, 6 August 2004.)
NASA celebrated the HST’s 15th anniversary with the release of new images of the Eagle Nebula and the Whirlpool galaxy (spiral galaxy M51), two of the most well-known objects that the Hubble had observed to date. The new images, made with the HST’s newest camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), were among the largest and sharpest the Hubble had yet captured, so sharp that, even if enlarged to billboard size, the image would preserve the stunning details. The new image of the Eagle Nebula revealed ultraviolet light originating from a group of massive hot stars and sculpting a tall, dense tower of gas. The new image of the Whirlpool galaxy, in addition to displaying its classic features, revealed a companion galaxy located at the end of one of the Whirlpool galaxy’s arms. The launch of the HST in 1990 had ushered in a new era in astronomy. Before the existence of the HST, no telescope had viewed the universe in visible light from above Earth’s atmosphere, which blurs light and causes images to appear fuzzy. Among its many achievements, the HST had helped astronomers calculate the precise age of the universe; helped confirm the existence of dark energy; detected small protogalaxies; proved the existence of supermassive black holes; provided sharp views of a comet hitting Jupiter; and demonstrated that the process of planetary system formation is common throughout the galaxy.(NASA, “Hubble Celebrates 15th Anniversary with Spectacular New Images,” news release 05-104, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05104_HST_anniversary.html (accessed 29 June 2009). 782 NASA, “NASA Establishes Exploration Systems Advisory Committee,” news release 05-106, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05106_esac_meeting.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
Scientists announced that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had detected water vapor on Enceladus, one of Saturn’s moons. Scientists described this as one of the most important findings in planetary science, because the discovery suggested that liquid water might exist on Enceladus. Liquid water is a prerequisite for the formation of life. Scientists had already known that Enceladus has a crystalline ice covering, the most reflective type of surface in the solar system, making Enceladus the brightest object in the solar system with the exception of the Sun. In addition, scientists had already known that diminutive Enceladus, which is only 310 miles (500 kilometers) in diameter, is the smallest object in the solar system to have volcanic activity. However, scientists were surprised to discover water vapor over Enceladus’s south pole, and they were unable to explain the finding. NASA and ESA had launched Cassini in 1997 to survey Saturn and its moons.(Guy Gugliotta, “Water Vapor Discovered on Tiny Moon of Saturn,” Washington Post, 19 September 2005. 838 NASA, “NASA Releases Plans for Next Generation Spacecraft,” news release 05-226, 19 September 2005; NASA, “NASA’s Exploration Systems Architecture Study,” November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/exploration/news/ESAS_report.html (accessed 10 July 2009).)
An international team of scientists led by Giacomo Giampieri of NASA’s JPL reported in Nature the results of their study measuring Saturn’s rotation period. Using magnetic field data collected by NASA’s Cassini spacecraft in 2003 and 2004, the researchers estimated that the rotation rate of Saturn is almost 8 minutes longer than the 10 hours, 39 minutes, and 22.4 seconds calculated in 1980. Scientists had based the 1980 measurement on the Voyager spacecraft’s observations of the radio waves generated when solar radiation hits Saturn’s atmosphere. Whereas scientists were able to measure the rotation period of other planets by comparing their magnetic and rotational axes, they could not use this procedure for Saturn, because its rotational axis is nearly identical to the axis of its magnetic field. Instead, scientists had measured distortions in the radio signals that Saturn emits—distortions that they believed were related to the planet’s magnetic field—to estimate the planet’s rotation rate. According to Giampieri, a planet’s rotation rate indicates the amount of centrifugal force acting on the interior of the planet, data that provides “a very important ingredient for planetary modeling.”(Giacomo Giampieri et al., “A Regular Period for Saturn’s Magnetic Field that May Track its Internal Rotation,” Nature 441, no. 7089 (4 May 2006): 62–64; Ker Than, “Length of Saturn’s Day Updated Based on Mystery Signal,” Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
Data from NASA’s HST revealed 16 objects, possibly the most distant planets ever observed by the HST. Scientists believed that the objects were extrasolar planets—planets located outside of Earth’s solar system—orbiting various stars in the Milky Way’s central region, 26,000 light- years away from Earth. Because of the distance and faintness of the objects’ star systems, scientists could acquire mass measurements for only two of the planets. Therefore, they designated the objects as “candidate” extrasolar planets. The HST data also revealed that five of the newly discovered planets were Ultra-Short-Period Planets (USPPs), a type of planet not found in searches of neighboring areas of the Milky Way. USPPs orbit their stars in less than one Earth day.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Extrasolar Planets Far Across Galaxy,” news release 06-326, 4 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06326_Extra_planets.html (accessed 31 March 2010).)
spend approximately six months aboard the space station.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russia’s Federal Space Agency,” contract release C07-18, 9 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_C07-18_Roscosmos.html (accessed 2 March 2010); Rob Coppinger, “NASA Signs Five-Year $719 Million International Space Station Crew and Cargo Contract with Russia’s Federal Space Agency,” Flight International, 10 April 2007.)
to connect, forming a space station. According to Bigelow Aerospace’s spokesperson Chris Reed, data indicated that Genesis 2 had adequate air pressure and its power system had good voltage; however, data did not officially confirm the deployment of its solar panels or the expansion of its outer shell. Genesis 2 was a near duplicate of Genesis 1, which had launched in July 2006 and remained operational. Genesis 2 carried a new suite of sensors and avionics to monitor and control the craft while in orbit, as well as 22 cameras, compared to the 13 aboard Genesis 1. Genesis 2 also carried a multi-tank system to inflate the module with compressed air, an improvement over Genesis 1 that added vital redundancy in the inflation process and allowed better control of the craft’s gas supplies.
NASA announced that it had signed Commercial Space Transportation Capabilities Agreements with PlanetSpace, of Chicago and Transformational Space Corporation in Reston, Virginia, to facilitate the commercialization of low Earth orbit. According to these nonreimbursable Space Act agreements, NASA would provide no funding to either company. Instead, the agreements established milestones and objective criteria that the companies would use to measure progress. The agreements stipulated that NASA share information with the two companies, to help them understand NASA’s projected requirements for space station crew, transportation launch vehicles, and spacecraft, as well as NASA’s human-rating criteria, which indicates how safe a spacecraft, launch vehicle, or airplane is for transporting people. Each company would develop and demonstrate vehicles, systems, and operations required to transport crews and cargo to and from low Earth orbit. Scott J. Horowitz, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, explained that stimulating the growth of commercial space enterprise would enable NASA to focus on long-range exploration of the Moon and Mars.(NASA, “Commercial Space Transportation Capabilities Agreements Signed,” news release 07-20, 1 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0720_COTS_agreements.html (accessed 13 January 2010); PlanetSpace, “NASA Signs Agreement with PlanetSpace for Development of Commercial Space Transportation Capabilities,” news release, 1 February 2007, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/PressRelease020107.pdf (accessed 13 January 2010).)
NASA announced that Richard J. Gilbrech would be resigning his position as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems to accept a position in the private sector. During his 17 years of service with NASA, Gilbrech had held positions as Director of NASA’s SSC and as Deputy Center Director of NASA’s LaRC. Effective 24 November 2008, Douglas R. Cooke would replace Gilbrech. Cooke was serving as Deputy Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems. In his 35 years with NASA, Cooke had served as Manager for the Advanced Development Office at NASA’s JSC, Manager of the Exploration Programs Office, and Deputy Manager of the Space Station Program. He had served as a technical advisor to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, a member of the team that conducted the 90-day study on lunar and Mars exploration, and a member of the Synthesis Group, which had reported to the White House on America’s space exploration initiative.(NASA, “NASA Announces Exploration Systems Directorate Leadership Changes,” news release 08-286, 12 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-286_ESMD_leadership.html (accessed 12 November 2011).)
