The Baltimore Sun discussed a cooperative program between NASA and the Italian Space Agency, which was to supply the satellite. The program involved a tethered satellite, a concept developed by engineers at Martin Marietta Corporation. Martin Marietta developed the boom that was to deploy the satellite, which would be connected to the Shuttle by a long "string" or cable. The first mission was to include an electrodynamics test in which the satellite and tether were to be used to generate electricity. (B Sun, Nov 28/91)
A space journal commended Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford's Synthesis Group report for its role in separating the issues involved in the space exploration initiative. The editorial stated that now NASA must deliver with respect both to the Space Station and Mission to Planet Earth in order to convince Americans of the desirability of sending astronauts to Mars. (AvWk, Jun 17/91)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed environmental challenges facing scientists worldwide. Commenting on greenhouse gases, it stated that the international program of Canada, the European Space Agency, Japan, and the United States would help fill knowledge gaps. Within this framework, NASA's Mission to Planet Earth formed a major part. This included the need to analyze the hydrological cycle over the oceans, represented in part by the use of a spectrometer supplied by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The lower atmosphere also needed study as pointed out by Jack Fishman of the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. Such study would include investigation of the "self-cleaning ability" represented by the hydroxyl radical. (CSM, Apr 25/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly briefed members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on the President's 1992 budget request of $15.7 billion for NASA, a 13.6 percent increase from the 1991 budget. Programs emphasized were the New Launch System to be developed with the Department of Defense; LIFESAT, a reusable biosatellite; Mission to Planet Earth, which shows commitment to the ecology; and a 17 percent increase for NASA's educational activities. (NASA Release 91-21)
The Washington Post reported on growing congressional hesitations about supporting NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program. Legislators recently realized the mission would cost almost as much as the Space Station although it would carry only robots, not people. The Senate recommended cutting $50 million from the administration's 1992 Earth Observing System (EOS) budget request. The EOS, which would involve a series of large, sophisticated satellites, is to be the centerpiece of the mission. The House cut $145 million from the proposed budget request. Meanwhile, a panel of aerospace experts is reviewing the EOS engineering design and posing difficult questions. (W Post, Aug 9/91)
NASA announced that the Italian Space Agency (ASI) would design and develop two Mini Pressurized Logistics Modules for Space Station Freedom under a memorandum of understanding signed with NASA in Washington. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly signed on behalf of NASA and Luciano Guerriero, President of ASI, signed on its behalf. The two agencies also agreed to work toward expanding their relationship, including the provision of a Mini Laboratory. (NASA Release 91-200)
The Bush Administration proposed $14.7 billion for NASA for FY1972, an increase of $1.2 billion. The proposal would allow starting a new family of rockets to lift heavy payloads. The budget would also authorize NASA and the Air Force to spend $175 million each to develop a new launching system by the end of the 1990s. The Administration also proposed almost $2 billion to continue development of a Space Station and almost $1 billion for NASA's "Mission to Planet Earth" as part of the study of global environmental change. (NY Times, Feb 5/91; USA Today, Feb 5/91; WSJ, Feb 5/91; UPI, Feb 4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
Peter J. Wylie, professor of geology at the California Institute of Technology, commended NASA's mapping of Venus but stated that only 29 percent of the Earth's surface has been mapped in detail. He suggested that NASA's Mission to Planet Earth take the form of an integrated space-borne and ground-based mission that could map the remaining 71 percent of the surface beneath the ocean. (LA Times, Jun 10/91; P Inq, Jun 22/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)
The Christian Science Monitor reviewed NASA's nine proposed Space Shuttle missions for 1992. It noted the strong international flavor of the missions, including the ascent of the first Italian Space Agency astronaut aboard Atlantis in July 1992. Astronauts from Canada and the European Space Agency were to fly on several missions. In August, Japan's first professional astronaut was to ride on the new orbiter Endeavour, scheduled to debut in May as replacement for the Challenger. Other proposed missions and their scheduled dates were outlined. (CSM, Dec 19/91)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch on September 12, would deploy the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) 350 miles above Earth. The UARS is to study humankind's effect on the planet's atmosphere and its shielding ozone layer and is the first major flight element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 91-136)
NASA's exhibit at the 39th Paris Air Show, June 13-23, was to feature a full-scale mockup of a Space Station Freedom module. The exhibit would also feature NASA programs Mission to Planet Earth and aeronautics research. (NASA Release 91-47)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
Ariane 44L, the most powerful rocket of the Ariane series of Arianespace, the commercial branch of the European Space Agency, blasted into space the night of January 15 from the northeast coast of French Guiana in South America. The rocket carried two European communications satellite: Italsat I, the first experimental communications satellite of the Italian Space Agency, and Eutelsat II-F2, the second communications satellite of the European satellite organization. (W Times, Jan 16/91)
Time published an interview with NASA Administrator Richard Truly in which various questions were asked about the Space Station. Truly justified proposed expenditures by stressing the payoff in such areas as environmental control, life-support research, power generation, and health care technologies as well as the discoveries themselves. He also stated that Mission to Planet Earth was poorly understood but promised "unbelievable benefits." (Time, Jul 1/91)
An editorial criticized expenditures by Congress and the administration on Mission to Planet Earth with its environmental concerns, as opposed to spending larger sums on space exploration. (W Times, Mar 28/91)
Extensive media coverage preceded the scheduled launching of Space Shuttle Discovery on September 12. The countdown was planned to begin on September 9, but the discovery of a leak in the orbital steering system might delay the mission. The flight was to be the first in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth program and was to place into orbit the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS). The UARS was to carry 10 scientific instruments, of which four would study the ozone layer. (AP, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 8/91; W Post, Sep 8/91; NY Times, Sep 8/91; P Inq, Sep 9/91; W Post, Sep 9/91; W Times, Sep 9/91; USA Today, Sep 9/91; C Trin, Sep 9/91; B Sun, Sep 10/91; NY Times, Sep 10/91; P Inq, Sep 10/91; W Times, Sep 10/91; LA Times, Sep 10/91; AP, Sep 10/91; UPI, Sep 10/91)
