Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
NASA and several other U.S. and Canadian agencies announced selection of an international team of more than 200 scientists to study the relationships between northern forests and the atmosphere and how those relationships affect the global environment. The study, the Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study, was intended to conduct ground-based, air-borne, and satellite measurements in a four-year, $30-million program. NASA's component is part of Mission to Planet Earth, the agency's long-term effort to study the Earth as a global environmental system. (NASA Release 92-215)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis made a near-perfect touchdown at Cape Canaveral after a nine-day atmospheric research flight, NASA's first manned "Mission to Planet Earth." Atlantis's ambitious flight marked the first in a series of at least 10 such missions to study the sun and Earth's atmosphere over the next decade to chart subtle changes in the sun's energy output that affect chemical processes critical to life on Earth. The Shuttle circled the world 143 times during its nine-day voyage and traveled 3.7 million miles. (UPI, Apr 2/92; AP, Apr 2/92)
NASA announced that the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) had resumed full science operations following the resolution of problems with the satellite's solar array drive. Flight controllers had turned off the satellite's instruments June 2 after observing that the solar array drive was not operating smoothly and that the solar array itself was not properly tracking the sun. UARS was launched September 12, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Discovery. It was designed to study the chemistry, dynamics, and energetics of the Earth's upper atmosphere, focusing particularly on ozone depletion. UARS was the first major satellite element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-117)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis and its seven-member crew was launched into orbit to begin eight days of around-the-clock research to probe the health of Earth's polluted atmosphere. Embarking on NASA's first manned "Mission to Planet Earth," Atlantis's flight was the first of 10 planned over the next decade to chart subtle atmospheric changes as the sun's energy waxes and wanes slightly over a complete 11-year "solar cycle." (W Post, Mar 25/92; USA Today, Mar 25/92; WSJ, Mar 25/92; B Sun, Mar 25/92; NY Times, Mar 25/92; AP, Mar 25/92)
President Bush kicked-off International Space Year (ISY), a year-long worldwide celebration of space cooperation and discovery. During the year, 29 space agencies and ministries from around the world, 10 international organizations, and the United Nations planned to celebrate the spirit of discovery and work together to promote a new era of global cooperation and to increase knowledge of planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-13)
NASA released to Congress a report on the Restructuring of the Earth Observation System (EOS). The system is the centerpiece of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, a coordinated program to study the Earth's environment as a complete global system and is composed of two series of spacecraft to collect data over 15 years. "The restructured EOS program meets the concerns for a less costly more flexible program while maintaining the science observations needed to support global change research," said Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications. (NASA Note N92-22)
