NASA announced an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) for the European construction of two docking nodes for the International Space Station (ISS). In exchange, NASA agreed to launch the ESA’s Columbus laboratory module. The “launch-offset barter agreement” was typical of the arrangements in progress to bring the ISS closer to fruition. The ESA announced immediate plans for the Italian Space Agency to carry out the actual construction of the two nodes, slated for mid-2000 launches. In addition to the construction arrangement, the ESA agreed to provide a variety of minor hardware, including refrigeration units, for the astronauts’ living space and for research areas of the ISS.(NASA, “NASA-ESA Agreement Enhances Station with Additional Node,” news release 97-36, 10 March 1997. 220 NASA, “Lunar Prospector Spacecraft Construction Complete,” news release 97-38, 12 March 1997.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASA’s more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlight⎯not enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecraft’s instruments from freezing. NASA’s policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the mission⎯the first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planet⎯as NASA’s boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: “I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.”(NASA, “Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet,” news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, “NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission,” news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, “Protestors Set Stage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
Space News reported that the Italian Space Agency had decided not to participate in construction of the International Space Station (ISS) because of NASA’s insistence that Italy meet previously established deadlines. The Italian firm Alenia Aerospazio had expressed interest in building, on behalf of Italy, two nodes, the pieces of hardware used to connect different sections of the orbiting laboratory. The Italian Space Agency had requested more time to investigate the feasibility of participating, after it determined that funding the $150 million project, solely in return for additional future use of the ISS, might strain its budget for other scientific projects. Gretchen W. McClain, Acting Director of Space Station Requirements, said that, although NASA regretted the loss of Italy’s participation in the ISS, placing the project on hold while the Italian Space Agency made its decision would result in significant schedule shortfalls. The development highlighted the difficulty of fostering international participation and, at the same time, maintaining the target delivery date of the ISS.(Peter B. de Selding and William Harwood, “Italian Nodes for Station Unlikely,” Space News, 3−9 February 1997.)
