Using the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), NASA scientists measured thermal radiation differences across the universe and come up with more conclusive evidence than ever to support the "Big Bang" theory that the universe was created by a single blast 15 billion years ago. Measurements made by COBE revealed that 99.97 percent of the early radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year after the Big Bang itself. "This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," said NASA scientist John C. Mather, who announced the findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society. (NASA Release 93-5; USA Today, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 8/93; AP, Jan 8/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
Benson Edward Gammon, 76, a retired research scientist with NASA, died on February 24. Mr. Gammon worked with NASA and its predecessor agencies for 32 years. He served as chief of research and technology in the office of plans and program evaluation, where he worked on the proposal for a manned flight to Mars. (W Post, Feb 26/93)
Operators of Biosphere 2, the world under glass experiment, named John B. Corliss, a NASA consultant, to head research for the $150 million private venture. (AP, Mar 1/93)
John H. Gibbons, Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, outlined to the members-designate of the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station, three budget options. The three options are a low option of $5 billion, a mid-range option of $7 billion, and a high option of $9 billion. Each option would cover the total expenditures for the Space Station from fiscal year 1994 through 1988. (NASA Release 93-64)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Edward Stone announced that the laboratory expected to eliminate l,000 of its 7,500 jobs in five years. The cuts resulted from the "realities of the federal budget" and the drop in aerospace work from defense contractors, according to Stone. (W Times, Feb 27/93)
John Bolton, a pioneer in radio astronomy, died  at Buderim in Queensland, Australia.  He was 71. Bolton was credited with having discovered, in 1947, the first radio "stars," galaxies that broadcast incredibly strong signals in radio wave length. (NY Times, Jul 20/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93)
Writing in the New York Times, author John Lukacs called the proposed $8.4 billion Super Collider in Texas "super nonsense." He labelled as outdated the view held by proponents of the Super Collider that science might discover the smallest building block of the universe and that the universe could be explained by a Grand Unified Theory. (NY Times, June 17/93)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)
Yuri Koptev, head of the Russian Space Agency, said that Russia would definitely take part in the creation of a proposed Space Station with the United States. Work on the Station should start in 1997 and be finished by 2001. (Reuters, Nov 16/93; P Inq, Nov 26/93)
Galileo's controllers at the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, continued to work on unfurling the spacecraft's stuck high-gain antenna. If their attempts were unsuccessful, the craft's controllers would use Galileo's low-gain antenna to gather data, including data from a probe that would descend into Jupiter's atmosphere. Use of the back-up system would enable NASA to complete 70 percent of its mission, according to project manager William O'Neill. (CSM, Jan 13/93)
The Senate confirmed John H. Gibbons as President Clinton's science and technology adviser. Gibbons was scheduled to direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), which advises the president on issues such as global warming, AIDS research, and support of science education in schools. A nuclear physicist, Gibbons, 64, headed the congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) for 13 years. (W Post, Jan 29/93)
Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific expedition have shed new light on the geology of eastern Russian.  The data was obtained in August and September by NASA and Russian scientists using NASA's Learjet Model 23 based at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. The expedition studied a variety of sites on the Kamchatkan peninsula; the data were to be used to study the geologic evolution of the volcanoes on the peninsula as well as the impact of large volcanic eruptions on the atmosphere and its chemistry. The data were also to be used to model thermal and dynamical aspects of volcanoes. (NASA Release 93-198)
Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts, died June 13 at his home in League City, Texas, of brain cancer. He was 69.
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, praised President Bill Clinton as generally being "on track" with  his space and aeronautics program. However, the author suggested that President Clinton needed to clarify his vision for the Space Station; decisive action was needed in a project that already had consumed $8 billion over nearly a decade. An editorial in the Orlando Sentinel urged President Clinton to keep his commitment to the Space Station but to do so with an "eye toward greater efficiency."  (AvWk, Feb 22, 1993; O Sen Star, Feb 22/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Bryan O'Connor, Deputy Director of the Space Station Redesign Team, would take over management of the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by the team's leader, Joseph F. Shea, that his workload be reduced. Shea submitted his resignation as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis; he was to serve as Special Advisor to the Administrator and advisor to O'Connor. (NASA Statement on Advisory Committee Meeting)
Dr. John Peoples Jr., director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois, was appointed to take over direction of the dismantling of the Superconducting Super Collider in Texas. Dr. Peoples was to replace Dr. Ray F. Schwitters, the Super Collider's founding director, who resigned last week after Congress decided to terminate the $11 billion project. (NY Times, Nov 9/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number  of organizational changes in the agency. He named John R. Dailey to be Acting Deputy Administrator and said that Dr. Joseph Shea, recently named as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis, would have oversight over all Space Station related development activities.
Joseph George Sobala, 60, a retired chief of the communications systems branch of NASA, died of cancer January 29 at his home in Washington.
Writing in the Washington Post, columnist Michael Schrage reported that physicist John H. Gibbons, White House science and technology policy advisor, was facing some tough choices. He soon had to decide whether science and technology would play a leadership role in the Clinton Administration's economic agenda or merely a supporting one. That choice appeared to be as yet unmade. (W Post, Apr 30/93)
A team of astronomers from the University of Arizona told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that they had found convincing new evidence that a black hole the size of a million suns is at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. The astronomers reported that they had detected faint infrared emissions from an area at the galactic core that is the source of a powerful radio signal possibly produced by forces surrounding a black hole. The team detected the emissions by using a new adaptive optics system known as FASTTRAC, developed by graduate student Laird Close and Donald W. McCarthy Jr., of the University of Arizona. (W Post, Jan 6/93; NY Times, Jan 6/93; USA Today, Jan 6/93)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
G. Joseph Minetti, 85, died of heart failure on March 13. He served on the Civil Aeronautics Board for 22 years, leading the panel during years of enormous expansion and change in the aviation industry. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
NASA announced that 14 astronauts who orbited the Earth during Project Gemini were installed in the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame. The new inductees were John E. Young, James A. McDivit, the late Edward H. White II, Charles Conrad Jr., Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Thomas P. Stafford, Neil A. Armstrong, David R. Scott, Eugene A. Cernan, Michael Collins, Richard F. Gordon Jr, and Buzz Aldrin. (UPI, Mar 18/93, March 22/93; Reuters, March 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93; P Inq, Mar 21/93)
At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)
On December 23, Bill Clinton picked John H. Gibbons, head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, to be his science and technology advisor. Gibbons planned to emphasize civilian-sector competitiveness; he also hoped to broaden industry's input into White House policy making while making sure that companies invested serious money into government-backed projects. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)
NASA announced that the IC2 Institute, Austin, Texas, had appointed John S. Gee as the Director of the Ames Technology Commercialization Center (ATCC) located in Sunnyvale, California. IC2 Institute, a unit of the University of Texas, was contracted by NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts Technology, Washington, D.C, to assist NASA centers in the transfer of technology to the private sector.  (NASA Release 93-185)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
In a letter to the editor of the Washington Post, Michael Oppenheimer, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund in New York, took issue with an April 5 Washington Post article on ozone depletion. Oppenheimer charged that the article failed to "convey the seriousness of the ozone depletion problem." (W Post, Apr 25/93)
Edward Frieman, who served as chairman of the White-House-led Earth Observing System Engineering Review Committee, said that NASA needed to institute an outside review process for its science missions. NASA's internal review process tended to bloat rather than streamline science missions, he said. "They're really not review teams, they're the advocates, said Frieman, director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in LaJolla, California. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)
Responding to an Op-Ed piece by John Lukacs in the New York Times that attacked both the Super Collider and the field of particle physics, Edward Farhi, Professor of Physics, M.I.T.,
Writing in Business Week, science writer John Carey predicted that Congress would ultimately keep alive the Space Station, which he labelled a boondoggle, and very likely kill the scientifically worthy Super Collider. Carney charged that the  Space Station was mainly being kept alive to preserve 15,000 mostly high-paying jobs in areas hard hit by defense cutbacks.  He viewed the cries of those who charged that the country couldn't afford the Super Collider as hypocrisy, noting that Congress funds much less worthy projects. (Business Week, Sept. 13/93)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts Colonel Vladimir G. Titov and Sergei K. Krikalev were scheduled to meet with the media for interviews on Tuesday, March 9. The two cosmonauts were training as mission specialists for Shuttle mission STS-60 set to be launched in late 1993. (NASA Editors Note N93-9)
The Prince William Journal reported that Daniel Goldin, NASA Administrator, had decided that NASA should spend $90 million for the development of the Perseus aircraft, a remote-controlled drone that NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Science Corporation of Manassas to build. The unmanned aircraft would be used for environmental studies of the upper atmosphere. (Prince William Journal, May 5/93; LA Times, May 9/93; UPI, May 14/93)
Joseph R. Cipriano, associate director of the department's Energy Research office, recommended that the department fire the project manager for the $11 billion Super Conducting Super Collider, slash President Clinton's budget request, and "take a year... to fix problems." In a memo, Cipriano noted that morale was very low, confidence in existing management was practically nonexistent, and cost and schedule trends were worsening at an alarming rate.  A nonprofit group of research universities, Universities Research Association, Inc, was under contract to build the instrument. (W Post, Aug 2/93)
The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
Rockwell International Corporation Chairman and CEO Donald R. Beall presented the Chairman's Team Award to National Aero-Space Plane engineers in recognition of the Engine Flowpath Team's significant contributions to hypersonic propulsion development in the United States. The team was composed of 11 engineers from General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt & Whitney, Rockwell's Rocketdyne and North American Aircraft businesses, and NASA's Langely Research Center. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 26/93)
Daniel S. Golden, NASA administrator, named Dr. Joseph F. Shea, adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former NASA employee, to be in charge of the redesign of the Space Station. Golden also announced measures to conserve resources and restrict new spending during the redesign transition. (NASA Release 93-038; Space News, Mar 1-7; UPI, Feb 27/93; W Post, Feb 27/93)
Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)
Included in the promises Bill Clinton made during his presidential campaign were two relating to NASA. Clinton promised to create a civilian research agency to serve as a means of transferring new technologies into new products. He also promised to support construction of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Jan 15/93)
Writing in the Washington Post, Michael Schrage, a columnist for the Los Angeles Times, suggested that a dramatic and effective way to boost the nation's industrial competitiveness while sending a signal that the Cold War was over would be to cut in half the budget of the national laboratories. The move might shock the labs into more energetically redefining their mission, according to Schrage. The national labs include the University of California's Lawrence Livermore Lab, Los Alamos in New Mexico, and Brookhaven in New York. (W Post, Feb 19/93)
Senator John Warner, R. Virginia, introduced legislation to kill NASA's manned Space Station project. Calling the Space Station "wasteful and unnecessary," the senator urged President Clinton to kill the project. (W Post, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93)
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
President Bill Clinton announced that he would ask Congress to support a scaled-down version of Space Station Freedom and would attempt to broaden international participation in the program. Clinton said that he would also support the Superconducting Super Collider project. (RTw, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; W Post, June 18/93; LA Times, June 18/93; USA Today, June 18/93; NY Times, June 18/93; W Times, June 18/93; B Sun, June 18/93; WSJ, June 13/93; AP, June 18/93)
William F. Ballhaus Jr. was named president of the Martin Marietta Corporation's Aero & Naval Systems division in Maryland. Ballhaus was director of NASA's Ames Research Center for a number of years. (B Sun, May 3/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)
In a letter sent to the White House, five senators  pressed the Clinton Administration to maintain tight restrictions on the export of space-launch technology that could be used to develop ballistic missiles. The letter was signed by senators Cliaborne Pell, D-R.I; Jesse Helms, R- N.C.; Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M.; John Glenn, D-Ohio; and John McCain, R-Ariz. (LA Times, Aug 12/93)
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
Donald Yeomans of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that "There is almost no question" that major chunks of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 would hit the planet Jupiter in late July  of 1994. Astronomers planned to aim virtually every telescope in the world at Jupiter in late July  to see what happens when big chunks of a shattered comet crash into the largest known planet at almost 40 miles a second. Astronomers predicted that the chunks would explode with the energy equivalent to almost a billion megatons of TNT. (W Post, Jul 5/93; W Times, Oct 5/93)
The U.S. Postal Service unveiled a new $2.90 stamp featuring the image of a futuristic spaceship. Deputy Postmaster General Michael Coughlin and ex-astronaut Robert Crippen, director of the Kennedy Space Center, dedicated the stamp at a brief ceremony that was to have occurred the same day as the launch of Shuttle Endeavour. That launch was delayed for two weeks because of engine problems. (AP, June 3/93)
