William G. Fastie, known for helping establish the prestigious Johns Hopkins University space program and for inventing the spectrometer, died in Baltimore at the age of 83. Fastie, often called the father of the Hopkins space program, was one of the United States’ preeminent astrophysicists. His spectrometer, which measured the spectrum of light, helping scientists gather data about other planets, was not only innovative but also rugged enough to travel into space.(Alice Lukens, “William G. Fastie, 83, Hopkins Astrophysicist Designed Spectrometer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 17 July 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, connecting nine power, data, and communications cables between the Russian-built Zvezda and Zarya modules. Lu and Malenchenko also assembled and installed a 6-foot-long (1.8-meter- long) magnetometer boom on the Zvezda module, to serve as a compass showing the relation of the ISS to Earth.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 106.html (accessed 30 April 2008); NASA, “STS-106 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-106/eva/index.html (accessed 2 May 2008).)
NASA reported to the public that Mars Global Surveyor had captured images depicting erosion and soil deposits consistent with the presence of flowing water on the planet in the past. Researchers had long postulated that, billions of years ago, Mars’s surface held abundant water, which had dried up as the planet’s atmosphere thinned. Because scientists had suggested that the one-time presence of water on Mars might indicate the one-time presence of life on the planet, the new evidence created significant excitement in the scientific community. In announcing the find, NASA reported that it “could turn out to be a landmark discovery,” but cautioned against drawing conclusions from the images without further analysis. Furthermore, the images suggested that water might have been present on the planet more recently than previously thought. Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler explained, “For two decades scientists have debated whether liquid water might have existed on the surface of Mars just a few billion years ago. With today’s discovery, we’re no longer talking about a distant time. The debate has moved to present-day Mars.”(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Craft Finds Evidence of Water,” Washington Post, 22 June 2000; William F. Nicholson, “Reports: NASA Finds Evidence of Water on Mars,” USA Today, 21 June 2000; NASA, “New Images Suggest Present-Day Sources of Liquid Water on Mars,” news release 00-99, 22 June 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
Cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri conducted a 5-hour spacewalk to repair tiny cracks weakening the hull of the Mir space station. The cracks, the result of the June 1997 collision of a cargo craft with the station, had caused the module to lose air pressure steadily. The spacewalk was not the first attempt to solve the problem, but previous teams had been unable to locate the cracks. Zalyotin and Kaleri tested a new “cosmic version of super glue,” designed to seal the fractures even in the harsh environment of space. The Russian Space Agency clarified that the cracks were not crippling to the space station, and that the crew could maintain acceptable levels of air pressure by manipulating oxygen outflow inside Mir. However, the agency hoped to solve the problem permanently, because Russia planned to use the aging space station for commercial purposes. The Netherlands-based MirCorp, which had committed nearly US$20 million to leasing Mir, observed the cosmonauts’ activities, calling the mission the first privately funded spacewalk in history.(Reuters, “Russia: Russian Cosmonauts Leave Mir and Start Spacewalk,” 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Experiment with Space Glue To Seal Cracks,” 12 May 2000.)
When the automatic docking system failed, cosmonaut Yuri P. Gidzenko used remote control to dock the first Progress cargo spacecraft arriving at the ISS. The craft, loaded with food, boots, and supplies, had traveled smoothly to the ISS until within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the station. When the spacecraft’s automatic docking system failed to lock onto the space station, Gidzenko took control, guiding the craft to within 15 feet (4.6 meters) of the station. Glaring sunlight and a fogged camera lens forced him to wait 40 minutes, before he was able to complete the maneuver safely.(Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonaut Forced To Dock Cargo Ship by Remote Control,” 19 November 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
Hatches between the ISS and Space Shuttle Endeavour opened for the first time, and the three members of the space station crew, who had been living aboard the ISS for five weeks, received their first visitors. ISS Commander William M. Shepherd commended Endeavour’s crew for their installation of the giant solar array on the space station. The two crews spent their day together transferring supplies, such as food, water, mail, and gifts, to the space station and removing trash, damaged items, and unneeded items for return to Earth.(Reuters, “Hatch Is Opened; Endeavour, Space Station Crews Become One,” Chicago Tribune, 9 December 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Crew Visits Space Station,” 9 December 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Crew Greets First Visitors,” New York Times, 9 December 2000.)
The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. “Bill” Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fame’s Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), “Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More,” 16 July 2000.)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev reiterated Russia’s commitment to the international community, stating that Russia definitely would bring Mir safely down in February 2001. Koptev “angrily dismissed Communist demands to keep the nearly 15-year-old station in orbit,” referring to the 20-hour loss of contact earlier in the week as a “final warning that time was up” and an indicator of the level of the station’s wear and tear. Communist lawmakers, including cosmonaut Svetlana Y. Savitskaya, who called the move a concession to NASA, had criticized the government’s decision to destroy the space station. However, Koptev had countered the criticism, saying that, if Mir spun out of control, the Russian president and government would have to explain to the world where the station would fall and how much damage it would cause.(Vladimir Iachenkov for Associated Press, “Space Officials Say Mir Back Under Control, Will Be Dumped in February,” 27 December 2000.)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
Astronauts Leroy Chiao and William S. McArthur made a spacewalk outside the ISS to link electrical cables to the station’s new truss and to deploy the main antenna. The pair routed six power- and data-cables between the truss and the station, as well as four backup cables. Tests indicated that all connections worked. The astronauts moved one of the truss’s two antennas to a temporary location out of the way of future construction work; mounted the main antenna, a 78- inch-wide (2-meter-wide) dish, to a 12-foot (3.7-meter) boom; and extended the main antenna. According to NASA’s schedule, the ISS crew would turn on the antenna during an April 2001 Shuttle mission.(Michael Cabbage, “Discovery Spacewalk Goes Off Without a Hitch: Crew Members Finished a Six-Hour Task that Included Hooking Up a Truss and an Antenna,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 October 2000.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
Space Shuttle Endeavour docked successfully with the International Space Station (ISS), the first Shuttle docking at an inhabited ISS. William M. Shepherd, Commander of the ISS, noted the festive mood at the space station, even though the two crews would not meet in person until later in the mission. Soon after Endeavour docked, Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to lift the 49-foot-long (15-meter-long) tower containing the solar array out of the cargo bay, where it would remain suspended 10 feet (3 meters) above the Shuttle while the crew slept.(Steven Siceloff, “Endeavour Docks at Station: Astronauts To Attach Arrays Today,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 December 2000.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, “20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers,” 3 December 2000.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler appeared before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics to address the future of NASA’s space science programs. Weiler discussed NASA’s problems in the previous year, such as the loss of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, explaining that, although NASA was developing a response to those losses, it would need more funding if it were to prevent similar failures in the future. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) indicated that President William J. Clinton had proposed increasing the space science budget by US$200 million over each of the following four years. NASA’s budget reauthorization bill for FY 2001 added an additional US$19 million in funding for space science programs.(Space Business News, “Money, Management Are Key To Avoiding NASA Failures, House Panel Hears,” 27 September 2000.)
Soyuz successfully docked with the unoccupied Mir space station. At the last minute, cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri docked Soyuz manually, because Russian space officials feared the autopilot was about to malfunction. The cosmonauts planned to concentrate on plugging a small air leak and conducting several scientific experiments during a spacewalk.(Associated Press, “Latest Space Crew Docks Flawlessly with Mir Space Station,” 6 April 2000.)
NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns,” 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, “New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmosphere’s Ozone,” New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
Endeavour astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega worked outside the ISS to connect power lines, correcting an electrical shortage that had restricted the station’s first crew to two of three habitable modules. The two astronauts also inspected the first solar panel that they had unfurled, to determine whether the crew could correct its tension. Wearing a small TV camera on his helmet, Noriega beamed down to Mission Control images of the loose tension cables on the array’s right wing. The cables had slipped off their pulleys during the solar panel’s deployment on 3 December. Tanner remarked that an astronaut could place one tension cable back on its pulley without too much trouble, but that the other cable would require more work. Mission Control instructed the spacewalkers to try to fix the cables on their third and final spacewalk the following day.(Chicago Tribune, “Space Station Gets an Electrical Boost from Solar Wings,” 6 December 2000; Associated Press, “Live from Space, ‘Carlos Cam’,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 6 December 2000.)
Three astronauts attached a new docking port to the ISS, with two of the crew spacewalking and one operating Discovery’s robotic arm from inside the Shuttle. Astronauts Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff and Michael Lopez-Alegria, assigned to work outside the ISS, had difficulty loosening the latches securing the docking port inside Discovery’s cargo bay. However, once they had freed it, Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata lifted the 2,700-pound (1,200-kilogram) port using the Shuttle’s robotic arm and positioned it on the space station. When the port was within 1 foot (0.3 meters) of its position, the astronauts outside gave Wakata “invaluable” instructions, necessary because the crew was working without the assistance of the camera at the end of the robotic arm. The camera had been out of commission since the short circuit on 14 October.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Docking Port Nudged Carefully into Place,” Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, FL), 17 October 2000.)
After spending more than two months aboard the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth. According to MirCorp, the mission had been the first privately funded crewed mission to Mir. Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri landed safely in Kazakhstan, having spent most of their time aboard the Russian spacecraft conducting crucial repairs. To keep the station running, MirCorp had signed a lease agreement for Mir and paid for the mission. However, with the return of Zalyotin and Kaleri, Russia placed on hold the prospect of continuing Mir, even if supported with private funds. “If there is no money, Mir will not fly,” Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev stated at the end of the mission. Russian officials indicated that the Russian Space Agency would leave the space station unpiloted once again, until private investors could fund another mission. The continuing focus on Mir, while the building of Russia’s ISS module ran far behind schedule, agitated some NASA officials and international space leaders.(Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Prepare To Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; CNN.com, “First Privately Funded Manned Space Mission Blasts Off for Mir, 4 April 2000, http://archives.cnn.com/2000/TECH/space/04/04/russia.mir.01 (accessed 15 July 2008).)
Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
In preparation for the December arrival of a pair of solar panels, astronauts Michael Lopez- Alegria and Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff cleaned up the top of the newly installed truss on the ISS. The two men also deployed a tray on the truss, which would hold the connections between the station’s central structure and the Destiny laboratory module built by the United States and scheduled for installation in January. Next, the spacewalkers tested “mini-jetpacks,” known as Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue or SAFER. NASA intended the nitrogen-powered jetpacks for use only in emergencies, such as rescuing an injured or incapacitated spacewalker. With only limited fuel supplies in the jetpacks, each of the astronauts’ moves had to be deliberate; each test maneuver lasted approximately 3 minutes, while the astronaut traveled a distance of about 50 feet (15 meters). The astronauts remained tethered to the Shuttle’s robotic arm throughout the tests.(C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Head Out for Final Day of Spacewalks,” 18 October 2000; Associated Press, “Discovery’s Crew Zips Around Bay on New Jetpacks,” USA Today, 19 October 2000.)
NASA awarded its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year awards. Inventors Anne K. St. Clair, Terry L. St. Clair, and William P. Winfree, working as a research team at NASA’s Langley Research Center, won the award for inventing a material that they had named Colorless and Low Dielectric Polyimide Thin Film. Commercial manufacturers could apply the thermoplastic material to many types of surfaces to protect against ultraviolet radiation and high temperatures. The researchers also suggested adding the material to liquids, such as paints and cosmetics, to provide ultraviolet protection. Douglas B. Leviton received the Government Inventor of the Year award for his Ultra-High Sensitivity, Incremental, and Absolute Optical Position Encoder. The encoder allowed scientists to calibrate space-bound instruments more accurately than they had done previously. Both awards recognized inventions completed during 1999. NASA honored the recipients at a ceremony, presenting them with plaques and cash awards.(NASA, “NASA Selected Its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year,” news release 00-53, 5 April 2000.)
NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASA’s Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion area⎯surpassing the ozone hole’s record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an “extremely intense Antarctic vortex”⎯an upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continent⎯might partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, “Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica,” news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
The American Museum of Natural History’s new Hayden Planetarium, which had used information gathered from NASA and the European Space Agency to compile a database containing billions of stars, opened to the public. From 1935 to 1997, the New York City museum had hosted thousands of visitors annually with a less elaborate planetarium. The new planetarium was only one part of the sparkling US$210 million Rose Center for Earth and Space, which museum curator Michael M. Shara hoped would inspire future scientists. The facility, resembling a spacecraft on the outside, featured informative programming hosted by celebrities, such as actors Tom Hanks and Jodie Foster. As they walked through the new facility, visitors could observe displays demonstrating how scientists believed the universe had evolved over a period of 13 billion years.(Associated Press, “Museum Unveils Planetarium for the 21 Century,” 2 February 2000.)
Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edgett of Malin Space Science Systems published research in the journal Science based on images from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft. The two researchers had found that the images showed massive sedimentary deposits on Mars, suggesting that the planet “was once a water-rich land of lakes.” Malin described the images as revealing “hundreds and hundreds of identically thick layers,” features that were “almost impossible to have without water.” J. William Schopf, head of the Center for the Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life at the University of California at Los Angeles, commented that the images provided the “strongest evidence yet for what appear to be sedimentary units on Mars,” supporting the theory that, billions of years ago, Mars had been wetter, warmer, and possibly hospitable to life.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Evidence of Martian Land of Lakes Discovered,” news release 2000-123, 4 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marslakes.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Associated Press, “Satellite Photos Indicate Mars Was Water Plentiful,” Washington Times, 5 December 2000; Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edget, “Sedimentary Rocks of Early Mars,” Science 290, no. 5498 (8 December 2000): 1927–1937.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
Astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega were able to tighten the slack solar panel on the ISS within minutes, using only a hook to place two tension cables back on their pulleys. Although the wing functioned well even though it was slack, if the astronauts had not adjusted its tension, the solar cells might have torn or the support rods might have bent or broken. After repairing the wing, the two astronauts installed a camera cable and a static-electricity monitor on the outside of the ISS. The monitor would help NASA learn how to protect spacewalking astronauts from electrical shocks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Breeze Through Wing Repair: ‘All Finished’,” 7 December 2000.)
An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASA’s scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers’ Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, “NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003,” news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
