Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-111 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 5:22 p.m. (EDT). NASA had originally scheduled the mission to lift off on 30 May but had delayed the launch because of mechanical and weather concerns. The Shuttle’s crew included Commander Kenneth D. Cockrell and astronauts Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, Valery G. Korzun, Paul S. Lockhart, Philippe Perrin, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson. Korzun, Treschev, and Whitson were also members of ISS Expedition 5, which was to remain at the ISS when Endeavour returned to Earth. STS-111 had several objectives. The Shuttle was transporting to the ISS the Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM), which contained racks for experiments, stowage, and resupply. The crew would also install a component called the Mobile Base System (MBS) to service the ISS’s robotic arm. Both the MPLM and the MBS were part of the payload of the mission, also designated ISS Utilization Flight 2. A further objective of the mission was to transport the crew of Expedition 5 to the ISS and to return the members of Expedition 4 to Earth.(NASA, “STS-111 (110),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-111/mission-sts-111.html (accessed 17 August 2008); NASA, “STS-111: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-111/ (accessed 17 August 2008).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named Michael C. Kostelnik as Deputy Associate Administrator for the ISS and Space Shuttle, a newly established senior management position in the Office of Human Space Flight. Kostelnik assumed responsibility for corporate-level management of the two programs’ budgetary, performance, safety, and scheduling requirements. Before his retirement from the U.S. Air Force, Kostelnik had served as commander of the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Deputy Associate Administrator for International Space Station and Space Shuttle,” news release 02-79, 14 May 2002; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “NASA Chief Creates New Space Station Post,” 16 May 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 launched from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:50 p.m. Central Standard Time (CST). The Shuttle’s crew members comprised Commander James D. Wetherbee and astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, John Bennett Herrington, Paul S. Lockhart, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Donald R. Pettit. The primary objective of STS-113, also designated as Station Assembly Flight 11A, was to transport the crew of Expedition 6―Bowersox, Budarin, and Pettit―to the ISS and return the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. Another major objective was to install the Port 1 (P1) Truss segment on the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The structure would eventually house the ISS’s solar arrays and would carry power, data, and temperature controls for the station’s electronics. In addition, STS113 would transport several experiments to the ISS, returning to Earth with several experiments that the crew of Expedition 5 had conducted.(NASA, “STS-113: A New Crew for the International Space Station,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-113/ (accessed 29 October 2008); NASA, “STS-113 Shuttle Press Kit” press kit, 25 October 2002, http://www.shuttlepresskit.com/STS-113/SPK_sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three ISS missions scheduled for 2003 and 2004. The crew of STS-118 would include Mission Commander Scott J. Kelly and crew members Charles O. Hobaugh, Barbara R. Morgan, Lisa M. Nowak, Scott E. Parazynski, and Dafydd Rhys Williams. Morgan, who had trained as Christa McAuliffe’s backup for the ill-fated Challenger Shuttle, would be the first teacher in space under NASA’s new Educator Astronaut Program. NASA hoped that the program would inspire students to become space explorers. The second mission, STS-119, would comprise Commander Steven W. Lindsey and U.S. astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt, Mark E. Kelly, and Carlos I. Noriega. STS-119 would also include ISS Expedition 9’s Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. Crew for STS-120 would be Commander James D. Halsell and astronauts Michael J. Foremen, Wendy B. Lawrence, Alan G. Poindexter, Piers J. Sellers, and Stephanie D. Wilson.(NASA, “Astronauts Named for Future Space Station Missions,” news release 02-249, 12 December 2002; NASA, “NASA’s Educator Astronaut Assigned First Flight,” news release 02-250, 12 December 2002; William Harwood, “Teacher Ready To Fulfill Space Legacy,” Washington Post, 13 December 2002.)
Crew members of STS-113 completed the installation of the P1 Truss segment, attaching it to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure. The installation entailed the use of the Shuttle’s and the ISS’s robotic arms, as well as three spacewalks, which astronauts John Bennett Herrington and Michael Lopez-Alegria performed. STS-113’s crew attached the 45-foot-long (13.7-meter-long), 14-ton (12,700-kilogram or 12.7-tonne) P1 Truss to the port side of the Starboard Zero (S0) Truss, the centerpiece of the Integrated Truss Structure. The P1 was the third segment of planned ISS equipment that would eventually include 11 contiguous truss structures. This particular truss segment contained the ISS’s Active Thermal Control System, scheduled for activation in 2003; one of two Ultra High Frequency Communications systems on the ISS; and a Thermal Radiator Rotary Joint intended to provide mechanical and electrical energy to rotate the ISS’s heat- rejecting radiators.(NASA, “STS-113 Overview,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/archives/sts-113/mm-sts-113.pdf (accessed 29 October 2008); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri would replace Sergei I. Moschenko as a member of the ISS Expedition 7 crew. Russian officials had proposed the change to the Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, which formally certified and assigned ISS crew, and the panel had formally approved the proposal on 10 October 2002. Kaleri had served three separate missions on the Russian space station Mir between 1992 and 2000. In addition to Kaleri, the Expedition 7 crew would include U.S. astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko.(NASA, “Expedition Five Backup Crewmember Named to Expedition Seven,” news release 02-235, 3 December 2002; NASA, “Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Russian Space Agency Concerning the Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station” (MOU, Washington, DC, 29 January 1998), Article 11.3, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/reports/1998/nasa_russian.html (accessed 5 November 2008).)
NASA named 16 crew members for two Space Shuttle missions to the ISS, scheduled for 2003. Mission STS-115 would carry Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. and crew members Daniel C. Burbank, Christopher J. Ferguson, Steven G. MacLean, Heidemarie M. Stefanyshyn-Piper, and Joseph R. Tanner. Mission STS-116 would carry Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt and the crew―American astronauts Robert L. Curbeam Jr. and William A. Oefelein, and Swedish ESA astronaut Christer Fuglesang. NASA planned for STS-115 to deliver a second port truss segment to the ISS. Later, crew would attach the second port truss segment to a third port truss, which STS-116 would deliver. STS-116 would also involve rotation of the crew: the Shuttle would carry ISS Expedition 8 Commander C. Michael Foale, astronaut William S. McArthur, and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev to the ISS, for a long-term stay, and would return ISS Expedition 7 Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and crew members Edward T. Lu and Sergei I. Moschenko to Earth.(NASA, “Astronauts Named to Key Space Station Missions,” news release 02-35, 26 February 2002.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-34 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:27 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)1:27 a.m. (EST). The mission, designated Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight, carried three crew membersCommander Yuri P. Gidzenko of Russia, Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, and South African businessman Mark Shuttleworth. The mission’s main purpose was to deliver a new Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS for use as an emergency lifeboat for the ISS’s permanent three-member crew. In addition, major media noted that Shuttleworth had paid the Russian Space Agency a fee of approximately US$20 million to fly on Soyuz to the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp4/taxi4/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); Houston Chronicle, “Space Tourist No. 2,” 25 April 2002.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:37 p.m. (CST), marking the end of Mission STS-113. During the mission, Endeavour’s crew had attached the Port 1 (P1) Truss to the ISS’s Integrated Truss Structure, in an installation that included three spacewalks by crew members John Bennett Herrington and Michael Lopez- Alegria. Shuttle and Expedition crews had also transferred 4,340 pounds (1,969 kilograms) of cargo between the Shuttle and the ISS. In addition, Endeavour had transported the Expedition 6 crew to the station, returning the crew of Expedition 5 to Earth. The total duration of STS-113 was 13 days, 18 hours, and 47 minutes.
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
Observations from the HST revealed the existence of medium-sized black holes. According to scientists, the discovery provided important information about the creation of many types of celestial bodies. Scientists were surprised to find that the black holes in the cores of globular star clusters―bright clusters of stars that orbit galaxies, including the Milky Way―are nearly 10,000 times less massive than galaxies. The HST data revealed that black holes in globular star clusters are proportionally smaller than massive black holes found in galaxies, demonstrating that the mass of a black hole is proportional to its stellar surroundings. The results also indicated that when the globular star clusters had formed they had black holes, suggesting that, to form large star clusters, black holes must act as gravitational anchors. Scientists believed these findings might illuminate the process by which galaxies and globular clusters formed. The discovery also suggested that black holes are more ubiquitous than scientists had previously thought.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Black Holes in Unexpected Places,” news release 02-174, 17 September 2002; William Harwood, “Finding May Connect Dots on How Galaxies Form; Mid-size Black Holes Are Discovered,” Washington Post, 18 September 2002.)
Using the most sensitive images ever taken by the HST, scientists found new evidence of star creation, challenging the findings of much of the existing research on the origin of the universe. Although the HST had captured images of portions of the skies that appear empty to the naked eye, the images revealed nearly 5,000 galaxies. Led by Kenneth M. Lanzetta of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, a team of scientists had examined approximately 150 of those galaxies spectroscopically, inferring from color variations their actual distance from Earth, as well as the properties of less visible light from even fainter and more distant galaxies. The scientists had also conducted spectroscopic analysis of remote quasars to measure the early universe’s gas density, because high gas density implies high creation rates of stars, which are the building blocks of galaxies and the birthplaces of solar systems. The new images indicated that countless stars had begun forming at a period closer to the birth of the universe than previous research had suggested. Although the HST had captured the images in 1995 and 1998, using the most advanced available technology, the findings suggested that the peak of star creation had occurred earlier than Hubble’s ability to detect it. However, the scientists believed that they could date the peak of star creation to within a few hundred million years after the Big Bang.(NASA, “Hubble Suggests First Stars Opened in a Blaze of Glory,” news release 02-01, 8 January 2002; William Harwood, “Stars May Have Brightened Infant Universe,” Washington Post, 9 January 2002.)
NASA announced the assignment of three crew members to begin training for the ninth expedition to the ISS. The three were Station Commander Gennady I. Padalka and crew members E. Michael Fincke and Oleg D. Kononenko. NASA assigned American astronaut Daniel M. Tani to serve as backup for his fellow compatriot Fincke and selected cosmonauts Alexander F. Poleschuk and Roman Y. Romanenko to serve as backups for fellow Russians Kononenko and Padalka.(NASA, “Astronauts Assigned for Space Station Expedition Training,” news release 02-55, 18 March 2002.)
NASA appointed John H. Campbell as Senior Manager at WFF and Director of GSFC Suborbital and Special Orbital Projects Directorate. In 1987 Campbell had begun his NASA career as a Systems Engineering Manager for the Flight Systems Software Branch, at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland. In the years before his appointment at WFF, NASA had awarded Campbell its Distinguished Service Medal, Outstanding Leadership Medal, and Exceptional Achievement Medal.(Inside Wallops, “Wallops Senior Manager Appointed,” 14 January 2002, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/ wallops/news/newsletters_archive.html#y2002 (accessed 29 July 2002).)
Scientists from California Institute of Technology announced that they had used NASA’s HST to measure the true size of an orbiting, planet-like body beyond Pluto. The sphere was the most distant object that a telescope had measured within Earth’s solar system. Like its neighbor Pluto, the object, which is nearly 4 billion miles (6.4 billion kilometers) from Earth, lies in the Kuiper Belt, an icy debris field that extends 7 billion miles (11.3 billion kilometers) beyond the orbit of Neptune. Using the HST, scientists Michael E. Brown and Chadwick A. Trujillo were able to determine several properties of the sphere, including its diameter of 780 miles (1,250 kilometers). Although too small to be a planet, the sphere, which Brown and Trujillo named Quaoarafter a creation deity of the Native American Tongva peoplehas planet-like traits that Pluto lacks. For example, Brown and Trujillo found that Quaoar has a circular orbit around the Sun and is in the same plane as the other planets in Earth’s solar system. Brown and Trujillo announced their findings at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences.(NASA, “Hubble Spots an Icy World Far Beyond Pluto,” news release 02-190, 7 October 2002; Usha Lee McFarling, “Pluto’s Not So Alone Out There, It Appears,” Los Angeles Times, 8 October 2002.)
William W. Parsons Jr. replaced Roy S. Estess as Director of SSC. Parsons had joined NASA in 1990 as a Launch Site Support Manager at NASA’s KSC, later serving in various positions at NASA’s KSC, SSC, and JSC. Estess had come to SSC in 1966 as a test engineer and had served as the Center’s Director from 1989 to 2002.(NASA, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 26 September 2008); NASA SSC, “William (Bill) W. Parsons Jr. Director, 2002–2003,” http://www.ssc.nasa.gov/about/history/personalities/parsons.html (accessed 26 September 2008); NASA SSC, “Roy S. Estess, Director, 1989–2002,” http://www.ssc.nasa.gov/about/ history/personalities/estess.html (accessed 26 September 2008).)
The U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space began hearings on legislation to reauthorize NASA programs. Subcommittee chairman Ron Wyden (D–OR) expressed concern about the agency’s financial management, particularly cost overruns for the ISS. He also urged NASA to maintain the excellence of the Shuttle program while research continued on a next-generation space vehicle. Members of the subcommittee heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who addressed them for the first time, and from William F. Readdy, Deputy Associate Administrator of the NASA Office of Space Flight. The members of the subcommittee questioned O’Keefe about his vision for NASA and his plans to reduce NASA’s budget by ending particular programs. In his prepared statement, O’Keefe discussed the status of the ISS and Space Shuttle programs.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, NASA Reauthorization, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 May 2002; Karen Masterson, “JSC Mission May Hit Detour,” Houston Chronicle, 9 May 2002.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISS’s escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1’s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The mission’s primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1’s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; NASA Mission Control Center, “Report #48,” http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA announced that Donald R. Pettit, a backup member of the crew of the Expedition 6 Mission to the ISS, would replace Donald A. Thomas on the mission. NASA had reassigned Thomas, a veteran of four Space Shuttle flights, because of medical issues affecting his qualification for long-duration spaceflight. Pettit, a chemical engineer who had joined the astronaut corps in 1996, had previously served as a staff scientist at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico.(NASA, “Backup Crew Member Assigned to Expedition Six,” news release 02-139, 26 July 2002.)
