ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Gennady I. Padalka performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the arrival of new unpiloted cargo ships, scheduled to launch in late 2005. ESA had created the new cargo vessels, formally called Automated Transfer Vehicles (ATVs). Fincke and Padalka installed new communications antennas and laser reflectors to facilitate the docking of the ATVs at the ISS. During the 41⁄2-hour excursion, the two men also replaced a circuit breaker and rotated scientific experiments.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-024,” news release SS04-024, 3 August 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
A privately funded rocket called SpaceShipOne became the first vehicle to complete a flight for the commercial spaceflight competition known as the Ansari X Prize. The X Prize competition would award US$10 million to the first private organization to create a spacecraft transporting a pilot and payload, with the equivalent weight of two passengers, to an altitude of 100 kilometers (62.1 miles) above Earth’s surface, twice in two weeks. California-based Scaled Composites had built SpaceShipOne, and the company’s founder Burt Rutan had designed the vehicle. The spacecraft left California’s Mojave Airport at 7:11 a.m. (PST), affixed to another aircraft. The aircraft released SpaceShipOne after attaining an altitude of 48,000 feet (9.1 miles or 14.6 kilometers). Although SpaceShipOne had some difficulty during its ascent, the vehicle’s pilot Michael W. Melvill was able to guide the vehicle to a peak altitude of 337,500 feet (63.9 miles or 102.9 kilometers). However, Scaled Composites would have to repeat the feat within the subsequent two weeks to win the Ansari X Prize.(Scaled Composites, “SpaceShipOne Surpasses 100 Km Altitude on First X-Prize Flight,” news release, 29 September 2004; Peter Pae, “Craft Rolls On into Space in Bid for Prize,” Los Angeles Times, 30 September 2004. 690 X PRIZE Foundation, “Ansari X PRIZE,” http://space.xprize.org/ansari-x-prize (accessed 12 May 2009); Scaled Composites, “SpaceShipOne Captures X-Prize,” 4 October 2004, http://www.scaled.com/projects/tierone/041004_spaceshipone_x-prize_flight_2.html (accessed 12 May 2009); John Schwartz, “Private Rocket Ship Earns $10 Million in New Space Race,” New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
NASA announced that astronaut Leroy Chiao would replace William S. McArthur Jr. as Commander of Expedition 9, the next mission to the ISS. NASA had disqualified McArthur from Expedition 9 because of an unspecified medical issue. Chiao, who had trained as McArthur’s substitute, would join Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev for the mission, scheduled to launch in April 2004.(NASA, “Chiao Replaces McArthur as Next Space Station Commander,” news release 04-019, 12 January 2004. 581 Mark Carreau, “Leak on Space Station Stopped,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 2004.)
Scientists announced research demonstrating that planets form according to a different process than scientists had previously thought. Comparing recent observations from NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) with data obtained earlier from other satellites, George H. Rieke of the University of Arizona at Tucson had led a team of scientists examining images of the dust clouds surrounding 266 stars of similar size. The prevailing theory of planetary formation held that small rocky planets collide to form larger planets, and the collisions produce a substantial quantity of dust, which steadily fades away over time. However, the team’s SST observations had significantly challenged that theory, revealing that some relatively younger stars have no surrounding dust clouds and that older stars tend to have large, bright discs of orbiting dust. The presence of dust clouds around the older stars indicated that planetary collisions continue far after initial planetary formation. The team concluded that planetary formation is a longer and more chaotic process than scientists had previously assumed.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover Planet Building Is Big Mess,” news release 04-347, 18 October 2004; John Noble Wilford, “A New Look at How Planets Are Formed,” New York Times, 19 October 2004.)
ISS crew members Alexander Y. Kaleri and C. Michael Foale conducted a spacewalk, leaving the station vacant. The spacewalk marked the first time that the ISS crew had left the station without another crew member remaining on board to assist in case of emergency. The purpose of the spacewalk was to service experiments located on the station’s exterior and to prepare the orbiting structure for future assembly work. The astronauts were unable to complete all of the planned tasks, however, because a problem with Kaleri’s spacesuit prompted Russian flight controllers to end the spacewalk early.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Is Cut Short; Malfunction in Cosmonaut’s Suit Cited,” Washington Post, 27 February 2004.)
The Expedition 9 crew of the ISS launched at 11:19 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on the Russian Soyuz TMA-4/ISS-8S. The crew members consisted of Russian cosmonaut, Expedition 9 Commander Gennady I. Padalka; NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke; and ESA astronaut André Kuipers of the Netherlands. Padalka and Fincke would remain at the ISS for nearly six months, while Kuipers would spend nine days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew members of Expedition 8―NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri.(NASA, “Expedition 9 on the Way to Space Station,” news release 04-133, 18 April 2004; National Space Science Data Center, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 605, 1 May 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx605.html. 629 Thomas H. Maugh II, “Einstein’s Theory Rockets into Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 21 April 2004; NASA, “The Gravity Probe B: The Relativity Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ gpb/index.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
A piloted rocket called SpaceShipOne reached the highest altitude ever attained by a privately funded vehicle. After its release from a plane flying over the Mojave Desert in California, the winged rocket flew to an altitude of 211,400 feet (40 miles or 64 kilometers). The vehicle’s pilot Michael W. Melvill landed SpaceShipOne at Mojave Airport. The event was a test flight in preparation for the planned official launch of SpaceShipOne on 2 June 2004. Scaled Composites, the company that had built the rocket, intended SpaceShipOne to become the first privately funded, piloted vehicle to achieve suborbital flight. Scaled Composites had built SpaceShipOne for use in commercial spaceflightsspaceflights in which customers pay a fee for a brief trip to outer space.(Peter Pae, “In Capital Venture, Rocket Reaches the Edge of Space,” Los Angeles Times, 14 May 2004; Scaled Composites, “Historic Space Launch Attempt Scheduled for June 21,” news release, 2 June 2004, http://www.scaled.com/projects/tierone/062104.htm (accessed 27 March 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the immediate appointment of James B. Garvin as NASA’s new Chief Scientist. Garvin had previously served as Chief Scientist for NASA’s lunar and Mars exploration programs. As Chief Scientist for all of NASA, Garvin would be responsible for ensuring the scientific merits of NASA’s programs, including formulating the programs’ scientific requirements. Garvin replaced former astronaut John M. Grunsfeld, who had served in the post since September 2003. NASA had selected Grunsfeld to train as an astronaut for a future long-duration mission.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Names New Chief Scientist,” news release 04-349, 21 October 2004.)
The company Scaled Composites launched the first privately developed piloted vehicle to travel beyond Earth’s atmosphere. The vehicle, called SpaceShipOne, departed from Mojave Airport in California at 6:45 a.m. Pacific Standard Time (PST), attached to another aircraft. Upon reaching an altitude of 46,000 feet (8.7 miles or 14 kilometers), the aircraft released SpaceShipOne. Propelled by a fuel containing rubber and nitrous oxide―laughing gas―SpaceShipOne eventually attained an altitude of 328,491 feet (62 miles or 100 kilometers), achieving suborbital spaceflight. After SpaceShipOne had remained in suborbital flight for nearly 31⁄2 minutes, the vehicle’s pilot Michael W. Melvill―who became the first civilian astronaut with this flight―safely landed the craft at Mojave Airport. Burt Rutan, the founder of Scaled Composites, had designed SpaceShipOne, and Microsoft cofounder Paul G. Allen had financed the project.(Peter Pae, “Private Spaceflight Is a Public Success,” Los Angeles Times, 22 June 2004; Scaled Composites, “SpaceShipOne Makes History: First Private Manned Mission to Space,” news release, 21 June 2004.)
NASA announced its findings concerning how and why a piece of insulation had separated from a fuel tank on Space Shuttle Columbia, an event that had later contributed to Columbia’s destruction upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. According to NASA official William F. Readdy, NASA had determined that extremely cold fuel had liquefied air or nitrogen, which subsequently had seeped into a portion of the foam or had collected on nuts and bolts below the foam, eventually expanding and explosively jettisoning a piece of the foam. The foam had shot from the fuel tank, hitting the orbiter and creating a large―and ultimately fatal―gash in its left wing. Before the Columbia tragedy, engineers had believed that when the fuel tanks shed foam, it fell away from the body of the orbiter. Readdy stated that NASA had redesigned the fuel tanks and improved techniques for applying the foam to remedy the problem that had caused the accident to Columbia.(Warren E. Leary, “Repairs and Need for Rescue Craft Pushed Back Shuttle Timetable, NASA Says,” New York Times, 21 February 2004.)
NASA-funded researchers announced that they had found the most distant object orbiting the Sun yet discovered. Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology had led a team of scientists to discover a small body of rock and ice located 8 billion miles (13 billion kilometers) from Earth. They had named the object Sedna after the Inuit goddess of the ocean. Sedna was the largest object found in the solar system since Pluto’s discovery in 1930. However, astronomers reported that they could not designate Sedna as a planet because, like Pluto, Sedna is too smallwith an estimated diameter of 1,100 miles (1,770 kilometers)and possesses an irregular orbit. The scientists stated that the discovery might also have been the first observation of a region called the Oort Cloud, which is located outside of Pluto’s orbit. Astronomers had long hypothesized the existence of this region of small frozen objects, the source of comets that enter Earth’s solar system. The team had discovered Sedna using the Samuel Oschin Telescope at the California Institute of Technology’s Palomar Observatory.(NASA, “Most Distant Object in Solar System Discovered,” news release 04-091, 15 March 2009; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Scientists Discover Icy Planetoid Beyond Pluto,” Los Angeles Times, 16 March 2009.)
ISS crew members repaired an air leak in the space station. Astronaut C. Michael Foale and cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri fixed a leak in a flex hose located in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory module. The orbiting space station had begun to lose air on 22 December 2003. After examining the station’s air pressure readings, NASA’s Mission Control had informed ISS crew members of the leak on 5 January 2004. The air leak had not endangered either the ISS crew or operations. By systematically isolating the ISS’s compartments and using an ultrasound device to determine the location of a hissing sound emitted by the faulty hose, Foale and Kaleri had discovered the source of the air loss.
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Gennady I. Padalka performed a spacewalk to conduct maintenance tasks and to prepare the ISS for the future arrival of a new cargo spacecraft. During the nearly 51⁄2-hour spacewalk, Fincke and Padalka replaced a component of the ISS’s cooling system, installed safety equipment for future spacewalks, and set up three antennas to aid the docking of ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), a new ISS cargo ship scheduled for launch in 2005.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-029,” news release SS04-029, 3 September 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
The ISS’s main oxygen generator stopped working, but the equipment failure posed no immediate danger to the station’s crew members. ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka stated that the crew could repair the generator, which had failed on previous occasions. The malfunction did not pose an immediate threat to Padalka or his fellow crew member E. Michael Fincke, because they could access several alternative sources of oxygen stored in the orbiting space station.(New York Times, “Oxygen Generator on Space Station Fails,” 10 September 2004.)
Thomas Q. Donaldson replaced Michael U. Rudolphi as Director of NASA’s SSC. Donaldson had previously served as Commander of the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command headquartered at SSC. Rudolphi had served as interim Director of SSC since May 2003 but had left the Center in December 2003 to become Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office at NASA’s MSFC.(NASA, “Stennis Space CenterMichael U. Rudolphi,” http://www.nasa.gov/centers/stennis/about/ history/personalities/rudolphi.html (accessed 11 January 2009); NASA, “Stennis Space CenterRear Admiral)
William H. Pickering, a former Director of NASA’s JPL, died at the age of 93. Pickering had begun his career at JPL in 1944 and had served as Director from 1954 to 1976. Soon after becoming Director of JPL, Pickering had led a project that had successfully launched the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 into Earth orbit on 31 January 1958. During the remainder of Pickering’s tenure, JPL had launched the Ranger and Surveyor missions to the Moon and the Mariner missions to Mars and Venus. Pickering had received numerous awards during his lifetime: NASA had presented him with its Distinguished Service Medal, President Gerald R. Ford had awarded him the National Medal of Science, and the Queen of England had given him an honorary knighthood.(NASA, “NASA Remembers William H. Pickering, Former Director of JPL,” news release 04-094, 16 March 2004.)
After more than six months in space, the crew members of ISS Expedition 8 returned to Earth, safely landing in Kazakhstan at 8:12 p.m. (EDT). The crew of Expedition 8 consisted of NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri. During their tenure at the ISS, Foale and Kaleri had conducted scientific research. Expedition 8 had been the second- longest expedition to the ISS, with the two men spending a total of 194 days, 18 hours, and 35 minutes in space. Returning with them to Earth was ESA astronaut André Kuipers, who had spent nine days on the space station conducting research as part of ISS Expedition 9. The other two members of Expedition 9, Gennady I. Padalka and E. Michael Fincke, remained at the ISS for a mission scheduled to last nearly six months.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-007, 29 April 2004. 195)
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASA’s JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSC’s Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASA’s JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, “Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director,” Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, “NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy,” news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
Edward J. Weiler became Director of NASA’s GSFC, taking over from Alphonso V. Diaz. Weiler, who had joined NASA in 1978, had served as Chief Scientist for the HST from 1979 to 1998 and as Associate Administrator for NASA’s Space Science Enterprise from 1998 to July 2004. Diaz, who had served as Director of GSFC since 12 January 1998, became NASA’s Associate Administrator of Science.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 1 May 2009); NASA, “Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate: Edward J. Weiler,” 7 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/about/highlights/weiler_biography.html (accessed 1 May 2009); NASA, “Alphonso Diaz: Associate Administrator, Science,” 4 November 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/about/highlights/diaz_bio.html (accessed 1 May 2009).)
A commission created by President George W. Bush released its report outlining how NASA and other organizations might implement President Bush’s new policy: the U.S. Vision for Space Exploration. The President’s Commission, led by Edward C. Aldridge Jr., endorsed the Vision for Space Exploration’s goals―to explore Mars and the Moon. In addition, the commission recommended that, to meet those goals, NASA needed to make numerous changes; the federal government needed to establish a permanent council to develop and coordinate space exploration policies; and the private sector needed to become more involved in space operations. Specific changes that the commission recommended were that NASA should focus on the research and development of space technology, and that private industry should conduct operational activities, such as launching payloads to low Earth orbit. The report also recommended that NASA pursue partnerships with the scientific community and with foreign space agencies.(President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, A Journey To Inspire, Innovate, and Discover: Report of the President’s Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy (Washington, DC, June 2004), http://www.nasa.gov/news/reports/index.html (accessed 6 April 2009); Warren E. Leary and John Schwartz, “NASA Is Urged To Widen Role for Business,” New York Times, 15 June 2004.)
NASA and the ISS partners announced crew assignments for the next two expeditions to the space station. NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka would serve on Expedition 9, and NASA astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov would provide the crew for Expedition 10. In addition, Chiao and Sharipov would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 9, while NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 10. Although NASA and its partners had previously scheduled Tokarev to pair with Chaio on Expedition 10, the ISS partners had decided to replace Tokarev with Sharipov, because Sharipov had previously trained with Chiao.(NASA, “New Crews Named for 2004 Space Station Missions,” news release 04-056, 6 February 2004.)
Russian President Vladimir V. Putin appointed Anatoly N. Perminov as Director of the Russian Space Agency. Perminov, a professor at the Moscow Aviation Institute, had previously served as Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Space Force. He replaced previous Russian Space Agency Director Yuri N. Koptev, who Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had appointed in 1992.
