Project Apollo, advanced manned spacecraft program, was first announced at NASA's Industry Conference.
NRL Communications Moon Relay (CMR) system using the moon as a reflector of radio signals between Hawaii and Annapolis, Md., was first publicly demonstrated.
NASA gave bidders briefing to industry representatives on Project Apollo study contract at Space Task Group, Langley AFB, Va.
Two USAF pilots, Capt. W. D. Habluetzel and Lt. J. S. Hargreaves, completed a 30-day, 8-hour, and 24-mlnute simulated round trip to the moon in the space cabin simulator at the School of Aviation Medicine. Brooks AFB, Tex.
X-15 made first flight with ball-shaped “hot nose," reaching 50,000 feet and 1,254 mph, NASA’s Nell Armstrong making his second familiarization flight
To date, the United States had successfully launched 31 earth satellites (9 of 16 still In orbit were still transmitting) and 2 deep space probes into orbit around the sun. The U.S.S.R. bad launched seven satellites (one of which remained in orbit) and one deep space probe. Tbe U.S.S.R. had also launched one lunar Impact mission (LUNIK II), while LUNIK III had passed once around tbe moon and then went into earth orbit before decaying. During 1960: World Lata Center A, Rockets and Satellites, of tbe National Academy of Sciences, continued to provide a means for international exchange of scientific data.
Lunar atlas published by the USAF, representing a comprehensive collection of high-quality photographs of the visible surface of the moon prepared by G. P. Kulper.
Lunar atlas prepared for USAF by group under technical direction of G. P. Kulper was released, an “Orthographic Atlas of tbe Moon” charted 5,000 base points combined with best available photos and grids.
U.S.S.R. published atlas on the far side of the moon based on LUNIK III photographs.
NASA signed contract with Aeronutronlc, a division of Ford Motor Co., for development and production of the first survivable capsule for landing instruments on the moon.
Two pilots scaled In "spaco cabin" for 17-day simulated flight to the moon, at SAM, Brooks AFB, Tex.
NASA selected Convalr, General Electric, and Martin to conduct individual feasibility studies of an advanced manned spacecraft as part of Project Apollo.
