NASA Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, said, in an interview, that at least 10 Apollo spacecraft would be ordered in the manned lunar vehicle prime systems contract to be awarded in December 1961.
February report of the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences was released recommending exploration of the Moon and planets “as the official goal of the U.S. space program and clearly announced, discussed, and supported.”
Ranger 2 shot postponed indefinitely as the 8-day “window” (i.e., when the Moon, Sun, and Earth were in favorable positions) had ended before technical difficulties could be corrected.
The Freedom 7 Mercury capsule in which Alan B. Shepard, Jr., made the first suborbital space flight, was presented to the National Air Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. In his presentation, NASA Administrator Webb said: “To Americans seeking answers, proof that man can survive in the hostile realm of space is not enough. A solid and meaningful foundation for public support and the basis for our Apollo man-in-space effort is that U.S. astronauts are going into space to do useful work in the cause of all their fellow men.” “Such flights as those of Freedom 7 are not stunts. They are not antithetical to sober scientific and technological research. Interpreted properly, these dramatic events can add much to public understanding and excite creative interest in extending the base on which public support must rest.”
Complete system studies of the Apollo spacecraft system that were begun in November 1960 were completed by three industrial contractors.
Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences submitted its recommendation of February 10-11 that “scientific exploration of the Moon and planets should clearly be stated as the ultimate objective of the U.S. space program for the foreseeable future.” During March: Announced that National Institutes of Health scientists were growing organisms found inside of a meteorite that fell at Murray, Ky., around 1950; first reported instance of living material, perhaps extraterrestrial, grown in a laboratory. ...	■ In an experiment at Boeing, biologist J. D. McClure spent 26 hours in a sealed environment with atmosphere recycled through algae to retain 21 percent oxygen content.
Deputy NASA Administrator Dryden sent an explanatory letter to Chairman Robert S. Kerr, of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on the broad scientific and technological gains to be achieved in landing a man on the Moon and returning him to Earth. Dr. Dryden pointed out that this difficult goal “has the highly important role of accelerating the development of space science and technology, motivating the scientists and engineers who are engaged in this effort to move forward with urgency, and integrating their efforts in a way that cannot be accomplished by a disconnected series of research investigations in several fields. It is important to realize, however, that the real values and purposes are not in the mere accomplishment of man setting foot on the Moon but rather in the great cooperative national effort in the development of science and technology which is stimulated by this goal.” Dr. Dryden pointed out that “the billions of dollars required in this effort are not spent on the Moon; they are spent in the factories, workshops, and laboratories of our people for salaries, for new materials, and supplies, which in turn represent income for others * * *. The national enterprise involved in the goal of manned lunar landing and return within this decade is an activity of critical impact on the future of this Nation as an industrial and military power, and as a leader of a free world.”
Jet Propulsion Laboratory awarded contract to Beckman Instruments for design studies on equipment to analyze the surface of the Moon.
has scheduled “at least two more manned space flights this year, one to circle the Earth, the other perhaps the Moon,” according to Dr. Grigori A. Tokaty, head of Northhampton College of Advanced Technology, London, England. Former director of Russia’s long-range rocket group, Tokaty also stated that the U.S.S.R. was planning to establish “one or two” unmanned lunar stations in 1962.
In news conference, Dr. Albert R. Hibbs, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Chief of Space Sciences, stated that it would be a “major accomplishment” if the United States were to overtake the Russians in the race to the Moon, a “less than 50-50 chance.” He pointed to the rumors that the Soviet Union had already attempted to launch a probe to Mars.
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Co. for placing of a major subcontract by Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build seven Surveyor spacecraft designed for soft landings on the Moon.
Soviet Cosmonaut Gagarin in New Delhi said that “we will not have to wait long” for the first manned flight to the Moon. Gagarin was making a 9-day visit to India.
NASA selected North American Aviation to design and build a three-man Apollo spacecraft leading toward eventual lunar landings and exploration of the Moon. Each proposal was evaluated by a team of nearly 200 NASA and DOD specialists.
Two pilots sealed in 8- by 12-foot simulated space cabin for 17-day round trip to the Moon, at the School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Tex.
In a speech before the National Press Club, NASA Administrator Webb reviewed NASA’s program and outlined the interest in the rendezvous-in-space technique for staging flights to the Moon and nearby planets.
NASA Apollo briefing held at Space Task Group for all prime contractors interested in submitting bids.
Interviewed in the Netherlands West Indies, en route to Brazil, Maj. Yuri Gagarin said that his next assignment would be a flight to the Moon. Asked about U.S. efforts, he reportedly stated that “there is a place on the Moon for everybody.”
NASA selected MIT’s Instrumentation Laboratory to develop the guidance-navigation system for Project Apollo spacecraft. This first major Apollo contract was required since guidance-navigation system is basic to overall Apollo mission. The Instrumentation Laboratory of MIT, a nonprofit organization headed by C. Stark Draper, has been involved in variety of guidance and navigation systems developments for 20 years.
Reported by Drew Pearson that CIA had warned that Russia “is preparing to launch a man around the moon in 60 days.”
X-15 No. 3 made first flight, a successful test of new automated control system, NASA’s Neil A. Armstrong as pilot in his first flight of XLR-99-engined X-15. At half throttle, X—15 reached speed of 2,502 miles per hour and an altitude of 81,000 feet.
In an interview in U.S. News & World Report, NASA Administrator Webb stated that “the kind of overall space effort that President Kennedy has recommended * * * will put us there [on the Moon] first.” This achievement, costing between $20 and $40 blliion, “probably toward the $20 blliion level * * * wlli be most valuable in other parts of our economy.” Mr. Webb said that the U.S.S.R. did have an advantage in being able first to orbit a multimanned spacecraft around the Earth and also around the Moon.
The Carnegie Institution issued annual report containing several findings from its space scientists: Philip Abelson contended that it was a waste of time and money to sterilize vehicles going to the Moon or planets because any life there would be so unlike terrestrial life that it could not be contaminated by Earth organisms; Horace Babcock offered a theory on alternating spiral magnetic fields of the Sun that might explain sunspots, flares, and the 22-year magnetic cycle; other scientists noted growing evidence of major differences in chemical composition of distant stars, indicating a need to revise methods of computing distances to those stars.
NASA invited 12 companies to submit prime contractor proposals for the manned lunar Apollo spacecraft by October 9.
At NASA press conference following President Kennedy’s call to Congress for an accelerated space program, NASA Administrator Webb pointed out that the long-range and difficult task of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth before the end of the decade offered a chance to beat Russia.
NASA Associate Administrator Seamans announced the addition of four additional Ranger spacecraft, bringing the total to nine, the number of Rangers to be launched in this phase of the lunar exploration program. “This new third phase of the Ranger program is a part of the general acceleration of the program to land an American on the Moon by 1970,” said Dr. Seamans.
Voice message sent from Washington to Woomera, Australia, by way of the Moon. NASA Deputy Administrator Dryden spoke on telephone to Goldstone, Calif., which “bounced” it to the deep space instrumentation station at Woomera. The operation was held as part of the official opening ceremony of the deep space instrumentation facility site in Australia.
Nationwide Gallup poll released which showed that 38 percent of those questioned thought the United States led in space research, while 38 percent thought the U.S.S.R. led. The same balance also was tabulated on which Nation will be the first to place a man on the Moon.
At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the University of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the “scientific value” of the U.S. space program to land on and return one or more men from the Moon.
Reported from Moscow that U.S.S.R. was planning to orbit a man around the Moon in 1962, and that the U.S.S.R. had ICBM’s in being with 100-megaton warheads.
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
House Science and Astronautics Committee approved $126.6 million additional to the President’s space budget, marking most of the increase for the Apollo program.
Survey of leading space experts on U.S. space goals from 197075 by the North American Newspaper Alliance produced a consensus that the United States would establish a Moon base from which to thoroughly explore the Moon and to launch interplanetary manned probes. Those interviewed included important figures in space industry, USAF, NASA, and space research.
NASA announced that Douglas Aircraft had been selected for negotiation of a contract to modify the Saturn S-IV stage by installing a single 200,000-pound-tlirust, Rocketdyne J-2 liquid-liydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine instead of six 15,000-pound-thrust P. & W. hydrogen/oxygen engines. Known as S-IVB, this modified stage will be used in advanced Saturn configurations for manned circuinlunar Apollo missions.
FCC first allocated radio frequencies to private industry (ITT) for experiments in bouncing signals off the Moon and artificial satellites.
Dr. Thomas Gold, of Cornell University, submitted that water exists on the Moon, perhaps shielded from evaporation by a layer of ice below the surface, in a paper given at American Physical Society.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower in speech at Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland, said: “I for one do not fully understand why, in the midst of a plethora of necessary and costly activities, our Nation should be required, urgently, to develop a capacity to put men on the Moon and challenge our principal opponent in doing so. * * *”
IB stage of the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle would be built by the Boeing Co., NASA announced. The $300 million contract, to run through 1966, called for development, construction, and test of 24 flight stages, plus several for ground tests. Assembly would take place at the NASA Michoud Operations Plant, New Orleans, La. The S-IB would be the first stage of the vehicle that would launch the three-man Apollo spacecraft for direct circumlunar flight or, with rendezvous, for lunar landing.
NASA headquarters announced that it was making a worldwide study of possible launching sites for Moon vehicles; the size, power, noise, and possible hazards of Saturn-Nova type rockets requiring greater isolation for public safety than presently available.
NASA Goddard scientists reported that Explorer X had encountered magnetic fields considerably stronger than expected in its elongated orbit which carried it 112,500 miles from Earth (almost halfway to the Moon), although it would take several weeks to analyze acquired data.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, said in a radio interview that a second Venus probe had been added to NASA’s 1962 program as insurance for the first probe scheduled in August. Both probes would be the Mariner R, the reduced-weight version resorted to because of time slippage in the Centaur booster program. Dr. Seamans also said the United States plans three attempts to land instrumented packages on the Moon in 1962. During December: General Electric announced operation of the largest solar thermionic power system at GE’s solar test facility near Phoenix, Ariz. Early tests generated an output of 12.18 watts and unit has potential efficiency of 15 to 20 percent of the total solar energy input.
