Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, in a Tass interview, said: “It is now necessary to determine how long a man can operate in outer space without prejudice to his health—five days, ten days, or more. This is one of the main tasks before proceeding to more complex flights to the moon, for example, or to the establishment of orbital or interplanetary stations.” He criticized the U.S. for being “reluctant” to file details of the Glenn flight with the U.N. “The best information about outer space has been obtained in the U.S.S.R. The Americans can benefit more by our experience than we by theirs. Some people in America are not interested in exchanges of scientific information.” The U.S. had submitted information concerning the Glenn flight to the U.N. on April 3,1962.
Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, told American Nuclear Society in Washington that peaceful use of atomic explosives had “the potentiality of becoming the first really important and thoroughly economic use of atomic energy.” Feasibility of such use was demonstrated last summer with 100-kiloton thermonuclear explosion at 635-ft. depth in Nevada, the explosion removing about 7,500,000 cu. yds. of earth and leaving crater 1,200 ft. in diameter and 320 ft. deep. Dr. Teller said radioactivity can be controlled so that excavated area can be entered a few weeks after the explosion with no more exposure than in an atomic laboratory. He predicted nuclear explosions on the moon could be used to extract water from chemical compounds in lunar rock.
British astronomer Zdenek Kopal of the University of Manchester said the gravitational pull of the earth might have heated the interior of thejmoon to nearly 2,000° C. He ascribed the moon’s growing diameter and its rising temperature to constant push-and-pull action of the earth’s gravitational force, causing tidal friction within the lunar interior. The friction generates heat faster than the heat can escape from the moon, thus contributing to the addition of tens of thousands of sq. mi. to the moon’s surface and 1,832° of temperature over the last 4.5 billion years. Kopal was speaking before the Conference on Lunar Exploration, Blacksburg, Va.
Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, predicted U.S. would land a man on the moon in 1969.
nasa Administrator Webb announced that the Mission Control Center for future manned space flights would be located at Manned Spacecraft Center (msc), Houston, Tex. The Center, including its computer complex, communications center, flight simulation facility, and flight operations displays, would be operational by 1964 for Gemini rendezvous flights and later Apollo lunar missions.
nasa announced it would negotiate with three companies to conduct three-month studies of a lunar logistics system. Negotiations with Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., related to $150,000 study of types of spacecraft which could carry supplies to manned Apollo landing site on the moon; negotiations with Northrop Space Laboratories and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. related to $75,000 studies and operational analyses of possible cargoes for the lunar logistics spacecraft. Various nasa centers simultaneously would study lunar logistics system trajectories, launch vehicle adaptation, scheduling, alternate spacecraft propulsion concepts, lunar landing touchdown dynamics, and use of roving vehicles on the lunar surface.
Upon returning to Sweden from Moscow, Swedish scientist Bjoern Malmgren reported that two Soviet cosmonauts were being trained in Swedish-built centrifuge for a trip around the moon and back. Malmgren reported Soviet space officials told him the venture was planned for late next year.
U.S. and Australian scientists reported in Science that phases of the moon affect rainfall on earth. Their studies in both northern and southern hemispheres disclosed that heavy rains fall most frequently in the first and third weeks of the synodical month— the period from one new moon to the next.
Speaking before the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Nobel physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey said that modern space science indicated the moon and the earth originated independently. It appeared likely that the moon was drawn into earth orbit early in the history of the solar system, some time after both bodies had been essentially formed in their present sizes and masses. He said that science now tended to disprove two widely accepted theories on the moon’s origin: (1) that the moon had been broken from the earth by tidal action, and (2) that the moon and earth had originated together in one gaseous cloud.
National Academy of Sciences awarded the J. Lawrence Smith Medal for outstanding achievement in the investigation of meteoric bodies to Dr. Harold C. Urey of the University of California of San Diego. The award was based upon Dr. Urey’s many publications on the chemical composition of meteorites, only one of his most recent fields of interest. He received the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1934. After World War II he launched into speculations concerning the origin of the solar system, the cosmic abundance of the elements, the composition and structure of the moon and the planets, the latter work depending upon his chemical analysis of meteorites.
Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, predicted in a press conference at Sunnyvale, Calif., that one of the next two attempts to impact the moon with a Ranger spacecraft would be a partial success. He reported that ranger iii was now more than 500,000	miles from the earth and moving into a solar orbit at 2,600 mph.
ranger iv impacted on the moon at 7:49:53 AM est, ending a 231,486-mi. journey from amr that began with its launching on April 23. Goldstone Tracking Station maintained contact with the 50-milliwatt transmitter in the lunar landing capsule until it passed behind the left edge of the moon. Impact velocity was 5,963 mph, point of impact 229.3° E, 15.5° S, on a part of the moon never seen by man. ranger iv’s instrumentation, which ceased useful operation some ten hours after launch, never functioned again. About the same time as the lunar impact, the Agena B 2nd stage passed to the right of the moon and went into orbit around the sun.
U.S. space experiments with regard to the moon may well give scientists new information on “how the Earth and the planets and the Sun were formed,” Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Associate Director of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics of the University of California, said in a Voice of America broadcast. The seismometer to be landed on the moon by nasa’s Ranger, for example, would help determine whether there are “moonquakes” some eight times more frequent than earthquakes, as there should be if the moon contains the same concentration of radioactive elements as the earth.
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories announced series of three high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments—Star Gazer, Sky Top, and Balast—to be conducted later this year. The primary objective would be to obtain more and complete information about the space environment with emphasis on the moon, Mars, and Venus.
Optical and radar observations of Project Highwater experiment, 23,000	gallons of water bursted from upper stages of Saturn test launch at 65-mile altitude on April 25, showed that the burst took 2-3 seconds to expand to about 10 times the size of the moon in a roughly circular pattern, and lasted about 10 seconds. A second fainter trail, about one lunar diameter, followed along the trajectory from the burst and lasted a few minutes, presumably caused by venting out of the incompletely destroyed second stage. Project Highwater was an msfc responsibility, a bonus experiment to the Saturn test conceived by Dr. Charles Lundquist.
In his State of the Union message to the Congress, President Kennedy said: “With the approval of this Congress, we have undertaken in the past year a great new effort in outer space. Our aim is not simply to be first on the moon, any more than Charles Lindbergh’s real aim was to be first to Paris. His aim was to develop the techniques and the authority of this country and other countries in the field of the air and the atmosphere. “And our objective in making this effort, which we hope wlli place one of our citizens on the moon, is to develop in a new frontier of science, commerce and cooperation, the position of the United States and the free world. This nation belongs among the first to explore it. And among the first, if not the first, we shall be. “We are offering know-how and cooperation to the United Nations. Our satellites wlli soon be providing other nations with improved weather observations. And I shall soon send to the Congress a measure to govern the financing and operation of an international communications satellite system, in a manner consistent with the public interest and our foreign policy. “But peace in space will help us naught once peace on earth is gone . . . .”
In concluding lecture in a Forum series on Space Science broadcast on the Voice of America, Dr. Carl E. Sagen of the Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of California (Berkeley), explained that “extraterrestrial life and the origin of life are questions intertwined.” Recent study on these issues related to four topics: (1) the origin of life on earth; (2) the physical environment of the moon and planets; (3) the present evidence of life beyond the earth; and (4) prospects for future exploration. He discussed the chemical reactions which must have existed in the primitive terrestrial environment and produced organic matter. The critical event was the origin of a molecular system capable of synthesizing itself, and “this event—which occurred some 4,200 million years ago—can be identified with the origin of life on Earth.” From then on the long evolutionary sequence from molecule to Man was under way. Dr. Sagen asserted that “through the interaction of organic molecules life must arise on countless other worlds, in our solar system, and other solar systems . . . [but] the forms of living organisms on other planets must be intriguingly diverse.” Dr. Sagen reviewed the improbability of life on Venus, the possibility of life on the moon, and the “favorable” environmental features for life on Mars. It is not, he said, a closed question with regard to life on Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. The presence of extraterrestrial organic matter in meteorites “greatly substantiates the belief that organic matter is an abundant constituent of the solar system.” Detailed characterization of extraterrestrial organisms likely to be found in exploration of the moon and the planets “will open up a new era, not only in biology but in all fields of human endeavor.”
nasa press conference at nasa Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital flights of vostok iii and iv. Participants: nasa Administrator James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden; Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director, Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for extended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.” Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration, which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me the significant element here is that on the second flight they were able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns can be protracted for one reason or another.” Mr. Holmes said he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.” Asked whether the nasa manned space flight program could be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1 to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It wlli be done inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries all of the considerations in an effective way . . .” To the question of who wollid first land on the moon, Mr. Webb replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and return before they do.” As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certailliy no better than that, that we collid do that as early as they can. It is for this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set at the lunar flight because this does require another booster on the part of the Russians as well as ourselves. “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowledge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
X-15 No. 3 flown to speed of 2,830 mph (mach 4.06) and to altitude of 179,000 ft. in a test of new adaptive control system to be used in Dyna-Soar and Apollo vehicles, nasa's Neil A. Armstrong was pilot. Whereas the previous control system was automatic only while the X-15 was within the atmosphere and the pilot had to control flight with reaction jets while in space, the new system would be automatic in both regimes.
British astrophysicist, Zdenek Kopal, suggested in ars lunar conference at Cleveland that the moon may have an abundant water supply, including geysers and under surface glaciers or permafrost.
usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories announced that it wollid conduct a series of high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments during 1962 and early 1963. Primary objective wollid be to get more complete and accurate information about the moon, Venus, and Mars. Scientific director of the project wollid be Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins University.
In Cleveland, Dr. Joseph F. Shea, nasa’s Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight for Systems, told ars conclave that the manned lunar landing was greatly dependent upon information acquired by the unmanned Ranger and Surveyor payloads. The landing zone for Apollo flights (strip 20° wide along lunar equator) is about the size of Alaska. Maps of two-fifths-of-a-mile to an inch are required, which must be based on photographs which can identify five-or six-ft. objects for navigational fixes and initial exploration. Smallest objects now discernable in the photographs of the moon’s surface by the test telescopes on earth are about the size of a football field.
William L. Gill, Chief of Crew Systems Div. Radiation Branch, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said walls of Apollo spacecraft would provide most of radiation shielding required for crew. Astronauts would have special shielding devices only for their eyes.
Sir Bernard Lovell of Jodrell Bank in an interview with London Daily Telegraph:	. . Although the Russians may have [space] superiority purely in the sense of rocketry, the Americans have tremendous superiority over the Russians in their ability to instrument their space vehicles and in the extraction of space information. “If you made an assessment of the scientific information we have obtained about the earth’s environment from space vehicles, you could find that this was very heavily biased in favour of the Americans. They have mounted more sophisticated experiments in their satellites and space probes and they have made them work much better.” During 1962: Dr. Louis Smullni of mit’s Lincoln Laboratories succeeded in detecting a laser reflection from the moon, although at too low a signal level and too long a pulse length for quantitative measurements. This was considered a first step in use of laser reflection for scientific research.
George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, predicted in Voice of America interview that final decision on manned lunar flight technique would be made soon. Of the lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) method, he said: “We in nasa have already reached the firm conclusion that this is the best, cheapest, most reliable and quickest way to reach the moon. . . . The final decision has not been made, but in the meantime, we are proceeding with the lunar orbit rendezvous approach.”
Back in Washington after two-day tour of U.S. space facilities, President Kennedy held news conference. Asked why decision was made to extend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests, the President said: “There are two reasons. One is that, as you know, because of the blow-up in the pad at Johnston Island and because of the earlier failures of the communication system in the missile, we were not able to carry out these tests which were . . . among the most important, if not the most important of our series. “So we are going to finish those. In addition, as a result of the earlier tests of this Dominic series, there were certain things learned which we would like to prove out. “So we have agreed to a limited number of tests in concluding the Dominic series, and also we have taken some steps to prevent a repetition of the incident which caused an increase in the number of electrons in the atmosphere, by lowering the altitude and the yield so that lunar flights will not be further endangered.” Asked whether U.S. position of refraining from competition with U.S.S.R. military space vehicles would condemn U.S. to second place in the mllitary field, President Kennedy replied: “No, Mr. Alexander. As I said last week, in the first place we are spending $1.5 billion a year on our military space program. What is the key for the success both of peaceful exploration of space as well as the military mastery of space are large boosters, effective control of the capsule, and the ability to rendezvous, and all of the rest, so that there is an obvious usefulness if the situation should require, military usefulness for our efforts, peaceful efforts, in space. “In addition, as you know, very recently we determined to go ahead with the Titan III, which gives the United States Air Force a very strong weapon if that should become necessary. So that the work that nasa is doing on Saturn and the work the Air Force is doing on Titan and the work being done on the Apollo program and Gemini and the others, all have a national security factor as well as a peaceful factor. . . . “I think the United States is attempting, and this Administration, as you know, is making a very massive effort in space. As I said, we are spending three times what we spent last year in space, and more in this year’s budget than the eight previous years, so that this is a tremendous effort, $5.5 billion as well as the money that we are spending for the military use of space. “As I say, the size of the booster and the capsule and the control all would have, if the situation required it, a military use. We hope it does not; we hope that space will be used for peaceful purposes. That is the policy of the United States Government, but we shall be prepared if it does not; and in addition, as I said from the beginning, both the Soviet Union and the United States have a capacity to send a missile to each other’s country with a nuclear warhead on it, so that we must keep some perspective as to where the danger may lie. But the United States, in the effort it is making both in the peaceful program and the military program, all of this will increase our security if the Soviet Union should attempt to use space for military purposes.” Asked if he were hopeful that U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative ventures in space exploration were likely in the near future, he replied: “No. As you know, Dr. Dryden had some conversations in Geneva with regard to the matter, and some progress was made, but it is limited in its scope and we would hope more could be done and more, perhaps, could be done if the atmosphere between the two countries should be improved.”
Rep. Edgar Hiestand asked citizens of the 21st Congressional District of California'—“Do you consider scientific information resulting from a U.S. moon flight worth its $40 billion cost?” Results of the poll were: 44% replied “no”; 35% replied “yes”; and 21% replied “undecided.”
Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale, recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster, and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
In address at Wheeling, West Virginia, Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, pointed out that nasa and dod “cooperate closely. For example, we have established a national launch vehicle program to provide the rocket power that both civilian and defense activities require. United States policy demands that every possible effort be made to perserve space as a peaceful resource for all mankind. We must not lose sight, however, of the fact that manned space flight involves facilities, vehicles, and techniques that may well be significant for national defense. . . . “Our landing on the moon will be a 240,000-mile step forward in the great adventure of space conquest. No one can say how far we will ultimately go, but I assure you of this—we are on our way to making the United States pre-eminent in space as well as on earth.”
Chairman of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, Rep. Chet Holifield, stated that he saw a narrowing of the Nation’s objectives in space: “I cannot help but wonder about the sincerity of our entire space effort in view of the trends which I see in our current program. It appears, increasingly, that our goal is gravitating toward a one-snot manned mission to the moon. “This effort is centered around the development of chemical rockets whose limitations, compared to nuclear propulsion, are severe. “. . . The leader in space cannot afford to be so lacking in vision as to fail to appreciate the need for nuclear power. If we are sincere in our effort to be the first on this new frontier, we must maintain a concerted effort to develop nuclear powered machinery for use in space.” Holifield’s views were made known in a statement accompanying publication of testimony taken during September 1962.
Three scientists at Boeing Company made seven-day simulated space trip to the moon in a cylinder-shaped capsule 8 ft. in diameter and 6 ft., 4 in. high.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev said in speech to transport workers that despite the claims of American scientists no U.S. rocket has hit the moon: “The Americans have tried several times to hit the moon with their rockets. They have proclaimed for all the world to hear that they had launched rockets to the moon, but they missed every time. The Soviet pennant on the moon has been awaiting an American one for a long time but in vain and is becoming lonesome.”
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, said in an interview in General Electric Forum that the U.S. space program would be paying for itself within another 10 years. “The real payoff does not lie in mining the Moon or in bringing gold back from the Moon, but in enriching our economy and our science in new methods, new procedures, new knowledge, and advanced technology in general.”
Dr. Carl Sagan, University of California astronomer, warned scientists at the Lunar Exploration Conference, Blacksburg, Va., of the need for sterilization of lunar spacecraft and decontamination of Apollo crewmen, pointing out that lunik ii and ranger iv probably had deposited a million terrestrial micro-organisms on the moon, possibly contaminating areas around the impact points. Even more serious, he said, was the possibility that lunar microorganisms might be brought to earth where they could multiply explosively.
usaf announced it wollid extend space survelliance to the moon through a system developed by the Space Track Research & Development Facility at Laurence G. Hanscom Field, Mass. There will be surveillance of orbiting man-made or natural objects beyond the earth’s nominal, low-altitude orbital areas out toward the moon.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston invited eleven firms to submit research and development proposals for the lunar excursion module (lem) intended for use in lunar orbital rendezvous (lor) flights of the multimanned Apollo spacecraft.
Reported that nasa wollid build facilities worth $15 to $18 million at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr), N.M., for testing Apollo spacecraft’s propllision and abort systems. Facilities for flight tests of the abort system and the lunar excursion modllie would be ready in January 1963; static-firing sites for testing propulsion systems would be operational in mid-1963.
Recent Soviet article discussed various methods the U.S.S.R. has been studying for sending a man to the moon in the current decade. The earth-orbital rendezvous method was reported as considered the most reliable, but consideration also has been given to the direct ascent method, using the “Mastodon” rocket. No decision has been made public.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, writing on the U.S. space program in The Saturday Evening Post, stated that he did “not see the need for continuing this effort of such a fantastically expensive crash program. . . . “Why the great hurry to get to the moon and the planets? We have already demonstrated that in everything except the power of our booster rockets we are leading the world in scientific space exploration. “From here on, I think we should proceed in an orderly, scientific way, building one accomplishment on another, rather than engaging in a mad effort to win a stunt race.”
Vice Adm. William F. Raborn (usn) wrote in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings that ability to control weather might bring about greater changes in warfare than did explosion of first nuclear bomb, adding: “The capabllity to change the direction of destructive storms and guide them toward enemy concentration may exist in the future arsenal of the Navy tactical commander. . . . We already have taken our first steps toward developing an environmental warfare capability. We are using satellite weather from tiros ii for current tactical operations and more accurate long-range weather predictions. . . . Some experiments in fog dissipation have shown promise, and some exploratory research has been conducted on ways to change the heading of major storms. . . .” Admiral Raborn said usn was planning 10-year study of the atmosphere (“atmos”) which would be coordinated with separate research on oceans. During December: Soviet Prof. V. Nikiforov, in article entitled “Chemistry in the Cosmos and on the Moon” which appeared in Soviet journal Aviation and Cosmonautics, suggested use of a chemical foam envelope on the moon to protect cosmonauts from great temperature changes, solar radiation, and materials on the lunar surface.
Soviet Academician Nikolai N. Semenov, Nobel Prize-winning chemist, was quoted as suggesting the moon be made into a major power source for earth. If the moon were covered with semiconductors and photo-elements of high efficiency solar energy falling on the moon could be converted to electrical power far exceeding that produced on earth. He also proposed the moon be made the site for all atomic and thermonuclear power stations, to avoid overheating and irradiating the earth. Research may find a way, he continued, to transmit the power to earth— perhaps by lasers or masers.
nasa and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced the selection of Military Electronics Division of Motorola, Inc., as contractor to manufacture and test radio equipment in the first two phases of a program to augment the Deep Space Instrumentation Facility by providing “S” band capability for stations at Goldstone, Calif.; Woomera, Australia; and Johannesburg, South Africa. With these stations located some 120° apart around the earth, dsif would have a high-gain, narrow-beam-width, high-frequency system, with very little interference from cosmic noise and would provide much improved telemetering and tracking of satellites as far out as the moon and nearby planets.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, speaking before the ias National Propulsion Meeting in Cleveland, said: “As we move on toward the moon, with Saturn, Advanced Saturn, and Nova as our launch vehicles, the reliability problem takes on a new dimension. “These big space vehicles will be the first developed especially for manned space exploration. The unit cost will be high. Only a few of each version will be produced. The systems and the missions are extremely complex, involving long periods of operation in space and a return launch from the moon without the help, needless to say, of a lunar Cape Canaveral.”
Full-size test boilerplate command module of Project Apollo spacecraft was delivered by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Div. to Northrop Corp’s Ventura Div., which would equip spacecraft with earth-landing system in preparation for drop tests early next year.
nasa announced award of contract to Army Corps of Engineers to define a research program necessary to give the U.S. capability to construct research station on the moon. D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said nasa does not have a program to establish a “manned lunar laboratory,” but that initial studies “are required now which can lead to the existence of a lunar construction capability.” Objectives of the six-month, $100,000 study: (1) define r&d effort required to provide U.S. lunar research capability; (2) define needed experimental facilities; and (3) prepare schedules and budgetary estimates for a lunar construction research program. Areas of research would include lunar soil characteristics; lunar soil movement and excavation techniques; construction materials; structural design; power generation; storing and handling of lifesupporting atmosphere, water supply, and sanitation; construction tools; and human engineering and training.
First commercial transmission of live TV via satellite and first transatlantic TV transmission, when telstar experimental communications satellite of at&t demonstrated vast new capabilities. Pictures were telecast from at&t center near Andover, Me., to telstar, then received and placed on all three major TV networks in the U.S. TV signals also were relayed from Andover, Me., to telstar, and then relayed to French antenna at Pleu-meur-Bodou on the Brittany peninsula and the British station at Goonhilly, Cornwall. In American relay experiment via telstar, at*t Board Chairman Fred Kappel in Maine called Vice President Johnson in Washington. In the first successful transatlantic TV transmission, picture of waving American flag was transmitted via telstar to both France and Britain, while transmission was also picked up at both Andover and Holmedel, N.J., and relayed to American TV networks. First voice transmission from space was the Christmas message of President Eisenhower which was broadcast from usaf Project Score satellite on December 18, 1960. echo i, passive communications satellite, provided a reflector for a host of communication experiments after its launch on August 12, 1960. The moon also had been used as a reflector in communications experiments, the first being a radar reflection on January 11, 1946, by the Army Signal Corps.
Governor Nelson Rockefeller, addressing New York State Associated Press Association, proposed establishment of New York state science and technology foundation “to stimulate industrial expansion through research attuned to the space age.” Mid-October: J. Thomas Markley, Apollo project officer at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, announced details of space facility to be established by nasa at White Sands Missile Range (see Sept. 17). To be used in testing Apollo spacecraft’s propulsion and abort systems, wsmr site facilities would include two static test-firing stands, a control center blockhouse, various storage and other utility buildings, and an administrative services area. October 16: Nike-Apache two-stage sounding rocket carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 103-mi. altitude, in nasa launching from Wallops Island, Va. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ionosphere electron density and temperature and to obtain data on the ion density and conductivity of the ionosphere.
Scientists at Hughes Aircraft Co. displayed Surveyor lunar probe at American Rocket Society, the probe containing redesigned payload weighing about 114 lbs. as compared to originally designed payload weighing 220 lbs. Payload of instruments would be placed on the moon in late 1964. Dr. Leo Stoolman, Surveyor project chief for Hughes, said reasons for redesigning Surveyor instrument package were difficulty in Centaur launch vehicle program and decision to include only instruments that would directly assist U.S. manned lunar landing program.
nasa’s nine new astronauts were named in Houston by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center (msc). Chosen from 253 applicants, the former test pilots who would join original seven Mercury astronauts in training for Projects Gemini and Apollo were: Neil A. Armstrong, nasa civilian test pilot; Maj. Frank Borman (usaf); Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr. (usn); LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn); Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf); Elliot M. See, Jr., civilian test pilot for General Electric Co.; Capt. Thomas P. Stafford (usaf); Capt. Edward H. White, II (usaf) ; and LCdr. John W. Young (usn). Dr. Gilruth stressed that they wollid not all necessarily make actual space flights. “Assignment to flight crews will depend upon the continuing physical and technical status of the individuals concerned and upon the future flight schedllie requirements.”
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, addressed the Southern Governors’ Conference, Hollywood-by-the-Sea, Fla., on the role of the South in the Space Age, and remarked: “. . . our space activities are in no sense stunts— spectaculars, if you will—nor will the landing of U.S. astronauts on the moon be our ultimate objective. Rather, the national effort is broadly organized to accomplish rapid advances in science and technology that will make it possible for us to perform any space assignment—military or civilian—that the national interest might require. Furthermore, from lunar exploration, we will go on to wider exploration of the solar system, ventures whose end no man can foresee. ...”
Three-man crew “survived” a simulated week-long, round-trip to the moon, in simulation chamber at Martin Co. plant, near Baltimore. Crew in the simulator, which resembled Apollo spacecraft in size and shape, consisted of 3 nasa civilian test pilots: Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream of Langley Research Center, and Glenn W. Stinnett of Ames Research Center. During the simulated flight, made in July, the men took turns as pilot, co-pilot, and navigator, and each made a simulated landing on the moon’s surface in the special one-man capsule designed by Langley scientists.
nasa first made public drawings of three-man Apollo spacecraft to be used in lunar landing development program.
In interview with Science Service, Dr. John O’Keefe of nasa said that pattern of re-entry of pieces of MA-6 booster rocket reinforced the theoiy that tektites originate from the moon. Tektites are black, glossy rocks scattered on the earth’s surface, and the wide area covered by MA-6 rocket pieces was a similar pattern.
dod activated nrl’s huge radar system near Chesapeake Beach, Md. Central feature of system was 150-ft.-diameter antenna, capable of obtaining signals from small aircraft or satellites from as far as 1,200 miles away and of receiving very strong signals from the moon (240,000 miles away). Radar wollid be used solely for research purposes.
nasa announced establishment of an on-site management unit of some 100 persons at the Space and Information Systems Division Plant of North American Aviation at Downey, Calif. It will be an element of the nasa Western Operations Office of Santa Monica. The Downey office is to expedite nasa contractor decisions and actions essential to development contracts such as the Apollo lunar-landing spacecraft and the second stage for the Advanced Saturn booster.
At aaas convention in Philadelphia, Dr. P. J. Coleman, ucla scientist, reported on the findings of mariner ii in the vicinity of the planet Venus. Coleman reported on the magnetometer experiment which showed no rise in the average value of the magnetic field above the “interplanetary value” during the fly-by of Venus: “The sensitivity, or lower limit, of the field’s change that could be observed on the magnetometer was five gamma . . . During the encounter, no changes were observed of this magnitude—five gamma—which might be attributed to Venus.” Observations thus far, he said, suggest that planets and satellites such as the moon that rotate slower than the earth have small magnetic fields.
Reported that nasa had selected Aerojet-General’s Algol solidpropellant motor to power Little Joe II booster, which would be used to flight-test the command and service modules of Apollo spacecraft.
nasa signed $1.55 million contract with Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. for development of spacesuit for Apollo crewmen. As prime contractor, Hamilton Standard has management responsibility of the overall program and wollid develop life-support, back-pack system to be worn by crewmen during lunar expeditions; Latex would fabricate the sllit with Republic Aviation Corp. furnishing human factors information and environmental testing. The suit wollid allow crewman greater mobility than previous spacesuits, enabling him to walk, climb, and bend with ease.
New York Academy of Sciences conference revealed disagreements on evidence presented on extraterrestrial life. Dr. Bartholomew Nagy of Fordham University, Dr. George Claus of NYuMedical Center, and Dr. Warren G. Meinchein of Esso Research presented evidence, first reported last year, that they had found “organized elements” in the Orgueil meteorite. Dr. Frank W. Fitch and Dr. Edward Anders of the University of Chicago reported that the Fordham group found “probably nothing more than earthly contaminants such as ragweed pollen and starch grains.” Dr. Harold Urey of the University of California (La Jolla) stated that the U.S. is spending $25 billion to go to the moon to answer this and other questions. All agreed that the question of extraterrestrial life was of basic scientific significance.
Vincent Johnson, nasa Centaur program manager, reportedly said nasa would spend an additional $33 million to accelerate slipping Centaur launch vehicle development, nasa would divert funds from other programs rather than request supplement from Congress. During August: First full-scale model of 3-man Apollo spacecraft underwent preliminary ocean drop-testing off California coast and was shipped to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center for further testing. J. Thomas Markley, Apollo project engineer for nasa, described all spacecraft structural tests thus far as “successful.”
A very eventful day in space exploration: launched into orbit were ariel i, cosmos iv, and two unidentified usaf satellites; ranger iv impacted the far side of the moon; and a U.S.-Japa-nese probe was launched from Wallops.
Representative Chet Holifield, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, declared in speech that “moon madness” is starving scientific programs other than space exploration. He predicted budgetary troubles for atomic energy programs because of “greater priority” of space programs. November 27-December 9: Four launchings of Centaur rockets took place from the Argentine Rocket Range, Chamical, as part of worldwide program of simultaneous measurements of winds and turbulence in the ionosphere by means of sodium-cloud experiments. The Argentine launchings were joint cooperative effort of French National Committee on Space Studies and the Argentine National Commission on Space Research.
nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, addressed National Industrial Conference Board, Chicago, on economic implications of manned space flight program: “ ... In a significant, though incidental way, the space program is already enriching and will continue to enrich our country. It is causing a rapid advancement of industrial technology and the stimulation of our economy. The billions of dollars required for the space effort are not being spent on the moon; they are being spent in our factories and laboratories—for salaries and for new materials and supplies, which in turn represent income for others. “Already the space industry is a major industry. It is creating new job opportunities at all levels of skills and abilities. It is improving standards of living. “New economically beneficial breakthroughs will be made in many fields. A successful space program will require major and rapid advances in the uses of energy and the development of new materials, fabrics, and lubricants—the very forces that are basic to economic growth. “Space research and development is already producing corollary benefits in the form of new products, new methods, and new industrial processes which can be employed in the manufacture of countless articles for human use. The surface has probably barely been scratched. . . . “The development of space science and technology will undoubtedly strengthen our whole industrial base and serve as effective insurance against technological obsolescence. ...”
nasa selected Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. as prime contractor to manage and integrate spacesuit program for Project Apollo as well as to design and produce its life-support pack. Spacesuit development and fabrication would be done by International Latex Corp. under subcontract.
In speech to the National Rocket Club in Washington, George Low, nasa’s Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, outlined the three methods of manned lunar missions (direct, earth-orbit rendezvous, and lunar-orbit rendezvous) and indicated that a nasa decision would shortly be forthcoming as to which would be used in the Apollo program.
nasa press conference explained basic decision on Apollo manned lunar exploration program: to base the next phase of its planning, research and development, procurement, and space flight program on the Saturn (C-5) to accomplish the initial manned lunar landing and recovery, using the lunar orbit rendezvous as the prime mission mode. Based on more than a year of intensive study, the basic decision on the lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mode enables immediate industrial consideration of the lunar excursion vehicle and firm planning on early employment of two-stage Saturn (C-lB) to test-flight the Apollo configuration in earth orbits. It was also announced: (1) an in-depth study of an unmanned lunar logistic vehicle would be undertaken; (2) continued feasibility studies would be made of the earth-orbit rendezvous mode using Saturn (C-5) with a two-man spacecraft, with the possibilities of a direct flight with this spacecraft; (3) continued study would be made of the Nova vehicle (two to three times capability of C-5). nasa Administrator Webb said: “We are putting major emphasis on lunar orbit rendezvous because a year of intensive study indicates that it is most desirable, from the standpoint of time, cost and mission accomplishment. In reaching this decision, however, we have acted to retain the degree of flexibility vital to a research and development program of this magnitude . . .” lor was unanimously recommended by nasa’s Manned Space Flight Management Council because it: (1) provides highest probability of mission success with essentially equal mission safety; (2) provides mission success months earlier than other modes; (3) will cost 10 to 15 per cent less than other mode; and (4) requires least amount of technical development beyond existing commitments.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched to 140-mi. altitude at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr), N.M., by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, with objective of studying x-radiation from the moon. X-rays expected from the moon were blanketed by much stronger source in general vicinity of constellation Scorpius. Analysis of data from sensors indicated the radiation is in form of soft x-rays that do not penetrate earth’s atmosphere below 50-mi. altitude. Data also seem to indicate the sensors may have detected a second x-ray source on the galactic rim. afcrl planned a second rocket flight for October to verify results of this experiment.
Report at American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies forum that Western Europe was planning 440 sounding rocket, 22 satellite, and 2 moon probe launchings by 1970.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, in London press conference, said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. was leading the U.S. in space exploration. “We have been putting all kinds of satellites in the air for meteorological readings and other scientific information, ...” but the U.S. has not been indulging in “the same kind of spectacular” as the U.S.S.R. “I think we should develop achievement upon achievement until it should be almost a matter of course for us to go to the moon, rather than indulge in the spectacular.”
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, predicted U.S. will have as many as 24 men operating a moon station within a decade.
John L. Sloop, nasa’s Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “. . . some of the new solid propellants promise an increase in performance of over 18 percent. ... If applied to our new Surveyor spacecraft designed to land instruments on the moon, this 18 percent increase in solid propellant specific impulse could make possible an increase in the weight of instruments aboard by more than 50 percent.”
ranger v, its batteries dead, passed within 450 mi. of the moon on its way into orbit of the sun.
In speech at the Seattle World’s Fair, Secretary of State Dean Rusk urged that activities in space be subjected to international law and supervision before it is too late. Without international regulation, he said, “the frontiers of space might be pierced by huge nuclear-propelled dreadnaughts, armed with thermonuclear weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base. Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an enemy. Weather control might become a military weapon. . . .”
James H. “Dutch” Kindelberger, President of North American Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L. Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later following Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During World War II, naa built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft including the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more recently the X-15. Under Kindelberger, naa’s Rocketdyne Division pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho, Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines, naa is presently prime contractor on nasa’s Apollo program and the S-II.
mit ordered a Honeywell 1800 electronic computer from Honeywell Electronic Data Processing, for work on Project Apollo navigation system. After installation in 1963, the computer would aid in circuitry design of Apollo spacecraft’s guidance computer and also wollid simulate full operation of spacebome computer during ground tests.
One year ago, President Kennedy in Iris address to Congress declared the national space goal of “landing an American on the moon in this decade.”
Catalogue of Astronomical Photographs featuring close-up photographs of moon, was released by Lick Observatory. Each photograph showed area 230 mi. by 280 mi. on scale of 30 mi. to the inch (view of lunar surface from 300 mi.). Lick spokesman said precise optical and guidance systems, high magnification, and skilled use of modern astrophotographic techniques were used to obtain the pictures. The 120-in. reflecting telescope at Lick is world’s second largest.
Speaking at meeting of American Institute of Biological Sciences in Corvallis, Ore., James C. Finn, Jr., of North American Aviation, predicted a permanent moon base would be established before 1990. He said the base would be dug at least 40 ft. underground to protect crew from bombardment by meteors and radiation and from temperature extremes between day and night.
aec announced University of California Lawrence Radiation Laboratory and Texas a&m Activation Analysis Laboratory would conduct nasa- and AEC-funded research in methods of determining chemical composition of lunar surface. First week in November: Armour Research Foundation reported to nasa that surface of the moon may not be covered with layers of dust. Initial Armour studies indicated dust particles become harder and denser in higher-vacuum environment such as that of moon, but studies had not proved that particles eventually become bonded together in rock-like substance as vacuum increased.
dod announced that Perkin-Elmer Corp. was completing a new 36-inch airborne telescope with 3-5 times as much resolution as any telescope on the ground. New instrument should finally answer the speculation about the so-called canals on Mars, the mysterious red spot on Jupiter, and perhaps the hidden surface of Venus. “This historic enterprise is only one more step forward, leading to large telescopes orbiting the earth in satellites and eventually constructed on the moon.”
Seven X-15 pilots and Paul F. Bickle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, were awarded the first John J. Montgomery Award for aerospace achievement by the National Society of Aerospace Professionals and the Aerospace Museum of San Diego. The X-15 pilots were : Scott Crossfield, naa; Maj. Robert M. White, usaf; Neil A. Armstrong, nasa; John B. McKay, nasa; Joseph A. Walker, nasa; Cdr. Forrest S. Petersen, usn: and Maj. Robert A. Rush worth, usaf. During September: Ground rehearsals for onr-nsf-nasa Stratoscope II balloon-carried telescope experiment took place in Norwalk, Conn., the 36-in. telescope focusing on the planet Jupiter. Later in month, telescope was disassembled and transported to Palestine, Tex., where it would remain in hangar until first flight, in February or March 1963. To be lifted above,most of the earth’s atmosphere by two balloons, telescope would be stabilized at 80,000-ft. altitude throughout each observing night, where it will make a variety of astronomical and planetary observations.
Neil A. Armstrong, nasa research pilot, awarded the 1962 Octave Chanute Award by the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias), as the pilot who had contributed most to the aerospace sciences during the year. He was cited for “outstanding contributions in both engineering and piloting capacity in the development of an experimental adaptive control system and in the flight testing of that system in the X-15, No. 3 aircraft.”
Rep. James G. Fulton, senior Republican on the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in an interview: “There’s no doubt our overall space program is slipping despite the high words and fine praise coming from the White House ... If it continues to slip, we’ll be lucky to get a man on the moon before 198°.” _ ...
Aerojet-General Corp. reported first successful firing of development engine for Apollo spacecraft’s service module, full-scale prototype engine with ablative thrust chamber assembly fired for checkout runs up to 50 sec.
Radarastronomy observations of the moon taken by Millstone radar, mit Lincoln Laboratory, revealed unusually strong echo from region of crater Tycho. G. H. Pettengill and J. C. Henry, who reported on experiments in Journal of Geophysical Research, concluded the enhanced radar reflectivity may be explained by unusually rough crater floor and by crater walls consisting of material characteristic of lunar subsurface.
M. Scott Carpenter Day in Bollider, Colo. Presented with an engineering degree from the University of Colorado, Astronaut Carpenter said that he hoped the degree, which he missed in 1949 because he failed a course in heat transfer, collid be justified by the “unique” education in the subject received during his re-entry in aurora 7. At a news conference, Carpenter said: “All mankind stands to gain more as a resllit of these flights— and mark my words, man wlli be going to the moon and neighboring planets in the near future—than in any previous exploration in the history of the world.”
Report released by White House of study committee examining nonprofit research groups. Report stated that Government must continue to rely heavily on private institutions, including nonprofit research groups, to carry out Federal research programs. At the same time, the committee recommended that steps be taken to improve the competence of the Government’s own scientific staffs and laboratories to direct research programs. Late April: faa awarded first seven contracts, totaling $2.66 million, for commercial supersonic transport aircraft, faa Administrator N. E. Halaby said the action was “the first step leading to the development of a safe, practical, economical airplane to carry the traveling public beyond the speed of sound.” During April: Dr. John C. Houbolt, of nasa’s Langley Research Center, writing in the April issue of Astronautics, outlined the possible advantages of lunar-orbit rendezvous for a manned lunar landing as opposed to direct flight from earth or earth-orbit rendezvous. Under this concept, an Apollo-type vehicle wollid fly direct to the moon, go into orbit around the moon, detach a small landing craft which wollid land on the moon and then return to the mother craft, which wollid then return to earth. Advantages wollid be the much smaller craft having to perform the difficllit lunar landing and take-off, the possibility of optimizing the smaller craft for this one function, the safe return of the mother craft in event of a landing accident, and even the possibility of using two of the small craft to provide a rescue capability.
nasa announced selection of International Business Machine Corp. to provide ground-based computer system for manned space flight Projects Gemini and Apollo. The computer complex will be part of the Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc), at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
ranger v lunar probe launched from Cape Canaveral by Atlas-Agena B, the Agena B stage attaining parking orbit and 25 min. later reigniting to send ranger v toward the moon. The spacecraft’s solar cells did not provide power, making it impossible for reception of flight-path correction signal and rendering its television cameras useless, ranger v was to have relayed TV pictures of the lunar surface and rough-landed an instrumented capsule containing a seismometer to send back data on moon quakes and meteoritic impact. Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists tracked the spacecraft for 8 hours, 44 min. before its small reserve battery went dead.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Air Force Association convention in Las Vegas that “the objective of our [national space] policy is to obtain and maintain leadership in space activities for the benefit of man’s freedom, man’s well-being, man’s understanding, and man’s scientific progress. The details of the policy are not quite so clear, as those who have studied our budgets and public documents have reason to know. It is clear, however, that our policy includes going to the moon during this decade. It includes developing an operational communications satellite system as well as navigation and meteorological systems on a world-wide basis. The specifics are less clear as to the roles of man in space and what can and should be done to maintain peace in outer space. This lack of clarity, however, is partly due to the difficulty of knowing what can be done and what cannot be done. Continuing efforts wlli be made to clarify policy, while keeping it necessarily flexible. . . .” September 21: Replying to September 20 statement by aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg regarding U.S. nuclear propulsion capabilities for a 1970 Mars mission, nasa spokesman said: “There is no such approved program for such a flight at this time, but the joint aec-nasa program is aimed at giving such a capability, and at this time it appears it may be feasible to conduct such a flight.”
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, presented details of Apollo spacecraft at Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias) meeting in Seattle. During launch and re-entry, 3-man crew would be seated in adjacent couches; during other phases of flight, center couch would be stowed to permit more freedom of movement. Apollo command module cabin would have 365-cu. ft. volume, with 22-cu. ft. free area available to crew. “The small end of the command module may contain an airlock; when the lunar excursion module is not attached, the airlock would permit a pressure-suited crewman to exit to free space without decompressing the cabin. Crew ingress and egress while on Earth wlli be through a hatch in the side of the command module.” During August: Under Secretary of the Air Force Joseph V. Charyk told Seventh Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space Technology that usaf had flight-tested two Agena D upper-stage vehicles, the first firing occurring in June. Agena D would accommodate a variety of payloads, whereas earlier models Agena A and B had integrated payloads.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
Wash. Evening Star reported that nasa’s Director’ofjMaimed Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, had announed in Cleveland that nasa X-15 pilot Neil A. Armstrong would become the first civilian astronaut as a part of the new selection of astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, interviewed in The National Observer, said: “Some people have drawn the conclusion that the Russians are ahead of the United States in the endeavor to land men on the moon and return them safely. This is based on a misconception that going to the moon is something like progress down a one-way street, passing successive street-corners. “That is far from being the case. The enterprise requires mobilization of a large task force with many tasks to be done and brought to fruition simultaneously. In some aspects, it makes small difference in what order the tasks are performed. The fact that the Russians have done one part of the work of going to the moon does not mean that they are ahead in the entire enterprise. ...” When asked about U.S. participation in international space programs, Dr. Dryden said: “The United States now has arrangements with more than 55 countries for space activity. . . . We hope to increase the number of countries with which we are co-operating. We have been engaged in negotiations with the Soviet Union toward that end. “Recently, Academician Anatoli Blagonravov and I concluded the first phase of the negotiations with a joint recommendation to our governments that they undertake co-operative efforts in meteorology, communications, and the investigation of the earth’s magnetic field. . . . ”
White House and State Dept, officials denied report by French newspaper Paris-Presse that U.S. and U.S.S.R. negotiators had signed cooperative agreement to send team of Russians and Americans to the moon in 1970 on first manned lunar flight. During December: Response to O.E. Forum survey of editors, writers, and publishers: 60% considered present expenditure for U.S. space program fully warranted; 26% probably fully warranted; 8% probably not; 5%, not warranted; and 1%, no response. Asked what should be level of expenditure (relative to gnp) in immediate future, 25% replied sharply higher; 30%, a little higher; 22%, remain at about present ratio; 6%, a little lower; 6%, sharply lower; 11%, no response. 33% said U.S. would probably exceed U.S.S.R. in space achievements by 1970, while 40% said U.S. would approximately equal U.S.S.R. by 1970. 45% said prime objective of U.S. in space was to exceed U.S.S.R. space achievements—but without duplication and inefficiencies of an all-out crash program. 35% said prime objective was to sustain a prudent and orderly program of scientific progress in space achievements, with little regard for who leads in the various aspects of space technology. 16% chose crash program to exceed the Russians in space. As to justification for U.S. space program, 59% said: “Because of its by-products, both actual and potential, our space program is an excellent dollar investment, over and above its value for military security and international prestige.” 29% chose this statement: “Our space program requires a high dollar expenditure which must be justified—preponderantly if not wholly—m terms of its value for military security and international prestige.” During December: nasa awarded contract to Ford Motor Co. Aero-nutronic Div. for development of camera system to be hard-landed on the moon. To relay photographs of lunar surface back to earth, camera would be used in future Ranger lunar spacecraft and would replace seismometers carried in bangers iii, iv, and v.
Specific use of the fuel cell as source of auxiliary power was confirmed when North American Aviation, Inc., prime contractor for nasa’s Apollo vehicle, awarded two fuel-cell development contracts to Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and Tapco Div. of Thompson Ramo Wooldridge.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, addressed National Advanced Technology Management Council in Seattle on the U.S. lunar program. “Although we are still in a very early phase of the greatest engineering project that man has ever undertaken, the Nation has made four crucial management decisions which clear the way for action. First, the goal has been identified. We are to land American explorers on the moon. Second, the timetable has been laid down. We are to carry out the mission and return the U.S. explorers safely to earth within this decade. Third, we have settled on the organization to meet the national goal on schedule. Finally, we have selected the method which we believe can accomplish the lunar expedition on the shortest possible time schedule, with the greatest assurance of success, and at the least expense. You do not need to be a specialist in management to realize that decisions such as these are central to the success of any job—what to do, when to do it, who is to be in charge, and how it is to be done. In the United States space program, these fundamental decisions have been made. And we have proceeded with the work to carry them out at the swiftest pace consonant with other processing needs of the country and with the resources available .... “The achievement which stands out [in the manned lunar landing program] . . ., in my opinion, has been the launching by the people of the United States of a truly national effort to demonstrate our determination and our capacity to sail on the new ocean of space and to master the technology of the space age in all its aspects—for the security of the Free World and the good of all mankind. “The lunar landing is no stunt. The most important accomplishment will be the development by this Nation of the ability to make the landing, and not the landing itself. Achievement of such ability is worth the great investment in brains and industrial capacity and technological advance that we are making. The lunar landing is a yardstick—a measure of this country’s technological leadership, a measure of the ability of this democracy to ‘manage,’ if you will, a great engineering and technological undertaking in the national interest.”
World’s first regularly scheduled Hovercraft transportation service ended. Operating since July with 8 round trips daily from Rhyl, Wales, to Wallasey, England, the experiment proved Vickers Armstrong 24-passenger Hovercraft could successfully negotiate soft sand and shallows as well as deeper water. Hovercraft rides 8 in. above surface (land or sea) on cushion of air.
Dr. Hans-Georg Clamann, Chief of Space Medicine at sam, submitted that a mountain peak near the south pole of the moon may be the ideal location for a lunar hase. Continuous sunlight would provide support for growing vegetation.
Four “hot spots” on the moon were reported discovered by Bruce Murray and Robert Wildey of Cal Tech, using new telescope with heat-sensitive, gold-plated mirror to detect infrared radiation. The two space scientists speclliated that hot spots collid indicate large areas of bare rock exposed on the lunar surface. Spots were discovered during survey of the moon which also revealed the lunar surface gets colder at night than previously believed, —270°F compared to —243°F recorded by earlier heat-measuring devices. Murray said the new evidence collid mean there are prominences of heat-retaining rock protruding through thick dust layer on lunar surface.
nasa announced contract with the University of Texas to design and build a radio antenna at the Balcones Research Center to be used in making radiation measurements of the moon and planets. It would be 16 feet in diameter and operate effectively at 30,000 to 150,000 megacycles.
Speaking on Radio Moscow, Prof. N. P. Arabashov said: “All the magnificent achievements of Soviet science convince us that flights by men to the moon and the planets are not only possible, but are also near. It is now clear that automatic interplanetary space ships, at first unmanned, will be sent to the moon and then to Venus and Mars.”
Report outlining nasa’s manned space flight projects was published by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with cooperation of nasa. Project Gemini two-man flights, planned for 1964 and aimed at orbital rendezvous, might be as much as a week long. Three-man Apollo flights would follow, circumlunar flights to be followed by lunar landing missions. Advance-design Gemini spacecraft would be first designed specifically by U.S. to come down on dry land, using Rogallo wing to control descent.
Unnamed Soviet scientist, called “chief designer of Soviet spaceships,” reported by Tass as saying that U.S.S.R. planned to establish an “industrial undertaking” on the moon.
Balloon-borne Cassegrain telescope was launched from Artesia, N.M., to altitude of about 86,000 ft. by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories. Besides the telescope, the 850-lb. payload included interferometer spectrometer to take spectra of moon and planet Venus. Other information obtained on this initial Project Sky top flight concerned amount of water vapor present in upper atmosphere. Third objective of flight was to obtain information required to measure amount of different gases in upper atmosphere of Venus. Instrumentation failure prevented the telescope from orienting on Venus for sufficient length of time.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy was asked for his “evaluation of our progress in space at this time” and whether the U.S. had changed its “timetable for landing a man on the moon?” He replied: “I have said from the beginning we’ve been behind. And we are running into the difficulties which come from starting late. We, however, are going to proceed. We’re making a maximum effort, as you know, and the expenditures in our space program are enormous. And, to the best of my ability, the time schedule, I hope, has not been changed by the recent setbacks.”
In news conference at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, Gherman Titov forecast cooperative flights to and around the moon if world leaders could come to an agreement on disarmament. He also stated that Soviet Cosmonaut No. 3 was ready to go.
Hindu astrologers predicted disaster during the period February 4-5 when five planets, the sun. the moon, and an invisible body called Khentu moved into rough alignment. Predictions of disaster were based on astrological tables. Reaction was so widespread that it prompted Prime Minister Nehru to ridicule the predictions in an address: “I do not know the secrets of nature. We will know them gradually. But what we don’t know, we should not accept blindly. At least what strikes our intelligence as completely absurd should not be accepted.”
nasa Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, addressing General Session of U.S. Savings and Loan League in Washington, said: “. . . What we are buying in our national space program is the knowledge, the experience, the skills, the industrial facilities, and the experimental hardware that wlli make the United States first in every field of space exploration—scientific and practical uses, including military applications. And to accomplish this result we must make advances at the frontiers of knowledge in nearly every field of science and technology which wlli project new ideas into our whole industrial system. . . . “The success of the National Space Program hinges on the ability of the American people, through their government, their industry, and their privately endowed institutions, to implement many difficult tasks. Not one or two men wlli make the landing on the moon, but, figuratively, the entire Nation. “And our ultimate success also depends, in some measure, on our abllity to enlist the cooperation of other nations in this enormous undertaking. An important (but certainly not determining) consideration in our international programs is winning and cementing friendly relations with our allies in the Free World and among the uncommitted nations. This we do by demonstration of our peaceful objectives and our willingness to share what we learn from space exploration with the scientific community the world around. . . . “The investment in space progress is big and will grow, but the potential returns on the investment are even larger. And because it concerns us all, scientific progress is everyone’s responsibility. Every citizen should understand what the space program really is about and what it can do. . . .”
London Times reported that Manchester University team conducting photographic survey of the moon, working at Pic-du-Midi Observatory in the French Pyrenees, and similar Japanese team, working at Kwasan Observatory, Kyoto, would be joined by a third observing station in California. Eight-hour time difference between France and Japan enables the two stations to photograph the moon for 16 hours of night; the California station would be a central point in time between the other observatories, making possible the first round-the-clock photographic survey of the moon. Manchester University program is sponsored by usaf, while Kyoto University program operates under nasa research grant.
Radio signals to Venus probe mariner ii, nearly 1.5 million mi. from earth, repositioned the craft and fired an onboard rocket to send the probe on desired trajectory toward Venus. Launched August 27, the 447-lb. interplanetary probe would have missed Venus by 233,000 mi. if the mid-course maneuver had not corrected its path. Signals from jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station were sent after 24-hr. delay for scientists to determine that the spacecraft’s antenna was pointing to earth and not the moon. Assuming that its corrected course was nominal, it was estimated that mariner ii would come within 9,000	mi. of Venus December 14, covering about 180,200,000 mi. through space and relaying scientific data on interplanetary space and Venusian atmosphere.
nasa announced 4,000-lb. micrometeorite satellite would be launched with Saturn test vehicles SA-8 and SA-9. Satellite, to unfold in space exposing surface area of 2,000 sq. ft., would be “bonus” experiment with chief missions of flight to be launch vehicle development test and atmospheric re-entry test of Apollo boilerplate spacecraft.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center released sketch of Project Apollo suit to be worn by astronauts making four-hour expeditions on lunar surface. Suit contains portable life support system to supply oxygen and pressurization, control temperature and humidity, and protect against solar radiation.
Early tests of pressure and dynamic stability models of the Apollo spacecraft were completed in wind tunnels at jpl and Langley Research Center.
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, in a speech on the Apollo Program at San Jose, California, outlined nasa’s progression of flight programs leading to goal of a manned lunar mission before 1970, relating the X-15, Ranger, Surveyor, Mercury, Gemini, and rocket propllision developments to the Apollo program.
nasa announced that the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle, to be used for manned flights around the moon and for manned lunar landings with rendezvous technique, would have five-engined first and second stages. The first stage (S-IB) would be powered by five F-l engines (total of 7.5 million pounds thrust) and the second stage (S—II) would be powered with five J-2 engines (total of 1 million pounds thrust). A third stage (S-IVB) with a single J-2 engine would be used on escape missions.
nasa announced plans to launch Ranger (5) toward the moon during mid-October. The 775-lb. lunar probe would represent third U.S. attempt to take close-up photographs of the moon, gather information on lunar surface composition, and land instrumented capsule on lunar surface.
In answering Premier Khrushchev, Dr. William Pickering, Director of jpl, stated: “On April 26, at 4:47.50 AM, Pacific standard time, ranger iv was tracked by the Goldstone receiver as it passed the leading edge of the moon. At 4:49.53 it crashed on the moon at a lunar longitude of 229.5 degrees East and lunar latitude of 15.5 degrees South.” After 64 hours of tracking, the trajectory of ranger iv was precisely known and it was only 110 miles from the surface when it vanished behind the moon.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric, in Armed Forces luncheon address in San Francisco, stated that he was reluctant to identify dod contributions to the national space program as “The Military Space Program,” because “there is only one unified national program, not two or three or four. “We are mindful of the stated U.S. national objective of using space for peaceful purposes only, and we [dod] support this policy completely and wholeheartedly. ... We are well advised in buying technological insurance even while earnestly hoping that space wlli be used only for peaceflli purposes.” Since the U.S. must avoid technological surprise in the military space area and there is no guarantee that the U.S.S.R. will cooperate on the peaceflli use of space, Gilpatric announced that dod has decided to develop manned orbital rendezvous space systems for inspecting other satellites to determine intent and neutralizing if hostile, and then land at predetermined locations on earth. These would be separate, he said, from nasa’s Gemini and Apollo programs. In reviewing the evolution of the U.S. space program, Gilpatric pointed out that the “division of labor” between nasa and dod in space was based “partly in logic, partly in pragmatic assessment . . .”
Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, speaking at Danish-Soviet Friendship Advancement Society in Copenhagen, attacked U.S. space projects. He charged U.S. launched satellites which spied on other countries, endangered space travel by its atmospheric nuclear tests, and put millions of copper needles in space, making space research difficult. He added: “I also know a certain country is considering plans to set up bases on the moon from which attacks on other parts of the world can be made.”
nasa X-15 pilot, Joseph Walker, said that film taken during recent record altitude flight of 246,700 feet showed five or six mysterious objects. Other space pilots on the panel at the National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space at Seattle, all of whom have flown above 100,000 feet, were Cdr. Malcolm Ross (usnr), Capt. Joseph Kittinger (usaf), Col. David Simons (usaf), Neil Armstrong (nasa), Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn), Maj. Robert White (usaf), and Lt. Col. John H. Glenn (usmc).
Reported that Neil Armstrong, nasa X-15 tost pilot, was studying approaches and abort maneuvers for Dyna Soar project by flights in an F5D aircraft.
X-15 No. 1 flown to near 100,000 feet to begin descent maneuvers with yaw damper off, nasa’s Neil Armstrong as pilot, in test of re-entry control with electronic equipment turned off. X-15 No. 1 was grounded after this flight for installation of telescopic cameras for future research flights.
In interview in Yugoslav Government newspaper Borba, Soviet Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said U.S.S.R. was planning flight to the moon in 1965. “If some problem arises and a solution is not found immediately, the time is extended.”
President Kennedy, back in Washington after inspection of defense and nuclear-rocket facilities, said: “We are going to let these test go on of the [Project Rover] reactor. These tests should be completed by July. If they are successful, then we will put more money into the program, which would involve the Nerva and Rift, both the engine and the regular machine. We will wait until July, however, to see if these tests are successful. “It should be understood that the nuclear rocket will not come into play until 1970 or ’71. It would be useful for further trips to the moon or trips to Mars. But we have a good many areas competing for our available space dollars, and we have to try to channel it into those programs which will bring us a result, first, on our moon landing, and then to consider Mars.”
mit scientists, headed by Prof. Louis Smullin, fired 13 separate bursts of light (using a ruby crystal maser) through 12-inch telescope at smooth area of the moon, then “caught” the reflection 2% seconds later in a 48-inch telescope. Ruby crystal rod was about six inches long and the red light would have been visible on the moon. Technique demonstrated was hailed as promising “a means of delivering power over vast distances to orbiting satellites.”
nasa announced that nine companies had submitted proposals to develop lunar excursion module (lem), one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft. After evaluating proposals, nasa would award contract “within six to eight weeks,” according to the Wall Street Journal.
Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of the U.S. delegation to cospar meeting in Washington, reported that the moon emits x-rays as a result of solar and cosmic ray bombardment. Rockets shot of October 24, 1961, detected x-radiation from the lunar surface. By future studies of these energies it is hoped to determine the composition of the surface of the moon.
Deadline for applications for nasa’s new astronaut positions; nasa began screening the more-than-250 applications received. The armed services supplied 53 of the applications while more than 200 civilians submitted applications. Once selected, the new astronauts would undergo intensive training at Manned Spacecraft Center for Projects Gemini and Apollo.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Greater Hartford (Conn.) Chamber of Commerce, said that the “habit of oversimplifying has carried over into the evaluation and understanding of our objectives in space. . . . Many of our citizens believe our major, and in some cases, our only purpose in space, to be one of winning, in a contest with the Soviet Union, ‘a race to the moon.’ . . . [This concept] overlooks the significant and seldom appreciated fact that learning how to get to the moon, developing the technology which will be required to get there, and employing this technology for many purposes in space, is more important than the lunar landing itself. . . . “Characterization of our effort solely as a ‘space race to the moon’ also leads to the mistaken notion that the nation first to conduct a lunar exploration will have assured itself of ultimate and enduring superiority in space. The fact is overlooked that landing men on the moon, although a great and challenging goal, is only one of many goals in space. . . . “With the resources which are being applied, and knowledge of how those resources are being utilized to mobilize our nation’s scientific, technical and industrial strength, I am confident that we will achieve a space posture satisfactory to the United States given a continuation of our present efforts and support for those planned for future years. On the basis of what we know now of the scope of the Soviet Union’s efforts, and of what is required to do the job, this country has a better than even chance to conduct the first manned exploration of the moon. For these reasons, I have said I believe we will be there first. “But in saying this I do not want to fall into the same trap which has snared too many of us—that of again inviting a characterization of this broad and vital national effort as a spectacular ‘race to the moon.’” He pointed out that President Kennedy did not set the national goal of “landing the first man on the moon.” Rather, the President “stated our determination to attain ‘a position of pre-206 eminence in space’ and to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation .... “That is our objective—to develop superior competence in space which will be available for any national purpose which may be required, whether it be the peaceful utilization of space for the benefit of mankind, or to keep the peace and forestall its exploitation by any nation for aggressive purposes . . . .”
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Blacksburg, Va., that dual space flight of vostok iii and iv “was impressive from the standpoint of the whole operation, . . . [but] it does not look like the Russians used any new equipment. I don’t think there was a technical breakthrough. . . .” When asked to comment on U.S. prospects of being first to reach the moon, Dr. von Braun said that manned lunar flights would require rockets bigger than any used either by the U.S. or U.S.S.R. so far. “We have such rockets under development, and the Russians also have to develop a new rocket to do this job .... Therefore I don’t think we have any serious handicaps to overcome so far as the lunar program is involved.”
X-15 (No. 3) flown to 3,715 mph and 133,000 ft. in test of new autopilot control system, nasa’s Neil Armstrong as pilot.
nasa would later select additional astronauts for Project Apollo, Dr. Robert Voas of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center told Virginia Psychological Association in Richmond. Dr. Voas said the nine new astronauts recently selected would participate in Project Gemini two-man, orbital rendezvous missions and Project Apollo, culminating in manned landing on the moon.
X-15 No. 3 flew to 207,000 ft. and 3,818 mph (mach 5.33) in a test of a special adaptive control system. Flight was made from Edwards afb, Calif., nasa’s Neil Armstrong as pilot.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, urged in speech before aaas that scientists be among the next group of astronauts selected for training. “I have a complete and utter conviction that we should take a scientist and make a flyer out of him rather than the other way around.” In interview, Dr. Newell outlined tentative nasa plans for 1963 launchings: 6-8 communications satellites, three weather satellites; 8 scientific satellites; at least one manned orbital flight; initial unmanned flight-test of Gemini capsule; three lunar impacts; Apollo capsule boilerplate tests of emergency flight conditions; three Saturn launch vehicle flight-tests; two electrical rocket-engine flight-tests; three re-entry heating tests.
In reviewing technical considerations leading to nasa’s selection of the lunar orbital rendezvous mode (lor) for Project Apollo, D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of Manned Space Flight, told ars lunar conference in Cleveland: “The mission I have described has been widely reported in the newspapers and technical journals, with a liberal use of superlatives in assessing its magnitude and complexity. In this case, resort to superlatives is well-advised—this is truly a staggering undertaking. Entirely new concepts of component and system reliability must be developed and proven. Extensive tests must be carefully planned and conducted, and results must be exhaustively studied. Crew capabllities must be developed and meshed with proven automatic systems so that the two work together with Swiss-watch precision. “It is a challenging task, studded throughout with difficult decisions which must be soundly based and properly made. . . . “With the decision as to the method by which we wlli go to the moon we think we have taken a giant step forward. Essentially, we have now ‘lilted off’ and are on our way. ...”
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
gsfc awarded contract to ibm Corporation’s Federal Systems Division for computer support services for Project Mercury flights, nonrendezvous Gemini, and unmanned lunar flights scheduled for Project Apollo.
Reported by Irene Fischer of the Army Map Service that three experimental methods measured the mean distance from earth to the moon as 238,866 miles, a figure accurate within about a mile. A fourth method gives a figure accurate within about 8% miles. The 238,866-mile distance is 9 miles more than previously accepted figure used for decades and based on direct observation of the parallax of the moon at its mean distance from the earth.
Walter C. Williams, Associate Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said “I can’t guarantee we’re going to be first [to land a man on the moon], but if we don’t try, we’re going to be last. Either we have to spend more money on space ... or change our goals.” Williams was speaking at dinner commemorating 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ flight, in Beverly Hills, Calif.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
nasa announced that nine new astronauts for Projects Gemini and Apollo would be named at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, on September 17.
usaf announced selection of four usaf and two nasa pilots as “pilot-engineering consultants” for the Dyna-Soar program. A decision would be made later whether the men would actually fly the spacecraft, usaf officers selected were: Maj. James W. Wood, Capt. Henry C. Gordon, Capt. Russell L. Rogers, and Capt. William J. Knight, nasa pilots selected were: Neil A. Armstrong and Milton O. Thompson. During March: White House panel headed by Dr. Paul Beeson of Yale University, assisted by Dr. James Hartgering, special assistant in the President’s Scientific Adviser’s office, recommended that nasa make greater use of usaf capabilities in bioastronautics.
Dr. Edward Teller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended a program for establishing a large and independent colony on the moon, as a means of having a working base in space and control of near space from a standpoint of national security. A nuclear reactor should be developed to operate on the moon, eventually to furnish the power to extract water from the moon’s rocks and soil, he said.
First J-2 engine of Block I r&d series of Saturn C-l was successfully test-fired by Rocketdyne Div., North American Aviation. During January: Manned Rogallo-wing paraglider built by nasa’s Flight Research Center launched by automobile tow from Rogers Dry Lake, Calif. Tests may include launch of glider by aircraft tow, leading to development of inflatible paraglider for use with Gemini and Apollo programs.
mariner ii flight-path correction was postponed for at least 24 hours, because scientists could not determine if the Venus probe was stabilized on the moon or the earth, jpl scientists received moon-reference indication from mariner ii’s earth-sensing system and earth-reference indication from its high-gain antenna. If mid-course maneuver were executed with moon-lock instead of earth-lock, the probe probably would come within 12,000 mi. of Venus instead of 10,000 mi.
nasa approved the highest national priority for the Apollo program, covering Saturn C-l, Saturn C-5, Titan II, and Atlas-Agena launch vehicles, as well as all stages and engines connected with the vehicles.
Dr. Gerald de Vancouleurs, Professor of Astronomy at the University of Texas, said in nas Voice of America broadcast that the discovery of clues to the prehistory of the solar system and possible contact with extraterrestrial forms of life “stand out as two of the most challenging and promising goals of space exploration.” Dr. de Vancouleurs pointed out that direct sampling and probing of the surface and crusts of the moon and planets may help discover these clues. “Of even greater scientific and philosophic interest,” he said, “is the probabllity that direct exploration of at least one planet—Mars—may place us in contact with extraterrestrial forms of life, whose study may help solve the problems of the origin and evolution of life under different planetary conditions.”
nasa announced selection of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to build lunar excursion module (lem) of the three-man Apollo spacecraft. In announcing the selection, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We are affirming our tentative decision of last July . . . using lunar orbit rendezvous as the prime mission mode to accomplish initial manned lunar flight. . . . Studies [of alternate approaches], now completed, along with a great deal of related analyses . . . during the intervening months, make us confident that our present course is the proper one.” D. Brainerd Holmes, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa and Director of Manned Space Flight added that more than 1,000,000 man-hours of some 700 scientists, engineers, and researchers had been devoted to studies of the Apollo mission. “. . . The results of these studies added up to the conclusion that lunar orbit rendezvous is the preferable mode to undertake.” Apollo lunar spacecraft will be composed of command module, service module, and lunar excursion module.
nasa selected three companies for negotiation of production contracts for major components of the Apollo spacecraft navigation and guidance system in support of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory initial development of the complex Apollo navigation-guidance system, a contract let last August. Companies selected from 21 bidders, which will work under Manned Spacecraft Center contract were: A.C. Spark Plug Division of General Motors Corp. to fabricate the inertial guidance with associated electronics, ground support, and checkout system, and to assemble and test all components of the system; Raytheon Company to manufacture on-board digital computer; and Kollsman Instrument Corp. to build the optical subsystems including a space sextant, sunfinders, and navigation display equipment.
nasa selected General Dynamics/Convair to design and manufacture “Little Joe II” launch vehicle to be used to boost the Apollo spacecraft on unmanned suborbital test flights. Little Joe II will be powered by solid-fuel motors in a cluster.
