Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, director of President Kennedy’s Office of Science and Technology, was asked in Voice of America interview whether an attempt to land astronauts on Mars in 1971 or 1973 “could be considered.” Dr. Wiesner replied: “I think it could be considered, but I don’t think it would be done. I think it is a very major effort, even considerably larger than the moon effort. We have made estimates of a Mars program cost and a round number like one hundred billion dollars seems to be a reasonable figure. It is obviously technically possible, [but] I doubt whether one could do it in the time period between now and 1970 without just an unbelievable crash program. I think that before the century is out we will probably have done just that, and it would be interesting to do, but I don’t believe anyone can deny the vital reason for undertaking the program of the kind you are talking about.” (Transcript)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced beginning of nasa Apollo environmental control system tests in Garrett-AiRe-search Los Angeles, ecs would provide life supporting atmosphere in command module of Apollo spacecraft. Tests would include simulating prelaunch, ascent, orbital, and re-entry pressure conditions on the system, (msc Release 63-61)
nasa Hq. had tentatively approved Project Luster, designed to capture lunar dust that was in orbit around the earth, Missiles and Rockets reported. Proposed by Ames Research Center, the project is based on the assumption that meteorite impacts on the moon above a certain velocity should throw out more than the meteorite’s own weight in dust. Some of this lunar dust should find its way into earth orbit. Ames would launch an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to attempt to trap some of the dust. (M&R, 10/14/63,9)	...
By this date, engineering design work on the Apollo spacecraft was more than 75 per cent complete and work had begun on fabrication of the stainless steel skin and molding of honeycomb aluminum inner walls of the command module at the North American Aviation plant at Downey, Calif. (Finney, NYT, 10/13/63, 80)
It would be two or three years before the U.S.S.R. tried to land a man on the moon, according to Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid Sedov in an interview with the Brussels newspaper Le Soir. He said the Russians do not yet have a definite system for landing a man on the moon but did have the technical ability to do it. (upi, Wash. Post, 10/8/63)
According to Soviet lunar-exploration timetable published in HunSrian magazine Lobogo, U.S.S.R. planned first manned circum-lar flight for 1964r-65, first manned lunar landings for 1966-68, and first “temporary laboratory” on moon for 1968-70. Article said manned Vostok flights had “virtually accomplished 80 per cent of a space rendezvous maneuver, lacking only the coupling of the two spaceships.” Next step after orbital rendezvous should be trip to moon. Abstract of article, which appeared in June 26 issue of Lobogo, was published in translation by Joint Publications Research Service of Dept, of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/4/63)
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., said in nationwide TV interview that U.S. could and would land a man on the moon: “We need no big, new scientific breakthroughs to complete this, we feel. We do not need the discovery of something as large as atomic power or anything like this in order to make the moon flight. Most of the technical details are known. It is now a lot of veiy hard and long engineering spade work and test procedure to prove out all these details and put them all together on the lunar mission.” (“Meet the Press,” nbc-TV, 4/21/63; AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)
Secretary of the Interior Stewart L. Udall announced U.S. Geological Survey had completed second in series of geological maps of the moon. Map was prepared by C. H. Marshall, astrogeolo-gist of Flagstaff, Ariz., Observatory. (AP, NYT, 5/12/63, 64)
Astronauts on the five-day manned lunar landing trip would not only pilot the Apollo but would make repairs to malfunctioning systems out of a stock of spare parts carried along for that purpose. This would be one means of upgrading the reliability of the entire system and reduce the need for redundancy of systems, saving weight and space. (Finney, NYT, 10/15/63, 22)
Cancellation of five follow-on flights of the Ranger lunar impact spacecraft announced by nasa Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. Decision to cancel the follow-on series represented $90 million saving in the Ranger project. Dr. Newell said: “By this move, we are placing greater reliance on the remaining four Rangers, the Surveyor landers and the Lunar Orbiters for unmanned lunar exploration prior to manned landings on the Moon. At the same time, this move will contribute to necessary economies in the overall nasa program.” (nasa Release 63-276)
Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F. Hornig appeared in the Washington Post, Chairman of the Chemistry Dept, at Princeton Univ., Dr. Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space installations in November, and was recently reaffirmed as Science Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18 members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since 1960. Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic research was distorted by the legacy of World War II when concentrated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific notions into impressive useful devices: “The days of pie-in-the-sky promises of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was one that suggested by turning loose great numbers of scientists miracles happened. Well they did happen, and I suppose it was logical that after the war the same notion would carry over. “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind performed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are no longer concentrated nor are their efforts. They do come, of course, but over periods of years .... “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demonstrated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology; capable, if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” He declined to label the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.” “The moon is, after all, the first important object beyond the earth. . . . There are valid scientific objectives to be pursued on the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cosmology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where we came from. ... (H. Simons, Wash. Post, 12/15/63, E3) December 15: dod decision to develop military communications satellite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported in New York Times. Funds were contained in proposed dod budget for FY 1965, recently presented to the White House. Plans called for 24—30 satellites in random polar orbits with altitudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 ini., linking military forces around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, until discussions with ComSatCorp resolve question of whether dod should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Finney, NYT, 12/16/63,1)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Maine) read letter from Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) in session, of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, the letter quoting three scientists who estimated that, at present pace, 60 per cent of all physical scientists would be working as nasa employees. Senator Bennett called on Republican members of Committee to see what steps were necessary to “prevent this concentration of scientific brains /"1„„--------A „A Al___________ ha uuvciiiniciit at uic ca^choc - -TA + A /lAV»r»A1*of.1ATtO L V Cl. tc Wli/OlUClVllO i n rl (NYT, 4/25/63) In aiaa speech at Dallas on “Space Policy and Space Management,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc. reviewed the national objectives in space: “First of all, there is an over-all policy objective, which the President has expressed as the determination of this country ‘to become the world’s leading space-faring nation.’ It is worth mentioning that this is a broad umbrella. . . . Suffice to say that the space program is not a one-project design nor a short-run episode. It is a growing, expanding, multi-project program, which I predict will become an increasingly significant part of our way of life. As important as it is, the moon project is not the whole space program; it is just one portion and one phase of an over-all program which has breadth through variety and depth far into the future. “A few features of this broad space policy are: “1. Its objectives are peaceful . . . the distinction as to what is peaceful and what is not peaceful is a matter of intent and is not determined by what agency of the government engages in them .... “2. Our policy asserts that space travel and space exploration are subject to international law and that such activity should be consistent with the provisions of the United Nations charter. . . . “3. It is our policy to seek increased international cooperation in, and mutually advantageous agreements for, the orderly and open conduct of space and space related activities .... “4. It is also our policy that the concept and performance of our space responsibilities shall be maintained and strengthened as a national program rather than a series of separate and unrelated projects. . . . “5. There are inherent risks in space exploration, particularly in manned flight, and they must be recognized .... “6. While we must continue to improve on state-of-the-art competences, it is essential that we strive just as hard to make so-called quantum jumps in technology and performance .... “7. It is a significant element of policy that progress be the joint product of government and private enterprise. . . . “In conclusion, the national space program is an essential and dynamic feature of our economy. It benefits the many rather than the few. It strengthens the nation, both at home and abroad. It looks forward rather than backward. It highlights the contributions of the most able technologists and the most able managers and gives them an unprecedented peacetime opportunity to repay more fully the special bonus they have received by living in this great country. “We can afford the space program. We must afford it. We can be satisfied with nothing less than first place—to the moon, to the planets, and throughout the solar system.” (Text)
Eclipse of the sun visible across Canada and Northeastern U.S. nasa joined other scientists and astronomers in scientific studies during the eclipse, with emphasis on ionosphere and on sun’s corona. At Churchill Research Range, usaf oar facility located at Ft. Churchill, Can., six Nike-Apache sounding rockets equipped with instruments to measure electron density, electron temperature, and solar radiation in ultraviolet and x-ray regions were launched for nasa Goddard Space Flight Center; Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with spectrophotometric instruments to measure absolute intensity of spectral features in ultraviolet region was launched for Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket with instruments to measure variations in D and E layers of ionosphere was launched for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, gsfc and afcrl scientists said preliminary results indicated collected data confirmed previous predictions of composition of the ionosphere. At White Sands Missile Range, gsfc project for eclipse was Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with coronagraph to photograph sun’s corona, ultraviolet spectrometer aimed at sun’s center, and camera to photograph Lyman-Alpha rays. At Wallops Station, gsfc project was measurement of electron and neutral particle temperatures in the ionosphere using instrumented payload launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket to 207-mi. altitude. At Pleasant Pond, Me., gsfc team photographed eclipse with specially made instrument for photographing stars and comets near the sun. DC-8 flying observatory flew north from Edmonton, Can., to meet eclipse at Great Slave Lake, following path of moon and flying above much of atmospheric-haze layer. Sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co. and National Geographic Society with 11 other participating organizations, expedition included nasa Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill studying various scientific details of the phenomenon. Also onboard were Sheldon Smith and Ray Torrey of nasa Ames Research Center, photographing rays of sun’s corona, (nasa Release 63-148; msc Release 63-113; Goddard News, 7/15/63, 1, 8; oar Research Review, Vol. II, No. 11; dod Release 978-63; Wallops Release 63-70; M&R, 7/29/63,24)
Disputing New York Times editorial (June 28) which approved House Science and Astronautics Committee’s rejecting nasa lunar orbiter for special survey of the moon, Assistant Director of Univ. of Calif. Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics Gordon J. F. MacDonald wrote that “no other program funded or contemplated will provide critical data on the moon’s gravity field and on the radioactivity of the lunar surface. . . . “[nas Space Science Board] . . . noted that the surveillance of the moon on a planetary scale is of first importance both to the manned landing and to the long-range scientific investigation of the moon .... “The full value of [Ranger and Surveyor] limited observations can ’	’’	’	1 ''	''	1 ia less detailed but orbiter .... “The long-range manned and unmanned exploration of the moon will be delayed by failure to fund during the current fiscal year the orbiter program. This failure is another expression of the inability of the scientific community adequately to present their case to Congress.” (Letter, 7/1/63, NYT, 7/16/63, E8)
Edward Z. Gray was appointed Director of Advanced Studies, Office of Manned Space Flight, nasa Kq., suceeedmgDr. WTilliam A. Lee, who was joining the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc. Mr. Gray had been with Boeing Aircraft Co. for 24 years, most recently as Development Program Manager of Advanced Space Systems, Aero-Space Div. (nasa Release 63-228)
Two major contracts for the Apollo project were awarded recently for (1) a lunar charting sendee by the usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis, Missouri; and (2) an exploratory study of guidance system techniques in emergency abort operation of the Apollo uf.m during lunar landing, awarded to Chance Vought Astronautics Division of Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., Dallas, Texas, (msc Fact Sheet *96)
Discussing President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said in Army-Navy-Air Force Joumal and Register article: “The big question ... is how far along are the Soviets in a moon program and which mode of approach did they select? “. . . if the Soviets have adopted one of the approaches we have discarded, any cooperative arrangement would require program reorientation on the part of both nations of such magnitude that the only imaginable result is complete chaos, compounded of the basic difference in approach, the language barrier, differing technological philosophies and engineering standards. “Even if the U.S.S.R. is already proceeding on the same lines as the U.S., i.e. the lunar orbit rendezvous mode, there are different methods of attaining the same end and it is extremely unlikely that their systems development parallels our own in every detail. “It is possible of course that the cooperative program consist of joint funding, a single lunar launch base and a common pool of astronauts, with the technical differences being resolved through the use of one spacecraft/launch vehicle combination without altering current developmental lines. But which one ? Who gets the program management? One can see a political and technical argument over the ‘Apollostok’ (or should it be ‘Vostapollo?’) which would leave the moon safe from assault for at least a couple of decades.” (A-N-AF Journal <& Reg., 9/28/63, 14)
Editorial in The Houston Post: “Why Khrushchev’s word should be accepted on this [commenting that Russia does not have a definite program for putting a man on the moon] any more than on anything else is hard to understand .... It . . . must be kept in mind that Soviet policy in any area is a zig-zag affair and subject to quick change. Moreover, under the Soviet system, Khrushchev does not have to worry about congressional attitudes or reaction if he should decide upon a change .... “. . . why should Khrushchev be permitted to set the policy on this country’s space program? That is something for the Legislative and Executive branches of the United States government to do on the basis of careful study and evaluation. “The fact is that the United States government made its decision several years ago. It stands committed to a program of trying to put a man on the moon in this decade. What the Russians do or don’t do should be a matter of secondary importance at this point in the program. Much more is involved than merely a contest with Russians as to time.” (Text)
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for “hypervelocity test device,” to be part of Hypervelocity Free-Flight Facility now under construction at Ames. Thiokol would design, build, test, and deliver the wind tunnel structure, to be used with light gas gun to test designs for manned orbiting spacecraft, vehicles returning from moon and planets, and possibly vehicles entering atmospheres of other planets. (Ames Release 63-20; nasa Release 63-89)
Development of the Apollo spacesuit and backpack was entering the manned test phase of the prototypes. Under a 3-phase program, Hamilton-Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. were now well into the second phase. The first phase had been design; the second called for development of prototypes of three suit designs, each building on test data from its predecessors. Prototypes of first suit were finished in August; prototypes of the second suit were nearing completion. The third phase, to be concurrent with the second phase, would include environmental and physiological tests. (Av. Wk., 10/28/63, 49)
Rep. Ben F. Jensen (R.-Iowa) inserted in Congressional Record a Washington Post article which said that majority opinion expressed by 25 U.S. Nobel Prize Winners criticized “waste” and “inefficiency” in America’s “crash program” to land man on moon by 1970. (Eisele, Wash. Post, in CR. 5/7/63,7424)
nasa submitted the following written answer to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in response to question raised by Senator Margaret Chase Smith on the contamination problem in space exploration: “Present plans for lunar spacecraft are to use assembly techniques in clean rooms and under environmental conditions similar to surgical operating facilities. These procedures will not make the spacecraft sterile but are expected to reduce the total population of viable organisms by orders of magnitude below otherwise expected quantities. As stated earlier, the natural environment of the Moon is believed suitably hostile to the propagation of Earth-like organisms to such an extent that any contamination will be contained in very local areas.” (Committee Hearings, NASA Authorization for Fiscal Year 1964—Part I, 598)
Dr. E. C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Georgetown University Forum: “In brief I would list some solid reasons for the moon trip: “1. [There is] No other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “2. A clear objective gives impetus, order, and efficiency to a program. “3. The lunar project requires the development of powerful rocket engines, sophisticated spacecraft, trained astronauts, tracking systems, and capability to protect man against the multiple hazards of space. “4. Success in this venture gives prestige essential at negotiating tables. “5. It will give an impetus to our standard of living, to education and employment, and to new methods and materials for the productive process. “6. There will be substantial defense spin-offs, in addition to the political and economic benefits which also tend to deter aggression. For example, rendezvous technique, life-protective measures, control and guidance systems, improvement in rockets, etc. “7. The moon is an excellent platform for mounting astronomical instruments, without atmospheric handicaps. “8. The moon can be a relay point for communications and a refueling point for space travels.” (Text)
In paper presented at Lunar Surface Materials Conference, Boston, nasa scientists Curtis W. McCracken (gsfc) and Maurice Dubin (Hq.) asserted moon is covered with dust from four inches to three feet deep. Basing estimate on data gained from spacecraft and ground observations of interplanetary dust particles, McCracken and Dubin said particles traveling at hypervelocities impact moon at such speed that both particle and its impact point are destroyed, creating lunar dust. They supported theory that dust layer is porous cobweb-like structure, (nasa Release 63-109)
Former nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, said in Hartford address that industry and government leaders must discover better ways to manage the U.S. space proSram. He discussed Project Apollo plans and said the space ight programs must be based pn better mutual confidence between Government and industry. (Hartford [Conn.] G our ami, 11/19/63)
Tass reported that a leading Soviet space scientist, Prof. Gleb Chebotarev, claimed U.S.S.R. would put satellites in orbit around the moon. Mars, and Venus “in the near future .... The regions of outer space around the moon, Venus, Mars and Mercury where stable movement of artificial satellites is possible have been determined by means of electric machines at the Theoretical Astronomy Institute.” (un, NTT, 11/21/63)
Humorous columnist Arthur Hoppe commented on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not competing to land a man on the moon, said this marked the beginning of a new weapon in Soviet diplomacy—“Competitive unresistance.” “Oh, it strikes at the one weakness in the American character. For while we are imbued with the will to win, we can’t stand licking somebody who isn’t trying. Competitive unresistance, let me warn you, will sap our will to resist. “. . . Of course we could do some things for other reasons. Like maybe feeding people because they’re hungry. Or reaching for the moon because we believe the future of our race lies in the stars. But would Congress buy that? Nonsense. It’s unrealistic-“So I say we must meet this new Soviet threat head-on. We # must abolish our moon program, knock off foreign aid and do our utmost, fellow Americans, to make our Nation a second-rate power. But cheer up. I’m certain we can count on Congress.” (Hoppe, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/63, 5)
Sermon by Dr. Duncan Howlett, Washington Unitarian minister, was quoted in Washington Post. On June 18,1961, Dr. Howlett said: “Why can we not boldly propose now a cooperative moon-shot, built and manned by Russian and American scientists ? Why can we not send a capsule to the moon with a Russian and an American inside it; and when they get there let them claim the moon— not for Russia, not for the United States, but for humanity ? ... “We can claim space for humanity or we can make it a battle ground to which to extend the ancient quarrels of earth. Which shall it be? There is but one choice before us. We can try to make the exploration of space a cooperative venture. We cannot succeed unless we try . . . .” (Glaser, Wash. Post, 9/28/63)
Sen. Barry Goldwater, speaking before Air Force Historical Foundation at Maxwell afb, criticized U.S. space policies: “By choice of official policy, so far, we. are choosing to relegate the military function of space to a secondary position. We have delayed and debated to the point where it must be said that the United States today has no fully defined and effective military space program at all. “. . . We have, in fact, policy declarations stating that we will not orbit weapons of .mass destruction in space unless forced to do so by the hostile action of others. In short we say that we will not utilize the military potential of space until such time as it may be too late. . . . “Just what is this race in space ? By our actions we are clearly saying that it’s a race for the Moon. We are moonstruck. And, to be sure, the Moon is most romantic .... But, while our eyes are fixed upon it, we could lose the Earth or be buried in it . . . .” (Text)
U.S.S.R. has failed in at least 13 attempts to send probes to Mars, Venus, and the moon since October 1960j Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported, and these failures were chiefly caused by inability of fourth stage to send the payload out of parking orbit. A&AE concluded, “it seems clear that the Russians have need for an improved upper stage to launch deep-space vehicles, and that Polyot I fills the bill.” (A&AE, 12/63,90) During 1963: Man’s conquest of space moved from spectacular hazard toward routine accomplishment, from the exhilarating peaks and slumps of first-generation hardware and experiments to the steadily improving reliability and capability of second- and third-generation launch vehicles and satellites, nasa launched 13 major space shots, with mission results of 11 successes, 1 partial success and 1 unsuccessful, compared with the 1962 record of 19 successes, 4 partial successes, and 3 unsuccessful. Project Mercury ended with L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; Project Apollo began its flight tests with two unmanned capsule tests. Communications satellites demonstrated near-synchronous orbit and Saturn and Centaur boosters moved toward operational status with successful test flights. U.S.S.R. conducted a 129-orbit tandem flight and orbited an unmanned prototype of a new manned maneuverable space capsule, nasa Administrator James E. Webb cited as nasa’s greatest specific accomplishment of 1963 the fact that his key staff people in Headquarters and the Centers had “learned to supervise the efforts at hand,” that he now has “the men matched with the job and the job matched with the men.” (nasa hhr-8 ; hhr-10 ; Space Bus. Daily, 1/3/64,10) During 1963: During the year the bud delivered two Minuteman wings to the Strategic Air Command, making an average of one icbm delivered per day in 1963. (afsc Release 312-R-114,1/1/64, 1) .
First public showing of guidance and navigation system for Apollo
Commenting on President Kennedy’s proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration negotiations, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans said in Houston press conference that the proposal did not mean Soviet cosmonauts would fly in Apollo spacecraft. Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, compared a cooperative moon program to cooperative exploration of Antarctica—U.S. and Soviet scientists explore the continent together but, he said, “they get there in different ships.” (Burnett, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/22/63)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences that “Project Surveyor is designed to make a giant stride in lunar exploration technology beyond that of the Ranger. Surveyor will demonstrate soft landing technology, will survey various landing areas on the lunar surface, and wifi measure physical-chemical properties of the lunar surface in the immediate vicinity of the spacecraft .... “Developments of the Surveyor orbiter were restricted during FY 1963 to permit reprogramming of funds into more critical areas in the Ranger and Surveyor landing programs. Design work has proceeded, however, and has resulted in ... [a system making] extensive use of Surveyor lander components. In FY 1964 we will begin work on the flight hardware. The lunar orbiter will provide complete photo-reconnaissance coverage which will permit us to extrapolate to other areas our knowledge about local spots in which we have landed with Ranger and Surveyor. We will then be able to make selections of potential manned lunar landing sates. In addition, the orbiter will enable use to determine the gravity field of the moon which will affect the Apollo orbits . . . .” (Testimony)
LRC-engineers described base-heating studies being performed on Saturn V Apollo rockets. Base-heating can be a severe problem with rocket vehicles pouring out exhaust gases at temperatures as high as 6000°F. Similar studies were performed on Saturn I. (lrc Release 63-95, LewisChronology, 12)
Testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced nasa had decided not to conduct another Project Mercury flight: “We will proceed at once to a very careful, thoughtful but vigorous reorientation and realignment of the nasa organization, to move on with Gemini and with Apollo . . . .” (Transcript)
nato announced U.S. Prof. Courtland D. Perkins had been elected chairman of nato’s Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research (agard). (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/22/63, A15) “. . . The very reasons which impelled the powers to reach a test ban treaty—a combination of common sense and a recognition that costs were going up by geometric progression—should now bring them to combine a space program.” (London Times) “. . . The horizons opened by the President . . . were vast.” (Paris Aurore) “. . ..Benefits from such a joint effort militate in favor of this second major step to develop the improved international relationship already stemming from the agreement on the limited nuclear test-ban treaty.” (NYT) “. . . Will excite world-wide attention . . . eminently sensible suggestion . . . national advantages to be derived by the first nation to the moon are great, in a political and propaganda context, but they are lesser than the advantages that all mankind will derive from the extension of human knowledge that is going to be involved in the effort to reach the moon . . . .” (Wash. Post) “. . . Stirred the imagination of the world . . . tend to open up the closed society of the U.S.S.R.” (Wash. Star) “. . . Kennedy envisages an incredibly bold scientific advance [and] accepts as possible a degree of collaboration between two opposing systems . . . which would have seemed incredible only a few months ago.” (London Daily Express, NYT, September 22,1963)
nasa selected Marion Power Shovel Co. to design and build crawlertransport vehicle for lifting and transporting three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle mated to Apollo lunar spacecraft and associated launch equipment. Vehicle would be required to haul the 400-ft.-high, 12-million-lb. assembly a distance of a little more than two miles—keeping it within 1/10 of a degree of true level—and deposit it on Merritt Island (Fla.) launch pad. Crawler would weigh 5.5 million lbs. and would measure 130-ft. long, 115-ft. wide, and 20-ft. high. Plans called for Saturn V-Apollo to be assembled in Vertical Assembly Building at nasa Launch Operations Center’s Complex 39, then transported via the crawler to launch pad. nasa planned to buy two crawlers at cost of $4-$5 million each, (nasa Release 63-27; msc Release 63-24)
Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space program was in the building stage this year and few space spectaculars could be expected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963: manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous mission, close-up photographs of planet Mars (with mars i probe), and several unmanned lunar soft-landing probes. Memorandum had been written before launching of Soviet probe lunik, iv, believed by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to soft-land on the moon. (Text; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
Little Joe II launch vehicle left General Dynamics/Convair plant en route to White Sands Missile Range, N.M., where test launch would be made next month. Purpose of flight would be to qualify Little Joe II launch vehicle for later flights with boilerplate Apollo payload and Apollo spacecraft built to production standards; Little Joe II tests would provide engineering information for use on manned Apollo orbital flights, (msc Release 63-115) 1 .D Axj JJpCCU 60,000-ft. altitudes at He du Levant launch center. {M&R, 7/15/63, 9) By this deadline, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center received 271 applications for astronaut openings. 71 applicants were military pilots recommended for possible astronaut duty; remaining 2(X) were civilians, including three women. {Av. Wk., 7/22/63, 325) Sen. Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) inserted in Congressional Record a letter from physics prof. John H. Gardner, Brigham Young Univ., criticizing “the trend in nasa and in the Department of Defense toward the development of inhouse capability for the performance of basic research and other scientific tasks which can and, under our private enterprise system, should be performed by the private sector of the economy with a secondary role being played by the university .... “It is far from evident that the creation of new Government laboratories in competition with and at the expense of existing laboratories will help us to achieve our goals in space any faster. Appropriate utilization of the private scientific resources of the country would seem to be faster and more in keeping with our traditions. The statement that nasa has too much money is frequently heard among scientists and it is indicative of the widespread fears and misgivings scientists have about the ominous changes taking place in the kind of role they play in our society. These fears and misgivings may underlie much of the growing opposition to our lunar landing goal . . . .” (Letter, CR, 7/15/63,11884)	_
Testifying before House Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, nasa Deputy Associate Adihinistrator and Director of Manned Space Flight D. Brainerd Holmes said that “the present Gemini is a different program than the one with which we started. It had two fundamental purposes originally which we have not given up and which we still consider to be of paramount importance—to gain experience in prolonged weightlessness and to gain experience in rendezvous before Apollo .... “However, as we developed the Gemini program, we found it was not wise to have only an updated Mercury spacecraft. We. found as we developed the subsystems for Gemini that it was much wiser to incorporate technology known today—not something that was early developmental technology of the past. This concept would lead us step by step toward Apollo, and we would reap tremendous benefits from it. Ip addition ... it became quite apparent to us that this would be a very useful Earth orbital spacecraft .... “In developing the Gemini subsystems, we find that they are better and more sophisticated than initially conceived and the spacecraft is much more sophisticated than anticipated. Therefore, the costs tend to be higher and the time scales longer .... “We had planned to have the first manned Gemini flight the second flight, during the first quarter of 1964. Our present plan is that the first manned flight in the series would not be until the fourth quarter of 1964. Our current plan grew in part from the advisability of having more sophisticated subsystems, which required more time, and in part from a reorientation of the profram to include a second unmanned flight before the manned ight .... “. . . the Titan II . . . has had some developmental problems over and above what we had anticipated. However, the problems are always encountered in a developmental program. In our opinion it will be safer to use the Titan II for manned flights if we have two structural missions. We will have more time to eliminate the developmental problems .... “We are planning an unmanned flight at the end of this year and about the middle of next year. We plan to have a manned flight in the last quarter of 1964 . . . .” (Transcript)
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite had definitely ceased useful transmission after almost 10 months of successful operation. Scientists at gsfc said trouble began in August, when the satellite’s transmitter failed to modulate—translate instrument signals into telemetry code—properly. Intermittent modulation had occurred since then, but little useful data had been received. The satellite signal is still useful for position reference. explorer xiv, launched on October 2,1962, had an initial elliptical orbit of 61,500-mi. apogee and 173-mi. perigee. After 10 months, gravitational influence of the sun and moon had changed the orbit to 60,220-mi. apogee and 1,280-mi. perigee, with a period of about 37 hours. Some 6,500 hours of data were received from the satellite. While not all the data had been analyzed, Dr. L. Cahill, Univ. of New Hampshire, said a number of new insights had already emerged, among them being: earth’s magnetosphere, as shown by mapping charged particles, flared away from the earth in an ogival—pointed arch—shape; confirmation that the vector magnetic field changes gently from a dipole configuration to a radial field at increasing distance on the night side of the earth near the equatorial plane; and further evidence probably supporting explorer vi’s finding of a ring current flow on the night side of the earth. ( nasa Release 63-223)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking on the Senate floor stated: “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does not constitute a crash program .... Failure to decide on a schedule for attempting to reach the moon is equivalent to setting no deadline at all. Work is done best—even by the technical community—which is not exempt from the laws of human nature—when a specific goal is set. An objective of landing on the moon in the 1960’s . . . permits us to work at a challenging pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the nation’s resources than our country can afford. This is only one percent of the gross national product at current rate .... “Project Apollo does not fit the description of a crash program.- The wartime Manhattan project was a crash program. We used all the resources we could to develop the atomic bomb in the shortest period of time, regardless of cost. We maintained duplicating operations over a 3-year period in the hope that one would work—and one did, in time to help win a war. Apollo is no such project. If it were, we would not have had the controversy over whether earth-orbiting rendezvous, lunar-orbiting rendezvous, or a direct landing was the best way to get a man to the moon. A crash project would have gone into operational stages of all three alternatives to a moon landing .... “The shortage of scientific manpower has not been aggravated in a measurable way by Apollo. Those critics who fear that it has, have not established their case. For example, in 1970, it is predicted that U.S. scientists and engineers will total 1,995,000, of which only 114,700 or less than 6 percent, will work for nasa and its contractors. It should be noted that a substantial portion of those are merely moving over from research and development work on aeronautics and missiles . . . nasa is enlarging its efforts to increase the national supply of scientific and engineering personnel. Last fiscal year, the agency provided graduate science and engineering fellowships to 100 students at 10 universities. In its budget proposal for fiscal 1964, nasa requests authorization for 1,250 fellowships covering 110 universities. “Additionally, the agency has provided funds for 150,000 square feet of research space at five universities; it is asking for funds to provide 400,000 square feet of laboratory space at 11 universi ties.” {OR, 5/23/63,8961-66)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, held press conference after returning from three-week tour of Soviet space tracking observatories. Lovell said that “there is a great deal of discussion in the Soviet Academy as to whether it will ever be worthwhile getting a man on the moon . . . .” “I think at the moment, the Americans are racing themselves . . .’ [for manned lunar landing], adding that he favored manned lunar exploration. He announced agreement on tracking deep space probes reached between tracking station in Crimea and Jodrell Bank facility, and agreement on three astronomical programs in which Soviet and Jodrell Bank telescopes would be synchronized. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/17/63; AP, Wash. Post, 7/17/63)
Speaking at the dedication of the Douglas Space Center in Huntington Beach, Calif., Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson emphasized the peaceful purpose of the U.S. in space research and compared our policy of cooperation in space to the secretive Soviet program: “Those who say—as some are inclined to do—that our purposes and the purposes of communism in space exploration are the same misread and misunderstand the history and meaning of our times. In 1957 when the Soviets placed the first sputnik m orbit, the Communist rulers of Russia refused to consider sharing the fruits of space research with other nations—refused to consider committing themselves to developing space for peaceful purposes alone. In that same year, we of the United States clearly stated our own national policy and purpose. We committed and dedicated ourselves to sharing the fruits of space research with all mankind—and to the sole objective of developing the uses of space for peaceful purposes. “It is significant that while the Communist efforts are conducted behind a curtain of secrecy, we of the United States enjoy the cooperation, support and alliance of more than 60 nations for our space program. It is significant that while we of the United States can and do propose joint endeavors for peaceful purposes, the Soviet both rejects our proposals and devotes itself to attempts to dissuade us from continuing on the programs we have established. “America’s commitment to the exploration of space for peaceful purposes—and for the good of all mankind—is a firm commitment. We will not retreat from our national purpose. We will not be turned aside in our national effort by the transparent maneuvers of those who would attempt to divert us. “Our national purpose in space is peace—not prestige. “Our foremost objective is not to send a man to the moon but to bring a greater measure of sunlight into the lives of men on earth.” (C^, 11/19/63, A7163)
Editorializing about possible cuts in Rover project, New Tork Times said: “. . . The effort to build a nuclear-powered rocket for eventual manned exploration beyond the moon is a longer-term project [than Project Apollo], one which might eventually be accomplished by joint work of Soviet and American scientists, or perhaps even by a broader international team. Any proposal to kill this program in its entirety appears to us unsound; while to continue it at a substantially reduced rate would retain the gains of past research and continue slowly to increase our capabilities in this field. Such a course of action would mean minimum loss for the nation’s near- and medium-term space goals, give us bargaining power in negotiations for a joint effort with the Soviet Union and still provide useful savings.” (NYT, 12/18/63, 40)
nasa announced granting of three patent waivers to Ampex Corp. (for two inventions) and Space Technology Laboratories, Inc. Action brought to 46 the total of nasa’s waivers of U.S. commercial rights to inventions developed under nasa contracts. (nasa Release 68-128) Jwne 11: Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony on U.S. space program from U.S. scientists: Dr. Lloyd V.	Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center of the Southwest; Dr. Lee DuBridge, President, Cal Tech; Dr. H. H. Hess, Chairman nas Space Science Board; Dr. Martin Schwarzschild, Princeton Univ. Dept, of Astronomy; and Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas President. Dr. Berkner testified: “Men everywhere see in the conquest of space the peaceful demonstration of the superiority of one of the two competing systems of economic organization—capitalism vs. communism .... [The nation gaining space superiority] will have won the equivalent of a war in demonstrating the superior viability of his system in the eyes of the world . . . .” Dr. DuBridge testified that factors such as national security, prestige, and advancement of scientific knowledge all were strong reasons for proceeding with Project Apollo. Dr. Hess outlined nas Space Science Board proposal for “reserve corps” of young scientists to participate in U.S. manned space program. Under proposed plan, nasa would select, about 500 volunteer scientists who would each year “do a period of active-duty training, say six to eight weeks, having to do with co-pilot activities on a space flight.” About two years before projected mission, 20 reservists would begin fulltime training and further screening at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. “Maybe five would be chosen, and maybe one would fly .... “Train astronauts to be scientists ? I think this would be virtually impossible. It would take 10 years.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/87; Averill, L.A. Times, 6/12/63; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/12/63)
F. J. Krieger, rand Corp. specialist on Soviet astronautics, said in report for usaf Project Rand that Soviet Cosmos satellites probably are “para-military” spacecraft of two types: (1) recoverable vehicle as large as Vostok spacecraft and (2) 4,400-lb., non-recoverable vehicle launched from another site and with different booster. Krieger also stated his belief that U.S.S.R. had six attempted probe launchings end in failure between August 25 and January 4 caused by inability to get fourth stage out of parking orbit. First three were attempted Venus probes; next two, Mars probes; last one, moon probe, (rand Memorandum RMOKAK TkT» *	A	TTT 7 j /Cia //**>	f\r\\ OUtfU—r JAj 111 II. V. YY tC^^/ZV/ oo, zz)
In press interview at nas, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild countered scientific critics of the U.S. space program, and said: “I am for it and I think it would be a mistake to arrest it. “The moon project is the stirring spearhead of a movement under the wing of which man will do real exciting things. . . . We must do an enormous effort of sparkling and grand and wonderful things and out of them one little pearl will come. . . . “Energy in one program will increase the push in all others. I hope art will blossom and pure science and philosophy. The first time you stop the present momentum you will not save money but you will stop the impetus for improving education in this country.” (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 4/25/63)
msc announced a reorganization designed to strengthen Apollo and Gemini management structure and to assimilate Project Mercury personnel into these programs. Under Dr. Robert R. Gilruth as Director and James C. Elms as Deputy Director would be four assistant directors, managers of major programs, and manager of msc Florida Operations. The four assistant directors: Assistant Director for Engineering and Development (Maxime A. Faget), Assistant Director for Flight Operations (Christopher C. Kraft, Jr.), Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations (Donald K. Slayton), and Assistant Director for Administration (Wesley L. Hjomevik). Major program managers: Apollo Spacecraft Program Office (Dr. Joseph F. Shea) and Gemini Program Manager (Charles W. Mathews), (msc Release)
Editorial in New York Times (Western Edition), inserted in Congressional Record by Senator William Proxmire (R.-Wis.), said: “. . . Energetic research and development efforts in space are vital, as a report just issued by the President makes clear, but intensive work (and expenditures) in the vast expanse of space studies is far different from—and far more important than—a mere race with the Russians. Whether the $20 billion (or $40 billion) race to the moon is justified on scientific, political, or military grounds, we do not think the matter has been sufficiently explained or sufficiently debated. We hope it will be in the present Congress.” (CR, 2/11/63,1989)
Team of four usaf and Lockheed experts, headed by Laurence Stoddard of Lockheed-Califomia Co., Lunar and Planetary Sciences Laboratory, announced they would attempt to photograph moon during 37-sec. solar eclipse near Cape Town, South Africa, Jan. 25. “Knowledge of the exact shape of the moon will give us additional information on the effects of moon gravity. This information is of great importance in planning lunar landings and computing the lifetime of manmade vehicles orbiting the moon,” Stoddard said. Stoddard photographed similar eclipse last July in Senegal, West Africa. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/21/63, A3)
Ham, first chimpanzee to be successfully launched on (suborbital) space flight, became a permanent resident of Washington’s National Zoological Park. Ham flew in Mercury-Redstone flight MIU2 down the amr on Jan./ll, 1961.	(Wash. Post, 4/5/63) Apnl 5: Tass reported lunik iv spacecraft was 365,000 km. (226,680 mi.) from earth at 6:00 p.m. Moscow time and was continuing on its flight toward the moon. Radio communications with the probe were good, and telemetry data indicated onboard instruments and systems were functioning normally. “Experiments and measurements, provided for by the program, are being conducted.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station (radiotelescope facility), reported receiving signals from lunik iv for 45 min., ceasing abruptly at 8:50 p.m. (10:50 p.m. Moscow time). Lovell said there appeared to have been some “complicated maneuvers” with the probe. Italian astronomers reported receiving 45 min. of TV pictures showing closeup of moon’s surface. In Moscow, two scheduled lectures on lunik tv flight were canceled by Moscow radio; a television discussion of history of lunar research made only passing reference to lunik iv. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 4/6/63, eos Trans.; NYT, 4/6/63, 2; upi, NYT, 4/6/63, 2; cbs-TV “Newsnight,” 4/5/63; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
Contract award for two Apollo mission simulators, for training astronauts from launch through lunar orbit and return to earth, was announced by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., was selected by North American Aviation’s Space Systems Div. to develop and install the two spacecraft simulators, one at msc in Houston and one at Atlantic Missile Range, (msc Release 63-79)
In Presidential news conference, the question was asked whether the President construed Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 as taking Soviet Union out of the moon race. The President replied: “I didn’t read that into his statement. I thought his statement was rather cautiously worded .... “I think it is remarkable that some people who were so unwilling to accept our test ban treaty, where there was a very adequate area of verification of whatever the Soviet Union was doing, were perfectly ready to accept Mr. Khrushchev’s very guarded and cautious remark that he was taking himself out of the space race, and use that as an excuse for us to abandon our efforts. “The fact of the matter is that the Soviets have made an intensive effort in space, and there is every indication that they are continuing and that they have the potential to continue. I would read Mr. Khrushchev’s remarks very carefully. I think that he said before anyone went to the moon there should be adequate preparation. We agree with that. “In my opinion, the space program we have is essential to the security of the United States, because, as I have said many times before, it is not a question of going to the moon. It is a question of having the competence to master this environment. I would not make any bets on Soviet intentions.” (Trans-9cript? Wash. Post, 11/1/63)
Prof. Eugen Saenger, Prof, of Space Research at Technical Univ. in Berlin, predicted in interview that if manned observation stations were established on the moon “no large-scale happening of any consequence anywhere in the world could go unseen.” Noting that it costs several thousand dollars to orbit a pound of payload, he predicted that by 1975 cost would be only $25 per pound. Dr. Saenger’s interview was published in Good Friday issue of German weekly publication Christ und Welt, (cdns, Wash. Post, 4/15/63)
afcrl research project to find if tliere were any correlation between phases of the moon and rainfall on earth involved checking 1,000 dates over 92 years of observations, checking each date against the lunar phase. Result of research, reported afcel’s Dr. Fred Ward, indicated there was no correlation between rainfall and the lunar cycle. (OAR Research Review, 12/16/63,2)
Hearings on nasa budget authorization for FY 1964 began before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Administrator James E. Webb repeated President Kennedy’s declaration of the national goal of making the U.S. “the world’s leading spacefaring nation” and achieving for the U.S. “a position of pre-eminence” in space. Mr. Webb testified: “The mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind, will not be determined by any single achievement. Superiority in the space environment with its great advantages and benefits will be won and very likely can be held by that nation which first fashions into a usable system all of the scientific knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience, all of the space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space navigation required for safety and regular services. “These are the capabilities and resources which the United States must have, and this budget is designed to make rapid progress toward acquiring them. “moving from our present position to achieve mastery of space requires that we add substant ially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is progressing on both of these fronts. In a complex effort such as this, conducted in a new medium about which much is yet unknown, the scientists and the engineer inevitably must work closely together and grow increasingly dependent upon one another. . . . “The nasa program, therefore, is designed to expand both science and technology. We are moving forward on a broad front. We have avoided becoming trapped in a narrow program—one limited, for example, to developing only the technology needed to reach the moon with state-of-the-art hardware. To do so might well be to find, some years hence, that we had won the battle and lost the war as far as ultimate and enduring superiority in space is concerned. . . .” (Testimony)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said at Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner, Oklahoma City: “Space . . . has gained the lion’s share of publicity—and justifiably so. “When we talk of space and space research, there are those who raise the question that our efforts cost too much. Certainly American leadership in space is not cheap. We are now spending 20 cents per week per capita on our national space program. “Other Americans ask if our space efforts are worthwhile. “I can answer in terms we can all understand. While the space age is not yet 5 years old, more than 5,000 companies and research organizations have been or are now involved in our space effort. We have produced more than 3,200 space-related products, many of which are already being put to use. “But, many prominent Republicans are questioning the value of the program. A former Republican President has referred to our moon project as a ‘stunt.’ “I can answer that simply: I do not believe that this generation of Americans is willing to resign itself to going to bed each night by the light of a Communist moon . . . .” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3243-44)
Life editorial said: “Now the United States can be foremost in another and greater adventure [than Columbus’]—or abdicate its own national greatness by not doing enough. Unfortunately the argument about whether space is worth it has been muddied by an increasing popular tendency to talk only about the race to the moon. . . . “The issue is much bigger than a moon race, although of course we plan to land on the moon. The U.S. commitment td space seems a natural undertaking for the American people, who are a venturesome lot. Indeed it makes sense for military, technology, and prestige reasons. . . .” (Life, 5/17/63, CR, 5/20/63, A3160)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded nasa contract to Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory for estimate of power needs of a manned lunar base and design of nuclear generator that could be sent to the moon for such a base. Data would be used by nasa in evaluating feasibility of lunar base, (dod Release 1255-63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor for development of Apollo lunar excursion module (lem), had awarded $8,370,000 contract to Hamilton Standard Div. for design, development, and production of environmental control system for lem. (msc Release 63257)
Harvard Business Revieic conducted poll of corporation executives on the space program, found that seven out of ten believe U.S.S.R. is ahead in race to send a man to the moon, six out of ten that the U.S.S.R. will beat the U.S. to the moon by a year and a half; only four out of ten would speed up the space program. (Harvard Business Review, Sept.-Oct. 1963)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director nasa Goddard Institute of Space Studies, speaking at the American Society of Newspaper Editors, attempted to explain the “scientific effort” in the context of the entire space program: “I think, personally, that there is also a powerful general stimulus wbich comes from the need for developing new ideas and technologies to operate in and master a new environment. One must go back to the explorations of the late 15th Century to find a parallel to what we are about to witness in the next 30 to 50 years. Those explorations 450 years ago and their results awakened interest in the world and an intellectual ferment which were the necessary foundations for the development of a scientific revolution. “The ideas of a scientific revolution could not have flowered in a static society with fixed ideas of what could and could not be done. It took the explorations of the 15th and early 16th centuries to shake established notions enough to permit the birth of modem scientific thought. In a subtle and deep sense, this is one of the reasons for the interest of the scientist in the exploration elements of the space program .... “I think that the history of the last 100 years demonstrates that we need not expect a very long wait before space research will feed back into everyday affairs and play a role in them. “In the 19th century, the lag was rather long. The Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell published a treatise on electromagnetism in 1864, but not until 1901 did Marconi transmit the first wireless signal across the Atlantic. “More recently, in 1932, Chadwick discovered the neutron in England. Fermi set the first atomic pile critical at Stagg Field in Chicago in 1942, only 10 years from the basic discovery to a very formidable application. “Still more recently, Bardeen and Brattain and Shockley at the Bell Labs discovered the transistor in 1948 and only six years later the first transistorized power amplifier appeared on the market .... “. . . the exploration of the moon has a very special role to play, precisely for the reason that would make one think the moon is uninteresting scientifically—specifically because the moon is a relatively lifeless body. It has no atmosphere, no oceans, nothing to wear away the record of the history of the solar system, and of whatever has occurred to the surface of the moon since its birth. “On the earth, record of even tremendous surface events disappear within 10 to 50 million years, a very short time compared to the age of the planet, and mountains form and are turned over. With the action of weather, everything changes and disappears as the millions of years go by. That is probably also true on Mars and Venus which resemble the earth in this respect. But the moon has no oceans, no atmosphere, no mountain-building activity that we can discern. For this reason, the moon is a kind of Rosetta Stone of the solar system from which we can read the past. That is why it is so interesting to the scientist. He has the opportunity to find there the record of the early history of the solar system. “To the student of the origin of the earth, the moon is even more interesting scientifically than Mars or Venus. “. . . if the moon and the planets were formed out of gas and dust in the condensation that surrounded the primitive sun, then we can expect such condensation to accompany the birth of every star. There are one hundred billion stars in our galaxy alone. Nearly every one of them we expect to have a planetary system around it. Some small fraction of those planets will be at the right distances from their suns, from their stars, and of the right size to have conditions favorable to the development of physical life as we know it. “If that is the case, it follows that life must be a relatively commonplace thing, physical life in the universe . . . “. . . there is one small instrument on the Tiros which has not achieved as much attention as it deserves. The size of a quarter, it is a black disc which detects the infrared energy radiated from the top of the atmosphere. That is the energy which is reflected back into space from the earth. We can accurately estimate the energy coming to the earth from the sun and we can take the difference between the two and calculate the amount of energy remaining in the atmosphere. “This energy deposited in the atmosphere constitutes the driving force that generates weather activity. With the aid of satellites, for the first time we can measure the energy difference and hope to break through from the day-to-day forecasting, which depends on immediately preceding events, to the week-long or two-week forecasts.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, asked for his reaction to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that U.S.S.R. was not competing to land a man on the moon, said it was “useful to have an authoritative statement” on Soviet plans but that “we will have to think a long time before modifying our program. “We will not want to change the status of our program until we determine precisely what the statement means and what is in our national interest.” (NYT, 10/27/63,12)
Unnamed nasa spokesman quoted as saying nasa had tried and failed to employ Col. Charles E. Yeager (usaf) and Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) as directors of astronaut training for Projects Gemini and Apollo at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Colonel Yeager is commandant of usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, and Major White is usaf pilot of X-15 aircraft, also at Edwards afb. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/63)
Soviet news agency Tass reported astronomer Pyoter Shcheglov had discovered a “flat cloud of hydrogen shaped like a pancake” circling the earth at an altitude of 6,200 mi. Similar to a ring around planet Saturn, the cloud would be visible to spacemen on the moon with special viewing instruments, (upi, Atlanta Journal and, Constitution, 3/31/63)
Sixth Apollo spacecraft impact test conducted by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., Downey, Calif. Highly instrumented capsule fell from 10-ft. height at vertical speed of 18 mph into test tank containing 300,000 gals, of water. (cbs-TV “Newsnight,” 4/5/63; L.A. Herald-Examiner, 4/4/63)	_
In ceremony celebrating establishment of new Australian tracking stations near Carnarvon and Canberra, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented scale model of 85-ft.-diameter tracking antenna to Australian Ambassador Sir Howard Beale. Carnarvon station was being established for Project Gemini and would also monitor Ogo and Oao unmanned satellites. Canberra station would be a portion of Deep Snace Network which tracks space probes to moon and planets, (nasa Release 63-195)
President Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral, his third tour of the test site within two years. Flying in from Palm Beach, where he was spending the weekend, the President spent three hours watching the launching of a Polaris missile from the submerged nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, riding in a helicopter over the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) where nasa is constructing facilities for Saturn V launches, visiting the Saturn I rocket on its launch site. Speaking of the Saturn I flight scheduled for earlv December, the President said that if successful it would give tlie U.S. “the largest booster in the world and show significant progress in space. “I think that would be an important milestone for us.” The President was briefed on Projects Gemini and Apollo and the related booster programs by a group of nasa officials including nasa Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and msfc Director Dr. Wem-her von Braun. At one point in the illustrated lecture, the President lagged behind his party to examine models of the various boosters in the space program. He picked up a model of the 72-ft. Atlas D which had boosted the Project Mercury astronauts into orbit and compared it with a model of the 281-ft. Saturn V intended to propel Project Apollo astronauts to a manned lunar landing. “This is fantastic,” the President said. (NYT, 11/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 11/17/63,2)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasa Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, speaking before Tbe Harvard Business Club at Syracuse, New York, said: “today space communism versus space democracy goes deeper than the mere competition of dumping material into orbit or the planning of landing men on the moon, or dreaming of traveling to the planets. It involves the very survival of our American way of life. The eyes of the world are upon the space race, and the Soviets using our own brand of Fifth Avenue public relations have gained a psychological advantage. Our national space objective is pre-eminence in space and not just landing a man on the moon. Although desirable and psychologically reassuring, the overriding issue is not who put the first man in orbit or who will put the first man on the moon, but which nation has been able to develop the overall research, technology, and manufacturing capability to not only explore but exploit space. . . . “The curtain of ignorance is thicker and more dangerous than the iron curtain.” (Text)
In the Senate debate on the Independent Offices Appropriations bill, Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) made a motion that the nasa appropriation be cut an additional $519 million—a flat 10% cut in each of the three nasa budget categories: research and development, construction of facilities, and administrative operations. “Simply stated,” the Senator said, “the purpose of the amendment is to allow time to reevaluate the goal of trying to reach the moon in this decsde and to Proceed on s, more Helibe rate find thoughtful basis.” (CR, 11/19/63, 21270-299)
President Kennedy’s news conference. Asked about developments on his proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar landing, the President replied: “We have had no indication that the Soviet Union is disposed to enter into the kind of relationship which would make a joint exploration of space or to the moon possible. But I think it is important that the United States continue to emphasize its peaceful interest and its preparation to go quite far in attempting to end the barrier which has existed between the Communist world and the West and to attempt to bring as much as we can the Communist world into the free world of diversity which we seek . . . .” Asked whether the question of verification had come up in U.S.-U.S.S.R. talks on an agreement to ban the orbiting of nuclear weapons, President Kennedy said: “... there is not an agreement. The United States has stated it would not put weapons in outer space. We have no military use for doing so, and we would not do so. The Soviet Union has stated that it does not intend to. We are glad of that. There is no way we can verify that, but we are glad to hear the intention .... “This is a matter, it seems to me, that can best be handled not through any bilateral agreement but as a General Assembly matter, because other countries may have the same capability, and I think every country should declare that they are not going to put atomic weapons in the atmosphere, which could threaten not only the security of a potential adversary but our own security, if for some reason the weapons should miscalculate and descend upon us . . . .” (Wash. Post, 10/10/63, 14)
--	t7'"-	-*-'7 to research and development, with the attendant flow of new processes, new inventions, new products, and new ideas which stimulate many sectors of the economy. So far, during the past six years we have spent less than $10 billion on all aspects of space development and exploration. This has averaged less than 20 cents per capita per week. Contrary to the careless thinking of some critics, this money has been spent for materials, jobs, facilities, etc., right here on earth rather than on the moon or some distant planet. In other words, its stimulating effect has resulted in a greater demand for consumers’ goods and greater savings and investments. “It is unrealistic to conclude that, if this money were not going into space work, it would necessarily flow into other essentials such as slum clearance, education, and cancer research. The facts are that we have been spending more for those essentials since there has been a space program; the space program contributes to such progress; and it is not likely that the Congress would vote more money for such other projects if there were no demand for space funds. This is not an either/or proposition . . . .” 741-623 0—64---17 He attributed to the space program major credit for such benefits as: “comprehensive knowledge and understanding” of earth-sun relationships, interplanetary space environment, origins of solar system and life itself; improved communications, weather forecasting, and navigation; improvements in metals, alloys, and ceramics, and “substantial progress in the whole field of electronics . . . .” In “peaceful application of space competence to national security” he listed: “1. Support of our terrestrial armed forces ... in communications, meteorology, navigation, and mapping; “2. Increase in our alertness against pending dangers and our knowledge of potentially hostile territories through early warning and observation capabilities; and “3. Competence to examine and neutralize, if necessary, hostile and threatening spacecraft. “. . . Of even greater importance is the potential impact the space program can have on world peace through substituting competition in space exploration for competition in building nuclear striking power. If sanity prevails, the path to the stars can be the path to peace.” (Text)
At nasa Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony, held at Smithsonian Institution, 23 individuals were singled out for outstanding contributions to the civilian space program. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated that U.S. space policy was clear: “With or without cooperation from any other country, we are going to the moon, and we are going to make that trip as soon as we can. . . . We would like to do this through international cooperation. Leaders of both parties have sought cooperation under two administrations. The moon represents our major space goal for this decade, and if cooperation is possible we are willing to share this goal as well as others.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb summarized the five years of space achievements and looked ahead: “From the first two United States satellites, Explorer I and Vanguard I, launched early in 1958, we learned that the earth was slightly pear-shaped rather than being the sphere it had been thought to be. We also learned that the earth was surrounded by a zone of radiation, called the Van Allen Belt after its discoverer Dr. James Van Allen. “In addition to these first satellites of scientific significance, we have orbited highly successful weather and communication satellites, probed the area of Venus, put men into orbit and brought them safely back to earth, and sent thousands of sounding rockets into space to study the earth’s environment. From these and other experiments installed in more than 100 satellites and deep space probes, we have succeeded in vastly expanding knowledge and understanding of our own planet earth and of the solar system of which it is a part .... “Looking ahead through the remainder of this decade, we have set our sights on a truly global weather satellite system, advanced communications and navigation satellites, space observatories for astronomical and solar studies, and a manned expedition to explore the moon . . . .” Awards were presented by Mr. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, and Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Eight cash awards totaling $12,200 were divided among 14 nasa employees for inventions and scientific and technical contributions: Robert L. Trimpi, ialrc, $3,000; Charles H. McLellan, lorc, $2,000; James H. Schrader, Lane, $1,500; Jesse M. Madey and Xopher W. Moyer, gsfc, $1,500 shared; James B. Newman, frc, $1,200; Hershel M. Nance, msfc, $1,000; Lee B. Malone, Charles E. David, and Harold R. Lowery, msfc, $1,000 shared; and Frank L. Clark, Charles B. Johnson, Wayne D. Erickson, and Roger I. Buchanan, iaRC, $1,000 shared. The nasa Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement went to Dr. Dean R. Chapman, arc, for his research on tektites; to Dr. Ernst D. Geissler, msfc, for contributions to Mercury-Redstone, Saturn, and Nova boosters; and to Dr. John C. Houbolt, formerly of LaRC, for work on lunar orbit rendezvous. The nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership was presented to Charles J. Donlan, nanc; and Dr. Walter TTaenssensann and Dr. William A. Mrazek, msfc. The new nasa Public Service Award, given to persons not employed by the Government, was presented to Jack N. James and Robert J. Parks, jfl, and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Cape Canaveral, (nasa Releases 63^-217,215; Wash. Post, 10/2/63; Webb, Text; Program, Honor Awards Ceremony) October 1: nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared on Voice of America, “Press Conference usa.” Speaking pf President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program, Mr. Webb said: “. . . after the ratification of the test ban and one day after Mr. Gromyko proposed that we agree not to put into orbit multi-megaton weapons, the President followed with a suggestion that had five elements. Most people have centered on only one of them.” The five elements were (1) measures against war by accident or miscalculation; (2) measures against surprise attack; (3) measures to curb the nuclear arms race; (4) exchange of information and persons; (5) U.S. consent to Gromyko’s proposal to negotiate an agreement not to orbit large nuclear weapons. “And then he added as a sixth item, we should also explore, now mark you, he said explore, possibilities for cooperation in manned space flight and then set a clear indication that he was not thinking of a limited exploration, that rather he was thinking of a broad exploration . . ., that we could even go step by step to the planning of a joint expedition.” Speaking of the preparations for the President’s U.N. speech, Mr. Webb said: “. . . I myself personally attended a meeting in the White House called by Mr. Arthur Schlesinger, perhaps a month ago, to consider things that the President might want to discuss at the United Nations. And I did myself on the day before Mr. Gromyko’s speech have a long talk with the President, maybe 35 or 40 minutes, about the whole space program in which we discussed this. And I think I should say that he had his office phone me in St. Louis on Thursday afternoon after Mr. Gromyko made his speech to read me the language that he then decided he would use, because it seemed such a natural follow-on to Mr. Gromyko’s proposal.” (Text)
nasa announced signing of $387,900,000 contract with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for development of lunar excursion module (lem) of the Apollo spacecraft. Contract provided that Grumman, on cost-plus-fixed-fee basis, would design, fabricate, and deliver nine lem ground test vehicles and 11 lem flight models, and also would provide certain operational support. Selection of Grumman for lem contract negotiations was announced Nov. 7, 1962. (nasa Release 63-51; msc Release 63^9)
Reorganization of Apollo Spacecraft Project Office of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center was announced, with Robert O. Piland named as Deputy Project Manager for the Lunar Excursion Module and James L. Decker as Deputy Project Manager for the Command and Service Modules. Deputy directors would be responsible for cost, schedule, technical design, and production of the three-module Apollo spacecraft under overall direction of Apollo Project Manager Charles W. Frick. Other organizational changes included establishment of a Spacecraft Systems Office for the Command and Service Modules, with Caldwell C. Johnson as Manager, and a similar office for the lem with Owen E. Maynard as Acting Manager, (msc Release 63-27)
In speech to American Psychological Association, Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory and editor of Science, repeated his view that there were no predictable economic advantages to the exploration of the moon or possible subsequent flights to Mars. Much of the justification for manned lunar program was national prestige, ne said, but “the half of the world that is undernourished could scarcely the expected to place a higher value on landing on the moon than on filling their stomachs.” (Barbour, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/2/63)
I believe that man will not merelv endure; he will prevail. He is immortal . . . because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance. “In exploring the moon and planets, I am convinced with Faulkner that man will prevail.” (Text, CR, 5/21/63, A3220)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said in U.S. News and World Report interview that U.S.S.R. did not have a priority program for landing a man on the moon. The president of the Academy of Sciences [Mstislav Keldysh] said that the Soviet Academy saw certain insuperable difficulties. “First, they did not at the moment see how it was possible to protect any lunar voyages from the lethal effects of solar radiation. “Secondly—and mixed up with this—is that they did not think it was economically feasible with present techniques to land sufficient material on the moon to give the necessary protection against solar radiation and, at the same time, to enable a scientific program to be carried out and also to give the chap a reasonable chance of getting back to earth. “Most important of all, it seemed to me, is this: They have decided that with a soft landing of instruments on the moon they can extract nearly all the scientific information they want long before there would be a chance of getting a man there to do it .... “I told the president of the Academy quite frankly that I didn’t agree with this sentiment, because I’m a very firm believer in the importance of getting a man on the moon not only for scientific reasons but also because it is a great challenge facing the human race . . . .” Sir Bernard said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on two objectives in space exploration: (1) “soft landing of instruments on the moon . . . and, subsequently, other planets” and (2) “assembly of a platform in space .... The cosmonaut program is related ... to this effort to erect a big platform in space and put a telescope on it . . . .” (Interview, U.S. News, 8/12/63)
At breakfast meeting of Republican Congressmen in Washington, Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said that anyone who would be willing to spend $40 billion to get to the moon was “nuts.” (Finney, AFT’, 6/13/63)
Writing on possible effects of subgravity on human beings, Dr. Tau-Yi Toong, consultant, usaf oar, said: “Two major difficulties present themselves in a study of such effects in earth-bound laboratories; first it is difficult to simulate subgravity on earth for long durations and, secondly, it is impossible to scale human beings up or down. . . . “It was pointed out to the author by Dr. Harold J. von Beckh that part of the effort of a human heart is spent to overcome gravity. It would seem that a lighter load is imposed on the heart of a man on the moon and thus his heart beat slows down. . . . The human heart might possibly degenerate to such an extent that its beat slows down further to something corresponding to the ‘normal heart beat of an abnormal giant’ on the earth. The situation might become even worse should he again return to the earth’s gravitational field with his weakened heart. . . .” (oar Research Review, 2/11/63, 3)
A second disturbance on the moon has been observed by usaf lunar mappers at Lowell Observatory, usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center announced. Sighting was made by Observatory Director Dr. John A. Hall aim four other observers Nov. 27 and lasted an hour and a half (first sighting Oct. 29 lasted 20 min.). Both sightings were near crater Aristarchus, both were ruby red, and both were seen when moon was in the same phase (sunlight returning to this surface area). Previous sighting was of three red spots, but this sighting was of single red area 12 mi. long and 1V2 mi- wide, inside crater’s rim where one of first spots had been seen. Observation was confirmed by astronomy graduate student Peter A. Boyce, at Ohio State Univ.'o Perkins Observatory. Dr. Hall believed spots may be gases released from lunar interior by intense heat of the returning sunlight. (AP, San Diego Union, 12/4/63; Time, 12/27/63, 54-55)	_
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin of the President’s Office of Science and Technology told National Space Club in Washington that low reliability of Scout booster (50%) was because of difficulties in four-stage booster teclmology. A basic difficulty to be overcome in future space systems, he said, was development of long-lifetime components and subsystems. Today’s missile system technology requires operational lifetime of less than a half hour; but Apollo would require 400 times that long and Mars fly-by mission, up to 20,000 times that long. The other basic problem for future space systems, he said, was achieving greater reliability with less flight testing. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/18/63, 417)
In nationally televised interview, Congressman Chet Holifield (D.-Calif.) said that funds for the $20-billion manned lunar program could be better spent in raising living standards on earth— on schools, hospitals, housing. Prestige value of landing a man on the moon was not worth the cost. Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said that even if these funds were not spent for landing a man on the moon, the funds would not be spent on raising living standards. “If we would stop everything we’re doing in space tomorrow. T think von would find there would be still Dlentv of people who would vote no on a program of better roads, better hospitals, better education.” (cbs-TV “Washington Report”; upi, Wash. Post, 4/9/63)
Senate Republican Policy Committee made public its report questioning priority of U.S. manned lunar program. “The question is not . . . whether man will ultimately reach the moon and beyond. The question is, rather, how shall it be done, and whether other aspects of human needs should be bypassed or overlooked in one spasmodic effort to achieve a lunar landing at once .... “A decision must be made as to whether Project Apollo is vital to our national security or merely an excursion, however interesting, into space research. “If our vital security is not at stake, a less ambitious program may be logical and desirable.” (CR, 5/14/63, 7916; Toth, NTT, 5/11/63,1,6)
T„	f_•_______£___________t>___:j__i. T':__l_____ ' Alt ' '<f! ’ll u l/y	t. r /If /<*/ a { .11 lull' 1U1U1C1 j- rroiucill riinniiimwni “Let us turn to the space exploration program, which I publicly have called downright spongy. Now clearly the strong competitive spirit of the American people has been aroused by the so-called space race. But let us step back for a moment from emotion and be objective. This is what my scientific advisers and I tried to do when we started space work back in 1955 and thereafter enlarged it into a comprehensive program. We didn’t and don’t want to be a second-best nation, not in any important field, and certainly not in total accomplishment. But can we best maintain our overall leadership by launching wildly into crash programs on many fronts? This is where we seem to have got out of focus. “Let me make it perfectly clear that we should have an aggressive program of research and exploration, so broadly based that in the long run there will be no question of our space leadership; but we should pursue it in an orderly, step-by-step way to enlarge systematically our knowledge of the scientific, military, and industrial potentials in space. This sort of a program would be a strong, steady push from the known into the unknowns of space 741-023 O—64--------14 science, accumulating along the way the techniques and skills to put our astronauts on the moon, among other developments. The annual cost would not include money for stunts and unnecessary contests. “Most of the scientists who advised me on space matters—all men of great knowledge and integrity—believed in this step-bystep program as most effective for the long pull, pointing out that the things we need to learn in space are almost as endless as space itself. Proud as we may be of our astronauts and, our Venus probe and other accomplishments in space, this racing to the Moon, unavoidably wasting vast sums and deepening our debt, is the wrong way to go about it, as I see it. Because it has been stated that the country’s prestige is at stake in this race, the average citizen may be loath to question the huge sums now being requested. But he should . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 5/18/63, 1519; CR, 5/15/63, 8111)
Dr. Donald E. Gault of nasa Ames Research Center told American Geophysical Union that moon dust, from one to 10 tons a day, was falling on earth. Dr. Gault estimated that 54 per cent of dust sprayed off moon (by impact of meteoroids) enters solar orbit; 40 per cent enters earth orbit; 3 per cent impacts earth directly soon after leaving moon; and 3 per cent hits earth after a month or more. He suggested methods of finding moon dust for analysis: launching rocket to collect sample particles from upper atmosphere; and obtaining samples of sea sediment in polar regions where, he said, layers of moon dust must have been deposited and trapped. (NYT, 4/18/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
Soviet Academician Nikolai Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory wrote in British magazine Nature describing evidence of volcanic processes on the moon. Ejection of gases, including molecular carbon, was observed from (1) central peak of Alphonsus crater on Nov. 3, 1958, and Oct. 23,1959; and (2) Aristarchus crater in Nov. and Dec. 1961.	(Nature, 6/8/63,979-80)
At 17-nation disarmament conference stymied in Geneva, Soviet Ambassador Semyon K. Tsarapkin said: “The U.S. knows very well that the Soviet Union can carry out nuclear explosions on the other side of the moon. The U.S. therefore proposed a ban on tests in outer space, but without any controls or inspections of rocket launchings or any other inspections whatsoever.” This showed, Tsarapkin explained, that the U.S. demands for on-site inspections of earth tremors were made for purely political reasons. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A4)
nasa announced six-month contract with Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., for study of and recommendations for nasa management of manned space flight program. Study was associated with nasa organizational changes necessitated by completion of Project Mercury and focusing on Projects Gemini and Apollo. Included in study would be ways of improving relationship of nasa centers and industrial contractors involved in manned space flight program, (nasa Release 63-156)
msc successfully conducted the first off-the-pad abort test of the Apollo launch escape system at White Sands Missile Range, N.M. A boilerplate version of the Apollo command ~y.~ J —1- / T"» _ " 1 1_a._ XT_ O \_i:A.-J	il__"IKK AAA 1I1UUUU5 ^A>UUt5rpia.W5 J^U. uj Wits lllltJAt UU 11U5 pitU. Uy L11C Ib.-thrust launch escape motor mounted on a launch escape tower attached to the Apollo module. Thrust continued to a height of 4,100 ft. (T + 8 sec.), escape tower jettisoned at 4,900 ft. (T+15.5 sec.), and parachutes deployed for the recovery. Primary purpose of the test was to determine the stability and operational characteristics of the escape configuration during a pad abort. (msc Release 63-247; NYT, 11/8/63,16)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced assignment of areas of specialization for nasa astronauts. Maj. L. Gordon Cooper, flight MA-9 pilot, and Cdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., flight MA-9 back-up pilot, would be responsible for pilot phases of Project Mercuiy; Maj. Virgil I. Grissom’s area of specialization would be Project Gemini; Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., would concentrate on Project Apollo; LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter’s duties would cover lunar excursion training; Cdr. Walter M. Schirra, Jr., would be responsible for Gemini and Apollo operations and training. As Coordinator for Astronaut Activities for msc, Maj. Donald K. Slayton would maintain overall supervision of astronaut duties. Specialty areas of the 9 new flight-crew personnel: trainers and simulators, Neil A. Armstrong; boosters, Maj. Frank Borman; cockpit layout and systems integration, Lt. Charles Conrad, Jr.; recovery systems, LCdr. James A. Lovell, Jr.; guidance and navigation, Capt. James A. McDivitt; electrical, sequential, and mission planning, Elliott M. See, Jr.; communications, instrumentation, and range integration, Capt. Thomas E. Stafford; flight control systems, Edward H. White II; environmental control systems, personal and survival equipment, LCdr. John W. Young, (msc Release 63-11; M&R, 2/4/63, 36)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Adminis-strator and Director of Manned Space Flight, told Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that current cost estimate of Project Apollo was $20 billion or less. (Transcript)
nasa signed contract with North American Aviation for studies of Apollo spacecraft modifications to permit its being used as a space science laboratory for missions up to one year. Contract was awarded by Manned Spacecraft Center. (Space Bus. Doily, 10/14/63, 76)
Unnamed nasa official said nasa had reviewed Pratt and Whitney’s prototype of fuel cell for Apollo spacecraft and had accepted the fuel cell. Recent criticism had previously been reported that the fuel cells fell short of nasa’s requirements. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/27/63)
Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) speaking for Republican Party’s Advisory Committee for Space and Aeronautics, charged Kennedy Administration had failed to build a strong military space program and recommended usaf be given authority to undertake an immediate military "space program with priority over nasa’s manned lunar landing program: “Very little of the hardware developed by nasa can be used militarily. But the Kennedy Administration tends to lead the public to believe that the opposite is true .... [nasa projects such as Mercury and Apollo] could no more be converted to competitive military space systems than could a Liberty ship into an aircraft carrier or a truck into a tank . . . .” (AP, Boston Herald, 1/4/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “. . . The past year has been an exceedingly active one for our manned space flight program. It was not only the year for accomplishments both in Project Mercury and in the initial Saturn test flights, but it was also a year for decisions in the rest of our program. “The lunar orbit rendezvous technique was selected for Project Apollo, and our preliminary program plans were translated into firm and decisive schedules. Every major hardware element has been placed under contract and construction of the required facilities is well under way. “In the current year we plan to carry forward all of the activities I have just described. By the end of this year much of the preliminary testing required in our program should have been completed and we should be well under way in the program designed to achieve not only a manned lunar landing in this decade,but also pre-eminence in manned space flight for this Nation.” (Testimony)
In an article in the September issue of Aerospace magazine, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out some of the many advantages to be gained from the lunar project: “. . . The lunar project has forced us to develop many competences which have military as well as non-military significance. These are competences which we would have been slow to develop were it not for this national moon objective. For example, rendezvous technique so basic to our moon project is essential to detecting and examining other spacecraft which may be hostile. Life protective measures are essential to a useful police force in space for maintaining the peace. Powerful rockets, reliability of space equipment, development of control and guidance systems, experience with manned spacecraft, etc., are all spin-offs from the lunar project, which help build our defense capability.” (Text, Aerospace, Sept. 1963)
Mining of water on the moon could provide rocket fuel for interplanetary spacecraft, thus eliminating need for more advanced rockets, John W. Salisbury of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories said. Converting water to its components oxygen and hydrogen would provide the two fuel elements of Saturn V’s upper stage. Salisbury said lunar water would be present either as subsurface ice or as* one-eighth of silicate rock formations known as olivine, usaf was conducting studies to determine most efficient way of mining water thus trapped in the moon, (nytns, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7)
Soviet Army newspaper Red Star reported an account of a rocket failure, the first public mention of a rocket launching failure in the U.S.S.R. No date or program was named, only a report of heroism of a Lt. Col. Serebreynnikov. He reportedly pulled out a starting plug by hand after mechanism had failed, and only six seconds before the rocket exploded. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A35) During November: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, writing in the 10011 ft A /?/> mo /to innn	tlio '■	*	'	OKf \y lllUgU/JUiA Ol VUV \JIV11VA il Plnofrin	OQirl • “Space is not a gambit. It is not a gimmick. “Our national activities in space research and exploration are no longer in the category of a gamble. We are able to talk seriously about explorations and journeys, 26 million miles away to the planet Venus—or 47 million miles away to the planet Mars. “We have come a long way. In the new Age of Space which brings us together, we are destined to go a Tong way further. Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler. I confidently believe that the developments of the Space Age will bring the beginning of the longest and greatest boom of abundance and prosperity in the history of man.” (Challenge, Fall 1963,24—5) The Marquardt Corp. of Van Nuys, Calif., has delivered 30 production units of its Roksonde 200-1 to West Germany. The sounding rockets would be used for meteorological testing at the Salto di Quirra Test Range in Sardinia. The meteorological data gathering is part of the overall European effort in support of the iqsy worldwide programs. As part of the program, the Mar?[uardt Corp. will assist the West German government in two aunching series. The first series was currently in progress, scheduled for completion by mid-December; the second would be completed in early 1964. (Marquardt Release, 11/21/63, sin, Jan., 1964) During November: jpl scientists Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and Roland L. Carpenter reported in Science magazine on recent radar experiments using an 85-ft. parabolic antenna at a tracking station in the Mohave Desert. The planet Mercury was found to be quite rugged, more so than Mars and twice as rugged as Venus. The experiments also corroborated Mercury’s rotation period as 88 days. (Science Service, NYT, 11/6/63, 33)
Ground-breaking ceremonies for eight-story nasa structure to be used for pre-flight testing of Gemini and Apollo spacecraft were held near Cape Canaveral. $7.69-million building would be first of 40 buildings in industrial complex located in the 87,000-acre Merritt Island area nasa had acquired for its space • projects. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced eight nasa astronauts were working with manned space flight simulator at LingTemcoVought, Dallas, evaluating manual control and instrument display should the Apollo lunar excursion module’s primary guidance system fail during descent to the moon, (msc Release 63-81)
In convocation address at the University of Maine, President Kennedy outlined U.S. foreign policy. Referring to the Cuban crisis of October 1962, the President said: “A year ago it would have been easy to assume that ail-out war was inevitable—that any agreement with the Soviets was impossible—and that an unlimited arms race was unavoidable. Today it is equally easy for some to assume that the cold war is over— that all outstanding issues between the Soviets and ourselves can be quickly and satisfactorily settled—and that we now have, in the words of the psalmist, an ‘abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth’ .... “The fact of the matter is, of course, that neither view is correct. We have, it is true, made slight progress on a long journey .... We have concluded with the Soviets a few limited enforceable agreements or arrangements of mutual benefit to both sides and the world .... “In times such as these, therefore, there is nothing inconsistent about signing an atmospheric nuclear test ban, on the one hand, and testing underground on the other; about being willing to sell to the Soviets our sumlus wheat while refusing to sell strategic items; about probing their interest in a joint lunar landing while making a major effort, to master this new environment; or about exploring the possibilities of disarmament while maintaining our stockpile of armaments. For all of these moves, and all other 741-623 o—64--26 elements of American and Allied policy toward the Soviet Union, are directed at a single, comprehensive goal—namely, convincing the Soviet leaders that it is dangerous for them to engage in direct or indirect aggression, futile for them to attempt to impose their will and their system on other unwilling peoples, and beneficial to them, as well as all the world, to join in the achievement of a genuine and enforceable peace .... “It is in our national self-interest to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere so that all our citizens can breathe easier. It is in our national self-interest to keep weapons of mass destruction out of outer space—to maintain an emergency communications link with Moscow—and to substitute joint and peaceful exploration for cold war exploitation in the Antarctic and in outer space .... “. . . For without our making such an effort, we could not maintain the leadership and respect of the free world . . . .” (Text, AP, Wash. Post, 10/20/63, A7)
National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa, (naa Release) Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astronautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force: “. . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the National Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force facilities and services to the overall effort. “The question of whether there is a need of an operational capability for United States military forces beyond the atmosphere may already have been answered for us in a number of public statements by Soviet military and political leaders .... Their major new book on Military Strategy . . . says, “Soviet military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist countries. ... It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text) Speaking at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver, Colo., Wolfgang E. Moeckel, chief of lrc’s Electromagnetic Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric propulsion for Mars exploration is as great or greater than that of other systems now under development and it becomes even more attractive for the exploration of the farther reaches of the solar system.” (lrc Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 4-5) Highlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch vehicles, conducted by General Dynamics/Astronautics and Martin-Marietta Corp. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, gd/a Program Director. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,34) Dr. H. O. Ruppe of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future Projects Office estimated manned Mars mission would require about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for operating costs (including procurement of Nova launch vehicles), and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs. Dr. Ruppe presented paper on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition) contract studies by Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford Co. Aero-nutronics Div., and General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. Results of studies indicated: only marginal capabilities exist for allchemically propelled space vehicles; even with nuclear-powered upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult task; because of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, flights during 1975-80 period may be technically or economically unfeasible; manned Mars program would require unusually high degree of coordination within entire National space program. {NTT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshall Star, 6/12/63,1? 4) Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, said: “[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceeding the Apollo program In total cost and difficulty. For that reason, we must realistically recognize that one of the factors determining the timing of such a mission will be the availability of funds and manpower. We must recognize that we cannot undertake such a mission until the Apollo mission begins to phase out. “If, as will probably be the case, rendezvous in earth orbit and some orbital assembly or propellant transfer will be required to perform the Mars landing missions, an earth orbiting space laboratory will probably precede the accomplishment of the actual planetary missions. The cost of such a system would also be high but it would probably be a necessary stepping stone to the planetary missions .... “The unknowns in such a mission will require the accumulation of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial development efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would be required in such a mission. I think it is to be expected that the time required for development of these systems puts the accomplishment of a manned Mars landing mission off until late in the seventies and more probably into the early eighties .... “I expect that large chemical rocket booster stages, in combination with nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish the Mars landing mission. I expect also that such vehicles and propulsion systems will be used to perform the preliminary missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into orbit around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in the latter part of the 70’s . . . .” (Text) A. James Shiner of nasa Man-System Integration delivered paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct requirement to obtain human design requirements for a Mars vehicle system, whether that system be nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the space environment^ and man’s ability to not only survive, but to perform useful functions in prolonged space missions. The manned orbital research laboratory under study by the Langley Research Center will have to operate for prolonged periods of time to obtain the required human research and biotechnology data needed for design of advanced space systems. A manned orbital research laboratory will eventually be used to simulate Martian voyages as well .	. .” (Text) Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap741-623 0—64--16 pening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . . [Space patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space activities, both scientific and military, in the event of hostile enemy actions.” (Rocky Mountain News [Denver], 6/7/63) Dr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby resemble cactus, especially barrel or saguaro cactus. (AP, Balt. Sim, 6/8/63) Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent Mars observations from Pic du Midi in French Pyrenees. Studying spotted patterns of dark areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal darkening or Martian surface was actually a filling in of spaces between dark spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucouleurs found it difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/63) Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th International Air Show at LeBourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit as well as other exhibits. (NYT, 6/8/63,35)
Commenting on action of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Committee’s Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, (D.-N.M.) said Committee approved nasa appropriations requests whenever they “made sense in terms of National objectives. On the other hand, some projects failed to get committee authorization because they are in need of further explanation .... “If an Apollo landing on the moon were to be the end of the line, then the attitude of the Congress toward nasa expenditure will be one thing. But if space is here to stay, and we believe it is, then our attitudes would be something else again. When we are asked for funds to cover a variety of advanced research projects and new engines and vehicles beyond those occasioned by Apollo, it is hard to be enthusiastic in supporting these projects in the absence of clearly stated national goals.” (Missile/ Space Daily, 8/2/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center issued $49,000 contract amendment to North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for extension of study on Apollo spacecraft modifications for manned space sciences laboratory. Amendment called for studies and concepts of linking two or more modified Apollo spacecraft. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/4/63,338)
Analysis of radar observations of planet Venus indicated Venutian surface is smoother than that of earth or the moon, it was reported. Observations were made Nov. 29-Dec. 7, 1962, by National Bureau of Standards’ radartelescope at Jicamarca, Peru. (Wash. Post, 1/11/63, A5)
Speaking in New York at a special seminar at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc director, told scientists that benefits from America’s space program would far outweigh the cost. The revenues from communications satellites alone would, by 1975, exceed the cost of nasa’s program in that area. There would also be benefits on which no pnce tag could be placed, such as discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts and the accomplishments of the weather satellites. Dr. von Braun said that man himself is a very important link in space exploration, and that the value of placing a man on the moon cannot be debated. . “Instrumented equipment can do the job if one knows exactly what he is seeking,” he said. “However, if one doesn’t know, then automated equipment is not quite good enough.” (Goddard News, 2/25/63, 2)
nasa announced that Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director (Systems) , Office of Manned Space Flight in nasa Hq., had been named Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, at msc. He would be responsible for the development of the Apollo command and service modules and for the lunar excursion module (lem). George Low, Deputy Director (Programs) in the Office of Manned Space Flight, would assume the added responsibility for the Systems organization, (nasa Release 63-226; msc Release 63-163)
msc awarded $100,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for a study of what modifications would be necessary to the Apollo spacecraft to use it as a space science laboratory in orbital flights lasting up to one year. (Houston Post, 10/15/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in address before aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas: “The age of space is, for all regions of America, a second industrial revolution, a revolution that is bringing a new future, a new degree of participation, a new scope of contribution for every region of our country, and for every segment of our society.” Regarding Project Apollo, he said that “to reach for the moon is a risk, but it is a risk we must take.” Failure to do so would be “even riskier.” (upi, NYT, 4/24/63)
U.S-S.R. and U.S. were reported by the Washington Post to have reached agreement on frequency allocation for communications satellites at the International Telecommunications Union-sponsored conference in Geneva. In previous years the Soviet Union had opposed any space activity by nongovernmental organizations, but in recent months had dropped its opposition to private firms, such as the U.S. ComSatCorp, operating in space. Original positions at the conference had seen the U.S. ask for reservation of 2,725 megacycles in a highly sought-after portion of the microwave spectrum, while the U.S.S.R. had favored only 1,600 me. Details of the compromise position would emerge when both nations went before the full convention. (Wash. Post, 11/5/63) pch-1, patrol craft hydrofoil built by Boeing, flight-tested by U.S. Navy at speeds of more than 45 knots. (AAA, January 1964, p. 5) Partial results announced by Univ. of Stockholm scientists from the U.S.-Swedish series of sounding rocket experiments made in July and Aug. 1963 showed extremely low temperatures to be associated with the presence of noctilucent clouds. Sounding rocket data from the Kronogard firings indicated that up to 35 mi. temperatures closely followed the profile found over the U.S. and other countries. The temperature increased from about — 50°C ( —58°F) at 10 mi. to slightly above 0°C (32°F) at 32 mi., where absorption of the sun’s ultraviolet radiation by ozone molecules causes a warming. Above this level, temperatures decreased again to a normal minimum at 50 mi. of 120°C ( —184°F). When noctilucent clouds were present at this altitude, however, the temperature dropped to what appears to be the lowest temperature ever recorded in nature— —143 °C (— 225° F). This would confirm earlier findings in 1962 that noctilucent clouds om COIRnOSed of cIAn^ tyqrfioloo orvoforl irifli ioa /\mba PaImca 63-248)r	* — v —	“	~ Laser beam bounced off the moon by Soviets was detected by Crimean Astrophysical Observatory. (AAA, January 1964, 5) Editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology by Editor Robert Hotz criticized the national space policy as “badly shredded” by President Kennedy’s recent statements, called for a new statement of policy “based on solid elements of national interest” before the FY 1965 budget debate begins in Congress. (Av. Wk., 11/4/63) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, spoke to the aiaa/ asd Vehicle Design and Propulsion Meeting in Dayton, Ohio, on the future of areonautical systems. He predicted a continued need for aircraft in the weapons inventory, cited particular improvement potential in cargo aircraft and V/Stol. Another potential was that “future space operations may require the use of recoverable boosters, for reasons of both efficiency and economy. The first stage of such a booster system would probably be a recoverable air-breathing vehicle.” Two technical areas of particular promise were identified as materials and propulsion. “We have identified new materials that are stronger, lighter, stiffer, and able to withstand higher temperatures. For example, new types of metallic fibers may be feasible in forming extremely strong, lightweight composite structures. If such projected applications prove to be practical, then we may be in for a revolution in aircraft design and fabrication. “There also appear to be high payoffs in the propulsion area. New technology should enable us to achieve better thrust-to-weight ratios and to move away from single point design. “. . . Engineers are almost always overly optimistic about the next two or three years and unduly conservative in their estimates of a 15-year period or more. There were study groups in the 1950’s that denied the practicality and feasibility of icbm’s, the turbofan, and hypersonic flight. Ten years ago, so-called ‘sound engineering judgment’ would not have forecast the present generation of systems. The point is that ‘engineering judgment’ does not always give the best evaluation of long-range predictions. The crucial question to ask is, ‘Does a new concept defy known scientific principles?’ If it does not, then the technical problems will eventually be overcome.” (afsc Release 310-R-9<)
At gsfc Colloquium, John A. O’Keefe discussed the origin and evolution of the moon, submitting his theory that billions of years ago the moon separated from the still “undifferentiated earth,” thereafter was subjected to volcanic eruptions, meteorite bombardment, and ultimate cooling and transformed into a hard cinder-like material. The volcanic dust produced the comparatively smooth lunar maria. If theory is correct, O’Keefe said, the original dust has long since become firm and constitutes “no hazard” for landings of space vehicles. O’Keefe supported his theory with available evidence on tektites. (Text; Wash. Post, 3/23/63,1)
nasa had decided not to begin development of the Multi-Mission Module (mmm) at this time. The module would use two RL-10 engines with tanks configured for different missions. Serving as the third stage of the Saturn I-B or the fourth stage of the Saturn V, it would give the big boosters the flexibility needed for planetary and other missions. Present decision was based on the fact that the stage is not necessary for the Apollo program. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 23) During October: Project Stabilization Agreement was ratified for nasa Mississippi Test Operations facilities by representatives of business, labor, and Government. Worked out by the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, the unusual agreement established a standard for working conditions, hours, hiring practices, grievance procedures, etc., in return for the promise of no strikes or work stoppages. Agreement would run to July 1, 1966. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/11/63,65)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, msc, spoke before the National Rocket Club in Washington. He explained the philosophy behind the recent changes in the Apollo flight-test program, when Saturn I launch vehicles were replaced by Saturn IB’s and the first manned flight thereby delayed for some nine months. Dr. Shea pointed out that the space age had advanced to the point that the space environment is understood well enough so that components can be designed, built, and ground-tested with confidence that they can perform well in space. The flight test program has become “the relatively small portion of the development iceberg which is clearly visible to the public.” This had led to a desire to flight-test the entire spacecraft configuration from the outset, rather than the previous method of adding additional systems flight by flight, when “every spacecraft is a somewhat different design containing the potential of new problems. “The discipline of a single configuration—configuration control, if you will—not only increases the carry over from test to test so necessary for establishing design confidence, but also provides repeated opportunities for early spacecraft tests of substantial scope.” (Text)
Rocket-boost testing of the Apollo spacecraft would begin during the summer of 1963 from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., nasa announced. The first flight tests would see dummy Apollo capsules launched to relatively low altitudes by the Little Joe II solid rocket to subject sections and the assembled vehicle to maximum combinations of g forces and aerodynamic resistance that would be encountered in the launch phase of normal flights. (NTT, 6/29/63,35)
Plans for modular Mars spacecraft as presented by D. M. Hammock, Assistant Chief of Spacecraft Technology Div., nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, were described in Missiles and Rockets. Six-man crew would undertake 400-day expedition to Mars in three-module spacecraft—Mars mission module, Mars excursion module, and earth entiy module. Hammock said nasa was evaluating merits of manned space stations, permanent lunar bases, and Mars expedition as follow-on to Project Apollo, and that technology needed for Mars spacecraft would be simpler in many ways than that required for lunar base or space station. (M&R, 5/13/63,34)
In commencement address at MacMurray College (Jacksonville, 111.), Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “. . . We are more masters of the future than of the past but we allow the hand of the past to rest heavily upon us ... . “At today’s pace, the sum of human knowledge is being doubled every decade. On a relative basis, the class of 1963 may well be three centuries of learning ahead of the class of 1933. But we are asking a generation capable of going to the moon to live in a world ordered and fixed by generations which scarcely knew the model T—and that makes no real sense . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/4/63, 9438-39)
A working experimental model of a one-man space scooter was successfully flight-tested at naa’s Space and Information Division. The jet-powered platform was designed by Jack Bell, director of Lunar and Planetary Systems, who made the first flight, and John W. Sandford, research specialist in Advanced Systems. According to Bell, “precision control of platforms can be learned in a few minutes’ flight time.” The vehicle hovers, rotates, or moves in any direction desired. An extremely versatile piece of equipment, the lunar scooter could permit moon explorers to traverse flat, rough terrain where walking is difficult and where surface vehicles would stall; as a “crater hopper,” it would permit a space-suited moon explorer to span or descend into fissures or crevasses; as a “lunescape climber,” it would serve as a vehicle to scale steep cliffs. As a “shuttle bus,” it would transport crew members between orbiting space vehicles, or it might be used to support man in assembling advanced space stations in earth orbit. Finally, its potential for use in military maneuvers on earth is considerable, (said Skywriter, 6/28/63)
In speech to the North Carolina Citizens Association at Raleigh, gsfc Director Harry J. Goett reviewed, the scientific exploration of space, its meaning, and future. He concluded: “From a scientific point of view it may matter little how quickly we come to understand sun-earth relationships, whether Nimbus [weather satellite] gets launched this year or next, or whether we land a man on the moon during this decade or not. But there is no doubt that our national prestige demands that the United States lead the world in the hard-won knowledge and technolog}' in the important areas of geophysics, solar physics and interplanetary science that have been opened by the advent of the space age. We must continue an aggressive program to assure that the United States retains its leadership. . . . “Our future in the exploration of space does not hold any simple panaceas, scientifically, technologically, and financially. But neither did the development of the United States come easy nor has the future ever been an easy one for a free people seeking truth and knowledge, and the preservation of freedom.” (Text)
D. Brainerd Holmes, speaking before American Society of Newspaper Editors meeting in Washington, said of Project Apollo: “If we do not make these efforts, we will not be first on the moon, we will not be first in space and, one day soon, we will not be the first on earth.” (Wash. Post, 4/21/63)
Sir Charles (C.P.) Snow, British scientist and author, said in New York interview that pace of U.S. lunar program was “probably a mistake,” an “all-out” effort in race with U.S.S.R. Most dramatic scientific achievements of next decade, he said, would be in molecular biology. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/21/63,11) Jv/ne 20-21; In hearings conducted by House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby outlined details of proposed Government-industry project to develop supersonic transport, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpts. 11/93 and 11/94) June 21: Addressing Conference of National Organizations in Atlantic City, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Dr. Joseph F. Shea said that “now that the costs are rising as predicted, the country is reappraising the commitment [to land men on the moon in this decade]. Such discussions are entirely proper. Indeed, the resolve with which we carry out our national activities is frequently strengthened [by the] tempering in the heat of debate . . . .” (Text)
A. M. Nowitsky, Director of Spacecraft Sterilization, Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., said in speech before Aerospace Medical Association meeting in Los Angeles that sterilization of lunar spacecraft was essential to prevent contamination of moon and to detect any organisms on the moon: “For millions of years the moon has been a vulnerable target in the path of extraterrestrial debris, possibly organic, bacterial and living—possibly disease-causing and preserved in a state highly acclimated to unfavorable environmental extremes. “If such forms do exist and are in any way dangerous or destructive, their early detection'would prove vital to man’s future planetary exploration and the protection of earth from mutual contamination.” (Miles, L.A. Times, 5/2/63)
First anniversary of mariner ix fly-by of planet Venus, providing data that clouds surrounding Venus are cold and dense and that Venus has surface temperature of 800° F. After passing the planet, mariner n continued in perpetual solar orbit. Since launch Aug. 27, 1962, mariner n has traveled 754 million mi. in 474 days. It is currently ahead of earth at straight line distance of 76,172,000 mi. Analysis of mariner n tracking data provided new determinations of the Astronomical Unit, the mass of Venus and the moon, and locations of points on earth. Communications records included sending commands to the spacecraft flying by Venus (36 million mi.), and reception of signal from the spacecraft at distance of nearly 54 million mi. (nasa Release 63-275)
Dr. Arthur R. Kantrowitz, Vice President of avco Corp., interviewed in U.S. News & World Report, said the moon was “set up as the priority target in our space program” because, at the time of the decision, “it was the most obvious goal .... But I think that, while it does provide us with a center for vigorous activity, it precluded other imaginative things that we might be doing, because it absorbs so much of our funds .... “I am one of those who favor, as our next objective, the permanent manned station in a low orbit around the earth .... It would give us a chance to learn to live and to work in space. It would give us a chance to achieve a larger vision of the potentialities of space .... A laboratory like this would enlarge man’s horizons in an important way. . . .” Dr. Kantrowitz said there was “certainly a possibility of going to the moon via a manned orbital station,” and that this might be the Soviet method. Asked if U.S. should be working on this approach in addition to lor, he said: “If we had two approaches, I would be willing to bet that it would accelerate our moon program, because there is a chance that either of these approaches will run into serious difficulties. Having two baskets for our eggs would seem to me to be a much more reasonable thing. Note that before the expensive later phases are reached by either approach a choice may be necessitated for economic reasons. “Furthermore, we might find after we’re deeper into the space program that there are more exciting things to be done than landing a man on the moon.” (U.S. News, 4/15/63,64-66)
At aaas meeting in Cleveland, biophysicist Dr. Harold C. Urey expressed disappointment with cutback in scientific exploration of the moon preparatory to manned lunar landings. Criticizing advocates of exploring the moon by instruments instead of men, he repeated his view that only personal observations by trained men will provide answers to scientific questions about the nature of the moon. In this connection, he deplored criteria for selecting astronauts, arguing that the emphasis should be on trained geologists rather than jet pilots. Later at press conference, Dr. Urey stated that there is no scientific reason to believe the moon is devoid of water and that “most probably” there are pools of water below the rocky surface. Dr. Urey discussed eruptions on moon near the crater Aristarchus, observed by Lowell Observatory and others. He said sightings may have been carbon in a form not found on earth. Action of water on calcium carbide beneath moon’s surface may have released acetylene gas, which was then broken down by the sunlight into a molecular form of carbon in which the atoms are paired. Such substance could exist in moon’s near-vacuum atmosphere, but on earth the atoms would join and form graphite. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/31/63, 5; Wash. Post, 12/31/63; AF/’-cts, Chic. Trib., 12/31/63) _	_	_	_
James T. Dennison, of nasa Technology Utilization Office, said in paper delivered at annual meeting of National Association of Business Economists, Cleveland: “. . . We suggest that the greatest contributions of our government’s aerospace programs to the business economy have been the psychological boost of setting for ourselves an utterly impossible goal and then buckling down to reach it. And this adventure has come at a time when there were those who cried that our democratic capitalistic economy was sluggish, that we were being outdone by overseas and overland competitors, that gloom was here and that doom was close at hand. “The challenge of the exploration of space, of putting our fellow man safely into a desperately hostile environment, has provided a spur to great segments of our American business economy. And that spur will be keeping us on the jump until • we get those men to the moon and back, and, then perchance, take off for Mars.” (Text)
Entire issue of Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering devoted to launch operations, including detailed summary articles by Dr. Kurt Debus, Director of loc, on “Launching the Moon Rocket,” Georg F. von Tiesenhausen on “Toward the Orbital Launch Facility,” and Arnold W. Frutkin on “International Co operation in Space Research.”
Addressing U.N. General Assembly, President Kennedy listed results of U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations: “We have, in recent years, agreed on a limited nuclear test-ban treaty, on an emergency communications link between our capitals, on a statement of principles for disarmament, on an increase in cultural exchange, on cooperation in outer space, on the peaceful exploration of the Antarctic, and on tempering last year’s crisis over Cuba .... “Finally, in a field where the United States and the Soviet Union have a special capacity—the field of space—there is room for new cooperation, for further joint efforts in the regulation and exploration of space. I include among these possibilities a joint expedition to the moon. “Space offers no problem of sovereignty; by resolution of this Assembly, the members of the United Nations have foresworn any claims to territorial rights in outer space or on celestial bodies, and declared that international law and the U.N. charter will apply. Why, therefore, should man’s first flight to the moon be a matter of national competition ? “Why should the United States and the Soviet Union, in preparing for such expeditions, become involved in immense duplications of research, construction and expenditure? Surely we should explore whether the scientists and astronauts of our two countries—indeed, of all the world—cannot work together in the conquest of space, sending some day in this decade to the moon, not the representatives of a single nation, but the representatives of all humanity. “All these and other new steps toward peaceful cooperation may be possible. Most of them will require on our part full consultation with our allies, for their interests are as much involved as our own, and we will never make an agreement at their expense. “Most of them will require long and careful negotiations. And most of them will require a new approach to the cold war—a desire not to ‘bury’ one’s adversary but to compete in a host of peaceful arenas, in ideas, in production, and m service to all humanity. “The contest will continue, the contest between those who envision a monolithic world and those who believe in diversity, but it should be a contest in leadership instead of destruction, a contest in achievement instead of intimidation. Speaking for the United States of America, I welcome such a contest. For we believe that truth is stronger than error, and that freedom is more enduring than coercion. And in the contest for a better life, all the world can be the winner . . . .” In addition to urging U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations, President Kennedy urged U.N. to work on five major projects, among them “a global system of satellites [which] could provide communication and weather information for all comers of the earth.” (Text, Wash. Post, 9/21/63, A10)
Senator Clinton Anderson (D.-N.M.) replying on the floor of the Senate to Senate Republican Policy Committee’s criticism of Project Apollo (May 10), cited buildup of TJ.S. scientific and technological base: “. . . insofar as our national security is concerned, the development of this basic structure for space power, and the scientific knowledge and technical skill required to enable men safely to explore the moon is probably of greater consequence than the lunar landing itself .... “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does not constitute a crash program. The decision-making process does not allow for vacuums; failure to decide on a schedule for attempting to reach the moon is equivalent to setting no deadline at all. Work is done best—even by the technical community—which is not exempt from the laws of human nature—when a specific goal is set. An objective of landing on the moon in the 1960’s was chosen as the one that would permit us to work for a lunar landing in a rapid, yet efficient manner. This permits us to work at a challenging pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the Nation’s resources than our country can afford. This is only 1 percent of the gross national product at current rate. “Once having been made—in 1961—the decision is subject to review and modification every year at budget time and can be modified within limits .... nasa is not immune from congressional appropriations review .... “Administrator Webb has announced that nasa, in this decade, will accomplish all the programs now planned, including lunar landing for under $35 billion. This is less than two-thirds of the budget requested by the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1964 alone—a small price for the experience, technology, industrial base, and facilities which may be required for national security .... “Mr. President, there is ample room in the current debate on the space program for divergent views and criticism and for constructive suggestions. But are we to believe that if we cancel the Project Apollo, the savings will be so translated into new hospitals, modem classrooms, and better diets for the ill nourished ? . . . . “We are not faced with an ‘either-or’ proposition. We can afford to have an effective, logical, and successful space program and we can afford these other efforts to improve well-being here on earth. Mr. President, we cannot afford not to go to the moon .... “Any slowdown in our Nation’s space programs would certainly afford great, comfort to our enemies and spread dismay among our friends overseas. To slacken the space effort after having accepted publicly on a national basis the Soviet challenge would open us to accusations of lack of firmness and resolution regarding national goals .... “In 1958, President Eisenhower declared:
Washington Post editorial said of U.S. manned lunar program: “We may not get to the moon first, or we may not get to it at all— but that will not mean all has been in vain. In trying to reach such a spectacular goal, we are developing the rockets that will place us in the forefront of the space age, and in developing the scientific and engineering skills required to achieve this purpose we are enormously expanding the country’s capacity to achieve scientific goals as yet unspecified. The skills and talents nurtured at nasa will be making their contribution to the knowledge, the comfort, the convenience and the survival of the United States long after moon landings have been accepted as a commonplace or abandoned as an impossibility. The world was altered by the voyages of Columbus, even though they failed of their planned objectives. And the world is being altered before our very eyes 741-623 0—64---13 by a new struggle to master man’s environment. Enterprises such as this are not to be judged by the ordinary criteria of scientists, economists or sociologists. They are not to be weighed on the balance against some other more practical and more appropriate or more feasible endeavor. Such heroic enterprises move by their own laws, abide by their own rules and set their own precedents and when they are over, leave humanity with its knowledge multiplied, its future expanded, its horizons widened, its outlook sharpened and its hopes uplifted by a new sense of man’s unending and unlimited possibilities.” {Wash. Post, 5/7/63; CR, 5/8/63,7491)
President Johnson signed the Executive Order establishing the John F. Kennedy Space Center: “whereas President John F. Kennedy lighted the imagination of our people when he set the moon as our target and man as the means to reach it; and “whereas the installations now to be renamed are a center and a symbol of our country’s peaceful assault on space; and “whereas it is in the nature of this assault that it should test the limits of our youth and grace, our strength and wit, our vigor and perseverance—qualities fitting to the memory of John F. Kennedy: “now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, I hereby designate the facilities of the Launch Operations Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the facilities of Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range, in the State of Florida, as the John F. Kennedy Space Center; and such facilities shall be hereafter known and referred to by that name.” (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, „ 2)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, said in address to Charlotte (N.C.) Chamber of Commerce: “The most important of the major reasons for undertaking a broad national program of space research and development—the one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind—is the least understood and the most difficult to explain. It is the certainty that the basic scientific knowledge gained, and the technological applications which will flow from it, will offer the greatest return on our space investment over many years ahead .... “The road to pre-eminence in space may be a long one. It certainly will not end on the moon, regardless of which nation lands the first explorers there .... “Much of what we need for pre-eminence in space will be acquired on the way to the moon. That is why we have chosen the lunar exploration as an immediate national goal of prime importance. “When will we clearly achieve the pre-eminence we seek ? This is not an easy question. The answer depends not only on_the sustained effort and investment we make, but on what the .Russians do. Their system lends itself to concentration of resources on specific tasks, but their system like any other is faced with conflicting demands for priority. At the present time we simply cannot know what level of investment they expect to make on a long-range space program. We do know we must not be trapped into a narrow one-purpose program such as one limited to a lunar landing. . . . “Unless the Russians unveil a new rocket on the order of Advanced Saturn in the next few years, our chances for being first to explore the moon remain good . . . .” (Text)
In press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “By when do you think we will be first in space, and in view of Russia’s current lunar probe [lunik iv], do you think we will beat the Russians with a man to the moon ?” He replied: “I don’t know. We started well behind. Quite obviously they had a tremendous advantage in big boosters and we are still behind, because obviously we haven’t gotten our new boosters yet, which we won’t get until 1964, ’65 and ’66. We will have to wait and see but I can assure you it is an uphill race at best, because we started behind, and I am sure the Russians are making a major effort. Today’s indication of what they are doing makes me feel that their program is a major one, and it is not spongy, and I think that we would have to make the same ourselves. “So I would say we are behind now, and we will continue to be behind, but if we make a major effort we have a chance, I believe, to be ahead at the end of this decade, and that is where I think we ought to be.” Questioned about his reaction to General Eisenhower’s charge that the national budget could be reduced by billions of dollars and that enormous sums were being wTasted in the space program (letter to Congressman Charles A. Halleck made public March 291, President Kennedy said: “. . . The United States Congress almost unanimously made a decision that the United States would not continue to be second in space. We are second in space today because we started late. It requires a large sum of money. I don’t think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies. We have the potential not to be. I think having made the decision last year, that we should make a major effort to be first in space. I think we should continue to do so. “President Eisenhower—this is not a new position for him. He has disagreed with this at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position. It is the position I think he took from the time of Sputnik on. But it is a matter on which we disagree. It may be that there is waste in the space budget. If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut by the Congress, and I am sure it will be. But if we are going to get into the question of whether we should reconcile ourselves to a slow pace in space, I don’t think so. “This Administration has concentrated its attention since it came into office on strengthening our military. That is one of the reasons why you could not possibly put in the cut which has been recommended, nine or ten billion dollars, without cutting the heart out of the military budget. The fact of the matter is when we came into office, we had 11 combat-ready divisions and we now have 16. We increased the scheduling on Polaris, nearly double per year. We increased the number of planes on the 15-minute alert from 33 per cent of our strategic air force to 50 per cent. In a whole variety of ways—in the Navy we have added about 46 vessels, and strengthened ourselves in defense and space . . . .” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 4/4/63)
msc announced a contract amendment to General Dynamics/Convair in the amount of $2,247,174 for two additional Little Joe II solid boosters for use in the Apollo test program. The two new boosters would be used in high-altitude abort test—around 60,000 ft.— testing the capability of the launch escape system to separate the command module from the booster. This amendment would bring total Little Joe II procurement costs to $8,928,637, including the four vehicles originally ordered and nearly $500,000 for design, development, and installation of two launchers at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. (msc Release 63-223)
R. W. Gillespie, systems engineer of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., said in Los Angeles press conference: “America’s giant program for a [manned] lunar landing should be reoriented to allow for a manned landing on Mars and a manned capture [orbital flyby] of Venus by 1973. Most of the talent now working on the lunar landing would have to be diverted for the Mars and Venus flights.” He said he was “one of those who thinks there is some form of life on Mars” and that a landing there would be of more value than one on the moon; scientists already have a pretty good idea of what man would find on the moon. Gillespie was in Los Angeles for 9th annual meeting of American Astronautical Society. (L.A. Times to Wash. Post, 1/16/63, A7)
Addressing Washington, D.C., meeting of American Red Cross, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Project Apollo offers us our greatest opportunity to overcome the lead in manned space exploration now held by the Soviet Union. It gives us assurance that if an American is not first on the Moon, he certainly will not be far behind. And most important of all, it demonstrates to all the world that we in the United States have the capability and the determination to carry on those things which we have declared seriously that we intend to do.” (Text)
Missiles and Rockets quoted Harrison Storms, president of North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., prime contractor for Apollo program, on proposals that a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program would enable U.S. to proceed at more leisurely pace and less expensively: “When is soon enough? I don’t see anything blocking us now. ... If you put it off, it will cost more money. You must have the level of effort capable of developing the systems to do the job. If you go below that level, it costs money. . . . When you begin to lower your effort it’s not the least capable man who leaves first, it’s the most capable. You lose critical talent and you may actually need the same or more manpower to reach the same goal at a later date.” (M&R, 10/7/63, 86)
In his 'Washington Post column, Walter Lippmann said: “The President has made his suggestion of collaboration in going to the moon at a time when there is some improvement in U.S.S.R.-U.S.A. relations. It happens also to be a time when there is a growing doubt among American scientists and among the people generally about the commitment to put an American man on the moon by the year 1970. “The President’s proposal at the U.N. is, it seems to me, excellent even if the joint effort proves to be technically and politically impracticable. It is excellent because it may offer an honorable way to correct the mistakes of our original commitments about going to the moon. “There were two big mistakes. One was the commitment to put a man, a living person rather than instruments, on the moon. The other mistake was to set a deadline—1970—when the man > was to land on the moon . . . .” {Wash. Post, 9/24/63)
Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., contractor to nasa’s Manned Spacecraft Center to build the lunar landing vehicle in which two U.S. astronauts would descend to the moon’s surface, named Space Technology Laboratory, a division of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge Corporation, to develop the lunar descent and landing engine. The lunar excursion module (lem) of Project Apollo would detach from the Apollo spacecraft orbiting around the moon and slowly descend to the lunar surface, (msc Release 63-92)
Selection of two new X-15 pilots, Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) and Milton O. Thompson (nasa) was announced by Paul F. Bikle, Director of nasa Flight Research Center, and Brig. Gen. Irving L. Branch (usaf) , Commander of AF Flight Test Center. Pilots would fill vacancies left by nasa research pilot Neil Armstrong, now a nasa astronaut, and Maj. Robert White (usaf), recently assigned other usaf duties, (nasa Release 63-127; frc Release 12-63)
U.S.S.R. announced successful launching of lunik iv probe on a Si/, -day flight toward the moon. Mission of 3,135-lb. instrumented spacecraft, said to have been placed in parking orbit around the earth and then fired toward the moon, was not disclosed. Tass announcement said all onboard equipment was functioning normally, scientific stations in U.S.S.R. were tracking the probe and receiving scientific information from it. “According to data which was already processed the flight of the automatic station continues along a trajectory which is close to the calculated trajectory.” At 4:00 p.m. Moscow time, lunik iv was reported 50,486 km. (31,350 mi.) from earth, (nyt, 4/3/63,1,14; Pravda, 4/3/63, eos Trans.)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, in Associated Press interview, was asked: “Mr. Vice President, as chairman of the Space Advisory Council [i.e., National Aeronautics and Space Council], you were intimately concerned in drafting the 5.7-billion-dollar space budget. Former President Eisenhower says the budget is spongy, and there is no hurry about getting to the moon. In view of this recent Russian shot [lunik iv], what is your reaction?” The Vice President replied: “The Administration has submitted to the Congress what we believe is a sane and responsible proposal to insure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of our space program. I know of no reckless desire in any responsible quarter to get to the moon at all costs and without regard to the consequences to other vital aspects of our national policy. “The objective of reaching the moon is one aspect or our national space program which will be of great benefit to our country, and I think to all mankind. It may be possible by appropriating more money to speed up slightly the attainment of that goal and, of course, we all know it would be mighty easy to slow that goal down. But I don’t think that either alternative would be helping our country. Gaining a short period of time would almost certainly be at the expense of other crucial programs. Slowing down might bring us some one of these days face to face with the shocking knowledge that we had permanently assigned ourselves to second place. “So, all in all, I think the Administration has submitted a program which we can all embrace and both parties can fully support.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	’
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
Dr. Soloman W. Golomb of Cal Tech, speaking before American Astronautical Society in Los Angeles? warned: “There’s been a great deal of thought given to preventing contamination of the moon and planets dunng visits by earth space vehicles, but an even greater problem entirely overlooked is . . . microscopic organisms carried to the earth on return flight.” Dr. Golomb said extraterrestrial organisms inadvertently brought to earth might be able to successmlly compete with terrestrial orfnisms for basic materials of life, (upi, Newport News Times-erald, 1/18/63)
Addressing the Kokomo (Ind.) Chamber of Commerce, nasa Adminstrator James E. Webb remarked: “We are in a continuing competition for world leadership, and leadership in space has become an important element in this struggle .... “It is logical that aggressive elements in the Soviet Union may hope to enter a new period of forward thrust by some startling breakthrough in space technology. The only way we can make sure that this does not happen—the only way to safeguard our technological frontiers—is to pursue an active program of research and development over the entire range of space technology. This includes manned space flight, the development of nuclear-powered rockets, electric propulsion for spacecraft, advanced communications, satellite observ ations of the global weather picture, lunar and planetary exploration, and acquisition of new understanding of the basic forces operating in our solar system and the universe. The space frontier has many salients, many different points of activity. We must not lag behind in any area of space technology or our ability to deter aggression, in space and on earth, may be jeopardized .... “Most of those who question the value of the lunar program fail to appreciate that it involves much more than a single expedition to the moon before 1970. Although the moon is the ultimate objective of the Apollo program, its main purpose is to develop our space competence—our space muscle and space skills —at the most rapid pace consistent with good management, crew safety, and the efficient use of funds .... “Do we conclude that a vigorous effort to develop knowledge and capability in space science and technology, particularly given the long lead times involved in this development, is fruitless and extravagant until military requirements are clearly defined ? Do we fly in the face of history and assert that the enormous economic potential of space research and exploration does not exist simply because we cannot pinpoint all of the precise benefits which such research will produce and which all the lessons of history tell us are there? Or do we, in the tradition which has made nils uuuiiliy great, grasp the opportunity to cross a challenging new’ frontier and insure that the nation will not sacrifice the opportunity or risk the hazards which lie beyond?” (Text) .
President John F. Kennedy wrote a letter to Rep. Albert Thomas “I am very glad to respond to your letter of September 21 and to state my position on the relation between our great current space effort and my proposal at the United Nations for increased cooperation with the Russians in this field. In my view an energetic continuation of our strong space effort is essential, and the need for this effort is, if anything, increased by our intent to work for increasing cooperation if the Soviet Government proves willing. “As you know, the idea of cooperation in space is not new. My statement of our willingness to cooperate in a moon shot was an extension of a policy developed as long ago as 1958 on a bipartisan basis, with particular leadership from Vice President Johnson, who was then the Senate Majority Leader .... Our specific interest in cooperation with the Soviet Union, as the other nation with a major present capability in space, was indicated by me to Chairman Khrushchev in Vienna in the middle of 1961, and reaffirmed in my letter to him of March 7,1962 .... So my statement in the United Nations is a direct development of a policy long held by the United States Government. “Our repeated offers of cooperation with the Soviet Union have so far produced only limited responses and results .... But as I said in July of this year, there are a good many barriers of suspicion and fear to be broken down before we can have major progress in this field. Yet our intent remains: to do our part to bring those barriers down. “At the same time, as no one knows better than you, the United • States in the last five years has made a steadily growing national effort in space .... “This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to cooperate with others are not in conflict. They are mutually supporting elements of a single policy. We do not make our space effort with the narrow purpose of national aggrandizement. We make it so that the United States may have a leading and honorable role in mankind’s peaceful conquest of space. It is this great effort which permits us now to offer increased cooperation with no suspicion anywhere that we speak from weakness. And in the same way, our readiness to cooperate with others enlarges the international meaning of our own peaceful American program in space. “In my judgment, therefore, our renewed and extended purpose of cooperation, so far from offering any excuse for slackening or weakness in our space effort, is one reason the more for moving ahead with the great program to which we have been committed as a country for more than two years. “So tne position of the United States is clear. If cooperation is possible, we mean to cooperate, and we shall do so from a position made strong and solid by our national effort in space. If cooperation is not possible—and as realists we must plan for this contingency too—then the same strong national effort will serve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also against possible hazards to our national security. So let us press on . . . .” (Letter, 9/23/63) “The climate has changed. It is somewhat more favorable.” {M&R, 9/23/63, 14)
nasa and Australian Dept, of Supply jointly announced manned space flight tracking and data acquisition facilities were being moved from Muchea, Australia, to a new site being built near Carnarvon, on the west coast. Move would consolidate at one site nasa’s ground support facilities in Australia for manned Projects Gemini and Apollo. Site also would include tracking and data acquisition facilities for unmanned Orbiting Observatory satellites—Oao, Ogo, and Oso. ( nasa Release 63-266)
In final meeting of the Space, Science, and Urban Life Conference at Dunsmuir House, Oakland, Calif., nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “ ... we must all concern ourselves with the progress and the promise of scientific research and technological development in this country, and the effects of this activity upon society. My own work on projects concerned with civic and urban problems, has left an indelible impression of their complexity and urgency .... “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in the social and economic structure of the country and the world; we are dealing, as well, with an even more profound change in man’s own conception of the boundaries and limitations of his habitable environment and his understanding of the forces of the universe . . . Man is no longer rooted to terra firma, either in the literal sense, or in his understanding of the powerful forces of the universe of which he is a minuscule part. Increasingly, he comprehends that the new understanding and knowledge which are being unleashed by science and technology will alter his existence in more ways, and more rapidly, than he can possibly foresee .... “Man has gained mobility, Ms horizons have broadened not only in the geographical sense, but because he no longer feels bound by a family farm, or a traditional village industry .... A civilization which can move with serious purpose to gear itself for travel to the moon and the planets will not be content with old and outmoded socio-economic concepts .... “Every thread in the fabric of our economic, social ana political institutions is being tested as we move into space. Our economic and political relations with other nations are being reevaluated. Old concepts of defense and military tactics are being challenged and revised. Jealously guarded traditions in our educational institutions are being tested, altered, and even discarded. Our economic institutions—the corporate structure itself—are undergoing reexamination as society seeks to adjust itself to the inevitability of change.” Mr. Webb stated that two thoughts were of critical importance: (1) “The need to create favorable conditions compatible with the American private enterprise system through which the knowledge which we gain and the skills which we develop in our huge program of federally sponsored research and development . . . are identified and made available for use in the industrial stream to contribute to economic growth and our nation’s power to survive in a world where second best is more severely penalized than ever before”; (2) “The necessity for developing viable relationships between science, education, industry, and government . . . .” (Text)
msc announced the award of a formal contract to Raytheon Company’s Space and Information Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for industrial support to mit, which is developing the guidance and navigation systems for Apollo, in the design and development of the onboard digital computer for the command module, (msc Fact Sheet #96)
Sending Man to the Moon Jointly: Not sure_________________________________11%
lunik iv was Soviet Union’s third attempt in 1963 to send instrumented payload to the moon, William Hines reported in Washington Evening Star, He quoted a Government official— outside of nasa and dod—as saying: “We are trying to make a record to place before the world. The preparation of this record is now in progress. There has been no official statement to date regarding things that are up there which we know about and don’t belong to us. But there are such things, and they should be made public—by us, if the Soviets refuse.” nasa and dod had no comment on any unannounced Soviet space launchings. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/9/63, Al)
Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft arrived at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center for dynamic and compatibility tests with the Saturn I. Boilerplate model included command and service modules and mockup of launch escape system. (Huntsville Times. 4/9/63; naa S&ID Skywriter, 4/19/63,1)
nasa announced selection of Pliilco Corp. for negotiation of contract to develop and equip Manned Flight Mission Control Center (mfmcc) at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston. To be operational in mid-1964, mfmcc would direct Gemini rendezvous and Apollo flights just as Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral directed Project Mercury manned space flights, (nasa Release 63-14)	,
usaf awarded to United Technology Center a $15,390,000 increment to existing contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing large segmented solid-propellant motors, usaf also obligated to Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $1,380,000 increment to existing contract for rad on solid-propellant motors, (dod Release 1609-63) During December: In its “Statement of Purpose,” the Subcommitee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics outlined scope of Federal Government’s support of rad and reviewed responsibilities of the Congress in answering questions of basic policy and evaluating the Federal rad effort. Report pointed out that Government provides “more than two-thirds of the total research and development money being spent in the United States. Of this total, 75 percent is spent in industry, 8 percent in colleges and universities, and 15 percent within the Government itself, according to studies of the National Science Foundation.” (“Government and Science No. 1: A Statement of Purpose,” Rpt. of the House Subcomm. on Science, rad, 1963) During December: Marshall Space Flight Center engineer Paul J. deFries spent two weeks at U.S. scientific stations in Antarctica gathering data on their experiences. Some factors might relate to the problem of supplying astronauts during long stays on the moon. (Marshall Star, 1/1/64, 1)
Ten senior executives, representing nasa’s major Apollo program contractors, visited the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston for a briefing on the current status of Apollo. (Space News Rowndup, 1/8/64, 2)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced signing of definitive contract valued at $7,658,000 with Kollsman Instrument Corp. for guidance and navigation equipment for Apollo spacecraft’s command and service module, (msc Release 63-147)
President Kennedy sent FY 1964 Budget Request to Congress, recommending nasa appropriation of $5,712 billion. Of this sum, $3.19 billion was for manned space flight, with Project Apollo receiving largest single increase in nasa budget—from $435 million in FY 1963 to $1.2 billion in FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb characterized the budget request as “austere”—it would neither speed up nor slow down the National effort to land an American on the moon in this decade. Total FY 1964 space budget, was estimated at $7,614 billion— nasa, $5,664 billion; dod $1,668 billion; aec, $254.3 million; Weather Bureau, $26.2 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.3 million, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964; Wash. Post, 1/18/63, A12; M&R, 1/21/63,13)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, interviewed by the New York Herald Tribune, acknowledged that parts of Project Apollo were behind the schedule as written two years ago. He singled out on-board power—“we have counted on fuel cells .... To say that the fuel cell is behind is not an adequate statement, but to say that problems have been encountered in solving the problems of enough on-board electrical energy to do the job would be an accurate statement”—and the Titan II booster for the Gemini program—“We must know what happens to men and equipment under a weightless condition for a week or two. We had hoped to get this information at an earlier, date in making our plans for Apollo and future flight missions. We still will get it early enough to do the job within this decade.” (Ubell and Loory, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 10/13/63)
Dr. Barry Commoner, Prof, of Plant Physiology at Washington Univ., St, Louis, said in speech before convention of National Science Teachers Association in Philadelphia that U.S. scientific research was becoming too “mission oriented.” “In 1962 about one-third of the total federal obligation for basic research—and federal funds are now the major source of support for basic science—came from a single agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. In a total federal budget of about $900 million for basic research, nasa was obligated to provide $350 million, while the National Science Foundation provided under $90 million .... “We are engaged in a spectacular balancing act. Education is supported by science, science by space, and space by the man on the moon . . . [The] policy of supporting education through science and science through space is dangerously unsound .... We should recognize this policy for what it is—a short-sighted, pinch-penny effort to buy a few selected fruits of the tree of knowledge, without accepting the honest responsibility of nourishing the whole living, growing organism.” (NYT. 4/7/63: St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/7/63) During April: William A. Hyman, internationally known trial lawyer and author of “The Magna Carta of Space—The Legal Lodestar,” speaking at the Inter-American Bar Association in Panama, said: “The Space Committee of the United Nations has failed to give due consideration and take appropriate action on the important question of sovereignty and security as they become involved in the use of space.” (CR. 6/27/63, A4133-34)
The Collier Trophy for 1962 was presented to the seven Project Mercury astronauts by President Kennedy in the White House Rose Garden: “I hope this award, which in effect closes out a particular phase of the program, will be a stimulus to them and to the other astronauts who will carry our flag to the moon and, perhaps, some day, beyond.” (AP, NTT, 10/11/63,18; naa Release 10/7/63)
Dr- Vannevar Bush, honorary chairman of the corporation of mit. long-time scientific adviser to the Government, and Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development from 1941-46, wrote a letter to the New York Times on the manned lunar program. Noting that Premier Khrushchev said recently that a manned lunar landing would not be worth the cost in money or in lives, Dr. Bush stated: “This is an aspect of the space program which the American public has by no means faced.” That lives would be lost in the program was inevitable, he asserted, and would occur with the whole world watching. “What will happen when the tragedy occurs? The public is now in doubt on the program. They will be impatient as it proceeds very slowly, with little of popular appeal to report. When a grim tragedy occurs they may throw the whole experiment out the window. “I have just as much enthusiasm as the next man for the parts of the program which make sense: the communications and weather satellites, for example. But the whole program has been blown up to absurd dimensions. Instruments on the moon would gather scientific information, nearly as much as a man would, and the information would not be worth the cost. “To put a man on the moon is folly, engendered by childish enthusiasm. It will backfire on those who drive it ahead.” {NTT, 11/17/63, 8E)
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
priorities in space as well as article from current issue of Reader’s Digest entitled “We’re Running the Wrong Race with Russia” which said: “The Russians have recently achieved an increase in the effectiveness of nuclear explosions so devastating that it dwarfs all previous records. Confirming this, our own atomic experts have warned that such stupendous forces, let loose above us from a satellite, could, in a few seconds, literally cremate a large part of the United States. There would be nothing left below, no man, beast, vegetation, buildings, nothing at all but the glare of white-hot cinders. “In the face of such a dire threat, it must come as a stunning shock to all thoughtful Americans to learn that the United States has no top-priority programs beamed at preventing, anticipating, or deterring such a terrifying prospect. Our top priorities are all tied up with steamrollering through the moon shot. Many billions of public money, together with the rich cream of scientific talent, are lavished on an effort that could well be aborted in midstride by Soviet enterprise and realism. “There is a crying need for a reappraisal of our space aims, for more specific public information, especially since statements from those highly placed in Washington are so contradictory that they blur rather than clarify our understanding . . . .” {Reader’s Digest, 8/63, CR, 7/31/63,13035-39)
nasa announced its Langley Research Center had issued requests for proposals for instrumented lunar-orbiter probes which would be launched by 1966 to secure topographic data on the moon’s surface. Photographic lunar-orbiters would team with Ranger hard-landing spacecraft and Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft in gathering data preparatory to Apollo manned lunar landing. To be launched by Atlas-Agena launch vehicle, lunar-orbiter would contain camera system capable of obtaining pictures not closer than 22 mi. above moon’s surface, (nasa Release 63-196: l,«bc Release)
Congressman Charles A. Halleck (R.-Ind.) publicly released letter from former President Eisenhower urging that “the new spending programs in the pending budget ... be drastically reduced .... “The space program, in my opinion, is downright spongy. This is an area where we particularly need to demonstrate some common sense. Specifically, I have never believed that a spectacular dash to the moon, vastly deepening our debt, is worth the added tax burden it will eventually impose upon our citizens. This result should be achieved as a natural outgrowth of demonstrably valuable space operations. But having made this into a crash program, we are unavoidably wasting enormous sums. I suggest that our enthusiasm here be tempered in the interest of fiscal soundness . . . .” {CR, 4/2/63, 5172)
Soviet scientists reported that radio soundings had indicated that the surface of the moon was “hard and extremely porous,” in contrast to other theories that the moon was covered with a thick layer of dust, (upi, Wash. Dally News, 11/14/63; Izvestia, 11/15/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
U.S.S.R. would use earth-orbit rendezvous for an early circumlunar manned flight with present-generation hardware, according to article in Pravda by “chief designer” of Vostok spacecraft. Author indicated that the tandem flight of L/Col. Valery Bykovsky and Jun. Lh Valentina Tereshkova was successful preliminary to such flight, which he said would last 8 to 12 days. Re-entry, he indicated, was the most difficult part of the moon flight. (M&R, 7/1/63,29)
nasa launched Little Joe II booster rocket with dummy payload simulating size and weight of Apollo command module and escape tower in flight test at White Sands Missile Range, N.M. The lj-ii attained 24,000-ft. altitude and mach 1.1 speed, impacted about 47,000 ft. downrange instead of planned 35,000 ft. because destruct system did not respond to ground command signal. This was first launching of lj-ii and was a flight qualification test to verify performance of lj-h before using it to test Apollo command module. 100 sec. of telemetry was recorded and five of the six test objectives were achieved, (nasa Release 63-193; Av. Wk., 9/2/63, 20)
nasa Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, at U.S. National Committee of International Scientific Radio Union meeting in Washington, referred to recent criticism of Project Apollo by scientists who had charged that scientific returns from manned lunar landing program aid not justify $20 billion cost: “They’ve been setting up a straw man and knocking it down. . . . No one in nasa had ever said the program was decided upon solely on the basis of scientific return. . . .” He described the manned lunar program as “a technological program, though it does have some science content,” and said it, like overall U.S. space program, was designed to give this country “mastery and pre-eminence” in space. Knowledge gained through Project Apollo, in rocket techniques as well as biosciences, would help prepare U.S. “for whatever we are called upon to do for both civil and military uses” of space. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/30/63)
Editorial in Washington Evening Star quoted Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson:“. . . To reach the moon is a risk. But it is a risk we must take . . . [for] failure to go into space is even riskier .... Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler.” Editorial cited “soundness of what he has had to say about our projected lunar voyages . . .” and added: “The warning is well-timed, especially so because of what some otherwise sensible and perceptive people have been saying about the alleged nonsensicality of flying to the moon when the money could be better spent on such urgent projects as building schools, sewage plants and more and more highways right down here on earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/63) April 26: usaf launched Blue Scout rocket from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with unidentified payload. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/63)
Article on “The Test Ban” by Stefan T. Possony of the Hoover Institute, Stanford University, printed in the Congressional Record, said: “. . . Currently there is no feasible method of verifying [nuclear] explosions in space. If the Soviets were to launch a space vehicle and explode a nuclear device, at not too great a distance, the United States might gain a good notion of what was going on. But we would not possess the type of evidence which ‘would stand up in court,’ assuming that we could make public use of the evidence we have. Hence, we would be reluctant to move, just as during the Cuban crisis, Washington did not move before there was clear photographic evidence of the presence of Soviet missiles .... “Few people realize that though we are entrusting our security to icbm’s, we never have tested a full assembly of such a missile, i.e., we have not launched an icbm together with its warhead, nor destroyed a target with an icBM-launched warhead .... “Testing also has a bearing on space propulsion. It is generally agreed that the Orion project—which is designed to use small nuclear ‘bombs’ to propel a space vehicle—would allow the lifting of maximal payloads mto orbit and permit the deepest penetration into the solar system. Of all propulsion systems it would nmiri/lo -fr\r* flia mocf offhpfnra nfilwafmTl nf Qnapp. TTnWftVPf. SH *-**'-' ~ ------------------------~------------ ----—• —7 far it seems impractical, because of radioactivity, to launch an Orion assembly from the ground; unfortunately, by using Orion propulsion only from orbit, much of the system’s utility would be lost. An all-fusion technology would eliminate the radioactivity and thereby open the road to getting really important payloads into space. “Should the Soviets decide to move into space as a decisive military medium, they may employ Orion techniques even before they are able to eliminate radioactivity .... The brutal twin facts which we cannot circumvent are that space utilization requires maximum energy releases and that nuclear explosions are the method through which maximum energy releases can be produced— produced most cheaply .... “Plowshare explosions may be required for the building of stations on the moon . . . .” {CR, 3/21/63,4365,4367,4368)
Dr. Simon Ramo, Vice Chairman of Board of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc., said in Air Force and Space Digest article: “The landing of men on the moon needs to be understood by the American people merely as a specific framework on which is built a broad research program to explore many areas of science. Space is new and special; it is only now that we have the ability to enter a region of the universe previously denied to us, except for viewing from a distance through the insulation of our atmosphere. Nevertheless, without a definite task, a broad space pro-741-623 O—64------22 gram of this size would be very inefficient, would wander and become redundant, unwieldy, and confused. We need to agree that what counts most is advancing science on a broad front .... “. . . the addition of a human passenger and observer to a total space effort is a necessary ingredient. An ideally laid-out program . . . requires emphasizing broad research aims in all of the sciences .... How can we justify a large national space-research program whose true objective is scientific discovery across all the spectrum of science if we are going to leave out the life sciences .... “It is essential then that the public should understand that the program they are buying is not just a man-on-the-moon program. Like an iceberg, the greater part of the program will be unseen. Space exploration will be lengthy and continuing, requiring patient backing as a long-term venture . . . .” {AF & Space Digest, 8/63, 49f) During August: Peak power output of 50w from pulsed gas laser demonstrated by Orlando Div. of Martin-Marietta Corp. At higher power levels the company predicted application of the laser in optical radar system. {Av. Wk., 8/19/63, 34)
The Space Vehicle Panel of the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee met at msc for briefings and presentations on the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs.	(Space Newft Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
On the eve of its fifth anniversary, nasa had run into a patch of “attack by partisan politicians, budget-cutters, those who want the military to have a stronger role in space, mismanagement sleuths, and persons confused by President Kennedy’s bid for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. moon venture,” Howard Simons claimed in the Washington Post. He cited nasa’s budget troubles, with the $5.7 billion request already cut to a $5.3 billion authorization, another $200 million already cut by a House Appropriations Subcommittee, and even further cuts threatened in the full Committee. nasa Administrator Webb, Simons said, had blamed budget problems on House Republicans, charging that they “ ‘are following a political line trying to make the President’s program look foolish—‘Nuts,’ as Eisenhower called it. They have moved to the position that military activities in space are the only ones worthwhile.’ ” Under mismanagement charges, Simons listed the gao report on the Centaur program and the nasa charges of substandard workmanship by industry in the Mercury program, which in itself implied, according to Simons, a nasa admission that it had not supervised industry effectively. (WasA Post, 10/5/63, 4)	*
Eric Sevareid, in Washington Evening Star column titled “If Columbus Had Never Sailed,” discussed the debate on landing men on the moon: “It was two years ago this week end that President Kennedy sent his special message to the Congress in which he said that he himself believed we ‘should go to the moon.’ It has taken two years to develop the beginnings of a national debate on the question, among Congressmen, scientists and editorialists. “I say the beginnings of a debate because, on its public plane at least, the argument has not yet come into its true focus. The true question is not whether we should try to land men on the moon—the nature of this political world as well as the nature of men’s curiosity and the unquenchable spirit of science make it inevitable that we try—but how we go about it ... . “This is only the beginning. Anyone has only to let out his imagination a short notch to see the ultimate possibilities—to see humanity’s push into space transforming this society, dominating its intellectual pursuits, absorbing its resources, altering the training of its youth and its moral and religious concepts, upsetting the priorities for the its social and humanitarian efforts on terra firm a. “Those who scold the worriers say that to cancel the moon voyage would be as if Ferdinand and Isabella had cancelled Columbus’ voyage which opened the New World. They are more often right than they know. What is at stake are not only the new marvels to be found, but also the profound transfiguration of the source of the search. 741-623 o—64--15 “After the voyage of Columbus the Old World was never the same, in political, economic, military, social, religious or intellectual terms. After the first men walk upon the moon, Old Earth will never be the same and the change will begin in the two societies, Russia and America, now competmg for the cataclysmic honor of commencing the alteration.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/28/63, A13) May US: Stanford Research Institute report, prepared under Aerospace Industries Association grant, criticized “industry-Government aerospace relationship” as inefficient, full of overregulation and ineffective administration by Government and “over-management” by industry. Report said its findings were of national significance because aerospace industry’s output represents three per cent of gross national product and even greater share of manufacturing volume and employment. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/29/63, A4)
U.S.S.R. reported lunik iv had covered 216,000 km. (134,150 mi.), more than half the distance to the moon, during its first 24 hours of flight. Tass announcement said several measurements had been made to establish spacecraft’s trajectory but did not indicate whether the “automatic station” was on course. Telemetry data indicated onboard instruments were operating normally, and internal pressure and temperature were within prescribed limits. There still was no description of the probe’s mission. Article in Izvestia by Soviet geologist Aleksandr Khabakov said that “a soft landing on the moon of a container with instruments and auxiliary apparatus seems to be technically feasible.” (NTT, 4/4/63,18; Izvestia,4/4/63, eos Trans.)
nasa announced it was dropping four manned Apollo orbital flights employing the Saturn I booster and accelerating the all-systems manned Apollo flights employing the Saturn I-B •booster. Saturn I would have been able to orbit only the command and service modules of Apollo. Saturn I-B can launch the entire system, including the Lunar Excursion Module (lem). Studies have concluded that running all-systems checks from the beginning is a quicker and more certain method of checkout than to add additional systems flight by flight. Also the deletion of the four flights would save $50 million in FY 1964. The changes would delay the first manned Apollo flights by some nine months. (nasa Release 63-246; NTT, 10/31/63,18; Wash. Post, 10/31/63, 5) October SO: Thrust-Augmented Thor space booster developed by the usaf would be added to the National Launch Vehicle program as booster for Agena and Delta vehicles, dod and nasa announced. tat would have three XM-33 solid-propellant rockets, each 31-in. in diameter and producing 54,000 lbs. thrust, strapped to the sides of the basic Thor vehicle. This is the same rocket developed by Thipkol Chemical Corp. as the second stage of nasa’s Scout booster. The three solid rockets would be fired at the same time as the Thor engine, would bum for about 40 sec., and then drop off as the Thor engine continued powered flight. Raising Thors total thrust to 330,000 lbs., tat would represent a 20 to 30% increase in capability over the Delta, putting 1,000 lbs. into earth orbit compared with 800 lbs. for Delta, (dod Release 1434-63)
In hearings on U.S. space program, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony of Dr. Philip Abelson, Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Geophysical Laboratory; Dr. C. S. Pittendrigh, Princeton Univ. biology dept.; Dr. Simon Ramo, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of Calif, prof, of chemistry; and Dr. Polycarp Kusch, Columbia Univ. physicist. Dr. Abelson charged Project Apollo was harming future expansion of scientific knowledge and ‘‘taking away from our national security”; he declared that “manned space exploration has limited scientific value and has been accorded an importance which is quite unrealistic . . . .” Dr. Pittendrigh testified he approved of lunar exploration program chiefly because of its value toward eventual exploration of Mars. He cautioned that manned Mars landing should be made only after it is assured there would be no contamination by terrestrial organisms. Dr. Ramo expressed his approval of Project Apollo, but advised a “calm watch” to assure such a project would not begin to “dominate” U.S. technology and economy. Dr. Urey, taking issue with Dr. Abelson’s suggestion that Apollo costs were hindering U.S. science and education, said that “if we should decide not to do the space program we will probably do less for education than we would otherwise . . . .” Dr. Kusch testified he opposed high priority for Project Apollo because “we have great national needs that far outweigh the exploration of space.” He cited such necessities as conservation of natural resources, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/63) Jwne 10: usaf decision to recover manned spacecraft at Edwards, Holloman, and Wendover Air Force Bases was reported in Missiles and. Rochets. All mission command and control would be exercised by Satellite Test Center, Sunnyvale, Calif. Unnamed usaf spokesmen said first program operating under this arrangement would be X-20 (Dyna Soar) in its air-launched phases. (M&R, 6/10/63,34)
nasa announced it would negotiate contract extension with General Electric Co. for plant- and test-support services at nasa Mississippi Test Facility. Extension was expected to exceed $25 million, nasa had selected GE in February 1962 to support Project Apollo including systems integration, checkout, and reliability—including plant and test support at mtf. (nasa Release 63-283)
After a technical lecture on the chemical structure of matter, Dr. Linus Pauling, 1963 Nobel Peace Prize winner, attacked the U.S. lunar program before the National Academy of Sciences meeting in the Department of'State auditorium: “I believe that it [the lunar program] is a pitiful demonstration. Something is wrong with our system of values when we plan to spend billions of dollars for national prestige.” Pauling claimed that for the same investment it would be possible “to answer 1000 interesting and important questions about the human body for every one question answered about the moon.” (Simons. Wash. Post, 10/23/63, 1)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
nasa announced it would negotiate extension to existing contract with Control Data Corp. for procurement of computers and associated equipment for Apollo spacecraft Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment (pace) stations. Cost of the equipment for the nine stations was expected to exceed $25 million. General Electric Co. would receive the equipment as government-furnished equipment, would deliver first two pace systems to North American Aviation, Inc., for checkout of Apollo command and service modules. Four systems would be delivered to John F. Kennedy Space Center, two to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., and one to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 63-286) ....	.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasa Director of Biotechnology, said in speech before National Rocket Club that Lt. Tereshkova’s orbital space flight established feasibility of sending scientists not trained as pilots to moon and nearby planets: “I think it is significant that she is not a pilot. This points to the importance the Soviets attach to gathering biomedical information on the effects of space flight and may be a preparation for flying scientists who are not trained pilots . . . .” (upi, NYT, 6/19/63, 3; Av. Wk., 6/24/63,33)
nasa announced selection of Boeing Aircraft Co. to negotiate contract for four-month study of lunar base concept. Study would be first phase of broad lunar base study program to determine feasibility of such a project following Project Apollo. (nasa Release 63-145)
lunik iv passed within 8,500 km. (5,281 mi.) of the moon at 4:26 a.m. Moscow time, Tass reported. “The experiments and measurements which were conducted by means of the spacecraft are completed. Radio communication with the spacecraft will continue for a few more days. “Broad experimental data, which are of great value for the solution of a number of technological problems related to the conquest of the moon, were obtained. Measurement data are now being processed and studied in scientific centers of our country which are responsible for the investigation of cosmic space.” Tass still did not reveal nature of probe’s mission. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station in England, was quoted as saying he believed the Soviets had failed in an attempt to land instruments on the moon. “It is hardly conceivable, after a lapse of three years, with all the improvements in techniques, that the Russians would merely set out to do again what they did with lunik iii.” (Pravda, 4/7/63, eos Trans.; AP, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
gsfc held bidders’ briefing with 350 representatives of 55 aerospace firms hearing outlined the “Unified S-Band” method of providing tracking and communications for Apollo lunar missions. Conferees were notified of firm design and production requirements for two complete systems and three partial systems. Contract would be awarded after April 1, 1964. (gsfc Release G-30-63)
A roundup of Congressional opinion on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that the Soviets did not plan to land a man on the moon and its possible effect on the U.S. manned lunar landing program indicated that most Congressmen thought it would result in some reduction in funds for the U.S. program. (Wash. Post, 10/28/63)
nasa Flight Research Center announced award of contract to Bell Aerosystems Co. for design and construction of two manned lunar-landmg research vehicles to be used in conjunction with Project Apollo. Free-flight test vehicles would be capable of taking off and landing under their own power, of attaining about 4,000-ft. altitude, of hovering, and of horizontal flight. Vehicles would be used in investigation of problems that may be encountered in landing manned vehicle on the moon; results of these studies would assist in preparation of flight-crew training devices, (frc Release)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, interviewed in Washington Post magazine, Parade. Asked “with all our needs on earth, can we afford to spend $20 billion to go to the moon?” he replied: “We can’t afford not to spend it. Only the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have the resources for extensive space exploration. If we are to lead the free world and insure our own security, we must be first in space. This does not mean that we must neglect other urgent needs. We have ample resources to explore space and do the other things, as well.” Asked “What is our ultimate destiny in space?” he replied: “I don’t know, nor does anyone else. Columbus didn’t find what he was looking for, but I think we’re all pretty glad that he took that voyage. Einstein, when he produced the formula E=MC2, didn’t know that it would change the course of history. “I am sure of one thing—the benefits which will flow from our venture into space will be beyond anything any of us could imagine. “Until now, in space, no shot has been fired in anger. Thank God. My hope is that, in the years ahead, the conquest of space will encourage peaceful co-operation among nations and become a substitute for war. “In the hostile environment of space there are challenges all mankind must share. We—all nations, that is—should go out there together, hand in hand.” (Parade, Wash. Post, 9/29/63)
Stratoscope II balloon was launched from Palestine, Tex., landed near Kosciusko, Miss., some 18 hrs. later, having lifted a 3^-ton 36-in. telescope some 80,000 ft. where the telescope, viewing space from a point above 95% of the earth’s interfering atmosphere, photographed the infrared light coming from Jupiter, the moon, and two giant red stars. Dr. Marvin Schwarzchild, of Princeton Univ. and head of the scientific team, said they were hopeful that the photographs would provide another piece of evidence on the life cycle of stars, nsf, which has sponsored the series of Stratoscope balloon flights along with onr and nasa, termed the flight “very successful.” (Wasli. Post, 11/28/63, L5; NYT, 12/3/63, 46)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysics Laboratory and editor of Science, criticized costs of landing men on the moon in this decade: “What we are witnessing is the expansion of a new, sophisticated form of the prewar Public Works Administration. Science is being used as a ‘front’ for technological leaf-raking. . . .” Dr. Abelson was speaking at Univ. of Maryland. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/63, Al)
Sen. Robert C. Byrd (D.-W. Va.), addressing Alumni of Concord college, said: “Our marvelous technological developments, our flights into outer space, have demonstrated that there is virtually no limit to the development of the human mind. Today the moon is within range, tomorrow the stars—after that, who knows? Human knowledge is a pyramid whose topmost point stretches into infinity .... “Who develops the mind of the astronaut, and his co-workers? That is the job of the teacher, of education. That pyramid of knowledge .... rests upon a base of solid, fundamental learning which makes all of our splendid achievements possible . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/6/63, A3655-56)
robes to the moon and Mars by 1970, by converting the Blue treak booster to use of liquid hydrogen, (cpi, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)	^
Speaking on Cuban television from Havana, Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova said that she was a member of the team of Russian cosmonauts chosen to make the trip to the moon and that Yuri Gagarin headed the team. She said she would propose that a Cuban woman be included on the team. The Russian plan for a moon flight was described by Miss Tereshkova: the manned capsule would be launched into earth orbit, where it would rendezvous with an unmanned tanker spaceship; then another rocket would be launched from earth and tow the manned-vehicle-tanker combination to the moon. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in television interview that “with very good luck” the U.S. could land a man on the moon by 1968 or 1969, but he personally thought U.S. lunar landing would be in early 1970’s. Senator Anderson said he doubted reports that U.S.S.R. was not racing U.S. to the moon. (cbs-TV “Washington Reports,” AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)_	_	_ _
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Montana State University, Missoula, Mont., listed six reasons for making Project Apollo the major manned space flight effort of the 1960’s: “1) The goal of lunar exploration is feasible from an engineering standpoint .... “2) By planning ahead, and adopting a realistic schedule, we rwrn. J 11> a ww .... n A. T v. n A j J	J	An J on f!«n*IA1«At tvviriu mo w aoiciauicao in iiiueuioiirii anu	mianuii^. “3) We have set ourselves a clear goal which the entire world can understand, and one in which we nave a good chance of being first .... “4) We have set a goal which will focus our efforts, and at the same time enable us to build up a broad base of space power .... “5) In Project Apollo we protect ourselves against the great psychological advantage the Soviet Union would have if it alone could occupy and use the moon . . . . “6) Project Apollo gives us our first good chance of overcoming the lead in manned space exploration which the Soviets now hold.” (Text)
The International Academy of Astronautics, at regular meeting, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper to succeed Dr. Frank J. Malina as President of the Academy. Dr. Draper is one of the world’s leading space engineers, engaged in the solution of problems of guidance and control of space vehicles. His latest and largest undertaking is the design of the guidance-navigation system to be used aboard the Apollo spacecraft, which is to carry man to a Moon landing and a safe return. He is Head of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as Director of the mit Instrumentation Laboratory, in which capacity he leads a team of 1,800 scientists, engineers and technicians, (iaf Release 17, 10/1/63)
In space studies symposium at Argonne, 111., Bernard I. Spinrad, Argonne National Laboratory scientist, predicted: “On the basis of techniques winch in general we now know, I believe that the larger scale exploration of the solar system will in fact be undertaken from a base on the moon.” (AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 5/4/63)
Premier Nikita Khrushchev told a group of visiting U.S. businessmen that U.S.S.R. was continuing its manned lunar landing program. Clarifying his remarks of Oct. 26, he said that “when we have the technical possibilities of doing this, and when we have complete confidence that whoever is sent to the moon can safely be sent back, then it is quite feasible, quite possible.” He said that polet i had made space rendezvous possible but that “no definite date” had been set for such an experiment. On the supersonic transport aircraft, he said: “I can say that we are designing and building a supersonic plane. I can’t give you the details because I don’t remember the technical data on that plane.” {NYT, 11/7/63,1; AP, Wash, Post, 11/7/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of formal contract to General Dynamics/Convair for four Little Joe II vehicles, two launchers, and launch support for testing boilerplate models of Apollo spacecraft in unmanned, suborbital flight from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. (msc Release 63-31)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center proposal to establish manned orbital space station which stressed that such a station and associated equipment could be established using rockets, equipment, and materials under development now for Project Apollo. Plan called for (1) orbiting space station with capacity for 18 crewmen; (2) sending six men in adapted Apollo-type spacecraft to board the orbiting station; and (3) sending two more such crews within a month of each other to staff the station, docking the shuttle spacecraft at the station’s three arms. Report said space station would be a national laboratory for studv of space. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/2/63)	'	_	_
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, in an interview with Communist newsmen published in Izvestia, said: “At the present time we do not plan flights of cosmonauts to the moon. “I have read a report that the Americans wish to land a man on the moon by 1970. Well, let’s wish them success. “And we will see how they will fly there, and how they will land there or to be more correct ‘moon’ there. “And most important—how they will get up and come back. “We will take their experience into account. “We do not wish to compete in sending people to the moon without thorough preparation. “It is obvious there would be no benefit from such competition. “On the contrary it would do harm since it would lead to the destruction of people. “It is a joke in our country to say ‘Who is impatient on earth, let him go to the moon.’ “For us it is good enough on earth. But if we are to talk seriously we will have to work a lot and prepare well in order to complete a successful flight of man to the moon.” (upi, NTT, 10/27/63,1)	_
James Reston, writing of President Johnson’s attack on poverty, said the President was faced with having “to choose not necessarily between the moon and the slums, but between the problems of today and the problems of tomorrow. “. . . some of the President’s scientific advisers have recommended that . . . [the FY 1965 budget request for Project Rover] be cut again to $100 million, which is less than half the Rover project budget for the current [fiscal] year. “There is, of course, no assurance that money saved on this project would be approved by the Congress for an attack on poverty and illiteracy in the slums, but President Johnson’s decision on this will give some indication of the set of priorities he proposes to establish for his Administration . . . .” (Reston, NYT, 12/20/63, 28)
At jpl briefing of nasa Hq. scientists, it was reported that Ranger 6 would be ready for flight to the moon by about Thanksgiving and Mariner 3 would be available for flight past Mars by fourth quarter of 1964. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/63)
If we do not make these efforts we will not be first on the moon, we will not be first in space and one day soon we will not be the first on earth.’ ” {Av. Wk., 4/29/63,17) April£9: aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, speaking at Centennial Charter Day Convocation, Univ. of Massachusetts, said: “If we look back a number of centuries to the Middle Ages, we find that man and society in the Western World were dominated by rather static concepts. The individual was born into a world that was essentially unchanging by our standards. He was not very important. Poverty, disease, toil, and natural calamities were simply an inevitable part of life. He accepted the proffered explanations of the world and the universe, and his curiosity was not encouraged. Man was a fearful and superstitious plaything of his environment. The concept that man might improve his lot was not widely considered. Nor were the tools at hand for such a task. “The beginning of the changes in this outlook are generally identified with the Renaissance and the Reformation. The questioning and inquisitive human spirit could not be stifled forever. Men began to question old forms and beliefs—in religion, politics, and the law; in art and literature; and in science and philosophy.	* “The process of breaking out of a closed world and liberating the mind was a slow one, and it is by no means complete. There were many landmarks, established by many brave men in all walks of life, on the route to liberation. An example was the overthrow, by the evidence produced by Copernicus and Galileo, of the dogmatic concept that the earth is the center of the universe. It is difficult for us today to estimate the impact, on a closed system of thought, of the knowledge that the earth and the other planets revolve around the sun. If such an important belief could fall, were not others vulnerable ? While science was opening man’s eyes to the truth of his surroundings, a change was m the making concerning the concept of nian himself. The themes of individual rights ana freedom were being developed in the period of the enlightenment and the first crystallization of these revolutionary ideas was in the American Revolution—the first revolution of which I am to speak to you today. Beginning with the Declaration of Independence and culminating with the adoption of the Constitution, the place of the State was confined to protecting the rights of the individual and becoming the instrument for man’s self-government .... “The freedom to embrace new ideas, the concept that men need not accept miserable conditions of life, and the hope inherent in science, unleashed as never before the economic energies of man. Our second revolution, the industrial revolution, and the rise of science and technology, saw a beginning of the realization of . . . a huge increase in industrial and agricultural production at a cost of less total labor, the conquest of many diseases, the lengthening of life, the improvement of health .... “As we now enter the early stages of the scientific revolution— our third revolution—the full flower of creative evolution is bursting upon us. Yet ‘powerful as the forces of science and technology have already demonstrated themselves to be, relatively speaking we are only beginning to feel their influence. Our Nation and the world are committed to an accelerating cycle of knowledge-gathering and knowledge-exploitation. We cannot visualize in detail the consequences for the future. We can, however, clearly see that we can, if we have the wisdom, create an environment essentially of our own choosing. The scientific revolution can provide for the essential needs of men around the globe. Our small world will grow smaller. At the same time our perspective will be broadened unimaginably by the exploration of space. We can only guess at the distant impact of this dynamism on man, his institutions, the content of thought and the quality of life. We can be sure, however, that successful adaptation to the changing environment can be achieved, in an atmosphere of freedom, only through advancement of men generally to higher 1 eve's of education . . . .” (Text, in CR, 4/29/63, 6847—49) April 29: Addressing the Senate space committee, Deputy Defense Secretary Roswell Gilpatric summed up dod’s philosophy on space: “The United States has a single national space program. . . . Space, like other mediums, affords useful and often unique ways for achieving defense objectives. Some of these are by no means uniquely military . . . similar remarks would apply to machines and devices used in the air, on land and on sea, and space is no exception. ... As a corollary to these observations, the totality of our military space efforts, assessed from a national rather than a departmental standpoint, greatly exceeds the efforts of the Department of Defense alone. Space systems and devices are not simply military or non-military merely because they are developed by one agency or another.” (M&R, 5/6/63) April H9: General Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, testifying before the House Science and Astronautics Committee, said that the Air Force was reviewing its space program, at the request of Defense Secretary McNamara, to determine how the Air Force might better achieve its military mission capabilities. Stressing the importance of both the Military Orbital Development Station (mods) and Aerospace Plane (asp), he said that mods was “of fundamental importance to achieving various military capabilities in space, both manned and unmanned.” (M&R, 5/6/63)
Scientist Dr. Charles R. Warren of U.S. Geological Survey’s Military Geology Branch said in Science magazine that the moon is probably covered with a layer of fuzz, about an inch deep. The “skeletal fuzz consists mostly of empty space” and could be a mesh or miniature tinker-toy structure or it might resemble a loose aggregate of snowflakes or reindeer moss. Dr. Warren had made study of lunar terrain for Army Corps of Engineers. (NYT, 4/12/63,29; upi, Wash. Post 4/12/63)
In editorial on “Apollo and Its Critics,” Aviation Week and Space Technology Editor Robert Hotz said: “Like all great pioneering ventures, the Apollo manned lunar landing program is the target of a continual barrage of carping. This anti-Apollo chorus usually reaches a crescendo in the spring, when the National Aeronautics and Space Administration budget is facing significant congressionl decisions, and dwindles to a barely audible pianissimo after every successful U.S. and Russian manned space flight. “This year the critics’ chorus is louder than ever and studded vvith many familiar faces ranging from ex-president Eisenhower, who still wishes the space age would dry up and blow away, to an esoteric wing of the scientific community which appears to be disturbed by the fact that non-scientist types, such as engineers and pilots, nave crept into the space program and are running their portion of it with vigor and enthusiasm directed toward specific goals that some scientists regard as unseemly. . . . “The scientific community has traditionally provided the most solid opposition to the manned space flight program, but there has been a steady rate of conversion from critics to supporters during the Mercury years. This has been helped by the fact that it has become obvious that nasa does not intend to neglect scientific exploration because of the Apollo priority. As the nasa program has unfolded with the years, it has become apparent that considerable scientific exploration by instrumented satellites and probes is a necessary preliminary to extending the parameters of manned space flight. It is also evident that manned space flight itself will offer a greater opportunity for scientific exploration of the universe than could ever be possible using only remotely controlled instruments and data transmission .... There are a great many valid, vital reasons why this nation must continue to press its exploration of space at the maximum feasible pace. “We intend to discuss them as the Apollo debate continues. But for the moment, there is no better summation of the purpose in this national effort than that stated by Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s director of manned space flight and the chief engineer of the Apollo program, when he said in a recent speech:
Addison M. Rothrock, Director of nasa Policy Planning Div., addressing Mid-Winter Conference on Science Teaching at Jekyll Island, Ga., discussed “the need for close relation between our studies in science and technology and our studies in the humanities”: “In space we are presented with the foremost challenge in science and technology that man has known. As a nation we face other challenges, challenges presented to us in the humanities— challenges calling for a mass assemblage of knowledge and intellect equal to that supplied by the 40,000 engineers and scientists that will by next year be working on our project to land men on the moon. And we have here a problem to which we have not found the answer: how to mount a mass attack by men with the kind of training acquired in the physical sciences to work on these problems in the humanities in which detailed, repeatable, and controlled experiments cannot be made. This, I think, is a great need, if not the greatest need of our time. If the space program shows us how to assemble—and use well—efforts of this magnitude and shows us the betterment for man that can result from doing it well, we will truly have made a great and lasting contribution to our nation and to our civilization. “. . . we as a nation must understand more of science and its implications .... “And though all children will not and should not attempt science as a calling, I think there should be an attempt as far as feasible to teach all children what science means and to teach them the importance of experimentation as a means of increasing our knowledge and understanding And for those who do not major in science this need to experiment—to learn from experience—should be heavily emphasized .... “So please educate our youth well, teach them of the power that comes with knowledge of our universe and the people who inhabit it. Teach them sciences so that they can achieve triumphs in technology. Teach them the humanities so that they will use these triumphs for man’s ^betterment. And above all help our children to grow in tolerance, help them to develop their wisdom, help them achieve self discipline. And ‘Holding fast to basic concepts while discarding outmoded practices,-----let us work together, make every effort and meet every challenge to build this nation’s most fundamental resource: the human mind.’ ” (Text)
Brig. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Vice Commander of Air Force Ballistic Systems Div., was appointed Deputy Director of Project Apollo in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 15. General Phillips would assume major responsibility for management and administration of Apollo, while Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, would continue having major responsibility for technical direction of Project Apollo, (nasa Release 63-287; dod Release 160563)
Senator J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) said in Tufts Univ. William L. Clayton Lecture that Project Apollo should be abandoned and money thus saved spent on down-to-earth causes such as education: “This allocation of priorities is a recipe for disaster, an unrecognized and powerful endorsement of the wrong side of the race between education and catastrophe (Boston Globe, 5/3/63,18)	'
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said in article in New York Times Magazine: “The challenge of space exploration and particularly of landing men on the moon represents the greatest challenge which has ever faced the human race. Even if there were no clear scientific or other arguments for proceeding with this task, the whole history of our civilization would still impel men toward the goal. In fact, the assembly of the scientific and military with these human arguments creates such an overwhelming case that it can be ignored only by those who are blind to the teachings of history, or who wish to suspend the development of civilization at its moment of greatest opportunity and drama.” (NYT Magazine, 4/21/63,12f)
jpl Deep Space Instrumentation Facility (dsif) at Gold-stone, Calif., succeeded in bouncing radar signals off planet Mercury 60,500,000 mi. from earth. Traveling at speed of light, signals took 11 min. to make trip from Goldstone to Mercury and back to Goldstone. Preliminary analysis of echo patterns indicated Mercury has rougher surface than Venus or Mars but same surface reflectivity as that of moon. Mercury experiment was to be conducted 12 hrs. per day May 6-29, at which time planet would move out of antenna’s range, (jpl twx, 5/29/63; Marshall Star, 6/5/63, 5)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) read into the Congressional Record an editorial from Life Magazine on priorities in the U.S. space program: “The United States needs a reasoned and balanced space program that is more than a series of jumpy reflexes to things Khrushchev may or may not be doing. The first priority is not the moon. It is the conquest of inner space (up to 500 miles high), the true military high ground from which our world can be photographed, weather surveyed, perhaps atom policed. Beyond that lie vast challenges in the quest for knowledge of space, where the moon is only one way station. The challenges must be met, the United States must be a space-faring nation; but at a rate and in an order set by our own capacity and deliberation.” (CR, 11/12/63, A7016)
Letter from Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden reporting on his recent visit to U.S.S.R. was inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.). Sir Bernard quoted M. V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, as saying U.S.S.R. had rejected, at least for present, any plans for a manned lunar landing, because of insurmountable problems of radiation in space. According to Sir Bernard, Keldysh said “that the manned project might be revived if progress in the next few years gave hope of a solution of their Sroblems, and that he believed the appropriate procedure would e to formulate the task on an international basis. He stated that the Academy believed that the time was now appropriate for scientists to formulate the task on an international basis (a) the reasons why it is desirable to engage in the manned lunar enterprise and (b) to draw up a list of scientific tasks which a man on the moon could deal with which could not be solved by instruments alone. The Academy regarded this initial step as the first and most vital in any plan for proceeding on an international basis . . . .” nasa Administrator James E. Webb’s reply to this letter also was inserted, in which he said:	“. . . With regard to space research and exploration, as you know, our present relationships with the Soviet Union have developed directly from the correspondence between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev on specific possibilities of cooperation in this field. Dr. Dryden’s discussions with Academician Blagonravov over the past year or so have followed within this framework. There is already a current agreement between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and nasa which represents the first fruit of these early efforts. “Accordingly, if the Soviet Academy is indeed interested in the matters you describe in your letter, we will look forward to the possibility of further explorations by Dr. Dryden and Academician Blagonravov as to their views and desires . . . .” (Letters, CR, 8/9/63, 13903)
Soviet scientist Anatoli A. Blagonravov said in Izvestia article that dual flights of Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich in August 1962 proved that, from a medical point of view, manned flight to the moon is now possible. Neither cosmonaut has shown physiological disturbances since the prolonged space flights, he said; flights proved man could avoid dangerous radiation and could work in outer space over long periods. Reviewing Cosmos series of 12 scientific satellites, to date, begun by Soviets in March 1962, Blagonravov said they could be considered a preliminary stage in creating “inhabited” satellites. (Av. Wk., 1/21/63,59)
Discussing the National Space Program before Iowa City Daily Press Association in Des Moines, nasa Associate Director of Plans and Program Evaluation Addison M. Rothrock said: “The prime objective of . . . [the manned space flight] program is to land men on the moon before the end of the decade. The scope covered by the program is much broader than this. It is in fact the research, development and operation of a series of research manned spacecraft that will determine for us man’s ability to operate in space. By focusing on the moon-landing we have set a goal that insures we develop all basic phases of the operation of manned spacecraft. I cannot emphasize this too strongly. “By the time our three astronauts leave for the moon-landing we as a nation will have accumulated 2000 flight hours in earth orbit of manned craft. To indicate to you the significance of this number—we have as of now less than five flight hours of manned aircraft at speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. ... In these 2000 hours we will have orbited the earth some 1300 times. Men will have gone to and from craft in orbit. We will have rendezvoused and inspected craft and transferred men and material between craft. We will have maneuvered the craft both in regards to the attitude of the craft as has been done with Mercury and the Orbiting Solar Observatory and in regards to changes in the flight path as has been done with Mariner II and Syncoms. These are the things that must be done and will be done in the development, operation, and functioning of manned craft in space. . . .” (Text)
Rescheduling of first manned Apollo flight—a three-man earthorbiting flight—from early 1965 to late 1965 or early 1966 reported by John W. Finney of New York Times. Unnamed nasa official attributed 9- to 11-month delay to technological difficulties inevitable in such a complex undertaking. (Finney, NYT. 9/1/63,1,27)
Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, chief Soviet space scientist, quoted as saying he “believes” that by 1968 there would be 100-ton space stations and an automatic scientific station on the moon. {Space Bus. Daily, 12/16/63, 400)
Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., awarded $9.5-million contract to develop two Apollo mission simulators for training astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and Cape Canaveral. Contract was awarded by North American Aviation, Inc., prime Apollo spacecraft contractors. {Av. Wk:., 5/6/63,25)
Lt. Gen. Leslie R. Groves (usa, Ret.), speaking at panel meeting (“Satellite Sanity—Lunar Lunacy”) of National Association of Manufacturers’ 68th Congress, criticized Project Apollo as a wasted effort, value of which would be only prestige. He charged the lunar landing program was too expensive and, if continued, would bankrupt the nation. nasa Administrator James E. Webb, attending the meeting, was invited by presiding officer Paul Bachman to the platform to answer General Groves. Mr. Webb defended values and costs of the national space program. In his remarks, Mr. Webb pointed out that the national debt ($300 billion) is only half of the annual gnp ($600 billion), so he didn’t think the country was bankrupt. He defended the use of manned instead of instrumented spacecraft and remarked, “I for one don’t think there is any doubt that man and his brain is superior to a machine.” Supporting Mr. Webb’s defense were panel members Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of Goddard Institute of Space Studies, and Walter L. Lingle, Jr., nasa Deputy Associate Administrator. (Halley, NYT, 12/7/63)
In address at a space exploration symposium at New York University, Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian, reviewed the birth of the space age and its first half decade. Referring to the impact of space exploration upon society, he said: “Space exploration—with all of its novelty and drama and future potential for society—continues to jar the intellect, stir the emotions, and stimulate actions among peoples everywhere .... Our children, of course, have no doubt whatever that man will soon set foot on the surface of the moon, and then the nearby planets; it is only a question of exactly how soon. The rest of us old folks, conditioned as we are to the scientific and technological realities of the recent past, have a little difficulty comprehending either the reality or the significance concerning the mobility or mankind in space today and tomorrow .... “To the historian, the closing of the present kindergarten era of astronautics, with its tender philosophy, offers the germ for a new renaissance in the mind and spirit of mankind. It could well be a renaissance for mankind as was sparked with the new geography of Columbus and Magellan and the new astronomy of Copernicus and Galileo which helped loosen Europe from the Dark Ages; or when the new biology of Darwin for the physical organism, the challenges of Marx and the new psychology of Bergson and Freud for the conscious man assisted the great intellectual stimulus of the late nineteenth century as well as the humanitarianism and the technological boom of the twentieth century . . . .” (Text; Airpower Historian, 1/64,6-10) November 1: Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory was dedicated by akpa and usaf in Arecibo, Puerto Rico. Largest radar-radio telescope of its kind in the world, aio is a l,000-ft.-diameter bowl constructed in a natural bowl formed by several mountain peaks. As a radiotelescope, it should detect radiation from galactic sources considerably more distant than any yet detected. As a radar, it would be the most sensitive instrument yet built for ionospheric research. Dr. Thomas Gold, head of the astronomy department of Cornell Univ., which built and would operate the new facility, predicted that it would help make clear “the grand architecture of the Universe.” (dod Release 1358-63; Schmeck, NYT, 11/2/63, 9)
Article by nasa scientists Dr. Homer E. Newell and Dr. Robert Jastrow in Atlantic Monthly inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Replying to scientists critical of pace set for landing men on the moon, the authors said: “This question requires a further exploration of the motives underlying the U.S. space effort. Is it primarily a scientific program, or is it motivated by a broader concern with the national interest ? Looking back to the overwhelming support given the new space program by the Congress in 1961, it seems clear that this support was not tendered for scientific reasons primarily, but came from a deep-seated conviction that the expanded program will make an important contribution to our future strength and security. We believe that this is the reason why the people have supported the enlarged space program. That brings us to the point on which we take issue with some of our scientific colleagues, who complain, ‘The scientific exploration of the moon has been accorded a secondary priority in the lunar program.’ This remark is based on the premise that science should have top priority in the space program. However, while science plays an important role in lunar exploration, it was never intended to be the primary Objective of that project. The impetus of the lunar project is derived from its place in the long-range U.S. program for the exploration of the solar system. The heart of that program is man in space, the extension of man’s control over his physical environment. The science and technology of space flight are ancillary developments which support the main thrust of manned exploration, while at the same time they bring valuable returns to our economy and our culture. The science which we do in space provides the equivalent of the gold and spices recovered from earlier voyages of exploration. It is the return to the taxpayer for his investment in his nation’s future. But the driving force of the program is not in scientific research alone, valuable though that may be in the long run. Thus, the pace of the program must be set, not by the measured patterns of scientific research, but by the need for a vigorous response to the national challenge . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/31/63, A4874-76)
Boilerplate Apollo capsule underwent eighth drop test of the 3-parachute landing system. At El Centro, Calif., U.S. Naval-Air Force Parachute Facility dropped the capsule from a C-133 transport aircraft from 13,000 ft. in a test of the parachute combination under low-altitude abort conditions, (msc Release 63-i78)	...
An msc operations team finished a study at Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., that indicated an astronaut could effect rendezvous in space using only his piloting skill and simple spacecraft radar. Although Apollo flight would have automatic guidance and navigation equipment and continuous assistance from ground tracking stations, developers of backup systems needed to know the minimum with which the astronaut could operate, (msc Release 63-238)
Air Force biomedical support of Projects Gemini and Apollo included: at School of Aerospace Med’cine. Brooks afb. Tex., studies of physiological effects of exposure to various atmospheric pressures and gases, special medical examinations of flight candidates, and thermal balance and water requirements for wearing the Apollo spacesuit; at Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, studies of effect on men of predicted impact velocities for Apollo landing, nutrient requirements, weightless orientation flights for astronauts, and thermal evaluation of prototype Gemini spacesuit; at Aeromedical Research Laboratory, Holloman afb, N.M., studies on effects of deceleration forces on Apollo pilots during recovery. (Space Bus. Daily. 10/18/63,108)	_
Three ruby-colored spots appeared on the surface of the moon on the night of Oct. 29, 1963, and might have been volcanic eruptions, Dr. John Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., announced. Hall said that James Greenacre found the spots while studying the moon through a 24-in. refracting telescope. The spots stood out against the yellow-white surface of the moon. Greenacre said that in three years of studying the moon’s surface he had never seen spots similar to these, although a Russian astronomer had reported sighting a similar phenomenon in Nov. 1958 or 1959. (upi, Ban Diego Union, 11/1/63; Christian Science Monitor, 11/2/63)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
In Barrow?s National Business and Financial Weekly, article entitled “Trackless Void: The U.S. Space Program Had Better Come Down to Earth”, said: “. . . Like Columbus, we have been told time and again, the United States today lives in an age of discoveiy. Like Columbus, the United States must got fail to seize its moment of greatness. “While popular and plausible, the comparison strikes Barron’s as unfortunate. To begin with, in contrast to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Columbus raised the funds for his epoch-making voyage at least partly from private sources. Far from setting out to discover America, moreover, the admiral and his financial backers merely sought to find a shorter—hence more profitable—route to the Indies; their primary aim was to make money, not history. Finally, though Washington has chosen to ignore the inconvenient fact, the conquest of the new world yielded Spain, after a short-lived fling at glory, four centuries of economic and political decay. “The parallel to Columbus can be pushed too far, not only by friends of the space program but also by its foes. Nonetheless, the lessons of the past, coupled with some contemporary widsom on the subject, underscore the need for a sweeping reappraisal of the current U.S. space program. For example, lawmakers now suspect that nasa’s skyrocketing budget (from which, according to the administration, not 1 cent can be cut without courting disaster) is designed to serve political as well as scientific ends. In turn, scientists, who know how to weigh alternatives, have grown increasingly skeptical of the overwhelming emphasis which Washington has placed upon landing a man on the moon. Thereby, they claim, the United States has ignored far less costly and more fruitful avenues of lunar exploration, while neglecting other promising ventures in space. The time has come, we submit, to ask ‘Is this trip necessary?’ ” (CR, 5/28/63, A3428-3429)
Choice of 5-psi, 100% oxygen environment for Apollo spacecraft was documented in Journal of Aerospace Medicine by Edward L. Michel, George B. Smith, Jr., and Richard S. Johnston of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. They said it ranks higher than 7-psi, 50/50 oxygen-nitrogen environment in weight, leakage rates, system simplicity, reliability, and decompression protection, lower in fire dysbarism and atelectasis protection. (M&R, 1/27/64, 27)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of aaas magazine Science, criticized in editorial the four justifications cited for manned lunar landing program: propaganda value of program had been “vastly overestimated”; possibility of military applications seemed “remote”; “technological fallout” would recover “not more than a small fraction of the cost of the moon program”; and scientific questions about the moon could be satisfied with unmanned, instrumented probes. If a scientist is not among the crewmen, “the alternative of exploration by electronic gear becomes exceedingly attractive. The cost of unmanned lunar vehicles is on the order of 1 percent of the cost of the manned variety; unmanned vehicles can be smaller and need not be returned. Most of the interesting questions concerning the moon can be studied by electronic devices .... Unmanned exploration could provide the basis for realistic design of manned landing craft, thus decreasing the total costs and increasing the chances of success. A reexamination of priorities is in order.” (Science, 4/19/63, in CR, 6/11/63)
President Kennedy, asked in press conference whether reports that U.S.S.R. was not striving for manned lunar landing would affect Project Apollo, said: “Well, in the first place, we don’t know whether the Russians are—what their plans may be. What we are interested in is what their capabilities are. While I have seen the statement of Mr. Lovell [July 16] about what he thinks the Russians are doing, his information is not final. Their capacity is substantial; there is every evidence that they are carrying on a major campaign and diverting greatly needed resources to their space effort. With that in mind, I think that we should continue. It may be that our assumption or the prediction . . . that they are not going to the moon might be wrong a year from now, and are we going to divert ourselves from our effort in an area where the Soviet Union has a lead, is making every effort to maintain that lead, in an area which could affect our National security as well as great peaceful development ? I think we ought to go right ahead with our own program and go to the moon before the end of this decade. “The point of the matter always has been not only of our excitement or interest in being on the moon, but the capacity to dominate space, which would be demonstrated by a moon flight. [This] I believe, is essential to the United States as a leading free world power. That is why I am interested in it and that is why I think we should continue, and I would be not diverted by a newspaper story.” Asked about the possibility of cooperating with U.S.S.R. in a joint lunar mission, he replied: “We have said before to the Soviet Union that we would be very interested in cooperation. As a matter of fact, finally, after a good many weeks of discussion, an agreement was worked out on an exchange of information with regard to weather, but we have never been able to go into more detail. The kind of cooperative effort which would be required for the Soviet Union and the United States together to go to the moon would require a breaking down of a good many barriers of suspicion and distrust and hostility which exist between the communist world and ourselves. “There is no evidence as yet that those barriers will come down, though quite obviously we would like to see them come down. Obviously, if the Soviet Union were an open society as we are that kind of cooperation could exist, and I would welcome it. I don’t see it as yet, unfortunately.” (Text. Wash. Post, 7/18/63)
Speaking on floor of Senate, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) advocated deployment of Nike-Zeus and development of more advanced antimissile missiles: “Imagine a world, treaty or no treaty, in which the Soviets had achieved a substantial lead in development of an anti-iCBM. Where then would be the sword and shield of peace ? What then would be the position of the Soviets to back their aggressions, and what would be our ability to stop them? “President Kennedy is fully confident that we can put a man on the moon—no mean feat—and is willing to spend $5 billion a year to do it ... . “I have talked enough to competent scientists and engineers who believe that a good anti-iCBM, capable of protecting the American people, would be no tougher task. But of course it would require an equal enthusiasm, money, and effort as our moon program does to accomplish. Hmv can we fail to apply anything less than our best efforts to produce it ? . . .” {CR, 8/13/63, 14043)
An editorial in the Washington Daily News supported the idea that a slower program would not save money in the long run. “. . . today the moon and space programs are in high gear and almost $5 billion in prime contracts have been placed with American industry. Plants are tooled up, scientists are on the job, research centers are going up and near Houston even a new city is being built. “We are inclined to agree with Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Director James Webb and others that a major slash in space funds at this stage would not save money in the long run because a stretched-out lunar landing program would come to an even greater total cost. Mr. Webb, for example, estimates an extra $3 billion for the additional overhead costs alone of a three-year stretch-out. “It was judged two years ago by the President and Congress to be in the national interest to place a man on the moon—and before the Russians, if possible. If the reasons were valid then, and we think they were, they are valid today.” (Text)
Study memorandum identifying U.S. “stamp lag” inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Frank E. Moss (D.-Utah). In the memo Frank Ballard, principal engineer of Sperry Utah Co., noted Communist bloc has issued at least 18 postage stamps identifying Soviet space successes, whereas U.S. has issued only two stamps associated with its space program, and these in limited editions. “. . . In the face of the existing world struggle, it is imperative, even urgent, that we utilize all available media of communication to advertise the forces of democracy. The U.S. ‘stamp lag’ is self-evident. We must engage in a vigorous program calculated for optimum utilization of the vast potentialities of the U.S. postage stamp. As a start, I should like to suggest a chronological documentation of the entire space program beginning with the suborbital flight through individual Mercury orbital flights. Gemini and Apollo . . . .” (Study Memorandum, CR, 9/25/63,17044-A5)
Questioned at nasa Budget Briefing about nasa’s substituting pickaback rendezvous target for Agena stage in Project Gemini flights, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans said: “That is definitely by the boards We did study that kind of possibility. We feel it is very important to have a program where there will be two separate launches. We will put up the Agena. . .” as target object in Gemini flights training astronauts for Project Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript)
nasa announced at msc the selection of 14 astronauts for the Gemini and Apollo projects, bringing the total number of NASA astronauts to 30. New astronauts were: Maj. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Capt. William A. Anders, Capt. Charles A. Bassett II, Capt. Michael Collins, Capt. Donn F. Eisele, Capt. Theodore C. Freeman, and Capt. David R. Scott, all usaf; Lt. Alan L. Bean, Lt. Eugene A. Ceman, Lt. Roger B. Chaffee, Lt. Cdr. Richard F. Gordon, Jr., all usn; Capt. Clifton C. Williams, Jr., usmc ; and R. Walter Cunningham and Russell L. Schweickart, civilians. nasa announced another contingent of astronauts would be named in the fall of 1965. (NYT, 10/19/63,9)
In letter to Speaker of the House, President Kennedy described his proposed program of U.S. supersonic transport development. “A successful supersonic transport can be an efficient, productive commercial vehicle which provides swift travel for the passenger and shows promise of developing a market which will prove profitable to the manufacturer and operator. “It will advance the frontiers of technical knowledge—not as a byproduct of military procurement, but in the pursuit of commercial objectives. “It will maintain the historic U.S. leadership in aircraft development. “It will enable this country to demonstrate the technological accomplishments which can be achieved under a democratic, free enterprise system. “Its manufacture and operation will expand our international trade. “It will strengthen the U.S. aircraft manufacturing industry— a valuable national asset—and provide employment to thousands of Americans . . . .” (Letter, CR, 6/17/63 10304) Jwne 14: nasa announced signing contract with AC Spark Plug Div. of General Motors to fabricate, assemble, and test navigation and guidance system for Apollo command module, (nasa Release 63136)
Administration reactions to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia would not attempt to land a man on the moon indicated strong reservations on Russian motivations. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Russian withdrawal announcement was “a very wise pronouncement. "Whether they planned to go to the moon or not, they have sensed some slackening of support for the moon program here and have made a strategic move to capitalize on this situation.” Another official said: “All during the moratorium on nuclear testing the Soviets secretly prepared for an intensive series of tests. How can we be certain that they won’t do the same thing in space?” (Wash. Post, 10/27/63)
Contract awarded to rca Services Company to create the sun’s intensity in two space environmental chambers. The largest chamber would measure 120 ft. high and 85 ft. in diameter; it would house the Apollo vehicle, consisting of command, service, and lunar excursion modules. The smaller chamber, measuring 85 ft. high and 65 ft. in diameter, would house the Apollo command module and provide the space environment for astronaut training. (Fact Sheet #96, msc)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
nasa announced it would negotiate with General Electric Co. for an extension of GE’s Project Apollo support effort to provide plant and test support services at nasa Mississippi Test Facility. Estimated cost of initial one-year contract was $1.5 million, (nasa Release 63-75)
First drop test of Project Apollo earth landing system successfully accomplished by Northrop Corp. for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft command module was released from modified C-133 cargo plane and safely landed by cluster of three Northrop Ventura ringsail parachutes, (msc Release 63- 85)
Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in address before Washington Day Banquet of Creve Coeur Club, Peoria, 111.: “For centuries men have gazed at the moon; have written poems and composed songs about it; have proposed to their ladies beneath it; and now they wish to stand upon it. To do this we must hurl men some quarter of a million miles through space to rendezvous with the moon, and then return these men to earth safely. This surely is a dear goal. All men know what it means when we say ‘leave the earth and go to the moon and return safely again to earth.’ A further parameter is also clearly defined and that is time. Our goal is to accomplish this mission within this decade . . . .” (Text)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said that spectacular “ ‘firsts’ in space are not truly accurate measurements of technical and scientific progress. The question of who is first in space will be decided by the total accomplishment and the total ability of each nation to sail this uncharted sea. Dramatic events, such as the first flight of a man in orbit, or the first landing on the moon, make up only a part of this assessment . . . .” Holmes was addressing Sidwell Friends School Forum, Washington, D.C. (Text)
nasa selected Boeing Co. for negotiation of incentive-type contract to build Lunar Orbiter spacecraft, contract expected to exceed $60 million. One of the five bidding firms, Boeing would provide probes that are three-axis stabilized, use Eastman Kodak-developed camera system, and rca power and communication subsystems. Five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft would be launched to take close-range photographs of lunar surface, as well as to measure such conditions as radiation and micrometeoroid density. Lunar Orbiter complements Ranger and Surveyor lunar probe projects, providing scientific data about the moon in preparation for Project Apollo manned lunar landing, (nasa Release 63-280)
Article in Soviet newspaper Pravda, reported in Missiles and Rockets, said the moon appears to be undergoing changes: During recent years, crater Linne has decreased to half its former size; crater Alhazen has disappeared; small craters have formed at bottom of Plato; and, at sunrise, greenish-gray spots periodically appear at bottom of some craters. Pravda said spots in bottom of crater Eratosthenes appear to some observers tobe moving. {M&R, 1/14/63, 23)
nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., speaking before the Chamber of Commerce, Albuquerque, N.M., said: “All of you saw the headlines saying, ‘Khrushchev Announces Withdrawal from Moon Race’ or words to that effect; but I wonder how many read the subsequent stories in which Khrushchev said his remarks had been misinterpreted, and that the Soviet Union intended to explore the moon as soon as this could be done with confidence of success.
Dr. Max Tishler, President of Merck, Sharp & Dohme Research Laboratories, received the 1963 Chemical Industry Medal of the American Section, Society of Chemical Industry, in Houston. In his acceptance speech Dr. Tishler discussed growth of Federal support of basic research, concluded: “Industrial research—once devoted exclusively to the promotion of economic growth—has become predominantly a Government-dominated institution for protecting the Nation’s security and exploring the solar system. “The question is being asked with increasing persistence whether we are devoting a disproportionate amount of our scientific and technical resources to the Government’s objectives. It has been pointed out that between 1954 and 1961 three-quarters of the increase in scientists and engineers engaged in research and development was absorbed by the defense and space programs, and that the programs on the drawing boards of these same agencies will require as many scientists during the next decade as all our institutions of higher learning will graduate during the same period .... How far and how long can this situation progress without damaging our country’s capacity to maintain its broad leadership in research ? “The Defense Department and the space agency have countered these concerns with predictions of spinoffs for the civilian economy from developments financed by them. So far, the evidence for this contention is unpersuasive. Whether or not the prophecy will come true does not alter the unrelenting fact that too little attention is being paid to the long-range effect on the civilian economy and to the manner in which we have been using tax money to divert our scarce scientific and technical resources into such crash projects as the race to the moon. Our Government has been prone to act as if these resources are either unlimited or can be expanded indefinitely by appropriating dollars. Neither proposition is correct . . . .” (Text, CR, 1/15/64, A143-145)
In column strongly supporting the U.S. space program, Roscoe Drummond stated that the United States “should not make the mistake of allowing Nikita Khrushchev to determine the size of the U.S. space program. This is a pitfall to be avoided at all costs .... “Naturally we must leave it to the concensus of the scientists and the technicians to decide whether the manned flight to the moon is the best way and the urgent next step to insure preeminence in outer space. The controlling and compelling objective is not a manned lunar landing on the moon for its own sake, but the achievement of mastery of the element of outer space for all that it will mean to the kind of earth we will inhabit for a long time to come.” (Wash. Post, 10/30/63)
Installation of new tracking system, Mistram (Missile Trajectory Measurement), on Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas, was announced. Mistram would provide more precise missile guidance and nose-cone impact data than presently possible on rockets fired from Cape Canaveral; it would provide accuracy required for controlling space rendezvous maneuvers in Project Gemini and for tracking return of Apollo lunar spacecraft. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
A technical services contract was awarded by the Manned Spacecraft Center to Lockheed Electronics Company to provide r&d support for Apollo. The contract involves vehicle instrumentation and communication systems to be used in the early flight phases of the program. ( msc Fact Sheet # 96)
In Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial, Robert Hotz said: “The current debate has done much to explain to the public and Congress the real aims of the space program, which are the development of a broad capability in space technology that eventually can be applied to whatever national purpose or need that may arise in the future. Gradually, the point that the manned lunar landing Apollo program is simply the best possible focal point for this effort in its present phase is emerging from the verbal pyrotechnics of the current debate. It is becoming more readily apparent that Apollo is not just an ‘over-Niagara-Falls-in-a-barrel’ type of dare-devil stunt, but a well-conceived program of broad exploration across the whole spectrum of space technology as we know it today. “The solid technical success of the Mercury program, particularly in the six- and 22-orbit flights of Cdr. Schirra and Maj. Cooper, has done much to make this point clear. It should be obvious now that Mercury, Gemini and Apollo spacecraft are really the Nina, Pinta and Santa Marias of space exploration, and are simply paving the way for whatever useful purposes this nation eventually decides to utilize space. . . .” {Av. Wk., 6/3/63, , ^ • •
Urging passage of $5.5 billion nasa FY 1964 authorization bill, Sen. Stuart Symington said: “It should be made clear that the United States is not committed to an all-out race, a crash program, so as to be first to the moon. “The moon is no finish line in a race. It is but a proving ground, where we will test and demonstrate that competence in space technology which our security should insure .... “[There is] a proper division of effort between military and civilian space programs, between space science and space technology, between current programs and advanced research in support of future programs, between the space program and other possibilities for substantial Federal contributions to research and development.” (AP, NYT, 8/9/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, speaking before American Editorial Cartoonists’ meeting in Washington, referred to complaints that excessive costs of Project Apollo and other U.S. efforts would “undermine the dollar .... But we are not told what would happen to the dollar—or to America—if space were defaulted to the Communist . . . .” “The question is which kind of philosophy, democratic or Communist, will dominate outer space ? “I, for one, don’t want to go to bed by the light of a Communist moon.” {Wash. Post, 5/12/63; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/12/63)
nasa was reported by Space Business Daily to be negotiating contract with Standard Oil Co. of Ohio for “a research investigation of a technique for abstracting information from non-cooperating objects in Earth-orbit.” (Space Bus. Daily, 3/6/63, 280) “The major problem remaining in the F-l engine program is the existence of the phenomenon known as combustion instability, which is characterized by pressure oscillations in the combustion gas inside the engine. Although combustion instability has developed in only seven of the 250 F-l firings in the last two years, even this small incidence cannot be tolerated. Consequently, we are placing major emphasis on solving this problem. The source of instability in liquid propellant engines has been the subject of considerable research, since most engines exhibit instability in the early stages of their development. . . . “We are confident that we will solve the instability problem on the F-l engine, just as it has been solved for all other liquid propellant engines in use, and we are confident that we can achieve the flight rating and delivery schedules. We are, however, giving this matter our closest attention and bringing to bear the knowledge and judgment of the most qualified experts in the United States. . . . In response to questions by Congressmen Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) and James G. Fulton (R.-Pa.), Mr. Holmes said that both Projects Gemini and Apollo slipped about five months because of the Administration’s refusal to request FY 1963 supplemental appropriations last fall. (Testimony; M&R, 3/18/63,10)
Political Committee of the U.N. General Assembly opened debate on report by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. 741-623 o—64Addressing the 111-nation Committee, U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson said President Johnson instructed him to reaffirm the proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in exploration of the moon that President Kennedy had offered last September. But, Stevenson continued, “If giant steps cannot be taken at once, we hope that shorter ones can. We believe there are areas of work, short of integrating the two national prorgams, from which all could benefit. We should explore the opportunities for practical cooperation, beginning with small steps and hopefully leading to larger ones.” Stressing that U.S. manned lunar program was only one part of the space program and that no more than 10 percent of the total U.S. space expenditure went directly for the lunar flight, he added: “Let me make clear that exploration of the moon is not a stunt, distinct from the outer-space program as a whole; nor is it the exclusive concern of only two nations. “Our policy of engaging in mutually beneficial and mutually supporting cooperation in outer space—with the Soviet Union as with all nations—does not begin or end with a manned moon landing. There is plenty of work yet to come before that—and there will be even more afterward.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/3/63, 1,14; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 12/3/63,1)
Robe	ix, president of Continental Airlines, speaking to an aviation group of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, proposed that the U.S. join with France and Great Britain to develop a mach 2.2 commerpial airliner and that at a later date those countries join the U.S. in developing a stainless-steel—titanium mach 3 airliner: “If our country can propose a joint effort with the Russians to reach the moon, we certainly should be able to entertain the idea of joint development of a supersonic transport with two of our best friends.” (Wall St. Journal, 10/2/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director, Marshall Space Flight Center, addressing Chamber of Commerce, Charleston, West Virginia, said : “In support of Project Apollo major manufacturing, testing, and launching facilities are now under construction. Years of construction, personnel buildup, and training for activation will be necessary before they can be put to use. If Project Apollo should be short-changed, these unfinished buildings would stand as monuments to America’s folly. You simply cannot turn a complex project like Apollo off and on like a faucet.” (Text)
Fifth anniversary of nasa. Ceremonies throughout the week included open house at Wallops Station, Va., Sept. 29 and 30; Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington; Project Mercury Summary Report Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex., Oct. 3 and 4; and nasa Fifth Anniversary Banquet in Washington Oct. 5. In its fifth year of space operations (October 1, 1962-October 1, 1963), nasa launched 12 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 10 were successful, 1 partially successful, and one unsuccessful. The X-15 rocket research aircraft set a new altitude record of 350,000 ft. and began its follow-on flights involving space research. The Mercury program added a 6-orbit flight and was concluded with a 22-orbit flight. Among other successful flights were four scientific satellites, two communications satellites, the first and second synchronous-orbit communications satellites, and another weather satellite. The fifth scientific lunar probe (ranger v) was unsuccessful and led to a reworking of the remaining Ranger probes. Project Apollo flight testing was begun. In its five years of space operations, nasa had launched a total of 68 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 39 were successful, 9 partially successful, ajid 20 unsuccessful, for an overall average of 2y2 successes for every failure. The rate of improvement ranged from 1 success per failure in 1958-59 and 1959-60, to 2 to 1 in 1960-61, to 5 to 1 in 1961-62, . to 12 to 1 in 1962-63.	(hhr-14)
In article on lasers in Pravda, V. Vyenikov wrote that “an auxiliary optical system can focus the laser beam in such a way that the diameter of its cross-section reaches values of 1 micron. This is approximately 60 times smaller than the thickness of a human hair. A similar beam, directed toward the Moon, illuminated on its surface a region less than 4 kilometers. This experiment proves that theoretically it is possible to transmit energy from Earth to future participants of lunar expeditions.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/9/63, afss-t Trans.)
Report that moon has porous surface consisting basically of silicon and aluminum oxides and that its core is very hot was made by team of Soviet radioastronomers at All Union Symposium of Radioastronomers in Gorki, U.S.S.R. (Komsomotskya Pravda, 3/8/63, eos Trans.)
Historian Arnold Toynbee, in Washington to address World Food Congress, said in news interview that U.S. and U.S.S.R. together controlled 80 per cent of world’s technical power but both nations were neglecting humanitarian applications. He cited the “moon race” as example of both nations’ “escapism” from basic problems of mankind. (Richmond News Leader, 6/12/63 )
In commencement address at Univ. of Pittsburgh, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “In the world you enter today, man is no longer rooted to terra firma, to his native land, or even to his city block, either in the literal sense or in his understanding of the powerful forces of the universe, of which he is such a minuscule part. Increasingly man comprehends that the new understanding and knowledge that are being unleashed by science and technology will alter his existence in more ways and more rapidly than he can possibly foresee .... “Forty years elapsed between the Wright brothers and the first supersonic flight. Only 10 years were required to reach 4,000 miles per hour in the X-15. Applying this knowledge, we now see a shrunken and bipolarized world, within which we can travel anywhere in a few hours, but cannot solve without force and violence man’s relation to man. And all of this was achieved using the atmosphere up to twice the height of mountains. “By the end of this decade, man will have stood on the moon and looked outward to the vast universe and beyond, and learned in the process vastly more about the earth itself . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/12/63, A3792)
msc officials said the Apollo Pad Abort Test No. 1, conducted at wsmr on Nov. 7,1963, appeared from data to have been successful in all respects and showed the aerodynamics of the Apollo escape system “to be just what we expected.” Liftoff and subsequent flight sequencing were within one second of program, (msc O\7________ ^ D ___7__ 11 /1 «»/£*»	1\ ir	x*.wivtujutof/? 11/ io/	A j
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) spoke on the space race: “Mr. Speaker, the announcement that the Soviet Union is withdrawing from the race to the moon has produced some disturbing reactions here in the United States. Here we have a breakdown in the Communist system. Here we have an opportunity to exert real leadership and show what a free econ _ . d vA/in 4" t r> /v 4" L n I UU 1 OVtitlllg UlOrO we abandon our efforts to explore the universe. I am perturbed. Why must we do something just because the Soviet Union does it? Why should we refuse to do something just because the Soviet Union refuses to do it?” (OR, 10/29/63, 19384) Addressing the Joint Meeting of Service Clubs, Bozeman, Montana, nasa Administrator James E. "Webb said: “To take a clear lead in rocket power, or even to match the larger rockets the Russians may be building now, we must cariy on with the development of the Saturn V. This giant rocket is needed to do extensive maneuvering in space near the earth and has the power to send the Apollo spacecraft on its journey to the moon and on prolonged flights in earth orbit. “The United States will inevitably need space power of this order even if we had no plans for going to the moon. We do not know now what future military requirements for rocket power may arise.” (Text) Project Gemini was running into serious problems in its onboard power systems, according to John Finney of the New Tork Times. The new fuel cell source for electric power was to have provided power for up to two weeks at only 1/6 to 1/10 the weight of batteries required to produce equal wattage. But fuel cell development has run into problems of leakage, inadequate lifetime, and poor thermal control. While such problems could probably be engineered out by the time fuel cells were needed for Apollo, the Gemini timetable might require batteries to be substituted for the fuel cells. This in turn might cut Gemini missions down to two days, nasa’s new Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller was said to favor beginning development of backup systems in some of the areas of new technology such as fuel cells but to be hampered in this approach by lack of money. (Finney, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
U.S. Geological Survey’s lunar mapping project, mapping 8.5 million sq. mi. of moon’s surface, was described in Washington Evening Star. Undertaken for nasa, project would provide basic geological information needed for placing instruments and men on the moon. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/63)
msc is experiencing an. increasing manpower shortage as it moves into high gear on Project Apollo, John Finney of the New York Times reported. Particularly scarce are top-flight engineers needed to oversee large systems and subsystems, msc hopes that its manpower ceiling will be raised this year from the present 3,500 to around 5,500. (Finney, NYT, 10/6/63, 71)
Tass announced lunik iv was 314,000 km. (194,494 mi.) from earth at 8:00 p.m. Moscow time and would pass close to the moon’s surface, indicating for the first time that the probe would not orbit or land.. Speculation was tbat lunik iv might havs bca-n planned to soft-land an instrument package on the moon. Tass said radio communication with the spacecraft was good and that onboard instruments were functioning normally. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/63; Pravda, 4/5/63, eos Trans.)
Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Aircraft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would bring back about 100-(earth)-pound sample of lunar terrain. {L.A. Times, 3/20/63)
nasa announced it would negotiate a contract with mit, AC Spark Plug Div. of GM, Raytheon Co., Kollsman Instrument Co., and Sperry Gyroscope Co., for the development, fabrication, and testing of the guidance and navigation system for the Lu,nar Excursion Module (lem) of the Apollo spacecraft. These same companies already are developing the guidance and navigation system for the Apollo command and service modules; the lem system would be as compatible as possible and have as many interchangeable parts as possible with the other systems, (nasa Release 63-234)
Charles W. Frick resigned as Apollo Project Manager at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center to accept a position with industry. msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth appointed Robert O. Piland as Acting Project Manager, (msc Release 63-72)
Missiles and Rockets reported nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was studying Mariner B and Voyager projects to determine if the Early January: Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa msfc, visiting West Berlin’s Technical University to receive honorary doctorate, said: “I am convinced personally that the Russians will not succeed in making a manned space flight to the moon and back before the Americans. The Russians now could send a man to the moon but that would be a one-way trip.” (Newport News Times-Herald, 1/12/63)
nasa officials testifying before a subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee offered sharply revised estimates on the cost of a manned lunar landing. Under questioning from senators, nasa Administrator James E. Webb agreed that nasa would spend much of the $20 billion normally stated as the cost of manned lunar exploration even if there were no program to land a man on the moon. When asked how much the manned lunar landing would cost over and above other space exploration, Mr. Webb estimated less than $3 billion, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., estimated $2 billion; nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George Mueller estimated $1 billion. Mr. Webb and Dr. Seamans had included the cost of unmanned investigation of the lunar surface, while Dr. Mueller was counting only the cost of the Lunar Excursion Module (lem). (NYT, 10/1*9/63, 1)
