Soviet news agency Tass said Soviet scientists had concluded the moon’s surface was a “loose porous substance” and the interior was solid rock. Conclusion was said to be based on study of radio waves from the moon. (AP, Wash Post, 3/12/64)	,
New York Times editorialized on the four-vote margin of the Senate defeat of Sen. Fulbright’s amendment to reduce FY 1965 Project Apollo funds by 10%.	“. . . The narrowness of the margin may be illustrated by the fact that if there had been abstentions by the Senators from even three of the states having direct economic interest in the most rapid prosecution of the moon race—say, California, Texas and Florida— Senator Fulbright’s amendment would have been adopted. . . [Senator Fulbright] lost his battle on the authorization bill, but he will have another chance when the bill actually appropriating the funds is considered. The new mood in Congress suggests that this battle may produce a decision to scrap the artificial 1970 deadline. . . {NYT, 6/30/64)
NASA’s ranger vii spacecraft was launched from Cape Kennedy on its flight to the moon. After an almost perfect countdown, Atlas-Agena launch vehicle boosted the 806-lb. spacecraft into a parking orbit around the earth, and then the Agena engines refired to place ranger vii on its trajectory to the moon. The spacecraft carried six television cameras designed to take and relay to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface. Flight to moon would take about 68 hours, with the pictures to be taken during the last 15 min. before craft impacted on the moon. The launching was so accurate that, even without the standard midcourse correction maneuver, ranger vii would hit the moon. However, scientists wanted pictures of the “Sea of Clouds” region and planned to execute midcourse correction to ensure impact and pictures in this area. (NYT, 7/29/64; nasa Release 64-176)
RCA announced it had received $22 million subcontract from Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for communications system to be used in Project Apollo lunar landing. The system would transmit continuous voice and telemetry data to earth, provide communications between the astronauts on the moon and Lunar Excursion Module (lem) and Apollo command module. (Phil. Eve. Bull.. 4/14/641
Rep. Peter W. Rodino (D.—N.J.) said on House floor: “. . . Hardly any problem seems beyond solution by our scientists and engineers. We marvel at our achievement of landing a vehicle on the moon, transmitting pictures of its progress to the very instant of impact. Yet, we are doing practically nothing to solve a major air safety problem, or, worse yet, to discover its cause. I refer to the increasingly serious jet age problem of clear air turbulence—CAT—a danger to every passenger flying commercial or military transport aircraft. . . . “Our scientific and industrial communities must be given adequate funds promptly to initiate work on the problem; and that can best be done through a coordinated research effort jointly undertaken by Government and private industry. . . . “Our failure to implement without delay a national effort to develop an effective cat detection and avoidance system may—in fact, probably will—cost the lives of many future air passengers. With every gain in air traffic, with every increase in aircraft speed, with every additional mile flown by every additional plane, the problem becomes more serious. . . .” He introduced into the Record an article on CAT by James A. Fusca in Space Aeronautics, August 1964. (CR, 8/19/64,19715-20)
Lunar photographs made by ranger VII and interpretations of their findings were discussed in Saturday Review by Science Editor John Lear: “The net sum of the evidence here recited is that the Congress and the people have been misled about the true significance of the Ranger VII mission. The pictures sent back home by the ingeniously constructed robot dragonfly contain no more assurance of the safety of a manned landing on the moon than existed before Ranger VII took off. On the contrary, one sure danger has been discovered that had not been suspected before. The apparent disappearance of the supposed danger of impenetrable dust is accompanied by the equal danger of a landing surface that may be as fragile as a tea biscuit. Ranger VII couldn’t possibly have seen what matters most of all when human expeditions of the moon are being weighed: the bearing strength of the lunar face. Given man’s present limited knowledge of soil physics, no photograph could tell whether the moon’s surface will hold a spaceboat or even a lone man. . . .” (SR, 9/5/64, 35-43)
Mockup of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) was shown to the press at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. after three days of design inspection by officials of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Objective of review was to establish design freeze on most areas of lem design. Under NASA contract, Grumman would build 9 lems for ground testing and 11 for flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/27/64, 7; M&R, 4/6/64, 26)
NASA announced that it had organized a moonwatch network to assist with development and operation of the “Moon Blink,” an instrument designed to verify and locate color on the lunar surface. When alerted by one of the stations, watchers at scattered distant points would train their telescopes on the moon to verify a sighting. Professional and amateur astronomers at some 35 stations linked by long-distance telephone were working with NASA to give volunteer assistance to the Moon Blink program. The instrument was being developed by NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology under contract with Trident Engineering Associates, Annapolis, Md., and consisted essentially of rotating color disks which would blink when red color showed on the moon. Although the instrument was being developed for detection of unusual coloration on all types of bodies orbiting in space, the moon’s surface was considered of particular interest since the red color could signify a source of gases and possibly of energy. Any source of energy would be significant to the NASA lunar landing program, (nasa Release 64-316)
Dr. Donald E. Hornig, scientific adviser to President Johnson, was quoted on the controversial MOL project and its possible merger with NASA’s Apollo: “mol is still under discussion, and the scope of it is still in a state of flux. The Air Force certainly has a role to play in space.” Sources inside the White House said Dr. Hornig was against full funding of the mol, for which project the Air Force wanted $175 million in FY1966.	(Av. Wk., 12/14/64,15)
Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Director of Lindheimer Astronomical Research Center and head of astronomy dept, of Northwestern Univ., Evanston, 111., said in an interview that remote control telescope on the moon was practical as well as desirable. Heart of lunar telescope would be image orthicon, comparable to picture tube in TV camera; signals would travel to the telescope and pictures would travel back to earth on laser beams. “. . . If you had a telescope on the moon, you could point it where you want to by remote control and the picture would go into an image orthicon to be flashed back to earth on the same laser beam that controls the moon telescope.” (Hughes, Chic. Trib., 2/19/64)
Three researchers from North American Aviation, Inc., stepped out of a rotating capsule after three days of rotation and one with the capsule at rest. The capsule, about twice the size of an Apollo capsule, was on the end of a 23-ft.-radius arm which traveled at a rate of five rotations per minute, producing a g force of 1.08. The test was preliminary to more extensive ones intended to study living and working conditions in a manned orbital laboratory. While in rotation, the researchers shot darts, maneuvered on a teeter-totter, worked puzzles and mathematical problems. Conclusion was that by end of second day, performance was back to normal, (naa s&id Skywriter, 6/12/64, 2)
President Johnson sent $97.9 billion FT 1965 budget to Congress. Of space research and technology, he said: “Our plan to place a man on the moon in this decade remains unchanged. It is an ambitious and important goal. In addition to providing great scientific benefits, it will demonstrate that our capability in space is second to no other nation’s. However, it is clear that no matter how brilliant our scientists and engineers, how farsighted our planners and managers or how frugal our administrators and contracting personnel, we cannot reach this goal without sufficient funds. There is no second-class ticket to space. “Appropriations enacted for 1964 for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration were $6008 million below the amount requested. As a result, major development programs leading to the manned lunar landing have fallen behind schedule. Careful replanning of the entire program, including a reduction in the number of test flights, will offset some of this delay. Even so, more funds are needed in 1964, and I am therefore recommending a supplemental appropriation of $141 million for this year. “For 1965,1 am requesting appropriations of $5.3 billion, $63 million above the 1964 amount, including the proposed supplemental appropriation. The 1964 and 1965 recommendations represent the minimum amount needed to achieve our goals in space. The estimated increase of $590 million in expenditures in 1965 is due principally to payments required by commitments made in 1964 and earlier years. With the leveling off of appropriations, annual outlays should remain relatively stable in subsequent years. “In addition to the manned space flight program, though related to it, funds are included to support unmanned space flights for lunar exploration and supporting research and development. Funds are also included for scientific satellites, planetary probes, and experiments with meteorological and communications satellites. “The programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are designed to maintain American supremacy in space and to demonstrate this supremacy by achieving a manned landing on the moon in this decade. . . . “The level of activity in support of the 3-man Apollo lunar spacecraft development program will reach its peak during 1965 with 13 flight spacecraft in production by the end of the year. The Saturn V rocket program will be proceeding rapidly along its development cycle in preparation for launching the Apollo spacecraft, and will account for about $850 million of the estimated 1965 expenditures. . . (Text, NYT, 1/22/64119-21)
Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, said that U.S. would land men on the moon before Dec. 31, 1969. He stated that in his judgment “we have a much better than even chance” of landing the first two astronauts on the lunar surface ahead of the 1970 deadline set by the late President Kennedy, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/6/64)
C. A. Syvertson and David H. Dennis of NASA Ames Research Center, in paper for AIAA first annual meeting, reviewed problems of atmospheric entry, atmospheric exit, and atmospheric cruise, suggesting that “future vehicles in each of these areas will differ significantly from their current-day counterparts. For example, entry vehicles for use in the interplanetary missions which may follow the lunar mission will enter the Earth’s atmosphere at speeds up to twice that of Apollo. At these speeds, radiative heating predominates and dictates the use of more slender configurations than the very blunt Apollo. The interplanetary entry vehicles will also require very precise guidance and control both when approaching the Earth and when flying within the atmosphere. ... “For cruise aircraft that follow the supersonic transports, the most characteristic feature will be the probable use of hydrogen fuel. This high-energy fuel provides excellent payload and range capabilities for transports flying up to about twice the speed of the supersonic transport. The low density of the fuel results in aircraft with very large fuselages which may be twice the size of current-day subsonic jet transports.” (Text)
In a report to the Atomic Industrial Forum, Frank Deluzio, staff director of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, called for increased funds for Kiwi and Nerva and also urged that the suspended Rift nuclear rocket program be reactivated. He suggested that studies be begun to substitute a nuclear reactor for the chemical engines in the giant Saturn V rocket. “While it is admitted that nuclear propulsion comes into its own in the large scale manned missions to the planets,” Deluzio said, “. . . nuclear stages should be committed to earlier programs, such, as lunar landings late in the Apollo program. The integration of a nuclear stage with the Saturn launch vehicle should be done at the earliest possible moment so that proper experience and confidence can be obtained . . . This will increase the utility of the Saturn for a great number of years; it means a high return to the nation for its investment in the Saturn, its ground support, related systems, and industrial capabilities.” Deluzio also urged that nuclear rocket development remain the province of aec. (McHugh, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 12/21/64)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft was mated to Saturn I SA—6 at Cape Kennedy in preparation for flight later this spring. (Marshall Star, 4/8/64, 1)
National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh said on “From the People” radio program that U.S. has “at least a 50-50 chance of getting to the moon ahead of [U.S.S.R.]. . . . I’m talking about landing on the moon and taking off from the moon and returning safely to earth. , I’m not talking about a [circumlunar] shot around the moon which they might be able to do even with this [present] equipment.” Discussing Soviet’s threeman VOSKHOD I space flight, he said the fact that the cosmonauts did not wear spacesuits was “probably one of the most significant aspects of the whole flight.” (AP, Houston Post, 10/19/64)
usn launched Polaris A—3 missile from land site at Cape Kennedy in successful flight test down AMR. This was 14th success in 23 land launches of the A-3.	(M&R, 1/13/64, 10) First Week in January: NASA lifted hiring freeze on about six manned space flight projects, including Apollo work at North American Aviation, Inc. (L.A. Times, Miami Herald, 1/10/64; naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
NASA Director of Manned Lunar Mission Studies Thomas C. Evans discussed at aas meeting the systems that might be used for post-Apollo exploration of the moon. The concepts, making maximum use of the investment in Saturn and Apollo, included: Apollo itself, with separate missions to each point of interest; Apollo supplemented with Stay Time Extension Module (stem) , with increased payload capacity developed in Apollo system to transport “saddle bags” of supplies or surface equipment attached to outside of lem; Apollo supplemented with Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) , with two flights—one to transport two astronauts, the other to deliver support equipment and supplies probably including lunar surface vehicle; and, Apollo supplemented with Lunar Exploration System for Apollo (lesa), with 2-3 flights and payload to include shelter-laboratory and roving vehicle. (Text)
New York Times editorialized that delay of the 1969 target date for Project Apollo “may increase the chance that the project of landing a man on the moon will become an international effort, mobilizing all the resources of world technology. That certainly would be most appropriate for man’s first landing in the cosmos beyond this tiny planet.” (NYT, 1/17/64, 42)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D.—Mo.) speaking before the Annual Meeting of the Cape Girardeau, Mo., Chamber of Commerce, said: “Our policies are peaceful in nature, and our space program is peaceful in purpose and content; but it is also a sound investment for our future national security, economic as well as military. . . . “Landings on the moon will add to our knowledge of the origin of the universe, and also contribute to our knowledge of the broad spectrum of science and technology in such areas as meteorology and communications . . . “But the lunar project is not the whole space program; and the military significance of the program cannot be judged by examining that project alone; nor can anyone today estimate the great wealth and resources that will flow from this new knowledge. Knowledge is, and will be, the basic power of modern states. “Moreover, the Defense Department is now deeply engaged in the space effort . . . “The true defense value of the lunar project rests with the development of our over-all space capabilities; and no one can say today how this stockpile of knowledge will be used in the defense of this Nation or how important it will be. . . .” (Text)
Dynatronics, Inc., Orlando, Fla., was selected by NASA to negotiate an estimated $3.5-million contract award for design, manufacture, and on-site engineering support of 19 pulse code modulation (pcm) systems in NASA’s worldwide Apollo Manned Space Flight Network, with options for additional systems. (NASA Release 64-319)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong addressed Aerospace Workshop at Drake Univ.: “We don’t feel at this time it is particularly important whether an astronaut is masculine or feminine. Astronauts are picked on the basis of experience and training. At present there are no women with the proper qualifications available. Some day we will have qualified women and I’m sure they’ll be included in the program.” (Des Moines Register, 7/11/64)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $9.2 million increase to contract with North American Aviation, Inc., calling for construction at Downey, Calif., of seven new buildings and modifications to existing structures to permit expansion of naa’s research and development. Naa is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module under contract signed with msc Aug. 14, 1963. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 1/24/64)	_
Analysis of findings by Stratoscope II balloon-astronomy investigation last November was announced by National Science Foundation and Princeton Univ. astronomers. Dr. Martin Schwarzschild, director of Project Stratoscope II, reviewed first findings of the telescope and instrument package carried aloft by balloon. Studies of the moon showed lunar surface material reflected more solar light in the infrared band than in the visible spectrum. Other findings included confirmation that water vapor exists near red giant stars—for example, there is “about as much water vapor above one square mile of Mira as there is above one square mile of Earth.” {NYT, 6/28/64, 56; Burkett, Houston Chron., 6/28/64)
In speech accepting Republican nomination for President, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater said: “I can see, and I suggest all thoughtful men must contemplate, the flowering of an Atlantic civilization, the whole world of Europe reunified and free, trading openly across its borders, communicating openly across the world. “This is a goal far, far more meaningful than a moon shot. . . (Text, NYT, 7/17/64, A10)
Appointment of Brig. Gen. David M. Jones (usaf) as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Dec. 15, was announced by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller. Gen. Jones would be primarily concerned with major development problems in Gemini and Apollo programs, planning for advanced missions and all mission operations. His most recent assignment had been as Deputy Chief of Staff (Systems), AFSC. (NASA Release 64-277)
General Dynamics/Convair shipped Little Joe II booster to White Sands Missile Range, where it would be used later this year to launch Apollo boilerplate spacecraft in test of the launch escape system, (msc Roundup, 2/19/64, 1)
Article in U.S. News & World Report assessing impact of Project Apollo on U.S. industry quoted unnamed U.S. space official: “ ‘Project Apollo is the biggest single job in history. In terms of manpower used, it dwarfs the building of the pyramids 'by three times. It is five times greater in cost than the wartime crash program to build the first atomic bomb.’ “Over-all price tag on moon exploration in this decade is 20 billion dollars. Ten billion of that has been spent—or will be spent—on preliminary programs such as Projects Mercury and Gemini and for new facilities, Government payrolls, tracking stations, communications. . . . “At a time when Pentagon spending on missiles and rockets is going down, higher spending by . . . [nasa] comes as a shot in the arm to thousands of firms. . . . “Apollo is now entering a critical phase, one entrusted almost solely to U.S. industry. At the peak of the industrial pyramid are four major aerospace firms, supported by 66 other major companies holding NASA contracts of more than half a million dollars each. . . . “What is bound to impress anyone is how the big companies have been pulled together on this vast project. ... To people in industry, working together in peacetime on a ‘national goal’ is new and satisfying. Explains one official: ‘The amazing thing is that industry is finding that space is not only good business—but it is a real adventure for us, too.’ ” (U.S. News, 10/5/64)
Successful test of Apollo escape system was conducted at White Sands Missile Range by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft (command and service modules) was mounted on Little Joe II. At altitude of 17,000 ft. the Little Joe II was exploded. Instantly the rockets in the escape tower ignited and propelled the Apollo command module away from the exploding booster—to maximum altitude of 24,000 ft.; then the escape tower was jettisoned automatically. Drogue parachute opened from nose to stabilize the spacecraft as it descended. Then at about 7,500 ft. three large parachutes were deployed from the nose. First chute broke loose from the spacecraft, but the spacecraft landed safely with two chutes at speed of about 30 fps. The 7l/>-min. test was termed successful, with all objectives achieved, (nasa Release 64-108; Freelander, Houston Post, 5/14/64; Witkin, NYT, 5/14/64,18)
RANGER VII successfully completed its historic mission of taking and relaying to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface. The spacecraft sent back 4,316 high-quality photographs of the moon before it crashed on the surface of the moon in an area northwest of the Sea of Clouds. All six cameras aboard the spacecraft worked properly, sending back photographs of the moon that improved the resolution of lunar detail as seen from the earth by a factor of 1,000. The closest pictures were snapped 2.3 sec. before impact, at 10.7° south latitude and 20.7° longitude, 68 hrs. and 36 min. after takeoff. At news conference on preliminary results from RANGER vii, held at JPL, principal experimenter Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory described sampling of the lunar photographs as they were shown to the public. In reply to a question, he said: “.. . the thing that struck me most was that the Moon, the region of the Moon, the dimensions which we have been able to observe ... this range, tremendous range of new knowledge has not resulted in any totally unforeseen problems_____ “The Moon has shown—the records show a continuity of features from the large craters observable with telescopes down to smaller sizes. “Think that the rounded features of the large numbers of secondary craters is new. Also their large number is new. . . . “It is also clear that primary craters exist, little pits which have very much the same shape. . . . They are smaller, but the shape, the form, is the same as the bigger craters. . . . “There are some ridges shown. These ridges in the maria are rather of the same nature, of the same shape, sort or form, as the larger ridges. “So I would say, in summing up, that the new region of knowledge is in a true sense an extension of the earlier knowledge. I think it shows that the craters continue to occur down to sizes of about three feet in diameter, about one foot depth. “This clearly implies that we are not dealing here with enormous layers of dust, of very, loose dust, that is, very loose material, where one would not expect any small features to be visible at all. It is not like sand, in other words.. , . “This is a great day for science, and this is a great day for the United States. . . . the amount of information that has been gained about the lunar surface is truly remarkable.” (nasa Transcripts)
NASA announced selection of RCA Missile and Surface Radar Div. for negotiations to procure C-band radars for support of Project Apollo. These radars would be part of instrumentation on the tracking ships being designed and built as joint dod-nasa effort, (nasa Release 64-107)
Theory that moon’s surface resembled cotton candy and was only about 19% solid was expounded by David D. Cudaback of Univ. of California’s radio astronomy laboratory at Berkeley. Based on his four years of research with microwaves from the moon, Dr. Cudahack said moon had highly porous surface extending down to a depth of “at least” nine or 10 ft., and “very possibly” deeper. He said only one other American scientist had obtained the same figures on high porosity, but that “quite a few Russians” had produced findings similar to his own. (Justice, Houston Post, 6/25/64)
Army Map Service announced completion of its topographic study of the moon. Prepared under agreement with NASA, the lunar map was the most complete ever made, the first to show variations in heights over all the visible surface of the moon. Map covered area of about 8,000,000 sq. mi., and more than 5,000 surface features were identified by name. The topographers established that the moon’s highest peaks reach about 35,000 ft. above its lowest points—making the lunar mountains about 6,000 ft. higher than Mt. Everest, (nyht, Wash. Post, 6/24/64; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/24/64)
James E. Webh, NASA Administrator, and Allen Fairhall, Australian Minister for Supply, announced jointly that a tracking station to support the Apollo manned lunar flight would be established near Canberra, Australia, as a part of the worldwide unified S-band Apollo tracking network. The station would be equipped with an 85-ft. diameter parabolic reflector antenna to support the lunar phases of Apollo missions. (NASA Release 64-290)
Saturn I SA-6 satellite, consisting of boilerplate Apollo spacecraft and S-IV second stage of the Saturn I vehicle, re-entered earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated over the Western Pacific Ocean about 8:30 p.m. edt, during its 50th orbit of the earth, (nasa Release 64-130)
Australian scientist Victor Albert Bailey speculated that moon may possess far-reaching electrostatic field, which could have been responsible for ranger VI camera failure by interfering with switches for the cameras. {SBD, 2/7/64,207)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Professional Group on Antennas and Propagation of the ieee, Kennedy Airport International Hotel: “In the development of national [space] capability, nasa is carrying forward the work begun a half-century ago by its predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Like the naca, the space agency is concentrating its efforts on research and development. The only important difference is that NASA also carries out operations in space and, in so doing, develops methods of operation as well as the needed technology. . . . “The facilities, manpower, flight hardware, and experience being created in the Apollo program will serve the country long after the program itself has been completed. In fact, fully 90 percent of the work now in progress in Apollo would be done to create space power even if there were no moon and our efforts in manned space flight had an entirely different goal. “It may be compared with the Paris objective of Lindbergh’s flight. His primary purpose was not to reach Paris but to develop and demonstrate the capability of transatlantic flight. . . .” (Text)
Boeing study of post-Apollo manned lunar bases for NASA was basis for lesa concept (lunar exploration system for Apollo), lesa provided that a 25,000-lb. module would be soft-landed on the moon by a Saturn V launch vehicle. Three crewmen would follow by means of Saturn V/Apollo. The module would have 3,000 cu. ft. volume and could support three men for 90 days on the moon. Boeing’s lunar base was expandable simply by adding more of the basic shelter modules, and longer visits by larger crews could be made with larger lunar bases. (M&R, 3/16/64, 26-27)
Apollo spacecraft boilerplate command module and related equipment for first full-scale test flight of Apollo launch escape system arrived at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., where it would be flight-tested with Little Joe II booster, (msc Release 64-39)	•
Interviewed in Data, Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., replied to question about “all-up” concept of testing in the Apollo program. “The general test policy requires that all-up testing will be the basic approach to the flight test program. This requires that where practicable, all flights will be scheduled as complete space vehicles using all live stages and as much of the lunar mission flight hardware as can be made available. This policy results from the recognition that true operational suitability of the flight hardware can only be obtained by operating the systems in the space environment and that the total number of development flights and total elapsed time can be reduced by making all flights as fully representative of the operational configuration as possible.” {Data, 10/64,7-13)
Project Amos, arpa project to develop and operate full-scale infrared astronomical observatory, was described by Howard Simons in the Washington Post. To be installed on 10,000-ft.-high Mt. Haleakala on Hawaiian Island of Maui, the observatory would be used in twofold program: research in locating and identifying missile nose cones and satellites; and study of infrared characteristics of missiles and satellites as well as earth’s atmosphere, the sun, stars, moon, and planets. (Simons, Wash. Post, 2/9/64, E3)
Scientists at AF Cambridge Research Laboratories discovered definite relationship between phases of moon and cloudiness around the earth, oar announced. Statistics covering 21,184 days from 1905 to 1962 indicated sunshine was slightly below seasonal averages for a few days following each new moon and slightly above average between last quarter and the new moon. (S.F. Chronicle, 8/17/64; SBD, 8/18/64, 241)
usaf and usn astronomers planned special telescopic observation of the moon on June 4 and 5 in an attempt to identify the mysterious red spots first observed by Sir William Herschel in 1738. The spots, located in the crater Aristarchus, were observed in October 1963 by astronomer J. C. Greenacre from the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz. They indicate the possibility of volcanos below its barren surface. (Ubel, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/4/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at the National Editorial Writers’ Conference in Cocoa Beach, Fla., said: “The Apollo development schedule is conservative. The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a time scale four years longer than the Mercury spacecraft, two years longer than the B-58 bomber, and one year longer than the X-15.” (Text)
George Low, recently appointed Deputy Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said in Houston that failure of ranger vi lunar TV probe was “a grave disappointment.” Despite Ranger failure, target date for manned lunar landing was still 1969, he said, but “we certainly can’t guarantee there won’t be technical difficulties that won’t let us do it. . . . If we have to use the Apollo as an unmanned reconnaissance craft our small margin [of time] will be eaten up.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
Federal investigators and an attorney from the NLRB were dispatched to Cape Kennedy to seek a solution to labor troubles which halted work on America’s programs for landing on the moon and for orbiting a manned space laboratory. An estimated 80% of workers on the Vertical Assembly Building for Project Apollo and the launch complex for the usaf’s Titan III refused to cross picket lines thrown up by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees in protest to use of a Government-owned railroad spur which had been operated since Jan. 23, 1963, by nonunion personnel. Cost of the projects affected by the work halt was estimated at $215 million. (Chic. Trib., 6/9/64; Balt. Sun, 6/9/64)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) called for 10% cut in NASA’s Apollo FY 1965 budget, in statement submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee. He stated 1970 Apollo goal had already been missed, so that cut in funds would have no serious effect, and that NASA’s past estimates of costs and time were not reliable, so that little confidence could be placed in NASA’s meeting its 1970 deadline. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President, in which he laid down his views on the form the U.S. space program should take, appeared in Science and Mechanics: “The concept that speeding men to the moon is the same as jockeying trotters over a muddy track must be abandoned, regardless of Kremlin propaganda. The idea that we can cooperate with the Russians to do the job quicker and cheaper is too ludicrous for comment. We are spending entirely too much money on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted program using unmanned lunar landing equipment could steadily build up a solid body of scientific knowledge about the lunar environment that would increase the safety factor for astronauts much later. Automatic landing equipment could be designed at minimum cost. The program should expand in easy steps, each one leading to the next. The billions of dollars thus saved could be profitably invested in other aspects of space research.”	, Speaking of the military role in space, he said: “All manned space research should be directed by the military, with national security and control of the access to space as primary goals. The threat from space now and in the foreseeable future is from spatial regions within a thousand miles of Earth and not from lunar distances. Routine daily surveillance of these regions must be established, and the additional capabilities of positive identification, interception, and destruction of hostile enemy space vehicles will be necessary. This would be the greatest deterrent to an enemy’s military space aspirations. It would also give us the means of developing experienced space pilots, scientific and technological methods, and new scientific knowledge which could be used later in sending men to the moon and the planets. The hardware, on a routinely reliable basis, would be available ofi-the-shelf. “It might be added that almost every successful NASA launch to date, manned and unmanned, has been made with military support—with missile rocket-boosters, launch facilities, technical know-how, communications (including air transport of boosters) or safety procedures—or with all five. . . . “Finally, I believe that an immediate initial step of any effective military space program must be a manned station in near orbit about the Earth, with necessary support equipment. . . .” Senator Goldwater also stated that in his opinion there was the need for two crash programs in space research. The first would develop the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, and the second would develop the potentiality of lasers for use as military weapons. (Science and Mechanics, 6/64; Wash. Post, 7/21/64) During June: France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aero-spatiales (ONERA) revealed it had successfully flight-tested hybrid rocket engine in a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility on the lie du Levant in the Mediterranean Sea. Engine employed combination of liquid nitric acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel. (Av. WL, 6/29/64, 24)
Developmental spacecraft landing rockets were tested using a Gemini boilerplate. Spacecraft was dropped from a C-119 aircraft at 7,000ft. altitude. Two 12,000-lb .-thrust rockets were fired simultaneously when the spacecraft was ten ft. above the water with burn time one and one half sec. Landing speed of the craft was slowed from 27 fps to about nine to 10 fps; normal g-force of seven to eight g’s was reduced to approximately two and one half g’s on impact. A controllable parachute steered by radio commands from a NASA ship lowered the spacecraft into the waters of Trinity Bay, Tex. The landing rockets were not a definite part of either the Gemini or Apollo programs, (msc Roundup,12/23/64,7)
Temperature on planet Jupiter was reported to be higher than previously thought. Geology-astronomy team at Cal Tech that studied the planet with heat-sensitive detector fitted to 200-in. telescope on Mt. Palomar found sunlit atmosphere of Jupiter averaged 230 degrees below zero F. But in shadow cast by one of its moons—Ganymede—temperature jumped to minus 117 degrees. Dr. Bruce C. Murray, associate professor of planetary sciences, and Dr. Robert L. Wildey, research fellow in astronomy and geology, gave two possible explanations for the unexpected rise in temperature: “Perhaps in sunlight the atmosphere is photochemically stable, and the shadow removes the stability. Then the atmosphere may start to break down into more transparent material, permitting the heat detector to observe much deeper into the atmosphere where temperatures are higher. Another possibility is that a breakdown of the shaded atmosphere may result in an upwelling from deeper, warmer zones of the atmosphere.” Study also showed that another of Jupiter’s moons—Callisto—radiated twice as much heat as a normal moon would be expected to do. (Dighton, AP, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (usaf), Commander of National Range Div., presented to Aviation/Space Writers Association meeting at Patrick AFB, Fla., a “status report” on newly organized nrd: “The activation of the NRD and the renaming of its organizations has already been well publicized.- Basically we have brought the old Atlantic Missile Range and the icbm and satellite test range portion of the Navy’s Pacific Missile Range under single management. Additionally, my job as the DOD representative in support of nasa’s Projects Gemini and Apollo has moved with me to the- new organization. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-61)
NASA Flight Research Center formally accepted from Bell Aero-systems Co. the first of two Lunar Landing Research Vehicles (llrv), to be used in extensive flight research program conducted by frc in support of Project Apollo. The program would investigate possible operational and piloting problems that might occur during final phase of manned lunar landing and initial phase of lunar takeoff, (frc Release 5-64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed Lunar Orbiter in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1963, die Lunar Orbiter was defined and a contractor selected. This program will move into high gear this year and will require $49.3 million in Fiscal Year 1965 to meet its targeted first launch in 1966. This will be a tight schedule but because of the importance of this mission in support of Apollo, every effort will be made to meet that date. . . .” Questioned by Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), Dr. Newell said NASA was thinking about adding five Lunar Orbiters to the five already approved. The proposed increase was because the Lunar Orbiter “will be a most important spacecraft not only for the support of the manned lunar landing effort, But for continuing research on the moon, on its geodetic properties, and experiments on radioactivity of the lunar surface.” Of the recently orbited echo ii passive communications satellite, Dr. Newell said: “The echo n has shown some scintillation in tfye radio wavelengths which might indicate that it has some defect in shape—perhaps a tear, maybe a dent, or something of that sort. However, it shows no such scintillation on the optical observations, which is puzzling. It remains, however, a completely adequate reflector so that whatever distortion in shape may have occurred has not interfered with its usefulness.” (Transcript)
Paul G. Johnson, of the AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, said in an article in Astronautics and Aeronautics that solid-core nuclear rockets would power the next generation of manned space vehicles. “The exact way in which nuclear rockets will he used in the space program will depend on many factors other than payload comparisons. One of the primary influences will he the relative emphasis placed on manned operations in earth orbit, on the moon, and to the near planets. An equally strong influence will be the experience in the nuclear-rocket development program, which will indicate the possible characteristics and availability dates of propulsion systems.” (A&A, 12/64, 22-28) During December: In the British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight, Brian J. Ford suggested that the first men on the moon might be imperiled by the residue of an electric charge which he said formed its craters. Mr. Ford proposed the theory that the moon’s craters were caused by a gigantic electrical discharge when the earth and moon were still hot and close together, and said that he had reproduced the theoretical conditions in miniature in a laboratory. He had found that electrical discharge created craters which showed the characteristic central peak of a lunar crater and formed other corroborating detail. He suggested that the moon might still carry an electrostatic charge from this original discharge which “might seriously imperil” the first men to land there, (upi, Chic. Trib., 12/28/64)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft with attached burned-out Saturn S-IV stage, launched into intentionally low orbit Sept. 18 by Saturn I SA-7, re-entered earth’s atmosphere over the Indian Ocean. The orbiting package was in its 59th orbit and had been in flight for three days, 19 hrs., 37 min. (nasa Release 64-250)
msc announced issuing requests for proposals for six-month study of how astronaut on the moon could conduct selenodetic measurements (lunar surface surveys), making maximum use of scientific equipment already planned for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module and Command Module. Proposals for the study were due March 5. (msc Release 64-457)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued a statement related to his letter to President Johnson [See Dec. 7, 1964] in which he had proposed a merger of the Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs: “Department of Defense and NASA officials have informed me of an agreement they have worked out in relation to the Air Force’s proposed Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the space administration’s proposed Apollo-X. “The Department of Defense and NASA have gone a long way toward answering the questions I raised several weeks ago. I suggested at that time that perhaps a great savings could be achieved without sacrifice to either the NASA or Air Force responsibilities in space by harmonizing mol and Apollo-X. I have been told that the Air Force and NASA will take advantage of each other’s technology and hardware development with all efforts directed at achievement of a true space laboratory as an end goal. The review underway by both agencies will strengthen the total space effort. “We should take full advantage of the technology and ground-support systems developed for Project Apollo. The object of the Senate Space Committee in raising questions about mol and Apollo-X was to accomplish the wisest use of personnel and money, not in criticism of either project.” New York Times reporter John Finney interpreted Sen. Anderson’s statement as an indication that the Administration “had gone along with his [Sen. Anderson’s] suggestions. Not lost upon the Administration was the letter’s implication that it would be difficult to defend the proposed $5.2 billion space budget on Capitol Hill unless the Administration could show it had eliminated duplication.” (Text; Finney, NYT, 12/20/64,45)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed World Affairs Council of Northern California, in San Francisco, discussed national and international aspects of the U.S. space program: “The competition is tough. The U.S.S.R. has the ability to concentrate its efforts without public debate and without the regard for individual freedom of choice or living standards which enjoy high priority in our own country. But it does not follow that our own space effort should be similarly concentrated. The implications of space are broad, broader than we can now know, and they do not end on the moon. The necessary technologies are enormously demanding and therefore enormously promising. And, whatever we do in space, we are critically dependent upon a thorough knowledge of the space environment. Moreover, the Soviet program, which has appeared to many of us to be so narrow and directed almost exclusively to prestigious exploits, more recently gives signs of broadening to include considerable basic research as well as practical investigations, for example, through the use of weather satellites in which we pioneered. “Therefore, we must not be trapped into a narrow competition— focusing our energies on one mission or even on manned flight alone. Our preparations must be broad enough to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort and ability to move in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. “The projects and programs, national and international, in which we are engaged have unprecedented scope and potential. It is this scope and this potential which make space activity a valuable instrument of national and international policy. It is a many faceted tool to be used for the economic and social advance of this and cooperating nations as well as for the preservation of our technological and political leadership in the world. This tool and its importance should be fully understood and appreciated. At the same time, as Lord Hailsham has said, we should remember that international cooperation is not a substitute for national excellence. “Europe has not been alone in recognizing these factors. In the complex of UN organizations, great interest has been evidenced among nations great and small in the problems and benefits of space. “Here again, space has served to bring East, West, and neutrals together in a code of legal principles to govern space activity, which was unanimously adopted in the last session of the General Assembly. In the associated forum of the International Telecommunications Union agreements were reached on the assignment of radio frequencies for space research and space communications. Without these arrangements the future of communications satellite systems would be heavily clouded. And in another UN agency, the World Meteorological Organization, a start has been made in the evaluation and planning of requirements for a world weather satellite system which also promises real economic and human benefits. “Thus it is clear that our national effort in space research and exploration is becoming a powerful force in developing greater international cooperation—cooperation which is not limited to the nations of the Free World, but which spans the Iron Curtain, as well. It is in this context, as a force which joins all mankind against a common enemy, the hostile environment of space, rather than against each other, that the space effort may bring the most significant and enduring rewards.” (Text)
Highlights of Recent Space Research,” by Robert Jastrow and A.G.W. Cameron of Goddard Institute for Space Studies, NASA, appeared in Science. The article presented highlights of recent space research in the physical sciences: geodesy, meteorology, the upper atmosphere, magnetosphere, magnetopause, atmosphere of Venus, exploration of the moon, solar physics, x-rays and gamma rays.	(Science, 9/11/64, gsfc Reprint)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Producers Association in Sikeston, Mo.: “Whether the Russians are attempting to build a rocket and spacecraft to match Saturn V and Apollo, we simply do not know. When they start flight tests of such a rocket, we should be able to identify it. Flight tests of our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and it is quite possible that the Russians may also be testing a super rocket by then. “This much we do know: It would be very foolish on our part to sit idle or to delay the Saturn V until we could confirm that the Soviets were also building super rockets. By that time, it would probably be too late for us to match them again in this century. “In our national space program we are moving rapidly and vigorously to do the things we need to do as a nation to prevent technological surprise, to prevent another major Soviet initiative based on space superiority. “We believe that peace and security and the possibility of useful cooperation with the Soviet Union all depend on our making doubly clear that they can hope to have no monopoly of space achievement to exploit for the purposes of communism. “Some people seem to think that our present space effort can be justified only if we are in a neck-and-neck race to the moon. These people miss the point. Our aim is not to race the Soviets, but to thoroughly discourage them from making an all-out effort to use space as a political, propaganda, or military weapon for greater power on earth. “I don’t believe the American people are investing $20 billion in the Saturn-Apollo program of manned space flight in this decade just to keep even with the Soviets. I think the American people want to lead, and lead without doubts and excuses. . . .” (Text)
gao complained nasa had spent money unnecessarily by producing four basically similar films on the flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project, two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation in the space program. The cost of the films ranged from $216,000 for one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT, 11/4/64,40)
NASA position paper on DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, embodying eight principles of NASA policy toward the mol, was made public. The paper stated: “The dod Manned Orbital Laboratory is a single military project (a specific goal; not a broad program) within the overall National Space Program. . . . “The mol should not be construed as the national space station, a separate program currently under joint study by NASA and the DOD. Such a space station project would be considered under the terms of the Webb/McNamara agreement on manned orbital research and development systems larger than Gemini and Apollo. The mol is, rather, a specific experimental test bed utilizing NASA’s Gemini project and the Titan III for certain potential military space applications not within the scope of NASA’s activities. . . .” (Text; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/2/64,1; A&A, 2/64,90; AF Mag., 74)
Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold said in Science article that absence of surface rock outcroppings in ranger vii close-up lunar photographs supported his thesis that the moon is covered with dust. Erosion of the moon’s surface at rate of one micron (1/25,000 in.) per year would be enough, “over geological time,” to smooth out a once-rocky surface. This erosion, caused by cosmic dust and energetic solar particles, would have deposited dust in low areas and gradually filled them. However, Dr. Gold said that even if in the craters and seas the dust were a mile deep, it was no cause for concern; dust on the moon, like that on earth, would not necessarily be loose and powdery at depths below the surface. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/4/64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said the Florida Times-Union: “Any statement of what space exploration will be like 100 years from now is ... in the same league as crystal ball gazing. . . . Any specific projects which we may describe . . . will fall far short of activities that will be routine a century from now. “One hundred years ago the ‘iron horse’ was the fastest means of travel available. . . . Airplanes were unknown. In this atmosphere Jules Verne sat down and wrote . . . ‘From the Earth to the Moon’ published in 1865. . . . His spacecraft carried three men (and two dogs), was launched from the east coast of Florida, circled the Moon, and returned to Earth during a round trip that took 11 days. . . . Jules Verne used a huge cannon buried in the sand to boost his capsule to escape velocity. . . . Today we are using Saturn chemical rockets to propel our Apollo spacecraft outward for its first trip to the Moon. And by the year 2064 altogether new means of propulsion will make our present-day launch vehicles and spacecraft appropriate relics for the Smithsonian Institution. . . .” (Fla. Times-Union, 12/27/64)
Interviewed in Washington Sunday Star, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh was asked how far U.S. now was on its way to the moon. “I suppose we went a good way toward the moon objective when the decision was made. Consequently, I would say that we are much more than a third of the way to the moon at the present time.” Asked about Administration policy to classify Soviet space failures, Dr. Welsh replied: “. . . The policy of classifying Soviet space failures was developed largely to protect sources of information, many of which in those days were individuals actually in the Soviet Union. “Most of the information we get today comes from sources outside the Soviet Union which need no protection. As a consequence, there is less j ustification at the present time for classifying Russian space failures than there was in the past. I am not saying that there is no justification. . . . “I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether or not it can be relaxed, to see whether there is any justification at all for keeping from the American people information in regard to Soviet failures.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 5/24/64)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, reviewed 1963 highlights in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Although direct measurements of the physical properties of the Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued with some exciting results. Lowell Observatory scientists detected evidence of gas escaping from three different spots in the area of the lunar crater Aristarchus. This observation suggests that the Moon may be far from inert, and it has an important bearing on how we may conduct our lunar investigation. For example, if the Moon is seismically active, the seismograph may play an important role in the investigation of the lunar surface. . . . “Also, much effort was applied to clarifying the data from Earth-based or balloon observations of Mars. One important subject of controversy developed. Whereas it had been believed previously that the pressure at the surface of Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 millibars is roughly one atmosphere of pressure, it is now believed by many that the surface pressure on Mars may be as low as 10 or 11 millibars. This has serious implications with regard to landing a capsule on Mars. If the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas with the higher pressure atmospheric drag could be used to slow down the incoming capsule. “Significant new knowledge on the fundamental physical nature of the universe may have to await the launching of the first oao. In the meantime, sounding rocket experiments continue to provide data in ultraviolet and radio astronomy. . . . “Although the formal development of Scout had been completed, additional work was required to improve its reliability. The primary objective of the December 1963 Scout firing was to determine the efficacy of the measures taken to correct observed deficiencies. The virtually perfect vehicle performance during this firing encourages one to look for a high success rate in future Scout firings. . . . “Performance of all Atlas-boosted launch vehicles would be considerably improved by introducing a mixture of fluorine and oxygen (flox) as the oxidizer. Careful study shows this can be done with admixtures of up to 30% fluorine without major redesign of the propulsion system. We are, therefore, planning to flox the Atlas. A primary objective of this program is to provide for additional payload in the Surveyor investigations. . . .” (Testimony)
Head designer of Soviet spacecraft, name not identified, was interviewed in Izvestia. His predictions for the next five years: “. . . permanently operating orbital stations consisting of sputniks having various purposes such as providing service in investigating the Earth, the Sun, forecasting weather, monitoring the radiation conditions in space, etc.; . . . an all-purpose radio and TV system for transmitting through space, with the aid of the so-called ‘hanging’ (‘stationary’) satellites; . . . ways of using space . . . for mail-freight deliveries, requiring high speed, and finally passenger service; . . . permanent orbiting stations [where] regular shifts of scientific workers of the most diversified specialties will live and work. ... In general, during this period flights into near space and return to Earth will become very commonplace. I think that in the next five years, many comrades will sojourn in space.” Regarding “direct investigations in the region of the Moon and on its surface,” the designer said: “In all likelihood, in the imminent years such studies can be accomplished only with the aid of small automatic devices transmitting the data to Earth by radio.” (Izvestia, 1/1/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
Fuel cells producing power to operate all electronic equipment in Apollo spacecraft would also produce enough drinking water as a by-product to supply the three-man crew during 14-day journey to the moon and back, MSC announced, (msc Release 64-32)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in article on nasa and usaf relations in The Airman: “At a time when possible military missions for manned spacecraft have not yet been clearly defined, the nasa Gemini and Apollo programs and the Air Force mol program are developing American manned space flight technology and operating experience at a rapid rate. “We believe that the progress called for in the Gemini, Apollo, and mol will enable us to demonstrate clear superiority over the Soviet Union in manned space flight capabilities during this decade. “Our accomplishments in these three programs will prepare us much better for whatever further steps may be necessary to meet our national defense needs in space. . . .”	(Airman, 8/64, 6-11)
The House Republican Conference’s task force on space and aeronautics charged that NASA was disregarding the safety of astronauts in its haste to place men on the moon. The report specifically criticized the agency for not developing means of rescuing astronauts stranded in orbit and called for a slowdown in the program until the feasibility of “rescue ships” could be explored. The criticisms were directed at the Project Gemini flights. The report suggested that NASA’s reluctance to develop a Gemini space rescue system resulted from a fear that it would slow the Apollo project. (Finney, NYT, 6/5/64)
Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co. has submitted study to NASA which concluded that six-man space research station, capable of orbiting for one year, could be orbiting earth within five years. Crew, serving on staggered schedule, would travel to and from station on modified Gemini or Apollo spacecraft. Station itself would provide small, degree of artificial gravity by rotating slowly and would include centrifuge to simulate re-entry forces. (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/14/64)	_	_
Midcourse maneuver for ranger vi lunar spacecraft was executed from NASA—jpl Tracking Station, Goldstone, Calif., 16 hrs. after the spacecraft was launched from AMR. The radio signal activated an onboard motor which fired for 69 sec., aiming the spacecraft on collision course with the moon. Target for the lunar spacecraft: Sea of Tranquility. (Witkin, NYT, 2/2/64, 1; Houston Chron., 1/31/64)
Results of space poll of 2,000 randomly selected AAAS members, 1,134 of whom responded, were published in Science. To the statement, “The vital national interests of the United States require that a high priority be given to landing a man on the moon by 1970,” 31% of the respondents said “Yes,” 62% “No.” To the statement, “A reasonable objective would be a lunar landing by 1970,1975,1980,1990, [or] Never,” 20% chose 1970; 23%, 1975; 19%, 1980; 9%, 1990; and 7%,Never. Asked to select “the most important justification for manned exploration of the moon” from prepared list of alternatives, respondents said: military, 7%; scientific, 58%; resources on moon, 1%; national prestige, 13%; technological fallout, 6%; spirit of adventure, 7%. Asked to rank following fields “in order of their potentiality for producing new knowledge,” respondents said: earth-based astronomy, 2%; manned lunar research, 10%; biomedical research, 51%; oceanography, 6%; physics research, 15%; chemical research, 9%; other, 7%. Asked to choose “what fraction of the total federal $15 billion” R&D funds “should be devoted to the space program,” 30% chose 0-10%, 31% chose 10-20%,' 14% chose 20-30%, and 5% chose 30-40%. Commenting on the poll, Robert C. Toth of Los Angeles Times noted that Science editor Philip Abelson was “an outspoken opponent of the moon program” and that the survey did not directly ask the key question: Should the existing program be slowed down now? Journal of the Armed Forces space editor James J. Haggerty, Jr., pointed out that “it all depends on who you ask.” Of the 1,134 respondents, he said, “it turned out that 86% were not connected with the space program. As a matter of fact, there is a strong suspicion that they are all medical researchers, since 51% of them indicated that biomedical research is the scientific field with the potential for producing the greatest amount of new knowledge, where only 10 percent thought manned lunar research would contribute anything of value. . . .”	(J/Armed Forces, 8/8/64, 12; Science, 7/24/64, 368; Toth, Wash. Post, 7/27/64)
NASA announced that failure of ranger VI spacecraft to take pictures of the moon may have been caused by unscheduled tum-on of cruise telemetry from the TV system at about the same time as Atlas booster separation. For unexplained reason, telemetry turned on for about one minute and relayed measurements in the TV system, including battery voltages and temperatures. It was possible that TV system could have turned on at die same time; if so, severe electrical arcing would have occurred and damaged the system. However, TV telemetry turned on 17 min. after separation from Agena stage as scheduled, and nothing at that time indicated any abnormalities in the TV system. Tracking data showed that ranger vi impacted the moon within 20 mi. of its target and within one third of a second of the predicted arrival time. ( nasa Release 64-33)
Aviation Week recounted an exchange between Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) in which McNamara stated that the Apollo program had psychological value but no direct military worth. In response to a question about the effect of the Apollo program on the mission of dod, McNamara said: “... if a psychological victory that might result from the Soviets arriving at the moon first leads to a shift in attitudes in the world, tending to reduce the belief in the strength of the West, and in increasing the Soviet’s view of the weakness of the West, this is bound to have a military effect. This is exactly what occurred in connection with our space programs, and it led to a very costly response by this country.” (Av. Wk., 7/20/64)
The impact of budgetary restraints upon the Nation’s research and development programs was marked in industry, Government agencies, and the university scientific community, John Finney claimed in the New York Times. Employment in the aerospace industry dropped from 1,186,000	in August 1963 to 1,112,000 in September 1964, and manufacturers were forced to turn to civilian products to augment sales. Limiting of NASA funds forced postponement of some of the follow-up programs for Apollo, such as a manned orbiting laboratory. Universities whose research programs depended heavily on Federal research support were having difficulty in obtaining funds to complete projects already undertaken and could no longer expect liberal Government support for their research proposals. (Finney, NYT, 1/11/65)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, answered gop critics, complaining of a “crash program” to reach the moon, with a “Not so. The eight years devoted to the Apollo Project is a longer period than the duration of any previous United States research and development program.” He continued: “Apollo’s time scale for development is four years longer than the time scale for the Mercury spacecraft, two years longer than the B-58 bomber and one year longer than the X—15.” (Houston Post, 6/7/64)
echo ii passive communications satellite was used for transmission of two radiophotos between Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station at Manchester and Gorki University’s radioastronomy observatory at Zimenki. A third space telegram was sent from Jodrell Bank to Zimenki via the moon, and its quality was comparable to those received via echo n. The U.S. satellite was termed by Tass commentator “the Friendship Sputnik.” (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64; NYT, 3/2/64, 9; Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64, 4, Atss-t Trans.)
Members of Local 1685, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, ended a 24-hr. strike at the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) and nearby Patrick AFB facilities. The walkout had tied up $246 million in construction for space projects, including construction on an assembly building for the Saturn V lunar rocket, and work at the Titan III and Saturn IB launch areas. Carpenters had protested the use of nonunion workers by the Akwa-Downey Construction Co., a subcontractor on one of the projects. It was the fourth major labor difficulty at NASA Kennedy Space Center in 1964. (upi, NYT, 12/18/64, 39 and 12/19/64, 48; Chic. Trib., 12/18/64) During the eclipse, extensive heat-map measurements of the lunar surface were made from Egypt by team of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories scientists. Preliminary analysis of their measurements showed hundreds of “hot spots,” or surface temperature anomalies, on the lunar surface, although the experimenters had expected to find only a few dozen. The experimenters made 12 20-min. scans of the moon during the eclipse, in both the visual and infrared portions of the spectrum. Measurements were made at El Kottamia Observatory, 50 mi. east of Cairo, at invitation of United Arab Republic Astronomical Service. (M&R, 1/4/65, 21; NYT, 12/22/64.; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, gave address at dedication of Magic Mountain Laboratory of the Marquardt Corp., Van Nuys, Calif.: “There is a considerable degree of misunderstanding of the overall purposes of our national space program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon is our paramount objective. This is not so. “Our principal goal is to make the United States first in space. The Apollo mission milestones—manned flight in earth orbit, into deep space, and to the moon and back—provide a focus for the development of the total capability that will enable the United States to compete in the race for space. . . .” (Text)
A policy statement issued by the Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human Welfare of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (aaas) charged that social and political pressures on the scientific community arising from such major U.S. space programs as Apollo, Starfish, and West Ford constituted a “serious erosion of the integrity of science.” The report was issued following a five-day meeting held by the association in Montreal, Canada. Commenting on the “spare race” aspects of NASA’s program, the committee said the pattern for orderly development of research had been altered by the “essentially political decision to pursue project Apollo.” The report concluded that Apollo did not appear to be based on the orderly systematic extension of basic scientific investigations. Another NASA program to come under fire at the AAAS meeting was the Voyager Mars exploration project attacked by Dr. Barry Commoner, professor of plant physiology at Washington University. Dr. Commoner said finding life in any form on Mars would have tremendous scientific significance, and that he was not opposed to the basic idea of searching for life on the planet. “I simply feel this country is not yet prepared to make a commitment of this scope,” he said. “We could at this time be a lot closer to resolving this question if the scientific community had been given the opportunity to fully discuss it.” He said even though the commitment had been made it was not too late to discuss fully the question of life on Mars before the 1971 launch. He said he hoped Congressional space committees would ask for complete justifications on the Voyager project. (Av. Wk., 1/4/65, 18; Abraham, Phil. Eve. BuU., 12/28/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said in press conference preceding address at Texas a&m Univ. that a geologist would be in crew of second Apollo lunar landing mission. Geologists probably would be sought when NASA recruited astronaut trainees for subsequent Apollo lunar flights. In his address, Dr. von Braun advised that U.S. must protect itself from any hostile force that attempts to “use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64; Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
DOD announced $5,550,012 contract for integrated navigation systems for three Project Apollo tracking ships had been awarded by Naval Bureau of Ships to Sperry Rand Corp. (dod Release 633-64)
Revival of George H. Darwin’s 1879 theory that moon was formed by breaking off the earth, by two independent scientists, was reported in Newsweek. Geologist Donald U. Wise believes that when earth was molten mass, heavy material flowed into core, causing instability in its rotation and irregular elongation of its form. Then centrifugal forces pulled smaller knob away, sending it into orbit to become the moon. Fragments breaking away at same time fell on moon and caused pock-marked surface. Related theory offered by A. G. W. Cameron, Canadian physicist at NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, was that earth lost at least half its mass, “enough material for ten moons,” in large chunks, some of which clumped together to form the moon while others shot out to become asteroids. (Newsweek, 1/27/64)
NASA Nike-Apache vehicle launched at 12:13 a.m. edt from Wallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in experiment to measure light intensity and charged particle flux as functions of altitude. Payload and spent second stage, which were not separated during flight, impacted 98 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fifth in series to measure and study the nature and causes of aurorae and airglow in the night sky during the dark of the moon, project of Rice Univ. under NASA grant. (Wallops Release 64-53)
usaf predicted reddish spots on the moon—observed last October and November—would reappear June 4 and 5. usaf astronomers at Lowell Observatory planned to take color photographs of the recurrence as well as scan Aristarchus area of moon with sensitive photoelectric spectrograph to determine nature of the “spots.” (Finney, NYT, 2/25/64,
Radiation hazards to Project Apollo astronauts bound for the moon were described at American Medical Association conference by Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer, scientist at U.S. Naval School of Aviation Medicine. Dr. Schaefer predicted that in 1969 proton streams from the sun could range from deadly “downpour” to very light “shower.” He calculated chance of lethal-dosage proton stream was three in 10,000; chance of moderate but incapacitating “rain” would be one in 1,000; and chance of light “shower” would be one in 100. Dr. Schaefer emphasized his forecast was based on predictable solar behavior and that the weather of the sun, like that of the earth, could be unpredictable. (Justice, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
nasa announced 84.6-million contract had been awarded by MSC to Space Technology Laboratories for mission analyses and trajectory simulation work in Projects Apollo and Gemini. Contract would be a continuation of Gemini spacecraft analysis project begun in September 1963 and an extension of similar activities in Apollo, (nasa Release 64-206)
Dr. N. A. Kozyrev of Pulkovo Observatory, U.S.S.R., told conference on geological problems in lunar research in New York that volcanic activity was evident in two of the moon’s craters—Alphonsus and Aristarchus. Overall, he said, “the Moon had an internal energy which can be not less than the internal energy of the earth.” And from analysis of certain light wavelengths, he believed there was “significant volcanic activity on Venus and only slight activity on Mars.” (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
A ten-second firing of the “battleship” stage of the Saturn S—II, second stage of the Saturn V moon rocket, was conducted by North American Aviation, Inc., at their Santa Susana Field Laboratory. The test demonstrated the ability of the battleship stage and accompanying facilities to operate the J-2 engine at full thrust. The S—II would be powered by a cluster of five J-2 liquid hydrogen engines, developing a total thrust of a million pounds, (naa' s&id Skywriter, 12/31/64, 2; Marshall Star, 12/16/64,1,12)
Series of six Sandia Corp. Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets was launched from May to August. The six Nike-Tomahawks, which reached altitudes of about 300 km. (186 mi.), were launched from the Island of Kania, as part of U.S. readiness program for use if space testing of nuclear devices was resumed. Experiment instrumentation for the series was provided by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists. Objective of the experiment was to obtain precise measurements of radiations in the sun’s corona. Another purpose was to demonstrate feasibility of using relatively inexpensive, spin-stabilized, ballistically pointed rockets for solar x-ray spectroscopy. Results of this research were lated reported at the December meeting of the American Geophysical Union (agu). (oar Review, 12/64,22) During the space age: As of the close of 1964, NASA had placed 70 spacecraft into earth orbit, lunar trajectory, or solar orbit since the birth of NASA on Oct. 1,1958. Of this number 52 were still orbiting as of Dec, 31,1964, and 21 were still transmitting signals. Some 55 million data points were being received daily at GSFC, recorded, and stored on magnetic tape at the rate of about 100,000 reels per year. Three of the 70 spacecraft impacted on the moon; 15 re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and burned up. Of the 31 silent satellites in orbit, 6 were in orbit about the sun, 25 about the earth. Satellites still transmitting meaningful data included one deep-space probe (mariner IV), 5 communications satellites (plus the beacon on passive communications satellite echo ii) , 3 weather satellites, 10 scientific satellites. (NASA Release 65—1)
msc operations at Cape Kennedy, renamed Msc-Florida Operations, was reorganized as “part of a broad NASA organizational realignment aimed at strengthening Gemini and Apollo management structures at Washington, Houston, and Florida.” The organization was headed by G. Merritt Preston, responsible for msc operations at the Cape since 1961. (ksc Release 43—64; MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed National Capital Section of aiaa and questioned whether hazard of intense solar radiation in the 1968-70 period might postpone Project Apollo lunar flight. He pointed out that 1968-70 is period of maximum solar activity in the 11-year solar cycle, and radiation intensity might require “very substantial shielding for the Apollo capsule.” This raised question of whether heavy shielding imposes too great a weight penalty on Apollo. Citing recent scientific recommendation that there was “relatively low probability” of Apollo crew’s encountering solar flare, he questioned whether maintaining the schedule would be worth such a gamble. (Finney, NYT, 1/16/64, 1; SBD, 1/16/64, 80-81)
At a symposium sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Dr. Norman F. Ness likened the earth to a kind of comet with a long magnetic tail that extended for an unknown distance. The “new look” was drawn from results of the first detailed mapping of the earth’s magnetic field on the nighttime side of the magnetosphere by explorer xvm (imp I, Interplanetary Monitoring Platform), launched Nov. 26,1963. Until recently, scientists had believed that the earth’s magnetosphere was basically spherical; however, data from explorer xviii indicate that countless magnetic lines of force stretched out like the tail of a comet to an unknown distance in space, apparently beyond the moon. Within this comet-like tail, the lines of force in the Northern Hemisphere were directed towards the sun; in the Southern Hemisphere, away from the sun. In between, there was a neutral zone. Dr. Ness characterized this neutral zone, which had been hypothesized but never before detected, as a thin sheet which was a permanent part of the earth’s environment and virtually void of any magnetic activity. Though the neutral zone’s exact role was unknown, Dr. Ness speculated that it might be responsible for formation of the auroras, creation of the Van Allen radiation belt, and presence of the gegenschein. Ness concluded that in view of the evidence from explorer xviii, “The only difference between the earth and a comet is that the earth possesses a strong magnetic field and comets do not.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/16/64; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/16/64; Wash. Daily News, 12/16/64; Toth, Detroit News, 12/16/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64; AP, NYT, 12/16/64, 30; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 25)
Editorial in Christian Science Monitor said: “It is one thing to question the wisdom of spending so much so quickly to put an American hopefully on the moon in this decade, a time limit that the economy drive in Washington may remove. But it would be less than wisdom to cut back sharply on space funding under the false assumption that the United States is pulling ahead of the Soviets. It is still coming up from behind.” (CSM, 2/1/64)
Saturn I SA-7 two-stage rocket was launched from Cape Kennedy, placing in orbit a nearly-37,000-lb. payload consisting of boilerplate Apollo spacecraft command and service modules, instrument unit, and spent S-IV stage. The orbit (145-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.6-min. period) was similar to the interim orbit for future three-man Apollo lunar missions. All major test objectives were met: final development testing of Saturn I propulsion, structural, guidance and flight control systems; development testing of Apollo spacecraft structure and design during flight through the atmosphere; and demonstration of physical compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft and test-jettisoning of spacecraft launch escape system. Except for minor changes in Saturn I vehicle, test was similar to Saturn I SA-6 (May 28, 1964). For third time, elaborate system of eight motion picture cameras and one TV camera was mounted in S-I stage to record such flight events as S-IV stage separation and ignition of S-IV engines. The eight motion picture cameras were ejected following S-I powered flight, but Hurricane Gladys was located about 300-mi. from camera impact point, so the recovery ship had to leave the area the previous day and recovery was not attempted, (nasa Release 64-228; upi, NYT, 9/19/64, 11; Marshall Star, 9/23/64,1; msc Roundup, 9/30/64,1)
Team of NASA space scientists and engineers, including Astronaut Walter Cunningham outfitted in a pressurized spacesuit, began week-long mobility tests at McKenzie Pass lava area in central Oregon’s Cascade Mountains, where they investigated man’s ability to perform on surfaces thought to resemble that of the moon. (AP, Balt. Sun, 8/26/64)
Canaveral District of the Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $19,055,953 firm-fixed-price contract to the George A. Fuller Co., for construction of Pad B of NASA’s Saturn V Complex 39 at Merritt Island, Fla. The contract also provided for building a two-mile section of crawlerway for transporting launch and arming towers to the pad. (dod Release 844-64; M&R, 11/30/64,22) November 30—December 3: James T. Ramey, a commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission, analyzed the use of cost-effectiveness techniques in a speech to the Atomic industrial Forum in San Francisco. He said: “The cost effectiveness technique assumes end-applications or requirements, and then figures out the costs of alternative systems of achieving equal or greater effectiveness ... it would seem that the requirements system, and the cost effectiveness techniques, tend to favor the status quo in technology, if not in economics or politics. . . . “This leads me to the conclusion that the underlying problem is really whose judgment and recommendations should receive most weight in determining which development programs and projects should go forward. Should these decisions be made by the science advisors and coordinators, and budget specialists who have no direct programmatic responsibility and are not accountable for failure to carry out the directives of the President and the Congress? Or should the judgment of the developmental agency which has the statutory responsibility for the program and the technical depth and experience receive the most weight? . . . I have a certain affinity for giving considerable weight to the judgment of the development agency, which, in regard to atomic energy, would be the aec and its laboratories. In regard to nuclear energy in space, it would be aec and nasa, and to some extent the Air Force. . . . “I am quite optimistic about achieving the great possibilities of atomic energy in space. I firmly believe the atom will provide the means for the propulsion and servicing of manned space ships for moon missions following Apollo, and to and from the planets . . .” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, During November: NASA’s Flight Research Center completed a series of wind-tunnel tests of X—15 models with canard stabilizers mounted on the nose to determine if a canard'surface would permit the X-15 to re-enter the atmosphere at higher angles of attack. Tests were carried out in a Jet Propulsion Laboratory tunnel. (M&R, 11/9/64,9) During November: The Titan III-C 120-in. solid strap-on engine was fired successfully at United Technology Center’s Coyote, Calif., development center. The engine burned for 110 sec. (M&R, 11/23/64, 9)
NASA signed $80-million incentive contract with Boeing Co. to build five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. Beginning in 1966, Atlas-Agena boosters would launch Lunar Orbiters from Cape Kennedy on missions to take close-range photographs of moon’s surface for scientific study and to help select landing sites for Project Apollo, (nasa Release 64-109)
Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, told the Radio and Television News Directors Association that television viewers would be able to watch the first astronauts land on the moon from the comfort of their living rooms. Television cameras carried by the astronauts would beam a signal back to earth which could be relayed to the major TV networks. The astronaut on the lunar surface would also take pictures as he walked along. All of these would be relayed back to earth, Haney said. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/12/64; Maloney, Houston Post, 11/12/64)
usaf annual report of unidentified flying objects said there were 382 sightings in 1963 compared with 469 in 1962 and 1004 in record year of 1957. During past 16 years, report said, usaf had investigated more than 8,000 sightings, all but 7.7 percent of which had been explained by natural phenomena, (upi, Houston Chron., 5/1/64) During April: Aluminum pressure suit designed for astronaut use on the moon was undergoing evaluation at msc. Officially called a “constant volume, rigid articulated, anthropomorphic protectic suit,” it featured increased mobility and constancy of pressure. Rigid suit concept was first introduced by Litton Industries in 1956 for use in pressure chambers. Advanced version for space use, with adaptations and improvements, was proposed to NASA by Litton last year, (msc Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
explorer xxvi, Energetic Particles Explorer D (epe-d), was launched into an egg-shaped orbit atop a three-stage Delta rocket from Cape Kennedy. The 101-lb. windmill-shaped satellite carried five experiments designed to learn how high energy radiation particles are injected, trapped, and eventually lost in the Van Allen radiation belts. Information obtained from the mission was expected to make important contributions to the Apollo manned lunar landing program, specifically in the design of protective spacecraft shielding and in planning flight trajectories for moon landing. Information on the depth of penetration of the geomagnetic field by high energy solar protons—particles of potential danger to moon-bound astronauts—might also be obtained. Preliminary orbital data: apogee, 16,280 mi.; perigee, 190 mi.; period, 7 hrs. 36 min.; inclination, 20.15°. The satellite was designed for an operational life of one year. (NASA Release 64-302; AP, Benedict, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
NASA launched ranger VI lunar probe with Atlas-Agena B launch vehicle from AMR in lunar landing mission to photograph the moon’s surface. The Atlas booster fired properly and, after stage separation, the Agena B stage ignited and attained orbital speed. After coasting in parking orbit of about 110-mi. altitude, the Agena B reignited, sending RANGER VI through the “launch window” on a course which would pass within 600 mi. of the moon. A midcourse correction maneuver was planned so that the spacecraft would impact the lunar surface. The only scientific instruments onboard the 804-lb. spacecraft were six TV cameras, designed to provide more than 3,000 photographs of the lunar surface during the last 10 min. of the 66-hr. flight. This was the first Ranger launch since October 1962, when extensive review of the Ranger project was undertaken because of previous Ranger failures. For ranger vi, changes were made in subsystems to improve reliability and provide redundancy in some areas; also, sterilization requirements for Ranger spacecraft were relaxed, since excessive heat was suspected of causing some previous malfunctions, (nasa Release 64-16; Witkin, NYT, 1/31/ 64,1; lrc Release 64-10; Miles, Wash. Post, 1/31/64, 1)
Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D.-Okla.) wrote in Washington World: “Space research and development may be the glamour girl right now, but the lady-who can do the work for us is aviation. . . . The market exists in the field of aeronautics, while it is still too soon to start printing tickets for round trip flights to the moon. “Government itself is in danger of being too yielding to the glamour girl. My principal complaint is about NASA’s division of the $5.5 billion it will spend in Fiscal year 1965. Only $37 million is budgeted for aeronautical research. The percentage for aeronautics is only seven-tenths of one per cent. Space exports will develop as we excel in this field, but by products—not systems—will constitute the commodities. Aviation has immediate economic potential, and we must pursue it vigorously.” (Wash. World, 5/18/64)
Soviet radio astronomy expert Iosif Shlovsky said at a symposium on 1964 science conducted by Tass news agency that the biggest success of 1964 in world astronomy was an experiment by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. The experiment showed that a large region of the Crab Nebula produced x-ray radiation. Data obtained by Friedman with an Aqrobee rocket launched July 5 from White Sands Missile Range “established how the flux of x-ray radiation coming from the Crab Nebula changed when the moon passed between it and the rocket,” Shklovsky said. Some scientists had attributed the radiation to a tiny, superdense “neutron star.” But observations from the rocket as the moon shut off direct view of the Nebula showed that a larger area was involved. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/29/64; Sullivan, NYT, 12/19/64,3)
NASA announced Collins Radio Co. and Philco Corp. had been selected for final competition for prime contract to provide Apollo Network S-Band Systems. Estimated $5-million contract called for basic purchase of two complete tracking and data acquisition systems with 30-ft.-diameter antennas and three electronic subsystems. The hand would handle such functions as tracking, telemetry, and TV and voice communication. (nasa Release 64-116)
In his State of the Union message to Congress, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “. . . our ultimate goal is a world without war, a world made safe for diversity, in which all men, goods and ideas can freely move across every border and boundary. “We must advance toward this goal in 1964 in at least ten different ways, not as partisans but as patriots. . . . “Fourth, we must assure our pre-eminence in the peaceful exploration of outer space, focusing on an expedition to the moon in this decade—in cooperation with other powers if possible, alone if necessary.” (Text, NYT, 1/9/64, 16)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25 through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted the hands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 10:00 p.m., when the men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 11:00. Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/64, 11)
Tass reported that a Gorky Univ. team, headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky, the leading Soviet authority on radio emanations of the moon, had found evidence they believed showed that the upper layer of the moon’s surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguishing it both chemically and in mineral content from deep layers. Results were obtained during the complete lunar eclipse of last Dec. 30 observed from Ussurisk, in far eastern Siberia. Troitsky’s group made use of the fact that the lunar surface cooled during eclipses and that the cooling caused a drop in the intensity of radio emanations. The Russians worked out the relationship between the decrease of radio emanations from the obscured part of the moon and the physical properties of the surface. Investigating the properties of the uppermost porous layer of the moon’s surface to a depth of about four inches, the Russians established that its electrical conductivity was 50% to 100% greater than that of the underlying rocks and concluded that the two layers differed in chemical composition and mineral content. The conductivity of the top layer was found to correspond to that of meteorites, confirming the hypothesis that bombardment by meteorites and the settling of meteoritic dust played an important part in shaping the uppermost layer of the moon. {NYT, 12/21/64)
Unnamed NASA officials were quoted as saying U.S. had detected Soviet failure within the last week in an attempt to launch a probe to the moon, by John Finney in New York Times. Failure was said to have occurred within minutes after rocket booster rose from launch pad near the Aral Sea. (Finney, NYT, 4/30/64,9)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Reeves Instrument Co. for negotiations of $2.5 million contract for three 30-ft. Unified S-Band Antenna Systems. The antenna systems would be installed in tracking ships for Project Apollo, (gsfc Release G-64-29)
Radar and Doppler velocity sensor system destined to assist the Surveyor spacecraft in its soft landing on the moon was in advanced test phases at Ryan Electronics, Missiles and Rockets reported. Flight tests of the system using helicopters at Holloman afb and at the Hughes Aircraft Co. airport had been successfully completed and had run from 6,000 to 20 ft. above the ground. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
John L. Sloop, Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, NASA, said in lecture to Santa Clara County Science Teachers, at NASA Ames Research Center: “On the momentous day of the first flight to the moon’s surface, the three astronauts will be using the results of almost a decade of concentrated effort which include knowledge, skills, and equipment of 30,000 people in ten NASA Centers and over a quarter of a million people in more than 5,000 companies. They will have flight experience in space 100 times longer than the total time logged in Mercury. They will have the knowledge gained by dozens of unmanned satellites that have probed space about the moon and beyond. They will have the result of Ranger photographs of the lunar surface plus more detailed surveys made by lunar orbiting and the Surveyor lunar lander. . . .” (Text; NASA R&sc Div.)
14 men selected last October for astronaut training reported to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center to begin training for the Gemini and Apollo space flight crew pool. ( msc Release 64-24)
The hydrogen-fueled J-2 engine that would power the upper stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle successfully demonstrated its ability to stop and restart in a ground test carried out at the Santa Susana Field Laboratory of Rocketdyne Div. The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine would operate in a cluster of five to provide one million lbs. of thrust for the S—II second stage of the Apollo moon launch vehicle, as well as operating singly in the S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB. The test engine was operated initially for 165 sec. and shut down. Following a 75-min. “coast” period, the engine was restarted. After seven seconds, it was shut down for six minutes, then restarted and operated for the full duration of 310 seconds. Among specific objectives demonstrated by the test were automatic repressurizing of the start tank during engine operation, sustained tank pressure during the orbital coast period, and reliable operation of the electrical and pneumatic systems used for restart. (Marshall Star, 12/16/64, 1, 12; AP, Balt. Sun, 12/12/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed Project Apollo before the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space: “The overall time phasing ... is quite conservative. The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a schedule four years longer than was needed for the Mercury spacecraft, and two years longer than was taken to produce the B-58 bomber. The Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles are being developed on a schedule two years longer than that of the Atlas missile, and a year longer than was required for the Titan. The total duration scheduled for the Apollo program is longer than that of any previous United States research and development effort. “The Apollo job, of course, is a big one and we will need all of the time allotted. . . . We found . . . that if the remaining six years of work [in Project Apollo] were stretched out over 12 years the total cost of the presently approved manned space (light program would increase by about 30 percent, or about six billion dollars. The economic considerations, therefore, support the maintenance of the present schedule. It is six billion dollars cheaper to continue on the course we are now following than to set out on a new course at this late date. . . . Among the benefits from Project Apollo is “the rapid advancement of United States capability in space—the ability to undertake whatever space activities the national interest may require. “There are seven major elements in this capability—people, industrial base, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational know-how, and the ability to manage research and development. Together, they add up to space power, which provides this country with freedom of action in this new medium. . . .” (Text)
Edmond C. Buckley, Director of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We are requesting $274.4 million to support the Tracking and Data Acquisition program in fiscal year 1965, as compared to $307.7 million in fiscal year 1964, a decrease of eleven per cent. The reason for this decrease is that most of our .new station construction requirements in all three networks, were funded in fiscal years 1963 and 1964. . . .” Mr. Buckley pointed out that the largest single item in ot&da budget for FY 1965 was $106.9 million for equipping the manned space flight network for Projects Gemini and Apollo. (Testimony)
Third anniversary of President Kennedy’s address to Congress on urgent national needs in which he said: “. . . I believe this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.”
Search for fragments from the moon would be conducted this spring in six western Iowa counties by NASA and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe announced. Western Iowa was chosen after Dr. O’Keefe had found some “promising” specimens there on an exploratory trip last summer. Residents of select counties were requested to turn over any unusual stones found during spring plowing of loess soil areas to local usda offices. Stones seeming most likely to have nonterrestrial origins would be forwarded to GSFC for further scientific examination and study, (gsfc Release G-6-64)
NASA announced that AC Spark Plug Div. of General Motors Corp. would become the prime contractor for production of the complete guidance and navigation systems for Project Apollo. Formerly, in the design and development phase of the systems, AC shared responsibility with Kollsman Instrument and Raytheon Missile and Space Div. The latter two firms now become subcontractors to AC. In this realignment of contractor relationships, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said: “. . . it has been determined that the most effective management of manufacturing complete systems can be achieved through a prime contractor.” (nasa Release 64-148)
Washington Daily News editorialized that the success of ranger vii’s mission represented “a significant milestone on a historic road to manned exploration of the moon.” The lunar flight was termed “a demonstration of man’s ceaseless, boundless quest for knowledge—and one which, in the end, is likely to pay off as well as similar past voyages into the unknown.” {Wash. Daily News, 8/1/64; CR, 8/4/64. A4114)
Edward Z. Gray, nasa Director of Advanced Manned Missions, described manned lunar bases under study for post-Apollo missions, in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. “The earliest system we can see for extending the capability of Apollo would be the Apollo logistic support system (alss) . “It consists of the launching on the Saturn V of an Apollo spacecraft with an unmanned LEM, wherein we have replaced the ascent stage of the lem with a cargo compartment. The Apollo spacecraft and unmanned lem, or lem truck are launched to the Moon. The lem truck is disengaged from the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit and lands in an unmanned mode on the surface of the Moon. “The payload capability with the present Apollo launch vehicles and spacecraft would be approximately 7,000 pounds. There would be a payload volume of about 2,000 cubic feet. This would provide a shelter with occupancy capability for two men for about 14 days on the lunar surface. An alternate payload that could be carried by the lem truck would be a two-man roving vehicle . . ., which would have a capability to cover about 200 to 300 miles on the lunar surface in the 14 days. . .. “Then looking beyond to the time when much greater staytime on the lunar surface would be desired, we show a lunar exploration system for Apollo (lesa) which weighs about 25,000 pounds on the surface of the Moon. These are Earth pounds. “It would be launched with a Saturn V without an Apollo spacecraft and would be delivered in an unmanned mode directly onto the surface of the Moon. It has a volume of over 3,000 cubic feet, and could provide satisfactory shelter and life support for 3 men to stay 90 days on the surface of the Moon. “The mode of operation would be to launch this unmanned vehicle to the surface of the Moon, and follow it up with an Apollo launch so that the lem would land in the near vicinity of the lesa payload, probably using a homing radar. ...” He described the LESA concept as expandable through addition of modules; for instance, three modules could form a base for 18 men, 24 months occupancy time. {1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 2, 59799)
Support for theories that extraterrestrial forces influenced rain and snowfall was reported at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Glenn W. Brier of the U.S. Weather Bureau presented evidence that the moon, when new or full, influenced the timing of precipitation by gravitationally nudging unstable atmospheric conditions into rainfall or snowstorms. Dr. E. Keith Bigg of Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization in Sydney reported research which substantiated his theory that meteoric dust particles acted as nuclei for ice crystals to form on and fell to earth as rain or snow, with the whole process taking about 30 days. (Osmund-sen, NYT, 12/29/64, 6)
Bendix Products Aerospace Div. was awarded $99,973 NASA study contract for shock absorbing device to permit soft landing on moon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Bendix would test various sizes and shapes of crushable aluminum honeycomb structures to determine performance characteristics under lunar environmental conditions, (msc Release 64-9)
ranger vii spacecraft successfully completed its midcourse correction maneuvers to put the spacecraft on its final collision course to the moon. RANGER vii carried out series of orders involving switching from the directional to the omnidirectional antenna, folding the directional antenna out of the way of the midcourse motor, pitch and roll maneuvers to properly orient the spacecraft, firing the midcourse motor, and reorientation by earth and sun acquisition after the midcourse motor had been fired. Telemetry indicated that everything aboard the spacecraft was normal after the midcourse correction activities had been completed. (NASA Release 64-187)
The last in a series of 11 tests of the F—2 Apollo service module engine was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec. and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing. The F—2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to earth from the moon. (Lee, Houston Post, 12/10/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that use of Centaur as a third stage for Saturn IB launch vehicle was now a “matter of study with a serious approach to the various alternatives” it could serve. He mentioned one such use might be as a booster for logistics support vehicle called Stay Time Excursion Module (stem) for establishment of lunar bases. Dr. Mueller also disclosed that payload for Saturn SA-10 flight had been changed from an Apollo boilerplate to a micrometeoroid detection satellite (mds), supplementing those for Saturns SA-8 and SA-9. Added mds was to further confirm that skin thicknesses on boosters and spacecraft can be reduced, thus trimming weight requirements for Project Apollo. (SBD, 4/15/64,83)
Senate passed (78-3) H.R. 10456 authorizing funds for NASA for FY 1965. Senate adopted the committee amendments en bloc. Amendment introduced by Sen. Fulbright to reduce R&D funds for Project Apollo by $267,750,000 was rejected by vote of 42—38. Bill would be sent to House-Senate conference committee. (NASA lar III/127; CR, 6/24/64, 14367-84)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of Apollo Spacecraft Office at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said in Milwaukee speech that the most probable date for U.S. manned lunar landing was late in 1968 or early in 1969. He discussed goals of Ranger TV probes, Surveyor lunar lander, and Lunar Orbiter probes, which would provide information about the moon preparatory to manned lunar landing. If these should fail, he said, NASA would plan manned Apollo reconnaissance flights to orbit the moon before the landing flight. “It might set our landing back six months to a year, but if the other programs don’t work, we aren’t dead.” (Pease, Milwaukee Journal, 2/4/64)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent to the moon. He described support gear—like elasticized parachute harness—which would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elimination of chairs and rearrangement of Lem’s gear permitted weight reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/64)
NASA announced signing of nine-month contract extension for Project Apollo spacecraft with North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. The $496-million extension called for five additional command and service modules, three additional flight boilerplate spacecraft, a full-scale mockup, and nine adapter sections to house Lunar Excursion Modules, (nasa Release 64-227)
NASA announced requesting from industry proposals for feasibility and design study of possible payloads for manned lunar exploration with an Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) . One of the payloads was a mobile laboratory capable of supporting and transporting two Apollo astronauts for about 14 days; the other payload concept included both a stationary base and a smaller vehicle. The ALSS concept, making maximum use of Apollo-developed systems, provided for Saturn V launch vehicle to launch into earth-moon trajectory a manned Apollo command module, service module, and lunar excursion module modified for landing equipment rather than men on the. moon and called the lem Truck. Following alss landing, astronauts would land nearby in unmodified Apollo lem. MSFC would manage the nine-month study. (NASA Release 64-62)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power, discussed nuclear rockets before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	. . our major effort is in the reactor area. It includes analysis and experimental work on all of the components and subsystems of our reactors with sufficient evaluation and testing to give the greatest possible confidence in the successful operation of the graphite reactors that will form the basis for the first nuclear rocket engines to be developed in the world. We are, however, not overlooking the potential advantages provided by the metallic tungsten reactors. We are, therefore, conducting a program to evaluate the feasibility and advantages of these systems. “Our nerva engine and non-nuclear component technology work has made substantial progress in those difficult areas of engine technology that require extension of presently available information so that system development can eventually be undertaken rapidly and with a high degree of confidence. “Sufficient facilities are available or are being constructed for the conduct of our presently planned program. Tests to be conducted in our reactor facilities during this year should clearly demonstrate the success of the solutions we have designed to avoid the mechanical problems that have been encountered in the past and should demonstrate the operating capabilities of graphite reactors. Our advanced concept work is fundamental in nature; it is long term; but it is being pursued because of the high, theoretical performance potential of these advanced ideas for nuclear rocketry. “Out of this over-all nuclear rocket program, I am convinced, will come a new family of rockets that will open the way to more extensive space travel than is possible with the chemical combustion rocket systems upon which we are now completely dependent. Although new in capability, the nuclear rockets we are now developing are logical follow-ons to the chemical rocket systems and, therefore, do not involve basically new test, development, and system technology or scientific breakthroughs. These nuclear rocket developments must be actively pursued to ensure that this country is not prevented from undertaking missions involving higher velocities, energies, and payloads than are required for the early Apollo manned lunar landing mission.” (Testimony)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question: “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the United States large increments of manned space flight capability. Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn— and perfect—the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before attempting the trip to the moon and hack. . . .” (nasa)
NASA announced selection of scientific satellites, imp-d and imp—e, that will be placed in orbit around the moon in 1966-67 to study interplanetary phenomena and earth-sun relationships in cislunar space. The eight experiments selected for the Interplanetary Monitoring Platforms were designed mainly to measure magnetic fields, solar plasma, micrometeoroids, and energetic particles in the vicinity of the moon, (nasa Release 64r-270)
It was reported that President Johnson would give special attention to science and technology programs in budget-making conferences at his Texas ranch. Dr. Donald S. Hornig, the President’s special assistant for science and technology, said in Austin Press Conference that the significance of his presence as a participant in all meetings was that Johnson was looking at the “totality” of the various Government enterprises supporting science and technology in an effort to pursue a balanced program. Hornig said the Federal government was spending about $15 billion—roughly 15% of its budget—on scientific research, technical development, test, and engineering programs with about half this amount spent by dod. Dr. Hornig also said he believed the hundreds of millions of dollars going into the effort to put an American on the moon by 1970 was well spent because “the moon is a very interesting place scientifically.” It will “take a lot of going” to achieve that goal, he said, but present schedules “will allow it.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/23/64)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
Gov. Nelson Rockefeller said in speech at Johns Hopkins Univ.: “I believe strongly that it is time for the American people to take a long, hard look at the political, military and scientific merit of the ‘one-shot,’ crash program to place a man on the moon by 1970. “I think we ought to put a man on the moon. But we must make sure that our program is sound, that our priorities are proper—that we are, in short, taking maximum advantage of the virtually unlimited opportunities which the scientific and technological revolution of our times presents us—that we are not warping our entire scientific effort for this one purpose. “I fear that the present moon-shot program of the Democratic administration in Washington does not meet the criteria for a soundly conceived program of scientific research and development in the national interest. . . .” (Text)
Amateur astronomers in Riverdale, the Bronx, saw a red spot on the moon between the craters Aristarchus and Herodotus at 4:20 a.m. It vanished at 5:10 a.m. before the moon had come into view of the western observatories which had observed spots near Aristarchus last Oct. and Nov. (NYT, 6/18/64)
Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the Committee on Space Research (cospar), said that many American and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weightlessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astronauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present conditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the only alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity to simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/64)
In an editorial, Robert Hotz, editor of Aviation Week and Space Technology, said: “There is a . . . good possibility that the national space program may get its most severe shellacking to date if some plans currently finding favor within Administration executive circles are, in fact, implemented. One of these proposals would slice the scientific programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the bone and concentrate the NASA budget on the Apollo manned lunar landing program. Some portions of the scientific community have been making this charge without much justification for several years. If NASA does virtually abandon its highly successful scientific exploration program now, the howl from scientists will rise in a swift crescendo. It would be a major mistake to make such a drastic switch in what is now a pretty well-balanced NASA effort.” (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,11)
nasa-dod agreement that instrumentation ships required to support NASA and dod space programs would be pooled and operated by dod on behalf of both agencies was announced. By end of 1967 pool would have 20 operational tracking ships. NASA would participate with dod in all phases of the program, including systems engineering and development of the plans and specifications. Navy Dept, would have central responsibility for design, construction, and modification of the ships. Military Sea Transportation Service (msts) would be responsible for ship operation, and dod Range Agencies would be responsible for scheduling and ship instrumentation operation. Senate and House space committees released $83 million of FY 1964 funds, which had been authorized subject to NASA—dod agreement. The funds would be used to acquire three ships from Maritime Reserve Fleet and to modify two ships for Apollo already in the joint tracking system, (nasa Release 64-34; dod Release 137-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/14/64)
Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry M. Goldwater issued report on science prepared by his Task Force on Space, Science, and the Atom, in which he had this to say of Project Apollo: “Man should indeed explore the moon, but I see no good reason why we must incur the large unnecessary expense of a crash program. The first man on the moon will probably not gain for us any vital military advantage.” He proposed instruments be sent to the lunar surface, emphasis be concentrated on efforts to assure the “security of nearspace.” (Wash. Post, 10/25/64, A9)
Alvin H. Parker soared his Sisu 1A sailplane from Odessa, Tex., to Kimball, Neb. (644 mi.) to claim new world soaring distance record over the previous 544.331-mi. distance record. (SSA Release) During July: Two 10-story buildings had heen completed in ksc Merritt Island Launch Area and were turned over to NASA. They were the $7.8 million operations and checkout building for the Gemini and Apollo spacecraft, and the $1.3 million spacecraft pyrotechnic installation building. (AP, Orlando Sentinel, 7/22/64)
Dr. Thomas Gold, Chairman of Cornell Univ.’s Astronomy Dept., told COSPAR that laboratory experiments to simulate conditions on lunar surface pointed “toward a surface of soft, crushable material, between 6 and 10 times less dense than solid rock. It would have a texture something like cake. A man walking on the moon might sink pretty far into the soft surface. How far we don’t know.” (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
NASA said major contractor on Project Apollo, North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div., would soon reduce its Apollo personnel by about 1,000. The action was a cost-reduction measure, and was not indicative of either current Congressional debate or change in Apollo scheduling. “We are merely trying to keep costs down as much as we can,” NASA spokesmen said. (AP, WSJ, 5/22/64; Finney, NYT, 5/22/64, 9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in interview with John Finney on the subject of U.S. and U.S.S.R.’s space programs: “The significance [of VOSKHOD I flight], it seems to me, is the clear indication that manned flight in large spacecraft is important to the Russians, and offers opportunities for them for the future that justifies the investment clearly required.” Asked if VOSKHOD i flight meant U.S.S.R. had “extended its lead over the United States in manned space flight,” Mr. Webb replied: “This is hard to answer categorically but if I had to give a quick answer, I would say ‘Yes.’ ” Asked when U.S. would overtake U.S.S.R. in manned space flight, Mr. Webb said: “Well, first I think we must always keep in mind that our program including the developmental flights on the Saturn IB and the flights out to a quarter of a million miles with Saturn V are designed to meet United States needs for an operational capability out that far in space. “If the flight capability of the Russian craft is extended to include these additional capabilities, then we will have a serious problem in catching up in the next few years. If their capability does not extend to the booster power necessary for the full range of operations out to the moon, then we will pass them in this decade, provided our present program is adequately funded and no unknown or unanticipated difficulties show up.” (Interview, NYT, 10/18/64, E5)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell* Jr., and Maj. Thomas P. Stafford practiced in the Gulf of Mexico developing a training technique for escaping from Gemini spacecraft, both with and without flotation collar, (msc Release)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in hearings before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that for Project Gemini “the year 1963 was, quite frankly, one of development headaches. It was the year of development and qualification testing of Gemini’s many equipments. The program is now largely over the development hump, however, and all Gemini spacecraft and launch vehicle subsystems will be fully qualified in 1964. Significant in 1963 also were a number of hardware deliveries. ... “In 1964, three vitally important flights will be made—the third one manned and orbital. The year will be characterized by production, test, and delivery of spacecraft and launch vehicles. . . .” Questioned about return to earth and landing in Project Gemini, Dr. Mueller and George Low said that plans now called for the two-man Gemini spacecraft to land on water rather than dry land. NASA had been investigating both procedures, and paraglider for land recoveries was still in development stage. Paraglider would be “available” at about the time of the last two Gemini flights but “not necessarily scheduled.” Dr. Mueller added that water landing also would be “characteristic” for manned Apollo flights. (Testimony; Finney, NYT, 2/19/64, \9-,M&R, 2/24/64,21)
Atlas D launch vehicle sent NASA’s 200-lb. Project Fire spacecraft more than 500 mi. into space from Cape Kennedy in test to provide data on re-entry heating of spacecraft returning from the moon. As the spacecraft fell back to earth, a solid-fuel Antares II motor ignited for 30 sec. to hurl it through the atmosphere at the speed of 37,800 fps (about 26,000	mph). With exterior heating at estimated 20,000 degrees, instruments in spacecraft interior relayed data back to earth while cameras and other instruments recorded the “flaming meteor” descent. About 32 min. after launch the Project Fire craft impacted in the Atlantic more than 5,200 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Raymond L. Bispling-hoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, commented that the experiment, conducted by NASA Langley Research Center, “recorded the highest speed ever reached by a manmade object in free flight.” In conjunction with the Project Fire test, NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched to 97-mi. altitude from Ascension Island. Its instrumented payload, provided by Univ. of Michigan, measured pressure, temperature, and density in the equatorial atmosphere using pitot-static probe technique. (NASA Release 64-69; AP, Wash. Post, 4/15/64; Cine. Enqr. 4/16/64, nasa Rpt. srl)
At aas meeting in New York, Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. Director of the Center for Radio Physics and Space Research, said the porous, crush-able material of the lunar surface extended “to a depth of tens of centimeters or meters,” according to radio thermal measurements. “It seems very probable that a few per cent of the lunar surface is hard and rough, probably in the form of many young craters, while the rest is covered with material considerably less dense than solid rock. . . . [We must be prepared] to find a crushable surface material many meters deep and smoothly deposited, covering most of the moon, and a few per cent of rough hard rock regions covered only with a thin layer of the fluff... (Av. Wk., 5/18/64,83)
North American Aviation, Inc., began testing prototype Apollo environmental control system, developed by Garrett Corp.’s AiResearch Div. Unmanned tests would continue for about six months, with manned tests scheduled to begin June 1.	(Av.Wk., 12/25/63,23)
NASA postponed indefinitely the launch of Ranger 7 lunar probe. New launch date would depend on further study of failure of ranger vi’s TV camera system before impacting the moon Feb. 2. nasa-jpl investigators still were concentrating on unscheduled turnon of telemetry from TV system which occurred at about same time as separation of Atlas booster engines, (nasa Release 64-38)
NASA announced it had selected Collins Radio Co. for procurement of a major portion of the S-band tracking, data acquisition, and communications system to be used in Project Apollo. Nine systems with 30-ft.-diameter parabolic antennas were to be provided, at a cost of approximately $20 million, (nasa Release 64-146)
President Johnson signed NASA Authorization Act (H.R. 10456) authorizing $5,227,506,000 for NASA FT 1965. Largest part of authorization was for Project Apollo, $2,677,500,000. The bill was $76,494,000 less than the Johnson Administration had requested. (AP, NYT, 7/15/64, 15)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said in Saturday Evening Post “As a Republican I believe in what has been called the ‘conquest of space,’ but which I prefer to think of as a thorough exploration of a new scientific frontier to improve our living here on earth. This is an exploration we should pursue vigorously with a step-by-step program in line with our means and our needs. That was the aim of the space program as initially undertaken during my Administration: On the advice of eminent scientists we conceived a long-range effort, not a stunt, with costs to be stabilized around two billion dollars a year. That hardly could be called picayune by any reasonable standards. “But now, under the Democrats, this program has been blown up out of all proportion. With hysterical fanfare our space research has been presented as a crash effort, as a ‘race to the moon’ between the United States and Russia which we must win at all costs. And the costs are tremendous: They now are running well over five billion dollars a year. The Government now has more than 73,000 engineers and scientists working on the nonmilitary space program, either on the federal payroll or employed under contract. This swollen program, costing more than the development of the atomic bom'b, not only is contributing to an unbalanced budget; it also has diverted a disproportionate share of our brainpower and research facilities from other equally significant problems, including education and automation. “We are breezily assured that the cost and dislocation brought about by this moon race are worthwhile for the new ‘prestige’ they will bring us. There is no way of telling how true that may be, but we can be sure of one thing: The voyage to the moon will set a new record for a trip taken on borrowed money.” {Sat. Eve. Post, 4/11/64, 17—19)
Frank Gifford of U.S. Weather Bureau, Oak Ridge, Tenn., postulated that “canals” on Mars are actually sand dunes 2,500 to 3,000 mi. long. Size of the dunes would indicate surface pressure of about 30 millibars, close to the 25 millibars calculated by jpl from spectrographic measurements. In Martian gravity and air density, wind speeds would have to be five to ten times those on earth to form dunes, and such winds have been observed in Martian dust storms. (M&R, 2/17/64, 21) During February: NASA Hq. contracted with rand Corp. for evaluation of alternate approaches to conducting Project Apollo and attaining its goal. (SBD, 2/14/64,248)
Expressing congratulations on the success of RANGER VII lunar mission, Chancellor Ludwig Erhard of West Germany said in telegram to President Johnson: “We are happy with the American people over this tremendous technical and scientific achievement.” Other response to the successful lunar mission included statement by President of Mexico Adolfo Lopez Mateos, who said that RANGER vil was “without doubt, up to the present moment, the most brilliant page registered in the scientific history of modem times.”. British astronomer Sir Bernard Lovell praised die success of ranger vii and said: “The results will be of . . . critical importance to the American plan for a soft landing of instruments on the lunar surface next year and for Project Apollo, involving a manned landing at the end of the decade.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/2/64)
In paper on manned lunar scientific operations, prepared for aas meeting in New York, NASA’s Dr. Paul Lowman (Office of Space Science and Applications) and Donald A. Beattie (Office of Manned Space Flight) said that . . it is apparent that the moon is a virtual Rosetta stone that, if properly read, may permit us to learn how the solar system, the earth, and the continents on which we live were formed. . . . “Since the scientific investigations of highest priority are in the fields of geology and geophysics, it appears that there is definite value in extending manned lunar exploration by the use of modified Apollo equipment. Experience has shown that geophysical and geological mapping investigations of large areas are Continuing tasks; like the painting of the Golden Gate Bridge, they are never really finished, because new concepts, questions, and methods evolve during the program. The occasionally-expressed view that the major questions about the moon could be settled by a few landings and the return of a few samples ignore the experience of several centuries of terrestrial geology and geophysics. . . (Text)
Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Presidential Science Adviser Donald F. Hornig replied to question about U.S. space goals after Project Apollo: “There are clearly a series of successively more difficult scientific objectives which we will pursue with unmanned spacecraft. It’s very difficult, though, to document a convincing case for a national commitment on major space goals that are far in the future. In any case, I can’t believe that the momentum gained by our space program is going to be allowed to be lost when we achieve the first major objective.” (M&R, 4/20/64, 35)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Bendix Corp. and Boeing Aerospace Div. for negotiations of separate identical nine-month $1.5 million studies of lunar exploration payloads for Apollo Logistics Support System (alss). Payload would be carried to moon by Saturn V/Apollo using modified lem (“lem truck”) to deliver from lunar orbit to lunar surface, (Marshall Star, 5/20/64,1)
Engine for Apollo service module fired for one second in programed 10-sec. test. Automatic cutoff device shut down the engine because of excess vibration due to unstable combustion. NASA spokesman called the test a “minimal success,” said results were “not entirely unexpected. The engine had been fired three times previously in acceptance tests, but it wasn’t fired in as complete a form as it was today.” (AP, L.A. Times, 9/23/64)
Results of five public opinion surveys conducted in 12 cities over 14 months for Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. were announced. Findings indicated that most Americans supported the national goal of landing men on the moon by 1970 but they felt no sense of urgency about achieving it. One third of those interviewed thought spending should be reduced. (NYT, 11/15/64, 66)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Washington that when nasa had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool, it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.” (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/64)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) submitted in Congressional Record “An Accounting of Stewardship 1961—1964,” which included summary of U.S. accomplishments in space: “Since 1961 the United States has pressed vigorously forward with a 10-year, $35-billion national space program for clear leadership in space exploration, space use, and all important aspects of space science and technology. “Already this program has enabled the United States to challenge the early Soviet challenge in space booster power and to effectively counter the Soviet bid for recognition as the world’s leading nation in science and technology. . . .” Among the achievements listed: Saturn I rocket’s successful flight; Saturn IB and V development; mastery of liquid hydrogen as rocket fuel; six manned Mercury space flights; Gemini spacecraft and Titaq II launch vehicle test-flight; Apollo spacecraft development; first close-up observations of another planet (Venus) with mariner ii and pictures of the moon with RANGER vu; orbiting observatory program initiation; Tiros weather satellite operation; and ComSatCorp establishment. “In short, the United States has matched rapid progress in manned space flight with a balanced program for scientific investigations in space, practical uses of space, and advanced research and technological pioneering to assure that the new challenges of space in the next decade can also be met, and U.S. leadership maintained.” (CR, 9/15/64, 21498)
ranger vii briefing to members of Congress, with Harris (“Bud”) Schurmeier, Ranger Project Manager, JPL, and Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Div., Univ. of Arizona, as principal speakers. Dr. Kuiper said: “I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that a new era has begun in the exploration of the Moon.. . . “Here, in one step last week a gain of a factor of 2,000 was made— 2,000	in the effective magnification of the image of the lunar surface [earlier reported as 1,000].. . .” Discussing preliminary results of the lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper said: “. . . down to the size of approximately two or three feet, the primary craters caused by direct impacts on the moon covered ... an area amounting to about one percent of the lunar surface. So this is a very great help in landing operations, either by unmanned soft landings, such as Surveyor, or manned landings as planned for Apollo. “. . . the innocent-looking ray systems, such as one has around Copernicus, Tycho, Kepler, a number of craters really are danger spots. When you look at them closely, . . . one sees them resolved into multitudes, clusters of secondary craters. ... I wouldn’t be surprised if slopes of the order of 15 degrees would be found. This would be somewhat difficult. This is a rather uncomfortable inclination on which to land. “. . . the surface between these craters is, smoother than I had thought. ... I have . . , many times hypothesized that if you would go to higher and higher magnification, higher and higher resolution, that there would be a large number of cracks on the moon, fissures similar to those one finds on lava fields such as on Mauna Loa, Hawaii, or recent lava fields which have not yet been eroded. “This apparently is not the case. This was wrong . . . these cracks are not present. It looks as if the surface of the moon has been buffeted, has been simply pounded on, and has been sort of smoothed out, and the cracks filled in the process.. . . “Now the question is, what about the surface? What is the nature of the surface. ... It is not just a loose pile of sand, dust. It has considerable stiffness. And . . . while we know from other data that the top structure is open, it is sort of like snow or a biscuit, a cracker. It has an open structure; nevertheless, it looks as if the moon may have considerable bearing strength. That, however, is something which must be measured separately, with separate equipment. “However, we can say that there are not enormous depths, several feet, ten, or a hundred feet of dust, which would simply not have permitted formation of the sharp little craters as we observe them.” (NASA Transcript)
William G. Gisel, President of Bell Aerosystems Co., said before N.Y. Society of Newspaper Editors, Niagara Falls: “I cannot contemplate the space exploration project , . . without a tremendous surge of pride in the human race. We are going to the stars, gentlemen. The human race will travel to the planets and, in time, to other solar systems and in doing so will fern the spark of greatness which in spite of ourselves has carried us from the cave to the threshhold of space. Man can go to the moon in this decade. The important question is, will it be an American?” (nasa r&sc Div.)
Dr Willy Ley predicted at Texas A&M Univ. that U.S.S.R. would attempt manned orbital flight to the moon during 1964. He did not believe such a flight would “significantly advance the time of an actual landing . . . [because] that would take great strides in new rocket power.” He believed U.S. had a “50-50 chance of being the first to get there.” (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/14/64)
(1) Isolated locations and atmospheric dispersion, and “(2) Containment and neutralization. . . . “In . . . our nuclear propulsion activities, neither routine reactor development testing and flight operations nor conceivable accidents are expected to release sufficient radioactivity into the atmosphere to constitute a hazard to public health and safety. “In chemical propulsion, there are some propellants that are toxic prior to combustion and some rocket exhausts that contain toxic products. Fortunately, the NASA space program is primarily concerned with non-toxic propellants. In our largest program, the Apollo effort, for example, the giant Saturn I and V boosters both bum oxygen and kerosene in their first stages and oxygen and hydrogen in their upper stages. The Apollo spacecraft uses toxic nitrogen tetroxide and a mixture of hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine, but the quantity is small compared to that used hy the Saturn boosters . . . [and is not used] until the Apollo is well into space under normal operation. . . . “In most rocket testing and in vehicle launches, the rocket exhausts directly into the atmosphere. The very high exhaust temperature and velocity serve to rapidly disperse the exhaust products. In some rocket testing we must simulate the low pressures encountered at altitude. In these facilities, the rocket exhausts into a duct where there is an opportunity to scrub the products with water before discharging into the atmosphere. A unique facility, an example of the containment and treatment method for use in populated areas, was built at the Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, for rockets using fluorine. This facility, put into operation in 1956, was designed to handle hydrogen-fluorine rockets up to 20,000 pounds thrust. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA would negotiate with the Univac Div. of Sperry Rand Corp. for purchase of digital data processors to be used in the Apollo Manned Space Flight Network ground stations and tracking ships. The fixed-price contract would approximate $4.5 million for the ten systems with options for additional systems, (nasa Release 64-318)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
Astronomers at Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., failed in an attempt to sight and photograph red spots in the vicinity of the Aristarchus region of the moon. Conditions were abont the same as on Oct. 29 and Nov. 27 when Lowell observers had sighted the red spots. (AP, Balt. Sun, 6/6/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, said in address at Commercial Museum, Philadelphia: “It takes a certain type of ability to manufacture plausible-sounding myths, and unfortunately such ability has been working overtime regarding the space program. . . .” He examined “several of these confusing rumors”: national security— “The critic who belittles what is being done in space to strengthen the nation’s defense is either ignorant, irresponsible, or both. . . . Progress of a substantial nature is being made in strengthening our national security through space competence”; crash program—“Crash programs have unlimited funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel approaches to the end objective. None of these aspects applies to the space program or even to the lunar project . . .”; either /or philosophy—“Actually investments stimulate other investments; they do not deter them. . . . What is more, decreased spending in education, for example, does not automatically increase the funds available for space exploration, or vice versa . . .”; and slowdown—“such an approach would be of great benefit to the Soviets as it would make it easier for them to increase their lead in some aspects of space and attain the lead in others. Do not think for a moment that they are not trying hard to do just that. So far this year, the USSR has put more than twice as many spacecraft into orbit as they had put into orbit by this time last year. In a sense, they are doubling their space effort. . . . To slow down a carefully planned project, such as Apollo, would be to increase its cost and reduce its likelihood of timely success. ... Those who propose the stretchout or slowdown in the space program are in fact arguing for inefficiency and higher costs as well as delayed accomplishments.” (Text) *	Appointment of Charles W. Harper, authority on simulation and aircraft flight research at NASA Ames Research Center, as Director of Aeronautical Research, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology, was announced by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 64-239)
Awards at 1964 Air Force Association national convention included H. H. Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E. LeMay (USAF CofS), who was named “Aerospace Man of the Year” for his “enlightened and aggressive leadership in behalf of the status and welfare of fhe military man”; David C. Schilling Trophy to Maj or Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58 pilot, for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theodore von Karman Trophy to Clarence L. Johnson, Vice President (Advanced Development Projects) of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., for designing theYF-12A (A—11) aircraft. Among the citations of honor: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, nasc, was cited for his “broad understanding and vigorous pursuit of aerospace goals.” Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), deputy director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., was cited for his contributions to Minuteman icbm program in previous assignment with afsc/bsd. Chief M/Sgt. Frank M. Davis (usaf) and Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) were named outstanding airman and outstanding officer of 1964 by afa. Davis was cited for leadership in desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among other citations. Engle was cited for “his active and aggressive” role as an X-15 test pilot. (AF Mag., 10/64, 33; Wash. Post, 9/12/64)
1964 would be a year of development test on individual systems which provide capability to carry out Project Apollo lunar landing, according to Dr. Joseph Shea, Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. He cited the test of Apollo launch escape and earth landing systems at White Sands Missile Range last May and launch of Apollo boilerplate aboard Saturn I (SA-6) also last May as two important development flight tests—milestones marking the gradual transition of Project Apollo to flight test phase. “However, there is still much ground testing to be done.” (naa s&id Skywriter, 9/11/64,4)	....	.
Mstislav V. Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Moscow press conference that vehicle used to launch VOSKHOD i spacecraft was more powerful “than that used before to put into orbit any instruments or astronauts.” Keldysh said voskhod i was first of a series but revealed nothing about future flights. Konstantin P. Feok-tistov, scientist-cosmonaut aboard voskhod I, revealed he had made astronomical observations during the space flight, practicing “aeronavigation by means of a sextant.” He predicted that on interplanetary flights “it will be possible to fix the spaceship’s position autonomously on hoard the spaceship.” Feoktistov also disclosed voskhod i’s attitude control system was based on ion propulsion engine. He described voskhod i’s return to earth as a “featherbed landing.” Of the spacecraft’s landing system, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said after parachutes were opened, a second retrorocket was fired to achieve the soft landing. Physician-cosmonaut Boris B. Yegorov disclosed that “sharp movements of the head caused slight dizzy sensations, sensations of general discomfort” for both him and Feoktistov. (Shabad, NYT, 10/ 22/64, 15; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 10/22/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 10/22/64) • Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, gave the 1964 Third Bicentennial Marshall Wood Lecture, Brown Univ., Providence, R.I. Dr. Dryden predicted that by the year 2000 astronauts’ trips to the moon “may be somewhat commonplace. . . . The moon will also be serving as an important scientific station for radio astronomers . . . [and] many other kinds of scientists. . . . We may be maintaining sizable installations on the moon. . . . “Beyond the moon it is probable that manned flights will have been made to Mars and possibly to the vicinities of other planets as well. . . . In space stations orbiting above the earth we shall likely be fabricating space vehicles; it is possible that we shall be using rockets, in ballistic trajectory through space, to deliver freight shipments from one continent to another. . . . “Let us let our imagination roam to a hundred years from now. It seems certain that we will have developed the capability to move throughout the solar system and will have sent at least exploratory expeditions to the outermost reaches. We will be considering the extension of our exploration of space to the nearest stars, but I am somewhat doubtful that we can even in this period discover new sources of energy which will make this journey possible in the lifetime of one man. “It seems likely that within 100 years we will have established outposts in the form of stations on the moon and Mars. It is possible that we will have moved to a certain degree of colonization on Mars, but I doubt that this will take place on the moon, unless the moon turns out to contain resources of great economic value to us here on earth. The resources required for such extensive exploration of Mars will require cooperation among the nations of the earth; otherwise it is not, likely to be accomplished. . . .” (Text)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) introduced a concurrent resolution to change the goal of the manned lunar landing to before 1975 instead of before 1970 (H. Con. Res. 257). “The change of policy ... is to allow our scientists greater flexibility in meeting the challenging technological problems of the Apollo project. Especially, I have in mind the desirability of eliminating the pressures of meeting time schedules, of minimizing perils such as solar radiation, and frankly I would stretch out the fantastic cost of the manned space exploration program over a longer period of time. . . . “My new resolution is to invite the opinions of qualified experts and knowledgeable persons on this subject. . . . Congress should provide for an overall reappraisal of such a costly manned flight activity which accounts for two-thirds of the $5 billion space budget. Certainly, I cannot believe there is any valid reason why the Space Administration and those engaged in the manned space research venture should not be given more latitude in the scheduling of the program. Any slippage in time schedules due to reasons of safety and increasing assurance of success should not require any apology or excuse. Nor should the program be speeded for prestige at the cost of added risk. Congress by adopting my resolution would be setting a policy of proceeding at an orderly and normal speed and of avoiding undue risks in establishing any deadline. Finally this greater latitude should allow for tighter budgeting and contribute to reductions in the level of annual appropriations.” (CR, 1/23/64, 932)
Baltimore Sun editorialized on ranger vii: “. . . we hear much talk of what this means in international prestige, and to what extent we have given the Russians (as well as the moon) one in the eye. Yet surely the thing itself is the thing itself, and is wonderful in the full sense of that word. To see actual photographs close-up of the surface of the moon, whose mystery throughout the history of mankind has but been enhanced by its proximity and by the fact that something could always be seen there, is a matter of awe and wonder; and that is the main thing about this moonshot.” (Balt. Sun, 8/1/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at aiaa Luncheon in Washington: “. . . the concept of the lunar landing was not new when NASA was founded in 1958. Research was continuing on the various technical aspects of such a mission. In 1959, inhouse work began on mission definition. In the fall of 1960, three six-month feasibility design study contracts were awarded. In January 1961 NASA received these interim findings. There were two basic vehicle approaches to be considered—direct ascent and rendezvous. In May of 1961, the study contract results were available, and supported our interim findings, and the recommendation was made to the Congress that the nation proceed with the mission. . . . “There will be missions after Project Apollo. We are already examining their feasibility, cost, and potential return. We are carefully establishing a variety of future space missions, both manned and up-manned, that exploit the near earth, lunar, and planetary environments. No decisions have been made and we are not ready to recommend them yet. As the information becomes available and as the results are analyzed, we will be able to present the country with a solid spectrum of achievable, well-conceived mission alternatives and options. The selection will be a national, not an agency, decision.” (Text)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving studies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA Release 64-175)
George H. Arthur, Deputy Director of the International Telephone and Telegraph Aerospace Laboratory at Nutley, N.J., predicted that the Russians would go to the moon before 1970 and make a manned circum-lunar mission in two and one half years. He said the United States would also be able to get to the moon by 1970 if it had as much success with its developmental program in the Saturn IB and Saturn V as it had with Saturn I. (Balt. Sun, 11/5/64)
In the U.S. for speaking tour, Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, told the Boston Globe: “. . . I am terribly impressed by the dynamic effort this country is making to be first in space. It appears to me the signs are extremely favorable so far as the West is concerned in the stake it has in America’s space program. . . . “This is the greatest challenge man has ever faced. If you’re going to be the leading power in the world, you simply can’t afford to come in second. . . .” Sir Bernard said press reports quoting him as saying the U.S.S.R. had given up going to the moon were “completely erroneous. “I have every reason to believe the Russians are trying to get to the moon every bit as fast as the Americans are.” (Leland, Boston Globe, 3/19/64)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., space editor of Journal of the Armed Forces, discussed the Agena rocket stage, calling it “a highly reliable, extremely versatile piece of hardware which serves triple duty as an orbital injection vehicle for satellites, as an upper stage booster for lunar and planetary probes, and as a spacecraft. From the standpoint of frequency of usage, Agena is far ahead of the field. In the seven years since Sputnik I went up, there have been about 290 spacecraft sent into earth orbit or deep space trajectory; Agena, in various versions, has been in on 142 of them—almost half. It is currently being employed at the rate of about 30 shoots a year and it will figure in some very important upcoming projects. . . Haggerty described Agena contributions, notably its remarkable accuracy in sending ranger vii on its course to the moon. (J/Armed Forces, 10/3/64, 8)
The day after RANGER vn’s historic photographs of the moon climaxed a “textbook flight,” President Johnson was briefed on the mission by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Dr. William H. Pickering. Discussing the lunar surface photographs, Dr. Newell said the principal investigators (Dr. Gerard Kuiper and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker) had tentatively concluded that “because there exists such sharp little craters here on the surface, this indicates that there is not a deep layer of dust in this area. There would be expected to be a layer of dust on the lunar surface . . . there has been much speculation about how deep it would be. . . . Some people had speculated as much as a thousand feet. Many as much as 30 or 40 feet. Others had said no, it can’t be. And those who said no, it can’t be, Dr. Shoemaker now thinks were right. At least as far as this area is concerned.” Asked by the President whether the ranger VII success confirmed “that you folks had known what you were doing,” Dr. Pickering replied: “Yes, I think it does. “First of all, it confirms we know what we are doing technically when we design something to do this job. Secondly, that as far as the Apollo Program is concerned, it confirms that the basic assumptions that they were making about the sort of surface we are going to have to land on is probably correct.” The President asked, “What similar achievements, scientific achievements, can be compared to this?” and Dr. Newell replied: “Dr. Kuiper was asked this question yesterday. He stated he felt this was comparable to the photographing of the sun in the ultraviolet light by the Naval Research Laboratory a number of years ago. “Someone else said that this amounts to a big jump in lunar science, equivalent to the jump that occurred when Galileo turned the telescope on the heavens.” President Johnson said: “If we were to conclude—if I were to conclude, if the Budget were to conclude, or if the American people should conclude—that we want to effect a savings here of a few billion dollars, would it he your opinion, Doctor [Pickering], that we would be pennywise and pound-foolish?” Dr. Pickering replied: “It would indeed, sir, because I believe that this is truly an investment not only which is needed to demonstrate our leadership in the relatively near future, but it is a long-term investment for the future. ” (NASA Transcript)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed banquet of Aviation/Space Writers’ Association in Miami. Discussing possible hazards to Apollo astronauts, he said that based on data from explorer xvi satellite it was “not anticipated at this time that meteoroids will constitute a major problem in the planning or scheduling of the first manned lunar exploration.” Radiation did not present a hazard either: “. . . In the case of solar flares, we compared the allowable safe dose with what would have been produced within the Apollo command module by the worst flares on record, that of July 1959. If an Apollo spacecraft had been in flight on a lunar mission at this time, the astronauts would have received only 15 percent of the safe dose, calculated on the basis of a report by a group established by the Space Science Board of the National Academy of Sciences. . . . “Very recently there have been suggestions that space flight—even relatively short duration flight—is harmful to man. There is no evidence from Project Mercury to support these fears. Based on our experience in Mercury, which included a flight of 34 hours by Gordon Cooper, there is no reason to believe that flights of two weeks or less will be harmful. . . .” Dr. Mueller then outlined nine medical experiments to be conducted during the two-man orbital space flights of Project Gemini. (Text; NASA Release 64^128)
“. . . I think we can safely say that our structural problems have been overcome and nuclear rockets can be developed for the performance of future missions beyond Apollo.” (Text)
New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller, campaigning in New Hampshire Republican primary for presidential nomination, said there was a “very serious question” whether U.S. should abandon Project Apollo manned lunar project and rely instead on instrumented spacecraft. About 95% of information obtainable by men on the moon “for a half an hour” could be gathered by instruments, he said. He said the decision for Apollo came after the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion, when the Administration decided the U.S. needed something “dramatic.” Rockefeller proposed reconsidering the space plan advocated by President Eisenhower, calling for a slower, less expensive, “scientific” program, (nyt, 2/14/64, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address at the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner. He compared U.S. and Soviet space accomplishments:	“1. As regards that key feature of booster power, the Soviets are ahead on an operational basis, although we are moving up rapidly, having attained the current weight-lifting record on a test shot by the Saturn I. “2. We have placed almost four times as many payloads into earth orbit, while they continue each year to increase their absolute lead in total weight of net payloads orbited. “3. Our numerical progress in orbiting payloads is impressive. Last year alone, the U.S. put more payloads into earth orbit than the USSR has since Sputnik I in 1957. “4. The increasing reliability of our launchings is also impressive. During the past three years, we placed successfully into earth orbit 82% of all the payloads which we attempted to put there. The Soviet record, while not identical, is comparable. “5. The Soviet heavy Vostok class of vehicle has accumulated some 1600 orbits, as compared with 37 for our smaller Mercury. . . . “6. The Soviets have devoted more of their attention to far-out space than we. have. As a percentage of total space launching attempts, they have devoted five times as much effort to escape-missions to the moon and planets as we have. The opposite is true as to near-earth orbits, in which the U.S. emphasis has been much greater than theirs. “7. Both countries have made impressive strides in accumulating scientific data about space. We may even be ahead in this regard, but it is not safe to assume so. “8. The U.S. is clearly ahead in world-wide sharing of space research in cooperative programs, and in direct application of space technology to practical use in communications, weather reporting, geodesy, and navigation. “In summary, we have made enormous gains in the past few years in the race with our able and aggressive competitor. “. . .1 want to emphasize that the Soviets have a strong orderly program, with every indication that it is continuing vigorously, apparently unaffected by adverse economic factors in their country. Wishful thinking to the contrary, we dare not slow down unless we are willing to pay the terrific price of second place. . . .” (Text)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, reported in New Scientist that technical difficulties, and not a deliberate slackening of effort, were hampering Soviet activities in getting men to the moon. He noted that the Russians apparently had not made a probe work in space successfully for more than a few weeks and concluded that the Soviets were failing where “once they shone—in basic rocketry techniques.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on NASA authorization for FY 1965. NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified: “In the tight budget situation faced by the President for Fiscal Year 1965 it was necessary to stress with him and the Bureau of the Budget that unless the full $5.3 billion authorization requested for FY 1965, and •the supplemental appropriation of $141 million requested for FY" 1964 are approved, the manned space flight program will encounter further delays- It will then not be possible to achieve the national goal of exploring the moon with men within this decade. “There may be some inclination to assume that the adjustment of our program to the reductions imposed for FY 1964 indicates that this will likewise be possible in the event of reductions in the request which is before you at this time. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this is not the case. “In adjusting our program to compensate for the reductions made in the appropriation for FY 1964, we have already sacrificed the margins and early target dates which were needed, and which in reality are still needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been set for us. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we are not able to maintain a reasonably balanced program, and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assurance that we can meet the 1970 lunar target date. The best we can say is that we have a ‘fighting chance.’ “To sum up our situation in a sentence, if we do not receive the funds which the President has requested, there is nothing left to sacrifice except the National goal itself. “. . . whether it is agreed or not that international considerations and national security factors require that we hold to the present pace of the space program, the fact is that prudence and economy will be served. Even if economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in the evaluation of the NASA request for FY 1965, the cost of establishing and maintaining superiority in space will be less if we maintain the pace, the momentum, which the supplemental, appropriation and this authorization request will provide. “. . . Despite the difficulties which have been experienced, we can still put two American explorers on the moon in this decade, and we can do it for less than $20 billion. . . . [But] if the program is further curtailed, if the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into the next decade, the cost will not be under $20 billion, it will be several billions more. The ultimate cost will increase for each year in which achievement of our goal is delayed. “. . . [According to a NASA study], the cost of the lunar exploration would increase by approximately $1 billion for each year that the landing is delayed. A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a six year delay $6 billion, with no corresponding improvement in the benefits obtained. . . (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64, A545-48)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dry den, appearing on CBS radio program “Capitol Cloakroom,” said that before U.S. and U.S.S.R. could cooperate in a manned space flight effort, the U.S.S.R. would have to radically change its secrecy policy in space exploration. Some changes might be required in U.S. space policies also. “To conduct cooperative manned flights,” Dr. Dryden said, “I think you’d have to . . . start from the beginning with a joint team to consider all the problems together.” Regarding U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements reached on weather satellites, communications satellites, and magnetic field studies, Dr. Dryden commented that “implementation of the agreements has been proceeding rather slowly. . . . We hope they’ll give us some clear indication as to whether they are ready to exchange cloud pictures in 1964, or not.” Regarding Project Apollo timetable, Dr. Dryden said that if Congress supported the proposed budget for the project it should be possible to land a man on the moon by 1970. However, two year’s “slack” built into the schedule to allow for contingencies was lost by the FY 1964 budget reduction, (upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 1/3/64; Wilson, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 1/3/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at Apollo electronics panel, IEEE Western Electric Show and Convention, Los Angeles:	“The United States is now completing the first decade of the exploration of space. During the last five years major strides have been made in exploring, understanding, and exploiting space. Today we have allocated almost half the resources needed to carry out the greatest adventure in the history of mankind—the manned lunar landing which is the goal of the Apollo Program. This goal could not have been conceived, much less achieved, without the amazing growth of knowledge, techniques, and technology in the field of electronics which has been ever accelerating since the last war. Communications, guidance, power, control, display, all these have passed and surpassed the maximum expectations of a decade ago. “In the Apollo Program we are developing a set of capabilities which will provide for manned exploration, understanding man’s proficiency in space and the vicinity of the earth. This is a capability which can be extended to meet the needs of this Nation for science or technology, for transportation or observation, for defense or commerce. “Although the end is manned exploration of space, the means, including the production of space vehicles, is being created here on earth. It is based in large measure on the expansion and growth of the electronics industry. It depends on that electronics industry to meet and exceed new goals for reliability and quality as well as performance in their products. . . .” (Text) August 28-September 7: In conjunction with Cleveland’s Parade of Progress exhibit commemorating opening of new Cleveland Convention Center, NASA exhibited Centaur space vehicle, full-scale spacecraft such as Ranger and Mariner, Sert spacecraft, ranger vii moon pictures, Gemini two-man spacecraft, and other exhibits. Space lectures and motion pictures were presented. NASA Lewis Research Center coordinated the display, (lrc Releases 64-72, -73, -75, -79, and -80)
President Johnson personally congratulated scientists and technicians responsible for the successful flight of ranger vii. He congratulated Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL, and Dr. Homer Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and then issued a statement on the experiment. He called the flight “a basic step forward in our orderly program to assemble the scientific knowledge necessary for man’s trip to the moon. . . . The pictures obtained of the lunar surface should prove extremely useful. ... They will be a guide in constructing the lunar excursion module and in planning the trip. Now we shall be able to better map out our descent route. We’ll be able to build our lunar landing equipment with greater certainty and knowledge of the conditions which our astronauts will encounter on the moon. I recognize that this great success has come only after a number of failures and partial failures in our efforts to send probes to the moon. This success should spur us on to added effort in the future. . . . On behalf of a grateful nation, let me again congratulate you on this magnificent achievement. All of you today have helped further the peaceful exploration of space.” (NYT, 8/1/64)
Senate’s narrow margin of defeating amendment to cut NASA’s FY 1965 Apollo authorization by 10% was subject of editorial by Robert Hotz in Aviation Week: “. . . There should be little satisfaction for supporters of the U.S. space program in the narrow margin by which the Fulbright amendment was defeated. It indicates clearly what a long, hard pull still lies ahead to educate the people of this country fully on the long-term needs to maintain this nation’s pre-eminence in the vital area of space technology. There will never be any lack of criticism of any legislative program that has progress as its goal. But it should be the genuine concern of the supporters of the U.S. space program to state their case with such force and clarity that this conservative carping from Sen. Fulbright and his ilk will produce only the hollow echo in history that it merits.” (Av. Wk., 6/29/64,11)
JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif., the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights to the moon and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H. Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec. (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 9 At the dedication of the jpl Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, remarked: “Often in our discussions of the Space Program we refer to the ‘manned program’ and the ‘unmanned program.’ We even talk about manned space science and unmanned space science. Strictly speaking, this is loose talk. There is, in fact, no such thing as unmanned science. Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science. “In the Space Program, it becomes simply a matter of where the man is in relation to his instruments and measuring devices. For those space missions that we call unmanned, man is back on earth while his eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechanically far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation. From his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data, measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility like the sfof is necessary. . . .” (Text)
NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight was holding three days of meetings with msc officials on problems related to Project Apollo. Members of Committee, established by nasa Administrator James E. Webb in December 1963, and which functioned in advisory capacity to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, delved into problems posed by launch vehicle systems, spacecraft systems, launch operations, science program, and space medicine. MIT physicist Dr. Charles Townes said at msc meeting of the Committee that he believed astronauts, not scientists, should be first men to explore moon. Scientists, he said, would concentrate on their own specialties in exploring the moon’s surface, but astronauts trained in scientific principles would bring back important information on the moon as a whole, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64, 1; Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee that 15 Saturn V flights were planned for Project Apollo program, the lunar landing to be accomplished in the last three months of 1969 with the fifteenth flight. Webb also said that if the proposed $5.3 billion nasa budget for fiscal year 1965 were cut so that the Apollo program had to be slowed down, the cost of the program would increase by a billion dollars with each added year of delay. (Text)
Among the ten top scientific, medical, and technological advances in 1964 as selected by Dr. Watson Davis, Science Service Director, were: 1.	Close-up photographs of the moon taken by ranger vii. 2.	Orbiting of the earth by three Russian cosmonauts in the voskhod I spacecraft. 3.	Discovery of quasars, the brightest, most violent, and heaviest sources of light and radio waves, possibly fueled by collapse of gravity waves. (Sci. Serv., Wash. Daily News, 12/14/64)
Educator Robert M. Hutchins, writing in the Omaha World-Herald, said of U.S. project to land a man on the moon: “I think it will not be argued that the primary object of this venture is to advance knowledge. It seems rather to be designed as a huge public relations stunt. The ‘knowledge industry’ will restore the prestige we lost when the Russians outdistanced us in space. . . . “If we were dedicated to advancing knowledge, we would have had some serious debate about the best way to do it. Is it to improve our colleges and universities or to put on scientific spectaculars?” (Omaha Sun. World-Herald, 3/29/64)
NASA and Univ. of Texas signed contract for 84-in. optical telescope to observe the moon and planets. NASA would provide $2.1 million to build the telescope, and the University would provide $759,000 observatory building and $1.2-million associated shop buildings. Scheduled to be operational in 1968, the telescope would be fifth largest in the world. (M&R, 9/28/64,13)
A. 0. Tischler, NASA Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, said in paper for aiaa : “At this time the United States stands on the threshold of transport in the space environment. Until now, with the exception of a relatively few payloads such as Syncom, payloads launched into space were put on their trajectory by the launch vehicle. Only minor path corrections were applied by the on-board propulsion systems. Even the Mercury capsule returns were made by a relatively minor slowing of the orbiting capsule, with aerodynamic braking providing the rest of the kinetic energy change. However in Gemini which may fly with men this year, and which will later effect rendezvous of separate payloads in space, and in Apollo, which will perform an intricate series of space maneuvers, we recognize systems that carry significant propulsion capability into space for use entirely in that environment. The time is rapidly coming when space is no longer something we throw darts into but is an environment in which working propulsion systems will maneuver and transport spacecraft payloads and eventually convey these payloads back to the earth’s atmosphere for descent to the surface to be used again. . . . “[Space] . . . booster engines have passed, or in the case of the Saturn V engines, are approaching their preliminary flight rating tests, while the more conservative spacecraft propulsion systems have not yet arrived at that milepost. While these spacecraft engines may be expected to come along at a faster pace than the big booster engine developments, the fact is that they are presently in a tail chase situation. I think we must observe that at this moment the status of spacecraft propulsion systems under development lags the development status of launch vehicle engines and is additionally behind in performing sophistication. That is the area that warrants propulsion attention.” (Text)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of msc, was one of featured speakers at opening of Houston Museum of Natural Science and Burke Baker Planetarium in Houston. Dr. Gilruth said msc was negotiating with museum officials for part time use of planetarium for Apollo project, (msc Roundup, 7/22/64, 1)
Ryan Aeronautical Corp. was awarded contract from RCA to design landing radar for the Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. RCA, responsible for major lem subsystems, would integrate landing radar with lem’s overall sensor system. (M&R, 1/13/64,10-11)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.) was quoted in World Book Encylopedia Science Service article as saying NASA’s Apollo three-man spacecraft could be modified for military missions to: orbit earth for two-to-three months with more than 2% tons of weapons or reconnaissance equipment by 1967; move from equatorial orbit to polar orbit, surveying earth every 24 hrs.; survey a single strategic portion of the globe from a stationary 24-hr. orbit; carry six 500-lb. rocket packages, adaptable to containing nuclear weapons. “If we do not succeed in developing . , . [such] military potential for Apollo, it will be because of lack of funding and direction, and not because of technical problems,” he said. “. . . our ability to defend ourselves in the future and thus our whole future is tied up in space.” (WBESciServ, Houston Chron., 9/13/64)
It was reported that NASA was actively considering methods to be used for exploration by astronauts on the moon. Two devices were under consideration: a mobile laboratory (Molab) in which men could work and also go out in spacesuits to gather rock and soil samples, and a “lunar hopper,” a helicopter device for short flights to sites that could not be reached on foot or by Molab. Parallel studies of the Molab concept were being undertaken by Boeing Co., Seattle, and Bendix Corp. of Ann Arbor, under contracts of $800,000. Bell Aerosystems Co., Buffalo, had been awarded a $199,333 contract to study the lunar hopper concept. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/17/64)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, said before House Subcommittee on nasa Oversight about Project Ranger: “. . . From the outset, the concept was advanced. It was conceived to seize the initiative in space exploration from the Soviet as well as to obtain important information about the moon. Had it succeeded, it certainly would have been a major first for this country, and it may still obtain that objective. The spacecraft itself is quite complex. ... It is comparable to the most sophisticated launch vehicles in terms of electromechanical system complexity. Launch vehicles developed in this country have typically taken 20 or more flights to achieve 50% reliability. Some have not done much better than this after many more firings. Indeed, we have read recently that last year there were 13 consecutive failures of the Atlas. In addition, the Discoverer project took 13 attempts to recover its first payload from orbit. Polaris experienced 5 initial failures before its first success. Skybolt experienced 5 flights without achieving complete mission success. In each of these projects, partial success in early flights helped improve later flights. Although I believe Skybolt was dropped for other reasons, Atlas, Discoverer, and Polaris all went on to become vital elements in the defense posture of this country. “Ranger is going through this same process. We have solved some of our launch vehicle problems to the point where the reliability is improving appreciably. The basic spacecraft bus has been retained and has now demonstrated its capability to deliver a payload to a precise spot on the lunar surface. We now must make the payload work. The payload also is pushing the state of the art in high power television telemetry. This was necessary to obtain high resolution photographs. . . . “Our reviews of the Ranger system continue to convince us of its capability of performing the mission. While we know we cannot have 100% reliability with launch vehicle, spacecraft, or payload, we expect to achieve at least one complete success with the remaining three flights. . . . “Ranger is a tough job. Although success has eluded us, it is within our grasp. We must have the fortitude to proceed. Space will only he conquered by those who do have such fortitude. It might he well to point out that our competitors in this area of exploration are not lacking in this respect. It is reported that the Soviet Union has failed in from 15 to 20 consecutive lunar and planetary mission attempts since Lunik III photographed the hack side of the moon in 1959. “Even should subsequent Rangers fail through unforeseen causes, we must move ahead. We must look at the totality of the space program. . . . The over-all picture is very good and is most convincing of this country’s capability to successfully complete these undertakings. The trends are all in our favor. . . .” (Testimony)
ranger VI crashed onto the moon on target in the Sea of Tranquility, but its onboard camera system failed to return TV photographs of the lunar surface. Indications were that the two TV systems responded to Central Computer and Sequencer (cc&s) command to warm up, but the cameras did not complete the warm-up to picture taking. RANGER Vi’s cameras (two wide-angle and four narrow-angle) were to have made more than 3,000 photographs during its last 10 min. The photographs were to have provided scientific data on lunar topography and supported the Surveyor unmanned soft-landing spacecraft and Apollo manned lunar landing program. Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL which is responsible for Ranger project management as well as its tracking and communications through Deep Space Network, said of ranger vi: “It was a sad finish to something that was going so good. “Our accuracy was a very significant achievement. The failure of the camera system isn’t going to discourage us. I’m quite confident in our ability, and we will succeed in exploring the moon on a future shot.” NASA planned three more Ranger TV flights this year. (Witkin, NYT, 2/3/64; upi, Wash. Post, 2/3/64; AP, Wash. Post, 2/3/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden said in keynote address at Fourth National Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space: “We have chosen to go to the moon because manned exploration of the moon involves every facet of overall space capability this nation must develop if we are to become a leading spacefaring nation. Also, the moon’s pockmarked surface, untouched by water or wind erosion since it has no atmosphere, bears the traces of everything which ever occurred there. . . . “We are carrying forward an active national space program, not limited to the moon, encompassing science, advanced engineering, practical applications, including manned space flight. “We are building toward pre-eminence in every phase of space activity—all the way from microscopic electronic components to skyscraper-tall rockets. “We are building a network of large-scale engineering facilities, space-yards, proving grounds, and space ports to assemble, test, and launch the space vehicles we need now and in the future. “We are creating new national resources of lasting value in these facilities; in the industrial and managerial capabilities we are developing; and in the growing number of scientists and engineers who are learning about space and space technology. “We sure filling the pipelines of hardware and knowledge, and as measured by the financial resources required, will be halfway toward our first manned lunar mission by mid-1965. “We are accumulating, in space, the basic scientific knowledge about the earth, the solar system, the universe, and about man himself. “We are bringing benefits not only to the United States but to all the world through the use of space and space technology, employing such new tools as weather, communications, and navigational satellites, and applying space-based techniques, equipment, and materials to improve industrial products, processes and services. “We are providing a much-needed stimulus to the energies and creativity of people everywhere, particularly to the minds and aspirations of young people.	. “We are bringing about increased economic activity at a time when the effects of automation on our society are beginning to be felt. “And we are making certain, through our sustained efforts, that the realm of space now opening up to us shall be a domain of freedom. “It is for these reasons that we have mounted the greatest peacetime undertaking in the history of mankind. . . (Text)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo program deputy director in NASA Hq. since last January, was appointed director of the Apollo program. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller had been acting Apollo director for the past year. / (nasa Release 64-267)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in Space Business Daily interview that the “major problem” in Project Apollo “is not technical or environmental,” but, rather, “proper funding.” Attainment of lunar landing goal before 1970 depended “more on funding than anything else,” he said. The hiring freeze imposed on Apollo contractors had been eased on a “selected basis,” with the only companies not receiving the easement being Pratt & Whitney and General Dynamics. (SBD, 2/24/64,289)
msc announced approval of improved Gemini spacesuit for use by Apollo astronauts in the earlier flights in earth orbit. Adoption of Gemini spacesuit would allow more time for development of Apollo suit, which would allow astronauts greatest mobility for walking on surface of moon. (Houston Post, 7/7/64)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, Director of Lunar and Planetary Observatory at Univ. of Arizona and chief experimenter on ranger vn lunar-photographing probe, said at mit conference that much of the moon’s surface is naked lava, ranger vii photographs showed that dark regions of the moon, particularly its seas, were of volcanic origin. Dr. Kuiper said other recent photographs of the lunar seas in various wavelengths, including infrared, showed sharp relief features in the lunar seas that were lava flows. “There cannot ever be one millimeter” of cosmic dust on the surface, he stated. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/1/64)
Prof. A. A. Blagonravov, chief delegate of the U.S.S.R. to the U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, told a news conference in Geneva that the Soviet Union had no set plan for landing a man on the moon “within the present decade.” (AP, Houston Post, 6/6/64)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy, where it would be orbited by Saturn I SA-6 in April. Three separate usaf aircraft transported the boilerplate launch escape system, command module, service module,.related ground service equipment, and adapter. Within a few hours, S-l stage and instrument unit for SA-6 arrived by barge after 13-day trip from Huntsville, Ala. (msc Release 64-33; MSC Roundup,2/19/64,1)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, visiting NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said extended manned exploration of the moon “does make considerable sense” as follow-on program to Project Apollo. He said such a program was one of several which NASA would present as possible post-Apollo goals to the President “in approximately a month’s time.” Other possibilities would include such programs as landing unmanned spacecraft on other planets. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/28/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech at Engineers’ Week dinner, Los Angeles: “At present, we estimate that more than 35,000 engineers and scientists are at work in the Gemini and Apollo programs and the studies of possible advanced manned missions. This number will reach a level of 45,000, about 2.8 percent of the national employment of scientists and engineers, when our currently approved programs reach their peak of effort next year. . . . “In recent months, we have reviewed thoroughly the status of program technology . . the pace of the program for its impact on total cost . . and the possible effects on the program of the hazards of interplanetary space. . . . “First, with respect to technology ... we have found all of the knotty questions involved in advancing the state of the art are yielding to hard work. We know of no technological problems that would prevent our accomplishing the Apollo program in this decade. . . . “[Second], . . . starting with the level of funding planned for the current fiscal year there is sound economic justification for maintaining the program on its present schedule. To stretch out the program at this time would add to the cost and unnecessarily delay this first major step in space exploration. “The final area of examination of the program has been with respect to the hazards of interplanetary space. . . . Estimates based on present information indicate that meteoroids will not constitute a major problem in the planning of the first manned lunar exploration. . . . “Altogether, the present evidence indicates that radiation does not present a hazard that would prevent ^accomplishment of manned lunar exploration in this decade. Indeed, there is no serious evidence that the radiation factor would inhibit us in selecting the time of a lunar mission. . . .” (Text)
Col. John M. Stapp (usaf) said at iaf congress in Warsaw that pigs and bears had been used in tests to determine best position for astronauts to be in when Apollo spacecraft returning from the moon hits the earth. Human volunteers were used in 146 test runs, but anaesthetized bears and pigs were used in tests which were considered too dangerous for human subjects. Results: safest position would be landing backwards at 45° angle to the line of impact, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/11/64)
The Federal government was critized by National Academy of Sciences committee for plunging into such major undertakings as a moon expedition or a supersonic airplane without assessing the effects on the Nation’s limited scientific and engineering manpower resources. The study, made public by President Johnson, said that since the Govern. ment supported about three fifths of all those engaged in research and development, it had a “massive influence” on the deployment and utilization of scientists and engineers. This, in turn, imposed an “entirely new order of responsibility” upon the Government to prevent “malutili-zation” of the manpower and to achieve a “balanced allocation of scientific and engineering talent.” Two of the committee’s principal recommendations: (1)	Steps be taken by the Executive Office of the President to develop an integrated program for collecting and analyzing information about scientific and engineering manpower. (2)	“Before the government reaches a decision to undertake a great technological program, it should make a careful assessment of the impact of the decision on the deployment and utilization of scientists and engineers.” Nowhere in its report did the committee suggest that the lunar expedition had unduly diverted manpower from other fields; in fact, the report showed that slightly less than 30 per cent of the Nation’s scientists, engineers, and secondary school teachers of science and mathematics were engaged in defense, space, and atomic energy research, and that space accounted for less than 5 per cent. The study, an outgrowth of a request by President Kennedy in 1961 for a review of the Nation’s scientific and engineering manpower resources, was prepared by a 17-man committee headed by Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., science adviser to former President Eisenhower and no^v chairman of the corporation of mit. (Finney, NYT, 7/12/64, 1, 33; Carey, AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64)
President Johnson ordered prompt removal of NASA tracking station from Zanzibar shortly after President Abeid Karume requested that the U.S. remove it before the end of this month. President Karume made the request to Frank Carlucci, U.S. Charge d’Affaires in Zanzibar, and reportedly told Carlucci that the action was a result of statement by U.S. Ambassador-to-Eenya William Atwood at New York press conference that Red China and East Germany were trying to turn Zanzibar “into a kind of non-African state to be used as a staging base for political maneuvers” on the African continent. NASA announced in Washington that the loss of the station would have no adverse effect on the U.S. manned space program. The station had been on a stand-by hasis since end of Project Mercury, would have been of “minimum use” in Project Gemini and not used at all in Project Apollo. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/8/64; Smith, NYT, 4/8/64, 11; Sehlstedt, Bah. Sun, 4/8/64)
Apollo spacecraft (BP-23) was subjected to simulated catastrophic failure of its launch vehicle in a successful test of the ahort escape system at White Sands, N. Mex. Apollo command and service boilerplate modules were boosted on a Little Joe II launch vehicle to the region of maximum dynamic pressure at 29,000-ft. altitude and launch vehicle failure was simulated. The escape vehicle, mated to the spacecraft by a connecting tower, yanked the Apollo free of Little Joe and carried it almost two miles higher. The Little Joe rocket fell to earth; the Apollo modules were returned gently to the ground by three 88-ft. parachutes. This was the third successful test of functioning of the 33-ft. launch escape tower designed to jettison the command module and three Apollo astronauts to safety in an ahort before or during the launch phase of a Saturn V mission. It was the first test of the boost-protective cover subsystem, a contoured shell fitting over the command module and designed to protect the docking mechanism of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) from excessive heating during high temperatures of first-stage flight. It also protected command module windows from exhaust of the launch escape motor, (nasa Release 64-299)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press conference at which he responded to questions regarding the mol project: question: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory with nasa’s Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.] Can you tell us how you feel about that?” secretary MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid duplicate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program. The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . . . My principle is a very simple one ... I believe we are a military organization, we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100 percent in favor of doing so.” question: “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether you are backing the mol or not?” SECRETARY mcnamara : “Yes, indeed.” question: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.” secretary MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the mol program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program not directly related to the Lunar Program. ... I want to be certain that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is directly related to the Lunar Program.” (Text; M&R, 12/21/64, 20; SBD, 12/15/64)
Discussing U.S. space costs in terms of the gross national product, Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said the GNP was nearly $2 billion a day, “and I guess we can afford a couple of days of that to get to the moon.” (AP, Louisville, Ky., Courier-Journal, 8/7/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told group touring Saturn-Apollo industrial facilities at NASA Michoud Operations that astronauts on flight to the moon would not be harmed by radiation from Van Allen belts or solar flares. Project Apollo astronauts would be “safer than test pilots in industry have ever been,” he declared. (Maloney, Houston Post, 5/12/64)
Potential of the gas-core nuclear rocket was outlined at recent press conference by National Aeronautics and Space Council staff-member Maxwell W. Hunter, Jr., and Welsey Kuhrt and George Mc-Lafferty of United Aircraft Corp., which is performing research on gas-core nuclear rocket under NASA contract. Maximum specific impulse for gas-core nuclear rocket would be between 2,000 and 3,000 (contrasted with 400 for the best chemical propellants and 1,000 for solid-core nuclear rocket). United Aircraft calculated useful payload sent to moon and back by gas-core nuclear rocket would be 10-30% of takeoff weight, compared to a fraction of 1 % for chemical rockets. Power of gas-core rocket would be so great there would be no need for rocket staging; single-stage rocket could take off from earth, land on moon, take off, return to earth, and land safely. Such a rocket vehicle would be reusable. (Witkin, NYT, 1/26/64, 32)
President Johnson sent to Congress his proposed $5,304 billion authorization for NASA in FY 1965, $600 million less than NASA earlier had requested. The proposed legislation (H.R. 9641) was introduced in the House by Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) and referred to Committee on Science and Astronautics. Of this sum, $641,000,000 would be for administrative operations; $281,000,000 for construction of facilities; and $4,382,000,000 for research and development. Of R&D amount, $3,011,900,000 would be for manned space flight—$2,677,500,000 for Project Apollo; $308,400,000 for Project Gemini; and $26,000,000 for advanced missions. At press conference on the budget, NASA made public its plans to request $141 million supplemental appropriation for FY 1964, to restore some of the budget cut by Congress. The NASA position, as expressed by Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.: “We have now been cut back to a point where we’ll have to admit we cannot carry out the [lunar landing] program in this decade without the full support of Congress for the supplemental and for our 1965 request.” Of supplemental request, $31 million would be for Apollo spacecraft development and the rest for Saturn launch vehicle. (NASA LAR III/7; Finney, NYT, 1/16/64, 1; WSJ, 1/16/64; Dodd, Chic. Trib., 1/16/64)
22,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine for Project Apollo service module, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64)
Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, told scientists at American Geophysical Union meeting in Seattle that the structure of some of the ridges on the lunar surface photographed by ranger vii indicated that water might exist on the moon. (AP, St. Louis PostDispatch, 12/31/64)
New maps of the moon made by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis, were termed “the best lunar maps ever made” by E.	A. Whitaker, astronomer at Lunar and Planetary Laboratory in Tucson, Ariz., and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, lunar geologist of U.S. Geological Survey Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz. Maps were on scale of one inch equals eight miles. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 6/28/64)
It was reported that NASA was considering diverting money from some of its other programs in an effort to save the National goal of landing men on the moon in the 1960’s. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Associate Administrator of NASA, said in an interview that the agency “faced a real uphill battle in the next five years” to achieve a lunar landing before 1970. He stated that the probability of success was “not as high as we’d like it to be, since this is a national commitment.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in interview that any further schedule slippages would inevitably throw the lunar landing into the 1970’s. Space officials were still holding to the 1969 goal, and, he added, “We haven’t given this up yet.” At the current time NASA was $217 million short of the bare minimum it had requested for FY 1965. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/19/64)
NASA invited scientists to propose research experiments and studies for manned and unmanned space flights during the last half of the 1960’s. The announcement of deadlines and guidelines for the submission of proposals was distributed by NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications to domestic and foreign scientists in universities, industries, and Government installations. The agency gave the world scientific community detailed descriptions and timetables covering a wide range of space research opportunities, including placing scientific experiments in available space on Gemini and Apollo manned flights, weather satellites, sounding rockets, the X—15 research plane, orbiting observatories, and balloons. (NASA Release 64-177)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.), speaking on the House floor, praised the team of scientists and technicians that made the successful RANGER VII lunar flight possible, and said that the “validity of the space program has been reconfirmed.. . Also in the House, Rep. Louis C. Wyman (R.-N.H.) said the transmission of lunar photographs was “a great tribute to the scientific progress of our experts in America’s space program,” and RANGER VII was “a highly technical success ... in the right direction; namely, the use of machines” rather than man in space exploration. He added that Project Apollo need not be called off, but he felt Congress should “hold back on the appropriations for Apollo space vehicle procurement until we have established that man can rendezvous in space by completing successfully the present Gemini program. . . .” He also advocated elimination of a target date for U.S. manned landing on the moon. (CR, 8/3/64,17203)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to present FY 1965 funding requirements for the manned space flight program and to discuss Project Apollo schedule considerations in detail. Dr. Mueller observed: “The funds thus far appropriated by the Congress represent about one-third of the cost of the manned space flight program—up to and including the first manned lunar exploration. We now approach the period of maximum effort. The measure before you will bring us about half way to the moon.” (Testimony)
Red spot on the moon was observed from 12:18 a.m. to about 1:00 a.m. by three lunar observers in Port Tobacco, Md. Using 16-in. telescope, the astronomers described the spot as a “red, pinkish glow” which was “located on the base of the central peak in the Crater Alphonsus.” This was said to be eighth sighting of such a spot on the moon in the last six years and the first in Alphonsus since the discovery of the phenomenon by a Russian scientist in 1958. The three observers, associated with Trident Engineer Associates of Annapolis, Md., were using equipment specially developed for detecting the red spots, in lunar observation project for NASA. (Wash. Sun. Star, 11/1/64; NASA Release 64—278)
Dr. J. E. Geake of the Manchester College of Science and Technology said that undamaged material on the moon brought to the surface By the impact of a meteorite or by possible volcanic activity could account for patches of red light observed there. He suggested that if the impact were in a region of luminescent material, the rocks would emit light when hit by charged particles. The impact could have occurred 10,000 or even 100,000 years before the luminescence was observed. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 12/1/64,19)
Saturn I SA—6 flight was conducted successfully from Cape Kennedy, the huge two-stage launch vehicle boosting into orbit an Apollo boilerplate spacecraft attached to the S-IV second stage. The one malfunction in the flight was premature shutdown of one of the eight first-stage engines, cutting off 24 sec. early. Preliminary analysis of telemetry data indicated that the remaining seven H—1 engines burned additional two sec. to compensate for lost thrust of the eighth engine, and the Saturn I’s guidance system corrected course deviations caused by the shutoff engine, so that orbital parameters (140-mi. apogee, 123.9-mi. perigee, 88.5-min. period, and 31.8° inclination to the equator) came very close to those predicted. This was first Saturn I flight test of active guidance system to inject upper stage and attached Apollo spacecraft into orbit. Eight movie cameras mounted on the Saturn I to photograph propulsion and fuel operations were ejected and recovered. Main purpose of the flight was further qualification of the Saturn I launch vehicle and continued development of technology necessary to build the more powerful Saturn IB and V launch vehicles, (Marshall Star, 6/3/64, 1; NASA Releases 64-113 and 64-130; M&R, 6/8/64,10)
In honor of ranger VII, the International Astronomical Union meeting in Hamburg, Germany, designated the region where the lunar probe impacted on the moon as “Mare Cognitum.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/2/64,14)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright, Chairman of Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said at Copenhagen celebration of 50th anniversary of Denmark-America Foundation: “The most urgent need of this troubled world is new thoughts and attitudes toward the old problem of human relations, as distinct from excessive preoccupation with traveling to the moon.” (AP, Kansas City Times, 5/12/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, described in Astronautics & Aeronautics the future space capabilities being developed for the U.S. through Project Apollo. The Saturn IB, Saturn V, and Apollo manned spacecraft would provide capabilities including extended lunar explorations, orbiting laboratory research, manned escape missions, and long-duration operations—including satellite inspection and repair. (A&A, 6/64,26—29) During June: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said in Scientific American article on the supersonic transport that NASA Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center had “devised several aerodynamic designs for what they call a scat, which is an acronym for ‘supersonic commercial air transport.’ Four of these designs, known as scat’s 4, 15, 16, and 17, are the products of eight years of research. Each design has characteristics that make it somewhat different from the others.. . . . “nasa engineers conducted extensive wind-tunnel tests of the four scat models at the Langley and Ames centers to evaluate and compare their aerodynamic characteristics. ... It is evident that we must discover how to combine the supersonic L/D [lift-drag ratio] characteristics of scat 4 with the subsonic performance of scat 16. We are optimistic that this can be done. . . . Discussing special structural problems of sst designs, Dr. Bisplinghoff said the metal fatigue would be accelerated under exposure to high temperatures of supersonic flight, hut at the same time it was essential that the airframe provide safety and serviceability for more than 10 yrs. or 30,000-50,000 hrs. flying time. “Prolonged screening of materials by NASA’s Langley and Lewis laboratories has identified a titanium alloy that appears to meet the unique and stringent requirements for strength, stiffness and high temperatures of an sst. The alloy contains 90 percent titanium, 8 percent aluminum, 1 percent molybdenum and 1 percent vanadium. . . .”	(Sci. Amer.,
Success of ranger vu spotlighted NASA’s preparation for further lunar and planetary exploration, including two more Rangers (early next year), Surveyor soft-landing spacecraft, Lunar Orbiter photographing spacecraft, and Project Apollo manned lunar expedition, as well as two Mariner spacecraft to gather data from the vicinity of Mars (last quarter of 1964). (nasa Releases 64—196,64-205)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9, 1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program and NASA’s Apollo X program. He argued that $1 billion could be saved over a five-year period if mol were to be cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. A jointly operated national space station program would, according to Anderson, best utilize U.S. space resources. Sen. Anderson felt that mol lacked growth potential because it could not progress beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
Full-scale metal mockup of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) for Project Apollo was review by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center officials at Grum-man’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Mockup’s appearance was highlight of week-long analysis of the mockup design with a critique aimed at defin-itizing the lem design, (msc Roundup, 10/14/64, 1)
NASA intended to award contracts for studying feasibility of improving the weight-lifting capacity of the Saturn V by more than one third in case the needs of the moon program dictated such an increase. Preliminary studies were to cost about $2 million. Proposals were being sought by msfc. With its 7.5-million-lb.-thrust booster, Saturn V would be able to launch either 120 tons into earth orbit or 45 tons to the moon. (AP, 6/12/64; NASA Release 64-140)
Among persons listed by Aviation Week and Space Technology for significant contributions to the progress of aerospace in the U.S. during 1964 were: Harold Finger and Milton Klein, manager and deputy respectively of the joint AEC—NASA Nuclear Space Propulsion Office for “pushing the Rover program through four successful tests of a nuclear rocket reactor using liquid hydrogen and demonstrating the technical feasibility of nuclear propulsion for manned interplanetary flights of the future.” Harris “Bud” Schurmeier, Ranger program director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and his technical team for “their tremendous technical success with the Ranger 7 that produced the first detailed photographs of the lunar surface.” Paul F. Bikle, Director of NASA Edwards Flight Research Center, and pilots Milton Thompson and Jack Mackay of NASA and Maj. Robert Rushworth and Capt. Joe Engle of USAF for “their continued operation of the North American X-15 research aircraft into a wide variety of unexplored areas both in performance and equipment testing.” John Mengel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for “direction of the global NASA tracking and data acquisition network which produced an average of 50 mi. of taped data per day from payloads in space.” Col. Harold W. Robbins, usaf Space Systems Div., for “technical direction and support of the large solid rocket program that culminated this year in the successful demonstrations of 156-in.-dia. motors and the initiation of a 260-in.-dia. program.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 9) December 28-30: Dr. John H. Wolfe of NASA Ames Research Center suggested the probable source of Van Allen belt radiation at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Seattle. Dr. Wolfe said the Van Allen radiation belts probably had their source in the cometlike tail of the magnetosphere extending from the dark side of earth away from the sun. Spiraling protons and alpha particles emitted by the sun were shielded from solar wind in this area. Affected only by the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of force and conveyed to the Van Allen belts. New data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instruments aboard explorer xxi imp-b (Interplanetary Monitoring Platform) and ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) led to this conclusion. Data collected from as far into space as 96,000 mi. revealed that interaction of the solar wind and the geomagnetic field around the sunlit side of earth created a boundary region 2^ earth diameters thick at a distance of five earth diameters from the point on earth closest to the sun. This expanded to six diameters thick 90° around earth. Hydromagnetic effects in this boundary deflected solar radiation around earth and prevented it from penetrating directly to the relatively low altitudes of the Van Allen belts except during the more energetic solar storms. Satellite data also indicated that the comet-like tail of earth extended directly along the line from the sun through earth, rather than being slightly deflected as had been believed. Wolfe said the tail seemed less tapered and more nearly cylindrical than had been expected, and extended at least as far as the orbit of the moon, (arc Release 65-2; AP, Detroit News, 1/8/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
Apollo program review was presented in special day-long session of fiveday national meeting of Society of Automotive Engineers (sae) in Los Angeles. Another highlight of the meeting was emphasis on in-flight maintenance problems associated with long manned space flights. General Dynamics/Astronautics reported its design philosophy of eliminating need for hand tools in spacecraft maintenance and repair. In address to the group, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said that “virtually none” of U.S. space flight projects had been “successfully completed within their originally estimated resources and on their originally laid out schedules . . . historically, schedules have often stretched out to nearly twice their length and costs have sometimes grown by factors of three or four. . . . [However] we don’t accept that management can’t do something about it. . . .” He predicted fewer new projects would be initiated unless industry “can show real evidence of having overcome the point of view that says R&D cannot be controlled. . . .” (naa s&ID Skywriter, 10/2/64, 1; M&R, 10/12/ 64,18; Av. Wk., 10/19/64,32)
Rep. Lionel Van Derelin (D.-Calif.) said in a telegram to J. R. Dempsey, president of General Dynamics-Astronautics: “Spectacular success of the Ranger moon shot should not overshadow the equally spectacular record of consecutive successful launchings by Atlas boosters. Ranger shot was the 17th straight. Such amazing reliability is the backbone of our space program.. . {CR, 8/4/64,17368)
George M. Low, NASA MSC deputy director, said all pilots in Projects Gemini and Apollo would be astronauts trained by NASA for its own manned space projects. Brig. Gen. Bleymaier (usaf), in interviews at Houston, had previously said he thought pilots selected by usaf, whose mol project he heads, would participate in Apollo and Gemini in order to acquire experience for the MOL project. Without NASA training for its astronauts, usaf would have to orbit its men without previous space flight experience or launch its own Gemini training flights. (Maloney, Houston Post, 6/10/64; HoustonChron., 6/10/64)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Space Flight, afsc, said that usaf would sharply increase its participation in NASA’s manned space flight program; usaf astronauts might be assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc) at msc. [George Low, msc Deputy Diricetor, denied this claim three days later (see June 9).] General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb; (2) usaf would begin discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of Defense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of mol; (3) 17 Titan III—C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) payloads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/64; M&R, 6/15/64, 12)	_
Soviet newspaper Trud science writer Leonid Byshko said flight to the moon was “one of the most immediate problems of cosmonautics.” After lunar flight, he said, next goal would be flights to other planets in the solar system. “For this purpose, new rocket carriers based on atomic energy are needed. . . . There are no difficulties in principle for creating such nuclear rockets. Only a certain time is required for designing, building and testing.” (upi, Wash. Post, 10/16/64)
Aerojet General Corp. successfully test fired Apollo service module engine in long duration test at Sacramento, Calif. The multiple-restart, 22,000-lb.-thrust engine was activated four times for total of 421 sec. (upi, Houston Chron., 4/29/64)
France’s preparations for hydrogen bomb development in the South Pacific were reaching unexpectedly large proportions, New York Times reported. Gaston Palewski, French Minister for Scientific Research, had recently said in Papeete that “France has engaged herself in Polynesia for a very big task.” Test site and military installations were being constructed at Mururoa in the Tuamotu Islands, 720 mi. southeast of Tahiti. French sources indicated France would become a thermonuclear power by late 1967 or early 1968. (NYT, 1/16/64, 4) Mid-January: Work on test site for Project Apollo at White Sands Missile Range was halted by strike of operating engineers, (sbd, 1/15/64, 72)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
At aiaa, William G. Huber of msfc outlined NASA’s plans for space projects beyond Apollo project. According to one set of plans for the 1970-1990 period, space program costs would be $6,970,000,000 per year for 20 years. This figure was highest yet publicly discussed by a NASA official. Huber was outlining possibilities for the future in his discussion of large post-Saturn launch vehicles. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/3/64)	_
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Student Conference at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs: “. . . in assessing the future one can always learn from the past, and if the thoughtful student of history learns anything from a review of the march of human progress, it is that the ultimate potential of contemporary undertaking is almost never perceived. “So, I believe, it is with research and exploration in space. . . . “Today, 500 years after Prince Henry and his use of the caravel to initiate die Oceanic Age, 400 years after Copernicus presented his theories about the solar system, 300 years after Newton worked out the formula for space flight, but less than 40 years after Goddard devised the vehicle to make it possible, man has left the earth, and widened his horizons to include the entire solar system. “Science today has at its disposal a modem caravel, the chemical rocket, which has already traveled to the moon and Venus. And, as with Henry and his explorations, we have improved navigation systems to guide them out and bring them back to make steadily more accurate measurements of the environment of space—that environment through which Gargarin and Glenn and others traveled, and through which our own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun at the relative speed of 67,000 miles per hour. “And to complete the parallel, just as Prince Henry inaugurated an Age of Discovery which led man to all the seas and continents of the earth, and into the atmosphere up to twice the height of his tallest mountains, so have we today embarked on a new Age of Discovery in which there is no foreseeable horizon. . . .” (Text; CR, 4/6/64, 6686)
In an interview with U.S. News & World, Report, Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the U.S. program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%” that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program” such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth. In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Russians—or, for that matter, even to land on the moon—but to design a hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.” (U.S. News, 6/1/64)
Use of lasers to measure craters on the moon was reported by J. S. Courtney-Pratt, of Bell Telephone Laboratories, to Society of Photographic Scientists and Engineers in New York. Based on computations made with laser beams sent to crater lips and then to crater bottoms, lunar craters were found to be as deep as 20,000 ft. (Devlin, NYT, 4/29/64, 15)
Commenting on Republican Presidential candidate Goldwater’s recently published views on the space program, Warren Burkett, science writer for the Houston Chronicle, pointed out that a good deal of research which can be of use to the military services was being carried on as part of NASA’s Project Apollo. He suggested that an Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory, based on components being developed in the Apollo program, could be used for military aspects of the space program such as space patrol and interception. The article suggested that the Apollo program was generally developing a group of “off-the-shelf’ space systems which could be adapted for military use should this appear desirable. (Houston Chron., 7/26/64)
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium in Philadelphia, displayed in Tel Aviv a clock designed for lunar explorers. The clock, designed by Dr. Levitt, accounted for the fact that a lunar day and night would be more than 28 times as long as the earth’s 24-hour cycle. His clock showed Greenwich time on earth as well as local time for any point on the moon. (NYT, 6/7/64, 78)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $1,356,000 contract to Blaw-Knox Co. for design and fabrication of three 85-ft.-diameter dish-shaped antennas to be used in manned space flight tracking network for Project Apollo lunar mission, (gsfc Release G-4-64)
First Apollo spacecraft preflight acceptance test station was declared operational. Built by GE Apollo Support Dept, with associate contractors Control Data Corp. and Radiation, Inc., the station would be used at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., facility in Apollo preflight testing. Three others would be located at Grumman Aircraft Engineering, Bethpage, N.Y.; NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex.; and Msc Florida Operations, Merritt Island, Fla. (NASA Release 64-214)
First large batch of unusual stones arrived from Iowa at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center for analysis in Project Moon Harvest. Residents of six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists were analyzing to determine if they were of lunar origin. Dr. John A. O’Keefe, project scientist, theorized that pieces of the moon’s surface were chipped off the moon by meteorite impapt and attracted by gravity to the earth. (Goddard News, 4/20/64, 4; GSFC Release G—13-64)
British astronomer Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank observatory, told newsmen in Boston that there were “indications the Soviet economy is being strained” by their space program. He predicted that U.S.S.R. would next attempt “to achieve a rendezvous of two spaceships and to circumvent the moon.” (Long, CSM, 10/19/64)
Washington Post editorialized: “The failure of the sixth straight Ranger spacecraft hoists aloft the question of whether the United States will accomplish its goal of putting an American on the moon by the decade’s end. . . . “A delay would not simply be a case of a stretchout in which work would continue but at a slower pace. A delay would take much of the binding and motivating tension from Apollo. It would increase costs by underusing men and facilities brought together for a tighter schedule, and it would allow projects and personnel to drift out of the main stream into the eddies of lower priority. A delay also would entail loss of prestige for NASA, for the Administration and for the Nation as well. “No schedule, however, is sacred. If it is determined that the landing of a man on the moon by Jan. 1, 1970, is simply not feasible, or cannot be done with reasonable assurance of safety for the astronauts, then the space agency and the country will have to adjust to this reality, no matter how costly and comfortless it may be. A manned flight to the moon will be no less exciting or valuable for being somewhat delayed.” {Wash. Post, 2/6/64,18)
nasa presented ranger VII press briefing, essentially the same presentation as that planned for the iau three days later, in which refined flight data were announced. RANGER VII impacted on the moon within 19 sec. and 6 mi. of the planned time and target. It landed in one of the rays from the crator Tycho; Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker and Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper expressed opinion that the crater rays were lava flows. Dr. Kuiper stated the impact area was not typical of the lunar surface. Of the RANGER VII lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper revealed that the photographs resolved objects down to 10—15 inches, and the resolution was considered 1,000	times better than the very best earth-based observation and 5,000 times better than routine earth-based observation. 200 more of the lunar photographs were released. On the question of the nature of the lunar surface, no firm conclusion was drawn. Dr. Kuiper, who estimated erosion on the moon to be about 5 ft., said it was “purely a guess” that there was “fairly solid stuff there.” He added that it was not possible to obtain such data as surface bearing strength from the ranger vii photographs. Dr. Harold Urey, whose paper was read in his absence, also expressed his belief that the photographs did not answer the question of surface strength; however, he said that a “spongy,” “fairy castle structure” could be prevalent many feet down. Dr. Shoemaker, who expressed view that moon loses more material than it gains, suggested erosion could be on the order of 50 ft. He said U.S. Geological Survey was converting the photographic data into topographic profiles, and the results were showing that moon’s surface was “smoother than I had dared hope.” He said average slope in the area being studied did not exceed 10° and pointed out that this was reassuring for Project Apollo, whose Lem spacecraft had been designed to land safely on slope of 15°. (NASA Press Conf.; Finney, NYT, 8/29/64; Toth, Wash. Post, 8/29/64; Watson, Balt. Sun, 8/29/64)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization. KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3) reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management, Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Support Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was divided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart organization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned') space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was attached to KSC. msc’s Preflight Operations Div. was renamed msc Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged. Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects Branch, remained unchanged, (ksc Release.10-64)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Director of Electronics and Control in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, said in address before Aero Club of New England, in Boston: “ .. . the NASA effort is not confined to a single objective such as landing men on the moon. Rather, it is a broad-based research and development effort which is designed to meet the needs of any agency of the government having work to do in space. And the vigor with which we pursue this activity will determine how effectively those agencies can meet their responsibilities, and cope with their problems in space, in the years ahead. . . . “With respect to such a large, complex, and unknown environment as space, and the still not precisely defined characteristics of the earth’s atmosphere, this nation would be be oblivious to the lessons of history if it, in every case, required that exploratory research and development be matched to a completely defined mission. . . .” (Text)
ranger Vii team of scientists presented lunar photographs to iau in Hamburg, Germany, and discussed data obtained from them. Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., known as an outspoken proponent of the “fairy castle” theory of lunar surface structure, said there was nothing in the ranger vn photographs that would give him reason to revise his hypothesis. Dr. Gold also disputed hypothesis of Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, of Univ. of Arizona, who identified what he interpreted as lava flows on the moon (crater rays, essentially); Dr. Gold stated none of the photographs showed evidence of volcanic lava on the moon. (NYT, 9/1/64)
A Saturn S-IVB stage began a 6,000-mi. land, sea, and river trip from the Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., Calif., to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. At msfc, the stage would be mated with a first stage of the Saturn IB, built by msfc and modified by the Chrysler Corp., and an Apollo spacecraft. Tests of the assembly would check the complete Saturn-Apollo vehicle for its ability to withstand vibrations and other stresses expected in flight. (Marshall Star, 12/9/64, 1-2)
Dr. J. Allen Hynek of Northwestern Univ. said that he and his colleagues would submit a proposal to NASA for a 24-in. telescope to be landed on the moon by the mid-70’s. Such a telescope might double the size of the optically observable universe from its present radius of about 5 billion light years to perhaps 10 billion. It would also “see” radiations from deep space that are totally excluded by earth’s atmosphere. (Schmeck, NYT, 11/20/64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced to newsmen the bilateral agreement negotiated between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in June 1962 (the “Dryden-Blagonravov Agreement”), by which the two countries would cooperate in space programs for communications, meteorology, and geophysics, was discussed by him and Academician Blagonravov at Geneva. Cooperation in Soviet-American communications for global meteorology was to be implemented by the two countries’ sharing costs equally, each supporting the program in alternate months; a bilaterally financed communications link between Moscow and Washington was to be solely for the purpose of exchanging cloud pictures. The 1962 agreement grew out of correspondence -between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev in Feb. and March 1962. Dryden and Blagonravov also discussed American-Soviet cooperation in space biology. Agreement was readied, subject to review before final approval, by which American and Soviet space biologists would prepare bilingual reports on similar subjects. Soviets had proposed cooperation in biology and medicine, both of which had great bearing on manned space flight when exploration extended beyond the moon. (Wash. Post, 6/9/64; NASA Transcript, 6/8/64[2] “Background Information,” “News Conference.”)
Soviet aircraft designer Artem I. Mikoyan, brother of Soviet President Anastas I. Mikoyan, remarked in Moscow: “Whatever secrets surround the earth’s nearest neighbor, they will be solved by man. And one would like to believe that the first man on the moon will be our Soviet cosmonaut. We are confident of this. Confirmation of this may be seen in the flight of the spaceship ‘Sunrise’ [voskhod] .”	(AP, Wash. Post, 10/26/64)
Sen. John Tower (R.-Tex.) said in Houston he favored continuing exploration of space and landing a man on the moon as soon as possible, thus differing with Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry Gold-water. Sen. Tower said: “I believe, knowledge is needed for the sake of knowledge. ... I would continue space expenditures at their present level.” (Houston Chron., 9/17/64)
Three USAF test pilots entered Apollo command module at Martin Co., Baltimore, for simulated 7-day lunar landing mission. (AP, NYT, 1/13/64, 9)
The first Apollo spacecraft adapter was delivered by Army CH-47A helicopter from Tulsa, Okla., to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center-Florida Operations at Merritt Island. The 4,000-lb., 22-ft.-dia., 28-ft. long, cone-shaped unit structurally simulated the adapter section that would house the Apollo lunar excursion module (lem) on its trip to the moon. It would undergo tests to determine whether the mechanical fit was adequate, if sufficient access was provided to perform service and checkout of the LEM, and to determine its compatibility with test facilities and ground handling. Helicopter was chosen over other forms of transportation because of the awkwardly large diameter of the section. (ksc Release 227-64)
Dr. Ted Foss, geologist at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, described model of the moon to be constructed at Msc for conducting time and motion studies with astronauts in their space suits. To be covered with slag rocks and ash, the area would be about 340 ft. in diameter and feature several craters about 50 ft. in diameter and about 15 ft. deep, as well as ridges as high as 12 ft. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers would perform basic work on the $50,000 construction job. (Houston Chron., 5/24/ 64; AP, 5/23/64)
At American Astronautical Society meeting in New York, msc’s Dr. Charles A. Berry said Apollo astronauts would be kept in isolation longer than earlier space crews, to prevent infection and disease. Families of crewmen would be given intensive medical care to ensure the good health of the astronauts. If one member of the three-man crew becomes ill, the entire crew would be replaced, he said. (Houston Chron., 5/6/64)
