The first NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., assembled over 400 university representatives interested in learning how their institutions could qualify for NASA grants for space-related research or expand present programs. Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, Director of the NASA Office of Grants and Research Contracts, reported that 200 universities were participating in the program, that some of the grants were for specific projects, some in university sustaining programs, and others for the support of predoctoral candidates. He said that while NASA was “mission oriented,” its job was not limited to putting a man on the moon: “Its objective is the expansion of human knowledge of phenomena in the atmosphere and space. One problem is how the academic community can communicate with nasa.” (McCoy, Kansas City Star, 3/1/65) In a luncheon address, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, urged educators not to strangle “the holy curiosity of inquiry.” He said the success of the U.S. space program depended largely on “formation of ideas by individuals working as individuals in universities.” (Text) Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) told the Conference that the U.S. must “widen the scope of man’s imagination, trample rough-shod over intellectually inhibiting barriers and stimulate to their fullest potential the mental powers of young and reasonably young Americans if the United States were to achieve and maintain preeminence in space.” Symington emphasized the need for communication of new knowledge. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65) Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of Univ. of California’s Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, reviewed activities supported by NASA multidisciplinary grant: “In the three years UCLA has administered [the . . . NASA grant, we have aided in bringing thirty-seven visiting scientists to this campus for short periods of time. This grant has supported fourteen visiting researchers for periods of up to one year. Through the use of these funds and program enrichment funds from the NASA Predoctoral Traineeship grant, we have aided in bringing seven new faculty members to this campus to augment the existing faculty in space-related fields. . . . Finally, we have made over fifty sub-grants to faculty for new starts on space-related research in various areas—Biology and Medicine, Physical Sciences, Engineering, and Business Administration.” (Text)
An 11-ton, 60-ft.-dia. radio antenna was erected on a mountain near San Diego, Calif., by USN Electronics Laboratory to bounce signals off the moon and certain artificial satellites. R. U. F. Hopkins, director of the Microwave Space Relay Project, said the antenna could improve the tracking and monitoring of active satellites such as the NASA Tiros weather-forecasting series, aid in studying refraction of radio waves caused by atmosphere, and beam powerful signals into space, (ap, NYT, 11/17/65, 33)
luna vin would land on the moon Dec. 6 at about 4:50 p.m. est, Tass reported. Telemetry data indicated the spacecraft was on a correct trajectory and functioning normally. (Reuters, NYT, 12/6/65,43)
Dr. Richard Shorthill of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories reported that from 400 to 800 “hot spots” were observed on the moon during the eclipse of December 18, 1964. The lunar face had been scanned at infrared wavelengths from the Helwan Observatory near Cairo, Egypt. Recent impacts from meteors, which would create rocky craters slower to cool after the sunlight was obscured, might account for the “hot spots.” It was already known that prominent craters from which rays radiated in all directions, such as Tycho, were slow to cool, compared to the normal surface, which was thought to be carpeted with dust. While the total number of slow-cooling locations would remain uncertain until the tape-recorded results had been plotted by computer, Dr. Shorthill felt that if the technique produced an inventory of young craters, it would help in spotting new ones when they occurred and in estimating the rate at which the moon and the earth were bombarded by debris from space. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/9/65)
At Vatican City, Pope Paul vi saw a movie made up of photos taken by ranger vii as it neared the moon. NASA Associate Administrator Robert Seamans, Jr., in Europe on. other business, and NASA European representative, Gilbert W. Ousley, were received by the Pope, showed him the movie, and answered his questions. (N.Y. Herald Trib., 1/11/65; ap, Balt. Sun., 1/11/65)
The New York Times commented on the success of the U.S.S.R. zond jii mission: “Like the Ranger and Mariner feats before it, Zond 3 has again shown what enormous gains in man’s knowledge can be obtained by using instruments alone, a technique much cheaper and less hazardous than sending men to the moon or the planets. There is every reason to suppose that a United States satellite could have gotten similar photographs of the other side of the moon even earlier than Zond 3 had a sustained effort to this end been made. “The restraining element has been the limitations imposed on this country’s exploration of space with instrument-carrying rockets by the overriding priority given to the enormously expensive Apollo project for landing a man on the moon by 1970. The Soviet propaganda and prestige gains that will result from the current accomplishment represent one of the costs of the decision to put so much emphasis upon a manned voyage to the moon.” (NYT, 8/17/65, 30)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
Gemini V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., together with Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, and Paul P. Haney, MSC Public Affairs Officer, held a news conference at MSC. Both astronauts recommended that in future flights both pilots sleep at the same time; more rehydratable foods be included in the diet; daily inflight exercises to compensate for muscular inactivity of the legs be included; the crew travel without spacesuits for greater comfort and flexibility; and that the training period be less compressed. Cooper and Conrad agreed that stowage had been the main problem throughout the flight. “Any small little item that was misplaced or wasn’t placed in the proper location seemed to multiply,” Cooper said. They had seen “a great many micrometeorites, and one meteorite when it was reentering the atmosphere down below us. And on any night side, during a very short interval of time, you could see micrometeorites reentering.” Dr. Gilruth said he considered both astronauts “very potential candidates” for the first trip to the moon. (Transcript)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo program director in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said that 1965 would be a year of “heavy ground testing” in NASA’s lunar program. Among the major events he anticipated were completion of testing of the Apollo spacecraft for the first manned flight; qualification of all elements of the Saturn IB launch vehicle and delivery of first flight stages to Cape Kennedy; and initial testing of Saturn V elements, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/22/65, 4)
U.S.S.R.’s photographic moon probe, ZOND III, was 33.4 million miles (52.8 million km.) from earth. Transmission of photos of the moon’s hidden side had been resumed according to the flight program. Pictures were of good quality. (Tass, 10/28/65)
Kansas City Star editorial: “In the long book of history, the 20th century is likely to have a place alongside the 15th and 16th centuries that saw historic explorations of the surface of the earth. Today, man is on the edge of the conquest of another world—the world of space. He now possesses the capability of leaving this planet and setting foot on the moon or another body of the solar system. “In fact, it now begins to appear that American astronauts will settle gently onto the surface of the moon in 1969. It will be an exploit that knows no counterpart in more than 4 billion years of earth’s history. . . .”	(Kansas City Star, 9/12/65)
ranger ix underwent a midcourse correction maneuver at 7:03 a.m. est that would aim the spacecraft more accurately for impact on the moon crater Alphonsus on Mar. 24. The maneuver consisted of a series of radio signals that changed the spacecraft’s attitude and then, through a 31-sec. burn of a small jet engine, speeded up its flight by 40.6	mph. ranger ix was then 175,416 mi. from earth, traveling at 2,943 mph. Newly estimated impact point was 12.9° south latitude and 2.3° west longitude—only four miles from the original target point of 13° south latitude and 2.5° west longitude. Before the correction maneuver, ranger ix was headed for a point about 400 mi. north of Alphonsus. JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering said during a press conference that the landing should be well out of the shadow of the towering peak in the center of Alphonsus—a possibility that had caused JPL scientists some concern since light was needed for the picture-taking. (L.A. Times, West, Wash. Post, 3/24/65; Hill, NYT, 3/23/65, 1)
According to USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories study, a continuous barrage of meteoroids was causing moon to lose up to 6,000 tons a day and earth to gain 10,000 lbs. a day. Because of its strong gravity, earth absorbed about four times as many impacts as moon, (oar Release 3-65-3; Chic. Trib., 3/11/65)
About 500 employees of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Operations were transferred to the Kennedy Space Center, effective today, under a realignment announced Dec. 24, 1964, by NASA Hq. Elements of the manned space flight organization were regrouped to meet the requirements imposed by concurrent Gemini and Apollo launch schedules. (msc Roundup, 1/6/65, 1)
NASA would stick with its Saturn launch vehicles for the Apollo program, Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, reportedly said in Tulsa. Asked about the possibility of “leap-frogging” in the Apollo and making use of Titan m-c—because of its launch potential—instead of Saturn V, Phillips said “no,” and commented: “The Saturn vehicle will do what we want insofar as the Apollo program is concerned, and leapfrogging now probably would mean some setbacks rather than advancing the Apollo project.” He said launch vehicles such as Titan iii-C, which had a potential of 11 to 15 million lbs. of thrust, most certainly would have major roles in future space operations. “But NASA is committed to the Saturn for the Apollo and we plan to stick with this vehicle.” (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 6/24/65)
LUNA VII moon probe probably was destroyed in impact on the moon because the firing of the retrorockets was “only partially successful,” speculated Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Observatory. Sir Bernard said variations in the signals heard at Jodrell Bank showed luna vii’s retrorockets were fired at 4:58 p.m. EDT for six minutes. He estimated that LUNA VII, traveling about 2 mps., was slowed down by five-eighths of a mile a second during this firing. Signals began again at 5:20 p.m. and then stopped at 6:08 p.m.—the precise time when Russia had said luna vn would reach the moon. There was no official word on the /ate of the ton-and-a-half space probe, but Western experts believed the Soviets had failed in their third attempt to softland on the moon. (upi. Wash. Post, 10/9/65, A6; ap. Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A5)
In a special report on Project Apollo, Edward Kolcum wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology that NASA was now driving to simplify Apollo spacecraft systems, subsystems, and components, and had embarked on an educational program with one goal: to stop the mushrooming tendency to build elements that were more complex and did more than was necessary. (Kolcum, Av. Wk., 11/15/65, 55)
The task of effecting a soft landing on the moon had been placed on the agenda of space projects in the U.S.S.R., Academician Leonid Sedov, leader of the Soviet delegation to the 16th iaf Congress, said at a press conference. He added: “Such a landing has already been worked out on the ground.” (Tass, 9/17/65)
NASA announced it had asked astronomers and scientists in 38 countries to help analyze and interpret the closeup photographs of the moon taken by ranger vii in July 1964. The scientists would first receive a set of 199 high-quality pictures taken by ranger vii’s “A” camera; photographs taken by other cameras would be sent later. NASA had also sent ranger vii photographs to the European Space Research Organization, the European Launcher Development Organization, the International Committee on Space Research, and the United Nations, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 2/15/65)
NASA announced plans to install Unified S-Band System equipment at Corpus Christi communications station for use with Apollo spaceflights. With the system, the station would be able to combine in a single two-way transmission all types of communications with the three Apollo astronauts. Seven kinds of communications would be conducted simultaneously, including tracking the spacecraft; commanding its operations and confirming execution of commands; two-way voice conversation; continuous checks on the astronauts’ health; continuous check on the spacecraft and its functions; continuous information from onboard experiments; and television pictures of the astronauts and their exploration of the moon. All communications would be conducted with one 30-ft.-dia. parabolic ground antenna to be constructed at Corpus Christi. (nasa Release 65-250)
M. V. Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, commented on the voskhod ii flight in an article in Izvesda: “One of the most significant accomplishments in the conquest of space was the experiment dealing with man’s emergence into space. New', grandiose perspectives are now open for the construction of orbital stations, the docking of spacecraft in orbit and the carrying out of astronomical and geophysical investigations in space. In the near future it will be possible to create, in orbit around the earth, a Space Scientific Research Institute in which scientists representing the most diversified fields will be able to work. The results obtained as a result of the flight of ‘Voskhod-2’ are most important steps on the way toward carrying out flights to the moon and on to other celestial bodies.” (Izvestia, 3/27/65, 5, atss-t Trans.)
William Hines commented on the economy of low bidding in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “The lowest bidder still produces hardware for Uncle Sam’s space effort, and this arrangement does not always prove the most economical in either time or money. A glaring example has developed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where America’s moonport is rapidly nearing completion. “The lowest bidder has built two huge tank-like vehicles called ‘crawler-transporters’ there, at a saving of almost $3 million below a competitive bidder’s price. The only trouble is that the crawlers will not do the job they were designed for, which is to carry a Saturn V moon rocket on a mobile launching tower some three miles from an assembly building to where the rocket will actually blast. “Trouble has been traced to some tapered roller bearings. . . . “There seems to be nothing wrong with the bearings, which are produced by the biggest and best known manufacturer of such items. The fault apparently lies in incorrect design assumptions which result in overloads sometimes being imposed on the bearings, causing them to fail. “Since the design—offered by the contractor, Marion Power Shovel Co.—was approved by NASA technical experts, the government will probably have to pay for the redesign necessary to make the crawler work. These redesign costs could well wipe out the difference between Marion’s bid and the higher proposal of Bucyrus-Erie, another large builder of heavy mobile equipment. . . . “As it turns out, the false economy of low bidding in this instance may cause the United States to miss its stated goal in space: men on the moon in the ’60s. Entirely aside from whether this is a worthwhile goal, it is a national objective and the national prestige is riding on it. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/9/65)
Gemini v backup crew members, civilians Neil Armstrong and Elliot M. See, Jr., began a training exercise in Gulf of Mexico waters designed to teach the astronauts the proper methods to leave the spacecraft after touchdown. Primary crew members Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) and Cdr. Charles Conrad (usn) would take the same training July 21. (ap, Houston Chron., 7/16/65)
U.S. Bureau of Mines said its scientists and engineers had begun research on how to tap the mineral resources of the solar system. This attempt to develop “extraterrestrial mining techniques” was being made at the Bureau’s research center in Minneapolis for NASA. The idea was not to mine the moon and planets for materials usable on earth but rather to develop means of exploiting celestial bodies for resources explorers could use to build bases or travel farther into space. The Bureau said that, because of its nearness, the moon “is likely to be the site of the first extraterrestrial mine.” (Bur. Mines Release, 7/4/65; upi, NYT, 7/4/65, 27)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert Seamans said during FY 1966 budget briefing: “. . . it is conceivable . . . that the lunar landing would occur in early 1970 ... we feel actually greatly encouraged at the progress that has been made freezing the design, and we feel very reassured at the test results we are achieving on our propulsion systems and with our stages. So that we really feel that there is more chance that we can get off the flight on an earlier mission than I would have said a year ago.” Dr. Seamans said Apollo gave the nation a capability for a wide variety of scientific and technological flights in earth orbit, in orbit around the moon, and also for an extended lunar stay time. He commented that the objectives of the current extended Apollo (Apollo-X) design and feasibility studies were to extend the time of the lunar mission out to the order of two weeks. He also said that Apollo-X circumlunar flights, in polar orbit about the moon and taking photographs of the entire lunar surface, on missions that could involve staytimes on the moon of up to one or two weeks, all would have great possibility and would offer great interest scientifically. In commenting on an earlier agreement (1963) with the Pentagon for developing of a manned orbiting laboratory, Dr. Seamans said: “At the time of that agreement, we were really thinking of something that we now realize is further out in time, namely, a more permanent space station that could stay in orbit for a year’s time and could be resupplied, and would permit the crew to be ferried into orbit and bring them back. The study really related to that kind of possibility which we now realize is much further out in time ... we may end up with what is called the MOL, and we may also find that there are important uses for the Apollo system beyond the present manned lunar landing program.” He said NASA studies of improving both the Saturn IB and the Saturn V launch vehicles indicated that “these two launch vehicles can take care of our needs for an extended period of time.” (NASA Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Writing in Pravda, I. Akulinichev, Dr. of Medical Sciences, said: “. . . Of course, the question of lunar laboratories is now only at the level of scientific planning. ... To bring this possibility closer to our times, it is necessary to accomplish manned flights to the region of the Moon. Further, we need to solve reliably the question of methods to use for a successful lunar landing of a spacecraft and the return of the cosmonauts to Earth. In my view, the first lunar laboratories will initially study the possibilities of the prolonged sojourn of man on the Moon. Scientists will investigate ways of using the lunar conditions for assisting the normal life activity of people. . . . Finally, the scientists will study the conditions of orientation on the Moon and the possibilities of the navigation of interplanetary spacecraft.” In the same issue of Pravda, Soviet Academician B. Konstantinov wrote: “In this New Year’s article, I wish to dwell on the possibility of international cooperation in the use of solar energy. . . . What appears most attractive is the conversion of solar energy into electricity. In the foreseeable future, man may solve this problem; along with this, it is conceivable that the problems of controlling the weather and climate will also be solved.” (Pravda, 1/3/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center had issued 11 new contracts and modified one other to provide for further studies and component development on the Apollo Extension Systems (Aes). (msfc Release 65-186)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
New York Times commented on the malfunction of the fuel cell in the GEMINI v spacecraft launched August 21: “Past manned space flights have gone so well in most respects that yesterday’s tension-filled hours were a shock and a surprise. It has all seemed too easy to the millions of television viewers who have observed previous man-in-space experiments. It was natural to assume that once Gemini 5 was so successfully launched, all would once again go more or less as planned. But those intimately involved with these efforts have known all along of the numerous possibilities of trouble. They were not greatly surprised that one of those possibilities for major difficulty—in this case a malfunction of the fuel cell on Gemini 5—turned into reality. “There will undoubtedly be future emergencies in space. Yesterday’s events are a sobering reminder that the effort to reach the moon during this decade is straining the limits of available technology, and that serious risks are being taken. These hazards are also faced, of course, by the Soviet manned space program. The brave men both countries are sending into space would be the prime beneficiaries of full Soviet-American cooperation that would pool both countries’ knowledge and experience to minimize the dangers inherent in these pioneering efforts.” (NYT, 8/22/65, 10E)
Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, announced at a news conference the crew selected for the Gemini VIII spaceflight: Neil A. Armstrong, a civilian, would be command pilot; David R. Scott (Maj., usaf) would be copilot. Backup crewmen named were Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), and Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (Lcdr., usn). Gemini vm was scheduled to include practice on rendezvous and docking maneuvers and a space walk that could last as long as one orbit of the earth—about 95 min. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/21/65, 6)
Thirteen NASA astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for an area near King Salmon afb, Alaska, for a week-long study of a large volcanic ash flow believed to be similar to the surface of the moon. The ash was deposited in 1912 from a volcanic eruption and is the largest flow of its type in the world, (ap, NYT, 6/22/65, 2)
Apollo Extension Systems (Aes) schedule was summarized by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in the Journal of the Armed Forces: “nasa has worked up a tentative Aes schedule. It calls, first, for perhaps three or four 14-day earth-orbital missions, using a basic Apollo spacecraft only slightly modified, starting in 1968. This phase would be followed by extended earth-orbital (45-day) missions at the rate of five or six a year in 1970-71 and 14-day lunar exploration missions at the rate of one or two a year in 1970-71.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 9/25/65, 23)
44 of the 107 pages of “Opportunities for Participation in Space Flight Investigations”—NASA’s semi-annual publication inviting scientists to propose spaceflight experiments—were devoted to Apollo manned missions, some of which were under study. Detailed descriptions and timetables covering a wide range of NASA flight projects, manned and unmanned, were provided in the publication. Flight dates generally covered the period from 1966 through 1972. Proposals would be reviewed and evaluated for scientific merit and technological feasibility, the competence and experience of the investigator, assurance of institutional support, and the scientific adequacy of proposed apparatus. (nasa Release 65-284)
Hughes Space Systems Div. at El Segundo, Calif., signed a contract with NASA to propose designs of a beacon that could be placed on the moon as a guide for safe landing for moonbound Apollo astronauts. The beacon would be landed on the moon with a Surveyor spacecraft, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bui., 2/10/65)
Louis Walter, geochemist at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that of the 400 specimens received from “Operation Moon Harvest” none analyzed was a meteor or other non-earth fragment. It had been theorized that because of the low gravity of the moon, meteoroids striking the moon might dislodge fragments which would be attracted by earth’s gravity, and that analysis of the fragments would provide important clues to composition of the moon.	(Des Moines Register,
Louis Walter, gsfc geochemist, told ap reporter his research with tektites indicated lunar surface may be sand-like. The key to this conclusion lay in Walter’s discovery of the presence of coesite in tektites, believed to be particles of the moon sent into space when meteorites impact the lunar surface. Coesite, also found around the world at known meteorite craters and sites believed to have sustained meteoritic impacts, is a form of silicon dioxide—a major constituent of sand—produced under high pressure. “If we accept the lunar origin of tektites, this would prove or indicate that the parent material on the moon is something like the welded tuft that we find in Yellowstone Park, Iceland, New Zealand, and elsewhere,” according to Walter. Welded tuft was said to have some of the qualities of beach sand, (ap, Chic. Trib., 3/1/65)
Writing about Surveyor lunar probe in the Washington Evening Star, William Hines said: “Surveyor will give science a view of the moon that will be different not just in degree but in kind. A ‘soft’ landing, with the spacecraft braked by automatic rockets, should enable scientists to learn—rather than infer—much about the lunar surface. “Even the first Surveyor . . . should tell a lot and this one will lack most of the cleverly designed scientific instruments of later probes. Equipped with television, the initial Surveyor may settle many points of contention over surface conditions . . . “Assuming success with Surveyor 1, scientists are hoping that its findings won’t evoke a repetition of the short-sighted clamor for ‘economy’ that followed the successful flight of Ranger 7 in July 1964 . . . owing to the mistaken impression that when you’ve seen one moon picture you’ve seen them all. “To suggest that photographic and physical evidence obtained by one Surveyor in one isolated spot could yield results characteristic of the whole moon is senseless. . . . "Since the safety of asironauts reaching the moon a few years from now may well depend on the wise selection of their landing site, it would be advisable to get as much first-hand Surveyor-type data as possible and let the nation’s best qualified scientists study this information as thoroughly as they know how.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/14/65, A12)
NASA announced that Launch Complex 16 at Cape Kennedy would be modified to convert the former Titan missile facility into static test stands for the Apollo' manned lunar spacecraft. Construction bids were expected to be opened by Army Corps of Engineers, late this month. The modified test facility would replace an Apollo static test stand originally planned for the NASA Kennedy Space Center’s Merritt Island facility. Officials estimated that the modification of Complex 16 would represent a cost reduction of about 72 per cent under the original $7 million construction estimate for test stands on Merritt Island, (ksc Release 7-65)
nasa had awarded a new $47,655,103 cost-plus-incentive/award fee contract to trw Inc., for work on the Gemini/Apollo mission trajectory control program and the Apollo spacecraft systems analysis program, (nasa Release 65-378)
zond ill’s photographs of the hidden side of the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Scientists and laymen from all nations will look forward to the pictures of the dark side of the moon that Moscow reports its Zond 3 satellite took last month. UnitI then the only photographic intelligence on the area had come from the pictures an earlier Soviet satellite took in 1959, a time when the available equipment—and consequently the quality of the result— was primitive by present standards. Six years ago' the marvel was that this feat could be accomplished at all. Now, in the wake of the photographic knowledge of the moon and of Mars obtained by this country’s Ranger and Mariner vehicles, world judgment of the importance of the Soviet accomplishment will depend upon the quality and the quantity of the new knowledge it provides.” (NYT, 8/16/65, E9)
At a background briefing at NASA Hq. on Advanced Chemical Propulsion, Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director, Chemical Propulsion Div., NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, revealed that NASA would probably be “confined to the Saturn IB and V for the next decade.” A maneuvering vehicle would be developed sometime around 1970 but would not be available for manned use until 1975. Tischler said that an ion propulsion system would never be applicable for deep manned space flight because of “its abhorrent thrust-to-weight ratio ... it is going to take a long time to accelerate the vehicle out of Earth orbit to arrive then later at the planetary orbit, and to decelerate in the planetary orbit, and vice versa. . . .” Ion propulsion systems would be suitable for unmanned missions, however, because unmanned systems generally were small and ion systems were small; also, time was not a factor. In addition, they might be practicable as auxiliary devices for midcourse corrections 'on manned interplanetary trips. After agreeing that present planning limited the application of nuclear systems to interplanetary trips, Tischler said: “There has been, during the last two years, a real marked decline of interest . . . about exploring Venus. I don’t think that is a correct viewpoint at all. I think there is a great deal ... to learn about Venus. “We shouldn’t eliminate the possibility of some other planets. We could easily . . . visit the asteroid belt. There are some good-sized asteroids. Ceres is one of them. We could ultimately . . . land on the Moon of Jupiter with such a system. I doubt if we will undertake a landing on Jupiter until we know how to fight gravity. . . . “All of these possibilities exist. In fact, I would even mention Mars has a couple of moons that we might use to land on in preference to Mars itself.” (Transcript)
Dr. Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech professor, summarized the results of the mariner IV mission to President Johnson in a White House ceremony during which the remaining photos transmitted by the spacecraft were presented to the President and the Nation. Dr. Leighton said: “Man’s first close-up look at Mars has revealed the scientifically startling fact that at least part of its surface is covered with large craters. . . . “The existence of Martian craters is demonstrated beyond question; their meaning and significance is, of course, a matter of interpretation. The seventy craters clearly distinguishable on Mariner photos Nos. 5 through 15, range in diameter from three to 75 miles. It seems likely that smaller craters exist, and there also may be still larger ones than those photographed, since the Mariner photographs, in total, sampled only about one percent of the Martian surface. “The observed craters have rims rising a few hundred feet above the surrounding surface and depths of a few thousand feet below the rims. Crater walls so far measured seem to slope at angles up to about 10 degrees. “The number of large craters per unit area on the Martian surface is closely comparable to the densely cratered upland areas of the Moon.” Dr. Leighton said that no earth-like features were recognized and that clouds “were not identified and the flight path did not cross either polar cap.” Some of the fundamental inferences drawn from the MARINER IV photos were: “1. In terms of its evolutionary history, Mars is more Moon-like than Earth-like. Nonetheless, because it has an atmosphere, Mars may shed much light on early phases of Earth’s history. “2. Reasoning by analogy with the Moon, much of the heavily cratered surface of Mars must be very ancient—perhaps two to five billion years old. “3. The remarkable state of preservation of such an ancient surface leads us to the inference that no atmosphere significantly denser than the present very thin one has characterized the planet since that surface was formed. Similarly, it is difficult to believe that free water in quantities sufficient to form streams or to fill oceans could have existed anywhere on Mars since that time. The presence of such amounts of water (and consequent atmosphere) would have caused severe erosion over the entire surface. “4. The principal topographic features of Mars photographed by Mariner have not been produced by stress and deformation originating within the planet, in distinction to the case of the Earth. Earth is internally dynamic giving rise to mountains, continents, and other such features, while evidently Mars has long been inactive. The lack of internal activity is also consistent with the absence of a significant magnetic field on Mars as was determined by the Mariner magnetometer experiment. “5. As we had anticipated, Mariner photos neither demonstrate nor preclude the possible existence of life on Mars. The search for a fossil record does appear less promising if Martian oceans never existed. On the other hand, if the Martian surface is truly in its primitive form, the surface may prove to be the best—perhaps the only —place in the solar system still preserving clues to original organic development, traces of which have long since disappeared from Earth.” Dr. Leighton noted that “one of the most difficult problems associated with the Mariner photographic mission to Mars was the wide illumination range” that was encountered. Assisting Dr. Leighton in his presentation were: Prof. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech; Prof. Robert P. Sharp, Cal Tech; Richard K. Sloan, jpl; and J. Denton Allen, jpl. President Johnson said he was a bit relieved that mariner’s photographs “didn’t show more signs of life out there.” He described the Mars pictures as “awe-inspiring” and said that “the flight of Mariner 4 will stand as one of the great advances of man’s quest to extend the horizons of human knowledge.” President Johnson presented the following awards: to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPL, the NASA Distinguished Service Medal; to Jack N. James, Assistant Director of jpl for Lunar and Planetary Projects, the NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement; and to Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, the NASA Medal of Outstanding Leadership. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/30/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 7/30/65, Al, A3)
Strongly urging greater emphasis on U.S. aeronautics and aviation than now exists. Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D—Okla.), Chairman of Senate Aviation Sub-committee, addressed Air Force Association in Dallas, Tex. “I am afraid some people, and I mean people of high stature and great influence, seem bent on relegating aeronautics to a secondary position. This I think is a crucial mistake. In aeronautics we stand on the threshold of a boundless upsurge which may well dwarf what has been achieved by aviation over the past 61 years. “Also, the economic productivity of aeronautics makes dollars . . . and sense. It means money in the bank, or rather gold in Fort Knox. On the other hand, I don’t know of any scheme . . . and I doubt that one will emerge within this century . . . for fighting the balance of payments deficit in outer space. “There simply are no dollars floating around between here and the moon. For the time being, outer space commerce just doesn’t seem to be in the cards. And as long as this is the situation, I don’t think we should banish aeronautics to the back seat ... or have a NASA budget which is better than 08 percent spacecraft and less than 2 percent aircraft. And this in spite of the fact that NASA and its forerunner, naca, were ostensibly founded to serve aeronautics! “I am not saying this to downgrade space, but to suggest that we strike a balance based on how the national interest and economy are served best. . . . This widening disparity between NASA’s space and aeronautical efforts . . . this wall flower treatment of the airplane ... is a reckless gamble, economically, politically and militarily, that will come back to haunt us in the future. My criticism, by the way, is not directed at the level of competence in that agency but at the lack of programming of aeronautical goals and the failure to mobilize this nation’s brain power on behalf of aviation. It seems to me the real deficiency is that the well qualified aeronautical talent in NASA js so far down in the hierarchy that these men rarely ever get involved in the decision making. It’s crystal clear that other nations, the Russians included, have cut this Gordian knot and are rapidly filling the vacuum which we so invitingly created for them. . . .” (Text; ap, NYT, 7/2/65)
In a telegram of congratulations to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on the rendezvous of GEMINI vi and GEMINI vii, President Johnson said: “You have all moved us one step higher on the stairway to the moon. By conducting this adventure for all the world to see, you have reaffirmed our faith in a free and open society. We invite those throughout the world who have shared our suspense and suffered with us during our temporary failures to share with us this triumph, for it belongs not just to the United States but to all mankind.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 593)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center reported it had saved $12 million toward a $35 million cost reduction goal for FY 1965. Major portion of this saving was made possible by a suggestion from Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, that instead of spending the budgeted $7,873,000 for a static test stand for the Apollo spacecraft at Cape Kennedy, the reserve Titan Launch Complex 16 be modified for static test use. Cost of modifying the Titan launch complex would be $3,982,900, with a net saving of $3,890,100. (msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill, Dr. Rolf H. Dyce, and Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., reported to the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that through radar studies with Cornell’s l,000-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, they had found an apparent “flat spot” on the planet Mars that seemed to correspond to markings seen there through telescopes. They also reported that radar observations indicated the planet Mercury rotated on its own axis once each 54 to 64 days, exposing all sides to the sun in a year. Its full day, corresponding to a 24-hr. earth cycle, would be about 180 earth days long. It was inconclusive whether Mercury rotated in the opposite direction from its orbit—a retrograde rotation—or in the same direction as its orbit—a direct rotation. Dr. Gold also speculated that Mercury could not have been in its present orbit for much longer than 400 million years. Otherwise, he postulated, the sun would have held the planet over a long enough period of time to force it into a synchronous or 88-day rotation. This suggested to Gold that Mercury might once have been a moon of Venus but broke away or was tugged away to establish its own orbit around the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65; Clark, NYT, 4/21/65, 17; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/21/65)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
Sealed brushless DC motor, originally developed to power instrumentation on unmanned spacecraft, was selected for use in the Apollo two-man Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and the Gemini two-man spacecraft. The new motor utilized photo-optical detectors and transistorized switching elements which duplicated the functions of conventional brushes and commutator without physical contact of the rotating parts. Environmental tests had shown the brushless motor had a predicted operational life of one year. A barrier to DC motors had been the short life of conventional brushes in the space vacuum because of the lack of lubricating moisture necessary to prevent excessive friction. Motor was developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center under contract with Sperry Farragut. (gsfc Release G—2—65)
B. F. Goodrich Corp. had been selected by Hamilton Standard to replace International Latex Corp. as subcontractor for garment portion of the Apollo spacesuit. Change followed problems with certain portions of garment. iM&R. 3 15 65, 7)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, science adviser to President Johnson, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that a manned Mars expedition would take from four hundred to six hundred days. He continued: “The longest manned mission we are currently planning is some 14 days. Whether such a long mission is physiologically or psychologically feasible is almost impossible to judge before we have more experience with Apollo, AES, and other manned systems. In any case, we would have to build systems of greater complexity and reliability than we have yet dreamed of. “. . . if we compare the probable scale and technical difficulties of a manned Mars expedition with Apollo it is hard to conclude that its probable cost could be much less than perhaps five times that of Apollo—that is, of the order of one hundred billion dollars.” (Text)
NASA selected four companies to perform four-month design studies on an experiments pallet to fly aboard Project Apollo missions: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Martin Co.; and Northrop Space Labs. The firms, under separate and concurrent fixed-price contracts valued at approximately $375,000, would design, develop detailed specifications, and produce mock-ups of a pallet to house scientific, technological, and engineering experiments to be carried on Apollo missions of up to two-weeks duration beginning in 1968. After review and evaluation of the design studies, NASA planned to select one of the firms to develop the experiments pallet flight hardware under a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract, (nasa Release 65-361)
An analysis of worldwide press reactions to the successful GEMINI IV flight indicated that most newspapers took the occasion to call for U.S.-Soviet cooperation in space ventures. “That this [cooperation] is unlikely shows how far our politics lag behind our technology,” Britain’s Manchester Guardian said. Dutch newspapers joined in asking for cooperation in space and Trouw said the duplication of effort by the Soviet Union and the United States “is a waste of money and know-how.” The West Berlin press highly praised the U.S. policy of reporting the Gemini flight as it was taking place. Swedish newspapers refrained from any comment amid a wave of anti-American sentiment over Viet Nam and the Dominican Republic. The Hindustani Times commented: “It is a pity that the two nations [U.S. and Soviet Union] are going about the job with such secrecy. The time has come for both nations to pool their resources and make the projected attempt on the moon a truly human adventure.” ( Wash. Post, 6/9/65, A3)
nasa had asked ComSatCorp to provide communications satellite services in support of tracking and data acquisition needs for Project Apollo, The facilities—six highly-reliable telecommunications channels to be made available to three Apollo tracking ships and three remote land stations—were to be in operation by the fall of 1966. Negotiation of a definitive contract would begin shortly. (nasa Release 65-320)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Apollo Program manager at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced at a press conference at North American Aviation’s Tulsa facilities that the Tulsa plant would build 16 Apollo service modules. Apollo contract work there totaled more than $61 million. (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 4/15/65)
NASA was negotiating with General Electric Co. to provide 50-w. isotopic power generator for Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Packages (Al-sep) program. The thermoelectric nuclear power unit, designated Snap—27, would use plutonium-238 as the heat source. The packages would transmit selected measurements back to earth. AEC would manage detailed design and development of the unit based on studies of prototypes by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (aec-nasa Release H-226)
Gerald L. Smith, NASA Ames Research Center, had been awarded $1,000 special service award for his computer analysis which resulted in decision to give ground-based navigation a primary role during Apollo lunar missions. Smith explained that, although radar tracking from earth and visual tracking onboard spacecraft were almost equally reliable, earth-based system could be maintained more easily and was not restricted by weight and size considerations, (arc Release 65-8)
Wall Street Journal space reporter wrote a “Memo on Space Semantics” to his editor: “I think you should be aware of some problems in semantics and etymology that are becoming acute as a result of the activities at Cape Kennedy. Unless we resolve some of these problems in the near future, I fear that a new space age neurosis may appear among our reporters and copy editors. “If you recall, since late 1957 there have been a number of hints that the advent of space exploration would create some new difficulties with our editorial style. First, there was the problem of deciding whether to italicize the Russian word ‘sputnik.’ Then we had to decide on the spelling and capitalization of ‘a-okay’ (or is it ‘A-OK’?). “Unfortunately, we are now encountering some difficulties which would tax the abilities of Clifton Fadiman, himself. . . . “Perhaps the most serious problem . . . stems apparently from an oversight on the part of our ancestors. In writing out the names of the nine planets of our solar system it became evident that we have neglected to formally name our own planet. At least this is the only conclusion one can come to when it’s noted that we capitalize the names of all the planets except our own. Webster, himself, insists on using a lower case ‘e’ for earth while dignifying tiny Mercury with a capital. Even the minor planets such as Eros carry formal names. “The neglect is even more conspicuous in the instance of our own natural satellite. While the moons of other planets have exotic names such as Phobos we refer to ours in the generic and, consequently, with a lower case ‘m\ “I suggest we either start capitalizing Earth and Moon or else ask the American Society of Newspaper Editors to convene an international conference to pick a name for our planet. While they’re at it, they might decide whether ‘marsography’ is a word and straighten out the planetary adjectives.” (Bishop, WSJ, 9/9/65, 12) September IQ: NASA began recruiting to select additional pilot/astronauts for manned space flight missions. There were presently 28 pilot/astronauts and five scientist/astronauts participating in the NASA manned space flight program. To be eligible for selection, applicants had to: (1) be a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, bom on or after Dec. 1, 1929; (2) have a bachelor’s degree in engineering, physical or biological science; and (3) have acquired 1,000 hrs. jet pilot time or have been graduated from an armed forces test pilot school. (NASA Release 65-288)
half of the lunar disc was in shadow. The first frames show a considerable part of the moon visible from the earth. Later frames show the surface of the moon when there was considerable solar side illumination, when the relief formations cast distinct shadows. The images from Zond 3 are sent with a clarity of 1,100 lines. When photographing from a distance of the order of 10,000 km., images of a lunar surface area of about 5 million square km. are possible. The quality of the photographs obtained make it possible to see numerous details of the lunar relief, which are of considerable interest. The photo obtained from Zond 3 will be published in leading newspapers and scientific journals. To analyze the result obtained and to name the craters, ranges, and other formations on the newly photographed sections of the moon, the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. has set up a special commission. Scientific investigations are continuing on Zond 3. For further testing of the radio line the transmission of photographs of the far side of the moon from the station will continue during subsequent communications sessions, right up to the greatest distance from the earth. Thirty-eight communications sessions have been conducted from Zond 3. All on-board systems are functioning normally.” (Izvestia, 8/15/65, 1)
Gen. Omar N. Bradley (usa, Ret.), Chairman of the Board of the Bulova Watch Co., disclosed at the annual stockholders meeting that Accutron-type electronic clocks were being designed for use on the control panel of nasa’s Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. Star-tracking devices incorporating Accutron would be in the moon vehicle’s navigation system. A special “moon van” containing components and examples of hardware for use in Project Apollo was on display at the meeting. (NYT, 7/28/65,43C)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of Science, editorialized: “To date the purely scientific results from our manned space program have not been impressive. With good reason, the engineering and medical aspects have been given overriding priority. In effect, our manned space program has consisted of a series of great technological stunts. . . . “Will the Space Agency be able to devise a continuing series of spectaculars of ascending dramatic quality? I think not. The first successful landing on the moon will be a climax. Just as succeeding climbs of Mt. Everest, after the first ascent, have drawn diminishing attention, later lunar travel will lose its novelty. “As for Mars, how many popular songs have been written about it? . . . More fundamental is the question, ‘How many people know where Mars is, or even care?’ Perhaps man will one day go to the planet, but the psychological and emotional impact of the trip will be pale in comparison with that of the first successful landing on the moon.” (Science, 10/29/65, 557)
Rep. James C. Corman (D-Calif.) announced that a poll taken among his constituents showed that 68.7% supported a program to land an American on the moon by 1970; 14% felt the program should be slowed down; 17.3% disapproved of the program. (CR, 5/10/65, A2275)
A 71-ton Little Joe n rocket fired from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., to test the Apollo spacecraft escape system split into fragments three miles above ground following a series of excessive rolls occurring about 25 sec. after launch. The escape rocket fired immediately, however, and carried the 14-ton Apollo boilerplate free of the debris; the parachute recovery system operated normally, lowering the command module to the ground. Apollo program manager Dr. Joseph F. Shea said: “Although the prime objectives of the high altitude abort test were not met, the launch escape system proved its mettle in an actual emergency, which is the purpose for which it was designed.” The launch escape subsystem would be used to propel the spacecraft and its crew to safety in the event of a Saturn launch vehicle failure either on the pad or during powered flight. Little Joe II had been programed to carry the test vehicle, Boilerplate 22, to 22-mi.-altitude in 89 sec.; an escape motor would propel the spacecraft to a peak altitude of about 35 mi. Finally, the three 84-ft.-wide parachutes would lower the command module to earth, (nasa Release 65—145; N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/20/65; naa S&ID Skywriter, 5/21/65, 1, 2; NYT, 5/20/65, 42; msc Roundup, 5/28/65, 8)
In a report on the pacing systems of the Apollo Program, the Subcommittee on nasa Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics concluded that the “general progress of the Apollo program is good at this time with a reasonable expectation of a lunar landing in this decade. . . .” It noted two major pacing items requiring maximum effort: lunar excursion module and command and service module. The report pointed out that NASA had been maintaining the Apollo program schedule within funds authorized and appropriated; “however, additional funds of the order of $200 million over and above the funds requested by NASA for fiscal year 1966 would have provided: “1. Increased assurance of meeting the Apollo goal of a lunar landing in this decade; “2. Broader latitude in providing system alternatives when engineering difficulties are identified; and “3. Additional management latitude in utilizing all of NASA resources of personnel, facilities, and equipment in the Apollo effort. . . (Text)
Philip E. Culbertson became Director of Lunar Mission Studies, Advanced Manned Missions Program Office, Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA Hq. Culbertson would direct studies concerning manned exploration of the moon in the time period following Project Apollo. Before joining NASA, he had been associated with General Dynamics/Astronautics since 1958, where he was Chief Project Engineer for Atlas launch vehicle systems, manager of the Atlas launch vehicle systems engineering and reliability program, manager and director of manned space studies, and director of advanced development. (nasa Release 65-308)
The suggestion that the Gemini vu/vi endurance-rendezvous mission scheduled by NASA for Dec. 4-13 might be a “space spectacular for spectators sake,” was firmly rejected by Rep. George P. Miller (D— Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at an MSC press conference. Miller said he believed the U.S. would land a man on the moon by 1970 and emphasized that information from the Gemini vu/vi mission would further the orderly exploration of outer space “for this country and the world.” (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/65)
Cape Kennedy and Moscow’s Red Square were linked in a British television program, “East Meets West,” marking U.S. and Soviet space achievements. First part of the program showed the triumphant return to Moscow of Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov. Then the scene switched to Cape Kennedy to show preparadons for the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil Grissom and John Young. Both parts were screened "live”—the Moscow scenes via Eurovision and the Cape Kennedy one via comm unications satellite. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3, 2-1/65! starch 24: tiAVRKK IX photograph of moon, 38.fi seconds before impact and 58 miles above lunar surface. March 24; After transmitting 5.814 close-up lunar pictures to earth, ranger ix. traveling at 5.677 mph, imparted the moon at 0:08 a.m. EST at 12.0° south latitude and 2.-10 west longitude in the crater Alphonsus. The 10-ft,, 800-lb. spacecraft, last in the Ranger series, was only four miles off Larget. NASA had made real-time TV coverage available and the three major networks broadcast “live7’ pictures during the last ten minutes of ranger tx’s flight. First pictures, taken as the photographic probe was 1.300 mi. from the moon, had about the same degree of detail as telescopic views from earth. Those taken a few seconds before impact defined objects as small as 10 in, across, including close-ups of canal-like rilles on the floor of the crater and dimple-like depressions at points along the rilles. Photographs shown on television were taken by the “B” camera, one of two wide-angle cameras used. Four narrow-angle cameras took other shots. Pictures were received on 85-ft. antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mojave Desert and recorded on both 35mm film and magnetic tape for detailed analysis. Simultaneously signals were relayed by microwave to the JPL laboratory in Pasadena where an electronic scan converter “translated” electronic impulses from the 1,152-lines-per-picture of the ranger IX signal system to the standard 500 lines of commercial television. The Ranger program had begun inauspiciously in 1961 with a series of failures and near-misses. Rangers 1 and 2 had been designed to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle but were not injected into the desired orbit, ranger iii, iv, and v were to rough-land a seismometer package on the moon to record moon quakes, and to transmit closeup photos of the moon to earth by radio. None of the missions was successful, ranger VI, first of the reworked and redesigned spacecraft, impacted within 17 mi. of its point of aim—but its television system failed. On July 31, 1964, ranger vii successfully relayed to earth 4,316 high-quality close-up photos of the lunar surface, ranger viii, launched on Feb. 20, 1965, transmitted 7,137 pictures. Total number of photographs from ranger vii, viii, and ix was 17,267. (nasa Release 65-96; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65, 1; ap, Dighton, Wash. Post, 3/25/65, Al, A12, A16; Hill, NYT, 3/25/65, 1, 23; nasa Proj. Off.)
M/Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), director of the Apollo program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the American Bar Association’s Seminar of the Committee on the Law of Outer Space in Miami Beach: “In many respects, the Gemini iv flight of Jim Mc-Divitt and Ed White could well be viewed as a turning point in the American manned space program. The success of this mission has given us greatly increased confidence that we will be able to carry out our national goal of a manned landing on the moon in this decade. “It is a pleasure to report that the Apollo Program is also moving ahead very rapidly, and we are meeting our key milestones on schedule. The progress on Apollo is especially rewarding since it is the largest and most complex single research and development project ever undertaken. This is a crucial year for Apollo, but our prospects look good and we are becoming increasingly confident that the lunar landings will take place before the end of 1969.” (Text)
An atomic clock so accurate it could help determine the position of a rocket hurtling at 238,000 mph toward the moon within three-quarters-of an inch was in production at Varian Associates, UPI reported. The clock would be about the size of a hatbox. (upi, NYT, 6/16/65, 31)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeared before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices, in support of the $5.26 billion NASA appropriation requested by President Johnson for fy 1966. He said:	“The budget submitted to the Congress by the President provides for activities that are essential to continuing the progress that we have made towards our goal of preeminence in space sciences, application satellites, manned space flight, and advanced research and technological development necessary for aircraft improvements and for future space activities. It does not provide for everything that we could do or would like to do. In fact, it has been necessary within the strict budget requirements imposed by the President that certain desirable project activities started in previous years be omitted from the 1966 budget. . . . “Within the confines of this limited budget, the President has provided the funds necessary to preserve the opportunity that we still believe we have to accomplish a manned lunar landing and exploration within this decade. The margin for insurance that had been built into our original program plan has largely disappeared. However, we now estimate this may be possible if we can maintain our current successful development efforts and make the all-up systems testing procedure work on the very large Saturn V-Apollo combination to launch men toward the Moon on earlier flights than we had originally planned. There is, therefore, still an opportunity to accomplish this national space objective within the time specified. Our work to date gives us somewhat more confidence than we had a year ago that we can still achieve the objectives that were planned in 1961 in spite of a limit on resources that will not fund all the flights planned at that time. It is important, however, to keep in mind that in Gemini we are just now in a position to find out by flight experiments how men can live, work, remain efficient, and make important contributions in space for extended periods. . . .” (Testimony; Incl. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 846-96)
U.S.-Mexican agreement for operation of NASA tracking station at Guaymas, Mexico, had been extended to 1970, NASA announced. The station would be used to track Project Gemini and Project Apollo. The two Governments also agreed to cooperate on meteorological sounding programs, (nasa Release 65-76)
In an article in The Huntsville Times, Richard Lewis said: “If Project Apollo continues at its present pace, the United States will be able to attempt the landing of astronauts on the moon in 1968. . . . “This impression of the status of Apollo . . . was gained by this reporter in tours of both industrial and test centers for the mammoth project. . . . “The story at these centers is this: no new breakthroughs in electronics, mechanics, metallurgy, propulsion or guidance and navigation are required for the program. All major problems are settled. They have been solved or ‘worked around.’ . . . “So well does Apollo appear to be running that there is a strong probability it will overtake the later flights of Project Gemini, the two-man spacecraft program.” (Lewis, Chicago Sun-Times, Huntsville Times, 1/20/65)
nasa had contracted with Collins Radio Co., Dallas (Tex.) Div., to procure Unified S-Band Telemetry Systems for three 85-ft. -diameter antennas in support of Project Apollo. Under the fixed-price type contract worth $2,740,000, Collins would install the three systems at antennas to be built at Goldstone, Calif.; Canberra, Australia; and Madrid, Spain, (nasa Release 65-63)
Tass reported that the Soviet Union was making extensive use of RANGER vii photographs presented to the Pulkovo Observatory: “Prof. Alexander Markov, who supervised the study of the photos, told a Tass correspondent that the materials received from the United States would be used to study the size and distribution of moon craters, to ascertain the origin and development of the entire lunary relief. He emphasized the particular topicality of these problems ‘in view of the landing of spacecraft on the lunar surface planned for near future.’ ” (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
U.S. News and World Report suggested that the success of the Gemini GT—4 flight should prompt reassessment of the U.S. position in the race with the Soviet Union. Two conclusions were noted: “1. In the civilian space race, White’s self-propelled ‘space walk’ and McDivitt’s ability to maneuver the spaceship put the U.S. ahead in at least two key areas and gave the U.S. a fighting chance eventually to overtake the Russians in the race to the moon. . . . “2. In the military space race, maneuvering of the Gemini spacecraft demonstrated that the region just above the earth—the inner space belt—could soon become vital to American security.” {U.S. News., 6/14/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in Subcommittee of the Senate ate Committee on Appropriations’ hearings on the requested $5.26 billion appropriation request for NASA in fy 1966, said: “Recent events have clearly demonstrated two important facts about space activities. First, the United States has shown that it can successfully build and launch complex spacecraft to measure the space environment over large regions of our solar system and to extend our knowledge of our neighboring space bodies. We have developed a capability to produce large launch vehicles, to test them, and to launch them successfully. We are producing the space hardware for environmental testing that will prove out our concepts and engineering for the large launch vehicles and spacecraft that will be required to operate out to and on the moon and meet all the demands of our other difficult undertakings. We have successfully developed space technology for improved communications and weather reporting and forecasting systems. The Ranger program, completed with Ranger IX, provided 17,000	closeup pictures of the moon that have not only given us a better understanding of its topography but may reveal totally unexpected processes taking place below the surface.- The first two manned flights of the Gemini program verified the system for using man in space, the capability of the Gemini spacecraft, the capability of an astronaut to operate outside of his spacecraft, and the utility of the ground net and mission control, and provided the first tests of some of the equipment designed to accomplish rendezvous and docking. They also served as an orbiting space laboratory with several experiments included on both flights. “The second major fact demonstrated by recent space events is that the Soviet Union continues to make a major commitment to its aeronautical and space activity. In late 1964, they launched the first multi-manned mission with the three-man Voskhod I satellite. So far in this calendar year, they have launched 17 Cosmos satellites; in the Voskhod II flight they achieved the first extravehicular activities of man in space; in April they placed in orbit Molniya I, their first active communications satellite; in May they launched a Lunik spacecraft to the moon with a successful midcourse correction but apparent terminal failure; and only a few days ago they launched another Lunik spacecraft to the moon with an apparent unsuccessful midcourse correction. They, too, are expanding upon a sound basis for both manned and unmanned activities in space. The growth of their space activity is quite apparent. The exhibition in Paris yesterday afternoon of a new very large air transport indicates the same kind of emphasis on equipment to use the earth’s envelope of air. “In aeronautics, it is important to note the increasing tempo of our research in not only the aerodynamics, loads and structures, propulsion, and operating problems of supersonic flight, but hypersonic flight as well. There is a resurgence of interest in airbreathing propulsion in the form of advanced turbojet and ramjet engines to meet the requirements of supersonic and hypersonic transports and to make them competitive with transports operating in the subsonic range. And of course, we are also engaged at the other end of the speed spectrum in our work with vertical takeoff and landing aircraft. . . .” In response to questioning, Mr. Webb said: “A substantial amount of time is now being put into aeronautics by our top people. Remember, we have to go through the air to get to space. The use of thin wall structures and the use of power delivered by engines all come out of the same research competence which we have. “. . . I have been asked once or twice to consider whether NASA should take on the management and development of prototypes and all other factors relating to the building of a supersonic transport. “Each time I have pointed out that we spend a large number of our dollars through the military services because they have the procurement capability. They are the only people in the U.S. Government today who know how to let a contract, monitor a contract, and take delivery on large airplanes and large numbers of airplanes. We use them for that purpose in boosters where they have already developed the competence; and in new boosters like SATURN V, we also use their contract administration and their Project 60 for engines. . . .” (Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings, 1095-1195)
nasa had awarded $300,000 grant to the Dept, of Interior’s Bureau of Mines for a three-year research program on the potential use of lunar materials to support manned exploration of the moon. The research team, utilizing data from nasa’s unmanned lunar programs, would study the possible production, processing, and uses of materials on the moon for the construction, supply, and operation of manned lunar bases. Faculty consultants and graduate students from Univ. of Minnesota would assist as part of the Bureau’s program to develop future capabilities at educational institutions, (nasa Release 65-144)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that the time had come for the Administration to decide on what goals it wanted to set for the period after landing astronauts on the moon. The U.S. must use the tremendous space capability it had carefully built up since sputnik I, he said, “or see its value erode. If we do not use what we have created, continued expansion of the Soviet program will likely lead to future Soviet missions that will have the impact of Sputnik I.” (Text)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center analysis showed that radiation shielding offered by the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) was negligible: a particle flux producing a 1-rem dose in the Apollo command module would produce a 17-rem dose in the Lem. The Apollo space radiation warning system would provide advance indication of need for astronauts to return from the Lem to the command-service modules. (.M&R, 3/22/65, 23) During March: usaf San Bernardino Air Materiel Area reported that Atlas and Titan icbm’s scheduled for phase-out by summer would be used in antimissile and space booster research and development assignments. Requests had been received to use the silos as civil defense shelters and for storage of petroleum, gas, and grain. (M&R, 3/22/65, 12)
Deploring the “belated decision” to finance the space defense of the U.S., syndicated columnist David Lawrence wrote: “It is interesting to note that on October 7, 1963, Louis C. Wyman, Republican, who was then a member of Congress and formerly was attorney general of New Hampshire, submitted alone a minority report to the House appropriations committee, in which he criticized at length the administration’s indifference to the military significance of space developments. He said: ‘As a first priority, rather than racing to the moon, the United States should establish and maintain an integrated weapons system in inner space within manned space capsules that have a capability to observe, intercept and, if necessary, destroy other objects in space.’ “Mr. Wyman’s extensive report will go down in history as a remarkable prophecy as well as an interesting example of how often minority reports become majority opinion.” (Lawrence, Kansas City Times, 9/16/65)
Houston Chronicle reported that preliminary funds for the unmanned exploration of Mars would be included in the NASA FY 1966 budget. On Oct. 30, 1964, the Space Science Board of NAS had recommended to NASA that Mars be the next goal because it was the likeliest of the planets to be inhabited by living things and would therefore be of greater scientific importance than the moon or proposed manning orbiting laboratories. (Mackaye, Houston Chron., 1/14/65)
Five lunar and Martian experts applied geological methods to interpreting Mars and the moon at the Geological Society of America Symposium in Kansas City. They found similarities between Mars and the moon: both bodies were subjected to slow erosion from showers of micrometeoroids from space; there was no evidence of surface water on either. Dr. Robert P. Sharp, Caltech, said that Martian craters were three-and-one-half times more numerous than on the lunar maria, but not as numerous as on the moon’s uplands. He believed the planet had an extremely thin atmosphere of carbon dioxide, temperatures ranging from 35° C to —100° C and no liquid water. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, related experiments on earth with features on the moon in effort to explain why the moon was being eroded. A nuclear explosion in Nevada, for example, created a meteorcrater-like hole, resulting in hundreds of secondary impact craters. “I think the surface is a fluffy material, about one meter thick, resting on the floor of small craters,” he said. “The bulk of matter is moved by the impact of small micrometeoroids. Probably a good deal of the material is melted and the melt may fly off into space.” Bruce C. Murray, Caltech, said that physical observations by studying emissions and radiation showed the moon emits light and other wave lengths in the same way that “fine, loose powder does.” He believed the outer one-half millimeter is covered with dust. Infrared heat samplings showed variations indicating a heterogenous type of rock near the surface. Dr. E. C. T. Chao, U.S. Geological Survey, discussed tektites—small, dark, glass, button-shaped objects, which he believed had been formed by meteoric impact, presumably on the moon, and had splashed off to fall on earth. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, showed a geological map of the moon with the ages of various areas in different colors. He said the Survey had mapped three million square miles in the potential landing areas on the equatorial belt. He found five different “episodes of movement” on the surface. (McCoy, Kansas City Times, 11/6/65)
First developmental test of a possible landing system for the Apollo Spacecraft was successfully performed at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center with the drop of a boilerplate spacecraft from a crane into a 700,000	gallon water tank. The boilerplate was fitted with two pairs of rockets and an 8-ft.-long altitude sensor. Rockets were mounted in the outer rim of the heat shield; thrust vector of the rockets was aligned with the gravity vector of the spacecraft. Structural reinforcement of the heat shield area was current solution for preventing damage to the spacecraft in a rough water landing. If the landing rocket system proved desirable, it would cut several hundred pounds from the weight of the Apollo command module in addition to providing an improved emergency and landing capability. (msc Roundup, 5/28/65, 8)
Article in Soviet Life by Academician Anatoli Blagonravov described the “three-directions of modern astronautics”: “The first is the study of the earth’s upper atmosphere and the portion of space adjoining our planet. . . . “The second is the study and exploration of . . . the moon. “The third is the study of solar space, including the nearest planets, Mars and Venus. “Soviet scientists are working in all three directions. “The first to be launched, always, are the automatic scouts, followed by men. “. . . The final stage in the solution of the first problem—exploration of near space—will probably be to set up a permanent manned space observatory-town, with bilateral contact maintained through rockets. Of course, long before this, reliable systems of meteorological sputniks, worldwide television sputniks, navigation sputniks, etc., will have been established. . . . “Several interesting moves have been taken in the second direction [lunar exploration]. . . . The automatic devices have not yet explored the moon’s surface in detail, have not yet determined the conditions prevailing there. Presumably, they will be followed by animals. Only after the safe return of the ship to earth has been assured will man go to the moon. “Manned landing will be preceded by numerous earth-moon flights. In the course of these flights the conditions along the entire route will be studied, detailed maps of the lunar surface made, and lunar space investigated. Need I add that all these flights will be made by teams of scientists only ? “The first stage in the exploration of the moon will be to set up a permanent research station on its surface. . . . “In the third direction—the exploration of near solar space and near planets—only the first steps have been taken, the first flights of automatic scouts. . . . The interplanetary routes will be explored again and again by automatic stations that will bring back much needed information on space and the nature of the planets to which they are sent. Only then will the first interplanetary expeditions take off. They will carry even larger teams than the lunar reconnaissance expeditions.” (Soviet Life, 5/65, 48) During May: Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President of Cal Tech, discussed objectives of the space program and what men hoped to learn through the space program about the moon, the planets, the sun, interplanetary space, and the earth itself. He concluded: “Man’s growing understanding of the nature and constitution of the universe had led to new advances in our knowledge of physics and of chemistry; and these in turn have led to applications of this knowledge to the development of things which men have found useful. We have never been able to predict in advance what the usefulness would be of new knowledge about the nature of the physical universe. All we know is that, by and large, new knowledge always has proved useful— and often it has proved useful in the most unexpected and unforeseeable ways. No one would have predicted that Newton’s enunciation of the laws of motion would lead to the age of machinery; that Faraday’s experiments would lead to the age of electricity; or that Einstein’s theory of relativity and Bohr’s theory of the atom would lead to the atomic bomb and atomic power. “We do know one thing: that scientific research which has been aimed at purely practical problems though it often has been of great value, has over a long run been of less value in producing wholly new things than has the research aimed solely at the extension of knowledge. The extension of man’s knowledge is the basic and the overriding purpose of the space exploration program.” (Text, JPL Lab-Oratory, 5/65, 10-12)
“A manned expedition to Mars within 15 years seems entirely feasible,” North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div. President Harrison Storms told William Hines of the Washington Evening Star. In charge of building the spacecraft for the Apollo moon landings, Storms offered an approximate timetable for a Mars expedition: “Start planning for it in 1970, start cutting metal in 1975 and go in 1980.” A recent report from the National Academy of Sciences had suggested 1985 as a feasible target date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
A New York Times editorial by Harry Schwartz concerning Soviet-American cooperation in space: “The real issues relate to the advantages and disadvantages in the moon race itself—including, of course, its propaganda aspects. “The argument that cooperation will not mean significant savings is strongest for the immediate future, but its force weakens rapidly as one extends the time horizon of both nations’ future space efforts. Even in the next year or two both countries could gain from a full pooling of space technology and knowledge because this would reduce the number of Gemini-type flights each would have to engage in. . . . “Major cost advantages can certainly be gained by agreement on a division of labor between the Soviet Union and the United States, if it is accompanied by a decision to send mixed crews on major missions. For example, a pooling of information and resources might permit one country to focus on the hardware needed for the moon trip, while the other concentrated on the equipment needed to send men to Mars. . . . “But the major savings from real Soviet-American cooperation in space might come from another direction entirely. In both countries influential voices are urging major military efforts looking to the creation of armed national space fleets . . . The time is past due for decision between space cooperation, or the extension of a rivalry that could cost both Soviet and American peoples dearly—and perhaps not solely in terms of vast sums wasted.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/14/65, 31, 32) Dr. James H. Wakelin, Jr., president of the Scientific Engineering Institute of Boston, said in an address at the Conference: “We must look forward to undersea dwellings, laboratories and military installations in which men would live and work for the economic good and military defense of the United States.” Dr. Wakelin advised President Johnson to appoint a National Advisory Commission on the Ocean to develop a 10-yr. program for study, exploration, and use of the seas, (upi, NYT, 6/15/65, 6) Capt. Jacques-Yves Cousteau urged the organization to “preserve and protect the sea from pollution.” He also warned against conducting undersea explorations entirely with instruments and suggested: “Let us go down . . . and see for ourselves, with our eyes.” (Casey, Wash. Post, 6/16/65, A14) opening remarks, Maj. Gen. Don Ostrander, afosr Commander, said: “The purpose of these Cloudcroft meetings is to stimulate ideas—to act as an intellectual catalyst. . . . We all have a responsibility to try to understand the complex interrelationships between science and technology, and between technology and national defense; through understanding, to participate in the excitement and urgency of the creative turmoil which is such an inescapable part of the age in which we live!” Historian A. Hunter Dupree, professor of history at the Univ. of California (Berkeley) and a consultant to NASA, said that scientists with a negative attitude regarding the Nation’s manned space flight activities had a laboratory-limited view of scientific endeavor and had lost perspective of the contributions made to American and world science through exploration and survey expeditions in the field. He pointed out the relationship of the Pacific voyages of Capt. Cook to Darwin’s later theory of evolution and said: “One can as little predict the results of space exploration as Captain Cook could have predicted Darwin’s theory.” According to Dupree, it was the general expansion of knowledge that would lead to later fruitful developments. But to justify these developments immediately or to justify exploration in terms of predictable developments would be a mistake. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/16/65; afosr Release 5-65—2; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 106110) An artificial frog’s eye which could be sent to the surface of Mars to detect living organisms was described by Warren McCullough and Louis Sutro. Research had revealed there were four varieties of ganglion cells in the eye of the frog—each processing different information. The MIT scientists had proposed the following scheme to nasa: the artificial eye would be coupled to a microscope in a tiny computer. Samples of Martian soil would be seen by the frog’s eye through the microscope. When movement was detected, the eye would inform the computer, which would decide whether a picture of the moving organism should be taken for relay back to earth. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al) Theories on biological rhythms were proposed by Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. at the AFOSR seminar. He suggested that oscillations or biological rhythms were serving a fundamental function that was not yet fully identified and that all organisms undergo oscillations with a periodicity that matches that of the external world—roughly 24 hrs. Light, even in negligible amounts, could alter these oscillations. In Pittendrigh’s view, once the true face of biological clocks—time measuring mechanisms innate in all living organisms—was seen, science would have vital clues to how life developed on earth and how biological rhythms determine what it is all living things do. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/22/65, A6) Star collisions were suggested by astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. as one way that energy now associated with a host of new objects observed throughout the universe was released. He said a prime candidate for providing the right kind of environment for star collisions was elliptical galaxies. In their predeath condition, elliptical galaxies start to lose stars that comprise the galaxies. Star loss causes the galaxies to shrink and become denser. The remaining stars rush in and out through the heats of these galaxies at speeds possibly as high as 24 million mph—greatly enhancing the chance for star collisions. The effect of collisions at these speeds would be to release amounts of energy equivalent to that calculated to be stored in the quasi-stellar radio sources. Gold had not observed such star collisions, but dense regions on the “brink of destruction” had been detected. “We must inspect each in turn,” Gold said, adding, “maybe we will learn that something totally different is involved, a new type of energy source that physics doesn’t know about.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/23/65)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA’s activities in the field of international cooperation: “Nineteen sixty-four was a year in which other nations emerged clearly as friendly competitors and valuable collaborators in space science and engineering and demonstrated by emulation their endorsement of our view that energetic efforts in these fields are essential contributors to the betterment of human society. I am thinking of such things as the energetic space programs of France, the demonstrated competence of Canada and Italy, the entry of the British aircraft industry into spacecraft engineering, the formal establishment of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo), and finally of the successful first test flight of a large new booster by ELDO. . . . “A year ago I reported our plans for including foreign experiments on NASA satellites under arrangements by which foreign experiments, selected in open competition with domestic proposals, are sponsored and financed by the experimenter’s national space authority. One such experiment flew in 1964—a British ion mass spectrometer on explorer xx, the U.S. fixed-frequency topside sounder. Six additional experiments were selected for flight, bringing the total to thirteen, with ten more under active consideration. We now have opened virtually all categories of NASA spacecraft, including Gemini and Apollo, to foreign participation on this cooperative basis. Indeed, we are now inviting foreign biomedic experts to a working conference in Houston, next April, to learn directly of the opportunities and constraints which apply to this program. . . . “A noteworthy development was the fact that esro became the first foreign space agency to seek a ground station on American territory. After conducting a site survey and finding a suitable location near Fairbanks, Alaska, esro has formally requested the Department of State to begin negotiations for an agreement. The ESRO station is projected as an element in a network of tracking and data acquisition facilities. . . . France is establishing a North/South fence from France through the Canary Islands, Algeria, Upper Volta, Congo Brazzaville, and South Africa, with an injection-monitoring station in Lebanon. This chain will also serve esro, which expects to have additional stations at Spitsbergen, Brussels, and in Australia and the South Atlantic. Both the ESRO and French networks will be entirely compatible with NASA’s, to maximize possibilities for mutual assistance. This is to our advantage, and we encourage it. . . . “Let me bring you up to date on the status of our cooperation with the Soviet Union. You will recall that we have a series of agreements with the Soviet Academy of Sciences providing for three coordinated projects—in meteorology, in surveying the geomagnetic field, and use of ECHO II for communications tests. The project involving the observation and use of echo ii is completed. The Soviet side observed the critical inflation phase of the satellite optically and forwarded the data to us; although not including radar data, which would have been most desirable. Communications via echo ii between the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. were carried out in only one direction instead of two, at less interesting frequencies than we would have liked, and with some technical limitations at the ground terminals used. On the other hand, the Soviets provided very complete recordings and other data of their reception of the transmissions.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 15-37)
U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill authorizing appropriations to NASA for FY 1966 totaling $5,183,844,850, as follows: $4,537,121,000 for research and development; $60,675,000 for construction of facilities; and $586,048,850 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5.26 billion. During the debate preceding passage of the bill, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) said: “We have moved quickly. But we are not in a crash program. We are now conducting a reasonable program . . . it is a well-planned program. “It is impossible to believe that in the fiscal year 1959 only $48,354,000 was authorized for space [nasa]. In fiscal year 1960 it went up ten times to $485,550,000. It doubled again in fiscal year 1961 to $915 million. “In fiscal year 1962 it went to $1,361,900,000. “In fiscal year 1963, it went to $3,742,162,000 and in fiscal year 1964 to $5,238,119,400. “In fiscal year 1965 it went to $5,193,810,500. “For this fiscal year, the committee has recommended $5,183,844,850, which is down from last year’s level. “I want the House to know we have gone over these programs thoroughly. We have made cuts in the committee, and the cuts were worthwhile. They are responsible, and they are substantial. They are not small.” Regarding funds restored to the NASA budget, Rep. Fulton said: “The M—1 engine development, the 260-inch engine development, and the snap-8 development, were ongoing programs of research that were approved by the committee and authorized by the House over the past several years. However, for reasons of economy, the Administrator cut these three programs entirely from the NASA budget. The committee on the other hand, believed that such actions in the long run would be extremely wasteful and later result in very high costs when it would become necessary to reactivate these programs. “Consequently, the committee restored $15 million to the M-l program to continue it on a technological development level, $6.2 million to the 260-inch solid rocket program to carry it through the test firing of two full length rockets, and $6 million to the SNAP-8 to continue it at the scheduled level of effort.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) discussed changes made by the Manned Space Flight Subcommittee: “The total request by NASA for manned space flight for fiscal year 1966 is $3,567,052,000. . . . The subcommittee is recommending a total reduction of $42,825,000. “NASA requested $3,249,485,000 for research and development in manned space flights. Total reduction in research and development amounts to $30 million. All of this reduction comes from the Apollo program. It is the view of the subcommittee that in the areas of Apollo mission support and engine development that program improvements could be made. However, the reduction was made in the total request to allow NASA to make program alterations with a broad management latitude of choice without adversely affecting the total program. It was recognized by the subcommittee that NASA, prior to coming before the committee, had made substantial reductions in their total research and development program. A further reduction was also made by the Bureau of the Budget. Based on this, the $30 million reduction is considered a maximum amount that could be taken without jeopardizing the pace and progress of the Apollo program.” (CR, 5/6/65, 9291, 9296, 9301)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said during a recent interview that the next immediate step beyond the initial Apollo lunar landings was to extend the usefulness of both spacecraft and launch vehicle to permit longer stays in earth orbit and on the moon. “This fall we will have to make a definite recommendation to fund one or both,” he said. (M/S Daily, 7/26/65)
LUNA VII 3,313-lb. instrumented moon probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Tass said the last stage of the multistage launching rocket was put into parking orbit and then LUNA VII was fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. Launching occurred on the eighth anniversary of the orbiting by the Soviet Union of the first earth satellite, sputnik i. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 10/5/65, All; Nordlinger, Balt. Sun, 10/5/65, 5)
NASA had decided to replace Lem’s fuel-cell power subsystem with a more conventional battery system, Missiles and Rockets reported. Motivation was concern for reliability. Decision would not affect use of fuel cell in the Apollo command module. (M&R, 3/8/65, 14)
100 university, research laboratory, and government scientists met in Falmouth, Mass., to recommend modifications or additions to NASA’s Apollo Program and Apollo Extension Systems lunar science program. Participants included three astronauts—R. Walter Cunningham and two of the six scientist-astronauts selected on June 28, 1965: Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt of the U.S. Geological Survey and Dr. Frank C. Michel of Rice Univ. This meeting resulted in recommendation of a 10-year post-Apollo lunar exploration program of mainly manned missions, with wide variety of scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry, geophysics, and bioscience. Top priority recommended for early Apollo landing missions was collection of greatest possible number and variety of lunar material samples. Conference was sponsored by the Manned Space Science Program of NASA’s office of Space Science and Applications. Report of the conference (nasa sp-88) was later published in January 1966. (nasa Release 66-4; NASA sp-88; nasa Release 65-239)
Gemini 5 Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Lt. Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (LCdr., usn) and their backup pilots Neil Armstrong and Elliot See met a news briefing at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini V mission, scheduled for August 19. Cooper explained that during the flight the astronauts would try to sight a USN Polaris missile to be launched from the East Coast and an unidentified missile to be launched from the West Coast. It was not disclosed at what point during the mission either of the launches would occur. In addition, Cooper said he and Conrad would attempt to sight rocket engines ignited on a rocket sled at Holloman afb, N. Mex. Also on the program would be an attempt to rendezvous with a Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) which would be ejected from the spacecraft and would drift to a distance of about 60 mi. from the spacecraft. The radar equipment onboard would then assist in performing maneuvers to achieve rendezvous with the Pod, although actual contact was not planned. Cooper said that backup system for reentry would not be used again because the thrust fuel would be used in the rendezvous experiment. No extravehicular activity would be performed during this mission. The astronauts announced they would attempt to communicate with fellow astronaut Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) participating in the USN Sealab ii experiment beneath the Pacific. Flight plans called for a landing in the West Atlantic. Both astronauts felt that personal hygiene would be one of the main problems of the flight. (Transcript)
First major piece of flight-type hardware for the Apollo program, Service Module 001, successfully underwent a 10-sec. shakedown static test firing at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s White Sands Operations. Service Module 001 was unlike previous boilerplate models in that it was constructed primarily of aluminum alloy and had an outside skin of honeycomb bonded between two aluminum sheets. Made by Aerojet-General, the service propulsion system engine had 22,000 lbs. of thrust. It would slow down the Apollo for entry into lunar orbit and speed up the spacecraft for escape from lunar orbit and the return to earth. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 8; naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/12/65, 1, 3)
NASA’s ranger ix, equipped with six television cameras, was successfully launched toward the moon from Cape Kennedy by an Atlas-Agena B. After the Agena had carried the 800-lb. ranger ix into 115-mi.-altitude parking orbit with 17,500 mph orbital speed, the Agena engines were cut off. Second burn of the Agena lasted about 90 sec., increasing the velocity to about 24,525 mph and freeing ranger ix from the major pull of the earth’s gravity, ranger ix then continued on its 2*/2-day, 245,000-mi. trip to the moon. About 70 min. after launch, NASA announced the spacecraft had been commanded to deploy its solar panels that would convert solar energy to electrical power for its equipment. Projected target was the crater Alphonsus, about 12° south of the moon’s equator, where gaseous emissions had been reported. On the day of impact, Alphonsus would be illuminated by slanting sunlight, producing long shadows and bringing out subtle surface features. The terminator—dividing line between the dark and sunlit portions of the moon—would be only 11° from Alphonsus. Five hours after lift-off, NASA announced that ranger ix’s course was so accurate it would hit the moon only 400 mi. north of the crater target; an inflight maneuver would be executed later to correct this small course error, (nasa Release 65-25; Wash. Post, 3/22/65; Sehl-stedt, Balt. Sun, 3/22/65; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65; WSJ, 3/22/65)
Reasons for choosing the moon crater Alphonsus as the target for RANGER IX were given by David Hoffman in an article in the New York Herald Tribune: “First, they are just plain curious. Rangers 7 and 8 photographed two lunar seas and taught scientists that all such ‘maria’ are pretty much the same. Now scientists want pictorial coverage of the moon’s rugged highlands. “Alphonsus’ walls rise 7,000 to 10,000 feet above its crater floor, and in the basin thus formed astronomers have observed reddish gas seeping from the surface. The question, then, is whether Alphonsus is really a lunar equivalent of a live volcano. “Second, some space experts believe Apollo astronauts, as they descend on the moon, may encounter an emergency. That emergency might force them down in the moon mountains instead of onto a flat lunar plain. Accordingly, NASA wants to know surface roughness of the smoothest part of the moon mountains. “Third, there are some who believe the smoothest areas on the moon actually lie within the great craters (Alphonsus’ diameter is 70 miles). If this proves true, astronauts might select a crater floor as their touchdown point, assuming there is no volcanic activity.” (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/23/65)
Commenting on anxiety about the Soviet Union’s capability of delivering strategic weapons from near space, Dr. S. Fred Singer said in an article in Reporter: “If a bomb is released from a satellite without giving it any propulsion, it will stay with the satellite and simply blow it up. For a bomb from a satellite to be directed to a point on earth, it must be propelled not only with a lot of rocket power but also with exceedingly fine guidance. In principle, this can be done from a satellite or from the moon or even from the planet Pluto; but the cost and complexity is enormously greater than that of an equally effective ICBM buried deep in the earth itself.” (Reporter, 6/17/65, 14)
afsc had selected nine graduates of its Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, Calif., to participate in crew performance studies for manned space flight to be conducted by NASA at the Martin Co. Three seven-day lunar landing simulations would be made using a simulated Apollo lunar landing mission. Each would utilize a three-man crew, (afsc Release)
A fuel cell system had successfully operated for more than 1,300 hrs.— the time it would take a spacecraft to make nine trips to the moon and back—producing electricity and drinking water from hydrogen and oxygen, John L. Platner of the Allis-Chalmers Research Div. told the 19th annual Power Source Conference in Atlantic City. Platner gave details of the cell’s performance in reporting on an advanced 2,000-watt fuel system being built by Allis-Chambers for NASA, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/19/65, A21)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved a $5.2 billion nasa authorization for fy 1966, cutting only $75 million from the President’s request. An unrequested $27.2 million was included for the 260-in. solid propellant program, the M-l liquid hydrogen engine, and the Snap 8. Biggest single reduction was $42 million cut in $3.6 billion request for Apollo. Other programs affected by the cut included Oao, Ogo, Surveyor, Rover, Lunar Orbiter, and Centaur. (WSJ, 4/28/65)
ComSatCorp asked Fee for authority to build four new satellites to provide communication services for the Apollo project as well as for other commercial uses. (ComSatCorp Release)
An editorial in the New York Herald Tribune referred to the U.S.-U.S.S.R. race for the moon: “The moon remains an elusive target, but it gets closer all the time. . . . “Ideally, this should be a cooperative venture, enlisting the common efforts of the peoples of all nations; instead, so far at least, it is a race between the United States and the Soviet Union. Because it is a race; because space technology is, in major part, inseparable from military technology; because space prestige is, however illogically, a factor in the struggle to keep the earth free, we have to compete. NASA’s ambitious program of a manned Gemini flight every three months promises a vigorous competitive effort. But the American effort does not parallel that of the Soviets; each is giving priority to different techniques, and the comparative standings in the race are hard to measure. What is clear, however, is that the Grissom-Young flight has carried the American program a long way forward—and beyond that, and more importantly in the long perspective of history, it has brought closer the day when man, not American man or Soviet man, finally breaks the terrestrial bonds that hold him to his native planet.” (N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/24/65)
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge Space Technology Laboratories chosen as the winner in a two-year design competition to produce the rocket engine for Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem). The liquid-propellant engine was designed to vary its power output between a low of 1,000 lb. thrust and a high of 10,000 lb.	(NYT, 1/29/65)
Ikeya-Seki comet reached perihelion (closest approach to the sun) with the comet only about 300,000 mi. from the visible solar disk and within a solaf radius of the sun’s surface. Traveling along an elliptical path that would carry it around the sun and deep into the solar corona, Ikeya-Seki had a visual magnitude of —10, nearly as bright as the moon. It was the brightest comet since the one in 1882 which reached an intensity of —7. (NASA Release 65-332; Osmundsen, NYT, 10/20/65, 39; Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/65, C23)
LUNA VI, 3,179-lb. instrumented moon probe, was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. with a multi-stage rocket into a parking orbit and then fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally and the trip was scheduled to last about three and a half days, according to Tass announcement. (Tass, 6/8/65)
Two more MARINER IV close-up shots of Mars were released by NASA. The first three photographs showed an almost unbroken strip of terrain more than 600 mi. long. They revealed features down to two miles in length, including several crater-like objects, a kidneyshaped depression 20-30 mi. in width, and ridges and depressions similar to those on the moon. None of them showed straight-line features that might have been taken by earth-based observers to be canals. Except for the suggestion of an arid, wind-swept, desert-like terrain, the pictures did not bear directly on the question of life on the planet. During a press conference held at JPL, Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, said that mariner iv had been a “magnificent success.” The computer which had reconstructed the numbers transmitted by mariner iv into photographs had proved capable of cleaning up and intensifying the image to a remarkable degree. The pic tures were of a high quality, and, in addition, the lighting conditions were expected to improve the detail in later photographs. Comparison of overlapping areas—one picture in a pair exposed through a green filter and one through a red filter—might reveal some things about color on Mars that would not otherwise be obtainable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/18/65, 1, 50; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/18/65. Al, A6; WSJ, 7/19/65, 1)
Reviewing NASA’s activities in manned space flight in the last year, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “It is a pleasure to report that . . . there has been substantial progress in the development and testing of flight vehicles and earth-based facilities, in the nearly complete marshalling of the government-industry manned space flight team, and in the consolidation of firm program-wide management. “During the past year, the Gemini Program has advanced to the point that we are ready for manned flight operations. The Apollo Program is entering a year of comprehensive development testing of major systems prior to the ‘all-up’ unmanned earth-orbital flights, which will begin in 1966. And our study of advanced manned missions has established that it is feasible to return dividends from the current investment by applying the wide range of Apollo capabilities to a number of other potential missions.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 143ff)
According to Missiles and Rockets, Dr. Joseph Shea, director of Apollo spacecraft program at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said Apollo spacecraft was having no weight problems. He explained that the current weight of 89,000 lbs. was under 90,000 lbs. goal and there was room for additional growth since Saturn V booster had increased estimated payload capability to 95,000 lbs. Weight of Lem was increasing in early development stage, but new evaluation stemming from NASA decision to make it as safe in terms of redundancy as command and service modules, could raise weight from 29,500 lbs. to 32,000 lbs. Shea commented that a stable baffled injector had been selected for service module’s propulsion system and it was currently undergoing qualification test series. Recent tests of heatshield in reentry tests with Scout (Aug. 18, 1964) achieved high total heat of 250 Btu’s per square foot—about 80'/< of the heat expected to be encountered during return from moon. (M&R, 3/8/65, 14)
At a House Science and Astronautics Committee budget hearing at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) said he thought U.S. had about a 50-50 chance of landing a man on the moon by 1970 “if we get the money for our space team.” Teague felt that America was ahead of Russia in development of scientific programs in space, but Russia was ahead in development of large boosters. Rep. Robert Casey (D-Tex.) stressed that the program would be considered a success even if 1970 schedules were not met. Rep. George Miller (D—Calif.), Chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee, said that in 50 to 100 years, “people won’t care if we made it in this decade, if the program itself is successful.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, said that the Apollo and Gemini spacecraft would not be limited to manned space program but also would be useful in other scientific programs. Teague expressed his disappointment at the military’s failure to make greater use of NASA-developed spacecraft and boosters. He predicted that both Gemini and Apollo would be used some day as weapon carriers. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/6/65)
Pegasus B, second of the “winged” micro meteoroid detection satellites, arrived at Cape Kennedy to he readied for launch during the next two months. Similar to pegasus i, Pegasus B would occupy a simulated Apollo service module aboard the sa-8 vehicle. A boilerplate model of the Apollo command module would be placed above the Pegasus; in orbit, the Apollo modules would be jettisoned and the satellite exposed. Preliminary data from PEGASUS I indicated it was confirming current theory on micrometeoroid density, (msfc Release 65-85; Marshall Star, 4/21/65, 1, 2)
President Johnson sent to the House and Senate his message transmitting annual report on the U.S. space activities. In his letter, President Johnson said: “The advances of 1964 were gratifying and heartening omens of the gains and good to come from our determined national undertaking in exploring the frontiers of space. While this great enterprise is still young, we began during the year past to realize its potential in our life on earth. As this report notes, practical uses of the benefits of space technology were almost commonplace around the globe—warning us of gathering storms, guiding our ships at sea, assisting our mapmakers and serving, most valuably of all, to bring the peoples of many nations closer together in joint peaceful endeavors. “Substantial strides have been made in a very brief span of time— and more are to come. We expect to explore the moon, not just visit it or photograph it. We plan to explore and chart planets as well. We shall expand our earth laboratories into space laboratories and extend our national strength into the space dimension.” A hypersonic aircraft—one that could fly the Atlantic in less than an hour—had reached the stage where models were being constructed for wind tunnel tests. President Johnson’s report disclosed: “Two structural models embodying design concepts applicable to the fuselage of a hydrogen-fueled hypersonic aircraft were being constructed for testing at 1,500-2,500° F—temperatures likely to be encountered in hypersonic flight. Equipment was developed for inducing angular oscillations in the test section flow of a large transonic wind tunnel and will be used to obtain the dynamic response of wind tunnel models.” (CR, 1/27/65, 1366; U.S. News, 2/2/65)
The three-orbit flight by Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young was in some ways the most remarkable space trip yet accomplished by this country’s astronauts,” said an editorial in the New York Times. “Particularly impressive was the apparent success of a series of maneuvers to change the Gemini’s orbit—maneuvers that will be required to join two spacecraft in orbit, notably on the return leg of the projected manned flight to the moon.” (NYT, 3/24/65, 44)
Hopper,” a versatile rocket-propelled Lunar Flying Vehicle (Lfv) to transport Apollo astronauts on exploration flights of the moon’s surface, had been designed by Bell Aerosystems Co. as a result of a 12-month study conducted for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Bell announced. The 400-lb., four-legged, rectangular Lfv would be desk size and propelled by a cluster of five 100-lb-thrust rocket engines; it could fly 50 mi. nonstop. Bell also disclosed receipt of a $489,898 follow-on nasa contract to design a Manned Flying System (Mfs) capable of carrying one astronaut-scientist and 300 lbs. of equipment or two astronauts. Intended primarily as an exploratory device, the Mfs would be able to fly 15 mi. round trip without fueling. (Bell Aerosystems Co. Release)
LUNA vi, Russian probe, passed the halfway point on its journey to the moon. All systems continued to function normally, Tass announced. (Tass, 6/9/65)
Dr. Warren Weaver, former president of the aaas, said in an interview with U.S. News & World Report that it was wrong to spend $30 billion on getting an American to the moon by 1970 when so much else to benefit the human race could be done with the money. He suggested: “We could give every teacher in the U.S. a ten percent raise a year for ten years; endow 200 small colleges with $10 million each; finance the education through graduate school of 50,000 scientists at $4,000-a-year; build ten new medical schools at $200 million each; build and endow complete universities for more than 50 developing countries; create three new Rockefeller Foundations worth $50 million each.” {U.S. News, 11/29/65)
Course of Soviet spacecraft luna viii was successfully corrected and it was now on a trajectory toward the moon close to the calculated one, Tass announced. (Tass, 12/6/65)
Sir William Hildred, Director General of the International Air Transport Association, said in an address at the Association’s 21st annual meeting that proposed supersonic jet airliners would face stiff competition from giant subsonic jets expected on international airways by 1967. Sir William said the airlines favored supersonic airliners, such as the planned British-French Concorde, if they could provide faster transportation “without insuperable financial, technical or operational problems.” He said the Concorde was likely to be available in 1971-72, and its American counterpart in 1973-74. But before that, Sir William continued, giant air buses, “stretched” subsonic jets seating up to 250 passengers, would be available. (NYT, 10/25/65, 66) During week of October 25: First two H-l rocket engines uprated to 205.000	lbs. thrust were delivered from Rocketdyne’s Neosho, Mo., plant to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Division in New Orleans. Later, at the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, H-l engines would be installed in Saturn ib vehicles to be used in the early stages of the Apollo program. The uprated engines would add a total of about 40.000 lbs. thrust to nasa’s Saturn ib booster, increasing the total thrust of the eight-engine cluster to 1,640,000 lbs. (msfc Release 65-269)
We must use a completely different approach. We must get away from this launching from pads, which costs millions and billions of dollars, to the more conventional way of taking off from a runway.’ ” Witze continued: “He predicts that after we have gone to the moon we will start over again. Project Apollo cannot be turned back, he says, but the next time ‘we must create an environment in space that can be used by men, not only for research but for commercial and military purposes.’ “This environment he is talking about is a permanent space station, one that will never come back into the atmosphere. This will require a logistics system—a recoverable, reusable space transporter to carry people and supplies back and forth to space. The Dyna-Soar was a crude but necessary step in this direction, replaced today by the concept of the aerospace plane. . . . “The Dornberger thesis is that a manned station in near space is as practical as a military base on Okinawa, a laboratory at the South Pole, or an aircraft parts and maintenance depot in Chateauroux. Once established, all that is needed is a logistics system to keep it going. From such a space station, expeditions can be sent to the moon, or many other places in space, with engines that give a thrust of only 20,000 pounds, instead of the millions of pounds required on one-way booster trips. . . .” Quoting Dr. Dornberger: “ ‘It took mankind hundreds of years to learn to use the sea, but only fifty years to use the air. Space can be used in twenty-five years, if we get started. I doubt that the use of space vehicles will be more hazardous than the use of submarines.’ ” (AF Mag., 10/65, 80-88)
luna vi, Soviet probe, would miss the moon by 160,000 km. (99,379 mi.) because of an unsuccessful midcourse maneuver, Tass announced. Engine used to adjust the spacecraft’s trajectory could not be switched off, causing a deviation from the planned course. (Tass, 6/10/65)
NASA was acquiring eight kc-135 jet transports and three ships to help maintain communications during Apollo moon flights. In addition, two ships of the existing DOD instrumentation fleet were being remodeled for support of the Apollo lunar mission’s reentry phase. The KC-135’s would be used during reentry to combat the effects of the plasma sheath blackout which had drowned out communications on previous manned launchings. In addition, three primary ground stations were being prepared at Goldstone, Calif.; Canberra; and Madrid. (nasa Apollo Proj. Off.; ap, CSM, 7/19/65)
NASA’s decision to divert funds from its basic science research program to Project Apollo as a budgetary expediency was criticized by the New York Times: “[nasa] is sacrificing scientifically important projects whose sole defect is that they lack the spectacular publicity value of Project Apollo, which already consumes most of nasa’s huge appropriation. “We believe this is an irrational set of priorities, the result of the public-relations approach. There is no compelling scientific reason why a man should be landed on the moon by 1969 rather than in 1971 or 1973. . . .” (NYT, 12/17/65, 38)	_
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
ComSatCorp had filed a contract with fcc for purchase of four satellites from Hughes Aircraft Co. to supply communication services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial services. Two spacecraft would be placed in synchronous orbits at about 22,300 mi.: one would be located over the Pacific between Hawaii and Midway Island; the other over the Atlantic near the west coast of Africa. Of the other two, one would be used as a reserve for replacement and one as a backup in case of a launch failure. Contract also provided an option for purchase of up to 15 of the satellites. Delivery date of the first satellite would be eight months after ComSatCorp would give Hughes notice to proceed, with one additional spacecraft of the four to be delivered every 21 days thereafter. (ComSatCorp Release) Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa for Manned Space Flight, introducing the symposium, noted three important general conclusions to be drawn from the results. First, data on man himself indicates that astronauts can adapt to the space environment, giving great confidence that manned space flight effort can move according to pian without the necessity of introducing special requirements such as artificial gravity. Second, further substantiation of the Mercury program evidences that man can see things from space which are not programmed on instruments to see. Third, the outstanding quality of photographs of earth from space demonstrates the feasibility of a number of significant applications of manned space flight for improvement of life here on earth, (nasa Release 65-321; nasa Rpt. of Symposium)
Editorial by Henry Eyring, Univ. of Utah, in Science: “. . . The crash program on the atomic bomb grew out of groundless fears that our antagonists would get the atomic bomb first. The vast sums being spent at present on a crash program for an early landing on the moon have their own somewhat obscure, psychological basis. If the moon program is really the most effective means of staving off all-out war, expensive as it is, it is still a bargain. On the other hand, the attempts which are sometimes made to sell the moon program on its scientific merits alone, in competition with other scientific uses of the money, are less convincing. The charitable conclusion is that in public affairs it is deemed necessary to oversimplify actual objectives so that the general public will best serve its own interests for the wrong reasons. This oversolicitude is probably neither necessary nor desirable. . . .” {Science, 10/22/65, 439)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at a press conference during the 23rd annual Hampton County (S.C.) Watermelon Festival that the Gemini V manned space flight would be an eight-day mission—the time required to fly to the moon, explore its surface, and return to earth. Webb also disclosed that NASA would announce next week the selection of six scientist astronauts. Speaking at “Mendel Rivers Day” ceremony, Webb pointed out that Congressman Mendel Rivers, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, “has steadily supported the Nation’s effort to build strength in space.” Webb also said: “Thoughtful students of national power and its uses are increasingly aware that America’s security as well as her leadership of the Free World, depends directly upon our progress in mastering and using space. “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration cooperates closely with the Department of Defense, to ensure that the technological progress we make in developing the peaceful uses of space will be drawn upon as needed to help keep the peace—in space and on earth. “As you can readily understand, the development of military space systems follows those basic research fields which provide the scientific understanding and technological capability to make such systems possible. It is NASA’s job, as the space research and development agency, to provide this basic knowledge and know-how.” Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young accompanied Webb to this festival, (nasa Release; Text; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 111-14)
Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. successfully tested a life-support back pack designed to meet requirements of the lunar surface suit for the Apollo lunar-landing mission. System functioned as planned for over three hours inside a vacuum chamber while the test subject walked on a treadmill to simulate the metabolic load of an astronaut on the lurain. The 65-lb. portable life support system supplied oxygen, pressurized to a minimum 3.7 lbs. psi, controlled its temperature and relative humidity, and circulated it through the suit and helmet. The pack pumped cooled water through the tubing of the undergarment for cooling inside the pressure suit. A canister of lithium hydroxide trapped carbon dioxide and other air contaminants to purify the oxygen for reuse. ( upi, NYT, 12/6/65, 42)
Saturn I (sa—S> launch vehicle, launched from Eastern Test Range, orbited a 23.0004b. payload of which 3,200 lbs. was the PEGASUS U meteoroid detection satellite and 9.700 lbs. was Apollo boilerplate command and service modules (bp-26(. This was the ninth successful test in nine flights for Saturn I, At launch. Apollo command and service module boilerplate spacecraft and launch escape system I Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with PEGASUS II folded inside the service module. After second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. After injection into orbit, the Apollo boilerplate was jettisoned into a separate orbit and a motor-driven device extended 96 X 14-ft. winglike panels on fecasus n, exposing 2,300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface. The satellite was attached to the Saturn’s s-iv second stage and would remain so during its lifetime. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and providing mountings for a total of 208 detector panels. As particles collided with this surface, the penetrations would be registered and reported to earth. Orbital data: apogee. 460 mi. (741 km.); perigee, 316 mi. (509 km.); period, 97 min.; inclination, 31.8°. Primary purpose of the flight was to gather information on frequency of meteoroids encountered in the near-earth environment for use in design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft, pecasus n, an improved version of pegasus r launched Feb. 16, 1965, would be visible to the naked eye under favorable conditions near dawn and dusk. (NASA Release 65-151; msec Release 65-121; Marshall Star, 5/26/65, 1: ap, NYT, 5/26/65. 10; V.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 143)
A guidance control system for the Little Joe II booster was released from a Las Cruces, N. Mex., hospital in satisfactory condition following emergency x-ray treatment. White Sands Missile Range technicians preparing for a Dec. 1 Apollo escape system test took the unit to the hospital after they failed to determine the cause of a malfunction. Industrial x-ray facilities at White Sands were closed for Veterans Day. (ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/15/65, A15)
F-l rocket engine completed its 1,000th test firing at nasa MSFc’s Rocket Engine Test Site where it operated at its full thrust of 1,500,000 lbs. for 165.6 sec. Test was conducted by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. In a cluster of five, F-l would provide 7,500,000 lbs. thrust in the s—ic first stage of the Saturn V booster that would launch Apollo lunar missions, (msfc Release 65—154; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)
A lunar dust cloud produced by braking rockets of Soviet probe LUNA v as it attempted a soft landing on the moon May 12 was photographed by the observatory at Rodewisch, E. Germany, said the observatory’s director in an interview with adn, E. German press agency. The tracking station had made photographs of the lunar approach of the spacecraft at 15-sec. intervals. At the moment of best visibility—10:15 p.m. Moscow time—the dust cloud was 140 mi. long and 50 mi. wide. It had disappeared by 10:21 p.m. Moscow time. This was the first indication that braking rockets aboard the spacecraft had been operative. Soviet announcement had given landing time for LUNA v as 10:10 p.m. Pictures of the dust cloud were published in Izvestia. (NYT, 5/16/65, 6; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/16/65)
All major goals of the Gemini program except actual docking of two spacecraft had been achieved with the flights of GEMINI VI and vii, msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said at an msc news conference. Gemini program director Charles Mathews said the remaining five Gemini launchings, all scheduled for 1966, would attempt to demonstrate some complex rendezvous techniques useful for Project Apollo, (ap, NYT, 12/19/65, 69; ap, Wash. Post, 12/19/65, A17; msc Roundup, 12/23/65, 6)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center hosted group of 61 Navy, Air Force, and civilian personnel from Navy Field Office for Manned Orbiting Laboratory at Los Angeles. The group received briefings on Apollo and Saturn programs and saw facilities at Marshall. They had previously visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were scheduled to tour NASA Kennedy Space Center, (msfc Release 65-52)
A projection of the U.S. space program was outlined by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, at the Building Products Executives Conference in Washington, D.C.: “1. After we have made initial landings on the moon, we will, if conditions warrant, make many other trips to explore the various parts of the lunar surface and possibly to establish one or more bases there. “2. Not only will unmanned probes be sent throughout the solar system, but manned expeditions will visit the planets whenever that becomes scientifically promising and practicable. “3. We will develop a family of useful manned earth-orbiting stations, growing from relatively small orbiting laboratories to large multi-manned permanent stations. Regular ferry service will transfer personnel and supplies to and from such spacecraft. “4. Global communications via satellites will become a fact in the very near future and will be followed by direct broadcast of both voice and TV by satellite to home receivers throughout large sections of the world. “5. Orbiting spacecraft will increase annually in numbers, in size, and in sophistication. Through such activity we will greatly increase our knowledge about the earth as well as about the heavens. “6. We can expect a marriage of the major features of both aeronautics and astronautics . . . lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry ability will be launched into near and distant space by means of recoverable and re-usable launch vehicles. Drastic reduction in the mileage cost of space travel will result. “7. Spaceports for the coming and going of spacecraft will be built in a number of parts of this country as well as elsewhere. “8. Improved propulsion—faster, more powerful rockets using nuclear as well as chemical energy—will characterize space transportation. Planetary trips which today would take many months will be done in perhaps a week’s time or less, while carrying substantial payloads of passengers, equipment, and supplies. And, “9. As competence in space increases ... we can expect to see greater economic progress and international cooperation. Then we can truly say that our space efforts have made major contributions to world peace. . . .” (Text)
Smithsonian Institution disclosed architectural plans for a national air and space museum to be built in Washington, D. C., opposite the National Gallery of Art. Designed by Gyo Obata, a St. Louis architect, the building would be modern in concept with an internal design that would provide a sweeping vista of exhibit areas. Smithsonian officials hoped to receive Congressional authorization to build the museum at a cost of $42 million. (NYT, 1/31/65) During January: Reviewing Apollo program progress, Dr. Joseph Shea, Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said that NASA had characterized the program as a series of phases. He explained that 1963 and 1964 were years of detailed designs and initial developmental testing; 1964 and 1965 were years of extensive ground tests and qualifications for flight; from 1966 on, ground tests would be supplemental to extensive flight tests, initially on the Saturn IB and later on the Saturn V. From his visits to almost all of the major Apollo hardware contractors, Dr. Shea said he could report that all of the subsystems associated with the command and service modules “are well along in their ground test programs. “Almost all elements are on schedule and the test results indicate that the designs will meet our program objectives. By early this year, all subsystem hardware will be undergoing the rigorous qualification tests which we require before certifying such hardware ready for flight. ... By the end of 1965, there will be three Apollo spacecraft in continuous ground testing. 1964 was, in retrospect, a year where milestone by milestone, we have achieved Apollo objectives.” (naa S&1D Skywriter, 1/15/65, 1, 4; Witkin, NYT, 1/24/65, 60)
Saturn V launch vehicle Is-ic stage) was static-fired for the first time, at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F—1 engines were ignited in a test which lasted 6V(> sec. during which they generated a thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (160,000.000 hp.). This was the first full cluster test and was made on a recently completed 400-ft.-tall test stand. The S—ic was the first stage of 364-ft.-tall Saturn V-Apollo combination that would ultimately take astronauts and equipment to the moon. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller congratulated MSFC personnel on the successful test: “. . . As this was one of the key milestones in the whole lunar landing program, its successful performance. 12 weeks ahead of schedule, has a great bearing on our program.” (mfsc Release 65-92; Marshall Star, 5/5/65, 5)
NASA announced management assignments in the Apollo Applications area: msc would be responsible for development and procurement of all standard and modified spacecraft (Command, Service, and Lunar Excursion Modules), astronaut activities, flight operations, and integration of experiments in the command and service modules; MSFC would be responsible for development and procurement of launch vehicles, integration of experiments into the Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn instrument units, and s-ivb stages (top stages of both Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles); KSC would assemble, check out, and launch Apollo Applications space vehicles and their associated payloads. Proposals for possible Apollo Applications experiments were expected to be submitted by the world scientific community, industry, other Government agencies, and the entire NASA organization. (NASA Release 65-381)
The S-ib-1, Chrysler-built first stage of NASA’s Saturn IB, arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center from Michoud Operations in New Orleans for static-firing tests. The stage was 21 ft. in diameter, 80 ft. in length, and weighed 90,000 lbs. For Saturn IB program, its eight engines had been uprated to 200,000 lbs. thrust each and weight had been reduced by some 16,000 lbs. It would be returned to Michoud Operations in about six weeks for post-firing checks. Saturn IB vehicles would be used for earth-orbital missions of Apollo spacecraft. ( msfc Release 65-60)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the American Society of Photogrammetry and the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, convening in Washington: “. . . since the dawn of the Space Age—in less than eight years—one of our most important tasks has been that of mapping—mapping the surface of the world and its geodetic figure; mapping the world’s weather, as revealed in its cloud patterns as seen from above; mapping the earth’s outermost atmosphere in three dimensions, and exploring its interaction with the newly-discovered solar wind; seeing and mapping astronomical sources for the first time in ultraviolet and X-radiation from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and mapping areas of our moon to an accuracy 2,000 times better than that now achievable from earth, and preparing to map areas of Mars to an accuracy as much as 100 times better than that attainable from earth. . . .” (Text)
Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in an article in Astronautics and Aeronautics for January: “. . . With Ranger 7, the prime factor was the expectation that the Apollo mission would choose a landing area on one of the smooth ‘maria.’ So it was of great value to this program to find out as much as possible about the mare topography. In particular, it was necessary to know if these areas were really lava flows and, if so, how much was exposed lava and how densely the small craters were scattered over the surface. “Ranger gave some of the answers. In some areas, at least, small craters were indeed strewn very thickly. Probably such areas lie along the rays which radiate from some of the more recent large craters. Between these ray regions the surface of the mare appears to be quite smooth. No large rocks or fissures are apparent, although the general roughness may be comparable to some terrestrial lava fields where the lava is of the ‘pahoehoe,’ or fluid variety. However, the absence of any significant number of features showing edges with a small radius of curvature, and the presence of small craters which have been filled with debris, point to erosion as a significant modifier of the primeval lunar surface. This erosion could arise from meteoric bombardment and the effects of solar radiations. Estimates of the depth of surface which has been eroded away range from 5 to 50 ft. . . .” (A&A, 1/65, 18-20) During January: GAO charged that mismanagement of the Nimbus meteorological satellite project resulted in unnecessary costs of $1.2 million. The report claimed that Nimbus’ project manager at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center “did not effectively carry out his responsibility” for flight planning when it became evident that the spacecraft had become overweight and that he allowed the contractor to continue working toward the original design goal “even though it was clear [the effort] would be futile” because of booster limitations. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, rebutted the GAO allegations: “The costs which were incurred on the Nimbus project during the 5V2 months between May 1961 and November 20, 1961, were for the development of the fully redundant Nimbus system to satisfy the requirements of the Plan for a National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. . . . Our effort to achieve the redundant system in the first Nimbus flight was continued as long as possible. ... we did not want to take the step of dropping the redundant system, even for the first flight, until we were sure we had to.” (gao Nimbus Rpt., 1/65; M&R, 2/8/65,9)	_
Picketing over a contract dispute by Las Cruces, N. Mex., Carpenters Union Loca 1 1962 of White Sands Missile Range construction project resulted in a partial temporary shutdown of the $133,900 project to build an addition to NASA Warehouse No. 1. Activities on the site included testing Apollo service module engines and preparation of test equipment for the Lunar Excursion Module. (Las Cruces Sun-News, 7/23/65)
Man might be able to change the orbit of asteroid Icarus and make it an orbiting earth station, suggested Soviet scientist K. Stan-yukovich in an interview published by Economichesky Gazetta. Icarus has almost a one-mile diameter and weighs over six billion tons; every 19 yrs. it passes within 4 million mi. of earth. “There is a great demand for a natural moon of Icarus’ size,” Stanyukovich said, where man could build scientific observatories and warehouses to store fuel for spaceships departing on interplanetary trips. He doubted that it could be captured on its next approach in 1968, but foresaw a possibility for 1987. (Burke, L. A. Times, 11/6/65)
The Interim Communications Satellite Committee (icsc), on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), approved a communications satellite system to provide services for nasa’s Project Apollo and for other commercial users. The system, which would provide the first commercial comsat service to the Pacific area and supplement services across the Atlantic as part of the Intelsat system, would include four satellites: two in synchronous orbit at about 22,300-mi. altitudes, one over the Pacific, the other over the Atlantic; and two in reserve. Larger and more versatile than early bird I comsat providing commercial service over the Atlantic, these satellites would weigh 150 lbs. compared to early bird i’s 85 lbs. icsc also approved ComSatCorp’s contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. to buy four satellites for the system. (ComSatCorp Release)
A Cairo newspaper revealed that the United Arab Republic was training men for space flight. No date for a possible launching was given. (upi, Milwaukee ]., 4/16/65) Noting areas of disagreement among scientists, theoretical astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. tried to explain why the Ranger pictures resolved so little: “The Ranger pictures are like a mirror. Everyone sees his own theories reflected in them.” Prof. Gold saw a moon covered with dust; young craters composed of solid rock while older craters had somehow gone soft; and vast sheets of ice locked under compacted sediment beneath much of the lunar surface. Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist from the Univ. of California, referred to evidence of widespread collapse of the lunar surface, probably due to underground movement: “The ranger ix’s pictures scared me more than anything. There’s all sorts of evidence that some of these craters are sinking.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey said that chances that the moon’s surface was too soft for the 15-ton Lem were “almost vanishingly remote.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Clark, NYT, 4/16/65) Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker agreed with findings in the paper he presented for his colleague, Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Dr. Kuiper concluded that the lunar surface had a bearing strength of between one and two tons per square foot. His calculations, made from data extracted from RANGER IX photographs, was based on the size of rocks ejected from a given impact crater and the distance they traveled. Other tentative findings were that the dark portions of the maria were due to some unknown fluid flows and not lava or ash flows; that the maria were not completely covered with lunar dust; and that the moon’s surface exhibited a remarkable series of fracture patterns which could be due to polar contraction, tidal effects, or some other force. (Clark, NYT, 4/16/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Boris J. Levin, section chief of the Institute of Earth Physics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, said studies based on radioactive emissions from meteorites and on lunar data indicated that the interior of the moon partially melted some two million years after the formation of that body began: “If you assume the moon is of the same material as meteorites, it is necessary to assume that the interior at one time was partly molten.” Prof. Levin said the moon was formed simultaneously with the earth and was not originally part of it. It was about 10 earth-radii distant and later shifted to the present position. He added: “We believe that there is a lava flow not covered by dust.” (Wash. Post, 4/17/65: Milwaukee /.. 4/17/65: CSM, 4/26/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Dr. John Clark, NASA Director of Space Sciences, said that a year ago nasa officials had hoped that Ranger would tell something about the topography of the moon: “That in turn would tell something about the geometry needed for the landing vehicle. Ranger has done this and now we look to the Surveyor spacecraft to tell us the bearing strength of the moon’s surface.” (ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Clark, NYT, 4/17/65) Dr. Fred Whipple of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said the moon’s surface might be lower than had been calculated: “The data indicates that ranger vii and vih, and maybe ranger ix, landed one second late because the moon was one mile small. The moon’s surface at the point of landing was lower by two kilometers fa mile and a quarter) than the average lunar radius.” ( ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Milwaukee /., 4 17 65)
NASA announced award of $3,713,400 contract to Raytheon Co. to provide digital systems for Project Apollo. Options for additional displays and consoles, if exercised, could add $400,000 to basic price. The equipment was for use at NASA control centers and critical tracking stations to give instantaneous display of information received by encoded radio signals during Apollo flight permitting immediate decisions concerning welfare of the astronauts and conduct of the mission, (nasa Release 65-79)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking at the Annual Convention of the American Trial Lawyers Association in Miami Beach, said: “I would like first to comment on what appears to be a general misconception about the overall purposes of the Apollo program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon, ahead of the Soviets, is the paramount objective. This is not so. The principal goal is to make the United States first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to the world. “Why ... is it so vital that the United States be pre-eminent in space? There are many reasons that can be cited, and they fall generally into two major categories—the imperative reasons and the ancillary, or spin-off benefits. It is imperative, in the Cold War arena, that the United States be first for reasons of national security, national pride of achievement, and the international prestige. The ancillary . . . reasons include the benefits of scientific discovery; the stimulation of economic and social progress; technological advancement, including the civilian application and utilization of the products of space-oriented research; and the compelling urge of man to explore and to discover.” (Text)
ranger VIII lunar photography probe struck its target on the moon at 4:57:36.8 EST, after radioing to earth about 7,000 close-up pictures of the lunar surface during the last 23 min. of flight. The point of impact was 2.59° north latitude, 24.77° east longitude, in the Sea of Tranquillity, an area slightly east-northeast of the center of a full moon. The spacecraft impacted at slightly less than 6,000 mph. Total distance of travel along its trajectory from lift-off had been calculated as 248,766 mi. Accuracy of the shot was reflected in the fact that impact had been planned for 4:57:30, and at 3° north latitude and 24° east longitude. ranger viii had been programed to execute a “terminal sequence” just before impact to point the six tv cameras more in the direction of flight; this sequence was omitted to allow the cameras to cover a larger area than planned and to provide greater continuity with the pictures transmitted by ranger vii last July 31. A second change in the flight was to turn on cameras 23 min. before impact instead of 13 min. and 40 sec. as planned. The new time had been chosen so that initial pictures would be about equal to earth-based resolution and then continue into impact. Two small anomalies: one part of the spacecraft had registered a higher temperature than had been anticipated and more telemetry data had been lost during midcourse maneuver than had been expected. ranger viii had been launched Feb. 17 from Cape Kennedy. (NASA Transcript; Appel, NYT, 2/21/65, 1, 65)
Commenting on the U.S. need for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in the San Antonio Express: “The nearly simultaneous launch of NASA’s Gemini and Air Force’s Titan ill—c caused some commentators to suggest that there is competition and rivalry in the space effort. Investigation convinces me that there is complete collaboration and accord between NASA and the military in the space program. “There is now little reason to doubt that NASA will succeed with Apollo, the Moon mission. Our continued leadership in the exploration of the peaceful uses of space seems assured. “It is now time to survey where we stand in the military implications and dangers from space. . . . “The first step in a needed military space program, which the Air Force earnestly and urgently proposes, is a manned orbiting laboratory (mol). It is visualized as an experimental space station in low orbit to determine what man can profitably do in space. “The anti-MOL advocates have suggested that the fall-out from the NASA space program will provide all the building blocks to produce military space vehicles quickly when the need is more clearly evident. Fall-out from the automobile industry did not provide the Patton tank. It was necessary to cut and try, build and test many experimental tanks over a period of 25 years. “Building blocks from civil air transports did not produce the b-52 bomber. We had to build and test 51 earlier bomber models. Effective space weapons will never come solely from the fall-out from the NASA program. “mol is said to be held up until the Air Force can precisely define and defend a military mission which MOL can be certain to accomplish. To require anyone to visualize and indicate definitely and in detail now, all that man may ultimately do in space, would be like having asked the Wright brothers in 1910 to lay down the specifications for a supersonic transport.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/14/65, 18)
Lunar Landing Research Facility, a controlled laboratory for exploring and developing techniques for landing a rocket-powered vehicle on the moon, had been put into operation at NASA Langley Research Center. The $3.5 million facility included a rocket-powered flight test vehicle which would be operated while partially supported from a 250-ft. high, 400-ft.-long gantry structure to simulate the one-sixth earth gravity of the moon in research to obtain data on the problems of lunar landing. (LaRC Release 6/30/65)
NASA selected Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div. for negotiations leading to a nine-month, $1 million contract for research, development, and preliminary design of a lunar penetrometer system applicable to the Apollo program. The penetrometer, an instrumented package capable of assessing the hardness, penetrability, and bearing strength of a surface upon which it is ejected, could furnish lunar surface information to an orbiting Apollo spacecraft for scientific assessment of remote sites inaccessible to manned spacecraft or unmanned earth-launch probes. NASA Langley Research Center would negotiate and manager the contract, (nasa Release 65-59; LaRC Release)
Professor Fred Hoyle, British astronomer, might accept U.S. position if U.K. Department of Scientific and Industrial Research determined not to build new Institute of Theoretical Astronomy which would house an American computer essential to his work. Hoyle complained last year that he had been prevented from using the only American-built computer in Britain that would do his work properly. (Feron, NYT, 3/8/65, 9; Wash. Post, 3/9/65 ) Week of March 7: Drop tests at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant demonstrated that substructure of Apollo spacecraft could withstand maximum Apollo water-landing conditions. A series of 18 more drop tests was planned. (M&R, 3/15/65, 7)
“On Wednesday, if all goes well, one of the epoch-making experiments in the history of science will take place as mariner iv comes within 6,000 miles of Mars and takes pictures for transmission back to earth. Not since Galileo first trained his telescope on the moon has there been such a prospect for a quantum leap in man’s knowledge of a nearby world. “Whatever the results of the picture-taking experiment, the accomplishments of mariner iv are already historic. Launched last Nov. 28, it has traversed a preassigned course for more than seven months. During this time it has flown roughly 350,000,000 mi. while communicating back to earth new scientific data as well as a steady flow of information on its flight and its internal condition. This performance far exceeds all similar earlier feats. “For comparison we may note that mariner ii—justly famed for its flight past Venus in 1962—needed to fly only three and a half months and 180 million miles to reach its objective. And while mariner II sets a record signalling to earth from a distance of 53.9 million miles away, mariner iv has recently been transmitting from the neighborhood of Mars, now over 130,000,000 miles distant from this planet.” (NYT, 7/11/65, E10)
NASA successfully conducted the first tethered test firing of the Apollo 009 Service Module propulsion system at Kennedy Space Center. Test was marred by failure in the master countdown clock, which—a split second after ignition-—recycled to T minus 99 sec., throwing the count out of real time. The ground computer, which operated in plus time only, was thus unable to send the signal to shut off the engine. Instead of the two planned 15-sec. firings, the system was fired only once for a total of 20 sec. and shut off with a signal from the blockhouse. For the same reason, the ground computer was unable to send the signal to gimbal the engine and this apparatus was not tested, (upi, NYT, 11/20/65, 21; M&R, 11/29/65, 28)
Commenting on cancellation of the Gemini vi mission, an editorial in the New York Times said: “The Atlas-Agena rocket has performed so well on so many different missions in the past that its failure to achieve orbit—and the consequent impossibility of the planned rendezvous and docking experiment—comes as a sharp disappointment. But it will be worth while if it destroys the tendency toward complacency that has been increasingly visible recently. The difficulties that still lie ahead of the effort to land a man on the moon are far greater than those that have been surmounted to date.” (NYT, 10/26/65, 42M)
Soviet Cosmonaut Col. Pavel Popovich, who orbited the earth 48 times in August 1962, said during a televised news conference in Moscow: “In the future, we shall be able to discard the cord connecting the cosmonaut with his craft. A small rocket engine will help the man to return to his ship.” Vasily Seleznev, Soviet doctor of technology, told the news conference he thought the significance for further space research of Leonov’s leaving his craft was that “in [the] future cosmonauts will take part in assembling spaceships. There may also arise the need for repairing the craft and, what is most important, there is the prospect of travel to other planets.” Seleznev said the Russians hoped to reach the moon in the not too distant future. (Rosenfeld, Wash. Post, 3/19/65, 1, 2)
Thomas W. Thompson of Cornell Univ. said in a paper presented at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that half the moon’s surface had been mapped in a lunar mapping program using the radioradar telescope at Cornell’s Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. From the radar signal returns, the hardest areas of the moon were the rim and floor of the relatively new craters. The floors of the older craters and the surface of the maria were covered by a three-to-four-meter-thick layer of highly porous material often referred to as “lunar dust.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/22/65; NYT, 4/22/65)
NASA awarded mit separate cost reimbursement contract, with no fee, to cover further work on guidance and navigation of Apollo command and lunar excursion modules. The new contract, running from March 1 through November 4, 1965, totaled §15,529,000, including $1.4 million to support research activities in the guidance and navigation field. (NASA Release 65-116)
Menu released by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in a request for bids from industrial firms interested in furnishing the Apollo astronauts with food for the journey to the moon included bacon and eggs, frosted flakes, toast, fruit juice, and a strawberry cereal bar. Food allowance of 8 lbs. would be dehydrated to reduce its weight. Astronauts would add water to the food from their drinking water supply. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 2/5/65)
usaf Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell, speaking at a meeting of the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., said: “. . . As airmen, all of us in the Air Force look at space with real concern. Will it someday become an area of military operation? If so, what will be the U.S. posture? In military language, what is our readiness? . . . “Space exploration is the responsibility of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. . . . The act which created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration gave NASA broad responsibilities for meeting many of the broad needs of the nation. It also stated that the Department of Defense should be responsible for and direct those space activities peculiar to or primarily associated with the development of weapon systems, military operations or the defense of the United States. “So we have both NASA and Air Force assigned specific responsibilities. We have the basis of a partnership. And a partnership it is in carrying out the national program as recommended by the President and authorized and funded by Congress. The intent of Congress is very clear. The members wanted the broad space capabilities of the nation to be built up as rapidly as possible without unnecessary duplication of effort or of waste. This we are attempting to do. And while I would not ordinarily try to speak for Jim Webb, the NASA Administrator, I think I can speak for him today on this subject, in saying, that it is a very well understood mutual objective between the Air Force and NASA.” Asked his opinion about spending of $20 billion to reach the moon, McConnell said: “I think it is necessary for us to get everything we can out of space. And I think we should get it as rapidly as we can at as reasonable cost as we can. But you can’t get it rapidly and at the same time cheaply . . . going to the moon is just the end product of what we are getting out of it. If we were just going to the moon, I wouldn’t think it would be worth 20 billion dollars to go to the moon. But I don’t hesitate to say that all of the other things which we have to do, the preliminaries, and the things that we’re going to learn in the process of achieving that goal is well worth the expenditure of whatever money is required to attain the knowledge which we will attain as a result of this project.” (Text)
LUNA v, a 3,254-lb. instrumented moon probe, was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. on an undisclosed mission. According to Tass announcement, the probe was launched by multi-stage rocket into a parking orbit and then fired toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally and a U.S.S.R. station tracking the probe was receiving “scientific information.” Tass reported that LUNA v was “moving along a trajectory close to the planned one.” At 10:00 p.m. Moscow time, the probe was 110,000 km. (68,323 mi.) from earth. (Tass, 5/9/65)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
Soviet scientists, writing in the bulletin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, asserted that a flight to the moon can now be regarded as fully reliable from the medical and biological viewpoint. This conclusion was reached in summing up the results of the medical-biological research carried on in the two Voskhod spaceflights. Careful training and selection of visual reference points in advance helped to offset the anticipated disorientation of spaceflight. (Tass, 9/3/65)
Existing contracts with the Boeing Co. and the Bendix Corp. had been extended to incorporate modification of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) as a shelter for use with a Local Scientific Survey Module (Lssm) for astronaut surface mobility, msfc announced. Boeing would receive $565,000 and Bendix $570,000 for the new work. Both contracts would run for about nine months. The two firms had completed individual studies of a possible lunar mobile laboratory (Molab) under the original terms of the contracts. The Molab would be much larger than the Lssm now being studied, (msfc Release 65-173)
New sunspots heralding the start of a new 11-yr. cycle were discussed at sessions on the International Years of the Quiet Sun held in Washington, D.C., under auspices of the American Geophysical Union and the International Scientific Radio Union. Scientists said the asymmetrical birth of the new cycle suggested it might not reach as intense a maximum as usual. The cycle was of vital interest to planners of a manned moon landing since it had been discovered that some solar eruptions shoot out protons at so close to the speed of light they could kill an astronaut. While astronauts were on the moon, or inside the Lem, they would be poorly protected against such a proton shower. Dr. Herbert Friedman, of the Naval Research Laboratory, said during the symposium they would be comparatively safe if they could return to their orbiting command capsule. The goal, therefore, he said, was to learn enough about these events so that astronauts could have sufficient warning to take refuge in their spacecraft. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/23/65)
Orbit of molniya I Soviet communications satellite was slightly corrected to increase its usefulness for relaying telecasts between Moscow and Vladivostok. Soviet Communications Minister Nikolai D. Psurtsev told Izvestia that the firing of a special rocket motor aboard the satellite had raised the apogee to 40,(M5.2 km. (24,872.8 mi.) ; perigee to 548.4 km. (340.6 mi.) ; and the period to 12 hrs. Previous orbital parameters: apogee, 39,467.7 km. (24,514.1 mi.) ; perigee, 498.4 km. (309.5 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 48 min. The corrected high elliptical orbit put molniya i within the visibility of Russia’s ground stations for the greater part of its period. (NYT, 5/5/65, 6) Discussing investigation of space by the U.S.S.R., Skuridin said that from 1962, the problem of going to the moon had been studied with the Cosmos series of spacecraft. He said cosmos iii and COSMOS IV had studied solor plasma, its energy and location in earth areas, and during the period April 24 to May 2, 1962, had transmitted to earth more than 50 million measurements; 20 million more had been stored in a data-storage system, cosmos xli had investigated charged particles at 40,000 mi. altitude. The Elektron series, he continued, had made important measurements of the atmosphere up to an altitude of 3,000 km. The ions of hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen had also been measured. Discussing future flights, Skuridin said the Soviet Union would like to study Saturn, Pluto, and the sun, but added that a satellite was needed that could be launched to far-off planets and the sun and return to earth, (upi, NYT, 5/6/65, 2; Kotulak. Chic. Trib., 5/7/65; M&R, 5/10/65, 12, 13) May 4^-6: Preliminary plans for Apollo Extension System (Aes) development required selection of three major spacecraft contractors, NASA official told Missiles and Rockets during Symposium on Post-Apollo Space Exploration in Chicago1: one to devise single payload plan, one to cover physical installation of experimental payloads and checkout systems, and one to translate Apollo spacecraft into Apollo extension vehicle with a six-week manned orbiting capability. NASA official attributed this decision to a reluctance to depend on a single contractor and a desire for broad-based readily available industrial capability. (M&R, 5/10/65, 13)
NASA had awarded a six-month, $117,175 cost-plus-fixed-fee study contract to Ball Brothers Research Corp. to define and determine engineering requirements for a solar telescope mount to be used on proposed Apollo applications manned missions. System would provide a capability of observing the sun with relatively large astronomical-type telescopes and in having an astronaut available to correct errors in alignment and make other adjustments, (nasa Release 65-302)
usaf announced a high vacuum test chamber that would simulate space environment and altitudes up to 990,000 ft. was being constructed at Wright-Patterson afb. Liquid metal system components such as space radiators, and expandable structures such as solar reflectors, would be tested in the chamber. Chicago Bridge and Iron Co. was constructing the facility, which would be completed in Sept. 1965, under a $699,780 contract awarded in Nov. 1964. (afsc Release 1.65) During March: Asked in an interview for the San Diego Union if the U.S. would succeed in landing a man on the moon in this decade, Dr. Donald F. Hornig. special assistant to President Johnson for science and technology, said: “When you lay down a schedule, it says that if everything goes as I see it, making allowances for reasonable difficulties, this is what Fll do. It’s a tight schedule and will take a lot of doing. We also have to acknowledge that unforeseen problems may arise. . . . When we started in 1961 on a nine-year program it was not wishful thinking but it was a purely paper exercise. We have slipped some on our schedules, but in a sense we have gained ground in that we have not run into any serious difficulties yet. We are now entering the hardest period of all, when the pieces begin to come out of the factory and have to be put together and tested.” Answering a query if there would be a manned expedition to Mars one day, he said: “It would be harder than going to the moon. I don’t anticipate he will go soon. But we have started the unmanned exploration. The results may whet our appetite or may prove that conditions are so inhospitable that it isn’t worth the effort.” (San Diego Union, 3/7/65)
Two seconds after lift-off, NASA’s Atlas-Centaur 5, carrying a dummy Surveyor spacecraft, exploded and burned on Launch Pad 36-B at Cape Kennedy. Failure occurred when two of the three Atlas engines shut off simultaneously due to closing of a fuel-line valve. The 150-ton, 108-ft. rocket rose three ft. from the pad, then fell back to the ground and exploded. Although burning propellant covered most of the launch complex, no injuries to personnel were reported. Damage to the launching pad was estimated at $5 million. Objectives of the Atlas-Centaur test had been to test the ability of its guidance system and hydrogen-powered second stage to send a payload the size of the 2,150-lb. Surveyor on a precise path to-the moon and to evaluate how well the mock-up Surveyor spacecraft would withstand the stresses of launching, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 3/2/65; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/2/65; ap, NYT, 3/3/65; Av. Wk., 3/8/65)
Apollo Spacecraft 009, first Apollo flight spacecraft of the type that would carry three U.S. astronauts to the moon and back, was accepted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during informal ceremonies at North American Aviation, Inc.’s, Downey, Calif., facility. Largest U.S. manned spacecraft built to date, Spacecraft 009 included a command module, service module, launch escape system, and adapter. {Marshall Star, 10/27/65, 1, 10; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/22/65, 1)
President’s message sending budget for Fiscal Year 1966 included the following remarks: “Space research and technology: This Nation has embarked on a bold program of space exploration and research which holds promise of rich rewards in many fields of American life. Our boldness is clearly indicated by the broad scope of our program and by our intent to send men to the moon within this decade. “The costs are high—as we knew they would be when we launched this effort. We have seen a rise in annual expenditures for the space program from less than one-half billion dollars in 1960 to over $4 billion in 1964. “Expenditures are continuing to increase. However, we have built up momentum and are concentrating on our highest priority goals. Therefore, we will no longer need to increase space out-lays by huge sums each year in order to meet our present objectives. “This budget proposes that expenditures increase by $22 million in 1966 over 1965. This is the smallest annual increase since 1959. The new obligational authority requested is about the same as enacted for 1965.” (nasa lar iv/16)
Dr. John W. Salisbury and Joel Adler of Cambridge Laboratories reported to 132d meeting of the AAAS in Berkeley, Calif., that American astronauts landing on the moon might encounter lunar dust that would stick like wet snow to their windows, faceplates, and camera lenses. Salisbury and Adler said they had reached those conclusions by two separate experiments. (Wash. Post, 12/30/65, A4) Medical and physical data from the two-week GEMINI vn flight indicated that man could withstand a lunar mission without any serious harm, reported Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for NASA MSC, at the AAAS meeting. Dr. Berry revealed that the astronauts’ heart rates and blood pressures during the flight had remained within normal ranges and that within 10 hrs. after splashdown, Borman had regained 4.8 lbs. of the 9.6 lbs. he had lost; Lovell, who had lost 5.9 lbs., had regained 6.6 lbs. Berry, who doubted the astronauts could have endured 14 days in spacesuits, attributed much of the success of the mission to the freedom of flying in underwear. He reported that the electroencephalogram studies recording brain wave activity had shown no abnormalities during the first two flight days, but that the electrodes on the astronauts’ scalps had come loose before the end of the planned 4-day experiment. As to the radiation dosage hazards on the 14-day flight, Dr. Berry said the measured amounts were “peanuts.” The calcium balance studies which required measurements of calcium loss to sweat, blood, urine, and feces might take “several more months to complete,” he added. Astronaut Edward H. White (L/Col., usaf) accompanied Dr. Berry to the meeting to brief scientists on preparations necessary to plan and execute successful space missions. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 12/30/65, Al)
The Life Sciences Committee of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board recommended to NASA that American astronauts returning from the moon and planets be kept in quarantine for at least three weeks to prevent possible contamination of the earth by extra-terrestrial organisms, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. Recommendation was in a report entitled “Potential Hazards of Back Contamination from the Planets.” Other recommendations included the need to avoid decontamination of returning equipment until it had been subjected to biological study; the possible need for the astronauts to shed their outer garments on the moon and Mars before returning home; the need to conduct immediate research on any samples of extraterrestrial life brought to earth; and trial runs to acquaint astronauts with methods for minimizing chance of contamination. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/23/65)
JPL Director Dr. William Pickering held up some fuzzy photographs of patches of the moon during a JPL press conference and said this was the best quality to be expected from the mariner iv television system. The pictures should be better than any ever obtained from earth if the system operated as planned, he said. Each of the mariner iv pictures would consist of 200 rows of 200 dots. Each dot would be sent as a number ranging from 0 to 63, designating the darkness of the dot. Reconstruction of the picture would be done by a computer at JPL. Because the first views would scan the planet obliquely, it might not be until the third image that one was received showing any obvious surface features. This, according to Dr. Pickering, might mean that no pictures would be displayed publicly until July 16. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/15/65, 1)
Donald E. Gault and William L. Quaide, NASA Ames Research Center scientists, believed the moon’s surface was a loose layer of fine sandlike material at least 10 ft. and possibly “tens of meters” deep, reported Associated Press. Their theory was based on laboratory experiments in which they closely matched the moon crater pictures transmitted to earth by the Ranger spacecraft. Laboratory results were confirmed in field tests, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65)
Boeing Co. unveiled to the public a mockup of its Molab (Mobile Laboratory), a six-wheeled vehicle being studied by NASA for use in manned exploration of the moon, (ap, Tulsa Daily World, 5/6/65) May 6: mariner iv, after 159 days in space, was 72 million mi. from earth, had travelled 243 million mi. The spacecraft continued to return scientific and engineering data to ground stations daily and to set new records for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-148)
Test results were received by NASA which promised a solution to the crawler-transporter bearing failure without jeopardizing the key milestones in the Apollo program. Roller bearings in a crawler-transporter had failed during a July 25 test at KSC and subsequent investigation had defined a new bearing system. (Cocoa Tribune, 10/18/65)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced selection of Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) and Lt. Cdr. Charles Conrad, Jr. (usn), to make the seven-day Gemini v space flight. Gemini v would be the third manned Gemini space flight and would be made in 1965. Backup crewmen were two civilians, Neil A. Armstrong and Elliot M. See, Jr. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 2/8/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 2/8/65; Witkin, NYT, 2/9/65)
It was too early to set a realistic date for man’s landing on the moon, Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said during a Moscow press conference devoted to the zond iii mission. He explained: “. . . we have . . . learned quite a lot about the surface of the moon. Yet this does not seem to be a great deal . . . where the choice of a landing spot is concerned. . . . Our knowledge of the soil of the moon is still somewhat contradictory, and I think it is much too early to start looking for a future landing site . . .” Yuri Khodarev, engineer in the Soviet space program, revealed that zond ill had used photographic film instead of magnetic film to record pictures for later playback on earth command. The mission had been essentially a test in which the spacecraft would continue to play back the moon pictures repeatedly at increasingly greater distances up to “hundreds of millions of kilometers,” Khodarev said, adding, “we have created a new, compact photo television system intended for photographing and transmission of images of planets under conditions of prolonged space flight.” The wide-angle camera lens had a 106.4mm. focal length at a relative aperture of 1:8. A 25-mm. film was used with exposures of l/100th and l/300th of a second. Describing the zond ill television system, Khodarev said zond III had taken 25 photos of the far side of the moon in little more than an hour. Only one command had been given from earth—to start taking the photographs. All remaining operations occurred automatically. The zond III photographs confirmed earlier conclusions concerning the scarcity of dark depressions on the moon’s reverse side, but also revealed sea-like formations up to 500 km. (310.5 mi.) across and about as long as the maria. These formations differed structurally from the maria and lacked their characteristic dark color. The northern part of the side of the moon was occupied by a bright elevation pitted with craters. Concentration of craters throughout the reverse side of the moon was high. Soviet astronomer Alla Masevich said the moon photographs were as good as those taken of the visible side from earth-based observatories: “They show beautiful half-tone transitions, reflecting the character of detailed surface relief.” Alexander A. Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, attributed the observed difference between the moon’s visible side and its reverse side to geological rather than astronomical factors. He noted the appearance on Zond photographs of chains of craters along elongated fracture lines which he attributed to volcanic activity. Prof. Keldysh noted that the trajectory of zond ill had passed far from the planets but said that “the experience we gained in launching this probe into remote space will be used in subsequent launchings to photograph the planets.” He said the U.S.S.R. had already begun preparations to achieve a soft lunar landing. Experiments aboard the spacecraft were for study of magnetic fields, solar wind, low-frequency radio emission of the galaxy, micrometeors, cosmic rays, and the infrared and ultraviolet spectra of the lunar surface. (Tass, 8/23/65; Shabad, NYT, 8/24/65, 1)
ComSatCorp announced agreement on a $4,512,772 contract with Page Communications Engineers, Inc., for three transportable earth stations to be used as links in providing communication services for Project Apollo. Contract was filed with the Federal Communications Commission in conformity with FCC rules requiring 10 days notice for such awards. ComSatCorp also had filed with the Commission a related application seeking authority to construct the stations and asking FCC approval of their technical characteristics. (ComSatCorp Release)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
Telemetry data from ranger ix indicated that the probe was on such an accurate course toward the moon that jpl engineers decided to delay for one day a planned mid-course correction, ranger ix began its 245,500-mi. trip to the moon Mar. 21, and was 144,488 mi. from earth at 9 p.m. est. (upi, Wash. Daily News, 3/22/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/22/65; ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 3/22/65)
Editorial in Life put into perspective the “break-throughs” and spectacular “firsts” recently achieved in space exploration—U.S.S.R.’s voskhod II, U.S.’s Gemini hi, ranger ix, ComSatCorp’s EARLY bird. “The first Sputnik was less than eight years ago, but already the space age has reached what President Johnson calls an ‘early maturity.’ Each technical advance is a planned and measured consequence of the previous one; Mercury fed Gemini and Gemini feeds Apollo; each hero stands on the shoulders of predecessors who are also his contemporaries. . . . “Our space program is, as Johnson puts it, ‘a national asset of proven worth and incalculable potential.’ Its cost is leveling off at about $7 billion a year. One hopes this includes enough to land us on the moon before the Russians—and what’s wrong with wanting to be first? . . . “Our program, which may or may not be overtaking the Russian, is well past its own first period of jumpy desperation. We can stick to it in confidence.” [Life, 4/9/65)
In an article entitled “The Pentagon, the ‘Madmen,’ and the Moon,” Maj. Gen. of the Soviet Air Force B. Teplinskiy said: “Sober voices in the United States call for collaboration with the U.S.S.R. in space research. The Saturday Evening Post said: ‘When we reach the moon and the stars, we shall find the solutions to the most profound secrets of the universe. How much more easily accessible all this would be if we would fly there together.’ “It is known throughout the entire world that the lag in this respect does not depend on the Soviet Union. It is the spiteful policy of those U.S. circles, which do not hide their military space plans, which constitute the obstacle. These plans are widely trumpeted by the press, television, and radio. Such a position is not accidental. On the one hand it allegedly pursues the aim of enhancing U.S. prestige while it actually is aimed at blowing up the psychosis around the space armaments race and at trying to provoke the Soviet Union into retalatory measures or to intimidate it by the alleged U.S. possibilities. A naive scheme.”	(Krasnaya Zvezda, 1/10/65, 3)
The New York Times editorialized: “. . . The care that has marked every phase of the [Gemini v] flight thus far provides assurance that the decision on whether to call the capsule back to earth before that time will be based solely on the best judgment of the scientific team as to whether any element of needless risk would be involved in keeping the astronauts aloft. Their safety must, of course, take precedence over the fact that the eight-day goal is the most important single objective of the flight. “This is no maiter of oneupmar.ship over the Russians, whose Valery Bykovsky stayed up for five days in 1963. The eight days it is hoped to keep Gemini 5 in space are roughly the time that woud be required for a round trip to the moon. If Colonel Cooper and Commander Conrad can function effectively in a state of weightlessness for that long and then return without injury, they will have given strong support to the hypothesis on which the whole program for a manned moonshot is based. “Whenever that shot is made—and remain convinced that it is foolhardy to chain it to any fixed deadline—it will have to be based on the fullest possible advance knowledge of man’s ability to cope in another environment with challenges his evolution on earth never required him to encounter.” {NYT, 8/26/65, 29N)
Test of the Apollo command module and launch escape system, scheduled for Dec. 8 at White Sands Missile Range, was postponed due to a malfunction in the Little Joe ii booster rocket guidance system. Malfunction was caused by bad soldering connections, (msc Info. Proj. Off.; Las Cruces Sun News, 12/6/65)
U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told the U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee that progress had been made on a start toward a basic international law for space and for the assistance and return of astronauts forced down on foreign soil. He said that an additional topic should be brought under study by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: “Within a few years, the need for a treaty governing activities on the moon and other celestial bodies will be real. My government plans to present a definite proposal as to the contents of such a treaty.” (upi, Wash. Post, 12/20/65, A15)
NASA would negotiate with International Latex Corp. and Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for development and production of Project Apollo flight suits and a portable life support system for extravehicular activities during earth-orbital flights and on the lunar surface. International Latex would receive about $10 million to produce the flight suits, consisting of a liquid-cooled undergarment, constant-wear garment, pressure garment assembly, and thermal-micrometeoroid protective over-garment. Hamilton Standard, under separate contract, would receive about $20 million to produce the life-support system: a backpack weighing about 65 lbs. containing an oxygen system, thermal control system, and communications equipment. Present plans called for the pressure suit to be worn during the latter phase of the Apollo/Saturn IB earth orbital mission series and during Apollo/Saturn V missions. Gemini pressure suits would be used on initial Saturn ib missions, (nasa Release 65-346)
Final approval for the Aug. 19 launch of Gemini V on an eight-day orbital mission was given by Mission Director E. E. Christensen. Astronauts L.	Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) passed a final physical examination, weather conditions were favorable, and the tracking network was in good operating condition. The astronauts and their backup pilots, Neil Armstrong and Elliot See, Jr., went through a complete review of the mission, (ap, NYT, 8/18/65, 12C)
PEGASUS ill meteoroid detection satellite was launched into orbit from Eastern Test Range, with a Saturn I booster—last(sA-lO) in a series of ten launch vehicle test flights. Initial orbital data: apogee, 336 mi. (541.9 km.); perigee, 324 mi. (522.6 km.); period, 95.5 min.; inclination, 28.9°. Main assignment of the 3,200-lb. spacecraft with wing-like panels was to add information on the frequency of meteoroids in near-earth environment, for use in the design of future manned and unmanned spacecraft. Eight of its detachable panels carried 352 thermal surface samples collected from the aerospace industry. If NASA should program an astronaut-PEGASUS III rendezvous, the astronaut would detach as many panels as possible and return them to earth for study. Also orbited was Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-9), which served as shroud for PEGASUS III. Apollo launch escape system was jettisoned during launch vehicle’s ascent. PEGASUS ill—expected to return meteoroid data to ground stations for at least one year—was identical to PEGASUS II, in orbit since May 25, 1965. pegasus I was sent into orbit Feb. 16, 1965. (nasa Release 65-232; msfc Release 65-185; msfc Release 65-190)
Comparing luna in [lunik iii] and zond ill, H. Pfaffe said in an article in East Germany’s Berliner Zeitung: “Owing to its trajectory, Zond 3 was able to photograph the moon under favorable illumination conditions for one hour and eight minutes. Luna 3 was able to photograph only 40 minutes. Zond 3’s trajectory was so chosen that the probe assumed a planetary orbit around the sun. Luna 3, on the other hand, assumed an elliptical orbit with the earth as one focal point. While Luna 3 transmitted its photos of the moon from distances of 400,000 km. and 40,000 km., Zond 3 began to transmit from a distance of 2,200,000 km. This and the fact that the new photos were on a 1,100-line basis indicated the advances made in the Soviet radio and photographic systems.” (Pfaffe, Berliner Zeitung, 8/15/65, 3)
Commenting on Dr. Warren Weaver’s Nov. 29 statement to U.S. News and World Report questioning the wisdom of spending $30 billion to get an American to the moon by 1970, the Wall Street Journal said: “Now Dr. Weaver is not against going to the moon . . . what he is against is the hell-for-leather way the moon program is being whipped along . . . where the emphasis rightly should fall is on Dr. Weaver’s assertion that ‘the great ideas that develop within the body of science —strange and improbable as this sounds—arise from curiosity and not from urgency,’ and that the moon program has caused a massive diversion of scientists and engineers from possibly more productive fields. . . .” (WSJ, 12/8/65, 16) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Conference, warned of the possible consequences of reduction in the NASA budget request for FY 1967:	. . history should have taught us that new space capabilities, in which we have made a considerable investment, must be used or their benefits will be lost.” Webb said history should have taught us also “that plans for the future should not be drawn by a timid hand.” He quoted the late Dr. Hugh Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, as saying “the present gap in manned flight activity [between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.] is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960 until May 1961.” (Text; LRC Release 65-88)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Personnel of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center would be augmented to meet the increasing tempo of Gemini and Apollo manned space flight operations, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Over the next ten months, approximately 200 persons would be transferred from msfc to MSC. Total number of personnel to be provided from other NASA activities had not been determined, (msfc Release 65—199)
NASA Lewis Research Center project officials said tracking data from jpl’s Deep Space Network on Aug. ll’s successful Atlas-Centaur launch from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, had indicated precise guidance system accuracy for lunar and planetary trajectories. Less than one-tenth of the midcourse correction capability in the Surveyor model payload would have been needed to put the spacecraft on the final trajectory for a soft landing at a preselected site on the moon. With the success of this mission, Centaur was first U.S. launch vehicle to qualify operationally an all-inertial guidance system for deep space application. (NASA Release 65-271)
Landing pads that might be used on unmanned or manned vehicles in NASA’s Project Apollo were patented for NASA. Bowl-shaped, the pads would be attached to the spacecraft’s struts by ball joints and would be braced inside by collapsible ribs to absorb lateral shock. The underside of the bowl would be covered by material similar to sheet aluminum designed to shear away if the pads should slide. The inventor, Josef F. Blumrich of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said the pads would support a vertical landing on level terrain and would not dig in or transmit undue shock if they should slip against rocks; they were designed to settle on rock or dust or a combination of the two. (Jones, NYT, 4/3/65, 34)
Service module of Apollo spacecraft 009 was delivered to KSC from North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant aboard the Pregnant Guppy aircraft. (KSC Historical Office)
Kenneth Gatland, Vice-President of the British Interplanetary Society, urged U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration in New Scientist article. “. . . it seems we are faced with the ludicrous situation of the world’s two most powerful nations, each with massively expensive rival programmes, heading for a common objective which each proclaims is being pursued in the highest interests of peaceful scientific exploration.” A joint venture would have the advantage of providing for contingencies such as rescue of astronauts possibly stranded on the moon or in lunar orbit—a capability not included in Project Apollo. “This situation can only be satisfactorily resolved by the provision in lunar orbit of a second soft-landing vehicle and back-up crew capable of mounting an emergency rescue operation. To achieve this would require a specially adapted version of the craft already designed to soft-land astronauts. “This is where the merit of US-Soviet cooperation lies for, as an international venture, a project to land men on the Moon would surely not be undertaken as envisaged in project Apollo; and certainly not with such rigid constraints on time. In all probability it would be planned as an operation rather than a solo mission, with logistic support from a second space vehicle placed in lunar orbit ahead of the main expedition. . . . “The essential requirement in terms of the eventual lunar expedition is that launchings should be coordinated so that expedition components arrive in lunar orbit together. By the mid-1970’s, orbital rendezvous techniques should be well established with the ability of men to move between orbiting vehicles. An agreed crew could then descend to the lunar surface while another ship remains in reserve orbiting the Moon in case of need. Alternatively, a reserve vehicle might be landed, unmanned, in advance. . . . “Although at this stage such ... [a combined lunar expedition] would have little influence on overall costs, it could mean a great deal to the safety of initial manned missions. “Such a move would demand concessions on both sides. It would mean America abandoning her 1970 target date for placing men on the Moon, and while allowing Russia to keep her rocket secrets she would have to be prepared to reveal her programme for manned spaceflight. . . .” (New Scientist, 3/25/65, 774^76)
At a press conference during the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Univ. of California chemist Harold C. Urey said that he hoped the moon was “interesting enough to make the $20 billion exploration program ‘worthwhile.’ ” He added, “If it turns out that the moon escaped from the earth, it will be just another incident and I will be disappointed. If, however, it was captured by the earth it will be an outstanding link in history.” Urey backed the U.S. program designed to land men on the moon by 1970 and said he did not consider the cost excessive. (Denver Post, 2/10/65)
In his column in the New York Journal American, Bob Considine cited an item written about Soviet failures in space by Julius Epstein, a research associate with the Hoover Institute of War, Revolution, and Peace, Stanford Univ.: “According to reliable reports in Washington, the Soviets have lost at least three cosmonauts on their way to the moon. My first publication of these assertions in 1962 met with no denial from our National Aeronautical and Space Agency when I forwarded a copy and asked for comment. A free-lance writer, researching the possibility of Soviet failures, tells me that NASA informed him that all such information had been classified as top secret. They recommended that he use my material! Isn’t that a reasonable indication for the veracity of this record?” (Considine, N.Y. J. Amer., 6/27/65)
First flight of Super Guppy, developed by Aero Spacelines, Inc., for NASA and the world’s largest aircraft in terms of cubic capacity. The aircraft was made up of sections from four Boeing 377 Stratocruisers as well as extensive new manufacture. Specifically designed to airlift outsized cargoes such as the s-ivb stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle and the Lunar Excursion Module Adapter for the Apollo program, the aircraft made its first flight from Van Nuys Airport to Mojave, Calif. (Huntsville Times, 9/9/65)
Surveyor mission to softland a television camera on the moon had been postponed until May 1966, JPL announced. Unspecified technical problems in the spacecraft and testing gear were blamed, (ap, NYT, 11/23/65, 11)
Reporting on the Lunar International Laboratory, under consideration by the International Astronautical Federation meeting in Athens, William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star, said the case for Lil had been outlined this way: “1. A spaceship is horribly expensive; it costs $15,000 now to boost one pound of instruments to the moon, and will cost $180,000 a man hour to sustain scientists in space in the 1970s. “2. The precedent exists for international scientific efforts: nuclear physicists already are discussing a trillion-volt atom smasher of which the world needs only one. “3. The concept of international science has been accepted by the United Nations since 1946. . . . “4. While the Russians have not taken an official stand, Sedov and others last year openly discussed Soviet studies on moon construction. “[C. Stark] Draper [Director of MIT Instrumentation Laboratory] ... has called for a computer center on the moon to collect data there and pass it on to earthly campuses and laboratories with information literally unavailable here. The Lil program has not yet reached the cost effectiveness and design stages yet, but at the rate the Apollo program to land men on the moon by 1970 is going, backers say only 10 to 20 years is needed. A curbstone opinion is that $20 billion to $30 billion . . . comparable to the Apollo costs—would handle the construction and start of Lil operations.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65, A8)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden told the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA planned to select 10 to 20 scientists to begin astronaut flight training this summer from over 900 applicants. Dr. Dryden said the Mercury astronauts had demonstrated man’s ability as a sensor and manipulator, and to some extent as an evaluator, in orbit. “Early Gemini and Apollo flights will further examine these capabilities so that, in the future, man’s full potential can be exploited.” (ap, NYT, 3/19/65)
Hamilton Standard delivered to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center a prototype portable life support system (Piss) to be used by Project Apollo astronauts. Weighing about 60 lbs., unit was designed for use with water-cooled undergarment astronauts would wear beneath a spacesuit during lunar surface exploration. Water-cooled undergarment would cool the astronaut by conducting the metabolic heat generated by his motions into water which would circulate through a web of plastic tubing in contact with the skin. Water would carry the heat into the portable life support system which would recool and recirculate it. Contract called for delivery of 52 packs. Testing of the undergarment and the Piss would be conducted at msc. (Houston Post, 8/3/65)
Prof. Hannes Alfven of the division of plasma physics at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden, revived a theory that the moon was once an independent planet. In an article written for Science, he said that “many if not all of the craters of the moon were produced” by an “intense bombardment of fragments of itself” when the moon swept too close to the earth and partly disintegrated under the tremendous tidal forces that were generated. “It is also possible,” the theory suggested, “that so much of the lunar matter fell down [on this planet] that the upper layer of the earth—the crust—originally derives from the moon.” Prof. Alfven wrote that this theory was first stated by H. Gerstenkorn of Hanover, Germany, and published in 1954 in Zeitschrift fur Astrophysik under the title “Uber die Gezeitenreibung beim Zweikorperproblem” (“About Tidal Friction in a Two-Body Problem”). (Osmundsen, NYT, 4/24/65, 31: Myler, Wash. Post, 4/24/65)
Move begun within usaf to offer all scientific experiments previously proposed for Mol to nasa was reported by Donald E. Fink in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Proposal was that NASA fly these experiments in its Apollo Extension System (Aes) program. (Fink, Av. Wk. 9/20/65, 26)
It is time now to put the manned military control of space on a crash basis equal in priority to the Apollo program,” said Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, in a letter U> the editor in the New York Times. He suggested the following steps be taken:	“The first M.O.L. flight is scheduled from two and one half to three years from now. This should be speeded up at least a year and the necessary sacrifices made to achieve it. The Gemini capsules required for the M.O.L. project should be ordered at once. To achieve our goals effectively the manned earth orbiting program should be placed under military control. . . . “I believe the only way the Department of Defense can meet its responsibilities in ‘near space’ is to assume direction of the manned earth orbiting program. It should reorganize the U.S. Air Force into the U.S. Aerospace Force and make it truly that. . . . “The decision we must make is not whether there will be military control of space but rather whether that control will be Russian or our own. . . .” (NYT, 6/19/65, 28)
Charles W. Harper, Director of NASA Hq. Aeronautics Div., discussed aeronautical research at a luncheon of the Aviation/Space Writers Association. He said: “ . . . aviation has a tremendous potential in the short-haul ‘aerial bus.’ Both vtol (vertical take-off and landing) and stol (short take-off and landing) are being considered for this job. . . . On the basis of our current knowledge I would conclude the vtol commercial transport offers tremendous potential but requires additional research . . . before it is ready for detailed feasibility study as a commercial transport. On the other hand the STOL machine is ready for a careful examination since the major problems seem to be in hand. “A 20 to 50 passenger stol machine should, or could, have a top speed of 300 to 400 knots, a steep approach with a touch down at 45 knots and an operational field length of some 1200 to 1500 feet. Allweather operation is required and, with the aid of space technology advances, this appears quite possible. We think we can display electronically to the pilot the important features of the airport so that he can approach it and land using the same information that he does in clear weather. “We see two large markets for vehicles of this type. In a smaller simple version, perhaps bearing a little sacrifice in performance, an air transport well suited for use in underdeveloped areas. Rugged, easy to fly and simple to maintain, it could enable these countries to jump from jungle or desert trails to modern transport system without building enormously expensive railways and highways. This would be a good market for U.S. industry. In a larger sophisticated version it could be the vehicle to make the present short haul feeder lines self sufficient, not depending on connecting traffic from the trunk lines. This too would be a desirable situation for American industry. NASA plans to pursue both of these potentials actively until the air industry has enough confidence in success to proceed on its own. . . .” (Text) Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, addressed the Science Teachers’ Association of Santa Clara County, Calif., at NASA Ames Research Center. He said: “The question then is, w'hat has man done in space to date? According to the eminent archaeologist, V. Gordon Childe, whatever man has done in the relatively short evolutionary history documented by his fossil remains, he has done without significantly improving his inherited equipment by bodily changes detectable in his skeleton. Moreover, this equipment is inadequately adapted for survival in any particular environment, and indeed it is inferior to that of most animals for coping with any special set of conditions. Yet in spite of his physical inferiority, man has been able to adjust himself to a greater range of environment than any other creature, to multiply much faster than any near relative amongst the higher mammals, and indeed to beat them all at their special tricks. Thus he learned to control fire, and he developed the skills to make clothes and houses, with the result that he lives and thrives from pole to pole on earth, and already he is concerned with a population explosion. He has developed trains and cars that can outstrip the fleetest cheetah, and he has developed the airplane so that he can mount higher than the eagle. Moreover, he developed telescopes to see further than the hawk, and firearms to lay low the elephant or any other animal, including himself. But whatever their use, the important point is that fire, clothes, houses, trains, airplanes, telescopes, and guns are not part of man’s body. He can set them aside at will. They are not inherited in the biological sense, but rather the skill needed for their conception, production, and use is part of our intellectual heritage, the result of a tradition built up over many generations and transmitted not in the blood but through speech and writing. “The true stepping stones to the moon are ourselves and our forefathers. The stepping stones beyond are our children, and much of what they will be and where they will lead the human race, is up to you and your kind. If you succeed in your work, you will have made an invaluable contribution to the betterment of man’s ability to make himself, to master himself, and finally to understand himself in his environment. Indeed, if you are especially successful, you may, in the words of V. R. Potter, ‘develop a new breed of scholars, men who combine a knowledge of new science and old wisdom, men who have the courage of the men of the Renaissance who thought truth was absolute and attainable,’ and who may yet be right. I submit we can do no less than find out.” (Text)
Dr. Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Lunar and Planetary Mission Studies, told Twin Cities aiaa Chapter in Minneapolis that NASA was “investigating and planning manned missions and experiments beyond the presently approved Gemini and Apollo programs. . . . “A logical sequence for future NASA manned space flight programs . . . begins with the Gemini and Apollo program base. The next logical development is the Apollo F.xtension System ( aes ) which is a stepping stone to advanced Earth-orbital operations, to lunar-orbital surveys, and to lunar surface exploration. The AES Earth-orbital activities are a development phase for an orbital research laboratory or early space station as well as a lunar exploration station. Based on the Apollo Command and Service module technology, we can also develop advanced logistic systems for larger orbiting space stations of indefinite life or for greater expansion of lunar exploration if desired. The advanced orbiting space station can likewise lead to an orbiting launch complex for planetary missions such as Martian flyby and exploration shelters or a lunar base for potential exploitation of the lunar environment. ... In Earth orbit, the AES can provide for experimental operations in the three major fundamental areas . . . : (1) flights to conduct scientific research in space requiring man’s presence; (2) Earth-oriented applications to increase the nation’s strength, and (3) development of advanced technology for support of both manned and unmanned space operations. ... In the field of Earth-oriented applications of manned space operations, NASA has been conducting studies and investigations jointly with the Departments of Commerce, Agriculture, Interior and Defense to determine how we might apply Apollo’s unique capabilities to improve our ability to forecast weather, to communicate globally at high data rates, to make an up-to-date inventory of the world’s resources, to monitor air and sea traffic on a global scale, to support a world-wide air-sea rescue service, to make better forecasts of food production and to provide a data-gathering system on a global scale. Experiments are also being evaluated to enhance over-all development of space operations. Biomedical, behavioral and other medical studies would be conducted as well as the development of advanced subsystems and technology for spacecraft. . . .” (Text)
Eleven of America’s 34 astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for a 10-day field trip into the volcanic regions of Iceland. Making the expedition were Edwin Aldrin, William Anders, Charles Bassett, Alan Bean, Eugene Cernan, Roger Chaffee, R. Walter Cunningham, Donn Eisele, Russell Schweickart, David Scott, and C. C. Williams. The trip would be part of the astronauts’ training in the type of geological formations they might find on the moon, (upi, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona, heading the panel for scientific evaluation of ranger viii photographs, said at a press conference that one of the most important results of this flight had been the discovery that the Sea of Clouds and the Sea of Tranquillity were similar in structure. He noted several “odd depressed regions” and said that they could be areas where collapse had occurred, which might suggest the presence of lava fields. He believed the lunar surface was composed of very light, frothy material such as would be formed when rock was melted and allowed to resolidify within a high vacuum, like that on the moon. The material envisioned by Dr. Kuiper might be considered similar to certain volcanic rocks found on earth: while it would probably be lighter than water, it could still have substantial strength. This theory was based on laboratory attempts several years ago to simulate conditions existing when the moon was formed. Ewen A. Whitaker of the Univ. of Arizona said he felt the lunar material, which he thought had a consistency of crunchy snow, would support a manned spacecraft. He said color lines and sharp boundaries tended to show that the surface was some sort of frothy, lava-like material and definitely not dust. Another member of the Panel, Dr. Harold C. Urey, of the Univ. of California, noted dimples on the moon’s surface and said their curved walls indicated material must have been thrown out of their centers when comparatively soft terrain was gouged by heavy masses of rock. He thought he saw spots in the center of some dimples into which soft material might be draining and estimated the depth of some dimples at 50 to 60 ft. Dr. Urey also suggested the surface material might have the consistency of crunchy snow, (nasa Transcript; Appel, NYT, 2/21/65; Miles, L. A. Times, 2/21/65; ap, Indianapolis Star, 2/22/65) February 20: No evidence of lunar origin had been found in rock samples from western Iowa tested at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said Donald E. Perry, gsfc Information Officer: “We had not . . . found anything in Iowa which could be identified as meteoritic or of the nature of a tektite.” NASA had requested a six-county area of western Iowa to submit rocks for analysis since gsfc astronomer, Dr. Walter O’Keefe, had had the theory that tektites came from the moon. Western Iowa had been chosen as a likely spot for the search for tektite fragments because of its heavy deposits of loose soil and near absence of natural rock formations. (Barton, Omaha Sunday Worid Herald, 2/21/65)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
Dr. Willard Libby, UCLA, recommended development of a nuclear spaceship in his address before the Aerospace Instrumentation Symposium in Los Angeles: “The only possible way of reaching into the deep reaches of space is by accelerating to incredible speeds, speeds that go far beyond those which we have obtained so far in the space program, and it is completely clear that the only way of reaching these speeds is by using atomic energy.” Libby specifically recommended consideration of a reactor complex capable of supplying 10,000 megawatts of power to an engine with a designed thrust of 15,000-20,000 lbs. Such a spaceship would cost billions of dollars and be a decade in the building, but “with it we could expect literally to explore the Solar System,” Libby said. He noted that Project Orion—the use of atomic explosions to propel massive space platforms—might be useful for delivering freight to the moon, but the shock of the explosions would pose difficulties for manned spaceflight. He was pleased with the success of the Rover-Phoebus thermally-heated atomic engines and felt they might be used to propel ships and run a ferry service to a moon base. (Text) In a press conference, Dr. Libby urged a program to put more science into space exploration because “the dominant factor so far in the manned space program has been the drive to establish good engineering technology.” He suggested: (1) NASA establish a six-man scientific task force to live and work for a year with training astronauts; (2) close cooperation between scientific research at outstanding universities, engineering efforts at aerospace industries, and NASA facilities; and (3) a mutually-happy “marriage” between space and education to attract and inspire students. (M&R, 10/11/65, 23) Jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering told the Symposium that adaptive instrumentation was an important requirement for future unmanned interplanetary missions. In view of the increasing number of instruments on interplanetary spacecraft, more effort should be concentrated on the onboard data handling and command system, he suggested. This might transmit data only when meaningful changes were recorded by sensors. Also, the data system should monitor the performance of instruments and take corrective action should a failure occur. (Pay, M&R, 10/11/65, 36)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said before the New York Academy of Sciences that “scientists should not set themselves up to judge the overall value” of the national space program. Past advice from scientists had not always been sound advice, he noted. “. . . Organized science has not always been outstanding for its courage, its vision, or its optimism regarding goals for human efforts. Elements of conservatism, parochialism, and even reactionary thinking do appear among scientists just as they do among many other groups in our society.” Dr. Welsh was also critical of the practice of criticizing the space program “by narrowly comparing” the dollars spent for space with what those same dollars might accomplish “if devoted to other endeavors, scientific or otherwise.” He said that often such dollars were not transferable; that space dollars might change the general climate to one favoring broader aid to the whole spectrum of science; and that since space expenditures sought broader goals than those of science, “the comparison may well be invalid on the face of it.” He continued: “The visionaries, whether primarily scientists or policy makers, must be given the opportunity to point out the many benefits which can flow from the manned and unmanned uses of aerospace. But, given such opportunity, they should use it effectively and affirmatively. Regardless of their motivations, the pessimists who cry out against aerospace research and technological endeavors have clearly set themselves against progress. The United States can no longer relax and rest on its past industrial laurels. The race for survival, literally and philosophically, is on. Of course, we would all like to believe in the solely non-aggressive uses of aerospace by all countries which have the needed technology. However, the realities of life dictate adequate preparation to preserve our national and Free World security. We should follow the axiom that a pound of prevention is worth mega-tons of cure.” Howard Simons commented in the Washington Post that these remarks were probably precipitated by a report from a committee of the American Association for the Advancement of Science which had charged that social, economic, military, and political pressures were distorting the traditional values and effectiveness of science. The report was highly critical of Project Apollo: “The Apollo program, in its present form, does not appear to be based on the orderly, systematic extension of basic scientific investigation.” (Text, CR, 1/28/65, A36T-65; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/12/65)
zond III automatic space station was launched into a heliocentric orbit by U.S.S.R. from a heavy artificial satellite placed in a parking orbit around the earth by a multistage carrier rocket, Tass announced. Tass said that the “trajectory of the automatic station is close to the expected one,” that communications were stable, and that all systems were functioning normally. The purpose of the launch was to “check the station’s systems in conditions of prolonged space flight and the holding of scientific studies in interplanetary space,” Tass said. Pictures of the farside of the moon taken by ZOND ill were later released on Aug. 20. (Tass, 7/18/65; Grose, NYT, 7/19/65, 1, 31; Loory, Wash. Post, 7/19/65)
The Christian Science Monitor asked Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and editor of Science magazine, to present elements of the debate on the question “Man in space: is it worth $40 billion?” Dr. Newell presented the case for manned space flight: “The manned space flight effort serves to round out the total program. Its primary aim is to develop a broad space capability that will secure to this nation strength, security, flexibility, and freedom of choice in space. Landing men on the moon and returning them to earth has been chosen as the means to this broader, more substantive end, and it is not to be considered as the only justification for our manned space effort.” Dr. Abelson, speaking for the critics, said: “The unmanned program has been a substantial contributor to our international prestige. Moreover, prestige based on science and technology tends to be enduring. ... “Our Apollo program was launched for reasons of international prestige. The yield has not been very good or very lasting. How many citizens can now recall the names of the astronauts and of their capsules? We can expect much the same reaction when we finally accomplish a moon landing.” (CSM, 4/9/65)
Two Soviet scientists retained their full capacity to work after spending 30 days in a closed test chamber—said to be the period necessary on a spaceflight to circle the moon. Psychologists did not favor a two-man crew for long space flights, however, since the experiment showed that “even trifles psychologically are blown out of all proportion.” Results and data of the experiments were published in Problems of Space Biology. (Tass, 9/6/65)
Absence of proper space laws may lead to dangerous conflicts and complications not only in this sphere of man’s activities but also1 in purely terrestrial affairs,” said Genadii Zhukov, scientific secretary of the Soviet Space Law Commission in an interview with Krasnaya Zvezda. The resolution adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on Dec. 13, 1963, had confirmed that outer space was open to all states. However, he stressed, the resolution made special reservations about the impermissibility of using sputniks for war propaganda and for inciting enmity between peoples: “All states must refrain from potentially harmful experiments in outer space or any other steps liable to interfere with the peaceful use of such space by other countries.” Zhukov noted that in connection with the prospects of creating permanent orbital stations, the need would arise to determine their legal status, as well as conditions of their use by other countries. As human beings made further inroads into outer space, the problem of determining the legal status of stations and settlements on the moon and on other celestial bodies, the conditions for tapping their natural resources, would become important. He added: “Space law must also guarantee protection of other living worlds if such are discovered on distant planets.” (Tass, 8/4/65) August 4^-5: Some 300 representatives of industry, NASA, and other agencies attended a conference on design of leak-tight fluid connectors at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Sponsored by MSFC and the Society of Automotive Engineers, the conference was planned to promote direct exchange of technical information on separable, semipermanent, and permanent fluid connectors, (msfc Release 65-196)
In a Cabinet report for President Johnson, NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden said: “The primary objective of the Gemini V mission to demonstrate man’s ability to function in the space environment for 8 days and to qualify the spacecraft systems under these conditions was met. This milestone duplicated the period required for the manned lunar exploration mission. “Gemini V also demonstrated the capability of man to withstand prolonged periods of weightlessness. The adaptability of the human body was indicated by the performance of the astronauts. For example, their heartbeat rates gradually dropped to a level significantly lower than their preflight normal rates, but by the fourth day, adapted to the weightless condition and leveled off. Upon return to Earth, the heartbeat rates were slightly higher than normal, as expected, but returned to normal rates during the second day. This has assured us of man’s capability to travel to the Moon and return.” (Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 258)
A group of amateur astronomers working on a lunar research project for nasa reported observations of unusual color glows on the moon and photographed this phenomenon. The group told nasa it saw the color in the crater Aristarchus during a four-hour period before daylight through a 16-in. telescope at Port Tobacco, Md. Although such events had been observed several times since the Russian astronomer N.	Kozyrev first recorded observations or red glows on spectrograms, this was the first time photographic equipment was used successfully to record the sightings in the crater Aristarchus. Observation was culmination of a 16-mo. vigil by members of a “Moon-Blink” team from Annapolis, Md. The team had made two previous confirmed sightings, including one in the crater Alphonsus last year, but they were much shorter and were not photographed. (NASA Release 65-370)
U.S.S.R. launched luna viii unmanned spacecraft toward the moon. Objectives were testing of soft lunar landing system and scientific research. Weighing 1,552 kg. (3,422 lbs.), the spacecraft was following a trajectory close to the calculated one. Equipment was functioning normally. (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/4/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, spoke at the dedication ceremonies for Martin Co.’s new Research Institute for Advanced Studies in Relay, Md., about some of the progress that had been made in space science: “Because of the space program, geophysics is experiencing a tremendous broadening of its horizons. . . . Moreover, geophysics is being carried forward to new domains, as instruments reach the moon and the planets, giving to the discipline a perspective it could never achieve as long as geophysics was confined to a single body of the solar system. “Similarly, the space program is giving a new dimension to astronomy. The ability to observe above the filtering distorting atmosphere in wavelengths not hitherto observable promises exciting new discoveries. . . . “The field of physics finds in the regions of outer space a laboratory of challenging opportunity. In interplanetary space, matter and fields exist under conditions unobtainable in the laboratory on the ground. . . . “It is, indeed, interesting to observe that one of the impacts of space efforts on physics, geophysics, and astronomy has been to draw the three disciplines together more closely than they have been drawn together in the past. In the investigation of sun-earth relationships, a most complex and challenging area of investigation, all three of these disciplines find themselves in partnership on problems of common interest. . . . “The impact of the space program on bioscience is still developing ... of particular importance is the area of exobiology. . . . “The satellite, space probe, and manned spacecraft give the scientist a new approach to the solution of many important problems. They serve to strengthen his hand—if used effectively. . . .” (Text)
A suggestion made at the White House Conference on International Cooperation that the U.S. seek international agreement on a legal code for human activity on the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “An important precedent for a code of lunar law exists in the Antarctic Treaty of Dec. 1, 1959. That pact, to which both the United States and the Soviet Union adhere, provides that Antarctica shall be used only for peaceful purposes and shall contain no military bases. It suspends all territorial claims to the Antarctic and establishes the principle that all settlements and activities in the area are open to inspection by observers designated by the nations ratifying the treaty. “The contracting nations agree to make available to each other all scientific information gathered there, and to exchange personnel among their expeditions and stations. “Adoption of an analogous code for the moon would be a major triumph of international cooperation . .	(NYT, 11/30/65, 40)
Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for Research at NASA Lewis Research Center, discussed possible propulsion systems for future space-flight beyond the moon before the Conference on Civilian and Military Uses of Aerospace sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. He cited a manned Mars project as a prime example of a mission that could be performed by a number of different propulsion concepts. For example, manned trips by chemical rockets would be weight-restricted, but chemical rocket systems would have the advantage of having been extensively flight-tested on many other missions. Although the reactor for planned nuclear propulsion systems had only been ground tested, evaluations of complete nuclear rocket engine systems were expected within the next few years. Electric propulsion systems for manned spaceflight were even further in the future and might not be ready by 1980; but by then the mission capability of the nuclear rocket would have been so thoroughly demonstrated that it would be more attractive than chemical engines for those missions requiring increased propulsion capability. Even further into the future were nuclear systems such as the gaseous-corecavity reactor which would yield higher performance, (lrc Release 65-5)
Application to “Spudnik 1” — a potato in orbit — of his theory of biological rhythms was explained by Prof. Frank A. Brown, Jr., biologist at Northwestern Univ., in an interview with the New York Times. About two thirds of the way to the moon, the earth’s magnetic field and other earth-related forces that might help run the biological clock, including gravity, electrostatic fields, and barometric pressure, would be absent, he said. Suggesting that NASA orbit a potato, he added, “If the potato dies, it [the space program] better be checked before a man is sent out there.” (Wehrein, NYT, 10/31/65, 73)
Speculation that the earth might briefly have had another moon, one of pure iron which disintegrated and fell to earth in a series of fireball showers, was reported in Science. Discovery of a 47-mi.-long string of craters and meteorites extending northeast to southwest in northcentral Argentina led scientists to propose that the rare meteorites, consisting of almost pure iron, might be remnants of a single object which had orbited inside the Roche Limit, been torn apart by the gravity of the earth, and fallen from orbit. Perigee of the hypothetical orbit would have been over the latitude of Argentina and inclination would have been about 40° to account for the alignment of the nine craters. {Science, 9/3/65, 1055-1064)
NASA successfully conducted an Apollo boilerplate pad abort test at White Sands Missile Range to check the launch escape system. The test simulated an abort from ground level, using the Apollo launch escape system for propulsion. This type of abort would be necessary in an actual mission if serious trouble developed with the Saturn launch vehicle just before or during ignition of the Saturn engines. Boilerplate 23A, the command module used for this test, powered by the launch escape rocket’s 155,000 lbs. of th rust, traveled 5,000 ft. above the range. Eleven sec. after ignition was signaled from the blockhouse, canards deployed near the top of the escape motor, causing the spacecraft to pitch aerodynamically to a blunt-end-forward position. Three seconds later, the tower jettison motor ignited, removing the tower and boost protective cover from the spacecraft. The forward (apex) heat shield was jettisoned .4 sec. later to uncover the parachute containers. Dual drogue parachutes were deployed by mortars from the upper deck two seconds after the LES was jettisoned. They slowed the spacecraft’s descent, then disreefed to stabilize the module in a blunt-end-forward position. When the drogue parachutes were jettisoned, three pilot chutes were deployed to extract the three main chutes from their containers. The main parachutes were deployed in reefed condition, then disreefed to lower the spacecraft to a gentle landing about one mile from the launch site. The flight sequence took about one minute. This was the first Apollo boilerplate to be reused, (nasa Release 65-202; upi, Chic. Trib., 6/30/65; msc Roundup, 6/25/65, 1) President Johnson signed the bill authorizing $5,190,396,200 for NASA during fy 1966. (ap, Wash. Post, 6/30/65) At Kennedy Space Center, NASA problems with radio frequencies forced at two-day postponement of an attempt to launch Tiros 10 weather satellite, designed to study hurricanes and typhoons. (Wash. Post, 6/29/65)	_
Soviet cosmonaut Col. Vladimir Komarov, who commanded the threeman spacecraft VOSKHOD I on its orbital flight, told a Havana newspaper: “I believe I will take part in a similar trip—if not to the moon, then to another place.” Komarov was a member of the Soviet delegation in Havana for celebration of the sixth anniversary of Fidel Castro’s revolution. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 1/3/65; ap, Hartford Courant, 1/3/65)
Ten firms had submitted proposals to the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for preliminary design study of the Optical Technology Satellite being considered as part of the Apollo Extension System (Aes). Two contracts would be awarded for parallel studies. Objective of the proposed Ots program was to advance NASA’s capability in space optics technology by performing several engineering and scientific experiments in space. Selected contractors would review existing conceptual designs for Ots and analyze the technical feasibility and justification for the performance in space of experiments being considered. The contractor would then create a conceptual design with onboard experiments. In Phase II, the contractor would perform a conceptual design study of the Ots subsystem to establish a sound base for overall preliminary design. The program would be under NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 65—213; msfc Release 65— 213)
In an article in the Orlando Evening Star, Barry Goldwater said: “Defense Secretary Robert McNamara has indicated that space weapons are too costly, as though any dollar cost is too high for the security of 190 million Americans and a billion allies and friends. The only major space-military program McNamara has permitted to stay alive is the Manned Orbital Laboratory, and he has so slowed and limited this that its orbit is apparently toward nothing but bureaucratic extinction. “We have deployed one or. two so-called ‘satellite killers,’ but they are a pitiful particle of what really is needed. “Pictures of Mars are fine. So is a trip to the moon. But the first job of any administration is to secure the nation against its enemies. “We will not remain the most powerful nation on earth for long if we do not reverse the suicidal Johnson-McNamara refusal to let us arm ourselves in space.” (Orl. Eve. Star, 8/4/65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed the national space program in address before the Hartford Rotary Club, Hartford, Conn. Looking toward the future, he said: “The Gemini and Apollo-Saturn programs are providing this country with a broad base of technological, managerial, and resources capability which makes feasible a wide spectrum of space missions beyond the first lunar landings. This capability can be exploited in a wide range of earth orbital, lunar orbital, and lunar surface missions. . . . “Over 90 percent of the Apollo program is directly applicable to our earth orbital capability. Many interesting ideas are under consideration on how to use this extended earth orbit capability to yield great benefits to mankind in his daily life on earth, and to conduct much significant scientific research. “We are also studying the use of modified Apollo vehicles for missions both in orbit about the moon and for exploration of the moon’s surface. In lunar orbit, we can do mapping, surveying, and exploration of the moon. On the moon, we can conduct detailed exploration of the surface environment and the moon’s overall properties. We are also looking at the moon as a base for astronomical and for biological studies. “All of these applications will capitalize on the presence of men in space. There is no substitute for having man’s abilities available right on the spot during a mission, with his human intellect to cope with the unexpected and operate in an unplanned or unprogramed manner. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/7/65, A5656-58)
Tass reported that Crimean Astrophysical Observatory of the Soviet Academy of Sciences had photographed luna VII moon probe with 2.6-meter telescope, largest in U.S.S.R. and Europe. Photographic method used made it possible to obtain an image of the object in motion in the form of a chain of three dots. This made it easier to distinguish the object from weak stars. Photographs would help to determine LUNA vil’s orbit with greater precision. (Tass, 10/5/65)
Reporting on public reactions to the two-man Gemini flight scheduled for Mar. 23, Samuel Lubell said in an editorial in the Washington Daily News: “In recent weeks more than half of the persons interviewed said funds for moon trips would be the part of the Federal budget they would cut first. Another third named space exploration in general. This interviewing took place before Russia’s space exploit of last Thursday.” (Lubell, Wash. Daily News, 3/22/65)
In Saturday Review, Science Editor John Lear reviewed GSFc’s Project Firefly as “an epic experiment that will at least track the essential spark of life wherever it can be found beyond the earth.” He reviewed Dr. William D. McElroy’s pioneering research in bioluminescence [see March 11] and noted that Norman E. MacLeod, head of GSFC Bioscience Group, emphasized in interviews the contribution of the Johns Hopkins scientist. He also reviewed the flight of “robot photographer named Ranger 8,” concluding “The Russians tend to be more practical about small but crucial obstacles than Americans do. Although they are years ahead in rocketry (having now demonstrated the ability to move a man out through the hatchway of a spaceship in flight and safely back again—a preliminary step to using the hatchway to link the two spaceships that will travel as one to the moon), they have not yet been so brash as to announce a date by which they will make a manned landing on the moon. Before we become still more acutely embarrassed by our lunar braggadocio, it would seem wise for Washington to abandon the virtually impossible 1970 deadline for putting an American on the moon.” (SR, 4/3/65, 45—48)
NASA awarded a $8,879,832 fixed-price contract to the Univac Division of Sperry Rand Corp., for digital data processors to be used in Project Apollo. The contract also called for computer programing assistance in modifying present computer programs or developing new ones for Project Apollo requirements, (nasa Release 65-50)
In an editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, Editor Robert Hotz said: “This is a year in which we will hear much about the growing pains of Apollo. It would be most amazing if we didn’t. For Apollo is now in the midst of that difficult period when the problems of creating this incredibly intricate and complex technical system are being hammered the hardest toward solutions. It is also the period when the effectiveness of the management structure in welding all of the complex subsystems into a successfully functioning overall system within the time and money boundaries already established becomes most vital.”	(Av. Wk., 1/18/65, 17)
First flight model of s-ivb, second stage of NASA’s Saturn ib booster, was en route via water from Douglas Aircraft Co., Sacramento, to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where it might be flown as early as December in the first launch of an Apollo flight-type spacecraft. (Marshall Star, 9/22/65, 10)
NASA Atlas-Centaur 6 launched a dummy Surveyor spacecraft along a simulated lunar trajectory in the fourth successful vehicle flight of six made to date. The Atlas booster operated as planned; Centaur ignited, burning for 7 min. 12 sec., and injected the dummy Surveyor spacecraft into a highly elliptical simulated lunar transfer orbit with apogee, 509,829 mi. (820,824 km.); perigee, 105 mi. (169.15 km.); period, 31 days; inclination, 28.55°. Speed of injection into orbit was 23,700 mph. The 2,084-lb. metal payload continued on a path toward a point 240,000 mi. from earth which would simulate a lunar transfer orbit. The target zone was on the path the moon follows as it orbits the earth. The 113-ft., 303,000-lb. launch vehicle produced 389,000 lbs. thrust at liftoff. The Centaur 2nd stage was powered by two RL-10 liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen engines with a thrust of 15,000 lbs. each. The AC-6 mission, sixth in a series of eight scheduled Centaur development flights, was a rehearsal for the ac-7 flight scheduled for later 1965 in which an engineering model of Surveyor was to make a soft landing on the lunar surface. Flight was designed to obtain data on several new Atlas-Centaur features and to continue evaluation of other components and systems tested during previous missions. Atlas-Centaur vehicle development for direct ascent missions was complete, and the vehicle was now capable of supporting fully operational Surveyor missions, (nasa Release 65-235; ksc Spaceport News, 8/12/65, 1; ap, ATT, 8/12/65, 11; nasa Proj. Off.)
Ten areas on the moon had been selected by NASA for planning photography by the Lunar Orbiter spacecraft next year. Areas included examples of all major types of moon surface to permit assessment of their suitability for spacecraft landings. Nine of the sites were within the area proposed for Apollo manned landings; eight were potential sites for Surveyor softlanding spacecraft. The 10 areas were located along the moon’s equator beginning at about 43° east longitude and stretching to 65° west longitude, (nasa Release 65-335)
Editorial comment on the successful transmission to earth of pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv: “There is something absolutely staggering about the idea of a piece of machinery from this country’s workshops finding its way to Mars and then pausing on schedule to make picture signals which bounce back here 12 minutes later. “Such a feat cheers up the most confirmed pessimist. After all, if man has the genius to reach back and forth into the universe, surely he will discover a way for peoples, nations and ideologies to live and survive together back here on this insignificant little planet.” (Wash. Post, 7/18/65) “Though all its findings are not yet in, it is already clear that Mariner 4’s historic journey to Mars is the most successful and most important experiment man has yet conducted in space, as well as one of the most brilliant engineering and scientific achievements of all time. “The triumph scored by mariner 4 in this first successful attempt at the exploration of Mars emphasizes a point suggested by the earlier achievements of instrumented probes, notably the Ranger photographic voyages to the moon. That point is that a great deal of scientific information about earth’s nearest neighbors in the solar system can be obtained relatively cheaply and without risk to human life by utilizing fully the potentialities of existing instruments. Cameras and other research devices can undoubtedly be placed in orbit about or landed softly on the surfaces of the moon and nearby planets. And intensive exploitation of the capabilities of unmanned rockets can make far safer the ultimate dispatch of man into far distant space.” (NYT, 7/16/65)
Decision to narrow the choice of type of broadcast satellite it would consider from three to two was announced by ComSatCorp president Joseph* V. Charyk at a stockholder’s meeting in Washington, D.C. Two of the approaches under consideration involved satellites that would operate about 6,000 mi. above the earth: one would have 18 satellites, orbiting in random positions; the other would have 12 satellites, orbiting at “phased” or controlled positions. The third approach, being tested in early bird I, had satellites placed at an altitude of 22,000 mi. in synchronous orbit. In his speech, Charyk revealed that the corporation had decided to drop from consideration the 6.000-	mi. random version. It had been discovered, he reported, that a 6.000-	mi.-high satellite could be controlled more easily than ComSatCorp had believed when it first started studying random satellites as one alternative approach. Moreover, Charyk said, it now appeared that a satellite could be designed that would operate either at 6,000 mi. in controlled positions or at the 22,000-mi.-high, synchronous position. LiOinSatCorp therefore wo: :Id invite satellite designers to offer bids to build this type of satellite. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/65, 12) . held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, where it was moved from Buenos Aires because of student demonstrations. A new working group was formed, with Morris Tepper (Chief of Meteorological Programs, nasa) as chairman. Called Working Group VI, for Scientific Space Experiments Concerned with Properties and Dynamics of the Troposphere and Stratosphere, it was formed to “further international understanding of, and cooperation in, the use of rocket and satellite systems and techniques for meteorological research, and to promote international discussions involving meteorologists with scientists of other disciplines in order to provide a good climate for the development of imaginative new approaches to the use of rockets and satellites for meteorological research.” (nas-nrc News Report, Vol. xv, 5/6/65, 6) Dr. 0. Z. Gazenko, physiologist and member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that cosmonauts had no difficulty knowing the orientation of their bodies and experienced no nervous disorders if they were given visual cues. He based his remarks on experiences of Soviet cosmonauts, especially those of Lt. Col. Aleksei Leonov in VOSKHOD ii: “When he saw the spacecraft, he had no problem knowing his orientation, but it was different when he didn’t see the spacecraft.” During the launch phase, the cosmonauts’ pulse and breathing rates were greater than noted during centrifugal tests in ground laboratories. In voskhod II, it took a comparatively long time for the normal levels to be reached, according to Gazenko. Comparison of the data of the Voskhod flights with other space flights showed fewer cardiovascular variations and better responses to stress. He recommended crews of several people since “the feeling of togetherness of cosmonauts is very important.” (Text) Success of the fully stabilized British Skylark rocket in obtaining new astrophysical data was described. Skylark was a single-stage, solid-fuel vehicle designed to carry 150-200-lb. payload to 200 km. (124 mi.) altitude. Using the sun as a reference, Skylark could achieve pointing accuracy of between two and three minutes of arc in pitch and yaw, reported Kenneth Pounds, lecturer at Leicester College, England, and one of its users: “The new Skylark has revolutionized the whole field of rocket research as far as we’re concerned.” He pointed out that many scientific experiments, such as taking x-ray photographs of the sun, could not be done by an unstabilized rocket: “You need 100 sec. or more exposure time, plus roll stabilization, or the photographs will be blurred.” (cospar Rpt.) M.	S. V. Rao, reporting on the Thumba, India, experiments conducted on World Days during the 1964—1965 iqsy, said east northeasterly winds with speeds of 60-90 knots were observed in the stratosphere during the monsoon. In the mesosphere, data revealed a region of unusually strong winds with high shear. Rao reported that radar observations of the rate of dispersion of chaff confirmed existence of complex pattern of high shears and pronounced turbulence in the equatorial mesosphere in the monsoon season. (Text) NASA scientists at Wallops Station, Va., had made a similar rocket launching during the Thumba experiments to get a synoptic picture. Arnold Frutkin, NASA Director of International Programs, said at the cospar meeting that “these data were the first relating to the monsoon problem on a global scale. It shows what very important work less advanced countries can do.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17) Activities in the 1964 U.S. space program were summarized by Dr. Richard W. Porter, National Academy of Sciences delegate to COSPAR:	“. . . Satellite storm warnings, intercontinental television, voice and data transmissions via satellite, all-weather navigational ‘fixes’ for ships at sea, and precise map making by means of satellite observations have become almost commonplace events. Space launchings at frequent intervals are providing a continuous stream of new information of value to science and mankind. ... In total, the various agencies of the United States carried out sixty-one successful satellite and space probe launchings; however, because of the occasional practice of launching several satellites at a time . . . the total number of useful discrete payloads in Earth orbit or escape trajectory was seventy-seven. . . . “In addition, the United States launched seven large high-altitude rocket probes, in the range from 700 to 1100 km., and well over one hundred other scientific sounding rockets, most of which reached altitudes between 110 and 250 km. Twelve hundred twenty-three small meteorological rockets, having a payload of about 5 kg. and a maximum altitude of about 60 km. were fired on regular schedules by the meteorological rocket network and more than one hundred scientifically instrumented large balloon flights were made during the period. “Technological advances made during this period which will contribute significantly to the space-research capability of the United States include the launching of three SATURN I booster rockets, capable of putting about 7500 kg. of useful weight into Earth orbit, one titan IIIA booster, and successful tests of the CENTAUR liquid hydrogen rocket. Electrostatic ion accelerator rocket propulsion devices were tested in space during 1964, and more recently a nuclear reactor with thermoelectric energy conversion devices successfully began an endurance run in space which is still continuing. Passive gravity-gradient stabilization techniques have been perfected by means of additional satellite tests to the point where this technique is ready for useful employment in a variety of space applications. The highly directional properties of a lasar beam were successfully used in tracking a satellite. Significant improvements were also made in sounding rocket, high altitude balloon design and in data conversion facilities.” (Text) K.	Maeda, chief Japanese delegate to the sixth international space symposium of cospar, told Missiles and Rockets Japan would launch its own satellite with its own launch vehicle within the next three years. A four-stage, solid-fueled rocket would be used, with the Mu rocket as first stage. The satellite, to be used solely for scientific research, would weigh between 50-100 kgs. and be sent into a 500-1,000-km. (311-621-mi.) orbit. (M&R, 5/17/65, 9) At a news conference during the cospar meeting, A. A. Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate, said that in view of the difficulties of soft landing on the moon, the Soviet Union would probably try to soft land another Lunik before attempting to land cosmonauts. He said the lunar surface must be known in detail and “should be examined by automatic stations.” Because of the problems involved, he added, “it is not possible to set any date for a lunar landing.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17)
Supreme Court Justice William 0. Douglas told Philadelphia Rotary Club members that money being spent to put a man on the moon could be better spent ending water pollution in the United States. He claimed that costs for equipping the Nation with adequate sewage disposal was about equal to that of sending a man to the moon in the Apollo project, (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 4/15/65)
This has been the best year in history for airline-equipment orders, Stuart G. Tipton, president of the Air Transport Association, told a news conference in a summary marking the tenth anniversary of the first order for jet airplanes. Tipton said that U.S. airlines would make delivery this year on 161 jet and propjet airplanes costing $880.6 million; 239 jets and propjets costing $1,201,600,000 would be delivered to the U.S. airlines next year, on the basis of orders already placed; and 187, costing $1,033,900,000, in 1967. (ap, NYT, 10/12/65, 69) William B. Taylor, Director of NASA Apollo Applications Office, outlined some long-range goals of Saturn/Apollo: “By 1980, it seems likely there will be a vigorous program for manned exploration of the near planets, probably based on a new generation of space vehicles capable of flights for durations of 2 to 3 years with crews consisting of 6 to 8 men. Although by 1980 it is not likely that men will have landed on Mars, it is possible that a Mars flyby or manned orbiting mission will be imminent if not already accomplished. “On the moon by 1980, there may be in operation one or more multi-manned research observatories, conducting astronomical and geophysical operations on a year-round basis. These observatories may also be home base for mobile lunar explorations, using self-sufficient surface vehicles. “In earth orbit by 1980 there may be one or more multi-manned, orbiting space stations, functioning as research laboratories for the advancement of human knowledge and increase of living standards. In addition to these permanent space stations, there could be a variety of smaller earth orbiting spacecraft, operated by private industry or government agencies in much the way aircraft operate today, to carry out such applications as long term weather forecasting and control; surveys of water resources, crops, forests and ocean currents; continuous, wide-band worldwide communications; air, sea and space navigation, and traffic control. “These, then are some of the longer range objectives of the 1970’s and 1980’s which we feel can be achieved with the wide base of space technology which can be developed in alternate missions using the Saturn/Apollo systems. . . (Text) Undiscovered biological rhythms in man could prevent his visiting other planets, reported biologist Eugene Spangler, TRW Systems. “The consequences of the removal [of man from earth] are in many respects unknown. The solution may not come except by means of gradual accretions in the total time that man spends in space together with careful monitoring of his reactions as that time is increased. But it seems necessary to come to further grips with the problem insofar as possible before prolonged space flight is attempted. The goals must be first to define the problem in two steps: (1) what specific correlations exist between the life processes of man and the variations in his geophysical environment? and (2) what are the results of substantial alteration of that environment on these correlations?” Spangler noted that all of the known human rhythmic cycles could be interrupted without apparent harm, yet even the adjustment to a rapid change of several time zones after a jet flight could involve unpleasant recycling of the body’s “biological clock.” (Text) Suits of armor might be worn by astronauts on long lunar explorations, reported Richard S. Johnston, James V. Correale, and Matthew I.	Radnofsky, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. The suits must be reliable, mobile, leak-resistant, and have lightweight construction and high durability for repeated wear. Two models of a metal spacesuit had met these requirements and been delivered to MSC for further testing, they said. Spacesuits for the Apollo mission, which would involve relatively brief lunar walks, would be of fabric and consist of several layers, starting with water-cooled underwear, followed by pressure layers to hold the suit’s atmosphere, and finally an “overcoat” of fabric. (Text) Greater space cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. was predicted by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) in a news conference. Cooper based his prediction on discussions he and fellow Gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had had with Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and L/Col. Aleksey A. Leonov at the International Astronautical Congress in Athens. Cooper said the cosmonauts were “mighty nice fellows” who “appeared to be very happy that we could get together and talk.” (Clark, NYT, 10/12/65, 9)	_ _ Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the meeting that the nation as a whole should be ready to decide whether to send men to other planets. He expressed faith that the public would want to continue space exploration: “It is all part of man’s wanting to know what the hell he’s doing in his environment. “The American people are just about what they claim they are—a people very fascinated with their environment, and when they can find another way to explore their environment they are very willing within reason to put their resources where their interest is. “They will do that so long as they are getting return on their investment. But there has to be a payoff here. . . The “payoff” would not necessarily come before the mid-nineteen seventies’ planetary decision, so the public would have to continue to have faith that the space program had such potential, Eggers said. (Clark, NYT, 10/14/65, 8)
Command Module of Apollo spacecraft 009 was delivered to KSC from North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant aboard a c—133b aircraft. (KSC Historical Office)
New York Times continued its editorial opposition to the national objective for Project Apollo of landing a man on the moon in this decade. On Feb. 19, an editorial drew from the two successful major launchings of the week (ranger viii and SATURN i sa—9) the lesson that the kinds of experiments on these flights (lunar photography of ranger viii and pegasus I micrometeoroid detection satellite on Saturn I) proved there wrere many unmeasured perils in space and that “In the face of these uncertainties, the American space program ought to retain maximum flexibility of timing, rather than try at all costs to achieve the artificial goal of a manned lunar landing by 1970.” On Feb. 22, following the successful conclusion of the RANGER viii lunar photography mission, another editorial praised the accomplishment, then noted that the Ranger series was not providing all of the answers to lunar questions critical to the Apollo program, and concluded:	“The two successful Ranger shots, however, make clear that much valuable information can be gathered about the earth’s natural satellite by relatively cheap instrument-carrying rockets that do not risk human lives. This demonstration, and the continuing uncertainties about matters essential for a safe manned round trip to the moon, strengthen still more the case for making progress slowly, without any arbitrary deadline, on Project Apollo.” {NYT, 2/19/65, 34; 2/22/65, 20)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)
luna v “hit the moon in the area of the Sea of Clouds” at 10:10 p.m. Moscow time [3:10 p.tn. edt], Tass announced. The release continued: “During the flight and the approach of the station to the moon a great deal of information was obtained which is necessary for the further elaboration of a system for soft landing on the moon’s surface.” The announcement revealed no further details of the landing. Western experts saw evidence that the Soviets had attempted a soft landing and failed. (Tass, 5/12/65; Shabad, NYT, 5/13/65, 1, 24)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told newsmen at Manned Spacecraft Center that the U.S. might land a man on the moon as early as late 1968. He expressed great confidence' in the space program, but cautioned: “Pm not going to say we’re ahead of schedule. We’ve had a remarkable set of flights, and we’re now entering a period of intensive testing.” (Freelander, Houston Post, 8/22/65)
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.
Chairman of the ucla Astronomy Dept. Dr. L. H. Aller believed the moon might be as solid as metal below the top few inches of surface, reported George Getze in the Los Angeles Times. According to Getze, Aller said chances were good that the chemical composition of the moon was more like the sun’s than the earth’s and that elements in the sun as gases would be found in the moon as solids. “The first few inches of the moon’s surface may have been changed a good deal by meteor hits and solar radiation, but if we go down a few feet we will probably find that the composition is like the sun’s,” he said. (Getze, L.A. Times, 5/6/65)
Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said at the 16th annual luncheon for Albert Lasker Medical Journalism Awards in Washington, D.C.: “The most important race is not the space race or the arms race. It is the human race. If America can get excited about putting a man on the moon in 1970, why can’t we get excited about putting a lot of people on their feet by the same date? . . . some day we will be able to tell the world that science has discovered the secrets of aging or of cancer or of muscular dystrophy or multiple sclerosis or mental retardation. That news will outrank in importance even the wonderful tidings that man has landed on the moon.” (Text)
A panel of scientists analyzed slides of the ranger ix lunar pictures at a post-impact press conference and noted that crater rims— some with level areas—and ridges inside the walls seemed harder than the plains but that floors of the craters appeared to be solidified volcanic froth that would not support a landing vehicle. Volcanic activity was inferred from indications that the moon had at least three types of craters not caused by meteorite impact. Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona said parts of the highlands around the crater Alphonsus and ridges within it seemed harder and smoother than the dusty lunar plains. Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of the same laboratory said of the crater: “It might well be better to make landings there.” Most significant finding of ranger ix’s photographs, according to Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey, was the smoothness of the crater walls and of the long ridges on the floor of the crater. Dr. Harold Urey of the Univ. of California referred to black patches in the pictures which he said might be composed of graphite: “. . . these dark halo craters are due to some sort of plutonic activity beneath the surface of the moon. They do not look to me like terrestrial volcanoes. . . . They look like a unique lunar type of object.” Dr. Urey said a Soviet scientist had reported a red flare near a peak in Alphonsus and that analysis had indicated presence of a molecule with two carbon atoms. He said this was “a very curious situation because this molecule . . . does not escape from any known volcano” on earth, (nasa Transcript)
Dr. Barry Commoner, professor of plant physiology at Washington Univ. in St. Louis and chairman of the aaas Committee on Science in the Promotion of Human Welfare, told Aviation Week and Space Technology that the question of the probability of finding life on Mars had not been “fully and fairly aired,” and that an “overbalance of the positive viewpoint has been presented to Congress and the public by NASA officials.” Dr. Commoner said that if asked his views on Voyager as a tax-paying citizen, his feeling would be that “the value of pursuing a program to find life on Mars at this time is not worth the $1.25 billion to be invested because the problem of finding life there has not been adequately explored.” He had made similar charges in a speech at the aaas meeting last December in Montreal. Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, was reported by Aviation Week and Space Technology as listing six major points in defending NASA’s position regarding Mars exploration: (1) Numerous competent scientists had said there was little liquid water on Mars and that the planet had a dry, dusty surface with high ultraviolet radiation. Changing patterns on the planet indicated some form of seasonal change, however. (2) With the evidence at hand, it was not possible to say there was life on Mars, only that life might be there. (3) If there were life on Mars it might be similar to basic life forms on earth. (4) The only reasonable approach we could take to the exploration of Mars would be to make sure we looked for life before the planet was contaminated from earth. If life was not found on Mars, it still would be valuable to determine how far the planet’s chemical processes had progressed toward life formation. (5) The Voyager program had not been sold to Congress on the basis that there was life on Mars. It has been pointed out during budget hearings that there might not be life on the planet but nobody could responsibly take the position that there wasn’t. Therefore, the early emphasis of Project Voyager was on bioscience. (6) The Mars exploration was part of an overall program to explore the solar system, including the moon, comets, and other planets. Mars happened to be the planet NASA was focusing its attention on because it would be in the optimum launch position through the mid-1970’s. (Av. Wk., 1/4/65, 18)
Geologist G. J. H. McCall of Univ. of Western Australia said he believed the lunar surface to resemble plastic, and he recommended another Ranger spacecraft be sent to the moon to test his theory. McCall was in Bend, Ore., attending the International Lunar Geological Conference. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 8/27/65)
At the Spring Meeting of the American Physical Society, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, attempted to answer the question “What can the space program do for experimental sciences like physics”:	. . the impact that space techniques are having and have already had on geophysics ... is three-fold in character. First, the geophysicist finds in the space program powerful tools to use in a new approach to solving old problems. Secondly, the application of space techniques to geophysics has already turned up a number of exciting new problems, greatly broadening the scope of the discipline. Thirdly, as space probes, and eventually men. reach other bodies of the solar system such as the moon and planets, the domain of geophysics grows beyond the confines of a single body of the solar system. Let us consider each of these extensions to geophysics a little further. “. . . space techniques have provided new tools for studying old problems of geophysics. Geodesy, meteorology, upper atmospheric physics, ionospheric research, and sun-earth relationships have all benefited from the application of space techniques. In the case of geodesy, the influence of the earth upon the orbits of various artificial satellites has been measured by careful radio, radar, and optical tracking and used to obtain quantitative measures of the various harmonics in the expansion of the earth’s gravitational potential. As a consequence of such measurements it has been found that the earth’s equatorial bulge is some 70 meters greater than one would expect. . . . Other departures of the geoid from the figure of hydrostatic equilibrium have also been determined from these satellite measurements. . . . These measurements in turn have important implications for the distribution of matter within the earth, and for the internal strength of the earth’s mantle.” (Text)
Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, head of the astrogeological branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, said in an interview with the Houston Post while at Rice Univ. as a speaker in the President’s Lecture Series that the Ranger program had cost a total of about $200 million. He estimated that each Ranger shot had cost just under $30 million and said that although four of the seven Ranger missions had failed, it would have been foolish to settle for one success: “Just imagine that the Martians sent a Ranger-like camera to take pictures of the earth. With just one shot, they’d end up with pictures of a space no bigger than the size of an urban lot, or of the peak of the Alps, or of the sand dunes in Arabia. Could they tell anything about the earth from pictures of just one of these?” The Ranger program, just concluded with the success of ranger ix, gave U.S. scientists good pictures of three different areas of the moon, Shoemaker said. “A Ranger picture is worth a million computer words.” (Perez. Houston Post, 4/8/65)
An instrumented experiment package capable of recording lunar phenomena and relaying information to earth, would be installed on the moon by astronauts before their return to earth, reported Howard Simons in the Washington Post. Simons said that NASA officials explained that the package would contain “combination of instruments to measure the moon’s gravity and atmosphere, heat flow and solar wind, proton activity and micrometeorite impacts for as long as a year.” Such information would be helpful in planning the establishment of permanent lunar bases and in studying the history of the earth and the solar system. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/14/65, A9)
In a luncheon address to the National Security Industrial Association in Washington, D.C., Lt. Gen. W. A. Davis (usaf), Vice Cdr. of Air Force Systems Command, discussed AFSC accomplishments in 1964:	. . Important strides were also made in the area of space. We carried out intensive studies on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Last month the Secretary of Defense announced that proposals are being requested from industry for design studies to assist in developing the cost and technical information needed to proceed with full scale development of the MOL. Titan hi, the Standard Launch Vehicle 5A, completed two highly successful test launches. Systems Command also provided support to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This included the use of the Atlas-Agena combination to launch Ranger 7 on its successful photographic mission to the moon and Mariner 4 on its way to Mars. We also conducted the first launch of the man-rated Titan II. It was very successful. “There are a number of tasks ahead of us in space. One of our most promising present programs is the Titan ill space launching system. The Titan in will be used to launch the 24 satellites for the interim Defense Satellite Communications System. It will also be used to launch the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), which is designed to determine man’s capability to perform military functions in space. The mol will have an important bearing on our future space capabilities.” (afsc Release)	.
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant mission results: “U.S. scientific satellites achieved the following firsts: discovery of the radiation belt, determination of the earth’s irregular geoid, ionospheric topside sounding (with Canada), solar spectroscopy, x-ray and ultraviolet satellite astronomy, polar orbits, and highly eccentric orbits to map the earth’s magnetosphere. Our deep space probes achieved the first successful direct monitoring of the interplanetary environment, the first lunar surface detail, and the first successful flight to Venus. We may soon achieve the first successful flight to Mars, if mariner iv completes its mission. In launch vehicle development, this program has yielded the first rocket stage using the high energy propellant combination of hydrogen and oxygen. It has also yielded the first and only all solid propellant space booster. U.S. meteorological satellites have yielded the following firsts: daylight cloud photography, night cloud observations including surface and cloud top temperatures, world cloud coverage, global heat balance and stratospheric temperature measurements, and direct cloud picture transmission to local users. Our communication satellites have been first in the following achievements: erection of large structures in space and their use as passive reflectors of radio signals; active repeating of radio signals at various altitudes and orbits of interest to system designers; transoceanic and intercontinental relay of teletype, facsimile, voice, data, and television; and achievement of the first true geostationary orbit. “The specific record of 1964 space missions of the Space Science and Applications Program ... is particularly informative because most major program areas achieved at least one highly significant success in 1964. Of the 10 scientific satellite missions attempted, 7 achieved full success and 2 partial success.” Dr. Newell observed that syncom ill communications satellite had been placed in a “virtually perfect circular equatorial orbit,” then maneuvered “to within about 1 mile of its station over the western Pacific where it successfully performed all its planned experiments. . . . The Syncom maneuver was comparable to the feat of Ranger VII in flying to within 6 miles of its target on the Moon. “Having completed our experiments with Syncoms II and III, we are turning them over to the Department of Defense. ... If required, full-time communications could be provided between the United States and southeast Asia by Syncom m. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 136-62)
“The space station relayed to the earth comprehensive data on the interplanetary magnetic field, cosmic radio emission, interplanetary ionized plasma, longwave cosmic radio emission, and micrometeorite particles. . . . During the flight around the moon, data were also obtained on the spectrum of its infrared and ultraviolet radiation.” (Tass, 9/18/65; Pravda, 9/19/65, 2)
Commenting on how swiftly man had moved into the space age, an article in the Baltimore Sun said: “Travel in space . . . remains and will remain dangerous—a work for none but the brave, the skilled and the dedicated. There will be moments of breathless drama, many of them, as when the first man arrives on the moon, and of tragedy. But short of those moments, travel in space near the earth is beginning to be routine.” (Balt. Sun, 9/17/65)
NASA’s ranger viii spacecraft, equipped with six television cameras to photograph part of the moon’s surface, was successfully launched from Cape Kennedy by an Atlas-Agena B. Seven minutes after lift-off, the spacecraft and the Agena stage went into a parking orbit some 115 mi. above Africa; the Agena engines were cut off. For the next 14 min., the combination coasted at 17,500 mph. Second burn of the Agena lasted 90 sec., increased the velocity to 24,476 mph, and freed the 808.8-lb. ranger viii from the major pull of the earth’s gravity. Several minutes after injection, ranger viii was separated from Agena, which entered an elliptical orbit. About an hour after launch, ranger viii received and obeyed the command to deploy the solar panels that would convert solar energy to electrical power for its equipment. About 31/) hrs. after launch, ranger viii completed its orientation maneuvering, achieved attitude stabilization, and pointed a high-powered antenna toward earth. The projected impact area was the Sea of Tranquility, a dark area relatively free of crater rays, near the shadow line on the three-quarter moon. Lower-angle lighting was expected to give more contrast and better definition of detail than was in the photographs made by ranger vii. A small rocket aboard the craft would be fired later to correct a moon-miss error on either side of the target; tracking calculations showed that the path of the vehicle would miss the edge of the moon by only 1,136 mi., well within the correction capability. (NASA Release 65-25; ap, Benedict, Wash. Post, 2/18/65; UPI, Chic. Trib., 2/ 18/65; ap, Houston Post, 2/18/65; Appel, NYT, 2/18/65, 1)
An editorial in the Washington Evening Star said: “. . . judging from Soviet cosmonaut Leonov’s spectacular ‘walk’ in the high heavens last week, the Russians seem to be well ahead of us at the moment. Interestingly enough, however, in marked contrast to the wide-open American procedure, they do not let the outside world have any look at either the launching or the landing of their spacemen. This furtiveness makes one wonder about the nature of their program and whether they’re really accomplishing as much as they claim to be. “In any case, regardless of what the Russians are hiding, there can be no doubt that the Grissom-Young flight represents an important advance for the United States in the race to the moon. Technically, we are ahead of the Reds in many respects, and it is entirely possible that we’ll make lunar landings before them.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/24/65)
Soviet spacecraft luna viii impacted on the moon. Indications were that it was destroyed instead of making a soft landing. Tass reported that “the systems of the station were functioning normally at all stages of the landing except the final touchdown.” Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank radiotelescope tracking station, said: “The recordings of the final stages of Luna 8 made at Jodrell Bank indicate that a minor fault probably developed approximately four minutes before touchdown. The retrorockets did not have full effect and the probe probably made a hard rather than a crash landing, but nevertheless sufficient to put the instruments out of action. It seems clear the Russians narrowly missed complete success. . . . They have probably obtained a great deal of new information which will enable them to correct the remaining minor faults. . . .” (Tass, 12/7/65; Balt. Sun, 12/8/65)
Construction work at Cape Kennedy halted as 3,700 building trade workers stayed off the job in a two-year-old contract dispute with NASA. The present dispute was between building trades unions and the Marion Power Shovel Co., a NASA contractor, over pay scales. Work on 44 projects involving contracts totaling $192 million had been brought to a standstill. The biggest project affected was the 52-story Saturn V moon rocket assembly building that was to be ready for the first of these rockets within two yesrs. (upi, MYT^ 1/29/65, 6; ap, Houston Post, 1/29/65)
Tass had reported that Soviet astronomers believed the upper layer of the moon’s surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguished chemically and in mineral content from deeper layers. “Highly accurate and reliable” observation had been made by a Gorky University team headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky, the Soviet Union’s leading authority on radio emanations of the moon. (Sha-bad, Louisville Courier-]ournal, 1/31/65)
ranger VIII lunar probe successfully executed a midcourse maneuver that corrected the path established at launch and aimed it for impact on the moon in the Sea of Tranquillity, an area centered 2.6° north of the lunar equator and 24.8° west of the moon’s north-south line. Signal for the maneuver was radioed from earth to activate commands previously stored in the spacecraft’s computer. At that time, the 808-lb. photo probe was 99,281 mi. from earth, traveling toward the moon at 4,100 mph. First command ordered the spacecraft to roll 11.6°; the second ordered the pitch maneuver of 151.7°; the third commanded the motor to burn for 59 sec. Then, after the spacecraft was ordered to break its attitude stabilization locks on the sun and earth, a “go” command was transmitted and ranger vm executed the maneuver in about 27 min. The correction completed, the spacecraft reacquired its stabilization locks and continued on its course. One measure of the accuracy of the maneuver was the current expected impact time on the moon:	Feb. 20 at 4:57:30 a.m. plus or minus 60 sec. The original planned time was 4:57:30 a.m. The photo probe’s initial course would have missed the trailing edge of the moon by 1.136 mi. (NASA Transcript; L.A. Times. Miles, Wash. Post, 2/19/65; Appel, NYT, 2/19/65; UPi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 2/18/65; ap, Chic. Trib., 2/19/65; Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 34)
In a Missiles and Rockets editorial, William J. Coughlin questioned NASA’s wisdom in drawing up mission requirements for lunar exploration. The article said:	“Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA associate administrator, told Congress last year:	‘Ranger will play an important role in the support of Project Apollo.’ . . . “Not a single change has been made in any part of the Apollo system or in the program’s operational plan as a result of the Ranger findings. None is contemplated. The reason for this is simple. The Block in Rangers were incapable of producing any such data. . . . “The case for Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter as supports for the Apollo program ... is not a very strong one. . . . “Dr. Newell sees them as part of what he calls the ‘total program for exploring the Moon.’ . . . [He said] in the following statement to Congress:	‘You will have a lunar landing. That lunar landing will involve a few hours of stay on the Moon, a look that the astronauts can make, a few collections of samples, maybe some simple tests, and maybe the implacement by the astronauts of monitors to be left on the lunar surface.’ “After their departure, Dr. Newell sees the instruments carrying on. Lunar Orbiter wheels overhead. Surveyor explores areas on the moon which Man would have difficulty in reaching. . . . “We suggest that if anyone proposed exploring the Antarctic in such a manner, he would he clapped in the pokey as a nut. Man is going to the Moon and he is going to explore it. Expenditure of billions of dollars on instruments remotely controlled from Earth to do the same job is folly.” (M&R, 4/12/65, 46)
NASA’s 200-lb. Project Fire II spacecraft—similar in shape to an Apollo command module—was launched into a ballistic trajectory from etr by an Atlas D booster that sent it over 500 mi. into space in test of reentry heating of spacecraft returning from the moon. Some 26 min. later, when the ballistic path of the payload turned it toward earth, a solid-fueled Antares rocket fired for 30 sec., accelerating the payload into the atmosphere at 25,400 mph. As a fireball estimated at 20,000°F formed a shock wave in front of the spacecraft, instruments in its interior radioed information to tracking stations. Tracking reports indicated that the heat probe impacted 32 min. after launch in the south Atlantic about 5,130 mi. southeast of Cape Kennedy. The spacecraft had been dubbed a “flying thermometer” because it was to radio more than 100,000 temperature readings. First Project Fire flight took place from Cape Kennedy April 14, 1964, and was the fastest controlled in-flight reentry experiment ever conducted. The spacecraft reached a speed of more than 25,800 mph and telemetered many important direct measurements of reentry heating, (nasa Release 65-131; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/23/65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, reviewing overall manned space flight objectives and reporting on the Gemini and Apollo programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Chronologically, the first objective of manned space flight is to establish man’s capabilities in space. Next is the establishment of a national competence for manned space flight, including the industrial base, trained personnel, ground facilities, flight hardware, and operational experience. Next, we use this capability for further space explorations and for other purposes. Finally, accomplishment of all these objectives brings about United States leadership in space. “. . . In 1964, we concentrated our efforts on Gemini ground tests and accomplished the first flight test. Filling the pipeline with hardware and carrying out development testing of subsystems were the major Apollo activities. Now in 1965, we have entered a year that will be devoted to Gemini flight test operations and the conduct of Apollo system development tests. “Looking at the remainder of the decade, 1966 will be the year when we learn new' space flight techniques in the Gemini Program, and conduct unmanned earth-orbital flight tests of the Apollo/Saturn IB space vehicle. In 1967, Gemini will be available as an operational system and we will carry out manned earth-orbital flights of the Apollo/ Saturn V space vehicle. Manned flights of the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle are scheduled for 1968, leading to the beginning of manned lunar missions before the end of the decade. “. . . I want to emphasize again that Apollo is an orderly program. The buildup of the Apollo effort has proceeded over more than three and a half years to its full strength. It is not a crash program. “The duration of Apollo, as we reported to the Congress last year, is one of the longer United States research and development programs, resulting in a schedule that permits rapid, orderly progress. The Apollo priority is high but not overriding. Parallel and backup development efforts are limited. Flight testing is being carried out on a logical basis, and only after all possible tests are conducted on the ground. “Efficient use of available resources is a major consideration in the conduct of the Apollo program, whereas a crash program follows the most expeditious course regardless of cost. “Finally, crash programs typically have goals beyond the existing state of technology and pursue these goals under the pressure of having to achieve a technological breakthrough. Apollo, on the other hand, harnesses current technology in the development of launch vehicles, spacecraft and facilities to permit effective space exploration. The greatest challenges in Apollo, in fact, are in the integration of those systems and the men who must fly them as well as the provision of ground operational support, and the overall management of this enterprise.” Dr. Mueller said that data received and analysis continued in 1964 regarding radiation and the lunar surface indicated that these matters were of less importance than had been previously deduced:	“. . . First, the chance of a significant solar event occurring during a mission is very low. Second, if the worst solar flare previously observed had occurred during an Apollo mission, the maximum dose that could have been received at the bloodforming organs by astronauts in the command module would have been about 10 per cent of the allowable safe dose, rather than 15 per cent as estimated last year. “Regarding the lunar surface, the data from ranger vii have been very helpful. The large area photography has indicated the probability that there are many areas of the moon’s surface where the design of the lunar excursion module is adequate with respect to surface slope and roughness. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 53-134)
NASA announced plans to negotiate with Lockheed Missile and Space Co. to modify five Agena D second-stage launch vehicles for use in Lunar Orbiter missions. Modifications under the incentive contract would include vehicle engineering support; systems testing; overall system integration functions; shroud, adapter and interface coordination; and design fabrication of ground equipment. The Lunar Orbiter program would secure topography data of the moon’s surface to extend scientific knowledge and to help select and confirm landing sites for the Apollo manned moon landings. (NASA Release 65-6)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., discussing the management of NASA’s aeronautics and space effort before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said: “. . . our performance in terms of data returned is perhaps the most succinct evidence of success. The volume of information brought back from space in 1964 averaged 57 million data points per day in comparison with a previous high of some 6 million data points per day. This indicates not only more advanced instrumentation but also more reliable functioning of flight experiments. We averaged 54 working experiments throughout 1964, which represents an improvement of 35/7 over the 1963 average. “We have achieved significant results in ground based experimentation, testing, aeronautical flights, and sounding rocket launchings. Work conducted in our wind tunnels continues to refine aircraft configurations for vertical takeoff and landing, supersonic transportation, and hypersonic flight. We are continuing to experiment with materials, fuels, turbines, injectors, and nozzles in order to improve the efficiency of air-breathing and rocket propulsion systems. The 3 successful power tests of the kiwi reactor demonstrated the applicability of nuclear energy to rocket propulsion. In 1964 we conducted 27 more flights of the x-15 aircraft, 19 of them over Mach 5, amassing data important to supersonic and hypersonic flight. In addition, we launched 131 successful sounding rockets from stations around the world to test new instrumentation and to obtain important scientific data in geophysics, astronomy, and meteorology. In the areas of manned space flight, the Apollo escape system has been successfully tested, and a boilerplate spacecraft checked out and flown on the Saturn I. A mock-up of the lunar excursion module has been approved. The Saturn IB and Saturn V ‘battleship’ upper stages have been successfully fired. The F-l engine has passed its flight rating test. This record was established by the hard work and careful attention to detail of the government-industry-university team charged with aeronautic and space exploration. This total team, numbering 380,000 people, is managed by the relatively small hard core NASA organization of less than 34,000.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 76-114)
Soviet scientist Dr. V. S. Troitsky, of the Scientific Research Radiophysics Institute in Gorky, said that radio emissions from the moon indicated that its interior was so hot that it must be four times as radioactive as the inside of the earth. He also said that radio observations indicated a surface layer of light material about 20-ft. thick, overlying denser rock. Dr. Troitsky made these statements at an international conference on the solar system, being held at Cal Tech. (NYT, 9/15/65)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center awarded rca a $4.6-million contract to provide a real-time deep space tracking and data acquisition system for support of Project Apollo missions. Contract called for installation, checkout, and documentation of rca’s long-range (32,000 mi.) FPQ radar on land made available near a NASA site on Cooper’s Island, Bermuda, through a land-lease agreement with dod. The “Q—6” radar would have a flexible capability to support NASA programs other than manned flight, (gsfc Release G-9-65; gsfc Release G-10-65)
In a letter-to-the-editor in Missiles and Rockets, Thomas M. Morse said that since there were no indications that the Russians were building a bigger booster for their lunar program, they might be planning to use a lihration orbit to reach the moon. He described the libration orbit as an almost stable earth orbit in which a spacecraft would always be on a direct line between earth and moon, about 33,000 mi. from the moon. Advantages offered over the U.S.-planned lunar orbit included easier rendezvous; pre-parking of unmanned freight, shielding, and modules; unlimited rendezvous and liftoff windows; continuous line-of-sight communications between earth, rendezvous craft, and lunar landing crew; better radiation protection; improved safety factor; reduced cost. {M&R, 3/8/65, 6)
Water could have been present on Mars during the first 3.5 billion years of the planet’s history and then disappeared before its craters were created by meteorites, said researchers Edward Anders of the Univ. of Chicago and James R. Arnold of the Univ. of California at San Diego in a report in Science. The scientists said they believed the Martian craters were only 300 to 800 million years old, compared with up to 4.5	billion years for those on the moon. They added: “. . . The crater density of Mars no longer precludes the possibility that liquid water and a denser atmosphere were present on Mars during the first 3.5	billion years of its history.” (Science, 9/24/65)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the radiotelescope facility at Jodrell Bank, England, said that the telescope would try to track Soviet lunar probe LUNA v on May 10. “We have been expecting the Russians to make an attempt to achieve a soft landing of an instrumented package on the moon for some time now,” he said. “This may possibly be the attempt.” {NYT, 5/10/65)
NASA had selected Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. for contracts to study feasibility of including optical-technology experiments— particularly lasers and large telescopes—in future extended Apollo flights. NASA was also interested in optical communication in deep space, the effects of space environment on optical systems, and related secondary experiments. The program would be directed by MSFC. (msfc Release 65-223)
Editorializing, the Hartford Courant said: “. . . Lunik V’s purpose was openly said to be a soft landing on the moon, an experiment that might have sent back the first pictures of the moon from the actual lunar surface, and information about the physical nature of that surface. Possibly the Russians were sure they had the problems of a soft landing solved. But just possibly they decided this time to be frank and out in the open about the whole business. After all, why be scared? Look at all the failures the United States has admitted. And right now the Russians have something to console themselves with. It’s called honesty, and its just as good to be distinguished for this as it is for technology.” (Hartford Courant, 5/16/65)
Soviet engineer T. Borisov suggested that cause of LUNA v’s apparent failure to soft land on the moon might have been failure of the braking rockets to fire “precisely when needed,” the New York Times reported. Borisov pointed out that earth stations could not help the automatic equipment during this phase because it takes 2% sec. for radio signals to make round-trip between earth and moon. (NYT, 5/14/65, 3)
U.S.S.R. believed it was possible to land men on the moon and bring them back tO' earth with the same rocket, Soviet cosmonaut Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev said in Tokyo. Colonel Nikolayev and his wife, Valentina Tereshkova, also a cosmonaut, were on a two-week visit to Japan. (Reuters, NYT, 10/27/65, 19)
Referring to a French rocket launching site, comparable to Kennedy Space Center, that would be operating in French Guiana by 1968, Pierre J. Huss said in the New York Journal American: “French experts claim the Guiana location makes it possible to fire toward the east at an angle that makes use of the earth’s rotation speed. They say it also offers optimal conditions for launching vehicles to the moon or Mars.” (Huss, N. Y. J/Amer., 7/8/65, 9)
Saturn I (sa-9) two-stage launch vehicle, launched by NASA from Cape Kennedy, orbited a 33,000-lb. multiple payload, of which 3,200 lbs. was the pegasus i meteoroid detection satellite. Orbital data:	apogee, 745 km. (462 mi.); perigee, 496 km. (308 mi.) ; period, 97 min.; and inclination, 31.7°. This was the eighth successful test in eight flights for Saturn I; pegasus i was the first active payload launched in the Saturn tests. At launch, an Apollo command and service module boilerplate (bp-16) and launch escape system (Les) tower were atop Saturn I, with pegasus I folded inside the service module. After first-stage separation and second-stage ignition, Les was jettisoned. When second stage (s-iv) attained orbit, the 10,000-lb. Apollo boilerplate command and service modules were jettisoned into a separate orbit. Then a motor-driven device extended winglike panels on the Pegasus satellite to a span of 96 ft. Each wing consisted of seven frames hinged together and made up of 208 panels, pegasus i remained attached to Saturn I’s second stage as planned. A television camera, mounted on the interior of the service module adapter, provided pictures of the satellite deploying in space. PEGASUS I exposed more than 2.300 sq. ft. of instrumented surface, with thicknesses varying up to 16/1000 in. As meteoroid particles collided with the surface of the panels, they would be registered electronically and reported to earth. Exposure of the large panel area over a long period would give designers of manned and unmanned spacecraft a good sample of meteoroid data. pegasus I would be visible from the earth without the aid of telescope on clear nights. (NASA Release 65-38; Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 1, 5; ap, Houston Chron., 2/16/65; Clark, NYT, 2/17/65; ap, Benedict. Wash. Post, 2/17/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/17/65; Sehlstedt. Balt. Sun, 2/17/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 133-134) February 16: On the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) commented upon the successful Saturn I launch: “ . . . this morning the United States took another giant stride in the exploration of space. At 9:37 a.m. a Saturn rocket . . . with its 1,500,000 pounds of thrust, lifted off the launch pad at Cape Kennedy, Fla., on a mission to place in orbit around the earth the Pegasus satellite. “This was the eighth launch of the Saturn rocket out of eight attempts, a truly outstanding scientific and engineering accomplishment of the men of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and of the many contractors who worked so long and hard to make this event a success. “I may say that the gratifying success of the Saturn booster has been matched in other programs as well. “I need only point to the Tiros weather satellite. “Nine have been launched out of nine attempts. “I think we have every right to be proud of our space team on this day of outstanding achievement.” (NASA LAR iv/30-32; CR, 2/16/65, 2630)
NASA had awarded a $3,135,977 contract modification to the Boeing Co. for preparatory work leading to dynamic testing of the Saturn V moon rocket at NASA msfc. Boeing would perform engineering services for the Saturn V dynamic testing program and would supply instrumentation equipment for the test stand, (msfc Release 65-94)
Results o{ a recent Gallup Poll indicated that 47% of the American public believed that the United States was ahead of Russia in the “space race.” A 1961 poll had shown that most Americans viewed the space race as an even contest. Asked if they, themselves, would like to go to the moon, 87% of the people approached said no. (Wash. Post, 7/23/65, A2)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Robert Hotz, editorializing in Aviation Week and Space Technology, said that it could be a “dangerous mistake” to defer development of earth-orbital operational capabilities until financial and technical peak loads of Apollo had been passed:	“The Soviets obviously have chosen the earth-orbital approach to their lunar landing mission. Therefore, they necessarily must develop rather fully their hardware and operational techniques in this area as a vital prelude to their lunar landing attempts and not as a postlude, in the manner of current U.S. planning. They also have made little attempt to conceal their primary military interest in the development of manned spacecraft operations in the earth-orbital area. “Thus, it is entirely possible that unless U.S. policy is drastically changed soon, the Soviets may have an opportunity to achieve the technical surprise in space that they so narrowly missed in the race to an intercontinental ballistic missile.” (Av. Wk., 4/12/65, 21)
Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said at a press conference at the International Transport Exhibition in Munich that the Soviet Union planned to land a man on the moon in 1970. Komarov, in charge of the first spacecraft with a three-men crew, was awarded the Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card—a top international aviation decoration. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/16/65)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, remarked in an interview with Missile Space Daily: “I do not doubt that with good fortune, the trip [to the moon] will be made during this decade, which to me means during the 1960’s. Replying to a question about the future use of solid fuel rockets, Dr. Welsh said: “I certainly see no reason to' doubt that the use of solids will continue to increase. Without attempting to predict specific dates or missions, I believe large solid motor technology will be a very valuable element in our growing national space competence. . . .” On post-Apollo missions: “. . . Under present circumstances, it would seem that our program will include extended exploration of the moon after the first trip, provided conditions are found to be favorable to such exploration. Also, we should be expected to develop a growing capability in earth-orbiting space stations and make an increasing effort in planetary exploration. 1 do not rate these major objectives one against the other because I believe the national space program will in time include all three of the broad missions I have mentioned.” Dr. Welsh said that he hoped the U.S. would be able to “maintain space expenditures at a figure above 1 percent of our Gross National Product.” (M/S Daily, 7/26/65)
The six scientist-astronauts selected for the Apollo program were announced in the Nation’s press: Owen K. Garriott, 34, associate professor of physics, Stanford Univ.; Edward G. Gibson, 29, senior research scientist, Applied Research Labs., Aeronutronic Div., Philco Corp.; Duane E. Graveline, 34, flight surgeon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn), 33, staff flight surgeon, Air Wing, 4, Cecil Field Naval Air Sta., Pa.; Frank Curtis Michel, 31, assistant professor of space sciences, Rice Univ.; Harrison Schmitt, 29, astrogeologist, U.S. Geological Survey. They W'ere chosen from a group of 16 nominees submitted to NASA by the National Academy of Sciences. NAS had screened about 400 applications forwarded by NASA earlier this year. The six new scientist-astronauts were to have been announced officially by NASA June 29 but NASA officials confirmed the six named on June 28, the day after the press stories. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 6/27/65; upi, Wash. Post, 6/27/65)
Commenting on “race” between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. to be first on the moon, Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev said: “1 simply don’t understand such appeals. As far as I know, we have no intention of competing in this area.” Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kamanin said: “In a space research program, haste is out of place. Each space flight, especially with a cosmonaut aboard, must be the product of a sustained effort that may take months. Improvisation is impermissable in space research; we don’t believe in crash programming.” Cosmonaut Aleksey Lenov said: “I also think that all this talk of getting to the moon first is nonsense. What we must do is work toward that goal calmly and thoroughly and without any rush. I think that those who work that way will be first on the moon.” (Soviet Life, 9/65, 28-29)
A Saturn,/Apollo Applications Directorate had been established in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. The new directorate would plan and direct programs utilizing technology developed in Project Apollo. M/Gen. David M. Jones (usaf) would be Acting Director of Saturn/ Apollo Applications in addition to his duties as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Programs). Deputy Director would be John H. Disher, formerly Test Director in the Apollo Program Office. Melvyn Savage, who had served under Disher as Chief of Test Planning, would become Apollo Test Director, (nasa Release 65-265)
An editorial discussing space weapons appeared in the Washington Evening Star: “Secretary of State Rusk ... is on record as having warned that the ocean of space might support ‘huge nuclear-propel led dread-naughts armed with thermonuclear weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base. Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an enemy’ and there might be other equally' deadly spatial advances. The same opinion is held by highly placed military officers. “As General Ferguson of the Air Force put it a couple of years ago, in urging the swiftest possible development of an American ‘military patrol’ in space, no one even dimly foresaw the nuclear bomber when the airplane began to operate a half-century ago. “. . . if we ignore General Ferguson, we could lose everything. As a matter of prudence, our country should at least maintain a program of research and development designed to insure it against the danger of becoming second best in the military uses of space.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and DOD Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced NASA—dod agreement on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), released in conjunction with fy 1966 budget: . . Planning for the Defense manned orbiting laboratory program will also consider, in cooperation with NASA, broader objectives of scientific and general technological significance. “To determine the essential characteristics of the vehicle that will be required, the DOD will continue intensive studies and design of experiments and systems aimed at the primary military objectives. “Cooperative studies, by NASA and Defense, will identify and define scientific and general technological experiments which might be carried out, with NASA participation, in conjunction with the military program. “dod, with assistance from NASA, will compare configurations of Apollo which may be suitable for military experiments with the Gemini b-mol configuration to determine the complete system that can meet the primary military objectives in a more efficient, less costly, or more timely fashion. “On the basis of these studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with full-scale development by Defense of a manned orbiting laboratory system and what the specific developments and vehicle configurations are to be. The Defense budget includes $150 million in fy 1966 for the program. . . . “Depending upon the manned orbiting laboratory decision, upon the progress in the Gemini and Apollo programs, and upon the results of NASA studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with modifications to the Apollo system and the nature and timing of necessary specific developments. The NASA 1966 budget includes about $50 million for proceeding with design and pacing developments. . . (nasa Budget Briefing fy 1966)
NASA’s budget for fy 1967 received comment in Aviation Week and Space Technology: “nasa is nervously asking the White House for $5.76 billion for Fiscal 1967 and contends it must have at least $5.25 billion compared with the $5,176 billion Congress appropriated for this fiscal year. “The Apollo program to land a man on the moon appears—thanks to Russian competition—pretty safe from the budget cutters. But every other program is a potential target, including the $1.2 billion Voyager program to explore Mars and all kinds of proposals to exploit the Apollo hardware. . . . “The Johnson Administration has prepared a pat answer to complaints that its tight Fiscal 1967 budget will thwart new initiatives. With so much accomplished in this session of the 89th Congress, the argument goes, next year must be ‘a management year.’ ” {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 15)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), interviewed by a group of women correspondents, was critical of the Administration’s failure to “pinpoint” objectives beyond its 1970 goal to put a man on the moon. She said she found it “hard to believe” the Administration wasn’t thinking beyond the moon to Mars and Venus but that “it’s difficult to get the answers.” (Dean, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/65)
The problem of the moon’s origin should be solved when Surveyor spacecraft had sent samples of the lunar surface to earth, predicted Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, at a news conference during the meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Seattle. Absence of terrestrial matter in lunar soil would indicate that the moon originated elsewhere in the solar system, Urey said, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/65)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said at the annual meeting of the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia: “Beyond military and political advantages of getting to the moon are possibilities we cannot conceive.” The moon, he said could prove to be “the Rosetta stone of the universe. Its lifeless surface could give us the clue to the process of life.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/21/65)
NASA selected three firms to design the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (Alsep) under separate and concurrent $500,000, six-month, fixed-price contracts. The firms were Bendix Systems Div., Bendix Corp.; Space-General Corp.; and TRW Systems Group, Thomp-son-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc. Packages would contain scientific instruments to measure the moon’s structure and surface characteristics, atmosphere, heat flow, solar wind, radiation, and micrometeorite impacts. They would be carried to the moon on the initial Apollo spaceflights and placed on the surface by astronauts. Instruments would transmit data back to earth for six months to one year. (NASA Release 65-260)
It was announced that the special magnetic actuator which worked shutters on rangers vii, vni, and IX, that photographed the moon, and on all nine Tiros weather satellites would be granted a patent. The device moved the shutter at a constant velocity so that the exposure was uniform. It was invented by rca engineers Langdon H. Fulton and Thomas D. Tilton. (Jones, NYT, 3/7/65. 35)
Alfred Gessow, Chief of Fluid Physics Research, nasa, discussed before the Compressed Gas Association in New York City the problems of spacecraft deceleration and heating involved in return through the earth’s atmosphere. He explained why the blunt shape solved deceleration and much of the heat problem in returning Mercury spacecraft from orbit through the atmosphere to earth. Looking beyond the satellite return speed (Mercury and Gemini) and lunar return speed (Apollo), return from interplanetary flight poses the problem of much higher spacecraft speed (and thus heating). Research indicates “that the more pointed shape, although it doesn’t show up too well at the lower re-entry speeds, is better than the blunt nose at the higher speeds because the bow shock is weaker, thus producing lower radiant heating losses. Thus, in a very short time scale, but taking a big leap forward in the velocity-temperature scale, we find ourselves going into another phase of the blunt vs. pointed nose cycle. “. . . The switching between slender and blunt shapes is not new in the race for higher speeds at all times of history. Going through history, compact rocks were replaced by slender arrows; the concept of powder guns created round cannonballs; the rocket age produced slender forms again, which ironically, finally got blunt noses. It is interesting to see how long it took to make such changes empirically and how rapidly these variations have been made by following scientific principles. . . .” (Text)
