Graduate Research Center of the Southwest president Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner addressed msc employees. Outlining postlunar landing exploration, Dr. Berkner said: "The very broad strategic objectives for the exploration of the solar system are clearly outlined in the National Academy of Sciences Summer Study that was done last summer. . . . It is urgent and imperative that this study be adopted, or something like it, as our major basic strategy beyond the moon. The first job is to adopt a national strategy. This is not just a decision of NASA; it is a decision of the administration, of the Congress, of the American people. "And second it is urgent and imperative that this study be translated by joint actions of NASA, the National Academy of Sciences and American scientists into specific tactical plans for a specific program with dollars attached to it. For example, in my opinion, it makes little sense to undertake the first Martian landing without some precedent exploratory steps. We must first orbit and map the planet and ascertain where a landing would be profitable. "To do the planetary exploration job effectively, we now need a tactical program of specific flights on specific dates with the instru-. mentation necessary to plan to accomplish those tasks. I remind you that what we are doing today was planned in 1961. And yet, when we get to our planetary program in the 1970’s, we don’t have corresponding specific plans.” He reemphasized the urgency by saying: "If we are to achieve in the planetary exploration of the future in an intelligent way, in light of the objectives of the Space Act, the time has come to get our scientists started now. Your vehicle program is already ahead of us.” Dr. Berkner said that the long-range program should meet certain specifications: "(1) step-by-step advancement of experiments in the proper order; (2) use of the right vehicles to carry out the experiments; (3) effective use of Saturn capabilities, from unmanned missions to the ultimate manned landing on Mars and perhaps Venus, and (4) proper phasing-in of smaller vehicles with the larger ones, and reasonable time/cost programming.” (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 3)
Little Joe II launch vehicle boosted a five-ton unmanned Apollo spacecraft to 15-mi. altitude from wsmr in test of ability of Launch Escape System (Les) to rescue the spacecraft from an abort at medium altitude. Planned pitch-up maneuver was executed and satisfactory launch escape vehicle performance demonstrated; successful canard operation caused command module to stabilize in proper attitude. After jettison of the Les, the hard part of the boost protective cover, and the forward heat shield, command module made safe descent on its three main parachutes. Test, conducted at maximum-Q conditions, was slightly marred by telemetry failure, (nasa Release 65-348; upi, NYT, 1/21/66,10; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/21/66)
Prominent details of the moon’s far side photographed by zond ill in July 1965 had been named by Soviet astronomers for great scientists, Tass reported. Among them were the Korolev thalassoid and the craters of Confucius, Spinoza, Mendel, Zhukovskiy, and Galois. Information relayed by zond ill would be included in second part of Atlas of the Other Side of the Moon, currently under preparation. First part was published in October 1960. Prof. Yuri Lipski, in charge of preparing the atlas, said one of the photos taken by lunar orbiter i that had been "kindly supplied by American researchers,” had revealed approximate ^ overlap of details in photo taken by zond hi while remainder of photo coincided in part with photos taken by Luna hi. (Tass, 9/27/66)
Johnson Administration could not increase NASA’s FY 1968 budget because of Vietnam war, but it could make a pobcy decision on a post-Apollo program, wrote Robert Hotz, in Aviation Week. "What it will take to get this effort going is some political courage to restate the necessity of proceeding beyond Apollo, a decision to chart a specific course from the available alternatives and some modest Fiscal 1968 funding to retain the technical resources that will be required for the future—particularly engineering and scientific manpower. This combination of activity has already been deferred one year beyond its critical moment by the Johnson Administration. Delay for another fiscal year could impose a braking effect from which eventual acceleration would be much more costly and much less effective.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 10/10/66, 21)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xi spacecraft, which entered lunar orbit Aug. 27, stopped transmitting at 2:30 gmt Oct. 1 when its batteries were exhausted, Tass reported. Spacecraft had completed 277 orbits around moon and had sent 137 transmissions of scientific information and trajectory data to monitoring stations on earth. Results would be published later. (Tass, 10/4/66; Tass, Pravda, 10/5/66, 1, uss-t Trans.)
NASA’s first Saturn IB booster launches unmanned Apollo spacecraft down the Eastern Test Range.
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) ascent engine test completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
L/C Vladimir Komarov, pilot-cosmonaut on U.S.S.R. voskhod I space flight Oct. 12-13, 1964, told second Japan-U.S.S.R. youth festival at Lake Yamanaka, Yamanashi Prefecture, Japan, that U.S.S.R. soon would softland an unmanned spacecraft on moon and return it to earth, then make similar flight with dog. Commenting on U.S. rendezvous and docking achievements, Komarov said: "The United States experiment was a very interesting one. But I do not believe that in the series of plans to conquer space the Soviet Union is behind the United States.” (Tass, 7/14/66; SBD, 7/25/66, 122)
nasa selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $17-million costplusincentive-fee contract to manufacture four Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (Alsep). The 170-lb. packages containing scientific instruments to measure lunar surface characteristics and atmosphere would be carried to moon in Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) on initial Apollo landing missions and would transmit data back to earth for six months to one year after crew’s departure from lunar surface. Contract would be managed by msc. (nasa Release 66-63)
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Univ. of Chicago astrophysicist, was one of 11 scientists named by President Johnson to receive 1966 National Medal of Science. (Pres. Doc., 1/2/67, 1832-3) Landing sequence began when spacecraft was oriented vertically to the moon. At 43-mi. (69-km.) altitude, radar system aimed at lunar surface and turned on retrorocket, and shock-absorbing system was prepared. Less than one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to 18 mph, instrument capsule was ejected and softlanded. Four minutes later, its petal-like covering opened, its antenna opened, and radio transmissions began. 18 hrs. after touchdown, luna xiii began photographing a panorama of the moon’s surface. Pictures showed barren, heavily pitted landscape littered with stones ranging upward in size from one inch, which Soviet scientists concluded had resulted from either volcanic eruptions or impacting meteoroids. There was no evidence of a thick layer of dust. In addition to photographic equipment, spacecraft also carried two mechanical manipulators to test firmness and density of lunar soil: (1) a rod which was driven into surface with specific force; and (2) a meter which measured soil’s resistance to radiation. Analysis of data indicated that lunar surface could bear manned spacecraft and that soil from 8- to 12-in. depth was similar to medium-density terrestrial soil. Also onboard were a dynograph which tested firmness of lunar surface by recording duration and force of impact impulse, and a radiation meter which revealed that moon’s surface reflected about 25 per cent of electrically-charged particles which struck it. Tass commented on LUNA xm’s successful mission: "There is no doubt now that it is these cosmic stations that can supply the information permitting a new approach to solve such important problems of science as the origin of the solar system, the origin and development of life on other planets, and the internal structure of celestial bodies.” (NYT, 12/25/66, 1, 40; 12/26/66, 19; 12/31/66, 6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/66, A3; 12/27/66, A4; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, Al; 12/31/66, 1,	7)	.	.	.	.	. .	.
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at NASA FY 1967 budget briefing that the "extremely stringent budget” ($5,012 billion) approved by President Johnson and the bob was the result of pressing needs of the Vietnam war and the Great Society. Major loser in the nasa budget reduction was the Apollo Applications (Aa) program: "The option to go ahead or not [on the Aa program] will be made in 1968 [budget],” he said. Although nasa had wanted $5.58 billion to carry out its FY 1967 program, Seamans said, the $5,012 billion would make it possible to continue "a good space program” with most of the projects intact. Yet, nasa did "not have the funds we would like to see” for Apollo. He said the approved FY 1967 Apollo budget of $2,974 billion (compared to $2,967 billion in FY 1966) would give the U.S. "a chance of lunar landing in this decade,” but there were no funds "for major difficulties that might occur.” (Transcript)
Astronaut Frank Borman, a 1950 graduate of West Point, gave Academy cadets a souvenir from space—the flag of the cadet company he had commanded—carried on his Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini vii mission, (upi, NYT, 6/2/66, 4) Landing sequence began 2,000 mi. above moon when, traveling at 6,000	mph, surveyor i shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar ejected at 52-mi. altitude, main retrorocket burned until 37,000-ft. altitude, slowing craft to 400 mph. After retrorocket burnout, smaller guidance rockets ignited, slowing surveyor i to 3Yi mph at 14-ft. altitude. Craft then free-fell to lunar surface at 8 mph. Landing—so precise that spacecraft’s three footpads touched lunar surface within 19 millisec. of each other—confirmed that lunar surface could support Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and proved concept of automatically decelerating a spacecraft from 6,000-mph speed to touchdown speed of 3H mph. Photos transmitted by surveyor i before its camera was secured after sunset of first lunar day (June 14) revealed nearly level lunar surface littered with rock fragments [see During June]. "Rubble scattered over the surface is probably a fairly general characteristic all over the moon,” NASA Surveyor Project Scientist Dr. Leonard Jaffe told jpl press conference. Pictures taken June 4 during seven two-second firings of nitrogen gas from spacecraft’s attitude control jets showed no disturbance of the lunar surface. In addition to wide- and narrow-angle lurain photographs, surveyor i obtained pictures of the stars Sirius and Canopus to determine spacecraft’s exact location. Halting communication with surveyor i June 14 to allow spacecraft to conserve battery energy throughout lunar night (June 14-29), JPL announced: "It is very difficult to predict if Surveyor’s batteries will withstand the —260°F cold. If Surveyor survives, the engineers estimate it will be several days after sunrise before the batteries thaw out” [see June 28-29]. Considerably more complex than Soviet luna IX which softlanded on the moon Feb. 3, surveyor i apparatus remained a closed intact system up until touchdown. A tripod-legged arrangement of cameras, antennas, and other equipment which used solar cells to convert sun’s energy into electric power for operation on lunar surface, surveyor i June- 2-14; surveyor i returned this photograph of its footpad resting on the surface of the moou. had a landing system which used radars, a computer, and four rocket engines to adjust its own speed, attitude, and flight path, luna ix was crash-proof, uncontrolled photographic instrument package jettisoned by its carrier rocket immediately before impact, which free-fell under pull of lunar gravity. It had transmitted only 12 photos. The near-flawless performance of SURVEYOR i, an engineering model, far exceeded jfl officials’ expectations. "This, in my opinion, puts the Surveyor program ahead a year,” Robert F. Garbarini, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications for Engineering, told JPL press conference. "We thought it would take three or four flights to get the craft operational.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-127; JPL Transcript; Spivak, WSJ, 6/3/66, 2; WSJ, 6/15/66, 1; Shreveport Times, 6/3/66, 12A; Clark, NYT, 6/3/66, 1, 22; 6/4/66, 12; 6/5/66, 1; 6/6/66, 40M; AP, NYT, 17; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/66, C3; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/6/66, A9; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/15/66, A6; Berman, Wash. Post, 6/5/66, A14; AP, Wash. Post, 6/15/66, A10)
Surveyor soft-landing retrorocket system was successfully tested by Hughes Aircraft Co. and JPL at Holloman afb. After test vehicle was released from balloon at 1,450-ft. altitude, three throttlable liquid engines operated by terminal descent guidance system’s radar and autopilot control slowed vehicle to simulated landing 500 ft. above ground, partially demonstrating performance required to softland on the moon. Three engines were then shut down and parachute system deployed to lower vehicle to ground. In actual mission, Surveyor would cut off its engines 13 ft. above moon’s surface and free-fall remainder of distance to avoid unsettling lunar dust with rocket engines’ exhaust. Test was second successful operation of the three liquid-fueled engines under radar control, (nasa Release 66-24; Marshall Star, 2/9/66, 9)
Recent Soviet space accomplishments indicated that a manned space spectacular was imminent, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He noted luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon Feb. 3, luna x’s launch into lunar orbit March 31, and the 22-day flight of two dogs in cosmos cx Feb. 22-March 16. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/14/66, A12)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have reached basic agreement on text of treaty for free and peaceful exploration of moon and outer space. Text would be presented within next two or three weeks for approval of U.N. General Assembly. U.S. was said to have agreed that all countries —not just U.N. members—should be allowed to sign treaty. Communist China, East Germany, North Vietnam, and North Korea would then be free to adhere to it if they chose. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 78)
Minneapolis Tribune polled 600 Minnesotans on whether U.S. or U.S.S.R. led in space exploration. 79% believed U.S. was ahead; 11% gave lead to U.S.S.R. June 1965 poll had indicated that 59% thought U.S. led, while 24% considered U.S.S.R. in front. Increased confidence in U.S. position was attributed to success of Gemini vii-vi rendezvous Dec. 15, 1965. 68% thought men could reach the moon and return safely, 56% believed U.S. would be first to do it, and 25% considered trip impossible. (Minn. Trib., 1/30/66)
Two space cooperation agreements were confirmed by Spanish Foreign Minister Fernando Castiella and Secretary of State Dean Rusk in a State Dept, ceremony attended by NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr. First agreement provided that NASA and Spain’s Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (inta) would share in the operation of nasa space tracking and data acquisition station near Madrid which maintains radio contact with unmanned lunar and interplanetary probes and would support manned Apollo mission. Effective from May 1, 1966, to Jan. 28, 1974, and in accordance with government-to-government agreement between Spain and U.S. of Jan. 29, 1964, contract provided that Spanish engineers and technicians would be trained and assigned to tracking, telemetry, communications, and support. Some of inta’s key personnel had already begun special training at Deep Space Facilities, Goldstone, Calif. Second agreement, part of a continuing Spanish-U.S. program of cooperation in space investigation, provided for joint project to launch four sounding rockets in Spain to study winds and temperatures at high altitudes. Agreement was in form of a memorandum of understanding between inta and NASA: inta would establish sounding rocket range, construct grenade-type payloads, provide two Nike-booster rockets, conduct launchings, and analyze and publish the data; NASA would lend range tracking and telemetry equipment and a launcher, provide two Nike-booster rockets, provide prototype payload, and train Spanish personnel as needed. Both agencies would bear the cost of discharging their respective responsibilities. Results of the experiments would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-83)
NASA’s lunar ORBITER I (Lunar Orbiter A) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in first U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Aug. 14-31]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 28-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft into 90-hr. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, lunar orbiter i deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s startracker failed to lock on Canopus and flight engineers were forced to lock it on the moon—-a weaker navigational reference point. Assistant Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC was "still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted it might be more difficult to obtain desired precision and exact positions required for optimum photos of lunar surface. At approximately 00:28 GMT Aug. 11 planned midcourse maneuver was successfully executed, and JPL scientists predicted spacecraft would miss original aiming point by only 50 mi. Primary objectives of NASA’s lunar orbiter i mission, first in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) obtain high-resolution photos of various types of lunar surface to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft and improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 3,000mi. strip along moon’s equator, concentrating on nine potential landing areas. Spacecraft would also attempt to photograph surveyor i landing sites; provide precision trajectory information; and monitor meteoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Release 66-195; Wilford, NYT, 8/8/66, 3; 8/11/66, 1, 12; 8/12/66, 51; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/11/66, Al; 8/12/66, Al; 8/13/66, Al; 8/14/66, Al, A6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/11/66, A3)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, incoming president of American Society for Public Administration (aspa), discussed responsibilities of administering a "Great Society” at aspa conference in Washington, D.C. Webb said that ". . . with the seething mass of humanity all around the world, not many of them very happy today, we have a strong requirement for effective administration, precision in the use of public power, for prediction, for planned use of limited resources. . . . "It seems to me that the public administrator in this period . . . must be a bigger, broader person than has been required in the past because the forces he must work with are so much larger, and yet so much more complex. . . . Somehow he must command the respect and following that will convert criticism from destruction of ideas to clarification and perfection of those ideas. ... I believe his performance will be measured ... by the scope and sweep of his vision and adjustment to some forces that will be beyond his ability to prediot or control; also his ability to ride the crest of the wave, that wave of the incoming tide of tomorrow that is now bringing in the fruits of a vital and vigorous society.” (Text) April 16: Preliminary results of flight of U.S.S.R.’s luna x, placed in circum-lunar orbit April 3 to become moon’s first artificial satellite, were announced at Moscow press conference. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Mstislav Keldysh said that considerably less braking power had been required to put a spacecraft in orbit around the moon than had been required in a soft landing. This had made it possible to increase the payload in luna x and to equip it with instruments for important studies of the moon and the space surrounding it. Academician Aleksandr Vinogradov, geochemist, said that study of radioactivity of rocks on the lunar surface had indicated the overall intensity of gamma radiation on the lurain was comparable to the intensity of gamma radiation emitted by terrestrial granites [see April 13]. However, part of it was not due to natural radioactivity but to interaction of cosmic rays and lunar matter. Such radiation was absent in terrestrial rocks because of the shielding effect of the earth’s atmosphere. Lunar rocks were comparable in natural radioactivity to basalt rocks on earth, indicating that "the processes of the formation of the core of the planets of the earth group apparently have the same mechanism.” Prof. Naum Grigorov said readings of luna x’s magnetometer indicated presence near the moon of a weak, homogenous, and regular magnetic field. Streams of ions of small energies were registered. Analysis of materials transmitted by luna x showed the intensity of particles in the moon’s radiation belt was 100,000 times less than in the earth’s radiation belts. Prof. Alexandr Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, said existence of an artificial moon satellite was important not only for physical research, but also for determining more exactly the mass and shape of the moon—information vital for building an exact theory of the motion of the moon and for study of the unevenness of the earth’s rotation. Replying to questions, Academician Keldysh said luna x did not carry photocameras but was intended for physical study of near-lunar space and the moon itself—its nature, ionosphere, radiations, and fields. Satellite would orbit the moon for "a few years.” Duration could not be predicted since parameters of the moon’s gravitational field were not known. Keldysh said that since assembly of large spacecraft in orbit was an important step toward the conquest of outer space, cosmonauts were preparing for the solution of this task. Referring to the problem of manned flights to the moon, he stressed that the most difficult task to be solved was return of the spacecraft into earth’s atmosphere. Keldysh said dogs Veterok’s and Ugolyek’s passages through radiation belts in cosmos cx had had no apparently serious effect on them but that prolonged observations were necessary. (Tass, 4/18/66)
"Love as an emotion will play a very important role in the future in the populating of outer space,” Soviet scientist Igor Zabelin wrote in Moskva. "In the future when mankind will fulfill its mission of populating outer space, men and women will be sent in spacecraft somewhere for many years.” Noting that "when a couple lives together for five to seven years, they may get sick of each other and very often there is a divorce,” Zabelin warned that such coolness could cause grave problems in outer space, (tipr, Wash. Post, 12/4/66, M7) During 1966: In 1966, NASA attempted 36 major launches with 34 successes. Of 29 NASA missions, 22 were successes, dod orbited 70 payloads in 43 launches. U.S.S.R. launched 43 payloads and France, one. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by surveyor I and lunar orbiters i and n, the soft-landing on the moon by surveyor I, and the five two-man Gemini space flights, surveyor I transmitted more than 10,000 photographs of the moon; the two lunar orbiters returned a total of 635 lunar photographs. Engineering data from these spacecraft indicated Apollo Lunar Module (Lm) could land and operate safely on the lunar surface. In Project Gemini, NASA conducted five two-man space flights, successfully concluding the project [see Nov. 15] and bringing U.S. manhours in space to 1,993 hrs. 34 min. (compared to 507 hrs. 16 min. for U.S.S.R.). Major ground and flight tests in Project Apollo accelerated preparatory to 1st three-man Apollo/Saturn spaceflight, planned for early 1967. Three Uprated Saturn I’s were launched; Saturn V stages for the 1st flight model passed their final ground test firings. Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueled booster completed its development testing, demonstrating restart capability in space. Applications satellites launched were nimbus ii meteorological satellite, three essa satellites inaugurating essa’s operational meteorological satellite system, and Intelsat ii-a communications satellite for Com-SatCorp. The first Applications Technology Satellite, ATS I, was launched into synchronous orbit. Scientific achievements included orbiting of OGO hi, pageos I, explorers xxxii and xxxiii satellites, and pioneer vii interplanetary spacecraft. More than 300 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched. A total of 20 flights of the X-15 research aircraft were conducted; X-15 No. 2 piloted by Maj. William J.	Knight set a new record speed of 4,233 mph (mach 6.33). nasa-usaf flight research investigating sonic booms got underway in six flights with XB-70 aircraft; research for the U.S. supersonic transport program continued. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle made 14 unpowered flights, and HL-10 lifting body made its first flight. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was static test firing of the 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 3.5 million lbs. of thrust. Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted. One, in 110 min. of power operation, demonstrated stability and controllability of the hot-bleed cycle nuclear rocket engine. The other involved first successful full-power operation and a restart operation, ending the program with an accumulation of more than 105 min. of reactor operation at full or near-full power. usaf flight tested its powerful Titan III booster and used it to orbit the first seven Idcsp satellites of an eventual worldwide military comsat system. Of the 43 Soviet payloads, 34 were Cosmos satellites and five, Luna spacecraft. Notable among these were cosmos cx, orbiting two dogs for prolonged period; cosmos cxxii, apparently first Soviet weather satellite; luna ix, achieving first soft-landing on the moon; and luna x, achieving first orbit of the moon. Also orbited were two molniya i com-sats and the 12-ton proton hi unmanned spacecraft used for cosmic-ray research; Yantar I ion-engine payload was flown in suborbital spaceflight test. France orbited her first instrumented scientific satellite, diapason i, the second satellite built and launched by France, (nasa Release 66-319; Major NASA Launches; nasc; Tass; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim) During 1966: International space events were highlighted by the U.N.’s agreement on a space treaty to govern "activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies.” The draft treaty—suggested by President Johnson May 7—was negotiatedby the Legal Subcommittee of theU.N. Committee onthePeace-ful Uses of Outer Space. On December 19 the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution endorsing the treaty, subject to ratification by five nations including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. By the end of 1966, 72 countries had cooperated with the U.S. in space research activities. Six countries joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), bringing the total membership to 54. France and U.S.S.R. entered into agreement on cooperative space research, including experiments in astronomy and communications. (U.S. Aeron, & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim)
Discussing the urgency of nasa’s deciding "what to do in space after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,” William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is hard to forget a hint, dropped ... by a leading Russian space official several years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline—if it is a deadline—is now less than 20 months away. "But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the U.S. with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing an automobile—what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
luna xii was launched by U.S.S.R. on trajectory toward the moon "to study the systems of the artificial satellite and near lunar space,” Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally, and spacecraft was traveling close to planned trajectory. (Tass, 10/23/66)
Urgency of NASA decision on post-Apollo program was discussed by Karl Abraham in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. He noted Saturn V’s potential for solar system exploration and many scientists’ fear of overcommitment to investigation of the moon. Among other factors involved, Abraham said, NASA "must consider how particular programs will affect its farflung field centers and their specialized work . .. some are so highly specialized that a sharp change of direction in rocketry or spacecraft and satellite objectives would tear them apart unless sufficient advance time were allowed for gradual changeovers to the new missions.” (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/17/66; CR, 2/10/66, A704)
T-38 aircraft of M/G Irving H. Branch (usaf), Commander of Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, crashed over Puget Sound when attempting an instrumented approach to Boeing Field, Seattle, during rainy weather. Branch was enroute from Edwards afb; his body was later recovered from Puget Sound by divers. (Seattle Times, 1/6/66, 31) During week of January 3: Representatives of U.S. Dept, of Agriculture’s Plant Quarantine Div. met with NASA’s Planetary Quarantine Committee to discuss handling and disposal of soil and rock samples brought to earth from the moon or other planets. A Dept, of Agriculture spokesman warned that without precautions, insects and microorganisms from outer space could conceivably be brought to earth on returning spacecraft and multiply unchecked in an environment that would not control them. (NYT, 1/9/66, 58)
ComSatCorp asked fcc for authority to build $5-million earth station near Moorefield, W.Va., to supplement ComSatCorp-operated facility at Andover, Me. Station would be in operation by late 1967, handling all types of commercial communications and supporting two Atlantic satellites, early bird i, and the proposed Apollo system. (ComSatCorp Release)
NASA was considering landing unmanned Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) equipped with an Apollo-type lunar television camera on the moon before the first manned mission, Aviation Week reported. Photographs from the camera, which would be mounted externally and coupled with a scanning device to permit broad coverage, would provide mission planners with information on lunar surface characteristics. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 36)
Commenting on President Johnson’s proposed U.N. treaty banning sovereignty claims on the moon, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) told the House: "The President has taken a very progressive and forward step ... in trying to establish a barrier against the use of the moon or outer space as a place of contest for the nations of the world. He has asked that these areas be internationalized and we follow in space exploration that principle which has been established already with respect to the use of nuclear weapons. "This is a great step forward by the President, and we in the House should appreciate it, and commend him for it.” (CR, 5/9/66)
Senate unanimously passed by voice vote the NASA FY 1967 authorization bill of $5,008,000,000—-$121,135,850 more than the sum voted by the House but $4 million less than President Johnson had requested. In speech on Senate floor during passage of bill, Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) said that if the U.S. failed to continue development of solid propellants, it would fail in the one thing it "should be doing to catch up with the Soviet Union in the field of space effort.” Senate bill included only the $3.5 million requested by the Administration for one additional firing of a half-length 260-in. solid rocket motor. In other debate, Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.) said he felt that national priorities were "substantially out of order when the Senate, in the course of 5 or 10 minutes, passes a $5 billion authorization bill to send a man to the moon,” and that he hoped the space effort could be put on an international cooperation and not a competitive basis. Clark was joined in his remarks against the bill by Sen. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.), who said such action was "typical, today, of any bill relating either to outer space or the military ... in my view, it is an outrageous distortion of priorities.” (CR, 5/24/66, 10715-20)
NASA selected Dynatronics, Inc., to provide 18 additional pulse code modulated (Pcm) telemetry decommutator systems for Project Apollo communications under $2.3-million fixed-price contract. Systems would receive, identify, sort, and prepare "real time” and "onboard stored” data. (NASA Release 66-114)
The Washington Post commented on criticism of NASA spending: "What an uproar there was in 1957 when Sputnik showed us we were second in space! The Eisenhower Administration was roundly condemned. Congressmen and Senators clamored for a stepped-up space program and promised all the money needed. President Kennedy, in his 1960 campaign . . . said repeatedly: 'I am not satisfied to be second in space.’ "Well, we are no longer second in space. And the critics of the Johnson Administration are now not satisfied to be first in space—■ unless it can be done cheap. As a result of the space program we are not only going to be first on the moon and first in space. We are going to be first in a thousand fields of science, education, and industry. "This country does not have to choose between a space program that will keep it in first place and a poverty program that will keep it first ... in national exertion for the disadvantaged. It can be and ought to be first in both.” (Wash. Post, 12/2/66, A16)
nasa modified existing cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts with North American Aviation, Inc., and ibm Corp. for Apollo program services with new agreements totaling $252.6 million: under $145.6 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract extended through December 1968, naa would provide 52 additional J-2 engines for launch vehicles as well as support services; ibm would receive $107 million under multiple-incentive contract, extended through February 1970, for design, development, implementation, maintenance, and operation of msc’s Real Time Computer Complex (rtcc). (nasa Release 66-205; msfc Release 66-176)
During White House meeting with President Johnson, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed current status of national space program and showed President two previously unreleased color photographs—one of southern Texas, the other of Baja California— taken from 180-mi. altitude during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Following meeting, Webb announced that Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong would leave Oct. 7 for three-week tour of 10 Latin American nations: Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/66, A4)
naa’s Rocketdyne Div. reported single J-2 rocket engine had operated continuously for 635.9 sec.—more than two minutes longer than burn time required for an Apollo lunar launch. Test firing was one of a series of 104 during which engine had accumulated a total of 12,120 sec.— more than three times engine’s specified operating life. {Tech. Wk., 7/4/66, 4)
U.S.S.R. launched 3,608-lb. luna xi space station toward moon for "further testing of systems of an artificial moon sputnik and scientific explorations of near lunar space.” Preliminary data indicated that spacecraft was traveling close to calculated trajectory and equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 8/24/66)
Compania Telefonica Nacionale de Espana (ctne)—the Spanish national telephone company under nasa contract—awarded ITT contract to establish a ground station terminal complex on Grand Canary Island to support communications for U.S. Apollo mission. Stations, equipped with 42-ft. parabolic antenna reflectors, super-cooled low-noise amplifiers, and 10-kw transmitters, would furnish multichannel telephone and telegraph service, (itt Release)
Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott received Exceptional Service Medals from NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in ceremonies at msc. Armstrong received a quality step increase in his Civil Service pay, and Major Scott (usaf), promotion to lieutenant colonel by President Johnson. At a televised msc news conference, Armstrong said he and Scott developed some "anxiety” but that they never for a moment thought they could not return the spacecraft tc earth. Both Scott and msc Director Robert R. Gilruth said that if the trouble had occurred over a ground tracking station, mission might have been salvaged. Malfunction would have been localized immediately and the information relayed to the astronauts. As it was, they had had no idea what was wrong or even whether the trouble was with the gatv/gemini viii or the spacecraft alone. (Waldron, NYT, 3/27/66, 64L; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/21/66, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/27/66, Al)
Proposed further reduction in NASA FY 1967 appropriation because of Vietnam war would amount to "national disaster,” Ira C. Eaker wrote in San Antonio Express: "Such desertion of our present space program would give the Soviets an advantage they are now striving mightily to achieve. The U.S.S.R. is now spending about twice what the U.S. is spending for space research.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 10/24/66) October 25: Propellant tank rupture occurred on Apollo spacecraft 017 service module during proof pressure test at 240 psi conducted by naa at Downey, Calif.; inflight operating pressure would be 180 psi. No test personnel were injured. NASA had established board of inquiry to investigate, (nasa Release 66-285; naa s&id Skywriter, 10/28/66, 4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/66, D18)
Analysis of NASA lunah orbiteh i’s orbit led to assumption that moon is homogeneous, not layered, Dr. C. L. Goudas of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories said in an interview with Walter Sullivan of the New York Times. He said its shape—-flattened at the poles with several bulges at the equator and slightly pear-like—was not "dominated by a 'frozen tide.’ ” Gamma ray recordings by U.S.S.R.’s luna x spacecraft indicated similar conclusion; lunar surface lacked emissions typical of granites, which are associated with layering. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/27/66, E7)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. introduced their draft space law treaties at opening session of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space’s Legal Subcommittee, meeting in Geneva to discuss peaceful cooperation in exploring the moon and other celestial bodies. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told Subcommittee that although drafts were different in scope, they could be reconciled if there were good will and common purpose to reach agreement. Soviet representative Platon Morozov charged U.S. should not speak of peace in outer space while continuing its "shameful aggressive war on the peaceful people of Vietnam.” (Reuters, NYT, 7/12/66; Wash. Post, 7/13/66, A23)
U.S. would land a man on the moon before 1970 and before the Russians, predicted Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., at a news conference held with Astronaut Frank Borman in Sydney, Australia. Schirra said U.S. space program had completed three basic requirements for a manned lunar landing: 14-day spaceflight, ability to rendezvous in space, and controlled reentry into earth’s atmosphere. Astronauts Schirra and Borman were visiting Australia on their eight-nation good-will tour of Asia. (Reuters, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
NASA announced schedule changes in manned Apollo flights because of launch vehicle and spacecraft development problems: second manned flight of an Apollo spacecraft (AS-205), scheduled for spring 1967, was postponed and no new date set; AS-205 prime crew Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham became backup crew for AS-204 mission—first manned Apollo flight—scheduled for first quarter of 1967. (nasa Release 66-295)
Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint exploration of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this population would be hungry: "The oceans represent the last great source for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water to meet all the future needs of man.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66, C12) NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), in report on "Management Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: "There is no single approach to program management that will guarantee success. The development of and experience with various management systems, techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed extensively to a more scientific approach. The 'art’ element remains, however. The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces management to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it deserves and requires the personal support of the program director through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and acceptance at the grass roots level. . . (Text) DeMarquis D. Wyatt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming, said that NASA’s cost model had "significantly facilitated management decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an overnight computational capability of great capacity. The computer program is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 different hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an unlimited number of production fines within each plant. It can . . . summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can subdivide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or users.. . .” (Text) . Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA omsf, outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S. national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including earth-orbital "Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys, and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: "At the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program includes subsystem developments for long duration manned flights. . . . This provides a logical growth pattern toward manned planetary travel with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to 1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $4.2-million, fixed-price contract to provide six computer complexes to support Apollo command-module and lunar-module simulators at msc and ksc by March 1967. (nasa Release 66-254)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-203 mission was successfully launched from Complex 37 down etr to obtain flight information on 2nd stage (S-IVB) and instrument unit (Iu), which reflected Saturn V configuration as nearly as possible. Two-stage Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) launch vehicle boosted unmanned payload composed of S-IVB stage, Iu, and nose cone into 117-mi.-altitude circular orbit (88.21-min. period, 31.94° inclination). S-IVB engine burned once in earth’s atmosphere and was shut down. Engine’s capability to restart after coast, as would be necessary during the Apollo mission, was demonstrated. No reignition was planned on this mission. Photos of liquid hydrogen fuel behavior were transmitted to four ground stations by one operable TV camera; attempts to repair malfunctioning second camera before launch had failed. During fourth orbit, while performing pressure differential test of S-IVB stage common bulkhead, internal pressure in the stage built up "well in excess of design values,” and the stage fragmented. Initial evaluation of flight data indicated that all mission objectives were attained. Success of mission—second of three preliminary missions preceding first manned Apollo flight—was critical in meeting lunar exploration timetable. 58,500-lb. S-IVB, heaviest satellite ever orbited by the U.S., was developed by msfc and launched by ksc under direction of NASA Hq. omsf. (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-157; Wilford, NYT, 7/6/66, 1; upi, Wash. Post, 7/7/66)
House passed NASA authorization bill for FY 1967 (H.R. 14324) totaling $4,986,864,150 as follows: $4,248,235,000 for research and development; $94,419,000 for construction of facilities; and $644,210,150 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5,012 billion. During debate preceding bill’s passage, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) offered amendments, subsequently rejected, to eliminate $41.9-million funding for Apollo Applications program and $9.1-million funding for construction of lunar sample receiving laboratory at msc; to reduce advanced missions by $5 million; and to cancel $10 million of prior authorizations for Facility Planning and Design. Rep. Fulton also offered, but later withdrew, an amendment to establish an Inspector General’s Office in NASA. Commenting on NASA’s $5,012 billion request for FY 1967, Rep. Fulton said: "[It] generally represents a tight program in terms of the allocation of resources to the programs that have been regularly approved by Congress as parts of the Nation’s effort in aeronautics and space. "At a level under $4.9 billion, I do not believe nasa can restructure its Apollo program moon landing in a form that would not cast the most serious doubt as to its ability to meet the objective of the manned lunar landing within this decade. "At $4.8 billion the moon landing objective could not be met. Below this level of the budget, it would become clear that the Nation had abandoned the concept of developing a well-rounded total space capability directed toward achieving space preeminence. . . .” Rep. John Wydler (R-N.Y.), proposing an amendment to earmark $20 million of the total h&d funds for development work on the problem of aircraft noise, suggested: ". . . it is incumbent upon us to bring this [space] program closer to the people and show them some way in which it can benefit them. We often hear there is going to be a fallout as a result of this program—some kind of fallout that will affect the civilian population beneficially. Here is an opportunity to give them some fallout directly that will be of benefit to them. . . .” Rep. Wydler’s amendment was defeated. (CR, 5/3/66, 9189-9223)
A space rescue service, "preferably under cooperative auspices of the United States and the Soviet Union,” was urged in a New York Times editorial: "Its function would be to send space craft, on very short notice, to aid a space vessel marooned in orbit and incapable of returning to earth under its own power. In some cases the need might be for additional rocket fuel or replacement parts; in others the primary function might be to save lives by taking aboard the crew of a disabled capsule. . . with relatively little development, tow-trucks of the cosmos may be a regular part of the safety arrangements for each new step on the road to the moon.” (NYT, 3/21/66, 30M)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
George A. Lemke, Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, died at age 54. A veteran of more than 26 years in aircraft and space industry, Mr. Lemke had formerly been NASA Apollo Project Resident Manager at North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Hq. Bull.)
NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) descent engine, Phase II, test began at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying on the nasa FY 1967 budget request before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the gap between the U.S. and Soviet space programs still remained and "this budget will not close it. We are as much as 2 years behind the Soviet Union in certain important aspects of space power. In . . . 1965, they launched 52 Cosmos satellites; successfully orbited a 3-man spacecraft; demonstrated a communications satellite capability with 2 Molniya spacecraft; and orbited the heaviest payload by anyone in the world to date, indicating they have developed a new launch vehicle with some WA to 3 million pounds of thrust. Since the beginning of 1966 they have achieved a successful soft landing on the moon and they have reached Venus with two probes. "The Soviet program shows every evidence of a continuing major commitment to long-term, large-scale operations in space. . . . The massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup and a long-term program underlines the importance they attached to advancing their space capabilities. It will require a strong and increasing effort initiated no later than fiscal year 1968 and vigorously pushed in the years after the United States has achieved a manned lunar landing to prevent them from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 5)
nasa’s lunar orbiter ii (Lunar Orbiter B) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in second U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Nov. 10-30]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 14-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft on 94-hr., 232,000-mi. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule lunar orbiter ii deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s star-tracker lost its fix on Canopus, delaying critical midcourse maneuver eight hours. Correction was accomplished at 44:09 get and jpl predicted spacecraft would come very close to original aiming point. Primary objectives of nasa’s lunar orbiter ii mission, second in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain high-resolution photos on various lunar surface areas to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft, and to improve our knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 13 primary target sites, located generally within northern half of the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. It would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment and refine definition of moon’s gravitational field. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of nasa’s ossa. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-286; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 11/7/66, Al, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/7/66, A3; upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 77; AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2)
arc’s new Hypervelocity Free Flight Facility would be fully operational by the end of July, nasa announced. "Light-gas guns” would fire free-flying spacecraft models into three wind tunnels. Muzzle velocities up to 20,000 mph against an air stream flowing up to 10,000 mph in the opposite direction would enable models to achieve test speed of 30,000 ,mph, simulating atmosphere reentry flight from moon or planets. (nasa Release 66-189; arc Release 66-10)
Astronauts had made more than 1,000 "flights” in the Rendezvous Docking Simulator and other facilities at LaRC to help develop techniques for the operation of vehicles in space. Developed by LaRC scientists to explore, under controlled laboratory conditions, man’s ability to complete a rendezvous in earth or lunar orbit during final 200 ft. of the space-docking maneuver, the simulator had been used extensively by Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott, who performed world’s first space docking March 16. (Lane Release)
gemini viii Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and his family were honored with a gala parade on their arrival in Armstrong’s hometown of Wapa-koneta, Ohio. Ohio’s Governor James A. Rhodes announced plans for the construction of a $200,000 airport near Wapakoneta to be named for Armstrong. Sen. Frank J. Lausche (D-Ohio) and Rep. William M. McCulloch (R-Ohio) announced a congressional resolution of tribute to Armstrong and his fellow gemini viii Astronaut David R. Scott. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/14/66; Wash. Post, 4/14/66, D16)
General Dynamics Corp. received eight-month, $275,000 msfc contract to investigate concepts of large space structures having possible post-Apollo use. Three structures which could fly as Apollo Applications (Aa) payloads on Saturn launch vehicles would be selected, evaluated, and validated for immediate useful application in space, (msfc Release 66-245)
U.S. space officials did not feel that luna ix’s successful soft-landing on the moon indicated U.S. was behind U.S.S.R. in the "moon race,” reported John Wilford in the New York Times. Vice President Humphrey, nasc Chairman, told Wilford in an interview that "so many systems and programs are involved that it is very difficult to say who’s ahead and who’s behind.” Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, admired the Soviets’ "solid, aggressive and expanding” space program and conceded that although U.S. program was broader-based "the Russians are awfully good at picking goals and going after them.” Wilford said U.S. space officials were unwilling to speculate on who would make first manned lunar landing, but foresaw no significant changes in U.S. program because of luna ix’s success. Dr. Seamans said Surveyor project would not be curtailed and could not be speeded up: "We’ve got to gather our own data because we can’t count on the Russians to release their own data. Besides, we want to land in other places on the moon. Hopefully, we can exchange data with the Russians.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/5/66, 11)
U.S.S.R.’s luna x completed its 284th orbit around moon and transmitted Communist anthem, "Internationale,” on command from Soviet center of deep space communications. Instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 5/10/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
American Astronautical Society (aas) held symposium on the moon in Washington, D.C., as part of American Association for the Advancement of Science’s (aaas) annual meeting. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said NASA’s lunar orbiter I photos had revealed "mass wasting” on the moon—a process similar to "downhill creep” which produced slopes of fragmented dirt and rock debris on earth. Accelerated by small local earthquakes caused by impacting meteorites, wasting process was rapidly covering all of moon’s small craters, Shoemaker said. He believed majority of lunar craters were caused by high-velocity explosive impacts of meteorites. Dr. Donald H. Menzel, Harvard Univ., told the press that man would make profound changes on the moon in 15-20 yrs.—particularly if lunar rock were found to contain water of crystallization. "There is a real possibility for man ... to establish self-support expeditions on the moon. Using solar or atomic energy for melting rocks, man could get water and then use the debris for building blocks. Lunar gardens . could be established and animals could be raised there.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/29/66, Al, A6; Clark, NYT, 12/30/66, 8)
28-member Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began article-by-article examination of drafts by U.S. and U.S.S.R. for proposed treaty governing exploration of space. U.S. Ambassador to U.N. Arthur J. Goldberg announced that U.S. had agreed to extend negotiations beyond proposal for treaty to ban military use of moon and other celestial bodies to cover "space itself along the lines proposed by the Soviet Union.” Agreed text would be presented to U.N. General Assembly in New York in September. (NYT, 7/22/66, 11)
Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology, received patent for an astronomical clock to keep track of the movements of the sun, moon, stars, and tides; provide a perpetual calendar; and show local and world time. Dr. Spilhaus said his clock could aid astronomers and navigators. (Jones, NYT, 5/7/66, 35)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Operations Planning Chief in Mission Operations, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, was appointed Assistant Mission Director, Apollo, (nasa Ann., 9/15/66)
In a lecture at Rice Univ., Dr. Henry Faul of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest’s geosciences division insisted on the terrestrial origin of tektites in opposition to lunar-origin theory of many experts: "The fatal objection to the theory that tektites are of lunar origin is the fact that there is no known mechanism of flight that can explain how something that hits the moon, generates a lot of heat and is melted into a jet stream, is somehow dumped in the widely varying patterns and areas where tektites have been found on earth.” (Justice, Houston Post, 4/19/66)
In scheduling manned space flights, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., crew safety was the principal consideration, followed by accomplishment of program goals. He pointed out the "open-ended” aspect of Apollo mission scheduling and expressed confidence that lunar landing would be achieved before the end of the decade based on present program posture. During question and answer session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA and its contractors had studied possible methods of rescuing astronauts in space and would continue to do so, the cost, complexities, and uncertainties made it appear to date that the money and effort would be better spent in making flights safer in the first place. He added: "We don’t exactly have instant rescue for people flying around in airliners and this is a large segment of the population.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/17/66, 16)
NASA Lunar Orbiter, scheduled to orbit moon in spring 1966, might photograph luna ix to gain perspective dimensions of lunar surface and determine spacecraft’s size and extent of damage caused by landing, the New York Times speculated, luna ix’s landing area, the Ocean of Storms, was not included in original flight plan of 10 regions to be photographed. (NYT, 2/7/66, 4)
Editorial comment on President Johnson’s proposal: ". . . In addition to rules governing space exploration a body of law is needed to govern the exploitation of useful resources that may conceivably be found on other solar bodies. Omission of this topic from the first international treaty on space law could produce future difficulties. But the President may well have felt that any present attempt to reach agreement on this delicate matter might prolong negotiations beyond the time of the first manned lunar landing. . . . There is no time to lose in getting international agreement to and ratification of this essential document.” (NYT, 5/9/66, 36) ". . . Someday such a treaty may save us from a new sort of far-out interplanetary imperialism. As revived by Mr. Johnson, however, the proposal has to do with a problem that will develop sooner and closer to home. After all between now and 1969 or 1970, Americans are going to be lofted to the moon’s surface, and so are Russians. This is a prospect full of very great historic importance. It lends special force to the President’s call for a renewed effort ... to negotiate an understanding under which the always unpredictable Russians will sign a treaty worthy of the name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/66, A6) "The first manned landing on the moon seems likely before 1970. The implications are immense, regardless of whether the first one is American or Russian. President Johnson’s proposal for an international compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense. ". . .Perhaps a willingness by Moscow to entertain a treaty on space may also open the door to discussions about pooling some of the costs, as the late President Kennedy proposed.” (Boston Globe, 5/11/66) ". . . Probably the most succinct argument against a comprehensive treaty of this nature is, 'Who needs it?’ Monopolization of the lunar surface by military units and establishment of terror weapons on the moon or in orbit appear to be neither immediate dangers nor remote possibilities. The bugaboo of an orbiting multimegaton H-bomb seems, on close examination, to be more trouble than it would be worth. . . . "There is no slightest indication that the Russians propose to lay claim to the moon if their cosmonauts get there first, any more than we do if we win the race. The precedent followed by both countries in Antarctica—nearest thing to the moon on earth—is neither to assert nor to recognize territorial claims. This was U.S. and Soviet policy before the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/12/66, A20)
Inactivity in Soviet manned space program could be explained by "strict economy” and preparations for ambitious new manned missions, Radio Prague’s Moscow correspondent reported. The new missions—"flights of much higher standards”—would include "a flight of man to the moon and the creation of a large orbiting laboratory.” Correspondent also predicted that the U.S.S.R. would launch a "group of rockets”— presumably unmanned ones—toward Mars about Jan. 4. (NYT, 12/23/66, 12) New York Times later editorialized: ". . . The possibility is raised that the Soviet strategy for a manned lunar landing may be based on a direct earth-moon trip. In that case there would be no need for the rendezvous and docking maneuvers. . . . Enormously powerful rockets would be required . . . but if Moscow has them they might make possible the spectacular achievement of a goal the Kremlin must want very much: a manned lunar landing on the moon by the fiftieth anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution next Nov. 7.” (NYT, 12/26/66, 20)
The 19 astronauts selected by NASA April 4 would be "too late to take part in the first lunar landings . . . [but they] should get into some of the follow-on Apollo flights and take some 60-day space trips,” Dr. Charles A. Berry, Chief of Medical Programs, msc, said in a press interview in Colorado Springs. (Gibney, Denver Post, 4/10/66)
Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, in Toronto to address the Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute, said at a news conference that although computers predicted that only one of the first three manned U.S. attempts to land on the moon would be successful, human judgment would perhaps prove them wrong. He said computers had predicted the loss of two of seven astronauts on the Mercury program but none was killed. (AP, Denver Post, 3/13/66)
Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Alexander Lebedinsky, professor; and Alexander Vinogradov, geochemist, held 216-hr. televised press conference in Moscow on the luna ix mission. Keldysh said U.S.S.R. had mastered the soft-landing technique and was planning more soft-landing missions in 1966 to obtain information on physical conditions on the moon, composition of lunar rock, and variations in lunar temperature. He said the next major challenge would be designing a spacecraft capable of returning men to earth from the moon and called for U.S. "cooperation not competition” in a program for manned lunar landing, luna ix’s mission was "only to photograph the surface of the moon and measure cosmic radiation,” Keldysh said. The full panorama of the lunar surface included 6,000 lines and was transmitted to earth in 100 min. Spacecraft contained no solar batteries. Lebedinsky revealed that luna ix had "shifted between the second and third transmissions of the panorama, and as a result, the inclination of the phototelevision camera changed several degrees, while the camera itself shifted its position several centimeters.” Keldysh added: "It may be that the station landed on an unstable small stone, or perhaps the ground settled slightly. Such a very small deformation could occur because of temperature changes on the moon or a certain mechanical impact by the station itself.” He expressed confidence that the lunar surface could support manned spacecraft. Lebedinsky said luna ix had measured rate of radiation in outer space at 30 millirads a day and that the spacecraft had detected additional radiation on lunar surface—apparently produced by nuclear reactions from cosmic rays hitting moon’s upper layers—but he did not disclose amount. Vinogradov reported that lunar surface was hard, porous, volcanic cracked rock, Dut acknowledged that other areas might be different. Keldysh announced that venus ii and venus hi spacecraft, launched Nov. 12 and Nov. 16, 1965, respectively, were scheduled to approach Venus March 1. (Wash. Post, 2/11/66; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66; Sullivan, NYT, 2/11/66, 17)
"In the last analysis, the only reason for having a space program is to satisfy the needs of society,” editorialized aiaa President Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff in Astronautics & Aeronautics. "Unless the space program serves people in a useful way, it will be transitory and fade into history as a curiosity. It will not even be enough for the program to serve people by measuring interesting scientific data. It must eventually serve the masses of people of the Earth, if it is to command substantial resources.” Communications, geodetic, navigation, and meteorological satellites, and other satellites designed to study and manage the world’s natural resources could, in Bisplinghoff’s estimation, contribute to meeting man’s needs, but international cooperation would be essential. (A&A, 11/66, 54-55) During November: Viewing space program in "historical perspective,” Solomon W. Golomb wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "The Manhattan Project established that we could run a program for three years and two billion dollars. This was the size limit for maj or technological projects until Apollo escalated the level to ten years and thirty billion dollars. The next major goal will be the establishment of permanent colonies on other planets. This may mean a commitment of 50 to 90 years and a price tag measured in Terabucks.” (A&A, 11/66, 14)
surveyor i bounced two to three inches upward on first impact with lurain June 2, jpl announced. According to data returned by 620-lb. spacecraft, signals generated by strain gauges indicated the three shock-absorber legs had all landed simultaneously on a horizontal surface. Eight-inch-diameter circular footpads rebounded clear of surface before settling on moon. Spacecraft exerted pressure of about 0.5 psi on lurain after it came to rest. Pressure of footpads at impact was about 8 psi. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/25/66, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/56, A12; AP, NYT, 7/25/66, C3; Tech. Wk, 8/1/66, 9)
"When U.S. spacemen go to the moon, they will surely meet Soviet people there,” Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, visiting Sofia for World Federation of Democratic Youth congress, told Bulgarian newspaper Narodna Armiya. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/12/66, A6)
Press commented on the gemini viii mission. New York Times: "The docking maneuver thus successfully pioneered is of the utmost importance. It is through combining the loads brought into space by individual rockets that the great structures can be built that will be necessary for man’s activities in the cosmos in the years ahead. Tomorrow’s stations in space will serve as laboratories for astronomers and other scientists, as terminals for transshipment of passengers and freight between short-range and long-range rockets, and unfortunately—if the future resembles the past—also as military bases reflecting in the sky the tensions and hostilities of earth. But whatever purpose they serve, these islands in space will have been made possible by repeated use of the same maneuver that Astronauts Armstrong and Scott performed for the first time last night.” Washington Post: "Space feats have become so commonplace and have been carried out with such precision that we tend to forget about the hazards. The abrupt but fortunately safe return of Gemini 8 is a timely reminder that space is still a frontier and that the exploration remains at best an inexact science. "That Astronauts Armstrong and Scott emerged unharmed from their awesome experience with their space capsule out of control is a tribute not only to their own cool judgment but also to the extraordinary competence of Space Agency officials. Americans listening to reports of the emergency must have applauded collectively when the crewmen made a successful reentry. They survived a predicament in space which, had it been on a highway, would have meant disaster.” Washington Evening Star: "In addition to its docking achievement, the mission was a success in the sense of demonstrating the care with which emergency devices were built into the space ship and the thoroughness of the planning for rescue operations in event of a forced landing. It is possible, indeed, that more can be learned from a mission that goes wrong than from one which is successful all the way. "Incidentally, there is a commentary on our times in the fact that while the suspense-filled space story was unfolding, Batman was being shown on television. The abc network interrupted the program with special news announcements, and was rewarded with more than 1,000 phone calls from complaining viewers.” (NYT, 3/17/66, 36M; Wash. Post, 3/18/66, A20; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, A16)
Commenting on national space goals in the post-Apollo period, Henry Simmons said in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "NASA over the past year quietly shifted its emphasis from an aap exploiting already financed Apollo hardware for alternate missions to a much vaster aap involving outlays on the scale of the Apollo lunar effort itself to support an intensive follow-on effort extending perhaps to 1975. Some NASA Centers engaged in the Apollo program, and particularly the Marshall Space Flight Center, are already confronted with the prospect of unemployment among their most skilled and valuable design personnel. 'We are right now in the position where over the next six months the engineers who did the original design on the Saturn and probably a year from now those who did it on the Apollo will be out of work,’ NASA Administrator James Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during its hearings last August on post-Apollo goals. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 5)	...
Editorial comment on May 17 scrubbing of Gemini IX mission: New York Times: "For the third time in the past few months, a space experiment involving the Atlas-Agena rocket Has run into trouble. Late last year a sequence of events similar to yesterday’s led to a postponement of the original Gemini rendezvous experiment, while in March of this year, Gemini 8 nearly met catastrophe when it was docked with an Agena target vehicle. There may well be no connection between these three separate incidents; but since the Atlas-Agena has been a highly reliable and successful instrument in other aspects of the nation’s space program, its emergence as the weak link in the Gemini series poses something of a mystery. The setback caused by last year’s failure to orbit an Agena target vehicle was made up for by the brilliant improvisation that permitted Geminis 6 and 7 to rendezvous last December. Warned by that earlier experience, space officials were better prepared for this latest setback. The substitute target rocket they have on hand may permit much of the originally planned Gemini 9 experiment to take place early next month. But for the moment at least, a shadow has again been thrown over this country’s lunar program.” (NYT, 5/18/66) Washington Post: "We shall do well to prepare for many more disappointments before man reaches the moon, including the possibility of serious accident. What remains essential in the competition is that considerations of human safety not be sacrificed to too feverish a schedule.” (Wash. Post, 5/18/66) Washington Evening Star: "The simple fact is that the United States has been incredibly lucky that no catastrophic accident has yet taken place during a manned space flight. The further fact is that the nation cannot logically expect this luck to last forever. Progress in space, as with nearly all human progress, will come at the cost of men’s lives. And the nation should be prepared for the day when our luck runs out; prepared to accept tragedy as the inevitable concomitant of so ambitious a voyage of discovery.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A18)
"The answer to the housing problem lies on the way to the moon,” technologist and Southern Illinois Univ. research professor Buckminster Fuller told Wolf Von Eckardt of the Washington Post. Much of the complex apparatus used in development of closed ecological systems for long manned space flights could be used in terrestrial housing, Fuller said. He envisioned enclosing the necessary machinery in a "little black box. . . . We are investing $7 billion in it. It weighs 500 pounds. We can probably mass-produce it for $2 a pound. "That means we can give all the things they need foremost in a house —water, heat, cooling and waste regeneration—for $1000. And we can give it to them without tying them down to real estate with its wastefully expensive water pipes and sewers . . . with high-pressure sprays and chemical regeneration, a man can quench his thirst and clean himself for a long time with just a glass of water. "[It] . . . also solved the pollution problem. . . .” (Von Eckardt, Wash. Post, 10/2/66, Gil)
U.S.S.R. released luna ix’s photographs of the moon for first time and criticized distortion of photos publicized by Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. Photos, shown on an eight-minute television program, were analyzed by scientists Vladimir Yurovsky, Yuri Mbelou-son, and Ivan Koval. Moon’s surface appeared very uneven with many small depressions and mounds. Surface near the station had not sunk into the soil to any substantial degree. No visible traces of dust were evident. At bottom of first picture, part of spacecraft, including antenna and two-faced mirror which reflected the lunar surface, could be seen. A small stone believed about 6XA ft. from the craft could have been a meteorite or could have fallen from a hill, in which case "we could presume there are some processes of movement on the moon’s surface,” scientists concluded. Tass announced details of luna ix’s structure and flight: 3,482.6-lb. spacecraft was an airtight package carrying radio system, program-timer, thermal-regulation system, power-supply sources, and television system ensuring 360° view of the landscape. Antennas mounted on outside of craft were set to open automatically after it had settled on lunar surface. Complete with shock-absorbing system and metal screens shaped like petals to protect it during touchdown, 220-lb. instrumented payload detached itself from engine immediately before landing, and two units landed at some distance from each other. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Commission for Exploration and Use of Outer Space, was critical of Jodrell Bank’s publication of luna ix photos and said that Jodrell Bank lacked the correct vertical and horizontal scales: "The horizontal scale of the British photographs had been shrunk by approximately 2.5 times.” Photos released by Moscow, vivid in detail and contrast, showed a landscape less pinnacled and strange than that in British versions. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/6/66, 76; Grose, NYT, 2/6/66, 1, 76; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/66, A14)
luna xii had photographed lurain with "a special phototelevision device,” Tass announced in first official statement relating to spacecraft since Oct. 22 launch. Satellite had entered lunar orbit Oct. 25 with 1,740-km. (1,081-mi.) apolune; 100-km. (62-mi.) perilune; and 3 hr. 25 min. period. First photos transmitted—shown on Moscow television less than an hour after announcement—showed clearly distinguishable details of craters and mountain ranges. luna xii was ninth photographic mission to moon. Five had been from U.S.: rangers vii, viii, and ix, surveyor i, and lunar orbiter i; four from U.S.S.R.: luna hi, zond iii, luna ix, and luna xii. (Tass, 10/29/66; AP, NYT, 10/30/66, 43)
Edgar M. Cortright, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications in support of NASA’s FY 1967 authorization, discussed the merits of the Apollo and Surveyor programs: "The scientific advantages of having Surveyors in the program along with Apollo is the ability to sample more sites and to determine what areas of the moon are worth visiting by man, for example, in addition to going to sites that man is not likely to for the next decade or more—up near the poles and certain of the mountain regions. "We would like to help develop this total strategy of exploration of the Moon in a sensible way. We think automated equipment continues to have a role to play. . . . "I think there is nothing we can fly on Surveyor that would improve or even come close to equalling what can be done by the Apollo once it gets there. In other words, bringing a sample back is so much better than doing analyses on the lunar surface.” (Transcript)
Shift of management of NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount mission from gsfc to msfc was evidence of nasa’s effort "toward inhouse development of major space projects” to ''offset threatened loss of personnel” at NASA manned space flight centers as Apollo program passed its personnel peak, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 80)
Success of U.S.S.R.’s luna ix and luna x missions supported two important conclusions, suggested the New York Times in an editorial: "The Soviet Union is now well ahead of the United States in scientific exploration of the moon; Moscow’s scientists are straining to beat this country in achieving man’s first round-trip to the moon. . . . "But no matter which nation will be first to conquer the moon, it is important to clarify the legal issues arising from this development. There should be general international agreement that the moon is the property of all mankind and not of any one nation . . . [and] is open for research by scientists of all nations. . . .” (NYT, 4/5/66, 36M)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at msfc for 145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-288) November 29-December 2: aiaa’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Display was held in Boston. In keynote address, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation. Panel discussion followed on future of U.S. space program. Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, predicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a "repairman” for scientific instruments. "The science . . . will be carried out on the ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discussion are available.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) said emphasis on space activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preservation of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into space. With advances in technology, U.S. must convert from "throwaway” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and recoverable boosters, he added. This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: ". . . all of the hardware developed for future projects would reflect our concern over . . . greater cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics—of which he was chairman—was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the space program. It was a difficult task, he said, to justify space expenditures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign aid, and Great Society projects. But, he insisted, "it is the translation of space technologies into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.” (Texts; aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7) Results from NASA’s EXPLOBER xxxm had shown for first time that tail of earth’s magnetosphere "extends more than 75,000 miles beyond the orbit of the moon,” reported gsfc scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness. Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and colleagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from luna x between April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that luna x data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be expected, (gsfc Release 20-66) In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of paa said problems in air transport industry "are being created by the phenomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed no signs of slackening’in the coming years, continued development and extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747— which would carry times more passengers than present intercontinental transports—was being developed with only commercial airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis. Borger noted that a major requirement for the "jumbo jets” was that they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that initial development and operation costs could be recovered. H.	F. Klump, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material "dumped on them.” W. D. Perreault, program director for Lockheed 500—a giant commercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s—discussed evolution of the 500 from C-5A transport under development for usaf. After reviewing three proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them "will provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of less than 2/ per ton statute mile.” (aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 31; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/66, A10) Commenting on the report of the aiaa Launch Vehicle and Missile Technical Committee, "The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles—• Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and Technology said: ". . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed for reasons of economy then development cost per booster must be so low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbiting capacity. This reasoning . . . casts considerable doubt on the Committee’s suggestion that a 'bold step’ leading to the development of reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on "Do We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years would probably "not require either new propulsion systems or new launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the S-IV-B Centaur. . . .” Cortright recommended that current launch capability be put "to effective use in exploring space and in developing practical applications of space flight.” (Text) During panel on -Space and Public Policy, "poor communications” between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for death of Project Mohole—killed by Congress because it would have cost at least three times the original estimate, nas president Frederick Seitz said such escalations in cost were "not unusual” for such scientific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a different name such as "deep ocean drilling.” "The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program purely as a "spectator sport,” and that space programs should be conceived to "maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: "We must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of aiaa advice to Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other disciplines eying the space money. "I call on aiaa to come to Congress with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that "aiaa is not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could, the assignment "would induce strains within aiaa and change its complexion.” (aiaa Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29) Four major aiaa awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award "to honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering development of protective devices enabling the human body to function and operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA frc, the Lawrence Sperry Award for "outstanding contribution to aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various spaceprobing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of msc, the De Florez Training Award for "contribution to astronaut training and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the G. Edward Pendray Award for "outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave dynamics.” (aiaa Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19) November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ft.-long Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223 mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R. would continue intensive exploration of space in 1966-70 period, Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh reported to general meeting of Academy. He listed these general programs: manned space flights; exploration of physical conditions on moon and nearest planets; and development of use of satellites and rockets for long-distance communications systems. (Tass, 6/28/66)
Apollo spacecraft—command module, service module, and adapter section— is raised up the gantry for mating to Saturn IB launch vehicle at Launch Complex 34, Eastern Test Range.
U.S.S.R.’s luna x unmanned spacecraft had achieved lunar orbit (1,000-km. [621-mi.] apolune, 350-km. [217-mi.] perilune, 3-hr. period) at 1:44 p.m. est April 3 to become world’s first artificial moon satellite, U.S.S.R. announced at 23rd Communist Party Congress meeting in the Kremlin. Accomplishment was dramatized by direct broadcast from luna x of the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” Tass released details of luna x’s structure and flight. 3,530-lb. spacecraft consisted of two main parts: moon satellite section and engine facilities section. 540-lb. satellite was an airtight package containing radio equipment, telemetry system, equipment for studying the moon and near-lunar space, heat-regulation and power supply systems, and small jet engines to stabilize the flight. Approximately 8,000 km. (4,969 mi.) from the lunar surface, spacecraft was oriented so that jet of the engine was directed against direction of its movement. At approximately 1:44 p.m. est retrorockets fired automatically, slowing spacecraft to 1.3 km. (.8 mi.) per second and putting it in lunar orbit. Twenty minutes after switching off retrorockets, earth command was sent to separate instrumented lunar satellite from engine facilities section, and first radio communications session was held. Equipment was functioning normally and radio communications were stable. There was no suggestion that photos of the lunar surface were being transmitted to earth, or that LUNA x was "tumbling” [see April 3]. (Tass, 4/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/4/66, A6; AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/66, A12) Aoril 4: House Committee on Science and Astronautics voted to report $4,986,864,150 NASA authorization bill—$25,135,580 less than $5,012, 000,000 nasa had requested for FY 1967. (nasa lar V/57-58)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xii was probably less than 100 mi. from moon, reported director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Sir Bernard Lovell. He said: "Last night the signals from tbe probe Were steady and indicated that, contrary to luna x and xi, it was ejected into orbit without rotation. That means that potentially it was a more successful exercise.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/27/66)
Alex P. Aven, owner of an Oklahoma City, Okla., petroleum consulting firm, was sworn in by NASA Administrator James E. Webb as consultant to the Administrator on management. (NASA Release 66-112) May 10-13: NASA successfully launched 18 Areas and Hasp meteorological sounding rockets to 200,000-ft. altitudes at intervals ranging from four minutes to six hours to investigate daily cycle of wind and temperature variations in upper atmosphere, compare results of various rocket and balloon measuring systems, and study effects of radiation from the sun on meteorological instruments. Instrumented payloads descending by parachute transmitted atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data, and ten specially instrumented high-altitude weather balloons, interspersed among rocket firings, transmitted information as they rose to 130,000 ft. Radar tracked both balloon and rocket payloads to determine speed and direction of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed by nasa Langley Research Center and sponsored by NASA, USA, usn, usaf, and essa. (nasa Release 66-118; Wallops Release 66-25) National Academy of Sciences delegate Dr. Richard W. Porter, summarizing activities of 1965 U.S. space program, said a manned lunar landing by 1970 would be a "difficult goal” but U.S. had made "substantial progress.” Dr. Porter presented an analysis of data transmitted by NASA mariner iv Mars probe which appeared to support theory that earth sometimes has comet-like tail stretching past orbit of Mars. On Feb. 5, 1965, a peculiarly timed solar eruption sent series of intense proton clouds into space, five of which were detected within 48 hrs. by mariner iv and two other U.S. satellites in near-earth orbit. Second and third clouds were reported by mariner iv three to five hours prior to their detection near earth, possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous length, forcing two clouds to detour through tail in order to penetrate earth’s magnetic field. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli A. Blagonravov summarized 1965 U.S.S.R. space program, and said luna x, which entered lunar orbit April 3, had recorded radiation pattern from lunar surface similar to that from basaltic part of earth’s crust. Apparently lunar surface exhibited no differentiation equivalent to granite on earth, indicating that earth and moon were created separately, luna x had found level of moon’s magnetic field barely above that of interplanetary space; small increase was attributed to moon’s passing through earth’s magnetic tail at time of measurement. Implication was that moon is cold throughout, since liquid metal core would produce large magnetic field. Report suggested that new minerals would be found on the moon because of unusual chemical reactions caused by its extreme temperature range, the impacts of micrometeorites, and rains of high-energy radiation. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Soviet delegate A. G. Prishchep, in a joint paper with colleague V. I. Vashkov, revealed that U.S.S.R. planetary probes were assembled in clean rooms and sterilized with two-fold process involving moist heat to prevent dryness and a gas mixture, harmless to the skin, which might have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained 50% ethylene oxide—extremely poisonous substance which is dangerously explosive when combined with oxygen—diluted with 40% methyl bromide for safety reasons. General Electric scientists H. G. Lorsch and M. G. Koesterer reported that current sterilization cycles varied from treatment at 320° for three hours to baking at 200°F for 14 days. They argued that no more than 10 billion microbes should exist within a spacecraft prior to beginning of sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of them was to be assured. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/12/66, 79; Beller, M&R, 5/16/66, 17-18) Drs. Herbert Friedman and R. W. Kreplin, Naval Research Laboratory, reported that solar radiation level would probably exceed highest ever recorded in 100 yrs. during 1969-1970—time of first projected manned lunar landing. Basing their prediction on measurements of solar x-ray emissions taken by explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) satellite, Friedman and Kreplin explained that x-rays, which could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, warned of approaching sunspots before they could be seen. Solar activities in the form of sunspots and gaseous flares occurred in 11-12 yr. cycles, but there was also a gross cycle which reaches its greatest intensity every 80 to 100 yrs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/13/66, 19; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Dr. Bessel Kok, Research Institute for Advanced Studies, described a small instrument which could determine the existence of life when landing on another planet. Designed on the assumption that even the simplest forms of life use water and such common chemical compounds as phosphates and nitrates, device would trace the transfer of nonradioactive isotope—Oxygen 18—from these chemicals to water. (Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to the meeting: (1) Italy’s platform for launching San Marco earth satellite at sea was in African port of Mombasa and would be towed shortly to site where U.S. Scout booster would launch satellite into equatorial orbit; (2) Pakistan was conducting monthly firings of rockets that injected copper chaff into stratosphere to disclose winds in that region over subtropics; (3) U.S.S.R. had fired 150 meteorological rockets—almost half from shipboard—and U.S. was firing about 120 monthly; (4) Romania had used orbital data from Washington and Cambridge, Mass., to photograph echo I and echo ii comsats in coordination with Soviet expeditionary stations in Egypt and Mali; (5) Sweden, Finland, Russia, and East Europeans had joined in observing orbital flight changes of echo i and echo II attributable to density variations in wisps of air at satellite altitude; and (6) East German scientists reported their conclusions on upper air structure derived from real-time transmissions from NASA explorer xxh satellite. It was estimated that 60 stations in various parts of the world were monitoring satellites that sent out "blind” data. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/66, 10E; Sullivan, NYT, 5/16/66, 88) Dr. A. I. Lebedensky, Soviet Academy of Sciences, reported that Luna ix photos revealed lunar surface was steadily eroding, at least in some places. He suggested that erosion could be caused by solar winds or impact of micrometeorites. Lebedensky pointed out two peculiar features on luna ix’s photos which supported his theory. First was series of streaks, resembling mineral veins in earth’s bedrock, on floor of crater where luna ix had landed. It had previously been assumed that moon’s surface was buried deep in debris churned up by meteorite impacts. Second was presence of rock-like objects on small pedestals similar to those on earth where soft but rock-strewn surface had been eroded. Stones, which ranged in size from one foot to less than one inch across and whose pedestals appeared as high as they were wide, "were the most unexpected and important result of the flight,” Lebedensky said. "Our conclusion is that the stone is harder than the ground around it and screens the ground underneath from the erosion effects of solar winds and micrometeorites.” Lebedensky admitted the possibility that erosion was peculiar to the crater or a particular region of the moon, but saw no obvious reason why this should be true. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/17/66, 28; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/17/66, A17) Radio occultation measurements from mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, Mars flyby indicated that regions on the surface of Mars might vary in height by three miles (five kilometers), jpl scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore reported, (jpl Release) Venus was rotating clockwise only once every 243 days, but during that period it seemed to be synchronized with earth, Dr. Richard Goldstein, chief of jpl Communications Systems Research, told the meeting. Dr. Goldstein also reported that radar probes of winter 1965 when Venus was nearest earth indicated prominences with the ability to depolarize microwaves. "They may well be mountain ranges,” Dr. Goldstein said, "although large fields of boulders would also depolarize microwaves. On earth, of course, such areas usually indicate the presence of nearby mountains.” (jpl Release) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli Blagonravov, addressing the annual cospar press conference, said France and U.S.S.R. had been negotiating —within the framework of cospar—on cooperation in space research which might extend to incorporation of French instruments in Soviet satellites "if this should be asked for.” Asked if he could imagine similar close cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Blagonravov said there was no need for it; if the situation arose, it would be better for them to cooperate in processing data obtained from their own satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/20/66, A5)	.
The Nation was facing a crisis in space planning, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a press interview at NASA Hq. The question was what to do with the Apollo project after men had landed on the moon. The answer would determine whether the U.S. remained a "major spacefaring nation,” and must be found within a year, he said— long before the first lunar landing was made. Search for the answer had been postponed several times because the problem seemed remote and budgets were tight. "It is extremely important not to think you can postpone the decision again. I think it is imperative to have a thoroughgoing national debate on whether we want to go past the point of no return.” If the Nation did not mind being second to the moon or chose to "dismantle the Apollo machine without recovering its great investment,” he would accept that, he said. But he did not believe that either the Congress or the public had consciously reached these decisions. He feared they just had not thought about them. (Clark, NYT, 5/30/66, 1, 22)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, predicted in response to questions in an interview with the Chicago Tribune that there would be at least four Gemini flights during the year: "We may even get off a manned Apollo flight before the end of the year.” Duration of the flight would depend on success of test flights of unmanned Apollos. (Chic. Trib., 1/16/66)
ComSatCorp’s third annual report revealed that early eird i, operating since June 28, 1965, as the first commercial communications satellite, had earned $2,138,577 as of Dec. 31,1965. Report omitted any corporate earnings statement, explaining that "with Comsat’s singular structure— and its newness—we are not yet able to present the corporate financial statements in a conventional mode.” With fcc approval, "the Corporation has adopted the accounting practice of deferring all revenues and expenditures until the commencement of full operations.” Financial statement showed, however, that $9,677,000 had been spent for "the construction of the Early Bird satellites, the cost of the launch in April [6,] 1965 and expenditures for satellite system equipment.” By the end of 1965, 75 of early bird i’s 240 two-way voice channels had been leased—64 by at&t, nine by Candian Overseas Telecommunication Corp., and one each by itt and rca. Corporation also earned $8,083,745 in income from temporary investments, compared with $4,312,714 in 1964. Report noted that membership of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) had grown from 20 to 48 countries during 1965, and cited plans to launch two improved satellites in late summer of 1966 "to provide communications support” for nasa’s Apollo program. (Text) During week of April 1: Pulsed laser beam communications system which could penetrate cloud of plasma or charged gases surrounding spacecraft during reentry and avoid communications blackout was patented by General Electric Co. engineers Dr. Kiyo Timiyasu and James R. Whitten. Principal use of invention would he in line-of-sight communications between earth stations and spacecraft, but two land stations not in line of sight also could exchange information by using cloud reflections. (Jones, NYT, 4/2/66, 32)
First static test firing of production version of Apollo spacecraft launchescape solid-propellant rocket motor, key component of emergency Launch Escape System (Les), was conducted at Redlands, Calif., by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. All test objectives were met, with motor producing scheduled 155,000 lbs. thrust for programed eight seconds to become first major Apollo spacecraft subsystem to complete NASA qualification tests for future manned flights. (Lockheed Release)
usn’s Pacific Missile Range reported 2,608 live missile firings in record total of 13,155 operations during FY 1966. (SBD, 7/19/66, 93) During June: Lurain as seen by surveyor i Science Evaluation Analysis Team after preliminary analysis of data was a dark, relatively smooth, gently rolling plain "the consistency of a freshly turned field,” studded with craters ranging in diameter from one inch to several hundreds of feet and littered with fragmental debris ranging in size from few hundredths of an inch to more than three feet. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said terrestrial scenery most closely resembling the lurain as seen by surveyor i would be Sedan crater at aec’s Nevada Test site—large crater covered with small craters and "secondary ejecta” resulting from explosion of subsurface nuclear device. Lurain appeared to be composed of soil-like substance, or a fine sand, with rougher material through it. It appeared to be about three feet deep with harder surface beneath. Surface had dynamic bearing strength of 6-10 psi. Leonard Jaffe, nasa Project Surveyor scientist, noted that results of surveyor i could be summarized by list of previous theories on nature of lurain that had been disproved: surface was not composed of hard rock; it was not composed of one piece of very porous rock; it was not covered by a layer of loose dust either thick or thin; it was a finely granulated material with particles that cohered to each other but did not seem particularly attracted to spacecraft; it was heavy enough for man to walk and work on and for a properly designed spacecraft to land on; and it reflected accurate radar signal from surface, not from subsurface substance. Jaffe noted there were a few hazards to manned spacecraft, mostly from large rocks and possibility of sinkage, but emphasized data so far indicated surface was adequate for landing Apollo Lem. There appeared to be two different types of rocks near surveyor i: one with pitted, spongy surface that appeared to be caused by molten rock that had cooled and from which gas had escaped; the other harder, smoother surfaced, and smaller grained. surveyor i photographs were considered superior to U.S.S.R.’s luna ix results because (1) camera was higher so that horizon was 10 times farther away; (2) camera resolution was greater (down to l/50th of an inch); camera worked longer and took more photos under different light angles, surveyor i’s pictures of its own footpad had yielded data on surface and subsurface composition. (Clark, NYT, 6/8/66, 1; 6/17/66, 15; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 0/11/06, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 6/19/66, 14F; SBD, 6/20/66, 297) During June: NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., writing in Astronautics & Aeronautics, outlined choices in "potential manned-spaceflight missions of the next generation” and argued for taking up the preliminary options now. He selected what he called "three natural, potential targets” for major extensions of manned space flight. First of these he saw as "a spacefaring research and operations center in earth orbit,” described as a "large, permanent, manned space facility” that would "make possible whole new ranges of experiments, investigations, and operations.” Second choice was "the moon itself... following up the initial exploratory landings with a permanent lunar base.” Third objective could be "manned surface exploration of Mars” within context of "extension of the lunar-landing experience to the near planets.” Citing both advantages and difficulties of the latter, he said: "Such an effort would represent a greater national commitment of far longer duration than our commitment in 1961 to a manned lunar landing, and would generate proportionately increased industrial, university, and government activities. Significant advances in virtually every field of space-related technology would be required. The increase in scientific knowledge from direct, firsthand observation and experimentation on another planet, however, has not yet been measured against the direct cost of its achievement, or against the more subtle cost of longterm dedication to a given course of action, with its inherent loss of national flexibility in allocation of the limiting resources—technical and scientific manpower.” (A&A, 6/66, 30-33)
Defense Electronics, Inc., received a $2,380,000 contract from usaf for telemetry equipment for Apollo airborne tracking aircraft. Firm would supply C-135 trackers with prediction playback monitors and other equipment to provide communications link to Apollo spacecraft prior to insertion into lunar trajectory. (Wash. Post, 4/5/66, C7)
Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler Corp. for 2k£ min.—longest duration firing—at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Stage would be shipped to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static-test checks and would be used in checking out the Apollo spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing, (msfc Release 66-69)
Potential of manned space flight in Apollo Applications program was examined by Peter Chew in National Observer. He suggested "... earth-orbiting astronauts .. . may be able to locate and track icebergs . . . spot fish-feeding grounds . . . support oceanography . . . produce agricultural, mineral, and fresh water surveys.” Manned satellites could provide "worldwide television coverage” and serve as "relay points for deep-space communications.” (Nat,l. Obs., 1/11/66; CR, 2/8/66, A609-10)
U.S.S.R. launched luna x unmanned spacecraft toward the moon "to test a system insuring the setting up of an artificial moon satellite with the aim of exploring near-lunar outer space and also testing systems installed aboard for placing the station in a selenocentric or near lunar orbit,” Tass announced. Spacecraft was following a trajectory close to the calculated one and onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Pravda, 4/1/66, 1, uss-t Trans.; Tass, 3/31/66; Loory, Wash. Post, 4/1/66, A3)
$3,000 block of magnesium used as vibration test fixture for Lunar Excursion Module’s propellant-gaging system brought $28.14 in Los Angeles junk yard. Two trash collectors had diverted block from Apollo project into their disposal truck while emptying trash cans at Giannini Corp., Duarte, Calif. They were booked on suspicion of grand larceny, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A6)
General Dynamics Corp. announced that U.S.S. Redstone, one of three World War II T-2 type tankers being converted by corporation into Project Apollo tracking-communications vessel, had undergone initial sea trials out of Quincy, Mass. (NYT, 6/12/66)
Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Tass as saying that he was in favor of strict international law governing cooperation in space. Through agreement, all stations, equipment, and spacecraft sent to moon or the planets could be available for use by representatives of other states, he noted. "However, all this would be justified only if the moon and the other celestial bodies are used by all treaty participants for peaceful purposes.” (Tass, 10/26/66)
New York Times editorial: "The Soviet-American race to the moon is heating up. Even as the United States-built satellite, Lunar Orbiter, finished photographing the moon, Moscow’s huge Luna 11 also went into lunar orbit. The indicated success of the second unmanned flight of the Apollo moonship—another step toward putting the first Americans on the moon—undoubtedly will speed initial tests of a Soviet lunar vehicle.” (NYT, 8/30/66)
Astronauts David Scott and Neil Armstrong awaiting recovery in the Pacific Ocean after their gemini vm space Bight.
nasa selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and Martin Co. for negotiations of parallel one-year $l-million fixed-price study contracts on integration of experiments and experiments support equipment in space vehicles and spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications (Aa) missions. Companies would define experiment integration work (payload integration in Apollo lunar module, Saturn launch vehicle instrument unit, and S-1VB stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles.) Contracts would be managed by msfc. (nasa Release 66-137)
New York Times characterized 1966: "In all future histories of lunar exploration the year 1966 will hold an honored and important place. In effect, it was the year of the moon, the year in which a dazzling array of Soviet and American instrumented capsules photographed, measured and probed the moon to an extent never before known. As a result of the successful flights of the Soviet Luna vehicles and of the American Surveyor and Lunar Orbiters, it is probable that more detailed information about earth’s natural satellite was gained in 1966 than in all the rest of human history. . . .” (NYT, 12/31/66, 18C)
Launch from etr of first unmanned Apollo spacecraft, scheduled for Feb. 23, was postponed because of cloudy, uncertain weather that would hamper visual and long-range photographic coverage of liftoff. {NYT, 2/23/66, 20; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, Al; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/66, A6)
luna ix was launched by U.S.S.R. on a trajectory toward the moon, Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally. Launch was apparent attempt to softland on the lurain. (Pravda, 2/3/66, USS-T Trans.)
Purposes of Saturn/Apollo Applications program, M/G David M. Jones (usaf), nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in an interview in Data magazine, were to serve as transition program from Apollo to next space goal and to accomplish "significant scientific experiments.” Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) said in an ' interview in the same issue that "barring some major setback, some major failure in a static test on the ground or major failure on a flight, it is reasonable to expect that the lunar landing . . . will be accomplished before the end of 1969.” (Data, 6/66, 27, 32)
nasa had begun study of how to keep two or more small monkeys in earth orbit for up to one year to assess long-term effects of weightlessness on primates and evaluate problems related to humans undertaking extensive work in space. Industrial firms had been asked to submit by Oct. 27 "preliminary design study” for Orbiting Primate Spacecraft capable of being carried into earth orbit during Apollo program. LaRC would manage study, (nasa Release 66-273)
luna x completed its 150th orbit of the moon and marked Lenin’s birthday by beaming back to earth the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” (upi, NYT, 4/23/66, 5)
Plans for manned solar astronomical mission to orbit earth in Apollo spacecraft during period of maximum solar activity beginning in 1968 were announced by NASA. Mission objectives would be to acquire high-resolution measurements and observations of structure and behavior of sun above earth’s atmosphere and to test man’s capabilities for conducting astronomical observations in space, msfc would have project and experiment development responsibility, (nasa Release 66-232)
luna xi, U.S.S.R.’s second lunar orbiting satellite, launched Aug. 24, was continuing to orbit moon and had completed 1,410 revolutions, Tass announced. All equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 9/14/66)
Contact Feb. 6 with LUNA IX after its scheduled research had been completed was explained by Tass: "Since the craft still had a certain amount of power left in excess of rated level an additional 2-hr. commutation session was held. , . . "During the transmission period the station exhausted practically all its remaining supply of electric energy and further radio communications with Luna 9 will be discontinued.” Moscow television showed photos of a circular panorama of the lunar landscape obtained from ujna ix’s television system during communications period Feb. 6. Panorama showed luna ix to be resting on comparatively even area of the lunar surface close to the equator on the eastern extremity of the Oceanus Procellarum. Surface of moon around station was very uneven with many hollows and hillocks. Some stone-type formations were scattered at different places. Small cavities could be seen in different parts of the panorama, specifically at its right end. Slightly hilly area could he seen along the horizon. Parts of the spacecraft, including antennas of receivers, transmitters, and dihedral mirrors reflecting sections of the lunar surface, were visible in forefront of panorama. At the bottom, lying on the ground, was section of rocket which had been thrown aside during landing. (Grose, NY~T, 2/8/66, 1, 20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/1/db, Al, AS)
NASA named crews for second and third manned Apollo missions, scheduled for 1967. Prime crewmen for AS-205/208 were James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell Schweickart; backup crew was Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Prime crewmen for AS-503, first manned flight using Saturn V launch vehicle, were Frank Borman, Michael Collins, and William A. Anders; backup crew was Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and C. C. Williams, Jr. (nasa Release 66-326)
NASA’s Project Gemini officially ended. From first manned flight in March 1965, Gemini had achieved its goals: demonstration of ability to rendezvous and dock with target vehicle; demonstration of value of manned spacecraft for scientific and technological experimentation; performance of work by astronauts in space; use of powered, fueled satellite to provide primary and secondary propulsion for docked spacecraft; long-duration space flights without ill effect on astronauts; and precision landing of spacecraft. Records set during Gemini program included: (1) longest manned space flight (330 hrs. 35 min.); (2) altitude (851 mi.); and (3) longest total of Eva (5 hrs. 28 min.) in one flight. Total U.S. man hours in space to date: 1,993 hrs. 34 min. msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth told a news conference: "We have done all the things we had to do as a prelude to Apollo. I believe the Gemini program has been most successful.” (nasa Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A6; Tech. Wk, 11/21/66, 16; ATT, 11/20/66, 2E)
General Precision Equipment Corp. received $8.6-million nasa contract to provide three sets of equipment to modify Apollo simulators at ksc. {WSJ, 11/2/66, 3)
President Johnson sent FY 1967 budget request to Congress including total space budget of $6.8 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5,012 billion (nasa had originally requested $5.58 billion); dod, $1.65 billion; aec, $173.7 million; Environmental Science Services Administration, $27 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.8 million. NASA R&D program was a major area of reduced expenditure with reduction of approximately $186 million (comparedwith FY1966 appropriation) mostly absorbed by the sharp drop in requirements for Project Gemini. With only three flights remaining to be made in FY 1967, the total budget dropped from $226.6 million in FY 1966 to $40.6 million requested for FY 1967. Sum included $19.1 million for the spacecraft and $8.5 million for mission support. There was also a reduction of some $54 million in lunar and planetary exploration and $12 million in physics and astronomy. Funding for Project Apollo increased slightly—from $2,967 billion in FY 1966 to $2,974 billion, including $1.2 billion for spacecraft (as compared with FY 1966’s $1.17-billion level). $100 million requested for Apollo Applications (Aa) program—once considered the single program with any potential for new major funding—was not approved. Major portions of the dod space budget would be spent on development of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)—which would be slowed down with no increase in funds over the $150 million allowed in FY 1966; development and launch operations costs of the Titan III launch vehicle; continuation of the reconnaissance and Vela nuclear detection satellite programs; navigational satellite launches; and initial launch of a satellite by the Defense Communications Satellite System, dod budget also provided for initiation of procurement of the FB-111B aircraft and development of a new short-range air-to-surface missile (Sram). aec’s budget allotment for space programs included $78 million for Project Rover; $39.5 million for testing of the Nerva engine system; and $8.2 million for testing of the Snap-8 nuclear reactor. essa’s Tiros weather satellite program would involve expenditures in FY 1967 of $17 million for spacecraft and launchings and approximately $10 million for data acquisition, processing, and archiving. faa’s FY 1967 budget request for $758 million contained $80 million for six more months of supersonic transport research. (Text; Wash. Post, 1/25/66, A10; Schmeck, NYT, 1/25/66, 1; Av. Wk., 1/31/66, 23, 29, 30; M&R, 1/31/66, 25)
Scheduled test of Apollo Launch Escape System (Les) at WSMR was postponed indefinitely due to heavy cloud cover. Countdown for the Little Joe II had proceeded to minus 30 min. [See Jan. 20.] (upi, NYT, 1/19/66, 38)
Karl Harr, president of Aerospace Industries Assn., spoke before the Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn.: "As we stand at the end of one record year of achievements and at the beginning of a year that we confidently predict will establish new records on all fronts, will historians view this point of time as having any particular significance from an aerospace point of view? After all we’re not going to the moon next year and we didn’t inject man into space for the first time last year. . . . "I believe historians may come to regard about this point of time as being the point when the aerospace business completed its transition from a matter of only peripheral concern to the total public interest, into the mainstream of American life. . . .” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, outlining the NASA manned spaceflight program at American Assn, of School Administrators meeting in Atlantic City, discussed the benefits to man on earth of the Apollo Applications program: ". . . man would have the capability of establishing world-wide, real-time television by placing large antennas and powerful transmitters into synchronous orbit; of establishing control towers in space both for aircraft and ocean-going ships; of using space observations to identify and exploit earth’s natural resources; and of controlling the weather.” (Text)
aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg discussed space role of nuclear energy in keynote address at Western Electronic Show and Convention in Los Angeles. In addition to advantages of nuclear propulsion, Dr. Seaborg said Snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) systems offered: (1) independence of sunlight, permitting use in shadow of a planet or moon and at great distances from the sun; (2) reduced atmospheric drag and propellant weight for maintaining low orbits of manned orbiting stations; and (3) larger quantities of electric power. He suggested nuclear power systems assembled on the moon could not only provide heating, cooling, and electric power, but could extract water and minerals and help produce synthetic food. (Text)
Television system on U.S.S.R.’s luna ix, which transmitted first pictures from moon Feb. 3-6, weighed less than 1.5 kgs. (3.3 lbs.), disclosed the Soviet designers of this equipment in an Izvestia interview. Since the TV camera had to "distinguish minute details of the surface and transmit to earth simultaneously the landscape around the spot where it landed,” a miniature Vega photocamera with lens that could "photograph at distances from two meters to infinity without focusing” had been used. First "radio communication session with the moon” began within 4 min. 10 sec. after the soft-landing and first television reportage began within seven hours. Complete panoramic scanning took 100 min. Future probes of moon’s surface would use camera coupled with microscope for minute study of the lurain. (Izvestia, 2/19/66, 1)
After trip from Seal Beach, Calif., aboard usns Pt. Barrow, S-II-F facilities stage—nonflight version of Saturn V/Apollo launch vehicle’s 2nd stage—arrived at ksc for use in testing launch facilities. Stage would be mated with two other facilities stages and an Apollo spacecraft mockup to form the 365-ft.-tall Saturn V launch vehicle. This would mark first time all major components would have been joined in the Saturn V configuration, (msfc Release 66-47)
Performance of Apollo Command Module (Cm), launched Feb. 26 from etr on AS-201 flight, was successful enough to obviate any delay in schedule for a 1969 manned lunar expedition, Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, told Gladwin Hill of the New York Times. The Cm, on display at North American Aviation, Inc., in Downey, Calif., remained structurally intact, and the few minor technical problems that had developed during flight were not serious enough to cause any engineering problems in the assembly-line production vehicles for subsequent phases of the testing program, Dr. Shea said. "This was the first major confirmation of design processes and it went quite well.” (Hill, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
First soft-landing on moon was made by U.S.S.R. when luna ix spacecraft softlanded an instrument package near Ocean of Storms west of the Reiner and Marius craters. Instrument package began relaying telemetric signals to earth immediately and Tass said "information received from the station is being processed and studied.” Landing sequence, as later described by Tass, began 8,300 km. (5,155 mi.) above moon approximately one hour before touchdown when LUNA ix was oriented vertically to the moon. At 77-km. (47-mi.) altitude, 48 sec. before touchdown, radar system aimed at lunar surface turned on the retrorocket and shock-absorbing system was prepared. Less than one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to less than 10 mph, instrument capsule was ejected. Rocket crashed and 4 min. 10 sec. after instrument capsule had landed, its petal-like covering and antennas opened and radio transmissions began. Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced luna ix had transmitted facsimile pictures of the moon from the time it landed at 1:45 p.m. est until 2:05 p.m. est, gone olf the air, and then resumed signals shortly after 9:00 p.m. est. Soviet spokesman declined to confirm report. British scientists were unable to translate signals into pictures but recorded them on magnetic tapes. U.S.S.R.’s four previous attempts to softland spacecraft on the moon had failed: luna v, launched May 9, 1965; luna vi, launched June 8, 1965; luna vii, launched Oct. 4, 1965; and luna viii, launched Dec. 3, 1965. (Tass, Pravda, 2/4/66, 1, uss-t Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/4/66, Al, A13; Grose, NYT, 2/4/66, 1, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star. 2/4/66, Al, A6; 2/6/66, A14)
International Assn, of Machinists (iam) struck five major airlines including twa, which provided base support services at ksc. Some work on Project Apollo was curtailed, but NASA officials said essential operations were continuing, (upi, NYT, 7/9/66)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, visited msfc to review technological and scientific progress on work being conducted by msfc for ossa projects, including Apollo Telescope Mount, x-ray astronomy experiment, and several other astronomy experiments. Accompanying Dr. Newell were his deputies, Edgar M. Cortright and Dr. John E. Naugle, and directors of ossa program offices, (msfc Release 66-256)
NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 launch vehicle was launched from etb with dummy Surveyor payload. Centaur stage’s failure to achieve successful double ignition in space caused 1,730-lb. dummy Surveyor payload to remain in earth orbit with the Centaur stage rather than enter simulated lunar trajectory as programed. Orbital parameters: apogee, 208 mi. (335 km.); perigee, 113 mi. (182 km.); period, 90 min.; inclination, 31°. Eighty minutes after launch NASA officials at ksc announced that only one of booster’s two hydrogen-fueled RL-10 rocket engines had fired the second time. Both engines were to have ignited for approximate 107-sec. burn and inserted payload into lunar trajectory. Later analysis of data indicated the failure was because of a malfunction in Centaur’s attitude control system [see May 3]. Purpose of AC-8 mission was to demonstrate Centaur’s capability to restart its high-energy engines in the space environment following coast period in earth orbit. Success of this mission was vital to nasa’s first operational mission which would attempt to land Surveyor spacecraft on the moon. Centaur program was directed by NASA ossa and managed by lrc. (nasa Releases 66-58, 66-92; nasa Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 4/8/66, A9; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/8/66)
Tass announced that luna xi had become second U.S.S.R. satellite to circle moon when it entered lunar orbit Aug. 27 with 1,200-km. (745-mi.) apolune; 160-km. (99-mi.) perilune; 2 hr. 58-min. period; and 270° inclination. In first official statement since Aug. 24 launch, agency reported that midcourse maneuver had been successfully executed Aug. 26 and that onboard equipment was functioning normally, luna x began orbiting moon April 3—first spacecraft to do so—but did not transmit photos to earth. (Tass, Pravda, 8/30/66, 1; AP, Wash. Post, 8/25/66, A3)
Hughes Aircraft Co. engineer’s smuggling of a small U.S. flag on nasa’s surveyor I spacecraft which softlanded on the moon June 2 was a breach of discipline and a violation of international space policy, wrote Joshua Lederberg in the Washington Post. ". . . NASA policy requires 'minimum contamination’ so that the moon can remain a useful preserve for the detection of any life that might be transported by, say, meteorites. This calls for 'clean room’ standards during the assembly of spacecraft components. "A bootlegged flag which could not have been subjected to such control for decontamination is a clear violation of a policy to which this country’s honor has been attached and calls for strenuous disciplinary measures to insure the integrity and credibility of purpose of our future exploratory missions.” (Lederberg, Wash. Post, 8/7/66)
nasa might have attempted to send Surveyor spacecraft to the moon in tion Week contended. NASA had wanted to rush Surveyor into launch that would have landed during lunar night rather than preferred daylight opportunity, to ensure that U.S. achieved first soft-landing before U.S.S.R. (Av. Wk., 7/4/66, 15)
NASA had assigned msfc project management of Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) for Apollo Applications (Aa) missions. A combination of accurate, high-resolution, solar-oriented telescopes, Atm would be attached to spacecraft so that astronauts could manually adjust it to select and focus upon a specific area on the sun. (nasa Release 66-185)
Press briefing was held at LaRC on results of nasa’s lunar orbiter i mission, launched Aug. 10 from etr to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progressively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or "blocks,” proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where surveyor i was resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare— flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters—it had 20 per cent fewer craters than any of the other sites. U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr. Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near surveyor i ana a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: "The moon is not a cold, dead, lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr. Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in two general directions—northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest —and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred along these lines. LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the "bulge” theory. Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any "hits” during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks. Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter B—second of five satellites in series—would be launched between Nov. 6 and 11 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by lunar orbiter i. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
Indications were increasing that President Johnson would accede to pressure from White House fiscal advisers to cut $1 billion from Project Apollo budget as part of effort to reduce proposed FY 1967 Government spending by $4 billion, Leslie Carpenter reported in the Washington Sunday Star. It was contended that reduction would postpone manned lunar landing by only two years, putting it between 1970-72 rather than 1968-70. nasa Administrator James E. Webb, opposing the move, argued it would raise the overall cost and permit the U.S.S.R. to beat the U.S. to the moon. (Carpenter, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A21)
International scientific community commented on luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon. Dr. William Pickering, Director of jpl, offered congratulations and said: "The difficulty of the task is attested to by the number of previous attempts to accomplish a soft landing on the moon. The success of this mission has already added to our knowledge of the lunar surface. We now await with interest the scientific data which will be received in the next few days.” Heinz Kaminski, chief of Bochum Observatory, West Germany: "American space flight technology is on a high level of perfection which the Russians just can’t match.” Dr. L. R. Shepherd, president of British Interplanetary Society: "[Soft-landing on the moon is] much more difficult than the orbit rendezvous achieved by the Americans.” Dr. Shotaro Miyamoto, chief of Kyoto Univ. astronomical observatory, Japan: "Soviet landing means men and materials will now be sent to the moon and its development accelerated.” (NYT, 2/5/66, 11; 2/6/66, Ell)
Taped conversations between Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and ground controllers disclosing the drama of the emergency but revealing nothing of the difficulty that had caused emergency landing March 16 of gemini viii were released at msc press conference. There was no indication of panic aboard the spacecraft during motion. In an "almost matter-of-fact tone,” Armstrong had reported to msc: "Well, we consider the problem serious. We are toppling end-over-end. . . . We cannot turn anything off.” It was announced there would be no public discussion of their mission by Armstrong and Scott for at least nine days during which they would rest and undergo debriefing at KSC. msc Director Robert R. Gilruth announced that preparations for the
Resources of U.S. space program were minimal "while the Russians apparently are increasing theirs,” Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told a news conference at mtf. "Competition in space is not lessening with time, but rather is increasing. What is needed is a clear definition of where the nation is going in space after the moon is explored.” (Russell, Miami Her., 5/3/66)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) commented on collision of XB-70 and F-104 aircraft: "This accident must serve as a reminder to the American public and to the world that all of the potential hazards of aircraft and space flight can never be entirely eliminated from our experimental program. The phenomenal success of our manned space flight programs Mercury and Gemini and the remaining flights of Gemini and the flights of Apollo . . . share the risk that Walker, White, and Cross faced each time they flew to test the XB-70.” (CR, 6/8/66)
NASA and ComSatCorp had signed agreement for satellite communications services to support Apollo program. ComSatCorp would provide voice/ data channels and teletype channels in synchronous satellites to be positioned over Pacific and Atlantic oceans by NASA. Draft tariff filed by ComSatCorp with fcc estimated that cost of services would be $8.95 million annually, (nasa Release 66-178; ComSatCorp Release)
Harold B. Finger, Director, nasa Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div. and Manager, aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed nasa and aec programs to provide nuclear energy systems for space applications before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: "A major new program initiated by the aec at nasa’s request during 1965 is the development of the snap-27 isotope-thermoelectric generator to power experiments that will be left on the Moon by the Apollo astronauts. This Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (alsep) is intended to transmit data . . . for at least a year. The snap-27 isotope power supply will provide 50 watts to the experiments and will weigh about 40 pounds. It will use a single plutonium loaded fuel capsule which will be inserted into the generator on the lunar surface by the astronauts.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 541)
nasa selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $6.9-million msfc contract to develop and produce three pointing-control-system (Pcs) units for the Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm), (nasa Release 66-309) Week of November 28: French space officials reported partial success for first firing of an experimental Coralie rocket from Hammaguir Range. Rocket, second stage of eldo’s Europa booster, underwent nominal countdown, launch, and flight until T+62 sec., when circuit malfunction prevented monitoring to T+100 sec. as planned. (Av. Wk., 12/5/66, 30)
U.S. should divert funds from nasa’s Apollo program and from Federal highway projects to improve urban housing and transportation systems, Sen. Eugene J. McCarthy (D-Minn.) suggested to International Conference of Social Work in Washington, D.C. (Honsa, Wash. Post, 9/9/66, A14)
Potential of U.S. space program was described by Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), NASA Director of Field Center Development, OMSF, in a speech before Michigan Assn, of the Professions in Detroit. "Man’s exploration of space, the moon and the planets is potentially the greatest inspirational venture in the history of man, and one in which the entire world can share. Thus, the exploration of the space frontier can well provide the seed for new flowering—sparking a Twentieth Century Renaissance, stirring man’s imagination, ennobling his ambitions, and igniting his spirit with fresh hope and excitement. As the European Renaissance was sparked by the discovery of new continents and seas, so a new Age of Discovery in many arenas may well be awakened by man’s venture into space. . . .” (Text)
Funeral of Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was held in Red Square. After eulogies by Leonid Smirnov, deputy chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers; Mstislav Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary; and Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the funeral procession moved to the Kremlin wall where the urn containing Korolev’s ashes was placed in a niche. Commentary in the New York Times: "Death has finally declassified the role and identity of Academician Sergei P. Korolev, the man who provided the scientific and technical leadership of the vast Soviet rocket program. The extraordinary pomp of his state funeral in Red Square contrasted sharply with the almost complete anonymity imposed on him while he was alive. In the most fruitful years of his career, the man who led the Soviet Union’s march into the cosmos from the first sputnik to Leonov’s 'walk in space’ was normally referred to in the Soviet press only as the mysterious 'chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were powerful enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photograph the back side of the moon. But they were too weak to break the chains of secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause he deserved.” (Tass, 1/18/66; NYT, 1/20/66, 31)
Space negotiations played important roie in visit of West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard to U.S. Following discussions with President Johnson, joint statement was released from White House: "The President and the Chancellor discussed possibilities for increased cooperation in technology and science and in particular in the field of space research. The Chancellor expressed his satisfaction that effective steps toward increased cooperation in space research have been initiated since his last meeting with the President in December 1965. The President and the Chancellor welcomed the decision to expand the present cooperative satellite program reached as a result of the recent discussions in Bonn between NASA Administrator Webb and Minister of Science Stoltenberg. "The President and the Chancellor agreed that scientific cooperation should be pressed forward for the mutual benefit of both countries and the advancement of human knowledge, preserving opportunities for additional nations to participate and contribute.” President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, later flew from Washington, D.C., to Cape Kennedy for tour of ksc. During speech in Vehicle Assembly Building, President Johnson said he was discussing "with the Chancellor, as well as other leaders, my hope that our scientists can join in joint endeavors to reap the full benefits of space research.” He said he had authorized Administrator Webb "to discuss whether solar physicists from Europe may wish to be associated with the American solar physicists” in program for Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) to be flown "on an Apollo flight in order to study the sun at the height of the solar cycle.” Appealing to the U.S.S.R. for early conclusion of a treaty on outer space exploration, Johnson said: "I earnestly hope that the Soviet Union—whose space achievements have been very great—will feel as we fee] in America: that the rapid evolution of space technology makes ... a treaty between us governing the use of space a most urgent matter ... as we explore the vastness of space, and as we dream of new horizons, we work, too, for the manmade controls that will keep these efforts at the service of man and at the service of peace.” He noted that the U.S. sought and would continue to seek cooperation in space with U.S.S.R.: "We have an agreement to exchange certain kinds of space data. . . . We will soon publish jointly American and Soviet material on space biology and medicine.” The President also mentioned that the U.S, was "on schedule in our plan and our determination to put men on the moon before 1970.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1365-6, 1370; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/66, Cl)
A Soviet victory in the race to achieve first manned lunar landing "would be a worldwide propaganda disgrace because we ourselves chose the target . . . [and] a crushing political blow at home to the President linked with it, which the present White House incumbent has been from the inception,” wrote William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets. He suggested a possible solution: ". .. extend the U.S. national goal prior to a manned lunar landing by either the U.S. or the Soviet Union. Then, if the Russians were the first to arrive on the Moon, we would be in a position to gracefully acknowledge their achievement while pointing out that to us the Moon was but a way-station en route to a more distant objective. If we accomplished the first landing, we would also have the benefits of victory. But we would not be so exposed in the event of a defeat. . . . "Without establishment of a higher goal and a greater challenge, U.S. space capability will dissipate. NASA efforts to prevent this by getting a worthwhile Apollo Applications Program under way have not met with notable success. This provides a second good reason for lifting our national goal. . . .” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/2/66, 46) During week of May 2: msc officials had not pinpointed exact cause, but had isolated probable cause of faulty thruster which prematurely terminated Gemini viii mission March 16, Missiles and Rockets reported. Corrective action would affect all these components on Gemini 9 and later spacecraft. Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews emphasized that thruster and its associated hardware and electronics were contained in adapter module abandoned by crew in orbit prior to reentry. "If we can believe telemetry data, we can isolate the cause of the problem to either spacecraft wiring or thruster valve solenoids,” Mathews said. Specific trouble spot within wiring or valve solenoids would be difficult to determine without testing actual equipment. (M&R, 5/9/66, 17)
Astronauts Armstrong and Scott landed safely in Honolulu after KC-135 jet aircraft carrying them from Okinawa to ksc lost oil pressure in its number two engine about 800 mi. east of Hawaii. Armstrong and Scott had earlier received an enthusiastic reception—-with brass band— when they disembarked at Okinawa from recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard F.	Mason for flight to Honolulu, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/19/66, A4; AP, NYT, 3/18/66, 21)
U.S.S.R. pilot Aleksey Anosov had established new world’s distance record for helicopter with 1,509-km. (938-mi.) flight in MI-1 helicopter from Sumi in the Ukraine to the Orenburg region in the Urals. Previous record of 900 mi. (1,449 km.) had been set by Capt. Chester R. Radcliffe, Jr. (usaf), July 5, 1962. (Wash. Post, 9/14/66, B2) a NASA manned space flight program, the greater part of logistics is not being provided by the Department of Defense. . . . "However, the need for increasing the emphasis on logistics management for Apollo is great. . . . "The Apollo Saturn space vehicle involves 20,000 contractors and subcontractors and has more than 900,000 individual parts. The Saturn V first stage holds 56 tank cars of propellants. The second and third stages of Saturn V transported by water during the Apollo program will spend a total of 700 days at sea. Apollo program transportation by all modes will require coordination with nine Government agencies. The launch windows for the Apollo lunar mission are relatively small, malfunctions on the pad must be kept to a minimum while corrective maintenance must be extremely fast and reliable. All of these elements make the Apollo logistics program both complicated and costly. . . .” (msfc Release 66-202; Text)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott arrived at ksc to begin an intensive three-day conference with Gemini project officials to attempt to reconstruct events leading to their loss of control of the gemini viii spacecraft March 16. Scott told a crowd at the airstrip that "the lift off, launching, rendezvous, and docking were really tremendous. We were really looking forward to the whole mission.” Armstrong agreed, adding: "We had a magnificent flight in the first seven hours. It was a magnificent launch—without a doubt one of the best there’s ever been.” (AP, NYT, 3/20/66, 82)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
Successful mock launching of Gemini 8 spacecraft at etr in preparation for March 15 three-day rendezvous and docking mission. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and David Scott spent two and one-half hours in Gemini capsule during simulated spaceflight, (dpi, NYT, 3/10/66, 10)
U.S. Bureau of Standards chemists had developed an advanced rocket fuel which might be used in spaceflights to the moon and other planets. A mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen called "slush hydrogen,” the fuel involved a freeze-thaw process which could be used to produce large quantities for storage, (nana, Boston Sunday Globe, 1/9/66)
Invention of reusable turbo-rocket engine, which could launch spacecraft for 1/10 current U.S. costs, was announced by Rolls Royce at British Assn, for the Advancement of Science meeting in Nottingham, U.K. Engine had been designed in titanium, but compressor blades could be made of hifil—new fiber-reinforced plastic five times as stiff as titanium, more reliable, lighter, and less expensive. Partly air-breathing turbo-rocket—cross between jet engine and rocket—would be fueled on kerosene and liquid oxygen. Battery of 48 turborockets—each weighing 1,000 lbs. and capable of generating 22,000 lbs. thrust—could boost Apollo spacecraft to 25,000-ft. altitude in fraction of a second and then be landed by remote control. Reported cost of launch would be $2.8 million compared to $28 million with U.S. booster. (Houston Chron., 9/5/66)
dod and NASA signed agreement specifying funding arrangements, responsibilities, and general procedures to be followed in acquisition, modification, test, and associated administration of the Apollo/Range Instrumentation Aircraft (A/Ria), which would provide telemetry and communication relay support for Apollo and other national missile and space programs. National Range Division (nrd) of afsc would exercise overall management responsibility for A/Ria project. (Text; NASA nmi 1052.67)
New York Times reported hint by Leonid I. Dubrovin, chief of 11th U.S.S.R. Antarctic expedition, broadcast by radio from Mirny Antarctic station, "that the Soviet Union planned to use the Antarctic as a testing ground for manned landings on the moon.” Dubrovin had said fierce Antarctic conditions would test man’s adaptability and scientists could learn much there "that would help man to survive in the desolate conditions of the moon.” (NYT, 5/1/66, 15)
Cosmonaut-pilots would head crews of all spacecraft landing on the moon in the future because landing "cannot be fully trusted to machines,” Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev predicted in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Belyayev, who manually landed voskhod ii March 19, 1965, said that two methods of braking were possible: jet engines and use of aerodynamic forces. (Tass, 11/4/66)
Lack of major manned spaceflight goal beyond Apollo Applications (Aa) program was causing NASA to delay Saturn booster development for at least two years, reported George Alexander in Aviation Week. Major Saturn contractors, facing end of current production contracts, wondered which derivatives would be chosen for development and when development and production would begin. Although current inventory of Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) and Saturn V vehicles was sufficient for programs through Aa, future missions might require a "super booster” with 280,000-lb. payload capacity or an intermediate vehicle with 40,000-lb. payload capacity. (Alexander, Av. Wk., 8/8/66, 59-78)
All primary mission objectives of first unmanned Apollo Saturn IB mission Feb. 26 were achieved and flight was very satisfactory according to initial evaluation of test results, nasa announced. Guidance and control systems performed well; both S-IB and S-IVB trajectories and velocities were normal and no structural problems were found in either stage or instrument unit. Quality of data received at ground stations was excellent and few losses occurred in expected 1,300 measurements telemetered. All spacecraft systems and subsystems performed as planned with two exceptions: (1) one of the main parachute harness legs failed to sever after landing, thus retaining chute attached to module; and (2) Service Module (Sm) propulsion system exhibited below nominal performance during both firing periods resulting in reentry speed about 500 mph less than 18,500 mph expected, but sufficient to evaluate performance of heatshield for orbital missions. Earth landing system functioned properly to safely recover Cm, and unsevered parachute was recovered for post-mission examination. Spacecraft would be flown to Downey, Calif., for detailed inspection by nasa and naa Apollo officials and tests for improvements, (nasa Proj. Off.; msfc Release 66-51)
Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had developed a 7M-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage. (Gibbons, WSJ, 1/21/66, 1)
President Johnson, in his State of the Union address to the joint session of Congress, proposed a "program to construct and to flight-test a new supersonic transport airplane that will fly three times the speed of sound—in excess of 2,000 miles per hour.” No mention of the space program was made in the address. This fact received comment in Aviation Week: "Mentioned or not, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has decided to stake out a top spot in domestic prestige after Apollo. . . . The agency now will take the initiative.” (Pres. Doc., 1/17/66, 31; Av. Wk., 1/17/66, 25)
Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams, and William W. Williams, Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers, had been named recipients of Wright Brothers Medal by Society of Automotive Engineers for group report on development of soft-field and rough-field landing gear. (Av. Wk., 9/19/66, 25) jpl engineers, uncertain of cause of malfunction, speculated it might be result of stuck valve or insufficient power to operate engine’s triggering mechanism. They said unless it was corrected, surveyor ii could not softland since all three vernier engines were needed to stabilize spacecraft during decelerating descent to lunar surface. On Sept. 22, when it became apparent the mission could not be completed, engineering experiments were performed to obtain as much data as possible on spacecraft performance. All communication with spacecraft was lost 30 sec. after main retro ignition at 5:34 a.m. edt. Probable cause was mechanical failure within telecommunications subsystem due to centrifugal forces generated by high tumbling rate. surveyor ii impacted in area of moon southeast of crater Copernicus about 11:18 p.m. edt. Spacecraft was second in series of seven flights to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo; it contained survey television system and instrumentation to measure lunar surface bearing strength, temperatures, and radar reflectivity, surveyor i, identically equipped, was launched May 30, successfully softlanded on moon June 2 in region of Oceanus Procellarum, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor program was under direction of ossa’s Lunar and Planetary Div.; project management was assigned to jpl; Atlas-Centaur booster was managed by lrc; prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Release 66-248; NASA Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/21/66, Al; Wilford, NYT, 9/22/66, 2; NYT, 9/23/66, 25)
President Johnson’s waning interest in space was postponing NASA’s decision on a post-Apollo program, William Hines suggested in the Washington Evening Star, "nasa ... is more to be pitied than censured for this silence. The agency has been led down the primrose path by . . . [President Johnson] who suddenly lost interest in the now shopworn ingenue. "nasa has no plans because . . . [he] has permitted it to make none; aspirations yes, but plans no. ...” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A23) *	nasa would negotiate $ 15-million fixed-price incentive contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. for 14 improved 2nd stages for Delta launch vehicle. GSFC would manage contract, (nasa Release 66-321) *	afsc announced awards to four aerospace companies: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $2-million initial increment to a $14-million fixed-price contract for production of Agena launch vehicles; Douglas Aircraft Co., $2.5-million initial increment to a $17.5-million fixed-price letter contract for production of Thor launch vehicles; and Aerojet-General Corp., $2.9-million initial increment to a $54.5-million contract, and TRW Inc., $2.9-million initial increment to a $50-million contract, both for r&d in an unmanned space technology program, (dod Release 1048-66; WSJ, 12/16/66, 4) *	News briefing on Project Apollo was held at msc. Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, said nasa hoped to launch three manned Apollo missions in 1967 involving "essentially every test that needs to get done in order to insure that the lunar operation is proper.” He outlined the flights: (1) AS-204—three-man, earth-orbital mission of up to 14 days to check out crew, spacecraft, and ground equipment; (2) AS-205/208—10- to 12-day flight in which Uprated Saturn I boosters would launch an Apollo spacecraft with three-man crew and an unmanned Lunar Module (Lm) on successive days for rendezvous mission; and (3) AS-503—full-duration lunar mission rehearsal in earth orbit in which single Saturn V would launch manned Apollo spacecraft and Lm. Shea warned against undue optimism about a manned lunar landing in 1968. "It is literally true that there is no planned date at the present time for the lunar operation . . . and I don’t see how there can be until we have had hardware in orbit to understand what vestigial problems still remain.” Donald Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, said that third, nonflying crew had been added to each Apollo mission for additional ground support. He also revealed that training for astronauts selected for Apollo lunar missions would be 40 weeks—14 weeks longer than Gemini training course. Comparing Mercury and Apollo training programs, AS-204 Command Pilot Virgil I. Grissom said: "When we started training for Mercury, we didn’t know what to train for. So we did everything. .. . Training for Apollo has been pretty straight forward. We know what we need to know and we know that we have to learn about the spacecraft, how to operate it and get our flight plan and our mission rules squared away. Back early in Mercury ... we were worried about whether a man could live and survive ... so we did a lot of things like spinning around in 3 axis machines that we don’t feel you really need anymore. . . .” Grissom confirmed that AS-204 mission would carry camera for live television coverage. (Text; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/66, A3)
Martin Co. had been awarded a three-month, $75,000 contract to design and develop a flight-qualified, lightweight, hand-held lunar core driller for use on Apollo missions, msc announced. Similar contract, also for $75,000, had been awarded Northrop Space Laboratories. {Chic. Trib., 8/18/66) Ford Foundation president McGeorge Bundy said that although the use of profits from a commercial business to finance a noncommercial undertaking might be novel to television, creation of a special carrier service in the public interest was not without precedent. He cited the Government’s granting of special mailing privileges to newspapers and magazines. Bundy disclosed the Ford Foundation was planning to arrange "a series of meetings in various parts of the country with potential users of a noncommercial satellite system.” Fred W. Friendly, TV consultant to Bundy, described what he said was the underlying irony of modem TV: commercial networks had the money to do qualitative public service but lacked sufficient time on the air, while educational TV had the time but lacked the money. ComSatCorp chairman James McCormack said the heart of the Ford proposal called for the 'Tunneling of savings” that might be enjoyed by commercial communications carriers into support of a cultural undertaking. While acknowledging the value of educational TV, McCormack said he felt only Congress could rule whether one segment of a diversified society could be compelled to support another segment without benefit of specific legislation to that end. AT&T vice president Richard Hough, itt executive Bertram B. Tower, and Western Union Telegraph Co. vice president Earl D. Hilburn challenged the proposal saying that any such communications system should adhere to the common carrier principle of serving all users rather than any particular group such as broadcasters. While these witnesses supported the objective, they questioned the feasibility of the plan on economic and technical grounds. Tower suggested that consideration be given to permitting special rates for educational TV services through existing common carriers. Hilburn said that rate adjustments in favor of educational broadcasters might be authorized if some form of subsidy were determined to be in the national interest. Sen. John O. Pastore (D-R.I.), who had called the hearings, said they were a "prelude” to action by fcc and noted that Congress almost certainly would want to explore the implications of the Ford proposal as it related to a private corporation. Hearings were completed Aug. 23. (ComSatCorp Releases; Gould, NYT, 8/18/66, 59; Wash. Post, 8/18/66, A12; AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/66, A2)
U.S.S.R. objected to a U.S. proposal to allow military equipment to be used on the moon or other celestial bodies for peaceful purposes, Platon Morozov, deputy acting permanent U.S.S.R. U.N. representative, told the Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space meeting in Geneva to draft a treaty governing outer space exploration. He said such a provision would create a loophole for violations; he was prepared, however, to accept with a few minor modifications other provisions of U.S. draft article. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 7/23/66)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xi that entered orbit around the moon Aug. 27 was described as containing "an entire orchestra of rocket engines.” Vladimir Orlov, writing in Pravda, said the spacecraft contained in addition to its main power system a braking engine installation and "four directing engines with comparatively small thrust.” (AP, NYT, 9/1/66, 2) .	.	...
Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, chief adviser on geology for Interior Dept.’s Geological Survey, proposed 10-yr. lunar exploration program following first Apollo astronaut landings late in this decade that "would have nothing to do with exploiting natural resources of the moon.” He explained: "We are using our mineral resources at a fantastic rate. What we really need to sustain our economic needs in the years ahead is a . . . theory about how the earth was formed. A good way to develop this theory would be by comparison with another celestial body—and the moon is just such a body.” Cost would be some $1.5 billion a year. Proposal was made during interview with William Hines, Washington Evening Star. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9121/66, A9)
gemini xii pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., told msc news conference that with proper equipment, like the waist straps and foot restraints he used during Eva, a man could work outside with no fear of fatigue—if he were well trained. Following press conference, Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of msc, ksc, nasa Hq., and industry Gemini program participants flew to lbj Ranch for visit with President Johnson, who said: "The splendid performance of man and machine in Gemini has been a product of the American system at its best. "The months ahead will not be easy as we reach toward the moon.... But with Gemini as the forerunner, I am confident that we will overcome the difficulties and achieve another success.” Group returned to MSC for formal awards ceremony. Receiving NASA Exceptional Service Medal were Gemini xii crewmen James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Col. John G. Albert (usaf), etr; Osro H. Covington, gsfc; and John D. Hodge, MSC. NASA Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. George E. Mueller, omsf; and Charles W. Mathews, MSC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: Robert F. Thompson, msc; John J. Williams, ksc; and M/G Vincent G. Houston (usaf), etr. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: James A. Chamberlin, MSC. NASA Public Service Award: John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Bastian Hello, Martin Co.; Bernhard A. Hohmann, Aerospace Corp.; Walter D. Smith, Martin Co.; Walter F. Burke, McDonnell; Louis D. Wilson, Aerojet-General; Lawrence A. Smith, Lockheed; William B. Bergen, Martin Co.; George M. Bunker, Martin Marietta; B/G Paul T. Cooper, afsc Space Systems Div.; Daniel J. Haughton, Lockheed; Roger Lewis, General Dynamics; James S. McDonnell, McDonnell Aircraft; R. I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L. Eugene Root, Lockheed; David S. Lewis, McDonnell; and Jack A. Bowers, Martin Marietta. NASA Superior Achievement Award: Arthur W. Vogeley, Richard J. Allen, LeRoy E. Day, John A. Edwards, Eldon W. Hall, Vearl N. Huff, and William A. Summerfelt, NASA Hq.; and Anthony L. Liccardi. NASA Group Achievement Award: Gemini Astronaut Team, Manned Spaceflight Network Team, Gemini Spacecraft Launch Team, Gemini Program Office at MSC, Gemini Program Office at NASA Hq., and Gemini Support Team at msc. (msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 8; Sheehan, NYT, 11/24/66, 36; Pres. Doc., 11/28/66, 1718-9)
NASA Lewis Research Center, first Government laboratory devoted to flight propulsion in all its aspects, celebrated its 25th anniversary. Authorized by Congress in 1940, the naca facility was originally called the Aircraft Engine Research Lab.; it was renamed the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in 1948 in honor of Dr. George W. Lewis, former naca Director of Aeronautical Research (1924-47). In 1958, when naca facilities and personnel were absorbed by the newly created NASA, the facility became the Lewis Research Center. From an initial Congressional appropriation of $2 million in 1941, LRC had emerged as a major research and development laboratory valued at $200 million. Marking the anniversary, LRC Director Dr. Abe Silverstein said: "Man isn’t going to be held to a single conquest or success. The past decade has seen aviation and rocketry undergo phenomenal change, but we’ve just started to realize its potential. The present generation will live to fly better than 2,000 mph in commercial aircraft and to observe at close range the interplanetary exploits of U.S. astronauts. The past 25 years have witnessed truly remarkable strides in aeronautics and space activities. In 1941, man had the capability to fly 300 mph and to attain altitudes of perhaps 30,000 ft. Today, he orbits the earth at 17,500 mph and in a few years will set foot on the moon and possibly later Mars.” (lrc Release 66-1; Lewis News, 1/23/66, 1-12; upi, Miami Herald, 1/24/66)
usns Kingsport, first ocean link in U.S. research in satellite communications, was retired from nasa’s networks and returned to dod. In July 1963 Kingsport had participated in world’s first demonstration of communications by satellite in synchronous orbit when a message was sent in 45,000-mi. loop from Kingsport anchored in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, to syncom ii comsat and back. Several days later, she was part of first direct exchange of radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst, N.J., terminal station with land circuits at Lagos. On Aug. 4, Kingsport and Lakehurst transmitted and received via syncom ii first satellite exchange of news copy and photo facsimile. Several days later, caught in a squall 40 mi. offshore, she became first terminal station to establish satellite communications from the open sea. Two months later, she participated in first trans-ocean press conference by satellite: stationed at Rota, Spain, she connected syncom ii communications between United Nations in New York City and NASA Hq. in Washington, D.C., with the International Telecommunications Union Conference in Geneva. Kingsport first demonstrated the practicality of communications by satellite during manned space missions March 16, 1966, by relaying voice reports from Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott via syncom ii to Hawaii ground station, (nasa Release 66-79)
More than 1,500 building tradesmen staged one-day strike at ksc to protest nasa’s method of awarding construction contracts. Work on three key Apollo projects was delayed by walkout, which had been called by Brevard (County) Building and Construction Trades Council, but preparations for July 18 Gemini X mission continued uninterrupted, (upi, NYT, 7/14/66, 21)
Soviet proposal for keeping moon free of weapons was presented to U.N. Secretary General U Thant by Ambassador Nikolay T. Fedorenko, head of the Soviet delegation to the U.N. Four principles were suggested as basis for international agreement: "1—The moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration and use by all states without any discrimination. All states enjoy freedom of the scientific exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies on an equal basis and in accordance with the basic principles of international law. "2—The moon and other celestial bodies should be used for peaceful purposes only. No military bases and installations including installations of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction should be stationed on the moon and other celestial bodies. "3—The exploration and use of the moon and other celestial bodies should be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all mankind. They are not subject to appropriation or any territorial claim. "4—In the course of the exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies, the states proceed from the principles of cooperation and mutual assistance and carry on their activities with due account of the respected interests of other states for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.” Proposal paralleled treaty suggested by President Johnson May 7. (Marder, Wash. Post, 6/1/66, Al)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, told the press that luna x spacecraft had gone into orbit around the moon, but that "all may not be well” with it. He suggested that luna x was tumbling uncontrollably in orbit around moon at distance of 300 or 400 mi.; this theory evolved after Jodrell Bank detected a series of maneuvers beginning at 12:50 p.m. est—15 min. after Jodrell Bank had first picked up luna x’s signals. Frequency of the signals had begun to decrease, indicating the probe was under the moon’s gravitational pull at a distance of about 2,000 mi.; signals then faded out entirely, suggesting that the retrorockets had been fired and the probe had landed. At that point Lovell said: "We think Luna 10 landed at 1:44 P.M. [est].” Minutes later, however, signals again picked up and the situation became "extremely obscure.” He concluded: "At last hearing our signals could be interpreted as coming from a tumbling spacecraft. We find it difficult to believe that it is meant to be tumbling.” U.S.S.R. had announced luna x’s lunar-orbit mission after March 31 launch. Sir Bernard’s theory came a day before Soviet announcement of mission results [see April 4]. (NYT, 4/4/66, 9; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/4/66; Wash. Post, 4/4/66, Al)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in the Pacific to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Another series of tests, which had begun April 24, was being continued to improve booster rockets necessary to propel manned spacecraft to moon. (Tass, 5/25/66, uss-t Trans.)
Discussing the "cost to land men on the moon” in Journal of the Armed Forces, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said late NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, "without much detailed information on which to base an assessment,” had estimated $20 billion. Now that work on all major contracts was well advanced, NASA had made new estimate that validated original figure: total cost would be $22.7 billion with possibility of adjustment that would bring it down almost to $20 billion. (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 6/18/66, 8)
Dr. C. V. Raman, 1930 Nobel Prize winner in physics, said in convocation address at Indian Institute of Technology in Madras that it was "nothing but sheer raving lunacy” to spend millions of dollars "to shoot men into space and make them walk there.” Dr. Raman said it was "mere pretence” to say these exploits were intended to find out what was happening on the moon. "It is militarism, very thinly disguised.” Dr. Raman said he thought spaceflight was the "most sinister aspect” of the progress of science in the last 60 yrs. (NYT, 8/1/66, 42) During July: Teofilo M. Tabanera, president of Argentina’s Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales (cnie), reviewed accomplishments and current plans of space program in the Air University Review. Since creation of cnie in 1960, Argentina had organized meetings to promote interest in space research and conducted experiments in aeronomy, ionospheric studies, cosmic radiation, and meteorology, launching balloons and rockets from Chamical Rocket Range. Current plans included: (1) continuation of Centaure sounding rocket launches for wind studies, using "luminous-trails” technique; (2) cooperation in inter-American experimental meteorological sounding rocket research network (exametnet) under agreement with NASA to launch boosted Darts and Areas rockets; and (3) launchings of sounding rockets to study cosmic radiation and ionospheric phenomena. {Air Univ. Review,
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller, testifying on FY 1967 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, stated that NASA had reached a manpower peak of 300,000 people in the manned spaceflight program: "We have passed our peak in engineering, we are reaching our peak in manufacturing, and we are at our peak in total Manned Space Flight manpower resources. . . . "A striking anomaly of the space program is that we begin to 'go out of business’ before we fly our first operational vehicle. . . . The program to develop the uprated Saturn I launch vehicle illustrates this situation. The decline in manpower on this program has been underway for several months, but the first flight took place only 2 weeks ago—and the first manned flight is almost a year away. By then, the employment level will be almost half the peak level of 1965.” Reviewing NASA plans for a manned project after Apollo, Dr. Mueller cited five major program alternatives under study. The alternatives "placed emphasis on (1) direct economic benefits to mankind, (2) lunar exploration and science, (3) planetary exploration, (4) maximum effort in all program areas, and (5) a program balanced over the whole spectrum of alternatives, which could be shifted as required to meet national needs. "We have not made a decision upon which of these courses we will embark.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 32-3, 148)
Changes in Apollo nomenclature were announced by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in memorandum from Project Designation Committee: (1) Lunar Excursion Module would be known as "Lunar Module”; (2) Saturn IB booster would be "Uprated Saturn I”; and (3) Saturn V stages (S-II, S-IC, and S-IVB) would be "first, second, and third stages.” Technical designations for Saturn V stages, Scheer said, were confusing to the public and would be dropped gradually, except in NASA’s internal and technical documentation. (Text)
International press commented on luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon. New York Times: "Two facts indicate the magnitude of the advance that has now been made. One is the known failure of four earlier Soviet rockets to make the soft landing finally achieved by Luna 9. The second is the unhappy history of efforts in this country to build the Surveyor vehicle, which is intended to perform moon reconnaissance of the type in which the Soviet ship is pioneering. The Surveyor project is currently far behind schedule. The first flight is not planned until later this year, and it is impossible even to forecast when a Surveyor will duplicate the soft landing of Luna 9. "The whole process demonstrates again the wastefulness of the Soviet-American moon race. Were the United States and Russia cooperating fully, rather than competing, the hundreds of millions of dollars spent on Surveyor would have been applied to progress in fields still inadequately explored by either country.” Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo: "It is possible to say that the Soviet Union is considerably ahead of the U.S. in the moon development program. It is regrettable that the two nations have failed to exchange information and technology for the development of outer space.” La Nazione, Florence: "If the Russians already know how to land on the moon, they still don’t know how to effect a 'rendezvous’ in orbit. The inverse holds, naturally, for the Americans. This means that both are still faced by formidable problems and that the great contest is still open.” Times of India, Bombay: "At this rate it is not unreasonable to presume that a Russian-manned probe will land on the moon and return in about a year from now, beating the Americans to it by about three years.” (NYT, 2/6/66, Ell)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
Comment on lunar orbiter i mission: New York Times: "Unfortunately, the decision made a half decade ago was to give priority to the Apollo program for landing a man on the moon . . . Lunar Orbiter’s achievements remind us that there is no pressing necessity for putting manned lunar flight first. If President Johnson should decide to slow down the Apollo project by cutting its budget appreciably, scientific investigation of the moon with instrument satellites could continue and be richly productive. "In a few years pictures of the earth’s orb as seen from distant space will become commonplace. Tomorrow’s schoolchildren will find it hard to believe there was a time when no human eyes had seen the full crescent arc of earth’s globe from the perspective of the moon or beyond.” Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: "Looking rather like a crumbly piece of Roquefort, there it was—Earth, as seen from the Moon by a camera aboard Lunar Orbiter 1. The picture was a black-and-white, but no matter. Since the Moon has no appreciable atmosphere, Earth will never take on the bright orange and yellow hues of a harvest moon. And since there are no forests, no lakes, no oceans, no snowcovered fields on the Moon, Earth will never be framed, for lunar lovers, in the sylvan or aquatic settings that lend so much enchantment and mystery to earthly views of the Moon.” Sam Shenton, leader and secretary of the International Flat Earth Society, claimed that the circular body shown in lunar orbiter i’s photos Aug. 25 was not really earth, but "one of the non-luminous bodies between us and the moon.” He admitted that photos of the earth had been "a great shock” to the 24-member society. (NYT, 8/19/66, 29; 8/27/66; Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/27/66; Reuters, Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A3) During August-September: usaf Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell discussed military future of manned aircraft in NATO’s Fifteen Nations. Aeronautical technology in fields of propulsion and composite materials— and less radical improvements in performance, navigation aids, fire control systems, and conventional ordnance—indicated that "by 1975 we will have increased by major increments the speed, range, altitude, payload and over-all versatility of manned aircraft for military roles.” Noting that X-15 could fly faster and higher than V-2 ballistic missile, General McConnell said he believed "that well in advance of the estimates that most people would make, Air Force pilots will be flying genuine aerospace craft that can take off under their own power, operate in space and return to a controlled landing.” (NATO’s Fifteen Nations, 8-9/66) During Summer: First four sessions of Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were summarized in an article by NASA Deputy General Counsel Paul G. Dembling and Daniel M. Arons, Attorney-Adviser, nasa Office of General Counsel, in Journal of Air Law and Commerce. (J/Air Law and Commerce, Summer/66, 329-86)
A ten-year lunar exploration program emphasizing manned missions was recommended in reports released by six working groups of scientists who had attended NASA 1965 Summer Conference on Lunar Exploration and Science in Falmouth, Mass., July 19-31, 1965. Program, which would utilize capabilities already under development by NASA, would gradually include scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry, geophysics, and bioscience. One or two manned lunar missions and one manned lunar orbital mission would be conducted annually through 1979, with astronauts remaining on the moon’s surface for longer periods after 1974. Reports recommended four requirements for period through 1974: (1) assurance of overlapping operation of instruments placed on moon by astronauts; (2) sufficient frequency of missions to provide continuity in experiments; (3) scheduling of adequate time between missions to permit necessary modification of experiments; and (4) gradually increasing staytimes of astronauts on moon. Top priority for early Apollo landing missions would be return of lunar material samples; second priority, emplacing Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (Alsep); third, traversing lunar surface to describe topographic and geological features, supplemented by stereoscopic photography. Report urged immediate testing to determine amounts and effects of atmosphere escaping from Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and outgassing of astronaut suits. One Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Orbiter mission (Aa-mlo) was recommended prior to first Apollo Applications-Manned Lunar Surface mission (Aa-mls), with minimum of three manned spacecraft missions in polar orbit to make complete lunar survey; five or six Aa-mls missions through 1974 were suggested, with larger scientific payloads and stays for the astronauts of up to 14 days. Reports listed basic types of equipment necessary for exploration program: automatic position-recording systems to relay to earth or Lem movements of astronauts and roving vehicles; roving vehicles to carry one or two astronauts and scientific payload of at least 600 lbs.; manned lunar flying vehicle able to carry 300-lb. scientific payload about 10 mi. to study features not accessible with roving vehicle; one-inch drill capable of penetrating at least 10 ft. in rubble or solid rock to assist heat-flow studies and provide samples of possible biological interest. Scientific training for astronauts in specific rather than general areas was recommended, with emphasis on geology. For post-1974 period, the scientists recommended surface travel by astronauts up to 500 mi. from landing point and fixed-site investigations lasting from two months to a year for measuring geophysical phenomena that could vary with time; studying lunar surface processes; deep-drilling studies to obtain information on early moon history and crustal composition; construction and manning of large radio and optical telescopes. Roving vehicles for the post-Apollo Applications phase should have 500-mi. range, shelter for three-man crew, two-month mission capability, and no requirement to return to starting point. (nasa Release 66-4; Conference Rpt., NASA SP-88)
Possibility that U.S. astronauts might land on moon in 1968 rather than 1969	"should serve to hasten agreement on international treaty aimed at making outer space exclusively a dimension of man’s peaceful activity,” postulated editorial in New York Times. "Hard decisions” about post-Apollo research should be made soon, especially since there were "far more possibilities for fruitful activities in space than even the United States can afford to carry on simultaneously.” (NYT., 11/16/66, 42M)
nasa invited aerospace industries to propose definition studies of integrating experiment equipment to be used in spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications missions. Studies would define experiments integration work in the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn launch vehicle instrument units, and top stages of Saturn IB and V vehicles; they would include consideration of mission analysis, experiment equipment, installation and integration of equipment, specialized crew requirements, launch facility requirements, tracking, and other support requirements. Two or more firms would be selected for negotiation of parallel nine-month study contracts, (nasa Release 66-14)
NASA had canceled hardware development and fabrication of Apollo experiments pallet whifch was designed to hold modular experiments and to fit into a section of the Apollo service module. Four firms selected in November 1965 for four-month Phase 1A design studies had been advised of decision: Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.; Martin Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; and Northrop Space Laboratories. (nasa Release 66-224)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-202 mission was successfully launched from etr’s Complex 34 at 1:16 p.m. edt: 56,000-lb. unmanned Apollo spacecraft (Oil) was boosted into suborbital flight by Uprated Saturn I launch vehicle generating 1,600,000 lbs. thrust in second flight test of major spacecraft systems; second performance check of command module (Cm) heatshielding; and third flight test of Uprated Saturn I. Liftoff and powered flight were as programed. After spacecraft separation, 21,500-lb.-thrust service module (Sm) propulsion engine burned 3 min. 35 sec. to boost spacecraft to 706-mi. (1,128.6-km.) altitude. Sm’s engines ignited three more times to test rapid restart capabilities, with last burn separating Sm. Cm reentered earth’s atmosphere at more than 19,900 mph. Maximum temperature of spacecraft’s surface was calculated to be about 2,700°F; temperature inside Cm was 70°F. Main parachutes deployed at 23,850-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Pacific Ocean some 500 mi. southeast of Wake Island—200 mi. from target—at 2:49 p.m. edt. Recovery was by aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet. Apollo heatshield well withstood high heat-load test, and the spacecraft was in "stable condition 1.” Officials said that during flight, minor problem developed in unit which was to cool drinking water and various electrical components. They did not consider problem serious. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told postflight press conference that "the results of today’s flight—once examined—will provide us with the information necessary” to make a final decision whether to commit the next Apollo flight to a manned mission, (nasa Release 66-213; NASA Proj. Off.; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/26/66, A4; AP, Wash. Post, 8/26/66, A3; Wilford, NYT, 8/26/66, 1)
U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported that U.S.S.R.’s luna xii spacecraft had apparently entered orbit around moon and was transmitting telemetry but no photographic signals. U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since Oct. 22 launch, (upi, NYT, 10/26/66, 10; Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A16)
Launch of U.S.S.R/s luna x spacecraft indicated Soviet goals and techniques for reaching moon were similar to those of U.S., according to William Hines in Washington Evening Star, and raised question whether U.S.S.R. would attempt manned lunar landing in November 1967 to mark 50th anniversary of Bolshevik revolution. Lack of evidence that Russians had developed a large booster comparable to U.S.’s Saturn V suggested they would use earth orbit rendezvous method to reach moon, Hines said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/1/66, Al)
Commenting on the tiny U.S. flag packed into surveyor i which softlanded on the moon June 2, Sydney Harris said in the San Francisco Examiner & Chronicle: "If we begin to export nationalism to the moon, we are defeating the very purpose of science and exploration.” (Harris, S.F. Examiner & Chron., 7/17/66)
U.S. gave U.N. proposed treaty on exploration of moon and other celestial bodies and asked that U.N. Outer Space Legal Subcommittee meet July 12 to discuss it. Draft—based on May 7 statement by President Johnson urging treaty to reserve celestial bodies for peaceful purposes— declared such bodies open equally to all countries, subject to claim by none, and off limits to nuclear weapons, weapon testing, military maneuvers, and fortifications. Soviet source said U.S.S.R. had submitted similar treaty earlier in day; text of proposal was not made public [see June 17]. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/17/66, A4)
U.S.S.R. announced annual Lenin prizes. Winners in science included anonymous space experts responsible for luna ix and luna x missions, luna ix made the first softlanding on the moon Feb. 3; luna x became the first manmade satellite of the moon April 3. Prize commemorated Lenin’s birthday and was considered highest in the Soviet Union. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/66)
Two photographs of the moon produced at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station by feeding radio transmissions from luna ix into newspaper telephoto machine were shown on British television. Each picture took eight minutes to receive and was recorded at 100 lines to one inch for finished 10- by 11-in. photo. Sir Bernard Lovell, station director, said in a television interview that photos "seem to destroy the theory that the moon’s surface is covered with dust several feet thick. There may be a few inches of dust, but the pictures tend to confirm the view of the moon’s surface as hard, spongelike pumice stone substance. "It would be perfectly satisfactory for landing not only heavy vehicles but also men.” Lovell pointed out rock-like pinnacles estimated to be 10- to 20-ft. tall; small stones, some less than one inch in diameter; the curved horizon of the moon; and sharp shadows which indicated the sun was casting the shadow. He emphasized, however, necessity of knowing the proper scale before photos could be meaningfully interpreted. Lovell said luna ix had landed in a location which would receive sunlight for 14 days, thereby permitting solar power to replenish its batteries. (Wash. Post, 2/5/66, Al, A6; Sullivan, NYT, 2/5/66, 1, 10)
George C. White, Jr., chief of nasa Hq. Apollo Spacecraft and Vehicle Test Performance Office, was appointed Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, (nasa Ann., 11/18/66)
National Science Foundation and National Foundation for the Advancement of Arts and Humanities urged in comments filed jointly with fcc that satellite system be devised that would "permit the distribution of high-quality programs in the arts, humanities, and sciences to remote areas in the Nation where educational and cultural opportunities are often minimal.” Comments were filed in response to fcc request for suggestions on establishment of comsat facilities by organizations other than Government and communications companies. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A18) During November: Two tests important to launch of nasa’s first manned Apollo mission had been successfully completed at msc. First was six-day manned Apollo systems test of spacecraft 008 which was conducted in Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory chamber. Second was entry-egress training in Gulf of Mexico for AS-204 prime and backup crews, (msc Roundup, 11/11/66, 8; naa s&id Skywriter, 11/11/66, 1, 2)
NASA awarded Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. nine-month, $250,000 contract extensions to continue evaluating optical experiments for possible future extended Apollo space flights, (nasa Release 66-300)
"Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting sponsored by usaf Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Co. was held in Orlando. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with three usaf space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: "These costs will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A4) Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a disabled spacecraft because "it is a problem we all know will one day confront us,” Col. Emil G. Beaudry, vice commander of usaf Air Rescue Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: "There is no reason today-—or certainly in the near future—why an operational rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the event of distress or tragedy during manned flights. "For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any way required.. . .” (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66) NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his "jet shoes” to aid astronauts during extravehicular activity: "This device may be thought of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes, which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested successfully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRC. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66, A18) Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would cause astronauts working in space to "confuse spheres with points of light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a bracket of strong lights "looking over the shoulder” of a working astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5) Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell had developed a rocket propellant "flying pogo stick” for transporting men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder movements, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66) The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during Gemini VIII mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm footing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a handheld tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al) In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasc staff, warned that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight: "They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected Russia to launch a "major manned program in the near future,” possibly a manned laboratory, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
NASA postponed third attempt to launch unmanned Apollo spacecraft with Saturn IB booster 44 sec. before scheduled liftoff because of continuing bad weather. (Wash. Post, 2/25/66, A7; WSJ, 2/25/65, 1)
luna x completed 218th orbit of moon after a total of 120 radio communications periods, Tass announced. Equipment was functioning normally, and radio link was said to be stable. (Tass, 4/30/66)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Space Business Daily that nasa had presented several proposed FY 1968 budgets to bob, including one for "just over $6 billion” and another for $5.5 billion. He said that in the $5.5-billion budget about $500-$600 million would be for Apollo Applications (Aa); the $6-billion budget would include about $1 billion for Aa. Emphasizing that major funds for Aa must be included in the FY 1968 budget if the billions of dollars spent on Apollo technology were not to be wasted, he indicated that a budget of about $5 billion would end plans for an adequate Aa program to follow Project Apollo. He noted that under a $5-billion budget, there would be a greater percentage cut back in contractor operations as opposed to inhouse nasa efforts, but that with a $5.5-billion budget the current ratio would remain about the same. Seamans confirmed that the first manned Apollo lunar landing could come as early as 1968, but said it is "most likely” to occur in 1969. (SBD, 8/29/66, 317-8)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. agreed in discussions at Geneva to treaty article on exploration of space barring any state from claiming sovereignty over space, including the moon and planets. Article was also approved by 28-nation U.N. Legal Subcommittee drawing up treaty from draft accords submitted by U.S. and U.S.S.R. Subcommittee also accepted article binding states to conduct space exploration in accordance with international law and in the interest of international peace. (Reuters, NYT, 1/22/66, 8)
New York Times praised success of NASA’s lunar orbiteh ii and GEMINI xii missions: "This week has seen two impressive demonstrations of United States space capabilities. . . . "It is no derogation of the important Soviet contributions to conclude that the United States efforts have contributed most of what men now know about the moon and about the possibilities and problems of manned space flight. In part this lead is the result of the long and unexplained halt in the launching of Soviet passenger-carrying rockets.” (NYT, 11/12/66, 28)
Paramount objective of NASA’s Apollo program was not to land man on the moon before U.S.S.R. but to make "U.S. first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to all the world,” NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told ieee Aerospace Systems Conference in Seattle, Wash. Apollo program was a means of acquiring the ability to operate in space on a variety of missions, Dr. Seamans explained: ". . . we are building much more than a rocket and a spaceship. We are developing, in government, in industry, in our universities, one of the most remarkable teams that has ever been assembled. There are more than 400,000 men and women, 20,000	industrial companies, and more than 150 universities actively engaged in the nasa program. More than 90 percent of NASA’s five-billion-dollar-a-year budget goes to contractors.” He warned against failing to look beyond the near-term goal of manned lunar exploration and said: "Programs of the future must be determined within the total context of national need and the availability of resources. The Nation’s interest in space projects, and the level of support accorded them must in the long run be related to tangible benefits that can be derived from the emerging technical and operational capabilities.” (Text)
Lunar surface photograph from U.S.S.R.’s luna ix mission "fully coincided with the photograph of a model of the moon designed by scientists at Kharkov University’s laboratory several years ago,” Tass announced. Nikolay Barabashov, chief of university’s observatory, hypothesized that "the relief at the landing site of the Soviet station is typical of the entire lunar surface,” which he claimed was "porous, spongelike, and sufficiently firm to hold a rather heavy body.” (Tass, 2/24/66)
"Whole towns” on the moon, complete with dome-like buildings linked by tunnels and parks under transparent hoods, might be constructed in 20th century, Soviet architect Nikolay Kolomiyets suggested in Krasnaya Zvezda. Kolomiyets said the moon town should provide a safe shelter for its inhabitants and be attractive as well. Best construction material would probably be lunar rocks. "It can be expected that after treatment with alkalis, lunar rocks can be used to build walls and roofs by pouring, just as they are made on earth by pouring concrete.” (Tass, 10/29/66)
First simulated exploration of the moon had shown that two astronauts could live and intelligently perform tasks for at least 18 days in cabin with 117 cu. ft. of living-working space. Test was performed in support of Apollo Applications program by two msfc engineers in Minneapolis [see Feb. 20, March 10]. (msfc Release 66-80)
Two Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ascension Island, 24 and 36 hrs. after Feb. 26 Apollo reentry test. Experiment, conducted by gsfc and Univ. of Michigan’s Space Physics Research Laboratory, was designed to measure pressure, temperature, density, and winds at altitudes of 19-75 mi. (30-120 km.) using pitot-static probe. First flight obtained necessary data for Apollo support program, attaining _82-mi. (131-km.) altitude. No useful data were obtained by second flight, because of breakup during 2nd-stage burn. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Clarence C. Gay, Jr., Acting Director of Gemini Test, became Chief, Apollo Spacecraft Test, Apollo Test Directorate at nasa Hq. (nasa Ann., 11/18/66)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
Fire in altitude chamber used to simulate environment of Apollo Command Module (Cm) at AiResearch Manufacturing Div. Torrance (Calif.) Facility severely damaged Apollo Environmental Control System, which had undergone 480 hrs. 37 min. of a 500-hr.-duration qualification test. Investigating board concluded that probable cause of ignition had been failure of electrical heater tape installed as part of the test set-up, and that some "ground test equipment and materials used . . . were not suitable for application in the vacuum aijd 5 psia 100% oxygen environments.” Board recommended improvement in selection of "some materials used in the Environmental Control System and Apollo Command Module” and pointed to a "potential fire hazard from arcing or direct short circuits.” (Senate, Hearing, Apollo Accident, Pt. 1, 2/7/67, 32-4)
nasa’s Apollo/Saturn AS-201 mission was successfully launched from etr at 11:12 a.m. est. Unmanned Apollo spacecraft (009) was boosted into suborbital flight by two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle (SA-201) to qualify command module (Cm) heatshielding and service module (Sm) of spacecraft-launch vehicle combination and major spacecraft systems. Liftoff and powered flight events were as programed. After ignition of liquid-hydrogen-powered 2nd stage (S-IVB), launch escape tower was jettisoned and recoverable cameras ejected. After seven-minute burn, 2nd stage and instrument unit separated from spacecraft; spacecraft reached 310-mi. (499-km.) altitude. Descending, service module performed ullage maneuver, firing reaction-control system rockets for 30 sec. to increase spacecraft’s reentry speed; Sm’s main propulsion engine was fired twice—once for 100 sec. and once for 10 sec. Sm was jettisoned and Cm reentered at 27,500 fps—2,000 fps faster than Apollo reentry from earth orbit—testing ability of spacecraft’s ablative heat shield to withstand reentry heat of about 4,000° F. Three main parachutes deployed at 12,000-ft. altitude, lowering Cm to splashdown in Atlantic at 11:51 a.m. est within 35 mi. of target. Recovery was by helicopter from carrier U.S.S. Boxer. Spacecraft was in "good” condition. Mission was first launch of Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft. Saturn IB, uprated version of Saturn I, was being developed under direction of msfc and Apollo spacecraft, under direction of msc. (nasa Release 66-32; nasa Proj. Off.; msc Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/27/66, Al, A8; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 2/27/66, Al, A6; Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, 1, 60)	.. >/, 3/1/66, 32)
Army Corps of Engineers had established Extra-Terrestrial Research Agency, headed by geologist Alice S. Allen, to coordinate studies of lunar surface in anticipation of moon exploration requirements. Comprehensive study of such surface properties as soil density, light reflectivity, and thermal and electrical conductivity, Corps of Engineers believed, would permit deductions about problems of "walking, digging, and moving of surface loads . . . providing shelter, water supply and necessary construction materials and tools.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/66, C3) o Properly managed, the value of the returns from Government investment in research and technology outweighed by "orders of magnitude” the investment itself, Dr. Chalmers W. Sherwin, deputy director (research and technology), Defense Department Research and Engineering, told a meeting in Chicago jointly sponsored by the Patent Law Assn, of Chicago and the Chicago Assn, of Commerce and Industry. Sherwin said the value of R&D had been confirmed by "Project Hindsight,” a study covering such systems as the Mark 46 torpedoes, Minuteman II, Hound Dog, Polaris, Sergeant, and Lance missiles. "We are not sure whether good ideas attract 'good5 (that is, flexible) money, or if innovative organizations just 'happen’ to always have such money. Available technology money simply must be spread all over the place in little pockets near the need. It is not the ivory towers which need flexible money the most, it is rather the organizations heavily involved in real problems— particularly in the early stages of development of new systems.” (Text)
NASA test pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency landing of X-15 No. 1 at Smith’s Ranch, Nev., after malfunction developed in aircraft’s fuel system. There was no damage to aircraft and no injury to pilot. Primary purpose of flight was photometer measurements of sharpness of earth’s horizon for use in Apollo program. (X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Wash. Post, 9/9/66, BIO)
In address to U.N. General Assembly in New York, U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg said U.S. would provide "tracking coverage from United States territory” for Soviet rocket launchings if a "mutually beneficial agreement” could be made. Stressing that tracking facilities were a matter for "bilateral negotiation and agreement,” he said the treaty to govern activities in outer space was "too urgent and too important to be delayed. ... It is all the more urgent because of man’s rapid strides toward landing on the moon.” Impasse had been reached in discussions in Geneva because U.S.S.R. had insisted pact guarantee that states granting tracking facilities to any country provide same facilities to other countries. (Text; NYT, 9/23/66, 12)
U.S.S.R. launched two unmanned spacecraft, luna xiii, on mission to study the "moon and its close environments,” was following trajectory close to calculated one. cosmos Cxxxvii, carrying instruments for further investigation of outer space, was in orbit with 1,672-km. (1,032-mi.) apogee; 225-km. (140-mi.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 49° inclination, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A3; Anderson, NYT, 12/22/66, 20)
NASA established new program offices at MSC and MSfc to "handle the increasing level of activity involving Apollo Applications.” Offices— headed by George M. Low at MSC and Leland Belew at MSFC—would manage "activities concerned with projects using ojpdy hardware for purposes in addition to the manned lunar landing.” To provide "program management and direction” for msfc’s consolidated research and technology program and to coordinate activities with NASA Hq., MSFC established new Experiments Office headed by Dr. William G. Johnson. (nasa Release 66-172: msfc Release 66-151)
The late Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard launched the first liquid-fueled rocket from Auburn, Mass., 40 yrs. ago. Annually on the anniversary of the first flight, Goddard is honored by the National Space Club at a memorial banquet in Washington, D.C. In 1962, Vice President Johnson predicted that within 25 yrs. there would be a permanent base on the moon. Vice President Hubert Humphrey, delivering the 1966 address, emphasized that the space budget must be tightly planned: "I feel the necessity for cost consciousness. This is the need, to put it another way, of getting the most space for the tax dollar. These are times when we must exert high discipline in public expenditure and our space program cannot be exempt from that discipline.” Humphrey said he could foresee "dramatic achievements ahead” in space exploration, notably: (1) exploration of the lurain and possible establishment of one or more permanent bases there; (2) development of "a whole family of earth-orbiting stations, supplied by regular ferry services”; (3) development of "recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneuverable spacecraft; (4) building of spaceports around the country; (5) improvement of propulsion methods so that planetary trips could be made in a week or less; (6) "launching of unmanned probes to every part of the solar system—and perhaps manned planetary expeditions as well.” (Text; CR, 5/4/66) National Space Club Press Award "in recognition of his exceptional photographic documentation of the manned space flight program” went to nasa photographer William P. Taub; Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews "for his contribution to the nation’s manned space flight program as a key engineering pioneer to investigate the feasibility of manned space flight, culminating in Project Mercury... and in the successful Gemini program, as well as in the establishment and refinement of the Apollo configuration”; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for "making a major advance in the state of the art of space systems” was presented jointly to msc, usaf Space Systems Div., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., IBM Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to Airman 2/C Frank H. Winter for "Danish Rocketry in the 19th Century”; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to university of recipient’s choice) "in recognition of the need for higher scientific education of American youth of exceptional merit” was awarded Benjamin N. Early, a senior at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C. (Text; Program)
Heat shields on the unmanned Apollo spacecraft that underwent reentry test Feb. 26 had developed three "hot spots,” nasa announced. Problem would be corrected with improved insulating compound. No delay in Apollo program was anticipated. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, A29)
First manned Apollo mission might be launched in late 1966, predicted Astronaut Virgil Grissom during news conference held by Apollo crew and backup crew at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., facility. Mission was officially scheduled for 1967. (Transcript)
Question whether "superrockets” for the Apollo manned space program should have liquid or solid stages was no longer debatable, said William Hines in the Washington Evening Star; the solids had been "forced through studied neglect to default.” He continued: "This is not to suggest, however, that the whole liquid-solid debate is moot. "Between Saturn I-B’s 35,000-pound orbital capability and Saturn V’s 250,000 pounds is a huge gap; between Atlas-Centaur’s 2,300-pound escape capability and Saturn Y’s 95,000 pounds is a gap that is even greater, proportionately. "A wide variety of scientific and manned payloads can be envisioned as fitting within these gaps. A flexible booster system based on large solid rockets of varying lengths and flight characteristics could fill the gaps quickly and at reasonable cost; liquid systems could not.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/66, A6)
President Johnson’s statement on surveyor i’s successful soft-landing on the moon: "Overnight the eyes of Surveyor I have become the eyes of the world on the Moon. Another exciting chapter in the peaceful exploration of the universe is open for men to read and share. . . . "The odds against achieving full success in such a difficult mission on the first flight were understandably great. This moment of triumph for all who have participated in the Surveyor project has been well earned, for back of Surveyor’s perfect performance on this first flight are years of hard work, painstaking care, and brilliant engineering. "Today our Nation salutes the highly deserving team of scientists, engineers, technicians, and managers—in Government, industry, and the universities—who have a vision and the skills to pursue it successfully. "As the day approaches when men land on the Moon, it is of the greatest importance that we agree to exchange openly all information that could affect their safety and welfare. It is equally important that we preserve these regions for peaceful, scientific activities. I welcome the constructive approach of the Soviet statement of May 31 on a treaty I have proposed to cover these matters and hope that progress can be made rapidly.” (Pres. Doc., 6/6/66, 728)
Investigations of seals’ habits might yield valuable information for astronauts exploring the moon, particularly with regard to enduring extremes of cold and lack of oxygen, Dr. Carleton Ray, New York Zoological Society, told the New York Times. Ray, who recently returned from Antarctica expedition sponsored by the Society with nsf aid, said that of pertinent interest would be "reasons why seals can endure tremendous cold, sleep under water without breathing, and use what appears to be a remarkable echo-sounding system for navigating in total darkness under thick ice to return to isolated breathing holes needed sporadically to help them remain submerged in a state somewhat akin to semihibernation.” (Devlin, NYT, 3/14/66, 6)
"The First Soft Step,” program discussing Project Surveyor and showing flight operations facilities, was broadcast on six Alabama Educational Television Network stations. Program, hosted by mit science reporter John Fitch, was first in 13-week "Science Reporter” series which had been taped on location at four NASA centers and nine contractor plants. Second program, to be telecast June 6, would be titled "Landing on the Moon” and would concern nasa’s Lunar Excursion Module, (msfc Release 66-117)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun discussed U.S. space objectives and accomplishments in U.S. News & World Report interview. Immediate objective, he explained, was "to land an American on the moon in this decade and bring him back alive”; far-reaching goal was "to develop a broad, national spaceflying capability.” He described Gemini program as "a smashing 100 per cent success. . . . The purpose of Gemini was to learn the kind of things you can’t learn on the ground . . . and we did make some surprise discoveries, for which we are more than grateful. . . .” Dr. von Braun said there was a "distinct possibility” U.S. might land a man on the moon in 1968. (U.S. News, 12/12/66, 62-7)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified in support of NASA’s FY1967 budget authorization before the House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Questioned by Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.) about the Apollo program schedule, Dr. Mueller said current budget request left no room for a major problem; any test failure would be directly reflected in a schedule slip. In connection with possible further use of Apollo/Saturn V hardware beyond the lunar landing mission, Dr. Mueller stressed necessity for early decisions on the FY 1968 budget. Industrial research, development, and manufacturing employment had already reached its peak and, ironically, would begin to decline sharply before the first manned flights with Apollo/Saturn hardware. Facilities now becoming operational would be scheduled for "mothballing” within two years if no further use were planned for capability beyond the lunar landing, Dr. Mueller said. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 279-384; msf Historian)
Employment in aerospace industry would increase to 1,266,000 by June 1966—a gain of 94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn. Aircraft employment was expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space employment remaining relatively stable. (Aerospace News, 3/15/66) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the first Annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture, stressed the importance of the contributions of men such as Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden to the dramatic development of the space program: "The history of nasa reflects much of Dr. Dryden’s understanding of how progress can be made and what the conditions are that produce effective responses to the challenges being faced. A pivotal concept that has guided NASA administration has been that of the relation of the research and development project to many rapidly growing disciplines of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own defined immediate ends. A project is a disciplined and organized effort directed to a specific objective; one of its principal characteristics is that it has a schedule. As such a project provides a creative and driving force in the total achievement of science, engineering, and technology _____” (Text) Wesley A. Kuhrt, United Aircraft Research Laboratories, predicted interplanetary and translunar tourist travel for FY 2001: "A six-day round trip to the moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered 'clipper’ ships would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an 18-month trip to Venus, the passenger would pay $32,000. Steerage class to Mars, a two-year undertaking, would cost $35,000. But for $70,000 a passenger could ride the Mars Express to and from the red planet in 11 months. . . .” All fares assumed the Government would underwrite the cost of developing the spacecraft, Kuhrt said. Other predictions made at the symposium included teams of superhuman astronauts bred over several generations as a result of present studies in genetics and molecular basis of life; communications between ordinary persons in their homes and anyone, anywhere; versatile robots to perform human tasks; cosmic cargo transported at $10 per pound; network of satellites to link everyone in the world so they could speak in their native languages via rapid automatic translating computers; and man-shaped robots sending back threedimensional pictures to human masters hundreds of miles away. Harvard astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that the trip from other galaxies had already been made and that earth had already been visited from space at least once. (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) told a luncheon audience that "we must lay out basic objectives far enough ahead that they will serve as relatively fixed goals—or in non-technical terms, as dreams. Such an early dream of man was to fly like a bird; later, we gradually translated this dream into making it easy for everyone to fly in an aircraft. We have these dreams and they affect our progress strongly. ...” To meet these ends, Karth recommended forming a "Hoover-type” Commission to review planning and decision-making system in the area of science and technology. In addition he cited the need for "frequent, systematic, large-scale surveys and analysis of science and technology from the near-term to the distant frontiers of knowledge. . . .” (Text) In a prediction of what the "Space Age Society” would be like in 2001, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told the symposium: "The major development over the coming years will be the speed of change. We already have great difficulty maintaining our perspective regarding the change which has taken place during the last 8 or lO years. Well, that rate of change is like the tortoise pace compared with what; is coming in the future. ... "Some with fertile imaginations foresee the time when there will be large scale emigration from earth to growing settlements on the moon and the planets. While I see the great growth in the ability to travel to such distant spots safely and speedily, I see little likelihood of any sizable movement of population even though nuclear reactors would furnish much of the competence to make conditions in such places both livable and productive. My reason for not predicting such movement is due to the simple belief that living conditions are going to be so improved here on earth that few would want to leave. .. . "As for space travel, we can certainly let our imaginations soar, as we are now only in the infancy of growth. The space child has barely learned to walk. The future with its space travel being almost as common as airplane travel is today is yet to come . . . but it will come. Interplanetary trips, at speeds many times what we now attain, will take place in craft as reusable as the jet plane is today, with at least as many passengers aboard. . . . "One more thing I can predict with great confidence. The debate on the worthwhileness of space technology and space exploration—still continuing on the part of those of little vision—will have disappeared completely within a decade or so. The benefits will have become so obvious and the potential so exciting that even the most near-sighted will be aware of the rich space harvest. . . (Text; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/16/66, A10; Hoffmann, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/16/66) Importance of materials science and space vehicle technology was discussed by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa Hq. oart. "The structural designer of future launch vehicles will face many new and challenging problems. Launch vehicles ... [will be] larger, complex, and more costly. If we are to reuse these launch vehicles without having to spend large sums of money either to bring them back or to refurbish them after recovery, major advances will be required in structural and materials technology.” Development of new materials and methods, such as "superinsulations” to prevent heat leakage; stronger shielding materials to protect spacecraft from meteoroids and intense radiation; advanced lifting-body designs for greater reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which could be reassembled in space, would play a major role in U.S. space program before the year 2000, he said. (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, nasc staff member, discussed overall economic outlook for space age up to FY 2001. Sheldon noted that U.S. space program took about one per cent of gross national product and estimated that "Soviet Union is putting about two per cent of their Gnp into space efforts . . . .The close tie with military rocketry has speeded space development in these recent years, but it has also saddled space technology with an expendable ammunition philosophy rather than aiming at the lower operating costs of a recoverable transport philosophy. . . . "Today we probably are headed toward an age of conservation, and one of deliberate recycling .. . the task of the remainder of this century may include the development of closed ecological systems for long-duration space flight, and on a different scale, heroic measures to recycle waste water and to reprocess industrial and consumer wastes into reusable products. . . . "If our urbanized society requires closed ecological systems even here on Earth, we can, in effect, air condition whole cities.” Discussing weather modification and climate control, he said: ". . . whether we bend nature itself, or create new sealed urban units, each almost self-sufficient in its ability to control its temperature, clean and recycle its air and water, and put all other wastes to productive use, some such heroic measures will be needed as this century runs out.” (Text)
nasa surveyor i’s successful soft-landing on the moon received worldwide acclaim. Daily Telegraph, London: "There is magic of a kind in the latest achievement of American exploration in placing their electronic Surveyor almost directly on its target on the moon. . . . The technological power behind the enterprise of putting a man on the moon is mounting with visible acceleration. But the human element remains most vital.” Le Monde, Paris: "In succeeding with their first attempt at a soft landing on the moon only three months after the Soviets, the United States has shown that they are on the point of catching up with the Soviets in the race to the moon. There is only one experiment left in which the United States is behind the Soviet Union: the orbiting around the moon of a lunar probe similar to Luna-10. This lag is not very great, since the first trial of the Lunar Orbiters is set for next month.” R Tempo, Rome: "We think that the best judgment, even if purely a prioristic, of the Surveyor is that given by the Soviet Government, which, the day after the departure of the lunar probe, practically adhered to President Johnson’s initiative of March 7, tending to a recognition of the internationalization of the moon and other extraterritorial bodies.” Tass: "The success of the Surveyor is an important part of the American space program and Soviet scientists think very highly of it.” (NYT, 6/5/66, E13) Congratulatory cable from Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny to President Johnson: "On the occasion of the successful soft-landing of the Surveyor I spacecraft on the moon, accept . . . our congratulations for the American specialists who ensured the success of this flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/5/66, 80)
First manned Apollo spacecraft (AS-204) would be orbited in first quarter of 1967, NASA announced. Mission would verify spacecraft systems performance and crew operations. NASA had hoped for December launching, but modification of environmental control system (Ecs) would necessitate further ground testing of spacecraft. Prime crew would be Virgil I. Grissom, command pilot; Edward H. White II, senior pilot; and Roger Chaffee, pilot. Backup crew would be James McDivitt, command pilot; David Scott, senior pilot; and Russell Schweikart, pilot. (nasa Release 66-284)
msfc engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr., entered lunar vehicle simulator to begin 14- to 21-day final laboratory validation tests on interior chamber design and investigation of human factors of an enclosed cabin environment. Cabin, 10-ft. cylinder with 7-ft. diameter and 5-ft. ceiling, had stations for performing various tasks—eating, sleeping, taking sample measurements, and completing geophysical assignments. Study, conducted by Honeywell, Inc., under NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) sponsorship, would determine: (1) functional relationships between physiological responses and behavior and the time required to perform assigned tasks; (2) how to design lunar roving vehicles to provide crew mobility and utilize cabin space; and (3) how to increase proficiency in performing required tasks during extended lunar exploration. Engineers would be isolated as if on moon, wear long-johns or spacesuits, and eat dehydrated food, but would have radio communications for receiving instructions and equipment to record physical condition continuously during test. (msfc Release 66-44)
Research by NASA and Air Transport Assn, indicated that wet-pavement skidding by aircraft could be substantially reduced by cutting 34s' to M-in.-deep grooves one to two inches apart in runways. Test runways would be equipped with grooves at cost of $70,000 by early 1967 for further experimentation. (Hudson, NYT, 8/14/66, 90; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/15/66) Spacecraft’s cameras had exposed 211 dual frames of film to photograph nine potential Apollo and Surveyor landing sites during mission’s photo acquisition phase, announced complete on Aug. 30. Readout was expected to be completed by Sept. 15. Medium-resolution camera returned good images; however, except for an excellent photo of moon’s far side, all exposures made with the high-resolution camera were disappointing. Camera’s malfunction was attributed Aug. 25 to spurious signal generated by spacecraft’s film transfer motor at 31-mi. perilune. Signal was tripping high-resolution camera shutter and causing film smear; lunar orbiter i’s perilune was lowered to 23 mi. (37 km.) to eliminate signal. Unprogramed photograph of earth, commanded Aug. 23 and received at NASA’s tracking station at Robledo de Chavela, Spain, Aug. 25, showed appearance of earth’s terminator—line dividing sunlit and shadowed portion of planet—from distance of about 240,000 mi. (386,400 km.). Spacecraft also photographed surveyor i landing site. (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Releases 66-228, 66-230, 66-233; Wilford, NYT, 8/15/66,1, 23; 8/16/66,15; 8/19/66,1; 8/20/66, 8; 8/21/66,1; 8/22/ 66, 8; AP, NYT, 8/24/66, 15; NYT, 8/25/66, A5; 8/26/66, 13; AP, NYT, 9/1/66, 2; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/15/66, Al, A13; 8/19/66, Al; 8/20/66, Al; 8/21/66, Al; AP, Balt. Sun, 8/18/66; Av. Wk, 8/29/66, 18) .
President Johnson said at news conference at Texas White House that there would be $60-million program reduction in NASA FY 1967 budget requiring some contract cancellations. About $30 million in expenditures was involved. Asked if changes in the NASA budget would cause postponement of target dates for any of the space programs, Johnson said: ". . . $30-million out of some several billion dollars wouldn’t cause a change in the target date of the moon schedule, if you are talking about that.” (Pres. Doc., 12/S/66, 1741; Transcript, NYT, 11/30/66, 18)
Astronaut David R. Scott would attempt—during about 90 min. outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft—to crawl about using hand holds, move through space using a maneuvering gun with nine times the capability of that used by Astronaut Edward H. White II, and unscrew bolts at small mechanic’s station on the spacecraft, NASA announced at msc news conference. Gemini VIII mission, designed to test man’s ability to maneuver in space and the first rendezvous and docking mission, would take place before the end of the first quarter of 1966. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager, said "the main significance of the mechanical work is that he [Scott] will be evaluating a tool that is specifically designed for space.” The special tool contained a motor to eliminate need for twisting motion by the astronaut that would swing his body around when he was weightless. Target for the rendezvous and docking—Gatv or Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda)—had not been chosen. (AP, NYT, 1/17/66, 12) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Office, said in an interview in Houston that the U.S. would achieve its goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth before the end of this decade: "No new inventions are needed. No breakthrough is needed. This certainly doesn’t mean that it is going to be easy. It is not going to be, but the technology needed to do the job is known now.” He stressed that the pace that had been set would have to be maintained until the goal was achieved. (Maloney, Houston Post, 1/16/66)
Trendex poll indicated favorable attitude toward nasa’s Project Apollo had increased 13% over past three years; negative attitude had decreased 40%. Sentiment to speed up program was greater than to slow down, but majority of respondents were content with present progress. While there was evidence of some increase in desire to reduce expenditures on space program, this attitude was in line with public’s increasing concern with governmental expenditures of all kinds because of the defense buildup. Public appeared receptive to news and information of further space programs and plans. (Text)
Crew for second manned Apollo mission, scheduled for 1967 as open-ended earth orbital flight up to 14 days, was announced by nasa: Walter M. Schirra, Jr., command pilot; Donn F. Eisele, senior pilot; and Walter Cunningham, pilot. Backup crew: Frank Borman, command pilot; Thomas P. Stafford, senior pilot; and Michael Collins, pilot. It would be first space mission for Eisele and Cunningham, (nasa Release 66-260)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told press conference in New York that U.S.S.R. had "a better chance now than two years ago” to land a man on the moon before the U.S. Basing his view on the Soviet lead in payload-orbiting capability, Webb said: "They have been launching and recovering 10,000-pound spacecraft for four years. You cannot work in space without large boosters.” He suggested that the 10-mo. period of Soviet inactivity in manned space flight would end "very soon.” (Loory, NYT, 10/11/66)
Twelve astronauts were selected for future NASA missions and two others assigned earlier were shifted to a different mission. Prime crewmen for the Apollo earth-orbital mission scheduled in the first quarter of 1967 were Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee; backup crew was James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart, NASA civilian employee. Prime crewmen for the Gemini XI mission scheduled in the last quarter of 1966 were command pilot Charles Conrad, Jr., and pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr.; backup crew was Neil A. Armstrong, command pilot, and William A. Anders, pilot. James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup crew for the Gemini XI mission, were reassigned as backup crew for Gemini IX, Original Gemini IX backups Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan became prime crewmen for that mission after the Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II. (nasa Release 66-67)
Three earth-orbiting objects not identified "with any launching or country of origin” were reported by gsfc Satellite Situation Report. Two had inclination of 85° and the third, 35°. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/66; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66,19) September 30-October 2: Series of Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding rocket were launched from nasa Wallops Station and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to obtain temperature, wind, pressure, and density data at intervals throughout 24-hr. periods near fall equinox. Using exploding grenade technique, experiment investigated thermally driven diurnal tide theory of upper atmosphere. Wind motion was studied by photographically tracking smoke puffs from upper grenade using Apache rocket motor. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) During September: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, in an interview with Technology Week, predicted that U.S. would land men on the moon in 1969—probably before U.S.S.R. He said the Johnson Administration had definite plans for "very active post-Apollo schedule,” but refused to "put a time schedule on what comes next.” Post-Apollo activities would include exploring the moon, increasing our knowledge of the planets, expanding earth-orbiting capability, both manned and unmanned, and developing maneuverable, reusable spacecraft. The Vice President foresaw no possibility of merging usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program with any of NASA’s manned projects. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 12, 13) During September: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were exchanging daily six to eight weather satellite photographs with nephanalyses. First U.S. transmittal began Sept. 6 with pictures from essa i meteorological satellite, launched Feb. 3. On Sept. 11, U.S.S.R. began sending pictures from cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Regions photographed—primarily Atlantic Ocean and Western Europe-—had been matched so operations of satellite systems could be compared. Joint effort to improve transmission quality had been proposed since transmission seemed to degrade photographs: U.S. scientists found Soviet photos "poor” in quality; Soviet scientists described U.S. photos as "usable.” Receipt of photos from cosmos cxxii had enabled U.S. to analyze satellite’s instrumentation: cosmos cxxii carried pair of 48° TV cameras canted 16.5° to each side of orbital plane to provide coverage of about 690 mi. of earth. Cameras overlapped field of coverage by 1°; frames transmitted so far had 10 per cent overlap. (Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 26-7; Schmeck, NYT, 9/27/66, 15)
LUNA x had detected electrons with energies higher than cosmic radiation, Tass reported: "Data have been obtained which may be interpreted as evidence of the existence in the near-lunar space of fluxes of electrons with energies of tens of thousands of electron volts. These fluxes are 70 to 100 times more intense than the cosmic ray background. Possibly, this phenomenon is due to the earth’s magnetic 'tail.’ Later measurements will permit more positive conclusions on the radiation conditions near the moon.” In addition, preliminary data analysis showed that intensity of the moon’s magnetic field was "somewhat above the level of magnetic fields in free interplanetary space” and that meteorite "particle density” near the moon was higher than in "interplanetary space.” upi reported that U.S. scientists, including Dr. James A. Van Allen, State Univ. of Iowa, believed radiation observed by LUNA X was either the earth’s comet tail or a similar feature produced by the moon itself. Reported level of radiation would be no threat to manned operations near the moon, they said. (Tass, 4/9/66; upi, NYT, 4/10/66, 79; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/10/66, A6)
Flight plan for Lunar Orbiter I, scheduled for launch between Aug. 9 and Aug. 13, had been changed to shift trajectory for mission so photographic spacecraft would pass over surveyor i twice. Stereographic photos, with resolution down to three feet, could thus be obtained. First seven areas selected for Lunar Orbiter photography remained unchanged and included examples of all major types of lurain to permit assessment of suitability for Apollo manned landing missions, (nasa Release 66-193)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev described U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 supersonic airliner in Soviet trade-union newspaper Trud. Four-engine aluminum aircraft would carry 121 passengers at 1,500 mph (compared with U.S. supersonic transport’s 250 passengers at 2,000 mph); speed had been deliberately limited to allow construction "of highly durable aluminum alloys,” Tupolev said. Tu-144 would be needle-nosed with small delta wing far back on fuselage and four jet engines in single container under rear section. Aircraft would be operational in "the nearest future”—possibly by 1970. (Anderson, NYT, 5/30/66, 36C) May 29-Ju.ne 4: Mapping the moon for man’s first lunar landing was discussed by leading scientists at an 11-nation International Conference on Selenodesy at Manchester, England. (Reuters, NYT, 5/30/66, 22) May 30-June 1: nasa’s surveyor i was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-10) booster on 63-hr. direct ascent lunar transfer trajectory. Spacecraft—carrying survey television system and instrumentation to measure lunar surface bearing strength, temperatures, and radar reflectivity—was first in series of seven designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. It would softland on the moon June 2. After surveyor I separated from Atlas, spacecraft pointed its solar panels toward the sun to power its equipment; at five hours get, sensing devices fixed on the star Canopus for cruise attitude stabilization. surveyor I spacecraft successfully completed mid-course correction of flight path on electronic commands relayed from antenna near jpl. Only flaw in launching occurred within one hour get, when radio signals indicated that one of two antennas on spacecraft might have failed to deploy, jpl’s Surveyor project manager Robert J. Parks said the problem was "not going to preclude a possibility of getting full success out of this mission since one antenna is sufficient to receive radioed commands unless the spacecraft gets in a position where the working antenna is out of range of earth.” The other antenna was properly deployed and working perfectly. Surveyor program was under direction of ossa Lunar and Planetary Program Div.; project management was assigned to jpl; prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was under direction of LRC. (nasa Release 66-127; Wilford, NYT, 5/31/66, 1, 33; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/31/66, Al)	.	...
NASA announced a change in sequence of two Apollo/Saturn IB launches scheduled for late 1966: AS-202 mission was rescheduled to follow AS-203 mission to "provide additional time for checkout of the Apollo spacecraft to be flown in . . . AS-202.” AS-203 would test Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and verify that orbital operations features of the liquid hydrogen propulsion system were satisfactory, (nasa Release 66-78)
Anticipating launching of Pacific satellite in late 1966, ComSatCorp filed tariff with fcc for Pacific services. Monthly rates ComSatCorp would charge authorized common carriers would be $2,700 between U.S. mainland and Hawaii; $4,900 from U.S. mainland to Japan; and $3,800 from Hawaii to Japan. Tariff for service to NASA for Project Apollo would be equivalent to level of charges applied to other commercial satellite channels. ComSatCorp also said it planned reduced rates for Atlantic services, to apply when second satellite became operational. (ComSatCorp Release)
nasa had eliminated final three Surveyors because of good results from Ranger series, surveyors i and n, and lunar ORHITERs i and ii. It had been determined that five remaining Surveyor spacecraft would provide necessary additional information about the moon to support Apollo manned lunar landing mission, (nasa Release 66-318)
Photographic proof that two clouds of "cosmic rubble”' were orbiting the earth in the same path as the moon was announced by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. engineer J. Wesley Simpson. The "rubble” might have come from all over the universe and could offer clues to the earth’s origin, solar winds, and the possibility of life in outer space. Although photographic images were too faint to be reproduced on papeT, they were visible on negatives and when projected on a smooth white surface, (upi, NYT, 9/1/66, 24) During August: Dr. Raymond L, BisplinghofF, head of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Special Consultant to NASA Administrator, wrote in Air Force and Space Digest that there appeared to be widespread lack of public understanding that aeronautical and space developments might have a profound effect on transformation of society: "It is not so much the possession of the new technologies . . . that counts. Of more importance are the quickened spirits, the sharpened intellects, and the developed resources that can permeate the whole fabric of a society.” (AF/SD, 8/66, 86-7)
State Dept, disclosed that on May 26 U.S.S.R. had given U.S. photos taken by luna ix after it softlanded on the moon Feb. 3. (upi, NYT, 6/10/66, 8)
gemini VIII Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott returned to their families in Houston after debriefing at ksc. (AP, NYT, 3/22/66, 18)
William Hines charged in Washington Evening Star that publicity given to proposed U.S. supersonic transport (Sst) was . . part of a propaganda barrage aimed at the American taxpayer, who in the years ahead will be called upon to underwrite deficits clearly predictable in building and operating a costly fleet of airplanes capable of spanning the Atlantic in two hours. "The sst program has been publicized since the program’s inception in 1963 with the same combination of gobbledygook and public-relations hokum used so successfully in merchandising the moon program. Technological challenge, the asserted psychological-spiritual imperative, and the added spur of an international 'race’—all are cited as reasons compelling development of a 2,000-mile-an-hour super-airliner. "Actually the sst, when built and placed in operation, will be no more a free-enterprise product than the Saturn-5 moon rocket is. It will be built to government specifications, by contractors selected by the government, with development costs largely if not entirely underwritten by the government.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/66)
Apparent inactivity in Soviet manned space program might reflect "growing dismay over the tremendously high cost of astronautics where men are involved,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. "The Russians may feel they have better things to do with their money, just as the United States would have if the Kennedy 'moon message’ of 1961 had not been hung like an albatross around the national neck as a commitment involving American prestige before the world.” Cost of Project Gemini was about $700,000 per man hour. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, A12)
Gemini Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong were received in Bogota by Colombian President Carlos Lleras Restrepo during their three-week tour of Latin America, (upi, Wash. Post, 10/11/66, B2)
AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg predicted at Univ. of Texas lecture that if man decided to colonize the moon or planets, he would need nuclear energy to make the environments habitable for human beings and large nuclear reactors to provide "planet conditioning”—an outer space version of air conditioning. In addition, reactors could furnish power "to extract water from the rock, to help produce synthetic food and to extract minerals and other materials from the surface.” Dr. Seaborg said he foresaw in the more immediate future the use of nuclear power plants on manned orbiting laboratories: "... it is desirable to operate these stations at the relatively low altitudes of between 100 and 200 nautical miles. For these low orbits the smaller exposed area of nuclear power systems results in greater reductions in the atmospheric drag—and in the pounds of propellant required to keep the station in its assigned orbit. An unmanned scientific or defense system which has to operate close to the Earth will similarly have the advantage of low atmospheric drag if nuclear power systems are used.” (Text; AEC Release s-<5-66)
Colonization of ocean floor would be more useful to man than colonization of the moon, said B. G. Anderson, senior research psychologist for General Dynamics Corp.’s Electric Boat Div. at joint aiaa-usn Marine Systems Conference in Los Angeles. The food and minerals available to man in and under the oceans were more important natural resources— and more easily retrieved—than any likely to be found on the moon or elsewhere in the solar system. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, H4) August 19: usaf launched usa’s secor vii geodetic satellite, ers-xv satellite, and an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, using Atlas-Agena D booster. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: "In just nine years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase about new manned flights. "It is too early for anyone to guess how such developments may affect the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in the world and in the universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, 11/10/ 66, P6) A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted, described as "consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr. Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as "one of the great pictures of the century,” said: "It provides new information, which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and structures on the moon.” (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36) Docking of spacecraft with gatv was in 2.3 revolutions—4:14 get. After plans to use gatv propulsion system to place gemini xii into higher orbit had to be abandoned because of gatv malfunction, gemini xii rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows. Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at 19:29:01 get with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 get with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin performed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for tethered operations, gemini xii backed out of Agena docking collar about 47:37 get and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolution later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva, Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experiments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 get for 51-min. duration. Total Eva time for gemini xii mission was 5 hrs. 28 min. Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:00:01 get; reentry in 59th revolution after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic was at 94:34:31 get. gemini xii landed about three miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Wasp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts were picked up hy helicopter within 20 min. Naucmher 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA's lunar ohbiter if. one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov, 25, confirms the moon's long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi. in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of the crater Marius (upper right). White House announced promotion of Aldrin from usaf major to lieutenant colonel. Lovell had been promoted to usn captain after cemini vn mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill Moyers said the flight was "the culmination of a great team effort, stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, and other Government agencies; in the universities and other research centers; and in American industry.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-272; Msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17; 11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, {Fash. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al, A4; 11/14/66, Al; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2) November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at 2,000	mph for 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment, nasa’s activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi. strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil, and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-Ames Convair 990A jet aircraft "Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, successfully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic. Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud for comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumentation, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satisfactorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space Commission. Photographs were taken by nimbus ii meteorological satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr., orbiting in Gemini xii spacecraft. AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi. (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density. Data were telemetered to ground receivers. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Netherlands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communications, and weather prediction, (nasa Release 66-285; Wallops Release 66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66, A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; nasa Rpt. srl)
"The American Space Outlook” for 1967 was summarized by Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., in the Baltimore Sun. ". . . 1967 should he a year of genuine accomplishments in space for men and machines. ". . . astronauts will begin to fly around the earth in the kind of spacecraft that will carry them to the moon in 1968 or 1969. . . . "New unmanned spacecraft will climb into orbit for additional views of the earth’s weather. Other craft will fly away to study the science of the sun; make further on-the-spot examinations of the moon’s surface, probe the nature of the stars and take another close look at Venus. . . the Defense Department will lay the groundwork for the 1969 launching of a manned orbiting laboratory to study possible military roles of men in space . . . the people who make airplanes will be planning the big jumbo jets and, in Europe, fashioning airliners that will go faster than the speed of sound. . . .” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/28/66)
zvaa’s Rocketdyne Div. at Edwards afb was struck by afl-cio United Auto Workers in a wage dispute. An estimated half of the 227 workers in UAW bargaining unit stayed off their jobs. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/1/66, A9)	_ During January: Series of tests was being completed by NASA msc’s Landing and Recovery Div. to check out direction and finding equipment for homing an Apollo spacecraft for post-landing location and recovery. Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo boilerplate spacecraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Apollo Survival Radio transmitting signals. Homing runs were made from altitudes of 28,000 ft. to 500 ft. to determine range of direction finder receiver onboard a usaf HC-130H air rescue aircraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Survival Radio on the spacecraft in the Gulf. Equipment had performed as expected with line-of-sight acquisition of boilerplate Apollo on all homing runs by the aircraft, (msc Roundup, 1/21/66,3) During January: Eulogies for the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, nasa Director of Space Medicine, appeared in Air Force and Space Digest: Walter T. Bonney said of Dr. Dryden: "Hugh Dryden was a deeply religious man. He held that man’s life at its fullest is a trinity of activity, physical, mental, and spiritual. Throughout his life he preached the compatibility of religion and science, and he lived what he preached. No less, he was a realist; and so, as in 1954, he would often remind his listeners that: 'I am not one of those few who believe that we can abolish the use of force in the world. As a nation we find it necessary to build great military power. I am confident that such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of the world ... than military weakness.’ "In 1947, he was called to direct the work of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. His tasks were enormously difficult—radically new and expensive research facilities had to be provided, but even more important, learning the nature of the intricate problems of flight in the new speed ranges and methods for their solution demanded new concepts of team activity and functional coordination. His leadership, disarmingly light and unobtrusive, was amazingly perceptive and effective. Facilities were obtained and changes were made; the period 1947-58 became what might be truly called naca’s golden age. "With establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (of which naca was the nucleus), he undertook the role of scientific leader, reporting to the Administrator, and made of it a position of paramount influence. He rejoiced in the US policy that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes and worked to promote international space cooperation; but no less, he saw in US exploration of space an activity essential to the strength and security of the nation. As perhaps never before, his great wisdom and his unexcelled mastery of the art of the possible were in those later years valued and used to their fullest.” Editor John Loosbrock said of Dr. Lovelace: "In widening circles, the full import of Randy’s untimely death becomes apparent. The Air Force Association and the Aerospace Education Foundation have lost a distinguished leader. The medical profession is poorer for the passing of a brilliant surgeon, an imaginative ^researcher. The United States Air Force will miss his sound advice and pioneering efforts in the special kind of medical knowledge that is required for those who fly—in air and in space. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration must find new leadership for its space medical effort. The entire nation and the world itself will find that Randy Lovelace’s death leaves a large and well-nigh unfillable niche.” (AF/SD, 1/66) During January: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, paid tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, in Applied Mechanics Reviews on Dr. Dryden’s scientific and engineering accomplishments. Dr. Bisplinghoff noted that the naca, under Dr. Dryden’s leadership, "produced a vast body of new knowledge which made possible routine supersonic flight and laid much of the ground for space flight that was to come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other place, the impact of Dryden’s leadership on the nation’s destiny. The development of high-speed wind-tunnel facilities and a companion competence for theoretical research within the naca contributed, in the opinion of the author, more than any other single factor to the leadership of the United States in supersonic flight. . . .” (AMR, 1/66, 1-5)
usn had issued to General Dynamics Corp. a $20-million supplemental agreement to an existing contract to install satellite communications systems aboard each of three former Navy tankers that would serve as ocean-going tracking stations for NASA’s Project Apollo. (Gen. Dynamics Release 1267)
msc awarded $70,000 contract to Rodana Research Corp. to develop emergency medical kits that would "satisfy all inflight and training requirements for the Apollo Command Module and the Lunar Excursion Module.” Two training units would be delivered for each flight, in addition to one mock-up and six prototype models; they would contain loaded injectors, tablets, capsules, ointment, inhalers, adhesives, and compressed dressings, (msc Release 66-8)
Izvestia described how the Communist Party anthem was transmitted from LUNA x to earth: "Before the launching, an electronic generator was installed in the artificial moon satellite to radiate in a definite sequence electric oscillations of the frequencies necessary for reproducing selected fragments of the melody. . . . The use of semi conductors made it possible to substantially reduce the weight and volume of the set and considerably increase the range of transmissions. The 'music’ signals of the set installed in the Luna 10 could be received even from the neighborhood of Venus. "The increase in range and the overcoming of cosmic noise were achieved by means of special narrow band-pass filters. The cycle of functioning of the instrument reproducing 'Internationale’ consists of two parts: generating in a certain sequence signals of various frequencies —10 seconds—and creating intervals before the repetition of the melody—45 seconds. The instrument is switched on by a signal from the earth.” (Tass, Izvestia, 4/28/66)
Edmond C. Buckley, nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, reviewed nasa’s tracking and data acquisition network program: "During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December.. . . "During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Technology Satellite. "In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is estimated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the network stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . "During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and transmission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year 1965, 85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support.. . . "The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of 228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new twoway communications record of 191 million miles between network stations and the spacecraft. .. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone facility received a signal from the Mariner IV spacecraft over a distance of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
NASA selected Warrier Constructors, Inc., for final negotiations of a $3.5-million, cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to complete construction and equip a lunar receiving laboratory at msc by end of 1967. A central complex where samples of lunar surface material collected by Apollo astronauts could be received, examined, and processed, laboratory would also be equipped to quarantine spacecraft and crew after flight to moon, (nasa Release 66-200)
President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY 1967 budget said in part: "Just over 60 years ago man entered the age of controlled flight. Today, men orbit the earth at speeds measured in thousands of miles an hour. In 1967, less than 6 years after this Nation set the goal of a manned landing on the moon within the present decade, we will begin unmanned test flights of the giant Saturn V rocket and the Apollo spacecraft—the complete space vehicle required for achieving that goal. Later on in the 1960’s, we will undertake the manned lunar mission itself. "Our many space achievements—both manned and unmanned—have dramatically advanced our scientific understanding and technological capabilities. They have also demonstrated our remarkable progress in the peaceful exploration of space. In 1967, our large space projects will be progressing from the more expensive development phase into operational status, and new projects of equivalent cost will not be started. Accordingly, expenditures of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are estimated to decline by $300 million in 1967 [as opposed to the new authorization requested in the FY 1967-budget]. This level will sustain our progress in space exploration and continue the advancement of science and technology.” (Text, CR, 1/24/66, 861; Pres. Doc., 1/31/66, 88-9)
John A. Edwards, Director of Gemini Flight Operations, became Deputy Director, Gemini Program, in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. He replaced LeRoy E. Day, who became Director of Apollo Test, (nasa Release 66-176)
Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Director of Field Center Development, NASA omsf, speaking in Washington, D.C., before the Community Development Conference of the 16th District of Texas, said that the magnitude and importance of the investment in the space program dictate that informed citizens from all walks of life participate in a national dialogue on decisions involved: "We in NASA do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of NASA alone... . The budget for the coming fiscal year permits NASA to hold open the option for a program to procure additional flight vehicles beyond those now programmed, so as to employ the Apollo hardware, facilities and capabilities at least through 1971. If we do not exercise this option in the decision for the 1968 budget, we will have to begin a phase-down of the manned space flight activities and the 'mothballing’ of some of our facilities. At a small fraction of the initial cost we can continue and we can expand our operations in space for the next ten years and more. These operations will have tremendous implications for our national security and for our position of world leadership, in addition to the benefits of scientific advancement and the betterment of man’s life on Earth. ... In the area of national security, our expenditures in space probably represent the cheapest insurance policy the nation can buy for the future.” (Text) "The 747 concept promises to be as revolutionary in relation to the current generation of jets as the initial 707s were to the piston-powered transports they superseded,” Aviation Week editorialized. "Biggest technical advancement will come from the new generation of high bypass ratio, high temperature, large turbofans typified by the Pratt & Whitney Aircraft JT9D. This new gas turbine cycle promises as much improvement in load-carrying capacity and operating economy as the original turbofan gained over the straight turbojet. It is the real root of the economic and technical revolution embodied in the 747 concept.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 4/18/66, 21)
At ksc post-launch conference, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller commented on AS-201: "This test was of extreme importance to the eventual manned lunar landing in that it provides us with the first test of the ablative characteristics of the heat shield protection for the Apollo spacecraft. It is the one test that we were unable to perform on the ground—the one test, therefore, that was a qualification test and which will be repeated again on 202, which is the next flight in the Apollo system.” (mcs Roundup, 3/4/66, 1-2)
Circular insignia of Project Apollo astronauts was displayed for first time at ksc. Capital letter "A” was in center with its crossbar formed by part of a curving track joining earth (at right) and moon (at left) of the "A.” Centered on the crossbar were three twinkling stars— symbolic of the three-astronaut crew of each Apollo mission. Earth symbol was dominated by North American continent; moon was represented in third quarter phase with dark part dominated by a man’s profile. Moon, earth, and letter "A” were displayed against dark blue background studded with stars—representing outer space. Entire design was ringed by a circle with "Apollo” at top and "nasa” at bottom. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/16/66, Al)
NASA selected McDonnell Aircraft Corp. for negotiation of $9-million, fixed-price contract to provide an airlock for an experiment in which astronauts would enter empty hydrogen tank of a spent Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) 2nd stage (S-IVB). Airlock would be stacked on space vehicle between Saturn and Apollo units using lunar module mounts. In orbit, command and service modules would separate and dock with airlock unit, and the crew would activate systems to pressurize spent hydrogen tank for habitation; hatch in airlock would permit astronauts to egress into space without depressurization of tank or spacecraft. First mission in MSFC-managed program would be carried out "no earlier than 1968.” (nasa Release 66-223; msfc Release 66-189)
Speech by Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wisc.) on need for research and development on socioeconomic problems such as transportation, construction, and waste management was inserted in the Congressional Record: "We should not allow heavy concentration of research and development in the three fields of space, defense, and atomic energy to blind us to the potential for research and development in civilian technology. . . . "But much of the growth and success of these three . . . 'giants’ must be explained in terms of the remarkable men associated with them. . . . "We think of Admiral Rickover and the nuclear submarine. Of Jim Webb and the space program. ... Of the personal sponsorship of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson for our manned landing on the moon______” (CR, 3/28/66, 6529)
U.S. monitors had received photographs transmitted from the moon by luna ix, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told the press: "We have obtained some information regarding those Luna 9 pictures from our own sources. Such data are currently under study ana evaluation. I believe it is important for the public to know that we do not rely solely on Soviet releases or Jodrell Bank pronouncements for our information.” (nasc)
NASA and USN completed an agreement calling for studies by U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office to define a series of experiments aimed at enhancing oceanographic and marine-technology research from manned orbiting spacecraft. Experiments would be considered for use in NASA Apollo Applications earth-orbiting missions and would employ existing or modified Apollo hardware, (nasa Release 66-6)
lunar orbiter i impacted on moon’s hidden side at 9:30 a.m. edt on command from earth. The spacecraft was deliberately crashed to obviate possible interference with mission of second Lunar Orbiter (Lunar Orbiter B) scheduled for launch Nov. 6. First U.S. spacecraft to orbit and photograph moon, lunar orbiter i, launched Aug. 10, became first satellite to be deliberately destroyed in space by NASA, (nasa Release 66-287; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/30/66, A10)
Two gallons of fuel exploded inside drum near Saturn IB launch pad at etr, but there were no injuries and no damage to the booster or launch complex, AP reported. Saturn IB was scheduled to launch unmanned Apollo spacecraft on Feb. 22. (AP, NYT, 2/16/66, 52)
President Johnson issued statement after gemini vm carrying Neil Armstrong and David Scott had splashed down safely following difficulties encountered in flight: "They are disappointed that their mission could not continue, but Gemini 8 accomplished the first docking in space—a major step on the course we have set. The information they have acquired will help us to perfect the spacecrafts that will carry us even further. "From their skill and strength we all take heart, knowing that the personal qualities of the astronauts and their colleagues will ultimately prevail in the conquest of space. We are very proud of them.” (Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 400)
First picture of earth from the vicinity of the moon, taken by NASA’s lunar ORHJTEH I. summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rocket and instrumentation performances were satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. SRL) August 14: The critical voices raised during Aug. 8-9 Senate debate on the NASA portion of the Independent Offices Appropriation bill (H,R. 14921) indicated the U.S. space program was in "political trouble,” concluded New York Times editorial. "Fundamental questions are being asked about whether this country should have gotten involved in the moon race in the first place, and invidious comparisons are being drawn about the dividends from money spent in space and those that might have been realized had those same funds been used to meet urgent human needs. . . . "There are important and useful things to be done in a post-Apollo space program, but it is doubtful in the extreme that the nation should go on indefinitely paying five billion dollars or more annually for such a program....” (NYT, 8/14/66, E10)
Apollo Spacecraft Lem Adapter (Sla) was transported by helicopter from Tulsa to msc for series of vibration and acoustics tests in conjunction with other Apollo spacecraft modu’es and a Saturn IB instrument unit. (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1)
Lee R. Scherer, manager of nasa’s Lunar Orbiter program, in interview with Seattle Times reporter Robert L. Twiss, expressed confidence that the Boeing-built spacecraft could help resolve many unanswered questions about the moon. With funding and nasa approval, Lunar Orbiters equipped with devices that could be deployed to the moon could be launched in 1969, yielding valuable scientific information, Scherer said. "We could gain substantial information about other areas of the moon than the site chosen for manned landing.” (Twiss, Seattle Times, 5/12/66)
V/Adm. H. G. Rickover (usn), in speech at Athens meeting of Royal National Foundation, noted benefits to humanity in science and warned of dangers inherent in misuse of technology. He urged that technological capability be applied selectively to enhance human welfare and conserve natural resources, rather than to "submit meekly to whatever is technically feasible.” (Text, CR, 6/21/66, 13114-17) At 49 min. get Stafford executed first course correction to position gemini ix for rendezvous, firing thruster rockets to raise perigee to 134 mi. After two more orbital maneuvers, spacecraft was within 25 ft. of target. Stafford, sighting atda, confirmed suspicions that its shroud had not jettisoned, and docking would be impossible. He radioed ground control: "It looks like an angry alligator out there.” nasa later revealed that shroud had not jettisoned because technicians, following "insufficiently detailed” written instructions, had installed lanyards improperly. Complying with modified flight plan, astronauts photographed atda, executed re-rendezvous maneuver, and executed rendezvous-from-above simulating Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) abort from the moon. After this maneuver, which depleted fuel supply to 11%—only 6% more than minimum reserve—Stafford and Cernan were fatigued and recommended 24-hr. postponement of Cernan’s walk in space. At 11:02 a.m. est June 5, Cernan opened hatch of depressurized spacecraft, climbed out, and retrieved micrometeoroid impact detector attached to side. He moved to full length of 25-ft. tether to take photos. After one hour, Cernan returned to Adapter Section to don Astronaut Maneuvering Unit (Amu)—a task which required "four or five times more work than anticipated.” His faceplate visor began clouding over, presumably because environmental control system was not absorbing moisture quickly enough. Ceman’s limited visibility and discovery that Amu’s radio transmissions were garbled forced Stafford to recall him to spacecraft. He had been scheduled to disconnect from gemini ix’s oxygen supply and maneuver in Amu to 150 ft. from spacecraft. Reentry on June 6 was normal. At 10:00 a.m. est, in the 46th revolution, gemini ix impacted 345 mi. east of Cape Kennedy—less than two miles from target—in the mo3t accurate landing to date, after total mission duration of 72 hrs. 21 min. Splashdown and recovery were carried on live television via EARLY bird I comsat. Within minutes, USN pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, placed flotation collar around spacecraft. At 10:45 a.m. EST, spacecraft carrying astronauts was hoisted onboard U.S.S. Wasp. Accomplishments of gemini ix-a mission were summarized by. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at msc news conference: (1) demonstration of three new rendezvous procedures—catching target in only three revolutions, locating it without radar, and approaching it from above rather than below; (2) accurately controlled reentry; (3) longest period of extravehicular activities—over two hours; (4) new information on man’s ability to work in space necessary for manned lunar landing and for assembling stations in space; and (5) new information on manned observation of another spacecraft in orbit. Five experiments were successfully performed in accordance with modified flight plan. Concerning mission’s disappointments, he said: "We will try to do as much as we can on each of our Gemini flights. We won’t always succeed in meeting all of the objectives. But we learned a great deal about the problems that do occur during the course of one of these very difficult space missions.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-97; Wilford, NYT, 6/4/66, 1, 10; 6/5/66, 1, 80 ; 6/6/66, 1, 40 ; 6/7/66, 1, 34; 6/8/66, 1,29; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/66, Al, A2; 6/5/66, Al, A6; 6/6/66, Al, A4; 6/7/66, A3; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/4/66, Al, A8; 6/5/66, Al, A14; 6/6/66, Al, A3; 6/7/66, Al, A7, A21; 6/8/66, A3; WSJ, 6/7/66, 2; 6/8/66, 1; Tech. Wk, 6/13/66, 14-15; Av. Wk, 6/13/66, 31-34)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told AP he saw "no urgency” in landing on the moon first. Discounting the theory that a manned lunar landing would have military significance, Senator Anderson said "had the United States and the Soviet Union cooperated from the start in space exploration, more knowledge at less expense might have resulted.” (AP, NYT, 12/15/66, 34)
Gemini VIII rendezvous and docking mission—world’s first space docking—began at etr with launch of 7,000-lb. Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) by Adas booster at 10:00 a.m. est, followed 100 min. later by launch of Gemini viii by two-stage Titan II booster with Astronauts Neil A.	Armstrong, command pilot, and David R. Scott, pilot. Primary objectives of the mission—sixth manned flight in the Gemini series—were rendezvous and docking of gemini viii spacecraft with gatv and performance of extravehicular activity (Eva) for one orbit. gatv was injected into near-circular orbit with 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; gemini viii entered initial orbit with 128.8-mi. (206.4-km.) apogee and 74.9-mi. (119.5-km.) perigee. Near third apogee, Armstrong fired aft thrusters, circularizing spacecraft’s orbit at 168-mi. (270-km.) altitude. Trailing gatv by 139 mi., Armstrong received intermittent lock-on between gemini viii radar and gatv’s companion transponder. After sighting gatv at 66-mi. range at 04:12 get, Armstrong fired thrusters and Scott read out computer data until 05:15 get, when they switched from catch-up to rendezvous mode. At 150 ft. from gatv, Armstrong reported he had matched velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions at that point were so favorable that Armstrong passed under gatv and came up 80 ft. in front of it, where he was able to read some data on gatv’s status display. Successful docking was confirmed at 6:33 get. Plan had been to remain docked with gatv through 7M-hr. sleep period until beginning Eva, but at approximately 7:00 get spacecraft-GATV combination began to roll and yaw violently. Unable to stabilize joined spacecraft, Armstrong fired gemini vm’s thrusters to undock and maneuvered away from the gatv. Once freed, however, gemini viii began to roll even more rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw rates increased, approaching one revolution per min. For three minutes, the astronauts fought to control gemini viii; finally, with oams turned off, Armstrong fired his Reentry Control System (Res) rockets in final attempt to counteract violent roll. This maneuver was successful and eight minutes later, at 7:25:30 get, the spacecraft was stabilized. Within a matter of minutes, the problem was isolated to the spacecraft’s No. 8 thruster, which had fired intermittently while gemini viii was docked with gatv and stuck open until Armstrong managed to turn off oams. It was later determined that a short circuit was probable cause of thruster’s malfunction. Premature use of reentry rockets forced Gemini flight director John D. Hodge to order an emergency landing, with recovery planned in the western Pacific during seventh revolution. (Safety rules of the Gemini program required immediate landing of any spacecraft once its Res squibs were blown; if the flight were allowed to continue, danger of Res fuel depletion would jeopardize firing of Res rockets, vital to safe return of spacecraft and crew.) Spacecraft landed 500 mi. west of Okinawa in regular emergency recovery area at approximately 10:23 p.m. est—10 hrs. 42 min. after launch. Landing was only three miles from intended impact point. Within minutes usaf frogmen parachuted from usaf C-54 rescue aircraft and placed flotation collar around capsule. At 1:30 a.m. est capsule and astronauts were hoisted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard Despite early termination, gemini viii mission accomplished one of two primary objectives—rendezvous and docking. Original flight plan had specified four gemini viii-gatv dockings and two hrs. 15 min. of extravehicular activity by Astronaut Scott. Five scientific, four technological, and one medical experiment were to have been conducted. Flight had been scheduled to last 44 revolutions—approximately 73 hrs. (NASAProj. Off,; nasa Release 66-52 ;Wilford, NYT, 3/17/66,1;Waldron, NYT, 3/17/66, 20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/17/66, 1; Av. Wk., 3/31/66, 30-32)
U.S.S.R.’s official silence on fate of LUNA xi artificial moon satellite launched Aug. 24 prompted speculation that spacecraft had switched off its beam in orbit, overshot the moon, or crashed. (Wash. Post, 8/28/66, A10; Wash. Sun. Star, 8/28/66, Al)
NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said NASA would request $6 billion for FY 1968, including $900 million for Apollo Applications and $100 million for Voyager, Aviation Week reported. Seamans’ statement that "Apollo Applications will fill the post-Apollo gap and that there is no need to define another goal now” was said to conflict with the recent contention of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, that a clear definition of the Nation’s post-Apollo goal was necessary. (Av. Wk., 5/9/66, 25)
NASA would ask $1 billion for Apollo Applications programing in FY 1968 to prevent a lapse in manned space flight by offsetting reduction in expenditures and aerospace industry manpower for Project Apollo, William Normyle reported in Aviation Week. He continued: "nasa was permitted by the Administration to request only $41.9 million for Apollo Applications in Fiscal 1967. Some of nasa’s advanced planners argued for $500 million in the Fiscal 1967 budget now under consideration, but the agency went to the Bureau of the Budget with a request for only $270 million, which was reduced to the $41.9 million.” (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/25/66, 30)
Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman and his family were welcomed by a parade in their hometown of Tucson, Ariz. Borman, who was given the keys to the city and told that a $300,000 planetarium would be built in his honor, was also praised in a special resolution passed unanimously by the Arizona legislature. He told a press conference he had joined the space program to go to the moon and "that’s what I want to do.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 1/9/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/11/66)
NASA awarded Philco Corp. $3.5-million contract for four tri-axis magnetometers and supporting equipment to be left on moon by Apollo astronauts. One of seven geophysical instruments to be carried in Alsep (Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package), 14.5-lb. magnetometer would determine presence or absence of lunar magnetic field, measure magnetic penetrability of moon, study interplanetary magnetic field and its diffusion to moon, and detect electrical currents in solar wind above lunar surface, (arc Release 66-9)
President Johnson sent a telegram to Nikolay Podgorny, Chairman, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R., on the success of luna ix: "You and the people of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are to be congratulated for the great success of Luna 9. Your accomplishment is one that can benefit all mankind. And all mankind applauds it. Your scientists have made a major contribution to man’s knowledge of the moon and of space.” (Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 166)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, Gerald M. Truszynski, testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: "To provide effective support of flight projects, NASA has established a worldwide network of tracking and data acquisition stations. . . . This network, at the present time, consists of ground stations which are operational or under construction at 28 locations. These stations are located in the United States and 16 foreign countries and territories. They represent a total capital investment of over $600 million and are operated by more than 2,500 highly trained NASA, contractor, and foreign national personnel. . ... "Many of the stations being used for Gemini support will also be used for Apollo. Capabilities are being added at these stations while other stations are being established. The network for support of Apollo missions . . . will consist of 10 fixed land stations with 30-foot antennas, three stations with 85-foot antennas, 1 transportable station, 5 instrumentation ships, and 8 instrumentation aircraft. In addition, three 85-foot antenna stations normally used for deep space missions will be used for support of Apollo. . . . "Our efforts are directed toward having the network fully qualified for lunar mission support in 1967.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 383, 387)
U.S. had current "edge” over U.S.S.R. in overall space capability but this status had been "recently acquired and is not sufficient to form even the slightest basis for complacency,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn. Industrial Luncheon in Washington, D.C. Dr.Welsh analyzed the areas of relative accomplishment: "(1) Number of spacecraft. The United States has placed almost 400 spacecraft into earth orbit and on escape missions, while the USSR has put slightly less than 200 on such missions. . . . However . . . Soviets have placed each year a greater total weight of payloads. ... (2) Lunar and Interplanetary. The United States has been far less active but considerably more successful in its interplanetary activities. . . . We have photographed Mars and had a productive fly-by of Venus while the USSR’s active interplanetary program has been primarily plagued by failure. In addition, we have taken some 17,000 photographs of the moon and are taking hundreds more by the magnificent Surveyor spacecraft. ... (3) Manned Flight . . . U.S. . . . has a distinct lead over the USSR with about 1500 man flight hours in orbit compared with about 500 . . . with the longest individual flight as well as the longest extra-vehicular activity. Also, the U.S. has had two controlled rendezvous maneuvers, one docking experiment, and considerable manned spacecraft maneuvering experience. So far, the USSR has achieved none of these latter goals. (4) Space Applications. The United States has navigation, weather, and communications satellite systems in regular operation, while the USSR is still in the developmental stage in such activities. (5) Scientific Data . . . the larger number and greater variety of U.S. scientific payloads, as well as the wider and freer dissemination of the information obtained, may well have added more to the world’s store of knowledge. (6) Propulsion . . . the USSR has surpassed the United States in the field of propulsion so far as the amount of thrust is concerned [but] this thrust advantage is much less true today as both countries have in operation and under development larger and more advanced propulsion systems.. . (Text)
msfc Director Dr, Wernher von Braun named Dr. Jerry C. McCall to organize and manage the Experiments and Applications Office—msfc’s portion of Apollo Applications; Stan Reinartz would assist him. (msfc Release 65-307)
Discovery of two powerful x-ray galaxies which might indicate existence of a whole family of celestial objects was reported by Naval Research Laboratory physicist Dr. Herbert Friedman at a news conference in Washington, D.C. The two galaxies—Cygnus A and M-87—were among the strongest of the 10,000 galaxies that emit radio signals and had been detected previously only by optical telescopes and by their radio emissions. "The startling thing about these extra-galactic sources is that their x-ray output is 10 to 100 times greater than their combined output of light and radio waves,” Dr. Friedman said, and he suggested that an x-ray satellite or a "fence-like array of 1,000 Geiger counters erected on the moon” could identify the sources. The discovery supported theory of an "exploding universe” whose evolution over billions of years, and in the future, would be characterized by violent cosmic explosions far beyond the relative calm of the Milky Way. Dr. Friedman, E. T. Byram, and T. A. Chubb obtained data from an April 1965 Aerobee sounding rocket flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/66, 2; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/3/66, A3)
Use of personal radar units by astronauts to counteract optical illusions which they might encounter while assembling a space station or exploring the moon was recommended by Cambridge Univ. Prof. Richard L. Gregory, author of Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing, in a New York press interview. Gregory believed astronauts might experience spatial distortion when seeing spacecraft’s structural elements gleaming luminously in sunlight or sharply etched against a jet black background. In addition, he thought they might experience reversed depth perception which would cause distorted images. Gregory recommended aiding astronauts with tones, heard through earphones, of a variable pitch which would be determined by a beam from radar unit each man would wear. Variations in pitch would indicate distance to different objects and astronaut’s rate of approach or retreat from them. Gregory was conducting his research at New York Univ. on a senior foreign scientist fellowship financed in part by NASA. (Osmundsen, NYT,	31; Houston Chron., 2/16/66)
