First Saturn V booster was moved to its launch pad on a crawler-transporter from ksc’s Vehicle Assembly Building. Three and one half mile trip took about 10 hrs. The 364-ft tall booster would undergo at least six weeks of additional testing at the pad before being used to launch unmanned Apollo 4 mission, tentatively scheduled for October. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) told newsmen at KSC that the movement of the Saturn V was an important milestone in the Apollo program. He predicted that, barring any maj or problems, U.S. could still achieve its goal of landing a man on the moon in 1969. He warned, however, that “it’s a long way to the moon and we have a maj or j ob ahead. Dangers go with this business. We’ve done everything we can to improve the equipment. But, remember, we’re treading on new ground and it’s a risky business. We feel we can overcome the risk and make it work.” (NASA Release 67-219; AP, W Star, 8/27/67, A3; NYT, 8/27/67,1,29; W Post, 8/27/67,1)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller testified on Apollo project reprogramming before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. First “man-rated” Apollo Block II spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in late 1967 and launched three months later with Walter M. Schirra, Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele as prime crew, Webb said. Back-up crew would be Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Ceman. Spacecraft would still have 100%-oxygen atmosphere, but use of noncombustible and fire-resistant materials would minimize fire hazard, he asserted. “We are confident that the results of the first Block II Apollo flights will justify moving rapidly to follow-on flights, thus overcoming some of the effects of the present delay ... [so that] we can carry out this plan within the funds now available for fiscal year 1967 and in NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1968.” In order to “assure maximum progress” and reduce pressures on North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, nasa was realigning its contracting arrangements, Webb said. Contracting changes included: negotiation of a new strong-incentive contract with naa for manufacture, test, and delivery of standard Block II spacecraft; extension of Boeing Co.’s present contract responsibility to include integration of command and service module and lunar module with the Saturn booster system; selection of a third contractor to make necessary modifications to standard Apollo spacecraft produced by NAA; and consideration of offers by other aerospace companies to provide contractor assistance in Apollo systems management and check-out and test procedures. Dr. Seamans described impact of Jan. 27 fire on Apollo schedule and budget. Lunar landing before 1970 “remains possible,” he said. “The impact . . . has been to reduce that probability, not eliminate it. . . . After the first manned Block II flight on the uprated Saturn I in 1968, we plan three to four manned Saturn V missions . . . [and] in 1969 ... up to six Saturn V missions.” Resulting $75 million of additional costs through FY 1968—for materials and equipment changes, flammability testing, launch facility modifications, and spacecraft delivery rescheduling—would be absorbed within the total budget plan currently before Congress. NASA’s responses to recommendations by Apollo 204 Review Board were outlined by Dr. Mueller: (1) bulk combustibles and other flammable materials had been replaced with flame-resistant materials, and necessary flammables stored in fireproof containers; (2) emergency procedures would be reviewed and exercised prior to each hazardous operation, and a quick-opening hatch installed for simplified egress from capsule; (3) new NASA Office of Flight Safety would be established under omsf to review and evaluate safety provisions and monitor test operations; (4) all emergency equipment had been reviewed and additions or substitutions—including installation of water fire extinguishers—made where necessary; (5) detailed design review of spacecraft communications system had been conducted and minor changes made to assure reliable operation; (6) full-scale mockup tests had been conducted to assess fire hazard and problems of gas detection and control; and (7) management and organizational changes had been instituted to clarify responsibilities and improve coordination between NASA centers and contractors. In response to questions by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) regarding rating of companies in the 1961 Apollo spacecraft contract competition, Webb said that Martin Co. had been rated first, on the basis of its technical proposal, by the source evaluation board. However he, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans—considering other factors such as lower cost estimate, outstanding company performance record, overall capability offered, and experience with X—15 experimental aircraft— chose NAA as prime candidate. Senator Smith expressed concern that the Committee was not kept informed of serious problems revealed in the Phillips Report and asked whether NASA followed any guidelines to determine when situations should be brought to the attention of the Committee. Webb replied that no such guidelines existed and indicated that he thought it unnecessary to detail the problems to the Committee since he thought that NASA could control them. Several other committee members also expressed their desire to be informed of any problems approaching the magnitude of those surrounding the Phillips Report. When Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) continued to criticize NASA’s reluctance to make the report public, Webb offered to discuss it, in complete context, in executive session, and repeated his objection to releasing such evaluations of contractor performance out of context. (Testimony; SBD, 5/10/67, 57-66; O’Toole, W Post, 5/10/67, Al)
Second of three phases of tests to evaluate use of heavy-lift helicopters for Apollo crew and spacecraft recovery in ksc launch areas was being conducted by NASA and dod at Eglin afb. Tests would develop operational equipment, techniques, and procedures to be used at KSC where standard recovery equipment would he ineffective in case of a launch escape system abort during liftoff because of the surrounding marsh, beach, and surf, (msc Release 67-16)
Five NASA officials were among 45 young business and Government executives from U.S. and abroad selected to receive mit’s 1967-68 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships for one year of study at mit’s Sloan School of Management “to accelerate their development into positions of major executive responsibilities. . . .” NASA recipients: R. Bryan Erb, Assistant Chief, Structures and Mechanics Div., msc; Robert H. Kirby, Jr., Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., Lane; Calvin K. Perrine, Jr., Assistant Chief, Mission Operations Div., Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc ; Robert J. Schwinghamer, Technical Assistant to Director of Manufacturing and Engineering Laboratory, MSFC; and William E. Scott, Deputy Chief, Research Div., Office of University Affairs, NASA Hq. (nasa Release 67—104)
Washington Evening Star writer William Hines criticized Apollo 204 Review Board’s failure to consult Walter C. Williams, operating head of Project Mercury from 1958-63, in investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire. “NASA has no ready answer ... to questions about why Williams’ name was omitted from the consultant panel. His standing in the space business is such that it could hardly have been due to chance oversight.” Hines said Williams had left NASA in April 1964, reportedly after “disagreement with superiors over management policies. His relations with headquarters officials had been strained for six months prior to his departure, ever since a final report on Project Mercury was issued . . . [in which] Williams castigated industrial contractors, saying they had given poor attention to quality control on hardware for manned missions. . . .” (Hines, W Star, 3/8/67, A5)
North American Aviation, Inc., President J. Leland Atwood assured the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that naa was making numerous technical, inspection, and management changes that would enable U.S. to “effectively accomplish the lunar mission in this decade.” He accepted naa’s share of responsibility for Jan. 27 Apollo fire but urged the Committee to view the deficiencies cited by Apollo 204 Review Board [see April 9] in the perspective of the standards involved. “... it must be recognized that in space work the standards are and must be extremely high. Literally perfection is the goal.” Noting that many of the problems in naa’s management of the Apollo program had resulted from “a rapid build-up in manpower . . . encountered in almost all large, complex developmental programs,” Atwood explained that the survey of naa workmanship summarized in the Phillips Report [see April 18] had been conducted during time when these problems were reaching their peak. Thus the report did not truly represent overall naa performance “but reflected the fact that the [Apollo] mission criteria had been evolving towards their final form.” Atwood stressed, however, that General Phillips’ recommendations had been accepted and corrected to NASA’s “general satisfaction” by April 1966. To further improve Apollo program progress, Atwood said, he and NASA Administrator James E. Webb had reviewed “the overall working relationship” between naa and NASA. As a result of this review efforts would be made to (1) improve coordination of management effectiveness and program control; (2) establish clearer and more specific objectives and measurement techniques for program performance; (3) conduct more periodic surveys and audits of program progress and performance; and (4) include sharper incentives and penalties in contract relationships. Only major changes in Apollo spacecraft would be incorporation of a quick-opening hatch and installation of additional insulation for interior wiring and tubing. (Hines, W Star, 5/4/67, 2; Wilford, NYT, 5/5/67,19; SBD, 5/5/67, 33^)
News briefing on results of Lunar Module (lm) flammability tests, conducted as a result of Jan. 27 Apollo fire, was held at MSC. Using a full-scale boilerplate mockup of LM cabin interior fabricated specifically for the test program by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., fires were deliberately set in 41 tests to investigate the flammability and propagation properties of all interior lm materials, contractor fire-hazard fixes, crew equipment and stowage areas, and apparent propagation paths. Although results indicated that most LM areas were adequately protected against propagation of an accidental fire, four materials which under specific conditions might act as flame propagation media were ordered replaced. In addition, beta cloth containers for food and flight data would be modified to enclose the stored items completely; flight data file and crew procedure notebooks would be redesigned to minimize their flammability; and procedures would be developed to control location and quantity of loose items and to combat onboard fire. Similar tests would be conducted in the Command Module (cm) . (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 12/1/61, A3)
Apollo Command Module (cm) No. 009, launched on a ballistic mission Feb. 25, 1966, and successfully recovered, would be modified by North American Rockwell Corp. and reused in series of dry-land impact tests at Msc. It was first of four previously used CMS to undergo the tests, (nar Release NL-15)	.
Apollo Applications (aa) briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented most detailed statement to date on the program. He said plans were to form an “embryonic space station” in 1968-69 by clustering four aa payloads launched with Uprated Saturn I boosters. First mission would be launch of manned spacecraft, followed several days later by launch of spent S-IVB stage converted into a workshop. After two spacecraft had docked, crew would enter workshop through an airlock. They would prepare workshop for storage and return to earth in their spacecraft 28 days later. In three to six months, second manned capsule would be launched on 56-day mission to deliver resupply module to workshop and rendezvous with unmanned Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), fourth and last launch in series. Cluster would be joined with multiple docking launched on S—IVB workshop. Emphasizing the importance of manning the atm, Dr. Mueller said: “. . . if there is one thing the scientific community is agreed on it is that when you want to have a major telescope instrument in space it needs to be manned. “First of all you need him to point it. Second, you need him to be able to change the films and so on. Thirdly, you need him to maintain it so when something goes wrong he can fix it instead of having to sit here on the ground and be frustrated by the fact that some little gadget didn’t quite trip when it should have. . . .” Dr. Mueller said principal areas toward which $454.7 million FY 1968 post-Apollo effort would be directed were “development of extended flight capability, the conduct of manned astronomical and Earth observations from space, and continued exploration of the Moon.” (Transcript; Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 7-8; Clark, NYT, 1/30/67, 2; Reistrup, W Post, 1/27/67, A7)
msfc awarded Bendix Corp. $7.4 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for development and production of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) pointing control system (pcs) . Bendix was scheduled to produce three units by August. ATM system would permit Apollo astronauts to point a telescope to selected regions of the sun during period of maximum solar flare activities beginning in late 1968. msfc had awarded American Optical Co. $740,460 contract to build a dynamic simulator for use in developing the pcs. (msfc Releases 67-54, 67-58; nasa Release 67-66)
The moon is not a dead body, but a living, breathing organism,” Tass reported following successful completion of lunar surface studies by U.S.S.R.’s Luna XIII. Prof. Nikolay Kozyrev’s 1964 claim that Aristarchus crater had smoke, gas, or dust rising from it had been confirmed by observations from earth of possible lunar volcanoes or eruptions of lunar dust; results of lunar-surface studies; a “special glow” discovered by Pulkovo Observatory near Kepler crater; and “manifestation of moon’s geological life,” recorded in 1966. (upi, NYT, 1/3/67, 10)
House completed general debate on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 10340) and was scheduled to resume discussion of bill June 27 when amendments would be considered and final vote taken. During debate Rep. Delbert L. Latta (R-Ohio) criticized the $444.7 million recommended by Committee on Science and Astronautics for the Apollo Applications (aa) program: “. . . we could spend [that money] toward research and possible cure of cancer, stroke, and heart disease, rather than some nebulous undefined program that will take place when—and I emphasize this point—and after we get to the moon. This money is to be spent on hardware after we get to the moon. No one knows when we are going to get there . . . [and] if we spend this money perfecting these vehicles and this hardware today, it might be out of date when we get to the moon. . . .” Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, defended the 8444.7-million recommendation. “The manned space flight program—Apollo, Apollo applications and advanced manned missions—drives the Apollo effort into its final phases and begins the work of realizing benefits for man on earth. It supports national security, fosters national growth, expands knowledge, and retains options for the future at a cost the country can well afford. To delay this program is, in effect, to cancel it. Such a decision would put the space plum in the hands of the Soviet Union. . . .” (nasa lar V/68; OR, 6/22/67, H7782, H7797)
Three Apollo astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc because “some engineer, technician, or inspector had gotten careless,” former Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations, told employees at General Motors AC Electronics Div., Milwaukee, where Apollo guidance and navigation equipment was manufactured. Slayton urged workers: “Take a good sharp look at your job. Are you giving everything you’ve got? Now you know somebody’s life depends on it.” An msc official later reported that Slayton’s speech had not been intended for publication. Slayton emphasized that he was not trying to affix blame for the Apollo accident, but was just trying to make workers ultraconscious of the importance of their jobs, (upi, W Star, 2/10/67; UPI, WIT, 2/11/67)
U.S. tourist vacationing on beach at Harbour Island in the Bahamas had found a 10-ft-long piece of metal bearing words “United” and “destruct mechanism here,” San Diego Union reported. Assuming metal to be part of a rocket, the tourist had notified Ksc officials, who retrieved the part and determined that it was an insulation panel from the upper stage of an Atlas-Centaur used Oct. 26, 1966, to launch a Surveyor model on a test flight. (AP, SD Union, 7/14/67) Launched by the last direct-ascent (single-burn) Centaur vehicle in Surveyor program, 2,290-lb Surveyor IV performed all required sequences on schedule, including a midcourse maneuver which narrowed estimated target miss from 124 mi to 2.4 mi. Landing sequence began as planned when spacecraft shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket downward toward moon. Radio contact was lost two seconds before retrorocket ended its planned 42-sec burn to slow spacecraft’s speed from 5,900 mph to 350 mph. Repeated attempts to reestablish radio contact with spacecraft failed. Surveyor IV carried photographic equipment, a surface sampler, and a magnetic device on one of its footpads to test for magnetic materials in the lunar soil. Primary mission objectives: (1) to softland on the moon in the Sinus Medii and (2) to obtain TV photos of the lunar surface. Secondary objectives: (1) to conduct a vernier engine experiment; (2)	to manipulate lunar surface with surface sampler in view of TV camera; (3) to obtain touchdown dynamics data; and (4) to obtain thermal and radar reflectivity data on lunar surface. Target zone in the Sinus Medii was almost in the exact center of moon’s visible hemisphere and was rougher than the Ocean of Storms where Surveyor I and Surveyor III had landed. Benjamin Milwitzky, NASA Surveyor Program Manager, said the site was so rugged that spacecraft had only a 50-50 chance of landing intact. “But this region is extremely important to Apollo and that’s why we’re going there.” Surveyor IV was fourth in series of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Surveyor program: Surveyor I (launched May 30, 1966) and Surveyor III (launched April 17, 1967) both softlanded successfully and transmitted photos to earth; Surveyor II (launched Sept. 20, 1966) did not soft-land because of ignition failure in one of its three vernier engines. Program was directed by OSSA Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; program management was assigned to JPL. (NASA Release 67-172; NASA Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/15/67, 22; AP, NYT, 7/17/67, 16; Reistrup, W Post, 7/15/67, B4; 7/16/67, A5; 7/17/67, 1; upi, W Star, 7/14/67, Al; 7/15/67, A2; 7/16/67, B5; 7/17/67, Al)	.
Soviet astronomers from Ukrainian Academy of Sciences had produced a lunar astronomical almanac containing data on the locations of stars as seen from the moon, Science Service reported. Star charts of the sky from earth become outdated after several years, but a star chart for the lunar sky had to be revised after only several days. Precession of earth’s axis causes each pole to complete a cone on the celestial sphere every 26,000 yrs; moon’s axis has only an 18.6-yr precessional period which makes construction of a star chart of the lunar sky extremely difficult. (SciServ, NYT, 3/28/67)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) introduced in the House H.R. 8145, a bill to establish Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to “provide the [nasa] Administrator with independent advice and assistance in safety matters, regardless of operational ‘commitments’ or budgetary considerations. Regardless of the outcome of the current [Apollo accident] investigation . . . the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s . . . safety practices need strengthening. Based on NASA statements and . . . [FT 1968] testimony . . . the area of greatest weakness appears to be in the lack of a truly independent review of NASA’s facilities, operations, and procedures solely from the viewpoint of safety.” (CR, 4/6/67, H3657; nasa lar VI/39)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
Impact of Jan. 27 Apollo accident on Apollo program schedule was discussed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We will include in our schedules the time necessary to conduct a thorough program of reverification and requalification of changes . . . based on what we have learned from the AS-204 accident. . . . Our policy of full qualification prior to manned flight will remain unchanged. “I do believe we still have a reasonable possibility of meeting the major milestones for the Apollo program which were established in 1963. In particular, although the probability is lowered, I believe we will be able to land men on the moon and return them safely to earth before 1970.” Asked about a manned lunar landing in 1968, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, who accompanied Dr. Mueller, replied that it was “not impossible, but almost impossible.” (Testimony; Transcript, 286)
Eastern Airlines named A. Scott Crossfield, naca test pilot from 1953 to 1961, Systems Director of Research and Development for Flight to help prepare airline for its first Concorde and Boeing 2707 supersonic aircraft. Crossfield in 1953 became the first man to fly at twice the speed of sound when he piloted the rocket-propelled D-558-II aircraft. He was also the first pilot to fly the X-15 to mach 2.97 (Nov. 15, 1960). In 1961, he became division director of test and quality assurance for naa’s Hound Dog Missile, Apollo, Saturn, and Paraglider projects. For his contributions to aviation he was awarded the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in 1961 and the Robert J. Collier Trophy in 1962. (NYT, 8/9/67,61) Nike-Apache launches were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to gsfc. Areas launch was part of Wallops Station’s Bio-Space Technology Training Program to assist biological experimenters in evaluating the engineering and operational aspects of spaceflight research. (WS Release 67—27)
U.S. officials praised successful flight of Apollo 4 (AS-501). President Johnson said that “the whole world could see the awesome sight of the first launch of what is now the largest rocket ever flown. This launching symbolizes the power this Nation is harnessing for the peaceful exploration of space. The successful completion of today’s flight has shown that we can launch and bring back safely to earth the space ship that will take men to the moon.” nasc’s Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said the Nation’s people “should be proud of this historic landmark in propulsion and precision, and particularly in the boost given our national space program.” Looking toward the future, NASA Administrator James E.	Webb praised this “successful demonstration of the devotion and high quality workmanship of over 300,000 men and women in thousands of industrial plants, laboratories, test facilities, universities and government installations [and this] success [which] will permit us to move more rapidly on to a second launch.” Dr. Wernher von Braun said, “No single event since the formation of the Marshall Center in 1960 equals today’s launch in significance [and] I regard this happy day as one of the three or four highlights of, my professional life—to be surpassed only by the manned lunar landing.” {PD, 11/13/67, 1541; Text; UPl, NYT, 11/10/ 67,32C; Marshall Star, 11/15/67,1-10)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had defaulted on their responsibility to report to the American public about the Congressional hearings which had been held on the Jan. 27 Apollo accident. In a statement inserted in the Congressional Record, Rep. Ryan said that since Congress seemed reluctant “to face some unpleasant truths and to ask some hard ques-. tions that need to be asked,” he had prepared his own report based on the hearings and on the hundreds of letters, documents, and personal commentaries he had received. Much of this correspondence, he said, which cited deficiencies and negligence which were both intentionally ignored and unintentionally overlooked, was made in confidence for fear of reprisals by NASA or NASA-contractor employers. Rep. Ryan concluded that Congress overfunded and underexamined the validity of major technological programs and the success and integrity of their administration. Having an excellent space program, he said, “is essential both to our pride and to our progress . . . [but] it is essential as well that we throw off the shackles of the space race and declare our intention to make rational plans designed to meet the needs of America not distorted by the conceptions and value judgments of another nation. It is essential that we examine our national priorities with the utmost care and make certain that the space program is neither made a handy villain by its critics nor a handy saviour by its spokesmen. We must establish reliability and make a sober and objective appraisal of the space program’s role in our society.” Congress, he asserted, ought to: (1) demand that NASA adopt new standards of candor, present regular status reports, and clarify its budget presentations, and that a panel of independent experts be created to provide objective technical evaluation of NASA management and planning procedures; (2) relinquish romanticism and evaluate each program in terms of specific objectives and social value; (3) revise its attitudes about hearings on the space program, being sure to call both friendly and hostile witnesses; and (4) establish a realistic view so that the space program could be assigned its proper place in national priorities and receive whatever funds necessary. (CR, 12/18/67, A6320-9; Ryan’s Off)
Latest Harris poll indicated American people, by 54%-to-34% margin, did not believe U.S. space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure. By 60%-to-30%, public would oppose continuing program at present rate of expenditure if U.S.S.R. were not active in space. People were divided sharply by income and age: (1) low-income persons opposed Apollo manned lunar landing program by almost three-to-one, while upper income favored it by nearly two-to-one; (2) 62% of persons over 50 opposed program, while 58% under 35 favored it. A 1965 poll had showed public supporting space program by 45%-to-42% margin. {WPost, 7/31/67, A2)
Congressional cuts in nasa’s FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296) indicated that a new era was beginning for NASA and the U.S. space program, Robert Hotz suggested in Aviation Week editorial. “We do not think it was the intent of this Congress to either repudiate or emasculate the U.S. national space program. We think it was the aim of these legislators to mark the end of the era when NASA got everything it wanted simply because it asked for it in a strident and persistent voice. We think it was also the goal of Congress to put the national space program in a better perspective in relation to such other high-priority problems as the Southeast Asia war and the urban riots. . . .” Hotz predicted that the future of the space program as a valid, continuing national goal “will depend in the long run on the successful development of its new hardware and the successful operation of this equipment on missions of increasing complexity and greater value. The most significant contribution that NASA and its industrial contractor complex can make to the future of the space program now is to bend their every effort to assure that the Apollo hardware will function flawlessly, not only for its missions to the moon but also for long-duration earth-orbital operations. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 8/7/67, 17)
Apollo spacecraft 017 was mechanically mated to Saturn V booster at ksc in preparation for AS-501 unmanned mission scheduled for launch in third quarter of 1967. ksc officials said no major problems had been discovered in additional inspection of Saturn V’s 2nd stage [see May 24]. (Marshall Star, 6/21/67, 1)
Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr. (usaf), first Negro selected for a mission in the Nation’s space program, was killed during routine training flight when his F—104 aircraft crashed on landing at Edwards afb. Copilot Maj. Harvey J. Royer (usaf), chief of operations at usaf’s Aerospace Research Pilot School, was injured. USAF appointed a board of officers to investigate the crash. Selected June 30, to train for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, Major Lawrence was ninth astronaut—first in dod astronaut program—to be killed in an accident and fifth to die in an air crash; three others had died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire and one in an automobile accident. Memorial services were conducted at Edwards afb and in Chicago. ( W Post, 12/9/67, Al; AP, NYT, 12/10/67, 44; B Sun, 12/11/67, A15)
Engine noise survey designed to study noise prediction during ground runups was postponed by NASA, reported Aviation Week. Tests, which would have been combined wth usaf studies of propulsion system calibration for amsa, were given lower priority because these' experiments would have caused two-week stand-down between flights. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 23) Reviewing history of naca and NASA, giss Executive Officer Arthur L. Levine noted that forces which accounted for creation of naca in 1915 were both different from and far less intense that those behind creation of NASA in 1958. NASA played a much more significant role in the Nation and in Federal activity in science and technology than naca, he said, and NASA’s leadership was subjected to a wider variety and greater intensity of pressures from within Government and from outside interests. NASA Historian Eugene M. Emme reviewed historical evolution of U.S. aeronautics and astronautics in context of major national policies and decisions. Citing effects of World Wars I and II, the “cold war” of the 1950’s, and launching of Sputnik, he described how they helped' determine the pace and utilization of technological advances and reviewed major U.S. turning points and relevant factors contributing to the Apollo decision. (Program) m/g J. D. Caldara (usaf, Ret.), President of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., suggested commonality between safety problems and solutions for underwater, aircraft, and space systems based on recognition, reasoning, and responsibility: “This process [of problem solving] spells out the basic building blocks in the structure of the man/machine relationships . . . involving safety. ... If every scientist-engineer accepts his rightful responsibility and applies his imagination and experience to his task, the end result will be . . . [operations that are] 100% efficient and . . . 100% safe.” (Text) GSFC engineers F. 0. Vonbun and J. T. Mengel proposed development of a worldwide tracking and communications system for manned planetary missions similar to that used for Apollo. Planetary Manned Space Flight Network (pmsfn)—consisting of three 30- to 50--ft-dia ground stations, three 210-ft-dia dish antennas, and three synchronous orbiting tracking stations (sots)—would obviate need for other radar, ships, and aircraft, sots, they said, while providing continuous communications, tracking, and telemetry functions, would be more cost-efficient by removing requirement for numerous new tracking stations. (Text; Program) Addressing Honors Banquet, use President Dr. Norman Topping stressed need for expanded program to search and disseminate data produced in space research. Although such data did reach social problems occasionally, “the arrival in the right place at the right time is largely a coincidence,” he noted. To realize the total potential of modern discovery, scientists had to communicate outside their separate, narrow fields, find a common language with the layman, and work together to “find places for their discoveries within the social, ethical, and moral framework of our civilization.” (Text) Princeton Univ. economics professor Oskar Morgenstem, participating in President’s Forum, “The Worth of the Space Program,” contended that the space effort, as a public investment of natural resources, had to be evaluated by comparing its benefits with other ways the resources could have been used. Although no basic discoveries as important as atomic fission, the transistor, or the laser could be attributed to space exploration, he said, U.S. could still afford a high degree of space exploration and could expect discoveries “of a magnitude that will astonish even this generation which has seen so much and is prepared to expect that our knowledge will increase without limit.” Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President of Associated Universities, Inc., and first NASA Administrator, submitted that the most important enduring contribution of the space endeavor to U.S. future was education. Progress in higher education, he said, had occurred as a result of the compelling challenge of space exploration along with nasa’s “clear and evident desire to assure an adequate flow of highly trained manpower. . . Current statistics on NASA investments in higher education were very impressive, he noted, but if NASA’s budget were trimmed further its support to education would have to be diminished. Dr. Willard F. Libby of ucla predicted that space program would “come out to be the best bargain the American people have ever made— both for its practical value in technological developments, and for its contributions to pure knowledge through science.” Space program had already contributed to and answered questions about geosciences, interplanetary sciences, astronomy, and chemistry but most consuming question was that of extraterrestrial life in solar system. (Texts) Major aiaa awards presented at Honors Convocation included: Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to LeRC Director Abe Silverstein for “imagination, technical excellence and leadership which have led to practical application of high energy liquid hydrogen fueled propulsion for space transportation, and for initiating and contributing to the free world’s first manned space transportation system”; De Florez Training Award to Edwin A. Link, chairman of General Precision Equipment Corp.’s Link Aviation Div., for “conceiving and implementing the idea of ground-based flight training equipment”; G. Edward Pendray Award to Columbia Univ. professor Robert A. Gross for “original contributions to gas-dynamics and plasma physics especially in the field of shock wave ionization phenomena”; and Lawrence Sperry Award to msc Flight Director Eugene F. Kranz for “outstanding contributions in directing spacecraft mission planning in developing flight control teams, and as Flight Director of manned Gemini spaceflight missions.” (Av Wk, 10/30/67, 13; aiaa Facts)	,
Launch of the first manned Apollo mission by March 31, 1968, “is a very difficult milestone to achieve, but it is possible,” George M. Low, Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, told the press at msc. All changes in the Apollo spacecraft necessitated by the Jan. 27 Apollo fire had been planned, he said, but until daily scheduling was completed, no date could be set for the mission. Low noted that Apollo parachute landing system might require requalification because design changes had increased spacecraft’s weight by 200-300 lbs, but he indicated that testing, if necessary, could be conducted in summer 1967 without seriously affecting the Apollo schedule. (Tech Wk, 6/12/67, 15; SBD, 6/8/67, 217)
NASA announced incorporation of at least seven changes in Apollo Lunar Module (lm) program “to reduce the possibility of fire and to increase crew safety” in accordance with Apollo 204 Review Board findings [see April 9]. Changes, which would increase total weight by 25-125 lbs, included: (1) reassessing combustibility of all nonmetallic materials and substituting or redesigning where necessary; (2) reevaluating material acceptability by intentionally starting fires in lm mockup; (3)	modifying water hose and providing a hose nozzle to permit use of water as a fire extinguisher; (4) using a built-in handle, rather than a removable tool, to open hatches; (5) instituting more stringent standards and controls on electrical systems and wiring; (6) adding isolation switches to electrical systems to ensure that no connector is “hot” while being connected or disconnected; and (7) installing TV camera to monitor activity inside LM cabin during ground tests. Changes were being made at Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor, (nasa Release 67-159)
Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, presented Distinguished Flying Crosses to the military astronauts who had made space flights in special Pentagon ceremony. Included were posthumous awards to L/Col. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and L/CoL Edward H. White II (usaf), who died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Capt. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., speaking on behalf of his fellow astronauts, said they were “proud members of the military, but also . . . representatives of a great and significant national effort,” who had grown “to enjoy the [space program’s] successes and live with its failures.” (dod Release 642-67; AP, B Sun, 7/14/67, 6; SBD, 7/17/67,_ 68)
The five-out-of-five successful missions of $200-million Lunar Orbiter project to photograph moon to aid in selecting Surveyor and Apollo landing sites and to contribute to scientific knowledge of moon were reviewed at NASA Hq. press conference. Photographic data provided by Lunar Orbiter I, II, and III and Surveyor I resulted in selection of eight candidate sites. Lunar Orbiter IV provided basis for extending cartographic grid system for front-face mapping around to moon’s hidden side by photographing eastern limb areas. Lunar Orbiter V photographed scientifically interesting areas on moon’s front side, completed farside coverage, and provided supplementary photography of potential Apollo landing sites. Apollo Program Director, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, said that, when “approaching on a pretty flat trajectory at about 30 miles from the landing site . . . details of the topography and the radar return which is coupled into the automatic control and landing system [must be known].” In planning details of approach and landing maneuvers, Phillips said that “a very great deal” had been learned from Orbiter “about the rather unusual light conditions and; the effect of light reflections from the lunar surface under various angles.” Harold Masursky, usgs, explained Lunar Orbiter photographs showed that “apparently the earth and the Moon are very similar in their distribution of high and low ground.” He hoped that “by examination and comparison of ... geologic plot with the selenodetic information . . . [from] the Orbiter series, we will be able to plot the geopotential field . . . and tie it in with geology. ... By studying the Moon we know that it has a long, complex geologic history, that many of the same kinds of things that happen on the earth happen on the Moon. We can now play these two against each other, compare their simulari-ties, contrast their differences, and perhaps'be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth.” Strange moon features looking like watercourses might be dry-gulch arroyos, Harold Spradley said. Because watercourses had originated in volcanic craters and carried “fluidal materials,” volcano’s output— possibly slurry of ash and water—would exist long enough to cut its way through dry lunar surface material. Scientists agreed that orthodox existence of water on “the airless moon” was improbable. Clifford Nelson, LaRC Lunar Orbiter Project Manager, described results of experiments: “. . . density distribution [very nearly homogeneous] in the moon now seems to be resolved . . . center of mass of the moon is displaced toward the earth from the center of its geometrical figure, a situation which would have interesting scientific implications as to the stability of the moon and its origin and history.” Meteoroid penetration rate “in the region covered by lunar orbiter spacecraft is less than one-half the rate in the near earth environment. . . .’’ He said all 13 MSFN stations had successfully tracked and communicated with lunar orbiter, and “orbit determination programs ... in the initial stages of checkout. . . will continue with Lunar Orbiter V.” nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed overall significance of Lunar Orbiter program: “Before the first Lunar Orbiter mission this country had never placed spacecraft into orbit about any other celestial body other than the earth. In all five . . . missions, the spacecraft were not only placed into initial orbits as desired, but then the orbits were changed in accordance with a plan ... set up beforehand, in ... a precision type of operation. . . . Lunar Orbiter and its companion, Surveyor, have shown that we can use sophisticated technology in complicated spacecraft for automated missions to other bodies of the solar system. And it is this kind of capability that we will be using again and again as we continue the exploration of our solar system.” (Transcript)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
NASA published the first extensive chart of the far side of the moon. Compiled by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center using NASA-supplied photos, map covered more than 75% of the moon’s hidden side. Approximately 85% of the photos used were provided by NASA Lunar Orbiters I, II, III, and IV; remaining 15% were provided by Soviet Zond III. Map was released to assist astronomers at the International Astronomical Union, convening Aug. 22 in Prague, in naming features on moon’s far side, (nasa Release 67-220)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testified in support of nasa’s FY 1968 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He reviewed 1966 accomplishments and discussed future space-flight activities: “We completed 22 missions during 1966 successfully out of 29 attempts, or a 76% success. This record is somewhat lower than the previous year, but it is marked by qualitative advances greater than any before. “The FY 1968 request represents the first true post-Apollo decisions. ... The combination of the 1971 Mariner flights and the initiation of a continuing, major Voyager program” represented effective translations into action of President’s Science Advisory Committee’s recommendation that planetary exploration be given a high priority in the post-Apollo period. “During FY 1968 we will be decreasing somewhat our application of manpower effort on the manned space flight programs with a considerable shift in effort from the Apollo to the Apollo Applications part of that activity. We will be increasing our total effort in space science and applications programs, particularly in the build-up of the Voyager program activity . . . [and devoting] more effort to our advanced research and technology activities. . . .” Emphasizing that he was “not prepared nor willing to state that a manned lunar landing cannot be achieved before 1970,” Dr. Seamans admitted there was a high probability that Apollo program would have to operate on a delayed schedule. “An important contributor to . . . success will be adequate resources and the flexibility to apply them when needed. . . . We cannot say today that the $2.6 billion requested for Apollo is not enough [but] we can say it is not too much. ... It cannot be reduced and still accomplish the objectives we have defined.” (Testimony; Transcript, 118)
nasa’s Apollo program was “back on the track” six months after the Jan. 27 fire at ICSC, Washington Evening Star columnist William Hines concluded after a tour of NASA centers. “Half a year after that unforgettable night of Jan. 27 the process of trauma, shock, and recuperation has run its course. Much remains to be done, of course—and it will be another nine or 10 months before astronauts fly again—but things are moving once more. “At Downey . . . where Apollo spacecraft are built, at Houston, where flights will be controlled, and at Cape Kennedy, where they will begin, there is a noticeable air of confidence (but not over-confidence) mingled with caution (but not over-caution). “A sadder but wiser Apollo team has emerged from the disaster at pad 34 with the realization that ‘pretty good’ simply is not good enough. . . .” (Hines, W Star, 7/27/67, Al)
Life magazine disputed critics who advocated cutting back NASA’s Apollo program: “We do not share the attitude that it doesn’t matter who gets to the moon first, we or the Russians. It does matter. . . . Remember the astonishment, the embarrassment, the apprehension, the loss of prestige we all felt so keenly when Sputnik I went up on Oct. 4, 1957? The prestige we then sought to regain was not mere prestige, an empty abstract symbol of superiority. The superiority at stake was real, not symbolic. . . . “NASA is now engaged in its customary annual defense of its budget requests. We recommend that its expenditures be kept at the $5 to $6 billion level for now. As we continue to compare NASA’s budget with other pressing needs, we must be aware of the challenges and opportunities that arise in space. . . .” {Life, 3/24/67)
Washington Post editorial criticized suggestion by nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller that nuclear explosions be used to provide data about moon’s interior: “Speaking for a multitude of laymen, we want our moon left intact. If not many farmers are left who do their planting by the times of the moon, at least all of us like to remember moonlit nights when we were not thinking of nuclear fission. ... If Dr. Teller wants to dig another Isthmian Canal with ‘a small nuclear explosive,’ we might consider that within the range of our needs. But let our moon alone. We look forward once again to sitting in the moonlight on a summer’s night and smelling honeysuckle without the thought that a chunk of moon might blast off suddenly into another orbit.” (W Post, 5/2/67)
238,154 airmen certificates—a new annual record and a 32% increase over 1965 total—were issued by faa in 1966. (faa Release 67-18) nuclear rocket—it could be used for continued exploration of the moon after first Apollo landings. “Using a non-nuclear Saturn 5, astronauts are restricted to landing areas in a narrow strip along the moon’s equator. A nuclear upper stage would permit a manned spacecraft to land anywhere on the surface of the moon.” Other possible uses included manned flyby missions to Mars and Venus; unmanned flights of large payloads to Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury, or within a few million miles of sun; and manned orbital flights to Mars and Venus. (Hines, W Star, 3/6/67,1; 3/7/67)
nasa named crews for first two manned Apollo/Saturn V flights. Prime crew for AS-504 (first mission), scheduled for 1968: James A. McDivitt, commander; David R. Scott, CM pilot; and Russell L. Schweickart, lm pilot. Backup crew would be Charles Conrad, Jr., commander; Richard F.	Gordon, cm pilot; and Alan L. Bean, lm pilot. Prime crew for AS-505 (second mission), scheduled for 1969: Frank Borman, commander; Michael Collins, CM pilot; and William A. Anders, lm pilot. Backup crew would be Neil A. Armstrong, commander; James A. Lovell, CM pilot; and Edwin E. Aldrin, lm pilot. A three-astronaut support team was named for each flight crew: for AS-504—Edgar D. Mitchell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Alfred M. Worden; and for AS-505—Thomas F. Mattingly II, Gerald P. Carr, and John S. Bull, (msc Release; AP, W Star, 11/21/67, A2)
NASA’s Mariner IV, launched Nov. 28, 1964, after 1,014 days of flight, reached its closest approach to earth at 29.1 million mi (46.9 million km). (nasa Proj Off) commands to turn its transmitter to low power. Spacecraft telemetry indicated that all systems were operational. The Surveyor V midcourse correction was accomplished at 21:45 Edt Sept, 8, Immediately after the correction, the pressure in the helium supply tank was determined to be decreasing, indicating that the regulating valve did not make a positive closure. Correction of leak was not possible; a descent strategy was developed to overcome the resultant degradation of the vernier engine retrograde capability. Surveyor V softlanded on the moon at 20:46:38 edt on Sept. 10. The landing site was in the Sea of Tranquility at approximate coordinates 23.19°E, 1.52°N, some 18 mi from the target point. The spacecraft took 200- and 600-line pictures of the lunar surface and conducted an alpha backscattering experiment. At lunar sunset, 6:40 am edt, Sept. 24, 18,006 high-quality lunar photographs had been obtained (more than the combined totals from Surveyors / and III). The alpha-backscat-tering instrument had operated for 83 hours on the lunar surface, providing excellent data on the relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar material. To optimize the conditions for lunar-night survival, the spacecraft was operated for short periods at 2%-hr intervals, using compartment heaters, until the battery charge was down to 30 ampere hours, about 4-6 days after lunar sunset. The spacecraft then would be placed in hibernation for the remainder of the lunar night. The vernier engine erosion experiment was conducted at 01.38 edt on Sept, 13, to obtain information on effects of impingement of a high velocity jet-gas stream on the lunar surface. TV pictures were taken of the area under study before and after vernier engine firing. Initially no significant erosion was noted, but follow-on operations with low sun angle photographs and shadow progression studies revealed a crater-like depression under vernier engine number 3 which had not been visible at the higher sun elevations. Surveyor V accomplished all mission objectives. Before touchdown, radar reflectivity data were obtained; touchdown dynamics data were determined at landing time (bearing strength of lunar surface as the ultimate objective). Thermal data were obtained (accumulation of - data throughout the mission was the ultimate objective). The Surveyor program was managed by JPL under ossa direction. Hughes Aircraft Co., under contract to JPL, designed and built the Surveyor spacecraft. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—227; B Sun, 9/11/67; AP, W Star, 9/25/67; Hines, W Star, 9/29/67; W Post, 9/14/67; O’Toole, W Post, 9/30/67; Clark, NYT, 9/30/67)
NASA’s Surveyor I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon June 2, 1966, was still functioning after transmitting over 11,000 photos to earth, jpl’s scientist Leonard Jaffe said in Cal Tech lecture. Surveyor I mission had been officially terminated July 21, 1966, after spacecraft’s battery suffered a sudden dip in voltage. (LA Herald-Examiner, 2/1/61)
Informed sources speculated that U.S.S.R. had been conducting heat-shield reentry tests with Cosmos satellites since November 1966 in preparation for manned flights to moon, the New York Times reported. Spacecraft on missions from moon would reenter earth’s atmosphere at about 25,000 mph and heat to 5,000-6,000° F—too hot for heat shields currently used on earth-orbiting missions. (NYT, 4/15/67, 13)
Injectors for Apollo Lunar Module’s ascent engine had performed in over 100 test firings at Rocketdyne Div.’s laboratory near Los Angeles, the company reported. Injectors had returned automatically to stable combustion after explosive charge was set off to deliberately create rough combustion in several tests. They were developed as backup to the original injectors after rough combustion was noted in test firings. Three designs would be continued through feasibility testing; then the best design would be chosen for development. (Rocketdyne Release)
Haste might have contributed to the April 24 crash-landing of Soyuz 1 in which Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov died, Edmund Stevens suggested in Washington Evening Star. He speculated that Soviet leaders, influenced by the goal of orbiting men around the moon by Nov. 7—50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution—had launched Soyuz I before it was fully man-rated. (Stevens, W Star, 5/1/67, Al, A6)
nasa’s Lunar Orbiter V (Lunar Orbiter E) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr on mission to photograph the lunar surface [see Aug. 5-27]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 860-lb spacecraft into parking orbit of 100-mi (161-km) altitude, reignited after 30-min coast period to inject spacecraft on 89-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, Lunar Orbiter V deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five sensors on the sun. On Aug. 2 the star tracker encountered slight difficulty in locating Canopus because of “glint” from the sun and “earthshine,” but obtained a fix at 18:34 get, before midcourse maneuver. At 06:00 on Aug. 3 midcourse maneuver with 26-sec engine burn was successfully conducted to slow spacecraft’s speed and alter its aiming point slightly. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter V mission were: (1) to place three-axis-stabilized spacecraft into high-inclination lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain photography of selected scientifically interesting areas on lunar surface and supplemental photography of candidate Apollo lunar landing sites. Photos would cover five Apollo sites, 36 scientific sites, and areas of the moon’s hidden side previously unphotographed. Spacecraft would also provide precision trajectory information to refine definition of lunar gravitational field, monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Last in series of five spacecraft designed to improve knowledge of the moon, Lunar Orbiter V differed from four earlier missions because it would concentrate on targets of primary interest to science. Lunar Orbiter I (launched Aug. 10, 1966), Lunar Orbiter II (launched Nov. 6, 1966)	, and Lunar Orbiter III (launched Feb. 4, 1967) were in direct support of Apollo and Surveyor programs, identifying at least eight areas suitable for manned landings. Lunar Orbiter IV (launched May 4, 1967)	completed broad photographic survey of 99% of moon’s front face with 10 times finer resolution than best existing telescopic views. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj OS; nasa Release 67—192)
The press praised Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire. Technology Week: “The harsh, scathing report of the Apollo 204 Review Board has effectively laid to rest charges that the board was assembled to conduct a whitewash of the January 27 fire, which took the lives of three astronauts. The board should be commended for the vigor with which it undertook to establish the cause of the fire, the energy with which it attacked what it regards as dangerous practices and procedures and the directness with which it distributes the blame. . . . Perhaps the question that will linger longest about the January tragedy is the part played by the pressure of the lunar landing deadlines. We personally believe that such target dates play a large and important factor in motivating the space program and keeping it moving at a healthy pace. But they should not be so sacred as to invoke carelessness. . . . Without waiting for another accident, it might be well to undertake the same sort of review of practices and procedures throughout the major elements of Apollo that has just taken place in regard to the spacecraft. . . . The Apollo 204 Review Board has set a good example of what can be accomplished.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 50) Aviation Week: “Its report is technically incisive and sharply critical of NASA and the private contractors manufacturing Apollo hardware. It is as thorough and technically solid as any other investigation of aerospace disaster in the past three decades. It disproves earlier charges that NASA is incapable of investigating its own technical faults. In fact, it would have been impossible to assemble another group sufficiently knowledgeable about the Apollo system from any other source to complete a useful investigation within this time span. “. . . there are none of the pat answers, so often demanded by legislators and harping critics, to the dangerous and complex problems of probing the unknown. Apollo is man’s most daring foray in his history on this planet. If all the problems involved in a lunar voyage were so obvious and the solutions so simple as many critics seem to think, we could all buy tickets for a lunar excursion tomorrow.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 4/17/67, 21)
naa’s incentive fees for the Apollo Command Module (cm) destroyed in Jan. 27 fire would be reduced by NASA to $41 million, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told the press. He said information provided him showed “that amount is $15 million less than what North American’s estimated potential incentive earnings would have been if the accident had not occurred.” Senator Anderson said he believed the settlement was realistic and fair: “A stricter penalty would have served no purpose and could have adverse effects on the relationship between [nasa and naa] (Text)
A minimum of four manned space flights would precede the first U.S. attempt to land men on the moon, Astronauts Joe H. Engle and Alfred M. Worden, recently returned from a geology survey in Iceland, told NASA Hq. press conference. Three of the four missions would involve rendezvous with another spacecraft in earth orbit. Astronauts also said that they and their colleagues had even more confidence in the Apollo program now than they had before the Jan. 27 fire. (B Sun, 7/19/67; W Post, 7/19/67)
LaRC selected Northrop Ventura Co. to negotiate .|3-million contract to conduct research flight-test program using an all-flexible parawing. Experiments would be performed at various scales with remotely controlled unmanned vehicles to establish a body of parawing technology which could be potentially adapted to manned spacecraft recovery systems. NASA’s goal was to extend recovery capabilities for the AA Program command module (cm) to include land landings in the early 1970’s. Northrop, relying on design criteria gained in earlier LaRC parawing research programs, would evaluate parawings in the 200-600-lb and 5,000-lb payload capacities, including flight tests, before designing 15,000-lb payload system required for the Apollo cm. (nasa Release 67-134)
Evaluation of Apollo 4 mission data . . . continues to confirm initial reports that Spacecraft 017 met all flight objectives without problems,” NASA announced. Detailed systems analyses were still in process, but evidence to date indicated spacecraft systems operated properly during Nov. 9 mission and met all specifications. First Service Propulsion System (sps) burn had occurred as scheduled; second sps burn, however, was 13 sec longer than planned, because of a switchover to ground control after burn was started by onboard guidance and navigation system. Although review of the burn was still being conducted, NASA had already determined that there had been no failure in onboard systems involved. Because of the longer-than-planned SPS burn, spacecraft’s reentry velocity was 0.0058% higher than expected; actual velocity was 24,913 mph, compared with nominal 24,772 mph. Increased velocity caused higher Command Module (cm) maximum heat rate—620 BTUs per sq ft per sec instead of planned 586 BTUs. Maximum rate expected on' lunar return was 480 btus. Maximum g on reentry was 7.3, compared with expected 8.33 g, because of a shallower reentry flight-path angle. Cabin pressure remained between 5.6 and 5.8 psi during entire mission, indicating negligible leakage rate. Cabin air temperature remained stable at 60° F during orbit and increased to 70° F during reentry. Structural performance of the spacecraft and Lunar Test Article 10-R (a simulated lunar module) during launch and boost phase was satisfactory. Earth landing system functioned as planned; all parachutes inflated properly, and recovery aids deployed and operated normally. Heat shield performance was good; maximum char thickness was 34 in, and charring of crew compartment heat shield was less than expected. Fuel cell and cryogenic subsystems functioned normally, with fuel cells producing potable sterile water and demonstrating excellent load-sharing and thermal-control capability. CM and sm reaction-control systems, electrical power subsystem, and spacecraft sequential devices operated normally, with all functions occurring at scheduled times. Guidance and control system and the mission control programmer performed properly. Range-to-go at drogue parachute deployment calculated was 2.2 nm. Comparisons with measured landing point indicated better than predicted performance. All communications objectives were accomplished. Each MSFN station, Apollo tracking ship Vanguard, and at least two of the Apollo/Range Instrumentation Aircraft established two-way communications with the spacecraft as planned. (NASA Release 67-294; Hines, W Star, 12/3/67, A20; SBD, 12/5/67, 172-3)
Trained monkeys completed a two-month simulated space flight which indicated that astronauts could return their spacecraft to earth even after a near-fatal dose of solar radiation. Sixteen rhesus monkeys, trained to operate an instrument panel, were used in a test at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Some of the animals were exposed over a 10-day period to from 500 to 1,000 roentgens of gamma radiation. Three of the monkeys in the high-dose group died but the others survived. This evidence of monkey vitality was of great importance to man because the U.S. target date for moon landings would come at a peak of the sun’s 11-year-cycle for emitting deadly radiation. (C Trib, 9/5/67)
New York Times commented on congressional cuts in nasa’s FY 1968 budget: “The Senate, ignoring the most obvious of all opportunities to cut nonessential spending, has not only matched the $4.5 billion the House voted for space excursion but tacked on nearly $100 million more to start new programs after the first Americans land on the moon. The certainty that another huge space appropriation will come out of conference on Capitol Hill adds special interest to the fact that twice recently the leading space scientist of the Soviet Union, Prof. Leonid Sedov, has publicly stressed the importance of large-scale international cooperation for manned flights beyond the moon. . . . Now that Professor Sedov has opened the door, the Administration has an opportunity to begin diplomatic explorations to see if the Russians really are serious about replacing senseless rivalry in space with rational international cooperation.” {NYT, 10/7/67, 28) Launches of military espionage spacecraft dominated U.S. space program, Soviet scientists Dr. V. Denisov and F. Soluyanov charged in Krasnaya Zvezda. According to the scientists, of 455 U.S. spacecraft launched by mid-1967, 346 were military satellites which the Pentagon “proposed to use . . . for reconnaissance on a so-called real-time scale, followed by an immediate transmission of information.” Although U.S. “continues to persist that its aspirations are the peaceful utilization of space,” they said, officials “do not hide the fact that NASA builds the scientific-technological foundation for the development of military-space facilities . . . [while dod] finances and controls the planning ... of space armament.” (Miles, PInq, 10/8/67,13C)
Time magazine considered the question “Why Should Man Go To The Moon?” and concluded: “The moon itself may not be a particularly valuable piece of real estate. But neither is a flight to the moon an end in itself; the moon is no more than a way station on a route that scientists have only begun to map. And there is no doubt that man is going to make the trip some day. . . . “The moon is a challenge that the U.S. has already taken, a milestone that U.S. astronauts are already looking beyond. . . . The real object is for the U.S. to develop the capability of voyaging confidently to the limits of man’s imagination and ingenuity. The value of such voyages will always be unpredictable. But the history of the human race, said famed . Norwegian Explorer Fridtjof Nansen, ‘is a continual struggle from darkness toward light. It is therefore to no purpose to discuss the uses of knowledge; man wants to know, and when he ceases to do so, he is no longer man.’ ” {Time, 2/10/67)
Greatest damage to Apollo I spacecraft in which three astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash lire seemed to have occurred near point where electrical cables from launch pad entered cabin, reported Aviation Week writer George Alexander, who represented news media when NASA authorized one person to visit ksc’s Launch Complex 34. Alexander said the spacecraft “looked like the inside of a furnace . . . the interior . . . is a darkened, dingy compartment. Its walls are covered with a slate-gray deposit of smoke and soot; its floor and couch frame are covered with ashes and debris—most of it indeterminate. . . .” (upi, NYT, 1/30/67; W Post, 1/30/67, Al, A2; W Star, 1/30/67, Al, A3)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller stressed importance of manned spaceflight program in speech before ieee meeting in Washington, D.C.: This is a particularly appropriate date for us to review our manned space flight programs. It was just five years ago today that John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth in his Mercury spacecraft, Friendship 7. Since that time, we have made noteworthy strides in the manned exploration of space. ... In the Mercury and the Gemini Programs, we learned much about man’s capabilities in space flight. . . . “We will learn much more from the Apollo missions. By 1970, we will have provided the capability to explore space out to 250,000 miles from earth and to conduct manned operations and experiments on flights of up to two weeks duration. The Saturn I and Saturn V boosters will have injected up to 140 tons of payload per launch into near-earth orbit. The Saturn V will have sent 48 tons to the vicinity of the moon. The Apollo spacecraft will have sustained a three-man crew for two weeks in a two-compartment, maneuverable vehicle and will have landed two men on the moon and returned them with samples of lunar material, to earth. The U.S. manned space flight programs will have logged more than 500 man days in space, during which data and experience will have been acquired from approximately 100 in-flight experiments.” (Text)
Most Soviet reporting of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died was factual. A few members of Soviet and Italian press, however, charged that “haste” had contributed to the accident. Radio Moscow: “We in the Soviet Union are deeply grieved at the news of the tragedy at Cape Kennedy. “The courage of Virgil Grissom, Edward White, and Roger Chaffee had won our esteem and we join in paying homage to their memories. . . .” Trud (Moscow): “The astronauts became the victims of the space race created by the leaders of the United States space program. Recently, the hurry, the haste in space Sights has continued to grow. There were a number of Saws in the ApoHo system.” La Stampa (Turin, Italy): “Technical revisions must be brought about so that the tragedy will not repeat itself . . . perhaps the rigorous time schedule . . . ought to give way to slower and more secure rhythm.” II Popolo (Rome) : The accident offered “questions for reSection, above all an invitation to weigh in proper measure the margin of risk that accompanies all the conquest of man. ... It is ironic that this happened, just when any danger seemed to be less proximate, during a normal exercise on earth.” (AP, NYT, 1/30/67, 2, 3; AP, B Sun, 1/30/67; Trud, 1/29/67, 3, uss-t Trans.)
Second Saturn V booster’s 1st and 2nd stages were mechanically mated at ksc in preparation for AS-502 unmanned mission to test Apollo spacecraft’s reentry heat shield. Booster’s 3rd stage was added July 13; instrument unit, July 14. (ksc Proj Off; Marshall Star, 7/12/67, 1)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.), speaking on the floor of the House, urged House to support Rep. Charles Mathias’ (R-Md.) bill (H.R. 69) to establish a commission to review organization of Executive Branch: “Congressional review has often been piecemeal and after the fact. For example, the recent congressional hearing concerning the tragic Apollo spacecraft fire unearthed a shocking amount of information about NASA’s operations which should have been reported to Congress long ago. . . . Legislation has been proposed to correct this, and hopefully, the provisions in the House version of the NASA authorization bill , . . will be accepted and thereby require NASA to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’. ... I am convinced such language is needed with respect to NASA. I am equally convinced that, if the operations of the executive branch are studied and reviewed for organizational deficiencies and economy of operation, there would be far less need to wage battles on the floor on a piecemeal, hit-or-miss basis.” (nasa lar VI/75)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., criticized the press for uninformed discussion of the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy: “I deplore comment in the press recently regarding the accident. The press has a responsibility not to comment in areas about which it is not informed.” Speaking on the fifth anniversary of his space flight in Friendship 7, Glenn noted that the deaths of three Apollo astronauts were part of the price man must pay in his quest for knowledge: “Man tries something and sometimes he succeeds and sometimes he fails. It is very regrettable. We hate to lose good friends, but we think they went in a good cause.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/21/67,8; AP, WPost, 2/21/67; NYT, 2/22/67,50) During week of Feb. 20: Princeton Univ. announced development of accelerator capable of raising electrically neutral atoms and molecules to energy levels never before obtained in controlled experiments. Utilizing supersonic jets of mixed gases in high-vacuum container, accelerator could generate molecular beams of neutral particles with kinetic energies of 10 or more electron volts. Particles at this energy level were necessary to many common gas-phase chemical reactions. Dr. John B. Fenn, professor who directed NSF-sponsored project, said accelerator would aid studies in meteorology and aerospace technology. (NYT, 2/26/67, 59)
First flight test of Saturn V, designated Apollo 4, was scheduled no earlier than Nov. 7, announced m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director. “This is a target date,” he said. “We are in a very complex learning process and we are going to take all the time we need on this first launch.” Launch vehicle and Apollo spacecraft combination was 363 ft tall and weighed 6 million lbs. Thrust of Saturn V’s first stage was 7.5 million lbs. Key objective of flight planned for Nov. 7 would be evaluation of Apollo command module heat shield under conditions encountered on return from moon mission. Flight would also test thermal seals for use in new quick-release spacecraft hatch which would be installed on all manned Apollo missions. Apollo 4 flight plan would call for Saturn V to place spacecraft and launch yehicle 3rd stage (S-IVB) into 117-mi circular orbit. After completing two orbits, 3rd stage would he re-ignited to place spacecraft into orbit with apogee of 10,800 mi. After separation from 3rd stage, service module propulsion system would be fired to rafee spacecraft apogee to 11,400 mi. During descent the service module motor would fire again, boosting velocity of spacecraft to about 25,000 mph, the reentry speed of a lunar return flight, (nasa Release 67-274; B Sun, 10/26/67, A6) • GSFC officials completed week of checkout of Oso IV and turned on last of nine experiments. All experiments were performing well and spacecraft was transmitting satisfactory data. The 599-lb spacecraft, launched from etr Oct. 18, had received 1,500 commands. It was 3,000th object in orbit since Sputnik I in 1957; 100th satellite orbited in 1967; and 50th satellite orbited by Delta launch vehicle in 53 attempts. (NASA Release 67-273)
NASA announced establishment of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office within omsf to increase effectiveness of directing Apollo lunar exploration and planning for post-Apollo lunar exploration. New office, headed by former Lunar Orbiter Manager Lee R. Scherer under general direction of Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), would consist of Flight Systems Development and Lunar Science Divisions. It would be responsible to OSSA for scientific aspects of Apollo lunar exploration; ossa would review operating plans, science SR&T tasks, mission objectives and plans, and scientific payloads and principal investigators for specific missions. (NASA Ann, 12/19/67)
Rep. Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) in joint dialogue with Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), appearing in General Electric Forum, when asked: “What is the present climate in the 90th Congress for other key legislative programs such as space?” stated: “Congress is interested in space and will support a strong space program. Those who are knowledgeable recognize that we have gone past the point of no return in giving full support to the Apollo lunar landing program. But many Congressmen are concerned about our course in the future exploration of space. When you relate the financial demand of another big quantum jump in space technology to our other fiscal burdens, you get the feeling that the 90th Congress will not be willing to embark on another major manned space program beyond the moon that will lead to another commitment of five or ten years or longer.” (GE Forum, 4/6/67,11-4)
President Johnson’s Science Advisory Committee’s (psac) report, The Space Program in the Post-Apollo Period [see Feb. 11], was criticized by Dr. Philip H. Abelson in Science. Report did not fully discuss the comparative value of space and nonspace activities and “quickly ducked” the difficult problem of priorities, Dr. Abelson said. Nowhere was there an evaluation of the chances of finding extraterrestrial life. “Another deficiency is the lack of a full discussion of the role of man in deep space exploration. To date, manned missions have contributed little scientifically. The unmanned missions have had a cost effectiveness for scientific achievement perhaps 100 times that of the manned flights. Nevertheless, the report implicitly calls for a major role for man in the post Apollo program. . . .” (Abelson, Science, 5/17/67)
Charles W. McGuire, formerly an aerospace engineer in the test directorate of NASA’s Gemini program, became Director of Safety for the Apollo Program. He would be on the headquarters staff of and report directly to the Apollo Program Director while being administratively assigned to the Safety Office, omsf. (nasa Ann, 8/7/67)
Soviet Academy of Sciences, using results obtained from Luna III and Zond III probes, had handed over to International Commission on Lunar Nomenclature list of objects on other side of moon and their names—list containing 153 objects of invisible hemisphere and two areas of visible hemisphere. Names would honor great scientists of the past and renowned contemporaries from many countries of the world. For two areas of visible hemisphere, it was proposed to call region of first impact of Luna II (1959), the Bay of Lunik; and region of first nondestructive lunar landing of Luna IX apparatus (1966), Bay of Lunar Landing. (S/F, 2/67, 38-9)
Purdue Univ. had approved memorials for alumni Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 Apollo spacecraft fire. Memorials included naming two campus buildings for astronauts, providing full four-year scholarships for the two children of each man, and establishing astronauts’ scholarship fund for worthy students. (AP, NYT, 3/3/67)	_
MSC had awarded Bell Aerosystems Co. a nine-month, $5.9-million fixedprice contract to provide three Lunar Landing Training Vehicles (lltv) for astronauts to practice simulated lunar landings. Capable of simulating % gravity environment of the moon, lltv would be towed to about 4,000-ft altitude and released; pilot could damp out % of gravity force on vehicle using jet engines; remaining % gravity would be supported by rocket motors simulating lunar landing conditions, (nasa Release 67-58)
Edward H. White II, one of the three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc, was named to receive AlAA’s 1967 Haley Astronautics Award. Selection had been made in early January. AIAA cited White for his historic walk in space and other contributions, undertaken “at great personal risk in the advancement of space flight” during June 3—7, 1965, Gemini IV mission. Award would be presented to his widow. (AP, W Post, 2/8/67, A6; upi, NYT, 2/9/67,9)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham toured McDonnell Douglas Test Facility near Sacramento to inspect 3rd stage of the Saturn V booster which would be used to launch them on first manned Apollo mission in 1968. Schirra told newsmen that NASA would not be “pressed by the press” into flying the mission on a specific date. Asked if he believed pressure from the press was in any way responsible for the Jan. 27 fire, Schirra replied: “. . . I found that whenever we . . . get together with the members of the press that you’re right away asking us, ‘Well, now when are yon going to fly?’ That’s almost the first question, and it’s not a very unique question. ... It seems you want that answer that may be hard news, but when we give you that answer then if we don’t make that date, for some reason or another it appears that we’re failing our goal. While the goal is to have a successful flight at a reasonable time rather than an early failure. . . .” (Transcript)
Early findings from Surveyor V, launched Sept. 8 and softlanded on moon Sept. 10, were summarized in Science by jpl scientists Leonard D. Jaffe and Robert H. Steinbacher. The 18,006 TV pictures taken Sept. 11—24 included views of interior of crater in which Surveyor V landed, level surface surrounding crater, star and planet sightings for attitude reference, and solar-corona sequence after local sunset. Alpha-scattering instrument produced data on lunar surface chemical composition— oxygen, silicon, and aluminum identified in preliminary evaluation— and showed general chemical composition to be “similar to that of a silicate of a basaltic type.” “Material of basaltic composition at the Surveyor V landing site implies that differentiation has occurred in the moon,” which summary attributed to “internal sources of heat.” Early findings were consistent with hypothesis that “extensive volcanic flows have been responsible for flooding and filling the mare [sea] basins.” Erosion experiment, spacecraft landing effects, and other observations indicated soil had significant amounts of fine-grained material and measurable cohesion. Surveyor V had provided first direct chemical analysis of lunar surface. Lunar magnet experiment produced results, that “are most similar to a terrestrial plateau basalt with no addition of free iron.” (Science, 11/3/67, 631-52)
Jerald Kubat, formerly Special Assistant to the Apollo Program Director, omsf, had been appointed Director, Apollo Program Control. He would have overall responsibility for program planning, configuration management, logistics, resources control, and procurement operations to ensure the attainment of Apollo goals, (nasa Ann, 7/17/67)
Under reduced gravity conditions on moon, most natural and comfortable gait for an astronaut would be “a lope at about ten feet per second,” advised Amos A. Spady, Jr., LaRC scientist. He and fellow scientist, Donald Hewes, had tested subjects on specially constructed device— simulating effects of astronauts moving in moon’s lower gravity. Simulated lunar gravity had not guaranteed that all motion would be higher, faster, or farther. Scientists had discovered that, at most speeds, lunar stride would be longer—sometimes twice as long—but number of steps per minute would be reduced by as much as half. (Weil, W Post, 10/2/67, B4)
Eight Apollo astronauts flew from New York to Iceland for eight-day expedition to gather geological data from an area believed to be similar to the lunar surface. Fifteen more astronauts were expected to join the expedition June 30. (NYT, 6/30/67,13)
Fabrication of five S—IIs (Saturn V’s 2nd stage) would be accomplished under a contract modification awarded by NASA to North American Aviation, Inc. Purchase of the five stages would complete the S-II requirement for the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles currently approved for development as a part of the Apollo program. The first of the stages would be delivered to nasa in Feb. 1969. The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., managed the Saturn program, (nasa Release 67-244)
First manned Apollo flight had been delayed at least one year by Jan. 27 fire at esc, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He said he believed men could still land on the moon by the original 1970 deadline “although the probability is lowered.” Dr. Mueller told the Committee that the replacement spacecraft for the first manned Apollo mission, which incorporated “all changes resulting from the findings of the Apollo accident investigation,” was on the assembly line at North American Aviation, Inc.’s plant in Downey, Calif. (AP, B Sun, 4/20/67)
NASA Surveyor V spacecraft on the moon responded to turn-on commands from Goldstone, Calif., station at beginning of its tourth lunar day. Spacecraft had operated during its second lunar day but had failed to respond during third. Battery was still functioning, and camera and alpha-scattering instrument were responding to commands, (nasa Proj Off; WNews, 12/15/67,5)
Charges that nasa’s Apollo program had serious deficiencies were reviewed by William Hines in series of articles in Washington Evening Star. A 55-page report submitted to nasa three days before Jan. 27 flash fire by Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., inspector at ksc Apollo warehouse, charged that improper parts had been installed in Apollo I spacecraft. Careless and unorthodox warehousing practices had caused many parts and materials intended for spacecraft use to lose their identity, Baron told Hines in an interview. “As a result there was probably a bundle of stuff [in Apollo] that they don’t have any idea what ... it is at all.” Baron also charged that on at least one occasion, naa had installed a substandard part with deliberate subterfuge, without the knowledge of nasa. Truth about the part could easily be concealed because nasa had no quality-control men of its own in receiving warehouse, Baron said. He was particularly critical of deviation from test procedures: “When you deviate on your small components, and you deviate on all of them, and you put these in one system and you run a systems test and you deviate again, you’ve ended up with a system that really isn’t worthwhile.” James Parker, former nasa quality control inspector at ksc, told Hines that nasa quality control supervision on Apollo contractors’ work was “spotty” and said he had periodically cited instances of waste and improper expenditures in reports to his ksc superiors. (Hines, W Star, 3/15/67, Al, A6; 3/19/67, A7; 3/23/67,1, A6; 3/26/67, A3)
msc Apollo Program Manager Dr. Joseph F. Shea briefed major Apollo contractors and subcontractors at msc about Jan. 27 flash fire, John Wil-ford reported in New York Times, msc made no announcement of the meeting. (Wilford, NYT, 2/4/67, 15)
Dr. Harvey H. Nininger, leading authority on meteorites and tektites, was honored at Meteoritical Society’s 30th annual meeting at arc by publication of special issue of the Journal of the Geochemical Society and by presentation of Society’s annual Leonard Medal. First to propose, in 1940, that tektites came from moon, Dr. Nininger later proved that coesite—a quartz-like material created by very high pressures—could be found in meteoroid craters. Presence of coesite was currently being used to determine whether a crater was formed by meteorite impact (arc Release 67—21) Qctober 27: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 99-mi (160-km) altitude in flight to measure, with moderate and high resolution, spectral irradiance of Venus (1,000 to 3,000 A), and star B Oriones (Rigel). No data were acquired from Venus because tracker was ineffective; Rigel was acquired and five-second exposure sequence was completed. (NASARptSRL)
NASA revised designations for Apollo and aa missions: (1) all Apollo missions would be numbered sequentially in the order flown with the next Apollo mission to be designated Apollo 4, followed by Apollo 5, etc.; (2) AA missions would be designated sequentially as AAP—1, AAP—2, etc. Number designations would not differentiate between manned or unmanned Uprated Saturn I and Saturn V missions. (Text)
Senate Minority Leader Everett M. Dirksen (R-Ill.) suggested on abc’s “Issues and Answers” TV program that Government expenditures on the space program be cut to avoid a tax increase. “I’ve been looking at that space program, I don’t mind telling you. Does it really make a difference whether we get to the moon this year or next year, or the following year ? “I doubt very much whether it makes a great deal of difference. And if we reconcile ourselves to that thesis, then of course there is a place where you can make a very substantial budget cut.” (W Star, 1/16/67, A5)
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501), which would be launched by Saturn V in three days, had the power to place astronauts on moon, or telescopes in orbit beyond earth’s atmosphere; American capability for major strides toward the unknown had arrived when interest in these endeavors had reached a new and understandable low, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., reported in Baltimore Sun. Along with the new era of less than major interest in space had come the high-priority problems of the Southeast Asia war and the urban riots. Aviation Week for Aug. 7 had said “An era ended for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration last week when Congress voted a $234,000,000 cut in the agency’s budget authorization for fiscal 1968.” Many people during recent months had looked toward the achievement of social as well as scientific goals, reappraisement of both being called for by Congress. Because AS-501 would be one of the highest achievements in space, the question was no longer whether man could reach into space, but “. . . . with what urgency it should be done in the light of all the needs on earth.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/7/67, 6)
Former Vice President and current leader for Republican Presidential nomination, Richard M. Nixon, on TV said it was “very likely . .. some of those appropriations [for the space program] are excessive.” Referring to the space program as “a sacred cow,” he called for the President to be “a balance wheel” in evening off the pressure from “vested interests.” He defended a congressman’s right when representing an area with important space business to fight for more funds. (SBD, 11/29/67,140) Coupling a plea for constructive realism with a denunciation of U.S.S.R.’s mere lip service toward international space cooperation, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin discussed ways for understanding “international space cooperation.” No Russian attended the conference, two speakers and one cosmonaut declined invitations. Frutkin explained that cooperation meant “joint projects, jointly undertaken, jointly carried out, and jointly profitable.” Realistic projects practicing space cooperation on an international scale were cited by Frutkin to be: nasa’s program; esro/eldo complex for combining “ten European nations in spacecraft development and seven nations in large vehicle development;” and Intelsat satellite telecommunications consortium, including “some sixty nations in day-to-day operational space communications traffic.” He included in U.S. benefits from the NASA cooperative program “gold flow [for] foreign purchase of space hardware and services,” Canadian ionospheric investigations, West German barium cloud technique, Italian atmospheric density measurements, and French global wind circulation studies. Frutkin referred to esro’s program as “a true pooling of resources [which] goes well beyond the NASA cooperative program. In esro, “common facilities have been planned, financed and operated on an international basis by an international governmental agency.” MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth discussed manned space flight “from Mercury to Apollo.” He said Mercury defined man’s survivability in space, Gemini defined man’s operational capability, and Apollo would be first in utilizing space for manned exploration. “To progress in ten short years from exploring survivability to utilization on the most difficult exploration mission ever undertaken implies a rate of change in technical capability which has no real parallel in history,” he said. Deep space and lunar operations would be faced as “two new major dimensions to our space capabilities.” Space explorers would be coping with the need for huge amounts of energy, extremely precise navigation to hit target and reentry corridor, and radiation protection that could include the intensities generated by solar flares. Lunar explorers would require a vehicle designed to operate entirely outside earth’s atmosphere, descend to and ascend from lunar surface, and propel reliably while exhibiting “relative sophistication of a throttleable engine.” Man returning from first lunar exploration trip would have accomplished “an age-old dream [of visiting] his nearest neighbor in space [and found] a key to the riddle of Earth’s relation to its nearest neighbor [and] a chance of understanding the creative forces that formed his own home—Earth.” “For the first time he will have soared beyond the confines of Earth’s gravity and felt the pull of a foreign planet [and] personally viewed our whole planet as a small bluish ball only four times the span of the lunar disk. These experiences may well produce profound changes in man’s attitude towards himself and his world comparable to those wrought by Galileo’s dramatic demonstration of the Copemican theory, changes which should tend to inspire man to place the affairs of his very small house in order.” (Text) NASA’s Apollo Applications Program (aap) Director Charles W. Mathews listed basic objectives for aap: long-duration space flights of men and systems based on unique capabilities of man, habitability, biomedical and behavioral considerations, and systems development; scientific investigations in earth orbit based on solar astronomy, earth observations, and stellar astronomy; applications in earth orbit based on meteorology, earth resources, and communications; and extended lunar exploration. “The activities involved in [aap] represent major steps in the utilization of our space capability. The results , . . can serve to establish the direction of future space exploration and applications. In particular, increased knowledge on the effective integration of men into the total system should accomplish much in determining the character, systems configurations and operational approach in future programs. The ability to capitalize on the large investments already made in the Apollo Program affords the opportunity to carry on this work in [aap] in an efficient and economical manner.” (Text)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, North American Aviation President J. Leland Atwood denied that pressures to meet 1970 lunar-landing goal had prompted naa engineers to take shortcuts in Apollo program. Terming the Apollo 204 Review Board’s study “a good and penetrating report,” Atwood conceded that deficiencies existed in the Apollo capsule, but disputed Board’s charge that “deficiencies existed in Command Module design, workmanship, and quality control. . . .” naa’s Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy said that although an electrical arc “probably” caused the fire, there were “various other possibilities”—such as Astronaut Gus Grissom accidentally kicking loose a wire that could have later initiated the blaze. Under stern questioning by subcommittee members, however, Dr. McCarthy admitted that this theory was pure speculation. In response to charge by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that prevailing attitude prior to fire was not “just a feeling of over-confidence” but “real negligence” by naa and NASA, Atwood reasserted that the most serious error made by naa and NASA was classification of the AS-204 test as “non-hazardous.” Questioned about the reasoning behind designing to minimize fire hazard, Dr. McCarthy pointed out that naa had concentrated on eliminating possible ignition sources while it turned out that the amount and placement of flammable materials was crucial. He characterized this as a “grave error in judgment.” Atwood assured the Subcommittee that naa and NASA had “placed great stress” on the importance of quality and workmanship: “The procedures followed and the depth of inspection which have been employed far surpass those . . . used on any other program. The fact of the accident itself makes it obvious that we must do more than we have done, that we must—guided by the finding of the board—redouble our efforts to approach perfection. Already we have gone over every other design feature of the spacecraft to identify any other area of possible failures . . . [and] we have found none.” (ATT, 4/12/67, 34; W Star, 4/12/67, A6)
nasa had amended its contract with Bendix Corp. for the ApoUo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) to add a heat flow experiment substation. $2.4-million amendment increased total value of contract to $23.6 million, plus incentive fees. Heat flow subsystem woud measure net outward flux of heat from moon’s interior, providing a comparison of radioactive content of the moon’s interior and earth’s mantle, a thermal history of moon, a lunar temperature-depth profile, and thermal parameters of the first three meters of moon’s crust. (NASA Release 67-135)
The ceremonies in Washington, Moscow and London putting the space treaty into effect mark not only the first major East-West agreement since the nuclear test ban treaty of 1963 but a potential starting point for an even more momentous accord,” New York Times commented on space law treaty which went into effect Oct. 10. It added that “recent statements by the Soviet Union’s leading space scientist, Professor Leonid Sedov, indicate that the Russians too may be coming around to the conclusion that the costs of going it alone to the moon and beyond outweigh the dimming propaganda magic.” (NYT, 10/11/67)
The Washington Post commented on NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Exploration of the moon. Giant orbiting space stations, with as many as a dozen men living and working in them for as long as a year. Unmanned landings on Mars. “These are the goals the United States has set for itself in outer space in the 1970s. With a budget request for fiscal 1968 of $5.05 billion, more than $500 million of it for dramatic new programs to carry us beyond a manned landing on the moon, President Johnson has made it clear that the United States is in space to stay, no matter what the Soviet Union does or does not do. ...” (W Post, 1/25/67, A18)
Vladimir Komarov was twelfth Soviet cosmonaut to die in a spaceflight accident, Julius Epstein, a Stanford Univ. professor, told upi. He claimed he had conclusive evidence including the names of Soviet cosmonauts who had supposedly died on space missions. Epstein said U.S. policy of not disclosing Soviet space disasters that U.S.S.R. does not publicize was based on the State Department’s desire “not to embarrass the Russians.” (upi, P Inq,	1) During April: The U.S. press commented on the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. New York Times: “Men have risked their lives in pioneering since history began—explorers, mountain climbers, the first aviators who conquered the globe’s blanket of air, and now the cosmonauts who enter the ‘infinite spaces.’ That much has to be accepted—but how much? It seems clear that the three Americans who died in the oxygen fire at Cape Kennedy were victims of insufficient care, slipshod work and haste. There is no way of knowing whether similar factors led to the death of Komarov yesterday; but it is a fact that the Russians are aiming at time schedules, hoping to beat the United States to the moon, trying to meet special dates connected with the fiftieth anniversary of their Revolution. The United States still insists on trying to reach the moon by 1970. “Both nations are duplicating costly and dangerous work. Thus good and brave men die unnecessarily, vast sums are wasted, and without doubt the progress that humanity could make through cooperation in the thrilling quest for knowledge of the universe is being hampered by pride, prestige and the nebulous possibility of strategic gain.” (NYT, 4/25/67,40) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin• “. . . hard on the heels of a test disaster that took the lives of three U.S. Apollo astronauts, tragedy has also struck the Russian space program with the crash of a new giant spacecraft and the death of its pilot, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. . . . “Had the Russians succeeded in mounting a new space spectacular at this time, it is possible that some of the sobering impact of the Apollo on this country would have been dissipated. Although there have been repeated disclaimers of a space ‘race,’ the sight of the Soviet Union again forging ahead would surely have fanned anew American competitive instincts. Surely the death of brave men on both sides will reemphasize for both the element of human fallibility and the need for offsetting it with infinite pains and caution in space exploration.” (P EB, 4/25/67) Technology Week: “The Soviet tragedy, by emphasizing the hazards of space flight, has perhaps eased some of the pressure of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and North American Aviation. There is more awareness now that the exploration of space will not be a series of glittering successes, one after another. There are dangers; there will be further tragedies, other brave men to mourn. While bringing home the care which must always be taken, the Soviet accident also makes it clear that in programs of this magnitude humans are not always infallible. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 5/1/67, 50) Aviation Week and Space Technology: “It is fortunate that the Apollo and Soyuz tragedies came this far downstream in the history of manned space flight. If they had occurred in the initial phases of Vostok or Mercury, the hue and cry of technical timidity in both countries might have killed the manned space flight programs before they had a chance to demonstrate their technical feasibility. Viewed against the perspective of Vostok, Mercury, Voskhod and Gemini and more than 2,000 hr of successful space flight logged by crews of both nations, the recent tragedies spotlight development problems but do not raise any fundamental doubts about man’s ability to reach the moon. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5/1/67,11)
First two Apollo spacesuits incorporating changes recommended by NASA’s Apollo 204 Review Board were scheduled to arrive at msc in early September for thermo-vacuum and compatibility testing. New suit, designated A-7L, was an improved version of the original A-6L suit. Changes, primarily replacing flammable materials with nonflammable or low-flammability materials, included substitution of: (1) Beta fabric, a nonflammable fiberglass cloth, for Nomex, a high-temperature nylon, in outside layer; (2) Nomex for a more flammable nylon inner layer; and (3) fire-resistant Kapton/Beta fiberglass insulation for aluminized Mylar-Dacron insulation. In addition to its greater fire-resistant properties, spacesuit, which was white rather than blue, was more comfortable and mobile than A-6L. It would be used in all manned Apollo missions during prelaunch and launch phases, and reentry. First production model of spacesuit, manufactured by International Latex Corp.’s Government and Industrial Div. under msc contract, was scheduled for mid-October delivery, (nasa Release 67—222)
Decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in U.S. spacecraft had not been made as a shortcut to compensate for U.S.S.R.’s superior booster capability, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told Interavia Air Letter. “There were other factors involved,” including weight and efficient use of oxygen-consuming fuel cells. Dr. Welsh emphasized there was “. . . no basis at all for a change in [Apollo program] policy” because of Jan. 27 tragedy at ksc and predicted U.S. still had 50-50 chance to land first man on the moon, (upi, W Star, 2/5/67, A8)
President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY 1968 budget said in part: “In 1961, this Nation resolved to send a manned expedition to the moon in this decade. Much hard work remains and many obstacles must still be overcome before that goal is met. Yet, in the last few years we have progressed far enough that we must now look beyond our original objective and set our course for the more distant future . . . we have no alternative unless we wish to abandon the manned space capability we have created. “This budget provides for the initiation of an effective follow-on to the manned lunar landing. We will explore the moon. We will learn to live in space for months at a time. Our astronauts will conduct scientific and engineering experiments in space to enhance man’s mastery of the environment. . . .” The President recommended that nasa proceed with the Voyager program for an unmanned landing on Mars in 1973 and continue “other unmanned investigations nearer the earth. . . . “These new ventures are the result of careful planning and selectivity,” Mr. Johnson said. “We are not doing everything in space that we are technologically capable of doing ... we are choosing those projects that give us the greatest return on our investment. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/24/67, S755)
msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, in welcoming address at msc’s twoday Gemini Summary Conference, urged space scientists to avoid “second-guessing” Apollo 204 Review Board because undue speculation on the Jan. 27 accident was a disservice both to the Nation and the Board, (msc Roundup, 2/3/67, 8; W Post, 2/2/61, A2)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
Earth-orbiting satellites, according to Soviet cosmonaut Pavel Popovich’s report in Aviation and Cosmonautics, would render practical help to agriculture, assessing crop and forest resources and discovering areas of vegetation affected by disease, fires, locusts, and underground springs. His report specified regularly photographing areas under cultivation from sowing to harvesting and processing data in computers to obtain yield forecasts. (S/F, 9/67,310) Soviet radio astronomer Professor Vsevolod Troitski, in statement to Tass, said new information had provided convincing proof that moon’s surface was sufficiently strong to support spacecraft landings. He stated that substance composing top layer of moon’s surface consisted of loosely connected particles averaging 0.01 in and that contacts between particles were very weak. On an average, porous substance covered moon to a depth of about 13 ft, according to Troitski. (S/F. 9/67, 305)
Confidential report submitted to NASA by General Electric Co. cited numerous serious workmanship flaws in Apollo spacecraft No. 17, scheduled to be launched by Saturn V booster on an unmanned mission no earlier than August, New York Times reported. Flaws included damaged parts, corroded valves, leaky pipes, three small holes in heat shield that “could have catastrophic implications” during reentry, and more than 1,300 “discrepancies” in the 20 mi of electrical wiring. Report was prepared by GE’s Apollo Support Dept, under terms of a 1962 contract with NASA to conduct computer-assisted checks of all systems in Apollo spacecraft prior to launch. George C. White, Jr., NASA Director of Reliability and Quality, omsf, told New York Times reporter John Wilford in a telephone interview that report was “a working document that, in effect, summarizes known problems” for KSC supervisors and should not be taken as “an alert of really big problems.” NASA officials said many of the flaws cited in the report had already been corrected; others had yet to be changed. (Wilford, NYT, 5/3/67, 1, 2)
Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel C. Phillips, commented on countdown operations for Satum/Apollo (AS-501): “. . . I was tremendously impressed with the smooth teamwork that this combined government/multi-industry team put together [and] you could almost feel the will with which it was being carried out. I think that’s important to the progress of Apollo . . . perhaps even more so than some of the technical returns we’ll get from this mission. . . . Apollo is on the way to the moon.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by Apollo 204 Review Board members, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testified on Jan. 27 flash fire before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Webb said the Board had found error, “but it has also found the capability within NASA and the Apollo team of contractors to overcome error.” NASA and industry would share their part of the blame “for what we have done or left undone,” Webb said, but the committee could have confidence that “nasa and its contractors have the capability to overcome every deficiency required to proceed to successfully fly the Apollo Saturn system and accomplish its objectives.” He said Board Chairman Dr. Floyd Thompson had reassured him that the “concepts and the basic design on which the Apollo system is based can be made to work in a reliable manner,” and Astronaut/Board member Frank Borman had reported he would be confident to fly the Apollo spacecraft if reported deficiencies were eliminated. Webb concluded: “If any man in this room asks for whom the Apollo bell tolls, it tolls for him and me, as well as for Grissom, White and Chaffee. “It tolls for every astronaut test pilot who will lose his life in the space simulated vacuum of a test chamber or the real vacuum of space . . . for every astronaut scientist who will lose his life on some lonely hill on the moon or Mars . . . for Government and industrial executives and legislators alike . . . for an open program continuously evaluated by the opinion makers with little time for second thought—operating in the brilliant color and brutal glare of real time, worldwide mass media with the speed of the television, from euphoria to exaggerated detail....” Asked why six of the eight Board members were NASA employees, Webb replied that they were the best qualified people for the investigation and noted that they were all familiar with the spacecraft or with similar types of investigations. He said that in his opinion the Board had “to a large degree . . . overstated the case.” Questioned about charges by the press that many qualified Project Apollo technicians were not called to testify before the Board, Webb responded: “It is easy to make allegations, hard to conduct an investigation, and even harder to make the Apollo Saturn fly at the earliest possible date. I do not believe these allegations are worth your consideration.” Dr. Thompson discussed methods and procedures followed by the Board, and key Board members traced the process of establishing the course of the fire, the “most probable” ignition source, and detailed findings and recommendations. (Testimony; Transcript 10, 15-8)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement based on third interim report by Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., on work of Apollo 204 Review Board. Webb observed: (1) “The risk of fire that could not be controlled or from which escape could not be made was considerably greater than was recognized when the procedures for the conduct of the test were established. Our experience with pure oxygen atmosphere included not only the successful Mercury and Gemini flights but a number of instances where a clearly positive source of ignition did not result in a fire. . . .” (2) Apollo spacecraft had been equipped with such items as Velcro adhesive pads to hold frequently used equipment and nylon netting to catch dropped objects. “While most of these [items] were constructed of low-combustion-potential material, they were not arranged as to provide barriers to the spread of a fire. Tests conducted . . . since the accident have shown that an oxygen fire in the capsule will spread along the surface of Velcro and along the edges of nylon netting much faster than through the material itself. (3) Soldered joints in piping carrying both oxygen and fluids were melted away, with resultant leakage contributing to the spread of the fire. . . .” (4) Capsule burst in such a way that flames traveled over and around astronauts’ couches toward rupture. “Under these conditions, and with just a few seconds of time available, the astronauts could not reach the hatch and open it. (5) This fire indicates that a number of items related to the design and performance of the environmental control unit will require the most careful examination and may require redesign. . . .” Webb announced that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would hold open hearing on Review Board’s preliminary findings Feb. 27 and that House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight would conduct full investigation of accident after completion of Board’s inquiry, expected by late March. Dr. Seamans said in his report that an “electrical malfunction” was regarded as “most likely source of ignition” of the fire but the “possibility exists that no single source will ever be pinpointed.” Board was still considering chemical reactions in onboard materials, spontaneous combustion of certain materials, and possible electrical phenomena. Evidence indicated fire had had three distinct phases: originating in left side of spacecraft, it had burned several seconds unnoticed, then spread becoming more intense and causing cabin pressure to rise rapidly as atmosphere became heated. Fifteen seconds after crew first reported fire, cabin ruptured. During second phase, gases and flames flowed past astronauts’ couches and through hole moving from left to right. With cabin’s oxygen quickly reduced by rush of flames and gas outside, fire continued as localized flame, smoking heavily, in third phase. Dr. Seamans said Board noted: “The experience in flight and in tests prior to the accident had suggested that the probability of a spacecraft fire was low. Continued alertness to the possibility of fire had become dulled by previous ground experience and six years of successful manned missions. . . . Potential ignition sources inside the spacecraft had been treated so as to be considered safe; neither the crews nor the test and development personnel felt the risk of spacecraft fire to be high. . . .” Dr. Seamans emphasized that Board did not recommend changing pure oxygen system or planned cabin pressure for space flight, but did urge that “trade-offs between one- and two-gas atmospheres be re-evaluated . . . [and] pressurized oxygen no longer be used in prelaunch operations.” It also recommended: (1) combustible materials be replaced where possible with nonflammable materials; (2) nonmetallic materials be arranged to maintain fire breaks; (3) systems for oxygen and liquid combustibles be made fire resistant; (4) full flammabmty tests be conducted with mockup of new configuration; (5) more rapidly and easily operated hatch be installed; and (6) on-the-pad emergency procedures be revised to recognize possibility of cabin fire. (NASA Release
Three-man crew for NASA’s first manned Apollo spaceflight (AS
Five of the 11 scientist-astronauts selected for NASA’s Apollo program were announced in the Nation’s press. NASA released complete and official list Aug. 4. (AP, NYT, 8/3/67, 8; upi, W Post, 8/3/67, Al)
NASA completed membership of its Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and expanded its scope of activities to include: (1) assistance in the “planning and conduct of all manned and unmanned missions to explore the Moon and planets,” and (2) development of “scientific objectives and general strategy for such missions including specific recommendations for mission design and scientific payloads.” Board would report to NASA Administrator James E. Webb through Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. (nasa Release 67—133)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified before the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, Senate Committee on Appropriations. His prepared statement made these principal points: NASA would not be able to achieve for this Nation “a position of leadership in space” for less money than an annual budget of between $5.5-$6.0 billion a year. At the proposed level of funding, after launch vehicle #216, production of the Saturn IB and the earth-orbital portion of the Apollo Applications Program would be terminated. Rather than continue to use the Apollo system for work in orbit at conclusion of Apollo flights, NASA would accept a hiatus in the continuous development of manned space flight, deciding on a fresh start for the years ahead. A new study would be begun in FY 1968 and FY 1969 on purposes and form of future development of spacecraft and “the national family of large launch vehicles that should be available in the 1970’s.” This “basic change in the United States space outlook” would make it “clearly prudent to preserve the physical facilities which have been built and paid for and which would be required if a decision is made to construct a large solid rocket vehicle.” Because the budget level approved by the House would prevent beginning work on NERVA II, development of a flight weight engine of the nerva i class, “with probably from 60,000 to 75,000	lbs of thrust” would be initiated in FY 1968. Because we would have “no choice” but to accept the fact that Voyager cannot be initiated in FY 1968, and, in order to preserve “a capability for future planetary programs,” NASA would propose about $10 million for the “lunar and planetary program for studies and supporting research in the technology of planetary exploration.” NASA would propose no changes in the budget for the Apollo program but would “accept the legislative history as a clear signal that we should proceed with a hard-hitting carefully managed effort to achieve the objectives of the Apollo program.” nasa would be able to launch “a total of nine Saturn V unmanned and manned missions before the end of Calendar Year 1969.” A further reduction in funding in FY	1968 could only cause	“complete havoc” and	would be a blow to the	national aeronautical	and space effort	from	which it would be extremely difficult to recover. Webb told the subcommittee: “In this situation, we cannot ask, as we otherwise would have done, that the Senate restore in full the amount reduced by the House. . . . We are here to ask the committee that the Senate approve the amounts passed by the House and accepted by the President, and to make a clear record in the legislative history that will give us	the flexibility we will	need to permit	us to	carry out the strongest	possible program within the amounts	made	available to us. . . . Long leadtimes requiring timely initiation of new programs and implying commitment to proceed over a period of years would . . . make it perfectly clear to all that we cannot somehow find a way to carry forward the same program and give the Nation the same assurance of a strong position in aeronautics and space with a $517 million cut in our budget.” He said he had been in touch with the President in the last 24 hours and “he still believes the recommendations he made in January represent” the best budget for the country. But the President also believed his proposed 10 percent income tax surcharge “is more important to press for than extra money for the space bill.” Webb said he had drastically reshaped the space program to comply with the $4.5 billion fund for this year voted by the House and approved by the President. But Subcommittee Chairman Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) and several senators, with major space installations in their states, gave strong indications they would plan to restore some of the millions of dollars cut by the House. Webb promised to revise his multi-billion-dollar space plans again “and bring you the best program possible for the money.” (NASA lar VT/101; Text; Testimony; AP, NYT, 9/29/67, A3; 9/30/67, 52)
New York Times editorial praised success of nasa’s Surveyor V, launched Sept. 8: “If present indications are confirmed, Surveyor 5 has made one the fundamental scientific discoveries of the century . . . that earth’s natural satellite is made up of the same kind of material as is the earth. “Surveyor 5’s historic finding, if backed by later experiments, must force new consideration of the possibility that the moon was tom from the earth. . . . Certainly much more evidence is required . . . [but] Surveyor 5 has performed a notable feat. Moreover it has demonstrated again how much can be learned from instruments delivered by relatively inexpensive unmanned rockets without the great dangers and huge costs required to send a man to the moon and return him safely to earth.” (NYT, 10/1/67, 12E)
Funeral services were held for Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc. All three men were buried with full military honors: Virgil I. Grissom (L/Col., usaf) and Roger Chaffee (LCdr., usn) at Arlington National Cemetery, and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) at West Point. President Johnson and hundreds of dignitaries attended services at Arlington; Mrs. Johnson and Vice President Humphrey were among the attendees at West Point. (Hines, W Star, 1/31/67 Al, A6; Secrest, W Post, 2/1/67, Bl; Casey, W Post, 2/1/67, Al, A4)
nasa announced Boeing Co. had been awarded incentive fee of 81,811,611 for two missions—Lunar Orbiter IV, 81,061,111; Lunar Orbiter V, 8750,500—completing performance fee portions of Boeing contract and totaling 86,809,053 in such awards for all five Lunar Orbiters. Previous incentive awards—Lunar Orbiter 1, 81,995,312; Lunar Orbiter II, $1,948,725; Lunar Orbiter III, $1,053,405-—had been earned by Boeing. After initial goal to photograph potential moon landing sites had been achieved by first three Lunar Orbiters, NASA’s contract modification set a new goal of more advanced scientific missions for Lunar Orbiter IV and V; Boeing could earn through outstanding performance remaining award fees not earned on previous flights. Modified contract provisions still recognized amounts of original Lunar Orbiter IV and V award fees. nasa’s Incentive Award Fee Board for Lunar Orbiter noted that Lunar Orbiter IV had photographed moon’s “entire front,” and Lunar Orbiter V had completed photography of “opposite side.” (nasa Release 67285)
GSFC scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness reported new findings on moon’s nature and environment. Data obtained from Explorer XXXV in lunar orbit indicated that: (1) no supersonic shock front preceded moon to impede flow of solar wind toward the lunar surface; (2) a sizable empty cavity or solar wind void existed behind the moon away from the sun; (3) moon had practically no magnetic field, and therefore no complex magnetosphere, surrounding radiation belts, or lunar ionosphere; and (4) moon’s average electrical conductivity was low (under 1,800° F). Findings did not appear to create any additional hazards to Apollo manned lunar landing program. Explorer XXXV, launched into lunar orbit from etr July 22, to study interaction of solar wind with the moon and investigate the lunar environment, was first satellite to orbit the moon without having a midcourse maneuver capability and the only operating satellite currently in lunar orbit, (nasa Release 67-295)
msfc had successfully completed 11-mo dynamic test program of Saturn V booster and Apollo spacecraft, which qualified the Saturn V configuration as dynamically and structurally sound. Conducted by Boeing Co., program included dynamic tests of Saturn V’s 1st, 2nd, and 3rd stages, Instrument Unit (iu), and Apollo spacecraft, (msfc Release 67-161)
Rep. Dante B. Fascell (D-Fla.) introduced in the House a bill (H.R. 7798) to strike commemorative medals in honor of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee who died in the Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire. (CR, 3/23/67, H3301)
At MSC the TRW Systems Group had received $10.7-million NASA contract extension to perform spacecraft analysis for Apollo, including studies, technical fact-finding, and investigations for systems in Command, Service, and Lunar Modules. Contract extension would carry through June 1968 and increased total cost of contract to $65.5 million, (msc Release 67-66)
l/g Nikolay P. Kamanin, military commander of Soviet manned spaceflight program, hinted in Zemlya o Vselennaya that U.S.S.R. would use Soyuz-type spacecraft for manned lunar landing. He made no direct mention of Soyuz I spacecraft [see April 23-24]—believed to be heaviest Soviet space vehicle ever launched—but said “payloads of more than 15 tons have already been put into orbit.” These payloads, he said, could soft-land on moon from lunar orbit. (AP, B Sun, 5/10/67)
NASA-sponsored research on equipment used for surviving hard landing on the moon and planets had been conducted by Cal Tech-JPL engineers in simulated operations. Split-second jpl impact tests, which used powerful compressed air guns and a giant slingshot, hurtled equipment against solid backstops at speeds up to 500 feet per second (340 mph). JPl’s engineer, Stan Taylor, explained: “During the brief instant that the test specimen is experiencing the 10,000 g shock, every part of it behaves as though it weighed 10,000 times its normal weight. The bolts supporting a one pound test item have to be good for about five tons.” The experiments had proved that intricate, delicate components required in sophisticated unmanned spacecraft of today and tomorrow could be protected to withstand shocks of 10,000 g. (jpl Release)
nasa awarded General Electric Co. and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. $50,000, fixed-price contracts to conduct four-month parallel studies of a medical laboratory for Apollo Applications (aa) flights. Designated Integrated Medical and Behavioral Laboratory Measurement System, laboratory would permit detailed measurements of human systems and crew functions during space flight. It could be flown as a complete laboratory or as selected group of measurement modules on specific missions. (nasa Release 67-102)
msc awarded Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. a $97,000, cost-plus-fixed-fee study contract to evaluate Beta fiber, a noncombustible fabric, for possible use in Apollo spacecraft and crew systems equipment, (nasa Release 67—90)
Serious difficulties” had developed in Soviet program to land a man on the moon and it would take “no little time” to solve them, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. (upi, NYT, 1/23/67, 2i)
Initial reaction by the press to Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died: Business Week: “After 16 space flights, in which 19 astronauts returned from their missions safely, many had forgotten the inescapable peril of exploration. No previous frontier has ever been crossed without the loss of life; it was not to be expected that space—the most perilous frontier of them all—could be conquered without sacrifice. None of this lessens the grief that every man in NASA feels for fallen comrades. But it is the nature of test pilots ... to accept disaster not as defeat but as a call for intensified effort and dedication.” (Bus Wk, 2/4/67) Washington Evening Star: “Now that the initial shock ... is beginning to wear off, the second guessers are . . . wondering whether we should be going to the moon at all. . . . From any rational point of view, the only thing to do is to carry on. The Apollo program necessarily will mark time until the true cause of the spacecraft disaster is located and corrected. It is conceivable that the delay could cause the Dec. 31, 1969, deadline to be missed. It is entirely possible that the Russians may get to the moon ahead of us. But so what? The world will not end nor the United States vanish, if the Russians beat us to the moon. ... It would be senseless to stop now. Fortunately, it probably would also be impossible.” (Hines, WStar, 2/2/67) Editor & Publisher:	“The recent disaster at Cape Kennedy indicates we are no less reluctant to face up to disaster than anyone else. Not only were our reporters not prepared for it-—none of them were there for the simulated flight test—but neither were our space officials . . . [because] the full import of the tragedy was fed out piecemeal. . . . The lessons for NASA officials and for newsmen are obvious. Space travel is fraught with dangers in every test, every maneuver, every piece of equipment, but we became complacent about them because of our successes. NASA’s record of dealing with the press up to now has been pretty good and if it hasn’t already developed a ‘disaster plan’ for such accidents it soon will. News media have learned that nothing in the space program should be considered ‘routine’ and that front row seat should never be left unoccupied at any time.” (Editor & Publisher, 2/11/67) Some press reaction to the accident later became increasingly critical of NASA: Washington Evening Star: “The implication of the NASA story was that no fire extinguishing apparatus or quick escape mechanism— neither of which was present on the Apollo 1—could have saved the men. The implication of the truth is that if the spacecraft had been equipped with a means of blowing open the hatch, Grissom, White and Chaffee might have had a chance. NASA’s motive in attempting to distort the truth may have been to protect the families of the astronauts from undue mental anguish. But it also served the function of protecting NASA by heading off criticism of the agency ... by deliberately misleading the press, Congress and the public.” (W Star, 2/9/67) New York Times: “The most basic issue ... is not, as NASA has tended to emphasize, the source of the spark that started the fire. It is rather the question of why so much was permitted to hinge on the assumption that there would be no fire. . . . “The answer is only secondarily, as a NASA official has suggested, that ‘alertness . . . had become dulled’ by previous successes. . . . More fundamental was the willingness to gamble for the sake of winning the race to the moon.” (NYT, 2/28/67,34)
Washington Evening Star columnist Richard Wilson compared “cloud of suspicion over large undertakings” in both dod and NASA programs: “An identical parallel is now disclosed between the award of the multi-billion dollar TFX fighter-bomber contract and the award of the very large contract for the Apollo capsule. In both instances the recommendation of the experts was rejected and a handful of public officials chose the contractor they favored.... In both instances many other facts and expert opinions were suppressed. “Contrary to the findings of expert boards and committees and of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the TFX contract was awarded to a company with good political connections which was temporarily in financial trouble. Contrary to the findings of a group of 200 space experts, the Apollo contract was awarded to North American Aviation, strongly represented in Washington’s political life, instead of to the Martin Company. “Congress and the public need to know how these huge undertakings have been handled because there will be many more of them in the future.” (Wilson, W Star, 5/15/67)
Editorial comment on Apollo accident hearings: New York Times: NASA “went to great lengths ... to assure the Senate Space Committee that all the expensive lessons taught by the fatal January fire will be taken into account before the next try. Yet doubts must persist because the pressurized oxygen system is retained. So is the prime contractor, North American Aviation, whose past errors and deficiencies contributed so much to the debacle. Moreover, NASA has preferred to ignore the pointed questions that have been raised about its own competence to supervise and manage this intricate endeavor.” (NYT, 5/10/67, 40) Washington Sunday Star: “Webb and his associates are not solely— perhaps not primarily—to blame for their attitude in time of crisis. In its formative years, the agency was pampered and spoiled by Congress like a favored child. The press willingly cooperated in the creation of NASA’s shining image of a superagency staffed by supermen. ... Inevitably, NASA became the spoiled brat of the federal establishment. “But NASA, of course, is no different than any other federal agency. It is composed of wise and foolish men, of dedicated and self-serving public servants, of heroes and of knaves. It is doing an extraordinary— and, in our opinion, a worthwhile—task [and] deserves continued public support.” (W Star, 5/14/67, Cl) New York Times: “Now that the public finally knows that North American was picked for the Apollo project by a few high officials— and not by a large group of technical experts as originally imagined—the question of why it was picked becomes even more intriguing than before. The cynics, of course, have always believed that the award went to North American as the result of a battle among influence peddlers, including Bobby Baker, former Secretary to the Senate Democrats. The cynics may he wrong, but the public cannot know without a full investigation. Congress has the obligation to force out all the facts.” (NYT, 5/11/67, 44)
A college which would train 2,000 pilots and technicians annually for the expanding aviation industry was proposed in report by a study group sponsored by the Economic Development Administration. Report recommended that various segments of the aviation industry join to form a nonprofit organization to operate flight training portion of the college. Academic side would be handled by Arizona State Univ. Report estimated college would cost $13-million and could be opened by 1969. (upi, NYT, 8/23/67, 73) Dr. Robert B. Leighton of Cal Tech reported that there were about three times as many craters on Mars as preliminary photos transmitted in 1965 by Mariner IV spacecraft indicated. Citing data from two-year study of photos using new computer-enhancement technique, Dr. Leighton said pictures showed 300 clearly defined craters and more than 300 additional possible craters. Original estimate from unprocessed pictures was less than 100. Mars appeared to be about as densely pitted as the moon but its craters were smoother because of more effective erosion processes. Several photos showed a number of linear features similar to lines formed by rifts and faults on the moon. These features were not the “much-discussed” canals of Mars because they were too narrow to be visible from earth. Dr. Leighton said, but they might be related to some of the markings identified earlier as canals, (nasa Release 67—225) Dr. and Mrs. Pierre Connes of Haute Provence Observatory and Meudon Observatory, France, respectively, reported evidence that might indicate Venusian clouds are not formed by water. Observation technique which greatly increased precision with which planets’ spectra could be analyzed showed spectral lines of hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride in the light reflected from Venus. When hydrogen fluoride combines with water it creates hydrochloric acid which absorbs radar waves; yet radar waves are known to penetrate Venutian clouds, returning echoes to the surface of the earth. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/24/67) The “mysterium phenomenon”—peculiar radio emissions from the Milky Way which display almost all the characteristics of artificial interstellar communication—was the subject of a report by Dr. T. K. Menon, National Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., and a later panel discussion. Dr. Menon said most recent observations of the emissions in the nearby part of the galaxy had been made simultaneously from California, Massachusetts, and U.K., using almost the entire width of earth as a baseline for measurement. They had identified sources of emissions which were smaller than the smallest star as seen by the human eye and discovered some of these emissions were fluctuating on time scales measured in hours or even less. Panel raised the possibility that emissions might be from stars in the process of formation. They were being transmitted at four closely spaced wavelengths associated with hydroxyl, a molecule formed of a single oxygen and hydrogen atom, and were being given off when such molecules shed energy. Emissions also appeared to have various properties associated with a maser—man-made device in which a radio or light wave is beamed through certain atoms whose energy has been raised, enormously amplifying original wave and, if wave is confined to a single axis, producing a beam of extreme intensity. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/26/67, 1, 10; 8/28/67, 22) Lunar Committee postponed naming of surface features on moon’s far side pending the results of Lunar Orbiter V mission. A list of 228 names for approximately 500 major features had been submitted by Soviet scientists, but U.S. delegates cited errors in their designations and asked that features be assigned numbers until a more definitive map could be prepared using Lunar Orbiter V photos. Commission agreed to interim number designations and accepted U.S. map temporarily, assigning study group to report on specific names at next assembly. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/25/67, 13; nas-nrc-nae News Report, 10/67, 6-7) IAU president Dr. Pol Swings of Belgium confirmed an observation made by two obscure Irish astronomers in 1882. Astronomers Lohse and Copeland had observed a comet during the day, apparently with a handheld spectroscope, and reported that it glowed strongly with spectral lines of iron as it passed the sun. All earlier observations of light emitted from comets as they neared the sun indicated they were composed of very light materials, and the idea that they were rich in iron was viewed skeptically. However, photos and electric recordings taken of the comet Ikeya-Seki as it passed the sun in 1966 showed unmistakable spectral lines of iron, Dr. Swings said. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/27/67, 51) Dr. Gordon H. Pettengill, mit’s Lincoln Laboratory, said that results from an experiment which studied Martian terrain by bouncing radar signals off the planet indicated: (1) Mars was roughly as mountainous as earth; (2) there were no large bodies of water on Mars; and (3) there was no clear correlation between height of land and presence of dark areas on Mars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15) Dr. Bradford A. Smith, New Mexico State Univ., confirmed report by French astronomer Pierre Guerin that atmosphere of Venus was moving around the planet in a clockwise direction at a remarkable rate of speed. Conclusion was based on photos of Venusian atmosphere taken successively both at night and during the day, which recorded changes in wavelengths of ultraviolet light. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/30/67, 15)
Unless U.S. space program moves much faster than now seems likely, U.S. consumption of helium this year . . . may be down as much as . . . 25%,” Chemical and Engineering News reported. Since Jan. 27 Apollo fire and resulting “slowdown” in space program, use of helium to pressurize rocket fuels—which accounted for 45% of helium consumption—had dropped to about half of its former level. Despite the 1967 recession, however, helium industry was optimistic that trend would be reversed when manned space flights were resumed in 1968. (C&E News, 7/3/67, 18-9)
NASA announced it was conducting series of conferences with Apollo prime contractors and “a number of other companies that may have resources which could be utilized to effect the most rapid feasible recovery from the setback to the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident.” Contractors with whom discussions were being held included: Aerojet-General Corp., Boeing Co., General Electric Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 67-105)
Lunar Orbiter III continued transmitting photos of the lunar surface [see Feb. 8-28]. On March 2—during 149th orbit—final photographic readout was interrupted when film failed to advance in the camera system. Efforts to clear the jammed film and continue readout were unsuccessful. Photographic data had been received on all but 29 of 211 frames, including six of the 12 primary Apollo landing sites and 29 of 31 secondary areas, nasa Hq. program and project officials and LaRC engineers would make an on-site analysis of telemetry time histories and engineering tapes at jpl to determine exact cause of failure. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-46)
msc selected naa’s Rocketdyne Div. to negotiate $5-million, costplusfixedfee contract for design, development, and qualification of a backup injector for Apollo Lunar Module (lm) ascent engine. Contract would provide initially for design feasibility and development testing with provision for delivery of four production injectors if required. Two of the injectors would be used in ground testing at wsmr and remaining two would be held for possible use in flight engines. NASA said present injector, which was being built by Bell Aerospace Corp., was causing unstable combustion in engine chamber and excessive erosion of ablative thrust chamber. Bell was attempting to correct the deficiencies, but “it was decided to develop an injector of a different design in the event the problems cannot be corrected.” (nasa Release 67—207)
Mass meeting in U.S.S.R.’s Palace of Congresses inside the Kremlin Wall heard l/c Aleksei A. Leonov recall heritage of fellow pioneers; he had been an associate of Col. Komarov who had been killed on Apr. 24 in the first flight of third-generation Soyuz I spacecraft. Cosmonaut Leonov said: “We cannot help recall our friend, test pilot Vladimir Mikhailovic Komarov. Grateful mankind will always preserve the memory of these wonderful people in its heart.” The mass meeting was the highlight of Soviet celebration of the 10th anniversary of Sputnik 7’s launching [see Oct. 4]. In the Soviet press on the same day, scientist Konstantin P. Feoktisov, veteran of three-orbit flight in 1964, listed a manned laboratory in orbit as first among coming space developments, then a moon landing, then a “starting to Venus and Mars.” (upi, AP, NYT, 10/5/67, C20)
U.S. space program was a sound investment which would pay “handsome dividends” to all Americans and to humanity in general, UCLA professor of chemistry Dr. Willard F. Libby told aas meeting in Denver. Winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in chemistry and discoverer of radio-carbon dating, Dr. Libby suggested that space program opponents “quit grumbling about going-to-the-moon extravagance with taxpayers’ money” and realize that large expenditures were necessary to maintain U.S. world leadership in space.	• “And we can’t stop at the moon. . . . Once we’ve ventured that far, we should establish a base there for manned takeoffs to Mars and Venus. “Now Congress is debating the merits of authorizing space exploration beyond the moon in the early ’70s. They have dpty to debate such a venture, costing more than $2 billion. But what . . . would Congress do with that money if it weren’t spent on future space research?” Space research had already made great contributions to medicine, microelectronics, worldwide communications, and many other fields, he said, and could continue to achieve much mote “for the good of humanity and the expansion of frontiers of human knowledge.” (Lindbergh, Denver Post, 7/16/67)	_
To astronauts, Maj. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr. (usaf), and Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), had won the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy, the Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced in New York. Trophies also would go to Miss Sheila Scott of Britain, who had established speed records during a 28,633-mi solo flight around the world in a single-engine plane, and to Alvin S. White. White, now manager of supersonic flight research and development for Trans World Airlines, was named the outstanding airplane pilot for test flights of the XB-70 at mach 3 as chief test pilot for North American Aviation Company. The awards are made annually for exceptional feats of individual piloting skill. (NYT, 9/10/67)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles, and Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div., NASA Office of Advance Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Ames said land recovery of manned spacecraft was one of OART’s major objectives; NASA had enlarged research plans substantially to acquire “without delay” the detailed technology necessary to “permit the confident application of steerable flexible-winged parachutes to the recovery of manned spacecraft.” Earliest major potential application would probably be to Apollo, to provide for land recovery in post-lunar-landing period of the early 1970’s. “Such a capability would greatly extend the operational flexibility and utility of the Apollo system and . . . contribute to the feasibility of refurbishment and reuse.” Dr. Jones said increased possibility of aspiration of particulate matter had been identified by nrc Space Science Board as a potentially serious effect of prolonged weightlessness. “In zero gravity conditions, dust particles do not settle out. This could lead to deposits in the respiratory tract which could have important implications in the production of pulmonary disease.” Jones said a new instrument to measure and record the number and size of dust particles in a spacecraft was scheduled for an Apollo flight. (Testimony)
jpl announced that 24-hr efforts—begun May 23—to reactivate nasa’s Surveyor 111 spacecraft on the moon after two-week lunar night were continuing. Officials said they were not concerned about spacecraft’s temporary failure to respond, noting that it had taken seven days to reestablish contact with its predecessor Surveyor /. (upi, NYT, 5/27/67, 2)	_	_ On May 29, Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev entered the Apollo spacecraft during a visit to the U.S. pavilion and discussed the instruments, levers, and buttons inside the spacecraft with Astronaut David Scott. Belyayev was first Soviet cosmonaut ever to have entered a U.S. spacecraft. On May 31, it was announced that two usaf rescue and recovery helicopters had left New York enroute to Paris, attempting to achieve the first nonstop helicopter crossing of the Atlantic. Helicopters would refuel in flight about eight times during flight, which was expected to take 28-32 hrs. usaf said purpose of the crossing was to demonstrate “the long-range capability of die HH—3E [helicopter] for employment in long range recovery of personnel who may be forced down at sea a great distance from land.” Helicopters landed safely at Le Bourget Airport June 1. (Long, NYT, 5/21/67, 88; upi, NYT, 5/27/67, 50M; W Post, 5/27/67, D20; W Post, 5/30/67, A1)
37-yr-old Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr. (Maj., usaf), was killed near Houston when the car he was driving missed a curve and crashed into an embankment. Two other usaf officers with him were injured, one critically. Givens was the first U.S. astronaut to die while off duty. Six others had died in connection with the space program: three in air crashes and three in the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. He was selected to join the NASA astronaut team April 4, 1966. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67, 1; upi, NYT, 6/7/67, 30; upi, W Post, 6/1/61, A7)
A total lunar eclipse began at 3:10 am edt; the earth cast an almost 900,000-mi-long moving shadow on its journey around the sun. A meteor shower—the Orionids—added to the meteorological event. Weather permitting, these events would have been visible over most of North America. Schedule for meteor shower was Oct. 16-21. During eclipse, infrared studies of lunar soil were made by msfc Space Sciences Laboratory and Univ. of Georgia research team. Perfect weather at Athens, Ga., permitted 20 traverses of moon during the eclipse. Using university observatory equipment—infrared radiometer attached to large telescope—to look for volcanic hot spots, scientists saw crater Tycho against cooler background during eclipse. The more general radiation pattern would be heat being radiated from lunar surface, including anomalies. Results were highly successful, reported Space Sciences Laboratory’s deputy director Gerhard B. Heller. (W Star, 10/15/67, B6; McCandlish, NYT, 10/19/67, 49; msfc Release 67-214)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb held press conference on management changes: (1) George S. Trimble, Jr., Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, OMSF, was appointed Deputy Director of msc. (2) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. He would be replaced by Donald P. Hearth, Voyager Program Manager. (3) MSFC Deputy Director Eberhard F. M. Rees was named to serve as Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to msc Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager George M. Low. Discussing space law treaty [effective Oct. 10] after making announcements, Webb said it was a valuable further advance of the rule of law into spaee but noted that laws could be broken. “We have an agreement in the Antarctic . . . not to introduce military operations or equipment and this has worked well. . . . We now have this agreement in space, and . . . the most important enforcer of these that relate to space technology is momentum and continued development of technology. The forward capability is what in essence has produced cooperation when we have had it. . . . [U.S.S.R.] and other nations must recognize that they’re not going to have a monopoly in this field. [Our being] . . . there is the most important way to make sure we get the benefits of the treaty. Without continued development of this kind I am not sure what the treaty means.” (Transcript; NASA Release 67-268)
NASA and Boeing Co. signed a $20-miUion letter contract extending the scope of Boeing’s work with NASA to include integration of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle [see May 9]. Boeing would: (1) assist and support NASA and its three manned spaceflight centers—MSC, msfc, and KSC—in performance of certain technical tasks for Apollo missions AS-501 through AS-515; and (2) be responsible for supporting Apollo Program Office in integrating Saturn V booster with Apollo Command Module (cm), Service Module (sm), and Lunar Module (lm). Work would be performed under overall direction of OMSF Apollo Program Office. Boeing Co.’s currently contracted Saturn work included engineering, construction, and testing of Saturn V 1st stage; support of assembly and system integration of Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stages with the 1st; and design engineering support of certain ground support equipment at KSC. (nasa Release 67-161)
nasa awarded Boeing Co. net bonus of Si,895,312 in accordance with incentive contract provisions for superior performance of Lunar Orbiter I spacecraft. Boeing Co. was prime contractor for Lunar Orbiter I, launched by nasa Aug. 10, 1966, on mission to orbit the moon and 324—SOI O—69
Jonathan Spivak in Wall Street Journal commented on congressional cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget: “Plans to launch unmanned satellites to Mars or Venus in 1971 and 1973 and conduct extended exploration of the moon by astronauts face probable abandonment because of a lack of funds. There will also be sharp curtailment of proposals for long-duration manned flights in orbit about the earth to enhance the nation’s space technology and exploit practical and scientific applications of space. Thus, say space officials, the present outlook is that only a limited national space program will continue in the 1970s after the lunar landing.” (Spivak, WSJ, 10/11/67, 24)
U.S.S.R.’s long-held superiority in large boosters had given it an advantage over U.S. in nuclear warhead protection, according to Pentagon sources. The advantage would become significant both offensively and defensively because of present developments in abm defenses—developments designed to destroy incoming warheads in outer space with intensive x-ray emissions. Soviet scientists could easily add more shielding to their warheads to halt x-ray bombardments from U.S. antimissile missiles, article noted, but U.S. was handicapped by weight limitations of its lower-thrust boosters. “Some officials,” article said, “are concerned that the hardness of Russian warheads will lessen seriously the protective capability of the Pentagon’s planned [abm systems] . . . [and] that U.S. offensive missiles now need more protection ... to survive Russian anti-missile explosions and reach their targets.” U.S. answer might lie in new lightweight composite materials under development; made by winding and inorganically bonding filaments of such materials as carbon, silica, and graphite, they would strengthen heat shield at little penalty in weight. (B Sun, 11/21/61, Al) November 27: In apparent sharp increase in testing, U.S.S.R. would launch fourth 1967 test series of “carrier rockets” into the Pacific between Nov. 28 and Dec. 30, according to Tass announcement. Aircraft and ships were warned not to enter either of two 129-km (80-mi) -wide target areas northwest and south of Midway Island, a U.S. possession, between noon and midnight local time each day, Tass said. UPI quoted observers on Soviet aims: to test new and bigger Soviet rockets needed to send a man to the moon and bring him back, and to expand recent Soviet experiments on the landing of space capsules at sea. upi said series would include launchings of 3,000-4,000 mi on down-range course from the Soviet Union, change from maximum of 6,000 mi for past launchings. Past announcements by U.S.S.R. on three 1967 “carrier-rocket” series had termed all three “successful.” (upi, W Star, 11/27/67, A5)
jpl scientists abandoned attempts to contact Surveyor IV spacecraft resting on the moon [see July 14-16]. A jpl spokesman said both Canberra and Goldstone tracking stations had sent signals to the spacecraft July 17, but had received no response. A committee was attempting to determine whether Surveyor IV had softlanded on the moon as planned or crashed out of control. (AP, W Star, 7/18/67, A3; AP, NYT, 7/20/67, 11)	_
The efficiency of Soviet scientific research was deteriorating and the price of getting an idea into production was rising, biologist Alexander Nei-fakh wrote in Literaturnwya Gazeta. Although scientists had doubled every 7 to 10 yrs, published works had doubled only every 13—15 yrs. “This shows that the effectiveness of scientific activity per scientist or per ruble invested in science is consistently falling,” Neifakh concluded. (Reuters, NYT, 4/22/67,31) Miami News: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration badly needed a victory to demonstrate that the moon program is not threatened by technical deficiencies, as the Apollo investigation seems to suggest. The landing of Surveyor III . . . and the transmission of TV picture fills the bill. . . . There is no denying, however, that Apollo is in serious difficulty . . . [and] NASA is creating the impression that it is unwilling to see the investigation carried to a complete conclusion. . . . Surveyor and dozens of similar achievements demonstrate that the overall space program has been a remarkable success. NASA would make a mistake to see the luster of this record dimmed by its failure to cooperate fully in the Apollo investigation.” (Miami News, A/21/67) New York Times: “Inevitably, Surveyor 3 calls attention to the fact that the first stages of lunar study and exploration do not require men, that the moon can be investigated to a considerable extent without incurring either the great risks or high costs of manned lunar flight. From the scientific and technical points of view, Surveyor-type flights are a rational and feasible alternative to Apollo. . . . Manned space exploration has unavoidable dangers, but these are multiplied many times by the pressure of the 1970 deadline that dominates the Apollo project. What Surveyor 3 has done is to remind us that—aside from propaganda and prestige considerations—there is no need to endanger brave men’s lives.” (NYT, 4/23/67,10B) Washington Post: “With the success in landing Surveyor III . . . [nasa] once again exhibited its stunning scientific and technological skills. . . . Surely the time cannot be far off when men will be shuttling from earth to the moon—and far beyond. . . . Bold ventures of mankind are always undertaken in din of criticism, and the manned flight to the moon will be no exception to the rule. Space exploration will continue—not because it excites expectations of an El Dorado or a Fountain of Youth—but because it is an inescapable challenge to human curiosity and imagination.” ( W Post, 4/23/67, C6) Launched April 23 from Baikonur by a “powerful new carrier rocket,” Soyuz / entered initial orbit “close to the estimated one,” Tass announced with unprecedented speed, only one hour 20 min after launch. Orbital parameters: apogee, 224 km (139 mi); perigee, 201 km (125 mi); period, 88.1 min; inclination, 51.4°. Onboard equipment was “functioning normally” and Komarov was “in good health and feeling well.” During the flight Tass distributed only a few terse reports in contrast to extensive publicity usually accorded manned missions. Final announcement, which followed 11-hr silence, said accident occurred during 18th orbit after program of test flight had been completed and spacecraft had been successfully braked with retrorockets for reentry. “. .. when the main parachute was opened at an altitude of seven kilometers [4.3 mi], the lines of the parachute, according to preliminary information, got snarled and the spaceship descended at great speed, which resulted in Komarov’s death.” Tass did not report whether the cosmonaut had a personal parachute to attempt an escape. Western experts believed Soyuz I was tumbling or spinning out of control during reentry : when parachutes were deployed, tumbling caused them to tangle among themselves or wrap around spacecraft resulting in crash-landing. Experts said difficulties apparently developed earlier in the flight because Komarov tried to reenter during 15th orbit but was unable to control his spacecraft. Informed sources had speculated that mission involved the launch of a second spacecraft carrying several cosmonauts that would dock with Soyuz I and permit at least one cosmonaut to transfer from second spacecraft to Soyuz I. Tass’s official announcement said mission would “test the new piloted spaceship, check the ship’s system and elements in conditions of space flight, conduct expanded scientific and physical-technical experiments and studies in conditions of space flight, and continue medical and biological studies on the influence of various factors of space flight on the human organisms.” Mstislav Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said on April 26 that Soyuz I spacecraft had been tested previously in two to four unmanned flights. Weight, size, and capacity of new spacecraft were not revealed. Immediately following the accident, which was first known fatality during a space flight, the Kremlin announced it was appointing a Government commission to investigate “all the circumstances” of the cosmonaut’s death. Komarov would be cremated and buried in the Kremlin Wall—a final resting place for Soviet heroes—and a monument would be erected on the site of his birthplace in Moscow. (NYT, 4/24/67, 1, 27; 4/25/67, 1, 20 ; 4/27/67, 2; W Post, 4/23/67, Al, A16; 4/24/67, A5; 4/25/67, Al, A16; W Star, 4/23/67, Al)
On presentation of NASA Exceptional Service Medal to m/g David M. Jones (usaf), Commander of afetr, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller stated: “As Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (programs) and as Acting Director, Apollo Applications, General Jones played an important role in guiding the definitions and development of future manned space missions.” Jones had been assigned to NASA from December 1964 through April 1967. (afsc Release 137.67)
High probability of mission success for Saturn project was born of sound engineering, judgment built on extensive experience, and supported by modern analytical techniques, Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to MSC Apollo Spacecraft Program Mgr. (former msfc Deputy Director) Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees said in interview with Aerospace Management. He summarized the factors which had enhanced the probability: “Considering that one Saturn V, including the launching costs, amounts to over 150 million, it is not hard to see why the test launchings preceding manned flights must be limited to only a few. What this limitation has done then is to stress more than ever before the critical need for intensive engineering, almost a compulsive meticulousness in manufacturing assembly, quality control, and most extensive testing on the ground, such as component qualification testing, and subsystem and system testing.” (Rees, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 23-27)	'
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501) was successfully launched from etr at 7:00 am EST in first all-up test of three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle, first in-orbit restart of third (S-IVB) stage, and first use of Launch Complex 39 and ground support equipment. Launch vehicle stages performed nominally; orbital insertion, 3rd stage restart, and injection into earth-intersecting coast ellipse were accomplished satisfactorily; Command Module (cm) encountered no functional problems; and splashdown occurred within 10 mi of planned landing point. Third stage ignited to insert Command Service Module (csm) into orbit with nominal parking apogee, 119 mi; perigee, 114 mi; period, 88.2 min; inclination, 32.6°. After two revolutions in parking orbit, 3rd stage was reignited for simulated translunar injection burn, injected stage and spacecraft into earth intersecting orbit with 10,774-mi apogee. Following stage/cSM separation, Service Propulsion System (sps) ignited for 16-sec burn, raising apogee to 11,314 mi. Spacecraft was aligned to a specific attitude to achieve thermal gradient across cm heat shield. Attitude, with cm hatch window directly toward sun, was maintained for about 41/2 hrs. [cm hatch window had been replaced with instrumented test panel containing simulations of flexible thermal seals and gaps between hatch and surrounding heat shield. Successful performance of thermal seals during reentry heating would qualify seals for use on manned cms,] SPS was then reignited for 271-sec bum to accelerate spacecraft to the most severe entry conditions that could possibly occur in a lunar-return trajectory, sps cutoff was followed by cm/sm separation and orientation of CM to entry attitude. Atmosphere reentry at 400,000 ft occurred at flight path angle of — 7.077° with inertial velocity of 36,537 fps (24,911 mph). cm landed in mid-Pacific near Hawaii at 3:37 pm, est, and was recovered by uss Bennington 2 hrs 14 min after touchdown. In significant step toward developing manned lunar landing capability, Apollo 4’s flight was the first of two to three missions designed to qualify Saturn V for manned flight, and the first test of the structural integrity and compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft. By subjecting cm’s heat shield to high heat load and heat rate, NASA was evaluating cm’s design adequacy for reentry from lunar missions—primary objective to achieve successful manned lunar mission. Other primary mission objectives were to: confirm launch loads and dynamic characteristics; demonstrate stage separation; verify operation of launch vehicle subsystems and spacecraft subsystems; evaluate performance of space vehicle Emer
afcrl Space Physics Laboratory scientists Drs. Graham R. Hunt and John W. Salisbury said, “Major ‘hot spot’ on the moon is not volcanic,” a conclusion based on measurements made by afcrl imaging device to produce thermal photographs of infrared emissions of lunar surface during dark of moon. Images had been obtained by using infrared imager in association with afcrl Strawberry Hill Observatory’s optical telescope at Concord, Mass. The hot spot, associated with crater Tycho, had heat distribution pattern very similar to solar illumination pattern just before lunar sunset. Because of clear relationship between heat release and solar illumination, Salisbury and Hunt had concluded that crater was emitting stored solar heat rather than volcanic heat. (OAR Res Rev, 7/67, 12-3)
The Nation’s press commented on photos transmitted by Lunar Orbiter V. New York Times: “Orbiter 5 is currently adding some enduring contributions to mankind’s cultural heritage as photographic by-products of the space effort. “Some of the close-up pictures of the moon have been among the wildest, most disordered and most surrealistic scenes ever viewed by human eyes. Yet its distant views of the far side of the moon convey a sense of desolate tranquillity, of peace achieved after many storms. “This new art form has been produced by machines hundreds of thousands and millions of miles away, in realms where men have never been. Yet many of these pictures have far more power to move than much of the output of contemporary artists. . . .” {NYT, 8/13/67,10E) Washington Evening Star: “The pictures of the moon we have been getting back from our assorted orbiting cameras have been fine and fascinating, but the most interesting of all has turned out to be the picture of the earth from the distance of the moon. “This is natural enough: self-portraits are always the best portraits, especially from the point of view of the sitter. “But the thing about this self-portrait is the inescapable conclusion that the earth is really a rather lovely place, when seen from 214,806 miles away____” (W Star, 8/18/67)
NASA officials dedicated at Corpus Christi, Tex., a 30-ft-dia dish antenna which would be used to receive signals from Apollo spacecraft. Operational responsibility for Corpus Christi tracking station, previously used for Gemini support, had been transferred from dod to nasa in 1966. (upi, AIT, 3/13/67,60)
NASA announced it had asked Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to deliver second Lunar Module {LM-2) in unmanned configuration, changing earlier plan for manned configuration. With the change, NASA could provide a backup for the Apollo V launch scheduled for early 1968 without a wait for modifications. If backup for LM-2 was not needed, manned launch would make use of LM-2 at later date, (nasa Release 67-266; Transcript)
nasa’s Surveyor VI (Surveyor-F) was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-14) booster on 64-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for the 2,223-lb (at launch) spacecraft was to perform a soft-landing on moon and obtain post-landing TV pictures of the lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would determine relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar soil with alpha scattering instrument; obtain touchdown-dynamics, thermal, and radar-reflectivity data; and conduct vernier engine erosion experiment, nasa’s Explorer XXXIV, in orbit since May 24, would serve as a “solar watchdog,” furnishing information on solar radiation for correct interpretation of Surveyor VPs soil analyses. At 00:04:06 get Surveyor VI with two-burn Centaur separated from Atlas and ignited to reach 100-mi-altitude circular parking orbit where it coasted for 12 min; Centaur then reignited to escape earth orbit and boost spacecraft toward moon. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its solar panels, and locked on the sun and the star Canopus. Based on a 56-mi target miss estimate, a 1.2-m midcourse maneuver was conducted at 00:18:41 get to assure precise landing on target in Sinus Medii in center of moon’s front face. Surveyor VI was sixth in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, obtain post-landing TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by OSSA Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed to LeRC; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 67-278, 67-287)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) inserted in the Congressional Record his statement expressing concern over Apollo 204 Review Board’s failure to determine whether Apollo accident was result of a single oversight or “indicative of a basic weakness in the organization of NASA and/or the contractors---I am deeply disturbed by the report of the Apollo 204 Review Board. My concern is not that the Board was unable to discover the precise cause of the accident during the course of its rigorous technical investigation, but, rather, that the Board failed to examine, or at least report on, the fundamental conditions which permitted the accident to occur and which, moreover, resulted in the tragic deaths of three fine young men. The report’s, and apparently the investigation’s, shortcomings in this regard leave open the possibility of similar catastrophes in the future.” {CR, 4/10/67, H3786-7)
msfc awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $496,024 contract to study advanced versions of Saturn S—IVB orbital workshop. Study would explore concepts for a follow-on workshop for the Uprated Saturn I and several more sophisticated versions for the Saturn V, with initial emphasis on uses of the stage in Apollo Applications (aa) program. (msfc Release 67-145) 324-801 0—69----14	199
Despite the high cost and dangers in exploring space, tragically dramatized by the deaths of three U.S. astronauts and a Russian cosmonaut in recent months, Americans overwhelmingly approve of the U.S. effort to land men on the moon,” the National Observer reported. Survey in 12 metropolitan areas showed that 77% of people questioned supported the lunar landing program; 17% opposed it; and 6% were undecided. There was less enthusiasm, however, for manned planetary exploration programs: 57% favored manned planetary expeditions; 31% opposed them; and 12% were undecided. (Nad Obs, 5/8/67)
Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell, was convinced the Soviet Union would attempt one or more space spectaculars during 1967, possibly during October, reported Richard Lewis of Chicago Sun-Times. October would mark the 10th anniversary of the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik I, and the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. The possibilities included a flight around the moon or a lunar landing with animals as passengers, a manned space station in earth orbit, and the first photographs of the planet Venus, the astronomer said. Sir Bernard Lovell said: “I have always believed that 1967 was the year they would try the circumlunar (around the moon) flight, but I should think they would do it unmanned because of the difficulties of the return at lunar flight velocity.” (Lewis, C S/T, 9/18/67, 16)
Lunar Orbiter III, launched Feb. 4, had sent full photographic coverage of six primary Apollo sites west of 20° east longitude and partial coverage, including high-resolution photographs, of six remaining sites in east. One objective had been to photograph a landed Surveyor with sufficient resolution to detect the spacecraft. NASA-appointed study group established location of image on Lunar Orbiter photographs that fitted all Surveyor l identification criteria. (NASA Proj Off)
A report expressing confidence in NASA’s management of the Apollo program was released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Report was prepared before Jan. 27 Apollo fire, but Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said the findings of the study were “essentially unchanged. . . . The public may look with confidence to the management, engineers, scientists and technicians of NASA and industry as the Apollo program progresses.” Report praised the ability of the NASA-industry team to identify and solve the administrative, technical, and engineering problems “inherent in performing a program contributing major technological progress. . . .” It identified the major Apollo pacing items as the Saturn V 2nd stage, the Lunar Module (lm) for the Saturn I and V, and the Command and Service Module (csm) for the Saturn I and V. “Any significant delays in attainment of flight capability of these items could affect both program shcedule and cost adversely.” Report said that an additional $300 million in NASA’s FY 1967 budget would have provided: “(1) increased confidence in meeting unforeseen development problems when encountered; (2) broader latitude in providing system alternatives when engineering difficulties are identified; and (3) an increased assurance of meeting the national goal of a lunar landing in this decade.” (Text; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/20/67)
Responsibilities of the Defense Communications Agency were described by its director, l/g Alfred Starbird (usa) . General Starbird said that dod’s Communications Satellite Program had been divided into three phases: . (1) use of existing syncom satellites, (2) installation of Initial Defense Communications Satellite System, and (3) investigation of Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project for later implementation. General Starbird outlined progress in implementing these steps and in meeting the “special operational requirements” for communication support of NASA’s Apollo program and for increased circuits to Southeast Asia. (Data, 1/67, 5-9)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. to negotiate 27-mo, $25-million, costplus-incentive-award-fee contract for payload integration of experiments and experiment support equipment on Apollo Applications (aa) spacecraft. Tasks would be performed at NASA’s three manned spaceflight centers: (1) msfc work would involve the orbital workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) ; (2) msc work, the meteorological and earth resources payloads; and (3) KSC work, the test integration planning and support for launch operations. Selection of contractor followed competitive definition phase in which Martin Marietta Corp. and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. studied aa payload integration under parallel, $2-million, fixed-price contracts, (nasa Release 67-199)
NASA’s previous approach to preventing spacecraft fires by “preventing their ignition” had been inadequate, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified at open hearing held by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. Also present were NASA Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations. NASA’s future approach would seek to: (1) minimize possibility of ignition, recognizing “that this possibility will always exist”; (2) limit chance of fire’s propagating once it has started; and (3) minimize consequences of fire to crew. Dr. Mueller outlined an extensive program of testing, redesign, and procedural changes, which included escape hatch for Apollo spacecraft that could be opened in two seconds; search for new, less flammable materials for cabin interior and spacesuits; and revised emergency procedures. All improvements and changes would be incorporated into an advanced version—Block II—of Apollo spacecraft. No more Block I spacecraft like Apollo 204 would be used for manned space flights. Dr. Mueller said no estimate of fire’s eventual cost in time or money would be made until completion of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, but he indicated that it would be at least 8 to 10 months before next manned Apollo flight. Dr. Mueller testified that launch rehearsal during which fire had occurred had not been classified as “hazardous” because seven years of experience with Mercury and Gemini programs had never indicated such tests were particularly dangerous. Even if the test had been categorized as hazardous., he said, it would have still taken 90 sec for crew to open the double hatch and complete their egress. Crew died within 20 sec after detection of fire. Webb added that the handle for equalizing pressure, necessary precondition to opening hatch, had not been actuated. Dr. Berry said carbon monoxide had asphyxiated astronauts. He confirmed that bodies had had “some thermal bums of second and third degree” but “not of sufficient magnitude to cause death.” Dr. Berry warned that “we are never going to be able to completely eliminate the risk of fire as long as oxygen is available.” Dr. Mueller said “an atmosphere which will support life will also support combustion. Therefore the first answer . . . must be fire prevention in terms of strict control of both potential ignition sources and combustible materials.” During the questioning session, Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) inquired about a 1965 report by Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel Phillips (usaf). Dr. Mueller said that he did “not recall such a report,” and when asked to supply a copy, Webb said NASA would try and identify the specific report and would make it available to the Comptroller General “under any request that the Committee . .. would make to him.” (Testimony; Transcript, 3-4, 24, 41-2, 61, 70, Apollo Accident, Part 2, 65-66, 75, 86, 97, 108, 115, 125 ff., and 130 ff.)
110 scientists from U.S. and six other countries were selected by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell—upon recommendation of Space Science Steering Committee—to conduct experiments with first lunar samples returned by U.S. Apollo astronauts. Principal U.S. investigators represented 21 universities, two industrial firms, three private institutions, and 10 Government laboratories. Nine scientific institutions were represented in U.K.; three in West Germany; and one each in Canada, Japan, Finland, and Switzerland. Most investigations would be conducted in scientists’ own laboratories, but time-critical experiments would be carried out in msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory during quarantine period—anticipated to last 30 days. Plans called for a total of 122 experiments on approximately 50 lbs of lunar material to study composition of lunar surface and search for evidence of its origin. Four major investigative areas were: (1) mineralogy and petrology; (2) chemical and isotope analysis; (3) physical properties; and (4) biochemical and organic analysis, (nasa Release 67-55)
Lunar Orbiter V’s photographs had revealed flow patterns characteristic of hardened fluid material on the floor of the moon’s Tycho Crater, NASA announced [see Aug. 5-27]. Preliminary study of new photographs tended to confirm prevailing theory held by scientists that the big crater had been formed by a great meteoroid crashing into the visible side of the moon. Some scientists believed much of the fluid material ejected when the three-mile-deep crater was formed might have resulted from the intense heat generated by the meteoroid’s impact. They also suggested that the appearance of the dark halo resulted from the manner in which pulverized ejected material had been deposited. Material might have traveled outward from the impact point in a “base surge” close to the moon’s surface, giving a windswept appearance to the terrain. NASA photo afforded scientists first close-up view of the crater floor, providing new clues to its origin. Orbiter Vs high resolution telephoto picture showed fractures, flow markings, and protruding domelike hills with exposed layers. The Tycho region was one of the 36 areas of high scientific interest on the moon photographed by Lunar Orbiter V. (nasa Release 67-231)
U.S. space program could benefit from experience and scientific research in the Antarctic, group of NASA officials headed by msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun concluded after studying U.S. installations and activities at McMurdo Station since Jan. 3. Interest in the Antarctic was based on research being conducted there which was applicable to space flight and on way Americans worked under conditions of stress, isolation, and extreme cold—conditions similar to those on the moon and in space flight. The group also observed minute fungi and algae growing in Antarctic and studied methods being used to detect living organisms, as preparation for detecting and studying such growths possibly existing in harsh environments of other planets. (Durdin, NYT, 1/15/67, 87)	.
Flash fire swept through oxygen-filled pressure chamber at Brooks APB, Tex., killing Airman 2/C William F. Bartley, Jr., and Airman 3/C Richard G. Harmon in accident similar to the one Jan. 27 which killed three Apollo astronauts at ksc. Fire struck at 9:45 a.m. Est, about 12 min. after airmen had entered the chamber to take blood samples from rabbits under observation to determine effects of pure oxygen on the blood. Cabin pressure was brought down to ground level within 13 sec after fire had ignited, but both men died from burns within several hours. Col. James B. Nuttall, commander of USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, said there were no plans to change research methods because of accident. “As you have seen, it is not safe,” but he said one-gas systems were less complicated and more reliable than two-gas systems. (AP, W Star, 2/1/67, A3; O’Toole, W Post, 2/1/67, 1)
Apollo spacecraft would carry two fire extinguishers, designed and built for NASA by Southwest Research Institute, the New York Times reported. Foam from new extinguishers would provide fire protection for astronauts. Extinguishers would weigh about eight pounds, measure nine inches long with five-inch diameter, and would have removable safety pin and pistol-type grip with thumb button for release of foam. (NYT, 10/15/67,29)
Apollo accident at ksc, January 27, 1967, was discussed in press circular released by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C.: “The sorrow of [the] American people is shared by peoples of all countries. In reality, cosmonauts are somehow representatives of the whole Earth, of the entire mankind in boundless Cosmos, no matter what . . . country has dispatched them.” (U.S.S.R. Press Cir/GSFC Trans.)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that NASA would present, within two weeks, detailed estimates of how much the Jan. 27 Apollo accident had cost; what changes in spacecraft would be made to reduce fire hazards; and the earliest date for the first manned Apollo mission. He declined to disclose his thoughts concerning canceling nasa’s contract with North American Aviation, Inc., because of failures to meet development schedules and stay within cost estimates: “They did not do all die things they should have done, but I can say the same thing about us at NASA.” He stated his conviction that he was obligated to “act responsibly in respecting confidences between himself and contractors.” Denying that undue risks were taken in order to speed the program, Webb emphasized that NASA had “never put schedule above safety.” Apollo 204 Review Board’s study was “a good report,” he said, but it should not be construed to be an evaluation of the entire space program: “The board has done an outstanding investigation of one accident but it is not a full and fair appraisal of the space program... [and] cannot be taken as a guide to the realities of this program. . . .” In response to questioning Webb stated that, in his judgment, the pacing item in the manned lunar landing program remained the Saturn V booster, and when it was ready for manned flight there would be a spacecraft ready. Committee Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) requested that nasa witnesses appear again not later than May 9 to detail changes the program, as suggested by Webb. (Wilford, NYT, 4/18/67, C26; O’Toole, W Post, 4/18/67, Al; SBD, 4/18/67, 275)
President Johnson told White House news conference he was “very hopeful” of landing men on the moon by 1970, but did not think “there is any guarantee that we will at all.” The President noted that a manned lunar landing was “a very difficult undertaking. I think it has been a very close question since the original target date was set.” (PD, 3/13/67, 419)
Alumni Assn, of Western High School, Washington, D.C., would honor alumnus Edward H. White II, one of three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 accident, with a memorial, which would include furnishings, decorations, and possibly a space exhibit for school’s guidance library and counseling rooms. (W Star, 5/7/67, Bl)
Robert F. Thompson, Assistant Manager of MSc’s Apollo Applications Program Office since its establishment in July 1966, was appointed Manager of that program. Post had been vacant since April 1967 when MSC Deputy Director George M. Low, who had been Acting Manager, became Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, (msc Release 67-73; msc Roundup, 12/22/67,1) Kurt Jung, member of West Germany’s Bundestag Defense Committee, said West Germany had allotted $25 million to purchase 220 F-4 Phantom jet aircraft from McDonnell Douglas Co., to replace ill-fated Lockheed F-104G Starfighter aircraft that had been worn out in use or lost in air crashes. (AP, B Sun, 12/9/67, 1)
JPL scientists continued efforts to reestablish contact with Surveyors V and VI resting on the moon. Surveyor V (launched Sept. 8) had responded immediately to turn-on commands during its fourth lunar day Dec. 14 and later transmitted 67 recognizable 200-line pictures. Following unsuccessful attempts to reposition the Antenna/Solar Panel Positioner on Dec. 16, transponder signals were lost, and complete loss of signal occurred. Surveyor VI (launched Nov. 7) had also responded to turnon commands Dec. 14, but telemetry lock-up was poor, and erratic signals were lost completely after 21/2 hrs. Attempts to reactivate both spacecraft for simultaneous communications and additional data would continue until end of lunar day Dec. 22. (NASA Proj Off; AP, NYT, 12/20/67, 29)
Plumbing leaks in the first model of LEM had delayed flight testing at Cape Kennedy. Portions of the plumbing system had been sent back to the plant of the main contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., Bethpage, N.Y. The plumbing leaks had virtually eliminated any chance of launching this year the first model of the craft that would land American astronauts on the moon. (AP, W Post, 9/26/67, A9)
Charges that haste to meet 1970 deadline to land first man on the moon had contributed to Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy were completely “unfounded,” Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told closed hearing of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in testimony released Feb. 11. “. . . the Apollo program is . . . the longest R.&D. program that we have undertaken in this Nation. ... It has been paced at a deliberate pace so that it would in fact reasonably economically, but certainly safely, arrive at a set of equipment capable of carrying out the mission. . . .” Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, said that a total of 20,756 hrs had been accumulated testing the use of 100% oxygen in NASA-sponsored spacecraft and spacesuit evaluation programs. Before Jan. 27 accident, three fires had occurred in pure-oxygen ground simulators: in all cases fires had been traced to electrical systems not used in spacecraft and crew members had recovered from burns. NASA witnesses recounted long history of precautions to avoid spacecraft fires, including insulation, circuit design and circuit protection for electrical wires, and fire-testing of over 400 materials. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., suggested that exact source of ignition might never be pinpointed: “It is therefore possible that we may fly the Apollo without having been able to establish the cause of the fire. Even in that case, I believe that the care and skill with which the board and program office are conducting their investigations and review will provide the necessary assurance that such an accident cannot be repeated. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., submitted second interim report to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on Apollo 204 Review Board investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo I astronauts died. Board had established 21 panels to conduct inquiry, and Dr. Seamans said he was satisfied that the procedures they were following were “well worked out. When this work is completed, it will give us as clear a view as can be obtained from the evidence.” Source of ignition had not yet been determined, but physical evidence thus far examined indicated fire had had considerable variation and density and might have had more than one phase. “One hypothesis, supported by the cabin pressure history, assumes a small, low-grade fire whose heat was at first largely absorbed by the spacecraft structure and that was burning at the time of the first crew report; that fire may have continued for as long as ten seconds. A more intense fire may have then developed, causing the rapid increase in cabin pressure. This fire was probably then extinguished by the depletion of oxygen.” Additional information on accident had been identified and was being analyzed. It was now clear that all three spacesuits had been burned through, Astronaut Grissom’s receiving the most exposure and Astronaut Chaffee’s, the least. Dr. Seamans said disassembly of spacecraft was proceeding with great care, and spacecraft was expected to be removed to industrial area at ksc by Feb. 17. He concluded: “It is important to note that no single spacecraft element is touched or removed for analysis without full Board approval and evaluation of its possible effect on any of the other on-going studies or analyses.” (nasa Release 67-28)
Hugo Gernsback, an inventor, author, editor, and publisher who was often called the father of modern science fiction, died in New York at age 83. Gernsback described radar in 1911—35 yrs before communications experts bounced a radar signal off the moon. In 1927 he began pub324-801 o—69lishing Amazing Stories, one of the earliest magazines devoted entirely to science fiction. In 1928 he sponsored New York’s first television broadcasts: images only slightly larger than postage stamps were received on crude scanners owned by 2,000 amateurs. (NYT, 8/21/67, 29)
Soviet scientists had compiled a structural and geological map of the lighted side of the moon to aid in selection of lunar landing sites, Tass announced. (Reuters, W Post, 12/29/67, D6)
Astronaut Frank Borman told Cleveland Engineering Society that he and other astronauts hoped U.S. would immediately revitalize the Apollo program: “We’d like to see the crews regrouped and the program under way as soon as possible.” (AP, W Post, 4/6/67, G2)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George Mueller announced revised Apollo mission schedule of six flights in 1968 and five in 1969 using “200-series” (Uprated Saturn) and “500-series” (Saturn V) launch vehicles to test and qualify Command, Service, and Lunar Modules (c&sm and lm) . Schedule for 1968 would include: Apollo/Saturn 204 (AS-204), first unmanned test of lm in earth orbit; AS-502, second unmanned flight test of Saturn V and Apollo c&sm; AS-503, third unmanned test of Saturn V and c&sm; AS—206, second unmanned flight test of lm in earth orbit; AS205, first manned Apollo flight, a 10-day mission to qualify C&SM for further manned operations; AS-504, first manned Apollo flight on Saturn V, to provide experience with both c&sm and LM, including crew transfer from c&sm to LM and rendezvous and docking. Schedule for 1969 would include five manned flights (AS-505 through AS-509) with the first four programmed as lunar mission development flights or lunar mission simulations—AS—509 being that on which lunar landing would he made. Possibly the lunar landing might be delayed until one of the remaining six Saturn V flights beyond 1969.	• All opportunities to accelerate progress in 1969 toward manned flights and a rapid accumulation of manned experience with Apollo/ Saturn system would be sought, Mueller said, (nasa Release 67-282)
Explorer XXXV, launched July 19, had completed 33 orbits of the moon. Results from gsfc’s magnetic field experiment aboard spacecraft indicated moon was not magnetized. Capture of interplanetary magnetic field lines by the moon and formation of lunar magnetosphere (theorized •by T. Gold in 1966) was not substantiated. A lunar bow shock wave had not yet been observed when moon was located in the interplanetary medium or the magnetosheath of the earth, (nasa Proj Off)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced to the House H.R. 10674, a bill to rename the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died in Jan. 27 Apollo accident, (nasa lar VI/65)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell, accompanied by his deputy Edgar M. Cortright and OSSA Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jafle, stressed importance of space science in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. “The space research effort has been abundantly fruitful in answering first and second generation questions about our space environment, and in turning up a whole new generation of fundamental and important questions, and potentially fruitful practical applications. To answer these new questions, and to continue advancing in this important field, it is time to select new missions to replace old ones.” Past OSSA successes and proposed 1968 program were outlined by Cortright: “During the past two years (1965 and 1966) 23 of the 28 OSSA missions were successful, including 7 out of 8 deep space missions to the Moon and into interplanetary space. In addition, we successfully launched 6 out of 6 payloads for other organizations. Further, the Atlas Centaur development program was successfully completed and Centaur was used to launch Surveyors I and II. The 1966 series of dramatic successes with second and third generation automated spacecraft demonstrated striking advances in the utility, durability, versatility, and effectiveness of this equipment.” The 1968 program—including Voyager, Mariner Mars ’71, Sunblazer, Nimbus (E and F), ATS, and Voice Broadcast Satellite—had been carefully planned to meet U.S.’s most urgent minimum future needs, Cortright stressed. “. . . this is a critical year in the development of our Country’s program to explore space and to apply space technology to the benefit of man. . . . Those new missions which we have selected to pursue . . . constitute the most important of a long list of exciting opportunities for' space exploration and practical application.” (Testimony; Transcript)
A manned Apollo spacecraft should be launched to recover Explorer 1, first U.S. satellite, whose orbit was expected to decay in late 1969, G. Snowden of Melbourne, Australia, suggested in a Letter to the Editor of Aviation Week. “When Apollo swings into action, maybe one of the tasks could be a rendezvous and retrieval of man’s first satellite. I say first because Sputnik 1 and 2 have decayed, leaving Explorer 1 at the head of the list. A replica can be built at a fraction of the cost of retrieval, but there is nothing like having the original. Not only would it have value as a historic memento of man’s venture into space, but also to scientists. I am certain after nearly 10 years in space it would be valuable to them. . . .” (Av Wk, 6/5/67, 110)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried Naval Research Laboratory payload containing two coronagraphs to 113-mi (180.8-km) altitude. Primary purpose of flight was to launch externally occulted coronagraphs during period when moon was very close to the sun. Rocket also carried a photographic spectroheliograph, a photographic extreme ultraviolet heliograph, and an ion chamber to measure total solar flux at Lyman-alpha. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
The Vatican had authorized the Roman Catholic apostolic delegate in U.K. to sign the International Treaty on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, AP reported. Unanimously approved by the U.N. General Assembly Dec. 8, 1966, treaty was signed simultaneously by representatives of 62 nations Jan. 27 in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow, and was kept open for additional signatures in those capitals. (AP, P Inq, 3/12/67) March 12: Apollo program was six months behind schedule because of Jan. 27 accident, but time could be made up later, msfc Director Dr. Wemher von Braun told Stuttgart, West Germany, audience. In Stuttgart to receive gold Boelsche medal for scientific achievement, Dr. von Braun said: “We have in no way lost our chance to fulfill the mission given to us: the landing of a man on the moon in this decade. I admit that the time has become tight. If further snags develop, this decade may run out . . . [but] we are firmly resolved not to take any undue risks.” (AP, B Sun, 3/13/67; upi, C Trib, 3/13/67)
New York Times commented on Apollo 204 Review Board’s final report on Jan. 27 flash fire: “Two months ago, on the basis of the incomplete evidence then available, we suggested that the Apollo catastrophe had taken place because ‘many men miscalculated—grossly.’ The official report . . . suggests that that conclusion was too kind . . . [since] the report convicts those in charge of Project Apollo of incompetence and negligence. “The core of the problem is indicated in the board’s fifth finding: ‘Those organizations responsible for the planning, conduct and safety of this test failed to identify it as being hazardous. Contingency preparations to permit escape or rescue of the crew from an internal command module fire were not made.’ “How could those in charge of the test have ‘failed to identify it as being hazardous?’ The three astronauts had been put into what even a high school chemistry student would know was a potential oxygen incendiary bomb, one needing only a spark to initiate catastrophe. . . . But at Cape Kennedy, in the report’s words, ‘No procedures for this type of emergency had been established either for the crew or for the spacecraft pad work team.’ “The incredible complacency thus revealed overshadows even the other disgraceful and disheartening findings of the review board. . . . And as the record of incompetence and careless work—devastating in its impact—is recited in the report, one wonders how many of the previous manned space flights succeeded rather than how the Apollo tragedy occurred. . . .” (AIT, 4/11/67, 44M)
American Astronautical Society’s (aas) 13th Annual Convention, “Commercial Utilization of Space,” was held in Dallas. msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun stressed the importance of space exploration to man’s general welfare: “The space program is providing us with new and valuable scientific information about our environment in this universe. The space budget cannot be justified, however, solely on the basis of expanding scientific knowledge, even though the discoveries may be regarded priceless by one segment of society. Space technology must continue and expand its contributions to the satisfaction of the needs and desires of society in general if it is to become a permanent outlet for man’s creativity and energies.” Dr. von Braun later suggested to the press that the lunar module (lm) might not be ready for the Apollo lunar mission as soon as the other launch vehicle and spacecraft elements. In that event, he said, NASA might decide to “fly the lunar mission [as a manned circumlunar flight], but just not activate one phase of it.” (Text; Av Wk, 5/8/67, 17) Future potentials of navigation satellites were outlined by Eugene Ehrlich, Navigation and Traffic Control Program Chief, OSSA. Navigation satellites could provide: (1) high-accuracy position determination service to craft, people, and shore stations; (2) communications service to pilots, traffic controllers, and passengers; (3) air traffic control and maritime coordination; (4) sst radiation warning; (5) search and rescue aid during emergencies; (6) weather routing for aircraft and ships; (7) iceberg warning; and (8) data on migratory habits of marine, land, and sea life. (Text) George S. Trimble, Director of Advanced Planning, omsf, called for increased industry responsibility in space exploration. NASA builds “the roads into space. It is beholden on . . . industry to make certain that we build the proper ones for . . . future use. ... As we look forward to missions of ever-increasing complexity, it is important that we continue to insure the most effective accomplishment of the most worthwhile experiments that this country can devise.” (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), describing industry’s attempts to capitalize on non-Govemment space business opportunities as “substantially insufficient,” urged industry to submit imaginative proposals for commercial development of space and to solicit Congress’ support for the effort. (AvWk, 5/15/67,67) A more realistic basis for determining space transportation costs should be devised to reflect actual use of the object in space, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus suggested. Although cost reductions were being studied, prospective commercial users of space should expect to spend about 10% of their overall program costs for launch operations, he said. He emphasized that more substantial savings could be realized in other areas such as reusable boosters and payload; increased life cycle of payload; reserviceable payload; and booster and spacecraft propulsion. (Text; Av Wk, 5/15/67,69) NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin noted that space program had to defend itself continuously to enlist international support: “In ten years of space development, no nation has been harmed in any way. We must point to this record constantly in order to improve the atmosphere and wisdom of international consideration . . . [and] emphasize the expansion of benefits rather than restrictions upon progress. The record makes clear that we can address the more complicated questions of international organization on an evolutionary basis with the advantage of growing experience. The needs of the developing world and the magnificent record of space applications so far combine to show that the issues of international organization are secondary to the task of accelerating benefits for the world.” (Text) mit Head of Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics Dr, Raymond L. Bisplinghoff and NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop discussed selection of technology and optimum conditions for its development. They pointed out how such development “. . . triggered vast areas of accomplishment in [its] wake [and] produced a sustained and long-term stimulus to education [and provided] influence [that is] one of spirit rather than power. . . .” Turning to discussion of impact of space program on engineering practices, they cited a major stimulus which was produced by “. . . the extreme environment of outer space combined with the requirements for low weight, small size, and exceptional reliability.” They pointed to the new stimulus to “imagination and creativity” among engineers. Among important reasons for having a space program they listed satisfaction of society’s needs; developing technology should serve as “. . . a solution to an existing or foreseeable social problem.” Calling attention to the international arena of technological development, the speakers urged “a balance of technologies in our favor [which] will . . . require wisdom in the selection of new tech324-801 0—69 nologies ... so vital to our national well-being and survival that [we] must, to the greatest extent of our ability, use imagination, good judgment, and energy in their planning and execution.” (Text) TRW Systems Group President Dr. Ruben F. Mettler suggested that space environmental characteristics could be useful and, in some ways, unique for certain manufacturing operations. He stated: “An environment so widely different from that to which we are accustomed suggests we [determine] whether the new features can be used for making conventional products of improved quality or performance or at lower cost, whether they can support new processes previously considered impractical, or if they can lead to new products of such characteristics that they create new and currently unidentified markets.” Mettler suggested these environmental characteristics for space operations which would be of interest to “possible specialized manufacturing operations”: low temperatures, approaching absolute zero with use of space cryostat; high temperatures with use of solar concentrator; near-perfect vacuum of infinite extent; weightlessness in orbit; low gravitational forces on moon; and radiation environment. (Text) Awards for achievement in 1966 presented at convention included: (1) aas Space Flight Award to msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth for “distinguished contributions to aeronautical and space research . . . direction of continuing investigation of man’s capabilities in space, and . . . active participation in the scientific community for the public good”; (2) aas Flight Achievement Award to Astronauts Charles Conrad and Richard F. Gordon for “their new space flight altitude record and the world’s first one-orbit rendezvous on Gemini XI”; (3) Melbourne Boynton Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, afsc, for exceptional accomplishments as the first flight surgeon in charge of astronaut medical operations; (4) W. Randolph Lovelace II Award to Dr. Robert M. Page, former Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for pioneering work in rocket astronomy and contributions to radar development; and (5) aas Fellowships to msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry “for providing exceptional medical support for the NASA manned spacecraft programs,” and to msc Director of Engineering and Development Maxime A. Faget for “contributions to the basic conceptual design of the Mercury spacecraft and . . . subsequent engineering efforts” on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo Projects, (msc Release 67-15)
m/g Holger Nelson Toftoy (usa, Ret.), a leading Army ordnance expert who recommended that former German V-2 development team under the leadership of Dr. Wemher von Braun be brought to U.S. at end of World War II, died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after a long illness. General Toftoy became commander of White Sands Proving Grounds immediately following World War II. In 1952 he became Director of the Ordnance Missiles Laboratory at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., and in 1958, when Redstone was reorganized as the Army Ordnance Missile Command, he was named Deputy Commander under m/g John B. Medaris. General Toftoy subsequently became commander of Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground until his retirement in 1960. {vpi, NYT, 4/20/67) Landing sequence began when Surveyor III shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar (later ejected), main retromotor burned and slowed spacecraft to about 250 mph. Vernier engines, which were to have slowed spacecraft to about 3 mph, failed to cut off at 14 ft above lunar surface as planned, and the 620-lb spacecraft made three separate landings—covering distance of 33 ft—before engines shut off 37 sec after initial touchdown. First pictures transmitted were unclear because of sun’s brightness, but later photos were excellent. They revealed that spacecraft was resting in a depression or small crater with 5° slope—which was expected to hinder photography of lunar horizon—and showed impressions made by footpads during multiple landing. Shortly after touchdown a telemetry malfunction falsely indicated major drain on power system, but photos confirmed that spacecraft’s batteries were intact and undamaged. In addition to photographic equipment, including two additional mirrors to expand camera’s field of view, spacecraft also carried a shovel-like surface sampler which would scoop soil, move debris, and strike lunar rock with an expandable arm operated by radio signals from earth. On April 21—22 sampler began bearing strength tests and excavation of trenches up to six inches deep. On April 23-24, cooled by two-hour lunar eclipse, Surveyor III took 118 excellent color photos of Venus, a star duster, and earth as it passed between the moon and the sun. On basis of preliminary digging operations and photos, project scientists concluded that lunar soil had consistency similar to wet sand and a bearing strength of about six pounds per square inch—firm enough to support Apollo spacecraft. Cal Tech professor and advisor to JPL on soil mechanics Dr. Ronald F. Scott explained: “The surface is like ordinary soil... a lot like fine grained sod or damp beach sand, and it behaves in perhaps a disappointingly ordinary way. The area presents no hazardous conditions and looks good for a landing site. An astronaut walking across the surface would not need snowshoes.” On May 3 communications with spacecraft were halted temporarily to conserve battery strength throughout two-week lunar night. Performance of Surveyor III, with equipment identical to Surveyor I	and Surveyor II except for soil sampler and two additional mirrors, was near flawless, and expected lifetime was indefinite. Surveyor I was launched May 30, 1966, successfully softlanded on moon June 2, 1966, in Ocean of Storms, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor II	was successfully launched Sept. 20, 1966, but failed to softland because of an ignition failure, (nasa Proj. Off; NASA Release 67-85; upi, W Star, 4/23/67, A10; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/67, A4; 4/23/67, Al)
Lunar Orbiter III press briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Apollo Program, omsf, said nasa had selected eight “candidate” locations along the moon’s equator as the smoothest and safest possible sites for first Apollo manned landings. Selection had been made after careful screening of photos taken by three Lunar Orbiters and Surveyor I. Detailed analysis of photos indicated that safest area might be a broad plain in the southeast part of the Sea of Tranquility—just east of Maskelyne D crater—where the surface was flat and there were few dangerous boulders and no deep craters. NASA officials emphasized, however, that no single site would be selected: each mission would have three possible sites along the equator-—one in the east, one in the center, and one in the west—to allow for launch delays. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, described evidence of “seismic erosion” as “one of the major processes on the moon’s surface that Lunar Orbiter has given us information about.” Several photos showed dunes of soil-like material that appeared to be debris from moon-quakes filling old craters. Some of the smoother plains on the moon might be caused in part by this process, Masursky suggested. (Wilford, NYT, 4/7/67, 1, 14)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued statement on Jan. 27 Apollo accident, commending “the diligence, integrity, and patent independence” of the Apollo 204 Review Board which would serve as a model for future inquiries. Noting the “admitted mood of overconfidence” exhibited by NASA and North American Aviation, he urged that a “renewal of chain successes . . . never again be permitted to encourage indulgence in such a potentially dangerous attitude. “. . . the Apollo accident may well move the date for an American landing on the moon beyond the reach of this decade. That would be regrettable. But there is nothing sacred about the goal. When set in 1961 it was a goal which was technically achievable. A target date was, and still is, essential to efficient planning and to maintaining a vigorous and competent organization. . . . The accident has taken a toll in morale and in momentum within the program . . . [but] that momentum will be regained and NASA will emerge stronger. I intend to support NASA in its requests for manpower and funds to get on with the important job.” (Text)
Distance between earth and moon had been calculated at 250,000 mi with 20,500-mi variation by jpl scientists Dr. J. Derral Mulholland and William L. Sjogren. New lunar values, which had an accuracy of less than 50 ft compared to previous discrepancy of one mile, were calculated from theoretical work by astronomer Dr. W. J. Eckert from spaceflight data; verified by ranging measurements of Lunar Orhiter I and II spacecraft; and used to revise a 50-yr table of lunar motion required for plotting spacecraft trajectories, determining launch times, and scientific research. ( jpl Release 436)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee had died of “asphyxiation due to smoke inhalation” but cause of Jan. 27 flash fire was still unknown, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reported in memorandum to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Seamans had met Feb. 2 with Apollo 204 Review Board at Ksc. “. . . clear identification of the source of ignition or of its possible source will depend upon detailed step-by-step examination of the entire spacecraft and its relative test support equipment.” Dr. Seamans said duplicate Apollo spacecraft had been flown to ksc from North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant to permit a “parallel step-by-step disassembly process.” In addition, Board was “defining a series of investigative tasks . . . and assigning these to teams for execution. . . .” Report confirmed that spacecraft had been operating on external power when fire occurred, but there was no evidence “up to this time that the source of power whether simulated internal or external was related to the accident.” Dr. Seamans emphasized that his statement was preliminary. nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller announced that nasa would proceed with launching of three unmanned Apollo flights scheduled for 1967: AS-206, AS-501, and AS-502. Manned Apollo missions were postponed indefinitely pending the outcome of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, (nasa Releases 67-21,67-22)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, praised NASA’s Lunar Orbiter program on the House floor: “In the short span of just under 1 year, all five Lunar Orbiters have been launched and have provided the world with more information about the moon than has been obtained in all previous history. Lunar Orbiter photography has certified four potential landing sites for our Apollo astronauts, and has provided detailed photographs for 99 percent of the front side of the moon and 60 percent of the back side. “Successful completion of the present mission (Lunar Orbiter V] will provide supplementary data for the certification of five more Apollo landing sites, detailed photography of virtually the entire moon’s surface, front and back, and very close view of 36 areas of great scientific interest on the front face of the moon. “I wish to compliment the NASA team that has made the Lunar Orbiter program one of the most successful in the 9-year history of that agency. . . .” (CR, 8/9/67, H10175)
Apollo 204 Review Board, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Key Board members summarized the Board’s findings and recommendations. Astronaut Frank Borman, asked if he believed U.S. decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been influenced by a desire to achieve first manned lunar landing, replied: “. . . never since I have been associated with NASA have I ever experienced any decision where a known detriment to crew safety was sacrificed to any operational requirement. And although I am willing to accept risk ... I am not willing personally to accept undue risk and I would not participate in any decision which I thought was expediting a program in an unsafe manner. And in the final analysis the crew is the Review Board because if we do not like the way the spacecraft is configured, we don’t have to get in.” Borman said if on Jan. 27 he had had the information accumulated by the Board, he would not have entered the Apollo spacecraft because: (1) the test had not been classified as hazardous; (2) the spacecraft contained too many combustibles; (3) the wire that provided the ignition source was vulnerable. Borman said he would be “willing and eager” to enter a 100% oxygen Apollo spacecraft which incorporated Board’s recommended improvements. (Testimony; Transcript, 181, 209—10, 258)
Astronaut Frank Borman objected to making anyone a scapegoat for Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire and said everyone connected with the program must be blamed. Interviewed on ABC television network with Chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Subcommittee on NASA Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Borman said he had “never . . . seen safety sacrificed for anything” in U.S. space program. Both men suggested that the greatest safety problem was tendency toward complacency about dangers inherent in tests. (W Star, 4/17/67, A2)
Testimony by NASA and naa officials at congressional hearings on Apollo accident was loaded with technical information to avoid discussion of mismanagement and responsibility, William Hines charged in the Washington Evening Star: “In execution, it was a masterful operation. Experts avalanched data on the committees until . . . [they had] far more technical information than they could possibly handle. . . .” Hines cited statement by Sen. Walter Mondale (D-Minn.) which “got to the very core” of the problem: “ ‘I am not interested in knowing enough about building spacecraft so that I can build one in my backyard, but I do think I have a responsibility to know enough about questions of management, contractor performance and quality control so I can pass judgment on the question of whether these are fundamental issues that we need to deal with.’ ” “If members of the House committee had all kept their eyes on this central issue and refused to be confused by the irrelevant and the trivial, the hearings on that side of the Capitol would have been far more fruitful to date.” (Hines, W Star, 4/20/67, A6)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
Congressional actions in response to Jan. 27 flash fire at KSC in which three Apollo astronauts died: Sen. Harrison A. Williams, Jr. (D-N.J.), urged Senate to ratify space law treaty [see Dec. 8,1966] as a worthy tribute to the astronauts. (CR, 2/3/67, S1449-50; nasa lar VI/16) Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Rep. Edward J. Gumey (R-Fla.) introduced joint resolution (S.J. Res. 30) to establish a Commission “to formulate plans for a memorial to astronauts who lose their lives in the line of duty in the U.S. space program.” Astronauts Memorial commission would be composed of five Presidential appointees—one NASA representative, one dod representative, and three civilians. (CR, 2/7/67, S1657; nasa lar VI/17) Sen. Vance Hartke (D-Ind.) praised efforts of Mitchell, Ind., residents to erect a memorial to Apollo Astronaut Gus Grissom. “The memorial will preserve the memory of that record for future generations who might otherwise lose sight of the spectacular achievements of the few individuals who made the first forays into space.” (CR, 2/16/67, S2071)
ksc awarded General Electric Co. a $7.7-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification for additional Apollo engineering support services. Modification, effective through Sept. 30, 1967, increased total value of original contract to $49 million, (nasa Release 67-158)
NASA FY 1968 operating plan was presented by Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reflecting accommodation of fund reductions by Congress during recent months— 20% for r&d programs other than Apollo, 50% for construction of facilities, and 7% for administrative operations. He reviewed decisions restructuring NASA effort at least through FY 1969. The first scheduled Apollo Applications flights of 1970—a “limited number with limited objectives”—would begin with a “precursor training mission for scientists-astronauts with certain orbital experiments, and then proceed with dual launch missions with the Orbited Workshop and the Apollo Telescope Mount.” Launch vehicle/spacecraft hardware for follow.-on Apollo Applications flights would depend on funding “some time after FY 1969,” because of stringent FY 1969 budgetary guidelines. Future planning for Uprated Saturn—acknowledging necessity for production termination after vehicle No; 216—included FY 1968-funded lead time items “to hold open the option of continued production ... at the rate of two per year.” Webb explained that he held open the option of definite termination of Uprated Saturn production, intending to “preserve competition among the companies involved and between solid, liquid, and, where applicable, nuclear propulsion systems.” To preserve competition would cost 83.5 million from FY 1968 funds. He announced NASA—dod discussions “to consider carefully future national requirements for large launch vehicles, including a possible new booster of the 100,000-pound in earth orbit class.” Webb stressed the need for planetary exploration utilizing both orbiters and landers in a long-term program: “We do not believe that it is the policy of the Nation or the intent of Congress that the United States abandon the field of planetary exploration.” Present program still had two Mars-Mariner 1969 flights; continuity depended on NASA’s current 8143.4-million allocation to lunar and planetary category which would serve as basis for reestablishing future programs in FY 1969 budget. Development of nerva I flight-qualified engine could proceed “with the amounts that we and the aec have available in FY 1968,” longer-range planning again dependent on “an affirmative decision” in the Administration’s FY 1969 budget for NASA. (Text)
Washington Evening Star commented on Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ open hearing Feb. 27 on the Apollo fire: “The nation’s space officials evidently have managed to keep their heads in the midst of the emotional chaos that followed the tragic accident at Cape Kennedy. They have resisted pressures from semi-informed sources condemning the pure oxygen environment that supported all Mercury and Gemini astronauts in space. And there is mounting evidence that the arbitrary 1970 goal for a manned lunar landing is no longer a maj or consideration in the space program . . . [and] that the space planners are determined that they will no longer be prompted to act because of any arbitrary timetable or out of a competitive desire to beat the Soviets to the moon, “This is as it should be. This nation should move outward into space with all deliberate speed. And right now, the emphasis should be heavy on that qualifying word.” (W Star, 3/6/67, All)
Christian Science Monitor, commenting on space law treaty which went into effect Oct. 10, noted that space exploration had evolved this treaty which banned military installations and nuclear weapons from moon and planets and which could evolve into space cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R. Treaty did not halt use of reconnaissance satellites but it provided for international inspection of vehicles and installations on moon and other bodies. Although there would be no right of inspection to see whether satellites were carrying nuclear weapons, and vigilance would always be vital in this regard, treaty was one more visible proof that Moscow and Washington could make useful progress. Space law treaty was agreement, following Antarctic Treaty, which could remove installations of war from one more section of mankind’s expanding environment. (CSM, 10/14/67)
msc Director of Flight Operations Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that new technological developments might enable NASA to make up some of the time lost when three astronauts died in Apollo capsule. In commencement address at St. Louis Univ.’s Parks College of Aeronautical Technology, Cahokia, Mo., he said, “If things go very right for us, we may still put a man on the moon by 1970.” He predicted space exploration would contribute solutions to problems posed by world’s growing population, specifically in communications, transportation, food production, and weather forecasting. {St. Louis P—D, 7/29/67)
Communist China charged that U.S.S.R. had betrayed Vietnamese people by signing space law treaty with U.S. and other nations Jan. 27. (Reuters, NYT, 1/29/67,9) Washington Evening Star: “There is bitter irony in the fact that the first disaster in our space program came during a simulated launch, a checkout in preparation for the real thing. From the beginning, it has been feared that some fatal mishap was inevitable. But most people had expected it during an actual launch, in space, during re-entry or in landing—hardly during a routine test with the rocket still on its pad....” (W Star, 1/28/67, A6) New York Times: “By chance, Grissom, White and Chaffee died on the day the space treaty was formally signed in Washington, London, and Moscow. Behind the unprecedented international cooperation represented by that treaty’s conclusion was the knowledge that space holds more than enough risks for men without adding the horrors arising from strife among nations. The tragedy at Cape Kennedy underlines that somber reality.” (NYT, 1/29/67,10E) Baltimore Sun: “They were brave men. When a man finally does put a foot on the surface of the moon, Grissom and White and Chaffee will be notable among those who assisted him in getting there.” (B Sun, 1/29/67,30)
Secretary of State Dean Rusk signs the space law treaty at White House ceremonies while (seated, left to right) Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean, U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Arthur J, Goldberg, and President Lyndon B. Johnson look on. photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. (NASA Release 67—14)
nasa’s Nimbus II meteorological satellite had made the first well-substantiated observation from space of a volcanic eruption when it recorded the eruption of Iceland’s Surtsey volcano in 1966, U.S. Geological Survey reported. “During August 1966, the Nimbus II satellite was in a near-polar orbit and passed over the island the day after the eruption began with its infrared sensing devices working. “The Surtsey eruption in its entirety was recorded as a minute black spot on infrared images during more than eight orbital sweeps of the Nimbus II satellite—first on August 20 and definitely identified as late as October 3.” Nimbus II was participating in a three-dimensional study of Surtsey by scientists from U.S. Geological Survey and afcrl using infrared survey techniques. Experiment marked first time volcanic heat had been monitored almost simultaneously from ground, aircraft, and space. Scientists believed the ability to measure heat radiation could be applied to studies of volcanoes on the earth, moon, and planets, (usgs Release, 7/30/67; Clark, NYT, 7/30/67, 41)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
To clarify apparently conflicting statements presented during Congressional testimony, NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement regarding selection of North American Aviation, Inc., as prime Apollo spacecraft contractor. In separate appearances before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Webb had indicated (1) that NAA was the unanimous choice and (2) that Martin Co. had been recommended by the nasa Source Evaluation Board in 1961. Webb explained: “Dr. Robert Gilruth, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden . . . were unanimous in their judgment that of the five companies submitting proposals . . . [naa] offered the greatest experience in developing high-performance manned flight systems and the lowest cost. “In the selection . . . the work of the Source Evaluation Board was not rejected or discarded. It was used as the basis for a more extensive and detailed examination of all pertinent factors . . . necessary to determine whether the facts then available formed an adequate basis for our selection of a contractor. We decided in the affirmative and then proceeded to select the contractor the facts indicated offered the most to the government. ” (NASA Release 67-122)
NASA launches Apollo 4 into orbit from Complex 39A of Kennedy Space Center in successful first flight test of Apollo/Satum V space vehicle. gency Detection System (eds) in an open-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and CM recovery. Saturn V was the most powerful space vehicle developed in U.S. space program; in launch configuration with Apollo 4, height was 363 ft, and weight, fully fueled, was 6,220,025 lbs. Saturn V’s 1st stage engines produced 7,610,000 lbs of thrust at liftoff, and the launch vehicle placed 278,699 lbs in earth orbit. This launch vehicle could place 96,000 lbs on the moon. Kerosene (RP-1) was the fuel used in the five 1st stage (S—1C) engines, while 2nd stage (S-II) engines used liquid hydrogen. The five S-II stage J-2 engines, developing total thrust of 1,000,000 lbs, were rated for operations to 117-mi altitude and to 935-mi distance down-range. Third stage (S-IVB) J-2 engine, using liquid hydrogen fuel, developed about 200,000 lbs of thrust. High-quality pictures of the earth were obtained from about one hour before to one hour after apogee on Command Module apogee camera film processed at MSC. Success for Apollo 4 (AS-501), according to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, had been achieved in terms of “pre-set primary objectives.” Heat shield design, S-IVB restart, structural/thermal integrity, compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft, and ground support had been proven. Direction of Apollo Program had been the responsibility of OMSF; development of Apollo spacecraft, flight crew training, and mission control the responsibility of msc ; development of Saturn launch vehicles the responsibility of MSFC; and Apollo/Saturn launch operations the responsibility of KSC. Under overall direction of OTDA, msfn had been managed by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-275; msfc Release 67-226)
Edward R. Mathews, chief of ksc Saturn systems office, was named acting Apollo Program Manager at icsc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18. (AP, NYT, 5/30/67, 44)
The first manned Apollo space flight might be delayed from spring to mid-summer of 1968 by modification of the Apollo spacecraft by its prime contractor, North American Rockwell Corp., according to NASA spokesman Julian Scheer. Scheer, nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, told upi the anticipated delay, among other things, could be because of considerable changes in the capsule after last January’s fire, (upi, W Post, 9/27/67, A6)
nasa awarded Carco Electronics Co. a $692,000 contract to design, fabricate, install, and check out a dynamic test stand for prototype Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) control moment gyro system. Installation at LaRC was scheduled for completion by spring 1968. (nasa Release 67-41)
msfc awarded $100,000 six-month contract to Bell Aerosystems Co. for flight testing of Bell’s “pogo stick” one-man flying vehicle at LaRc’s 1/6 gravity test facility. Pogo stick was being evaluated for Apollo lunar surface mission use. (msfc Release 67-12; Marshall Star, 1/25/67, 3) .
William C. Schneider, formerly Mission Director for NASA’s Apollo Applications (aa) program, was named Apollo Mission Director and Apollo Program Deputy Director for Missions, omsf. Schneider would be responsible for management, direction, and coordination of mission and flight plans, schedules, and associated activities, (nasa Release 67-206) During July: Editorial comment on proposed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills [see June 28]: Science: “The political atmosphere surrounding the U.S. space program is today murkier and less hospitable than at any time since 1961 when President Kennedy'decided to send men to the moon. This does not necessarily mean that nasa is in any danger of falling off its $5-billion-a-year budgetary plateau . . . [but] it is clear that, where Congress is concerned, the agency has lost much of its innocence and therefore its plans are to be reviewed with caution and skepticism. “Some members of Congress are remarkably frank in indicating that their principal interest in the space program lies in the economic benefits it brings their districts. . . . Indeed, one might be justified in predicting that the major budgetary struggles of the future will be less concerned with how much money nasa gets than with how NASA spends the money it does get.” (Carter, Science, 7/14/67, 170-3) Washington Evening Star: “If continuity and momentum are to be maintained in the space program . . . the [congressional] conferees must act with special wisdom this year. “Two . . . items in the House bill should be embodied in one final version. . . . One would establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and the other would require . . . [nasa] to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’ of problem areas in the space effort. “Both proposals were strongly opposed by administration spokesmen on grounds that seem shallow and legalistic. It would be well to embody both in the final 1968 authorization bill, if only to put NASA on firm notice that it is time to shape up.” (W Star, 7/7/67, A16) New York Times: “To read the record of the Congressional debate on NASA’s budget is a melancholy experience. . . . Behind the rhetoric it was easy to see the pressure of the many corporations and communities now sharing in nasa’s largeness and fearful of the impact of any maj or cut in this flow of golden manna. . . . “A rational 1968 space budget would have been substantially lower than either the House or Senate version, and would have cut particularly severely at the Apollo project. ... It would have changed the present emphasis ... to lay greater stress on the exploration of the cosmos with relatively cheap, unmanned rockets. Instead, the enormously expensive manned lunar landing effort is left virtually intact, while the highly promising program for sending unmanned Voyagers to Mars and other planets could be entirely eliminated. “The lobbyists can rejoice, but the nation’s real interests have been dealt a severe setback.” (NYT, 7/3/67,10)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told the press at MSC that he did not foresee any problems in combining his new assignment as President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness [see June 6] with his duties as an astronaut. He said he would devote about one fourth of his time to the fitness program and the rest to keeping “in a state of readiness” for future space flights. “The fact that I am not spending all of my efforts on my new assignment does not mean I consider it any less important than my role in space. In fact, I can’t think of any mission more important than that of persuading the American people to keep themselves healthy and fit. These qualities are basic to everything we do. Whether we are trying to reach the moon, or merely running to catch a bus, it helps to be in good physical condition. ... A healthy population is the backbone of a strong nation.” (Text)
Astronaut Donn F. Eisele, in Columbus, Ohio, to receive a “Governor’s Award” for increasing the prestige of the state, told AP he was opposed to “an unrealistic, arbitrary” chronological date for reaching the moon. He favored a “technical” date, which he explained to mean “as soon as we’re ready, when we have performed sufficient missions to be ready, when the spacecraft is ready.” (AP, NYT, 2/12/61, 31)
Bistatic radar detection—experimental technique for mapping celestial bodies by bouncing signals off them from an orbiting spacecraft—had been used successfully to map a portion of the lunar surface, Stanford Univ. Center for Radar Astronomy scientists Dr. G. L. Tyler, V. R. Eshleman, G. Fjeldbo, H. T. Howard, and A. M. Peterson reported in Science, Radar waves emitted Oct. 12, 1966, from an antenna on nasa’s Lunar Orbiter I spacecraft had reached earth as two signals: one directly, and one after being reflected by the moon. Both underwent different shifts in frequency. From a measurement made on the ground scientists were able to tell the direction from the spacecraft to the site on the moon. Other measurements related to the same site enabled them to triangulate the position. (Science, 1/Y4J61, 193-5)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller outlined Apollo Applications (aa) program at aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Series of innovations would be made, he said, to permit sufficient reductions in unit costs: (1) reuse of Command Module (cm) ; (2) addition of land-landing capability which would facilitate CM reuse, permit increase in crew capacity, and, possibly, make use of naval recovery forces unnecessary; (3) “double use” of Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage as booster during launch phase and as Orbital Workshop in space; (4) repeated use of Orbital Workshop as an embryonic space station; (5) longer-duration flights of one year or more; and (6) use of Apollo flight hardware and physical plant and employment of Apollo program officials and industrial organizations as they become available. “. . . this is a program that provides for a detailed measurement of the utility of man in space at a relatively low cost. The measurement is obtained by doing useful things—astronomical observation, extended exploration of the moon and experiments with sensing equipment that can lead to benefits of enormous significance to all mankind.” (Text)
A correlation between earthquakes and the forces exerted on the earth by the sun and moon was reported by Dr. Alan Ryall, Director of Univ. of Nevada seismological station. Dr. Ryall said he could support with scientific data the theory that where the earth’s crust is fractured and weakened, all that is necessary to cause earthquakes might be the pulling force or gravity of the sun and moon. (W Post, 3/24/67)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering) George Hage was named Deputy Director (Engineering) of the Apollo Program, omsf. (nasa Ann, 10/13/67) Inquiry into economic impact of building sst was made by Dael Wolfle in Science editorial. Congressional arguments on whether to build sst “illustrate why members of Congress want to increase congressional competence to assess the consequences of technological developments and proposals. . . . What Congress needs in deciding about the sst or other technological matters is essentially what it needs in deciding about taxes, military affairs, education, or other matters with which it deals: ability to ask the right questions and ability to evaluate critically the information it receives from advocates and opponents of proposed actions.” (Wolfle, Science, 10/13/67)
nasa’s Surveyor I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon June 2, 1966, was reactivated on the lunar surface for 12 hrs to transmit data on the motion of the moon. JPL said the new data would be used to help “refine the Moon’s distance from the Earth, its position in orbit at a given time, and other elements of its velocity and motion.” (SBD, 1/11/67, 42)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
nasa appointed an interim working group composed of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.) to review nasa safety procedures and prepare a plan under which the Administrator could establish an Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel. Gen. Mark Bradley (usaf, Ret.), Garrett Corp., would serve as a consultant to the chairman, Dr. Eggers. The action would implement Section 6 of Public Law 90-67 (the nasa Authorization Act for FY 68). Eggers was Special Assistant to the Administrator and Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Thompson, Director of nasa’s Langley Research Center, served as chairman of the Apollo 204 Accident Review Board. Gen. Smart was NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Policy, (nasa Release 67—249)
nasa had agreed to fly four dod experiments on Apollo Applications (aa) missions to support USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), Aviation Week reported; more would be added. Experiments selected to date included: study of an inflatable elastic air lock; use of alternate restraints to determine standard workshop technique in weightlessness; evaluation of suit donning and sleep stations; and integration of multipurpose equipment maintenance, (nasa Proj Off; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 18)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
Astronaut Clifton C. Williams, Jr. (Maj., usmc) , was killed during routine flight when his T-38 jet aircraft crashed and disintegrated near Tallahassee, Fla., apparently after he had blacked out from an oxygen deficiency. A Lunar Module specialist and Gemini X backup pilot, Williams was eighth astronaut to be killed in an accident and third to die in a T-38 crash: one other astronaut had died in an air crash; three in Jan. 27 Apollo fire; and one in an automobile accident. He would be buried in Arlington National Cemetery Oct. 9 with full military honors. (W Post, 10/6/67, Al; 10/10/67, B3)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III (Lunar Orbiter C) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in mission to photograph possible lunar landing sites for Apollo astronauts (see Feb. 8-28). Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 15-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 92-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter III deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five solar sensors on the sun, and fixed its star-tracker on Canopus. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III mission, third in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; (2) to obtain high-resolution pictures of previously photographed lunar surface areas to confirm their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft; and (3) to improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 12 primary target sites located within the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of JPL-oper-ated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—12; AP, W Post, 2/5/67, A6; AP, W Star, 2/5/67, A8; AP, NYT, 2/6/67, 12)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, Director, University of Colorado’s study of Unidentified Flying Objects (ufos) , said that “such studies ought to be discontinued unless someone comes up with a new idea on how to approach the problem.” Condon said “it’s been extremely difficult to gather information on this subject” and asked anyone with any “hard information to speak now—or forever hold your peace.” He stated: “We have approached the problem in an unprejudiced way, seeking to find whatever there is to find by objective scientific means with no scientific results so far. Some of the difficulties associated with belief in visitors from outer space are well set forth in an article by Prof. William Markowitz in Science for Sept. 15 and should be studied by all who wish to be informed on the subject,” he added. (Harkins, Boulder Camera, 9/27/67; AP, LA Times, 9/28/67) September 27-October 2: nasa launched for ComSatCorp the fourth of Intelsat ii series of commercial communications satellites (Intelsat II—D)-— designated Pacific II—and second of them in the Pacific. Launch was from etr by Thrust-Augmented Delta (DSV-3E) launch vehicle. Satellite went into transfer orbit over Pacific at approximately 176° east with 29,056-mi (37,105-km) apogee, 186-mi (299-km) perigee, 658.8-min period, and 26.4° inclination. Satellite would supplement services of and replace current Pacific satellite, Intelsat II-B (174°E), in event of its failure, nasa support nominally would terminate after about three days, subsequent to providing backup transfer orbit data and calculations. Final orbit and spin axis orientation would be made by ComSatCorp with onboard hydrogen peroxide system. Approximately 15 days after launch, satellite would be available for commercial use. Satellites could handle TV data transmissions, or up to 240 voice channels (480 circuits) between “first class” ground stations such as Andover. Part of satellite capacity would support ncs/nascom for Apollo program. It would serve as backup against interruption of satellite communications service and would add communications capability across the Pacific. On Sept. 30, apogee motor was ignited at 7:45 pm edt, on command from ComSatCorp-operated earth station at Paumalu, Hawaii, and kicked new satellite from its elliptical transfer orbit into a planned, near-synchronous orbit over Pacific. Reorientation and velocity correction maneuvers were carried out Oct. 1 and 2 to place spin axis in orbit plane and to improve circularity with predicted orbit (resulting from these maneuvers) of apogee, 22,531 mi (36,260 km), perigee, 21,805 mi (35,091 km), period, 1,430.5 min. drift rate, 1° east per day. As Intelsat II—D approached Intelsat II—B, launched Jan. 11, now located between 174° and 175°, drift rate would be reduced and intersatellite interference tests would be conducted to determine minimum angular separation which could be employed without mutual interference (nasa cooperating with ComSatCorp in planning tests). The Intelsat satellite system, in addition to this new Pacific II satellite, included the Pacific I satellite and two satellites serving the Atlantic area, Early Bird I, launched Apr. 6, 1965, and Atlantic II, launched Mar. 22, 1967. (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Releases 67-45 and 67-48)
J. V. Reistrup, in the Washington Post, reported that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had prepared a draft report on Apollo accident hearings which would be published in early 1968. The report, revealed as a result of Rep. William Ryan’s (D-N.Y.) Dec. 18 criticisms on Congress’ failure to produce such a report, was said to be critical of NASA but to have reaffirmed Apollo lunar-landing goal. (Reistrup, W Post, 12/22/67, Al)
NASA launched ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C (nicknamed “Atlantic II”) comsat from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit had 22,115-mi (37,200-km) apogee, 183-mi 294-km) perigee, 660.56-min period, and 27° inclination. On March 25, ComSatCorp fired apogee motor transferring satellite into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic. Scheduled to enter commercial service April 6, Intelsat II-C would join Early Bird I, world’s first commercial comsat, in providing service across the Atlantic and in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements. It was third satellite in ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II program to place two comsats in synchronous orbit—one over the Pacific, one over the Atlantic. First satellite—Intelsat II—A—was launched by NASA Oct. 27, 1966, but failed to achieve synchronous orbit because apogee motor malfunctioned; second—Intelsat II—B was launched Jan. 11, achieved synchronous orbit over the Pacific, and entered commercial service Jan. 27. Intelsat II comsats, larger and improved versions of Early Bird I (Intelsat I) satellite, were capable of handling television and data transmissions of up to 240 voice channels. (ComSatCorp pio; ComSatCorp Release)
End of the “space race” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. was nowhere in sight, Holmes Alexander speculated in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “As matters stand today, the space contest is pretty much a race between the Communist and capitalistic systems. . . . Percentagewise the Soviet government is investing 2.5 times as much of its gross national product in the moon dash as we are. Moneywise, the investment is about equal. But the Russian economy, being much more ‘managed’ than ours, permits the ordering of what our economists call an ‘internal brain drain.’ Russian consumer industries are raided in order to feed the USSR space programs, whereas . . . NASA must compete . . . [with other agencies]. “It is wishful thinking to believe that the Russians will make any substantive concessions to ease the cost of the space race. As in Vietnam, we are locked in an expensive contest against Communism. Nobody has yet found a way to the negotiation table.” (Alexander, P EB, 5/9/67)
The earth from 22,300 miles in space—color photography transmitted by NASA’s Ats III satellite to Rosman, N.C., ground station beginning Nov. 8. This photo, transmitted Nov. 10, shows portions of North and South America, Africa, end Europe and the Greenland ice cap. The Antarctic continent is under cloud cover. A cold front is moving eastward over the central United States and a tropical storm can he seen at bottom center, with a cold front extending into Argentina. adjustments of funding under r&d operations for the remainder of FY 1968.	Fund reallocation {congressional appropriation figures in parentheses) showed: Apollo Applications, $253.2 (315.5) million; ossa, $568.1 (528.0) million; oart, $318.7 (301.5) million; otda, $275.0 (270.0)	million. In more detail, on ossa, physics and astronomy $141.5 (130.0)	million; lunar and planetary, $143.4 (125.0) million; launch vehicle procurement, $141,9 (145.0) million; bioscience, $41.8 (40.0) - million; space applications, $99.5 (88.0) million. On oart, electronics systems, $39.2 (35.0) million; space vehicle systems, $35.0 (no change) million; human factors systems, $21.0 (no change) million; basic research, $21.5 (20.0) million; space power and electric propulsion systems, $44.0 (no change) million; nuclear rockets, $54.0 (46.5) million; chemical propulsion, $37.2 (35.0) million; and aeronautics, $66.8 (65.0) million. Sustaining university was $10.0 (no change) million, and technology utilization, $4.0 (no change) million. Webb presented rather brief outline on present long-range planning for lunar and planetary mission hardware. Limited funds could continue development of flight-qualified engine for nerva i and would support plans for first Apollo Applications flights in 1970. Two Mars-Mariner flights for 1969 would be the “last in present program.” Five Mariner flights in 1970s, two or more Titan III launches in Voyager series in 1973, and Saturn V flight in 1975 could be considered in FY 1969 budget. Webb reasoned that NASA could “use the Atlas-Centaur . . . and the Titan III with transtage, to move out into further planetary operations but with very limited expenditures in 1968 and 1969.” Responding to questions by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Webb referred to recent CSC decision on NASA personnel contracts and said he would join with CSC chairman and the Comptroller General in working out pattern for support contracts, the KSC contract providing his guidelines. (Testimony; transcript)
Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller (D-Calif.), in a Letter to the Editor of the Washington Evening Star, commented on William Hines’ May 25 column criticizing Committee member Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) speech before the National Space Club May 17. “The article unfairly alleged that Rep. Joseph E. Karth ... by speaking out . . . was the ‘tool’ chosen by the administration to do a public relations job for NASA and the space program. . . . “What Mr. Hines failed to say was that Congressman Karth has led a number of hard-hitting congressional space investigations over the years for me. Both NASA and the contractors involved were ‘taken to the woodshed.’ The Apollo program is no exception. Mr. Karth has been critical—and made it clear that the accident responsibility falls squarely on NASA and the contractor. “Very simply, Mr. Karth said that perhaps the Congress, the administration and the press could do a better job of giving the public objective information on the space program. The wide swings from ‘everything is great’ to ‘everything is wrong’ must be confusing. . . .” (W Star, 6/6/67, A12)
GAO had begun “detailed examinations into certain specific areas of the Apollo program,” Assistant Comptroller General Frank H. Weitzel wrote in a letter to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), who had inquired about GAO reviews of NASA-NAA contracts. Examinations were begun “on the basis of information developed during” a preliminary review, started in October 1966, which had covered NASA Hq., “several NASA centers,” and plants of NAA and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. (Hines, W Star, 6/1/67, C16)
Technology Week editorial criticized Los Angeles Times editor Marvin Miles’ accusation that Jan. 27 Apollo accident was caused in large part by NASA’s shortsightedness and that NASA was trying to hide its negligence. “Mr. Miles discusses the hatch hazard and NASA’s failure to provide an explosive hatch and its failure to develop a fire suppression system. Then comes the ringing finale . . . ‘The nation should be told the whole truth.’ “It is our impression that the agency is trying valiantly to come up with just such information and we don’t understand the implication of a cover-up.” Editorial noted that in the past NASA had often been criticized for being too stringent and that despite all precautions, “something somewhere went wrong. . . . “We think the agency’s standard of conduct has been high. Its statement before Congress was a frank and honest appraisal of the fact that, despite very strong efforts, somehow it had failed to take the steps to 324-801 O—69----6	71 protect against the unlikely chain of circumstances that led to disaster.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 3/13/67, 50)
Glennan Space Engineering Building in Cleveland at Case Institute of Technology was dedicated, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “We need more men like nasa’s first administrator . . . Dr. Keith Glennan . .. men who are willing ... to seek out new facts, new concepts of reality as to the current human situation and [who] have the courage to base new and untried political, professional, industrial and technological ventures on information they test and learn to trust.” Recognizing the value of institutions who provide graduate education, he said: “There is little further room to doubt that a high level of basic research, an intellectual activity that must be closely associated with graduate education, is indispensable to an advancing front of scientific knowledge. . . .” Webb referred to a June 1957 speech of J. S. McDonnell of St. Louis who had made predictions to graduating students at Rolla’s Missouri School of Mines. Prediction No. 1 had a satellite circling earth and moon in 12 years. Webb said accomplishment was completed in three months for earth and in two years for moon. Prediction No. 2 had a satellite circling earth and Mars in 23 years. Webb said this was accomplished in seven years. Prediction No. 3 had manned space flight in earth orbit in 33 years. Webb pointed out this was done in four years. Webb continued: “If we look backward, we can easily see that it took 37 years to conquer the earth’s oceans ... by the Caravelle sailing vessel [and] after that 37 years, the mind of man was never the same again. Control of the earth’s ocean avenues by England through the maintenance of a favorable balance of ocean technology was a predominant force for stability in the affairs of men for over 400 years [but] no clear favorable balance of air technology was held by any one nation long enough to create world stability. It was, in fact, a predominant force in the affairs of men for less than 60 years. Space technology will be a dominant force far longer than was the case for those of ocean and air. Not limited as was the ship to the water or the airplane to the air, or by international boundaries, or to the fuel that its tanks can carry, spacecraft are today unlimited tools to explore and measure the environment within which the earth itself moves and has its being.” (Text)
In informal remarks at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb predicted that congressional cuts in the space budget would slow up the launch rate and lead to the phasing out of Apollo equipment after man landed on the moon. Webb said that only nine of the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles could be launched before 1970, instead of 13 planned launchings. “I don’t think there’s any doubt that to absorb this cut for $500 million, after already having absorbed a $600 million cut back in 1964, means that we will have to slow up the launch rate,” he stated. The cut had also knocked out any new planetary missions before 1975. Space budget cuts would likely mean die elimination of the Saturn IB from the middle-term space program, Webb explained in a brief press conference. NASA was committed to the purchase of 16 Saturn IB launch vehicles. Three had been flown; the next one would propel the first manned Apollo into earth orbit in mid-1968. NASA planned to switch manned flights to the three-stage Saturn V as soon as possible. The first Saturn V flight, an unmanned test, was scheduled for Oct. 19. The Saturn IB had been planned for continued use on flights not requiring the huge power of the Saturn V, but Webb said that emphasis instead would switch to the Air Force’s Titan HIM launch vehicle, being developed for the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Webb listed several future checkpoints: (1) fewer orders for new Apollo spacecraft equipment after the moon landing, in such programs as Apollo Applications; (2) definition of the next system after Apollo, which could be a 100,000-lb space station, or something bigger, launched with Saturn V, or a new launch vehicle; (3) development of new and better concepts since planetary missions have been knocked out until 1975; and (4) massive reorganizational changes a possibility for NASA. Webb and West Germany Minister for Scientific Research Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, at the press conference, stated jointly: five West German scientists would participate in studying Apollo program results, and two research satellites and a solar probe would be launched in West German-U.S. cooperative program. Stoltenberg also said that West German industry would be main contractor for an ESRO satellite for 1969 launching, the “first German satellite.” Webb said Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell had been asked to examine question “How do we . . . decide whether a mission should use man or not use man?” (Text; upi, W Star, 9/21/67; Hill, H Chron, 9/22/67)
Earth had been cooling off rapidly since 1950 because of accumulation of atmospheric dust, Univ. of Wisconsin meteorologist Reid A. Bryson told UPI. Solid particles clogging paths of sun’s warming rays had caused earth to experience an average loss in temperature from %° to 140, he said. (St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/9/67) May 8—June 1: NASA’s Lunar Orbiter IV became fourth U.S. spacecraft to circle moon when it entered lunar orbit following successful deboost maneuver which reduced its speed by 1,475 mph, permitting lunar capture. Orbital parameters: apolune, 3,797 mi (6,111 km); perilune, 1,681 mi (2,706 km); period, 72 hr 1 min; and inclination, 85.5°. Launched from etr May 4, spacecraft performed 670 attitude changes, responded to 7,067 commands, and recorded two micrometeoroid hits. Spacecraft performed normally except for five-day period when camera thermal door operated improperly, causing overexposure and fogging. Problem was solved, however, and 193 medium- and high-resolution photos—including coverage of 99% of moon’s front face—were taken with almost a hundredfold increase in discernible detail for most of the area covered. Final readout, underway since mission’s photo-acquisition phase was terminated May 26 because of an encoder failure, was completed June 1. By its telephoto coverage of eastern limb areas, Lunar Orbiter IV provided the basis for extending the cartographic grid system established for front-face mapping around to the hidden side, so that features there could be precisely located for future mission planning and operations. Initial photos, taken at 2,176-mi altitude, showed broad panorama of moon’s South Pole region—which had never before been photographed—with typical rugged terrain of craters and ridges. Closer, wide-angle pictures of this area revealed a 200- by 10-mi crevice which scientists speculated had been formed by volcanic action. Other photos transmitted included excellent pictures of the Alpine Valley and Mare Orientale, a large and relatively young impact crater whose center lay beyond the western rim of the visible face of the moon. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Releases 67-127, 67-143; W Post, 5/12/67, A10; 5/13/67; AP, NYT, 5/28/67,50) During week of May 8: A sandbox full of hundreds of thousands of bullet holes accurately simulates the crater-pocked lunar surface, U.S. Geological Survey reported. Dr. Henry J. Moore, one of Survey’s astrogeologists who fired projectiles of differing calibers into a sandtable at ARC, told upi that results of experiment supported theory that moon’s craters were, for the most part, created by the impact of meteorites, (upi, NYT, 5/14/67,29)
Washington Evening Star suggested that House Committee on Science and Astronautics might have been “the victim of a high-level snow job last year when it did research for a 1,200-page report on Project Apollo” because report’s conclusions conflicted so greatly with findings of Apollo 204 Review Board. Committee report issued March 29 praised ability of NASA and industry “to identify and solve technical and administrative problems” and stated that the Apollo accident did not “alter the basic conclusions of the report.” Board report, by contrast, criticized NASA and naa for poor management and deficient quality control. (WStor, 4/10/67, A7)
Moscow Aviation Institute professor Feliks Zigel had called for a “joint effort of all the scientists of the world,” to determine the nature of unidentified flying objects (ufos), according to Soviet press agency Novosti. Group of which he was a member had had 200 reports of sightings, Zigel said. Typical of these was “a luminous orange-colored crescent flying with its outward bend forward. Its surface is only a little duller than that of the moon. The horns of the crescent throw out jets, sometimes with sparks. The outer contour of the crescent is sharp and the inner contour blurred and wavy.” The main task, Zigel asserted, was to organize a systematic study of the phenomena from astronomical and meteorological observatories to determine whether the objects were of protoplasmic or extraterrestrial origin. “Unfortunately, certain scientists both in . . . [U.S.S.R. and U.S.] deny the very existence of the problem instead of helping to solve it. . . . The U.F.o. phenomenon is a challenge to mankind. It is the duty of scientists to take up this challenge, to disclose the nature of the u.F.O. and to establish the scientific truth.” (Kamm, NYT, 12/10/67, 70)
nasa’s Surveyor III (Surveyor C) was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-12) booster on 65-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for the 2,283-lb spacecraft was to perform a soft-landing east of the Surveyor I landing site within the Apollo zone and to obtain post-landing TV pictures of the lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would obtain data on lunar surface bearing strength, radar reflectivity, and thermal properties and photograph use of a surface sampler to manipulate the lunar surface [see April 19]. At 34:53 GET Surveyor III with two-bum Centaur—being used for the first time on a Surveyor mission—separated from Atlas and ignited to reach 100-mi-altitude circular parking orbit where it coasted for 22 min; Centaur then reignited to escape earth orbit and boost spacecraft toward the moon. Surveyor III separated from Centaur, deployed its solar panels, and locked on the sun and the star Canopus. Based on a 248-mi target miss estimate, a 4.2-mi midcourse maneuver was conducted shortly after midnight April 18 to assure precise landing on target in the Ocean of Storms. Surveyor III was third in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, obtain post-landing TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed by Lewis Research Center; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-85)
NASA’s Surveyor III spacecraft, resting on the moon, would not be reactivated until about May 23 despite the end of the two-week lunar night, nasa announced. Officials said they wanted spacecraft to warm up gradually before resuming communications, (upi, NYT, 5/18/67, 22)
msfc had awarded Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. a $334,031 contract to study methods of increasing the number of astronauts that could be delivered to the moon with the Saturn V booster and to determine the most promising concepts for efficient delivery of logistic payloads. For the purposes of the study, Lockheed would consider: (1) a hypothetical 1975 mission involving two “product improved” Saturn V boosters— one to launch a modified Apollo spacecraft and one to launch a cargo payload; and (2) a hypothetical 1980-82 mission in which two Uprated Saturn V boosters would launch a six-man spacecraft direcdy to the moon, (msfc Release 67-123)
Apollo 204 Review Board announced that completion of its final report on Jan. 27 fire would be delayed one week until April 8. Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of LaRC and Chairman of the Board, issued another call for any information that might aid the probe. Board also announced that it had completed piece-by-piece disassembly of Apollo I spacecraft, although testing and analysis of spacecraft systems and parts were continuing, (upi, W Star, 3/25/67, A5; W Post, 3/25/67, A5)
msc awarded Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co. a $3.4-million, costplusfixed-fee contract for development and testing of an improved fuel cell power system for Apollo Applications (aa) program, (nasa Release 67-33)
Soviet Vostok spacecraft were equipped with quick-opening explosive hatches and jet-propelled ejection seats—equipment might have saved U.S. Apollo astronauts Jan. 27, Cosmonaut Valentina Nikolayeva-Tereshkova said in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. (upi, NYT, 3/23/67)
Prime crew for first maimed Apollo mission—shown here preparing for mission simulator tests at North American Aviation plant—are, left to right, Donn F. Eisele, senior pilot; Walter M. Schirra, Jr., command pilot; and Walter Cunningham, pilot. feel and show this same confidence if the work and the sacrifice of the past are to have meaning and the objectives of manned space exploration are to be achieved.” Several subcommittee members, however, condemned NASA for withholding facts about cost and management problems with North American Aviation, Inc. ( NAa) , and indicated that they would be more critical of nasa in the future. In response to charges by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that Webb had “an obsession with secrecy,” Webb asserted that NASA had been exceptionally cooperative: “No program of this magnitude has ever been operated with greater public scrutiny. No agency has ever given its committees more information on what it is trying to do.” He offered to elaborate on the Phillips Report [see April 18] in closed session but declined to discuss it publicly, insisting that further public discussion would destroy close relationship between NASA and its prime Apollo spacecraft contractor. (Testimony; Wilford, NYT, 5/11/67,26; O’Toole, W Post, 5/11/67. A9)
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee would conduct a “full review” of the Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex) announced. {NYT, 1/29/67,47; WPost, 1/29/67, A18)
Lunar Orbiter II, Lunar Orbiter III, and Lunar Orbiter IV, all circling the moon, were being used by NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network personnel and stations for practice tracking exercises. Satellites served as “stand-ins” for the manned Apollo spacecraft which would eventually orbit the moon, (nasa Release 67-183)
Surveyor VI briefing was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL Surveyor Project Scientist, said Surveyor VI had discovered or confirmed that: (1) lunar maria were covered primarily with very fine, 0.001-in-dia particles but also with “some coarse particles and rocks up to a yard across”; (2) particles stuck together weakly and were not suspended above lunar surface; (3) radar return was from surface and not from subsurface layer; (4) strength of lunar maria was three to eight pounds psi at one- to two-inch depth; (5) composition of rock was basic and basaltic with very little meteoritic iron on the surface; (6) surface was extremely uniform; and (7) particles were cohesive and adhesive, but there was “no need for concern” about manned spacecraft’s sinking or being covered by sticky soil in maria sites investigated. Simultaneous operation of Surveyors V. and VI would permit measurement of moon’s “wobble” or physical libration by obtaining spacecraft’s range and range rate, Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief of gsfc’s Laboratory for Theoretical Studies, explained. “The moon has a sort of a nose [Sinus Medii, landing site of Surveyor L7] that sticks out in front. The earth’s gravity takes hold of that nose and wiggles it . . . back and forth as the earth slightly moves either way.” Although scientists had a fairly good idea of the size of the “nose” and how firmly earth could grab it, they did not know how the moon responded to the pull, he said. Response depended on whether lunar mass was concentrated toward the center, in which case it would yield easily, or toward the outside, in which case moon’s inertia would be much stronger. Dr. O’Keefe also showed Surveyor VI photos of lunar surface lit by sunshine. In one, corona was traceable out to a distance of 30 solar radii from the sun—furthest ever traced. Another revealed persistence of a line of light after the instant of true sunset. Line, which had appeared less clearly in previous Surveyor photos, he said, could be explained either as a layer of 0.001-inthick particles or as lunar material floating a short distance frcm surface because of electrostatic charges. Surveyor VI mission represented “the completion of two major milestones of lunar surface exploration—the investigation and certification of four prime candidates for future manned landings and the scientific evaluation of four . .. widely separated regions in the moon’s equatorial belts,” Surveyor Program Manager Benjamin Milwitzky asserted. To maximize the scientific value of the last Surveyor mission in the series, NASA had established a group of scientists to study and recommend possible landing sites for Surveyor G. As a result of group’s recommendations, NASA had selected Tycho crater, south of the equator, as primary target, and Fra Mauro, north of the equator, as an alternate. Highland Tycho area was “risky as a landing site,” he said, because it was covered by ridges, grooves, and rocks, but it would provide scientific data for comparison with data from previous lowland maria landing sites. Surveyor G, scheduled for launch Jan. 7, 1968, would be equipped with surface sampler, TV cameras, alpha-scattering instrument, and minor payload items such as magnets on footpads and surface sampler scoop and special mirrors. (Transcript; Reistrup, W Post, 12/15/67, A20; W Star, 12/15/67, A7)	_
Wind tunnel tests at usaf’s Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) in Tullahoma, Tenn., indicated “nasa has miscalculated the control spacemen would have over the Apollo spacecraft at the critical point it reenters the Earth’s atmosphere,” the Nashville Tennessean wrote in a copyrighted story. Loss of control “means that the Moon spacecraft’s maneuvering ability would be cut, perhaps to a dangerous degree.” Results of tests, which had been forwarded to msc, “will cause NASA to alter its computer projections of the Apollo’s reentry path.” (AP, H Chron, 7/21/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller appeared before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight to submit Apollo project reprogramming plans presented to the Senate May 9. Dr. Seamans assured the Subcommittee that schedules could be met and urged that Congress continue to support NASA: “We have confidence in the ability of our technical and adrrdnistrative teams, both in government and industry, to meet the challenge before us. But that is not sufficient; the Congress, representing the people of the Nation, must
First flight test of Apollo Lunar Module (lm), designated Apollo 5, was scheduled no earlier than Jan. 17, 1968, NASA announced. The 31,700-lb lm, one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft, was designed to carry two astronauts from lunar orbital flight to a landing on the moon, then back to the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit. It would be launched on the 6-hr 30-min test flight by 1.6-million-lb-thrust Uprated Saturn I (AS-204) originally scheduled for first manned Apollo mission in February 1967, and would not be recovered. Primary objective of the unmanned Apollo 5 flight would be verification of lm’s flight readiness for manned operations in space. Test would flight qualify lm descent stage propulsion engine, including restart; ascent stage propulsion engine; systems; structures; and staging. (NASA Release 67-313; upi, NYT, 12/27/67, 15; AP, W Post, 12/27/67, A4)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
Electronics Research Center was studying a navigation satellite system capable of providing location information to ships and aircraft accurate to within 0.1 mi, Aerospace Technology reported. System would be competitive with recently declassified Navy Navigation Satellite System [see July 29], but would be aimed primarily at small users such as private aircraft and pleasure craft. User cost for receiving equipment would range from $1,000 to $5,000. Current phase of program involved three contractors: (1) Philco-Ford Corp., which had completed study on fan beam navigation satellites; (2) RCA, which was studying a hyperbolic L-band ranging system providing continuous radiation of the signal; and (3) trw Systems which was designing a synchronous-orbit satellite system, also operating in the L-band. The next phase, pending NASA Hq. approval, was laboratory testing followed, possibly, by flight experiments in Applications Technology Satellite (ats) or Apollo Applications (aa) program. (Aero Tech, 8/14/67, 10)
U.N. Secretary General U Thant stated that “the very important treaty governing the activities of states in outer space, on the moon and other celestial bodies, forged in the conference room of the United Nations, has reaffirmed the principle first stated in the General Assembly that outer space is the province of all mankind.” [Space law treaty signed Jan. 27 would go into effect Oct. 10.] (NYT, 10/5/67)
Average U.S. taxpayer would not help finance any space program beyond manned lunar landing unless he could understand it and identify with its purpose, m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.) told aas Symposium in Huntsville. “Putting a man on the moon was a good objective. People can see the moon. They can understand communication and weather information and possible defense benefits from a moon landing. “But after the astronaut puts an American flag on the moon’s surface and satisfies the public, what will happen to our program then? We have to have a steady commitment of great resources to keep this program going. We have got to convince the public that there is a link between them and our next objectives . . . [and] give them some sort of objective they can identify with their own welfare.” Noting that “people recoil in fear from the concept of the endlessness of interstellar space,” General Medaris suggested that public would approve of an objective such as establishment of a lunar colony. “We better forget the spectacular and use a public relations approach like the soap companies do and figure out what the public will pay for.” (Houtz, B News, 6/14/67)
NASA would use AS-204 booster—an Uprated Saturn I—to launch first Apollo Lunar Module (lm) on unmanned flight in summer 1967 because it was last booster equipped with full research and development instrumentation. Original plans had been to use AS-206 booster. Undamaged during Jan. 27 fire, AS-204 launch vehicle would be moved from Launch Complex 34 to Launch Complex 37, which was equipped for unmanned launches of the LM. AS-206 booster would be stored for use in a subsequent mission. Purpose of first LM mission was to obtain data on ascent and descent propulsion systems, including a restart of the descent system; verify lm structure; and evaluate staging, (nasa Release 67-67)
In a prelaunch press conference at Launch Complex #39, ksc, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., referred to high points of Nov. 9 scheduled launch of Apollo 4: “. . . Apollo 4 launch is . . . most difficult and significant milestone to date [and] tomorrow we’ll be flight testing the Saturn V for the first time. We’ll be flight testing on Apollo spacecraft entering the atmosphere at lunar return speeds for the first time. We’ll be five-testing our launch and operational facilities for the first time, and we’ll be testing our development and operational team in its first major mission attempt for the first time. I am certain, this team . . . will not be found wanting.” (Text)
New York Times editorial on U.S.’s and U.S.S.R.’s competitive programs to land men on moon: “We fail to see that it makes any difference who reaches the moon first or whether the landing takes place in the 1960’s or the mid-1970’s. Moreover, we see large, unsatisfied needs here on earth—in this country and elsewhere—that could very usefully employ some of the vast resources now being devoted to the Apollo program and its Soviet analogue. A cutback in those resources and their diversion to more pressing needs would make more sense. “The moon is not going away, and it can wait a little longer for visitors.” (NYT, 3/27/67)
Planned launch of Apollo 4/Saturn V for Oct. 17 was postponed until early November, according to NASA spokesmen at etr, reported upi. Troubles with ground support equipment had stalled countdown rehearsal. Once rehearsal was finished, engineers would evaluate results and set date for unmanned launch, (upi, W Post, 10/11/67, A18)
Need for design modifications had required shipment of a manned orbital workshop to the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Center, Huntington Beach, Calif., said Marshall Space Flight Center. Workshop, built by McDonnell Douglas, was model for the Saturn S—IVB stage and when modified would represent Saturn stage as it was to he used in Apollo Applications program as a manned space laboratory. Some 50 ft long and 21.5 ft in diameter, workshop was used at msfc as an engineering tool in designing structures, equipment, and experiments for the initial mission of 28 days, (msfc Release 67-181)
Rep. Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) introduced legislation to House authorizing the President to “designate a day in January of each year as a day of remembrance” for Apollo Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 fire at ksc. (CR, 3/9/67, H2460)
The time had to come to end the “belabored post-mortems of the Apollo fire” and to restore confidence in the Apollo program, William Coughlin suggested in Technology Week, “nasa certainly has its faults, particularly in the quality control area. But we believe that the overall record of the Apollo 204 probe offers some inspiration for confidence in NASA management. It takes a great deal of integrity to give an accident review board full freedom and support when the outcome can only be critical of those setting up the board—and NASA provided that freedom and support. It then takes courage to stand up and disagree with some of the findings of the board—and NASA did that The Phillips report, damaging as it was, also was testimony that NASA had been on top of the problems at North American and was making progress in solving them. . . . ‘^Confidence in Apollo must be restored and the program allowed to move ahead, without undue restriction, on its new lunar schedule. “Anything less will diminish the sacrifice made by three brave men.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 5/22/67,58)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Thomas P. Stafford, and Frank Borman were interviewed on nbc-tv’s “Meet the Press.” Borman said he had “nothing but admiration for the way NASA had conducted its investigation of the Jan. 27 Apollo accident and that, far from losing confidence in the agency, he had gained confidence in it. Asked if he believed that some other group should also investigate the fire, he replied: “Absolutely not. I don’t understand the desire for another investigation.” Schirra, asked if he believed it were necessary to send men to the moon when unmanned spacecraft were obtaining valuable information, responded: “It is only natural that man must go out there and see for himself.” The computer in unmanned flights is only a product of man’s mind, and, “if something different occurs, man is best equipped to make the move.” (AP, Newsday, 5/22/67)
White House had received a letter from an unnamed scientist suggesting that it conduct its own investigation into Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Karl Abraham reported in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. Scientist, who was not identified, felt nasa had not sufficiently heeded warnings of fire hazards presented by use of pure oxygen atmosphere. (Abraham, P EB, 2/8/67)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, told AP he did not think “we will ever know what caused that fire” in which three Apollo astronauts died. Thousands of NASA and industry technicians responsible for Apollo I spacecraft would always wonder whether they contributed to the accident, Teague suggested. Asked if he believed NASA officials had taken unnecessary risks to land a man on the moon by 1970, Teague said: “Maybe we were a little bit careless.” He said some of the safety checks probably should have been more thorough, but did not elaborate. (AP, W Star, 3/30/67)
A restructuring of the Nation’s space program was outlined by NASA Administrator James E. Webb in testimony on proposed nasa FY 1968 operating plan, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Decisions had reflected fiscal, resources, and time factors. The national fiscal situation required minimum expenditures on space for the next two years. Primary emphasis on completion of Apollo program and other financially important ongoing efforts would be carried out to avoid major losses. Decisions on nasa’s space posture for the 1970s would be postponed until “fiscal year 1969 budget or later.” According to Webb’s planning, “Our allocation of resources in fiscal year 1968 must hold open for later decision the most promising future aeronautical and space options which our past large investments will support.” FY 1968 operating plan figures, presented by Webb, showed nasa’s
Displeasure with NASA’s administrative officials was voiced by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of the House, “nasa continues to evade the serious responsibility of candor,” said Rep. Ryan while inserting a series of documents in Congressional Record, including Feb. 15 letter from msfc Director Wernher von Braun to S. K. Hoffman, naa Rocketdyne Div. president, on “. . . hardware failure, most . . . traceable to human error, inadequate manufacturing, quality control, or test procedures.” NASA Hq. news conference, called at 5:00 pm same day by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by key NASA and industry officials, responded to Rep. Ryan’s charges and explained that letter to Hoffman had been a case of normal Government-contractor business. Webb pointed out that subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were kept informed each month so that emergency matters could be brought to their attention. Dr. von Braun explained how inspection and quality control procedures were continued as rocket engines were processed at contractor’s plant and at Government test sites. He stated that NASA-Rocketdyne coordination on inspection continuity and quality control were applied to both the rocket engine as an entity and the rocket engine/launch-vehicle-stage complex. As trend of news conference discussion turned from quality control to Saturn/Apollo weight problems, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, said the heavier Lunar Module resulted from fire-hazard-type design changes. He stated that lm was now 31,500 lb against a 32,000-lb control weight. Referring to weight-lifting capability of Saturn V, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said lunar payload had increased from 90,000 to 100,000 lb by increasing engine efficiency. Similar improvement was expected in lm’s propulsion, which would ease the weight problem. (CR, 10/5/67, H13046-8; Transcript)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations at Msc, received Virginia Press Assn.’s (vpa) “Virginian of the Year” award at joint banquet of the vpa and National Newspaper Assn, (nna) during nna’s annual meeting in Richmond. Kraft said U.S. might miss 1970 target date to land the first man on the moon. “If we are lucky, and if everything works well, we can probably do it. But if we have a normal share of problems, as happens with any large research effort, then I don’t think we can.” (AP, W Star, 6/26/61, B5)
NASA contract activity:	Negotiations were initiated with McDonnell Douglas Corp. on a 121-million contract for Improved Delta launch support services. Contract would cover 20 launchings from WTR and ETR during 21-mo period beginning Jan. 1, 1968, and would provide for inspection, checkout, and actual launch. Negotiations were concluded with North American Rockwell Corp. on a $812-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for continuation of Apollo Command and Service Module Program from Dec. 4, 1966, through program completion. Contract covered engineering, design, manufacture,-analysis, and testing for Apollo spacecraft and related equipment, including production of four additional spacecraft through S/C 115A; contained improved plans for quality, reliability, assurance, and safety; and provided for an award fee based on achievement of specified management objectives. (nasa Releases 67-298,67-299)
The U.S. should expect “an early Soviet attempt to send a large payload around the moon and recover it on earth,” Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in releasing committee report: “Review of Soviet Space Program,” prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Library of Congress’ Science Policy Research Div. This 1957-67 review drew comparisons with the corresponding program in U.S. Rep. Miller commented: “At the same time that space efforts in the United States appear to be slackening, the pace of Soviet space flight has picked up by about 60 percent this year over the corresponding ten months total of last year. The strong technological base the Russians are building through a sustained, longterm commitment to space [assures them] sophisticated and intricate planetary probes . . . unmanned or manned space platforms . . . [application of] aerospace technology systems management to a great variety of industrial and social purposes here on earth.” Committee report gave “no simple, direct answer” on “whether there is a space race” but suggested “at the present time both the Soviet Union and the United States have put large resources of somewhat similar size into very broadly based programs of great strength.” Competition in overall space capability, especially on weight lifting and thrust of launch vehicles used by U.S. and U.S.S.R., was illustrated: “In connection with the nasa Administrator’s August 1967 pronouncement on the expected large Soviet vehicle [Saturn V class], he made a plea for support of an American nuclear stage to mount on Saturn V in order to leapfrog the Russians. A month later, Leonid Sedov in Moscow stated his belief in the importance of nuclear propulsion for the very large rockets which will soon be needed.” (Text; nasa SP-4007, 212; Committee Release, 11/20/67)
NASA awarded Boeing Co. a $2.275-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for procurement of long-lead-time materials for two additional Saturn V launch vehicles. Contract, which would expire Jan. 1, 1968, was first Saturn V procurement in support of Apollo Applications (aa) program, (nasa Release 67-200)
Object, believed to be “probable” 10th moon of Saturn discovered by French astronomer Dr. Audouin Dollfus of Meudon Observatory in December 1966, had been sighted by Richard L. Walker of the U.S. Naval Observatory, Walter Sullivan reported in the New York Times. New moon, believed to be a 150-mi-dia “snowball” of very light, frozen material, was in orbit 52,000 mi from Saturn with a period of 18 hrs. Confirmation was uncertain, however; Walker, in a telephone interview, said the object was so close to the rings of Saturn that it could be a lump . in the rings, rather than a moon. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/5/67, C17) January 6: Harold B. Finger, Director of Nuclear Systems and Space Power in NASA Hq. oart and Manager of AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, temporarily assigned additional duty of heading group of NASA officials who would analyze needs for procedural revisions and functional alignments within NASA Hq. (nasa Release 67-2)
NASA reported success of Lunar Orbiter IV, launched May 4, noted that final readout of all photographs had been completed. Photographs would provide photo coverage of 99% of the moon’s front face and show high resolution photos of polar and limb areas with extensive geological detail. Report said convergent stereoscopic coverage had been obtained of entire Apollo zone of interest; photographic coverage obtained of the back side of the moon was still under review (nasa Proj
Press commented on Congressional hearings on Apollo accident. Philadelphia Inquirer: “With both the House and Senate conducting their own investigations of the Apollo tragedy, in the aftermath of the exhaustive inquiry by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s own review board, there is a danger that what will result is a negative witch hunt instead of constructive criticism of benefit to the space program. Congress should strive to protect the Nation’s investment in this critically important and expensive venture and that is not to be accomplished by laboring the deficiencies of Apollo I. Above all, the concern should be for the safety of future space voyagers. It should be to certify that no unnecessary risks will be taken that might invite another lethal disaster.” (P Inq, 4/12/67) New York Times: “It is a new, and rather shocking, NASA image that is being projected by the current Congressional investigations into the Apollo tragedy. One would have expected that NASA would make available every possible bit of relevant information. . . . The Space Administration cannot afford even to raise the suspicion that it may be covering up evidence relevant to the deaths of the three astronauts . . . [and] certainly does not want to reinforce the view of cynics who insist that NASA actually stands for ‘Never A Straight Answer.’ ” (NYT, 4/19/67, 40) Washington Post: NASA “has merited the reproach of the investigators of the Apollo disaster and the searching scrutiny of the congressional committees reviewing the program. . . . What must not be overlooked however, are the risks of the space program that cannot be eliminated altogether without abandoning it___When these catastrophes take place, the Government and the people must and should react as they reacted to the Apollo fire, by demanding new and further precautions, even more careful and complete protection. But there will not be much bold venturing in a society that visits a sanguinary fury upon those unfortunate enough to preside over calamity. For in that kind of society, more and more men will discover that the way to avoid getting any reproach is to avoid taking any risks.” (W Post, 4/19/67)
House and Senate both passed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills which were less than the $5.1 billion originally requested by NASA. Senate bill (S. 1296) authorized $4,851 billion: $4,136 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. House bill (H.R. 10340) authorized $4,791 billion: $4,076 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. Senate defeated two amendments by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to reduce nasa authorization—-one by $317 million; one by $98 million. An amendment by Sen. Charles Percy (R-Ill.) which would require NASA to keep Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences “fully and currently informed” was also defeated. Committee Chairinan Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) said the proposal had been considered by the Committee and rejected as unnecessary: “It’s not needed. What is needed is enforcement and compliance with existing legislation.” House bill authorized $200.7 million less than Committee on Science and Astronautics had recommended [see May 16]. An amendment by Rep. Richard L. Roudebush (R-Ind.) to an amendment by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) cut $65 million from $455 million proposed by Committee for aa program. Fulton’s original amendment had recommended cutting the program by $250 million. Remaining reductions, totaling $135.7 million, were contained in surprise recommittal motion offered by Representative Fulton at the end of the day. They included: (1) $6.2 million from advanced missions (funding eliminated); (2) $21.5 million from Voyager; (3) $20 million from nuclear rockets; (4) $78 million from launch vehicle procurement; and (5) $10 million from sustaining university program. Amendment also contained provision to establish an independent safety review board within NASA. Establishment of the board had been urged by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) as one means of avoiding another accident like the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Differences between Senate and House authorization bills would be resolved by joint House/Senate Conference Committee. (CR, 6/28/67, S9078-94, H8150-200; upi, NYT, 6/29/67, 11; Reistrup, W Post, 6/29/67, A6)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey told the National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Dinner that U.S. space program would continue to move forward despite the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. “On behalf of President Johnson, I assure you . . . that we have not lost heart—that we will not falter—that we shall move forward with renewed determination in our exploration of space.” The Vice President said the first obligation was to “come as close as humanly possible to determining the cause of the Apollo 204 accident, so that we can make sure it will never happen again.” He said he was impressed with the “tough-minded way the Review Board is going about its work.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/3/67, 31)
GAO, responding to March 14 request by Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had reviewed NASA’s Apollo contract with North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), and published a “Summarization of National Aeronautics and Space Administration Management Review of North American Aviation, Inc., Activities” based on the Phillips Report. According to gao, the Phillips Report “stated that, at the start of the csm and S—II programs, key milestones were agreed upon, performance requirements were established and cost plans were developed . . . [but] as the program progressed, there were slippages in key milestone accomplishments, degradation in hardware performance, and increasing costs.” In evaluating the probability of naa’s ability to “meet future commitments, the report stated that, for both the S-II and the csm, significant technical problems still remained which had to be resolved. The review team did not find significant indication of actions underway, for the S—II, to ‘build confidence that future progress will be better than past performance.’ While some progress was indicated to improve the outlook for the csm, the report stated that ‘there is little confidence that NAA will meet its schedule and performance commitments within the funds available for this portion of the Apollo program. . . .’ ” (Text)
United States exhibits spacecraft at Expo ’67 in Montreal: Lunar Orbiter (top left). Surveyor (center), and Apollo Command Module suspended from parachutes (right). G.	Shinkle (usa, Ret.), Apollo Program Manager at ksc, resigned for “personal reasons.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, commented: “I deeply regret the decision of General Shinkle to leave the program. Throughout his association here, his experience has been of major assistance in our contribution to the Apollo program.” (nasa Releases 67— 128, 67-129; AP, NYT, 5/20/67, 2) * NASA announced it would negotiate three-month $500,000 fixed-price contracts with Martin Marietta Corp. and McDonnell Aircraft Astronautics Co. for preliminary design studies (Phase B) of planetary entry capsules for the Voyager program. Phase B contractor efforts were the responsibility of jpl in conjunction with LaRC. Responsibility for system design and hardware development subsequent to Phase B would be divided between jpl and LaRC with jpl responsible for surface laboratory and LaRC responsible for capsule bus system, which included entry and landing equipment. (NASA Release 67—126)
New York Times praised Senate ratification of the space law treaty April 25 and called for increased international cooperation in space: “Ideally, the probing of space and the planets would be the province of a World Space Organization affiliated with the United Nations, financed by the contributions of all nations desiring to participate, and drawing upon the technical manpower and knowledge of all nations. This international organization could be the owner of the moon and other solar bodies, arranging for the exploitation of resources found there, and using any extraterrestrial profits for the benefit of all men. “It will take much time before such an ideal can be reached. But even now the more sober spirit evident in Moscow and Washington opens the door to greater bilateral cooperation. Both nations have technical knowledge in this field that they could exchange to their mutual advantage. Their space tracking and rescue facilities could be coordinated into a single world system; they could agree on a division of labor that would eliminate such duplication as is represented by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter. The result could easily be major savings in money and increased safety for all astronauts, regardless of nationality.” (NYT, 4/26/67)
Water might have played an important role in shaping the lunar surface, Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California physicist, told National Academy of Sciences. As evidence to support his theory of the former existence of “lakes” on the lunar surface, Dr. Urey showed spacecraft photos of the moon’s surface in which material had filled in depressions as though it were free-flowing. He also cited carbon-rich meteorites which seemed to be fragments of ancient lake beds. Dr. Urey believed many, if not all, the stony meteorites were fragments dislodged from the moon by impacting objects such as iron meteorites. As further evidence of water action, he noted the presence of meteorites within which numerous founded fragments were embedded which appeared to have been shaped by frictional effects within flowing material. A body much smaller than the moon would not have had sufficient gravity for this flow effect, Dr. Urey argued. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/67,23)
First aerial drop in test series to develop and qualify Earth Landing System (els) for heavier Block II Apollo spacecraft was conducted by Northrop Ventura at El Centro, Calif. Tests were studying the use of a two-stage reefing system for three main els chutes and larger diameter drogue parachutes for the els. Block I Apollo spacecraft used only a single-stage reefing. (NAA Skywriter, 7/21/67,1,2)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb had been encountering a “storm of criticism” since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, but “odds are he’ll see his job through,” Business Week concluded in an article summarizing Webb’s career. It noted some of Webb’s accomplishments as NASA Administrator: “. . . Webb has steered steadily growing budgets—from $l-billion in 1961 to this year’s $5-billion—among the Congressional reefs. He runs a NASA organization of nearly 35,000 people in 16 facilities that stretch from Boston to Cape Kennedy, from Houston to the West Coast—and a worldwide network of tracking stations. At the same time, he has had to deal directly or indirectly with nearly 21,000 contracting companies, which employ about 400,000 people. . . .” Article concluded that Webb had been “bruised, not beaten” by the controversy surrounding the Apollo accident. “. . . odds-makers in Washington are betting that when the smoke clears Webb will emerge still at the helm of NASA. Further, they think NASA still may meet its deadline of a moon landing before 1970.” (B Wk, 5/27/67, 71—7)
Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, in its report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended that $46.8 million be cut from $3.4 billion requested by nasa for FY 1968 manned space flight program. Recommendation, which included $25-million reduction in Apollo program, was approved by full committee May 16. (W Post, 5/12/67, A13)
Rocket engine for Apollo service module’s propulsion system had been undergoing tests at Arnold Engineering Development Center during past 3Y2 years. Initially, engine performance was unknown; it would use an ablatively cooled thrust chamber and a high expansion ratio nozzle of thin metal and would operate at relatively low combustion chamber pressures. Initial tests were on configuration of engine’s fragile nozzles. Follow-on tests, for prequalification of engine combined with heavy duty replica of propellant tankage, had checked ballistic performance. Simulated high-altitude testing would lead to eventual man-rating of propulsion system, (aedc Release 67-212)
Univ. of Iowa professor Dr. James A. Van Allen, writing in Science, warned against “abandoning in situ study of the planets to the Soviet Union.” Citing important contributions made by unmanned planetary probes, he noted that intelligible telemetry signals had been received from Mariner IV from ranges as great as 320 million km and that the spacecraft was still operating properly 36 mo after launch. Entire Mariner V mission, he said, “was conducted with such precision and competence as to draw cheers from even the most hardened professionals.” Although successful Mariner missions had been accomplished at a cost of less than 2% of NASA budget, Congress had failed to provide for preparatory work for any specific planetary mission beyond Mariner Mars ’69, he said. “Even more devastating is the reluctance of NASA to forcefully request December IS: The Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nevada, as the NEftVA nuclear rocket reactor, NRX-A6, is operated at or above design power of 1,100 m energy (55,000-lb thrust) for 60 min. adequate funding for such work . . . despite the existence of well-conceived programs of great scientific potential. . . . The basic technology is available, and a rich diversity of feasible experiments has been proposed. . . .” Despite evidence that U.S.S.R.’s planetary exploration plans were both ambitious and increasingly competent, he said, U.S, “is now allowing its own high competency in planetary exploration to decay. . .	(Science, 12/15/67) The New York Times later commented: “Professor Van Allen is en* tirely right in his complaint . . . that [U.S.] is spending a ridiculously small sum ... on planetary exploration by unmanned rockets. “. . . the cost-effectiveness in scientific terms of the nation’s planetary program is far greater than that of the Apollo program for a manned flight to the moon, the nearly bottomless well into which the vast majority of NASA’s funds are now going. The existing allocation of funds is scientifically irrational, explicable principally in terms of the propaganda and public relations returns envisaged from ‘winning’ the moon race.” (NYT, 12/19/67,46)
NASA announced establishment of an Astronomy Missions Board, to be chaired by Harvard College Observatory Director Dr. Leo Goldberg. Twelve astronomers and physicists would make up the Board, which would advise NASA through Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. John E. Naugle. Executive Director for the Board would be ossa’s Deputy Director of Physics and Astronomy Dr. Henry Smith. The Board would develop and review scientific objectives and general strategy for space astronomy missions of sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites and would recommend designs for missions, telescopes, and other equipment. Excluded from the Board’s responsibility would be studies of moon and planets from close range and earth orbital observations of the earth, (nasa Release 67-284)
msfc would design and build inhouse a multiple docking adapter (Mda) for use in Apollo Applications (AA) payload cluster scheduled for launch in 1968-69 [see Jan. 26]. Preliminary designs called for a 10-ft-dia, 15-ft-long cylinder surrounded by five 36-in-dia tunnels with docking collars and sealing hatches for orbital docking, (msfc Release 67-42)
Expanded memory units for tracking facility computers of the Apollo lunar landing program had been added by NASA as a modification to its fixed price contract with the Sperry-Rand Corp. The work would be performed at Sperry-Rand’s Univac Defense Systems Div., St. Paul, Minn., which would expand existing memory bank units for digital data processing systems from a storage capacity of 32,000 to 48,000 words. The systems would be installed in ground stations and aboard ships in the worldwide tracking network for Apollo flights. Work would be performed under the direction of gsfc. (nasa Release 67-246)
nasa’s Eighth Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, Dr. Roger W. Heyns, Chancellor of Univ. of California, discussed impact of space program on university curricula and research efforts in his keynote address. “Through the stimulation of nasa programs, new fields of study have been created ... and NASA ... [has become] one of the world’s most ambitious attempts to pool the talents and learning of thousands. ... “. . . nasa has been doing pioneering work of immense significance to modern society that has nothing to do with the exploration of space per se. Objectives have been defined, scientific and technical knowledge and talent have been collected, trained and aimed at research objectives and results produced. That is a massive accomplishment of human engineering . . . [and] an inspiration to all of us. . . . Just how much ... is transferable to other situations remains to be seen, but ... it certainly is not inconceivable that what we have learned, and what we will learn, about public administration from NASA may, in the long pull, mean every bit as much as the scientific and technological developments from the exploration of space itself.” Recipients of Distinguished Service Medal: nAsa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell; Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Edgar M. Cortright; LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson; and former Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. NASA’s second Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to Dr. Charles S. Draper, director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory. Special Group Achievement Award was presented to Canadian government for outstanding success of Alouette I satellite (launched Sept. 28, 1962). Exceptional Service Medal: Astronaut Roger B. Chaffee (posthumously); Charles F. Hall, arc ; Donald R. Bellman and Robert D, Reed, frc ; William J. Boyer, Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., James S. Martin, Jr., and Clifford H. Nelson, LaRC; James S. Kramer and H. Warren Plohr, LeRC; Robert H. Gray, ksc; Howard H. Haglund and Robert J. Parks, jpl; Paul G. Marcotte, gsfc; William Cohen, George C. Deutsch, Arthur F. Hood, Joseph B. Mahon, Benjamin Milwitzky, Lee R. Scherer, and William M. Shea, nasa Hq. Recipients of Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: Michel Bader, Donald E. Gault, and Maurice D. White, arc ; Walter B. Horne, William H. Phillips, and Israel Taback, LaRC; Samuel S. Manson, LeRc; and Eugene M. Shoemaker, USGS. Group Achievement Award: Apollo 204 Review Board; nasa sst Evaluation Team; Lunar Orbiter Spacecraft and Operations Team; and 260-in Solid Motor Project Team. Public Service Award: William Feldman, Eastman Kodak Co.; Robert J.	Heiberg, Boeing Co.; Mark Sasso, RCA; Robert L. Roderick, Hughes Aircraft Co.; and Richard Cottrell and Paul B. Datner, Aerojet-General Corp. Exceptional Bravery Medal was presented for “courageous and heroic action” in attempting to rescue the Apollo 204 crew to Donald 0. Babbitt, Stephen B. Clemmons, James D. Gleaves, Jerry W. Hawkins, and L. D. Reece, naa; and Henry H. Rogers, ksc. (Text; nasa Release 67—272; Program)
Lunar Orbiter news briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Apollo Program, omsf, said that 635 Lunar Orbiter I and II photos of the 1,000-mi Apollo strip near moon’s equator had “removed any doubt that there are numbers of suitable places for Apollo to land satisfactorily.” Of the regions photographed, 10 sites appeared to have smooth areas; detailed analysis of three of these had revealed two areas that were only about 6% crater-marked. Dr. Reiffel said Apollo landing site should be 3- to 5-mi-dia oval area, relatively free of craters and boulders, with 30 mi of smooth terrain approaching it and no more than 7° slope. In addition, since moon’s optimum light ranged from 7° to 20° and sun moved across moon 13° per day, landing sites ideally should be spaced 26° apart at this longitude to allow for launch delays. “We . . . need not one site or a couple of sites ideally, but we would like, in order to make life as simple as possible, to have a number of sites. Then at the specific time of the launch ... we will pick a set of three....” Dr. Lawrence Rowan, U.S. Geological Survey, said Lunar Orbiter photos had shown that moon’s dark mare was smoothest terrain; bright rays had variable roughness and upland plains appeared very rough. He said photos indicated that mass movement on the moon modified both mare and upland. LaRC Lunar Orbiter Project Manager Dr. Clifford H. Nelson, discussing future Lunar Orbiter missions, said Lunar Orbiter 3 would be “site confirmation” flight to photograph areas already determined by Lunar Orbiter / and II as promising for Apollo landings. Spacecraft 4 and 5 might be used to photograph 400 lunar sites of primary scientific interest. Capt. Lee R. Scherer, Lunar Orbiter Project Manager, ossa, noted that one Lunar Orbiter in polar orbit around the moon could survey 80% of moon’s front face with 10 times resolution of earth-based photos. “These types of missions would provide a framework upon which to base major decisions concerning our total lunar exploration program after these initial manned landings,” Scherer said.
USNS Mercury, third Apollo insertion-injection tracking ship, left General Dynamics Corp.’s Quincy, Mass., shipyard after successfully completing final contractor instrumentation systems tests. Ship docked in Hoboken, N.J., where it would undergo inspection and instrumentation adjustments before range testing and final preparations in Florida for Apollo 503 mission. Mercury, her two sister ships Vanguard and Redstone, and reentry ships Huntsville and Watertown were part of National Range Instrumentation Ship pool. They would be equipped with special antennas for communications between Apollo astronauts and mission control via Atlantic and Pacific satellites. For Apollo missions they would be operated as part of GSFC-operated msfn, which supported Apollo with tracking, command, and voice and telemetry communications via land lines, microwave, submarine cables, and comsats. Operation of Apollo ships was assigned to wtr; crew was provided by Military Sea Transport Service, and technical instrumentation crew by usaf, (nasa Release 67-305)
A completely fireproof version of the spacecraft fabric Velcro had been perfected and would be used on NASA’s first manned Apollo mission in 1968, William Hines reported in the Washington Evening Star. In tests conducted at msc early in August, the all-metallic fabric did not ignite, even in pure oxygen atmosphere at 16.5 psia. Velcro Corp. vice president Jack Mates told Hines in an interview that NASA had not yet placed an order for the improved Velcro, but that his company was beginning production of a substantial quantity. In the Jan. 27 Apollo fire, flames in the spacecraft had quickly spread along the surface of ordinary nylon Velcro adhesive pads which were used to hold frequently used equipment. (Hines, W Star, 8/18/67)
NASA had discarded crew assignments for three manned Apollo missions originally scheduled for 1967 but postponed shortly after Jan. 27 fire, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton told the press at msc. “We don’t have any crews assigned officially to any missions at the present time. There’s not much point in worrying about crew assignments until we know what we’re going to do.” Backup crew for AS-204 mission had been Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham; prime crew for AS—205/208 mission had been James A. McDivitt, David Scott, and Russell Schweick-art; for AS-503, Frank Borman, Michael Collins, and William Anders. (upi, W Star, 3/24/67, A2; AP, W Post, 3/24/67, A6; Wilford, NYT, 3/24/67,1,15)
Mayor Henry Maier of Milwaukee, addressing a conference of upi editors and publishers in San Francisco, said: “The central city cannot be saved without a reallocation of our national resources to spend as much to build decent cities for man on earth as we spend on sending a man to the moon.” (ctns, C Trib, 9/19/67)
First regular data reports of activity on sun’s “invisible hemisphere”— side visible from earth only once every 13.5 days—were being made to essa’s Solar Disturbance Forecast Center in Boulder, Colo., by nasa’s Pioneer VI and VII satellites, in orbit around sun. Satellites’ observations on physical characteristics of solar storms would allow continuous scientific study of solar surface and provide Apollo astronauts with additional warning time to avoid solar radiation hazards. (nasa Release 67-174)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences voted to report $4,851 billion NASA authorization bill (S. 1296)—$249 million less than $5.1 billion NASA had requested for FY 1968. Committee reductions included $120 million from Apollo Applications (aa) program and $71.5 million—total amount requested—from Voyager program. Responding to Committee report, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., issued a statement saying that the affected programs were of “first-rank importance to mankind. The scientists of this country have expressed deep concern that the United States is not making enough progress in the exploration of the planets. “We feel that many members of Congress will want to give further consideration to the President’s recommendations” for the aa program. (Reistrup, W Post, 6/24/67)
NASA personnel changes: (1) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, resigned effective Aug. 1 to become a vice president of Polaroid Corp.; (2) b/g Carroll H. Bolender (usaf), omsf, was named manager for the Lunar Module (lm) at msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, replacing Dr. William A. Lee, who resigned for personal reasons. Bolender would be responsible for management of the lm program including design, development, and fabrication of the vehicle by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor; (3) Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, became Director of Program Control, omsf, replacing William E. Lilly, who was appointed Assistant Administrator for Administration March 8. White would be responsible for the total financial, administrative, and business management support services for omsf and the administration and direction of approved facility projects in support of the manned flight program, (nasa Releases 67-196, 67-198; O’Toole, W Post, 7/26/67, A10; AP, W Star, 7/26/67)
NASA engineers maneuvered Lunar Orbiter III, launched Feb. 4, by firing spacecraft’s velocity control engine 125.5 sec, with intent to simulate planned orbit for manned Apollo. Planned 100-mi circular orbit for Apollo was approximated in 196-mi apolune and 89-mi perilune achieved by maneuver from Lunar Orbiter Ill’s prior 1,133-mi apolune and 87-mi perilune. Data on lunar gravity fields would be obtained for Apollo program. Lunar Orbiter series of four spacecraft orbiting around moon was providing valuable tracking target activity for NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) . (nasa Release 67-233)
NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network would be tested for the first time with the unmanned Apollo 4 mission, tentatively scheduled for early October, Barry Kalb reported in the Washington Evening Star. Dr. Friedrich 0. Vonbun, chief of gsfc’s Mission and Trajectory Analysis Div., told Kalb in an interview that the “reliability of the system is 99.5 percent.” Network included a new system, he said, which combined functions of tracking, signaling, and voice communication. Previously a separate system was required for each. Only certain portions of the network would be used for the Apollo 4 mission, Von Bun said. The entire system consisted of 13 earth orbit tracking stations, three deep-space stations (each with a backup unit), five tracking ships, and eight specially fitted jet aircraft. Three deep-space stations, located in Gold-stone, Calif., Madrid, Spain, and Canberra, Australia, were designed specifically for “communicating with vehicles at lunar distance.” (Kalb, W Star, 8/14/67, A6)
Prime and. backup crews for NASA’s first manned Apollo mission [see May 9] told a news conference at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant that they were “very impressed” with the design changes being made in the Apollo spacecraft as a result of the Jan. 27 flash fire. Major changes included: (1) a new hinged hatch that could be opened outward in about two seconds by activating a springed lever; (2) replacement of many highly flammable materials such as nylon netting; (3) sheathing of open wiring with hard panels; and (4) flame-resistant spacesuits. In addition, spacecraft would be pressurized with nitrogen rather than oxygen on launching, and in orbit—where oxygen is indispensable—pressure would be reduced one third to 5 psi. Questioned about his attitudes toward the program since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra replied:	. . we went through a very agonizing self-appraisal; we suffered through three months of recrimination; we’ve culminated these three months with some very firm ideas.” These ideas, Schirra said, were being phased into an orderly program that “will continue—with orderly haste . . . [and] we are not going to run rampant on schedules.” The crews anticipated that Apollo 101 spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in December and that first manned mission would be flown in first quarter of 1968. Primary mission objective would be to “exercise the vehicle in earth orbit,” Schirra said. Asked if the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov had had any adverse effects on plans for earth landings in the Apollo program, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford replied: “The earth landing system that consists of the three main parachutes and the two drogue chutes- had been qualified completely. . . . We still have some earth landing drops to be made. But right now as far as the crew is concerned, either the parachutes in this vehicle are qualified or we don’t fly.” (Transcript; Newsweek, 5/22/67, 94; Hill, NYT, 5/11/67,27)
Announcement of major breakthrough in Soviet space program—probably an orbiting manned space platform—was imminent according to unidentified U.S. scientist recently returned from two weeks in U.S.S.R., Marquis Childs reported in Washington Post: “The likelihood of a dramatic new Soviet achievement takes on particular weight in view of the tragedy to the three American astronauts at Cape Kennedy. It will dramatize the degree to which the Soviets are ahead in heavy boosters essential to carry out a landing on the moon. Repeated denials from both sides that this is not a race to the moon are all very well. The fact remains that the first power to land men on that silver orb will gain enormous prestige.” (Childs, W Post, 2/1/67)
Development of a military base in space or on the moon would be the least expensive way to protect U.S. cities, Rep. William Jennings Bryan Dorn (D-S.C.) suggested in speech on the House floor. He said that the refinement of U.S. capabilities to destroy, on a moment’s notice, any potential enemy anywhere in the world would be far superior to development of an antimissile missile system for the. protection of selected cities only. In addition, stations in space that could control the weather and current of the sea might well “deter a madman dictator” and a spacecraft capable of raining atomic warheads could ensure peace. (CR, 3/9/67, H2422-3)
